Hotable British Trials 


Charles Frederick Peace 


NOTABLE BRITISH TRIALS SERIES. 


General Editor—HARRY HODGE. 


Dr. Pritchard. Edited by William Roughead. 
The Stauntons. Edited by J. B. Atlay. 
Franz Muller. Edited by H. B. Irving. 
The Annesley Case. Edited by Andrew Lang. 
Lord Lovat. Edited by David N. Mackay. 
Captain Porteous. Edited by W. Roughead. 
William Palmer. Edited by Geo. H. Knott. 
Mrs. Maybrick. Edited by H. B. Irving. 
Dr. Lamson. Edited by H. L. Adam. 
Mary Blandy. Edited by William Roughead. 
City of Glasgow Bank. Edited by W. Wallace. 
Deacon Brodie. Edited by William Roughead. 
James Stewart. Edited by David N. Mackay. 
A. J. Monson. Edited by J. W. More. 
Oscar Slater. Edited by William Roughead. 
E. M. Chantrelle. Edited by A. D. Smith. 
Douglas Cause. Edited by A. Francis Steuart. 
Mrs. M‘Lachlan. Edited by William Roughead. 
Eugene Aram. Edited by Eric R. Watson. 
J.A. Dickman. Ed. byS. O. Rowan-Hamilton. 
The Seddons. Edited by Filson Young. 

Sir Roger Casement. Edited by G. H. Knott. 
The Wainwrights. Edited by H. B. Irving. 
H. H. Crippen. Edited by Filson Young. 
Thurtell and Hunt. Ed. by Eric R. Watson. 
Burke and Hare. Edited by W. Roughead. 
Steinie Morrison. Ed. by H. Fletcher Moulton. 
G. J. Smith. Edited by Eric R. Watson. 
Mary Queen of Scots. Edited by A. F. Steuart. 
Neill Cream. Edited by W. Teignmouth Shore. 
Bywatersand Thompson. Hd. by Filson Young. 
Adolf Beck. Edited by Eric R. Watson. 
Henry Fauntleroy. Ed. by Horace Bleackley. 
Kate Webster. Edited by Elliott O’ Donnell. 
Ronald True. Edited by Donald Carswell. 
Abraham Thornton. Ed. by Sir J. Hall, Bt. 
Katharine Nairn. Edited by W. Roughead. 
Charles Peace. Ed. by W.iTeignmouth Shore. 


IN PREPARATION. 


H. R. Armstrong. Edited by Filson Young. 
Madeleine Smith. Ed. by F. Tennyson Jesse. 
Dick Turpin. Edited by Eric R. Watson. 
Queen Caroline. Edited by 8. M. Ellis. 

J. P. Vaquier. Edited by R. H. Blundell. 
Duchess of Kingston. Edited by L. Melville. 
S. H. Dougal. Edited by F. Tennyson Jesse. 
Adelaide Bartlett. Ed. by Sir John Hall, Bt. 


Wm. Hodge & Co., Ltd., Edinburgh and London. 


—_ 
ae 
ee 


» 
= 
5 


Arey 


mt ee 


va red 7) 


Charles Peace. 


Trials of 
Charles Frederick Peace 


EDITED BY 


W. Teignmouth Shore 


Editor of the ‘‘ Trial of Neili Cream,” &c. 


EDINBURGH AND LONDON 


WILLIAM HODGE & COMPANY, LIMITED 


MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 

BY} 

WILLIAM HODGE AND COMPANY, LIMITED 
“EDINBURGH AND LONDON 


1926 


TO 
MY FELLOW MEMBERS OF 0.8. 


PREFACE. 


SELDOM, if ever, can writer have received so much and such 
kindly help as I have in the preparation of this work. Without 
it, this volume would have been a task; it has been made a 


pleasure. 


Where so many have been generous to me, to give the 
names of all is impossible and it would be ungracious to record 
some only. Therefore, will all those}who came to my assistance 
accept my sincere gratitude ? 

That errors have not crept in I am not so foolish as to hope ; 
I ask pardon for such as there may; be and will gladly wel- 


come any corrections of, or additions to, the story told. 


W. TEIGNMOUTH SHORE. 


October, 1926. 


CONTENTS. 


Charles Peace: Commentary and Biography, 


TRIAL OF JOHN AND WILLIAM HABRON. 


First Day—Monpay, 27TH Novemsrr, 1876. 


Opening Speech for the Prosecution, - 


Evidence for the Prosecution. 


B. Littler, - - - - = 12 Alfred Love, 
Abraham Wilcox, - : = ele John Gillanders, 

Mrs. Eleanor Carter, - - =) 7s Charles Hodson, 
James Brownhill, - - = Ue John Henderson, 
Sarah Beck Fox, - - - 14 Joseph Keighley, 
Elizabeth Whitelegg, - - - 14 James Fitzpatrick, 
Nathaniel Williams, - - - +14 John Vickers, . 
John Massey Simpson, - - 44 John Walsh, - - 
James Beanland, - 15, 24 Henry Hayson, - 


Abraham Ellison, - 16 Ann Cabers, 
William Morrell, - 
William West, - 
William Ewen, - 


Moses Thompson, 


- - 16 Mrs. Mary Brundrett, 
- 3 hs Edward Blakeley, - 
- - 416 Francis Deakin, 
Donald M ‘Clelland, 
John Dill, - . 17 John Henry Simpson, 
James Bent, - - = LF William Griffiths, 
Police-sergeant Thomson, - =) 20 John Leverett, 
Thomas Whillan, - - - 20 


‘ ‘ ' 1 ' 
' 
~ 
«I 


Srconp Day—Tvusspay, 28TH November, 1876. 


James Beanland (recalled), - - z z : F 


Huidence for the Defence. 


William Kelsall, - - - - 25 Mary O’Brien, 
John Cosgrove, - - - - 26 William Raines, 
Miss Winifred Foy, - - - 27 John Gresty, 
Catherine Conlon, - - = 27 


Speech for the Defence, 

Closing Speech for the Prosecution, 

Charge to the Jury, - : - - 
The Verdict, - - - - = - - 


Commentary and Biography, - 


PAGE 


ll 


24 


D6 CONTENTS. 


TRIAL OF CHARLES PEACE FOR SHOOTING 
EDWARD ROBINSON. 


19rH NovempBeEr, 1878. 


PAGE 
Edward Robinson, 2 - 56, 59 John Body, - - - - 659 
Charles Brown, - - Se Sarah Selina Cooper, - - - 59 
William Girling, - = - 658 
The Verdict, - - 3 ‘ Z «= 3 b = é : EVE GO 

THE BANNER CROSS MURDER. 
Magisterial Proceedings, - - 2 - - = : = - ‘Oe 
First Day—Fripay, 17TH JaANuvARY, 1879. 
Mrs. Katherine Dyson, - - 67 Thomas Wilson, 2h tes - $81 
Mrs. Mary Ann Gregory, - - 71 Charles William Harrison, - 81 
Mrs. Sarah Colgreaves, : - 74 George Ward, - - - - 82 
Charles Brassington, - - ea iff | Jacob Bradbury, - - 2) AD 
Srconp Day—Fripay, 24TH JANUARY, 1879. 
Mrs. Dyson (recalled), - - : - - - - - : - 86, 87 
Jacob Bradbury (eeeatied), - - 2 are - - - - - - 87 
John Pearson, - - - - - - - - - - - 105 
Commentary and Biography, : - - - - : - - - 108 
THE TRIAL. 
TursDAY, 4tH FEBRUARY, 1879. 
Opening Speech for the Crown, - - s 2 : 2 = = a12 
Hwidence for the Prosecution. 

Charles Edward Johnson, - - 119 James William Harrison, - - 147 
Mrs. Katherine Dyson, - 120, 148 Jacob Bradbury, - - - 148 
Mrs. Mary Ann Gregory, - - 148 Mrs. Rose Annie Sykes, - - 149 
Mrs. Sarah Colgreaves, — - - 144 James Sykes, - - - - 149 
Charles Brassington, - - - 144 Mrs. Jane Padmore, - - - 150 
Charles Whyman, - - - 146 Edward Robinson, - - - 151 
Thomas Wilson, - - - - 146 Charles Brown, - - - - 151 
George Ward, - “ - - 147 James Woodward, - - - 51 
Closing Speech for the Crown, — - - - - E : : S - 152 
Speech for the Defence, - - - “ E = : : “ C162 
Charge: tothe Jury, 2. (ae) tas ieee oe coins GT 
The Verdict, - - - - E : E 4 3 2 = - 164 


Commentary and Biography, - - - = 5 - 2 - 165 


CONTENTS. xi 


APPENDICES. 

PAGE 

A. Mrs. Dyson’s Letters to Charles Peace, - - E - - : - 173 
B. The Dyson Inquest, - ° - = = : : : ‘ ae eke 
Mrs. Katherine Dyson, - - - - 5 - . - 177, 189 
Thomas Wilson, - - ‘ ~ = 3 = : : - 185 

James William Harrison, - - - - 5 5 - - 186 

Mrs. Mary Ann Gregory, - - - - : z - 186 

Mrs. Sarah Colgreaves, - - : “ : : ‘ 5 = 188 

Charles Brassington, - : - “ - = . : - 188 

Charles Whyman, - - - - - : 2 = ‘ - 188 

George Ward, - - 5 : ss a s ~ - 189 

The Summing Up, - - 2 = : S = ‘ = - 189 

The Verdict, - - E = 2 - - t : Z - 191 


C. Trial of Hannah Peace, - - - - - - - - - - 192 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Charles Peace, - - : : E 


Map illustrating Whalley Range Murder, - 


Sole of Boot worn by William Habron, - 


Scene of the Whalley Range Murder, - 


Tomb of Police Constable Cock,  - 


- - Frontispiece 
- Facing page 10 
- ¥ 18 
- 54 25 


- 4] 


Charles Peace’s Map of Whalley Range Murder 


locality, - - : : . 3 
No. 5 East Terrace, Peckham, - - - 
No. 2 St. John’s Park, Blackheath, - 
Handwriting of Charles Peace, - . 


Map illustrating Banner Cross Murder, - 


Sketch of Charles Peace, by Frank Lockwood, 


- of 44 


- 53 


Note.—Kind permission to reproduce the photographs facing pages 53 and 


57 was given by the Reverend N. Kynaston Gaskell. 


CHARLES PEACE. 


Ei 


Cuartus Peace is one of the most astonishing figures in the story 
of British crime, and one of the most distinguished of English 
criminals. He presents an entrancing personality to students of 
criminology and of criminal psychology, and his Trials are far from 
uninteresting from the legal point of view. He was an accomplished 
burglar and general thief, and a pugnacious murderer. He pos- 
sessed every gift that goes to make the complete criminal—he was 
liar, braggart, and actor ; conceited ; cunning ; lecherous ; malignant ; 
without conscience, and, as every murderer is, remorseless. 

As is only too often the case in regard to the lives of great 
men, there is sparse accurate information concerning his child- 
hood and environment, the character of his relations and com- 
panions, and so forth. In a general way one can fairly judge 
what manner of boy Peace was from the deeds of his manhood; as 
we can do in, say, the instances of William Shakespeare and Mr. 
George Bernard Shaw. For the writing of his adult life the material 
is ample, but too frequently of bad or dubious quality. Around 
great names legends quickly gather, which are useful only when 
fairly contemporary, for then their general character is sure to 
be consonant with that of the man; the legend of Shakespeare’s 
deer-stealing escapade would never have been invented concerning 
a poet who was incapable of poaching or who was notoriously no 
sportsman. In the following pages a stern attempt has been made 
to present facts only; but even the most conscientious editor is 
human, and I ask pardon humbly for my sins of omission and of 
commission. 

The arrangement of the material that composes this volume 
differs considerably from that adopted in other Trials in this series, 
but seemingly was the only one which could enable a consecutive 
and clear narrative to be presented. Whether that result has 
been achieved is for the discerning reader to decide. 


II. 


According to a statement accredited to him by a too-intimate 
friend, Charles Peace ‘‘ was born in Angel Court, Sheffield, of 
: 1 
B 


Charles Peace. 


respectable parents.’? The date was 14th May, 1832. He was 
the youngest of a family of four. His father, John Peace, a shoe- 
maker, was previously an excellent tamer of wild beasts. Peace 
stated, as reported by one of his mistresses, ‘‘I have 
been, and my father before me, a tamer of wild animals, 
and I think I shall tame you, my lady.’’ He continued, according 
to this informant, that his father was a caretaker of the animals in 
Wombwell’s menagerie, which the father and son had accompanied 
up and down the country. His father died in 1845, when Charles 
was thirteen; whether his influence and example had been for good 
or for evil is not known. Of his mother nothing can be ascertained. 

Judging by his correspondence, of which some specimens are 
produced in fitting places, Charles did not receive much in the 
way of education. He himself claimed to have gone to a good 
school, but, of course, his and our definition of ‘‘ good’ might 
differ. That he could read and to some extent write is all that 
can be definitely said. The defects in his education were certainly 
not due to lack of ability, and, judging by his subsequent career 
and achievements, he had artistic and musical leanings, and would 
have achieved fortune as an actor. As a specimen of his literary 
ability this may suffice, for the present; this obituary notice of 
his father— 


In peace he lived, 
In peace he died, 
Life was our desire, 
But God denied. 


He had a distinctly mechanical turn of mind, which served him 
to bad purpose in the contriving of the implements necessary in 
his profession of burglar. It is stated, on what authority I know 
not, that in his youth he worked as a tinsmith, and he was employed 
for some time in the Millsands Rolling Mill, near Sheffield; there 
in 1846 his leg was injured in an accident, which rendered him 
permanently lame. Another account gives it that he lost a finger, 
and received other damage to his left hand in this mishap. Yet 
another statement is that this maiming of his hand was the result 
of his being shot by another young blackguard. Such are the diffi- 
culties which have to be faced and overcome, when possible, by the 
conscientious biographer. Of the accident at the mill, it is recorded 
that he said in later days—‘‘I never cared to work after that.” 
However that may be, he certainly did not pursue an honestly 


laborious life. When incarcerated at Dartmoor, for his country’s 
2 


Charles Peace. 


good, he suggested some improvements in the machinery then in 
use, which were adopted there and in other convict establishments. 


Ill. 


The ‘‘ History of Peace,’’ by Mrs. Thompson, one of the famous 
man’s many mistresses, has already been quoted. How far it is an 
exactly trustworthy account it is impossible to determine, but its 
statements, where they can be checked, appear to be reasonably 
reliable. According to Mrs. Thompson, after the death of his 
father, Peace ‘‘ started on his own account. Even then, he admitted 
to me, his tastes were depraved and disgusting. But there, I cannot 
tell you of it; it is too bad. There is one thing I will say which 
will give you an idea of his character at that age. There was a 
féte at Sheffield, and for purposes of plunder he attended it and 
concealed himself in the ladies’ lavatory. There he had to remain 
the whole day, for, the place being constantly occupied, he was 
unable to escape without being discovered. He used to gloat over 
this when telling it to me.’’ On this occasion he relieved an old 
gentleman of his gold watch, which may have been his first con- 
siderable criminal transaction. It is impossible to track Peace’s whole 
career in detail; fortunately, it is unnecessary so to do. This 
fact is noteworthy—from the outset he always worked alone, to 
which may be attributed his prolonged success. The many 
thefts and burglaries he committed will never all be ascertained ; if 
we could believe that all which are credited to him were actually 
his handiwork, they must have been innumerable. But all that it 
is desirable to do here is to present such a picture of the man and 
his achievements as will enable us to visualise and understand the 
central figure in the Trials presented. He was not alone the mere 
picker of pockets, in which practice he indulged at Sheffield Fair 
and on other such convenient occasions; he was also a portico- 
thief, utilising as a means of entrance the porticos over the hall 
doors of the houses which he desired to despoil. To his unlawful 
pursuits he added those of carver, gilder, and frame maker; he 
was a hawker of small wares; and a musician, singer, and enter- 
tainer! Inconsiderably known to fame as ‘‘ The Modern Paganini,”’ 
and ‘‘ The Great Ethiopian Musician.’? Among his favourite 
melodies was ‘‘ The Campbells are Coming,’’ and he is said to have 
composed a song he often sang, ‘‘ My Own Sweet Will.’’ He per- 
formed chiefly at public-house ‘‘ sing-songs,” fairs, and kindred 

3 


Charles Peace. 


entertainments, and occasionally offered his services as a reciter 
at private schools. Of one such occasion Sir Archibald Bodkin has 
kindly given me a brief account—‘‘ It is a curious fact that in 
about 1873 or so, while I was a boy at school in Highgate, this 
rascal came, and, with permission of the headmaster, gave a reci- 
tation in the Big School to us boys, and chose the grave-digger’s 
scene from ‘ Hamlet.’* We had, in consequence, nearly a half- 
holiday, and much enjoyed it.’? Peace performed upon a one- 
stringed fiddle of his own manufacture, and in his years of triumph 
gathered together a considerable collection of violins, some of which 
were of considerable value and none of which cost him more than the 
effort of appropriating them. 

Peace’s first term of imprisonmeiit, a month, seems to have 
been that allotted to him in the autumn of the year 1851, when he 
burgled a house at Sheffield. After serving this foretaste of what 
was to come to him, he seems to have gone thoroughly to the 
bad, to have become the associate and pupil of criminals, and to 
have been ‘‘ known to the police.”’ Exactly what were his enter- 
prises and what success attended them is not recorded, but in 1854 
he landed himself in very considerable trouble at Sheffield. The 
papers of 21st October report that one Charles Peace, aged twenty- 
two, a joiner; Emma James, nineteen, spinster, servant; and Mary 
Ann Neild (or Neil), married, fell-dresser, were indicted for stealing 
a quantity of rings, brooches, and other jewellery from the house 
of Mr. Richard Stuart at Brincliffe Edge. Apparently Peace was 
in a poor way at the time, as he and his comrades in misfortune 
were undefended. The house had been burgled on the night of 
30th August, and Peace and company had later on pawned portions 
of the abstracted property, others being found in their possession. 
Peace’s defence of himself was an unconvincing rigmarole, and his 
lady friends declined to say anything. Evidence was given that 
Peace had been previously convicted of felony, and there were two 
other indictments against the prisoners for burglary. Peace was 
sentenced to four years penal servitude. 

The following extract from the Manchester Evening Mail, 25th 
February, 1879, is not without interest :— 

“Peace . . . was no stranger to the Wakefield House of 
Correction, where he has been in durance vile on three or four 
occasions, one of his visits being memorable for a daring per- 


* A favourite scene with him, 
4 


Charles Peace. 


formance. A man named Joss Roberts, who lives in Garden Street, 
Wakefield, and was for many years an officer at the Wakefield 
Prison, informed a correspondent that in 1854 Peace was ordered to 
be imprisoned for four years, and he was sent to Wakefield. 

One afternoon whilst he was in charge of Roberts he succeeded in 
making his escape out of the room, the door of which had acci- 
dentally been left unfastened. . . . he managed to climb 
upon the roof of a house in the prison yard, which was occupied by 
the late Dr. Milner. . . . Peace removed some of the slates on 
the roof . . . descended into one of the bedrooms 3 
an alarm was raised . . . the daring fellow was found secreted 
on the top of a wardrobe . . . placed in solitary confinement, 
when he became violent and made a most determined attempt to 
destroy himself. He inflicted a very severe gash in his throat, the 
scar of which is still visible.’’ 


IV. 


So we proceed to October, in the year 1858, when Peace was 
again free to pursue his varied avocations. On a date, possibly in 
1859, and at a place unascertained,* Peace was joined in holy 
matrimony to Mrs. Hannah Ward, widow, with one son, Willie. This 
unlucky woman is said to have been unaware of the character of the 
man who for the future was to cherish her. During Peace’s next 
imprisonment a son was born to him, whom he never saw owing to 
a fortunately early decease. But the said John Charles was im- 
mortalised by his father in these verses— 

Farewell, my dear son, by us all beloved, 
Thou art gone to dwell in the mansions above, 


In the bosom of Jesus who sits on the throne, 
Thou art anxiously waiting to welcome us home. 


It may here be mentioned that Peace confessed to the following 
faith :—‘‘ I believe in God, and I believe in the Devil, but I don’t 
fear either.’’ 

Later a daughter, Jane Ann, was presented to him. 

In the future Peace would on occasion resign his own name 
and work under that of John Ward, as we shall see. 

After various enterprises, of which reliable details are not avail- 
able, Peace again landed himself in bad trouble in 1859. He was 


*See Appendix C, p, 192. 


Charles Peace. 


lodging in Manchester, a city with which his fame is as closely 
allied as with Sheffield, with a man named Newton. Together, 
during the night of 11th August, they removed a large number of 
articles from the house of Mrs. Elizabeth Brooks, South Villa, 
Victoria Park, Rusholme. Part of the booty they concealed in a 
hole in a field near Brighton Grove; here the police discovered it, 
put left it as a bait, while careful watch was kept. Peace and his 
colleague returned, and after a desperate fight were arrested. At 
the police station Peace facetiously described himself as George 
Parker, giving his residence as Nottingham and his occupation as 
‘‘a professor of music’?! His mother, ‘‘ an aged woman ”? (did 
she give her name as Parker?), was called to prove that her son 
had been at home all the week during-which the burglary had been 
committed, but the upshot was six years’ penal servitude for Peace 
and eighteen months for his comrade. 

Liberated in 1864, he returned for some while to his native 
city, but apparently found Manchester a happier hunting ground, 
until, in 1866, aged thirty-four, he once more placed himself within 
reach of the law. He was caught red-handed burgling a house 
in Victoria Park, Lower Broughton, and on 3rd December was tried 
at the Manchester Assizes, under the alias George Parker, alias 
Alexander Mann. The report in the Manchester Guardian contains 
this— 

‘“The prosecutor, Mr. W. R. Gemmell, lives in Victoria Park, 
Manchester. On the 29th of August he was disturbed about four 
o’clock a.m. by a noise, and on his servants going downstairs 
they found that the house had been entered through the kitchen 
window, that the dining-room had been broken open, and that a 
large number of things and some money had been stolen. The 
prisoner was apprehended a few minutes afterwards. He had in 
his possession property which was identified by the prosecutor, and 
a centre-bit, two gimblets, a punch, and other articles. In defence, 
Mr. Torr merely raised the point that there was no proof that the 
house had been burglariously broken into. The jury found the 
prisoner guilty, and he pleaded guilty to a previous conviction in 
August, 1859, when he was sentenced to six years penal servitude.” 

As was his wont, when affairs were going against him, Peace 
snivelled and whimpered, in hopes of softening the hard heart of the 
judge ; pleaded for mercy for his children’s sake and so forth; but the 


Court was unmoved. After referring to his previous conviction, 
6 


Charles Peace. 


his lordship said—If he had really been penitent, it was 
not likely that he would have committed the present offence, and 
that, too, in a manner which showed he was prepared to go all 
lengths in housebreaking. Not only, however, did he commit this 
burglary, but on the very same night he broke into another house, 
from which he stole some plate; but that charge would not be gone 
into. The sentence was penal servitude for seven years. 

In. August, 1872, Peace was released from Chatham Gaol on 
ticket-of-leave. 


Vs 


So far Peace has been but a commonplace and not too suc- 
cessful performer, an apprentice. We now enter upon the period 
in which he made his name as an exceptional exponent of the fine 
art of burglary and as a ruthless murderer, showing himself a 
master. 

He reappears in Sheffield, where, supported by his wife, step- 
son, and daughter, he plied the trade of picture framer and gilder, 
reporting himself to the police on the first Wednesday in each 
month for the duration of his ‘‘ ticket,’’ the police having ‘‘ nothing 
against him.’’ But, probably, their information was not com- 
plete. 

To trace Peace’s doings up to the year 1875 would necessitate 
indulging in the dangerous pleasure of conjecture and the narration 
of many very dubious accounts of his proceedings. 

In 1875 he removed to Darnall, a suburb of Sheffield, where 
he made the acquaintance of the man for whose murder he eventually 
paid penalty. At this place his wife was a bottle-washer to a firm 
of wine and spirit merchants, and his stepson was employed in a 
grocer’s establishment. 

This is a suitable place to take stock, so to speak, of the per- 
sonality of the man, his appearance, his habit, and so forth. He 
was now forty-threé years of age, but appeared much older. In the 
following year he is thus described by the police—‘‘ He is thin and 
slightly built, from fifty-five to sixty years of age,* five feet four 
inches or five high, grey (nearly white) hair, beard, and whiskers. 
: He lacks one or more fingers off the left hand, walks with 
his legs rather wide apart, speaks somewhat peculiarly as though 
his tongue was too large for his mouth, and is a great boaster. 


* A bad shot, 


Charles Peace. 


He is a picture frame maker. He occasionally cleans and repairs 
clocks and watches, and sometimes deals in oleographs, engravings, 
and pictures.’ To which description was later added this— 
‘‘ Alias George Parker, Alexander Mann, ‘Paganini.’ Age, forty- 
six. He looks ten years older.’? Almost a monkey of a man, with 
extraordinary power of pulling about and altering his features, so 
as to make his face unrecognisable even by his relations and in- 
timates. Cunning and cruel, absolutely selfish. In short, an un- 
restrained savage. 

It was on account of the dangerously obvious injury to his 
hand that Peace adopted his famous false lower arm, a sort of 
sheath of cloth and wood, which he held in his hand, and to which a 
stout iron hook was attached—something of the same sort of 
appliance as that used by Captain Cuttle. Not that he attached 
any great importance to the appearance of his hands, for he said— 
‘‘ A policeman always goes by the face. He never thinks of look- 


ing at people’s hands.’’ True then; scarcely so now. 

Slight as was his frame, his strength was enormous. As an 
example of his pluck and brawn, the following is amusing. My 
informant briefly describes Peace as ‘‘ A big, little man, almost 
5 feet 3 or 4; small to look at. . . He met two men one day 
who said to him, ‘ Charley as ta got any brass wi’ thi? We are 
about as dry as a lime basket. Gi’ us a pint.’ Peace was not 


complaisant, so they made a grab at him. Upshot, the two lusty 
men spent some time in hospital, Peace’s farewell to them being— 
* You will mind what you buckle on another time.’ ’’ The same cor- 
respondent provides these two tales—One day he had been going 
his round, as a hawker, and visited some farms, it being ‘‘ just his 
delight to sell some of his fancy ware to the lassies, besides putting 
a few fowls in the bottom of his basket.’’ On his homeward way 
he met a farmer, a big, burly, strong chap, to whom he offered a 
watch, which had on its face a picture of a man ploughing with two 
horses—“‘ it wanted winding up every time you had a look at it.” 
The farmer’s fancy was tickled, and he acquired the seeming treasure 
in exchange for his own watch and the sum of two pounds. When 
they met again a few weeks later ‘‘ there was a small pantomime, 
but Charley Peace won. There was not many that could beat him 
in a rough and tumble.’’ Another day he had been to Mosborough, 
and on his return journey in a lonely lane he encountered a brawny 
navvy, who said—‘‘ Cud you help a bloke ’at’s hard up?’’ ‘‘ Hard 


up!” replied Peace. ‘‘ Ah, hard up! I am allus hard up and 


Charles Peace. 


nobody gives me out, and tha’ll have to have the same.’’ The 
man got hold of Peace, but found himself sprawling in the pond 
near by, and would have been drowned but for the timely assistance 
from some passers-by. 

Many such stories are still current along the Yorkshire and 
Lancashire countryside; whether they all are true or not, they do 
serve to indicate the character and casual doings of Charles Peace, 
who tickled the public imagination as no other criminal has done, 
with the possible exceptions of Jack Sheppard and Dick Turpin, both 
greatly overrated heroes. This appeal to the public fancy was 
strengthened by such incidents as this—‘‘ On one occasion Peace 
called at my grandmother’s house,’’ writes a Sheffield correspondent 
to me, “‘ and asked if he might leave two pictures while he went 
for a drink. Having had too much, he forgot about them. Several 
months later my grandmother saw him passing by, called him in, 
and asked him if he had forgotten the pictures. Because of her 
honesty he had a very large picture framed and gave it to her.” 
As a rule, however, he was most abstemious, especially when pro- 
fessionally engaged, and was seldom known to be drunk. Two 
glasses of beer were his usual ration 

Further light upon this really amazing fellow is provided by 
Sir William Edwin Clegg; I quote from one of his very helpful 
letters—Peace was (in 1879) ‘‘ a small, spare man, clean shaven, 
and with a very prominent chin, which he could so distort as to 
make himself almost unrecognisable. Whilst he was in custody 
here ’’ (Sheffield) ‘‘ he informed me that on many occasions he 
went to Scotland Yard for the purpose of reading the notice offering 
a reward for his own apprehension, but that by manipulating his 
jaw he could escape detection. He had no very great belief in the 
efficiency of the police, and, on many occasions, he daringly put 
himself in their way. He was an expert in the use of a revolver. 

He was not an educated man, but very shrewd and very 
cunning.’’ 

Now from the man to his deeds. 


Vi. 


In 1875, as already stated, Peace and his family took up their 
residence in Darnall, at 40 Victoria Place, Britannia Road, next 
door but one to Mr. and Mrs. Dyson, of whom much more anon, 


who lived in No. 36, between being an unoccupied house. Peace. 
9 


Charles Peace. 


carried on business as picture framer, carver, and gilder, but 
chiefly devoted himself to his profession, in the pursuit of which 
he was assisted by his tramping the countryside as a pedlar, thus 
getting into touch and conversation with servants and others, who 
unwittingly supplied him with valuable information. Peace was 
outwardly a devout Christian, sometimes attending chapel, some- 
times church, and it has been stated even assisting as a teacher in 
Sunday school; certainly his daughter Jane Ann did so. 

While serving a sentence in Wakefield Gaol Peace had made 
the acquaintance of the chaplain, the Reverend John Henry Little- 
wood, who, when vicar of Darnall, was astonished one day to find 
himself face to face with his old convict friend, now seemingly a 
respectable and well-respected parishioner. Peace visited the vicar, 
and, for ‘‘ the sake of his family ’’ and on the understanding that 
he would stray no more, induced him to say nothing about his 
past. Of Peace’s wheedlesome ways Mr. Littlewood said—‘‘ He 
is a most interesting man to talk to, and, although not educated, 
he has so much cunning and tact about him that he can draw out 
what information he requires and then make use of it.”’ 

This not being a biography of Charles Peace, but an account 
of him only sufficiently detailed to enable the Trials to be followed 
with understanding and the character of the man to be examined, 
we shall not deal in full with Peace’s doings at Darnall, but confine 
ourselves to two main incidents—one, a visit he paid to Manchester 
in 1876, and, two, his dealings with the Dysons. It will be con- 
ducive to clear narration if we take the Manchester episode first, 


Peace at the time being resident at Hull; why so will be explained 
later. 


VII. 


During the night of Ist-2nd August, 1876, Police Constable 
Nicholas Cock was shot at Whalley Range, outside Manchester. 

At the Manchester Winter Assizes John and William Habron 
were tried and convicted for the murder. Peace attended the trial, 
which, as he cynically said afterwards, “‘ greatly interested me. I 
always had a liking to be present at trials, as the public no doubt 
know by this time.’’ 

It will be convenient to give the Trial first, then to comment 


upon it and upon the evidence produced, which is interesting to 
students of such matters. 


10 


TRIAL OF 
JOHN AND WILLIAM HABRON. 


First Day—Monday, 27th November, 1876. 


The learned judge, Mr. Justice Lindley, took his seat upon 
the bench at 10.30. 


Joun Hapron (23) and Wintiam Hapron (18,5,) were charged 
with feloniously, wilfully, and of their malice aforethought killing 
and murdering one Nicholas Cock (P.C. 1015) at Whalley Range, 
in the parish of Stretford, on the night of lst August, 1876. Mr. 
W. H. Higgin,* Q.C., and Mr. John Addison, Q.C., prosecuted ; 
Mr. J. H. P. Leresche defended the prisoners. 


Opening Speech for the Prosecution. 


Mr. Hiaqin said the deceased policeman had been in the county 
police force for a period of eight months. He was stationed at 
one of the suburbs of Manchester called Chorlton-cum-Hardy, 
which adjoined one of the most respectable suburbs of Manchester, 
Whalley Range. The learned counsel then described the exact 
locality of the murder, which occurred in a triangular piece of 
ground, from which three roads diverged, the Chorlton-cum-Hardy 
Road, the Upper Chorlton Road, and Seymour Grove.+ There 
was also a small occupation road which went to a farm called Firs 
Farm, and which diverged from the triangular spot above 
mentioned, where the deceased met his death. The two prisoners, 
with a third brother, Frank, who had been discharged by the 
magistrate on this charge, were employed by Mr. Francis Deakin, 
nurseryman, Chorlton-cum-Hardy. These men slept in an out- 
house in Mr. Deakin’s premises. The learned counsel dwelt at 
some length on the plan, showing that Mr. Deakin’s premises could 
be reached by the Chorlton-cum-Hardy Road, which was the public 
road, as also by the private occupation road to Firs Farm, by 
which it was alleged the murderers escaped. The deceased con- 
stable was distinguished for the zeal with which he endeavoured to 


* Chairman of the Salford Hundred Sessions. 


+See Map. rr 


Charles Peace. 


Mr Higgin 

do his duty, and so had incurred the hostility of the three brothers 
Habron. In the month of July he had summoned the brothers for 
being drunk and disorderly. William was brought before the 
magistrates on the 27th July, and fined 5s. and costs. The case 
against John was adjourned to the Ist of August, and he should 
call evidence to show that between those dates the prisoners used 
threats against the deceased, stating that they would be revenged 
if the policeman carried out his intentions. The deceased attended 
at the Court, and by his evidence procured a conviction against 
the prisoner, William Habron, on the 27th; and then on the Ist 
of August the adjourned case was heard and dismissed. On that 
very night the officer was shot, and died in half an hour. There 
could be no doubt that a brutal murder had been committed. The 
learned counsel then outlined the evidence, which showed how the 
deceased and a Mr. Simpson had been walking along Chorlton- 
cum-Hardy Road when the deceased was joined by another officer, 
named Beanland. Mr. Simpson, having seen the deceased up to 
that point, left them, and shortly afterwards heard two shots. 
On returning to the spot he found Constable Cock on the ground 
bleeding. He was taken to the surgery of Dr. Dill, and died 
half an hour later. Mr. Simpson had seen a man loitering near 
the place, who in general appearance was like the prisoner William. 
The next day some footprints were examined, and found to tally 
remarkably with the boots worn by William. William was also 
proved to have been in a shop pricing some cartridges. Immediately 
after the death of the constable a posse of constables went to the 
outhouse where the prisoners slept. At first they saw a light, 
which was shortly put out. When the officers got into the house 
one of the Habrons, John, before anything was said to him, 
exclaimed, ‘‘ I was in bed at the time,’’ so showing he knew the 
errand which had brought the police. After further detailing the 
circumstances, the learned counsel concluded by saying that he 
thought the evidence would warrant a conviction. 


Evidence for the Prosecution. 


_B. Lirrisr, architect, proved and described the plans of the 
locality. 


ABRAHAM Wi.cox, Eccles Road, Chorlton-cum-Hardy—I am 
a watchmaker. I remember cleaning a watch belonging to the 
prisoner John. I took it back to him at Deakin’s nursery, and 
he told me about some words between him and the “ little bobby a 
outside Lloyd’s Hotel some time before Whitguntide. He said 
the ‘‘ little bobby ’’ (meaning the deceased) had threatened to 
summon him. He said, holding up his finger, ‘‘ If he does any- 
thing to me, or either of my brothers, by God I’ll shoot him.” 


Frank was then present. The prisoner spoke very earnestly. [| 
12 


Trial of the Habrons. 


Abraham Wilcox 


spoke afterwards to the deceased about it, and also told his mother. 
I was acting then as an assistant postman. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lerescus—After I heard of the 
murder this conversation immediately recurred to my mind. 

By Mr. Jusricz LiypteEy—John was sober when he said that. 


Exieanor Carrer, wife of John Carter, whose husband kept 
the Royal Oak—I know the two prisoners, who have been regular 
customers. John and William came to my house about the middle 
of July. John said the “‘ little bobby ’’ was going to summon 
him, but he had no right to interfere with them, as they were 
close to their own home and not interfering with anybody; and 
‘‘if he does summons us, by God we’ll make it hot for him, 
we'll shunt the bugger.’? I said, ‘“‘ Tha’ll what, Jack?’ He 
said, ‘‘ We’ll get our gaffer to shift him. He is not the first he 
has shifted, and he will shift him.’’ I gave evidence before the 
coroner. JI remember when John went to the Police Court on the 
31st July. John and William came to the Royal Oak. John was 
in his best clothes, and said he was going to get the case adjourned. 
They had some beer. John gave a toast and wished himself safe 
back. William said, ‘‘ Damn and bugger the bobby, and, if he 
gets the day, by God, we’ll finish him, and we will see an end to 
that bugger.’’ I remember the constable being shot, and this 
conversation was within two days of the murder. I have heard 
on various occasions similar threats used, that ‘‘ If the deceased 
was too officious they would do for him.’’ They were sober when 
they made those threats. John seemed very bitter when he used 
these threats. John was at the Royal Oak on Tuesday night at 
about nine, between eight and nine; I can’t say as to William. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lerescue—William was there, but | 
did not serve him. He bought tobacco. Other people heard the 
threats ; they were made openly. 


James Brownaiut, wheelwright, Chorlton-cum-Hardy—I know 
John Habron; I saw him the day he went to the Court. He came 
past my shop and asked for some water, and then went to 
Mr. Deakin’s field. I asked why he was dressed up. He said he 
had been to the Court, and that his brother, William, had been 
summoned for drunkenness. I asked him how much it had cost 
him, and he said 10s. 6d. I also asked which policeman summoned 
him, and he said “‘ the little one.’? He, John, had to appear the 
week after; there had been a mistake. ‘‘ But if it cost him any- 
thing he would shoot the bugger.’’ The little policeman meant 
Cock. I did not think at the time he meant anything. He was 
sober and not in a temper. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lerzscuzr—The deceased was an officer 
who was rather too forward, and I said so to the prisoner at this 
conversation. It was the impression in the neighbourhood. 

13 


Charles Peace. 


Sarah Beck Fox 

Saran Brox Fox, Chorlton—On the 27th July I saw John 
Habron and his brother, Frank, and Elizabeth Whitelegg. I 
heard her ask John how he had got on. He said, ‘‘J have not 
got on at all; my case did not come on: it will come on on Tuesday, 
and if he does me I will do him before next Wednesday.’ Frank 
Royal Oak, and did not hear what was 


then had gone to the : 
r four yards from him. It 


said. I was at my palings, three o 
was not said secretly. 


ELIZABETH WHITELEGG,  laundress, Chorlton-cum-Hardy, 
describing the same incident as the last witness—I saw John on 
lst August coming from the Royal Oak at 2.30, and he asked how 
my young man was—I had kept company with Cock. I said he 
was all right. ‘ 

Cross-examined by Mr. Leruscuz—This was about two in the 


afternoon. 


NatHaNnieL Wixuiams, Chorlton-cum-Hardy—On Tuesday, Ist 
August, I was going home, and past West Point at five or ten 
minutes to twelve at night. I was on the left-hand side going 
from Manchester. I saw a man standing near the gateway leading 
to Firs Farm. I cannot say who it was. There is a lamp at the 
opposite corner, and another up Seymour Grove, and another past 
West Point. After passing West Point I met Cock with a gentle- 
man, walking. I saw them 40 yards from West Point, and the 
constable was going in the direction of West Point. 

: Cross-examined by Mr. Lerescnze—The man I saw was stand- 
ing still. I have not been called previously. 


Joun Massey Simpson, law student, Whalley B 
Chorlton Road—On Tuesday night, lst August, 4 oy ee to 
twelve, I was walking towards Upper Chorlton Road. After I 
passed Mr. Deakin’s grounds I fell in with Police Con 
stable Cock, and walked with him to the jutting-stone am 
West Point. There are a good many trees overhangin th 
footpath. Beanland joined us at the stone, and we “ a 
and talked for five minutes. While we were talkino’ 
saw a man walking out of the darkness from under ah 
lamp and crossing the road. He partly crossed Seymour Gro : 
and turned up in that direction. He seemed to falter and bien tae 
which way to go, and turned suddenly up Seymour Grove o the 
left-hand side, when I lost sight of him. As he passed und . the 
lamp I had a good view of him. I was at that time 10 to 1d i 
Saray ao ee fe brown coat and a pot hat—a round ken 

stooped a little. could not see his fa i 
T left the constable a minute or two after ce eae a Bah 
oe fee in the direction of Manchester. About a fois 
y " rom West Point there is a bend in the road, and some 


Trial of the Habrons. 


John Massey Simpson 


stumps near Mr. R. Spence’s gate. When I got to this spot I 
heard two shots. The first was two or three minutes after leaving 
the constables, and the second shot immediately after the other. 
It was the report of a pistol—two sharp reports. I ran back, 
and saw two carts—the horses were galloping—pulling up. 
Beanland was in the middle of the road, whistling. Cock was lying 
on the footpath, a few yards from where I left him. I helped to lift 
Cock up; he was bleeding from the breast. Another constable came 
up, and they put Cock into one of the carts and took him to 
Dr. Dill’s surgery. I went on in front. The deceased lived half 
an hour, and died at the surgery. On the Thursday following I 
went to the Old Trafford Police Station, and saw a man sitting in a 
chair, dressed in a brown coat, but without a hat. I stayed a 
few minutes in the inspector’s office, and then passed into another 
room. The man came into the room into which I had gone; and 
he had slight stoop. I did not recognise his face. The coat in 
colour and shape appeared to be the same as the one I saw worn 
by the man on the night of the murder. The man in the police 
office was William Habron, and was of the same height and build as 
the man I saw the night before. I did not particularly notice his 
walk. I thought the man I saw under the lamp was an elderly 
man from his stoop and general appearance. 

Cross-examined by Mr. lLerescpe—The road is over- 
shadowed by trees, and there are very dark patches. The hat and 
coat were of an ordinary kind. 


JAMES BEANLAND, Police Constable stationed at Old Trafford— 
On the night of Ist August I was on duty near West Point. I 
met Cock there at twelve o’clock. Mr. Simpson was with him 
when I came up to them. I came from the direction of Chorlton. 
I stayed talking for five or six minutes. Mr. Simpson was the 
first to leave; he went towards Manchester. I then noticed a man 
coming down Upper Chorlton Road; he crossed Seymour Grove. 
When this man got to the lamp he turned and looked at Cock and 
myself. He was 3 or 4 yards away from the parapet and lamp. 
He walked quickly. He made a stop and turned his face to them. I 
said to Cock, ‘‘ Who is that man?’’ I noticed that the man was 
young and fresh complexioned. I could see very well from the 
light of the gas. He was about 5 feet 7 or 8 inches in height, 
and dressed in dark clothes. I can’t say who it was. I think 
now it was William. I watched him up Seymour Grove, and bent 
down to see if he went any further than Mr. Gratrix’s gate; I 
did not see him pass it. I told Cock I would go and see who the 
man was. I then went to Mr. Gratrix’s gate, which I found open, 
and I went and tried the front doors and found them fastened. 
The windows seemed all right. I turned to go back to West 
Point, and saw a flash and heard shots. It was only half a minute 
after I left Cock. I saw two flashes at the interval of a second. 

15 


Charles Peace. 


James Beanland 


They came from the direction of West Point corner, on the outside 
of Mr. Gratrix’s wall. I heard a shout, “ Oh, murder, murder ! 
I’m shot; I’m shot.’”’? I ran with all my might to West Point, 
and found a great confusion, men trying to stop the horses in 
the carts. The carts had passed Cock in the interval. I had heard 
the carts before. I found Cock with his head against the wall, 
and his feet on a small flag. He was bruised on the temple and the 
cheek bone. I raised him and said, ‘‘ Oh, Cock, whatever 1s the 
matter?’ Then I whistled, and heard a man say, “‘ There 1s 
another policeman.’’ Then Mr. Simpson, the two carts, and a 
gentleman named West, and Constable Ewen came up. es 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lerescuz—I was on Mr. Gratrix’s 
doorstep when I saw the flashes. I could not swear that the 
prisoner is the man I saw. I saw no one when Simpson was 
talking to us. > 


ApraHAM ELuison, carter in the employment of the Stret- 
ford Local Board—At twelve o’clock on the night of the Ist 
August I was passing along the Chorlton Road with a horse 
and cart. Morrell had another cart; he was with me. In passing 
I saw Police Constable Cock at West Point standing by himself 
looking up Seymour Grove. A little after I heard a shot behind 
me. My horse became restive and started off. I heard no other 
shot. When I stopped I saw Cock running from Seymour Grove 
toward the stone. He screamed ‘‘ murder ’’ two or three times 
and ‘‘ I’m shot.’? He was put in my cart and taken to Dr. Dill’s 
house. 


Witiiam Morrexi, carter—I was with Ellison. I passed Cock 
standing by West Point by himself. I heard shots. I pulled up my 
horses. I turned round, and saw Cock running, then he fell 
down. 


__ Witiiam Wust, Chorlton-cum-Hardy—I was going home that 
night. When near Darley Hall I heard two shots from towards 
West Point. Then I hurried along, and saw Mr. Simpson run- 
ning. No one passed me, and when I got to the place I saw Cock 
on the ground. After seeing him put into the cart I went home. 


Witu1am Ewen, police constable, Old Trafford—I i 
Seymour Grove when I heard a report. I was 600 yards ee 5 


the time; I ran towards the place; and no one came that way 


Cross-examined by Mr. LurescHe—Did you ask C i 
knew who shot him, and did he say, ‘I dont eee a 
c poe eed questions as to the remarks made 

y the deceased, to which Mr. Leresche obj j 
said it might as well all come out. Seauatamita ie 


The witness then stated that the deceased said when witness 
16 


Trial of the Habrons. 


William Ewen 


got on the cart, ‘‘ Who is that, Beanland?’’ He replied, ‘‘ Ewen.”’ 
Witness then asked who had shot him, and he said, ‘‘ They have 
done for me this time.’’ He also said, ‘“‘I do not know; they 
have done me.”’ 


Moses THompson, police sergeant—I was on duty at Chorlton 
Road at the time. I heard a whistle and went to the place. I 
met the cart in which Cock was placed. I went and knocked Dr. 
Dill up. I asked Cock if he knew who shot him, once in the cart 
and three times at Dr. Dill’s; he did not say anything. He died 
about ten minutes after he got there. 

Mr. Lerescue said he had no reason to object to anything 
the deceased said, and he should raise no objections. 

The witness then said he again asked the deceased, in Dill’s 
surgery, who shot him, and he said nothing to these questions, 
but on the fourth time he said, ‘‘ Leave me a be; oh, Frank, you 
are killing me.’? There was no one named Frank in the room. 


Jonn Dinu, surgeon—The deceased died half an hour and 
ten minutes after being brought to my house. Cock was shot in 
the right side by the nipple. When probing the wound deceased 
said, ‘‘ You are killing me.’’ I made a post-mortem examination, 
and found a punctured wound under the right nipple. I traced 
the wound through the right lung and found the bullet had broken 
the fourth rib, forcing a portion into the lung. The bullet then 
lodged in the muscles of the spine. There was no doubt that the 
deceased had died from the effect of the gunshot wound. I found 
the bullet produced. It is a conical bullet. 


JAMES BeEnv, police superintendent—About a quarter to one 
in the morning of the 2nd August I received intimation of this 
occurrence. I went in a cab to Dr. Dill’s house, and saw the de- 
ceased, Cock, who was then alive. J sent some constables to Chorl- 
ton, and followed myself. On getting there, I left the cab, and I 
and the constables went up the Chorlton-cum-Hardy Road to Mr. 
Deakin’s gate, from whence the outhouse where the prisoners slept 
can be seen. The windows can also be plainly seen. On arriving there 
I observed a light in the window. I then called Mr. Deakin up. 
On returning I found the light was gone. I was away a few 
minutes. Mr. Deakin called out ‘‘ Jack ’’; some one answered, 
and the door was opened. Mr. Deakin did not stay, but went 
away immediately. Mr. Deakin said, ‘‘ Mr. Bent wants you.’’ 
I and Inspector Whillan rushed into the house, and by the light 
of the lamp I saw the three brothers in bed. The head of the 
bed was towards the door. The prisoners did not say a word. 
They did not seem like men that had been asleep. I pulled the 
clothes off, and told them to remain quiet; then made them get 
up one by one and dress. I told them to put their boots on, 

Co) 17 


Charles Peace. 


James Bent 


and when they had put their feet in the boots I asked them to 
return them to me. I kept William’s boots, and allowed the 
others to put their own on again. William’s were wet and 
‘¢ slutchy.’’? They appeared to me to have been recently wetted. 
Frank and John had only one pair; William had two pairs. The 
others were wet, not ‘‘slutchy.’? William put a pot hat on. I 
handcufied them. I had up to that time made no charge. I then 
said, ‘‘Mind what I am about to say. You three men are 
charged with murdering Police Constable Cock.”’ That was all 
I said. I had named neither day, place, nor time. Upon that 
John raised his hands and said, ‘‘ 1 was in bed at that time.”’ 
I had not mentioned any time. Frank and William did not 
speak ; they were all three sent in a cab to Old Trafford Station. 
I searched the outhouse, and found no firearms. The outhouse 
consisted of only one room. On the mantelpiece I found a 
candle half burnt, and I am of opinion that it had been recently 
burning. The candle was soft, as if it had just been blown out. 
There was no gas. The fireplace was cold, and there was nothing - 
to have shown a light but the candle. I then went to West 
Point and remained there till daylight, posting officers to prevent 
people from walking upon the spot. I examined the ground, 
which was sandy gravel and cinders and hard, at Firs Lane gate, 
and found a number of footprints, which appeared to have been 
made by two or three pairs of boots. I found one particular one, 
near the gate, pointing from the Firs Farm. There was another 
which I found to be one coming from the farm. It was that of 
a labourer on the farm. The one I compared was very distinct, 
and coming in the direction of Seymour Grove. On seeing that 
mark I sent for the boots from Old Trafford. I compared 
William’s left boot* with that footprint, and found it to corre- 
spond in every particular. The footprint was a recent impression. 
I made another impression close to the footprint, and they corre- 
sponded exactly. 
[The boot was produced and handed up to the Bench. | 
I saw the outside rows of nails were very close together, and 
they corresponded with the footprints. Inside the outer row of 
nails there was an inner row, and I counted the marks in the 
impression and found 14 in one row and in the other 13. After 
counting the nail marks I counted the nails in the b 
found them to correspond i Soon Maes 
: pend in number and shape. Between the 
outer and inner there are two rows. I counted the marks in the 
impression in each row, and they corresponded perfectly. There 
was an irregularity in the boot, and so there was in the impres- 
sion. In the toe of the impression there were two marks ana it 
was the same in the boot. There was an iron plate on th heel 
of the boot, and the same in the im i wie. 
pression. There were some 


* See Illustration. 
18 


\ ‘Joey otf} JO 4avd UAOM BI 09 TT pur ‘syreu 
[euptarput 09 OT ‘6 ‘8 ‘2 ‘9 ‘Gg ‘SON = “Guadgooy ay Jo osoyy 03 Sutpuodsoi100 S¥ DDUOPIAS oY} UI 07 UdYods s[IeuU fo SMO OY 09 4uIOd *F ‘g ‘Z ‘T S1OqUIOg OULL 


‘uoIqeyy WeI[{IM Aq UIOM 100g }J2e"J BY} JO BJOG oy} Jo Ydeazo}OYUg 


Trial of the Habrons. 


James Bent 


marks round the heel plate, and I found them in the impression 
in the same relative position. There was no single particular in 
_ which the impression did not correspond with the boot. There 
were impressions of the boots worn by John, but, though they 
coincided generally, I could not find a perfect impression. The 
impressions I have spoken of were on each side of the Firs Lane 
gate. Other officers were present. After comparing the impres- 
sions I went to the Old Trafford Station, and in William’s left-hand 
waistcoat pocket I found two percussion caps, which he said he 
knew nothing of. He afterwards said those caps might have been 
in the pocket when Mr. Deakin gave him the waistcoat. I knew 
Mr. Deakin had given him clothes. I took the statement. He 
said he had not been to the Police Court that day. He said he 
had had two or three glasses of ale at the Royal Oak, and he 
and John had been to Lloyd’s and had two or three glasses there, 
but they were in bed by half-past nine. He then checked himself, 
and said he afterwards went to the Royal Oak for some tobacco 
a little after nine, and that Frank was in bed when he got 
there. I took Frank’s statement, and then John’s. John said 
he never was away from the place where he lived after he came 
back from the Court. I said, ‘‘ William says you were drinking 
at Lloyd’s.’? He then said, ‘“‘I did go to see if William had 
come home, but I had no drink, and we were in bed at half-past 
nine.’’ John and William had been to the Police Court on 27th 
July, and John and Frank on Ist August. The summons against 
John, which had been adjourned, was dismissed. William had 
been fined on the 27th. The place at which the officer was shot 
was the end of his beat, and he arrived there at the proper time. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lerescue—-William and John were 
both summoned on the first occasion. William pleaded guilty, 
and was fined. John set up a defence that he was not the guilty 
person, and he had witnesses to prove that it was his brother 
Frank. The case was adjourned, and then when it came on again 
the charge against John was dismissed. 

Cock was 5 feet 7 or 8. One bullet had hit the wall; 
it is 9 or 10 feet up. Cock gave evidence against John on Ist 
August; it was over at two or thereabouts. I suspected the three 
men from the first, and did not allow a moment to elapse before 
going to their place. I have made every search, but could not 
find any arms. I and my officers have dug over the wheat 
field, and searched all the pools and ditches, draining 
them and searching the muddy bottom. In fact, I have made 
an exhaustive search and found nothing. There were six or eight 
men with me when I went to the outhouse. I did not say, ‘‘ Get 
up, you men; you have killed Police Constable Cock.’’ I am 
certain I made use of no such words. It was on the sand and 
gravel I found the footmarks. There had been no rain from ten 
o’clock the previous night. The road there was dry. I made 

19 


Charles Peace. 


James Bent 

no cast or photograph of the footprints. The ground was 
admirably adapted to receive an impression. I examined the 
impression before the rain fell at 5 a.m. I could not find an 
impression of the extreme outer row of nails. 

Re-examined—You could get from Firs Lane gate to the 
outhouse without leaving footmarks, by the high road or the 
grass. 


Police Sergeant THomson, recalled—aA little before Cock died 
I went with Gillanders to Deakin’s. I stopped at his gate. I 
saw a light in the outhouse five minutes before Mr. Bent came up. 
When he charged the men neither time or place was mentioned. 
Mr. Bent did not make any remark when he first went in as to 
his errand. He did not say, ‘‘ You have shot Cock to-night.” 
John interrupted Mr. Bent, and.said, ‘“‘I was in bed at that 
time.’’? The other two hung down their heads, and were trembling 
very much at the time. I was with Mr. Bent when the examina- 
tion of the footsteps was made, and was satisfied of their identity 
with the boots. Mr. Bent’s account of the footprints is correct. 


THomas WHILLAN, police inspector—I went with Bent to 
Deakin’s. I saw a light in the outhouse seven minutes before Mr. 
Bent knocked at the door. [This witness then confirmed Bent and 
Thompson’s evidence as to the charge and John’s answer; also as 
to the footprints.] The men were not sleepy. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lerescue—lI believed these were the 
men. I brought the boots to the place for comparison. 


AuFrrep Love, landlord of Lloyd’s Hotel—I was present when 
the footprints were compared with impressions made by the 
prisoner’s boots, and they corresponded exactly. I could detect 
no variation. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lerescaz—I saw one print first at 
4 a.m., and two afterwards at 5 a.m., a few inches apart, along- 
side. I did not count the nails in the second impression. I 
counted the inner nails of the first, when the boot came. I noticed 


the impression of the plate. Bent’s impression was not so perfect 
as the first. 


JOHN GILLANDERS, police constable, Old Trafford—I went 
to Deakin’s. I saw a light in the outhouse. It was 
out five minutes afterwards. [Witness then corroborated 
Bent as to what passed in the outhouse and as to the 
eae pee was black slush on William’s boots 

were ree wet i in’ 
were no marks of boots nee Ae Seas 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lurnsoue—The road in Firs Lane was 


hard. There was a pit of water in Deakin’ 
eak : 
footmarks between Firs Lane and Lloyd’s. eS Sa nere area 
20 


Trial of the Habrons. 
Charles Hodzon 


CHARLES Hopson, police constable, described the search of 
the outhouse—On the 3rd of August I went to the outhouse again. 
I found a black waistcoat and three percussion caps and a bullet. 
The caps were in a grey waistcoat; both belonged to John. 


Joun HeEnDERSoN, police inspector—On the 3rd of August I 
found a conical bullet on the mantelpiece, and in a box a waist- 
coat, in the pocket of which were some percussion caps. 
[He described the footprints, showing the peculiarity of the im- 
pressions.| He had no doubt whatever that the boot produced 
made the impressions he had seen. He made a memorandum at 
the time. There was rain on 1st August between six and seven. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lerescue—I saw the marks on the 
morning of the 2nd August. I made the memorandum shortly 
after. 

Re-examined—I compared boot and impression at 10 a.m. on 
Wednesday. 


JosepH Kricuury, police sergeant, described the search of the 
prisoners’ premises—He also had compared the footprints, which 
corresponded exactly with the boots. 


James Firzpatrick and Joun Vickers, police constables, gave 
corroborative evidence. 


Joun Watusu, labourer—I was waiting for John Gresty, market 
gardener, opposite Lloyd’s Hotel. I was at Lloyd’s Hotel on Tues- 
day, Ist August; John and William Habron and Patrick Walsh 
were there, and had some beer. It was ten o’clock or after when 
they and I left. The Habrons went towards Mr. Deakin’s. At 
nine o’clock I saw Frank in bed. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lerescne—William and John came 
out with him, and they went to their home. He did the same. 
William had his boots off at the time he saw Frank in bed, and 
witness asked him to come out and have a glass. William said 
he was not going out; but witness pressed him, and he came out. 
William went with me for some tobacco at the Royal Oak before 
nine o’clock. 


Henry Harson, farm labourer—On the Ist August I saw 
John and William Habron at Lloyd’s in the evening. They left 
about half-past ten. 


Ann CaBERs, waitress at Lloyd’s Hotel—I live at Lloyd’s. 
On the Ist of August the prisoners were there about 10 and left 
at 10.30. They had beer, two glasses each. John had two 
whiskies earlier in the evening. 
21 


Charles Peace. 


Mary Brundrett ; 
Mary Brunpretr, wife of Henry Brundrett, Chorlton—I live 
in Oswald Grove, which communicates with Firs Lane. There is 
a road from Lloyd’s to Firs Farm, across the ditches at the back 
of my house. It is not a public road. During the night of the 
1st August, from twelve to one, | heard at the back of the house 
a great noise as of something running fast. At first I thought 
it was a horse or a cow. My husband got up and looked, but saw 
nothing. It was by the end of the house ; there is a lamp there. 
Cross-examined by Mr. LrerzscHe—It was unusual to hear 
such a noise. We had cows in the garden before. 


Epwarp Buaxensy, a boy eleven years of age—On the Ist 
of August I was staying at Mr. Chambers’s house in Chorlton. 
There is a path leading to Firs Farm, near the house. I was 
wakened by Mr. Chambers’s dog barking at 12.15. I heard the 
clock strike afterwards. I never heard the dog bark before. 


Francis Deaxin—I am a nurseryman. The prisoners have 
been in my employment for some time—William for seven years, 
Frank for eight years, and John for nine years. On Tuesday, 
Ist August, I went away to market at 3 a.m., and returned before 
five. I was at home afterwards. Before I returned on Tuesday 
I saw the prisoners Frank and John at the Police Court. The 
case was dismissed against John; William was not there. John 
had been working up to the time he came to Court, gathering 
raspberries, and when he came back he would return to that 
occupation. I saw William with a man named Cosgrove tying 
lettuces during the day. I saw them last at 5.30 or 6. It rained 
on the morning of that day; it was fine in the afternoon. It was 
a dirty job for the hands and boots gathering lettuces. The soil 
is light ; there was no black slutch among the raspberries or lettuces. 
I remember Mr. Bent coming to my house, and I went with him 
to the outhouses. I stayed till the police took them away. I did 
not hear Mr. Bent make any charge. He told them to put the 
clothes on they had on the night before, and he told them not to 
speak. The black waistcoat and the grey one were given to John 
by me. The prisoners bore good characters. I never gave them 
any caps, powder, bullets, or firearms. I did not know they 
possessed any percussion caps. I kept the box with the caps 
locked up in a desk. There was no means of the prisoners getting 
to the desk. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lerescne—The prisoners were peace- 
fully disposed. John was my foreman. John was at work all Mon- 
day as far as I know, till I sent him away to the carters, and then 
into another field. We were busy preparing for Tuesday’s market 
busy and shorthanded. On Tuesday at five William was at work. 
and could not have been away without my knowledge. If any of my 
men had been away that afternoon I must have found it out. 

22 


Trial of the Habrons. 


Francis Deakin 


William remained at work till six. I left word with John on the 
Tuesday what work he had to do. I used to carry caps in my 
waistcoat pockets. It is quite possible that some caps might have 
been in them when I gave them away. All Saints’ Church is 34 
miles from my place. 

Re-examined by Mr. Hice1n—I was not from home on Monday. 
William was cutting cauliflowers at 2.30. I then sent him on a 
message to the carters at Red Gate on the way to Manchester. I 
saw him no more that day. It is eighteen months since I fired 
my gun. I gave the waistcoats away last spring. I had them 
laid by a long time. 


DonaLp M‘CiELLanp—I am shop assistant in the employment 
of Mr. Moore, ironmonger, opposite All Saints’ Church. William 
came to my master’s shop either on the 31st of July or Ist August, 
some time between three and five o’clock. He asked to see some 
cartridges. I asked him what kind, and he asked to be shown 
some. I again asked what kind, as we kept both pin-fire and 
central-fire. He said, ‘‘ Show me some out of the window.’”’ I said 
the two kinds were in the window, and he replied he would go out- 
side and point out what he wanted. He went out and pointed to 
the box produced. I took them to the counter. They are Eley’s 
patent central-fire cartridges, No. 450, for revolvers. I asked 
him if he had the revolver in his pocket. He hesitated, and said 
*“ No.’’ He said he thought they were the proper size, and asked 
the price. I said either 3s. 3d. or 3s. 6d. the box. He said he 
did not want a box, and asked if he could have less. I said we 
could not break into a box. He said he could not take a box, 
he would have to consult somebody else in the matter. I showed 
him a revolver which would take the cartridges he had been 
shown, and placed a cartridge in the chamber. The prisoner said, 
‘‘] think that is the size.’? He asked the price of the revolver, 
and I told him 35s. or 40s. but that we had some cheaper, from 
10s. I am sure William is the man; I saw his face and his dress. 
He had an Irish accent. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lerescue—I never saw him before. 
He did not come back. I read an account of the murder in the 
paper. I went to the station on the llth August. I had not 
spoken to the police myself, but I believe a friend of mine had. 
Mr. Bent came to the shop to ask me to come and see if I could 
recognise the man. I saw the prisoners come in the dock, and 
identified William at once. I cannot say the day, or come any 
nearer to the time than that it was between 2.30 and 5; but I 
should think it was nearer five. He had a similar coloured shirt 
to what he has on now—it was the only thing I had noticed. A 
police constable came on 2nd August to make inquiries. I 
identified William as the man as soon as I saw him. 

Re-examined—It is unusual for a man like the prisoner to 
ask me to break into a box of cartridges. zs 


Charles Peace. 


John Henry Simpson 


Joun Henry Stupson—I am fellow-shopman to the last witness. 
I was in the shop when the occurrence spoken to by the last witness 
took place. It happened on the Ist August, between three and five. 
I cannot positively swear to the prisoner, but I think William is 
he. I was doubtful as to the day until after the coroner’s inquest. 
I am sure now it was Tuesday. 

Cross-examined by Mr. LerescHe—I may have said Monday. 


Wiuuram Grirritus, gunsmith, Bridge Street, Manchester— 
I have been a gunsmith forty years. The bullet found in Cock’s 
body was a conical bullet used for a breech-loading firearm. It 
is part of a revolver cartridge, No. .442. It is a size smaller 
than those in the box produced by last witness, and the revolver 
produced by the last witness would not take cartridges with bullets 
like that found in the body. The bullet had been fired out of a 
rifled barrel. The weapon must have been of poor workmanship, as 
the grooves were ragged and not clean cut—not a pin-fire. It must 
have been fired from a rifled barrel, and not a fowling-piece. The 
larger cartridge—the one found in the mantelpiece—was a Govern- 
ment Snider cartridge. The caps are three sizes, and are all 
fowling-piece caps. But they would fit a large pistol nipple. It 
requires a practised eye to distinguish between a .442 and a .450 
cartridge. The difference is the 8000th part of an inch. 

Cross-examined by Mr. LurescHE—Caps are not wanted to fire 
cartridges. 


JOHN LEVERETT, bootmaker, said he had seen the boot. He 
described certain peculiarities of the nailing, arising from imper- 
nate of workmanship. The right boot did not correspond with 
the left. 


Evidence for the prosecution closed. 


The Court adjourned. 


Second Day—Tuesday, 28th November, 1876. 


Mr. Justicz Linpugy said that before the evidenc 
e was called 
he Should like to recall Police Constable Beanland, in order a 
satisfy himself as to a certain point in his evidence. Beanland 
said that the man he saw came down Chorlton Road from the direc- 
tion of Manchester, and crossed Seymour Grove and stopped; 
hens doe ede Cock and himself 3 or 4 yards from the 
fees ould like to know which lamp. He understood it was 
The witness said he crossed from the lamp opposite West 


Point towards Mr. Gratrix’ i 
Monet fated 1x's, and then walked to the lamp in 


24 


(9301 049 09 Supumy oy} st erory anoursag) 


C9661 ‘Avp-09 st 41 sy) 


“Jepinw esuey AejTeyM 24} yo euadg 


Trial of the Habrons. 


Evidence for the Defence. 


Witu14m Keusatt—I am a gardener in the employment of 
Mr. Deakin, and have been there since the Ist May. I know the 
two prisoners and their brother. On Tuesday, lst August, Frank 
and John went to the Court—on the day of the night the police- 
man was murdered. On the Monday I was picking vegetables. 
On Tuesday I went to market. I left the market, as near as 1 
can remember, about twenty minutes past three. It was that time 
by the clock in the Strudehill Market when I came down Upper 
High Street. As I left, I was joined in the cart by Frank and 
John. They had returned from Court, and joined me in the cart. 
We drove from the market to Mr. Deakin’s ground, and arrived 
there about four o’clock, and directly I got there I found William 
in the yard. I saw him for the rest of the afternoon. I remem- 
ber William bringing me my allowance of beer in the stable. I 
was taking the pony out at the time, and William said, ‘‘ Kelsall, 
I have brought your beer.’’ I again saw him in the field, after 
I had done attending to the pony, pulling lettuces. William was 


there at six o’clock, when I left. Prisoners have borne good 
characters, and are peaceable men. I never heard them threaten 
any one. 


Cross-examined by Mr. Hiaary—I never interfered with them, 
and never gave them any cause for quarrelling. I was always on 
good terms with them. There were two fields of lettuces. I was 
in one across the road. They went to Smithfield Market. It was 
about 4 miles from Mr. Deakin’s ground to Smithfield Market. 
I think it is about a mile and a half from All Saints’ to Mr. 
Deakin’s house, and 4 miles from the market. The first time I saw 
William on that day was at four o’clock. We stopped on the road 
coming back, first at the Crown in Great Jackson Street. We came 
home up Moseley Street and by City Road. We only stayed a few 
minutes at the Crown. We next stopped at Kellam’s, watch- 
makers, where Frank called to see if his watch was ready for him. 
I did not get out of the cart. There was no clock at Mr. Deakin’s, 
and when I said we returned at four o’clock I spoke to the best 
of my judgment, considering the time I left Manchester. I well 
remembered getting the pint of beer, for Mr. Deakin allowed each 
man in his employment a pint of beer. 

You said you left Manchester at twenty minutes past two!— 
No, at twenty minutes past three. 

You said two?—I beg your pardon, I said three. 

You said two distinctly, but if it is a mistake it is no matter. 

Re-examined—I have not heard the prisoners utter threats 
about the policemen. In fact, they seemed very jovial. and I 
thought they were jovial and glad they had got off. I never heard 
any expression of anger from them all the way back. 

25 


\ 


Charles Peace. 


John Cosgrove 


Joun Coscrove—I am a labourer at Mr. Deakin’s. 1 have 
worked there eight years. I remember John and Frank going to 
Court the day of the murder, and I was at work on that day from 
six in the morning until late at night. Frank and John went 
to Court about ten o’clock. I worked with William all that day, 
getting raspberries till nine o’clock in the morning. After that 
they were tying lettuces, and I was doing that the rest of the day 
up till five o’clock. I was in the yard when John and Frank came 
back, and William was with me. We went back to the lettuces, and 
worked till eight in the evening. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Hicarn—I was ill on Monday and not 
working. I never said that I, John, and Frank were gathering 
raspberries on Monday, but on Tuesday. I never said that we 
were gathering raspberries on the Monday. I never said I could 
not remember where they were working on Monday, or what time. 
I could not give any account of Monday. 

Have you ever said you could not remember where you, John, 
and Frank were working on either Monday or Tuesday, as to the 
time ?—I never did. 

Do you know Inspector Henderson /—Yes. 

Did he make any inquiries from you on this matter /—He did. 

Did he write in a book what you said ?—Yes, sir. 

Did he read it over to you ?—Yes, sir. 

Did you put your mark (pointing to the book) ’—Yes, sir. 

Is what you told him true!—Yes, sir. 

Don’t mutter to yourself.. If you have anything to say speak 
out ?—I have nothing to say but what I said before. 

Then what you told Mr. Henderson is true ?—Yes, sir. 

When was it he asked you about this writing in the book ?—I 
cannot tell what day it was. 

I dare say you can remember when the three brothers were 
up before the magistrates !—Yes. 

Were you in the Court?—No. 

The witness went on to say that from seven to six were the 
usual hours of work. Monday was wet, and no raspberries could 
be gathered. I was not there on the Monday, because I was suffer- 
ing from diarrhoea. I knew I had to come early on Tuesday, for 
Martin Farrer came and told me close upon seven at night. 

(Mr. Hicern then read the witness the words he was alleged to 
have signed in Inspector Henderson’s pocket-book. These words 
were: “‘ On Monday, before the murder, I, Frank, and John were 
getting raspberries, but I cannot remember where or how we were 
aa on Monday or Tuesday as to time. (Signed) John 

(Showing witness the book)—Is that yo _— : 
is wrong ; there is a mistake ia the da oe ee 

There is a mistake in the day? Now I understand. What 


days do you substitute for them? “What da : 
to 1—Well, I cannot say. ya were youcrelor ring 


26 


Trial of the Habrons. 


John Cosgrove 


Mr. Hiacrn—lI thought so. 
Re-examined by Mr. Lerpscuse—You say on Monday you were 
away, and on Tuesday you were there !—Yes. 


Winirrep Foy, single woman, Southern Street, City Road— 
I work for Mr. Deakin. On Tuesday, the Ist August, I saw 
William, first, at seven in the morning, then, through the morning, 
and, again, at dinner-time at twelve. He was there when we went 
to work at one. I also remember Kelsall, John, and Frank coming 
back in the trap. William was in the place all the time between 
one and four; I saw him at five in the yard, and at 6.30. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Hicein—I was examined by Mr. 
Henderson. I did not say at any time I did not remember what 
they were doing on the Tuesday. I told him all they were doing on 
the Monday. 

Did you tell him anything you were doing on the Tuesday ?— 
Yes. 

Did you tell him what you have told us to-day !—I told him 
as near as I could guess as I have told you to-day? 

Have you told us to-day as near as you could guess?—Yes. I 
was picking raspberries on Monday from 7 until 11.30. Then it 
came on wet, and later in the day, between the showers, until seven. 

Did you tell Inspector Henderson anything about the Tues- 
day !—I forget. 

Did you tell him you could not tell him anything about the 
Tuesday !—No, sir. 

Upon your oath, upon his questioning you about Tuesday, did 
you give him an answer to a single question /—Yes. 

What did you tell him’?—TI said I had been with William on 
Tuesday. 

Did he write it down ?—Yes. 

Did he ask you to make your mark ’—He did. 

Frank is called Adam, and William, Bill?—Yes. 

Upon your oath did you mention anything to Mr. Henderson 
about the Tuesday ?—I cannot say. 

{The entry was then read, and it said, ‘‘ They were working 
on Monday until dinner-time at 11.30, then Mr. Deakin took them 
away. Until night we got raspberries.’’ | 

Mr. Justice Liyptey—There is nothing in the book about 
Tuesday ? 

Mr. Hiaein—No. 

By Mr. Justice Linptpy—Was Cosgrove working on Monday? 
—No. 


CaTHERINE Conton—I work for Mr. Deakin. I worked on Ist 
August all day. William was there all day from 7 a.m., picking 
raspberries. John and Frank went to Court. At 11 a.m. William 
sent me to get currants, and came every half-hour to see us. At 
twelve he fetched kettles and hot water for dinner. He had lettuces 

27 


Charles Peace. 


Catherine Conlon 


before and after dinner. I weeded after dinner in the same field 
as the lettuces are. I was on the rise and he below me in the 
same field. John and Frank came home at four. William came 
for a can at about four. I saw him in the opposite field. At a 
quarter to five he and his brother came down the field. At half- 
past six I saw him again. ; 

Cross-examined—I do not recollect what I was doing on the 
day before or after the murder. William was working in the 
field on the other side of the road—opposite the Royal Oak. I 
got no raspberries between eleven and four. Cosgrove was getting 
lettuces with William. 


Mary O’Brien, examined by Mr. Lerescns—I worked 
at Deakin’s. On the Ist August I worked with Foy and 
Conlon all day. I saw WiNiam during the day, all 
day. John and Frank came home at four. I dined 
between twelve and one. Then went to weed. William took us to 
show us where to work. He tied lettuces with Cosgrove. This went 
on until four. I saw William in the yard then. I went then to 
get raspberries with William, Frank, and John till 6.30. William 
worked at the lettuces with Cosgrove in the other field. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Hicern—Buses run fifteen minutes 
before every hour past Deakin’s up past All Saints’ Church. The 
Ist August was the first day I went to work at Mr. Deakin’s. I 
went weeding on a rise in the field where William was working. I 
do not remember what I did on other days. 


Witt1am Raines, physician, Chorlton, examined by Mr. 
Lurescue—I have known the Habrons familiarly five or six years, 
and they are peaceable, well-conducted men. > 

Cross-examined by Mr. Hiaein—Buses are frequent past 
Deakin’s. They do not go right to All Saints’ Church. The end 
of Jackson Street which they turn down is about half a mile from 


the church. The Brook’s Bar omnibuses ran much oftener, and 
some of them passed All Saints’. 


i Nags GRESTY, Market gardener, Chorlton—I live next to 
eakin’s. I have found the prisoners to be decent, quiet people. 


Speech for the Defence. 


Mr. Lerescue said that it now 
them views likely to assist them in 
issue they had to discharge. 


became his duty to put before 
“ reference to this most important 
i ( e could quite understand that th 
inhabitants of the suburbs of Chorlton aud Whalley Range must ie 
very much disquieted by this incident, and it was therefore impera- 
ive in a momentous question like the present that they should 


have the i i sate : 
is most cogent, conclusive, irresistible evidence before they 


Trial of the Habrons. 


Mr Leresche 


brought the crime home to any prisoner. It was a case in which 
they could come to no compromise. It was either murder, or it was 
_ nothing at all as regarded the prisoners; but, so far as regarded 
the poor policeman, it was unquestionably murder. There was no 
doubt that the policeman was on his beat, going his accustomed 
rounds at midnight, when he was shot dead, and that not by 
accident, but by a deadly weapon used by a person who knew what 
he was doing. The mere fact that a murder had been committed 
did not touch these men. The question was, was there any 
evidence, of the character he had described, which brought home 
conclusively and affirmatively to their minds that the two men 
the prosecution had put in the dock were guilty of the crime with 
which they were charged? His contention was that the prosecution 
had failed to make out their charge, and, that, being so, these 
men were entitled to leave that Court freed from that terrible 
charge. 

There was an entire absence of direct evidence in this case. 
The poor man, although he lived half an hour, yet practically 
died on the spot, for he was utterly unable for all practical pur- 
poses to give any account of this matter. The expression spoken 
to by the police, ‘‘ Frank, let me be,’’ was the delirium of a dying 
man, and could not be relied upon. In the absence of direct 
evidence his learned friend had put his case on the ground that 
he had established a perfect chain of circumstantial evidence. 
That being so, he wished to remind them, with regard to circum- 
stantial evidence, that it was a matter which the history of the 
law (particularly the criminal law) had shown to be surrounded 
with difficulties, and accompanied also in many cases by the gravest 
uncertainty. When such a terrible charge had been made it was 
absolutely vital that they should feel that they were convinced, not 
upon any uncertain ground, but upon the surest. Far be it from 
him to address twelve gentlemen and suggest that it was impossible 
that there could not be a chain of circumstances so close, so packed, 
so cogent as to make it irresistible for the jury to arrive at a con- 
clusion in the absence of direct evidence. What he suggested was 
that it was a class of evidence which required careful watching. 
There should not only be a continuous chain, but each individual 
link in it must be perfect. 

He asked whether a sufficient motive had been adduced? It 
was said that revenge was the acting principle, but he 
asked the jury to inquire how far that motive had _ been 
made out. Why should the prisoners have had such a deadly 
malignant feeling as to induce them to shoot the policeman dead? 
He contended that the threats used were nothing more than the 
rash, coarse way of speaking, too prevalent amongst the lower 
classes, which any observant person in passing down the street had 
heard over and over again. However violent the language used, 
they must not attach too much importance to what were, after all, 

29 


Charles Peace. 


Mr Leresche 

mere breath and random expressions. He particularly desired to 
impress on them this fact that only one threat was imputed to 
William, all the rest being charged upon John. Among the wit- 
nesses who spoke of threats was Wilcox, the watchmaker, but his 
testimony referred to a period so far back that it could not be 
accounted trustworthy. Then the evidence of Mrs. Carter, the 
landlady of the Royal Oak, did not imply very active malice, for 
the remark she particularly insisted upon was that the prisoners 
said, ‘‘ We’ll shunt him.’”? They did not say ‘‘ shoot him.”’ 

Then, further, the evidence of identity was extremely loose. 
The witnesses would not pledge their word as to the prisoners’ 
identity, but spoke in so loose a manner that no intelligent person 
could feel convinced that identity was proved. A good deal had 
been made of the officers seeing the light in the outhouse, but the 
only thing he would point out wasthat a thousand reasons would 
suggest themselves to any one to account for the men getting up and 
striking a light. It was quite insufficient upon which to found 
any charge. Again, as to the question of mud being found on the 
prisoner William’s boots, the evidence of Police Constable 
Gillanders showed that there was plenty of muddy pools, which 
would account for the state of his boots. It was also suggested 
that John repudiated the time before he knew what he was charged 
with, but he would ask them to remember that it was extremely 
likely that Superintendent Bent was agitated, and also that the 
prisoners, being awakened at that hour of the night, were not so 
coherent as they might have been. As to the evidence of M‘Clelland, 
who stated that William went to purchase some cartridges, he would 
say that if they relied upon the evidence of all the people who were 
engaged at the nursery, and believed they were speaking the truth, 
then the conclusion they must come to was that there was a mistake 
on the part of M‘Clelland. That witness was not confirmed by 
his fellow-shopman, Simpson. The first positively swore to 
William ; the second said he could not be positive. That somebody 
went that day to inspect the cartridges he was not prepared to 
deny, but that it was proved to have been one of the prisoners he 
did deny. 

He had no reason to object to Inspector Henderson’s memo- 
es ; Aone he could say was that he might be a good police 
a. : te + was Pp indifferent note-taker. Adverting to the 
ee os ey ie cas a that there was only one footmark. 
7 ee se y ome er that fact distinctly. There was 

y t one which was said to correspond with the right foot 
so that they would see that they had not the evidence of a pair of 
ee corresponded with these impressions. 
Selo tess Aen NAM to consider seriously whether it was 
eravel—that a sche t a ey mia ground—sand, cinders, and 

perrect mould would be made? Again, everything 


oe zeal, untiring toil, and labour could accomplish 


Trial of the Habrons. 


Mr Leresche 


had been done by Superintendent Bent; and, although all this 
had been done, the prosecution had not been able to trace to the 
' possession of any of these men a weapon such as must have been used 
in the carrying out of this project. This was not a case where 
a long period having elapsed between the committal of the murder 
and its discovery, there would have been an opportunity to remove 
all traces; but it was a case where, within a few minutes 
after the man was shot down, the superintendent arrested the sus- 
pected men, when they could not have had any time to make away 
with any weapons. If anything had been thrown away, it must 
have been found. The police had emptied every ditch, turned over 
the silt and mud, dug up the fields, and found nothing. He com- 
plimented Mr. Bent as a zealous and intelligent officer, but he 
contended that it was presumptive evidence of the accused’s inno- 
cence that after all this searching nothing was found. He asked 
the jury, before they came to the conclusion at which the prosecu- 
tion wished them to arrive, to weigh all the points of the case 
and reject any link in the evidence which was faulty. The all- 
important question of motive was not properly made out. There 
was no trade combination which made men lose their heads and 
become tools for the vengeance of others, nothing to induce them 
to come to the horrible determination to shoot a fellow-creature. 
Surely the flimsy pretext suggested was not a sufficient motive. 
Taking all the evidence into consideration, the only course which 
they as fellow-citizens could pursue in this momentous case was to 
find the prisoners ‘‘ Not guilty.” 


Speech for the Prosecution. 


Mr. Hieein commenced by paying a warm compliment to Mr. 
Leresche on the manner in which he had conducted the defence, 
and, so far as any word of his could go, he ventured to tell him 
that no one, whoever he was, could have done more honest, per- 
fect justice in a case of that kind than his friend, Mr. Leresche. 
It was no part of his duty to wrest or to win any verdict, and 
least of all to win it by any rhetorical effort. He asked them to do 
him the justice to remember that in opening that case he had 
endeavoured to lay before them the facts as they occurred, and as 
they appeared to him to be pertinent to the case. These men were on 
a trial which involved their lives, but the charge had no fears for 
him. It only made him consider well what was his duty towards 
them. That the policeman had been cruelly murdered no reasonable 
person could doubt. A remark had been made about quieting the 
fears of the inhabitants of this locality. If the facts pointed to a 
conviction, and that conviction was rightly come to, then he should 
be glad for the fears of the inhabitants to be quieted. If not, the 
inhabitants must do the best they could to find out the murderer ; 
but these men’s lives were not to be sacrificed to quiet the fears 

31 


Charles Peace. 


Mr Higgin 

of the inhabitants of that district. Some people stated that a con- 
viction should never be obtained upon circumstantial evidence. 
He would say that circumstantial evidence might be as strong, as 
powerful, and as convincing as the most direct evidence. It might 
be as strong as if they saw the act committed, and therefore he 
did not believe that there was any gentleman in the box who came 
with the predeterminaticn to allow any view or prejudice of any 
kind whatever to step in between his judgment in this case and 
his preconceived opinion; and, therefore, presuming that he was 
addressing men who were desirous of approaching the case from a 
reasonable and sensible point of view, he believed they would not 
be frightened by being told it was a case of circumstantial evidence. 
If they were to take any one point alone which might be proved, 
he did not think the jury would convict on that one point, and 
he would not ask them to do it. He asked them first of all to 
consider those particular points which were proved to their satis- 
faction, to dismiss those which were not so proved, and then to 
put them all together and ask themselves, as sensible and reasonable 
men, what conclusion they pointed to. 

Mr. Higgin then reviewed the evidence, and said that 
he should- not ask them to disbelieve a man’s testimony 
because he was a fellow-labourer of the prisoners. But he would 
ask them to weigh M‘Clelland’s: evidence against the evidence 
for the defence. He contended that Cosgrove could not be 
believed. | He saw no reason whatever to disbelieve the evidence 
given by M‘Clelland and his. fellow-shopman. The former swore 
positively to the prisoner, William, and the latter had a confident 
belief that he was the man who came for a few cartridges. This 
was the evidence they had against what was brought in favour of 
these men. Somebody upon that fatal day was endeavouring to 
buy cartridges. The witness said it was William, and another 
had a confident belief it was that man. Two of the witnesses 
brought from the farm to give evidence for the prisoners were 
proved to have come here to say that which they knew to be untrue. 

With regard to the characters of the prisoners, they were said to 
be peaceable and quiet men. If that were so, they indulged in the 
strangest possible language, and carried in their breasts the most 
deadly and savage revenge. It did not seem consistent to him 
that quiet and decent persons should be going about to public- 
eee uns such threats as had been stated, and that they should, 
if they elieved the case for the prosecution, be shooting down a 
policeman in the dark. He had no desire to rob these men of any 
ee shadow of good character which attached to them, but, 
ties Apnate oe be said against them otherwise, it was 
as Oe noe! a committed this murder, all the jury could 

ogg Ree aracter was good for nothing at all. 

unsel reminded the jury of the circumstances 


hae with the finding of the deceased after he had been shot, 


Trial of the Habrons. 


Mr Higgin 


and with the arrest of the prisoners. He then said if, about twelve 
o’clock on this particular night, the prisoner, William, was near 
the place where the deceased was shot, in company with his brother, 
John, who that very morning had uttered threats against the 
deceased, and if afterwards William was found under suspicious 
circumstances in the place where he slept, the evidence of the alibi 
fell to the ground. To what conclusion was the jury to come, then, 
but that this was the man who fired the shots. He did not desire 
to pursue these men. He only wished to perform his duty to the 
public and to the jury. He desired that in this case there should 
be no failure of justice. If they could say with safe consciences 
that these men were innocent of the crime laid to their charge, 
no man in that Court would rejoice more than he. 


Charge to the Jury. 


Mr. Justion Linpiey said that unquestionably this case was 
one of very great importance, not only because all cases of murder 
were important, but because this particular murder was that of a 
policeman upon his beat; and not in the course of a struggle or 
in the course of any riot or disturbance. It was done, so far as 
one knew, without any immediate provocation, and it was, there- 
fore, in the highest degree desirable, and in the highest degree 
important, in the interests of the public that the person who killed 
that policeman should be found, and should be brought to justice. 
No doubt from the facts that the deceased was murdered at so 
short a distance from the town. and in one of the most respectable 
suburbs, this case had given rise to considerable excitement, and 
the probability was that the jury had heard through the papers 
a great deal more about it than he had. Their duty, however, 
was simply to find out the truth if they could. The question 
before them was a very simple one. Did the prisoners, or either 
of them, shoot this man Cock? He asked them to investigate this 
question as they would any other, without the slightest regard for 
consequences. The question resolved itself into two at the outset. 
In the first place, was Cock murdered? Of that he thought there 
could not be much doubt. It had hardly been suggested that he 
came by his death in any other way. But, apart from that, they 
could, by attending to the evidence, come to the conclusion that he 
must have been murdered. That his death was caused by the 
bullet which was extracted from his body was plain beyond all 
question. Now, how came the wound in the deceased? There was 
not the slightest reason to suppose that the deceased inflicted it him- 
self. There was ample reason to suppose that he did not. Then 
the wound must have been inflicted by somebody. Again, the 
evidence negatived anything like an accident, or a struggle. Who- 
ever did the deed must have done it deliberately, and with a 
desire to take the man’s life. By that train of reasoning they had 

D 33 


Charles Peace. 


Mr Justice Lindley 


arrived at the conclusion that Cock was murdered, and they had 
arrived at that conclusion entirely by circumstantial evidence. 
They now came to that which was a much more difficult and 
serious question, did the prisoners or either of them, murder the 
deceased? He would ask them to apply to this the same process 
and the same train of reasoning. Let them put to themselves 
throughout the double question, is the evidence consistent with the 
guilt of these men, or either of them, and is it fairly inconsistent 
with their innocence? If, in answer to that double proposition, 
they found that the evidence was consistent with the guilt of the 
prisoners, or of either of them, and was fairly inconsistent with 
their innocence, then they would arrive with the same certainty and 
the same safety at the conclusion that one of these men committed 
the murder, as they had arrived at the conclusion that Cock was 
murdered by somebody. But if the result of the evidence upon 
their minds should be that, although the whole of it was consistent 
with the fact that these men, or one of them, might have murdered 
Cock, yet, when considered fairly, it did not exclude a reasonable 
inference of innocence, the case would be one of suspicion as dis- 
tinguished from one of proof. They had to consider whether this 
case was one of reasonable certainty or of suspicion. Passing to 
the circumstances which pointed to the guilt of the prisoners, he 
said it was in accordance with human nature that they, having 
been heard to utter threats against the deceased, should be suspected 
of having murdered him. He proceeded to read over the evidence. 
The learned judge then referred to the question of the buying 
of the cartridges at the shop near All Saints’. He said the first 
question was, when was the application made and by whom? Upon 
both these points there was some little doubt, although now it 
appeared tolerably fixed that the application for the cartridges 
was on the afternoon of Tuesday, the lst August. Both M‘Clelland 
and Simpson at first were not sure about the date. M‘Clelland 
spoke to the man, but without certainty as to the date; whilst 
Simpson did not speak as to the man, but with more certainty as 
to the date. It would, however, appear to be established that the 
application for the cartridges was made on Tuesday afternoon, and 
not on Monday. The jury would have to consider whether there 
was any mistake as to William being the man who called. 
M‘Clelland said there was no mistake, and no doubt it was a very 
important fact if it could be satisfactorily established whether 
William was the man who called. On the one side was the evidence 
of M‘Clelland, and on the other of Cosgrove and the three women 
who worked at Mr. Deakin’s. On the one hand was the evidence 
of the man who identified a man whom he had seen for the first 
time, and it was for the jury to take that fact into consideration. 
As to the evidence of the others, it was for the jury to consider 
whether they were trustworthy, but, with reference to the case of 


Cosgrove, he said his evidence must have struck the jury, as it did 
34 


Trial of the Habrons. 


Mr Justice Lindley 


himself, as being very unsatisfactory, because the account he now 
gave was different from the account he gave to Inspector Henderson. 
Therefore, the evidence of Cosgrove must be taken with caution, 
not to say with suspicion; but it did not follow because he had 
given them a different account that the other witnesses were not 
to be believed. The evidence of the other witnesses—the women 
who worked with William—covered the greater part of the day. 
M‘Clelland said the call was made between three and five. Accord- 
ing to the other witnesses, William was at work from one to four 
when the other came back, and then from four everybody in the 
place seemed to say that William was there. It was suggested, not- 
withstanding, that he might have gone by omnibus, and come back 
without being observed. A great deal depended on the credibility 
or truthfulness of the witnesses. If the jury were of opinion 
that these witnesses were banded together to speak an untruth, then 
that was a matter for the jury to judge. The learned judge also 
pointed out that Mr. Simpson and Constable Beanland saw the 
man going towards Seymour Grove at two different times. The 
question was, had the man retraced his steps? It was for the 
jury to reconcile those statements. 

Referring to the impressions of boots, he said that, although 
there were several impressions which were said to resemble John’s, 
yet there was no reliable evidence which would enable them to 
say that any particular print was made by any particular boot, 
unless it was the one said to have been made by the left boot of 
William. He asked them to dismiss as valueless the evidence 
of Leverett, because the whole value of his testimony de- 
pended on a comparison of the right and left boot. They 
had not got two impressions; therefore, although his evidence 
was honestly given, yet it was inapplicable. The evidence which 
was important was that given by Superintendent Bent. Of course, 
in weighing this evidence they must satisfy themselves in the first 
place that the witnesses were desirous of telling the truth, and 
probably they would be fully satisfied on that head. The next 
point was, was he possessed of habits of accurate observation, not 
merely of general appearances, but of minute particulars? Boots, 
especially those worn by labouring men, were made in great num- 
bers, and were more or less like each other. Any one who would 
say that any impression was made by any particular boot, unless 
they could show some particularly defined features in the boot, was 
not worthy of belief. Therefore they must start with the first step 
of showing the particular boot to be distinct from all other boots. 
They had not the impression before them, and they could not com- 
pare. The learned judge then went on to show that, according to 
the evidence of Superintendent Bent, there were peculiarities which 
distinguished this boot from others. There was the ragged edge. 
There were four little nails in the heel which were very irregularly 
arranged. The row had also been put in irregularly. The nails 

35 


Charles Peace. 


Mr Justice Lindley 


also appeared to have been twisted and worn. These were the sort 
of things one would look to in order to distinguish the impression 
of this boot from that of other boots. 

He would now ask them to consider how far they had 
got? Did either of the prisoners shoot the deceased? If he 
did shoot him, he must have been on the spot. - What was the 
evidence that they were there at the time the man was shot ? 
In the first place, what was the evidence against John 
except the statement made to Bent when he was charged? 
As to the man that was seen, no one pretended that it was John, 
and if John was not there it was for the jury to say what evidence 
there was to convict him. There was another thing he would 
point out. The men were at Lloyd’s drinking at 10.30, but, 
according to Welsh, they were all in bed at 9.30. He asked them 
to put these things together. It would not do, in dealing with a 
question of circumstantial evidence, to take each fact by itself. 
The strength of the evidence would be in its cumulative char- 
acter. It was in the multitude of evidence warranting an infer- 
ence, or pointing in the same direction, which rendered circum- 
stantial evidence useful and trustworthy. They must not only find 
that all the evidence was consistent with the guilt of the persons 
accused, but that it was not inconsistent. He had shown them the 
evidence, if there was any at all, which pointed to John being 
there, and he asked them as reasonable men to weigh it. If those 
materials did not satisfy them then they must consider what other 
evidence there was to implicate him in the matter. He must be 
shown to have been guilty of one of three things—first, of shooting 
the deceased ; second, of aiding and abetting; third, of previously 
inciting and urging men to do it. Was there any evidence to 
satisfy them that John did that? Was there anything beyond the 
exclamation he made when Bent charged him, or the statement that 
he made that he was in bed at 9.30, when he was not in bed till 
10.30? Was there sufficient evidence to bring the offence, in either 
of the three forms he had mentioned, home to the prisoner John? 
As regards William they must return to the question, was he on 
the spot? They had the evidence, such as it was of Simpson and 
Beanland, and they had the evidence of the footprint. He asked 
them to satisfy themselves that the impression was the impression 
of William’s left foot. If they were of opinion such impression 
was not that of William, they would have but little difficulty in 
dealing with the case. If they were, in the contrary, satisfied the 
impression was made by William’s boot, then came the next ques- 
tion, what evidence is there to show when it was made, for that 
was a serious conclusion for them to come to, because, according 
to the evidence for the defence, he could not have been there the 
oa. tree print would not have been there if not 

J: e then reviewed the evidence produced in their 


sabe Firstly, they were of good character 3 secondly, when 
3 


Trial of the Habrons. 


Mr Justice Lindley 


arrested they were where they ought to have been—in bed; thirdly, 
no trace of firearms had been found. These were questions for the 
jury. They must consider whether there was sufficient evidence io 
convict both, or either of the men, of the crime with which they 
were charged, and act accordingly. 


The Verdict. 


The jury retired at five minutes to five, and after an absence 
of two and half hours returned a verdict of guilty against William 
Habron, and of not guilty as to John Habron. The jury recom- 
mended William to mercy on account of his youth. 

On being asked what he had to say why sentence of death 
should not be passed, he said, ‘‘ I am innocent.’’ 

The judge then assumed the black cap, and, in passing 
sentence, said—‘‘ You have been found guilty by the jury of having 
murdered Police Constable Nicholas Cock. It is my duty to pass 
sentence upon you. The trial has been long, but not unnecessarily 
so, for the evidence which had to be adduced against you consisted 
of a number of small details which had to be proved, and all of 
which had to be carefully considered together. The jury most 
patiently attended to the whole, and they found the verdict they 
have just found. I shall simply discharge my duty by passing 
sentence of death upon you. It will be my duty to present to Her 
Majesty’s Government the recommendation to mercy which the jury 
have made by reason of your youth; but, having regard to the fact 
that they have found you guilty, you must not be deceived—for 
this murder, which is now found to have been a murder committed 
by yourself, was a cruel murder—and you must not be surprised if 
that recommendation is disregarded. However, that does not rest 
with me, but with Her Majesty’s Government.”’ 

Sentence of death was then passed in the usual form. 

The prisoner on leaving the dock repeated, raising his hands, 
**T am innocent.’’ 


But this was not the end; for the Cock murder remains, and 
must ever remain, an unsolved puzzle. 

First, there is no sufficient proof that the Habrons were in any 
way connected with the afiair. Second, another claims the 
dubious distinction of being the murderer. 

It can scarcely be argued that the evidence against the Habrons 
was convincing, and Mr. Justice Lindley, a newly appointed judge, 
with little, if any, experience of criminal work, was thought by 
many competent observers to have been unduly impressed by the 


evidence in regard to the footprint which was alleged to have 
37 


Charles Peace. 


been that of William Habron. Certainly this evidence was unsatis- 
factory, and was not skilfully handled by any one concerned. The 
most that can be said about it is that it may have been William 
Habron’s footprint ; but, even if it was so, that is no proof that he 
was present at the murder. As to the cartridges, all that was 
attempted by the prosecution was to show that William Habron had 
made an effort to purchase, but no proof was adduced to demon- 
strate that he had succeeded in doing so. Further, in regard to 
this point, the evidence that William Habron was at work all of 
the day in question in Mr. Deakin’s nursery garden at least 
balances the evidence that he was elsewhere engaged in trying to 
buy cartridges to fit a pistol which was never found, although the 
search for the weapon was keen and thorough. Not one witness 
could swear definitely that he recognised William as the man, or 
one of a possible two men, seen hovering round immediately be- 
fore the crime was committed; Simpson described him as “‘ an 
elderly man from his stoop and general appearance,’’ which does 
not at all fit in with the description of William Habron; Bean- 
land saw this man after Simpson had gone off! The contra- 
diction here, alluded to by the judge, is flagrant. 

Even if the Habrons were present, there is no proof that either 
of them, still less which of them, fired the fatal shot. 

Altogether it seems that the police jumped to conclusions first, 
and looked for proof second. Bent said in his evidence, ‘‘ I 
suspected the three men from the first.’”’ Such an attitude of 
mind does not conduce to a thorough exploration of all sides of 
the case, or to an impartial weighing of the evidence; certainty not 
to a search for further evidence than is needed to convict the sus- 
pected persons. But Bent stated that he did not confine himself 
to ‘‘ finding evidence against the prisoners.’ 

The Habrons, by all accounts, were quite decent fellows, liked 
by all who knew them, and thoroughly trusted by their employer. 
John was a particularly steady workman, and saved a portion of 
his wages, which he sent home to his parents in County Mayo. 
The only thing that in any way justified suspicion against them 
was the intemperate language they had used against Cock. But 
chaos would come again if suspicion attached to every aggrieved 
man who expressed unkindly opinions of and vaguely threatened 
the police. In this connection it may be noted that after the 
summons against John for drunkenness had been dismissed by the 


magistrate, Mr. Hawarth Ashton, on the morning before the 
38 


a) 


Trial of the Habrons. 


murder, Constable Cock, looking rather flustered, reported to 
Superintendent Bent that outside the Court the Habrons had 
threatened they would shoot him; which Bent pooh-poohed, saying 
that Cock should take no notice; that they were only letting off 
gas from annoyance, and that ‘‘ threatened men live long.’’ 
Another version is that Cock said, ‘‘ John Habron has told me he 
will shoot me before twelve o’clock to-night,’’? which looks uncom- 


monly like a prophecy after the event. 
A brief summary of some of the evidence as to William 


Habron will clear the air— 
AGAINST. 
I. His threats against Cock. 


II. His attempt to buy cartridges 
between the hours of three and 
five either on Monday, 31st July, 
or on Tuesday, Ist August, at a 
shop opposite All Saints’ Church, 
Oxford Road, Manchester, 34 miles 
from Deakin’s. <A bus ran fre- 
quently to within almost half a mile 
of the church. The owner of the 
shop swore to William’s identity. 
On the Monday, Deakin had sent 
William on a message to Redgate, 
on the way to Manchester. 


III. Two percussion caps, such 
as were used for fowling pieces, 
were found in William’s waistcoat 
pocket. 


IV. William’s boots, on the 
night of the murder, were found 
to be wet and slushy ; b/ack slush. 
Near the gate in the accommoda- 
tion road to Firs Farm, apparently 
cindered, a footprint was found, 
which corresponded in many 
minute particulars with an im- 
pression made by Bent alongside 
with one of William’s boots. 


For. 
I. Not denied. 


II. Simpson, the shop assistant, 
could not swear to William, and at 
the Coroner’s Court was doubtful 
as to the day, but at the trial he 
swore to the Tuesday. The alibi 
applied to the Tuesday. Any- 
way, no proof whatever was put in 
that William made any purchase. 


III. Deakin had given him this 
waistcoat and admitted that he 
used sometimes to carry such caps 
in his pocket. 

Note.—No firearm was ever 
found, despite the thorough search 
made. 


IV. No cast or photograph of 
the footprint was taken. 


39 


Charles Peace. 


V. Rather mudy. Was it 
expected that the men would be 
asleep after the noise of the 
approach of the police? Why 
should they not have a light? 
Why should they not extinguish it 
on hearing the approach of un- 
expected footsteps ? 


V. The Habrons were arrested 
stark naked in bed; all appeared 
to be awake, and a light, a candle, 
had recently been extinguished. 


Was the man whom Simpson, when talking with Cock and 
Beanland, saw crossing from under the lamp and turning up 
Seymour Grove the same as the man whom Beanland saw later 
coming from Manchester? Either way, was this man William 


Habron? 
AGAINST. 


I. Simpson saw a man in a 
brown coat and pot hat, who 
stooped, and seemed to be elderly. 


II. When arrested, William put 
on a brown coat and a pot hat. 
William had a slight stoop. 


III. The man whom Beanland 
saw was fresh complexioned, 
about twenty-two, and walked 
quickly and uprightly. Beanland 
said, ‘‘1 can’t say who it was; I 
think now it was William. I can- 
not swear to the man.” 


IV. Cock said he did not know 
who shot him. 


For. 


I. He did not see his face. 


II. Was this 
mode of attire ? 


an uncommon 


III. It is very strange that 
Beanland, a police officer, had not 
seen and noted the man observed 
by Simpson. If they both saw the 
same man (and at the same time) 
the contradictions in the des- 
cription are embarrassing. 


IV. He knew William well, and 
must have seen the man, or men, 
observed by Simpson and Bean- 
land. Most likely, too, saw the 
man who shot him. 


All points considered, was the verdict of Guilty justifiable? 


Surely, no. 


There were many in Manchester also who were dis- 
satisfied with the result of the case. 


Many communications were 


made to Mr. Secretary Cross at the Home Office, and a numerously 
signed memorial praying for a reprieve for William Habron was 


sent in. 


On 19th December the following telegram was received 


by Captain R. A. Leggett, Governor of the County Gaol—‘‘ War- 


40 


74 
— 
sale 


ae | 
ue At 4 Pia q 
net . \ \ 


‘a 
+ 


“7 oi - \ ‘) 
Tes Aaa +i wey 
Ne, u 


f 
r 


Vir wy ere | \\.. 


\ 
\ 
: \ 
{ . ; 
\\ 
‘ \ , i \\ 
Pai 
kan \ 
1, ay : - x ; 
pee oe _ , r\ 
eee ws 
\ Au toe ot J ov, f 
’ Vy, j 
nf ’ : 


Tomb of Police Constable Cock. 


Trial of the Habrons. 


rant under the hand of the Secretary of State has been forwarded 
by the night’s post respiting the capital sentence in the case of 
William MHabron until further signification of Her Majesty’s 
pleasure.’’ The news was at once communicated to Habron, who 
at first did not seem to realise the full significance of the message. 

This, the first chapter of the intriguing story of the murder 
of Police Constable Cock, may fitly be rounded off by a letter 
from John Habron to Mr. Megson, of Manchester, who had been 


zealous in the matter of the memorial :— 


From John Hebron.* 
Cloonfad, Ballyhaunis, Co. Mayo, Ireland, 


January the 8/1/77. 


Dear Sir 
Mr. Megson 


I John Hebron one of the prisoners who was taken for the murder of 
police Constable Cock, am at present in Ireland with me parents, am glad 
to say that either me or my brother william Hebron never had anything 
to do with that dastardly crime. Mr. Megson, I feel and ought to be, 
and am very much oblidged to you and all the other gentlemen who did 
so befriend me brother william Hebron after his sentence. 

Dear Sir It’s a very poor and hard case to us his brothers and parents, 
knowing the man innocent, for which he is, but I hope the lord will show 
justice some day, and whoever has done the dastardly crime, i hope will 
be found yet. Dear sir I am certain if not for you. gentlemen who looked 
after him after his sentence he would have suffered wrong, for which we 
feel very thankful. But as you gentlemen did so well for him, I hope you 
will try and perhaps help to get him out of misery in time to come. I 
am very sorry we have lost all our hard earnings by trying to defend 
ourselfs. It cost us about £150, so by money we can do no more. 

So I must say all friends thank you, and all the other gentlemen, 
most kindely wishing you all a happy New Year, and a blessing with kind 
regards. 

I am yours obd 
JoHN Hzpron. 


VIIl. 


In February, 1879, Charles Peace was confined in H.M. Prison, 
Leeds (Armley Gaol), under sentence of death for the murder of 
Mr. Dyson, and on Wednesday, the 19th, at his own urgent request 
he was visited by the Reverend J. H. Littlewood, vicar of Darnall. 


* Seemingly the correct way to spell the name. 
41 


Charles Peace. 


Here is Peace’s letter of invitation— 
HM. Prison, Armley, 17th Feb., 1879. 
From Charles Peace. 


The Rev. Mr. Littlewood, Vicar of Darnall. 


Dear Sir,—This is from that poor, miserable man, Charles Peace, now 
lying under sentence of death in this prison. Dear sir, I have a great 
desire to see you as early as possible this week if you don’t think it too 
much trouble or think that I am so base or bad that it is not worth your 
while to see me. But, O sir, do come and see me at once, for I have a 
great message for you to bear to the people of Darnall, and I think you 
yourself will not repent coming to see me. You will have to bring this 
letter with you, and the governor will give you further instructions. 
Please write back and let me know per return of post. 


Believe me to remain yours, 
CHARLES PEACE. 


Peace had friendly confidence in him and it transpired that he 
wished to make a confession. Part of this will be dealt with later 
on; here only a portion of it concerns us. 

‘“T wanted to see you,’’ said Peace, ‘‘ to unburden my mind 
to you. I know I am about to die, and I want to take from my 
conscience some things which weigh heavily upon it. Before I 
begin, do you believe that I am anxious to speak the truth, and 
nothing but the truth?’’* 

To which Mr. Littlewood answered, ‘‘ I cannot conceive it 
possible that any human being in your fearful position could 
deliberately lie, and confirm these lies, knowing that your Creator 
and Judge is conscious of all you say, and that you will have to 
render an account of it all.”’ 

The kindly parson thus displaying more piety than knowledge 
of criminal mentality. 

‘““T know I shall be hanged next Tuesday,’’ Peace replied. 
““T desire to be hanged. I do not want to live out my life in 
penal servitude . . .’’ and so on, ad nauseam. Then—‘‘ I am 
exceedingly grieved and repentant for all my past life, and if I 
could only undo what I have done, or make amends for it in any 


way I would suffer my body, as I now stand, to be cut in pieces inch 
by inch.”’ 


_ *It very much looks as if Peace’s talk has been edited, Compare it with his 
written confession, p, 44, and his letter on p, 167. 
42 


Trial of the Habrons. 


Peace suddenly, most unexpectedly, turned to the Cock murder, 
saying— 

““T was in Manchester in 1876. I was there to work some 
houses. I went to a place called Whalley Range. I had spotted a 
house there, which I thought I would do. I was respectably dressed, 
because I made a point of dressing respectably, as the police never 
think of suspecting any one who appears in good clothes. In this 
way I have thrown the police off their ground many a time. On 
my way to the house that night I passed two policemen on the 
road. There were some grounds about the house, and my object 
was to get into these grounds in the dusk, and wait a chance of 
getting to the house. I walked into the grounds through the gate, 
and before I was able to begin work I heard a step behind me. 
Looking back, I saw it was one of the policemen I had passed on 
the road. I doubled to elude him. For the moment, I succeeded, 
and, taking a favourable chance, I jumped on the wall, and as 
I, was dropping down I all but fell into the arms of a second 
policeman, who must have been planted for me. This policeman— 
I do not know his name—made a grab at me. My blood was up, 
being nettled that I had been disturbed. So I told him, ‘ You 
stand back, or I’ll shoot you.’ He didn’t stand back, and I 
stepped back a few yards and fired wide at him, purposely to 
frighten him, that I might get away. Now, sir, I want to tell you, 
and I want you to believe me when I say that I always made it a 
rule during the whole of my career never to take life if I could 
avoid it. Whether you believe me or not, I never wanted to murder 
anybody. I only wanted to do what I could do and to get away, and 
it does seem odd that, after all, in the end I should have to be 
hanged for having taken life—the very thing I was always so 
anxious to avoid. I have never willingly or knowingly hurt a living 
creature. That is why I tell you I fired wide at him. But the 
policeman was as determined a man as myself, and after I had 
fired wide at him, and it was all the work of a few moments, sir, 
I observed him seize his staff, which was in his pocket, and he 
was rushing at me, and about to strike me. I saw I had no time 
to lose if I wanted to get away at all. I then fired the second 
time, but all I wanted to do then was to disable the man that 
carried the staff in order that I might get away. I had no inten- 
tion of killing him. We had a scuffle together. I could not take 
as careful an aim as I would have done, and, the ball missing the 
arm, struck him in the breast, and he fell. I know no more. I 
got away, which was all I wanted. Some time after I saw in the 
papers that certain men had been taken into custody for the murder 
of this policeman. That interested me. I thought I should like 
to attend the trial, and I determined to be present. I left Hull 
for Manchester, not telling my family where I had gone. I 
attended the Manchester Assizes for two days, and heard the 
youngest of the brothers, as I was told they were, sentenced to 
death. The sentence was afterwards reduced to penal servitude 

43 


Charles Peace. 


for life. Now, sir, some people will say that I was a hardened 
wretch for allowing an innocent man to suffer for my crime. But 
what man would have done otherwise in my position? Could I 
have done otherwise, knowing, as I did, that I should certainly 
be hanged for the crime? But now that I am going to forfeit my 
own life, and feel that I have nothing to gain by further secrecy, 
I think it right, in the sight of God and man, to clear this 
young man, who is innocent of the crime. The man was sentenced 
to death the day before I shot Mr. Dyson. I did not intend—I 
really did not intend to kill the policeman, but only to disable 
him, to get away myself, and I call God to witness that his life was 
taken by me unintentionally. I came to Sheffield the morning 
after the criabenc ay.) 

He then proceeded to deal with.other matters. 

Mr. Littlewood stated that he firmly believed that Peace was 


sincere and had told the truth. 
This viva voce confession was followed and confirmed by a 
written one, which, with a plan drawn by himself, was forwarded 


to the Home Office. Here it is— 
This is the confession of Charles Peace now under sentence of 


Death now in H.M. Prison, Leeds: 


On the 27 & 28 of nov 1876 at Manchester assizes thare was tow brothers 
triad for the morder of Police man cox in Seymour Grove at Whalley range 
near Manchester ther was from seven to ten witnesses appeared against 
them & all of them but one perjered themselves against them to the utter- 
most. for I saw this trial myself & the only Person that spoke the truth 
was a civilian not the Lawyer’s son for he did not speak the truth. 

The circumstances of the case are as folows 

On Tuesday night the 1st of august 1876 at aboute Midnight I was at 
brookes bar & and you will see by the word (me...... ) on the Plan that 
I went from brookes bar to Seymour grove & as I turned the corner of 
Seymour grove I saw the Police men & two civilians stood at the “ ducking- 
stone ’* ABCD I crossed the road, went up seymour grove & then into 
the grounds of the third house as shown on the Plan. one of the Police 
men followed me there & stude on the steps of the house with his bulls eye 
turned on & then I came over the wall into seymour grove & crossed the 
road to where (me) is marked & then saw a Police man crossing the road 
from the corner ware the letter D is marked towards me & I saw his 
intention & fired off one chamber of my revolver for to frighten him but 
he still came forward to within a yard & a half of myself I discharged 
another chamber & the ball of which struck him on the nipple of the seit 
breast & then he threw up his walking stick saying—Ah! you bu ae 
then feil & I turned round & crossed over into the grounds of ni a 
house I then made good my escape by climbing over the wall at back 


ms Should be < jutting.”’ 
44 


Trial of the Habrons. 


of the house, crossing the lane over the hoarding & across the fields as 
shown on plan & then went to old Trafford railway station & went through 
the tunnell & walked on the line for about two miles before I took the road. 
As I crossed the fields I saw a man working by a fire as marked ‘EH’ on 
the Plan, near the railway, but who did not see me. 

As I was in the act of making my escape over the wall of the fourth 
house I heard a dog barking. 
The two brothers who were charged with this Murder were named Frank 
& Aaron Harman. Frank was acquitted & Aaron was sentenced to death 
but recommended to mercy on account of his youth. & after wards 
repreved by the Secteary off State down to Life. 
as a prooff of his in inosence, you will find that the ball that was taken 
out of coxs brest is one of Heleys No. 9 pinfire cartridge & was fired out of 
my revolver now at the leeds town Hall & if you take the ball out of one of 
Heleys No. 9 pinfire cartridge it & the one taken out of coxs body both 
will weight alike & allso bouth of them to fit into the one cartridge case. 
what I have said is nothing but the truth & this man is inosenc. I have 
done my duty & leve the rest to you. 


IX. 


The plan drawn by Peace should be compared carefully with 
the other plan reproduced. Allowing for his being drawn from 
memory, there is still much to desire in the direction of accuracy. 

Was Peace’s confession true? 

Peace certainly knew Manchester, at any rate the districts 
where there were ‘“‘ likely ’’ houses, and the plan alone is, there- 
fore, no proof that he was the murderer of Cock. 

Then, he was almost certainly in Manchester in April, 1876, 
when three houses in Broughton Park were burgled. From one 
house the thief took an English concertina. After Peace was 
arrested at Blackheath, his house was searched, and among the 
loot there found was this concertina. 

And it has been asserted, probably with truth, that Peace was 
commonly credited with the murder of Cock by criminals in Man- 
chester with whom he associated, which could scarcely be the case 
unless it was known that he was in Manchester on Ist August, 
1876. 

Looking closely into the details given in the two confessions— 


(a) To Mr. Littlewood Peace stated that he was desirous 
of getting into the grounds of the house he intended 
to burgle ‘‘ in the dusk.’’ How was it, then, that he 
did not arrive till midnight—‘“‘ aboute Midnight ’’? 


(b) Peace’s dates are correct; the second day of the Habron 
trial was Tuesday, 28th November, and he shot Mr. 
45 


Charles Peace. 


Dyson at Banner Cross, Leeds, on Wednesday, 29th 
November. 

(c) Peace states that he went into the grounds of the third 
house in Seymour Grove, where he was disturbed by 
a constable, who must have been Beanland, who swore 
that it was into the grounds of the first house—that 
of Mr. Gratrix—that he went, and from which he 
saw the flashes of the shooting. 

(d) Cock was not carrying a stick or a staff. 

(e) It was positively proved, out of Court, that the dog in 
the fourth house, through the grounds of which Peace 
asserted he made his escape, did not bark that night. 

(f) A man, or men, were at work in the fields behind the 
houses in Seymour Grove on the night in question. 

(g) Judging from the position in which Cock’s body was 
found as compared with Peace’s account, either 
Peace came over the wall of Mr. Gratrix’s house or 
he fired at Cock from some distance—that is, he 
could have got away from Cock without firing at all. 
Peace is all at sea here. 

(h) Peace’s having committed the crime would account for 
the Habrons’ pistol not having been found. 

(i) The bullet. Mr. James Woodward, a witness in the 
Banner Cross Murder Trial (see page 151), was shown 
the bullet which caused Cock’s death, and at once 
declared that it was exactly the same as the bullets 
which were fired from Peace’s revolver. The marks 
of the rifling seemed to correspond accurately with 
those upon the bullets fired by Mr. Woodward out of 
Peace’s revolver, and, considering that they were 
cast bullets, the weights agreed very closely—that of 
the Dyson bullet being 185 grs., of the Robinson 
bullet 188 grs., of the Cock buliet 192 grs. The Cock 
bullet would fit the empty cartridge case taken out 
of Peace’s revolver in the Robinson cage, which was 
a pin-fire Eley 12, and would not fit an Eley 9. 
(Peace in his written confession said he used an 
Eley 9!). Professor Richard Owen,* whose opinion 


es Sir Richard Owen (1804-1892), the famous naturalist, It is curious to run 
across him in such a connection. 


46 


Trial of the Habrons. 


was asked, judged that the ball fired by Mr. 
Woodward from Peace’s revolver and that found in 
Cock’s body were both fired through a revolver of 
the pattern used by Peace. 


The confession and the plan were sent to the Chief Constable 
of the Lancashire Constabulary, Captain the Honourable C. G. 
Legge, who sent his deputy to Manchester to go thoroughly into 
the matter. Together with Superintendent Bent and Mr. H. T. 
Crofton, solicitor to the Manchester Division of the Lancashire Con- 
stabulary, he visited the scene of the murder. ‘‘ When we arrived 
there,’? Mr. Crofton writes to me, ‘‘ the deputy chief constable 
produced the confession and plan, and let Superintendent Bent 
and myself read it. Then we drove up and down, examining the 
locality, and explaining to the deputy chief constable what we 
knew. I had been in charge of the prosecution of the Habrons, 
and the conclusion I came to was that, though it was quite probable 
that Peace had studied the houses there for burglary purposes 
(there were few cribs he had not thought of cracking round Man- 
chester ), he had not escaped as he said he had done by going down 
Seymour Grove. . . . If he had taken that line he must have 
run into the arms of a supernumerary constable in plain clothes, 
who was on his way to meet, at West Point, the murdered constable, 
who had come from Chorlton-cum-Hardy, and had reached the end 
of his beat there.’’ 

At first the authorities had grave doubts as to the reliability 
of Peace’s confession, but, as the result of a careful scrutiny of 
the evidence and documents in the case, the Home Secretary was 
advised that there were strong grounds for believing that William 
Habron was innocent of the crime of which he had been convicted. 
He received a free pardon and an indemnity of £800. 


Re 


Now back to Sheffield, to Darnall, where, as already recorded, 
Charles Peace and family had taken up their residence in 1875, 
next door but one to Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Dyson and their young 
son. 

Dyson was a civil engineer, who had worked in America, in 
the employ of the Atlantic and Great Western Reilway. While 
there he married, in 1866, and some time in 1873 or 1874 he re- 


turned to England, securing a post with the North-Eastern Rail- 
47 


Charles Peace. 


way Company. He was a very tall, thin man, of ‘* genteel ’’ 
appearance, of not too robust health. So tall, indeed, was he that 
at York a special desk had to be constructed for him in the sur- 
veyor’s office, so that he might work in comfort. It is stated that 
he was a member of an old Sheffield family, which matters not. 
He was about forty-eight. 

As for Katherine, his wife, it will serve to tell her story in 
her own words, taken from an interview she gave to the Sheffield 
Independent (in 1879), being desirous ‘‘ of contradicting in the 
most emphatic terms the imputations which have been freely cast 
upon her character and her morality.’? Thus— 


‘* Of course, I am Irish. My brogue is sufficient to tell you 
that. I used to talk very much like an American, but since 
returning to this country I have lost the American twang, and have 
somehow or other recovered the rich brogue of the old country. 
I was born in Ireland, at Maynooth. There I remained till I was 
fifteen years old. Then, having just left school, I started off by 
myself to see my sister, who had previously gone to America. She 
was living at Cleveland, Ohio. . . . Then it was a much 
smaller place than now. . . . It was there I first met my hus- 
band. He was a civil engineer, in the service of Sir Morton Peto,* 
and was at that time one of the engineers on the Atlantic and 
Great Western. . . . Then we went to Darnall, and it was 
there that my troubles began.’’ 


Further on, this— 


“You will naturally ask how I became acquainted with 
Peace. It was impossible to avoid becoming acquainted with him. 
Besides, at that time I did not know the sort of man he really 
was. He lived the next door but one to us at Darnall, and he 
used generally to speak to Mr. Dyson on going in and out. Mr. 
Dyson was a esp an and, of course, when Peace spoke to him 
he used to reply. But Peace wasn’t content with a merely speak- 
ing acquaintance. He wanted to force himself upon us. 5 
One of his favourite means was to place his parrots and his other 
birds upon a wall. He could then call our attention to them, and 
to what they could do, and thus get us into conversation with 
him. . . . At first Mr. Dyson did not object, and Peace 
became a constant visitor to the house. Our impression of him 
was that he was a really nice old man. . . . He was plausi- 
bility itself. . . . IT am certain that much which he has guc- 
ceeded in doing, both before and after the murder, is the result of 
the power which he has been able to exercise by. his tongue and 


* Sir Samuel Morton bay the well-known contractor, who helped to 
raise the Nelson Column in 1843 and to ti i 
deaths Cann Wee. construct the Balaclava Ratlway 


48 


Charles Peace. 


manner. . . . To us he appeared to be simply a picture 
framer in anything but good circumstances, for he had but little 
business to do, and his wife used to go out every morning washing 
bottles. We considered they were poor. . . . Mr. Dyson soon 
began to tire of him. My husband had travelled, and could 
converse well on many subjects. Peace was plausible enough, but 
his language was not good; in fact, he very soon began to show 
that he was anything but a gentleman. Mr. Dyson could not 
stand that, and Peace showed him some obscene pictures, and my 
husband said he didn’t like a man of that kind, and wouldn’t 
have anything more to do with him. Besides, another thing 
greatly repelled Mr. Dyson. It was this. Peace wanted to take 
him to Sheffield to show him what he called ‘ the sights of the 
town.’ Mr. Dyson knew what that meant, and being, as I have 
said, a gentleman, he became much disgusted at Peace. . . . 
But we couldn’t get rid of him. We were bound to show him 
common politeness. . . . He would, for instance, drop in 
just when we were sitting down to tea, and we were compelled 
almost to ask him to have a cup. His constant visits to the house 
at last became intolerable to us. . . . When he found that 
he could no longer gain access to the house, Peace became awfully 
impudent. He would, for instance, stand on the doorstep and 
listen through the keyhole to what we were talking about, or look 
through the window at us. . . . Mr. Dyson did not take a 
stronger disgust to Peace than I did. In fact, I was the first to 
express my disgust. I could not stand his impudence and the 
way in which he went on. I had not been used to such society as 
his proved to be, and I rebelled against it. I can hardly describe 
all that he did to annoy us after he was informed that he was not 
wanted at our house. He would come and stand outside the 
window at night and look in, leering all the while; and he would 
come across you at all turns and leer in your face in a manner 
that was very frightful. . . . His object was to obtain power 
over me, and, having done that, to make me an accomplice of his. 
I have told you that when I knew him first I thought him to be a 
picture framer, and nothing more. Since then, however, I have 
learnt a good deal, and much that was difficult to understand has 
been made plain. He wanted me to leave my husband! Posi- 
tively to leave my husband. ‘ What should I do that for?’ I 
said. ‘If you will only go to Manchester,’ he answered, ‘I will 
take a store (American for shop) for you, and will spend £50 in 
fitting it up. You shall have a cigar store, or a picture store. 
You are a fine-looking woman. You will look well in fine things, 
and I will send you fine clothes and jewellery, and if you wanted 
to pawn them it would be easy. . . He also said, ‘ If you 
will only do what I want there shall not be such another lady 
in England as you may be.’ . . . I remember on one occa- 
sion he offered me a sealskin jacket and several yards of silk. 

I declined his present, and told him that if he had a 

* 49 


Charles Pence: 


sealskin jacket and some silk to spare he had ‘better make a 


present of them to his wife and daughter. . . . I remember 
that, when he was speaking to me about Manchester, he said, ‘ If 
you will only go I’ll fix you up there nice. You will have a 


splendid business, and will live like a lady.’ ‘ Thank you,’ I 
said, ‘1 have always lived like one, and shall continue to do so 
quite independently of you.’ . . . Hehad a way of creeping 
and crawling about, and of coming upon you suddenly unawares ; 
and I cannot describe to you how he seemed to wriggle himself 
inside the door, or the terrible expression on his face. He seemed 
more like an evil spirit than a man. . . . I used to be especi- 
ally afraid of him at nights, because he had a habit of continually 
prowling about the house and of turning up suddenly. He would, 
too, assume all sorts of disguises. He used to boast how effectually 
he could disguise himself. . . . He once said, ‘I am never 
beaten when I have made up my mind. If I make up my mind to 
a thing I am bound to have it, even if it cost me my life.’ ad 


This long quotation from an extraordinary document seems 
to shed light upon the character of Mrs. Dyson, who played an 
important part in the life of Charles Peace, and without whose 
assistance it is doubtful if he would have come to the gallows. 
It will help to the understanding of her evidence at the inquest 
upon her husband (see Appendix, p. 177) and at the trial of Peace. 

She was ‘‘ buxom and blooming,’’ somewhere about twenty-five 
years of age. Of her person we read—‘‘ Though, perhaps, not 
what might be termed a handsome woman, she is an exceedingly 
fine-looking woman—tall, well built, and robust.’’ In the same 
account* we are informed that “‘ last spring they ’? (Mr. and Mrs. 
Dyson) ‘‘ lived at Alexandra Road, Healey, and perhaps it is no 
secret to say that on one or two occasions the police were asked to 
mediate between husband and wife and reconcile their differences. 
Mr. Dyson has practised the art of throwing at his wife, and she 
in turn has wielded the poker at times, with very marked effect. 
As a rule, however, they appear to have lived tolerably happy 
together.”’ 

Undoubtedly Peace was enamoured of Mrs. Dyson; what were 
her real sentiments towards him, and whether or not there was an 
intrigue between them, must be judged from the evidence she 
gave at the inquest and at the trial, and from the statements made 
by Peace. Two assertions of his in regard to her may be noted 
here: he declared that she had more than once told him that she 
was not married to Dyson, and he asserted over and over again 
that she was his mistress. It does not affect the case against Peace 


* Sheffield Independent, 30th November, 1876. * 
50 


Charles Peace. 


whether his or her statements in this respect were true, but it 
would greatly influence our view of her trustworthiness as a witness. 

It will be better to withhold for a while full details of the 
deed which brought this famous and infamous burglar to the 
scaffold; here a mere outline of the events will be sufficient to 
forward us on our story. 

On Ist July, 1876, Peace meeting Dyson in the street, grossly 
insulted him. In the evening of the same day he threatened Mrs. 
Dyson in the presence of several persons. Ags a result of this 
conduct, Dyson took out a peace summons against Peace, and a 
warrant was issued for his apprehension. It is stated that when 
instructing his solicitors to take out this summons, Dyson said that 
he knew that Peace had a number of letters, which he had shown 
about, stating that they were from Mrs. Dyson, and in her hand- 
writing. He, Dyson, had seen them, and declared them to be 
*“most impudent forgeries.’’ He wished them to be read in Court 
when the summons was heard! 

Very naturally, Peace did not approve of these proceedings, 
and, having no desire to be hauled up, he and his family left 
Darnall for Hull in July, where he opened an eating-house in 
Collier Street, which was presided over by his wife and daughter, 
he himself being lucratively if spasmodically engaged in quite 
other pursuits.* But before he made tracks for security Peace 
told his son-in-law, Rolsover, in Darnall, to keep a watch upon 
the Dysons, and to advise him of their doings and movements. 
Bolsover, on 25th October, 1876, noted that there was a furniture 
van in front of the Dysons’ house. He did not witness the 
departure, but was able to find out the direction taken; tracked 
the vehicle through Sheffield and along the Ecclesall Road (see 
Map); on his way, to his amazement, he met with Peace, who, 
he thought, was in Hull. Joining forces, they followed the van 
to its destination at Banner Cross Terrace. Peace did not hesitate 
to explore the Dysons’ new dwelling-place, then made a purchase 
in a neighbouring shop. After a brief colloquy with Mrs. Dysont 
and the fortunate avoidance of a meeting with Dyson, Peace went 
back into Sheffield, thence returning to Hull. 

Not much is known of Peace’s attitude and sentiments toward 
Mrs. Peace, his stepson, and his daughter, but they were not over- 
kindly. On one occasion, in the Collier Street house, his daughter 


* Peace’s Hull home was blown to pieces during a German air raid. 

+ For details as to this and of Peace’s doings and sayings until after the 
murder on 29th November, see the Trial (p. 111) and report of the inquest 
(Appendix B, p, 177). a 


Charles Peace. 


made a remark about Mrs. Dyson which her father greatly resented. 
He made to hit her, but her mother intervened, with the result 
that he struck her cruelly, sadly disfiguring her face. He then 
cleared them all out of the house, and himself went off. 

We already know that, according to his own statement, Peace 
was in Manchester on Ist August, and again there on 28th Novem- 
ber, returning on the 29th from hearing an innocent man con- 
demned to death for a crime which, as he says, he had himself 
committed—to Sheffield to perpetrate a murder which in due 
time brought him to the halter. 

That evening Dyson was shot, in the presence of his wife, by 
Peace, in the passage beside the Dysons’ house, in Banner Cross 
Terrace, shortly after eight o’clock. Naturally, he did not loiter 
to see the result of his handiwork, but ran across the road, 
climbed a wall, and so escaped. It is almost incredible, but it is 
true, that for many months he eluded all pursuit. The methods 
adopted by the police do not seem to have been very expert, in- 
deed were very haphazard and by no means sufficiently persistent. 

In December the police issued this bill— 


MURDER. 
One Hundred Pounds Reward. 


WHEREAS on the 29th ult. Mr. Albert Dyson, C.E., 
was murdered at Banner Cross, Sheffield, having 
been shot in the head in the presence of his wife 
by Charles Peace, who escaped in the darkness 
of the night, and is still at large, and WHEREAS 
at the coroner’s inquest, held on the 5th inst. 
upon the body of the said Albert Dyson, a verdict 
of wilful murder was found against the said 
Charles Peace, NOTICE is hereby given that a 
reward of one hundred pounds will be paid by 
Her Majesty’s Government to any person other 
than a person employed in a police office in the 
United Kingdom who shall give such information 
and evidence as will lead to the discovery and 
conviction of the said Charles Peace. 


An account of the inquest forms Appendix B, p. 177. 
52 


No. 5 East Terrace, Peckham. 


(Peace’s Home in 1877.) 


Charles Peace. 


XI. 


It would be interesting, but not conducive to the purpose of 
this volume, to follow Charles Peace’s career in detail, step by 
step, from one astonishing deed of dare-deviltry to another. The 
pen of a writer of fiction would splutter over producing as a work 
of imagination such a series of strange adventures. 

We will pass on to the year 1877, when Peace, under the 
name of Thompson, was living at No. 5 East Terrace, Evelina 
Road, Peckham, London, 8.E. A quite ordinary suburban villa, 
but by no means a quite usual suburban establishment. At the 
head of it Mr. Thompson, a most respectable person, a regular 
attendant on Sunday evening at the Parish Church, employed with 
a Mr. Brion, a neighbour, is contriving an invention ‘‘ for raising 
sunken vessels by the displacement of water within the vessels by 
air and gases’; entertaining friends at musical parties; proud 
of his collection of violins, banjos, and other musical instruments ; 
kindly busy with his dogs, cats, rabbits, canaries, parrots, and 
cockatoos ; curious as to why a Christian nation should support the 
very un-Christian Turks against the Christian Russians; early to 
bed—but not to sleep, for he ‘‘ worked ’’ by night, most success- 
fully. 

But not so happy a household as it appeared to be! There 
were Mrs. Peace, who went by the name of Mrs. Ward, and Willie, 
her son, to whom the basement was allotted. The better rooms 
were occupied by Peace—‘‘ Mr. Thompson,’’ that is—and Mrs. 
Thompson, alias Susan Grey, whom he had picked up during a 
brief residence at Nottingham in 1877; a pretty woman—the 
widow, so it was said, of a certain Mr. Bailey; twenty-four, or 
was it thirty-five?—of fair complexion, with an abundancy of 
fair hair, and with light brown eyes; altogether a quite prepossess- 
ing person, but said to be a bit too fond of strong drink. 

Peace remarked later on of Mrs. Thompson—‘‘ You know, she 
is a dreadful woman for drink and snuff; she snuffs half an ounce 
a day; and as for drink, I have paid as much as £3 in two days 
for her. She talked at one time about putting herself in an ayslum 
for drunkards, and [| think it is the only way she can be cured. 
If I saw her again I should advise her to go there, and try to be a 
good woman.’’ 

Peace had shaved his white beard, dyed his hair, stained his 
face with walnut juice, wore spectacles—had transformed himself 

53 


Charles Peace. ; 


beyond much chance of recognition by over-curious members of 
the police force or by inquisitive acquaintances from Sheffield. A 
thin, wiry, benevolent-looking old buffer. 

Between November, 1876, and 9th October of this year, 1878, 
Peace had been practising his profession of burglar with enor- 
mous, and to the police disconcerting, success, the major part 
of his business being conducted in the southern portions and 
suburbs of London. All this while being wanted by the police for 
the Banner Cross murder ! 

According to a statement made by Mrs. Thompson, Peace in a 
moment of temper had said to her, ‘‘ They would give £100 for me 
at Darnall.”’ , 

In the evening of 9th October Mr. and Mrs. Thompson enter- 
tained themselves with a musical evening, he adding to the charm 
of the proceedings by playing on the violin, accompanied on the 
piano by one of the ladies of his harem, while the other indulged 
them with a song. Doubtless in the drawing-room: gorgeously 
furnished-—a costly suite of walnut furniture, rich Turkey carpet, 
many mirrors, a bijou piano, a Spanish guitar, said to have been 
looted from a countess. Peace maybe in his comfortable beaded 
slippers. 

Then early to bed; only to rise very early; then to work. 

With the following result, as recorded in the Kentish 
Mercury of 12th October, 1878, a bald but quite convincing nar- 
rative :— 

‘‘ A man refusing name and address, age about 50, of negro 
type, with face bandaged, was charged before Mr. Slade at 
Greenwich Police Court on Thursday, 10th October, with burglary 
and shooting a police constable with a revolver. P.C. 284 R. 
Gurling said: about 2 a.m. that morning he was on duty at St. 
John’s Park, Blackheath, when his attention was called by 
P.C. 202 Edward Robinson,* to a light at the back of No. 2 St. 
John’s Park, the residence of Mr. J. A. Burness. P.S. 32 R. 


*In a volume edited by Walter Wood, ‘‘ Survivors’ Tales of Famous 
Crimes”? (Cassell, 1916), there is an account of the capture of Charles 
Peace by Alfred Tate, ex-sergeant in the Metropolitan Police. He states 
that he was stationed at Blackheath in 1878, and was on duty during the 
night of 9th-10th November; that Robinson was armed with a revolver, 
and—in short—his whole story differs in toto from that told at Greenwich 
Police Court and at the Old Bailey, Tate claiming to be the real hero. 
Among other items is that the burglar volunteered that his name was 
Peace! Blessed are the uses of imagination ! 

54 


Charles Peace. 


Brown then arrived and directed the two P.C.’s to stay at 
the rear, whilst he went to the front. Shortly afterwards 
the prisoner came out of the house and down the garden. And 
P.C. Robinson went towards him, when he fired two shots (both 
missed) and shouted ‘ Keep back, keep back, or, by God, I’ll shoot 
you.’ The P.C. closed with him, when he fired three more shots, 
the first passing on the left side of his head, the second over his 
head, and the third entered his right arm. The other constable 
came to his assistance, also P.S. Brown, and they overpowered 
him and took him into custody. After the evidence of the other 
witnesses, prisoner was remanded.’’ 

** On 18th October, 1878, prisoner appeared on remand, when 
he gave his name as John Ward, aged 60. Mr. Beard* appeared 
for prisoner. Inspector Phillips of Greenwich said that when 
prisoner was searched a pocket knife, bearing the name engraved 
Mr. Moss Isaacs, Herne Hill, Dulwich, shipbuilder, whose house 
was burglariously entered on 11th December, 1877, was found upon 
him. He was then further remanded till 26th October, 1878. 

‘* Further remanded for 1 week; then committed for trial at 
C.C. Court, commencing 18th November, 1878.”’ 

John Ward, whose age was not sixty, but forty-six, was Mr. 
Thompson, of Peckham. Needless to say, the kindly old gentleman 
was missed ; neighbours conjectured that he had gone away to some 
pleasure resort; not till he was identified as John Ward did the 
saddening truth leak out. On 2nd November Peace wrote to Mr. 
Brion, signing himself ‘‘ J. Ward,’’ appealing to him to come to 
Newgate to visit an unfortunate wretch who had gotten himself into 
trouble through over-indulgence in drink and who was despised by 
‘‘ his own family.’? Mr. Brion went and found himself face to 
face with his colleague, Mr. Thompson! Naturally the police put 
themselves into contact with Mr. Brion, who told them all he 
knew. Mrs. ‘‘ John Ward ’’ and ‘‘ Mrs Thompson ’’ fled. The 
pretty villa was shut up. The happy family scattered. 


* Peace’s solicitors were Messrs. Beard & Sons, 10 Basinghall Street. 


55 


Charles Peace. 


Peace was tried and found guilty at the Central Criminal 
Court on 18th November. Here follows an abbreviated account :— 


THE TRIAL wItHIN THE 


CENTRAL CRIMINAL COURT, OLD BAILEY, LONDON, 
19ta NOVEMBER, 1878. 


Judge—Mr. JUSTICE HAWKINS. 


Joun Warp, alias Cnarues Pace (60), feloniously shooting at 
Edward Robinson with intent to murder. Other Counts with in- 
tent to do grievous bodily harm and to resist his lawful apprehen- 
sion. 


Counsel for the Crown—Mr. Ponanp' and Mr. Dovenas 
Straicut.? (Instructed by the Treasury.) 


Counsel for the Prisoner—Mr. Montacu Wriuuiams® and Mr. 
Wituram Austin Murcaurs. (Instructed by Mr. Beard.) 


Epwarp Rozinson, policeman, R 202—On Thursday morning, 
10th November, about two o’clock, I was on duty in the avenue 
leading from St. John’s Park to Blackheath—that is, at the rear 
of No. 2 St. John’s Park, the house of Mr. Burness. In passing 
that house I noticed the flickering of a light in the drawing-room, 
at the back of the house; I watched it for some little time, and 
then went in search of another constable. I found Girling; he 
accompanied me back, and we both made observation of the 
drawing-room. We noticed the light move from the drawing-room 
into several other parts of the house. I was then assisted by 
Girling on to the garden wall. Sergeant Brown then came up, 
and he helped Girling on to the wall, and went round to the 
front of the house and rang the bell. Immediately upon that the 
light I had noticed was extinguished, and the prisoner came out 
from the drawing-room window, which opens on to the lawn of the 
garden. Girling then jumped off the wall into the avenue, and I 
jumped into the garden. I was in uniform. In my jumping 
down I broke some glass, which made a noise. I then saw the 
prisoner run towards the bottom of the garden; I immediately 
followed him. As I was following him he turned round and 


Sir Harry (Bodkin) Poland, K.C., J.P., D.L.; for many years one of the 
Counsel to the Treasury and Home Office ; Recorder of Dover, 1874-1901. 

2 Afterward Sir Douglas Straight (b. 1844; d. 1914); M.P. for Shrewsbury, 
1870-74 ; Judge, High Court of Judicature, at Allahabad, 1879-92, &c. 

*Montagu Stephen Williams (b. 1835; d. 1892); Metropolitan Stipendiary 
Magistrate, 1886; Q.C., 1888. 

56 


» 


* i tay F ie Lae 
nee ip ay, - Mie (aan Wey fl ee 
ole a ; 7 a a , at 
Ter at ee eben 
f a) ew 4 : a) a) ; ° e 
1 7 : : ra a 


\e ea Aye hiee 6 vmesn 


(Csmopura VQ OA} 949 UT poorjou 
AIM SAYSI] VY} { WLOOI-SULUTG O44 SI AYSII 949 UD “SLST UL posotly SVAr aovoed o10Y AA ) 


“qreeqHoRld ‘Wed S,UYOL 4S Z ‘ON 


The First Trial. 


Edward Robinson 


pointed a revolver at my head. I was then about 6 yards from 
him. It was a moonlight night. I could see the revolver. He 
said, ‘‘ Keep back, keep off, or, by God, I will shoot you.” I 
said, ‘‘ You had better not.’”’ He immediately fired three 
chambers of the revolver at my head, two of the shots passing to 
the left of my head and the third over my head; I heard the shots 
whistling past my head. I then made a rush at him, and he fired 
a fourth shot at me, passing to the right of my head. He aimed 
at me. I then closed with him, and struck him in the face with 
my left hand, and with my right I guarded my head. The 
prisoner then said, ‘‘ You bugger, I will settle you this time,’’ and 
immediately fired a fifth shot, which I received through the right 
arm above the elbow. I closed with him again, and threw him 
down. Whilst we were on the ground he said, ‘‘ You bugger, I will 
give you something else,’’ and he moved his left hand towards his 
pocket. I then doubled his right arm up, got hold of the revolver, 
and struck him on the head with it—the revolver was strapped 
round his wrist. I doubled his arm up with the revolver in his 
hand, and struck him several blows on the head with the revolver 
and with his own fist too. I turned him over face downwards. 
and held him with my knee and left hand till Sergeant Brown 
came. He stood by until Girling came up. I then began to feel 
weak from loss of blood. I handed the prisoner over to Girling. I 
had this greatcoat on (produced)—there is the mark where the 
shot went through; one shot made the two holes. 

Cross-examined—I was 6 yards from him when he turned; I 
got closer to him; I ran towards him; before he fired the first 
shot I was about 2 yards off him; I had not my truncheon 
drawn at the time. He fired the three shots in succes- 
sion, when I was within 2 yards of him, threatening me in the 
same way that he did afterwards. When he hit me, the shots went 
close to me. After the three shots had been fired I made a dash at 
him and struck him. I struck him very hard. The fourth shot 
came almost immediately after that. The subsequent wound was 
in the arm with which I guarded my head; I had it up in that 
position when the fifth shot was fired. I did not move my arm 
before the last shot was fired; I kept it in that position; at the 
same time he struck me in the face and fired at me. I did not 
hear the prisoner say after the struggle, ‘‘ I only did it to frighten 
him.”’ 

Re-examined—I believed that there was a burglary committed 
in Mr. Burness’s house. 


Cartes Brown, police sergeant, R 32—On this morning I 
was with Robinson and Girling at the back of No. 2 St. John’s 
Park. I told them to guard the rear. I went round to the front, 
and knocked and rang several times. Shortly afterwards I heard 
some shots fired ; they appeared to come from the back of the house. 

57 


Charles Peace. 


Charles Brown 


I also heard a cry for assistance. I immediately ran round to 
the back of the house, got over the wall, and there found that 
Robinson had been shot. He was lying above the prisoner, who 
had this six-chamber revolver in hig hand; his elbow was resting 
on the walk, and the revolver was pointing at me as I came up— 
it was strapped round his right wrist. I at once went to Robin- 
son’s asistance. After striking the prisoner on the hand with my 
truncheon, I got the revolver from him. I struck him on the right 
arm because I could not get the revolver out of his hand. I held 
him till Girling came. He was then secured. I searched the 
place to see if there was any other man. I found no one else. I 
found on the prisoner a silver pocket flask, a banker’s cheque- 
book, and a letter-case, which have been identified by Mr. Burness. 
I also found this small crowbar* in his left-hand trousers pocket. 
I went into the house and found the dining-room window open, and 
on the table some of the plate, a crumb scoop, a sugar basin and 
spoon, and a decanter stand ready for removal. It was not packed ; 
he had been disturbed, apparently. I took a gold ring from his 
hand at the station; that has not been identified. 

Cross-examined—I could not state how many shots were fired ; 
I could hear several. Six cartridges were drawn from the 
revolver at the station; the six chambers were all empty; every 
chamber had been discharged. Robinson was lying atop of the 
prisoner when I saw him first; no shots were discharged after that; 
how many had been previously discharged I don’t know. I did 
not hear the prisoner say, ‘‘ I only meant to frighten him.” I 
was there before Girling. 

Re-examined—All the chambers had been recently discharged. 
I examined them at the station. 


Wittiam GiRLING, policeman, R 284—I was with Robinson 
on the top of the wall. I saw the prisoner come from the drawing- 
room window on to the lawn. I jumped from the wall into the 
avenue, and ran down to the bottom. I heard the revolver fired 
five times within a minute. I ran back and got over the wall into 
the garden, and found Robinson struggling with the prisoner. 
The prisoner was on his face, and Robinson was on the top of him. 
He said, “‘] am shot through the arm, Girling.’’ I got hold of 
the prisoner and said, ‘‘ I have got him all right; you had better 
go to the station and have your arm dressed.’? The prisoner said, 
““T only did it to frighten him, so as I could get away.’ J 
searched the prisoner in the garden, and took from him several 
housebreaking implements, which are produced—an auger, a centre- 
bit, a little hand vice, two knives, a gimlet, three screws, and 
several other things. I found them in his pockets behind; they 
were handed to the inspector. After I had taken hold of the 


* Jemmy. 
58 


The First Trial. 

William Girling 
prisoner he attempted to get away, and I hit him with my staff. 
He was then taken to the station. 

Cross-examined—aAll he said was, ‘‘ I did it to frighten him, 
so as to get away.”’ 


Joun Bopy, police inspector, R—After the prisoner was taken 
into custody I went and examined the premises. I found marks 
of the jemmy at the back dining-room window; it appeared as 
if it had been forced; the catch had been sprung and the window 
forced up. There was a hole in the dining-room door, about 5 
inches square, large enough for a man’s hand to be put through and 
undo it on the other side. In the library a desk had been forced 
and some drawers of a chiffonier. I entered the charge against 
the prisoner at the station; it was for burglariously breaking and 
entering the dwelling-house of 2 St. John’s Park, Blackheath, and 
shooting Constable Robinson with a revolver, with intent to murder 
him. He made no answer to the charge. I asked his name and 
address. He replied, ‘‘ Find out.’’ I received a bullet from Mr. 
Burness the following day. 


SARAH SELINA CoopER—I am a servant at No. 2 St. John’s 
Park. On the night of 9th November, when I went to bed at ten 
o’clock, the house was all safe; the doors and windows were 
all fastened. I was aroused in the morning. When I was 
cleaning out the dining-room I found a bullet on the hearthrug, 
and there was a hole in the centre of the window about the same 
size as the bullet. I gave it to the housemaid. 


Epwarp Rosinson, re-examined—lI should say I was about 15 
or 16 yards from the dining-room window when the shots were 
fired; the bullet went right through my arm; it came out about 
2 inches beyond the place where it entered. 

After consulting in the box for four minutes, the jury brought 
in the verdict of guilty on the first count. 


During the hearing of the case Peace adopted a very respectful 
and penitent mein. He was a capital actor. But when he heard 
the verdict he, says Montagu Williams, ‘‘ completely broke down, 
and his bearing upon the occasion . .. was far from suggestive 
of the man of courage he most certainly was.’? When asked by the 
judge if he had anything to say why sentence should not be passed, 
‘‘ in a whining tone, with tears in his eyes, and almost grovelling 
on the floor,’”’ he made this amazing appeal— 

*« Yes; I have this to say, my lord—I have not been fairly dealt 
with, and I declare before God that I had never any intention to 
kill. All IT meant to do was to frighten him, so as I might get 
away. If I’d wanted to kill him I could easily have done it, but 
I never did. I say I didn’t fire five shots—I only fired four; and 

59 


Charles Peace. 


I think I can show you, my lord, how I can prove only four shots 
were fired. If your lordship will look at the pistol you’ll see it 
goes off very easily; the sixth barrel went off of its own after I 
was taken. When the fifth shot went off the policeman had a hold 
on me, and it went off by accident. I really didn’t know the 
pistol was loaded. I hope, my lord, you will have mercy upon me. 
I know that I am base and bad. I feel that I am that base and 
bad that I am neither fit to live nor die. For I have disgraced 
myself. I have disgraced my friends, and I am not fit to live 
among mankind. I am not fit to meet my God,* for I am not pre- 
pared to do so. So, oh, my lord, I know I am base and bad to 
the uttermost, but I know, at the same time, they have painted 
my case blacker than what it really is. I hope you will take all 
this into consideration, and not pass upon me a sentence of 
imprisonment which wili be the means of causing me to die in 
prison, where it is very possible I shall not have a chance amongst 
my associates to prepare myself to meet my God that I hope I shall 
meet. So, my lord, do have mercy upon me. I beseech you, give 
me a chance, my lord, to regain my freedom, and you shall not, 
with the help of my God, have any cause to repent passing a 
merciful sentence upon me. Oh, my lord, you yourself do expect 
mercy from the hands of your great and merciful God. Oh, my 
lord, do have mercy upon me, a most wretched, miserable man— 
a man that am not fit to die. I am not fit to live; but with the 
help of my God I will try to become a good man. I will try to 
become a man that will be able in the last day to meet my God, 
my Great Judge, to meet him and to receive the great reward 
at His hands for my true repentance. So, oh, my lord, have 
mercy upon me, I pray and beseech you. I will say no more; 
but, oh, my lord, have mercy upon me; my lord, have mercy 
upon me.’’ 

Montagu Williams says—‘‘ This harangue seemed to have an 
effect upon everybody in Court except the man to whom it was 
addressed. It was a great treat to watch the face of Mr. Justice 
Hawkins during the speech.’’ 


Mr. Justice Hawkins, addressing the prisoner, said—‘‘ John 
Ward, the jury have found you guilty, upon the most irresistible 
evidence, of having fired this pistol five times at the constable 
with intent to murder him, and I must say that I entirely concur 
in that verdict. I do not believe that any other would, upon con- 


* On other occasions Peace professed to be anxious on this point. T 
‘ : ns 
Reverend J. W. Horsley, the last chaplain of Her Maj existe: Prison rr 
Clerkenwell, who had some acquaintance with Peace at this time, bluntly 
rye ae 2 gate ma ee until his guilt could no longer be 
ing rather unkin 9 
oe ayes Sree <indly that “in appearance he resembled a half- 


60 


The First Trial. 


sideration, have been satisfactory to themselves. You were detected 
in the act of committing a burglary, and, putting altogether aside 
what may have been your conduct on other occasions, the circum- 
stances of this particular case are quite sufficient to prove to my 
mind that you are an accomplished burglar, and that you went 
to this house, determined to rob, by fair means if you could, but 
armed in a manner that shows you were also determined to resort 
to foul means if necessary to escape detection. You have asserted 
that you only fired the pistol at the constable in order to frighten 
him, that thus you might be enabled to make your escape. I do 
not believe you. A man who has a deadly instrument of this 
description strapped to his arm does not make use of it in the 
manner you did without a deadly intention; it is beyond belief 
that he can have any other; and the prosecutor, and you, also, 
have to thank God the constable’s life was spared. In the dis- 
charge of his duty, and, in the bravest manner, he advanced to 
close with you, and while he was near to you, four shots were 
deliberately fired at him, and, if any one thing was wanting to 
show your murderous intention it was supplied by the expression 
made use of by you before you fired the fifth shot, ‘I will settle 
you this time.’ This shot was fired at his head, and, but that 
he was guarding his head at the time with his arm, he would have 
received the shot upon it, and, if that had been the case, death 
would most likely have been the result, and you at this moment 
would probably be receiving sentence of death. I do not 
consider it at all necessary to make any inquiry into your ante- 
cedents; the facts before me are quite sufficient to show that you 
are an accomplished burglar, and a man who would not hesitate to 
commit murder in carrying out that object. Notwithstanding 
your age,* therefore, I feel that I should fail in my duty to the 
public if I did not pass upon you the extreme sentence of the 
law for the offence of which you have been convicted, which is 
that you be kept in penal servitude for the rest of your natural 
life.”’ 

The jury expressed their admiration of the courageous manner 
in which Robinson had discharged his duty, and trusted that his 
conduct would be recognised and rewarded. The Court concurred 
in the recommendation of the jury, and ordered a reward of 
£25 to be paid to Robinson. 


Peace was then removed to ‘‘ gloomy Pentonville ’’ to com- 


mence the serving of his sentence. But, it having been discovered 
that ‘‘ Mr. Thompson,’’ alias ‘‘ John Ward,’’ was in truth the 
long-sought-for Charles Peace, steps were being taken to bring him 
to trial on the charge of the murder of Arthur Dyson. 
Meanwhile the unfortunate Mrs. Peace had been arrested in 


* Of course Peace was not sixty years old! 
61 


Charles Peace. 


Sheffield, was brought back to London, and tried at the Central 
Criminal Court on 14th January, 1879 (see Appendix C, p. 192). 


XII. 


After her bereavement Mrs. Dyson had returned to her 
relations in America. Without her evidence the case against Peace 
would have been very weak. She was sent for, and expressed her 
readiness to come. In the Sheffield Daily Telegraph of 7th January, 
1879, the following Central News telegram was printed—‘‘ Queens- 
town: Among the saloon passengers who arrived yesterday in the 
White Star steamer, ‘ Britannic,’ from New York, are Mrs. Dyson, 
the wife of Mr. Arthur Dyson, who, as alleged, was shot by the 
notorious burglar Peace, and T. Walsh, the Sheffield Police 
Officer.”’ 

Peace must now have realised that he was in serious trouble, 
and can have had small, if any, hope that he would escape the 
scaffold. 

The following letter from him to the Home Secretary is typical 
of his literary efforts, but it may be that, when he was in a tight 
corner and desired to appeal to any soft spot there might be in 
the hearts of his persecutors, he made himself out to be more help- 
lessly illiterate than he really was :— 


newgate Prison 
Nov 25th 1878 
To the Right Honerbul 
Secretary off State 


Sir this is from John Ward a prisoner under the sentence of Life inprison- 
ment. & as thear is a noughter charge against me on serphison* of been 
the Morderer of Mr. Dyson of Sheffield. but knowing myself not to be 
gilty & also nowing that I can Prove myself not to be gilty of the crime 
if I have Justest don to me so that 

Sir I hope & truest that you will be so kind in Justest & Mercy to me. & 
hear all that I shall say to you. for I only ask for Justest so do have Pity 
on me & and grant me that, Sir. Sir, I shall tel you. in the first place 
that the woman that called herself Mrs. Dyson & as now hepstonded te 
amarcketer was not his wife but a woman that he brote from amarcketer 
with him & and not his wife. & her and me was cohabiting to gather & I 
have got a grate nomber of noates in her hand writing & on some of them 


* The spelling, punctuati : 
the es . nation, and ‘so forth are here given exactly as in 


62 


‘g0¥ag Sap1¥YyD jO SUTILIAAPUe]Ty Jo a]1uTIsoe 


The First Trial. 


she is telling me that Mr. Dyson is out & askeing me to come over to her 
& is huseing all maner of bad talk in them to me. & I have allso got her 
‘Porthrate & mine taken togather & allso three more Porthrates of her & 
these three Porthrates is in the hands of the Police at black heath Police 
Station & as the Police do not know that they are the Porthrates of her I 
am a frade that they will disstrow them & if they do disstrow them it will 
be my doonfall. 

& thear is anoughter Porthrate of her & a great meny of the noates that 
she sent to me at Sheffield & allso I have a meny Persons to call upon to 
Prove that Mrs. Dyson as tractent the Life of Mr. Dyson & allso that Mr. 
Dyson as treacten to take her life & as Pointed a Paire of Pistels throught 
the bed room winder in Presnts of a meny Persons & and said that he would 
take her Life & and my Life to. & I have a meny Persons more that I 
must call upon to Prove of her & me been at defent Public houses her 
been drunk & saying that she whould take Mr. Dysons Life before she had 
don with him. all this I can reaily Prove if I have Justest don to me. 

Sir 

as I have got this charge to Prove to be folest & that my Life is now 
in danger & as I am a Prisoner that will have to be triad for my Life, I 
do hope and trust that you will take it into consideraceon that I am a 
Prisoner for trial & acording to Low & Justest I am alowed to Prepaire for 
my Defence. so that I do hope and trust you will not take heny thing rong 
that I have sad in this to you. for I do not entend to give heney ofence, 
Sir. 

Sir & do have Pity on me & give me your kind Permision that the 
Pappers & letters comcerning my coming trial shall not be taken away 
from me or be disstrodedt when I am removed from this Prison to heney 
Prison that I may be taken to. 

but O Sir 

do take it into consideraceon that I am a Prisoner under a charge that my 
Life depends upon, by me having thes Porthrats & noats in redeness for 
my trial, so do have Pity upon me & alow me to Prepaire for my defence 


& to Prove myself innocent of the Chatge§ of Morder that is lade agantest. 
me. 


Sir, I am that most rected unheppy 
man John Ward. 
or Charles Peace. 


but have Pity upon me & let me have a reply from you respacted 
Sir 


XIII. 


On Friday, 17th January, 1879, in charge of two warders, 
Peace was conveyed from Pentonville to Sheffield, leaving King’s 
Cross station early in the morning, and reaching his destination 


+ Threatened. + Destroyed. § Charge. fe 


Charles Peace. 


at nine o’clock in good time to make his appearance before the 
Stipendiary Magistrate, Mr. E. M. E. Welby. 

Peace was evidently bent upon doing a fine and impressive 
piece of acting—insolent, defiant, plaintive. Here follows a com- 
prehensive report of the proceedings, useful for the history of the 
case, for purposes of comparison with the evidence given at the 
inquest (see Appendix B, p. 177) and at the subsequent Trial (see 
p. 111), and as a help to the understanding of the character of 
this astonishing rogue. 


THE BANNER CROSS MURDER. 
MAGISTERIAL PROCEEDINGS AT SHEFFIELD.* 


First Day—Friday, 17th January, 1879. 


Cuartes Pzacsz, alias Joun Warp, now undergoing sentence of 
penal servitude for life, was brought before the Stipendiary and other 
Magistrates, charged with the murder of Arthur Dyson, civil engineer, 
at Banner Cross on 29th November, 1876. 

Mr. Pouuarp, Solicitor to the Treasury, prosecuted on behalf of 
the Treasury. 

Mr. W. E. Cizcey defended the prisoner. 


[The Sheffield Daily Telegraph describes Peace as ‘‘ a little 
man; unquestionably an insignificant-looking man . . . face 
clean-shaven, and the front part of his forehead also shaven, the 
sparse white hairs combed forward on each side ’’—wearing spec- 
tacles through which he calmly surveyed the scene. | 


Mr. Potuarp—In this case, sir, I appear on behalf of the 
Treasury, who have the prosecution of this man charged before 
you of the wilful murder of Arthur Dyson on the 29th November, 
1876, at Banner Cross in this borough. I understood that an 
application is to be made on behalf of the prisoner for an adjourn- 
ment. Perhaps it would be more convenient that the application 
should be made at once, and a decision taken upon it, before I 
enter upon a statement of the case. 

Mr. Creac—I appear for the prisoner. My application is 
that he may be remanded upon various grounds. The principal 


* The account is adapted from that in the Sheffield Daily Telegraph. 

+ Now Sir William Edwin Clegg, C.B.E., LL.D., J.P., Lord M 
Sheffield, 1898-99; (b. 1852); Messrs. Clegg & Sons, solicitors, phoma * 

64 


The First Trial. 


ground upon which I base my application is that I was only in- 
structed this morning to appear in this case. It has been a matter 
of utter impossibility for me to have got full instructions from the 
man, seeing that I was only instructed about ten o’clock this morn- 
ing in the matter. I understand that the prisoner has only been 
brought down from London this morning, and therefore it has 
been imposible for me to have communication with him earlier, 
or that I could have had a personal interview with him before. 
I also understand further that until yesterday he (prisoner) had no 
knowledge at all that the Treasury was going to bring him to 
Sheffield to put him upon his trial. The Treasury have had a 
great deal of time for the purpose of getting up the prosecution 
against the prisoner. They have had various interviews with the 
witnesses whom they are going to call for the prosecution; and I 
think it would have been only fair on their part to have given 
the prisoner some idea as to what was going to be done 
with him, and as to when he was going to be put upon his 
trial, so that he might have had ample opportunity to instruct his 
solicitor for his defence. Whereas he informs me that only yester- 
day was he aware that he was going to be brought up this morning. 
As the charge for which he has been brought up is for a murder that 
happened in November, 1876—as it is one of the highest charges 
that can be preferred against a man—as there has been evidence 
given before another tribunal,* which I have not had the oppor- 
tunity of reading and of making myself acquainted with—I say 
under all the circumstances I trust your worship will not think 
this application is made without sufficient grounds. I feel this 
morning, if the case were gone into—of course I have certain 
information from him (prisoner), but by no means full—I feel if 
the case were gone into I could not do my duty towards the prisoner 
in defending him on this charge. He says he will require certain 
witnesses to be produced to give evidence on his behalf. Whether 
these witnesses are important or not I cannot venture to say until 
T have had more conversation with him. Of course, I shall take 
the opportunity of seeing them, and of getting the evidence he 
wants them to give, but whether that will be important or not 
I cannot say until I have the opportunity of getting the evidence 
that he wants them to give. He himself tells me the witnesses are 
important; whether they are important or not I cannot pledge 
my word. 

The Stirenpiaky—We shall not adjourn the preliminary 
inquiry now, because there cannot be any reasonable grounds for 
getting an adjournment of the hearing of the witnesses for the 
prosecution. 

Mr. Crece—My principal ground for applying for an adjourn- 
ment is that I have only just been instructed in the case, and I 
have not had an opportunity of taking my full instructions. It 


* The Coroner. 
F 65 


Charles Peace. 


is only fair to give the prisoner the fullest opportunity of meeting 
this charge, that he may not have an opportunity of saying that 
the prosecution has been hurried against him, and that he has 
not had an opportunity of fairly defending himself against it. 
This is the most serious charge that can be brought against him, 
and I hope your worsbips are prepared to grant my application for 
an adjournment. 

Mr. Poutarp——The only thing I can say is this—firstly, that 
we should never wish to hurry on a case of so grave a nature 
against the prisoner, but your worships must remember that this 
is not the first time this case has been inquired into. No doubt 
Mr. Clegg is perfectly well aware of the evidence given before the 
coroner at the inquest held two years ago. I propose only to give 
again the evidence which was taken before the coroner. As to the 
prisoner being under any hardship by the examination of these 
witnesses, I do not think that he will be. 

The StrPpENDIARY—You are only proposing to give the evidence 
which was taken before the coroner ? 

Mr. PoLttarpv—lIn fact, I may say I have hardly a word to add 
to the evidence. I may say that, as he has been committed on the 
coroner’s warrant to take his trial, the prisoner need not have 
been brought before the bench at all. We could have preferred a 
bill of murder before the grand jury, and then we should only 
have had to supply him with a copy of the depositions of witnesses. 
But it was thought that it would perhaps be more fair to bring 
him before you and let all the evidence be given in his presence. 
After hearing the evidence Mr. Clegg will see if he thinks it at 
all reasonable to renew his application for the adjournment in 
order that he may cross-examine the witnesses. 

The SripenpiaRy—If he wants to call any witnesses for the 
defence we must grant an adjournment for that purpose, but it 
does not follow that we shall adjourn the hearing of the witnesses 
for the prosecution. It would be a great expense and a great 
trouble to do so. 

Mr. Pottarp—No doubt. And I propose to go on with the 
examination of the witnesses here to-day. I hope to complete the 
case to-day. It is hardly worth while to adjourn it, or that the 
public mind should be kept in a state of anxiety with reference 
to this case for two or three days, or two or three weeks. 

Mr. Crecc—In answer to that, sir—the statement about only 
offering evidence which has previously been given before the coroner 
—he seems to forget that we have not had an opportunity of cross- 
examining the witnesses. Therefore, I am still in the same 
position. 

The Stipenp1ary—I have consulted my colleagues, and we all 
seem of opinion that no sufficient cause has been shown as yet for 
an adjournment of the case. Therefore, it must go on; at this 
stage at any rate. 

66 


The First Trial. 


Mr. Potuarp—I don’t know that it is really worth my while 
to occupy your time with making any statements of the facts of 
this case. You will hear them as they come out in the evidence 
put before you. But there is one fact, and it is this. I wish to 
observe that the prisoner escaped from justice two years ago, and 
he did not then stop in his career of crime, but kept on in it 
during the last two years. In October of last year—1878—he was 
captured whilst in the commission of another offence. 

Mr. Cizae—lI object to this; it has nothing to do with the 
present charge. 

The StirenpiaRy—You had better not go into that now. 

Mr. Potuarp—But the man was then taken into custody. 

Mr. Cieae—I object to that; we are not charged with any 
offence committed then. 

The StipenpiaRy—Why take the other case? Why not go on 
at once with this charge? 

Mr. Potutarp—I simply wished to say that whilst engaged in 
the commission of another offence he was taken into custody. 

Mr. CLtecc—lI object to any remarks on that subject. 

Mr. Potutarp—He is here as a convict in a convict dress. 

The Stippnpiany—We must go back to November, 1876. 

Mr. Pottarp—Very well; I will call Katherine Dyson. 


Mrs. Dyson then entered the witness-box, and was examined 
by Mr. Poxuarp. 

What is your name?—Katherine Dyson. 

Prisoner (addressing Mrs. Dyson)—Will you be kind enough 
to take your veil off? You have not kissed the book. 

Mrs. Dyson raised her veil and was again sworn. 

Where are you residing now?—At 58 Harrington Road, 
Sheffield. 

Are you the widow of Arthur Dyson ?—Yes, sir. 

In 1876 were you living with your husband at Britannia Road, 
Darnall ?—Yes, sir. 

You know the prisoner, Peace?—Yes, sir—I have known him 
for a long time. 

When you were living in Britannia Road did he live next 
door !—Yes, sir.* 

What was his name?—Charles Peace. 

Was that the name you knew him by ?—Yes, sir. 

What did he say his trade was?—A picture-frame maker. 

Did he do any work for you or your husband in reference to 
pictures?—He framed four picturest 


* Or next door but one? Was not the correct address Victoria Place, 
Britannia Road; the Dysons at No. 36 and Peace at No. 40? 

+ The pictures framed by Peace for the Dysons were a portrait of Mrs. 
Dyson’s sister, a portrait of Arthur Dyson, a portrait of Mrs. Dyson’s 
brother, a portrait of her boy, and also two pictures from Harper’s 
Weekly. 

67 


Charles Peace. 


Mrs Dyson 


Did he come and visit you and your husband as a neigh: 
bour /—Yes, he came in frequently. ; 

He visited you and your husband!—Yes, sir, he came into 
our house frequently. { 

Did anything take place between your husband or yourself 
and him, in reference to these visits!—My husband did not like 
him, and had written him a card asking him not to come at all.§ 

Did he still continue to call upon you ?—Yes, sir. 

In the month of October did you and your husband remove ?— 
Yes, sir. 

Was that in consequence of anything!—Yes, sir. 

What was it in consequence of 2—In consequence of his dis- 
agreeable visits; he became quite annoying to us. 

Was it in consequence of his visits that he became annoying !— 
Yes, sir. 

Prior to that had the prisoner done or said anything to you 
with reference to a pistol?—He had threatened my life. 

When was that!—In July, 1876. 

What was it that led to that?—He passed me on the road, 
and said he should blow my brains out and those of my husband. 

Had he a pistol with him at the time?—Yes, sir, he put it 
6 inches from my face. 

Was he holding it in his hand ?—Yeg, sir. 

In consequence of that was there a warrant applied for ?— 
There was a summons taken out, but he failed to appear to it. 

And then a warrant was issued ?—Yes, sir. 

The Sripenpiary—Was that in June? 

Mr. Potuarp—In July, 1876. 

Do you remember what day it was on which you removed your 
goods from Darnall—but first of all, where were you going from 
Darnall, where were you going to take a house?—At Banner Cross. 

And on what day was it that you sent your goods to Banner 
Cross ?’—The 29th of October, 1876. 

On that same day did you and your husband go to Banner 
Cross by rail?—Yes. 

When you got there did you find a wagon with your goods 
standing opposite the door !—Yes. 

The Stipenprary—It is suggested that Mr. and Mrs, Dyson 
could not go all the way from Darnall by rail; it had better be 
set right. 

Mr. Potuarp—That is my mistake. 

Mrs. Dyson—We came from Darnall to Sheffield by rail, and 
from Sheffield to Banner Cross by omnibus. 

As you were going to the house, whom did you see?—I gaw a 


+See Mrs. Dyson’s statement, quoted on p, 48. 


§ On this card was written—‘‘ Charles Peace is requested not to inter- 
fere with my family.” 


68 


The First Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


man named Bolsover* standing in the middle of the road, and I 
walked up to him, knowing him to be on intimate terms with Peace. 
I spoke to him. 

Did you see any other man?—I saw the prisoner coming out 
of the house where my goods had been taken in. 

Did the prisoner see you ?—Yes. 

And your husband ?—Yes. 

Did he say anything?—He said, ‘‘ You see, I am here to 
annoy you wherever you go.’’ 

Did you or your husband say anything in reply?—I made 
the remark that there was a warrant out for him. He said that 
he did not care for the warrant—or the police either. 

Did he say anything else?—He said something else, but I 
don’t remember what it was. 

What became of him then?—He went down the street in 
company with Bolsover. 

What time would it be then?—It would be 7.30 or eight 
o’clock. 

Now, when did you next see Peace!—On the 29th of Novem- 
ber, 1876. 

About what o’clock in the evening was it?—Ten past eight. 

Had you gone into the yard!—Yes. ¢ 

Did you take a light with you ?—Yes, a small lantern. 

Had you to go along the side of the house and right down 
the garden !—Yes. 

Is that where the closets were ?/—Yes. 

Did you go into the closet, taking the lantern with you?—Yes. 

As you were coming out of the closet, whom did you see?—lI 
saw the prisoner. 

The StipenpIAaRY—How long were you in the closet !—About 
two minutes. 

Where was Peace?—Standing at the door with a revolver in 
his hand. 

PrisonER—I really cannot hear. 

Mr. Pottarp—You must speak louder, Mrs. Dyson, that the 
prisoner may hear you. Was Peace standing there?—Yes, with a 
revolver in his hand. 

Did he say anything ?—He said, ‘‘ Speak, or I’ll fire.”’ 

What did you do?—I screamed loudly. 

Loudly !—Yes. 

What did you do about the door?—I banged it and shut 
myself in. 

What next happened ?—I heard my husband’s footsteps com- 
ing across the yard. 

What then ?—On hearing his footsteps I came out of the closet. 


* Bolsover, who had married Peace’s daughter. 


+See plan, opposite p, 111. = 


Charles Peace. 


Mrs Dyson 


Where was the prisoner then?!—Walking down the yard. 

With his back towards you!—No, sideways to me. 

Down the passage /—Yes. 

Does that lead into the street?—Yes. When he got into the 
passage he fired. 

But, before he got to the passage, what did your husband do? 
—He was following behind the prisoner, and I was behind my 
husband. 

Now, you say when he got to the end of the passage he fired? 
—Yes, in the direction of my husband. 

Did he turn round?—yYes, he turned round and faced my 
husband and fired. 

What was the result of that shot?—It went into the wall near 
the gateway. I heard the bullet strike the wall. When he got to 
the end of the passage he turned and fired again. 

What was the result of the shot?—It struck my husband in 
the left temple. 

What became of your husband !—He fell instantly. 

What became of the prisoner upon the second shot taking 
effect ?—-He went across the road and stood in the middle for a 
moment, thinking whether to fire again or not. 

Mr. CLrecc—You must not say that. 

By Mr. Potuarp—What did he do after he had stood a moment? 
—He saw some people coming down. He got over a wall at the 
opposite side of the road and escaped. 

You have told me that on the other side of the wall there 
is a field ?—A small garden, and the field is behind the garden. 

Now, after the second shot, and your husband fell, what did 
you do?’—I screamed. 

The neighbours came, and eventually Dr. Harrison was sent 
for !—YYes, sir. 

Did your husband ever speak again ?—No. 

In what position did he fall?—He fell on his back. 

Have you ever seen the prisoner from that time?—Not before 
I saw him in Court here this morning. 

Now, you have stated that your husband wrote a card to the 
prisoner forbidding him from visiting at your house?—Yeg, sir. 

Will you look at that (handing up a card) and say whose 
handwriting it is’—It is my husband’s handwriting. 

Did your husband give it to the prisoner ?—He threw it into 
his yard.* 

Did you see it given ?—No. 

Is this one of your husband’s cards!’—Yes. 

The Stipenprary—Is it an ordinary card ?—Yes. 

Mr. Pottarp—It is an ordinary card bearing the name, ‘‘ Mr. 
Arthur Dyson.’’ That is all I intend to ask Mrs. Dyson. 


* This was, of course, at Darnall. 


70 


The First Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


Mr. Cince—I ask that the cross-examination of the witness 
may be adjourned. 

The StipenpIARY—We shall adjourn the cross-examination of 
Mrs. Dyson until after the other witnesses have been heard, and 
then we will consider whether it is necessary to grant you the 
adjournment until Tuesday. 

Mr. Crece—tThat is all I ask. 


Mary Ann Gregory, examined by Mr. Pottarp—I am the wife 
of John Gregory, of Banner Cross, grocer. Our house is the one 
next door to the one the Dysons lived in. I remember their coming 
to live there. It was in the end of October, 1876. 

Do you remember on any night, about the time of their 
coming to live there, seeing the prisoner ?—Yes, sir. 

About what date was that?—It was the night they came to 
live at the house. 

The prisoner came that night /—Yes. 

Did he come into your shop !—Yes. 

Was your husband present!—He was at home, and I called 
him into the shop. 

Did they have some conversation, the prisoner and your hus- 
band ?—Yes. 

For about how long?—For about ten minutes. 

Did you hear what the conversation was about?—No, sir, I 
did not. I came out of the shop. 

Did he buy anything on that occasion!—He bought half an 
ounce of tobacco. My husband served him. 

Did you ever see the prisoner again?!—Yes, sir. I saw him 
on the 29th November. 

How came you to see him then ’—He came into the shop about 
seven o’clock in the evening. 

Did he ask for your husband on that occasion !—Yes, he asked 
if he was at home. 

_ But your husband was not in?—No, sir, and I told him so. 

Did prisoner say anything!’—He said, ‘‘I wish he was; I 
wanted to see him.’ 

PRISONER (interrupting) said he could not hear the answer. 

Mrs. Gregory’s reply was repeated, and prisoner appeared 
satisfied. 

Mrs. Grecory—I said I expected my husband in every minute. 

And then did he leave your shop?—Yes, he went out. 

And you say this was about what time?’—-About seven. 

How soon did you go to the door after he had left?—I should 
think it would be five or ten minutes afterwards. 

Did you hear any noise in the meantime !—No, sir. 

By the Strppnp1ary—There had been no moving about at the 
back, or any noise 1—No, sir. 

71 


Charles Peace. 


Mary Ann Gregory 


Examination continued—Did you see anybody !—I saw the same 
man go down into the road off the steps from the back door. 

What became of him then?—He went down the road, and I 
watched him to the second lamp-post. Then I came in and shut 
the door. 

In about an hour did you hear anything else?—I heard Mrs. 
Dyson come past our window* with her clogs on. 

Would that be in the direction of the closet ?—Yes. 

By the Sripmnpiany—You thought at the time it would be 
Mrs. Dyson ?—Yes. In two minutes, or not so much, I heard her 
scream very loud. 

Examination continued—What did you do upon that?—I ran 
to my back door and opened it and called Mr. Dyson. ; 

Where was Mr. Dyson then?—He was standing at their door 
close by our door.+ 5 

When you spoke to him what did he do?—He went directly 
round the corner, down the passage. 

At the time you saw Mr. Dyson and spoke to him, did you see 
any other person ?—No. sir. 

What did you next hear ?—I heard a noise. 

What noise ?—A bang of something—TI don’t know what. 

Did you hear more than one noise?—Twice, I know. 

You heard two sounds like what?—A banging noise? 

The StipeNpIAaRY—-What do you mean by a banging noise {— 
As if some one had struck her. 

The prisoner (excitedly, pointing to Mr. Pollard)—He can 
tell her that. 

Mr. Cuzae (to prisoner)—Be quiet. 

Mrs. Grecorr—At that time I was inside my house. I had 
shut the door and locked it. Soon afterwards I went to Mr. 
Dyson’s house. That was when I heard a lot of footsteps. 

Mr. Poutarp—Did you find Mr. Dyson bleeding ? 

Mr. Ciurae—Please don’t suggest. 

At this point prisoner interfered, and, speaking to the chief 
constable, said—I object to that man taking my portrait (pointing 
to a gentleman at the right of the chief constable)—the man next 
to you, Mr. Jackson. I object to it. 

The Cuter ConstasLE—The gentleman on my right? 

PrisoneR—Yes, he is sketching my portrait. I object. 

Mr. CLrecc—He is a reporter taking notes. 

The Curmr Constante (turning to the magistrate)—The 
prisoner complains that the gentleman next to me is taking his 
portrait. The gentleman is a reporter, and says he could not 
take the portrait if he were so disposed. I assure you (speaking 
to prisoner) he is only taking notes. 


* The back window. 
+ The two back doors. 
72 


The First Trial. 


Mary Ann Gregory 


The Sripenprary (looking down)—I don’t see a portrait at 
any rate. 

Mrs. Grecory—Mr. Dyson was in a chair. He seemed 
insensible, and blood was streaming from his head. A doctor 
was sent for, and Dr. Harrison came. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Cuzae—When you saw the prisoner 
on the first occasion did he tell you what he had come to see you 
about ?—No, sir. 

Did he purchase the tobacco before your husband came in !— 
When he asked for the tobacco I called for my husband. The first 
thing he did was to ask for some tobacco. My husband served 
him. 

Is your husband here to-day ’—Yes. 

Did you hear anything that took place between him and your 
husband ?!—I did not. 

The second time he came, did he buy anything ?—No. 

Did he have any conversation with you?’—No, he merely 
asked for my husband. 

When you told him he was not in what did he do?—He went 
out again, directly almost. 

Did you ask him what he had come to see your husband 
about !—No, sir. 

I believe that was the last time you saw him until this morn- 
ing 1—I saw him in London.* 

You didn’t see him again that night ?—No. 

I believe you didn’t come out of your house again until you 
saw Mr. Dyson in his house?—No, sir. 

Had you seen Mrs. Dyson that day?—I don’t remember that I 
did. 

When you say that you heard Mrs. Dyson go past the door 
you were supposing it was her ?—There was no one else living at 
the house that could go past. 

How many houses are there in the row?—Only those two have 
the doors close; the others are parted off.t 

Did you see the person who passed your door?’—I did not 
see her. 

Is there not a thoroughfare from your passage to the other 
houses?’—Not without going up the gardens. They can go up 
the gardens by a flight of steps and right through, but it is a 
long way. 

I take it that you guessed the person who passed your door 
was Mrs. Dyson ?—I believed it to be. 

Was your door closed at that time ?—Yes. 

Very well, you say you heard a scream !—Yes. 

You did not see the person who screamed ?—No, I did not. 


* Mrs. Gregory was taken to London to identify John Ward as Charles 
Peace. 


+See plan, opposite p. 111. 
73 


Charles Peace. 


Mary Ann Gregory 


Could you see anybody when you opened the door?—I saw 
Mr. Dyson at my right hand. He passed me. 

Did you close the door immediately he passed you?—Yes, 
and locked it. 

How far is the closet from the Dysons’ door !—A dozen yards. 

And is it round the corner !/—Yes. 

Before you heard this banging noise, did you hear any 
scuffing /—No. 

Did you hear any talking /—No. ; : 

What sort of a night was it?—A clear, moonlight night. 

Your are quite certain /—Yes. : f 

Mr. Pottarp—Which night was the clear, moonlight night— 
the October night or the November night’—November night. 


Saran CoLGREAVES, wife of Thomas Colgreaves, Dobbinhill, 
near Sheffield, examined by Mr. Pottarp—My house is a quarter 
of a mile from Banner Cross Terrace, where Mr. and Mrs. Dyson 
lived. I remember on one night in 1876 going to Mr. Gregory’s 
shop. It was on the 29th November, at about half-past seven 
o’clock in the evening. As I was going along I met the prisoner 
about 30 or 40 yards from Mr. Gregory’s shop. He spoke to me, 
and asked me if I knew who lived in the second house up. 

Which house would that be?—Mr. Gregory’s is the first. 

It would be the next door to Mr. Gregory’s you understood 
him to mean ?—Yes. 

Did he say anything more?—I told him ‘‘ No,’’ and then he 
said, ‘‘ Do you know if they are strangers?’’ And I said, ‘‘ Yes.’’ 

Did he ask you to deliver any message for him?—Yes. He 
asked me did I mind going to say that an elderly gentleman wished 
to speak to her, but before that he said, ‘‘ You don’t know that?’’ 
and I said, ‘‘ No.’”’ He said, ‘“‘ Then I will tell you. This woman 
is my bloody whore.”’ 

What did you say to him when he said that?—I told him he 
ought to mind what he said, and particularly about strangers. 

And then he asked you to go and deliver a message for him !— 
I said to him, ‘‘ Go yourself.’’ 

And did you go on then towards Mr. Gregory’s shop, leaving 
him ’—Yes. 

And as you went on did you notice which way he was going — 
Not then, but I saw him afterwards when I was coming out of 
Gregory’s. 

In about ten minutes time you say you saw the prisoner go? 
Where was he?—At the passage bottom; he was coming out of the 
passage by Mr. Gregory’s. 

Where did he go then ?—He went up the road. 

And that is the last you saw of him ’%’—Yes. 

Until you saw him in Newgate ?—Yes* 


* Mrs. Colgreaves was taken up to London to identify Peace. 
74 


The First Trial. 


Sarah Colgreaves 


Cross-examined by Mr. Curac—Did you see him before you 
saw him at Newgate /—Yes. 

Then that was not the first time you had seen him since the 
night of the murder? Did not you see him in the Court at 
London ?—No. 

Were not you in the Central Criminal Court when he was 
being tried !—No. 

PRIsONER—The day before you saw me at Newgate?—No. 

The StipenpIaRy—Perhaps she would not know quite if it were 
in Newgate. Where was it you saw him next? Was it in the 
street, or open air, or where!—It was in the yard, in the airing 
place.* 

Cross-examination continued—Were other persons present with 
the prisoner ?—Yes, and they were walking them round the 
yard. 

Was there anybody with you?—A policeman. 

Anybody else ?—-No, sir, not where I had to identify him. 

Did you not go with somebody from Sheffield ?—Yes, I went up 
with the other witnesses. 

Did you go together to identify him ?—We went in separately. 

Can you tell me the date on which you went to London ?— 
I am sure I don’t know the date; I went up with the other 
witnesses. 

You remember the date, 29th November, 1876. Cannot you 
tell me the date on which you went to London !—I cannot say. 

It is not long since, you know?—I know that. 

Did not you go to see him in the Court before you went to 
the gaol 1—No, sir, I did not. 

How was he dressed when you saw him in the prison ?—He 
had a dark coat on, and he appeared to have a soft hat on. 

You knew you had been taken up to identify him?—Yes, of 
course I did. 

Had you ever seen him before this night of the 29th Novem- 
ber ?—Not to know him. 

How was he dressed on that night?—He was in dark clothes, 
but I cannot say anything more about it. 

You can only say they were dark clothes?—They were dark 
clothes. 

Can you tell me what sort of a hat he had on?—No, I cannot. 

You did not particularly notice him?—I met him by the 
lamp, and he walked up by the side of me. 

Away from the light /—Yes. 

Am I to take it you did not particularly notice him ?—I noticed 
him that much that I knew him directly I saw him in Newgate. 

What did you identify him by when you saw him in the yard 
of the prison ?—I identified him by his own looks. 

By his face or what ?—By his face and his stature altogether. 


* At Newgate. a 
5 


Charles Peace. 


Sarah Colgreaves 


Did you notice him particularly !—When I met him and he 
spoke to me, of course I looked at him. rae 

If you noticed him particularly, how is it that you cannot 
tell me what sort of clothes he had on and what sort of a hat?— 
I don’t know what sort of a hat he had on, but I know he had 
dark clothes on. 

I suppose he had on a hat of some sort?—Yes, of course, he 
had a hat on. 

But if you looked at his face you would see what sort of a 
hat he had on?—Well, it looked like one of those hats there (a 
felt one with low crown, on the solicitor’s table). 

How long were you in conversation with him before you left 
him !—Perhaps five minutes. 

Would it take you five minutes to walk 30 or 40 yards?!—It 
took me the time I told you, and then, of course, I left him. 

Had you been walking with him the whole time?—Yes, slowly. 

Were you walking away from the light /—Yes. 

Did you notice the colour of his face when you saw him in 
Newgate ?—A little. 

PrisoneR—Was I like this (making a horrible facial contor- 
tion). 

The Stipenpiary (to Prosoner)—You had better not interrupt. 

Prisoner—I beg your pardon, sir, but my life is at stake, 
and I am going to vindicate my character as well as I can. If 
you don’t want me to speak, put a gag in my mouth. When I 
hear a person perjuring herself I will speak. I wish to say it 
openly and in Court that up to the time when this woman saw me in 
Newgate I had disfigured my face so as not to be known. I was 
not then known as Charles Peace, and I had disfigured my face, 
so that I had deceived all the detectives in London. My face was 
disfigured when this woman saw me. 

The Strpunp1arY—It was merely for your own sake I told you 
not to speak. 

PrisonsR—I am bound to speak when I hear wrong state- 
ments. 

Cross-examination continued—When you saw his face in New- 
gate, tell me, was it the same complexion as it is now?—No, it 
looked darker. 

Much darker, was it not’—Yes, but not so very much. 

Is it darker now than when you saw him in Newgate?—He 
does not look darker. 

Do you know that at the time you saw him he had been tried 
for another case?—No, sir, I don’t. 

Did you stop for his trial ?-—I think his trial was over. 

Previous to this 29th November you had never seen him at 
all’—Not to know him. 

What sort of a night was this 29th November?—It was moon- 
light. 

76 


The First Trial. 


Sarah Colgreaves 


How far was he away from you when you saw him, as you say, 
rire out of Gregory’s passage!—He was coming out of Gregory’s 
op. 
How far is that place off?—A couple of yards. 
Did you speak to him?—No. 
You say he went up the road—towards Ecclesall !—Yes. 
From Gregory’s house, was it not !—Yes. 


Cartes Brassineron, Lane End, Ecclesall, labourer, examined 
by Mr. Pottarp—I remember being on the road near to the Dysons’ 
place on Wednesday night, 29th November, 1876. I was stood in 
front of the Banner Cross Hotel at the time.* 

How far is that from Mr. Gregory’s shop?—It may be 30 
yards from Mr. Gregory’s. It would be between eight and nine 
o'clock in the evening—it would be turned eight. It was a moon- 
light night. 

Did you notice any one passing you whilst you were there!— 
Yes, there was a man walking backwards and forwards on the 
causeway I was on. 

You say he passed you two or three times, as he walked back- 
wards and forwards ?—Yes. 

Where were you standing with reference to any lamp?—I was 
standing on the causeway underneath the lamp. 

What happened? Did any one speak to you?—Yes. 

Who did?—The prisoner there. 

Did he come up to you and speak to you?—Yes. 

What did he say?—He asked me if any strange people had 
come to live about, and I said I did not know of any. When we got 
to the lamp above he showed me some photographs. 

Did you walk together to the lamp above?—Yes, we walked 
up to it from the Banner Cross Hotel. 

Very well. Did he say anything more!—Yes; he showed me 
some photographs, and then he showed me some letters. 

And did he say anything!—Yes, he wanted me to read those 
letters, and I told him that I could not read the letters. 

The Strpenp1ary (to prisoner, as witness was speaking in a low 
tone of voice)—Can you hear him? 

PrisonsR—Yes, I can hear him, I can hear him; I’m watching 
him. 

Examination continued—Did he say anything to you?— 
He told me he would make it warm for the strangers before morn- 
ing. He would shoot them both. 

PrisonsrR—Oh! you villain. God reward you. He will. 

Examination continued—Did anything else take place, or did 
he go away?—No, sir. He went down the road towards Gregory’s. 

How long do you think you were with him altogether, taking 


* See plan, opposite p. 111. 
(Hy 


Charles Peace. 


Charles Brassington 


it from the first time you saw him until he left you !—Happen ten 
minutes. I can’t say exactly. 7 

And did you have a good look at him?—Yes, I looked at him, 
but I did not take very great notice of him. 

Where did you next see him?—In London. 

When was it?!—I cannot name the day. 

Some time in last November, was it? Was it two or three 
months ago!—Yes. : 

Where did you see him then!—I saw him in Newgate. 

Where did you see him in Newgate?—At the Town Hall. 

Was it in a building like this or out in a yard, or where!—They 
were walking round a yard. 

Were there any others with him ?—Yes. 

But how many?—I cannot say how many there were. There 
were several others besides him. 

All walking round the yard ?—Yes. 

Was that in the prison at Newgate!—Yes. 

PrisonserR—Why do you put the word Newgate in his mouth 
like that? He did not say Newgate; he said ‘‘ in the Town Hall.”’ 
(To the Stipendiary)—Why did he say ‘‘ It was in Newgate you 
saw him,’’ when the witness said Town Hall? I am going to have 
fair play, and I will interrupt the proceedings if I don’t get it. 
He said ‘‘ in the Town Hall,’’ and then you (Mr. Pollard) deli- 
berately say that it was in Newgate the prisoner was. You were 
putting that very word in his mouth. He did not say Newgate, 
but ‘‘ Town Hall.”’ 

The Stprenp1ary—What I understood the witness to say was 


this 

PrisonER—I have seen a great deal of injustice done in different 
Courts, but I am not going to have injustice done here. 

Mr. Roxsinson explained that the witness said he saw the 
prisoner in Newgate at the Town Hall. 

The Prisonsr—He said he saw me in the Town Hall, in London, 
then directly after that he (Mr. Pollard) says he saw me in New- 
gate. 

The Smprnpi1ary—lIt is not worth while going into that. 

PrisonER—Oh, yes, but it is worth while to me. I am not a 
dog. My life is at stake. If you hang me it will only free me 
from a long, dreary life of penal servitude, and I don’t care much 
which way it is; but I am going to have full justice done me. I 
will interrupt you if you do not do justice, and if you gag me I’ll 
try to interrupt you. 

The Strprnprary—Just you listen to me. 

The prisoner, however, mumbled something to the warders and 
police near to him, and interrupted the Court. 

Mr. Pottarp—I wish to remind you of this. If the prisoner 
threatens the Justice, needlessly interrupts the witnesses, or, after 

78 


The First Trial. 


Charles Brassington 


being told to desist, does not conduct himself properly, you can 
order his removal. 

The Sripenprary—We have great power, but it is not always 
wise to exercise it. (Zo the prisoner)—If you listen to what is put 
down it will be what the witnesses have said. 

Mr. Rosinson—tThis is as I have it down—‘‘I next saw him in 
London, in Newgate, two or three months ago, in a yard in the Town 
Hall.”’ 

The prisoner shrugged his shoulders. 

Examination continued—Did you go in alone to see him ?— 
Yes. 

Who was with you, if any one? The warder, or policeman, or 
anybody of that kind!—Yes, a gentleman was with me. I cannot 
say who it was. 

Was it any one you knew?—No, sir. 

Did you identify him directly you saw him?—Yes. 

Are you certain he is the man?—Yes. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Ciuraa—I believe you said that when 
you saw him on this night you did not take much notice of him?— 
No. I did not take so much notice of him. 

Did you notice how he was dressed !—He had dark clothes on. 

You say that he showed you some portraits /—Yes. 

Can you say what sort of photographs they were!—They were 
men and women. 

Was there more than one man and one woman in a photo- 
graph?—I cannot say. There might be half a dozen or more. 

By the Sripenprary—Do you mean half a dozen photographs 
or people in each ?—Photographs. 

Cross-ecamination continued—I am now talking as to how. 
many persons there were in each photograph. Was there more than 
one; were there two?—I cannot say how many there were. I 
never had them in my hand. 

You know you were shown a photograph. Was there a woman 
in the photograph /—_Yes. 

Anybody else besides her?—Yes, there were two or three men 
and women on them. 

But in one photograph !—No. 

Was there one photograph with one woman on?—Yes. 

Did you see that portrait /—Yes. 

Can you tell us who it was!—No, I cannot tell whose it was. 

Do you know who it is now?!—No, I don’t know her. 

Can you identify that person now? Do you know who it 
is /—No. 

The woman J am talking about !—No. 

Now, you saw another photograph with a man and a woman 
on it, did you not?—No, there were men and women on them all 
that I saw; there were none of them both together. 

79 


Charles Peace. 
Charles Brassington 


By the Srirznp1ary—Were there more than two figures on any 
of the photographs that you saw ?!—No. ; 

Cross-examination continued—Was there not a man and a 
woman taken together on one you saw!—No, not that I saw; not 
both on one portrait. 

Were those portraits taken in a proper manner, or was there 
anything indecent on them?—No, not that I saw, there was not. 

Did he tell you who.they were/—He said they were those 
strange folks that had come to live at Banner Cross. 

When you saw him first how far were you away from Gregory’s 
shop ?—Happen 30 yards away. 

Which way did you walk!—We walked up the hill. 

Were you walking away from Gregory’s shop ?—Yes. 

Had he mentioned to you anybody’s name?—No. 

Was he talking the whole time he was with you?—Yes. 

Have you told us the whole of the conversation you had with 
him ?—Yes. 

What, the whole of it?—Yes. 

About what time was this that you saw him?—It would be 
between eight o’clock and nine o’clock when I saw him the first. 

How long were you with him?—Happen ten minutes; I wasn’t 
with him long. 

Then, as I understand, you left him going away from the direc- 
tion of Gregory’s shop?—Yes. When I left him I was going home. 
He then went down the road towards Gregory’s. 

Did you see him go that night ?—No. 

Have you been up to London more than once?—No, no. 

When you went to London did you go to a Court something 
like this’—No; we did not go into a Court. 

I suppose you knew the purpose for which you were going up 
to London !—Yes. 

Did you know the man before that night, or had you ever 
seen him before that night?—No, sir, not that I know of, I had 
not. 

Was his appearance exactly the same when you saw him in 
Newgate as when you saw him that night?—Yes, he had dark 
clothes on in Newgate. 

Was his face the same colour when you saw him in Newgate 
as when you saw him that particular night?—I could not tell any 
difference. 

You did not look particularly enough to notice?—I did not 
take so much notice of his face. 

I am now talking about the night—You did not take so much 
notice of it?—No. 

Did you notice how he was dressed on this particular night— 
on the 29th November !—He had dark clothes on. 

What sort of hat had he on?—I cannot say as to his hat. 

80 


The First Trial. 


Thomas Wilson 


THomas WILSON, examined by Mr. Pontarp—I live at Brin- 
cliffe Hill, and am a scythe maker. I remember on the night of 
the 29th November, 1876, being outside the Banner Cross Hotel. 
It was about twenty minutes past eight o’clock. 

Did you hear anything ?!—Yes, I heard the report of a pistol, 
which was fired twice. The shots were in quick succession. The 
second came from down the road. 

Upon looking that way did you see anything ’—Yes. 

What did you see?—I saw a man run across the road, and get 
over the wall. He ran from the bottom end of the houses. On 
getting over the wall he would drop into the garden, and then, by 
ee over a low wall about 4 feet high, he would get into the 

eld. 

Wheat sort of a night was it with regard to light?—It was 
moonlight. 

I believe you could not see to distinguish who it was. You only 
saw that it was the figure of a man ?—That was all. The moon was 
just under a cloud at the time. 

Having seen and heard this, what did you do? Did you go 
to Gregory’s house?—I did not do anything at all. I heard a 
woman scream, and I went to the place where I heard the scream. 
I went into the entry by the side of Gregory’s house. 

When you got there did you find Mr. Dyson, and Mrs. Dyson 
holding his head up ?—Yes. 

In the house was it /—No, in the passage. 

You went for a doctor, I believe ?—Yes. 

Did you fetch Dr. Harrison ?—Yes. 

And he came soon afterwards ?—Yes. 


JAMES WILLIAM Harrison, surgeon, Cemetery Road, examined 
by Mr. Pottarp—On the 29th of November, 1876, I was called 
by the last witness to see Mr. Dyson. 

About what time did you get there?—About 8.30 o’clock. 

Did you find Mr. and Mrs. Dyson in a room in the house }—Yes, 
sir. 

Describe what you saw, and in what state Mr. Dyson was i— 
He was in a chair. There was a lot of blood about his feet and on 
the floor. He seemed to bleed from the left temple, and he was 
unconscious. I had him laid down on the floor and attended to 
him. 

Did he ever recover consciousness !—No. 

Did you remain with him till he died !—Yes. 

What time was that /—At 10.30, so far as I can recollect. 

The same night /—Yes. 

Did you subsequently make a post-mortem examination /—I 
did. 

What was the result of it?—I found a wound on the left 
temple, running upwards and backwards, and I found this bullet 
situated in the substance of the brain. 

@ 81 


Charles Peace. 


James W. Harrison 


Will you state what in your opinion was the cause of death ?— 
Shock from the presence of this bullet in the brain. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Creac—Can you tell me whether the 
wound was a straight or a slanting one?—It ran obliquely from 
the left temple to the right side of the head. 


Grorce Warp, police constable, examined by Mr. Pottarp— 
On the 30th of November, 1876, I searched in a field opposite to 
Mr. Dyson’s house. 

How is that field situated with reference to Mr. Dyson’s 
house ’—There is a road parts the house from the field. It is the 
turnpike road, and is about 10 yards. 

Is there a garden between the field and the road ?—There is a 
garden in a line with the field. . 

With reference to the wall which divides the garden from the 
field, did you find anything!—About 15 yards from the garden 
wall I found some papers, and among them this card. 

The Stipenpiary—Is it the same card that has been referred 
to previously ? 

Mr. Potuarp—It is. (Zo Witness)—To whom did you give the 
card and the other papers?!—To Inspector Bradbury. 

By Mr. Cuzrae—Do you produce these papers?!—The Inspector 
does. 


Jacop Brapsury, inspector of police, Highfield Division, 
Sheffield, examined by Mr. Po~ttarp—On the morning of 380th 
November, 1876, did you receive a card, which you now produce, 
from the last witness !—Yes, sir. 

The card was then put in. On one side was engrossed the 
name ‘‘ Mr. Arthur Dyson,’’ and on the other side was written, 
‘“ Charles Peace is requested not to interfere with my family.’’] 

Examination continued—I believe on the previous night you 
went to the house of Mrs. Dyson ?—Yes, sir. 

Was Mr. Dyson then alive!—No, he was just dead. It would 
be thirty-five minutes past ten. 

Did Mrs. Dyson give you any description of the person who 
had shot her husband, and did she mention any name ?—Yes. 

In consequence of that, for whom did you search?—For a man 
named Charles Peace, 

Were you able to find him!—No, I was not. 

I believe other members of the police force also endeavoured 
to find him?—Those who knew him did. Mrs. Dyson gave us a 
very good description of the prisoner. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Cizac—Did she say the man had a 
beard ?—Yes. 

You say Ward gave you some papers. Will you let me look 
at them ? 

[The papers were handed to Mr. Clegg, who examined them. ] 

82 


The First Trial. 


Jacob Bradbury 


Was there any portrait amongst these papers!—No, sir. 

Have you seen one?—Not amongst these papers. 

When did you ?—In the chief constable’s office. 

Whose was it?—There were two on one photograph. 

Who did the portraits represent?—There was a male and a 
female. The male was the prisoner, and the female I believe to 
be Mrs. Dyson. 

Taken together !—Yes, I should think so. 

You saw another portrait. Who did that represent ?—Mrs. 
Dyson. 

From your own knowledge do you know whence the chief con- 
stable got them !—No. 

Mr. Potuarp—That is my case. 

Mr. Ciuce—I renew my application now, and I think I have 
stronger grounds than before, because, you see, certain letters have 
been produced, which it is presumed were in the possession of the 
prisoner on November, 1876. From that day to this neither he 
nor anybody else that represents him has had an opportunity of 
seeing the contents of those letters, and, as there are a great num- 
ber of them, I ask in the interval that the cross-examination of Mrs. 
Dyson may now be deferred to some day suitable to your worships. 

The Stipenp1ary—What other day do you ask for? 

Mr. Ciecc—Wednesday, I think, is the most convenient day. 

The Stipenp1any—Then we adjourn till Wednesday. 

Peace was taken back to London. 

Comments upon the above evidence, at the second hearing by 
the Stipendiary and upon that given before the coroner are reserved 
until after the trial. 


Ey. 


Peace, remanded to Wednesday, 22nd January, spent the inter- 
vening time at Pentonville. 

On the morning of that day, handcuffed, and in convict garb, 
in charge of James Crosgrove, chief warder at Pentonville, and 
Warder William Robertson, Peace again departed from King’s 
Cross Station, by the 5.15 express, which was due to arrive at 
Sheffield at 8.45. 

During the journey of the previous week he had been exceed- 
ingly troublesome, making an excuse of necessity to leave the 
train at each stopping place and! also behaving in the carriage in a 
beastly and beastlike manner. At Peterborough he had been allowed 
to get out, and there had been unseemly difficulty in bringing him 
back. To put a stop on this behaviour, the warders provided a 
number of paper bags, and whenever Peace required one it was 
given to him and then thrown out of the window. These details 

83 


Charles Peace. 


are disgusting, but assist the realisation of the brutish nature of the 
man. 

After passing Worksop the route would be familiar to Peace. 
Between Shireoaks and Kiveton Park stations Peace demanded 
another of these bags—he had! already used several—and stood up 
with his back to Robertson. The window was lowered for him to 
throw out the bag, and at once he leaped out. The train was then 
running at some 45 miles an hour. Robertson caught him by the 
left foot, and there Peace hung, struggling, and kicking with his 


free foot. The chief warder, unable to render his colleague any 
assistance, pulled the alarm cord to stop the train, but with no 
result. “ 


Robertson held on, but Peace’s boot did not. He fell on the 
track in the snow. The train was brought up some way further 
on, and the warders and others, running back, found Peace lying 
on the six-foot way, insensible, bleeding from a wound in his head. 
He was lifted into the guard’s van of the slow train that had 
come up, and, regaining consciousness, muttered: ‘‘ I am cold; 
cover me up.’’ He was then wrapped in some rugs and taken on to 
Sheffield. 

What was his motive? Escape or suicide? It was close to 
Darnall, a neighbourhood he knew thoroughly; had he got away 
unhurt he might have been at liberty for some time. His own 
account, given to his stepson, was this—‘‘I saw from the way I 
was guarded all the way down from London, and all the way back, 
when I came for my first trial, that I could not get away from the 
warders, and I knew I could not jump from an express train without 
being killed. I took a look at Darnall as I went down and as I 
went back ; and after I was put in my cell I thought it all over. I 
felt that I could not get away, and then I made up my mind to kill 
myself. I got two bits of paper, and I pricked on one of them the 
words, ‘ Bury me at Darnall. God bless you all.’ With a bit of 
black dirt that I found on the floor in my cell I wrote the same 
words on another piece of paper, and then I hid them in my clothes. 
My hope was, that when I jumped from the train I should be cut to 
pieces under the wheels. Then I should have been taken to the 
Duke of York (a public-house at Darnall), and there would have 
been an inquest over me. As soon as the inquest was over you 
would have claimed my body, found the pieces of paper, and then 


you would have buried me at Darnall.’’ 
84 


The First Trial. 


Meanwhile a huge crowd had assembled outside the Magistrates’ 
Court, hopeful of catching a glimpse of Peace, but at 10.15 the 
Stipendiary announced that the hearing was adjourned, owing to 
the injuries Peace had received. 

The prisoner was confined in a cell on the second landing of 
the police station in Water Lane, where, curled up ina heap of 
rugs, he spent the night; complaining of the cold; whining and 
moaning. He was solicitously attended to by the police surgeon, 
Mr. Hallam. By nine o’clock he was appreciably better. The 
warders kept strict watch upon him, and so did he upon them; 
brandy and milk were administered ; he did not sleep, at least he said 
he did not. In the morning he announced that he wished he was 
dead ! 

It seems to have been the opinion of the police that he was not 
nearly so bad as he made out to be. At any rate it was considered 
highly desirable to avoid all unnecessary delay, in order that Peace 
might be tried at the forthcoming Assizes in February. 


ZY. 


The adjourned inquiry was continued, not in the Magistrates’ 
Court, but in the dark and cheerless corridor outside Peace’s cell. 
By candle-light! During the whole time he was lying swathed in 
bandages and wrapped in rugs. By some it was thought that the 
prosecution were acting somewhat harshly in their dealings with 
him. 


Second Day—Friday, 24th January, 13879. 


When the stipendiary had taken his seat, two warders brought 
out the prisoner and placed him in an arm-chair. 

Looking round with a stare of vacancy and groaning between 
the words, the prisoner said—‘‘ What are we here for? What is 
this? ”’ 

The Sripenpiary—This is the preliminary inquiry, which is 
being proceeded with after being adjourned. 

Prisoner (groaning)—I am not able to bear it. I ought not to 
be brought here. 

The Srrpenprary—Then you must do the best you can do. This 
is only the preliminary inquiry. You are not absolutely obliged to 
be here, so you must attend as well as you can. You are repre- 
sented here, and the preliminary inquiry is to be finished to-day. 

85 


Charles Peace. 


PrisoneR—I wish to God there was something across my 
shoulders. I am very cold. Oh, dear; oh, dear! Then am I to 
be committed to-day? : 

The Srrpenprary—The preliminary inquiry will be finished, and 
if the evidence is sufficient you will be committed. 

PrisoneR—I want to have my solicitor here. Oh, dear! and I 
want to call my witnesses. 

The SrrpenpraRy—You will have plenty of time to do that. 

Mr. Crzac—You will have sufficient time for that; you will 
have plenty of time to call your witnesses. 

PRrisoneER—I am not able to go on. Oh, I am so cold! (A 
thick rug was here thrown over him by one of the warders.) I 
am not able to go on; I am not. This is not justice; it is not 
justice. 

The Sripewprany—You must také it for what it is. 

Prisoner—Then I say it is not justice; it is not justice. Why 
does not my solicitor prevent this, and ask for a remand? What 
is my solicitor doing not to prevent this? Tell my solicitor I want 
him. 

Mr. Cizac—Well, what do you want? 

PRisoNER—Why don’t you ask for a remand? 

The StipENDIaRY—lIt is no use asking for a remand. [I tell 
you the inquiry is going to be proceeded with. 

PRISONER—It is not justice. I am not able to go on. You 
know how I am. Oh, dear! It isno matter. If I’d killed myself 
it’d be no matter. You know how I am, and I ought to have a 
remand. I feel I want it, and I must have a remand. 

The Stiprwprary—A remand will not be granted, and you had 
better attend to what is said. 

Mr. Crece—If you want to say anything, wait until I am 
cross-examining Mrs. Dyson, and it can be done then. You had 
better save your energies until then. The inquiry will be proceeded 
with to-day. 


Mrs. Dyson, further examined by Mr. PoLtutarp—There were 
some papers produced the other day in Court (handed in). Have 
you seen those papers before !—Yes. 

When was it you saw them !—At the coroner’s inquest. 

At the coroner’s inquest in December, 1876 ?—Yes. 

You have seen the first card—the card numbered one. That, 
I think you say, is the handwriting of your husband on the back 
of it?—Yes. 

With reference to all the other papers, do you know the hand- 
writing /—No, I do not. 

PrisoneR—They are not all there. I want to look at them. 
_ By the Strpznprary—You do not know whose handwriting it 
is a any of then?—No. I know none of them except the post- 
card. 

86 


The First Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


PrisoneER—I want the milkman calling.* 

Hzamination continued—Were any of those written by your 
authority? Do you know any of them?—Not by my authority. I 
know nothing of them. 

There is only one other question I wish to trouble you with. 
What distance should you say it is from the house that you lived 
in at Darnall to the house you removed to at Banner Cross !— 
About 5 or 6 miles to the best of my knowledge. 

And at the opposite side; is it from one end of the borough to 
the other ?—Yes. 


Inspector Brapsury recalled, and further examined by Mr. 
PotLarp—Do you produce a bullet /—Yes (producing it). 

From whom did you receive it?—From Dr. Harrison. 

When ?—On the 8th of December, 1876, the day of the inquest. 

By the Stipmnp1ary—Is that the bullet that was produced the 
other day /—Yes. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Cuzac—You remember, on the last 
time, Mr. Bradbury, that I asked you if you had seen a photo- 
graph !—Yes. 

Have you got that photograph now!—Yes. [The photograph 
was produced. | + 

I believe you got it from Mr. Jackson, the chief constable ?— 
I did. 

Mr. Potuarp—I want to ask one or two questions of Mrs. 
Dyson with reference to these photographs. 

The Stipenp1ary—Certainly. 


Mrs. Dyson, recalled, and further examined by Mr. PotLbarp— 
Whose photograph is this?—It is the prisoner’s and mine. 

When was that taken ?7—It was taken in 1876, at Sheffield Fair, 
but I do not remember the date. t 

When was that taken ?—It was taken in 1876. 

How near was it to the 29th of November, 1876 !—It was some 
months before that date; at the Sheffield Fair. 

Will you look at that (handing a small photo to witness) !— 
That is mine. 

Had you in the year 1875 or 1876 a photograph like that in 
that position ?—Yes, I had one in a locket. 

Was it in 1875 or 1876 ?—I had it in 1875. 


* Made clear later. Not nonsense. 

+ The photograph was what was known as a “ tintype,’’ taken by an 
itinerant photographer. Peace paid for it; took it home, and the chief con- 
stable found it in the house of Bolsover, soon after the murder, and it was 
copied and circulated. Much will be heard of it later on. 

+ The Summer Fair held on Whit Tuesday and Wednesday; the Winter 
Fair in November. 


87 


Charles Peace. 
Mrs Dyson 


Can you say at all whether it was in 1875 or 1876%—Yes, 1 
had it in the early part of 1876. Pgh. 

Have you that photograph in the locket now!—No, sir; it 
was taken from me. : 

How do you mean?—It was taken out of the house without 
my knowing how. 

It was in the winter ?—Yes, 1875, as well as I can remember. 

By the Stipenp1ary—Before the bigger one was taken 1—Yes, 
it was. 

Examination continued—Can you say whether it was the 
winter of 1875 or 1876%—Well, it was about Christmas. 

Do you say that the locket was stolen’—No, the photograph 
was taken out of the locket. 

You were living at Darnall then, were you ?—Yes, sir. 

Where was the locket when you~missed the photograph from 
it?—It was in my bedroom. 

Did you speak about the loss?—Yes, I mentioned it to my 
husband. E 

Did you ever find the photograph !—No, sir. 

Is that the original, or a copy of the photograph that 
you so lost?—That is not the original, because the one I had was 
taken in Cleveland, Ohio. 

And this is a copy of it, is it?—Yes. 

I see that this has the name of F. Barber, photographer, 
Church Gates, Sheffield !—This is not the original. 

Did you ever go to Mr. Barber’s to be photographed !—No, no; 
I never had a photograph taken in this country except that one 
that was taken at the Fair. 

The Srrpenpiary (to Prisoner)—You must not put your 
feet on the table. 

PrisoneR—AI] right. 

Examination eontinued—Did you tell any other person at the 
time beside your husband of the loss of the photograph from your 
locket —I told one of the officers. 

You did not mention it to any neighbours at all?—No. 

At Sheffield Fair time the prisoner was a neighbour of yours 1— 
Yes; I believed him at that time to be a respectable man. 

And a picture-frame maker, as you said ?—Yes. 

You said you had this photograph with you then. Where 
was it kept?—On the mantelpiece in the kitchen. 

With reference to the day it was taken, did you miss it from 
the mantelpiece? When did you miss it?—In a week or so after 
it was taken. 

When did you next see this one (lifting another photograph) 1— 
T cannot exactly say the day. 

Recently 7—One day last week. 

Where did you then see it—in whose hands?—Mr. 
Jackson’s. 

In the hands of the police ?—Yes. 

88 


The First Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 
Did you give it to any one?—No, I did not give it to any 
one. It was taken away without my knowledge. 
Then with reference to the photograph which was taken from 
your locket, what about it?—It was taken away without my 
knowledge. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Ctuaa—Was not that photograph taken 
in the Fair of 1876%—In 1876. I think so, as well as I can 
remember. 

Was it during the time you were residing at Darnall ?—Yes. 

When did you leave Darnall; was it on the 29th October !— 
On the 25th October, 1876. 

Was it at the Fair preceding the time you left Darnall ?—It 
was at the Fair before I left Darnall. 

I want now to know for certain. Are you certain this was 
taken in the preceding Fair before you left Darnall?—I did not 
say the preceding Fair. 

Well, I ask you now?—I cannot say. 

You have already said you thought it was the Summer Fair 
of [1876%—I think so, but I am not quite certain, but it was 
taken at Sheffield Fair. 

IT will try and assist your memory. Did you not say before 
the coroner that you had known the prisoner for about ten 
months !—I don’t recollect exactly. 

At the time you gave evidence before the coroner in December, 
1876, how long had you known the prisoner ?—Perhaps near a 
year. 

Had you been with him to more than one Fair 1—No, sir. 

Had you been with him to what is called the Winter Fair ?— 
No. 

Then the Fair at which you had been with him was the Summer 
Fair ?—_Yes. 

You say you had only known him a year, and you had not 
been with him to a Winter Fair. Now, then, cannot you now say 
that it was the Summer Fair of 1876?—Oh, no, I cannot say, 
because I am not quite sure. 

I will try and assist you a little further. How many months 
was it before you took out the summons against him for threaten- 
ing your life that you had been with him to the Fair?—I cannot 
tell you how many months. 

Please to try and remember. Are you troubled with a bad 
memory !/—Not very bad. 

Then try and remember, please. Can you tell me how long 
after you had been to the Fair you took out the summons !—I can- 
not tell you exactly. It might be two or three months, perhaps. 

Two or three months?’—It might be. I cannot be quite sure. 

When were you married to Mr. Dyson?—I do not remember 
the date. 

Don’t remember the date?—What year was it?—I can’t tell 


you that. 
89 


Charles Peace. 


Mrs Dyson 


Please to listen to me. Do you mean to swear upon your 
oath that you can’t tell the year when you were married ?—No, 
I can’t say what year. 

Not what year?—No, but I can find out. 

I want to know now. Do you mean to stand there and say 
you don’t know what year you were married in!—I don’t. 

Where were you married?—In Cleveland, Ohio; Trinity 
Church. ; 

Were there any witnesses present at your marriage ?—Cer- 
tainly. 

What were their names?—My sister, Mrs. Thomas Mooney, and 
Dr. Sargent. 

Did you get a certificate of your marriage’—Certainly. _ 

Did you bring that to England with you?—No, it is with 
my agent in America. . 

With your agent? What is your agents’ name {?—Booth, 
Barret & Co. 

Where is their place?—St. Louis, Missouri, United States. 

Had you any object in leaving your certificate there ?—I have 
left other papers there. They are more safe than carrying them 
about. 

The Stipenp1ary here interposed with reference to the manner 
in which Mr. Clegg was cross-examining. 

Mr. Cieac—In this case it is a question of credibility as to 
what actually happened, and as this witness is the only person 
who actually saw what happened I think I have a right to test her 
credibility in every possible way. I have an object in asking these 
questions as to her marriage, in consequence of what I am instructed 
she has told somebody about it.* I wish to inquire into it whether 
it is true or not. 

(70 Witness)—Was your husband friendly with the prisoner !— 
Yes. 

Did he frame any pictures for you ?—Yes. 

Did he tell you what they were ?—Yes. 

Please tell me—One was a portrait of my sister, one of Mr. 
Dyson, one of my brother, and one of my little boy. 

Nobody else?—He did other two, but these were taken from 
Harper’s Weekly. 

Was your husband’s mother not amongst them ?—I think not, 
sir. 

Will you swear he did not frame that?—No, he did not. 

Had your husband a portrait or picture of his mother ?—I 
had one. 

Did you ever ask him to frame this portrait—this picture of 
your husband’s mother ?—Yes. I was to get a large one of my 


* Peace declared that Mrs. Dyson told him more than once that she was not 
married to Dyson. 


90 


The First Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


mother. I mentioned it to him about framing them, but I never 
got the photographs. 

Did you ask him to frame your mother’s portrait !—Yes, but 
he never did it. 

Did you write him any letter? 

Mr. Pottarp—She gives a reason why she did not ask him. 

Mr. Crecc—lIt is not in answer to my question. I do not 
care about her reasons. (Z'o Witness)—Did you send him a letter 
about it?—No, sir. 

Look at this letter, No. 6.* Is it in your handwriting !—No. 

Is it in your husband’s writing /—No. 

Do you know whose writing it is?—No, I don’t. 

Did any person know of your wish that he should frame the 
picture of your husband’s mother but your husband and your- 
self 7—Not that I am aware of. 

Have you ever seen the prisoner write ?—No, sir. 

You will swear that yeu never saw him write?—No, I never 
saw him write. My husband used to write for him. I have seen 
him sitting at a table with writing materials in front of him. 

Could you tell his writing if you saw it again?—I have not 
seen him write. 

Have you ever seen letters purporting to come from him ?!— 
No, I never have, for I did not know he could write, because he 
used to get my husband to write for him. 

As far as you are concerned in reference to this wish that you 
wanted the prisoner to frame your photo?—TI did not ask him to 
frame mine. 

I did not ask you that. I said your husband’s mother’s 
photograph, that you did not tell any one of that?—I do not 
remember that I did. 

Now, just listen to this letter—‘‘ Saturday Afternoon—I write 
you these few lines to thank you for all your kindness, which I 
shall never forget, from you and your wife. She is a very good 
one. Does she know you are to give me the things or not? How 
can you keep them concealed? One thing I would wish you to do 
is to frame his mother’s photograph, and send it in with my music- 
book ; if you please; do it when he is in. Many thanks for your 
kind advice. I hope I shall benefit by it. I shall try to do right 
by everybody as far as I can, and shall always look upon you as 
a friend. Goodbye. I have not much time. Burn this when 
you have read it.’”? Madam, will you still venture to swear that 
that paper is not in your writing?—No, sir, it is not. 

PrisoneR—I will prove it, though. 


* For all references here and hereinafter to these letters, see Appendix A, 
p. 173. 
+ Mrs. Dyson said she did not write any of these letters. Peace could 
not have done so. Who did? 
91 


Charles Peace. 


Mrs Dyson 


By Mr. Cuzac—You remember that you are upon your oath? 
—yYes, I do. 

You were very intimate with Peace, were you not ?—Yes, used 
to go into his house with his wife and daughter. 

Have you been together with him, and have you not been to 
places of amusement together ?—I have been with him, his wife, and 
daughter. 

I did not ask you that. Have you not been alone to places of 
amusement with him ?—Not to places of amusement. I have been 
to one place in Sheffield alone with him. 

Where?—I don’t know where. Peace said that there was a 
man there who was his brother. 

What sort of a place was it?—A public-house. A man was 
there who he said was his brother. 

By Mr. Rosinson-—Did you see*that man there !—Yes, we saw 
hin. 

Do you know the name of the street? 

Prisoner (raising himself up, and addressing his solicitor, 
extending his arm towards Mrs. Dyson)—Ask her about going to 
the theatre with me. 

By Mr. Cusae—Have you been to the theatre with him?—I 
was with him and his daughter and wife. 

Was your husband there!—No; but I had other friends along 
with me. 

Have you been with him alone to the Albert Hall?—No, I 
never was with him alone; his daughter was with me. 

Have you been to any public-houses together?—I have 
already told you I have been to one. 

More than once?—No, not along with him; but he has 
followed me into public-houses when I was with my husband. He 
followed me into one or two at Darnall. 

What is the name of it?—I cannot tell you the name of it. 

Was one the Duke of York ?—I believe go. 

Didn’t you used to go there alone?—I used to go there. 

Stop a bit. Did you not sometimes go to that house to get 
something to drink, and tell the landlord to put it down to Peace, 
the prisoner?—No. There was no landlord, only a landlady in 
the house, then. 

Oh, do you remember that? The name is Mrs. Liversidge, is 
it not? I ask you now, have you been to the Halfway House ?— 
Yes. 

Have you told the persons belonging to that house to put 
down the drink you had to Peace?—Not to my knowledge. 

Not to your knowledge ?—No. 

Will you swear you have not?—I cannot swear it, but I say 
I never have to my knowledge. 

Did you frequent that house?-—I called there two or three 
times, I believe. 

92 


The First Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


Did you know a person of the name of Goodlad !—Goodlad 4 

Yes, did you know the pianist at the Star Music Hall, in 
Spring Street /—No. 

[Mr. Goodlad was here called up. | 
Look at that man, Mrs. Dyson.—I never remember seeing him 
before. 

Prisonsr—Call his master, call his master. 

By Mr. Cuzae—Have you and the prisoner been to the Star 
Music Hall together ?—I don’t know it by that name. 

Then I will ask you this question, have you been to a music 
hall together, and to a public-house?—He called it a picture 
Senet I did not hear any music there. There was no music 
there. 

Where was it?—It was in Sheffield. 

Can you tell me whereabouts it was?’—I could not tell you the 
street. I could not find it now. 

Have you been to a public-house with him, where there was 
music and singing ?—We were at his brother’s public-house, and 
he said his brother was in some music hall. I believe so, I am 
not quite sure. 

Have you been to a music hall held at a public-house, where 
there was some music and singing !—Not to my knowledge. 

What ?—It looked as if there was some music because there 
was a small stage, but there was no music in our time. It was 
early in the afternoon. 

Have you not been at night when there have been music and 
singing, and that man who was called has been playing there !— 
No, I do not remember to have seen his face. 

Do you know a public-house in Russell Street, Sheffield, called 
the Marquis of Waterford?!—No. The public-house I am talking 
about now is in the street where the prisoner’s brother lived !— 
I do not know it by name. 

But do you know it now I have given you the place? Do you 
know where the prisoner’s brother lived?—I do not know where he 
lived. He was in that public-house. 

[Mr. Cragg was called before the Court. | 

Do you know that man?—No, I never remember seeing him 
before. 

That man is the landlord of the public-house that I have been 
talking about?—I never remember seeing him, but he may have 
been there and me not see him. 

Have you been to several public-houses with Peace, and had 
something to drink with him at those public houses’—No, I had 
soda water. 

By the Sripznprary—You do not deny that you have been to 
these public-houses!—I have been there. 

But you have not seen these men that have been produced to 
your knowledge ?—Not to my knowledge. 

93 


Charles Peace. 


Mrs Dyson 


Cross-examination continued—You have had some drink there? 
—TI have had a bottle of soda water or pop. 
Have you had something stronger than either of those two !— 
No. 
How many times have you been with him to these various 
houses ?/—Only once. 
Where !/—The house where you speak of. 
But I think you do not know it?—I have been to the house 
where his brother was. 
But I am not talking of the place you call the picture gallery, 
I am talking of another public-house altogether ?—Oh! I did not 
understand. 
Have you been to more than one public-house with him?—I 
have been to the picture gallery and another place with him. 
Those are two, and have you been with him to the Halfway 
House ?—Not with him. 
Or to the Duke of York’s?!—Not with him. 
Have you and he been out of the town together ?—Yes, he 
followed me one day to Mansfield. 
Was any one with you?—Mrs. Paramore and her three 
children. 
When was that ?—The summer before we removed. 
Was that about the time you had your photograph taken with 
him ?—No, not about the time. 
Was it before the Fair or after the Fair?—I cannot tell you 
exactly. 
Don’t take refuge behind ‘‘ Cannot tell exactly ’’ 7—I cannot 
remember the date, and you don’t want me to tell a lie. 
I don’t want you to to tell me a lie?—It was in the summer 
some time. 
Before or after the photograph was taken?—I cannot tell 
you exactly. 
Can you tell me whether it was before the Fair or after the 
Fair ?—Don’t remember. 
Oh, please, do try and remember !—Well, I can’t, but I will 
find out for you. 
Find out! But I want to know now?—I can’t remember 
all this. 
Was it before or after you had taken out the warrant !—Why, 
long before. 
At the time you went to Mansfield had you any quarrel with 
prisoner /—Yes; I didn’t want him to annoy me. 
Had you had any quarrel ?—Yes, because he was a nuisance 
to me. 
That was before you had your portrait taken with him, when 
you went to Mansfield ?—I don’t remember. 
Do you say it was two or three months before?—I didn’t say 
two or three months; I said a while before. 
94 


The First Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 

What do you call a while?—A month or so—two or three 
weeks. It might be longer. I am not quite sure. 

Before you took out this summons against him had you had 
any quarrel at all?—Not a quarrel, only that he was such a 
nuisance about the house, calling me a brute, and listening on the 
doorstep to our conversation. 

[Prisoner here groaned, and asked for the surgeon. Mr. 
Hallam, the police surgeon, felt his pulse. He then suggested that 
his feet should be raised by being placed on a chair. This was 
done, and then prisoner lay back in his arm-chair, with his feet 
curled before him. | 

Cross-examination continued—Had you any unpleasantness 
before you went to Mansfield ?—He was a constant source of annoy- 
ance by his disagreeableness. He used to listen at the door, and 
jump over the wall, and be very disagreeable indeed. He was a 
constant annoyance. 

What train did you go by when you went to Mansfield !—The 
afternoon train. 

Where did you go after you got there? Was he with you ?— 
He followed us, and came into the house just as we were sitting 
down to tea. 

Do you know a person of the name of Kirkham ?—Kirkham? 

Yes, the man who used to deliver the milk to you?—Yes, I 
should know him if I saw him. 

[Kirkham, a person about twenty years of age, was brought 
into the corridor. | 

By the Stippnp1aRy—Do you know him ?—Yes, I remember his 
face. 

By Mr. Cueac—You know him now; there can’t be any doubt 
about it?—I remember his face. 

By Mr. Pottarp—Do you know him by name, or only know his 
face ?—I only know his face. 

Cross-examination continued—He delivered the milk ?—He and 
his father. 

Have you never given him notes, with instructions to deliver 
them to Peace?—I gave him two receipts Mr. Dyson gave out for 
picture framing. 

What were they written on!—On paper. 

In an envelope?—I don’t know whether there was an envelope. 
I think only a piece of paper. 

Have you not given him notes!—I have given him two receipts. 

You know I don’t care about receipts. I ask you, have you 
not given him notes !—No, no notes. 

Little scraps of paper !—No, I have given him two receipts. 

Where did your husband keep his address cards!—In his, 
writing desk? 

Locked up ?—No. 

Where was the writing desk?—In the sitting room. 

95 


Charles Peace. 


Mrs Dyson 


Had you no address cards!—I, myself? 

Yes /—No. 

Did you ever use your husband’s?—No. 

The prisoner had a daughter named Jane, had he not ?—Jane 
Ann they called her. 

Now then, look at that (showing her a card*). It is in the 
same writing as the other. Read out what it says (handing witness 
the card) ?’—I cannot read it, and it is not written very plain. 

Then I will try and assist you; you can read !—Yes. 

And you can write ?/—Yes. 

This is what it says, then—‘‘ After he is going out I won’t 
go if I can help it, so see me. Love to Janey.’’ Now, then, will 
you venture to swear that you did not write that?—I did not 
write it. 

Has that card been altered from ‘‘ Mr.’’ to “‘ Mrs.’’ Will you 
venture to say you did not use that address card, and alter that 
from ‘‘ Mr.’’ to ‘‘ Mrs.’’ ?—I did not alter it. 

It is on your husband’s address card.—I am aware of that. 

Now, do you know a little girl named Hutton?—I don’t 
remember the name. 

Do you know a Mrs. Hutton living in Britannia Road ?—No, 
I don’t remember the name, but I might know her if I saw her. 
I can’t tell her by name. 

Did not you go and meet him there?—No, I never did. 

Were you never together in Mrs. Hutton’s ?—We called together 
one day when I was looking after a little girl to go errands for me. 

Was it Mrs. Hutton’s little girl?—Yes, I believe that was 
the name. 

Now, didn’t you use to give notes to this little girl? Will 
you swear that you never gave notes to the little girl to give to 
the prisoner ?—I will swear it. 

What do you write with generally, a steel pen or a quill pen ?— 
It does not make much difference, though I usually write with a 
quill. 

Well, write with a steel pen—‘‘ I will write a Note when I 
can, perhaps to-morrow.”’ Yes, that will do: go on and write, 
‘* You can give me something as a keepsake if you like, but I don’t 
want to be covetous and take them from your Wife and Daughter. 
Love to all.’ You have not written this half as well as the first 
part.—It is the best I can do. 

Now, look at this first line. ‘‘ I will write to you a Note,’’ 
and look at this card. Now, madam, will you swear that this is 
not your writing !—That is not my writing. 

Will you swear that?—I say that it is not my writing, 

Will you swear that it is not your writing?—I say that it is 
not my writing. 


* See Appendix A, p. 173. + See Letter ITI., Appendix A, p. 173. 
96 


The First Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


Now, I will go over these letters. Did the prisoner ever give 
you a ring !—Yes. 

Did you write to acknowledge the receipt of that ring?—Not 
to my knowledge. 

Had you any envelopes in your possession like this!—I cannot say. 

Look it well over, please. It is important?—I cannot say. 

Was prisoner living next door to you when he gave you that 
ring !/—Yes. 

[Mr. Hallam here felt Peace’s pulse, whereupon the prisoner 
groaned a good deal. Mr. Hallam, however, found his invalid all 
right, and left him for a time. | 

} Now, then, first look at that letter—that envelope with the 
writing upon it. Is that your handwriting/—No, it is not my 
writing. 

Did anybody besides you and the prisoner know he had given 
you a ring —I don’t know. I guess his daughter knew, at least 
he said so. 

Did you know whether the daughter could write or not?—l 
don’t know. I guess she could. 

Do you know about when that ring was given to you?—No, 
I can’t remember. 

You can’t tell?—No. 

Can you give me any idea about what time it was!—No, I 
can’t remember. 

How soon was it before you left Darnall?—I don’t know. 

Was it before you had that portrait taken, or afterwards ?—I 
can’t tell you. 

No idea?—No, I can’t tell you. 

You can’t give me any idea?—Well, no. 

Very well; now then, listen to me. I am going to read a letter, 
and you follow me. ‘‘I don’t know what train we shall go by, for 
I have a good deal to do this morning. Will see you as soon as I 
possibly can. I think it will be easier after you move; he won’t 
watch so. The r g (meaning the ring) fits the little finger. 
Many thanks and love to Janey. I will tell you what I thought 
of when I see you about arranging matters. I think it well. 
Excuse this scribbling.’ What is the next word, is it ‘hello’? ?— 
I don’t know, I cannot tell. 

Now, ma’am, you admit you have received a ring from him? 
—yYes, he gave me a ring. 

Will you swear that is not a letter from you to him?—lIt is not 
from me. 

Not after putting the ring on, and trying it on, and telling 
him the ring fits?—The letter is not from me. 

Did the ring fit?—No. 

Did you tell him not?—I did not keep it very long. It did not 
fit my little finger. 

i 97 


Charles Peace. 


Mrs Dyson 


Did you try it on?—Yes, I tried it, but I could not put it on. 

What sort of a ring was it?—I could not tell you exactly. It 
was not worth much. a 

What sort of a ring was it?—It had a few glass stones in It. 

Do you remember the prisoner’s foot being damaged?—No, I do 
not remember anything about it. 

Do you remember his foot being injured about March, 1876 !— 
No, 1 cannot remember anything about it. 

Will you swear that you did not write this note to him (pro- 
ducing a letter marked No. 5)?* Is that in your handwriting!— 
No. 

Mr. Ciece—I will read it to you. 

Mr. Pottarp—The witness keeps on saying she did not write 
the letters to him or the notes. I object that unless it is proved 
the thing is connected with the case it cannot be used. She denies 
that she wrote it. 

Mr. Cirac—I submit, then, sir, that you have a most curious 
coincidence. She admits that the ring is given to her by the 
prisoner, and yet she denies writing the letter in which this very 
ring is mentioned to him. 

Mr. Pottarp—A ring? 

Mr. Ciece—Well, a ring—a ring that is given to her. And 
yet you have this fact, that those letters which have been put in 
by the prosecution had been dropped by the prisoner. 

The Sripenp1any—What does it all lead to? 

Mr. Ciecc—lIt leads to this. This woman has sworn now, as 
she did previously, that she did not write any of those letters, 
and I am in a position to prove that she did. 

The Stipenprary—She distinctly denies it. I did not, how- 
ever, stop you when you said you would draw her attention to it, 
but I say that there is no necessity for going into the whole of it. 

Mr. Pottarp—There can be no object in overhauling the 
contents of each of these letters. 

The Sripenpiary—You have quite enough evidence to damage 
her credit. 

Prisoner (moaning)—I demand that justice be done; I demand 
that justice be done. 

The Stipznprary (to Prisoner)—Don’t you interrupt. 

Mr. Potzarp—I will take your opinion, sir, on the subject. 

The Strpsnprary—I think enough has been gone into for the 
purposes of the preliminary examination. You can reserve the rest 
for the trial. I consider that enough has been gone into for the 
purpose of the preliminary examination. 

Mr. Cireae—Supposing that at the trial this man is not de- 
fended, a state of things which is not at all unlikely. 


*See Appendix A, p. 173. 
98 


The First Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


_ _ The Srrpenpiary—You know very well that in that case the 
Judge would order some learned counsel to defend the prisoner. I 
am not going to deal with a state of circumstances that may arise 
at the trial. It would be presumption in me to provide for want 
of justice before the judges; it would be great presumption on 
my part. 

Mr. Crnae—This is a preliminary inquiry, and I can put in 
whatever I think is for the benefit of the prisoner. Though it is 
only a preliminary inquiry, I am bound to do it. 

Mr. Pottarp—We are all subject to your approval. 

The Srrpenpiary—I rule that sufficient has been asked about 
those letters. 

Mr. Cxizec—I shall persist in asking them questions until I 
am stopped. 

The Srrpenpiary—Then I stop them now. You have quite 
enough for your purpose. 

Mr. Creac—I don’t think I have. 

The Strpenpiary—You have quite enough. You can prosecute 
her for perjury, if she has spoken falsely as to what has been 
asked of her. There are two very particular points on which she 
has decisively spoken in reference to these letters. 

PrisoNER—She has done more than that. 

The SripenpIaRy—You may, if you have cause, indict her for 
perjury. It can lead to nothing else. 

Mr. Ciuee—I put it on this ground; I think I am justified in 
saying it is a question of credibility. 

The Stipenp1aRY—Quite so. 

Mr. Crrae—Then at present I don’t think I have got sufficient, 
in my opinion, to test this witness’s credibility. 

The Strpenpiary—In my opinion you have. If what you have 
asserted is shown to be true, you have more than sufiicient to 
damage her credibility, and more than sufficient to have a cause for 
indicting her for perjury. Beyond that it is not necessary for you 
to go, and I rule you shall not go. 

Mr. Cuzac—How can I indict the woman for perjury unless I 
put the letters in her hands? 

The Srremnprary—She has looked at them, because I told 
her to look at them myself. I said to her, ‘‘ Look at each one, 
and see if it is not in your handwriting? ’’ That is in itself suffi- 
cient. 

Mr. Crrce—Those letters have been already produced by the 
prosecution. I have the right to call for those to be read, and if 
you will not now let me cross-examine her in reference to them in 
detail, I ask that the letters be read; then I can cross-examine 
upon them, and that comes to the same thing. 

The Sripsnpriany—You should have done that before. It is 
too late now. I cannot have them read now. 

99 


Charles Paice. 


Mrs Dyson 


Mr. Cruaa—Put that decision on the depositions. 1 ask that 
those letters put in by the prosecution be read by the clerk of the 
Court. 

The Srrpenpiary—You have seen them? 

Mr. Cuzac—I have not seen them. I have not had the oppor- 
tunity of reading these original letters. By mere favour I have 
had copies of them sent to me. 

Prisoner (after a long groan)—It is nothing but injustice. 

Mr. Cieaa—It is enough when this man is in the state he is to 
hurry on this trial in the way it is being done, but I did not object 
because I thought there would be a full inquiry, just as though 
the evidence had come out in public Court; but now it appears I 
am not to cross-examine. 

Mr. Potuarp—Surely 

The Srrpenprary—You will take the ruling of the Court, Mr. 
Clegg, if you please, and have done with it. You will take the 
ruling of the Court. 

Mr. Cizae—I put it to you as a matter of law. 

The Srrprnpianry—I have given my decision, Mr. Clegg. You 
will please proceed with the case. 

Mr. Ciuae—I object to proceed until these letters are read. 

Prisonpsr—Hear, hear! 

The Sripenp1ary—You can proceed with your cross-examination. 

Mr. Cuzaa—lI will proceed with my cross-examination if you let 
me go on as I have done. 

The Srrpenpiary—No, no; as to doing that, the time is past. 

Mr. Cireca—The time is not past, I submit, until the case is 
closed. It is not closed, and I have a right to have the letters read 
if I please. 

The Srrpenwp1ary—You can read them over yourself if you like. 

Mr. Cizee—If they are put into my hands I shall read them 
to witness. 

The Srrpewp1ary—Then you may read them.* 

Mr. CLeaa—Very well, sir; then that is all I want The witness 
has denied that she had anything to do with them. (Zo Witness)— 
Have you read them?—Some of them. 

Have you read them all?—Not all of them. 

Then I will read them to you. 

Mr. Pottarp—There will be no necessity for these being read 
aloud. Let the witness read them to herself. 

The Srirpenp1ary—She said she could not read them. 

Mr. Pottarp—She would know if they were in her writing. 

The Sriprwprary—Mr. Clegg wishes to read them. 

Mr. Ciuca—lI did not wish to read them—only to the witness. 

The Srrpenprary—She said she had looked at them, but did not 
know them. 


* The noble art of hair-splitting in excelsis. 
100 


The First Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


Mr. Potnarp (to Witness)—Have you looked at them1—Yes. 

And carefully 7—Yes. 

_ And are they in your handwriting?—They are not in my hand- 
writing. 

Mr. Cieac—I will read this one to you now, if you please—“ If 
you have a note for me send now while he is out, but you must not 
venture for he is watching, and you can’t be too careful. Hope 
your foot is better. He went to Sheffield yesterday, but I could 
not see you anywhere. Were you out? Love to Jane.’’ Did you 
write that letter?—No. 

Now, I put that letter in. _ Have you had an envelope in your 
possession like that (handing an envelope to the witness) ?—I don’t 
know ; perhaps I might have. As regards the envelope, the prisoner 
used to come for paper and writing materials to my house. 

PrisuNeER—No, I did not—oh, no. 

By Mr. Creae—Have you read the contents of this?—yYes, 
excepting something I could not make out. 

Will you swear that is not in your writing?’—I swear there are 
none of them in my writing. 

Did you ever give the prisoner an American cent ?—No. 

Will you please write ‘‘ C. Peace ’’’ upon a piece of paper! 

| The witness did as desired. 

Mr. Ciece compared it with a paper in his hand, and then said 
to witness—You are in too big a hurry. I wish you would write 
it a bit slower. Don’t be in a hurry. 

The witness wrote the word over again. 

After comparing it with the paper in his hand, Mr. Clegg pro- 
duced another paper which he said was marked No. 12, and was 
handed to witness. | 

Have you seen that paper, No. 12?—I have seen it when I 
looked them over before. 

Very well. Did you ever borrow any money from the prisoner? 
—No. 

Not at all?—-I never did 

Have you read this paper that I put in, that I showed you 
last ?—I have looked it over. 

You say that this is not your writing?—I say so. 

‘‘ Things are very bad, for people told him everything. (Then 
there is something missed out.) Pick out the L.D.’’ Do you know 
what that means?—No. 

** Do keep quiet, and don’t let any one see you money send me 
some.’’ You did not write that? 

You had a son named Willie?—William Henry. 

How old is he?’—Seven years old last December. 

Did the prisoner ever give your son any halfpennies or coppers 
that you know off—No, not that I am aware of. 

Do you know a woman named Norton?—Norton. I seem to 


remember the name. I think I remember the name. 
101 


Charles Peace. 


Mrs Dyson 


Did you ever write this to the prisoner—‘‘ Mrs. Norton is raising 
hell about what I (then follows a blank). Can you settle it, and 
send me a pint, that is—her to let me have a pint he is gone out 
come now for I must have a drink ’’ !—No. 

When you were before the magistrates last week you said that 
you left Darnall in consequence of the prisoner annoying you !— 
Yes, on account of his annoyance. 

Had you seen him from July, 1876, up to the time when you 
left in October ?—No. 

Did you know where he was?—No, I did not. He made him- 
self scarce on account of the warrant I had taken out against him. 

And you did not know where he was!—Certainly not. 

Did his family leave the neighbourhood before you left ?—I 
don’t know. 

Now, as you did not see him from*July to October, will you still 
say it was in consequence of his annoying Visits to you that you 
left Darnall? 

You were asked last time if you and your husband removed 
in the month of October, and you said that was in consequence of 
his (prisoner’s) disagreeable visits !—I did not say visits. 

What word did you use?!—I can’t remember. I didn’t say 
visits. 

What do you now say was the reason for your leaving Darnall? 
—Because we were afraid of him. That was the reason. We 
thought he might come in in the night. We thought we had better 
go where he would not know where to find us. 

It was because you were afraid of him?—Yes, he had threatened 
both my life and that of my husband. 

Was the sole reason you left because you were afraid of him? 
—Yes, and we were told that he visited Darnall in female attire.* 

Can you tell me the names of any persons who told you that 
he used to go to Darnall in woman’s attire!—There were many. 

Tell me the name of one?—Mrs. Paramore, and others. 

Was it in consequence of his visits that you left the place?— 
No, not because of his visits, for he took care not to let us see him. 

Did you say that the prisoner had threatened to blow your 
brains out, and those of your husband?—Yes, I said that. 

Will you say that he threatened to blow your husband’s brains 
out?—Yes, I will swear that he threatened to blow out both my 
brains and my husband’s. 

Did you tell that before the coroner ?—The case was not brought 
before the coroner. 

Were you not examined before the coroner !—Yes, on the case 
of murder, nothing more. 


Were you examined as to the death of your husband ’?—Yes. 


- * Peace certainly did on occasion masquerade as an old woman. 
102 


The First Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


Did you say then that the prisoner had threatened your life 
at all?—Not that I remember. 

Did you not, when before the coroner, say that there had been 
eee between your husband and the prisoner ?—I don’t remember 

at. 

Had there been a quarrel between them at the time you 
Jolay from Darnall’—The prisoner made himself very disagree- 
able. 

Had there been any quarrel between prisoner and your husband? 
—TI say he had been very annoying. 

Was there any quarrel?!—I can’t say there was any quarrel, 
because my husband would not speak to him. 

Have you ever received a letter from the prisoner at all?— 
No, sir. Oh! yes. I have received threatening letters. 

Have you got them?—Mr. Chambers has them, I think. 

I am now talking about the night of the murder. Previous 
to your going into the closet had your son been taken to bed, do 
you know!—Yes, sir. 

Did you see the prisoner when you were in the bedroom !— 
No, sir. 

Did you see him through the blind?—No, sir. 

When you were coming out of the closet did you see the 
prisoner !—Yes, I did. 

Did you say to him, ‘‘ You old devil, what are you doing 
here’? ?—I don’t remember saying anything to him, but he said, 
** Speak, or I’ll fire.”’ 

I am not asking what he said to you, but what you said to 
him. Will you swear that you did not say, ‘‘ You old devil, 
what are you doing here? I should have thought that you had 
brought enough disgrace upon me ’’ #—I don’t remember speaking 
at all. I was too astonished. 

Did the prisoner say this—‘‘I have come to try and see if 
I cannot get you to get your husband to come to terms, as I am 
away from my wife.’’ Did he say that?—No, sir. 

Did you say that you did not think your husband would settle 
it?—I did not speak to him that I remember. 

Well, I am bound to put these questions to you. Did he say 
to you, ‘‘ I will let you have the notes back again if you will get 
him to stay proceedings ’’ #—No, sir. 

Did you say, ‘‘ You know very well he won’t do it, as he has 
placed it in the hands of the lawyers’’ ?—No, I did not speak to 
him. 

Your husband then came up !—Yes. 

How far was he from you and the prisoner before you first 
saw him?—About 2 or 3 feet. 

Only 2 or 3 feet? Where were you then?—At the end, in 
the passage. 

103 


Charles Peace. 


Mrs Dyson 


How far is the passage from where you were to the closet!— 
Close by. 

Well, how many yards!—I can’t say. 

How far were you from the closet door when you saw your 
husband!—Only 3 or 4 feet. I was just at the end. 

Not more, then, than from the lane to the closet?—He came 
up the passage, and the closet is at the other end. 

Yes, but you cannot see the closet from your door. Your 
husband came up. Whereabouts was the prisoner when he came 
up He was just at the end of the closet, at the side. 

Walking away from where you were!—Moving towards the end 
of the passage. 

Was he walking or running away!—He was not running, and 
he was not walking. He was going at a rather quick pace. 

Was he walking pretty quickly -away from your husband?— 
He was going down the passage. 

Away from your husband?!—Away from him. 

Did your husband speak either to you or to him?!—No. 

Did they both get out of your sight!—No. 

Did your husband try to get hold of the prisoner !—No, he was 
not close enough to him. 

Did you say before the coroner this—‘‘ My husband followed 
him. I cannot say whether he attempted to get hold of Peace 
or not ’??—Did you say that before the coroner?—I do not re- 
member. 

Were these depositions read over to you before you signed 
them?—lIf I have said it, it is correct. 

Well, it is here so, and you have signed your name to it?— 
Yes. 

You heard what I read to you just now about you saying that 
you could not say whether your husband attempted to get hold of 
the prisoner or not before any shots took place?—I cannot. 

You cannot, and I suppose you will not, venture to swear that 
he did not try to get hold of him? You have already said that 
you cannot say, and I suppose now that you will not swear that 
he did not try to get hold of him?—I cannot say. 

Can you tell me the height of your husband?—6 feet 6 inches. 

When your husband was going towards the prisoner, did you 
hear him say, ‘‘ If you don’t stop I’ll fire ’’?—No. 

Did you see the prisoner on the ground!—How do you mean? 

With your husband. Was there any struggling between your 
husband and the prisoner?—No, no. 

How far were you away from them when your husband was 
shot, did you say?—A few feet off. 

Did you hear the prisoner speak to your husband before he 
fired?—No, I did not. There was no speaking at all. 

Did your husband speak at all?—No. 

104 


The First Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


Not from the time he came out right up to the time he was 
shot i—No. 

Never a word!—No. 

Will you swear that your husband and the prisoner were not 
struggling together on the ground!—No, they were not struggling ; 
they were not close enough together. 

Did this take place in the passage?—The passage end, just 
before going down to the road. 

By the SripEnp1ary—The turnpike road end or the other !— 
No, the passage end. 

Cross-examination continued—What became of the lantern that 
you had?—I threw it down. 

Before you saw your husband come out, had you the lantern 
still in your hand ?—Yes. 

Re-examined by Mr. Pottarp—I am not quite sure whether we 
have it quite clear. Are there some steps coming from the passage 
into the roadway !—There are one or two steps. 

When your husband fell, in what direction did his head fall 1— 
From the side of the passage. 

With reference to the steps, how near to the steps did his head 
fall? Were his feet or his head nearest the steps’—His feet were 
nearest. 

Near the two steps leading into the causeway ?—Yes, in rather 
a slanting direction. 

Had he moved at all? Did he take any steps forward after the 
bullet had struck him?—No, he dropped instantly. 

At the time the bullet was fired, did you see whether Peace was 
down on the pathway of the causeway /—Yes. 

Therefore he would be some few feet below your husband ?—Yes. 
He was down off the steps on the causeway when he fired the second 
shot. 

And you say he would therefore be some two or three feet 
below your husband’s head at the time he fired /—Yes. 

You were saying something about threatening letters ?—Yes. 

How many ?—I know of two, and there were perhaps more. 

Have you those letters?—Mr. Chambers, solicitor, has them. 
Mr. Dyson gave them to Mr. Chambers. 

You gave them to Mr. Dyson, your husband, and he gave them 
to Mr. Chambers ?—Yes. 

You don’t know whether they are in existence or not? You 
don’t know whose writing they were!—They were signed, as if from 
prisoner, and seemed to come from Germany. 


Joun Pzarson, police constable 235, examined by Mr. Pontarp— 
Do you know the prisoner ?—I do. 

How long have you known him?—Three or four years. 

You remember the date of the murder of Mr. Dyson in 


November, 1876 1—Yes. 
105 


Charles Peace. 


John Pearson 


Did you receive some instructions from your superior officer to 
go in search of the prisoner ?—I did. 

How long afterwards was it?—I received instructions the 
same morning, at half-past two o’clock. 

That was the 30th November /—Yes. : 

Did you make diligent search for him?!—I did, sir. 

In Sheffield and the neighbourhood!—I did. 

And Darnall, was that one of the places?—I did not go to 
Darnall. 

Did you go anywhere else besides the neighbourhood of Shef- 
field?—On Monday morning, the 6th December, 1876, I went to 
Hull, by direction of the chief constable. 

Did you make careful search for him there ?—Yes. 

Did you go to any place in Hull which you had any reason 
to know ?—Yes, I went to 37 Collier Street. 

Who was living there!—Peace’s wife, I believe,—the same 
person who has been locked up here in the name of Hannah 
Peace. 

Was she keeping a shop ?!—She was. 

You failed to find him there?—I did. 

Did you make any inquiry anywhere else?—I was in Hull 
six weeks, and during that time 

But did you go to any other towns?—Yes, I went from there 
to Goole. 

Without success likewise !—Yes. 

Anywhere else did you go!—No. 

At the time was this reward bill issued?—Yes; I circulated 
these bills over Hull. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Ciraa—Did you see them placarded ?— 
Yes, I got copies from the chief constable, and went round with the 
poster to see them placarded. 

Did you see them on the walls at Sheffield ?—I did, sir. 

And it is a bill authorising a reward of £100 for the arrest 
of Charles Peace, whom you charged with the murder of Arthur 
Dyson, and so forth ?—Yes. 

I suppose you did your best to find the prisoner, and didn’t 
succeed !—] did so. 

Mr. Pouuarp said that was his case. 

PrisonrER—Cannot you call my witnesses? What is the use of 
my having witnesses if they are not called? 

The Stipenpiary—Listen to me. 

PrIsonER—I cannot have them called, then? 

The Sripswprary—Oh, yes, you can. You first of all have to 
make a statement, and then if there are any witnesses to be called 
they can be called. Now, listen to me. The charge against you 
is that you wilfully and of malice aforethought did kill and murder 
one Arthur Dyson, on the 29th November, 1876. Having 

106 


The First Trial. 


heard the evidence, do you wish to say anything in answer to the 
charge? 

PrisoneR—Yes, I wish to say that 

The Srrpenprary—Listen to me. You are not obliged to say 
anything in answer to the charge. What you do say will be taken 
down and may be given in evidence against you on your trial. [The 
rest of the legal caution was then read to prisoner. ] 

Mr. Cruce—If you take my advice you will simply say not 
guilty. 

PrisonsR—I say I am not guilty, and that justice has not been 
done to me. I can prove that I am not guilty. That is what I 
want. I want that. I want justice done to me. Why don’t they 
let me call my witnesses? You are asking me, will my witnesses 
be called? Why should they not be called here? Why, because 
I have not the money to pay the expenses. 

The Sripenp1ary—What is it you complain of? 

Prisonger—I want my witnesses called to prove that I have 
really not done this. 

The Strpenprary—Are there any witnesses to be called? 

PrisonER—Yes, sir. 

The Stipenp1ary—Are they here? 

PrisONER—Yes, Sir. 

The Srrpenprany—Then you must ask your solicitor. 

Mr. Rosrnson—You say, ‘‘ I say I am not guilty, and 1 want 
my witnesses called to prove I am not guilty.”’ 

PrisoneR—That is what I said. I have lots of witnesses who 
can prove that that base, bad woman has threatened my life, and has 
threatened her husband’s life. But I can’t talk to you, I am so 
bad. I feel very bad, but she has threatened to take my life often. 

The Strpenp1rary—lIs this what you say? 

Prisonsr—I say I am not guilty, and I say I have not justice 
done me to prove [ am not guilty, and that I want my witnesses 
called. (Then loudly.) Isay I can prove that I have not threatened 
her life. She has threatened her husband’s, and she has pointed 
pistols and things at me. He has threatened hers as well. 

The Strpenp1ary——Have you any witnesses to-day? You are 
not taking your trial to-day. This is only a preliminary examina- 
tion. 

PrisonzR—I cannot have these witnesses, it seems, without I 
pay for them. 

Mr. Crucc—I say I don’t intend calling any witnesses to-day. 

The StipeNpraRY—Do you care to sign your statement? Would 
you like to put your name to the statement! 

Prisonsr—I will try. (To his warder, in a very rough tone 
of voice)—Let me be. (Then, taking up the pen.) I cannot see. 

Mr. Cracac—Just sign it there. 


107 


Charles Peace. 


* [Prisoner then rested his head on his arm and signed his name 
very deliberately, the capital initials ‘‘C ”’ and “‘ P’”’ being par- 
ticularly well flourished. | 

The Sriemnpiany—You are committed to take your trial on this 
charge at Assizes at Leeds. ; 

Prisonsr—Will you let me sit before the fire a bit before I go? 
I am really very badly. 

Mr. Cusaa—He complains of being cold. : 

PrisoNER—You may put me in irons if you like, but put me 
near a fire. : ; 

The Cur ConstasnE—The cells are warm enough. It is 
only in this corridor that there is so much air 

Mr. Ciece—You will be warm enough in the cell. 

PrisonsR—I want to see you. 

Mr. Ciece—Yes, I will see you. 

Prisoner was then removed to tha cell, groaning most piteously, 
the energy he so lately displayed having suddenly left him. After- 
wards, however, he gave instructions to his solicitor in a very firm 
and decided tone of voice. 


XVI. 


There cannot have been a more grim scene in criminal history 
than this of Peace’s examination in the cold, draughty corridor, by 
candlelight ; he was swathed in rugs, bandaged, moaning, groaning, 
cursing, expostulating. 

The next day, Saturday, 25th January, he was removed from 
Sheffield and taken to Wakefield Prison by the 2.12 train. He was 
carried from his cell, laid upon a mattress in the police van, and 
covered up with rugs. In the same fashion, in the special carriage 
reserved for him in the train from Wakefield, he was taken to 
Armley Gaol, Leeds, and, finally, on the night before the trial, he 
was transferred to a cell beneath the Town Hall, Leeds. 

It is unnecessary to quote all the voluminous correspondence 
indulged in by Peace between his committal and his appearance 
on the scaffold, but some must be given, as it sheds light upon the 
character of this extraordinary person. 


Here is a letter from Wakefield to the so-called Mrs. Thomp- 
son— 


My dear Sue,—This is a fearful affair which has befallen me, but I hope 
you will not forsake me,* as you have been my bosom friend, and you 
have ofttimes said that you loved me, that you would die for me. What 


* She had done so. 
108 


The First Trial. 


I hope and trust you will do is to sell the goods I left with you to raise 
money to engage a barrister for me, to save me from the perjury of that 
villainous woman, Mrs. Dyson. It will have to be done at once, and the 
money you send let it go to Clegg and Sons, 57 Bank Street, Sheffield. 
You must do it with all speed, as the Assizes commence 28th January. 
I hope you will not forget the love we have for each other. Do your best 
for me. I should like you to write, and come and see me if you could. I 
am very ill from the effects of the jump from the train. I tried to kill 
myself to slip all further trouble and distress, and to be buried at Darnall.— 
I remain your ever true lover till death, 

JOHN THOMPSON. 

CHARLES PEACE. 


If this is genuine and undoctored, it shows Peace to be less 
grotesquely illiterate than is indicated by other productions of his 
pen. 

Then this, to Mrs. Peace, who was staying with her married 
daughter, Mrs. Bolsover, at Darnall— 


Her Majesty’s Prison, Wakefield, 
29th Jan., 1879. 
Dear wife and children,— 

I received your letter a few minutes ago. I am still very ill, and 
think I shall be no better in this world. You say in your letter that 
the people will not come forward and speak for me. I always told you 
to summon them, and not to ask them at all; and when they had once 
been in court the Treasury would have paid their expenses and com- 
pelled*them to be at the assizes free of all expense to you. But now you 
have involved this expense on yourself, I think; but you must do your best 
for me. 

I care for nothing but the villainous perjury of one man. 

Write to me daily and let me know; and if you have any idea when 
I am going to be tried let me know, for I have no idea myself. 

I wrote to Sue and have had an answer back. She is still living 
at * * * and they have got the things from her. She says she has 
nothing to make money of for me. I know she has plenty of things to make 
money of for me. 

I have also wrote to transfer all property to Mr. Clegg. Order him 
to have the property in London sold for my defence and to prosecute any 
persons who are in possession of it. 

I have also wrote to Mr. Beard, solicitor, to get money from Levy, and 
Mr. Beard says he will give £10; but Mr. Clegg says that he will not be 
enough; but I am going to write at once to London to Mr. Beard to get 
more money from Levy. 

And you had better go and see Mr. Clegg to see if he is taking any 
steps to have this property sold. 

I now conclude with my best love to all dear friends. I remain your 
affectionate and unhappy husband, 

CHARLES PEACE. 


109 


‘Charles Peace. 


The Leeds January Assizes opened on Thursday, 30th January, 
1879, and a bill of indictment against Charles Peace, alias John 
Ward, forty-seven, joiner or carver or gilder, for the wilful murder 
of Mr. Arthur Dyson, at Sheffield, on the 29th November, 1876, 
was presented to the Grand Jury in the Crown Court, the Town 
Hall. 


XVII. 


On 4th February Charles Peace made his last appearance 
in public, and attended the last trial he was to hear—‘‘ a shabby, 
wretched-looking old man,’’ he was described in the Sheffield 
Daily Telegraph, ‘‘ looking as if hope had left him; grey hair, 
closely cropped; cheeks hollow; lips pale; but the eyes steely, keen, 
and restlessly watchful.”’ Lord Stuart of Wortley, one of his 
counsel, says—‘‘ So far as 1 remember, he made no scenes; but I 
heard him muttering imprecations when certain witnesses spoke to 
his having given utterance to vindictive sentiments towards the 
murdered man.’’* 

After Peace, the figure of interest was Mrs. Dyson. 

These two only, the accused and the accusing witness, knew 
the whole truth for certain. 


* Letter to me, 13th January, 1925.—Ep 
110 


THE TRIAL. 


AT LEEDS ASSIZES, 
TUESDAY, 4ra FEBRUARY, 1879. 


Regina on the Prosecution of Jacob Bradbury, Police Inspector 
at Sheffield. 


Judge— 
Mr. JUSTICE LOPES.! 


Counsel for the Crown— 


Mr. CAMPBELL FostTsEr, Q.C.? 
Mr. Hues SHIELD? 


(Instructed by the Treasury; local agents for the Crown, 
Messrs. Rodgers, Thomas & Co.). 


Counsel for the Prisoner— 


Mr. Frank Lockwoop.! 
Mr. Stuart-WorRTLEY.® 


(Instructed by Messrs. Clegg & Sons). 


1Afterward First Baron Ludlow of Heywood, created 1897. Henry Charles. 
Lopes (b. 1827; d. 1899). Recorder of Exeter, 1867; Q.C., 1869; M.P., 
Launceston, 1868-74; and Frome, 1874-76; Judge of High Court of Justice, 
1876; of Court of Appeal, 1885-97. 

2 Thomas Campbell Foster (b. 1813; d. 1882). Q,C., 1875. 

3 Hugh Shield, Q.C. (b. 1831; d. 1903). M.P., Cambridge, 1880-85. 

4Sir Frank (Francis) Lockwood (b. 1846; d. 1897). Q.C., 1882. M.P., 
York, 1885. Recorder of Sheffield, 1884. Solicitor-General, 1894-95. 

5 Now the Rt. Hon. Lord Stuart of Wortley. Charles Beilby Stuart- 
Wortley (b. 1851). Q.C., 1892. M.P., Sheffield, 1880-85 ; and Hallam Division, 


Sheffield, 1885, 1916. 
111 


Charles Peace. 


Mr. Justice Lorzs took his seat at ten o’clock, accompanied 
by the High Sheriff (Mr. Aldam), there being also on the bench 
Lord Houghton, Sir James Ramsden, the Mayor of Leeds (Alder- 
man Addyman), Mr. W. B. Denison, M.P., and others. 

Mr. Bromuzy, the clerk of assize, demanded that Charles 
Peace, alias Ward, should be put to the bar. The prisoner was at 
once placed in the dock, to answer the indictment charging him 
with the wilful murder of Mr. Arthur Dyson, at Sheffield, on the 
29th November, 1876. 

The Prisoner pleaded not guilty. 

The following gentlemen were then sworn upon the jury :-— 
John E. Allison, Edward Chandler, Charles Crabtree, Henry S. 
Smith, 8. T. Craik, Charles Lee, Alfred Hartley, Frederick Mann, 
Thomas G. Mills, William Nettleton, William Town, William 
Vollans. . 

None of the jurymen being challenged by the prisoner’s 
counsel, the prisoner was accordingly given ‘‘ in charge of the 


jury.”’ 


Opening Speech for the Crown. 


Mr. CampsBetL Foster—May it please your lordship—gentle. 
men of the jury, I cannot disguise from myself nor from you that 
this case, from the great public comment which has been made 
concerning it in the various newspapers, must come before 
you in one way or other calculated somewhat to bias your minds; 
and before entering upon the case I would beg and implore you, 
so far as you possibly can, to put from your minds—to put entirely 
out of your consideration, if you can—anything that you may 
have read about this case, and be guided entirely by the sworn 
testimony to be given before you to-day in arriving at a judg- 
ment as to the guilt or innocence of the prisoner. With these 
observations, I will now proceed to state to you what are the facts 
of the case to be established before you. It will be shown that 
previous to July, 1876, the man into whose death you are to-day 
inquiring lived at Darnall, a village about 3 miles to the 
east of Sheffield from the parish church, but now, from the ex- 
tension of the town, one of the outskirts of Sheffield itself. Dyson 
and his wife lived in a row of cottage houses in that village, and 
next door, or next door but one, the prisoner resided with a 
woman who is, so far as is known, his wife. From being such 
very near neighbours, it would seem that the Dysons got to know 
the prisoner, who was in the habit of framing pictures and doing 
little jobs of the kind, and they employed him to frame two or 
three small prints and pictures which they had in the house. 
This led to an acquaintance between the prisoner and the Dysons ; 
but Mr. Dyson seems at last not to have liked the persistent 

112 


s\n 


Yn 
2 
Ww 
Q 
x 
xt 
Oo 


K 
jaa: 
2 
Wa I, ut 
o + 
e 


ECCLESALL ROAD 


THE DYSONS 
HOUSE 


TO SHEFFIELD 


Map illustrating Banner Cross Murder, 


ial. 


(From a Sketch by Frank Lockwood.) 


Charles Peace on Tr 


The Second Trial. 


Mr Campbell Foster 


familiarity with which Peace treated them, walking in at any 
time into the house of the Dysons, even during meals. This 
annoyed both Dyson and his wife, and, in consequence, shortly 
before 1st July, 1876, Mr. Dyson wrote on the back of one of his 
address cards—‘‘ Charles Peace is requested not to interfere with 
my family.’’ This card was, I believe, thrown over the wall into 
Peace’s garden, and that address card may become an important 
item for your consideration. The sending of this card seems to 
have created a bad feeling in the mind of Peace against Mr. 
Dyson, for it will be shown to you that on 1st July Peace, meeting 
Mr. Dyson in the road, suddenly commenced an assault upon 
him, attempting to trip him up and throw him down. Later in 
the evening, while Mrs. Dyson was talking to some neighbours 
about this extraordinary attack upon her husband, Peace came 
up and wanted to know if they were talking about him. He 
was told that they were. He asked Mrs. Dyson to repeat what she 
had said. She did repeat what she had said, and then Peace, 
apparently in a sudden burst of passion, produced a revolver, 
and, presenting it at her head, said he would blow her brains out, 
using bad language, and adding that he would blow out the brains 
of her husband too. In consequence of this outrageous threat, a 
summons was taken out against him. He did not appear on that 
summons, and a warrant was granted against him in the ordinary 
course. He seems to have known this, for from that time, the 
beginning of July, until the following October, he was not again 
seen in the neighbourhood, and the Dysons were not interfered 
with by him. But they kept an eye on him, and, for reasons 
which I need not go into, they apprehended a visit. His 
animosity had been unmistakably shown to both of them. 

To be out of reach of his annoyance the Dysons determined to 
remove from Darnall. From Darnall to Banner Cross is a dis- 
tance of 6 miles; about 3 miles to the west of Sheffield. Accordingly 
in October they took a house in Banner Cross Terrace, at Kcclesall, 
and on the 26th of October they sent their furniture in a wagon 
from Darnall to Banner Cross for the purpose of placing it in their 
new home. Mr. and Mrs. Dyson followed the furniture by rail, and 
on arriving at Banner Cross on the 26th of October, you will learn 
that on approaching their house they saw the furniture being un- 
loaded, and the first person they saw coming out of the house was 
Peace. This was a surprise and somewhat of a shock. Some 
conversation took place between Mrs. Dyson and him, whereupon 
the latter said, ‘‘ 1 am here to annoy you, and I will annoy you 
wherever you go.’’ Mrs. Dyson told him there was a warrant 
out against him, and he replied that he did not care for the 
warrant, and he did not care for the police. That sort of con- 
versation would tend to show that there was on his part the same 
bad blood, the same strong ill-feeling against both Mrs. Dyson 
and her husband which had existed in the previous July. On 


I 113 


Charles Peace. 


Mr Campbell Foster 


that day the prisoner went into the shop of a person named 
Gregory. 

It will be convenient to place a couple of these maps in your 
hands (plans of Banner Cross Terrace were here handed to the 
jury), and you will, perhaps, be kind enough to follow me.* Now, 
gentlemen, you see the Ecclesall New Road, to the west of two 
houses marked Gregory’s and Dyson’s. Gregory’s house, you 
see, is the last in the row. In front of these two houses you see 
two small forecourts leading into the road, and at the extreme 
corner you see a little square forecourt, and out of that forecourt 
there is an entrance passage, which leads to the back of the two 
houses. About midway down the passage you will see a place marked 
‘* closets.’? I think that is all. If you keep that before you, 
you will understand the subsequent explanation about what was 
done. The prisoner seems to have gone into Gregory’s house 
about the end of October. Gregory keeps a sort of shop, and sells 
smallwares—tobacco and things of that kind—and Peace pur- 
chased some tobacco. Peace had a conversation of some little 
duration with Gregory. Mrs. Gregory was in the shop, but 
apparently not attending to what was said. She saw him distinctly 
at that time, and was particularly struck by his having a long 
talk with her husband. She saw him well, and, I think, served 
him with a paper of tobacco, which he required. He took the 
tobacco and left the shop. This was on the 26th October. They 
saw no more of the prisoner until the 29th November. 

Now, I beg your careful attention to what took place on the 
29th November. About seven o’clock he called at Mr. Gregory’s 
shop, and he wanted to know if her husband was in. She told him 
that he was not, and he expressed some regret at that, because he 
said he wanted very much to see him. That was at seven o’clock. 
Mrs. Gregory will tell you that, when he left, something induced 
her to go to the shop door and look out, and she saw him about ten 
minutes after going down the road and loitering about. Soon 
after that a Mrs. Colgreaves was going up the road to Gregory’s 
shop to make a purchase, and about 30 or 40 yards from the shop, 
as she will tell you, she met the prisoner in the road. He entered 
into conversation with her, asking her if she would take a message 
for him to Dyson’s house, asking Mrs. Dyson to come out, and he 
made use of a coarse expression with regard to Mrs. Dyson. 
Mrs. Colgreaves refused to do so, and told him to go himself. 
That was about half-past seven o’clock. She passed him and went 
on, he walking alongside her for some distance, and she went into 
Gregory’s shop, which is next door to Dyson’s house. She did 
her shopping, and remained in the shop about ten minutes, and on 
leaving went down the road again. She will tell you that about 
ten minutes after she first met him, she again saw him loitering 


*See map specially prepared for this volume, p. 112. 
114 


The Second Trial. 


Mr Campbell Foster 


about in the road. Very soon after this—and this brings us to 
about twenty minutes to eight o’clock—a man named Brassington 
saw this man Peace walking up and down the road in front of 
the Banner Cross Hotel, which is very near to Dyson’s house, and 
on the same side. Brassington will tell you he was standing under 
a gas lamp, and that Peace passed him, walking to and fro up 
and down the road several times. At last he stopped and came 
up to him, and began to talk to him, saying, ‘‘ Have you seen 
some strangers who have come to live in this neighbourhood? ’’ 
To this he replied, ‘‘ I don’t know anything about them.”’ The 
prisoner then began to speak about them in a disrespectful 
manner, and to say things which astonished Brassington. At 
last he handed Brassington a roll of bits, or half-sheets, of paper, 
which he wanted him to read by the light of the gas lamp, because 
he said ‘“ he wanted to show him what sort of people these Dysons 
were.’? Among these things was a photograph or two. Brass- 
ington told the prisoner he could not read, and that he did not 
want to look at them. He will tell you, gentlemen, that this was 
at eight o’clock, as near as he can tell. He will tell you that he 
and the prisoner were walking up and down, talking about these 
things for, as nearly as he can tell, about ten minutes, and that, 
therefore, when they parted it was about ten minutes past eight 
o’clock. 

We have, therefore, the prisoner brought into the neighbour- 
hood of the Dysons’ house, and loitering about and speaking ill of 
them, until about ten minutes past eight. Now, you will learn 
from Mrs. Dyson that about that time, as near ten minutes past 
eight as she can tell, she had occasion to go to the closet, 
the position of which you will see from the plan which has been 
handed to you. To do so she put on her clogs and took a lamp 
with her, leaving her door open. To go to the closet she had to 
pass the back of Gregory’s house. She went round the corner of 
Gregory’s house to the closet. After being there a short time she 
opened the door, and saw the man Peace standing before her! 
He had in his hand a revolver, which he presented at her face, 
and said, ‘‘ Speak, or I’ll fire.”’ The woman gave a sudden, 
loud shriek on seeing him, and, stepping back into the closet, 
slammed the door and fastened it. She will tell you that the next 
thing she heard was her husband’s footsteps. Mrs. Gregory will 
tell you that she had heard Mrs. Dyson’s clogs passing her window 
and going round the corner. Within two minutes of that she 
heard a loud shriek, coming apparently from the closet. 
She instantly went out of her house and called to Mr. Dyson, 
who had been attracted to the door by the noise. She said to Mr. 
Dyson, ‘‘ You had better see to your wife.’ She herself, being 
alarmed, went into her own house again, and fastened the door. 
Mrs. Dyson will tell you that, on hearing her husband’s footsteps 
coming round the corner and towards the closet, she became more 


115 


Charles Peace. 


Mr Campbell F oster 


bold. She opened the closet door, and advanced towards the end 
of the passage, towards Gregory’s back door, on her way back. 
She had got 2 or 3 feet from the closet when her husband came 
up. He passed her, and she saw Peace going out of the passage 
by the front. He was a few steps from the front gateway of the 
passage. Her husband stepped after him. According to her 
statement, he was never near enough to touch him. Having just 
got out of the passage into that square forecourt which you see 
(referring to the plan), Peace faced round and fired his revolver, 
apparently at Mr. Dyson. The shot struck the stone lintel of the 
doorway at the entrance to the passage. Mr. Dyson continued to 
advance, but he did not get entirely out of the end of the passage. 
Peace, Mrs. Dyson will tell you, had got across the little square 
forecourt, from which there are a couple of steps into the road. 
Having got into the road, he again faced round and fired his 
revolver, and she saw her husband. instantly fall. She shrieked 
out, and you will learn from the testimony of a person standing 
by, a young man named Whyman, that she cried out loudly, 
“Murder! You villain, you have shot my husband.’’ A young 
man named Wilson was standing in the road at a little distance, 
and he will tell you he heard two shots fired, that he saw a man 
cross the road from the direction of Gregory’s. You see the place 
in the map, marked ‘‘ garden.’’ The man got over the fence into 
the garden, and there disappeared from view. Mrs. Gregory will 
tell you about this same transaction. J am trying to follow the 
order of the case just as the things occurred, without following 
the particular evidence of any one witness. Mrs. Gregory will 
tell you that whilst this transaction was going on she heard two 
loud bangs almost immediately after Mr. Dyson had entered the 
passage. She did not know what they were. She then heard a 
scream and a great clattering of feet in the passage. Soon after- 
wards the poor man was brought into his house insensible and 
bleeding from the head. A surgeon was sent for—Mr. Harrison 
—and Mr. Harrison will tell you he found Mr. Dyson in a chair, 
in a room in his house, bleeding from the left temple. He will 
tell you Mr. Dyson died about half-past ten. He will tell you 
that the result of the post-mortem examination was that he found 
that a bullet had gone through the right temple, and had passed 
into the left lobe of the brain, where, upon examination, it was 
subsequently found. 

A search was made in the garden, in the hopes of tracing 
the man who had committed this offence. You will learn from a 
police officer that Mrs. Dyson gave a very accurate description of 
the man Peace as the person whom she had seen do it. She gave 
his name, described him, and spoke of him as the man who had 
committed this offence. On going to the part of the garden where 
Wilson had seen the man run away, the officer found footprints— 
not of a very large foot—footprints without nails, and these foot- 


116 


The Second Trial. 


Mr Campbell Foster 


prints were traced to the wall which leads to the field. 
It was apparent that the prisoner, who had got over into the 
garden, had gone to a wall about midway (you will 
see it on the plan), and so got over this wall. Constable Ward 
got over the wall where the man climbed over, and attempted 
to track the man. Going in the proper direction, as well as he 
could suppose, he found upon the ground a small packet—a small 
bundle of papers tied together. On picking these up and looking 
at them, he found amongst them the very card upon the back of 
which Mr. Dyson had written, ‘‘ Charles Peace is requested not to 
interfere with my family.’’ Well, gentlemen, there can scarcely 
be a doubt that the person who had dropped these papers was 
the person who had had them in his possession, and the person 
in whose mind the card had created so much ill-will and ill-feeling 
as to cause him to threaten Mr. Dyson, and to put a pistol in the 
face of Mrs. Dyson, and who had dogged both their movements, 
as I have described to you. 

Nothing could be heard of Peace again in November, 1876. 
The officers could find no trace of him. Nothing was heard of 
him until October of last year, when a policeman on duty at Black- 
heath (in the neighbourhood of London) found apparently a burglar 
making his way from a gentleman’s dining-room window on to the 
lawn. ‘The officer got over the wall on to the lawn, and, seizing 
the man, was fired at with a revolver five times by the person whom 
he had seized. One of these shots passed through his arm. The 
two struggled, the officer threw the man down, and, another officer 
coming to his assistance upon his outcry, the prisoner at the bar 
was taken into custody, being mastered only after a severe struggle 
for the revolver, which he still held in his grip, and which he gave 
up only after his head had been battered by the truncheon of one or 
other of the policemen. For that offence Charles Peace has been 
tried, and he is now suffering imprisonment for it. Gentlemen, I 
have told you there was a good deal of evidence against Charles 
Peace. It was at this trial that they discovered that they had found 
at last the man Charles Peace, who had committed the offence in 
November, 1876, and who had been so long sought for. Mrs. Dyson, 
after his apprehension, was looked for, and it was found that she 
had gone to America. She was sent for, and was brought over 
to this country, and, as soon as it was conveniently possible, she 
was taken to Sheffield to be examined for the purpose of identify- 
ing the prisoner and of his being committed for trial for the 
offence which I have just opened to you. 

Gentlemen, there is a fact to be mentioned here, although 
perhaps it has very little weight in this case, but on his way to 
Sheffield Peace made a most daring attempt to escape from custody. 


Mr. Lockwoop—I don’t know, my lord, how far my friend 
is justified in introducing this matter as part of his case. It is 
117 


Charles Peace. 


Mr Campbell Foster 


not a matter affecting the guilt or innocence of the accused. It 
would be affectation on my part to object seriously, because it has 
become a matter so notorious to everybody that no real harm 
could be done thereby to the unfortunate man whose interests are 
committed to my care. But I do protest, at the same time, to my 
friend introducing irrelevant matter. 

Mr. Justicn Lopes—I think it is quite unnecessary. 4 

Mr. Campsett Fostur—Very well, my lord. I thought it 
was relevant, my lord; but he had sufficient motive to escape. 

Mr. Justice Loprs—Quite so. It does not advance the case 
at all. 

Mr. CampseLL Foster—No, my lord. Well, gentlemen, I 
have stated to you, I think, the whole facts. The revolver will be 
produced before you, which was taken from Peace at Blackheath. 
The bullet will be produced before you which was taken from the 
dead man’s head. It will be shown to you that it has the same 
rifling as that of the revolver which was taken from the prisoner. 
The bullet is one capable of being fired from the revolver. Now, 
putting all these facts together, which will be put before you, it 
is for you to say, is that the man who fired the shot which killed 
Arthur Dyson? If you believe the evidence, which shows Peace 
hanging about the place from seven o’clock to ten minutes past 
eight, talking first to one person and then to another; if you 
accept Mrs. Dyson’s evidence ; and the evidence as to the tracing of 
Peace across the field, the finding of the packet of letters, amongst 
which was a card which unquestionably had been in the prisoner’s 
possession—even without the evidence of Mrs. Dyson—you cannot 
disbelieve that that man (pointing to the prisoner) fired the shot 
that killed Arthur Dyson. Well, gentlemen, with what mind, or 
intent, did he do it? Did he do it maliciously? If he did, then 
he is guilty of the full charge contained in this indictment. 
With what object did he follow these people from Darnall to 
Ecclesall? With what object was he loitering about their house, 
telling Mrs. Dyson publicly, ‘‘ I know you have got a warrant for 
me, but. I do not care for it; I do not care for the police either ’’? 
With what object did he show Brassington the papers and tell 
him a scandalous story about these people? To what probabilities 
do all these things shape themselves? Do they not point to malice, 
to malignity, to hate against these Dysons? With what object 
did he carry a revolver? If he had prepared himself to do that 
which was unquestionably done by him—prepared himself to do 
it with apparently none but the motives which I have already 
glanced at—that he greatly disliked them, that he hated them, 
that he wanted to do something dreadful to them, that he wanted 
to do that which he told Brassington he would do, ‘‘ to give them 
a warm one ’’ and to “‘ shoot them both before morning ’’—if those 
were his intentions according to his words and according to his 
acts, gentlemen, can you have any doubt that his was the hand 

118 


The Second Trial. 


‘ Mr Campbell Foster 
which fired the fatal shot, and that the motive that prompted him 
to do it was malice? If you come to these conclusions, as being 
the only ones which the nature of the case permits, there is but one 
duty for you to perform, namely, to find that he did do these 
things—that he did commit the offence with which he is charged— 
Soe with malice aforethought he killed and murdered Arthur 

yson. 


Evidence for the Prosecution. 


CuarLes Epwarp Jounson, surveyor, Sheffield, examined by 
Mr. Sure~p, produced a plan of the premises at Banner Cross 
Terrace. Gregory’s and the Dysons’ house are the two last houses 
at the north end of the terrace, at the end nearest Sheffield, front- 
ing Kcclesall Road. There is a backyard common to the two, 
going on the east at the back of the houses and turning round the 
corner at the north end of Gregory’s house, and a closet there. 
The passage ends in a gateway which opens into a small court- 
yard, and this opens into the Ecclesall Road. There is a window 
from each house looking into the backyard. Britannia Road, 
Darnall, where Peace lived, was about 4 miles away—the places 
are on opposite sides of Sheffield. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lockwoop—Do you know the back of 
the house? It rises there steeply, does it not, from the wall that 
bounds the passage !—Yes. 

What is there at the back ?—Gardens. 

And do you approach these gardens by steps—up the court- 
yard I have spoken of !—Yes. 

How many steps are there!—Six. 

Do you know the height of each step?—They usually rise 
about 8 inches. 

But are these of the usual kind ?—Yes. 

Did you go into the gardens at all!—Oh, yes. 

How many storeys has Dyson’s house!—Two storeys and an 
attic. I have not been in the house. I believe there is an attic. 

There seems to be one, outside ?—Yes. 

Would it not be possible for any one standing in the garden, 
on account of the steepness with which it runs up, to see into the 
first-floor window?!—Yes. They might. 

Mr. Justice Lopes—Of Dyson’s house? 

Mr. Locxkwoop—Yes, my lord. (Zo Witness)—That passage 
that runs from east-west, I think, down to Ecclesall Road, how 
wide is it? Take it, first of all, at its most easterly point ?— 
3 feet. 

You give me from Gregory’s house side to the boundary of 
the little grass plot?—To the garden edge. 

But the passage itself is not bounded by a wall on either side 


until you get past the closets!—It is past the closets. 
119 


Charles Peace. 


Charles Edward Johnson 


Before you get to the end of the passage, or, rather, at the 
end of that passage, and at the beginning of the courtyard, is 
there not an archway!—A doorway covered at the top. 

Did you know this man, Arthur Dyson, at all?—Yes. 

He was a civil engineer, was not he?—He was. 

He was an extremely powerful, athletic man?—A very fine 
man. 

You mean physically fine—a big man’—He was big, but 
delicate. 

By Mr. Justice Loprs—A muscular man?—lI should think so. 

By Mr. Lockwoop—Was he tall ?—6 feet 5 or 6. 


Karuerine Dyson, examined by Mr. Suietp—I am _ the 
widow of Arthur Dyson, and I now live at 58 Harrington Road, 
Highfield, Sheffield. In the year 1876 I was living with my 
husband in Britannia Road, Darnall. Whilst living there I knew 
the prisoner, Charles Peace, and was acquainted with him. He 
lived the second door from us. He told me he was a carver and 
gilder and picture-frame maker by trade. He framed three or 
four pictures for me. He frequently came into our house. 

How did your husband regard these visits? 

Mr. Locxwoop objected to this question as irrelevant, and 
Mr. Suietp did not press it. 

Examination continued—(handing the witness a card)—Do you 
know the writing on that card ?—Yes. 

Whose is it?—My husband’s. 

Do you remember his writing it?—Yes, I do. 

What was done with the card after it was written ?—I did not 
see, but my husband said he would give it to the prisoner, or put 
it where the prisoner could see it; but I don’t know what he really 
did with it. After that the prisoner was not permitted to come 
into the house, but was continually annoying me and my husband. 
I and my husband removed from Darnall in October, 1876. Some 
time before that removal, in July of that year, something passed 
between myself and the prisoner. It was of a threatening nature 
on his part. He said he ‘‘ would blow my brains out and those 
of my husband also.’’ He had a revolver in his hand when he 
said that. There were some people standing by. The prisoner 
added, ‘‘ There is death for six if they interfere. I know the 
names of the people who were standing by. They were Mrs. Pad- 
more, Mrs. Sykes, James Sykes, and Mrs. Ingle. In consequence 
of that I took out a summons against the prisoner. 

By Mr. Justicn Lopss—This took place in front of my house 
at Darnall. 

Examination continued—It was about nine o’clock in the 
evening. The next morning, in consequence of the threat, I took 
out a summons against Peace. He failed to appear, so a warrant 
was taken out against him. We removed from Darnall on the 25th 

120 


The Second Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


October, 1876, and went to Banner Cross. I remember the day 
when our goods were sent from Darnall to Banner Cross. I and my 
- husband went to the new house together, and, on approaching it, 
found the wagon with our goods being unloaded. I know a man 
named Bolsover, and met him in the road. I knew he was an in- 
timate friend of the prisoner Peace. He was, in fact, his son-in- 
law. I spoke to Bolsover, and after I had done so I saw Peace 
coming out of the house we were going into. The prisoner spoke to 
us, and said, ‘‘ You see I am here to annoy you, wherever you go.’’ 
He made use of some other disagreeable remarks, which I do not 
wish to repeat. I told him there was a warrant out against him. 
He said he did not care for the warrant or the police either. After 
he had said that he went down the road with Bolsover, muttering 
and talking together. That would be about half-past eight o’clock 
in the evening. The next time I saw the prisoner was on the 
29th November. That was the night on which my husband was 
shot. I had occasion to go to the closet, at the north end of 
Gregory’s house, shortly after eight o’clock. I had a small lantern 
in my hand. I had a pair of pattens, or clogs, on my feet. As 
I was coming out of the closet I saw the prisoner with a revolver 
in his hand. He pointed it at me and said, ‘‘ Speak, or I’ll 
fire.’”’ He was standing close by the closet door when he said 
this. I screamed, and banged the closet door to, myself inside. 
I next heard my husband’s footsteps, which came across the yard, 
and I came out of the closet. I saw the prisoner go down the 
passage to KEcclesall Road. That would be from my husband. 
My husband followed him down the passage. 

Just describe what next you saw?—When my husband came 
near him he fired. 

When he fired, did you hear anything?—TI heard the bullet 
hit the wall. I heard the noise of the bullet against the wall. He 
fired again immediately he got to the bottom of the steps leading 
on to the pavement, and my husband fell. 

By Mr. Justice Lopss—Where was your husband then ?— 
Inside the passage, just at the top of the steps. 

Examination continued—How far off was the prisoner !/—2 feet, 
I should think. 

Had you heard any talking between your husband and the 
prisoner /—None that I heard of. 

Was there any talking ?—No. 

Was there any struggle between your husband and the 
prisoner ?—No, my husband never touched him. After firing the 
second shot, the prisoner crossed the Hcclesall Road and scaled the 
wall on the other side and went into the garden beyond. To the 
right of the garden there is a field, separated from the garden by 
a low wall. Some neighbours then came up, and afterwards Dr. 


Harrison came. 
121 


Charles Peace. 


Mrs Dyson 


‘ Mr. Locxwoop—Will your lordship kindly allow me to have 
the letters? I have not had an opportunity of seeing them before. 
Mr. Justice’ Lopes—Yes; you will find twenty-three docu- 
ments here. There were twenty-four, but the card has been 
taken. Perhaps, Mr. Foster, you had better give it to Mr. Lock- 
wood. 

Mr. Suietp—We will put the card in. 

Mr. Justice Lopss—They say they will put the card in, Mr. 
Lockwood. Do you object? 

Mr. Lockwoop—It depends upon whose custody it isin. She 
identifies the handwriting, but that does not make it evidence. 
You must show the circumstances connected with the finding. 

Mr. Justice Loprs—If you object, I think at present it is 
not evidence. 

Mr. Locxwoop—At present I do object. I should think the 
more convenient course would be to call the person who has to 
produce them, and see how far it goes. 

Mr. Suizup—We will withhold it for the present. 

Examination continued—You say Dr. Harrison came ?—Yes. 

Did your husband speak again!—No. He died about half- 
past ten o’clock the same night. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lockwoop—Mrs. Dyson, where were 
you that night before you went out? Were you putting your little 
boy to bed ?’—Yes. 

How old is he?—Seven years on the 11th of last December. 

That’s December, 1878. He was five years old then at this 
time 1—Yes. 

What room were you putting your child to bed in?—The back 
bedroom. 

Was there a light in the room when you were putting your boy 
to bed !—Yes, I should not think of putting him to bed in the dark. 

Your husband was downstairs reading, was he not ?—yYes. 

He was still reading when you went out ?—Yes. 

Did you say anything to him’?’—No. 

Did you pass through the room where he was when you went 
out !/—Yes, certainly. 

. When you heard him coming, did you come out of the closet? 
—Yes. 

You went towards the Gregorys’ to meet him. Is that so?—No. 

i You did not go down the passage towards Ecclesall Road ?— 
oO. 

Then did you remain in the closet till he passed the door ?— 
No. Both the closet and the passage are at the end of the house. 
The passage is a few feet from the closet. 

Is the closet near the house end ?—Yes. 

Now, Mrs. Dyson, this is supposed to be a plan of the house 
you were then living in, and of Mrs. Gregory’s house. Do you 
understand it!—Not very well. 

122 


The Second Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


You see where the outhouse is marked in the plan. That 
shows also the distance from Mrs. Gregory’s to the house end. 
Do you see that ?—Yes. 

It is some feet ?—Well, may be some yards. 

How far do you say it was in feet from the closet to where 
you met your husband coming round the corner ?—4 or 5 feet. 

And then he passed you, and went on in the direction of 
where you say the man Peace was!—Yes. 

Now, we have heard that the passage he then got into was 
about 3 feet broad?—I do not know myself; I am not an architect. 

You don’t know; but we do. Could you see your husband in 
that passage !—Yes. 

Well?—Yes, sir. Clearly; very distinctly, indeed. 

Everything that he did?!—Yes. 

What pace was he going at?—To whom are you referring? 

Your husband?—He was going rather slowly—at a walking 
pace. 

Did I understand you to say, in answer to my learned friend 
just now, Mrs. Dyson, that you are prepared to swear that your 
husband never touched that man (the prisoner) !—He never touched 
him. 

You are prepared to swear that ?—Yes. 

Are you prepared to swear that he did not try to get hold of 
him ?—I can’t tell you what was in his mind. 

No, no; I am not speaking of what was in his mind, Mrs. 
Dyson. I am speaking as to whether or not he did anything ?— 
He did not do anything, because he did not come close enough to 
him. 

You say he did not do anything?’—He did not get close 
enough. 

If you are so certain of this before, Mrs. Dyson, how was it 
you swore before the magistrates—you remember being examined 
before the magistrates !—Yes. 

Were you then quite as certain as you now are about this ?—Yes. 

Sure ?—I feel I am. 

You feel! Are you sure?—I believe I made the same state- 
ment I am making now. 

When you were before the magistrates did you say this: ‘I 
cannot say that my husband did not get hold of the prisoner ’’ 1!— 
I don’t recollect saying so. I say I don’t know what was in his 
mind. If I have said so, it was correct. 

I am not speaking of what was in his mind. I ask you now, 
Mrs. Dyson, do you remember, when before the magistrates, being 
asked whether you remembered saying before the coroner that you 
could not say whether your husband attempted to get hold of the 
prisoner 1—I may have said so. 

That is not an answer to my question. I ask you again, Mrs. 
Dyson, do you remember that question being put to you before 

123 


Charles Peace. 


Mrs Dysoa 


the magistrates?—I fancy I remember the question being put, but 
I think I gave the same answer as now. 3 ae 

That, again, is not an answer to my question!—I can’t give 
you any better answer than that. 

I think you can!—No, I can’t. e 

You remember the question being asked you?—No; I can’t 
say I do. 

By Mr. Justice Loprs—lIs it a fact you don’t recollect whether 
your husband got hold of the prisoner!—I know he did not, 
because he was not near enough. 

Cross-examination continued—Do you remember being before 
the coroner /—Yes. 

Did you then say, ‘‘I can’t say whether he (meaning your 
husband) attempted to get hold of Peace or not’’?—I can’t re- 
collect saying so; but, if I have said so, it is correct. What I 
said then was true. ; 

Are you now prepared to swear that your husband did not 
attempt to get hold of him?—I can’t swear that; but I can swear 
he did not get hold of him. 

That we will come to. Do I understand you, Mrs. Dyson, 
to distinctly swear that?—That he did not get hold of him? 

Yes?—No, he did not touch him. 

That you will swear ?—Yes. 

When did you first become so certain about this?—I was 
certain of it all the time. 

All the time ?—Yes. 

Were you certain about it on the 24th of January last ?—The 
24th of January last? 

Yes ?—I knew all the time. 

Just answer my question. Were you certain about this on 
the 24th of January last?—Yes. I was as certain as I am now. 

Just so; as certain as you are now. When you were before 
the magistrates did you say this—‘‘I can’t say that my husband 
did not get hold of the prisoner ’’?—I can’t say as he did. I 
cannot say he did not try. 

No, no. When you were before the magistrates did you say 
this—‘‘I can’t say that my husband did not get hold of the 
prisoner ’’?—You have not put in that little word “‘ try.” 

That is on the deposition. Do you remember the deposition 
being read over to you?—_Yes. 

You remember signing it ?—Yes. 

Will you look at that (handing deposition to witness) 7—I 
have done so; it is not necessary. 

I would rather you did?!—It is not necessary, thank you. 

By Mr. Justice Loprs—That is your signature, and it was 
read over to you before signing 7—Yes. 

Mr. Justice Lopss—Read the words again, Mr. Lockwood. 

124 


The Second Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 
Mr. Locxwoop—‘‘ I can’t say my husband did not get hold 
of the prisoner.’’ (Zo Witness)—Do you remember saying those 
words!—I said, ‘‘ I cannot swear my husband did not try to get 


‘hold of him.”’ 

Do you remember saying those words I have put to you?— 
The word ‘‘ try ”’ is left out. 

Do you remember saying the words I have put to you?—I 
can’t say I do. 

Will you swear you did not?—I won’t swear I did not, 
because it is written down. 

Have you seen anybody, between that time and this, as to that 
piece of evidence?—No; I don’t have any communication with 
anybody. 

Nobody ?—No. 

Not a soul ?—No. 

Having read what I have put in your hands, will you now, 
Mrs. Dyson, pledge your oath that your husband did not get 
hold of this man?—I say he did not get hold of him. 

You say he did not?—He did not, because he was not near 
enough to him. 

Did you give the reason when you were before the magis- 
trates ?—Did I give the reason ? 

Yes?—They didn’t ask me for it. 

Do you mean to say that you were not cross-examined about 
this ?—Yes, I was. 

You remember that. Do you remember being asked whether 
you could swear as to this!—Yes. 

And what did you say?—I said it was the truth. 

When you were before the magistrates, do you mean to say 
you told the magistrates that you could swear your husband did 
not get hold of Peace?—I did so. He did not get hold of him. 

Did you swear that?—I said he was not near enough to 
him. 

Answer my question. Do you mean now to say that when 
you were before the magistrates you swore that your husband did 
not get hold of Peace?—I do not remember swearing it, but what 
I have said is correct. 

Do you remember being asked the question !—Yes. 

What was your answer!—I expect it is written. 

You expect it is written? I have put your deposition into 


your hand to refresh your memory with. Now, can you tell 
me what your answer was!—Such as what is before your eyes, I 
expect. 


Do you mean to say that when you were before the magis- 
trates you expect you swore that your husband did not get hold 
of the prisoner? Is that what you mean?—I could not swear that 


he did not try to get hold of him. 
125 


Charles Peace. 


Mrs Dyson 

Did not you also swear that he did not get hold of him?—I 
do not know. If I have said so it is correct. Whatever is put 
down is correct. 

By Mr. Justicz Loprs—Whatever you said before the magis- 
trate is correct?—Witness nodded assent. 

Cross-examination continued—Did you notice how your hus- 
band fell 7—Yes, on his back.* 

Did anything touch him before he fell on his back ?—No. 

Will you swear that?+-The bullet touched him, of course. 

I did not ask you that. Did this man (pointing to Peace) 
touch him with his fist!—No, the bullet touched him. 

After the first shot was fired, will you swear your husband 
did not come up and take hold of this man?—He did not take 
hold of him. 

Did he not catch hold of him by the arm?!—No. 

Wait a moment. Did he not catch hold of him by the arm 
which held the revolver !—No. 

And did not Peace strike your husband in the face with his 
fist about the chin and nose?—No. 

Will you swear that your husband was not touched in the 
face by him?—He was not touched in the face by him; it was by 
the bullet. 

May I ask you, Mrs. Dyson, how long you have known Peace? 
—Four years or more. 

Do you mean from the month of November, 1876?—No, from 
the first time I saw him at Darnall; the entire time. 

Up to the present time?—Witness nodded assent. 

Did you make his acquaintance, or was it your husband ?— 
That I am not prepared to tell. 

What do you mean by saying you are not prepared to tell? 
—Well, that I cannot tell exactly. He was living next door. 

He lived next door ?—Next door but one. + 

When did your husband begin to dislike him?—In the spring 
before we left Darnall. ‘ 

In the spring of 1876 %7—Yes. 

Was he jealous!—No. 

. Do you remember a photograph of yourself and this man?— 
es. 

When was that taken?!—It was taken at the Sheffield Fair. 


* A shot man almost invariably falls forward, on his f 
i i less there 
is something to throw him backward. This seems to ace, unless 
tention that there was a struggle. confirm Peace’s con- 


+ There was an empty house between the D 
é sons : 
garret of which the latter asserted he used 5 Sh ee a ee He 
er Lied ais see Lockwood’s cross-examination was an effort Si atte 
ec eee 
ee nection between the two was much more intimate than the lady 


126 


The Second Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


How came you and the prisoner to be photographed together ? 
—We were not photographed together. The children were with us. 

And were the children photographed too? You don’t mean to 
suggest, Mrs. Dyson, do you, that the children were photographed 
in the same picture with you?—Not in the same. 

The children were taken also, were they not, but they were 
taken separately !—They were taken separately, on another card. 

What Fair was this?—Sheffield Fair. 

Was it in the summer of 1876?—Yes, or the year before. 

Do you remember being examined about this before the magis- 
trates /—Yes. 

Attend to me for one moment. Did you say this—‘‘ I had 
not been with him to the Winter Fair ’’?—I had been with him 
to the Summer Fair. 

Would not that be the Summer Fair of 18762 You had 
only known him ten months in November, so you could not have 
known him in the summer of 1875. That must be so, must it 
not ?—I suppose it must. 

Come, it does not require much thinking. You say you first 
made his acquaintance in 1875. You had known him for a year 
at the outside in November, 1876, you say?—Ten months, or a 
year, I said. 

Then you could not have been with him at the Summer Fair 
of 18752 Will you swear you did not go with him to the Summer 
Fair of 18751—I cannot swear it, because I am not prepared to 
tell you. 

Then we must go back to how long you had known him in 
November, 1876. How long had you known him then?’—Only 
about ten months. 

Then you first made his acquaintance at the earliest in 
November, 1875. That must be so, must it not?—(No answer.) 
Now, Mrs. Dyson, that must be so, must it not? You said that in 
November of 1876 you had known him for ten months, or a year. 
Then you could not have been with him in the Summer Fair of 
1875 21—(No answer.) 

The Summer Fair, when you had your photograph taken, was 
in 1876, was it not? Is not that so?—I am not quite certain 
about it. 

Must not that have been so, Mrs. Dyson?—(No answer.) 

Why will you not answer this question?—I cannot answer it, 
for I am not quite sure. 

Was it at the Summer or Winter Fair?—(No answer.) 

Tf it was in the Summer Fair of 1876, how comes it, Mrs. 
Dyson, that you were at that Fair being photographed with the 
man with whose conduct your husband was dissatisfied in the 
spring of that year ?—(No answer.) 

Can you explain that to the jury!—I can’t. I think there is 


a mistake in the date, sir. 
127 


Charles Peace. 


Mrs Dyson 


A mistake in which date?—In the date of the Fair. 

It was the Summer Fair, was it not?—I am not quite sure; 
I can’t say. 

Do you mean to say you are not now quite so certain about 
it as you were five minutes ago?—I am not quite sure, but I 
think it was the Summer Fair. 

The Winter Fair, you know, in 1875, would be just when you 
made his acquaintance, would it not? Or perhaps you had not 
made his acquaintance then?—To the best of my remembrance it 
was in the spring of the year when he first came to Darnall. 

By Mr. Justice Lopes—In what year ?—In 1875. I would not 
be quite certain; I am not quite sure about it. 

Cross-examination continued—The spring of the year 1875 1— 
I think so. 

Do you know that?—I am not quite sure that it was in the 
spring of that year. : 

Did you know him, then, when he first came to Darnall !—No. 

Do you still adhere to your statement that in November, 
1876, you had only known him for a year or ten months!—A year 
or ten months, to the best of my knowledge. 

Is that correct ?—I won’t say it is quite correct. 

You will not say it is quite correct?—No, because I am not 
quite certain. 

Was it more than a year?!—It might be. 

By Mr. Justice Lopes—Then in November, 1876, you may 
have known him for more than a year !/—Yes. 

Cross-examination continued—Do you mean to suggest, Mrs. 
Dyson, that you have known this man since the spring of 1875 %— 
I say I am not quite sure as to dates, and I am not fit to say. 

You must excuse me, I think you underrate yourself there? 
—I am not quite sure of the date or the time of the year. 

Do you mean to say, now, you may have known this man 
since the spring of 1875 !—Yes, I may have; but I won’t be quite 
certain, because I have travelled, and been knocked about a good 
deal since, and I forget things. 

When did you remove to Darnall?—I cannot tell. 

About ?—I cannot tell. 

What year ?!—I cannot tell you that. 

Do you really mean that ?—Yes. 

That you cannot tell the jury the year you went to Darnall 7— 
No, I cannot. 

Was it 1876 ?—I cannot tell you. 

1875 ?2—I say I cannot tell. 

1874?—I say I cannot tell. 

1873 %—To be certain, I could not tell you. 

Do you mean to say you cannot tell within three or four years 
when you went to Darnall?!—No, I cannot tell you what year it 
was, to be quite certain. 

128 


The Second Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


By Mr. Justics Loprs—Cannot you tell to three or four years? 
—Oh, I could tell you within three or four years. 

Cross- examination contimued—Do you remember being examined 
before the coroner !—Yes. 

Was that in December, 1876 ?—Yes. 

Did you swear this—“ I have been married to my husband 
ten years ’’ 1—Yes. 

“* And we were married in Cleveland, Ohio, America ’’ ?— 
Yes. 

‘* We came over here three years ago.’’ Is that correct ?— 
Yes. 

** And first lived with his mother at Tinsley ’’ !—Yes. 

How long did you live with his mother at Tinsley!—A year 
or more, perhaps. 

Do you swear that you lived with her more than a year there? 
—I cannot be quite sure. Perhaps a little more, or perhaps a 
little less. I can’t tell exactly to a month or two. 

You think it was about a year !—To the best of my belief. 

Did you then say this—‘‘ We moved to Highfield, Sheffield, 
about two years ago ’’ ?—Yes. 

That, you see, would be about December, 18742 “* From 
there we removed to Alexandra Road, Healey ’’ !—Yes. 

How long did you live at Highfield?—Three or four months. 

Not more?—I don’t know. 

A year 17—No. 

Half a year?—Not quite. 

You then removed to the Alexandra Road, Healey. How long 
did you live there!—About four months. 

And from there you went to Darnall ?—Yes. 

That would take you to Highfield, at Sheffield, in December, 
1874, so it must have been about the end of 1875, or at any rate 
about eight months would have gone of 1875 when you went to 
Darnall, because there was about half a year at Highfield and 
three or four months at Alexandra Road?!—I cannot be quite sure 
about the month. 

That being so, about eight months would have gone of 1875 
when you went to Darnall. Having given you that information, 
all of which you gave the coroner and appear to have forgotten 

Mr. CampseLL Foster—Don’t say that. 

Cross-examination continued—Do you say or do you not say 
that you went to Darnall at the end of the year 1875%2—I don’t 
remember the date. 

But do you mean to say now you cannot remember !—No, I 
cannot. 

How long after you had been at Darnall was it that you first 
got to know Peace’—We were there a few months before he came. 

[The prisoner here made some remarks to the warders which 
caused them to laugh. | 


K 129 


Charles Peace. 


_ Mrs Dyson 

You say the prisoner framed some photographs, or, rather 
not photographs, four pictures for you!—Yes. ‘ : 

Do you remember some conversation about his framing @ 
portrait of your husband’s mother !—Yes. , 

Did you wish Peace to frame it?—I asked him to frame it. 

Do you remember writing a letter to him!—No. 

A letter asking 

Mr. CampseLtt Foster—The contents of the letter I object to. 

Mr. Lockwoop—You are too precipitate. 

Mr. Justice Lopes—She may be asked the contents of 
the letter. The letter may be read, and she may be asked the 
contents. No doubt Mr. Lockwood will be bound by her answer. 
What may happen afterwards is another matter. You may take 
a document and put it to the witness, and say, ‘‘ Did you write 
this? ’’ 

Mr. CamppetL Fostrr—Suppose, my lord, she says no; can 
you read a document and say it is evidence? 

Mr. Justice Loprs—He is bound by her answer. 

Mr. CampsBett Fostper—You may as well read the Song of 
Solomon or the 100th Psalm. 

Mr. Justice Loprs—Mr. Lockwood is perfectly justified in 
saying, ‘‘ Did you write this? ”’ 

Mr. Campsett Foster—So far, I don’t object. 

Mr. Justice Loprs—Well, that is all he asks for. 

Mr. Lockwoop—Never mind Mr. Foster saying you did not 
write it. 

Mr. CampseLL Foster—I did not say that. She has answered 
that. 

Mr. Locoxwoop—However could she say so when I had _ not 
shown the letter to her? (Z0 Witness)—Now, Mrs. Dyson, you 
Say you remember wishing Peace to frame your husband’s mother’s 
portrait 1—Yes. 

Did you mention it to Peace?—I don’t know; he was framing 
the others. 

Did you mention it to him?!—To him or to his daughter. I 
am not quite sure which. 

When was it you mentioned it to him?—I cannot tell you 
exactly. 

Did you write and ask him to send it?—No. 

Did he ever send it?—Send what? 

% Why did you not ask him why he did not send it?—I don’t 
now. 

Did you ever write telling him to send it?—No. 

Then, for all you know, he was never told not to send it?— 
I don’t know anything about that. 

(Handing witness letter No. 6)—Will you look at this letter, 
please? Have you looked at it?—Yes. 

Do you say that it is not yours?—It is not mine. 

130 


The Second Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


By Mr. Justicn Lopzs—That is not your handwriting !—No. 

Cross-examination continued—Do you know whose it is’—I 
don’t know. 

Is it anything like yours!—That I could not tell. 

(Handing witness letter No. 3)—Will you look at that? Is 
that yours?—No. 

Look at both sides?—I have looked at them before. 

(Lo Mr. Justice Lopes)—I think your lordship has a docu- 
ment which I have not got here. 
aa au Justice Loprs—No, I have given you every document 

ad. 

Mr. Lockwoop—When this case was before the magistrates, 
the gentleman who appeared on behalf of the prisoner dictated to 
this witness some words which were written down by her, and, as 
I understand, they were marked. They should be on the deposi- 
tions, my lord. Here is the paper; this should clearly have been 
on the depositions. It is initialed by the magistrate. 

(Paper handed to witness)—Is that your handwriting /—Yes, 
that is my handwriting. 

Did any one, excepting yourself and your husband and the 
prisoner, know you wanted that picture of your husband’s mother 
framed?!—His wife and daughter knew. 

Had you talked to them about it?—I had mentioned it to his 
daughter. 

Do you remember going on an occasion to Mansfield !—Yes. 

When was that?—In the summer before I removed. 

That is the summer before October, 1876 ?—Yes. 

What month?—It was in the summer. I don’t remember the 
month. 

Who went with you?—Mrs. Padmore and the children. 

Had you told him you were going!—No. 

Did you write—— 

Mr. Campseti Foster objected. 

Mr. Justice Loprs—He can ask—did you write to this effect? 

Cross-examination continued—What train did you go by to 
Mansfield ?—By the afternoon train. 

What time?—I cannot tell; after dinner. 

Did you ever write to Peace saying you thought you would 
go by the nine o’clock train?—No, I did not. 

Did you tell him he ‘‘ must not go by train, because he will 
go down with me ’’?—No. 

‘* Don’t let him see anything of you.’’ Did you write that? 
—No. 

‘* Meet me in the Wicker.’’ Did you write that?—No. 

‘‘ Hope nothing will turn up to prevent it. Love to Janey.’’ 
Did you write that 1—No. 

Did you write that (handing her letter No. 19) 1—_No. 

131 


Charles Peace. 


, Mrs Dyson 


By Mr. Justics Loprs—Is that your handwriting /—No, none 
of them are; I have looked at them before. 

Cross-examination continued—Were you in the habit of dealing 
with Francis Walker, wholesale and retail grocer and Italian ware- 
houseman, who carries on business in High Street, Attercliffe 1— 
No, I never bought any groceries there. 

Did you ever deal at his shop!—No, I did not. I don’t know 
such a person. 

When you got to Mansfield, Mrs. Dyson, the prisoner was 
there, was he not, to meet you!—Yes. 

You had never told him!—No. 

Can you tell me how he had got to know you were going ?— 
I cannot. But he was constantly following me about. 

Do you remember this man (the prisoner) giving you a ring? 
—Yes. . 

When was this—when did he give it to you?—Some time in 
the winter. 

In the winter ?—I don’t know what time. 

Can you remember what year it was!—No, but I remember 
the incident. 

Do you remember the incident /—Yes. 

You know, Mrs Dyson, you are able to remember going by an 
afternoon train on one particular occasion; how is it you cannot 
actually tell me the year in which a ring was given you? Think? 
—I don’t remember. I cannot remember. It was a small matter ; 
it was not worth remembering. 

The ring was a small one?—The incident altogether was a 
small one. 

You remember it. When was it?—I cannot tell. 

Do you think it was in the winter?—I don’t know; I cannot 
say. 

Was it before you were photographed together, or after 1— 
That I cannot tell you. 

Did you show it to your husband?—I don’t remember, because 
I threw it away after I got it. 

Why did you throw it away?—Because it was not worth 
keeping. 

You had this ring given you by him. You did not show it 
to your husband !—I say I cannot remember ; I threw it away. 

When did you throw it away ?—Next morning. 

Did the ring fit you?!—No. 

Did you ever write this to him—‘‘ I don’t know what train 
we shall go by, for I have got a great deal to do this morning. 
Will see you as soon as I possibly can. I think it will be easier 
after you move. He won’t watch so. The r—g (I suppose that 
means the ring) fits my little finger. Many thanks. Love to 
Janey. I will tell you what I thought of when I see you about 

132 


The Second Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


arranging matters. I think it well. Excuse this scribbling. 

Love.’”’ Did you write that?—No. 

Did you ever tell him that the ring would not fit, except the 
little finger —No. 

Are you now, Mrs. Dyson, prepared to swear that you did 
not write to acknowledge that ring!—I did not write to acknow- 
ledge it. 

When you were before the magistrates did you say this— 
““T did not, to my knowledge, write to acknowledge the receipt 
of the ring ’’? Were those the words you used?—I cannot tell 
you exactly; but, if I did say so, it is correct. 

Mrs. Dyson, just before I leave the letters, let me ask you, 
do you prefer to write with a steel pen or with a quill pen?—It 
makes no difference. 

Then you shall have a steel pen. Will you please write what 
I now dictate to you: ‘‘ I write you these few lines to thank you 
for all your kindness, which I shall never forget. I will write 
you a note when [ can.”’ 

(The paper containing these words, written by Mrs. Dyson, 
was handed to Mr. Lockwood, who compared it with one of those 
alleged to have been written by her.) 

Is that your best writing /—Yes. 

I believe that on one occasion you have told us—at least not 
to us here, but you said it at Sheffield—you went to a public-house 
with this man ?—Yes. 

When was it?—I don’t remember the date. 

What year?—I think it was the year we moved in—in the 
early part. 

Not the summer, was it?—In the summer or early spring. 

In the summer, you say, before you left!—I say I can’t 
remember the date, but I went one time. 

Can you tell me where that public-house is!—In Sheffield. 

Mr. Campsett Foster interposed here, asking to be allowed 
to look at the words just written by Mrs. Dyson at Mr. Lockwood’s 
dictation. 

Mr. Justice Lopes (to Mr. Lockwood)—I think he is entitled 
to look at it? 

Mr. Locxkwoop—I think after a time—but at present I would 
rather not. 

Mr. Justice Lopss—If it is more convenient for you that 
Mr. Campbell Foster should look at it afterwards, all right. But 
as you have used it, he will be entitled to look at it presently. 

Mr. Locxwoop—Until I make some use of it, it is not before 
the jury, and my learned friend is not entitled to look at it. 

Mr. Justice Loprs—That is so. If you have made no use 
of it, I don’t think Mr. Campbell Foster is entitled to look at it, 
but directly you do make use of it, he will be entitled to look 
at it. 


133 


Charles Peace. 


Mrs Dyson 

Cross-examination continued—Was that after your husband had 
become dissatisfied /—No. 

He became dissatisfied after that !—Yes. eke 

Was it in consequence of that that he became dissatisfied 4 
—wNo. 

Are you sure of that ?—Yes. ; ; 

Did you tell him that you had been into a public-house with 
Peace ?—I told him I had been to a picture gallery. é 

Did you tell him you had been to a public-house with him? 
—It is a public-house and picture gallery combined. 

Did you tell him you had been there !—Yes. 

Was it after that he became dissatisfied?—I cannot say 
exactly. 

But you just now said that it was?—I think it was. 

Do you know a public-house called the Marquis of Waterford, 
in Russell Street, Sheffield ?—Not by that name. 

Do you know a public-house which is in the same street as 
the prisoner’s brother lived!—I know there was a public-house in 
the same street as where a man lived who the prisoner introduced 
to me as his brother. 

You know the house ?—I know it, but not by name. 

Did you know a man named Cragg, the landlord of it?—No. 

Have you ever been to a public-house in that street with the 
prisoner and had a drink with him?—I have been to a public- 
house in the street where he said his brother lived, and had a 
bottle of ‘‘ pop ”’ (soda water) with him. 

That was in the picture gallery place!—No, it was not. 

Then this is two places you have been to with the prisoner? 
—Yes. 

Do you know Cragg ?—No. 

[Cragg was then called into the Court. | 

Look at Cragg. Will you swear, Mrs. Dyson, that you have 
not been with Peace to a public-house called the Marquis of Water- 
ford, Russell Street, Sheffield, several times?—No; I have been 
there on one or two occasions. 

With Peace?—Yes; I have been once or twice with Peace. I 
am not sure about twice, but once, I know. 

You are sure once, but are not sure you have not been there 
more 1/—No. 

By Mr. Justice Loprs—That is the Marquis of Waterford, in 
Russell Street, Sheffield ?—I don’t know it by that name. 

Cross-examination continued—You say you may have been 
once or twice?—I am sure of once; I may have been twice. 

When you were there with Peace, has he not paid for drink 
for you?—I have had a bottle of ‘‘ pop,’’ which he paid for. 

Do you always have a bottle of ‘“‘ pop ’’?—I have been there, 
and had a bottle of ‘‘ pop ”’ once. 

More than once?—I cannot say. I am not prepared to say. 

134 


The Second Trial. 


But think ?—I cannot think. 
Perhaps you will not swear that you have not been more than 
_ twice ?—I will swear that I have been once. 

So will I, but I ask for more than once?—I cannot say. 

You say once or twice. Will you swear that you have not 
been on several occasions with Peace?—Not on several occasions. 
But I am quite sure of once. 

Will you swear that you have not been six times?—I swear 
that I have not been six times. 

Four times ?!—No. 

Three times ?!—No. 

Twice then!—I cannot say for that; I know of once, but I 
cannot say for any more. 

Do you remember when this was!—I don’t remember the date. 

Did you tell your husband?—I told my husband I was at a 
picture gallery, and that Peace introduced me to a man he called 
his brother. 

Did you tell your husband you had been to a public-house 
called the Marquis of Waterford, in Russell Street?—I do not 
know it by name. 

Did you tell your husband that you had been to a public- 
house !—Yes. 

Was that before he became dissatisfied?—I don’t remember. 

But do you mean to say you have gone to this public-house 
with this man after your husband was dissatisfied /—No. 

Then it must have been before, must it not ?—yYes. 

Do you know the Norfolk Dining Rooms, in Exchange Street, 
Sheffield 7—No. 

Have you ever been to some dining rooms near the market 
with Peace ?—Yes. 

Alone with him’?—No, not alone. 

Never alone !—No. 

[John Wilson was here called into Court. | 

Did you ever see that man in those dining rooms!—No, not 
to my knowledge. I never remember seeing his face before. 

Do you ever remember being introduced to this man by 
Peace?—I never remember seeing his face before. 

Will you swear you never saw him{?—Never seen his face 
before, to my knowledge. 

Will you swear that you did not on several occasions go to 
those dining rooms in company with Peace!—Not on several 
occasions. 

You have been more than once?—I don’t know which dining 
rooms you mean. 

Near the Market. How often have you been to that place%— 
Once only. 

Will you swear that /—Yes. 

Alone with Peace ?—No. 


Mrs Dyson 


135 


Charles Peace. 


Mrs Dyson 


Who was with you!—Two children. 
Whose children were they?—My own, and one of Mrs. Pad- 
more’s. 

Your boy was about five years old at that time?—Yes. 

How old was the other child?—Three years, I think. 

Had you refreshments there /—Yes. 

When was this?—At the time of the Sheffield Fair. 

The Summer Fair?—I don’t know. It was the same day as 
I had my photo taken. It was the only time I ever had any refresh- 
ments with him there. 

After you had your photo taken, you and Peace and these 
two children went to this dining-room?—I won’t be sure whether 
it was before or after. 

But you know it was the same day !—Yes. 

What had become of your husband /—He was away from home. 
Was he at the Fair?—Yes. ~ 

Did you see him there!—Yes, I met him in the evening. 
What time in the evening did you meet him?—I cannot tell 


a 


you. 
Late ?—EHarly. 
Hight o’clock?—It was earlier than that. After the photo- 
graph was taken. 

Will you swear now, Mrs. Dyson, that you were only once in 
these dining rooms with this man?—Never but the once I have 
referred to. 

And your husband on that day did not come, as you say, 
until evening !—He did not come into the town till evening. He 
was in Sheffield, but not in the Fair. 

The Fair was in the town ?—Yes. 

Then is it true that your husband was in the Sheffield Fair 
that day with you!—He did not go into the Fair. 

Do you know a music hall in Spring Street, Sheffield ?—I 
don’t know Spring Street. 

Do you know a music hall?—What is the name of it? 

The Star ?—Is that what I call a picture gallery? 

I cannot tell you.—Then I cannot tell you. 

Do you know a man named Goodlad?—No. 

[Goodlad was called into Court, and Mr. Lockwood pro- 
ceeded. | 

Have you ever been to the Star Music Hall with Peace?—I 
don’t know the name. 

Have you been to any music hall with him?—I have been at 
a place where there was music in the evening, and where there was 
a picture gallery, a small stage, and tables and chairs round. 

Do you remember being introduced to this man Goodlad 
by Peace at a music hall?—No. 

Do you swear you never were?—I never remember seeing him 
before, except at Sheffield Town Hall. 

136 


The Second Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


Have you not been three or four times to this music hall, 
the Star, in Spring Street, Sheffield!—No, I have not, only once. 

Will you swear you have only been once!—Only once. 

- Do you know an inn at Darnall called the Halfway House? 
— Yes. 

Do you know a woman called Liversedge, who keeps it !—No. 

Whose name was Norton and is now Liversedge !—Yes. 

Have you ever obtained drink there which was put down to 
Peace ?—No, not to my knowledge. 

Do you mean by that that you can’t swear whether you did 
or not!—I say, never to my knowledge. 

Do you mean by that to swear that you never did?—I say 
I never did to my knowledge. 

Are you prepared to swear you have not obtained drink 
there ?—Never to my knowledge. 

Will you swear?—I say I never have done. 

Will you deny it on oath? Say ‘“‘ yes”’ or ‘‘ no,” please? 
—Never to my knowledge. 

You must answer more positively !—I can’t do more than that. 

Can you swear one way or the other?—I can’t swear. I 
never did to my knowledge. 

Can you swear elther way !—No, I cannot. 

I have shown you some letters, Mrs. Dyson. Did you ever 
write a letter to this man (the prisoner) !—No. 

Do you know a little girl called Elizabeth Hutton? Call 
her in. 

{The girl was called into Court. | 

Will you swear you have never sent that child with a note 
to Peace?—Not with a note. 

What did you send her with?—I have sent her with receipts. 

How many!?—Two or three; perhaps three. 

What were they receipts for?—Picture framing. 

Which pictures?—He had framed three or four for me, but 
those receipts were not for my pictures, but for those of other 
people, and he wanted the receipts written out for them. My 
husband was in the habit of writing out letters and receipts for 
Peace. 

Now, look at that child. Will you swear that child has not 
brought you back notes from Peace for yourself!—She brought 
me back one, and I told her to take it back where she had fetched 
it from. 

When was that?—After the removal. 

What month?—I don’t know what month. 

Would it be July?—I cannot tell. 

After who had removed ?—After the prisoner had removed to 
the opposite side of the road. 

At Darnall !—Yes. 

Did you ever give that child anything for taking notes!—No. 

137 


Charles Peace. 


Mrs Dyson 


[When witness denied that she had received notes by that 
girl, Peace turned to the warders and informed them she had told 
a ‘‘ damned lie.’’ | 

Do you know a man named Kirkham !—Yes.* 

Did you send notes to Peace by him?—No. — 

Will you swear that?—Yes. I have given him receipts. 

How many ?—Two, I think. : 

By Mr. Justics Lopzs—What receipts were they !—Receipts 
for picture framing. The prisoner was in the habit of having my 
husband to write them out for him. 

Receipts he wished to give to somebody by whom he had been 
employed /—Yes. 

Oross-examination continued—Look at that man again. Has 
he given you notes from Peace ?!—No. 

Never !—No, not to my knowledge. 

Will you swear that?—Never to my knowledge. 

Can you swear one way or the other !—Never to my knowledge. 
I will not swear it. He never gave me notes from Peace, to my 
knowledge. 

You cannot swear it?—Never to my knowledge. 

By Mr. Justice Loprs—You say he never gave you notes?’ Did 
he ever give you a note?—Not from the prisoner, to my know- 
ledge. 

Cross-examination continued—Why did your husband write out 
these receipts ?—When the prisoner was on friendly terms we thought 
he was a nice man at that time. 

Why did he not write them himself ?—He said he could not 
write very well; and he used to come in to ask my husband to 
be kind enough to do it for him, and he obliged him. 

Did you ever send the child (the girl Hutton) for drink to 
Mrs. Liversedge’s!—To where? 

To Mrs. Norton’s?—Not to my knowledge. I never sent her. 

I understand by that that you mean that you cannot swear 
one way or the other?—Not to my knowledge. 

You must answer the question. Can you swear one way or 
the other !—I have never sent her, to my knowledge. I have sent 
her out for beer, but I don’t know where she fetched it from. I did 
not tell her to go there in particular. 

I want to bring you now to the day before the 29th of 
November. On the 28th day of November, that was the day 
before your husband was killed, were you at the Stag Hotel, 
Sharrow ?—Yes. 

Who was with you?—A little boy; Mrs. Padmore’s little boy. 

a How old!—He was six years old, I think; five or six years 
old. 


* Other versions give this answer as ‘‘ No.’ 
138 


The Second Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


Anybody else with you!—There was nobody else with me. 

[Prisoner muttered something about the boy being Willie. ] 
Cross-examination continued—Are you sure it was not your 
own little child Willie?—Quite sure. 

Was there a man with you!—No, I was in by myself. 

[Mrs. Redfern was called into Court. ] 

Look at Mrs. Redfern. Do you know her?—Yes; I remember 
seeing her. 

Will you swear that on the 28th November, when you went 
into that hotel, there was no one with you but that little boy !— 
A man followed me in and sat down beside me, but I went in by 
myself with the little boy. 

Was that the man (indicating the prisoner) !—No. 

Will you swear it?—I can almost swear it was not him. 

That won’t do. Look at that man, and now look at me; 
now, on your oath, did not this man Peace go with you into that 
house on that night?—On my oath, he did not. 

You swear it?—I swear it. No, no; he did not go with me 
into the house. 

Did he follow you in?—Some man followed me in, but I did 
not know him. 

On your oath, did thes man follow you in?—No, not to my 
knowledge. 

Will you swear that he did not?—I will swear he did not, 
unless he had made himself something different to what he is now. 
He was a young man who came in. 

By Mr. Justicu Lopres—Different to what? What do you mean 
by that?—Something different to what he had been, because the 
person who sat beside me was a young man about twenty-five 
years of age. 

Cross-examination continued—What did you mean just now by 
saying that you could almost swear that this was not the man ?— 
Because he had such a habit of disguising himself, so that I cannot 
tell. 

Did you speak to him?—I do not remember speaking to 
him. 

Did the man speak to you?—He asked me where I had been, 
or where I was going, or something. 

What was it?—He asked me where I had been, and where I 
was going. 

What did you say?—I don’t know. 

But you spoke to him?—He passed some remark. 

Did you answer him’?—I cannot tell, because I only stopped 
a minute or two. 

Did the man go out when you went out’!—Yes, he followed 
me out just after. I am not quite sure, but I believe he did. 

Did you not see him after he left?—No, I did not. 

Do you mean to say that afterwards you did not see the man 

139 


Charles Peace. 


Mrs Dyson 


sitting here (referring to Peace), and that he did not tell you he 
would come and see you the next night!—No, I did not see him. 

I did not say that. Did he that night tell you he would come 
and see you the next night?—No, he did not. _ é 

Did he say anything to you!—Nothing particular. Nothing 
worthy of remark, because I did not take any notice of him. 

After he left, I mean !—Left what? 

Left the public-house?—I did not speak to him after I left. 

That you will swear?—Yes; I went straight home. 

Did you think at the time that he might be there?—No, I 
had no idea. 

Had you been in the Fair with any one that night?—No. 

Did you tell Mrs. Redfern you had been in the Fair that 
night with any one?—No; I don’t remember. 

You may have done?—I don’t remember anything about it. 
I believe she asked me if I had been at the Fair, or something of 
the kind. 

What did you say?—I don’t remember; I can’t tell exactly. 

You cannot tell whether you said ‘‘ Yes’”’ or ‘‘ No’’?—I 
must have said ‘‘ No.’’ 

When Mrs. Redfern asked you if you had been at the Fair, 
what did you answer /—I tell you I believe I said ‘‘ No.’’ 

And you are prepared to say you did not say ‘‘ Yes’’?—I 
may have said ‘‘ Yes.”’ 

If you said ‘‘ Yes,’’ it was a lie?—I came through the Fair, 
but I had not been in the Fair that night to stop. 

Had you been into a booth?—No; I had not been inside of 
one at all. 

You know the booth I mean—Turner’s booth ?—No. 

Did you go into it?—Certainly not. 

Did you pass close to it outside?—I don’t know it at all. 

Did you go from one end of the Fair straight to the other? 
—No; I mean I walked past coming up from the station, but I 
did not go inside the Fair. 

After you had passed the Fair, did you go to a public-house 
or beer-house on Shalesmoor, near Bower Spring ?—No. 

Where did you go?—TI called at a friend’s and had some 
supper in Fargate. 

. Before that, had you been to the Norfolk Dining-rooms?— 
Oo. 

Did you then go to Turnell’s, in High Street?—I don’t know 
where it is. 

Some vaults there, you know?—I don’t know. 

Did you go into any public-house!—No. 

Not the Yorkshire Stingo?—I don’t know it by that name. 

Did you go into it?—I did not go into any; none until I 
called at my friend’s house, and then I went to the Stag. 

140 


The Second Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


Will you swear after you left the Fair you went into no 
public-house except the Stag’—Not to my knowledge. 

By that I understand you mean that you will not swear one 
way or the other ?—I say I did not to my knowledge. 

You have told me that. Do you mean by that that you 
cannot swear one way or the other ?—I say, not to the best of my 
knowledge. 

So you have said. You cannot swear one way or the other 1— 
I can’t say any more than I have done. 

Very well. Now, before starting for the Stag Hotel you 
went to the house of some friends. What is their name?—Yes. 
Is it necessary to tell? 

By Mr. Justicn Lopss—Yes, you must answer the question.— 
Mr. Muddiman’s. 

Cross-examination continued—Did you not tell Peace that night 
that you wanted to go to Muddiman’s, at Sharrow?—I didn’t see the 
prisoner at all. 

Will you swear you did not tell him that?—I did not say so. 

Will you swear it?—I will swear it. Mr. Muddiman does not 
live at Sharrow. I did not see the prisoner after I left the Stag. 

How long were you at Mr. Muddiman’s?—Perhaps an hour 
or two. 

From there you went to the Stag?—Yes, I went straight on. 

You went in an omnibus, didn’t you!—No; I walked. 

Have you seen Mrs. Liversedge here, or Mrs. Norton, who 
occupies the Halfway House at Darnall !—Yes. 

Have you ever been turned out of there on account of being 
drunk ?—No, I have never been drunk there in my life. 

Will you swear it 1—Yes. 

Bring Mrs. Liversedge back. Now, look at that woman. 
Will you swear that you have never been drunk in the Halfway 
House /—Never drunk; I might be slightly inebriated. 

Will you swear you were never turned out of her house for 
being slightly inebriated?—No, not to my knowledge. 

No, that is quite true. You may not have known that you 
were inebriated?—I always know what I am doing. 

Re-examined by Mr. CampseLtt Foster—My friend has asked 
you a great many questions as to whether your husband ever 
attempted to get hold of Peace. Are you quite sure that he did 
not attempt to get hold of him? 

Mr. Locxwoop—I object to my friend putting the question 
that way. 

By Mr. Campseit Foster—He hever got hold of Peace?—No, 
he was not near enough. 

My friend has asked you how your husband fell, and you 
told him he fell on his back ?—Yes, on his back; rather slanting. 

Was that in the passage or in the little court?—In the little 
court at the end. : 

141 


Charles Peace. 


Mrs Dyson 


Is there a wall on the other side of the court ?—Yes. 

What is the width of the little court?—I can’t tell. — 

Is it quite as wide as the passage, which they tell us is 3 feet 
wide?—Yes, I think it is, to the best of my memory. 

Did you observe, when he fell, whether the side of his head 
went at all against the wall or not?—It might, in falling, because 
he fell close to the wall, rather slanting, but on his back. 

My friend asked you a great deal about your knowing Peace 
before you left Darnall. Did you say a year and ten months, or 
a year or ten months. 

Mr. Locxwoop objected to the question, and Mr. Justice 
Lopes said Mr. Campbell Foster had better ask her how long it 
was. 

Witness—May be a year or ten months, or more. 

By Mr. CampseLt Foster—You have been asked about going to 
a dining-room near the market with two children, and I think 
you answered that you went to get some refreshments /—Yes. 

Were the children hungry, or were you hungry !—The children 
were hungry. 

Mr. Locxkwoop—But you suggested that? 

Mr. CampseLt Foster—Then object. 

Mr. Locxkwoop—Then I do object. 

Mr. Justice Lopzs said the question must be put in regular 
form. 

Mr. Locxwoop—I did not consider it necessary to watch my 
friend so narrowly; I thought his age and experience would have 
taught him that the question must not be put in that way. 

Re-examination continued—You said some one brought you a 
note from Peace!—Yes, and I told them to take it back and give 
it to the person they had received it from. 

Have any other notes been sent to you by Peace?—No, not 
to my knowledge. 

I don’t propose to follow you through all the list of places 
you have been to. In your last answer to my friend you stated 
that you might have left the Halfway House a little inebriated. 
Just explain yourself. How did it happen?’—I cannot tell you 
exactly. I might be slightly inebriated, and I cannot tell you 
any more. 

By Mr. Justice Lopzs—You recollect when the prisoner, as you 
say, came to the closet door !—Yes. 

After the prisoner said, ‘‘ Speak, or I’ll fire,’? how long was 
it before the first shot was fired?—About a minute or two; it 
might be a little more. , 

_ How long between the first shot and the second?—They were 
in succession. 

_As far as you could see, did the prisoner stand in the same 
position when he fired the two shots, or had he moved ?—He was on 
the lower steps when he fired the last. 

142 


The Second Trial. 


Mrs Dyson 


And where was he when he fired the first ?—In the yard. 
And how far did he stand from the steps?—2 or 3 feet. 
When he fired the second, where do you say he was!—On the 
' lower step. 

Where was your husband ?—In the yard. 

Then the whole of the steps were between your husband and 
the prisoner ?—Only two. 

Were they the same as the bottom steps ?—Yes. 


Mary Ann Grecory, wife of John Gregory, of Banner Cross, 
examined by Mr. Campsetn Fostrer—I remember the prisoner 
coming into my husband’s shop in the early part of October. My 
husband was at home, and I called him into the shop, and he 
and the prisoner had some conversation together, which lasted 
about ten minutes. I could not tell what the conversation was 
about, because I was not in the shop. During the time the 
prisoner was in the shop I had every opportunity of observing 
him. The next time I saw the prisoner was on the evening of 
the 29th November, 1876. It was about seven o’clock, and the 
prisoner came into the shop and asked for my husband, who was 
not in, and I told him so. The prisoner went out, and I watched 
him down the road. About eight o’clock I heard some one go 
past the back of my house with clogs on; then a scream. I went 
out to see what it was, and found Mr. Dyson standing at his back 
door. I said, ‘‘ You had better go to your wife, Mr. Dyson.’’ 
Mr. Dyson passed me, and went in the direction of the closet, 
from which the noise seemed to come, and I went into my house 
and locked the door. Afterwards I heard two loud bangs. One 
took place immediately after the other, within a few minutes of 
Mr. Dyson going in the direction of the closet. I heard another 
scream; it was a woman’s scream. Later I heard footsteps upon 
the entry, and I went out to look. I saw a number of men carry- 
ing what looked like a man. I found afterwards that it was Mr. 


Dyson. I saw him later, in an insensible condition, sitting in a 
chair, with blood streaming down his face. I saw Dr. Harrison 
come. My house and Mr. Dyson’s were the only two which 


opened into that part of the yard. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Locxkwoop—When I saw Peace in 
November he looked just as he did in October. He had a long, 
white beard. JI did not on the 26th of October hear Peace say to 
my husband, ‘‘ Don’t tell the Dysons that I have been.’? I did 
say before the coroner that I had heard Peace tell my husband not 
to tell the Dysons of his visit, but it did not refer to that occasion. 

How long was it from the time you heard a person go up the 
yard with clogs on to the time you heard the scream !—Directly, 
I might say. ; : 

Now, think?—I am sure it was not two minutes. 

143 


Charles Peace. 


Mary Ann Gregory 


* When you had seen Dyson and locked your door, | suppose 
you remained in the kitchen at the back ?—Yes. 
When Dyson set off to go after Peace, did he go quickly !— 
Yes. 
Did he run?’—No, he stepped quickly. 
When you last saw him he was going quickly ?—Yes, sir. 


Saran CoLGREAVES, examined by Mr. CampsetnL Foster—lI 
am the wife of Thomas Colgreaves, of Dobbin Hill, Ecclesall. I 
live about a quarter of a mile from Banner Cross Terrace. I 
remember on the night of 29th November, 1876, going to Mr. 
Gregory’s shop. It was about half-past seven o’clock. As I was 
going | met the prisoner. He was 50 or 40 yards from Gregory’s 
shop. He was walking for the shop. He spoke to me, and asked 
me if I knew who had come to live at that house, pointing to the 
Dyson’s. Mr. Gregory’s is the fixst house. I said “‘ No.’’ He 


asked if I knew they were strangers, and I said ‘‘ Yes.’’ He said, 
** You don’t know them then?’’ and I said ‘‘ No.’’ Then he 
said, ‘‘ That woman is a bloody whore.’’ I said, ‘‘ You ought to 


mind what you say.’’ He asked me if I minded going to Dyson’s 
house and saying that a gentleman wanted to see Mrs. Dyson. I 
told him ‘‘ No,’’ he must go himself. Then I went to Gregory’s 
shop. I remained in it for about ten minutes. When I came out 
I saw the prisoner by the end of the passage. He went towards 
Ecclesall. Whilst this conversation took place I had a good oppor- 
sued of seeing him. He walked by the side of me, and I am sure 
it is him. 


CHARLES BRASSINGTON, examined by Mr. CampsetL Foster— 
I live at Lane End, Ecclesall, and am a labourer. J remember the 
night of 29th November, 1876. I know the Banner Cross Hotel, 
and Gregory’s shop. They are 30 yards apart. I was on the 
road near to the Banner Cross Hotel about eight o’clock. It was 
a moonlight night. I noticed a man walking backwards and 
forwards. He was on the road. I should know that man. He 
came up and spoke to me after he had passed me three or four 
times. 1 was under a lamp when he came up and spoke to me. 
He asked me if I knew of any strange people who had come to live 
about there. I said, ‘‘ No,’’ and he then pulled out some letters, 
When we got to the next lamp, the prisoner showed me the letters 
and wanted to read them, and I said I could not read them. 
(Taking some letters into his hand.) | These are something like 
those which were shown to me. I did not take much notice of 
them. I told him I could not read them, and he then said, ‘‘ I 
will make it warm for those folks before morning ; I will shoot them 
both.’? After he had said that to me he walked away from me 
towards Gregory’s; and I went home. We were talking together 
about ten minutes. I did not notice the man very particularly. 

144 


The Second Trial. 


Charles Brassington 


Just look now at the man in the dock. Do you recognise that 
man !—Yes, sir. 

Is that the man ?—Yes, sir. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Locxkwoop—Without looking at the 
dock, don’t you remember the man you met that night on account 
of his clothes more than anything else?—He had dark clothes on. 

Did you notice his clothes more than his face?—I did not 
take much notice of him at all. 

How do you know it was the 29th of November ?—I expect it 
was. 

I think you said just now you could not tell us; is that so?— 
Except as to the date of the murder. 

Did they tell you it was the 29th!—(No answer.) 

Who told you? Which of the policemen told you that ?—None 
of them told me. 

Then how did you find it out?!—I looked at the paper. 

Can you read!—No. 

Then that would not help you. How did you know it was the 
29th ’—Some one told me. 

Who was it ?—TI don’t know. 

Who do you think it was?—I don’t know. I only know by 
what the others say. 

What others!—(No answer.) 

Who are the others?—I have heard other folks say it. 

(Counsel asked seven or eight times what others, but could 
get no further answer.) 

Now, you know you gave evidence in the month of December, 
1876, before the coroner. Then in January this year before the 
magistrates. Did any one read your previous evidence to you on 
the last occasion ?—Yes; Mr. Pollard. 

Did Mr. Pollard read it to you and say, ‘‘ This is what you 
are going to say ’’?—(No answer.) 

Have you a good memory!—Not very. 

I should think not. When before the coroner did you not 
say this, ‘‘ He said that he would make it warm for them before 
morning; I expect he meant the strangers.’’"—Did you not say 
that ?—(No answer.) 

Mr. CampseLtt Foster—You had better read on, 

Mr. Locxkwoop—I do protest against such an interruption. 

Mr. Justice Lopss—Mr. Campbell Foster, you have the privi- 
lege of re-examining. 

Cross-examination continued—lIs it true?1—Yes, I do not know 
but what it is. 

Then he did not say he would shoot the strangers?!—Yes, he 
said he would shoot them. 

What did you mean by saying that you ‘“‘ expected ’’ he meant 
the strangers? Was that the conclusion you came to yourself from 
what he said ?—Yes. 


i 145 


‘ 


Charles Peace. 


Charles Brassington 


Is it that you thought he meant shoot by saying he would 
“‘ make it warm ’’?—No, he said he would shoot them. 

You have had this evidence read over to you by Mr. Pollard 
since?—Never since. I have told you all that took place between 
us on that night. 

Re-examined by Mr. CampszLt Foster—Did you say to the 
coroner, ‘‘ He said he would make it warm for them before morn- 
ing; I expect he meant the strangers he had been talking about. 
He said he would shoot them both before morning.’’ Is that what 
you said ?—Yes. 

Now, was it on the night of the Sheffield Fair that Mr. Dyson 
was shot /—Yes. 

By Mr. Locxkwoop—What sort of a hat had the man on that 
you met on the night of the murder ?—I did not notice. 


CuaRLES WuHyYMAN was called. 

Mr. Lockwoop—May I draw your lordship’s attention to the 
fact that this man’s naine is not on the back of the indictment ; 
neither has the prosecution given notice of their intention to 
produce him? 

Mr. Justice Lopes—lIt is always better to do it, especially in 
what is not an ordinary case, and the party has neither been before 
the magistrates nor the coroner. But here the man has been 
before the coroner, and you have had the opportunity of seeing his 
deposition on that occasion. The object of notice is that counsel 
for a prisoner shall not be taken by surprise. It is not so much 
the calling of the witnesses as the nature of the evidence which is 
important. 


CHARLES WuHYMAN, examined by Mr. CampseLL Fostser—lI live 
at Ecclesall, and am a quarryman. I remember the night when 
Mr. Dyson was shot. I was in the Banner Cross Hotel that night 
about eight o’clock. I heard two reports from a gun or some- 
thing of that sort. I went to the door of the hotel and heard Mrs. 
Dyson screaming ‘‘ Murder.’’ I went in the direction of the 
scream, and, when I got to the end of the houses, saw Mr. Dyson 
ying on the ground, with Mrs. Dyson holding his head, partly in 

er arms. 


THomas WILSON, examined—I am a scythe maker, and live at 
Brincliffe Hill, near Banner Cross. On the night of the murder 
I was on the roadway at Banner Cross, about 50 yards from 
Gregory’s house, from about eight till twenty minutes past. While 
there I heard two reports of a pistol in quick succession. The 
sound came from the passage near the Gregorys’ house. I looked 
back towards where the shots were fired, and saw a man go across 
the road from the direction of Gregory’s house, and get over the 
road wall.* Over the wall is a garden, and to the right of the 


* About 4 feet high. 
146 


The Second Trial. 


Thomas Wilson 


garden are another low wall and a field. It was a moonlight 
night, but at the time the moon happened to be under a cloud. I 
could not see who the man was. I heard a woman scream just as 
he was running across the road. I went down to where the 
woman was screaming, and found her in a small yard at the 
bottom of a passage leading into the road. It was Mrs. Dyson. 
She was holding Mr. Dyson’s head up, and screaming, and saying, 
““ The man has shot my husband.”’ 


The Prisongr, as this witness left the box—Oh, you villain. 


Police Constable Gzoran Warp, Highfield Division, examined 
by Mr. Campsett Foster—On the 30th November, 1876, I made a 
search near the house of Mr. Dyson, at Banner Cross. I searched 
in the garden and field opposite Gregory’s house. I found foot- 
steps near the road in the garden, and followed them into the 
field. They were middle-sized footsteps. In the field I found this 
bundle of letters (produced). They were not tied up. Amongst 
them I saw a card. The card contained the words, ‘‘ Charles Peace 
is requested not to interfere with my family,’ and on the other side 
Mr. Dyson’s name. 

In reply to Mr. Justice Lopes, Mr. Campseuti Foster said he 
intended to put the card in as evidence. 

Mr. Lockwoop contended that as Mr. Campbell Foster had 
examined Mrs. Dyson in respect of the letters, and had also referred 
to the card in his opening address, he was bound to put in the 
letters if he put in the card. 

Mr. Justice Lopzs ruled that neither the card nor the letters 
could be put in, inasmuch as they were all irrelevant to the issue. 
He said that Mr. Lockwood had most properly cross-examined on 
the letters to ascertain the credibility of Mrs. Dyson; but he was 
bound by her answers and could not contradict her by intro- 
ducing the notes as evidence in the case. 


James WiLuiAM HARRISON, surgeon, Cemetery Road, Sheffield, 
examined by Mr. CampsBeLL Foster—I was fetched to attend Mr. 
Dyson on the 29th November. I arrived at the house about 8.30. 
I found him seated in a chair bleeding from a wound on the left 


temple. I had him laid on the floor, and examined the wound. 
It extended to the brain. I remained with him until half-past 
ten o’clock, when he died. He was insensible all the time. I 


made a post-mortem examination, and found a bullet on the sur- 
face of the brain. This caused death. I extracted the bullet 
and gave it to Inspector Bradbury. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lockwoop—The witness denied that 
there were any bruises on the body of the deceased which showed 
that there had been struggling. He had found some slight 
abrasions on the nose and chin, but they were very slight. They 

147 


Charles Peace. 


James W. Harrison 


could not have been caused by a blow from the fist. They were 
abrasions; the skin had been grazed off. He did not think a ring 
on the finger of any one who might have struck him would have 
caused these abrasions, which appeared more like the result of 
a fall. He did not think the deceased had fallen on his face. 
When shown the depositions taken before the coroner, he 
admitted that he at that time said, ‘‘ I noticed a bruise on his 
nose and chin, as though he had fallen on his face.’’ That state- 
ment he now adhered to. 

By Mr. Justice Lopes—Then what you said before the coroner 
was right?—Well, it was not very far wrong. 

Re-examined by Mr. Campsett Foster—The deceased’s face 
was not violently marked. He did not appear as if he had fallen 
with any weight upon his face. He might have fallen against the 
wall lightly. The injuries to the face were but superficial. The 
cause of death was shock and the presence of the bullet in the brain. 


Jacop Brapsury, inspector of police, Highfield Division, 
Sheffield, produced the bullet given to him by Mr. Harrison and 
said—I received the bullet on the 8th December from Mr. Harrison. 
On the 29th November I saw Mrs. Dyson at her house, shortly 
before Mr. Dyson died. It was about half-past ten o’clock. 
Mrs. Dyson gave me a description of Charles Peace, and, together 
with other officers, I searched for him, but could not trace him. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lockwoop—The bullet has been in my 
possession ever since, until yesterday, when I gave it into the 
possession of Mr. Denton, who returned it to me. It was never 
out of my possession except on that occasion. I produce a photo- 
graph of Peace and Mrs. Dyson, stated to have been taken at 
Sheffield Fair; I received it from Mr. Jackson, but I don’t know 
from whom he obtained it. 


Mrs. Dyson, recalled and further cross-examined by Mr. Locx- 
woop—Will you look at that photograph? Is it the one taken of 
Peace and yourself in the Fair ?—Yes. 


Mr. CampsrLt Fostmr said he proposed to produce evidence 
of the threats made by Peace in July, 1876. 

Mr. Locxwoop objected to the introduction of such evidence, 
on the ground that, the pursuer being on his trial for an offence 
committed in November, what had taken place in July was too 
remote to have any direct bearing on the case. 

Mr. Justice Lopes said it would not be very cogent, but he 
could not say at present whether the evidence was admissible or 
not. 

Mr. Locxwoop asked his lordship to take a note of his objec- 
tion. 

Mr. Justice Lopzs—You object to the evidence because it is 
too remote ? 

148 


The Second Trial. 


Rose Annie Sykes 


Mr. Lockwoop—Yes, my lord. 

Mr. Justice Lopus—I hold it is not too remote; but whether 
it is admissible is a matter that I must decide when I have heard 
it. At all events, at this point I decide that it is not too remote. 


Rosz Anniz Sykes, examined by Mr. Surznp—I am the wife 
of James Sykes, and live at 13 Hazel Road, Darnall, but resided 
at 30 Britannia Road, Darnall, next door but one to the house 
where the Dysons lived in 1876. I remember the afternoon of Ist 
July, Saturday. Looking out of the window, I saw Mr. Dyson. He 
was coming down the street. I saw the prisoner, Peace, walking 
behind him. He got hold of his heels, as if to trip him up. 

So far as you could see, was it done in sport or in anger ? 

Mr. Lockwoop—I must object. Cannot we have what actually 
was done? 

Examination continued—Did you hear anything said by either 
of the men ?—Mr. Dyson did not speak, but the prisoner said some- 
thing I could not hear. On the night of the same day, between nine 
and ten o’clock, I was standing at the bottom of our passage, 
talking to my husband, Mrs. Padmore, and Mrs. Dyson. The 
prisoner came up. 

What did you hear the prisoner say /—He said to Mrs. Dyson, 
** ll blow your bloody brains out and your bloody husband’s 
too.’’ {The prisoner made an emphatic sign of dissent and then 
groaned loudly.] The prisoner then took a revolver out from his 
pocket at his side, and pointed it at Mrs. Dyson’s head. After- 
wards the prisoner came up to my husband, and said, ‘‘ Jim, you 
are a witness that she struck me with a life preserver.’’ 

Had you seen Mrs. Dyson do anything with a life preserver 7— 
No, sir, I had not. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lockwoop—I did not hear Mrs. Dyson 
threaten to strike anybody. I was not aware there had been any 
disturbance between Mrs. Dyson and the police before that. 

About Mrs. Dyson being slightly inebriated?—Not that I 
know of. The conversation I heard took place on the Ist July, 
1876. I have told no one about it. I did not give evidence 
before the coroner, because I was taken ill the same night, and 
it was a month before I got out again. I did not go before the 
magistrates. I remember the date, because it was the Satur- 
day before my little boy was born. 


James Sykes, quarryman, 13 Hazel Road, Darnall, examined 
by Mr. CampseLt Foster—I was present at the time when the con- 
versation referred to took place. We were talking about a man 
who had committed an assault. Peace came up at the time, and 
Mrs. Dyson said to him, ‘‘ What are you annoying my husband for, 
everywhere he goes?’’ Peace replied, ‘‘ I will annoy you and your 
husband wherever you go.”’ 

149 


Charles Peace. 


James Sykes 


Did the prisoner do anything when he said those words ?— 
Yes, sir; he pulled out a revolver from his pocket, held it at the 
head of Mrs. Dyson, and said, ‘‘ I will blow your bloody brains 
out, and your bloody husband’s too.”’ 

Prisoner—You bloody villain, I will have my turn yet; you 
are a devil. 

Witness—Peace then turned up the passage, but came back 
in about a minute’s time and said, ‘‘ Now, Jim, you are witness 
that she struck me with a life preserver.’”’ I said, ‘‘ No, I am a 
witness that you pointed a pistol at her head, and threatened to 
blow out her brains.’? The prisoner then turned round to go 
away, saying, ‘‘ I have got enough ammunition here to do for half 
a dozen of you.’’ I saw no life preserver in Mrs. Dyson’s hand, 
and I was standing within a yard of her. She did not strike him 
with a life preserver or anything. 


Janz Papmore said—I am the wife of Edward Padmore, and 
I live at 40 Catherine Road. In 1876 I lived in Britannia Road, 
Darnall, and was acquainted with James Sykes and his wife. I 
remember, on the Ist of July in that year, talking to Mrs. Dyson 
and the other persons mentioned at Darnall. Whilst we were 
talking, I saw the prisoner, who came up. Mrs. Dyson said to 
him, ‘‘ Why do you annoy my husband in the way you do?” 
He walked up to her, held a revolver against her face, and said, 
** T will annoy you and your husband too. I will blow your bloody 
brains out, and your bloody husband’s too.”’ 

Did he say or do anything more?—No; he went away and 
walked down the passage. He afterwards went across the road, 
to his own house, and I did not see him again. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lockwoop—I remember on one occasion 
going to Mansfield with Mrs. Dyson. We did not go with Peace. 
I suppose he followed us. We went in the back part of the 
train, and he in the fore part. 

In the same train !—Yes. 

Did you go to a public-house with him and Mrs. Dyson ?— 
We did not; we went to a temperance hotel and got tea. 

I beg your pardon, I should not have called it a public-house. 
It is a public-house, but a temperate public-house. (Laughter.) 
You had tea there, then?—Yes, not Peace with us. I and Mrs. 
Dyson and three children. 

Was he not with you?—He was not. He walked into the 
room, went to the far end, sat down in an arm-chair, and called 
for a bottle of sherbet. 

Did you leave Mrs. Dyson at Mansfield ?—No, she came back 
with me. 

Did you see Peace again at the house of a person where Mrs. 
Dyson was going to call?—No. We returned to our own homes 
direct from the station. 

150 


The Second Trial. 


Jane Padmore 


Did he return in the same compartment with you from Mans- 
field ’—He did not. 

Did he not pay for some drink for you!—He never did. 

Where did you leave Mrs. Dyson that day /—At her own home. 

Was it during the Sheffield Summer Fair?—It was on the 
Friday in Whit-week. I cannot remember the date. 


Epwarp Rosinson, 202 R, Metropolitan Police Force, examined 
by Mr. Camppetyt Foster—I was on duty at Blackheath on the 
night of the 10th October last year, about three o’clock in the morn- 
ing, near the residence of Mr. Burness. The dining-room window 
opens on the lawn. Whilst I was in the avenue outside St. John’s 
Park, I saw a light in the dining-room window across the lawn. 
There is a shrubbery at the bottom of the garden. I got over the 
wall into the garden. The prisoner ran from the verandah outside 
the dining-room across the lawn to the shrubbery. I ran after him 
across the lawn. He turned round, and, pointing a revolver at me, 
said, ‘‘ Keep off; keep back, or by God I’ll shoot you.’’ I said, 
“You had better not,’? and made a rush at him. He fired two 
shots. JI made another rush at him, and he fired a third shot. We 
dodged about the shrubbery, and he fired two more shots, and the 
fifth shot struck me in the elbow. JI closed with him, and got him 
on the ground, when Police Sergeant Brown came to my assistance, 
and we took him into custody. 


Police Sergeant CHARLES Brown, Metropolitan Police Force, 
examined by Mr. Sureup, said he was on duty on the night of 
10th October, 1878, and wrested the revolver (produced) from 
the prisoner. 


JAMES WoopwarRD—I am a gun and rifle maker, 64 St. James’s 
Street, London. I have examined the revolver produced. The 
barrel is rifled in seven grooves. I should say the weapon was 
of Belgian* manufacture. I have seen the bullet, which is now 
passed to me, before, and it is one which is adapted for this pistol. 
The bullet at its fullest part shows the rifling; it shows the rifling 
that this barrel would produce. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lockwoop—And that is a most common 
kind of revolver?—No, it is not the most common. 

It is a common kind%—It is a common kind. 

Manufactured and sent over in thousands ?—Yes. 


Mr. CampBeLL Foster—That is the case for the prosecution, 
my lord. 

Mr. Justice Lopzs (to Mr. Lockwood)—Do you wish to call 
witnesses ’—No, my lord, I don’t. 

Mr. Locxwoop said that, as it was not yet five o’clock, out of 


* Query—Dutch ? 
151 


Charles Peace. 


Mr Campbell Foster 


consideration for the jury, he would prefer to go on with the case 
without an adjournment. 


Closing Speech for the Crown. 


Mr. CampBeLL Foster said that, if the cross-examination of 
Mrs. Dyson meant anything, he could not for the life of him 
tell what it did mean. Attempts had been made to show that 
Mrs. Dyson had been on terms of improper intimacy with the 
prisoner, but had not those attempts signally and miserably failed? 
But even if the defence had succeeded in that direction, would 
it not have suggested that there might have been jealousy on 
the part of the prisoner, and was not jealousy the passion that more 
than any other prompted men to the commission of desperate 
deeds? But even if Mrs. Dyson.and Peace had been intimate in 
the way which had been suggested, was that any justification for 
taking the life of Mr. Dyson? He submitted that the circum- 
stantial evidence was so strong that the jury ought to have no diffi- 
culty in concluding that this shooting had been done by Peace 
with malicious intent. Again referring to the cross-examination, 
he said that, though the jury might not have detected it, it was 
a charming piece of acting, an art in which there was no one 
more accomplished than his learned friend. It was a solemn sham, 
employed for producing a bad impression, and acted simply for 
the purpose of throwing dust in the eyes of the jury. He pointed 
out how direct was the bearing of the statements of the various 
witnesses upon the charge now hanging over Peace, and especially 
emphasised the improbability of the man who was seen getting over 
the garden wall on the night of the murder, and who also left the 
packet of letters behind him, including the card which he had 
had in his possession some time before, being any other man than 
the prisoner at the bar. If this was so, who could doubt that his 
guilt was clear and fully established? It certainly had been hinted 
at that there was a struggle between the deceased and the prisoner ; 
but where was the evidence of it? No witnesses had been called for 
the defence. There certainly had been no such struggle; but the 
prisoner’s advisers had not anything better to put forward by 
way of defence. He concluded by asking the jury to discard all 
mere rumours, and to decide only upon the evidence, bearing in 
mind that, although many imputations had been cast upon Mrs. 
Dyson, at every step the evidence had been plainly and strongly 
corroborated. 


Speech for the Defence. 


Mr. Lockwoop then addressed the jury—Although the hour is 
now somewhat late when I commence to address you, yet I can’t 
help feeling I.might have preferred to have had some short time to 

152 


The Second Trial. 


Mr Lockwood 


prepare the words I am now about to address to you, some oppor- 
tunity for preparing an appeal to your feelings in order that I 
might the more confidently expect your verdict. But when I con- 
sider, gentlemen, that it is not my convenience only that is at stake, 
but that of each of you, I don’t think I should be doing my duty 
towards you unless I were to rise now at once to meet the case for 
the prosecution, and to put before you that defence which I intend 
to put before you on behalf of this man. I don’t think any man in 
any profession has a more painful duty, or a more onerous duty, 
to discharge than when he feels he has to stand as it were alone 
against the whole world to protect the life of his fellow-man. My 
learned friend, Mr. Campbell Foster, alluded, in opening this 
case to you, to the rumours which had been circulated through this 
town with regard to this man. Aye, gentlemen, these rumours have 
not been limited to this town, they have not been limited to this 
county, but from one end of this country to the other there has 
been a wild and merciless cry for blood, which is a disgrace to 
the country in which I now stand. Never in the whole course of 
my experience—and I defy any of my learned friends sitting 
around me to quote an experience to the contrary—has there been 
such an attempt made on the part of those who should be the most 
careful of all to preserve the liberties of their fellow-men and to 
preserve the dignity of the tribunals of justice to determine the 
guilt of a man. I say these people, who have this mighty care 
entrusted to them, have terribly forgotten their duty. They have 
not hesitated for a moment, for the sake of the paltry pence which 
they could snatch from the public which they wickedly tried to 
gull, to prejudice this man’s life. 

Prisoner—Hear, hear. 

Mr. Locxkwoop—It has been done, and it has been done 
wickedly, and, as I was going to say, no duty can be more onerous 
and terrible than the one I am now called upon to perform; and it 
is a duty, gentlemen, in which I have had short experience, perhaps, 
compared to that of my learned friend; but during the short ex- 
perience I have had I have known what it has been in this hour of 
trial to be sustained by the thought that I am addressing twelve 
men who approached the trial with minds thoroughly impartial and 
thoroughly unbiased. Gentlemen, have I that comfort now? Can 
I hope for a moment that when this question had been dis- 
cussed and canvassed, aye, and determined, throughout the 
length and breadth of the country, you have not been 
drawn into the vortex of that discussion; you, who did 
not know until to-day the solemn and awful part you 
would have to play in this most fearful drama? You did not 
know until your names were called out to-day that you would have 
to take that place in the box which you now occupy. You have had 
your ears filled with reports; and you with others, actuated by what 
you have read, have discussed this matter, and possibly—I don’t 

153 


Charles Peace. 


Mr Lockwood 


Know whether it is so or not—possibly you have come into the 
box to-day with a strong opinion formed as to the merits of this 
case. But, gentlemen, if that be so, think what an awful duty 
you have now got to perform. Won’t you be careful when you 
come to consider your verdict? | Won’t you be careful to see 
that any such bias, if it does exist, has been thoroughly eliminated ? 
Oh, gentlemen, I implore you by all you hold most sacred, dis- 
miss from your mind any such feeling as that. I do entreat you 
most earnestly, by the oath you have sworn, not to approach this 
question as one you have already determined, but to approach it 
remembering that it is for those who appear on behalf of the 
prosecution to establish their case. It is the great law of this 
land that every man is held to be innocent until he is proved 
to be guilty. People have not been content with animadverting 
upon this case alone. There is not a fact in the life of this man 
they have not raked up. His life may have been a wicked one. 
But, gentlemen, you must remember that if his life has been a 
wicked one, he, of all others, is least fitted to be hurried into the 
presence of his God, where he will be judged again. 

PrisoneR—I am not fit to die. 

Mr. Lockwoop—My learned friend, Mr. Campbell Foster, in 
speaking of the manner in which I have conducted this defence, 
had called what I have done a piece of acting. He told you 
that what I had attempted was a solemn farce. That in cross- 
examining Mrs. Dyson I was only carrying out that which in his 
opinion was a mere piece of acting, which he was clever enough 
to see through. Gentlemen, I grant my learned friend great credit. 
Experience and age always bring their fruits. But was my 
learned friend acting? Was it a solemn piece of acting on his 
part when he told you that he did not know what defence was 
going to be set up? I was asking myself whether my learned 
friend was not acting when in an almost jocular tone—the tone 
least fitted for such a case as this—he put it to you, that per- 
haps I was going to set before you a case that, if this man had 
carried on an intrigue with that woman, it gave him the right 
to shoot her husband! I give my learned friend every credit 
for knowing what the defence is. But, gentlemen, you know per- 
fectly well that that was never the defence I am going to put 
before you on behalf of this man. I had to attack the credit of 
Mrs. Dyson, and I did not hesitate to do it. I don’t think, gentle- 
men, that you would have considered that I had done my duty in 
this case if I had not tested to the best of my ability the credibility 
of that woman, seeing she is the only witness who spoke to the actual 
transaction itself. When you have got one witness standing alone, 
speaking as to a transaction, it surely becomes a material thing 
to inquire as to how far you may rely upon her testimony. For 
that purpose, and for that purpose alone, I asked those ques- 
tions which went to the credibility of Mrs. Dyson. Gentlemen, 

154 


The Second Trial. 


Mr Lockwood 


you have had the opportunity of hearing Mrs. Dyson give her evi- 
dence, and I will now point out to you what, in the evidence of 
Mrs. Dyson, entitles me to ask you to regard the evidence of that 
woman with very great suspicion. First of all, according to her 
story as first told—and, gentlemen, she has had every opportunity 
of telling her story, being examined by my learned friend on 
behalf of the Crown—she told him that she had known the prisoner 
for a year or ten months, from the 29th November, 1876. _ Now, 
gentlemen, that was the date which was fixed. She fixed it for her- 
self. She knew she was going to be asked that question. She was 
prepared with an answer; she had been examined before; she had 
given the same answer ; since the time when she was first examined 
she had had every opportunity of verifying that answer. She 
must have known perfectly well when she gave that answer to-day 
that, if she was speaking the truth, this was the exact time during 
which she had known this man. In the course of my cross- 
examination I put it to her as to when it was her husband first 
became dissatisfied with the conduct of the prisoner. In answer 
to that question she said she thought it was in the spring of 
1876. Now, gentlemen, it is important for me to show that after 
the time her husband had become dissatisfied she was keeping up a 
communication with this man. Because, you know, she denied that 
this quarrel between her husband and this man was on account of 
herself. I am most anxious to find out as to whether, after that 
dissatisfaction had been expressed by the husband, she was still 
continuing to carry on friendly intercourse with the prisoner at the 
bar. Then the photograph is produced. Did you see that photo- 
graph? She says that it was taken in the Summer Fair. That was 
her first answer. Then that must have been the Summer Fair of 
1876. The answer to the question before had been, ‘‘ My husband 
became dissatisfied with the prisoner in the spring of 1876.’’ Mrs. 
Dyson was quick enough to see that it would not do for her to 
acknowledge to-day that she was actually photographed with this 
man in June, 1876, after the time that her husband had fallen 
out with him and was dissatisfied with his conduct. She at once 
began to shuffle—first of all by endeavouring to put that photo- 
graph back to the Summer Fair of ’75. That would not do. 
She tried, but it could not be done, because we have her fixed to 
this time, that her acquaintance with this man only went back 
to the November, 1875. So that would not do. Something was 
said about her having put it at a year and ten months, but my 
lord soon corrected that. I don’t know from whom that suggestion 
came, for she said distinctly that it was a year or ten months. 
I took the trouble to impress upon you the importance of that 
answer. It was that answer I took the trouble to impress upon 
you, for it was a question I was bound to put. We started with 
this fact proved, that in the Summer Fair of 1876 she was going 
about with this man, and she was being photographed with him. 
155 


Charles Peace. 


Mr Lockwood 


Gentlemen, I understood it so; I do not know whether you did or , 
not. Perhaps in speaking of these matters one’s mind is apt 
to be influenced by the evidence given on former occasions, be- 
cause on hearing the evidence of a former time the impression was 
on my mind that she said she was in the Fair with the prisoner, 
but it was in company with other people, and her husband was 
there. Then she was asked as to whether she had not on a certain 
day been in a music hall or public-house with the prisoner—‘* Were 
you not there with him?—Yes.’’ First I think she denied it, and 
she afterwards said that some one was with her. Whom? Two 
children, one of the age of three and the other of the age of 
five. They were with her; her husband was not there. The day 
she went to the Fair these children were with her. Where was her 
husband? He did not go into the Fair until the evening. So that 
we have it that she was alone in Sheffield Fair with the prisoner, 
except for two young children, atid was photographed on that day 
with him on the Fair ground. Now, gentlemen, my learned friend 
has suggested that certain people have been called, and been paid a 
small sum of money to present themselves before Mrs. Dyson when 
she was in the witness-box, in order to impress you with the idea 
that Mrs. Dyson was saying what was not true. Gentlemen, let 
me just explain to you the position I am placed in with regard 
to the contradiction of Mrs. Dyson. Anything that went to the 
credit of a witness no doubt is not capable of contradiction. If 
Mrs. Dyson had denied that she had been to a public-house with 
this man I could not contradict her. If Mrs. Dyson had even 
denied that she had ever been to the Sheffield Fair for the pur- 
pose of being photographed with this man I could not have contra- 
dicted. The question is not relative to the issue, and I am bound 
by the answer. But I will ask you to carry your recollection back 
to the time when Mrs. Dyson was in the box, particularly when I 
called those persons before her, as to whether she did not flinch 
from them as I put them before her. I ask you to carry back your 
recollection when I called upon her to say whether or not she would 
swear that she had not been to a certain place with this man— 
this woman who had been so bold up to that moment, when con- 
fronted by people who knew and could say that she was lying if 
she denied it—then she commenced to make such answers as ‘‘ Not 
to my knowledge.’’ ‘‘ Will you swear it?’’—‘‘ Not to my know- 
ledge.’’ Were those witnesses people who had no effect upon the 
trial? The witnesses who, his learned friend said, had been pur- 
chased at a paltry sum to come and act a lie! If my learned friend 
did not realise the influence of these witnesses he was sorry for 
him! Was that what his learned friend called a solemn piece 
of acting on his part? Did that cross-examination make any im- 
pression on their minds as to the credibility of this woman? 
And then I had to press her in a way that is distasteful to any 
man to have to take with a woman, for I had almost to attack her 
156 


The Second Trial. 


Mr Lockwood 


in a way; then I succeeded. Do you remember one question I 
put to her—about the last one I put to her—when she swore that 
_ she did not see this man from July to October, 1876? They would re- 
member how she had sworn over and over again to that. Yet when 
I put the question whether she could swear that this man did 
not follow her into the Stag Inn on the 28th of November, what 
did she say? Why did she not at once give an indignant denial 


and say, ‘‘ No, because I never saw him from July, 1876, to 
November ’?? Looking at me, she said, ‘‘ I can almost swear that 
he did not.’ Do you remember that? If that man had come 


in with her that night, then she felt she could not swear that he 
had not. The question took her by surprise, startled her, and she 
would not go to the full length of a denial upon oath. Then 
she recollected herself, and, remembering that this was one of those 
things upon which she could not be contradicted, because it 
went only to her credibility, she made up for her temporary lack 
of presence of mind. After a moment’s thought, she said she would 
swear it; and this woman, who two minutes before had said she 
could almost swear it, was now ready to swear it on her solemn 
oath. You will bear in mind the nature of her answers when 
you come to consider the credibility of this witness. I will en- 
deavour to show you, to the best of my poor ability, the im- 
portant bearing this evidence has upon it. There is no other 
soul to come and speak to what occurred in that passage but 
that woman and that man (pointing to the prisoner). I think 
my learned friend actually asked me why I did not call witnesses 
as to that part of the case. I may be doing him an injustice, 
but I say that to the best of my recollection my learned friend put 
that question to me through you. The absurdity of such a pro- 
position removes it from the necessity of being replied to. Now, 
gentlemen, I will tell you why I say that I am entitled to ask 
you to think deeply of this. I claim your verdict because you have 
to depend entirely upon that woman’s evidence with regard to the 
fact I am going to call your attention to—her evidence, which is 
not only uncorroborated, but is actually contradicted in some 
points material to the case. You heard my cross-examination, and 
no doubt saw what was my defence. A struggle had taken place. 
In the course of that struggle the weapon might have been dis- 
charged for the purpose of frightening Dyson. It should be re- 
membered as a point in the prisoner’s favour that the bullet was 
found high up in the wall; a shot fired at a man 6 feet high would 
hardly have been found there if it had not been fired for the 
purpose of frightening him. Then this big man Dyson pursued 
the prisoner for the purpose of seizing, and, as I suggest now to 
you, actually did seize him. A struggle had taken place; in the 
course of it the revolver, which was in the hand of this man, 
might have gone off. It might easily have done so, and had death 
been so caused that clearly was not murder. I put this question 
157 


Charles Peace. 


Mr Lockwood 


to Mrs. Dyson in cross-examination. I asked her particularly 
whether she could swear that her husband did not attempt to get 
hold of the man Peace. I cross-examined her somewhat lengthily 
with regard to that part of the case, and eventually she admitted 
that she could not swear that her husband did not attempt to get 
hold of the man. I asked her whether on a previous occasion 
she did not swear, or decline to swear, that her husband did not 
actually get hold of the man, but I could only get from her 
that answer which came from her over and over again, ‘“ Not 
to my knowledge.’’ In your consideration of this matter you must 
bear this in mind, and must remember it most indulgently on 
behalf of the prisoner at the bar. I was compelled to cross- 
examine her to a length which my learned friend has described 
as tedious. 

Gentlemen, my case is this. -When the first shot was fired with 
the intention of frightening him, Mr. Dyson must have been on 
the upper side of the archway. But he was not found there. 
He was lying in the little square yard at the end of the passage, 
and his head was towards Ecclesall Road and his feet towards the 
passage. He must have advanced after the first shot was fired. 
I decline to believe that Mrs. Dyson could possibly have seen 
what took place. She was behind her husband, and he was a tall 
man, correspondingly broad, and standing in a narrow passage. 
Yet she swore in a most unhesitating manner as to everything 
that took place, and she did so because she knew she could not 
be contradicted. But I maintain that the evidence which has 
been given tended strongly to corroborate the claim which I now 
make, that after the first shot was fired Dyson went out of the 
archway for the purpose of wresting the revolver from the prisoner. 
You will remember the direct contradiction as to the position of 
the body of the deceased man, and I would remind you that you 
must not take a presumption against the man at the bar. You 
must not suppose that he was guilty. The medical evidence, I 
maintain, does not help you a bit. Mr. Harrison said that an 
abrasion could not be caused by a blow with a fist or a ring. 
But I confidently leave that question with you. It was not a 
question of medical skill or of scientific opinion; it is a question 
for you as men of common sense to say whether the abrasion could 
have been caused by a blow on the face. The prosecution has not 
a tittle of evidence on which to test the theory that this abrasion 
was caused by a fall against the wall. They have gone out of their 
way to put before you a theory that would account for it, feeling 
the necessity of doing away with the force of that part of the 
evidence. I maintain, however, that before the weapon was used 
a second time there was a struggle of some kind between the 
deceased and the prisoner, and that before that an attempt had 
been made to seize him—and that woman could not contradict it. 
That attempt was successful, but not altogether, for the deceased 

158 


The Second Trial. 


Mr Lockwood 


received a blow in the face, which hit him on the chin, grazing 
the skin, and on the nose. There was strong corroborative evidence 
of this, and, in addition, you have to remember the position in 
which the body was found. You must remember that that woman 
told you that when the deceased was struck he fell on his back 
with his head towards the top of the passage and his feet towards 
Ecclesall Road. How could they reconcile that with Wilson’s state- 
ment that his head was towards Ecclesall Road? That was a 
strong reason for the need of corroborative evidence with regard to 
what actually did happen that night. 

I will now deal with the letters, which my learned friend 
considers are of such little importance in the case as to decline to 
make them part of the case for the prosecution. Not only that, 
but he rejected a piece of testimony which he mentioned in open- 
ing the case. He has read that evidence—the card—to you, and 
has asked Mrs. Dyson if it was not in the handwriting of her 
husband. If that card could have been put in without his being 
compelled to put in the letters, he would have had it in evidence. 
But rather than let you see the contents of these letters, rather 
than let you know what had been written, he had forfeited the 
evidence he might have put in. Who is throwing dust in your 
eyes? Was not the prosecution doing—as they always did— 
claiming the proud privilege of saying it was not their duty to 
ask you—the jury—to convict unless all the facts are before 
you which tend one way or the other to illustrate the case? Rather 
than let you know what these letters contain, my learned frieud, 
in his wise discretion, refused to put them in on behalf of the 
unfortunate man in the dock, who himself could not do so. You 
will have to consider your verdict without knowing the contents 
of the letters, and you will surely feel that the prosecution must 
have the strongest possible motives for preventing their being 
known. Will that fact have no weight in your deliberations? 
Will you not ask each other why the prosecution so strongly 
objected to produce those letters? The prosecution must have 
some strong reason for not daring to put in those letters, and 
you must look with even more suspicion upon the woman who had 
been charged this day with writing them. Will this have no 
effect upon you as to the credibility of Mrs. Dyson? Will it not 
influence you when you consider, not whether it was a shot that 
killed Mr. Dyson, but how that shot was discharged? There was 
not a shadow of doubt that the shot killed the man; but there 
was not much in the evidence, except what I have called your atten- 
tion to, that combated the contention of the prosecution. If 
Mrs. Dyson was correct, her husband was walking straight down 
the passage when he was faced by the prisoner. Why, if the 
weapon had been discharged then, what would have been the 
result? A man firing straight at Mr. Dyson could never have 
hit him on the side of the temple. The bullet would have found 

: 159 


Charles Peace. 


Mr Lockwood 


its way through the front of his head. But the medical man 
proved that it had entered on the left side of the temple and 
turned down into the brain. Does that look as if the prisoner 
fired at Mr. Dyson as he was calmly and slowly coming down the 
passage, or did it look as if the pistol had been discharged during 
a struggle—when the prisoner’s hand was aloft and an attempt 
was being made to wrest the weapon from his grasp? You have 
evidence to show that there was such a struggle. You must ask 
yourselves if Mrs. Dyson is a woman upon whose evidence you 
would risk a man’s life. I infer that Mrs. Dyson saw Peace from 
the bedroom window on that night and slipped downstairs to meet 
him. Her husband was reading in the room and did not notice 
anything until he heard the door close after her. He had been 
jealous before. He now went out to see what had become of his 
wife. Mrs. Gregory saw him stahding at his door; that, I main- 
tain, is not the action of a man who was called out by his wife’s 
scream for help. He would not have stood at his door, nor would 
he—as Mrs. Dyson said—have walked down the passage. Next, 
with regard to the witness Brassington. I contend that, as he 
took so little notice of the man with whom he spoke, and was so 
uncertain as to dates, that his evidence is worthless. Then a 
witness was called who, Mr. Campbell Foster stated, would identify 
the prisoner as the man who ran away from the place, but this 
witness did nothing of the kind. He stated that he could not 
identify the man, though he would not say that the prisoner was 
not the man who was there. ‘I feel bound to refer to this specimen 
of Mr Campbell Foster’s unfair treatment. 

The prisoner is a wild and reckless man, but statements have 
been made about him which are unkindly untrue. It is quite 
possible for a man of his temperament to use threats under the 
influence of passion which he did not seriously intend to carry out. 

I trust you will seriously. and solemnly weigh all the considera- 
tions I have brought before you and that you will not return your 
verdict without having carefully paid your best attention to every 
detail. It was not that I felt myself uncertain that you would 
retire to consider your verdict with as firm a resolve as men 
could have to do what was right and just in discharging so painful 
a duty, but I venture to call your attention to the stress that has 
been laid upon the language the prisoner was said to have used. 
I beg you to remember that you have to pay attention to the 
evidence only, and not to consider anything you have heard 
outside. 

I have endeavoured to show you that the evidence of Mrs. 
Dyson, tainted in many a particular, cannot be looked upon but 
with the gravest suspicion, and wags not sufficient upon which 
to forfeit a man’s existence. I do not care what the prisoner’s 
life has been; I ask you to spare it because—as I have said—the 
worse his life has been the less fitted is he to die now. (The 

160 


The Second Trial. 


Mr Lockwood 


prisoner, turning up his eyes, ‘‘I am not fit to die.’’) But I 
base my claim to a verdict in the prisoner’s favour on stronger 
grounds than that; that the prosecution has failed by means of 
satisfactory and reliable evidence to bring the charge home to 
the prisoner. 

We are standing in a Court of justice, and, although mercy 
is the handmaid of justice, I do not appeal to her. I do ask 
you most solemnly to consider before you give your verdict 
whether on the uncorroborated evidence of that woman you are 
going to return the verdict which the prosecution has asked you 
for. 

Gentlemen, whatever that verdict may be, I am certain it 
will have your calm consideration, and it is for your own sakes 
alone that I do again and again implore you to approach that 
contemplation and consideration with all the calmness in. your 
power, in order that you may not at any future time have to 
reproach yourselves with having given a verdict which was not 
consistent with the laws of the country. 


Charge to the Jury. 


Mr. Justice Lopes—I am certain that no observations are 
necessary from me in order to intensify the appreciation which 
you have of this momentous issue now submitted to you. I 
am certain you will approach that issue, which is of vital import- 
ance to the prisoner, with that impartiality which is pre-eminently 
the characteristic of Englishmen and of an English jury. I 
earnestly implore you to discard from your minds everything 
you may have heard or read about the case before you came into 
Court, and to decide other questions you are called upon to deter- 
mine upon the known testimony of the witnesses who have given 
their evidence before you to-day. Before proceeding to deal with 
that evidence, I will endeavour, as clearly and shortly as I can, 
to explain the law as it bears upon this case, because it is only 
by understanding the law that you can properly appreciate the 
evidence. Murder ig the killing of another with ‘‘ malice afore- 
thought ’’—that is, intentionally. In every murder the law pre- 
sumes malice. Malice is only presumed, and it is open to the 
party charged to rebut that presumption in several ways, amongst 
others by showing that the homicide amounts to manslaughter 
only. Homicide that would be murder may be reduced to man- 
slaughter upon provocation, provided that the circumstances of the 
case lead to the conclusion that the act done was not the result 
of cool, deliberate purpose and previous malignity of heart, but 
was imputable to the impulse of the moment or a frenzy of passion. 
But no slight provocation would be sufficient to reduce that which 
would be murder to manslaughter, when a deadly weapon was 

M 161 


Charles Peace. 


Mr Justice Lopes 


used, and, further, no provocation would reduce that which would 
be murder to manslaughter if express malice was proved. That 
is to say, if a preconceived ill-will by the party charged is proved 
to exist against the deceased person, then the plea of provocation 
fails altogether, because then the suggestion that the blow was 
struck in the heat of the moment is at an end and the act becomes 
attributable to malice aforethought. You will see, therefore, 
that a homicide which would be murder may be reduced to man- 
slaughter in certain circumstances. For instance, if there was 
an angry scuffle between two persons, and in the course of the 
scuffle a deadly weapon—such as a pistol—went off accidentally 
and killed one of them, that would not be murder but man- 
slaughter. That, as I understood, was the defence which had 
been so ably made for the prisoner by Mr. Lockwood. It is con- 
tended that you must not belieye Mrs. Dyson, that she is not a 
reliable witness, and that what really occurred was that the first 
shot was fired simply to frighten either Mr. or Mrs. Dyson; that 
then a scuffle ensued between Mr. Dyson and the prisoner; and 
that in the course of this scuffle the pistol which the prisoner was 
carrying accidentally went off and thus accidentally caused the 
death of Mr. Dyson. Now, that, of course, presumes that you 
disbelieve Mrs. Dyson, because there can be no question that, if 
you accept her evidence as true, the theory of the defence—and 
I am bound to say it is very much a theory with but little, if any, 
evidence in support of it—falls to the ground. 

As regards Mrs. Dyson, it is necessary that you should care- 
fully consider and carefully examine her evidence. It was said 
by the counsel for the prisoner that they must discredit Mrs. 
Dyson’s evidence altogether ; that she had on several occasions con- 
tradicted herself, and had answered some of the questions with so 
much hesitation that she was unworthy of belief. She had been 
cross-examined at very considerable length—I do not say at too 
great length—regarding a supposed intimacy between her and the 
prisoner at the bar. I do not know what feeling you may enter- 
tain, as to any familiarity—I do not say improper familiarity— 
between Mrs. Dyson and the prisoner. If such was the case, it 
might be said on the one hand that something existed which would 
supply a motive for that which afterwards happened; and the sug- 
gestion was that, having been on those familiar terms with the 
prisoner, she afterwards conceived a grievous dislike and hate 
towards him, and that she now came into Court to endeavour by 
perjured evidence, or by withholding evidence of circumstances that 
had taken place, to make the case against the prisoner worse than 
it really was. But it is my duty to remind you that the case does 
not rest on her evidence alone. There is a vast amount of testi- 
mony besides hers which you may or may not think is corroborative 
of the evidence which she has given. It is not denied that the 
prisoner was there; that shots were fired. I need not remind you 

162 


The Second Trial. 


Mr Justice Lopes 


that the most important ingredient in the defence is the accidental 
discharge of the pistol. What is the evidence of that? There is 
none. It is an absolute inference; an absolute surmise. Of course, 
the learned counsel for the prisoner was entitled to say that there 
could be no witnesses of the accidental discharge of the pistol, 
because Mrs. Dyson and the prisoner were the only persons who 
saw what actually took place. As the accidental discharge of the 
pistol was so important an ingredient in the case, I will, by and by, 
ask you to take the pistol in your hands and try the trigger of 
it, so that you can form your own opinion as to whether it was a 
pistol likely to go off accidentally or not.* Of course, the pistol 
produced might not have been the pistol used at Banner Cross; 
I am bound to remind you of that. But, on the other hand, it had 
been sworn by the gunsmith that the bullet which came out of the 
revolver in November, 1876, bore marks upon it such as would 
have been produced had it come from the revolver taken from the 
prisoner in October of last year. 

(Mr. Justice Lopes then read much of the examination of 
Mrs. Dyson.) 

Referring to the threats used in July, 1876, he said it was a 
fair comment to make on this part of the case that because the 
prisoner entertained an angry feeling at a certain time, that was no 
reason why he should entertain the same feeling some months 
afterwards. That certainly was a fair comment to make. But 
it is for you to say whether it was not a very significant thing 
when they found that at that time—in July, 1876—the prisoner 
threatened to blow out the brains not only of Mrs. Dyson, but 
of her husband as well. I must remind you that the evidence 
as to the threats in July does not consist of the uncorroborated 
testimony of Mrs. Dyson, but that her statement was supported 
by three witnesses, who gave, though not in the same words, sub- 
stantially the same meaning of the conversation which took place 
when the threats were used. 

In reference to what took place when Mr. Dyson was shot, if 
Mrs. Dyson is to be believed, there was no struggle whatever—in 
point of fact, her evidence clearly proved that there was no struggle 
or scuffle. That being so, the defence set up for the prisoner had 
no foundation. The question for you to decide is, do you believe 
her? The object of the cross-examination of Mrs. Dyson was to 
discredit her evidence. The learned counsel was perfectly justified 
in that course; in fact, he would not have done his duty had he 
not acted as he had done. But it was the law of evidence that, 
although any question within reason might be put to witnesses 
for the purpose of testing their credit, their answers must not be 
contradicted by other witnesses, unless the answers they gave were 


* Oblivious of the fact that more than two years having elapsed, the 
condition of the weapon might be entirely different now to what it was then/ 


163 


Charles Peace. 


Mr Justice Lopes 


relevant to the issue which was being tried.* The learned counsel 
was bound to test Mrs. Dyson; he was also bound by her answers. 
In the course of this cross-examination much had been said about 
some notes and letters found in a field near Mr. Dyson’s house, 
but they had not been put in by the counsel for the prosecution 
because they could not actually be traced to the prisoner, and they 
could not be put in by the counsel for the prisoner because they 
were irrelevant.+ You must estimate for yourselves what was the 
value of these documents. { 

The case now passes from me to you. You have a most re- 
sponsible duty to discharge. You are bound to look carefully into 
the whole of the evidence; if you can conscientiously give the 
prisoner the benefit of any doubt you ought to give it to him. On 
the other hand, if the evidence is such as to satisfy you that the 
prisoner did commit this murder, and that there was no solid 
ground on which the defence could rest, then you must recollect 
that you owe a duty to the community at large, and must also 
recollect. the duty you have incurred by the oath you have taken. 

The jury retired at 7.13 p.m., returning into Court at 7.25 

.m. 
4 Having answered to their names, 

The CuerK or ARRAIGNS—Are you agreed upon your verdict? 
Do you find the prisoner at the bar guilty or not guilty? 

The Foreman or THE JuRY—Guilty. 

The Currk or Arraians, addressing the prisoner—Charles 
Peace, you have been indicted and convicted of wilful murder. 
Have you anything to say why the Court should not pass sentence 
according to law? 

The Prisoner, very faintly—It’s no use saying anything. 

Mr. Justice Loprs—Charles Peace, after a most patient trial, 
and after every argument has been urged by your learned counsel 
on your behalf which ingenuity could suggest, you have been found 
guilty of the murder of Arthur Dyson by a jury of your country- 
men. It is not my duty, still less is it my desire, to aggravate 
your feelings at this moment by a recapitulation of any portion of 
the details of what, I fear, I can only call your criminal career. 
I implore you during the short time that may remain you to live 
to prepare for eternity. I pass upon you that sentence, the only 
sentence, which the law permits in a case of this kind. That 
sentence is that you be taken from this place to the place whence 
you came, and thence to a place of execution, and that you be 


* Namely, the guilt or innocence of Peace. 


+ Surely the latter consideration only bears any weight. There was 
ample evidence that Peace had a packet of letters in his possession on 
the evening of the murder. Who else but he could have dropped that card 
on that night in that place? 


+ Considering how much of them had been read in public again and 
again, all this seems rather farcical. 


164 


The Second Trial. 


Mr Justice Lopes 


there hanged by the neck until you are dead, and that your body 
be afterwards buried in the precincts of the gaol wherein you were 
last confined before the execution of this judgment upon you. And 
may the Lord have mercy upon your soul. 

The CuapLarin—Amen. 


It is said that Peace heard the verdict and his sentence 
phlegmatically ; it is said that he did just the opposite; does it 
matter? That he was guilty there can be no doubt. 


XVIII. 


That Peace did slay Arthur Dyson, and that the act was 
murder, cannot be questioned. None the less it is interesting to 
read and mark the account which the rogue himself gave of his 
deed. 

Reference has already been made to the confession which he 
delivered to Mr. Littlewood while he was awaiting execution, 
that portion of it referring to the Habron case having been quoted ; 
the remainder pertains here. 

After having obtained an assurance that his statements would 
be received with credence, Peace went along thus :—* 


“* Now, Mr. Littlewood, about the Banner Cross murder. I 
want first to say solemnly to you, in the sight of these men, and 
in the hearing of God, that several witnesses grossly perjured them- 
selves, but I freely forgive them (naming two in particular), and 
I hope to meet them in heaven. You may ask me what their per- 
jury was. It was this—They swore that they heard me threaten 
Mrs. Dyson; that was a lie. I call God to witness that I never 
threatened Mrs. Dyson. Mrs. Dyson and I were on such intimate 
terms that it would not have suited my purpose to have done so.”’ 
(Here the convict made use of language implying familiarities with 
Mrs. Dyson—language which cannot be published.) Then Peace 
suddenly changed the subject to the Whalley Range murder. “. . . 
I came to Sheffield the morning after the (Habron) trial, and I 
went to Banner Cross in the evening. Now, about that. There is a 
low wall at the back of the house where the Dysons lived, which is 
one of the houses in the terrace called Banner Cross Terrace. My 
object was to see Mrs. Dyson. I stood on the low wall at the back of 
the house. I knew it very well, both front and back, and that 
the bedroom was to the back. While I was standing I noticed a 
light moving about in the bedroom. The blind was up, and I could 
see Mrs. Dyson carrying a candle and moving about the room. She 


* Manchester Evening Mail, 25th February, 1879. 
165 


Charles Peace. 


was putting her boy to bed. I watched her for some time. I 
cracked my finger and gave a low whistle to attract Mrs. Dyson’s 
attention, as I had often done before at other places. Mrs. Dyson 
came downstairs. She knew the signal, and in response to it 
she came out and passed into the closet. I then got down off the 
wall and followed her there. What did I want there? I went 
simply to beg her to get her husband to withdraw the warrant 
which was out against me. I was tired of being hunted about. If 
I had got that warrant withdrawn I should have gone away again. 
Mrs. Dyson became very noisy, and used fearful language and 
threats against me, and I got angry. I pulled out my revolver, 
and held it in her face, and said, ‘ Now, you be careful what 
you are saying to me. You know me of old, and know what I 
can do. Iam not a man to be talked to in that way.’ She did not 
heed what I said, but continued her abuse and threats, and while 
this was going on Mr. Dyson hastily made his appearance. As 
soon as I saw him I immediately started down the passage which 
leads to the main road. Before I could do so, Mr. Dyson seized 
me. I struggled to get past him. I said, ‘ Stand back, and let 
me go,’ but he did not, and I then fired one barrel of my revolver 
wide at him to frighten him. I assure you I purposely fired wide. 
I could have shot him dead at the first shot had I cared to do 
so, I was so near to him. Mr. Dyson kept his hold of me, and 
we struggled together, and he seemed likely to get the better of me. 
He had got hold of the arm to which I had strapped my revolver, 
and then I knew I had not a moment to spare. I made a desperate 
effort, wrenched the arm from him, and fired again. It was a life- 
and-death struggle, sir ; but even then I did not intend to shoot Mr. 
Dyson. My blood was up, and, having fired one shot, I knew if 
I was captured it would mean transportation for life. That made 
me more determined to get off. I fired again, as I told you, but 
with no intention of killing him. I saw Mr. Dyson fall; I did 
not know where he was hit, nor that his wound was one which 
would prove fatal. All that was in my head at that time was to 
get away, and if we had not struggled I should have got away 
without this. Whatever was sworn to at the trial, I tell you we 
had a scuffle, and for a time Dyson had the best of it. With my 
revolver I could have shot him dead at the first, but I did not 
do so, and when I fired the second time I could not calculate my 
aim owing to the excitement. If I could have done so, I should 
simply have disabled him and got away. After Dyson fell, I 
rushed into the middle of the road, and stood there for some 
moments. I hesitated as to what I should do. I felt disposed at 
first to go back and help Dyson up, not thinking that he was 
wounded fatally; but people began to gather. I was greatly 
agitated, and I decided on escape. I jumped over the wall on 
the other side of the road, and got away. As I did so the packet 
of letters fell from my pocket. I call God to witness, sir, I did 
166 


Charles Peace. 


not kill Mr. Dyson intentionally, and I most solemnly swear that in 
shooting at him I did not intend to murder him. If any one thinks 
for a moment, he will see that I never intended murder when 
I went to Banner Cross. If I had meant to murder Mr. and Mrs. 
Dyson, or either of them, I knew the place well enough. All I 
had got to do was to go to the door, walk in, and shoot them both 
as they were sitting; and do you think, sir, that if I had gone 
there to murder Dyson I should have allowed myself to be seen 
by so many people? Of course, I do not deny that I took Mr. 
Dyson’s life, as it turned out, but I did not go there with the 
intention of doing it. It was as unintentional a thing as ever 
was done, and it would not have been done if I had not been 
interrupted in trying to get Mrs. Dyson to induce her husband 
to withdraw the warrant, and if Mr. Dyson had not been so deter- 
mined to get me into trouble and prevent my getting away.” 


Peace repeated again and again that both at Manchester and 
at Sheffield the struggle to get away was the cause of his messing his 
aim. 

He closed the interview by asking Mr. Littlewood to hear him 
pray. For twenty minutes he poured out fervent petitions for 
mercy, praying especially for Dyson and Cock, the men whom he 
had killed, but not murdered. 

This and Peace’s other admissions amount to no more than 
that he did shoot Cock and Dyson, did shoot at Robinson, but 
always under the compulsion of self-defence. In brief, that he was 
an unruly brute. 


XIX. 


The days following his trial were spent by Peace in preaching 
and prayer, without fasting. He annoyed his relatives and others 
by his admonitions towards a godly life. 


Here is an epistle— 

Armley, Feb. 6th, 1879. 

My dear wife and children. 

I got your letter A minnit ago I hope that you will all keep your 
Spirits up as well as you can trought your grate trouble as well as you 
can & Pray to God to have mercy upon My Poor Soul I think that I shall 
have to dei in A fortnight from now. . . . I conclude with best 
Love to you all as Long as I do Live . . . I am yet verey ill. 


The next day this amazing performance— 


H.M. Prison, Leeds, 7th February, 1879. 


My dear Son-in-law,—I hope this lettr will find you as well it can 
do i am Still very weak and ili but a little better than i have been. You 
167 


Charles Peace. 


will know well that i have been perged (perjured) against by three persons 
in Darnall what I wish to say to you is this do not make any attempt to 
avenge the wrong that was done to me by Jim and his wife and Mrs. Pad- 
more, for under my Present feelings i feel no imbetterness against no 
Person in this world, for if i must be forgiven i must forgive. So, My 
Dear Son, do you Not Commit yourself in either thought, word, or deed 
against any of these Persons, but in Place of being in their Company 
do all you Can to avoid them, and this will keep you from doing anything 
at each other that will be offencive. I do Send you a form of Prayer that 
I Compiled Myself before i left Pen ton vile Prison. 

O Lord, turn not Thy face from me, but have mercy. Good Lord, 
have mercy on me. _ I need not to Confess my life to thee, for thow knows 
what i have been and what i am So O My Blessed Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ, have mercy upon me, and wash and cleanse me from all my 
Sins and Make Me Clean, and save “me from the danger of sin and from 
the Power of Hell. O God do not despise me nor Cast me from thee, but 
have mercy Good Lord have mercy upon me, and make me what thou 
would have me to be, to enter into the Kingdom of heaven, and then 
receive my Poor Soul at the last for Jesus Christ his Sake. Amen. ‘‘ The 
Lord have mercy upon me, Christ have mercy upon me. Amen.” 


My Dear Son, 

I have sent you this Prayer to Show you all the State of Mind 
that i do now feel myself to be in i do not feel no trouble so great as i 
do my Sinful life agains my God i begin to feel that my God will have 
mercy upon me and forgive me all my Sins and receive my Poor Soul 
into the Kingdom of heaven i send my best love, thanks and Good wishes 
to all friends that Came up on my trial to Speak for me i do want to see 
all my family as often as i can do before i die you Can See me any week 
day but you will have to bring this letter with you and go to the Leeds 
Town Hall and enquire for Mr John Thornton magistrates clerk and he 
will give you every information yo require to see me you cannot see me 
without an order from him So to Save time and trouble go and see him 
before you Come to the Prison. 


I send my Dearest love to my Dear, dear Wife and all of you my 
loving children. 


I am 
Your Wretched Husband and Father, 


CHARLES PRAOCE. 


Then on the 19th February, the confession to Mr. Littlewood. 
Farewell interviews with various members of his family; but 
not with ‘“‘ Mrs. Thompson,’’ who was not allowed to see him; pos- 
sibly Peace would have said to her things unkind, especially if he 
had been shown the following letter. She put in her claim for the 
reward of £100 :— 
168 


Charles Peace. 


March 11th, 1879. 


To Mr. Cross 
Home Sect. 
Whitehall 
London 
Sir 


I hereby beg to make formal application for the reward 1 Hundred 
pounds offered on the conviction of Charles F. Peace. the information was 
given by me to inspectors Bonny & Philips of the R devision on Nov 5th 
1878, in the presence of Mr. & Mrs. Brion the treasury have instructed me 
to make this claim to your dept. 
awaiting your favourable consideration 


I am yours 
respectfully 
F Bartey, alias 
S THompson 


P.S. will you very kindly address me by the name of Mrs. Daly as I 
do not want to be known. I have suffered so much. 


Then came the day before. His cell was filled with a sound 
of hammering. Said he—‘‘ That’s a noise that would make some 
men fall on the floor. They are working at my scaffold.’’ Told 
that it was not so, he replied—‘‘ I am not mistaken. I have not 
worked so long with wood without knowing the sound of deals; and 
they don’t have deals inside a prison for anything else than scaf- 
folds.’’ 

To his wife he presented a funeral card he had designed, bear- 


ing the words— 
In 


Memory 
of 
Charles Peace 
who was executed in 
Armley Prison 
Tuesday, February 25th, 
1879. Aged 47. 


For that I don but never 
intended 
XX. 


Peace awakened after his last sleep, which was calm, at six 
o’clock of a cold and frosty morning. He wrote more letters, all 
169 


Charles Peace. 


breathing Christian resignation. Ate a hearty breakfast, but com- 
plained of the quality of the bacon. 

Said he to a warder—‘‘ I wonder if Marwood could cure this 
cough of mine.’’ 

Remaining overlong in the lavatory, he answered to the knock- 
ing of the warder. ‘‘ You’re in a hell of a hurry; are you going 
to be hanged or am 1?”’ 

Then he smoked his clay pipe with sedate satisfaction. 

To Marwood he said, ‘‘ I hope you will not punish me. IL 
hope you’ll do your work quickly,’’ receiving the reply, ‘‘ You shall 
not suffer pain from my hand.’’ To which Peace replied, ‘‘ I hope 
to meet you all in heaven. I am thankful to say my sins are all for- 
given.”’ ° 

Then to the gentlemen of the press, who were present— 

‘* Gentlemen, you reporters, I wish you to notice the few words 
I am going to say. You know that my life has been base and bad. 
I wish you to tell the world what my death is. I ask—what man 
could die as I die if he did not die in the fear of the Lord? Gentle- 
men, tell all my friends that I feel assured that my sins are forgiven 
me, and that I am going to the Kingdom of Heaven, or else to that 
place where people rest till the great judgment day. I have no 
enemies that I feel anything against on earth. I wish that all 
my enemies would do so to me. I wish them well; I wish them 
to come to the Kingdom of Heaven, to die as I die. To one and 
all I say good-bye, and Heaven bless you, and may you come to 
the Kingdom of Heaven at the last. Say my last wishes and my 
last respects are to my dear children and their dear mother. 
I hope that no person will disgrace himself by taunting them or 
jeering them on my account, but will have mercy upon them. 
God bless you, my dear children ; good-bye, and Heaven bless you. 
Amen. Qh, .my Lord God, have mercy upon me! ”’ 

And so—the end. 


170 


APPENDIX A. 


THE LETTERS, &c., ALLEGED TO HAVE BEEN WRITTEN BY MRS. 
DYSON TO CHARLES PEACE. 


[A statement has been made, upon what authority I do not know, that 
Mr. Dyson had seen these letters and had declared them to be forgeries. 
This is scarcely likely to have happened. Peace declared again and again 
that they were genuine.—Ep. ] 


18 
A Visitine Carp, bearing the name ‘‘ Mr. Arthur Dyson.’ On the 
reverse was written—‘‘ Charles Peace is requested not to interfere with my 
family.”’ 
II. : 


ANOTHER VISITING CARD, on which ‘‘ Mr.’’ has been altered to ‘‘ Mrs.”’ 
and these words written—‘‘ After he is going out I wont go if I can help 
it. So see me. Love to Janey.” 


dBi 


On a Canp—‘‘ I will write you a Note when I can, perhaps to-morrow. 
You can give me something as a keepsake if you like, but I don’t want 
to be covetous and take them from your Wife and Daughter. Love to 
alls 


Note.—It has been said that Mrs. Dyson admitted that part of this letter 
was in her handwriting. 


EVe 


“T dont know what train we shall go by for I have a good deal to 
do this morning will see you as soon as I possibly can I think it will be 
easier after you move he wont watch so. The r——g fits the little finger 
many thanks love to Janey I will tell you what I thought of when I 
see you about arranging matters. I think it well. Excuse this scribbling. 
Hello (?)*” 


V. 


Lurrer—‘‘ If you have a note for me send now while he is out, but 
you must not venture for he is watching, and you can’t be too careful. 
hope your foot is better, he went to Sheffield yesterday, but I could not 
see you any where. Were you out? Love to Jane.” 


* Probably ‘‘ Love.” 
173 


Charles Peace. 


VI. 


Lerrsr—‘‘ Saturday Afternoon. I write you these few lines to thank 
you for all your kindness, which I shall never forget, from you and your 
wife. She is a very good one. Does she know you are to give me the 
things or not? How can you keep them concealed? One thing I would 
wish you to do is to frame his mother’s photograph, and send it in with 
my music-book. If you please, do it when he is in. Many thanks for 
your kind advice. I hope I shall benefit by it. I shall try to do right 
by every one if I can, and shall always look upon you as a friend. Good 
bye. I have not much time. Burn this when you have read it.” 


VII. 


WRITTEN ON AN Envetope—‘‘I have just run out of writing paper 
excuse the envelope. Many thanks for my book don’t mind framing the 
picture let him have it without as T have nothing to say in the matter. I 
will thank your wife as soon as I have a chance to see her for her kind 
present tell her so with my love. I was very sorry to hear your quarling, 
hope it is all settled now and having to hear the readings you should be 
quiet. You have a good wife be kind to her. This was written yesterday 
but could not see you.’’ 


VIII. 


AN ENVELOPE CONTAINING A CENT PrEcE. 


IX. 


An Envenorn, addressed—‘‘ C. Peace.’’ 


X. 


AN ENVELOPE, addressed—‘‘ C. Peace.’’ 


XI. 


On a Sur or Parer—‘‘ He wont say when he is going. Not to-day 
anyhow he is not very well. I will write to you when I have a chance 
and put you in the work.”’ 


XI. 


On a Stir or Paper—‘‘ Things are very bad for peple told him every- 
thing. Do keep quiet, and dont let anyone see you. Money send me some.”’ 


XIII. 


Lrtrer—‘‘ How well you never told that man I looked at you out of 
the window. You left me to find out for myself would not put me on 
my guard as I do you. hope you won’t omit again. don’t talk to Willie 
much or give him any half pys don’t be a fool. it looks as if you want 
people to know the way you and —— if you are not more careful we will 
have to say quits I have told you not to say anything until * * * * 

174 


Appendix A. 


Ve 


Letrer—‘‘ Mrs. Norton is raising hell about what I —— can you 
settle it and send me a pint that is—her to let me have a pint he is gone out 
come now for I must have a drink. I love and * * * 


XV. 


Lerrur—‘‘ Dear sir,—Are you at home or not for I carn’t see you. 
I looked for you yesterday when I went to Sheffield but could not see 
you, and don’t like to send if you are not in, because I know Janey have 
not seen you all day; but he has not been out. You are getting very thick 
with old Ned don’t blab anything to him for it will be all over. Never 
speak of me. I will not send this till I know you are at home. Hope you 
are well and don’t fret but I will give you the wink when the coast is 
clear but you must not take notice till I tell you or you will make a mess 
of it because he is always on the look out. Don’t know when he will go 
out again but will sure* tell you. Love to G—— b burn this.” 


XVI. 


On a Stipe or Paper—‘‘ He only went for tobacco and he has not been 
out. I shall tell you when he does. You must not say I am Dr. when I 
am not for I don’t thank you for you form that opinion. I shall go to 
Ireland if you dont be—— I am washing to-day so he wont be out perhaps. 
Get me paper, love.’’ 


XVII. 
On a Suie or PapeR—‘‘ Give it to me up in the garrett but don’t talk 
for fear he is not going only his sister is coming, love to all.” 
XVIII. 


On a Stipe or Papsr—‘‘ Have you got your handkerchief I lost mine 
thanks for this money —— must be careful and not show anything or 
I will let you starve.” 


XIX. 


On a Smatn Hanpsmir—‘‘ I think I will go by nine o’clock now, you 
must not go by train, go by tram because he will go down with me dont 
let him see anything of you. Meet me in the Wicker hope nothing will 
turn up to prevent it. Love to Janey.” 


XX. 


he is out now.”’ 


On a Sure or Parer—‘“ be quick you 


* An Americanism, scarcely likely to be used by Peace. 


+ Next door, over an empty house. : 
175 


Charles Peace. 


XXII. 


On a Sure or Paper—‘‘ If you are not at home Janey will give you 
this do be careful you will get yourself into trouble about the empty house 
~ don’t come until I tell you there is a man over the wall says he will 
give you hell now I tell you this as a friend so as you may be on the look- 


out for your familyes.”’ 


XXII. 


On a Sure or Paper—‘‘ Will you send me a shilling-or two and a drop 
and keep very quiet, be quick.” 


XXIII. 


On A Scrap or Parper—‘‘ Send me a drink. I am nearly dead.” 


XXIV. 


On a Sure or PapeR—‘“‘ he is out now so be quick Fanny as —— let us 
have a look at you.”’ 


Note.—Modern scientific methods would have settled this question of 
the handwriting beyond cavil. 


176 


APPENDIX B. 


Tar Dyson Inquzst.* 


The inquest on the body of Mr. Arthur Dyson, civil engineer, who was 
murdered on the night of Wednesday week by Charles Peace, at Banner 


Cross, Friday, 8th December, 1876, at the Stag Inn, Sharrow Head, before 
Mr. Wightman, coroner. 


KATHERINE Dyson,+ widow of the deceased, said—I live at Banner 
Cross, and am the widow of the deceased, who was a civil engineer. I 
have been married to him ten years. We were married at Cleveland, Ohio. 
I came to England with him three years since, to the best of my recol- 
lection, and we first lived with his mother at Tinsley. We removed from 
there to Highfield about two years ago. We lived there four or five 
months, and from there we removed to Alexandra Road, Healey. From 
there we went to Darnall, and from there to Banner Cross, where we had 
lived six weeks. We went there on 26th October. 

By the Cononrr—Was there any special reason for your leaving Darnall? 
What I want to get at is this—Did you know a man named Peace before 
you left Darnall ?—Yes. 

When did you first get to know him’?—About ten months ago. 

Where at?—At Darnall. 

Was he living there at that time ?—Yes. He moved there from 
Sheffield. 

Did you know him before then?—No, sir; I never saw him before. 

And you were living there when he came to Darnall ?—Yes. 

Did he come to live near you?—Yes, the second door from us. 

Two doors from you?—Yes; no, one door from us. 

The next door?—The next door but one. 

What was his Christian name?—Charles Peace. 

Was Charles Peace an intimate friend of your husband, or how did 
you get to know him?—He just came in as a neighbour. He used to want 
to take the child in to play with him, and we got acquainted in that 
way. 

Was he in the habit of coming to your house ?—Yes. 

Did he come almost daily ?—Yes. 

Perhaps he did come daily?—At one time he did. He used to come 
in, perhaps, at some time of the day. 

Did your husband and Peace become friendly; did they go together ?— 
He wanted my husband to go with him, but he would not. 


*From the Shefield Independent, 9th December, 1876. 

+It is worth while collating this lady’s evidence at this inquest with 
that given by her before the magistrates, see p. 67, and at the Trial, see 
p. 120. 

N 177 


Charles Peace. 


Where to?—To Sheffield. 

Did he want him to go more than once?—Yes. 

Did your husband never consent to go with him?—No, sir. 

Did your husband go into his house, or did Peace come into yours ?— 
He used to come in to see us. But when my husband came to know 
him he never liked to have anything to do with him, because he did not 
like him. 

That was so? Your husband did not like him, and never went to his 
house, did he?—Yes, he had been in. 

How do you know he did not like him?—Because he said Peace was 
not gentlemanly enough for him to take to. 

He said he was not a gentleman ?—Yes. 

When you left Darnall was Peace still living there?—No, he left when 
the summons was issued for him last July. 

What was that about?—For threatening my life. 

That was in July of last year ?—Yes. 

Tell me how it came about that he did threaten your life?—We 
would not have him come into the house; and it annoyed him a good deal 
when we would not speak to him. 

Who caused that, you or your husband ?—Both of us. 

Which of you first proposed it; do you remember?—I cannot exactly 
tell. I think we made up our minds together. 

About July of last year ?—Yes. 

Who told him he must not come?—Mr. Dyson. 

Can you give me any special reason why your husband told him he 
must not come to your house?—Because my husband thought he was a 
man of bad reputation; at least he had heard so. 

About July of last year your husband told him he was not to come to 
your house any more, did he?—Yes, not to interfere with him or his 
family. 

Mr. Dyson, brother of the deceased—Mr. Coroner, she says July of 
last year; she means July of this year. 

By the Coronsr—About July last your husband told him not to come to 
your house, and not to interfere with him or his family ?—Yes. 

Had there been any quarrel with him then?—No. 

Just look at that card, if you please. Take it in your hand and look 
at it. 

(The coroner handed to the witness a card of Mr. Dyson, on the back 
of which was written, ‘‘ Charles Peace is requested not to interfere with 
my family.’’) 

The Wrirness, after looking at the card, said—That is my husband’s 
writing. 

By the Coronzr—Do you know what was done with it? Was it given to 
Peace by any one?—Not to my knowledge; I don’t know that it was 
given to him. 

You never saw it before?—I had a copy of it at the same time. 

But you do not remember that being given by your husband to Peace? 
—No; but I remember my husband telling me he had written it and 
thrown it in his garden. 

178 


Appendix B. 


He threw it in?—Yes. 

You don’t know the reason why that quarrel took place?—There was 
no quarrel at all. My husband said he was a man of bad reputation, and 
that he did not like his language. 

Did Peace say anything about it? Did he complain of having been 
forbidden to come to your house?—No; but he still continued to annoy us. 

In what way did he annoy you?—By coming to our door. 

What did he do there?—He used to listen. 

When, then, did your husband take any other steps for preventing him 
from coming ?—He consulted a lawyer, and he said we could not do any- 
thing unless 

Do you know who the lawyer was?—Mr. Chambers. 

Did Peace continue to come?—Yes, he continued to follow Mr. Dyson 
and to annoy him whenever he went out. 

He followed Mr. Dyson when he went out?—Yes. 

Had Peace’s coming to your house and annoying you anything to do 
with your removing from Darnall ’?—Yes, it had. 

Do you mean to say you removed in consequence of Peace, then ?— 
Yes. 

Entirely ?—Yes, we removed entirely on that ground. 

Was Peace in the habit of coming to your house when your husband 
was away ?—He was not there when we removed, because he had not put 
in an appearance since last July, when the warrant was issued for him. 

Had you anything to do with the issuing of the warrant for threaten- 
ing your life?—It was I who had it issued for him. 

When was that?—On the 4th July last. 

How came he to threaten your life?—That I do not know. 

Did he want you to do anything, or want you to go anywhere with 
him ?—Yes. 

Where to?—To Manchester. 

Was it in July he wanted you to go to Manchester ?—Yes. 

Had he ever written to you at that time ’?—No. 

And you refused to go then?—Yes. 

When you refused to go what did he do then?—He threatened my 
life. 

Tell me what he did and what he said?—I cannot exactly remember. 

As near as you can?—He said if I did not go with him he would 
always continue to annoy me as long as I lived. 

In what way did he threaten your life?—With a revolver. 

Did he present it at you?—Yes, he held it within 6 inches of my 
face. 

Where were you?—In front of my own door. 

Where was your husband then?—My husband was in my house. 

Was Peace’s wife living there then ?—Yes. 

Tell me what he said when he presented the revolver at you?—He 
said he would blow out my bloody brains and those of my husband also. 

It was in consequence of that threat that you took out a peace 


summons ?—Yes. 
Your husband took it out, I presume?—No, I did. 
179 


Charles Peace. 


To appear at Sheffield was it?—Yes. He never appeared to the 
summons, and a warrant was issued in consequence. 

In default of his appearance ?—Yes. 

Was he ever apprehended under this warrant ?—No. 

Then did he go away, or continue to live there?—He went away, he 
disappeared. 

Don’t you know where he went to?—No, I do not. 

And he never was apprehended on this warrant at any time ?—No. 

Don’t you know where he went to?—No, I do not. 

How long did he remain away?—Up to the time—I never heard or 
saw anything of him until the night we removed to Banner Cross, the 26th 
October. He then made his appearance, and said he would still continue 
to annoy us. 

Was that the day you removed ?—Yes. 

To where?—To Banner Cross. * 

Where did he turn up? Where did you see him?—He came out of Mr. 
Gregory’s door. 

At Banner Cross ?—Yes. 

On the very same day you removed ?—Yes. 

Did your husband see him?—Yes, he saw him walking down the middle 
of the road. 

Did Peace speak to you or to your husband first? Now, tell me as 
nearly as you can what he said?—He said, ‘“‘ You see, I am here! And I 
shall follow you wherever you go, and annoy you.” 

Was there any quarrel between your husband and Peace then ?—Nothing 
except the warrant. 

Yes, but I mean when you got to Banner Cross?—No, my husband 
never spoke to him. 

You are pretty sure of it?—Yes, quite sure. 

Your husband did see him, did he?—Yes, he saw him, but he never 
spoke to him. 

During the time that he was away, when this warrant was out against 
him, did he never write to you?—Yes, he pretended to write from Ham- 
burg. 

Do you produce the letters?—No, I have not got them at present. 

He wrote, dating his letters from Hamburg ?—Yes. 

Did he write frequently? More than once?—Two letters, I believe. 
I believe he wrote three; one to me, threatening me if I went to give 
evidence. 

Have you any reason for believing that he never was in Hamburg 
when he wrote them?—I believe he was not, and that he only did it for 
a cover. 

When did you see him next after that?—On the night that he 
threatened my life. 

When was that?—On the last night when he threatened to shoot me. 

Was that the night on which the deceased died?—Yes, on Wednesday 
night. I do not remember the day of the month. 

Don’t you know what day of the month it was?—No, I cannot re- 
member the date. 

180 


Appendix B. 


The Coroner—What day was it? 

Inspector Brapsury—The 29th November. 

By the Coronrr—You are quite sure it was on the day on which your 
husband died ?—Yes, it was on the Wednesday. 

Now, what time of the day did you see him first?—At a quarter past 
eight exactly. 

At night ?—Yes. 

Where ?—In our yard. 

Where was your husband ?—Sitting in the room reading. 

Had you not heard from Peace at all, by letter or anything ?—No. 

You are quite sure of that?—No, I had never heard from him in any 
shape. 

Where was it where you saw him?—At the closet. 

What time did you go out of the house?—Just a quarter-past eight. 

Where is the closet?—At the end of the house, coming in from the 
road. 

How long do you suppose you were in the closet?—-Two minutes, to the 
best of my recollection. 

When you came out, where did you see him?—As I opened the door 
about a foot. 

To come out ?—Yes. 

What did you see?—I saw him with a revolver in his hand, faced 
before me. 

You saw Peace at the door in the yard?—Yes, quite close to the door. 

And he presented a revolver at your face, did he ?—Yes. 

What did he say ?—He said, ‘‘ Speak, or I will fire.”’ 

What did you do?—I screamed and shut the door. 

Was it dark?—No, it was not dark, it was light. 

And you had not the slightest doubt as to its being Peace?—No, I 
have not the slightest doubt that it was he, because I saw him. 

Had you a candle or a light?—I had a small lantern in my hand. 

And you can swear without any doubt at all that it was Peace?— 
Yes. 

When you screamed, what then?—My husband ran to my assistance. 

Did you see him come?—I heard him, but I did not see him. 

You have no doubt he did come?—Oh, no. 

What became of Peace?—Peace fired at my husband when he ran to 
my assistance. 

Where did Peace go when your husband came to your assistance ?—He 
went down the passage. 

Did he walk down or run down?—He ran down. 

Did your husband ever get near to him?—Yes, I think so. 

Did you see your husband try to get hold of him at all? Do you 
think he ran after him with the intention of getting hold of him?—That 
I do not know. 

When your husband came you had shut the door?—Yes, and when he 
came I came out. 

When Peace went down the yard your husband went after him, but 
whether with the intention of catching him or not you don’t know ?—No. 

181 


Charles Peace. 


He followed Peace ?—Yes. 

Can you tell me whether Peace ran or walked?—He was walking when 
I saw him. 

Down the yard?—No. After he had shot my husband he went across 
the road. 

Wait; we have not got to the shooting yet. I want to know whether, 
when he went down the yard, he was walking or running?—He walked. 

Did your husband. walk or run?—He walked. 

Walked after him?—Yes. 

You cannot say whether your husband attempted to get hold of him 
or not?—No, I cannot. 

Did you follow your husband ?—Yes. 

Did you see anything of your husband when he came into the yard 
before there was any shooting?—No. We never spoke to each other; we 
never saw each other. I was in the closet, and my husband came out and 
saw what was the matter. 

Then do you suppose your husband saw Peace going down the yard? 
—Yes, I suppose he did. 

Do you think he did ?—Yes. 

Then he followed Peace, and you followed your husband ?—Yes. 

Well, now, what then?—He followed, and Peace shot him. 

Where ?—At the end of the passage, just by the cottage. 

Did you see him fire, or merely hear the shot?—I heard him fire, and 
saw my husband fall. 

How many shots did you hear ?—Two. 

Were they quickly repeated, or was there time between the shots ?— 
There would not be a second; instantly, almost. 

How far were you from your husband at the time?—About a yard 
or so. 

No more than a yard when he fell?—No. 

What did you do?—I fell by the side of him and spoke to him, but 
he would not answer me, and I thought he was only stunned. 

Now, just tell me, can you undertake to swear who fired those shots? 
—Yes. 

Who?—Charles Peace. 

Did you see him ?—Yes. 

You are quite sure you saw him ?—Yes. 

What did he do when he had fired?—He ran across the road, and then 
turned and looked back to see if he should fire again; but the people were 
rushing out then. 

He looked back to see what?—To see if he should fire again, I expect. 

As though doubting whether to fire again ?—Yes. 

What did you do; did you remain at your house ?—Yes. 

What became of Peace, as far as you could see?—He ran into the 
garden on the opposite side. 

Did you see him get over the wall?—yYes. 

Have you ever seen him since ?—No. 

Nor heard from him?—No. 

You are quite sure of that ?—Yes. 

182 


Appendix B. 


How long did your husband live?—About an hour. 

Did you see any wounds on him?—Yes. 

Where ?—One on the left temple. 

In your opinion, was that wound made by a bullet ?—Yes. 

Was he in good health previous to that ?—Yes. 

Has there been any quarrel between you and your husband with 
regard to Peace?—No; we did not quarrel with regard to him. 

You are quite sure your husband never quarrelled with you on account 
of your familiarity with Peace ?—No. 

You are sure of that ?—yYes. 

You are quite sure of that ?—Yes. 

Has he never complained of your speaking to Peace at all?—He did 
not wish me to speak to him. 

Has he never found fault with you for doing so?—No, he did not 
find fault with me, because when he told me not to speak to him I did 
not. 

Did Peace’s wife live with him all the time you were at Darnall ?— 
Yes. 

All the time ?—Yes. 

When did she remove from Darnall?—About two months ago, I should 
think. 

When Peace left Darnall did you live near to his wife?—No, she went 
before we did. 

Where did they go to then?—That I do not know. 

You do not know where she went to live?—No. 

Do you know where she is living now?—At Hull. 

How do you know?—A police officer informed me. 

Didn’t you know before that ?—No. 

The Coroner (to the jury)—Will you ask any questions, gentlemen, of 
this witness? 

By Mr. Lanestarre—Did you not make the observation that Peace walked 
across the road ?—Yes. 

Then I think the next time you said he ran across the road? 

By the Cornoner—Did he walk or run across the road after he had shot 
your husband?—It was a quick walk. He turned round when he got into 
the middle of the road. 

I have got it down that he ran across the road. It does not matter 
very much. Did he walk or run?—It was neither running nor walking. I 
cannot describe it exactly. 

I do not think it is fair to press you very much on that point. When 
a wife sees her husband shot she may be confused, and probably you would 
be. You cannot say positively whether he ran or walked?—No, I cannot 
say; but he went at a very quick speed. 

Did you see anybody about? Was there any one else about when he 
ran across the road?—Yes, one man was coming down the street. 

How far off?—About 4 or 5 yards, I should think. 

Did you see a boy at all?—Yes. 

Where ?—On the side walk on the opposite side. 

183 


Charles Peace. 


How near was the boy to the best of your recollection?—I cannot tell 
you that; he might have been some yards off. 

Was it a long distance?—No. He was so near that he was able to see 
Peace. I do not know who the boy was, but I saw him afterwards. 

Inspector Brapsury handed to the coroner a packet of letters and 
cards, who asked the witness if she knew in whose writing some of them 
were ’—She replied that she did not, and she had never seen them before. 

By the Cornonrr—Did you ever lend Peace a book?—No, never. 

(Zo the Jury)—Here are a lot of letters, gentlemen, but they are not 
addressed, and it is difficult to say what bearing they have upon the case. 

Inspector BrapBpury—Several of the envelopes are addressed to Peace. 

By the Cornoner—Did Peace never write to you at all?—No. 

You are quite sure of that ?—No. 

He never wrote to you at any time?—No. 

He never wrote asking you to meet him?—No. 

The Coronsr—I suppose some one will give evidence as to where these 
letters came from? 

Inspector BrapBury—Yes. 

The Coronsr—The difficulty, gentlemen, is to know what to do with 
regard to these letters. They are not addressed. There is one here, but I 
really don’t like to read it, because it does not say whom it is to. It says, 
‘‘T write you these few lines to thank you for all your kindness,’ and 
so on. It is not addressed to any one, and it may have been written by 
Mrs. Dyson or it may not have been. (Z'0 Witness)—Did you ever write a 
letter to Peace in your life?—No. I have never written to him. 

Neither on a scrap of paper nor anything 7—No. 

Never wrote a word to him on paper at all, do you mean to say ?—No. 

Now, just be careful, please. Do you mean to swear that you never 
wrote a word to him on paper?—No; I never wrote to him on paper. 

Never at all?—No. 

The Coronzr—I do not know where all these letters came from. 

Inspector BraDBsurRy—A constable found them the next morning in a 
field, somewhere near to where Peace got over the wall. He (Peace) had 
been up in the neighbourhood, to Mr. Newman’s,* and the Prince of 
Wales’, and other places, showing these letters. He said Mrs. Dyson 
wrote them to him at different times, when he lived at Darnall. 

A Juryman—Are they all in one handwriting? 

The CoroneR—Some are in pencil and some in ink. There is one card, 
in Mr. Dyson’s handwriting, cautioning Peace not to annoy his family. 
Tell me (handing a letter to the witness) whose handwriting that is?—I 
do not know. 

You do not know whose it is?—No. 

Is not that (handing her another letter) in your handwriting?—No, it 
is not mine, sir. 

Can you write?—Very little. I never do write hardly. 

The Coroner here put the letters and cards into Mrs. Dyson’s hands, 
and asked if she could identify the writing on any of them. 


* A near-by clergyman, with whom he had a strange interview. 
184 


Appendix B. 


Mrs. Dyson picked out one of her husband’s visiting cards and said 
the writing upon it was his. 

The Coronsr—That is the one we have already seen. It is a card of 
Mr. Dyson’s, on which is written, ‘‘ Charles Peace is requested not to 
interfere with my family.’’ 

Mrs. Dyson next picked out a letter, and said the writing might be 
Peace’s, but she could not say positively. 

By the Coronsr—Do you know his handwriting when you see it?—Yes, 
and this looks like the letter we received. 

You say you have never written to him; has he ever written to you? 
—No, he has written to my husband; and this is similar to the other 
letter we got. 

What other letter?—The threatening letter which he wrote from 
Hamburg. I have not it here; it is at Mr. Chambers’s office. 

Inspector Brappury said he believed that Mr. Chambers had shown 
one or two letters to Mr. Jackson,* and that he (Mr. Jackson) would have 
been present to-day but for the death of a brother. 

The Coroner (to Witness)—I understand you to say that, with the 
exception of the threatening letter, he never wrote to you or you to him ?—No. 
The threatening letter was written to my husband. 

I understand Peace never wrote to you either a threatening letter or 
anything else?—No; the letter was meant for both of us. 

Did Peace ever come into your house whilst your husband was away? 
—Yes, he came to the door and threatened me. 

Was that the only time, whilst your husband was away ?—No, he was 
in before, and his daughter used to come in sometimes. 


THomas Witson, Brincliffe Hill, a lad, seventeen years of age, said— 
Between a quarter and half-past eight on the night of the murder, as I was 
standing against Mrs. Roberts’ shopdoor at Banner Cross, I heard two 
shots fired. I was then about 30 or 40 yards from Mr. Dyson’s door, but 
I was not aware at that time that he lived there. The shots were fired 
in quick succession, and immediately afterwards I saw a man run across 
the road and get over a wall into some gardens. I heard Mrs. Dyson 
scream after the shots were fired. I could not tell who the man was, or 
whether he was old or young. He was dressed in dark clothes. The 
screams came from a woman, and I ran to her, to Dyson’s entry. I then 
saw Mrs. Dyson holding the deceased’s head from the ground. There was 
blood on the ground, but I could not see where it came from. I ran for 
a doctor, and when I got back I saw the deceased in his house. He was 
then alive, and was sitting in a chair. The people were bathing a wound 
in his head. 

By the Coronsr—Do you think you could identify the man who ran 
across the road if he were produced to you?—No, I don’t think I could; 
I don’t think I had ever seen him before. He was dressed in dark clothes. 

By the Jury—He had gone across the road before I started to go to 
Mr. Dyson’s house. The moon was covered by a cloud, and it was 


* Mr. J. Jackson, chief constable of Sheffield. 
185 


Charles Peace. 


raining a little. I do not think I could identify the man who ran across 
the road. That part of the road where the man crossed over it is between 
two lamps, the nearest being about 30 yards distant. 


James Witt1am Harrison, surgeon, said—I was fetched about nine 
o’clock on the night of the murder to see Mr. Dyson. I found him sitting 
in a chair. He was talking, but was insensible. As he was losing blood 
fast, I had him immediately laid on a mattress, and then examined a 
wound on the left temple. He never recovered consciousness, and died in 
my presence at about a quarter to eleven o’clock. Mrs. Dyson was present, 
and also a man named Gregory. I have since made a post-mortem examina- 
tion, assisted by Mr. John Benson. I found a bruise on the nose and 
chin, as if the deceased had fallen on his face. The wound on the left 
temple was about an inch above the external orbit of the eye, and I could 
pass in the little finger right through it to the skull, and into the brain. 
There was a quantity of effused blood between the skull and the scalp. 
Upon taking the scalp away from the skull, I found a circular opening 
in the skull about an inch in diameter. The opening went through the 
anterior inferior angle of the parietal bone. The ball went through the 
brain in a direction upwards and backwards through the left lobe, and 
was found lodged on the upper surface of that lobe. The bullet (pro- 
duced) was flattened. The fact of its being so flattened is, in my opinion, 
caused by its coming in contact with the bones above mentioned. The 
bullet went obliquely and took an upward direction. From this latter fact 
I imagine the man who fired the shot was in a lower angle than the 
deceased. The appearance of the bullet leads me to the conclusion that 
it was a conical one, but I cannot say it was so positively. I did not 
make a sufficiently minute examination to say whether the deceased was a 
healthy man, because the presence of the bullet in the brain fully 
accounted for death and for all the symptoms I saw. 

In answer to the coroner, Mr. Harrison said the direction in which 
the ball went was not such as would be likely to be the case if the deceased 
had fired the pistol himself. 


Mary Ann Grecory said—My husband’s name is John Gregory. He 
lives at Banner Cross Terrace, and keeps a grocer’s shop. I knew the 
late Mr. Dyson. Our house is next door to his. We were in the habit 
of seeing him almost daily. I knew his wife. They appeared to be 
living on good terms with each other. I remember their coming to live 
at Banner Cross Terrace. It was on the 26th October, I believe. On the 
evening of the same day I saw the man Peace. He came to our shop a 
little before eight o’clock. He was rather short and slightly built. I 
can’t say whether he told us his name, or whether it was Mrs. Dyson 
who afterwards told me. I believe I never heard of his name until after 
the murder. He appeared to be fifty years of age. He asked for half an 
ounce of tobacco, and got it. My husband went and talked to him. 
He did not talk to me. I saw him again a week ago last Wednesday 
evening, the 29th November. It was as near seven o’clock as I can re- 


member. He asked to see Mr. Gregory, but I told him he was out. 
186 


Appendix B. 


Peace then asked when he would be in. I said I could not tell to ten 
minutes or a quarter of an hour, but that I expected him every minute. I 
asked him if he had any message for him. He said no; he (Mr. Gregory) 
did not know his name; he would only know him if he saw him. He 
did not, however, come again. Mr. Gregory told Mr. and Mrs. Dyson 
of Peace’s first visit to our house. When Peace first came to see us he 
told Mr. Gregory he had some advice to give us, as we had some new 
neighbours coming. He told us the Dysons would get into debt if they 
could, and would not pay; and said he wished to put us on our guard. 
He also said they were very bad people, and he had got letters and would 
send them to Mr. Gregory. He said he would not send his own address, 
but his mother’s, and the letters could be sent to her. He did not send 
us any letters, and he did not bring any; for he never came from that 
night till the night of the murder. On the night of the murder he went 
out of our house a little before seven. He did not appear excited or in 
any way unusual. He was dressed in black, with a good deal of white 
about his necktie. It appeared to have a brown stripe in it. It looked 
only brown and white. His hat I could not be certain about. After he 
left I wished Mr. Gregory would come, and I looked out for him. About 
five minutes after Peace left I went to the door, and saw Peace creeping 
down as slowly and quietly as possible, as if he did not wish to be seen. 
He was just stepping out of the passage from the garden into the little 
yard, and I saw him go into the road. He crossed the road and went 
down. I watched him as far as I could see. Mrs. Colgreaves afterwards 
came in. I asked her if she had met such a man, and she said she had. 
She advised me to lock the door, and I did so, because I considered him 
a suspicious character. She looked out and saw him creeping down the 
yard again. Some time afterwards, in about an hour, I heard a woman 
scream. I opened my door. I knew it was Mrs. Dyson, because I had 
heard her go forward in the back yard towards the closet. As I opened 
the door Mr. Dyson was at his door, just as if stepping out. I said, 
““Mr. Dyson, go to your wife.”? He said ‘“‘ Yes,’ and went down the 
yard as quickly as possible. Then I heard a noise like a bang. I 
did not know what it was. I heard two sounds like a bang. I did not 
know what to do I was so frightened. When I had seen Mr. Dyson I 
locked my door. J heard then bringing him up the passage, and I then 
went out and saw several men. I went into Mr. Dyson’s. Mrs. Dyson 
was bathing his face. It was after the murder that I heard Mrs. Dyson 
calling the man ‘‘ Peace.’’ I heard some one ask her if she knew who it 
was—who the man was who had shot her husband? She said his name 
was Peace, and she knew him very well. Peace never told me anything 
about Mrs. Dyson. I believe I would know him again if I saw him. 


By the Jury—When I saw Peace creeping along it was down the front 
that leads into the road. 


Mr. H. Dyson—You asked, Mr. Coroner, whether it was possible for my 
brother to have shot himself? All I have to remark is, that had he done 
so he must have been a left-handed man, according to the position of the 
wound in the left temple; and my brother was not a left-handed man. 

187 


Charles Peace. 


Mrs. Sanan ConcREAves, wife of a table-blade maker, at Dobbin Hill, 
a short distance off the main road in the direction of Greystones, 
said—On the night of the murder, about half-past seven o'clock, 
I was on my way to Mr. Gregory’s shop. On the main road 
I met a man with white pointed whiskers, who seemed to be about 
forty-five years of age. I could not describe his features, or how he was 
dressed, except that he had dark clothes. He asked me if I knew “‘ who 
lived in the second house up?” I replied that I did not. He then asked 
me if I knew they were strangers, and I said ‘‘ Yes.’? He then said, “* You 
don’t know them,” and on my again replying that I did not, he made use 
of a remark implying that he was on too intimate terms with her. I told 
him he ought to be careful what he said, and especially to strangers. He 
then said, ‘‘ Would you mind going to the door and saying that an elderly 
gentleman wished to see her?’’ I said he must go himself. I then left 
him at the lamp, a few yards from Mr. Gregory’s door. He was then 
walking slowly up, and was a short distance from the Dysons’. I stayed in 
Gregory’s shop about ten minutes, and as I was leaving I saw him come 
out of the passage to Mr. Dyson’s house, and cross the road. He then went 
up the hill and I never saw him again. 


CuargtEs BrassIncton, who lives at Lane End, said—On the evening 
in question, as he was standing near Mr. Stainforth’s shop at Banner 
Cross, he saw a man walk several times backwards and forwards. The 
man appeared to be “‘ oldish,’’ but he could not say how he was dressed. 
Ultimately the man stood near the stone yard, and then asked him where 
he lived, and witness told him a little distance up the road. He then asked 
him if he knew that any strangers had come in the neighbourhood; and, 
on his saying that he did not, the man said they were a nuisance to the 
country. When they got to a gas lamp the man pulled out some likenesses 
and showed them to him. 

By the Cononzr—Photographs, do you mean ?—Yes. 

What kind of photographs were they?—I did not notice them much. 
One of them was the likeness of a man; another, that of a woman, and he 
showed me one with two persons on it. 

Were they indecent pictures; were the figures in an indecent position ?— 
No, they were dressed. As I was leaving him he caught hold of my sleeve, 
and asked me to read some letters. I told him that I would not. He then 
said, ‘“‘ He would make it warm for them before morning,’’ and that ‘‘ he 
would shoot them both.” 

The Coroner endeavoured, but without success, to induce the witness to 
give the exact words made use of by Peace, but he could not get in 
reply anything beyond that ‘‘he would do for them before morning.”’ 
Witness added that he imagined the man referred to Mr. and Mrs. Dyson. 


CuaRLEs WHYMAN, a quarryman, living at Ecclesall, said—On the 29th 
November I was at Banner Cross, and heard the report of a pistol or 
something. I was in the front room of the Banner Cross Hotel. It was 
about half-past eight. I was six doors off Mr. Dyson’s house. There were 
others in the room. I heard two shots. I went to the door and heard a 

188 


Appendix B. 


woman squealing ‘‘ Murder.’”? I went down to her. It was Mrs. Dyson. 
Mr. Dyson was lying on his back on the outside of the entry. Mrs. Dyson 
was holding his head up from the ground. She said, ‘‘ The villain has shot 
my husband, and he’s gone across the road.”” I did not see him. I went 
across the road to see if I could see anything of him, but did not. 


Police Constable Gzuorgz Warp proved having found the letters pro- 
duced. He picked them up in Mrs. Else’s grass field, opposite to Mr. 
Dyson’s house. They were all in a roll, but not tied with a string. He 
saw some feet marks within 4 or 5 yards of the letters. He also saw where 
a person had got over the wall into a garden opposite the entry end, 
leading to the deceased’s house. The impressions were those of a light 
boot, without nails. In an envelope, addressed ‘‘ C. Peace, Esq.,’’ he found 
an American cent coin. The envelope was addressed in lead pencil, and 
the writing was very faint indeed. 


Mrs. Dyson was here recalled, and was asked by the coroner if she 
was not an American? She replied that she was not, but had lived for 
some time in America. 

Just look at that coin (the cent piece). Where did you see it last ?—1 
could not say where I have seen that, because I have seen several like it. 

Do you know where Peace got it?—No. 

Did you not give it to him?—No. 

Didn’t you ever give him a coin at all?—No. 

Have you any doubts at all—I didn’t ask you this question before— 
that Charles Peace was the man who shot your husband?—Not the slightest. 
I will swear he is the man that shot him. 

And that you saw him do it?—Yes. 

Tell me what you saw him by?—By the light of the lantern in my 
hand. 

How far were you from him when he shot your husband?—About 3 or 
4 yards. 

Did you see him quite distinctly ?—Yes. 

Did you speak to him?—No. 


The Coroner then summed up. He said he did not intend to call 
any more evidence, as in all probability the jury would come to a conclusion 
upon that which had been brought before them. As it was, there had been 
a very full inquiry into the death of the man Arthur Dyson. Inspector 
Bradbury, he was bound to say, had got up the case exceedingly well, and 
had brought forward apparently every person who knew anything about the 
matter, and whose evidence could be of the slightest importance in the 
inquiry. Indeed, the only thing he had not done, and that he ought to 
have done, was to apprehend Peace. He had no doubt, however, that he 
had tried his best to do so. The jury had first of all to consider how the 
deceased came by his death, and then whether any party, and, if so, who, 
was to blame in the matter. With regard to the cause of death, they would 
no doubt consider the evidence of the medical man, Mr. Harrison, quite 
conclusive. Mr. Harrison had made a post-mortem examination, and he 

189 


Charles Peace. 


said the cause of death was a bullet in the brain, and the bullet was pro- 
duced. They would, therefore, be satisfied that the cause of death was the 
firing of a bullet from either a gun or a pistol, and the question was, who 
fired it, and how came the deceased to be shot? The evidence was really 
very conclusive, and he did not think he needed to trouble them with any 
remarks about it. The evidence began with that of Mrs. Dyson, the 
widow, who identified the body; and she was really a most important 
witness. She had sworn before them that on the 29th November she went 
out into the yard to the closet, and that there she saw a man, who, she 
declared, was Peace. She also stated that he presented a revolver to her, 
and used some words; that she then screamed, and that her husband, the 
deceased, then came out, no doubt brought thither by the scream and going 
to the assistance of his wife. She swore that then and there she saw a man 
whom both she and the deceased had known previously, and known inti- 
mately and well, shoot her husband, and there could be no doubt that 
was true. There was a lot of evidence following as to who this man was, 
Peace having been seen in the neighbourhood. It was true that none of 
the other witnesses identified him as Peace, because none of them appeared 
to have known him before. However, her description of Peace and the 
description given by the other witnesses of the man whom they saw 
in the neighbourhood, and who was heard by one of the witnesses to say 
that he would shoot them both, quite coincided. There was no con- 
tradiction in the evidence given by Mrs. Dyson about Peace and the descrip- 
tion of the man who was seen in the neighbourhood by the other witnesses. 
The question was whether the jury believed that the man Charles Peace 
was sufficiently identified before them to justify them in returning a verdict 
of wilful murder against him. Of course, he need not tell them—he was 
quite sure they knew sufficient of the law to know that if the man Dyson 
was shot by Peace it was, and must be, wilful murder. Whether malice 
was sufficiently proved before them or not did not matter. The law assumed 
that there was malice if a man killed another wilfully; and consequently 
the only verdict they could return would be one of wilful murder. He 
thought the only serious question they had to consider was whether the 
man was sufficiently identified before them to justify them in swearing that 
it was Peace who shot the man. Now, he was inclined to think it was, 
and they most likely would be of the same opinion. Putting Mrs. Dyson’s 
evidence on one side for a moment, all the other evidence, and especially 
that of Mrs. Gregory, who was certainly an important witness, was very 
clear. Mrs. Gregory declared that the man Peace went into her shop 
and during the conversation with him she was evidently alarmed, and 
had an idea that the man was a bad character, and was there in the 
neighbourhood for no good; for she swore that she locked the door to 
protect herself, before she heard any of the screams or shots. It really 
appeared to him to be beyond any doubt that the man Peace—if the jury 
were satisfied that it was Peace—went there for no good. He was hanging 
about the place, and evidently had a pistol with him. He could not see 
that they could come to any other conclusion than that Peace went there, 
gern a pistol in his possession, with the determination to shoot either 


Appendix B. 


one or both of the parties; and especially when they took into consideration 
the evidence of the young man who had sworn that a man, whom, however, 
he did not definitely identify as Peace, said, ‘‘ He would do for them both 
before the morning.” All that the jury had to do was to satisfy themselves 
first as to whether Mr. Dyson was killed by a shot, and, if so, whether the 
man Peace did it. If they were, they could only return a verdict of wilful 
murder against him. 

The jury did not wish the evidence to be read to them, inasmuch as 
it was very clear, and, after deliberating a few minutes with closed doors, 
they returned a verdict of wilful murder against Charles Peace. 


191 


APPENDIX CG 


TRIAL OF HANNAH PEACH. 
CENTRAL CRIMINAL COURT. 
Turspay, 14TH January, 1879. 

(Before Mr. Commissioner Robert Malcolm Kerr.) 


Hannaw Pracn, fifty-eight, described as a married woman, was indicted 
in the name of Peace, alias Ward, for feloniously receiving seven pocket- 
handkerchiefs and a quantity of other articles, the proceeds of different 
burglaries committed in the neighbourhood of Blackheath last year by a 
man named Peace, who she alleged was her husband, well knowing the 
same to be stolen. 


Mr. Dovetas SrrarcHt* and Mr. Tickrnn prosecuted for the Treasury ; 
Mr. Forrest Furtont and Mr. Wiit1am Austin Mercatre defended. 


Mr. SrraricHt said—The facts were very simple and they had been 
very recently before the public. There was no doubt but that the prisoner 
had been living with a man named Charles Peace for a great many years. 
This man had committed numerous burglaries in the vicinity of Blackheath, 
and was now undergoing a term of penal servitude for life in respect of 
them. Shortly after his apprehension the prisoner also was taken into 
custody in the neighbourhood of Sheffield. The police there visited the 
house of her son-in-law,{ where they discovered a large quantity of property, 
the proceeds of the burglaries, and this was claimed by her. There would 
be no question as to this. The matter in dispute was as to the prisoner 
being the wife of the man Peace. She contended that she was, and that es 
such she was acting under authority and dealing with the property as he 
directed. It would be for them (the jury) to consider whether, even suppos- 
ing that she was his wife, she was not taking an active and independent 
part in the disposal of the property. At the time she was removing it 
Peace himself was in custody in London. 

Formal evidence was then given as to the numerous burglaries having 
been committed, and the property was identified as the proceeds of them. 


Henry Purtxips, police inspector, T.—I am attached to the Criminal 
Investigation Department. John Ward, alias Charles Peace, was convicted 
last November of shooting at a police constable; he was arrested on 10th 
October, 1878. From inquiries I made I went down to Darnall, which is 


* See ante, note on p. 56. 


+ Sir Forrest Fulton, K.C., Recorder of London, 1900; b. 1846; d.? 
t Bolsover. 


192 


Appendix C. 


about 5 miles from Sheffield, on 5th November. The house I went to was 
occupied by William Bolsover, his wife, sister, the prisoner, and Willie 
Ward. I sat down and had some conversation with them, and told them 
I had come from Peckham. I turned and saw a clock on the drawers, 
which I knew from a description to belong to Miss Dodgson, of Blackheath. 
Inspector Twybell came in, and I told the prisoner and Bolsover that the 
clock was stolen property, and I should take charge of it. The prisoner 
said, “I did not know that it was stolen. A tall man gave it me about 
five weeks ago.’ I told her a man who lived at Peckham had been 
remanded, and she said, ‘“‘ He has been a great deal of trouble to me and 
seems to harass my life wherever-I go.’’ I searched the house and found 
various articles which have been identified by different persons. When 
the other inspector was about to open a box, the prisoner said, ‘‘ Never mind 
that box, Mr. Twybell. I know what you want. I will give it you.” We 
opened the box and took from it a large parcel containing about forty 
articles. We took the residue of the property, and I charged her with 
receiving the property knowing it to be stolen. She replied, ‘‘I did not 
know it was stolen.”” She was taken before the magistrate on 13th 
November. On the 14th I went to Bolsover’s house again and found the 
articles identified by Mr. Shapley. The prisoner gave her name as Hannah 
Peace, and her son said in her presence she was married at St. George’s 
Church, Sheffield.* She did not contradict it. I brought a big box up to 
London, too large to bring here, which I showed to Pickering and to Mrs. 
Belfit. The prisoner said the old man burnt her marriage certificate some 
time ago. 


Emma SHaptny—I am the wife of William Gordon Shapley, of Seymour 
Lodge, Peckham. On the night of 23rd September, 1878, we discovered 
that about £25 worth of wearing apparel had been stolen. I identify these 
articles as the same (produced). 


JoHN Bonney, inspector, R., said—On 5th November, 1878, I went 
to Mrs. Belfit’s, 11 North Street, Nottingham, where I saw a small red box 
open, and in it I found a pickle-fork, which has been identified by Mrs. 
M‘Donald. I also found the seven handkerchiefs and tablecover which 
have been identified by Mrs. Shapley. At Peckham I had twenty spoons 
twenty-four forks, and two scoops handed to me. 


Louisa Newman said—I am cook to Mr. Charles Thomas Perry, of 
Richmond Lodge, Honor Oak Road, Forest Hill. On the night of 5th 
August, 1878, I went to bed, leaving the house safe, and next morning I 
found that it had been entered. Amongst other things we missed two 
caskets, one tortoiseshell and one cornelian, value about £30 or £40. 


Freperick Sranuey said—I live at Arbutus Lodge, Denmark Hill, 
In September, 1877, I was at Brighton, and on my return I missed, amongst 


* Search in the register at this church proves this statement to have 
been untrue. Why was not Hannah made to prove she was Peace’s wife? 
193 
fe) 


Charles Peace. 


other things, two dessert knives, one dessert fork, and a pair of bracelets. 
These are the articles (produced). 


Samugt Smire said—I am a builder’s foreman, of 68 St. Mary’s Road, 
Peckham. In May, 1878, I had a house, 5 East Terrace, Evelina Road, 
Peckham, to let. Four persons called on me with reference to it—the 
prisoner (who passed as Mrs. Ward), Mr. and Mrs. Thompson, and Willie 
Ward. I asked for references, and I went to their old residence. I gave 
them possession of the house; it was let to the man, in the name of 
John Thompson. In October I went to the house and found all the 
occupants gone and the back door open. The house was empty. I had 
received no notice from them and never got the keys. 

Cross-examined—It was after 10th October I found them gone, and 
after I heard of the burglaries. I saw Mr. and Mrs. Thompson in the house 
early in October. 


* 


Henry Forsry Brion said—I live at 22 Phillip Road, Peckham Rye. 
On 23rd September, 1878, I called at 5 Kast Terrace, and saw the Thompsons, 
Willie Ward, and the prisoner. Thompson is the man, I believe, who was 
afterwards tried here as Ward. Thompson said to Mrs. Thompson, ‘“‘ Sue, 
will you fetch the fowls for this gentleman to see?’’ and as I was on the 
point of leaving the room he said, pointing to Mrs. Thompson, ‘“‘ That is 
my wife.’’ The prisoner was present; she made no reply. I frequently went 
to the house from May to August. The Thompsons appeared to be living 
as man and wife. On ist November I received a letter in the name of 
John Ward, and I came to Newgate to see the man. It was a most imploring 
letter, to know if I would go and see him. While there I saw Mr. Sidney 
Smith, the governor, and lots of questions were put to me to see if I 
knew the man. I did not know the writing or the name, but he was 
the man I had known as John Thompson. When I ceased visiting them 
they called at my house on one occasion, when Mrs. Thompson was intro- 
duced as Mr. Thompson’s wife, and the prisoner as Mrs. Ward. In 
consequence of a communication made to me I wrote to Mrs. Belfit, who 
then lived at 11 North Street, Nottingham. I received a red box from her. 


Rosert Mapieson said—I am chief warder of Her Majesty’s Gaol of 
Newgate. A man who was committed in the name of Ward was under my 
custody; he was tried at this Court for attempting the life of a police 
constable on 10th October, and sentenced to penal servitude for life, I saw 
the last witness visit him. 


Eriza Mary Ann Corrinson Dapson said—I am the daughter of Mr. 
Campbell Dadson, and live at 5 Kidbrook Terrace, Blackheath. On the 
night of 3rd August, 1878, I missed this clock, which had been stolen. 
There was much more valuable property stolen as well. 

Cross-examined—This is only worth a few shillings. 


Exizaseta M‘Donaxp said—I am housekeeper to Mr. Bourchier, of 10 
Kidbrook Villas, Blackheath. On the night of 10th August, 1878, the 


house was broken into, and I missed a pickle-fork and an Indian tablecover. 
194 


Appendix Ck 


Tuomas PickERInG said—I am a porter in the service of the London, 
Chatham, and Dover Railway Company at Nunhead. On 11th October, 1879, 
in consequence of a message I received from another quarter, I went to 5 
East Terrace, Evelina. Road, Peckham, when I saw a woman whom I 
believed to be the prisoner. In consequence of what she said I took three 
boxes to the station, and had them labelled for King’s Cross. I have since 
seen one of the boxes, a large one, at Bow Street. One was a small brown 
box, which I nailed down. The woman and the boxes went by the 5.55 
train. 

Cross-examined—I was in the woman’s company about three minutes. 
She followed behind to the station. I saw her on the platform. I do not 
swear to her; there were other females there. 


EvizaA Bririt said—I am the wife of Robert Belfit, of Great Freeman 
Street, Notting Hill, N. On 5th November, 1879, I was living at 11 North 
Street, Nottingham. On that day Police Inspector Bonney called on me. 
Prior to that Mrs. Thompson, between twelve and one o’clock, accompanied 
by the prisoner, who Mrs. Thompson introduced as Mrs. Ward, called. 
I could not accommodate them, and they stayed till four or five o’clock 
and went by an early train. I accompanied them to the station, where Mrs. 
Ward got two boxes from the cloakroom—one large one—which were lifted 
into the railway van. I have seen a box at Bow Street like the large one. 
She afterwards went for two other boxes, which she asked me to take 
to my house. One of them was a small red box. She said they belonged 
to her and her daughter, and that the red box was an old family relic, 
and would I take care of it. I took the boxes home, and about a fortnight 
after Mrs. Ward came to my house again and took something out of the 
box. There was a paper parcel in the red box. When Inspector Bonney 
came in November I saw him open the red box and take out some plate 
and a tablecloth. On 25th November my daughter handed the parcel to 
Mrs. Brion, I having received a letter from Mr. Brion, and on 3rd December, 
in consequence of a letter I received, I sent the small red box to Mr. Brion at 
Phillip Road, Peckham Rye. This is the box (produced). 

Cross-examined—I have seen Mrs. Thompson this morning, not here. 

Re-examined—I knew her as living at 5 Kast Terrace, Evelina Road, 
with a person named Thompson, as his wife. 


Auice Brion said—I am the wife of Forsey Brion. I went to the 
house of Mrs. Belfit on 25th November, and received this parcel from 
her daughter (produced), which I handed to Inspector Bonney. 

Cross-examined—My daughter has been living with me since the 
prisoner was taken into custody. I understood Mrs. Thompson lived 
with Peace, and that they were Mr. and Mrs. Thompson. I had often 
seen the prisoner at 5 East Terrace; she occupied the position of a lodger 
in the house, having two rooms upstairs and a back kitchen, and Mr. and 
Mrs. Thompson occupied the rest of the house as man and wife. There 
was no servant in the house to my knowledge; the prisoner did not act 
as their servant in my presence, and I never heard them say she was their 


servant. 
195 


Charles Peace. 


Crcmza Karcuer said—I am housekeeper to Mr. Wood, whose house 
was broken into on 20th August, 1878, and I missed this silk dress and 
these other articles (produced). 


Witt1am Botsover said—I live at 4 Hazel Road, Darnall, near Shef- 
field, and am a miner. I knew the prisoner when she lived at Darnall. 
Jane Ann Peace lived with her and passed as her daughter. She at that 
time lived with Charles Frederick Peace. I married the girl on 8th 
January last (i.e., 1878), at Hull. Charles Frederick Peace was not 
present. Last Whit Monday I came to London with my wife, and went 
to 5 East Terrace, Evelina Road, where I saw Peace living as Mr. Thomp- 
son with a woman who passed as Mrs. Thompson; a lad named Willie 
lived there. I stayed there eight or nine days and went home. The 
prisoner and Willie took their meals ,alone, and Mr. and Mrs. Thompson 
in another part of the house. On 12th October the prisoner came to my 
house at Darnall and said she had left a large box at the station, Shef- 
field. She said she had seen something in the paper relating to a man 
who was apprehended, and she supposed it was her husband. I took her 
in, and on the following Monday I went to Sheffield and brought her box, 
which was heavy. The box I have seen is the same. There were eventu- 
ally two brought to my premises. I saw them searched. All the things 
that have been identified as found on my premises had been brought 
there by the prisoner. I had nothing to do with them. 

Cross-examined—Peace represented that he was the father of my 
wife, and I had no doubt about it until these proceedings. He gave me 
some money on Whit Monday. I believed Peace and the prisoner to be 
man and wife, and my wife to be their daughter. She had lived with 
them from infancy. At that time Mrs. Thompson was not brought on the 
scene to my knowledge. 

Re-examined—I knew them as living together at Darnall for perhaps 
two years; that would be about 1873 or 1874. Peace then went away, and 
I lost sight of him. His daughter informed me that he had been to Hull. 
I never saw him again till about twelve months ago last Easter, at Hull, 
in the street. My wife married in the name of Peace. 


Joun Pinper Twysetnt said—I am an inspector of police at Sheffield. 
On 6th November, 1878, I assisted Phillips in searching Mr. Bolsover’s 
house. I left Phillips, and afterwards returned to the house. I saw 
the prisoner, Mrs. Bolsover, Willie Ward, and Bolsover. I said to Bol- 
sover, ‘‘ We have found a large quantity of property in your house which 
we have good reason to believe is stolen; there is a clock there which 
Mr. Phillips identifies as part of the proceeds of a burglary at Black- 
heath; how do you account for it being in your house?” 


He said, ‘‘I 
know nothing of it.” I said, ‘It is stolen, and you will have to 
account for it.’”’ The prisoner said, ‘‘I brought it from Hull five weeks 


ago, a tall woman brought it to me,” that a friend had sent it to her 
house. She said, ‘‘I don’t know her,’’ and she said the other property 
was hers nearly two years ago. JI collected all the property, and assisted 


in the search on 14th November. Some time between the 6th and 14th 
196 


Appendix C., 


she said she was married at St. George’s Church, Sheffield, in the name 
of Hannah Ward, to Charles Peace, the year before her daughter was 
born, who was nineteen years old; that her husband had burnt the cer- 
tificate; and that the two witnesses to the marriage, John Clark and Clara 
Clark, were dead. 

Cross-examined—When I had that conversation with the prisoner the 
man Peace was in custody, and it was before the public that he was con- 
cerned in the burglaries, and he was committed for trial. 


Mr. Futron submitted that there was no case to go to the jury, inas- 
much as the presumed marriage between the prisoner and Charles Peace 
had not been disproved by the prosecution. 

The learned judge said he considered that the onus of proof was on 
the prisoner to prove that she was married, but he pointed out that the 
evidence so far led to the inference that she might be married. 

Mr. Futon then urged that the prisoner ought not to be convicted, 


as if was a principle of law that a married woman was supposed to act 
under the direction of her husband. 

Some technical discussion followed. 

A consultation was then held between the Commissioner and Mr. 
Justice Hawkins upon a point of law, and in the result the Commissioner 
stated that Mr. Justice Hawkins concurred with him in the opinion that 
he had formed, namely, that the charge against the prisoner could not be 
supported, as there was reasonable evidence to show that the prisoner was 
Peace’s wife, and, as such, acted under his authority. 

The Jury eventually expressed an opinion that they were satisfied 
that the prisoner was the wife of Peace, and returned a verdict of not 
guilty. 

The prisoner was discharged. 


Note.—The above trial is not only interesting in itself, but sheds 
light upon Peace’s activities. 


197 


SERIES OF 


NOTABLE BRITISH TRIALS 


SERIES” OF 


NOTABLE BRITISH: “FRIEAEs: 


INTRODUCTION. 


‘The annals of criminal jurisprudence exhibit human nature in a variety 
of positions, at once the most striking, interesting, and affecting. They 
present tragedies of real life, often heightened in their effect by the grossness 
of the injustice and the malignity of the prejudices which accompanied them. 
At the same time real culprits, as original characters, stand forward on the 
canvas of humanity as prominent objects for our special study, I have often 
wondered that the English language contains no book like the causes célébres of 
the French, particularly as the openness of our proceedings renders the records 
more certain and accessible, while our public history and domestic conflicts 
have afforded so many splendid examples of the unfortunate and the guilty. 
Such a collection, drawn from our own national sources, would exhibit man as 
he is in action and in principle, and not as he is usually drawn by poets and 
speculative philosophers.” —Aurke. 

Such a work as the present series of ‘“‘Notable British Trials” sup- 
plies the want in literature indicated in the passage above quoted. 
The value of faithful records of the more important of our 
national trials can hardly be over-estimated. The historian finds 
in them the facts and circumstances upon which to form an im- 
partial judgment ; for the physician they are full of professional 
interest, and are of great service as text-books of medical juris- 
prudence; to the lawyer they are indispensable, whether as 
exainples of bygone practice or as affording precedents for his 
present guidance; for the student of human nature there is no 
more fertile and attractive field; while the general reader 
experiences in their perusal that truth is indeed more fascinating 
as it is stranger than fiction. This series is intended to exhibit 
a comprehensive view of famous trials, both modern and histor- 
ical, and the volumes already published and arranged for publi- 


cation indicate its scope and purpose. 


No pains have been spared by the respective editors to obtain 
the best and fullest information possible regarding the various 
trials; appendices to the volumes contain much new and 
unpublished matter ; while an accurate text and copious illustra- 
tions, together with an exhaustive introduction, provide a 
definite report of each case. 


Notable British Trials Sertes. 


Each volume is demy Svo. in size. Fully illustrated. 


The Trial of Mary Queen of Scots. (1586.) 
Edited by A. Francis Steuart, Advocate. 
Dedicated to His Grace, Donatp MACKINTOSH, 
Archbishop of Glasgow. 


The trial of Mary Queen of Scots was the first formal trial of a 
crowned and accredited Sovereign in historic times. It took 
place not, as many people think, for any of her deeds or misdeeds 
done during her reign in Scotland, but on account of her alleged 
complicity in the Babington plot which designed to free her and 
to kill Queen Elizabeth of England, a plot into which she, a 
prisioner for eighteen years of that Queen in England, had been 
entrapped by Queen Elizabeth’s faithful creature Walsingham. 
This volume gives the State Trial, the legal processes which led 
up to it, the tortuous policy of the English lawyers, and a rare 
account of the Queen’s last miseries borne with such dignity and 
bravery. 


The Trial of Captain Porteous. (1736.) 
Edited by Wittiam RoucHeEap. Dedicated 
to the Hon. Lorp ARDWALL. 


The trial of Captain John Porteous, ‘‘a name memorable in 
the traditions of Edinburgh as well as in the records of criminal 
jurisprudence” (Sir Walter Scott), took place in July, 1736, and 
in view of the strange and far-reaching events by which it was 
attended is certainly one of the most remarkable that ever came 
before the High Court of Justiciary. The editor has been fortunate 
enough to find in the British Museum and Public Record Office 
much unpublished material, throwing light upon what Professor 
Hume Brown, in his Aistory of Scotland, describes as “one of the 
most dramatic incidents in the national history.” Much new 
matter has also been obtained from the Records of Edinburgh 
Town Council and other original MSS. 


The Annesley Case. (1743.) Edited by ANDREW 
LANG. 


The Annesley Case, in which James Annesley claimed to be 
the legitimate heir of Arthur, third Lord Altham, was tried in 
Ireland in November, 1743. The claimant, James Annesley, if 
his story be true, enjoyed a life of adventure and romance that is 
seldom met with outside the pages of fiction. His early years 
were none too happy, and on the death of his father, Lord 


Notable British Trials Serves, 


Altham, he was destitute of all friends and depended upon the 
charity of others for his livelihood. The Earl of Anglesey, the 
defendant in the case, then came forward and claimed the title of 
Lord Altham, as brother and heir to the deceased lord, upon the 
supposition that the late lord had died without male issue. 
About four months after the death of the late Lord Altham, 
James Annesley was, through the instrumentality of the Earl of 
Anglesey, kidnapped, sent to America, and there sold for a 
common slave. He remained in this condition for a number of 
years until the story of his unfortunate life reached the ears of 
those who helped him to return once more to Great Britain, and 
there his case was taken up with such vigour as to enable him to 
obtain a verdict in his favour at the hands of the judges and jury 
before whom the case was tried. 


The Trial of Lord Lovat. (1747.) Edited by 
Davip N. Mackay. Dedicated to the Right 
Hon. Downatp James, Lorp Reavy. 


Lord Lovat’s trial in 1747 and his condemnation to death for 
treason marked the close of an epoch in Scottish history, the end 
of the clan period in the Highlands. When a hundred and 
seventeen peers answered, with weary monotony, “Guilty, upon 
my honour,” the public career of the last Scottish clan dictator 
came to anend. Thenceforward the name ‘ chief” was to be a 
thing of polite conceit, except when the bearer had other claims 
to respect. Tull then clan feeling had been a matter of vital 
importance, now it was to become one of the sentiments. 


The Trial of Mary Blandy. (1752.) Edited 
by Wititam Rovucueap. Dedicated to Lorp 
Dunsany. 


The heroine of this eighteenth century cause cé/ébre was convicted 
at Oxford Assizes in 1752 for the murder of her father at Henley 
by poisoning him with arsenic. Her defence was that she gave 
him the drug believing it to be a love philtre, with the view of 
making him ‘‘kind” to her lover, Captain Cranstoun, and 
removing his opposition to their marriage. Cranstoun escaped 
and died abroad, leaving the partner of his crime to pay the 
penalty. The introduction gives from contemporary sources a 
full account of the whole circumstances, which afford a graphic 
view of eighteenth century life and manners. The official report 
of the trial is reprinted verbatim, the appendices contain much 
new and unpublished material from the British Museum and 
Record Office, &c., and the illustrations include reproductions of 
all the known portraits of Mary Blandy. 


Notable British Trials Serves. 


The Trial of James Stewart. (1752.) Edited 
by Davin N. Mackay. Dedicated to 
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL FRASER. 


The outlines of the story of James Stewart’s life in Duror of 
Appin are familiar to all students of Scottish history and of those 
splendid romances by Robert Louis Stevenson—‘“ Kidnapped ” 
and “Catriona.” In view of the importance and interest of the 
case, the publishers have included in this edition a full reprint of 
the evidence and speeches so far as available, prefaced by a care- 
fully written introduction, and followed by biographical and 
other appendices which will enable the reader to realise the 
political and local surroundings of the story. 


Eugene Aram: His Life and Trial. (1759.) 
By Eric R. Watson, LL.B., Barrister-at-Law. 


In the year 1744-45 Daniel Clark was murdered at Knares- 
borough. In 1758 his bones were found and Eugene Aram 
arrested. In the following year he was tried and condemned for 
the murder. Bulwer’s famous novel and Tom Hood’s poem have 
kept this mystery alive, but it has remained for the present volume 
to present this famous case in its true light. 


The Douglas Cause. (1761-1769.) Edited by 
A. Francis STEvUART, Advocate. Dedicated to 
the Hon. Lorp GurTurie. 


The “Douglas Cause” is probably the greatest civil trial 
affecting s¢atus that Scotland will ever know, and no trial of its 
time created so great a sensation or aroused so much popular 
feeling. The Cause lasted in all for eight years. In 1761 
Archibald Steuart or Douglas was served heir, as nephew, of the 
late Duke of Douglas. This service was at once challenged by 
the tutors of the Duke’s heir male, the young Duke of Hamilton, 
who alleged that Archibald Douglas had no right to the Douglas 
estates, being a supposititious child. The legal proceedings came 
to their first halt in 1767, when the Court of Session—the four- 
teen judges of which were equally divided—gave, by the vote of 
the Lord President only, their judgment against the popular 
hero, young Douglas. He appealed to the House of Lords, 
and in 1769 had the satisfaction of being replaced in his position 
as heir to the Duke of Douglas, though not without the protest of 
five peers. 


Notable British Trials Sertes. 


The Trial of Katharine Nairn. (1765.) Edited 
by Witiram’ RovuGuHeap. Dedicated to 
Epmunp Lester PEARSON. 


The case of Katharine Nairn is one which presents innumerable 
points of interest to the criminologist and the psychologist. A girl 
of nineteen, daughter of a Perthshire baronet, Sir Thomas Nairn 
of Dunsinnan, she married Thomas Ogilvy of Eastmiln, a bonnet- 
laird and small farmer, more than twenty years her senior, in 
January, 1765. Four months afterwards he died suddenly, and 
suspicions that his wife had poisoned him, with the connivance of 
his brother, Lieutenant Patrick Ogilvy, culminated in their arrest 
on a double charge of incest and murder. The Trial of Katharine 
Nairn, which took place at Edinburgh in August, 1765, is one of 
the most celebrated of Scottish causes cé/ebres, but until now has 
been available to very few. Mr. Roughead has discovered a mass 
of new material relating to the trial, all of which is here set forth. 
In addition to an exhaustive introduction, there are numerous 
appendices containing matter now published for the first time, 
along with a portrait of Katharine Nairn, and invaluable facsimile 
reproductions of the actual handwriting and signatures of many 
concerned in this strange case. The book, apart from its interest 
for the lawyer and the layman, sheds a strong light upon the 
extraordinary, often incredible, customs of the time, and should 
prove a mine of valuable information to students of the period 
and all lovers of romance. 


The Trial of Deacon Brodie. (1788.) Edited 
by Witti14m RovuGueap. Dedicated to the 
Hon. Lorp Duwpas. 


The trial of William Brodie for breaking into and robbing the 
General Excise Office for Scotland took place on 27th and 28th 
August, 1788. No more picturesque and striking figure than 
Deacon Brodie ever appeared at the bar of the High Court of 
Justiciary, and the story of his strange career, as unfolded in the 
course of the trial, is as enthralling as any romance. The double 
life which he so long and successfully led—as a respected citizen 
and town councillor by day, and by night the captain of a band of 
housebreakers—was the wonder of the Edinburgh of his time, and 
is still remembered as a triumph of skilful duplicity. His fame 
has acquired fresh lustre from the interest which his character 
aroused in Robert Louis Stevenson, who embodied Deacon 
Brodie in a play and owed to him the original conception of Dr. 
Jekyli and Mr. Hyde. 


Notable British Trials Series. 


The Trial of Abraham Thornton. (1817.) 
Edited by Sir Joun Hatt, Bart. 


On the morning of Whit Tuesday, May 27th, 1817, the body 
of Mary Ashford was found in a pond near Sutton Coldfield. 
The surrounding circumstances suggested that she had been 
criminally assaulted and murdered. The night before she had 
attended a village dance at which Abraham Thornton, a young 
man in a somewhat superior station of life, had paid her marked 
attentions. Public opinion with one voice pronounced him 
guilty. Nevertheless, at the subsequent assizes at Warwick, he 
was acquitted. So unpopular was this verdict that an obsolete 
process of law was revised, an appeal of murder was ‘‘sued out,” 
Abraham Thornton was re-artested and had to plead at West- 
minster Hall to a charge of which, three months earlier, he had 
been declared ‘‘not guilty” by a jury of his countrymen. The 
legal arguments occupied the attention of Lord Ellenborough and 
three of his learned brethren for several months, and when at last 
Thornton was discharged the feeling against him was still so 
strong that he was obliged to emigrate to America. The scandal 
of these proceedings led the Attorney-General to bring in a bill, 
which was placed upon the statute book in 1819, abolishing 
appeals of murder and the ordeal by battle. If for no other 
reason, therefore, Abraham Thornton’s trial is memorable as 
having brought about a change in the law. But to most people 
this aspect of the case will be overshadowed by the human 
interest attaching to the story. For to this day the actual 
circumstances of poor Mary Ashford’s death can only be a 
matter of conjecture. 


The Trial of Henry Fauntleroy. (1824.) 
Edited by Horace Bieackiey, M.A.(Oxon.). 


When Henry Fauntleroy, the banker, was brought to trial for 
forging a power of attorney on October 30, 1824, it caused the 
greatest excitement throughout the whole of Great Britain. The 
accused man was a gentleman of position, and the crime with 
which he was charged was punishable by death in the open street 
at the hands of the common hangman, and, according to the 
newspapers, Fauntleroy had led a most luxurious and dissipated 
life. The evidence at the trial was clear to conclusive; the 
criminal had swindled the Bank of England to the amount of 
£265,000; he was found guilty and condemned to death. 
Great efforts were made to secure a reprieve, without success, 
and the unfortunate banker was hanged in front of Newgate 
Prison, on November 30, 1824. This volume of the “Notable 
Trials” Series contains the fullest report of the Fauntleroy trial 


Notable British Trials Sertes. 


that has yet been published together with a full account of his 
very interesting career and a complete description of his various 
forgeries. His pedigree is given and many contemporary 
portraits. There are also lengthy accounts of the lives and 
crimes, based upon most elaborate research, of the following 
forgers, most of whom suffered the penalty of death:—John 
Ayliffe, John Rice, Daniel and Robert Perreau, Dr. William 
Dodd, William Wynne Ryland, Henry Cook, Henry Weston, 
John Hadfield, Joseph Blackburn, Henry Savary, Captain John 
Montgomery, Joseph Hunton, Rowland Stephenson, M.P., 
Thomas Maynard. 


The Trial of Thurtell and Hunt.  (1824.) 
Edited by Eric R. Watson, LL.B., Barrister- 
at-Law. Dedicated to Sir Harry B. PoLanp. 


The trial of Thurtell and Hunt at Hertford Assizes on 6th 
January, 1824, before Mr. Justice Park, for the murder of Mr. 
Weare in Gill’s Hill Lane, near Elstree, is probably now best 
remembered by the familiar lines which contain a succinct account 
of the tragedy :— 

His throat they cut from ear to ear, 
His brains they battered in ; 
His name was Mr. William Weare, 

He lived in Lyon’s Inn. 

But, in its day, it was the subject of universal interest, and Sir 
Walter Scott himself visited the scene of the crime. The present 
volume gives, for the first time, a full account of the whole 
circumstances of the murder, together with a verbatim report of 
the legal proceedings, which resulted in the conviction of both 
prisoners. It is illustrated with many rare portraits of the persons 
concerned, views of the locus, &c., and forms a complete and 
authentic report of one of our most famous criminal cases. 


Burke and Hare. (1828.) Edited by Witiiam 
RouGcHeap. Dedicated to Professor HARVEY 
LirtLejoun. [Also a Limited Edition, price, 
25/- net, containing the whole proceed- 
ings against Hare, and several additional 
Appendices |. 

The names of Burke and Hare are familiar as household words 
wherever the English language is spoken. The magnitude of 


their crimes—they confessed to a minimum of sixteen murders— 
established a record in homicide. These miscreants, incited by 


Notable British Triats Sertes. 


the large sums paid by anatomists for subjects for dissection, 
conceived the scheme of establishing in Edinburgh a sort of 
murder factory, in order regularly to supply surgeons with 
material. Throughout the year 1828, the business was successfully 
conducted, the purchaser in every instance being the notorious 
Dr. Knox, the extra-mural rival of the Professor of Anatomy. 
The discovery of their last crime resulted in the apprehension of 
the gang, including Burke’s mistress, M‘Dougal, and Hare’s wife. 
Owing to the difficulty of securing a conviction the Crown was 
forced to accept the Hares as King’s evidence. At the trial 
Burke was found guilty and M‘Dougal was acquitted. 


The Trial of William Palmer. (1856.) Edited 
by Gerorce H. Kvwort, Barrister-at-Law. 
Dedicated to Sir Harry B. Potanp. Second 
Edition, edited by Eric R. Watson, LL.B. 


The trial of William Palmer, which took place in May, 1856, 
was, in the opinion of Sir James Stephen, the eminent jurist, one 
of the greatest trials in the history of English law. The events 
which led up to the trial occurred in November, 1855, at Rugeley, 
in Staffordshire, where Palmer, who was about thirty-one years of 
age, had been a medical practitioner until two or three years 
previously. | Mr. John Parsons Cook, whom Palmer was charged 
with poisoning, was a young man of about twenty-eight, who had 
been articled as a solicitor, but he inherited some £12,000 and 
did not follow his profession. He also went on the turf, kept 
racehorses, and betted, and it was in this common pursuit that 
Palmer and Cook became acquainted. Three judges were 
appointed to try the case: a very rare occurrence in England. 
The bar on each side was exceedingly strong, and during the 
course of the trial some of the most celebrated chemists and 
physicians were called upon to testify either for or against the 
prisoner. In the end Palmer was found guilty of the crime 
charged against him and suffered the last penalty of the law. 


The Trial of Madeleine Smith. (1857.) 
Edited by A. Duncan Situ, F.S.A.(Scot.). 
Dedicated to the Hon. Lorp Youne. 


_ Madeleine Smith, the daughter of a well-known and respected 
citizen of Glasgow, was tried at Edinburgh in June, 1857, for the 
murder of Pierre Emile L’Angelier. When still young Miss Smith 
made the acquaintance of L’Angelier, who was a clerk ina Glasgow 
warehouse and much below her in social station. From the first 


Notable British Trials Series. 


their association was of a clandestine nature ; meetings and inter- 
views became frequent, and when these were found impracticable, 
affectionately worded missives were exchanged. On her becoming 
engaged to a gentleman in her own station of life Miss Smith 
endeavoured to get back from L’Angelier the compromising letters 
she had written him, but without success. At the trial of Miss 
Smith which followed the sudden death of L’Angelier the case for 
the Crown was that death was due to arsenical poisoning, and 
that on several occasions Miss Smith had supplied L’Angelier with 
cocoa or coffee poisoned with arsenic. 


The Trial of Mrs. M‘Lachlan. (1862.) Edited 
by Wititram RovuGHEap. Dedicated to 
ANDREW LANG. 


This case created an enormous sensation in its day, and is still 
remembered by its once famous name of “The Sandyford Mystery.” 
After the prisoner had been convicted of the murder of her friend 
and fellow-servant, Jessie M‘Pherson, the Government took the 
unusual step of appointing a Crown Commissioner to take fresh 
evidence to test the truth of a statement the prisoner had made 
after the verdict of guilty had been returned against her, with the 
result that the sentence of death was commuted to penal servitude. 
The action of the Government was the subject of lengthy debates 
in the House of Commons. The dramatic scene in which the 
convicted woman in the dock denounced the chief witness for the 
Crown as the actual murderer is unparalleled in the records of 
criminal trials. 


The Trial of Franz Muller. (1864.) Edited by 
H. B. Irvine. Dedicated to Lorp HAtssury. 


On the night of Saturday, the 9th of July, 1864, a suburban 
train on the North London Railway arrived at Hackney about ten 
minutes past ten o’clock. A passenger who was about to enter a 
compartment noticed it was covered with blood, and in the 
carriage a hat, stick, and bag were found. About twenty minutes 
past ten on the same night a driver of a train noticed the body of 
a man lying on the six-foot way between Hackney Wick and Bow 
stations. The unfortunate man was still alive, but his skull had 
been fractured, and late the following night he expired from his 
injuries. Great public indignation was aroused by the crime, and 
the inquiries which followed resulted in suspicion falling upon a 
man named Miiller who was found to have left London for 
America. He was followed by two detectives and subsequently 


iP 


Notable British Trials Sertes. 


arrested on board the “Victoria” when it arrived in New York 
harbour. An eminent array of counsel were engaged in the case, 
and after a four days’ trial Miller was found guilty and sentenced 
to death. Miiller suffered the last penalty of the law on the 14th 
November, 1864. 


The Trial of Dr. Pritchard. (1865.) Edited 
by Witiiam RovucuHeap. Dedicated to Sir 
Davip BRAND. 


Dr. Pritchard was a well-known medical practitioner in Glasgow, 
where he resided with his wife and family. He was charged with 
the double murder of his wifé and mother-in-law by poisoning 
them. After a trial which lasted five days and abounded in 
sensational incidents, Pritchard was found guilty, and was 
executed on 28th July, 1865, this being the last public execution 
in Scotland. The amazing hypocrisy of Dr. Pritchard affords a 
psychological study of high interest. Seldom has a more cruel 
and crafty miscreant graced the gallows. The sensational 
evidence of Dr. Paterson, who had seen the victims when alive 
and believed that they were being poisoned, yet maintained that 
it would have been contrary to medical etiquette for him to have 
interfered to save their lives, was one of the features of 
the trial. 5; 


The Trial of the Wainwrights. (1375.) Edited 
by H. B. Irvine and Sir Epwarp MarsHaLu 
Hatt, K.C. 


The trial of the Wainwright brothers for the murder of Harriet 
Lane was one of the most notorious cases of the early seventies. 
It was tried at the Central Criminal Court, London, before Lord 
Chief Justice Cockburn on 22nd November, 1875, and resulted in 
the conviction of both prisoners. Henry Wainwright, a married 
man with a family, had long led a double life, and when his affairs 
became embarrassed he determined to rid himself ot his mistress, 
Harriet Lane, who was pressing him for money. His brother, 
Thomas, under the assumed name of Frieake, pretended that he 
was going to provide for her. On 11th September, 1874, she left 
her lodgings and was never seen again alive. To her relatives 
Wainwright said that she had gone off with “Frieake.” Exactly 
twelve months afterwards Wainwright was apprehended in the act of 
transferring from acab to his brother’s business premises two 
parcels which were found to contain the dismembered body of a 
female. At his own place of business in Whitechapel Road a 


Notable British Trials Serves. 


grave was found in which the remains had been buried for a year. 
The murder was committed with a revolver, the three shots from 
which had been heard by workmen in an adjoining yard. But for 
Wainwright’s folly in leaving the parcels in the custody of an 
innocent third party while he himself went in search of a cab, it is 
probable that the crime would have remained a mystery. The 
defence denied the identity of the body with that of the missing 
woman ; but the facts were too strong for them, and Henry was 
sentenced to death, Thomas to seven years’ penal servitude. 


The Trial of The Stauntons, (1877.) Edited 
by J. B. Artay, Barrister-at-Law. Dedicated 
to Sir Epwarp Criarkg, K.C. 


The case of the Stauntons, or, as it was more generally known, 
the Penge mystery, will always rank among the English causes 
célebres of the last century. It aroused at the time an amount of 
excitement and interest among all classes of the community for 
which it would be hard to find a parallel. The case was tried in 
September of 1877 at the Old Bailey before Sir Henry Hawkins, 
recently appointed to the bench, and lasted for a week. There 
were four prisoners on trial, Louis Staunton, his brother, Patrick 
Staunton, Mrs. Patrick Staunton, and Alice Rhodes, a sister of 
Mrs. Patrick Staunton. They were charged with the murder of 
Mrs. Louis Staunton by starvation and were all found guilty and 
sentenced to death. Strong representations, however, were made 
to the Home Secretary by the leaders of the medical profession in 
favour of the hypothesis of natural disease and the prisoners were 
reprieved, though only on the day before the date fixed for their 
execution. Alice Rhodes, against whom there was practically no 
evidence of anything but adultery, was at once released; the 
Stauntons were sentenced to long terms of penal servitude. 


The Trial of Eugene Marie Chantrelle. 
(1878.) Edited by A. Duncan Situ. Dedi- 
cated to Sir Henry D. LITTLEJOHN. 


The trial of Eugene Marie Chantrelle, for the murder of his 
wife by poison, occupies a conspicuous position in the annals of 
Scottish criminal jurisprudence. The evidence in the case was 
almost entirely circumstantial, and it undoubtedly derived its 
force from a continuous series of particulars, any one of which, in 
itself, would have justified no more than a mere suspicion 
against the accused. Mr. Aitken Ransome in an article in the 
Bookman said: ‘Although nothing is written in the way sen- 


Notable British Trials Series. 


sational novelists believe it necessary to write in order to produce 
curiosity and excitement, no book for a long time has so detained 
me against my will. And why? Simply because its form is the 
best conceivable for the development of a single sensation and 
the gradual scientific exposition of an extraordinary type of mind.” 


The Trial of Kate Webster. (1879.) Edited 
by Exztiotr O’Donnett. Dedicated to Sir 
Harry Bopxin Poranp, K.C. 


In Mr. Elliott O’Donnell’s introduction to this volume, which 
he has edited, there is set forth as much as could be gathered 
together of the history of Kate Webster, the murderess of Miss 
Thomas, of Richmond, from the day of her birth to the moment 
of her execution. It also contains many original and striking 
comments on her character and references to certain analogous 
cases, 7.¢., in which other female servants have murdered their 
mistresses. The trial, at which Sir H. B. Bodkin, K.C., to whom 
this volume is dedicated, appeared for the prosecution, is given in 
full. In reading these pages it is easy to understand why the 
trial not only excited such an almost unparalleled sensation at the 
time, but left behind it a panic so great and continuous, for, apart 
from the barbarity of the crime itself and all its appalling accom- 
paniments, the case presents various novel features. For example, 
there is the clever impersonation of the murdered woman by the 
‘ murderess ; the very ingenious manner in which the murderess 
tried to incriminate several innocent men, and very nearly suc- 
ceeded ; the extraordinary nature and number of her statements 
and confessions, and her very exceptional personality and psycho- 
logy. These and sundry other features combined in imparting to 
the case a grim fascination that is, perhaps, unique. 


The Trial of the City of Glasgow Bank 
Directors. (1879.) Edited by Wutiiam 
Wattace, Advocate. 


The trial of the City Bank Directors ranks in the estimation at 
least of the layman, if not of the professional lawyer, as probably 
the most important which has taken place in Scotland. The 
magnitude of the financial crisis brought about by the collapse of 
the Bank, the social standing of the Directors to whose hands the 
management of it was entrusted, the startling nature of the 
evidence adduced by the prosecution, all combined to invest the 
trial with an interest which is not surpassed in the annals of our 
criminal jurisprudence, 


Notable British Trials Sertes. 


The Trials of Charles Peace. (1879.) Edited 
by W. TeicnmoutTH SuHore. 


Charles Peace holds a very distinguished place in the annals of 
British crime, presenting an entrancing personality to students of 
criminology and of criminal psychology, and his Trials are far 
from uninteresting from the purely legal point of view. Burglar, 
murderer, and a very minor artist; callous, brutal, remorseless ; 
yet, somewhat like Robin Hood, almost a figure of admiration 
to the populace in his own days and in ours. For the writing of 
his life the materials are ample, but too frequently of poor 
quality. Around famous men legends rapidly gather and are 
useful when they are fairly contemporary; for their general 
character is sure to be consonant with that of the man himself. 
The legend of Shakespeare’s deer-stealing would not have been 
invented, certainly would not have survived, if the poet had been 
incapable of poaching or had been notoriously no sportsman. In 
the pages of this volume a stern attempt has been made to 
present facts only, and a vast mass of gossip and irresponsible 
assertions has been rejected. Much has been written about 
Charles Peace, but this account may be taken as the first attempt 
to present faithfully the man and his work; every attainable 
source of information has been tapped, with the result that much 
new matter has been discovered and many fables scotched. 


The Trial of Dr. Lamson. (1882.) Edited 
by Harcrave L. Apam. Dedicated to Sir 
CuarLes Matuews, 


Dr. Lamson was tried in the year 1882 for the murder of his 
nephew, Percy Malcolm John. This is one of the few cases 
recorded where the poison used was aconitine. John, although 
nineteen years of age, was at school when the poison was ad- 
ministered to him, the motive for the murder being some small 
property which he had, and which would partly revert to Dr. 
Lamson on his death. The trial took place before Mr. Justice 
Hawkins, and Lamson was found guilty. Although great 
pressure was brought to bear, especially from America, to obtain 
a commutation of the sentence, he was eventually hanged. 


The Trial of Mrs. Maybrick. (1889.) Edited 
by H. B. Irvine. Dedicated to the Hon. Sir 


WILLIAM PICKFORD. 


James Maybrick, a Liverpool cotton broker, died at his resi- 
dence, Battlecrease House, Aigburth, on Saturday, the 11th of 


Notable British Trials Sertes. 


May, 1889, under mysterious circumstances. He was fifty years 
old at the time of his death. A suspicion had arisen in the 
minds of some of those attending on Mr. Maybrick during his 
illness that his wife was attempting to poison him. She was 
arrested after his death, and tried for his murder at the Liverpool 
Assizes. She was convicted, and sentenced to death on the 7th 
of August, 1889. On the 22nd of August this sentence was 
commuted by the Home Secretary to one of penal servitude for 
life. Mrs. Maybrick served fifteen years of imprisonment, and 
was released on the 25th of January, 1904. The justice of Mrs. 
Maybrick’s conviction was gravely questioned at the time, and 
has been the subject of criticism ever since. 


The Trial of Thomas Neill Cream. (1892.) 
Edited by W. TEIGNMOUTH SHORE. 


Thomas Neill Cream was one of the most brutal scoundrels 
ever hung, and to the student of criminology affords a most 
interesting “subject.” From youth upward he was a murderer, 
unscrupulous and unmerciful. His character was complex; 
sometimes he murdered for money, sometimes apparently for sheer 
love of slaughter, lust of cruelty. Born in Glasgow in 1850, he 
was taken as a boy to Canada, where he was well educated. He 
studied medicine, and qualified as a physician and surgeon both 
there and in this country. From the start of his professional 
career in Canada and Chicago he adopted murder as a means of 
livelihood and seemingly of pleasure, the climax being the series 
of murders he committed in Lambeth in the year 1891. And in 
the end he very nearly escaped the just recompense of his crimes, 
as it was by no means easy to bring his misdeeds home to him. 
He was hung for murdering an unfortunate named Matilda Clover, 
his guilt being brought home to him by his having shown an 
intimate knowledge of the cause of her death before any one had 
suspected foul play. Also at the trial in October, 1892, Mr. 
Justice Hawkins admitted as evidence against the accused proof 
that he had made a practice of buying poison such as had been 
administered to Matilda Clover, and that he was almost certainly 
guilty of other and similar crimes. 


The Trial of A.J. Monson. (1893.) Edited by 
Joun W. Mors, Advocate. Dedicated to the 
Lorp Justrice-CLerk. 

The trial of Alfred John Monson on the double charge of 


attempting to murder and of murdering Windsor Dudley Cecil 
Hambrough, at Ardlamont, Argyllshire, may be placed in the 


Notable British Trials Series. 


list of Scottish trials as the most important which has taken place 
since that of Madeleine Smith. The circumstances of the alleged 
crime, the place where it occurred, and the social position of the 
accused and his alleged victim, were of such a kind as to at once 
arrest attention and to make people look with interested eyes to the 
High Court of Justiciary in Edinburgh, where, on 12th December, 
1893, the prosecution and the defence began their efforts, 
extending over ten long days, to get at the heart of the mystery. 


The Trial of Adolf Beck. (1904). Edited 
by Eric R. Watson, LL.B. 


The abiding peculiarity of Adolf Beck’s case consists in 
several things not commonly found in the general run of 
“mistaken identity defences,” though, as will be seen, it has 
parallels. First there is a very confident identification of Beck 
by a very intelligent woman in the street as the man who had 
defrauded her three weeks before. Then we have him recognised 
by an honest retired police officer as the actual criminal. We 
find this criminal by mere chance using the same haunts as Beck 
and wearing very similar clothes. We find a thing that, in the 
experience of a learned judge, almost never happens, a man 
challenging, and with justice, his identity as a person previously 
convicted of the same class of crime. Finally we find Providence, 
if it be not presumptuous to try to trace the finger of God in the 
detection of human guilt, bringing the truth at last to light by 
suffering the actual offender to persist in his wicked courses, when 
the innocent, but by no means estimable, wrongly convicted 
Beck was again under lock and key. 


The Trial of Oscar Slater. (1909.) Edited by 
Wiiu1Am RouGHEeap. Dedicated to the Hon. 
Lorp GUTHRIE. 


The case of Oscar Slater, who was tried in May, 1909, for the 
murder of Miss Marion Gilchrist, excited widespread interest at 
the time, and, by reason of the sensational rumours of which it 
was the occasion, exercised the popular imagination for many 
months. But apart from these, the case itself contains elements 
sufficiently strange and suggestive to supply, in an unwonted 
degree, a legitimate and lasting interest. The trial at Edinburgh ; 
the obvious weakness of certain links in the formidable chain 
forged by the Crown; the surprising verdict; and, finally, the 
illogical and unsatisfactory reprieve, combined to merit for this 
case a conspicuous niche in the gallery of Scottish causes célébres. 


Notable British Trials Series. 


The Trial of Hawley Harvey Crippen. (1910.) 
Edited by Firson Younc. Dedicated to Sir 
Bast. Horne Tuomson, C.B. 


No trial of modern times was more widely known and discussed 
than that of ‘‘Dr.” Crippen for the murder of his wife, and few 
cases are richer in the human and dramatic interest which con- 
stitutes the chief appeal of a great crime. The character of the 
criminal and his passion for his mistress; the contrasted types of 
the two women, the one the victim of his hate, the other of his 
love ; the unusual method of the murder ; the sensational flight of 
Crippen and Le Neve and their subsequent arrest at sea; and the 
later disclosures of the trial at the Old Bailey ; combine to give to 
this case its unique attraction and a place by itself in the 
catalogue of crime. 


The Trial of John Alexander Dickman. 
(1910.) Edited by S. O. Rowan-Hamitton, 
Barrister-at-Law. Dedicatedto_Lorp COLERIDGE. 


The crime with which John Alexander Dickman was charged 
at Newcastle Assizes in July, 1910, was the sixth murder com- 
mitted in a railway carriage since the introduction of railways into 
England. _ He was convicted, upon purely circumstantial 
evidence, of the murder, in a train near Morpeth, of John Innes 
Nisbet who was carrying a bag containing 4370 to pay wages at 
a colliery. The identification of the prisoner was far from con- 
clusive, and the unsatisfactory account of his conduct and move- 
ments which he gave in the box was mainly accountable for the 
verdict. The case is a remarkable example of the operation of 
the Criminal Evidence Act of 1898. The full text of the trial is 
printed, including the cross-examination of the prisoner which 
virtually sealed his fate, and the introduction contains a complete 
history of the case and of the many interesting and important 
points to which it gave rise. 


The Trial of Steinie Morrison.  (1911.) 
Edited by the Hon. H. Fiercuer Moutron, 
B.A.(Cantab.), Barrister-at-Law. Dedicated to 
the Hon. Mr. Justice Dar ine. 


Steinie Morrison was convicted of murdering Leon Beron 
a Russian Jew, who was found dead on Clapham Common on 
New Year’s Day, 1911. His face had been mutilated by a knife 
and two large S’s—“‘the mark of vengeance”—had been cut on 


Notable Brittsh Trials Sertes. 


the cheeks. The sentence of death was commuted to one of 
penal servitude, and Morrison, still protesting his innocence, died 
from semi-starvation in Parkhurst Prison Infirmary some years 
later. What makes this trial of continued interest is the picture 
it gives of a life in London almost unaffected by ordinary con- 
ditions, a life in which men who do no work stay all day in 
restaurants ; where a man with an income of fifteen shillings a 
week is described as a retired gentleman living on his means, and 
where a man is one day a waiter and the next day a customer in 
the same eating-house. 


The Trial of the Seddons. (1912.) Edited by 
Fitson Younc. Dedicated to Sir Epwarp 
MarsHati Hatt, K.C. 


The trial of Mr. and Mrs. Seddon in 1o12 for the murder of 
Miss Barrow, their wealthy lodger, forms an important commen- 
tary on the value and effect of purely circumstantial evidence. 
The wife was acquitted; the husband was found guilty, and was 
duly executed. The victim died from the effects of arsenic, but 
possession of that poison was not brought home to the prisoners, 
nor was there any evidence of administration. Seddon was 
probably convicted as the result of his appearance in the witness 
box, and the case is an instructive illustration of the working of 
the Criminal Evidence Act. The full text of the trial is given, 
including the speeches of the Attorney-General (Sir Rufus Isaacs) 
for the Prosecution and of Mr. Marshall Hall for the Defence, 
and in the introduction the main features of the case are focussed 
in a way which shows that criminology, handled by a man of 
letters, can be made interesting to a far larger public than the 
legal fraternity affords. 


The Trial of George Joseph Smith. (1915.) 
Edited by Eric R. Watson, LL.B., Barrister- 
at-Law. Dedicated to ArTHuUR NEIL. 


George Joseph Smith, executed for the first of a series of 
murders, which are mostly remembered by the public as the 
“Brides in the Bath Murders,” was one of the most remarkable 
criminals of all time. An old reformatory boy, dismissed in 
pre-war days with ignominy from Her Majesty’s service, so 
ignorant that in the summer of 1915 he spelt “German” witb an 
initial “J,” he yet contrived to win golden opinions from most 
women and many men, the chaplain who finally attended him 
and the bishop who confirmed him in Maidstone gaol being 


Q 


Notable British Trials Series. 


amongst those who could scarcely believe in his guilt. The 
method of the murderer was entirely novel, and demonstrated 
the possibility, nay ease, of drowning an adult woman without 
bruising her. 


The Trial of Sir Roger Casement. (1916.) 
Edited by Grorce H. Kwort, Barrister-at- 
Law. Dedicated to the Lorp Cuter JusTICE 
and the Hon. Mr. Justice Dartine. 


Though the trial of Casement for High Treason in the High 
Court of Justice in 1916 was but one of the minor sensations of 
the Great War, yet its intrinsic imterest and historical importance 
well warrant this authentic report of the proceedings. Casement, 
having held divers high appointments under the British Crown, 
having been knighted for his services and having retired on a 
pension, upon the outbreak of hostilities proceeded to Germany 
where he was actively employed in inciting the Irish prisoners of 
war to join the German arms against England. The frustration 
of his attempt to run men, arms, and ammuition with a view to 
raising a rebellion in Ireland reads more like some tale of strange 
adventure than sober history. A full report of the trial is here 
given, as well as of the no less important proceedings in the Court 
of Criminal Appeal, together with many documents and photo- 
graphs illustrative of the case. 


The Trial of Ronald True. (1922.) Edited 
by Donatp Carswett. Dedicated to the 
Right Hon. Lorp Justice ATKIN. 


The criminal responsibility of the insane has for many years been 
a source of acute controversy between lawyers and medical men. 
Should insanity be an absolute defence to a criminal charge? 
If not, is the law in a position, having regard to the general 
principles of natural justice, to formulate the conditions the 
defence may be a good one? On these questions law and 
medicine join issue. Neither at present can give a wholly satis- 
factory answer. The case of Ronald True has been included in 
the Notable British Trials Series on account of the precision with 
which it exposes this medico-legal dilemma. Unfortunately the 
inherent difficulty of the subject has been aggravated by the 
misconceptions and prejudices with which it is surrounded. The 
editorial introduction has therefore been written with the object 
of clearing these away and setting the problem in a proper 


Notable British Trials Sertes. 


perspective. In his réswmdé of the facts Mr. Carswell gives a 
fascinating study in morbid psychology, and his historical and 
critical exposition of the English law of criminal responsibility 
makes Zhe Trial of Ronald True a valuable addition to the 
library of the criminal lawyer and the alienist. 


The Trial of Frederick Bywaters and Edith 
Thompson. (1922.) Edited by Fitson 
Younc. Dedicated to Herpert Austin. 


The trial of Frederick Bywaters and Edith Thompson on a 
joint charge of murder took place at the Old Bailey on 6th 
December, 1922, and the following days. They were jointly 
charged with the murder of Percy Thompson; a second indict- 
ment of conspiracy not being proceeded with. It had come 
out in the Police Court proceedings that Mrs. Thompson had 
written a long series of letters to Bywaters, during his voyages in 
a ship on board of which he was employed as laundry-steward. 
In these letters, strangely mingled with passionate expressions of 
love and long dissertations on books which she was reading, 
were the most direct and definite references to alleged attempts 
which she represented herself as making on the life of her husband. 
Constant references to poison and to the use of ground glass, 
passionate appeals that Bywaters would “send her something” 
which would achieve the desired end appear in these letters, 
which, when read aloud in Court, produced a very great effect on 
the jury. Nevertheless, the case for the prosecution was a weak 
one, inasmuch as there was no witness of the murder, except 
possibly Mrs. Thompson; and if she had not gone into the 
witness-box it is very unlikely that the jury could have convicted 
Bywaters of anything more than manslaughter, or that they could 
have convicted her at all. But she insisted on going into the 
witness-box; and under cross-examination, in the attempt to 
explain the references to poison and so forth in the letters, she 
stated that she was writing to Bywaters asking him to send her 
something which, administered to Percy Thompson, who suffered 
from heart attacks, would have so impaired his strength that when 
he next had a heart attack he would not have recovered. This 
admission hanged her. 


. 
* 
v4 


2 
a” ¢ rq : ns ¢ 
> 


a 


I 


ym ob 


v3 
r 
» & 


> ale 


