it 


Hh 
wy 


te 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 


https://archive.org/details/trialofsteiniemoOO000hfle 


Wotable British Trials 


Steinie Morrison 


NOTABLE BRITISH TRIALS SERIES. 


Madeleine Smith. Edited by A. Duncan 
Smith. 


- Dr. Pritchard. Edited by William Roughead. 
The Stauntons. Edited by J. B. Atlay, 


Barrister-at-Law. 
-Franz Muller. Edited by H. B. Irving. 
*The Annesley Case. Edited by Andrew Lang. 
-Lord Lovat. Edited by David N. Mackay. 
Captain Porteous. Edited by William 
Roughead. 
William Palmer. Edited by Geo. H. Knott, 
Barrister-at-Law. 
Mrs. Maybrick. Edited by H. B. Irving. 
» Dr. Lamson. Edited by H. L. Adam. 
-Mary Blandy. Edited by William Roughead. 


City of Glasgow {Bank Directors. Hdited 
by William Wallace, Advocate. 


» Deacon Brodie. Edited by William Roughead. 
James Stewart. Edited by David N. Mackay. 
-A. J. Monson. Edited by J. W. More, 
Advocate. 
» Oscar Slater. Edited by William Roughead. 


Eugene Marie Chantrelle. Edited by A. 
Duncan Smith, Advocate. 


The Douglas Cause. Edited by A. Francis 
Steuart, Advocate. 


*Mrs.M‘Lachlan. Edited by William Roughead. 


Eugene Aram. LEdited by Eric Watson, 
Barrister-at-Law. 


«J. A. Dickman. Edited by 8S. O. Rowan- 
Hamilton, Barrister-at-Law. 


+The Seddons. Edited by Filson Young. 
Sir Roger Casement. Hdited by Geo. H. 
Knott, Barrister-at-Law. 
The Wainwrights, Edited by H. B. Irving. 
*H. H. Crippen. Edited by Filson Young. 
‘Thurtell and Hunt. Edited by Eric Watson. 


Burke and Hare. Edited by William 
Roughead, 


Steinie Morrison. Edited by the Hon. 
H. Fletcher Moulton. 


IN PREPARATION. 
George Joseph Smith. Edited by Eric 
Watson. 


Mary Queen of Scots. Edited by A. Francis 
Steuart. 


Particulars may be had from the Publishers. 


Wm. Hodge & Co., Ltd., Edinburgh and London. 


Steinie Morrison. 


oirial of 


Steinie Morrison 


EDITED BY 


H, Fletcher Moulton, B.A.(Cantab.) 


OF THE MIDDLE TEMPLE, BARRISTER-AT-LAW 


LONDON AND EDINBURGH 


WILLIAM HODGE & COMPANY, LIMITED 


PRINTED BY 
WILLIAM HODGE & COMPANY, LIMITED 
GLASGOW AND EDINBURGH 


January, 1922 


TO 
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE SIR CHARLES JOHN DARLING 

THIS VOLUME 

Is 
BY KIND PERMISSION 
RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED 

BY 

THE EDITOR 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 
Introduction, RAEN ae ee pees EA EF OO meet 
Table of Dates, - - - - - - - . - - - - Xxxi 
The Trial— 
First Day—Monpay, 6TH Marcu, 1911. 
Opening Statement for the Crown, - - - : E 2 E 3 3 
Hvidence for the Prosecution. 
David Davis, - - - - 7 Joseph Needham, - : AO 
Joseph Mumford, - - - 8 Solomon Beron, - - =D 
Frederick Freyberger,  - Seed! Alexander Snelwar, - - = 28 
Srconp Day—Turspay, 7TH Marcu, 1911. 
Hvidence for the Prosecution (continued). 
Joe Mintz, - - - Se 28 Israel Zaltzman, - - coo 
Henry Hermilin, . - - 40 Mrs. Nellie Deitch, - - 54, 67, 77 
Jack Taw, - - : - 44 Edward Hayman, - - 60, 81 
Jacob Weissberg,  - - - 51 
Tuirp Day—WeEDNESDAY, 8TH Marcu, 1911. 
Evidence for the Prosecution (continued). 
Andrew Stephens, - - 5 Gy Harry Jeffries, - - - = 82 
Charles Cooper, - = = 75,112 James Bellinger, : - eee 
Alfred Castlin, - - - - 78 Frederick Wensley, - 83, 102, 217 
Thomas Pithers, - - 81, 215 William Brogden, - - 88 
Thomas Green, - - - F aaelll Henry Dessent, - - 2= 90 
Harold Clockfield, - - 782 Charles Staff, - - - - 90 
Aaron Weisman, - - - - 82 John Harris, - - - -- 90 
Walter Ellis, - : 82 Roderick Mackenzie, - - 90 
Abraham Stitcher, - 82 Richard Nursey, - = at Od 
Isaac Flitterman, - 82 Alfred Ward, - - - 91, 93 
Fourta Day—Tuurspay, 9TH Marcu, 1911. 
Hvidence for the Prosecution (continued). 
Maurice Myers, - - oe alls: Dr. William Robert Smith, - 116 
Alfred Perry, - : - - 113 Dr. William Henry Willcox, - 118 
John Jones, - - - = 21i3 
Opening Speech for the Defence, . - . = “ 2 : - 120 
Evidence for the Defence. 
John Holmes Greaves, - - - 123, 222 
- = HL25. 


Mrs. Annie Zimmerman, - - 


CONTENTS. 


Firrnh Day—Fripay, 10TH Marcu, 1911. 
Evidence for the Defence (continued). 


Eli Gilbert, ~ - - - 130 William Whiddett, - 
Maurice Zimmerman, - - 130 Frederick Stalden Crocher, 
Mrs. Esther Grose, - - - 131 Michael Goldberg, 
Esther Brodsky, - - 132, 144 Mrs. Florrie Dellow, 
Jane Brodsky, - - - 186, 145 Mrs. Anna Hall, - 
Max Mannis, - - 144 Herbert Raggett, 
Ernest Melbourne Edward Lewis, William Cunningham, 

148, 154 Steinie Morrison, - 
Tsabel Saunders, - - - 148 


Sixto Day—Saturpay, lltH Marc, 1911. 
Evidence for the Defence (continued). 


Steinie Morrison, : - - 


SrventH Day—Monpay, 13TH Marcu, 1911. 


Evidence for the Defence (continued). 


Steinie Morrison, - = = 193 Francis Edmond Bell, 
Dr. Jonathan Tearnley, - - 211 Ernest Laundy, - 
Joseph Alburn Bunker, - - 215 Abraham Feldman, - 
Willoughby Lancelot Vining, - 215 Lewis Minchinsky, 


Further evidence for the Prosecution. 


Hector Munro, - - = - “ E 3 
Stephen Dart, : - - = : 5 E 
Mr. Abinger’s Closing Speech for the pees - - - 


Eienta Day—Tvrspay, 14TH Marocg, 1911. 


Mr. Abinger’s Closing Speech for the Defence (continued) 
Mr. Muir’s Closing Speech for the Prosecution, - - - - 


Ninto Day—Wepnespay, 15TH Marcu, 1911. 


Further evidence for the Defence. 


George Greaves, - - - : 
Mr. Abinger’s Closing Speak for the Dalene (continued), : 
Mr. Muir’s Closing Speech for the Crown, - : = 
Mr Justice Darling’s ee to the ger - - - - 
The Verdict, - - - ; - . - : 


The Sentence, - : 3 : : = = 


APPENDIX, - - = - : 2 2 3 = e 


149 
150 
150 
151 
155 
155 
156 
156 


164 


215 
222 
222 
222 


223 
224 
226 


231 
244 


247 
260 
261 
266 
278 
278 


281 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Steinie Morrison, - 3 : Zz 


Plan of Clapham Common. (Exhibit No. 1a.) The cross, 
printed in red, indicates where the body was found, 


Photograph of the murdered man, - - - . 


Lines drawn over a photograph of the dead body of Leon 
Beron, showing the shape of the lines said to be “S ”s, 
cut by a knife on the murdered man’s face. The rest 
of the photograph has been obliterated, - : 


Solomon Beron, - - 2 < 2 u 


Plan of neighbourhood of Kennington Gate and Camberwell 
New Road. (Exhibit No. 17), - - g : 


Edward Abinger, leading Counsel for the accused, - - 
Leon Beron, - - - - = E : : - Z 
R. D. Muir, leading Counsel for the Crown, - : 2 
The Hon. Mr. Justice Darling, — - - . - 


Frontispiece 


facing page 


29 


8 
ll 


266 


STEINIE MORRISON. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Axout eight o’clock on the morning of New Year’s Day, 1911, the 
body of an elderly man was found by a policeman, lying in some 
bushes on Clapham Common. Examination showed that the man 
had been killed by blows on the head, and that he had subsequently 
been stabbed and his face mutilated with a knife. The most 
important mutilations consisted of two cuts, each somewhat re- 
sembling an ‘‘ S,’’ one on either cheek. It was clear that the man 
had been murdered on the footpath and then dragged into these 
bushes, eight or ten yards away. 

Papers found on the body enabled it to be identified as that 
of Leon Beron, a Russian Jew, who had been in this country for 
five years, and was living in Whitechapel. By 6th January the 
police had sufficient information to issue notices offering a reward 
for a cabman who had driven two men from the East End to Clapham 
Common between midnight and 6 a.m. on the Ist January, or had 
picked up a man on the South Side of Clapham Common or 
Clapham High Street between 2 a.m. and 6 a.m. on that morning. 

On the 8th January Steinie Morrison—an ex-convict—was 
arrested and subsequently charged with murder. The arrest took 
place at a Jewish restaurant in Fieldgate Street, Whitechapel, where 
Morrison was breakfasting. The police evidently expected trouble— 
they had ascertained that Morrison was in the habit of carrying a 
revolver—for no less than five policemen took part in it. Morrison, 
however, made no resistance, but told the police that they had made 
a great mistake. 

He was taken to Leman Street Police Station. After 
being detained there for some hours he sent for Inspector Wensley 
and subsequently for Inspector Ward, and said, ‘‘ I understand 
that I am detained here on a very serious charge—murder, I am 
told.”’ 

This statement led to one of the most acute controversies in 
the case. According to the evidence for the prosecution no mention 
had at this time been made of the charge on which he had been 


X1 


Steinie Morrison. 


arrested, and stress was laid on the fact that he himself mentioned 
murder, as showing he must have had knowledge of the crime. 
Morrison on the other hand declared that he had already been 
informed of the charge, and this evidence was corroborated by 
P.C. Greaves—a constable on duty at Leman Street that morning. 

Morrison then made a statement as to his history and recent 
movements, which seems to have been substantially correct. 

The next day the prisoner was formally charged with the 
murder before Mr. de Gray at Leman Street Police Court. 

It is not necessary to refer in detail to the evidence at these 
proceedings, which was for the most part the same as that given 
at the trial. There were, however, unusual incidents in that two 
witnesses for the prosecution gave evidence which they afterwards 
retracted. 

The first case was that of a girl—Eva Flitterman—who testi- 
fied to having seen the prisoner on the Ist January wearing a 
five-guinea or five-pound piece on his watch chain. As a five- 
guinea piece had been one of Leon Beron’s ornaments this evidence, 
if true, would have been most material, though it is difficult to 
believe that Morrison, who, according to the evidence for the 
prosecution, had successfully disposed of the rest of the deceased’s 
jewellery, would have flaunted such a damning object on the very 
day of the crime. Eva Flitterman identified the coin as a five- 
guinea piece by its similarity to one worn by her father. The 
witness on the next occasion said that she had since found from 
her mother that the coin her father had worn was a two-guinea 
piece, and therefore her former evidence had been wrong. As the 
coin worn by Morrison seems to have been a Kruger half-sovereign 
this witness’s power of observation would appear to have been of a 
somewhat low character. 

This recantation led to a somewhat dramatic application by 
the Defence for a committal for perjury, and on this being refused 
by the Magistrate a letter was written to the Director of Public 
Prosecutions asking that he should prosecute the witness for 
perjury. This Sir Charles Matthews refused to do. There can be 
little doubt that this refusal was right. Most people reading the 
whole of this witness’s evidence would come to the conclusion that 
she had made a genuine mistake, and her subsequent course of action 
in immediately informing the police and the solicitors for the defence 
of this mistake strongly corroborates this view. But it is a matter 
of surprise that more care was not taken to test the evidence of such 
a witness before she was put into the box on behalf of the prosecution. 


The second witness was a youth named Rosen who, after 
xii 


Introduction. 


Swearing to seeing the prisoner in the streets at half-past one a.m. 
on Ist January, and also to having seen him with a revolver, 
retracted the statement as to the time, and said that he had never 
seen the prisoner with a revolver. He also alleged that he had 
_ been threatened by the deceased’s brother that harm would happen 

to him if he retracted his previous evidence. Naturally neither 
witness was called at the trial. 

Steinie Morrison reserved his defence and was in due course 
committed for trial. Meantime the Coroner’s inquest had been 
proceeding and had resulted in a verdict of wilful murder against 
Morrison. 

On 27th February four men were charged at the Lambeth 
Police Court with assaulting Alfred Stephens—a witness for the 
prosecution. The evidence of Stephens was of the utmost importance 
to the case for the Crown since he was alleged to have picked up 
Morrison near Clapham Common just after the murder. Stephens 
stated that he had been threatened as early as 15th January 
because he was assisting the police in the Clapham Common case, 
- and that on 20th January he had been attacked in the street by 
the defendants with such violence that he had to be taken to 
hospital. The principal defendant Rappolt admitted the assault, 
but said it was because Stephens had kissed Rappolt’s wife. Three 
of the men were committed for trial, and on 3rd March were 
convicted and sentenced by Mr. Justice Darling to terms of hard 
labour. There was no evidence beyond that of Stephens to connect 
them with Morrison, and they all denied that they were acquainted 
with him in any way. 

Three days later the trial of Morrison was opened before the 
same Judge, Mr. R. D. Muir, leading for the Crown, and Mr. 
Abinger for the defence. The case for the prosecution was simple. 
Morrison was well acquainted with the deceased, had been with 
him all the evening of the 3lst December, had driven with him 
to Clapham Common in jhe early morning of the Ist January, and 
had been seen leaving Clapham Common shortly after the time 
when the murder had been committed. Added to this Morrison 
had left his lodgings the next morning, and had not returned to 
them; had appeared with a large sum of money, and had also on 
the same day (1st January) pawned his revolver as if anticipating 
possible arrest. The principal witness for the Defence was the 
prisoner himself, who denied that he was a close acquaintance of 
Beron or had been with him at all on the night in question. He 
stated that he had been at a music-hall from nine till eleven and 


had gone to bed at midnight, and he called witnesses—some of whose 
xiii 


Steinie Morrison. 


evidence was severely shaken in cross-examination—to support 
these statements. He explained his absence from his lodgings by the 
fact that he had gone to live with a woman, and his increased 
resources by the receipt of money from his mother in Russia. 

At the end of a nine days’ trial the jury returned a verdict 
of guilty, and Morrison was sentenced to death. His appeal 
against his conviction was dismissed by the Court of Criminal 
Appeal, but the Home Secretary in the exercise of his prerogative 
of mercy commuted the sentence to penal servitude for life. 

A few comments may here be made on the evidence by which 
the prosecution sought to bring home the crime to the prisoner. 
The main evidence for the prosecution dealt with the movements 
of the prisoner on the night in question. It may be divided 
into two classes, the more important being that relating to the 
question of the prisoner’s presence near Clapham Common about 
the time of the murder, the other and less important class referring 
to his being seen with Leon Beron in various parts of Whitechapel 
on the night in question. Of course, this latter evidence would 
not in itself have been sufficient to secure a conviction, but if 
believed it showed the statements of the prisoner and witnesses for 
the defence to be untrue. 

This last class of evidence may be again divided into that of 
witnesses who claim to have seen the prisoner and deceased together 
before midnight—thus conflicting with the story told by the 
prisoner and the Brodskys that he was at the music-hall, and of 
those who saw him after midnight, thus discrediting his alibi, viz., 
that he had gone to bed at midnight and remained there. The 
first class included Snelwar, who kept the eating-house; Mintz, the 
waiter; Hermilin, Jack Taw, Zaltaman, and Weissberg. These 
witnesses all knew both men well and had ample opportunities of 
seeing them, so that mistake on their part was impossible—their 
evidence must have been true or perjured. 

Those who saw Beron and Morrison in the streets after mid- 
night were Jack Taw, Zaltazman, Weissberg, and Mrs. Deitch. 
Here the opportunities for clear identification were much less, and 
mistakes were possible, more especially if Beron’s companion 
resembled Morrison. 

In the case of Mrs. Deitch there ig the further difficulty that 
ne Rae the time when she saw the prisoner at 2.15 
> ee he eae oe of fue cabman Hayman is that he picked 

e corner of Sydney Street at 2 a.m. It ig 


not possible to admit any substantial mistake as to this latter time 
X1V : 


Introduction. 


as this would throw out the whole time table on which the prosecu- 
tion based their case. The jury must have taken the view that 
Mrs. Deitch was mistaken either as to the time, or as to the identity 
of both the men she saw. 

The evidence on which the case really turned was that of the 
three cabmen. The first of these was Hayman, who claimed to 
have picked up the prisoner and another man at Sydney Street 
at two in the morning of the Ist of January, and to have taken 
them to Lavender Gardens. Hayman made no attempt to see the 
police until the 9th January, on the 10th he made his statement 
to the police, and on the 17th he picked out the prisoner from six 
or seven other men. 

The next was Andrew Stephens, who picked up a single fare at 
Clapham Cross and drove him to Kennington. He again did not 
go to the police until the 10th January, and not till after he had 
seen a picture of the accused in the papers. In this case also the 
identification took place on the 17th. In Stephens’ first statement to 
the police he placed the time at which he picked up his fare at 2.30 
a.m. If this had been the time, the fare, of course, could not have 
been Morrison, since according to the evidence for the prosecution 
he was at that time being driven with Beron towards Clapham 
Common. Apparently this witness had told the police in the first 
instance that he was certain of the time, as it was about one hour 
after the last tram went, and that that tram went at 1.30. Later the 
witness went of his own accord to the tramway company and 
found that on that particular night the last tram had not 
gone till past two. Accordingly the witness changed his estimate 
of the time at which he picked up his fare to a few minutes past 
three. The witness stated definitely that he had not spoken to 
Hayman before going to the tramway company. Curiously enough, 
the question never seems to have been put to him as to what was 
the reason that caused him to doubt his first statement as to the 
time, and to think it necessary to verify the time of the last car 
from the tramway offices. 

The third witness was Alfred Castlin, who drove two men— 
one of whom he identified as the prisoner—from Kennington 
Church to Finsbury Park at 3.30 a.m. In this case the identifica- 
tion took place on the 9th January. 

In all these cases the cabmen described the prisoner’s appear- 
ance with a surprising wealth of detail and identified him without 
hesitation, but in each case the evidence was open to the comment 
that the prisoner was unknown to the witness, that the witnesses 


had only seen him for a few moments on a dark night, that in two 
XV 


Steinie Morrison. 


cases the identification did not take place till the 17th January, 
and that in the interval numerous portraits of the prisoner had 
appeared in the Press. 

No property belonging to the deceased could be traced to 
Morrison, but this fact was of little significance since a week had 
elapsed before his arrest, and he was a man well acquainted with 
the channels for disposing of stolen property. On the other hand 
the state of Morrison’s finances certainly seems to have improved 
about the date of the murder. 

Another point on which considerable, perhaps undue, stress 
was laid by the prosecution was the supposed fact that at the police 
station Morrison had sent for an inspector and said that he under- 
stood that he had been arrested for murder. ‘According to the 
police evidence no such charge had been mentioned to him, in fact 
no statement had been made as to the cause of his arrest. There- 
fore, said the prosecution, if Morrison was innocent why should 
he think of murder as the charge? 

But in the middle of the closing speech for the Crown Mr. 
Abinger stated that he had just got new evidence on this point and 
asked leave, which was granted, to call a fresh witness. This 
witness was P.C. Greaves, a constable who had been on duty at 
Leman Street Police Station on the morning of Morrison’s arrest. 
This witness swore positively that he had heard Sergeant Brogden 
tell Morrison that he had been arrested for murder. 

In view of this conflict of evidence the jury probably attached 
little weight to Morrison’s supposed statement. But even if the 
evidence of the prosecution as to how it was made were accepted, 
such a statement would have little significance. Between the time 
of the murder and of Morrison’s arrest the Press was full of news 
and theories relating to the murder, and some of the items pub- 
lished certainly would have been sufficient to have given Morrison 
the idea that he was suspected of the murder, if in fact he read 
them. It was announced that the police were looking for a tall 
handsome man who had appeared at Snelwar’s restaurant about 
two months before and had become intimate with the deceased. 
This stranger was described as a Russian speaking several foreign 
languages, and, though many of the incidents relating to him seem 
to have been pure inventions, some of them would certainly have 
been recognised by Morrison. Perhaps the most important was 
that this stranger had handed a parcel containing an iron bar to 
the waiter at the restaurant on the night of the murder, and 
received it back when he left the restaurant with Beron. Tie ain 


fact, Morrison knew from the Press reports that the police were 
xvi 


Introduction. 


looking for him as the murderer, the question as to whether he 
had been told of the charge on which he had been arrested before 
he made his statement at the police station becomes comparatively 
unimportant. 

The imputation cast upon the police was, however, too grave 
to pass over. Questions were asked in Parliament and an inquiry 
was ordered to be held. This inquiry was conducted by Mr. (now 
Lord) Cave, who, after a hearing lasting over five days, found 
that the evidence given by P.C. Greaves was incorrect, and that no 
intimation of the charge had been made to Morrison prior to his 
statement. 

From the legal point of view the most interesting feature of the 
trial was its illustration of the working of the Criminal Evidence 
Act, 1898, which permitted the prisoner to give evidence on his 
own behalf. Perhaps the chief objection which had been urged to this 
measure when first proposed was that it would lead to a conflict 
between two principles of criminal practice—one that the jury 
must not (except in certain special cases) be informed of any 
previous convictions of the prisoner, or of other circumstances in 
his past career, not directly connected with the crime with which 
he is charged, which would be likely to prejudice them against 
him—the other that any witness may be cross-examined as to 
credit, sc as to shake the value of his testimony, and, in particular, 
may be asked questions as to previous convictions. If then the 
prisoner himself gave evidence could such questions be put to him? 

A compromise was arrived at which at first sight seems very 
fair to the prisoner—no questions tending to show previous bad 
character might be put to him wnless the conduct of the defence 
had been such as to involve imputations on the character of the 
prosecutor or of the witnesses for the prosecution, or unless 
evidence of the prisoner’s good character had been offered. But in 
practice—as is well shown in the present case—this puts the 
counsel for the defence under very heavy disabilities. He may 
know facts which should properly be brought to the notice of the 
jury as weakening the testimony for the prosecution, but he must 
either leave them untouched, or risk this effect of his client’s 
previous character being told to the jury. And this effect is very 
different to that produced in the case of any other witness. The 
prisoner’s previous bad character, if it affects the minds of the 
jury at all, will tend not so much to shake their faith in his 
veracity as to make them think that, having been guilty of other 
crimes, he is the more likely to be guilty of the crime with which 
he stands charged before them. 


B XVii 


Steinie Morrison. 


Further, the rule is not really a fair one. In order to protect 
the prisoner from cross-examination as to character the whole of 
the witnesses for the prosecution must be exempted from questions 
tending to reflect on their veracity, but the protection so obtained 
by the defence extends to the prisoner alone, and any other witness 
for the defence may be asked questions as to character or previous 
convictions. Thus in a case where the records of the witnesses on 
both sides were not irreproachable the witnesses for the prosecution 
might appear to the jury with unblemished reputations, while the 
evidence of the others would be discredited by questions put as to 
their previous career. 

It would appear to be more in accordance with the desire of 
our law that the prisoner should be convicted only on evidence 
directly bearing on the crime with which he is charged, that the 
protection accorded to him if he enters the witness-box should not 
have to be purchased by the abandonment of a legitimate weapon 
of the defence. If the protection were absolute it would not in 
general lead to any injustice. It is very doubtful whether the jury 
attach much importance to the supposed veracity of a man charged 
with a serious crime—as in the case of Steinie Morrison. The 
effect of the prisoner giving evidence is not that the jury will think 
“* He cannot be guilty for he has sworn he is not, and we cannot 
think that he would tell a lie on such a matter,’’ but rather that 
they will form their judgment on the sufficiency of his answers to 
the questions put to him, and on his demeanour in giving his 
evidence. 

Of course, the other exception—where the prisoner calls 
evidence as to his own good character—stands on an entirely 
different basis. There the defendant has deliberately chosen to 
make his previous character one of the points to be considered by 
the jury, and therefore all evidence for or against him on this 
point should be admitted. 

A somewhat curious attempt to extend the circumstances in 
which the prisoner might be cross-examined as to character occurred 
in a recent case. The prisoner was charged with murder and set 
up the defence that the dead man had attempted to commit a 
criminal assault upon him, and had then attacked him, and that 
he had killed the deceased in resisting this attack. The counsel 
for the prosecution claimed that this imputation on the character 
of the victim had the same effect as an imputation on the character 
of a prosecutor or witness, and asked questions of the prisoner 
tending to show that he had been guilty of another crime, viz., 


misappropriating money. The prisoner was convicted of man- 
Xviil 


Introduction. 


slaughter, but the Court of Criminal Appeal quashed the con- 
viction on the ground that questions as to the prisoner’s previous 
character had been improperly admitted. 

In the case now under consideration it was suggested by the 
prosecution that questions had been asked of two of their witnesses, 
viz., Mrs. Deitch and the waiter Mirstz, which would entitle them 
to cross-examine the prisoner as to his previous career.* In the case 
of Mrs. Deitch it seems clear that such questions had been asked, 
but the other case was far more doubtful. Mintz was asked 
whether he had not been put in an asylum after an attempt to hang 
himself. Of course, felo de se is a felony, and the prosecution 
claimed that this question was therefore an attack on the character 
of the witness. But it is clear that Mr. Abinger’s object in putting 
the question was not to suggest that the witness was a criminal, 
but that he was mentally unbalanced and had shown this in the 
- clearest way by attempting to kill himself. Certainly such a 
question was not within the spirit of the exception laid down in 
the Act, and Mr. Justice Darling based his decision that counsel 
for the prosecution were entitled to cross-examine Morrison as to 
his previous career on the questions put to Mrs. Deitch. 

Mistaken identity and the question of the reliance to be placed 
on a witness’s power of identification are subjects of very old 
standing interest. If the average reader will try in his own mind 
to give a description of the dress and appearance of a few persons 
whom he has met casually say a week or a fortnight before, he 
will be somewhat surprised at the very accurate description of 
suspected persons given by witnesses to the police in this case as 
well as in many others. No doubt part of this apparent perfection 
is due to the skill of the police inspector who takes the particulars. 
Where what is sought is a description which will enable others to 
recognise the man whom the witness has seen, the clearest mental 
photograph is useless if the witness cannot put it into words. Here 
official routine and knowledge of the features necessary for identi- 
fication can render useful and legitimate aid. But it is impossible 
sometimes not to suspect that some of these details may have been 
suggested to the witness, where the appearance of the suspected 
person is otherwise known to the police. Any such suggestion 
almost destroys the value of subsequent identification. Once a 


* Tt should be stated that no blame can attach to the counsel for the defence 
in respect of this cross-examination as these questions were put on the express 
instructions of the prisoner after he had been warned by his counsel of the 
possible consequences to himself.—Eb. 


xix 


Steinie Morrison. 


suggestion as to any prominent feature in the suspected person has 
been made to and accepted by a witness, the latter is apt to con- 
centrate his attention on the presence or absence of such feature 
when attempting to identify the person he is supposed to have seen. 

Of course, the strongest possible form of suggestion is a photo- 
graph. If from a general resemblance the witness thinks it is that 
of the man whom he saw, he is almost certain unconsciously to use 
the portrait to fill up blanks in his memory, and his mental 
picture of the man he saw becomes more and more a reproduction 
of the photograph. 

There can be little doubt that these difficulties were very 
strongly before the judge’s mind and influenced his summing up, 
which undoubtedly showed that he personally would have hesitated 
to convict the prisoner. 

The present is a case where the legal interest is of quite 
secondary importance. The outstanding feature which must strike 
every student of modern murder trials when he comes to the 
Clapham Common murder is the strangely theatrical nature of the 
crime and all its surroundings. No one could imagine the sordid 
crimes of the Seddons or Deeming forming a subject for dramatic 
treatment, unless in works produced for the benefit of those strange 
coteries who seem to specialise in plays whose outstanding feature 
is the drabness of the life and vices which they portray; plays 
whose failure, when submitted to the acid test of the box office, is 
one of the most satisfactory tributes to the inherent good sense of 
the British public. 

But in the case of Steinie Morrison the action unrolls itself 
in a milliew, which not only suggests the theatre, but seems hardly 
conceivable as existing in modern London. The apparent 
irresponsibility of all the characters and their strange far niente 
lives—conducted according to rules and motives utterly strange 
to the average Briton—is typified by the witness who described 
himself as ‘‘ a retired gentleman living on his means,’’? and then 
gave his address as at Rowton House and those means as about 
fifteen shillings a week. To appreciate the society and manners 
with which this case deals we must realise that this witness was 
not, as the cross-examining counsel suggested, indulging in a 
ridiculous boast or perpetrating a silly joke, but was stating a 
simple fact, a fact which he and his friends knew to be an everyday 
occurrence, 

Let us consider the life of the murdered man as told by his 
brother. His income was about ten shillings a week, derived from 


rents, and his budget, in which the principal items were 2s. 9d. 
xXx 


Introduction. 

% 
a week for a room (of which 9d. was provided by a charitable 
brother) and about ls. 3d. a day for living—the very figures of the 
prices come in these post-war days as a refreshing breeze from a 
distant land—would practically balance on this income, though 
without leaving any margin for those vices with which he was also 
liberally endowed by that brother’s story. Then the manner of this 
life. This was simply that of the continental café, represented 
by a Kosher Jewish eating-house, an eating-house whose patrons 
seem not infrequently to have sat in it from breakfast time till 
midnight. His only occupation was to talk to the other guests. 
And yet he was a man of substance—a man with a gold watch and 
heavy gold chain on which hung a five-guinea piece, items of 
adornment which must have represented more than a year’s pur- 
chase of his annual income. 

Further, his position was fully recognised by the other 
habitués. He was undoubtedly a gentleman—if we accept that 
definition which makes living without the need of work the test of 
this condition of life—he had sufficient for all his wants—he dis- 
played in oriental manner great possessions on his person. Natur- 
ally stories of wealth grew up and it was supposed that he periodi- 
cally carried large sums of money-—a proposition as to which little 
real proof was adduced. 

A further dramatic feature is found in the life of the victim 
and his two brothers. They had claims on a London estate of 
fabulous value, their just pretensions were said to be thwarted 
by a firm of rascally solicitors, they had come to London to establish 
their claims—and had remained there for sixteen years apparently 
without making one step in this direction. All this is in strict 
accordance with the principles of melodrama, and suggests Jerome’s 
““ Stage Life ’’ far more than a story unrolled under the grimmest 
circumstances in a British Court of Justice. 

And then the strange life of these three brothers, passed in 
idleness in an alien land, apparently in forgetfulness of the purpose 
which brought them there, their ignorance or lack of interest in 
each other’s lives, and yet their daily meeting at the appointed 
hour for the prescribed family prayer, a meeting of such regularity 
that the non-appearance of one brother immediately led the others 
to think that he must have come to a tragic end. Truly the 
Russian Jew lives here as an alien—not in the sense that his 
interests or sympathies belong to any other country, but because 
he carries his Ghetto with him, a Ghetto whose gates enclose a life 
which we neither know nor are capable of understanding. 

The life of the prisoner was also far removed from the 

XX1 


Steinie Morrison. 


ordinary. He was a man of magnificent physique, standing six 
feet three high, handsome, intelligent, courageous, but apparently 
untroubled by any moral sense whatever, though he seems to have 
been kind to women and children: an habitual criminal, who, 
though under thirty, had already served two long sentences, of 
doubtful nationality and uncertain name, of unknown resources 
whether these were legitimate or the reverse, living a life whose 
circumstances seem to admit neither of verification nor disproof, 
his probable actions and motives were hard to conjecture. One of 
the strongest features of the case for the prosecution was that 
immediately after the murder the prisoner disappeared, his dis- 
appearance being, in fact, effected by merely moving into an 
adjoining street and patronising a different eating-house. He 
explained this disappearance as merely the result of a passing 
amour, for women, to whom he was undoubtedly attractive, played 
a large part in his life. But if a deeper reason is sought we are 
bound to attempt to judge his actions in view of his criminal 
antecedents and mode of living. On the one hand he might desire 
to escape the notice of the police, either because of his past history 
or because he was engaged on crimes other than that with which 
he was charged; on the other hand a mere change of address, 
harmless though the motive might be, was in his case a very serious 
step—in fact a crime which entitled those police to arrest him at 
sight, for he was a convict released on licence. 

But best of all from the reader’s point of view is the real mystery 
attending the crime itself. The place, a lonely common; the time, 
the dead of night; the utterly unexplained circumstances which 
led to the presence of the victim, all add to the vivid interest of this 
crime of crimes. Why should an apparently respectable elderly 
gentleman of comparatively regular habits proceed across London at 
dead of night, whether alone or whether accompanied by his murderer- 
to-be, and hurry into the heart of Clapham Common? Neither prose- 
cution nor defence suggested any explanation which carries the 
slightest conviction. 

Then the mysterious signs cut on the face of the victim after 
death—those two mystic “‘S’s’’ which learned professors recog 
nised as the sign of treachery and reveng> in half a dozen different 
languages—yet of which no explanation ever emerged. Here great 
and mysterious names come floating on the scene—Peter the Painter 
(now said to be occupying the honourable post of Lord Chief Justice 
in Russia)—Sydney Street—Russian anarchists—not the modern 
variety produced by German gold and half-digested German litera- 
ture, but the real brand found in the novel, redolent of secret 

xx 


Introduction. 


societies, assassination and revenge. All these appear and seem to 
claim a solution and explanation, a claim which, alas! is unsatisfied, 
since while the novelist can, and inde-d must, always explain every- 
thing, a Court of Justice may, and frequently does, fail to do so. 

The character of the evidence was also refreshingly different 
from that found in so many of the trials of this series. Here were 
no scientific experts slowly but conclusively establishing the 
prisoner’s guilt by irrefutable evidence—yet by evidence which the 
average reader or the average juryman must take on trust, since he 
has not the scientific education which would alone enable him to 
judge of its true value. Nor did the trial really turn on circum- 
stantial evidence, where we start with a series of facts more or less 
conclusively established, and the real contest is whether the inference 
to be drawn from these facts is that the prisoner is guilty. Here 
the real question was whether the evidence tendered proved certain 
facts—facts which once established would be undoubted proof of the 
prisoner’s guilt. If, for example, we accept the evidence of 
identification, which would prove that the prisoner and the murdered 
man came together across London from Whitechapel about the time 
the murder was committed, and disappeared together into the dark- 
ness of Clapham Common, and that a quarter of an hour afterwards 
the prisoner reappeared alone, there is but one conclusion; and not 
the most hardened counsel for the defence could seriously argue that 
there was any doubt that the prisoner committed the murder that 
took place. Here the fight was whether these facts were estab- 
lished, whether the evidence of identification was sufficient, which 
witnesses were to be believed. It was a case in which the jury had 
to fulfil their most typical and valuable function, that of assessors 
of the credibility of evidence. 

And this task was no sinecure in the present case. The wit- 
nesses told frankly contradictory stories—were called liars in the 
good old-fashioned way, and were not infrequently proved to be so. 
Apart from the evidence of the cabmen, the chief contest was what 
the prisoner did on New Year’s eve, that saturnalia in London East 
End life when no one goes to bed and every one is in the street for 
no thotive at all. And the general irresponsibility of this type of 
East End life was reflected in the witnesses and their easy treatment 
of the oath; in fact, the atmosphere of the case resembled more that 
of certain Indian cases in which, according to one eminent judge, 
the Court should approach all evidence in the spirit that if verbal 
it is perjured, and if written forged, but ahexe all should avoid being 
prejudiced against the merits of a party’s case merely because that 
case is supported by false evidence. 


The circumstances of the trial itself were also of a dramatic 
XXI111 


\ 


Steinie Morrison. 


nature. The unshaken demeanour of the prisoner, his frank con- 
fession of his criminal career, his ready responses to the pitiless 
questions of the cross-examining counsel, were remarked by all 
present. And as the culminating effect the outburst of the maniac 
brother of the victim—whose reason had been apparently destroyed 
by the tragedy—as he flung himself on the counsel for the defence in 
the midst of his closing speech and was removed from the Court to 
the asylum where he remains to this day. 

All these circumstances had a very real effect in increasing the 
difficulty of the task of the jury. The essence of the jury’s function 
is the exercise of common sense; they are there to form their judg- 
ment in view of the probabilities of ordinary life. Accordingly, the 
average Juryman estimates probability or the reverse according to 
the standard of his own life or the life of those with whom he is 
acquainted. But what is such’a man to do when the action moves 
in a strange world, in a new Boheme (though rather a drab one) 
where no one seems to work, where independent gentlemen live in 
Rowton House on ten shilllings a week, yet carry about 
valuable gold watches, and in which hardly an actor or a 
witness ever seems to have been governed by a principle or a motive 
such as the average Briton knows? This difficulty was reflected in 
the result. Mr. Justice Darling—who conducted the case throughout 
with conspicuous dignity and fairness—evidently was of opinion 
that the guilt of the prisoner was not conclusively proved. The jury 
arrived at a different conclusion and convicted him. And in so doing 
each was strictly acting within his province. 

Here it may be well to explain the different functions of a judge 
when delivering his summing up, functions which are perhaps not 
universally appreciated. Firstly, he recalls to the minds of the 
jurymen the evidence which has been given. In this he acts rather 
in a ministerial than in a judicial capacity, and should preferably 
refer to all the evidence. If he should make any gross omission 
or misstatement, counsel would probably respectfully call his atten- 
tion to the fact. But all this evidence has already been before the 
jury, and slight omissions in its recapitulation are therefore not 
hkely to lead to serious results, consequently the Court of Criminal 
Appeal is loath to interfere with a conviction on the ground that 
the judge did not refer to certain evidence, unless that Court is of 
opinion that the omission was really serious. 

His second function is to declare and explain to the jury the law 
relating to the case. Here he is omnipotent so far as his own Court 
is concerned; he declares the law as the Pope declares matters of 
faith, and the jury are bound to accept his ruling whatever their 

XX1V 


Introduction. 


private convictions may be. Moreover, it will always be assumed 
that the jury have so followed his rulings of law. Consequently any 
misdirection on this point is considered of the greatest. importance 
by the Court of Criminal Appeal, and if it is established, the con- 
viction will be set aside unless it is clear that from the facts of the 
ease it could have had no effect on the verdict. 

Thirdly, he is entitled, though not bound, to comment on the 
evidence, and even to express his private opinion on the inferences 
he would draw from it. But here he is no longer speaking as a 
superior whose word is law, he is merely talking to the jury as man 
to man, and though the jury may ‘quite properly give weight to 
the opinion which he expresses, it is for them, and for them alone, 
finally to decide on the matter. 

Tt was in this last capacity that Mr. Justice Darling seemed to 
indicate, though he did not state it in so many words, that in his 
opinion there was a reasonable doubt as to whether the evidence 
definitely established the prisoner’s guilt. This opinion was entitled 
to weigh with the jury, and probably did so, but they were entitled 
and bound to form their own opinion, and this they did by returning 
their verdict of guilty. Whether they were right or wrong cannot 
now be said. We may read the evidence, but we have not seen the 
witnesses, and in judging of the weight to be attached to evidence 
the English Courts have always, most rightly, held that the opinion 
of those who have themselves heard and seen the witnesses must 
prevail. This verdict was necessarily followed by the only sentence 
the law permits; but it is to be observed in passing that sentence 
Mr. Justice Darling abstained from using the usual phrases expressing 
his personal concurrence with the verdict. 

The case then went to the Court of Criminal Appeal, and with- 
out hearing counsel for the Crown the judges held that the verdict 
must stand. This decision was undoubtedly right. There was 
ample evidence before the jury to justify a conviction, though this 
evidence was contradicted by that of other witnesses, and in such 
cases it is for the jury, and for the jury alone, to decide. Even 
if every member of the Court had been of opinion that he personally 
would have acquitted the prisoner (and possibly such opinion might 
be inferred from their judgment), the Court must yet have upheld 
the conviction, unless they were of opinion that the verdict was so 
perverse that no reasonable jury would have given it. 

But there is another tribunal known to the English constitution 
—the King himself. The Sovereign has always had inherent power 
to pardon, or to remit or diminish punishment. The prerogative 
ig now exercised by the Home Secretary, and a petition for the 

XXV 


Steinie Morrison. 


reprieve of the sentence on Morrison was accordingly presented to 
him. Mr. Winston Churchill, who then occupied this office, decided 
to exercise the power of mercy, anl the death sentence was com- 
muted to one of penal servitude for life. 

This decision led to much adverse criticism. The leader- 
writer, and the man who fills the correspondence columns had a full 
opportunity of indulging in that cheap and usually fallacious logic 
so dear to a portion of the reading public. If there was no doubt 
of Morrison’s guilt he should have been hanged, if there was any 
possible doubt he should have been acquitted—in either case the 
decision of the Home Secretary was wrong. The fallacy of this 
argument lies in the assumption that a prisoner must be acquitted 
if there is ‘‘ any possible doubt ”’ of his guilt. | Were this the 
criterion a conviction could hardly ever result. A man might be 
found standing over a murdered body with a bloody knife in his 
hand and the property of the victim in his pockets, and yet it would 
be humanly possible that another man had committed the murder, 
and that the person so found had come to the spot since and merely 
plundered the body. And yet in such a case a jury would, in the 
absence of other evidence, convict—and rightly so, because the 
prosecution had discharged their burden, they had proved beyond 
‘*“ all reasonable doubt ’’ that the prisoner was the guilty man. 

That is the true criterion—does the evidence offered prove 
beyond ‘“‘ all reasonable doubt ’’ that the prisoner is guilty? In 
English law the sole tribunal to judge of the ‘‘ reasonableness ’’ of 
any doubt suggested by the defence is the jury, and (unless their 
verdict is held to be perverse) it is final on this point and binds 
all higher Courts. 

But the Home Secretary in exercising his prerogative of mercy 
is not necessarily bound by the strict rules that bind the Courts, 
though naturally they have great weight with him. Here appar- 
ently he felt that there was no ground to hold that the jury were 
wrong in saying that on the evidence offered there was no reason- 
able doubt of the prisoner’s guilt. Consequently the conviction 
was allowed to stand. But at the same time he seems to have felt, 
as many readers undoubtedly will, that, in a case where there were 
so many circumstances unexplained, there was a ‘‘ possible ’’ 
doubt, and a chance that evidence might turn up later which would 
affect the case.* Once a death sentence is executed there can be no 
pardon, no reparation. So he chose to let the prisoner live so that 


* Doubtless the expression used by Mr. Justice Darling both in summing up 
and in passing sentence, and also the form of the judgment of the Court of 
Criminal Appeal influenced the Home Secretary towards granting a reprieve.—Ep. 

XXV1 


Introduction. 


if it were shown that a mistake had occurred, the greatest mis- 
carriage of justice might be avoided. 

And it seemed as if this expectation of further evidence would 
be justified. On the very day that Morrison was reprieved an 
English lady, Mrs. R., who was residing in Paris, overheard a 
remarkable conversation between two foreigners on a tramcar there 
to the effect that the murder had been committed, not by Morrison, 
but by one ‘‘ Gort ”’ or ‘‘ Cort,’’ but that the speaker preferred 
that Morrison should suffer rather than their comrade should run 
any risk. Although Mrs. R. noted the hotel to which these men 
went and immediately communicated with the prisoner’s solicitors, 
the French authorities failed to find or identify the men. 

This evidence cannot be brushed aside as the result of imagina- 
tion stimulated by too great interest in the case, since Mrs. R. 
(whose declaration is given in full in the appendix) had not even 
read the reports of the trial, though, of course, she had seen 
Morrison’s name in the English papers. Further, although the 
French police could not find the men she had heard speaking, or 
identify ‘‘ Gort,’’ they recognised certain of the other names as 
those of members of an international gang well known to the police. 

Later in 1912 a further attempt was made to obtain a revision 
of the sentence in view of the statement made by a woman (who 
may be called Mrs. X., as it is not advisable to give the names of the 
persons still alive) who was living in Whitechapel at the time of 
the murder. This woman made a declaration to the solicitors for 
the defence in which she stated that on the night of the murder X. 
had gone out at about 11 o’clock and had not appeared again for 
three days. When he came home at the end of that time his shirt 
was covered with blood. He explained this by saying that he had 
been fighting, but when Mrs. X. suggested sending the shirt to the 
laundry he tore it up and burnt it on the fire. He then threatened 
Mrs. X. that he would kill her if she ever spoke to any one of the 
blood on the shirt, and these threats were repeated on many 
occasions. X. became very agitated when he heard of Morrison’s 
arrest, sent a friend out to see if the news were true, and kept in the 
house for several days afterwards. He was also heard on several 
occasions to exclaim ‘‘ There is nothing like a Jewboy for keeping 
his mouth shut.’’ 

This declaration was laid before the authorities as showing 
that X., and not Steinie Morrison, was the probable murderer, but 
its effect was wholly altered by a further declaration that Mrs. X. 
made direct to the authorities. In this further declaration she 


stated that Steinie Morrison had brought Leon Beron to see X. 
XXVi 


Steinie Morrison. 


shortly before the date of the murder, and that the three had then 
gone out together, and further, that on the night of the 31st 
December, Morrison had called for X. at 11 o’clock, that they had 
gone out together, and that X. had not come home again for three 
days. 

So far from exculpating Morrison, this evidence tended to show 
that he and X. were accomplices in the murder. It was always the 
theory of the prosecution that two men had been engaged in the 
murder, and the evidence of the cabman Castlin showed that 
Morrison had met the second man at Kennington Church and 
driven off with him. The further evidence above referred to would 
tend to show that X. was this second man, and that both he and 
Morrison were concerned in the crime. 

Later there was a rumour (which proved to be false) that two 
men who had been arrested in Boston, U.S.A., had admitted their 
knowledge of the true criminal, and again statements were made— 
in some cases on oath—to the effect that witnesses for the prosecu- 
tion had admitted that they had given false evidence. Each of 
these supposed clues were followed up by Messrs. Claude Lumley 
& Co., who, together with the prisoner’s counsel, Mr. Abinger, 
worked unsparingly to obtain their client’s release, but no tangible 
evidence tending to shake the verdict could be obtained. 

Morrison himself never ceased to protest his innocence. A 
morose and at times a savage prisoner, he is said to have 
petitioned four times that the original sentence of death be carried 
out. An interesting account of his life at Dartmoor by the prison 
chaplain has recently appeared in the World’s Pictorial News, and 
contains the following statement made by the prisoner :— 

““ The man who killed Beron is no doubt a man who is exactly 
my double, but about four inches shorter. He met me in the East 
End of London one afternoon. He stopped me with a look of aston- 
ishment on his face and said, ‘Who the hell are you?’ I said to him, 
jokingly, ‘ It is singular that there should be two such good looking 
men.’ He replied, ‘ You may be damned sorry for it one day.’ 
He then told me he was associated with some foreign secret society 
and asked me if I knew anything about them. I said, ‘ No, and 
I don’t want to.’ ”’ 

Morrison also told the chaplain that the money he had on him 
was the proceeds of another crime, and on leaving the prison on 
his transfer to Parkhurst he said, ‘‘ 1] committed a burglary that 
night at a certain bank in North London, and the money I had 
on me was the proceeds.”’ 


Neither of these statements carries conviction. A resemblance 
XXVill 


Introduction. 


such as Morrison speaks of might have led to a mistake in identi- 
fication by the cabmen, who were not well acquainted with Morrison, 
_ but it is almost impossible to conceive that it would have misled the 
witnesses, who swore that they saw Morrison and Beron together 
during the evening at the eating-house. With regard to the second 
statement it may be remarked that no such burglary took place 
on the night in question. Incidentally this statement gives the go-by 
to the most important evidence for the defence, namely, that given 
by the prisoner and others that he went to bed at midnight and 
did not go out again that night. 

Whatever his character may have been in civil life, Morrison 
proved himself a violent and intractable prisoner. The first part 
of his sentence showed many records of punishment for violence, 
but after he was removed to Parkhurst he gave way to despair, and 
sought his release by death. Self-starvation was the only available 
means and this he took, not at once by a single long abstinence, but 
by a series of fasts which wore down even his magnificent physique, 
till finally, on 24th January, 1921, he passed away in Parkhurst 
Prison Infirmary. 

With Morrison’s death there ends that personal interest in the 
case which was shared by the prisoner and by those who worked so 
strenuously to obtain his release. But a wider and more 
lasting interest remains. No one arouses greater sympathy 
than a prisoner believed to be innocent, nothing causes greater 
discomfort to the public conscience than a suspicion that a con- 
viction has involved a miscarriage of justice. And undoubtedly, 
such a suspicion has been felt by many with regard to the Clapham 
Common murder. 

Cases of mistaken identity are known to occur in fact as well 
as in fiction, and some of the important witnesses for the prosecu- 
tion saw the murderer under circumstances where such a mistake 
would have been possible. But if the reader will consider the story 
of that New Year’s night step by step—starting from the restaurant 
where Morrison was well known and observation easy, passing by 
the later hours in the Whitechapel Road and ending in the dead of 
night round Clapham Common—and compare Morrison’s story 
with that told by the host of witnesses for the prosecution, he will, 
I think, understand how strong the case for the prosecution really 
was. The subsequent evidence here referred to (with the single 
exception of that of Mrs. R.) and the statements since made by 
Morrison tend to strengthen rather than weaken that case. 

History shows such extraordinary instances of mistaken 
identity that this possibility can never be wholly eliminated, unless 

XX1X 


Steinie Morrison. 


the prisoner confesses or is arrested flagrante delicto. It is there- 
fore a risk that any system of justice must face, while employing 
every means to minimise its probability. But even more important 
than the question of whether a particular conviction was in fact 
right is that of whether the system and conduct of the trial was 
scrupulously fair, and judged by this test the present case throws 
no slur on British Justice. 


XXX 


LEADING DATES. 


1911. 
Ist January. Murder of Leon Beron. Disappearance of Morrison. 
6th i Reward offered to cabmen. 
8th SA Arrest of Morrison. 
9th i. Morrison identified by Castlin. 
17th Morrison identified by Hayman and Stephens. 
6th March. Trial of Morrison. 
15th Bs Verdict and Sentence. 
23rd 4 Morrison’s Appeal dismissed. 


12th April. Morrison reprieved. 


LEAR 
24th January. Death of Morrison. 


XXX1 


THE TRIAL 


WITHIN THE 


CENTRAL CRIMINAL COURT, 
OLD BatLey, LonpDon, 


MONDAY, 6TH MARCH, 1911. 


Judge— 
Mr. JUSTICE DARLING. 


Counsel for the Crown— 


Mr. R. D. Morr. 
Mr. LEYCESTER. 
Mr. INGLEBY ODDIE. 


Counsel for the Prisoner, Sternie Morrison— 


Mr. E. ABINGER. 
Mr, MacGRreqor. 
Mr. RoLAND OLIVER. 


First Day—Monday, 6th March, 1911. 


The Cierxk or tax Courr—Steinie Morrison, you are indicted 
for, and also stand charged on the coroner’s inquisition with, the 
wilful murder of Leon Beron. Are you guilty or not guilty? 

Stemig Morrison—My lord, if I was standing before the Almighty 
I could give but one answer. I am not guilty. 


(A jury was then sworn.) 


The Cierx or tHe Court—Gentlemen of the jury, Steinie Mor- 
rison is indicted for, and also stands charged on the coroner’s in- 
quisition with, the wilful murder of Leon Beron. To this indict- 
ment and inquisition he has pleaded not guilty, and it is your duty 
to inquire whether he is guilty or not. 


Opening Statement for the Crown. 


Mr. Muir, in opening the case for the Crown, said the 
inquiry on which the jury was about to embark was one as to the 
murder of a man whose body was found on Clapham Common on 
the morning of last New Year’s Day. A police constable going his 
rounds found the dead body of a man concealed in a clump of bushes 
on the common. The police surgeon was summoned about nine 
o’clock, and his opinion was that the dead man had been murdered 
about six hours previously—that would be some time about three 
o’clock in the morning. The dead man had been killed by blows 
on the head from an instrument resembling a crowbar or a “‘ jemmy,’’ 
with which the skull had been smashed. Eight blows in all were 
struck, two over the right eye, being the first blows, and the 
remainder were evidently inflicted while the man was lying un- 
conscious on the ground. 

It would be clearly shown that the man was murdered on the 
footpath, and the body then dragged face downwards into a clump 
of bushes eight to ten yards away. The body was then robbed, 
because only one halfpenny was found upon it, and having been 
robbed, it was stabbed three times in the chest, these stabs given 
after the man was dead, as were also seven cuts upon the face. Two 
of these cuts were somewhat symmetrical in shape. What was in- 
tended by them was not clear, but, according to the medical view, 
they were made after death. 

The body was afterwards identified as that of Leon Beron, aged 
forty-seven, a Russian by birth, who had spent all his life in 
France until the year 1894, when he came to London, and lived in 


2 
o 


Steinie Morrison. 
Mr. Muir 


the East End from that date. At the time of his death the man 
was in receipt of the rents of nine houses in the East End of London, 
and lived in a very poor way, spending his days for the most part at 
a restaurant kept by a man named Snellwar. The restaurant- 
keeper was in the habit of giving the deceased gold in exchange for 
silver, which was doubtless the proceeds of the rents from his houses. 

In this way the restaurant-keeper had frequent opportunity 
of seeing how much money Beron carried about him, and stated that 
it usually amounted to £20 or £30 in gold, carried in a wash-leather 
bag fastened into an inner pocket of the waistcoat with a safety pin. 
There was no secrecy about Beron’s habits, and any one frequenting 
the restaurant could easily learn that he carried a considerable amount 
of money in his pockets. 

In addition to the money, Beron carried a valuable gold watch 
and chain, to which was attached a £5 gold piece. Both the watch 
and chain were of unusual value for a man in Beron’s position, and 
were worth £30 or £40, so that he usually had in his possession 
money and easily convertible valuables to the amount of from £50 
to £70. 

So far as the evidence showed, the murdered man had no busi- 
ness or other connection with Clapham or its neighbourhood where 
his body was found, and the evidence would show that some pretext 
was used by means of which he had been induced to go there in order 
that he might be murdered and robbed, and that the person who 
murdered him was no stranger to the district. Whoever murdered 
Beron could not afford to run any risk at all of having him alive after 
the robbery, because had he been left alive he could have told who took 
him there and who was with him at the time he was assaulted and 
robbed. So that although the first two blows were sufficient to kill 
the man, six others were struck, and after he was dead and robbed 
he was stabbed three times in the chest with a knife having a blade 
at least five inches long. No risk was taken by the man who robbed 
Beron of leaving him alive. 

At the restaurant which Beron used the prisoner was also a 
frequent visitor, and for a fortnight or so before the murder was 
often seen in the company of Beron, both in the restaurant and out- 
side it. No explanation was forthcoming of this sudden friendship 
on the part of the prisoner for Beron, a man much older than himself. 
Their intimacy grew to such an extent that on one occasion the 
prisoner was seen handling and examining Beron’s watch. It was, 
therefore, perfectly obvious that for some reason or other the accused ~ 
was seeking the confidence of Beron. 

On 31st. December last the prisoner and Beron spent the greater 
part of the day in the restaurant. Between seven and eight o’clock 
on the evening of that day the prisoner gave a parcel to a waiter in 
the restaurant, which, in reply to the little daughter of the restaurant- 
keeper, Morrison said contained a flute, a statement which the 

4 


Opening Statement for the Crown. 


Mr. Muir 
waiter knew must be false, because, from the weight and feel 
of the parcel, he judged it to be a bar of iron. It was about two 
feet long and an inch and a half in diameter. Late at night, about 
11.40, when the restaurant was closing, the prisoner claimed his 
parcel from the waiter, and he and Beron left the restaurant together. 
_ The two men were subsequently seen together at various places 
in the East End, and identified by persons acquainted with both. 
At two o’clock on the morning of Ist January a cabman was engaged 
at the corner of Sidney Street, and told to drive to the Shakespeare 
Theatre, Clapham. The cabman drove them to the corner of 
Lavender Gardens, Clapham, where he was paid 5s. by the prisoner. 
The distance was about six miles, and the journey in a hansom cab 
occupies at night about thirty-eight minutes. That would bring the 
prisoner and Beron to Lavender Gardens somewhere about 2.38 on 
New Year’s morning. From the place where the two men left 
the cab to the spot where Beron’s murdered body was afterwards 
found was about ten minutes’ walk, so that they arrived there about 
2.48. 

From there to Clapham Cross, where there is a cab-rank, would 
take about eleven minutes. Another cabman named Stephens had 
identified the prisoner as the man who came up to the cab-rank 
Arom the direction of the pavement about ten minutes or a quarter 
past three. He engaged Stephens’ cab, and was driven to opposite 
the Hanover Arms public-house, near Kennington Church, where he 
got out of the cab and crossed the road, and went in the direction of 
Kennington Gate. The cabman walked his horse to the Elephant 
and Castle, where he arrived at 3.40. 

These times left about a quarter of an hour for the commission 
of the murder and the robbing of the body from the time Beron and 
the prisoner left the first cab at Lavender Gardens until the time 
that the prisoner appeared alone and engaged the second cab at 
Clapham Cross. From the Hanover Arms it was only a few minutes’ 
walk to a taxicab-rank opposite Kennington Church, and a taxi- 
cab driver named Castlin had identified the prisoner as a man who, 
in company with another man, came up to him there and engaged his 
cab to take them to Finsbury Park. ‘The prisoner had, therefore, 
been joined at Kennington by another man who went with him to 
Finsbury Park. 

The whole thing had been carefully planned,—the wrapping up 
of the iron bar in a parcel, the lingering about the East End of London 
until the time should have elapsed when Clapham Common would be 
cleared of all passers-by, even on a New Year’s morning, and the 
journey back to Kennington with the proceeds of the robbery, accom- 
panied by murder, to meet the companion who was waiting for the 
murderer. Among the proceeds were the watch and chain and the 
£5 piece, three articles which required conversion into another form 


in order to avoid detection. ; 
vo 


Steinie Morrison. 
Mr. Muir 


There could be no risk of leaving Leon Beron alive; there could 
be no risk of being found in the possession of Beron’s watch and 
chain. All had been carefully prepared beforehand. The companion 
met the prisoner at Kennington Gate, and they drove off together. 

Who committed this murder on Clapham Common, at the other 
side of the town from the place where Leon Beron was known! It 
was no stranger to Clapham Common who planned the robbery and 
murder. And the prisoner was no stranger to Clapham Common. 

Mr. Muir went on to narrate how the prisoner for seven weeks 
from 21st September had worked as a baker with a Mr. Pithers, 
who was in business at Lavender Hill, within a stone’s throw of where 
the prisoner and Beron were set down by the cabman, Hayman. 
Clapham Common was within five minutes’ walk of Mr. Pithers’ 
place of business, and the prisoner in his leisure and in his business 
—for part of the time he delivered bread on a round that. actually 
took him on to the common itselfi—was perfectly familiar with 
Clapham Common. He was seen within an hour of Leon Beron’s 
death in company with Leon Beron by people who knew them both, 
and he was identified by the cabman, Hayman, as being set down 
with Leon Beron within a quarter of an hour of the murder. 

It was a singular thing that from shortly before midnight on 
New Year’s Eve the prisoner, who was daily and almost hourly in 
Snellwar’s restaurant in company with Beron, was never seen there 
again, except for a few brief seconds about ten o’clock on New Year’s 
Day, when he put his head inside the door, glanced round, and went 
away again without speaking to any one, and never came back again. 

For a week the newspapers of the metropolis were full of this 
murder, and the man who had been Leon Beron’s daily companion 
made no inquiry, and gave no information. He never spoke to 
Beron’s brothers, never went near the restaurant; he might have 
been dead so far as the people acquainted with Leon Beron were 
concerned. After glancing into the restaurant on New Year’s morn- 
ing, the prisoner went to the cloakroom at the station at St. Mary’s, 
Whitechapel, and in the cloakroom there deposited a loaded revolver 
and forty cartridges, done up in a parcel, in the name of Bandmann. 
The man who committed the Clapham Common murder must have 
anticipated arrest, and it would not do for him to be found in pos- 
session of a revolver, and so it was deposited at the cloakroom in a 
false name. 

On 23rd December the prisoner pawned a watch and chain for 
£4 10s., evidently being in need of money, yet on Ist January he 
bought a gold chain for £1 18s. 7d., and was on that day in pos- 
session of a paper bag containing gold money, and at least two £5 
notes. He cashed a cheque for £4 for a man named Isaac Flitter- 
man, and gave Flitterman’s daughter, Eva, a present of £2, and still 
had gold in the bag and the £5 notes. Where did that money come 


from? When the prisoner was arrested on 8th January by Inspector 
6 


Opening Statement for the Crown. 
Mr. Muir 


Wensley and taken to the police station, before any charge was made 
against him of any kind, he said to the officer, ‘‘ This is the biggest 
mistake you have ever made in your lives. I have no doubt you 
have made many mistakes, but this is the biggest.’’ 

About an hour and a half afterwards he wanted to make a state- 
ment to Inspector Ward ; but that officer sent for Inspector Wensley, 
to whom the prisoner said, ‘‘ You have charged me with murder.”’ 
At that time no charge of any kind had been preferred against the 
prisoner. _ The inspector replied, ‘‘I have done nothing of the 
kind.’? Later the prisoner repeated his statement to Inspector 
Ward. Where did the idea of a charge of murder come from? The 
prisoner must have brought that charge out of his own inner conscious- 
ness. He knew what he was arrested for, and what he was likely 
to be charged with. Although no accusation had then been made 
against him, he himself suggested that the charge against him was 
one of murder. When actually charged, the prisoner’s reply was, 
* All I have to say is, it is a lie.”’ 

Mr. Muir then narrated how on the shirt and collar the prisoner 
was wearing when arrested bloodstains were found, though no explana- 
tion was forthcoming why he should be wearing that shirt a week 
after the murder. He had plenty of clean linen at his lodgings in 
York Road. When the blood spots were pointed out to him by 
Inspector Ward, Morrison said they were mud spots, but the analysis 
would show that they were blood, and that the larger one on the 
euff was human blood. It would be suggested to the jury that these 
blood spots fell upon the prisoner’s clothing when he was raining blows 
upon the head of Leon Beron as he lay upon the ground. 

These were the facts of the case which the jury would have to 
consider. The central facts were that the prisoner was the constant 
companion of the murdered man almost up to the moment of his 
death. He had to pawn his watch and chain on 23rd December, 
but was flush of money on lst January, the day of the murder. He 
disappeared that day from the places where he was known; he was 
silent—absolutely silent—about the murder, and made no inquiries 
and gave no information either to the police or the relatives of Leon 
Beron during the week which elapsed between the murder and the 
arrest. His movements on the night of the murder had been traced 
for all but one half-hour, and in that half-hour Leon Beron was 
murdered. These were the central facts of the case, which did not in 
the least depend on such things as bloodstains. 


Evidence for the Prosecution. 


Davip Davis, examined by Mr. Luycrster—I am police constable 
545, of the W Division. I prepared exhibit No. la, which is a 
plan of Clapham Common and the roads adjoining it. On the 
morning of 1st January I went to Clapham Common. Going along the 

7 


Steinie Morrison. 
David Davis 


path which leads from Lavender Gardens towards the bandstand there 
was pointed out to me a spot where there was blood upon the ground. 
It was just between the fountain and the straight path diagonal to 
the stand, called Bishop’s Walk, about half-way. I saw the blood 
there myself. I put a cross with a red pencil on exhibit No. la, 
showing where I saw the blood. The body was not still there 
when I visited the common. There was blood at that spot upon the 
asphalt pathway and on the gravel, and from that there was a mark 
upon the ground leading into the bushes—two marks, as if a toe or 
a heel had been drawn along. The marks ran parallel in a semi- 
-circle from the path to where the body lay. I have made an enlarged 
plan, exhibit No. 2, showing the way in which that trail went into 
the bushes. I have marked the lamps on a copy of exhibit 1a. 
Between those lamps and the spot where I saw the blood there was a 
wood—bushes and big scrub. The light from those lamps would not 
reach anything lying upon the ground inside those bushes. I have 
also made a plan of the immediate neighbourhood of Kennington 
Gate, exhibit 17. That plan shows the Hanover Arms, the cab- 
rank by the side of Kennington Church, and also Claylands Road. 
I prepared exhibit 16, which is a plan of Gardner’s Corner, White- 
chapel, and the roads in that neighbourhood. That shows upon the 
left Osborn Street, with No. 32 marked, and on the right Jubilee 
Street, with No. 133 marked (where Beron lived), and next to it 
Sidney Street, and then a turning out of Sidney Street, Newark 
Street, with No. 91 marked (where the accused lived). 

Cross-examined by Mr. Asrngzr—Were you also asked to prepare 
a plan of Clapham Cross?—No, not Clapham Cross; it is shown on 
the large map. 

Does that plan show how Clapham Cross is hghted?!—No, I have 
not marked the lamps on. 

How far is the South-Western Police Court from the spot where 
the body was found?—I have not measured it, but I will give you a 
rough guess—600 yards; between 500 and 600 yards. 

Just one other question. Just take exhibit 13 (handed) and 
mark upon it or indicate to us the directions of a public-house known 
as the Horns? (The witness did so.) Will you tell us whereabouts 
the Horns les?—Towards London, towards the Elephant and Castle. 

Is the Horns in the Kennington Park Road!—Yes, on the corner 
—Westminster Bridge Road. 

A person alighting at Kennington Church and wishing to go to 
the Horns would continue to walk along Kennington Park Road?!— 
Towards London, yes. 


JosepH Mumrorp, examined by Mr. Lryrcustsr—I am a police 
constable of the W Division. At ten minutes past eight on the 
morning of 1st January I was on duty on Clapham Common, and I 
was passing along the footpath which leads from the bandstand 

8 


*punoy sem Apod oy} aloyM soyvorpur ‘pat ur pojutad ‘sso1o oy, 


Cel ‘ON FqIyx|) ‘uowul0g weyde[D jo uelg 


yap gone 


> 


Ue 
wwe 


° 2 


3 ouv2__\e 
SNA NING? 


_ Evidence for Prosecution. 
Joseph Mumford 


towards Lavender Gardens. The path is marked on the plan, exhibit 
No. 1a. Close to the path I found the dead body of a man lying 
among some bushes, close to the red cross on the plan. I raised his 
left hand and it dropped again, leaving the body in the same position 
as it was when I found it. I sent for assistance, and other police 
officers and a divisional sergeant came to the spot. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Aprnger—The pathway is asphalt, is it 
not /—Yes. 

What was the soil where you found the body?!—Mould. 

Did you see any footprints ?—Yes. 

Did you take an impression of them?—No. 

- How many impressions of feet did you see on that mould?—I 
could not say. 

Was there blood on the asphalt ?—There was some on the asphalt. 

A pool?—No; there was a pool at the side of the railings, and 
on the gravel. 

The railings are on the other side of the path, away from the 
bushes, are they not?—Yes, that is right. 

Then was there a trail of blood from the railings across the path? 
—Yes. 

Was the greatcoat folded?—Yes, buttoned; the second button 
from the top. 

What was the head reclining on ?—It wag lying on the astrakhan 
collar of his coat. 

Do you mean the collar of the coat had been pulled up?— 
Yes, up to just about the base of the skull. 

What was the head reclining upon?—A few dry leaves. 

Were the legs crossed or not ?—Crossed. 

How were the arms?—The left arm was lying exposed. 

Naturally ?—Yes, by the side of the body. 

And the right arm?—It was under the side of the hip. The 
bare hand was covered over by his. coat. 

By Mr. Justice Dartisc—Was the body lying on its side, or 
face, or back?—Flat on its back. 

Cross-examination continucd—Did you see the hat !—Yes; it was 
about 12 feet from the head, in the southern direction. 

That would take you across the asphalt path, would it not?— 
No. 

Was the hat lying on the mould in the bushes!—It was lying just 
above the body. 

Further into the plantation or nearer the asphalt?—A little 
farther in the plantation—in the bushes. 

How deep is the plantation’—Do you mean the depth of the 
bushes ? 

From the asphalt to the horse drive—there is a horse drive the 
other side, is there not?—About 450 yards. 

The clump of bushes is about 450 yards deep?—No; the depth 


of the bushes would be about 8 feet. ; 


Steinie Morrison. 
Joseph Mumford 


I want you to try and explain. If you saw the hat lying about 
12 feet away, then it could not have been in the clump of bushes ?— 
No, the hat was not in the clump of bushes. It was lying outside 
the bushes. 

Not on the asphalt ?—No. 

On the mould?—On the mould. 

Did you examine the hat?—No, I did not interfere with the hat. 

Was there blood upon the greatcoat!/—There was some on the 
left side of his neck—on the collar of the coat. 

Were there astrakhan cuffis?—No. 

There was blood on the neck. Did you notice blood anywhere 
else !—On the sleeves. 

Anywhere else?—I cannot remember just now. 

Was there blood upon the man’s face’—Yes. 

On his hands?—I could not say. 

Was there a collection of blood on the mould ?—Yes. 

Near the head of the body, or which part of the body !—Near 
the head. 

Was there anything on the deceased man’s head?—A black silk 
handkerchief, with some red marks about it. 

Red stripes!—Yes. It was crossed right over the scalp of his 
head, laid right over the crown of his head and tucked into the top 
of his coat. 

That would conceal the face, would it not?—It would conceal his 
hair just down the side of his face. (Handkerchief put in and marked 
exhibit 36.) 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—The handkerchief hid both sides of the 
face, but not the front of the face. 

Cross-ecamination eontinued—Let the hat be produced. I see 
it is unbroken ?—It was unbroken. 

There was a handkerchief, was there not, somewhere near the 
man’s face?—Yes. (Exhibit No. 38.) 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—lIs that the one you see in the photo- 
graph (exhibit No. 19) underneath his hip?—It was lying on his left 
hand side. 

Cross-ecamination continued—Was there a walking-stick ?—I 
did not see any walking-stick. 

Or a pipe!—Yes, I saw a pipe, after it had been handed to the 
police. I recognise the pipe now shown me as the pipe. 

You did not find it yourself ?—No. 

The face was all covered with dirt, was it not !—Yes. 

Could you see the cuts on the face?—Yes, on the day of the 
inquest I saw the cuts. 

You could not see them on the day you found the body ?!—No. 

Just look at exhibit No. 8a. That is a photograph of the dead 
body with a hat on. You say you saw the body on the day of the 
inquest. That was 5th January, was it not?—Yes. 

10 


‘ueUl peotepinu eq} JO yYdeasojoyd 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Joseph Mumford 


Now, will you look at exhibits 13 and 13a? Did you look at the 
face at the inquest ?—Yes. 

And did you see on the left cheek and on the right cheek a cut 
resembling the letter ‘‘ § ’’?—Yes, I saw the cut down the face from 
.) eye to the mouth. (The witness pointed out the cut he referred 
oO. 


Joun Boustmap, examined by Mr. Luycrstpar—I am a detective 
-at New Scotland Yard, and I am engaged there in taking photo- 
graphs. On the morning of lst January I was called to Clapham 
Common, and I saw there the dead body of a man lying among some 
bushes. Before it was moved I took a photograph of it just as it lay 
(exhibit No. 18). That photograph, from the other side of the rail- 
ings, shows the body at a distance from the bushes. Exhibit 19 is a 
photograph taken by me from a spot closer to the body. After the 
body had been removed to the mortuary I took photographs of it 
while it was held up in an erect position. Exhibit 8 consists of three 
different photographs of the body in three different positions. Ex- 
hibit 84 is an enlarged copy of one of these photographs. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Asmvczr—Will you look at exhibits 13 
and 134 (handed). Did you take those photographs!—This is a 
copy I have taken. 

You took the copies, but you did not take the originals ?—Yes. 

To whom did you supply the copies !—Inspector Ward. 

Are they touched up?—There was nothing done on the photo- 
graph—not while I was doing them. 

Inspector Ward is the officer in charge of the case?—Yes. 

Mr. Justice Darzinc—I want to understand this. I do not 
want to ask anything embarrassing, of course, but I do not appreciate 
the point of this. 

Mr. Apmncer—If I may say so, in a sense, the point is this: a 
part of the defence will be that the motive of the awful injuries was 
not robbery, but vengeance. 

(To Witness)—Who asked you to take the copies ?—Inspector 
Ward. 

Tt was at Inspector Ward’s request that you took copies of the 
photographs which he supplied you with ?—Yes. 

What time did you get to Clapham Common?—About 11.30 in 
the morning. 

Was it wet or dry?—It was raining just a little. 


Freperick FRnyBERGER, examined by Mr. Luyrcustper—I am a 
pathologist. On 3rd January I made a post-mortem examination on 
the body of Leon Beron, at the Battersea mortuary. I found a 
number of injuries upon the body. I observed on the head a series 
of wounds; four were scalp wounds, and five were on the fore- 
head. The first wound that I observed was level with the right 

li 


Steinie Morrison. 


Frederick Freyberger 


ear. It began three inches behind it. It was horizontal, 
jagged, and contused, and pierced the whole thickness of the scalp 
for an inch or so. The second wound began three and a half inches 
above the right ear. It was slightly curved, contused, and pene- 
trated the whole thickness of the scalp, and was 5 inches long, and 
ended an inch and a half to the left of the middle line of the head. 
The third began one inch above the beginning of wound No. 2, and 
it had a right-angled course. The longer branch was an inch and a 
half long, and the shorter one half an inch long, running from right 
to left. The fourth wound was to the left of the middle line of the 
head, in ideal continuation of wound No. 3. It consisted of two 
contused wounds parallel to one another, each two inches long, united 
near the middle line by a transverse wound 1 inch long. The inter- 
vening strip of scalp was almost completely divided into two pieces 
by a short transverse wound half an inch from the end of the strip. 


This intervening piece of scalp was completely detached from the — 


underlying skull membrane, and was perfectly freely movable. 
These were the wounds in the scalp. 

On the forehead I observed five wounds, the first of which was 
a double wound. Above the right eyebrow there was a double con- 
tused scalp wound arranged in the shape of a horseshoe, the point 
of union between the two was one and a half inches above the right 
eyebrow, the two inner branches ending one inch above the nasal 
end of the right eyebrow. The strip of skin between these two 
wounds was two inches long, and completely detached from the 
underlying skull membrane. One inch above the root of the nose 
there began a straight cut through half the thickness of the scalp, 
ending a quarter of an inch to the left of the inner margin of the 
socket of the left eye. This wound was an inch and a quarter in 
length. Then an inch and a quarter above the middle of the left 
eyebrow, and ending three-quarters of an inch above the lower end 
of the previously described wound, there was a star-shaped wound 
composed of three legs, which pierced the whole thickness of the 
scalp and ran down to the frontal bone. Then the left ear was torn 
through horizontally about one inch from the top. The edges of the 
wound in the skin were sharp, but those of the gristle were irregular 
and jagged. 

Could all these wounds which you have described up to now 
have been inflicted by the same kind of instrument?!—In my opinion, 
they were inflicted by the same kind of instrument, a blunt metallic 
instrument, which need not be heavy. If it were not heavy, it 
would have to be used with great force. 

On the face I found a series of cuts. Five of the cuts were 
on the right side, and two upon the left side of the face. On 
the right ‘side of the face the first cut began half an inch below 
the inner angle of the right eye, and ended three-quarters of 
an inch above the right angle of the mouth. That cut ran through 

12 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Frederick Freyberger 


the outer layer of the skin only. The next cut began close to the 
lower attachment of the wing of the right nostril. It had a slanting 
cross from above to the right down, and to the left. It measured 
seven-eighths of an inch in length, and was lost among the hairs of 
the moustache. Then a quarter of an inch above and to the right 
of the right angle of the mouth there was a superficial cut 24 inches 
long, the first half-inch barely penetrating the outer layer of the 
skin. After an interruption caused by the intervening moustache, 
the cut was continued across the lower lip and ended at the top of 
the chin, increasing in depth from above downwards. One-sixteenth 
of an inch to the right of the top of the cut just now described there 
was a second small curved and somewhat deeper cut nine-eighths of 
an inch long, ending over the lower margin of the right half of ‘the 
jaw. On the left cheek, starting almost from an identical place as 
that cut No. 1 on the right cheek there was a superficial cut taking 
@ symmetrical course with cut No. 1, two and a quarter inches in 
length, ending like the cut No. 1 a quarter of an inch above the 
left angle of the mouth. Half an inch to the left of the upper end 
of the last described cut there was a superficial cut three inches 
long, convexed towards the left ear, ending a quarter of an inch to the 
left, and at a level with the left angle of the mouth. 

Those were all the cuts that I observed upon the face. Apart 
from the cuts, there were injuries to the lips. The right half of the 
upper and lower lips was bruised internally opposite the teeth, but 
the teeth were not loosened. 

With regard to the cuts, what would have caused those? 
—The cuts were, in my opinion, caused with a knife. 

And the injuries to the mouth?—The injuries to the mouth, in 
my opinion, may have been caused by the deceased falling. On the 
back of the left hand, over-the third metacarpal or finger-base bone, 
and at right angles to its course, there was a dark brown leathery 
chaff on the outer skin, five-eighths of an inch long and three- 
sixteenths of an inch wide. There was also a cut on the left forearm 
parallel with the left elbow, through the outer skin. 

How would those injuries be caused !—By the deceased falling. 

On the body, did you find three stabs?—Yes. The first stab 
was situated on the left side of the chest, between the sixth and 
seventh ribs, two and a half inches to the left of the middle line. 
That stab wound was five-eighths of an inch long, and it gaped to 
the extent of a quarter of an inch. The outer angle was three- 
eighths of an inch lower than the inner angle. The wound pene- 
trated through the whole thickness of the chest wall, and the direc- 
tion was one towards the abdominal cavity, straight down. It was. 
continued on to the front of the stomach, where the outer and middle 
coats were cut, but the mucous or inner lining membrane had not 
been injured. The second stab was two inches below the first stab, 
on the left side of the chest. Its course was perfectly parallel with 

13 


Steinie Morrison. 
Frederiek Freyberger 


the former, and the length and the amount of gaping the same. It 
went through the whole thickness of the chest wall, or, rather, the 
abdominal wall, but it had not touched any of the internal organs. 
On the right side of the chest, exactly half-way between the levels 
of the first and second stab, there was a stab nine-sixteenths of an 
inch long, perfectly parallel with the other two stabs as to its direc- 
tion, which penetrated the first wall and went into the liver, where 
the cut was seven-sixteenths of an inch long and an inch and a half 
deep. 

Could all those three wounds have been inflicted by the same 
kind of instrument ?—Yes. 

What kind of instrument would be required?’—In my opinion, 
they were inflicted with a knife. From the depth of the wound 
and the thickness of the chest wall, and, taking into consideration the 
clothing, the blade must have been at least five inches long and half 
an inch broad at least. 

Could you form any opinion whether they were inflicted during 
life or after death?—I came to the conclusion that the stabs were 
inflicted after death. 

By Mr. Justice Dartmiyvc—What made you think so?—In the 
first instance, the sharp character of the edges which were not everted 
and rounded off and suffused, and the fact that there was only a 
small quantity of blood found in the abdominal cavity, which would 
not have been the case if these wounds, especially that in the liver, 
had been inflicted during life. 

When you say “‘ inflicted after death,’’ could you judge within 
how short a time after death?—It would be impossible to fix the 
time accurately, but very shortly after death, because there was a 
little blood diffused, but the quantity was very small. 

Laamination continued—From the course which these wounds 
took in the body, I came to the conclusion that the body was lying 
on its back when these wounds were inflicted. 

I examined the contents of the stomach. There was a smell of 
alcohol about them. From the fact that the contents of the stomach 
were about two-thirds digested, I formed the conclusion that death 
took place between three ‘and four hours after the last meal. 

I then examined the skull, and I found it to be extensively 
fractured and splintered. At the horse-shoe shaped wound I found 
that there were two parallel cracks for the whole thickness of the 
frontal bone, corresponding in length and direction with the course 
of the double wound. 

What, in your opinion, was the cause of death?—In my opinion, 
the cause of death was concussion of the brain and fracture of the 
skull caused by blows. In my opinion, the wound first inflicted was 
the double wound on the right side of the forehead, which I have 
described as being horse-shoe shape. That in itself would be suffi- 
cient to cause death. The blows there would immediately cause un- 

14 


_— 


Evidence for Prosecution. 

Frederick Freyberger 
consciousness, and death would rapidly supervene. The person who 
received such a blow would immediately sink to the ground. The 
other blows on the head must have been inflicted after he was on 
the ground. In my opinion, there were eight blows inflicted upon 
the head, the first two causing the horse-shoe shaped wound. Blood 
would come from them on to the instrument by which they were 
inflicted, and I should think that if the instrument was being raised 
So as to repeat the blows, there would be sufficient blood on the 
instrument to run down to the end and then drop off. It might in 
that way drop upon the hand or the arm of the person who was 
using the instrument, and it might also drop down upon his collar. 

The stabs were caused by a knife or a similar cutting instrument. 
In my opinion, it is very likely that it was an instrument with one 
complete cutting edge running up one side, and a partial cutting 
edge running up the other side some distance from the point. From 
the appearance of the wounds and the position of the wounds on the 
head, I should think the blows were inflicted in rapid succession. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Asrvczr—What is the sum total of the 
blows and cuts?—Seven cuts on the face, three stabs, and eight 
wounds on the head, eighteen in all. 

One while the man was erect and seventeen while on the ground ? 
—The first two blows were struck in very rapid succession. 

Sixteen while on the ground and two while he was erect !—Yes. 

Was maniacal force used?—I should not say maniacal force. 

Will you look, please, at exhibit 13, which is a photograph of 
what you call the horse-shoe shaped wound. Look at the top of 
that wound. You see it forms something in the shape of an arc, a 
part of a circle?—It appears like that there, but that is due to the 
contraction of the skin after death. 

Do you tell us that that was a perfectly straight blow?—It is 
not perfectly straight. It could not be perfectly straight, because it 
was a blow upon a curved underlying boney surface, so that it would 
naturally have a slight curve in its course. 

That has a considerable curve?—Yes, I should say that is due 
to the fact that the edges of the wound were contracting. This 
photograph was taken on the third day after the death, and the 
scalp contracts. 

On what do you base your opinion that this was the result of 
two blows?—I say there were two blows, because there were two 
parallel cracks in the skull, each of them corresponding with one of 
the branches of the wound. 

Would not one blow with the sharp edge of a hammer have 
inflicted that class of injury?—No, one blow would not. 

Why not?—Because there are two blows. 

Oh, yes, but why could you not get the double wound with an 
eats rp edge of a hammer{!—I cannot see how 
instrument, say, the sharp edg - 
ao 


Steinie Morrison. 
Frederick Freyberger 


it could have been inflicted with the sharp edge of a hammer. The 
sharp edge of a hammer would pierce the bone. 

Was the bone not pierced here?—No, the bone was cracked. 

Do you draw a distinction between ‘‘ pierced ’’ and “‘ cracked ’’? 
—Oh, yes, there is a great distinction between pierced and cracked. 

Could you crack a bone without piercing it?—Yes, the crack 
pierces the bone, not the instrument which causes the crack. 

Would you expect the instrument which inflicted that injury to 
have an angle?—The instrument may have had angles, but it need 
not have had angles. 

In your opinion, what is the probability—that it had an angle 
or that it had not?—I cannot give any definite answer as to that, 
because the injury may have been inflicted with an angled or a non- 
angled metallic instrument. 

By Mr. Justice Dartuyve—Did you ever see a burglar’s jemmy? 
—Yes. 

Could that do it?’—Yes. 

Cross-ecamination continued—The cuts on the face were all 
superficial ?—All superficial. 

Not dangerous to life?—They were inflicted after death. 

I know, but I am not asking you that. They were superficial 
cuts!—Superficial cuts. 

Not deep enough to do serious mischief!—Not deep enough to 
cause serious mischief. 

Done, I suggest to you, for the purpose of mutilating?—I have 
formed no opinion as to why these cuts were made; I can express no 
opinion upon it. 

Did you form an opinion, having regard to the terrific character 
of the wounds on the head and the stabs on the body, why these 
wounds on the face were inflicted ?—No, I did not. 

Were there two symmetrical wounds on each cheek, resembling 
the letter ‘‘S ’’%—There were two symmetrical cuts, one on each 
cheek. 

Resembling the letter ‘‘ S ’? /—Resembling something like what I 
describe as ‘‘ an open S-shaped cut.”’ 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—Are they shown well in the photograph? 
—wNo, they do not come out well in the photograph. 

Cross-exramination contunued—Were they any more distinct on 
the face of the dead man as you saw them than in any of those 
photographs?—Yes, they were. When this photograph was taken, 
it was taken soon after the death, and the muscles of the face were 
drawn. The face was more flat when this photograph was taken. It 
was taken three days after death, and the muscles of the face had 
relaxed, rigor mortis passing off, consequently the fulness of the 
cheek being more or less restored, the curve becomes more or less 
pronounced. 

Did you form an opinion whether these two symmetrical, identical 

16 


Evidence for Prosecution. 

Frederick Freyberger 
cuts had been deliberately traced on that face?—I have formed no 
opinion about that. 

Am I correct in saying they are both symmetrical and identical? 
—They were symmetrical images of each other as far as it was 
possible. 

You told us that the contents of the stomach smett strongly of 
alcohol ?7—Yes. 

Does the process of absorption go on after death, or does it stop 
instantaneously with the extinction of life?—The process of absorption 
may go on after death, but the process of digestion does not go on 
after death. 

“When you told us that you found the food two-thirds digested, 
you did not suggest what food, because I suppose food varies in time 
to digest ’—Yes. There was some meat; I remember meat and bread. 

Just stop there for a moment. Pork is the most indigestible 
meat, is it not?’—Yes, I should think it would be. 

We can eliminate pork, as Beron was a Jew?—Yes. 

Suppose the man had had a light supper of tea or coffee and 
cake, and things of that class, how long would that take to dis- 
integrate?—Cake would suffuse in fluid pretty rapidly, in an hour 
or two. 

Cannot you give it a little nearer than that ?—No, it is impossible. 

Mutton ?—I should say that, if mutton remained in the body for 
three or four hours, it would probably have been in the same state as 
I found the pieces of meat that were in the stomach. 

How long would mutton take to digest?—I do not know. It 
depends upon the individual’s digestion. There is no fixed rule. 

Is there not a table showing roughly the duration of the diges- 
tions or assimilations of the various foods?—I should think those 
tables of digestions are chiefly digestions in test tubes, and not in 
human stomachs. It depends upon the individual. It is impossible 
to fix any definite number of minutes or hours. 

Supposing this man had had his last meal shortly before twelve 
o’clock, some very light refreshment, say, tea and cake, do you 
tell the jury that you would only expect to find that two-thirds of it 
was digested at 9 o’clock the next morning?—That would mean to 
say that the man had lived until nine o’clock in the morning before 
he died? 

No, if he had been alive?—The stomach would have been empty 
by nine o’clock in the morning surely. 

When do you say that would be digested ?—I could not tell. 

Not approximately 7—Not approximately. 

It would digest much more rapidly than a meat supper?!—lIt 
would digest much more rapidly than a meat supper. 

Within an hour or two?—Most of the contents would probably 
pass out within two hours, but if he had any whisky, or that kind 
of fluid, in the stomach they would remain longer in it. 

- 17 


Steinie Morrison. 
Frederick Freyberger 


If the food was two-thirds digested (we know the man was 
found dead at nine o’clock in the morning), what period do you 
put complete digestion at?—I cannot tell you. I had not seen the 
deceased before he died. 

Then it amounts to this, that you are making an honest guess 
at it?—From the experience I have had of persons who died a 
certain number of hours after their last meal, I judge the condition 
of the remains of the meal in that man’s stomach similar to that I 
have found in other persons whose hours of death I knew. 

Irrespective of what their last meal consisted of !—Practically 
irrespective of what their last meal consisted of. 

Did you form any opinion as to whether this was the work of 
one or two?—I have formed no opinion as to that. 

You are quite satisfied that there were two weapons?—I am 
quite satisfied that the wounds inflicted upon the head were different 
from the wounds upon the face and the stab wounds. 

Are you satisfied that the instrument which inflicted the stabs 
was the same instrument which inflicted the mutilation of the face?— 
I should say yes. 

Were there corresponding stabs through the greatcoat!—Yes. 

Three stabs in the greatcoat?—I remember two distinct stabs in 
the greatcoat, but the third stab might have gone through the open- 
ing of the coat or buttonhole; I do not know. I saw two distinct 
stabs on the left-hand side of the coat, I think. 

You see that the prisoner is a tall man?—Yes. 

Tt follows from what you have told us that a man of the height 
of the prisoner inflicting these stabs and sixteen other wounds on a 
man after he had fallen must have stooped !—Yes. 

Knelt or stooped?’—I do not know. I have not examined the 
prisoner closely. I cannot answer the question. 

A large quantity of blood would naturally escape from his scalp 
wounds !—No. 

No blood?—No, because death intervened, and after death the 
wounds cease bleeding. Later on they start bleeding again, but 
that is more in the manner of oozing than of spurting out. 

I thought you said to my learned friend that the weapon which 
inflicted these wounds was dripping with blood. That is during 
life, you know ?—Yes. 

So that there might be a quantity of blood?—From those two 
wounds, yes. 

We have heard from other witnesses that there was a pool of 
blood?—I have not seen the blood. I have not been there, and I 
cannot answer. 

Would the stabs spurt ?—No. 

They would if the blows were inflicted during life?—If the blows 
were inflicted during life there would have been a fair amount of 
bleeding. 

18 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Frederick Freyberger 


atl a 

Are you prepared to tell us during what period after death the 
blows were inflicted?—I could not say, but they were inflicted very 
soon after death. 

What do you call a short interval?—I could not say in this case. 

A second !—No, I could not bind myself down to any number of 
seconds. 

Under a minute?’—No, I could not say that. I said a short time 
after death. 

I have a particular reason for asking you to tell me within what 
period of time?—A short time after; I do not know how long. 

What period would elapse between the unconsciousness which 
you said would be the result of the horse-shoe shaped blow and 
death?—A short time, considering the amount of bruising on the 
brain and the fracture of the skull. I should say the period of time 
elapsing between the blows on the forehead and death was a short one 

Tt might be a few seconds, it might be a minute, and it might 
be two minutes?—It might be, but I could not give you a precise 
answer. 

I put it to you that the man who committed this act must 
have been stooping or kneeling over the prostrate body of the 
man, cutting his face, and during that period there was opportunity 
for blood to spurt on the man?—I should think by the time that 
the man was on the ground and these cuts on the face were inflicted 
it had ceased spurting. 

How can you give us that answer if you cannot tell the jury 
how soon death would supervene?—No, but if a person is rendered 
unconscious through a blow, bleeding from arteries ceases. There 
might be a slight oozing up, but there is no spurting of blood once a 
man is unconscious. 

Do you tell us, then, an unconscious man stops bleeding /— 
And when he comes to he starts bleeding again. 

You have had an opportunity of seeing these wounds. How 
long do you think this operation would have lasted !—What? 

The whole transaction ?—I could not say, I was not present. 

Re-examined by Mr. Murr—What is the greatest space of time it 
would take to inflict those injuries!—A few minutes. 


JosrpH NespHam, examined by Mr. Murr—I am divisional surgeon 
at Balham. At nine o’clock in the morning of Ist January I went 
to Clapham Common and saw the dead body of a man lying in 
some bushes. The body was not lying altogether on its back—it was 
slightly to its left side, at about an angle of 45 degs. with the earth. 
The face was uncovered. There was a muffler at the top of the head, 
and on both sides of the face over the ears. The greatcoat was pulled 
up over the back of the head, and the muffler was higher than the 
collar. 1 examined the head, and I found a number of severe wounds 
upon it. Only the second button of the overcoat was fastened, and 

19 


Steinie Morrison. 
Joseph Needham 


that was immediately beneath the chin. On the front of the coat 
there was some blood and mud. ‘There was a quantity of soil 
adhering to the toes of the boots. There was mud on the back of 
both hands. From those marks of mud I formed the opinion that 
the man had been dragged to the position in which he lay by the 
back of his collar, face downwards.. That would place the collar 
and the muffler in the position in which I saw them. I followed these 
tracks where he had been dragged to the asphalt path. I opened 
the clothes as he lay there on the ground, and I tested the warmth of 
his body, and formed the opinion that he had been dead about six 
hours. That would take it back to three o’clock. I was present 
when Dr. Freyberger made his post-mortem examination, and I have 
been in Court to-day while he has given evidence. I agree with that 
evidence. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Anrnazer—I want to ask you a question 
or two about these facial marks. Did you say at the inquest, and 
do you agree, that the symmetrical cuts on the face were extra- 
ordinarily like two ‘‘S’s ’’?—Yes, that is so. I think I described 
them rather as being like the “‘ f ”’ holes of the violin, on each side 
of the strings. 

Do you know Russian ?—No. 

Did you say they could not be produced accidentally ?—Yes, 
undoubtedly. 

And is that your opinion ?—yYes, still. 

By Mr. Justice Darninc—You think that the body was seized 
by the back of the coat and dragged along on the ground on its 
face !—Yes. 

Could the marks have been caused by the face passing over 
some rough things on the ground!—No. It would be impossible, 
because the nose would be in contact with the ground. There must 
have been some very projecting material to have inflicted wounds— 
symmetrical wounds—on the two sides of the face at the same time. 
Cross-examination continued—They were cuts, were they not? 
—Yes. 

Cuts with a knife?—Yes. 

Superficial cuts ?’—Yes. 

How deep ?—Just through the outer skin. 

As regards the blood, was there blood on the back of the left 
hand and cuff?—There was very little on the right cuff, but a great 
deal on the left. 

Was there blood on the knees of the trousers?—Yes, it was mud 
and blood mixed. 

Was there blood on the greatcoat (now produced) !—Yes. 

A quantity?’—Yes. There was blood on the sleeves and down 
on the left sleeve (indicating). 

Any on the collar?’—Yes, there is blood on the collar. 

Is there much or little?—A fair amount. 

20 


*‘pageieqiqo usaq svy ydearsoqoyd 
9} JO JSat OY], “ows SLU polopmut oy Uo oFTUy vB kq Quo J,, 9 0} pres ‘sory eyg Jo advys oy} Surmoys 


6 Per 


‘uol9q uoay yo Apoqg Peep oy} Jo ydeazojoyd © JaA0 UMP Soul] 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Joseph Needham 

How many stabs were there through the coat?/—I have not 
examined the coat. Looking at it now, I can only find one on the 
right side. 

What did you say in the Court below, dealing with these facial 
injuries?—I thought it was extraordinary that any one should have 
stopped to inflict such wounds. 

They were not dangerous to life?—No. 

Did you say that you thought they were some sign?—Yes, I 
said that at the Coroner’s Court. 

_ Do you know the word ‘‘ spic,’’ which is Russian?—No. 
‘Meaning “‘ false spy ’? ?—No. 

Or “ spickan,”’ the Polish word for ‘‘ spy ’? ?—No, at that time 
I knew nothing about it. 

Did you know the word ‘‘ Sorregio,’”’ the Camorra sign ?—Not at 
that time. I have learnt this since. My information is gleaned from 
the newspapers. It is common property. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—We must not have this. 

Mr. Asincur—I was asking him because the witness said that 
he thought it was a sign, but I will not press it if your lordship 
thinks not. : 

(To Witness)—Did you form an opinion whether that wound 
on the forehead was the result of one or two blows?—Yes, I thought 
it was two blows. 

Why?—Simply because of the direction of the wound upwards 
and downwards and diverging. 

Would the claw end of a hammer produce such a wound!—A 
hammer would not produce such a wound at all. 

I am putting to you the claw end of a hammer!—No. 

Would a straight bar have inflicted it?—Yes. 

Such as my lord suggested to the jury—a jemmy!?—Yes, a 
jemmy. 

By Mr. Justice Dartivc—Yes, but that would take two blows? 
—Yes, certainly. 

Cross-examination continued—In your judgment, was the 
weapon which inflicted that blow an instrument with an angle!—Yes. 

Look at the shape of what we call the horse-shoe shaped wound 
in exhibit 13. Do you see it describes a kind of arc?—Yes. 

Can you account for that?—Yes, I think it is caused simply by 
the rotundity of the cranium. 

Did it present that appearance when you first saw the body ?—I 
could not judge, because it was covered with blood and mud—dried. 

You did not see the body, I presume, from Ist January to the 
5th, the date of the inquest?—No, I saw it at the post-mortem on 
the 3rd. 

Will you tell us whether it presented that curved appearance on 
that occasion?—It was very similar, I should think, trusting to 
memory, but I made no special note of it. 


21 


Steinie Morrison. 
Joseph Needham 


Which was the deepest end?—That I cannot quite recollect; the 
bone was exposed throughout. 

Assume that the deceased man had had a meal consisting of tea 
and cake at half-past eleven o’clock at night, in what time should 
you expect that to have digested?—In a very short time—possibly 
an hour or a couple of hours. 

Assuming the man had had a pork supper, how long!—Three or 
four, or four or five hours; it varies very much. 

As the food was two-thirds digested, if the man’s last meal 
were at a quarter to twelve or half-past eleven, and of that char- 
acter, you would have expected to find it totally digested ?—By three 
o’clock in the morning? 

Yes?—Not necessarily. 

Why ?—Because it varies according to the activity of a person’s 
stomach. A stomach may contain food seven days after it has been 
placed there. 

That is abnormal?—Diseased. There was meat in this man’s 
stomach. 

What meat ?—I could not tell you what meat—muscular fibre. 

Can you say, in your judgment, that the last meal that this 
poor man had consisted partly of meat ?—Yes. 

Or might that have been his mid-day meal?—That would exclude 
the question of the physical condition of the stomach. 

Might that have been a mid-day meal!—Not if he were in perfect 
health. 

Re-examined by Mr. Murr—There was a mass of partly digested 
food. I did not go into the details of it. We had not a microscope 
present. It would be consistent with ham sandwiches. Besides the 
meat and bread, there was a distinct odour of alcohol. 

You spoke of an instrument with an angle. What sort of an 
angle do you mean!—Very often a coal chisel has an angle; instead 
of its being cylindrical, it has sides. 

By Mr. Justicy Dartinc—Hexangular or octangular, that kind 
of thing ?—Yes. 

Which runs along its length?—Yes, the end of a coal chisel, 
and I believe the end of a hammer is flattened out like a chisel. You 
get a sharp angle there that would produce these things we are 
discussing. 

A hexangular bar?—A bar with a chisel-shaped extremity. 


Sotomon Buron, examined by Mr. Luycuster—I live now at 
133 Jubilee Street. I have no occupation at all. Leon Beron was 
my brother. He was forty-eight years old, and he lived at 133 
Jubilee Street, where I was also living. He was born in Russia. 
Our family left Russia when he was about a year old, and lived 
for thirty years in France, and then we came to this country in 


1894. Ever since then my brother lived in the East End of London. 
22 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Solomon Beron 


He did not do any work. He had some house property—nine small 
houses—in the East End of London, bringing him in about £25 a 
year, after paying all outgoings. He did not have any banking 
account ; he carried money about with him, and at the time of the 
crime he had £12. He had a gold watch and chain which he always 
wore, with a £5 piece on the chain. The watch and chain, together 
with the £5 piece, were worth about £30, I believe. The pipe 
which is now shown to me is my brother’s pipe. I last saw my 
brother alive about 10.45 in the evening of Saturday, 31st December, 
in Fieldgate Street—just that same spot where the accused had been 
arrested. My brother was standing leaning to the pavement, with 
his stick in his hand, and just on the same spot where the restaurant 
was situated. There was nobody with him. I tried to speak to 
him, but he did not speak to me. On the following day I identified 
his dead body in the mortuary at Battersea. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Asivasr—How many brothers have you 
alive —Only one now. 

What is his first name?—David. 

Whereabouts does he live?!—With me. 

At 133 Jubilee Street ?!—Yes. 

Where did you live the week preceding the death of your 
brother ?—Rowton House. 

That is a common lodging-house?—Yes. 

At 6d. a night?—3s. 6d. a week, and 7d. a night. 

When did you go to live at 133 Jubilee Street?—After the 
crime, when my brother was missing. 

Did you help your brother with the rent, or did he help you?-- 
My brother had nothing to help me. 

Were you doing any work?—No. 

What were you doing in December, 1910?—I was doing nothing. 

By Mr. Justice Dartryc—What did you live on!—From what I 
have earned in Paris. 

You have been living on what you earned in Paris ?—Yes. 

What were you in Paris!—A placier—a traveller for my sister, 
selling drapery. 

Wher did you leave Paris!—In January last year ; twelve months 
back I am in London. 

Had you made enough money in Paris to live on in London!— 
Yes, and I came just over to try and make an application before your 
lordship about some solicitors in regard to a trust estate. 

Cross-examination continued—Did it take twelve months to come 
over and make an application!—There is five years already my case 
is going on. 

I do not want to go back so far into your history, Mr. Beron. 
I am talking about December last year. Do you describe yourself 
as an independent gentleman !—Yes. 

Living in a Rowton House at 6d.—I beg your pardon, 7d.—a 


Steinie Morrison. 


Solomon Beron 


night ?—What is that to do with the case? It has nothing to do 
with the crime. If you ask me independent [impudent?] questions, 
nothing relating with the crime, I will not answer you. 

Did anybody help the deceased man with his rent?—You go and 
ask him. I cannot tell you. If you ask me silly questions I will 
give you no answer. ; 

Did any one help your deceased brother to pay his rent ?!—Yes, 
my brother David used to pay him 9d. 

How much rent a week did your brother Leon pay !—2s. a week. 

And David paid 9d.?—Yes. 

So that was 2s. 9d.?—2s. 9d. 

So that your brother, who was carrying the sum of £12, I think 
you said, on the day of the murder, was allowed 9d. a week by his 
brother to help him to pay his rent ?—Well, that is so. 

It is true?—It is true. 

How long had David been allowing Leon 9d. a week ?—The time 
that he is living with him. 

How long is that?—About fifteen months, I believe. | When 
David used to live with my father, I do not know how they used to 
manage. 

Do you tell us that David and Leon lived together at 133 Jubilee 
Street ?—Yes, yes, I have told you already. 

How long did they live together?—Fifteen months. I have 
told you that already. Since my father has been in a home they 
lived together. 

You, during this period, had no income?’—No income. 

Did Leon help you?—No, how can he help me? 

You were living in a common lodging-house at 6d. or 7d. a 
night, and your brother, you say, had property, a gold watch and 
chain, and money in his pocket. Did you ever ask him to help 
you!—Oh, well, it is no good you go on asking me that. If I spoke 
to you several times, ‘“‘ No, no, it is not,’’? you say, ‘‘ Is not it? ’’ 
I never received any assistance from my brother. 

Did you get your brother to help you?’—I cannot ask a man 
who cannot help me. He had not sufficient for himself to live. 

He had a watch?—He had a watch, yes. 

Did you ever see it?—Yes. 

Was it a cheap one?—Well, I think this watch to buy new 
cost £25. He paid fourteen guineas second-hand. 

When ?—Well, I don’t know. I was not in London when my 
brother bought it. I was in Paris then. 

How do you know he gave £14 for it?—He told me. 

Then he had got a chain?—He had a chain, yes. 

Was it gold?—Yes, gold. 

Where did he get that?—He bought it. 

You tell the jury that he only had 10s. a week, and that some- 
body had to pay 9d. a week for him. Where did he get the money 

24 : 


Evidence for Prosecution, 


Solomon Beron 
from ?—If you want to know, from 1894 to 1905 he was living with 
me, and he used never to spend a penny himself. He had some 
money saved, and with this money he has bought a watch and 
chain, because, you know, Jewish people like jewellery. They buy 
Jewellery to save money, as you always get it back again. 

Is your father alive?—Yes. 

Where is he?—In a Jewish home at 105 Nightingale Lane, 
Wandsworth. 

Does that lie to the south of Clapham Common ?—Yes. 

Was your brother Leon in the habit of going to see his father? 
—Never. 

Did you?—Always since I am in London. 

How do you know your brother never went ’—I know, because 
every brother knows how he is related to his father. My brother 
was not very friendly with my father. 

Is this a charitable institution where your father is?—Yes. 

Will you go so far as to swear that Leon never went to see his 
father?’—Yes, yes. If you disbelieve me, I shall bring my father. 

I do not disbelieve you!—It is nothing to laugh at; it is not a 
laughing matter; I do not see the joke. You are laughing. I do 
not see the joke. There is no joke in here to laugh. 

What time did you go to bed yourself on 31st December ?—When 
I go to bed was before I met my brother—I go usually this time. 

Did you go at ten o’clock then?—I went to bed at 10.45. 

You are sure of that hour!—Sure of that hour. 

How far is Rowton House from Fieldgate Street!—Well, say, 
500 yards, or three-quarters of a mile ; that is all. 

And you saw your brother at F ieldgate Street at 10.45 2—Yes. 

Then you went straight to bed?!—Yes. 

Were you ever with your brother in the evenings—at night ?— 
No, I was not with my brother this evening, I told you. 

Can you tell us where he passed his evenings !—If I was not with 
my brother, I could not tell you where he passed his evening. 

Do you know the Anarchist Club, at Jubilee Street?—I do 
not know. 

You know Jubilee Street ?—I know Jubilee Street, but I do not 
know an Anarchist Club. 

Do you know it is in the same street as your brother was 
living!—I know, yes. I have heard of it, that it is an Anarchist 
Club, but I do not know. I know there is an Anarchist Club there 
on the same side where my brother’s house is situated, but I have 
never been there, and I do not know. 

What work are you doing now!—Nothing. 

You look very nicely dressed and comfortable. Where did those 
clothes come from?!—Very well. Do you want to know? 

T am dying to know!—I am not going to tell you. If the judge 


asks me I am going to tell you. 
25 


Steinie Morrison. 


Solomon Beron 


By Mr. Justice Dartivc—You must answer the question?—lf I 
must answer the question, you may tell him that I brought over in 
London about £100, money what I have saved from what | have 
made in Paris from my business. 

Cross-ecamination continwed—You brought over £100 in 19091 
—Yes. 

Where is it?—In the Bank of England. 

You mean you have spent it?—Spent it, yes. 

Have you got any of it left now?—I don’t know that; I shall 
have a look. 

At any rate, the jury are to understand you are living in 
London, and you do no work ?!—Well, I get some property in London ; 
I got an estate. 

What, Rowton Buildings!—I got an estate. 

You have got an estate?—If my lord would allow my applica- 
tion, I have got an estate. I will prove it to you I have got an 
estate. 

Where does David live now!—With me, I told you. 

What does he do’—Nothing. He is doing some little jobs. 

What do you mean by “ little jobs ’’?—A jeweller. 

Do you know a man named Fritzvar?—I do not know. 

Will you swear you did not know him?—I says to you I do not 
know. 

Did you know a man called Peter the Painter?—I do not 
know—no. 

Haye you ever met either of these men? Do you remember 
that you visited the restaurant of Mr. Snelwar?—Yes. 

Did you see that photo. of Peter the Painter?’—No. Mr. 
Hermilin will say yes, that you showed a photo., and you have said 
that the prisoner, the accused man, is perhaps Peter the Painter. 
You have said that. Is that correct or not? 

Mr. Justice Daritinc—You must not ask learned counsel 
questions. Just answer his questions. 

The Witness—Why should not I ask him questions? 

Mr. Justicn Dartinc—You must not ask him questions, 
because you are a witness and he is not, that is the reason. 

Cross-examination continued—Will you swear that you did 
not know either of these men?’—I do not know. 

Do you know a boy named Rosen?—Do you mean the one who 
eevee a witness in the case? Yes, since he has mixed in the 
affair. 

Did you speak to Rosen after he had given evidence at the 
police court /—Never. 

Now, listen; did you say to Rosen if he came to Court and 
told the truth he would go to prison?—No, never. 

And that he would be poisoned or drowned?!—I never spoke to 
him. 
26 


Solomon Beron. 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Solomon Beron 


Do you know Mrs. Deitch !—Only since she came here. 

Do you know Mr. Deitch ?—Never. 

Do you know a boy called Jack Taw 1—Only by sight. 

Have you spoken to him since you gave evidence at the police 
court /—Never. 

Have you seen Jack Taw in the Warsaw Restaurant, that is 
Snelwar’s restaurant, since?—I do not take any interest in it. It 
had nothing to do with me in this case. I took no interest in it. 
if you take any interest, I do not. Do not put me so many questions 
or I will go out ‘from here. 

Have you seen Jack Taw?—I saw him, but I did not speak 
about this affair. 

Where did you see him?—In the restaurant. I saw him in 
Court—all along. I do not care about it. 

Have you been every day to Snelwar’s Restaurant 1—Yes. 

Have you seen Jack Taw there every day?’—Some time I see 
him, some time I not. 

What is Jack Taw?—He is a waiter—a kitchen boy. 

Always a waiter?—I do not know what he is. Ask him. 

Do you say that Taw is always a waiter?—He is not now. 

What is he now?—I do not know. 

How is he earning a living?—Oh, I could not tell you. 

But you meet him every day at this restaurant?—i do not ask 
him. I do not take any notice of him. It is not my business. 

How many hours each day do you pays at Snelwar’s Restaurant? 
—I spend all the time what I got. 

What time do you get there?—About one o’clock I goes and I 
come in. I do not spend all the time there. Oh, it is no good 
talking. 

Where else do you spend your time?—I go nowhere else. 

You go nowhere else but Snelwar’s Restaurant !—No, nowhere 
else, only to do my business. 

What business?—I go to my solicitors. I cannot see the joke. 
What are you laughing at? 

When did you go to your solicitors last?—Well, it was Friday, 
I believe. 

Where?—In Basinghall. 

Unless you are round at the solicitors you are in Snelwar’s 
Restaurant ?—Yes. 

And Jack Taw as well?—Sometimes I saw him, sometimes I 
don’t. I do not know where he is. 

Have you seen Mrs. Deitch in Snelwar’s Restaurant ?—I have. 

Where is your brother David now?—He is in the street. He 
is trying to earn a shilling. 

Re-examined by Mr. Murr—The club was in Jubilee Street. It 
is not open now. I believe it is a picture shop now. I never 
knew the name of the club. 


On 
27 


Steinie Morrison. 


Alex. Snelwar 


ALEX. SNELWAR, examined by Mr. Murr—I keep a restaurant 
at No. 32 Osborn Street. I knew a man named Leon Beron; he 
had used my restaurant for six years, and he was known to my 
customers as “‘ the landlord.’”’ I used to give him gold in exchange 
for silver. He kept his money in a wash-leather purse in his great- 
coat pocket, secured with a safety pin. He always used to keep 
about £20 or £30 there. I know the accused. I used to see him 
about two months before the crime—that is in the months of 
November and December last. He came a lot to my restaurant. 
I saw him during the last three weeks every day in the company 
of Leon Beron, for half an hour or sometimes an hour each day. 
I would see him sometimes about nine o’clock and sometimes ten 
o’clock at night. I have seen the accused using his right and 
left hands; he was a left-handed man. He was not always dressed 
in the same way; he had about two or three new suits during the 
two months. I saw Leon Beron on the last day of the old year. I 
used to see him at 2 o’clock, and then I would see him at nine 
o’clock, when I came down from upstairs. Steinie Morrison was 
with him at nine o’clock on 31st December. They remained together 
till a quarter to twelve. 

Were they in the restaurant all that time, or in and out?—I 
have seen him from nine till a quarter to twelve. I do not remember 
if they were out in the same time, but I find him at a quarter to 
twelve in the same place, sitting together at a table. They then 
went out together. Beron wore a big 18-carat gold watch, with a 
big chain and a £5 piece, and he was wearing that on the last night 
of last year. I close my house at twelve o’clock. I never saw Leon 
Beron alive again after that Saturday night, but I saw the accused 
on the Sunday morning. He walked into the middle of the shop, 
and then he walked out again, speaking to nobody. This was between 
eleven and twelve on the Sunday morning. He did not come back 
again. For two months up to 3lst December he had been a regular 
customer. He had an overcoat on, which I recognise as exhibit 14. 
I have seen him wearing that overcoat frequently. He was wearing 
it on the night in question. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Apinaer—What is the name of your 
restaurant?—The Warsaw Restaurant. 

What time used Leon Beron to come?—He used to come at two 
o’clock every day. 

And what time did he leave every day ?!—Twelve o’clock. 

All the year round?!—All the year round. 

What would he be doing during those ten hours?—Well, he was 
Sitting and talking and eating all the time. 

How much a day did he spend?—He used to spend 1s. 6d. a day. 

Including Sunday ?—Every day. 

Never more?—No, sometimes less. 

What was the smallest amount—ls.?—The smallest amount was 
Is. 3d. 

28 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Alex. Snelwar 

Did he have supper on the night of the 31st December ?—Yes. 
ae did he have?—I have seen him drink a glass of tea; that 
is all. 

What did he eat ?—Nothing at all. 

What time was that !/—Half-past nine. 

Can you tell us whether he ever bought any meat at your 
restaurant after half-past nine?—Yes. 

Did he?!—He was drinking a glass of tea at half-past nine. 

Anything after that?—I do not know; I never see him eat 
anything. 

Were you in the restaurant after half-past nine till closing time? 
—Yes. 

Did you serve him with any supper ?—No. 

What did he have to eat before he had the glass of tea!—I do 
not know; I was not in the shop till nine o’clock. 

When you are in the shop, who takes the money?—The missus. 

How many customers do you, as a rule, have in your restaurant? 
—Always about twenty or thirty customers. 

Did Beron smoke !—Yes. 

Did not you say at the Police Court, ‘‘ He would spend Is. 3d. 
to Is. 6d. at most. He had dinner, tea, and supper. He did not 
smoke ’’ ?—They did not ask me if he smoked or not. 

You said so at the police Court? 

Mr. Justice Daruinc—Well, but did he? 

Mr. Asrineur—‘‘ He had dinner, tea, and supper. He did not 
smoke.’’ I accept it from you if you say it is a slip. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—You see, he may be talking of that 
particular occasion. 

Mr. ApincerR—This is the context. ‘‘ Leon used to sit down 
and eat and talk to customers. He sat down where he liked. He 
kept company with different men every day. He would spend 
1s. 3d. or 1s. 6d. at most. He had dinner, tea, and supper. He did 
not smoke.’’ That is at the very commencement of the cross- 
examination. 

(To Witness)—You say he did smoke, do you?—He did not 
smoke much, because he used to smoke a pipe. He bought tobacco 
somewhere else. 

He did not buy tobacco at your shop?—I do not sell tobacco; I 
only sell cigars and cigarettes, and he smoked a pipe. 

What sort of pipe?—I do not know what you call it. 

A meerschaum pipe, or a wood pipe, or a clay pipe, or what? 
—A clay pipe. I do not know what they call the pipe; it was a 
white pipe. 

Your clzéntele is principally Russian /—Yes. 

Did Beron talk Russian?—No. I always used to hear him talk 
in French. 

And then he would have no one to talk to?—When he used to 
talk to me he used to talk Yiddish. 


29 


Steinie Morrison. 


Alex. Snelwar 


How long had he continued to attend at your restaurant from 
two in the afternoon to twelve midnight; was it months, or weeks, 
or what !—Always—ever since I knew him; five or six years. 

Did you ever know him do any work during that period /—No. : 

Do you know that his income was about 10s. a week ?—I know ~ 
he had nine houses; I do not know his income. 

Do you know that his brother Solomon was living at Rowton 
House at 6d. or 7d. a night?—Yes. 

Was he a customer at the Warsaw Restaurant /—Yes. 

How many hours would he stop?—The same time. He used 
to come in sometimes at cone o’clock—about twelve or one o’clock— 
and stop till ten, or a quarter to ten. 

Was that every day, or occasionally, or what ?—Every day. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—Do these people who come do business 
in your restaurant/—No. They only come in to eat; that is all. 

Do they do business with one another while they are there?’— 
Nothing at all. 

Cross-examination continued—What do they talk about— 
politics’—What they like they talk. 

How far is Osborn Street from Jubilee Street ?—About fifteen 
minutes’ walk. 

If these people come in—you have told us that the deceased man 
stopped from two o’clock to midnight, and another one from eleven 
or twelve o’clock till half-past ten—what are they doing if they 
spend only 1s.?—Sitting talking. They cannot afford to spend any 
more. I cannot make them go out of the shop if they have not 
got any money to spend. 

Did you employ a waiter named Jack Taw?—I do not employ 
him now; I used to employ him. He has left a long time, but I 
give him a job sometimes. He was not working that day in my 
shop. 

I did not ask you about any day. You say you left off employing 
him. I want you to tell the jury the date?—I am afraid I cannot. 

Was it January that you employed him?—No, I only give him 
a job. 

What do you call giving him a job?—Getting him to give a 
little help. 

How much at a time?—A few hours. 

How much money did you give him for the little help ?—Some- 
times Is., and sometimes 1s. 6d., and sometimes only 6d. 

How often?—Sometimes a day or two a month. 

When did you last give that boy a job to help you?—I cannot 
remember that. 

Does the boy come into the Warsaw Restaurant still?—Yes. 

Was he there yesterday ?—Yes. 

Does he come in every day?—I do not know what he does. 

What does he do there?—He comes in to eat his dinner. 

30 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Alex, Snelwar 

How long does he stay there at night?—He is in my shop all 
day long, ‘ 

After dinner ?—Yes. 

What is he doing there?—I do not know. He comes in and out. 
I have got plenty of people, and I cannot look after everybody. 

How late does he stay as a rule?—Until twelve o’clock. 

How old is this boy !—I think he is about seventeen. 

You had a waiter named Joe Mintz?—Yes. 

Have you got him still?—No. 

Why did he go?—I do not know. He left. 

When did he go?—He have not got no job at all. 

When did you leave off employing him?!—On Thursday ‘it will 
be two weeks. 

Why !—He left me, I do not know why. 

Did Joe Mintz try to hang himself?—Yes. 

Where—in the shop?—Yes. 

Did you cut him down!—No. 

Who did?—I do not know; I was not at home. 

Was that this year or last year?—That would be in summer time. 

Was he in the hospital after that ?—Yes. 

Was he wrong in his head?—I do not know. They took him 
away to Colney Hatch. He came out about three months ago. 

That would be just about Christmas time?’—Yes, just about 
two months before Christmas. 

He is still strange in his manner. Did he have a fight in the 
restaurant just before Christmas?—I cannot tell you that. Perhaps 
he had a fight, but I did not see it. 

Have you heard it?—He had a row. 

Perhaps you do not call a row a fight?—I do not call it a fight. 

Do you know Mrs. Deitch !—No. 

You have never spoken to her?/—No. 

Do you know a Mr. Deitch?—I do not know him at all. 

Do you know Mr. Hermilin?—Yes. 

Is he a frequenter of your Warsaw Restaurant /—Yes. 

How long has he been going there?—He lives at my place for 
three years. 

Lives upstairs ?—Yes. 

Do you live there?/—Yes. He is on the third floor, and I live 
on the first. ; 

I put it to you it is Solomon Beron who has been coming to the 
restaurant every day recently !—Yes. 

Jack Taw has been coming to your restaurant every day recently? 
—Yes. 

A man named Jacob Weissberg has been coming to your res- 
taurant every day recently?—No, not every day. He only comes 
on Saturday, and sometimes a day or two in the week. 

3l 


Steinie Morrison. 


Alex. Snelwar 


And a gentleman named Zaltzman?—Yes. He used to come 
every day. 

When has he left off coming every day!—About four weeks ago. 

Mr. Zaltzman comes only occasionally, now and then?—Yes, now. 

I put it to you that Mr. Solomon Beron, Mr. Jack Taw, Mr. 
Weissberg, and Mr. Zaltzman have been in the habit of meeting 
at your shop since this case has been going on, and sitting down at 
the same table and talking?—They never used to talk together. 

They have not sat down together and talked since this case has 
been proceeding /—They have never talked together; they are not 
talking together ; they are talking, but not together. 

What do you mean by that? Whom was Jack Taw talking to? 
—I do not look after everybody to whom he is talking. 

This is a small restaurant?—I cannot look after everybody. 

Will you tell us, please, whom you have seen Jack Taw talking 
to!—Talking to everybody. 

Have you not seen him talk to Beron?—Beron don’t talk to him. 

Have you not seen him talking to Beron?—I used to see him 
talking, but he don’t answer him; he don’t want him in his company. 

Why not; do they quarrel ?—-He makes to go away from him. 

Have you seen Beron talk to Weissberg ?—Yes. 

Have you seen Beron talk to Zaltzman?—Yes. 

Sitting at the same table together?—Yes. 

Frequently ?—No ; sometimes when they are sitting together they 
are speaking. 

Does David Beron come into your restaurant?—No. He came 
in once or twice, and now he has stopped coming, about two weeks 
ago. 

That is whilst this case was proceeding at the Police Court /—Yes. 

Do you know the London Music Hall—the Shoreditch Empire, I 
think it is called? How far from your restaurant is it?—I can make 
it in twenty minutes. 

I want you to be sure about this. Do you tell us, or do you 
not, that on 31st December, between nine and closing time, Leon 
Beron did not go out of your restaurant ?—I cannot tell you that. I 
have seen him at nine o’clock, and I have seen him at a quarter to 
twelve, in the shop. 

Can you tell us whether he left your restaurant or not?—I 
cannot tell you. Perhaps he left and I did not see; I find him at 
nine o’clock, and I find him at a quarter to twelve at the same table. 

Can you tell us if Morrison went out?—No. 

At what hour do you pledge your oath that you first saw Morrison 
in the restaurant !—I have seen him at nine o’clock. 

Will you swear that he remained in the restaurant from nine 
until closing time?—I am not going to swear, because I do not know. 

Used Morrison to have money ?—No. 

32 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Alex. Snelwar 

Do you suggest that Morrison used to come to that restaurant 
and stop from two o’clock to midnight 7—No. 

Morrison used to have his morning meals in that restaurant, 
and then go out ?—Yes. 

Do you know that a month or two before Christmas last year 
he was going about selling cheap jewellery?—I did not know that. 

Did you not buy a silver watch from him yourself?—I never 
bought a watch from him; I only bought a pawn ticket. He had a 
silver watch and chain to sell. He pawned it, and I bought the 
ticket and took the watch out of pawn. I paid him 2s. 6d. for the 
ticket, and 13s. to the pawnbroker for the watch. 

Have you seen Morrison with a revolver in your shop?—I have 
never seen him with a revolver, but I have seen him put it in his 
hip pocket when he went out. 

I put it to you he tried to sell that revolver?—No; I only see 
him put it in his hip pocket when he went out. 

He did that quite openly, walking down the shop!—Yes, near 
the door; he put it in his pocket. 

Do you remember the murder of three constables in Hounds- 
ditch on 16th December?—I remember that. 

Did you ever hear Mr. Beron, during the last ten hours he was 
in your restaurant, discuss that /—No. 

Do you swear you have never heard any of your customers discuss 
that in the restaurant?—I swear I never heard Beron talking about 
it. The customers have all been talking about it, but not Beron. 

If Beron was in receipt of 10s. a week, assuming for the moment 
that he was spending 10s. a week in your restaurant, can you give 
us any indication how this man you had known so many years was 
getting this gold that you say he had in his pocket?—Yes. I hear 
that Beron brought from France £26,000, and he lost it here. 

By Mr. Justicn Dartinc—You said that he used to produce to 
you silver money, and you used to give him gold for it?—Yes. 

How much at a time have you given him in gold?’—Only £1 at 
a time—and he used to collect the rent. 

Cross-examination continued—You knew the man five years as 
coming to your restaurant from two o’clock in the afternoon till 
midnight, and you did not know anything about his affairs !—No. 

Did you ever ask him?—I never asked him. What is the good 
of me to ask him? 

Can you tell us what he had in his pocket on the 31st December? 
_——I cannot tell how much money, but I know he always used to have 
from £20 to £30. 

You do not know at all what he had on the 31st of December ?— 
I do not know, but I know he had money. 

Did you see Morrison with gold before 31st December /—Yes. 

Frequently /—Yes. 

Did you ever see Beron with women 1—Never. 


D 


Steinie Morrison. 


Alex. Snelwra 


Did you know his father was alive?—I know Beron’s father was 
alive. 

Did you know he was living at Nightingale Lane?—I did not 
know where he was living. 

Did Beron ever mention at the restaurant that his father was 
living in Nightingale Lane?—He lived in a Jewish home; I do not 
know where it is. 

Re-examined by Mr. Murr—When was it that you had this 
transaction about a pawn ticket with the prisoner!—That was about 
three or four weeks before the crime. 

Did he produce a pawn ticket to you?—Yes. He told me before, 
‘*T do not want to sell the watch and chain,’’ and I said, ‘‘ Oh, 
pawn it, and I will buy the ticket.’’ Somebody pawned it and gave 
13s. for the watch and chain, and I gave him a half-crown for the 
ticket. 

Mr. Justice Dartia (to the jury)—Would you like to go to the 
place in Clapham Common where the body was found? 

The ForrEmMan oF THE JuRy—Yes, I think we would. 

Mr. Justics Dartrvc—Then Constable Davis shall go with you, 
and will simply point out where the body was found. 


(Two officers were sworn to take charge of the jury.) 


The Court adjourned. 


34 


Second Day—Tuesday, 7th March, 1911. 


Jon Mintz, examined by Mr. Murr—I was a waiter at 32 
Osborn Street during the whole of December last. I have been 
employed at that restaurant for two years—since I have been in 
London—and during those two years I knew Leon Beron as a 
customer. He was called ‘‘ the landlord.’? I knew the accused, 
Steinie Morrison, as a customer from Ist December to 31st December. 
He used to be a regular customer every day. 

Were he and Beron together at all?—About a week before the 
crime Steinie Morrison makes very good friends with Beron. I 
saw them together talking every day. On 3lst December, after 
six o’clock, Steinie Morrison came to the restaurant—I was at the 
counter—and he handed me a parcel which was about 2 feet long 
and wrapped up in brown paper. 

By Mr. Justice Dartina—Why do you say he was very good 
friends with Beron!—Because I never saw—he was not to anybody so 
friendly like to Leon Beron the last two weeks before the crime. 

Examination continued—The parcel was about 4 or 5 inches 
round. When he give me this parcel the little girl, the daughter 
of my governor, asked him ‘‘ What is it? ’’ and he said “ It is a 
flute.’’ He gave me the parcel and said ‘‘ Keep me this parcel ; 
when I go out I will take it from you.’’ He handed me the parcel 
and: went to the middle of the shop. _ Leon Beron was at this time 
in the shop, and he went with Leon Beron to a separate table and 
was sitting with him the whole evening at the table—only the two 
of them—Leon Beron and Steinie Morrison. Between eight and 
nine o’clock Steinie Morrison called for two glasses of tea with 
lemon, no milk. He spoke in English to me. I did not serve 
them with anything after that. About twenty minutes to twelve 
Steinie Morrison called me up for a glass of lemonade. When he 
came up to the counter I gave him the lemonade and he asked me 
for his parcel. Leon Beron was standing with him. He had the 
lemonade, and I gave him the parcel, and then he went away with 
Leon Beron. I handled the parcel twice—once when I got it 
handed to me and once when I handed it back to the accused. It 
was much too heavy for a flute. It felt like a bar of iron. (Shown 
exhibit No. 4, a flute found in the possession of the accused.) It 
was not that parcel. Leon Beron had a gold watch and chain and 
a £5 piece. I never saw Morrison again after the 3lst December. 
From 1st December to 31st of December he used to be a regular 
customer, but after 3lst December I never saw him again until I 
saw him in the police station in Leman Street, where they took me 
to identify him. 

35 


Steinie Morrison. 
Joe Mintz 

Cross-examined by Mr. Aprnger—What is your address!—My 
address is now 155 Jubilee Street. Previously I lived at Snelwar’s 
Restaurant. On Thursday it will be two weeks since I went to 
Jubilee Street. ; 

Do you know Solomon Beron?—I know him as a customer in 
the restaurant. 

When did you see him last?—I saw him the last day when I 
went from the restaurant, and I saw him yesterday in the Court 
here. 

Have you not seen him in Snelwar’s Restaurant since the 31st 
December!’—He used to be every day there. 

Is Jack Taw a customer?—I know him in the restaurant some- 
times as a customer, and sometimes when there is too much work 
in the governor used to give him a job to help a little. I saw him 
yesterday in Court. 

And before that?—Before that, the last day when I left the 
restaurant. 

Do you know Hermilin?—Yes, 1 know him. I have not seen 
him since I left the restaurant till yesterday in the Court. 

Was Hermilin friendly with Solomon Beron?—I cannot tell 
you, because I do not know if somebody is friendly with another 
man. 

Have you seen them chatting together’—I cannot tell you. 
There are so many customers in the restaurant. They are talking 
together, but I do not know if they are talking about business or 
friendly. 

Your memory is quite clear that you saw Morrison talking to 
Beron on the 31st December, but you cannot tell the jury whether 
you saw Hermilin talking to Solomon Beron?!—He used to talk to 
him every day. 

Who used to talk?—Solomon Beron and Hermilin, and so many 
customers that were talking together. 

When Jack Taw was not a waiter but a customer, whom used 
he to talk to? I cannot tell you. If a customer comes in for his 
dinner or for his supper, I never notice to whom he is talking. I 
have no time. It is not my business to do so. 

Were you not ‘looking for your work’’ on the 38lst 
December?—I noticed them then because they were at a separate 
table—nobody else—only them two—Leon Beron and _ Steinie 
Morrison. 

Have you seen Jack Taw speaking to Solomon Beron?—I 
never saw him speak to Solomon. 

You have had a little trouble yourself, have you not?—Is that 
anything to do with the case, what I had trouble for myself? 

Did you try to hang yourself in this restaurant?—I believe it 
has nothing to do with this case. 

36 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Joe Mintz 

Is it true?—It is true, but it has got nothing to do with the 
case. That was nine months ago. 

Mr. Justicn DaRLING—It is true, you say /—Yes, it is true, but 
it has nothing to do with this case. 

It is true that you tried to hang yourself 1—Yes, but that was 
nine months ago. 

Cross-examination continwed—And did you afterwards go to 
Colney Hatch Asylum!—Yes, I have been there. 

How long for?—Three months, and I was discharged from there 
on 22nd October. 

Was this attempt to hang yourself a single attempt, or have 
you attempted to do that more than once?—I do not tell you this. 
That is my business. 

I am sorry to have to ask you!—Very well, I am sorry you 
ask me. It has nothing to do with this case. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—I suppose you realise, Mr. Abinger, 
that suicide is a felony, and that you are asking this man whether 
he attempted a felony? 

Mr. Axsincpr—Suicide is a felony, my lord, but he did not 
succeed. 

Mr. Justice Daruinae—Yes, but an attempt to commit suicide 
is an attempt to commit a felony. 

Mr. Apincrr—If your lordship thinks that I should not pursue 
this 


Mr. Jusricn Darurva—I am not saying that you should not 
pursue it, only I did not quite know whether you knew what it 
might lead to. You are cross-examining him on a suggestion that 
he attempted to commit felony. That is an attack on a witness for 
the prosecution. 

Mr. Apmvcer—I am not imputing an offence to the witness at 
all. A man may be non compos ments when he attempts to commit 
suicide. 

(To Witness)—Have you more than once attempted to commit 
suicide, to kill yourself ’—Only once. 

Have you got a good memory !—Yes. 

Did you have a fight or a row in the restaurant after you came 
out of Colney Hatch?—No. It may be that you mean when Steinie 
Morrison came once in the restaurant. This was in the morning 
from (sic) 31st of December, and he asked for his breakfast. I 
did not serve him at once and he abused me, but I never answered 
him for that. 

What time did Beron come into the restaurant on the 31st of 
December?—He come in the afternoon, past two o’clock. 

Did he ever leave the restaurant again that evening until he 
finally went?—I did not notice that; I cannot tell you. 

What time did Morrison get to the restaurant 1—He was once in 

37 


Steinie Morrison. 
Joe Mintz 
the morning from (séc) 31st December, then he came back past 
six o’clock. 

Did he ever leave the restaurant again that night?—I cannot 
tell you; I did not notice him. 

I thought you said that Beron and Morrison sat together all the 
evening ?—When I came up into the shop to the table where they 
were sitting I saw them sitting together. If they went out for a 
few moments I cannot tell you. I saw them the whole evening when 
they came in the evening till twenty to twelve in the midnight. 
I saw them together sitting at the table. 

Whom else did Beron talk to that evening!—Nobody; no one. 
Only Steinie Morrison and Leon Beron. 

Was Solomon Beron there on 31st December!—He was in the 
afternoon and he was in the evening. 

What time in the evening!—I cannot tell you that. 

Did Solomon Beron talk to Leon!—I cannot remember if he 
was talking together this day. I do not see him talking. 

Did you know that Solomon and Leon Beron’s father lived 
south of Clapham C-mmon?—No; I do not know this. 

How long had you known Solomon Beron?—A year. It may 
be a month longer, but I cannot tell exactly. I cannot remember 
when he came the first time in the restaurant. 

Cannot you remember whether Morrison ever left the restau- 
rant again that evening after he handed you that parcel!—No, sir; 
I cannot remember this. There were too much customers there 
this evening, and I cannot remember. 

Where did you put the parcel?—I put it in the cupboard. 

Was the counter between Morrison and the cupboard where 
you put the parcel?—No; I was between him and the cupboard. 

Then without walking at all you could put the parcel which you 
received from Morrison into the cupboard!—No, I must turn round 
like that. (Illustrating. ) 

You would have to take one step?—Yes. 

The little girl Becky asked what it was?—She was very friendly 
with him, and she asked what it was, and he answered it was a 
flute. 

I do not want you to tell me exactly, but can you tell me 
approximately how many people there were in that restaurant when 
Morrison handed you that parcel?—No; I cannot remember how 
many people there were in the restaurant. Over the counter there 
was nobody except me and the little girl when Steinie Morrison came 
and handed me the parcel. 

Where was Leon Beron?—He was in the middle of the shop. 

You were not very busy if nobody was near in this restaurant? 
—There were so much customers, but not by the counter. The 
counter is not the place for to eat there; it is only for cigarettes 
and lemonade. 

38 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Joe Mintz 

Did Morrison hand you this parcel at the counter !—Yes. 

He was very fond of that little girl Becky?—He took too much 
notice of her every day when he used to come to the restaurant. 

How old is Becky?—Ten years. 

Did he make a pet of her?—He used to play with her every 
day when he came to the restaurant. 

Do they sell joints of meat or meat in the shop!—Yes, meat 
from joints. 

Did Leon Beron have a good supper that night?—No. 

He had a glass of tea, is that what you say /—Yes, a glass of 
tea with lemon. 

When he came in?—When he came in he had his dinner. He 
had soup and meat about two o’clock. 

‘And for tea he had nothing else but a cup of tea’—No. 

And nothing to eat with that cup of tea 1—No. 

You are sure?—I did not serve him. 

Was Jack Taw serving as a waiter on that day 1—Not that day— 
31st December. 

By Mr. JusticE Dartina—Do you sell spirits, or beer, or wine? 
—No. 

Cross-examination eontinued—Have you seen Steinie Morrison 
offer a revolver for sale in the restaurant 1—No, I have not seen him 
with a revolver. 

Have you seen him offering cheap jewellery for sale?—No. 

Have you seen Morrison before 3lst December wearing a gold 
watch?—I saw Steinie Morrison—this was about three weeks before 
the crime—come up one morning. He had a silver watch and chain. 
He talked something to the governor, but I do not know what. 
Then I was called, and he gave me that watch and chain for me to 
pawn it in a pawn shop. I went to 88 High Street, Whitechapel, 
and pawned the watch and chain. 

Who told you to pawn it?—Steinie Morrison, and I took 12s. 
for the watch and chain, and I gave him the ticket and the money. 

I asked you if you had seen him with a gold watch?—The last 
couple of days before the crime I saw him; he had a gold watch and 
chain, but a very small one—a very thin chain. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—Was he wearing it? Had he got it 
in his waistcoat?—In his waistcoat. 

He was wearing it like one wears a watch /—Yes. 

Cross-examination continwed—is_ that the gold watch?— 
(Handed)—I cannot tell you about the watch because I did not 
notice the watch, how big it was, but the chain I noticed. The last 
time this chain had a half sovereign attached to it. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—lIs that the chain? (Handed.) 
Would you know the chain if you saw it?—I cannot tell you exactly. 
I did not notice it exactly. 

Cross-ecamination continued—Did you see Morrison wearing a 

39 


Steinie Morrison. 
Joe Mintz 


chain with a little coin on it?—I cannot tell you. 1 saw him with 
a gold watch and chain a couple of days before the crime, but I 
did not notice whether it was the same chain or not. 

Then you did not notice his watch and chain?—No. 

Are you prepared to swear that you only saw it two days before 
the crime?—A couple of days before the crime. 1 cannot say two 
or three. I do not remember it. 

Will you swear you had not seen it a week or two before the 
crime?—I cannot swear that; I do not know when I noticed it the 
first time. I do not take notice of how a customer is dressed, or 
what he has got in his possession. ; 

I put it to you that Morrison had been wearing this watch since 
30th November ?—I cannot tell you. I was not there in November. 

The Forrman—Two or three of my colleagues wish to know 
if you would care to test the witness’s sense of length. For in- 
stance, how long he considers this flute is. 

By Mr. Justice Dartivc—How long do you think that fiute is? 
—It is more than a foot. I cannot tell you exactly how much it is. 

More than a foot, but you cannot say how much more?—No; 
I know the parcel that what Steinie Morrison handed me was longer 
than this and heavier than this. 

The Forreman—Did they send out from his restaurant for any 
alcoholic drinks to bring to their customers? 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—Suppose a customer in the restaurant 
asks for spirits or beer, would you send out?!—No, I have been there 
two years, and I never go to fetch him a drink or spirits. 

Have you never known it done?—No, not that I saw—not the 
time I have been there. 

All the time that Beron, the man who is dead, used to come 
to the restaurant, did you ever know him take any wine or beer or 
spirits /—No. 

You never knew him bring it in with him?—No, I never saw him. 


Henry Hoeruinin, examined by Mr. Luycusrpr—I am a furrier 
and I live at the restaurant at 32 Osborn Street, where I am every 
day. I knew Leon Beron for over three years. I used to see 
him at the restaurant every night. I knew the accused Morrison 
for two months. I used to see him talking to Leon Beron in the 
restaurant, | Leon Beron had a watch and chain which he always 
wore. I offered him £13 for the watch only. Both the chain 
and the watch were 18 carat gold. The watch was a big one, and 
it weighed 6 ounces altogether—the movement 3 ounces and the 
gold 3 ounces. Hight days before Christmas the accused took the 
watch from Beron and said, ‘‘ It is a very heavy watch.’? I was 
sitting opposite to them in the restaurant at the time. I do not 
know whether Beron told the accused what it was worth. 

When I came down from my room between half-past eight and 
40 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Henry Hermilin 


nine on the night of Saturday, 31st December, I saw the accused 
and Leon Beron at a corner table. They had tea together. I 
took the opposite table and asked the waiter to give me a cup of 
tea as well. There was no one else with them at that time. 1 
saw them go out together a couple of times and then come back. 
The last time they went out was between half-past eleven and a 
quarter to twelve. Beron was wearing his watch and chain when he 
went out. He had an overcoat with an astrakhan collar, and it 
was not buttoned. I never asked the accused what he was, and he 
never told me. I did not talk to him. Beron always had money 
in a. small wash-leather purse in his pocket, which was secured with 
a safety pin. I know he had sometimes £20 and sometimes £30, 
but I could not tell how much exactly, because I did not ask him. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Aninczer—Do you know where he got it 
from ?—He said the money he had got was to pay the mortgage for 
his houses. 

You live upstairs ?—Yes. 

How many times have you seen Morrison and Beron talk 
together ?—I did not take notice. 

Altogether 1—Altogether two weeks before the crime he was 
too much friendly with him. I saw him every night when I came 
from my work. 

You gave evidence at the police court?—Yes. 

Was your statement read over to you, and did you sign it?— 
In the police court I signed it. 

Did you say this in examination in chief, ‘‘I had known 
prisoner about two months. He was friendly with Beron for two 
weeks before he was murdered. I have seen them a couple of times 
talking together. I did not hear their: conversation.’ Is that 
correct—a couple of times?—A couple of times, yes. 

That is what you swore and signed?!—Yes, the two weeks before 
the crime he was too friendly with him. 

You saw them talking together a couple of times and you 
thought them too friendly!—Yes; and he went out with him 
together. 

Did you see Morrison’s gold watch?—Yes, I saw it. He had a 
small chain like this and a gold watch. 

How long had you seen him wearing a gold watch?—lLeon 
Beron? 

No, Morrison ?—I cannot tell you exactly ; I did not take notice. 

A month or so?—I cannot tell you. I did not take notice 
how long he had this watch. 

When Beron showed Morrison his watch, did Morrison show his 
watch too?—I did not take notice about this. 

How did you come to take notice of the one and not of the 
other? I suggest that you might have taken notice of the other as 
well?’—I did not take notice that he showed him his watch. 

41 


Steinie Morrison. 
Henry Hermilin 


You cannot remember /—No. 

I put it to you that Morrison showed Beron his watch and Beron 
showed Morrison his watch. Will you swear that did not take 
place?—I did not take notice that he showed him his watch. 

Is that the chain Morrison was wearing ?—(Handed)—No; he 
had a chain like this. (Indicating his own chain.) 

Now look at the other chain. Was that the chain he was 
wearing /—No. 

Did you take Beron’s chain away and have it weighed?’—Yes; 
not Morrison’s chain, only Leon Beron’s chain. It weighed 34 
ounces. 

You told us to-day that you thought Beron had between £20 or 
£30 about him generally?—I cannot tell you how much. I know 
he told me he must have £20 or £30, because he said he had got to 
pay his mortgage. 

When did that occur to you first? You did not say a word 
about that at the police court?—I cannot say when. I know every 
time he had in his possession money. 

Did you say that at the police court —What? 

That you had seen Beron with money—£20 or £301—Yes, 

es. 
: You said that at the police court /—Yes. 

Look at what you swore at the police court and you will not 
find it there?—I know he had every time money in his possession. 

Did you ever say at the police court that you had ever seen 
Morrison and Beron go out together before they finally left?—Yes, 
a couple of times. 

I do not want to waste time, but there is not a word of that in 
the deposition?—A couple of times. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—If you say what is in the deposition, or 
what is not in it, you must put it in. 

Mr. Asrnerr—That is true, my lord. Unfortunately, we have 
got to deal with a foreigner. (To witness)—Let me read what you 
said at the police court—‘‘ On 31st December I was at the restau- 
rant at 32 Osborn Street. I live upstairs. I was there in the 
afternoon. I knew Leon Beron over three years. He often came 
to the restaurant. I saw him there that night between half-past 
eight and nine. He took a seat next to prisoner. No one else was 
at that table. I didn’t take notice what they did. They talked 
together. I didn’t hear them say anything. I had seen them 
together before. I had known prisoner about two months. He 
was friendly with Beron for two weeks before he was murdered. 
I have seen them a couple of times talking together. I didn’t 
hear their conversation. Beron wore a watch chain, a double 
chain, 34 ounces, 18 carat gold, a £5 piece, 1887. The watch was 
an English lever. He never told me the value in the presence of 


prisoner. I saw prisoner with the watch in his hand a week before 
42 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Henry Hermilin 

Christmas, and he said it was a heavy watch. He came in with 
another man and asked me and the landlord if we had change for 
a half sovereign. I didn’t notice that Beron said anything about 
the watch. Prisoner and Beron left between half-past eleven 
and a quarter to twelve on the night of the 3lst December. On 
9th January I went to Leman Street police station. I saw some 
men put up there. I picked out a man—the prisoner. I picked 
him out as the man who had left the restaurant with the murdered 
man.  Cross-examined—I came in at six in the evening. I live 
upstairs. I went out at seven and returned at eight, and stopped 
till it closed at twelve. Beron came in with prisoner between 
half-past eight and nine, together. Neither of them left that I 
saw. Beron may have gone out and I may not have noticed. 
Prisoner went out twice and came back, I can’t say exactly what 
time. It can be half an hour or an hour he was away. I didn’t 
take notice. It can be he went out at a quarter to nine. I can’t 
say how long he was away. Prisoner said he was a diamond 
merchant. I have never seen him trying to sell cheap jewellery. 
My business is at Philpot Street workshops, No. 2. I work for 
Mr. Kotchinsky. I go to the restaurant for my dinner and again 
at night. Signed, Henry Hermilin.”? You see you did not say a 
word about having seen Morrison and Beron go out twice together 
and return together on that 31st December. 

Mr. Justice Dartavc—No, but what he did say was this. He 
said—‘‘ Beron came in with prisoner between half-past eight and 
nine, together. Neither of them left that I saw. Beron may have 
gone out and my not have noticed. Prisoner went out twice 
and came back. I cannot say exactly what time; it can be half 
an hour or an hour he was away; I did not take notice. It 
can be he went out at a quarter to nine. I cannot say how long he 
was away.”’ 

Cross-examination continued—There is nothing in your deposi- 
tions about the money—not a word?—What money? 

Re-examined by Mr. Mur—I want to ask you one question. 
You say you saw the prisoner and Leon Beron talking together a 
couple of times ?—Yes. 

How many times do you understand a couple of times to be?—It 
can be ten times; it can be more. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—You are a furrier, and you live regu- 
larly over this restaurant?—Yes, I have a separate room in 32 
Osborn Street. 

And you took your meals there!—Yes. 

Was Beron a particular friend of yours?—Yes. 5 

You knew him well ?—Yes, over three years ; he was a quiet man. 

And when was it you saw his watch and had it weighed?—I saw 
it last year, because I hoped it for myself. He say, ‘‘ I want to sell 


my watch.’’ 
43 


Steinie Morrison. 
Henry Hermilin 

And you were thinking of buying it?—Yes, and I offered him 
£13 for myself. 

And that is how you came to see it and have it in your hand? 
—Yes. 

How long had you known Morrison?!—Only the last time two 
months—no more—when he start to come in as a customer in this 
restaurant—no more. 

After he came back, did he appear to you to get very friendly 
with Beron?—Yes, he did. 

He became very friendly with Beron?—Yes, two weeks before 
the crime he was very friendly. 


Jack Taw, examined by Mr. Lrercustmr—lI live at M‘Carthy’s 
lodging-house, in Thrawl Street. I do not have any regular employ- 
ment, but I sometimes work as a waiter at Snelwar’s restaurant. I 
was employed there during the week after Christmas. On the even- 
ing of the last Saturday in December I left there at eight o’clock, 
and I went back at eleven. Leon Beron was in the restaurant when 
I went out at eight. The accused was with him, and they were 
sitting together at the same table. When I came back at eleven 
they were still there. They went away together at 11.45. 

Did you see any more of them that night?—I saw them at a 
quarter to two at night, at the coffee stall in Whitechapel Road, at 
the corner of Church Lane. They were on the opposite side of the 
road from me, and were walking along towards Mile-End. This is 
almost opposite Osborn Street. 

Have you ever seen the accused with any pistol in the restaurant? 
—Yes; he showed me a black pistol in the restaurant in December. 
He did not say anything when he showed it to me. He just took it 
out of his hip pocket and showed it to me, and then he put it back 
again. (Shown exhibit 10.) It looked like that pistol. I have 
seen the accused writing with his left hand. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Axsrnepr—How old are you!—NSixteen. 
I am going to be seventeen in a few weeks. 

How long have you been in England?—Three years. 

Where do you come from?—Galicia, Austria. 

Who brought you over!—By myself, I came over. 

You, a little boy of thirteen, came to London alone?’—Yes. 

Who took care of you when you got to London—whom did you 
live with when you got to London?—By myself. 

Where did you go to live when you got to London, coming from 
Galicia !—I lived in Montague Street. 

Had you got any money when you came to London !—Yes. 

How much?—I forget. 

Then did you start earning your own living when you were 
thirteen !—_Yes. 

With your father and mother!—No, sir, I have got no father. 

44 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Jack Taw 

Got a mother ?—Yes. 

Where?—I do not know where. 

Why did you leave Galicia to come to London when you were a 
little boy like that?—A lot of people goes away. 

Then have you been living alone ever since?—Yes. 

Where ?’—Montague Street. 

Where are you living now?—Rowton House. 

How long have you been living at Rowton House?—Three weeks. 

Where were you living before you were living at Rowton House? 
—M‘Carthy’s lodging-house. 

How long were you at M‘Carthy’s lodging-house?—Four months. 

What used you to be doing at Snelwar’s restaurant?—I used to 
be a waiter there, and sometimes a customer. 

What used Snelwar to pay you?—For what job I done he used 
to pay me—7s. a week. 

Do you say Snelwar paid you 7s. a week ?—Sometimes. 

And other times what?—Other times I did little jobs there. 

What do you call “‘ little jobs ’??—A day’s work, or two days’ 
work. 

What would he pay you for that?—1s. 6d. and eating. 

How often would you get 1s. 6d. and eating a month?—About 
four times a month. 

When did you last receive 7s. for a whole week at Snelwar’s 
restaurant !—Two years ago. 

Are you still going to Snelwar’s restaurant !—Yes. 

Were you there yesterday /—Yes. 

Do you go there every day!—Yes. 

As a customer or as a waiter?—Sometimes as a customer and 
sometimes as a waiter. 

Have you had any money from Snelwar as a waiter this month? 
—Yes. 

How much /—2s. 

Did you have any last month ?—Yes. 

What month is this?—What month? 

What month is this?’—February. 

What ?—Well, I cannot tell you. 

What is the date to-day?—I cannot read; I cannot tell you 
the date. 

What time is it?—Five past twelve. (This was correct. ) 

What time did you leave the restaurant on the 31st of December? 
—11.45. 

Had you worked as a waiter that day ?—Yes. 

All day?’—No, half a day. 

Did you go to the theatre that day!—Yes. 

Where?—The Cambridge. 

Cambridge Music Hall?—Picture show. 

In the evening or in the afternoon?—In the evening. 


Steinie Morrison. 


Jack Taw 


What time?—From nine to eleven. ; 

In which half of the day were you being a waiter?—From the 
morning till the afternoon. 

What did you go back to the restaurant for after you had been 
to the theatre/—To take some money for the work. 

What did you get ?—6d. , 

Is that all the money you took that Saturday night ?—Yes. 

That just paid for your night’s lodging /—Yes. : 

Having worked as a waiter in the morning, and having gone 
to the theatre in the evening, and having drawn your week’s money 
or your day’s money, did you go to bed?—No. 

Were you not tired ?—No. ; 

You say you saw Morrison and Beron at a quarter to two in 
the morning !—Yes. 

At Gardiner’s Corner ?—Yes. 

How far is Gardiner’s Corner from the Osborn Street restaurant? 
—Five minutes’ walk. 


Mr. Justice Dartivc—It was not at Gardiner’s Corner that he 
saw them. 

Cross-examination continued—Where did you see Morrison and 
Beron together at a quarter to two?—Opposite Church Lane, at the 
corner. 

How far is that from the Osborn Street restaurant !—Fifty yards. 

By Mr. Justice Dartisc—Fifty yards from where ?—From Osborn 
Street to the coffee stall. 

Cross-cxamination continued—Where you stand outside this 
restaurant you can see that corner, can you not?—No. 

Do you say fifty yards?—I think so. 

Mr. Asmncer—You can see the distance, gentlemen, on the plan. 

The Forrman—It is about 150 yards. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Not from the corner of Osborn Street to 
the coffee stall. 

Mr. Murr—No, my lord, from the Osborn Street restaurant. 

The Forrman—Yes, from the restaurant, I should think it was 
exactly 150 yards, as near as possible. It scales 450 feet. 

Cross-examination continued—At a quarter to two you saw 
Beron and Morrison at a distance we now know to be 450 feet away 
from the restaurant?—No, I was next the coffee stall. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—You were at the coffee stall, and they 
were in the Whitechapel Road, at the opposite corner to you?—Yes. 

Cross-examination continued—You saw Morrison and Beron 
together within 450 feet of the restaurant? Never mind where you 
were /—Yes. 

Then what had you been doing for two hours outside that 
restaurant /—Standing outside with the boys. 


From a quarter to twelve to a quarter to two in the morning? 
46 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Jack Taw 
a was inside in the lodging-house. They were playing the piano 
ere. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—Were you playing with the boys?—No, 
they were playing the piano inside. 

You were standing outside?—I was inside and outside of the 
lodging-house. 

Cross-examination continued—M ‘Carthy’s lodging-house!—Yes. 

Where is that?—I do not know the street. 

Brick Lane is it?—Yes, Brick Lane. 

My plan does not show it?—It runs out of Whitechapel Road, 
to the north from Osborn Street. You go up Osborn Street and 
turn to the left. Thrawl Street turns out of Brick Lane. 

Brick Lane is a continuation of Osborn Street, is it not ?—Yes. 

Do you tell the jury that there were boys playing about there 
at a quarter to two in the morning? 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—No, he said they were playing music 
inside. 

(To the Witness)—They were playing music in M‘Carthy’s 
lodging-house /—Yes. 

Cross-examination continued—What music!—A piano they used 
to play. 

Up till the early hours in the morning ?—Yes; that was the New 
Year’s Day morning. 

That is the reason for your listening to the pianoforte playing in 
M‘Carthy’s building. What time did you come out of M‘Carthy’s 
building then?—About twenty minutes to two. 

Alone ?—Alone. 

Do you say there is a piano in M‘Carthy’s building ?—Yes. 

Did you give evidence before the coroner ?—Yes. 

What time did you tell the coroner you saw these two men 
together ?—At a quarter to two. 

It may be a mistake, but do you swear that you did not tell 
the coroner you saw them at 1.35 in the street ?—At a quarter to two, 
I told the coroner. 

Mr. Murr—‘‘ I saw him Saturday night, on December 31, at 
quarter to two in the night.’’ 

Mr. Avinapr—According to my copy, it is 1.35. 

Mr. Justice Dartmc—tThis is what he said—‘‘ I left Snelwar’s 
restaurant two weeks ago, and have done nothing since then. I saw 
Morrison and deceased in the Whitechapel Road, at the corner of 
Church Lane. Beron had on a coat with fur on; his coat was open; 
it was a warm night. I was two yards from them. This was at a 
quarter to two. I was out in the street after 11.44. Morrison used 
to write with his left hand; he used the knife with his left hand.’’ 
(To Witness)—You mean when he ate his food?!—Yes. 

Mr. ApincuR—I am referring to his evidence in the earlier part 
of the depositions. 


47 


Steinie Morrison. 
Jack Taw 

Mr. Justice Dartmve—‘‘ The two men went down from Osborn 
Street to Whitechapel; they were speaking together. I did not hear 
what it was. I never saw Beron again. I did not see Morrison 
again until I saw him at the police station and picked him out. When 
I saw him in Whitechapel Road he was dressed in a black striped 
motor coat and a bowler hat. I saw Beron had his watch and a £5 
piece on it at 1.45 in the street. Morrison was a left-handed man. 
I left the restaurant at 11.44.”’ 

Mr. Asinger—I am much obliged to your lordship. In cross- 
examination he says—‘‘ The coffee stall at the corner of Church Lane 
is fifty yards from the restaurant. It was a quarter to two that I 
saw Beron with prisoner. I had seen him leave the restaurant at 
11.45, two hours after I saw them only fifty yards away. During 
those two hours I was in Osborn Street, and afterwards at the coffee 
stall for something to eat. I was in the street looking about for two 
hours. I could not go home to sleep so early. I was alone. I 
passed the time by speaking to some boys and men I knew. There 
are plenty of boys about there. I generally go to bed at ten minutes 
to two. Igo to bed sometimes at twelve, sometimes at one. I know 
the time by the big clock on the church. There is a clock in the 
restaurant.’’ (To Witness)—You did not say a word about being 
in M‘Carthy’s lodging-house at all, or listening to the piano. You 
said—‘‘ I was in the street looking about for two hours.’’ Now, 
which of those two accounts is true? Were you in the street looking 
about for two hours ?’—Yes. 

You do not say a word about being inside listening to the 
piano ?!—(No answer. ) 

Very well. When you saw the revolver, I put it to you that 
Morrison was trying to sell it to two men. Is that true/—No. 

Where was Morrison when he showed it to you’—In the 
restaurant. 

Sitting down?—Standing up. 

Who else was there ?—A lot of people were there. 

Did anybody else besides you see the revolver ?—Yes. 

Plenty of other people?—Only one little girl. 

Do you know the boy Rosen?—No, sir; I used to know him. 
He used to come to Snelwar’s restaurant. 

When did you speak to Rosen last ?—I do not remember. 

Last week ?—No. 

Since this case has been going on?—No. 

You swear that?—Yes. 

You have not spoken to Rosen since this case has been going on 
in the Police Court?—I spoke to him twice. 

__ During the time that the case was going on at the Police Court. 
did you speak to him?—I did not speak to him about the case; I 
spoke something else to him. 

You did speak to him then, but not about the case. Was 

48 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Jack Taw 
Solomon Beron there when you spoke to him?—I do not know. I 
did not see him; perhaps he was there, but I did not see. 

Where did you see Rosen?—In the restaurant. 

Was Solomon Beron in the restaurant at that time?—I do not 
know; I do not remember. 

Did you take Rosen to the police station!—Yes. 

Can you remember what date that was?]—That day was 2nd 
January—the day of the Sidney Street fight. 

Mr. Murr—That is 3rd January. 

Mr. ApmngeR—Sidney Street was surrounded on the 2nd, and 
the firing was on the 8rd. 

_ By Mr. Justice Dartivc—Were you there at the Sidney Street 
row!—I was there. 

When the firing was on?—Yes. 

And the soldiers fired !—Yes. 

Was that the same day that you took Rosen to the Police 
Court !—Yes. 

Cross-examination continued—Were you called into the Police 
Court whilst Rosen was giving evidence ?—Yes. 

Did you say to Rosen if he came to the Police Court and told 
the truth he would go to prison ?—No. 

Or would be poisoned !—No. 

Did you tell Rosen that he had got to say he had seen prisoner 
with a revolver?—No. 

Did you tell Rosen to say that on that day he saw the prisoner 
out in the street at half-past one!—I did not say that. 

Did Rosen say to you he could not remember the time?—He told 
me he would like to go to the Police Court and say his evidence 
that he saw the prisoner on the last night, and he came to the Police 
Court and he gave evidence there. 

By Mr. Justice Dartrnc—He told you he would like to go to the 
Police Court to give evidence?/—Yes, and he did not know where 
it was. 

Cross-examination continued—Was Solomon Beron present when 
you say Rosen asked you to take him to the police station !—I do not 
know. 

Did you say to Rosen, ‘‘ If you come to the police station you 
will see some pictures ’’ /—No. 

Did Rosen cali you ‘‘ Jacobs ’’ 1—No. 

Or ‘‘ Jacob ’’ 1—No. 

Were you called into Court whilst Rosen was giving evidence, 
and did Rosen point to you as the man he knew as “‘ Jacobs ’’ /—He 
did not call me ‘‘ Jacob,’’ he called me ‘“‘ Jack.’’ 

Did you tell Rosen that he must go and ask his governor before 
he could give evidence?—He told me some man told him that he 
was to go and tell somebody else. 

Did you tell Rosen he must go and ask his governor before he 
gave evidence !—No. 

pi 49 


Steinie Morrison. 
Jack Taw 

Did you say to him, ‘‘ They will show you some pictures. lf 
you want to write your name in as a witness you can »? No, 1 did 
not say that. ; 4 

‘Tf not, it is nothing.’? Did you say that to him?—I did not 
say that. 

Did you say to Rosen that you would write his name down as a 
witness /—No. 

Did Rosen say, ‘‘ I will go and ask whether I can be a witness,” 
and did you say, ‘‘ I will write you down as a witness ’’ /—No. 

Do you know Mrs. Deitch?—Yes. 

How long have you known her!—A few weeks ago I know her 
properly. 

Have you been to Mrs. Deitch’s house?—No. 

Do you know Mr. Deitch?—I have seen him twice. 

Has Solomon Beron ever threatened Rosen whilst you have been 
there/—He did not speak to him. 

Has Mr. Deitch ever threatened Rosen in your presence !— 
Which Mr. Deitch? 

Are there two!—Yes. 

You know them both?—Yes. 

I am talking of the Mr. Deitch who lives at 401 Commercial 
Road ?—He did not see him. 

Never mind if he saw him or not. That is the Mr. Deitch I 
am talking of ?—No. 

Where does the other Mr. Deitch live?—Snelwar’s restaurant. 
They call Hermilin ‘‘ Deutsch.”’ 

Which one is it you have seen twice!—He lives in Commercial 
Street. 

When you say you have seen Mr. Deitch twice, do you mean 
Hermilin or the other one!—The other one. 

Not Hermilin?!—No. 

Let Mr. Hermilin come forward for a moment, please. (Mr. 
Hermilin did so.) (To the witness)—Is this the man you are 
talking of ?—Yes. 

You know him as Mr. Deitch?—They call him ‘‘ Deutsch.”’ 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—When you came over from Austria 
did you come over all by yourself ?’—Yes. 

Did other Austrians at the same time come over from Galicia? 
—Yes. 

You came to get your living here ?—Yes. 

; And you have been getting your living here ever since?—Very 
adly. 

Have you never been to school?—Night school, my lord. 

Here in England?—Yes, my lord. 

You have lived all the time down about Whitechapel, have you? 
—No, my lord; sometimes if I get money I live at a private lodging- 
house. If I got no money I live in a lodging-house. 

How long have you known Morrison?—Two months. 

50 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Jacob Weissberg 

Jacos WuissBERG, examined by Mr. Luycusrsr—I am a butcher 
and am employed by Mr. Cudoc, of Darlby Street, Soho Square. I 
live at 56 Quaker Street, Spitalfields. I knew the deceased, Beron, 
for about four years. I also knew the accused. I saw him for 
about two months in Snelwar’s restaurant, where I used to go nearly 
every evening. I saw Beron and the accused together the last night 
of the year, 3lst December. I had not seen them together before 
that. I saw them together first on 31st December at half-past 
eleven in Commercial Street. I was with my friend, Mr. Zaltzman, 
at the time. I saw them again together at a quarter to one in the 
morning in Whitechapel Road, at the corner of Black Lion Yard, 
to the west of the London Hospital. I was with my friend Zaltzman, 
and we were about 50 yards from the London Hospital. We were 
going to St. Mary’s Street, and the accused and Beron were walking 
westward, the opposite way. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Asrnazrr—I am a Russian, and I knew 
both Leon Beron and Solomon Beron. 

What were you doing at Mile End on 31st December at this 
hour ?—I walked with my friend Zaltzman. 

Where did you meet your friend?—In the restaurant, about six 
o’clock. 

What time did you go to the restaurant?—About six o’clock. 

What time did you leave!—Directly. 

Then where did you go’—We walked about to the Bank of 
England, and then afterwards we went to my friend’s house in St. 
Mary’s Street, Whitechapel. We went out again about a quarter to 
seven and walked back to the Bank of England, and then we returned 
to Bishopsgate. By this time it was about half-past seven. 

Was Zaltzman with you all this time?’—Yes. 

Then what did you do next?—We went to Commercial Street, 
and had our supper at Snelwar’s restaurant. 

What time did you get back to Snelwar’s restaurant?—At eight 
o’clock, or a quarter-past eight. 

What time did you leave Snelwar’s restaurant !—Directly we had 
our supper—a quarter-past or half-past eight. We then went 
towards Mile End to Aldgate, and then back again for a walk. 

What time was it when you got back to Aldgate?—I cannot tell 
you exactly the time. Of course, we went there and back all the 
time. 

You walked about all this time with Zaltzman!—Yes. — 

You were getting rather weary. You had been walking about 
since six o’clock?—I also met a girl friend and had a conversation 


with her. 
The three of you walked about—you, the girl, and Zaltzman ? 


BeOS 


And so on until a quarter to one in the morning !—Not with the 


girl; the girl left us about eleven. as 


Steinie Morrison. 


Jacob Weissberg 


Then did you go on walking backwards and forwards from 
Aldgate to Mile End?—Yes. : 

How many times?—I cannot tell you exactly—five or six, or 
more. : 

You would be getting very tired?!—Yes, we got very tired. 

At what time did you think of returning to Spitalfields, where 
you lived?—About a quarter to one. 

What are you?—A butcher. f 

Saturday night is a busy time for a butcher?—It is not busy 
in our shop, because it is a Jewish butcher’s shop. 

Yes, but the Sabbath goes out in the evening’—The guv’nor 
opens the shop, but I am not working in the evening. 

Do you say that you never work at the butcher’s shop on 
Saturday nights?—No, never. 

Are you still employed by Mr. Cudoc at Darlby Street, Soho? 
—Yes. 

Do you know Jack Taw?’—I know him. 

How do you know him’!—Because I have seen him in the 
restaurant. 

At any time before you gave evidence at the Police Court did 
you see Jack Taw in the restaurant /—I have seen him many times. 

Have you asked him about this case in the restaurant?—No. I 
have mentioned it to some persons, but not to him. 

Why not to him?—Because I have not had company with him, 
because he is a poor chap. 

Did you mention it to Solomon Beron ?’—Sometimes. 

And to Hermilin—‘‘ Deutsch ’’ ?—Sometimes I talked to him. 

And to Snelwar?—Also. 

And to Rosen!—Who is Rosen? I do not know Rosen. 

Do you know when Zaltzman, your friend, went to the police?— 
I do not know where he is going to. 

Did you tell him to go!—I have not told him. I have been at 
work at the same time when he is going to the police. 

When did you give your statement to the police?—I cannot 
remember the date. I suppose it must have been on 10th February. 

Why did you not go to the Police Court until 10th February ?— 
Because I heard that my friend had made a statement, and I thought 
that one witness that saw him at the same time would be enough. 

When did you think that one witness would not be enough ?— 
All the time. My friend told me he went to the station. 

By Mr. Justice Dartmye—You said you did not go to the police 
station because you thought one statement would be enough. Zaltz- 
man had made his statement, and later he told you that you had 
better go to the police. That is what it was, is it not?—Yes. 

Cross-examination continued—Then was it Zaltzman who thought 
it better to have two of you?—I do not know what Zaltzman means 

52 


Evidence for Prosecution. 

pas Jacob Weissberg 
with it; only Zaltzman said that I should go to the station, that I 
was wanted, and so I went and made a statement. 

Can you tell the time by looking at the clock!—Yes, it is nearly 
five minutes past one. (This was correct. ) 
Can Zaltzman?—I do not know whether he can or not. 

_ Re-examined by Mr. Murr—Zaltzman told me that they had called 
him to the station where he would make a statement. Then they 
asked him who had been with him that. same night at a quarter to 
one, and he said, “‘ My friend Jacob.’’ They asked, ‘‘ Who is 
Jacob? ’’ and he said, ‘‘ He is a friend of mine; he lives at 56 Quaker 
Street.’? So a gentleman came to me and told me that I was wanted 
at the station, and I went and made a statement. 


IsrazL ZALTzMaAN, examined by Mr. Luycuster (through the 
Court interpreter)—I am a furrier, living at 11 St. Mary’s Street, 
Whitechapel. I knew Leon Beron for about three months. I used 
to see him at Snelwar’s restaurant. I have known the accused for 
about four months. I have seen Leon Beron and the accused together 
in the evenings. I saw them together in Commercial Street at half- 
past seven on the last evening of last year. I was then along with 
Weissberg. While I was still with Weissberg I saw them again in 
Whitechapel, next to Black Lion Yard, at a quarter to one. About 
two months before the murder the accused showed me a revolver in 
Snelwar’s restaurant. I said to him, ‘‘ I have seen a man like you 
at the pictures,’’ and I also said, ‘‘ I am also a good shot.’’ He took 
the revolver from his hip pocket. I heard of Leon Beron’s death on 
the Monday morning, 2nd January, and I went to the police that day 
and made a statement. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Anrncur—I am a Russian Pole. I do 
not know what Jack Taw is or where he comes from. Leon Beron 
was a Russian. He told me that he was a small boy when they 
moved him to Paris. I have heard that Hermilin is a German. 
Weissberg is a Russian. 

Do you know that Morrison was born in Australia ?—No. 

What time did you meet Weissberg on 31st December ?—Three 
or 3.30 in the afternoon. 

Where did you go!—We walked in Whitechapel, Mile End Road, 
and Shoreditch. 

What time did you get to Shoreditch ?—At half-past eight. 

Are we to understand that you walked about the streets from 
half-past three till eight, till you got to Shoreditch?—It was 7.30, 
and at 7.30 we went to Osborn Street to eat. 

When did you leave the restaurant !—About eight o’clock, and 
then we walked about in Aldgate, there and back to Mile End. 

For what time?—Up till a quarter to one in the morning. 

Do you say that you were walking about with your friend 

53 


Steinie Morrison. 


Israel Zaltzman 


Weissberg from 3.30 in the afternoon, with the exception of a quarter 
of an hour, till a quarter to one in the morning /—Yes. 

Where did you part with Weissberg?—At the corner of Osborn 
Street, and Whitechapel Road. 

At what time?!—At a quarter to one. 

Where was it that you say you saw Morrison and the deceased 
man together?—The very last time? 

Yes, the last time?—In Whitechapel, next to Black Lion Yard. 

How long would it take to walk from Black Lion Yard to the 
corner of Osborn Street?—One minute. 

Did you go to the Bank of England with Weissberg!—Yes. 

Did you meet anybody!—I met Morrison and Leon Beron. 

Did you meet anybody besides Morrison and Leon Beron?—I 
have not seen any others. 

Think carefully whether you did or did not meet somebody 
else and walk with somebody else?—From the Mile End into Osborn 
Street somebody else also walked with us, but I do not know him by 
his name. 

Anybody else besides that man?—Except this man nobody else 
spoke to us. I do not remember anybody else. 

In what direction was Morrison walking with Beron!—Towards 
the city. 

On which side of the road?’—The side where Black Lion Yard is. 

How do you fix the time?’—Because I pointed out at the time, 
‘“ They are both together again.’’ 

How do you fix the time when you last saw them?—Because I 
felt very tired, and I thought about retiring, and then I looked at the 
Whitechapel clock. 

What is the time now!—Thirty-one minutes past one. (This 
was correct. ) 

Re-examined by Mr. Murr—Did you have any conversation with 
any woman that night? 

Mr. Asrncur—lI object to that question. It is a leading question. 

Mr. Justice Daruinc—Yes, so it is. I do not think you should 
ask that, Mr. Muir. 

By Mr. Murr—In what direction were you and Weissberg walk- 
ing at the time you met Beron and Morrison for the second time, the 
last time?—We walked from Osborn Street towards Mile End and 
they walked the opposite way, Mile End towards Aldgate. 


Mrs. Nexium Drrcn, examined by Mr. Murr—I am the wife of 
Samuel Deitch, gasfitter, and I live at 401 Commercial Road. 1 
knew Leon Beron for about twelve years. On 3lst December my 
husband and I were at a party at my father-in-law’s house, 73 Com- 
mercial Street, and we left the house after one o’clock in the morning 
of Ist January. On our way home we met Leon Beron, between 
Philpot Street and Bedford Street. The accused was along with 

54 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Nellie Deitch 

Beron, and they were coming towards us. I had never seen the 
accused before. When I was about a yard away from the accused 
I made an observation to my husband. I saw the accused’s face and 
he saw me; we looked at one another. When I passed the remark 
to my husband about Mr. Beron being his friend the accused turned 
round to look at me. I heard on the Monday evening that Leon 
Beron had been found dead on Clapham Common, and I went to the 
police station that same Monday evening and made a statement. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Anrngsr—My husband is a gasfitter. 

What are you?—What am I? I am a woman, of course. 

I can see that, but what is your occupation!—My occupation? 
That is a fine question to ask me. I am at home in the house— 
looking after my children—looking after my business. We have a 
gasfitting shop, and I look after it while my husband does the work 
outside. 

It is a gasfitting shop ?—It is. 

No other business ?—No. 

Is it a bicycle repairing shop?—It is all included. 

Is the bicycle business yours?—No, it is my husband’s; it 
belongs to the both of us—I am his wife. 

Did you say this at the Police Court—‘“‘ The bicycle business is 
mine ’’’—I did not say anything of the kind. I only said I looked 
after the business while my husband did the outdoor work. 

I will read to you what you said at the Police Court—‘* My 
husband has been a gasfitter since I knew him twelve years. He had 
a small repairing bicycle shop. There is a shop window. I attend 
to that. There are incandescent things in the window. The bicycle 
business is mine.’’? Was your statement at the Police Court handed 
to you, and was it read out to you!—I never heard it read out to 
me that the bicycle business was mine. I know that it belongs to 
both of us. Before living at 401 Commercial Road I was living at 
4 Jubilee Street up till about twelve months ago. We left because 
we failed in business there. 

No other reason?—No other reason. My husband is not here 
to-day. cap 
Do you know a woman named Lizzie Holmes !—No. 

Do you swear that ?—I swear that. 

You never heard of her?—I know so many people, but I cannot 
remember what their names are. I do not know any woman by the 
name of Holmes. oF 

Do you pledge your oath that Lizzie Holmes did not live in your 
house?—I have no girls living in my house, and never had any girls. 
If I had, it was a servant girl, that is all. I do not know a woman 
named Dolly Nevy or a woman named Lena Hall. 

Do you pledge your oath that neither Lena Hall, Dolly Nevy, 
nor Lizzie Holmes has ever lived in your house?—I do not know 

55 


Steinie Morrison. 
Nellie Deitch 
any of the names. I had a servant girl Lizzie; I do not know her 
surname. She left me about a month ago. 

Did you keep a servant in Jubilee Street?—Yes, I have kept 
servants always, but not under these names; I do not know these 
names. At one time I lived at 5 Jubilee Street. 

Is it true that Lizzie Holmes had a room at 5 Jubilee Street for 
which she paid 3s. a week?—No. I had a tenant for two rooms, 
but never a tenant for one room. 

Used she to take men in to your knowledge?—No, no such 
thing. 

cand did they sleep with her, or stay a short time ?—Never such 
a thing happened. 

Did she pay you 3s. for every man that stopped all night /—No, 
that is an untruth. I do not know anything about it. I had two 
rooms let to a Jewish tenant, one of my own people—a Mrs. Simmons, 
with her husband and two children. 

It is not true that this woman used to pay you 3s. for every 
man who slept with her the whole night !—No, I had only one tenant, 
and I can bring her to prove it. 

And 1s. for every man that stayed a short time?—I do not know 
anything about that; I never heard of such a thing. 

Where did you get that fur from?—That is my business. 

Tell us, please?!—Why should I tell you? ‘You do not think 
I am as foolish as all that. You insulted me last time, but you will 
not insult me to-day. You asked me last time where I got my fur 
from. My husband bought it, what he worked for. I do not ask 
you where your wife got her fur from. 

Is it true that this woman, Lizzie Holmes, followed you from 
Jubilee Street to Commercial Road?—I had no woman there. I only 
had a tenant there, who was with me seven months. 

Did she have a middle bedroom in Commercial Road?—I have 
had no bedrooms let out. 

And on the same terms on which she lived in your house at 
Jubilee Street ?!—Nothing whatever. 

I put it to you that you sent for this woman, Lizzie Holmes, 
about March of last year, to go with a man at your house?!—No, I 
do not know anything about it. I did not do anything of the kind. 

And she came, and that you got 10s., 5s. from the man and 5s. 
from Lizzie Holmes, and the girl got 15s.?—I do not know anything 
about it. 

Do you tell the jury that the story I have put to you is an in- 
vention ?—It must be. 

In the face of what I have put to you, do you pledge your oath 
that the Lizzie you say you had as a servant is not the Lizzie I am 
putting to you!—No, Lizzie is a young girl whom I had with me. I 
can always find her if you want to see her. 

56 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Nellie Deitch 


Mr. Justice Dartinc—Did you say that Lizzie Holmes was here 
yesterday? 

_ _ Mr. Asmycer—No, I did not say that. Iam told by the solicitor 
instructing me that her proof was taken a fortnight ago. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—lI expect her to be here to-morrow morn- 
ing, when this witness shall be here also. 

Cross-examination continued—lI knew Beron for twelve years, 
but I did not know his father, nor do I know anything about him. 

Did he never talk to you about his father?—No, never. 

And you had known him twelve years!—Yes, but I never knew 
that he had a father alive. I do not know anything about Solomon 
Beron; I only knew Mr. Beron by living in my father-in-law’s place, 
Philip Deitch. 

Used Beron to visit Philip Deitch ?—He used to live in his house 
with his first wife. 

What year?—Twelve years ago, when I was first married I saw 
him in my father-in-law’s house. I was married in Brick Lane, and 
my father-in-law used to live there some years ago before he moved 
to 73 Commercial Street. Leon Beron’s wife has been dead for 
some years—I cannot exactly say how long. I do not know whether 
he married again; I never saw him with a lady after his wife died. 
He has never been to 5 Jubilee Street ; I always used to meet him in 
Commercial Road. Solomon Beron has never been to my house in 
Commercial Road or in Jubilee Street, and he has never spoken to 
me about his father. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—I do not want to embarrass you, Mr. 
Abinger, but I want to follow this case. Would it trouble you to 
indicate what is the importance about Beron’s father? 

Mr. Asrncpr—My friend in opening this case suggested to the 
jury that nobody but the prisoner Morrison would be apt to think 
of a place like Clapham Common, because he was engaged in a baker’s 
shop there. It has been discovered that Beron also must have known 
Clapham Common, because his father was living on the south border 
of it, and therefore the deceased man might have gone not un- 
naturally to Clapham Common. 

Cross-examination continued—You were highly indignant, of 
course, at the murder of a man you had known all these years ?— 
Yes. 

And your husband would also be highly indignant?’—Well, he 
has heard about it. 

When you saw your old friend on New Year’s Eve did you stop 
and wish him a ‘‘ Happy New Year ’’??—Do you mean that at that 
time of the morning we were going to stop and wish them a happy 
New Year? We were going home and we met many friends, but we 
were not going to stop to talk to everybody. We never spoke to 


them ; we just passed them. 
57 


Steinte Morrison. 
Nellie Deiteh 

Neither you nor your husband ever said a word to him 1—No. 

Do you know a woman named Eva Flitterman !—I know her now, 
but I did not know her before. I got to know her at the South- 
Western Police Court when I met her there. We spoke each time that 
we met in Court. 

Did you know what that woman Eva Flitterman had come to the 
Court for?—No, I did not know anything about it, but I know it 
now. ‘The night in question was dry. We went to the party at 73 
Commercial Street between eight and nine o’clock in the evening. It 
would take about half an hour to walk from my house to 73 Com- 
mercial Street. We left the party about a quarter-past one in the 
morning, and we got home past two. We had some refreshments on 
the way, in Commercial Road—at Levy’s refreshment place, at the 
corner of Richard Street. That was before we met Beron with 
Morrison. 

Did you not have supper at the party!/—We left at that time 
in the morning, and we thought we would have something to eat and 
take something home for the children. It is not a restaurant; it is 
a ham and beef shop. We got to that shop at a quarter to two, and 
sat down and had some meat. It would take us about ten minutes 
to get from the ham and beef shop to our home. 

Are you sure you left that party at a quarter-past one /—Yes. 

Did you say this at the Police Court—‘‘ On 31st December I was 
at a party at 73 Commercial Street. I left about half-past one ’’ ?—I 
might make a mistake. I know it was past one, and it might have 
been half-past one. Assuming that it was half-past one, then we 
would get to the ham and beef shop at nearly two o’clock. We were 
not quite a quarter of an hour in that shop. 

Will you explain why you said this at the Police Court—‘ It 
was nearly a quarter to three when we got home ’’!—I said it was 
past two. I do not remember exactly saying a quarter to three. I 
know it was past two when we met them. 

Here is what you swore to in your examination on 28th January 
—‘‘ They were going towards the city when he (Morrison) turned 
round. I saw his face. It was nearly a quarter to three when we got 
home; that is a good way down from where I was then.’’ That is 
what you swore on 28th January?—Well, it was near that time. I 
might make a mistake in a little, but I know it was about a quarter- 
past two when we met them, because I remember saying the time 
when we left the place, and it never took two minutes to cross the 
road to Philpot Street from the refreshment shop. I know Jack 
Taw, but I have only known him since this case has commenced. 
Neither my husband nor I ever goes to Snelwar’s restaurant. I do 
not know the boy Rosen, and I never saw him when he was with my 
husband. 

Had you ever seen Morrison before that night ?—No. 

58 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Nellie Deitch 


What sort of hat was he wearing!—I cannot remember his hat. 

How did you know his name!—By the paper. 

When you went to Leman Street were you shown some por- 
traits?—No. I only saw the photograph of the accused in the Hvening 
News after I identified him. I swear that I never saw his photo- 
graph at Leman Street. 

Did you say this at the Police Court—‘‘ I saw the murder of 
Beron in the Lvening News on Monday. The name of Beron was in 
the paper. I saw a portrait of the prisoner in the paper last week. 
I saw it at Leman Street police station ’’ !—No, I said I saw his photo 
after I identified him on Monday morning at Leman Street station. 

I have read to you what you swore and signed at the Police Court 
—“‘T saw it at Leman Street police station’’ ?—Yes, but you asked me 
such a lot of questions at the last hearing and you upset me, and I 
did not know what I was talking about. 

Let me remind you of what you went on to say—‘‘ I saw it at 
Leman Street police station. I was shown a number of portraits, 
amongst which I saw the prisoner’s’’?—No, the portrait of the 
prisoner I saw in the Hvening News in my shop. It was brought in 
after the identification. I do not know who it was brought the 
statement to me. I signed it in my shop, and I asked to be shown 
Beron’s photo, and they showed me. 

You made this statement upon your oath at the Police Court——- 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—You never can give a proper impression 
of your evidence if you only take out little bits. 

Mr. Apryczer—I was getting the bare facts first as to whether 
she had seen a portrait of the prisoner at Leman Street station. 

(To Witness)—Did you ever see a portrait at the police station? 
—I saw them at my shop. 

And never at all at the police station?—No. 

Do you wish the jury to understand that you did not see a 
photograph of the prisoner at the police station?—I do, and I can 
swear that. I saw a portrait of Morrison in the Hvening News the 
same evening; he was sketched with two officers standing by the side 
of him. I identified Morrison between eleven and twelve o’clock on 
the morning of 9th January. 

Re-examined by Mr. Murr—I remember giving evidence before 
the magistrate and being asked by Mr. Abinger questions about 
taking women into my house for immoral purposes. I lived for five 
years at No. 4 Jubilee Street, and then I was for two years in No. 5, 
on the opposite side of the road. At No. 4 I had no tenant, as it was 
a small house or shop, and I lived there along with my husband and 
children and a servant. No. 5 had one room extra, and I let two 
rooms at 6s. 6d. to a Jewish tenant of the name of Simmons—a 
husband and wife with two children. They were the tenants during 
the whole time that I was at No. 5. 

59 


Steinie Morrison. 
Nellie Deiteh 


Did you ever let any part of your house to women for immoral 
purposes /—Never. ’ 

Or have you ever done so at any house that you have ever lived 
in?—No. 

And are you a respectable woman?—I am. I have five children. 
About twelve months ago we moved from 5 Jubilee Street to 401 
Commercial Road. I let a part of my house there to a husband 
and wife and a little girl; their name was Campbell. They lived with 
me for seven months. They left about three months ago, and I do 
not know where they have gone. Since then I had a young couple, 
Mr. and Mrs. Hyman, who lived with us for two months. They are 
now living at 99 Charles Street, just at the back of me. My rooms 
are empty now. I left my father-in-law’s house on the morning of 
1st January at about a quarter or half-past one. I know that it was 
past one, because there is a clock in Commercial Street, Greenlees’ 
Distillery clock, and just as we got out of the house I noticed the 
time, and it was a little over a quarter-past one. I cannot remember 
what hat Morrison had on. 

Can you remember any of his clothes at all!—Yes, the overcoat 
he had on was a long overcoat. (Shown exhibit 14.) That is like 
the overcoat he had on, but the colour I cannot remember exactly. 

How did his appearance strike you as to dress!—Very smart. 


Epwarp HayMaN, examined by Mr. Leycrster—I am a taxi- 
cab driver. In December last I was driving a hansom cab, and on 
the night of New Year’s Eve I was in the Mile-End Road with my 
hansom. I picked up two people at the Mile-End corner of Sidney 
Street about two o’clock in the morning. I was going towards the 
city, and the two men were going tewards Bow when I asked them 
if they wanted a cab. I have since picked out from a number of 
other men the accused as one of these two. The other man was 
about 5 ft. 5, and was dressed in dark clothes and a black 
bowler hat. The accused had on a long greyish striped cvercoat 
and a black bowler hat. When I asked them if they wanted a cab 
the accused said ‘‘ Yes, I want to go to Lavender Hill,’’ mentioning 
Shakespeare Theatre, and asked me ‘‘ How much?’ I said ‘I 
leave that to you,’’ and he said ‘‘ Very well, then, 5s.,’? and I said 
“Thank you.’? They got into the cab and I drove them at an 
ordinary pace and set them down at the Clapham Junction side of 
Lavender Gardens. The accused paid me. After his arrest I 
picked him out on Tuesday, 17th January, from a number of other 
men at the South-Western Police Court. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Anrncer—I know the East End pretty 
well. Sidney Street leads into Mile-End Road. At that junction 
there is another road, Commercial Road. Philpot Street is in Com- 
mercial Road. I picked the accused up at the corner of Sidney 
Street and Mile-End Road (marked in red on the plan). I set my 

60 


Evidence for Prosecution. 

Edward Hayman 
fare down on the other side of Lavender Gardens, almost opposite the 
South-Western Police Court. It was a dry night, or morning 
rather. 

You, I suppose, along with other Londoners, heard of this 
murder on New Year’s Day?—I did not hear of it; I just read it 
on the Monday, 2nd January. It was in all the papers, of course. 

And all the posters?—I expect so. 

You drove a man on lst January within a very few yards, as 
you say, of the very spot where this murder was committed ?—It 
was not very far from it. 

When did you first go to the police station!—About a week 
afterwards, I think it was the 9th, if I am not mistaken. It was 
on the Monday or Tuesday. 

Which was it ?— 

Mr. Justioz Daruinc—What does it matter? 

Mr. Apincer—It is vital to my case. 

Mr. Justicn Daruinc—Whether he went to the police on the 
9th or the 10th? 

Mr. Asrncer—As your lordship hears this case developed you 
will realise that it is vital to the defence. 

(To witness)—Was it the 9th, or was it the 10th?—-I would not 
be sure whether it was the 9th or the 10th. It is hard to say how 
many fares I carry in a day and night. Some days I might have 
twenty or more, and others only thiee or four. 

You will appreciate that you had driven a large number of 
passengers between 2nd January and the 9th or the 10th when you 
went to the police station?—Yes. I went to the police station at 
8.45 or 8.50 at night. 

Had you seen a newspaper relating to Morrison before you 
went to the police station ?—Yes, I saw it in the papers, and there 
were notices posted in different cab yards and cab ghelters 

By Mr. Justioz Dartinc—Had you seen a portrait of him ?— 
No, I had only seen an account of it in the paper. 

Cross-examination continued—I have in my hand a copy of the 
Evening News of 9th January, the 5.30 edition—exhibit 43. Do 
you remember seeing that paper before you went to the police ?— 
No. 

Will you tell the jury if you did not see this description of 
Morrison in the Hvening News of 9th January why you had not 
been to the police station either on the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th 
or 8th to say it was you who drove the man to the spot where this 
murder was committed ?!—Well, I went to the station as soon as. I 
could. 

Why did you not go before the 9th or the 10th?—I do not know. 

Are you prepared to pledge your oath, in a serious case of this 
sort, that you had not seen the Zvening News of the 9th before you 
went to the police station?—I had not seen it. I had not seen any 


61 


Steinie Morrison. 


Edward Hayman 
papers. I saw the notices posted down the cab yard where i was 
driving, and they were the cause of my going to the station. ; 

I have in my hand a police notice, dated 6th January. Did 
you see that?—It was down in the yard. It was posted up in all 
the yards, and in the cab shelters as well. 

Then if you saw that police notice, offering a reward to cabmen, 
dated 6th January, why did you not go to the police station until 
the 9th or 10th?—I was driving night work at the time, and I went 
home each day tired after doing my work. 

There was a reward attached, and London was ringing with 
the crime, and yet you were too tired to go. To have called at the 
police station at any time during those nine days and to have 
said, ‘‘ Why, I drove a man from Whitechapel to Lavender Gardens 
at that very spot and about that very time,’’ would only have been 
a matter of a few moments. Why did you not go!—I went when 
I thought proper. 

I am compelled to press you as to why you remained quiet and 
silent for nine or ten days if you drove this man on this night to 
the spot !—Notices were not down in the yard until the date it has 
got here—the 6th. 

But the papers were full of the Clapham murder, and do you 
mean to say that you, the man who drove the murdered man, as 
you say, to this place at Clapham Common remained quiet for nine 
or ten days. Now, look here, sir, you say you saw portraits of 
Morrison ?!—I did not say I saw portraits of him. 

I have in my hand the Dasly Chronicle of the 10th with a full- 
sized portrait of Morrison in it?—I might go a week without 
looking at a paper. 

I also show you the Daily Mirror and the Daily News of the 
10th with a full-sized portrait of Morrison?—I do not read a lot 
of papers. I might go three or four days without looking at a 
paper. 

Mr. Asrncer—I call for the original statement which this man 
made when he went to the police station. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Have you got it, Mr. Muir? 

Mr. Murr—Yes, my lord. The statement itself is undated; 
the reports with regard to his going to the station are dated. 
(Statement and Reports handed.) 

Mr. Apincer (after perusing the statement)—My lord, this is 
the 9th. 

Mr. Murr—Are you going to read it? 

Mr. Asrnapr—I do not know what my learned friend is interro- 
gating me for. 

Mr. Murr—tThe rule is, if my friend does not read it then I 
am entitled to do so. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Oh yes. You have stated part of its 
contents. 

62 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Edward Hayman 


Mr. AnrnceR—I have stated the date. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—That is part of the contents. 

Mr. Asincrr—I thought it would be fair to state that. Does 
your lordship rule that if counsel, while cross-examining a witness 
as to a date, reads the date on a statement, but not what is in the 
statement, that entitles counsel on the other side, representing the 
Crown, to read the whole statement? 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—You have read part of it. 

Mr. AsrncER—I read no part of it; I only read the date, which 
is not the statement. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—You called for the statement of the 
witness with great emphasis, as though the witness had contradicted 
something he had said in it. 

Mr. Asincur—lI called for it with emphasis, my lord. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Yes, and as far as I gather you read 
it through, and you said it was dated 9th January. 

Mr. Asincer—It was only the date that I read out. I should 
like your lordship to know that the date I read is not the date on 
the statement at all, but the date of the report of the police. 

Mr. Justice Dartivc—I shall not rule about it until it is tendered 
in evidence, and then I will hear argument about it. 

Mr. Asincer—Now we know that the date was the 9th. 

(To Witness)—I give you the opportunity now to explain to 
the jury why, if you were able on the 9th to go to the police and 
give a description of the man you drove on the Ist, you did not do so 
before?—The notices were not out, for one thing, until the 6th or 
the 7th. What was posted up on the yard said, ‘‘ Wanted, the 
driver who drove two men through the East End towards Clapham 
Common.’’ 

Do you tell the jury that you did not know of the murder until 
the 6th ?—_I had heard of it, certainly ; I had read of it in the papers. 

Of the murder at Clapham Common !—Yes. 

Then I want you to explain to those twelve gentlemen, if you had 
heard of the murder and you knew that you had carried a passenger 
on that very night when that murder was committed, at about the 
_ very time, why did you not go to the police without a police notice !— 
Well, I went there when I thought proper. 

When you thought proper?’—Yes, when IJ had the time. As I 
told you, I was driving a cab all night, and I used to go home and go 
to bed in the daytime. 

I put it to you, the reason why you never went to the police 
station was that you never in your own mind connected the fare you 
drove on 1st January with the murder with which the whole of London 
was ringing until you went to the police station on the 9th!—I went 
there when I thought proper. 

Why did you not go before ?—I cannot give any reason for it. 

The police notice of the 6th is in these terms—‘“‘ Metropolitan 

63 


Steinie Morrison. 
Edward Hayman 

Police. To Cabmen. £1 reward. The driver of ( ) cab who 
between twelve night on the 31st December and 6 a.m. on the Ist 
January, 1911, took up at the neighbourhood of the East End two 
men, and drove them to Clapham Common; also if any driver picked 
up one or two men in the neighbourhood of South Side Clapham 
Common, or Clapham High Street, between 2 a.m. and 6 a.m., 
Ist inst., going in direction of London.’’ That was posted in 
every cab yard in London, was it not ?—Yes. 

Why did you not go on the day you saw it?—Because I was not 
sure whether I was—to tell you the truth, I did not want to have 
anything to do with the job at all. 

You started by saying, ‘‘ I was not sure.’? What were you going 
to say? Now, Hayman, do not spar at me!—I tell you I cannot 
give any reason for not going. 

Did you ever connect anybody you picked up at Sidney Street 
and took to Lavender Gardens on Ist January with this murder ?!—I 
know I identified him. I went and identified the fare I drove. 

Did it occur to you till 9th January, at a quarter to nine in the 
evening, that the fare you picked up on Ist January was connected 
with the murder?—yYes, I had an idea that it was something to do 
with the murder. 

When !—Well, a few days afterwards. 

Why did you not go to the police station !—Well, I did not go. 

Why?—I do not know. 

When were you taken to identify the man?—lI think it was on 
the 17th, the Tuesday. 

Do you know why, having gone to the police station on the 10th, 
you were not taken to identify him till the 17th?—1I could not tell 
you that. I know nothing about that. 

How many hundreds of fares had you seen between Ist January 
and the 17th?—I had plenty of fares certainly during that time, 
but I never picked one up at the Mile End Road; that is an exception. 

I suggest that you took up about 170 in seventeen days, and 
yet you are taken to identify the man for the first time after these 
seventeen days!—Yes. 

Had you or had you not seen some of those full portraits of 
the accused in the papers before you went to the police station ?—Yes. 

Before you went to identify him?—Yes, before I went to identify 
him, but I did not go by portraits. 

Do you agree with me that it would be very difficult to find a 
man in London who could not identify the accused after a portrait 
like that had appeared in the Daily Mirror?—I did not identify the 
man from the portrait. 

Could you identify the other man?—No, I could not swear to 
the Pia man, because Morrison was the one who engaged and paid 


? 


Evidence for Prosecution. 

Edward Hayman 
me and had the conversation with me. I only know he was a man 
of 5 feet 5 or 6, dressed in dark clothes. 

Is Sidney Street a likely place to pick up a passenger ?—No, not 
as a rule. You might come down the Mile End Road with a cab for 
six months and not find a fare. 

You said at the Police Court that the corner of Sidney Street 
was a likely place ?—Well, on a New Year’s evening you are likely to 
pick up a fare anywhere. 

Have you ever picked up fares there before!—No, I cannot say 
that I have. I never use the East End with a cab unless I have a fare 
to take me down there. I took a fare down there, and that is how 
I came to pick up the other fare. I was going back to the city. I 
came out that night about eleven o’clock, and I picked up this man 
somewhere about two o’clock. I had been at the People’s Palace in 
Mile End Road after taking a fare from the Bank. I had several 
fares before that. When I first came out I had a fare from the 
Elephant to Brixton. Then I went back to the Elephant again, and I 
had a fare to Hoxton. From Hoxton I got to the Bank, and then I 
got to the People’s Palace, and then I picked up this fare at the 
corner of Sidney Street. 

Who got out first when the cab arrived at Lavender Gardens !— 
That I could not say. 

How long did you take to drive from Sidney Street to Lavender 
Gardens?!—It might be half an hour and ten minutes—somewhere 
about three-quarters of an hour. Of course, when I am out with a 
cab I do not look at the time when a fare gets into the cab and the 
time when he gets out. 

I suppose you have a better class horse in the day than you have 
at night ?—Sometimes. 

Did you get a fare back again to London?—From Clapham 
Junction? 

I did not say anything about Poa Junction?—I put my 
horse on the Clapham Junction rank. 

Re-examined by Mr. Murr—When did se first form the opinion 
that the men you had driven to Lavender Gardens had something to 
do with the Clapham murder ?—I suppose when I saw this notice put 
up in the yard where I was driving. 

Not before?—No. The date on the notice is Friday, 6th January. 
I saw the notice on the Friday. I went to the Kennington Lane 
police station on Monday, the 9th, somewhere about nine o’clock, and 
I spoke to the inspector there, but I do not know his name. Next 
day a detective officer named Jones came to me and took my state- 
ment, which I signed. I should think it would be about nine o’clock 
in the morning of the 10th that Jones took my statement. I went 
to the South-Western Police Court on the 17th, and I identified the 
accused from about six or seven other men. He was wearing the 

oY 65 


Steinie Morrison. 
Edward Hayman 
long overcoat that I had seen him in before. I picked him out from 
the others without any hesitation. 
You know what a serious case this is. Have you to-day any 
doubt whatever?—None whatever. I heard him speak on the night 
in question, but I have not heard him speak since. 


Sauugt Derron, examined by Mr. Murr—I am the husband of 
Nellie Deitch, and I carry on business as a plumber at 401 Commercial 
Road, Stepney. We have been married for twelve years, and during 
those years we have lived in five different houses. We were at my 
father’s house on the night of 31st December last, and we left at 
half-past one in the morning and walked home by Commercial Road. 

While you were going along did you or did you not see anybody 
you knew?—I did not see anybody. I certainly saw plenty of people, 
but, of course, I did not take much notice of any. 

Did you see the late Mr. Beron at all?—No. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—You must not tell me what she said, 
but I want to know if you remember your wife making an observation 
to you as you went along?’—Yes, she did, as we were walking along. 

Can you tell me at about what part of the road?!—That was after 
we passed the men. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Anrnczr—Your wife made many observa- 
tions to you while you were walking home?’—She did not; she only 
made one. 

She never spoke to you all the way from Commercial Street till 
you got home with the exception of that one remark ?—She said she 
would like to have some refreshments. 

Re-examined by Mr. Murr—Where were you then?!—Walking. 
along just by New Road. 

Besides the observation about refreshments did she make any 
other observation?—Not exactly. 

By Mr. Justics Dartinc—Besides asking for refreshments, did 
she speak to you on the way home?’—She only spoke to me of seeing 
Beron with a young friend. That is all. 

Where were you then?—Just by Philpot Street. 


The Court adjourned. 


66 


Third Day—Wednesday, 8th March, 1911. 
\ 

Mrs. Durren, recalled, further cross-examined by Mr. Apincmr 
{shown Mrs. Holmes]—I do not know that woman, and I do not 
remember seeing her before. I may have seen her in the street, but 
I cannot remember. I swear that she has never been in any house 
in which I have lived. She is not my maid named Lizzie and never 
was my servant. 

[Shown Sarah Lask]—I do not know that woman. Do I know 
you! 

Sarau Lasx—Yes. 

The Wirness—You are telling lies. I have never seen you 
before. How dare you come and tell lies? 

Saran Lasx—I am not a liar. 

The Witness—You are; I have never seen you. 

By Mr. Azsincur—I put it to you that that woman at the end 
of last year, about three months ago, brought a man to your place 
at Commercial Road ?—Can she prove it? I do not know the woman 
and it is a lie. 

Is it true that you have been round to her house, inviting her 
to go to your place as you could introduce her to a nice man and 
could earn money as well as yourself?—I know nothing about it. 
I do not know her and have never seen her. I have never been 
down Boyd Street. I do not know Batty Street Buildings, Com- 
mercial Road. It is not true that I have been round there several 
times inviting women to come to my house to earn money. 

I put it to you that this woman Sarah Lask was in your house 
three weeks ago?—It is a lie. I have a tenant that lived at the 
time can prove it. 

Re-examined by Mr. Murr [shown Mrs. Simmons]—That is 
Fanny Simmons, the wife of Samuel Simmons. They lived with 
me between seven and eight months in two rooms in my house at 
5 Jubilee Street. I have known them for about ten years. They 
had two children while they were living with me. They were 
respectable people. [Shown Woolf Phillips.] That is Woolf 
Phillips, tailor and house agent, 12 Jubilee Street, Stepney. He 
called personally to collect my weekly rent at 5 Jubilee Street. 


ANDREW STEPHENS, examined by Mr. Murr—I am a hansom 
cab driver. In the early morning of Ist January I was with my 
cab on the rank at Clapham Cross, and while I was there I picked 
up a fare. I first saw my fare walking round the palings from 
the Old Town, Clapham. As he walked by me I asked him ‘‘ Cab, 

67 


Steinie Morrison. 


Andrew Stephens 


sir??? He walked a little way on, and turned and came to the cab, 
and told me to drive to Kennington. I drove him to Kennington 
and set him down between the Hanover Arms and the Oval Station 
of the electric railway, directly opposite the Kennington Church. 
He paid me my fare. I had an opportunity of seeing what the 
man was like. It was the accused—I am quite sure. I went to the 
police on 10th January. (Shown exhibit 15.) 1 had seen that notice 
in my cab yard on Monday night, 9th January, and I went to the 
police at ten o’clock next morning. I saw a portrait of the accused 
that same morning before going to the police. 

Did you recognise it or not ?—No, the man had his hat off and 
his coat on as he stood in the dock. I gave my description of the 
man I had seen to the police. On Tuesday, the 17th, I went to the 
South-Western Police Court where there were a number of men. 
I was asked to pick out my fare from Clapham Cross, and I picked 
out the accused. At that time he was dressed in the same way as he 
was when he got into my cab—the same coat and hat, or something 
similar—a bowler hat. I drove at an ordinary pace from Clapham 
Cross to Kennington. After the accused paid me my fare I went 
back to Claylands Road, and then I took my horse to the Elephant 
and Castle and put up on the rank there. The accused got out a 
little way from the Hanover Arms. Having done that I went to 
the coffee stall to have some supper. I do not know exactly what 
time it was when I got to the Elephant and Castle. There were 
other men on the rank and we got talking. When I got to the 
coffee stall it was twenty minutes to four. I think I might be 
talking to the other drivers on the rank for four or five minutes. I 
remember driving my cab another night about eleven o’clock, with 
Sergeant Cooper, from Sidney Street to Lavender Gardens. I drove 
at an ordinary pace, crossing the Thames by London Bridge, then 
along Borough Road and Lambeth Road, through Vauxhall, and 
straight up Wandsworth Road to Lavender Hill. That night I 
drove with Inspector Ward and Sergeant Cooper from Clapham 
Cross to Hanover Arms, then doubled back to Behring’s Road, and 
then went at a walking pace to the Elephant and Castle. On the 
morning of Ist January, when I set my fare down, I saw him cross 
behind the back of the cab across the road towards Prima Road, 
walking towards Kennington Park. That was the last I saw of him. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Anrncur—I came out on 31st December 
between two and three in the afternoon, and I got off the cab at 
half-past six next morning, after a spell of about sixteen hours. 
During these sixteen hours I had four fares with the first horse and 
I think eight with the second, about twelve or thirteen fares, but 
I cannot say exactly, nor can I tell exactly how much money I 
earned, but I had nineteen shillings at the end of the day. The 
last fare I had before picking up the accused was from the Royal 
Hotel, Blackfriars, to Cedars Road, Clapham. I should think I 

68 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Andrew Stephens 
took about half an hour. The fare I had before that was from 
Leicester Square to Clovelly Mansions, Gray’s Inn Road. I am not 
exactly sure what time it was when I got to the rank at Clapham 
Cross, but I got there just before the last tram went to Tooting. I 
should think I got to the cab rank somewhere between half-past one 
and two o’clock. I picked the accused up about an hour after the 
last tram went, but I cannot tell the time exactly. There is a large 
illuminated clock quite near the cab rank at Clapham Cross. 

Do you mean to tell the jury that with the clock so near that 
cab rank you cannot tell us what time you picked that man up ?— 
No, I did not look at the clock. I was on the ground when the 
accused came up, and I put my rug round me to jump up on my 
cab. It was not cold that night; it was a beautiful night. When 
I got to the cab rank there were a four-wheeled cab and a hansom 
cab there, but when I saw the accused coming along I was alone 
on the rank. (Shown plan No. 22.) After looking at the fountain, 
the clock and the cab rank on that plan, I mark as near as I can, 
with a red cross, where my cab stood. 

You say that the man came from the direction of the Old Town, 
along the pavement, round the corner ?—Yes. 

So that the light of the clock when he came towards your cab 
would be behind him?—Yes. [ said to him ‘‘ Cab, sir?’’ He walked 
past the cab and said ‘‘ Kennington,”’ and then he got into the cab 
and I drove him there. I suppose it took me ten or twelve minutes, 
but I did not time myself. It was not raining that night. I pulled 
up at the Hanover Arms. When the man got out of the cab he 
passed behind the back of my cab and walked towards Prima Road. 

Did he walk in the direction of the taxicab rank?—No. When 
he got out I turned the horse and cab round, and as I turned round 
I saw him coming down towards Kennington Park. 

The taxicab rank is round the corner. He was walking in that 
direction, towards the cab rank?—The cab rank is right outside 
Kennington Park. That is Kennington Park where the cab rank 
is. The Horns is at the corner of Kennington Park Road and 
Kennington Road. To get from the Horns to the Hanover 
Arms you pass right by Kennington Park, past the cab rank. 

When did you first hear of the murder committed on Clapham 
Common ?—On the Sunday night, Ist January. 

You had, within a few yards of that, picked up a man, as you 
say, on that very night, on that very spot ?—Yes. 

Why did you not go to the police on the Monday ?—Because I 
did not connect it up then with that man; I never thought of it at 
the time. I do not think I read a description in the papers on 
2nd January of the injuries inflicted on the man; I never got up all 
that day. 

Do you tell the jury that on the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 

69 


Steinie Morrison. 


Andrew Stephens 


8th, and 9th you had not sufficiently connected your fare with the 
murder to compel you to go to the police?—No. : : 

Then why did you not go?—Because I did not think this man 
bad anything to do with it at the time. 

Why ?—I do not know why. : 

Why ?—Because the general appearance of this man when he 
came to me was like an actor or a professional man, and | thought 
he lived in the neighbourhood of Kennington Park. That is why 
I never went to the police. I did not go to the police because I 
never thought of it; it never entered my mind. ; 

That is what I am also suggesting to you, that you never did 
think of it, and that is why you did not go to the police?—I never 
gave it a thought at the time. 

When did you begin to give it a thought!—On the Monday 
morning, 9th January. 

On 9th January this man stood in the dock in an open Police 
Court in London, you know?—I read that in the Daily Chronicbe 
of 10th January. 

Do you pledge your oath that you had not seen the evening 
papers of the 9th?—Yes. 

Do you tell the jury that having in your mind having picked 
up a man on Clapham Common this early morning you were not 
sufficiently interested in what took place on Clapham Common as 
to want to look at the paper !—I hardly ever buy a paper. 

I put it to you that you saw the evening papers on the 9th ?— 
No. 

You know that admirable evening paper, the Hvening News, of 
course ?—I never buy it, and never read it. I am ademocrat. If I 
buy a paper it is usually the Star. I did not read the Star or any 
other paper that night. 

Listen to this—‘‘ Steinie Morrison charged. Clapham murder 
arrest. Accused man at the Police Court. Tall, well dressed. The 
ordinary cases of the day had been disposed of by 3.25, and two 
minutes later the place of a man charged with cruelty to a horse was 
taken by a tall, well-dressed, clean-shaven man, the accused. With 
Detectives Ward and Hawkins the man walked to the little iron- 
railed dock in the centre of the gas-lit Court, and faced the magis- 
trate with complete unconcern. Morrison wore a heavy overcoat of 
rough greenish cloth, dark trousers, and well-polished, fairly new 
boots. He looked like a person in fairly good circumstances.’’? Do 
you pledge your oath you did not read the Huening News of 9th 
January, or the Star, or any other evening paper’—Yes. I saw the 
police notice offering a reward of £1 on Monday, the 9th. 

That police notice was exhibited on 6th January. Do you tell 
the jury that you had not seen it on the 6th, 7th, or 8th?—It was not 
put up in our yard until the Saturday. I never went to work on the 
Sunday. 

70 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Andrew Stephens 


Do you tell the jury, as a London cab driver, you did not know 
that the Metropolitan Police were looking for two men, for a driver 
who picked up one or more men in the neighbourhood of the south 
side of Clapham Common or High Street ?—I knew it on the Monday, 
but not before. 

You do not live by yourself; I suppose you talk to your fellow- 
cabmen /—Sometimes. 

Do you tell the jury that you never heard of that police notice 
till the 9th?—Yes. 

Have you had that sovereign?—No, and I do not expect it. 

_ Do you agree with me that if you had seen the description which 
I have read to you from the Lvening News—“‘ Tall, well-dressed, 
clean-shaven, heavy overcoat, roughish green cloth, and dark 
trousers ’’—it would not be a very difficult thing to pick out Morrison? 
—TI do not know about that. I never read it. 

Look at exhibit 9. Is that the statement you made to the police 
on 10th January, and is that your signature!—Yes. 

I am going to read it. ‘‘ I am a hackney carriage driver. On 
Sunday morning, 1st January, the date I fix on account of its being 
New Year’s morning, at about 1 a.m., I picked up two gentlemen 
at the Royal Hotel, Blackfriars, and drove them to Cedars Road, 
Clapham Common. I arrived there about 1.30, and after putting 
down my fares, went back and put on the cab rank at Clapham Cross 
near the clock. There was another cabman with a four-wheeler on 
the rank at the time. I remained on the rank until just before half- 
past two, when a man alone came from the direction of the ‘ Old Town, 
Clapham.’ He passed the other cabman. I said to him ‘ Cab.’ 
He did not answer, but walked down the cab rank a little way and 
then came back. He said ‘ Kennington,’ and then got in the cab. 
I drove him to Kennington and put him down just by the Hanover 
public-house, opposite Kennington Church. He paid me two shillings, 
did not speak, and walked towards the Horns public-house. The man 
was perfectly sober, and seemed to be in a hurry to get away. He 
was wearing a dark grey or green blanket coat with gauntlet cuffs 
and heavy collar, it was buttoned up, and a white handkerchief round 
his neck tucked inside, a black bowler hat, rather tight trousers. 
He was my height, 5 feet 10, clean-shaven, dark complexion, I should 
think. I took him to be a man belonging to the theatrical profession. 
I have seen a photograph of Steinie Morrison in the Hvening News of 
yesterday’s date, the 9th ’’—the 9th is my word—“‘ and identify 
him as being the man I picked up at Clapham Cross and drove to 
Kennington.’? Now, sir, is that the statement you made and signed 
to the police?—Yes. 

You see what you say there about the Hvening News of the 9th. 
Why did you swear that you had never seen the Hvening News on the 
9th ?—I never saw the Lvening News on the 9th. I never saw it till 
I went to Brixton. 

cpl 


Steinie Morrison. 
Andrew Stephens 

Then why did you put it in your statement to the police 1—That 
was the next day. 

You told the police you picked this man up at half-past two, or 
just before?—I told the police this, that I was not sure of the time, 
and it was about one hour after the last tram went. The police 
asked me the time of the last tram, and I said about half-past one, 
and that would make the time half-past two. 

Do you suggest that this is the language of the police, and not 
your language!—I suggested it by the time of the tram. ‘ 

Now, you know that if that statement is true, that you picked 
up a man at half-past two, Hayman’s evidence cannot be true, because 
he would be in Hayman’s cah at half-past two?—I do not know. 

Do you tell the jury that you do not know that Hayman has 
sworn that Morrison in fact was in his cab at half-past two?—I do not 
know. 

Have you spoken to Hayman ?—Yes. 

Do you think it is quite fair that you should be the cabman 
selected to go and take this second drive!—I do not know; it is no 
business of mine. I was asked to do it, and I did it quite fair; I 
acted quite fairly to everybody. Iam a fair dealing man. The first 
time I saw Morrison after lst January was on 17th January. 

Had you seen portraits of Morrison in the press by that time?!— 
Yes. 

It was a bit of a farce going to identify a man whose portrait 
you had seen in the press, was it not?—-No. I should have done it 
for any man if I had driven him under any circumstances. 

Which portrait did you see?—The one in the Daily Chronicle; 1 
saw it in a public-house in the borough. I should think there were 
ten or twelve men with Morrison when he was paraded at the West 
London police station. 

Did you say to the officer, or anybody, anything to this effect, 
‘“ What is the good of asking me to pick this man out; I have seen 
his portrait in the papers ’’? !—No. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—When I picked him out he had a hat 
on. There is no hat in the Dacly Chronicle picture. 

Cross-examination continued—How many passengers did you 
pick up between 31st December and the 17th January?—I only went 
to work three days between that time. 

How many of the passengers you picked up on 3lst December do 
you think you could identify now ’—Several of them. 

Do you tell the jury if you pick up a passenger who says one 
word ‘‘ Kennington,’’ is in your cab for ten or twelve minutes, and 
pays you your fare, you could identify him seventeen days after- 
wards !—Quite possible. I have known men ride in cabs and you 
know them again a month afterwards. 

_ _ No doubt if you see the portrait in those papers it is quite easy— 
in fact it is difficult to avoid identifying, but do you tell the jury that 
72 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Andrew Stephens 


without seeing a description you can identify{—I gave my own 
description without any assistance from the newspapers at all. 

Do you tell the jury you did not know, after you had made this 
statement to the police, that if that hour was correct, namely, half- 
past two, Hayman must be wrong!—I will tell the jury how I come 
to correct him if I may be allowed. 

I suggest to you that that time was altered to twelve minutes 
past three because that fits in with Hayman’s time. What do you say 
to this—two of you were claiming this man at the same time!—I 
never claimed to drive him at all at half-past two. 

. This is a murder charge?—I know. 

Be frank with me. Do you tell the jury that that hour, half- 
past two, was altered to a quarter-past three after it was known that 
Hayman stated that this man was in his cab from two o’clock till 
some forty minutes after? Do you tell the jury that on your oath? 
—I say this on my oath, that if it had been true I should have stuck 
to it. I made all inquiries; I went to the tramway company and 
made inquiries regarding when the last tram went, and on their 
statement I went to the police and altered the time entirely of 
myself. 

By Mr. Justice Dariinc—I ascertained from the tramway 
company the time the last tram went from the Plough, Clapham, to 
Tooting on this morning—1.58 a.m. 

Cross-examination continued—I then went to the police and I 
told Inspector Ward that I had been to the tramway company. 

If you did not know the time, how could you tell it was an hour 
after the last tram had gone?—I said about an hour I was there on the 
rank—I had been waiting about an hour. 

How could you tell if you had not been looking at this illumin- 
ated clock?—I can tell an hour. It is part of my business to know. 

Do you tell me that what you said to the police was not what 
is written down and signed by you, but something to this effect, ‘‘ I 
arrived about half-past one.’’ This is what you wrote or signed. 
Did you read it?—No. 

“« After putting down my fare I went back and put on the cab 
rank at Clapham Cross near the clock ’’!—I said I got there before 
the last tram went. Sergeant Cooper, who took my statement, 
wrote it down as I said it. 

Did you say to Sergeant Cooper, “‘ I arrived there about 1.30’? 
—I told him I did not know the time, and I put on there as the last 
tram went away. That was the way. I told him then there were 
forty or fifty people waiting for the last tram, and there were tram 
people waiting there on this morning. That was why I put on the 
rank, and it was just before the last tram went that I put on the 
rank. I saw the last tram go, also the staff tram that runs after- 
wards, and that was how the time was first thought of. I said it was 
about half-past one. 


mqQ 
io 


Steinie Morrison. 


Andrew Stephens 


By Mr. Justice Dartinc—Who said it was about half-past one? 
—TI said so. I saw the last tram go and the staff tram go, and I 
thought it was about half-past one. ‘ 

Cross-examination continued—‘ 1 remained on the rank until 
just before half-past two.’? Did you say that to Sergeant Cooper /— 
No. I said I was on the rank about an hour or an hour and a half, 
or some time like that. 

You did not say just before half-past two the man came along? 
—The way half-past two was got at was, one hour after I put on the 
rank ; that was half-past one to half-past two. Instead of that the 
right time was from two o’clock till three or a little after. 

Your statement is signed by you?—Yes, but the time is wrong. 
I told you that before. I did not know the name of the other cabman 
referred to in my statement, but I know where he works. As I 
made my statement in an office upstairs in Brixton police station 
it was typed by a clerk who was not in uniform. I made my state- 
ment between eleven and twelve o’clock in the morning. 

You told my friend about ten; you now say between eleven and 
twelve?—I went at eleven o’clock in the morning to the Borough 
police station. I had my cab out in the yard, and I went to the office 
at Brixton police station, and I arrived there about eleven or half-past 
eleven—I did not take any notice. The officer came with me from the 
Borough. 

Is this what you said to Sergeant Cooper— It was a dark grey 
or green blanket coat with gauntlet cuffs and heavy collar ’’ !—No. 
I never mentioned a blanket coat at all. I said it was a grey or green 
motor coat. 

Was this read to you before you signed it /—Yes. 

Why did you not say, ‘‘ I did not say that ’’?—One answers to 
the other. It is a blanket coat. 

Did you tell Sergeant Cooper the man wore rather tight trousers ? 
—yYes. They asked me, and I said, ‘“‘ Yes, fashionably dressed.’’ 

Do you tell the jury, with his greatcoat buttoned up you could 
tell whether he had tight trousers on’—I could tell you what boots 
he had on without having seen him in the photos, and never seen him 
before. 

Did you see the colour of the tie or the handkerchief he had on? 
—No. 

Re-examined by Mr. Muir—Before Monday, 9th January, I 
think the last day I worked at my yard was the Wednesday. I was 
not well on Thursday, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday, and I stayed 
indoors. I went down to the yard on the 9th, and I then saw the 
police notice.._I went home, and then I went to the police station 
next morning with my employer. On the 9th I went home about 
twelve o’clock in the day, and went to bed about five o’clock at night, 
and I never saw any paper till the next morning. I told the police 
that the man had a button on the arm of his coat. I saw that as he 

74 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Andrew Stephens 


paid me with the left hand, and I was struck with the button on it. 
The policeman put down ‘‘ gauntlet.’’ The first time I saw the 
portrait of Morrison in the Lvening News was at Brixton police station 
after I had given my description. One of the officers showed it to me 
—I do not know his name. I then put at the end of my statement, 
““T have seen the portrait of Steinie Morrison in the Hvening News 
of yesterday’s date and identify it as being the man I picked up.”’ 
When I pulled up on the rank at Clapham Cross there was a four- 
wheeled cab there, behind me. The cab was just driving off the rank 
when I got there, and then I was left entirely on my own. 

. The Formman—My lord, several members of the jury would like 
‘these questions to be put, if they are proper questions to be put. 
(Handing a paper to his lordship.) 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—When the time was altered so that your 
statement as read to-day does not give the time as you gave it 
when you first gave your evidence in the box to-day, did you act 
entirely on your own doing, or was it suggested to you?!—I went 
entirely on my own to find out whether I had made a mistake or not. 
Had I found I had made a mistake I would have owned and said that 
I had make a mistake, and that this man was not the man. I went 
entirely on my own and made inquiries myself, and when I found they 
were right I went and told the police what I had done, entirely on my 
own. Nothing was ever told me by the police what to do. 

Before going to the tramway company and going to the police 
and telling them the result of your investigations about the time, had 
you seen Hayman to talk to?—No. I have seen him, I have known 
him four or five years, but I have not seen him during this case. I 
never spoke to him about this matter, and I never knew he was a 
cabman at all until 17th January. 

When the man paid you his fare, did he open his overcoat, did 
he unbutton it?—No, he had the money in his hand. He looked the 
same look as he has got now, on one side. I have been driving a 
cab for fifteen years. 


CHARLES CoopmrR, examined—I am a detective sergeant in the 
Western Division. 

By Mr. Asmverr—I was at the South-Western Police Court, 
Lavender Hill, on 17th January in connection with this case, but not 
on 9th January. I took a statement from the witness Stephens at 
Brixton police station about noon, but I do not remember exactly 
when. Besides Stephens and myself there was in the room Constable 
Durbin, who typed sentence by sentence statements made by Stephens 
to me and repeated by me. ‘The language in ‘that statement is 
Stephens’ own language. I probably asked him how he fixed the date, 
Sunday morning, Ist January. 

‘© At about 1 a.m. I picked up two gentlemen at the Royal Hotel, 
Blackfriars, and drove them to Cedars Road, Clapham Common.’’ 

75 


Steinie Morrison. 


Charles Cooper 


Are those the exact words used by Stephens?—As near as was pos- 
sible they convey the meaning he conveyed to me. 

“ J arrived there about 1.30, and after putting down my fares 
went back and put up at the cab rank at Clapham Cross near the 
clock ’??—I think I suggested the clock to him at the time and he 
accepted it. 

‘There was another cabman with a four-wheeler on the rank 
at the time.’’ Was that Stephens’ own language ?—Yes. 

“©T remained on the rank until just before half-past two.” 
Was that Stephens’ language?—Not exactly. In the first place, he 
said he remained on the rank he should think about an hour. I! 
asked him if it was possible to fix the time by anything, and he 
then mentioned something about the last tram leaving, and by that 
he came to the conclusion it was about 2.30 that he picked this man 
up. 

g ‘¢ When a man alone came from the direction of Old Town, 
Clapham ’’ ?—Yes. 

‘* He passed the other cabman and I.’? Did he say that?—l 
cannot say that he used the exact words, but I am sure he said some- 
thing about passing another cabman. I do not remember whether he 
said ‘‘ and I.’’ I know he said there was another cabman present. 

“*“ T said to him, ‘ Cab, sir.’ He did not answer, but walked down 
the cab rank a little way, and then came back, and he said, ‘ Ken- 
nington ’ and got in the cab.’’ Is the whole of that his language?— 
Yes. 

““T drove him to Kennington and put him down just by the 
Hanover public-house opposite Kennington Church.’’ Is all that in 
his language /—Yes. 

‘“ He paid me 2s., did not speak, and walked towards the Horns 
public-house ’’ ?—If I remember right, he said he walked across the 
road first and then went in the direction of the Horns. It is very 
probable that the clerk omitted that as of no importance, the man 
crossing the road. 

““ The man was perfectly sober, and seemed in a hurry to get 
away ’? 1—Yes. 

“He was wearing a dark grey or green blanket coat with 
gauntlet cuffs and a heavy collar.’’ Did he use that expression !—To 
the best of my belief he did, but when he came to the police station 
he had @ bad attack of bronchitis and could scarcely speak, and there 
was difficulty in understanding him. 

Did he mention gauntlet cuffs!—That, I think, is my word. 

You had not seen the accused’s coat?—No, I had never at that 
time seen the accused or his coat which he was then wearing. 

Why did you suggest gauntlet cuffs if you had not seen them 
when as a fact there are gauntlet cuffs on this man’s coat?—I should 
not say they are gauntlet cuffs. In describing the coat I think he 

76 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Charles Cooper 
mentioned a button, and then I asked him if he would call it a 
gauntlet sleeve, and he agreed. 

And heavy collar—that was his language ?7—Yes. 

“It was buttoned up. He had a white handkerchief round his 
neck, tucked inside ’??—That is his own language. 

‘A black bowler hat, and rather tight trousers ’’ /—Yes. 

Did you stop a moment and ask him how he could tell that the 
accused had rather tight trousers if he had got a long grey coat 
buttoned up?—I did not think it was impossible to see his trousers 
even though he was wearing a long coat getting in and out of the 
cab. : 
‘““He was my height, about 5 feet 10, clean shaven, dark 
complexion.’’ Was that all his own language?—Yes, he added the 
““T should think ’’ when I asked him to be certain about the 
complexion. 

“‘ I took him to be a man belonging to the theatrical profes- 
sion ’’?—That is his own language. 

‘“‘ I have seen a photograph of Steinie Morrison in the Evening 
News of yesterday’s date.’’ Did he tell you that?—That was in 
answer to my question. I think, as far as I remember, there was an 
Evening News lying there at the time in front of him, but I am 
not quite sure. It was never shown him, and it was quite accidental 
that he saw it. To the best of my belief, the newspaper, whatever 
it was, that was on the table at the police station contained a portrait 
of Morrison. 

Was Stephens sitting down when he was making his statement ?— 
Yes. I stood at the end of the desk. I do not swear that the 
newspaper was on that desk, but I think there was a paper lying 
there. 

If it was there at all, what was it there for?—It would be there 
quite by accident ; some one would have purchased it the night before 
for the purpose of reading it, and would have left it on his desk. 
After the statement was typed, it was read over to Stephens, and he 
signed it. I had nothing to do with taking Hayman’s statement. 
I think it was taken by Constable Jones. 

Re-examined by Mr. Mum—I had no idea that Stephens was 
coming to Brixton police station on the morning of the 10th to 
make a statement in the Clapham murder case. 


Mrs. Nei Derron, recalled. Further cross-examined by Mr. 
AptnaprR—I do not know a woman called Dolly Nevy, nor do I know 
the name. 

[Shown Dolly Nevy.] I have never seen that woman before to 
my knowledge. I might have seen her in the street, but I cannot 
remember. That woman never lived in my house, nor did she ever 
take anybody to my house. I did not see her or speak to her last 


night. - 


Steinie Morrison. 
Nellie Deitch 

[Shown Lena Hall.] I have never seen this woman before in 
my life. This woman never brought men to my house in Jubilee 
Street. ‘ 

[Shown Becky Blue.] I do not know this woman, nor have I 
ever seen her before in my life. She has never brought men to my 
house. 

Mr. Justice Dartmvc—Gentlemen, I always think it well that 
the jury should exactly understand what is going forward, the same 
as the judge does, and I may tell you that all this examination is 
admissible as impeaching Mrs. Deitch’s credit as witness, but Mr. 
Abinger cannot in law call any of these witnesses to contradict her. 
The law does not allow him to do so, and you will see why when I 
tell you that, if it did allow Mr. Abinger to call them to contradict 
this witness, then a number of people could be called to contradict 
them, and we should be practically trying the question whether Mrs. 
Deitch has committed perjury or not, or whether these women have 
committed perjury or not. If that could be done there would be no 
end to this case, or to any case in which that system was permitted. 
Therefore, although Mr. Abinger may cross-examine Mrs. Deitch as 
to her credit, and may confront her with all these women, and so on, 
he cannot call them as witnesses to contradict her. The law simply 
does not permit it. If he were to tender them, I should have to 
say that they could not be sworn, and could not give evidence. 


ALFRED CasTLIN, examined by Mr. Luycestsr—I am a taxicab 
driver. In the early morning of New Year’s DayI was on the cab rank 
near Kennington Church. I took up a fare about 12.30, and then I 
came back to the rank. I picked up a second fare about 3.30. There 
were two men, and I took them to Finsbury Gate. On 9th January 
I picked one of them out from a number of other men at Leman 
Street police station—the accused. He was one of the two men I 
picked up at Kennington Church. The other man was shorter than 
the accused. I did not have any conversation with him, and I did 
not look much at him. The accused asked me how much I would 
take him to Finsbury Park station for, and I said 7s. He hesitated 
slightly, and the other man spoke to him in a foreign tongue and 
pushed him into the cab. I took them both to Finsbury Gate, in 
the Seven Sisters Road. They got out there, and the accused asked 
me what the fare was, and I said, ‘‘ You have struck the bargain, 
and you know,” and he gave me three half-crowns. I do not know 
what became of them after they left me. 

I saw a notice up in our garage, but I could not say whether it 
was like exhibit 15 or not. I went to Brixton police station on 4th 
January and made a statement. Afterwards, on the 9th, at Leman 
Street police station, a number of men were placed before me, and I 
picked out the accused from amongst them. 

Did you notice what sort of coat the accused had on?—He had a 

78 


\ i 
: 
\ 
ve 
| 
\ 
: x 
1 The 2 1 
i ) i le sf i. : 
\3 
3 ; ‘ 
} } 
\ i 
tt ; 
e 7 iy * 
i ‘ 
i 
: : 
As 
»s ‘ 
7 \\r - 
St). Sites ange ee TP Seale 
ey : , ire 


pooystnoqysieu jo uelg 


CLT ON FIqIyxq) “peoy MeN [[eMaequieg pue ajeg uo}suluUey Jo 


auntasey 
gyasone 


2 


Ty 


a ae 
dope 


wv NOLSNINNIM 
aoe eee 


V0) 
YO" SOWva ayy 


0 

¢ 

$ 

¢ 
ESV alates ae 


_ Evidence for Prosecution. 
Alfred Castlin 


long overcoat, a motor shape fashioned coat. I believe he had a 
cap on his head, but I did not take much notice. The other man, 
who was a shorter man, had a bowler hat. As far as I can remember, 
he was a dark man, with a dark moustache, about 5 feet 6 inches in 
height. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Anrnenr—Are you sure of the time?— 
Yes, near enough. It was within a few minutes, one way or the 
other, of 3.30. I started work on 31st December about 12 noon, 
and I was working till about ten minutes to five next morning. I 
was not tired. 

When do you get tired, if you do not get tired after fifteen and 
a half hours?—When I have earned enough money to take home. 

You are quite sure there were two men?—Perfectly. 

How far was your taxicab away from the main road, Kennington 
Park Road, when you picked up your two fares?—I could not tell 
you the exact distance. I was in the Camberwell New Road, just the 
breadth of the road away from Kennington Church. I mark where 
my cab was with a cross on the plan. It was just by the side of 
the electric lamp. 

Which of the two men asked how much you would take them to 
Finsbury Park station for?’—The accused. 

You said 7s., and then the accused hesitated. You mean he said 
it was too much?—He may have thought so. When he hesitated the 
other man spoke to him in a language I did not understand and 
pushed him into the cab, and then got in himself. The taxi regis- 
tered just- over seven miles, as far as I know. I arrived at Seven 
Sisters Road about four o’clock, and I finished and went into the 
garage at 4.45. I have been on a taxicab for about four months, 
but I was on the roads on the busses for a long time before that. 

Do you remember the anarchist outrage in Seven Sisters road, or 
in Tottenham, or about there?—Yes, I remember it. 

Was that on the part of the road where you were driving !— 
No, I know nothing about Tottenham; I am a London cabman, not 
a suburban cabman. 

You cannot tell us how far you were away from Tottenham at 
that point in Seven Sisters Road where your fares got out 1—I have 
never done it on the road. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—When was this anarchist outrage? 
Was it before or after you took these men?—It might be two years 
previous to that. , : 

Cross-examination continued—A man jumped from a bus with 
a revolver, firing at everybody, and killing people. That is the 
incident I am asking you about?—I remember the incident, and I 
know what you are talking about. 

That was in this neighbourhood, a few miles further on. 

Will you mark on the map the spot where the two men got out 
of the cab?—I cannot give you the exact spot. It was about a mile 

79 


Steinie Morrison. 
Alfred Castlin 
beyond Finsbury station. (Witness marked spot on the map with 
red pencil.) 

You say you saw a police notice, and you went to the police 
station?—There are always police notices. I went to the station 
before I saw the police notice. 

Did you see a description of the accused before you went to the 
police station?—No, I just read the account of the murder in the 
papers ; that was all. 

Did you read the Hvening News?—Yes. 

Did you see a description in the Hvening News before you went 
to the police station?—I just read a bit of the Huening News; it 
said they were looking for two Frenchmen, that is all. 

On what date did you see that?—About the 3rd, I think it was. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—You went to the police on 4th January, 
as I understand ?—Yes. 

Here is the Hvening News of 3rd January. Just show me what 
description you saw there?!—‘‘ As reported in the Evening News last 
night, the murdered man whose body was hidden in the . 
has been identified as Leon Beron, a French Jew, who had lived 
many years in the Hast End of London. At present an inquiry 
is being pursued for two Frenchmen who have been missing since 
the discovery of the crime.” 

Oross-examination continued—I am sure it was the 4th, and not 
the 6th, that I went to the police station. I went to Leman Street 
police station on the morning of the 9th. 

Where was the accused when you saw him?!—About the centre, 
as near as possible. 

How many men were there!—About twelve, I should think. 

You thought the police were looking for two Frenchmen ?—Yes. 

That is what made you connect your fare with this murder?— 
Yes. 

Did you think the police were looking for two men who drove 
to Clapham or from Clapham?—Looking for two who had been to 
Clapham and left. 

And drove from Clapham ?—Yes. 

Did you see this police notice of 6th January /—Yes. 

If your memory is accurate, that was after you had been to the 
police station !—Yes. 

Then because you picked up two men at Kennington Church 
and drove them to Finsbury, beyond the fact that you picked up 
two Frenchmen or two foreigners, there was nothing to connect this 
fare with the murder ?—Nothing whatever. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—I heard the short man speak to the 
other in a language I did not understand. When the taller man 
spoke to me he spoke in English, with a foreign accent. I do not 
know French at all. 

80 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Thomas Pithers 


THomas Prruers, examined by Mr. Muir—I am a baker at 213 
Lavender Hill. My shop is about 50 yards from Lavender Gardens. 
The accused entered my service as a baker on 21st September of last 
year in answer to an advertisement, and he stayed with me until 
10th November. I paid him 12s. a week and board and lodgings. 
The last part of the time he was in my service he went on a round 
which took him to roads opposite Clapham Common. Alderburgh 
Gardens was the one nearest the Common. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Asrncpr—I know Nightingale Lane; it 
bounds the Common on the south side. 

_ I suppose the accused baked at night?—The bread was baked at 
night. 

And he slept when?—In the day—from half-past ten in the 
morning until six in the evening. 

Was the accused gentle and kind and nice to your little children? 
—vVery nice to them—very kind all the way round. He did a certain 
amount of work from six to half-past eight, and he came off again 
about twelve at night. It was during the last ten days when he was 
in my service that he was on a round. 

Re-examined by Mr. Murr—The round was from about nine in 
the morning until about twelve noon. 


Epwarp Harman, recalled, further examined by Mr. Muir— 
When going from Sidney Street to Lavender Gardens on the morning 
of 1st January the route J took was Whitechapel Road, Fenchurch 
Street, over London Bridge, High Street Borough, Borough Road, 
Lambeth Road, Embankment, Vauxhall, Wandsworth Road, then 
Lavender Hill. 

Mr. Murr—I think that is identically the route that Stephens 
described. 


Tomas Gremn, examined by Mr. Laycuster—I am a clerk in 
charge of the cloak room at St. Mary’s Railway Station, Whitechapel. 
Exhibit 20 is a ticket given out by me on Ist January of this year 
at about eleven o’clock in the morning. In respect of that ticket I 
took in a brown paper parcel, and I attached the counterfoil of the 
ticket to the parcel. Exhibit 31 is the brown paper which covered 
the parcel, and the counterfoil is on it. I understood the name given 
to me by the person who deposited the parcel as ‘*Banman.’’ On 
9th January, at Leman Street police station I picked out the accused 
from a number of other men as being to the best of my belief the man 
who handed in the parcel. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Apincer—I take particular notice of 
names in the booking office. 

Re-examined by Mr. Mur—lI ‘take particular notice of names 
because of special instructions. 

r 81 


Steinie Morrison. 
Harold Clockfield 

Harotp CLockrmmtp, examined by Mr. LeycustsR—I am a clerk 
in the cloak room at St. Mary’s Railway Station, Whitechapel. On 
8th January Detective Sergeant Nursey brought me a ticket, exhibit 
20. I looked up the parcel that had the counterfoil of the ticket on 
it. The counterfoil had the name ‘‘ Banman ”’ on it. I saw Sergeant 
Nursey open the parcel. It contained a towel, a revolver, and a box 
of cartridges. 


Aaron Wersman, examined by Mr. Luycuster—I am an incan- 
descent mantle dealer in Walworth Road. I know a man named Max 
Frank, jeweller, 8a Southwark Bridge Road; I have done business 
with him. (Shown exhibit 22)—I gave that cheque for £19 7s. 6d. 
to Mr. Frank on 13th December. 


Water Exiis, examined by Mr. Murr—I am cashier at the 
London and North-Western Bank, Walworth branch. (Shown exhibit 
22)—I cashed that cheque on 21st December, giving two £5 notes 
(exhibit 23) and £9 7s. 6d. for it. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Aprncer—I keep a register showing the 
numbers of notes paid out. 


ABRAHAM STITCHER, examined by Mr. Lrercester—I am a second- 
hand clothes dealer in Commercial Road, Spitalfields. I have done 
business with Isaac Flitterman. (Shown exhibit 7)—I handed that 
cheque to Isaac Flitterman on lst January. It is made payable to 
M. Jess, because I thought that was his name. It is his brother-in- 
law’s name. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Aprncer—Eva Flitterman used to work 
for me about six months ago. I gave her the sack. I have seen her 
about this Court every day. 


Isaac FirrrerMan, examined (through the interpreter) by Mr. 
Murr—lI was living at 18 Thrawl Street, Spitalfields, on Ist January. 
I am a second-hand clothes dealer. (Shown exhibit 7)—I got that 
cheque from Mr. Stitcher on the Sunday afternoon. After I got the 
cheque I was at home. My sister Eva was there, and also the accused. 

Did anybody change that cheque for you?—This man (indicating 
the accused). At first he intended giving me a paper for £5. He 
took it out from a purse and wanted to give it to me, but I say I 
do not know what it is. I noticed there were several papers like 
this. He gave me eight half-sovereigns. He also gave two sovereigns 
to my sister Eva for a costume. He took the money from a paper 
bag from the Bank. 


Harry Jnrrrigs, examined by Mr. Luycustpr—I am a detective 
constable of the H Division. From 6th to 8th January I and 
Detective Bellinger were keeping watch upon 91 Newark Street. 

82 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Harry Jeffries 


At 9.20 on the morning of the 8th I saw the accused go to that house. 
When he arrived he was carrying a brown leather bag, a small brown 
paper parcel, and a walking stick, which I now identify. He went 
into the house, and then he left after a few minutes and went to 
111 Commercial Road, where some people called Abraham lived. He 
was still carrying the same things. From there he went to 27 Field- 
gate Street, Whitechapel, a restaurant, and he went in there. I then 
communicated with Detective Inspector Wensley, and he arrived with 
several other officers, and we all went into the restaurant. Detective 
Inspector Wensley said, ‘‘ Stein, I want you,’’? and then he and I 
seized hold of the accused, who was sitting at a table, and searched 
his pockets. He said, ‘‘ Don’t get putting anything in my pockets.”’ 
I assisted Sergeant Brogden to take him to Leman Street police 
station. On the way to the station he said, ‘‘ This is the biggest 
blunder you have ever made, and I suppose it is not the first you have 
made, but you have made one this time.’’ Up to that time no charge 
had been mentioned. When we arrived at the police station he was 
searched and put into a cell. During the whole of the time I was in 
his company no charge of murder was mentioned, nor was the name 
of Leon Beron mentioned at all. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Aprncer—Did you say this at the Police 
Court—‘‘ Inspector Wensley did not say, ‘I arrest you for 
murder ’ ’’ /—_Yes. 

“J did not know myself at the time that he was wanted for 
murder ’’ 7—Yes. 

“* Yes, I did know he was wanted for murder. When I said ‘ I 
did not ’ it was a slip.’? Did you make that statement, was it read 
out, and did you sign it at the Police Court !—Yes, I did. 

Re-examined by Mr. Luycustsr—lIt was in cross-examination, and 
I think I got excited, but I cannot explain it. I immediately corrected 
it in the next sentence. 


James BeLiincer, examined by Mr. Leycesrar—I am a detective 
of the W Division. I was keeping watch with Jeffries at 91 Newark 
Street, and I saw the accused going there. Along with Jeffries I 
followed him to the restaurant in Fieldgaite Street. I was outside 
when he was arrested, and I afterwards went to the police station. 
During the whole of the time I was present there was no charge 
against him mentioned at all to my knowledge. 


FRreperIcK WENSLEY, examined by Mr. Muir—I am a detective 
inspector of the Metropolitan Police, H Division, stationed at Leman 
Street. At 10.15 in the morning of 8th January I went to a restaurant 
at 27 Fieldgate Street, Whitechapel, and saw the accused there, 
sitting down just inside the door. I said to him, “ Stein, I want 
you.”’ Sergeant Brogden and Detective Jeffries seized the accused 
and began to search him, and he said, ‘‘ Don’t you get putting any- 


83. 


ae 


Steinie Morrison. 
Frederick Wensley 

thing into my pockets.’”? He was taken to Leman Street police 
station by those two officers, and I followed them. At the police 
station I said to the accused, ‘‘ What is your name and where have 
you been residing?’ and he said, ‘“‘ You know my name; I am 
living at No. 4 Whitfield Street, W. I picked up with a girl a week 
ago, and have been living with her since at 116 York Road, West- 
minster. I did not go home last night, as I lost the last train, so I 
stopped with Mrs. Simmons at No. 32, in the buildings at James 
Street.’’ I told him that he would be detained, but I did not charge 
him with murder at all. I did not mention Leon Beron’s name or the 
Clapham murder in his hearing. About noon the same day I received 
a communication from Inspector Mackenzie, and I went and saw the 
accused in a room at the station. I said to him, ‘‘ I understand you 
want to see me to make a voluntary statement.’’ He said, ‘“ Yes, 
you have accused me of a serious crime; you have accused me of 
murder.’’? I said, ‘‘ I have done nothing of the kind.’’ He replied, 
‘* You told me that you wanted me for a serious crime, and that it 
was murder, and I want to make a voluntary statement.’’ I said, 
‘*T am expecting Inspector Ward here, who is dealing with this 
matter, very shortly; I would prefer him to take your statement.’’ 
He replied, ‘‘ That will do just as well.’’ I had not told him that I 
wanted him for a certain crime. I communicated with Inspector 
Ward, and he saw the accused in my presence, who dictated a state- 
ment in my presence to Inspector Ward. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Asrncer—What was the date of the 
Houndsditch murders!—On the night of the 16th December. 

And may I take it from that date up to now you have been en- 
deavouring to find the perpetrators of those abominable murders ?— 
Yes. 

You are in charge of that case?—So far as the Metropolitan 
Police are concerned. 

When was Josef Federof arrested?—I can tell you by reference 
to my note. I think it was the 22nd December. 

_ He is accused of being concerned in connection with that transac- 
tion, is he not ?’—He is. 

When was Jacob Peters arrested ’—The same day. 

For the Houndsdi'tch murders ?—Yes. 

When was Duboff arrested?—I am not sure. He was arrested 
at Shepherd’s Bush. I was not there. 

Peter the Painter has not been arrested?’—He has not. 

Do not answer this question if you think on the grounds of 
public policy you should not answer. Are the police looking for 
persons besides Peter the Painter in connection with the Houndsditch 
murders!—I do not think it desirable to answer that question. 

Beron, you know, was murdered on the Ist January ?—Yes. 

When was Sidney Street surrounded!—On the night of the 2nd 
January. 

84 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Frederick Wensley 


. Was that in consequence of information received by the police? 
—Yes. 

Was there a man in that building named Fritz Svaars?—Yes. 

He died in that building !—Yes. 

Did you know that anarchist club in Jubilee Street ?—Yes. 

You shut it up, did not you?—Yes. 

And very properly shut it up. I think we know now geographi- 
cally, but I should like to have it confirmed by you, Jubilee Street 
is either the next, or close to Sidney Street?—A matter of 200 
yards. 

What class of tenants are they in Jubilee Street /—Foreign 
humble people. 

What number in Jubilee Street was the anarchist club?—I could 
not give you the number. 

I want you to tell the learned judge and the jury whether Nos. 
4 and 5 Jubilee Street are the humble class tenements that you have 
been describing !—Yes. 

How many floors have they ?—I am not quite sure, but I think 
they have one floor and an attic above it. 

The deceased man lived at 133 Jubilee Street ?—Yes. 

Have you seen his landlord ?—No, I have not. 

Did you know the deceased man ?—I did. 

How long had you known him!—Four or five years—probably 
longer. 

Did you know his brother Solomon ?—I do. 

Did you know David Beron ?—Yes. 

Have you seen him here?—I have not seen him here. 

Did you see him at the Police Court ?—No. 

Do you know where he is?—No, I do not know where he is at 
the present moment. 

Did you know that Beron’s father lived in Nightingale Lane? 
—I heard so. 

Recently !/—Yes. 

Since the Police Court proceedings or before?—Just before. 

Just look at this handkerchief (exhibit 32 handed). That is 
considerably bloodstained ?—Yes. 

Do you see there is a laundry mark in ink in the corner ?— 
There is a mark ‘‘ 109 ’’ in both the corners, and there is something 
else in each corner besides the ‘‘ 109.”’ 

When did you first see this handkerchief ?!—The first time 
I saw it was at the Police Court. I do not know where or when 
or by whom it was found. 

Have you been to the laundry where Morrison’s linen was 
washed ?—Yes. 

And have you inspected the laundry mark which is upon his 
linen !/—No, Inspector Ward inspected it and I was with him. 

In the police notice of the 6th January I find this—‘‘ Two men 

85 


Steinie Morrison. 
Frederick Wensley 
and drove them to Clapham, also if any driver picked up one or 
more men in neighbourhood of south side Clapham Comm.n.”’ 

Can you tell us why the police directed the attention of drivers 
to the neighbourhood of the south side of Clapham Common !—No. 

I see on this plan which has been put in by my friend, Mr. 
Muir, Nightingale Lane appears?—I am sure I do not know; I 
have had nothing whatever to do with that part of the inquiry. 

Nightingale Lane is due south of Clapham Common !—Yes. 

The statement goes on ‘‘ or Clapham High Street between 2 
a.m. and 6 a.m., lst inst., going in the direction of London.” 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Well, Mr. Abinger, what is the ques- 
tion ? 

Mr. Asincer—One has to be so careful in a case of this kind 
in forming one’s question. (To witness)—How many officers were 
there present when Morrison was arrested?—Five—four besides 
myself. 

He was sitting at breakfast, was he not !—He was sitting down. 

Reading a paper ?—He was not reading a paper when I spoke 
to him. 

It wag rather exciting, was not it—five men?—Well, I do not 
know about excitement—the excitement that attends the arrest of 
persons. 

He said to you—‘‘ You have accused me of a serious crime—you 
have accused me of murder ’’?—That was at the station. 

He wag seized by some officers, I suppose?—Yes, Sergeant 
Brogden and Detective Jeffries both put their hands round him. 

Did you not say to him “ Steinie’’ or ‘‘ Stein, I want you 
for murder ’’?—I did not. 

You said at the police station when you told him you had not, 
he said ‘‘ You told me that you wanted me for a serious crime, and 
that it was murder ’’ ?—That is what he said at the police station, 
yes. 

‘‘7T want to make a voluntary statement? ’’—Yes. 

Re-examined by Mr. Murr—I am the officer of the Metropolitan 
Police in charge of the inquiries relating to the Houndsditch 
murders, and I am acting in combination with the officer of the 
city police. He is also inquiring into the same matter, and he and 
I communicate our information to each other. What is known to 
the police of those murders is known to me. 

You have known Leon Beron for four or five years, or possibly 
longer !—That is so. 

So far as you know was Leon Beron in any way connected with 
the persons responsible for the Houndsditch murders ? 

Mr. Asincper—I object. 

Mr. Justice Darttnc—Do not answer that for a moment. 

Mr. Asincrr—I submit any answer to that question must be a 
guess. How can a witness take upon himself the functions of a 

86 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Frederiek Wensley 


judge and jury and hazard a guess whether a particular person is 
concerned in a particular offence? 

Mr. Justice Darutinc—He is not asked to take upon himself 
the functions of a judge or jury. He is asked so far as he knows 
is Beron connected with the Houndsditch murders. What is the 
objection to that? 

Mr. Asrngur—I do not object if my friend asks him as far as 
he knows. 

Mr. Murr—That is what I did ask. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—What is the answer? 

By Mr. Murtr—So far as you know was Leon Beron connected 
with the Houndsditch murders? 

Mr. Azsincer—I do not want to interrupt my friend, but I 
have never suggested that he was, and I never do suggest that he 
was. 

By Mr. Murr—In the course of your inquiries into the Hounds- 
ditch murders information was given to you by informers !— 
Certainly. 

Was any information of any kind given to you with regard 
to these Houndsditch murders by Leon Beron!—No. 

Do those dates that have been put to you, the date of the 
Houndsditch murders, 16th December, the date of the arrest of 
Federof and Jacob Peters, and the date of the surrounding of 
Sidney Street, so far as you know, have any connection whatever 
with the murder of Leon Beron?!—None whatever. 

You have been asked as to numbers 4 and 5 Jubilee Street. 
Those are houses occupied by Mrs. Deitch ?—Yes. 

Have you got access to the police records with regard to the 
houses in Jubilee Street and elsewhere !—Yes. 

Are they well conducted ?—Yes. 

So far as you know were those two houses respectably con- 
ducted whilst Mrs. Deitch was in them ?—Yes, the records have been 
searched since yesterday for the purpose. 

Have you seen David Beron since the murder of his brother 1— 
No. 

Is he in London as far as you know!—Yes. 

And could be brought here if required?—Yes. The last time 
I saw him personally was two days before the last hearing at Tower 
Bridge; he came to the police station to see me. 

There igs no difficulty about finding him if he is wanted !—No. 

You were asked whether you knew that Leon Beron’s father 
lived at Nightingale Lane, and you said you did?—Yes. 

That is a Jewish Home for incurables?—Yes. 

Has a statement been taken from him!—I do not know. 

Do you know what his state is?—I understand that he is in a 
very bad state mentally and physically. 

87 


Steinie Morrison. 
Frederick Wensley 

Mr. Justice Dartingc—You were asked if you had known the 
deceased Leon Beron, and you said you had known him for four or 
five years or more. What was he?—He was reputed to be a man of 
some means. He apparently did nothing by way of occupation. 
He was chiefly in this Jewish restaurant in the East End, and he 
was reputed to be a fairly wealthy man. 

Was he known to the police at all?—Only by sight. He had 
some house property in the East End of London. 


Wititram Broapen, examined by Mr. LercresteR—I am a 
detective sergeant in the H Division. On 8th January I went with 
Inspector Wensley and other officers to a restaurant in Fieldgate 
Street, Whitechapel, and I saw the accused sitting at a table there 
partaking of refreshments. I immediately seized him, in conjunc- 
tion with Detective Jeffries. Detective Wensley said ‘‘Stein, I want 
you.’? I immediately placed my hand round to his hip pocket, and 
he exclaimed, ‘‘ Don’t get putting anything into my pocket.’’ On 
getting to the station I found some money in his hip pocket. 
Jeffries and I took him to Leman Street police station, and on the 
way to the station he said, ‘‘ This is the biggest blunder you have 
ever made; I suppose it is not the first one you have made, but you 
have made one this time.’’ Up to that time no charge had been 
mentioned at all, nor had the name of Leon Beron been mentioned. 
I searched him at the police station and I found on him two Bank 
of England notes for £5 (exhibit 23), £4 in gold, 5s. in silver, 6d. 
in bronze, a lady’s gold watch, latch key, comb, and several memos. 
On the same day, 8th January, I went with Inspector Ward to 
116 York Road, and in a room upstairs I saw a woman whom I now 
know by the name of Florrie Dellow. In the rear of the premises 
I saw the man Max Frank. In the room where I saw Dellow, Ward 
and I took possession of a quantity of man’s wearing apparel from 
different parts of the room, soiue in a rush basket and some in a 
portmanteau. At about midnight I again saw the accused at 
Leman Street, and along with Detective Sergeant Dessent I divested 
him of the whole of his clothing except his pants and stockings. I 
identify in exhibits 10, 11, and 12 the collar, the tie, and the shirt 
which he had on. 12a and 12c are portions of the shirt. I found 
a small spot of blood on the centre of the collar and on the left side 
of the tie, and two small spots of blood on the left hand cuff of the 
shirt. When we were trking his clothes the accused said, ‘‘ What 
are you taking my clothes for,’’ and I replied, ‘‘ Mr. Ward will 
tell you that to-morrow morning.’’ I handed the collar, shirt, and 
tie to Detective Inspector Ward the following morning. During 
the whole of the time I was in the accused’s company upon 8th 
January no charge of murder was ever mentioned to him at all, nor 
was anything whatever said about the murder of Leon Beron. 

88 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


William Brogden 


Cross-examined by Mr. Axsrncer—Did not one of those five 
officers say, ‘‘ Steinie, I want you for murder ’’?—No. 

_ How was the procession formed up in the street? Who held 
him in the street?—Jeffries had hold of one arm, and I had hold 
of the other. I suppose that the other three officers were behind us. 

Was he reading the newspaper when you went in?—No, he 
was partaking of some refreshments, either tea or coffee, I should 
imagine. 

You found on him a knife?—Yes, an ordinary penknife (exhibit 
24). I think he had his coat off when I went into the restaurant. 

You cannot charge your memory as to whether he was reading 
a paper or not?—I do not believe he was reading a paper; he may 
have been ; there was a paper on the table, I believe. I went along 
with Inspector Ward to 116 York Road to see Dellow’s room, and 
I should think we were there about an hour and a half. We made 
a thorough search of her room, and I believe that we took away all 
the accused’s clothing that we found there. Miss Dellow gave us to 
understand that we had got the whole of his clothing. 

Did you turn the mattress of the bed over?!—We turned every- 
thing over, I may say. We went into Frank’s room, but we did 
not search there. I should think it would be about twelve noon when 
we got to 116 York Road. There was a quantity of clothing in the 
gladstone bag and the rush basket which are in Court. 

Was there any dirty linen in the room!—That I could not say. I 
know we did not take possession of any dirty linen. At that par- 
ticular time the whole of the wearing apparel was taken possession 
of and made a parcel of, and, in company with Inspector Ward, I 
subsequently went to Brixton police station, and it was left there for 
other officers to scrutinise and examine. 

Did you see the woman named Eva Flitterman?—Yes, I saw her 
in her house, Thrawl Street, Brick Lane, on 10th January, along 
with Detective Sergeant Edwards, W Division. 

Did you hear that woman swear at the Police Court that you 
asked her whether she had seen the £5 gold piece upon Morrison !— 
No, she did not swear that. She suggested that some other officer 
had shown her a £5 piece, but she did not suggest that I showed 
her one. She pointed me out in the-Court as the officer who came 
to her at Thrawl Street, but not as the officer who showed her the 
£5 piece. She never told me, or any one in my presence, that she 
had seen Morrison wearing a £5 piece. 

You know she swore at the Police Court that she had seen 
Morrison wearing a £5 piece?—Yes. After she had given her evi- 
dence at the Police Court she went to the police at Leman Street 
and said it was not true. She did not see me, as I am attached to 
the Commercial Street police station. 

Were you at the police station when a £5 piece was brought by 


the police constable for her to inspect /—I was not. 
89 


Steinie Morrison. 


Henry Dessent 


Henry Dussunt, examined by Mr. Luycuster—I am a detective 
sergeant of the H Division. I was one of the officers who took part 
in the arrest of the accused. I went inside the restaurant, and then 
I accompanied him to the police station. During the whole time I 
was present, I heard no mention made of the charge of murder or 
of Leon Beron. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Anrncer—The accused was not reading 
when I went into the restaurant. There may have been a paper on 
the table in front of him, but I cannot say. He had his coat off. 


Cuarues Starr, examined by Mr. Luycestmr—I am a police con- 
stable in the H Division. On the morning of 8th January I was on 
duty at Leman Street police station. After the accused was brought 
there, from about 10.30 to twelve noon, he was left in charge of me 
and another officer named Harris. During the whole of that time 
nothing whatever was said to the accused by anybody about any 
charge of murder. About twelve o’clock he said to Harris, ‘‘ I want 
to make a confession. Will you take it down?’’ I then fetched 
Inspector Mackenzie. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Anrncer—I put it to you he said, “I 
want to make a statement ’’?—No, he said, ‘‘ I want to make a 
confession ; will you take it down? ”’ 


Joun Harris, examined by Mr. Luycasrsr—I am a police con- 
stable of the H Division. On the morning of 8th January, Police 
Constable Staff and I were in charge of the accused at Leman Street 
police station from 10.30 until noon. During the whole of that 
time nothing to my knowledge was said about any charge of murder. 
About noon, in consequence of what the accused said, Inspector 
Mackenzie was sent for. 


Roprrick Mackenziz, examined by Mr. Lrycustpr—I am a police 
inspector of the H Division. I was on duty at Leman Street police 
station, in charge of the station, on the morning of 8th January, 
and I was there when the accused was brought in by Detective 
Inspector Wensley and other officers. The accused was left in charge 
of Constables Harris and Staff until about mid-day, when, in conse- 
quence of a message, I went and saw him in his cell. He said, ‘‘ I 
want to speak to Mr. Wensley. I have a confession to make. This 
is a serious matter, and I want to clear myself.’? I said, ‘‘ Very 
well, I will send for Mr. Wensley at once,’’ which I did. 

During the time that the accused was detained at Leman Street, 
was he detained upon the charge of murder or not!—Not upon the 
charge of murder. 

Cross-examined by Mr. AningeR—I suggest to you that the 
accused said, “‘ I want to make a statement to clear myself ’’ /—No, 
he used the word ‘‘ confession.” 

90 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Richard Nursey 


Ricnarp Nurser, examined by Mr. Luyczsrsr—I am a detective 
sergeant of the W Division. On the evening of 8th January I went 
to the cloakroom at St. Mary’s station, Whitechapel, and took with 
me the cloakroom ticket, exhibit 20. They handed to me the parcel, 
exhibit 21, which contains a revolver, loaded in six chambers, and a 
tin box containing forty-four cartridges which fitted it, wrapped round 
with a towel. I got the ticket from the lining of a black hard felt 
hat which was handed to me at Brixton police station by Detective 
Inspector Ward. 


AtFreD Warp, examined by Mr. Murr—I am divisional detective 
inspector of the W Division. At 9 a.m. on Ist January I went to 
Clapham Common and saw the dead body of a man lying in some 
bushes. The body was taken to the mortuary and photographed 
there in a standing position for the purposes of identification. A 
rent book had been found in the pocket by Dr. Needham. I searched 
the pockets at the mortuary, and found a halfpenny, a tobacco pouch 
with tobacco in it, a pair of gloves, two keys, a handkerchief, some 
pieces of black paper, and two paper bags, one of which contained 
some pieces of ham sandwich (paper bags now put in and marked 
exhibit 48). The remains of the ham sandwich were in the right- 
hand overcoat pocket. I made inquiries and caused steps to be taken. 
Amongst the people that I saw were Solomon Beron and David Beron. 
I did not see the father ; a statement was taken from him by Detective 
Jones. I directed a watch to be kept on 91 Newark Street. The 
accused was arrested, having been seen coming from that house on 
the morning of 8th January. I received a communication from 
Inspector Wensley, and I went to Leman Street police station about 
11.30 that morning. I saw the accused, but we did not speak. I 
saw him again in the afternoon, along with Inspector Wensley, who 
introduced me. The accused said that he wanted to make a state- 
ment. He said, ‘‘ I understand I am detained here on a very serious 
charge of murder, I am told, and I desire to make a voluntary state- 
ment.’’ I said, ‘‘ Very well, perhaps you will tell us verbally what 
it is; we shall understand it, and then we can write it down cor- 
rectly.’’ He spoke verbally first, and subsequently made a state- 
ment which was typewritten, and which he afterwards read over and 
signed in my presence. I saw the statement being taken down by 
the typist, and I could see that what was being taken down was 
what the accused said. He was then put back in the cells and 
detained. 

I afterwards directed the whole of his clothing to be taken 
from him. I saw him again at Leman Street on 9th January, and 
gave him his own clothing. He asked me what we wanted to take 
his clothes from him for, and I said, ‘‘ There are blood stains on the 
cuff of your shirt and also on the sleeves, on your collar, and on your 


tie.’? He said, ‘‘ That igs not blood at all. ‘That is mud that I got 
91 


Steinie Morrison. 
Alfred Ward 


yesterday.’’? I told him that he would be put up for identification, 
which was done, and he was identified from among twelve other men 
by nine persons. He was allowed to stand where he chose. He 
was then taken to Brixton police station and charged with the wilful 
murder of Leon Beron. He said, ‘‘ All I can say is that it is a lie.” 
I took the shirt, the collar, the tie, and a number of other articles 
of his clothing to Dr. William Robert Smith, 37 Russell Square, and 
left them with him for examination. 

On 8th January Sergeant Brogden and I searched the woman 
Dellow’s room at 116 York Road, and among the articles I took away 
there was a black bowler hat—the one referred to by Sergeant Nursey 
to-day—in which the ticket was found. 

On Ist February, with Sergeant Cooper, I drove in a hansom 
cab, driven by the witness Stephens, from the corner of Sidney Street 
and Mile End to the corner of Lavender Gardens, Lavender Hill. We 
left about eleven o’clock at night, and the journey took thirty-eight 
minutes. On 3rd February Sergeant Cooper and I walked from the 
corner of Lavender Gardens to Clapham Common, and by the nearest 
footpath to the spot where I had seen the dead body on Ist January. 
Walking at a moderate pace, it took us ten minutes. On the same 
day I walked from where the dead body was to the cab rank at 
Clapham Cross, down the path from where the body was to the 
junction of Bishop’s Walk, and, walking at a moderate pace, it 
took us ten minutes. On Ist February I drove in Stephens’ cab from 
the Clapham Cross cab rank to opposite Kennington Church in the 
road, and the journey took eleven minutes. From the Hanover Arms 
I drove back to the corner of Claylands Road, and then turned round 
and went to the Elephant, the journey from the Hanover Arms to the 
Elephant taking sixteen and a half minutes. 

I found in a gladstone bag at 116 York Road the pawn ticket 
(exhibit 63) dated 23rd December,1910, for the pawning of a gold 
albert for £4 10s., in the name of Stanley Morris, 16 Sidney Street. 
I have been to 16 Sidney Street, but I have not been able to find 
any such person as Stanley Morris. I have seen the accused using 
his left hand to write. Besides the clothes I have mentioned, I got 
back from the accused a suit of clothes which I gave him on 9th 
January, and I submitted this to Dr. Wilcox. Besides being put up 
for identification on 9th January, the accused was put up for identifi- 
cation on the 17th, along with nine other men, at the South-Western 
Police Court. The two cabmen, Hayman and Stephens, were called 
in to see if they could identify him. Those were all the identifications 
that took place. 


The Court adjourned. 


Fourth Day—Thursday, 9th March, 1911. 


Aurrep Warp, recalled, cross-examined by Mr. Apincpr—You 
produced yesterday, I think for the first time, two paper bags which 
you found in the pocket of the deceased man!—Yes. 

Was there anything inside those paper bags when you found 
them ?—In one of them there were some pieces of bread and ham— 
small pieces. There was nothing in the other bag. 

Did you preserve the remnants of that ham sandwich ?—No. 

Have you been to the address on that bag—‘‘ Wrigh't & Son, 
Royal Standard Arrowroot Biscuits, 183 Commercial Road ’’?—No. 

And at the back it has just ‘‘ Sandwich Biscuits ’? —Yes. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—What sort of shop is 183 Commercial 
Road!—It is a refreshment shop—ordinary refreshmen'ts, ginger 
beer. I know that from what Sergeant Cooper told me. 

Cross-examination continued—You were early upon the scene 
of this murder, were you not?—Yes, I should think between nine and 
ten some time—perhaps before. 

We have been told by a constable that there were upon 'the soft 
mould impressions of feet—footprints /—Yes. 

Did you see them?—No. The mould had certainly been shifted 
as if some one had been walking about, but there were no distinct 
footmarks. It was not mould; the ground is very hard. 

I't was not a frosty night, was it?—No. 

Had it been raining !—No. 

Did you see the deceased man’s hat?—Yes. It was on the grass 
just by the back of the head, about 4 yards, I should 'think, from the 
head. 

Not broken?—Not broken. 

Was there any sign of a struggle in that brushwood—it is short 
brushwood, is it not?’—No, it was not short brushwood. It was high 
bushes. 

Was there any sign of a struggle in 'those high bushes ?—No. 

No broken wood !—No. 

Do you know if the body had been moved before you got there 1— 
I do not think it had, except as far as the doctor had moved it to. 
examine the body. ; 

Had a quantity of leaves been collected under the head in a sort 
of pillow ?—No. 

Is there a wa'tchman’s hut on Clapham Common ?—There was a 
watchman’s hut near the road that runs parallel with the long path. 
It is shown on the map, with a cross, near the Bishop’s Walk. 

What is the name of the watchman!—I do not know. 

93 


Steinie Morrison. 
Alfred Ward 


Have you inquired?—He was seen by Sergeant Hawkins, who 
is at present very ill in bed, and a verbal report was made to me. 

Did you ever reduce that verbal report into writing !—No. 

It is rather an important fact, is it not ?—Not at all. 

Within how many feet from where you saw that body was that 
watchman’s hut?—200 or 300 yards, I should think. : 

Did you ascertain if the watchman was on watch during the 
night and morning of the 3lst December and the Ist January!— 
The watchman was there. 

What is the name of that watchman?—I do not know. 

Who does know?—Sergeant Hawkins. 

Did you ever mention the fact that there was a watchman within 
160 yards of this spot before I put the question to you to-day !—No. 

Now let us come to the Common keeper’s hut. Have you ascer- 
tained whether ‘there was a Common keeper in the hut that night or 
in the following morning?—There was not. 

Have you seen the Common keeper?—I have seen several there. 

I accept it from you. Can you tell us whether it is the custom or 
not for the Common keeper to be in his hut at night-time ?—I't is not 
the custom. 

How many watchmen are there on duty in Clapham Common at 
night?—I do not think there are any. 

This man we are talking of who was interviewed by Sergeant 
Hawkins I ga'ther is on the boundary of the Common!—Yes. They 
were repairing the road; he had something to do with the road, and 
nothing to do with the Common. 

Is there not at the back of the clump of bushes a horse drive ?— 
By the side of the road that runs down at the back. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—The horse drive is separated from Clapham 
Common by a belt of trees?—Yes, there is part of the Common, then 
comes the road, and then the horse drive is on the other side. 

Cross-exanvination continwed—Can you kindly tell us whether 
there were any lamp posts on the plan marked from the fountain down 
to Bishop’s Road!—The plan has all the lamp posts marked upon it. 
I see I have put the hut too near the scene of the murder. I have 
put it north of the Bishop’s Walk when I should have put it south. 

Passing from that subject, did you when you gave evidence at 
the South-Western Police Court on 9th January say this, ‘‘ Shortly 
after he (Morrison) was taken there (Leman Street police station) 
he sent for Inspector Wensley and subsequently for me. He said, ‘ I 
understand that I am detained here on a very serious charge—murder, 
I am told—and I desire to make a voluntary statemen't ’ ’’ ’—Yes. 

‘““T said, “ Very well, perhaps if you tell me verbally what it is 
we shall understand, and then we can write it down correctly.’ He 
did so.’’ That is correct ?—Yes. , 

By Mr. Justicy Darninc—‘ He did so ”’ means that he told you 
verbally, is that so?—Yes, he 'told me verbally. Z 

94 


Evidence for Prosecution. 

Alfred Ward 
~ Is this the statement that was alluded to yesterday and not put 
in 

Mr. Murr—Yes. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Let it be produced, and let me see it. 

Mr. ABINGER—May the officer of the Court read it, my lord? 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Yes. 

The Dspury Crerx or tH@ Court—This is headed ‘‘ Leman Street 
Station, H Division, 8th day of January, 1911. Name, Steinie 
Morrison. Address, 116 York Road, Lambeth, S.E. Station. I 
have sent for Divisional Detective Ward and Wensley and desire to 
make a voluntary statement in consequence of my having been 
arrested this morning under the suspicion of murder—Mr. Wensley 
having told me this. I am an Australian, born in Sydney, brought 
up in England. I am a confectioner and baker, and now a traveller 
in common jewellery. During the month of September I obtained a 
situation as a journeyman baker at 213 Lavender Hill. I should think 
I was there about ten weeks altogether. I was sleeping there during 
tthe whole of that time. I left of my own accord, having saved up 
about £4. I then commenced to travel in cheap jewellery. I went 
to reside at No. 5 Grove Street, E., and remained there for two weeks. 
I bought the cheap jewellery from various persons; you will find the 
receipt for some of it in my bag. On leaving Grove Street I went to 
reside at No. 91 Newark Street. I remained there until last Sunday, 
the Ist, and then went to live with a girl named Florrie at 116 York 
Road, and have continued to live with her up till the present time. 
Last night I stayed with a friend named Mrs. Cinnamon, who lives 
in 'a building off Grove street—the number is 32, and is next to a 
grocer’s shop—as I was too late to return to my lodgings. This is my 
voluntary statement, and all I wish to say. Signature, Steinie 
Morrison.”’ 

Cross-examination continued—aA. record is kept of the identifica- 
tion of prisoners by witnesses ?—Yes. 

Is the 'time recorded?—I eannot tell you; I have nothing to do 
with the identifications. 

The name of the policeman has been mentioned to us who took 
Hayman’s statement—John Jones, I think ?—Yes. 

Is he here ?—Yes. 

How many persons do you say identified Morrison at Leman 
Street police station !—Nine. 

Tell me them, please/—Alfred Castlin, Thomas Green, Mrs. 
Deitch, Snelwar, Hermilin, Taw, Rosen, and Monschein and Minnets 
‘es 
yee was Monschein?—A person who identified the prisoner. 
He has never been called. 

Just tell the jury whether all these people were together when 
they were at the police station ’—I cannot tell you whether 'they were 

95 


Steinie Morrison. 
Alfred Ward 
all together ; probably they would be in a room before they identified 
the man. 

Then who was taken out first ?—Castlin, then Green, then Mrs. 
Deitch. They were brought from the room into the charge room, 
where the prisoner was standing with twelve other men. 

Where did they go after they identified the prisoner ?!—They 
were taken to a different corner of the room—placed in the telephone 
room, which is a corner of the charge room—but they did not go back 
to where the other witnesses were. 

Where did you get those twelve men from?!—Out of the street. 

Adjacent to the police station !—Yes. 

The physique of the population near Leman Street is a different 
sort of physique to that of the accused!—No, there were men equally 
as well built as he, and as well dressed. 

Do you tell the jury that you had this man paraded with twelve 
fellows as tall as he?—Yes; two men were taller than he. 

Do the police keep a record of the names of the persons who are 
paraded ’—No. 

Had the prisoner got on 'that green overcoat, or green motor 
coat, to use a neutral expression ?—Yes. 

How were the twelve men dressed!—I think they were nearly 
all in coats similar to that of the accused. 

Well-dressed men ?’—Yes. 

Englishmen !—Yes. 

Ten of them identified the prisoner?—Nine. I said ten when 
I gave evidence before, but I did not coun't them then. 

What time did you charge the prisoner at Brixton police station? 
—I should think between one and two in the afternoon. 

What time did he leave Leman Street to go to Brixton ?—About 
noon. 

Upon which day?—-On the 9th. 

So that the prisoner slept at Leman Street police station on the 
9th ; is that correct ?—On the night of the 8th. 

Now, will you kindly look at the police station notice issued by 
the police on 6th of January. (Exhibit 15 handed.) Was that 
published under your directions on the 6th ?—Yes. 

And was it exhibited all over London and the suburbs?—Yes, I 
should think so. 

Let me call your attention to the language of it. There was 
no description of the man?—No. 

I will read it to make it intelligible. ‘‘ The driver of ( ) 
cab who between twelve night, 3lst December, and 6 a.m., Ist 
January, 1911, took up at the neighbourhood of East End persons of 
the following description: Two men, and drove them to Clapham 
Common ; also if any driver picked up one or more men in neighbour- 
hood of South Side Clapham Common, or Clapham High Street, 
between 2 a.m. and 6 a.m., Ist inst., going in direction of London.’’ 

96 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Alfred Ward 


I call your attention to the fact that the ‘‘ neighbourhood of South 
Side Clapham Common ”’ is mentioned. Clapham High Street is 
mentioned, but Clapham Common, north side, is not mentioned. Will 
you kindly tell the jury why you were inquiring about men who had 
been driven to the south side of Clapham Common and not to the 
north side?—Because the south side is the main road, and would be 
the most likely place for a cab to be driven to; secondly, the cab rank 
is on the south side of Clapham Common, and there is no cab rank 
on the north of Clapham Common, or any main road—it is very 
quiet. 

Nightingale Lane is on the south side of Clapham Common ?—But 
a long way away—half a mile away. 

On the plan with which we have been provided it is marked on 
the extreme side of the Common abutting!—Nightingale Lane is a 
road running through ; it is not a main road. 

Was there a blood-stained handkerchief found on Clapham 
Common ?!—Yes. 

At what date was it brought to you?—On 2nd January. 

That is exhibit 32%—Yes. 

Who brought it to you?—A young lady (Miss Saunders) 
deposited it at Scotland Yard, and it was brought to me by an officer 
there. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—Is Miss Saunders here?—I do not 
know. I know she has been subpcenaed by the defence. 

Cross-eramination continued—You can tell us perhaps whether 
it was found near the Windmill public-house?—Yes, about 600 yards 
from the scene of the murder. 

You knew that handkerchief had been found at the time you 
caused some police notices to be published ?’—Yes. 

Just look at the laundry mark. I put it to you that that is a 
foreign laundry mark. What do you say?!—I am no judge of foreign 
laundry marks, and I am not going to express any opinion about it 
being a foreign laundry mark, but I should say it is not a foreign 
laundry mark, according to those I have seen. 

The mark is “‘ L.T. 109 ’’ 2—It looks like that. 

That handkerchief was found on the 2nd January at half-past 
eight o’clock in the morning !/—Yes. 

Do you tell the jury that the discovery of that handkerchief 
had nothing to do with the police notice referring to the south side of 
Clapham Common!—Absolutely nothing to do with it at all. It 
was found more than twenty-four hours after the body was found. 

Just walk with me along the road from the Windmill Place just 
about where the handkerchief was found in the direction of Clapham 
Cross. You walk along the road until you come to the Long Pond? 
—Yes. 

I am going to ask you to assume for the moment that the man 
who committed that murder dropped that handkerchief, and that he 

G 97 


Steinie Morrison. 
Alfred Ward 


wiped his hands with it. It is covered with blood, is it not?—I do not 
assume he dropped it there. 

If he wished to get to Clapham Cross he would pass the Long 
Pond, would he not!—Yes. 

If he had a murderous weapon, such as has been described in this 
case, that would be a convenient place to put it, would it not?—Yes. 

Has that Long Pond been dragged?—They are cleaning it out 
at the present time. It was dry at the time, and there was about a 
yard of mud at the bottom. 

Was it searched!—Yes, a search was made round there. 

Was anything found?—No. I ought to alter that answer about 
nothing being found. There have been several things found. 

I mean relating to this case?—Oh, I cannot tell you. 

If you walk along the continuation of that road past the Long 
Pond and strike into Clapham Common Long Road, and if you walk 
towards that cab rank, it is exactly the opposite direction, as if you 
were coming across from the Old Town!—Yes. 

The spot where Stephens says he saw Morrison come !—Yes. 

Now, I ask you this question; did the police take any steps to 
try and discover to whom that handkerchief belonged ?—Yes. 

Have you seen advertisements inserted in most of the London 
papers and some provincial papers by the defence offering a reward 
to laundry men who would discover whose laundry mark that is?— 
That inquiry had been thoroughly made by the police before that 
offer appeared. 

By advertisement ?—No, not actually by advertisement, but by 
detective officers going to every laundry in London. 

And you have not been able to find from any laundry that mark? 
—No. 

On 8th January, the day you arrested Morrison, did you search 
Florrie Dellow’s room ?!—Yes. 

You went there with a friend of yours—a subordinate officer !— 
Yes. 

I think it was Inspector Wensley who told us that you spent an 
hour and a half there?—Not in searching the room. 

Did you go through the man’s linen found in that woman’s 
room?—No. Sergeant Nursey went all over the linen, but I do not 
think he took any notice whether it was clean or dirty at the time. 

Has not a list been made of it?--Yes, exhibit 49. 

‘Green jacket and vest and trousers, boots, spats, leggings, 
muffler, gloves, one grey scarf, two white silk handkerchiefs, one 
grey and one blue border, six white pocket handkerchiefs, ten linen 
collars, one grey Alpine hat, black bowler hat, three pairs of white 
cotton pants, two white cotton vests,’’ &c. That is the list ?—Yes. 

Can you charge your memory as to whether some of that linen 
was clean and some dirty ?—I have seen it since I saw it at the Police 
Court, and there is one shirt dirty. 

98 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


: Alfred Ward 
And how many collars ?—Five. 
Five dirty collars?—Yes, and I think all the socks were dirty. 
If there were ten collars there were five clean and five dirty !— 

Yes, five clean and five dirty. 

How many articles were submitted to the learned medical gentle- 
men for analysis!—I think the whole of them have been submitted. 

Will you tell us the date when they were submitted to those 
medical gentlemen ?!—Some were submitted to Dr. Smith on the 10th 
and others submitted to Dr. Willcox later. 

Whilst the case was being heard at the Police Court the prisoner 
_ was wearing this green overcoat, was he not?—No. 

He never wore the coat, exhibit 14?—Yes, the first time he 
appeared at the Court he did wear it. 

He was wearing that coat on the 17th?—Yes. 

And on the 9th?—No. 

That coat was taken from him!—Yes, it was taken away from 
him at the time, I think. It was given back to him on the 17th, in 
the morning, before he was put up for identification, and it was taken 
from him in the evening, and he has never had it since. 

Then he was wearing it on the 17th, it having been given back 
to him in the morning, the whole day ?—Yes. 

Was that greatcoat also sent to the medical gentlemen for 
examination !—Yes. 

And whilst it was being examined by them the Commissioner of 
Police provided him with another greatcoat’—The Prison Commis- 
sioners did. 

You told me what was found in Florrie Dellow’s room. Of course, 
you searched it thoroughly?—I took everything from there that she 
said belonged to him. 

I mean to say you searched it thoroughly to see if anything was 
secreted in the room!—Yes. 

Did you search her purse, or examine her purse?—I might have 
asked her to let us look in her purse, but I am not sure. 

Did you examine the room occupied by the man Frank down- 
stairs ’—Yes, I had a look round. I did not particularly search there. 

Has his shop ever been searched!—Yes, by Sergeant Hawkins, 
on the 9th. : 

Did Sergeant Hawkins take away with him a large number of the 
works of different watches!—Yes, and handed them back again to the 
man. 
How many did he take away !—I could not tell you. 

A large number—twenty or thirty !—Yes, probably. 

Did not Florrie Dellow hand you some dirty linen taken from 

a rush basket under the bed?—No, she did not. 

I accept from you that that drive was fairly conducted with 
Stephens, and it took thirty-seven minutes?—Yes, I timed the 
distance, and it was thirty-eight minutes. 


99 


Steinie Morrison. 
Alfred Ward 


The pipe has been referred to as having been found on Clapham 
Common ?—Yes, a briar pipe. 

Did you pick it up?—No, it was picked up by some man and 
handed to the constable (M‘Ewen) who was there at the time. 

Were you in Court when Snelwar, the proprietor of the Warsaw 
Restaurant, gave his evidence ?—Yes. 

Did you hear him swear that the deceased man, Beron, used to 
smoke a white pipe—a clay pipe?—Yes. 

Was any tobacco found upon the deceased man?!—Yes, a pouch 
full. 

Any clay pipe?—No. 

Could you tell how far that pipe was found away from the body? 
—I cannot tell you exactly, but it would be about 40 yards. I was 
shown the spot where it was found. It was found in the bushes near 
the bandstand—going towards the bandstand—just about there. It 
was 20 or 30 yards away. 

On the grass?—No; just off the path, on the mould. There is 
no grass under these bushes there. 

There is an asphalt path, and then railings?/—There are no 
railings on the right. There are on the Common side, but not on 
that side. It was found on the side where there are no railings. 

Did you see M‘Ewen pick it up!—No. While M‘Ewen was there 
a man passed along the path and picked the pipe up and handed it 
to the constable, as I understand it, and the constable handed it 
to me. 

There was another handkerchief picked up under the body of 
the dead man, was there not ?—Lying beside the body—partly under 
the body. 

Was there any blood on it?—I cannot say offhand whether there 
was. 
Did you go to the laundry where the prisoner used to send his 
washing !—Yes, the Japanese Sanitary Laundry, 51 Beresford Street, 
Commercial Road. I went there on 16th February. 

And did you take away the prisoner’s clean linen from there 
and pay for it?—Yes, 8d., I think. 

What did you take away!—There was one shirt, two or three 
collars, two handkerchiefs, one or two pairs of socks, a sheet, and a 
large bath towel. 

Do Japanese do the washing there/—No, it is a Russian Jew 
who keeps it; that is simply the name of the laundry; it is known as 
‘“The Japanese Sanitary Laundry.”’ 

Were you at the South-Western Police Court on 17th January? 
—Yes. 

Were you present when Hayman and Stephens were taken there 
for the purpose of identifying the prisoner’—I was present at the 
identification, but I had nothing whatever to do with it beyond that. 

Who had!—The police inspector on duty at the Police Court. 

100 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Alfred Ward 

Who is that?—I do not know who he was. 

Did you see Stephens and Hayman arrive or go away !—No. 

Have you made inquiries at the home of the aged Jews!—I have 
had inquiries made there. I have made inquiries myself over the 
telephone only. 

Did you say that Beron’s father is of unsound mind?—He is a 
very old man, but I do not know about his being of unsound mind; 
he is very, very feeble. 

Re-examined by Mr. Murr—I found among the prisoner’s belong- 
ings a number of bills. A number of them have been exhibited, 
- but there are five that have not (exhibit 314). 

Those that were produced at the Police Court were put in at the 
request of Mr. Abinger?—Yes. 

Your evidence at the South-Western Police Court on the 9th 
January was read, in which you said the prisoner said, ‘‘ I understand 
I am detained here on a very serious charge—murder, I am told— 
and I desire to make a voluntary statement.’’ You said, “‘ Very 
well.’? To what part of the prisoner’s observation did you assent 
when you said ‘‘ Very well ’’?—When he said, ‘‘I want to 
make a voluntary statement,’’ I said, ‘‘ Very well.’’? The witness 
Monschein, who identified the prisoner on 9th January, was a person 
from whom I had taken a statement. His statement was submitted 
to those conducting this prosecution, but he was not called as a 
witness. With regard to the exhibit No. 32—a blood-stained hand- 
kerchief which was found by Miss Saunders—I endeavoured to see 
whether that could be connected with either the prisoner or the 
deceased man or anybody else, but I failed to connect it with anybody 
at all. Some pieces of iron were brought to me as having been 
found in the mud in the Long Pond, and I caused inquiries to be made 
with regard to them, but, as far as I have learnt, they have nothing 
to do with the crime. I saw the works of the watches which were 
taken away from Max Frank’s shop, about thirty, I should think. 
There are no cases to anyof these works. I was in Court when Solomon 
Beron identified the briar pipe as his brother’s. I have had inquiries 
made with regard to that briar pipe. I do not know the name of 
the man who picked it up, because he gave an address, and, upon 
inquiry there, no such person was known. The pipe was identified 
by Solomon Beron at the inquest, and also here. I did not pursue 
the matter further. A pouch of tobacco was found upon deceased, 
but no pipe or cigarette papers. I saw the leaves that were under 
the head of the deceased man. A few leaves, apparently, had been 
dragged up as the body had been dragged in, and rested across the 
shoulders. There were two watchmen, one night and one day. I 
gave directions for a statement to be taken from the night watchman. 

Mr. Apingur—There is no point in this. I accept what the 
witness says. I forgot to ask Inspector Wensley a question on an 


important part of my case. 
101 


Steinie Morrison. 
Frederick Wensley 


Freperick Waunsuey, recalled, further cross-examined by Mr. 
ApincerR—You are the officer who took the statement of Eva F'litter- 
man, are you not /—Yes. : 

Did she make a statement to you, and was it reduced into writ- 
ing, and did she sign it?—Yes, she did. 

At the Police Court you were unable to find the original state- 
ment ?—I think it was put in. 

You may be right, but my recollection is that it was not found. 

Mr. Muirr—The original was put in at the inquest; that is why 
it was not produced. We have it now. 

Mr. ABinapr—lI have called for it and put it in. I am going to 
read it. ‘‘ Leman Street Station, H Division, 21st day of January, 
1911. Name, Eva Flitterman ; address, 18 Thrawl Street, Spitalfields, 
E.; age eighteen; occupation, tailoress. Statement—I am single, 
and reside with my mother, a widow, at above address; my father 
died on the 4th ult. On Saturday, the 24th ult.—that is, December 
—I was introduced to Steinie Morrison by a man who I know as Issy, 
and who at that time resided with his wife, Nancy, at No. 2, a street 
(Harding Street) opposite the Penny Bank, Commercial Road, E. 
This was the first time I had seen Morrison. He was wearing a gold 
watch and chain. I saw the watch; it was like a lady’s watch; there 
was a £1 piece on the chain. I again met him at 6 p.m. Monday, 
the 26th ult., at the corner of Newark Street, and we went for a 
walk. I left him at 10 p.m. He told me he was a single man, and 
was living at 91 Newark Street; he said he was a jewellery traveller, 
and asked me to visit his lodgings; he said he would introduce me to 
his landlady. At 6 p.m., Wednesday, the 28th ult., I went with him 
into the front room on the ground floor, and he told me that this 
was his room; he had a large box in the room. We remained in the 
room about four hours, and during that time he showed some photo- 
graphs, one being of a young lady and one of himself and of two 
other young men; he told me that they were his brothers. He also 
took from the bottom of the box a small brown paper parcel tied up 
with string. This he untied, and I saw that it contained a flute; he 
played the flute to me. He had introduced me to the landlady on 
my entering the house, and either her or her two children were in 
and out of the room during my stay there; we were not left alone. 
We left the house at about 11 p.m., and he walked part of the way 
home with me. He said as we were walking along, ‘ Would you like 
to stop at my place with me all night?’ I considered him to be 
joking, and I replied, ‘ If you marry me, then I will stay with you 
always; I am a respectable girl.’ We separated at the corner of 
Thrawl Street and Brick Lane. At about 8 p.m., Friday, the 30th 
ult., I was in Osborn Street, Whitechapel. I looked in the door of 
No. 32, a Jewish restaurant, and I saw Morrison there. He noticed 
me and came outside, and asked me to go with him to a theatre. I 


refused, and we went for a walk. I left him at 10 p.m. I did not 
102 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Frederick Wensley 
see him at any time during the next day, Saturday, the 3ist ult. 
Between 7 and 8 p.m. on Sunday, the Ist inst., he called at my house; 
my brother, mother, also my married sister were there at the time. 
He remained with us in the kitchen for about three-quarters of an 
hour, and we talked about different things; we were all together the 
whole of that time. He told my mother that he would like to 
marry me, and he showed me some money, gold, which was in a 
paper bank bag, and what I thought was cheques. He was wearing 
a gold chain, similar to the one produced; it had a £5 piece on 
it; I asked him where he had got the £5 piece from, as it was the 
‘first time I had seen it on the chain, similar to the one described 
above. He replied, ‘ It is Paris gold; I have got it from Paris.’ 
He gave me £2, and changed a cheque for my brother for £4, and 
paid my brother in half-sovereigns. He left at about 8 p.m., and I 
walked to the corner of the street with him. Before saying good- 
night he told me he had left his umbrella at my house; I remembered 
him coming into the house carrying an umbrella, but I knew that he 
had no stick or parcel with him on that Sunday night. On Monday, 
the 2nd inst., he called twice during the day. The first time was in 
the afternoon; my sister’s little boy came upstairs and said, ‘ A 
gentleman wants you, mother.’ My sister Rachel was there, and 
she said, ‘ That’s for you, Eva.’ I then went downstairs, and there 
saw Morrison. He said to me, ‘ Will you go with me to a friend 
named Rotto, who lives at Tottenham Court Road, and then go on to 
a music hall?’ I said, ‘ My mother will not let me go,’ and he 
went away. He called again between 7 and 8 p.m. the same day, 
and stayed about an hour, but I am not sure as to the exact time 
that he left. On entering the house he took his overcoat off, and I 
then noticed that he was wearing a similar gold chain, but the £5 
piece which I had seen him wearing the previous evening (Sunday) 
was missing. I have been shown a £5 piece by the police, but not 
mounted, and it was similar to the coin I saw on Morrison’s chain on 
the Ist inst. I said to him, ‘ Where is the five-guinea piece.’ He 
replied, ‘ I have pawned it,’ but a few minutes afterwards he said, 
‘J have changed it for a gold watch.’ I asked him to let me see 
the watch. He said, ‘I shall get it from the watchmaker’s 
to-morrow.’ About 10 a.m., Tuesday, the 3rd inst., I was in the 
workshop at 75 Commercial Street when my mother came to me and 
said Morrison wanted his umbrella, and as I had taken it to the 
workshop with me, I gave it to her. On Sunday evening, the Ist, 
when Morrison came into our house, my mother, my married sister 
Becky Yess, and my brother Isaac and I were in the house. As 
Morrison (who had told me his name was Harry) was leaving the 
house that night, my brother-in-law, Morris Yess, came into the 
house. We never made any appointments, but I gave Morrison my 
address, and when he wanted to see me he came to our house. He 
gave me the address, 32 Osborn Street, the cook shop, and when I 
108 


Steinie Morrison. 
Frederick Wensley 


wanted him I went there for him. When Morrison left on Monday, 
the 2nd inst., he promised to come and see me on Sunday, the 8th, 
but he never came. I first learned that he had been locked up on 
Wednesday, the 12th inst., when I saw his photograph (placard) 
outside of a shop. The half-sovereign (mounted) shown me by 
Inspector Ward is similar to the one I first saw Morrison wearing on 
his watch chain. I have this day, 21st inst., been shown a brown 
parcel tied up with string, which is like the one that Morrison took 
out of his box at 91 Newark Street when I went there with him on 
Wednesday, the 28th of December last. The contents of the brown 
paper parcel was shown to me by Inspector Ward, and it is the same 
flute as Morrison took out of the parcel and played a few notes on. 
I have been in England fifteen months, and I have been employed, 
with the exception of when work has been slack, for the whole of the 
time. I have also lived with my parents the whole of the time. 
Eva (X) Flitterman, her mark. Taken by me this 21st day of 
January, 1911. A. Ward, D.D. Inspector. Witnessed by D.D. 
Inspector Wensley.’’ 


Were you at the South-Western Police Court on 16th January !— 
Yes. 

Did you hear the evidence given by Eva Flitterman in the 
witness-box?—I did. 

In substance did the girl swear in the box to the same effect 
as the statement which she had made to you?—No. 

I put it to you, with the exception of her statement as to the 
date she saw the £5 piece on Morrison’s watch chain, her evidence, 
to all intents and purposes, was practically the same?’—No, I think 
there was some variation. 

I am reading from her depositions taken on 24th January—‘“‘ I 
am single, aged eighteen. I am a tailoress. I live with my mother 
at 18 Thrawl Street, Spitalfields. My mother is a widow. My father 
died on 4th December last, a Sunday. I know the prisoner. I was 
introduced to him three weeks after my father died by a fellow named 
Issy. That day Iwas about two hours in the prisoner’s company. He 
was wearing a watch and chain; there was a £5 coin hanging on the 
chain. (Here an interpreter was sworn, and witness’s evidence taken 
through him.) Perhaps it was on a Monday when I first saw prisoner. 
He was wearing a chain then. It was the same pattern as the chain 
now produced (exhibit 5). I look at the pendant produced (exhibit 
6) on the prisoner’s chain. I saw that after I saw the £5 piece. 
(Question repeated by the interpreter.) I first saw that on the first 
Sunday prisoner came to our house; that was the Sunday next after 
the Monday. I saw him four or five times. He asked me to marry 
him. I have a brother named Isaac Flitterman and a brother-in-law, 
Morris Yess. I remember one day my brother had a cheque like the 
one produced (exhibit 7). It was in my house that I saw that. 

104 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Frederick Wensley 


Prisoner was there; it was a Sunday. My brother gave the cheque 
to prisoner. Prisoner gave my brother money for it—£4 in half- 
sovereigns. He took them from a brown paper bank bag from his 
pocket. I don’t know whether prisoner had any other money in the 
bag. He gave me money the same day; that money he took from the 
bag; it was £2. He saw my stuff for making costumes on the table. 
He asked me how much it would cost to make them? I said, ‘ £2.’ 
He took out £2 and gave it to me. I would not take it. He said, 
‘ All right,’ and I took it. On that occasion he was wearing a watch 
chain like exhibit 5; there was nothing hanging on to it then. The 
time I saw the £5 piece was when he was introduced to me. I spoke 
to him about that £5 piece on a Sunday when he came up to my house. 
It was after the Sunday when he changed the cheque. I asked what 
he had done with the £5 piece, and he said he had pawned it. After- 
wards he said he had changed it for a watch. I said I wanted to see 
it. He said he would show it to me to-morrow. He never showed 
me the watch. I saw him another Sunday after that. He did not 
show me the watch. He never told me where he got that £5 piece 
from. He did not say anything about it. I only looked at it in my 
hand. Iam sure J had it in my hand. It was in Commercial Road, 
near the Penny Bank. No one else was there, only he and I. I 
cannot fix the date. I don’t remember what day of the week it was. 
I look at the pendant (exhibit 6). That was not the one. It was 
bigger than this. I know it was a £5 piece; my father had one, and 
I know a £5 piece when I see it. On the day my brother got the 
cheque changed prisoner came at eight o’clock in the evening. He 
brought an umbrella, nothing else. He left it behind. He got it 
again on the Tuesday—I think the Tuesday following. I didn’t see 
him that Tuesday. I did not see him after the Monday following 
that Sunday. I look at the flute (exhibit 4). I saw that in prisoner’s 
house at 91 Newark Street on a Sunday. He took it out of a box. 
He showed me he could play. I have not seen this lady’s chain 
before. When I spoke to prisoner about the absence of the £5 piece 
I was in my-house. I don’t remember what day that was. Cross- 
examined—I am eighteen years of age. I work for Mr. Stitcher, 
Commercial Street. I can’t tell exactly the number. I have worked 
for him over a year. Mr. Stitcher is a tailor. I am now living 
with my mother at 18 Thrawl Street. That is where my father died. 
He died Sunday seven weeks—seven weeks ago last Sunday. It was 
a fellow named Issy who introduced me. He used to live opposite 
the Penny Bank. I don’t know where he moved to, but he doesn’t live 
there now. Issy was not a sweetheart of mine. He is married. I 
know that because he is living with a woman. I don’t know the 
woman. I have never slept with the prisoner. I swear that. I have 
known him three weeks. It was three weeks after my father died 
that I first met prisoner, that is, when Issy introduced me to him. 
That was when I first saw him wearing the £5 coin. My father had a 
105 


Steinie Morrison. 
Frederick Wensley - 


£5 coin. When my father died my mother sold that coin and the 
chain. I don’t know where she sold it, but I know she did sell it, 
because she had no money for the doctor. My mother never told me 
she sold it, but I knew by instinct. Mother’s name is Charyah 
Flitterman. I don’t know how much mother got for the coin and 
chain. Mother met prisoner in our house. The £5 piece was hanging 
on the chain. It was hung on the chain through a little ring passed 
through the coin. I do not know whether there was a hole in the 
coin. I had the coin in my hand, but I cannot say whether it had a 
hole in it. I look at the half-sovereign, the pendant (exhibit 6). I 
cannot say whether the £5 coin was hung on the chain like this 
pendant would be. I am not quite sure whether the coin had a ring 
passed through it or not. Prisoner was wearing the chain across his 
waistcoat quite openly, and, of course, every one could see it. It 
was last week that the police asked me to give evidence. I can’t 
tell on what day. I think it was Monday. I have forgotten the 
policeman’s name. He came to my house. It was the man I now 
point out who gives his name as Detective Sergeant Brogden. I was 
afraid. He said, ‘ Is your name Eva?’ First I said my name was not 
Eva, and then I said it was. I was afraid. He did not show me the 
chain (exhibit 5) when he first came to my house. He first showed 
it to me in the police station, Leman Street, the same day that he 
showed me the flute. I can’t remember what day it was. He showed 
me the flute and the chain on a Monday, I think. He came first at 
nine o’clock in the evening, and I went to the station the same night. 
I did not see the flute and chain that time. He came again and took 
me to the station, and then showed me the chain and flute. When 
he showed me the chain he asked me, ‘ Did you see a £5 piece? ’ 
He asked me that before I told him that I had seen a £5 piece. I did 
tell the policeman my father had a £5 piece, because he asked me 
how I knew a £5 piece. My father’s £5 piece was attached to a chain. 
I didn’t see whether it had a hole, but it hung on the chain. My 
father’s £5 piece was mounted like this coin (exhibit 6). I do not 
know Florrie Dellow. I have not seen prisoner with another girl, 
not when I was speaking to him. When he went away from me I 
don’t know where he went. I have never seen him with another girl. 
Prisoner gave me money once only—#£2. I have never slept with 
prisoner in Newark Street and received money from him for that. 
I swear I have never slept with the prisoner. I never went into bed 
with him. I never went to the restaurant with him. I have been to 
Newark Street with the prisoner. There was no bed in the room. 
He took me; he said, ‘ Come to the place where I live’? It was seven 
or eight o’clock in the evening. I went for nothing. I did not stay 
long—not more than an hour and a half. I went out with him to the 
corner of Brick Lane and Thrawl Street. During the hour and a half 
I was in his room I did nothing. He said he wanted to marry me. 
Tt was the second time I met him that he took me to Newark Street. 
106 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Frederick Wensley 


I leave off work at eight in the evening. It was between seven and 
eight I went to his room, work was slack at the time. Re-examined— 
I am a respectable girl, eighteen years of age. There is no truth in 
what has been put to me that I took money from the prisoner because 
I slept with him. During the time I was with prisoner at Newark 
Street he introduced me to the mistress of the house, and she stayed 
a while and then went away. She came with her husband and two 
children, and they stayed a while and then went away also. I came 
to this Court last week on Tuesday. It was after I came to the Court 
that they came for me, and I went to the station and saw the chain. 
I do not know the.woman who now comes forward. I never saw her 
before—that is Florrie Dellow. (On reading over)—I wish to say 
that I saw the pendant (exhibit 6) before I saw the £5 piece, not 
after. I saw the half-sovereign on the chain, and I saw the £5 piece 
ona chain. I saw the £5 piece on the chain first.’’ 

Then she was recalled by my friend Mr. Muir so that I might 
cross-examine her further on 28th January. ‘‘ Cross-examined—lt is 
true that I said last week I saw Morrison wearing a watch chain with 
a £5 piece attached. I now say he was wearing a chain, and there 
was a coin on the chain, it was not a £5 piece, it looked to me like a 
shilling. I look at the pendant (exhibit 6). That was not the coin, 
it was a little bigger than that. It looked to me like gold, not silver. 
When I said last week that he had a £5 piece on the chain I made a 
mistake, because I did not know what money was; I asked my mother 
what my father had on his chain. My mother said it was a £2 piece. 
When she told me that I went to the police station, Leman Street. I 
saw a fat man. He asked me to come at half-past nine. I then saw 
a man who is now in Court (Inspector Wensley). I told him I had 
made a mistake. He told me I should have to go somewhere else to 
tell them I’d made a mistake. Yesterday I went to the office of 
prisoner’s solicitors and made a communication to them. It is not 
true that Inspector Brogden spoke about a £5 piece to me first.”? On 
the 24th she stated that the officer had asked her whether she remem- 
bered the £5 piece before she mentioned it at all. That is a serious 
allegation against the officer. ‘‘ I remember the officer asking me 
was my name Eva, and I first denied it, and then said it was (I was 
afraid). He did not then ask me about the £5 piece. He only asked 
me to come to the station. If I said he did last week, it was because 
it was my first appearance in Court, and I was afraid and nervous. 
I did not understand that prisoner was being tried for murder. I 
did not know what he was tried for. I did not know Morrison was 
accused of murdering Mr. Beron. I was afraid, because I had never 
been in a police station or Court before. I do not know Fiorrie 
Dellow. I did not have a conversation with her for an hour last 
Tuesday week. The first time I saw her was in Court. I spoke to 
her in the Court last week. That was the first time. It was true, 

107 


Steinie Morrison. 
Frederick Wensley 


as I swore last week, that Issy introduced me in the street to 
Morrison.’’ There was no re-examination by my friend at all. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—No, but there was examination by the 
Court. 

Mr. Anrncur—‘‘ By the Court—I told the detective first about 
the £5 piece. I thought 1 would do the prisoner good in mentioning 
the £5 piece. The mark of Eva Flitterman.’’ (To witness)—Did 
counsel, representing the accused, then immediately apply to the 
learned magistrate for a summons, or warrant, against this girl for 
committing perjury ?—Yes. 

Did the magistrate state that an information should be made 
and laid before him for consideration !—He did. 

I call for a letter dated 30th January, 1911, from Messrs. Claude 
Lumley & Co. to the Director of Public Prosecutions. ‘‘ To the 
Director of Public Prosecutions, Whitehall, Rex v. Morrison. 

‘* Sir, we beg to refer you to the admissions made by the 
witness, Eva Flitterman, on the 29th inst., at the South-Western 
Police Court—(1) That her oath on the 24th inst. to the effect that 
she had seen the accused wearing a £5 gold piece was untrue. 
(2) That her statement that it was not the police officer who first 
mentioned the subject of the £5 piece was equally untrue. (3) That 
she did not know that the prisoner was being prosecuted for the 
murder of Beron. By perusing her evidence given on the 24th inst., 
as compared with her evidence on the 28th inst., you will readily 
appreciate that Flitterman’s recantation was made after it became 
obvious by her answers in cross-examination that her evidence was 
untrue. The witness made other false statements on the 24th inst., 
which we do not enumerate here. In these circumstances counsel for 
the accused suggested on the 28th inst. to the learned magistrate 
that he should forthwith issue a warrant against Flitterman for per- 
jury, but the learned magistrate, however, suggested that a sworn 
information should be laid before him. We shall, therefore, be glad 
to hear from you at your convenience during the course of the next 
two or three days whether you propose to move in the matter, as 
in the event of your deciding not to apply for process we shall do 
so on behalf of the accused without any delay whatever.—Yours 
obediently, Claude Lumley & Co.”’ 

Then there is a letter in reply from the Director of Public 
Prosecutions on the lst February— 

“‘Gentlemen—Rew v. Morrison—I have carefully considered your 
letter of the 30th January, in which you apply to me to institute 
proceedings for perjury against the witness, Eva Flitterman. Dealing 
with the suggested assignments of perjury, in the order given in your 
letter—(1) The evidence to prove the falsity of Flitterman’s state- 
ment that she had seen the accused wearing a £5 gold piece, would 
consist of her own statement to the contrary effect. As to this, I 
have considered the authorities cited in ‘‘ Archbold ’’ (24th edition, 
page 1174), and am of opinion that a Court would not hold that such 

108 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Frederick Wensley 


statement would be sufficient to prove perjury, in the absence of any 
confirmatory evidence. (2) The evidence to prove the falsity of this 
statement would consist of the testimony of the police officer, coupled 
with Flitterman’s own statement to the contrary. As to this, I think 
it would be difficult to prove motive, and that the alleged false 
statement was made wilfully, in view of the fact that the interpreting 
of her evidence on the day when she made the false statement was 
admittedly unsatisfactory, and that she has stated that she was 
excited and confused at the time she made it. I do not think that 
a charge of perjury based on this suggested assignment could be pre- 
ferred with any reasonable prospect of success. (3) In my judgment 
no satisfactory evidence is available sufficient to establish the fact 
that Flitterman must have known that the prisoner was being prose- 
cuted for the murder of Beron, in view of her youth, and of the other 
circumstances to which I have called attention in my observations on 
(2). Having regard to the whole of the circumstances, therefore, I 
do not propose to institute the suggested prosecution. I would add, 
however, that should you desire to do so on behalf of your client, the 
evidence of any witness called on behalf of the Crown is at your 
service, and no difficulties would be placed in your way by me. I am, 
gentlemen, your obedient servant, Charles W. Mathews.”’ 

In reply to that there is a letter on the 3rd February, 1911, 
from Messrs. Claude Lumley & Co. to Sir Charles Mathews— 

“ Sir—Rea v. Morrison—We are in receipt of your letter of the 
1st inst. We note, however, that you do not deal with Flitterman’s 
statement of the 24th ult. to the effect that having missed the £5 
piece which she had seen the prisoner wearing she asked him what had 
become of it, and that he replied that he had pawned it and purchased 
a watch and chain with the proceeds, a manifestly untrue statement. 
It appears to us that it would be quite easy to obtain the prisoner’s 
oath, and also that of another witness, to the effect that Morrison 
on that day was not wearing a £5 piece at all, and the above oaths, 
together with the admission made by Flitterman on the 28th ult., 
to the effect that she had never seen Morrison wearing a £5 piece at 
all, would, we respectfully suggest to you, constitute a prima facie 
case upon which a police magistrate would be likely to grant a 
summons. If you see no reason therefore to change the views 
expressed in your letter of the 1st inst., will you be so good as to 
notify us to that effect. We are, your obedient servants, Claude 
Lumley & Co.”’ 

Then there is a letter of the 6th February from the Director of 
Public Prosecutions— 

“* Dear sirs—fea v. Morrison—I beg to acknowledge the receipt 
of your letter of the 3rd inst., and to inform you that I must adhere 
to the determination which we announced to you in my letter of the 
Ist inst. JI am, dear sirs, faithfully yours, Charles W. Mathews.’’ 

109 


Steinie Morrison. 


Frederick Wensley 


Did you hear a witness named Rosen give his evidence at the 
Police Court ?—I did. 

Rosen was examined, was he not, on the 24th January /—Yes. 

He was a boy, was he not?—Yes, a young man about eighteen, 
I suppose. 

Older than Jack Taw or younger?—There was not very much 
difference in their age—older, I think, if anything. 

‘Sam Rosen on oath says—Frostick Buildings, Old Montague 
Street, cabinetmaker. I know the restaurant at Osborn Street. I 
was there on the 3lst December at half-past eleven at night. I saw 
Beron there. He was with the prisoner. They sat at a table eating. 
I left at half-past eleven. They were in the restaurant then. I saw 
them again about half-past twelve—it was half-past one—in the street 
in Whitechapel, at the corner of Brick Lane. I saw them go by one 
way. I went the other way and went home. They were going in the 
direction of Sidney Street. I went to the police station at Leman 
Street to point out the man I had seen with the deceased man. 1 
don’t know what date it was. They asked what man it was, and I 
picked out prisoner.’’ He was one of the witnesses who went to 
Leman Street on the 9th January?’—That is so. 

‘¢ They asked what man it was and I picked out prisoner. I 
have known him since I came from America—about two months. I 
knew he had a revolver in his pocket at the restaurant. Cross- 
examined—I am a Russian. I have been to America. I was in 
America two years. I left America about two months ago, and have 
been in London about two months. I work for any one in a shop. I 
worked in London for a week in the street where I lived. I don’t 
know the man’s name I worked for. I earned a sovereign. I saved 
money in America and lived on that. I do not belong to an anarchist 
club ; I don’t belong to a club. I know prisoner by sight about five 
or six weeks. When I saw him he had a motor coat on, brown, a 
hard hat, bowler, and nicely polished shoes. I didn’t notice his 
trousers. It was half-past one when I saw him in Brick Lane. It 
was about five minutes’ walk from Osborn Street to there. They left 
the restaurant at half-past eleven. They left at the same time as I 
did. I went in the street. I met a countryman of mine and spoke 
to him some time. We walked about, and then I went home about 
half-past one. We walked about the whole time. I hadn’t a watch. 
When I got home I saw the clock. I saw about ten men at Leman 
Street station. I don’t know what officer was with me. I hadn’t 
been shown any picture of prisoner before that. I had seen portraits 
of prisoner in the paper. I saw people reading the paper and I looked. 
Re-examined—I don’t know when I first saw a portrait of prisoner. 
(By the magistrate at the request of prisoner’s counsel)—I didn’t 
recognise my countryman. He recognised me; I don’t know his 
name.’’? Was this a man or boy—you say he was a young man— 

110 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Frederick Wensley 
peated on the 8th February at the request of the prisoner’s advisers? 
—Yes. 

He gave evidence originally on 24th January !—Yes. 

““Sam Rosen, recalled. Cross-examined—On the 31st December 
last I slept at 28 Troshe Place. I don’t know in whose house. It 
was in Louis Mitchinsky’s house. I slept in half a room, and 
Mitchinsky and his wife and child in the other half. Mr. and Mrs. 
Mitchinsky could get in their half of the room without passing through 
the part where I was. There was only one door to that room. On 
31st December I do not remember what time I came home and went 
to bed. It was not at half-past eleven. I saw the prisoner that night, 
but I don’t remember the time. I can swear I saw him, but I can’t 
Swear as to the time. After I gave evidence at the Police Court 
I had a conversation with Mitchinsky. I was home at his place. I 
don’t know who it is you are talking about. (A man comes forward 
and gives his name as Mitchinsky.) I used to live with the man who 
now comes forward. I met him in Signet Street, Bethnal Green, 
after I gave evidence at the Police Court. 1 left his house about eight 
or nine days ago, a week and a half, Mitchinsky said that I told 
lies at the Police Court. I said I was not obliged to say, but I had 
given my name in as a witness, and all that I told at the police station 
was misinterpreted to the people there. I did not tell Mitchinsky that 
I could not understand the interpreter at the Police Court. I said I 
wanted to tell the truth, and wanted to see the solicitor for Morrison. 
I told Mitchinsky I wanted him to arrange for me to see Lumley 
& Co. the solicitors for the accused, or that I would tell them the 
truth and wanted to see the solicitor for Morrison. I told 
Mitchinsky I wanted him to arrange for me to see Lumley & Co., 
the solicitors for the accused, or that I would tell them the truth. 
I wanted to tell them the truth, which was not told to the police at 
the police station. I can give the truth. People have told me that 
what I have sworn I must keep to, and I must not put anything 
else in because I might get prison. The landlord’s brother told 
me that. By the landlord I mean Beron, which was killed. 
Beron’s brother told me that if I changed my evidence I should go 
to prison. A lot of people told me that. TI have also been to the 
Journal and wanted to tell the truth. No policeman has spoken 
jto me since I gave evidence at the Court. The truth is I saw this 
man Morrison at night in a street. I have also seen him in a 
restaurant. The actual time, the night time. I did not know. 
When he was sitting at a table drinking tea. I did not gee any- 
thing by him. Person who wrote down statement I made, put down 
that I saw Morrison with a revolver. I deny that. It was Detective 
Inspector Ward (who now stands up) who took down my statement. 
I did not tell Inspector Ward that I saw Morrison with a revolver, 
some one else said that, a man Jacobs, the lad who now stands up 
in Court. I did not say anything, it was Jacobs who spoke. I did 

lll 


Steinie Morrison. 
Frederick Wensley 

see Morrison and Beron together on the night between 31st December 
and Ist January, but I do not know the time. Whether the other 
person wrote it down I do not know. That night, 31st December, 
I left the restaurant at about half-past eleven. I did not go 
straight home to bed. I went about the streets. I don’t know for 
how long, but I met a person and then I went back. I saw Morrison 
and the landlord, they were going towards Sidney Street and I was 
going towards Commercial Road. I can’t tell you the right time 
when I went to bed that night. I don’t know the actual time.” 

Re-examined by my friend Mr. Murr—‘‘I wanted to tell 
Morrison’s solicitors the truth. I saw this person, but I don’t know 
the time. I saw him at night time inside the restaurant, and 
outside the resaurant. When I was in the restaurant the boy Jacobs 
came and asked me if I wanted to look at some pictures. Then 
I went and looked at some picture. I told him, ‘I am going to 
ask my governor first whether I am able to go as a witness.’ 
Jacobs told me ‘ They will show you some pictures, if you want to 
write your name in as a witness, you can; if not, it is nothing.’ 
When I went there Jacobs said he would write my name down as 
a witness, I said I'l] go and ask her whether I can be a witness, 
and then he said, ‘ I will write you down as a witness.” I wanted 
to tell him that people and some witnesses are threatening me that 
in the event of my saying different they will shoot me. It was the 
landlord’s brother and Jacobs and Mr. Deitch that threatened me 
that if I tell truth I shall get prison. Strangers also have 
threatened me in the restaurant. I can’t give their names. They 
did not give the true interpretation in all matters. They put me 
as a witness. I can’t be a witness as I haven’t said the truth. I 
went with that man to see the pictures. I can’t give you no answer 
because I am frightened. I did not see a revolver in the possession 
of the accused. Before the coroner I did say I saw a revolver in 
Morrison’s hip pocket, and I placed my hand on my hip. I was so 
frightened I was compelled to say so. The reason I put my hand 
pn my hip was that I had never been a witness before, and they 
told me to say so. Jacobs, the boy that went with me, told me to 
say so. Before I came to Court to-day I did not tell Jacobs that if 
the prisoner was convicted I should be killed. I did not tell Jacobs 
that the man Mitchinsky was one of the men who had threatened 
me. I told Jacobs nothing.”’ 

Mr. Murr—In consequence of what was said this morning I 
want Sergeant Cooper to be recalled. 


CuarLes Coopmr recalled, further examined by Mr. Muir— 
The address upon the bags is 183 Commercial Road. I went there 
last evening and found it to be a pastry cook’s shop where they sell 
various cakes. They do not sell sandwiches there. 

112 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Maurice Myers 


Maurice Myers, examined by Mr. Murr—I am secretary for 
the home «f aged Jews, Nightingale Lane, Balham, between Clapham 
Common and Wandsworth Common. I know an inmate there named 
Max Beron. He has been there since October, 1908, and is an old 
man and very weak. I do not know what visitors he has had, but 
I have spoken to him on the subject. I believe Solomon Beron 
oe him, but Leon Beron did not visit him at all as far as I 

now. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Asincer—lIt is not part of my business 
to keep a record of the visitors. On account of his physical con- 
dition it would be very difficult for Max Beron to give evidence, 
but his mental condition is all right. 


ALFRED Perry, examined by Mr. Muir—I am a tramway car 
driver. I was on duty on the night of 31st December and the 
morning of Ist January last, and I drove a staff car from Clapham 
Cross to Tooting Broadway. I left the depot at 1.55 and Clapham 
Cross about 1.58. That would be the last car on the road to Tooting 
that night. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Anincrr—I was asked to give evidence 
this morning. The staff car takes the drivers and the conductors, 
and it leaves at 1.55 every Saturday night. There is no record 
kept of the staff car in the office. The car cannot leave the depot 
before 1.55. 


Joun JONES, examined by Mr. Murr—I am a detective constable 
of the W Division. I took down in writing the statement of the 
cabman Hayman. I also visited the Jewish Home and took the 
statement of Max Beron, an inmate there. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Axninaur—I took statements from a 
number of persons including one from the taxi driver, Castlin. 
This statement I took on Friday, 6th January, at about eleven or 
twelve in the morning at his address, Bramcote Road, Bermondsey, 
where I had been sent by Inspector Ward. I took the statement 
from his mouth and wrote it down and took it to Brixton police 
station, where I left it with the typist, a police officer. I never saw 
it again. 

Mr. Murr—lIt is not in existence. It probably was destroyed 
when the copy was made in type. The typed copy was submitted 
to Castlin, who read it over and signed it. That was treated as 
Castlin’s statement, and it has Castlin’s signature upon it. 

Mr. Asinaer—I am going to read it, although I have never 
seen ib. ‘* Alfred Castlin of 46 Bramcote Road, South 
Bermondsey, says, I am a taxicab driver, badge No. 6281, in the 
employ of the London General Motor Cab Co., Ltd., No. 1 Brixton 
Road. At about 3.30 a.m., Sunday morning, Ist inst., I was with 
my cab on the rank at Kennington Church. It was the front 

H 113 


Steinie Morrison. 
John Jones 

one, and in the direction of Camberwell New Road, when two 
foreigners came up from the direction of Brixton or Clapham 
Roads. Description as follows :—First, age, 30; height, 5 feet 8, 
fair, clean shaven, dress, dark overcoat and cap. Second, about 
the same height and dark, but I cannot identify him. The first 
man asked me how much I would charge to drive him to Finsbury 
Park, just by Finsbury Gate, in Seven Sisters Road. They stopped 
me and got out, and the first man gave me 7s. 6d. They dil not 
give me any address to drive to, but when they got out they walked 
towards the houses on the right hand side. They appeared to me 
to be Frenchmen, and were smartly dressed. (Signed) A. Castlin, 
9th January, 1911. Since making the above statement on the 6th 
inst., I have to-day, the 9th inst., at Leman Street police station 
identified the first man from among a number of others, as the man 
who actually hired me, and my reason for thinking they were 
foreigners was because the other man spoke in a foreign language.’’ 
So this was not signed on the 6th January?’—It is two separate 
statements. I went back to him on the 9th to get it signed, about 
8 p.m. 

A portrait of Morrison had appeared in the home edition of 
the Lvening News that evening. Do you know that ?—No, I do not. 

Why was he not asked to sign it before the 9th?—I do not know. 
Inspector Ward handed me that statement on the 9th and told me to 
go back and get it signed. ; 

Do you say when you went back on the 9th you found Castlin 
at home?—I did not go to his home. 

Where did you go!—By Kennington Church, down in the garage. 

Was that typewritten document in your possession !—Yes. 

Unsigned /—Yes. 

Where did you find him?’—In the Hanover Arms. 

In a public-house ?—Yes. 

Was he alone?—No, other cabmen were with him. I do not 
know their names. I asked him to come outside the public-house, 
and he came outside, and he signed it on the wall. 

Where was the ink got from?—lI took it down. 

What in?’—In an ink bottle. 

What did you take the ink bottle for!—For him to sign with. 

Then did you expect that you were going to take his statement 
where there was no ink available?—I knew he was going to be on the 
cab rank, because I had an appointment to see him. 

He came out of the public-house and signed the paper ?’—Yes. 

In the dark !—There was a light from the window shining on it. 

Do you think that is a proper way to collect evidence in a murder 
case !—I was not collecting evidence. 

Getting a signature to an important statement in a murder case 
on a wall outside a public-house at night !—That was done. 

114 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


John Jones 


Why was he not asked to attend at the police station to sign it? 
—Because he was working. 

Where did you take Hayman’s statement!—At his home, 16 
White Hart Square. 

What day?—Tuesday, 10th January, at about half-past seven to 
eight in the evening. 

Was that by appointment ?—No. 

And did you write down his statement as he gave it to youl—Yes 
(exhibit 55). 

What date did Hayman sign it!—He put his signature to that 
statement on 10th January, between half-past seven and eight o’clock 


at night. 
Had you seen the morning papers of 10th January?—I saw one, 
I expect. 


Will you accept it from me that with a few exceptions they all 
contained full-sized portraits of the prisoner?—I do not remember 
that. 

Very well, I will refresh your memory. There is a Daily Mirror 
of the 10th January. Does that recall it to your mind?—I do not 
remember if I saw the Daily Mirror. 

Did you see full-sized portraits of Morrison in the morning 
papers of 10th January?!—I do not remember. They were in so many 
papers the previous evening, and next day as well. 

At any rate, you saw them?—I have seen his photographs in the 
papers, yes. 

And before he signed that statement ?—Yes. 

The Deputy CLerk or THE Court read the following statement :— 
“ Brixton Station, 10th January, 1910. Statement of Edward 
Hayman, cab drivér, badge No. 13523, of 16 White Hart Square, 
Lower Kennington Lane. Who saith—I am a horse cab driver, and I 
drive at night. I am learning to drive a taxicab by day. About 
2 a.m. on the Ist inst. I was driving my cab along the Mile End Road, 
towards the city, when I saw a hansom cab pulling away from two 
men standing at the corner of Sidney Street. I said to the driver, 
‘ What, is it too far for you?’ He made no reply, but drove on 
towards the city. The two men (description—Ist, height 6 feet, 
age thirty-five, clean-shaven, long nose, medium complexion, heavy 
greyish stripe overcoat, collar and tie, black hard felt hat, Jewish 
appearance ; 2nd, height 5 feet 5 inches, age forty-five to fifty, dark 
moustache, held his head down, dark overcoat, hard felt hat) then 
walked towards Bow. I turned round and asked them if they wanted 
a cab. The tall one looked up and said ‘ We want to go to the 
Shakespeare Theatre, Lavender Hill. How much do you want?’ I 
gaid, ‘I will leave it to you, sir.’ The tall man said, ‘Say 5s.’ The 
shorter man did not speak. They then entered the cab, the shorter 
got in first, and I drove right away to Lavender Hill. Just about 
3 yards past Lavender Gardens the tall man pushed the trap up and 

115 


Steinie Morrison. 


John Jones 


said, ‘ This will do.’ They then got out, and the tall man gave me 
5s., and did not say anything. I left them standing at the corner of 
Lavender Gardens, and they did not come up the hill towards Clapham 
Junction, as I drove down the hill and put up on the rank. The tall 
man was good-looking, and I could identify him. I did not notice if 
they were carrying walking sticks or parcels.’’ 


Dr. Wrii1am Rosert Surra, examined by Mr. Muir—t! am Pro- 
fessor of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology at King’s College Medical 
School, and public analyst for the borough of Woolwich and the 
borough of Boston. On 10th January I received from Detective 
Inspector Ward some articles of clothing, including a collar (exhibit 
10), which was photographed in my presence (exhibit 10a). There 
were a number of spots on the collar when I received it, and those are 
indicated on the photograph. I analysed some of those spots, and I 
found they consisted of blood. I also received from Inspector Ward 
a tie (exhibit 11), and it was photographed in my presence (exhibit 
114), the photograph showing two spots on the front and one on 
the upper part, the wing. I removed those spots and subjected them 
to tests, and found they consisted of blood. I also received a striped 
cotton shirt (exhibit 12), and I cut up a portion of the sleeve and 
the whole of the cuff, and those were photographed in my presence 
(exhibit 128), showing some marks. I removed the portions where 
the marks were, and subjected them to analysis, and found that they 
consisted of blood. Further examination revealed that it was mam- 
malian blood, and still further examination revealed that it was 
human blood. 

Have you any doubts as to the results you obtained ?—No, the 
only qualification which one could make with reference to that point 
of human blood is that it might have been the blood of one of the 
higher apes. There is no doubt that they were stains either of 
human blood or of the blood of higher apes. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Anrnaer—Look at the collar. You may 
take it that I accept it from you that it was human blood. This 
collar has the words ‘‘ Gardiner & Co., Scotch House, Limited, 
London. Hand work. Superior quality. St. Andrews, 15} by 24” 
upon it?—Yes. 

It has no laundry mark upon it?—No, not as far as I remember. 
__ There are some spots at the back which look like—you shall 
tell me what they look like?—I should think probably those were 
spots of mud. 

I suggest to you one or more of those spots are ink ?—Well, I 
think one spot is, but I do not think the others are. 

a Those spots were on the collar when it was delivered to you!— 
es. : 
The general condition of that collar at the Police Court was 
clean, was it not _—Fairly clean. 
116 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Dr. W. R. Smith 


_ Now, I suggest to you that the spots of blood were about the 
Be the point of a pin or the head of a pin?—They were very 
small. 

““ Very small ’’ is not quite so definite as the size of the humble 
article I am suggesting—the point of a pin?—I am afraid I do not 
quite agree with you there. The photograph gives the best idea of 
what the size was. The size of these spots on the collar is really 
larger than what is shown on the photograph, because it is not a full- 
size photograph. 

You have cut them off, and we cannot see them now. The por- 
tions have been destroyed, have they not !—Naturally they have been 
‘destroyed in the examination. 

I do not complain. I suppose they had to be destroyed in the 
course of the examination ?—Yes. 

And all we have got to-day is a photograph of them’?—Well, 
the photograph speaks for itself. 

I suggest to you those spots are about the same size as a spot 
of blood would be which would come upon the collar if a man 
scratched his neck in pinning his collar?’ What do you say to that? 
—No, I do not think so; I cannot agree with that. There are a num- 
ber of spots on this collar, two of which were in the form of streaks. 
I do not think a man could do that by scratching the back of his 
neck. 

The sort of streak which the point of a pin would make?—Yes, 
there were two streaks. 

Such streaks as the point of a pin would make?—The point of 
@ pin would make them, but they were a } inch long. 

Well, I suppose the point of a pin would smear blood a +} inch. 
Now, let me have the shirt, please. (Handed.) I would ask the 
accused to put on that coat (exhibit 14). (The accused did so.) 
Now, I ask you to note the length of the cuff of that coat !—Yes. 

The cuff has entirely disappeared from the shirt. May I see the 
cuff that was taken off? (Handed.) There is a faint smear at the 
extreme end of the cuff, is there not?—That is so, where it joints 
the sleeve. 

There was a spot of blood that you have got? I suppose that 
was also destroyed?—No, that is an exhibit. (Produced. ) 

That is about the size of a biggish pinhead, is it not?—No, 
not if it is the one you are alluding to. 

A pin would do that, would it not?—No, I do not think go. 

If the accused were wearing that overcoat with the handkerchief 
round his neck, the ends being tucked in, and the coat being but- 
toned up, you will agree that it would be almost an impossibility for 
blood to have got on that cuff here at the base of it?—Well, as you 
put it, I do not think one could say that it would be an impossibility. 
You have alluded to a handkerchief being wrapped round his neck. 

I alluded to the whole of his condition. I should not talk about 

117 


Steinie Morrison. 
Dr. W. R. Smith 


the neck when I am handing you up a cuff. I am talking about his 
arm /—Yes. 

Do not let there be any mistake about it. I put it to you that 
it is almost an impossibility when a man has got that coat on for 
that little tiny smear, which I accept from you as blood, to have got 
there ?—Yes, it would be very difficult. : 

Do you see the inside of that coat sleeve; there is an elastic band 
there ; I do not know how you describe it ?—It is a wind protector. 

If that wind protector were in the position it now is it would be 
a physical impossibility, would it not!—If it were round there it 
would be an absolute impossibility. 

And if that wind protector were open I suggest to you it would 
be an impossibility, not an improbability, for blood to get on to the 
cuff without there being blood upon that wind protector?—That is 
very difficult to say. 

How? Do you suggest that the blood might have dodged the 
wind protector and got on to the cuff?—The cuff might have been 
down below the wind protector. 

I am not putting that hypothesis to you. You are here as an 
expert /—Yes. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—While you call the witness an expert, he 
is not an expert in wind protectors and cuffs; he is an expert in 
analysis, and not in overcoats. 

Mr. Asrinerr—lI feel that. 

Mr. Justice Dartivc—What I mean is this, your arguments may 
be very proper arguments, but they are arguments one can address 
to twelve gentlemen without putting them to a doctor. 

Mr. Asinezr—My lord, I feel the force of that. (To Witness)—- 
Dr. Smith, I will not ask you anything more. Of course, you are 
only here to speak to those spots being blood. I am grateful to your 
lordship. 


Dr. Wruu14am Henry Witicox, examined by Mr. Laycester—I 
am senior scientific analyst to the Home Office. On 18th January 
I saw for the first time the collar (exhibit 10). It was then in the 
possession of the last witness, and portions of it had been removed. 
There was still a minute stain upon it situated on the under surface 
of the upper fold, which is still visible. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Apingzpr—Between thirty and forty 
articles of clothing have been submitted to me for analysis. I did 
not detect any blood on any of them except on those regarding which 
evidence has been given, namely, on the collar, tie, and shirt. 

By Mr. Justicw Dartavc—tIn giving evidence before the magis- 
trate I said this—‘‘ I know Dr. Freyberger. I believe he has great 
experience in post-mortems. If there were six cuts on the right side 
of the face and three on the left, and three stabs on the body, and 
blows on the head, a considerable amount of blood would flow 31 can 

118 


Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr. W. H. Willcox 
quite believe that there would be a pool of blood on the ground where 
the deed was done, and a certain amount of bleeding would take place 
after death. Assuming that the deceased was dragged some distance 
along the path by the collar of his overcoat, I should not necessarily 
expect to find a great quantity of blood on the clothing of the person 
who did that. It would depend upon how it was done. It would be 
possible for a great deal of blood to get on his clothing, and it would 
be possible for a little to get on it. I should not expect much.’’ 
That is still my opinion. 

Cross-examination continued—I did not see the body, nor did I 
see the spot where he lay or the pool of blood. 

Let me remind you of what Dr. Needham has sworn here—‘‘ The 
deceased man’s cuff much stained with blood, little blood on the right 
hand, the knees of the trousers covered with blood, a considerable 
amount of blood near the railing, on the face of the coat, quantity 
of blood on the greatcoat, fair amount on the coat collar.’’ Would 
all that blood, blood-stained jemmy, dripping with blood, eight blows, 
one after the other, brought down on this man’s head—would not 
that cause you to modify a little your view that there is not one drop 
of blood to be found on that greatcoat?’—I should not modify the 
opinion I have given, because those blows would be rapidly rained, 
and the tissues would be crushed at the time. There would not be 
much bleeding at the time the blows were delivered. The blood 
would ooze out afterwards. 

The crowbar must have been dripping with blood?—There would 
be some blood on it. 

Mr. Murr—My lord, that is the case for the Crown. 


The Court adjourned. 


119 


Fourth Day—Thursday, 9th March, 1911. 
Opening Speech for the Defence. 


Mr. Apsrycer then opened his case to the jury. He began by 
contrasting the difference between the resources of the Crown and 
of the accused in their ability to procure evidence. On the one side 
were endless resources, under the guidance of Sir Charles Matthews, 
the most able Director of Public Prosecutions he had known. On 
the other side there was a poor man who had to be content with such 
evidence as his solicitors could obtain. On the previous day counsel 
for the prosecution had said something about wasting time. He (Mr. 
Abinger) felt it at the time, though he was sure Mr. Muir did not 
mean the remark unkindly ; but he could assure the jury that he did 
not put a single question which he did not consider necessary. He 
would not waste time now by any analysis of the evidence for the 
prosecution, but would at once set out the defence and the nature 
of the evidence he would call. The jury would want to know where 
the accused was on the night of the 31st December and on the morn- 
ing of Ist January, and the subsequent days until his arrest. Mr. 
Muir had said that on 1st January the accused had disappeared. But 
he was in Whitechapel every day from that date, and, although the 
papers were full of the hue and cry after the murder of Beron, the 
accused had stood his ground, stayed in Whitechapel, going to res- 
taurants, and, on the morning of his arrest, was having his breakfast 
in a restaurant within a stone’s throw of Snelwar’s restaurant. 

Gentlemen, I am going to call the prisoner, and he will have to 
go through an ordeal more terrible, I suggest to you, than the 
ordeal heretics had to undergo in the days of the Inquisition ; because 
he, a man of imperfect education, as you will soon discover, fighting 
for his life, will have opposed to him a brilliant counsel, than whom 
there is no more skilful cross-examiner at the bar. It will be a very 
unequal contest, as unequal as a fight between a professional prize- 
fighter and a curate. The prisoner will tell you that on 31st December 
he was about the city selling tawdry jewellery, a sample of which he 
will show you. He went to Snelwar’s restaurant to have his supper 
about eight o’clock. You will remember that Mintz, the waiter, 
told you that the accused was annoyed that morning because he was 
kept waiting for his breakfast. You will hear from the evidence I 
am going to bring before you that after he left the restaurant he 
went to the Shoreditch Empire of Varieties. He was seen there by 
some witnesses who will be produced. These witnesses were after- 


wards seen by the police. In fact, you may take it that every witness 
120 


: 


a7 


Edward Abinger, 


Leading Counsel for the accused. 


[ 

‘ 

; ea ‘ 
} 

= 


1 

oJ i . ins q 
* L 

yi ‘ 

' 

= “A 
5 4 na 

\ - ig 

ey = 

1 ca i» we 

‘ ul 

—_ i = : 


Opening Speech for the Defence. 


Mr. Abinger 

I shall call has been seen by the police. How they got to know that 
these witnesses were going to be called I do not know, but the police 
have interviewed them. Morrison will tell you how he left the theatre 
at the close of the performance, having deposited his flute, which has 
been described by the waiter Mintz. My lord thought I was accusing 
that man Mintz of a felony—attempting to commit suicide—far 
from it. 

Mr. Justice Darurvc—No; to commit suicide is a felony. I 
do not think you appreciated what I meant when I interrupted you. 
It is immaterial now, because you have done so many other things 
since which make it immaterial; but what I meant was this: to 
commit suicide is a felony. You accused that man of having 
attempted to commit suicide. That is of itself a crime; it is a 
misdemeanour to attempt to commit a felony. You pursued that 
cross-examination in such a way as to make it perfectly clear to my 
mind that you were imputing to that man something against his 
character. The fact that you did that (I mentioned the Criminal 
Evidence Act to you at the time) entitled Mr. Muir, the counsel for 
the prosecution, to cross-examine the defendant if he went into the 
witness-box, as to his character. That is what I meant, and I did 
not know whcther you appreciated it. That is why I did not say 
more at the moment than I did say; but you have since then attacked 
another witness’s character in such a way that there is no longer 
any harm in saying it. 

Mr. Asryaur—My lord, I was familiar with the Act of Parlia- 
ment, if I may say so; it is a very short time since it was passed. 
Gentlemen, my lord, even now, if I may most respectfully say so, 
does not appreciate the real object of those questions 

Mr. Justice Daruivc—I hope you will excuse me; it was not a 
question of what was your object. The question I had in my mind 
was what Mr. Muir would claim to do, because of your questions, 
no matter with what object you put them. It was perfectly obvious 
to me that he would claim upon that to cross-examine the defendant, 
if he went into the witness-box, to cross-examine him as to his 
character. 

Mr. Asinger—My lord, I am aware of that. That has been held 
as a rod oyer my head ever since this case started. Gentlemen, I 
venture again, most respectfully to my lord, whose consideration for 
counsel for the defence has been most marked, to say that that was 
not the point of my cross-examination at all—miles away from it. 
Here was a poor man who had had to go into a lunatic asylum; that 
was the point, gentlemen—that he was non compos mentis. Ask 
yourselves if any one of you—no one can tell what the future has in 
store for you or for me, or for anybody—suppose you are placed upon 
your trial upon a criminal charge, and a man gives deadly evidence 
against you, and the counsel representing you is to be deterred by 
any consequences from asking that witness if he has not been in a 

121 


Steinie Morrison. 
Mr. Abinger 


lunatic asylum, what would you think of such a counsel if he omitted 
to ask the question? And, in a murder case, when a man goes into 
the witness-box and gives a deadly piece of evidence like that man 
did, what would you think of a counsel who did not let the jury 
know the fact that that man within six months had been confined 
in a lunatic asylum? That was the point of the cross-examination— 
not that he had been guilty of a felony or of an attempt at a felony 
or a misdemeanour. Poor man. I said to his lordship, if your 
lordship asks me, for the sake of humanity—not for the sake of the 
man himself—not to pursue that cross-examination—I will desist. 
In this country it is no offence to attempt to commit suicide if the 
Almighty afflicts you with madness—no offence at all. If a sane 
person wickedly attempts to destroy his own life it is an offence, 
but this man was insane. Gentlemen, the rod has been held over 
me until it is insupportable. I was threatened then by my lord 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—I wish you would not use that word. 
‘* Threatened ’’ is not the word. You say, ‘‘ I was threatened then.’’ 

Mr. Asrnger—If your lordship wishes me to withdraw the word 
‘* threatened,’ I will withdraw it. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—lIt is not a question of my wishing you to 
withdraw it. I pointed that out to you absolutely to save you from 
what I thought might be the consequences of your own cross- 
examination—with no other motive. I might have sat absolutely 
quiet and let you go on. 

Mr. Apincer—Your lordship might have given me credit, after 
practising in these Courts for twenty-five years, for knowing a statute 
which every student of law must. know.. I knew what I was about, 
gentlemen, when I put those questions. I weighed the consequences. 
Can you picture to yourselves the anxiety that counsel has in a case 
of this sort? Is the jury to know that this man was a lunatic or not? 
At any rate, gentlemen, I will resume what I was saying to you; 
you will pardon me, I am sure, from aberrating from it. 

Continuing his statement, Mr. Abinger said he would prove 
that, after leaving the restaurant and going to the theatre, the 
accused went back for his flute and went home; that he saw Beron 
talking with a tall man at the corner of Sidney Street; and that 
Beron called out ‘‘ Bon soir ’’ as the accused passed. Morrison 
returned the salutation and proceeded home to 91 Newark Street, 
where he lodged with a man named Zimmerman and his wife. These 
people, whom the police had interviewed over and over again, would 
tell the jury the time the accused arrived home, and that he went 
to his room. Zimmerman bolted the street door, and he will tell 
you how he and his wife heard the accused in his room. He was 
there in the morning, and it was a physical impossibility for him to 
have left the house without their hearing him. Zimmerman and his 
wife will pledge their oaths that the accused was not out of the 
house on the night of 3lst December from the time he came home 

122 


Opening Speech for the Defence. 

: Mr. Abinger 
until the following morning. In the morning he left the house and 
went to see a girl named Dellow at 116 York Road, and arranged to 
live with her. The revolver, about which Mr. Muir had made so 
much, was deposited at the railway cloakroom by the accused, because 
he did not wish to take it with him lest the girl should be frightened. 

He would call the cashier of one of the banks, who would prove 
that Morrison had cashed £35, and the £5 notes and the money to 
which his learned friend had referred were part of that money which 
he had drawn from the bank. The suggestion had been made that 
the sum he gave to Eva Flitterman, and that with which he 
cashed a cheque for her brother, was Beron’s money. But when they 

found that the accused had drawn this £35 from the bank they 
would see that that allegation was without foundation. 

On 4th January he bought half a dozen collars in the shop of a 
man named Clarke, and the collar that he was wearing on the day 
he was arrested, which had blood stains upon it, was one of those 
collars. He would prove also that the accused changed his clothes 
on 7th January, and that he was wearing an entirely different suit 
on the day that he was arrested. Two warders from Brixton prison 
would also be called to prove that the prisoner’s nose bled naturally 
on several occasions. It would be evident to the jury that the 
accused when arrested with £14 in his pocket, who went about 
Whitechapel every day after the murder, when the newspapers were 
full of the crime, had sufficient means to enable him to leave the 
country if he had so wished. 

If the accused’s story, which he would tell in the witness-box, 
and the evidence given for the defence were proved, there would be 
an end of the case for the prosecution. He would not point out to 
them at that moment that some of the witnesses in the case had 
practically admitted committing perjury, and it would not be safe 
in a case of this kind to act upon evidence of that sort. 


Evidence for the Defence. 


Joun Hotmes GREAVES, examined by Mr. Asincer—I am a 
medallist of the Royal Institution of British Architects and a 
member of the firm of M. B. Burnand & Company, 17 Old Burling- 
ton Street, estate agents, surveyors and valuers. On Sunday, 27th 
February, I went into the house at 91 Newark Street and I prepared 
a plan of the ground floor from my own measurements taken on 
the spot. (Copies of the plan were handed in.) In the front there 
is a sitting room, which I was told was occupied by the accused. 
Immediately behind that room there is a room separated from the 
other by a wall 44 inches thick. Sound would pass very easily from 
the one room to the other. The distance from the door of the first 
room to the door of the back room is 4 feet, and the distance from 

123 


Steinie Morrison. 


John H. Greaves 

the front entrance door to the back room is 14 feet. Further down 
the passage there is a third room, described on my plan as a kitchen, 
and leading out from the kitchen there is a door into the wash-house, 
and then there is a yard in which there is a tap and gully. There 
is a party wall between No. 91 and 93, 4 feet 7 and 4 feet 4 in 
height. The front of No. 93 is used as a shop. There is a gas lamp 
immediately over the counter and the light shows into the street. 
I prepared a plan of the door of 91. There are two bolts upon that 
door, top and bottom. There is a night latch and also a stop lock. 
The bottom bolt cannot be used as the door is sprung slightly 
out of position. The top bolt is the only bolt which can be used 
and that only with great difficulty. It takes ten seconds at least 
to undo that bolt, and during that process it makes a very loud 
noise—it shrieks terrifically and also makes a grating noise. I 
heard the noise myself from the back room. The night latch was 
in perfect condition. The lock does not work except as to the latch. 
The latch has to be fastened back with a piece of wire to hold it in 
position. There is a keyhole. The bottom sash of the front room 
is hung on each side with cord and weights in the ordinary way. 
It works very badly ; as a matter of fact, it is very loose and shaky, 
and cannot be opened without a considerable amount of difficulty 
and making a considerable amount of noise. 

I went to Clapham Cross at 1.30 in the morning. I prepared 
a plan of Clapham Cross (exhibit 42). There is an illuminated 
clock with a large dial a little beyond the cab rank—marked on my 
plan. There is a lamp post, marked with a red cross on my plan, 
and there is also a lamp post adjoining the fountain. 

Assume a man walks from the direction of the Old Town along 
the railings round the fountain, towards the cab rank, and assume 
a person is standing at the cab rank at 2.30 or 3.15 a.m. on Ist 
January, what opportunity is afforded in your judgment to the 
person standing at the cab rank to see a person coming round from 
Old Street, Clapham !—From the observations I made when I paid 
my visit (I tried various methods) I came to the conclusion that for 
any one to positively identify an individual, even if it were some- 
body you knew, you had to place him in a certain position to get 
the light on him full in the face, and the only way to do that 
was to stand opposite him with your back to the clock tower your- 
self, and with the individual under observation with his face to the 
clock tower so that you got the full light on his face, otherwise it 
was very difficult indeed to distinguish his features. In my 
opinion it was impossible to distinguish the features of any one 
approaching the cab rank with his back to the clock tower. The 
light which they had in front of them was distant from them 44 
yards when they reached that first cab, and the lamp behind 
was 16 yards. The lamp on the other side of the road indicated 

124 


ED Lg ial ie 


Evidence for Defence. 


John H. Greaves 


on the plan is 22 yards from the first cab, and the clock tower is 
33 yards from the first cab. I mark on the plan where the driver 
of the first cab would be on the night I was there. Behind that 
spot there is a cab shelter. 

The Foreman—This witness marks the same place as Stephens 
was standing on the plan. They have both taken observations at 
the same place or as nearly as possible. 

Examination continwed—The second shelter, which is beyond 
that in the other direction from the clock tower, is closed up at 
night, and therefore I did not take any notice of it. The distance 
from Clapham Cross cab rank to the Hanover Arms is 13 miles, 
and the distance from the Hanover Arms to the corner of Sidney 
Street is 4 miles 400 yards, so that the distance from Clapham 
Cross to the corner of Sidney Street is some 40 yards short of 
6 miles. The distance from Hanover Arms to the point indicated 
on the map by the witness Castlin in Seven Sisters Road on the 
way to Tottenham is 7 miles 250 yards. The distance from the 
point in Seven Sisters Road to Newark Street is 5 miles 710 yards. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mutr—The height of the sill of the 
window of the front room of No. 91 from the ground outside is 
2 feet 7. A person standing by a cab at the rank at Clapham Cross 
where I have marked it, and facing the clock tower would have the 
light in his face from the fountain lamp 16 yards away, and there- 
fore a man walking down past the cab from the apex of the triangle 
would have the light behind him. If he turned and walked back he 
would have the light right in his face. 


Mrs. AnniE ZIMMERMAN, examined (through the Court inter- 
preter) by Mr. Asrncer—I am the wife of Maurice Zimmerman, 
ladies’ tailor, and I live with him and my three children in the 
two rooms upstairs at 91 Newark Street for which we pay 6s. 6d. 
a week. Downstairs we occupy the kitchen and the bedroom. The 
accused occupied the front room where there was a sofa made up 
as a bed on which there were four cushions and one sheet which 
was changed every week. There was a fireplace in the room. The 
accused came to live in our house on a Friday three weeks before 
Christmas, and with the exception of, I think, three days he was 
there during the whole of that time. From my bedroom I can hear 
when the bolt is moved as it is a very hard bolt. I am a light 
sleeper. The accused paid me 3s. a week, and he had a cup of 
milk every day for which he paid 7d. for the week. I would take 
him his milk about 9 or 9.30 in the morning. I used to make up 
his bed in the morning and I would take his dirty linen to the 
tate at Bedford Street every week. I know the man I used 
to take it to, but I do not know his name. My husband and I 
usually went to bed at twelve, sometimes at eleven, and sometimes 

125 


Steinie Morrison. 


Annie Zimmerman 

even at ten. When the accused went out he used to shut the door 
of his room; sometimes he would leave the key in the door and 
sometimes he would hand it over to me. There was a wardrobe 
in his room and it was sometimes locked. If we required anything 
we opened it, as the key of the wardrobe and the key of the room 
were kept together in the kitchen. The accused went to bed at 
different times—sometimes ten, sometimes nine, sometimes eleven, 
and at. the very latest at twelve. He had a latch key, but he never 
came in after my husband and I had gone to bed. 

By Mr. Justicy Dartinc—We never went to bed until the 
accused arrived, as we wanted to bolt the door in case he might 
forget it. 

Examination continued—In the day time the front door was 
kept shut, so that if the accused wanted to come into the house 
during the day he would require the latch key. Ihave seen the 
accused wearing a gold watch and a gold chain before 31st 
December. In the evening of New Year’s Eve I was at home. As 
I have little children and cannot go out with them I am at home 
every evening. I remember the accused giving me notice on a 
Sunday to go, but I cannot remember whether it was before or after 
New Year’s Eve. I remember seeing him on New Year’s Eve. 
He came home at twelve or possibly five minutes or ten minutes 
past twelve. Just opposite me they were closing the shops and 
sometimes they close at twelve and sometimes a quarter-past twelve. 

When the accused came in on New Year’s Eve where did he 
go He went nowhere ; he went to sleep. I had the key of his room 
that evening and he came into the kitchen where my husband and 
I were, and took it from me. I saw him go into his room to bed, 
and a few minutes after that my husband locked the street door. 
I did not hear the bolts move that night after my husband bolted 
the door. If the bolt had been moved I must have heard it. I 
sleep in the same bed with my little child, who is nine months old. 
IT never saw the deceased man Beron, and I did not know him. My 
husband and I got up at 9.30 or 10 the next morning. Sometimes 
the accused would wash himself in the kitchen, and sometimes he 
would wash himself at the pipe in the yard. There are public 
baths in Sidney Square, but I never saw him go there. I saw the 
accused on the morning of Ist January at ten o’clock when I took 
him his milk in the front room. His bed had the appearance of 
one that had been slept in, and I made the bed again. 

Was there any blood upon the sheet or sheets?—There was no 
blood. 

Or on the pillows or on the chairs !—No. 

Did you ever see in the accused’s room or in his possession 
a long iron bar ?—I have not seen any iron bar, and I always had 
access to his room because I had the key. 

126 


Evidence for Defence. 


Annie Zimmerman 

Have you ever seen in his room or in his possession a dagger 
or a knife 5 or 6 inches long?’—No. 

Had a fire been burnt in his room on New Year’s Eve’—No. 

Did the accused seem to be agitated 1—No. 

Was he cheerful?—As usual—he was not cheerful, and he was 
not miserable. While he was drinking his milk he gave me 3s. and 
7d. for milk. He gave me some linen that morning to send to the 
wash. He used to change his underclothes every week, and he 
would have two or three collars a week. There was no wash-stand 
or water in his room. I do not remember exactly what linen he 
gave me to wash on that New Year’s Day. 

Was there any blood on the dirty linen that Morrison gave 
you!—Morrison never gave me any underlinen with blood. I do 
not take it with blood. Sunday was the usual day when he used 
to put on his clean things. It was my custom to count the articles 
that he gave me to go to the wash. I took the linen—I used to 
wrap it up in one of hig shirts—to the laundry after dinner on the 
Sunday. Morrison went out that New Year’s Day about a quarter- 
past ten and he came back at two o’clock and told me that he was 
going to pack all his clothes together, as he was going to Paris; he 
might come back in three days, or in two days, or in a week’s time 
or in two months. 

Did you know at that time that the accused had made the 
acquaintance of Florrie Dellow?—No, I did not know anything. 
The next time I saw Morrison was when he called about nine o’clock 
in the morning of Sunday, 8th January. He called for the 
washing, and I left him waiting in the house while I went to the 
laundry. He was fond of my children and used to play with them. 
When I returned I told him that the linen was not ready and that 
he was to come back about four o’clock in the afternoon, and he 
said he would come. About 11.30 that same day the police came 
to my house. They went into Morrison’s room and searched it. 
I believe there were three or four policemen, but I do not remember. 
They were in the room till the evening. My husband was taken to 
the police station about twelve o’clock, and I was taken to Leman 
Street police station about 2 or 2.30. At the police station 
Inspector Wensley and Inspector Ward, whom I recognise here, 
spoke to me. They asked me all about Morrison. I was shown 
Morrison’s photograph in the police station. The police officers 
asked me whether Morrison slept at home or whether I had not seen 
any blood. 

Did the police suggest to you any place where you might have 
seen blood?—I don’t really know anything that I was asked at the 
police station because I was very agitated, it being the first time 
in my life that I had been to a police station. 

Did they ask you if Morrison had slept in?—Yes. 

And what did you say!—That he slept at home. The police 

127 


Steinie Morrison. 
Annie Zimmerman 
have been back to my house two or three times since then and they 
have asked me if I still told the same story, that Morrison had 
slept in his bed that night. On one occasion the police came to my 
house with an interpreter, but I cannot remember what questions 
were asked on that occasion. The police have tried the bolts of the 
door and have measured the passage in the room. I remember an 
occasion when they called and took away something with them. 

Have you seen the accused in possession of paper money before 
he left your house?—I have not seen, but my husband has seen, and 
he has shown it to me. 

Were you present when Morrison has shown it to your husband? 
—I was in the room, but I did not notice, because the children were 
erying. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Murr—Do you know whether Morrison 
went out after he came home that New Year’s Eve?—He did not go 
out. 

You are quite sure about that ?—Yes. 

Could Morrison let himself in and out with his key ?—Yes. 

Could Morrison go in and out with his key without your 
knowing it?—You can hear if anybody locks the door. Nobody 
tan come in without being heard. 

When did you know for the first time that he was going to 
leave your lodgings?’—Two o’clock in the Sunday afternoon. 

The first of the year /—Yes. 

He had given you no notice before then?—No; he had no need 
to give me any notice. 

Were you indoors when he returned on the Sunday in the 
afternoon !—I was indoors, but I was in the yard, and returning 
I saw him in the room. 

What was he doing when you were returning?—He done 
nothing, but he said he is going to pack up all his clothes. 

_ Did the prisoner keep any spirits in his room?!—Once he took 
in cherry brandy. 

Did the police take away a number of empty bottles of cherry 
brandy from his room?—I think three or four bottles. 

How long was prisoner with you altogether 7—Three weeks, and 
the next Friday would have been four weeks. 

Now, you made a statement to the police, did you not, on 
8th January at Leman Street police station?—I myself never told 
them anything but what they asked me. 

Was it written down in your sight, and did you sign it with 
your mark?—Yes. 

And witnessed by Inspector Ward /—Yes. 

Was it through an interpreter !—Yes. 

Did you say this to the police ‘‘ As soon as he took the room 
he paid me three weeks’ rent in advance ?!—Yes. 

128 


Evidence for Defence. 


Annie Zimmerman 


‘“‘I then gave him a key for the front door which he kept 
himself ’’ !—Of the street door. 

The front street door !—Yes. 

““ Morrison used to get up in the mornings about nine o’clock 
and return between eleven and twelve at night, always letting 
himself in with his key. My husband and I used to wait up at 
nights for him and lock the street door. On Saturday, 31st 
December, 1910, Morrison got up at 9 a.m. the same as on other 
days. I think he went out about ten o’clock, but I could not say 
as the clock was in Morrison’s room. He came home about 2 p.m. 
and remained a while in his room and went out again. I next saw 
him about twelve o’clock at night, when he entered with the key 
he had in his possession. He took the key of the room which I 
kept when Morrison was out and went to his room. This was the 
last I saw of Morrison that night. The next thing I saw of him 
was between nine and ten in the morning ’’ !—Yes. 

Now, did you say this at the Police Court; ‘‘ Morrison had his 
own key to go out and come in without me knowing it ’’ ?—Yes. 

Re-examined by Mr. Anincer—Could he come in and out in 
the day time with his key without your knowing it?!—Yes. 

Could he go out at night time without your knowing it?—No. 

Did Morrison pay his rent in advance!—Yes. 

Would you therefore expect any notice if he wished to leave ?— 
When he took the room he gave me 9s. and he told me he was taking 
it for three weeks. 


The Court adjourned. 


129 


Fifth Day—Friday, 10th March, 1911. 


Ex1 Grupert, examined by Mr. Apincpr—I am attached to 
V Division. On the instructions of Mr. J. Troutbeck, coroner for 
the south-western district, I took, developed, and printed five photo- 
graphs of the deceased man Beron. Any suggestion that I touched 
them up is untrue. Those photographs (exhibits 13 and 134) were 
used at the inquest. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Murr—Did you retouch an enlargement 
that you made of one of those photographs ?—No, I cannot retouch. 

Did you mark it with broad lines?—Yes, I marked one of 
them, indicating the marks on the face. 

Which were not in the photograph at all?—They were in the 
photograph I believe. There were lines in the photograph. 

And you made them broad lines?!—Yes, that was for my own 
information; it was my own picture. 

Re-examined by Mr. ApincpR—The one that I put the marks 
on was for my own keepsake—not exhibited at all. 


Maurice ZIMMERMAN, examined (through an interpreter) by 
Mr. Aprncer—I am a tailor working at 106 Mile End Road. My 
employer’s first name is David; I am not sure of his second name. 
I live with my wife at 91 Newark Street. I know the accused ; 
he lived with me for about four weeks. I go to work about eight 
o’clock in the morning. The accuse] was usually up earlier than 
I, and he used to wash in the yard. He would sometimes go to 
bed at nine, and sometimes at ten, and eleven, and the very latest 
at twelve. He had a latch key. The key of his bedroom and the 
key of his wardrobe were kept in the kitchen. I saw him before 
the New Year wearing a gold watch and chain. I have also seen 
him with paper money, but not with gold. He had paper money 
the first week he came to our house. I have seen him with jewellery 
similar to exhibit 41. He told me he was dealing with these cheap 
articles. 

I remember New Year’s Eve. I was at home about seven o’clock 
that evening, and I did not go out again that night. I went to bed 
about twelve or five past twelve. 

At what time did you see Morrison come in, if he came in at 
all ?—About twelve or five past twelve. It was my custom to lock 
the street door. I used to be the last to come home because I worked 
till eleven o’clock at night. On this particular evening, however 
(a Saturday evening), I came home at seven o’clock. 

If you came hume before Morrison would you go to bed or would 
you wait up till Morrison came home?—I used to wait. When he 

130 


Evidence for Defence. 


Mauriee Zimmerman 


came home on that Saturday night, 31st December, he went to bed, 
and after bolting the door I went to bed. I cannot say exactly what 
the time was, but it must have been about twelve. I cannot say how 
many minutes past twelve as my watch stopped. I slept with my 
wife and baby child in the next room to Morrison’s. The bolt used 
to close very hard, making a noise that I could hear. I did not 
hear any noise during the night in question. If the bolt had been 
drawn that night I would have heard it, as I am a light sleeper. 
I got up the next morning about nine-thirty or ten o’clock, and I 
saw Morrison when I got up. I did not see my wife take his milk 
up. I do not know when he went out that morning. I did not 
see him when he called in the afternoon. I saw him the following 
Sunday, 8th January, about ten o’clock in the morning. He had 
come for his washing, and my wife went and fetched it. While she 
was away for the washing I remained with Morrison. 

Was anything said by Morrison to you about Paris or France? 
—I cannot remember. 

Did you ask him why he had not gone to Paris?—Yes, and he 
said he should not go. When I came home at twelve noon that day 
I saw the police. I told the police that I had seen Morrison that 
very day at my house. The police took me to the police station, 
and I came home after three o’clock. The police officers asked me 
whether Morrison had slept at home on the night of the New Year, 
and I told them he had come home at twelve o’clock. I cannot 
remember whether the police asked me if I had heard the accused 
go out during the night. They took a statement from me that day 
and asked me to sign it, and I made a cross. I cannot say how 
many times subsequently the police came to my house. 

During the time that Morrison lived in your house did you 
ever see him with a knife 5 or 6 inches long ?—Never. 

Or a crow bar!—No. I did not know the deceased man Beron; 
he had never been in my house to my knowledge. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Murr—Morrison could not have got in 
on the night of 31st December without a latch key. Nobody could 
get in without the latch key. 

Do you say that you bolted the door every night ?—Yes. 

What is the necessity to bolt the door if nobody can get in 
without a latch key?—That a thief should not be able to get in. 
It is a dithcult bolt to bolt; it makes a great noise, it shrieks. 

Does it waken the children every time you bolt it !—No, it never 
wakes up the child, the child sleeps. 


Mrs. EstHpr Grosz, examined by Mr. Rouanp Oniver—I am 
the wife of Solomon Grose, who is a tailor’s presser, and I live 
with him at 93 Newark Street, where we have been for thirteen 
months. The front of our shop on the ground floor is used as a 
ladies’ trimmings shop. I know the accused, he lived next door 

131 


Steinie Morrison. 


Esther Grose : 
to us, at 91. I know Mrs. Zimmerman. I remember the evening 
of 31st December. I was standing at the street door that evening 
about twelve o’clock, and I saw the accused pass the door. He took 
a key and let himself in at the door. There is a light outside. 
About five or ten minutes after he went into No. 91 I heard the 
door bolt—I could hear the noise of the bolt. This would be at 
12 or 12.30. I did not shut up my shop until nearly one o’clock, 
because I had some customers. We open on Saturdays at about six 
o’clock in the evening. I did not hear any one go out of No. 91. 
When I went to bed it was nearly two o’clock. I got up next 
morning before nine, and I saw the accused in the yard washing 
himself under the tap. There was only a very low wall between us. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Muir—I have known the accused for 
about three weeks. I cannot say that I saw him go home every 
evening, because I was not always standing in the door to watch who 
was passing. I would see him go home perhaps three or four times 
altogether, but I do not remember when these times were. The 
second time would be in the second week when he was there, but I 
cannot say on what day of the week it was. It would be about 
eleven o’clock. I cannot say what hour it was the first time I saw 
him go home; I did not look at my watch. The second time I saw 
him go home it would be about eleven o’clock. 

So you saw him go home twice at eleven o’clock /—Yes. 

You are quite sure about that ?—Yes. 

Did you hear the door bolted on each occasion ?—Yes, but not 
always. 

Did you hear the bolt go?—The last time. 

Every time?—Only the last time. 

You never heard the bolt go except that once?—No. I was 
standing there listening to the door. 

That is the only time you heard the bolt go?—Yes. 

How many bolts did you hear go!—Two. 

How do you know it was two bolts ?—Because we can hear ; it is 
not so far. 

You heard first one?—Yes. After I heard something which I 
thought was bolting—it was locked. 

Did you hear the lock go!—I do not know what it was that was 
locked. I heard for sure it was bolted. I do not know it was 
two. 

Two bolts?—I do not know it was two, but the door got bolted. 

Re-examined by Mr. Asrincpr—It was twelve o’clock when I 
saw the accused go home on the night of the New Year. I cannot 
remember when I heard that Beron had been murdered. 


Estumr Bropsxy, examined by Mr. AprnczR—I cannot speak 
much English. If you can understand me I will speak, but I 
cannot understand much you say. I am twenty-three years old, 

132 


Evidence for Defence. 
Esther Brodsky 


and I live with my father and my sisters at 71 Cleveland Street. 
My father is a tailor, and I look after the home. I went with my 
sister Jane, who is younger than me, to the Shoreditch Empire on 
New Year’s Eve; it is about twenty-five minutes’ sharp walk from 
our house to there. I think it was the third performance that we 
went to, but I do not remember. We got there about nine o’clock, 
and we sat in the orchestra stalls, the price of which was ls. I do 
not remember any particular performance that I saw that evening. 
I recognise the accused in the dock as being a man that I saw that 
New Year’s Eve in the Shoreditch Empire. He was sitting about — 
three or four seats from us in the same row. 

When you see a good-looking man in the stalls of a theatre do 
you look at him?’—Well, it is not for that that I looked at him. 
I knew that man from sight, as I had seen him pass our door. 
Cleveland Street is near Sidney Street, and it is about ten minutes’ 
walk from Newark Street. My sister and I left the Shoreditch 
Empire that evening about a quarter or half-past eleven. The 
accused went out before me, and I saw him at the door. I cannot 
remember whether there was an interval or not. The next time I 
went to the music-hall was on Monday, 2nd January. I went with 
my sister Jane and we sat in the orchestra stalls. When we came 
in on that Monday we happened to sit next to Morrison. I think 
I can only remember one part of the performance that night—a man 
playing the piano and singing a song. My sister and I had a 
conversation with Morrison about the play in the stalls. After the 
performance we walked home, and Morrison walked with us as far 
as the house: it was too late for him to come in. On the way home 
I mentioned to my sister that her birthday was on the next Satur- 
day, and Morrison said he would like to call round and see us and 
bring her a nice birthday present if she would accept it. My sister 
said, ‘“‘ I could not tell you until I ask my father—if my father 
agrees.’? Morrison said he would call on Friday, and he did call 
between 5 and 5.30. My sister Jane opened the door and intro- 
duced him to my father. (Shown coat, exhibit 14.) I do not think 
he had that coat on; it was a big motor shaped coat with a big 
collar that he had on. Now that I look at exhibit 14 again I think 
it was this one. Morrison said to my father that he had a little 
present for my sister, and my father said that he did not accept 
presents from strangers, but because it was ber birthday and he 
got it for her he could give it to her if he liked, and he gave it to 
her—a little silver watch. She does not have that silver watch 
now; she gave it to the police. On the Tuesday or Wednesday after 
Morrison was arrested the police called at our house and they saw 
me and my sister. They took a statement from my sister, but not 
from me. I went with her to Leman Street police station. Morrison 
asked my father’s permission to take me or my sister to the 
Forrester’s music-hall, where a pantomime was being played. I 

133 


Steinie Morrison. 
Esther Brodsky 
could not go, but my sister Jane went with my little sister Becky. 
This was on the evening of the day on which he brought the watch. 
They returned home about nine o’clock. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Murr—How many times altogether did 
your sister Jane see the accused to speak to?—To speak to, it was 
on the Monday night, the Friday night, and the Saturday night 
after, 2nd, 6th, and 7th January. 

Was anything said about his marrying your sister ?—I could 
not say about the conversation that they had together. She did 
not know him long enough for that. 

Did he say in your hearing anything about their being mar- 
ried!—That I could not tell you. 

Or to your father ?—I could not say. He told my father about 
where he lived. He said he was a baker. At first my father asked 
him what he is. That was on the Friday night, and he said he was 
a baker, and he worked before at Lavender Hill or something. He 
gave my father his address. I could not tell you where it was, but 
he gave my father his address, and he said that now he is a 
traveller travelling with jewellery, and he also showed us a box 
which contained some brooches, and all the other things—common 
jewellery it was. It was not much value—little brooches and all the 
other things. One box I did see. He opened a box up and I saw 
there were brooches. 

Did he say where he was living ?—I did not hear all of it, but 
he said he was living at—I could not tell you; 1 do not remember 
it exactly. Perhaps my sister Jane can. I cannot. 

Did he not give you an address!—Not to me. 

Nor your father !—Yes, my father. 

What was the address he gave your father?—I could not tell 
you; I only heard a few words. He said he would give my father 
the address where he worked and where he lived, but where it is 
I could not tell you. I have not got the address on me. 

Was there any talk between you and your sister about this man 
wanting to marry her !—No, there was no talk at all. We did not 
have no chance to talk, they went away on Saturday night. 

Did your sister Jane tell you that he wanted to marry her ?— 
No, we did not have no conversation about that at all, because she 
did not tell me, and I did not ask her anything. I could not say 
because I do not know. 

Was he making love to your sister Jane!—I could not tell you 
whether he made love or not. That I do not know. They only 
had a conversation because we knew him sitting there, and that is 
all it was. We knew him from seeing him, but we never had no 
conversation before that Monday night. 

You went to the Shoreditch Empire on the Saturday ?—On the 
New Year’s Eve. 

134 


eae 


Evidence for Defence. 
Esther Brodsky 

You are quite sure about that?—Oh yes—certain—of course | 
am sure. 

By Mr. Justice Darting—Are you quite certain ?—Quite 
certain. 

Cross-examination continued—And Morrison was there !—Yes, 
he was there; I could not say whether he was in the third or fourth 
seat, but he was in the same row. 

That is in the same row as yours. You were not there by 
appointment with him!—No, I saw him there when we were going 
out at a quarter-past eleven. My sister pointed to him, saying, 


_“* You recollect seeing that gentleman?’’ I said, ‘‘ Yes, I do.” 


He often used to pass our door. That is how I knew him, but I 
never spoke to him before that Monday. 

He was in the same row as you and your sister /—Yes. 

Who was there first, you or Morrison ?—On the Saturday night? 

Yes?’—I could not say. I noticed him as we were sitting. I 
could not say whether he came in first or whether he came in after. 
I noticed him there as they started playing. It must have been 
nine or half-past nine—about that time. 

And you went again to the music-hall on the Monday ?—On the 
Monday, as there was a different company there. 

And you went into the stalls again !—Yes. 

Did you sit down next to Morrison or did he come and sit down 
next to you!—No, he was sitting there when we came in, and we 
sat next to him. 

Did you sit next to him because you saw him there?—No, 
because they were seats in front; I did not like to sit at the back. 

It was quite by accident ?—My sister Jane sat there first, and 
I sat afterwards. 

It was quite an accident there happened to be vacant seats next 
to him ?—Yes. 

Did you look at the performance on the Saturday ?—Yes, that 
is why I went again on the Monday. 

And was there the same performance on the Monday as on the 
Saturday /—No. 

Can you tell me any difference between the Monday and the 
Saturday performances!—Well, I cannot tell you. I cannot re- 
member on the Saturday, but I know there was a Jew man there 
playing a piano, but otherwise I do not know. 

Can you tell me any single item in the programme that you 
saw on Saturday?—On the programme? No. 

Have you seen anything of the accused since he was in prison } 
—No. 

Have you visited him in prison?—I beg your pardon. 

Have you gone to Brixton Prison to see the prisoner to. 

You are quite sure about that?—Oh, certain—I am certain of 


that. 
135 


Steinie Morrison. 
Esther Brodsky 


Has your sister gone to Brixton Prison to seo the prisoner !—I 
could not tell you yes or no to that; I do not know. 

Do you mean to suggest to the jury that your sister might have 
been to Brixton Prison to see the prisoner and you not know it?— 
I could not tell you whether she did or did not. That I cannot 
say. I do not know whether she did go to see him or whether she 
did not. 

Do you on your oath say that your sister never told you that 
she had never been to Brixton to see the prisoner /—She never told 
me nothing. 

By Mr. Justicr Dartinc—She has never told you whether she 
has been to Brixton Prison or not?—No. 

Cross-ezamination continued—Has there been any communica- 
tion with the accused at all?—I could not say; I do not know. 

Has she ever told you whether she has been in communication 
with the prisoner ?-—I couid not tell you anything about that; I do 
not know. If I do not know it is no use saying. I know what I 
say, and say what I know. 

Has your sister ever told you whether she has been in communi- 
cation with the accused!—My sister never told me nothing. 

Has your sister ever toldyou whether she has ever been to see the 
accused’s solicitor ?—Yes ; she took me up to him. She told me she 
was going to see him. 

How often!—I cannot say how often. She may have been 
there once or twice. 

How often have you been there!—Only once. 

When was that ?—It is a few weeks ago, but I cannot remember 
how long. 

And you have had no communication with him since. Have 
you been writing to the prisoner’s solicitor /—No. 

How long have you been in England !—About sixteen or seven- 
teen years. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—Did you take your seats beforehand, 
or did you simply walk in and pay your shilling !—We walked in 
and paid a shilling. 

By Mr. Murr—I thought you said something about early doors? 
—lI know there are early doors, but when we went in we paid a 
shilling. Perhaps it is a booked seat; that I could not say. 


Jane Bropsxy, examined by Mr. Apincrer—I am sixteen years 
of age, and I live with my father and two sisters at 71 Cleveland 
Street. About two weeks before Christmas I saw Morrison pass our 
house nearly every day during the week. On New Year’s Eve I 
went with my sister Esther to the Shoreditch Empire. We took 
seats in the stalls, and the performance had commenced by the time 
we went in. I saw Morrison in the music-hall that New Year’s 
Eve. I recognise him in the dock, and I am quite certain that he 

136 


ie 


Evidence for Defence. 
Jane Brodsky 


was at the music-hall that night, sitting in the same row as we were, 
a few seats up. I only remember one part of the performance— 
Harry Champion, who comes in with a ginger wig on and sings 
“Ginger, you’re balmy.’’ I do not remember any of the other 
turns, but I remember that one, because he was the favourite there. 
When the performance was over I saw Morrison going out of the 
music-hall up the steps and into the street. I do not remember 
anything else that happened at the music-hall that night. 

Do you remember a fight or a row or anything of that sort ?— 
No, I do not quite remember that. I did not speak to Morrison 
that night. We left the music-hall between 11 and 11.30, and it 
would take us about twenty-five minutes or half an hour to walk 
see to Cleveland Street. Cleveland Street is opposite Jubilee 

treet. 

On the Monday after the New Year I again went to the same 
music-hall with my sister Esther. It was a different programme, 
and Mr. Champion was not singing. I remember one or two of the 
turns. There was Harry Harris, who played the piano and sang, 
and then there was one dressed as a Scotsman—I cannot remember 
his name. Morrison was sitting next to me. I had not made an 
appointment to be there with him. He was there before we came 
in, and he spoke to us and asked permission to see my sister and 
me home. He walked with us as far as our home, and on the way 
my sister happened to mention that the following Saturday, the 7th, 
was my birthday. Morrison asked me if I remembered him on the 
Saturday keeping me up from falling and I said I did. On the 
Saturday, 3lst December, about two o’clock, he passed our place; 
I slipped and had it not been for him I would have fallen. When 
my sister mentioned that the 7th was my birthday he asked if he 
could come round on that day. I told him I could not give him an ~ 
answer, but if he would come round I would ask father if he could 
come in. He said he would like to bring me something as a birth- 
day present. He called upon me on 6th January, about 5 p.m., and 
I introduced him to my father. He asked my father’s permission 
to give me a watch as a birthday present. My father told him that 
he never allowed me to take presents off anybody that he did not 
know, but as it was my birthday he could give it to me if I wanted 
to take it. (Shown exhibit 60.) That is the watch which he gave 
me. He asked my father if I could go with him to the Forrester’s 
music-hall, because it was just round the corner from where I lived. 
My father said I could go, but not alone. Morrison took me along 
with my younger sister Becky, and we saw the ‘‘Babes in the Wood”’ 
pantomime. He brought us home about nine o’clock and came in 
and had some tea which was made by my sister Esther. When I 
saw Morrison on those occasions he was wearing a long overcoat, a 
long ulster. (Shown exhibit 14.) It was like that coat. Before he 
left that evening he said he would call and see me the next day, the 

137 


Steinie Morrison. 
Jane Brodsky 


7th. He called about four o’clock and saw me as well as my father 
and my sisters. He stayed till about seven and then we walked 
from Cleveland Street down the Mile End Road, took a motor bus 
to the top of Tottenham Court Road, and then walked to Rotto’s 
in Fitzroy Square, Charlotte Street. Rotto’s are grocery shop 
people; I did not know them before. We went into their house 
and saw Mr. and Mrs. Rotto and had refreshments. Morrison took 
me home about ten o’clock by motor bus to the corner of Cleveland 
Street. 

By Mr. Justicp Darytinc—Was anybody with you and 
Morrison!—It was me and Morrison alone. 

Examination continued—The police called upon me on the 
Tuesday or Wednesday after Morrison was arrested—I cannot say 
the exact date, but it would be the 10th or the 11th. There were 
two of them and they came into the house. 

Were you frightened !—No, not very; I knew I had nothing to 
be frightened of. They knocked at the door and I opened it. They 
asked for ‘‘ Miss Brodsky,’’ and I asked them what they wanted ; 
they said it was not me they wanted, but another Miss Brodsky— 
“‘ Jane.’’ I told them that was me. They came and saw my sister 
in the kitchen, and they said, ‘‘ It is her we want and not you,’’ 
because they had found my sister’s photograph in Morrison’s 
pocket. They called my sister out and asked her whether she went 
with Morrison and she told them no. 

I call for that photograph, the sister Esther’s photograph ?— 
It was a photograph of my other sister, Tillie. The police then 
asked me when I first knew Morrison, and I told him I first spoke 
to him in the Shoreditch Empire on Monday, 2nd January. I told 
them about him seeing me home and about the watch. They wrote 
a statement themselves—they asked me questions and I answered 
them. (The photograph was handed by the accused to Mr. Abinger.) 
That photograph—exhibit 61—is the photograph of my sister Tillie 
which I have referred to. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—Morrison was up at our place on 
Friday, 6th, and saw the photograph on the mantlepiece. He asked 
if he could have it and my sister said yes, he could have it if he 
wanted it. 

Hxamination continued—When the police were taking your 
statement did they ask you whether you had seen Morrison on New 
Year’s Eve ?—They did not. On the back of the photograph exhibit 
61 there is written ‘‘ To Steinie Morrison from darling Tillie 
Brodsky.’’ That is not my sister’s handwriting. The police have 
fetched me up to Leman Street police station about four or five 
times. 

Had you told the police you were going to give evidence for 
Morrison?—No. I saw Inspector Ward, Inspector Wensley, and 
Sergeant Cooper, and I recognise them in Court to-day. Some- 

138 


Evidence for Defence. 
Jane Brodsky 


times they kept me a long time at the police station, and sometimes 
not quite so long. They would put questions to me for about an 
hour or so at a time. I told them I could not make a statement on 
my own accord, but if they would ask me questions I would answer 
them. I signed three statements on three different occasions. I[ 
have been to Brixton Prison since Morrison has been charged with 
this offence. Once I went with my father and once with my sister, 
otherwise I went alone. I should say that I have been about four or 
five times to see Morrison. I saw him through the grille. There 
was only the warder there besides us, walking up and down, and 
I would be there for about ten minutes or a quarter of an hour. 
On the second occasion I think my sister Tillie was with me. My 
sister Esther has never been to the prison with me. I went there at 
Morrison’s request ; he wrote and asked me to come. 

Was that it (exhibit 14 handed) ?—Yes, that is the one. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—It was like that, was it?—Yes. 

Examination continwed—Before he left that evening was an 
appointment made as to hig seeing you or your father or somebody 
again /—Yes. 

Who !—He said he would call and see me to-morrow. 

That is the 7th ?—Yes. 

Did he call?—About four o’clock. 

Who were there besides yourself ?—My father and my sisters. 

How long did he stay?—Till about seven. 

And then ?—He went to Mr. Rotto’s. 

I want you to tell us this particularly; you walked from 
Cleveland Street 7—Yes. 

Which way did you walk ?—We walked down towards Mile End. 

You came out of Cleveland Street and walked down the main 
road—the Mile End Road?—Yes, and then took a motor bus to the 
corner of Tottenham Court Road, and then walked down to Rotto’s. 

Where is Rotto’s?—In Charlotte Street. 

Fitzroy Square ?—Yes. 

What is Rotto’s?—Grocery shop people. 

By Mr. Justicu Dartinc—Did you know the Rottos before this? 
—No, I never knew them before. 

Examination continued—Did you go into Rotto’s house?—Yes 

Who was there?—Mr. and Mrs. Rotto. 

Did you have refreshments there !—Yes. 

What time did he take you home?—About ten. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Murr—Was Monday, 2nd January, the 
first time you had ever spoken to this man/—Yes. 

And Friday, the 6th, the second time /—Yes. 

And Saturday, the 7th, the third time ?’—Quite so. 

Did he make love to you!—No, not exactly. 

Not at all?—No. 

Never ?7—Never spoken; he has not spoken himself of love. 

139 


Steinie Morrison. 
Jane Brodsky 

Has he spoken of marriage?—Yes ; he did not exactly say that. 
He asked me if I would give him permission to go with and then 
marry me. I told him he had better ask father. Father said he 
would give him permission to go with me, but not to talk any rot 
into my head, as I was young yet. ; 

When was it this talk of marriage took place?—On the Friday 
or Saturday. 

For the first time?—For the first time. 

You had seen him on one occasion only before?—I had seen 
him; I had spoken to him on one occasion before, but I had seen 
him various times before. 

That was said on the Friday, was it?’—Yes. 

Then on the Saturday you went out with him alone?—Yes. 

And he took you to Mr. Rotto’s?—Yes. 

Charlotte Street, Soho Square?—Fitzroy Square. 

How long were you there!—From about half-past seven to ten. 

Did he introduce you to Mr. Rotto?—Yes. 

How did he introduce you!—TI cannot exactly remember it. I 
think he said, ‘‘ a lady friend ’’ or ‘‘ the girl I intend to marry ”’ 
—I cannot say for sure. 

How many interviews did you have altogether with police 
officers ?—I have been to the Police Court about four or five times 
but I have been spoken to about sixteen times. 

Were some of the interviews long interviews !—Yes. 

And was the subject of those interviews the nature of your 
acquaintance with Morrison /—Yes. 

Anything else?—That is all. 

That was the whole subject of it—how long you had known 
him 1—Yes. 

And that kind of thing. You did not want to keep anything 
back from them, did you?—I did not know that telling them that 
on the Saturday before I had seen him would be of any value. They 
did not ask me whether I had seen him before and I did not tell 
them. I told the police officers I did not know how to make a state- 
ment of my own accord, and if they would ask me questions I would 
answer them; otherwise I did not know anything. 

Had you any reason for keeping anything back from them ?— 
No, not the first time, but afterwards I had. 

What was the reason you had after the first time for keeping 
ones back from the police?—Because they were bullying me too 
much. 

Bullying you !—Yes, they tried to say things to me that I conld 
not know and_did not know what to answer to. 

What officer bullied you?—Inspector Wensley asked n.e 
things—if I had known Morrison five years ago, and he said he 
had also been told that I have been going about with Morrison 
from five years ago or at the time we lived in Jubilee Street. I 

140 


Evidence for Defence. 
Jane Brodsky 


told Inspector Wensley if he knew how old I was at the time I lived 
in Jubilee Street. He said no, but he had been told by a certain 
man that I had been going with Morrison in Jubilee Street. If 
told him I was the age of ten or eleven, and I did not know 
Morrison then. He said, ‘‘ Well, it is funny that the man should 
come and say that you did.’’ I said, ‘‘ I did not know him. Do 
not believe him, believe me,’’ and I asked him to bring the man 
- front of me and I would answer the man’s questions and not 
im, 

Is that the bullying you are referring to/—lI did not like the 
way he spoke. He asked me certain things I did not like. On 
one occasion the police officers asked me if I had noticed anything 
in Morrison’s pockets. I told them that that was a nice question 
to ask me, and that I did not look in other people’s pockets. 

Anything else?—I cannot exactly remember every word they 
said to me. 

Had you any other reason for keeping anything back from 
the police?—No. 

No other reason at all?—No. 

Did you ever at any of those interviews tell the police 
that you had seen Morrison in the Shoreditch Empire on the 
Saturday night?—No. 

Never once?’—Never once, because Mr. Ward asked me if I 
had ever seen Morrison before I told him I had, but I was angry 
at the time and would not answer any questions. 

What were you angry about?—Because I asked them not to 
send anybody round to my home as the people in the street were 
talking of police officers coming to my door. I asked them several 
times not to do it, but they went on doing it. One day I came 
home for dinner and they said I was to come at once. Being 
hungry I did not want to, but they said I must. I was not going 
to walk through the street with a police officer, and so I told him 
to go before whilst I followed. He went on, but he waited for me 
at the top of the street; he did not believe I was coming of my 
own accord, but he waited for me. I told him to walk on the 
other side of the street, and we walked on different sides all the 
rest of the way. At the police station they kept me waiting for 
about a quarter of an hour outside. They then said come inside. 
Inspector Wensley and Mr. Ward were there. They told me they 
had kept me waiting because I was in a temper. I told them they 
ought not to have done it because I was wasting enough time, and 
time was money. Mr. Wensley said why was I in a temper and 
why did I not want to come. I told him that I asked them not 
to send any police officer, and that if he had wanted me so 
urgently why did not he send a post-card. He said because he 
wanted me most important. He said he had lost a statement of 
mine. Is it possible for a police officer to lose a statement? I 

141 


Steinie Morrison. 


Jane Brodsky 

told them I did not believe they had lost the statement. Mr. 
Ward said Inspector Wensley could prove he had lost the state- 
ment and he asked me again what time it was I had noticed 
Morrison at the Shoreditch Empire on Monday night. I did not 
want to answer. I told them I had told them once and that was 
enough. They said I was compelled to tell them everything. I 
told them it was nine o’clock. Then he asked me had I ever seen 
Morrison before? I said I had. They asked me when, and I told 
them it was no concern of theirs. 

Then it is not true that you were not asked whether you had 
seen him before the Monday night?—That was after I had already 
made my statement to the lawyer. 

You were asked whether you had seen Morrison before !—That 
was quite a long while after—not the first time—that I told them 
1 had. 

Listen, madam, you told this gentleman that you were never 
asked whether you had seen him before. Now you tell us you 
were asked?—I said that the first time they came they did not 
ask me if I had seen him before. 

Why did you not say that when you were asked whether you 
had ever seen him before?—Because I was angry with them, and 
did not want to answer them. I told them I would appear before 
the magistrate and tell him everything. They said there was no 
need for me to go before the magistrate; I was no use—my 
evidence was of no use. 

You had seen the prisoner’s solicitor before you gave that 
answer to the police ?—Yes. 

Had you seen the prisoner also in prison before you gave that 
answer to the police?—Once, I think. 

Had you told the police that you had seen Morrison passing 
your house?!—Yes. 

You had told them that ?—Yes. 

Why did you keep back from them that you had geen him 
sitting in the same row of the stalls on the Saturday night ?— 
They did not ask me the question, and I did not answer them. 

They did ask you the question?—If I had ever seen him 
before, but not at any place. Mr. Lumley asked me if I had seen 
him at several places and I told him once before at the Shoreditch 
Empire. 

I am asking you about what you told the police. You told 
the police that you had seen him passing your door. They asked 
you whether you had seen him before and you never told them 
that you had-seen him in the stalls three seats from you on the 
Saturday night?—No, because I was angry and refused to answer 
any questions at all, only they told me I had to answer those as 
I have already said. 

You say you went to the prison because the prisoner asked 
you !—Yes. 

142 


Evidence for Defence. 
Jane Brodsky 


Have you got the letter?—I do not know, I will see. 

Have you got the letter?—I do not think so. 

On your oath have you got the letter ?—I said I do not know, 
it may be somewhere at home; I cannot say. 

Did he ask you more than once?—Yes. 

In letters /—Yes. 

Have you got the letters?—I do not know. 

Will you swear you do not know?—I will swear I do net know. 

Are you sure you have not got them!—I cannot swear they 
are not at home somewhere; I do not know. 

_ How many letters have you had?—I cannot say exactly; I 

have had a good many. 

While he has been in prison ?!—Yes. 

Look at that photograph. (Exhibit 61 handed.) Look at 
the back and tell me whose handwriting it is in?—Stein Morrison’s. 

Re-examined by Mr. Asrncrr—Who was it who told you that 
your evidence was of no use!—The inspector; they told me | 
would not be called in Court because my evidence was not of 
much value. 

My friend Mr. Muir has elicited from you that you did 
not like the police going round to your house?—No. 

Or policemen waiting at the corner of the street for you?— 
No, because the neighbours were already speaking of the police 
coming round to me. 
Which police officer suggested that you had known Morrison 
for five years?—Inspector Wensley. 

By Mr. Justice Dartiyc—You were at Rotto’s house from 
half-past seven till ten o’clock that evening ?—About that time. 

Whereabouts were you during all that time?—We were in 
Rotto’s house. I cannot say the exact name of the street. 

You mean in another street ?—Yes. 

In a private house, was it ?—Yes. 

Were you alone with him?—With him and Mrs. Rotto. 

Did you know anything about Florrie Dellow at this 
time !/—No. 

Do you now?!—Reading the papers I know who she is. 

Did you know where he was living at that time?—No. 

Did he tell you where he lived ?—No. 

Did you ask?—I did not ask. 

Was he proposing to marry you at this time?—Yes. 

Had you agreed to marry him?—I told him I would gee. 

Did he spend money while he was out with you?—Not much. 

On what sort of things did he spend money on you?—He paid 
for me to go to the Forrester’s, and he paid my fare on the motor 
bus. 

Did he pay for refreshments anywhere ?—No. 

At Rotto’s did he pay for anything there, or were they friends 
of his?——Friends of his. 

143 


Steinie Morrison. 
Max Mannis 

Max Mannis, examined by Mr. Rouanp Oxiver—I trade as 
‘‘ The Japanese Laundry.’’ I know Mrs. Zimmerman who lives 
at Newark Street. She brings washing to me. For four weeks 
she brought me washing which she told me was for her lodger 
Morrison. I remember New Year’s Day, but I cannot remember 
whether Mrs. Zimmerman brought any washing after that. I 
remember the police officers coming to me on Sunday night and 
producing the ticket for Morrison’s washing. That washing was 
brought to me by Mrs. Zimmerman on the Monday morning, and 
it consisted of three collars, two handkerchiefs, a sheet, a towel. 
and a flannel shirt. Morrison’s laundry mark was 217 with a 
cross. (Shown handkerchief, exhibit 62.) That is my mark. 
(Shown collar, exhibit 10.) There is no laundry mark on that. 
(Shown bundle of linen, exhibit 63.) Those are the things the 
police called at my place for, and they have Morrison’s laundry 
mark. The first time the police ofticers came they asked me 
whether I noticed blood on the things when they came to the wash, 
and I said, ‘‘ I do not take notice of that, I could not examine 
all the things that come into the place.’’ When parcels of linen 
come I open them, but I only examine the number—I do not take 
notice of any stains. If there were blood on the linen that came 
to me I would see it, but I do not take any notice of that. 


Mr. Murr—My lord, may I recall Miss Esther Brodsky to ask 
her a question on a point on which I have just received informa- 
tion, and may the sister be out of Court while she is being 
examined ? 

Mr. Justice Daruinc—Yes. 


Ester Bropsxy, recalled, further cross-examined by Mr. 
Murr—When we went to the Shoreditch Empire on the Saturday 
I think my sister paid, and also on the Monday. Sometimes I 
take the tickets and sometimes she takes them. We never go in 
for more than a shilling seat; we always pay a shilling. We 
entered the hall on the Saturday about nine or a little past nine. 
I think the performance had begun when we got in. We got the 
seats in the stalls all right. I do not remember whether there 
were many vacant seats when we got there. We did not go in 
by the early door. 

Was the acting manager standing at the pay box and telling 
people that there were no seats before nine o’clock?—I do not 
remember that. 

You had seats?—I had seats, but whether it was before nine 
or after nine I could not tell. I did not look at the time. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—Do you say that you got in by 
paying a shilling on that night of New Year’s Eve?—Yes. 

Not going in by the early door ?—Yes. 

That there was room for you?—Yes. I am not making any 

144 


Evidence for Defence. 
Esther Brodsky 


mistake about the date, because we wanted to go and hear the 
bells at St. Paul’s Church, but we thought we would get home too 
late, and instead of going there we went to the Shoreditch Empire. 

Cross-examination continued—I want to put this to you, that 
that being New Year’s Eve the lowest price for the stalls was 
Is. 6d. Are you not making any mistake?—I am not making any 
mistake. I am certain what I paid. I could not tell you what 
the prices were at the time, but I know what I paid. I cannot 
remember whether I took tickets or whether my sister did. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—Either you or your sister paid the 
2s. at the box office?-—-The box office. 

Cross-examination continued—I put it to you that that was 
impossible?—You put it to me that that is impossible. Then it 
must come out that I am a liar if you speak the truth. 

It does—exactly /—Well, I speak the truth. I know we paid 
Is. 

Further re-examined by Mr. Asincpr—The Shoreditch 
Empire is not a very large music-hall, and it is not very small. 

Whether you paid 2s. or 3s. that night, were you there that 
night?—We were. After leaving the music-hall we did not go to 
the bells at St. Paul’s as it was too late. 


JANE Bropsky, recalled, further cross-examined by Mr. Morr 
—We went to the Shoreditch Empire at nine o’clock on the 
Saturday. I know the time because I never go in before nine; 
the performances began at nine. There were only the two seats 
left at nine o’clock; we just came in time. The performance had 
just started. They were lifting the curtain up when we went in. 
Our two seats were in the stalls, about three or four rows from 
the stage. I paid Is. When we went on the Monday it was at 
the same price and we were in the same part of the house, about 
three or four rows from the stage. We paid the same price on 
the Monday—ls. I do not remember whether I paid, but I think 
I did. 

Do you swear you went there on the Saturday 7—Yes. 

Do you swear that you got two vacant seats ?—Yes. 

Just as the performance began ?—Yes. 

Do you swear that you paid 1s. each for yourself and your 
sister ?—Yes. 

Do you know that the price was raised on the Saturday ?—I 
daresay it is—early doors, but I know that I paid 1s. 

Do you know that the price was raised for the orchestra stalls 
to 1s. 6d. each?—I do not know that. 

And that you could not have got in at nine o’clock or at any 
other time for ls.?—I know J got in. 

For 1s.?—For ls. I know I paid 1s. and got in. 

And that before nine o’clock there were no seats left in the 


a 145 


Steinie Morrison. 
Jane Brodsky 


house, and that people were standing!—People may have been 
standing, but I got two vacant seats. 

And the assistant manager was standing at the pay office door 
and telling people that there were no seats?—Well, there were just 
two empty. Whether the people had got up I do know, but there 
were two seats empty for me and my sister. We were sitting at 
the end of the row and the seats were not very convenient. Not 
everybody cares to sit there because they would not be able to see ~ 
because of the poles that were in the way. There were people 
standing; the place was full. : 

Further re-examined by Mr. Anrncpr—Whether the prices of 
the seats were 3s. or 2s., were you there on the night of 31st 
December ?—I do not know anything about the price. I always 
pay 1s. when I go into that part. I swear that I paid Is. on 3lst 
December. 

How many times have you been to a music-hall?—Not often. 
This is the first two times I have been there. My father told me 
I could spend ls. at the music-hall, and I spent 2s. in seats for 
myself and my sister. I think I gave two single shillings. I did 
not know Florrie Dellow, but I have heard of her through the 
papers and I have heard that the accused was living with her. 

Do you come here voluntarily to speak on behalf of Morrison? 
—I come to tell the truth. I come to say nothing that I do not 
know, but all that I know. 

Was it your desire to come here and speak on behalf of 
Morrison, knowing that fact about Florrie Dellow?—I knew that 
Morrison lived with Florrie Dellow, but I came here to say what 
I know. 

By Mr. Justice Dartine—My sister Tillie is a tailoress. 

When did you first know of this murder of Mr. Beron?—I do 
not very often read the papers. J did not know till Morrison was 
arrested. I think it was the same day that the police came and 
when Morrison’s photograph was in the Daily Mirror. 

When you first saw the police and made a statement, did you 
know that Morrison was suspected of murder ?—Yes. 

You knew at that time, did you, that you had seen him in a 
theatre on the very night when the murder was committed, 31st 
December !’—Yes, but I did not think that seeing him before would 
be of use to the accused. I did not know what was valuable to the 
police. 

But why did you not tell them, “‘ I saw Morrison as late as 
eleven o’clock at night on the 31st, the night of the murder ’’ ?— 
Because I did-not know that it would be of any value. I asked the 
police to ask me questions, and I would answer them. I had never 
made a statement before, and I did not know what was really needed 
for a statement. They asked me when I first knew Morrison, and I 
told them what I said about the Shoreditch Empire on the Monday 

146 


Evidence for Defence. 


Jane Brodsky 
night. I cannot say that I know anybody if I have not spoken to 
anybody. 

Why did you not say, ‘‘ 1 saw him there on Saturday night up 
to eleven o’clock ’’?—As I answered before, I did not think it was 
- any use. I did not think that if I saw anybody it was to know 
them. 

. They asked you, according to you, when you first knew him ?— 
es. 

You knew at that time he was suspected of committing this 
murder on that very Saturday night ?—Yes. 

Did it not occur to you that, if you could show that he was 
at the Shoreditch Empire until eleven o’clock, it would have some 
bearing upon where he was on the night that the murder was com- 
mitted’—No, I did not think of that at all. I did not think that 
would be of any value, because I heard that the crime was committed 
at midnight. 

You heard the crime was committed at midnight, and you knew 


~ where he was up to eleven o’clock ?—Eleven o’clock is not midnight. 


Did you know where the murder was committed ?—Yes. 

Did you know that was a long way from the Shoreditch Empire? 
—Yes; but according to the time that the paper writes the murder 
was committed, he could have been in many more places between the 
times. 

Is that the reason why you did not tell the police you had seen 
him up to eleven o’clock that night?—I did not think that would 
be of any value. 

Before this time he had already asked you if you would marry 
him /—Yes. 

Did you conceal from the police that you had seen him up to 
eleven o’clock because you thought it would help him?—No, I did 
not say anything to help him; I only said what I knew. 

Did you conceal it from them because you never saw him there 
at all?—I did see him. I swear that I saw Morrison there on the night 
of 3lst December. Nobody can deny my own eyes. 

Tell me plainly, why did you not tell the police that ?—Because, 
as I say again, I did not think it would be of any use. I did not 
know what was really valuable to tell the police in a matter like 
this. I thought that what you see at the time it is done is of use, 
and afterwards and before is of no value. 

When did you first realise that it was worth your while to 
mention that you had seen him at the Empire that Saturday night? 
—When I read in the paper about Mr. Snelwar saying that he had 
been at the restaurant that night, I asked the advice of a friend of 
ours in the workshop. They advised me to go and see the lawyer 
and tell him that I had seen him there, and that it could not be true 
that he was at the restaurant. That was the same week after I had 
seen the police. 

147 


Steinie Morrison. 
Jane Brodsky 


Why did you not tell the police that before going to the lawyer? 
—I understood, as the lawyer was for his defence, it would be better 
for me to see the lawyer. 

You never told the police from start to finish?—No, because 
when I first saw the police I did not hear of this yet. Afterwards I 
did, and I told the lawyer. 

You saw the police after you saw the lawyer ?!—Yes. 

Why did you not tell the police then’—Because I was angry 
with them. 


Ernest Metpourne Epwarp Lewis, examined by Mr. AsrinaER— 
I am a clerk at the head office of the Capital and Counties Bank. In 
the early part of last December I was cashier in the Commercial 
Road branch. On 2nd December a man came to the bank in Com- 
mercial Road with £35 in cash, and asked for bank notes. 

Look at the accused. Can you say if that was the man?!—Well, 
I do not know that I remember him. I could not be sure. I do not 
know that it is the business of bank clerks to know people’s faces. 
The man I have referred to was talking to me for a very short time— 
just necessary to ask for the transaction. I do not remember his 
exact words, but I presume he asked if we could give him £35 in 
£5 bank notes, and I agreed to do so, and made out an exchange 
form and asked him to sign it, which he did. I then gave him seven 
notes of £5 each. (Shown exhibit 65.) That is an exchange slip, and 
it says, ‘‘ Capital and Counties Bank, £35. Stein Morrison. Please 
give bearer cash for discount specified in margin on my account.”’ 

(The accused handed to counsel a slip of paper on which he had 
written his name twice, marked exhibit 66.) 

I have seen some signatures of Steinie Morrison in Court to-day. 

In your opinion, are they, or are they not, the signatures of 
the man who signed the form at the bank?—I should say that the 
signatures were signed by the same man. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mur—tThe notes that I gave him were 
all dated 24th November, 1909, and were numbered 79424 to 79430. 
I have compared the handwriting on the piece of paper written in 
the dock (exhibit 66), and the handwriting on the back of the photo- 
graph postcard (exhibit 61), and the handwriting on the exchange 
slip (exhibit 65), and I should say that these are the same. 

The ‘‘S” in the handwriting in the dock to-day is made 
differently to what it is on the exchange slip ?—Yes. 

The ‘‘S”’ on the exchange slip is very open, like the open thing 
in a fiddle?—Yes. 


IsaBreL SaunpDmuRS, examined by Mr. Rouanp Oxriver—I am a 
spinster, and I live with a married sister at 69 Manchuria Road, 
Clapham Common. Our road leads right on, to Clapham Common. 
I remember walking across the Common at 8.30 on the morning of 

148 


Evidence for Defence. 

Isabel Saunders 
2nd January. There is marked with a cross on the plan which is 
now shown me the spot where I found a handkerchief stained with 
blood. The handkerchief when I found it seemed damp—from dew, 
I should have thought. It was lying at the railings by the side of 
the grass. When I found that handkerchief I had heard that there 
was a murder at Clapham Common. My sister told me at breakfast 
time that there had been a rhurder. I picked up the handkerchief 
and put it in my pocket, and then at lunch time I took it to 
Scotland Yard. 

By Mr. Justice Dartiyc—When I found the handkerchief it was 
right at the end of the path leading from the bandstand. A good 
ome people walk along every day near where I found the handker- 
chief. 

Haramination continued—I do not know on what spot of Clapham 
Common the murder was committed. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Murr—The handkerchief was lying on 
the ground by the railings when I saw it. It caught my eye at once 
as I passed. 


Wii14m Wuipperr, examined by Mr. Axsincpr—I am a taxi 
driver, and I usually stand at the Clapham Common rank, opposite the 
Alexandra public-house. The lights of the shops, public-houses, &c., 
are all out about twelve o’clock, and the only light that is left is an 
ordinary lamp in the middle of the rank. I am short-sighted, and I 
always wear spectacles, with which I can see very well. 

Assuming that a man were coming from the direction of Clapham 
Old Town, round the apex of the triangle, at three o’clock in the 
morning of 3lst December or Ist January, what do you tell the 
jury as to the possibilities of being able to speak to that man’s face? 
—I should not look at him. I should simply say, ‘‘ Cab, sir? ’’ and 
if he said, ‘“‘ I want Kennington,’’ then he would get in, and off 
we would go. 

But if you did look at him, what should you say?—I should not 
be able to recognise him again, because I would not take sufficient 
notice. 

Could you, under such circumstances, describe the coat, trousers, 
hat, and handkerchief that such a person was wearing!—No, not 
even in the day time. 

Mr. Justice Darumc—The witness started by saying that he 
would not look at him. 

Mr. Asrncpr—That is just one point of the defence. A cabman 
does not look at his fare. 

The Wirness—No, he does not. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Murr—My taxicab rank is just outside 
the tramcar shelter. There are two ranks, a horse cab rank and a 
taxicab rank, but there are no horses there now hardly; we always 
pull right up to the front. 

149 


Steinie Morrison. 
William Whiddett 

The Foreman or tHE Jury—When we were at Clapham we wanted 
to find out whether there was any mixing up of the taxicabs and the 
hansom cabs. We found that the taxicabs were at the extreme end, 
away from the clock tower, and as far away as they could be from 
the place indicated on the plan where the driver Stephens says he 
took his cab. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—There are generally about two horse 
cabs on the rank, and we generally pull up as close to the cabs 
as we can. The horse cabs are nearer the clock than the taxicabs. 

Re-examined by Mr. Apincer—I should think that the taxicabs 
are about 20 yards away from the apex of the triangle. 


FREDERICK STALDEN CROCHER, examined by Mr. Axsincer—lI 
am a taxicab driver. I have no particular rank, but if I am any- 
where near Clapham Common I generally put up at the rank near 
the Plough. At three o’clock in the morning, when the public- 
houses and other places are closed, the light is not very good; it 
would be rather a doubtful light I should say. 

When you have a fare do you take particular notice of the 
passenger /—No. 

Or his clothing—what he is wearing ?—Not in a general way, 
not as a rule—unless there is something remarkable about it. 

If you collected a fare at three o’clock in the morning of 
3lst December at Clapham Cross cab rank could you speak to that 
fare or his clothing ten days afterwards!—I could not, unless 
something specially drew my attention to it. 


MicnaEL GoLpBERG, examined by Mr. Asrinanr—lI live at 11 
Fournier Street, Spitalfields, and I am a salesman in the hosiery 
department of Messrs. Gardiner & Co., Commercial Road. (Shown 
exhibit 31.) That is my invoice, dated 4th January, and it shows 
that I sold a vest and a pair of pants, half a dozen collars, two 
shirts, and a pair of cuffs, the total value being £1 5s. 3d. 
(Shown exhibit 68.) ‘hat is the class of collar, the price being 
8d. each. 

Just look at exhibit 10. Is that collar identical with the 
other collars that I have just put to you?—I cannot swear that it 
is one of the half dozen collars that I sold to him. I think it has 
been washed before—the button hole has gone too far for a collar 
that has been worn only three days. 

Is that collar identical with the clean collars in front of you? 
—Yes, it is one of the same cut and make of collars—same size, 
and the same quality. The police have not been to see me. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Murr—These collars were bought on 
the 4th and the prisoner was arrested on the 8th. Do you know 
that !—Yes. 

150 


Evidence for Defence. 
Michael Goldberg 


You say that that button hole is gone too far for a collar that 
has only been worn three days!—Yes. Messrs. Gardiner have been 
making that pattern of collar for more than two years. They 
have more shops than one at which they sell those collars. We will 
sell about ten dozen of these collars in the week. 

Re-examined by Mr. Asrncer—Look at the accused, can you 
say that you have ever seen this man!—Well, I think this is the 
man I served. 


Mrs. Fuorrig DELLow, examined by Mr. Asinczr—I am a 
married woman, and I have been living apart from my husband 
at 116 York Road for six or seven months. My bed-sitting-room 
ig on the ground floor and I pay 6s. 6d. a week. The landlord 
is Mr. Frank. On the floor above there live Mr. and Mrs. Hall. 
Mrs. Hall does my washing and cooking and other work. I first 
saw Morrison between twelve and one on Ist January. Mr. Frank 
introduced him to me in my room. I had heard of him before 
then as Mr. Frank told me he knew a gentleman whom he would 
like to introduce to me. When I met Morrison he said that I 
looked lonely and he asked me if I would care to live with him. 
I said I would if he looked after me and he said he would. He 
said that he would first ask the landlord’s permission. He stayed 
with me on the Sunday night, and went away the next morning 
between ten and eleven o’clock, I think. He said that when he 
got the landlord’s permission he would come back. He came on 
the Tuesday evening about six o’clock to live with me. He told 
me then, on the Tuesday, that he travelled in cheap jewellery 
which he took round the coffee houses. He left me about 10 or 
10.30 on the Tuesday night, as I told him I had a friend coming 
and it was not convenient. He went to see my little boy at 
Camberwell Gate and we had supper together. He returned with 
his luggage on Wednesday, 4th, between eleven and mid-day. He 
brought his luggage in a cab. He continued to sleep in my room 
from that day till the Saturday morning. I had a friend coming 
and I told him it was not convenient for him to come home that 
night, and he gaid it did not matter, he would see me the next 
day. I saw him put on clean clothes that morning. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—He put on clean underclothing on 
the Saturday morning!—Yes, after he had been in the baths. 
Mrs. Hall happened to come into the room whilst he was changing 
his clothes. 

Examination continued (Shown exhibit 12)—I put his cuff 
links in that shirt before he put it on. He took a clean collar out 
of a box labelled ‘‘ Gardiner’s ’’ and put it on. There was some 
of his dirty linen in a basket under my bed. 

During the time this man was staying with you did his nose 

151 


Steinie Morrison. 
Florrie Dellow 

bleed ?—Yes, I think it was on the Thursday morning. He left 
me about eleven o’clock on the Saturday. On the Sunday morning, 
about 11 or 11.30, three detectives came to my house. Mrs. Hall 
and another lady were in my room at the same time and they sent 
them out, and then they locked themselves in with me, and 
searched my place. They were there for quite an hour and a half : 
I said, ‘1 do not know who you are,’’ and one of them said, 
“‘T don’t think he is here. I have not seen him to-day,’’ and he 
added, ‘‘ Oh, you will soon know.’’ Then he asked me if I was a 
foreigner and I said, ‘‘ No, I am not.’? They searched my purse 
and they asked for Morrison’s clothing and for any dirty clothes. 
I recognise Inspector Ward as the officer who asked for those dirty 
clothes. They took some dirty linen from the basket under the 
bed. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Murr—You have lived six months in 
this house?—Six months, yes. 

Do you take men home there?—I have a few friends which 
visit me. 

With the knowledge of Mr. Frank ?—Well, he knows. 

And Mrs. Hall?—Mrs. Hall knows certainly, yes. 

That you take different men home there?—My friends; I do 
not take different men; I have my friends there. 

You are a common prostitute are you not?—I beg pardon, no. 

You have been convicted !—I might have been, that is nothing 
to do with this case, is it. 

For prostitution in the street ?—Yes. 

More than once!—Twice, the same detective that took me has 
been home with me twice. 

Then he made no mistake about you?—He did not make a 
mistake I do not think, no. 

Who else lives in this house besides you and Mrs. Hall and 
Mr. and Mrs. Frank?—There is an old lady has the back room; 
she is seventy-three; she is an old-age pensioner. There was a 
working man upstairs, but he has left. 

When did you first see that collar box?—It must have been 
about the Wednesday I think. 

How many collars were taken out of the box?—I could not say 
how many, but there were several. 

Did you take any out on the Wednesday ?—Yes, I took a clean 
one out and gave it to him. 

In the morning ?—In the morning, yes. 

Are you quite sure about that?—I am quite sure. 

What time in the morning of Wednesday did you take a clean 
one out of that box?—Nine or ten, I could not swear to time. 

When you got up in the morning ?—When I got up, yes. 

You swear that, do you?—Yes, I do swear to it. 

Do you know that that box was not bought until the Wednes- 

152 


Evidence for Defence. 
Florrie Dellow 


day ’—Well, I cannot say for Wednesday, or if it was Tuesday; 
I am not quite sure of the day. 

By Mr. Justice Daruivc—But you have sworn to it?—Well, I 
thought it was Wednesday ; I was so confused, I have been so worried 
I cannot remember anything. 

Cross-ecamination continued—Had you ever seen Morrison 
before you saw him on the morning of Sunday, Ist January !—No, 
my landlord had told me about him, but I had not seen him. 

Did he tell you where he was living !—Yes, in the East End. 

Will you swear that he did?—I will not swear, but I feel sure, 
because he had a room down there; he was paying 3s. 6d. 

Did he not tell you that he was living in Tottenham Court Road? 
—wWhitfield Street. 

Tottenham Court Road ?—Well, I do not know where it is. 

Did Frank tell you that the accused was living in Whitfield 
Street ?—Yes. 

Did the accused tell you so?—Yes, Whitfield Street, but I 
thought that was in the East End. 

Do you know Tottenham Court Road?—No. I have been down 
Tottenham Court Road, but I do not know any of the streets or by- 
streets. 

Do you think that Tottenham Court Road is in the Hast End of 
London ?—I cannot tell you; it is in the city, is it not? 

How long have you been in London ?—I have not lived in London 
long. 

Where have you lived during the last year !—Westminster 
Bridge Road. I have lived there for three years. Before that I was 
in Lincolnshire. 

Do you tell the jury on your oath that you do not know where 
Tottenham Court Road is?—I do not; I do not go about, so I do not 
know. 

Will you swear that prisoner told you that he lived in Tottenham 
Court Road?!—In Whitfield Street or Whitfield. 

Did he tell you what he was!—Yes, a traveller in cheap jewellery. 

Are you sure he said that?—I am quite certain sure. I had his 
card to that effect. 

Did you tell the police that you understood the prisoner was a 
diamond merchant or jeweller ?—No, I did not say diamond merchant ; 
indeed, I did not. They took my card, and on it was a diamond dealer 
and jeweller, but I did not tell them so; they read it for themselves 
on my card. 

That is the card he gave you!—Yes. 

Did you tell the police ‘‘ I understood him to be a diamond 
merchant or jeweller ’’ /—No, I did not ; a dealer in common jewellery 
I said. 

Did he have any money while he was living with you?—I did not 
see much money. 

153 


Steinie Morrison. 


Florrie Dellow 


How much did he give you?—About £2. 

What form did he give it to you in, gold or silver?—I do not 
remember. 

Where did he take it from?!—From his pocket. 

Did you see a paper bag in his possession with gold in it?—No, 
I do not think I did, no. 

Did you see any banknotes in his possession?—Yes, I saw one 
or two. I could not say how many. 

Have you been visiting the accused in prison?—I have, every 
day except Saturday. 

Any other people in your house!—Yes, Mrs. Hall, also Mrs. 
Wheeler, an old lady, also another friend I know. 

Has Frank visited him?’—I have heard he visited him, but I 
do not know whether he got a visit. 

Do you not know that Frank visited the prisoner in prison ?— 
Well, I know he went. 

Did you see him after he went?—I saw him that night. 

Did he tell you he had seen prisoner?!—Am I bound to answer 
your question ? 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—Yes, you are!—Yes, he did. 

Mr. Axsrnepr—Of course, my lord, that is not evidence, what 
Frank says to somebody behind the back of this man. 

Mr. Justicu Dartive—lIt is cross-examination. 

Re-examined by Mr. Asineapr—My friend has thought it neces- 
sary in the discharge of his duties to ask you if you are not a common 
prostitute; you were a married woman?—I was. I lived with my 
husband at Tooting, South Norwood, and at South Wimbledon, but 
he deserted me. 

Had you any means of support?—No, my father is a publican, 
and he has always helped me. I have two children; my mother has 
them ; and I have one little boy that I keep. 

Does your husband contribute anything to their support!—No. 

Have you ever been brought up to any trade or occupation in 
which you can earn your living’—yYes, I have been on the stage. 

Did you endeavour to earn a living on the stage?—Yes, but I 
was not very long; I got married. 

My friend has asked you if you have been prosecuted ; I did not 
quite hear your answer!—Yes, I have. 

What was it for?—Soliciting, he said. 

Were you fined’—Yes, I paid my fines. 

Has any other charge ever been brought against you in your 
life 1—Never. 


Ernest MeLBournE Epwarp Lewis, recalled, further examined by 
Mr. Axsincpr—I do not remember whether I gave him the £35 
loose or in a bag. It is not at all usual to put notes in a bag. 

154 


Evidence for Defence. 
Anna Hall 


Mrs. Anna Hatt, examined by Mr. Anrncer—I am a married 
woman, and I live with my husband in Mr. and Mrs. Frank’s house 
at 116 York Road, on the first floor. We have been living there for 
eight or nine months. I do cooking and washing for Florrie Dellow, 
who lives below me, and I also take in a little washing. On the first 
Saturday in the New Year I went into Mrs. Dellow’s room about 
half-past nine or a quarter to ten to fetch something for their break- 
fast. The accused was in the room changing his clothes. He changed 
his under-drawers, under-shirt, top shirt, pair of socks, and a collar. 
I saw Mrs. Dellow take his collar out of a cardboard box at the side 
of the bed. Mrs. Dellow asked me to do the washing, and I collected 
them up and put them in the bath with her washing. I saw Mrs. 
Dellow take two links out of one shirt and put them in the other 
shirt. I have not seen the police at all in connection with this matter. 
I have been twice to Brixton Prison, and have seen the accused there. 

Why did you go?—Because I thought I should like to see him. 
I went along with Mrs. Dellow. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Murr—I have been in the room on several 
occasions while Morrison was dressing. I believe he changed his 
underclothes once a week. 

Why do you believe that?—By having his clothes to wash. 

Did you ever have his clothes to wash at all 1—Only once, when 
they were taken away with Detective Ward. 

You did not have them to wash at all/—No. I could not say 
whether Mrs. Dellow always took the links out of his cuffs. 

Did she always put out a clean collar?—Yes, and put it on the 
bed. 

Always taking it from that green box which is in Court?—Yes. 
The first time I saw him dressed was on the Wednesday morning. 

Did she take a collar out of the green box on the Wednesday 
morning !—Yes, I believe she did—I remember it quite plainly. I 
am not aware that she took men home to sleep with her, but I believe 
she had two or three gentlemen callers. I could not say whether they 
slept the night, as I never troubled about that, my place being in my 
own husband’s house. 

When those other gentlemen were there with Mrs. Dellow did 
you go in while they were dressing—No. 

How is it you favoured the accused by going in when he was 
dressing ?—Well, I believed they were going to knock their heads 
together—they were going to live together as man and wife. 

Re-examined by Mr. Asmvczr—I am a respectable woman. 


Herpurt Raccurr, examined by Mr. Asrycer—I am a warder at 
H.M. Prison, Brixton. The prisoner’s nose has bled once since he 
has been in Brixton Prison, on 28th February. I reported it to the 
medical officer, Dr. Dyer. The bleeding lasted for two or three 
minutes, as far as I could see. 

155 


Steinie Morrison. 
Herbert Raggett 


Cross-examined by Mr. Mum—I made a note of it at the time. 
The accused called my attention to it and told me to put it in the 
book and to report it, which I did. 


Witi1am CunyincHam, examined by Mr. Asmvazr—I am a warder 
at H.M. Prison at Brixton. Morrison’s nose has bled once to my 
knowledge since he has been at Brixton—at 7.30 a.m. on 15th 
February. I made an entry in the book, and reported to the medical 
officer. In my report I stated that the bleeding appeared to come on 
quite naturally. The accused was very excited, and requested that 
a note be made of it. 


Sremie Morrison (prisoner on oath), examined by Mr. AsincEr 
—I was born in Australia, and I am between twenty-nine and thirty 
years old. During September of last year I was in the employment 
of Mr. Pithers, baker, 213 Lavender Hill, my wages being 12s. a 
week, board and lodging. I used to start at twelve o’clock at night 
and finish about nine in the morning. During the day I used to sleep 
till six in the evening, and then I used to get up to make dough till 
eight in the evening, and then I slept again till twelve. I think it 
was on 10th November that I left Mr. Pithers. I had a letter saying 
that my father was ill, and I intended to go home, but I received 
another letter saying that he was better, and that it was not necessary 
for me todo so. I told Mr. Pithers at the time that I was leaving 
this country when I left. 

You did not go?—No. I bought a stock of common jewellery 
and started travelling with that. The first time I bought any it was 
at the corner of Tottenham Court Road, but I do not know from 
whom I bought it, as I did not keep the receipt. When I left Mr. 
Pithers I went to 4 Whitfield Street, where I stopped for two days, 
and then I went to 5 Grove Street and engaged rooms there at 3s. a 
week. I went to 91 Newark Street on a Friday—the last Friday in 
November, I believe. During this period I earned £2 a week, some- 
times more, sometimes less, but very seldom less. On 30th November 
I bought some clothes. On 27th or 28th November my mother sent 
me £20 from Russia—somewhere between 25th and 30th. My father 
is alive. (Shown exhibit 29.) That is a receipt for a suit of clothes, 
£2. (Shown exhibit 27.) That is a receipt from A. Feldman, dated 
30th November, for an 18-carat gold watch, an 18-carat go!d chain, 
and a 10s. piece, £9 17s. 6d. On the same day I bought an overcoat 
for £2 from Mr. Phillips’ shop. The receipt was on me when I was 
arrested ; I cannot tell what they have done with it. On 2nd Decem- 
ber I bought at the same shop a mackintosh, for which exhibit 28 is 
the receipt, £1 17s. 6d. The same day I bought some clothes at 
Hope Brothers, the amount being £3 5s. 5}d.—scarves, handker- 
chiefs, tie, half-hose, vest, brushes, comb, slippers, and so on. Some 
time in December I bought a revolver for about 7s. or 8s. at a sale in 

156 


Evidence for Defence. 
Steinie Morrison 

a shop in Aldgate. I tried to sell it again on several occasions in 
Snelwar’s restaurant, where I showed it to everybody, about thirty 
people, on many occasions. At the same time I bought a box full of 
ammunition (exhibit 21). Iwanted 12s. for the revolver in Snelwar’s, 
and on one occasion two men wanted to buy it. I loaded it to show 
them how it could be loaded, and it has been loaded ever since. I 
have only had it in my pocket on two different occasions; after that 
it was lying in my room all the time. On 2nd December I converted 
thirty-five sovereigns into bank notes at the Capital and Counties 
Bank, Commercial Road. 

_ Where did you get that £35 from?—About Ist December I went 
to the club in Greenfield Street, where I used to go on several occa- 
sions to watch other people playing faro. On this occasion the 
croupier induced me to put up some money. I laid out £10, and 
at the end, towards ten o’clock, I had won £28, which, with the £10 
I had put in, made £38. I paid the croupier £3, being a sovereign 
for every £10 and £1 extra, and I left the club with £35. I may 
mention that the bank bag which has been spoken about I got in 
this place. It was a bag for 5s. worth of silver, and I took it up to 
put the gold into it when I left the place. As regards the watch 
which I pawned on 23rd December, I could not sell it, and so I 
pawned it. 

On that 23rd December were you in any need of money ?—None 
whatever ; I had close on £30, in fact. During the time I was selling 
this cheap jewellery and living in Grove Street or Newark Street, I 
was in the habit of going to Snelwar’s Warsaw Restaurant. Some- 
times I used to go in there about three times a day to have my 
meals, and sometimes I would miss a day or two. 

Did you meet there the unfortunate man?—I did. I knew him 
by the name of ‘‘ the Landlord.’’ I did not know him by any other 
name. He was known by everybody in there as ‘* the Landlord.”’ 

Did you kill that man?—No, I did not. 

How often used you to meet that unfortunate man!—Every time 
he used to come in it was in the afternoon; he was always there, as 
well as his brother. I have been using the Warsaw Restaurant ever 
since I have been living in the East End, since about the month of 
November. ; 

Did you ever see Beron with large sums of money about him !— 
I have never seen him with any money whatever, bar some silver he 
used to take out of his right-hand trouser pocket—silver out of a 
small purse. f 

Have you ever seen him with £20 or £30 in gold?—I have never 
seen him with any such money. : 

In a wash-leather bag?—I have never seen 1t. 

It has been said that on one occasion you compared watches, or 
you saw his watch?—Anybody could see his watch, for the ae 


Steinie Morrison. 
Steinie Morrison 


reason that, whenever he was sitting down by the table, his coat was 
always open. 

Did you ever have it in your hand?—Never in my life. 

Did he ever have your watch in his hand?—No. When Beron 
was in the restaurant, he always used to walk up and down and talk 
to everybody as well as myself. 

Was he always there when you went to the restaurant ?—Not 
always, but generally three or four days a week. 

Were you ever in Beron’s rooms at 133 Jubilee Street /—I never 
knew where he lived until it was put in the papers. 

Was Beron ever in your rooms!/—Never in my life, so far as I 
know, unless he has been there when J was out. 

Was he ever in Grove Street ?—Never; I did not know him at 
the time. 

Was he ever in Newark Street?—No. I used to offer jewellery for 
sale in Snelwar’s restaurant. I used to see the boy Jack Taw in 
the restaurant every day. 

What was he doing there ?—Loafing about all day long. I have 
seen him sometimes acting as a waiter. I never showed the pistol to 
him, but he was standing by, and saw it at the time I tried to sell it 
to those two men. I ama left-handed man. About 12th December I 
was travelling with common jewellery in Southwark Bridge Road, 
and as I was passing Frank’s shop I saw him in the window repairing 
watches. I had got to know him eight years before. I went into 
his shop, and I heard then for the first time of the existence of 
Florence Dellow. 

Have you met a man at Snelwar’s restaurant called ‘‘ the 
Colonial ’’ 1—Yes, the first time I went in there. He was a very old 
customer, going there every day. He has not been called here as 
a witness. I do not know his name, but everybody in there knows 
him as “‘ the Colonial.’’ He is also a jewellery traveller. 

What is your habit as to changing your linen?—I used to change 
my linen every Sunday morning, sometimes on Saturday, very 
seldom. Always on Sunday morning I used to put on my best suit 
of clothes—that is, the one out of which pieces have been cut for 
analysing purposes. I used to wear a collar about two days, some- 
times three. At that time I had six or seven collars. 

I have here eight collars found by the police either at the 
laundry or at Florrie Dellow’s, or at Newark Street. Were any of 
those collars bought at Gardiner’s ?—Six. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—What is the point? 

Mr. Asincer—The point here is this, that a man who had got 
six or seven clean collars is not likely to be wearing the same blood- 
stained collar that he was wearing on the night of a bloody murder 
committed eight days before. 

Lramination continued—As regards the chain I was wearing 
when I was arrested, I bought it on 23rd December somewhere near 

158 


~~" x BO 


Evidence for Defence. 
Steinie Morrison 
the London Hospital. I paid £1 10s. for it, but I did not get a 
receipt. I had two pairs of boots, one brown and one patent. I 
had a Homburg hat, a bowler, and a brown cap. I bought the hat! 
in the Strand about 30th November or the beginning of December, 
and paid half a crown for it. 

Before the last day of last year, did you ever walk with Beron 
homewards?—I never walked with him through the streets to my 
knowledge, so far as I can remember. 

How would you, in the natural way, walk from Osborn Street, 
the Warsaw Restaurant, to Newark Street ?—When coming out of the 
restaurant I generally turned to the left and came into the White- 
chapel main road ; then I turned to the left again, and straight along 
the pavement on the left-hand side up to Sidney Street at the corner ; 
then I crossed the road and turned round the corner into Sidney 
Street, and when I came to Newark Street I turned to the right in 
Newark Street until I came to No. 91. I think I got up between 
eight and nine o’clock on 31st December; I generally get up about 
eight o’clock in the morning, sometimes nine. When I got up I 
used to go out and wash myself, and by the time I was dressed Mrs. 
Zimmerman generally brought some milk to me. I had a latch- 
key for 91 Newark Street, which I sometimes used in the day time, 
but very seldom. 

At night did you use the latchkey!—I could not have come in at 
night if the door was bolted, but whenever I did come in at night, 
when the door was shut, I always opened it with my latchkey. The 
key of my room was kept in the kitchen. There was a wardrobe in 
my room, and the key for that was also kept in the kitchen, so that 
anybody who had access to my room could have opened that wardrobe 
if they wanted to. 

Have you ever possessed a dagger 5 or 6 inches long?—I never 
had one in my life, so far as I know. The penknife that has been 
produced is the only one I had. 

Had you in Newark Street a weapon which has been described 
as a bar of iron?—I had no weapon of any kind whatever in there 
bar the revolver. I see no reason why I should have such a thing; 
I had no use for it. 

Where and when did you buy the flute that has been produced? 
—On 3lst December, the last day of December—31st, I believe. I 
bought it in Aldgate, as you come out of Whitechapel into Aldgate, 
about the third or fourth stall on the left-hand side. I believe I 
bought some common jewellery down there, and I took a fancy to 
that flute and bought it as well. I paid 4s. or 4s. 6d., I believe, or 
something like that. I should think it would be between ten and 
eleven in the morning when I bought it. I had my breakfast that 
morning at the Warsaw Restaurant. Mintz kept me waiting for 
about a quarter of an hour. I saw him standing and talking in the 
kitchen, and I shouted out to him, ‘ Hullo, what are you doing 

159 


Steinie Morrison. 
Steinie Morrison 


down there? Are you trying to hang yourself again? ’’ Upon which 
he ran out of the kitchen, came to my table and served me; but he 
told me, ‘‘ If ever I get the chance to get it out of you I will ’’— 
and I believe he is doing it now. 

When did you first learn that the man had been in a lunatic 
asylum ?—When I first came there he was not at that restaurant ; he 
came to that restaurant, I should think, some time in November, and 
he began to be waiter there again, and they told me that he hanged 
himself. 

I left Snelwar’s restaurant after my breakfast, soon after nine, 
I believe, and I went to the stall in Aldgate, where I bought the flute. 
The flute was done up in brown paper and tied up with a bit of string, 
and I put it in my overcoat pocket. After that I went about travel- 
ling with that common jewellery. 

Did you sell any?—Oh, yes. I had my dinner about half-past 
two, I think, somewhere in Commercial Road. I was at the time 
travelling with that jewellery round about Cambridge Road, in 
Commercial Road, and I happened to go at the back of Cambridge 
Road into Cleveland Street—that was about two o’clock in the morn- 
ing, I believe. 

Two o’clock in the morning—in the afternoon you mean ?!—Yes, 
two o’clock in the afternoon. As I was passing by Jane Brodsky— 
whom I had seen occasionally before but whom I did not know to 
speak to—was standing at the garden gate, and as she was coming 
out she happened to slip. She accidentally knocked into me and 
I apologised. I then went up the road towards Whitechapel and 
had my dinner in a restaurant, and afterwards I went up to 
Newark Street where I had a wash. I came to know Eva Flitter- 
man some time about 25th December. I met her at 2 Harding 
Street, which is a prostitutes’ house. I asked her to come home 
with me and she came with me to Newark Street. I gave her 5s. 
Ske was awake all the evening, she complained about the cold— 
and I gave her as a present a green scarf for which I paid half 
a crown. 

By Mr. Justicn Daruing—She came with me to Mrs. Zimmer- 
man’s house in Newark Street in the evening and she stayed for 
about an hour and a half or two hours. 

Heamination continued—I went into Snelwar’s restaurant on 
31st December about eight o’clock in the evening. I do not re- 
member looking at the time, but I do not believe it was later than 
that—it might have been a few minutes perhaps. I had the flute 
in my pocket when I went in. The little girl ran forward to meet 
me—the little girl I used to give fruit to—and asked me ‘‘ What 
have you got in this parcel?’’ I said ‘‘ A flute,’’? and I took off 
my overcoat and hat and then took the parcel out of my pocket, 
gave it to the waiter who was standing behind the bar, and asked 
him to keep it for me till I came back from the Shoreditch Empire. 

160 


eh a 


Evidence for Defence. 


Steinie Morrison 


I did not know the waiter’s name at the time, but I know it now 
to be Mintz. 

You did it openly—could everybody in the restaurant, if they 
wanted to do so, see you give it to him?—I went inside, to the 
middle of the restaurant, and put it on the table. I took off my 
overcoat and hat and put it on the bench and then took the flute 
off the table, took it up to the bar, and handed it to him. 

On your oath was there a bar of iron in that brown paper !— 
It was that flute that they have got down here in the Court. 
Nothing besides that so far as I know. I had some food of some 
sort; I do not remember what exactly it was but I should think 
it was a substantial tea. 

Was Beron there?’—I believe so, but I am not quite sure. I 
know that his brother Solomon was there. There were a lot of 
customers about the restaurant at the time—thirty or forty I should 
think—and I did not take no notice of anybody particularly. 

It has been said by Mr. Snelwar that you were with Beron 
about nine o’clock. Is that true?—No, I could not have been. 

That you stayed together with him until 11.45?—I did not. 

That at 11.45 you two men went out together ?—We did not. 

Did you know this man Hermilin]—Yes, he was in the 
restaurant almost every day. I did not know his name but I knew 
him by sight. I have spoken to him, too. 

He says that eight days before Christmas he saw you look at 
Beron’s watch!—He never saw me doing anything of the kind. 
I used to see his watch and chain every day because his coat was 
quite: open and anybody could see. I have seen his watch as he 
took it out to look at it, but I have never had it in my hand. So 
far as I know I never remarked that it was a very heavy watch. 

Did you have the watch in your hand and did you remark 
that it was a very heavy watch?—I did not. It is not the case that 
I was taking tea with Beron between 8.30 and 9. I had my meal 
by myself and I left the restaurant at 8.30 and did not come back. 
I looked at my watch and I saw that it was 8.30 when I left the 
restaurant. 

Why did you look at your watch!—I always do before I leave 
the restaurant and sometimes when I have meals. After leaving 
the restaurant I went to the Shoreditch Empire and I was in the 
place, I believe, ten or fifteen minutes before the performance 
commenced. I was standing behind at the time. The perform- 
ance generally commenced about nine o’clock, but I cannot re- 
member exactly. I have been there several times, but I have never 
had occasion to watch the time the performance commences. I 
remember I took out half a sovereign and put it on the counter 
and I got a ticket and some change—8s. or Qs. 

Did you pay ls. or did you pay Is. 6d.?—I cannot remember, 
but when I did go to that music-hall I generally paid 1s. because 

L 161 


Steinie Morrison. 


Steinie Morrison 


that is the price of the place I go whenever I do go inside. I 
cannot remember paying more than ls. even on a Saturday. I 
rather liked this music-hall, and I have been there on several 
occasions, and I always go to the same place, the stalls. 

On this occasion you say you put down half a sovereign. Are 
you prepared to tell us whether you received 8s. 6d. or 9s. change 
that night?—I cannot exactly remember. Of course I expected to 
get 9s. change for the simple reason that I always paid ls. I 
believe I can remember some of the turns at the music-hall that 
night. There was an actress—I believe it was Gertie Gitana. 
There was Harry Lauder. 

By Mr. Justice Dartiye—I am not sure whether Harry 
Lauder was there—I cannot remember exactly. 

Why did you mention his name?—Because I have seen him 
there. Then there were also a little boy and girl singing a song 
and acting as man and wife. There was somebody playing a 
piano; there was a lady singing; there was a gentleman dressed 
up as a Scotsman, and he spoke in the language of a Scotsman, too. 

Examination continued—In the part of the house in which I 
was seated I saw Miss Jane Brodsky. I took notice of her because 
of her good looks. I also saw her sister, but I did not know that 
she was her sister at the time. I did not speak to them that night. 
I left the music-hall I think at 11.20 or 11.30; I am not quite 
sure, because it is such a long time ago, but I am perfectly sure 
it was after eleven o’clock. I did not have a programme; I never 
buy one, in fact. After leaving the music-hall I turned to the left 
along Commercial Street and I got to Snelwar’s restaurant about 
11.45 or something like that. It is a good twenty or thirty 
minutes’ walk from the Shoreditch Empire to that place. 

When you arrived there did you see Beron?’—It is quite 
possible that I believe I did. I do not think he was sitting down: 
he nearly always stands up most of the time. 

By Mr. Justice Dartisc—Do you remember seeing him on 
that night ?—Yes. 

Examination continued—tThere are separate tables with chairs 
round them in Snelwar’s restaurant and any one can go in and 
sit down where he likes. ‘As you go into the restaurant there is a 
bar where cakes, bread and butter and so forth are exhibited. 
ee into the restaurant there are about fourteen or fifteen 
ables. 

Did you sit down at the same table with Beron that night ?— 
No, of course I did not. The restaurant never closes before twelve 
o’clock on Saturday nights, and very often later. 

How much later !—Well, I have not been there long enough to 
wait till they shut it up altogether ; I generally leave before twelve 
myself. 

162 


Evidence for Delasee. 


Steinie Morrison 


What time did you leave the restaurant?—I should think it 
was about 11.45 or 11.50. I had a cup of tea, I think, and a 
piece of cake. I do not think I had my coat off. I went to the 
bar and asked for the flute. While they were giving me the flute 
I called for a glass of lemonade. I drank the lemonade, put the 
flute in my pocket, and went out. I had on the brown motor cap 
that is now in Court. I had brown boots with very light spats, 
loose from the boots. If I wanted to take my boots off I took the 
spats off first. 


The Court adjourned. 


163 


Sixth Day—Saturday, 11th March, 1911. 


Stemnre Morrison, recalled, further examined by Mr. ABINGER 
—When I came out of the restaurant on the night of 31st December | 
turned to the left; I came out into Whitechapel and turned again to 
the left, and went right along Whitechapel till I came to Cambridge 
Road, and then I crossed the road into Sidney Street. As I was 
coming round the corner of Sidney Street somebody shouted out to 
me, ‘‘ Bon soir, monsieur.’? I looked round, and saw the unfor- 
tunate man and another very tall man standing across on the other 
side of the pavement—-that is, Sidney Street. I could see that man; 
he was very well dressed, but I could not see his face, as he was 
standing with his back towards me. I turned round the corner, went 
right up Sidney Street, and came to Newark Street, turned into 
Newark Street, and as I was passing No. 93 I saw a woman standing 
at the door, but I did not speak to her—one of the witnesses that 
came here yesterday, I believe. The next door was the house where 
I was living at the time. I let myself in with the latchkey, which I 
took out of my pocket, and went inside the kitchen. The landlord and 
the landlady, Mr. and Mrs. Zimmerman, were both inside. I took 
the key of my room from the mantelshelf in the kitchen and went 
to my room, locked the door, undressed myself, and went to bed. 
About ten minutes after I had gone into my room I heard the door 
bolted. 

Upon your oath, did you leave that room again that night ?— 
I swear that I never left this house till the first thing on the Sunday 
morning, lst January, after nine o’clock. I got up between nine and 
ten, and went into the yard to have a wash. I then put on my 
jacket and went to the baths just outside of Sidney Street—Sidney 
Square, I believe itis. After I had my bath I came back home and 
went into my room and dressed myself. First of all I put on clean 
linen, and then I put on my green suit, the one I am wearing now. 
When I dressed myself Mrs. Zimmerman was putting the milk up to 
warm for me, and I stood outside the street door till it was ready. 
At the same time Mr. Zimmerman came along the passage and asked 
me the time, and I remember taking out my watch. I think it 
would be about twenty minutes past nine when I saw Mrs. Zimmer- 
man that morning. When she brought my milk in I gave her my 
washing, and I paid her 3s. for my lodgings and 7d. for my milk. 
It was customary for me to pay my rent on a Sunday. After paying 
my rent, I put on my green overcoat and hat, and went up Newark 
Street, along the back of the London Hospital, and into Fieldgate 
Street. I went into a restaurant there—No. 7 Fieldgate Street, I 

164 


Db Sh eS 


Evidence for Defence. 

f ; Steinie Morrison 
believe it is, the one in which I was arrested. (Shown Daily Graphic 
of 9th January exhibit 73.) That contains a picture of the 
restaurant. 

Why did you not have your breakfast at the Warsaw Restaurant? 
—Because I am not a regular customer down there. I had been in 
this restaurant on several occasions before, and had very often had 
breakfast there. One reason why I did not go to the Warsaw 
Restaurant was that Mintz kept me waiting the day before, and I 
complained to him. After I finished my breakfast I put on my 
overcoat and my hat, and came out of Fieldgate Street into White- 
chapel, along Whitechapel into Osborn Street, and into Snelwar’s 
restaurant. There were several customers in at the time. I saw 
Snelwar standing against the counter, and I asked him if he had 
seen the ‘‘ Colonial ’’ there, and he said that he had not been there 
yet, but he might be there by and by. I then left the restaurant and 
came out into Whitechapel, turned to the right, went towards the 
Bank, and from there I went to Westminster Bridge ; I crossed West- 
minster Bridge and went to 116 York Road. About 28th December 
I received a postcard from Frank, the landlord, in which he invited 
me to come on a Sunday, and that he would introduce me to Florrie 
Dellow. I knocked at the door, and a little girl opened it, and I 
went in. Frank was in the kitchen with his wife and children 
having their breakfast. This would be between twelve and one, I 
think, or perhaps it was not quite twelve. Mrs. Frank was counting 
some money which they told me was their rent money. I saw two 
£5 notes on the table, and I asked her if she would oblige me with 
those notes for gold. She said, ‘‘ You can have them if you like.’’ 
Mr. Frank took two notes off the table and handed them to me, and 
I gave him ten sovereigns for them. 

Why did you want bank notes for gold?—Because whenever I 
have gold I always change it into bank notes, as I do not like carrying 
loose money about with me. I am aware that bank notes have 
numbers upon them and can be traced. After changing the sovereigns 
into notes, I was taken upstairs by Mr. Frank and introduced to 
Florrie Dellow. It was arranged between her and me that I should 
live with her. I went back by railway to Newark Street, arriving 
there after two o’clock, and I told the landlady that my intention 
was to go away to Paris. I said that because I did not want her 
to think that I was leaving her place for a different place. I packed 
up my things and took my luggage and revolver, intending to go to 
St. Mary’s railway station. On my way there I thought that if I 
went to 116 York Road without the landlord’s permission I might 
get turned out, and that therefore it would be advisable for me to 
leave my things in the East End. Newark Street is a good half- 
mile’s walk from St. Mary’s railway station, and I did not wish to 
carry them back, and so I took them to the nearest place, 72 Romford 
Street, Fieldgate Mansions, just at the back of St. Mary’s railway 

165 


Steinie Morrison. 
Steinio Morrison 


station—a private house kept by a married couple—I believe Taylor 
is their name. I left the revolver in the cloakroom at the station. 

By Mr. Justice Dartmvc—I engaged a room in this house at 
Fieldgate Mansions for 3s. a week, which I paid, and left my things 
there. 

Examination continued—I did not go back to Mrs. Zimmerman’s 
because it was such a long way to go back to Newark Street, and 
I had been carrying my things in my hands all the time. 

Why did you deposit the revolver at the railway station ?— 
Because I intended to go to Florrie Dellow, and I did not wish to 
frighten her with it. That was my only reason. After leaving my 
things at Fieldgate Mansions I went into Fieldgate Street, and from 
Fieldgate Street into Whitechapel, and then into Osborn Street, past 
the restaurant, and into a street which I know now as Thrawl Street, 
into No. 18, where the Flittermans lived. I got there some time 
in the evening, I cannot remember when. I went in and saw Miss 
Flitterman, her mother, her sisters, her brothers, and her brothers- 
in-law. The mother asked me for some money, and I cashed a cheque 
for Isaac Flitterman. I gave him eight half-sovereigns, taking the 
gold out of a brown paper bag. I also had some bank notes. I 
stayed at the Flitterman’s for about two hours, leaving about 8.30 
or nine o’clock, and I went to St. Mary’s railway station and took a 
ticket for Westminster. From there I went to York Road, and I 
slept that night with Mrs. Dellow. Next morning, 2nd January, I 
had my breakfast with Mrs. Dellow, and I left her between nine and 
ten o’clock and went to Romford Street, Fieldgate Mansions, and 
took the common jewellery from there and went about travelling with 
it right up Mile End Road, Bow Road, and round about that district. 

It has been suggested that you disappeared after 3lst December. 
Were you, as a matter of fact, walking about that morning in White- 
chapel ?—Certainly. 

What part?’—The main road. I tried to sell my jewellery round 
about Bow, in all the coffee shops and restaurants. I took my mid- 
day dinner in a Christian coffee shop somewhere near Bow Road, 
which is a turning out of Mile End Road. 

Dellow has told us that you could not sleep with her on Monday 
night ; is that true 

The Forsman—My lord, are we to try all this? These details 
seem to me quite unnecessary. I do not know anything about the 
legal points of view. I am only talking as it appeals to us. 

Mr. Justice Dartivc—I sympathise with your view very deeply, 
and I have tried to indicate that more than once. It is necessary, 
I think, that some sort of explanation should be given, but that it 
should be given in all this detail is to my mind absolutely unnecessary. 

Mr. Asrmnerr—And to my mind, with great submission to your 
lordship, absolutely necessary, for this reason. It has been suggested 
that this man has committed a murder and disappeared. I am 

166 


Evidence for Defence. 


f : Steinie Morrison 
directing my questions with the view of showing that this man stood 
his ground, did not disappear, and walked about Whitechapel every 
day. Unless your lordship rules that I am not to do this, or the 
jury indicate that they do not want to hear it, I propose taking this 
man’s life during the week that he was wanted. London was being 
ransacked, I might say, to discover the murderer of Mr. Beron. This 
man was reading the papers and knew that this was being done, and 
stood his ground, and I thought, to the best of my humble judgment, 
it was a most important fact, not from the point of view of the 
prosecution, but from the point of view of the accused. 

Mr. Justice Dartmve—Are you addressing the jury, or what are 
you doing now? 

Mr. Apincrr—I am addressing your lordship. 

Mr. Justice Dartivc—There is no need to address me on a point 
like this in such a rhetorical strain. 

Mr. Asrnesr—lIf your lordship rules 

Mr. Justice Dartivc—I rule nothing of the kind. I told the 
jury that, although I indicated to them that it is right and proper 
that he should give some explanation as to where he was between 
this time and his arrest, yet that it should be done in such detail as it 
is being led into now is, to my mind, absolutely unnecessary. If he 
gives some proper sort of indication where he was on each of those 
days, where he slept and what he was doing, that is enough. There 
is this that must be borne in mind, that he will be cross-examined, 
and if there is anything more that is desired to be known about it, 
he will be asked it then; but if he accounts for his time not in every 
detail, but with some sort of particularity, that is enough. 

Examination continued—On the evening of 2nd January I was 
in the Shoreditch Empire. After I had sat down the Miss Brodskys 
came in and sat next to me. 

Did you speak to either of them!—Yes ; this was the first time I 
ever spoke to them. After we came out I walked home with them. I 
did not go inside their house in Cleveland Street, but I was standing 
outside for a quarter of an hour, I should think. That night I slept 
at Romford Street, 72 Fieldgate Mansions. The next day, 3rd 
January, I went about travelling with common jewellery. In the 
afternoon I happened to be in Southwark Bridge Road, and I went 
into Mr. Max Frank’s shop and asked his permission to live with 
Florrie Dellow, and he agreed. After that I went to York Road, 
Lambeth. Before that I went to Flitterman’s to get my umbrella, 
which I had left there on Sunday evening; I went through Osborn 
Street into Thrawl Street and past Snelwar’s restaurant. I slept that 
night in Romford Street. I did not sleep with Florrie Dellow because 
ghe said there were some friends coming to her house and it would 
not be convenient. I walked out with her, however, through York 
Road and Westminster. She went to see her boy somewhere in 
Camberwell. 


167 


Steinie Morrison. 
Steinie Morrison 


When I got up on the morning of 4th January I had my break- 
fast in Fieldgate Street, in the restaurant where I was afterwards 
arrested, and then I went to Gardiner’s shop at the corner of Com- 
mercial Road and Whitechapel and bought six collars and some other 
things. I then went to York Road, taking all my things with me. 
I continued to sleep every night with Florrie Dellow until Saturday. 
I was in Whitechapel every day. I can read English. During this 
period I was reading the papers every day. 

Did you know of the hue and ery after the murderer of Mr. 
Beron?—Oh, yes, but I did not know that it was the ‘‘ Landlord.” 
I knew that there was a murder in the middle of Clapham Common, 
and that they were looking for the murderer, but I certainly did not 
know that that was the man. I did not know that his name was 
Beron. I knew Solomon Beron merely by sight; I did not know his 
name. In the restaurant he was known as the ‘‘ Landlord.’’ 

On the evening of Friday, 6th January, I called at Miss 
Brodsky’s, and I gave her a silver watch and a rolled gold chain as 
a present, which cost about 14s. or 15s., I believe. I took her and 
her little sister to the Forrester’s music hall. } 

On the morning of 7th January, after sleeping the night with 
Florrie Dellow, I asked her where the nearest baths were, and she 
said, ‘* You go outside, get on a tram, and it will put you down at 
Kennington Baths.’’ I went and had a bath, and when I returned 
I changed my socks, pants, vest, shirt, collar, and two pocket hand- 
kerchiefs ; I put on my Sunday clothes and Sunday tie. When I was 
going out Mrs. Dellow said that some friend was coming that Saturday 
night, and I said ‘‘ It does not matter; I will come on Sunday 
morning.’’ I slept that night at 32 St. James Street—Mrs. 
Cinnamon, a friend of mine I used to know a very long time ago. 
I slept with her son in the same bed. I did not go back to Fieldgate 
Mansions, because I had removed all my things from there. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—You slept at Mrs. Cinnamon’s—in what 
street was it?—32 St. James Street. I am not perfectly sure that 
that is the name of the street. 

Whereabouts is it?—I heard Mr. Wensley mention that name, 
but I am not quite sure where it is. It is off Commercial Road. I 
should think it will be about 500 yards from Snelwar’s restaurant. 

Examination contenued—I got up about eight o’clock on Sunday, 
8th January, or perhaps past that. While I was washing my nose 
began to bleed, and as I was stooping down some blood got on to my 
left hand. I went that morning to Newark Street to get my washing. 
Mrs. Zimmerman went to the laundry to fetch the things, and when 
she came back she said that the laundry was not open. I went to 
Fieldgate Street and had my breakfast in the restaurant where I 
was arrested. I read the papers there. 

Describe carefully when the police came into the restaurant ; 
how many came in?!—Three of them jumped in at once, but there were 

168 


eS 


Evidence for Defence. 
Steinie Morrison 


one or two afterwards. I was seized at once by two, and the third 
one, Inspector Wensley, caught hold of my arm. Inspector Wensley 
said to me, “‘ Steinie, I want you for murder.’’ The other two officers 
at once started rubbing my hands along my sides. I did not know 
what it was for. I thought they were going to put something in my 
pockets, and I said to them, ‘‘ Please don’t put anything in my 
pockets.’’ My pockets were searched in the restaurant, and then I 
was taken through the streets. One detective held my left arm and 
another detective held my right arm; Inspector Wensley was within 
a foot or two behind me, and the other two were following up. 

- When you were taken to the police station what happened ?— 
They searched my pockets and took everything out of them. 
Inspector Wensley was writing something in a book across the desk, 
and I was standing behind the desk. He said to me, ‘‘ You will be 
detained at present, but you will be charged with murder when 
Inspector Ward comes.’’ I was then put in an open cell. All my 
clothes were taken away from me—everything bar the pants, socks, 
and vest—and they gave me some blankets to put on. There were 
no people brought into the police station on that Sunday for the 
purpose of seeing whether they could identify me. I slept that night 
in Leman Street. 

On the 9th I was taken into the office, where there were nine or 
ten persons, every one of whom was very shabbily dressed, poorly 
dressed, and I was told to stand among them. 

You have seen all the witnesses now. Who was the first witness 
that was brought in?—I cannot remember ; they, most of them, were 
out of Snelwar’s restaurant. Castlin, the cab driver, was not the first 
man who was brought in. Mrs. Deitch came that morning, also 
Hermilin, Snelwar, Rosen, and several others. I should think it 
would be about ten o’clock, but I did not have a watch, and [I could 
not tell the time. I was taken to Brixton some time in the afternoon, 
and I was charged formally there. I cannot remember whether I had 
my dinner at Leman Street or at Brixton. While at Leman Street 
I sent for Inspector Wensley and said that I wished to make a 
statement. 

Inspector Ward has told us that you said, “‘ I understand that 
I am detained here on a very serious charge, murder, I am told, and 
I desire to make a voluntary statement,’’ and that he replied, “‘ Very 
well, perhaps if you tell me verbally what it is we shall understend.”’ 
Is that what took place?—Yes. I was put into the dock at the South- 
Western Police Court that afternoon. The Court was crowded, I 
believe. Whilst the case was proceeding at the Police Court my 
greatcoat was taken from me for examination. About a week ago— 
after I had been committed for trial—a suit of clothes was taken 
from me. That suit of clothes was not returned to me; I saw it 
yesterday in this Court. I feel perfectly sure that pieces must have 
been cut out of it as it was taken away for analysing. 

169 


Steinie Morrison. 


Steinie Morrison 


Mr. Apincer—Sergeant Cooper tells me that pieces have been 
cut out of the trousers of that suit. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Murr—When you went to the Flitterman’s 
on Ist January how much money had you in your possession ?—l 
should think I had about £28, not more than that; I cannot tell you 
exactly. I had four bank notes, and I had £8 or £9 in gold. 

Just look at the two bank notes which have been produced 
(exhibit 33). Are those two of them!—Yes. 

Where did you get those from!—They are the two that I got 
from Mr. Frank for ten sovereigns. 

Where did you get the other two from?—At Cook’s offices; one 
of them I changed in York Road on Wednesday, I believe; we had 
some supper at Savage’s restaurant. Cook’s name is on the back of 
it as well as my name in pencil, ‘‘ Steinie Morrison.’’ 

What had you given in exchange for those two that you got from 
Cook’s offices?—Ten sovereigns. I wish to point out to you that I 
did not change them all at once, but one at a time; sometimes two 
at a time; it all depends how much gold I had got in my pockets; I 
very often change them like this. 

Which of Cook’s offices did you get those two bank notes from? 
—Aldgate. There is a bank at the corner of Commercial Street ; the 
office is several yards away from that bank. 

When did you get those two bank notes !—Before Christmas. 

Where did you get the gold from that you gave for those two 
bank notes to Cook’s’—When I changed my £35 into seven bank 
notes in Commercial Road in the course of business it was necessary 
for me sometimes to change it into gold, as sometimes going into a 
restaurant I had to oblige customers—on the Sunday especially—I 
cashed them cheques for £3 or £4 on different banks; I paid them 
with money and cashed the cheque afterwards. Sometimes they 
even paid me 6d. for doing so; and if I take those cheques to the 
bank, if they are £4 and less, sometimes I put a sovereign on the 
counter and ask them to give me a £5 note; but as I am not a 
customer at the bank they tell me they cannot do it for me, so they 
give me gold, and when I have gold I generally go into Cook’s or 
somewhere else and change the gold into notes. 

What I asked was where you got the gold from that you gave to 
Cook’s for those two £5 notes?—I changed the bank notes which 
I had in the course of business for gold, and having gold in my pocket 
I went into Cook’s and got bank notes for it. 

You had £35 in bank notes on 2nd December !—Yes. 

What did you do with those notes!—In the course of business 
I was obliged to change them. Afterwards when I had gold again I 
used to change it at Cook’s for notes again or somewhere—wherever 
I had a chance to change it into notes. 

In what business did you change £35 in notes between 2nd 

170 


Evidence for Defence. 


Steinie Morrison 


December and this date?—As I have told you before, if I go into a 
restaurant—— 

What was the business you were carrying on!—Paying out money 
for cheques and getting a sixpence, sometimes a shilling, for it. 

A money changer ?—Sometimes, yes ; to oblige people who cannot 
go to the bank on a Sunday. 

Can you name any single person for whom you changed a cheque 
between 2nd and 25th December?—No, certainly not; I never ask 
them their names. 

Do you get their cheques ?—Certainly. 

With their names on them?—Is it my business to look at their 
names? Their names are not on the cheque. 

Will you name any single person for whom you changed a cheque 
between 2nd and 25th December ?—But you will excuse me; the name 
of the person for whom I changed the cheque is not on the cheque. 

Answer my question. Will you name any person for whom you 
changed a cheque between 2nd and 25th December!—No, certainly 
not, because I never asked them for their names. 

You cashed those cheques at the bank /—Yes. 

Can you bring any witness to prove that you cashed any cheque 
between 2nd and 25th of December?—If I had known that I would be 
arrested and accused of a crime that I had never committed I would 
certainly take the precautions to take the names of those people, 
but, as I did not expect anything of the kind, I naturally did not ask 
them for their name. 

Will you name any bank where you changed the cheques that 
you got?—I did not even know the name of the bank in which I 
cashed the cheque—the very last one—for the simple reason that I 
did not look at it. 

You have told us that you got £38 in sovereigns in a gambling 
house !/—Yes. 

What date did you get that £381—I believe it was on Ist 
December, between six in the evening and ten in the evening, or 
perhaps a bit later than that. 

Had you ever been in that gaming house before!—I have been 
there once, yes; I used to go in there to look“on—there are several 
gambling houses in the same street. 

I am talking about that one?—In this one I had been twice— 
once before that occasion. 

Have you got any witness at all who can say that you won money 
in that gambling house!—I do not know the names of those people, 
but I can bring forward—of course, I do not know where he lives, 
but I can give you the name of the croupier who drew the bank for 
me, if you could find him; his name is 

It depends absolutely on your word that you won that money at 
all?—I will tell you. If I had known that I would be arrested for 
murder I would certainly take precautions to get such evidence, but, 

171 


Steinie Morrison. 


Steinie Morrison 


as I tell you, I am arrested on a crime that I have not committed, 
and I naturally did not expect that such things would come up. 

Have you got any witnesses to corroborate your statement that 
you won money at all in a gambling house on that date?—As I tell 
you, I can give you the name of the croupier. 

Will you answer my question 

Mr. Justice Darumc—He is trying to answer it. He says he 
can give you the name of the croupier. 

By Mr. Mur—Have you got any witnesses?—If I am taken by 
two police officers, or more, in a taxicab, I can take you to the place 
and bring you a dozen witnesses who saw me win the money there. 
As I do not know the name of the house, or the name of the people, 
I cannot give you their addresses, but if I am taken there I can bring 
you forward the whole house to prove that I won that money there. 

Have you made any application to the Home Secretary to be 
allowed to go there for the purpose of finding witnesses who can prove 
that you won that money?!—No, for the simple reason that I did 
not know anything of the kind would be allowed to me. 

Have you ever told this story of winning £38 in gold until you 
came to this Court?—No, for the simple reason that I did not wish 
the detectives to go and bully all my witnesses as they did to every 
one of them that have been present in Court up to now. 

But you have no witnesses to prove this!—No; as I told you 
before—the fact is there still—that I did have that money and did 
change it at the bank. 

You told us also that you got £20 from your mother !—Yes. 

When did you get that?—Between the 20th November and the 
30th; I cannot exactly remember the date. 

Where did the money come from?—From Russia. 

What form did it come in?—It came in two £5 notes and a £10 
note, as far as I can remember. 

English money !—English money, yes. 

What did you do with those notes!—I bought some clothes— 
everything almost that I have now bar a set of underclothes I bought 
at Gardiner’s, and a pair of boots and shoes—everything else, as well 
as the gold watch and chain I bought for that money. 

Have you got any letter that came with that money ?—No. 

Does that again depend entirely upon your word?!—I destroyed 
that letter, for the simple reason that I did not wish to keep it with 
me. 


Have you got any corroboration at all of your word that you 
got that £20 from Russia !—As I told you before, I have no witnesses 
to prove it, but the fact is there that I did have it; otherwise I would 
not be able to buy all those things. I did have it; the fact is there 
whether I am able to prove it or not. 

Now, besides the £35 and the £20, what other money had you 
during the month of December?!—I did not have any money bar that 

172 


Evidence for Defence. 
Steinie Morrison 


I used to get from the common jewellery, about £2 a week, sometimes 
£2 5s., sometimes £2 10s., but very seldom less than £2. 

On 23rd December you pawned a watch and chain?—On 23rd 
December I pawned a chain for £4 10s. 

Where had you bought that chain?—The chain, half-sovereign 
mounted, and gold watch I bought together between the 30th and the 
lst or 2nd of December, I cannot remember the date, but the date is 
on the receipt, in Black Lion Yard, in a jeweller’s. As you come 
from Whitechapel into Black Lion Yard it igs on the right-hand side 
—it is the second or third jeweller’s; I cannot exactly remember. 

You have the receipt?—Yes, it is exhibit 27. 

So that you bought that chain on the 30th November ?—Yes. 

Now I want to call your attention to the amount of money that 
you spent on that day. First of all, a pair of boots, one guinea /— 
Yes. 

A suit of clothes that you bought from Lazarus, Limited, 
£1 17s. 1—Yes. 

Then Feldman ?—£9 17s. 6d. 

Hope Brothers, £3 5s. 5d. and 12s. 6d. ?—Yes. 

Then Simson, suit, £2?Yes. 

Then the overcoat, £2; you say you bought that the same day ? 
—Yes. 

Mr. Asivgur—My lord, I will at this stage ask my learned friend 
what issue this cross-examination is directed to. 

Mr. Mum—lIt is the possession of the money on lst January 

which he attempts to account for in the way he has already stated. 

Mr. Asrncer—That is not an answer to the point I put. I asked 
my friend what is the issue that this is directed to? 

Mr. Murr—tThe issue whether he was on the Ist of January in 
possession of the proceeds of the robbery of Leon Beron. 

Mr. Axsincer—Then that is cross-examination directed to the 
credit of the witness, and I object to it. 

Mr. Justice Darurvc—On what ground? 

Mr. Anrnger—On the ground that, by the Criminal Law Evidence 
Act, 1898, such questions can only be put to a prisoner if the prisoner 
or his advocate have brought themselves within the provisions of 
section 1 of that Act. I would like to remind your lordship, if I 
may, of the provisions of that Act. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—I know the words quite well. Have you 
forgotten your cross-examination of Mrs. Deitch? 

Mr. Apinczr—I have not forgotten anything. 

Mr. Justice Dartanc—And your cross-examination of Mintz as 
to whether he twice tried to hang himself? 

Mr. Azincer—My lord, I do not accept that description of my 
cross-examination of Mintz. 

Mr. Justice Dariivc—But the words were, ‘“ Have you twice 
tried to hang yourself? ’’? That about Colney Hatch was introduced 

173 


Steinie Morrison. 
Steinie Morrison 


afterwards. If the question had stopped at, ‘‘ Have you been at 
Colney Hatch for mental disease or aberration? ’’ that would have 
been one thing, but there was this distinct cross-examination, and I 
pointed it out to you at the time, and I told you that I pointed it 
out because I did not think you were bearing in mind the terms 
of the Criminal Evidence Act. 

Mr. Asinezr—Your lordship may take it from me that I was 
bearing in mind the provisions of this Act; but I submit with great 
confidence that, where counsel ask questions directed to show—and 
in some detail—that a witness has been trying to commit suicide, 
that is not a cross-examination directed so much to the credit of the 
witness . 
Mr. Justice Dartinc—It was not the question of the lunatic 
asylum to which I called your attention; the question was that you 
asked the man whether he had not twice attempted to hang himself. 

Mr. Apsinger—Then your lordship, if I might respectfully say 
so, might have waited till I finished the question, or, at any rate, 
asked the next question. The cross-examination was directed to show 
that this man Mintz might have been afflicted by the Almighty with 
madness, and therefore, apart from the man’s character, was not a 
proper person to give evidence in a murder trial. Your lordship—I 
appreciate and acknowledge it—made that observation for my benefit, 
but it was heard by the jury and heard by everybody in Court, and 
could easily be appreciated and understood. At any rate, I submit 
that neither of those two questions was an imputation of felony, as 
your lordship said, or attempted felony, as your lordship said, upon 
a witness for the Crown. May I remind your lordship of the 
language of this section?—‘‘ A person charged and called as a 
witness in pursuance of this Act shall not be asked, and if asked, 
shall not be required to answer, any question tending to show that 
he has committed, or been convicted of, or been charged with, any 
offence other than that wherewith he is then charged, or is of bad 
character ’’ (which is what my friend is doing), ‘‘ unless (1) the 
proof that he has committed or been convicted of such other offence 
is admissible evidence to show that he is guilty of the offence——’”’ 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—That is not the one at all. 

Mr. Apinepr—No. Then ‘‘ (2) he has personally or by his 
advocate asked questions of the witnesses for the prosecution with a 
view to establish his own good character, or has given evidence of his 
good character. x 

Mr. Justice Dartoyvec—Now comes the point. 

Mr. Asincer—Yes; ‘‘ or the nature or conduct of the defence 
is such as to involve imputations on the character of the prosecutor 
or the witnesses for the prosecution.’? I submit that the cross- 
examination by myself—a cross-examination made after the most 
careful consideration of this Act of Parliament—was not a cross- 

174 


ais 


Evidence for Defence. 


Steinie Morrison 
examination involving imputations on the character of the prosecutor 
or the witnesses for the prosecution. 

Mr. Justice Dartiyc—Did you not impute to Mrs. Deitch that 
she kept a brothel? 

Mr. Axsryezr—Will your lordship allow me to deal with this in 
order? It is a most serious matter, and I must deal with it in its 
order. Therefore I submit, with regard to Mintz, there was no cross- 
examination or imputation involving the character of that witness. 1 
never asked him if he had been convicted for dishonesty or anything 
of that kind; I asked if he had attempted to commit suicide more 
than once, and had been confined in a lunatic asylum. If your 
lordship rules that that is cross-examination involving some imputa- 
tion on that man’s moral character, I bow to your lordship’s ruling 
wich the greatest submission. Now, as to Mrs. Deitch, your lord- 
ship must bear this in mind. I respectfully call your lordship’s 
attention again to the language of this section; ‘‘ or the nature or 
conduct of the defence is such as to involve imputations on the 
character of the prosecutor.’ 

Mr. Justice Dartmya—Why do you stop at the prosecutor ? 

Mr. Asincer—I will go on; ‘‘ imputations on the character of 
the prosecutor or the witnesses for the prosecution.” 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—You left out “‘ or the witnesses for the 
prosecution.”’ 

Mr. Apincer—My lord, it was a slip. Now, your lordship appre- 
ciates that at the date of my cross-examination of the woman Deitch 
there had been a cross-examination of the woman Flitterman, a witness 
of the same class, from the same district, and there had been evidence 
by a man who alleged that he introduced Flitterman to the prisoner. 
Eva Flitterman admitted, after cross-examination, that she had com- 
mitted perjury of, I suggest, a most diabolical character. 

Mr. Justice Dartivc—When did Eva Flitterman commit it? 

Mr. Apincer—At the Police Court. 

Mr. Justices Dartinc—Had that been established before Mrs. 
Deitch was called? 

Mr. AxninezrR—Before she was cross-examined to credit—long 
before ; I can tell your lordship the date. 

Mr. Justice Daruivc—I have got a note of the witnesses. 

Mr. Asincer—She was called on 24th January. 

Mr. Justice Darzinc—No, no; I cannot take notice of what was 
done in the Police Courts. The question is what was done here in 
this Court. Eva Flitterman has not been called at all. 

Mr. Asrinczr—I submit that in this particular case your lordship 
cannot close your eyes to the fact that in a murder trial 

Mr. Justicn Darnovc—A murder trial does not differ from any 
other trial. 

Mr. Apinger—lI shall submit that it does. 


175 


Steinie Morrison. 
Steinie Morrison 


Mr. Justicn Dartivc—The same rules of evidence are applied in 
murder trials as in other trials. 

Mr. Asrnapr—The same rules of evidence, yes, but I submit that 
in this case your lordship must take into consideration the fact that 
in a trial (to use a neutral expression) Eva Flitterman had, before 
Mrs. Deitch had gone into the witness-box, admitted that she had 
committed perjury. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—There is no proof of that before me— 
none at all. 

Mr. Anrncer—The proof before your lordship is on the deposi- 
tions which have been put in. There is her statement to the police 
officer that she saw prisoner on the Ist January with a £5 piece, 
there being evidence at that time that the deceased man had a £5 
piece ; that Morrison had told her that he had pawned it and bought 
a chain with it. Then, my lord, on 28th January she came to the 
Police Court, and she said the whole of that was untrue, that she had 
never seen Morrison 

Mr. Justice Dartivc—I really am astounded at this argument. 
Here is a person who asks me to hold judicially that Eva Flitterman 
has been guilty of perjury. 

Mr. Asincer—I have not asked your lordship to hold it judicially. 

Mr. Justice Dartuvc—You tell me I ought to have regard to the 
fact that this evidence of Mrs. Deitch was given after Eva Flitterman 
had given her evidence. How can I hold that she committed perjury 
except judicially? 

Mr. Asrycer—I do not ask your lordship to convict her of 
perjury. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—I did not say that you did. If you would 
attend to my words we should understand one another better. Before 
I can give a decision I must come to a judicial conclusion. You say 
it is before me that Eva Flitterman committed perjury. I say that I 
cannot find as a matter of judicial opinion that Eva Flitterman has 
committed perjury when I know that she has never even been 
accused of it or tried for it, and that the Public Prosecutor has been 
asked to put her upon her trial for it and has declined to do so. 

Mr. Murr—And the magistrate has refused process. 

Mr. Asrncur—I hope my friend will not interrupt. I have quite 
enough to contend with. I will use a neutral term—not perjury—if 
that expression does not meet with your lordship’s approval, but 
stating in the witness-box something which she afterwards says is 
not true. It cannot be suggested that that is not the fact, because 
I have put in the statement that she made to the effect that Morrison 
had this £5 piece on his watch chain on Ist January, and I have 
put in her sworn statement on 28th January that that is untrue. 

Mr. Jusricp Darumc—All that was done after your cross- 
examination of Mrs. Deitch. 

176 


Vt ee 


Evidence for Defence. 
Steinie Morrison 


Mr. AsinaurR—With great respect, that was only the formal 
matter. 

Mr. Justicn Dariunc—Oh, no. 

Mr. Asincrer—Your lordship thinks not. I respectfully sub- 
mit that it was; but what is not formal and what is the substantial 
matter is that long before Mrs. Deitch’s evidence Eva Flitterman 
stated that what she had sworn at the Police Court was not true. 

Mr. Justicy Dartine—Of that I knew absolutely nothing, 
because it was not proved in this case until afterwards. I do not 
come here with my mind full of what has happened in Police Courts. 

Mr. Asincur—What opportunity had counsel for the defence 
to prove this document then? I could not prove it at that stage. 
The case does not rest there. This case is a murder case, and 
although your lordship does not think that it makes any difference, 
I respectfully submit that it does. Rosen at the Police Court swore 
that he saw Morrison at half-past one in the morning in White- 
chapel; he fixed the hour; he swore that he saw Morrison with a 
revolver; he is recalled by the prosecution for further cross- 
examination by the prisoner’s counsel, and he stated on his oath 
that both of these statements were untrue. I do not use the word 
“perjury ’’ again; I respectfully bow, so far as I can consistently 
with my duty to my client, to anything that falls from your 
lordship. He stated that both those statements were untrue, and 
that he had been threatened by Solomon Beron and David Beron 
and Deitch that if he came here and withdrew that false evidence 
he would be poisoned or sent to prison. When Inspector Wensley 
got into the witness-box I proved that as far as it was humanly 
possible to prove it; I put in his original oath at the Police Court ; 
I put in his subsequent statement to that effect and my friend has 
not called him here to-day, and my friend has not called Eva 
Flitterman here to-day. So that your lordship has, I should say 
even in your lordship’s long experience, for the first time in a 
murder trial, two witnesses who have been found out stating that 


_ which is untrue in the witness-box when a man is being tried for 


his life. That was the frame of mind of the advisers of this man 
when Mrs. Deitch came into the witness-box. Mrs. Deitch gave 
the most deadly evidence against the prisoner. She swore that at 
a quarter to two she saw the prisoner standing at the corner of 
Philpot Street—between Philpot Street and Bedford Street; she 
met him walking; came face to face with him and the deceased 
man Beron, and that she recognised Mr. Beron and the prisoner, 
and had no doubt about it. 

Now the reason why I ask your lordship’s ruling in this 
particular case that that cross-examination does not justify my 
learned friend’s proposed cross-examination of Morrison, is this. 
Is it to be held that where a man is being tried for his life—that 
is why I emphasise this as a murder case—where a man is being 

M 177 


Steinie Morrison. 
Steinie Morrison 


tried for his life, and it has been established that two witnesses 
who have given deadly evidence against him have stated that which 
is untrue—is his counsel to stand mute when a woman who may 
be or may not be of immoral character gives evidence against him? 

Mr. Justice Daruinc—No, he is not bound to stand mute, 
but if he puts questions which come within the Criminal Evidence 
Act he takes the consequences of the Criminal Evidence Act. 

Mr. AsinceR—I submit not. It would be barbaric cruelty if 
aman on trial for his life is to have to stand mute by his counsel 
when a person of the most infamous character comes into the 
witness-box to give evidence against him, and if his counsel 
dares 

Mr. Justic—e Darurnc—I should be obliged if you would not 
address me (as I said before) in such rhetorical terms. I am 
bound by the Act of Parliament, and I am not to consider whether 
it is barbaric or otherwise; if it is within the Act of Parliament 
I will allow the cross-examination ; if it is outside I must reject it. 

Mr. Asincer—Then, my lord, I submit it is not within the 
Act of Parliament, and that if it were, there must be a discretion 
vested in some one whether it should be exercised. Your lordship 
is good enough to say that you are not going to consider whether 
it is cruel or barbaric or not; but there must be a discretion 
vested in some one. My learned friend is attempting to cross- 
examine as to the character of the prisoner. Is this a case where 
the prisoner should have his life ransacked because his counsel has 
asked this woman in front of half a dozen witnesses whether she 
was of an immoral character? I submit that if there is power in 
the statute—which I dispute—it should not be exercised. If the 
cross-examination by myself of Mrs. Deitch does bring it within 
sub-section 2 of section 1, then by your lordship having in the 
hearing of the jury warned me of the consequence of my cross- 
examining Mintz as to his having attempted to commit suicide 
and being confined in a lunatic asylum—told the jury at that stage 
of the case that my friend Mr. Muir could cross-examine as to his 
character—it does not require the intellect even of this jury to 
appreciate what that meant. For those reasons, I submit that my 
friend should not be permitted to cross-examine my client upon 
his character. 

Mr. Justicz Dartinc—I need not trouble you, Mr. Muir. In 
my opinion the words of the statute, the Criminal Evidence Act, 
1898, are perfectly plain. Ordinarily speaking, any witness who 
goes into the witness-box to give evidence may be asked questions 
going to impeach his credit, or such as to show that his credit as 
a witness must be bad, and that he igs not to be believed like 
another witness because his character is bad. When the Criminal 
Evidence Act was passed there was some discussion, as is very well 
known, as to whether prisoners in giving evidence, which, until 

178 


Evidence for Defence. 


Steinie Morrison 


1898 they were not allowed to do, should be put upon exactly 
the same level as other witnesses; and it was resolved by Parlia- 
ment that they should be put in a privileged position; they are 
not to be asked questions such as other witnesses are asked which 
go to show that they are of bad character and so to diminish the 
value of their evidence upon oath, unless they themselves do 
certain things, or their advocates for them do certain things, 
which are specified in the statute. It is unnecessary to read some 
of the things because there is no suggestion that in this case those 
have been done; but one of the occasions which render admissible 
‘the cross-examination of a prisoner as to his own character is 
expressed in these words—‘‘ Or the nature or conduct of the 
defence is such as to involve imputations on the character of the 
prosecutor or the witnesses for the prosecution.’? Now, in this 
case, in my opinion, two witnesses have been cross-examined in 
such a way as to involve imputations upon their character. One 
is the case of Mintz, who was asked simply baldly in the first 
instance, without a word of suggestion as to his being insane, 
whether he had not tried to hang himself upon two occasions. I 
myself realised in a moment, of course, what might be the effect 
of Mr. Abinger putting what appeared to me to be so incautious 
a question. I pointed out to him that he was charging that man 
with having attempted to commit a felony—the felony of com- 
mitting suicide. The attempt to commit that felony is in itself a 
misdemeanour. I pointed out to Mr. Abinger that it might be 
argued that he was imputing to that man a misdemeanour, and 
that advantage might be taken of it. The only thanks I got for 
doing so was to be told by Mr. Abinger that he had been twenty- 
five years at the bar and did not need my counsel in the:matter. 
After that Mrs. Deitch was put into the witness-box. Mrs. Deitch 
gave evidence to my mind of a most commonplace sort—as to 
having seen the defendant in the street. She might have been 
mistaken. It might have been suggested to her that she was mis- 
taken. Instead of that she was cross-examined very severely as to 
whether she did not keep a brothel, and when she denied it, it 
was put to her over and over again, which the money she derived 
on various occasions suggested, and when she denied it, several 
witnesses were called into Court to be confronted with her, and 
she was asked with regard to each of those whether that or the 
other woman did not use her house as a brothel. No graver 
imputation on the character of a witness who happens to be a 
woman could be made. Therefore it seems to me that the conduct 
of the defence has been such ag to involve imputations on the 
character certainly of Mrs. Deitch, and I think also of Mintz, but 
I give the go-by to that—I found my decision on this point upon 
the imputation on the character of Mrs. Deitch. There hag been, 
in my opinion, an imputation by Mr. Abinger as counsel for the 
179 


Steinie Morrison. 


Steinie Morrison 


defence in the crogs-examination of Mrs. Deitch—an imputation 
on the character of Mrs. Deitch, who was a witness for the prose- 
cution—and the consequence is that the prisoner may now be 
cross-examined as any other witness might be cross-examined. 
The privileged position in which the statute puts him was subject 
always to that qualification ; that privileged position has been lost 
and the matter is now at large. I might as well say that I can see 
no reason whatever in the argument which was addressed to me 
that because two witnesses in the Police Court have given evidence 
which Mr. Abinger says is untrue, and which I am content to 
accept for the sake of argument is untrue, the position of the 
defence is in any way altered. I look at the statute; and in the 
fact that two witnesses for the prosecution in the Police Court may 
have given evidence which was untrue, I can see no reason why 
the statute which I have just read does not apply to the prisoner 
at the bar and to the conduct of the defence by his advocate. 

Cross-examination continued—You have told us about the 
money you had you got from your mother before the 31st of 
December—the £20!—Yes. 

Had you any other money before that date?—Oh yes, close 
on £15. 

Where did you get that from?’—About £4 I saved up while 
working at Lavender Hill; the remainder I also received from 
home, as well as some I had before I started working at Lavender 
Hill. 

From you mother /—Yes. 

In what form did you receive that?—-Just the same. 

Nothing to show that you received that sum of money ?—No, 
of course not. 

No letter ?—No, I did not think it would be necessary for me 
to keep them or else I certainly would have done so. 

Now the items that I read out to you show that on 30th 
November you spent £22 10s. ?—Yes. 

That is on the items that we know of; and that is how you 
account for the money ?—That is how I account for the money, yes. 

And on 23rd December you are pawning your gold albert?—I 
pawned it because the very same morning, the very same day, I — 
bought a lady’s watch and chain, for which I paid £1 10s.; as I did 
not like the other, and did not want it any more, I pawned it for 
£4 10s., and I tried to sell the ticket for a sovereign ; so that in doing 
so I could earn 5s. or 10s. on it, as I very often do. 

How much did that chain cost when it was new?—£5. 

And you pawned it for £4 10s.?—£4 10s. 

Have you got any document to show that between 23rd December 
and Ist January you were spending any money at all’—I have no 
document to show that I was spending money, for the simple reason 
that it was not necessary for me to buy anything whatever. I had 

180 


Evidence for Defence. 


Steinie Morrison 


everything I wanted, and it only cost me 25s. or 30s. a week to live 
on. 

What money had you between 2nd December and the 23rd?—I 
had bank notes and I had gold. 

Had you got any of those bank notes left after the 23rd?—I 
had one of those left till Wednesday, 4th January, which I changed 
in the restaurant ; I gave it to the girl after I had some supper there— 
put my name in pencil on the back of it and gave it to the girl te 
be changed. 

Where did you get that bank note?—In Cook’s offices. 

I am asking you about the £35 worth of bank notes 3 had you 
any of those left after 23rd December?—No. As I told you before, 
in the course of my business it was necessary for me to change them. 

What I point out to you is this, that on 23rd December you are 
pawning a gold albert; you have got no document to show any money 
spent by you at all; and on Ist January, the day after this man’s 
murder, you are in possession of £242—I can bring forward the 
landlord and landlady to prove that they have seen me during the 
time I have been there with four and five £5 notes, or six in fact, 
in their kitchen. 

Now I want to ask you about Leon Beron. You knew him?— 
Yes, I knew him by sight. 

For how long?—Ever since I began to come in that restaurant; 
I see him there almost every day. 

When did you begin to go to Snelwar’s restaurant ?—Ever since 
I have been living in the East End; I cannot particularly remember 
the date ; it must have been some time in November. 

You left Pithers on the 10th November !—Yes. 

How soon after you left Pithers did you go to live in the East 
End?!—Two days after. 

That would be 12th November. Did you become a daily cus- 
tomer of Snelwar’s from that time?—Not a daily customer; I may 
have been having my food at other restaurants, but I did go there 
for my food sometimes two or three times a day, sometimes once a 
week ; sometimes I did not come in for two or three days. 

Did you see Beron there?—I saw him when I went there; he 
used to come up and say ‘‘ Good morning ”’ ; he would say ‘‘ Comment 
vous portez-vous,’’ and I would say ‘‘ Tres bien’’; that was the 
only communication that passed between us. A 

You know the evidence of the witnesses for the prosecution is 
that for the last two or three weeks you were very friendly with him 
indeed ?—That is evidence for which I cannot answer, because that 
man never in any way has been friends with me; I never on any 
occasion walked with the man in the street as any two friends might 
have done. According to their own evidence you can only point 
out that these people saw me with this man on this one occasion. Is 
it possible, do you think, for a man who has never been with another 

181 


Steinie Morrison. 
Steinie Morrison 


man in the streets except on one occasion—for that same man to walk 
with him through the streets everywhere about London as you are 
trying to suggest ? 

The witnesses Snelwar and Hermilin and Mintz all say that for 
the last fortnight or longer you were very friendly with Beron, 
constantly in his company in the restaurant. Is that true/—No, it 
is not true, for the simple reason that they themselves say they never 
heard any conversation pass between us. Why do they not tell you 
that they ever hear any conversation pass between the two of us? 
They themselves tell you that they never heard any conversation 
between us, and as there was no conversation between us how could 
we be friendly? 

Were you sitting at the same table with him day by day in the 
restaurant /—Never, so far as I can remember; but I will admit that 
on several occasions we might have been sitting at the same table ; 
there is no special table for anybody; anybody can come in and 
sit where he likes. 

It is sworn that on one occasion you had Beron’s watch in your 
hands?—That I never did. 

And remarked that it was a heavy one?—I never said anything 
of the kind, for the simple reason it was not necessary for anybody 
to do that, as you could always see the man’s watch and chain; it 
was quite open, and he used to take it out and look at it every five or 
ten minutes ; everybody could see that the watch was very big, so it 
naturally would be heavy. 

The witness Hermilin has said that he saw you with Beron’s 
watch in your hands’!—Then he knows a great deal more than I, 
because I never had that watch in my hand. 

Is that true ?—Certainly not. 

You do not agree that you were friendly with Beron at all?—I 
was as friendly with him as I was with any other customer in the 
restaurant; I did not know their names, and I did not know his 
name. Whenever he used to come up to me the only sentence he 
ever said was to ask me in French, or sometimes in English, how I 
am getting on, and my answer used always to be “‘ 7'res bien ’’ (very 
well). That was the only conversation that ever passed between the 
two of us so far as I can remember. 

The evidence of Snelwar, Hermilin, and Mintz is that you spent 
the whole of the evening of the 31st December in that restaurant with 
Beron?’—That is not true. 

Sitting at the same table with him ?—That is not true. 

And that you went in in the evening and that you beckoned him 
over to come to your table?—I never did anything of the kind. His 
own brother gives evidence that he saw him in the street between 
nine and ten in Fieldgate Street, and he was quite alone; and I can 
AG that I had not been in the restaurant since 8.30 to 11.20 or 

182 


Ser ag 
<4 


Evidence for Defence. 


Steinie Morrison 

And the same witnesses say that you left together?!—Well, I do 

not agree with them. That is the difference; because I never went 
out with that man together—never in my life so far as I know did I go 
with him side by side in the street. 
_ Now, when you left that restaurant had you got that revolver 
In your possession !—No, I never had that revolver in my possession 
in my pocket since about the 16th—I cannot exactly remember the 
date—of December ; it was in my house and in this portmanteau. 

You had in your possession the parcel that Miniz handed to you? 
—Yes, that very flute down there. 

: When did you buy that flute?—In the morning, I should think 
between nine and ten, or a bit past that perhaps. 

Where?—In Aldgate, where I bought some common jewellery 
on a stall, and I took a fancy to that and bought it at the same time. 

What day!—Saturday morning, of course—the last day of 
December. 

Whereabouts was the stall that you bought this from?!—As you 
come into Aldgate from Whitechapel there is a row of stalls on the 
left-hand side; on one of those stalls; I cannot tell you the stall 
exactly, because I never counted them, though I pass there dozens 
of times, but on one of those stalls. 

What sort of things were sold on that stall?—All sorts of cheap 
articles—brushes, combs, jewellery, and anything you like to mention 
—all sorts of things. 

Jewellery !—Yes. 

Anything else?—All sorts of articles; I did not look at them in 
particular ; I only looked for such articles as I wanted to buy myself. 

What sort of articles did you want to buy!—Some pieces of 
common jewellery—if you will show me the box. 

Do you know that on Saturday morning they have the hay 
market in Aldgate?—That is quite possible; the hay carts are right 
in the middle of the road; you can see them down there; that has 
got nothing to do with the stalls. 

And that until three o’clock in the afternoon there are only 
eleven stalls allowed to stand in Aldgate?—I did not count them, so I 
cannot tell you. 

Where did you get that revolver?—I bought it in a shop in 
Aldgate, on the right-hand side going towards the Bank. 

What sort of shop was it?—That I cannot remember. 

What sort of things were in the window!—There were all sorts 
of things in the window as far as I know. 

Can you describe the shop in any way in which you bought this 
revolver in Aldgate/—No, it is such a long time ago, but I know I 
could find my way to that shop. 

I suggest to you there is only one shop in Aldgate where they 
sell such things, and if you had bought it there you could easily 

183 


Steinie Morrison. 


Steinie Morrison 


prove it?—Certainly, I can prove it; I do not say I cannot prove it; 
I can take you to the shop where I bought it. 

Have you got a gun licence?—No, certainly not; I did not 
know it was necessary for me to take out one, as I never had a 
revolver in my life. 

Do you say that you bought a revolver at a gun shop in Aldgate 
without producing a gun licence!—I say I bought a revolver at a gun 
shop in Aldgate without producing a licence. I can take you or 
anybody else to that shop and prove it. 

Were you asked for a licence?—I was asked for a licence, and I 
said I had not got one, and he told me he could sell me the revolver 
provided I go and get a licence, but I did not understand where it 
was to be got from, and as I wanted it for re-sale I thought it was 
not necessary for me to get one, as I only expected to keep it a few 
days. 

: You disposed of that revolver by putting it into a cloak room {— 
Yes. 

Loaded ?—I did not take particular notice at the time that it was 
loaded, but it was loaded; about two days after I bought it or a day 
or two it was loaded, and it has been loaded ever since lying in my 
box, but I did not take notice that it was; I only wrapped it up in a 
paper and put it in the cloak room. 

When do you say you bought it?—Some time in December, 
about the 16th or 17th; I cannot remember the date. 

When did you load it?—I loaded it in Snelwar’s restaurant. 
Two men wanted to buy it. 

When ?—I should think it was about the 18th or 20th December. 

And it has been loaded ever since!—Two men wanted to buy it, 
and they wanted to know how it was loaded; I showed them how; I 
put the cartridges in, and it has been loaded ever since lying in my 
house; I never carried it about after that. I tried to sell it, but 
nobody wanted to buy it, so that it was on my hands—wasted money. 

Mintz has said that he saw it in your pocket ?—He said a lot of 
things that are not true. 

He said he saw it in your pocket?—I do not know whether he 
saw it or not. I did have it in my pocket two days after I bought 
it—whether they saw it then or not I cannot tell you. : 

Taw has said that you had it in your pocket?—I had it in this 
handbag down there. 

You deposited that loaded revolver in a cloak room on Ist 
January !—Yes ; it was at the station wrapped up in the towel; that 
is the reason I wrapped it up in a towel. 

You said-you did that because you were afraid that it might 
frighten Dellow ?—That is one reason, and another reason was because 
there had been such carrying on in London lately that I was afraid 
to have it in my place; but the chief reason I put it there was not 
to frighten the girl. 

184 


Evidence for Defence. 


Steinie Morrison 

Was it necessary to deposit the cartridges !—Naturally, because 
they might explode. 

Did you think the cartridges would frighten her !—Is it necessary 
for me to carry cartridges about? They might drop out of my pocket 
or out of my hand and explode. 

What name did you deposit the revolver in?—I do not remember. 
I said something about Banman, I believe. 

Why did you use a false name?—Because it was a revolver, 
that was the reason. 

What hour of the day do you say you deposited that revolver !— 
After I came back from York Road, Lambeth. I should think it 
would be about three o’clock after I packed up my things and took 
them with me. 

Green has said that you deposited that revolver at eleven o’clock 
in the morning ?—He is making a mistake then, so far as I know, 
because I put it in the afternoon; I am perfectly sure of that, because 
I did not go across the river until after I started packing up my 
things, and that was in the afternoon. 

You took your clothes away from Mrs. Zimmerman’s on that 
Sunday ?—Yes, I took everything away to go to York Road, Lambeth. 

You said you were going to Paris?—I said to her as an excuse, 
because I can prove that when I left Grove Street I said the same 
thing ; when I left Pithers I said the same thing—every time I leave 
a lodging or a situation I say the same thing, because it is my 
nature to be friendly with everybody, and I say it to prove to them 
that I do not leave the situation or the lodging because I find a better 
situation or a better lodging, but because it is necessary. 

And you took them to Fieldgate Street!—I took it to Romford 
Street. 

That is the same thing, is it not?—I believe it is. 

In what name did you leave them there?—Steinie Morrison. I 
engaged the room as Steinie Morrison, and left all my things there 
as Steinie Morrison. 

And then you went off to Frank’s!—Yes, at ten o’clock in the 
evening ; I arrived there at ten o’clock; I had been at Flitterman’s 
most of the time. 

Now, you know that Mr. Zaltzman and Taw say that they saw 
you in the street in Shoreditch at quarter-past one in the morning !— 
How is it then that I did not see them? 

They say they saw you. Were you there?—No, certainly not. 
because I was in bed at that time and asleep. 

Taw says he saw you at quarter to two!’—Yes; they most of them 
say the very same thing, but I was in bed at the time, so they could 
not have seen me, could they? 

Mrs. Deitch says that she saw you in the Commercial Road !— 
She may have seen me in bed if she went into my room. 

185 


Steinie Morrison. 


Steinie Morrison 


Do you know Mrs. Deitch?—No, I have never seen her in my 
life before, not till she came to identify me at the Police Court. 

Did you hear Mrs. Deitch cross-examined at the Police Court ?— 
Oh, yes, certainly. 

Did you hear it suggested to Mrs. Deitch that you had taken 
Eva Flitterman to her house for an immoral purpose?—Well, I did 
hear it, certainly. 

Is it true?—No, certainly not; I have never been in the house, 
so far as I know. 

Can you understand how that was put to Mrs. Deitch, that you 
had taken Eva Flitterman to her house for an immoral purpose, if you 
had not instructed your solicitor to say so?—I did not instruct my 
solicitor to say so, because I have never seen that woman in my life 
till she came to identify me; but it is quite possible that some wit- 
nesses may have read the statement in the police station. I have 
no friends in England bar two girls, and I was in prison all the time. 
I cannot tell what is happening in London when I am shut up in 
prison. 

But you heard that put to her at the Police Court?—I cannot 
remember ; if you say so I will take it that it is true. 

You say you spent Saturday evening at the Shoreditch Empire? 
—Yes. 

What time did you go there?’—I left the restaurant about 8.30 
or a bit later. I remember I got to the restaurant just past eight— 
between eight and half-past; I stopped there about a quarter of an 
hour and then left. 

What time did you get to the Shoreditch Empire?—I should 
think it was about ten or fifteen minutes to nine. 

Did you go in there !—Certainly. 

Did you get a seat?—Oh, yes. 

What part of the house did you go into?—On a level with the 
stage—the stalls, I believe it is called. 

How far from the stage?—That I cannot remember. I should 
think several rows from the stage; but I cannot remember, it is such 
a long time ago; besides, I have been since then as well. 

What part of the house did you sit—in front, in the middle, or 
at the side?—I sat near the middle, I believe. 

Were you in the same row as the Brodskys?—Yes. 

They said they were sitting three or four rows from the front? 
—Then I was in the same seats. 

Was there a queue of people waiting outside to go in when you 
got there?—Yes, and I was about the middle of them. 

I suggest to you that every one of those seats was let before nine 
o’clock that night?—If those seats had been let, then those people 
who had been sitting there must have got up, for one thing I am 
perfectly sure of is that when I went in there was an empty seat and 

186 


zc 


as SE 


Evidence for Defence. 


Steinie Morrison 


I took it. It very often happens when I go in myself after a quarter 
of an hour or so I get up to go to the back. 

Seating accommodation for 310 people ; 502 people in that part 
of the house ; that is*what I suggest the state of the house was on that 
night ; is that right “<I did not count them. I can give you a better 
proof than that if you'do not believe that I have been there. As I 
was coming up Osborn Street turning into Whitechapel and then 
Commercial Street—as I was going by Spitalfields Market avery poorly 
dressed man came out of a fried fish shop; three gentlemen passed 
him, and he accidentally knocked against them, or they stumbled 
against him, and they knocked his fish and taters out of his hand. 
He caused a disturbance ; two police officers came up and he wanted 
to give them in charge. The poor man said to the police officer, ‘‘ If 
it was I you would have arrested me at once ”’; the police officer said 
to him, ‘‘ Do not be too sure of that, as you only took the name of the 
gentlemen.’’ If you make inquiries in that police station about these 
officers that had been on duty between 8.30 and midnight, that would 
give you proof that { had been in that street and on my way to the 
Shoreditch Empire, and if I had been in this restaurant I could not 
have seen that. 

How does this show that you were in this Shoreditch Empire on 
that night!—That shows that I had been in Spitalfields Market, on 
my way there. For what other reason have I been there? If, as 
the witness has suggested, I have been in the restaurant all the even- 
ing, I could not have been there at that time. 

Did you get a ticket when you went in ?!—Certainly. 

What sort of ticket ?—I do not remember ; they sometimes issue 
paper tickets there, and sometimes labels; I cannot remember what 
it was. I have been in that Empire on several occasions, but I did 
not take notice. 

Did you keep it after you got in?—No, they take it away from 
you at the door. 

Did they take it away at the door that night?—It is quite pos- 
sible. They must have done, I expect; it is usual. 

How long have you known Mrs. Frank?—The first time I knew 
her was when I used to come in Walworth Road, about eight years 
ago; there was a jeweller’s and watchmaker’s shop in front, and the 
back was a post office. I used to go down there to see the girl I 
used to walk out with; she served behind the counter, and I had to 
pass his place. I also took him a silver chain to be gilded, for which 
I paid 30s. I sold it to Mr. Snelwar a few weeks ago, when I bought 
my gold watch and chain. ; 

Do you know that Frank is a convicted receiver of stolen 
jewellery ’—I did not know anything of the kind till it was put in 
the papers after his being cross-examined by you at the coroner’s 
inquest. . 

You are in possession of two £5 notes obtained from Max Frank 

187 


Steinie Morrison. 


Steinie Morrison 


on that very Sunday ?—I am in possession of two £5 notes obtained 
from his wife on that very Sunday for ten sovereigns; and I wish 
to mention to you, sir, that that man has been offered £100 to come 
forward and give evidence against me; he has been arrested in 
Brixton, and he stopped there a day. 

Who offered him £100 to come forward and give evidence against 
you?—That he did not tell me; he told me it was one of the detectives. 

When did he tell you that ?—When he came to see me in Brixton 
prison. 

Hlow often has he been to see you in prison’—Only once. Then 
I would not have let him in if I had known what he was. When I 
was put into the box he came to see me. I did not expect him, 
and I did not want him to come to see me, because if I had known 
what he is I would not have lived in his house. 

By Mr. Jusrice Darzine—Did you think that, if he had been a 
respectable man, he would have let a room to you to live with a 
prostitute in it?—There are dozens of respectable men here in London, 
grocers and all sorts of people, who keep women in their houses. 

Respectable men?—Quite respectable men—as honest as there 
can be—at least what I mean is that they have not been convicted 
of any crime. 

Cross-examination continued—Is Mr. Rotto one of those!—No. 

How long have you known Mr. Rotto?—Ever since I was in 
England; he has always been very kind to me. He has on one 
occasion found me a good situation as baker. 

How long have you known Mr. Rotto!—I have known him ever 
since—well, I should think seven or eight years ago. 

Do you know that he has been in custody for receiving /—I 
did not. 

Do you know that he has been connected with the white slave 
traffic!—No, I did not know anything of the kind. All I know him 
to be a grocer—keeps a grocer’s shop. 

Grocers are respectable people who take in men and women 
for immoral purposes?!—Not that man; he is as respectable a man 
as ever I came across. He has always given me a helping hand. 
He has on one occasion found me a good situation ; that is all I know 
about him; he has always been kind to me. 

When did you see Rotto for the first time after 17th September? 
—The first two days after I left Lavender Hill—my employer down 
there—I kept my things in his house. That is the first place I went 
to; because he is always kind to me, and invites me when I am in 
need for afew days 

Before you went to Flitterman’s at all, had you seen Rotto?— 
Yes, and he found me a situation with Jewish people not very far 
from Tottenham Court Road; but I did not stop with them because 
they are Jewish people. 

By Mr. Justicu Dartmryc—What was your objection to Jewish 

188 


Evidence for Defence. 
Steinie Morrison 
people !—Because they do not do their work as it ought to be, in a 
proper manner; they have not got standing hours. Some Jews 
expect you to work nineteen hours out of every twenty-four right off, 
and they expect you to go out with a barrow after you have done 
your work all night as a baker. 

Is that girl, Jane Brodsky, a Jewess?—I believe so. 

Were you going to marry her?—I was going to. 

To marry her!—-I intended to do so ; Tam very fond of the girl. 

Why did you take her to Rotto’s house?—Because he has been 
my best friend, and very kind to me; he is the only friend, in fact, 
that I have in England. I have not got anybody else; he has always 
been kind to me. 

Cross-examination continued—Is Rotto a Jew 1—Oh, yes, he is 
a Jew. 

Now, during this week, between Ist and 8th January, you say 
you were selling cheap jewellery in the East End of London?—Yes. 

In restaurants !—In restaurants. 

And coffee shops?—And coffee shops. 

Did you ever once during that week go inside Snelwar’s res- 
taurant!—It was not necessary for me to do anything of the kind. 

Is it the fact that you did not; is it the fact that you did not 
once during that week go inside Snelwar’s restaurant?—I¢ is a fact 
that since the Ist January I did not go in there up to my arrest. As 
I told you before, or whether I did not, I can tell you now, the 
reason why I did not go in there was because the waiter annoyed 
me and did not serve me properly; the other reason, because I was 
living in Romford Street. From Romford Street to the Fieldgate 
Mansions is only a few paces, and it is not necessary for me to 
pass one restaurant to go to another. It was only two days I was in 
Romford Street ; after that I went to York Road. Mrs. Dellow used 
to cook my food, and there was no longer necessity for me to go a 
fourpenny ride across to Snelwar’s. 

I do not know whether you understood my question. We have 
been told that you were selling cheap jewellery in Snelwar’s?—Yes. 

Why did you not go there for that purpose ’—Because it was 
very seldom I did sell anything there. There are very poor people 
come in there, and they do not buy things there. I have shown them 
things on many occasions, but I very seldom sold anything in there. 

When did you first hear about the Clapham murder?—I heard on 
the Ist January. It was in the papers, the Ist or 2nd; I read it 
first in the papers. 

Did you read it in the Hvening News?—Yes; I read every day 
one of the papers, and I read about the murder, and that the man 
was looked for; but I did not know that that was the man I had 
seen in the restaurant as the ‘‘ Landlord,’’ because in the paper 
they did not put any such name. 

Now, will you look at that Hvening News of Monday, 2nd 
January, two large headlines, ‘‘ The Mad Landlord ”?—You will 

189 


Steinie Morrison. 


Steinie Morrison 


excuse me; I did not say that I read that particular paper. ‘“‘ The 
Mad Landlord ’’ does not point to the ‘‘ Landlord,’’ does it? The 
‘‘ Landlord ’’? I had known in the restaurant was not mad at all; 
there was nothing the matter with him. 

Do you tell the jury that you never knew, never thought, that 
this was the man you knew in Snelwar’s restaurant ?—I tell the jury 
that I never thought for a moment till the day of my arrest that 
that was the man, because, if I did, I would have gone to the police 
station myself to prove that I had been asleep that night, and not 
wait to be arrested, as I was, for a crime that I had not committed. 

Why should you do that? Why should you, if you had known 
that this was Beron who was murdered, go to the police station to 
tell them that you were somewhere else ?—Because, according to that 
paper, or any other paper, it said that there was a man in the same 
restaurant, associated with the same, coming out with him, and so 
on. That would at once show me—if I knew that it was the ‘‘ Land- 
lord ’’ as pointed out in that restaurant—that that must have been 
the man, and that I was suspected. 

But why, because you say you were not associating with him, 
and did not leave with him?—Exactly ; but at the same time, I had 
been in that restaurant all the week, and before, but that would point 
out that I, not having been in that restaurant for several days, and 
the man having disappeared the same, giving the description in the 
paper, that would have pointed at me, would it not? That is the 
reason. 

m Now, you say that you saw Beron out in the street that night? 
—Yes. 

What hour was it that you saw him out in the street ?—I remem- 
ber looking at my watch when J went round the corner ; it was about 
seven or eight minutes past twelve. 

Where exactly was it that you saw him?—As I was crossing the 
road—when I came to Cambridge Road, I was just crossing the road 
to Sidney Street; I was crossing at this side of the pavement to go 
along Sidney Street, on the right-hand side; he was standing on the 
other side of the pavement, also the corner of Sidney Street, on the 
left-hand side of the road. 

At the corner of Sidney Street and Mile End Road?—No. As 
you turn into Sidney Street from Mile End Road or Whitechapel, or 
whatever it is, as you turn into Sidney Street, I was coming along 
round the corner on the right-hand side; he was standing on the 
other side of the corner, opposite me, that is, on the left-hand side. 

Do you mean the corner of Sidney Street, which is also at 
the corner_of Whitechapel Road ?—I believe go, yes. 

That is where you saw him?—That is where I saw him. 

What was the man like that you saw with him?—I could only 
see his back, he was very well dressed indeed; I could not see his 
face as he was standing back towards me. 

190 


Leon Beron. 


Evidence for Defence. 


Steinie Morrison 


What sort of hat had he on?—I did not notice; as he shouted 
out to me “‘ Bon soir,’’ I shouted to him ‘‘ Bon sour,’’? and went 
round the corner straight away. I did not look more than a few 
seconds at that man 

What height was he?’—I cannot exactly remember. I believe 
it was a bowler hat. 

But how tall?—He was tall, he was certainly taller than Mr. 
What’s-his-name. 

Was he as tall as you?!—I do not know, I did not have time 
to notice. 

By Mr. Justice Daruinc—He said “‘ Bon soir” to you 1— 
The ‘‘ landlord ’”’ did. He shouted to me “ Bon soir, monsieur.’’ 

Used you and he to speak French together 1—No, I never spoke 
to him at all. Whenever I sat at the table he used to come up and 
say “‘ Comment vous portez-vous,’? and my answer used to be 
“Tres bien,” that is the only conversation that ever there was 
between us. 

Cross-examination continued—So that Beron was out that night 
with a tall man 7—I have seen him standing at the corner ; I do not 
know whether he was out or not. 

How tall was the man?—I cannot tell you, I did not look at 
him more than a few seconds; I was going round the corner, in 
fact I was past them round the corner before they shouted out. 
I had turned round to look at the men, it could not have taken 
me more than a second. 

Eight minutes past twelve/—Eight minutes past twelve or 
something like that, I remember looking at the watch round the 
corner, it was eight minutes past twelve. 

So that he was in the Whitechapel Road at eight minutes past 
twelve with a tall man?—yYes, so far as I could see. 

Now, you say you put on that collar, tie, and shirt clean on 
the Saturday morning ?—Yes. 

We have had evidence which is not disputed that the collar 
had bloodstains upon it ?—Yes, according to the doctor’s evidence. 

How do you account for those?—Very simply. At Mrs. 
Zimmerman’s I went to have a wash under the tap; as I was 
washing myself my nose began to bleed; as I was carrying water 
from under the tap to my nose the blood out of my nose dropped 
into the palm of my hand; I emptied that water; at the same 
time there were stains of blood and water dropping out of the 
nose at the same time; as I was putting the palm under the tap 
to get some more water the force of the water running out of the 
tap on to the palm caused it to splash up, and that is the way 
it must have got on to that sleeve. 

Had you got your collar and your tie and your shirt on at 
the time you were washing!—No, I merely had my shirt on, but 
afterwards, after I wiped myself, I went in to put my collar on; 

19] 


é 


Steinie Morrison. 
Steinie Morrison 


there must have been bloodstains, blood and water mixed on my 
fingers; as I was pinning the collar behind it must have left a 
stain on the collar. I took out the bar from my tie to put it 
in again; I mean the golden bar, or metal bar ratlier, is very 
blunt, the pin of the bar, and to put that pin through the tie it 
is necessary for me to hold it with my finger like this, and if there 
was stains of blood and water on my fingers it must have left the 
stain on it. And if you will kindly ask them to produce the bar 
which they have taken out of that tie you will see what I say is 
true; they have taken out that bar, but they have not said anything 
about it. 

You mean we shall see that it is blunt, is that what you want 
eee 1—No, I want to have a look at that bar which they have 
taken. 


The Court adjourned. 


192 


Smee | 


Seventh Day—Monday, 13th March, 1911. 


Srerie Morrrson, recalled, further cross-examined by Mr. 
Murr—Do you mind speaking very slowly and clearly and telling 
me what was the address in Fieldgate Mansions where you say you 
deposited your clothes on Ist J anuary !—I believe it was at Romford 
Street, No. 72. As you come into Romford Street it is the last 
door on the right hand side, and the first floor as you go up 
the steps. 

There is no such number as 721—It is quite possible that it 
is 172, but I remember that 72 is the furthest. 

What is the name of the landlord or landlady there?—In fact 
I did not ask their name and they did not tell me. 

What is the floor on which you had your room?—It is the first 
window above the street, the one facing the street is the room 
I have occupied. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—What name did you give?—Steinie 
Morrison ; that is if they asked me my name. 

Cross-examination continwed—You have been in correspondence 
with your mother in Russia ?—Sometimes, yes. 

Have you got any letters from your mother ?—None at all. 

To what address were the letters containing money from your 
mother sent?—To the General Post Office, London. 

Were those letters that contained English bank notes coming 
from Russia registered !—No, they were not registered ; they were 
in letters. ; 

In what name were the letters addressed to you at the G.P.O.? 
—Steinie Morrison. 

You say you were selling cheap jewellery in the East End of 
London from Monday, the 2nd; till Saturday, the 7th of January? 
—Yes. 

Where had you bought that cheap jewellery 7—Wherever I took 
a fancy to it, sometimes passing a stall or a shop or any place. 

Have you any document to show that you bought any cheap 
jewellery before 6th January ?!—No, I had several, but after I gold 
the jewellery it was no longer necessary for me to keep them. 

On the 8th of January the stock that you bought on the 6th 
was intact except a 64d. brooch ?—Yes. 

Dees it depend entirely upon your own word whether you ever 
sold any cheap jewellery .t all?—Yes. As I told you on Saturday 
aif I knew I would be arrested and tried for a crime I never com- 
mitted I would have taken precautions to keep those documents. 

Did you ever tell the police officer that you were carrying on 


N 193 


Steinie Morrison. 


Steinie Morrison 
a business of changing cheques for money?—No. He never asked 
me anything of the kind. 

Did you give any of those notes that you got on 2nd December 
to your friend Mr. Rotto?—It is quite possible that I gave one 
or two, but I cannot remember exactly. 

For what consideration did you give one or two bank notes 
to Mr. Rotto?—In the course of business, of course. I remember 
having some small watches in his shop—black ones they were— 
very cheap. 

Do you know the public-house called the King’s Head at 128 
Commercial Road, kept by a man named Bloom!—No, I never in 
my life went to a public-house, as far as I remember. 

Was that a public-house that you were in the habit of visiting 
with women?—I never went into a public-house as far as I can 
remember on any occasion. 

Did you change two £5 notes in that house!—No. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—Can you say for certain you did 
not change a note in that public-house?—I cannot remember ever 
having changed notes in a public-house ; I cannot remember it at all. 

Cross-examination continued—Do you say you have never been 
out in the streets at night with Leon Beron?—No, never at all— 
never walked with him in the street—never after the restaurant— 
on any occasion. 

Who keeps the house at 2 Harding Street that you said was a 
prostitutes’ house ?—I cannot tell you. 

Who introduced you to Eva Flitterman?—The man of the 
house. There are several men living in the same house and several 
women as well. 

What are the names of the men who live in that house?—I do 
not know; I never asked them. 

Do you know a man named Hugo Pool who lives in that 
house?—No, never heard of it. 

[Hugo Pool and Mrs. Pool were brought into Court. ] 

Look at these people?—I know these people, but they are not 
the people who kept the house. 

How long have you known Pool?—For several weeks before 
Christmas. 

Did you know him when he was living at No. 116 Grove Road? 
—No, I did not. You mean Grove Street. 

You did visit him?’—I went to No. 36 Grove Street where he 
told me he could be found on one occasion, but I have never been 
in 116 Grove Street. 

Have you visited him in a house in Grove Street?—In 36, 
yes, but he was not there. 

What is 36?—That is the same sort of house where these people 
are to be found. 

What you call a prostitutes’ house!—Exactly, yes. 

194 


bile toe Ob | 


Evidence for Defence. 


Steinie Morrison 


On Thursday, 29th December, did you visit Hugo Pool at 
2 Harding Street ?—I believe I did. 

Was Mrs. Pool there?—I cannot remember 3 it is quite possible 
she was. 

In bed?—I have not seen her in bed as the room is upstairs. 
I have never been upstairs. 

Did you ask him to go out?—I never asked him—never spoke 
to him—I spoke to some other women who were in the house, but 
I never spoke to him. 

Did you say to him, ‘‘ Will you come out and have a drink ’’ 7— 
No, for the simple reason that I do not drink. 

Did he say, ‘“‘ No, I am not very well, and it is too late ’’?— 
I do not remember saying anything to him, for the simple reason 
that I never spoke to him. 

Was Leon Beron with you in that house on the night of 29th 
December?—Oh, no, certainly not. He never was with me in any 
house, as far as I can remember. It ig quite possible that he may 
have visited there. Places like these are visited by all sorts of people. 
It is quite possible that he was upstairs, because people coming in 
there generally go upstairs. I have never seen him while I was there 
on any occasion. ’ 

On that same night, the Thursday, were you at Snelwar’s 
restaurant !—Oh, yes, very likely, but I do not remember it. It 
is quite possible that I was. 

Did you leave Snelwar’s restaurant with the witness, Israel 
Zaltzman, at about twelve o’clock on that night /—Neither then nor on 
any other occasion, as far as I can remember. 

And was Beron with you!—No, certainly not. 

And another man—an old man?—I do not remember anything 
of the kind. There was an old man in that restaurant who came in 
under the name of the ‘‘ Colonial,’’ if you mean that man. 

Dia this take place on the Thursday previous to the murder ; 
Beron, you, and the old man and Zaltzman left the restaurant together 
at twelve midnight and went to the corner of Osborn Street and 
Whitechapel Road, where the old man said to Beron, ‘‘ Come on, 
let’s go home ’’ ?—Do you mean that we left the restaurant when the 
people were turning out of the restaurant? It is quite possible. All 
are turned out at once from the restaurant, but I do not remember 
having walked with that man through the street on this occasion 
or on any other occasion. 

I will just read the rest of it to you, and then perhaps you will 
remember it. ‘* Then Morrison said to Beron, ‘ Come through the 
Whitechapel Road way.’ The old man left us and went through 
Church Lane, and we (Beron, Morrison, and Zaltzman) went down 
Whitechapel Road to St. Mary’s Street, where I said good-night and 
left Morrison and Beron together.’’ Is that true?—No, certainly not. 

Did your visit to Pool occur either on Thursday, the 29th, or 

195 


Steinie Morrison. 


Ss 


Steinie Morrison 


on the Friday night, the 30th?—I do not remember. It must have 
been some time that week, but whether it was on that date I cannot 
tell. 

Was Beron with you on either night?—No, certainly not. He 
has never been with me on any occasion. I never went with that man 
through the street. 

You have told us on Saturday where it was you bought the flute. 
There is a plan of the stalls at the hay market. Can you indicate 
whereabouts in that row of stalls it was that you bought the flute 1— 
At one of them, but I cannot tell you exactly the one. 

I am not asking you exactly; I am asking you about ?—How can 
I tell you about? I came into Aldgate on the left-hand side, and I 
went along the stalls until I came across that particular stall. I did 
not take note of the stalls, or what part of the street they were in. 

You told us on Saturday that it was the third or fourth stall 
as you go towards Aldgate ?—That is what I thought. 

Do you say so now!—That I cannot tell you. IJ bought it at one 
of those stalls. (To Mr. Abinger)—-Will you kindly hand me that 
paper I gave you just now. (Blue paper handed.) Hand that to my 
lord. (Handed.) (To Mr. Muir)—You have told me on Saturday 
that you would bring over the keeper of the ironmongery stall, or 
something of the kind. I should be very much obliged if that keeper 
is brought over here and asked whether he sold me any implement 
that it is suggested I did buy. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—This is addressed to his solicitor. I see it 
begins ‘‘ Messrs. Claude Lumley & Co., March 13th. Dear sir, I 
request that this is handed over to the judge.’? Then there is this 
which I had better read, I think. What is put in my hands is public. 
‘“ My lord, last Saturday Mr. Muir said to me ‘ Yes, and I can bring 
the keeper of the ironmongery stall in Court.’ I did not at the time 
understand what he meant, but I understand now that he meant to 
say that instead of buying a flute I bought a bar of iron. My lord, 
I ask that the keeper of the ironmongery stall is brought into Court 
and asked whether on the 3lst December, or at any other time, 
he hes ever sold me a bar of iron or any other deadly instrument. 
Respectfully yours, Steinie Morrison.’? (Letter put in and marked 
exhibit 77.) 

Mr. Murr—My lord, I intended to make no such suggestion. 

Mr. Justice Dariryc—No. 

Mr. Murr—The ironmongery stall keeper is here for quite another 
purpose. 

Mr. Aznrncer—That is the reason I did not pass it to your lord- 
ship. I am satisfied my friend made no such suggestion. 

Mr. Justice Dartivc—(To the Witness)—You mistook Mr. Muir. 
He did not in the least mean to ask that man whether you bought the 
bar of iron there. The only question was as to whether you bought 
anything there. 

196 


Evidence for Defence. 


Steinie Morrison 

Cross-examination continued—What were the kinds of things 
that they were selling on the stall where you bought the flute?—I 
have told you on Saturday I cannot remember. I merely took 
notice of such things as I wanted in cheap jewellery as I bought 
then, and that flute. That is the only thing I took notice of. 

Did you buy cheap jewellery at the same stall?—Yes, several 
articles. 

At the same stall?—Yes, at the same stall. There were some 
brooches and German-made diamonds. 

Anything else?—A silver brooch, a small one. 

I put it to you that there was no stall there at which you could 
buy such things!—You were not there on that morning, were you? 

I am suggesting to you that there was no stall there at which 
you could buy these things?!—I say I did buy them there. 

On that morning?—Yes, on that very morning. 

Would you know the man again whom you bought the thing 
from ?—No, certainly not. 

Then it is no use producing him in Court and asking you whether 
he is the man!—Because it is such a long time ago. I do not recog- 
nise people after two or three months. It is simply impossible. You 
ask me a thing which is quite impossible for any man to do. 

Do you remember Eva Flitterman going to 91 Newark Street ?— 
Yes. 

When was that?—I should think the first time she went was 
about the 24th or 25th December. 

Do you remember what day of the week it was?—No, I do not. 

Had you got a flute then?—No, I had not, nor a big box, as she 
suggested. Nor can I play it as she suggested that I did. 

That is the only time she was there?—Yes. 

In the documents which have been read in Court as coming 
from Eva Flitterman she said that you had a flute on that occasion? 
—She also said that she saw me with the dead man’s £5 piece. 
The girl has been told by the police to give false evidence against me. 

Is it true 1—It is not. 

Listen to the question—That you had a flute in your possession 
when Eva Flitterman was at your house at 91 Newark Street ’—It is 
not true. I never had a flute in my possession until 31st December. 

Did you hear the witness Green from the railway station cloak 
room say that it was, as near as possible, eleven o’clock in the morn- 
ing when you left the revolver there?—Yes, I did hear him. 

Did you notice that your learned counsel did not cross-examine 
him at all as to the hour?—I asked my solicitor not to cross-examine 
him, for the simple reason that I admit I did put a revolver there. 
As to the hour, that is quite wrong. 

Why did you put the cloak room ticket in the lining of your hat? 
—If I, as you suggest, tried to do away with the revolver because 
I was afraid, I should certainly have destroyed the ticket, but I kept 

197 


Steinie Morrison. 


Steinie Morrison 


it. That is enough proof in itself that I was not in the least afraid 
of that ticket being found on me. 

Why did you put the cloak room ticket in the lining of your 
hat?—I simply took off my hat and put it inside the lining, which 
is just as good as putting it in your pocket. 

Had you any other document there?—None whatever, but I very 
often do put something in. 

When you were arrested you say that you were arrested on the 
charge of murder ?—Yes. 

And that Inspector Wensley said so?—He said so, yes. 

How many people were there when he said it?—So far as I can 
remember I was the only person in the restaurant; there was nobody 
else besides me. 

Were there other police officers there?—Three of them jumped 
in at once and afterwards two or more came in. 

And at least three of them heard that!—They must have done so. 

Have you heard them all swear that nothing of the kind was 
said ?—If Detective Inspector Wensley did not charge me or say that 
IT am wanted for murder in that restaurant, and if the detective whom 
I know now is Detective Inspector Brogden didn’t, while walking 
along, say to me that I am wanted for murder, and if Detective 
Inspector Wensley did not again say in the police station that I will be 
charged with murder, may my innocence never be proved. Do you 
believe me now? 

I point out to you that five police officers who were present have 
all sworn that nothing of the kind was said?—Then that is not true. 

Did he say which murder ?—He did in the police station ; he said 
the Clapham murder. 

At the restaurant, first of all, did he say which murder?!—No, 
he merely said, ‘‘ You are wanted for murder.’’ 

Did you say, ‘‘ Which murder ’’ ?—No, certainly not. 

Did you know!—What do you mean—did I know? 

Did you know which murder it was you were being arrested for? 
—Of cqurse not. I heard about the Clapham murder, as I read it 
in the papers every day. 

And you had also heard about the Houndsditch murders, 1 
suppose /—Certainly. 

Did you ask which murder it was you were being arrested for? 
—No, because in the police station he told me which it was, and 
it was not necessary for me to ask him. 

At the police station did Wensley say, ‘‘ What is your name, 
and where have you been residing ’’ !—Yes. 

Did you reply, ‘‘ You know my name ’’!—For the simple reason 
that he called me “‘ Steinie ’’ in the restaurant, and that is why I 
said, ‘“‘ You know my name.”’ 

‘“T lived at No. 4 Whitfield Street, West ’’?—I said I lived at 
No. 4 Whitfield Street, West. 

198 


Evidence for Defence. 


Steinie Morrison 


You did live there?—Certainly ; I lived there two days. 

Is it true that you were living at 4 Whitfield Street, West, at 
the time you were asked for your address!—No, of course not. 

Is that the address you gave!—Yes, that is the address I gave 
at the time. 

Is that Rotto’s address?—There are several people living in the 
house, but it is Rotto’s address. 

By Mr. Justicp Daruiv¢—When had you lived there?—I went 
there on the 10th, and I lived there till about the 12th November. 

Cross-examination continued— 1 picked up with a girl about 
a week ago, and have been living with her since at 116 York 
Road ”’??—That was after he said to me, ‘‘ You will be charged 
with murder when Inspector Ward comes.”’ 

“J did not go home last night, as I lost the last train, so I 
stayed with Mrs. Cinnamon, No. 32 in the buildings, St. James 
Street.’? Did the inspector say this to you, ‘‘ You have not reported 
your change of address, and you will be detained for the present ’’ !— 
He did not say anything of the kind to me on any occasion till he said 
it at the Coroner’s inquest, or whatever it is; he said it in Court. 

Were you, in fact, at that time a convict on licence?—I was; 
but allow me to tell you that that has nothing to do with this case. 
That is just the reason why they are down on me. That is the only 
reason why they are building up this story. But for that they would 
not have dared to arrest me. 

Had you given as your registered address No. 4 Whitfield Street, 
West, which was Rotto’s house?—I had given that as my address 
when I first went there, and I kept on reporting myself to Tottenham 
Court Road police station on every 17th of the month till within a 
few days before my arrest. 

Reporting that 4 Whitfield Street was your address!—Yes, 
because they bullied me. During the time I have been living at 
213 Lavender Hill every night a police officer came into the bakehouse 
to see whether I was in there in the evening. A private detective 
came in while I was there, and I was hunted out of that place. Mr. 
Thomas Pithers is in Court now. Let him stand up and contradict 
if what I say is not true. 

Did you say to the police officers who were in charge of you that 
you wanted to make a voluntary statement?—Yes, because they 
charged me with murder, and I wanted to clear myself. 

You have heard every one of those officers say that no such 
charge was made in your hearing!—Every one of those officers are 
telling lies, because they cannot get the right man, and they want 
to take somebody just to make themselves a name—just because | 
have been in prison. That is the only reason why they are building 
the story up. That is where they have got the advantage. But for 
that they would not have dared to arrest me. 

At the time you made the statement you knew that it was the 

199 


Steinie Morrison. 
Steinie Morrison 


Clapham murder that you were wanted for?—Yes, certainly, because 
Inspector Wensley told me at the desk. 

And this statement was made for the purpose of clearing your- 
self —Yes, certainly. 

Did you intend what you said in this statement to be believed !— 
Certainly. 

I read exhibit 1. ‘‘ I have sent for Divisional Detectives Ward 
and Wensley, and desire to make a voluntary statement in conse- 
quence of my having been arrested this morning under the suspicion 
of murder, Mr. Wensley having told me this ’’?—Yes, and he was 
present at the time it was dictated. If, as he said, he did not say 
anything of the kind, why did he not contradict me? 

Mr. Justice Darutryc—lI have told you, Morrison, you must not 
ask Mr. Muir questions. Perhaps it is difficult, but you must remem- 
ber he is not allowed to answer. 

Cross-examination continued—No mention there or throughout 
the statement about its being the Clapham murder, or the murder 
of Mr. Beron?—Would you like to know the reason why? Shall 
I tell you the reason why? 

You are entitled to give me the reason’—The reason is this, 
because most of the words in that statement are by Detective 
Inspector Ward, out of his mouth and not out of mine. I told him a 
different story to what is in the statement. He dictated it to the 
typewriter, and the typewriting man put it down as he said it, and 
not as I said it. He put a different face on it altogether to what I 
said to him. It is quite true that I read it through and signed it, 
but at the same time I did not at that time think, because if I was 
as clever as that man I could at once see that he was building up a 
story to hang me. See? I would not have signed that statement, but 
I am not quite as clever as these people, and that is just the reason 
why they have got me here. 

Did you mention in the course of your statement, which was 
made in the hearing both of Inspector Wensley and Inspector Ward, 
the name of Leon Beron?!—No, certainly not. 

Did you mention the Clapham murder ?—If they mentioned it to 


me. 

You say it is not written down as you said it. You say you said 
something more than is written down. Did you mention the Clapham 
murder ?—They mentioned it to me. 

Did you mention it in the course of making your statement /—I 
do not remember, but I know perfectly well they mentioned it to me 
on several occasions while making that statement. 

The next statement which you say you intended to be believed 
is this—‘‘I am an Australian, born in Sydney, brought up in 
England.”’ Is that true?—I am an Australian, born in Sydney, and 
I have been there eighteen months. Afterwards my people went over 
to Russia, where I lived for about twelve years. After that I was 

200 


Evidence for Defence. 


Steinie Morrison 


sent to Germany. In Germany I have been eighteen months. After 
that eighteen months in France, and from France I came over to 
England. 

.. When did you come over to England?—I should think it was 
about 1899 or 1900; I am not quite sure. I came over from France 
to England, and I have been in England ever since. 

What is your name?—Steinie Morrison. 

That is your true name?——That is my true name. 

Is your true name Alexander Petropavloff{—No, that is not, 
but that is the name by which I bought that revolver in Aldgate 
when you tried to make out I did not buy anything of the kind. 

How long have you used the name of Alexander Petropavloff 1— 
That is the only occasion on which I have ever used it, so far as I 
remember. 

Were you not born in that name?—No, certainly not; I was 
born in the name of Steinie Morrison. 

Where were you born?—In Australia—in Sydney. 

What year were you born in?—I should think about 1882. 

Was it not 1879?—No, I do not think so. In fact, I cannot tell 
you exactly when I was born, for the matter of that, for the simple 
reason that J do not exactly know my own age, but I believe I am 
between twenty-nine and thirty. 

Were you not born in a place called Korsovsk, a station in the 
district of Liutzin, in the Government of Vitebsk, in Russia ?’—That is 
the address I gave at the time when I petitioned the Home Secretary 
to allow me to leave the country. I tried to make out that I was a 
Russian born, but they would not grant me that petition. As a matter 
of fact, I am not a Russian born at all, but I may be called a Russian, 
for the simple reason that I was almost a baby when I went there. 

Then, for your own purposes, and in order to deceive the Home 
Secretary, did you say that your name was Alexander Petropavloff, 
that you were born in 1879 at Korsovsk, a station in the district of 
Liutzin, in the Government of Vitebsk, in Russia ?—I said that because 
I have had such bad luck here in England; ever since I came to 
England I have had nothing but trouble, and I tried to better myself 
for all that. Even here in England I have done my best to work 
honestly for my living until I have been hounded out by these police 
officers. 

Is it true for your own purposes, in order to deceive the Home 
Secretary, you gave that account of your birth?—That account is a 
true one. The only thing that is not true is that I was born in 
Russia, but, as a matter of fact, I am considered a Russian subject 
in my own country, because I am a baby brought over to Russia. 

Is your name Alexander Petropavloff!—No, Steinie Morrison. 

You told the jury a moment or two ago that the only time you 
ever used that name was when you bought that revolver?—But I 
did not for a moment consider that I wrote that petition. At any 

201 


Steinie Morrison. 


Steinie Morrison 
rate, that name is not mine, and if you make inquiries at that address 
you will soon find out. ; 

It is a false name and a false account of your birth, given to 
the Home Secretary in order to deceive him; is that right?—I am 
considered as a Russian subject for all that. 

Is that right?—The name and the birth. 

A false name, a false account of your birth given to the Home 
Secretary in order to deceive him. Is that right?—Because I 
knew that that was the only. 

Is that right, first of all?—Yes, it must be right because I 
knew that was the only way they would allow me to leave this 
country under the new Act. That is the reason why I put it down 
—for no other reason. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—Were you in prison when you sent 
that petition to the Home Secretary /—Yes. 

Cross-examination continued—Did you go on to say this to 
the Home Secretary, ‘‘ The reason I have left my country is because 
of the military system, otherwise I have never committed a crime in 
my life, not until I came to England ’’ !—That is quite true, but 
when I left Russia I was fifteen years of age; the military system is 
twenty-one years of age; no man is accepted until that age. 

‘‘ For fear that my relations may discover that I have sunk 
to the depth of an English prison I have taken a false name.’’ 
What was the false name you had taken?—M rris Stein. 

‘‘ And fear of being forced to leave this country at my dis- 
charge because of the new Act made me give a false nationality 
to the officers who made inquiries of me before my trial as to the 
country I belong to ’’ ’—Well, that is the country I was brought 
up in—Russia, but I was born in Sydney, Australia, just the same. 

So that you deceived not only the Home Secretary by false 
statements, but the officers who arrested you as well ?—But that has 
nothing to do with this case. I should wish, since it has come out, 
that the jury should know what sort of crimes I committed, and 
to see the tools. Among all the tools that were taken away from 
me there never was in my possession an instrument with which a. 
man could be murdered like this. 

What I am pointing out to you is that you made a series of 
false statements to suit your own purposes to whomsoever it was you 
might want to make them to?—I have had a very hard life in 
England, and I wanted to leave this country to better myself. 

Did you tell the police officers who arrested you that you were 
an Englishman; that is to say, an Australian born in Sydney ?— 
Yes, I told them the truth. 

And you are saying here to the Home Secretary what is a 
falsehood?!—That also must be the truth, because I was taken as 


a baby to Russia, and brought up as a Russian, and when the 
202 


Evidence for Defence. 


Steinie Morrison 


military system starts I should have to appear. As a matter of 
fact, I should have to appear now if I returned. 

Is this true or false—‘‘ Ever since I left those I loved and 
who love me—my own relations in my own country—for shame 
I did not write to them so that my relations do not even know I 
am alive or dead ’’?—That is quite true. I did not write to them 
while I was in prison, but I did when I was out of it. I never on 
any occasion wrote to my relations while I was in prison. I have 
no intention to write to them even now. 

You were writing in prison in July, 1909, saying you were 
ashamed to write to your relations, and they did not know whether 
you were alive or dead?—Certainly; I was ashamed to write to 
them while I was in prison, but I did when I came out. 

But did you write to them while you were in prison?—No, 
never on one occ; sion. 

Never once?—No, never once. 

When did you get out of prison?—17th September last. 

Did you write to your mother then?—I did. 

At what address ?—At the same address you have got now. 

At what address?—You have not got the number, and I have 
no intention to give it to you. 

You decline to give the address !—Certainly. 

To which you wrote to your mother ?—Certainly; I have n 
intention that my mother should be bothered by you or the police 
either, nor have I any intention to let her know that I am in such 
grievous trouble. 

‘* My greatest wish, and my only desire is to return to my 
country and to my relations.’’ Was the purpose for which you 
were sending this petition in July, 1909, that you might be released 
from prison ?—Certainly not; my sentence was expired at the time 
when I wrote. 

‘** T will find no difficulty in finding employment in a country 
where passports, not characters, are required.’? What country 
was that ?—Russia. 

** For so soon as I return to Russia there are three years 
and several months military system awaiting me.’’ Do you still 
say that it is true that you are an Australian, born in Sydney, and 
brought up in England ?—I still say that I was born in Australia 
and taken over to Russia. I left there for Germany, from 
Germany to France, and then came over to England, and I have 
lived here for the last eleven or twelve years, or something like that. 

When were you first convicted for felony?—I cannot say— 
1900, or something like that. 

Was it the 17th December, 1898?—That might have been it. 

You were nineteen years of age at that time?—That is the 
age I gave. 

Did you give the name of Moses Tagger ?—Yes. 


an 
203 


Steinie Morrison. 


Steinie Morrison 


What did you say your nationality was then?—I said a 
Hebrew, as I know to speak that language as good as English, so 
I went in as a Hebrew then. 

Yes, but what countryman?—As a Russian. 

Was that for stealing from your master ?—I never stole any- 
thing. In fact, all of the convictions I had were for no crime 
committed whatever. It is a crime simply made out against me. 
What did I steal? Will you kindly put that to the jury? 

Were you charged with stealing!—I was charged with that, 
but what did I steal? Will you kindly tell that to the jury? 

What were you charged with stealing?—I cannot remember 
what I was charged with stealing at the time. What I do know is 
that I have committed no crime whatever. I was sent to prison 
for no crime whatever on that occasion, and one or two more 
occasions. 

Was that at the Worship Street Police Court?—It might be; 
I cannot remember; I did not know the name at the time. 

And did you get a month’s hard labour?—I did. 

For stealing some ledgers, the property of your master !— 
That is what they made it out,- but, fancy a man stealing books. 
What use are they to him? It was simply a charge made out 
against me. 

Were you arrested in the name of Morris Stein and sentenced 
to two months’ hard labour on 28th February, 1899?—I was not. 

For being a suspected person on enclosed premises?—I was 
not—never—never done two months’ imprisonment. 

At the Thames Police Court?—Never—that is not true al- 
together. 

Under the name of Morris Stein?—Never done two months’ 
imprisonment. 

Were you sentenced to six months’ hard labour at the North 
London Sessions on Ist August, 1899, for burglary, in the name 
of Morris Tagger?!—I was sentenced to six months, yes. 

Were you arrested on 15th April, 1900, for being in the 
unlawful possession of a quantity of cigars, pipes and tobacco, 
the proceeds of a burglary !—I was living at the time somewhere 
up Whitechapel, and there was another man sleeping with me in 
the same room. That man on one morning brought in a big 
parcel with him. I did not know what it was. Afterwards that 
man tried to sell it somewhere. When he was arrested he was 
somewhere near by. He was arrested, and his room was searched, 
and I was arrested along with him. 1 was charged with receiving 
that property in my room. As a matter of fact I knew nothing 
at all whatever about it, and I received fifteen months’ imprison- 
ment for a crime I never had anything to do with whatever. 

What did you say your nationality was then ?—Russian. 

204 


ONeh = 1 


Evidence for Defence. 


Steinie Morrison 
K: And was the evidence at your trial interpreted in Yiddish? 
—Yes. 

Was that for your benefit, or that of your fellow prisoner ?— 
I cannot remember whether it was for myself or fur him. 

On 10th September, 1901, were you convicted at this Court 
for burglary, and sentenced to five years’ penal servitude!—I was 
convicted for attempted burglary. 

e No, for burglary, in the name of Morris Stein; is that right? 
—Yes. 

Did you plead guilty?—On that occasion I cannot remember 
whether I did or did not. I believe I did. 

When did you come out from that term of penal servitude ?— 
I came out in 1905. I found a situation at 124 Hackney Road, 
Shoreditch. The master baker is still there. I continued to work 
as I did for Mr. Pithers until I was hounded out by the police, 
and I can call that master baker to prove it. 

On 5th August, 1905, you were released on licence; is that 
right ?—Yes. 

On 14th August, 1906, were you arrested by a police constable, 
Arthur Page, at one o’clock in the morning /—Yes. 

And the charge against you at that time was of being a sus- 
pected person, and having housebreaking implements in your 
possession 7—Yes. 

Were a brace and bit the things that you had in your 
possession when you were arrested by Page ?—Yes. 

And a jemmy?—I do not remember having a jemmy; I never 
had one in my life. I had a chisel with a blade about four 
inches long. 

Mr. Asrncrr—Is my friend partly trying this charge again, 
otherwise I fail to see the relevancy of cross-examining this witness 
upon what implements he had in his possession in 1906, when he 
is being pros cuted for a murder alleged to have been committed 
by him in 1911. All the things have been taken away, of course, 
by the police. I invite him to tell me the relevancy of these 
questions. 

Mr. Muir—The prisoner himself has said that he never had 
a bar of iron in his possession in his life. 

The Witness—I never had a bar of iron in my life. 

Mr. Mutr—tThe prisoner has said that he had no use for such 
a thing. The medical evidence is that the murder that we are 
now inquiring into was committed with such an implement, and 
I am now going to show that the prisoner’s evidence that he never 
had a bar of iron in his possession, and had no use for such a 
thing, is untrue evidence. 

The Wrrness—I never had any use, and never have any use 
for such a thing, even if I did the crime which you said I have 
committed—(I admit it)—the only thing I ever used was a chisel. 


205 


Steinie Morrison. 
Steinie Morrison 


I never had a jemmy or a bar of iron. I have no use for such 
things whatever. 

Mr. Asincer—That will do, Mr. Morrison. 

Cross-ezamination continued—Were you arrested by Police 
Sergeant Charles Bartlett (now in Court) on 24th January, 1901!— 
I was arrested, very likely, but I cannot remember that officer. 

Were you with another man at the time ?—Yes. 

The charge was burglary /—Yes. 

One of you threw away a large carpenter’s chisel?—Not a 
large one—the same size as I pointed out just now. It was a 
chisel. Whenever I did commit a crime ! never used any other 
implement. It is suggested that I had a bar of iron. I never 
had such a thing in my life, and I never had no use for it. 

Do you say that you had not a jemmy on the 14th January, 
1906, when Police Constable Page arrested you?—I say, so far as 
I can remember, I never had a jemmy in my life, but if it was it 
could not have been more than about that length (indicating), 
because I had it in my pocket when I was arrested, and they could 
not see it on me anywhere at all. 

Was it what is called a cold chisel?—A carpenter’s chisel 
altogether about that big (indicating). 

On that last occasion when you were arrested were the pro- 
ceeds of three burglaries found in your possession?—They were, 
yes. 

What do you use a chisel for?—To get into a house. 

In through the window?—Through the window. 

Without waking the inhabitants?—Without waking the in- 
habitants. 

And out again?—As a rule, you know, the places I commit 
burglaries in, the inhabitants of gentlemen’s houses generally lived 
right upstairs; there is nobody down below. 

But still you have got to get in and out without alarming 
people inside?—That is the way, yes, but you could not do it 
in a house in the East End, though, where people are living in 
every room. 

When your clothes were taken from you you saw Inspector 
Ward, did you not’—Yes, my clothes were taken from me, I 
believe, before he came there. 

And the next morning you saw Inspector Ward ?—yYes. 

And did he point out spots upon your collar, cuff and tie, and 
say they were blood?—He pointed out spots on the cuffs, the collar 
and tie, but they were so faint that the naked eye could not see 
them. I could not tell what they were, and even I myself thought 
they were mud, and if I am not telling the truth let him stand up 
and say so. According to the evidence given they have been trying 
to make out they could see blood spots as clearly as blood spots 
can be seen. As a matter of fact they were so faint that the naked 

206 


Evidence for Defence. 


Steinie Morrison 


eye could not tell what they were. It is only the doctor’s evidence 
which proved them to be what they are. 

Did Inspector Ward say they were blood?—That is what he 
said, yes. 

Did you say, ‘‘.No, they are mud ’’?—‘‘ No, they are mud 
spots ’’—and so they were—blood and mud mixed together. 

Did you say a word to the inspector about your nose bleeding ? 
—No, of course not, because I did not think of it at the time, but 
that is a fact just the same. 

Re-examined by Mr. Asinger—Have you ever in your life 
been convicted of a crime of violence?—Never in my life—never 
had a fight with a man in my life—never done violence. 

Just shortly; have you ever in your life been convicted of 
assault ?—Never. 

Or charged with assault ?—I have never been charged with any 
violence of any kind in my life. 

You have been convicted, and you frankly admitted it, of 
stealing some ledgers and some cigars ?—Yes. 

What was the date of your release from the last sentence — 
17th September, 1910. 

On what date did you enter the employment of Mr. Pithers, 
the baker ?—I went about the 21st; I do not exactly remember the 
date—but I worked before then for two days. 

Take one thing at a time. How many days had elapsed 
between your release and your finding honest employment !—Five 
or six, I believe—not more. 

How did you get that employment?!—I saw an advertisement 
in the Daly Chronicle and I made an application for it, and I had 
a hard job to get it, too. 

I think you told us you were paid 12s. a week wages and your 
board and lodging ?—Yes. 

And did that involve working nearly the whole of the night? 
—Between twelve and thirteen hours, I should think. 

Why did you leave there?—Because they hounded me out of 
that place. J wanted to be my own master. I could not stand it 
any longer; every night they used to come bothering me. 

By Mr. Justice Darirnc—What could you not stand any 
longer !—They kept on bullying me. Mr. Pithers complained about 
it, and he wanted to know why the police came in there. 

Cross-examination continued—Did the police ever call ?—They 
never called till I came there. é 

Did you see them at Pithers’ place?—Yes, in the bakehouse: 
they used to go right into the bakehouse and sometimes stop there 
two or three hours. 

Could you give the name or description or number of any one 
of those constables?—I certainly could pick them out if they were 


207 


Steinie Morrison. 


Steinie Morrison 
put in a row, but I do not know their names and I do not know 
their numbers. 

Have you seen one here to-day?—If Thomas Pithers is called 
he can prove what I say. Every night police officers used to come 
into the bakehouse. 

Every night ?—Every night the whole time I have been there; 
they hounded me out f that place. 

Did Mr. Pithers know, or did he not, that you had been con- 
victed 7—No, he did not, but he began to be suspicious. He wanted 
to know why the police kept calling there, especially at eight o’clock 
in the evening—private detective men. He in fact told me he was 
going to make a complaint to the magistrate over the road. 
Whether he did so or not I do not know. 

Were those constables in plain clothes or in uniform?—In 
uniform. 

Tell the jury this frankly. Your first lapse, we know, was for 
stealing ledgers?—Yes, that is what they put to my charge, but I 
know nothing at all about it. They missed those ledgers and they 
arrested me for them. I was working in that place at the time. 

How old were you then?—I think I was about eighteen or 
nineteen. 

Having been convicted as a boy of stealing ledgers, what made 
you commit the offences which you frankly admit that you did 
commit !—Nothing but hardship, but two of them, the last crimes 
which I have committed, were because the police bullied me and 
kept on worrying me every time I came out. That was the only 
reason. They would not let me stop and work for an honest living 
at any time. 

Did you hear my friend Mr. Muir, in opening this case to 
the jury, say that one of the central facts of this case on which he 
was going to rely was that you had not been to the police yourself 
with respect to the murder of Beron!—I did not say it before, but 
now it is out I will tell you, my lord, the reason why I did not go 
there. 

I would rather you did not. I will leave it there. He went 
on to say that if you were an innocent man one would have 
expected you to have gone round to the police to tell them that you 
had missed Beron. Did you hear my friend open the case like 
that ?—Yes, that is what he said. 

Did you hear Inspector Wensley swear he had not mentioned 
the word ‘‘ murder ’’ to you?—Yes. 

Is that true?—It is not. 

Did you hear two constables and an inspector swear here that 
you wished to see Inspector Wensley, as you wished to make a 
confession ?—I never said anything to them about confession at all. 
‘Did you hear those constables swear that?—I did, yes. 

That you wished to make a confession?—I did, yes. 

208 


Evidence for Defence. 
Steinie Morrison 

The three of them?—I did. 

Did you hear Inspector Wensley say that you wished to make 
a statement /—Yes,. 

My friend asked you whether Eva Flitterman had not sworn 
that when she visited your house in December you played the flute? 
Is that true?—How can it be? Kindly call the landlord and 
landlady and ask them if they ever heard me play a flute. If I 
did it could be heard all over the house. 

Did any one swear to that fact except Eva Flitterman ?— 
Nobody. 

Did any one except Eva Flitterman swear that you were geen 
wearing a £5 gold piece !—Nobody. 

You were asked by my friend whether you had ever made a 
statement before you entered the witness-box here with respect to 
purchasing a revolver and a flute and a variety of other matters. 
Did you, or did you not, receive advice from your solicitor ag to 
whether you should go into the witness-box at the Police Court? 
—Yes. 

Did you or did you not act upon your golicitor’s advice?— 
Yes, I did. 

How long have you been in the habit of going to music-halls 
in the East End of London?—I go two or three times a week ; 
sometimes twice a week. 

Have you been admitted into the more expensive parts of one 
of these East End music-halls with a cheaper ticket ?—That very 
often happens. I generally myself go very early, but that very 
often is the case in music-halls. 

Is it true or not that you took Jane Brodsky round to Rotto’s 
house for an improper purpose?—Jane Brodsky is as innocent a 
girl as there ever was in this world. She ig as pure and as 
innocent a girl as anybody’s daughter, and anybody saying against 
that is a liar. 

Is it true that you took her round to Rotto’s house for an 
infamous purpose’—It is not. 

Had you or had you not ever heard before it was suggested 
by my learned friend that Rotto was concerned in the white slave 
traflic!—I never knew anything about him about that. 

Had you ever heard it suggested that he had?—I did, yes. 

Before that?—No, never before he suggested it. 

Was Rotto alone when you took that young girl round there?— 
I did not take her into his house at all; I took her into the shop. 
Mr. Rotto invited us to go up to his house and he took us up 
to his house and left us with his wife and myself, and then he 
went back to his shop again. 

Was Mr. Rotto alone or was any one with him!—His son was 
with him in the shop. 


re) 209 


Steinie Morrison. 
Steinie Morrison 

Did the girl go upstairs?—Yes, where his wife was in the 
parlour. She was with us all the time. 

Has Rotto any children?—Two little girls and two boys. I 
am not quite sure, but they are generally in the house in the 
evening. 

My friend put the Hvening News of the 2nd January to you 
and asked if you had geen it, but you said no. 

This is the whole article: ‘‘ ‘ The Mad Landlord; ’ stories of 
the murdered man; the mysterious Frenchman. Jubilee Street, in 
which are Jubilee Buildings, where the murdered man lived, is a 
long thoroughfare stretching from Commercial Road to Mile End 
Road. The buildings, which are comparatively new, consist of 
shops and tenements, let principally to members of the Jewish 
community. He had occupied a room on the second floor. ‘ He 
came to us with his brother, who is about twenty years his junior,’ 
the daughter of the landlady told an Hvening News representative 
‘about three years ago. His name was Beron, and he was a 
Frenchman. Apparently he did no work, but we know that he had 
house property, because a neighbour once told us that she had lived 
in one of his houses in Grove Street, E. The brothers spoke to 
each other in French, and we understood that they came to this 
country from Paris fifteen years ago. They had very little fur- 
niture in the room, and only paid us 2s. 9d. a week rent for it. It 
seemed rather strange to us that a man with such property should be 
content to live in one room, but it seemed to serve him well enough. 
He was frequently out very late; in fact it was generally between 
one and two o’clock in the morning when he returned home. We 
could hear him, because we lived on the same floor.’ ‘I have 
known Beron by sight for the last seven years,’ said Mr. Jack 
Gold, of Little Holloway Street, ‘ and I last saw him on Friday 
night. He was passing through Coke Street between eight and nine 
o’clock. He was wearing a blue Melton overcoat, a bowler hat, and 
patent leather boots, and, as usual, he was smoking his pipe. He 
had a curious walking gait, with a peculiar swing, and he always 
wore his overcoat collar turned up. Though I have known him 
so long by sight, I never knew what his proper name was.’ Night 
walks. ‘ He was often to be seen in the early hours of the morning, 
often between one and two o’clock, generally in the Commercial 
Road. In this neighbourhood he was known as ‘‘ the mad land- 
lord,’’ and the boys called out this name after him whenever he 
made an appearance. It was known, or believed, that he had con- 
siderable house property, but where it was situated I don’t know. 
It was, too, believed that he went about with money on him, but 
he didn’t part with it freely. I saw him on Boxing Day about 
4.30 p.m. He had a couple of pails, with a brush in each, and 
some rolls of paper. He used to do his own paperhanging in his 
own houses. I said to him, ‘‘ Have you been at work?’’ but he 

210 


Evidence for Defence. 
Steinie Morrison 


didn’t reply. He was not at all a sociable man—it was rarely 
that he spoke to any one.’ A resident of Burros Street said that 
he had known the murdered man by sight for some years. ‘ My 
work keeps me out late, and I have often seen the old chap in 
Commercial Road. He was a regular customer of a coffee stall 
where I often go between one and two o’clock in the morning.’ ”’ 
Did you read that?—It is quite possible, but I am not perfectly 
sure ; I do read the papers, but whether I read that or not I cannot 
tell. It is such a long time ago. 

It says in that article that he was not a sociable man. Had you 
during the time that you knew him been received by him on terms 
of acquaintanceship, or anything of that sort?—As I said before, 
I never had any conversation with that man. The only time I ever 
had any conversation with him was when he came up to the table 
and said ‘‘ Comment vous portez-vous, Monsieur,’’? and I used to 
say, “Tres bien, merct.’? That was the only conversation that 
ever passed between the two of us. 

Did you read this passage out of the same newspaper, ‘‘ The 
victim of the murder has been identified as a man named Beron, 
of Jubilee Street, Stepney. The official description referred to him 
thus :—Fifty to fifty-five years of age, 5 feet 6 inches in height, com- 
plexion, sallow; hair, grey ; moustache, dark; wearing a black 
Melton overcoat with an astrakhan collar, dark striped jacket and 
vest, cloth trousers, patent leather boots, dark muffler. Hoe was of 
French origin. He had lived at the Stepney address for about three 
years. He had resided with a brother, and he was visited daily by 
another brother, who resides in the same part of London. He was a 
widower. From his first wife he obtained a divorce; his second 
wife died about four years ago. His landlady understood that he 
lived on income derived from property at Balham. The dead man 
was last seen at his rooms at noon on Saturday. The brother with 
whom he had lived does odd jobs for people in the district. 
Yesterday morning he had an engagement at a local wedding. He 
did not return until 4 a.m. to-day. The police were then in pos- 
session of the house, and detective officers took the man to the 
Leman Street police station. At nine o’clock the second brother 
paid his usual call, and also was taken to Leman Street. It is said 
that the murdered man had two sisters, one of whom is married, 
living in London, and a third living in Paris. The Central News 
says that the brothers taken to Leman Street police station are 
named David and Solomon Beron. David has been released and 
Solomon detained until inquiries have been made ’’?2?—I cannot re- 
member. I must have read it. It is very likely, but I cannot 
remember, because it is so very long ago. 


Dr. JonaTaan FraRNLEY, examined by Mr. Aninaer—I am a 
member of the Royal College of Physicians and a licentiate of the 
211 


Steinie Morrison. 


Dr. Fearnley 


Royal College of Surgeons, and I practise at 21 Devon’s Road, 
Bromley-by-Bow. I have had considerable experience in accidents 
and injuries, and I have frequently given evidence in Courts of 
Justice where questions of physical injuries to men have been con- 
cerned. I have had an opportunity of reading the evidence given 
here by Mr. Freyberger and Dr. Needham. Being shown exhibit 
13, being a portrait of the deceased man, showing the horseshoe- 
shaped wound on the right hand side of the forehead—in my 
judgment that injury was inflicted by a single blow. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—I did not see the dead body of 
Beron. 

Examination continued—On examining the photograph I find 
that there is a flap of skin which has the appearance of a lacerated 
wound. The end towards the temple has a point; the end towards 
the nose has the flap of skin connected at the base with the rest of 
the skin. I think that an angular instrument, such as a hammer, 
must have been used. 

By Mr. Justice Dartivc—I cannot suggest any other instrument 
besides a hammer. It must have been an instrument having some- 
thing at the end of it at an angle. 

Hzamination continued—I produce and hand to the jury an iron 
bar, 14 inches in diameter, and 4 or 5 inches round. I procured that 
bar from Messrs. Buck & Hickman, iron and steel merchants, 2 and 
4 Whitechapel Road. It weighs 12 lbs. 

In your judgment, was it possible that such an injury as is 
exhibited upon that photograph could have been caused by such a 
weapon!—No, because with a weapon of this size it would have 
smashed this flap of skin to pulp. 

What effect would such a blow, dealt by a weapon like that, 
have upon the skull?—It would fracture it, of course. 

Would it make a hole right through the skull, or would it only 
orack it?—It might do either. In my judgment, the arc-like appear- 
ance of the wound at the top indicates retraction of the muscle. 

Could a straight bar such as I have put in your hands have 
produced a wound in the shape of an arc like that?—No, not with 
two blows. 

I want you to tell us in a little detail why it indicates to you 
that one blow was inflicted, and not two. In the first instance, will 
you look at that spot where the two open ends of the horseshoe 
end?—They are exactly opposite one another, at the base of the 
flap of skin. That indicates to me that it is a single wound, and 
not two wounds, because they would hardly meet exactly opposite 
one another as that. It would be a most remarkable coincidence 
that two wounds should finish exactly at the same spot. Not only 
that, but if they did that, they must have been parallel below the 
lower end of the wound. 


Assuming two separate blows had caused those open ends at one 
212 


Evidence for Defence. 

: ; Dr. Fearnley 
side and closed the ends at the other, could not that be accounted 
for by the shape of the skull?—No, I do not think so. My second 
reason for thinking that this was the result of one blow and not two 
is that the skin has been raised up in a flap. The upper end of the 
wound is obviously the place where the weapon entered. Every 
wound must have a point of entry of the weapon. It has been given 
by the assailant facing the victim, and has penetrated deeply at that 
point ; and when the assailant was withdrawing the weapon after the 
blow, which he naturally would do, he has carried the skin and the 
pericranium, which is the linmg membrane of the bone, down towards 
the nose in the form of a flap, indicating that it has been done by an 
angular instrument at one blow. There are no signs upon that 
photograph of a continuation of the burst in the skin. 

Does that indicate anything?—It does, because the two blows 
must have been parallel, and the whole shape of the wound would 
have been oblong, not pointed at the upper end; it would have even 
had lateral splits at the upper end. 

You have read the evidence of Dr. Needham and Dr. Frey- 
berger. Do you find any history of two parallel fractures of the 
skull to correspond to the two blows on the forehead?—I have read 
that the fracture corresponding with the site of this horseshoe-shaped 
wound on the skull, that is to say, below it, had two parallel cuts. 
A vertical crack was also mentioned. I could not form an opinion 
in my own mind as to what relation the vertical character had to 
the two parallel ones. The appearance of those two parallel cracks 
does not interfere with the hypothesis which I have just expressed, 
because the skull is an elastic body. If you throw a skull upon the 
floor, it will rebound, and the site of fracture does not always corre- 
spond with the actual blow. A single blow might depress the skull 
and cause a fracture at either side of its edge. 

By Mr. Justice Dartive—I have not seen the skull. 

You do not know whether the cracks were where the wound 
was or not?—I have read the account, and it says so. 

Examination continued=-Accepting the evidence that the frac- 
tures were where the wounds were, I was explaining why that was not 
inconsistent with my hypothesis that this is the result of one blow, 
because immediately underneath that point of the hammer which is 
applied to the skull the elasticity of the skull would allow it to go in, 
and you might get a parallel fracture on either side of the circum- 
ference of the hammer. My evidence is that the corresponding 
fractures are consistent with either theory. It is difficult to say 
what form a fracture will take when a blow is applied to the skull. 

Under what conditions is a fracture of the skull more probable— 
if a man is standing and receives a blow, or if he is lying in a 
recumbent position on the ground !—When he is lying on the ground, 
because the ground itself forms a resistance on the other side; this 
and opposing force. 

213 


Steinie Morrison. 
Dr. Fearnley 


By Mr. Justicz Dartmvc—Do you mean to say, if anybody took 
a heavy piece of iron and struck a man who is standing up a blow 
where that wound is, that it could not fracture the skull when the 
victim is standing up in that position}—No; I do not say that it 
would not fracture the skull, but I say it would be more likely to 
do so when he was on the ground. It is more likely to glance off 
the skull when he is standing up. ~ 

Examination continued—\ have heard that the bowler hat 
belonging to the deceased man was found, uninjured, some distance 
from the body. 

Could that wound have been delivered upon the deceased man’s 
forehead with his hat on, when he was standing erect?—No; when 
the man received the horseshoe-shaped wound upon his head, he may 
have been either erect or recumbent, but I think he was more likely 
to be recumbent. I have read the evidence of Dr. Needham, who 
saw the body as it lay on the early morning of Ist January, having 
eighteen wounds upon it; and I have heard the evidence of Dr. Smith 
and Dr. Willcox that twenty-six articles of wearing apparel belonging 
to the accused had been submitted to them for analysis, and, with 
the exception of three articles—the collar, tie, and shirt, which are 
before me—they found no traces of blood. 

Have you read that the man must have been struck on the 
head, knocked down, dragged by the collar of his coat some distance, 
slashed about the face on both sides, stabbed in the abdomen, and 
then arranged almost in a natural sleeping position!—I have read 
that. 

Slashed in the face while he was lying upon the ground would 
have involved the assailant either stooping or kneeling—do you 
agree or do you not?—It would involve stooping. 

Having that in your mind, would you or would you not expect to 
find more blood upon the assailant than the spots which are on the 
garments before you?—Not necessarily whilst he was delivering the 
wounds, but I should expect to find more blood while he was dragging 
the body away and manipulating it. 

By the Forsman—Do you mean there would not be sufficient 
spurting of blood ?—There need not be. There must have been oozing 
of blood all over the skull, but not necessarily spurting. 

Examination continued—Assuming eight blows were rained 
in rapid succession on the head of the deceased man, would you expect 
to find blood upon the instrument ?—Yes, of course. An instrument 
such as I have in my hand, in order to inflict such a wound, would 
have to be raised over the shoulder or the head of the assailant. 

Assume that whilst those blows were being delivered by the 
accused he was wearing the green coat which he has put on just now, 
would you have expected to find any blood upon that coat?—Not 
necessarily. It could have been done without. 

Assuming there is a quantity of blood upon the coat of the 


deceased man, and particularly about the collar, in your judgment, 
214 


Evidence for Defence. 

Dr. Fearnley 
could the deceased man have been dragged as I have described to you 
by his assailant, turned over and arranged, without blood getting 
upon the sleeve of that coat?—It might not if the man were extremely 
careful, but I should not expect it not to do so. I should expect to 
find some part of his overcoat, either the sleeve or the skirts in 
front, or his trousers possibly, smeared or soiled with blood. 

Assuming that at the spot where the body fell there was a 
pool of blood, would you expect, with a tall man like the accused, 
wearing that long overcoat, to find blood upon the skirt of the great- 
coat when he was stooping ?—I should. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Murr—I was instructed in this case about 
ten days ago. This is the first criminal case—except Police Court 
cases, in which I have given evidence. The only material I had 
before me to enable me to form an opinion was the two photographs 
(exhibits 84 and 13), and the report of the Police Court proceedings. 


Josep ALLBURN Bunker, examined by Mr. Rontann Oniver—I 
am a clerk of Messrs. Claude Lumley & Co., solicitors for the accused. 
I produce the Datly Chronicle, the Daily Mail, the Daily Mirror, 
and the Daily News of 10th January (exhibit 79). There is a photo- 
graph or picture of the accused in each one of those papers. I also 
produce the People, Reynolds, Weekly Times, and Weekly Dispatch 
of 17th January (exhibit 80). Each of those papers contains a 
portrait of the accused. 


Wi.oveusy Lancetor Vinine, staff photographer on the Daily 
Graphic, spoke to a picture in the Dadly Graphic of 9th January 
(exhibit 73). 


Francis Epmonp Bet, examined by Mr. Anrycer—I am assistant 
art editor of the Daily Graphic. (Shown exhibit 73.) That copy of 
the Daily Graphie contains what purports to be a photograph of 
Cohen’s restaurant, Fieldgate Street, Whitechapel Road, and under- 
neath is the following written matter—‘‘ The unfinished meal left in 
Cohen’s restaurant, Fieldgate Street, Whitechapel Road, yesterday 
morning by the man who has been detained in connection with the 
Clapham Common mystery. He was seated in the empty chair on the 
right.’’ The first intimation I had of this arrest came by the 
Exchange Telegraph Company’s tape shortly after one o’clock on 
Sunday, 8th January. In consequence of that tape message the 
photographer was sent. The written description would not be pre- 
pared until it was confirmed from other sources. 


Taomas Prrumrs, recalled, further cross-examined by Mr. ABinaur 
—During the time Morrison was in my employment, from September 
to 10th December, he was hard-working and industrious. When he 
left my employment I did not know that he had been convicted. If 
I had known that he had been convicted I do not think I would have 

215 


Steinie Morrison. 
Thomas Pithers 


taken him into my employment. On one or two occasions I saw 
police constables come to the bakehouse door—twice I did so—about 
three o’clock in the morning. 

Had you ever, in your experience as a baker, been honoured in 
this manner by police constables in the morning before you took 
Morrison into your employment!—No. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—Had you ever seen them there before 
he came into your employment !—Yes. 

Cross-examination continued—How could the police find their 
way into the entrance of the bakehouse!—I believe it is part of their 
beat to come along by that part of the entrance. 

You do not suggest that your bakehouse is part of their beat ?— 
No, not inside the bakehouse. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—I saw them twice inside whilst Morrison 
was in my employment. Morrison complained to me and said he did 
not see why there was any need for them to come, and I said that if 
I was passing the police station I might mention it to somebody, but 
I did not mention it. If I had discovered that he was a convicted 
person whilst in my employment, I think I should have discharged 
him. 

Further re-examined by Mr. Murr—The constables whom I saw 
about three o’clock in the morning were in uniform. I did not 
inquire, nor did I know, what they had come for. I do not think they 
came for anything in particular. I do not know whether they warmed 
their bottles of tea in the bakehouse, and I have not inquired whether 
they were in the habit of doing so. I do not have any distinct 
recollection of seeing police constables coming to my bakehouse before 
the accused was in my employment. 

Do you know whether they have been to your bakehouse since he 
left?—Yes. I remember now it was only on one occasion when 
Morrison was there, and once since; it is only twice that they have 
been there, to my knowledge. They have never said anything to me 
at all about Morrison. 

Would it be true to say that the police hounded Morrison out 
of your employment !— 

Mr. Asrncur—lI object to that question. 

Mr. Justice Daritinc—I do not think you can put that, Mr. Muir. 

By Mr. Murm—Did the police ever do anything, so far as you 
were concerned, to make Morrison leave your employment !—No. 

How did Morrison come to leave your employment !— 

Mr. Anryeur—I object to that question. It does not arise out 
of my cross-examination. 

Mr. Justice Dartiyc—No, it does not. 

Mr. Murr—Will your lordship allow this question—did he leave 
your employment voluntarily, or did you discharge him? 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—No, I think not. I do not think that 
strictly arises. It is contradicting the accused himself. 

216 


Fvidence for Defence. 
Frederick Wensley 


Freperick Wensiey, recalled, further cross-examined by Mr. 
Asincer—lI am the police officer who effected the arrest of Morrison. 

Could you have put your finger upon Morrison if you had wanted 
to before 8th January!—I could not. I did not know, nor had I 
heard before 8th January, that he was in Whitechapel. 

What did you arrest him for on the morning of the 8th!—That 
he, being a convict on licence, failed to notify his change of address. 

How many police officers did you take with you to effect that 
arrest /—Four besides myself. 

Do you tell the jury that it is usual to take five officers to detain 
a man for failing to notify his change of address?—If that had stood 
alone, no. 

Do you tell the jury on your oath that you did not take this man 
for murder?—I took him for failing to notify his change of address, 
and with the possibility, as I then knew, of his being charged with 
murder. 

Do you pledge your oath you did not arrest him on suspicion of 
having committed a murder?’—Certainly. I have said so over and 
over again. 

Had the police received statements connecting Morrison with 
this murder before he was arrested !—-They had not. 

Do you know that Inspector Ward has sworn that they had? 

Mr. Murr—Will you point out where Inspector Ward has sworn 
that ? 

Mr. Apincer—Yes, certainly. I read what Inspector Ward 
swore at the City of London Police Court—‘‘ On the 9th January 
the prisoner was put up for identification. He was identified by nine 
persons. Those witnesses were all obtained before the 9th and before 
the 8th.” 

(To Witness)—What do you mean by swearing that the police 
had received no information 

Mr. Muir—I ask my learned friend to call attention to any 
statement by Inspector Ward that he made connecting Morrison with 
the Clapham murder. 

Mr. Asrnezr—Is my friend entitled to get up and interrupt me 
in the middle of a question to give an explanation to your lordship? 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Yes, certainly, because you are suggesting 
that what you have just read showed that Inspector Ward had made 
statements connecting the accused with the crime. 

Mr. AsineprR—I am suggesting that Inspector Ward gave his 
evidence as an honest, upright, honourable officer. 

Mr. Justice Dartivc—That is not the point at all. 

Mr. Astncpr—That is the point I shall make to the jury. 

Mr. Justice Dartivc—And that this officer is not? 

Cross-ecamination continued—Do you still say that on the date 
of Morrison’s arrest the police had received no statement or infor- 
mation connecting Morrison with this murder?—No. We received a 

217 


Steinie Morrison. 
Frederick Wensley 


description from the many witnesses who were subsequently called, 
giving in some instances a description of the man. We had no 
knowledge that that man was the prisoner at the bar at that time, 
nor until he was identified either. I think it was on 2nd January that 
Mrs. Deitch made her statement to the police. I was present when 
she made it. 

Do you say that the statement of Nellie Deitch does not connect 
Morrison with this murder?—Not beyond the description. 

Was it a description which corresponded with Morrison ?—Yes. 

Then what do you mean by swearing you had nothing which 
connected Morrison with murder?—It might have connected a dozen 
other people. 

Is it your point that it did?—My point is what I have already 
stated—she gave a description of a man. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—We must have Mrs. Deitch’s statement 
read now. This is the statement of Nellie Deitch. Nellie Deitch, 
wife of Samuel Deitch, of 401 Commercial Road, E., says—‘“‘ I have 
known the deceased man, Mr. Beron, for the past twelve years. On 
Saturday, the 3lst December, 1910, I went to a party at 73 Com- 
mercial Street ; we broke up at 2 a.m. on the Ist January, and walked 
as far as Gardiner’s Corner, as we could not get a tramcar. There 
was no car here at Gardiner’s Corner, and we walked to Bedford 
Street, Philpot Street, Commercial Road, and when near here I met 
Mr. Beron with a friend. Description as follows:—Tall—I should 
say head and shoulders more than deceased. Age twenty-six—he 
might be older; he was dressed in an overcoat, muffler, and collar; 
he carried a walking-stick, and had patent boots and a smart cap. 
They were walking towards Aldgate, westward. The deceased was 
dressed in an overcoat with astrakhan on the collar, bowler hat, collar, 
and muffler, smart patent boots. He was smoking a pipe. I noticed 
the man with him in consequence of his smart appearance. Knowing 
that deceased usually walked with his brother, and seeing him at 
such a late hour drew my attention, and I said to my husband, ‘ Look, 
there’s Mr. Beron, and the fellow he is with looks like a Russian.’ 
My husband said, ‘ Take no notice,’ and I felt suspicious of the man 
and took particular notice of his appearance. I said to my husband, 
‘That is Mr. Beron,’ and the man who was with him turned round 
and looked at me.—(Signed) Nellie Deitch. Taken this Ist January, 
RET eget 

Then there was a further statement on 9th January, 1911— 
‘On the 9th January, 1911, I attended Leman Street police station 
and identified the man I had seen with Mr. Beron from amongst a 
number of other men as the man I saw with him on the morning of 
the Ist, going westward in the direction of Aldgate.—(Signed) Nellie 
Deitch. Taken this 9th day of January, 1911.” 

Cross-examination continued—l was present when Castlin’s 

218 


oe ee ae 


Evidence for Defence. 
‘Frederick Wensley 


statement was made, but I do not remember the date. I should 
think that in all probability I knew that he went to the police station 
on 4th January. 

Do you tell the jury that you did not connect Morrison with 
this murder after knowing of Castlin’s statement!—I have already 
said I did not connect him with the murder until he was identified, 
so far as the witnesses are concerned. 

Will you answer my question? Do you tell the jury, or do you 
not, that you did not connect the accused with this murder after 
reading Castlin’s statement ?—No. 

- You did not connect him?—No. I do not know the date when 
Jack Taw made his statement to the police. They were all about the 
same time, the 2nd or the 5th, or something like that. 

Inspector Ward has frankly told us that nine persons made their 
statements before the accused was arrested. Did you or did you not 
know before Morrison was arrested that the statements of nine dif- 
ferent persons had been taken?—Yes, I knew. 

Do you tell the jury, knowing that the statements of nine dif- 
ferent persons had been taken before the 8th, you did not arrest 
Morrison on suspicion of murder ?—I did not. 

I show you the Daily Graphic of 9th January, which contains a 
photograph of Cohen’s restaurant. I invite you to tell the jury if 
you did not mention at that restaurant that you were arresting 
Morrison for murder, how could that illustration have got into the 
paper on Monday morning, when you arrested him on the Sunday? 
How could that information have got there if you did not use the 
word ‘‘ murder ’’?—I do not know how it could have got there; 
it may have got there by many, many means. Almost immediately 
after this man was arrested and was going to be put up for identifica- 
tion, officers were sent out to these witnesses asking them to attend 
the station as early as possible for the purpose of identifying this 
man, but we could not get them all in together until the following 
morning. Publicity must of necessity have been given to it almost 
immediately after he was arrested. 

Do you suggest, then, that this photograph taken inside this 
restaurant was in consequence of information afforded by Jack Taw 
or Mrs. Deitch, or that class of witness?—I cannot tell you who it 
was given to, or anything of that kind. 

The only man who would know what he was arrested for would 
be Morrison, according to you!—Yes. 


Or the inmates of that coffee house. Do you follow my 
question ?—No, I do not. 
If you had said, ‘‘ Morrison, I arrest you for murder,’ he 


would have known that he was arrested for murder, and the inmates 

of this house would also know. If you did not mention that he was 

arrested for murder, Morrison would not know it and the inmates 
219 


Steinie Morrison. 
Frederick Wensley 


of the coffee house would not know it?—No, not what he as 
arrested for. 

Then the only suggestion that you put before the jury is that 
this information must have been furnished by Taw, Deitch, or some 
of the witnesses called from Whitechapel?—I only gave you that as 
one reason. I will follow it up with another if you wish it. Before 
twelve o’clock the accused had already communicated to the inspector 
on duty at Leman Street that he wanted to see me to make a volun- 
tary confession, and publicity may have leaked out in some direction 
or another even from that quarter. 

That is interesting. Do you suggest that the word ‘‘ murder ”’ 
passing in a police station would leak out, so that it would escape the 
police station and find its way into this coffee house in White- 
chapel?—It evidently did leak out somewhere, but I have no know- 
ledge who made the communication. 

Do you suggest that any police constable, police sergeant, or 
inspector would mention such a fact as that outside the police station? 
—Possibly he might, and think no harm in it. 

What? That Morrison had been arrested in connection with the 
Clapham Common murder, when he had not been?—No. After that 
statement, it would have been just possible for a police officer to have 
heard it and communicated it quite in the ordinary way. 

Heard what?—Heard that this man wanted to make a voluntary 
statement or confession. 

Perhaps, but why in connection with the Clapham murder ?— 
As I have told you, I had already sent out for those witnesses who 
were going to identify the man in connection with the Clapham 
murder. 

Did you hear Morrison swear that you said to him, ‘“‘ Steinie, 
I want you for murder ’’!—I heard him say so. 

This is what Inspector Ward swore to at the Police Court— 
‘* Shortly after he was taken there (that is, Leman Street) he sent 
for Inspector Wensley, and subsequently for me. He said, ‘ I under- 
stand I am detained here on a very serious charge—murder, I am 
told, and I desire to make a voluntary statement.’ ’’ This is what 
the inspector replied, ‘‘ Very well; perhaps, if you tell me verbally 
what it is, we shall understand, and then we can write it down 
correctly.’? There is nothing here about, ‘‘ No, Morrison, you are 
detained on a charge for failing to notify ’? /—He was already charged 
with that offence and detained for that offence, and an entry was 
made in our book. 

Do you draw a distinction between ‘“‘ arrested for’’ and 
‘* detained for ’’ 1—Yes. 

What was Solomon Beron detained for?—He was not detained 
at all—not in the sense of detention. He came to the station, and 
his statement was taken. 

220 


Evidence for Defence. 
Frederick Wensley 

Could he have refused to go!—Well, if he had refused to go the 
statement would have been taken at the address where he was found. 

_ Supposing he had refused to give it?—Then I should use suffi- 
cient tact to induce him either to come to the station or something 
of that kind to take his statement. 

Do you, in face of the statement I have read to you by Inspector 
Ward, and in face of the fact that the Exchange News on this morn- 
ing at one o’clock was telephoning it to the Daily Graphic, tell the 
jury again that you did not use the word ‘‘ murder ’’ or the words 
*“ Clapham Common ”’ in that restaurant?7—I never used the word 
** murder ”’ at all. 

In a murder charge, any suggestion that the prisoner wanted to 
make a confession is a most serious matter ?’—Yes, it is. 

It amounts to this, that the prisoner wished to plead guilty to 
the charge of wilful murder—a confession of murder ?—Yes. 

Did you see the prisoner with regard to his request to make a 
voluntary confession ?—Yes. 

Do you pledge your oath that he used the word ‘‘ confession ’’ !— 
I am not quite sure whether he did or did not to me; I think to 
myself he said ‘‘ voluntary statement.’’ I heard the evidence of the 
two police constables, Staff and Harris, and of the inspector, Mac- 
kenzie, that Morrison said he wished to make a confession. I heard 
the evidence of Inspector Ward that he wished to make a statement, 
and I know what he said subsequently. 

Do you suggest that is a confession !—No. 

Further re-examined by Mr. Murr—lIs this what Inspector Mac- 
kenzie said, repeating the prisoner’s words, ‘‘ I want to speak to Mr. 
Wensley. I have a confession to make; this is a serious matter, and 
I want to clear myself ’’ ?—Yes. 

It was a confession to clear himself—that is the kind of confession 
of which he was talking?—Yes, that is so. When he was arrested I 
gave him into the custody of Inspector Mackenzie, who was the 
inspector in charge of the station. 

Upon what charge did you give him into the custody of the 
inspector ?—That he, being a convict on licence, failed to notify his 
change of address. ; ; 

You were asked why, if you were only arresting him upon a 
charge of failing to notify his change of address, it was necessary 
that you should take so many officers with you 1—I had known that 
this man was carrying loaded firearms. The officer who went up to 
him at once searched his hip pocket. 

In any statement taken from the nine witnesses, was Morrison’s 
name given as the person who had gone away with Beron?—In none 
of them. : : 

That is to say, he was not mentioned by name, but was described ? 


—That is so. 


221 


Steinie Morrison. 
Ernest Laundy 

Ernest Launpy, examined by Mr. Asrmnazr—I am the assistant 
publisher of the Evening News. The 5 p.m. edition of the 
Evening News gets out on the streets at 4.30, and on Saturdays it is 
out at 3.30. The 6.30 edition gets on to the streets about 5.45. 
The circulation of the 5 p.m. edition, the home edition, is about 
90,000 copies, and of the 6.30 edition it is about 279,000 copies. 


ApraHam FunpMaNn, examined by Mr. AprnazR—I am a jeweller, 
and live at 6 Black Lion Yard. On 9th November I sold to a man an 
18-carat gold watch, an 18-carat gold chain, and a 10s. piece for 
£9 17s. 6d. Exhibit 27 is the receipt, and it is in my own hand- 
writing. 

Look in the dock. Do you or do you not recognise the man in it 
as the man to whom you sold that watch and chain?—No, I cannot 
recognise the man; I cannot be sure; I cannot recognise his face. I 
think the man was in the shop about ten or twelve minutes. It must 
have been in the evening. My shop is illuminated with gas and 
electricity. 


Mr. Justice Dartryc—Any other witness? 

Mr. Asincer—A meteorologist has been subpcenaed to attend 
here to prove that on the night of 31st December and early morning 
of 1st January there was no moon. 

Mr. Murr—That is a matter which can be proved by the calendar. 
I agree that is right. 

Mr. Asrncer—I am obliged to my friend—no moon, clouds, and 
no rain. I am now going to call my last witness. 


Lewis Mincuinsky, examined, through the Court interpreter, by 
Mr. Asincer—I am a bootmaker, and live with my wife at 27 North 
Place, Buxton Street, E. Sam Rosen lived with me as a lodger at 
Frostic Place, Whitechapel. I moved from Frostic Place to North 
Place some time in January. I find that the rent in Frostic Place 
was last paid on 16th January. Rosen used to sleep in the back part 
of the shop, and I slept in the parlour at the back of the shop. I 
remember the day before the New Year. Rosen went to bed at 11.30. 
I read a report of Rogsen’s evidence in the newspapers. After he had 
given that evidence I met him and I spoke to him. He said that he 
did not speak correctly when he said that he saw Morrison and Beron 
at half-past one at night-time. He said he would like to speak to the 
solicitor of Morrison and say the truth. 


JoHN Hotmms Greaves, recalled, further examined by Mr. 
Apincur—The distance from a point somewhere near Philpot Street 
and Bedford Street in Commercial Road to the corner of Sidney Street 
in Mile End Road is 710 yards. 


Mr. Apinger—That is the defence. 
peo 


Evidence tor Prosecution. 


Mr. Murr—The accused gave evidence for the first time at this 
Court both by himself and by witnesses stating that he and two 
witnesses he called were in the Shoreditch Empire between nine 
o’clock and some time after eleven. That evidence was intended to 
contradict the evidence called on behalf of the Crown as to the accused 
and Beron being together for the greater part of that time in Snelwar’s 
restaurant. I propose to call evidence to show that the statements 
made by the accused and his two witnesses as to their being in that 
theatre were untrue. 


Further Evidence for the Prosecution. 


Hactror Munro, examined by Mr. Murr—I am the acting manager 
of the Shoreditch Empire. I remember having performances at that 
music hall on 31st December last. Exhibit 74 is a plan showing the 
seating accommodation upon the ground floor, On the night of 31st 
December there were two rows only at 1s.—the back two, marked L 
and K. The price of the seats in the next row (J) was Is. 6d., and 
the seats in the remaining rows were all reserved seats at 1s. 9d., 
which were booked at the box-office or by telephone. All the seats up 
to row J were booked up for the second performance on that night at 
five o’clock in the afternoon. The door opened to let people in to row 
J at ls. 6d. at about ten minutes to nine. There are thirty 
seats in that row, which is the ninth row. The seats in that row were 
filled in two or three minutes after the door opened. There was a 
queue at the door that night, which began just after seven o’clock. 
In order to get a seat in row J it would be necessary to be in the queue 
at about quarter-past seven. The door for the two unreserved rows 
at 1s. opened at about ten minutes to nine, and the people for these 
seats were also in the queue that I have referred to. The seats would 
be filled up in a minute or two after the door opened. For a seat in 
the back rows (Land K) a person would get a dark-blue paper ticket 
which would be given up at the first entrance. For a seat in row J 
he would get a blue cardboard ticket, a piece of which would be torn 
off at the front entrance, and it would be given up when they got to 
J row, and would admit them into that row. With regard to the 
remaining rows, A to I, the persons who booked seats would get a 
counterfoil paper ticket showing the number of their seat and the 
name of the row. They would keep that ticket the whole night. I see 
the place marked on the plan with a pencil cross between G9 and F8. 
There is no post in front of that at all. There are two posts at the 
back of J row, which I mark with a red pencil. There are 310 seats 
on the ground floor. On the night in question there were 502 persons 
admitted. I was at the booking office that night. About three 
minutes after we opened the theatre there was standing room only. 
On that Saturday night there was no performance of a little girl and 

223 


Steinie Morrison. 


Hector Munro 
boy acting as man and wife, nor was there any performance by a man 
acting as a Scotsman. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Asrvgzr—What enables you to come here 
on 13th March in a murder trial to tell the jury on your oath that 
you can remember what time this particular queue was formed up ?!— 
Because this night in question, 3lst December, was the Saturday night 
of a Bank Holiday week. Inspector Brogden, whom I have known 
for the last six years, telephoned me last Friday and said that the 
judge wanted me in Court here, and to come along right away. I 
have mentioned to no one besides Mr. Muir when the queue formed 
up. I have seen Inspector Brogden at the music hall during the last 
six years, but I would not say frequently. I may have had drinks 
with him in the theatre bar, but I do not remember. On the night 
in question there was a man called Harry Champion on the stage, 
and he sang a song called ‘‘ Ginger, you’re barmy.’’ He was singing 
in the hall all that week, but he was not there on the Monday follow- 
ing. There was nobody dressed up as a Scotsman performing in 
the week ending 3lst December; the Scotsman did not start till 
Monday, 2nd January. Gertie Gitana sang on the Saturday night 
in question ; she was not singing the following week, as the programme 
was entirely changed. 

Have you ever known two girls—we will suppose two good- 
looking girls—coming rather late to the music hall, being given two 
seats by two men? Is that an unusual thing in a music hall?—Yes, 
I should say it is unusual, but I have heard of such a thing happening. 

Re-examined by Mr. Murr—When the house is full I always tell 
the people that there is standing room only. I told them that night 
at about five minutes to nine. 

Mr. Murr—The accused said that on Saturday morning, 31st 
December, he had bought a flute at a stall in the market. I propose 
to call evidence as to what the state of the market was on that 
morning. 


StepHin Dart, examined by Mr. Murr—I am a police constable, 
and I was on traffic duty at the top of Leman Street in the High 
Street, Whitechapel, between eight in the morning and twelve noon 
on Saturday, 31st December last. The plan (exhibit 76) shows where 
the stalls stand in that part. In the morning there is a hay market 
in the middle of the street, and no stalls are allowed to come any 
further towards Leman Street from the entrance to Aldgate Street 
Chambers. 

Mr. Asinger—My lord, my learned friend cross-examined the 
prisoner upon certain matters on a certain issue, and he is now pro- 
ceeding to call evidence to contravert the oath of the defendant. I 
submit that he can only do so where the matter that he is cross- 
examining about is relevant to the issue, and if it is not relevant to 
the issue he is bound by the defendant’s answer. 

224 


OE tt OR 
; pooh ie hel Cer 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Mr. Justice Dartrve—But why is this not relevant to the issue? 
_ Mr. Asincer—The issue in this Court is ay or no, did the 
prisoner murder Mr. Beron? 

Mr. Justice Dariinc—But there are many other issues besides 
that; that is one issue. 

Mr. ABINGER—My lord, that is the issue. 

Mr. Justice Dartanc—That is one issue, that is the main issue 3 
but there are many other issues leading up to that. This is not merely 
as the general proof of the guilt of the prisoner, 

Mr. Axsincer—It is contradicting him. 

Mr. Justice Dartmc—lt is not merely as to his guilt. 

Mr. Apivczur—I have always thought the principle was that if 
the defence raised fresh matter, then the Crown might rebut by 
calling fresh evidence. I have never heard it ruled yet that where a 
prisoner had been cross-examined and counsel for the Crown had closed 
the case he might call evidence to contradict the prisoner’s oath on 
by-issues. 

Mr. Justice Daruryc—You will find practically all the modern 
law on the subject in the judgment in The King v. Crippen, which 
is reported. 

Mr. Axsrnezrr—In the case of The King v. Crippen it was a 
different point altogether. In The King v. Crippen the question 
arose in this way—speaking from memory—whether a shirt which 
was found in the cellar was purchased a long time before the murder 
or after the murder, or about the time of the murder. The prisoner 
was cross-examined, and swore to a date when he purchased the shirt, 
which date made it impossible that he could have had the shirt when 
he committed the murder, because that particular shirt had only been 
manufactured afterwards. I submit that there is no analogy between 
the two cases. Your lordship sees how this question arises. The 
dispute here is this. The Crown allege that on the night of the 
murder the prisoner took away from Snelwar’s restaurant a parcel 
containing a bar of iron. On the other hand, the prisoner says on 
the night of the murder, ‘‘ I took away a parcel which contained a 
flute.”” That is strictly relevant to the issue. Now, my learned 
friend is trying to prove that the prisoner when in the box swearing 
that he bought that flute on that day was not telling the truth—that 
he bought it at some other date. That is not the issue. The issue 
is, was this a bar of iron or a flute that the prisoner purchased? Won 
constat that if he had bought it on some date—not that date—it 
might have been that parcel. I know it is a very difficult question— 
to me it is a very difficult question at least, but I submit with great 
confidence that this evidence is not admissible. 

Mr. Justice Daritine—I will give you the benefit of the doubt 
that you felt, and exclude the evidence. 

Mr. Muir—My lord, if it is relevant I submit that it is most 


important evidence and ought in the interests of justice to be 
225 


Pr 


Steinie Morrison. 


admitted. The defendant says, as accounting for a parcel which 
he took away from Snelwar’s restaurant at midnight, ‘‘ That was a 
flute which I had bought in the morning and which I was carrying 
about in my pocket till eight at night. That is the parcel; that 
is how I came to have the parcel.”’ 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—I will tell you, Mr. Muir, what I will 
do. If there had been no flute at all I would have admitted the 
evidence, but he had got a flute and therefore it is simply narrowed 
down to when and where he bought the flute which undoubtedly 
he had. It is for that reason I do not allow the evidence, although 
I am not going to have it reported that it is not evidence, because 
I do not say so. There are some things in which one favours a 
defence, and this is one. 

Mr. Murr—Your lordship puts it on that ground? 

Mr. Justice Dartinec—That is the only ground, I should think. 

Mr. Asrincer—My lord, I do not accept it. Although I am 
grateful to your lordship I decline to accept it on that ground. 

Mr. Justice Daruinc—If you ask me to reject evidence, I 
can reject it, and you cannot choose your reasons, Mr. Abinger. 
I have rejected it. 

Mr. Asincer—If it is evidence let it be admitted. 

Mr. Justice Darutive—Ah. 

Mr. Murr—My lord, there is another issue upon which I 
propose to call evidence. The prisoner swore that he had never 
been with Leon Beron outside Snelwar’s restaurant at all. I put 
to him two instances in which I suggest that he was. 

Mr. Justice Darutina—They were two or three days before? 

Mr. Muir—Yes. 

Mr. Justice Dariinc—I should not allow that. There is 
always a point at which evidence becomes too remote from the 
matter being investigated to be altogether germane to it, and 
although it is difficult to draw the line I should not admit evidence 
to contradict what he said about that. 

Mr. Muir—If your lordship pleases. That is all the evidence 
for the prosecution. 


Closing Speech for the Defence. 


Mr. Axrincer addressed the jury on behalf of the prisoner. He 
remarked that his lordship had complained, not unreasonably, of the 
time taken by him as representing the accused in eliciting certain 
facts; he had asked the jury to appreciate the responsibility resting 
upon counsel who undertook the defence of a man charged with 
murder; they must remember that whilst in that case they were 
affected for a week, to the man in the dock it meant eternity. 

226 


Closing Speech for the Defence. 
Mr. Abinger 


__ One of the central facts of the prosecution was that the accused 
did not go to the police and tell them that he had known the 
dead man. But, counsel submitted, the accused was a convicted 
man on licence. If his character had not been in issue, and had his 
counsel not cross-examined witnesses as to his character, the jury 
would never have known why he did not go to the police. For the 
first time in his long experience an accused charged with murder 
had demonstrated that two witnesses called for the Crown at the 
Police Court had stated that which they knew to be untruths, and 
untruths of the most deadly character. One of those statements 

-was by a woman to the effect that a portion of the deceased’s pro- 
perty was seen upon the accused on the very day of the murder. 
The other statement was that at a critical part of the day the accused 
was seen in the company of the dead man. Those statements were 
of the most deadly character. Both were untrue, both invented, and 
both confessed to. Did the jury doubt for a moment that the most 
diabolical perjury was committed by the boy Rosen? Flitterman had 
been able to come forward and commit perjury in a murder case, and 
yet she escaped. The accused knew the consequence of the ques- 
tions which were put to impeach the credit of Mrs. Deitch, and it 
was on his instructions that those questions were put. And this had 
been held as a rod over him, although he had demonstrated the falsity 
of some of the principal witnesses called against him. 

The jury now knew the history of the accused, and, speaking 
frankly, he was glad they knew it, for two reasons. The first reason 
was, “I am free. I can say what I like. No more rod can be held 
over me now. You can do me no more harm.’’? The second one 
was a more cogent reason, and one which he hoped the jury would 
remember, because they could not hope to do justice in the case 
unless they did. It was this: if the Crown, represented by his 
learned friend, thought they had a clear and conclusive case against 
Morrison, what necessity was there, because he questioned a woman 
as to her credit, to parade the shame of the accused’s life? It was 
an admission that the case was so weak that unless the jury knew 
the history of this man it might be in danger. There was not a 
previous suggestion of violence against him, not even a conviction 
at a Police Court for common assault. But it had a danger, inas- 
much as a jury might be influenced by a prisoner’s past instead of 
dealing only with that which related to the present. He asked them 
to remember that in considering their verdict. 

What was the motive for this murder? There was not a scrap 
of evidence on which they might rely that Beron had any money in 
his pocket. He was going to suggest. that robbery had nothing to 
do with that murder. If that was not the motive, what was? Here 
came the remarkable part of the case. What must strike anybody in 
this case is one fact which his learned friend from the moment he 
opened had carefully avoided. Certain photographs had been put 


QO" 


a4 


Steinie Morrison. 


Mr. Abinger 
in by the defence showing the ‘‘ S ’’ cut upon the sides of the man’s 
cheeks. Let them examine that. Beron lived in Jubilee Street. 


Beron was known to the police. There was an anarchist club in Jubilee 
Street. On 16th December there were atrocious murders, and three 
precious lives lost, sending the whole of the country into mourning. 
London was ransacked for the murderers. Some were arrested on 
the 22nd, some on the 23rd, but the ringleaders were not arrested. 
‘‘ Peter the Painter ’’ was at liberty. What followed? On Ist 
January Beron was murdered. The inspector had said that, in 
consequence of information received, Sidney Street was surrounded 
on 8rd January, and two men were burnt. But another man, ‘‘ Peter 
the Painter,’? was at large, and was still being looked for. The 
inspector had been asked, ‘‘ Who are the other persons you are 
looking for?’’  ‘‘ I would rather not answer that question,’’ was 
the reply. Was that a coincidence? Let them examine what hap- 
pened on Clapham Common in the light of those facts. If the murder 
had been for robbery every moment would have been considered 
precious. But in this case there were not only two blows used to 
kill Beron (though he suggested that death was caused by one), but 
the deceased man’s face had been slashed with the letter ‘‘ S,’’ the 
first letter of ‘‘ Sckpick,’’ the Russian for spy. Then there was the 
placing of the body in an almost natural position. This, he con- 
tended, was a crime of vengeance. The prosecution had never for a 
moment—and he defied them to do it—suggested the remotest con- 
nection between the accused and the perpetrators of the Hounds- 
ditch murderers. Mr. Muir said to the bank clerk who was called 
to identify the signature of Morrison, ‘‘ Look at these S’s, are they 
not open shaped like the opening of a fiddle? ’’ The suggestion he 
(Mr. Abinger) ventured to describe as grotesque; it was that a man 
transported with fury, as the murderer must have been, transported 
with rage, and possessed of diabolical violence and force, would slash 
the dead man’ in the face in the same manner as he would sign his 
name on a piece of paper. Not one thing found on the Common 
that night was proved, or even suggested, to be the property of the 
accused. There was the red and black silk handkerchief. To whom 
did it belong. Not to Morrison. If it did not belong to Beron, it 
belonged to the murderer or his accomplice. It did not belong to 
the accused. With reference to the instruments that must have been 
used, what opportunity had the accused of concealing them? The 
prosecution had no evidence of the accused man being in possession 
of weapons with which the injuries could have been inflicted, unless 
they accepted the statement of the waiter, Mintz, as true. If they 
rejected the evidence of Mintz, the case for the prosecution was 
derelict, and the floor of the Court was littered with its wreckage. 
A bar of iron was not a thing a man carried about with him. Did 
they think that a man who was going to commit a murder would 
take such a weapon and give it to a waiter in the place where his 
228 


Closing Speech for the Defence. 


victim was. Mintz had been an inmate of Colney Hatch Lunatic 
Asylum. Was the accused to be sent to his death on such evidence 
as that? When he (counsel) was cross-examining Mintz he was 
interrupted by his lordship 

Mr. Justice Dartrvc—I did not call attention to the Criminal 
Evidence Act when you were asking the witness whether he had been 
to Colney Hatch. When you asked him whether he had not twice 
tried to hang himself, then it was that I suggested to you that you 
might be put in a dangerous position. But I told you on Saturday 
that I should not have ruled when the counsel for the prosecution were 
asking questions such as were asked to-day—I should not have ruled, 
as I did upon what you asked of Mintz, but what I thought I was 
obliged to admit those questions upon was what you asked of Mrs. 
Deitch. 

Mr. Axsincer—I accept that, my lord, but I must say this: I 
might have commenced with the lunatic asylum and finished with the 
suicides, but the order of the evidence happened to be first of all 
the two attempts to commit suicide. 

Mr. Murr—There is only one attempt. 

Mr. AsrnceR—One attempt admitted and two suggested. If my 
lord had waited for me to continue that cross-examination he would 
have appreciated, as any one must appreciate, that I was not casting 
an aspersion on that man’s character. I never suggested that he 
was dishonest, or committed perjury, or had a spite. I was suggest- 
ing he was ill. That is the state of things when Mrs. Deitch comes 
into the box. Two witnesses confess that they have stated on their 
oath 


Mr. Justice Dartivc—You must not say two witnesses. They 
are not witnesses in the sense that they had nothing to do with 
this trial. They were two people who gave evidence at the Police 
Court, but they have nothing whatever to do with the question of 
witnesses in regard to the Criminal Evidence Act. Nothing that 
you might have said about those two people would have induced me 
to hold that you were bringing yourself within the Act, because they 
are not witnesses, and the words in the Act are ‘‘ witnesses for the 
prosecution ’’—that means witnesses in the case that is being tried. 

Mr. Asrnerr—Suppose this man had been unrepresented at the 
Police Court, and Flitterman had not been cross-examined, and she 
had come here and repeated her story—the same story that she told 
at the Police Court. Suppose the prisoner’s counsel cross-examined 
Flitterman, and had said to Flitterman, ‘‘ I suggest that you are not 
telling the truth,’’ my learned friend would have been entitled to 
cross-examine the prisoner as to his credit. If I had suggested that 
she was committing perjury—inventing that story—my learned friend 
would have been entitled immediately to cross-examine the prisoner. 

Mr. Justice Dartiva—Where—in the Police Court? 

Mr. Asrneur—Here. 

229 


Steinie Morrison. 
Mr. Abinger 


Mr. Justice Dartmivc—No, he would have been entitled to do 
nothing of the kind. 

Mr. Asrnezr—I am afraid your lordship did not hear what I was 
saying. I say, if Flitterman had not been cross-examined at the 
Police Court, and she had given evidence here—I do hope your lord- 
ship will not interrupt me more than is necessary. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Of course, if she had been called here—— 

Mr. Asrncer—That is what I was putting. Suppose she had not 
been cross-examined at the Police Court, and had gone into the box 
here and had sworn that she saw a £5 piece in that man’s vest, then, 
if I had suggested to her that she had committed perjury at the Police 
Court, the penalty of that would have been that you are to try 
the prisoner, not on the facts of the case, but on the facts of the 
case plus what ?—that he has been prosecuted and convicted. 

Mr. Murr—My lord, the Court of Criminal Appeal has decided 
exactly the opposite. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—I hope I have indicated as much. Of 
course, as Mr. Abinger appeals to the jury with this—which is not, 
in my judgment, strictly a matter for them—you may deal with the 
point from your point of view when you come to address them. 

Mr. Asrncer—Gentlemen, do you doubt that my friend feels the 
pinch of what I am saying when I am pressing the point that two 
witnesses called by him at the Police Court both committed perjury— 
as I am entitled to suggest. 


if 


The Court adjourned. 


230 


Eighth Day—Tuesday, 14th March, 1911. 
Closing Speech for the Defence—Continued. 


Mr. AsinemR, in resuming his address to the jury, said that he 
- would at once deal with one of the central allegations in the case, 
namely, the assertion that the accused disappeared shortly after the 
murder. Now, what were the facts? On the early morning of Ist 
January, the day of the murder, the accused was at Snelwar’s 
restaurant. He declared that he asked Snelwar whether he had seen 
a man called ‘‘ The Colonial ’’ there. Snelwar said, ‘‘ Yes, he did 
come, and looked round, but said nothing.’’ On the same day, 
according to the evidence for the prosecution, the accused was within 

a stone’s throw of the restaurant—at Flitterman’s house—and did © 
something of a remarkable character ; he was offering to cash a small 
cheque for £4. Therefore, they had it, not only that he showed 
himself in Whitechapel on the Sunday, but that he was actually in 
funds. He admitted that he left his lodgings, but it was proved to 
demonstration, and it was not disputed, that on the Sunday he went 
to see Florrie Dellow, and when the police went to her on the day 
of his arrest they found his wardrobe there. It was true he left 
his lodgings in Newark Street, giving the excuse, ‘‘ I am going to 
Paris,’’ but he had to give some explanation for leaving a place 
where he had been comfortable, and where he had been staying with 
the one witness whom it was impossible for the prosecution to dis- 
parage. If the police had wanted Morrison immediately after the 
murder, they could have found him walking about in broad daylight 
in Whitechapel. Yet he was reading the newspapers daily, and knew 
of the hue and cry. He did not go to the police because he was a 
convict on licence with a string of convictions behind him. If Mr. 
Muir was going to suggest that the accused disappeared, he (Mr. 
Abinger) declared there was not a scrap of evidence at all to support 
such a suggestion. Disappeared? The police wanted this man. He 
was in Romford Street; he was walking about the streets, walking 
about with Florrie Dellow to see her little boy, going to the music 
hall, calling on the Brodskys, calling on the Flittermans. My friend 
says this man disappeared. You cannot convict a man in murder 
cases by rhetoric; it must be facts, gentlemen, not eloquence. Was 
it likely that, seeing Morrison take from the waiter the bar of iron, 
Beron would be induced to the lonely spot where the murder was 
committed? The case was a mystery. There was nothing left for 
the jury to guess, for Beron was not drunk. If there had been evi- 

231 


Steinie Morrison. 
Mr. Abinger 


dence that Morrison had been trying to persuade Beron to go to 
Clapham Common, it would be a different thing, but there was not a 
scrap of such evidence. There was no suggestion that he was 
drugged. This was a point which struck at the bedrock of the case 
for the prosecution. And yet his learned friend had never referred 
to it. There was not a scintilla of evidence that the accused induced 
Beron to go to Clapham Common; but they had this fact, that, 
although the inhabitants of the restaurant were definite that the 
deceased man and Morrison were associates and companions, they 
had heard nothing of any conversation that had passed between them. 
The contention of the police that the two minute bloodstains—the 
one on the shirt cuff and the other on the linen collar—were caused 
by the murder was mere trash. He (counsel) did not want to throw 
dirt at the police. They were the finest and bravest body of men 
they had in this country—men who carried their lives in their hands 
—and he was not going to sling mud at the police; but he did say 
that it was absurd to put forward the theory that the man who 
murdered with an iron bar, who stabbed Beron five or six times with 
a dagger, and stooped down to cut those mystic signs on his face, 
after he was done to death, would have no more blood on his coat. 
Why, there must have been blood all over his clothes! Blood! blood! 
blood! If the blood found could be weighed, it would represent one 
drop, and no more, and yet it was suggested that the man who was 
charged with committing that murder, and who had thirteen collars, 
was walking about eight days after with the same collar, the same 
shirt, the same tie. It was ludicrous, farcical, pure trash. 

Mr. Abinger proceeded to reconstruct the scene, describing the 
murderer dragging Beron’s body to a place of concealment, and 
pointing out that a tall man like Morrison would have to bend. If 
he did that, could he by any possibility have avoided touching the 
ground with the bottom of his greatcoat? If it was on the ground, 
then it was in blood, and if it was in blood, then blood would be 
found upon it. But not a solitary spot was found upon the bottom 
of the coat. Where was the weapon? How was it carried away? In 
the pockets? No blood was found in any of the pockets. Clapham 
Common had been scoured, and the pond had been examined, but the 
weapon had not been found. The murderer must have walked away 
with it, but not one witness in the whole case, except Mintz, had so 
much as suggested that this man was ever carrying anything. The 
cabman did not say so. What became of it? Where was the dagger? 
If they could find that bar and that dagger, then they could find the 
murderer. If the accused had committed the crime, did not the jury 
think that, having a whole week in which to do it, Morrison would 
have taken the most careful precautions to destroy every garment 
which had the vestige of a bloodstain on it? Mr. Abinger submitted 
that that was the weakest link in the whole chain of circumstantial 
evidence. 

232 


Closing Speech for the Defence. 


Mr. Abinger 


If robbery was the motive of the murder, what evidence was there 
that the accused had any of the proceeds? The jury were the judges. 
Theirs was the responsibility, and he suggested that unless they were 
satisfied in every direction that the case pointed to Morrison, and 
to him only, they were bound to acquit him. That was why he 
regretted so much that his learned friend had increased their labours 
and made them almost impossible by electing to put evidence before 
the Court that the accused was a convicted person. They had to try 
and keep that out of their minds. If Mr. Muir thought a conviction 
was to be obtained by parading before the jury the fact that this 
man had been convicted of burglary, he was mistaken. What a cold 
squib that was, and how it fizzled out. But how deadly it would 
have been if he could have proved that this man had been convicted 
of any offence involving violence. But there was not as much as a 
common assault against him. If the prosecution had a clear case 
was it necessary to introduce it? He admitted that they were entitled 
to do so; but they did not do many things which they were entitled 
to do. Although Mr. Muir had the right, why did he elect to let 
the jury know that the accused had been previously convicted, unless 
it was to prejudice him? He challenged and defied Mr. Muir to give 
any other reason. The question of blood on the clothes was a rotten 
link in the chain of circumstantial evidence, and when examined it 
smashed. The prosecution had suggested that the case was one of 
highway robbery. In all their lives had the jury heard or read of 
a highway robber dealing his victim eight blows upon the head, four 
stabs in the stomach, slashing his face, and then engraving a sign 
upon the cheeks. None of the proceeds of the robbery had been 
traced to the accused ; on the contrary, all the bank notes on Morrison 
had been accounted for. There was no evidence that Leon Beron 
was possessed of sums anything like that. Leon Beron was a poor 
man; he was not murdered for his money, but out of vengeance for 
what he knew in connection with the Houndsditch police murders. 

Gentlemen, picture to yourselves this—this man is being tried 
for his life. If you find a verdict of wilful murder against this 
man he will be executed in a very short time ; that will be the result of 
your verdict. There is a woman living in London; there is a woman 
walking up and down the corridor cf these Courts who is to be found 
to come here and to invoke the name of the Almighty and swear that 
she saw this man with a £5 piece—knowing it is a lie—and in a 
murder trial. It is appalling. You have consciences; we have con- 
sciences; has that woman? What was her frame of mind when she 
swore that—Cross-examination—‘‘ Did not you know that man was 
being tried for his life?—No.”’ 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Mr. Abinger, what do you want? Do you 
want the prosecution to call her or not? 

Mr. Asrncer—No, my lord, I do not want them to call her; it 
would be a terrible spectacle. 

233 


Steinie Morrison. 
Mr. Abinger 


Mr. Justice Dartinc—There is no good in the prosecution calling 
people if you and they and everybody else know that they are only 
going to say what is not true. 

Mr. AxnrnceR—I agree. : 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—And say what is not true against the 
accused. 

Mr. Apmcrer—Your lordship invites me at this moment to say 
what I want. May I respectfully tell your lordship what I want? 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Do, certainly. 

Mr. AsrncerR—I want that woman to be brought into Court so 
that the jury may see the class of woman she is. That is what I 
want. 

Mr. Justice Dartivc—But you have got it established that what 
the woman says is not true. What is the use of looking at one har 
more or less? 

Mr. Axsrvcer—Gentlemen, I pass from that, but you won’t. 
What my lord meant by saying one liar more or less one can easily 
guess. My lord must be thinking of Rosen, another liar—although, 
of course, not such a shocking liar as Flitterman, but another liar— 
the next liar—the liar in a murder case who swore that at half-past 
one he saw this man in the street with Beron, and then said it was a 
lie. That man has a conscience. He says—‘‘ I want to go to the 
man’s solicitor; take me there.’’? My lord says what is the good of 
spending all this time on one liar when this case is full of liars. Then 
there is the next liar, this boy. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—While you are telling the jury what I 
said I may as well mention what I really was thinking of. I was 
thinking of the observation of King David—not of Rosen. 

Mr. Anmvger—Gentlemen, I wish I had the remarkable abilities 
of my lord who is able to allow his mind the luxury of dwelling upon 
King David when we are discussing this sordid case. Gentlemen, 
of course you know my lord’s literary talents; I have none. Gentle- 
men, that is the next liar, Rosen. You remember the paper bag 
which was found upon the deceased man. Ward tells Cooper to go 
there and ascertain what sort of shop it is, and this is what Ward 
told you Cooper reported—‘‘ It is a sort of refreshment house.’’ 
Ward tells us that that is not true; it is not a sort of refreshment 
house at all; it is a pastry cook shop. Cooper told Ward it was a 
sort of refreshment house; that would lead you to imagine that you 
could get sandwiches there. It is a pastry cook shop where they do 
not sell sandwiches ; they sell arrowroot. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—The fact that they did not in that shop 
sell sandwiches does not prove that there had not been sandwiches 
in that paper bag. 

Mr. Anrvcur—I agree. 

Mr. Justicy Dartinc—You said there were no sandwiches in that 
paper bag because in that shop they did not sell them. There is 

234 


Closing Speech for the Defence. 
Mr. Abinger 


distinct evidence that there were the remains of sandwiches in that 
paper bag, and that there was partly digested meat in the stomach 
of the deceased man. 

Mr. Asrycer—I accept your lordship’s correction, but that was 
not the object of my observation so much as this. I shall have to 
deal again at some little length with Cooper. He said to Ward— 
““ It is a sort of refreshment house ’’—sort of place where you can 
get sandwiches. It was not. I said to Ward—‘‘ Who told you that? ”’ 
He said—‘‘ Sergeant Cooper.’’ I said—‘‘ Do you know of your own 
knowledge? ’’ and he said—‘‘ No.’’ Then when Cooper comes into 
the box I said to him—‘‘ What sort of place is this? ’’ and I pressed 
him. He knew, of course, that if I chose I could send a clerk at once 
to see the sort of place it was; so he said—‘‘ A pastry shop.’ I 
did not say to him—‘‘ What do you mean by telling your inspector 
that it was a sort of refreshment house, and then coming here with 
another story?’’ Now, I accede to what my lord said. It is non 
constat, gentlemen—I mean to say it is perfectly possible that the 
deceased man bought sandwiches somewhere else. Of course it is. 
But ham sandwiches by a Russian Jew on a Saturday is a rather large 
order to swallow—Saturday—pork. Do you think Beron is the sort 
of man to go about eating pork sandwiches on Saturday? I suggest 
not. I suggest it is the very last thing that Mr. Beron would eat 
that night, and that an arrowroot biscuit is much more likely to be 
his last meal of the day. But, gentlemen, it is a matter which you 
will deal with. You may think that, however devout Mr. Beron was 
when he put in an appearance at the Synagogue on the Saturday, he 
would slyly put his hand in his pocket and pull out a ham 
sandwich 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Do you say you suggest it is more likely 
he would eat biscuits on a Saturday night than a ham sandwich? 
There is the distinct evidence of the doctor that inside the stomach 
was partially digested meat; I do not think that he said it was pork, 
but meat. You are suggesting that he would really naturally eat a 
biscuit. Does that dispose of the sworn testimony that, as a matter 
of fact, inside him there was meat? 

Mr. Asrveger—I am much obliged to your lordship. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—You must accept that. You must not 
say that the doctor is telling an untruth. 

Mr. AprinceR—With great submission, my lord does not appre- 
ciate my point. My point is that the man had a meat supper. That 
ig my point—the man had a meat supper. I am not going to impute 
that Dr. Needham, the divisional surgeon, was swearing falsely when 
he said he found meat in that man’s stomach. That is the point I am 
making. He did have a meat supper, but the point I was making was 
that he did not call at a pastry cook shop and have ham sandwiches ; 
he sat down and had a meat supper. Where, gentlemen? That is the 

235 


Steinie Morrison. 
Mr. Abinger 


point of these observations—where? With whom? My lord did not 
appreciate the point I was making. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Oh, yes, I did, and I will tell you another 
point which you have not explained to me, and that is this—If he had 
the meat supper, as you say, where is it? There is no evidence 
that he did have a meat supper; but there is evidence that the remains 
of sandwiches were found in his pocket ; and what occurs to me is, that 
if he had a meat supper, why did he get given to him, or buy, or 
take from somebody else, sandwiches? There is evidence that he had 
sandwiches ; there is evidence that he had meat in his stomach ; there 
is no evidence that he went to any place and sat down and ate a 
meat supper. There is evidence of two things—you will use them as 
you will—there is evidence that somewhere or other he got some 
sandwiches, of which there were the remains in his pocket, and there 
is evidence that there was meat in his stomach, which may be the 
meat of sandwiches or of supper, and there is evidence that somewhere 
and somehow he got some alcohol. 

Mr. Asrycrr—That is one way of looking at it. 

Mr. Justice Dartriync—I mean those are the simple facts. You 
may look at the facts how you like, but what I have stated are simple 
facts deposed to and accepted. 

Mr. Asrvcer—These are the facts proved; that two paper bags 
were produced with nothing inside at all—empty—not a speck inside. 

Mr. Justice Dartriync—That is not so. 

Mr. Asrncer—Yes, with great respect—empty. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—No, there were remains of something 
which had been sandwiches. 

Mr. Asincer—No, they were empty. 

Mr. Justice Dariina—You say not a speck. Where is that 
evidence ? 

Mr. AsinceR—I say they are empty when they are produced in 
Court. 
Mr. Justice Dartivec—Oh. 

Mr. Asincer—That is the evidence. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—The evidence that they are empty when 
produced in this Court is evidence from looking at the bags, but the 
sworn testimony is that when they were found in Beron’s pocket they 
had the remains of meat sandwiches in them, and that because that 
sort of stuff decomposes it had to be thrown away. 

Mr. Asinaer—If the shorthand note is referred to, I think it 
will be seen that there is not a word about any meat being found 
inside the bag. I put it to him very carefully. He said, ‘* It 
looked as if there had been sandwiches inside the bag. I did not 
keep what I found, but it bore the appearance of a man putting his 
hand in his pocket eating as he was walking along.’”’ He never 
said that he saw meat inside that bag. I suggest to you, gentle- 


men, that if you are going to find meat undigested at three o’clock 
236 


Closing Speech for the Defence. 


Mr. Abinger 
in the morning in the man’s stomach, you must assume that he had 
a meal, and, gentlemen, you are perfectly entitled on this state- 
ment to believe that the man had a meal somewhere. I ask you, 
with whom had he it? It has not been proved that he had it with 
the prisoner. Where did he have it? With whom did he have it? 

Mr. Justice Dartinac—This is what Inspector Ward said. He 
said, “‘ The body was searched; one lalfpenny was found upon him; 
in the right-hand pocket were two paper bags with the remains of 
ham sandwiches in them; there was very little left, as though a 
person had eaten sandwiches by breaking them in his pocket.’’ 

Mr. Asrmvczr—I am much obliged to your lordship ; my memory 
was not very far out. I said ‘“‘ ham sandwiches.’’? Gentlemen, you 
have heard me deal with that point, and I will pass from it. 

Mr. Leycustmr—My lord, he speaks of it again in cross-examina- 
tion; he says there were some small pieces of ham. 

Mr. Azinezr said he would pass from that. After referring to 
the evidence of witnesses, he stated that they had seen the accused 
and the deceased in Whitechapel, but said not one had gone into the 
box to say that they had ever seen them together before this night. 
He asked the jury to consider whether it was safe to rely upon the 
times given by Mrs. Deitch. Mrs. Deitch was also a liar, but she 
had not confessed. 

Mr. Abinger next directed his attention to what had been called 
the strong point in the Crown’s case—that Morrison himself said he 
had been arrested for Beron’s murder before it had even been men- 
tioned to him, and that he had said this out of ‘‘ an inner conscious- 
ness.”’ Mr. Abinger submitted that Inspector Wensley had a bad 
memory with regard to what transpired in that connection. If, 
when the five police officers rushed into the restaurant to arrest Mor- 
rison, any one of them used the words ‘‘ murder,” or ‘ Clapham 
Common,”’ that part of the case fell in a very flat manner. He 
suggested that in the confusion and excitement Inspector Wensley, 
or some other of the officers, used the word “ Clapham,’’ or 
** murder.”’ 

Next he came to what he considered the real part of the case; 
if that broke down there would be no case. The case turned on what 
they call the question of identity. Some persons were exercising 
the powers of identification every day of their lives. There were 
others who never exercised them. How often was a London cabman 
called upon to identify his fare? Before dealing with this part of 
the case it was as well to remind the jury of things that had occurred 
connected with identification. There was the Beck case, in which it 
was established that witnesses had made a mistake. It was not 
suggested in that instance that any one committed perjury. It was 
a trick of imagination. If the jury were prompted by their 
conscience to return a verdict of wilful murder against the accused, 
let not a word of his deter them from doing so. But there would 


237 


Steinie Morrison. 
Mr. Abinger 


be no chance of rectifying it—it would be too late. That was why, 
in a murder case above all cases, if they were invited by the Crown 
to find a man guilty on the evidence of identity, they were entitled 
to have the most ample, complete, and almost perfect evidence; and 
they were within their rights to refuse to act upon imperfect testi- 
mony because of the awful consequences which would follow if that 
evidence should be mistaken. They were entitled to say, where a 
man’s life was involved, ‘‘ You must convince us beyond any reason- 
able doubt of the identity of the person, otherwise we will not take 
the responsibility.’’ 

Counsel then alluded to witnesses who he said had done busi- 
ness with the accused, and yet who, when called, had been unable 
to identify him, although they had better opportunities of doing so 
than cabdrivers in the middle of the night. According to Hayman, 
he took up the two men at Sidney Street just before or just after two 
o’clock, and, timing the journey at forty-five minutes, they would 
arrive at Lavender Gardens at 2.424.a.m. (He (counsel) was striking 
an average.) According to Stephens, the man he drove left at 3.124 
a.m., giving the murderer 344 minutes. That is to say, he had to 
walk from some spot near the South-Western Police Station to the 
place where the murder was committed, murder the man as had 
been described, and then drag him to the bushes, get rid of the 
crowbar and the dagger, take the blood off his hands, and compose 
himself and make himself presentable to drive through the streets. 
Allowing ten minutes from Lavender Gardens to Clapham Common, 
where the murder was committed, and eleven minutes for walking 
from there to Clapham Cross, that meant twenty-one minutes from 
the 344, leaving only 134 minutes to commit the murder. It 
would be pretty sharp work. They could imagine the horror and 
fright of the murderer, and yet, according to the Crown, he walked 
calmly to the well-lighted Clapham Cross, exposing himself to the 
view of any one who might be there—and all this within 13} minutes 
of the crime. But, accepting Hayman’s estimate of time occupied 
in driving from Sidney Street, he contended that there were only 
nine minutes for the murder, so that the time was further reduced. 
Mrs. Deitch said she had seen Morrison with Beron at about 1.45 on 
the morning of the murder. It was eventually proved that she must 
have seen the man she saw after two o’clock. | Were witnesses to 
be allowed to say one thing, and then when it had been found 
necessary to make a time-table, to alter it? Time was of the very 
essence of this case. If Mrs. Deitch was correct in the time she 
stated, Hayman could not have taken the men at the time he had 
stated. They knew that Beron was wearing a coat with an astrakhan 
collar, rather a conspicuous article of wearing apparel; but Hayman 
never noticed that. He did not doubt that the cabman, Hayman, 
picked up a fare. But was it the accused? Why was it that 
Hayman and Castlin should be able to give such an accurate descrip- 

238 


Closing Speech for the Defence. 


Mr. Abinger 
tion of the accused when neither of them was able to give any clue 
to the identity of the other man who accompanied him? Once Morri- 
son stood in the dock of a public Court charged with a monstrous 
crime, and once a portrait was published in the public Press in con- 
nection with the crime, any identification of Morrison was absolutely 
futile and beside the point. If such identification were to be 
accepted, who was safe? The cabman, Stephens, was the most 
important witness called for the Crown, and his evidence had broken 
down. Could they believe that he had the opportunity, on a moon- 
less, cloudy night, of making so minute an examination that he 
could fully describe Morrison as he had done? In his statement to 
the police Stephens said he picked up a man at Clapham Cross at 
half-past two. Afterwards he altered that time so as to make it fit 
in with the cabman, Hayman’s, evidence. Would the jury accept 
evidence of identification so amended? If they did, the responsi- 
bility would rest with them. It was to his mind appalling that a 
jury should be asked, on such evidence of identification, to send a 
man to an ignominious and hateful death when they knew that in 
that Court fourteen witnesses had sworn wrongly to the identifica- 
tion of the man Beck, although they had had infinitely better oppor- 
tunities for identifying him than had the witness Stephens to 
identify the accused in the present case. The psychological time 
in the case was 9th and 10th January, when Morrison’s portrait 
appeared in the papers, and Stephens did not come on the scene 
until the 10th, and he would suggest that Stephens and Hayman 
were together in the Police Court, and had an opportunity of con- 
ferring together. He did not believe Stephens came there to commit 
perjury. There was no doubt he did take up a fare, but was it not 
a case of ‘‘ What the mind imagines the eye sees,’’ and with the 
photographs and public descriptions, Stephens really believed that 
Morrison was the man. There could be no conviction unless the 
jury were convinced beyond any shadow of doubt that the identifica- 
tion of Morrison by the cabmen, Hayman and Stephens, was an 
impression on their own brains of what they saw in the flesh, and 
not what they saw in the public Press. There was an important 
discrepancy in the description by different witnesses of the man 
they identified. Mrs. Deitch described him as wearing a cap. 
When he got to Hayman he was wearing a billycock, when he got 
to Stephens a billycock, but when he got to Castlin it was trans- 
formed into a cap. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—The prisoner’s own account was that on 
that evening he was wearing a cap. 

Mr. Apincer—Yes, that is his own account.  Castlin drove the 
two men who got into his cab at Kennington to Tottenham, a hotbed 
of anarchism. The man who was escaping from a murder would 
naturally be anxious to get home to his bed as soon as possible. The 
accused lived in Newark Street, and if he went to Seven Sisters Road 

239 


Steinie Morrison. 
Mr. Abinger 


in Castlin’s cab, he would be further away from his home than he 
was at Clapham. There was no evidence to prove that the prisoner, 
if he were the man, returned to Newark Street from Seven Sisters 
Road, and Whitechapel at that time was full of police, some of whom 
must have seen him on his way home in the early hours of the morning 
of Ist January. I make my friend a present of the information he 
obtained by reading a confidential document which was never intended 
to be used in a Court of justice at all, and ought never to have been 
read in a Court of justice at all. It was a breach of confidence of the 
most serious character. I am referring to the humble petition of 
prisoner during a time of penal servitude to His Majesty’s Secretary 
of State. That is a confidential communication coming from the 
prisoner asking for the clemency from the Crown which is exercised, 
gentlemen, by our Constitution. 

Mr. Justice Dartrinc—Mr. Abinger, if you say that that docu- 
ment ought never to have been read in a Court of justice, why did not 
you submit that to me at the time? 

Mr. Asincer—I did not make that submission at the time, 
because I thought it was admissible in the evidence. I am not 
suggesting it was not admissible, but I suggest it ought never to have 
been produced. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Who has been guilty of breaches of con- 
fidence—the Secretary of State? 

Mr. Asrycpr—Your lordship puts a hard task upon me. I do 
not suggest the Secretary of State, of course, for a moment. 

Mr. Justice Dariive—I will not allow general allegations of 
misconduct against people. If you wish to accuse any one of mis- 
conduct, we wish to know what it is. 

Mr. AprinceER—May I respectfully invite your lordship, if your 
lordship will, to state whether you disagree with my view that that 
should never have been read here. If your lordship thinks I should 
not make these observations I will desist. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—lI distinctly disagree with such a comment 
—absolutely disagree. 

Mr. Asrncrer—Gentlemen, I have made that offer to the learned 
judge. If he thinks it has been improperly produced I accept it. I 
must have taken an erroneous view. I thought an appeal to the 
Secretary of State in the nature of a confidential communication ought 
not to be used against a man who is standing his trial for murder. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—The rule with regard to public offices is 
that they are allowed a very large discretion. They are presided over 
by very high officers of State, and if they object that the production 
of any document which comes to their offices is against the public 
interest the Courts will not order it to be disclosed, but if they do 
not take that objection, and if it is used for a perfectly legitimate 
purpose, and no objection is taken, then they deserve no condemnation 
from anybody. 

240 


Closing Speech for the Defence. 
Mr. Abinger 

Mr. AsmvcuR—There is no power in the country to compel the 
Home Secretary to produce that petition. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—No, if he had taken the objection that it 
was against the public interest that it should be produced ; but surely 
the Home Secretary could not say that it was against the public 
interest to put the jury in possession of the real facts concerning the 
man when the law allows that they should be put in possession of 
them. 

Mr. Arrncrr—-I pass from the topic. It is well to know it. Ifa 
man sends a petition to the Home Secretary and he is afterwards 
prosecuted, he must be prepared to have that petition read out. He 
is praying to be released before his time expires, and in his anxiety 
to get out of prison he mentions facts which are not strictly accurate. 
He must be prepared to have that statement put before him here as 
evidence of his want of veracity, although the occasion is go different. 
He is serving a long term of penal servitude, and in his petition to 
the Home Secretary he makes statements which are not quite true. 
I asked to see it, and it has never been shown me. Now it is too 
late for it to be shown me. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—He admitted they were absolutely untrue, 
and he said he made them to deceive the Home Secretary. It does 
not matter what they were. We know what they were. 

Mr. ArmvceR—There may have been some truth in the statement. 
May I see it? 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—There may have been some truth in it. 
Hand it to Mr. Abinger if he wants to see it. (Handed.) If you 
wanted a topic of lament I think you might lament that the Home 
Secretary did not allow him to go to Russia when he asked. Let me 
say that it was not this Home Secretary, so that there shall be no 
mistake. 

Mr. Asryvcur—We counsel have got quite enough to do without 
making comments about Secretaries of State. I pass from that topic. 
My friend is entitled to make the best of it. You have got my 
observations upon it. If they are untruths they are very venal. 

Continuing his address, Mr. Abinger remarked that the Crown 
asked the jury to convict the prisoner of murder upon circumstantial 
evidence. Circumstantial evidence must point to one man, and one 
man alone. Was it not possible—probable—that Beron might have 
given information to the police with regard to the Houndsditch 
murderers? He would be a useful man to employ. Two men, they 
knew, were killed in that house at Sidney Street, but the arch-fiend 
of them all, Peter the Painter, was at large. He was not going to 
suggest that Peter the Painter committed the murder, but did not 
the facts of the case point to the possibility that the object of the 
murder was not robbery, but vengeance? 

Just before I sit down, gentlemen, let us have a quiet, intel- 

@ 241 


Steinie Morrison. 

Mr, Abinger ‘ 
lectual, dispassionate discussion. This is the theme, and I do pray 
your most serious attention to it. I have pointed out to you the 
basis of this theory, namely, that all the facts must point in one 
direction where you are going to convict a man of murder on circum- 
stantial evidence. I have pointed out to you there are many circum- 
stances in this case which might justify my suggestion to you, that 
the facts point to some person other than the prisoner actuated, not 
by a desire to rob, but by a desire to wreak revenge. Let us see, 
gentlemen, quite quietly and dispassionately, if the facts of this case 
enable us or do not enable us to make those remarks with respect 
to any person—any anonymous person—who may have committed 
this act for revenge. It must be plainly understood by you, gentle- 
men, that I am going to make no charge—no insinuation whatever— 
but the observations I am bound to make to you are directed simply 
with the view to seeing whether the circumstances—whether the 
circumstantial evidence in this case might not be made to point to 
some person other than Morrison. Take, for instance, Solomon Beron. 
If my friend Mr. Muir attempts to put upon me that I make any 
suggestion whatever against him, I say now he has no justification 
whatever for making such a suggestion, because I repudiate it here 
and now. I ask you to remember that if he ventures to do so. I 
am putting this before you ex hypothest, that is to say, as an illustra- 
tion that if you do not think that the circumstantial evidence points 
to this man, and this man alone, beyond all reasonable doubt, then 
he is entitled to be acquitted. I am putting these observations to you, 
gentlemen, in the same way as I put the observations to you with 
respect to some person who I suggested might have committed this 
act. Let me see what facts there are here to which | say these 
observations might apply. The motive? Who would benefit by the 
death of Leon Beron? 

Mr. Justice Daruivc—Mr. Abinger, do I understand that you 
are proceeding upon the hypothesis that Solomon Beron may have 
committed this crime? 

_ Mr. Axsincer—No, I am proceeding upon a hypothesis by way 
of illustration to indicate to the jury that the circumstantial evidence 
in this case cannot be said to be all directed towards this man, and 
this man alone. I am suggesting that it might point exactly in the 
same manner to Peter the Painter, or somebody of that description, 
or of that class, having committed this murder. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—lI understood that you were going to argue 
that the facts might just as well point to Solomon Beron. 

Mr. Anrycer—I make no comparison between the two. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Then why did you mention his name? 

Mr. Azincer—I mentioned Solomon Beron’s name, but I am 
not comparing the evidence of Morrison with the evidence which I 
suggest 

242 


Closing Speech for the Defence. 


Mr, Abinger 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Not “ the evidence of Morrison,’’ but I 
thought you were proceeding to argue that the facts of this case, 
as proved, are circumstantial, and that they point to Solomon Beron 
as conclusively as they point to this man in the dock. If that is not 
the suggestion, let it be stated so at once. 

Mr. Asrvger—The subject I was embarking upon was a matter 
of considerable moment, and I took pains to reduce into writing the 
language I was going to use, and I will Say it again. ‘‘ It must be 
plainly understood that I am going to make no charge whatever—no 
suggestion—no insinuation—but the observations I am bound to make 
to you are directed simply with the view to seeing whether the circum- 
stantial evidence might not be made to point to some other person 
than Morrison.’’ 

Mr. Justics Dariinc—lI distinctly heard the name “‘ Solomon 
Beron.”’ 

Mr. Asrincpr—‘‘ Take, for instance, Solomon Beron,’’ I said. 
Mr. Justice Dartinc—Have you in mind the conduct of Mr. 
Charles Phillips in a certain case? 

Mr. Azrvcer—Yes. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—It is very near it. 

Mr. Asmerr—I think nowhere near it. 

Mr. Justice Daruinc—Very well. It is a dangerous line for an 
advocate to take. Understand me, Mr. Abinger. If you take a non- 
existing person and say the facts might point to a person who had 
the opportunity of being there, and who was there, and who knew this 
man, and who had such a motive, that is one thing, but you name a 
man by name, and you proceed to argue upon that. You may succeed 
in keeping it so clear that no one will suppose that you mean to 
suggest that Solomon Beron did it, but it will require a great deal of 
ingenuity. 

Mr. Anrnger—Yes, my lord, I admit that. That is why I took 
pains to write down what I was going to say. I was going to point 
out certain facts which might quite improbably, certainly quite im- 
properly, be directed toward certain circumstances of the case 
relating to Solomon Beron, not for the purpose of suggesting so much 
that this man was concerned with the murder, but for the purpose 
of showing how the facts in this case do not point their finger to this 
man and this man alone. 

Mr. Abinger then brought the address for the defence to a con- 
clusion by saying that between the accused and death there stood 
only the judge and a jury sworn to find a true verdict, and, in 
the belief that they would do so, he left his client’s case in their 
hands. 


243 


Steinie Morrison. 


Closing Speech for the Prosecution. 


Mr. Murr, in the course of his speech; said—This is the view put 
forward by the man who says, ‘‘ I accuse nobody who is not here to 
defend himself,’’ and attacks the dead man, Beron, on no shadow of 
basis at all. He says that Beron was known to the police, yet he 
never puts a single question to Inspector Wensley, who says, “ I 
am an inspector in the East End of London. I have known the man 
six years.’’ My friend suggests against the dead man’s memory that 
he was known to the police as a criminal. There is no shadow of 
foundation laid for it in the evidence of Inspector Wensley, who was 
there to answer any question that could be put to him. ‘“‘ I am not 
the person,’’ says my friend, ‘‘ to cast accusations on those who 
cannot answer me, and therefore I do not attack Peter the Painter.’’ 
Solomon Beron! ‘‘ I ask you to say that the evidence here before 
you points to Solomon Beron as much as it points to the prisoner as 
the man responsible for his brother’s murder.’’ 

Mr. Asinenr—I protest. 

Mr. Murr—tThat is the view 

Mr. Aprnapr—LExcuse me, I am addressing the Court. I protest 
against that. I made no suggestion that the deceased man was a 
criminal. I suggested he might have given information to the police. 
I made no suggestion against Solomon Beron whatever; I guarded 
myself as much as any counsel can from making such a suggestion. 
If my friend is to be allowed to say that, I ask that what I said may 
be repeated in the hearing of the jury. 

Mr. Justice Dartiyvc—I understood you to say from your very 
carefully worded writing that it might be shown by a tenable 
hypothesis that Solomon Beron had committed the murder because the 
facts which would show that Morrison committed it might also be 
made to show that Solomon Beron committed it; but you stated, 
and very carefully stated, that you did not accuse Solomon Beron, 
but only meant it as a tenable hypothesis which you put forward for 
the sake of argument. It is a perfectly possible thing to do, but 
it is so near the line that I said—and I repeat it—I thought it very 
undesirable that such a line should be taken, because it is very 
difficult to distinguish between what is a real accusation and what is 
a hypothetical accusation. 

Mr. Asrnaur—And I obeyed your lordship. I am not complain- 
ing of that at all. My friend may attack me, my lord. If I may say 
so, I enjoy listening to it, but what I am complaining of is that my 
friend should be permitted to say that I said of that dead man that 
he was acriminal. I challenge my friend to produce any statement 
of mine in the shorthand note which may be taken to mean such an 
accusation. 

244 


R. D. Muir, 


Leading Counsel for the Crown. 


Closing Speech for the Prosecution, 


Mr. Muir 
_ Mr. Justicy Dartivc—You did state that he was known to the 
police, and that Inspector Wensley, who was down there, knew him. 
You said that was significant ; I did not know what you meant. 

Mr. Asincur—I suggested that he might have given information 
to the police, and that is why he was murdered, for revenge. 

Mr. Justice Dartmc-—You know, Mr. Abinger, that is the worst 
of these indefinite suggestions. It assumes that he might have given 
information about something—as I understood it—some organised 
society, because he had belonged to it himself. There is the “ S ” 
you know, which means “‘ spic,’? which is “ spy.’ 

- Mr. Asincur—May I suggest this. I am sorry to interrupt my 
friend, but he has brought it upon himself. This is the trend of my 
reasoning. Leon Beron, in Jubilee Street, near an anarchist club— 
Leon Beron known to the police—on the Ist January information 
given to the police—Leon Beron murdered on the 1st January, with 
““$” on the cheeks, indicating revenge. He might have been an 
informer, but not a criminal. My friend has no justification for 
suggesting that I said he was a criminal. 

Mr. Justicn Dartiya—No, but he may have come in simply by a 
confidential 

Mr. Asinapr—The jury have heard what I have said. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Yes, they have heard it. 

Mr. Azineur—I never suggested Leon Beron was a criminal. 

Mr. Murr—This hypothesis which is now put before you with 
regard to Leon Beron being an informer was put distinctly by me to 
Inspector Wensley in re-examination, and Inspector Wensley said 
that he never gave any information at all. He said, ‘‘ So far as my 
knowledge goes, Leon Beron was in no way connected with those 
responsible for the Houndsditch murders; Leon Beron gave me no 
information whatever about them.’’ So far as the evidence is con- 
cerned, there is not one syllable or shred of evidence that Leon Beron 
was in any way connected with the anarchist club. But, supposing 
he was; supposing this was a murder for revenge directed by the 
Houndsditch murderers; who were the Houndsditch murderers! 
Russian burglars. 

Mr. AsineeR—I object to this. What evidence is there before 
the Court to justify my friend saying that the perpetrators of the 
Houndsditch murders were Russian burglars? 

Mr. Murr—It is a notorious fact. 

Mr. Asrincpr—I am addressing my lord for the moment. I 
submit there is no evidence before the Court to justify my friend 
making that statement. Your lordship is not trying the Houndsditch 
murderers. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—You are suggesting that there is no eyi- 
dence of that. I was waiting for an opportunity to call on Mr. 
Muir to tell me what there was. 


245 


Steinie Morrison. 
Mr. Muir 


Mr. Murr—My lord, any facts so notorious that the jury may be 
presumed to have knowledge of them may be evidence. Further, it 
was my friend who cross-examined as to persons bearing Russian 
names in connection with the Houndsditch murders. Nobody knows 
what the Houndsditch murderers were 

Mr. Justice Dartive—I do not think I can hold there is evidence 
here that they were Russian burglars. It is a purely spurious objec- 
tion for Mr. Abinger to take, as he has himself, wherever it has 
suited his own purpose, referred to the Sidney Street affair, and all 
about it, with considerable freedom, and even mentioned the names 
of people who he says are connected with it, although there is no 
evidence that they are. However, as the objection is taken, Mr. 
Muir, I do not think I can take judicial cognisance of the fact that 
the Sidney Street people were burglars, nor can I say there is evidence 
of it. Anything the jury may know I cannot help their knowing. 
Mr. Abinger has himself mentioned that they were anarchists and 
soon. You must not say that they were Russians or that they were 
burglars. 

Mr. Murr—No. Their names, gentlemen, were Fritz Svaars, 
and some other similar-sounding names. 

Mr. Asincer—My friend was trying to associate my client with 
it, and that is what I am objecting to. He never put a question to 
him about it while he was in the witness-box. 

Mr. Justice Dartiyc—Mr. Abinger, I have ruled very, very 
strictly in your favour. You yourself used this topic whenever it 
suited you; the moment it does not you get up and object, and I 
have upheld your objection. 

Mr. Murr—Gentlemen, all I am desiring to point out to you is 
that, if somebody, for motives of revenge, had Leon Beron murdered, 
you have to look for evidence to see who was the instrument by 
whom that murder was carried out. There is nothing impossible 
in the facts before you in the prisoner being that instrument, whatever 
the motive was, but, as I have suggested to you, this theory of 
murder for political or other motives is a false theory based upon 
nothing at all except a few slashes upon the face of this man, which, 
in my submission to you, are devoid of meaning, except the meaning 
that it was a murder for plunder, and that the person who perpetrated 
the crime of murder was cunning enough to put those slashes on the 
face in order to divert attention from the real motive which accom- 
panied the murder. Having said that, I pass from that topic 
altogether. 


The Court adjourned. 


246 


Ninth Day—Wednesday, 15th March, 1911. 


Mr. Axsincer—Would your lordship allow me to make an 
application? 

Mr. Justice Dartinec—Yes. 

Mr. Asrncer—Before my learned friend Mr. Muir continues his 
address to the jury, I ask that I may be permitted to call further 
evidence in this case. If your lordship desires me to do so, I shall 
mention the nature of that evidence. 

Mr. Justice Daruisc—Oh, no, certainly not. Who is the 
witness ? 

a Mr. Aprincur—A police officer, George Greaves, 86 H Metropolitan 
olice. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Yes, certainly. 


Further Evidence for the Defence. 


Grorge GREAVES, examined by Mr. Asrnczrr—I am a police con- 
stable of the Metropolitan Police. I was on duty in the charge room 
at Leman Street police station on 8th January from 6 a.m. to 2 p.m. 
I was present when the accused was brought in custody into the 
charge room. He said, ‘‘ What am I brought here for? ’’ A detec- 
tive officer, whom I believe to be Sergeant Brogden, replied, ‘‘ I told 
you before; you are brought here on a serious charge—on suspicion 
of murder.’? The accused then said, ‘‘ All I have got to say is this, 
that it is not the first blunder the police have made.’’ There was 
nothing more said. The accused was standing about 1 yard from 
the desk in the middle of the charge room, and I was standing close 
up to the desk. There were other two or three police officers present. 
I can only point out’ one—I believe his name is Sergeant Brogden. 
[Shown Detective-Sergeant Brogden.] That is the police officer who 
was present and made the statement to the accused. The accused 
was then taken down into the large association cell at the end of the 
cell passage. I went down to that cell and saw him there, and two 
police officers standing by at the door, P.C. 368 H (Staff) and P.C. 
168 (I believe Harris). [Shown Police Constable John Harris.] I 
believe that is the second police officer, but I am not absolutely 
certain. The door of the association cell was wide open, and those 
two officers were close by the door. One may have been in the cell, 
but I think one was outside in the passage. The association cell is 
about 16 yards from the charge room. I do not think that either 
Harris or Staff was present in the charge room when Brogden made 

247 


Steinie Morrison. 


George Greaves 

the statement to the accused to which I have sworn. I have no idea 
who the officers were who were on duty in the charge room. I sent 
a telephone message that morning on the instructions of a man in 
plain clothes, whom I believe to be a detective constable, but whose 
name I do not know. The entry in the police telephone book of that 
message is as follows :—‘‘ From Police Constable (C.I.D.) Jeffries, at 
Leman Street, to D.D. Inspector Ward, Brixton. Please come to 
Leman Street at once, 9.28 a.m.”’ 

When did you first make the statement that you have just sworn 
to in the witness-box to any one?—About 12.30 this morning. 

Had you before that written anything !—Yes, I wrote a letter to 
you (Mr. Abinger) at 4 a.m. on Tuesday. I wrote that letter in my 
bedroom at 65 New City Road, and it was posted about 5.30 a.m. 

Did you give authority to Morrison’s counsel to use this letter if 
he thought fit in the interests of justice/—Yes, I did. (The letter 
and envelope were put in and marked exhibits 82 and 82a). 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Gentlemen, this is the envelope. It is 
marked ‘‘ Confidential. Mr. Abinger, K.C., counsel for the defence 
of Steinie Morrison, Central Criminal Court, Old Bailey, London, 
E.C.”’ It has got a post-mark, ‘‘ London, E., 8.15 a.m., Mar. 14th, 
1911,’’ on one side, and ‘‘ London, E.C., 10.5 a.m., Mar. 14th, 
1911,’’ on the other. This is the letter—‘‘ Tuesday, 14th March, 
1911. 4 a.m. Strictly confidential. To Mr. Abinger, K.C. Sir, 
on the day that Steinie Morrison was brought in custody to Leman 
Street Police Station I was on duty in the charge room. ‘On 
reserve,’ as we call it. A few minutes after Morrison was brought 
into the station, and while in the charge room he said to a detective 
(I think his name was Brogden), ‘ What am I brought here for? ’ 
The detective replied, ‘I told you before; you are brought here on 
a serious charge—on suspicion of murder.’ Morrison replied, ‘ All 
I have got to say is that it is not the first blunder the police have 
made.’ Shortly after this Morrison was placed in the association 
cell under the guard of two uniformed constables (I believe P.C. 360 
H, Staff, and P.C. 168 H). That was where I last saw Morrison. 
If it was after Morrison was put in that large cell at the end of the 
passage guarded by the two police constables that he is alleged to 
have spoken of murder, I state that I heard murder mentioned to 
him (as before stated) before he was placed there, and soon (perhaps 
ten minutes) after he was brought into the station. Shortly after 
the above related circumstances happening I went off duty. It seems 
to be implied that Morrison was not sought after for murder, yet on 
the day of his arrest, and before the arrest, a telephone message 
was sent as follows from Leman Street police station:—‘ From P.C. 
(C.I.D.) Jeffries, Leman Street, to Divisional Detective Inspector 
Ward, Brixton. Please come to Leman Street at once.’ I sent this 
message by order (on police telephone), and it is recorded in full 
in 8 police message book. To me this message suggests a very 


Bah tate 


Evidence for the Defence. 


George Greaves 


_ strong connection between Mr. Ward’s murder case and the impending 


arrest of Morrison. I am not sure of the time the message was 
sent. It was, however, that morning. I appeal to you, sir, to 
guard my interests should you deem it necessary to take any action 
in consequence of this communication, for if the Commissioner of 
Police should discover I had sent this letter to you it would probably 
cause my instant dismissal from the police service, so, if possible, do 
not let this communication be known to have passed from me. 
Should you require my evidence, and I hope you will not, you could 
ask for the attendance at sessions of all the constables who were on 
reserve duty in the station at the time Morrison was brought in to 
see whether they heard anything; that would include me. However, 
I prefer to remain out of the case if not absolutely required. I feel 
compelled to write this to you in the interests of justice, as it seems 
to be stated in evidence that ‘ murder’ was not mentioned to 
Morrison a short time after his arrival at Leman Street police station, 
and I know it was, for I heard it as related. I write solely with 
the object of giving fair play to Morrison, so please treat this letter 
as strictly confidential if possible. Yours faithfully, George Greaves, 
P.C. 86 H, Metropolitan Police, residing at 65 New Road, White- 
chapel, East.’? Now, gentlemen, I think I ought to state publicly 
(there is going to be no mistake and mystery about it) this is an 
investigation not to establish this or to establish that proposition, 
but it is an investigation to find out if possible whether that man 
is guilty of what is alleged against him, and when these matters 
were brought to my notice (and that is the reason for the delay that 
took place this morning) without any kind of putting responsibility 
on anybody else, I ordered that whatever may be the consequences 
either to this officer or to any other officers, or to anybody at all, 
all this should be made public in this Court of justice. 

Examination continued—I was on duty last night in White- 
chapel Road. I received an order to attend at Leman Street police 
station, and a sergeant fetched me, and I arrived about fifteen 
minutes after midnight or thereabouts. I made a statement in the 
presence of Sir Melville Macnaghten, Assistant Commissioner of the 
Criminal Investigation Department, and to Mr. Abinger. There was 
no one else present in the room. Questions were put to me by Mr. 
Abinger, and they were written down by Sir Melville. That examina- 
tion concluded somewhere about half-past one this morning. Sir 
Melville read out to me what I had stated, and I signed it. Exhibit 
83 is the statement. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Murr—It was between five and ten 
minutes after the accused was brought into the station that I heard 
the statement about murder made to him. The inspector in charge 
of the station at that time was Inspector Mackenzie, but he was not 
in the charge room. I think it was about one o’clock in the day 
when the accused was brought in, but I am not very sure about the 

249 


Steinie Morrison. 


George Greaves 


time. (Police Officers Jeffries, Brogden, Dessent, Inspectors 
Mackenzie, Staff, Harris, and Berringer were brought into Court.) 
I do not remember whether Constable Harris was in the charge room 
when the statement about murder. was made to the accused. I do 
not remember whether Police Constable Staff was in the charge room. 
Inspector Mackenzie was not in the charge room; I have no idea 
where he was. Sergeant Brogden was in the charge room; he was in 
plain clothes. The first thing I heard him say to the accused was, 
‘* Why don’t you sit down?’’ The accused then said, “‘ What am 
I brought here for? ’’ And then Sergeant Brogden said, “‘ I told you 
before. You are brought here on a serious charge—on suspicion of 
murder.’? That is all that Sergeant Brogden said. The accused 
replied, ‘‘ All I have to say is that it is not the first blunder the 
police have made.’’ Nobody else said anything after that. 

Did the accused ask ‘‘ What murder ’’ 1—No. 

Did Sergeant Brogden say what murder?—No. 

In your hearing did any one say what murder to the accused 
or in his hearing?—No. I do not know whether Sergeant Dessent 
and Detective Berringer, whom I now see, were present. Inspector 
Wensley was not present. I do not know whether Detective Constable 
Jeffries, whom I now see, was present. 

Were there any other officers besides Sergeant Brogden in plain 
clothes there?—I am not sure about that. I think there was one in 
plain clothes and one in uniform, but I am quite uncertain about it. 
{ have known Sergeant Brogden for, I think, six months. He has 
been at Leman Street police station occasionally during that time. 
I believe he belongs to the same division as I do, Whitechapel 
Division. 

You have known him for six months?’—Well, I knew that the 
gentleman was a detective sergeant, but I do not know much about 
him. Ido not know whether he reports to a superior officer at Leman 
Street. I do not know whether he goes there constantly. For 
months I did not see him at all. I do not remember how often I 
saw him in the week before 8th January. I have known his face, 
but not his name, for six or twelve months. It is this way—we get 
to know the names of the detective officers in the division—we get 
to know their faces, but we do not know which face belongs to which 
name. 

In your statement that you made last night did you say that 
the accused said it to a detective whom you believed to be Detective 
Sergeant Brogden?—Yes, I was sure of the man, but not sure of his 
name. I cannot name any police constable except Sergeant Brogden 
who was present when this was said. I have known Detective Sergeant 
Dessent’s face for quite twelve months, but I have only known his 
name for a few weeks. I believe he was in my division, but I do 
not know what his station was. I believe that Detective Constable 


Jeffries was in my division. I knew him as a detective, but I did 
250 


Evidence for the Defence. 


George Greaves 


not know his name. I have not seen him very often at Leman Street 
police station. I never saw Berringer before to-day to my knowledge. 
I do not know whether he was at the police station on 8th January. 

Except Detective Sergeant Brogden, can you name anybody who 
ean either confirm or deny the statement you are making now!— 
Yes, the accused. I do not remember reading counsel’s opening 
statement at the Police Court. 

Do you remember reading anywhere at the very commence- 
ment of this case it was stated that the accused was the first person 
to mention murder in connection with his detention?—Some consider- 
able time, I think, after the Police Court proceedings, I heard some 
people saying that the police said that the accused spoke about the 
murder before the murder was mentioned to him. I do not remember 
hearing that until something like five or six days ago. I did not 
read much about the case while it was on at the Police Court. I 
first spoke of this conversation that I heard between the accused 
and Sergeant Brogden to some police officers about two or three 
days ago. I would rather not mention these officers, because I 
cannot mention them with any absolute certainty. I think one of 
them was 209H—Heiler. 

Where were you when you spoke to him?—lIn the street, I think 
—Whitechapel Road. 

Mr. Justice Dartina—Let Heiler be telephoned for, and not be 
informed by anybody what this witness has said. 

Mr. AsinaeR—I do not object in the least. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—lIt is not a question of anybody objecting. 
I am giving directions as to what is to be done in this investigation. 

Mr. Apinger—Does your lordship think this is the occasion when 
this matter should be thoroughly sifted as to which particular police- 
man he spoke to, or whether it should form the subject of investi- 
gation afterwards? 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Asg you have asked me, i think that it 
should be investigated while this trial is undecided, and not after 
it may have been decided and possibly have ended one way or the 
other in a miscarriage of justice. I will have no more discussion 
on it. 

Cross-examination continued—I think I spoke to Heiler on two 
nights—the Sunday and Monday nights—but I am not sure of the 
date. 

Did you speak to any other officer?—I have talked about this 
matter a little to several police officers during the last two days, but 
I do not remember them. We have gossiped about this case. 

About what?—About what happened in the charge room. 

About what Sergeant Brogden said to the accused, do you mean? 
—Well, I have not used Sergeant Brogden’s name. 

But about that being said to the accused about “‘ murder ”’ by 


251 


Steinie Morrison. 


George Greaves 


some police officer ?—I have mentioned it to some—I think to about 
three. 

Within the last two days!—Yes; Monday night and Tuesday 
night. 

: Do you fell the jury that having done that within the last two 
days you cannot name the officer to whom you spoke about it?—l 
cannot remember. 

Is that what you say on your oath?—I do say that. They would 
be officers upon beats coming in contact with my beat. Besides the 
police officers, I have also spoken about this matter to a man belong- 
ing to the Salvation Army who performs duty in the Salvation Army 
Headquarters, Whitechapel Road. I do not know his name, but I 
know his face well; he seems to be a night watchman. I saw him 
last night and the night before, and I may have mentioned it on a 
previous occasion. I think Monday night is the earliest date on 
which I spoke to that man. I might have spoken of it on the 
Saturday night, but I cannot remember. 

Do you tell the jury on your oath that you spoke to this man 
on Saturday night about what was said in the police station?—I do 
not remember. Besides him I also spoke to Lewis Zavitski, a 
barber’s assistant, living at 65 New Road, where I also lodge. I 
spoke to him about the matter yesterday. I am not sure whether 
I mentioned it before that. I also spoke to his mother, Mrs. Annie 
Zavitski, yesterday, and also probably about three days ago; but | 
cannot remember. I do not remember speaking to anybody else 
about it. 

Can you swear positively you have not spoken to anybody else 
about it?—I have said as much as I can say about it—that I do not 
remember speaking to any one else about it. 

What made you speak to these people about it?—One likes to 
talk sometimes to people that one lives with, and to officers with 
whom one works. 

Was that the only reason for mentioning it to these people ?!— 
Yes, that was the only reason. 

Did you regard it as being important !—I thought it was rather 
an important matter. 

When did you think it rather important?—As soon as I first 
heard that there was a dispute on the point—I think about five days 
ago. 

An important matter to the accused !—Yes. 

As possibly affecting the verdict of the jury?—Yes, but there is 
one thing I should like to say about that, that although I had heard 
people say that this point of contention had arisen, 1 did not see it 
in the newspaper, and, therefore, I did not take any action—waiting 
until I should see it in the newspaper. When I saw it there 1 decided 
to take some action. 

When did you see it in the newspapers for the first time ?— 


252, 


Ug a eee 


Evidence for the Defence. 


George Greaves 
Yesterday morning. I saw it in the Star and the Evening News, 


in my lodgings, about 3.30 in the morning. It would be Monday 
night’s edition, 6.30. I also had a cursory look at the Star in 
Fieldgate Street about one o’clock in the morning. I had looked 
at papers occasionally before, but I did not see sufficient to justify 
me in taking any action. 

What is the ordinary course of duty when you are reporting a 
matter concerning a criminal case that you think is of importance to 
an accused person’—Well, as a matter of duty, strict duty, I think 
it should be reported to the officer on duty at the station to which I 
belong. 

Did you do that ?—I did not. 

Why not?—For one thing, there was no time to go through such 
formalities, or it appeared so to me. 

Any other reason?’—Well, I was not sure that it was necessary 
for me to give any evidence, and I therefore submitted the matter 
to Mr. Abinger. 

With the request that your name should be kept out of it. Why 
did you want your name kept out of it?—I did not want to interfere 
in this matter unless it was absolutely necessary. 

But why did you want your name kept out?—For that reason, 
that I do not wish to enter into a case of this kind unless I am abso- 
lutely required. I prefer to be outside these cases. 

This is a matter of importance to the accused, who is on trial 
for a crime. Why did you want your name kept out of it?—I was 
not absolutely certain that it was of importance to the accused, and 
although I heard that he had mentioned ‘‘ murder,’’ I did not know 
whether he mentioned it before he came to Leman Street Police 
Station or not. In fact, I did not thoroughly understand the case. 

Was that your reason for not reporting it to your superior officer ? 
—Yes, I did not see that it was really necessary. 

By Mr. Justice Dartiva—You had a reason, had you not ?—It is 
this—I do not like to interfere in this way until I feel that it is 
absolutely necessary. 

You are in the police force, and so is Brogden, and so are the 
others. Had that fact anything to do with your not mentioning it 
at the police station, but writing to Mr. Abinger!—No. 

Cross-examination continued—I have been in the police force 
for seven years and nine months, and I have been removed four or 
five times from one division to another. I began in the L Division, 
and then went to the Public Carriage Branch in New Scotland Yard. 
I know ex-Inspector Syme. He was working with me at Scotland 
Yard. I have not seen him during the last eight months, but I have 
sent him about two letters. The last one would be about a fortnight 
ago, and IJ received a reply, but I do not have it with me here. This 
case was never mentioned between me and Mr. Syme. 

“Is ex-Inspector Syme the man who has been attacking the police 
253 


Steinie Morrison. 


George Greaves 


in a newspaper called ‘‘ P.IJ.P.,’’ accusing them of corruption and 
giving false evidence !—Yes, I believe so. I have read those articles. 
Mr. Syme is a man who was dismissed from the police. 

Is he the same man who was prosecuted at Bow Street for 
threatening the late King !—Yes. 

Mr. Asincer—Does your lordship think that it is necessary now 
to inquire into ex-Inspector Syme’s conduct? This man hag sworn 
that he had no communication with him about this case, and he has 
not seen him for eight months. I think there must be some limit 
to this cross-examination. 

Mr. Justice Dartinea—This cross-examination is addressed to 
show that this witness was corresponding with Syme, not about this 
case, but that Syme is a man who makes it his business to attack 
the police and to accuse them of giving false evidence, which is 
exactly what this witness has come here to do. I therefore think the 
cross-examination is perfectly relevant. 

Cross-examination continued—Ex-Inspector Syme has written a 
pamphlet complaining about his dismissal from the police. I have 
read that pamphlet, but I do not have a copy of it here. 

Have you yourself been suspended for making a false accusation 
against a superior officer—a police sergeant!—Not exactly that. I 
was suspended for making accusations of general oppressive conduct 
on the part of my sergeant which I was unable to prove. 

And were you suspended upon the ground that your accusations 
against your sergeant were unfounded?—I think not. It is a matter 
of routine to suspend a man making a complaint against a superior 
officer if the complaint is serious. It was this way—I volunteered to 
give evidence in favour of a constable who had been reported for mis- 
conduct, and my evidence was against the sergeant in the case— 
Sergeant Napper. I was reported on a second charge at the same 
time for making untruthful statements when giving evidence in the 
superintendent’s office. 

Evidence on oath?—Oh, no. 

Were the accusations found to be untrue by the tribunal which 
heard them?—That is what the discipline board said—at least that 
in respect of the first charge it was not proven. With regard to the 
second charge, the charge of making untruthful statements before 
the superintendent, I was severely reprimanded and strictly cautioned 
and transferred to another division. This took place in June or July, 
1909. 

Was your charge against Sergeant Napper one of oppressive 
conduct /—It was. 

Towards his constables?—Towards me. I also alleged that 
other constables complained of such conduct, and that statement was 
considered to be untruthful. 

It was investigated?’—In a way it was. I named these other 
constables, and they were ordered to attend at the office. 

254 


Evidence for the Defence. 
George Greaves 

And did they deny the truth of what you had said ’—In the super- 
intendent’s office they did deny it, but in speaking to me one of the 
men admitted it. 

On your oath, when was the last time you saw ex-Inspector 
Syme?—To the best of my remembrance it would be about nine 
months ago—an accidental meeting in a shop in Pimlico. It may be 
that the shopkeeper sent for Inspector Syme; I am not sure. I 
think the shopkeeper’s name was Jones, and he dealt in oils and 
groceries ; but I forget the name of the street. I remember seeing 
Inspector Wensley at Leman Street Police Station on the morning of 
8th January, after the arrest of the accused. I had part charge of 
the telephone that day. Inspector Wensley was not using the tele- 
phone to my knowledge. He would generally use the telephone from 
his own office. 

If you are in charge of the instrument, can you hear what is 
being said in the inspector’s room ?—It depends what plugs are used. 

Did Inspector Wensley come out of his room and find you inter- 
fering with the plugs and complain about it, and reprimand you 
about it?—No, he did not. I have never tampered with any plugs 
on any telephone. It is possible that Mr. Wensley might have come 
to the telephone box and complained of being cut off before he had 
finished his conversation. 

Do you swear that Inspector Wrasle- did not on that Sunday 
morning come out and speak to you about the way in which you were 
interfering with the plugs!—He certainly did not. 

And I put it to you that at that time Inspector Wensley was 
speaking with Sir Melville Macnaghten on the telephone?—I do 
not know. I cannot call to mind any occasion in January last when 
Inspector Wensley was speaking on the telephone with Sir Melville 
Macnaghten. 

On that morning after the accused was in custody, did Inspector 
Wensley leave the police station, was he sent for, and did he come 
back again?—I do not remember. 

After Inspector Wensley came to the station on that day for 
the second time did Inspector Mackenzie call you and the other officers 
into the charge room!—I do not remember it. 

And did he ask you all whether anybody had spoken to the 
accused about a charge of murder ?!—So far as I know, he did not ask 
any such question. He did not ask me whether anybody had spoken 
to the accused about a charge of murder, and I did not tell him that 
I had not, nor did the other officers say the same thing in my hearing 
or to my knowledge. 

Is that false?—That is absolutely false. 

By Mr. Justice Daruine—He did not ask me any such question, 
and I did not hear him ask any others such a question. 

You swear that he asked you no such question?—I do swear 
that he asked me no such question. 

255 


Steinie Morrison. 


George Greaves 

Cross-cexamination continued—Since the committing of the 
Houndsditch murders have you not sent a large number of letters 
to Detective Inspector Wensley about those murders!—I have sent 
him statements of what I have heard concerning the murders. 

Did you say in those letters that you had got the information 
from people in the house where you were living?—In some I did say 
that. 

Mr. Asrinczer—One moment—my learned friend is  cross- 
examining the witness about a letter. I submit that the witness is 
entitled to see that letter. 

Mr. Justice Darteve—Oh, no! Certainly not. It may be ulti- 
mately shown to him. 

Mr. Asincer—I submit that if you are cross-examining a man 
about his own letter he is entitled to see it at the moment he is being 
cross-examined about it. 

Mr. Justice Dartina—No, not at the moment he is being cross- 
examined about it. 

Cross-ecamination continued—lI said in some of the letters that 
I got the information from a certain person in the house where I was 
living. 

Did some of those letters make definite accusations against named 
people/—Yes, they did. 

By Mr. Justicn Dartine—You say that you got that information 
from a person in the house where you were living. Who is the 
person ?—It would be very much against the interests of that person 
if I were to name him. 

That does not matter. Who was the person who gave the 
information?—Charles Lazarus Zavitski. 

Cross-ecamination continued—Has any action whatever been 
taken upon any of the letters that you sent to Detective Inspector 
Wensley ?—I do not know. 

Have any of the persons you named in those letters been arrested ? 
—I do not know. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—You would have heard, would you not, 
if the persons you yourself had named had been arrested?—I do not 
know the names, except one name. 

Has he or she been arrested !—Not under that name—not as far 
as I know. 

Cross-ecamination continued—I do not remember up to what date 
I continued sending those letters to Inspector Wensley. The last one 
was about a week before the ‘‘ Peter the Painter ’’ pictures came into 
the newspapers. I should think about two months ago. I asked 
Inspector Wensley whether I was to send him any more information 
by letter. 

And did the detective inspector tell you that, so far as he was 
concerned, the correspondence must cease!—He did not tell me that. 
A detective told me that in Mr. Wensley’s name. 


256 


Evidence for the Defence. 


George Greaves 


Did you read the evidence in the Houndsditch murder case?— 
Yes, I have read most of it, but not particularly carefully. 

When you made your statement last night did Sir Melville Mac- 
naghten say to you, “‘ If this letter is true, and written in good 
faith, I can assure you that your professional career will in no way 
be affected ’’ 1—He did. 

With the exception of that statement to you, was the examina- 
tion conducted entirely by Mr. Abinger?—Yes. I do not think that 
any questions were put to me by Sir Melville Macnaghten. 

Re-examined by Mr. Axtnazrr—Do you appreciate that in 
making this statement that you have made you are making an impu- 
tation upon a superior officer?—Yes, I understand that. 

What compelled you to write that letter at four o’clock in the 
morning to counsel representing the accused ?—Simply because I con- 
sidered it my duty to any man that is accused to give any evidence 
in my power in defence of that man. That is why I wrote it. 

Has any inducement been held out to you by anybody to give 
this evidence?—No, none whatever. No one knew that I was going 
to write to you. 

Did Lazarus Zavitski or Lewis Zavitski hold out any iaduce- 
ment to you to induce you in any way to write that letter?—No. No 
one has ever offered me any inducement. I regarded it as my duty, 
and I am trying to do it. 

Has ex-Inspector Syme held out any inducement or had any- 
thing to do with inducing you to write that letter ?—No. 

Or any one else?—No one else whatever. 

You have been asked whether a number of men who were paraded 
were asked whether the charge of murder had been mentioned in the 
hearing of the accused. Had any instructions been given in the 
police station in your hearing as to whether the charge of murder 
should be mentioned or not?—No, not in my hearing or to my know- 
ledge. 

E Then if your answer is correct, and if Detective-Sergeant Brogden 
did make that statement to the accused, so far as you knew he 
was disobeying no order?—I considered that he was only doing his 
duty. I think that Detective-Sergeant Brogden gave the accused the 
usual caution; but I am not quite certain about that. I think he 
said, ‘‘ And anything you say may be used in evidence against you ”’ ; 
but not being quite sure about that I did not mention it before. 

Is it or is it not usual on arresting a man on so serious a charge 
as murder to tell him so when arrested?—I do not know what may 
be usual, but whenever I arrest a man on such a charge I should tell 
him what the charge is. a 

Suppose you were arresting a man on suspicion of murder and 
for not notifying his address, what would you tell him then!—I should 
certainly tell him that I was arresting him on suspicion of murder. 

By Mr. Justice Dartinc—Where is the order that tells you to do 


: 257 


Steinie Morrison. 


George Greaves 


that?—The Commissioner’s order, to the best of my knowledge, is 
that when a person is arrested for any offence he shall be told for 
what offence he is being arrested. 

Yes. Now, then, what you have just said is that if you arrest 
a man for the offence of not reporting himself, and you have 
suspicion that he has committed a murder, you will tell him you are 
arresting him on suspicion of having committed a murder. Would 
you do that?—No, I should not. I did not understand the question 

Re-examination continued—Did you know before you wrote that 
letter to counsel what Inspector Wensley said he did in fact say when 
he arrested the accused !—Yes, I read in the newspaper that Inspector 
Wensley said ‘‘I want you.’’ 

Do you think in writing that letter to counsel you were advancing 
your prospects in the police force !— 

Mr. Justice Dartina—That is not an admissible question. What 
the witness thought is not relevant. 

Re-examination continued—What was your object in writing 
that letter?—That the accused might have fair play. I had never 
seen the accused to my knowledge until he was brought into Leman 
Street Police Station, nor do I know any one connected with him. I 
believe Sergeant Brogden belongs to the H Division. There are about 
540 uniformed constables in that division, I believe, and a propor- 
tion of sergeants and a number of detectives in addition. Sergeant 
Brogden is a detective officer and wears plain clothes all day. 

Why did you make up your mind to write to counsel on 14th 
March and not before?!—Until that morning I had not seen in print 
anything which would justify me in taking that action, although I 
had heard some vague rumours. 

Further cross-examined by Mr. Murr—There are copies of the 
Police Informations available for every officer to see. What is shown 
me is a Police Information of 16th January, 6.30 p.m.—‘‘ Wanted 
for petty offences, No. 303, licence holder, Maurice Stein 3 
for failing to reside at his registered address; caution; carries fire- 
arms and may attempt to use them.’’ I did not see that at the 
time. I have not seen it until now. 

Is it a regular practice for those informations to be read out in 
the station by the inspector’—Some of the informations are read 
usually. That information may or may not have been read; I may 
or may not have been on duty that day. 

Further re-examined by Mr. Asryezr—Did you read in the paper 
when my learned friend opened this case that he said the charge of 
murder must have evolved from Morrison’s own inner consciousness ? 
—I read something about that in the newspaper quite recently. I 
should like to make a short statement in explanation of the letters 
which I am alleged to have written about the Houndsditch murders. 
They were hardly letters. They were rough notes. Soon after the 
Houndsditch tragedy I happened to hear a great deal about it. It 
was gossip that I heard—it was not in the papers—and I thought it 

258 


Evidence for the Defence. 


George Greaves 


might afford a clue to Inspector Wensley and be of some use to him 
if | gave it to him, and so I gave him a report of what I had heard, 
thinking it to be in the interest of the service. Mr. Wensley promised 
me that he would never ict any one know where he got the informa. 
tion from, or where I had got it from. He said, ‘‘ If you hear any 
more, write it down on paper, put it in an official envelope, and 
address it to me.’’ I simply carried those instructions out. Not 
hearing any more from Inspector Wensley, I at last asked him 
whether he still required such information, and I received a message 
from a detective which said, ‘‘ Mr. Wensley thanks you very much 
for the information you have given him, and he will not require any 
more. Probably he will see you to-morrow.’’ That is the explana- 
tion. 


CHarites Heiuer, examined by Mr. Axsincpr—I am police con- 
stable 299, of the H Division. My duties take me to the neigh- 
bourhood of Leman Street Police Station. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Murr—I know Police Constable George 
Greaves. Last night and the night before my beat has come near 
Greaves’ beat. 

Has he spoken about this case while you were on duty during 
either of those nights!—Yes. He asked me whether I had followed 
the papers closely, and I said, ‘“ Well, I have seen them; I have 
been looking at them every day.’’ So he says, ‘‘ Do you know what 
was said about the prisoner—whether he made a statement about a 
murder before there was anything said about it to him.’’ I said, 
“‘ Well, so it says in the papers.’’ He then said to me, ‘‘ Well, 
if they say that, I know different, because I was on reserve at the 
time when they brought the prisoner in. They told him to sit 
down. He did not sit down; he came to the desk, and when told 
to sit down again he said, ‘ All I want to know is what I am being 
detained for.’ He was then told by one of the C.I.D. officers that 
he was wanted on a very serious charge—on suspicion of murder. 
It was then that Morrison said, ‘ You have made some blunders, but 
no blunder as big as this,’ ’’ or something to that effect. This was 
said to me on Monday night, and it has not been repeated to me 
since. I took very little interest in it, and I do not know that I 
made any answer, nor do I recollect whether he made any further 
observations. He did not say anything about giving evidence or 
giving information as to what he knew. I believe I spoke to Greaves 
on Sunday night or Monday morning, but I do not think he spoke 
to me about this matter. I think that was the first occasion on 
which he spoke to me or I spoke to him, except last night, when he 
came back after he had been called to the station, and said to me, 
“¢T have got to go to the Central Criminal Court to-morrow.” 

Those are the only two occasions on which he spoke to you 
about this matter at all?—As far as I can remember. 

Re-examined by Mr. Axsmncur—I was brought here from the 
station by a gentleman, but I do not know who he is. I have had 

259 


Steinie Morrison. 
George Greaves 

no communication whatever with any solicitor, counsel, or clerk 
representing the accused. 

Mr. Justice Dartina—Mr. Muir, will you resume your speech? 

Mr. Asinazr—Before my learned friend does that I have a sub- 
mission to make to your lordship. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—I had forgotten, Mr. Abinger. You have 
a right to address the jury upon this new evidence, but it must be 
confined to that. 


Closing Speech for the Defence—Continued. 


Mr. Asrineer—lIt shall be very short. May it please your lord- 
ship, gentlemen of the jury, there is a maxim as old as the hills— 
“* Truth will out.’’? Almost at the last minute, at the last hour, a 
letter is received by counsel and communicated immediately to the 
highest police official in the country, Sir Melville Macnaghten. A 
gentleman worthy in every way to occupy his high position takes 
prompt steps, putting aside all questions of personal convenience, 
attends in the middle of the night at a police station in a repulsive 
part of London, and proceeds himself to secure the attendance of a 
police constable without there being avy possibility of any other 
person knowing his name. He found that police constable patrol- 
ling Whitechapel at midnight last night, and he required that police 
constable to come to the station. 

Mr. Justice Dartinae—Mr. Abinger, the Zavitskis are here now— 
all three of them. Do you want to ask them anything? 

Mr. AsinesR—No, my lord. I will put them in the box if my 
learned friend would like them. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Very well, then they may go away. 

Mr. Asrmvcer—Gentlemen, I admit it takes a great deal to 
surprise a counsel who has been practising as long as I have been. 
but I was surprised when my lord asked me if I proposed calling any 
further evidence and my friend did not ask leave to recall Detective- 
Sergeant Brogden, so that I might then, with the knowledge which 
I had not then, have cross-examined him. 

Mr. Murr—My friend is entitled to do that without an invita- 
tion from your lordship. 

Mr. Justice Dar~inc—Of course he is. 

Mr. Asrncger—May I express my thanks to my friend, Mr. Muir, 
for telling me that. Of course I know that. But it is a very long 
way from the point I am making. The point I am making is this: 
it is to be supposed that Brogden does not know the charge which is 
made against him? /re you to suppose that my friend does not 
appreciate that it is a serious charge striking at the bedrock of his 
case? Does he wait for my invitation to put that witness in the 
box—I, counsel for the prisoner—to call into the witness-box a 

260 


Closing Speech for the Defence. 
Mr. Abinger 


witness for the Crown? Does he do what I did then? Without any 
possibility of knowing what the man was going to say, I called Greaves 
into the box. Why did not he call Sergeant Brogden, the witness 
for the Crown? 

__ Mr. Jusricz Dartinc—How can you say that you called Greaves 
without knowing what he was going to say? 

Mr Axsinger—I mean Heiler. 

Mr. Justice Dartiva—When you had had written down by 
Sir Melville Macnaghten the whole of his questions and answers? 

Mr. AsingerR—It was a lapsus lingue which I should have 
thought was pretty apparent. 

Mr. Justice Darurinc—Before Mr. Muir addresses you, gentle- 
men, I think it just as well to say what I had made up my mind to 
say to you from the time that Mr. Muir opened this case, and it 
is this. This point which has recently been represented to you as 
though it were the critical and crucial point of the whole case, is to 
my mind one of the very smallest points in it. The point is whether 
before he had been charged with murder the defendant assumed that 
the charge against him was murder, and was so stated. The words 
have been used over and over again. ‘“Mr. Muir has said he 
evolved that from his inner consciousness.’? What I intended to 
say to you in my summing up—I will say it now, and if I remember 
I will not say it again—was this, that it did not appear to me to be 
at all unnatural if he said it. Assuming he said it, it did not appear 
to me at all unnatural that a man who is being arrested while in a 
restaurant, and has no definite charge made against him, and arrested 
close to Sidney Street where those murders had been committed, and 
arrested within a few days of the Clapham Common murder, which 
was notorious to anybody in that district, because Leon Beron had 
lived there—it did not appear to me to be at all unnatural that a 
man arrested without explanation should assume, with nothing said, 
that he had been arrested for one or other of those murders. I had 
meant to say that in my summing up, and I say it now in the hope that 
it may save a lengthy reply to what in my mind is a much too long- 
drawn-out episode in this case. 

The Forrman or THE Jury—May I say that 

Mr. Justice Daritivea—No, no, gentlemen. Don’t you say a 
word. Juries should never express any opinion except by their 
verdict. Take my word for it. 


Closing Speech for the Crown. 


Mr. Murr—May it please your lordship, gentlemen of the jury, 
before my lord addressed to you the observations which have just 
fallen from him, it had been determined by those responsible for 
this prosecution that our duty in this matter in this issue was abso- 

261 


Steinie Morrison. 
Mr. Muir 


lutely clear, and that was to ask you in any verdict that you might 
return unfavourable to the prisoner not to take that episode into 
consideration at all. 

Then it is said—it is rather surprising that it should be 
said, but it is said—that there is no evidence that the prisoner 
was ever seen outside Snelwar’s restaurant in company with Leon 
Beron. That is surprising for two reasons. Firstly, that there is 
the evidence of Weissberg and Zaltzman that he was seen outside 
Snelwar’s restaurant at half-past seven on the night of 31st December. 

Mr. Asincer—My friend will pardon me, but that is not what I 
said. I said there was no evidence that these two men were seen in 
that man’s company on any other night than the 3lst December. 

Mr. Murr—My memory has misled me as to what my friend 
said. The prisoner’s account of his finances is this—‘‘I received 
from my mother first of all a sum of £15; secondly, a sum of £20; 
in all, £35. I won at gaming on the lst December £38, and paid 
£3 of it to the croupier, leaving me £35. I had saved at Pithers, 
£4.’’ Those are capital sums amounting to £74. What became 
of that money? We know that on the 30th November and the 2nd 
December he spent something under £30, according to his own 
account—probably under £25—he called it £30. There is a capital 
sum of £44 left. What became of it? We have no account of what 
became of that £44. ‘‘ Further than that,’’ he says, ‘“‘ I] was earning 
an honest living, selling cheap jewellery, and making £2 a week at 
it, and in addition to that I was making some money in the changing 
of cheques for people in the East End.’’ Gentlemen, he is living in 
a lodging at 3s. a week, and he is getting his meals at Snelwar’s 
restaurant, the miserable accommodation of which establishment is 
the basis of my friend’s argument that Leon Beron, getting his meals 
there, could not have possibly had any money. What became of 
that money of the prisoner’s, his £2 a week plus his earnings as a 
cheque changer? Gentlemen, you have only to examine those figures 
to see that the prisoner’s account of his finances is a false account. 

The Prisonsr—It is not a false account. I can give a proper 
account, but I have never been asked. I can give a full account of 
every farthing. 

Mr. AsinceR—I think my friend’s figures are erroneous, for 
this reason. The evidence was that in the early part of November 
he received from his mother £20. He was asked if he had received 
other moneys from his mother, and the witness, as he then was, 
replied, “‘ Yes; before that I received £15.’’ There it stopped. 
He was not asked when he received that £15, and my friend, without 
any evidence, I should submit, is 

Mr. Justice Dartine—Are you addressing me or the jury? 

Mr. Asrygsr—Your lordship. 

Mr. Justice Dartine—But you were looking straight at the jury. 
I can hear you better if you will turn towards me. 

262 


NEE ONE 


Closing Speech for the Crown. 
Mr. Muir 
__ Mr. Axsrmeczr—I apologise. My friend is therefore without any 
evidence suggesting an admission on the part of the prisoner that 
he received from his mother £15 in the month of November or 
December. I challenged. 

Mr. Murr—I have not made that observation. 

Mr. Asingur—I beg your pardon. His own account was that 
he had £15 from his mother, and he had £20 from his mother, which 
makes £35. He had £4 saved up. That makes £74, with the £35 
he won at faro. 

Mr. Murr—I did not say that he received those sums in Novem- 


ber. I did not say that at all. 


Mr. Justice Dartine—No. 

Mr. Murr—The time here, gentlemen, is fixed. The prisoner 
was released from prison on the 17th September, and the dates, 
therefore, with which we are dealing are dates between 17th Septem- 
ber and 2nd December. Gentlemen, I therefore submit to you that the 
prisoner’s account upon the face of it is a false account of his finances. 
ah The prisoner says, ‘‘ At half-past eight I left the restaurant. 
I went to the Shoreditch music hall. I entered there about nine 
o’clock, getting a seat for 1s. There I saw Jane Brodsky and Esther 
Brodsky in the same row of seats as myself.’ 

Mr. Asrncer—I am sorry to interrupt my friend, but my witness 
did not swear it was ls.; he said he gave half a sovereign, but 
whether he received 8s. 6d. or 9s. as change he would not swear. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Yes, but the Brodskys said they entered 
for 1s. He was called after the Brodskys, and was asked the same 
question, it being a point made that nobody could have got in for 
less than Is. 6d., and he said he could not 1emember what he paid, 
because he put down half a sovereign, and he did not know whether 
he got 8s. 6d. or 9s. in change. 

Mr. Aprvasr—Yes, but that does not justify my friend 


saying 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Please, Mr. Abinger, I have said what the 
evidence is. It is no good making remarks, and it is out of order 
to do so. 


* * * * 


Mr. Murr—Why does that bolt shriek? Because it has never 
been used. Is it conceivable that if that bolt was used habitually 
by these people, with children sleeping in that house, that a drop of 
oil or grease would not have been put upon it to facilitate the bolt- 
ing, and to lessen the noise? But no—shriek—fit to wake everybody 
an the house—such a shriek as could be heard by the neighbour in 
the street next door. That is the bolt in the house which is selected 
by the prisoner to live in—a man carrying on, as I shall suggest 
to you on_ this evidence, the profession, the business, the 
calling of a professional burglar—a professional burglar sleeping 
in lodgings. The story is that the landlord and landlady said he 

263 


Steinie Morrison. 
Mr. Muir 


waited for him every night until he came home to bolt him in with 
a shrieking bolt which he cannot undo without everybody in the house 
hearing it. 

Mr. Asincer—Is my friend endeavouring to suggest that my 
client is a professional burglar? Is my friend entitled to suggest to 
the jury that this man is carrying on the business of a burglar, 
without any evidence whatever? I submit that there is no evidence 
whatever in support of that suggestion. 

The Prisonsr—I have got evidence to prove against it. 

Mr. Justices Dartinc—He has proved that this man was twice 
convicted of burglary. 

Mr. Murr—Three times. 

Mr. Justice Dartriveg—He has been twice sentenced to penal 
servitude for the crime of burglary, and it is proved that he came 
out on the 17th September, and he is on ticket of leave. 

Mr. Asrnagpr—And. 

Mr. Justice Darutivc—One moment, if you please—that he 
worked as a baker for a certain time; that he left that place, and 
then established himself at Newark Street. 

Mr. Asivger—He has been selling cheap jewellery. 

Mr. Justice Darutina—He sold cheap jewellery. It is argued 
that he had no more than this amount of money. There is no evidence 
that he was at this time committing burglaries; but Mr. Muir is per- 
fectly entitled to make the suggestion that the man was a burglar 
by profession, and that he was living in this place. He cannot point 
to any definite burglary that he was then committing, and he does 
not attempt to do so. 

Mr. Murr—Gentlemen, in my view to you the last place in the 
world that would be selected by the prisoner as a lodging, if every- 
thing that Mrs. Zimmerman says is true, and if everything that Mr. 
Zimmerman says is true, would be that house. . . . Hayman 
says, ‘‘ I gave that description from no newspaper,’’ and I assert 
to you upon the documents that have been produced and examined 
here, no newspaper exists which contains 

Mr. Asnrnezr—My friend must not say that. It is in evidence. 
The description is in the 5.30 edition of the Hvening News of the 
9th. The 5.30 edition contains the verbal description, and the 6.30 
edition contains the portrait. They are both in evidence. 

Mr. Justice Daritinc—Whether they are in evidence or not, 
just hand them to Mr. Muir. (Exhibits 43 and 44 handed.) 

Mr. Murr—Gentlemen, that is the newspaper (handed) from 
which I read, while Hayman was in the box, the description pointing 
out what was in and what was not in the newspaper. Here are two 
portraits which Hayman saw of the prisoner. Where do you find 
‘““ Height 6 feet ’’? Where do you find ‘‘ Age thirty-five ’’? Where 
do you find ‘‘ Heavy grey striped overcoat ’’ in that portrait, or in 
any description in the newspaper? 

Mr. Asinazr—No ; I do not suggest you do in that one, but you 

264 


ho Na ae 


Closing Speech for the Crown. 


Mr. Muir 


do in this one. This is the 6.30 edition of the 9th January, and it 
says, “‘ The accused man is a tall man of foreign appearance,”’ dc. 
(Counsel read the description.) That has a portrait of Morrison 
with his hat on, below it. 

Mr. Murr—You have got both before you. In my submission 
to you—you are the judges of it—it is not the same description at 
all. It is a description of the same person—yes, but not the same 
language—not the same description. Gentlemen, that is the descrip- 
tion he gave on the 10th January, and he picked the prisoner out 
on the 17th January, which was the very first date upon which the 
prisoner would be at the Police Court, where the identifications almost 
invariably take place—they never take place in prison. 

Mr. Apincger—There is no evidence of that. I object to my friend 
saying that. He could have called evidence as to that, and I was 
waiting for it, but he did not do so. 

Mr. Justice Dartine—Do you suggest that Hayman could have 
identified him at any other time? 

Mr. AnrnauR—I suggest he ought to have had an opportunity of 
identifying him sooner. 

Mr. Justice DarLine—lIt is not a question of what he ought to 
have had. 

Mr. Murr—That was the time, at the Police Court, when Hay- 
man identified him. Stephens sees there lying on the table the 
Evening News of the previous night, and says, ‘‘ I have seen the 
photograph of Steinie Morrison in the Hvening News of yesterday’s 
date, and I identify it as the man I picked up at Clapham Cross.”’ 

Mr. Asivger—In my friend Mr. M‘Gregor’s note, which is before 
me—if it is wrong it can be put right by looking at the shorthand 
note—what he said was this, ‘‘ I went to the police on 10th January. 
I had seen notices in the cab yard. I look at exhibit 15. That is 
the noticeI saw. I saw it on the 9th, Monday night.”’ 

Mr. Murr—What is my friend doing? Have I misstated any- 
thing ? 
Ae Justice Darting—What is it that Mr. Muir has said which 
is inaccurate ? 

Mr. Asrvasr—My friend has said that Stephens told the jury 
he had not seen this portrait before he went to the police station, 
but I can point out that he said he saw it before. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Where? Is it in cross-examination? 

Mr. Aprnaur—Examination-in-chief. The passage commences— 
‘<T went to the police on 10th January. I had seen notices in the 
cab yard. I look at exhibit 15. That is the notice I saw. I saw it 
in the yard on Monday, and I went to the police next morning. I 
saw the portrait on the same morning before I went. I did not 
recognise it.’’ er 

Mr. Murr—It was not this portrait at all. This (indicating) 


is the one he recognised. 
265 


Steinie Morrison. 
Mr. Muir - 


Mr. Asinaur—He saw a portrait before he went to the police 
station. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—A portrait. 

Mr. Apinasr—‘‘I saw a portrait before I went to the police 
siation.’’ That is all the note says. What was it, then, if it was 
not the portrait of this man? 

Mr. Murr—He saw no portrait that he recognised before he saw 
this Hvening News at the police station. Gentlemen, that is 
Stephens’ evidence. 

Mr. Justice Dartinc—Here is what he said, ‘‘ I did not see the 
Lvening News on the 9th January. I never saw it until I went to 
Brixton.”’ 


Charge to the Jury. 


Mr. Justice Dartina—Gentlemen of the jury, you are here, as 
you know, trying a man of foreign nationality for the murder of 
another man of foreign nationality. I know not how in his own 
country he might be tried, but you will try him, of course, strictly 
according to the law of England, which, if it differs from the law of 
other civilised countries, errs always on the side of mercy. It 
requires more proof, it certainly gives greater advantages to an 
accused person, and it requires this, that, in order to get a convic- 
tion you should be satisfied of the guilt of the accused beyond reason- 
able doubt, and also that the jury which tries him should be unani- 
mous, which is not the case in many other countries. 

Now, gentlemen, I need detain you, I think, but a comparatively 
short time in what I have to say. A great deal of evidence, it is 
true, has been given in this case; but you have heard every point put 
and put again, commented upon by Mr. Abinger for the defence, 
and within the last few minutes by Mr. Muir for the prosecution, and 
I cannot suppose that there is any point in this case upon which you 
are not by this time fully informed as to what is proved, and as to 
the argument used upon each side with regard to it. 

A good deal in this case is beyond dispute and is not contested. 
It is beyond dispute that in the very early hours of the first day of 
this year, somewhere about three o’clock in the morning, probably, 
Leon Beron was killed at a point on Clapham Common, upon the 
asphalt path close to those bushes which you have seen yourself ; 
that his body was dragged in there, and there left. That is beyond 
dispute. It is beyond dispute, too, that death was due to murder, 
and to nothing else. Then, if you can ascertain who killed him, 
that person is guilty of the wilful murder of Leon Beron. There is 
no dispute about that. 

How was he killed? He had about him many, many wounds, 
several of which were in themselves sufficient to cause death. He 
had a blow upon the head which must have felled him instantly to the 

266 


Charge to the Jury. 


Mr. Justice Darling 


ground, and which in the opinion of those, the doctors, who saw the 
dead body very soon after his death, was of itself sufficient to kill; 
his skull was fractured in two places; but beyond that he had received 
@ variety of stabs about the body from a long knife. 

Now, gentlemen, it may be that he was killed by one man only ; 
but it is quite possible that more than one man was engaged in this 
murder. Two weapons undoubtedly were used upon him, one of 
which was a blunt, heavy weapon. ‘The doctors say, ‘‘ Something 
like a bar of iron might have done it.’’ One of them thought the 
bar would probably have some sort of angle about it; something like 
a thing which is hexagonal, or octagonal in shape, might have in- 
flicted them. Neither of them thought that the thing which caused 
the wound was a hammer. A claw-ended hammer was suggested to 
the doctor who was called for the defence. He thought it must have 
been something with a right angle about it, such as a hammer would 
have, but he had nothing in the world to go by except a photo- 
graph, and his evidence, therefore, is not the evidence of persons 
who were in such a good position to judge as were the other two. He 
explained his theory to you. I leave it there, content that you shall 
judge it. But that some instrument, be it a hammer or be it a 
bar of iron with angles or round, was used upon the head of Leon 
Beron, again is uncontested. That may have been used by a different 
man from the man who gave the stabs. If Leon Beron was the 
man who was driven by Hayman to the top of Lavender Hill with 
one man only, whether it was the prisoner or somebody else, then 
they were joined by another man, or the other man was waiting on 
Clapham Common at the place to which he was taken, and there he was 
set upon and killed. Now, gentlemen, whether there were two or 
not two men we do not know, but if two men were employed upon 
that murder, either the man was waiting there, if the prisoner was 
the man who went with Leon Beron in the cab, or else Beron did not 
go with the prisoner in the cab if the other man went with him; 
the assumption of the prosecution is that Beron went in a cab with 
one man only, and that man-was the prisoner. 

Now, gentlemen, beyond this, as to how the murder was caused 
we are absolutely in the dark. We know nothing of the motive. 
That he was robbed there is the best of reasons for supposing, for 
he always wore a watch and chain. Every one agrees with that. 
When the body was found he had no watch, he had no chain, he had 
nothing upon him but a halipenny, a tobacco pouch, and a couple 
of bags with small remnants of sandwiches in one of them. There- 
fore, you may very well come to the conclusion that robbery at all 
events entered into the motive. Mind, it may not have been the 
exclusive motive. There may have been other reasons for killing 
Leon Beron of which we know absolutely nothing. It is suggested 
that it is the work of some secret society, and that the cuts upon 
the face show it. I am not going to give my opinion about it. It 

267 


Steinie Morrison. 
Mr. Justice Darling 


is not for me to express an opinion about matters of fact. I can 
only say that any one who sees the figure ‘‘S”’ in either of those 
scratches has either better eyes or a more vivid imagination than | 
can possibly claim to possess. It is for you. Killed he was, for 
whatever reason. 

Where do we know for certain that he was? We know for certain 
that at 11.50 he was at the corner of Sidney Street, Whitechapel. 
That we know beyond dispute, because we know from the evidence 
of the prosecution—people who were at Snelwar’s restaurant—that 
he left Snelwar’s restaurant about 11.45, and we know from the 
evidence of the prisoner himself that he saw him at the corner of 
Sidney Street. According to his own statement, the prisoner left 
Snelwar’s restaurant at that time, 11.45, or within a few minutes 
of that—the same time as Leon Beron left it. At the corner of 
Sidney Street Beron said to him, ‘‘ Bon sozr,’’ and he said, “‘ Bon 
sotr, monsieur,’’ and he says that is the last time that he ever saw 
Beron. 

Now, gentlemen, I-am going to deal very rapidly with this, for 
this reason. The prosecution have called a great deal of evidence— 
Mintz, Hermilin, Taw, and others—to show that on that night the 
prisoner and Beron were on intimate terms in the restaurant, and 
it is said they left it together. The prisoner says, ‘‘ No, that is not 
true; I was not in the restaurant that night.’’ He says he was at the 
Shoreditch Empire on that night, that he came out of the Empire 
at twenty minutes past eleven or half-past eleven, walked up to Snel- 
war’s restaurant, looked in, had some very light refreshment (he forgot 
what it was), and then left immediately, and, having said ‘‘ Bon 
sor ’’ to Beron at the corner of Sidney Street, went home to bed, 
and never left his room till next morning. I give the go-by to all 
the evidence of the Brodskys and to the evidence of the people at 
Snelwar’s restaurant, because, as to the bearing upon what has 
happened in Snelwar’s restaurant, Mr. Muir has lately addressed you, 
and Mr. Abinger has also fully dealt with it; but upon the point of 
where he was and where Beron was at 11.50 on that night, they 
were close together, and they were speaking to one another. Where 
did they go? He says he went home and went to bed. Zaltzman, 
Taw, and Weissberg all say that they saw him and Beron about the 
streets in that neighbourhood long after, up till nearly two o’clock 
in the morning. Mrs. Deitch says the same; that she saw him some 
time after one; she very vaguely fixes the hour. She says she saw 
- him and Beron walking along together. She knew Beron, but she 
had never seen the prisoner before. She described how he was 
dressed—wearing a smart cap, and so on. If you believe those 
people, why then the whole alzbz which he called the Zimmermans 
to prove is gone; it cannot exist. But the question you must ask 
yourselves is this—Are you sufficiently convinced by the evidence 
of Taw, Zaltzman, Weissberg, and Mrs. Deitch that when they say 

268 


Darling. 


Mr. Justice 


The Hon. 


r o - ‘ oh ote - : a 


: ‘ 
4 be A cee ‘ Me it ‘ a 
F ee sono eal leldnie Sia DIOCIRATA Re SBRNINO I: AAIAANG hans view tree “aero on + 
= e Ms ee a 
ao 
. PS 
— 
— oe x 
a 
: \ 
: A 


Charge to the Jury. 


Mr. Justice Darling 
they saw him they really did see, not some other man, but that man 
with Beron long after twelve o’clock at night—somewhere between 
one and two o'clock, up to very nearly two o’clock? If you are 
convinced of that, why then the prisoner stands, you know, con- 
victed of having told you an absolute untruth as to where he was— 
that he was at home all night—and it is inconsistent absolutely with 
the evidence of Mr. and Mrs. Zimmerman. Although they may not 
know how inconsistent it is, it is inconsistent with their impression 
that he never was out from the time he came in that night. Of 
course, if you regard it as proved, that he was walking about at the 
time spoken to by Zaltzman, Weissberg, Mrs. Deitch, and Taw, why 
then, one of two things must have happened; either he did not go 
home that night, and the Zimmermans are saying what is not true, 
or else he did go home, and, for some reason or another, very soon 
afterwards let himself out of the house unknown to the Zimmermans, 


and rejoined Beron. But that last alternative seems a curious 
hypothesis, because it would involve this, that Beron was walking 
about the streets alone, as far as we know, waiting for him. Of 


course, he may have been doing it, but it involves what is to my 
mind a violent hypothesis, and one which perhaps you are not very 
likely to adopt. 

Beron, that night after he left that restaurant, got something 
to eat; he got some ham sandwiches. I mean to say, he ate them; 
I do not say he procured them afterwards, but he certainly did some- 
how eat ham sandwiches after he left that restaurant. There can be 
no manner of doubt about that. I do not say ham sandwiches, but 
he ate the meat and bread which were found undigested in his stomach 
after his death. He took some alcohol. There is no evidence of 
where he got it. Some slight remains of ham sandwiches were found 
in his pocket, and from that it is suggested (it is not proved) that 
he must have purchased a ham sandwich after he left the restaurant. 

There is no explanation of where he got that. Now, you must 
take it that no witness for the prosecution says that he saw the 
prisoner go with him to any kind of refreshment place. No one says 
that they ever took such things away from Snelwar’s restaurant. 
There is no suggestion that with the prisoner he ever got hold of 
ham sandwiches or of alcoholic drink. 

Now, what is the next thing we know? We know—I suppose 
we know for certain—that at two o’clock in the morning a man hailed 
Hayman somewhere by Gardiner’s Corner. Hayman is of opinion 
that that man was the prisoner. Two men got into Hayman’s cab. 
The suggestion of the prosecution is that Beron was one. It is not 
certain that Beron was one, but it may well have been, because I 
think you may take it for granted; seeing that old Beron was at 
about twelve o’clock at night at the corner of Sidney Street, that 
he undoubtedly was murdered somewhere about three o‘clock in the 
morning as far as we can tell, and he did not get to the place where 

269 


Steinie Morrison. 


Mr. Justice Darling 


the body was found by walking at that time of the night, being of 
the age and build that he was, you would consider it not to be at all 
improbable that Beron was driven to Clapham Common that night. 
Well, then, Beron may have been one of the men driven by Hayman, 
but it is not certain that he was. Hayman does not identify Beron 
anything like so distinctly as he identifies the prisoner. I will not 
deal at this moment with the question of identification. Hayman 
drives him and takes him at about two o’clock—he could not be 
certain to minutes—he drives two people (no one says he did not 
drive two people) from Gardiner’s Corner to Lavender Hill by 
Lavender Gardens. No one disputes that one of the men who told him 
to go there said, ‘‘ Put me down near the Shakespeare Theatre.’’ 
Supposing Beron was one and the defendant was the other, which 
was Hayman’s opinion, what would happen then? If the time taken 
was the exact time which Stephens took (Stephens took thirty-eight 
minutes) it would be about twenty minutes to three, as they left 
Gardiner’s Corner a little before three or a little after three, when 
he got the men, whoever they were, to that point near the Shake- 
speare Theatre, or wherever it was Hayman put them down. Now, 
gentlemen, walk from there to the place where the body was found. 
You have done it. It is said by the police witnesses who walked it 
that ten minutes would be the ordinary time to walk it in, but you 
can correct that by your own experience because you walked it. That 
would bring him there, you see, at about ten minutes to three. Now 
we know it takes, according to the evidence for the prosecution (here, 
again, you can check it by your own experience) eleven minutes to 
walk from where the body was found up to Clapham Cross. At some- 
where about three o’clock in the morning Stephens says the prisoner 
got into his cab to drive back. Therefore the time (of course, nobody 
pretends these minutes are accurate) in which that murder was com- 
mitted is very, very short; it is a very few minutes at the outside. 
That is one of the reasons, gentlemen, why I suggest to you that 
perhaps the hypothesis that only one man did it is not the true 
hypothesis, and why I suggest to you that the fact that two weapons 
were used to bring about the man’s death may well point to there 
having been two men present differently armed. 

Now we take up the matter. At somewhere about three o’clock 
Stephens says he picked up the prisoner. I am not going to comment 
upon it, as you have heard it commented upon over and over again. 
I am giving you, gentlemen, just an outline which I hope is distinct, 
because I think it will assist you more than if I go too much in detail 
into it. Many people do not remember in commenting upon evidence 
that you may do it in such a way that, as was said very wisely and 
picturesquely at the end, ‘‘ You cannot see the wood for the trees.’’ 
It is said by Stephens after he has corrected his evidence (you must 
use your own judgment as to whether he legitimately corrected it, 
or whether he corrected it because he is the perjurer that Mr. 


270 


me EY Oe NMR Fey .) 2 
A ee * STS AS PaO 


Charge to the Jury. 


Mr. Justice Darling 
Abinger says he is, who has arranged his evidence to suit another 
man for the reasons you have just heard given), according to him, 
going by the time the staff tram left, he left that place at Clapham 
Cross at about three o’clock. By that time Beron would have been 
dead somewhere about ten minutes. He drove to Kennington—a 
place near Kennington Church—IHanover Arms, and I think, if I 
remember, the whole time which has been taken from Clapham 
Common to the rank by the church and back to Cleveland Road, and 
then trotting and walking the horse to the Elephant and Castle, is 
16$ minutes, so that it does not take 

Mr. Murr—No, eleven minutes to the Hanover Arms, and then 
164 minutes. 

Mr. Justices Dartinc—I am obliged to you. It took cleven 
minutes from Clapham Cross to the Hanover Arms. There he puts 
down the man whom he has driven from Clapham Cross. He said that 
before he put him down he had heard some one call, but could not 
find that person. He went back and looked about. You remember 
how he went and trotted the horse, and then walked his horse down 
to the Elephant and Castle. He put up, after that, for the night. 
The man he had driven got out by the Hanover Arms, and Stephens 
saw him no more. At this time it must have been somewhere 
between three and a quarter-past—something like that. Almost 
immediately Castlin, who is on the rank at Kennington Church, is 
hailed by two men. Whether another man who had been engaged in 
this murder who had left by another route had got back just before 
the man driven by Stephens, or whether a man who was expecting 
the booty and was the man to dispose of it, was waiting there, or 
however it may have been done, we do not know, but just after 
Stephens had dropped one man, and just after Stephens had heard 
another man call, two men engaged Castlin, paid him 7s., I think 
it was, and told him to drive to Tottenham—to Seven Sisters Road. 
He did not tell him to drive to Tottenham; as a matter of fact, he 
drove them to Seven Sisters Road. These three men, with varying 
degrees of certainty—-Hayman, Stephens, and Castlin—all swear 
that the prisoner was the man who was in Hayman’s cab, in Stephens’ 
cab, and in Castlin’s cab. Of course, he says he was not. But if 
you come to the conclusion that he really was, of course, it becomes 
very difficult for him to explain why he was in that neighbourhood 
unless he was engaged in that murder. Ask yourselves—whether he 
was the man or not, are you satisfied that the man who was driven 
by Stephens, and by Castlin afterwards, away from the scene of the 
murder, was the murderer, or one of the murderers—a man who had 
been engaged in it? Are you satisfied of that? If you are not satis- 
fied of that, then there is no necessity to ask who he was. But, 
suppose you are satisfied of that, then comes the question, was it the 


prisoner ? 


271 


Steinie Morrison. 
Mr. Justices Darling 


The prisoner says he was in bed and asleep. Those three men say 
he was not in bed asleep; they say, just as Jack Taw, Zaltzman, 
Weissberg, and Mrs. Deitch say, he was not in bed and asleep when 
he says he was. They say he was not in bed and asleep when they 
were in Whitechapel. These three men say he was not in bed and 
asleep when they were driving up this road and coming back. 

Here really comes, to my mind, the deciding point of the case. 
If he were the man, how can you account for his being out there and 
denying that he was out there—not saying, ‘“ Oh, yes, I can give you 
this reason why I was there; I had gone for this, that, or the other 
reason.’? How can you account, if he was the man who was there, 
for his being there unless he was either the sole murderer or a partici- 
pant in the murder (in which case he is equally guilty) of Beron? 
Therefore, at this point it becomes very necessary to ask yourselves— 
are you satisfied—beyond reasonable doubt, mind, not, do I think on 
the balance of probabilities; that is not it—are you satisfied beyond 
reasonable doubt that that is the man who was in Hayman’s cab, 
in Stephens’ cab, and in Castlin’s cab on that night? 

Stephens has been attacked, and he has been called a perjurer. 
So many people have been called perjurers by Mr. Abinger that 
Stephens has no right to pride himself on that; but the others have 
not. Now, mind, these men may be perfectly honest, and they may 
be mistaken, or you may not be able to make up your minds as to 
whether they are mistaken or not. If you cannot make up your 
minds whether they are mistaken or not, he is entitled, as the 
defendant, to a verdict of not guilty. I do not want to speak for 
myself, but, think for yourselves. With what certainty can you, 
do you think, swear to a man whom you saw on a night like that, 
by the kind of light that there was at these places which you have 
seen? Can you feel certain that a man would not be mistaken, and 
that he is not mistaken? You have heard the description that they 
gave. Suppose you had got that description, could you, from the 
description alone, if you had a dozen men, of whom the prisoner wag 
one, before you, have picked him out? Do you think you could? 
You remember what they were. I do not mean the evidence given 
afterwards when they pointed him out, but the statements that they 
made as to his being “‘ tall’’ and ‘‘ medium complexion,’’ and so 
on. What is a ‘‘ medium complexion ’’? That is the kind of 
evidence. Do you think from that description you could have picked 
the man out? I think, myself, it is a very difficult thing to describe 
aman. Suppose I look at a man in Court, and am asked to write 
down a description of him, do you feel certain, if I did write it down, 
that you could pick him out from other men in Court I do not know? 
They gave a description. Let us assume they gave it to the best of 
their ability; let us assume they were honest. Even then, are you 
so certain that they really took notice enough, that they had oppor- 
tunity enough, to be able some days afterwards to swear with 

272 


-Charge to the Jury. 


Mr, Justice Darling 
certainty to the man they had driven, and to swear with certainty 
that he was the man when they saw him again ? 

Now, gentlemen, something has been said about the means they 
had of identifying him before they gave their evidence, and it cer- 
tainly is to be regretted (I do not reproach these men at all, but it 
is to be regretted) that they had the means, if they chose to use 
them. Apparently one of them did use them, and honestly said he 
did ; he saw the paper with the man’s photograph lying on the desk 
when he went to the police station; but, before they picked out the 
prisoner at the police station, they, each of them, had the means if 


‘they used them, and certainly one of them, innocently enough, if you 


like, did use them, and the others may have done—they had the 
means of knowing what was the personal appearance of the man they 
were going to identify. Gentlemen, strong language has been used 
about this photographing of people and the publishing of photo- 
graphs. You yourselves have made a protest which must by this 
time have reached the authorities against the indiscriminate snap- 
shotting of those engaged in such a trial as this. There is no 
necessity to point out the inconveniences, and possibly the dangers, 
of such practices as that, but it is a far graver thing when people 
are permitted to take photographs of accused persons who have not 
been identified, and who are yet to be put up for identification by 
those who are to give evidence against them on their trial. 
Gentlemen, sitting here where I know one’s words are heard 
beyond the limits of this Court, I am not going to indulge in a 
condemnation of the Press for publishing those photographs. There 
must be a measure observed in this as in other matters. In many 
ways the Press by publishing descriptions and by publishing even 
photographs can help, and does help, and notoriously has helped, to 
the identification of persons who are suspected of a crime; but it is 
quite another matter after a person has been arrested and is awaiting 
his trial that anybody should be permitted to take his photograph, 
to reproduce it, and to publish reproductions of it all over the place 
so that they may be seen by possibly uncertain witnesses, who will 
thereby be persuaded to come forward and swear to identification 
which they would not otherwise have done, or they may possibly 
(that is not suggested in this case) come before malicious witnesses 
who may come, and for some of those reasons which we cannot fathom 
but which we know do influence people, will swear to @ man as to 
whom they have no certain knowledge. Gentlemen, in this case I 
think it is to be deeply regretted that those photographs of the 
prisoner were published when he was merely an accused person on 
remand on suspicion of having committed this crime. It is perfectly 
obvious the damage which it has done for the prosecution. It may 
possibly have frustrated the whole ends of justice; it is quite possible, 
and because it is so I think I need say no more than this, that it 
becomes imperative that the authorities at the Home Office, who are 


7 273 


Steinie Morrison. 
Mr. Justice Darling 


the proper persons, should consider this matter, and should consider 
whether regulations which would require probably an Act of Parlia- 
ment must not be made in order to prevent the repetition of a prac- 
tice which may possibly tend to the casting of great doubt upon the 
evidence of perfectly honest witnesses by showing that they had other 
means of identifying the prisoner—who, when he is put in a row 
with others, is supposed never to have been seen by them before— 
than the mere sight of him at that time as on the first occasion. 
Gentlemen, [ pass from that and I come to a matter which I had 
meant to deal with, and which I had overlooked—lI should have dealt 
with it before this last matter. It is the question of the blood upon 
the prisoner’s clothing. It was suggested at first that the blood upon 
his clothing was the blood of Beron, the murdered man. That it was 
the blood of a man is not disputed. He has accounted for its getting 
where it did; but, gentlemen, I do not know how it strikes you— 
mind, I express no opinion—I throw this out merely for your con- 
sideration—when it is said, ‘‘ Would you expect blood to be upon the 
murderer a week after the murder; when he had every opportunity of 
getting rid of it, would you expect him to leave a single drop of 
blood upon anything that he wore?’ I suppose the answer expected 
by the defence is, ‘‘ No, you would not.’’ I think it is not doing 
much violence to suppositions to say that that would probably be 
your answer, ‘‘ No, you would not.’’ But, gentlemen, if he was the 
murderer, whoever the man was who took Castlin’s cab and went 
up to Seven Sisters Road and walked, as far as we know, to some 
house or another there, because he did not come back again, but 
got out, and he wanted to go to Seven Sisters Road, had very ample 
opportunity of destroying every bit of clothing that he had got about 
him if it were necessary; nothing would have been easier. If that 
was the murderer, and hewas with another man who was an accomplice 
of some sort, nothing would have been easier than for him to get 
rid of his shirt, his collar, his necktie, and everything. Therefore, 
when you say this blood is not the blood of the murdered man—vwell, 
suppose it is not; there were opportunities if that was the murderer 
who went to Seven Sisters Road of getting rid of that before the 
murder was seen by any witness in this case. If it were the prisoner, 
if Mrs. Zimmerman and Mr. Zimmerman, and the woman who lived 
next door, are telling the truth, he was back at between nine and 
ten o’clock in the morning—at all events, back; (he says he was 
at Zimmerman’s, and never left there) ; he was at the back washing 
himself at the tap, and so on. If that is so, he had come back 
somehow or other from Seven Sisters Road. Mr. Abinger said to you 
—and I thought said with great force—if that is so, it is curious 
that nobody noticed him coming back from Seven Sisters Road. It 
is a long way. There are many streets to pass through, and no one 
noticed him. No one did, and yet on the supposition that he was 
274 


De ts tS ee ee 


Charge to the Jury. 
Mr. Justice Darling 


the murderer, and he went in Castlin’s cab, he did go to Seven Sisters 
Road, and he did come back, and was back early in the morning. 

Now, gentlemen, I have almost finished what I have to say to 
you. If there is any point which you think I have overlooked upon 
which you wish my guidance, if you will mention it to me, I will 
address myself to it. 

Now, we come to some considerations as to the defence. The 
evidence of the defendant you have lately heard summarised very 
accurately by Mr. Muir as to what he was doing, where he went when 
he left these premises, why he left them, and so on. Gentlemen, there 
is no doubt about it, the evidence leaves much to be explained. All 
that about the revolver, and so on, is very suspicious, gentlemen, but 
you know you must not convict a man on one suspicion ; you must not 
convict him on a thousand suspicions; you must not add a thousand 
suspicious circumstances together and say, ‘‘ that is proof.’? No, 
you must find somewhere a solid anchorage upon which you can say, 
“I am secure of this basis.’”’? Some things he did which damage 
his defence to my mind very much. There, again, you must not let 
that prejudice you. It is difficult to preserve a perfectly clear and 
even mind in favour of a man if you can see that that man had said 
before you in the box what is not true, and if he has called evidence 
of other people which you believe to be false. Suppose you come to 
the conclusion that he never did go to the theatre on the 31st, then 
the evidence of all those people at Snelwar’s restaurant rises up 
strong against him, but yet he may have been at Snelwar’s restaurant ; 
they may be telling the truth and he may be telling a falsehood; he 
may have come out with old Beron, and he may, as he said, have left 
old Beron and gone home. It may be that he did say ‘‘ Bon sotr ’’ 
to Beron and leave him and go home, and yet it may not be true that 
he had been to that theatre at all. The fact that a man calls a false 
alibi, calls false witnesses, does not necessarily or by a long way 
prove that he is guilty. JI do not comment upon it, but it may be 
that you are satisfied that he was not at that theatre with those two 
Brodskys, but that is no proof of his guilt. It may be that you have 
come to the conclusion that the evidence they gave is false. It was 
evidence which they did not give when first interrogated. They 
spoke at first about being there on the Monday. Jane Brodsky never 
told the police that she saw him on the Saturday, and would not tell 
them. You may come to the conclusion that that is a fabricated alibi, 
fabricated by him or for him, and sworn to falsely by the Brodskys. 
You may think it is demolished and blown out of Court by the 
evidence of Hector Munro and by its own inherent improbability, but, 
supposing you do come to that conclusion, why, even then, he may 
not be proved to be guilty—he may be guilty, and never proved to be 
guilty ; he may be guilty as a fact, and he may not be proved to be 
guilty. Let me give you this caution (I think I am justified in giving 
it to you, although there is no evidence of it in this case; I es it 

275 


Steinie Morrison. 
Mr. Justice Darling 


to you as a thing you know for yourselves), this man is a foreigner, 
those Brodskys are foreigners, apparently Polish Jews; they are 
Polish Jews or Russian Jews. He was a Jew when he was writing 
that letter to the Home Secretary; he said he was a Hebrew then, 
and that his name was Petropavloff. Ask yourselves, do you or do 
you not know that it is very common among people of certain classes 
and of certain nationalities if they have got a good case not to rest 
upon that good case? If you have ever talked to anybody who has 
administered justice in India you will know that there, if they have 
got a good case, they are not content to rest upon the good case, 
because they are convinced that perjured evidence will be brought 
against them, and that in order to overthrow the perjured evidence, 
which they suspect will be brought against them, they themselves 
procure perjured evidence to defeat the case which will be made by 
the other side. Gentlemen, I make that observation, as you see, in 
favour of the prisoner, to suggest to you this, that if you come to 
the conclusion that this alibi is false, you should not judge it then 
as strictly against him as if it had been produced by an Englishman, 
because if you know yourselves that there is that habit and that 
likelihood where foreigners are engaged, you are bound to give him 
the benefit of every doubt, and you are bound to give him the benefit 
of that doubt among others. 

Now, gentlemen, as to dealing with the evidence in this case, 
I have done with it. There is evidence (I cannot say there is not) 
for you to consider, and carefully consider, as to whether this case 
is plainly made out against that man so that you may say he is 
guilty of the murder of Leon Beron; but before you say he is guilty 
you must be convinced that the evidence can only be explained upon 
the assumption that he is guilty. If upon any part of it which is 
necessary to the deciding of his guilt or his innocence you have a 
reasonable doubt, you must decide it in his favour. You know 
without my telling you a reasonable doubt means such a doubt not 
as some people “‘ conjure up ’’ about anything, but such a doubt as 
would influence a man in his own ordinary daily affairs. 

Gentlemen, in one part of our country there is the power of 
giving another verdict besides that of ‘“‘ guilty ”’ or ‘“‘ not guilty.’’ 
It is possible in Scotland to return a verdict of ‘‘ Not proven.’’ An 
English jury cannot do that, but for all that, if they come to the con- 
clusion that the case is not proven, although they may not say ‘‘ Not 
proven ’’ aloud in Court, they give what is after all an equivalent 
verdict. If it is ‘‘ Not proven ’’ they must not say, ‘‘ Oh, it is not 
proven, but we find him guilty ’’ ; they must say, ‘‘ It is not proven; 
therefore we acquit him.”’ 

Now, gentlemen, I have dealt with the case, I think, with 
sufficient fulness to enable you who have attended as you have, as 
every one acknowledges you have—so thoroughly to every point in 
this evidence—I have dealt with it in such a way, I think, as to 

276 


Charge to the J ury. 
Mr. Justice Darling 


direct your attention to the necessary matters in order to enable you 
to come to a conclusion in this most serious case. Consider it, gentle- 
men, attentively and carefully. I know you will. And remember 
what I have said, that it is the characteristic of English justice that 
we do not seek to avenge a crime 3 we do not seek upon balance of 
probabilities to say, ‘‘ Some one must be held responsible for this ”’ ; 
we only seek to find out by our methods, our strict rules and methods 
of evidence, whether the accused person is proved to be guilty, and if 
he is not proved to be guilty there is only one verdict which an 
English jury is permitted to give. Gentlemen, you consider it. If 
the case is proved, I know you have fortitude enough to act upon 
your conscientious judgment and to say that he is guilty; but if you 
are not satisfied you know your duty, and I am sure you will do it. 

Mr. Murr—Your lordship indicated that with regard to the 
question of previous convictions you would address some observations 
to the jury by way of caution. 

Mr. Justice Dartine—I am much obliged to the learned counsel 
for the prosecution. I did say that I would refer to the question of 
previous convictions. You know what the previous convictions of 
this man are. It has been perfectly well explained to you that he 
might have stood here and no one would have known of those previous 
convictions had not his own counsel made it necessary—I think it 
was absolutely necessary—for the counsel for the Crown to bring out 
what was his true past history. That was done because he insisted, 
and his counsel insisted, upon an attack upon the character of a 
witness, possibly of more than one witness, for the Crown, an attack 
which brought the defence into the position that they had lost the 
protection given to the prisoner by the Criminal Evidence Act of 
1898. If it had not been for those attacks you would have known 
nothing about this. He has only himself and those who have con- 
ducted his defence to thank for the fact that you know what you 
know about him. 

Gentlemen, I did say that I would give you a word of caution, 
and I am obliged to the learned counsel for the prosecution for re- 
minding me. It is right—the Legislature has said it, and you and 
I must not question it—that in these circumstances, although in no 
others, a jury should be informed of the past criminal career of the 
accused ; but, gentlemen, the caution I meant to give you is this. 
It must not be allowed to prejudice or warp your judgment, and, 
believe me, no one is more conscious than I am of the danger that 
such knowledge as you now have should warp the judgment not only 
of you but of myself. It is almost impossible to put as good a 
construction now upon the most innocent thing that that man may 
do ag it was when you believed him to be an unconvicted man. But, 
gentlemen, bear in mind that the only use to be made of these previous 
convictions is to show that when you have to rely upon his word as 
contradicting something stated by somebody else, or as alleging 

277 


Steinie Morrison. 
Mr, Justice Darling 


something which is not corroborated, you have not the word of a 
person who has done nothing wrong, who has never told any lie, and 
who has never broken the laws of England; you have only the word 
of a man whose past career has been what you know it to have been. 
Mr. Muir has indicated to you that he felt bound to go into the 
matter. I think he was bound to go into it for another reason, as 
to the capabilities of the prisoner—and it has a bearing upon that— 
the capacity or not of the prisoner for getting into or out of a house 
without making as much noise as a person would make who had never 
done it before. 

Gentlemen, with those words, which are all I need add to what 
I have already said to) you, I would ask you to retire to your room 
and consider, and let me know when you have arrived at a con- 
clusion. 


[Two officers being sworn to take charge of the jury, they retired 
at eight o’clock. They returned into Court at 8.35. | 

The Dspury CierK or THE Court—Gentlemen, are you agreed 
upon your verdict? 

The Foreman or THE JuRy—We are. 

The Duruty Cuerk or THE Court—Do you find Steinie Morrison 
guilty or not guilty of the murder of Leon Beron? 

The Forsman—wWe find the prisoner guilty. 

The Deputy CLERK or THE CourtT—You say that he is guilty, 
and that is the verdict of you all? 

The Forsman—That is the verdict of us all. 

The Deputy CLERK oF THE Court—Steinie Morrison, you stand 
convicted of wilful murder. Have you anything to say for yourself 
why the Court should not give you judgment of death according to 
law? 

The Prisonsr—I have got a great deal to say. For one matter, 
the evidence against me as to the funds which has been seen on me 
on the Ist January being the proceeds of the murder. I can prove 
that in November I had a sum of £300, and out of this £300 I have 
still got £220. If I can prove that, will that in any way alter the 
jury’s verdict? 


Sentence. 


Mr. Justice Dariine—Steinie Morrison, you have been found 
guilty, after a long, careful, and most patient investigation, of the 
crime of wilful murder. Every point which could possibly be put, 
every argument which could be used, was submitted to the Court and 
to the jury on your behalf. They have arrived at the conclusion— 
the only conclusion as it appears to them consistent with the whole 
of the evidence against you—that you did on that night, either alone 
or with the help of another, kill that man Leon Beron. Undoubtedly 

278 


a 


ss 


Sentence, 

Mr. Justice Darling 
your case was supported by evidence demonstratively false. I am 
sure that that did not unduly weigh with the jury, and that they 
have convicted you upon the strength of the evidence for the prosecu- 
tion, and upon that alone. As to anything you may have to say 
for yourself hereafter, you must be advised by your solicitor and your 
learned counsel ; I can say nothing. My one duty is to pass the judg- 
ment which the law awards; it is that you be taken hence to the 
prison from whence you came ; that you be taken thence to a place 
of lawful execution ; that you be there hanged by the neck until your 
body is dead, and may the Lord have mercy on your soul. 

The Prisoner—I decline such mercy. I do not believe there is 
a God in Heaven either. 


APPENDIX. 


DECLARATION OF Mrs. R. 


I, M. A. R., British subject, wife of W. H. R., residing at Paris, make the 
following statement on oath :— 


On Wednesday morning the 12th of April at a quarter past 10 in the 
morning I got on to a tram in the Avenue Kléber between the Trocadero and 
the Arc de Etoile. I got on the outside of it, sitting at the further end. 
Behind me was a man and there were two other people on the outside at the 
other end. I was reading a French newspaper. Before arriving at the Etoile 
my attention was attracted by the man behind me calling out to another man 
(who had just got on to the tram and was about to take his seat on my side at the 
further end) ‘‘ Hullo Georges!” ‘The other one called out ‘‘ Hullo!” and went 
round the end of the seats and came back and took his place beside the man 
behind me. They proceeded to talk in French for some time—for a few minutes— 
to which I paid little attention. Then my attention was drawn by the French- 
man, that is the man who had got on last, saying in French, ‘‘ What are you 
doing in the affair Stinie Morrison?” (He pronounced it ‘‘Steen.”) The 
foreigner said ‘‘hush” and looked round, and then said, ‘‘speak English” in 
English. The Frenchman answered ‘ All right, are you going to do anything ?” 

The Foreigner—‘‘ No; why? Gort’s (or Cort’s) life is more valuable to us 


than his.” 
The Frenchman—‘‘ Yes, but we cannot let him hang. Cannot you write a 


letter?” 

The Foreigner—‘ That is no good, we did that before.” 

The Frenchman—‘‘ When?” 

The Foreigner—‘“‘ In 1907.” 

The Frenchman—‘‘ That was not so serious. They did not hang him, they 
will this man.” 

The Foreigner—‘‘ Well, Iam not going to interfere, [am not going to get 
the police on to me. We cannot spare Gort.” The last phrase was repeated 
several times in different ways—that Gort (or Cort) was more useful. 

Other fragments of conversation I heard— 

The Foreigner—‘‘ Have you heard from or of ——?” (Name not heard.) 

The Frenchman—“‘ Yes, his eyes are still bad. He is fixed up at Marseilles 
still. Seely (or Seebay) had a baby, you know, there.” 

The foreigner seemed much surprised and I heard a broken sentence of some- 
thing about ‘“‘ What already.” They also mentioned a name like Keritoft, a man 
named Peter, mentioned another Georges and Karatoff and Conrad. The French- 
man got off at the rue de Rome. They shook hands and said good-bye. The 
foreigner went on and got down at the rue Tronchet. He walked along to the 


Opera, and I got down and followed him. He got into the Opera-Pantin tram. 
281 
iD we 


Appendix. 


He got on top and I inside. He got down at the Boulevard Magenta and walked 
along it, stopping ata shop, and either bought or fetched a stick. Then he turned 
down the Faubourg St. Denis, I think, down another short street into the rue des 
Deux Gares where he entered No. 11, the Hotel de Amiens. 


DESCRIPTION OF THE MEN. 


The Frenchman—A Jew, short, rather fat, dark hair, light coloured 
moustache and beard, moustache drooping over mouth, longish. Hardly any 
eyebrows atall. A pasty complexion. Was dressed in dark tweed suit without 
an overcoat, a bowler hat with a very wide curly brim and low crown, old 
fashioned. He had brown gloves on little fat hands. 

The foreigner was tall, I should think 5 feet 11 inches, dark, good looking, 
short dark moustache. He had a very, very slight limp. He had dark trousers, 
dark grey overcoat, black tie, and a soft dark felt hat (not black, brown). He 
had long well-shaped hands very well tended, and on his right hand by the 
knuckles two moles, one very large one. 

The foreigner, as I call him, spoke fluently cockney English with a foreign 
accent. The Frenchman spoke English very badly with a very foreign accent. 
The foreigner also spoke French very well. The foreigner carried a serviette, 
and when the other man had gone he took out some papers and looked at them. 
One of them (the one I saw) was an architect’s plan drawn on architects’ 
paper and colored. 

I communicated the above statement to Mr. Lane, director of the D.M. 
(Paris Edition), on Wednesday, 12th April, with the condition that it should 
immediately be placed before the police authorities in Hngland. 

I heard through a letter from the D.M. on Saturday, 15th, that the Com- 
missioner of Police was taking no steps in the matter. I wrote on 15th to Mr. 
Abinger in London, enclosing the statement. 


282 


sient 


