chy 
tries 


Hdinburgh University 
Library~ 


Ealiak 
(TAPE. 2004+ 


EDINBURG GTN ThW 1 md Ye 


~/VUTIITENIAL ued 


———30150--—~-007261388 _ 


Wotable English Trials 


Eugene Aram 


NOTABLE TRIALS SERIES. 


Madeleine Smith. Edited by A. Duncan Smith, 
Advocate. 


Dr. Pritchard. Edited by William Roughead. 
The Stauntons. Edited by J. B. Atlay, Barrister- 


at-Law. 
Franz Muller. Edited by H. B. Irving. 
Lord Lovat. Edited by David N. Mackay. 


Captain Porteous. Edited by William 
Roughead. 


William Palmer. Edited by Geo. H. Knott, 


Barrister-at-Law. 
The Annesley Case. Edited by Andrew Lang. 
Mrs, Maybrick. Edited by H. B. Irving. 
Dr, Lamson. Edited by H. L. Adam. 
Mary Blandy. Edited by William Roughead. 


City of Glasgow Bank Directors, Edited by 
William Wallace, Advocate. 


Deacon Brodie. Edited by William Roughead. 
James Stewart. Edited by David N. Mackay. 
A.J. Monson, Edited by J.W. More, Advocate. 
Oscar Slater. Edited by William Roughead. 


Eugene Marie Chantrelle. Edited by A. 
Duncan Smith, Advocate. 


The Douglas Cause. Edited by A. Francis 
Steuart, Advocate. 


Mrs. Wi‘Lachlan. Edited by William Roughead. 
Eugene Aram, By Eric Watson, Barrister-at-Law. 
J. A. Dickman. Edited by S. O. Rowan- 


Hamilton, Barrister-at-Law. 


The Seddons. Edited by Filson Young. 


. KUGENE ARAM 
convicted at bork ABIX es Aug’ BST99. [or whe 
Murder of Dan‘Vlark y Knaresborough nr the 
Coty of kork [hs body was hung tr Chins prr- 
sianliokes sentance in knaresborough org He 
was Executed pourteen Years after theMurder Lis 
onnDeyence isvery aryid and mgeniwus. bub 
- vel bgore bejiupperd be ones the facl. 
Se Bald yeti eg 


2 


(From a rare engraving in the possession of the wuthor.) 


ORS IF 


Eugene Aram 
His Life and Trial 


} 


By 
Eric R. Watson, LL.B. 


Of the Inner Temple, Barrister-at-Law 


Author of ‘‘ The Principles of Indian Criminal Law,” etc. 


EDINBURGH AND LONDON. | 
WILLIAM HODGE & COMPANY 


PRINTED BY 
WILLIAM HODGE AND COMPANY 
GLASGOW AND EDINBURGH 
1913 


PREFACE. 


THE purpose of this addition to the bulky mass of Aramiana 
may be briefly put. The main interest in Aram has ever 
centred around the facts of his crime and trial. His scholar- 
ship has lent an added fascination to the story of the murder ; 
but it is the killing of Daniel Clark which keeps his memory 
green. The story of that murder has never yet been truly or 
fully told. Interest procured the suppression of some facts; 
others have unaccountably been overlooked. Fable and 
romance have usurped the place of historical narrative. No 
connected account of the-man or his crime anywhere exists. To 
the meagre reports of the trial, dating from 1759, must be 
added the two anecdotal and desultory works of Scatcherd, a 
vast number of magazine articles from 1759 up to the present, 
and many long-forgotten publications, among which I mention 
here only the rare York Pamphlet, anonymously published in 
the year of the trial, and some phrenological tracts of the early 
nineteenth century. A careful collation of all the works to 
be found in the bibliography, together with a detailed examina- 
‘tion of the manuscript records in the Record Office and of the 
contemporary newspapers, has enabled me to weave a connected 
story—with certain /acune due to the subject’sown reticence—of 
Aram’s life and crime, and in so doing to dispel the many errors, 
repeated by writer after writer—to show that, so far from being 
convicted on the sole testimony of Richard Houseman, Aram 
was, in fact, convicted upon ‘‘many concurrent proofs and 
a number of the strongest circumstances ’’—and that he was 
in no way taken by surprise by Houseman’s or any other 
evidence, being justly convicted to the full satisfaction of his 
contemporaries. To establish the legal proof of his guilt, 
never doubted by any one of consequence till Bulwer and Hood 
spun their webs of romance round the schoolmaster, has been 
one of my objects; another has been to make clear the law 
and procedure under which he was tried, and refute much 
ignorant criticism, aimed at showing that the trial was unfair. 
v 


PREFACE. 


That a man, who in the opinion of many is little to be dis- 
tinguished from other heroes of the Newgate Calendar, should 
have succeeded in attracting to himself for nigh on two centuries 
so much of the sympathy of educated and uneducated alike, is 
far more remarkable than anything in the circumstances of 
his life or crime. Between his apologists, who choose only to 
recognise the scholar—while reluctantly admitting that perhaps 
“homicide is not to be allowed even to the most amiable 
genius ’’—and his detractors, who see only the common assassin, 
opinion has become so confused that the story of Aram seems , 
to belong to legend rather than to history. The fascination 
of his career is partly that of every cold-blooded homicide, 
which attracted the supersensitive de Quincey to the truculent 
butcheries of Williams, Pée to the barbarous murder of Mary 
Cecilia Rogers, and continues, whenever a peculiarly callous 
and revolting crime of this sort is brought to light, to focus 
the attention of all classes and of all grades of intellect. This 
fascination, often denounced as morbid by those canting persons, 
who affect not to read such things, is the normal man’s tribute 
of admiration—in the Miltonian sense—at what so entirely 
transcends his own experience. A degree of respect is felt for 
a being who can calmly go on eating his dinner after doing a 
deed, to read of which sends ordinary men into shivers; the 
interest is also akin to that felt for a pathological specimen of 
the race—a great murderer is, like Tom Thumb, or the Irish 
giant, or Daniel Lambert, or the Siamese twins, something at 
which the morally normal man looks as at a monster. The 
very use of the word ‘‘ monster ’’ to denote a man of the utmost 
depravity is proof of it. 

“ Real culprits,’”’ says Burke, ‘as original characters, stand 
forward on the canvas of humanity as prominent objects of our 
special study.’’ 

In Aram’s case the interest is peculiarly intense, because, 
while other men of learning and letters have been condemned 
for murder, hardly a parallel can be found of a man go studious, 
so correct, so patient, so free, at least in the received accounts 
and accepted traditions, from the vagaries associated with the 
criminal life, ending his career at the hands of the executioner. 
Thomas Griffith Wainwright was indeed a murderer, but hig 
writings, like those of Lacenaire, were those of a mere 


vi 


PREFACE. 


dilettante ; they are enough in themselves to awaken suspicion 
of his morals ; they are disfigured by a levity and egoism from 
which a base nature cannot but be inferred. Savage was con- 
demned for a murder, yet it hardly surprises us; he was 
desultory in his habits of composition, careless, ungrateful, and 
to the highest degree erratic in his conduct of life. The 
homicide he committed was barely murder—it lacked design, 
and arose upon a quarrel. Moreover, neither of these was 
executed, and Aram’s gibbet has done more to keep his memory 
alive than his achievements in philology or letters. Villon and 
Verlaine lived criminal lives—one committed homicide and the 
other attempted it; both proved that great poetic genius may 
consort with the vilest tendencies; but their lives are homo- 
geneous. We expect crime from those of such irregular habit, 
nor are the gravest moral aberrations surprising in a vagabond 
bard. Of Aram, as a poet, it would be unfair, perhaps, to 
say, in the phrase of Gautier, ‘“ Vrai meurtrier et faux poéte,” 
but his versification is as little remarkable as his crime is the 
contrary. Moreover, his great staidness is all at variance with 
the cases of the other homicidal poets—Savage, for example. 

That a philologist should commit premeditated murder and 
expiate it on the gallows was long unique until the nineteenth 
century produced a parallel to Eugene, recalled to mind in the 
recent reminiscences of Professor Goldwin Smith, in the person 
of one Ruloff, some account of whose case will be found in a 
subsequent part of this book. 

Was Aram really a scholar? This question has often been 
asked, and very justifiable doubts have been thrown on the 
extent of his reading. Murderers are habitually liars, and are, 
like other criminals, in the highest degree vain and egoistic. 
Whether Aram had or had not made himself master of all those 
subjects of study, which he enumerates in his fragment of auto- 
biography, I see no reason to differ from Dr. Garnett’s estimate 
of his attainments, or to question that learning was one of the 
dominant passions of his life. The case of Ruloff shows how 
compatible the cultivation of philology may be with murder 
as a fine art. I think, on the other hand, that, especially in 
the matter of the famous defence, much uncritical appreciation 
has greatly exaggerated the erudition and profundity of Aram’s 
literary performances. The Gentleman’s Magazine, and one or 
two books lent to him in prison, constitute Aram’s authorities 


Vii 


PREFACE. 


for his address; and in two instances, at least, his statements 
are entirely inaccurate. 

“Tf we set aside his achievements in poison,” wrote Oscar 
Wilde of Wainwright, “what he has actually left us hardly 
justifies his reputation. . . . W.C. Hazlitt was of opinion 
that his love of Art and Nature was a mere pretence 
and assumption, and would have denied to him all literary 
power. This seems to me a shallow, or at least a mistaken, 
view. The fact of a man being a poisoner is nothing against 
his prose.”’ ; 

These remarks, which seem to me true of the murderer of 
Helen Abercrombie, may equally be applied to Eugene. That 
he committed murder is a fact impertinent to the question of 
his eminence as a scholar. It should neither factitiously 
enhance nor be suffered to extinguish what little he certainly 
strove to do towards the advancement of philology. After all, 
however, it is his crime, and not his learning, which has 
really focussed interest upon him, and it is to explode the false 
current notions, so widely disseminated about that, which has 
been the main object of this book, justified, I hope, by the 
fresh evidence adduced from the records. ‘No _ historical 
decision,’’ says Motley, ‘‘ is final; an appeal to a more remote 
posterity, founded upon more accurate evidence, is always valid ; 
but when the verdict has been pronounced upon facts which are 
undisputed, and upon testimony from the criminal’s lips, there 
is little chance of the reversal of the sentence.”’ 

That testimony exists in Aram’s case, and a considered 
judgment can hardly differ from the conclusion reached at the 
time, so much at variance with more recent opinion. Yet so 
hardly do men cling to the romantic rather than the real that, 
just as the Cenci legend sprang up, in spite of Prospero 
Farinacci’s avowal at the time, that there was no ground for his 
appeal to Clement VIII.’s mercy on behalf of Beatrice, and 
has survived Bertolotti’s complete exposé of her abandoned 
character, so futurity will continue to cherish the memory of an 
Aram, solicitous even for the worm upon the footpath and foully 
done to death on the sole evidence of a perjured rascal by a 
bloodthirsty Jeffreys of a judge. ‘To whitewash the 
scoundrel,’’ says Mr. Charles Whibley, ‘‘is to put upon him 
the heaviest dishonour.’? Let us do Aram no such disservice— 

vu 


., PREFACE. 


let him appear as what he was—as the man his contemporaries 
knew—in murder a finished artist, in philology a true pioneer, 
genuine scholar, and genuine rascal! In this endeavour to place 
before the world the real facts, hitherto denied it, I have been 
much assisted by the valuable suggestions of several corre- 
spondents, and I must expressly thank Messrs. Horace Bleackley, 
J. W. Scott, J. W. Woolstencroft, and Alfred Ela, of Mass., 
U.S.A., for indicating some of the less obvious sources of 
information. I regret that, death having overtaken the Rev. 
W. C. Boulter, whose name is familiar to all readers of “‘ Notes 
and Queries,’’ I cannot take this opportunity to convey to 
him my thanks for placing his extensive bibliographical 
knowledge at my disposal. To Mr. E. M. Beloe, of 
King’s Lynn, my especial thanks are due for the loan, not only 
of a curious collection of Aramzana, but for that of the collection 
formed by the late Rev. F. W. Joy, including the autograph 
letter of Aram, here reproduced. Lastly, I desire to acknow- 
ledge the courtesy of Mr. Scargill-Bird, Deputy Keeper of the 
Rolls, in permitting me to photograph the records, and of 
Professor Keith, M.D., LL.D., in permitting me to photograph 
the cranium of the murderer, in the R.C.S. Museum, and for 
his valuable report on what remains of the victim. 


ERIC R. WATSON. 


KEY TO ABBREVIATIONS IN THE 


FOOTNOTES. 
“*Y, P.” = ‘ York Pamphlet ”—Anon. 1759. 
**Mem.” = ‘‘The Memoirs of Eugene Aram, by N. Scatcherd, 2nd ed. 


1838. 


SSGlsi¥’ ‘Gleanings after Eugene Aram,” by N. Scatcherd, 1836. 


[For particulars of these and of other works referred to in the Notes, 
see the Biography in the last Appendix. ] 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 
Chronology of the story of Aram, _ - - - - - é Ses ay 


Cuaprter I. 


Introductory and bibliographical, - - - - Sm 3 1 


Cuaprer II. 


Parentage and early life of Aram—his marriage and removal to 
Knaresborough—his acquaintances there—the plot—disappear- 
ance of Clark—Aram absconds, - - - - : - - 7 


CHAPTER III. 


Aram’s life in London—his strange courtship and its abrupt end 
—various employments as tutor—an alleged visit to France—he 
copies Acts of Parliament—Usher at Lynn, - - - - 23 


CHaprTer IV. 


Aram’s life at Lynn—Lynn society in 1758—the Grammar School— 

a classical curriculum—Aram’s scholars and acquaintances 

there—the alleged attempt to rob the Master—an unfounded 

“ charge—Aram and the sex—a mysterious female—his solitari- 
ness and oddities—his recognition and arrest, - - - - 30 


CHAPTER V. 


The finding of a body on Thistle hill—John Theakston holds an 
Inquest—verdict thereat—a second Inquest on the same corpse 
on the same day—verdict—William Thornton takes informa- 
tions and arrests Houseman—the duties and functions of an 
xviii. century Justice—inquisitorial methods—Houseman’s two 
examinations—the remains discovered in Saint Robert’s Cave— 
the final Inquest and verdict, - - - . . - - 45 


CuHarrTerR VI, 


Arrival of Aram at Knaresborough—his personal appearance— 
meeting with his wife and family—Sally Aram—an 
untrustworthy anecdote—Eugene is taken to Thorneville and 
examined by Thornton—his disingenuousness and agitation— 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 
taken back and re-examined——arrest of Terry—his self-possession 
—his committal to York Castle—and examination—Aram’s 
piteous letter to Collins—reports in the Press, - : - - 56 


Cuapter VII. 


Letters from prison—Aram exploited by the booksellers—Houseman 
becomes an evidence-for the King—the dilemma of the Crown 
—Aram selected as the victim—reasons for this choice—practice 
ag to wives’ evidence in criminal cases—Aram composes his 
‘‘Defence”—the assizes commence—the judges and counsel— 

a true bill found against all three—the witnesses for the prosecu- 
tion—the prisoners put themselves upon their country, - - 68 


Cuapter VIII. 


The cause list for Friday, 8rd August, 1759—a good day’s work— 
character of William Noel and of Fletcher Norton—the 
prisoners presented to their jury—good and lawful men—George 
Mason tried—trial of Houseman—practice as to King’s evidences 
—some absurd errors—he is acquitted—Eugene Aram is put to 
the bar—his indictment—quaint formalities—opening of the 
Crown case—the evidence—Houseman in the box—did Aram 
cross-examine ?—other witnesses—Aram called on for his defence, 74 


Cuaprer IX. 


Eugene Aram’s defence—did he compose it? - - - 


CHAPTER X. 


The effect of Aram’s address—its singularity—a critical estimate of 
it—favourably noticed by writers on medical jurisprudence 
—probable impression produced on Noel—James Allan Park, J. 
on Thurtell’s defence—Noel’s summing up—the verdict—Aram 
to be hanged and dissected—the sentence altered—evidence 
from the records—the practice of the times—Terry’s acquittal— 
true story of the murder unknown—remains subsequently 
found in the cave—did Aram murder others ?—Ruloff—close of 
assizes, : - : - - - - - - : - 100 


Cuapter XI. 


Aram’s last hours—his letters and fragment of autobiography—much 
of the latter suppressed—the influence of Iles—Aram’s 
impenitence and hardness—reception of his wife—desires the 
sacrament of Collins—his ‘‘confession”—attempts suicide— 
his execution and gibbeting—fate of his skull and remains— 
vicissitudes of his family—Houseman’s hostile reception—his 
miserable existence and death—traditions of Clark and of Iles 
—extinction of their families,  - - : - - - - 116 
xii 


CONTENTS. 


CHapTEeR XII, 


Aram’s literary remains—the papers found in his cell—his want of 
religion—his ‘‘swan song”—other poems—prose pieces—esti- 
mate of his place as a scholar—mystery of his story and character 
—compared with others—had he a fair trial ?—unique nature of 
it—his impenitence—a characteristic of murderers—Fitzjames 
Stephen and Lord Campbell on the sig les aa ga Vv. 
posterity—conclusion, - - - - - : = 


APPENDICES. 


APPENDIX I, 
Transcripts of MSS. in the Record Office, - Se eee ee 


AppEnpDIx II. 
Extracts from the Press, 1744-1759, - = : E : x 


Appenpix III, 


Phrenological observations on the skull of Eugene Aram with an 
account of its history since 1759—report of Professor Keith upon 
the skull of Clark, - - - - - - - - . 


Appenpix IV. 


Aram’s autobiographical letter, - - - = . f 


APPENDIX V. 


Prose remains and poems of Eugene Aram, - -~— - tees 


APPENDIX VI. 


The Bibliography of Eugene Aram, - -~ - - 3a ee 


ADDENDUM. 
The Case of R. v. Goldsborough, eee : : 2 E ‘ 


CORRIGENDUM. 


Eugene Aram’s lantern, - : Z - = ‘ : d z 


PAGE 


130 


149 


169 


175 


181 


207 


220 


221 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Eugene Aram, - - = 

St. Robert’s Cave, - - - 

Plan of Knox’s House, - 
Inquisition, - - - : - 
Page of Aram’s Second Examination, 


Letter written by Aram, = : 


Page from the Northern Circuit Minute 


Book, 


Page from the Northern Circuit Gacl Book, 


Eugene Aram, - - - - 
The Cranium of Aram, - - - 
Part of parietal bone of Clark, - 
Playbill of ‘‘ Eugene Aram,” - 


Frontispiece 


facing page 21 


38 
55 
60 
64 
72 
110: 
162 
178 
180: 
206. 


Chronology of the Story of Eugene Aram. 


1704 —Eugene Aram born at Ramsgill and baptised at Middles- 
moor on 2nd October. 


1710 —Eugene Aram removes to Skelton, near Newby. 


1718 —Sir Edward Blackett dies, and Eugene shortly after goes 
to London as clerk to Mr. Christopher Blackett. 


1720-1—Eugene Aram returns to Ripon. His father, Peter, 
moves to Ripley, entering the service of Sir J. Ingleby. 


1731 —Eugene Aram, some years established as schoolmaster at 
Gouthwaite Hall and Ramsgill, marries, on 4th May, 
Anna Spence. 


1734 —Eugene Aram removes to Knaresborough, as steward to 
Mr. W. Norton, and soon opens a school. 


1744-5—Daniel Clark leaves Aram’s house with Aram and House- 
man and a strange man about 11 p.m. on the night 
of 7th February, and is last seen by W. Tuton at 
3 a.m. next morning. 

1745 —Eugene Aram in April leaves for London. The exact 
course of his movements is uncertain for several 
years. 


1757 —Eugene Aram leaves London and goes to King’s Lynn in 
December. 


1758 —Eugene Aram is on 14th February appointed usher at 
the Lynn Grammar School. 


—-Thompson discovers remains on Thistle Hill on Ist 
August, and on the 3rd finds the rest of a skeleton, 
which is examined on the 4th by two surgeons. 


—On 12th August the two inquests are held on this 
skeleton. 


—Houseman arrested on the 14th August, and examined | 
on that day, and again on the 15th. 


—On the 17th August the body of Clark is found in St. 
Robert’s Cave by Houseman’s direction, and the 
inquest thereon is held on the 18th August, when 
Aram and Houseman are pronounced guilty of Clark’s. 
murder. Aram arrested at Lynn about 19th. 

xv 


CHRONOLOGY OF THE STORY OF ARAM. 


1758 —Eugene Aram examined at Thornville on the 21st 
August, and lodged in York Castle, where on the 26th 
August Terry is also contined. 


1759 —3rd March—Commission Day of York Lent Assizes. 
On the 10th Sir M. Foster makes an order for the 
prisoners’ continuance in gaol. By 2nd June, if not 
earlier, it is determined that Houseman shall turn 
King’s evidence. 


,»» —Hugene Aram is tried at York before Noel J. on the 3rd of 
August, found guilty, and hanged on the 6th and 
gibbeted on the 7th. His trial first published on the - 
16th. 

1777 —Eugene Aram’s claims as a scholar recognised in Kippis’ 
“ Biographica Britannica,” and in 1784 in Adelung’s 
German “ Lexicon.” 

1829 —‘The Dream of Eugene Aram,” published in the ‘‘ Gem.” 

1831 —Bulwer’s novel, ‘‘ Eugene Aram,” appears. 


1832 —Eugene Aram’s debut on the stage at the Surrey on 
lst February. Mr. Elton as Eugene. 

1873 —Eugene Aram played by (Sir) Henry Irving at the 
Lyceum on 19th April. 


1902 —Eugene Aram’s most recent appearance on the stage in 
England at the Avenue in “After All” on 15th 
January. Mr. Martin Harvey as Eugene. 


xvi 


EUGENE ARAM. 


CHAPTER I. 
Introductory and Bibliographical. 


Eveernz, Eugine, otherwise Eugenius Aram, was, as all the world 
knows, executed on the 6th of August, 1759, for a murder com- 
mitted on the 8th of February, in the year 1744-5. 

From that time ever since, through succeeding generations of 
men, his genius and his fate have engaged in turn the interest 
and activities of minds, distinguished in almost every depart- 
ment of knowledge. The historian has paused in his narrative 
of plots and policies to tell the hapless scholar’s fate. |The 
poet has moved millions by his matchless realisation of the 
long agony of apprehension, which throughout fourteen years 
never forsook this “man of solitude and mystery.’’ The well- 
remembered actor has recited, with inimitable intensity, the 
poet’s story of the crime, and has been the protagonist in a 
tragedy written around and called after Eugene Aram. The 
novelist Las made familiar to two hemispheres a character 
which, but for his romance, might now be scarcely more than 
the shadow of a name to many. The Queen herself was 
absorbed by the ghastly tale, and pronounced it ‘‘ fearfully 
interesting.’’! The jurist, the professor of forensic medicine, 
the antiquary, and even the phrenologist have taken up the pen 
to expatiate upon the case of Aram in the light of their several 
sciences and professions. 

In the magazines and periodicals, from 1759 until the present, 
a host of Gigadibses has adumbrated “the extraordinary story 
of Eugene Aram.’’ Yet the true history of the murder of 
Daniel Clark has never until now been published. Generation 
after generation of writers has been content to take the facts 
from those meagre and hasty compilations which appeared 
within a few days of the trial, and, albeit condemned at the time 
by the Gentleman’s Magazine, have ever since supplied a legion 
of sciolists with arguments to prove that Aram fell a victim to 
a judicial murder, or was, at least, executed after a very unfair 
trial upon wholly inadequate evidence. To dispel such notions 
is one of the objects with which this monograph, based upon 
original research, has been undertaken. 

No wiser maxim than Coke’s favourite saying, ‘‘ Melius est 


1 Hsher—‘‘ Girlhood of Queen Victoria ” (1912), ii., 83. 
A I 


Eugene Aram. 


petere fontes, quam sectari rivulos,”’ can guide the investigator 
in such a task, and in the forefront of my authorities I place 
those manuscript records in which are contained the original 
depositions and the prisoners’ own examinations, together with 
much other matter extracted from the gaol and minute books 
and miscellaneous papers of the old Northern Circuit. From 
these records have, for the first time, been transcribed the 
hitherto suppressed parts of Eugene’s examinations, the wholly 
unknown examination of Henry Terry, the evidence of many 
witnesses, such as Mary Bransby, Bryan Hardcastle, and 
Stephen Latham, whose very names have never before figured . 
in the story, and certain entries from the circuit books which 
establish facts hitherto uncertain—as, for instance, what 
became of Terry. 

Of less historical value than these, but still much more reli- 
able than some latter-day lucubrations, are the notices in the 
contemporary press, and certain reports of the trial, issued at 
the time, which bear evidence of being composed by persons in 
situations of advantage for ascertaining the truth. 

Of the journals of that day it is safe to say that not the 
slightest use has been made to illuminate the story by any 
previous writer, and the most singular of the contemporary 
pamphlets, that anonymously published at York in 1759, has 
been allowed to pass unnoticed, save by Norrisson Scatcherd, 
whose purpose, as an avowed apologist, prevented his dealing 
fairly with a work exhibiting so strong a contrary bias. In 
addition to these hitherto unexplored sources of information, I 
have very carefully collated all published matter relating to the 
story. The bibliography which concludes this work will show 
how various indeed are the authorities I have been led to 
consult for this purpose, and I may add that a perusal of them 
has only deepened my conviction of the necessity of setting forth 
the true history of a case long buried beneath the accumulations 
of baseless legends and obscured by the fantastic inventions of 
fabulists masquerading as purveyors of incontrovertible fact. 

The history of the bibliography may here be briefly sketched. 
From 1759 until the publication of Hood’s poem in 1829 there 
was a constant stream of reports of the trial. Many magazines 
printed accounts of it, and a multitude of pamphlets appeared. 
Of these pamphlets most became early out of print, but one, 
sold by Bristow in London, it is said, as agent for Ann Ward, 
of York, established itself as the standard version, and con- 
tinued to be reprinted, sometimes with, sometimes without, 
Aram’s literary remains, by a succession of Yorkshire publishers, 
of whom Ann Ward, Charles Etherington, and Ely Hargrove 
are the most familiar. Some editions differ in containing 
additional letters of Aram’s; but in general each is a mere 

2 


, 
Oe 


Bibliographical. 


reprint of its predecessor, archaisms of language and spelling 
being gradually modified as the eighteenth century merged into 
the nineteenth. 

A notable letter, dated from York Castle on the eve of the 
Lent Assizes, appears only in the sixth edition, and another, 
indicating Aram’s clear previous knowledge that Houseman 
was going to turn approver, was omitted from several, to the 
undoing of many superficial commentators. 

Hood’s poem and Bulwer’s novel appearing within a short 
period of one another, a remarkable revival of interest was 
manifested, and Aram enjoyed for a season a factitious fame, 
exceeding that of 1759 itself. Three so-called critical produc- 
tions marked this revival. The “‘ Memoir of Eugene Aram,”’ 
by Norrisson Scatcherd, first appearing in 1832, was followed 
by his “Gleanings after Eugene Aram” in 1836, and by a 
second edition of the “ Memoir’’ in 1838, containing valuable 
appendices. The third work indicated was the edition printed 
by M. Bell in 1832, and published by him at Richmond, York- 
shire. It was, I believe, reprinted in 1842. 

Something must here be said concerning Scatcherd and his 
singular volumes. Though described in the Leisure Hour. for 
February, 1885, as ‘‘a very respectable lawyer”’ (2.e., 
attorney), he was in fact educated for the bar, and the privately 
printed ‘‘ Register of Admissions to Gray’s Inn’’ (Hansard, 
1889) shows that Norisson (sic) Scatcherd, eldest son of Watson 
Scatcherd, of Morley, was admitted a student in 1799. It is 
uncertain if he was ever called to the bar. In William Smith’s 
“Old Yorkshire ’’’ (London, 1881) there is an account of him, 
with portrait, at pages 67-69, wherein he is stated to have been 
called in 1806. The law lists for 1805 and 1807 contain the 


following entry :— 
‘* Scatchard, Esq.—N. circuit.” 


The name does not thereafter appear, and, having regard to 
the difference of spelling, there might seem to be some doubt 
as to the identity of the two; but I cannot trace any other 
student of a like name, whence may be inferred our worthy’s 
call to the bar at some date in 1804. His works betray an 
ignorance of legal procedure and an inability to weigh evidence 
or to appreciate its tendency which almost exclude the possibility 
of any real membership of the profession. So maladroit an 
advocate is he that he leaves us with a far worse impression 
of his hero than we entertained before perusing his pages, and 
with the quaintest naiveté he relates anecdotes exhibiting Aram’s 
character in a sinister or sometimes a contemptible light. Of 
Bell I will merely say that, on careful examination, he is dis- 
appointing. True, he has the merit of annotating (sometimes 
3 


Eugene Aram. 


superfluously, at others inaccurately) Aram’s address and other 
passages in his letters and remains, but he has disingenuously 
borrowed from Scatcherd and some others under the pretence of 
conducting original research. His account of the trial, long 
pronounced the best, is faulty to a degree, and is largely based 
on an authority he does not acknowledge, the pompously named 
Grand Magazine of Magazines for August, 1759, while for the 
summing up he impudently cribs a paragraph straight out of 
Bulwer, without the tribute of quotation marks! 

To conclude the history of Aramiana, I may say that of 
articles in works of reference the number is legion; would that. 
their value equalled their voluminousness! But when I state 
that the abridged D.N.B. causes Aram to be arrested at “ Lyme 
Regis ’’; that Chambers’ ‘‘Book of Days’’ hangs him at 
Tyburn, London ; that the ‘‘ Encyclopzedia Britannica’’ discovers 
the bones at Thistle Hill in February, 1759; that Firmin-Didot 
has him arrested ‘‘lorsqu’il professait dans une maison & 
Lyon’? (in the D.N.B. it is ‘‘a private school at Linn,’’ which 
is not much better); that the American Cyclopedia makes 
Houseman testify that Aram ‘and a man named Ferry were 
the murderers ’’—the weaver never alluding to Jerry at all; 
that from the D.N.B. downwards nearly all conspire to say 
that Houseman appeared as the sole witness; that a minority 
of others alternates between making Anna Aram the chief 
witness against her husband and representing him as utterly 
“‘taken aback ’’? by Houseman’s evidence, and the latter as 
equally so by being questioned in Court about the murder 
(cf. W. Andrews); when, finally, I produce the last of the 
“cloud of witnesses’’ in the person of Bulwer’s latest bio- 
grapher, Mr. T. H. S. Escott, with his amazing statement that 
“the storys of Eugene’s relations with the Lester family was 
taken word for word, fact for fact, from the notes of James 
‘Burney,’’ then a boy of eight (Aram in the novel is to marry 
Madeline)—scholars, at least, will unite with me in my plea for 
a worthier. relation of a famous cause, and in admiration at 
the poetic justice, which has subjected the memory of an exact 
and patient student to the indignity of literary scarification at 
the hands of men, for the most part, scholastically unworthy to 
unloose the latchets of his sandals. The nemesis of Aram was 
not the gibbet ‘‘ upon Knaresbro’ fforest ’’—it is the shocking 
outrage of slovenly sciolism, which makes up the bibliography 
of his life and crime! 

As compared with other great criminals of the eighteenth 
century, Aram will ever remain a figure enveloped in mystery ; 
this is mainly the consequence of his having escaped the honour 
of figuring in the State trials; partly it results from his own 
extreme reticence. Every source of information has been 


4 


The Romance of Reality. 


explored, and, if the results seem meagre, at least much 
has now come to light as to the real relation of the various 
parties to the story of the crime. Clark, Houseman, Terry, 
and Iles have all-received attention, no less than the prota- 
gonist himself. The use made, for the first time, of the con- 
temporary press, if it adds little that is trustworthy to our 
knowledge of Aram, well illustrates, on the other hand, the 
position of journalism at that date. Not a single newspaper 
report contains anything that the vilest sheet would now accept 
as sufficient. Several abound in errors, and until the pamphlets 
made their appearance no witness’s name was known except 
Houseman’s. Amazing, too, is the flagrant contempt of Court 
in the “ Letter from Yorkshire,” branding Aram, before trial, 
as a triple murderer! 

No attempt has been made in these pages to “idealise the 
real”—in Calverley’s phrase. Here is presented the Aram 
of history, not the “Eugene Aram, who, though a thief, a 
liar, and a murderer, yet being intellectual, was among the 
noblest of mankind ”—that ridiculous being who stalks through 
the pages of Bulwer and Scatcherd. Nor was there need to 
borrow from fiction, for, as it has well been said, “ The story 
of Eugene Aram is one of those singular events where real 
life seems more romantic than romance itself. It touches 
every chord that vibrates in sympathy with scenes of mystery 
and terror, and calls into play the deep-rooted principle of 
curiosity, which leads us to the study of great crimes, as 
aberrations of our moral nature. . . . The murder so long 
concealed, so unaccountably discovered—the scene at St. 
Robert’s cave, the trial, the defence—made it seem as if the 
genius of romance had snatched the pen from history for a 
moment to relieve her details by this frightful episode. Few, 
we should think, who have read the story but must have 
realised to their mind’s eye the schoolmaster in the Court at 
York—so subtle, so self-concentred, equal, as he says himself, 
to either fortune, watching with inward agony but outward 
calmness the progress of the evidence against him, and then 
rising to deliver that celebrated defence, which convinces no 
one by its sophistries, and yet leaves on the mind a mingled 
feeling of admiration and horror! No portrait of the kind 
can be more impressive than the real Aram of history. From 
the surface of common life his original character is projected 
in bold relief, a compact and consistent whole, his strong 
intellect playing into the hands of his evil principle, his 
courage enabling him to realise his plans, his constancy to face 
their consequences.’ 


2 Hdinburgh Review, April, 1832. 


Eugene Aram. 


The great public interest felt in the culprit at the time was 
not exaggerated by Bulwer. No sooner were the “genuine 
accounts” upon the market than the town was flooded with 
column upon column, in which “Mr. Eugene Aram” was 
exploited both as scholar and as scoundrel. 

To these a full reference will be found in the last Appendix, 
which, in other respects, aims at including all published works 
throwing any real light on the story. To include all in any 
way referring to Aram would be the mere affectation of 
pedantry. 

How it came about that, the transcendent interest in the - 
culprit notwithstanding, the York booksellers, who twenty years. 
earlier had provided the public with a shorthand report 
of the evidence against Turpin, suffered no fuller account of 
the trial of Aram to appear than those at which we shall 
glance, must remain shrouded in mystery. The machinations 
of Iles hardly seem to explain all. The deep-rooted contem- 
porary prejudice against Aram cannot be gainsaid. The 
figure of the lean and silent dominie remains in a measure 
inscrutable after all! 


CHAPTER II. 


Parentage and Early Life of Aram—His Marriage and Removal to 
Knaresborough — His Acquaintance there— The Plot—Dls- 
appearance of Clark—Aram absconds. 


Evcrnz Aram was born at Ramsgill, a little village in Nether- 
dale, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in 1704, and baptised 
at Middlesmoor on the 2nd of October.1 He is described as 
the son of Peter Aram, whom we know by his hapless child’s 
account to have been a gardener, a native of Nottinghamshire, 
and a man of uncommon abilities, as addicted to studies as 
Eugene himself, and the author of a poem on the beauties of 
Studley Park, thought worthy of being included in a work 
printed by Thomas Gent on the history of Ripon.? It cannot, 
however, be said that there is anything remarkable in the poem, 
save that it was the work of a gardener. “It is like a dog 
walking on his hinder legs; it is not well done, but you are 
surprised to find it done at all,” quoth the great Cham on some 
occasion, and these are very much our feelings on reading the 
rhapsody of the gifted horticulturist. 

This is an example of his poetic fire in an address to the 
sun— 


In what a sad, deplorable Estate 
Were man reduced to want thy Light and Heat. 


‘And thus does he take leave of the muse— 


Blest sure are they, who such Delights pursue, 
Which give them Health and make them happy too. 


Aram, in his letter to the Rey. Mr. Collins, gives particulars, 
“rather ostentatious than pertinent,” of the descent of his 
family, which was, at one time at least, considerable.? He had, 
as we learn from his and Terry’s examinations, two brothers, 
Stephen and Henry, the latter of whom at the date most 
material to our story, 1744-5, was apparently residing at 
Hull, though in what employment does not appear.* Peter 


1Gls. 49; Bell 49, citing baptismal entry. 

2«The Antient and Modern History of the Loyal Town of Rippon,” 
introduced by a poem by Mr. Peter Aram, &c. Printed by Thos. Gent. 
Cf. Davies’s York Press, 172 and Gls. 50. The Arams did not, pace 
Scatcherd, subscribe to this. 

3 Appendix IV., p. 

4 Appendix I., p. 


Eugene Aram, 


Aram entering the service of Sir Edward Blackett at Newby,® 
Eugene was removed at a very early age to Skelton, hard by, 
and thence, at about five or six years of age, to Bondgate, 
near Ripon, where he received the little education he ever 
had other than what he taught himself. At thirteen or four- 
teen he returned to his father at Newby, and, “with applica- 
tion intense and unwearied,” began those studies which only 
the hangman cut short. Peter Aram’s employer dying in 1718, 
Christopher Blackett, his fourth son, offered Eugene a place 
in his “accompting house” in London. The young scholar, 
then about sixteen, accepted it, and might have remained in 
that situation but for an attack of the smallpox, which occa- 
sioned his return home, where he renewed study in earnest. 
It seems probable that for some little time after Sir Edward 
Blackett’s death, the family lived at the house in Bondgate, 
and that it was to this house that Eugene repaired after his 
recovery from the smallpox about the years 1721-2. At about 
this time Peter Aram entered the service of Sir John Ingleby, 
or Ingilby, of Ripley, where he died—“ respected when living 
and lamented when dead.” Newby Hall was later put up for 
sale, being advertised in the London Hvening Post for 13th 
April, 1745, but the Arams had then long departed from it. 
It seems probable that at Ripon Eugene occasionally taught, 
if we may so conclude from a cryptic expression in his letter 
to Collins. 

After a while he was invited into Netherdale, his native air, 
and here at Ramsgill, his birthplace, he commenced as school- 
master. “Gaining some popularity as a teacher among the 
respectable farmers in the neighbourhood, he was accommo- 
dated with a room at Gouthwaite Hall, which is about two miles 
from Ramsgill, and entrusted with the education of their sons.”6 
Here he had under his care John Horner, Esq., of Hull, and 
his brother, George Horner, deputy-paymaster of the Forces, 
who subsequently resided at Haden-carr.? . . . Here, in 
addition to these, Eugene Aram was the first instructor of 
William Craven, D.D., whose father lived at Gouthwaite Hall.8 
There is a tradition that a family of the name of “Hanley” 
were also among his pupils here.9 At Ramsgill he taught, 
among others, a certain R. Iveson, who in later life described 


5 Fletcher oddly says ‘‘ that it is uncertain if Peter worked for Blackett 
or Sir William Ingilby.” ‘‘A Book about Yorkshire,” 319. 


6 Bell, postscript. 
7 Fletcher—‘‘ Pict. Yorkshire,” IV., 68. 
§ Bell, ubi supra. 
® Speight—‘‘ Upper Nidderdale,” 296. 
8 


Aram’s. Marriage. 


him as “a somewhat rigid disciplinarian, but a famous 
scholar.”10 

Whether it was before or after this time that he spent a 
month with John Adcock, vicar of Burnsall, to improve his 
education, there is no means to determine ; we only know that 
“at a very advanced age for that” he spent a short time with 
this highly eccentric personage. It was during this period 
“¢ Ramsgill that Aram became acquainted with the Greek and 

atin. 

By the middle of 1731 he had thrived sufficiently to take a 
wife, and on 4th May “Ujenius Aram” and Anna Spence were 
married, “after banns thrice published,” the bride’s brother 
Isaac espousing on the same day one Jane Feart. Anna was 
four years younger than her husband, having been baptised 
“ye Ist of March, 1708.” She was the daughter of Christopher 
Spence and his wife Ann; her mother was a widow in 1731; 
she had another brother, Abraham, who is referred to in the 
hitherto suppressed part of Aram’s second examination. She 
had also a sister, Rebecca.1! These names suggest a Jewish 
origin for the family, and Aram was alleged to have been in 
company with a Jew on the night of the murder; certain it is 
that he conveyed some of the goods of Clark to Abraham, for 
he himself admits it. 

The marriage took place at Loftus or Lofthouse, Anna’s birth- 
place, and a daughter was born to them prematurely, being 
baptised in the same church on January 23rd, 1731-2; she did 
not long survive, being buried on the 3rd of June following. 
She was named after her mother. A suggestion, cruel to the 
memory of the much-aspersed Anna, has been launched, that 
this was not Eugene’s child—on no better ground than that 
it may have been born in November, and so conceived out of 
wedlock !12 It, indeed, seems not unlikely that the Arams 
had some illegitimate children—a circumstance far from 
surprising in those of their class. There was other issue of 
the marriage, for the register of Knaresborough, according to 
our antiquary, contains the following baptismal entries :— 


Jan. 8, 1734—Anna d. of Eujenius Aram. Knar. 
Feb. 22, 1736—Henry, son of Eujenius Aram. Knar. 
Nov. 11, 1739—Elizabeth Daut. of—Aram. Knar.}3 


In addition to these, according to information gleaned by 


10 Bell, 54, n. 
1 W. Grainge—“ Nidderdale,” pp. 127-9; Bell, 49; Gls. 50. The date 
of her baptism is O. 8. (=1709 N. S.). 
12 J, M. Richardson in the Leeds Mercury, 11th November, 1899. 
18, W. Joy’s MSS. notes; Scatcherd gives the date of Henry’s birth as 
1737, in other words adopts the new style. Gls. 59. 
9 


Eugene Aram, 


Scatcherd, the Arams had two other sons, Joseph and Michael, 
and two other daughters, Sally and Jane, of whom the former 
was, according to two accounts, with her father at Linn when 
he was arrested.14 She was the only member of the family 
between whom and its unhappy head any affection appears to 
have existed. It might nowadays be thought significant that 
one of the children was, throughout his brief life, an idiot 
subject to fits. To this marriage, loveless though fruitful, 
Aram, in his closing moments, attributed “this infamy and 
this sentence,” a remark the little candour of which will in due 
time appear. ‘ 

In the midst of his literary pursuits and the labours of teach- 
ing he received an invitation from his “good friend William 
Norton” to go to Knaresborough, ever since associated with 
his name, and thither he repaired, he says, in some part of 
1734,15 and was “well accepted and esteemed.” His first 
employment is said to have been to officiate as steward of 
Norton’s estate, and this would explain how later on he came 
to be arrested for a debt due to his patron.}!® 

Established at Knaresborough, he commenced the Hebrew, 
and, though his own narrative significantly drops the veil 
over the period of his acquaintance with Clark, to resume with 
his return to London, we learn through the least friendly of 
the pamphleteers!” that, “through the general Estimation and 
Opinion Gentlemen had of his uncommon Abilities and Exten- 
sive Learning, he was always looked upon and treated in a 
more genteel and respectable Manner than People of his 
Station . . . generally are. His way of living and outward 
Deportment were most remarkably unblameable for many 
Years. He was most upright and fair in all Dealings and 
Transactions he had with other People, of great outward Tender- 
ness and Humanity. . . . In his own Profession, that of a 
Schoolmaster, he seldom, or never, punished those under his 
Care, without pretending great Reluctancy.” His school at 
Knaresborough was the second cottage, afterwards a brewhouse, 
up the White Horse Yard, Houseman’s backdoor opening on to 
the same yard. He did not, it seems, live there, but at a 
cottage in Church Lane, up a passage behind the house of a 
certain Mason. One of his pupils here was Richard Collins, 
son of James Collins, and nephew of the vicar of Knaresborough, 


M4 Where were the Arams living between the birth of Anna the elder and 
Anna the younger? It is conjectured at Ripon, and that some of the other 


children were born there. Aram witnessed a will at Ripon on 5th June, 
1735. Inglis, p. 7. 


15 Anna the second was baptised on 8th January, old style, ¢.e., in 1735. 


16 «« The most extraordinary case of E. A.” at p. 182, See Appendix V., 
pian 8 ; 


7 The anonymous York Pamphlet. 
10 


Domestic Differences ot the Arams. 


a worthy who plays his part in the closing scene of our story. 
This nephew in after years pointed out the schoolhouse, when 
it was occupied by one Mitchell, a hatter, who had served 
apprentice to Francis Moor, hatter. one of the constables who 
apprehended Aram at Lynn. That Aram’s was a mean school 
appears from the fact that there were but two thatched rooms, 
with no fireplace.18 

Of Aram’s domestic life, the little that is known represents 
him in a very indifferent light. “ Aram was a very proud man, 
who thought himself so far above his wife that he always 
shunned her in the street, and did not speak to her if he met 
her in public.”!9 “One of the artifices which Aram employed 
to torment his wife . . . iscurious. He would, for instance, 
dress up a shapely boy in female apparel, and contrive that his 
counterfeited attentions to the fine girl should catch the view 
of Anna. It may well be imagined how much these mutual 
jealousies contributed to the welfare of either party.”2° 

The epithet “mutual” demands an explanation. After his 
conviction Aram put forward the excuse that he suspected his 
wife’s relations with Clark. Of this there is not the slightest 
evidence. Clark, a weedy, stammering, “ pock-broke” youth 
of twenty-three, was married shortly before his murder to a 
young woman of property. Anna Aram was no longer young, 
had borne eight children and reared them, and had, on 
Scatcherd’s own showing in the above passages, been treated 
by Aram with studied neglect, coldness, and cruelty. Lytton 
“put wholly out of question the excuse of jealousy, as unsup- 
ported by any evidence.” While I cannot agree with him that 
Aram never put it forward, I prefer to accept contemporary 
opinion “that it is greatly to be suspected, it being at the 
expense of an innocent, industrious, poor woman, whom he ever 
treated in an infamous, inhuman manner.” 

It now remains to introduce upon the scene the known con- 
federates of Aram in the plots which led to Clark’s undoing. 
Daniel Clark, or Clarke, was a cordwainer, or, as we should 
now say, shoemaker of Knaresborough, the eldest of three 
brothers, of whom the other two were Joseph and Robert.?1 


18QJs, 20-1. That Moor was a hatter appears from his recognisance. 
Young Collins had a sister, who on 3rd January, 1758, married the Rev. 
Mr. Lamplugh ; she is described as ‘‘a young lady of beauty, merit, and 
fortune.” The Cambridge Journal, 7th January, 1758. This description 
of the lady was what in law is called ‘‘common form.” The fair were 
always thus thrice blessed. 

19 Gis. 22. 

20 Mem. 12. 

21 Js, 22. Andrews in his ‘‘ Historic Yorkshire” describes Clark as a 
travelling jeweller, an error possibly derived from the Grand Magazine 
of Magazines, which much exaggerates his dealings in jewellery. All legal 


documents describe him as cordwainer or shoemaker. 
II 


Eugene Aram. 


He was about twenty-three years of age, pale and ‘“‘ pock- 
broke,’’ about 5 feet 6 inches to 5 feet 8 inches high, and had 
a very bad stammer.22 He was doing well in business, his 
trade increasing, likewise his apprentices, when he decided to 
marry, and was successful in his suit with a young woman 
named Foster.23 She brought him, for persons in their con- 
dition, a considerable fortune, variously estimated at from 
£160 to £300, and that he was in comfortable circumstances 
appears from the fact that he kept a horse at a livery stable. 
His widowed mother seems to have lived with him, and he 
probably became acquainted with his murderers through their - 
living in close proximity to Philip Coates, who had married 
Clark’s wife’s sister, and belonged to a rank in life rather 
superior to theirs.24 Clark and Aram had one taste at least 
in common—a love of gardening, but while the apologist sees 
in this an excuse for the undoubted intimacy between the 
scholar and the cobbler, Hargrove represents this community 
of interest as having displayed itself in the systematic ran- 
sacking of neighbours’ gardens for flower roots.25 It seems 
probable that Clark, in his humble way, shared Aram’s taste 
for books. Pope’s ‘‘ Homer,’’ in six volumes, and a two-volume 
edition of Chambers’s dictionary were among the articles adver- 
tised as missing after the disappearance of Clark, and it is 
significant that we find the name of Cesar Ward, the well- 
known York bookseller, among those offering £15 for the 
recovery of “‘ large quantities of goods, viz., . . . books— 
and no question asked.’’26 It is certainly strange that none of 
these books seem to have been found upon the search of Aram’s 
house on or about the 10th of February, 1744-5. 

Richard Houseman, the only figure in the story besides Aram 
to have been drawn in any detail by the generality of pens, 
was a man of precisely Aram’s own age, being born and 
baptised in 1704;27 he is variously described, according to 
the writers’ bias, as ‘‘remarkable for his open, free and 
inoffensive disposition. . . . one of the utmost humanity 
and tenderness,’’28 and as a ‘‘ big, broad-shouldered, square 


2 York Courant, 12th March, 1745. 


Gls. 22. The Y.P. says she was Hannah Olding, daughter of an 
exciseman. 


*4He is generally described in the legal documents as a gentleman, a 
word of specific meaning in law. He is once described as a yeoman, as 
was Aram, a condition inferior to the other. Scatcherd says he was an 
attorney, but this is very doubtful. 


10th Edition, p. 47; also Kendrew’s Edition, p. 36. 
76 York Cowrant, 12th March, 1745, 

27 Gls. 59. 

SD eed Een ON 


12 


Aram’s Confederates. 


knave with a malevolent, sulky, downcast loos, of repulsive 
aspect ’’—“‘the real picture of a murderer,’ and of “a 
character well suited to his looks.’’?29 He was bald, and wore 
a brown wig. On the night of the murder he was without 
a wig, and borrowed a handkerchief of Mrs. Aram to tie about 
his head. | When he returned this, the good woman espied 
a drop of blood upon it about the size of a shilling.30 By 
trade he was a heckler, flax-dresser, or ‘‘ linning-weaver,’’ an 
occupation very common in his neighbourhood, which also 
boasted a remarkable number of cobblers; four at least are 
concerned in our story. 

Of Henry Terry we know little, so that most published 
accounts either ignore him altogether or follow Bulwer in the 
common error of saying that what became of him is unknown. 
Scatcherd and the York pamphlet are well-nigh alone in devot- 
ing any space to his case, and his examination, which curiously 
confirms Aram’s in impeaching Iles, now sees the light for the 
first time, and it appears that a true bill was returned against 
him by Sir Cecil Wray and the grand jury, upon which he 
pleaded not guilty, and was acquitted. He was an ale draper, 
a word defined in Bailey’s dictionary as a humorous name for 
a seller of malt liquors, but in Yorkshire, at least, it was at 
this time a proper and legal designation of a publican.3! He 
had a brother Robert, living at How hill, who was almost 
certainly privy to the crime, and was very probably present 
at its commission.32 Besides his employment as a publican, 
Terry seems to have acted as gamekeeper to “‘a most worthy 
baronet’? of the county of York (there were three on the 
grand jury which returned a true bill against him), and we 
learn from a singular passage in Aram’s second examination 
that he was something of a sportsman and in the habit of 
going out shooting. His inn was in the High Street, its sign 
the ‘‘ Barrel,’’ and it stood opposite the Crown Inn, a hostelry 
which survived in Scatcherd’s time.33 

Of Mr. Francis Illes or Iles, the most mysterious figure in 
this confederacy, yet less is known, but even here my 


29 Mem 17-18; Gls. 14, 15, 19-21, 61. 

3° Gls. 19; Anna Aram’s deposition, Appendix I., p. 159. 

31 A jury list between party and party contains the following for the 
panel for York City, 1759 :—29, George Davison, aledraper. 36, Robert 
Tenant, aledraper. 46, John Jackson, aledraper. Dr. Rimbault refers 
also to the words ‘‘aledraper” and ‘‘aledrapery” as occurring in ‘‘ Kind 
Harte’s Dream,” by Henry Chettle, 1592, and the Rev. F. W. Joy also 
to the ‘‘ Discoverie of the Knights of the, Poste,” 1597. 

82. Ag to the Terrys’ connection with the crime, see J. R. Walbron, at 
p. 222 of Surtees Society, volume 42. 

33QJs. 25. See Barnett’s deposition. 


13 


Eugene Aram. 


researches have added two facts to previous knowledge; one, 
that Iles was among those to advertise a reward of £15 for 
the recovery of the goods missing with Clark; the other, that 
Terry confirmed that part of Aram’s second examination, 
hitherto suppressed, which pointed to Iles as the ultimate 
receiver of a great part, at least, of the booty. He lived at Fish 
Hall, near the ‘‘ Long Flat,’’ was reputed a receiver of stolen 
goods, and I see much reason to agree herein with Scatcherd that 
he was, if not the promoter of a series of crimes, at least the 
chief person to benefit by their commission—a local Jonathan 
Wild, in fact.34 ; 

There is some reason to think that in 1744 the confederacy 
had promoted an earlier plot of robbery aad murder, a Jewish 
boy or young man travelling in jewellery being the victim; 
and it has with some probability been conjectured that the 
first discovered remains were his, and that Clark had as much 
concern in this crime as any of the others. It is also sug- 
gested that Aram was as deeply involved in this affair as he 
was in that for which he suffered.35 However that may be, 
the complicity of Houseman and Aram, at least, in the frauds 
now about to be explained, admits of no denial. Clark, it is 
said, was weak or unprincipled enough to be prevailed on to 
order a great many goods, in view of his approaching mar- 
riage, beyond what he could either use or afford to pay for. He 
was the better able to secure credit from his stable, if not from 
his increasing business as a shoemaker, and from the reports of 
his bride’s fortune, which, as commonly happens, was much 
exaggerated. It is a matter of doubt whether Clark had any 
fraudulent intention at all. If he really designed to go off, 
as Aram in his second examination asserted, he deliberately 
elected to sacrifice a thriving business, desert a newly-married 
wife about to become a mother, abandon all beneficial interest 
in his freeholds in Knaresborough, as well as the ownership 
of a horse he had, and sever all connection with kindred and 
friends. A man’s affairs must indeed be desperate for him to 
contemplate a measure so apparently in conflict with his 
interests and desires. Many accounts, especially that in the 
Grand Magazine of Magazines, greatly exaggerate the extent of 
Clark’s indebtedness. He is there represented as placing large 


34 Gls. 17; Mem. 15. 


* See curious facts supporting these conjectures in Y.P., pp. 45-6, and 
Gls. 63, referring to a MS. poem on the subject of this murder, by Thos. 
Gent. (Cf. also Bell, p. 54, for an anecdote indicating Aram’s privity in 
some dirty work about this time. In September, 1758, the papers boldly 
charged the confederates with the murder both of the Jew and his man! 
See Appendix II., p. 172. Years later a second body was found near the 
site where the first was discovered on Thistle Hill. Gls. pp. 62-3. The 
first body was that of a young person, as deposed by the surgeons. 


14 


Clark the Dupe. 


orders locally for jewellery and plate, as supposed agent for a 
London house having a large export order, on the terms of 
receiving credit, until himself paid by his principals, engaging, 
in a word, in what are now termed ‘“‘ long-firm frauds.’’ If 
this view of the facts, which is apparently followed by Mr. 
Andrews,°° be true, though there is nothing to support it, it 
all the more indicates other and maturer minds as guiding this 
stuttering youth of twenty-three in the labyrinths of crime. 
It is at variance, however, with the fact established by the 
York Courant’s advertisement—that it was local people who 
were the creditors, and were very unlikely to believe that a 
great London house would send large orders to a young cobbler 
of Knaresborough, for goods in which he did not deal—ne sutor 
ultra crepidam. 

If the story of the Jewish boy be put out of account, there 
seems no adequate reason to suspect Clark of any criminal 
designs at all. Millions of young men since time began have 
ordered goods on credit, for which they could not pay when 
the day of reckoning came, and tradesmen have never been 
backward in forcing their wares on inexperienced youths sup- 
posed more affluent than they are. Much of what he ordered 
might have been for the purposes of his trade, viz., the leather, 
of which Houseman possessed himself to the value of £45.37 
The other articles are of a nature that makes it easy to suppose 
their acquisition due to the extravagance, and, possibly, folly of 
a young fellow, flattered to be thought the highly substantial 
bridegroom of an heiress, and many are such (the bed and table 
linen, for example, the velvets and cambrics) as would be 
necessaries for setting up house or gratifying the taste for 
finery of a buxom bride of position enough to have a professional 
gentleman for her brother-in-law. As to the borrowed tankards 
and cups, what proof is there that Clark would not have held 
the feast and returned the plate, if callous villainy had not 
cut him short? A man who stammers, as has been observed 
by more than one medical writer, is rarely other than frank 
in his nature; the character of a chevalier d’industrie does not 
sit lightly upon one who can barely stutter out the truth, much 
less weave with glib tongue a specious string of falsehoods. 
The hue and cry after him when he was believed to have gone 
off proves nothing. So long as he was supposed alive, that 
he had fraudulently absconded was an inevitable inference from 
the absence of all portable property of his. As only £15 was 
offered for the recovery of the goods, it is a fair inference that 
their value, the loaned goods included, was not, at the highest, 
above £150—a sum well within his wife’s fortune, taking that 


36 «« Historic Yorkshire,” Chapter xxiii . 
37 Stephen Latham’s deposition, Appendix I., p. 152. 
15 


Eugene Aram. 


at the lower figure, given by Peter Moor; that fortune, in the 
absence of a settlement, very unlikely to exist in the case of 
a cobbler’s bride, would have passed absolutely to Clark, jure 
maritr, as the law then stood. Indeed the handing over, 
after demur, of the money to the husband, negatives the idea 
of any settlement. Add to this the facts that £45 worth 
at least of the goods so ordered consisted of leather, a 
natural commodity for a shoemaker, that Clark was seised 
of two freeholds, and was so far from appearing embarrassed 
to his intimates that his servant, Peter Moor, lent him £38 
but a few days before he disappeared, and Clark’s share in 
any criminal design becomes very problematical, resting as it 
does upon the assertions of his murderer, driven to account 
in some such way for Clark’s sudden vanishing and continued 
absence. Moreover, if Clark’s designs were fraudulent, it is 
difficult to see why he should have run the risk involved in 
disclosing them to several others. 

To return to the narrative, with whatever intent, Clark 
received from the neighbouring tradesmen both goods and 
loans of money and plate. Thus of Beckwith he had velvets, 
cambrics, and fifteen guineas; of Ward, a saddler, whips and 
leather ; of Iles, blankets, &. ‘‘ He even descended so low as 
to become a customer for a tea kettle,’’? quaintly says the 
York pamphlet, reminding us of that yet greater measure of 
infamy reached a few years later by Dr. Dodd, who at length 
(horresco referens) ‘‘ descended so low as to become the editor 
of a newspaper ”’ !38 

Other things he got included silver tankards, quarts and — 
pints (described in the old reports as ‘“‘tankards’’ and 
“* pints,’? showing that the more generous measure was the 
one generally called for at the ‘‘ Crown ’’ and the “ Barrel’), 
one silver milkpot, nine rings, eight watches, two snuffboxes, 
‘““Chambers’s Dictionary,’’ and Pope’s ‘‘ Homer,’’ with much 
bed and table linen, and linen and woollen drapery goods. He 
continued to buy on credit and to borrow up to the time of his 
disappearance, going about borrowing or trying to borrow plate 
for a supposed or actually intended wedding feast on the night 
of the 7th of February, 1744-5, when he was last seen alive. 
About nine o’clock on this night he left his home, telling his 
mother he was going to a place called Newell Hall to see his 
wife, who was there, the next morning.39 The same night he 
told his brother-in-law, Philip Coates, that he would be with 
him about nine the following morning. Clark did not keep 
this appointment, and Coates, on inquiry at his house, was 


38 See Knapp and Baldwin’s Newgate Calendar (1824-28), iii. 53. 
*° Dorothy Clark’s deposition, Appendix I., p. 150. 
16 


The Eve of the Murder. 


Be: he had gone to Newell. He called again the next day, 
and hearing nothing of him, went over to Newell, where his 
wife and her sister (Clark’s bride) expressed surprise that 
nothing had been heard of him. On further inquiry Coates 
ascertained that upwards of £200 in cash had disappeared, 
together with a great quantity of plate, but that Clark’s horse 
—so convenient to enable him to fly his country, had he had 
that design—was still at bait at Bryan Hardcastle’s stable.40 
Clark had been seen by many persons up till a late hour on the 
night of the 7th. At eight o’clock he came with Houseman 
to borrow a tankard from the house of Jonathan Locock, but 
the maid said her master was out. An hour later she saw 
them again, going into Kirkgate, in company with Aram, 
as she was in Jockey Lane.41 Between eleven and twelve 
o’clock Clark called upon one William Tuton, or Tutin, a 
mason, to leave some leather, rousing him by sending his 
apprentice. Later, ‘‘ about two of the clock,’’ as he told 
the magistrate, or “‘ nigh three,’’ as he told the coroner, Tuton 
was again visited by Clark, who called him out of bed. Look- 
ing out of the window, to speak to Clark, he saw, it being 
moonlight, Aram and Houseman standing near Clark’s cellar 
door, the former in a dark, the latter in a light coat. Upon 
being observed they withdrew to the end of the street, towards 
Knaresborough Castle Yard, where, Clark presently joining 
them, all three disappeared. While thus lurking in the shadow 
of the moon, than which there is nothing more impenetrable, 
either Aram or Houseman abstracted a pick belonging to Tuton, 
which he subsequently found and identified at Aram’s house 
two or three days later.42 

_ In about two days’ time after Clark’s disappearance it seems 
to have been assumed that he had absconded to evade his 
creditors. As early, at least, as the 12th of February he was 
advertised as missing, with a list of the goods he was supposed 
to have taken. This advertisement was repeated on the 19th, 
and on the 12th of March there appeared the following in the 
York Courant, a newspaper recently founded and owned by 
Cesar Ward and one Chandler :— 


‘*Wuerzas Daniel Clarke, of Knaresbrough, a thin 
pale looking pock-broke Man, about five Foot six or eight 


40 Coates’s deposition and information, Appendix I., pp. 153, 157. 


41 Mary Bransby’s deposition, Appendix I., p. 150. 

42 See Tuton’s information and his deposition. He had mentioned the 
pick on the 12th August at the first inquest. Elsewhere it is styled a 
mason’s hammer—quite a different tool, much blunter. Tycho Wing’s 
Almanack for 1745, the Lady’s Diary, and other ephemerides establish 
that the moon, full on the 5th, rose on the 7th at 7.58 p.m., ‘‘southed’’ 
at 1.22, and set about 8.30 a.m. 

B 17 


Eugene Aram. 


Inches high, aged about twenty-three Years, has a very 
great Impediment and Stammering in his Speech, went 
from Knaresbrough on Friday, the 8th of February last, 
and defrauded several Persons of large Quantities of Goods, 
viz., Silver-Pints and Quarts, Diamond and Gold Rings, 
Watches, Snuff-boxes, Books, etc., the Particulars of which 
may be seen at large in this Paper on the 12th and 19th 
of February last. 

‘‘ WHonver can give any account of the said goods (so as 
they may be had again) to Mr. James Collins, Mr. Francis 
Iles, Mr. William Clayton, or Mr. William Pullen, of 
Knaresbrough; Mr. Ward, Bookseller in York; or Mr: 
William Sandby, Bookseller, at the Ship, without Temple- 
Bar, London, shall receive Firrsun Pounps Reward for the 
Whole or in Proportion for any Part thereof, from any of 
the Persons above-mention’d: and no Questions ask’d.”’ 


After the way of the world, Clark’s previous fair reputation 
at once gave place to the settled notion that he was a fraudulent 
rascal. Bryan Hardcastle made but two days’ delay in handing 
over his horse to one John Holliday, who paid him for his 
keep. Philip Coates, as we have seen, searched Clark’s house, 
and found money and goods all gone. Those who had given 
Clark credit were now much put about, and Iles, Ward, Hawk- 
ridge, with others, among whom was Tuton, came to Aram’s 
house as that of a suspect of privity in the frauds and flight 
of Clark, and after a prolonged search discovered not only 
some blankets and the kettle, where such things might naturally 
be looked for, but velvets, cambrics, and woollens, together 
with stockings, buried in the garden. At Houseman’s was 
found some leather, which he pretended to have received from 
Clark as security for a loan, and also some whips, obtained 
from Ward, the saddler (the only Ward to advertise for Clark 
was the bookseller). A good deal probably lay concealed 
under his flax; yet about £45 worth was traced to his 
possession.43 The plate which had been obtained in such 
quantities, was never found. It was beaten out of shape, 
conveyed by the two Terrys, Henry and Robert, to How Hill, 
and thence over the border to Scotland, where it was disposed 
of.44 A tradition was long preserved that it was broken up, 
not at the cave, but at the house at How Hill, of which 
Robert Terry was the tenant, and this seems much more 
probable than Aram’s assertion—a necessary fiction to account 
for his presence at the cave on some other errand than 


* Stephen Latham’s deposition. 
4 Aram’s second examination 
18 


Iles the Fence. 


murder.45 Much of the plate, however, fell into other hands 
than the Terrys’—into those of a personage, always greatly 
enveloped in mystery, Mr. Francis Iles, who, as the York 
Courant, the York pamphlet, and others of the most unim- 
peachable contemporary sources go to show, played a con- 
spicuous part in the recovery of the goods, and in so doing 
incurred the lasting resentment of Aram and Terry, whose 
examinations, so far as they reflected on himself, he managed 
to suppress. ‘‘ We suppressed a part of his second con- 
fession, because it reflected on some characters that stand 
unimpeached.’’46 So wrote the compiler of the 1759 editions 
of Anne Ward and Bristow, and the discretion of subsequent 
editors suffered the veil to remain unwithdrawn with regard 
to the participation of Iles in the profits of the crime. The 
York pamphleteer was yet more disposed to champion Iles, 
whom he represents as most active and (we are invited to 
believe) disinterested in the recovery of the goods. Not until 
Scatcherd’s second edition of the ‘‘ Memoir’’ in 1838, was 
even a part of the suppressed passage in Aram’s second ex- 
amination given to the public, and only with the appearance of 
the present work is it disclosed in its entirety, together with 
examination of Henry Terry, of the existence of which previous 
writers seem to have been unaware. 

Iles certainly bestirred himself to recover the goods, and 
the anonymous pamphleteer tells us, being here confirmed by 
Aram himself, succeeded in obtaining a parcel which Eugene 
had conveyed to his brother-in-law, Abram in the Dales; he 
further paid the pedagogue £3 12s. as a proportionate reward 
for the discovery of more, but we are told that Aram pocketed 
the money, and made no attempt to restore the property.4? 

It is a conclusion, almost forced on the critical reader of 
the earliest authorities, that Iles possessed sufficient substance 
to procure the interest of local pens to shield him at the 
expense of his confederates, and having by threats and duress 
amassed not only a large part of the proceeds of this con- 
spiracy, but a considerable fortune—the fruits of other felonies— 
was able by his command of wealth to secure his own immunity 
and ensure the destruction of the confederate most likely from 
his courage and vindictiveness, to involve him in ruin, should 
aught bring to light the ghastly transactions on which they 
had been engaged. That a wealthy man might in the middle 
of the eighteenth century have interest enough to remain un- 


4 J. R. Walbron, F.S.A. ‘‘Memorials of the Abbey of St. Mary of 
Fountains,” p. 222, note. 

46 Cf. Bristow, p. 31. 

“Y.P. p. 35. 


Eugene Aram. 


harmed by the outraged law more than one melancholy instance 
has proved— 

In the corrupted currents of this world, 

Offence’s gilded hand may shove by Justice, 

And oft ’tis seen the wicked prize itself 

Buys out the Law 


Aram and Terry, while pee kene open to suspicion when 
shielding themselves, may be thought deserving of some credit 
when impeaching another, and both concur that Iles 
‘* possessed himself of Clark’s goods to a considerable extent,’’ 
and it is a probable conjecture that he was enabled to do this 
from some knowledge he had acquired and his threats of using 
it. Scatcherd, a strong partisan, it is allowed, represents 
Iles as a well-known receiver, and adds that Clark’s plate went 
to his house near the Long Flat, where, after his death, im- 
mense quantities were found.48 Some people believed him to 
have been the instigator of all the mischief which ensued, and 
that much booty passed through his hands. His house stood 
by the wayside, just at the town’s end, going to York; his 
property went to a spendthrift nephew,*? and the family became 
extinct, 

How many were concerned in the dark transactions of the 
night of the 7th—and there is strong reason to suppose that a 
fourth man, not Terry, shadowed the other three, to wit, Aram, 
Houseman, and Clark on the fatal journey to the cave— 
can now only be conjectured ;5° what is clear is that the most 
vehement suspicion fell on Eugene. On or about the 10th of 
February he was arrested on a mesne process, an obsolete civil 
proceeding, for a debt due, says Bristow, to one Norton, 
probably the patron on whose invitation he came to Knares- 
‘borough, and it may be in respect of money collected by him 
as steward and not handed over. He speedily procured his 
release by offering at once to discharge the debt, and producing 
at the same time—to the great astonishment of Stephen Latham, 
the officer who arrested him, and knew him to be very poor— 
upwards of a hundred guineas in gold and other large coin 
‘from his breeches’ pockett.’? This incident he neither 
explained nor denied at any time, merely saying in reply to 
justice Thornton’s questions that he ‘‘ does not recollect it.’” 
The production of the money, so far from allaying, naturally 
increased suspicion, and Aram was arrested on a warrant 
eranted by a justice of the peace named, according to Terry, 
Townend (or Townsend or Tancred), for a misdemeanour, in 


48 Gls. 17. 

49°Mem. 15. 

5° Y.P. p. 27. Houseman’s first examination, in the original, is full of 
prevarication about this person. 


20 


5 Fea a eR ae em Pot en eR ee 
i 


Phe 


ae 
2+ = 


se 


Cyfnowgsaspuy “wosuryiA “Si MQ 070Ud) 


‘Aep yueseid oY} 9B SB CABO SAIEqOY 49 jo 101IEIxXH 


Aram. Absconds. 


possessing himself of some of the goods fraudulently obtained 
by Clark ; but, the charge not being made out, he was dismissed 
and set at liberty. About this time, according to contem- 
poraries, he paid off a considerable mortgage on his house at 
Bondgate, which had come to him on the death of his father,5! 
and this statement has been so variously repeated in what 
appear to be independent accounts of the case of the year 1759, 
that it is difficult to resist the conviction that the mortgagee 
was a witness against him upon his trial. Scatcherd makes 
hereon the characteristically naif, not to say fatuous, sugges- 
tion that Eugene was enabled to pay off the mortgage by the 
aid of a legacy received under “the will of an old lady then- 
abouts.’’52 It is strange that so opportune a windfall escaped 
the capacious memory of the person most concerned to explain 
to the law his possession of unaccountable wealth soon after 
the disappearance of his victim. 

Aram continued some time longer at Knaresborough, with- 
out further molestation of any kind, but his character was now 
so stained by suspicion that it became imperative, apart. from 
the secret of St. Robert’s cave, which chance or a flood—a 
common occurrence—might discover, to tempt fortune anew 
among strangers. Accordingly, on a date not quite certain, 
with considerable stealth, and ‘‘ without acquainting any person 
with his intention,’ as the York pamphlet puts it, he left 
Knaresborough, proceeding first, if we can believe him, to 
““near Notingham, to be with some relations a few days”; 
though a tradition is preserved that he went first to Catcliffe, 
an obscure village near Rotherham,®? and it is not improbable 
that he remained within an accessible distance of his home for 
some little time, since Seatcherd tells us, on the authority of 
an eye-witness, Polly Powell, his next-door neighbour at 
Knaresborough, that at dead of night, by the pale glimpses 
of the moon, the lean form of the schoolmaster was seen to 
creep into the house of mystery in which such strange things 
had been doing for some time past.54 The object of this furtive 
visit was never disclosed, for Anna Aram denied all knowledge 
of it to the good gossip when taxed with it. 

Of Daniel Clark it remains to be said that he was advertised 
for, and ‘‘ all diligence used in order to obtain a discovery of 


51 When Peter Aram died is uncertain. In 1735 Peter and Eugene were 
respectively second and third subscribers to the ‘‘ Annales Regioduni 
Hullini” or History of the Royal and Beautiful Town of Hull, by Thos. 
Gent, sold by Ward & Chandler. The Arams did not subscribe, as has 
been said, to the History of Ripon. 

52 Mem, 35, n. 

53 Gls. 52, n. 

*4 Gis. 12. 

21 


Eugene Aram. 


him, but that not the least intelligence of him was ever 
obtained.’’55 The sole extant advertisement appears to be that 
already quoted. That he was alive somewhere, in hiding, was 
the belief of his relatives and friends; his mother refused to 
believe him dead, and his wife was of the same persuasion ; nor 
were they convinced to the contrary until the discovery of the 
bones where Houseman had indicated.5° Philip Coates gave 
a practical proof of a similar conviction by suing Clark in tres- 
pass on the case, when, the defendant not appearing, he was 
outlawed on a writ of ‘‘capias utlagatum’’ on the 20th day 
of October, 1746, on an inquisition taken by Henry Ibbetson, 
Sheriff of the city of York, at York Castle,57 and the Pipe Rolls 
from 1747 until 1832, when they ceased, record among the 
annual ‘‘Summonses of the Pipe ”’ directions to the Sheriffs to 
levy on the lands of one Daniel Clark, cordwainer, whose miser- 
able ghost thus haunted the Exchequer long after his mortal 
remains and those of his murderer had been mingled with the 
dust. In 1832 Clark owed arrears, the sum of which was 
precisely £638 6s. He then finally disappeared from the ken 
of the law. He left a posthumous child, of which his wife had 
been enceinte about a month when he disappeared; it died in 
infancy. Houseman, despite the fact that £45 worth of Clark’s 
leather had been traced to his house, by adroitness or by bluff, 
seems to have avoided the inconvenience of arrest; notwith- 
standing that ‘‘he increased in wealth surprisingly and to 
some gave great suspicion.’’58 Whenever the Nidd overflowed 
its banks, as was afterwards remembered, he would prowl dowa 
them, and was once observed by an old woman creeping out of 
St. Robert’s Cave, and then going to wash his hands in the 
stream. The general opinion subsequently was that he lived 
in a state of great alarm, fearing that every flood would expose 
the body of Clark.59 

Terry and Iles continued in the locality, and the publican 
was not the last to hear and to profit by any tap-room gossip 
concerning the fate of the vanished cordwainer. 


55 Coates’s information. 
56 Gls, 22 and Mem. 50. 


*” Pipe Roll, 20 Geo. II. The proceeding before the sheriff would be on 
a writ of inquiry as to damages. 

ey sepsis 

* Gls. p. 61. 


22 


CHAPTER III. 


Aram’s Life in London—His Strange Courtship and its Abrupt End 
—Various Employments as Tutor—An Alleged Visit to France 
—He Copies Acts of Parliament—Usher at Lynn. 


Arrivine in London, according to his letter to the Rev. Mr. 
Collins, about the 18th of April, 1745 (by a lapsus calamt 
Aram wrote 1744, the year ending on 25th March), ‘‘ where,”’ 
in the quaintly inexact language of his first examination, ‘‘ he 
resided publickly till he went to Linn,’? Aram began to make 
use of the money and effects of which he was now master in a 
manner more extravagant and suitable to his inclinations than 
he could have done in the country. According to a well-known 
authority, he soon disposed of such of his booty as did not 
consist of cash to a Jew.1 The York Pamphlet, which bears 
some evidence of having been compiled from first-hand informa- 
tion, now becomes our principal authority. 


“In short, he became the Gentleman, dressed well, and 
kept Genteel Company, to which he found easy Admit- 
tance. . . . Having left his Wife behind . . . he 
began to think of having a fresh one. . . . For this 
Purpose he singled out a fair one of a good Share of Beauty, 
genteel, and who carried the outward Marks of having a 
competent Fortune. . . . Here the wily Aram was, 
however, deceived. She, notwithstanding her outward 

~  Deportment, being no other than a Lady of Pleasure, and 
kept by a Gentleman of L—ds, whose Name we chuse 
rather to omit, than here mention it with such a Villain. 
Enamoured as he was, his Profusion in Dress and in 
Presents to the Object of his Flame, scarce knew any 
Bounds. . . . Being, as he daily was, one Afternoon 
on a Visit to drink Tea with his virtuous Fair 
the Gentleman, her Keeper, chanc’d to drop in. ae 
He was not wholly pleased at finding her so familiarly 
engag’d. Tea being just brought up, he however staid, 
behaving civil and complaisant to Mr. Aram during the 
Time. Aram’s Face, however, not being altogether a 
Stranger to him, he took his Leave, with a Resolution of 
returning the next Morning, and knowing of his suspected 
Lais, the Reason of his being there. He, pursuant to this 


The New Newgate Calendar, 1810. 
23 


Eugene Aram. 


Resolution, came and interrogated her . . . as to 
who, and what the Gentleman was, he found her with the 
Day before; whether she knew him; on what Account he 
was there, and other such-like Questions. To which the 
innocent Nymph ingenuously replied, That she, _indeed, 
knew not particularly who, or what he was; that his Name 
was Aram, and she believed a Gentleman, from the Appear- 
ance he made, as well as from the Quantity of Money, 
which she thought to be about three hundred Pounds, he 
one Day counted out before her, saying he had just been 
and received it of his Banker: As also from the many 
handsome Presents he had made her . . . adding 
further, That she supposed she shou’d in a small Time be 
forced to leave him to the Caresses of another Mistress ; 
for that Mr. Aram paid his Addresses to her in an honour- 
able Way. . . He answered her, That he shou’d be 
extremely glad to see her at any Time well provided for 
but that with Respect to the Courtship of her present 
Admirer, he wou’d advise her to be very cautious 
for that he knew him well, and instead of the Gentleman 
he appeared to be, he was in Fact as errant a Villain, as 
was upon the Earth. . . . He told her, if she fol- 
lowed his Advice and ask’d him what Countryman he was? 
Whether he had not lived at Knaresbrough in Yorkshire? 
Whether he did not know one Daniel Clark of that Town, 
and whether he was there in London or if he knew what 


was become of him?’’—the answers would convince her 
that there was something wrong.2 
““ Aram came to prosecute his Suit, and... . carelessly 


inquired who the Gentleman there the Day before was? 
She told him he was a Cousin, and a very good Friend of 
hers. She, in her Turn, begun by slightly asking him in 
what Part of England he resided; He answer’d he gener- 
ally spent a Month or Two in London every Year, but that 
his Estate was in Essex. . . . ‘Did you never live 
in Yorkshire, Sir, at a Place called Knaresbrough?’ she 
replied. At this he seemed a Little confounded, and began 
to hesitate, saying: No, he never lived there; that he 
had indeed been at the Place, sometimes for a few Days 
on Business. She here more plainly saw the Confusion 
he was under, and continued . . . by asking him 
whether he was not acquainted with one Daniel Clark, 
whether he was not with him in London or not, and 
what was become of him? Here his Confusion and visible 


* The grammar here becomes so defective in the original, that I merely 
give the sense of the concluding words of this sentence. 


24 


A Courtship Curtailed. 


Consternation . - . firmly convinc’d her that her 
Gentleman had some very cogent Reasons for setting her 
upon interrogating her Lover in the Manner he had. To 
the last Questions Aram replied in a most fault’ring 
Manner; That he never knew any such Man at Knares- 
brough and consequently cou’d give no Account of his being 
in Town or not; he had, he thought, indeed seen some 
such a Man advertised in the Papers, but who, or what he 
was, he knew not; and why shou’d she ask him about so 
low a Creature as a Shoemaker? Here he immediately 
found he had overshot himself and quickly recovering his 
Blunder, continued, ‘A shoemaker, I think, he was 
described to be in the Papers.’ She carelessly replied, 
She had no great Reasons for such her Enquiries, but was 
desired by the Gentleman that was there the Day before. 
‘He desire you, Madam,’ replied the still more con- 
founded Lover, ‘ Pray what Countryman is he?’ ‘One 
of L—ds,’ said she, ‘and he thought he was not un- 
acquainted with your Person ; but since it prov’d a mistake, 
there can be no great Matter in it.’ ”’ 

‘¢ The Mistake, if however of little Consequence to her, 
was not so to the conscious Aram. . . He, therefore, 
much sooner than common, took his Leave of his fair One, 
under a faithful Assurance of visiting her next Day.’’3 


The lady imparted to her patron the whole of what had 
passed, ‘‘ which on hearing, made him resolve to meet Aram 
there in the Afternoon, and have some further Discourse with 
him. But this the crafty Aram was aware of, for he never 
visited or came nigh his Beloved again, nor cou’d the Gentle- 
man, tho’ he made the most diligent Enquiry, ever find, or dis- 
cover the least tidings of our sham Essex Gentleman.”’ 

This strange story is not antecedently improbable. Whether 
the Lady of Pleasure deceived her Gentleman as to the strictly 
honourable nature of Aram’s addresses, as she did Aram as to 
her relations with the Gentleman, it were bootless to inquire. 
If he contemplated bigamy here, as I think he may have, it 
gives some colour to the supposition that years later, at Lynn, 
he was unscrupulous enough to pay his court to a young lady 
residing in the neighbourhood. It is a slight, internal circum- 
stance in confirmation of this story that the Gentleman of Leeds 
is represented as suspecting Clark to be in London with Aram, 


8 The York Pamphlet, pp, 38-45, a passage, upon which no subsequent 
writer has bestowed the slightest notice ; Scatcherd seems to be the only 
one acquainted with this tract, and he was too much of a partisan to 
indulge his readers with this strange glimpse of his hero’s ‘‘honestly 
laborious days.” 


25 


Eugene Aram. 


or in a situation known to him; were the incident merely the 
invention of the anonymous scribe of 1759, one would not 
have expected this touch to have been introduced into a 
narrative so artless. : 

After living in a prosperous manner for some time, our hero 
was once more under the disagreeable necessity of recommencing 
teaching, and he accordingly agreed “to teach the Latin and 
writing ’’ for the Rev. Mr. Painblanc in Piccadilly, and, he 
adds, “he, along with a salary, returned by teaching me French. 
. . . I remained in this situation two years and above.’ 
We are not surprised that, with his undoubted linguistic. 
ability and ‘continued application every night,” he ‘soon 
became a tolerable master of French.’”’ . . . ‘‘Some time 
after this,’’ he proceeds, ‘‘I went to Hays,* in the capacity 
of a writing master, and served a Gentlewoman there, since 
dead, and staid after that, with a worthy and Revd. Gentleman ; 
I continued here between three and four Years.’’5 At some 
time or other, in these first ten years of his life in London, 
Aram seems to have visited France. The authority for this 
is the curious letter now given at length. It is very doubtful 
if such a visit ever took place. It is hard to reconcile the 
statement that he “ acquired the language ’’ on this visit with 
the passage above, that he soon became a tolerable master of 
it under Painblanc. Further, it seems unlikely that one living 
as furtively as I am convinced Aram did, would have cared to 
court official inquiry into his identity by applying for a pass- 
port. Murderers, as observed by Sir James Stephen, are com- 
monly very great liars, and it is possible that a mere impulse 
of vanity, a trait of every criminal character, may have induced 
Aram to invent this story of foreign travel; for it behoved every 
fine gentleman to have made the grand tour, and Eugene had, 
in consequence, to make it, though but in the imagination. 
Neither in his letter to Collins nor in his first examination does 
he say anything about this supposed visit. The letter is as 
follows :— 


Dr. Sr. 

If that particular Acquaintance, if that Intimacy and Ancient 
friendship which have so long subsisted between us is not yet forgot ; 
if yet they have any influence, I know not whether I ought to be more glad 
to write or you to hear, many Years and many accidents have now past 
over me, but still with some advantage I hope both with regard to my 
circumstances and my abilities in Letters, My Scituations since I left you 


*Said to be Hayes in Middlesex, not in Kent. It is said that he taught 
in a boarding-school here, and the Biographical Magazine says it was 
kept by the Rev. Anthony Hinton, but this is an error. 

*The Rev. Anthony Hinton, of the Botanical Gardens, Chelsea, from 
whom we learn of Aram’s great humanity to worms! 


26 


An Alleged Visit to France. 


have been various, I was Tutor 3 Years to the sons of a ffamily of 
Distinction in Berks and in other Imployments of that kind 4 Years, with 
the money arising thence I went over into ffrance a Tour partly of curiosity 
and partly of profit in which I have visited Roan [Rouen, not Roanne, 
E.R.W.] Paris, &c., and even Blois and Orleans I acquired the Language 
which is now at once an extraordinary recom’endation and benefit to me, 
This you see has been Ye manner among thousand amusements in which I 
have disposed of my time, my observae’ons whilst abroad have neither 
been few nor I hope impertinent, their Performances with the Pen did not 
escape me but they appeared to me Labour’d painted and despicable,*I 
brought over a few not to imitate them I assure you Sr. but for Ye same 
reason our Sailors do Monkeys, In Town indeed are a few Masterly hands. 
and but a few Chicannene champions, pray reply in two or three Posts 
at farthest, otherwise I shall be gone and don’t direct for me but for 
Mr. Wm. ffisher in Milford Land in Ye Strand London 


I am Sr. Yr. hbe. Sert. 
E: Aram 


It has been conjectured that the addressee of this letter was 
either Norton or Collins, but whether it was directed to anyone 
at Knaresborough seems doubtful. ‘‘ My Scituations since I 
left you ’’ may refer to the very abrupt departure from Knares- 
borough or to the more open removal from Ripon, where Aram 
had, as we shall see, an occasional correspondent. One thing, 
at least, appears from the very cautious conclusion to this 
epistle—Mr. Aram was not living quite so “‘ publickly’’ in 
London as he wished upon his first examination to be believed. 
He does not tell his correspondent where he is going in ‘‘ two 
or three days,’’ nor the name of any one of those employers 
in those ‘‘Scituations’’? so various, and the only name he 
gives is that of an obscure personage, who, apparently for a 
consideration, allows the embarrassed to make use of his 
address as an accommodation one. 

Before going to Lynn, Aram had another employment—the 
severe drudgery of transcribing Acts of Parliament to be regis- 
tered in Chancery. These are Acts, for the most part 
private, formerly removed by certiorari to the Chancery and 
deposited in the Rolls Chapel, often several reigns after their 
enactment, in order to be exemplified under the Great Seal. 
Nothing enables us to fix the date when he was so engaged, 
but from his letter to Collins it would seem to have been his 
last shift, before a somewhat brighter prospect opened before 
him at Lynn. 


In Appendix II. of the ‘‘Memoir” is a communication, which a MS. 
note of Scatcherd’s in the B.M. copy states came from John James, F.S.A., 
purporting to identify, by their superior neatness, the transcripts made 
by Aram. James says that he found them after some difficulty ‘‘on being 
indulged with a look at the statutes at large.” These were never in the 
Rolls Chapel, and have nothing to do with the Acts Aram copied: these 
last are all on parchment, engrossed, and the only signature appearing on 
them is that of the Clerk to the Parliaments. They are in Gothic 
character. 

27 


Eugene Aram. 


To whose patronage Aram was indebted for his next situa- 
tion, as usher at Lynn, we are not informed. Advertisements 
of vacant usherships are far from infrequent in the old papers ; 
most probably he was one of several to present himself in con- 
sequence of some such alluring notice as the following :— 


‘* BoroveH or Apingpon—Ave. 10TH, 1758. 


‘* Wuerzas the Ushership of the free Grammar School of 
this Boro’, at the yearly Salary of £20, is become vacant 
by the resignation of the late Usher . . . ete.’’? 


A comparison of the salaries in Nicholas Carlisle’s ‘‘ En- 
dowed Grammar Schools’’ shows a variation in the usher’s 
emoluments between a minimum of £15 and a maximum of 
£30. In a private school advertisement I found a salary as 
low as £10. When Carlisle was compiling his work there 
‘was no longer any usher at Lynn. 

The British Chronicle, Lloyd’s Evening Post, and other 
early authorities inform us that Aram went to Lynn “ about 
the beginning of December, 1757’; it is important to fix 
the date, because of the charge, which will be examined, that 
he attempted during the Christmas vacation to rob the master 
of the school fees. Whatever was the exact date of his arrival 
in Lynn there is no reason to think that his connection with the 
school did not begin until the vacation was over. His appointment 
was subject to the confirmation of the Corporation of King’s Lynn, 
although subsequently the master was empowered to select his 
ushers independently.8 A congregation was holden on the 6th of 
January, 1758, at which certain business was done, and the 
next? was on the 14th of February, the proceedings at which, 
80 ag as material, are thus entered in the Corporation hall 
‘book— 


** Krne’s Lynn, GuinpHALu. 


‘““Ar a Congregation there holden, the 14th day of 
ffebruary, 1758, being the day for proclaiming the Mart.— 


“‘ Benjamin Nuthall, Esq., Mayor. 


“John Exton, Sir John Turner, Baronet, William 
Bagge, Edward Everard, Philip Case, and others. 


"The candidates were invited to attend on the 7th of September 
following, which helps to fix the date of the summer vacation—the 
materiality of which will appear. The advertisement is from Jackson’s 
Oxford Journal, 12th August, 1758. 

SE. M. Beloe, Lynn News, 18th June, 1898, 


*So I am informed by Mr. J. W. Woolstencroft, the present town-clerk. 
28 


Aram Appointed Usher. 


‘*“Mr. Knox having informed this House by Letter that 
he had dismissed John Birkes his late Usher, and had 
engaged Eugenius Aram in his stead, subject to their 
Approbation, the said Eugenius Aram is approved by this. 
House during the Pleasure and under the Control and 
Power entirely of the said Mr. Knox; and it is ordered 
that the Usher’s salary be paid to Mr. Knox during the 
Pleasure of this House.”’ 


During all these years Aram had continued to be seised of 
his house in Bondgate, Ripon. Most probably he had mort- 
gaged it again up to its full value as a security, for he was 
clearly destitute of means for his defence when arrested, and 
could procure neither witnesses to character, nor counsel, nor 
attorney. Scatcherd has investigated his connection with the 
Bondgate property, but, with his usual carelessness, has only 
made confusion worse confounded. 

Appendix vil. of the ‘‘ Memoir ’”’ has the following :— 


*« Extract from the Town’s book of Knaresborough re- 
garding certificates :— 


‘For Eugenius Aram, from Aismonderley, with Bond- 
gate and Liberty of Ripon. Granted 12th of May, 1752.’” 


_ In the ‘‘Gleanings’’ he writes, at p. 52— 


‘* Extract from the Town’s book of Knaresborough re- 
tract the following :— 


‘©12th of May, 1732. For Eugenius Aram, etc.’” 
(ut supra to the word “‘ granted ’’). 


“* Rugenious. Airham,”’ in a list of owners and occupiers of 
houses in Bondgate, entitled to an average rent, appears as the 
31st name, and ‘‘on Mr. Humphrey’s plan of Ripon he stands 
as No. 922, and seems to have been the owner of a cottage, 
and entitled in respect thereof to the yearly sum of two shillings 
and sevenpence halfpenny, besides a cattlegate.”’10 A letter 
of Aram to an unknown correspondent in Ripon, dated from 
York Castle, 1st March, 1759, indicates that he had long been 
a stranger to that town. 


10 Gls, 51-2. The B.M. copies with Scatcherd’s MS. corrections do not 
put these dates right. One is certainly wrong; in 1732 Peter was the 
owner of the Bondgate property. Scatcherd gives the date of the 
appointment as usher as 14th July! 


29 


CHAPTER IV. 


Arams Life at King’s Lynn—Lynn Society in 1758—The Grammar 
School—A Classical Curriculum—Aram’s Scholars and Acquain- 
tances There—The Alleged Attempt to Rob the Master—An 
Unfounded Charge—Aram and the Sex—A Mysterious Female 
—His Solitariness and Oddities—His Recognition and Arrest. 


Our knowledge of Aram’s life for the next few months is 
happily less fragmentary than might have been expected. 
Linn Regis, the modern King’s Lynn, a seaport strangely con- 
founded by some of our ‘“‘ authorities’’ with Lyme Regis, in 
Dorsetshire, was not only a centre of commercial activity, with 
two markets a week, but was favourably distinguished by its 
ancient and excellent Grammar School, its fine Assembly Rooms, 
recently erected, and a provincial society, which from old 
advertisements and ‘‘ fashionable announcements ’’ seems to 
have enjoyed with unusual zest the amenities of the ballroom 
and the conversazione; while musical entertainments of the 
highest merit were furnished to a wide circle of his acquaint- 
ance by so eminent a virtuoso as Dr. Burney. 

The holding of the Mart (under an ancient private statute of 
Elizabeth), proclaimed, as we have seen, on the day of Eugene’s 
appointment, was the occasion of much festivity, and on 11th 
February, 1758, the Ipswich Journal advertises that— 


‘“* Lynn Mart AsseMBiy 


““Will be held by Mrs. Eastland at the Town-Hall on 
Monday, the 20th of February. Tickets to be had of 
Mrs. Eastland at Mr. Harris’s Boarding School. Price 
2 shillings and sixpence.’’2 


The Grammar School was at this time carried on, says the 
late Mr. E. M. Beloe, in the beautiful ‘‘ charnel chapel, which 


1The Norwich Mercury, 18th August, 1753, announces that “ Mr. 
Burney’s Subscription Concert will be held at the Town-Hall on Tuesday, 
the 28th August, at Seven o’clock in the Evening: After which there will 
bea Ball. Tickets for non-subscribers to be had at Mr. Burney’s house at 
Lynn. Price 3 shillings.” 

® Harris was more devoted to Terpsichore than to the graver Muses, and 
on 22nd August, 1758, advertises a ‘‘Scholars’ Ball for the 25th.—Tickets 
5 shillings each.” Mrs, Eastland kept a young Ladies’ Seminary, and her 
Misses presumably ‘‘ chased the glowing hours” with Harris’s Scholars on 
this occasion. Ipswich Journal, 22nd August. 


30 


The School in 1758. 


stood where the Shambles and reading-rooms now are, on the 
Saturday market-place,” and was next St. Margaret’s Church.3 
According to the recollection of the Rev. A. Fitch, a scholar 
at the Grammar School, early in the nineteenth century, the 
schoolroom stood over a butcher’s shambles, a most unsuitable 
spot, upon the Saturday market-place, and consisted of one 
room, with a small closet for books, &., and as a ‘‘ with- 
drawing-room ’’ for the master or his usher, on that side of it 
furthest from St. Margaret’s Church.4 This room sufficed 
for the accommodation of the scholars, who mostly lived at 
home, the few boarders being received at the master’s house, 
which, according to Fitch, was in a street opposite to the 
Tower, 700 yards or so from the schoolroom. The room above 
the shambles continued to be used as the schoolroom until 
1779, at least, and Fitch says that the Corporation built a 
new one in his time, apparently some years later. The 
master at this date was Mr. John Knox, at a salary of £60 
a year and a house, where he took such boarders as there 
were. This worthy man resigned in September, 1760, and 
Mr. David Lloyd was elected master ‘‘in the place of Mr. 
John Knox, resigned,’’ at a congregation held on the 29th 
September in that year. 

Of the pupils there we have some knowledge, and of the 
nature of their studies we can form an opinion from this 
interesting paragraph, in the issue for 21st April, 1759, of the 
Ipswich Journal— 


‘* Lynn, April 7th, 1759. 


‘On Tuesday last was perform’d at St. George’s Hall, 
by the Young Gentlemen of the Grammar School the 
‘ Apetput’ of Terence to a numerous audience, with very 
great and deserv’d Applause.”’ 


Aram was then languishing in gaol, after his respite from the 
March Assizes, but it is very probable that a Latin play was 
then an annual custom at the school, as it has long been at 
Westminster ; the imperfection of the old newspaper files has 
proved an obstacle to my tracing any further such perform- 
ance. It is pleasant to think that in the eighteenth century, 
as in our own, small boys, who imperfectly understood what 
they said, wrung plaudits from their sisters, their cousins, 
and their aunts who did not understand at all! 

Of individual scholars at Lynn under Knox and Aram we are 
not without information. One James Burney, son of Dr. 


3 Lynn News, 18th June, 1898. 
“In a letter to the Rev. F. W. Joy, penes Mr. E. M. Beloe, Junr. 


31 


Eugene Aram. 


Burney, and brother of the authoress of “‘ Evelina,’’ who rose 


in later life to be rear-admiral and a great authority on whist, 
entered the school at a very early age, and long professed to 
retain recollections of the melancholy and brooding usher. 
‘‘ The late Admiral Burney,’’ wrote Hood in his preface to the 
‘“‘Dream,”? ‘‘was a scholar at the school at Linn ; 
where Aram was an Usher, subsequent to his crime. The 
Admiral stated that Aram was beloved by the boys, and that 
he used to discourse to them of murder, not occasionally, as 
I have elsewhere written, but constantly and in somewhat of 
the spirit ascribed to him in the poem.’’5 ‘‘It is probable,”’ 
comments Mr. Austin Dobson, ‘‘ that there was more accepted 
tradition than positive experience in these memories, since James 
Burney can only have been a little over eight years old on 
the memorable night in August, 1758, when ’’— 


Two stern faced men set out from Lynn 
Through the cold and heavy mist, 

And Eugene Aram walked between 
With gyves upon his wrists. 


The editor of the ‘‘ Diary of Fanny Burney ’’ (Bell, 1889) 
varies this slightly by relating that James Burney would in 
after life retail ‘‘ how the gentle usher paced the playground 
at Lynn arm in arm with one of the elder boys, talking of 
strange murders, and how he himself shuddered on seeing Aram 
taken to prison (he was taken to a post-chaise) with handcuffs. 
on his wrist.’’§ 

So common has the poem made this tradition that some 
writers have been led into the belief that Aram virtually ‘‘ gave 
himself away ’’ in this manner.’ So little consistent with what 
we know of Aram’s extreme reticence about his “‘ affair,’’ as 
he calls it, is this notion, that it is gravely to be doubted if 
there is a word of truth in the Burney tradition. The most 
recent of our ‘‘ authorities,’ Mr. T. H. S. Escott, in his 
‘* Edward Bulwer,”’ renders it supremely ludicrous by solemnly 
telling us that ‘‘ the whole account of Eugene Aram’s relations: 
with the Lester family in the romance was taken word for word, 
fact for fact, from Burney’s notes.’’ He refers to an authority 
for this, which does not bear him out at all, viz., the preface 
to the ‘‘Dream’’ in Moxon’s edition of Hood, II., 283—a 


5 Burney was a day-boy, A. Dobson ‘‘ Mme. d’Arblaye” vi., 421; Gls 37.. 

Sp. 57. 

7A. H. Norway—‘‘ Highways and Byways in Yorkshire” p. 308 ; 
Wharton and Stillé, vol. i, § 813, remarking that Hood’s poem is “‘a 
paraphrase of the evidence on the trial.” Mr. Frankfort Moore assumes: 
the little boy to have been James Burney, and the book upon which he 
pored Gessner’s ‘‘ Death of Abel” (published in 1758). See ‘‘The Keeper- 
of the Robes ” (1911), pp. 33-34., and The Leisure Hour, vol. xliv,, p. 47. 


32 


. 


A Benevolent Murderer. 


mere reprint of Hood’s original preface just quoted. The 
idea of a small boy of eight chronicling in his copy-book the 
flirtations of an indigent usher, the father of six surviving 
children and fifty-four years old, with a wholly mythical young 
lady of beauty and fashion, is too exquisite to be buried in the 
oblivion that such twaddle might, by the mere student, be 
deemed to deserve. 

‘Such were the facts,’’ adds our biographer, ‘‘ not sought 
out by Bulwer, but forced upon him.’’ 

There may be some slight ground for identifying the novelist’s 
paternal grandfather with Rowland Lester ;8 there can be none 
for supposing that the starveling usher was permitted to court 
the first Baron Knebworth’s aristocratic aunt. A curious 
volume, published at Norwich shortly before Aram went into 
Norfolk, may have come into his hands and occasioned those 
traditional discourses on murder as a fine art, which go to 
make up the legendary Aram of to-day. It has a strange title 
page, commencing-— 

A Warnine PIEce 
against the 
Crime of Murpzr 
or 
An account of many extraordinary and Providential 
Discoveries 
of 


Secret Murpsrs 


Published and sold by - - - W. Chace, Norwich.? 


A more established tradition is that of Aram’s habitual 
kindliness to the boys under his care; a gleam of goodness in 
this sinister and repellant character, which shines all the more 
for-the surrounding blackness.1° 

‘‘Cergiel,’’ writing to the Gentleman’s Magazne for 
September, 1837, says at page 218 that— 


“‘In the month of March, I was in Wisbeach, and hap- 
pening to hear that an old woman in the almshouse had 
been present when Eugene Aram was arrested in the year 
1757 (sic), I paid her a visit. She informed me that at 
the time of his being arrested she was a girl of eleven years 
of age; that he was put into a chaise handcuffed, and 

8 Escott, p. 10. 
9 Advertised in the Norwich Mercury in 1753. 
10 Of, Simpson’s ‘‘ Phrenological Report ” post p. 
c 33 


Eugene Aram. 


that the boys of the school were in tears; that he was 
much esteemed by them, having been used to associate 
with them in their play hours. Perhaps as usher, this 
was part of his office. I merely give her words.’ 


More particulars from the recollections of this worthy, Mrs. 
Beatley by name, will follow in their place.!! 

Lytton, in the preface to the 1840 edition of the novel, 
confirms this favourable view of the usher’s outward deport- 
ment, but anything he states is greatly to be discounted by his 
indefensible employment of much obvious fiction in the guise 
of historic fact. ‘‘ It so happened,’’ he wrote, ‘‘ that during 
Aram’s residence at Lynn his reputation for learning had 
attracted the notice of my grandfather—a country gentleman 
living in the same county, and of more intelligence and accom- 
plishments than, at that day, usually characterised his class. 
Aram frequently visited at Heyden (my grandfather’s house), 
and gave lessons, probably in no very elevated branches of 
erudition, to the younger members of the family.!2 This I 
chanced to hear when I was on a visit to Norfolk, some two 
years before this novel was published, and it tended to increase 
the interest with which I had previously speculated on the 
phenomena of a trial which, take it altogether, is perhaps the 
most remarkable in the register of English crime. I endea- 
voured to collect such anecdotes of Aram’s life and manners as 
tradition and hearsay still kept afloat. These anecdotes were so 
far uniform that they all concurred in representing him as a 
person who, till the detection of the crime for which he was 
sentenced, had appeared of the mildest character and the most 
unexceptionable morals. An invariable gentleness and patience 
in his mode of tuition—qualities then very uncommon at schools 
—had made him so beloved by his pupils at Lynn that in after 
life there was scarcely one of them who did not persist in the 
belief of his innocence.’’ 

From the indefatigable Scatcherd, from E. H. Barker,!5 and 
from the late E. M. Beloe,!4 we further learn that Aram was 
in the habit of visiting the rector of Gaywood, who appears 
from the account of his nephew, Richard, to have been Samuel 
Beatniffe (although from Scatcherd, who in 1836 was in cor- 
respondence with Barker on the subject, one would not have 


11 She died in 1838, aged ninety-one. 


12 Ascott states that they were the daughters of the Justice—and so 
Bulwer’s aunts. Escott identifies the grandfather with Rowland Lester. 
So Madeline must have been one of these little children—a sufficient 
refutation in itself of his silly story of young Burney’s notes. 


18 << Literary Anecdotes,” (Lond.) J. R. Smith, 1852, pp. 35-42. 
4 Dynn News and County Press, 18th June, 1898. 


34 


Friends and Fair Pupils. 


gathered this, and Mr. Beloe speaks of the rector as ‘ Arch- 
deacon Steadman ’’). 

Aram, it seems, “scraped acquaintance ’’ with the rector, 
and was in the habit of meeting young Richard Beatniffe, after- 
wards a bookseller and publisher in Norwich, author of “ The 
Norfolk Tour,’’ and at this time bound apprentice to one 
Hollingsworth ; it is to this youth that we are indebted for some 
glimpses of Aram, which are curiously at variance with the 
accepted tradition of the sedate propriety and monastic solitude 
of the scholarly recluse, whose lighter occupations consisted in 
talking murder to small boys and in removing with caressing 
finger the unlovely worm writhing on the garden path. From 
these glimpses I now cull the following :— 

“He was about five feet eight in. high, remarkably straight- 
limbed, and well-made; and I have heard him (Barker prints 
‘them ’) say that when young, he could wrestle with and 
throw any man he ever met.’’ This account is in conformity 
with the description of the skull, in the catalogue of the R.C.S. 
Museum,1!5 but it is remarkably at variance with the subject’s 
own description of himself in 1759 as he was fourteen years 
earlier—‘ I past the vigour of my age, feeble and valetudinary 
—so macerated, so enfeebled, that I was reduced to crutches.’ 
Quite the “feeble man and old”’ of the poem—more likely to 
be a victim than an assailant! 

Another clerical friend, besides Samuel Beatniffe, was the 
Rev. Mr. Weatherhead, vicar of Heacham, who lived at Ingends- 
thorpe, and hed two sons at school under Aram; it is said that 
Eugene spent the winter vacation of 1758-9 as the guest of this 
worthy man.1° If he, indeed, went down to Lynn at the begin- 
ning of December, this may have been so, but his association 
with the school seems not to have begun till the New Year, 
and it is more probable that the visit took place in the summer, 
if, indeed, it happened at all. 

Some female pupils beside the Bulwers Aram also taught out 
of school hours, for a Miss Lidderdale was an Eldise to our 
Abelard. She was the only daughter of Dr. Lidderdale, “a 
man of uncommon acquirements and extensive learning,’’ and 
was herself ‘‘ an extremely amiable and accomplished lady ”’ ; 
she died in 1787, and was now probably of the age of Abelard’s 
immortal pupil at the commencement of their love.17 


The mastoid processes of the skull show the subject to have been 
muscular, like his neighbour Thurtell ; much developed mastoid processes 
are said by Lombroso to indicate the homicide; see also A. Debierre 
“Crane des criminels,” 121. They correspond with the bumps of 
combativeness and destructiveness of Phrenology. 

16 The Rev. A. Fitch doubts this and says that Weatherhead was Rector 
of Babingley. 

V7 Richard’s ‘‘ History of Linn” (1812) p. 1040; Cf. Barker. Eloise was 
eighteen. 


35 


Eugene Aram. 


Possibly the erudite rascal paid her some gallant attentions, 
later furbished up into the romance of Madeline Lester; but, as 
we have reason to think that his salacious nature did not suffer 
him to dwell alone “in solitary sanctity ’’ in his lodging, his 
attentions must have been masked from his mistress as carefully 
as she was concealed from his fair pupil. 

Of other scholars at the school, beside those mentioned, one 
was William Davy, for Barker tells us that ‘‘ The Rev. William 
Davy, brother of the Rev. Dr. Davy, master of Caius College, 
Cambridge, was on the playground when Aram was arrested.’’!8 

It here becomes necessary to examine a tradition which has 
gained a very wide currency, but is nevertheless devoid of all 
likelihood, that Aram, in his early days as usher, designed to 
rob the master of the whole of the term’s fees. The legend 
has two main forms. One indictment lays the offence as an 
attempt to rob David Uloyd; the other as an attempt on the 
coffers of John Knox. The first version was originally formu- 
lated in the Literary Gazette for 21st January, 1832, in these 
terms— 


‘* At Lynn the character of Aram was, until his appre- 
hension, wnexceptionable; but after that event circum- 
stances were called to mind which seemed to indicate a 
naturally dark character; but whether these were all 
strictly founded in truth; or magnified suspicions, arising 
from the appalling circumstances of the crime, of which he 
was convicted, I am unable to determine. The following, 
being derived from unquestionable authority (having been 
related by Dr. L , who was Master of the Grammar 
School at the time) may serve for an example :— 

“Tt had been customary for the parents of the scholars, 
on an appointed day, to dine with the Master, at which 
time it was expected they would bring with them the 
amount of their bills. It was late at night, after one of 
such meetings, that Dr. L was awakened by a noise at 
his bedroom door; he rose up, and, going into the passage, 
which led into the staircase, but which was not in the direct 
way from Aram’s bedroom to the ground floor, he dis- 
covered the Usher dressed. Having questioned him as to 
the object of his rising at that unseasonable hour, Aram 
confusedly answered that he had been obliged to go down- 


18 Barker recorded this fact, with the others mentioned in this chapter 
as the result of a conversation with Captain Davy, R.N., at dinner at 
‘‘Kilverstone” on 4th September, 1832: Scatcherd, Beloe and others, to 
the same effect, merely repeat Barker, who gave Scatcherd licence to 
publish his memoranda years before he did so himself. Some additional 
matter is to be found in MSS. of the late Rev. A. Fitch. Dr. Davy was 
regis 28th January, 1762, and did not go to the school till 1770.—per 

itch, 


36 


An Unfounded Charge. 


stairs. The Doctor then retired unsuspiciously to bed. 
From the combined circumstances, the worthy Doctor, in 
later years, had no doubt that, from its being known to 
Aram that a considerable sum of money was in his bedroom, 
Aram intended nothing less than to rob him; ‘ and, no 
doubt,’ continued the narrator, ‘he would have murdered 
me too, if it had been rendered necessary from my dis- 
covering and opposing him.’ ’’19 


We can dismiss this charge at once with the remark that 
David Lloyd was not at Lynn at this time; nor did he, as we 
have seen, succeed Knox until September, 1760. It now 
becomes necessary to dispose of the other version, which comes 
to us in various forms, on the authority of the late E. H. 
Barker, Scatcherd, in his ‘‘ Gleanings,’ merely anticipating 
him in the publication of his jottings; in a measure, too, Fitch 
supports this latter charge. 

“I remember,’’ narrates the possibly biassed Richard Beat- 
niffe, ‘‘ to have heard Mr. Knox, Master of the school at Lynn, 
say, after Aram’s arrest, that at a Christmas vacation, when 
he had taken a considerable sum of money of his boarders, 
Aram, one night, came softly into his bed-chamber, and on 
Knox asking him what he wanted, he replied he came to tell 
him something about the housekeeper, Mrs. D—d, to which 
Mr. Knox observed that that was an improper time and place, 
and angrily ordered him to go away, which he did.’’ 

*‘J. T. H.’’ places the incident at a rather later date, for it 
is ‘‘soon after the boys had returned from the holidays.’’ 
“The Rev. S. A.,’’29 of Lynn, is emphatic that it was Knox 
who was then principal, ‘‘ and I well recollect to have heard 
from Mr. Turner, who was Mayor of Lynn in that year ’’ (he 
was not; Benjamin Nuthall was; Turner was elected Mayor on 
29th August, 1759, per Read’s Weekly Journal of 8th Septem- 
ber, 1759) “that Mr. Knox described his alarm at being awaked 
by finding Aram in his bedroom; and that the answer was so 
confused as not to be quite satisfactory, though he did not 
appear to have apprehended a guilty intention, and if he had 
just received the amount of the boys’ bills, this must have 
occurred to him.”’ 

“«Mr. H.’’ (Howes) called on the Rev. “S. A.’’ when he was 
inditing the above, and he, having been a pupil under Lloyd, 
stated that ‘‘he remembers an old gentleman, a visitor to his 
mother, who was housekeeper to Knox (Mrs. D—d?), when 


19 Of. ‘‘Mem.”, 55; Ist Ser., NW. & Q. ii., 360. The Rev. A, Fitch, 
writing to the Rev. F. W. Joy, describes this story as ‘‘ perfect bosh.” 
No such dinner to parents took place in Dr. Davy’s time at the school, 
1770—? 

20 Beloe tells us he was Stephen Allen, vicar of Linn, four years old at 
the time of the murder. His mother married Dr. Burney. 

37 


Eugene Aram. 


Aram was arrested. He believes the circumstance of his being 
found in the chamber was correct.’’ ‘‘The Rev. J. H.”’ is 
more confident yet! ‘‘ He was certainly in Mr. Knox’s hed- 
room at two in the morning. The room is divided from Aram’s 
room by a staircase on the opposite side. They are about ten 
yards apart. After this occurrence, he had very strong fasten- 
ings put to his chamber, which are still there. There was a 
considerable sum of money in Knox’s hands at the time.’’ Yet 
another parson has it thus—The Rev. Mr. Spurgeon, of F ; 
in Norfolk, says that—‘ When residing at Lynn, Aram was 
found opening and examining the drawers in Mr. Knox’s bed- 
chamber ; and when disturbed, affected to wake suddenly, and 
excused himself on the pretence that he was subject to walk 
in his sleep.”’ 

This exhausts the published versions; it remains to notice 
the letters of Mr. Fitch in reference to it. He was at the school 
long after Aram had left it, but was intimate with Dr. Davy, 
whose brother was ‘‘on the playground when Aram was 
arrested.’’ It was from the doctor that he derived most of his 
information. ‘‘ Now, as regards the suspected attempt at rob- 
bery,’’ he writes—‘“‘ in those days the boys were accustomed to 
bring back after holidays the amount of their school bills in 
hard cash, deposited in the master’s bedroom, which also con- 
tained pens, ink, copy-books, &c., for school use. Early one 
morning, soon after the pupils had returned, the Master heard 
some one in his bedroom, and asked, ‘ Who is there?’ Reply, 
‘Me, Eugene Aram ’ [we may be sure that he was not so regard- 
less of grammar]; ‘I only want a fresh pen.’ As he was a 
great writer, the Master thought no more about it, but when 
his Usher was arrested for murder, the Master was so impressed 
with the idea that Aram came intending to murder and rob him 
that he at once had put on his bedroom door ponderous iron 
fastenings; these I have often seen. . . . The Master’s 
room was upon the right-hand side in a passage, Eugene Aram’s 
bedroom at top of a flight of some twelve stairs, and, of course, 
most easy of access to the Usher.’’ In a subsequent letter he 
repeats the same statement about the boys bringing the school 
fees back in their trunks on return from the holidays, and 
encloses a rough plan of Knox’s house. This is here reproduced. 

Not one of these old wives’ tales will bear a critical scrutiny ; 
thus the allegation that the incident occurred during a Christmas 
vacation is met by the contention that Aram was never at 
Lynn school during such a vacation ;21 the Corporation Hall 
book brings him there some time after 6th January, and 
probably he only arrived to take up his new duties with the 


21‘He is, indeed, stated in Lloyds’ Hvening Post or British Ohronicle to 
have gone to Lynn early in December. 


38 


MASTER’S 
BED 
ROOM 


Passage 


ARAM'S 
BEDROOM 


bed occupied 
by Fitth 
at the Sthoo/ 


DORMITORY 


PUI SWRI E NN 


Playground, where Privy 
was situated 


Plan, after Fitch, of Mr. Knox’s House, showing relative 
positions of Rooms and Staircases. 


SATURDAY MARKET PLACE. 
ENTRANCE 


WITHDRAWING 
ROOM 


$e 


SCHOOL- ROOM 


ST MARGARETS CHURCH. 
SATURDAY MARKET PLACE. 


Window Window 


Plan of School-Room, above the Butcher’s Shambles, after Fitch, 
showing Withdrawing Room, where Aram was apprehended. 


Aram the Anchorite ? 


commencement of the term about the date of his appointment; 
moreover, if the boys brought back the fees on returning, there 
would have been nothing to steal until the vacation was over. 
It is impossible to state with any certainty when the new term 
began ; if young ladies’ seminaries can afford a clue, it may be 
noted that on Saturday, 9th February, Mrs. Goodwin announces 
in the Zpswich Journal that on the 11th she intends opening 
her boarding school for young ladies at Diss. There were but 
two terms and two vacations a year at Lynn school at this 
time, according to Fitch, and thus the new term probably 
began a good deal later than is customary nowadays. It 
hardly seems likely that Knox should have troubled to have 
the irons put on the door when Aram was safely under bolt 
and bar in York Castle; a possible explanation of the legend 
is that John Birkes was summarily dismissed for the attempt, 
which posterity has chosen to fix upon his notorious successor. 

There remains another slur upon Aram’s character during 
his stay at Lynn. It is said that a young woman was living 
with him at this time. Thus speaks Richard Beatniffe 
hereon :— 


“JT knew Aram well when he was usher to Mr. Knox, 
who kept the free school at Lynn in 1758. What he 
asserted in the paper left upon the table the night before 
his execution was not true, for he brought a young woman 
to Lynn, whom he pretended to be his niece, and lived with 
her upon most intimate terms in defiance of all his boasted 
purity; for when the constables took him and conveyed 
him to York this woman proved to be his mistress only, 
and no relation. He was then fifty-four years old, and 
she not above thirty.” 


Scatcherd says as to this— 


“Yes! Aram did, indeed, bring a young woman with 
him to Lynn. . . . But who was this beloved female? 
Why, his own daughter, Sally, to be sure. . . . But 
why did he represent her as his niece? Why, evidently to 
avoid those inquiries which would have ensued had he 
called her his daughter, and that scandal which would have 
arisen if he had not claimed her as a near relative. Besides 
this, she was, as old people have told me, his express 
image in person, in demeanour, and in taste; so that 
suspicions must have arisen . . . had he introduced 
her in any other character than that of his “ niece.’ ’’?? 


22 Gs. 31; Bell, 63-4, also says that the girl was Sally; it would not seem, 
from Beatniffe, that Aram slept in Knox’s house, and he says nothing of 
the supposed attempt to rob. Years later, a woman offered Bishop Percy, 
and, after, Dr. Lort a manuscript of Aram’s ; might not this have been his 
Lynn fair one? ns 


Eugene Aram. 


It is difficult to know what to make of this. If Beatniffe is 
to be believed, there was a scandal, at least upon the arrest. 
He was in a far better position to know than either Bell or 
Scatcherd, and I am inclined to think that Aram visited his 
inamorata in a very stealthy manner in the small hours of the 
morning at a baker’s shop, where he had procured her a 
lodging. oe | 

A possible solution is afforded by the horrible suggestion in 
the York pamphlet, which Scatcherd, in replying to its strictures 
in general, studiously omits to notice, and which I will briefly 
indicate “in the decent obscurity of a learned language ”— 
narrat, enim, libellus ille Eboracensis Eugenium cum filia 
sua in strupris monstruosis esse volutatum, et inde liberos- 
habuisse, semel, forte etiam szpius. This odious charge also 
offers an explanation of what may be meant by a Lynn writer, 
who speaks of ‘‘ the horrid flagitiousness of at least one part of 
his life,’’23 a passage which can hardly be taken as a reference to 
the act of murder. A man, who had always treated “ silly 
reflections on his faith and morals” as things indifferent to 
him, and had not stopped at murder, was hardly likely to shrink 
from the commission of an offence at that time only the subject 
of ecclesiastical censure, and that but nominally !24 

The accounts we have of Aram’s personal characteristics 
at this time, while not wholly harmonising, agree in repre- 
senting him as to a considerable degree furtive and apprehen- 
sive. Mrs. Beatley told “Cergiel” that he always wore his 
hat bangled, which she explained to mean “bent down, 
slouched.” “In ‘Bailey’s Dictionary,’” continues “ Cergiel,” 
“T find ‘ bangle-eared, hanging down, flag-eared.’ One remark 
she made, which I think very interesting and worthy of record. 
She said that it had been observed that in looking kehind him 
he never turned his head or his person partly round, but always 
turned round at once bodily. I give you her very words. Has 
any poet, any observer of nature, ever depicted this instance 
of fear mustering up resolution? ”25 

This “flapped hat,” together with Aram’s “gloomy aspect 
and frequent, melancholy, lengthened turns in the garden of 
the schoolhouse, which were long remembered,” also recurred 
to the memory of Knox’s housekeeper.26 “He seldom,” wrote 


3 Richards—‘“‘ History of Linn,” 1142, note. 

*4 Of. Stephen—“ History of English Criminal Law,” II., 430. 

» Gentlemans Magazine, 1837, p. 218. Mr. E. M. Beloe, in 1898, wrote 
‘The only tradition I remember was the habit of Aram of turning his 
head frequently over his shoulder, and looking back, as if someone was 


following him . . . and his solitary walks in the country.” This is 
hardly consistent with Mrs. Beatley’s version. 


26 Barker ; Gls. 37. 
40 


A Melancholy Man. 


Beatniffe on the fly-leaf of his York pamphlet, “ appeared in the 
public and most frequented streets, but walked in the fields 
adjoining to Lynn by himself, muffled up in a horseman’s 
great coat and a flapped hat.” “TI believe,” says the same 
authority, “that he had been miserable from the time of 
Clark’s death, for when at Lynn he carefully avoided that sort 
of company, for which his abilities eminently qualified him; 
nor can he be said to have associated with any company, 
making it his daily practice to rise very early and go to a 
baker’s office, near where he lived, and stay there until it 
became necessary for him to attend in school.” 

These remarks were written by one born about 1744 or 
earlier. They must have been set down long before Hood’s 
poem, nearly ninety years later, gave to the world that imper- 
ishable picture of the usher, who— 


oats sat remote from all, 
A melancholy man. 


They need the qualification that Aram certainly knew the Rev. 
Samuel Beatnifie, the Rev. Mr. Weatherhead, Dr. Lidderdale, 
whose daughter he taught, the Bulwers, if only in his profes- 
sional capacity, and the Davys, of Mileham; further, we are 
informed by Fitch “‘ that I have heard him [7.e., Dr. Davy] 
say that E. Aram’s society was in great request, and he received 
every possible kind attention and hospitality from the neigh- 
bouring squires and clergymen.” His peculiar appearance was 
recalled by “J. T. H.,” who had heard his mother speak of it. 
“Aram seems to have been justly described as a man of lone- 
liness and mystery, as solitary and cheerless in his rambles. 
Whether his wonderful talents were really appreciated in this 
neighbourhood I have no means to ascertain. . . . A very 
intelligent lady [7.e., Miss Lidderdale] has often mentioned to 
me that she was instructed by Aram.”27 Even at Knares- 
borough Scatcherd learnt “he was a complete recluse, or, if 
seen abroad in an evening, he was always alone, and appeared 
lost in meditation.’’ Yet, as the bitterly inimical York Pamphlet 
states, here, too, he was treated by the gentry more as one of 
themselves. There is probably truth in both points of view, 
and that his solitariness was not the result of lack of acquaint- 
ance, but arose from that ingrained love of solitude so common 
in scholars, so impenetrable to those who cannot make real 


27 The Rev. S. A.—Cf. Barker. He was Stephen Allen, vicar of Lynn, 
per Beloe. His widowed mother married in 1761 Dr. Burney then a 
widower. Cf. ‘‘Memoirs of Dr. Burney,” ii., 130, whence it appears that 
she was literary. This lady came to know Johnson. Birkbeck Hill’s 
‘* Boswell” iv., 208. 

41 


Eugene Aram. 


friends of books, and suppose their companionship a sorry 
substitute for that of men.?8 

But that which he had all along apprehended was soon to 
break upon these peaceful days. The secret of the hermit’s cell 
had been brought to light! Clark, long outlawed, was well- 
nigh forgotten, but— 


more though he’s buried in cave 
And trodden down with stones, 

And years have rotted off his flesh, 
The world shall see his bones. 


The discoveries of two skeletons on either bank of the Nidd, 
which led to Aram’s apprehension, will be related hereafter.. 
It belongs here to explain how he was traced and arrested, 
and here, again, are the inevitable discrepancies in the testi- 
mony. Miss Lidderdale wrote the following in her copy of his 
“Life and Trial” :—“He was recognised by a person from 
Yorkshire while on a visit at the Rev. Mr. Weatherhead’s at 
Heacham during the vacation at Mr. Knox’s school at Lynn.” 
“In June, 1758,” says Beatniffe, “he was accidentally dis- 
covered at Lynn by a man who came out of Yorkshire with a 
stallion, and from the information he gave when Houseman was 
apprehended Aram was arrested.’’ ‘‘ Aram was staying with 
Dr. Weatherhead and working with him in his garden during 
the winter vacation on a very cold morning, chiefly to keep 
themselves warm, when a horse dealer from Yorkshire presented 
himself and asked to look at a horse which Dr. W. had to 
sell. The horse dealer observed that he knew the gentleman 
who was working in the garden over the hedge, that his name 
was Aram. ‘Yes,’ replied Dr. W., ‘it is.’ The horse dealer 
said nothing, but when he returned into Yorkshire he reported 
the circumstance, and a warrant was sent for his apprehen- 
sion.”29 The warrant, be it noted, was not sent till a late day 
in August! 

Fitch has a different version. According to Dr. Davy, 
‘““Kugene Aram was much noticed by the squires and clergy- 
men, whose sons or relatives were pupils under Aram. On 
one occasion he was staying with Mr. Davy of Mileham (the 
birthplace of the great lawyer Coke), and in walking in the 
park, a string of horses for sale, in charge of a Yorkshireman 
(near Knaresborough)?° came up to the squire; the man knew 
Aram and spoke to him, but Aram ignored him in foto; the 


8 We can scarcely imagine Aram delighting much in the Squire Westerns 


of the neighbourhood. His preference for his own society is avowed in his 
letter to Collins. 


*9 Per Captain Davy, R.N. 
30 Sic. 


42 


Aram Arrested. 


man’s dignity was offended, and after the discovery of Clark’s 
bones, when an inquiry as to Eugene Aram’s whereabouts 
arose, the man told when and where he had seen him—hence 
his arrest at King’s Lynn.’’ 

Bell varies the circumstances a little by saying that it was 
not known, even when it was decided to arrest Aram (7.e., after 
15th August), where he was ‘‘ till a man, who had formerly 
lived in the neighbourhood of Knaresborough, and who then 
travelled about the country with a stallion, happened to be in 
the town, and hearing Aram’s case mentioned, said he had seen 
that man lately at Lynn . . . and added ‘but he was too 
proud to speak to me.’ ”’ 

The rapidity with which the arrest was effected is proof that 
the constables knew perfectly well where to go, on being 
entrusted with their warrant, and the occupation of the York- 
shireman makes it probable that the recognition took place in 
the summer. The warrant issued by Thornton directed John 
Barker, cordwainer, and Francis Moor, hatter (we can find 
nothing to indicate that Ernest Day, as stated in the Gentle- 
man’s Magazine for 1836, at p. 677, was one of the party, 
much less Houseman, as that periodical alleged at the time), 
to Sir John Turner, Bart., J.P., and M.P. for Lynn; he further 
ordered them to call at every post office on the road and 
inquire for letters directed to Aram. They did so, and found 
one in which was written, according to Bell, ‘“‘ Fly for your 


life, you are pursued.’’ Feigning to be cattle dealers, Barker 
and Moor, on arriving at Lynn, inquired of the landlord of an 
inn ‘‘ ‘If there was not a school there, which was in great 


repute, and what was the name of the usher,’ to which he 
answered ‘Mr. Aram,’ and gave both the master and usher 
the best of characters.”’ 

Sir John Turner, to whom they were directed, endorsed the 
warrant for the county of Norfolk, and either he or his brother 
Charles accompanied the constables to the schoolhouse and 
asked for the usher. Beatniffe is alone in saying that the 
arrest occurred at Mr. Knox’s house, which was some half a 
mile distant. Some doubts having been expressed as to the 
exact spot where the arrest was effected, it may suffice to say 
that Eugene’s own assertion upon the trial, on this not very 
material point, is confirmed by the impressions of Fitch’s 
school-fellow. ‘‘My old school-fellow,’’ he says, ‘« fancies 
that Eugene Aram was arrested in a room adjoining our old 
schoolroom ”’ (7.e., the one previously described as a withdraw- 
ing-room). At the trial Aram asserted that, to the best of 
his recollection, he was arrested in a room adjoining the school- 
room. 

His behaviour, on appearing in answer to the inquiries, was 


43 


Eugene Aram. 


such as must have gone far to hang him. Ignorant observa- 
tions having been made as to the evidence as to the arrest, 
given by the constables at the trial, it may be as well to point 
out that the behaviour of a person on arrest, what he said, 
or what was said to him, or in his presence, has always been 
legal evidence. Aram’s conduct was such as consisted with 
nothing but the consciousness of guilt. He pretended to 
know neither Clark nor Knaresborough, nor Barker, a fellow- 
townsman, until his evident confusion made it impossible to 
maintain appearances any longer, and he admitted, in a falter- 
ing manner, knowing all three. He admitted knowing St. 
Robert’s cave, and to the officer’s improper comment, ‘‘ Aye 
to your sorrow,’’ he returned no reply. Mr. Knox, Scatcherd” 
tells us, was unwilling to let Moor and Barker take his usher 
until he was made to understand the great gravity of the 
charge. The boys, as Mrs. Beatley afterwards related to 
“‘ Cergiel,’’? were in tears at the catastrophe. Young William 
Davy was there, and also James Burney, the youthful 
chronicler of Aram’s passion for the mythical Madeline. The 
opportunity of having what in stageland is termed a ‘‘ general 
rally ’’ for the penultimate act in the tragedy was not to be 
resisted, and every one connected with Aram at Lynn has been 
brought on to the scene to witness the arrest, not excepting 
the heartbroken Madeline, who is made to accompany our hero 
in the chaise! While I cannot speak with certainty, my 
investigations indicate that any date between the 17th and 20th 
of August was probably in the summer vacation, when Masters 
Burney and Davy were in all likelihood nowhere near the 
spot where Eugene was handcuffed.31_ However that may be, 
no Madeline or other beauteous fair accompanied the manacled 
usher on his journey to Yorkshire. That a female was left 
behind, Beatniffe explicitly states. | Whether this was Sally 
we have already speculated and shall consider again. Aram 
conversed with his captors in the chaise on the feeling about 
him at Knaresborough, and as they passed the gibbets at the 
cross-roads the prisoner was visibly perturbed at the sight of 


the grisly anatomies as they rattled and gyrated in their iron 
suits.32 


31 Abingdon Grammar School broke up on the tenth of August or earlier, 
the breaking up dinner being on the 7th. Candidates for the ushership 
were to apply on the 7th September, 1758 (Jackson’s Oxford Journal, 
August 5th and 12th). Lavenham School held a breaking-up dinner on 
14th August. (Ipswich Journal, 29th July, 1758.) 


22.Y.P., pp. 51-52. 


44 


CHAPTER V. 


The Finding of a Body on Thistle Hill—John Theakston Holds an 
Inquest—Verdict Thereat—A Second Inquest on the Corpse on 
the Same Day—Verdict—William Thornton takes Informations 
and Arrests Houseman—The Duties and Functions of an XVIII. 
Century Justice — Inquisitorial Methods — Houseman’s Two 
Examinations—The Remains Discovered in Saint Robert’s 
Cave—The Final Inquest and Verdict. 


Ws are now obliged to travel back about three weeks to the 
first of August, 1758. On that day a labourer, William 
Thompson, by occupation, as appears from his recognisance, a 
sweep, was digging for stone to supply a lime-kiln at a place 
called Thistle Hill, overlooking Knaresborough. Having dug 
at the edge of the cliff, near ‘‘ the rock,’’ he struck with his 
pick some human remains; these turned out to be an arm 
bone and what Thompson termed a ‘‘splinter bone.’”’ His 
pick broke both these bones. They were not, as has been 
represented, interred in any box, but lay in the ground. 

Thompson returned to the spot on Thursday, the third of 
August, and dug anew in the same place. He now found the 
remainder of the skeleton of a human being; there were several 
teeth in the jaws, and the body appeared to have been bent 
double. The news quickly spread over Knaresborough, and 
Philip Coates, the prosecutor in 2. v. Aram was told of the dis- 
covery the same day. Yet it was not till the twelfth of the 
month that John Theakston, the coroner for the West Riding, 
opened an inquest, the remains having been meantime viewed, 
on the fourth, by two surgeons. 

He summoned a jury of thirteen at the house of Henry 
Mellor, in Knaresborough, and proceeded to take evidence. 
Thompson proved the discovery as described, adding, quaintly 
enough, ‘‘that the person had been murdered he verily 
believes.’”’ John Yeats, a barber, followed, who said that, 
going over the spot where the remains had been found, nigh 
Candlemas, thirteen or fourteen years ago, he had observed a 
place fresh dug up, and that it was the same as that where 
the body was found. He was confirmed herein by Barbara 
Leetham, a widow, who added that she passed the spot one 
morning, about Candlemas, thirteen or fourteen years before, 
and then noticed that there was a place dug up which had not 
been so dug when she had passed the spot the previous night, 

45 


Eugene Aram. 


? 


and that the earth ‘had been filled up in a careless manner.” 
Bryan Hardcastle, Stephen Latham, and William Tuton! gave 
the same evidence that they repeated later Tuton n-entioning 
the finding of his pick at Aram’s house, a detail he omitted 
to the magistrate. 

Anna Aram gave the like evidence as at the subsequent pro- 
ceedings, concluding that ‘‘she does believe him (Clark) to 
have been murdered by her husband and Richard Houseman.’’ 
Philip Coates also gave his evidence, more briefly than at the 
inquest on the eighteenth, concluding that as ‘‘no person 
either in Knaresborough or the neighbourhood had ever been 
missing in his time, he had great reason to believe they are 
the remains of Daniel Clark.”’ . 

William Higgins and Aaron Locock, the surgeons, were next 
questioned touching their examination of the remains on the 
fourth. Both seem to have assumed, as they did later on, 
that the bones were those of Clark. Higgins began ‘‘ that he 
very well knew Daniel Clark,’’ &. Both opined that the 
body was that of a young person, twenty-three years of age— 
Clark’s precise age, as they were well aware—and that break- 
ing a thigh bone they found it “‘ fresh,’’ whence they concluded 
that it had lain in the ground about thirteen or fourteen years, 
having been interred double. Upon this, with much circum- 
locution, the jury found that ‘‘ some persons to them unknown 
moved and seduced, &c., had murdered the person, whose 
skeleton it was,’’ and that ‘‘ from all apparent circumstances, 
the said skeleton is the skeleton of Daniel Clark.’’ 

On the strength of Anna Aram’s testimony, Houseman was 
now taken to view the corpse, of whose murder he was sus- 
pected. The belief that a murdered body would in some manner 
accuse its murderer was still prevalent, as appears, not only 
from the curious ‘‘ Warning Piece against Murder,’’ published 
in 1752, but from the ‘‘ State Trials ’’ themselves, wherein we 
read that so late as 1727 the guilt of one Howatson was pre- 
sumed from his refusing to touch the remains2—the notion 
being that they would sweat blood or otherwise make manifest 
the presence of the guilty. | Houseman, then, being desired to 
take up a bone of the dead, discovered great alarm and con- 
fusion ; it is said, though no legal record confirms the incident, 
that he then unguardedly dropped the expression, ‘‘ This is 
no more Dan Clark’s bone than it is mine.”? This, as has 


1Tuton said that the first time Clark called him u , about eleven, h 
had retired half-an-hour and that Clark’s Spence: eaticd him. ‘Why 
was not this youth called asa witness? Was he dead? Latham said that 
‘‘ Aram had a very great quantity of Clark’s goods in his possession.” 


214 St. Tr. ; “ P : 
p. 1395. r. 1328. See also ‘‘an ancient and grave person’s” story at, 


46 


The First Inquest. 


been well observed, exhibits ‘“‘ the involuntary tendency to truth 
and consistency, except when the mind is on its guard and 
studiously bent on concealment . . . a law of our nature 
that sometimes gives rise to unpremeditated acts of great 
weight.’’3 

Houseman, perceiving that he had committed himself, and 
in answer to further questions, said that he could produce a 
witness who had seen Daniel Clark on the road two or three 
days after he was missing. This witness, one Parkinson, 
being called, merely proved hearing from another that he had 
seen some one like Clark muffled up on a snowy day, subse- 
quently to the shoemaker’s disappearance. The behaviour 
of Houseman, while it confirmed the suspicion of his guilt, left 
it exceedingly doubtful if the remains found were indeed those 
of the cobbler; accordingly Theakston proceeded to swear a 
second jury—this time of sixteen—and to hold a second inquest 
on Thistle Hill itself. Save Parkinson’s (which, however, was 
not reduced to writing, being vouched for only by the reports), 
no fresh evidence seems to have been taken, and the jury 
on the same 12th day of August returned a verdict of murder 
of a person unknown by persons unknown.4 

Rumour was not long in asserting that the remains were 
those of a male Jew, and that he had been murdered by Clark, 
Aram, and Houseman, and that Clark had been slain in a 
quarrel over the booty.5 

The coroner reduced his depositions to writing, and informed 
the Justice, William Thornton, who on the first available day, 
Monday, the 14th of August, heard the information of Philip 
Coates and of Anna Aram, who so strongly incriminated House- 
man that the justice issued a warrant for his arrest on a 
suspicion of murder, and he was brought before him at Thorn- 
ville the same day to undergo his statutory examination. 
Thornton was a somewhat eccentric character, a sportsman, 
and a staunch supporter of the reigning dynasty, in whose de- 
fence he had, in 1745, raised the ‘‘ Yorkshire Blues.” A 
perusal of the examinations of Houseman at once dispels the 


3 Wills’ ‘‘ Circumstantial Evidence” p. 121. 

4The Thistle Hill inquest was clearly the result of the doubts aroused 
by Houseman’s demeanour. It is indorsed ‘Skeleton of an unknown” ; 
the other “A skeleton, 1758.” This second : inquest would appear 
to have been void, the coroner being functus officio. Cf. 2 Hale, P.C. 58; 
R. v. White, 3 BE. and E. 137; R. v. Sanders, 1 Strange 167; R. v. Wood, 
73 J.P. 40. 

5 See post p. and Appendix II., p. 172. 

6 Speight’s “‘Nidderdale,” 161. ‘John Atkinson” has a panegyric on 
him in the Gent.’s Magazine, 1758, p. 538. “J. A.” is said to be Eugene 
Aram. In raising the regiment, Thornton had the assistance of “blind 
Jack of Knaresbro’,” John Metcalfe—a character as familiar as Eugene. 


47 


Eugene Aram. 


oft-repeated story that it was when confronted with the bones on 
Thistle Hill that Houseman dramatically declared where the 
remains of Clark really lay. Others, besides Bulwer, have 
disseminated this error. It will be observed that he said 
nothing of this until, at the end of his second examination, on 
the 15th, he admitted a belief that the body of the cordwainer 
might be found in Saint Robert’s Cave. A more explicit state- 
ment to Barker followed the next day, but it was not, it seems, 
until Thursday, the 17th, that the body of Clark was found. 
The duties of a justice, unlike those of a coroner, which 
have changed but little, have been entirely revolutionised since 
the middle of the eighteenth century. The statutes under 
which Thornton acted were respectively 1 & 2 Philip and Mary, 
cap. 13, and 2 & 3 Philip and Mary, cap. 10, which remained 
in force until Sir John Jervis’s Act, in 1848, completely 
altered the whole character of magisterial inquiries. At this 
date the duties of a justice were those of a prosecutor rather 
than of a judge. The office was something like that of the 
French “Juge d’instruction,” that functionary’s duty being 
to collect all the information he could against the accused 
person, swear the informants, bind them over to appear at the 
assizes, if he decided to commit, and then on apprehending 
his prisoner subject him to a series of questions, based on the 
evidence he had collected. He dealt with the suspect as a 
person presumably guilty, and was required to examine him 
fully as to the circumstances of his supposed offence. The 
degree of hostility with which this was done varied greatly 
with individual justices; and, in any case, the suspect was in 
the difficult position of having to make definite replies at a very 
early stage of the case, which might afterwards much em- 
barrass his legal advisers in their defence. But what was 
yet harder for him was that he had no right to be present 
when the informations against him were taken; he was about 
as much in the dark as a person accused by the Inquisition.7 
The questions put, as will be seen, might indeed vaguely convey 
to the prisoner the nature of the evidence of which the Crown 
was in possession, but they often left it impossible to ascertain 
definitely the names of the witnesses, and by so doing to search 
about so as to be able to impeach their credit or capability. 
Thus about this time Mr. John Barbot, an attorney, had pro- 
duced against him, on his trial for murder, a fellow said to 
have been flogged at the cart’s tail, but when the witness was 
placed in the box it was too late to impeach his credit by 


Key ‘ “ ss ep in charging be grand jury in Rv. Thurtell, Hunt, and 
robert, speaks of a magistrate’s duties as ‘‘ Inquisitorial.” the 7 
5th December, 1823. : : ne te ns 


48 


Justice’s Justice in 1758. 


proving his conviction in the’ proper manner. Barbot was 
hanged.8 

Except in the favoured case of treason, of which the legis- 
lators might themselves be guilty, no prisoner knew anything 
in any official manner of the evidence to be produced against 
him, although in practice, as Sir John Hawles, Solicitor- 
General under William III., tells us, the prisoner’s friends, 
attorney, and counsel were allowed access to him,? and he was, 
except when friendless and destitute, not so much prejudiced 
as might have been supposed by the apparent harshness of the 
system, ostensibly directed though it was to keeping him in the 
dark about “‘ everything which was to be produced in evidence 
against him.’’10 

That this was a bad system may be admitted, but that some- 
body had to act as prosecutor is no less certain, and as no 
police existed to do it, it fell to the justices. That the justices 
could perform their duties with humanity and impartiality 
appears, happily, from several instances. It is most material 
to observe that the justice who examined a prisoner appeared 
against him as a witness on his trial, and put in the examina- 
tion as part of the Crown case, and it often constituted, as it 
certainly did against Aram, the most damning evidence of 

uilt. 

: The tenor of Houseman’s first examination (which is printed 
in full in the Appendix) was that he was with Clark 
on the night of the 7th of February, 1744-5, between eleven 
o’clock and some hour in the morning, removing goods from 
Clark’s house to his; that he left him at Aram’s house with 
an unknown person, and came away with a note of the prices 
at which he was to sell Clark’s goods, held as security for a 
debt the shoemaker owed him. He admitted that Anna Aram 
came to him in a passion, and demanded money of him, showing 
him at the same time shreds of burnt cloth, and asking what 
they were. He denied ever being charged with the murder 
** till now by Anna Aram.’’ He chose to waive signing this 
examination, ‘for he might have something to add to it, there- 
fore desired to have time to consider it.’’ 

Next morning Mr. Thornton committed him to York Castle. 
What follows is given in the language of Bristow’s 1759 
edition, which substantially agrees with the York Pamphlet, 
and very fairly conveys the substance of the second examination 
or confession. 

‘* As he chose not to sign this examination, it was presumed 


548 St. Tr., 1272, 1292. A.D. 1758. 
9 Houseman, we shall see, conferred with his counsel. 
10 J. A. Park, J., in the Times, 5th December, 1823, p. 2, col. 3 in R. v. 
Thurtell. 
D 49 


Eugene Aram. 


that he was conscious he had not declared the truth of the 
matter, and Mr. Thornton thought proper to commit him to 
York Castle the morning following. At Green Hammerton, 
on the road to York, he behaved to his conductors in such a 
manner as to show that he was concerned in the murder, or 
knew of it, and that he was desirous of making more ample 
confession on their arrival at York. Being come to the Minster, 
in Micklegate, they were acquainted that Mr. Thornton was 
then passing by. Houseman desired he might be called into 
the house, and in his presence made the following confession :— 

‘That Daniel Clark was murdered by Eugene Aram, late of 
Knaresborough, a schoolmaster—and, as he believes, on Friday, 
the 8th of February, 1744-5 ; for that Eugene Aram and Daniel 
Clark were together at Aram’s house early that morning (being 
moonlight! and snow upon the ground), and that he (House- 
man) left the house, and went up the street a little before, 
and they called to him, desiring he would go a short way with 
them, and he accordingly went along with them to a place 
called St. Robert’s Cave, near Grimbald Bridge, where Aram 
and Clark stopped, and there he saw Aram strike him several 
times over the breast and head, and saw him fall as if he were 
dead, upon which he came away and left them. But whether 
Aram used any weapon or not to kill Clark he could not tell; 
nor does he know what he did with the body afterwards, but 
believes that Aram left it at the mouth of the cave; for that 
seeing Aram,do this, lest he might share the same fate, he 
made the best of his way from him, and got to the bridge 
end, where looking back he saw Aram coming from the cave 
side (which is in a private rock adjoining the river), and could 
discern a bundle in his hand, but did not know what it was. 
Upon this he hasted away to the town, without either joining 
Aram, or seeing him again till the next day, and from that 
time to this he never had any private discourse with him.’ ”’ 

This examination he signed, saying that it was the truth, 
and so was committed to the castle. Either next day or on 
the 17th, he described, it is said to Barker, the position of 
the body in the cave, with its head to the right, in the turn at 
the entrance to the cave. And here it was accordingly found 
on the 17th, and an inquest was held thereon the next day, 
Friday, the 18th of August.12 

The York Pamphlet relates that an old woman had meantime 
informed the coroner that she saw Houseman go into the cave 


1 As to the moon, see ante p. 172. 


2 J. S. Fletcher says, ‘‘ This (i.e., the remark about the bones) led to his 
(Houseman’s) arrest on suspicion of knowing something about Clark’s 
death. What he revealed to the authorities has never been known.” (1) 
** Nooks and Corners of Yorkshire” (1911), p. 106. 


50 


The Final Inquest. 


a few days after the body was found on Thistle Hill, and 
emerge, first peeping out to see if the coast was clear, and 
then go and wash his hands in the river Nidd. 

The final inquest was opened at the house of Henry Mellor, 
in Knaresborough, before a jury of sixteen, ‘‘ touching the 
death of a person unknown, supposed one Daniel Clark.’’ 
Here were examined three witnesses—Mary Bransby, Dorothy 
Clark, and Thomas Barnett. Mary Bransby deposed that 
Clark came with Houseman at eight o’clock on the night of 
February the seventh, 1744, to borrow a tankard cf her 
master, Jonathan Locock. He was out. She saw them again 
about nine o’clock, with Aram, passing the end of Jockey Lane, 
_ going towards the Kirkgate, and never saw Clark again. 

The deceased’s mother, Dorothy Clark, proved that her son 
went out at nine o’clock on the night in question, saying that 
he was going to Newell Hall next morning, and that she never 
saw or heard of him afterwards. 

Thomas Barnett, a dyer, deposed to seeing ‘‘ between twelve 
and two of the clock,’’ as he was going home from the 
““Crown,’’ in the High Street, at Church Lane end, a much 
muffied-up man come out of the passage from Aram’s house, 
who tried to pass him, but whom he recognised as one Richard 
Houseman. The witness’s signature reveals him a tolerable 
scholar. 

Theakston and the jury now adjourned to ‘‘ view the body,”’ 
and the rest of the evidence was taken in the presence of the 
ghastly remains. And whereas the three preceding depositions 
purport to be taken “‘ touching the death of a person unknown, 
supposed one Daniel Clark,’’ those which follow are taken 
“touching the death of one Daniel Clark,’’ until certitude 
merges into absolute certainty, and Philip Coates and Anna 
Aram ‘are ‘‘examined upon the view of the skeleton of one 
Daniel Clark, late of Knaresbrough aforesaid, cordwainer, then 
and there lying dead,’’ and Tuton is examined ‘‘ upon the death 
of one Daniel Clark his skeleton then and there being.’’ 

The first evidence taken at St. Robert’s Cave was that of 
Bryan Hardcastle, which, like that of the two females, has never 
before been published. He kept a livery stable, and deposed 
to having kept Clark’s horse at bait. Two days after Clark 
had disappeared, Hardcastle delivered the horse to one John 
Holliday, who paid him for his keep. This witness, who was 
called to negative the theory of Clark’s flight, for which the 
horse would have been so convenient, was bound over in £20 
to appear at the Assizes. More material still is the evidence 
of Stephen Latham, albeit it, too, has néver seen the light 
till now. His deposition traced to Aram’s possession a large 
sum of money,| of whith no explanation was forthcoming at 


EDINBURGPt UNIVERSITY LIBRAR® | 


‘ 


VWiileibDe 
VVE LEN BAS 


Eugene Aram. 


any time by Aram, to rebut the inference that it was a part 
of Clark’s wife’s dowry. Latham swore to being employed, 
just after Clark had disappeared, to arrest Aram, who was an 
intimate acquaintance of Clark, for debt ; and that Aram asked 
what the debt was, and produced upwards of 100 guineas in 
gold and other large coin; that he knew Aram to be at that 
time very poor, and that such was his general reputation ; 
that he (Aram) had great quantities of Clark’s goods in his 
possession, as also had Houseman, to the value of £45, which 
he pretended to hold for a debt. Peter Moor was the next 
witness, who proved being at Newell Hall, with Mrs. Clark, 
his mistress, when Clark disappeared, and that Clark had £38 
of his, borrowed a day or so before; and that, a fortnight 
before, he went with his master to Aram’s, where Houseman 
also was; that Aram welcomed Clark and asked if he had his 
wife’s money. Clark replied that he had it—£160. The three 
then went upstairs and the witness left. 

The medical evidence followed next, and its remarkable 
tenuity, as taken in writing, is very apparent to any one who 
knows the fulness with which such evidence is given now. 
But medical jurisprudence was as yet in its infancy, and it was 
by no means understood that a medical witness must confine 
himself to scientific opinions only. We find the two surgeons 
apparently not merely assuming, what was not in their 
province, that the remains were those of Daniel Clark, but 
also that a mason’s pick had caused the fatal injuries, whereas, 
according to present ideas, they should have stated merely that 
the appearances were consistent with that mode of death. 
Their evidence does, however, establish one thing, in contradic- 
tion of all the printed accounts, viz., that the lesion was on 
the back part of the skull; nothing is said of a wound of entry 
and of another of exit on the left and right sides of the head 
respectively, although an elaborate defence of Aram has been 
framed on the supposition that a blow was struck face to face, 
penetrating the left side of the skull, as might be the case, 
where a right-handed combatant struck his antagonist: Mr. J. 
M. Richardson’s theory, advanced in the Leeds Mercury on 
11th November, 1899, is thus seen to be refuted by the positive 
medical evidence that there was a large fracture of the base of 
the skull only. This brief evidence indicates rather a heavy 
blow of a blunt instrument, smashing in the bone at the point 
of impact, and not the penetrating blow of a pick-axe, such as 
has been generally described. 

Philip Coates, brother-in-law of the deceased, followed the 
medical witnesses. He had already sworn an information 
before Thornton on the 14th of the month, and was destined to 
be the prosecutor in R. v. Aram, Houseman, and Terry. He 


52 


Tuton’s Tale. 


proved the disappearance of Clark on the 8th of February, his 
failure to keep an appointment for that morning with him, 
or to reach Newell Hall, where his wife awaited him. He 
proved that at the time of his disappearance Clark had a large 
sum of money, upwards of £200, as he told Mr. Thornton, in 
his house, and that nothing was found there after he had gone; 
he added that nothing had been heard of his brother-in-law 
until his body was discovered in the cave, on Houseman’s 
information. To the magistrate he had further stated that 
Clark left behind his horse, so convenient to enable him to 
fly his country had he the wish, and that there was much 
plate missing with the money, and that Clark never gave the 
least hint of his departure. Coates added, when before 
Thornton, that Aram, who was “never us’t to have sums of 
money, was after the 8th of February seen to have a great 
deal,” and that, “talking sometimes about the missing of 
Daniel Clark, she, Mrs. Aram, said she believed Houseman 
deserved to be hanged about him, and her daughter said that, 
in case her mother hanged Houseman, she would hang her 
father, at which (the) girl seemed much concerned.” 

These last two statements well exhibit the irregular manner, 
according to our ideas, of taking depositions. Aram’s possession 
of money appears to be sworn to from hearsay. Coates does 
not profess to have seen him with it. The statement of a 
conversation in the accused’s absence was, of course, not 
evidence, but Thornton was not sitting judicially, but making 
@ criminal investigation. He could no more have proved this 
conversation before Noel and the jury than Anna Aram herself. 
Coates concluded his information by saying that he had adver- 
tised for Clark in the newspapers without success. 

To return to the inquest—William Tuton, a mason, was the 
next witness. He had been examined the previous day by 
Thornton, but now added a most material detail to his deposi- 
tion, and, if unshaken at the trial, as appears to have been 
the case, it must have pressed heavily against Aram. Like 
the others, it has never previously been printed. He proved 
that on the fatal Thursday, between eleven and twelve at night, 
Clark came to his house to leave some leather; that nigh three 
in the morning Clark came again and called him out of bed. 
Talking to Clark out of the window Tuton distinctly saw House- 
man and Aram, the one in a dark, the other in a light, coat, 
standing by Clark’s cellar door. They seemed anxious to elude 
observation, and “went about the corner of the street towards 
the Castle yard,” and there Clark joined them. The witness 
never saw Clark again, but he found in Aram’s garden his 
mason’s pick three days or so later, and was positive that 


53 


Eugene Aram. 


neither he nor any member of his family had lent it to the 
schoolmaster. 

Anna Aram was now called. Her deposition is lengthy. It 
repeated, with some embroidery, what she had already told 
Thornton on the 14th, and if she had been a competent witness 
against her husband, her story must have told strongly against 
him. She swore that Clark, Houseman, and her husband came 
to her house about two on the morning of 8th February, 1744-5, 
and went upstairs. They all left about three, Clark having a 
wallet on his shoulder believed to contain valuables. Houseman 
and her husband returned alone about five, and Eugene came 
upstairs, but refused to say what he had been doing, and 
required a fire below for Houseman. She professed to hear-a 
highly suspicious conversation between the two, in which it 
was agreed to get rid of her, to stop her mouth. Next morning 
she found among the ashes, which had been thrown out, charred 
fragments of clothing, though none of the family’s was missing. 
Houseman left behind a handkerchief, borrowed overnight to 
tie round his bald head, and on this she found a spot of blood 
about the size of a shilling. She showed the burnt clothing to 
Houseman, saying that she feared they had done something bad, 
to which he answered that he knew not what she meant. To 
the magistrate she also detailed certain conversations with 
Eugene, in which she charged him with having done something 
to Clark, to which insinuations he would not reply. She added 
that on hearing her husband and Houseman plot to destroy 
her she tried to get out of the window, but failed. It is difficult 
to reconcile this alleged terror with the fact that she taxed 
both her husband and Houseman with the murder to their faces, 
and even attempted to blackmail the heckler, as appears from 
his examination. Both her depositions and her information, 
to which she appended a more scholarly signature than might 
have been expected of one in her condition, are singularly free 
from those interlineations and corrections so noticeable in the 
examinations of the persons she accused. While this proves 
that she had got her story “pat,” it affords no criterion of its 
truth. 

Her deposition concluded the evidence, and the jury of sixteen 
forthwith returned their verdict, and “ upon their oaths did say 
that Richard Houseman . . . and Eugenius Aram .. . 
not having the fear of God before their eyes, but being moved 
and seduced by the instigation of the devil, with force and arms, 
and so forth, at Saint Robert’s Cave . . . Daniel Clark 
; then and there being in the peace of God and of their 
Lord the King feloniously, wilfully, and of their malice afore- 
thought, did kill and murder against the peace of their Lord 
the King, his Crown and Dignity.” 


54 


The Verdict. 


They further found that neither Houseman nor Aram had 
any goods or chattels, lands or tenements, at the time of the 
felony and murder done and committed, nor did fly for the 
same to the knowledge of the jurors. 

To this verdict, duly engrossed on a parchment indenture, 
the coroner, John Theakston, set his hand and seal, the 18th 
day of August, 1758.13 The constables, already well on their 
way to Lynn, must have effected Eugene’s arrest not later than 
the following day. 


18The counterpart in the Record office is merely signed; the other is 
signed and sealed by the coroner and each member of the jury. 


55 


CHAPTER VI. 


Arrival of Aram at Knaresborough—His Personal Appearance— 
Meeting with His Wife and Family—Sally Aram—An Un- 
trustworthy Anecdote—Eugene is taken to Thornville and 
Examined by Thornton—His Disingenuousness and Agitation— 
Taken Back and Re-examined—Arrest of Terry—His Self- 
possession—His Committal to York Castle and Examination— 
Aram’s Piteous Letter to Collins—The Case Postponed— 
Reports in the Press, 


“Wuen Aram arrived from Lynn in a post-chaise, with Barker 
and Moor, the constables, the streets were so choaked (sic) 
with people,” says Mr. Benson, one of Scatcherd’s octogenarian 
gossips, “that they could scarcely get down to the Bell Inn, 
where they alighted, and were received by the vicar, Collins, 
and the Reverent Brotheric. Aram was dressed in a very 
genteel suit of clothes, with beautiful frills to his shirt wrists, 
and had every appearance of a gentleman; he was quite com- 
posed and collected among the many Knaresborough gentlemen 
in the room, talked much, and said he could clear himself of the 
crime imputed to him. . . .” 

He wore, as usual, his own hair—he had never so much 
affected the man of fashion as to wear a wig—and his strong 
features, with the bold aquiline nose and cold blue eyes, 
exhibited their wonted serenity. 

One of his daughters went with a certain Polly Powell to see 
kama = 4. As they crossed the street they perceived a 
mob near the Bell Inn, and heard that he had arrived, where- 
upon Polly went and asked if Mrs. Aram would not go and see 
him; Anna said she would if Polly would accompany her, 
whereupon Mrs. Aram and her daughters, with Polly and a girl 
she had brought up, went together to the Bell. When they got 
into the room they found Aram in conversation with Collins 
and Brotheric, the magistrates (sic) not being ready to examine 
him. Mrs. Aram and her party did not interrogate Eugene, 
but he could not help seeing them enter. However, he took 
not the least notice of them until he had finished his address 
to the gentlemen, when, upon their quitting him, he bowed to 
his wife and said very coolly, ‘ Well, how do you do?’ He also 
noticed Polly, and, asking who the young people were, was told 
they were his daughters, except the young woman who was 
with Polly, whom he then noticed much, having known her 
56 


The Adamantine Aram. 


when a child. He then enquired after his other children, par- 
ticularly a boy, who, when he left Knaresborough, was labouring 
under some mental derangement, and Anna told him he was at 
Hammerton, and had grown worse. At this he seemed much 
concerned, and told her that, had she followed his instructions, 
there would have been a different result.” 

It is impossible to read this account without coming to a 
very unfavourable conclusion concerning the man who, after a 
fourteen years’ desertion of his home, returns in custody for 
murder, ignores his wife and children, while gentry are still in 
his presence, and finally greeting them with a very cool “How 
do you do?” proceeds to slight them and take much notice of 
a stranger to his blood, having nothing but upbraiding for the 
abandoned wife, who has had a bitter struggle to bring up six 
surviving girls and boys, one demented, without the slightest 
assistance from her spouse. Adamantine hardness and a total 
want of natural affection are features of every cold-blooded 
murderer’s character. Yet even William Palmer, on his first 
interview when in custody with his friend Jerry Smith, paid, 
with a few rare tears, a tribute to the feelings of human 
nature. 

“Among thousand amusements,” in which, in his own quaint 
words, he had passed his time, had his thoughts ever turned 
homewards? Had he spared a single sixpence out of the moneys 
arising out of his employments for his famished dependants, or 
done the least in the world to enable Anna to educate afflicted 
Henry or the others “ according to his instructions”? Was this 
the wife, jealousy for whose honour, we are gravely told, nerved 
him to strike down that daring and unprincipled gallant, 
“pock-broke,” stuttering Clark? 

In so evil a light does this account represent Eugene that 
we’should hesitate to receive it, did it not come to us from 
his avowed advocate, a writer too infatuated to recognise that 
the gossip he quoted discredits utterly the conception of his 
hero as a man of great tenderness and humanity. 

We are not told whether Sally Aram was present at this 
scene; ‘‘the daughters’’ referred to may have been Bessie, 
born in 1739, and Jane, whose age is unknown, her baptism 
not having been traced. Sally’s subsequent history I shall 
relate in its place. 

Scatcherd, however, introduces here an anecdote, accepted 
indeed by Mr. H. B. Irving, but which I venture to regard as 
probably apocryphal—‘‘ Thither (z.e., York Castle), with a 
fidelity and devotion characteristic of the sex . . . Sally 
attended her father. She was then a fine young woman, 
about. twenty-seven years of age [if so, she was born out of 
wedlock, Anna, the first child of the marriage, having been 


LY 


»” 


Eugene Aram. 


baptised in January, 1731-2], and my informant, who had 
shaken hands with Aram, was witness to an interview between 
them, which she told me was very affecting! Sally was 
standing before the iron gates, sobbing violently, when Aram 
accosted her. ‘Sally, my dear,’ said he, ‘ you are very much 
tanned and freckled.’ ‘Yes,’ said Sally, ‘I know that, 
father, but I cannot help it. What would you advise me to 
do?’ ‘Oh,’ said he, ‘make a wash with a juice of lemons; 
that will clear you.’ ”’ 

It will be remembered that no warrant for Aram’s arrest 
had been issued until after Houseman’s second examination, at 
the earliest, and most probably not until the finding of the 
body confirmed the heckler’s story. The journey from Knares- 
borough to Lynn, nigh two hundred miles by road, the return’ 
thence to the Bell Inn, and after that the visit to Thornville, 
four miles on the way to York, the taking of the examination 
there, the return later for the second examination, and the 
final drive to York Castle, were all accomplished, despite the 
inevitable law’s delays, between the 17th and 2lst of August. 
The post-boys must have ridden hard on their way back. How 
could Sally have pursued them, penniless as she was, from Lynn 
to the Castle, in time to consult her omniscient parent on the 
virtues of lemon as a cosmetic! The lumbering mail coach, 
could she have afforded even that, would have arrived days too 
late; and the hire of post-horses was far beyond the means 
that could have been available, for in a few days her father 
had to beg a trifle of the vicar of Knaresborough and was sent 
ESE If Sally were outside the castle when Eugene, with a 
singular freedom from the restraints usually imposed on 
persons in his situation, ‘‘ accosted her,’? then Beatniffe was 
right in asserting that the young woman with whom he was 
living at Lynn was his ‘‘ mistress only, and no relation.”’ 

It seems incredible that after incarceration Aram should have 
been allowed the liberty implied in the narrative of this inter- 
view, although he was apparently allowed to receive food from 
without, as a certain Mrs. Burnet used to take him his dinners 
to the Castle. 

After the delay at the Bell Inn, Aram was carried, it being 
a Monday, before Mr. Thornton, at Thornville, to undergo 
his examination under the statute of Philip and Mary. This 
and the subsequent examination, though never before published 
in their entirety, have long been given to the world with sub- 
stantial accuracy, albeit strangely overlooked by those shallow 
critics who have harped on the iniquity of condemning Aram 
on the uncorroborated testimony of Richard Houseman, Upon 
his first examination Aram, abandoning the pretence affected 
at Lynn of not knowing Clark or Knaresborough, admitted just 
as little as possible, relying on inability of recollection when- 

58 


Aram Examined. 


ever a specific fact was put to him to admit or deny. What 
follows is Bristow’s abridgment of the examination, given 
at length in the Appendix. Being brought before Mr. Thorn- 
ton, and examined, he said, ‘‘ That he was well acquainted with 
Daniel Clark; and, to the best of his remembrance, it was 
about, or before, the 8th of February, 1744-5; but utterly 
denied he had any connection with him in those frauds which 
Clark stood charged with at or before the time of his disappear- 
ance, which might be about the 10th of February, 1744-5, when 
he (Aram) was arrested by process for a debt—that during the 
time of his being in custody he first heard that Clark was 
missing—that, after his release, he was apprehended by a 
warrant from a Justice of the Peace for a misdemeanour, but 
appearing before the Justice, and the charge not being made 
out against him, he was dismissed. After this he continued 
at Knaresborough a considerable time, without any kind of 
molestation, and then he removed to Nottingham, to spend a 
few days with some relations, from whence he went to London. 
There he resided publicly till he came down to Lynn, which 
was about seven months before he was arrested by warrant, on 
suspicion of being concerned in the murder of Daniel Clark.’’ 
Thornton now proceeded to put to his prisoner the case against 
him—to outline the evidence he must be prepared to meet. 
It will be seen that Tuton’s, Barnett’s, and Latham’s evidence 
(though Latham is not named) is put to him, and in each case 
he returns the disingenuous answer that he cannot recollect. 
The answers are merely non-committal. ‘He admits that 
he might be with Clark in February, 1744-5, but he does not 
recollect that he was at Mr. Carter’s, who keeps a public-house, 
in Knaresborough, with a Jew, Richard Houseman, a flax 
dresser, and Daniel Clark, about twelve o’clock at night, on 
the 7th of February, 1744-5; nor does he recollect that he was 
in company with Clark and Houseman after two o’clock in the 
morning, at any particular time or place, in February, 1744-5 
—nor at or after three o’clock in the morning—nor at Grim- 
bald Bridge—nor at or near a place called St. Robert’s Cave, 
on the 8th of February, 1744-5, in the morning—nor does he 
know anything of Clark’s being murdered—nor does he recollect 
that he was with Clark and Houseman when Clark called upon 
William Tuton, on the 8th of February, 1744-5, in the morning 
—nor does he remember anything of a mason’s tool being found 
in his own house when he was arrested by a warrant in 1744-5— 
nor does he remember meeting Mr. Barnett, or seeing him in 
company with the above said persons on the 8th of February, 
1744-5, in the morning—nor does he remember that he came 
home that morning at five o’clock with Houseman, and made 
a fire for them in his own house, which is asserted by his wife-— 
nor does he remember that he had so great a sum of money as 


59 


Eugene Aram. 


fifty guineas about that time, or pulled any such sum out of 
his pocket—nor did he seek to suborn or ask any one person to 
say that he had seen Clark since the 8th of February, 1744-5, 
who really had not seen him. But true it was that he had 
often made inquiry about him, and he thinks he hath heard 
some persons say they have seen him since, and particularly 
his brother, Stephen Aram, but does not recollect any other 
person, except another brother of his, Henry Aram, who has 
said that he saw him—nor does he know where it was those 
brothers say they saw him. 

“As to the examination of any further particulars touching 
the premisses, and the signing this examination, this examinant 
chuses to wave (sic) them for the present, that he may have 
time to recollect himself better and more fully least (sic) any- ° 
thing might be omitted or slip his memory that is material, 
which may hereafter occur to him ’’—so concludes Mr. Thorn- 
ton; but, whenever added, a weak and rather illiterate signa- 
ture is to be seen appended to this singularly unveracious 
document. 

We may surmise that Moor and Barker, as they were con- 
ducting Aram to York Castle, whither Thornton had promptly 
committed him, enlightened their prisoner somewhat as to 
the strength of the case against him, more especially as to 
the admissions of Houseman. At least they had not gone 
far when Aram begged to be taken back to Thornville, for he 
had ‘‘ something of consequence to impart.’ 

From the heading of this second examination it is apparent 
that Mr. Thornton took it solely to relieve the anxieties of the 
prisoner ; it is no strained inference from its language that it 
was volunteered by Eugene despite a magisterial caution that 
he should not commit himself. It is headed— 


““ On the same day as above (in consequence of the fore- 
going examination), and after mature deliberation and at 
his own instance, Eugene Aram desires to make farther! 
discoveries relating to the affair of the missing of Clark.’’ 


No summary—not even a literal transcript—can convey the 
effect of this remarkable paper. It is crammed with erasures, 
and the critical part—what happened at the cave—has been 
written over and erased so often that it is only with the greatest 
difficulty that it can be made out at all. What follows is from 
the text of Bristow, the full examination with the passages 
hitherto suppressed being reserved for the Appendix. This 
document, so full of perilous admissions, and so utterly irrecon- 
cilable with what Aram had said an hour or so before, was, of 
course, part of the case proved against him, and it was for 


Written over an erased word, terminating in the letter “ y-” E.R.W. 
60 


c. < ? ul. : 
a PS . ia ond wah n Zz Be S&S 
ye 


Cee, SH el fh, & 
cx : ; a eo 


fe hg bp 
vee 


De Fascia ah 9) oF 9 OF 


YZ 


Concluding page of Aram’s second examination by Thornton, from 
the original in the “Record” office. 


(Photo. by A. P. Monger, London.) 


a oy fo 


SS a a a es 5 ee Ss 


Tes Sy Ss ope ack oars a ie 


7 ee 


A Revised Version. 


him in his defence to deal with it to the satisfaction of the jury— 
a thing, we shall see, that he-made no sort of attempt to do. 

The examinant now said, ‘‘ That he was at his own house, 
the 7th of February, 1744-5, at night, when Richard Houseman 
and Daniel Clark came to him with some plate, and both of 
them went for more several times, and came back with several 
pieces of plate, of which Clark was endeavouring to defraud his 
neighbours ; that he could not but observe that Houseman was 
all night very diligent to assist him to the utmost of his power— 
and insisted that this was Houseman’s business that night, and 
not signing any note of instrument, as pretended by Houseman. 
That Henry Terry, then of Knaresborough, alehouse-keeper, 
was as much concerned in abetting the said frauds as either 
Houseman or Clark, but was not now at Aram’s house, because, 

_as it was market day,? his absence from his guests might have 
occasioned some suspicion—that Terry, notwithstanding, 
brought two silver tankards that night, upon Clark’s account, 
which had been fraudulently obtained—and that Clark, so far 
from having borrowed £20 of Houseman, to his knowledge 
never borrowed more than £9, which he had paid him again 
before that night. 

“*That all the leather Clark had, which amounted to a eon- 
siderable value, he well knows was concealed under flax in 
Houseman’s house, with intent to be disposed of little by little, 
in order to prevent suspicion of his being concerned in Clark’s 
fraudulent practices. 

‘‘ That Terry took the plate in a bag, as Clark and Houseman 
did the watches, rings, and several small things of value, and 
carried them into the Flat, whence they and he (Aram) went 
together to St. Robert’s Cave, and beat most of the plate flat. 
It was then thought too late in the morning, being about four 
o’clock on the 8th of February, 1744-5, for Clark to go off so 
as to get any d'stance; it was therefore agreed he should stay 
there till the night following, and Clark accordingly stayed 
there all that day, as he believes—they having agreed to send 
him victuals, which was carried to him by Henry Terry—he 
being judged the most likely person to do it without suspicion, 
for, as he was a shooter, he might go thither under the pretence 
of sporting. That the next night, in order to give Clark more 
time to get off, Henry Terry, Richard Houseman, and himself 
went down to the cave very early, but he (Aram) did not go into 
the cave or see Clark at all; that Richard Houseman and Henry 
Terry only went into the cave, he staying to watch, at a little 
distance on the outside, lest anybody should surprise them. 


2 From the report of the Royal Commission on Markets and Fairs (1889) 
p- 219, it appears that Wednesday, the 6th of February, was the market 
d 


ce 61 


Eugene Aram. 


“That he believes they were beating some plate, for he 
heard them make a noise; they stayed there about an hour, 
and then came out of the cave, and told him that Clark was 
gone off. Observing a bag they had along with them, he took 
it into his hands, and saw it contained plate. On asking why 
Daniel did not take the plate along with him, Terry and House- 
man replied that they had bought it of him, as well as the 
watches, and had given him money for it—that being more 
convenient for him to get off with, as less cumbersome and 
dangerous. After which they all three went into Houseman’s 
warehouse, and concealed the watches with the small plate there, 
but that Terry carried away with him the great plate. That 
afterwards Terry told him he carried it to Howe Hill, and hid 
it there, and then went into Scotland and disposed of it. But. 
as to Clark, he could not tell whether he was murdered or not 
—he knew nothing of him, only that they had told him he 
was gone off.’’ 

The suppressed passages, it will be observed on comparing 
this version with that in the Appendix, are those impeaching 
Iles, and the curious underlined paragraph near the end, where 
Aram endeavoured to explain why he had nothing to do with 
Houseman’s and Terry’s possession of the missing cobbler’s 
watches and plate. 

The frequent erasures, the many interlineations, the weak 
and tremulous signature at the end, all alike testify to a mind 
struggling with guilt, as well as with perplexity, and to one 
unnerved by fear. It is difficult, in the face of these two 
examinations so speedily following one another, to understand 
how acute minds can have reached the conclusion that House- 
man supplied the sole evidence against Eugene, or that Eugene 
himself was ‘‘ free from the premeditated design and the actual 
deed of murder.’’ His own admission brings him to the cave 
on the fatal night—privy to the unlawful purposes of the other 
three, though he professes to deny participation—“ He can’t 
tell what to say, whether Clark was murdered or not’’ (a 
singular frame of mind!) ‘‘ only they told him he was gone 
off.’’ 

So far is he from offering any explanation of the inconsis- 
tencies of these two examinations in his defence, that he char- 
acteristically lets them alone, together with ‘“‘ what is called 
evidence,’ and proceeds to stultify himself by alleging at this 
time an infirmity so great that he “was reduced to crutches.” 
He had forgotten in August, 1759, having admitted in August, 
1758, going on two successive winter nights to the cave for 
hours together. It may be that he did not know that his 
examinations would be proved against him. It is for his 
defenders to explain how these contradictions are to be reconciled 
with any theory. of his innocence. 

62 


Terry Arrested. 


Aram lodged in York Castle on the 21st of August, Thornton 
proceeded to arrest Terry, who was examined—where, does not 
appear—on the 26th as a prisoner on suspicion. No evi- 
dence at this time implicated the publican, who was arrested 
solely on the credit given to Aram’s examination. Beyond ‘a 
tankard and two salts,’’ according to the York Pamphlet, no 
goods of Clark’s were ever traced to his possession, and, having 
been at large all the month, he knew how weak, in all proba- 
bility, was the case against him. He accordingly met 
Thornton’s inquiries with confident denials. He admitted 
knowing Clark, but had seen nothing of him for some time 
before he disappeared. He remembered Aram being charged 
in 1744-5. He himself never had any of Clark’s goods; he 
had heard that Mr. Iles had possessed himself of a lot of them, 
but he did not know if Houseman had any. Houseman, Aram, 
and Clark were all very intimate. He never brought two 
tankards to Aram’s house, as he alleged, but might have been 
at the house during the day preceding the disappearance. He 
denied going to the cave or knowing anything about the murder, 
but if there was such a thing, the worthy publican would sooner 
suspect Houseman and Aram than anybody else. 

This examination he signed in fair writing. Aram and 
Houseman were already involved by their admissions in the 
fateful visits to the cave. Neither could assign any innocent 
motive for it. Terry wisely denied all participation in such a 
visit. It is difficult to see why he was committed and why 
next year the grand jury found a true bill against him. 
That evidence against him did appear later seems the 
unavoidable conclusion, and the York Pamphlet even says 
‘‘that from this time (7.e., his arrest) to the assizes fresh dis- 
coveries were made every day, and it was last Lent Assizes the 
general opinion they wou’d all three have been hang’d.’’ The 
indictments of all three, on the backs of which would have been 
endorsed the names of the Crown witnesses, having disappeared 
from the records, it is impossible to supply the name of a single 
witness against the ale-draper. 

The miseries of an eighteenth-century prison soon broke 
the spirit of Eugene, and the very next day after the arrest 
of Terry he thus addressed himself to the charity of the Rev. 
Mr. Collins— 


Rev. 8r., 
I know not, loaded with public odium as I am, and charged with 
acrime, nay, a complication of crimes’, all of which I detest, whether I 
ought to be solicitous to procure anything in support of Life, particularly 


8 Alluding doubtless to the infamous letter from Yorkshire, published in 
the press, accusing Aram roundly of the murder of a Jew and his man. 
See Appendix II., p. 172. ‘ 

3 


Eugene Aram. 


under such aggravated circumstances, wherein it is better to Dye than to 
Live; but the propensions of nature are strong, her calls frequent and 
importunate, and few but have or think they have, some interest to attend 
too (sic) some social connexions or other not easily to be dispensed with. 
Admonished by these, but most for the generous concern I know you bear 
for humanity, however distressed and wherever situated, I venture to ask, 
and that with reluctance enough, that you would intercede for something, 
how and to whom you think fit, whereby to make this remain of being 
a little less uneasy, a little more supportable If this is not inconsistent 
with your convenience and character and if it is not disagreeable in such a 
way and once thus to serve. 
Yr hble Servt, 


E. ARAM. 
York, 27th August, ’58. 


Bristow adds that Mr. Collins showed this letter to some 
gentlemen, when £5 were collected and sent to him. 

The strong phrase ‘‘ loaded with public odium’’ in itself 
refutes the contention of Eugene’s apologists—notably Scatcherd 
and a writer in the Leisure Hour for February, 1885—that the 
execrations of the mob were reserved for Houseman while 
Aram was an object of popular sympathy. The shocking libels 
which continued to be circulated and published in Yorkshire 
about this time explain, though they do not justify, the odium 
which attached to Aram and his memory throughout the genera- 
tion which witnessed his fall. 

The next letter which survives is dated Ist March, 1759, and 
was thus written on the eve of the Lent Assizes, in anticipation 
of a speedy crisis in the writer’s affairs. It appears only in 
one edition, an undated duodecimo, printed by C. Etherington 
for E. Hargrove, known as the sixth edition. A misprint sup- 
plies the year 1776 as a conjectural date for its publication. 
We learn from the preface that the letter was one of several 
of like tenor. It runs— 

York, Ist March, 1759. 
Sin 

I know not whether, after such a length of time, such a distance of 
place, such and so many accusations heaped upon me I yet possess that 
part of your esteem, which I flatter myself I formerly had, and was proud 
of. For, as I have been prosecuted with so much accrimony (sic), and repre- 
sented with so much malevolence, prejudice has infected some, though I least 
suspect its influence on you, whose share of reason and penetration I have 
known too long and too well, to think you can ever look upon the 
invidious reports of my enemies as truths. Upon this supposition I write, 
and in this confidence of your good wishes to me entreat, that you would 
come at my trial which will begin here on the 5th or 6th of March [the 
commission day was the third. E.R.W.], to speak in support of my 
character as to what you know, and so far as is honest and right; which 
surely, as it will be a favour of so great importance to me and to you no 
extraordinary trouble or expence, I need not despair of from you. For 
ever since I was capable of thought and reflexion I always heard and saw 
the name of B with pleasure. And if any other services are in your 
power, which from your consideration in the world, and the number 


64 


(uopuoT ‘sabuow ‘ad “WV fq °0704d) 
Chsq ‘aojag "Ww “a fo worssassod ay? we qourbrto ayy W0.1y]) 
‘OLISBO AIOK Ul wery Aq wo0qqwWM 10940, 


= fa 


ee yf hp rs eee 


es . : 
L 2 de od dard ripe? eae 4 


: igs see As, 227 ve ne iA vas 
mia Tait a ph i” ia eit ee 
wer 


“2D wt bo y yer 


a sk teat 


ter Tan fae 


his 


— 


The Lent Assizes. 


of your friends, may be considerable, and which may not now occur to me, 
pray forget not him, who is, as he has always been. 
Sir, 
Your most humble servant 
EK. ARAM. 


P.S.—I am promised the Act of friendship I have solicited from you from 
some in the Netherdale, and Dallagill, etc., and should be glad to hear of 
the concurrence of any from Ripon. Mr. H——I hear, saw a person at 
Gaunt answering the description of Clark in the advertisement, if he will 
come, through regard to your application, which I beg of you, he might be 
a serviceable evidence. I desire a line by return of Burnet the waggoner. 


This letter, the composition of which is so characteristic as 
to leave no doubt of its authenticity, is addressed, as we see, 
to some one at Ripon, whose name began with ‘‘B,” of some 
station in the world, and long known to Eugene. It is a 
reasonable conjecture that the recipient was one of the sons 
of the deceased Sir Edward Blackett, whose country seat at 
Newby was put up for sale in 1745. Aram had, it is evident, 
long been a stranger to Ripon. 

Whether the letter produced the gift of money, indirectly 
solicited in its conclusion, or the attendance of the addressee 
at the impending assizes, we are without information. When 
the trial did come on, however, upon the summer circuit, 
Aram had to face it alone. “If he should be hanged,”’ said 
Johnson, speaking of Baretti and his friends, “none of them 
will eat a slice of plumb pudding the less.’’ It is to be feared 
that Aram’s friends were even more lukewarm than the im- 
petuous Italian’s; but Aram had not, perhaps, the gift of 
attaching the affection of his fellows, and remembered an 
acquaintance only when it occurred to him that such a one 
might do him a service. Scatcherd tells us that numbers of 
Lynn gentlemen were willing to go bail for Aram, only, of 
course, it could not be allowed. None, however, from any 
quarter, was willing to be an evidence to his good character ; 
though he really does seem to have won “ golden opinions of 
all sorts of people ’’ from his undoubted learning and apparent 
respectability. 

The illustrious Mansfield was accompanied by Sir Michael 
Foster, a great criminal lawyer, and, like his chief, “‘ out of 
the King’s Bench ’’ to hold the Lent Assizes on the Northern 
Circuit, the Chief Justice taking the pleas, the puisne the 
Crown side. On the tenth of the month Philip Coates, the 
prosecutor in &. v. Houseman, Aram and Terry, came before 
Foster to swear an affidavit,4 asking for further time to pre- 
pare his evidence, and alleging tha ‘* a very material circum- 
stance . . . hath appeared since the commencement of 


4See Appendix L., p. 166. 
E 65 


Eugene Aram. 


these assizes.”? The learned judge made the order asked for, 
for the continuance of the prisoners in gaol until the Lammas 
Assizes following. The judge’s order is thus entered in the 
Circuit “Goal Book ’”’— 


Yorkshire, 3rd March, On reading the affidavit 
1759. Ricuarp Hovseman,| of Philip Coates the 

CHARLES TURNER, Esq.,. HucEne Aram, prosecutor, let them 
High Sheriff. Henry TERRY, remain in goal untill 

Sir Diesy Lecarp, the next Assizes. 
Foreman. 


(sd.) M. FOSTER. 
A little below is the following— 


EXTRA’S IN MURDER. 


Putts 28 July, 1759, Guilty. 
Eugene Aram, late of Knaresbro’, etc., etc. 
for the murder of Daniel Clarke. 


Putts 28 July, Not Guilty. 
Richard Houseman, late of Knaresbro’, etc., etc. 
for the murder of Daniel Clarke. 


No entry here appears relating to Terry. The inference 
to a lawyer is that the bill of indictment against him was not 
ready; for these entries, given in full in Appendix I., are 
entries of pleas and verdicts, taken from the captions of the 
prisoners’ indictments. Was the Crown expecting fresh 
evidence before framing the bill against the ale-draper? 

No researches on my part have enabled me to discover such 
evidence, and I am led to believe that the ‘‘ very material 
circumstance ’’ alluded to in the affidavit was the likelihood 
that Houseman would stoop to the miserable position of a 
King’s evidence. That he was approached while the Crown 
lawyers were in York city during these days with that object, 
is a well-nigh irresistible conclusion. At least by the end 
of May he had definitely decided to take his counsel’s advice 
and give Aram away, as the unhappy schoolmaster was 
evidently aware. 

The Press had begun long ere this to take some notice of the 
matter; the tenuity of its reports offers a strange contrast to 
the exuberance of modern dailies on all kindred topics. 

The Leeds Intelligencer of Tuesday, 29th August, 1758, 
The Cambridge Journal of 26th August, Lloyd’s Evening 
Post of the 25th, and the Ipswich Journal of the 2nd Sep- 
tember, give almost identical accounts of the finding of the 
bodies, the inquests, and committals of Aram and Houseman. 
The Leeds Intelligencer of 6th March, 1759, announced the 

66 


Press Paragraphs. 


forthcoming trial, and on the 13th announced the postpone- 
ment, news of which also appeared in The Cambridge Journal 
on the 17th and in Lloyd’s Evening Post on the 14th.5 Early 
in September, 1758, at least three papers® were suffered to print 
a shameful libel upon Aram, in flagrant contempt of Court. 
They boldly stated that Aram, now awaiting trial, murdered 
not only Clark, but ‘‘ a Jew and his man”’ ag well, the death 
of Clark being represented as arising out of a quarrel over the 
booty plundered from the unfortunate Hebrews. Like wicked 
insinuations had been made in Miss Blandy’s case, and were 
gravely censured by the. Court. 


5See Appendix II, p. 173. The last and the London Evening Post, also 
reported the arrest of Terry. 

6 Lloyds’ Evening Post, The Whitehall Post, and Payne’s Universal 
Chronicle. The London Hvening Post omits Aram’s name. 


67 


CHAPTER VII. 


Letters from Prison—Aram Exploited by the Booksellers—-Houseman 
Becomes an Evidence for the King—Dilemma of the Crown— 
Aram Selected as the Victim—Reasons for this Choice—Practice 
as to Wives’ Evidence in Criminal Cases—Aram Composes his 
Defence—The Assizes Commence—The Judges and Counsel— 
A True Bill Found Against All Three—The Witnesses for the 
Prosecution—The Prisoners Put Themselves upon their Country. 


Tue development indicated in the last chapter, in what Aram 
habitually styles ‘‘ the affair,’’ now began to occasion him 
some anxiety, and he addressed himself to certain booksellers 
and men of their kidney, who had no real design to serve his 
interests, but were willing to exploit his pen and avail them- 
selves of his notoriety to their own pecuniary advantage. He 
accordingly sent to Etherington some of those literary pieces, 
which appeared in the first published and subsequent accounts 
of his trial, in return, we may suppose, for offers of assistance 
towards his defence, and some slight provision of amenities 
in the prison, having previously despatched the letter which 
follows— 


SIR 

"The very humble opinion I ever entertained of anything I wrote 
prevented my retaining any copies; there remains an elegy on Sir John 
Armytage, who fell at St. Cas—if I can possibly recover it it shall come 
accompanied with a transcript of the papers you procured, and the rest 
shall follow as speedily as I can write them, which indeed, if you had not 
the curiosity to desire, I could not have had the assurance to offer ; scarce 

believing I, who was hardly taught to read, have any abilities to write. 

I am Sir, 
with much gratitude for your kindness and with all possible 
respect, 
your most humble, 
most obliged servant, 


E. ARAM. 
P.S.—I will order you Mr. Recorder’s letter, which I mentioned, from 
which you may be able to judge of my affair, in which you were pleased 


to say you would serve me. I have but one question to ask, which my 
next shall bear you. 


This letter is undated. It sows that he had already men- 
tioned ‘‘ Mr. Recorder’s letter,’’ and the tenor of that is 
apparent from the postscript to the letter which follows. It 
is to be inferred that Etherington had recovered from Lynn 

68 


A Dilemma. 


some MSS. left behind in the usher’s hurried departure. He 
next writes— 


York, 2nd J 1759. 
Goop Sir, enshiciar thins Se 


To satisfy my promise and your request, I have transmitted 
part of the papers, and propose copying and transmitting to you the 
remainder of them early next week, or as early asI can. Iam only able 
to employ half my time in this, but wish 1 could dispose of all my time that 
way, either for your amusement or your service. J have no materials for 
my purpose by me, not so much as books, papers, or MS. of any kind, so 
that it is easy to conceive under what disadvantages I write. Memory is 
all I have to trust to, and that can never be capacious of all I want. 

You were pleas’d to promise me some assistance in my affair, in hopes 
of which I have subjoined the only question, I think, of any importance to 
me, and beg satisfaction in it by what you may judge best. 

Iam, Sir, 
under great obligations, 
and with all possible respect, 
your most obedient 
and most humble servant, 


E. ARAM. 


Q. Whether Houseman, who, after his being apprehended and in 
custody, and commitment upon a charge of murder, can possibly be 
admitted evidence for the King, against me, as he says his counsel tells 
him he may: the fact with which he impeaches me being fourteen years 
ago, and there being nothing against me, but what he pretends to say. 
Whether is the power of admitting evidence invested in the Judge, or 
King’s Counsel, or both? 


Thus Aram was aware, some time previous to June, of the 
negotiations between the Crown lawyers and Houseman, with 
a view to his admission as King’s evidence, which, as I have 
shown, had probably been initiated during the late assizes. 
Some further light is thrown hereon by the York Pamphlet— 


‘« Proof was, however, still wanting to convict them all; 
they had sufficient, indeed, to condemn Aram or House- 
man singly, but not both; and after many consultations 
as to the person whom it was most advisable and just to 
punish, Aram, as the grand villain, was unanimously 
agreed on to be the man, and that Houseman and ‘Terry 
should be acquitted, the former of whom was to give 
evidence against Aram.’’! 


The difficulty of the Crown lawyers was this—If Aram were 
acquitted, his wife’s evidence would be available against House- 
man; but it would not be available against Houseman, much 
less against Aram himself, while the schoolmaster was still in 
jeopardy of conviction, except in so far as Anna could implicate 
Houseman without at the same time bringing in her husband.? 


1 
p. 48. 
2 See Roscoe’s Criminal Evidence, pp. 105, 127. 69 


Eugene Aram. 


Had the three been indicted together, Mrs. Aram would have 
been wholly incompetent to testify ; equally so, if either of the 
other two had been indicted with Aram. She was bound over 
in twenty pounds to appear at the assizes, and it may well have 
been contemplated at one time to acquit Eugene and use 
Anna’s testimony against the heckler. Even so her evidence 
could only have been admitted in so far as it did not jeopardise 
her husband, whose acquittal as principal would have been 
no bar to his indictment as accessory, or to what was then 
far from uncommon, an “‘ appeal of murder’ by Clark’s heir- 
at-law. In the famous case of Thurtell the evidence of Mrs. 
Probert, after her husband’s acquittal, was only very cautiously 
admitted by Mr. Justice Park, who rejected questions as to. 
what Probert said relative to the disposal of Mr. Weare’s 
remains. It is therefore highly doubtful if Anna’s evidence 
as to what occurred on the morning of the 8th of February, 
after the two had returned, could have been admitted in any 
circumstances against the heckler, as it necessarily involved 
Eugene as well. 

On the other hand, unless Houseman were acquitted and 
admitted evidence, there was nothing legally admissible against 
Aram to connect him with the body found in the cave, or to 
identify the body as Clark’s. Such were the reasons for 
selecting Aram as the victim—the greater difficulty of convict- 
ing Houseman and the fact that he had from the first put 
himself in the position of a would-be ‘‘ approver ’’; and it 
has always been unusual, one of several confederates having 
confessed, to look elsewhere for a King’s evidence, though it 
was done in the great ‘‘ gig murder,’? when Probert was sub- 
stituted for Hunt as the instrument for convicting 
Thurtell. I have shown from these letters how fully aware 
Aram was, more than two months before the trial, that House- 
man would go into the box against him—to the confounding 
of those sciolists who, rushing in like the fools in the adage, 
have declared that Eugene could never have supposed that the 
evidence of such a villain as Houseman would be admitted 
against him, and as being so taken aback as to be unable to deal 
with that evidence in his address. There ig the less excuse 
for this common error, made by Scatcherd and many more, 
as the query appended to the letter of the 2nd June appeared 
in the first edition of 1759 and was often reprinted; nor can 
it be questioned that Eugene’s lingering doubts were resolved 
in the answer, which Etherington presumably sent him, that 
Houseman’s evidence was perfectly admissible in the discretion 
of the Crown counsel, whose decision in the matter the Court 
would accept as of course. 

Aram continued to solace his mind with study and composi- 
tion, borrowing books to enable him to supply the illustrations 


70 


Time’s Winged Chariot. 


of his defence. One such letter Bell purports to reproduce in 
facsimile, although the writing bears no resemblance to Aram’s 
undoubted autographs, albeit a good, clerkly hand, though 
little suggestive of the scholar. The letter runs— 


Goop Sir, 

If you can procure me and at the same time excuse the 
trouble, the ‘‘Monasticon Eboracense,” a Catullus, and any Welch 
Dictionary, they will be very acceptable, divert the tediousness of these 
hours, and alleviate a few of the many dissatisfactions of this place, for 


Good Sir, 
your most humble 
and most obliged servant, 


E. ARAM. 
To Mr. WALLACE. 


The ‘‘ Monasticon Eboracense,’’ by John Burton, M.D., had 
recently appeared, being advertised in the Public Advertiser 
on 12th March, 1759, and Eugene doubtless hoped to find 
some matter therein for his defence—some strange discoveries of 
holy bones, though in fact none of his instances appears to have 
been derived from it. The ‘‘ Welch Dictionary ’’ was mani- 
festly required for his ‘‘ Essay towards a Comparative Lexicon.”’ 
*‘ Wallace,’’? says Scatcherd, ‘‘ appears to have been in the 
law.’? If so, he may have been the rising junior who figures 
frequently in Burrow’s and Blackstone’s reports and assisted 
the law officers in certain curious proceedings against the 
Chevalier d’Eon. 

The address, on which Aram was now busy, was composed 
with the assistance of about half a dozen numbers of that 
popular monthly The Gentleman’s Magazine, and three or four 
other authorities, two at least of which Aram quotes inaccur- 
ately. While elegant in its phrasing and perspicuous in its 
argument, it is far from being the recondite composition, the 
labour of years, which it has often been represented to be, to 
the prejudice of its author. A detailed examination of it will 
be found in a later chapter. 

While Aram thus busied himself and ever heard 


_ Time’s wingéd chariot hurrying near, 


the law was moving majestically on in its journey to crush 
him. On the 4th of July, a date in no long time to become 
memorable, the Hon. Mr. Bathurst, afterwards Lord High 
Chancellor, and the Hon. Mr. William Noel, ‘‘two of his 
Majestie’s Judges out of the Court of Common Pleas,’’ issued 
their precept to the sheriffs to hold a commission of Oyer and 
Terminer and General Gaol Delivery on the 28th day of July. 
With them came the redoubtable leader, Fletcher Norton, 
K.C., to conduct the prosecution; Mr. Joseph Yates, a very 
71 


Eugene Aram. 


learned junior, many years a special pleader, and now, though 
only called in 1753, well on his way to a seat on the bench, 
which he filled with such sturdy independence as wrung from 
“‘ Junius ’’ the rare tribute of praise, to assist Norton; and 
two other junior counsel, both natives of Yorkshire, Mr. John 
Stanhope, of Horseforth, and Mr. George Hartley, of Middleton 
Tyas, who was called in 1747.3 The name of Houseman’s 
counsel, alluded to by Aram, remains unknown. Nor do we 
know if Terry was defended by counsel, though ‘‘ the most 
worthy baronet,’’ to whom he was gamekeeper, would probably 
have seen to that, if his henchman lacked the means to fee a 
barrister himself. Sir Cecil Wray, of Sleningford, was foreman 
of a grand jury of twenty persons of consideration, two others 
of his quality being with him in Sir William Foulis of Ingleby 
and Sir William Robinson of Newby, places well known to 
Aram in former years. 

True bills were found against all three, though upon what 
conceivable grounds in Terry’s case cannot now even be con- 
jectured. Some witnesses, whose depositions have disappeared, 
must have been examined against him by the grand jury, for 
then, as now, it was the function of such a jury to hear the 
Crown evidence and thereupon to ignore or to return the bill 
as true. No true bill could have been returned merely on 
the strength of Aram’s accusation. The gaol book clearly 
shows that Terry was put upon his trial before a petty jury, 
and acquitted and discharged. 

While we may surmise that the witness from Harrogate who 
identified his ‘‘tankard and two salts’? was one of those 
examined against the ale-draper, we are able with confidence 
to dispose of the trite fable that Aram was convicted upon the 
‘sole evidence of Richard Houseman,’’ or upon that evidence 
supported by testimony that would not now suffice to secure con- 
viction upon a most trivial charge. To his contemporaries Aram 
appeared to be convicted ‘‘ upon many concurrent proofs and 
a number of the strongest circumstances,’’ and not the slightest 
doubt was ever entertained of his guilt until several genera- 
tions had passed away and men took the romantic figure of the 
novelist for the unlovely reality. 

Excluding Anna Aram, but including the examining magis- 
trate, the two constables, Beckwith, whose evidence of finding 
goods in Aram’s garden is printed in the most reliable reports, 


3 The York Pamphlet gives the names in the proper order of seniority :— 
Norton, of the Middle Temple, took silk in 1754; Stanhope, of Gray’s 
Inn, was admitted a student in 1718, and was probably about fifty six, 
There was another Stanhope at the bar, Lovell, called in 1747, but he went 


into political life. Yates was of the Inner Temple. Hartley was a 
Lincoln’s Inn man. 


72 


CuopuoT ‘wabuoy “ad “VF fq °090Yd) 
‘ood SyNUIP YMOITIOM UTST.VION ey} Wor esed VW 


br PP eg onlin te aed ee 


- 7D oo $GYEC"G ah og oo. 


ie Wels 
a eae TC iC Hie wry f Pee: vere nyse wey wy 
/ Profle Ly, eo braved) vs ine oy 9 os dees? 2 rory TRY Gr aes —« 
f Ge revs 


"yy sed lin ake ee Gojoe OO 


| yds ve . 
% g yl Seed gp e im 7? Bs wu he 
| oo seca ad oo Cid shies in it on 7 
! hyve) ley ; Ayes ieee 6a VA BOs 770 
ECG Me Mies pape IRL LEY 
} pay yori anes poopy yyy TOU 
. prey yig  OWAM  P 


To be Tried by his Country. 


and all those others whose depositions or recognisances will be 
found in the Appendix, we have fourteen known witnesses 
against the protagonist in the story. In some cases the 
depositions are not extant, and the nature of their evidence 
must be gleaned from the pamphlets. That the mortgagee of 
Aram’s property in Bondgate was called to prove the repay- 
ment by Eugene soon after 8th February, 1744-5, of the sum 
advanced, seems very probable, and we are also informed that 
the Crown was in a position to trace the whole of Clark’s £200 
to Eugenius, but that the case was considered sufficiently 
strong without it.4 However that may be—and Norton was 
not the man to fail to press a case thoroughly home—we must 
bid a long farewell to the pious legend of ‘‘ the sole testimony 
of Richard Houseman.”’ 

Saturday, the 28th of July, being the Commission day, the 
judges after formally opening the assize at the Guildhall, 
adjourned at once to their lodgings, and on the following 
Monday proceeded to hear the civil and criminal pleas for the 
city and county of York, Bathurst sitting at misc prius and 
Noel on the Crown side. Between 30th July and 3rd August 
the three prisoners were called on to plead to their indictments, 
to which each in turn pleaded “not guilty,’’ and so “‘ put 
himself upon his country ’’—a fact recorded upon his indict- 
ment by {the superscription above his name of the word 
** putts.”’ 


4 Bristow, p. 39, n. 


73 


CHAPTER VIII. 


The Cause List for Friday, August 3rd, 1759—A Good Day’s Work— 
Character of William Noel and of Fletcher Norton—The Prison- 
ers Presented to Their Jury—‘‘Good and Lawful Men”— 
George Mason Tried—Trial of Houseman—Practice as to 
King’s Evidences—Some Absurd Errors—He is Acquitted— 
Eugene Aram is Put to the Bar—His Indictment—Quaint. 
Formalities—Opening of the Crown Case—Houseman in the 
Box — Did Aram Cross-Examine— Other Witnesses— Aram 
Called on for His Defence. 


Wuen Mr. Justice Noel took his seat on the morning of Friday, 
3rd August, 1759, such a cause list awaited the day’s work 
as no present-day judge would attempt] to get through at a 
sitting. It has so commonly been represented that Houseman 
and Aram were the only two brought to justice on this day— 
the few old tracts which mention the case of Terry representing 
it as disposed of next day—that it is well to reproduce here 
from the minute book the total calendar of the day, if only to 
show the untrustworthiness of received reports, too evidently 
the work of persons not present. 
The cause list was— 


. Lister and others, misdemeanour. 
. George Mason, for larceny. 
. Richard Houseman, for murder. 
. Eugene Aram, for murder. 
. Henry Terry, for murder. 
. John Goodaire, for receiving stolen goods. 
. The Inhabitants of the Township of Hook, for non- 
repair of a highway. 
R. v. The Inhabitants of the Township of Brayton, for 
a like offence. 
R. v. James Walker and Thomas Hancey, for an assault. 


So 
Feee eee 


No adjournment of felony cases, once begun, was then 
possible. In the notorious case of Nairn and Ogilvie the Court 
sat for forty-three hours continuously, with but half an hour for 
refreshments. In Stephen Colledge’s case the Court was 
sitting at three o’clock in the morning, when it “called for 
two bottles of sack,’’ which, the reporter drily adds, ‘‘ were 


74 


William Noel. 


consumed in the presence of the prisoner.’’ After trying Green, 
Berry, and Hill for the murder of Sir Edmond Berry Godfrey, 
the Chief Justice observed that it was time to break up the 
Court, as in the afternoon he had to sit at nisi prius. Such 
a case would occupy a modern judge at least two days. What 
assisted despatch was the fact that the judges took few or 
no notes, trusting almost entirely to their memories, which, 
as Mr. H. B. Irving well says in his ‘‘ Life of Jeffreys,’”’ must 
have been developed to an incredible extent in this special 
direction. It would be a mistake to suppose the trials of this 
time to have been perfunctory. Miss Blandy’s case and Eliza- 
beth Canning’s show the thoroughness with which the gravest 
or most complicated issues could be handled. There being 
less ‘‘ waiting for his lordship’s pen’’ than now, evidence 
could be taken more rapidly. 

Noel sat alone on the Crown side. ‘‘ Two judges sat and 
four counsel were engaged against Aram ’’—so runs an account 
by a legal writer. But Bathurst was sitting at nist prius, 
and at this time was busy trying a big ‘‘ breach’”’ case, in 
which a jury awarded Miss Redfern £1500 damages against 
William Bowes, Esq., for his perfidy.1 Of William Noel much 
has been ignorantly and spitefully written, so that it is but 
a duty to his memory to vindicate it from aspersions which it 
were charitable to ascribe to lack of knowledge rather than 
to that utter want of conscience in dealing with the administra- 
tion of justice as incidental to history, which has been so 
great a blemish on more than one historian’s reputation. The 
criticisms levelled at Noel’s conduct of the case will be better 
appreciated when the case itself has been unfolded ; I therefore 
reserve them, merely observing that with the exception of some 
strictures, themselves censured by the Gentleman’s Magazine as 
based on maimed accounts of the proceedings, they date only from 
the period of Aram’s elevation into a hero of romance. We are 
invited to believe Noel unworthy of his station because Horace 
Walpole, of all people, spoke flippantly of him as “‘ a pompous 
man of little solidity.’’ Noel had had a singularly successful 
career at the bar, and owed his preferment to the bench to 
the high opinion Lord Hardwicke entertained of his abilities. 
I, for one, would rather be wrong with Hardwicke than right 
with Walpole in the estimate of a lawyer’s fitness for judicial 
office. It need not be added that Walpole, who habitually 
calumniated all men greater than himself, had the lowest 
opinion of Hardwicke himself! Noel’s candour and fairness 
on this trial were noticed by contemporaries, as will later appear. 


1 Cambridge Journal, Aug. llth, 1759; Read’s Weekly Journal, same 
date. 
15 


Eugene Aram. 


It belongs here to refute the charge of bloodthirstiness by 
showing that he was ready to give a prisoner on trial for 
murder the full benefit of the law, where it took a merciful 
view of a particular crime. On the 6th of September, 1759, 
‘‘in an ingenious and pathetic speech, supported by adjudged 
cases and the doctrine of the wisest sages of the law, and also 
by arguments of reason and conscience,’’ he, sitting as Chief 
Justice of Chester on the case of John Stephenson, a cheese- 
monger, found guilty of killing Francis Elcock, ‘‘ declared 
that the prisoner’s crime could amount at most to manslaughter 
only. Whereupon he was burnt in the hand and discharged.’’? 

The crime for which Stephenson was thus so leniently 
punished was the deliberate shooting of a young attorney who 
had come to arrest him on a warrant. A slight technical flaw” 
was later discovered in the form of the warrant, and to this the 
prisoner owed his life. Noel was as much bound to administer 
the law as he found it in this case as in Aram’s, though it may 
have operated less favourably to the scholar than to the cheese- 
monger ! 

Noel was not, as has been said, a man of interests confined 
solely to professional advancement ; thus we find the celebrated 
antiquary, Samuel Gale, writing to Dr. Stukeley (one of 
Eugene’s authorities) in January, 1728-9, that he has left. at 
Mr. Noel’s “not only my Cotovicus, but likewise Father 
Bernardin’s (for both of whom I have a singular respect). If 
I was not fully persuaded that they were in good hands I 
should hardly have ventured them so far.”3 Somewhat self- 
seeking and somewhat of an opportunist he was, but without 
such defects of character success in the career of his choice had 
been impossible. 

Far more formidable to Eugene was the leading counsel for 
the Crown—Fletcher Norton, K.C., a bold, unscrupulous, hard- 
fighting advocate, no great lawyer withal, but a verdict getter. 
He had been miserably poor in early life, and a hard struggle 
had left its scars upon a character never very amiable. Of 
literature he was so destitute that Johnson said he did not 
seem to know that there were such publications as the 
“ Reviews,”’ and his success was attributed by the Sage as well 
as by others to the dogged tenacity with which he pursued his 
profession. Horace Walpole, need it be said, thought ill of 


2 London Magazine, Sep., 1759 ; 19 St. Tr. 878, the latter in error gives 
the date as August 6th, the day of Aram’s execution. 

8 Nichol’s ‘‘ Literary Illustrations.” Cotovicus was the author of 
“Ttinerarium Hierosolymitanum et Syriacum” and of the ‘‘ Synthesis 
Reipublice Venetz.” Noel went to the same school as Samuel Johnson— 
Hunter’s Grammar School at Lichfield. For further particulars of Noel, 
see Foss’s Lives of the Judges. 


76 


Sir Bull-Face Double-Fee. 


him, and Wilkes told a story, much to his discredit, of an 
opinion he had offered to the libertine member for Middlesex 
on a matter arising out of his gallantries. 

But a far weightier authority on “Sir Bull-Face Double-Fee,” 
as he was dubbed, Lord Mansfield, said of him—‘“ Norton’s art 
was very likely to mislead a jury, and with him I felt it more 
difficult to prevent injustice being done than with any person 
whoever practised before me.” Such an advocate was more 
than likely to employ everything that resource could suggest 
to secure a verdict, whether by introducing topics of prejudice 
or by such appeals to passion as are now only heard, and that 
rarely, from the lips of counsel for the defence. The circum- 
stances of the case, the wild rumours that had been flying 
about, and the sinister impression made on the general mind 
by Anna’s evidence at the inquests gave Norton every oppor- 
tunity for those methods of advocacy noticed by Mansfield. 

The judge having taken his seat, the proceedings opened by 
the disposal of R. v. Lister and others, the defendants’ recog- 
nisances being discharged. This took but a moment, and then 
the real work of the day began. The several prisoners in 
felony were now together put to the bar for presentation to 
the jury, their pleas having been taken on some previous 
occasion.4 

The clerk of arraigns rose and thus addressed them— 
“Prisoners at the bar, hear what is said to you. These good 
men you shall now see called are those who shall pass> between 
our Sovereign Lord the King and you upon your lives and 
deaths. Therefore, if you would challenge them, or any of 
them, you must challenge them as they come to the book to 


4 Aram’s plea was taken in this wise. The clerk of arraigns, upon his 
arraignment, thus addressed him, ‘‘ Eugene Aram, hold up thy hand, You 
stand indicted by the name of Eugene Aram, late of Knaresbrough, in the 
county of York, schoolmaster, otherwise called Eugenius Aram, late of 

c. . . .” Here followed the substance of the indictment, and in 
conclusion, the clerk asked, ‘‘ How sayest thou, Eugene Aram, art thou 
guilty of the felony and murder whereof thou standest indicted, or not 
. guilty?” Aram: ‘Not guilty.” The clerk: ‘‘Culprit, how wilt thou be 
tried?” Aram: ‘“‘By God and my country.” Culprit is derived by 
Blackstone from “‘cul.,” for “culpable,” and “‘ prit” an abbreviation of 
“paratus verificare,” being the legal mode of joinder of issue on behalf of 
the Crown on the plea of not guilty. The expression ‘‘ By God and my 
country ” is said by Stephen to have dated from the days of compurgators 
and of the ordeal, when the accused elected to be tried by his country, if 
he could find compurgators, but if not, was tried by God, i.e., the ordeal. 
When ordeal disappeared the alternatives became fused into the senseless, 
if sonorous, phrase above, which continued in use until 1827, being used by 
Thurtell in 1824. eas nee 

«The j assing on the prisoner’s life”—‘‘ Measure for Measure, 
ED. 5 1.,;20. MWe ease pass ee his life ”—‘‘ King Lear,” III., vii., 26. 


77 


Eugene Aram. 


be sworn, before they are sworn, and you shall be heard.” 
No jurors appear to have been challenged, and there were 
sworn Thomas Sutton, Robert Skelton, Robert Kitchin, 
William Edmond, William Aked, Richard Crosier, Richard 
Marshall, Nathaniel Priestley, John Brook, Joseph Clement, 
John Whittaker, and Thomas Coates. All these good and 
lawful men, whose names are entered in the minute book and 
in the York county jury list, are described as of the condition 
of “gentlemen”—a word in law implying the possession of a 
liberal education, and carrying a refutation of the oft-made 
apology for Aram, that he was convicted through the impene- 
trable stupidity of boors, unable to understand his “ beautiful 
oration” and its train of reasoning.® 

The jury sworn, proclamation was made in the language still 
in use, calling on all and sundry to inform “my lords the 
King’s justices, the King’s Serjeant, or the King’s Attorney 
General of any treasons, murders, felonies, or misdemeanours, 
done or committed by any of the prisoners,” and upon those 
bound by recognisances to give evidence, to come forth and 
give it, “for the prisoners stand now at the bar upon their 
deliverance.” George Mason, the other prisoners being put 
back, was now presented to the jury, who found him guilty 
of stealing two pecks of malt, value one shilling and sixpence, 
and three of wheat, value twopence; whereupon he “ pleaded 
his clergy,” was burnt in the hand, and discharged. 

Richard Houseman was next put to the bar and given in 
charge of the jury, the substance of his indictment being stated 
to them, as it alreadyhad been to the prisoner on taking his plea. 
No evidence was offered against the heckler, Norton merely 
rising to ask for a verdict of not guilty, if the Court was willing 
that that course should be taken, whereon Noel replied that it 
was entirely a matter for counsel’s discretion, and directed a 
verdict of not guilty, which the jury at once returned.?7 No 
lawyer will need to be told that this is what happened. Yet 
scarcely any of our “authorities” has failed to write some 
drivel on the supposition that Houseman was acquitted on the 
weight of evidence! The Grand Magazine of Magazines started 
this fiction ; it was amplified by Bell, who in no respect displays 


6The word ‘‘gentleman,” though indiscriminately used in parish 
registers, as is shown in Boswell, anent the description of Samuel Johnson’s 
father, has always had a strict meaning in law, the addition of ‘ gent.” 
being familiar to all readers of law reports. The York City jury list 
includes tradesmen of all descriptions, unlike the County List, which 
consists of gentry solely. 


_ 7It had been the custom, on acquittal, for the prisoner to fall on his knees 
in the dock, exclaiming ‘‘ God save the King and the Honourable Court.” 


78 


Houseman——A pprover. 


more signally his utter untrustworthiness than in the following 
passage : — 


“Richard Houseman was first tried, but the evidence 
not being sufficient to convict him, he was acquitted 
: though the Court were convinced from circum- 
stances during his trial that he was deeply implicated in 
the fact, yet as there was no direct proof of it, the jury 
could not find him guilty.” 


And this is the work which in “Wills on Circumstantial 
Evidence ” is described as the best edition of the trial! Andrews 
is yet more exquisitely ridiculous— 


“The case against the three prisoners was anything 
but strong, and had it not been for the pusillanimous 
demeanour of Houseman while on his trial in the dock it 
is probable that all three would have been acquitted; but 
his agitation and fear led the counsel for the prosecution 
to examine him sharply [in the dock! E.R.W.], which 
had the effect of causing him to inculpate himself and 
Aram, and in accordance with the usage of Criminal 
Courts, he was permitted to turn ‘ Queen’s evidence.’ ” 


Caulfield also makes the common error, adding that “ these 
questions (7.e., whether he saw Aram kill Clark) fairly staggered 
Houseman,” though he had long ago confessed witnessing the 
murder, and over two months before had definitely bargained 
with the Crown to save his life by saying so. Nor will any 
lawyer need to be told that, far from his transfer from dock 
to witness-box being the hasty decision of a moment, each 
“treasury brief” had a full “proof” of what “Richard 
Houseman will say ’’—in other words, the Crown attorney’s 
prepared version of the heckler’s story. 

It is as well to review Houseman’s exact legal position as a 
result of this acquittal. He had been acquitted as a principal; 
he could still be indicted as an accessary before or after the 
fact; he could also, and this was a real danger, be “ appealed 
of the murder” by Clark’s heir-at-law. This accounts at once 
for his reticence and for his explicitness. He dare not impeach 
himself for fear of a second accusation; if he failed, on the 
other hand, to ‘‘ come up to his proof,’’ the Crown could indict 
him as accessary. He was thus interested in steering a middle 
course between the truth and a complete suppression of it. 
He had yet to earn his immunity from further action by the 
Crown by impeaching his confederate, and at the same time 
give no occasion to Clark’s heir to seize upon any incautious 
admission to demand that he should go again before a jury 

79 


Eugene Aram. 


on an appeal of murder, which meant death beyond the reach 
of mercy, for the King had no power to pardon a convicted 
appellee. 

Aram was now taken from the cells and put to the bar, when 
the Clerk of Arraigns thus proceeded— 

“Eugene Aram, hold up thy hand.8 Gentlemen of the jury, 
look upon the prisoner. He stands indicted by the name of 
Eugene Aram . . . d&c.,” continuing to recite the substance 
of the indictment, as he had already done in taking the plea. 
The indictment itself is missing from the records, but a very 
fair idea of its language will be obtained by reading the 
inquisition of the coroner’s jury. It probably contained several 
counts, laying the offence in divers ways, as “ with a certain 
offensive weapon, to wit, a mason’s pick, of the value of one 
shilling, which he in his hand then and there held,” varied by 
another saying, that he held it in his right hand, or “‘ in both 
the hands of him,” and so forth. 

Having read the conclusion ‘‘ against the peace of our Lord 
the King, his crown and dignity,’’ the clerk added, ‘‘ He is 
also indicted upon the coroner’s inquisition. Your charge, 
therefore, is to iquire whether he be guilty of the felony 
and murder whereof he stands indicted or not guilty. If you 
find him guilty you shall inquire what goods or chattels, lands 
or tenements he had at the time of the felony and murder 
committed or at any time since, and if you find him not guilty 
you shall inquire whether he fled for the same; and if you 
find he did fly for the same you shall inquire of his goods and 
chattels as if you had found him guilty; and if you find him 
not guilty, and that he did not fly for the same, say so and 
no more, and hear your evidence.’’? 


8 «Sir, you might as well tell us you had seen him hold up his hand at 
the Old Bailey, and he neither swore nor talked bawdy.” Johnson at the 
Crown and Anchor, A.D., 1768. 


9 This finding occurs also in the verdict at the inquest ; it had long been 
a matter of form, the jury in convicting always pronouncing the prisoner 
to be unpossessed of goods or lands; on acquitting they also found in the 
negative, if asked to find on the subsidiary question ‘‘ whether he fled for 
the same.” The practice probably dated from the days when jurors 
informed the Crown of the prisoner’s guilt from their own knowledge, and 
not from the evidence ; and so were in the position to know if there was 
any property to escheat to the Crown on conviction. The statute ‘“‘De 
Officio Coronatoris,” A.D., 1276, bound the coroner to value the goods of a 
person found guilty by his jury of murder, ‘“‘sicut statim vendi possunt.”’ 
When jurors in later times decided solely on the evidence, as no evidence 
was before them as to the prisoner’s means, they found that he had none, 
though many State prisoners were very wealthy. One, who fled from 
justice, forfeited his goods even if afterwards acquitted, hence the object 
of the second question. See Foster’s ‘‘Crown Law,” pp. 276, 288. Wills’ 
‘‘Circumstantial Evidence,” 125, and 7 and 8 Geo., IV., c. 28, s. 5 abolish- 
ing this verdict. 


80 


Forensic Oratory——a.D. 1759. 


Mr. Joseph Yates, as junior counsel for the Crown, now 
opened the indictment by stating it very much more briefly 
than it had just been done, adding, ‘‘ To this indictment the 
prisoner hath pleaded not guilty, and for answer hath put 
himself upon his country, which country you are, and that is 
the issue which you have to try.”’ Mr. Fletcher Norton, K.C., 
then rose to address the jury. His speech has not been pre- 
served, but that of Henry Bathhurst against Mary Blandy may 
afford some idea of the vigour of language in which at that age 
a prosecuting counsel of ability clothed his statement of the 
facts. Nor were the arts of oratory despised. | Whatever 
effect could be gained by skilful antithesis, or sonorous climax, 
or any use of tropes or other tricks of rhetoric was striven for 
as strenuously as it would now be avoided, and Blair, in his 
“Lectures on Rhetoric’’ has preserved, as a parallel to the 
famous instance in Cicero’s ‘‘ Pro Cluentio,’’ a climax in a 
Scottish address, in which the advocate has endeavoured to 
move the passions of his hearers against a poor, young woman 
charged with killing her natural child. 

Having concluded what no doubt was a powerful and im- 
pressive oration, Norton resumed his seat, to be followed, 
perhaps, on the same side by Mr. Stanhope—for it was usual 
to hear two Crown counsel in serious cases at this time, though 
none could be heard in felony for the defence. The opening 
speeches concluded, Mr. Stanhope, whose seniority at the bar 
is proved by his being given the charge of a most difficult 
witness, proceeded to call Richard Houseman. We have no 
very full account of the flax-dresser’s evidence, but of the 
manner in which he gave it there is a most complete con- 
currence of contemporary opinion. ‘‘ Houseman’s evidence,’? 
says the Press of that day, ‘‘ was delivered with all the anxiety, 
diffidence, and embarrassment of conscious guilt, solicitous to 
accuse the partner of his iniquity no farther than consisted with 
keeping the curtain drawn between the Court and him.”’ 

Houseman, who was evidently a witness requiring a great 
deal of ‘‘ bringing up to the fence,’’ deposed that he went one 
night, about Candlemas, 1744, to Aram’s house to receive some 
leather of him; that he then received twelve skins, and some 
time after seven more; that between two and three in the 
morning Aram and Clark went out of the house, asking him 
to take a walk with them, which he complied with; that they 
walked up the street together; that there was another man, 
unknown to him, on the other side of the way; that they pro- 
ceeded to a close, where St. Robert’s Cave is; that Aram and 
Clark went into it over the hedge ; that he saw them quarrelling, 
and saw Aram strike Clark, but he could not see if Aram had 

¥F 81 


Eugene Aram. 


any weapon.!0  ‘‘Here the judge asked what the witness 
said, for he, being in the utmost horror and confusion and 
self-conscious of equal (sic), spoke very low. Mr. Stanhope 
replied, ‘ My lord, he says he saw Aram strike Clark down.’ ’ 
The witness continued that he knew not when they went 
out of Aram’s intention to murder Clark, and that, on seeing 
Clark fall, he made the best of his way home; that 
he knew not what Aram did with the body till next morning, 
when Aram called on him and told him he had left it in the 
cave, but threatened vengeance on him if he ever disclosed 
what had passed the preceding night.!! 

Whether Aram cross-examined this witness is uncertain. The 
accounts of Houseman’s evidence, given in Bristow, the York 
Pamphlet, in Jackson’s Oxford Journal, and in Lloyd’s Evening 
Post say nothing of any cross-examination. Indeed the only 
contemporary accounts which do are Sympson’s edition of the 
trial, which also prints the spurious confession, and the very un- 
veracious account in the Grand Magazine of Magazines. The 
alleged cross-examination is, however, accepted by Bell, 
Scatcherd, and a host of uncritical writers. | While premising 
my own unbelief in the ‘‘remarkable questions he put to 
Houseman,’’ as Sympson expressed it in his puff preliminary 
of his ‘‘ Genuine Account,’’!2 I proceed to give them. 


T here follow The York Pamphlet; Bristow’s account differs in not 
mentioning the strange man on the other side of the way who had been 
mentioned by Houseman in his examination a year before. The York 
Pamphiet, as will be seen, states that this fourth man was not Henry 
Terry. Thus Bristow :—Houseman was then called upon, who deposed 
“that, in the night between the 7th and 8th February, 1744-5, about 
eleven o‘clock, he went to Aram’s house—that, after two hours and up- 
wards spent in passing to and fro between their several houses to dispose 
of various goods, and to settle some notes concerning them, Aram proposed, 
first to Clark, and then to Houseman, to take a walk out of town. That 
when they came to the field where St. Robert’s Cave is, Aram and Clark 
went into it over the hedge, and when they came within six or eight yards 
of the cave he saw them quarrelling. That he saw Aram strike Clark 
several times, upon which Clark fell, and he never saw him rise again; 
that he saw no instrument that Aram had, and knew not that he had any. 
That upon this, without any interposition or alarm, he left them, and 
returned home. That the next morning he went to Aram’s house, and 
asked what business he had with Clark last night, and what he had done 
with him? Aram replied not to this question, but threatened him if he 
spoke of his being in Clark’s company that night—vowing vengeance, 
either by himself or some other person, if he mentioned anything relating 
to the affair.” 

“The Annual Register, Bell, and others represent Houseman as saying 
that he went to Aram’s to inquire what he had done with Clark. The 
York Pamphlet and other reports of 1759 differ herein. . Bristow, however, 
p. Ba. agrees with the A.R. It is of no moment; the whole was palpably 
untrue. 

Tn the Public Advertiser, 30th August, 1759. 


82 


Aram’s Cross-examination of Houseman. 


Aram first asked the witness how, in the depth of winter, 
when the nights are very dark, he could see him strike Clark. 
Houseman replied that he could see sufficiently by moonlight. 13 
The second question was as to what distance he (witness) was 
when he saw the accused strike Clark ; to which Houseman re- 
plied that it was about ten or a dozen yards. Aram is then 
said to have asked why he did not go over the hedge into the 
field along with him and Clark, since they came out together, 
and had no business to talk of but what concerned them all. 
This, like the other questions, appears only in the dubious 
authorities referred to. Houseman is here represented as 
throwing himself on the protection of the Court, on the ground 
that the question tended to incriminate him, and as being 
excused for answering it. His danger was real; for, while it 
would have been utterly opposed to the practice of the Crown 
to have indicted him on any incautious admissions, as accessary, 
nothing could prevent Clark’s heir-at-law from seizing on such 
a slip to appeal him of the murder, and a singular peculiarity 
of such appeals was that the Crown had no power of pardon. 

This last question of Aram’s has been praised by indis- 
criminate admirers as showing great acuteness. It only served, 
however, to bring into relief the fact of a common guilty in- 
tention—whether to commit murder or to destroy the plate. 
Houseman, by declining to answer, virtually confessed privity 
to an unlawful purpose, and thus cut away almost the only 
possible ground of defence — that the killing was upon a 
sudden quarrel, not arising out of the execution of an unlawful 
design. The question, if put, reflects upon the caution of 
the questioner, and it is safe to say that no counsel would have 
put it, there being nothing to be gained by establishing what 
the Crown admitted—that Houseman was an accomplice, and 
no object in cross-examining to credit a man who came before 
the jury as a King’s evidence and a rascal. 

Nor did the question in the least assist the defence that 
Aram seems to have relied on—that there was no sufficient 
proof of the corpus delicti. Houseman was endeavouring to 
protect his accomplice by representing the killing in the light 
most favourable to Aram as arising out of a sudden quarrel. 
The question tended to bring out the witness’s privity in a 
murderous design—the very thing to be avoided. Before he 
left the box the heckler was asked by the Court the obvious 


13. The moon, as shown by Tycho Wing’s Almanack, The Lady’s Diary, 
and other ephemerides, rose at about 8 p.m., ‘‘southed” at 1.22, and set soon 
after 8.30. It seems exceedingly unlikely that the cautious Aram should 
have forgotten that it was moonlight on the night in question, and should 
have risked bringing this out by so rash a question. The moon was but 
two days after the full, and, with snow on the ground, the light must have 
been considerable. ‘ 

3 


Eugene Aram. 


question—why he did not discover the affair. To which he 
made answer that ‘‘ Aram threatened to take away his life if 
he made any discovery of what had passed.’’ Aram, in com- 
menting on this, after conviction, observed, ‘‘ That part. of 
Houseman’s evidence, wherein he said that I threatened him, 
was absolutely false; for what hindered him, when I was so 
long absent and far distant?’’ This is true enough, but it 
is for the schoolmaster’s apologists to reconcile this passage 
in the letter to Collins with the writer’s innocence. The motive 
for Houseman’s silence was impertinent; the fact that he did 
long conceal the crime remains. Indeed Aram’s comment 
impliedly admits it. 

Peter Moor was next put into the box to prove the conversa- 
tion between Aram and Clark concerning Mrs. Clark’s fortune. 
To what he swore in his deposition, the witness, according to 
Bristow, now added that Clark, speaking of the money, said, 
“‘Tt was with difficulty I got it.’’ Barnett followed; his de- 
position will be recalled; and was succeeded by Beckwith, a 
witness whose deposition is not extant. According to Bristow, 
Mr. Beckwith deposed ‘‘that when Aram’s garden was 
searched on suspicion of his being an accomplice in the frauds 
of Clark, there were found buried there several kinds of goods 
bound together in a coarse wrapper, and among the rest, in 
particular, a piece of cambric, which he himself had sold Clark 
a very little time before.’”’ The Grand Magazne of Maga- 
zines informs us that there were several other witnesses to 
prove similar discoveries. 

The very material evidence of William Tuton and of Stephen 
Latham was next called. It is easy to see how much the 
testimony of each, unshaken by cross-examination, must 
have impressed the jury. Tuton proved Aram and 
Houseman to have been in Clark’s company as late 
as three in the morning; rightly or wrongly he swore that 
they endeavoured to elude notice. He further gave the 
significant evidence touching his missing pick or hammer— 
an instrument used for giving a facing to masonry. Did Aram 
cross-examine either witness? The Grand Magazine 
says that ‘‘ Aram, indeed, asked the witnesses several questions 
to try if by their answers he could find something to invalidate 
their evidence,’’? but no more reliable authority mentions a 
word of such cross-examination, and it is rather opposed to the 
flippancy with which he dismisses, without a single observation, 
“what is called evidence ’’ in his address. It is not difficult 
to see how an advocate of the most moderate skill could have 
attacked Tuton’s evidence. Why had he not mentioned the 
pick to Thornton on the 17th? Would he explain how he was 
able to recognise the prisoner if he was endeavouring to hide 

84 


Fatal Equivocations. 


from him? Equally so Latham might have been rendered 
much less positive about the amount of the money he saw 
the prisoner produce. It would also have been put to this 
witness that the prisoner made no concealment of the money, 
produced it in the most open manner, and so forth, to rebut 
the inference that it was Clark’s. 

Even more fatal was the evidence which followed, when, 
according to Bristow, John Barker, the constable, who 
executed the warrant granted by Mr. Thornton, and 
indorsed by Sir John Turner, deposed ‘‘that at Lynn, 
Sir John Turner and some others first went into the school 
where Aram was, the witness waiting at the door. Sir John 
asked him if he knew Knaresborough? He replied, ‘ No.’ 
And being further asked if he had any acquaintance with one 
Daniel Clark, he denied that he every knew such a man. Wit- 
ness then entered the school, and said, ‘ How do you do, Mr. 
Aram?’ Aram replied, ‘How do you do, sir! I don’t 
know you.’ ‘What,’ said the witness, ‘don’t you know 
me? Don’t you remember that Daniel Clark and you had 
always a spite against me when you lived at Knaresborough? ’ 
Upon this he recollected the witness, and owned his residence 
at Knaresborough. The witness then asked him if he did not 
know St. Robert’s Cave? He answered, ‘ Yes.’ The 
witness replied, ‘Aye, to your sorrow.’ ‘That upon their 
journey to York Aram inquired after his old neighbours, and 
what they said of him. ‘To which the witness replied that 
they were much enraged against him for the loss of their goods. 
That upon Aram’s asking if it was not possible to make up the 
matter, the witness answered he believed he might save himself 
if he would restore to them what they had lost. Aram 
answered that was impossible, but he might perhaps find them 
an equivalent.’’ 

Aram was then asked by the judge if he had anything to 
say to the witness before him. He replied that, to the best 
of his knowledge, it was not in the school, but in the room 
adjoining the school, where Sir John Turner and the witness 
were when he first saw them. 

The witness, who was evidently hostile to Aram, introduced, 
according to the York Pamphlet, a topic of prejudice by describ- 
ing the prisoner’s alarm at passing a body hanging in chains 
on the road from Lynn; but on this, the same authority adds, 
the judge in his summing up laid little stress. There is a 
verisimilitude about Aram’s answer to the Court’s invitation 
to cross-examine, which, to my mind, stamps this part of the 
report as true. Prisoners in such a situation, if unused to 
the ways of Court, usually reply to a witness instead of ques- 
tioning him, and, as often as not, are content to set him right 


85 


Eugene Aram. 


on an immaterial, or at least a trivial, circumstance. Francis 
Moor, according to the York Pamphlet, had preceded Barker 
in the witness-box ; that he was bound over in a recognisance 
in £20 to give evidence appears from the records. He swore, 
apparently, to the conversation about Clark and Knaresborough 
taking place with him, while Barker remained outside, burst- 
ing into the room at the moment when Aram was denying all 
knowledge of Knaresborough and its historic cobbler, in order 
to put him to confusion, he being unquestionably known to 
the prisoner, whereas Moor, perhaps, was not. Of Ernest 
Day, said by the Gentleman’s Magazine to have assisted at the 
arrest, no trace can be discovered among the records. 

The lame explanation has been put forward that Aram denied 
knowing Clark because he feared to be accused of complicity in 
his frauds. But he had already been dismissed on this charge 
in 1744-5. Nor could anything fresh well have come to light 
since, save the discovery of the body. The bald précis of the 
two constables’ evidence, as it appears in the reports, but faintly 
conveys its probable effect upon the Court and jury; the con- 
fusion and evasions of the accused while in the schoolhouse at 
Lynn formed the strongest link in the chain of circumstantial 
evidence against him. The remark of Barker, ‘‘ Aye, to your 
sorrow,’’ while certainly improper, was, coupled with the 
prisoner’s failure to reply, admissible against him. 

It now remained to call the medical evidence, and finally the 
justice, and so complete the Crown case. Higgins and Locock 
were both bound over on their recognisances, but only Locock’s 
name figures in the reports of the trial. Their depositions 
establish two things of medico-legal importance. The blow was 
on the back part of the skull or occiput, not on the side or 
“temporal bone,’’ as has been stated in so many reports and 
also in Taylor’s ‘‘ Medical Jurisprudence.’’? Secondly, the frac- 
ture was caused by a relatively blunt instrument, causing a 
large fracture, and not a small wound of entry and a larger 
wound of exit, as has been described.14 Thus is exploded the 
ingenious defence of Aram by Mr. J. M. Richardson, who calls 
him the Dreyfus of the eighteenth century, and endeavours to 
show that Eugene struck his man in a fair fight and face to 
face, and so occasioned a wound on the left side of the skull, 
as a right-handed man would naturally do. | Waiving the 
question whether that would have altered Aram’s guilt in the 
eye of the law, the contention is hopeless, in view of the 


4 A glance at Glaister’s ‘‘ Medical Jurisprudence,” plates facing p. 229, 
will show how utterly unlike a wound with a pick-axe is to that described 
by these witnesses. The tool of Tuton’s appears to have been that now 
known as a mason’s hammer, relatively blunt, though Tuton, indeed, 
styles it a ‘* pick.” 


86 


Questions of Forensic Medicine. 


express statement of the doctors that the fracture was at the 
back. The nature of the fracture, said Locock, who produced 
the skull, was such that it could not have been made but by 
the stroke of some blunt instrument; the piece was beaten in- 
wards, and could not be replaced but from within. He gave it 
as his opinion that no such breach could proceed from any 
natural decay—that it was not a recent fracture by the instru- 
ment with which it was dug up, but seemed to be of many 
years’ standing. 

Whether he was asked anything as to the age or sex of the 
person to whom the bones belonged, or as to how long they 
had been in the ground, or how he could tell that the injury 
was inflicted in life, we do not know. 

Taylor does, indeed, say, in speaking of Aram’s defence, ‘‘ He 
also positively denied the conclusion as to the age and sex of 
the skeleton, but this objection was entirely set aside by the 
medical evidence.’’ But it does not appear that the learned 
author had access to any reports of the medical evidence 
superior to those furnished by the various tracts ; and, inasmuch 
as he speaks of the fracture being of the temporal bone, 
whereas the depositions point to the occiput as the seat of the 
lesion, we can arrive at no conclusion, even on so high an 
authority, that the sex was in this case unimpeachably deter- 
mined. A poftion of the skull produced in Court by Locock 
having come into my possession, I recently submitted it to 
Professor Keith, the Hunterian Lecturer, soliciting the favour 
of his most valuable opinion upon the following points, all 
suggested by Aram in his defence :—(1) What was the sex of the 
subject? (2) What was the age of the subject at death? (3) 
What was the probable length of time during which the body 
had lain in the ground, bearing in mind that it lay without the 
protection of any coffin, shell, or even clothing? (4) Whether 
it was possible to say definitely that any one of the apparent 
fractures upon the fragment was inflicted before burial, and 
presumably therefore in life? 

The replies of Professor Keith will be found at length in the 
third Appendix. In brief, modern science steps to the aid 
of eighteenth century speculation, and establishes—(1) That 
the subject was a male; (2) that he appeared to be of about 
thirty years of age; (3) that the appearance and state of the 
bone is entirely consistent with its having lain in blackish 
mould for about thirteen or fourteen years, but that it might 
have lain longer, even for a century, though its state fits 
better with the shorter period ; (4) there was certainly a fracture 
occasioned before burial. | Whether or not this was the cause, 
it certainly was not the consequence of death, as Aram had 
contended. This fracture might have been the prolongation of 
a severe occipital fracture. 

87 


Eugene Aram. 


Whether the assumption having been made as early as the 
inquest at St. Robert’s Cave that the remains were Clark’s, all 
or any of these questions of forensic medicine received proper 
attention we cannot tell; but that the surgeons had expressed 
their opinion that the skull was of a male appears from that 
passage in Aram’s defence, where he observes, ‘‘It is said, 
which perhaps is saying very far, that these are the skeleton of 
a man—’Tis possible, indeed, but, then, is there any known 
criterion which incontestably distinguishes the sex in human 
bones? ”’ 

The answer is that the law does not look for incontestable 
certainty, but for reasonable certainty, and this medical science 
can afford.15 : 

A particular identification of the skeleton as Clark’s was not 
in the circumstances to be expected. Age, sex, and stature 
might be determined, but all clothing having been removed, 
and there being no physical disfigurement or peculiarity such 
as led to the identification of the remains of Dr. Parkman 
(from the state of his teeth), and the execution of Professor 
Webster, the general conclusion only could be reached that 
the bones might be those of the cordwainer, and to this Pro- 
fessor Keith entirely assents in the following words :—‘‘ All 
the appearances are consistent with the bone being Clark’s.’’ 

The medico-legal importance of these points was, in this 
particular case, relatively slight, because the proof of the 
corpus delicti really lay in the discovery of the skeleton in 
the precise position indicated by Houseman. In dealing with 
this aspect of the case, Sir Alfred Wills says—‘‘ When House- 
man at the inquest upon what were then supposed to be Daniel 
Clark’s bones, exclaimed ‘They are no more his bones than 
mine,’ who can say that the incident was without a bearing 
upon the subsequent inquiry whether Clark was dead, whether 
the bones found at no distant place were his, and whether he 
had been the victim of foul play: and of course Houseman’s 
exclamation might have been of a more definite character and 
have pointed to the place where Clark’s bones would be 
found.’’16 

Had the learned editor been aware that the bones were found 
on 17th August by Houseman’s direction, as the depositions 
as well as the inquisition and his second examination clearly 
establish, he could hardly have failed to observe that here 
was a proof of the corpus delictc far stronger than has often 


For grave errors as to age and sex, see Lancet, X., 758; Beck’s 
‘‘ Forensic Medicine,” 541; Taylor’s ‘‘ Medical Jurisprudence” (1910), I. 
Aram’s own skull was mistaken for (1) a woman’s (2) a young man’s’ 
16 Wills’ ‘‘ Circumstantial Evidence ” (1912), 6th. Ed., pp. 343-4. 


88 


Close of the Crown Case. 


been acted upon, it being incredible to suppose that Houseman 
should name the spot by chance, and impossible to assign a 
motive for an invention so full of deadly peril to himself. 

Other evidence must have been given, or at least have been 
available, for Barbara Leetham, a widow, and William 
Thompson, a sweep, were bound over in £10 apiece to attend 
the assizes. Mrs. Leetham’s evidence had been taken upon the 
first inquest, and was, as touching the other skeleton, probably 
dispensed with at the trial. Like that of Thompson, her 
recognisance was taken by Thornton, the justice. The evidence 
of the man Thompson, who found the body on Thistle Hill, 
is said to have been called, but it hardly seems relevant to the 
issue. The last witness to be examined was the examining 
magistrate, William Thornton. He proved taking the pri- 
soner’s two examinations, which were then put in and shown 
to the jury, with all their erasures, interlineations, and correc- 
tions—the manifest indications of a mind labouring with guilt 
no less than with perplexity. 

On the close of the case for the Crown the evidence impli- 
cated Aram by proof of motive, opportunity, conduct after the 
event inconsistent with innocence, such as the possession of 
money, the denial of knowing Clark, and the strangely con- 
tradictory nature of the two examinations, which were hope- 
lessly at variance with one another and with the statement 
made at Lynn, and by the direct proof of Houseman—worth- 
less, it is allowed, as to the fact deposed to, but, coupled with 
the discovery of the body by his direction and with the medical 
evidence, conclusive as to the corpus delictt. When called 
upon for his defence, therefore, no slight task lay before Aram. 
It is not unfair to say that he made no attempt to discharge 
it beyond a skilful, if highly academic, animadversion upon 
one part of the case only—the proof of the corpus delicti, or 
that the remains found were these of the man of whose murder 
he stood indicted, and that the man had met his death by 
criminal violence. To the rest of the evidence he directed 
no attention, and some of his assertions in his defence, unsup- 
ported by proof, were completely inconsistent with the earlier 
statements in his examinations, and with facts sworn to by 
the witnesses. 


89 


CHAPTER IX. 
Eugene Aram’s Defence—Did He Compose It? 


Wuetner, when called upon for his defence, Aram made any 

preliminary remarks, or whether he at once plunged am medias 
res by reading from his manuscript, demands a brief examina- 

tion. The very unveracious account in the Grand Magazine 
of Magazines for September, 1759, represents Eugene as. 
explaining the absence of any witnesses as due to the lapse of 

time, and as thus proceeding—‘‘ That the terror and confusion 

of his mind was so great and so powerfully wrought upon his 

spirits upon this awful occasion, that he fear’d he should not 

be able to speak properly and methodically to the several points 

he had to observe, and therefore had taken this method (2.€., 

reading a MS.) to make his defence.’’ Bell enlarges by 
representing Eugene as objecting to the admission of House- 

man’s evidence, ‘‘ who, it appeared (even on his own showing), 

was an accessary to the fact,’’ and as commenting on the cir- 
cumstantial nature of the evidence. These interpolations seem 

to me to be clumsy fictions. So far was Aram from being 
overcome by terror that, as a contemporary York report says, 

‘“‘he behaved throughout with great steadiness and decency.’’ 

Had he wished to take exception to Houseman’s evidence he 

would surely have done so before it was given. 

Bell was aware from Aram’s letter of 2nd June that he had 
an idea that Houseman’s evidence ought not to be received, 
and he was content to fabricate this episode to make his 
version appear the result of independent researches not previ- 
ously attempted. For a prisoner to read his defence, generally 
written for him by another, was the invariable practice at this 
time, unless the wretch was too overcome by his situation, in 
which case an officer of the Court read it for him, as was done 
in Hunt’s case. 

Any apparently new matter in Bell is too often either a 
crafty plagiarism or a weak invention. The York Pamphlet. 
says nothing of these preliminaries, but states that Aram at 
once produced his ‘‘ manuscript book, which he begged leave 
to read.’ The version, which follows, is taken directly from 
Bristow’s, which professed to be printed direct from the manu- 
script, retaining even the grammatical inaccuracies. Bell 
has, with characteristic disingenuousness, corrected some slips, 
notably in the allusion to the ‘“‘ Campden tragedy,’’ while 

go 


The Defence. 


Bulwer has taken the unwarrantable liberty of abridging the 
address to its manifest disfigurement both as a piece of reason- 
ing and as a prose composition. At the age when he wrote 
‘‘ Eugene Aram’? the novelist was by no means equal to 
improving his hero’s felicity of expression. Aram read as 
follows :— 

‘“My lord—I know not whether it is of right, or through 
some indulgence of your lordship, that I am allowed the liberty 
at this bar, and at this time to attempt a defence, incapable 
and uninstructed as Iam to speak. Since, while I see so many 
eyes upon me, so numerous and awful a concourse, fixed with 
attention, and filled with I know not what expectancy, I 
labour, not with guilt, my lord, but with perplexity. For 
having never seen a Court but this, being wholly unacquainted 
with law, the customs of the bar, and all judiciary proceedings, 
I fear I shall be so little capable of speaking with propriety 
in this place, that it exceeds my hope if I shall be able to speak 
at all. 

‘‘T have heard, my lord, the indictment read, wherein I find 
myself charged with the highest crime—with an enormity I 
am altogether incapable of—a fact, to the commission of which 
there goes far more insensibility of heart, more profligacy of 
morals, than ever fell to my lot. And nothing possibly could 
have admitted a presumption of this nature, but a depravity 
not inferior to that imputed to me. However, as I stand 
indicted at your lordship’s bar, and have heard what is called 
evidence in support of such a charge, I very humbly solicit your 
lordship’s patience, and beg the hearing of this respectable 
audience, while I, single and unskilful, destitute of friends, 
and unassisted by counsel, say something, perhaps, like argu- 
ment in my defence. I shall consume but little of your lord- 
ship’s time ; what I have to say will be short, and this brevity, 
probably, will be the best part of it; however, it is offered 
with all possible regard, and the greatest submission to your 
lordship’s consideration, and that of this honourable Court. 

‘First, my lord, the whole tenour of my conduct in life 
contradicts every particular of this indictment. Yet, I had 
never said this, did not my present circumstances extort it 
from me, and seem to make it necessary. Permit me here, 
my lord, to call upon malignity itself, so long and cruelly busied 
in this prosecution, to charge upon me any immorality of 
which prejudice was not the author. No, my lord, I con- 
certed not schemes of fraud, projected no violence, injured no 
man’s person or property. My days were honestly laborious, 
my nights intensely studious. And I humbly conceive my 
notice of this, especially at this time, will not be thought 
impertinent or unreasonable, but at least deserving some atten- 


gl 


Eugene Aram. 


tion ; because, my lord, that any person, after a temperate use 
of life, a series of thinking and acting regularly, and without 
one single deviation from sobriety, should plunge into the very 
depth of profligacy, precipitately and at once, is altogether 
improbable and unprecedented, and absolutely inconsistent 
with the course of things. Mankind is never corrupted at 
once—villany is always progressive, and declines from right, 
step after step, till every regard of probity is lost, and every 
sense of all moral obligations totally perishes. 

‘* Again, my lord, a suspicion of this kind, which nothing 
but malevolence could entertain and ignorance propagate, is 
violently opposed by my very situation at the time, with 
respect to health; for but a little space before, I had been - 
confined to my bed, and suffered under a very long and severe 
disorder, and was not able, for half a year together, so much 
as to walk. The distemper left me indeed, yet slowly and 
in part; but so macerated, so enfeebled, that I was reduced 
to crutches; and was so far from being well about the time 
I am charged with this fact, that I never to this day perfectly 
recovered. Could, then, a person in this condition take any- 
thing into his head so unlikely—so extravagant? I, past 
the vigour of my age, feeble and valetudinary, with no induce- 
ment to engage—no ability to accomplish—no weapon where- 
with to perpetrate such a fact ; without interest—without power 
—without motive—without means! 

‘‘ Besides, it must needs occur to every one, that an action 
of this atrocious nature is never heard of, but when its springs 
are laid open, it appears that it was to support some indolence, 
to supply some luxury, to satisfy some avarice, or oblige some 
malice ; to prevent some real or imaginary want; yet I lay 
not under the influence of any one of these. Surely, my lord, 
I may, consistent with both truth and modesty, affirm thus 
much ; and none who have any veracity and knew me will 
ever question this. 

“In the second place, the disappearance of Clark is suggested 
as an argument of his being dead; but the uncertainty of 
such an inference from that, and the fallibility of all con- 
clusions of such a sort, from such a circumstance, are too 
obvious and too notorious to require instances. Yet, super- 
seding many, permit me to produce a very recent one, and 
that afforded by this castle. 

“In June, 1757, William Thompson,! for all the vigilance of 
this place, in open daylight, and double-ironed, made his 


a ? His skeleton was found on 8th July, 1780, behind the old Court House 
in York Castle, near the foundations, about three feet from the wall, with 
double irons on. It is supposed he was killed by the fall. 


92 


The Defence. 


escape ; and, notwithstanding an immediate inquiry set on foot, 
the strictest search, and all advertisements, was never seen or 
heard of since. If, then, Thompson got off unseen, through 
all these difficulties, how very easy was it for Clark, when none 
of them opposed him? But what would be thought of a prose- 
cution commenced against any one last seen with Thompson? 

‘““Permit me next, my lord, to observe a little upon the 
bones which have been discovered. It is said, which is perhaps 
saying very far, that these are the skeleton of a man. ’Tis 
possible, indeed, it may—but, then, is there any certain known 
criterion which incontestably distinguishes the sex in human 
bones? Let it be considered, my lord, whether the ascertain- 
ing of this point ought not to precede any attempt to identify 
them. 

‘‘The place of their depositum, too, claims much more 
attention than is commonly bestowed upon it, for of all places 
in the world, none could have mentioned any one wherein there 
was greater certainty of finding human bones than a hermitage, 
except he should point out a churchyard, hermitages in time 
past being not only places of religious retirement, but of burial 
too. And it has scarce or never been heard of, but that every 
cell now known contains or contained these relics of humanity 
—some mutilated, and some entire. I do not inform, but give 
me leave to remind your lordship, that here sat solitary sanctity, 
and here the hermit, or the anchoress, hoped that repose for 
their bones, when dead, they here enjoyed when living. 

‘* All this while, my lord, I am sensible this is known to your 
lordship, and many in this Court better than I (sic). But it 
seems necessary to my case that others, who have not at all 
perhaps adverted to things of this nature, and may have 
concern in my trial, should be made acquainted with it. Suffer 
me then, my lord, to produce a few of many evidences, that 
these cells were used as repositories of the dead, and to enumer- 
ate a few in which human bones have been found, as it 
happened in this in question ; lest to some that accident might 
seem extraordinary, and, consequently, occasion prejudice. 

‘1. The bones, as were supposed, of the Saxon, St. 
Dubritius, were discovered buried in his cell at Guy’s Cliff, 
near Warwick, as appears from the authority of Sir William 
Dugdale.? 

“9. The bones, thought to be those of the anchoress Rosia, 
were but lately discovered in a cell at Royston, entire, fair, 


2 Wither referring to his ‘‘ History of Warwickshire” (1730) 273, or his 
“‘Monast. Avglic.” VI., 1220, ‘‘de morte et sepultura S. Dubricii.” But 
Aram’s memory is at fault. The saint was buried at Bardsey Island, 
though he used this cave. A ‘Heremite” and Guy, of Warwick, were 
buried here. Dugdale does not confirm Aram’s point. 


93 


Eugene Aram. 


and undecayed, though they must have lain interred for several 
centuries, as is proved by Dr. Stukeley.? 

‘¢3. But our own country, nay, almost this neighbourhood, 
supplies another instance, for in January, 1747, was found 
by a Mr. Stovin, accompanied by a reverend gentleman, the 
bones, in part, of some recluse in the cell at Lindholm, near 
Hatfield. They were believed to be those of William of Lind- 
holm, a hermit, who had long made this cave his habitation.4 

‘¢4, In February, 1744, part of Woburn Abbey being pulled 
down, a large portion of a corpse appeared, even with the 
flesh on, and which bore cutting with a knife, though it is 
certain this had lain above 200 years, and how much longer 
is doubtful, for this abbey was founded in 1145, and dis- 
solved in 1538 or 9.5 3 

“What would have been said, what believed, if this had 
been an accident to the bones in question ! 

‘Farther, my lord, it is yet not out of living memory, that 
a little distance from Knaresbrough, in a field, part of the 
manor of the worthy and patriotic baronet who does that 
borough the honour to represent it in Parliament, were found 
in digging for gravel, not one human skeleton only, but five 
or six, deposited side by side, with each an urn at its head, as 
your lordship knows was usual in ancient interments. 

‘“ About the same time, and in another field, almost close 
to this borough, was discovered also, in searching for gravel, 
another human skeleton; but the piety of the same worthy 
gentleman ordered both the pits to be filled up again, com- 
mendably unwilling to disturb the dead. 

““Ts the invention of these bones forgotten, then, or indus- 
triously concealed, that the discovery of those in question may 
appear the more singular and extraordinary? Whereas, in 
fact, there is nothing extraordinary in it. My lord, almost 
every place conceals such remains. In fields, in hills, in 
highway sides, in commons, lie frequent and unsuspected bones. 
And our present allotments for rest for the departed is but 
of some centuries. 


3<«Paleogr. Britann,” (1748) p. 8. So far from “ entire, fair, and 
undecayed” were the remains, that ‘‘the bones were much decayed and for 
the most part carried away with the rubbish.” They were probably not 
those of Rosia. Charles Parkin in 1748 published, at Norwich, an amusing 
reply to Stukeley. Of. ‘Royston Winter Recreations” (1873), 96-99, by 
W. W. Harvey. 

* “ Gentleman’s Magazine,” Jany., 1747, p. 23.  Stovin found the bones 
on Aug. 21st, 1727, in a cell in the midst of 60 acres of ground. They were 
very large. 


5 « Gentleman's Magazine,” Jany., 1749, p. 153. It mentions only coffins. 
94 


The Defence. 


‘“‘ Another particular seems not to claim a little of your 
lordship’s notice and that’ of the gentlemen of the jury— 
which is, that perhaps no example occurs of more than one 
skeleton being found in one cell; and in the cell in question 
was but one, agreeable in this to the peculiarity of every other 
known cell in Britain. Not the invention of one skeleton, 
then, but of two would have appeared suspicious and 
uncommon. 

“But then, my lord, to attempt to identify these, when 
even to identify living men sometimes has proved so difficult, as 
in the case of Perkin Warbeck and Lambert Symnel, at home, 
and of Don Sebastian abroad, will be looked upon perhaps as 
an attempt to determine what is indeterminable. 

** And I hope, too, it will not pass unconsidered here, where 
gentlemen believe with caution, think with reason, and decide 
with humanity, what interest the endeavour to do this is caleu- 
lated to serve, in assigning proper personality to those bones, 
whose particular appropriation can only appear to Eternal 
Omniscience. 

“‘ Permit me, my lord, very humbly to remonstrate that, 
as human bones appear to have been the inseparable adjuncts 
to every cell, even any person’s naming such a place at random 
as containing them, in this case, shows him rather unfortunate 
than conscious prescient, and that these attendants on every 
hermitage only accidentally concurred with this conjecture—a 
mere casual coincidence of words and things. 

‘But it seems another skeleton has been discovered by 
some labourer, which was full as confidently averred to be 
Clark’s as this.© My lord, must some of the living, if it 
promotes some interest, be made answerable for all those 
bones that earth hath concealed and chance exposed? And 
might not a place where bones lay be mentioned by a person 
by chance, as well as found by a labourer by chance; or is it 
more criminal accidentally to name where bones lie, than acci- 
dentally to find where they lie? Here, too, is a human skull 
produced, which is fractured ; but was this the cawse, or was it 
the consequence of death? Was it owing to violence or 
was it the effect of natural decay? If it was violence, was 
that violence before or after death? My lord, in May, 1732, 
the remains of William, Lord Archbishop of this province, 
were taken up, by permission, in this Cathedral, and the bones 
of the skull were found broken; yet certainly he died by no 


6It was so found to be at the first inquest on the 12th Aug., 1758, at 
Henry Mellor’s house. See ante p. 46. 
t 95 


f 


Eugene Aram. 


violence offered to him alive that could occasion that fracture 
there.? 

‘“ Let it be considered, my lord, that upon the dissolution of 
religious houses, and the commencement of the Reformation, 
the ravages of those times both affected the living and the 
dead. In search after imaginary treasures, coffins were 
broken up, graves and vaults dug open, monuments ransacked, 
and shrines demolished; your lordship knows that these 
violations proceeded so far as to occasion Parliamenatry 
authority to restrain them, and it did about the reign of Queen 
Elizabeth.8 I entreat your lordship, suffer not the violence, 
the depredations, and the iniquities of those times to be 
imputed to this. 

“Moreover, what gentleman here is ignorant that Knares-- 
brough had a castle, which, though now a ruin, was once con- 
siderable both for its strength and garrison. All know it was 
vigorously besieged by the arms of the Parliament; at which 
siege, in sallies, conflicts, flights, pursuits, many fell in all 
the places around it—and where they fell, were buried; for 
every place, my lord, is burial earth in war, and many, ques- 
tionless, of these rest yet unknown, whose bones futurity shal} 
discover. 

“J hope, with all imaginable submission, that what has 
been said will not be thought impertinent to this indictment; 
and that it will be far from the wisdom, the learning, and the 
integrity of this place to impute to the living what zeal in its 
fury may have done—what Nature may have taken off, piety 
interred—or what war alone may have destroyed—alone 
deposited. 

““As to the circumstances that have been raked together, 
I have nothing to observe; but that all circumstances what- 
soever are precarious, and have been too frequently found 
lamentably fallible; even the strongest have failed. They 
may rise to the utmost degree of probability—yet are they but 
probability still. Why need I name to your lordship the two 
Harrisons, recorded in Dr. Howel,9 who both suffered upon 


7 Cf. Drake’s ‘‘ Eboracum,” where the author, an F.R.S. and F.S.A., 
states as an eyewitness of the removal of the bones: ‘‘ The smaller bones, 
and those of the skull, which were broken, were wrapt in a piece of 
sarcenet double.” It is odd that Aram does not cite this reference, which, 
unlike the preceding, does to a slight degree, bear him out. ‘The refer- 
ence is 1736 ed., p. 420. These remains, like Rosia’s, were brittle, and 
largely pulverised, through age. 

8Probably Aram refers to I. Jac. I. c. 12, which made the taking up 
of bodies out of graves felony without b enefit of clergy. Bristow’s edition 
has . about the beginning of the reign,” but subsequent editions omit these 
words. 

® Aram’s reference is to William Howell, LL.D., in his ‘‘ Medulla. 
Historie Anglicane” (1742 ed.), IL., 232. The case is also in ‘‘ Howell’s 


96 


The Defence. 


circumstances, because of the sudden disappearance of their 
lodger, who was in credit, had contracted debts, borrowed 
money, and went off unseen, and returned again a great many 
years after their execution. Why name the intricate affair 
of Jaques de Moulin,1° under King Charles II., related by a 
gentleman who was counsel for the Crown; and why the 
unhappy Coleman,!! who suffered innocent, though convicted 
upon positive evidence, and whose children perished for want, 
because the world uncharitably believed the father guilty. 
Why mention the perjury of Smith, incautiously admitted King’s 
evidence, who, to screen himself, equally accused Fainloth and 
Loveday of the murder of Dunn, the first of whom in 1749 was 
executed at Winchester; and Loveday was about to suffer at 
Reading had not Smith been proved perjured to the satisfaction 
of the Court, by the surgeon of the Gosport hospital.12 

‘* Now, my lord, having endeavoured to show that the whole 
of this process is altogether repugnant to every part of my life; 
that it is inconsistent with my condition of health about that 
time—that no rational inference can be drawn that a person 
is dead who suddenly disappears—that hermitages were the 
constant repositories of the bones of the recluse—that the proofs 
of this are well authenticated—that the revolutions in religion 


State Trials” 14, 1312-24, and had been in Hargraves, Vol. IV., 204, 
X. Appendix 2, 29: it is also in Craik’s ‘‘ English Causes Célébres ” (1840), 
255. It was also published in tract form, and three copies of the tract 
are in the Craufurd Collection in the Inner Temple Library, ex libris 
John Adolphus (D.N.B. I., 141-2), senior or junior, who has written on 
the fly-leaf of one, ‘‘the case is undoubtedly authentic.” Its facts are 
worth stating. John Perry swore before a justice a circumstantial 
narrative of how his brother Richard and his mother Joan murdered 
William Harrison, steward of Viscountess Campden, he abetting them, on 
16th August, 1660. All three were executed, after conviction at Lent 
Assizes in 1661. Some years later Harrison reappeared, asserting that 
he had been kidnapped, taken aboard ship, and sold into slavery in 
Smyrna. The case is also in the ‘‘ Harleian Misc.” (1808 Ed.), III., 547. 
Aram’s reference is, as will be seen, inaccurate as to names, and he 
fails to bring out the salient point of resemblance to his own case, that 
a witness should in each case swear to presence at a murder not in fact 
(in his contention) committed to the endangering of his own life. 

10 Gentleman’s Magazine, 1754, pp. 404-6. A case of conviction upon 
very strong circumstantial evidence, for coining; it is followed in the 
G.M. by the ‘‘ good uncle” case, cited by Thurtell. 

 Gentleman’s Magazine, 1749, pp. 139, 185; 1751, pp. 377-8. The case is 
also in the Newgate Calendar, and is referred to by Thurtell as ‘‘Holman’s 
ease,” both in the Times report and in the Newgate Calendar (of 1840) 
report of his address. It is authentic. Coleman was convicted of the 
murder of a woman under atrocious circumstances. He had been with 
her shortly before, but left her, in fear of her actual assailants. Instead of 
surrendering, he fled from justice. His pusillanimity led to his undoing. 
A dying declaration by the woman partially exonerated him. 


2 Gentleman's Magazine, 1749, pp. 138, 291-3. 
G : 97 


Eugene Aram. 


or the fortune of war has mangled or buried the dead—the 
conclusion remains, perhaps no less reasonably than impatiently 
wished for. I, last, after a year’s confinement, equal to either 
fortune, put myself upon the candour, the justice, the humanity 
of your lordship, and upon yours, my countrymen, gentlemen of 
the jury.” 

It remains to notice an allegation—apparently made more 
than once—that Aram was not the author of this famous 
address. At pp. 130-1 of William Grainge’s ‘‘ Nidderdale ’’ 
(1863), there is a note to the effect that a Mr. Hopkinson, of 
Stamford, F.S.A., in March, 1863, at a meeting of the Bath 
Literary and Philosophical Association, stated ‘‘ that the defence 
was written by a Mr. Mauleverer, . . . who had been 
brought up to the law, and travelled the Northern Circuit,’’. 
and who ‘‘ when in practice was notorious for the ingenuity 
and astuteness with which he conducted a weak case, but if he 
had a good case, for his maladroitness and indifferent manage- 
ment of it. In Aram’s case St. Robert’s Cave and the oppor- 
tunity of exercising his talents in describing the mode and 
places of ancient sepulture tempted Mr. Mauleverer to write the 
defence, which was adopted by Aram. I had the above account 
from my father, who, when a young man, . . . had 
visited some friends of Mr. Mauleverer, then alive, about four- 
teen years after the trial, and they always believed and con- 
fidently asserted that Mr. Mauleverer was the real author, and 
that, in fact, Aram was not up to it.’’ We are not informed 
whether this was a specimen of Mr. Mauleverer’s astute conduct 
of a bad case, or otherwise. The Bath papers for 1863 do not 
report Mr. Hopkinson’s address, though a meeting of the Bath 
Royal Literary and Scientific Association was reported in two 
papers on the 21st of March, when the secretary acknowledged 
the receipt of £5 from the Philosophical Society, an inde- 
pendent body. 

Mr. Hopkinson’s presence was not mentioned in either paper, 
and my utmost diligence has failed to trace any further account 
of this singular effort in iconoclasm. Grainge ridicules the 
whole thing, roundly asserting that no Mauleverer, ‘‘ the head 
of the family,’’ as Hopkinson put it, was then alive, the last, 
according to him, having died in the previous century. Here 
he is wrong, for the manuscript records of the Inner Temple 
contain the following entry :— 


‘Thomas Mauleverer, generosus, filius et heres apparens 
Timothei Mauleverer de Arncliffe, in parochia de Ingleby, 
in comitatu Ebor, Armiger, admissus est . . .  tercio 
die Julii A.D. 1736.” 


Whence we may infer that he was at the bar and on the 
Northern Circuit in 1759, and had succeeded his father as head 
98 


Mauleverer’s Claim Ill-founded. 


of the family fourteen years later. This, however, is no more 
a proof of his having composed the address than the bricks 
eee alive at this day to testify it’’ of the chimney made 
by Jack Cade’s changeling father were evidence of Jack Cade’s 
descent from the great Mortimer, 

Mauleverer’s name is unknown to the Reports, and _ his 
““ ingenuity and astuteness ’’ escaped the notice of contemporary 
attorneys. Nothing in the matter or manner of the address is 
inconsistent with the view that Aram composed it. It is the 
effort of a scholar—remote, indeed, from his books—not of a 
barrister. No barrister could have failed to cite correctly the 
case of &. vy. Perry, which was then, as it is still, in the ‘‘ State 
Trials,’’ a work of authority; no barrister, as Charles Philips’s 
oration for Thurtell shows, would have failed to insert a 
passionate protestation of innocence, not as being in itself 
entitled to credit in a prisoner’s mouth, but because its omission 
must create an impression in the highest degree sinister. Even 
the verbal peculiarities of Aram stamp the address as his, as, 
for instance, his curious use of the word ‘‘ supersede,’’ which 
twice occurs in the same sense in the ‘‘ Essay Towards a 
Lexicon,’’ or his characteristic phrase, ‘‘I humbly conceive,”’ 
which also occurs there; so do the slips of memory—evidently 
the consequence of confinement and of the inability to refer 
to his books. 

Moreover, the failure to present any consistent view of the 
defence—to reconcile the various conflicting statements of the 
accused—to deal, though it could, in a written speech, be only 
by way of anticipation, with the case for the Crown—all these 
defects point to the address, masterly in some respects, admir- 
able in its literary finish, as the work of a man indeed ‘‘ wholly 
unacquainted with law, the customs of the bar, and all judiciary 
proceedings.”’ 

The sole indication of its being the work of another hand 
lies not in its erudition—that was well within Eugene’s compass 
—but in its eloquence. However, a man is not tried for his 
life every day, and Aram was determined to rise to the occasion, 
like Lacenaire, and to fix the attention of the world upon him 
ere he quitted the scene, and, like Lacenaire, was more con- 
cerned with producing an impression than procuring an acquittal. 
The words, ‘‘ equal to either fortune,’ pregnant with the man’s 
real feelings, are almost enough by themselves to exclude 
Mauleverer’s authorship. No professional advocate sits down 
with a final observation that he more than half expects his client 
to be hanged. In the ‘‘ deadest ’’ case he must still ‘‘ con- 
fidently claim a verdict of not guilty at your hands, gentlemen.”’ 


99 


CHAPTER X. 


The Effect of Aram’s Address—Its Singularity—A Critical Estimate 
of it—Favourably Noticed by Writers on Medical Jurisprudence 
—Probable Impression Produced on Noel—James Allan Park, 
J., on Thurtell’s Defence—Noel’s Summing-up—The Verdict— 
Aram to be Hanged and Dissected—-The Sentence Altered— 
Evidence from the Records—The Practice of the Times— 
Terry’s Acquittal—True Story of the Murder Unknown— _~ 
Remains Subsequently Found in the Cave—Did Aram Murder 
Others P—Ruloff—Close of the Assizes. 


Or the effect which this celebrated address produced on the 
auditory we have varying accounts. The contemporary news- 
papers unanimously record that, ‘‘ Considered as a defence, it 
could not avail to exculpate him, but as a composition it was 
greatly admired for the closeness and acuteness of the reason- 
ing.’? On the youthful Paley, aged about sixteen, it produced, 
says his biographer, a deep impression. Samuel Parr, the 
famous headmaster, spoke ‘‘ of Aram’s defence in the highest 
terms of approbation for its eloquence and reasoning.’’! Bulwer 
and Bell? go so far as to state that a verdict of not guilty was 
expected at its conclusion, but nothing in contemporary accounts 
gives them the least support. ‘It availed him but little,” 
says the York Pamphlet. Yet an appreciation of its merits as 
a composition was universal. ‘‘ What this Eugene is remark- 
able for,’”? comments the London Magazine for August, 1759, 
“is having read a very extraordinary defence, which he had 
drawn up with great art, and in no inelegant style.”’ 

Smollett, in the Critical Review, justly observes, “In his 
defence, which, however, seems to be as good as his cause 
admitted of, he does not confute anything here alledged against 
him.”’ It is, indeed, the most singular apologia in existence. 
None, not even that of Socrates, condescends so little to any 
notice of so vulgar a thing as evidence. Thurtell, Donellan, 
and many others whose fates are to be read in the ‘‘ State 
Trials ’’ or in less reliable compilations, do make some endeavour 
to meet the case against them. From beginning to end Aram 
mentions not one name of any witness against him. Clark’s 


1 Ex. rel. Capt. Davy, R.N., per E. H. Barker, 


*“* His defence made such a forcible impression, that it was the general 
belief a verdict of not guilty would be returned.” p. 45 and cf. 47. 
100 


Aram’s Alleged Surprise. 


name escapes him but thrice. It is possible to suppose with 
Bulwer that ‘‘his silence might have been the natural result 
of a disdain that belonged essentially to his calm and proud 
character.’’ In this there is some truth; but those who were 
to pass upon his life were fairly entitled to the conclusion that 
his silence arose from his not having anything to offer in answer. 

One false impression cannot be too strongly exposed. From 
a very early period? it has been put forward that Aram 
failed to notice Houseman’s evidence, because his ‘‘ defence was 
drawn up long before his trial, and he seems not ever to have 
entertained a suspicion of the fidelity of his comrade.’’ ‘‘ Up 
to the very day of his trial he evidently had little idea of 
Houseman’s being a witness for the Crown,’’ says Scatcherd. 
“‘He never seems to have entertained a suspicion that the 
evidence of a man so utterly worthless as Houseman would 
have had any weight with the judge or with the jury,’’ observes 
Bell. Mr. Irving is thus not unnaturally misled into remark- 
ing, ‘‘ To the surprise of Aram, Houseman, who had been 
previously arraigned and acquitted, appeared in the box as a 
witness for the Crown. It may be partly due to his surprise 
at this proceeding that in his now famous defence he made no 
effort to reply to the evidence against him.’’ Dr. Garnett 
fares no better. ‘‘ Aram was . . . apprehended, House- 
man appearing as the sole (?) witness against him. He defended 
himself with extraordinary ability, laying but little stress on 
the tainted character of Houseman, who he probably thought, 
when he prepared his speech, would not be admitted to give 
evidence.’’ We have seen how far Houseman was from being 
the sole witness; we have also seen that ‘“‘ Mr. Recorder’s 
letter ’’ informed Eugene of Houseman’s turning approver some 
months previously, and on 2nd June we find him writing to 
Etherington to know if this can be allowed, when he was doubt- 
less informed that it could. 

Three views of the address remain to be noticed—the view 
that it was a work of the most extraordinary erudition, the 
fruit of years devoted to it, under the chill apprehension of 
ultimate discovery; the view that the incidents and instances 
relied on were purely apocryphal, and the absence of any denial 
of guilt in direct terms tantamount to its admission; and the 
view of it as a reasoned effort to show that the corpus delicts 
was not proved beyond reasonable doubt, or in other words the 
view of it in the light of forensic medicine. The first view 
was voiced in particular by the author of the ‘‘ Evidences of 
Christianity,’’ but Paley was but a lad when he heard the 
address. It may be doubted if he ever traced a single reference 


3 Occurs as early as the 1767 edition, which omitted the letter of 2nd June. 
IoI 


Eugene Aram. 


of Aram’s to its source. His well-known apophthegm that 
“Not every one hanged himself by his own cleverness, as Aram 
certainly did,’’ seems shallow and unjust when once the address 
is critically examined. ‘‘ That laboured address to the jury 
must have employed his thoughts for years,’’ wrote a con- 
tributor to Votes and Queries. ‘‘ Aram’s defence was so clever 
that he must have spent the whole fourteen years in preparing 
it ’’ is said by Mr. J. M. Richardson to have been the comment 
of Noel—an observation, assuming as it does the prisoner’s guilt, 
that the judge would never have made. Such criticism could 
be multiplied. 

Passing over William Thompson’s case, whose escape was 
advertised in the papers, and of which Aram must have heard 
from his gaolers, we observe six of Aram’s instances are to be’ 
traced to the Gentleman’s Magazine, of which he was a reader, 
and to which, in the name of ‘‘ John Atkinson,’’ he contributed 
a panegyric on Thornton in 1758; there is a reference to Dug- 
dale which is apparently inaccurate ; another, which certainly is, 
to Dr. Stukeley; another, though the authority is not cited, 
to so familiar a book as Drake’s ‘‘ Eboracum,’’ and a final one 
to Howell’s ‘‘ Medulla Historie Anglicane,’’ wherein may also 
be found the references to Perkin Warbeck and Lambert 
Symnel, if we are to suppose the quinquagenarian schoolmaster 
previously unacquainted with their histories. 

The reference to Howell’s account of the ‘‘ Campden tragedy ”’ 
is so inexact as to rebut the inference that the composition 
represented the labour of years of liberty rather than the effort 
of a mind, unassisted by books, seeking material in a dungeon. 

No less singular than the foregoing views, and equally 
erroneous, is the conclusion that Aram coolly invented the cases 
he referred to in his address. One writer, indeed, only ven- 
tures to put this as a conjecture ;4 but another boldly states 
it as a fact. ‘‘ There can be little doubt that the impression 
made by the delivery of such an elaborate essay on the finds of 
apocryphal skeletons by a man who was on trial for his life on 
a charge of murder was the reverse of what was intended.’’5 

There is less doubt, perhaps, of the extreme impertinence, 
in either sense of the word, of such silly and ignorant criticism. 
But the gods are just, and have made instruments to plague 
Aram’s vexed spirit in the persons of critics of this calibre. 
The commonest of all lay criticisms, however, is that “ Aram 
nowhere directly asserts his innocence.’”’ It would have been 
easy for Aram to have concluded with a peroration like Thur- 
tell’s, dramatically striking his breast as he thundered forth, 


41st Ser. VW. & Q. IL, 360. 
5 W. 1. Newsam, ‘‘ Poets of Yorkshire” (1845), p. 65. 
102 


Medico-Legal Merits of Defence. 


“So help me, God, I am innocent.’’ But such a theatrical 
device, well enough for a Surrey melodrama, was foreign to 
Aram’s delicate literary taste and to the severely logical habit 
of his mind. ' Realising that no allowance would be made by 
reasonable men for protestations of innocence by those in his 
situation, he forbore to make any, oblivious of the fact that 
reason is seldom employed by the mass of men to guide the 
mind to a conclusion, but that the greatest weight has always 
been considered to attach to an accused’s own statement as to 
whether he be guilty or no. 

By writers on medical jurisprudence, the merits of the 
defence have been fully recognised and placed in their true light. 
Thus Paris and Fonblanque, after paying a high tribute to the 
skill of the argument, print the entire defence in an appendix— 
a compliment never, it is believed, paid to any other. Taylor 
also appreciates the force of Eugene’s remarks. He says— 
‘‘ The case of Eugene Aram also furnishes an instance of the 
necessity for closely examining skeletons when it is suspected 
that the individuals have died from murderous violence. . . . 
Aram’s defence throws some light upon the questions which are 
apt to arise when evidence is given trom the examination of 
exhumed bones. Thus we find these points strongly urged, 
involving the consideration of the time required for the destruc- 
tion of the skeleton, and therefore of its identity; of the form, 
situation, and appearance of a fracture of a bone, so as to 
enable a medical witness to determine whether it be of recent 
or of old standing, and whether it was likely to have been caused 
by accident previously to or during the exhumation, or had 
arisen from the direct application of violence to the skull during 
life. Lastly, a clear determination of the sex was required 
from an examination of the bones.’’ 

The Lancet of 4th May, 1912, observes, ‘‘ His defence was 
4 masterpiece. . . - His speech on cave burial strangely 
resembles a Hunterian lecture.”’ 

It is improbable that Noel was favourably impressed by the 
address; to its literary qualities he might not have been 
indifferent, having cultivated studies not dissimilar to Eugene’s 
in the leisure of earlier life, and being reputed a book lover by 
the celebrated antiquary, Samuel Gale. But the cases referred 
to by Aram were to be found in books which, if known to the 
judge, he must yet have viewed with professional suspicion. 
The only case likely to be known to the Court—that of the 
Perrys—was so mis-cited by the prisoner that it probably failed 
to meet with Noel’s recognition, and, as for the rest, a fair 
idea of the weight allowed them may be gathered from the obser- 
vations many years later of Mr. Justice James Allan Park upon 
the analogous part of Thurtell’s celebrated oration. ‘‘ He could 

103 


Eugene Aram. 


not help saying that . . . if it had been the wish of the 
parties to have weakened their defence as much as possible, 
they could not have effected their purpose better than by quot- 
ing cases from the ‘ Newgate Calendar,’ the ‘ Percy Anec- 
dotes,’ and other volumes, of which no lawyer knew anything, 
and which, for anything he knew, might be mere volumes of 
romance.’’S He referred to the whole of this part of the 
defence as a “‘farrago of nonsense.’? Substitute the Gentle- 
man’s Magazine, Dr. Stukeley, and Dr. Howell for the authori- 
ties which so failed to appeal to Park, and a fair idea may be 
obtained of how Aram’s Hunterian lecture impressed the occu- 
pant of the bench. 

However that may be, all contemporary reports, in vehement 
contrast to later writers, attest Noel’s impartiality. ‘‘ On the 
judge’s summing up to the jury in the most fair and candid 
manner,’’ observes the York Pamphlet, ‘‘ they, after a very 
short consultation, brought him in guilty of murder.’”’ ‘‘ The 
judge stated the evidence to the jury ; and after having observed 
how the testimonies of the other deponents confirmed that of 
Houseman, he proceeded to remark upon Aram’s defence, in 
order to show that he alledged nothing that could invalidate 
the positive evidence against him.’’? 

No more elaborate account appears until we come to Bulwer’s 
romance. The author, after deploring the absence of any 
detailed memorial, proceeds to exercise the licence of the 
novelist in reconstructing, for the purposes of fiction, what 
the judge might have been supposed to say. This is proper 
enough in a work of imagination, but it hardly affords Bell an 
excuse for coolly plagiarising an entire passage, barely altering 
a word, and putting it forward as a version obtained from a 
gentleman ‘‘ more than forty years ago.’’ It is such errors 
of taste, to put it mildly, which subtract from our respect for 
Bell as an independent seeker after truth, and make us 


6 The Times, 8th Jan., 1824. Mr. John Barbot had cited the same cases 
in 1753, when they were similarly dismissed as invented for the occasion. 
See 18 St. Tr. 1303-4. I cannot help remarking that with unconscious 
irony the New York Appeal Court in Rulof'v. The People (4 Smith N.Y. 
Rep. 179) cites Park, J. in &. v. Thurtell, from the ‘‘ Chronicles of Crime, 
or New Newgate Calendar,” a work by a fictitious member of the bar, 
“Camden Pelham.” 


7” Appears as early, at least, as Etherington’s 4th ed., 1767, published at 
York. Etherington was perhaps present. Bristow and the newspapers 
say nothing of the summing-up, but that Noel was, on the strength of 
‘‘maimed versions of the trial,” subjected to criticism, appears from the 
Gentleman's Magazine for 1759. Bulwer’s remarks (plagiarised by Bell), 
put into the mouth of the judge, on the “eloquence and art” of the 
address, appear to be mere fiction. 


104 


Bell’s Plagiarisms. 


vehemently suspect him of invention, whenever he states a 
fact incapable of verification.8 

Contemporary accounts of the summing-up being such as we 
have seen, what, we may well ask, is the justification of those 
who from time to time libel the administration of justice by 
writing that Aram “had a Jeffreys for his judge,’’? or that 
““his conviction was a disgrace to the bar and to the nation,’’!0 
or that ‘‘no British judge would be found at the present day 
who would sum up with such a hostile feeling to the prisoner 
as Judge Noel certainly manifested,’’11 or that ‘‘ Noel cer- 
tainly shows in many ways a strong bias against Aram? To 
suggest that the man had a fair trial would be ridiculous.’’!2 

While nothing remains of the summing-up, we may yet be 
certain that it dealt adequately both with the law applicable 
to the case and with the facts. So much criticism has been 
expended on the case by writers destitute of all knowledge of 


§ Bulwer, 1831. 

He stated the evidence with 
peculiar care and at great length 
to the jury. He observed how 
the testimony of other deponents 
confirmed that of Houseman, and 
then, touching on the contradic- 
tory parts of the latter, made 
them understand how natural, how 
inevitable was some such contra- 
diction in a witness who had not 
only to give evidence against an- 
other, but to refrain from criminat- 
ing himself. There could be no 
doubt but that Houseman was an 
accomplice in the crime, and all 
therefore that seemed improbable 
in his giving no alarm when the 
deed was done was easily rendered 
natural and reconcilable with other 
parts of his evidence, &c. 


9“ Mem.” 32. 
10 «¢ Mem.” 33. 
11 Bell 48, n. 


summing up as ‘‘the utterance of a bloodthirsty prosecutor.” 


Bell, 1832. 

He then recapitulated the evi- 
dence at great length to the jury. 
He observed how the testimonies of 
the other deponents confirmed that 
of Houseman, and then, touching on 
the contradictory parts of the latter, 
he gave it as his opinion that some 
such contradictions might naturally 
be expected, and, indeed, were in- 
evitable in a witness who had not 
only to give evidence against an- 
other, but refrain from criminating 
himself. There could be no doubt, 
he said, but that Houseman was 
an accomplice in the crime; and all 
therefore, &c. (as in Bulwer). 


Andrews’ ‘‘ Historic Yorkshire,” p. 160, speaks of the 


The most 


singular result of Bell’s production was the effecting of a complete change 
in the tone of the Gentleman’s Magazine towards Aram. In reviewing 
Bell, misdescribed as ‘‘12mo., pp. 124” (it is octo.), ‘Mr. Urban’’ proceeds, 
‘“‘With regard to the innocence of Eugene Aram there can be but one 
opinion ; nor is it a little proof in his favour that Paley, even, who was 
present, thought him guiltless, and we have no hesitation in saying that 
had not Judge Noel gone out of his way to act the advocate (anxious 
to show his skill in detecting what he was pleased to call Aram’s cold and 
rhetorical defence, as if any man conscious of his innocence would con- 
descend to make an appeal to the feelings of a jury), this victim to a 
judge’s self love would not have been sacrificed.” G.M., 1832, p. 448. 


12 Yorkshire Notes and Queries (new series), iv. 138, 
105 


Eugene Aram. 


legal principles, who think it to the purpose to argue that 
Houseman himself may have struck the blow, that some 
examination of the law of murder is essential. The judge 
would have explained to the jury that before they could find 
the prisoner guilty they must be satisfied that the remains 
produced were those of Daniel Clark, and that he had met his. 
death by felonious violence. If they were satisfied on that 
point, the question would arise whether the prisoner was so 
involved in the affair as in the eye of the law to be guilty as 
a principal. | He would have explained that a common inten- 
tion to commit a murder or felony made the act of one the 
act of all; that ‘‘ presence at the commission of a felony ”’ 
was not confined to mean a strict actual presence, such as would 
make a man an eye or ear witness of what passed, but that a 
man might be involved who was utterly out of sight or hear- 
ing of what passed; as, for instance, if he watched at a dis- 
tance to prevent a surprise. Further, he would have added, 
where several people joined to do an act in itself unlawful 
and death ensued from anything done in the prosecution of 
that unlawful desigit, it would amount to murder in all those 
who were present (in the sense explained), aiding and abetting 
the unlawful design, ‘‘ though it were but a bare trespass.’’ 
So that a man might in judgment of law be guilty of murder 
‘“when possibly his heart abhorred the thoughts of it.’? He 
would have proceeded to show that if they accepted the 
prisoner’s story, as it stood in his second examination, that he 
went to the cave to keep watch while Terry, Clark, and House- 
man broke up the plate obtained by fraud, and came to the 
conclusion that the death of Clark occurred in the course of that 
unlawful project, Aram would, in the eye of the law, be guilty 
of his murder, though having no actual part in the killing and 
howsoever that had happened, whether by mischance or 
design.13 

He would have proceeded to deal with the proof of the corpus 
delictt, observing that while little enough of credit attached to 
the direct evidence of Houseman, it was highly important to 
remember that a body was on the previous 17th of August 
found in the cave precisely where the heckler had indicated ; 
and that the body so found appeared to have sustained a severe 
fracture of the skull sufficient to account for death. They 
would have to consider what motive Houseman could have for 
imperilling himself by saying he had been present at Clark’s 
death if such were not the case. He would have adverted to 
the prisoner’s contention as to this—‘‘ Might not a place be 
mentioned by a person by chance as well as found by a labourer 
by chance? Or is it more criminal accidentally to name where 


13 Of. Foster’s ‘‘Crown Law,” Discourse Three. Also R. v. Jackson, 18 
St. Tr. 1071-3. 


106 


The Summing Up. 


bones lie than accidentally to find where they lie? ’’—and have 
asked them how the argument would hold applied to the ordinary 
concerns of life—if, for example, a man found a bank note in 
a secret drawer of a bureau they might admit a finding by 
chance ; but if a man said, ‘‘ In such a bureau is a secret drawer 
wherein will be found a note for so much,’’ and it was so found, 
would any reasonable man believe that he spoke otherwise than 
from knowledge that it had been put there? That was the case 
before them; for the body was not only found with its head 
to the right, as Houseman had said, but the medical evidence 
confirmed him that it was the body of a man whose skull had 
been fractured. 

He would have next gone through the evidence of the wit- 
nesses who proved seeing Houseman and Aram in company with 
the supposed deceased at various hours of the night—Bransby, 
Barnett, and above all Tuton, commenting on the alleged 
attempt at concealment of their persons by the heckler and the 
usher, and on the incident of Tuton’s pick—for what purpose 
it could have been taken, why it was not borrowed openly, and 
why not returned. Next he would deal with the evidence of 
Peter Moor, Coates, and Latham, showing Clark to have been 
possessed of £200 in cash, of plate, &c., and that Aram, after 
the disappearance, appeared for the first time to have a ready 
command of money, observing how unfortunate it was for the 
prisoner that he could only tell them in his first examination 
that he was unable to recollect what these witnesses deposed, 
and that in the defence to which they had just listened he had 
made not the slightest reference to any part of all this evidence. 

Dealing with the theory of Clark’s flight, he would have 
recalled the fact that Peter Moor had sufficient confidence in 
his master to lend him £38 but a few days before, and that 
Dorothy Clark, Coates, and Hardcastle had given evidence, 
whence they might infer that, whatever the state of his affairs, 
he did not go nor intend going off on the night of his dis- 
appearance. § Beckwith’s and other similar evidence being 
passed in review, the judge can not have failed to deal fully 
with the prisoner’s own statements relative to the missing of 
Clark. How first to Peter Moor he denied knowing Clark 
at all or even Knaresbro’; how, confronted with Barker, he 
abandoned this position (cautioning them against giving too 
much weight to the matters of prejudice introduced by this 
witness, as the York Pamphlet tells us he did); how, first 
examined by Thornton, he would not admit going to the cave at 
all or knowing anything about Clark’s frauds at all; how at 
his own request he, the same day, withdrew all this, admitted 
going to the cave and being privy to the beating up of the 
plate, and could only say as to the murder that “he can’t tell 
if he was murdered or not ’’ by the others. How, finally, in his 

107 


Eugene Aram. 


address, he shifts his position again, poses as a man of un- 
blemished reputation, and apparently forgetful that he had 
admitted going two nights running to the cave, claims to have 
been so feeble and valetudinary as to have been unequal to such 
an excursion—indeed, reduced to crutches. The prisoner’s 
arguments on the medico-legal questions as to the age and sex 
of the bones, and whether the fracture was ‘‘ the cause or con- 
sequence of death ’’ having’ been contrasted with the evidence 
of Locock—conclusive, apparently, on the latter point—the 
judge may have proceeded to deal with the prisoner’s observa- 
tion on the danger of convicting on circumstantial evidence. 
Whether or not he treated Aram’s instances as disrespectfully 
as Park did Thurtell’s, he probably used language much similar 
to Park’s, as reported in the 7mes. , 

‘* Yet circumstantial evidence in the testimony of all persons 
who were accustomed to attend judiciary proceedings : 
was considered as more satisfactory in producing conviction in 
the human mind than the direct testimony of any single indi- 
vidual who saw the crime in question committed.’’ 

Finally, remarking upon the prisoner’s evident abilities and 
upon the good character he claimed, he would have observed 
that neither could prevail where no rational doubt existed, and 
that it was for the jury to say whether, upon the whole, they 
felt such a doubt; if not, they must do their duty. 

The judge having told the jury to consider their verdict, 
“‘they immediately brought him in guilty.’”’ The York 
Pamphlet speaks of a ‘‘ very short consultation.’’ It seems 
unlikely that they retired. Etherington says that they did 
not. According to Caulfield, who adopts capitals for emphasis, 
the verdict was ‘‘ to the satisfaction of the Court,’’ but whether 
he means Noel or the auditory is not clear. Beatniffe says that 
there was “not the slightest doubt of his guilt.’? According 
to Dr. Kippis he deservedly fell by the hands of the common 
executioner. ‘‘ Aram’s sentence was a just one,’’ was the con- 
temporary opinion as expressed by Bristow. Nor was any con- 
trary tendency apparent until many years had elapsed and 
Aram had been elevated into a hero of romance, a position 
from which he has never since been entirely deposed. With 
Bulwer’s novel came the turn of the tide. _Bell, professing to 
have it from a conversation with a gentleman ‘‘ more than forty 
years ago,’’ speaks of the verdict as ‘‘ contrary to the general 
expectations.”’ After some remarks, already quoted, about 
the judge, he proceeds to add that he “‘ is still more convinced 
that no twelve men could now be found in England who would 
return a verdict of guilty against such a man as Eugene Aram 
on such evidence as was offered against him.’’14 


14, 48, n. 
108 


The Verdict Impeached. 


Bulwer observes that ‘‘ in the present day a man tried upon 
evidence so scanty and suspicious would unquestionably escape 
conviction.”"!5 To Scatcherd, of course, the conviction of 
Eugene was as flagrant a miscarriage of justice as the acquittal 
of Terry, though against the ale-draper we can discover no 
evidence at all! 

The strongest impeachment of the verdict is in an initialled 
article in the Letswre Hour for February, 1885—‘‘ The real 
story is so little known, and doubts of so impressive a character 
have been brought to bear upon the extent to which Aram was 
involved, that it even seems mysterious how a verdict of guilty 
should ever have been returned, and it is certain that no one 
could be convicted in the present day upon such evidence as 
condemned him.”’ 

Harry Speight sums up his views in much the same way— 
“* At the present day there is no doubt he would have escaped 
the hard penalty which he suffered.’’?16 ‘‘ Whether the learned 
culprit was actually guilty of the desperate crime of which he 
stood accused will probably never be known. The evidence 
against him was certainly deficient, and had such a case been 
tried at the present day there is no doubt that he would have 
escaped the hard penalty which he suffered.’’17 It ig difficult 
to assign any meaning to such passages; either Clark was killed 
while Aram was admittedly at the cave for an unlawful purpose, 
or he was not; the cobbler disappeared either above ground or 
below; Aram was either guilty of murder or nothing. So much 
nonsense has been talked by Scatcherd, whose legal training 
ought to have taught him better, by Mr. Richardson, and others 
about it being a case of manslaughter, that it must be insisted 
that, whoever broke the cobbler’s skull, Aram, if present for 
an unlawful purpose, was guilty of his murder. 

To the same effect is Mr. J. S. Fletcher, who speaks of 
Eugene’s guilt as ‘‘ veiled in uncertainty,’’!® and Mayhall, 
who observes, ‘‘ Aram was convicted and hung on evidence 
which would not now induce a jury to give an adverse verdict 
even on a most trivial charge. Scatcherd’s opinion on a subject 
of this kind is entitled to some weight.’’19 ‘‘ The evidence for 
the prosecution was of the weakest and thinnest ; the allowance 


151840 ed., Preface, 
16 «« Upper Nidderdale,” p. 77. 


17 «* Nidderdale,” p. 249. On the same page the author states that the 
body found on Thistle Hill ‘‘ ultimately proved to be that of . . . Daniel 
Clark.” On p. 248 he describes how Aram hid the hody of Clark in the 
cave on the other side of the river! Andrews (‘‘ Historic Yorkshire, 
ch. 23, p. 157) also confounds this body with Clark’s. 

18 «A Book about Yorkshire,” p. 322; ‘‘ Pict. Yorkshire,” IV., pp. 25-27. 


19 “‘ Annals of Yorkshire,” I., p. 384. Cf. Grainge, p. 131. 
109 


% 


Eugene Aram. 


of damaging statements not evidence is amazing, and the whole 
proceedings at the trial appear to have been scandalously 
unfair,’? wrote the late E. M. Beloe.2° ‘‘I believe that as 
early as the day of his execution the judge and grand jury 
knew that a great error had been committed, and saw the 
necessity of hushing up the voice of independent inquiry,’ 
thus Mr. J. M. Richardson, to whom Aram appears as the 
‘* Dreyfus of the eighteenth century.’’21 

‘* To suggest that the man had a fair trial would be absurd,’’ 
says a contributor to Yorkshire Notes and Querves. The reader 
of these pages will be able to assign their proper weight to these 
criticisms, which mostly involve the assumption that the Crown 
had to prove which particular hand struck the blow. 

A verdict in a criminal case was then taken with some 
picturesque ceremonial, long vanished. The prisoner was 
bidden for the last time to hold up his hand, the jury were 
bidden to ‘‘look upon the prisoner.’? Having found him 
guilty, they next found that he had no goods or chattels, lands 
or tenements at the time of the murder or at any time since. 
The gaoler or the executioner was bidden to ‘‘ see to him and 
tie him up,’’2? and there followed the familiar ‘‘ allocutus,’’ the 
calling on the prisoner if he had anything to say. It is not 
recorded that Eugene said anything, and after the usual pro- 
clamation for silence the Court passed sentence under the 
terms of the recent statute, 25 Geo. II. c. 37. This Act first 
gave statutory recognition to the practice of hanging in chains 
as part of the punishment for murder; but, by a resolution of 
the judges of 1752, it had been agreed that only the ‘‘ dissect- 
ing and anatomising’’ should be part of the sentence, and 
that, if it should be thought advisable, the judge might after- 
wards, by special order to the Sheriff, direct the hanging in 
chains. The minute book distinctly establishes that the prac- 
tice was in this case adhered to, as afterwards in the case of the 
notorious Tom Lee. The statement in the York Pamphlet that 
the sentence was altered at the request of the grand jury is thus 
neither confirmed nor refuted; but the fact that the hanging 
in chains could form no part of the original sentence answers 
the sorry nonsense of Scatcherd about the barbarity of the 
alteration. 

Of Aram’s demeanour at the close Etherington gives us a 
curious glimpse in his edition of 1767—‘‘ Without leaving the 
Court the jury presently found the prisoner guilty. During 


Lynn News, 18th June, 1898. 

7 Leeds Mercury, 11th November, 1899. 

* Apparently the culprit was sometimes tied up by the thumbs. See a 
print in T. Seccombe’s ‘Twelve bad men” of Charteris so tied. Such 
tying was also a mild alternative for peine forte et dure. 

IIo 


PRES oa : see 
= ‘ . SSS & CER ee 24 


| todlteam ie 


Ge e pfersafiranber| 


. lee be. Sed telly g Le 7d alerces HAL he PAS a 


| Z bei. be Ne 
. Lory es 
Rigs le aor 


f 


fle 0 of Dace Gebers he oy 


bess (a 2h bes Be 6" Das of Ley! neark Diet i 
Lod 2 Bo fang Ae LS pes Gu recben ee 20g) ties y 


See LO A We ongh — 
Yani fie lng i G, thos 1 


fe ty Year fecrdcort to the fe le! 


fhe noth ay fate 
- EPL ee ee e 
fla Bo ae 9G LS Sage de Affe ; Pee Ze a | 

fh fs) ae Gots cf ee ie amr 


bh 
hace. oe lol 


A page from the Northern Circuit Gaol Book. 
(Photo. by A. P. Monger, London.) 


2 Neve, an a 7 


The Mysterious Fourth Man. 


the whole trial he behavéd with great steadiness and decency. 
He heard his conviction and received his sentence with profound 
composure, and left the bar with a smile on his countenance. 
Whether this was the expression of indignation or the affectation 
of heroism we pretend not to determine.’’ 

Henry Terry was next put to the bar. He was indicted, 
say the contemporary newspapers, as an accomplice, a word 
covering “‘abetting,’’ ‘‘counselling and procuring,’ and 
““comforting and assisting.’? On whose evidence the grand 
jury had found a true bill against him cannot be ascertained ; 
his indictment is missing; no surviving depositions touch him 
at all; Aram, already civiliter mortuus, as a capitally con- 
victed felon, would have been incompetent to testify. No 
evidence, it is said, was offered against him, and he was at 
once discharged. ‘‘ This fellow,’’ observes the York Pamphlet, 
““had the audacity to ride out of York in a triumphant and 
boasting manner, wearing a green cockade in his hat, in 
contempt and derision of the malice of his prosecutors.’’ 

It is boldly asserted in this pamphlet that a fourth man 
preceded Aram and the heckler and their victim to the cave, 
keeping on the other side of the road, and that this man 
was not Henry Terry. ‘‘ We have,”’ it adds, ‘‘ from many 
circumstances . . . and from the words and actions as 
well of Aram as of Houseman, the strongest and most presump- 
tive reasons to induce us to think him a different person. 

A fourth, who is as yet undiscover’d, there certainly 
was, and of Aram’s acquaintance and procuring.’’ Houseman, 
it will be remembered, did in his first examination speak 
equivocatingly of a strange man whom Clark and Aram fol- 
lowed into the market-place. The language of the pamphlet, 
with its direct reference to the words of Aram, points strongly 
in the direction of Iles as the other confederate. The 
suppressed passages in the second examination implicate him ; 
that the suppressed passage in the letter taxed him with com- 
plicity in the murder seems a vehement probability. 

It is quite certain that the true story of the murder lies 
buried with its perpetrators. That Clark ever came alive to 
the cave seems doubtful. The local tradition, preserved by 
Walbron, that the plate was beaten up at Robert Terry’s house 
at How Hill is far more likely than Eugene’s account of the 
matter. The cave, even in 1744, was not an unfrequented 
spot, for the diligence of the Rev. Mr. Joy has disclosed a 
carved date, 1737, upon the rockwork on the left of the 
entrance, and Thomas Gent had referred to the cave in his 
work on Knaresborough of 1733. 

Whether killed in the cave or carried there dead, that 
Clark met his death through a preconcerted scheme of murder 


III 


Eugene Aram. 


admits of no doubt. The occasion was chosen when the pro- 
tection of his servant and the company of his wife were both 
withdrawn; that simple robbery was the motive, and that 
the killing of Clark formed no part of ‘“‘the premeditated 
design’ of Aram, at least, as Bulwer pretends, will not bear 
a moment’s scrutiny. The robbery of Clark by persons per- 
fectly well known to him could only have resulted in_their 
conviction and execution unless they fled their country. Every- 
thing points to a well-conceived scheme of murder. The time 
chosen, which would leave many hours of darkness for the 
burial of the body, the care with which the body was stripped, 
the cunningly selected site for the interment, the speedy 
despatch when once the marriage portion had been paid over, 
all point more to a calculated crime than to a crime of impulse. 
That the site was selected by Aram with a view to the artful 
defence that he subsequently set up is, perhaps, no very forced 
conclusion. The cave he then knew to have been occupied 
by a hermit, and many years later, in 1833, the bones of a 
recluse were discovered just outside it. 

‘‘Chance brought to light,’’ wrote the late Dr. Granville, 
‘Can excavation 2 feet deep made in the solid rock, with 
hollows at the bottom to receive certain projecting parts of a 
human body—such a one having been found there in it in a 
state of decay at the time of the discovery.’’?3 

The doctor opines that, had the discovery been made before 
the conviction of Eugene, it ‘‘ would have snatched guilt from 
punishment.’’ I can see little reason to agree in this. These 
remains, like Rosia’s and St. William’s, were much decayed. 
A silver coin was found with them. Their great antiquity 
was manifest; nothing of the sort appeared in the case of the 
remains found by Houseman’s direction. Calvert, too, insists 
that ‘‘had Eugene Aram known of the grave in the floor of 
the little chapel [he does not mean what is known as St. 
Robert’s Chapel; that is some distance from the cave.— 
E.R.W.] . . . it would have added very much to 
his artful and specious defence that the skeleton . . . was 
the remains of an anchorite, who had there prepared his place 
of sepulture.’’ To which it may suffice to reply that this grave 
would have been equally known in that case to Richard House- 
man, and his ability to point it out as strong proof of his 
story as he actually offered.24 


23<«The Spas of England” (1841), I, p. 95. Cf. Timbs’ ‘‘ Abbeys, 
cee Ancient Halls,” I., 285-7, and Calvert’s ‘‘ Knaresborough” 
), . 


4 Of. the Quarterly Review, vol. 133, p. 12, to the same effect. The 
excavations were made not within, but outside the cave’s mouth. The 
objects discovered were removed some years ago to St. Robert’s Chapel. 


I1I2 


A Plurality of Murders. 


Tt is advisable here ‘to’ gather up the evidence that Aram 
was concerned in more than one murder. Of legal evidence 
there is, of course, none. That he was involved in some 
dark transactions prior to the murder of Clark appears from 
an anecdote in Bell that, some little time before the cordwainer 
disappeared, one of the Spences, riding over to see Anna, was 
bidden by her to return at once and not stay the night, as 
there was something amiss in the house.25 

The body found on Thistle Hill, interred without a coffin or 
apparently any clothing by which it might be identified, was 
seemingly that of a young man; the cause of death was not, 
indeed, ascertained, but if Mrs. Leetham was right that body 
was interred one night about the very time of Clark’s murder. 
Coates, on the other hand, swore that no one but Clark had 
been missed from the neighbourhood. Against that is the 
united testimony of the York Pamphlet, Bristow, and of the 
“‘ letter from Yorkshire,’’ that the Jew and his man had dis- 
appeared. So firmly was the belief in a triple murder enter- 
tained at that time in the locality that Scatcherd tells us he 
saw a manuscript poem by Thomas Gent on the subject. Again, 
the discovery of a second corpse on Thistle Hill many years 
later is a slight confirmation of the legend.26 If the story be 
true, it would explain the possession by Aram and Houseman 
of an amount of booty exceeding their probable share in the 
plunder of Clark. For Eugene, though compelled to disgorge 
a great part of his share to Iles, arrived in London (if we 
credit the lady of pleasure) with a sum surpassing Clark’s 
entire fortune, and Houseman waxed rich so suddenly as “‘ to 
some gave great suspicion.’’ This is hardly consistent with 
the view that their wealth was in each case but a fourth or 
fifth part of a treasure for the restoration of which, entire, 
but £15 had been offered—the two Terrys and Iles presumably 
dividing the rest. 

If the confederates were, indeed, involved in these other 
murders, we are still at liberty to suppose Clark at least no 
party to them, although tradition has it otherwise ; his posi- 
tion has already been reviewed ; it cannot be denied that much 
mystery remains. His dealings with the leather are difficult 
to understand. Why does he call Tuton up twice, late on a 
winter’s night, to leave leather? That he aroused the mason 
by sending his apprentice negatives the notion that he was 
bent upon concealment of so inexplicable a transaction. Why 
Tuton should suffer himself to be put to the inconvenience of 
rising at three in the morning to take in leather was, we may 
suppose, explained upon the trial. 


¢ 
i 


2 Bell, p. 54, n. 
% Gls. 62-63. 
H 113 


Eugene Aram. 


If Aram was a triple murderer, his case the more resembles 
that of his American counterpart, Ruloff, of whom Professor 
Goldwin Smith27 writes—‘‘ We had something like a counter- 
part of him (Eugene Aram) at Ithaca, in the person of one 
Ruloff, who in a remarkable way combined criminal propensi- 
ties with literary tastes, being a great philologist and engaged 
in the invention of a universal language. Ruloff committed 
a series of robberies and murders, the series of murders begin- 
ning with those of his wife and daughter. On that occasion 
he escaped justice through the absence of a corpus delicti, Lake 
Cayuga, into which he had thrown the bodies, being undredg- 
able. He wandered into Virginia, where he committed other 
crimes, all the time working at his universal language. Return- 
ing to his old haunts, he again committed robbery and murder, 
and again fell into the hands of justice. The opponents of 
capital punishment petitioned against his execution on the 
stock plea of insanity and on the somewhat inconsistent 
ground that he had invented a universal language, and that 
by hanging him a light of science would be put out. ee 
Ruloff was hanged. His forehead bespoke intellect, but the 
width of the head between the ears gives it the aspect of that 
of a bull.”’ 

Whatever may be the truth as to these other murders, we 
are not to suppose that such vile calumnies as the ‘‘ Letter 
from Yorkshire ’’ were suffered to prejudice Aram’s fair trial. 
Like scandalous publications against Miss Blandy were gravely 


27 «« Reminiscences,” p. 386. For the career of Edward Howard Ruloff, 
America’s remarkable criminal scholar, see ‘‘The Man of Two Lives— 
Edward Howard Ruloff, Philologist and Murderer” (1871), ‘‘The Life, 
Trial, and Execution of KE. H. Ruloff” (1871), Barclay (America) ; and the 
following Law Reports:—People v. Ruloff, 3 Parker’s Cr. Reps. 40 
(1858); Ruoff v. People (motion for new trial), 4 Smith, N.Y. Rep. 179 
(1859), where the conviction of Ruloff of the murder of his child was 
quashed on writ of error; also Ruloff v. People (1871), 45 N.Y. Reps. 
213, 5 Lansing 26, and Abbott’s Pr. Reps. N.S. 245; sustaining 
Ruloff's conviction for the murder of Merrick. The N.Y. Tribune 
for 12th January, 17th, 18th, and 19th May, 1871, gives particulars 
of his conviction, last hours, and execution, and specimens of his philo- 
logical treatise, ‘‘Method in the formation of Language,” in which the 
murderer quotes six ancient and modern languages. He had studied law 
under Duncan Robertson, also medicine, mineralogy, conchology, &c. 
Like Aram he was entirely impenitent and wholly concerned at the last 
with his literary reputation. An agnostic in religion, he was yet perfectly 
sane in medical opinion (7'ribune, 17th May, 1871), and acknowledged the 
sanctions of morality, though refusing to be fettered by them. Not a 
little remarkable is the way in which ‘“‘the man of blood became a 
patient, amiable, bookworm” (Tribune, 19th May, 1871). His escape in 
1858 was due to his cunning in destroying all evidence of the corpus delicti. 
In the crime for which he suffered, his participation, he contended, did 
not extend to the homicide, but only to the burglary to which it was 
incidental. But, as in Aram’s case, this was no defence, if true. 


114 


Cost of the Prosecution. 


denounced by the prosecuting counsel as well as by the Court,27 
and, if such came to the knowledge of either Noel or Norton, 
it would have been the duty of either to warn the jurors to 
disregard them utterly. 

Terry dismissed from the bar, Noel concluded the day’s list, 
finished the Crown cases next day, and by Monday was fast 
posting on his way to Newcastle, what time justice was being 
done upon the body of Eugenius. His prosecution had cost 
the town of Knaresborough the very moderate sum of £54 
8s. 1040.28 


7718 St. Tr., pp. 1169-1170. See also Gurney’s shorthand report of 


Donellan’s case. 
28 Calvert, p. 116. 


115 


CHAPTER XI. 


Aram’s Last Hours—His Letters and Fragment of Autobiography— 
Much of the Latter Suppressed—The Influence of Iles—Aram’s 
Impenitence and Hardness—Reception of His Wife—Desires the 
Sacrament of Collins—His ‘‘Confession”—Attempts Suicide— 
His Execution and Gibbeting—Fate of His Skull and Remains— 
Vicissitudes of His Family—Houseman’s Hostile Reception—His 
Miserable Existence and Death—Traditions of Clark and of 
Iles—Extinction of Their Families. 


Aram, whose firmness during his trial and sentence we have 
noticed, now busily employed his mind in writing. Surprise 
has been expressed at what he was able to accomplish in but 
a few hours in the ‘condemned hole’’; but, as was said by 
Sir Oracle at a rather later time, ‘“‘ Depend upon it, sir, when 
a man knows he is to be hanged in a fortnight, it concentrates 
his mind wonderfully.”’ 

On Saturday, at ten o’clock, he wrote as follows, apparently 
to Mr. Collins :— 


"I thank you much for your kind concern for me, and which you 
have expressed so well. Mr. Wharton begged my defence of yesterday, and 
there is no other but that, which only is genuine. If you think it will be 
either pleasure or advantage to you, I will upon the least intimation speak to 
Mr. Wharton that he suffer you to copy it. As to my life, it is of no 
importance to the publick, nor would it be of service to anybody ; nor does 
any one know much about it. Nor if it was material, have I time. But I 
am certain it was spent much more commendably than that of any one of 
my enemies. 

I have three books of yours, and thank you for the amusement some of 
them have afforded me ; and wish. you could send for them, it not being in 
my power to get them to you. Yet, Sir, if any general particulars of my 
life will oblige you, you have nothing to do but let me know. 


Iam, 
with great respect, 
Sir, 
Your most humble servant, 


KE. ARAM. 
Saturday, ten o‘clock, 
4th August, 1759. 


The same day he also wrote thus, to whom is uncertain, but 
probably to Etherington— 


R 
” Thad both your favours, for which I thank you; you have enclos’d 
what I thought proper to say concerning myself, family, and affair. I 
promised it to the Rev. Mr. Collins. If you choose to order any of your 


116 


A Censored Autobiography. 


people to transcribe it, you thay keep this, and I will subscribe my name 
to such transcript. Do which you please. I thank you again and again. 
I write in great haste, as no doubt appears, but you will pardon inaccu- 
eee I should be very glad to see you to-morrow, if it can be allowed ; 
and am 


Your most obliged, 
humble servant, 
KE. ARAM. 
4th August, 1759. 


P. 8. Mr. Collins will visit me on Monday morning. 


The enclosure referred to is the letter to Collins in the Fourth 
Appendix, on looking at which it will be seen that Aram 
writes, “‘In April . . . 1744 [error for 1745] I went again 
to London (the reasons shall follow).’’ Nought, however, 
appears as to the reasons, and the reference at the close to the 
“affair’’ bears every evidence of having been ‘‘ censored.’’ 
We have seen that nothing was known until Scatcherd’s second 
edition of the “‘ Memoirs’’ appeared in 1838 of that part of 
Aram’s examination, which reflected on Iles; and that Terry’s, 
which also did, has never been printed till now. We are forced 
to the conclusion that Aram’s reference to the crime, written 
after conviction, was almost wholly suppressed by Iles. That 
Aram wrote much more than remains seems certain. The 
editors of the 1759 pamphlets must here be quoted. 

The anonymous York writer, who professes throughout to 
relate “as well what has been publickly rumoured, as what 
we, from private Information, have been able to gather as 
authentic .’, and admits that ‘‘enough, nay, too 
much, will, we are sorry to say, appear to give the unprejudiced 
Reader too bad an Opinion, not only of those already named 
(i.e., Clark, Aram, and Houseman), but of some only hinted at, 
‘for a few Things mentioned, though never so strongly in their 
Favour’ (e.g., Iles’s share in recovering the goods), thus 
alludes to the letter to Collins— 


“The Whole, notwithstanding his great Judgment and 
Learning, was a Piece so infamous and incoherent, that it 
was judg’d totally unfit for the Press, without being 
altered, and render’d different in almost every Par- 
ticular.’”1 


Thus Anne Ward, Bristow, her London agent, and Ethering- 
ton, who printed the first York edition— 


‘‘ Aram wrote the following short account of . . . 
his . . . life. . . . So far as it is given to the 
publick, it is given with the same scrupulous exactness 
with which his defence has been printed. It must, how- 
ever, be declared, That as we suppress’d a part of his second 


1p. 55. 
F 117 


Eugene Aram. 


Confession, because it reflected on some Characters that 
stand unimpeach’d, so we have also suppressed a part of 
this performance, as being extremely injurious to the 
Integrity and Candor of the Court.’’ 


One cannot help inferring that the motive of suppression was 
quite as much a desire to shield Iles as Noel, who was far 
beyond the reach of poor Aram’s malevolence. It is odd that 
what is allowed to appear implicates only Houseman and Terry, 
precisely as in the case of the second examination, in which, we 
now know, grave reflections were also made on the “ Integrity 
and Candor ”’ of Iles. 

Aram continued to manifest a bold and unrepentant . 
demeanour. He exhibited throughout, as Mr. H. B. Irving 
well says, ‘‘ not the slightest feeling of remorse,’’ and uses, in 
reference to the “ affair,’’ the language of an aggrieved man. 
*“Ah, my dear sir, ’tis this very conscious innocence that is 
of the greatest prejudice to you,” quotes our author, pardon- 
ably reminded of some associations with Joseph Surface. 
According to the York Pamphlet, Anna Aram visited him on 
the last Sunday of his life, ‘‘ who tenderly advis’d him to 
prepare himself for his latter end, which discourse he evaded 
by asking questions about his son’s welfare and other trifling 
matters.’’2 Polly Powell he also saw, when he inveighed 
bitterly against Houseman’s perjured evidence.? The similarity 
of these scenes with what happened when Anna and Polly saw 
him in the “ Bell Inn,’’ as described in the “‘ Gleanings,’’ sug- 
gests that only one such interview took place, and that after 
conviction. He probably saw Etherington on this day, as 
appears from his letter, of which the publisher was seemingly 
the recipient. Two clergymen had visited him on the Saturday. 
One was certainly Collins, ‘‘ whom he desired to attend him 
after his conviction,’’ and who was to give him the sacrament 
next morning; the other may have been Brotheric. To them 
he made one of those half-confessions in which the fact is 
admitted but the vile motive denied. Just as Miss Blandy 
admitted poisoning her father, but professed herself “ perfectly 
innocent as to any intention to destroy or even hurt her dear 
father ’’; just as Beatrice Cenci, having denied the murder of 
her father, after conviction put forward a monstrous excuse for 
which her advocate, Farinacci, admitted there was no ground, 


2p. 55. 


rd ie 14. ‘*In a most bitter manner inveighing against Houseman.” 
.P. 54, 

“Opera Farinaccii Cons. LXVI. (Vol. IV., Noribergee MDCLXXXII.), 
and Bertollotti’s ‘‘The Cencis.” ‘Et idem (commutation of sentence) 
firmiter sperabatur de sorore Beatrice, si prepositam excusationem pro- 
basset, prout non probavit. Laus deo.” Prosper Farinacci. J. C. Rom. 

118 


Scatcherd’s Fatuities. 


so Eugene Aram conceded ‘killing Clark, but basely put forward 
as an excuse a well-founded, as he pretended, jealousy of Clark’s 
relations with his wife. Bulwer has thrown over this excuse, 
and prefers to think that Aram never put it forward—he was 
bound to acquit his hero of so shameful a cloak for his villainy. 
Scatcherd, on the other hand, insists that it was true, and 
comments, “ As he certainly acted upon that conviction, I boldly 
say, in spite of all the clamour of an unthinking world, that he 
ought not to have been brought to an ignominious end.’’5 
Elsewhere he says, ‘‘ That Aram did not go out on the fatal 
night with the intention of killing Clark is manifest. . . .”6 
One is invited to suppose that our hero, “feeble and vale- 
tudinary,’’ went, upon those apocryphal crutches, with the 
defiler of his bed, to a lonely cave, at three in the morning, and 
there fell a-quarrelling, upon a sudden, over the favours of a 
lady, whom Aram so highly esteemed that he cut her in the 
street, and deserted her as soon as he had cleared Lothario 
from his path, Lothario of the stuttering tongue and ‘“‘ pock- 
broke ”’? countenance! Yet Scatcherd is everywhere hailed as 
our ‘‘ Authority.’’? His zpse diait has induced two French 
compilers to state as undeniable this “ eirconstance extenuante.’’ 

The fact of confession having been denied by many, it is 
well to discriminate between the unquestionably spurious “ con- 
fession ’’ of the Newgate Calendar and that above indicated 
to Collins and the other clergyman, whoever he was. The last 
comes to us on the authority of Bristow and Ann Ward, dates 
from 1759, and was never, as far as I can trace, contradicted 
by Collins, to whom it must have been known. The interview 
at which it took place is thus described by Bristow— 

‘* Aram’s sentence was a just one, and he submitted to it with 
that stoicism he so much affected ; and the morning after he was 
condemned he confessed the justice of it to two clergymen (who 
had a licence from the judge to attend him), by declaring that 
he murdered Clark. Being asked by one of them what his 
motive was for doing that abominable action, he told them 
“he suspected Clark of having an unlawful commerce with his 
wife—that he was persuaded at the time when he committed 
the murder he did right—but since he has thought it wrong.’ 

“¢ After this, ‘ pray,says Aram, what became of Clark’s body, wf 
Houseman went home (as he said upon my trial) immediately 
upon seeing him fall?’ One of the clergymen replied, ‘ I’J0 
tell you what became of it ; you and Houseman dragged wt into 
the cave, stripped and buried it there—brought away his clothes, 
and burnt them at your own house’; to which he assented. 
He was asked whether Houseman did not earnestly press him 


5 <« Mem.”’ 36. 


6 Gls. 64. 
119 


Eugene Aram. 


to murder his wife, for fear she should discover the business 
they had been about. He hastily replied, ‘He did, and 
pressed me several times to do wt.’ ”’ 

Bell adds that Aram protested, in answer to a question by 
one of the clergy whether, if it were the case, that his wife 
was unfaithful with Clark, he had a right to murder the man, 
‘* As much right as George the Ist to do so to Count Konings- 
mark.’’ I rather suspect that Bell may have invented this 
to show the readiness of Aram’s mind and his fertility of ideas. 
He promised, it is said, to make a full confession before he 
was turned off; but this, if he ever intended it, he took care to 
frustrate by attempting suicide. According to the York 
Pamphlet, Mr. Collins discovered him, on coming on Monday- 
morning to give him the last rites of the Church. Bristow thus 
describes the scene— 

“ This was the substance of what passed with Aram the morn- 
ing after he was condemned; and, as he promised to make a 
more ample confession on the day he was executed, it was 
generally believed everything previous to the murder would 
have been disclosed; but he prevented any further discovery 
by a horrid attempt upon his own life. When he was called 
from bed to have his irons taken off, he would not rise, alleging 
he was very weak. On examination, his arm appeared bloody ; 
proper assistance being called in, it was found that he had 
attempted to take away his own life by cutting his arm in two 
places with a razor, which he had concealed in the condemned 
hole some time before. By proper applications he was brought 
to himself, and, though weak, was conducted to Tyburn, where, 
being asked if he had anything to say, he answered No. Im- 
mediately after he was executed, and his body conveyed to 
Knaresborough Forest, and hung in chains pursuant to his 
sentence.”’ 

The Press of the day unite in the following report of the 
incident— 

“Yesterday morning (being the day fix’d for his Execution), 
he cut with a Razor, which he had conceal’d in his Cell some 
little Time before, the Veins of his Left Arm, a little above 
the Elbow and also a little above the Wrist, but miss’d the 
Artery, by which before it was discovered, he had lost so much 
Blood, that he was render’d very weak. Surgeons were 
immediately sent for, who stopp’d the Bleeding, and he was 
carried to Tyburn (at which Place he was sensible, tho’ very 
feeble, and was there ask’d if he had anything to say, to which 
he answer’d No), where he was executed and his Body carried 
to Knaresborough Forest, where it is to be hung in Chains in 
the nearest part of it to that Town, pursuant to his Sentence.” 

A very old man, reputed to be then one hundred and four 

120 


The Gibbet. 


years of age, told the writer of the paper in the Leisure Hour 
for February, 1885, “ about thirty-seven years ago,” 7.¢., about 

1847, “that he had been taken as a child to the execution by 
his father, and held up on his shoulders to see Aram hanged 
ao and the old man murmured out his recollections of the 
indignation of the crowd.” 

If the old man were one hundred and four in 1847, he must 
have been sixteen when Eugene stood under “ the fatal tree ”— 
old enough to stand on his own feet to watch the sport. It is 
more probable that he mistook his age, and was but a child 
at the time of the execution, for one among the horrible notions 
which lingered almost to within living memory was that it was 
a good thing for infancy to learn its first lessons in morality 
at the foot of the gallows, and, what time the hangman did his 
office, to receive correction at the hands of age and wisdom! 
And, if this were not enough, an occasional visit to some gibbet 
would drive the moral home !? 

“My mother,” said a certain Mrs. Matson to Scatcherd, “saw 
him hung up, and he was to all appearance as dead as a stone. 
When he was brought to Knaresborough he was deposited for 
the night in a stable of Mr. White’s at the ‘Angel Inn,’ in 
the bottom of the town, and was gibbeted next day near Thistle 
Hill.” Scatcherd had also conversed with an old man who 
had helped to draw Aram up on to his gibbet. The place of 
execution was the Knavesmire, on the outskirts of York, a spot 
long dedicated to the offices of the common hangman ; like other 
such spots, it enjoyed the distinction of sharing the generic 
name of “Tyburn,” whence Chambers, in his “ Book of Days,” 
and others have rashly concluded that Eugene was brought to 
London for the final purposes of justice. 

_ The subject of hanging in chains has received the attention 
of the antiquary, in the person of Mr. Hartshorne, and from 
time to time the gruesome theme has drawn from the older 
readers of Notes and (Queries some personal recollections 
of scenes which at this date can no longer be within the memory 
of the living. A learned controversy has resulted in establishing 
that at a remote period men were even hanged alive in chains, 
but this barbarity had long disappeared. 

That hanging men in chains excited no disgust in our 
ancestors is established by nothing more strongly than by the 
following incident related in entire unconsciousness of its 
bitter irony :—A co-adventurer of Drake, landing with a party 
on the inhospitable coast of Patagonia, had occasion to observe 
that they ‘‘ were much comforted by finding a gibbet standing, 


7 On the custom of taking children to executions and gibbets and correct- 
ing them at the same time, see Notes and Queries, 8th Ser. IV. 404, 
V. 34, IX 26; 6th Ser. VIII. 353; ‘‘ Heart of Midlothian,” Ch. XXVI. 


{21 


Eugene Aram. 


a proof that Christian people had been there before them.” 
The grisly and putrefying anatomy showed that desolate shore 
to be no mere haunt of birds or beasts or of the untutored 
savage, but that the Church of Christ had planted her banner 
there !8 

These so-called “chains” were, in fact, a suit of iron bands 
encompassing the corpse, so that it should not drop to pieces 
in the process of decay, which was in a measure arrested by 
coating the déad malefactor in a vesture of canvas and pitch. 
The ‘‘ chains ’’ were suspended by a swivel from the gibbet, so 
that the rattling bones might noisily gyrate in the night time 
as in the noon tide, and youth and levity, making wanton on 
their primrose path, might espy the . 

thin dead body which waits the eternal term 


and learn its dumb lesson. It is to be feared, however, that 
public gibbeting served as little the interests of morality as 
the procession to Tyburn, of which Johnson deplored the suspen- 
sion. “Sir, the public was gratified, and the criminal was 
supported by it.”9 The corpses were often treated with shock- 
ing irreverence; Aram’s head was cut from his body, while 
many years later, as a contributor to Motes and Queries 
relates, Christian feeling for the miserable dead did not prevent 
a “sporting gentleman” from aiming at a poor skeleton with 
his gun and bringing down its skull. 

So firmly did the chains bind the bodies that they sometimes 
held together for many years, the head being so well secured, 
that in September, 1883, the cranium of Breed, executed in 
1742, still remained “ fast riveted within the framework of the 
head.” 10 

Aram’s body was occasionally visited by his widow, and even 
by his children. Mrs. Pickard, a gossip of Scatcherd’s, had 
been nursed in early years by Betty Aram, who in 1759 was 
a@ young woman of nearly twenty, and she remembered that 
“one afternoon Betty had taken us to see her father’s gibbet 
on the moor. Her mother, on our return, asked her where she 
had been with us all the afternoon. As she did not reply, my - 
sister said we had been to see the gibbet, at which Anna was 
much hurt, and scolded her severely, and went and told m 
grandmother of it, and wept much as she related it.”11 

Mr. Sandars, who must have been very young at the time, 
related to our worthy antiquary “the following circum- 


8 See Notes and Queries, 8th Ser. IV. 514. 


®T hardly need remind the reader of Swift’s ‘Cl Tom Cli : 
to be hanged.” ever Tom Clinch going 


0 Notes and Queries, 6th Ser. VIII. 182, 
1 Gls, 19. 


122 


Fate of the Remains. 


stance” :—“When Tom Lee, the noted highwayman, was 
brought through Knaresborough, preparatory to being hung in 
chains at Grassington, the procession stopped for the night at 
the Blue Bell Inn, now the Crown, where he was put into a 
stable for the night. A great mob assembling to see him 
depart, Mrs. Aram took me up into her chamber . . . I 
recollect she cried very much.”12 This occurred in July, 1768. 

The significance of these episodes is that they show that 
her husband’s cruel neglect of her, his desertion, his wicked 
excuse for his crime at her expense had not killed womanly 
affection in the heart of this “innocent, industrious, poor 
woman,” and help us to understand her piety for his unworthy 
bones; for it is recorded that, as the remains fell down from 
the gibbet, she collected and interred them. Old John Clint, 
Scatcherd’s authority, ‘‘. . . himself had buried one of 
the hands.’’!3 

A good many years later a surgeon, Mr. Strother, buried in 
the garden of a solicitor, Mr. Tolson, a thigh bone and the 
arms of Eugene.!4 Strother had “never either seen or heard 
anything about the skull.”15 Nor was this strange, as it had 
ere this been stolen from the gibbet by Dr. Hutchinson, of 
Knaresborough, for his museum, under circumstances described 
at length in Appendix III. Great force was evidently used to 
extricate it from the circumvolving hoops, and in so doing 
part of the right mastoid process was cut off, and perhaps at 
the same time the skull was sawn in two along the median 
line; at least this was done while it was in Dr. Hutchinson’s 
possession, for Mrs. Pickard told Scatcherd that her husband 
put the hinges on for the doctor, to hold the two halves together ; 
these still serve their purpose, and afford the best evidence of 
the skull’s identity. After passing through many hands, as 
will be seen in the Appendix, the skull has found a fitting resting 
place beside Thurtell’s in the Royal College of Surgeons’ 
Museum. It so far baffled the phrenologists that the illustrious 
Spurzheim pronounced it female, thus paying a tribute to the 
force of Eugene’s argument! 

The gibbet, which ‘‘had stood upon forest, south- 
east of the Low bridge, and on the right-hand side of the road 
leading thence to Plumpton, perhaps seventy or eighty yards,’” 
was removed in 1778, on the enclosure of the forest. It was. 
studded with nails to prevent people from cutting it down, 


12 @]g. 23-4. Sandars was born in 1761. Tom Lee’s sentence passed 
by Sir Joseph Yates, as entered in the ‘‘Gaol Book,” is printed at the 
end of Appendix I. 

BGls. 61. 

4 Inglis, 17. 


16 Tb. 
123 


Eugene Aram. 


and was purchased for a baulk or beam for the Brewers’ Arms 
(to what base uses !), where, until that hostelry was pulled down, 
it was an object of curiosity.16 

Aram’s lantern, which was hung outside the school, passed 
into the possession of Dante Gabriel Rosetti, and thence into 
the hands of Henry Irving, who used it in the tragedy written 
for him by William Gorman Wills, produced and played for 
three months at the Lyceum in 1873. It is now the property 
of Messrs. Sotheran, who bought it at the sale of the actor’s 
collection.17 A further curious memento of Aram yet lingers at 
Knaresborough—a carved head, adorning the cottage of a 
constable there, more probably the work of Peter than of 
Eugene. 18 a 

Of Aram’s numerous family the brief tale is soon told. The 
two elder girls had died in infancy ; Henry, the epileptic, died 
in 1761. Jane, ‘‘ who took after her mother, went into service, 
and died young.’’ Betty, ‘‘a miraculous, wild, and giddy girl 
. . . got married to a tramp currier of the name of York. 
‘She was a stout and very wild girl.”’19 She died at Northallerton, 
“* quite a celebrity, sought out by people of all parts,’ on 30th 
January, 1805.20 Joseph became a saddler at Greenhammer- 
ton, appears to have turned Methodist preacher, and left a son, 
Matthias, who later emigrated to America with his mother and 
two sisters.21}_ Sally, whose baptism, like Jane’s, cannot be 
traced, had possibly been born out of wedlock, for Scatcherd 
represents her as twenty-seven in 1758, and Beatniffe’s young 
woman was ‘‘ then not above thirty ’’ ; whether she followed her 
father from Lynn to York, or was ever in the former place, 
is more than doubtful. It is agreed, however, by Bell and 
Scatcherd that she subsequently found her way to London— 
“after some misfortunes, which I shall not mention,’’ 
Scatcherd significantly adds. She there called upon a York 
bookseller, who happened to be in town, told him she was in 
distress, and hoped he would be so good as to make her a 
present out of the profits, which had arisen from the publication 


__16Gls. 61-2; Fletcher’s ‘‘ Pict. Yorkshire,” IV., 35.; Speight’s “‘ Upper 
Nidderdale,” 76. An inn is named after our hero. The Brewers’ Arms 
was not in existence in 1880, according to Joy. 


ae Brereton’s ‘Life of Irving,” I., 141; Speight’s ‘“‘ Upper Nidderdale,” 


i Speight’s ‘‘Nidderdale,” 475; ‘“‘ Upper Nidderdale,” 325; Grainge, 


19 Gls. 18, 19, 23-4, 60. 
20 «« Nidderdale,” 475. She died of cancer in the workhouse. Gls. 60. 


71 Gls. 17, 18, 60. Joseph died on 21st J anuary, 1803, and was buried in 


ey Churchyard ; the inscription records his deep piety and religious 
zeal, 


124 


Unjust Aspersions, 


of her father’s trial. She was dejected enough to threaten 
suicide. 

A ridiculous letter by her, formerly in the possession of 
Hargrove, is reproduced by Scatcherd, from whom Bell 
plagiarises it. Scatcherd, indignant at the theft from his 
““Memoirs’’ of ‘“‘the chief ornament with which they are 
adorned,’ justly asks what we are to think of a writer who, in 
1832, professes to have conversed with Sally in 1767! 

‘‘The chief ornament ’’ is such sorry nonsense that I forbear 
to printit. . . . ‘Sally cared nothing about dress, finery, 
or sweethearts,’’ gushes Scatcherd, oblivious that the idol 
himself was much attached to all three !22 

Anna Aram, described by one who knew her as a soft kind 
of woman, struggled for years in a small shop, where she sold 
bread, black puddings, and pies, in the High Street; she after- 
wards moved ‘‘to a very poor house, about half-way down 
Blucher Street,’’ then called Hilton Lane, and later known as 
Powell’s Yard, where she continued her battle with poverty, 
until she died in 1774, and was interred in Knaresborough 
Churchyard. The apologists of Aram have so aspersed her 
character as to suggest a long and habitual infidelity to Aram. 
Seatcherd casts doubts on the paternity of all her children, 
except Sally, while Mr. J. M. Richardson, in stating that ‘‘ a 
daughter was presented_to him in or about November of that 
year’’ (z.e., 1731), he having married in May, coolly invites 
us to believe that Eugene was not the father, as if the custom 
of Aram’s class were not known—to marry only when it was 
‘‘high time’’! There is not the slightest support for the 
story of her intrigue with Clark or any other man; she seems 
to have deserved her reputation of ‘‘ an innocent, industrious, 
poor woman,’’ loyal to the husband, who had done nothing to 
maintain her or her large family, and had never, “‘ amid thousand 
amusements,’’ sent her a kind word or a sixpence. She 
gathered up his bones and gave them burial, but not even 
her forgiving nature could charitably deny that ‘‘ he made her 
an indifferent husband.’’ 

I am far from suggesting an insane diathesis in Eugene’s 
own case, but the fits of Henry, the miraculous wildness of 
Betty, the irregularities of Sally, and the religious fervour 
which made Matthew turn ‘‘ Methody,’’ alike point to con- 
siderable instability in the Aram family; and history yields 
several examples of a cold and crafty murderer being kith and 


22 We have noted the ‘‘very genteel suit of clothes, with beautiful frills 
to his shirt-wrists!” Gls. 12. Of his dress we elsewhere read that he 
commonly affected a blue coat lined with white, or else a black one. 
Mem. 10. It may have been Sally, who offered Bishop Percy, and later, 
in 1784, Dr. Lort, ‘“‘some MSS. of Eugene Aram’s Celtic Dictionary.” 


t. p. 134. 
See post. p . 


Eugene Aram. 


kin to persons of unbalanced minds. Palmer’s brother Walter 
was a dipsomaniac, and his mother openly lived under her own 
roof as the mistress of his bosom friend ‘‘ Jerry Smith.’’ The 
frequency with which atrocious murderers, sane enough to be 
hanged, have relations at some time under restraint, suggests 
a subtle link between moral idiocy and the unsoundness of 
mind which the law recognises as exempting from punishment. 
Whatever may have been the public feeling about Aram, 
whether the ‘‘ indignation of the crowd’’ at the execution was 
directed against the victim or Jack Ketch, whether Scatcherd 
had the slightest ground for supposing Eugene to have been the 
‘‘ object of much pity,’’ there is no doubt at all that House- 
man’s acquittal, the reason for which was not apparent to the 
lay mind, was very unpopular. The London Chronicle -of 
Saturday, 18th August, prints the following news :— 


‘‘York, Aug. 14th.—Last week a mob assembled about 
Richard Houseman’s House in Knaresbrough (who was 
acquitted of the Charge of being concerned in the Murder 
of Daniel Clark, in order to be admitted an Evidence 
against Eugene Aram, as mentioned in our last), and it 
was with great Difficulty they were prevented from 
pulling it down. However, they carried Houseman about 
the Streets in Effigy, which was afterwards knock’d on 
the Head with a Pick-ax (sic), and then hang’d and burnt.”’ 


An identical report appeared in the issue for the same date 
of the Cambridge Journal and in Lloyd’s Evening Post for 
25th to 28th August. ‘*‘ Houseman returned home; a few 
of his comrades went out to meet him, and for his better 
security, two or three principal people shook him by the hand, 
in the way of congratulation, as though he had been acquitted ! 
But the manceuvre was instantly seen through, and the burst 
of indignation was not to be averted. A cry, almost universal, 
of ‘scape-gallows’ arose, and so furious did the multitude 
become that, although some one opened him a house of refuge, 
his life was with difficulty preserved. During the rest of his time 
at Knaresborough he was scarcely even seen abroad, and at 
length he went to Marton, where he was interred. It was 
afterwards discovered that, besides much booty, he had the 
whole of Clark’s leather in his possession.’?23 “The individual 
who thus offered Houseman asylum was one Shepherd, and he 
seems to have appeased the crowd by throwing open to them 
his cellars. | Mrs. Benson thus described her recollections to 
Scatcherd, at the age of eighty-three.24 


23 Mem. 23. 
24G1s. 14. 
126 


Houseman the Outcast. 


*“Mrs. Benson further stated ‘ that she remembered House- 
man’s solitude after his acquittal—that he never durst stay 
out, the inhabitants being so much enraged against him; and 
that he was generally considered the worst in the transaction. 
His house was beset two or three times, and would have been 
pulled down to the ground had not Mr. Shepherd, his next 
door neighbour, appeased the people by opening his cellar and 
giving them all his liquor. She says that Houseman’s death 
when it happened was kept a profound secret, and he was taken 
away in a cart to Marton, in the night time, to the great regret 
of many, especially of Clark’s family, who had determined to 
wreak their vengeance upon him, either living or dead. She 
says that he died before she was married, and her eldest son 
is now above fifty years of age—that his dwelling was the 
house adjoining the White Horse Inn, in High Street (both 
now pulled down, and on which the Eugene Aram Hotel stands) 
—that he was a broad-set, round-shouldered man, and never 
went out by daylight after his acquittal.’ ”’ 

Another attack was occasioned by the visit to Knaresborough 
of two Oxford scholars, formerly pupils of Aram’s, who, being 
shown the heckler’s premises, broke in, smashed his windows, 
and, being joined by others, would soon have taken vengeance 
on his person, but he saved himself by a precipitate retreat. 
Houseman was advised by a Mr. Simpson to ‘‘ pocket the 
affront,’’ which he did, and soon after retired to Marton.25 
Scatcherd further tells us, on an authority not named, that 
‘Houseman married the widow of one Johnson, who had a 
daughter (Nancy) by her first husband, but no issue by House- 
man. With this, his daughter-in-law, after her mother’s 
death, he lived ; and it is said she once or twice cut him down, 
after he had hung himself upon an apple tree in his garden. 
It was remarked by many people, and long remembered, that 
for many years after Aram left Knaresborough, whenever the 
river there overflowed, Houseman was always seen prowling 
down the banks, and one old woman told the coroner she had 
once seen him creeping out of St. Robert’s Cave, and then going 
to the water to wash his hands. The general opinion after- 
wards was that he lived in a state of great alarm, fearing that 
every flood would expose the body of Clark, the place where the 
remains were found being only a few feet above the normal level 
of the river.’’26 

‘* He always,’’ said William Mitchell, erstwhile an apprentice 
to Peter Moor, who had arrested Aram, ‘‘ appeared much 
dejected, hung down his head, and was at times so melancholy 
that he frequently spent whole nights in his shop. . . . He 


2 Wx rel. E. Hargrove, Mem. 24. 


2% Gls. 61. 
127 


Eugene Aram. 


frequently went out at nights, over a wall at the top of the yard, 
to walk in the fields. . . . He had a very downcast, bad 
look. He was a stout man, and wore a brown wig.’’2?7 ‘“‘ He 
was always,’’ related Sanders, ‘‘ considered an outlaw by the 
Knaresborough people, and, I believe, would have been killed, 
especially by the Clark family, if he had ventured out.’’26 
Scatcherd was informed by this worthy that Houseman was ex- 
communicated. Excommunications were not at this time in- 
frequent as is shown by numerous entries of such in the ‘‘ Great 
Doggett,’’ but I have failed to trace this one. 

Retiring to Marton,29 he there died, and we may let the 
curtain fall upon the heckler with this extract— - 


‘©1777—May 19th.—Buried Richard Houseman of 
Knaresborough.’’3° 


Of Clark little need be said. In an earlier chapter we have 
seen how this outlawry survived in the Pipe Rolls until 1832. 
His widow outlived him many years, but their only child, born 
posthumously, died in infancy. Thus Mrs. Brown: 

‘Mrs. Brown deposed that she was niece to Daniel Clark, 
who was murdered—her father and he being brothers. ‘He 
was the oldest, and my father, Robert Clark, was the youngest 
of three, there being Joseph between them. Daniel’s wife’s 
maiden name was Foster; she came from Embsay, and had 
£300 to her fortune. It is rather singular, but my mother 
was born on the very night on which my uncle Daniel was 
killed. My grandmother never entertained any idea that her 
son was murdered, but thought that he had run away with his 
wife’s fortune. My aunt, Daniel Clark’s widow, had one 
child, a boy, with whom she had been pregnant a month 
before Daniel disappeared. This child died soon after it was 
born.’ ’°31 

In the “‘ Memoir ’’ (p. 50) Scatcherd adds—‘‘ Mrs. Clark (a 
very respectable woman) was a widow sixty-two years. She 


27 Gls. 20-21. 
% Gls. 24. 


29From Ward & Chandler’s *‘ List of Voters for George Fox”? (1742), it 
appears that Houseman was a freeholder of property at Marton. Other 
worthies in the same List are Coates, James and Thomas Collins, 
Thompson, P. Moor, Beckwith, and Norton. Aram does not figure as a 
freeholder either at Knaresborough or Ripon. Clark was still a minor. 

* Register of Marton, Gls. 59. He had been baptised 9th May, 1704. 
A memorial card in Mr. Joy’s collection states that he ‘departed this 
life, at Knaresborough, 16th May, 1777, removed to Marton on the night 
of the 18th, for fear that the Dead Body should be torn in pieces by the 
Inhabitants, and was there interred, 19th May, 1777.” 


31 Gls. 22. 
128 


Terry and Iles. 


told my informant, who oceasionally worked for her and helped 
to ‘lay her out’ after death, that ‘until the discovery was 
made of her husband’s bones she always believed him to be 
living, and that he would some day return to his home.’”? A 
spinning-wheel of hers, along with a copper coffee mill of her 
busband’s, is exhibited in York Castle, where, also until about 
1880, might have been seen a small fragment of the skull, which 
was so important an ‘‘ exhibit ’’ in R. v. Aram.32 

Of Terry nothing more is known. His triumphant exit from 
the city on his acquittal is the last glimpse of the ale-draper. 
The sinister figure of Francis Iles continued to be the subject 
of strange conjectures. Upon his death a great quantity of 
goods was discovered at his house. How he had acquired his 
wealth is uncertain. His reputation was indubitably evil; no 
less apparent in his influence on the whole tribe of York 
pamphleteers. That it was ‘‘ Offence’s gilded hand’’ which 
suppressed, in the publications of the time, all references to 
Tles, except as being ‘‘ very active in the recovery of the 
goods,’’ admits, I think, of scarcely a doubt. The name was 
extinct when Scatcherd made his investigations, and the ill- 
gotten fortune dissipated by a spendthrift nephew. House- 
man dying childless, with submission to Bulwer, who presents 
him with a daughter, there remained no issue to any of the 
confederates, save to Eugene. Betty Yorke had a family as 
numerous as her celebrated sire’s; Joseph also raised up seed 
to the number of three, as is related in Scatcherd,33 of whom 
we take our final leave in saying that he died in 1853, aged 
seventy-three, and previously had received the distinction of 
being elected F.S.A.—a worthy and amiable gentleman, of 
little judgment or real knowledge.#4 


22It is now the property of Mr. E. M. Beloe, of King’s Lynn. Governor 
Twyford gave it to Mr. Joy. 

33 Gls. 60. 

34Smith’s ‘‘Old Yorkshire” (1881) 67-69, with portrait. Bulwer, it 
seems, approved the ‘“‘ Memoir.” 


I 129 


CHAPTER XII. 


Aram’s Literary Remains—The Papers Found in His Cell—His Want 
of Religion—His ‘‘ Swan Song ”—Other Poems—Prose Pieces— 
Estimate of His Place as a Scholar—Mystery of His Story and 
Character—Compared with Others—Had He a Fair Trial P— 
Unique Nature of it—His Impenitence—A Characteristic of 
Murderers—Fitzjames Stephen and Lord Campbell on the 
Subject—Contemporaries v. Posterity—Conclusion. 


Wun Collins and the ministers of the law entered the con- 
demned “‘hold,’’ or ‘‘hole,’’? as the York Pamphlet styles it 
(neither monosyllable conveying much notion of comfort), 
there was found among those pieces, which had so diligently 
occupied his last hours, and furnish the only surviving proofs 
of his claim to the title of scholar, some verses in Aram’s 
writing, together with a piece of prose, to serve as his swan 
song. Bristow, after describing his ‘‘ horrid attempt upon his 
life,’’ thus proceeds— 

“On his table in the cell was found the following paper, 
containing his reasons for the aforesaid wicked attempt :— 

“““ What am I better than my fathers? To die is natural 
and necessary. Perfectly sensible of this, I fear no more to 
die than I did to be born. But the manner of it is something 
which should, in my opinion, be decent and manly. I think 
I have regarded both these points. Certainly nobody has a 
better right to dispose of a man’s life than himself—and he, 
not others, should determine how. As for any indignities 
offered to my body, or silly reflections on my faith and morals, 
they are (as they always were) things indifferent to me. I 
think, tho’ contrary to the common way of thinking, I wron 
no man by this, and hope it is not offensive to that Eternal 
Being that form’d me and the world; and as by this I injure 
no man, no man can be reasonably offended. I solicitously 
recommend myself to the eternal and almighty Being, the God 
of Nature, if I have done amiss. But perhaps I have not; 
and I hope this thing will never be imputed to me. Though 
I am now stained by malevolence, and suffer by prejudice, I 
hope to rise fair and unblemished. My life was not polluted 
—my morals irreproachable—and my opinions orthodox. 

130 


ca: heen 
Pro 
? ?! Ae 
ny 
eeeute 
Cn. H 5: 
Rte 
y wan 

‘ 


A i 


yeh HUA 
Mile r 1 Ae aga’ ie 
unkT: ya = iil i Hf Lo +} 
leit ata tl t 
aHtE : peated Patt if 
afta tayt ipa . fl i Uitte by] Wi 
Nt re Hie Heel P| yas 
diel se ie ith ip iN 
TUNA Hmm Lat “il 


Eugene Aram. 


vindication of suicide, a paper on which subject the avowed 
infidel Hume did not venture to publish in his lifetime, as from 
all that is related of him, alike by partisans and detractors. 
‘‘ That he was an Atheist,’’ says the York Pamphleteer, “‘ is 
what I am well assured has been by the generality of those 
who knew him firmly believed for many Years past. For 
often has he been heard to ridicule, and treat as a trivial, 
immaterial Thing, not only the horrid Crime of Murder, but 
every other Crime, held most heinous, and contradictory to 
the Laws of: God and of Man.’’ Nor is it traversed by his 
advocate, that he was ‘‘a republican in his politics, and a 
reasoner in his religion,’’? and that he probably incurred the 
ill-favour of others by his outspokenness on such subjects. 
An infidelity, which cost Hume the loss of a chair of philosophy, 
which harassed Diderot with lifelong persecution, sent Paine 
to prison, and so endangered Arouet himself that he was forced 
into the pretence of reconciliation with the Church, expressed 
in the building of a chapel, whereon was inscribed ‘‘ Deo 
erexit Voltaire ’’—must greatly have hampered Aram, both 
in his struggles to obtain employment and in combating the 
undoubted prejudices that were manifested against him during 
the year’s imprisonment. That he was careless of aggravat- 
ing the bias of the orthodox appears from the fragment above, 
where he protests that ‘‘ silly reflexions on his faith or morals 
were things always indifferent to him.’’ He lacked the com- 
mercial prosperity which enabled Hume and Voltaire to survive 
the rancour of bigotry and to rise, the one to an Under- 
Secretaryship, the other to the favour of a mighty prince. 

Other compositions were the fruit of those days in prison. 
Most were, doubtless, executed before the trial, and some seem 
to have been copies of manuscripts recovered from among his 
effects at Lynn. The poems, I think it will be allowed, reveal 
a genuine, albeit not a rare, gift of poesy. Unlike the wretched 
rhymes of Peter, his father, Eugene’s lines occasionally ring 
with real feeling, as distinct from mere felicity of expression ; 
though real feeling was not the strength of the eighteenth 
century muse, nor a special characteristic of Eugene’s. If, 
as Swift has sung, a poet, in order to soar, needs to be hungry, 

And like a jockey for a race 
His flesh brought down to flying case, 

we must yet admit that the ‘‘ condemned hole’’ was not an 
ideal poet’s bower, and make some generous allowance for a 
half-starved and forsaken man— 


Languid with want, and pale with polar cold, 
*Mid cells resounding with the voice of ‘pain, 
Where fear, pale pow’r, his dreary mansion keeps, 
And grief, unpity’d, hangs her head and weeps. 


132 


His Value to Philosophy. 


Nor need we be alert to discover slips of syntax in these com- 
positions, or condescendingly observe upon ‘‘ those lesser 
inaccuracies, from which the writings of men solely self- 
educated are rarely free.’? Accepted poets of genius have 
blundered too often in their grammar for it to be made a 
ground of belittling Aram, that he occasionally trips where 
giants have fallen; he would, for example, have been quite 
incapable of Byron’s intransitive use of the verb ‘‘lay,’’ an 
error too frequent to be set down to aught but ignorance. 

It is, however, upon the “ Essay Towards a Comparative 
Lexicon ”’ that the position of Aram in literary history now 
almost entirely depends. It lifts him out of the ruck of 
poetasters to give him a definite rank among the fathers of 
philology. The value of this suggestive fragment has not 
received, perhaps, as much attention as it deserved. Had he 
had leisure and means to carry out a work which could not be 
remunerative, and would have been impossible without the 
assurance of subscriptions enough to defray its heavy cost, he 
might have eclipsed the fame of “‘ the great lexicographer ”’ 
himself. He had an acquaintance with the Greek which, if 
he spoke truly of his reading, as I think he did, far exceeded 
Johnson’s; and a knowledge of the Hebrew, Sanskrit, and 
Celtic to which the other had no pretensions. Even with 
liberty, Aram had lacked the patrons so necessary to the under- 
takings of a poor scholar at that date. In prison, without 
friends, without books, save perhaps a ‘‘ Welch Dictionary,’’ 
in the valley of the shadow of death, with no hope that he might 
see his reputation lifted out of the ‘‘ hangman’s record ’”’ and 
based upon his merits as a scholar, Aram receives from the 
just critic the fullest credit for his achievement in philology. 

‘‘ As a self-taught scholar he has had many equals,’’ says 
Dr. Richard Garnett, ‘‘ but his peculiar distinction is to have 
lighted upon a truth of the greatest moment, unrecognised in 
his day by any scholar—the affinity of the Celtic to any other 
European languages. . . . Aram’s fragment on the subject, 
though marred by fanciful analogies between the Celtic and 
Hebrew, proves that he had thoroughly grasped it. He had a 
clear perception of the importance of local names in etymology, 
and he was, perhaps, the only man of his age who disputed 
the direct derivation of Latin from Greek. It is hardly too 
much to say that had he enjoyed wealth and leisure he might 
have advanced the study of comparative philology by fifty 
years.”’ How little his contemporaries appreciated the value 
of the philological truth he had seized appears from this over- 


2<« Childe Harold,” IV., CLXXX.; ‘The Adieu,” X., 1.4 ; “ Pignus 
Amoris,” III., 1.3. 
< 133 


Eugene Aram. 


looked letter from Dr. Lort to the Lord Bishop of Dromore, 
Thomas Percy, of the ‘‘ Percy Reliques ’’— 


My Dear Sir, 

In the papers of this week you will probably have seen some 
strange papers concerning Mrs. Thrale’s marriage with Piozzi. Se 
It is said that Dr. Johnson had written her a long letter to prevent it. 
F Since he (one Major Vallancey) went, a woman called on me to 
offer me some MSS. of Eugene Aram’s Celtic Dictionary, which she says 
had been once in your hands, and I suppose would have continued so, if 
you had thought them of any value. Had I seen her before Vallancey 
went . . . I would have sent her and her papers to him, who seems 
to be deep in Celtic etymologies; can you recollect any particulars of 


these papers ? 
Your Lordship’s 
ever faithful, 
M. LORT. . 


The letter is dated ‘‘ Saville Row, July 27th, 1784.’’ It 
must rest uncertain if this manuscript was the ‘‘ Specimen 
of a Lexicon ’’ which follows in an appendix, or was some other 
of those papers, the loss of which, on his arrest at Lynn, Eugene 
adverts to in his letter to Collins and in the brief note to 
Etherington promising transcripts of the ‘‘ papers you 
recovered,’’ already given in an earlier chapter. One must 
also be content to speculate whether the woman referred to was 
Sally, who had repaired to London and married a publican, or 
the uncertain fair one who scandalised the elect of Lynn when on 
Aram’s arrest she was discovered to be no relation. It is more 
likely that the manuscript offered to Lort was one left behind 
at Lynn, for in writing to Collins after sentence, Eugene refers 
to his books and papers on the Celtic in all its dialects as 
scattered and lost,? and the ‘‘ Specimen ”’ was itself compiled 
in prison without the aid of books. 

The indifference of such as Bishop Percy has, however, in 
the course of the centuries given way to a genuine recognition 
of Aram’s claims to scholarship. ‘‘ Eugene Aram,” writes 
Mr. Havelock Ellis, ‘‘ is now recognised as a comparative phil- 
ologist, who foresaw and to some extent inaugurated some of 
the later advances of that science.’’ 

““ There was scarcely any part of literature,’’ wrote the late 


3«J then investigated the Celtic, as far as possible in all its dialects— 
begun collections, and made comparisons between that, the English, the 
Latin, the Greek, and even the Hebrew. I had made notes, and compared 
above three thousand of these together, and found such a surprising 
affinity, even beyond my expectation or conception, that I was determined 
to proceed through the whole of these languages, and form a comparative 
Lexicon, which I hoped would account for numberless vocables in use 
with us, the Latins, and the Greeks, before concealed and unobserved. 
This, or something like it, was the design of a clergyman of great erudition 
in Scotland ; but it must prove abortive, for he died before he executed 
it, and most of my books and papers are now scattered and lost.” 


134 


A Stroke for Fortune. 


C. L. Craik, “‘ with which Aram was not profoundly conversant. 
- + + But he is a mournful example of high mental powers 
brought low by ill-regulated passions and of the vanity and 
worthlessness even of talents and knowledge when separated from 
moral principle.’’ 

It is this reflection which makes the story of Eugene Aram 
one of ever-green freshness—the contrast between the scholar 
and the felon. People have ever asked how a man who had 
industry, memory, a high power of inductive reasoning, a con- 
stitution impeached only by himself in his defence, reached 
fifty-four years of age without capturing success, attaining 
competency, or achieving any worthy ambition. For Eugene 
was no sciolist. | What he did, he did thoroughly ; he had per- 
severance, he had all the makings of a great scholar. It was 
the fault of the age, not of Aram, that with such gifts penury 
was his certain portion. Johnson, with the influence of Pope 
and of Earl Gower behind him, had failed from lack of a degree 
to secure a grammar school mastership.4 Aram, not even an 
alumnus of either University, had no brighter prospect before 
him than the meagre stipend of an usher. Selfish, salacious, 
bold, and unscrupulous, Aram was driven to crime to supply 
himself with those amenities, that genteel apparel and profusion, 
which his soul craved. Fond of the society of his social 
superiors, galled by that of his equals, embarrassed by debts, 
Aram resorted to crime with as little hesitation as any gentle- 
man of the road. Twenty pounds a year was all that the 
scholastic career held out to him. One bold stroke might win 
him as much as ten years of teaching, and Aram was not the 
man to shrink from it when the opportunity arose. Had he 
been a gamester like Charteris or Casanova he might have 
pursued pleasure and emolument at once. Unhappily he was a 
scholar, and then, as now, the scholar’s lot is one of poverty. 

- To such a lot Eugene could not resign himself. Courageous 
and unprincipled, he preferred to play for a desperate stake. 
When at length he lost, he exhibited neither contrition nor a 
sense of shame. ‘‘ Equal to either fortune,’’ as he stoutly said 
he was. Some little insincerities attending his leave-taking of 
life—expressed in the paper found in his cell—point rather to 
some incoherence of ideas or to that odious hypocrisy already 
noticed in Miss Blandy’s case, which is common to all deliberate 
murderers, than to any desire to seek Eternal mercy. Like 
Thomas Griffiths Wainwright when visited in his cell by 
former friends, he may have considered his case as that of a 
man who had speculated and in the end been beaten by fortune. 
The mention of the poisoner of Helen Abercrombie introduces 
another element of mystery. How did a murderer, it is asked, 


4 Boswell (Birkbeck Hill) I., 131-4. ; 
13 


Eugene Aram, 


get to know all these respectable people—these clergymen at 
Lynn, Chelsea, and Knaresborough—to say nothing of Bulwer’s 
Lord , whose seat was at 1 How did Wainwright, 
to whom in morals Aram was “ Hyperion to a satyr,’’? come 
to know Charles Lamb, Tom Hood, De Quincey, and Serjeant 
Talfourd, to name but a few of his eminent friends? If one 
who amid works of exquisite prose had specially adumbrated the 
subject of murder as a fine art, if one who had written his most 
notable poem on the very subject of Aram’s crime, if one, who 
united rare literary gifts with the experienced lawyer’s insight 
into men, could not detect the murderer in the pretentious but 
amusing dilettante—‘‘ Egomet Bonmot ’’—why should country 
clergymen discern the brand of Cain on the brow of the reserved 
and erudite schoolmaster? It is far too commonly supposed 
that the murderer, even when not pursuing his craft, is a trucu- 
lent ruffian, full of oaths and obscenity, from whom cuffs and 
‘blows may be expected at any moment, like showers in April— 
a man ungoverned in temper and conduct. That such men 
have often died on the gallows is true enough, but their names 
have died with them. The real murderer is outwardly often 
enough a courtly gentleman. His most noticeable failing is a 
deep and habitual untruthfulness, the extent of which is seldom 
detected but with his crime. Wainwright, who pleaded the 
thickness of poor Helen Abercrombie’s ankles as an excuse for 
his poisoning her, and is credibly believed to have murdered at 
least three people—to be transported for another crime—was 
witty, polished, a delightful host, and highly esteemed by the 
leading artists and men of letters of the day. Professor 
Webster, who murdered his colleague, Dr. Parkman, to evade 
payment of a debt, the evidence of which he sought to destroy 
with his victim, was learned and of high repute. The pro- 
fligacy which involved him in ruin only came to light, as such 
things commonly do, when he was already overwhelmed by the 
accusation of having slain his benefactor. Ruloff, ‘‘ who in a 
remarkable way combined criminal propensities with literary 
tastes, being a great philologist, and engaged in the invention 
of a universal language,’’ murdered his wife and daughter, not 
to speak of several others ; yet all the while he was actively pur- 
suing the path of knowledge, and possessed the most indubitable 
right to the title of scholar. | Eugéne Marie Chantrelle, being 
an ‘‘ excellent linguist and a man of considerable culture and 
polished address, made rapid headway and obtained profitable 
engagements in some of the leading educational establishments 
in Edinburgh. His reputation was enhanced by the compila- 
tion of several works on the French language, the utility of 
which was evidenced by their adoption as text-books in many 
136 


The Intellectual Homicide. 


of the schools; and to his accomplishments as a teacher of 
French and German he added a proficient knowledge of Latin 
and Greek, which he put to advantageous service in private 
tuition.”’ This monster, who ‘‘ maintained remarkable coolness 
and indifference, and died with a stoicism that excited wonder,”’ 
murdered his wife for the insurance money; he had corrupted 
her when a schoolgirl of fifteen, and had married her to escape 
from a difficulty. ‘‘ To the last the convicted man refrained 
from indicating anything that could be construed into a con- 
fession of guilt.’ 

Francois Villon is the supreme example of a man of 
almost superlative genius who was at the same time a 
man of criminal and homicidal tendencies ; he narrowly escaped 
the gallows on more than one occasion, and it is actually 
uncertain if the father of French poetry did not die by the 
hands of the public executioner! Dr. Pritchard was an admir- 
able lecturer, the author of several treatises, medical and geo- 
logical (Webster had written on geology as well as chemistry), 
and of charming manners, though afterwards ‘‘ reckoned the 
prettiest liar of his time.’’ Lacenaire was a man of decided 
literary accomplishments, and on his trial delivered an address 
which “ eyoked the admiration of all present. . . . A 
crowd of young advocates . . . warmly congratulated him 
on his achievement. The philosopher did not conceal his satis- 
faction at these professional testimonies to his skill.’? Lebiez, 
like his schoolfellow, Barré, was of far more than average 
ability, ‘‘le drapeau de l’école,’? was keenly interested in 
biology, and was collecting specimens when his co-adventurer 
in murder was arrested. Like Aram he was a botanist. Prado 
was devoted to books. Verlaine, who shot Rimbaud, and whose 
whole life alternated between outbursts of crime and of exquisite 
lyrics, is perhaps the best example of a being equally com- 
pounded of literary and criminal elements. Palmer was not 
literary, but he enjoyed the reputation in Rugeley of a kindly, 
open-hearted, generous man; he poisoned his wife, his mother- 
in-law, brother, his friend Cook, and about ten other persons ; 
he took the sacrament on the Sunday on which he administered 
poison to his brother, and as his victim writhed in the agonies 
of death he very coolly sent out to know what had won some 
paltry handicap! To the poor he was always ready to give, 
his temper was bland, and his features, if commonplace, were 
ingenuous.® 


5 His features, said Dr. Kenealy, ‘‘ gave the impression of honesty, 
calm, passionless, truthful. . . . His manners were courteous, bland, 
sympathetic.” He was so much liked that Kenealy was sure he would 
never have been convicted locally—‘‘ Memoir” of Kenealy, 161-5. 


137 


Eugene Aram. 


These instances, which might be indefinitely multiplied, 
suffice to show that neither literary gifts, the passion for exact 
studies, nor outward charm of manner or mildness of disposi- 
tion afford the slightest presumption against guilt. Such a 
man as Aram then might very well be a murderer wm posse. 
Was he satisfactorily proved to be one im esse? In other words, 
had he a fair trial? To ask that question is to assume that 
a “fair trial” is an objective reality, like a black coat, instead 
of being a purely subjective notion. He had such a trial as 
the laws of his country then allowed, and they were regularly 
put into force against him, though his position was much more 
harsh than Palmer’s or Pritchard’s, a century later. 

If it be said that the procedure under which Aram, Miss 
Blandy, Donellan, and Thurtell were convicted, and Thornton 
acquitted, was unfair in seeking to interrogate the accused, and 
so make him an evidence against himself, it may be replied 
that not only under the Continental system has this ever been 
the practice, but a British colony of the present day provides 
a very similar method of investigation. Were an Aram to be 
tried to-day in Ceylon he would be constrained not only to make 
a statement in reply to the charge to the magistrate, but would 
have to submit to an interrogation by him on the facts as 
deposed against him. The effect of the provisions I allude to 
is to involve a guilty man in a series of falsehoods, from which 
it is exceedingly difficult for his advocate subsequently to dis- 
embarrass him, and in operation the procedure results in the 
discomfiture of the guilty, while greatly impeding the setting 
up at a later stage of defences elaborated by their lawyers. 
Some such powers are indispensable to the magistracy wherever 
it cannot rely on a highly organised, incorruptible, and specially 
trained police. In England in 1758, as in modern Ceylon, the 
magistrates exercised functions more of criminal investigation 
than of purely judicial inquiry.® 

The law, as it then stood, if in some respect it hampered 
Aram in his defence, in others threw its protection around him, 
as in excluding the damning evidence of his wife. Pretentious 
ignorance has placed Anna Aram in the box, and proceeded to 
comment that’ “to-day such evidence would be inadmissible, but 
in the barbarous ages (sic), which obtained in the middle of the 
eighteenth century, all evidence, however biassed, was heard.” 
The rule, peculiar to English law and vehemently attacked by 


° Ceylon Cr. Proc. Code (1898) ss. 155 and 295. In murder the magis- 
trate is to proceed to the spot and hold an investigation. The questions and 
answers, or the fact that the accused refused to answer, with the magis- 
trate’s inference, are put in on the trial. 


7 «Famous Crimes,” H. Furniss. 


138 


Medical Evidence, Anno 1759. 


Jeremy Bentham, which excluded the evidence of his wife, gave 
Aram an advantage which, he would not have enjoyed had he 
been tried in any other country of Europe, or had he been 
tried in British India to-day !8 It could not, of course, preserve 
him wholly from the prejudice which a knowledge of the wife’s 
evidence, common, we may suppose, to all twelve of his jury, 
must inevitably have created. But so long as two independent 
investigations take place in cases of murder, one held by a 
coroner not bound by the rules of evidence, the other by a 
magistrate who is, the inconvenience must sometimes arise 
that the jury is, in spite of all attempts to eliminate it, affected 
by the knowledge of some matters sworn before the coroner, 
but not legally admissible upon the trial. It is worth while, 
however, to observe that if Aram had been tried in almost any 
foreign country Anna’s evidence would have been admitted 
against him. 

The least satisfactory part of the case is the medical evidence. 
It will be observed that the doctors’ two depositions read as if 
they followed a “common form”—the same expressions are 
used by each. They certainly went astray in relation to the 
first skeleton, which was “confidently averred to be Clark’s” ; 
and at each inquest seem largely to have assumed what had to 
be proved—that the bones were Clark’s. That each should, at 
the first inquest, give the age of the deceased as twenty-three— 
the exact age of Clark as advertised—is highly suggestive of 
a biassed state of the mind. On the other hand, the first body 
may well have been interred at the same time as the second, 
and have been that of a young male.? No text-book on medical 
jurisprudence was then available, and the consideration of the 
questions involved lay beyond ordinary medical experience.1 
In view of Houseman’s testimony, however, the medical evidence 
sinks to minor importance, except, perhaps, as to the cause of 


8Indian Evidence Act, s. 120. This departure from English Law was 
due to the influence of Bentham on Stephen, the legal member of the 
Viceroy’s Council, who framed this Act. Bentham’s works, as Stephen 
finely said, are like a bomb buried beneath the ruins it has made! For 
his attack on the rule excluding wife or husband’s evidence see ‘‘ The 
Rationale of Jud. Ev.” V., 341. He there speaks of the home as in 
consequence a ‘‘nursery of crime”; there is much to be said on the other 
side, yet one cannot regard with unmingled admiration a system which 
might enable a monster to seal the lips of the chief witness against him by 
marriage, and so escape conviction. See a striking passage in Baron 
Rolfe’s address to James Blomfield Rush, in passing sentence of death, and 
Serjeant Ballantine’s ‘‘ The Old World and the New” (1884), p. 98. 

9 According to some the Jew’s assistant was a man, according to others, 
but a boy. 

10 A modern scientific witness would have tested the bones for traces of 
fluorine, ferric oxide, fluoride of calcium, &c., to ascertain the probable 
period of interment. 


139 


Eugene Aram. 


death.11 I have exploded already the myth that Aram was 
taken by surprise by the entry of the flax-dresser into the box, 
or by what the others deposed—put to him in his first examina- 
tion a year before. He was sage enough to know that they 
would be witnesses upon his trial, and had ample time to 
answer them; he equally knew that the men who arrested him 
would be called to prove what he said at the time. Had he any 
doubt as to what evidence would be produced, Houseman, who 
had attended the first inquest and had conferred with his 
counsel, or Terry, who had been at liberty while Thornton 
took the informations, could have enlightened him. Yet to not 
a word of all the evidence does he address himself! Not one 
witness does he name from beginning to end of his address! 
“JT have heard what is called evidence,” he arrogantly says, 
“. . , As to the circumstances that have been raked together 
I have nothing to observe,” he adds later on. It is this which 
makes his trial unique. Thurtell in his celebrated oration did 
seek to reply to the case against him, and his comments on 
circumstantial evidence, which so aroused the spleen of Mr. 
Justice Park, were merely by way of interpolation. No speech 
ever confined itself less to the issues, and even when poor Aram 
did approach relevancy he did so in a manner the least 
calculated to produce an impression on the Court. When he 
speaks of the fractured skull of St. William he deigns not to 
cite his authority as that of an eye-witness, Drake, F.R.S., 
F.S.A. When he introduces by far the most apposite case of 
wrongful conviction on circumstantial evidence, “the Campden 
tragedy,” his memory plays him the unhappy trick of confusing 
the names, and he speaks of the Harrisons when he means the 
Perrys, and refers to Howell’s slight allusion in an unfamiliar 
book when he might have cited the case from the State Trials, 
in which the Court had honourably figured, and of which it 
would take judicial notice. Worst of all, he forgets to mention 
by far the strongest fact in that case—that John Perry falsely 
swore to presence at a murder never actually committed, to 
the jeopardy of his own neck—just as, in his contention, 
Houseman must have done! 

These criticisms, however, rather rebut the common supposi- 
tion that the address was a work of such profound erudition 


™ Mason, J., in what I believe to be the only judicial reference to R. v 
Aram says ‘‘ In the case of Eugene Aram, when the skeleton was found in 
a cave thirteen years after the murder, the proof of the identity of the 
body as that of Clark was very faint, and but for the strong circumstantial 
evidence a conviction could never have been justified.” 3 Parker, Cr. Reps. 
at p. 443. But it is well understood that no such evidence can supply 
the place of adequate proof of the corpus delicti. Of. Wills’ “ Circum- 
stantial Evidence,” p. 308. 


140 


Stephen on Prisoner’s Detences. 


that it must have occupied his thoughts for all those years. 
As we have seen, it was,in many respects superficial and 
inaccurate—a defect attributable rather to want of material 
than to any want of thoroughness on the part of Aram. 

A further observation arises upon it by way of answer to 
the question, why did not Aram attempt any reply to the 
evidence against him, particularly that of Houseman? When 
a prisoner could not be defended by counsel, and had therefore 
to speak for himself, says Sir James Stephen, “every statement 
made by the prosecution amounts to an indirect interrogation 
of the prisoner. . . . He was thus unable to say, as counsel 
sometimes still says for him [written before the Criminal 
Evidence Act], that his mouth was closed. On the contrary, 
his mouth was not only open, but the evidence against him 
operated as so much indirect questioning, and if he omitted to 
answer the questions it suggested he was very likely to be 
convicted.”12 It will readily be seen how apposite these remarks 
are to Eugene’s case. He failed to deal with Houseman, Tuton, 
or the others, for the simple reason that there was nothing he 
could offer but a bare contradiction. A perusal of Miss 
Blandy’s, of Donellan’s, of Thurtell’s cases will show that a 
prisoner’s defence in person, so far as it attempted to deal with 
the facts, consisted of a series of statements, unsupported by 
proof, directly at variance with the sworn testimony for the 
Crown. Counsel may, indeed, rest his case on the ground 
that the Crown has not made out the case beyond reasonable 
doubt, but it is easy to see what prejudice must arise against 
a prisoner in person who can offer nothing with more of the 
ring of innocence about it. Aram’s address comes to this—he 
admits that the facts proved raise a strong presumption of his 
guilt, but “‘it is but probability still’? ; he asks, not for an 
honourable acquittal, but for a verdict of “not proven.” This he 
should have been as much entitled to do as counsel would have 
been ; the mere fact that on his lips the contention sounds miser- 
ably unconvincing illustrates the truth of Stephen’s remarks. 
No direction by a judge to a jury, that it is for the prosecution 
to prove its story, could counteract the unfavourable impression 
produced by an address so significantly silent on the most 
damaging parts of the Crown case; perhaps Aram was right to 
try to draw away attention from what could not be explained— 
his own inconsistent statements in particular—by a dissertation 
on the fallibility of circumstantial evidence; every advocate has 
at times to pass over matters; but Noel would have failed in 
his duty if he had not, as the reports say he did, pointed out 
that “ Aram had said nothing to invalidate the positive evidence 


12 « History of English Criminal Law,” L., 440; III., 383. 
141 


Eugene Aram. 


against him.” To the common criticism that Aram “nowhere 
directly asserts his innocence,’’ I have already replied, and will 
but add that nothing would have been easier or entitled to less 
weight. 

Of the alleged penitence of Aram we cannot, pace Bulwer, 
Hood, or Scatcherd, discover a trace. ‘‘ The affair ’’ is merely 
a disagreeable memory—that is all. Bitter are the complaints 
that Terry, Houseman, or Iles had the watches, the rings, or 
the plate—‘‘ as for me, I had nothing at all.’”’ I have already 
indicated my belief in the so-called confession to Collins, for I 
cannot persuade myself that the clergyman would have allowed 


the various editors to repeat it unless it were made. The 
falsehoods it contains, like those in the verses found in the cell, 
are wholly in keeping with a murderer’s behaviour. ‘“‘ The 


passion for lying which great criminals display is a strange, 
though distorted and inverted, testimony to the virtue of truth. 
It is difficult to assign any logical connection between lying 
and murder; but a murderer is always a liar. His very 
confession almost always contains lies, and he generally goes to 
the gallows with his mouth full of cant and hypocrisy.”’ Such 
is the opinion of the great expositor of criminal law. 

I have met in the course of considerable study with scarcely a 
single instance of a murderer who murdered for lucre dying 
otherwise than impenitent and lying. Lord Campbell well 
says of Miss Blandy, ‘‘ There was a verdict of guilty on the 
clearest proof of premeditation and design; but to show the 
worthlessness of the dying declarations of criminals and the 
absurdity of the practice of trying to induce them to confess, she 
went out of the world with a solemn declaration that she had 
no intention of injuring her father.’? ‘‘ When I read Despine’s 
conclusion that the moral sense is utterly and invariably absent 
in all criminals who commit violent crimes in cold blood, I 
confess it startled me as a most extravagant proposi- 
tion,”’ said a well-known prison surgeon, quoted by Stephen, 
who continues, ‘‘yet he adds, the result of his in- 
vestigations has much astonished him, and not a little 
shaken his incredulity. He states that of 430 mur- 
derers he has had in medical charge, only three dis- 
covered the slightest remorse for their crime, corroborating, he 
considers, the opinion that the moral sense is wanting in great 
criminals.’’ Stephen proceeds—‘‘My own experience cer- 
tainly is, that people who commit great crimes are usually 
abominably wicked, and particularly murderers. I have the 
very worst opinion of them. I have seen something of a good 
many of them, and if I had not had that experience I should 
not have imagined that a crime, which may be the result of a 

142 


Had he been tried to-day ? 


transient outbreak of passion, indicated such abominable and 
heartless ferocity, and such depths of falsehood, as are, in my 
experience, usually found in them.’’13 

Everything, then, in Aram’s conduct points to his guilt of 
deliberate murder without a shadow of excuse. And this was 
exactly how his crime appeared to contemporaries. He 
appeared to them ‘‘deservedly to fall by the hands of the 
common executioner,’’!4 Smollett being alone in urging that 
““ Tf ever murderer was entitled to indulgence, perhaps it might 
have been extended not improperly to this man, whose genius, 
in itself prodigious, might have exerted itself in works of general 
utility.’”” We can only regret that he allowed fifty-four years 
to pass over his head without performing any! 

This opinion stood alone, until the fictions of seventy years 
later started the Aram myth, which it has been my endeavour 


to dispel. It is, in the classical sense, ‘‘ impertinent ’’ to 
ask whether, under our modern procedure, Aram might have 
escaped. The conviction of a guilty man can never be a 


reflection on the system which secured it. It cannot be doubted 
that his two examinations under the old statutes had as much 
to do with his conviction as anything, and that he would 
nowadays have escaped such. We are in these days far too 
apt to prefer the trite maxim that it is better for ninety-nine 
guilty men to be let off than for one innocent person to be 
convicted, to the true one, ‘‘ Judex damnatur cum nocens 
absolvitur.’”’ Under the system of procedure, which originated 
in 1836 and expired in 1898, and, as Stephen has said, was 
‘‘highly advantageous to the guilty,’’15 Aram, well defended, 
would have had some chance of acquittal. I scarcely think he 
would have had such a chance now. Had he been tried to-day 
under the criminal procedures of some of our Imperial dominions, 
which allow the magistrate to interrogate the accused, he would 
have had no chance at all. Some systems, which our insularity 
is apt to decry, have the advantage of securing convictions of 
guilty men where ours would fail.16 My task, however, is 
accomplished in showing what manner of trial he had, and that, 


13‘ History of English Criminal Law,” II., 185; Cf. his remarks on 
Palmer in III., 424-5. See a remarkable disquisition on remorse in 
murderers in the late Benjamin Howard’s ‘‘ Prisoners of Russia” (1902), 
pp. 264-275. The author, an M.D., found homicides, who had slain 
through passion, jealousy, &c., to be contrite and humiliated, but cold- 
blooded, mercenary murderers to feel no remorse other than the ‘‘ chagrin 
at the mistake . . . in not securing immunity.” 

14 Dr. Kippis ‘‘ Biog. Britt.” 1777, I., 230-235. 

15‘ History of English Criminal Law,” I., 441. 

16 Of, Stephen on the affair of St. Cyr. ‘‘ History,” III., 506-7. 


143 


Eugene Aram, 


if open to the criticism that he was not ‘‘ presumed innocent ’’ 
in the earlier stages, it was yet conducted not unworthily of 
British justice, and led to a righteous condemnation. That 
his love of study was a genuine passion, and no mere affecta- 
tion to secure him the world’s attention, will, I conceive, be 
allowed by every candid reader of his literary remains. When 
his miserable opportunities are considered, and the daily 
drudgery of teaching the rudiments of learning to small boys, 
the extent of his reading and the tenacity of his memory appear 
truly remarkable. No less singular is his consistent profession 
of modesty—so different from the exaggerated egoism of other 
literary criminals, notably Wainwright; no less striking is his 
admirable sanity ; he is pre-eminently logical and perspicuous ; 
there is no trace of decadence; nor, considering his disadvan- 
tages in prison, can we dismiss his work as superficial. Thus, 
after all, he seems to stand alone among criminals—the 
scoundrel and the scholar as astonishingly mingled in him as in 
any fabled Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde; the decent, humane, 
erudite pedagogue, sought out by parson and by squire, and 
the professor of murder as a fine art. No mean professor 
either! By De Quincey’s canons, the murder of Clark, even 
if he had no other murders to his credit, was no amateur— 
the cleverly selected place of sepulture, the plausible theory of 
flight, supported by the supposed fugitive’s confederates, the 
stripping of the body of all traces of indentity, the masterly 
defence—all these would elevate Aram to a higher rank as an 
assassin than he can claim as a philologist. Only Houseman’s 
blunder brought the affair to light ; only Eugene’s pusillanimous 
confusion on arrest detracts from as fine an example of calcu- 
lated murder as has encountered our knowledge. Let us be 
fair, then, to the memory of this man! Let no detractor, 
in the guise of an apologist, take away his reputation as a 
murderer! To attempt it is in worse taste than the frequent 
denunciation of him as a ‘‘common criminal,’’ who kept ‘‘ low 
company.’’ Aram kept good and bad company ; was sought 
out by social superiors. So distinct a dual personality does 
not perhaps elsewhere occur outside fiction. That is the 
haunting charm of this strange eighteenth century student. 
Fools may wring fond hands over another ‘noble nature, 
blasted into guilt,’? but Aram was as much a born criminal as 
born scholar. His love of books is as entirely irrelevant to 
his criminality as Wainwright’s of the work of Fuseli, or 
Palmer’s of a thorough-bred horse, or even Peace’s of music 
on the violin. He has enriched human experience with the 
knowledge of a character that will continue to mystify it. 
Let Orthodoxy write his epitaph in the lines of the mighty poet, 
144 


An Epitaph from Marlowe. 
whom it would claim as himself so sad an exemplification of 
their truth— 
Cut is the branch, that might have grown full straight, 
And burnéd is Apollo’s laurel bough 


That sometime grew within this learnéd man. 


Determinism sees in his story only a most whimsical illus- 
tration of its doctrines. 


K 145 


APPENDICES. 


APPENDIX I 


——_— 


ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS IN THE RECORD OFFICE IN THE 
MATTER OF R. v. ARAM, HOUSEMAN, AND TERRY. 


(A) THe Ovrnawry or Danrex Cragk. Extract From THE PIPE 
Rott, 21 Gzo. II. 


The Sheriff for the year ending at Michaelmas, in the twentyfirst 
year of the reign of King George the Second, oweth vij viiij vij 
(£7 19s. 7d.), in part of viij iiij (£8 4s.), by the year for the issues of 
a waste building in Knaresborough, in the County of York, late in the 
tenure of Daniel Clark, of the then yearly value of iiij Li (£4) in all. 
Z of the lands and tenements of Daniel Clark, late of Knares- 
brough, in the County of York, Shoemaker, outlawed at in (sic) the 
Castle of York, at the Suit of Philip Coates, gentleman, in a plea of 
trespass on the case, for which Cause by a certain Inquisition indented 
and taken at the Castle of York, in the said County, the xxth day of 
October, in the xxth year of the reign of King George the Second, 
before Henry Ibbetson, Esq., Sheriff of the City aforesaid, by 
virtue of a certain writt of our Lord the King, called a capias 
wtlagatum to this Inquiry annexed. The said premisses were taken 
and seized into his Majesties’ hands as is contained in the King’s 
Remembrancer’s side of the xxist year of King George the Second, 
to witt among the records of Trinity Term in the Roll (to witt) 
ffor the issues of the said premisses for one whole year except xxi 
days ending at Michaelmas, in the xxi year of King George the 
Second. =... 2 


Extract From Tue Piez Rou, 2 anp 3 Wit. IV. 


ii . . . Of the same Sheriff oweth viij iiij (£8 4s.) by the year 
for the issues of a waste building in Knaresborough in the said 
County, in the tenure of Daniel Clark, of the yearly value of 
iiij li (£4), and one undivided moiety or fifth part of and in a certain 
farm called Moat Farm. . . . of the yearly value of xxj li (£21), 
of the lands and tenements of Daniel Clark, Shoemaker, outlawed 
at the suit of Philip Coates, gentleman, in a plea of trespass on the 
case, for which cause seized the xx day of October in the xx year 
of King George the Second, Roll of the said King in adhuc item 
and vic xxxj liiis arrears. Sum is vi° xxxviij li vis (£638 6s.). 


[It will thus be seen, on calculation, that the arrears date back, 
at £8 4s. per annum, to a period seventy-seven odd years previous, 


149 


Eugene Aram. 


which brings the date to 1754-5. The outlawry was some years 
earlier, as the earlier Pipe Roll shows. One infers that, in the 
meanwhile, the Sheriff had successfully levied. I confess to a sense 
of obscurity.—E. R. W.] 


(B) DocumENTS RELATING TO AN INQUISITION UPON A SKELETON 
FOUND AT KNARESBROUGH IN 1758. 


(1) Deposttions TakEN By JoHN TuHEaKsToN, Esq., His MagEsty’s 
CoRONER FOR THE West Ripine or YORKSHIRE, AT AN INQUEST 
HELD oN 18TH August, 1758. 


(Indorsed.) 


Tue Kine INFORMATIONS 
Vv. taken before the 
Houseman and Aram. Coroner. 


The examination of Mary, the wife of George Bransby, late of 
Knaresbrough, in the County of York, yeoman, taken upon oath 
the eighteenth day of August, 1758, at the house of Henry Mellor, 
scituate at Knaresbrough aforesaid, before me John Theakston, gentle- 
man, His Majesty’s coroner for the said County, touching the death 
of a person unknown, supposed one Daniel Clark. 

THis ExaminantT saith that she knew Daniel Clark, late of Knares- 
brough, cordwainer; that about Candlemas, betwixt thirteen and 
fourteen years ago, she was servant to Mr. Jonathan Locock of 
Knaresbro’ aforesaid; that about eight at Night Daniel Clark came 
to her Master’s House to borrow a Tankard, that Richard House- 
man stood in the Entry, whilst Clark came into the House; that 
her Master not being in the House, they went away; that about 
nine the same Night, she was going to the Assembly Room to her 
Mistress, she saw Daniel Clark, Richard Houseman, and Eugenius 
Aram as she was in Jockey (?) Lane, and they passed the Lane 
End and went into Kirkgate; that she never saw Daniel Clark 
since, which was the night before Daniel Clark was missing, which 
she says she heard he was about two days after. 


Taken by me, Her 
John Theakston, Mary X Branssy. 
Coroner. mark, 


The examination of Dorothy Clark of Knaresbrough. 
Widow. . . . (formal parts as above). 


Tats ExaMinaNnT saith that she was mother to one Daniel Clark 
of Knaresbrough aforesaid; that the last time she saw him was on 
the seventh day of ffebruary in the year seventeen hundred and 
forty four; he told her he was going to a Place called Newell Hall 
to see his wife, who was then there (the next morning); that she 

150 


Appendix I. 


never heard of him or see (sic) him since and does believe that, 
had he been living, would in the space of this Time, have wrote to her, 
but does verily believe him-to be murdered. 

Taken by me, 


John Theakston, DorotHy CLARK. 
Coroner. (Illiterate. ) 
The examination of Thomas Barnett. . . . Dyer, & ... 


(formal parts as above). 


Tuts EXAMINANT saith that betwixt twelve and two of the Clock 
at the Night, being the Night before Daniel Clark of Knaresbrough 
was missing, he was going Home from the Crown in the High 
Street to his own House, in Company with his wife, that in Church 
Lane End he saw RicHarRD HovusEMAN (erased) ONE PERSON (erased) 
a@ man come out of the Passage of the House of Eugenius Aram; 
that on seeing him, he went up to him, to see who it was; AND 
(erased) he being wrapt up in a wide Great Coat and the Hood over 
his Head; that when he made up to him, he endeavoured to shun 
him, but he found him to be one Richard Houseman, 

Taken before me, 

John Theakston, Tuomas BARNETT. 
Coroner. (Good, bold hand.) 


(Here the coroner and jury adjourned to view the body.) 


The examination of Bryan Hardcastle, . . . Yeoman, &c., &c. 
. . . taken at a Place called Saint Robert’s Cave 
touching the death of one Daniel Clark. 


Tuis ExaMINANT saith that he very well knew Daniel Clark in 
his Life; that betwixt thirteen and fourteen Years ago he was miss- 
ing, at which Time he had a Horse kept at Livery by this examinant, 
and that he had him in his Custody two Days after he was so missing, 
and he then delivered him to one John Halliday, who paid him for 


his Keeping. 
Taken before me, His 
John Theakston, Bryan X HARDCASTLE. 
Coroner. mark. 


The examination of Stephen Latham, Cordwainer, &c., taken at a 
Place &. . . . touching &. . . . (as above). 


Tats ExAaMINANT saith that he very well knew Daniel Clark in his 
Lifetime, that on Saturday morning, about thirteen Years ago last 
ffebruary, it was reported he was gone off and that he never has 
been heard of since, till on the seventeenth instant, he was informed 
that his Skeleton was found in Saint Robert’s Cave aforesaid; that 
Clark in his Lifetime was possessed of good Effects; that this 
Examinant, after the Report of Clark’s being gone off, was employ’d 

151 


Eugene Aram. 


to arrest one Eugenius Aram, who was an intimate Acquaintance 
of Clark’s; that whilst he was under arrest, he ask’d what the Debt 
and Charges were, and he wou’d pay them, and drew out of his 
breeches’ pockett a large Quantity of Gold in Guineas and other 
large Coin, which he thinks amounted to above one Hundred Pounds, 
and that he knew Aram at that time to be very poor, and that was 
his general Character, and that he had great Quantities of Goods of 
different Sorts of Clark’s in his Custody, as had also one Richard 
Houseman, of many different Sorts, which were appraised to fforty 
five Pounds, which he pretended he had received for a Debt due 
from Clark to him. 
Taken before me, 
John Theakston, SrerpHen LATHAM. 
Coroner. (Very fair signature.) 


The examination of Peter Moor, Cordwainer, at a Place called, &c. 
touching the death of one Daniel Clark, late of Knares- 
brough aforesaid, Cordwainer. 


THis EXAMINANT saith that he was servant to Daniel Clark in 
his Lifetime; that on the eighth Day of ffebruary 1744, he went 
with his Mistress to Newell Hall; on the same after Dinner he 
left his Master at his own Door; that they staid there till Sunday; 
that his Master told him that he would come to them the day 
after they went; that they went to buy Household Goods, 
his Master being lately married; that he never came _ to 
Newell, but on their Return, Mr. Coates informed this Examinant 
and his Mistress, that Clark was gone off, and that about a Day 
before he borrowed of this Examinant thirty eight Pounds; that, 
about a fortnight before he was supposed to have to have (sic) gone 
off, he, Clark, had been abroad; and this Examinant being at the 
House of one Eugenius Aram, he came there, and one Richard House- 
man was there at the same time; that on his coming in, Aram said 
““You are welcome Home, Mr. Clark, have you got the Money?’ And 
he told him he had received about one Hundred and Sixty Pounds; that 
then Aram, Clark, and Houseman went up the Stairs and this Exami- 
nant came away, and that he never heard of Clark since he was sup- 
posed to be gone off, till he heard his Skeleton was found in Saint 
Robert’s Cave. 

Taken before me, 

John Theakston, Prrrr Moor. 
Coroner. (Hlliterate.) 


The examination of William Higgins, Surgeon, &c., &c. . 
taken at a Place called &. . . . upon the view of a Skeleton 
of one Daniel Clark, then and there lying. 


Tis EXAMINANT saith that he knew Daniel Clark, who was a 
Cordwainer, in Knaresbrough aforesaid, in his Lifetime; that he was 
missing between thirteen and fourteen Years ago, and notwithstanding 


152 


Appendix I, 


the strictest Search has never been heard of since until the seventeenth 
instant, when by the Information of one Richard Houseman the 
Skeleton of Clark was found, in Saint Robert’s Cave, aforesaid; that 
he has this day viewed the Skeleton; he observ’d upon the back 
Part of the Skull of the said Skeleton a large Fracture, supposed to 
have been done by a Mason’s Pick, or some such like tool and does 
verily believe the same to have been the Cause of the Death of the 
said Daniel Clark. 
Taken by me, 
John Theakston, Witi1am = Hicaeins. 
Coroner. 


The examination of Aaron Locock, Surgeon, at a Place, &., &c. 
touching the Death of one Daniel Clark. 


Turis ExaMINant saith that on the seventeenth instant, by the 
Information of one Richard Houseman, the Body of one Daniel Clark 
was found in Saint Robert’s Cave aforesaid; and that he has this 
Day viewed the same and that he observed upon the back Part 
of the Skull of the said Skeleton a large Fracture, supposed to have 
been done by a Mason’s Pick, or some such like Tool, and that he 
does verily believe the same to have been the Cause of the Death 
of the said Daniel Clark. 

Taken before me, 


John Theakston, Aaron Lococx. 
Coroner. 
The examination of Philip Coates . . . Gent., taken at Saint 


Robert’s cave upon the view of the skeleton of one Daniel Clark 
late of Knaresbrough aforesaid cordwainer then and there lying 
dead. 


Tuts EXAMINANT saith he knew Daniel Clark from a child; that 
he was a cordwainer in Knaresbrough aforesaid; that he was with 
Clark on the seventh of ffebruary 1744 in the night about nine of the 
clock, that he promised to call upon this examinant in the morning, 
but he, Clark, not calling, this examinant went to his house about 
nine of the clock the same morning; that the maid said he was gone 
to Newell to see his wife, and this examinant saith that on the 
tenth, Clark being missing, he went to Newell to seek him; that 
when he came there could not hear of him; nor ever did till on 
the sixteenth instant being informed that one Richard Houseman 
(who was an acquaintance of Clark’s and who he likewise was 
informed had along with one Eugenius Aram had (sic) been last 
seen with him), had confessed before a justice of the peace that he 
saw Clark murdered and that he was buried in the said place Saint 
Robert’s cave; that on the seventeenth instant he saw the said 
skeleton, and does believe it to be the remains of the said Clark 
and that he was so murdered and that about a week or ten days 


153 


Eugene Aram. 


before he was missing he had received a large sum of money, and 
that no money was remaining at his house to his knowledge. 
Taken before me, 


John Theakston, PHILIP CoatEs. 
Coroner. (Fair.) 
The examination of William Tuton . . . mason .. . at the 


cave of Saint Robert . . . touching the death of one Daniel 
Clark, his skeleton then and there being. 


Tuis EXAMINANT saith that he very well knew Daniel Clark late 
of Knaresbrough aforesaid cordwainer; that the last time he saw him 
was on the morning before he was missing, which was on Thursday 
at night about Candlemas, betwixt thirteen and fourteen years ago, 
betwixt eleven and twelve of the clock, when Clark called upon 
him to take some leather into his house; that nigh three the same 
morning Clark called again; that being in bed he got up and spoke 
out of the window; that whilst they were talking together it being 
then moonlightl he observed one Richard Houseman and one Eugenius 
Aram standing at Clark’s cellar door; that Houseman had on a wide 
dark-coloured riding coat and that Aram had on a light one; that 
when they perceived this examinant and Clark talking together 
they went about the corner of the street towards the castle yard, 
and that Clark went towards them, and that he never saw him more 
but heard on the said eighteenth (?) instant his skeleton was found 
in Saint Robert’s cave Knaresbrough, and two or three days after 
Clark was missing he found in Aram’s house a pick belonging to him 


and that he never had lent him one nor had any of his ffamily as they 
informed him. 


Taken before me, 


John Theakston, WILLIAM TourToN. 
Coroner. (Illiterate. ) 


The examination of Anna Aram, wife of Eugenius Aram late of 
Knaresbrough yeoman . . . taken ata place called, &c. : 
upon the view of the skeleton of one Daniel Clark late of 
Knaresbrough aforesaid cordwainer then and there being. 


Tuts ExaMINant saith that she well knew Daniel Clark late of 
Knaresbrough aforesaid; that about the eighth day of ffebruary 1744, 
about two of the clock in the morning the said Daniel Clark and 
one Richard Houseman came with her husband home and came 
upstairs to the room where she was and Clark had a wallet in which 
were contained things of value, but who brought in the wallet 
knows not; After staying about an hour Clark said ‘‘twou’d be soon 
morning and we must get off’; that they all went down together 
and went out of the house, but where they went knows not; that 
AU SES ee Wipe eet Va Snr 

1 As to the moon, see Ante, p. 17. 


154 


Appendix I. 


Clark went out of the door having a wallet upon his shoulders, 
and when they went ’twas about three; that about five of the clock 
the same morning her husband and Houseman came back; and her 
husband came upstairs. She’ asked him what they had been doing, 
but he would not give her any answer, but desired her to go to 
bed; and he would come to her; that she refused and she then 
told him she was afraid they had been doing something bad, but 
he gave no answer, but said he wanted a fire below stairs for Richard 
Houseman would not come up but chose to stay below; that as 
she was going downstairs, Richard Houseman said ‘‘She is coming, 
she’ll tell’’; her husband said ‘‘Poor simple thing, what can she 
tell? she knows nothing; so she can say nothing! ’’ Houseman said, 
if she told that he was there twou’d be enough; her husband said 
he would bolt the door to prevent her from coming; Houseman 
said to her husband ‘‘Something must be done to her to prevent 
her telling’? and pressed him to it very much: ‘For if she did 
not,” he said ‘‘at that time, she might at some other.’ Her 
husband said: ‘‘ We will coax her a little till this passion be off, 
and then take an opportunity to shoot her’’; Then Richard Houseman 
said: ‘‘ There is her cloaths’’ and asked her husband what must be 
done with them; and it was agreed that they would let her lay 
where she was shot with her cloaths on; that when she came down 
in the morning, all the ashes were taken away from out of the grate 
below stairs, where they had their fire, and were thrown in the 
yard, where she examined them, and found some pieces of linnen 
and woollen cloth, which were burnt, and that no part of any 
cloaths of the ffamily were missing; that Houseman asked her 
husband for a handkerchief which he put upon his head the night 
they went out, and that he left it when he went away; and on 
which she found some blood, and she never saw Clark after that: 
That she carried the peices (sic) of cloath and shewed them to House- 
man and asked him what they meant, and she said she was afraid 
they had done something bad To Cxarx (erased); but he answered 
he knew not what she meant, and she does believe the said Clark 
to have been murdered by Richard Houseman and her husband. 
Taken before me, 
John Theakston, AnnA ARAM. 
Coroner. (Fair.) 


(End of the Depositions.) 


(2) A CoRoNnER’s ROLL INDORSED, ‘“‘ AN INQUISITION ON A SKELETON 
FOUND AT KNARESBRO’’’ (AND IN PENCIL ‘‘ DANIEL CLaRrK’’). 


An Inquisition, indented and taken at a place called Saint Robert’s 
Cave, nigh Knaresbrough, in Yorkshire, the eighteenth day of 
August, in the thirty second year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord 
George the Second by the grace of God of Great Britain, ffrance, 


155 


Eugene Aram. 


and Ireland, King, Defender of the ffaith and so forth, and in the 
year of our Lord seventeen hundred and fifty eight, before me, 
John Theakston, Gentleman, His Majesty’s coroner for the said 
County, upon the view of the Skeleton of a Human Body then and 
there being, upon the oath of William Wright, Thomas Wheel- 
house, Christopher Norris, Thomas Hodge, John Walker, Richard 
Harrington, Francis Bussy, Daniel Lofthouse, Richard Calverly, 
Richard Simpson, Peter Atkinson, Ninian Proctor, William Yates, 
Geoffrey Wilkinson the younger, William Poppleton, and John 
Fawcett, good and lawful men of the said County, who, being 
Impanelled and Sworn, and charged to enquire on the part of our 
said Lord the King when, where, how, and in what manner the Body 
of the said Skeleton came to its death, do say that on the fifteenth 
day of August, one Richard Houseman, of Knaresbrough aforesaid, 
fflax-dresser, confessed that the Body of one Daniel Clark, Cord- 
wainer, of Knaresbrough, aforesaid, was murdered betwixt the hours 
of three and five in the morning of the Eighth day of ffebruary, in 
the Year of our Lord seventeen hundred and fforty four, at Saint 
Robert’s Cave aforesaid, and buried in the same Cave, and that 
by this Information the Skeleton was found therein, and that the 
said Daniel Clark has been missing from the time last aforesaid, and 
the Jurors aforesaid, upon their Oath aforesaid, say that Richard 
Houseman, of Knaresbrough, in the County of York, fflaxdresser, 
and Eugenius Aram, late of the same place, Yeoman, not having the 
fear of God before their eyes, but being moved and seduced by the 
instigation of the Devil on the Eighth day of ffebruary, in the 
Year [etc.], betwixt the hours of three and five in the morning of 
the same day, with force and arms and so forth, at Saint Robert’s 
Cave aforesaid, in and upon the said Daniel Clarke, whilst then 
and there being in the peace of God and of our said Lord the King, 
ffeloniously, voluntarily, and of their malice aforethought, made 
an assault, and that they the aforesaid Richard Houseman and 
Eugenius Aram, then and there, upon the back part of the head of 
the said Daniel Clark, violently, ffeloniously, and of their malice 
aforesaid (sic), Struck and pierced, giving to the said Daniel Clark 
one Mortal Wound of which said Mortal Wound he then and there 
instantly died, and the Jurors aforesaid, upon their Oath aforesaid, 
say that the said Richard Houseman and Eugenius Aram, on the, 
&c., &c., in the said Year, &c., at Saint Robert’s Cave aforesaid, 
in the County aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid, ffeloniously, 
voluntarily, and of their malice aforethought, the said Daniel 
Clark killed and murdered against the peace of our said Lord 
the King that now is, his Crown and Dignity, and the Jurors afore- 
said, upon their Oath aforesaid, say that the aforesaid Richard 
Houseman and Eugenius Aram, at the time of the ffelony and 
murder in form and manner aforesaid, ffeloniously, voluntarily, and 
of their malice aforethought, done and comitted, had not, nor 
either of them had, any Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements to 
the knowledge of the said Jurors, nor did they or either of them 
fly for the same to the knowledge of the said Jurors, In Witness 
whereof as well I, the said Coroner, and the said Jurors, have here- 
156 


Appendix I, 


unto this day set Our hands and Seals the day, year, and place first 
above written. JoHN THEAKSTON, 


: eS Coroner. 
(Assizes, 44 Rec. Off.) ; (No seal.) 
74 


(C) INForMATIONS TAKEN BY WILLIAM THORNTON, Esq., A Justice 
OF THE PEACE FOR THE West RipinG oF YORKSHIRE, ALL 


INDORSED ‘“‘3 Marcu, 1759,” in R. v. Hovusgman, ARAM, AND 
TERRY. 


West Riding 
Yorkshire. 

Tue Information of Philip Coates, of Knaresbro’, 
touching the supposed murder of Daniel Clark, of the 
same, shoemaker, taken before me, one of His Majestie’s: 
Justices of the Peace for the said Riding. 


Wuo Sarru that he married the sister to the said Daniel Clark’s 
wife; that he was in company with him on the seventh day of 
ffebruary, 1744, when Clark promised to be with him the next morn- 
ing about nine o’clock; which he not doing went (sic) to Clark’s 
house the next morning to enquire the reason of it, and askt the 
maid were (sic) her master was, who told him that he was gone 
to Newal to his wife; he went again the next day to enquire if he 
was returned, but he could hear nothing of him; and his wife and 
her sister were sirprised (sic) that they had heard nothing of him nor 
hath she (erasures), or any of the familly directly or indirectly to 
this informant’s knowledge or belief ever heard of him since save 
what he has further to relate below 4 

Which is that Daniel Clark being so amissing, and having things 
of great value by him at the time of his disappearing, viz., upwards 
of £200 in cash and plate to a great amount, and to away without his 
horse altho’ he had one at a livery stable at the time he was amissing, 
and might easily have taken him if he intended to fly his country, 
nor took any leave of his mother, wife, or relations, nor gave them 
the least hint (?) of it: From all which circumstances he this informant 
is of opinion and verily believes he hath been made away with. 

And from the many circumstances he hath collected since by being 
made acquainted that the night Clark was missing he was with Eugenius 
Aram and Richard Houseman at an unseasonable time of night and 
later on in the morning, and that they were last persons seen in 
his company, and he further saith that Aram, who never us’t to 
have sums of money, was after the 8th of ffebruary seen to have a 
great deal. 

And this informant further saith that talking sometimes with Mrs. 
Aram about the missing of Daniel Clark, she, Mrs. Aram, said 
that she believed Houseman deserved to be hanged about him, and 
her daughter said that in case her mother hanged Houseman she 


157 


Eugene Aram. 


would hang her father, at which girl (sic) seemed much concerned ; 
from all which circumstances this informant verily believes that his 
brother-in-law, Daniel Clark, has been murdered, and that Eugene 
Aram and Richard Houseman are the persons that perpetrated it. 
Puitip CoaTEs. 
Taken before me this 14 (127) of August, 1758. 
William Thornton. 


The above informant further saith that the said Clark was adver- 
tised in the publick newspapers, and all diligence used to obtain 
a discovery of him, but that (not?) the least intelligence hath ever 
been given of him. Witiiam THORNTON. 


West Riding 
Yorkshire. 


Tue InroRMATION of Anna Aram, of Knaresbro’, wife 
of Eugine (sic) Aram, late of Knaresbro’, schoolmaster, 
touching what she can recollect of the circumstances 
relating to the murder of Daniel Clark, of Knaresbro’, 
on or about the 8 of ffebruary, 1744. 


Wao SairH that she knew Daniel Clark, of Knaresbro’, shoe- 
maker, for that he was an intimate acquaintance of her husband’s, 
and that they had several transactions together on and often before 
the 8th of ffebruary, 1744, and also that Richard Houseman was 
very often with them on and before the 8th of ffebruary, in the year 
1744, and that on the said 8th of ffebruary, at two o’clock in the 
morning, Richard Houseman and Daniel Clark was at their house, 
and that Clark, she believes, had several things of value with him: 
she observed at Clark going out at that late time in the morning 
with Houseman and her husband; that he took a wallet with him 
which she believes had plate contained in it; in about two hours 
after this her husband and Houseman returned to their house, viz., 
about five o’clock in the morning, without Clark, and her husband 
came upstairs to her where she then was, and wanted to have a 
fire made below stairs, which she objected to, there being a good 
one above, but he said Richard Houseman, who was with him, 
would rather chuse to be below; she having some jealousy of what 
was become of Clark, she asked him what they had been doing, to 
which he made no answer but bade her go to bed and he would come 
to her, but she refused, and said she would neither go to bed with 
him nor without him, and said she was afraid they had been doing 
something they should not, on which her husband went downstairs, 
and she was a following him when Houseman said “She is a coming,”’ 
on which her husband replied, ‘‘ We will not let her ’’; saies House- 
man, ‘‘If she does she will tell.’ ‘‘ What can she tell?” replies 
Aram. ‘She knows nothing, we told her nothing, and she had not 
so much as taken any notice of us.”” Houseman replied if she told 
he was there it was sufficient; her husband said he would bolt the 


158 


Appendix I. 


door to prevent her from coming, but Houseman said something must 
be done with her to prevent her discovering, and pressed him to it 
very much, and said, if she did not tell at that time she might at 
some other; ‘‘ No,”’ saies her husband, ‘‘ we will coax her for a while 
and take an opportunity to shoot her afterwards,’’ which seemed 
to satisfy Houseman; but in case they shot her, Houseman askt, 
what might be done with her cloaths? but both agreed that they 
would in that case let her laye with them where she was shot. 

Overhearing this discourse much terrified this informant, and made 
her attempt to get out of the window but could not, therefore was 
forced to remain quiet; she further saies that during the time of 
Houseman’s stay there her husband and he made a fire below, and in 
ye morning, coming down and seeing the ashes taken away, made 
her suspect there was some reason for it, and went to examine where 
they had laid them, and on examining them she observed some bitts 
of woollen and linning (sic) which she thought might belong to wear- 
ing apparel, and was apprehensive might be part of Daniel Clark’s, 
whom she was apprehensive they had murdered, and had burnt them 
to prevent a discovery. She, this informant, also at the same time 
observed a handkerchief, that her husband took from her and lent 
to Richard Houseman the night before to tye about his head, to 
have a spot of blood about the size of a shilling. 

She, this informant, further saith that she often urged since to 
her husband that Houseman and him (sic) had murdered Clark, to 
which he would give little or no answer; but urging the same 
subject to Houseman, and shewing the shreads of burnt cloath that 
she had pickt up from the ashes as above, he seemed very hardened 
and pretended he knew not what they were; and she lastly saith: 

From all ye circumstances that she can recollect, she verily believes 
that Daniel Clark was murdered by Houseman and Aram at the 
time above mentioned. 

And further saith . . . (deposition here breaks off).1 

ANNA ARAM. 
(Fair.) 

“Taken before me, one of His Majestie’s justices of The Peace for 
the sd. Riding, on oath, at Thornville y* 14 of August, 1758. 

William Thornton. 


West Riding 
Yorkshire. 


Tue InFoRMATION of William Tuton, of Knaresbro’, 
mason, taken before me 17 of August, 1758. 


Wao Sarru that on ffriday morning, about two a clock on the 
eighth of ffebruary, 1744, he saw Eugene Aram and Richard House- 
man with Daniel Clark, near his house; Daniel Clark having just 
called him out of bed, and in looking out of the window to talk with 


1 Was she about to go into the two other murders? 


159 


Eugene Aram. 


Clark he observed Aram and Houseman loitering at a little distance, 

whom (sic) seemed to be shy of being seen by the informant whilst 

Clark received his answer, and he observed Clark to join the said 

Houseman and Aram, and they went all away together, and he hath 

never heard or seen Clark since, but he verily believes that they made 

away with him at that time. Wiiii1am Turon. 
Taken before me as above, at Thornville. (Very illiterate.) 

William Thornton. 


West Riding 
Yorkshire. 


Tue Examination of Richard Houseman, of Knaresbro’, 
linning weaver, touching the murder of Daniel Clark, late 
of Knaresbro’, shoemaker, taken before me, one of- his 
Majestie’s Justices of the Peace for the said Riding. 


Wuo Sart that he was in company with Daniel Clark the night 
before he went off, which he believes might be on a Thursday in 
February, 1744, and the reason of his being then with him was upon 
account of some money (viz., £20) that he had lent Clark, which 
he wanted to get again of him, and for which he then gave him 
some goods, which took up some time in carrying from Daniel Clark’s 
house to his, and might take him from about eleven o’clock at night, 
being the time he went to Clark, till some time the next morning, 
the goods which he, the examinant, took was leather and some linning 
cloth, which as soon as he had possesst himself of, and also a 
note of the prices he was to sell them at, he left Clark at Aram’s 
house, with Aram and another man, not known to this examinant, 
who further saith that Aram and Clark immediately after followed 
him out of the house and went into the marketplace with y® other 
unknown person, which he could very well observe and discover 
by the light of the moon, and does not know what became of them 
after, and utterly disowns coming back with Aram again that morn- 
ing to Aram’s house, as charged by Mrs. Aram, and without Clark, 
nor was ever with Aram at his house that night, but with Clark 
were (sic) he went to find him to obtain the note from Clark as 
above, which he now saies was obtained at Aram’s house and not 
at Clark’s, for that he only got all the goods at Clark’s house, and 
when he secured the goods at his own house he went to seek Clark 
to obtain the note and found him at Aram’s with the unknown 
person, and after he obtained the note he came away directly as 
before related. 

Now Houseman saith that the unknown person was in the street 
the first time he saw him, and does not know wether (sic) he was 
in the house at all with Aram. 

This examinant saith that he did not see Clark take any watch, 
plate, or things of value along with him when they came out of the 
house the last time late in the morning. 

The examinant admitts that some time after Clark was a missing, 
Anna Aram came to him in a passion and demanded money of him, 


160 


a», 


Appendix I, 


and said he had money of her husband’s in his hands, and pretended 
to shew some shreds of cloath, and demanded of him if he knew what 
they were, and he answered that he did not know what they were, 
and entirely disowns that he has ever been charged with the murder 
of Daniel Clark till now by Anna Aram. 

Upon asking the examinant if he chose to sign this examination, 
he said he chose to waive it till further, for he might have some- 
thing to add to it; therefore desired to have time to consider of it. 

Taken before me at Thornville, 

this 14 day of August, 1758. 

William Thornton. 


The further examination and confession of Richard Houseman, late 
of Knaresbro’, flaxdresser. 


(in fold ‘‘ Houseman—Confession.’’) 


THis EXAMINANT saies that true it is that Daniel Clark was mur- 
dered and (superscribed) by Eugene Aram, late of Knaresbro’, School- 
master, as he believes, and to the best of his remembrance he did it 
on Friday morning, the eighth of February, 1744. 

(Here follow many erasures) 
AS SET FORTH BY OTHER INFORMATIONS AS TO THE MATTER OF TIME, FOR 
THAT (erased), for that he and Eugene Aram and Daniel Clark were 
together at Aram’s house early on that morning, and there was snow 
upon the ground, and moonlight,1 and went out of Aram’s house a 
little before them, and went up the street a little before them, and 
they called to him to go a little way with them, and he accordingly 
went with them to a place called Saint Robert’s Cave, near Grimble 
bridge, where Aram and Clark stopt a little, anD IN THEIR way 
THITHER STOPT A WHILE AT THE GRIMBLE BRIDGE (erased), and there 
he saw Aram stricke him several times over the breast and head, 
and KILLED HIM (erased), saw him fall as if he was dead, and he, 
this examinant, came away and left them together, but wether (sic) 
Aram used any weapon or not to kill him with he can’t tell, nor 
does he know what he did with the body afterwards, but believes 
Aram left it at the cave’s mouth, for this examinant seeing Aram 
do this, to which he declares he was no way abetting or privy to, 
nor knew of his design to kill him at all, did this INFORMANT 
(erased) €xaminant make the best of his way from him least (sic) he 
might share the same fate, and got to the Bridge end, and then lookt 
back, and saw him coming from the cave side, which is in a private rock 
adjoining the river, and he could discern some bundle in his hand, 
but does not know what it was: On which this informant (sic) made 
the best of his way to the town without joining Aram again or 
seeing him again till next day, and from that time till this he never 
had any private discourse with him. 
Taken before me this 
15 of August, 1758. 
William Thornton. 


RicHarpD HovusEMAN. 
(Fair writing.) 


1As to the moon, see Ante p. 17. 
L 


161 


Eugene Aram. 


West Riding 
Yorkshire. 


Tun ExAMINATION of Eugine (sic) Aram, late of Linn, 
schoolmaster, but formerly of Knaresbro’, concerning 
the murder of Daniel Clark, taken before me, William 
Thornton, one of His Majestie’s Justices of the Peace 
for the said Riding, this 2lst day of August 1758. 


Wao Saitx that he was well acquainted with Daniel Clark, and to 
the best of his remembrance it was about and before the 8th of 
ffebruary, 1744, but utterly disowns having any criminal connextions 
(sic) with him, such as Clark stood charged with at or before the time 
of his disappearance, which might be about the tenth of ffebruary, 
1744, when he, this examinant, was arrested by WARRANT (erased), a 
process for a debt; during the time of which being in custody he first 
heard that Clark was a missing; after his release from such custody he 
was apprehended by a Justice of the Peace’s warrant for a misde- 
meanour, from which complaint (?) upon appearing before the Justices, 
the (erasures) charge not being made out against him, he was dismissed ; 
after which he continued to reside at Knaresbro’ for a considerable 
time without molestation of any kind arrmr (erased) ; when he removed 
to near Notingham (sic) to be with some relations for a few days, and 
then went to London, where he resided publickly till he went to Linn, 
which was about seven months ago, where he was arrested by a warrant 
on account of a suspicion of being concerned in the murder of Daniel 
Clark. 

' This examinant admits that he might be with Clark on THE EIGHTH 
oF (erased) ffebruary, 1744, but does not recollect, being at Mr. 
Carter’s, a publick house in Knaresbro’, with a Jewl and Richard 
Houseman, a flaxdresser, and Daniel Clark, at about twelve a clock 
at night on the seventh of ffebruary, 1744, nor does recollect ever 
being in company with Clark and Houseman after two a clock in 
the morning at any time or place in ffebruary, 1744, nor after three 
a clock in the morning, nor at Grimble bridge, nor at nor near a 
place called Saint Robert’s cave on the 8th of ffebruary, 1744, in the 
morning; nor does he know any thing thing (sic) of the aforesaid 
Clark’s being murdered there at all; nor does he recollect being along 
with Clark and Houseman at Wittiam TuTiIn’s (erased) when Clark 
called upo William Tutin on the 8th of ffebruary in the morning, 
nor does remember anything of a mason’s tool being found in his 
house, when he was arrested by a warrant in 1744, nor does he 
remember meeting Mr. Barnets (sic) or seeing him in company with 
abovesaid persons at that unseasonable time in the morning as above, 
viz., the eighth of ffebruary in the morning (the scribe meant that 
Aram was in company, &c., &c.); nor does he remember his coming 
home the said morning at five a clock with Houseman and making a 
fire for them in his house as he stands charged by his wife; nor 


1 Was this the fourth man of the York Pamphlet, or was he the (supposed) first 
victim, found on 1st August, 1758? 


162 


Eugene Aram—the portrait recognised by Mrs. Beatley 
as excellent. 


(From an engraving in the possession of the author.) 


Appendix I. 


does he remember having so great a sum as fifty guineas about that 
time, or pulling such a sum or a greater out of his pocket, which he 
stands charged with. 

Nor did he ever ask or endeavour to suborn any one person to 
say they had seen Clark since the eighth day of ffebruary, 1744, 
UNLESSE THEY HAD REALLY SEEN HIM (interlined), but true it is 
that he hath often made inquiry about him, and he thinks he hath 
heard some persons say that they have seen him since, and par- 
ticularly his brother Stephen Aram; but he does not recollect at 
present any other person except another brother of his, Henry Aram, 
which (sic) have said they have seen him, nor does not (erased) 
know where these brothers of his did say they had seen him at. Tus 
EXAMINATION (erased) As to the examination of further particulars 
touching the premisses and to signing this examination, this examinant 
chuses to waive them for the present, that he may have time to recol- 
lect himself better and more fully, least anything might be omitted or 
slip his memory, that is material which may hereafter occur to him. 

Taken before me as above at 

Thornville, EvucEene ARAM. 

William Thornton. 

[The signature is large, straggling, and by no means scholarly. 
In view of the foregoing, I suspect it is not genuine.—E. R. W.] 


On the same day as above, in consequence of the foregoing examina- 
tion, and after mature deliberation and at his own instance, Eugine 
Aram desires to make FARTHER (written over another word ending 
in ‘‘Y”’) discoveries relating to the affair of the missing of Clark. 

And saith that true it was that he was at his own house on the 
seventh of ffebruary, year 1744, at night, when Richard Houseman and 
Daniel Clark come (sic) to him with some plate and went out for 
more several times both of them, sometimes one of them and some- 
times the other, and came back with several pieces of plate, which 
Clark was endeavouring to defraud his neibours (sic) of ; and could not 
but observe that Houseman was all that night very diligent to abett 
‘him and assist him, and did it to the utmost of his power; and this 
examinant insists this was Houseman’s business that night, and not 
the signing of any note or instrument or agreement, as mentioned 
and insisted on by Houseman and THIS EXAMINANT SAITH (super- 
scribed and erased) this examinant saith that Henry Terry, then of 
Knaresbro’, ale-house keeper, was as instrumental in abetting the 
said frauds as either Houseman or Clark, but was not there because 
it was market-day, and his absence from his guests might have 
occasioned some suspicion, but that Terry, notwithstanding, brought 
two silver tankards that night upon Clark’s account, which had been 
fraudulently obtained. 

This examinant further (sic) that Houseman at that time, so far 
(from) having lent Clark £20 as he hath insisted on, that he very 
well knows that he never ought (sic) him but £9, which he had paid 
him again before that night; and further saith that all leather Clark 
had, which was of considerable value, he very well knows that 
Houseman had then concealed under flax in his own house, and 

163 


Eugene Aram. 


intended to dispose off (sic) little by little, in order to prevent 
suspicion of his being concerned in Clark’s fraudulent practices at 
all. 

And this examinant further saith that Mr. Illes of Knaresbro’, 
by divers undue means and threatenings, possest himself of consider- 
able effects belonging to Clark. 

And this examinant further saith that as to the plate and other 
things that Clark had so fraudulently possest himself off, after that 
Abram Spence had taken off the goods (which Mr. Illes afterwards 
possest himself off) into the Dales, then Richard Houseman, CLARK, AND 
THIS EXAMINANT WENT INTO THE (erased), took the watches, rings, 
and several small things of value, and Clark took the plate in a 
bag, and the abovesaid Henry Terry having taken the great plate 
at (sic) Clark carried them into the long long (sic) flat, where they 
and this examinant all went together to Sarnr RoBERT’s cave (THIS 
BEING ON THE EIGHTH OF Frsruary, 1744, EARLY IN THE MORNING, 
WHICH RICHARD HovUsEMAN AND TERRY ONLY WENT INTO WITH CLARK, 
WITHOUT THIS EXAMINANT, WHO STAID WITHOUT . . . AS IN 
; ©. WHICH THEY SINCH . . . WATCH Timi Temy so ) 
(all much erased and corrected). Where they beat most of the 
plate flat, and it was then too late at that time in the morning, 
being about four a clock on ffebruary 7-8, 1744, for Clark to go off 
so as to get any distance; therefore, this examinant saies, it was 
agreed that he should stay there till the night following, and Clarke 
accordingly staid there THE NEXT DAY (erased), as this examinant 
believes, all that day, they having agreed to send him victuals as 
THEY TOLD HIM, AND THAT (erased), which was carried to him by 
Henry Terry, he being . . . the properest person, and could do 
it with the least suspicion, being a shooter, and could it under pre- 
tence of sporting, and this examinant saith that the next night, 
very early Henry Terry (AND THIS EXAMINANT AND) (erased) Richard 
Houseman and himself went down to the cave AS SOON AS THEY COULD 
(erased) to Clark, in order that Cuarx. (erased) he might have more 
time to get off, but this examinant did not go into the cave or see 
Clark at all, but Richard Houseman and Henry Terry only went 
into the cave, and he staid to watch at a little distance on the out- 
side, least anybody should come and discover them, and he believes, 
FOR HE HEARD A GREAT NOISE—THEM MAKE A GREAT NOISE (erased) ; 
they were beating some of the plate, for they told him so, for he 
heard A GREAT NOISE (erased), them make a great noise, and they 
staid there about an hour and then came out of the. cave, and 
returned and told him Clark was gone, but upon observing a bag 
they had along with them, he took it into his hand, and saw it was 
plate, and askt, ‘‘What! has not Daniel taken the plate along 
with him?’’ And Richard Houseman replied, as well as Terry, that 
they had bought it of Daniel, as well as the watches, &., &c., and 
given him money for it, which was more convenient for him to go 
off with, as he found it cumbersome and dangerous. Tuey (erased), 
and both Houseman and Terry told this examinant; that as 
they had bought these things of Clark, he had nothing to do with 


164 


Appendix I. 


them (italics in MS.); after which they all three went into House- 
man’s whare-house (sic) and concealed the watches and smal (sic) 
plate there, save what Terry carried away with him which was the 
great plate, and afterwards Terry told him he carried it to Hough 
hill and concealed it there, and afterwards ToLD HIM (erased) carried 
it to Scotland and disposed of it there, but as to the murdering of 
Clark, this examinant can’t tell anything of it, nor can’t tell what 
to say, wether (sic) he was murdered or not, only they told him 
he was gone off. Eucene ARAM. 
(Large, scrambling signature.) 
[The passages in this examination reflecting on Lles, as well as 
Terry’s following, have hitherto not figured in any reports of the 
trial; for some reason, also, the italicised passage has been omitted.] 


West Riding 
Yorkshire. 


THe EXAMINATION of Henry Terry, prisoner, on sus- 
picion for being concerned in the murder of Daniel Clark, 
taken before me, one of his Majestie’s justices of the 
peace for the said Riding. 


Wuo Sarru that he was acquainted with Daniel Clark, of Knares- 
bro’, shoemaker, but he never had any dealings with him of any 
kind, nor had been conversant with him of a long time before he was 
a missing, which might be about the 8th of ffebruary, 1744, but this 
examinant can’t take upon himself at this distance of time to he 
very certain about the time. 

But very well remembers that Eugene Aram, schoolmaster, was 
about that time under some confinement or arrest, which, as he 
apprehends and believes, was upon account of a warrant issued out 
against him by Mr. Townsend (or ‘‘Townend’’ or ‘‘ Tancred.’’— 
E. R. W.), one of His Majestie’s Justices of the Peace, for having 
possest himself of some goods which Clark had fraudulently obtained, 
before the time of his being missing ; some of which things, he believes, 
were found in Aram’s house or in his possession, but that he himself 
never had any of the goods, plate, or effects belonging to Clark at 
all, nor knows anything about them of his own knowledge, but only 
by hearsay, which was, that Mr. Illes had possest himself of such to 
a considerable amount, but knows nothing of Richard Houseman’s 
having any of the effects of Clark, but knows very well that Clark, 
Houseman, and Aram were very frequently together about that time, and 
observed them often walking the streets together. He, this examinant, 
further saith that he has a brother that then lived and now does at 
a farm at How hill, viz., Robert Terry, and that Aram has a brother 
called Henry, whom the said Aram emploied this examinant about 
that time to go to Hull to enquire after, and to get him to come over 
to Knaresbro’ to his brother; and as to bringing two tankards to 
Aram’s house on account of Clark, as he stands charged with, he 


165 


Eugene Aram. 


absolutely denies to be true; nor can at this distance of time under- 
take to charge his memory with being at Aram’s house on that 
night at all, but believes he was at his house in the day time about 
that time. : 

He denies that he knows anything of Houseman’s possessing 
himself of watches or anything of value belonging to Clark, or that 
he took a bag of plate on the seventh of ffebruary at night into the 
long flat; Bur (erased) he utterly disowns going to Saint Robert’s 
cave, or being in it on any account with Aram and Clark and House- 
man, or of being in it at any other time, or of knowing where it is; 
and denies that he was privy to, or knew of, any victuals being 
carried to Clark whilst in Saint Robert’s cave, as he hath been 
charged with. 

And utterly disowns that he knows anything relating to the murder 
of Clark; but if there was such a thing as Clark’s being murdered, 
he should sooner suspect that Houseman and Aram were the per- 
petrators of it than any body else. 

Taken before me this 26th of 

August, 1758. Haney TERRY. 
William Thornton. (Fair writing.) 


York, 3rd of March, 1759. 
Tue Kine 
v. 
Houseman, Aram and Terry. 


Prosecutor’s affidavit 
in order for defendants’ 
continuance in Goal (sic). 


Sworn 10th of March, 1759. 


Tue Kine against Ricoarp Houseman, Eucrnn, otherwise KucEnius 
ARAM, and Henry TERRY. 


Philip Coates, of Knaresbrough, in the County of York, yeoman, 
the prosecutor in this cause, maketh oath that the said Richard 
Houseman, Eugene, otherwise Eugenius Aram, and Henry Terry, 
are now detained as prisoners in His Majesty’s Goal, the castle of 
York, having been committed there in or about the tenth day of 
August last on suspicion of murdering one Daniel Clark, late of 
Knaresbrough, aforesaid, in the month of February, one thousand 
seven hundred and forty-four; And this deponent further saith that 
by reason of the great length of time, which hath elapsed from the 
time the supposed murder was committed, in which no circumstantial 
proof appeared so as to charge the said Richard Houseman, Eugene, 
otherwise Eugenius Aram, and Henry Terry in being concerned in 
the said murder, till the month of August last, so this deponent 
hath not been able as yet to procure the several witnesses and proofs, 
which are very material and necessary witnesses, as he, this deponent, 
is informed and believes, to be produced on this Tryal against the said 
Richard Houseman, Eugene, otherwise Eugenius Aram, and Henry 
Terry, for the said murder; and this deponent further saith that 
for want of such his witnesses, and from the several and various 
circumstances, which appear in this cause and which this deponent 


166 


Appendix I, 


as yet hath not been able from the great length of time that hath 
elapsed as aforesaid fully-to make out, this deponent can’t safely 
proceed to Tryal at the said Assizes; And this deponent further 
saith that a very material circumstance relative to the said murder 
hath appeared since the commencement of these Assizes, which this 
deponent can’t effectually prove for want of sufficient time to procure 
his witnesses to prove same. 

Sworn at the City of York, the 10th day 

of March, 1759, Putnie COATES, 
before me, 
M. Foster. 
(Z.e., Sir Michael Foster, a judge of the K.B.) 

Here follow the several recognizances of the witnesses bound over 
by Theakston and Thornton respectively. 

One document comprises those of— 

John Barker, cordwainer. 

Francis Moor, hatter—each in £20; and 

Barbara Leetham, widow—in £10. 

Another binds Philip Coates in £20, and another 

Anna Aram and 

William Tuton—in £20 each, and 

William Thompson, a chimney-sweep, in £10. 

These are all taken by Thornton. 

William Higgins, Aaron Locock, surgeons; Thomas Barnett, a 
dyer ; Stephen Lathom, cordwainer; Bryan Hardcastle, yeoman; Peter 
Moor, cordwainer; and Dorothy Clark, widow, were all bound by 
Theakston in £20 apiece, on the 18th of August, 1758. 


(This completes the documents in the Assize bundles, marked 45 
in the Record Office.) 26 


ExTRACTS FROM THE MINUTE AND Gaot Books oF THE NORTHERN 
CrrovuiT, ANNO 1759. 


Minott Book (Assizxes 7) 


Friday morning. Present—Mr. Justice Noel. 
Jury. Thomas Sutton. William Aked. John Brook. 
Robert Shelton. Richard Crosier. Joseph Clement. 


Robert Kitchin. Richard Marshall. John Whittaker. 
William Edmond. Nathaniel Priestley. Thomas Coates. 


putts guilty burnt in y° right hand, 
George Mason, for stealing two pecks of malt, price one shilling 
and sixpence, and three pecks of wheat, value two- 
pence, the property of Robert Calverly. 


Same Jury 
putts not guilty, 
Richard Houseman, for the murder of Daniel Clark. ( 
107 


Eugene Aram. 


Same Jury 
putts Guilty, to be hang’d and body anatomised [erased], to be hung 
in chains on Knaresbro’ forest, 
Eugene Aram, otherwise Eugenius Aram, for the murder of Daniel Clark. 


Same Jury 
putts not guilty, 
Henry Terry, for the murder of Daniel Clark. 


(Here follow the other cases in the day’s cause-list. ) 


41 
Gao Boox (AssizEs ve 


YORKSHIRE, 

3rd March, 1759. 
Charles Turner, Esq., 
High Sheriff ; 

Sir Digby Legard, 
Foreman. 


On reading the 


fiidavit of 
Richard Houseman. Philip Chae: 


Eugene Aram. the prosecutor, 
Henry Terry. Let them remain 
in goal until 
the next assizes. 


Michael Foster. 


Extra’s in murder. 


putts, 28th July, 1759, Guilty, 

Eugene Aram, late of Knaresbro’, in the county of York, schoolmaster, 
a.d. (alias dictus), Kugenius Aram, late of Knaresbro’, in the county 
of York, schoolmaster, for the murder of Daniel Clark, 
putts, 28th July, 1759, Not Guilty, 

Richard Houseman, late of Knaresbro’, in the County of York, flax 


dresser, for the murder of Daniel Clark. 
Charles Turner, YORKSHIRE TO Wit.—THE GENERAL Goat DELIv- 
Esq., Sheriff ; ERY OF Our Lorp The Kine of his County of 
Sir Cecil Wray, York, held at the Castie of Yorx, in, and for 
Foreman. the said County, on Sarurpay, the twenty eighth 


day of July, in the thirty third year of the reign 
of our Sovereign Lord, Grorcr the second, now 
Kine of Great Brirarn, etc. Before the Honour- 
able Henry Bathurst, Esquire, one of the Justices 
of His Majestie’s Court of Common Pleas, William 
Noel, Esquire, one other of the Justices of the 
same Court, and other ffellow Justices of our said 
Lorp and Kine, assigned to deliver his Goa there 


: of the Prisoners therein being, &c. 
16 


Appendix I, 


E Attainted of murder. To be hanged on Monday, the 
beams igéiitn 6th day of August next, and his body to be hang’d in 
tec: chains upon Knaresbro’ forest, near to the town of 


J Knaresbrough. 


(Here follow the sentences of death on the two Cockburns for burglary 
and some others.) 


Richard Houseman, Henry 

Terry, Mary Wilson, Isabel, {| Not Guilty to be 
the wife of William Cockburn, discharged. 
&e., &e., &e., Ke. 


William Noel. 
(This concludes the Record office MSS. relative to the case.) 


42 
Extract FRoM Goat Book FoR 1768 (AssIzES ot 


Let the body Thomas Lee. 
of Thomas Lee, Attainted of murder, 
after execution, to be hang’d on Mon- 
be hung in chains day, the 25th day of 
as near as may July instant, and his 
conveniently be body to be dissected 
to Grassington and anatomised. 
Gate, near the (Sd.) Joseph Yates. 


town of Grassington. 


(Confirms anecdote in Scatcherd, and proves that the order for hanging 
in chains was subsequent to sentence.—H. R.W.) 


APPENDIX II. 


EXTRACTS FROM THE CONTEMPORARY PRESS. 
1744 to 17859. 


(1) Tue Missinea or DANIEL CLARK. 
(Only one extract extant.) 


(Extract from the York Courant, dated Tuesday, 12th 
March, 1745.) 


WHEREAS Danie CLARKE, or KNARESBROUGH, a thin, pale looking 
Pock-broke Man, about five Foot six or eight Inches high, aged 
about twenty-three Years, has a very great Impediment and Stam- 
mering in his Speech, went from Knaresbrough on Friday the 8th 


169 


Eugene Aram. 


of February last, and defrauded several Persons of large Quantities 
of Goods, viz., Silver-Pints and Quarts, Diamond and Gold Rings, 
Watches, Snuff-Boxes, Books, &c., the Particulars of which may be 
seen at Large in this Paper of the 12th, and 19th of February last. 

Whoever can give an Account of the said Goods (so as they may 
be had again) to Mr. James Collins, Mr. Francis [les, Mr. William 
Clayton, or Mr. William Pullen, of Knaresbrough; Mr. Ward, Book- 
seller in York; or Mr. William Sandby, Bookseller, at the Ship, 
without Temple-Bar, London, shall receive FIFTEEN POUNDS 
Reward for the Whole, or in Proportion for any Part thereof, from 
any of the Persons above-mention’d; and no Questions ask’d. 


(2) Tue Finpina oF THE BonEs, AND ARREST OF THE PRISONERS. 


(Extract from the Leeds Intelligencer, dated Tuesday, 
29th August, 1758.) 


Richard Houseman, flax-dresser, Henry Terry, and Eugene Aram, 
schoolmaster, were a few days ago committed to York Castle, on Sus- 
picion of murdering Daniel Clark, a shoemaker at Knaresbro’ about - 
14 Years ago. The Circumstances attending this are somewhat 
remarkable, and are as follows. 

Some workmen were lately digging about Sir (sic) Robert’s cave, 
near Knaresbro’, found the remains of a Body, which they supposed 
to be murdered; and as Daniel Clark had suddenly disappeared, and 
was generally thought to have been murdered, they therefore carried 
Houseman before a Justice of the Peace on Suspicion, as he was one 
of the last Persons seen in Clark’s Company. On his Examination, 
he said that the Body found was not Clark’s, for he was buried in 
another Place, where he mentioned, and accordingly the Remains of 
another Body was found. 


(Zatract from the Cambridge Journal, dated 26th. August, 1758.) 


York, Aug. 22nd. 

Last week Richard Houseman was committed to the castle on 
Suspicion of murdering Daniel Clark, of the same Place, Shoemaker, 
about 14 years ago. The Circumstances attending this are somewhat 
remarkable, and, we hear, are as follows. : 

Some workmen, who were lately digging about Saint Robert’s 
cave, near Knaresbro’ found the Remains of a Body, which they 
supposed to be murdered; and as Daniel Clark had suddenly dis- 
appeared, and was generally thought to have been murdered, they 
imagined it might be his Body; and therefore carried Houseman 
[&c., &c., as above. . . . ] On his Examination before the Justice 
he said [&c., &., as above. . . . ] was found there. On which 
he was committed as above, and yesterday Eugene Aram was com- 
mitted to the Castle on Suspicion for being an Accomplice in the 
above Murder. 


170 


Appendix II. 


(Hatract from the London Evening Post, 24th-26th August, 1758.) 


Last week Richard Houseman was committed to the castle on 
Suspicion of murdering Daniel Clark, of the same Place, Shoemaker, 
about 14 years ago. The Circumstances attending this are somewhat 
remarkable, and, we hear, are as follows. 

Some workmen, who were lately digging about Saint Robert’s cave, 
near Knaresbro’, found the Remains of a Body, which they supposed 
to be murdered; and as Daniel Clark had suddenly disappeared, and 
was generally thought to have been murdered, they imagined it might 
be his Body; and therefore carried Houseman [&c., &c., as above. 

] On his Examination before the Justice he said [&c., &c., 
as above. . . . ] was found there. On which he was committed as 
above, and yesterday Eugene Aram was committed to the Castle on 
Suspicion for being an Accomplice in the above Murder. 


(Zztract from the London Evening Post, 31st August, 1758.) 


York, Aug. 29. 
Last Saturday Henry Terry was committed to the Castle on sus- 
picion of being concerned in the murder of Daniel Clark, of Knares- 
brough, lately mentioned. 


Lloyd’s Evening Post of 1st September, 1758, has an identical 
paragraph. 


(Extract from the Whitehall Evening Post of Tth-9th September, 1758.) 
Extract from a letter from a correspondent in Yorkshire. 


At the town of Knaresbrough, in Yorkshire, about twenty miles from 
hence (York?) a man was diging (sic) for Limestone and found the 
Bones of a human Body; it being an uncommon Place made some 
Stir, insomuch that they examined a Woman in the Town, who had 
often been heard to say, she had it in her Power to hang her Hus- 
band (who had been from her several Years) and several others in 
that Neighbourhood: Upon examining her they discovered the Murder 
of three Men as follows. Several Men in the Town agreed together, 
that one of them, under Specious Pretences, should borrow Flate, 
Jewels, &c., of all substantial People in the Town, and then make 
off with the Booty: It fell to the Lot of one Clark to borrow, who met 
with the wish’d for Success; at that time a Jew and his Man were 
in the Town, they sent for him, offered him the Goods, and sold 
them to him and received the Money, when done, they murdered both 
the Jew and his Man, and buried them; while they were throwing 
the Earth upon them, one of the Company whose naine is Arom (sic) 
and who is now in York Castle, with another Confederate, took up a 
Pick-Axe, and struck Clark into the Skull and killed him, and buried 
him in another Place, and so they became Masters of the Whole 


171 


Eugene Aram, 


unsuspected: Every one concluding Clark was quite gone off with the 
Goods he had borrowed. This happened Fourteen Years since. 


Payne’s Universal Chronicle, or Weekly Gazette, for 9th-16th Sep- 
tember, and Lioyd’s Evening Post for 8th-1lth September, 1758, have a 
similar account headed, ‘‘ Extract of a letter from Yorkshire.’”’ The 
London Evening Post of 9th-12th September is to the same effect, 
omitting the words, ‘‘ whose name is Arom.’’ No doubt many more, 
now no longer extant, published similar scandalous statements in utter 
contempt of Court. 


Owen’s Weekly Chronicle, for 26th August, 1758, under ‘‘ Country 
News,’ has an account beginning, ‘‘The week before last Richard 
Houseman, &c.,’’ as in the Cambridge Journal, supra, and others. 


The Public Advertiser, for 26th of August, 1758, has a letter from 
York of the 22nd to the same effect, but not mentioning the arrest 
of Aram and his incarceration the previous day. 


Lloyd’s Evening Post, for 25th-28th August, and The Ipswich 
Journal, for 2nd September, 1758, have accounts identical with that 
in The Cambridge Journal. 


(5) Taz Yorx Lent Assizzs, 1759. 
(Zztract from the Leeds Intelligencer, dated 6th March, 1759.) 


The following Prisoners are to take their Trials at the Castle of 
York, at the Assizes, which began Yesterday before the Right 
Honourable William Lord Mansfield, and Sir Michael Foster (Charles 
Turner, Esq, High Sheriff), viz., Richard Houseman and Eugene 
Aram, on Suspicion of murdering Daniel Clark, of Knaresbrough; and 
Henry Terry, charged on Examination of Eugene Aram, with being 
in Saint Robert’s Cave with Clark, at the time of his being missing, 
and with bringing a large Quantity of Plate, out of the cave, &c. 


(Hatract dated 13th March, 1759.) 


We hear from York, that the Trial of Houseman, &c., on Suspicion 
of murdering Daniel Clark, of Knaresbro’ 14 years ago, is put off till 
the next Assizes. 


(Latract from the Cambridge Journal of 17th March, 1759.) 


York, March 13. 
Yesterday the Assizes ended for this County. . . . Richard 
Houseman, Eugene Aram, and Henry Terry, on Suspicion of murder- 
ing Daniel Clark, were ordered to be continued in Goal till the next 
Assizes, it appearing to the Court, on Affidavit, that the prosecutor 
could not be fully provided with his Witnesses at this time, it being 
above fourteen years since the Fact was committed. 


Lloyd’s Evening Post of 14th-16th March, 1759, contains the same 
news. The Ipswich Journal for 24th March, 1759, gives an account 
of the Assize business, but omits all reference to Aram’s case. 


172 


Appendix II. 


(4) York Summer Assizzs, Trias or Houseman, ARAM, AND TERRY. 
EXECUTION oF ARAM. 


(Extract from Jackson’s Oxford Journal.) 


Last Friday came on at York the Trials of Richard Houseman, of 
Knaresbro’, Eugene Aram and Henry Terry, for the murder of Daniel 
Clark of Knaresbro’ aforesaid, who disappeared on the 8th of February, 
1744-5, having a little Time before borrowed and bought on Credit 
a large Quantity of Silver Plate, a great Number of Watches, Rings, 
and other Things of Value, for the Sake of which it is supposed he 
was murdered, no Account ever having been given of him or them. 
Richard Houseman was acquitted and then admitted Evidence; who 
deposed That in the Night between the 7th and 8th of February, 
1744-5, after above two Hours spent in passing and repassing to and 
fro between their several Houses to dispose of various Goods, and to 
settle some notes concerning them, Aram proposed first to Clark 
and then to him, to take a Walk out of Town; that when they came 
to the Field where Sir (sic) Robert’s Cave is, Aram and Clark went 
over the hedge into it; and when.they came within six or eight Yards 
of the Cave, he saw Aram strike Clark several Times, upon which he 
fell, and he never saw him more, but saw no Instrument that he had, 
and knew not that he had any; that on this, without any Interposi- 
tion or Alarm, he left them and returned home. And being asked 
why he did not discover the Affair, said That Aram threatened to 
take away his life, if he made any Discovery of what had passed. 
Houseman’s Evidence was delivered with all the Anxiety, Diffidence 
and Embarrassment of conscious Guilt, solicitous to accuse the Partner 
of his Iniquity no farther than it consisted with the keeping the 
Curtain drawn between the Court and him. Aram in his defence 
(that he had drawn up previous to his Trial, which as a defence, 
could not avail to exculpate him; but as a Composition it was greatly 
admired for the Closeness and Acuteness of the Reasoning and in 
general for the Propriety, the Force, and Eloquence of the Expression) 
expatiated greatly on many innocent Persons suffering by the Perjury 
of Accomplices and circumstantial Evidence, and as such recom- 
mended himself to the Clemency of the Judge and Jury; who on 
Houseman’s evidence, with corroborating circumstances given by 
others, immediately brought him in Guilty; and Sentence of Death 
was passed upon him. 

Last Monday (being the day fix’d for his Execution) he cut with 
a Razor, which he had concealed in his Cell some Time before, the 
Veins of his Left Arm a little above the Elbow and also a little above 
the Wrist, but miss’d the Artery, by which, before it was discovered, 
he had lost so much Blood, that he was rendered very weak. Surgeons 
were immediately sent for, who stopp’d the Bleeding, and he was 
carried to Tyburn (at which Place he was sensible, tho’ very feeble, 
and was there ask’d if he had any Thing to say, to which he answer’d 
““No,”) where he was executed and his Body carried to Knares- 


173 


Eugene Aram. 


brough Forest, where it is to be hung in Chains in the nearest Part 
of it to that Town, pursuant to his Sentence. 

He wrote an Account of his Life, which with the Defence he made 
on his Trial, he left with the Rev. Mr. Collins of Knaresbrough. 


The London Evening Post, the Cambridge Journal, and Lloyd’s 
Evening Post have identical reports in their issues for 9th-12th August, 
11th August, and 8th-10th August respectively, the Cambridge 
Journal adding, ‘‘ Henry Terry, indicted for being an accomplice in 
the said murder, was acquitted.” 


(Eatract from the Leeds Intelligencer, 7th August, 1759.) 


We hear from York that Richard Houseman turned Evidence against. 
Eugene Aram, for the murder of Daniel Clark of Knaresbro’, about 
14 years ago; and on which the said Aram was convicted, and executed 
Yesterday at York, and his Body will be hung in Chains nigh Knares- 
brough. As nothing appeared against Henry Terry, he was acquitted. 


(Hatract from Read’s Weekly Journal or British Gazetteer, 
for 11th August, 1759.) 


At York Assizes (which began on Saturday, July the 28th) Eugene 
Aram, charged with the murder of Daniel Clark of Kaaresbrough, 
several years since, was found guilty, and ordered to be executed the 
next day. Richard Houseman and Henry Terry, charged with the 
above murder, were admitted evidence for the Crown. 


(This report, short as it is, contains two blunders, one as to the 
date of the execution, the other as to Terry turning King’s evidence.) 


The Public Advertiser, for Saturday, 11th August, and the London 
Chronicle, for 9th-1lth, have very similar reports. The latter also 
records Terry’s acquittal. 


(Hatract from the London Chronicle of 16th-18th August, 1759.) 


York, Aug. 14th. 

Last week a mob assembled about Richard Houseman’s house, in 
Knaresbrough (who was acquitted of the charge of being concerned in 
the murder of Daniel Clark, in order to be admitted an Evidence 
against Eugene Aram, as mentioned in our last). and it was with 
great difficulty they were prevented from pulling it down. However, 
they carried Houseman about the streets in effigy, which was after- 
wards knock’d on the head with a pick-ax (sic), and then burnt. 


The Cambridge Journal of 18th August has a York letter, dated 
14th August, to the same effect. The same paper reports the next 
day’s cases, including the breach of promise before Bathurst, J., of 
Redfern v. Bowes. 


174 


Appendix II. 


(Zxtract from the Newcastle Courant.) 
ow York, August 4. 

Last Friday came on the trials, &. . . . Richard Houseman 
was acquitted and then admitted evidence, which with corroborating 
Circumstances given by others, the Jury immediately brought him in 
guilty ; and Sentence of Death was passed upon him. Yesterday morn- 
ing, &. . . . He was carried to Tyburn. where he was executed, 
and from thence to Knaresbrough Forest, where his Body is to be 
hung in Chains, in the nearest Part of it to that Town, pursuant to 
his Sentence. Henry Terry, indicted for being an Accomplice in the 
said Murder, was acquitted. 


(All later newspaper reports, such as that in The Universal Chronicle 
for 25th August-1st September, are excerpts from one or other of the 
printed pamphlets, which succeeded one another in rapid succession, 
from 16th August onwards. The following is the advertisement of 
Sympson’s edition :— 

This day is published, Price 6d., The Genuine Life, Trial, and 
Dying Words of Eugene Aram, who was convicted the 3rd. of 
August instant at York Assizes, and executed the 6th for the 
murder of Daniel Clark of Knaresbrough fourteen years ago. 
Containing the strange and wonderful Manner by which this Murder 
was first discovered ; his attempting to bleed to Death by cutting 
his Arm with a Razor the Night before he suffer’d, his Behaviour 
and last dying Words at the Place of Execution, with the Copy 
of a Letter he deliver’d to a Person who attended him in his last 
Moments. 

Printed by C. Sympson, in Stone-cutter Street, Fleet-Market, 
of whom may be had 

The Amorous Duchess, or the Lucky Gamester—a novel founded 

on Facts—Price one Shilling. 

The Fortunate Beauty, or Love and Hatred reconciled—Price 

one shilling. 

(From the Public Advertiser, 16th, 17th August, &c., 1759.) 


APPENDIX III. 


PHRENOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS ON THE SKULL OF 
EUGENE ARAM, WITH AN ACCOUNT OF ITS HISTORY 
SINCE 1759, AND A REPORT OF PROFESSOR KEITH UPON 
THE SKULL OF CLARK. 


ARAmM’s SKULL TAKEN FROM THE GiIBBET BY Dr. HUTCHINSON. 
(Extract from the Literary Gazette, January, 1832. 


Sir, Dec. 9th, 1831. 
Some years since, &., &c. 
The doctor sallied forth from the town of Knaresbrough, with a 


175 


Eugene Aram. 


ladder on his shoulders and with the firm purpose of mounting the 
gibbet and detaching from the iron hoop, which bound it, the skull 
of Eugene Aram. The gibbet clung to its own property with wonder- 
ful tenacity, but the ardor of the Doctor became a furor and he suc- 
ceeded in extricating another neck at the risk of his own (relates how 
Hutchinson died and) the skull of Eugene Aram thence came into 
possession of a gentleman of great literary and scientific acquire- 
ments, and in the year 1817 a friend . . . who had lately been 
in company with Dr. Spurzheim, introduced the subject of phrenology. 

[The issue was to place before Spurzheim the skulls of Aram and 
Adam de Thirsk, last abbot of Fountains, hanged for denying the 
supremacy of Henry VIII.] 


Spurzheim replied : 
23 Foley Place, London, 


22nd May, 1817. 
My Dear Sir, 

The parcel containing the two skulls is arrived. I will 
mention what I think of the skulls. . . . One of the skulls is 
certainly that of a man; the other resembles that of a woman, and if 
it belonged to a man, his mind entered into a female habitation. The 
female had a good share of common sense without being able to 
reason deeply; she was pleased with witty, amusing, superstitious 
stories and fond of theatrical performances. She had strong feelings 
without great hope, a great deal of vanity, attachment, and personal 
courage; she might have been able to commit an error to please those 
she liked. Example was to her particularly important. . . . She 
was more easily guided by soft means and flattering treatment than 
by command, which revolted her feelings and would induce her to 
have recourse to desperate means. 


A professional gentleman of eminence, in forwarding this, added— 


‘Her vanity and attachment render her liable to be led astray 
by bad example; and if*she was the wife, or connected with the 
man, was probably led into the commission of crime by him. 
She has a greater degree of courage than is generally seen in 
female heads.”’ 


Spurzheim, who remarked on the presence of strong animal appe- 
tites, on being informed of the sex, pronounced Aram’s skull to 
resemble that of a Celt. 


(Extract from the Morning Chronicle for 25th Auqust, 1838, 
reporting a meeting of the British Association.) 


Dr. Inglis was then called upon to exhibit before the section (i.e., 
medical) the head of Eugene Aram, and to deliver some remarks upon 
it. The doctor said it would be necessary for him, in the first place, 
to prove the identity of the skull, and his explanation amounted to 
this. After the execution of Eugene at Tyburn, his body was con- 
veyed to Knaresborough, where, according to his sentence, he was 


176 


Appendix III. 


hung in chains. After he had hung some time, Dr. Hutchinson, a 
physician of that town, anxious to obtain some relic of the man, took 
a ladder to the gibbet and cut off his head. After the death of Dr. 
Hutchinson . . . the skull was given to the Rev. Mr. Dalton 

for the purpose of having it inspected by Spurzheim along 
with the head of an abbot who was hanged for resisting Henry VIII. 
In addition, there were indications upon the skull of the iron hooks 
by which the culprit was gibbeted. In consequence of its being 
understood that the remains of Eugene had been interred by an old 
man, the doctor stated that he had made enquiries of that person 
(Mr. Strother—E. R. W.) and found that the thigh bones and arms 
had been interred, but not the skull. It may here be proper to 
remark that Spurzheim mistook the head for that of a female, but 
minutely described many peculiarities which corresponded with the 
genera] character of the Yorkshire schoolmaster. The doctor then 
entered into a review of the circumstances under which the crime 
was committed, having this object in view, that as the evidence was 
circumstantial and did not clearly establish the proof of his guilt, 
after an examination of his head on phrenological principles, he should 
be deemed not guilty of the crime for which he suffered. He said, 
if he had been found guilty at all by a jury of the present day, it 
would under no circumstances have been of murder, but of man- 
slaughter. Dr. Granville said Dr. Inglis wished to prove by phreno- 
logical observations that the individual whose character he had been 
developing suffered rather unjustly. (Here followed a long discussion 
as to whether the skull was properly identified.) Dr. Hindmarsh, who 
stated that he had had considerable experience as an anatomist, said 
he would almost trust his honour that this could not be the skull of 
Eugene Aram. It appeared to be the skull of a male person, not 
above thirty years of age, and probably not more than twenty-five. 
Eugene Aram was fifty-four. A gentleman, also an anatomist, would 
put it to Professor Owen whether it was possible to iudge a person’s 
age (by the skull—E. R. W.) within ten years. Mr. Simpson de- 
tailed the circumstances under which he had examined the skull. He 
considered it was the skull of a person very likely to be of a criminal 
character, and he had declared his opinion that he would be a dangerous 
man. If they had to judge by the skull it was sufficient to con- 
demn him. ... . He would say that if a blow had been given on 
the head it was very likely to come from the person to whom the skull 
belonged. Professor Owen said his opinion was that it was the skull 
of a middle-aged man. 


(Lxtracts from the Pamphlet of James Inglis, Doctor of Medicine.) 


PHRENOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS ON THE SKULL oF EKuGcENnE ARAM, 
MDCCCXXX VIII. 


(Pp. 20-22.) 
Combe’s report—‘‘ Anterior lobe, long, but neither high nor broad— 
coronal region above causality full, above cautiousness rather small, 


M 177 


Eugene Aram. 


except in firmness. Basilar region very large. Age, temperament, 
and education not mentioned.”’ 

(There follows a chart of Aram’s skull tabulated under thirty-five 
heads, combativeness being very large, destructiveness large, as also 
self-esteem, amativeness, philoprogenitiveness and size; wit, time, 
causality, imitation, eventuality, individuality, and ideality are all 
“‘full’’?; “hope”? is small, and “‘conscientiousness ’’ moderate. The 
summary concludes—‘‘ The intellectual organs are well marked, but on 
a small scale.’’) 

Combe proceeds—‘‘I am not informed concerning the education, 
rank in life, or temperament of the individual. the cast of whose skull 
has this day been sent to me. I can therefore sneak only of his dis- 
positions and talents in general. The brain has been of an average 
size, indicating medium power of mind. The region of the lower pro- 
pensities decidedly predominates. He might show considerable 
activity in the domestic affections, when not influenced by his temper, 
which was hot. He was irascible and vindictive. He was proud and 
essentially selfish ; yet to serve a purpose he might exhibit great plausi- 
bility of manner. His intellectual faculties were intense in action 
rather than comprehensive and vigorous. He had talents for obser- 
vation, and for the sciences which depend chiefly on observation. 
His reflecting powers were good, but limited in comprehensiveness as 
well as in depth. He had some taste for the imitative arts, and could 


have been an actor. He was not a stranger to benevolent feeling, 
but his benevolence was greatly inferior to his selfishness. He was not 
scrupulous. 


“‘The head on the whole indicates a man of low natural dispositions ; 
with as much of the higher powers as to render him dangerous by his 
talents and plausibility; but not enough of them to render him in 
ordinary circumstances amiable and virtuous.” 

Another chart was submitted to Inglis by Hewitt C. Watson, editor of 
the Phrenological Journal. This expert had, however, the advantage 
of knowing whose skull it was. He also, of course, using the same 
method, found the same organs highly or poorly developed, placing 
*‘ wit,’ ‘‘ time,” and ‘‘tune’’ among the moderately developed organs. 

He thus estimates Hugene—‘‘ The anterior part of the skull is so 
narrow that I feel rather doubtful whether all the intellectual organs 
should not be brought one degree lower, comparatively with those of 
the propensities. I have estimated them as above, on account of the 
prominence, more than the breadth, of the middle part of the fore- 
head. The intellect is not that of a profound philosopher, but of 
one calculated to appear to advantage in society.” ; 

Thus another expert, Mr. Simpson—‘‘ Animal organs preponderate, 
moderate intellect, some degree of benevolence, very deficient hope, 
poor conscientiousness, very large amativeness, very large destructive- 
ness, very large combativeness. He would be a violent and dangerous 
man when the inferior feelings were excited. Exceedingly sensual— 
very fond of children, which probably would be the only thing that 
softened him. Ideality, the best part of the anterior lobe; he would 
enjoy sensual love songs.” 


178 


The cranium of Eugene Aram in the Royal College 
of Surgeons’ Museum, 


(Photo. by A. P. Monger, London.) 


Appendix III. 


Secretiveness was found by all to be large, which entirely corres- 
ponds to Aram’s character.” 

Inglis’s own summary is as follows:—An examination of the intel- 
lectual faculties would not elevate the man in our opinion as a 
profound philosopher. Eugene’s skull wants depth and breadth of 
the reflecting faculties; for although they are well marked, they want 
expanse. His defence, though admirable so far as it went, was not 
sufficiently comprehensive. Had his secretiveness and self-esteem 
been overcome by his reflecting organs, he might have confessed a par- 
ticipation in the gain and thus in the guilt, and have cleared himself 
in a degree in respect to the murder. . . . Perhaps his adhesive- 
ness and benevolence might prevent him giving the evidence he could 
have done against Houseman and Terry (!) 

(V.B.—After conviction Aram was incompetent to testify; he did 
not get the chance to turn ‘‘ approver,’’ like Houseman.—E. R. W.) 


OSTEOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS ON THE SKULL oF EvuGENE ARAM IN THE 
CATALOGUE OF THE RoyAL COLLEGE or SuRGEOoNS’ Museum. 


(Skull No. 337, renumbered 469 i.) 

‘*The cranium is small and almost feminine in appearance, but the 
mastoid processes are long, and the glabella well developed. There is 
considerable post-coronal depression. . . . The condition tends to 
confirm this history (i.e., going to establish the identity of the skull), 
as it has evidently never been macerated. The end of the right mas- 
toid process has been cut off, probably in removing the head from the 
body.”’ 

In conversation with an attendant of the osteological section of the 
museum, I ascertained the following further particulars. The subject 
was not a young man; years older than the neighbouring Jonathan 
Wild (executed when forty-three), as was shown by the post-coronal de- 
pression and the absence of all back teeth; the mastoid process by its 
development showed the subject to have been muscular (this is the 
bony projection behind the ears, the phrenological organ of com- 
bativeness). His cranial capacity was only 1400 cc., whereas the 
average male’s is 1570 cc., as against 1378 for a female (Dixon Mann, 
‘‘Forensic Medicine,’’ 1908, ed. p. 82). The skull was presented by 
the Rev. John Walker, grandson of Dr. Hutchinson, of Knares- 


brough. 2 
We have seen how the skull passed through various hands after 


the death of Dr. Hutchinson. That gentleman had pointed it out to 
the Rev. Mr. Dalton as Eugene’s, as also to a Mr. Richardson, and 
it was in Dalton’s possession when discussed by the British Associa- 
tion. Scatcherd and Inglis both describe the skull as sawn asunder 
and clasped vogether by two hinges. These, Mrs. Pickard told 
Scatcherd, were put on by her husband for Dr. Hutchinson. The 
skull No. 337, or 469 i as it is now numbered, exhibits these very 
peculiarities, sufficient to raise a strong presumption of its authenticity. 
The indentations, caused by the iron bands of the gibbet, observed by 


179 


Eugene Aram. 


Inglis, can still be seen. This, with the fact that the skull has never 
been macerated, the exposure on the gibbet having achieved the same 
effect, should remove all doubts. The scarce pamphlet of Inglis, quot- 
ing from a letter of Scatcherd, proves the identity at length. 


Lzrrers FROM PrRorrssok KEITH TO THE AUTHOR RESPECTING THE 
SKULL oF DANIEL CLARK 


E. R. Watson, Esq. 
é Royal College of Surgeons of England, 
Lincoln’s Inn Fields, London, W.C. 


26th day of March, 1912. 
My Dear Sir, 


Ist. As to the fragment of skull: what you have is about 2-5 of the 
left parietal bone. 

i, Condition and staining suggests burial in blackish mould and 
quite of the consistency and preservation of a bone, which dates back 
to the eighteenth century. 

ii. The bone has been broken after the skull was already stained 
by the burial, for (the lines) f-g, d-e, and a-h are unstained, and there- 
fore more recent fractures made after exhumation. 

iii. The fracture a-b-c was done before the burial. This fissure may 
have been the prolongation of a severe occipital fracture. 

iv. It is clear that the fragment is part of a skull, which had been 
rivetted after it was artificially broken—perhaps to examine the 
interior (see rivet marks). 

v. The fragment shows (1) from ‘‘i.’’ to ‘‘g.’’ the temporal suture, 
probably what Taylor means by ‘‘ indentation of temporal”’ (referring 
to Taylor’s ‘‘ Medical Jurisprudence ’’). (2) As I have said, a fissure 
or fracture, stained as deep as is the bone (a-b-c) probably may be 
Taylor’s ‘‘ traces of fracture.” 

The sagittal suture is quite open; therefore the person was probably 
under forty. If I were asked to guess the age, the thickness, &c., 
would make me suggest about thirty years. 

It is a man’s skull. Thickness and muscular impressions. His head 
was rather small, but same shape, evidently, as Eugene’s. 

(Here follow observations on another bone, but it turns out not io 
have been human; it did not come from official custody.) 
; Yours very truly, 
A. Keira. 


; 29th day of March, 1912. 
My Dear Sir. 


If my note is of any service to you, it is freely at your disposal. 
(Here follow more observations on the non-human bone, sub- 
mtteed with Clark’s.) 
Yours faithfully, 
A. Kaurrn. 
E. BR. Watson, Esq. 


180 


Part of left parietal bone of Daniel Clark, now in the 
possession of E. M. Beloe, Esq., Coroner for King’s 
Lynn. The letters correspond with those of a sketch, 
by Professor Keith, in the author’s possession. 


(Photo. by Boughton, King’s Lynn.) 


Appendix III. 


30th day of March, 1912. 

Dear Sir, rine 

A bone will lie in a damp cave for over a century and still be 
as well preserved as the specimen, said to be Clark’s. But the history 
you give, buried for thirteen years, fits better with the condition in 
your specimen. All the appearances are consistent with the bone being 
Clark’s. 

Yours faithfully, 


A. Kairu. 
E. R. Watson, Esa. 


(A letter from Captain Twyford, Governor of York Castle, to F. W. 
Joy, authenticates this fragment, which is now, with the letter, in 
Mr. E. M. Beloe’s possession.) 


APPENDIX IV. 


ARAM’S LETTER TO THE REV. MR. COLLINS, VICAR OF 
KNARESBROUGH 


Anima fugit indignata sub umbras. 


Reverend Sir,—I always believed any relation of my life of no 
manner of importance or service to the public, and I never either had 
any temptation or desire to appear in print. The publications ushered 
to the world, which I had ever little concern for, and have as little 
now, by persons in my situation, always appeared to me only calcu- 
lated for the advantage of the Press, and for the amusement of a very 
_idle curiosity. But to oblige you, and not to forget my promise, I 
will recollect as many particulars as 1 can upon so sudden a notice, 
and the small pittance of time which I have left me will allow. 

I was born at Ramsgill, a little village in Netherdale, in 1704. My 
maternal relations had been substantial and reputable in that dale for 
a great many generations. My father was of Nottinghamshire, a 
gardener, of great abilities in botany, and an excellent draughtsman. 
He served the Right Rev. the Bishop of London (Dr. Crompton) with 
great approbation, which occasioned his being recommended to Newby, 
in this county, to Sir Edward Blackett, whom he served in the capacity 
of a gardener, with much credit to himself and satisfaction to that 
family, for above thirty years. Upon the decease of that Baronet, he 
went and was retained in the service of Sir John Ingilby, of Ripley, 
Bart., where he died—respected when living and lamented when dead. 

My father’s ancestors were of great antiquity and consideration in 
this county, and originally British. Their surname is local, for there 
were formerly lords of the town of Haram, or Aram, on the southern 


181 


Eugene Aram. 


bank of the Tees, and opposite to Stockburn in Bishopric, and appear 
in the records of St. Mary’s, at York, among the charitable names, 
early and considerable benefactors to that abbey. They, many cen- 
turies ago, removed from these parts, and were settled, under the fee 
of the Lords Mowbray, in Nottinghamshire, at Aram. or Aram Park, 
in the neighbourhood of Newark-upon-Trent, where they were possessed 
of no less than three knight’s fees, in the reign of Edward III. Their 
lands, I find not whether by purchase or marriage, came into the hands 
of the present Lord Lexington. While the name existed in this 
county, some of them were several times High Sheriffs for this county, 
and one was Professor of Divinity, if I remember right, at Oxford, and 
died at York. The last of the chief of this family was Thomas Aram, 
Esquire, sometime of Gray’s Inn, and one of the Commissioners of the 
Salt-office, under the late Queen Anne. He married one of the 
co-heiresses of Sir John Coningsby, of North-Mims, in Hertfordshire. 
His seat, which was his own estate, was at the Wild, near Shenley, 
in Hertfordshire, where I saw him, and where he died without issue. 

Many more anecdotes are contained in my papers, which are not 
present, yet these perhaps may be thought more than enough, as they 
may be considered rather as ostentatious than pertinent; but the first 
was always far from me. 

I was removed very young, along with my mother, to Skelton, near 
Newby; and thence, at five or six years old, my father making a little 
purchase in Bondgate, Ripon, his family went thither. There I went 
to school, where I was made capable of reading the Testament, which 
was all I was ever taught, except—a long time after (about a month), 
in a very advanced age for that—with the Reverend Mr. Alcock, of 
Burnsall. 

After this, at about thirteen or fourteen years of age, I went to mv 
father at Newby, and attended him in the family there till the death 
of Sir Ed. Blackett. It was here my propension to literature first 
appeared, for, being always of a solitary disposition, and uncommonly 
fond of retirement and books, I enjoyed here all the repose and 
opportunity I could wish. My study at that time was engaged in 
the mathematics. I know not what my acquisitions were, but I am 
certain my application was at once intense and unwearied. I found 
in my father’s library there, which contained a very great number 
of books in most branches—Kersey’s Algebra, Leyburn’s ‘‘ Cursus 
Mathematicus,’’ Ward’s ‘‘ Young Mathematician’s Guide,’’ Harris’s 
Algebra, &c., and a great many more; but these being the books in 
which I was ever most conversant, I remember them the better. I was, 
even then, equal to the management of quadratic equations and their 
geometrical constructions. After we left Newby I repeated the same 
studies in Bondgate, and went over all parts I had studied before, I 
believe not unsuccessfully. 

Being about the age of sixteen, I was sent for to London, being 
thought, upon examination by Mr. Christopher Blackett, qualified to 
serve him as a book-keeper in his accompting house. Here, after a 
year or two’s continuance, I took the smallpox, and suffered severely 
under that distemper. My mother was so impatient to see me, that 


182 


Appendix IV. 


she was very near upon a journey to London, which I, upon an invita- 
tion from my father, prevented by going to her. 

At home, with leisure upon my hands, and a new edition of authors 
to those brought me from Newby, I renewed not only my mathematical 
studies, but began and prosecuted others of a different turn, with much 
avidity and diligence. These were poetry, history, and antiquities— 
the charms of which quite destroyed all the heavier beauties of numbers 
and lines, whose applications and properties I pursued no longer, except 
occasionally in teaching. 

I was, after some time employed in this manner, invited into Nether- 
dale, my native air—where I first engaged in a school—where I married, 
unfortunately enough for me, for the misconduct of the wife which that 
place afforded me has procured me this place—this prosecution— 
this infamy—and this sentence. 

During my marriage here, perceiving the deficiencies of my education, 
and sensible of my want of the learned languages, and prompted by an 
irresistible covetousness of knowledge, I commenced a series of studies! 
in that way, and undertook the tediousness, the intricacies, and the 
labour of grammar. I selected Lilly from the rest, all which I got and 
repeated by heart. The task of repeating it all every day was im- 
possible while I attended the school, so I divided it into portions—by 
which method it was pronounced thrice every week—and this I per- 
formed for years. 

Next I became acquainted with Camden’s Greek Grammar, which I 
also repeated in the same manner—memoriter. Thus instructed, I 
entered upon the Latin classics, whose allurements repaid my assidui- 
ties and my labours. I remember to have at first hung over five lines 
for a whole day; and never in all the painful course of my reading, 
left any one passage, but I did, or thought I did, perfectly comprehend. 

After I had accurately perused every one of the Latin classics, 
historians, and poets, I went through the Greek Testament—first pars- 
ing every word as I proceeded: next I ventured upon Hesiod, Homer, 
Theocritus, Herodotus, and Thucydides, and all the Greek tragedians—a 
tedious labour was this—but my former acquaintance with history 
lessened it extremely, because it threw a light upon many passages, 
which without that assistance must have appeared obscure. 

In the midst of these literary pursuits, a man and horse from my 
good friend, William Norton, Esquire, came for me from Knares- 
brough, along with that gentleman’s letter, inviting me thither; and 
accordingly I repaired thither, in some part of the year 1734, and was, 
I believe, well accepted and esteemed there. Here, not satisfied with 


1I have before me Aram’s copy of Marsilius Ficinus’s Latin Edition of Plato(Lugduni 
MDLVIL). He bas marginally annotated the ‘‘Phedo,” ‘‘Charmides,” ‘Timzus,” 
and ‘‘De legibus.” The notes progress from such simpletcomments as ‘‘definitio,” 
“<confutatio,” to paraphrases of the text of a more or less elaborate sort, illustrating, 
perhaps, his increasing grasp of his author, and mastery of the Latin. They are 
supplementary to the printed marginal notes. I select a few at random. “ Quibus 
causis corporis et anime salus adipiseitur.” (Timzus), ‘“Judicium generale post 
mortem,” (Pheedo) ; “ Dei natura (xli. Isaiah, 9), et providentia (xl. Isaiah, 22)” . . 

“ Judicium Dei in malos” (De legibus). These awful truths, confirmed by ‘‘ Proofs of 
Holy Writ,” are rather at variance with the commentator’s practices. 


183 


Eugene Aram. 


my former acquisitions, I prosecuted the attainment of the Hebrew, 
and with undefatigable diligence. I had Buxtorff’s Grammar—but that 
being perplexed, or not explicit enough—at least, in my opinion at 
that time—I collected no less than eight or ten different Hebrew 
grammars; and here one very often supplied the omissions of the 
others; and this was, I found, of extraordinary advantage. Then I 
bought the Bible in the original, and read the whole Pentateuch— 
with an intention to go through the whole of it, which I attempted, 
but wanted time. 

In April, I think the 18th, 1744,2 I went to London. (The 
reasons shall: follow.) Here I agreed to teach the Latin and writing 
for the Rey. Mr. Painblanc, in Piccadilly; which he, along with a 
salary, returned, by teaching me French, wherein I observed the pro- 
nunciation the most formidable part—at least to me, who had never 
before known a word of it; but this my continual application evéry 
night, or other opportunity, overcame, and I soon became a tolerable 
master of French. I remained in this situation two years and above. 

Some time after this I went to Hays,® in the capacity of writing 
master, and served a gentleman there, since dead, and staid after that 
with a worthy and reverend gentleman. 

I succeeded in several other places in the south of England, and all 
that while used every occasion of improvement. I then transcribed 
the Acts of Parliament to be registered in Chancery; and after went 
down to the F'ree School at Lynn. 

From my leaving Knaresbrough to this period is a long interval, 
which I had filled up with the farther study of history and antiquities, 
heraldry, and botany—in the last of which I was very agreeably enter- 
tained, there being so extensive a display of Nature. I well knew 
Turneforte,* Ray, Miller, Linneus, &c. I made frequent visits to 
the Botanic Gardens at Chelsea, and traced pleasure through a thousand 
fields; at last, few plants, domestic or exotic, were unknown to me. 
Amidst all this I ventured upon the Chaldee and Arabic—and with a 
desire to understand them, supplied myself with Erpenius, Chapelhow, 
and others. But I had not time to obtain any great knowledge of the 
Arabic; the Chaldee I found easy enough, because of its connection 
with the Hebrew. 

I then investigated the Celtic, as far as possible in all its dialects— 
begun collections, and made comparisons between that, the English, the 
Latin, the Greek, and even the Hebrew. I had made notes, and com- 
pared above three thousand of these together, and found such a sur- 
prising affinity, even beyond my expectation or conception, that I was 
determined to proceed through the whole of these languages, and form 
a comparative Lexicon, which I hoped would account for numberless 
vocables in use with us, the Latins, and the Greeks, before concealed 
and unobserved. This, or something like it, was the design of a 
clergyman of great erudition in Scotland; but it must prove abortive, 


2 Aram means 1745, the year (old style) 1744 ended on 25th March. 
3Said to be Hayes in Middlesex. 
4 Joseph Pitton de Tournefort, 1656-1708. 


184 


Appendix IV, 


for he died before he executed it, and most of my books and papers are 
now scattered and lost. 

Something is expected as to the affair upon which I was committed, 
to which I say, as mentioned in my examination, that all the plate 
of Knaresbrough, except the watches and rings, were in Houseman’s 
possession—as for me I had nothing at all. My wife knows that 
Terry had the large plate, and that Houseman himself took both that 
and the watches, at my house, from Clark’s own hand, and if she will 
not give this in evidence for the town, she wrongs both that and her 
own conscience ; and if it is not done soon, Houseman will prevent her. 
She likewise knows Terry’s wife had some velvet—and, if she will, can 
testify it. She deserves not the regard of the town if she will not. 
That part of Houseman’s evidence, wherein he said I threatened him, 
was absolutely false—for what hindered him, when I was so long 
absent and far distant? I must need observe another thing to be 
perjury in Houseman’s evidence, in which he said he went home from 
Clark—whereas, he went straight to my house, as my wife can also 
testify, if I be not believed. Evcrne ARAM. 


APPENDIX VY. 


LITERARY REMAINS. 
(1) PROSE PIECES. 
THE MELSUPPER AND SHOUTING THE CHURN. 


These rural entertainments and usages were formerly more general 
all over England than they are at present; being become by time, 
necessity, or avarice, complex, confined, and altered. They are com- 
monly insisted upon by the reapers as customary things, and a part 
of their due for the toils of the harvest, and complied with by their 
masters perhaps more through regards of interests than inclination. 
For should they refuse them the pleasures of this much expected 
time, this festal night, the youth especially, of both sexes, would 
decline serving them for the future, and employ their labours for 
others, who would promise them the rustic joys of the harvest supper, 
mirth and music, dance and song. ‘These feasts appear to be the 
telics of Pagan ceremonies, or of Judaism, it is hard to say which, 
and carry in them more meaning and are of far higher antiquity 
than is general’ apprehended. It is true the subject is more curious 
than important, and 1 believo altogether untouched; and as it seems 
to be little understood, has been as little adverted to. I do not 
remember it to have been so much as the subject of conversation. 
Let us make then a little excursion into this field, for the same reason 
men sometimes take a walk. Its traces are discoverable at a very 
great distance of time from our, nay, seem as old as a sense of joy 
for the benefit of plentiful harvests and human gratitude to the eternal 


185 


; Eugene Aram. 


Creator for His munificence to men. We hear it under various names 
in different counties, and often in the same county; as, melsupper, 
churn supper, harvest supper, harvest home, feast of in-gathering, &c. 
And perhaps this feast had been long observed and by different tribes 
of people, before it became perceptive with the Jews. However, 
let that be as it will, the custom very lucidly appears from the follow- 
ing passages of S. S., Exod. xxiii. 16, ‘‘ And the feast of harvest, the 
first fruits of thy labours, which thou hast sown in the field.’”’ And 
its institution as a sacred rite is commanded in Levit. xxiii. 39: 
‘‘When ye have gathered in the fruit of the land, ye shall keep a 
feast to the Lord.”’ 

The Jews then, as is evident from hence, celebrated the feast of 
harvest, and that by precept; and though no vestiges of any such 
feast either are or can be produced before these, yet the oblation 
of the Primitie, of which this feast was a consequence, is met; with 
prior to this, for we find that, ‘‘ Cain brought of the fruit of the 
ground an offering to the Lord.’’—Gen. iv. 3. 

Yet this offering of the first-fruits, it may well be supposed, was 
not peculiar to the Jews, either at the time of, or after, its estab- 
lishment by their legislator; neither the imitation of the Jews, or 
rather by tradition from their several partriarchs, observed the right 
of offering their Primitie, and of solemnising a festival after it, in 
religious acknowledgment for the blessing of the harvest, though that 
acknowledgment was ignorantly misapplied in being directed to a 
secondary, not the primary, fountain of this benefit—namely, to Apollo 
or the Sun. 

For Callimachus affirms that these Primitiz were sent by the people 
of every nation to the temple of Apollo in Delos, the most distant 
that enjoyed the happiness of corn and harvest, even by the Hyper- 
boreans in particular, Hymn to Apol., Oi pév ro Kaddpnv Te Kal lepd 
dpdyuara mpGroa acaxtwy (popéovov).+ *‘ Bring the sacred sheafs, and the 
mystic offerings.”’ 

Herodotus also mentions this annual custom of the Hyperboreans, 
remarking that those of Delos talk of JIpd évdedceudva ev Kadaun 
mupoy é€& ‘VepBopéwv, ‘‘Holy things tied up in sheafs of wheat 
conveyed from the MHyperboreans.”? ‘And the Jews, by the 
command of their law, offered also a sheaf: ‘‘And shall reap the 
harvest thereof, then ye shall bring a sheaf of the first fruits of the 
harvest unto the priest.’ 

This is not introduced in proof of any feast observed by the people 
who had harvests, but to show the universality of the custom of offer- 
ing the Primitie, which preceded this feast. But yet it may be 
looked upon as equivalent to a proof; for as the offering and the feast 
appear to have been always and intimately connected in countries 


* Aram unquestionally derived this and the following quotation from 
Dodd’s Callimachus [1756] p. 118 note. The very free translation and the 
error of writing dcaxvwy for doraxvwy establish this. Popéovow, necessary 
to complete the sense, is omitted by both Dodd and Aram. Callim., 
“Hymn to Delos,” 283-84. 


2 Herod. iv., 33. 
186 


Appendix V. 


affording records, so it is,more than probable they were connected 
too in countries which had none, or none that ever survived to our 
times. An entertainment and gaiety were still the concomitants of 
these rites, which with the vulgar, one may pretty truly suppose, 
were esteemed the most acceptable and material part of them, and a 
great reason of their having subsisted through such a length of ages, 
when both the populace and many of the learned too, have lost sight 
of the object to which they had been originally directed. This, 
among many other ceremonies of the heathen worship, became disused 
in some places and retained in others, but still continued declining after 
the promulgation of the Gospel. In short, there seems great reason 
to conclude that this feast, which was once sacred to Apollo, was con- 
stantly maintained, when a far less valuable circumstance, i.e., shout- 
ing the churn, is observed to this day by the reapers, and from so 
old an era; for we read of this acclamation, Isa. xvi. 9: Ci al kitsich 
ve al kitserach ha yadid naphal, ‘‘ For the shouting for thy summer 
fruits and for thy harvest is fallen’’; and again, ver. 10: Ubaccramin 
lo yerunnan lo yirsa ha yadad hishcati lo, ‘‘ And in the vi.eyards 
there shall be no singing, their shouting shall be no shouting.’’ Hence 
then, or from some of the Pheenician colonies, is our traditionary 
‘‘shouting the churn.” But it seems these Orientals shouted both 
for joy of their harvest of grapes and of corn. We have no quantity 
of the first to occasion so much joy as does our plenty of the last; 
and I do not remember to have heard whether their vintages abroad 
are attended with this custom. Bread or cakes compose part of the 
Hebrew offering (Levit. xxiii. 13), and a cake thrown upon the head 
of the victim was also part of the Greek offering to Apollo (see 
Hom. Il. a), whose worship was formerly celebrated in Britain, where 
the May-pole yet continues one remain of it. This they adorned with 
garlands on May-day, to welcome the approach of Apollo, or the sun, 
towards the north, and to signify that those flowers were the product 
of his presence and influence. But, upon the progress of Christianity, 
as was observed above, Apollo lost his divinity again, and the adoration 
/of his deity subsided by degrees. Yet so permanent is custom that this 
rite of the harvest supper, together with that of the Maypole (of which 
last see Voss.3 de Orig. ac. Prog. Idolatr. 1, 2), have been preserved 
in Britain ; and what had been anciently offered to the god, the reapers 
as prudently eat up themselves. 

At last the use of the meal of the new corn was neglected, and 
the supper, so far as meal was concerned, was made indifferently of 
old or new corn, as was most agreeable to the founder. And here 
the usage itself accounts for the name of Mellsupper (where mel 
signifies meal, or else the instrument called with us a Mell, where- 
with antiquity reduced their corn to meal in a mortar, which still 
amounts to the same thing) for provisions of meal, or of corn in 
furmity, &c., composed by far the greatest part in these elder and 
country entertainments, perfectly conformable to the simplicity of 
those times, places, and persons, however meanly they may now be 


3 Gerard John Voss, b. 1577, d. 1649; the work is ‘‘ Vossius, de origine ac progressu 


idolatrie,” 1641, Amsterdam. 
187 


Eugene Aram. 


looked upon, And as the harvest was last concluded with several 
preparations of meal, or brought to be ready for the mell, this term 
became, in a translated signification, to mean the last of other things, 
as when a horse comes last in the race they often say in the north, 
“He has got the mell.” 

All the other names in this country festivity sufficiently explain 
themselves except Ohurn-supper, and this is entirely different from 
Mel-supper ; but they generally happen so near together that they 
are frequently confounded. The Churn-supper was always provided 
when all was shorn, but the mel-supper after all was got in. And it was 
called the ‘‘ Churn-supper’’ because, from immemorial times, it was 
customary to produce in a churn a great quantity of cream, and to 
circulate it by dishfuls to each of the rustic company, to be eaten 
with bread. And here sometimes very extraordinary execution has 
been done upon cream. And though this custom has been disused in 
many places, and agreeably commuted for by ale, yet it survives still, 
and that about Whitby and Scarborough in the east, and round 
about Gisburn, &c., in Craven, in the west. But, perhaps, a century 
or two more will put an end to it, and both the thing and name shall 
die. Vicarious ale is now more approved, and the tankard almost 
everywhere politely preferred to the churn. 

This Churn (in our provincial pronounciation Kern) is the Hebrew 
Kern, or Keren, from its being circular like most horns; and it 
is the Latin corona, named so either from radii, resembling horns, as 
on some very antient coins, or from its encircling the head; so a 
ring of people is called corona. Also the Celtic Koren, Keren, or 
corn, which continues according to its old pronounciation in Corn- 
wall, &c., and our modern word horn is no more than this; the 
antient hard sound of & in corn being softened into the aspirate A, 
as has been done in numberless instances. 

The Irish Celtz also call a round stone, clogh orene, where the 
variation is merely dialectic. Hence, too, our crane berries, 1.e., 
round berries, from this Celtic adjective, crene, round. 


NV.B.—The quotations from Scripture in Aram’s original MS. were 
both in the Hebrew character, and their value in English sounds. 


; 


AN ESSAY TOWARDS. A LEXICON UPON AN ENTIRELY 
NEW PLAN. 


(From the original formerly in the possession of the Rev. Jas. Tate.) 


To attempt the work of a Lexicon, and at a time, too, when so many, 
and those so considerable, have already appeared, valuable for the 
excellence of their composition, and respectable for the authority of 
their authors, may possibly be looked upon as unnecessary, if not 
altogether a supernumerary labour. 

How far such an opinion may be just, or premature, will be better 
elucidated by a very cursory perusal of, and a little deliberation upon, 

188 


Appendix V. 


the subsequent plan. And this, whatever appearances of novelty 
it may be attended with, however strongly the current of general 
opinion opposes it, is neither so recent nor so foreign to the service of 
letters, as by some may be imagined. 

Before I open the plan I have to offer to the literati, and upon which 
the superstructure is intended to be built, it may perhaps not be 
improper here to throw out a few preliminary reflections which have 
occurred to me in the course of my reading, a part of which are these 
that follow. 

All our lexicographers, a very few excepted, for aught I have 
adverted to, have been long employed, and have generally contented 
themselves, too, within the limits of a very narrow field. They seem 
to have looked little farther than the facilitating for youth the attain- 
ment of the Latin and Greek languages, and almost. universally con- 
sider the former as only derived from the latter. These two single 
points seem to have confined their whole view, possessed their whole 
attention, and engrossed all their industry. 

Here and there, indeed, and in a few pieces of this kind, one sees 
interspersed derivations of the English from the Latin, Greek, &c., 
inferred from a conformity of orthography, sound, and signification, 
and all these are very true. But, whence this relation, this con- 
sonancy arose—why it has continued from age to age to us—has 
floated on the stream of time through so long a series of changes, 
and passed to such a distance of place—how ancient words have sur- 
vived conquests, the migrations of people, and the several coalitions 
of nations and colonies, notwithstanding the fluctuating condition of 
language in its own nature—they have neither observed with diligence 
nor explained with accuracy. 

The various etymologists that have fallen into my hands, and 
detained my eye, have not indeed been mistaken in the comparisons 
they have made, or in the uniformity they have observed, between the 
Latin and Greek, and between both those languages and our own; 
but then, their instances have been but short and few, and they have 
failed in accounting for their uniformity; they have indeed sufficiently 
evinced a similarity, but produced no reason for it. It is not to 
be thought of, much less concluded, that the multitude of words among 
us, which are certainly Latin, Greek, and Pheenician, are all the relics 
of the Roman settlements in Britain, or the effects of Greek or 
Pheenician commerce here; no, this resemblance was coeval with the 
primary inhabitants of this island; and the accession of other colonies 
did not obliterate, but confirm this resemblance. and also brought in 
an increase, an accession of other words, from the same original, and 
consequently bearing the same conformity. How nearly related is 
the Cambrian, how nearly the Irish, in numberless instances, to the 
Latin, the Greek, and even Hebrew, and both possessed this con- 
similarity long ago, before Julius Cesar and the Roman invasion. ‘L 
know not but the Latin was more different from itself, in the 
succession of six continued centuries, than the Welsh and Irish, at this 
time, from the Latin. Concerning this agreement of theirs with the 
Latin, Greek, Hebrew—not to mention others. gentlemen of great 


189 


Eugene Aram. : 


penetration, and extraordinary erudition—Dr. Davies* may be con- 
sulted, and the learned Sheringham,® who have both exhibited a 
long and curious specimen of Greek and Cambrian words so exactly 
correspondent in sound and sense, or at least so visibly near, that, 
as far as I know, no gentleman has ever yet questioned, much less 
disputed their alliance. 

This similitude subsisting in common among the Irish, Cambrian, 
Greek, Latin, and even Hebrew, as it has not escaned the notice and 
animadversions of the learned, so their surprise has generally increased 
with their researches, and considerations about it; new circumstances 
of agreement perpetually arising. A great many gentlemen conversant 
in antiquities, and pleased with literary amusements of this kind, have 
ascribed these palpable connexions to conquest, or to commerce; they 
have supposed that the intercourse which, on the latter account, 
anciently subsisted between the Phcenicians. the Greeks, and the 
Britons (see Bochart, Huet, &c.*) occasioned this very remarkable com- 
munity between their languages. Indeed, this accident of commerce 
must needs have had its influence, but then this influence must have 
been weak and partial, not prevalent and extensive. 

Commerce has made, and always will make, continual additions to 
any language, by the introduction of exotic words: yet words of this 
kind, and at that time, would hardly extend a great way; they would 
only affect the maritime parts, and those places frequented by traders, 
and that but feebly, and would be very far from acting or making 
any considerable impression upon the whole body of any language. 

But, even supposing that a number of Greek vocables may have 
found admittance and adoption in Britain, and after this manner, yet 
they could never penetrate into the interior parts of it, into recesses 
remote from the sea; the inhabitants being strangers to all corres- 
pondence, without the temptation, without the inclination to leave 
their natal soil, their own hereditary village, yet is Greek even here; 
we find pure Greek in the Peak itself. whither foreigners, especially 
at the distance of more than twice ten centuries, can scarcely be sup- 
posed to have come. There could have been but few invitations to 
it then, and perhaps there are not many now. 

Since, then, I have taken notice of this almost, community of 
language, observable between the Greek and the Celtic. in some dialect 
of it or other; and have attempted to show it could scarcely be 
imported, in the manner so generally believed, it seems incumbent 
upon me to offer a more probable conjecture—if it is a conjecture—how 
at has taken place, which is the subject of the following dissertation. 

I must here intreat such candid literary gentlemen as may honour 
these sketches with a perusal, to reflect a moment, that J have neither 
books, papers, nor any other material to assist me—every quotation, 
and all I produce, must be entirely derived from memory alone, and 


4 John Davies, D.D. (1570 ?-1644), lexicographer, see D.N.B. 
5 Robert Sheringham (1602-1678), royalist divine, see D.N.B. 


6 Samuel Bochart, French Protestant etymologist (1599-1667). Peter Daniel Huet, 
Bishop of Avranches (1630-1721). For both see Firmin-Didot’s “N ouvelle Biographie. 


190 


Appendix V. 


I beg them to make some generous allowances for the inaccuracies I 
fall into—unavoidable in: this sitwation. 

After what has been produced as prefatory, it is now time, if it 
may not be thought it was so before, to exhibit the plan I mentioned, 
not attempted in confidence of my own, but to excite superior abilities 
to think farther, and for the farther illustration and service of letters, 
and submitted with the greatest deference to the learned, and with the 
extremest diffidence of myself. 

It is this—that the ancient Celte, by the numberless vestiges left 
behind them, in Gaul, Britain, Greece, and all the western parts of 
Europe, appear to have been, if not the aborigines, at least their suc- 
cessors, and masters, in Gaul, Britain, and the west ; that their language, 
however obsolete, however mutilated, is at this day discernible in all 
those places which that victorious people conquered and retained ; 
that it has extended itself far and wide, visibly appearing in the 
ancient Greek, Latin, and English, of all of which it included a very 
considerable part; and, indeed, it still unquestionably forms a most 
important ingredient in all the languages of Europe; it emerges in 
the names of springs, torrents, rivers, woods, hills, plains, lakes, seas, 
mountains, towns, cities, and innumerable other local appellations of 
very remote antiquity, many of which have never, that I know of, 
been accounted for—that it is even now partially considered as a 
language, in some of its dialects—in the declining remains of it, at least 
—still dispersed among the Irish, in Armorica, or Basse-Bretagne, in 
St. Kilda, in Cantabria, or Biscay, and in the mountains of Wales; 
that much of it is still extant in the works of our earlier poets and 
historians; and much is yet living upon the tongues of multitudes 
(inter Rura Brigantum) in Cumberland, &c., unknown and unobserved, 
as, I hope, the succeeding exercises will make apparent; that the 
original of both the Latin and the Greek is, in a great measure, Celtic ; 
that the same Celtic, which, polished by Greece and refined by Rome, 
only with dialectic variation, flowed from the lips of Virgil, and 
thundered from the mouth of Homer. 

The design, then, of all this is to exhibit and illustrate these con- 
nexions. 

After having proceeded thus far, and so often reiterated Celte and 
Celtic, it is high time to come to an explanation of these words, and 
enumerate the people to whom they have been usually applied. The 
Celte, then, were confessedly Scythians or Tatars, the posterity of 
Gomer (the grandson of Noah), and, agreeably to the name of their 
patriarch, called themselves, in their own language, Oimmeri, Cummeri, 
or contractedly, Oimbri; and the Welch, to this day, call themselves 
Cummeri, whence Cumberland, pointing out very lucidly their extrac- 
tion by their name. But what becomes of Celte in all this? And 
why were these Cimmeri denominated Celtw? As they were Tatars 
or Scythians, and both their name, country, and original at first 
unknown; and, it being observed by the people they invaded, that 
they were all or mostly horsemen, and of great celerity, the Greeks, 
almost the only historians of early ages, very naturally distinguished 
these Cimmerians, or Gomerians, by the name of Keletes, Celta, 


191 


Eugene Aram. 


i.e., light horsemen. They made several very terrible irruptions into 
the fairest parts of Asia, and thence into Europe and back again, 
like a retiring tide, under the conduct of Brennus, to the number of 
150,000. Callimachus relates that the origin of the temple of Diana, 
at Ephesus, was owing to a little statue of that goddess, which these 
Cimmerians erected in the hollow of a tree, while their armies and 
depredations, under Ligdamis their captain, wasted Asia. Their 
migrations were frequent and noted. For, obliged by real or imaginary 
necessity, incited by avarice, or stimulated only by a spirit of war, 
they became often vexatious to one another, and always formidable to 
their neighbours. They also in another prodigious swarm poured out 
of Tartary, about 950 years after the Flood; and made another dreadful 
irruption, under Alacon, their leader, into the Greater Armenia, and 
in a little space made themselves masters of Pontus, Cappadocia, 
Phrygia, and the greater part of the Lesser Asia, where, as in several 
other countries, continued a great many memorials of their name and 
conquests. But Phrygia seems to have been their principal residence, 
and there they have been most distinguished. 

They had various appellations imposed upon them, as Gigantes, and 
Titanes, both signifying sprung from the earth; in this, referring to 
the obscurity of their origin. Of this eminent people was Saturn, 
he himself was a Cimmerian, and passed, one may believe, not 
unattended into Italy, upon some disagreement with Jupiter, his son. 
The body of these Cimmerians or Celie, which is but an adventitious 
name, the time not ascertained, proceeded far into Europe, even 
into Britain, and its islands, &c. And, that the name of Cimmeri 
or Cimori was also remembered in Gaul, as well as Britain, is clear; 
for the soldier who was sent for the execution of Caius Marius the 
consul, is by some historians called a Gaul, by others a Oimber, which 
two names, as is evident from hence, were esteemed synonymous, and 
indifferently applied to the same person.7 There is also the Oimbric- 
Chersonese (i.e., Jutland), &c., but these Cimmerians scarcely advanced 
together, and at once, but gradually, and time after time, established 
their settlements, where and as they could. Their government was 
the oldest known, 7.e., it was patriarchal; and so it remained in 
Scotland till within our own memories. Afterwards, there was 
absolute coalition, in many nations of this people and their language, 
with those they conquered, and with the colonies from Greece, Tyre, 
Carthage, &c., and theirs, and all of them, a while after this incorpora- 
tion, are found in history under the common name of Celtew. The 
very same accident happened between the Saxons and Britons; and 
also between the Scots and Picts in the north. It can scarcely be 
imagined that the Saxons destroyed all the Britons that escaped not 


’ Here, again, Aram’s authorities do not quite supporthim. In Appian, 
the soldier is described as Tadarns, a late form of Kédrys (see Liddell & 
Scott. In Velleius Paterculus, he is ‘‘ Germanus, qui forte ab imperatore in 
eo bello Cimbrico captus erat”; in Plutarch he is trmeus de Taddrns 7d -yévos 
H KiuBpos (4uporépws yap ioropeira.) Thus Plutarch regarded Celt and Cim- 
brian, as distinct, not synonymous. ‘A Celt or Cimbrian horseman (the 
histories have it both ways).” 


192 


Appendix V. 


into Wales; or, that the Scots extinguished all the race of Picts that 
did not cross the seas. No; ’tis unlikely ; ’tis impossible; these two 
nations united with the two subdued; and became one people, under 
the name of the most predominant. So it was with the Celtce when 
one of themselves, or upon their incorporation with the conquered, 
they became populous and powerful, especially in Greece, their 
principal seat. Colony peopled colony still farther and farther, till 
they with the language they brought along with them from the east 
and Greece, &c., arrived in and about Britain, and whither else we 
ean fix no bounds; as waves departing from one centre swell with a 
wider and wider circumference, wave impelling wave, till at last these 
circles disappear. 

The Greeks, the posterity of Javan, as is generally allowed, and as 
is plain from their name, Iawy, and historical evidence, and by 
the connexions their language has with the Hebrew and Pheenician, 
&c., arrived at first from Asia, and colony after colony peopled Pelopon- 
nesus, the islands of the Archipelago, and those of the Mediterranean, 
and there continued, with no considerable variation of language but 
what was made by time, and what is incident to all, till this inunda- 
tion of these Cimmerians, which they called Celte. Particular appel- 
lations, indeed were annexed to their tribes, but from this difference 
of names in those tribes we must not suspect them to be of different 
extraction; by no means, they were all but portions of the same vast 
body. Their dominions, after their union with the original Greeks, 
became very extensive; and all the north-west parts of Europe were 
from them called Celto-Scythia. 

Bodin,® ’tis true, has affirmed that the name of Celtica was peculiar 
to Gaul; but he is a writer of very inconsiderable authority, and is 
learnedly confuted by Cluverius,? who, in his Germania Antiqua, I 
think in his fourth chapter, shows Celtica included Illyricum, Germany, 
Gaul, Spain, and Britain; and Mr. Irvine,!” a Scots gentleman of 
great abilities, asserts that the colonies of the Celte also covered Italy, 
the Alps, Thessaly, &., and all this I am induced to believe may be 
satisfactorily proved, if by nothing else, yet by the very great con- 
similarity in their languages, when carefully considered in comparison 
with one another, especially in many old local appellatives, which 
have certainly existed before commerce or intercourse could possibly 
be concerned in imposing them. But, because I am unwilling to 


8 Jean Bodin (1530-1596), a prolific writer, especially on witchcraft, demonology, 
lycanthropy, etc. (see Lecky’s ‘‘ Rationalism.”) See ‘‘ Bodini, advocati, Methodus ad 
facitem historiarum Cognitionem,” Parisiis, MDLXVL., pp. 416-423, Aram borrows 
much from him, including the connection of Celt with riding. 


9 Philippi Cluverii ‘‘Germanie Antique,” Liber Primus, p. 24, 1. 4 et seg. (Lugduni 
Batavorum apud Ludovocum Elzevirium, anno MDCXVI). Cluver was born 1580, 
died 1623. 


10 Christopher Irvine, M.D., 1638-1685. See D.N.B. and Chambers’s ‘Eminent 
Scotsmen,” He was eminent, among other things, in philology. The reference is to 
his “‘ Historiz Scoticee Nomenclatura Latino-vernacula,” Edinbruchii, 1583, p. 39. 


N 193 


Eugene Aram. 


convert what was only meant as prefatory into a Lexicon, I must 
supersede the proofs of this, or what I take to be such, till I come 
to treat of the words themselves. Should this be doubted or con- 
tested, and any objections, and those not apparently immaterial, arise, 
or be imagined to arise, in opposition to any particular that has been 
advanced, I humbly apprehend that an accurate examination into this 
plan will never contradict, but support every observation contained 
in these papers. But what will appear most decisive upon this 
head is that unquestionable remains of their language exist at this 
day in countries where their name is entirely forgotten; and what is 
yet more convincing, though probably unsuspected, is, that a very 
great number of topical names, &c., are continually occurring where 
the Celte have penetrated, and been established from time immemorial, 
as in the English, the Latin, and the Greek, &c., which can never be 
investigated from any other original. 

Add to this, that wherever history fails in accounting for’ the 
extraction of any people, or where it is manifestly mistaken, how can 
this extraction be more rationally inferred and determined, or that 
mistake rectified, than from the analogy of languages? Or is not 
this alone sufficiently conclusive, if nothing else was left? Thus 
Cesar, so conspicuous for either Minerva,l1 and whose opinions will 
ever have their proper weight with the learned, asserts that the 
Britons were from Gaul, not so much from their vicinity to one another 
as from the remarkable analogy of their tongue to the Gallic. And 
admit there was not a record left in the world to prove the original of 
our American settlements, I would ask if their language itself, not- 
withstanding many words both now and formerly unknown in England, 
and adopted into it, was not sufficient to prove it? And must not a 
similitude as near, considering the very great distance of time, an 
extensive commerce, the admission of new colonies, the revolutions 
of kingdoms, and the natural inconstancy of languages, equally prove 
an alliance among those in question? The traces of the Celtic, not- 
withstanding the ruins consequent upon all these, have hitherto 
remained indelible. They almost perpetually arise in the geography 
of all the west of Europe; and often in the more confined and topo- 
graphical descriptions. Not a county in Britain, scarce any extent 
of sea or land from Kent to St. Kilda, wherein the most satisfactory 
evidences of this may not be found. The same congruity holds, too, 
in Gaul, Spain, Italy, &c., and a work of this kind, begun with cir- 
cumspection, and conducted with regularity, could not fail of throwing 
great light upon all the languages concerned, and upon the obscurity 
of thousands of local names, and, in short, seems to promise fair to 
contribute as a lamp to the elucidation of many dark antiquities. 

The Greek and Hebrew, then, &., observable in our language, and 
not unnoticed by the learned, and found in recesses where they might 
little be but expected, as will be shown in the course of these remarks, 


ll Aram’s pedantical way of saying that Cesar was as eminent in war as in the arts 
and letters, Minerva, like Athene, being goddess of war and learning. 


194 


Appendix V. 


were not imported by the Pheenician merchants and Greek traders 
only, but entered along ,with the earliest colonies from the east into 
Britain ; after each colony had protruded others through all the inter- 
mediate continent, of which Britain probably was once a part. Not 
that the whole of a people entered into any long migration; I believe 
never. The aged, the infirm, and the youth of either sex, incapable 
of engaging in war, or of enduring the fatigues of travel, of sur- 
mounting the opposition of mountains, forests, and rivers, remained 
a feeble company behind; and certainly retained the same language 
their itinerant countrymen had carried with them, which sometimes 
was very far remote. Hence an almost identity of languages is some- 
times found in places at a great distance from each other; and hence 
that agreement in many vocables between the Greek and the Cambrian 
and the Irish Celtic. Nor is there so much inconsistence as has been 
insinuated, in that immemorial tradition existent among the Welch, 
that they were the descendants of the Greeks. That they came with 
Brutus is not only fabulous, but ridiculous; but that they are of 
Greek extraction perhaps is neither. The tradition is undoubtedly 
false, with regard to the person Brutus; but certainly real as to the 
thing—this Greek extraction. It may be objected, indeed, that this 
is only a tradition; what else could it possibly be? Could they have 
history, annals, and inscriptions before they had letters? Was there 
not also a period wherein Greece herself, afterwards so illustrious for 
arts, was destitute and ignorant of these? Could these then be 
expected in Britain, so far detached from the sources whence Greece 
drew all her science? No; memory, or some rugged uninscribed stone, 
in these obscure and early ages, was the sole register of facts, and 
tradition all their history. 

In the subsequent specimens I have been very prolix; but, as the 
subject had been unattempted before, and seemed so repugnant to the 
general opinion, I supposed there was really some necessity for enlarge- 
ment, that the connexions I had intimated might appear the more 
visible and striking, and leave the less uncertainty upon the mind. 
And I humbly conceive that the congruity among the languages 
adduced here is made as obvious as the nature of the thing is capable 
of, particularly regarding this distance of time, this mutation of king- 
doms, times, and manners, and under such abilities as mine. I cannot 
but beg pardon for some little Oriental introductions in the word 
BEER ; I would very gladly have superseded them had I not believed 
it preferable to refer to the original, and to produce the evidences 
together and at once, that they might possess the force of union. I 
am led to think that very little deliberation upon this subject will be 
required to perceive the utility of it; and but a small acquaintance 
with languages, to be sensible of the pertinence of the comparisons. 
I imagine, too, that to a moderate portion of letters and sagacity it 
will soon be clear that the Greek, the Latin, and the Celtic, considered 
and compared together, will abundantly dilucidate one another. And, 
perhaps, the examples to be hereafter produced in support of this plan 
will better evince the reasonableness of it than whole reams employed 


in arguments. 
195 


Eugene Aram. 


EXAMPLES.1 


BEAGLES. 


A Race of hounds, so named for being little; a name perfectly 
agreeable to the primary signification of the Celtic pig, 1.e., little. 
The Greeks anciently used this word too, and in the sense of little, 
of which they seemed to have constituted their muyuawus, te. & 
. dwarf. It still subsists among the Irish, and still in that language 
conveys the idea of little; as Fir-pig, a little man; Bandh-pig, a 
little woman ; Beg-aglach, little fearing. It was almost common in Scot- 
land, in the same acceptation ; for one of the Hebrides is named from 
this cubital people, Dwnie-Beg, %.e., a little hill (see Mr. Irvine), and 
it yet exists in Scotland in the word phillibeg, i.e., a little petticoat. 
And we ourselves retain it in the provincial word eagles, i.e., cowslips, 
a name imposed upon them of old, from the littleness of their flowers. 
(See the Herbals of Gerard and Parkinson.) And our northern word 
Peggy is, properly speaking, applicable to no female as a Christian 
name, but is merely an epithet of size, a word of endearment only. 


Nip. 


Nothing seems more suitable than this Celtic name for this river; 
which, after running a considerable way from its fountain, enters 
again the earth, by a wide and rocky cavern; then taking a sub- 
terranean course of some miles, again emerges to the light by two 
issues, whose waters are immediately united below. This word Nid, 
among the Celte signified under, below, or covered; and so it does 
yet. The Irish Celta say Neth-shin, 1.e., under a place; Nes-sene, 
2.e., @ bird’s nest (and nead, a nest simply), where ¢ is converted 
into 8s, as is common: so the Greek has ydd@ooa, or yAGTTA3 
and so the Germans of their ancient wasser have made watter, 1.e., 
water (vid. Archel).2 This word Nid is very widely diffused, too; 
there is found Mith-isdale or Nidd-isdale, in Scotland; Nid, near 
Knaresbrough, the seat of Francis Trappes, Esq.; both probably 
named from their having been formerly hid in the depth and obscurity 
of woods. MWidum is also found in Glamorganshire; there are the 
rivers Niderus, in Norway, and Nid even in Poland, and Nid also 
appears as the name of a river in Greece, mentioned by Callimachus 
(Hymn to Jupiter) and by Pausanias (in Arcadicis). The Grecian 
Neda rises in Arcadia, and runs into the Sinus-Cyparisseus. It is 
part of the modern words, be-neath, neth-er, and Neth-er-lands. This 


1These examples are, as much as possible, drawn from the Trish, I industriously 
omitting the British, lest it should be thought, as I know it has been sometimes, that 
the Romans left us the words that bear any relation to the Latin, while this can not 
be objected to the Irish, since the Romans never set foot in Ireland. Pardon 
inaccuracies too, since I have had no assistance but from memory.—E. A. 


2 Archeologica Britannica, by Edward Lhyd, M.A. (1670-1709), Oxford, 1707, fol. 
It was never completed. 


196 


Appendix V. 


neath was formerly written nead ; for an epitaph, transcribed from a 
monumental stone at Kirklees, by Dr. Gale, has, 

“Undernead this little steane,”’ 
where the former part of the word under is only explicatory of the 
latter part, nead. This signification of Nid leads to the true and 
original meaning of Shakespeare’s niding, i.e., a person that hides 
himeelf. Mr. Johnson, in his Dictionary, interprets it a coward, 
but that is only its secondary signification, and but true sometimes, 
for a person does not always hide himself through fear. It appears 
to be the radical of the Latin Nidus, nidifico, nidulor, nidificatio, 
and also of the Greek veossos, in the Attic veorrés, pullus 
avium, &c., which all know to be very well hidden; and they bore 
this Greek name, not because they were young, but because they were 
hidden. So, veoccia, or veorr nidus, &c., whence our modern 
word nests. 


Viz. 


This word is, and that precisely enough, the Celtic Vir; its very 
great antiquity and use with the Celte appears in the Irish regal 
proper name, Fergus I., Fergus II.; in our modern surname, Fer- 
gusson; also in the word Pirbolgs (i.e., Viri Belgici), by which the 
old Irish called a colony of the Belgie which settled amongst them. 
And of this word Bolgz, Cesar (Com. lib. 1) and the Romans formed 
the Latin Belge, which, indeed, imports the same, and is the same 
word with the Greek medhaoyo, either from their coming by sea, 
or from their vicinity to it. Pir, in most words into whose composi- 
tion it enters, implies something of ability and strength, as in the Irish 
fertamhwuill, 1.c., a man of an able body; and in the Latin, fortis, 
wirtus, &e. Neither was it infrequent in Gaul; it composes a part 
of Cexsar’s Vircingetoriz, Viridomarus, &c. (Ces. Com. lib. 7, cap. 3, 
&.). The German Celte likewise used it, for it exists with them in 


_ the compound word were-wolf, i.c., 2 man-wolf (vide Verstegan3). 


This wer, in the Latin sense of vir, appears also among the Anglo. 
Saxons; for in the Saxon Pentateuch of Atlfric, the monk, published 
at Oxford, is, ‘‘ And God made them wer-man, i.e., male, &. (Gen. i. 
26). The word man, homo, anciently, as in our modern translation 
of this place, included both sexes, and the Saxons prefixed wer, to 
man, to determine the female sex; hence they wrote wyf-man, which 
by contradiction became wy-man, now softened down to wo-man. 


MaGIstTzER. 


All the explications I have seen of this word appear to me to want 
others; but how natural, easy, and lucid does its original appear from 
the Celtic moighitz, whence the Latin magnus and the Greek péyas, 
great, and tor, dominus, nor has the first of these entirely left us; 
it remains in the northern obsolete word mickle, much or great, as in 
Micklegate, a large street in York. And meg in many places is yet 


2Richard Verstegan’s “A Restitution of Decayed Intelligence, etc.” Quarto, 
Antwerp, 1605, etc. Vide Gentleman’s Magazine, July, 1811. 
197 


Eugene Aram. 


commonly heard, and even ludicrously applied to a very tall woman ; 
it is also used for a huge stone in an erect position. Mr. Camden, I 
think, in Cumberland, takes notice of a tall, upright stone there called 
Long Meg. There is also another high and upright stone near 
Sawley, in our own county, distinguished by this name. And the 
great cannon in Scotland, taken at Mons, the Scots call Mons-Meg. 
It seems a radicalused in common by many of the Celtic nations, 
each agreeable to its dialect. And tor is the Greek and Latin rupavvos 
and tyrannus. 


BEER. 


This word has been one general Oriental name for a well or water, 
and very probably has been transmitted, along with the earliest settle- 
ments, into Europe. It is still found in this island, both in its 
primary and translated signification, 7.e., for water, and for beer. It is 
read, Gen. xxix. 2, &., Va yare ve hinneh—beer ; and in the Chaldee, Va 
chaza ve ha—bera, i.e., ‘‘ He looked, and behold a well.”’ Water was 
the first beverage of mankind, and was, as was undoubtedly natural, 
applied to other drinkables as they were invented, the great simplicity 
of ancient languages and times not directly affording any other term 
than beer. So we apply the word wine, once, perhaps, peculiar to the 
juice of the grape, to liquids extracted from many other fruits, as 
goose-berries, elder-berries, &c. And here, though the copiousness of 
modern languages distinguishes these, which the poverty of the 
ancient did not, or not early, yet they retain the name of wine still. 
Hence beer, though originally a word for water, became expressive of 
some liquors drawn from vegetables, because they became, like water, 
a beverage, and bir is still used for water in some parts of Ireland.4 

In the very same manner the Celtic Zsca, or Uisga, originally signi- 
fying water, was imposed on other liquids; there being at first no 
other, whereby readily to express them, they were called sca, water ; 
so whisky, a liquid used in Scotland, is nothing else but a corruption 
of the ancient Jsca, water; yet it is not simply water. Jsca, too, 
is found in Ireland, in the word usque-bagh,5 i.e., strong, making 
strong water, by way of distinction from common water. 

Beer yet continues in its primary acceptation of a rivulet from a 
spring, or water simply, in the recesses of this country, but little 
frequented ; and in Scotland for water itself. To these places colonies 
and conquests have carried but few innovations; for words annexed to 
things of such frequent use as water, fire, &c., heard mentioned every 
day for years, must necessarily have maintained their ground longer, 
and resisted the shocks of time better, than those but seldom used, 
and as seldom named. Hence about Roxburgh it is usual to ask, 
“ Have you any burn?” i.e., water, simply, meaning ‘in the house cies 
where burn is the Hebrew beer, the final m only terminates the word 
after the taste and genius of the German, and alters nothing. 


4 Bir, the inflection of bior, water; O’Donovans’s edition of O’Reilly’s Trish-English 
Dictionary. Dublin, 1864. 


5bagh, s. m., “strength”; adj. “ trembling,” O'Donovan. 


198 


Appendix V. 


In Netherdale are two torrents named Bierbeck and Doubergill, 
descending from the moors. In the first of these the latter syllable 
beck is only put as explanatory, and as the sense of the prior syllable, 
bier, water, or a rivulet ; it is the same in another torrent in Cumber- 
land, near Longtown, called Bierburn, whero burn in like manner 
explains bier. In Doubergill the last syllable$ gill, an old Irish word 
for water, is only affixed to explain ber, the syllable immediately 
preceding it; and dow in the Celtic implies black, a colour proper to 
this torrent, and contracted from its passage through peat earth and 
morasses; the word Dou-ber-gill, then, in modern English means 
Black-water-gill. 

And even so low as our own times this affixing a word, explaining 
the foregoing, continues, as Hals-haugh-hill, at Ripon, Mickle- 
haugh-hill, near that town, where Aili, a modern word, is only expli- 
catory of haugh and how, a more ancient one for the very same thing. 

And to show that ber, bier, &c., is not confined to these retirements— 
no, nor to Britain—there is the Ver, a rivulet near St. Alban’s, of 
which the Romans formed their Verulamiwm. We have more streams 
possessed of this name also, as Bierburn, near Longtown, running 
into the Esk. There is the Var, too, in France, the /berus, in Spain, 
and the Z'iber, in Italy, all including this ber in their names. Where, 
by the way, 7%, in the Celtic, did, and does at this day, in St. Kilda, 
signify great, and ber is water, or a river: the whole will be the 
great river, a name that sufficiently distinguishes it there, as it is by 
far the greatest river in that part of Italy. I cannot particularly 
recollect whether ber, for water, is in the British, but I suspect it is; 
however, the Britons used aber, for the mouth of a river, except it may 
be thought the Latin aperio. But the Irish retain ber still for a 
water, as Inbher-stainge, a river by Wexford; Inbher-Domhoin, in 
Connacht, i.e., the deep river, domhoin importing deep. Neither is 
the Latin destitute of this ber, in the signification of water too, for of 
kuopos i.e. this seems formed the Roman imber, and it is also the Greek 
verds which last is the modern English wed. 

The old Irish, and our Yorkshire gil, a torrent, or water, is indeed 
the Hebrew gel, i.e., wnda, from the tossing and rolling of the waves. 
And almost all torrents the ancient Irish call gills, as we do at this 
day, from the fury, and rapidity, and rolling of their waters. And 
in Holderness the waters left by the tides in the great hollows of the 
sands are called the guile. And the guile-vat is so called hence, that 
is from the exagitation of the liquor in working, and from the efflor- 
escence of the yeast, like the spume of the sea; both deriving their 
name from the motion and rolling of their parts. 

And from the Hebrew, bir, is our word fairies, fairies mean- 
ing nymphe, or Naiades, they being fontal nymphs. The Irish call 
them not fairies, but by a synonymous word, %.e., gil-veis—water 
nymphs ; and though we do not use veis here, yet they do in the 
more northern counties, and on the borders of Scotland. About Dum- 
fries they call them fay-folk; and in a piece of Mr. Mawer’s of 


6It is the Hebrew gel, i.c., unda, from the rolling and rapidity of most torrents ; 
jt remains in the English also.—E. A. 
199 


Eugene Aram. 


Middleton-tyas, he calls these Nymphs fays, which is the Irish veis. 
And Fairies is ber-veis, 6, v, and f often being used for one another, 
and v being anciently pronounced as w. 


An AppLE-TREB, 7.e., APOLLO’s TREE. 


But, it may at first be thought, what reference this can have to 
Apollo; this is yet to appear. This name in the Danish is, I think, 
eble-traee. The Saxon Pentateuch, before referred to, if 1 remember 
right, has afel, the Irish abhal, and the Welch a consonant word 
whose orthography I forget; and the Dutch, German, &c., are either 
the same, or only varied by kindred letters. Other original of the 
name, though sought for, I have nowhere found. I should have 
suspected it to be a translation of the Latin malwm, but it seems to 
have been in the Celtic before the Celtz were acquainted with Christi- 
anity, or the sacred writings, and when Apollo was better known 
than the consequences of the mortal apple; and they could never name 
it from things and accidents with which they were absolutely un- 
acquainted. Besides, should it be thought the name has any way respect 
to evil, that may as rationally be referred to Apollo as to malwm. 
But be this as it may, the name is certainly very ancient, as ancient 
as heathenism, and the worship of Apollo, from whom it was, though 
not always, distinguished by this name. For it was once one of the 
symbols of that god, and dedicated to his deity; and hence by this 
name, with some inconsiderable variation in different countries, 
delivered down to our times. The name was probably introduced here 
with the worship of Apollo, and by early colonies, and contained its 
name, when the custom that gave rise to it was forgotten. And that 
this is its orginal will be easily deducible from a little reflection on the 
proofs in support of it. The prizes in the sacred games of Apollo 
were the olive crown, apples, parsley, and the pine. Lucian,7 in his 
book of games, affirms apples to have been the reward in the sacred 
games of Apollo. And Curtius,8 on gardens, asserts the same thing. 
It appears also that the apple tree was consecrated to Apollo before 
the Jawrel, for both Pindar9 and Callimachusl0 observe that Apollo 
put not on the laurel till after his conquest of the Python, and he 
first appropriated it to himself on account of his passion for Daphne. 
The victor’s wreath at first was a bough with its apples hanging on it, 
sometimes along with it a branch of lawrel; these antiquity united 
together in the Pythian games. 


? Avaxapots. eon uot de wha Tov lepdy Tod Beov.” The wild olive wreath, 
parsley, and pine are also mentioned here. Solon and Anacharsis are 
discussing the Lycean Appollo. 

; 8 Not the classical Q. Curtius Rufus, but Benedictus Curtius ‘‘ Hortorum 
libri triginta. . . in quibus continetur arborum historia.” Lugduni, 
1560, fol. 

®T cannot trace the passage. 


1 Aram presumably refers to the Hymn to Apollo, of which a translatio 
Ty pelos 1755, by the Rev. William Dodd, another victim of 
ack Ketch. 


200 


Appendix V. 


HAMILTON (MORE PROPERLY HaAmiLpuUN) Hitt. 


A name of very remote antiquity, and imposed upon several hills in 
this country, and it occurs, too, in several other places. I am not able 
to recollect precisely if it remains in the Welch; but if it does not, it 
is probable that it has once existed in it. This name is derived, 
not from the elevation of these hills, but from their figure to the eye; 
which is, as far as I had an opportunity to remark, or inform myself, 
that of half a globe, with its convexity upwards; which has a gradual 
descent, like them, from its summit every way. Now, any hill or 
mountain of such a form the Irish, to this time, called himmel, and 
they imposed this name immediately from their resemblance to the 
appearance of the heavens, considered as to their convexity. And 
that they were considered thus is plain from Ovid’s remark, ‘‘ Con- 
vexaque ceeli,”’ and which from our zenith seems to decline on every 
side, till terminated by the horizon. The Latins called heaven celum, 
from «édov, 7.¢., the hollow, considering it as a concave. But 
the Teutonic, in himmel and hemal, has looked upon them as a cover- 
ing, and the Germans yet call a bed tester, himmel, from its covering 
the bed, and they call the heavens himmel, from their covering the 
earth; and that antiquity looked upon them as a covering is also 
evident from ‘‘Ccelum quod omnia tegit.’”’ Ovid. And the Aither is 
said vestire campos by Virgil. This initial him or hem in himmel is 
the old Saxon helm," only the liquid 7 is dropt, as with us in talk, 
walk, &c., first in pronounciation as with us; afterwards in ortho- 
graphy, as with them. And this word helm, and all its relations, 
ever imply covering; hence helmit, to cover the head, home, to cover 
the family, &c., and in the rwra of this country they commonly call 
a little shed wherein are put instruments of husbandry, a helm. So 
peasehame and house regard the very same thing, implying covering ; 
and so does a sheep-cote, a cottage, and coat, our upper garment, which 
are from the British coed, a wood, the most ancient covering. 

The final 7 in himmel is the radical of the Latin altus, just as the 
Celt ard, high, is that of the Latin arduwus. Himmel, then, signifies 
the lofty covering. The syllable don or dun, mons, that concludes 
Hamildun, is so notorious that it wants no illustration; hence the 
Downs, in Kent, and the hills called Banstead Downs, in Surrey; and 
hence Lugdunum—Batavorum, &c. But one may here observe that 
Himmel was not a name applied to these hills, as to any covering, but 
only as they were thought to resemble the appearance of the sky, 
which is so. 

The hills called Hamilton that I am acquainted with are that on 
which are the races, near Gormire; that near Kirby—Malzeard; one 
near Tadcaster, and another towards Kendal. 


EBoRACcUM. 


If it is evident, as I conclude it is, that Ber or Ver, originally signi- 
fying water or a well, was afterwards applied to the stream flowing 


Tf this Saxon helm is not the Hebrew shell, the skins of beasts, which were the 


ancient covering of mankind, I know not whence it is.— FE. A. 
201 


Eugene Aram. 


from it, or a river, it seems to me to enter into the composition of 
Eboracum Bor here really appears no more than the ancient ber or 
bir, so generally used among the Celte; it is from the Hebrew, 
berer, to cleanse, because water is the natural, universal purifier, and 
bir (Jeremiah vi. 7) is understood as a fountain, and applied there 
very elegantly. If it be said that it is not bir, but Ouse that is 
the name of the river at York, this is true; but if the river do 
not now bear this name, it may fairly be inferred that it has borne 
it formerly ; and that, too, both from its Greek and Latin appellation. 
Besides, the name Ouse is only the Celtic isca, which still signifies a 
river, and, I believe, is pure and original Celtic. They are, then, two 
different names for the same thing, and isca has succeeded to bir. It is 
called here Owse, or Isis, and not Yore, as at Ripon, because of its 
confluence with the Nid and Swale; for Zsis is no more than a redupli- 
cation of Zsca, and contractedly pronounced is is, for isca, isca, which 
has been done in other rivers of Britain, and is a practice familiar 
enough to ancient languages, and that exility of sound in e or 2, in 
ber or bir, a Roman ear or some peculiarity of dialect might easily 
change into a. For the Romans, I believe, seldom, if ever, absolutely 
altered the ancient names of people, cities, rivers, places, &c., but 
often stripped them of some barbarities, smoothed their asperities, and 
gave them a more harmonious pronunciation. The initial letter H 
is a Celtic article, and appears among the Celts, even when situated at 
a great distance from one another, with no material alteration; as the 
Iberus, in Spain, Zsurium, with us, &c. 

The Brigantes were also called Vicci, from their being collected in 
little villages, and hence wic is a very usual termination in many of 
them. Ac in Hboracum seems nothing but the Celtic, wic, vic, wic, or 
vig, which is the radix of the Latin vicus, viculus, &c., and not 
differenced but by the termination us, which means nothing. It is 
very like the Greek mayos also, for the people of the north have 
sometimes pronounced py as w, which is a letter peculiar to the north. 
And formerly here, as among the Romans of old, the articulation, as 
well as orthography of w and v, was as little distinguished as observed. 
For the Romans said and writ either sylve or sylwe, and yet in Surrey 
the populace never do, or indeed scarcely can pronounce v, but con- 
stantly substituted for it w or w, saying winegar or winegar, for vinegar, 
pronouncing v as we do the Greek in vios. The wic was so 
common among the Danes and Anglo-Saxons that to multiply the 
instances would be needless and tedious, and this was from very 
ancient usage; for in the Feroes, so far detached from the Continent, 
and who had maintained little or no commerce with strangers, we 
find the names of many places concluding with viig, as Boardeviig, 
Joteviig, Qualviig, &c. The first appropriation of wig or vic, seems 
to have been to places upon the seashore and banks of rivers, as in 
Eboracum, &c.; but in length of time it became applicable to places 
near neither. Respecting the more primitive sense of the word wic, 
we have the village called Wic, upon the Thames; also Dulwich, upon 
the same river, where dul in the Celtic signifies low or watery, and 
is often met with, and is the root of the Latin dilwviwm. Perhaps 


202 


Appendix V. 


wie never originally signified a place of refuge, as some affirm, but 
only accidentally. The Teutonic has an old and proper word for refuge 
or security, and that is burgh, the Welch berrwe, and the Greek 
Tupyos. Moreover, it may be observed that wic was not at first 
imposed indifferently on any place upon the water, but on those seated 
upon or near some little inlet, creek, or recess of waters, and this was 
its first designation; hence, in all northern counties, and in the 
neighbouring parts of Scotland, the corners of the mouth are now called 
wics, or wiikes. Wic has spread far and wide: it occurs in Germany, 
and is met with in the Iberian Vigo too; as for the small difference 
of c and g, it is only dialectic, and the Romans themselves used c and 
g promiscuously or. successively, as appears from the inscription upon 
the Duilian pillar, where is read pucnando for pugnando. The final 
um is nothing but a termination suiting the genius of the Latin. Upon 
the whole, then, agreeable to the conclusion of our ablest antiquaries, 
Eboracum implies no more than a town seated wpon a river. 


: N.B.—The quotations from the Hebrew, Chaldee, Saxon, and Irish 
in Aram’s MS. were in the characters of those languages, with their 
value in Enzlish sounds. 


(2) POEMS. 
AN ELEGY 
on the death of 


Srr Joun Armytacz, Bart.,l 
of Kirklees, 


M.P. for the City of York, 
Who died gloriously in the Service of his Country, 


On the 11th September, 1758, near St. Cass, on the Coast of France, 
in the twenty-seventh year of his age. 


Humbly Inscribed 


To the remains of that ancient and respectable family. 


Strike, strike the bosom, touch the vocal string, 
Bring funeral euge, the funeral cypress bring: 
The strain be mournful ; let the feet move slow, 
The numbers ling’ring with their weight of woe. 
Not with more grief great; Maro’s breast did swell, 
When glorious, with his legions, Varus fell ; 


1See Gentleman’s Magazine, 1758, pp. 444 and 539, and Ann. Reg., p. 69. Aram in 
confinement was evidently studying the former. Armytage was shot through the head, 


on September, 1758 ; he was a volunteer of great promise. 
203 


Eugene Aram. 


Not Troy beheld her matchless Hector slain, 

Than feels thy country. Tell us, was thy fate 

Or more illustrious, or unfortunate? 

Thy arms almost alone the foes impeach ; 

Thou stood’st like Sceva, in the dangerous breach, 
Slain, but not vanquished; fallen, but not fled; 
That ground thou kept alive, thou kept when dead. 
Hast thou obtained thy laurels with the pall? 
Didst thou more bravely dare, or greatly fall? 
Calder with sadder murmurs rolls her floods, 

And deeper gloom invests thy Kirklees’ woods. 
France, too, deplores thee little less than we, 

And Britain’s genius gave a sigh for thee. 

What though no wife’s, though no fond mother’s eyes 
Grow dim with grief, whose transports pierce the skies ; 
What, though no pomp, no pious dirge, no friend 
Wail thee with tears, no solemn priest attends, 

O! yet be happy—thy sad sisters here 

Bewail thy loss with sorrows too sincere ; 

And falls in silence the fraternal tear. 

Sleep, much lamented, while thy country pays, 
Mingled with sighs, the tribute of her praise. 
Suppress those sighs, and wipe the humid eye 
Her sons nor fall in vain, nor unreveng’d shall die. 
When her loud thunders reach the hostile shore, 
Swift as the winds, and like the billows roar; 
What vigils must repentant Gallia keep? 

What hostile eyes must close, what fair ones weep? 
Remorseless war! how fatal to the brave! 

Wild as rough seas, voracious as the grave! 

Blind when thou strikes, deaf when distress complains ; 
What tears can whiten thy empurpl’d stains? 
Waste waits thy step, as southern breezes show’rs. 
Like floods thou rages, and like floods devours. 
Fear flies before thee—thou relentless hears 

The virgin’s pray’r, and sees the mother’s tears, 
Sink down, be chain’d, thrice execrable war, 
Extinct thy torch, or flame from Britain far. 
Breathe we where bliss in flow’ry vales is found ; 
Soft spring glow near me, rural sweets be round; 
Perennial waters, which the rock distils, 

The shaded villa, and the sunny hills, 

Long wand’ring shores, the voice of falling floods, 
The gale of odours, and the night of woods. 

These, lost to thee, for thee accept of fame, 

Thy Kirklees smiles—she yet can boast the name; 
Rank’d with the great thy fragrant name shall be; 
Rome had her Decius—the Brigantes thee. 


At p. 538 of the Gentleman’s Magazine for 1758 is a panegyric on 
William Thornton, the Justice, signed ‘‘ John Atkinson,’ dated York, 


204 


Appendix V. 


Oct. 17, 1758. Bell includes it as from the pen of Aram. It alludes 
to Armytage. Aram’s poetry is not of that quality which compels us 
to include his doubtful pieces; moreover, the Gentleman’s Magazine 
is very accessible.—E. R. W. 


Insonuere cave gemitumgue dedere Caverne.—Virg. 
(A poem written by Aram in York Castle.) 


For these dread walls, sad sorrow’s dark domain; 
For cells resounding with the voice of pain, 

Where fear, pale power, his dreary mansion keeps, 
And grief, unpity’d, hangs her head and weeps; 
What muse would leave her springs and myrtle shades, 
The groves of Pindus and the Ionian glades? 

The hallow’d pines that nod on Ida’s brow, 

And suns that spread eternal May below? 

Or comes the nymph, she soon averts her eyes, 

And but bestows one transient look and flies. 

In vain would I ascend—too weak my wings, 

In vain the plectrum strikes the sleeping strings, 
They wake no more. The fire that blaz’d, but glows; 
The lute, the lyre, and all are mute, but foes. 
While my small bark, by sable tempests tost, 

Lies wreck’d on an inhospitable coast ; 

Bleak rocks the place, and clouds the skies infold, 
Storms follow storms, and seas on seas are roll’d. 
Yet, if the fates be kind, and you this lay, 
Daughters of Isis, with a smile survey— 

If, while you gild the moments as they rise, 
Suppliant, I make your soft regards my prize; 
Farewell, Pyrene! once so loved; and you 

Pierian sisters, tuneful maids, adieu ! 

For ever I your feeble aid decline; 

Come, lucid stars, fair northern lights, be mine; 
Whose graces lull life’s cares, whose wit removes, 
Whose virtues charm me, and whose sense improves ; 
From you spring each sweet hope, each gleam of joy, 
Each dearer name, and every social tie. 

You, my bright subject, all to transport turns, 

My breast with more than mortal ardour burns. 
Rapt into years to come, the muse’s eyes 

Behold your future sons illustrious rise ! 

Patriots and chiefs, renown’d for war and laws, 
Warm in their country’s and in virtue’s cause. 


When time another crop of foes shall bear, 
Another Thornton shall in arms appear ; 
Another Cumberland shall rise and save; 


205 


Aram in a note refers to the Gentleman’s Magazine for 1756. 


Eugene Aram. 


His soul as honest, and his heart as brave.1 

Some Slingshy curb again rebellious rage, 

Some Ingilby again his prince’s ear engage. 
Mahon2 once more shall British troops receive, 
What Stanhope won, a Stanhope shall retrieve. 

Some harp for Copgrove’s hapless youth be strung,3 
And Albion’s rocks repeat what Deering sung. 

Some future bard in Roundhills shall commend 

The breast humane, the scholar and the friend. 
Lambhill shall bid its fadeless laurels grow, 

To shade some Norton’s, Garth’s, or Plaxton’s brow. 
The sacred page some Walton shall review, 

Some Wanley clear the runic line anew. 

The trumpet’s sound shall die, the discord cease, 
Thou Britain ! flourish in the arts of peace; 

Fairest of Ocean’s daughters, and his pride, 

Safe in thy oaks, with Neptune on thy side! 

Who, fond to bless thee, with his Thames has crown’d, 
And, pleas’d to guard thee, pours his seas around ; 
The wounds of war thy commerce soon shall cure, 
That peace thy fleets command, thy Pitt assure. 
Come, gentle Peace, propitious goddess, come, 

Thy olive bring—let all but mirth be dumb. 

What blessings reach us that thou dost not give? 
Thou fled, is it to suffer or to live? 

Thy sweet recess, thy happy ports to gain, 
Plough’d is the verdant, plough’d the watery plain. 
For thee this swelters under Lybia’s suns, 

That sails and shivers where the Volga runs. 

To thy soft arms through death itself we flee. 
Battles and camp, and fields, and victory 

Are but the rugged steps that lead to thee. 

For thee kind showers distil, the meads to cheer, 
Or bend in old Isurium’s4 field the ear ; 

For thee the streams make gay the banks they lave, 
The soft breeze whispers, and the green woods wave. 
All these I see, as sailors see the shore, 

And sing, secluded, scenes I tread no more. 

Nor stars, nor cheerful suns I now behold, 

Languid with want, and pale with polar cold. 


1 These lines refer to Thornton’s part in suppressing the 1745 rebellion. 


2 Refers to the loss of Fort Mahon, through the failure of Byng to assist the garrison. 


Essays, etc., ‘‘ Port Mahon” in that publication. 


See index to the 


3Aram here deplores the death, during Verney’s expedition to Cartagena, of 


Mr Hodges, s. of Henry Hodges, Esq., of Copgrove, ‘‘a young gentleman of great 


abilities . . andoncemy friend.” Heagain refers to the ‘‘ Gentleman’s Magazine” 
for 1741. 
4The modern Aldborough. 


206 


Appendix V. 


Where smiles Elysium?—where those happier skies, 
Where after death superior virtue flies?— 

Where wrongs, nor night, nor torments, they deplore, 
The sigh forgotten and the tear no more. 

What passage to the blissful meadows guides? 

What horrors guard it? or what covert hides? 


Thus to the Gete, in a barbarous throng, 

The last sad numbers flow’d from Naso’s tongue.5 
The Thracian thus, whose harp bewail’d his wife, 
Torn by the mad Bacchantes, lost his life ; 

The strains that hell had pleas’d, they disregard, 
And snatch’d the life that softer Pluto spar’d.6 


APPENDIX VI. 


THE BIBLIOGRAPHY OF EUGENE ARAM. 


(A) Lzcat REcoRDS RELATING TO THE OUTLAWRY AND MuRDER OF 
DantreL CLARK. 


I. A Pipe Roll for the 21st, George II., fixing the outlawry of Clark 
as the 20th October, 1746. 

II. A Pipe Roll for the 2nd and 3rd, William IV., showing the arrears 
then due from Clark to the Exchequer. 


(The intermediate Rolls contain recitals of the first.) 


Til. A collection of eleven documents, the property of a gentleman, 
who bought them in at Sotheby’s sale on 3lst May, 1912. These 
contain two inquisitions on the first skeleton found, dated 12th August, 
1758, and depositions thereat, and a further inquisition, dated 18th 
‘August, 1758. The counterpart of the third Indented Inquisition, 
dated 18th August, with the depositions, is in the Record Office. 

IV. A collection of nine documents in the Record Office, in a bundle 
marked Assizes 45; being the depositions at the inquest of 18th August, 

26 


1758. 

V. An ‘Inquisition,’ indented and dated 18th August, 1758, find- 
ing Aram and Houseman guilty of the murder of Clark; from a bundle 
in the Record Office, marked Assizes 44. The other part of this Inden- 


74 
ture is in the Collection III., supra. 


5A reference to Ovid’s ‘‘ Tristia.” 


6A reference to Orpheus. Eugene apparently argues that if his strains were not 
addressed to barbarous ears, he would not have to utter them from the recesses of a 
prison. Norton, supra, is his prosecuting counsel, Fletcher Norton. For Walton 
(Brian), and Wanley (Humphrey), see the D.N.B. ms 


Eugene Aram. 


VI. A collection of informations, taken by Wm. Thornton, J.P., 
in R. v. Houseman, Aram and Terry ; mostly never before published, all 
in the bundle, Ass. 45. 

26 

VII. Recognisances of the witnesses examined by Theakston and 

Thornton, with those of others, in the bundle, Ass. 45. 


26 

VIII. An affidavit, sworn by Philip Coates, prosecutor, on 9th March, 
1759, in the bundle, Ass. 45. 
26 

IX. The two examinations of R. Houseman, the second signed by 
him, in the bundle, Ass. 45. 
26 

X. The two examinations of Eugene Aram, both apparently ‘signed 
by him, in the same bundle. ; 

XI. The examination of H. Terry, now first published, from the same 
bundle. 

XII. Minute book of the Northern circuit, Ass. 42. 

7 


XIII. Gaol book of the same, Ass. 41. 


XIV. Miscellaneous information, jury lists, directions to Sheriffs, pre 
cepts, directions to the clerk of arraigns, &c., in the bundles, Ass. 
47 and 44. 

1 74 


(B) Tus ConrEmMporARY PREss. 
(Dailies, Bi-Weeklies, and Weeklies.) 
Lonpon. 


I. Owen’s Weekly Chronicle—26th August, 1758. 

Il. The London Evening Post, 24-6th August, 31st August, 9-12th 
Sepember, 1758; 9th August, 1759. 

III. Payne’s Universal Chronicle—9th-16th September, 1758, con- 
tinued as 

IV. The Universal Chronicle—25th August, 1st. September, 1759; 
1st-8th September, 1759. 

V. Lloyd’s Hvening Post—25th August, 1st September, 1758; 14th 
March, 8th and 29th August, 1759. 

VI. Read’s Weekly Journal—llth August, 1759. 

VII. The Whitehall Hvening Post—9th August, 1759. 

VIII. The London Chronicle—11th, 18th, and 28th August, 1759. 
er The Public Advertiser—26th August, 1758; 11th and 16th August, 


PROVINCES. 


I. Phe York Courant—1lth March, 1744-5, advertising Clark’s dis- 
appearance (other files missing). 


208 


Appendix VI. 


Il. The Leeds Intelligencer—29th August, 1758; 6th March, 13th 
March and 7th August, 1759. 

Ill. The Newcastle Cowrant—with letter of 4th August, 1759. 
ee Jackson’s Oxford Journal—llth August and ist September, 

V. The Cambridge Journal—26th August, 1758; 7th, 11th, and 
18th August, 1759. 

VI. The Ipswich Journal—Saturday, 2nd September, 1758. 


(The files of the Stamford Mercury, the Norwich Mercury, and 
many other papers, some still existing, or carried on in other names, 
are either missing or destroyed, or mutilated for all material dates. 
This is much to be regretted in the case of the York and Norfolk 


papers.) 
(Magazines and Periodicals, 1759.) 


I. The Annual Register—1759, p. 351. 

Il. The Gentleman’s Magazine—August, 1759. 

Ill. The Scots Magazine—August, 1759, pp. 401, 447, an identical 
account with the preceding. 

IV. The London Magazine—August, 1759, pp. 408 and 451. Speaks 
of Aram as ‘“‘ convicted on many concurrent proofs and a number of 
the strongest circumstances.’’ I believe it to be fairly reliable. 

V. The Grand Magazine of Magazines—August, 1759, pp. 85-8, 
131-3, September 185-8. The report of the trial is unique, but very 
misleading ; untrustworthy. 

VI. The Critical Review (edited by Smollett)—1759, vol. viii., 229, 
art. viii. As in Smollett’s history, the estimate of Aram’s genius is 
extravagant. 

VII. The Magazine of Magazines (Limerick)—August, 1759, 118-123. 

VIII. The Newcastle General Magazine—August, 1759, p. 405. 

IX. The Royal Magazine—August, 1759. 


(C) Reports of THE TRIAL. 


I. York—N.D., but plainly of the month of August, 1759; anon. ; 
‘printed and sold for the booksellers.’’ 8vo.; scurrilous, 
anecdotal, unique; title-page, ‘‘The Genuine and Authentic 
Account of the murder of Daniel Clark, shoemaker, on the 8th 
of February, 1744-5, also the material part of the Arraign- 
ment and Tryal of Richard Houseman, Henry Terry, and 
Eugene Aram for the said murder, &., &. Printed and sold 
for the booksellers.”’ (York, cited in this work as ‘‘ Y.P.’’). 

II. London, 1759—C. Sympson’s edit., pub. 16th Aug., advd. in the 
‘*Pub. Adv.” on that day. I have not met it, but the Rev. 
R. V. Taylor describes it as of ‘‘the Seven Dials’ order. 
Cf. ‘‘ Yorkshire Bibliographer ’’ (1888), 1, 53. 

Ill. London, 1759—Bristow’s ed., 8vo.; title-page, ‘‘The Genuine 
Account of the Trial of Eugene Aram for the murder of Daniel 


fo) 209 


Eugene Aram. 


Clark, late of Knaresbrough, in the county of York, who was 
convicted at York Assizes (sic), &c., &c. London. Published 
and sold by W. Bristow at his Lottery Office in Cheapside ; 
and of all booksellers in Town and Country.’’ (Cited in this 
work as ‘‘ Brist.’’). 

IV. York, 1759—The ‘‘Second Ed.” published by Ann Ward for C. 
Etherington. Omits the literary pieces, but prints the letters ; 
12mo. 

V. York, 1767—The 4th ed., 12mo., printed for C. Etherington. No 
literary pieces. Dated MDCCLXVIII. 

VI. York, 1776 (?)—The 6th ed., 12mo., printed by C. Etherington 
and sold by E. Hargrove, Knaresbrough. Is unique in con- 
taining a letter, dated Ist March, 1759. 

VII. York, 1792—8th ed., printed for E. Hargrove, anno 1792. 
8vo. 5 

VIII. Knaresbrough, 1810—10th ed., E. Hargrove & Sons; adds anec- 
dote of Aram and Clark robbing gardens. 12mo. 

IX. Leeds, 1810—Davies & Co. I have not seen this; it is said to be 
a superior ed.; sed quaere. 

X. Knaresbrough, 1814—11th ed. A reprint of the 10th. 

XI. Knaresbrough—l4th ed. N.D., Hargrove, 12mo. 

XII. 1824—The ‘‘ Pamphleteer,’’ vol. 23, No. 45. 

XIII. London, 1832—A ‘ 2nd ed.,’”’ by Mitchell, of Old Bond Street; a 
mere reprint of Ann Ward’s. 

XIV. Richmond, 1832—Printed for M. Bell; has numerous notes and 
has long passed for the best. It is, however, largely an impos- 
ture. The specimen of Aram’s writing bears no resemblance 
to genuine autographs of his, and the whole performance is 
to be viewed with suspicion, 8vo. The Gentleman’s Magazine, 
1832, p. 448, describes the work as 12mo. 

XV. Boston, U.S.A.—Ist American ed., based on the 11th English 
ed. B. Franklin Edmonds. 

XVI. Durham—G. Walker, junr. N.D. 1840 (?). 

XVII. Newcastle—W. & T. Fordyce. N.D. 1842 (?). 

XVIII. Knaresbrough—G. Wilson, with Hood’s poem. N.D, 

XX. Clerkenwell—E. C. March & Co. ‘The life and execution of 
E. A.,’’ with Hood’s poem and Aram’s letters. 1d. N.D. 

XXI. Clerkenwell—E. C. March & Co. ‘The life trial and remarkable 
defence of H. A.” 1d. N.D. 

XXII. Knaresbrough—W. Parr; reprints some of Scatcherd’s matter. 
1868. 

XXIII. (?) 1869—C. Blenkhorn. I have not seen this. It is cited by 
the Rev. F. W. Joy in his MSS. folio “‘Eugenius Aram,” 

XXIV. London—Printed for James Kendrew, Colliergate, York. N.D. 
1810 (2). 

XXV. W. Langdale. N.D. This and the last are also referred to by 
Mr. Joy and others. I have no reason to believe it superior 
to the rest. 

XXVI. Knaresborough—W. Parr. N.D. Portrait, Hood’s poem, and 
extracts from Scatcherd. 


210 


Appendix VI. 


XXVII. An Irish quarto (?)—See E. H. Barker, infra (H., ii.). 
I have not met it. 


Besides the editions, 3rd, 5th, 7th, 9th, 12th, 13th, &., which I 
cannot trace there are others mentioned in ‘‘The Yorkshire Biblio- 
grapher,”’ 1888, i., 53, H.; Speight’s ‘‘ Nidderdale,’’ 1894, pp. 249-251; 
“Yorkshire Notes and Queries,’ old series, ii. 54-5; Boyne’s ‘‘ York- 
shire Library,” and Davies’s ‘“‘ Memoir of the York Press,” G., vi., 
infra. 


(D) ARAMIANA. 


In this somewhat arbitrarily named class I place the works of Nor- 
rison Scatcherd by themselves, as being entirely sui generis. 


I, ‘‘Memoirs of the celebrated Eugene Aram,” by N. 8S. 1832. 

II. ‘Gleanings after Eugene Aram,”’ by N. S. London and Leeds. 

1836. 

III. ‘‘ Memoirs, &c.’’ by N. S. London and Leeds. 1838. A 2nd ed., 
with appendices. (II. and III. cited in this work as ‘‘ Gls.’’ 
and “‘Mem.,’’ were together reprinted, with omissions, by 
Thos. Hollins, of Harrogate, in 1875. These curious works are 
invaluable for their thumb-nail sketches, and, while preserv- 
ing much dubious gossip, reveal everywhere the author’s sin- 
cerity of purpose, together with a touching naiveté and lack 
of judgment. The author, evidently an amateur and dilet- 
tante (his pages are full of clerical errors), set out to rehabili- 
tate Aram. In this he has signally failed, but he gleaned 
much that otherwise would have been lost from the traditions 
current in his youth and from eye-witnesses.) 


(E) BiograpHicaL DicTionarins, ENcycnopmpias, &C. 
This is a very large class, from which I extract only a few. 


‘I. Dict. Nat. Biog.—Article by Ric. Garnett, LL.D., who is misled by 
the accepted versions into thinking Houseman the sole witness. 
King’s Lynn Grammar School is rather singularly described as 
a ‘private school’’; in the epitome the scene is shifted to 
Lyme Regis. 

II. ‘‘ Enc. Britt.’-—This account errs gravely in saying that the bones 
were found in February, 1759; also in saying that we do not 
know what became of Terry—an error copied by hosts from 
Bulwer. 

III. The Amer. Cyclop., 1873—Chalmers, Firmin-Didot, 1835; Gorton, 
Haydn, Longman, Michaud, Rose, Thomas, Waller, &. Some 
of their errors are noted in the first chapter. The earliest 
foreign work in this class to give an account of Aram is J. C. 
Adelung’s continuation of C. G. Jécher’s ‘‘ Gelehrten Lexicon,”’ 
Leipsic, 1784. 

IV. Kippis—‘“‘ Biographica Britannica,’ London, 1777, vol. i., pp. 
230-5. The inclusion of Aram was warmly canvassed at the time. 

211 


Eugene Aram. 


V. “The Biographical Magazine,’’ ‘‘an ingenious work now publish- 
ing in monthly numbers,” 1776—Vol. i., p. 77 gives us some 
particulars of his ‘‘Scituations and Imployments” between 
1745 and 1758. 


(F) CrrmmrInAL CALENDARS AND COLLECTED TRIALS. 


I. “The Tyburn Chronicle,’”’ iv., 110. N.D., but the last case was in 
1768. 

II. ‘“‘The Newgate Calendar,” 1777—J. Cooke. London, v., p. 39. 

III. ‘‘ The New Newgate Calendar,’’ 1810 (?)—ii., p. 12. With portrait 
by Nuttall. Fisher & Dixon, Liverpool, dated 1st January, 
1810. 

IV. Abridged ed. 12mo.—‘‘ By an Old Bailey barrister,’’ 1840 (?) 

V. Another 12mo. N.D. 1850 (?). 

VI. Knapp and Baldwin’s ‘‘ Newgate Calendar.’’ N.D. London, J. 
Robins, iii., p. 12, with portraits. (5 vols. 8vo.) 

VII. Another copy, 6 vols., 8vo., iii., p. 13, with same portrait. 

VIII. Another ed., 1824-8—J. Robins, 3 vols., 8vo., ii., p. 246. 

IX. Another ed., 1824-5—J. Robins, 2 vols., 8vo., ii., p. 246. 

X. ‘Trials from the Newgate Calendars ’’—Sisley, 1908, pp. 86-107. 

XI. ‘“‘The most extraordinary case of EK. A., who was hanged for 
murder ’’—From a collection lent me by Mr. E. M. Beloe. 
It is at p. 131. This may be some edition of John C. Hotten’s 
“Book of Remarkable Trials and Notorious Characters,’’ in 
one of which Aram’s case is at p. 137. 

XII. ‘‘The Trial of E, A., of Knaresberough, in the County of York, 
schoolmaster, for the murder of D. C., shoemaker, &c.,’’ at 
p- 129, of a volume of ‘‘ Remarkable Trials,’ lent me by Mr. 
E. M. Beloe. 

XIII. ‘‘ The Trial of E. A.,’’ in James Caulfield’s ‘‘ Portraits, Memoirs, 
and Characters of Remarkable Persons,’’ 1819-20; iii., p. 5. 

XIV. J. C. Hotten. See XI., supra. 

XV. ‘‘Chronicles of Crime,’ 1841 (London), by ‘‘Camden Pelham,” 
ii., 85. 

XVI. ‘The Old Bailey Chronicle” (1783-4), iii., 238, by J. Mountague. 

XVII. ‘‘ Remarkable Trials and Interesting Memoirs from the year 
1740 to 1764,” ii., 519. London, 1765. Prints a wholly 
different version of the address, and says ‘‘ it was read by the 
clerk in open Court.”’ 

XVIII. “Celebrated Trials,” 1825, iv., 243. Portrait ed. by George 
Borrow. Inaccurate. 


(Except Caulfield, who rejects it as a forgery, all the foregoing print 
a vile concoction, in the way of a confession, as impudently as it is 
transparently false. Another spurious confession is contained in an 
old broad-sheet, hawked about at the time, of which I have a copy. 
It is distressing to find writers of repute deceived by impostures which 
make the scholarly Aram talk the tongue of Seven Dials. Wm. Andrews 
has adopted the ‘‘ Newgate Calendar” confession.) 


212 


Appendix VI. 


(G) Yorxsurrz BrstiocRAPHizs, ANTIQUITIES, County Historizs, &0. 
(A very numerous class, from which this is a selection.) 


I. Allen—‘‘ History of York,’’ iii., 145. 

II. Andrews, W.—‘‘ Historic Yorkshire,” chap. xxiii. ‘‘E. A., the 
Yorkshire Murderer.”’ 

III. Bigland, Ralph (?)—‘‘ Yorkshire.” (I cannot trace this; it is 
referred to in Grainge and in ‘“ Yorkshire N. and Q.,”’ infra.) 

IV. Boyne—‘‘ The Yorkshire Library,” 135, 252-3, a bibliography. 

V. Calvert, M.—‘‘ History of Knaresborough,” 1844, p. 116. 

VI. Davies, R.—‘‘ A Memoir of the York Press’’ (1868). 

VII. Fletcher, J. S—‘‘ A Picturesque History of Yorkshire’ (1904), 
i, c0l; im,, 165; iv, 2; 25-7, 35, 60, 62, 68: 

VIII. acral J. S.— A Book about Yorkshire’’ (1908), pp. 316-7, 

8-22. 

IX. Fletcher, J. S.—‘‘ Nooks and Corners of Yorkshire’’ (1911), 103. 

X. Grainge, W.—‘‘ Nidderdale’’ (1863), pp. 127, 129-32 (Doubts sug- 
gested as to authorship of Aram’s address.) 

XI. Knipe, W.—‘‘ Criminal Chronology of York Castle’’ (1867), pp. 
67-81. 

XII. Mayhall—‘“‘ Annals of Yorkshire’’ (1878), i., 128, 383. 

XIII. Newsam, W. I.—‘‘ Poets of Yorkshire’’ (1845), posthumous. 

XIV. Norway, A. H.—‘‘ Highways and Byways in Yorkshire’’ (1899). 

XV. Smith, Wm.—‘‘ Old Yorkshire (1881), pp. 67-9, with portrait of 
Scatcherd ; (1882), p. 212; (1884), pp. 90-6. 

XVI. Speight, Harry—‘‘ Nidderdale and the Garden of the Nidd” 
(1894), chap. xv., ‘‘The Vale of E. A.,”’ pp. 298, 358, 475, 
493 (161), (287), (293), (467). The last four references are to 
other personages in the story. 

XVI. Speight, Harry—‘‘ Upper Nidderdale”’ (1906), pp. 29, 45, 74-5, 
77, 296, 315, 325-6, 547, 363. 

XVII. Turner, J. H.—‘‘ The Yorkshire Bibliographer’’ (1888), i., 53. 
An excellent bibliography by the Rev. R. V. Taylor. 

XVIII. Twyford, A. W. and Griffiths, Arthur—‘‘ Records of York 
Castle ’’ (1880), p. 270. 

XIX. ‘“‘ Yorkshire Notes and Queries and Folklore Journal’’ (1890), 
ii., 54-55, 3506. 

XX. ‘Yorkshire Notes and Queries,’ new series; iii., 147, 204; iv., 
116, 138; v., 135, giving particulars of an unfinished work by 
John James, F.S.A., beginning, ‘‘ Whoever has observed man- 
kind with attention must have been struck with the reflection 
that moral rectitude is not intimately joined with great mental 
attainments. If we consult history, &c.’’ He sent this to 
Scatcherd, who reported adversely, and James discontinued the 
work. One is glad to credit Scatcherd with one real service 
to letters ! 


(H) MisczLLANEOUS. 


I. Andrews, Wm.—‘‘ The Law and Lawyers” (1897), p. 212. 
213 


Eugene Aram. 


II. Barker, E. H.—‘‘ Literary Anecdotes ’’ (1852), i., pp. 35-42. Chiefly 
concerning Aram’s life at Lynn, mostly already used by 
Scatcherd. 

III. Brereton, Austin—‘‘ Life of Sir Henry Irving’’ (1908), i., 106, 
107, 141; with particulars of Irving’s recitations and of the 
production of Will’s play at the Lyceum. 

IV. Chambers—‘‘ The Book of Days ’”’ (1869), i., 734; ii., 229-30. Brings 
Aram to London to be hanged. 

V. Chandler, F. W.—‘ The Literature of Roguery ’’ (1907), i., 180, 182, 
271; ‘‘Roguery on the XIXth Century Stage; ii., 344-7, 
*‘Romantic Roguery.”’ 

VI. Craik, G. L.—‘‘The Pursuit of Knowledge Under Difficulties.” 
Various editions.. In the 1906 edition (Bell), at pp. 244-5, ‘One 
of the most arresting chapters in the history of human guilt.” 

VII. Ellis, H. H.—‘‘ The Criminal,” cites Eugene Aram as the intel- 
lectual type (1901), p. 157. 

VIII. Escott, T. H. S.—‘‘ Edward Bulwer” (1910), pp. 9, 10, 15, and 
176, where is made the amazing error exposed. 

IX. Granville, A. B. (M.D., F.R.S.)—‘‘The Spas of England,” i, 
93-6. 

X. Irving, H. B.—‘‘ Occasional Papers’’ (1906). ‘‘The True Story of 
Eugene Aram,” reprinted from ‘‘The Nineteenth Century.” 
Has woven Scatcherd’s raw material into a finished article; no 
original research. 

XI. Meadley, G. W.—‘“‘ Life of Wm. Paley,’’ 1809 ed., pp. 6-7; makes 
Anna Aram a witness! 

XII. Nichol—‘‘ Literary Anecdotes” (1812), iii., 722. 

XII. Nichol—‘‘ Literary Illustrations,’ vii., 464, a curious reference 
to the fate of Eugene’s “Celtic Dictionary ’’(?). 

XIV. Smollett, Tobias—‘‘ History of England,” xii., 479. 

XV. Timbs, John—‘“‘ Abbeys, Castles, and Ancient Halls,” i., 285-287 ; 
2nd ed., iii., 201, “‘ Knaresborough Castle and Eugene Aram.’’ 

XVI. Victoria—Girlhood of H.M. Queen (1912), ii., 83. 

XVII. Walbron, J. R. (F.S.A.)—‘‘ Memorials of the Abbey of St. Mary 
of Fountains’ (1862), being vol. 42 of the Surtees Soc. ; at p. 
222 a curious note on a tradition as to the Terrys. 

XVIII. Wanley, Nathaniel—‘‘The Wonders of the Little World,”’ 
various editions. In that of 1806, at p. 135, “Strange ways 
in which murders have been discovered.”’ 


(I) Lucan anp Mezpica, Works REFERRING To ARAM. 


I. Beck—‘‘ Medical Jurisprudence ”’ (1842), p. 541. 
II. Howell—‘‘ State Trials,” xiv., p. 1328. 


III. Paris and Fonblanque—‘ Medical Jurisprudence ” (1823), iii., 79 and 
511, with Aram’s defence. 

IV. Parker’s ‘‘Crim. Rep.”’ (Amer), iii., p. 448, per Mason, J. 

V. Stephen, Sir J. F.—‘A History of the Crim. Law of England,”’ 
lea pee 


214 


Appendix VI. 


VI. Taylor—‘‘ Medical Jarisprudence’’ (1910), 233 et seq. 

VII. Tidy—‘‘ Legal Medicine’’ (1882), pp. 151, 155, 207; case 43. 

VIII. Wills, Sir Alfred—‘ Circumstantial Evidence” (1912), pp. 121-2, 
343-4. 

IX. Wharton and Stillé, J.—‘‘ Forensic Medicine” (1873), vol i. § 813. 


(J) Press ARTIcLES AND NoTiIcEs sINce 1759. 


(This class must remain imperfect owing to the difficulty of tracing 
unindexed articles.) 


I. 1776—‘‘The Life of Eugene Aram,” from The Biographical 
Magazine, ‘‘an ingenious work now publishing in monthly 
numbers,’ reproduced in the pages of a periodical of that 
date, the name of which I have failed to trace. I have it in 
my collection of cuttings. 

II. 1778—The Universal Magazine, July, makes Anna Aram 3 
witness. 

Ill. 1778—The London Magazine, August, p. 374, warmly attacks 
Kippis for including Aram in his ‘‘ Biog. Britt.’ 

IV. 1789—The Gentleman’s Magazine, p. 904. Letter of Sam. Pegge, 
dated 1760. 

V. 1790—The Gentleman’s Magazine, pp. 219, 324. The same topic 
as III., swpra. 

VI. 1832—i'he Literary Gazette, 7th and 21st January, with account, 
infra, K. i., of Spurzheim’s report on the skull, and the story 
of Aram’s attempt to rob Lloyd. 

VII. 1832—The Gentleman’s Magazine, p. 448. <A vindication of 
Aram. 

VIII. 1836—The Gentleman’s Magazine, p. 677, mentioning the death, 
at the age of 101, of E. Day, who is there said to have 
arrested Aram (?) Scatcherd had conversed with this worthy. 

IX. 1836—Chambers’ Edinburgh Journal, p. 194. 

X. 1837—The Gentleman’s Magazine, p. 218. ‘‘Cergiel’s’’ familiar 
letter. 

XI. 1838—The Morning Chronicle reports the British Association 
meeting when the skull was discussed. See infra K. ii. 

XII. 1838—The Leeds Mercury announces Inglis’s pamphlet. 

XIII. 1880—The Leeds Mercury. Various references, including an 
extract from a broadsheet of 1759 (11th September). 

XIV. 1885—T'he Leisure Hour, February, p. 127. ‘‘ Strange Stories 
Retold in the Firelight’’; ii, ‘‘The Strange but True (?) 
Story of Eugene Aram.’’ A worthless and uncritical account, 
based on Scatcherd; adds one fact to our knowledge, on the 
authority of an old man present at the execution. Signed 
Ghali ea a Weide 

XV. 1897—The Nineteenth Century, No. 42, p. 280. ‘‘The True 
Story of Eugene Aram,” by H. B. Irving. 

XVI. 1897—The Living Age. An identical article. See H. 10. 


215 


Eugene Aram. 


XVII. 1898—The Lynn News and County Press, 18th June. A paper 
by the late E. M. Beloe, who was of opinion that Aram had 
an unfair trial. Mr. Beloe was a practising solicitor. 

XVIII. 1899—T'he Leeds Mercury, 11th November. A vindication of 
Eugene Aram, by Mr. J. M. Richardson. Untenable in view 
of the facts herein disclosed. 

XIX. The Police Budget, edited by Harry Furniss, i., 157, 177, 204. 
A worthless account. 

XX. 1912—T'he Lancet, 4th May, p. 1211 (Cf. Westminster Gazette, 
same date). 


(There are innumerable minor references which it would be mere 
pedantry to produce here. Those in the Z’imes are to be found in 
Palmer’s index. Reviews of the novel and poem are designedly 
omitted, also first night critiques. The dates of the chief premiéres 
are—1, 9th February, 1832, at the Surrey, Mr. Elton as Eugene Aram ; 
2, 19th April, 1873, at the Lyceum, Henry Irving as Eugene Aram; 
3, 15th January, 1902, ‘‘ After All,”’ at the Avenue, Martin Harvey 
as Eugene Aram. I have many old Press cuttings, purchased 
privately, which I am unable to trace. The Yorkshire papers abound 
in references.—E. R. W.) 


(K) PHRENOLOGICAL ARAMIANA—1832-8. 


I. 1832—The Interary Gazette, January, at p. 25. See Appendix III. 

Il. 1838—The Morning Chronicle, 25th August. See Appendix III. 

Ii. 1838—Inglis, James, M.D.—‘‘ Phrenological Observations on the 
Skull of Eugene Aram.’’ (London, Leeds, and Ripon.) 


(L) ARam IN THE BrstiogRAPHy oF Linn REGIs. 


I. Beloe, E. M. (sen.)—‘‘ Our Borough,” pp. 80, 177 (1899). 

II. Dutt—‘“‘ King’s Lynn,”’ pp. 29, 46. Makes error as to date of 
arrest, which is placed in 1759. 

Ill. Hillen, H. J.—‘‘A History of the Borough of King’s Lynn” 
(Norwich, 1907), pp. 498, 854. The reference to the Rev. 
Aug. Jessopp, D.D., is, that gentleman informs me, an error. 

IV. Prescott-Row—‘‘ Guide to King’s Lynn” (1907), p. 23. 

V. Richards—‘ History of Linn’’ (1812), pp. 1040, 1078, 1142, note. 
Little about Eugene Aram. More about his fair pupil, Miss 
Lidderdale. 


(M) Aram IN Fiction, Drama, AND Porrry. 


I. Bulwer—‘‘ Eugene Aram,”’ a novel (1831). About 20 English 
editions. Two French are catalogued in the B. M. See the 
B. M. catalogue for full particulars. 


216 


Appendix VI. 


II. Bulwer’s ‘“‘ Eugene Aram,” a fragment of a tragedy, first printed 
in the New Monthly Magazine, August, 1833. 

Il. Hood—The Dream of Eugene Aram,” first printed in The 
Gem, in 1829. See B. M. catalogue, but it has often been 
reprinted in ephemera, e.g., The Mirror, 1829, p. 318, and 
T. P.’s Weekly, 1903, p. 524. See Iconography, infra. 

IV. Moncrieff, Wm. T.—‘‘ Eugene Aram, or St. Robert’s Cave; a 
drama in three acts.’ It follows the novel, whereas in 
Bulwer’s fragment Houseman becomes Boeteler, Aram takes 
poison. (Another published edition of the play is among 
French’s acting editions.) 

VY. Thackeray, W. M.—‘‘ Novels by Eminent Hands,”’ first printed in 
Punch. ‘‘George de Barnwall,’” by E. M. B. L., a pungent 
skit. For Geo. Barnwell, see ‘‘The Tragical History of 
G. B., who was undone by a strumpet, who thrice persuaded 
him to rob his employer, and to murder his uncle,’”’ and 
numerous ballads and chap-books; and for a brief apprecia- 
tion of his life and genius, per Mr. Weller, junior, ‘‘ Pick- 
wick,’ chapter x. To Thackeray is ascribed another skit on 
Bulwer’s novel—‘“‘ Elizabeth Browrigge,’’ anonymously appear- 
ing in Fraser’s Magazine. 

IV, Wills, William Gorman—‘‘ Eugene Aram,” a tragedy. This, 
unlike his ‘‘ Charles I.,’’ seems never to have been published. 
Brereton’s description of it makes Houseman a character, but 
Freeman Wills gives the name in his account of it as Coleman. 

VY. Wills, Freeman and Langbridge, Fred—‘‘ After All,’”’ produced at 
the Avenue Theatre, in 1902. Founded on the novel, but 
Aram is acquitted. 

VI. Parodies on Hood’s ‘‘Dream’’—See several in W. Hamilton’s 
‘Parodies of English and American authors’’ (1884), i., 130- 
132. One of the best appeared in Figaro, 9th October, 1875. 
All are, in effect, satiric pieces at the expense of Irving. 

_ VII. Translations—The novel has only, I believe, been done in French, 
but of the poem there is also Riihe and Von Franck’s German 
edition of 1841. The translators justly observe that ‘‘ Aram 
was not a fit subject for a novel,’’ and they refer to a tragedy, 
based on Eugene Aram, produced in Berlin. The ‘‘ Dream” 
has also been done into Welsh. 


TuRee STANZAS FROM THE ‘“‘ Figaro’”’ Paropy. 


’Twas in the prime of autumn time, 
An evening calm and cool, 

And full two thousand Cockneys went 
To see him play the fool, 

And critics filled the stalls as thick 
As balls in a billiard pool. 


217 


Eugene Aram. 


‘“Now, Mrs. B., what is’t you read?” 
Asked he, with top-lip curving. 

“Queen Mary? A play by Mr. Wills, 
Or something more deserving? ”’ 

Said Mrs. B., with an upturned glance, 
“Tt is the fall of Irving.” 


One night, months thence, whilst gentle sleep 
Had stilled the city’s heart, 

Two bill stickers set out with paste 
And play-bills in a cart, 

And the eminent I had his name on them 
In a melodramatic part. 


(N) ‘‘Norzs AND QUERIES.” 


From its inception this admirable weekly has inserted much matter 
relating to Aram. Without its assistance this monograph would not 
have been undertaken. The index volumes render any references 


unnecessary, but one allusion has not been indexed under Aram. I 
give it here— 


llth Ser. i., 280. 


In reference to ‘‘ Eugene Aram,’’ Mr. Escott relates that the 
Eugene Aram in real life had been engaged by Bulwer’s grand- 
father (the ‘‘Justice’’) to give his daughters occasional instruc- 
tion in their schoolroom at Heydon Hall. Moreover, among 
the pupils at the King’s Lynn school where Aram was usher had 
been a boy afterwards distinguished as Admiral Burney. With 
him Bulwer, perhaps on Thomas Hood’s suggestion, placed himself 
in communication. The whole account of Eugene Aram’s relations 
with the Lester family in the romance was taken word for word, 
fact for fact, from Burney’s notes. In the edition published by 
Chapman & Hall in 1849, Lytton states that, ‘On going with 
maturer judgment over all the evidence on which Aram was con- 
demned, I have convinced myself that, though an accomplice in 
the robbery of Clark, he was free both from premeditated design 
and the actual deed of murder.’’ Bulwer “accordingly so shaped 
Aram’s confession to Walter.” 

In The Leeds Mercury of 11th November, 1899, appeared a long 
defence of Eugene Aram from the pen of Mr. J. M. Richardson, 
who styles Eugene Aram ‘the Dreyfus of the eighteenth century.” 


I have already dealt with the astonishing statement here noticed by 
the reviewer. 


218 


Appendix VI. 


ICONOGRAPHY OF EUGENE ARAM. 


I. “‘The New Newgate Calendar” has a profile portrait, published on 
1st January, 1810. 

II. Knapp and Baldwin’s various editions reproduce this. (It is, no 
doubt, this one which Mrs. Beatley told ‘‘Cergiel’? was an 
excellent likeness. See ‘‘G. M.,’’ 1837, 218.) 

III. Cooke’s ‘‘Newgate Calendar’? has a woodcut depicting the 
murder, p. 40, vol. v. 

IV. Caulfield’s ‘‘ Portraits, &c., of Remarkable Persons’’ has an in- 
different likeness. 

VY. Alexander Hogg published another, after Thornton, with letter- 
press beneath. 

VI. A similar one is in the collection, formed by the Rev. F. W. Joy, 
without letterpress. 

VII. “The Trial of Eugene Aram” (F. 12), and W. T. Moncrieff’s 
edition of the play, are embellished by a ‘‘sensation wood- 
cut ’’ depicting Eugene overcome by the spectacle of a skeleton 
hanging in chains, illumined by a flash of lightning, with a 
waterfall in the distance! 

VIII. ‘“‘The Dream” has been profusely and beautifully illustrated. 
I here note only (1) Rossiter’s two fine etchings in the Junior 
Etching Club’s Edition (1858); (2) Doré’s Edition of 1872; (3) 
the Henry Irving Edition, with caricatures of the actor 
in the part, executed in red on black. By F. D. Niblett, 
dedicated to J. L. Toole. 

IX. A. Rankley painted a schoolroom scene, representing Aram stand- 
ing moodily at a window while the scholars pore upon their 
books ; a reverent pedagogue is regarding Aram pensively, and 
a young lady is playing upon a spinet (1852). 

X. Cattermole, Creswick, and other masters have illustrated the novel. 

XI. ‘‘ Yorkshire Notes and Queries,’’ new series, iii., 147, has a por- 
trait, and another in Bigland’s ‘‘ Yorkshire’’ is referred to in 
the ‘‘ Yorkshire Bibliographer ”’ (1888), p. 53. 

XII. Parr’s 1868 Edition and his present-day 2d. pamphlet have profile 
portraits of Aram. Scatcherd had a painting, a copy by a 
good artist of one done from the life, which he was assured 
by old people was an excellent likeness (‘‘Gls.’’ 33). 

XIII. The schoolhouse of Aram and Houseman’s shop are represented 
in a lithograph frontispiece to the ‘‘ Memoir.” This school- 
house, with Grimble Bridge, Gouthwaite Hall, Ramsgill, &c., 
form illustrations in the text of Mr. Speight’s two works. 
There is also another of Eugene Aram’s supposed lantern. 
Most of the class G. have illustrations of Aram’s haunts. 

XIV. George Borrow’s ‘‘ Celebrated Trials ’’ has an engraving of Aram, 
by Neele and Stockley, 352 Strand, and a plate depicting the 
murder. In chapter xxvi. of ‘‘ Lavengro,’’ Borrow puts into 

~ his friend Thurtell’s mouth the boast, ‘“‘ Equal to either for- 
tune,’’ from Aram’s peroration. Had Weave’s murderer read 
EKugene’s story. 


219 


ADDENDUM. 


After this work was completed for the press, a chance perusal of 
the late Samuel Warren’s ‘‘Miscellanies”! brought to my notice a 
case which I believe to be unknown to the present generation of 
lawyers, though in all respects most deserving of professional study— 
the case of R. v. Goldsborough, tried at York in March, 1842. Its 
remarkable resemblance to the case of Aram was observed upon by 
the author of ‘‘Ten Thousand a Year,’’? than which he said it was 
little less remarkable. A perusal of it brings out the following 
extraordinary resemblances. 2 


I. In each case a man recently in possession of a considerable 
sum in cash disappears suddenly. 

II. In each case he is last seen in company with the person subse- 
quently accused, who is aware of his possession of the money. 

III. In each case that person at the time of the disappearance 
gave out that the vanished man had gone off to evade creditors, 
for which there was some colour, and was himself found in possession 
of that man’s effects, which he pretended to hold as security for a 
debt (Houseman’s pretence). 

IV. In each case a long period of years elapsed before the chance 
discovery of remains by workmen—in one case over thirteen, in the 
other about twelve years. 

V. In each case the supposed murderer fell at the time of the 
disappearance under such suspicion as to compel him to withdraw 
from the neighbourhood. 

VI. In each case an accomplice turned ‘‘ approver,’’ though in the 
later case the approver died before the trial, his deposition being 
put in. 

VII. In each case the questions of forensic medicine were identical. 
Were the remains those of the missing man? Was the lesion of the 
skull the cause of death? 

VIII. Evidence of motive and of possession of wealth after the dis- 
appearance was startlingly similar; as also conduct of accused when 
taxed with doing away with supposed victim. 

IX. Clothing burnt and threats used by alleged murderer when 
questioned on the subject of the disappearance. 

X. In each case a party to the crime previously indicates where 
the body will be found. 

It may well be asked how it came about that Goldsborough was 
acquitted on a case in many respects stronger than that against 
Aram. A careful examination of both cases yields the following 
answer :—The weakness in each was as to the proof of the corpus 
delicti, but as against the evidence tending to identify the body 
found in Stokesly Beck with Huntley, which was inconclusive, 


1“ Miscellanies” (Blackwood), 1885, i., 185. 
220 


Addendum. 


there was no doubt that’the body found in St. Robert’s cave was 
found by Houseman’s direction. The evidence that Goldsborough 
indicated where the body would be found was only given after it 
had been found by chance. Thus it might be an invention or a 
misrecollection.? Secondly, Goldsborough made but one voluntary 
statement under the then system of magisterial inquiry, and so did 
not entangle himself, like Aram in his examinations, with incon- 
sistent asseverations. Thirdly, in place of an elaborate, academic 
defence, not directed to the evidence, and not supported by the fire 
of cross-examination, the defence of Goldsborough by Serjeant Wilkins 
was aimed at all the weak parts of the Crown case, witnesses being 
sharply cross-examined as to character and credit, with some damaging 
results. Also the medical expert was cross-examined by the Serjeant, 
who, as Ballantine tells us,? was himself a medical man, and had 
practised that profession: Again, Noel summed up for a conviction, 
Rolfe for an acquittal. That was the fortune of war. Many a judge 
would have summed up dead against Goldsborough, who had a narrow 
escape, as, notwithstanding, the jury were out a long time before they 
acquitted. Had Goldsborough been tried to-day, he could hardly 
have escaped, unless able to bring very strong expert evidence to show 
that the remains could not be Huntley’s. Wilkins opined that they 
were female. Under our modern law Goldsborough must have gone 
into the box for cross-examination, or have suffered great prejudice by 
abstaining. Then ‘“‘ My client’s lips are sealed’ ’’? came to his rescue. 
Again, Wilkins could not have thrown all the mud he did at the 
Crown witnesses without the prosecution retaliating by proof of the 
prisoner’s character. 

The two trials, studied side by side, admirably illustrate the working 
of two former systems of English criminal investigation. Our present 
mode, as a means of arriving at the truth in cases of murder on cir- 
cumstantial evidence, is superior to either. If the system in force in 
1758-9 was too harsh, that of 1842 was too favourable to a guilty 
man. 


CORRIGENDUM. 


The lantern referred to at p. 124, though unquestionably once Sir 
Henry Irving’s, is not the genuine Eugene Aram lantern, as Messrs. 
Sotheran clearly explain in their description of it (lot 679) in their 
catalogue of autographs, relics, &c. (Piccadilly Series, No. 28). Mr. 
Hall Caine is said to own the genuine lantern, bequeathed him by 
D. G. Rossetti, and I learn from a gentleman, who is attending to his 
correspondence during his absence abroad, that Mr. Caine wrote an 
article on the subject, but this I am entirely unable to trace.—E. R. W. 


2If Goldsborough were innocent, and had indeed said that the body would be found 
in Stokesly Beck, he would have supplied an illustration of Aram’s argument at p. 95, 
lines 31-35. 

3‘*Some Experiences of a Barrister’s Life,” chapter 3, 


221 


* 


Tet 


setae 


a: 


bert} 


oleh 


+ 

3; 
sleds TetaTyTT, 
fopeemnnnnins 


fs 
a} 


ie 
7. 


er 
Tetetetess 
goo Ss534 
sti 

ina al 
abate 5f: 
rae et 


ze 


Ty 
Na 


ue 
i 


i 


Ps ; =. 
rie. risa} 
sate 

a shy 
waht pT 
sia eitanantht 

iat repose tits 
SNH SHES 
Malate heiteleleiniet 


af 
St 
ath 


He 
ral 
nity 


4? 
rat 


ty 
ath 
it 


rast. 
Sait 

Mf oe 
ett Te 


sie! 


sig} 
<. at 4} 
nie 
sit 


ahh 


eetsety 


ve 


oe 


Beery 


