^ 


\ 


f  ?yv/6^5>v 


IRotable  Scottish  trials 


City  of  Glasgow   Bank   Directors 


c3 


bo 


CD 

O 

rH 

M 

^ 

hH 

fl 

fl 

0 

1-3 

m 

'r— 1 

&D 

fl 

h- f 

S 

>, 

O 

U 

d 

a 

a 

® 

0 

W 

+3 

0) 

tn" 

o 

w 

>. 

c3 

■p 

E^ 

X3 

a 

0 

c3 

« 

■!   -    .-.jswitw;, 


.^    :>;:::: 


(0 

;j 

(D 
0 
O 
Dti 

£ 

(D 

(M 
O 

tc 

H-l 

o 


Trial  of  the 


City  of  Glasgow  Bank 
Directors 


EDITED    BY 

William    Wallace,    M.A. 

Advocate 


LONDON 

SWEET    &    MAXWELL,    LIMITED 

Glasgow  and  Edinburgh  :   WILLIAM  HODGE  &  COMPANY 


PRINTED  BY 

VVJLLIAM   HODGE  AND  COMPANY, 

GLASGOW   AND   EDINHURGH. 

1905. 


n;  UNlVi.^^^^^^^^  BARBARA 


CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Introductory— 

The  Stoppage  of  the  Bank,        .-...--  I 

The  Petition  for  Bail, 12 

The  Trial— 

Discussion  on  Relevancy,  ---.-.--  26 

Evidence  for  Prosecution — 

Dr.  M'CJrigor, 42 

G.  A.  Jamieson,           -..-....  48 

James  Muir,          ..-....-         -  50 

William  Morrison, 91,  159 

C.  8.   Leresche,    -         -         .-..--         -  141 

William  Miller, 162 

William  Morris, 165 

John  Turnbull, 192 

James  Wenley, 198 

James  Paul, 201 

John  Fleming, 207 

William  Glen  Walker, 235 

John  Hunter, 252 

A.  F.  Somerville, 264 

John  Gillespie,     ---....--  267 

Alexander  Sutherland,          ......  269 

James  Smith, 271 

Dugald  Bell, 272 

John  Inglis, 277 

John  Wardrop, 282 

James  Hutton,     -----..--  284 

Evidence  for  Defence — 

Alexander  Moore, 293 

James  H.   Stewart, 296 

William  M'Kinnon, 296 

Cunningham  Smith,     ..-.---  297 

J.  A.   Potter, 304 

Henry  Taylor, 305 

Peter  Clouston,    ---------  309 

G.  W.  Clark,       -                  309 

Robert  Tod, 309 

Rev.  F.  L.  Robertson. 309 

Patrick  Playfair, 309 

Michael  Connal, 3(»9,  310 


viii  CONTENTS. 

PAGF. 

Evidence  for  Defence — contintied. 

Lauderdale  Maitland,  --------  309 

John  Cowan, -         -  309 

William  Borland, 309 

Samuel  Raleigh,  ------.--  309 

R.   H.   Evans, 310 

Allan  Sandilands, 310 

Speech  for  Prosecution — 

The  Lord  Advocate, 311 

Speeches  for  Defence — 

Mr.  Trayuer  for  Mr.  Stewart, 354 

Mr.  Balfour  for  Mr.  Potter, 360 

Mr.  Asher  for  Mr.   Salmond, 363 

Mr.   Mackintosh  for  Mr.  Taylor, 365 

Mr.  Robertson  for  Mr.  Inglis,    ------  366 

Mr.  Guthrie  Smith  for  Mr.   Wright,          .         -         .         .  366 

Mr.  Fraser  for  Mr.  Stronach,     ------  367 

Summing-up — 

Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge,        ------  370 

Verdict  and  Sentence,         -.-....  408 

Appendices — 

I.  Petition  for  Warrant  to  Arrest, 409 

II.  The  Indictment, 413 

III.  Declarations  of  the  Prisoners,     - 439 

IV.  Investigators'  Report, 459 


LIST   OF   ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Portraits  of  the  Prisoners  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis, 

John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  S.  Stronach,     -         -  Frontispiece 

Portraits  of  the  Prisoners  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter, 

and  Robert  Salmond, facing  page    12 

Mr.  Mackintosh,  Counsel  for  William  Taylor,  -        -        -  „  26 

Mr.  Balfour,  Counsel  for  Lewis  Potter,     -        .        .         .  ,,  70 

Mr.  J.  P.  B.  Robertson,  Counsel  for  Henry  Inglis,  -         -  „  92 

Mr.  Asher,  Counsel  for  Robert  Salmond,           ...  ,,  128 

Lord  Craighill, „  168 

Mr.  J.  Guthrie  Smith,  Counsel  for  John  Innes  Wright,   -  ,,  214 

Lord  Mure, „  268 

Mr.  Trayner,  Counsel  for  John  Stewart,  -        -         -        -  „  296 

Lord  Advocate  (Watson), ,,  312 

Lord  Justice-Clerk  (Lord  MoncreiflF),         .        .         .        .  „  37O 


THE    CITY   OF   GLASGOW   BANK 

TRIAL: 

JANUARY,  1879. 

CHAPTER    I. 
The  Stoppage  of  the  Bank. 

The  trial  of  the  City  Bank  Directors  ranks,  in  the  estimation  at 
least  of  the  layman,  if  not  of  the  professional  lawyer,  as  probably 
the  most  important  which  has  taken  place  in  Scotland.  The 
magnitude  of  the  financial  crisis  brought  about  by  the  collapse 
of  the  Bank,  the  social  standing  of  the  Directors  to  whose 
hands  the  management  of  it  was  entrusted  and  who  so  shame- 
fully abused  the  confidence  reposed  in  them,  the  unparalleled 
disclosures  of  financial  turpitude  and  recklessness  revealed  in 
the  report  of  the  professional  gentlemen  who  conducted  the 
preliminary  investigation  of  its  affairs  immediately  after  the 
stoppage,  and  the  startling  nature  of  the  evidence  adduced  by 
the  prosecution,  all  combined  to  invest  the  trial  with  an  interest 
which  is  not  surpassed  in  the  annals  of  our  criminal  jurisprudence. 
That  this  financial  disaster,  which  brought  ruin  to  so  many 
homes,  depriving  in  many  instances  the  widow  and  the  orphan 
of  their  sole  means  of  maintenance,  was  brought  about,  not  by 
innocent  misfortune,  but  by  the  criminal  recklessness  of  men 
whose  commercial  probity,  high  social  standing,  and  professed 
religious  belief  had  induced  thousands  of  their  fellow-countrymen 
to  place  implicit  trust  in  their  honesty  and  integrity  only  serves 
to  intensify  the  interest  felt  in  their  trial.  How  these  men 
abused  the  confidence  reposed  in  them — ^how,  by  insidious  steps, 
they  converted  a  once-sound  and  prosperous  banking  concern 
into  a  mere  machine  for  the  abstraction  of  the  hard-won  savings 
of  the  small  and  all-too-confiding  investor,  only  to  throw  them 
into  the  lap  of  wealthy  and  unscrupulous  speculators,  who  were 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

thus  enabled  to  dissipate  them  in  schemefii  of  reckless  folly  and 
insensate  gambling — how,  while  posing  as  pillars  of  com- 
mercial integrity,  they  were  in  reality  the  rotten  props  of  a 
decaying  and  worthless  concern — ^may  be  seen  from  a  perusal 
of  the  evidence  adduced  for  the  prosecution,  of  the  brilliant 
and  incisive  speech  of  the  Lord  Advocate,  and  of  the  no  less 
luminous  and  weighty  charge  to  the  jury  of  the  learned  Lord 
Justice-Clerk. 

The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  commenced  business  as  a  banking 
company  in  the  year  1839,  having  its  head  office  in  Glasgow 
and  numerous  branches  throughout  Scotland.  It  continued  to 
carry  on  business  until  the  end  of  the  year  1857,  about  the 
time  at  which  the  Western  Bank  of  Scotland  closed  its  doors, 
when  it  also  suspended  payment.  But  at  the  instance  of  a 
number  of  influential  men  in  the  West  it  was  resuscitated,  and 
again  resumed  businessi  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  1858. 
It  was  registered  under  the  Joint  Stock  Companies  Act  of  1862 
in  November  of  that  year,  and  continued  its  operations  until 
it  finally  ceased  to  do  business  and  closed  its  doors  on  2nd 
October,  1878.  There  were  in  all  1249  partners  connected 
with  it,  and  the  paid-up  capital  amounted  to  £1,000,000.  At 
the  beginning  of  1878  the  reserve  fund  was  stated  at  £450,000, 
the  dividends  and  surplus  profits  in  hand  at  £148.501,  the 
deposits  at  £8,382,712,  and  the  "circulation,  acceptances,  etc.," 
at  £2,114,229.  A  noteworthy  fact  in  connection  with  the  bank 
was  that  it  had  more  branches  than  any  other  Scottish  establish- 
ment, the  total  number  of  these  being  133.  Taken  at  the 
quotations  made  in  the  course  of  December,  the  price  per  £100 
of  stock  for  the  last  three  years  was— 1875,  £228  ;  1876,  £228  ; 
and  1877,  £243. 

Notwithstanding  its  apparent  prosperity,  the  Bank  had,  how- 
ever, begun  to  experience  some  difficulty  in  carrying  on  its 
business.  For  a  week  or  two  before  the  final  crash  it  had 
been  pretty  generally  hinted  in  banking  circles  that  calamity 
in  a  certain  quarter  could  not  long  be  delayed.  It  had  begun 
to  be  bruited  in  banking  circles  that  the  unusually  large  number 
of  acceptances  which  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  had  floating  in 
the  London  market  had  latterly  lent  colour  to  the  belief  that 
the  Directors  were  not  so  careful  in  their  dealings  and  financial 
operations    as    prudent    men    of    business    should    have    been. 

2 


The  Stoppage  of  the  Bank. 

There  was,  it  was  rumoured,  a  disposition  on  the  part  of  the 
Directors  to  lend  countenance  to  unsound  speculations,  and  to 
give  credit  where  it  could  not  be  given  without  considerable 
risk,  and  that,  as  a  consequence,  the  influential  position  of  the 
Bank  had  itself  in  the  long  run  become  jeopardised.  Against 
this  suspicion  there  was,  at  the  same  time,  the  share  list  to 
point  to,  in  which  the  stock  of  the  Bank  was  to  be  found 
keeping  its  place  well  alongside  its  neighbours'. 

To  the  general  public,  however,  the  intelligence  came  no 
further  back  than  a  week  before  the  stoppage,  and  even  then, 
of  course,  the  gossip  was  altogether  indefinite,  as  no  one  cared 
to  overstep  caution  by  publicl}^,  naming  the  bank  suspected. 
In  what  manner  the  unhealthiness  of  the  concern  was  for  so 
long  kept  a  secret  cannot  even  yet  be  explained.  But  the 
fact  that  in  August,  1878,  a  dividend  at  the  rate  of  12  per 
cent,  had  been  declared,  and  that  up  till  the  day  before  the 
crash  the  stock  remained  steady  at  £236,  proves  that  the  actual 
state  of  matters  was  not  before  the  minds  of  the  shareholders, 
and  could  not,  it  was  at  first  believed,  have  been  known  to  the 
Directors.  So  soon,  however,  as  the  rumours  began  to  assume 
a  shape,  the  topic,  notwithstanding  its  vagueness,  engrossed  a 
great  part  of  the  business  talk  up  till  the  Friday  previous  ;  but 
as  there  was  no  appearance  in  the  state  of  the  Bank  stocks  to 
bear  out  suspicion,  the  stoiy  was,  at  the  end  of  the  week, 
believed  by  most  outsiders  to  be  merely  an  Exchange  hoax. 

Just  as  the  public  were  beginning  to  believe  that  the  dis- 
quieting rumours  would,  after  all,  prove  false,  the  worst  fore- 
bodings were  realised  by  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank.  The  sudden 
fulfilment  of  the  evil  rumours,  therefore,  found  the  commercial 
community  all  but  unprepared.  The  resolution  of  the  Directors 
to  take  the  step  was  made  known  at  a  comparatively  late  hour 
on  the  forenoon  of  Tuesday,  the  1st  of  October,  1878,  and, 
meeting  immediately  afterwards,  the  managers  of  the  other 
banks  agreed  to  issue  an  announcement  to  the  effect  that,  to 
lessen  the  inconvenience  of  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank  and  its 
ceasing  to  issue  notes,  they  would  receive,  in  the  ordinary  course 
of  business,  the  notes  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  then  in 
circulation. 

Though  nothing  publicly  transpired  as  to  the  causes  which 
had  brought  about  the  failure,  the  significance  of  the  occurrence 
was,  happily,  not  misunderstood  by  the  public,  and  any  panic  in 

3 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

the  circumstances  was  felt  to  be  unreasonable.  To  the  jjeneral 
public  the  occurrence,  it  was  at  first  thought,  might  even  prove 
beneficial.  The  complications  of  the  Bank,  it  was  feared,  would 
prove  fatal  to  the  concern  itself,  and  the  failure,  it  was  believed, 
might  be  more  disastrous  to  those  directly  concerned  than  even 
the  failure  of  the  Western  Bank  was,  but  depositors,  on  the 
other  hand,  would,  it  was  expected,  be  fully  provided  for.  The 
action  of  the  other  banks  in  accepting  City  of  Glasgow  Bank 
notes  prevented  a  repetition  of  the  panic  which  occurred  at  the 
stoppage  of  the  Western  Bank,  when  its  notes  were  refused  by 
the  other  banks.  Indeed,  no  better  testimony  of  the  public 
confidence  in  the  soundness  of  the  Scottish  banking  system 
could  have  been  given  than  the  calmness  with  which  the 
announcement  of  the  stoppage  was  received.  Though  the 
announcement  that  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  had  closed  its  doors 
came  upon  the  public  like  a  bolt  from  the  blue,  the  common 
sense  of  the  public  asserted  itself,  and,  profiting  by  the  lesson 
taught  by  the  failure  of  the  Western  Bank,  there  was,  fortu- 
nately, no  run  upon  the  banks.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that, 
deeply  as  the  stoppage  was  regretted  because  of  the  loss  and 
inconvenience  which  it  must  necessarily  occasion,  there  was  a 
pretty  general  feeling  of  relief — a  rotten  branch  had  been  cut 
away,  and  the  good  tree  of  Scottish  banking,  it  was  felt,  would 
brave  all  storms  the  better  for  its  absence. 

The  subject  of  the  stoppage  was,  of  course,  the  chief  topic 
of  conversation  among  business  men  throughout  the  day,  and 
a  good  deal  of  uneasiness  was  manifested  in  many  quarters  as 
to  the  effect  it  was  likely  to  have,  especially  on  the  smaller  class 
of  tradesmen.  The  rapid  recovery  of  the  Bank  from  its  last 
crisis,  and  the  consequent  rise  in  the  value  of  its  stock  under  the 
impulse  of  improving  dividends,  seems  to  have  rendered  City 
Bank  shares  a  favourite  investment  with  small  capitalists,  and 
more  especially  with  widows  and  persons  retired  from  business 
on  a  moderate  competency,  and  it  was  feared  that  a  considerable 
number  of  this  class  might  be  seriously  affected,  more  especially 
as,  besides  holding  shares,  many  had  also  their  deposits  chiefly 
lodged  in  this  Bank.  The  more  the  list  of  shareholders  was 
scanned  the  less  confidence  did  it  inspire  among  commercial  men. 
It  was  seen  to  be  one  of  the  most  unsubstantial  of  share  lists 
for  an  undertaking  of  such  an  extensive  character  that  could 
possibly  be  imagined.  A  considerable  number  of  the  share- 
4 


The  Stoppage  of  the  Bank. 

holders  wez-e  alleged  to  have  had  advances  made  to  them  by  the 
Bank  to  the  extent  of  their  holdings,  and  altogether  it  was 
believed  there  were  so  many  who  might  not  be  able  to  respond 
to  any  call  made  on  them  that  the  whole  of  the  deficiency  would 
have  to  be  made  up  by  a  comparatively  limited  section  of  the 
copartnery.  When  business  opened  on  the  Exchange,  brokers, 
under  instructions,  pressed  large  quantities  of  stock  upon  the 
market,  with  the  natural  result  of  a  fall.  Very  little  bank 
stock  changed  hands,  but  other  stock  started  at  a  reduction  of 
from  £1  to  £4  per  share.  Several  million  pounds  worth  of 
stock  are  said  to  have  been  offered,  and  the  losses  arising  from 
forced  sales  must  have  reached  an  enormous  amount. 

On  the  day  following  the  stoppage  the  Directors  placed  the 
books  of  the  Bank  in  the  hands  of  Alexander  Bennet  M'Grigor, 
LL.D.,  of  the  fii'm  of  Messrs.  M'Grigor,  Donald  &  Co.,  writers  in 
Glasgow,  and  William  Anderson,  C.A.,  of  the  firm  of  Messrs. 
Kerr,  Andersons,  Muir  &  Main,  accountants  there,  with  instruc- 
tions to  investigate  into  and  prepare  a  report  of  the  state  of  the 
affairs  of  the  Bank,  to  be  laid  before  a  meetinsr  of  the  share- 
holders,  to  be  subsequently  convened.  At  a  meeting  of  the 
Directors  of  the  Bank  held  in  Glasgow  on  5th  October,  Messrs. 
Anderson  and  M'Grigor  reported  that,  though  they  had,  as  yet, 
been  able  only  in  the  most  cursory  manner  to  examine  into  the 
condition  of  the  Bank,  they  were  satisfied  it  was  impossible 
for  it  to  continue  its  business,  and  that  it  would  be  advisable  for 
it  to  wind  up  its  affairs.  They  therefore  recommended  that 
in  the  interests  of  the  shareholders  no  time  should  be  lost  in 
having  it  put  into  liquidation,  and  that  with  this  view  a  meeting 
of  the  shareholders  should  be  convened  under  the  provisions  of 
the  Companies  Acts.  It  was  accordingly  resolved  to  call  an 
extraordinary  general  meeting  of  the  shareholders  for  the  22  nd 
October,  to  resolve  as  to  whether  the  Bank  should  be  wound  up, 
and,  if  so  resolved,  to  appoint  liquidators.  The  date  named  was 
the  earliest  for  which,  legally,  imder  the  contract  of  copartnery, 
the  meeting  could  be  called.  The  investigation  into  the  affairs 
of  the  Bank  by  Messrs.  Anderson  and  M'Grigor  was  meanwhile 
proceeded  with  as  rapidly  as  possible,  but  the  work  proved  so 
complicated  and  difficult  that  no  official  statement  could  be  placed 
in  the  hands  of  the  shareholders  for  several  days.  Enough 
was,  however,  then  known  to  place  the  magnitude  of  the  failure 
beyond  doubt,  though  it  was  still  hoped  that,  when  all  the  assets 

5 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

were  realised,  the  sum  to  be  made  good  by  the  shareholders  might 
not  be  quite  so  large  as  had  been  indicated. 

The  report*  by  Dr.  M'Grigor  and  Mr.  Anderson  was  issued 
shortly  before  nine  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  Friday,  18  th 
October,  and  it  revealed  a  state  of  matters  which  far  exceeded 
the  anticipations  of  the  most  despondent  shareholder.  The 
rumour  had,  indeed,  got  bruited  about  before  the  issue  of  the 
report  that  the  deficiency  amounted  to  upwards  of  £5,000,000, 
but  it  was  at  firs-t  discredited,  and  it  only  received  credence  at  all 
owing  to  its  persistent  repetition  by  those  who  were  supposed  to 
have  good  information  on  the  subject.  Only  a  few  copies  of 
the  report  were  at  first  issued  for  the  use  of  the  press,  and  conse- 
quently some  time  elapsed  before  the  details  oozed  out.  When 
they  were  ultimately  sufficiently  confirmed,  there  was  something 
like  consternation  amongst  the  anxious  crowds  who  besieged  the 
offices  of  the  various  newspapers.  Men  were  taken  aghast,  and 
could  not  realise  the  astounding  facts  disclosed.  Nothing  like 
it  had  been  anticipated  even  by  the  most  pessimistic,  and  groups 
of  haggard  and  anxious  people  lounged  about  the  streets  until  a 
late  hour  talking  over  the  dreadful  disclosures,  while  general 
gloom  and  an  uneasy  feeling  prevailed.  With  the  issue  of  the 
report  the  shareholders  had  at  least  some  light  thrown  upon  the 
condition  of  the  Bank's  aflairs,  and  a  most  sombre  light  it  was, 
unfortunately.  The  sum  of  the  whole  matter  was  seen  to  be 
that  the  Bank  had  lost,  on  a  moderate  and  probably  favourable 
estimate,  £6,200,000 — i.e.,  the  whole  of  the  paid-up  capital  and 
reserve  fund,  together  with  fully  £5,000,000  besides.  That  was 
a  most  disastrous  statement  for  the  unhappy  shareholders,  and 
it  was  apparent  that  a  loss  of  such  magnitude  could  never  have 
fallen  on  them  but  for  reckless  mismanagement  to  begin  with, 
and  deliberate  and  long-continued  fraud  practised  to  hide  that 
mismanagement.  The  story  set  forth  in  the  report  was  one  of 
the  most  disgraceful  in  the  history  of  banking.  Accounts  had 
been  deliberately  falsified,  securities  entered  at  fictitious  values, 
bad  debts  taken  as  good  assets,  and  the  xerj  gold  which  ought 
to  have  been  held  under  the  Act  of  1845  against  the  note  issue 
deliberately  squandered  to  the  extent  of  over  £300,000.  The 
Government  had  been  deceived  by  false  returns,  the  shareholders 
by  "  cooked "  balance  sheets,  and  everything  done,  in  short, 
that  a  perverse  ingenuity  could  think  of  to  conceal  the  bankrupt 

*  See  Appendix. 


The  Stoppage  of  the   Bank. 

condition  of  the  Bank  until  it  became  a  national  calamity. 
The  revelations  of  the  investigators  startled  the  mercantile  com- 
munity almost  as  much  as  the  news  of  the  failure,  and  were  felt 
to  be  the  signal  for  many  and  needed  reforms.  Here  was  a 
bank  ^professedly  occupied  with  the  commerce  of  Scotland,  a 
bank  notable  among  Scots  banks  for  its  pushing  endeavours  to 
establish  branches  all  over  the  northern  half  of  the  kingdom, 
throwing  away  millions  of  the  money  of  its  depositors  to  support 
hopelessly  rotten  firms  in  the  East  India  trade,  investing  in 
doubtful  or  altogether  speculative  securities,  such  as  Erie  shares 
and  other  American  railway  stocks,  buying  land  in  Australia  and 
New  Zealand,  and  generally  behaving  like  an  insane  gambler 
mad  to  be  rid  of  his  fortune.  This,  too,  was  a  position  into 
which  the  managers  of  this  Bank  had  obviously  drifted  at  first 
by  following  the  ordinary  recognised  course  of  banking  business. 
They  had  lent  rather  freely  on  a  bad  security,  or  hud  puffed  up 
some  possibly  shrewd  and  rich  but  over-eager  speculator,  to  the 
loss  of  the  concern.  Then  courage  failed  them  ;  they  dared  not 
tell  the  truth.  It  was  easier  to  hide  losses  in  ambiguous  balance 
sheets,  good  only  for  deception,  and  the  first  losses  were  thus  con- 
cealed. Then  worse  came,  and  it  became  necessary  to  go  from 
one  criminal  act  to  another  in  order  to  keep  the  ever-increasing 
losses  out  of  sight,  until  at  last  the  criminality  reached  the  point 
of  paying  a  splendid  dividend  and  issuing  a  balance  sheet  showing 
a  large  surplus,  at  the  very  time  when  the  funds  of  the  Bank 
were  so  utterly  exhausted  that  the  managers  had  to  abstract  the 
gold  held  against  the  notes  in  order  to  keep  the  concern  above 
water  for  a  few  more  days.  Recklessness  led  to  difficulties,  and 
difficulties  led  to  fraud  in  order  that  the  true  state  of  matters 
might  be  kept  from  the  shareholders  and  the  public.  As  the 
deposits  of  honest  men  came  in  they  were  handed  over  to 
speculators  whose  losses  daily  demanded  more  and  more.  One 
evil  step  led  to  another.  The  utter,  almost  inconceivable  rotten- 
ness of  the  concern  had  to  be  cloaked  with  a  fair  seeming,  and  to 
that  end  dividends  were  paid,  and  when  peoj^le,  perhaps  with 
some  suspicion  that  all  was  not  right,  took  their  stock  into  the 
market,  it  was  bought  by  the  Bank  itself,  in  order  to  keep  up 
the  quoted  price.  From  first  to  last  there  was  not  one  redeeming 
feature. 

Paradoxical  as  it  might  seem,  the  case  was  so  bad  that  it  was 
even  hoped  that  it  might  sitrengthen  the  confidence  which  the 

7 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

country  had  in  its  banking  system.  It  was  impossible  to  imagine 
that  there  could  be,  in  the  management  of  any  other  bank,  men 
so  bereft  of  honour  and  honesty  as  to  be  carrying  on  a  system 
so  base  as  that  which  had  prevailed  in  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank, 
and  if  that  was  true,  as  who  can  doubt,  the  soundness  of  Scottish 
banking  might  be  considered  as  fairly  proved.  Some  critics  in 
England  had  at  once  been  ready  with  their  assurance  that  the 
Scottish  system  was  to  blame.  The  truth  was  that  the  cause  of 
the  failure  was  the  gross  and  criminal  departure  of  the  Directors 
from  the  Scottish  system.  It  must,  however,  be  remembered 
that  among  the  Scottish  banks  the  City  of  Glasgow  had  always 
occupied  a  somewhat  exceptional  place.  The  stoppage  in  1857 
brought  to  light  the  damaging  fact  that,  with  numerous  branches, 
extensive  deposits,  and  a  large  circulation  of  notes,  this  unwieldy 
and  widely  ramified  concern  had  yet  attempted  to  cai'ry  on  its 
business  without  either  the  aid  or  the  protection  of  Government 
stocks  or  other  convertible  securities.  At  that  time  it  had  been 
pointed  out  by  competent  financial  authorities  that  the  true 
safety  of  both  public  and  shareholders  was  to  be  found  in  allow- 
ing the  Bank  to  be  wound  up.  Much  indignation  was  expressed 
in  Glasgow  commercial  circles  at  this  opinion,  but  the  result 
seemed  to  show  that  enormous  suffering  would  have  been  saved 
had  that  advice  been  taken.  What  the  Bank  then  was  it  had 
apparently  continued  to  be — a  bank  merely  in  name,  in  truth  a 
simple  channel  to  convey  the  money  of  depositors  from  the 
country  districts  to  Glasgow,  in  order  that  it  might  be  squan- 
dered in  India,  the  Western  States  of  America,  Canada,  and  New 
Zealand.  By  such  operations  the  home  trade  was  impoverished, 
foreign  and  colonial  business  inflated,  and  even  the  price  of 
land  in  New  Zealand  raised  to  a  point  hurtful  to  emigrants 
as  well  as  prejudicial  to  the  ultimate  interests  of  permanent 
settlers. 

Upon  a  good  many  of  the  points  that  have  been  mentioned  the 
list  of  shareholdeis  casts  a  lurid  light.  Take,  for  instance,  the 
position  of  the  Directors.  Several  of  them  had  had,  beyond  all 
doubt,  large  advances  out  of  the  funds  of  the  Bank.  Many 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  pounds  had  been  thus  applied ;  and 
the  meaning  of  it  was  that  these  Directors  had  been  able  to  use 
their  position  to  get  advances  which  no  prudent  manager  would 
have  made.  It  might  have  been  expected  that  the  Directors 
would  at  least  have  a  substantial  interest  in  the  concern  which 
8 


The  Stoppage  of  the   Bank. 

they  managed,  or  mismanaged.  Here  is  an  account  of  their 
holdings :  — 

John  Stewart,          -----  £1,000 

Robert  Salmond,     -         -         -         -         -  1,200 

Lewis  Potter, 1,200 

John  Innes  Wright,         -         -         -         -  1,200 

William  Taylor,      -         -         -         -         -  1,800 

R.  S.  Stronach,       -----  900 

*Henry  Inglis,           .         -         -                   .  1,700 

*John  Gillespie,        -----  2,000 

♦Robert  Craig,                    -         -         .         .  20,467 

*A.  F.  Sommerville,          -         -         -         -  11,000 

The  asterisks  show  those  Directors  who  constituted  what  was 
called  the  Edinburgh  Board.  They  were,  it  is  understood, 
entrusted  with  the  Edinburgh  business,  but  had  little  or  nothing 
to  do  with  the  management  of  the  general  afEairs  of  the  Bank. 
That  was  left  to  the  Glasgow  Board,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  the 
stock  held  by  all  the  Glasgow  Directors  only  amounted  to  £7300, 
or  less  than  half  that  of  one  of  the  Edinburgh  Directors  alone. 
A  man's  holding  may  not  be  a  fair  measure  of  his  ability  as  a 
Director,  but  shareholders  as  a  rule  prefer  that  those  who 
manage  their  affairs  have  a  really  substantial  interest  in  the 
concern.  The  list  of  the  shareholders  as  at  the  date  of  the 
crisis  presents  features  of  no  less  interest.  The  power  of  the 
shareholders  to  meet  the  demands  which  were  likely  to  be  made 
upon  them  became  a  question  of  inuch  importance  in  view  of 
liquidation.  An  analysis  of  the  list  of  shareholders  may  not  be 
amiss.  The  list  shows  that  the  shareholders  were  divided  as 
follows  :  — Those  holding: 


Under  £100,      - 

- 

- 

95 

At  £100, 

- 

- 

- 

-       183 

Exceeding 

£100 

and    under 

£200, 

55 

jj 

200 

500, 

-       455 

5J 

500 

1,000, 

-       240 

1,000 

2,000, 

-       156 

>> 

2,000 

5,000, 

72 

5,000 

10,000, 

12 

JJ 

10,000 

- 

- 

4 

Total  shareholders,    -         -         -     1272 

This  analysis  brings  out  some  noteworthy  facts.  Thus,  it  will 
be  seen  that  more  than  a  fifth  of  the  whole  number  of  stock- 
holders held  amounts  of  £100  or  under.      They  represented,  for 

9 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

the  most  part,  people  with  small  savings,  the  accumulations,  per- 
hajis,  of  years  of  toil,  which  at  one  fell  swoop  were  swept  away. 
More  than  a  half  of  the  whole  number  had  less  than  £500  of 
stock,  and  they  were  largely  people  not  able  to  bear  any  great 
pressure.  Most  prominent  of  all  is  the  fact  that  there  were 
only  eighty-eight  stockholders  who  held  amounts  of  £2000  and 
upwards,  and  even  in  these  eighty-eight  were  included  the  Bank 
itself,  which  held  no  less  than  £153,536  of  stock.  We  have, 
then,  this  startling  fact,  that  the  quantity  of  stock  held  by  the 
Bank  reduced  the  actual  paid-up  capital  of  the  Company  to  below 
£847,000,  and  it  was  consequently  upon  the  holders  of  this  sum, 
and  not  upon  the  holders  of  a  full  million,  that  the  loss  ultimately 
fell. 

The  Crown  authorities  acted  with  commendable  vigour  and 
promptitude  in  the  case  of  the  Directors.  No  sooner  was  the 
report  of  the  investigators  made  known  than  the  first  steps  were 
taken  towards  the  prosecution  of  those  who  had  taken  part  in  the 
frauds  which  that  I'eport  revealed.  Warrants  were  issued,  and 
on  Saturday  evening,  the  19th  October,  Robert  Salmond,  Lewis 
Potter,  John  Innes  Wright,  William  Taylor,  Directors ;  R.  S. 
Stronach,  Director  and  Manager ;  and  Charles  Leresche,  Secre- 
tary, were  arrested  in  Glasgow ;  while  John  Stewart  and  Henry 
Inglis,  Directors,  were  arrested  in  Edinburgh.  The  first-named 
formed  the  Glasgow  Board,  which  managed  all  the  general  affairs 
of  the  Bank.  They  were  apj^rehended  by  order  of  the  Lord 
Advocate,  and  taken  before  the  Sheriff  of  Lanarkshire,  when  they 
were  remanded  for  forty-eight  hours.  A  petition  and  complaint 
at  the  instance  of  William  Alexander  Brown,  advocate,  the  Pro- 
curator-Fiscal of  Lanarkshire,  was  thereupon  prepared  and 
presented  to  the  Sheriff  on  the  21st  October,  charging  them  with 
falsehood,  fraud,  and  wilful  imposition ;  and  declarations  with 
reference  thereto  having  been  emitted  by  the  accused,  the  Sheriff, 
after  considering  the  same,  and  the  evidence,  so  far  as  taken,  of 
same  date,  committed  them  for  trial.  Thereafter  a  second  peti- 
tion and  complaint  at  the  instance  of  the  Procurator-Fiscal 
was  presented  to  the  Sheriff  on  29th  October,  1878,  charging  the 
said  Lewis  Potter,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  and  John 
Stewart,  Directors  of  the  Bank  from  and  since  the  year  1872, 
and  John  Innes  Wright  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  the 
former  a  Director  and  the  latter  the  Manager  of  said  Bank  from 
and  since   the   year    1875,   and  Charles   Samuel   Leresche,    the 

10 


The  Stoppage  of  the  Bank. 

Secretary  of  said  Bank  from  and  since  the  year  1870,  with  the 
crime  of  theft ;  and  the  accused  having  been  brought  before  the 
Sheriff,  they  each  of  them  emitted  a  declaration  having  reference 
thereto,  and  were  of  same  date,  namely,  29th  October,  1878, 
committed  to  the  prison  of  Glasgow,  therein  to  be  detained  until 
liberated  in  due  course  of  law. 


zx 


CHAPTER    II. 

The  Petition  for  Bail. 

Bt  the  Act  1701,  cap.  6,  which  was  the  principal  statute  relating 
to  bail  in  force  at  the  date  of  the  arrest  of  the  Directors,  a 
person  accused  of  a  crime  not  inferring  a  capital  sentence  might 
demand  his  liberation  on  offering  sufficient  caution  that  he 
"  shall  appear  and  answer  to  any  libel  that  shall  be  offered 
against  him,  for  the  crime  or  offence  wherewith  he  is  charged, 
at  any  time  within  the  space  of  six  months."  The  effect 
of  this  enactment  was  to  make  non-bailable  such  crimes  as 
forgery,  furtum  grave  {i.e.,  theft  of  a  serious  kind),  or  theft 
by  a  person  who  was  a  thief  by  habit  and  repute,  which  at  that 
time  were  all  crimes  for  which  a  capital  sentence  might  be 
exacted.  In  considering  whether  a  crime  was  capital  or  not, 
the  magistrate  was  entitled  to  take  into  consideration  all  the 
facts  set  forth,  and  to  judge  whether  they  amounted  in  law  to 
the  name  of  the  crime  in  the  warrant  of  commitment.  If  the 
magistrate  or  other  judge  to  whom  the  application  was  made 
considered  the  crime  to  be  one  not  inferring  a  capital  sentence, 
and  therefore  bailable,  he  was  obliged,  within  twenty-four  hours 
after  the  petition  was  presented  to  him,  to  specify  the  amount 
of  bail  to  be  found,  under  pain  of  wrongous  imprisonment.  The 
discretionary  power  as  to  fixing  the  amount  of  bail  to  be  found, 
which,  before  the  Act,  was  vested  in  the  magistrate  or  other 
judge,  was  abolished,  and  it  was  provided  that  the  maximum 
amount  of  bail  should  be — For  a  nobleman,  6000  merks  ;  for 
a  landed  gentleman,  3000  merks ;  for  any  other  gentleman  or 
burgess,  1000  merks;  and  for  an  inferior  person,  300  merks. 
By  the  Act  of  11  Geo.  I.  cap.  26,  the  magistrate  was  empowered 
to  double  the  former  amounts ;  and  by  39  Geo.  III.  cap  49, 
the  maximum  amount  of  bail  was  altered  to  sums  of  £1200, 
£600,  £300,  and  £60  sterling  for  the  respective  classes  enumer- 
ated under  the  Act  of  1701. 

12 


■d 
a 
o 

a 

M 

+3 
ti 
m 
,Q 
O 

c 


0 

to     ■£ 


o 

J 


-p 
03 


-p 
M 

O 

1-3 
CO 

o 
n 

-p 


to 

-p 

-p 

u 
o 


o 
a. 


^     1 


o 


The  Petition  for  Bail. 

The  High  Court  of  Justiciary  or  the  Lord  Advocate  had,  how- 
ever, in  the  exercise  of  their  discretion,  the  power  of  granting 
bail  for  crimes  which  were  not  bailable  under  the  Act^,  and  could 
fix  the  amount  of  bail  at  any  sum  which  they  deemed  right. 

Immediately  after  their  commitment,  therefore,  the  Directors, 
Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  John  Innes  Wright,  William 
Taylor,  and  John  Stewai't,  together  with  Robert  Summers 
Stronach,  the  Manager,  and  Charles  Samuel  Leresche,  the  Secre- 
tary, applied  to  the  Sheriff  to  be  admitted  to  bail.  From  the 
latter  bail  to  the  extent  of  two  sureties  to  the  amount  of  £5000 
each  was  accepted,  with  the  consent  of  the  Lord  Advocate,  and 
Charles  Samuel  Leresche  was  subsequently  liberated.  The 
application  of  the  other  petitioners  was  refused  by  the  Sheriff 
ujjon  the  ground  that  the  offence  for  which  they  had  been 
committed  amounted  to  furtum  grave,  and  that  bail  could  not 
be  accepted  without  the  consent  of  the  Lord  Advocate,  which  had 
not  been  obtained.  They  accordingly  presented  a  petition  to 
the  High  Court  of  Justiciary  to  be  admitted  to  bail,  and 
founded  on  the  terms  of  commitment  and  of  the  complaint  upon 
which  it  was  pronounced.* 

At  the  calling  of  the  petition  before  the  High  Court, 
Mr.  AsHER,  who  appeared  for  Mr.  Potter,  said — The  accused  Mr.  Asher. 
applied  to  the  Sheriff'  to  be  liberated  on  bail,  but  hi8  application 
was  refused  upon  the  ground  that  he  was  committed  on  a  charge 
of  furtum  grave,  and  therefore  it  was  not  within  the  power  of 
the  Sheriff  to  grant  it  without  the  consent  of  the  Crown.  The 
accused  thereupon  applied  to  the  Lord  Advocate,  and  offered  to 
find  bail  to  the  extent  of  £10,000,  but  the  Lord  Advocate  refused 
his  consent.  His  lordship  having  been  asked  to  state  whether 
his  refusal  was  in  consequence  of  the  amount  offered  being  insuffi- 
cient, I  understand  it  has  been  intimated  that  bail  will  not  be 
accepted  in  the  present  case.  In  these  circumstances  the  present 
application  is  made  to  your  lordships  on  the  two-fold  ground — 
first,  that  the  petition  upon  which  the  commitment  has  proceeded 
does  not  set  forth  facts  inferring  a  crime  not  bailable  by  law  ; 
and,  secondly  and  alternatively,  that,  under  the  equitable  power 
which  the  Court  undoubtedly  possesses,  bail  ought  to  be  accepted 
in  the  circumstances  of  the  present  case.  The  commitment  by 
the  Sheriff  is  in  the  usual  terms.  It  does  not  specify  the  charge 
on  which  the  accused  is  committed,  except  by  reference  to  the 
complaint ;  and  although  theft  is  charged  in  the  complaint,  it 
does  not  follow,  I  submit,  that  the  accused  is  committed  for 
theft.     He  is  committed  merely  for  trial  upon  the  facts  stated 

*  See  Appendix. 

It 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Mp.  Ashep.  in  the  complaint.  The  question  therefore  is  whether  the  facts 
stated  in  the  complaint  do  or  do  not  amount  to  a  case  of  furtum 
grave,  and  therefore  to  a  crime  which  is  not  bailable  by  law. 
I  have  to  ask  your  lordships'  attention  to  the  terms  of  the  com- 
plaint. That  charge,  my  lords,  I  think  in  substance  amounts  to 
this,  that  Mr.  Potter,  being  a  Director  of  this  Bank,  and  knowing 
that  the  Bank  was  insolvent  as  the  i-esult  of  reckless  trading 
on  the  part  of  most  of  the  Directors,  and  having  conspired  with 
his  co-Directors  to  continue  the  business  of  the  Bank  and  make 
it  appear  solvent,  and  having  certain  bills  in  the  possession  of 
the  Bank  for  the  purpose  of  collection,  endorsed  those  bills  to 
the  London  Joint  Stock  Bank,  by  which  bank  the  proceeds  were 
placed  to  the  credit  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank.  The  bills 
must  have  been  endorsed  to  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  because 
the  charge  is  that  they  were  transferred  by  that  Bank  hj  endor- 
sation  to  the  London  Joint  Stock  Bank,  which  could  not  have 
been  done  unless  they  had  been  endorsed  to  the  City  Bank. 

The  Sheriff  having  committed  the  accused  for  trial  on  the 
species  facti  I  have  mentioned,  the  question  is  whether  these 
species  facti  constitute  a  case  of  furtum.  It  is  true  that  the 
line  which  separates  breach  of  trust  and  embezzlement  from 
theft  has  frequently  been  said  to  be  somewhat  shadowy ;  it  is 
equally  clear  that  theft  and  breach  of  trust  and  embezzlement 
are  two  distinct  crimes  in  the  eye  of  the  law.  Nothing  could 
more  thoroughly  illustrate  this  than  the  consideration  that  if 
this  crime  is  theft — looking  to  the  number  and  amount  of  the 
charges — it  is  a  capital  offence ;  if  it  is  embezzlement,  it  is 
not  a  capital  offence.  It  has  also  been  said  in  applications  like 
the  present  that  where  the  facts  of  the  particular  case  are  such 
as  to  bring  it  close  to  the  margin  which  divides  breach  of  trust 
and  embezzlement  from  theft,  the  Court  will  not  at  this  stage 
decide  to  which  category  it  belongs,  but  leave  it  for  decision 
on  the  indictment  at  the  trial.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  quite 
plain  that  there  are  cases  in  regard  to  which  there  can  be  no 
doubt  as  to  which  category  they  belong  to.  The  thief  who 
walks  into  a  shop  and  theftuously  lifts  an  article  and  appropriates 
it  to  his  own  uses  and  purposes  could  never  be  said  to  have 
committed  breach  of  trust  and  embezzlement.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  mercantile  agent  who  receives  goods  on  consignment  for 
sale,  and,  having  sold  them,  appropriates  the  price  to  his  own 
uses,  could  never  be  said  to  have  committed  theft.  If  in  such 
a  case  the  mercantile  agent  were  committed  for  theft,  and  so 
was  deprived  of  his  right  to  bail,  he  would  be  entitled,  I  submit, 
to  come  to  this  Court  and  say,  "  The  facts  on  which  I  have  been 
committed  have  been  improperly  designated  theft ;  they  do  not, 
in  law,  constitute  theft,  and  I  am  therefore  entitled  to  bail." 
On  behalf  of  the  accused  in  the  present  case  I  now  prefer  a  like 
demand,  and  on  the  same  grounds.       The  species  facti  in  the 


The  Petition  for  Bail. 

complaint  in  the  present  case  never  can  be  construed  as  amount-  Mr.  Asher. 
ing  to  the  crime  of  theft. 

There  are  two  points  which  appear  to  be  conclusive  against 
the  case  being  one  of  theft.  First,  it  is  not  said  that  the 
proceeds  of  these  bills  were  appropriated  by  the  accused  either 
for  their  own  uses  and  purposes,  or,  through  their  instrumen- 
tality, for  the  uses  and  pui-poses  of  the  institution  of  which  they 
were  the  Directors.  It  is  not  said  that  the  proceeds  of  these 
bills  when  collected  in  London  were  not  immediately  credited 
and  ultimately  paid  to  those  who  had  deposited  them  for  collec- 
tion ;  and  in  the  absence  of  any  allegation  to  that  effect  I  am 
entitled  to  assume  that  the  case  against  the  accused  is  merely 
this,  that,  having  bills  in  their  possession  for  collection,  they 
prematurely  sent  them  to  London  for  that  purpose,  and  that 
when  collected  the  proceeds  were  credited  or  paid  to  the  parties 
to  whom  the  bills  originally  belonged. 

The  second  point,  which,  I  submit,  is  conclusive  against  the 
case  being  one  of  theft,  is  the  nature  of  the  accused's  possession 
of  the  things  said  to  have  been  stolen.  What  they  are  said 
to  have  stolen  are  bills — pieces  of  paper  having  that  written 
upon  them  which  made  them  bills.  Documents  are  the 
things  said  to  have  been  stolen.  That  gives  rise  to 
the  question,  was  Mr.  Potter's  possession  of  them  such  as 
to  make  his  appropriation  of  them,  even  assuming  that 
he  did  so,  to  his  own  uses  and  purposes  an  act  of  theft,  or  was 
his  possession  not  such  as  to  make  that  appropriation  merely 
breach  of  trust?  My  lords,  I  know  of  no  case  in  which  facts 
at  all  resembling  those  of  the  present  case  have  been  held  to 
amount  to  theft.  The  Bank  were  endorsees  of  the  bills  in 
question.  Now,  there  is  no  case,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  in  which 
a  person  possessing  a  thing  under  such  a  title  as  an  endorsee 
custody  merely  commits  theft.  But  if  the  property  so  appro- 
priated is  in  his  lawful  possession,  he  does  not  commit  theft, 
but  breach  of  trust.  This  distinction  is  recognised  in  several 
cases — for  example,  in  the  cases  of  Hugh  Climie,  High  Court, 
21st  May,  18.38,  2  Swinton,  118  ;  and  George  Brown,  High  Court, 
3rd  July,  1839,  2  Swinton,  394.  In  all  such  cases — ^the  case  of 
the  earner,  for  example,  the  case  of  the  serv^ant  having  custody 
of  his  master's  wine,  and  such  similar  cases,  in  which  appropria- 
tion by  the  custodier  is  held  to  be  theft  and  not  breach  of 
trust — the  possession  has  been  of  the  nature  of  custody  merely, 
and  did  not  exclude  the  ownei-'s  possession. 

Applying  that  principle  to  the  present  case,  the  question 
arises  whether  the  possession  by  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  of 
the  bills  endorsed  and  delivered  to  them  for  collection  was  at 
all  akin  to  that  of  the  watchmaker  who  receives  the  watch  for 
repair,  under  contract  to  return  the  very  article  he  has  received, 
or  whether  it  was  not,  as  in  the  class  of  cases  represented  by 

IS 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Mr.  Ashep.  Climie,  such  possession  as  that  of  the  servant  who  received 
money  to  pay  particular  accounts,  not  under  an  obligation  to 
apply  the  money  so  received  in  forma  sptcifica  in  payment  of 
the  accounts,  but  to  expend  an  amount  equal  to  that  which  he 
had  received  in  payment  of  the  accounts.  The  bills  here  were 
put  by  the  owners  into  the  possession  of  the  Bank  for  a  purpose 
which  excluded  the  idea  of  the  possession  of  the  owner  con- 
tinuing and  the  Bank  being  merely  a  custodier.  It  was  iio 
part  of  the  contract  under  which  the  bills  were  endorsed  and 
delivered  to  the  Bank  that  the  bills — the  things  stolen — should 
be  returned  to  the  owner  in  forma  specifica.  It  is  against  the 
whole  theory  and  practice  of  banking  that  such  a  thing  should 
ever  happen.  The  purpose  of  a  bill  being  endorsed  and  put  into 
the  hands  of  a  bank  is  that  the  bank  may  have  a  title  to 
neo-otiate  it,  and  when  this  has  been  done  it  is  not  the  bill  in 
forma  specifica  that  comes  back  to  the  owner,  but  the  proceeds 
which  are  realised  from  its  negotiation.  The  purpose  of  the 
transaction  was  that  the  bills  should  be  negotiated.  All  the 
bills,  with  the  exception  of  two  payable  in  Govan,  were  payable 
in  London.  Now,  what  was  the  duty  of  the  Bank  in  such  a 
easel  Was  it  not  part  of  the  contract,  and  according  to  the 
intention  of  such  a  transaction,  that  the  Bank  should,  some  time 
prior  to  the  date  of  payment,  take  the  necessary  steps  for  having 
the  bill  presented  to  the  party  by  whom  it  was  due,  and  at  the 
place  where  it  was  payable?  That,  surely,  does  not  imply  that 
the  Bank  is  to  send  an  official  to  London  cariying  the  bill  with 
him,  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  the  money  and  bringing  the 
money  back  in  a  bag,  and  delivering  it  in  forma  specifica  to  the 
owner  of  the  bill.  The  transaction  is  this — The  City  of  Glasgow 
Bank,  having  a  correspondent  in  London,  has  in  due  course  to 
endorse  the  bill  to  the  correspondent,  by  whom  the  money  is 
collected,  and,  when  received,  it  is  placed  to  the  credit  of  the 
Glasgow  Bank,  leaving  the  Glasgow  Bank  to  account  to  the 
person  from  whom  they  received  the  bill,  either  by  putting  it  to 
the  credit  of  his  account  or  paying  over  the  money  when  it  is 
wanted. 

I  submit  that  this  is  a  case  about  which  there  is  no  doubt 
as  to  the  category  to  which  it  belongs.  The  facts  stated  may 
amount  to  breach  of  trust,  but  clearly  can  never  be  theft,  the 
Bank  having  been  lawfully  in  possession  of  the  bills  for  the  pur- 
pose of  negotiating  them,  and  with  a  title  to  negotiate  them.  I 
know  that  this  is  not  the  stage  of  the  case  at  which  the  relevancy 
of  the  charge  falls  to  be  determined.  But.  on  the  other  hand, 
this  Court,  I  submit,  will  not  allow  any  one  to  be  deprived  of 
his  legal  right  to  bail  where  the  facts  disclosed  in  the  petition 
plainly  and  distinctly  do  not  constitute  a  non-bailable  crime, 
merely  because  in  the  petition  they  are  put  under  a  nomen 
juris  which  belongs  to  that  class.  That  is  distinctly  stated  in 
i6 


The   Petition  for  Bail. 

the  case  of  Joseph  Dawson  Wormald,  High  Court,  3rd  December,  Mr.  Asher. 
1875,  3  Couper,  191.  I  ask  your  lordships  to  observe  the 
marked  distinction  between  that  case  and  the  present.  In  the 
case  of  Wormald  the  thing  stolen  was  the  money  so  viciously 
acquired  ;  here  the  thing  said  to  have  been  stolen  is  a  bill 
admittedly  endorsed  and  delivered  to  the  Bank  for  collection. 
I  submit  it  is  not  within  the  range  of  possibility  that  at  the 
trial  of  this  case  facts  can  possibly  coiae  out  which  will  establish 
that  there  was  vice  in  the  acquisition  by  the  Bank  of  the  bills 
in  question  at  all  analogous  to  the  vice  which  existed  in  the 
acquisition  of  the  money  in  Wormald's  case.  It  would  be  con- 
trary to  the  whole  case  set  out  in  the  petition  that  such  a 
result  should  happen.  That  case  is  simply  this,  that  the  bills 
were  endorsed  and  delivered  to  the  Bank  for  collection.  They 
were  therefore  in  the  lawful  possession  of  the  Bank,  with  no 
obligation  to  return  them  in  forma  specifica — on  the  contrary, 
with  a  duty  to  negotiate  them,  to  convert  them  into  cash,  and 
account  for  the  proceeds.  It  is  impossible  that  a  case  of  that 
nature  ever  could  at  the  trial  turn  out  to  be  theft.  In  the 
case  of  Wormald,  which,  of  course,  was  a  prosecution  at  the 
instance  of  the  Lord  Advocate,  it  was  stated  by  the  Lord  Justice- 
Clerk,  and  concurred  in  by  the  other  learned  judges,  that  "if 
the  charge  of  theft  had  been  inserted  in  the  petition  in  order 
to  prevent  the  offence  from  being  bailable,  without  any  reason- 
able ground  in  the  facts  stated,  we  might  interfere."  My  con- 
tention is  that  in  the  present  case  the  species  facti  in  the 
complaint  have  been  misnamed — that  they  do  not  afford  any 
reasonable  ground  for  a  chai-ge  of  theft,  and  therefore  that  my 
client  is  entitled  to  bail. 

I  have  further  to  ask  attention  to  the  Act  52  Geo.  III.  cap. 
63,  which  is  an  Act  passed  to  prevent  bankers  embezzling 
securities  or  documents  which  are  placed  in  their  custody.  I 
refer  to  that  Act  for  the  purpose  of  showing  that  the  Legis- 
lature, when  dealing  with  a  crime  of  that  nature,  and  making 
statutory  provision  for  its  punishment  at  a  long  time  subse- 
quent to  the  Act  1701,  attached  to  it  a  sentence  which  in  law 
makes  it  a  bailable  offence.  Now,  the  Legislature  in  that 
statute  makes  the  act  of  a  banker,  entrusted  with  negotiable 
documents,  fraudulently  appropriating  them  to  his  own  uses 
and  purposes  a  statutory  crime,  and  attaches  to  it  a  sentence 
which  makes  it  a  bailable  offence.  The  charge  in  the  present 
case  is  not  under  the  statute,  but  at  common  law.  Indeed,  the 
facts  in  the  complaint  would  not  have  warranted  the  statutory' 
charge.  The  statute  deals  with  the  case  of  a  banker  who,  being 
entrusted  with  a  negotiable  document,  defrauds  the  party  from 
whom  he  got  it,  and  defrauds  him  for  the  pui-pose  of  taking  the 
benefit  to  himself,  whereas  it  is  not  said  in  the  present  case 
either  that  the  banker,  by  endorsing  the  bill  prematurely,  or 
B  17 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 


Mr.  Ashep.  sending  it  to  London,  benefited  himself  or  the  institution  of 
which  he  was  a  servant  to  the  extent  of  one  single  shilling,  or 
defrauded  the  person  from  whom  he  got  the  bill  to  the  extent 
of  a  single  shilling  either.  I  contend  therefore  that  the  more 
aggravated  statutory  crime  being  bailable  by  law,  it  would  be 
a  denial  of  justice  to  treat  the  charge  in  this  complaint  as 
constituting  a  crime  not  bailable  by  law.  These  are  the  remarks 
I  have  to  make  in  support  of  the  petition  in  so  far  as  rested 
on  the  legal  right  of  the  accused  to  bail. 

But  I  put  the  case,  secondly  and  alternatively,  on  this  ground, 
that,  possessing,  as  your  lordships  undoubtedly  do,  an  equitable 
power  to  grant  bail  when  it  cannot  be  demanded  as  matter  of 
right,  this  is  a  case,  looking  to  the  circumstances,  in  which  that 
equitable  power  should  be  exercised.  My  lords,  I  have  a  further 
ground  to  state,  and  it  is  this,  that  upon  the  species  far.ti  of 
this  petition  there  are  no  less  than  five  or  six  persons  detained 
in  jail  upon  a  charge  of  theft  which  could  only  have  been  the 
act  of  one  man.  The  theft  is  said  to  have  been  committed  by 
endorsing  and  transmitting  the  bills  to  the  London  Joint  Stock 
Bank.  It  is  scarcely  conceivable  that  that  should  have  been 
the  act  of  all  the  Directors.  It  was  the  ordinary  mode  of 
passing  to  the  London  banker  the  title  to  the  bills  which  had 
to  be  collected  in  London,  and  would  presumably  be  done  by 
an  official  of  the  Bank  in  discharge  of  his  ordinary  duty.  The 
power  of  the  Court  has,  I  think,  never  been  doubted.  It  was 
expresslv  recognised  in  the  case  of  WiUiam  Hamilton  Thomson, 
High  Court,  10th  July,  1871,  2  Couper,  103.  I  have  only 
further  to  point  out,  in  support  of  my  appeal  to  the  equitable 
power  of  the  Court,  the  great  importance  to  the  accused  of 
being  at  liberty  for  the  purpose  of  assisting  in  the  preparation 
of  his  defence  for  the  trial.  The  case  will  necessarily  involve 
much  complicated  detail,  and  the  importance  to  the  accused  of 
having  free  access  to  those  acting  for  him  is  too  clear  to  require 
to  be  stated.  The  age,  also,  of  the  accused,  viz.,  seventy-two, 
and  his  social  position,  are  elements  not  to  be  overlooked.  On 
the  whole  matter.  I  submit  that  the  accused  is  entitled  to  bail 
as  matter  of  right ;  but  if  your  lordships  should  be  of  a  different 
opinion,  then  T  submit  the  circumstances  of  the  case  are  such 
as  to  call  for  the  exercise  by  the  Court  of  its  equitable  power 
to  allow  liberation  on  bail  being  found  to  such  an  amount  as 
your  lordships  may  think  proper. 

The  Lord  Advocate,  who  replied  on  behalf  of  the  Crown, 
said — I  have  hitherto  considered  this  as  a  non-bailable  offence  ; 
but  even  if  I  had  entertained  the  opposite  view  I  would  have 
refused  the  offers  of  bail  that  have  been  made,  simply  because 
I  did  not  think  that  their  acceptance  would  have  enabled  me 
to  rely  upon  the  attendance  of  the  accused  on  the  day  of  trial. 
It  is  very  obvious  that  matters  of  this  kind  depend  upon  con- 

i8 


Lord 
Advocate 


The  Petition  for  Bail. 

siderations — nay,  upon  suspicions  or  surmises — which  it  would      Lord 
be  highly  inexpedient,  and  certainly  improper,  to  state  in  open    "^°*'^'®* 
Court.     There  are  two  points  raised  on  behalf  of  the  prisoners. 
The  first  is  that  the  crime  or  offence  described  in  the  complaint 
before  the  Court  does  not  amount  to  theft ;   and  the  second  is 
that,  assuming  that  it  does,  the  circumstances  of  the  case  are 
such  that  the  Court  ought  to  use  their  discretion  and  liberate 
the  accused  on  bail.     As  regards  the  first  point,  the  Court  will 
not,  I  apprehend,  deal  with  the  question  at  this  stage  as  one 
purely  of  relevancy,   but   will   view   the   crime   charged   as   one 
purely  falling  within  the   category  to  which  the  public  prose- 
cutor has  assigned  it,  unless  the  contrary  plainly  appears  on  the 
face  of  the  complaint.     And  I  would  first  call  attention  to  what 
is  alleged  in  the  complaint  against  the  accused,  and  then  advert 
to  the  authorities  cited   in  favour  of  the   contention  that  the 
charge  made  is  not  one  of  theft.      No  doubt,   in  the  ordinary 
course    of    dealing    between    the    Bank    and    its    customer,    the 
money  received  from  the  acceptor  would  be  put  to  the  credit 
of  the  customer's  account  with   the  Bank.     But  my  allegation 
is  that  the  Bank  had  no  right  to  deal  with  the  bills  otherwise 
than  by  collecting  their  amounts.     They  were  not  entitled  to 
negotiate  the  bills,  and  thereby  rear  up  an  entirely  new  set  of 
obligations,    because    the    moment    a    bill    is    endorsed    by    the 
Bank,   either  to  a  banking  company  or  to  an   individual,   the 
result  is  that  the  depositor,  who  wants  nothing  more  than  that 
the  money  shall  be  collected  from  the  acceptor,  and  who  gives 
it  for  that  purpose,  becomes  personally  liable.     The  bill  when 
negotiated  (being  endorsed  by  the  Bank)  becomes  a  ground  of 
personal   liability  against  the   depositor   as   an   endorser.  ■     The 
purpose  for  which  the  bills  were  deposited  with  the  Bank  was 
for  collection,  and  that  they  might  not  go,  according  to  com- 
mercial  phrase,    into    the   circle.     The   question   raised   here   is 
not   whether,    if    the    mandate    given    to    the    Bank    had    been 
followed  out  and  the  money  received  by  the  Bank,  that  money 
was  the  property  of  the  customer  of  the  Bank,  and  whether  it 
was  stolen,  because  it  is  quite  clear  in  criminal  law  that  you 
may  have   the  theft  of  a  document  or   obligation   upon   paper 
given  for  the  purpose  of  collection,  even  although  the  result  of 
following   out   instead   of  acting   in   breach   of   the  mandate    to 
collect  would  be  to   make  the   collector  accountable,   and   only 
accountable,   for   the  money.     What   is  here   complained   of   is 
the  appropriation  of  the  ipsissivia  corpora  of  the  documents  of 
these  depositors,    and    in    breach   of   the   contract   under   which 
they  were  delivered  to  the  Bank,  and  the  appropriation  of  the 
same  by  the  Bank.      And  I  contend  that  is  an  act  of  theft,  and 
theft  only. 

^  The  cases  of  Climie  and  Brown  in  2  Rwinton  which  have  been 
cited    merely    illustrate    certain    well-known    principles    of    the 

19 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  criminal  law,  and  do  not  exhaust  the  whole  principles  of  the 
*  law  on  the  point.  But  the  principle  of  these  cases  was  carried 
a  good  deal  further  in  the  direction  I  am  contending  for  by 
the  case  of  Robert  Micliie,  High  Court,  28th  Januaiy,  1839,  2 
Swinton,  319.  The  second  alternative  charge  in  that  case  was 
in  these  terms — "  The  said  James  Laurie  having,  time  and  place 
above  libelled,  delivered  to  the  said  Robert  Michie  a  bank  or 
banker's  note  for  £'!{}  sterling  in  order  that  he  might  get  the 
same  changed,  and  return  with  and  deliver  the  change  thereof 
to  the  said  James  Laurie,  the  said  Robert  Michie  did  then  and 
there,  or  at  some  other  time  and  jDlace  to  the  prosecutor 
unknown,  wickedly  and  feloniously  steal  and  theftuously  away 
take  the  said  bank  or  banker's  note  for  £20  sterling,  the  property 
or  in  the  lawful  possession  of  the  said  James  Laurie."  Thus 
the  mandate  given  to  Michie,  the  accused,  along  with  the  note, 
and  the  contract  upon  which  he  got  it,  being  that  he  should 
get  it  changed  and  return  with  the  twenty  pounds  in  cash,  it 
was  contended  that  his  appropriation  of  the  note  could  not 
amount  to  theft  because  he  had  the  authority  of  Laurie  to 
change  it,  and  that  made  him  simply  liable  to  account  for  the 
twenty  pounds,  the  proceeds  of  the  note.  But  the  bench  of 
three  judges  were  clearly  of  opinion  that  the  libel  was  relevant ; 
and  when  the  case  went  to  trial,  the  only  defence  made  was  an 
attempt  to  prove  that  Michie  had  changed  the  note,  and,  in 
point  of  fact,  had  stolen  the  change.  That  case  goes  this  length, 
that  the  theft  of  a  note  given  for  the  special  purpose  of  getting 
change  and  returning  the  change  is  a  relevant  charge  of  theft, 
even  although  the  theft  of  the  change  might  not  have  amounted 
to  that  crime.  There  is  also  the  case  of  John  Mooney,  High 
Court,  l7th  November,  1851,  J.  Shaw,  496.  In  that  case  the 
accused,  of  whom  certain  articles  had  been  purchased,  received 
from  the  purchaser  a  £1  note,  that  he  might  retain  the  price 
and  return  the  balance.  He  appropriated  the  whole  sum,  and 
it  was  held  that  it  was  a  theft  of  the  £1  note,  and  not  of  the 
balance.  The  charge  in  the  libel  was  that  he  took  the  note 
and  appropriated  it  to  his  own  use  without  changing  it  for  the 
purpose  of  accounting  for  the  balance. 

This  is  not  a  case  of  sending  the  bills  to  the  London  Bank 
for  collection.  What  is  averred  is  that,  instead  of  retaining 
them  in  their  hands  for  the  purpose  of  collection,  they  paid 
them  into  their  account  with  the  London  Bank.  If  the  bills 
had  been  sent  to  London  for  collection,  the  London  Bank  would 
have  been  directly  liable  to  the  creditors  in  the  l)ills,  and  they 
would  have  accepted  the  mandate  given  to  the  City  Bank,  and 
would  not  have  put  the  proceeds  to  the  credit  of  the  account 
between  them  and  the  City  Bank.  And  I  maintain  that  that 
is  complete  appropriation  by  the  Bank  of  the  corpora  of  the 
bills  to  their  own  purposes.     The  question  is  not  one  of  account- 

20 


The  Petition  for  Bail. 

ing,  but  a  question  of  what  the  Bank  has  done  with  the  price      Lord 
of  the  moveable  propert}'  which  the  bills  represented.  Advocate. 

The  only  remaining  question  is  as  to  whether  the  Court  ought, 
in  the  circumstances,  to  admit  the  accused  to  the  privilege  of  bail. 
I  do  not  in  the  least  dispute  that  the  Court  has  such  a  discre- 
tionaiy  power,  and  I  do  not  suppose  that  any  public  prosecutor 
would  ever  think  of  interposing  himself  between  the  discretion  of 
the  Court  and  the  accused,  if  the  Court  felt  disposed  to  exercise  it ; 
but,  my  lords,  I  am  bound  to  say,  upon  the  authorities  reported, 
that  I  can  find  nothing  to  justify  bail  on  the  arguments  stated 
for  the  accused.  In  the  case  of  John  Wilson,  High  Court, 
October,  1875,  3  Couper,  169,  Lord  Ardmillan  laid  down 
the  law  upon  an  application  to  be  admitted  to  bail  thus — 
"  I  do  not  think  this  application  incompetent.  I  do  not  say 
that  the  Court  could  not,  in  the  exercise  of  their  discretion, 
authorise  the  liberation  on  bail  in  this  case,  if  they  thought 
that  the  circumstances  of  the  case  really  required  it.  But,  while 
I  think  there  is  nothing  to  preclude  the  Court  from  granting 
the  prayer  of  this  petition,  were  they  satisfied  that  it  was  right 
to  do  so,  still  I  must  keep  in  view  that  a  large  discretion  rests 
on  the  Lord  Advocate,  and  that  the  Court  trusts  him,  and  has 
every  confidence  that  he  exercises  that  discretion  well."  With 
reference  to  the  suggestion  that  the  Court  should  require  some- 
thing like  proof  from  the  public  prosecutor,  I  shall  not  shrink 
from  giving  your  lordships,  in  that  inquiry,  all  the  assistance 
in  my  power,  but  I  must  enter  my  protest  against  such  a  course 
being  followed  in  a  case  like  the  present. 

Mr.  Balfour,  who  appeared  for  Potter,  Salmond,  Taylor,  and 
Leresche,  substantially  repeated  the  arguments  advanced  by 
Mr.  Asher. 

The  Lord  Justice-General  delivered  the  leading  judgment, 
which  was  acquiesced  in  by  all  the  other  judges,  with  the 
exception  of  Lord  Young,  who  dissented. 

The  Lord  Justice-General  said- — The  petitioners  have  been  Lord  Justice- 
committed  for  trial  by  warrant  of  the  Sheriff  of  Lanarkshire,  General, 
granted  on  a  petition  by  the  Procurator-Fiscal,  charging  the 
petitioners  with  the  theft  of  certain  valuable  securities,  being 
bills  of  exchange  for  the  aggregate  amount  of  £23,693  lis.  7d. 
No  such  waiTant  is  ever  gi'anted  by  a  Sheriff  without  full  and 
deliberate  consideration  of  the  declarations  of  the  prisoners, 
and  of  the  precognitions  of  the  witnesses  examined  for  the 
prosecution.  The  Procurator-Fiscal  did  not  content  himself 
with  stating  the  charge  in  the  general  terms  which  I  have  just 
used,  which  would  be  quite  sufficient  and  according  to  practice  in 
ordinary  cases  of  theft,  but  he  most  properly,  in  so  serious  and 
important  a  case,  has  set  out  the  species  facti  which  he  contends 
amount  to  an  act  of  theft,  committed  by  all  the  petitioners  in 

21 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  Justice-  pursuance  of  a  wicked  conspiracy.  The  offence  thus  charged, 
General.  j^  -^  amount  to  theft,  is,  on  the  admission  of  the  counsel  for  the 
petitioners,  not  bailable.  But  it  is  open  to  the  petitioners  still 
to  demand  that  they  shall  be  admitted  to  bail  as  a  matter  of 
right,  if  they  can  show  clearly  that  the  species  facti  alleged 
against  them  can  in  no  view  amount  to  the  crime  of  theft 
charged.  But  we  are  not  under  such  an  application  to  deal 
with  the  question  as  if  we  were  judging  of  the  relevancy  of  an 
indictment.  Unless  the  petitioners  can  satisfy  the  Court  that 
the  facts  stated,  even  when  cast  into  the  more  jjrecise  and 
detailed  form  of  the  minor  proposition  of  an  indictment,  will 
be  clearly  and  undoubtedly  insufficient  to  sustain  a  charge  of 
theft,  they  cannot  demand  liberation.  I  am  not  satisfied  of 
this.  It  is,  in  my  opinion,  far  from  being  clear.  This  being 
so,  it  seems  to  me  that  it  would  be  quite  improper  to  go  further 
for  the  present,  or  to  state  or  indicate  any  impression  I  might 
possibly  entertain,  as  an  individual  judge,  as  to  the  future  course 
01'  prospect  of  the  prosecution,  for  that  would  be  to  prejudge 
to  some  extent  questions  which  may  hereafter  arise  as  to  the 
relevancy  of  indictments  or  criminal  letters  which  may  be  served 
on  the  petitioners.  Such  a  couise  would  not  be  fair  either  to 
the  prosecutor  or  to  the  accused. 

The  petitioners  further  appeal  to  the  discretion  of  the 
Court  to  liberate  them  on  such  bail  as  may  be  sufficient  to 
ensure  their  appearance  hereafter  to  answer  the  charges 
made  against  them.  That  we  possess  such  discretionary 
power  cannot  be  disputed.  But  in  prosecutions  conducted 
by  the  public  prosecutor  the  discretion  is  vested,  in  the  first 
instance  at  least,  in  the  Lord  Advocate ;  and  unless  it  can 
be  alleged  that  the  Lord  Advocate  has  refused  bail,  not  for  the 
purpose  of  securing  the  ends  of  justice,  but  for  some  other  and 
therefore  illegitimate  puq^ose,  I  think  the  Court  ought  not  to 
interfere,  because  such  interference  would  be  nothing  less  than 
relieving  the  Lord  Advocate  of  the  responsibility  attaching  to  hi.s 
high  office.  He  is  subject  to  this  responsibility,  and  vested  with 
the  corresponding  discretion,  because  he  has  means  and  api3liances 
for  obtaining  information  and  forming  a  judgment  which  are  riot 
within  the  reach  of  any  other  official  and  are  not  possessed  by 
this  Coui-t.  But  it  has  not  been  suggested  that  the  Lord 
Advocate  is  not  discharging  his  important  and  responsible  duties 
with  fairness  and  impartiality,  and  with  a  sole  view  to  the  public 
interest  and  tO'  secure  the  ends  of  justice.  For  the  Court  to 
interfere  in  such  circumstances  with  his  discretion  would  be 
inconsistent  with  the  whole  previous  practice  of  the  Court,  and 
in  the  last  degree  inexpedient. 

Lord  Young.  Lord  Young — The  law  of  bail  in  Scotland  stands  on  an  enact- 
ment of  the  Act  1701  in  these  words — "That  all  crimes  not 
inferring   capital    punishment    shall    be    bailable."        The    peti- 

22 


The  Petition  for  Bail. 

tioners  contend  that  the  crime  for  which  they  stand  committed  ^°'^^  Young, 
does  not  infer  capital  punishment,  and  so  demand,  as  matter  of 
right,  that  they  shall  be  admitted  to  bail ;   and  the  demand  is 
clearly  irresistible  if  the  contention  on  which  it  rests  is  sound. 
The  question  for  us,  then,  is  whether  the  crime  for  which  the 
petitioners  are  in  prison  infers  capital  punishment  or  not,  and  we 
must  judge  of  it  on  the  facts  as  they  are  stated  in  the  warrant  of 
commitment,  or,  as  it  happens  in  this  case,  in  the  petition  of  the 
Procurator-Fiscal,  to  which  the  wanant  refers.       But  the  proposi- 
tion which  we  have  now  to  consider  is,  that  the  alleged  conduct 
amounts  to  a  capital  offence,  or,  to  use  the  language  of  the  Act 
1701,  to  a  crime  '"  inferring  capital  punishment."       This  proposi- 
tion would  be  very  shocking  if  it  were  taken  to  mean  what  it 
expresses ;   but  even  taking  it  as  unreal,  except  in  so  far  as  it 
may  signify  that  an  old  barbarity  of  the  criminal  law  had  not 
been  repealed  by  statute,  but  had  disappeared  under  the  influence 
of  advancing  civilisation,  I  cannot  assent  to  it.       For  I  am  of 
opinion,  first,  that  at  no  period  of  our  history  did  such  facts  as 
are  here  alleged  import  a  capital  crime  ;   and,  second,  that  they 
assuredly  do  not  now.       Down  to  the  date  of  Mr.  Hume's  work, 
and  probably  for  some  short  time  thereafter,  theft,  if  attended 
with  any  aggravating  circmnstance — and  the  great  value  of  the 
thing  stolen  might  be  one — was  by  the  custom  of  Scotland  punish- 
able with  death,  if  the  judge  in  his  discretion  saw  fit.     That  it 
was  customary  law  only,  and  subject  in  its  application  to  the 
discretion  of  the  judge,  Mr.  Hume  announces  emphatically  and 
repeatedly.      He  introduces  the  subject  with  these  words — "  to 
come  now  to  the  practice  of  Scotland  " — and  treats  of  the  whole 
law  of  punishment  in  cases  of  theft  as  depending  on — I  quote  his 
expressions — "  ancient    custom,"    "  equitable    discretion,"    "  the 
course  of  practice,"  "  custom  and  practice,"  "  the  ordinary  course 
of  justice  for  such  offences."       As  the  conclusion  of  the  whole 
matter,  he  leaves,  as  he  doubtless  intended,  his  readers  with  the 
impression  that  the  law  of  punishment  for  theft  was  customary, 
and,  to  a  lar^e  extent,   discretionarv,  and  that  there  had  been, 
and  was,  "  a  variable  course  of  practice  in  which  the  mstances 
are  numerous  to  the  side  of  mercy,"  although  grrave  thefts  always 
brought  the  panel  "  into  hazard  of  his  life."       The  law  on  this 
head  is  still  customary,  but  the  custom  has  greatly  changed,  and 
it  is  not  and  has  not  for  a  long  while  been  true  that  by  the 
custom  of  Scotland  theft  infers  capital  punishment,  or  that  any 
theft,  however  grave,  brings  the  panel  "  into  hazard  of  his  life." 
In  Hume's  time  the  older  custom  was  on  the  wane,  but  had  not 
died  out.       It  is  now  dead,  not  to  be  revived,  unless,  indeed,  we 
should  relapse  into  barbarism.       Theft  is  not,  and,  indeed,  never 
was.  capital  by  statute  ;  and  although  the  common  law,  which 
Hume  refers  to  by  the  expressions  which  I  have  quoted  from  his 
book,  such  as  "  custom  and  practice,"  "  the  ordinary  course  of 

23 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

LordlYoung.  justice,"  etc.,  once  permitted,  or,  it  may  be,  enjoined  the  graver 
sorts  of  it  to  be  punished  with  death,  these,  viz.,  custom,  practice, 
and  the  ordinary  course  of  justice,  and  with  them  the  common 
law,  which  rests  on  t]iem,  and  is,  indeed,  another  expression  for 
them,  are  and  have  for  a  long  while  been  changed.  I  am  there- 
fore of  opinion  that  theft  is  a  crime  not  "  inferring  capital 
punishment."  But,  further,  I  am  of  opinion  that  the  facts  alleged 
against  these  petitioners  do  not  amount  to  the  crime  of  theft. 
I  quite  understand  the  argument  employed  to  bring  them  within 
that  category,  and,  understanding  it,  reject  it  as  too  subtle.  To 
constitute  theft  there  must  be  a  felonious  taking  of  property  out 
of  the  owner's  possession,  and  the  bills  here  in  question  were,  I 
think,  clearly  not  so  taken.  The  Lord  Advocate  was  unable  to 
adduce  any  decided  case  more  available  for  his  argument  than 
that  of  a  man  apj^ropriating  and  running  off  with  a  sovereign  or 
bank  note  which  he  had  got  to  change.  I  will  not  now  enter  on 
an  examination  of  the  decisions,  but  content  myself  with  saying 
that  I  think  they  are  all  inapplicable  to  the  facts  here  presented 
to  us.  I  have  cited  the  enactment  of  the  Act  1701,  which  em- 
bodies the  whole  law  of  bail.  The  expediency  of  it  may  be  ques- 
tionable, but  it  is  certainly  clear.  And  I  cannot  approve  of  any 
attempt  to  control  or  modify  its  operation  by  a  fanciful  and  alto- 
gether unreal  extension  of  capital  crimes  according  to  customs 
which  have  long  ceased  to  be  observed,  and  which  no  one  would 
for  a  moment  think  of  attempting  to  revive.  Now,  the  question 
to  which  I  have  addressed  myself,  in  a  matter  of  purely  customary 
law,  is  whether  now  in  this  year  1878  it  can  be  safely  and  truly 
affirmed  that  the  former  custom  of  Scotland,  according  to  which 
theft  was  punishable  capitally,  has  been  completely  superseded  by 
another  custom,  now  as  firmly  established  and  on  as  good 
authority  as  ever  it  was,  whereby  (that  is,  without  violating  the 
custom)  death  may  not  be  inflicted  for  that  crime.  This  ques- 
tion no  former  decision  can  hinder  me  from  answering,  as  I  have 
done,  in  the  affirmative.  I  think  it  not  doubtful,  and  do  not 
suppose  any  one  does,  that  to  punish  any  of  the  petitioners  with 
death  for  the  misappropriation  of  these  bills  would  violate  the 
custom  of  Scotland,  as  it  would  that  of  any  other  civilised  country 
in  the  world.  The  result  is  that,  in  my  opinion,  the  crime  for 
which  the  petitioners  stand  committed  is  not  a  crime  inferring 
capital  punishment,  and  that  it  is,  therefore,  bailable.  I  have 
only  to  add  that  I  think  the  law  of  bail  is  unsatisfactory,  and 
requires  amendment,  and  that  if  I  could  have  dealt  with  this 
application  as  made  to  the  discretion  of  the  Court,  I  should  have 
concurred  with  your  lordships  in  refusing  it. 

The  cautious  and  even  hesitating  opinion  of  the  learned  Lord 
Justice-General,  one  of  the  most  brilliant  and  clear-headed  lawyers 
who  ever  adorned  the  Scottish  bench,  seems  to  indicate  that  he 
24 


The  Petition  for  Bail. 

was  endeavouring  to  find  reasons  for  an  opinion  not  wholly  in 
accord  with  his  intellectual  judgment,  and  that  had  the  burden 
of  proving  that  the  charges  libelled  against  the  accused  amounted 
in  law  to  a  charge  of  theft  i-ested  with  the  prosecution  rather  than 
with  the  prisoners  to  prove  the  negative,  the  issue  ^A^ould  have 
been  different,  with  the  not  unlikelv  result  that  no  trial  of  the 
Dii-ectors  would  ever  have  taken  place.  It  can  hardly  be  doubted 
that  had  the  right  of  the  prisoners  to  bail  been  affirmed  and  the 
accused  set  free,  as  they  must  have  been  on  finding  sufficient 
security  for  £300,  the  public  sense  of  justice  would  have  been 
most  justly  shocked.  For,  while  all  impartial  people  properly 
abstained  from  prejudging  the  case  against  the  prisoners,  it 
could  not  fail  to  have  been  regarded  as  a  scandal  if  persons  so 
deeply  suspected  of  a  sei-ious  crime  had  been  afforded  facilities 
for  escaping  trial.  Yet,  owing  to  the  state  of  the  law  affecting 
bail  then  in  existence,  this  certainly  was  uncomfortably  near  the 
case.  Indeed,  it  is  perhaps  not  wholly  fanciful  to  suppose  that 
this  consideration  was  not  altogether  absent  from  the  minds  of 
the  learned  judges  who  formed  the  majority,  and  it  is  perhaps 
permissible  to  believe  that  the  judgment  of  Lord  Young  was  the 
only  one  dictated  solely  by  a  consideration  of  the  law  as  it  stood, 
untrammelled  by  a  fear  of  the  consequences  of  the  verdict  of 
public  opinion. 

The  result  of  the  judgment  was  undoubtedly  to  draw  public 
attention  to  the  state  of  the  law  affecting  bail,  and  to  institute  an 
agitation  in  favour  of  its  repeal.  Yet  so  conservative  are  our 
methods,  and  so  slowly  does  public  opinion  crystallise  into  statute 
law,  that  it  was  not  till  eight  years  after  that  any  alteration  in 
the  law  took  place. 

The  law  as  to  bail  is  now  administered  under  the  Criminal 
Procedure  (Scotland)  Act,  1887,  and  by  the  Bail  (Scotland)  Act, 
1888,  by  the  latter  of  which  the  Act  of  1701  was  repealed.  It  is 
provided  by  that  Act  that  all  crimes  except  murder  and  treason 
are  bailable,  it  being  in  the  discretion  of  the  magistrate  before 
whom  the  accused  is  charged  to  grant  or  refuse  bail.  If  bail  be 
admitted,  the  magistrate  must  fix  the  bail  at  such  an  amount  as 
shall  ensure  the  attendance  of  the  accused  at  all  diets  to  which  he 
may  be  cited  on  the  charge.  Where  an  application  for  bail  after 
commitment  is  refused,  or  where  the  accused  is  dissatisfied  with 
the  amount  of  caution  ordered  to  be  found,  he  may  appeal  to  the 
High  Court  of  Justiciary.  25 


CHAPTER  III. 
The  Trial. 

On  Monday,  28th  January,  1879,  in  the  presence  of  a  crowded 
and  expectant  Court,  the  Manager  and  Directors  of  the  Bank 
were  placed  at  the  bar  to  answer  to  the  charges  of  falsehood, 
fraud,  and  theft  preferred  against  them. 

On  the  bench  there  were  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk  (Lord 
Moncreiff)  and  Lords  Mure  and  Craighill. 

The  counsel  for  the  prosecution  were  the  Lord  Advocate 
(Watson),  the  Solicitor-General  (Macdonald),  and  Messrs. 
Burnet,  A.D.,  and  Pearson. 

The  counsel  for  the  prisoners  were — For  John  Stewart — Mr. 
Trayner  and  Mr.  MacLban  ;  for  Lewis  Potter — Mr.  Balfour 
and  Mr.  Jameson  ;  for  Robert  Salmond — Mr.  Ashbr  and  Mr. 
GouDT  :  for  William  Taylor— Mr.  Mackintosh  and  Mr.  Omond  ; 
for  Henry  Inglis — ^Mr.  J.  P.  B.  Robertson  and  Mr.  Maconochie  ; 
for  John  Innes  Wright — Mr.  J.  Guthrie  Smith  and  Mr.  Dickson  ; 
for  Robert  Summers  Stronach — The  Dean  of  Faculty  (Frasbr) 
and  Mr.  Darling. 

DISCUSSION  ON  THE  RELEVANCY. 

The  Lord  Justice-Clerk  having  asked  if  there  were  any  objec- 
tions to  the  relevancy  of  the  indictment, 
_Mp.  ^  Mr.  Mackintosh,  who  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  panel,  Mr. 
Taylor,  said — I  have  to  state  certain  objections  to  the  relevancy 
of  the  libel,  and  I  may  say  that  these  objections  are  concurred 
in  by  my  learned  friends  who  represent  the  other  prisoners,  it 
being,  however,  understood  that  any  of  my  learned  friends  may 
supplement  my  observations  upon  any  matter  which  they  think 
material  to  their  respective  clients.  The  indictment  is  a  some- 
what extensive  document,*  and  it  will  be  proper  that  I  begin  by 
asking  your  lordships'  attention  to  its  general  scheme.  The 
major  proposition  .sets  out  five  separate  charges  which  it  affirms 
to  be  crimes  severely  punishable  by  the  law  of  Scotland.  The  first 
three  are  the  well-known  and  nominate  charges  of  (1)  falsehood, 
fraud,  and  wilful  imposition  ;  (2)  theft ;  and  (3)  breach  of  trust 

*  See  Appendix. 
26 


Mackintosh 


Photn.] 


[J.  Horsbnn/h. 


Mr.    Mackintosh, 
Counsel  for  William  Taylor. 


Discussion  on  Relevancy. 

and  embezzlement.  The  other  two  are  innominate  charges,  fall-  jj^^g^nVQ-ii 
ing  under  no  recognised  legal  category,  and  they  immediately 
follow  the  charges  of  falsehood,  fraud,  and  wilful  imposition. 
That  is  the  major.  The  minor  propositioxa  sets  out  in  the  usual 
form  that  the  accused  are,  all  or  one  or  more  of  them,  guilty  of 
the  said  crimes,  or  one  or  more  of  them,  in  so  far  as,  during  the 
period  mentioned,  they  committed  a  number  of  acts,  which  are 
set  forth  under  seventeen  separate  counts  in  the  minor.  It  will, 
I  think,  be  found  that  these  seventeen  counts  divide  themselves 
into  three  sets  or  series,  the  charges  in  each  set  'of  the  series 
being  substantially  identical.  The  first  set  are  counts  one  to 
three  inclusive,  the  substance  of  which  is  that  they  charge  the 
accused  with  issuing  false  balances  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank 
during  the  years  1876-77-78.  That  is  the  first  series  of  charges, 
and  they  apply  to  all  the  accused.  The  second  series  of  counts 
or  charges  are  those  numbered  four  to  seven  inclusive,  and  they, 
in  substance,  charge  what  I  may  call  for  brevity  the  overdrawing 
of  accounts  by  Directors,  or  certain  of  them.  The  charge  is 
not  common  to  the  whole  of  the  accused,  Messrs.  Potter,  Salmond, 
and  Stronach  not  being  included.  The  third  set  of  charges,  those 
numbei-ed  eight  to  seventeen,  are  charges  of  stealing  or  other- 
wise embezzling  certain  bills  which  had  been  sent  to  the  Bank 
for  collection.*  And  this  set  of  charges  is  directed  against  all 
the  accused.  That  is  the  general  scheme  of  the  indictment, 
and  that  being  so,  I  proceed  to  consider  its  relevancy.  And, 
first,  as  to  the  major  proposition,  I  do  not  know  that  it  is 
necessary  to  enter  upon  any  detailed  discussion.  Questions,  of 
course,  suggest  themselves  in  regard  to  the  two  innominate 
charges  to  which  I  have  referred,  and  I  must  say  that,  construing 
these  charges  upon  their  terms  and  according  to  the  ordinary 
rules  of  construction,  I  think  a  very  serious  question  suggests 
itself  as  to  the  relevancy  of  these  charges.  In  one  view,  the 
charges  in  question  are  simply  charges  of  uttering  untruths  in 
a  particular  form,  and  for  the  purpose  and  with  the  result  of 
producing  a  particular  state  of  public  opinion.  In  another  view, 
they  are  not  distinct  and  separate  charges  at  all,  but  simply 
charges  of  falsehood,  fraud,  and  wilful  imposition,  with  this 
remarkable  peculiarity,  that  although  it  appears  that  the  alleged 
fraud  was  committed  for  the  benefit  of  the  Company,  it  at  the 
same  time  appears  that  the  effect  of  the  fraud  was  to  injure, 
not  merely  third  parties,  namely,  members  of  the  public,  but 
also  members  of  the  Company.  But  while  these  criticisms  may 
be  made,  it  must  be  kept  in  view  that,  in  dealing  with  innominate 
charges,  it  is  always  possible  to  construe  them  by  reference  to 
the  more  detailed  statement  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  minor. 
And  therefore  it  will  be  convenient  to  take,  at  least  in  the  first 

*  The  second  anrl  third  series  of  charges  were  withdrawn  at  the  close  of 
the  evidence  for  the  Crown,  no  evidence  having  been  led  in  regard  to  them. 

27 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Mackintosh  i^^stance,  the  whole  argument  upon  the  relevancy  of  the  minor, 
upon  the  construction  of  which  I  am  to  maintain  to  your  lord- 
ships that  from  first  to  last  it  contains  no  relevant  charge  of 
falsehood,  fraud,  or  wilful  imposition,  or  breach  of  trust  or 
embezzlement,  or  theft,  or  any  other  crime,  nominate  or  innomi- 
nate, known  to  the  law  of  Scotland. 

My  lords,  I  begin  with  counts  one,  two,  and  three,  which  I 
have  described  as  charges  of  issuing  false  balance  sheets,  and  I 
propose  to  take  as  a  specimen  the  first  charge,  which  deals  with 
the  balance  sheet  of  1876.  I  take  that  charge  as  a  specimen, 
because  in  substance  the  other  two  charges  are  substantially  the 
same  and  raise  substantially  the  same  questions.  The  charge 
begins  by  narrating  that  the  accused  were  Directors  of  the  City 
of  Glasgow  Bank,  an  institution  having  a  capital  of  one  million, 
and  that  during  certain  years  which  are  mentioned  it  was  their 
duty  as  Directors  and  Manager  to  see  that  the  books  were 
properly  kept  and  all  transactions  duly  entered,  and  that  it  was 
further  their  duty  to  see  that  every  year  an  abstract  or  stat^ 
ment  at  1st  June  was  prepared  and  submitted  to  the  shareholders. 
It  then  sets  forth  that  "  nevertheless,  on  the  first  or  one  or  more 
of  the  days  of  the  month  of  June,  1876,  or  July  immediately 
following,  the  time  or  times  being  unknown,  in  or  near  the  head 
ofiice  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  you,  the  said  John  Stewart," 
and  so  on,  "  did  all,  or  one  or  more  of  you,  wickedly  and  feloni- 
ously, with  intent  to  defraud  the  members  of  the  Company  and 
the  public,  and  for  the  purpose  of  concealing  and  misrepresenting 
the  true  state  of  the  affairs  of  the  said  Company,  concoct  and 
fabricate,  or  cause  and  procure  to  be  concocted  and  fabricated, 
a  false  and  fictitious  abstract  balance  sheet  or  statement  of 
affairs,  purporting  to  represent  the  true  condition  of  the  Bank's 
affairs  as  at  7th  June,  1876,  in  the  following  or  similar  terms." 
Then  follows  a  copy  of  the  balance  sheet,  which  I  need  not  read. 
Then  there  follows  an  enuniei-ation  of  the  particular  misrepre- 
sentations or  falsehoods  which  it  is  said  to  have  contained,  which 
are  set  forth  under  eight  heads  or  articles,  it  being  premised 
that  the  prosecutor  does  not  bind  himself  to  prove  that  the  whole 
of  these  eight  misrepresentations  were  false  and  fictitious,  Ijut 
only,  as  the  indictment  expresses  it,  that  the  balance  sheet  was 
false  in  the  eight  particulars  mentioned,  "  or  part  thereof." 

These,  my  lords,  are  the  avennents  of  the  falsehood  of  the 
balance  sheet.  Then  the  minor  proposition  goes  on  to  aver 
the  publication  of  the  balance  sheet,  the  purpose  for  which  it  was 
published,  and  the  result  of  its  publication.*  .  .  .  That  is 
the  purpose,  and  these  are  the  results  of  the  publication.  That  is 
all  that  it  is  necessary  to  read  in  connection  with  the  charges  of 
issuing  false  balance  sheets.  And  the  first  question  which  arises 
on   the   relevancy   of    these   charges   is,    whether   the   falsehood 

*  See  page  86. 

28 


Discussion  on  Relevancy. 


of  the  balance  sheet  or  balance  sheets  is  relevantly  averred.     I         Mr. 
submit  to  your  lordships  that  on  this  head  the  libel  is  irrelevant     ^'^  '"  °^  * 
— (I)  as  wanting  in  specification;  and  (2)  as  being  contradictory 
and  unintelligible. 

My  lords,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out,  the  balance  sheet  in 
question  is  said  to  have  been  false  in  eight  several  particulars, 
that  is  to  say,  it  is  said  to  have  contained  eight  several  false 
statements.  The  first  observation  which  occurs  is  that  we  are 
here  left  altogether  in  doubt  as  to  the  sense  in  which  the  state- 
ments complained  of  are  said  to  be  false.  Are  they  false  in  the 
sense  of  being  disconform  to  the  books,  or  in  the  sense  of  being 
disconform  to  the  facts?  or  are  some  of  them  false  in  the  one 
sense  and  some  of  them  in  the  other?  and  if  so,  which  are  false  in 
the  one  sense  and  which  in  the  other?  The  truth  is  that  on  the 
face  of  it  this  enumeration  appears  to  have  been  made  up  on  two 
different  and  inconsistent  principles,  without  any  attempt  at 
discriminating  between  them.  My  observation  is,  that  no  infor- 
mation is  conveyed  to  me  as  to  the  standard  of  truth  in  this 
matter — as  to  the  sense  in  which  the  statement  is  false — whether 
it  is  false  as  disconform  to  the  fact,  or  only  false  as  disconform 
to  the  books  of  the  Bank. 

Passing,  however,  to  the  particulars,  I  first  ask  your  lordships' 
attention  to  the  eighth  article.  What  I  have  to  submit  to  your 
lordships  is,  that  that  eighth  article  is  altogether  wanting  in 
that  sjiecification  to  which  the  accused  were  entitled.  The  state- 
ment there  is  that  this  balance  sheet  is  false  in  respect  that  it 
includes,  as  good,  bad  and  irrecoverable  debts  to  an  amount  far 
exceeding  the  whole  capital  of  the  Bank.  It  is  here  necessaiy 
to  be  borne  in  mind,  first,  that  the  capital  of  the  Bank  thus  said 
to  have  been  lost  amounts  to  £1,000,000  ;  and,  secondly,  that 
the  whole  debts  which  are  thus  stated  to  have  been  overstated 
amount,  as  I  read  the  indictment,  to  something  like  £11,000,000. 
There  is  £8,000,000  in  the  balance  sheet,  and  £2,000,000  more 
should  have  been  added,  so  that  it  comes  to  this,  that  out  of 
£11,000,000  of  outstanding  debts,  the  prosecutor  alleges  that 
upwards  of  £1,000,000  were  bad  and  irrecoverable ;  and  he 
proposes  to  leave  the  accused  to  find  out,  as  best  they  may, 
among  this  £11,000,000  of  debts,  which  million  he  means  to 
found  upon  as  bad  and  in-ecoverable.  I  submit  that  that  is 
altogether  uniDrecedented — that  it  is  unjust  to  the  accused — 
and  that  the  effect  of  this  want  of  specification  must  at  least 
be  to  delete  this  part  of  the  charge  from  the  indictment.  In 
this  matter  I  am  not  speaking  without  authority.  I  do  not 
know  that  this  precise  question  has  ever  come  up  in  a  criminal 
case,  but  I  don't  suppose  that  the  prosecutor  will  contend  that 
he  is  entitled  to  greater  latitude  than  the  pursuer  in  an  action 
founded  on  the  same  media  would  be  entitled  to  in  a  civil  cause. 
Now,  we  have  a  judgment  of  the  First  Division  of  the  Court  of 

29 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

,„„  ,'^'';    .     Session  in  a  civil  cause  founded  upon  precisely  the  same  media 
raaekintosn.  ,  ti    n    i  i  i  •       i  i 

as  tnose  libelled  here,  and  m  that  case  the  same  pomt  was  care- 
fully considered,  and  judgment  pronounced  upon  it.  I  refer  to 
the  case  of  Inglis  v.  Tlie  Western  Baiih,  22  Dunlop,  505. 

The  Lord  Justice-Clerk— What  is  the  specification  here  which 
jou  desiderate — the  individual  debts,  or  the  amounts 

Mr.  Mackintosh — The  individual  debts;  and  I  have  not  got 
the  individual  debts  here,  nor  the  amounts,  nor  anything  else. 
In  the  case  quoted.  Lord  Curriehill  concurred  with  the  Lord 
President  and  Lord  Ivory  that  a  suitable  record  should  be  of 
new  made  up,  and  that  the  revised  condescendence  lodged  should 
be  withdrawn.  That  was  what  was  ultimately  done.  Lord 
Deas,  I  should  add,  also  concurred  with  the  other  judges  that 
it  was  impossible  to  require  the  defenders  to  go  to  trial  without 
having  the  particular  debts  which  were  alleged  to  be  bad  and 
irrecoverable,  and  known  to  be  bad  and  irrecoverable,  set  forth, 
so  that  they  might  prepare  their  defence. 

Now,  my  lords,  that  being  the  case  of  Inglis,  is  there  any 
distinction  between  that  case  and  the  present,  except  that  we 
are  here  not  in  a  civil  but  in  a  criminal  case  ]  If  the  defenders 
in  that  civil  case  were  entitled  to  know  which  million  of  the 
three  millions  of  debts  there  in  question  were  to  be  brought 
against  them  as  bad  and  irrecoverable,  surely,  a  fortiori,  we  are 
entitled  to  know  which  million  of  the  eleven  millions  of  debts 
which  are  here  in  question  are  said  to  be  bad  and  irrecoverable. 
This  is  a  case  of  the  Directors  being  charged  with,  both  in 
hooks  and  balance  sheets,  representing  a  million  and  upwards 
of  bad  and  irrecoverable  debts  as  subsisting  assets  ;  and  the 
question  is  whether,  that  being  charged,  the  accused  are  not 
entitled  to  know  what  the  debts  are  to  which  the  charge  applies, 
and  what  the  accounts  in  the  books  are  that  are  founded  on, 
or  to  know  in  some  other  way  what  is  the  nature  of  the  case 
to  be  made  against  them. 

Without,  therefore,  going  further,  I  submit  to  your  lordships 
that  article  eight  falls  for  want  of  specification,  and  if  that  is  so, 
then  the  next  point  is.  that,  article  eight  falling,  articles  six  and 
seven  must  fall  along  with  it.  The  charges  really  depend  on 
each  other.  If  your  lordships  hold  that  article  eight  is  bad  for 
want  of  specification,  articles  six  and  seven  must  fall  on  the  same 
ground,  for  it  would  not  do  for  the  Crown,  after  being  shut 
out  from  proving  under  article  eight  bad  debts  of  which  they 
had  given  the  accused  no  specification,  to  bring  in  the  same 
evidence  without  notice  as  regards  articles  six  and  seven. 

I  have  next,  however,  to  submit  that  the  averments  of  the 
falsehood  of  this  balance  sheet  are  irrelevant,  not  merely  from 
want  of  specification,  but  in  respect  that  they  are  contradictory 
and  unintelligible.  And  I  begin  with  article  one  of  the  enumera- 
tion, premising  what  I  have  already  mentioned,  that  under  this 
30 


Discussion  on  Relevancy. 

indictment  the  prosecutor  puts  foi-ward  each  of  his  eight  par-  Mr. 
ticulars  as  being  each  by  itself  sufficient  to  entitle  hiin  to  a  con-  ^*^  '"  °^  ' 
viction.  Now,  what  is  the  falsehood  set  forth  in  article  one  ?  It 
is  this — that  the  deposits  of  the  Bank  are  said  to  have  been  under- 
stated. Now,  is  that  intelligible  as  a  basis  for  a  charge  of  fraud  1 
How,  standing  by  itself,  can  an  under-statement  of  the  deposits  in 
a  bank  tend  to  defraud  either  the  shareholders,  or  depositors,  or 
anybody  else?  Passing,  however,  from  that,  I  come  to  article 
three  and  article  eight.  These  articles  are  contradictory.  The 
amount  of  bills  of  exchange,  credit  accounts,  etc.,  it  is  said  in 
article  three,  were  understated  to  the  extent  of  £2,698,000, 
or  thereby.  That  is  to  say,  the  assets  were  understated  by 
two  millions  and  upwards.  But,  then,  in  article  eight  it  is 
said  that  these  same  assets  were  overstated  to  the  extent 
of  over  a  million.  How  is  that  to  be  explained?  The 
contradiction  is  demonstrable.  For  observe  what  it  comes  to. 
The  Crown  complains  in  article  three  that  the  accused  under- 
stated the  assets  of  the  Bank,  and  understated  a  particular  class 
of  assets,  namely,  those  under  head  one.  But  when  it  comes  to 
article  eight,  the  Crown  complains  that  the  accused  overstated 
the  assets  of  the  Bank,  and  overstated  that  same  particular  class 
of  assets,  being  those  under  head  one  of  that  balance  sheet.  The 
Crown  says  in  one  breath  you  have  understated,  and  in  the  next 
breath  you  have  overstated.  It  is  for  my  learned  friend  to  say 
how  he  exiplains  this.  I  conjecture  that  his  explanation  may  be 
something  of  this  sort — that  article  three  states  a  disconformity 
between  the  balance  sheet  and  the  books,  and  article  eight  states 
a  disconformity  between  the  liooks  and  the  facts.  But  if  that  is 
so,  that  just  brings  us  back  to,  and  illustrates,  the  general  objec- 
tion with  which  I  started,  that  the  falsehoods  here  alleged  are 
false  in  different  senses,  and  that  there  are  no  means  of  ascertain- 
ing in  what  sense  any  particular  falsehood  is  said  to  be  false. 

So  far,  my  lords,  I  have  endeavoured  to  show  that  the  aver- 
ments of  the  falsehood  of  this  balance  sheet  are  irrelevant.  But 
now  the  next  question  which  arises  is  this,  whether,  assuming  the 
falsehood,  it  appears  from  the  indictment  that  the  balance  sheets 
were  issued  for  the  purpose  and  with  the  result  required  to 
constitute  the  crime  of  falsehood,  fraud,  and  wilful  imposition, 
or  any  other  cognate  offence?  It  is  here  necessary  to  say  a 
word  or  two  upon  a  matter  of  principle. 

We  have  not  here,  your  lordships  will  see,  to  deal  with  docu- 
ments which  are  said  to  be  false  in  the  sense  in  which  forg-^d 
documents  are  false.  Language,  no  doubt,  is  used  in  the  major 
proposition — ^loosely  and  improperly  used,  I  think — which  is  only 
appropriate  to  the  case  of  forged  documents.  I  refer  to  such 
passages  in  the  major  proposition  as  that  in  which  the  Directors 
are  accused  of  fabricating  the  balance  sheets.  But  it  is  plainly 
not  there  meant,  however  loose  may  be  the  language,  that  the 

31 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

.,  ^^T  ^  ^  balance  sheets  were  other  than  tjenuine  balance  sheets.  The 
alleged  falsehood  of  the  balance  sheets  consists  simply  in  this, 
that  they  are  said  to  be  mendacious.  In  short,  the  balance 
sheet  is  said  to  be  false  and  fraudulent  simply  in  the  sense 
that  it  purports  to  set  out  truly  certain  facts  in  regard  to 
the  assets  and  liabilities  of  this  Bank,  and  yet  sets  forth 
those  facts  untruly,  and  is  therefore  a  mendacious  document. 
That  being  so,  we  are  not  dealing,  as  I  have  said,  with  a  case  of 
falsehood  in  the  sense  of  forgeiy ;  neither,  again,  are  we  dealing 
with  another  kind  of  case  with  which  your  lordships  are  familiar, 
the  case  of  false  statements  put  forward  by  persons  holding  public 
offices,  in  violation  of  public  duty.  Familiar  instances  of  the 
latter  kind  of  crime  are  the  cases  of  messengers  returning  false 
executions,  of  notaries  making  false  docquets,  and  of  doctors 
issuing  false  vaccination  certificates.  We  have  nothing  of  that 
kind  here.  These  Directors  are  simply  managers  of  a  trading 
company,  and  that  being  so,  you  have  in  these  balance  sheets 
simply  certain  false  statements  made  by  certain  private  persons 
to  the  shareholders,  and  it  may  be  to  the  public,  in  regard  to  the 
state  of  this  City  of  Glasgow  Bank.  The  case  would  not  be 
in  the  least  degree  different  if  the  alleged  false  statements  had 
been  made  in  the  report,  or  in  the  chairman's  speech  at  the 
shareholders'  meeting.  Now,  that  being  so,  the  question  comes 
to  be,  under  what  conditions  is  simple  falsehood  recognised  as  a 
crime  according  to  the  law  of  Scotland?  I  submit  that,  upon 
a  review  of  the  whole  authorities,  it  will  be  found  that  falsehood 
can  only  be  a  relevant  basis  for  a  criminal  charge  when  it  is 
used  as  the  means  of  obtaining  to  the  accused,  or  to  some 
institution  which  the  accused  represents,  patrimonial  gain  or 
advantage,  at  the  expense  and  to  the  injury  of  some  other 
person  or  persons.  In  other  words,  where  you  exclude  forgeiy 
and  breach  of  munus  publicum,  the  only  remaining  category 
under  which  criminal  proceedings  founded  upon  falsehood  of 
this  sort  can  be  brought  is  what  Hume  describes  as  "  fraud  or 
cheating."  I  may  just  mention  one  case  which  brings  out 
veiy  distinctly  the  necessity  of  the  falsehood  being  first  proved 
for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  the  resulting  advantage.  I  refer 
to  the  case  of  Wilkie,  tried  before  your  lordship  in  the  chair 
and  Lord  Cowan  at  Stirling  Circuit  on  13th  September,  1876. 
and  which  is  reported  in  2  Couper,  353.  The  libel  was  there 
held  irrelevant,  in  respect  that  it  did  not  sufficiently  appear 
that  the  false  representations  were  made  in  order  to  obtain 
the  patrimonial  advantage  which  the  accused  was  said  to  have 
obtained. 

Now,  my  lords,  if  that  be  so,  let  us  see  here  what  are  the 
advantages  or  results  which  are  said  to  have  been  produced 
by  these  fraudulent  balance  sheets.  They  are  three  in  number, 
and  I  shall  take  them  separately.      The  first  result  said  to  have 

32 


Discussion  on  Relevancy. 


been   produced   is    this,    that   members    of   the   company   were  Mackintosh. 

induced   to    retain    the    shares    held    by   them    therein.       Now, 

is  it  a  relevant  statement  in  a  charge  of  this  kind  to  say  that 

by  means  of  false  balance  sheets  made  by  the  directors  of  a 

joint  stock  company,  issued  to  the  members  of  the  company, 

the    members    were    induced    to    retain    their    shares?        It    is 

essential,  in  libelling  a  crime  of  this  sort,  that  the  indictment 

shall  set  out  some  wrongful  result  or  results  as  following  from 

the  falsehood.       And  I  am  at  present  considering  whether  the 

results   which   are   set   out  as   produced   by   the   publication   of 

these    balance    sheets    are    results    involving    patrimonial    gain 

on  the  one  hand  or  patrimonial  loss  on  the  other.      I  am  not 

in  the  least  suggesting  that  it  was  defensible  in   any  view  to 

issue   these  balance   sheets.       But  that  really  brings   one   back 

to   the   proposition    with    which    one    started,    that   the    law    of 

Scotland  does  not  recognise  the  telling  of  untruths  as  criminal ; 

and  it  does  not  recognise  the  publication  of  untruths  as  criminal 

unless   something   follows,   involving,    on   the   one   hand,    injury 

to  the  person  deceived  and,  on  the  other,  patrimonial  gain  to 

the    person   deceiving.       I    therefore    ask   whether   there    is    an 

averment    here    of    this    fraud    having    been    effectual    to    that 

effect.      It  is  quite  plain  that,  if  the  truth  had  been  told,  the 

shareholder   must  have   retained   his   shares,    as    nobody   would 

have  bought  them.      Therefore  it  is  impossible  to  say  that  he 

suffered  any  loss.      He  had  to  retain  them  as  it  was,  and  he 

would  all  the  more  have  had  to  retain  them  if  the  truth  had 

been   told ;    and   if   it   be   necessary,    in   order   to   complete   the 

charge  of  falsehood,  fraud,  and  wilful  imposition,  or  any  cognate 

charge,  that  there  shall  have  been  a  wrong  produced  to  a  third 

party  by  the  fraudulent  act,   then  this  averment  is   irrelevant 

in  respect  that  it  does  not  involve  the  allegation  of  any  wrong 

as  sustained  by  the  party  said  to  have  been  defrauded.       And 

I  may  say  that  the  question  thus  raised  is  not  a  new  one.      It 

arose  in  Dohie  v.  The  Directors  of  the  Edinburgh  and  Glasgow 

Banh,  21  D.  624,  where  the  present  Lord  President  pronounced 

the  proposition  now  put  forward  by  the  prosecutor  "  as  of  a 

startling  nature."      It  also  came  up  in  Cullen  v.  The  Directors 

of  the  same  Bank;   but,  so  far  as  I  know,  there  is  no  example 

anywhere   in   the   books   of   the   averment   being  held   relevant 

that  shareholders  were  induced  by  fraud  to  retain  their  shares, 

as  here  alleged. 

The  next  result  said  to  have  been  produced  by  the  issue 
of  these  false  balance  sheets  is  this — It  is  said  that  "  many 
of  the  public,  including  Robert  Craig,"  etc.,  "  were  induced 
to  acquire  stock  in  the  said  Company."  Now,  my  lords, 
I  do  not  dispute  that  this  would  have  been  quite  a  relevant 
averment  if  it  had  borne  that  many  of  the  public  were 
induced   to   purchase   stock    in   the   Company   from   the    Com- 

c  33 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

MaeWntosh  V^^J-  -^"^  ^^^  averment  here  does  not  suggest  that.  All 
that  it  comes  to  is  that  the  Directors  of  this  Company  issued 
certain  false  statements  as  to  its  affairs,  with  the  result  of 
inducing  certain  transactions  between  third  parties.  My  pro- 
position is,  that  no  charge  is  relevant  which  does  not  set  forth 
at  least  patrimonial  gain  to  the  Bank  ;  and  in  regard  to  the 
case  of  persons  induced  to  purchase  shares,  which  is  the  case 
I  am  now  dealing  with,  I  say  it  has  never  been  suggested  to  be 
a  crime  in  the  law  of  Scotland  that  a  person  by  misrepresenta- 
tion induces  a  transaction  between  third  parties  in  which  the 
alleged  offender  has  no  interest.  If  that  were  so,  it  would 
follow  that  every  person  publishing  a  canard  in  a  newspaper 
would  be  liable  to  be  indicted  for  falsehood,  fraud,  and  wilful 
imposition,  or  some  similar  offence.  That  has  never  been 
suggested  ;  and  I  say  it  was  no  interest  of  the  Bank  whether 
members  of  the  public  bought  shares  as  members  of  the  Company 
or  not.  It  was  all  one  to  the  Company  whether  transfers  took 
place  or  not.  If  they  lost  the  transferer,  they  gained  the 
transferee ;  and  it  was  quite  as  likely  that  the  transferee  should 
be  a  better  man  than  the  transferer  as  it  was  that  the 
transferer  should  be  a  better  man  than  the  transferee. 

But  then,  my  lords,  we  now  come  to  the  third  result  said  to 
have  been  produced  by  these  balance  sheets,  viz.,  that  members 
of  the  public  were  thereby  induced  to  deposit  money  in  the 
Bank,  to  the  great  loss  and  prejudice  of  the  said  members  of 
the  public.  There  is  here  undoubtedly  an  averment  of  patri- 
monial gain  to  the  Company — the  averment  that  by  false  repre- 
sentations the  Company  obtained  what  I  may  concede  to  be  a 
benefit.  But  two  questions  here  arise — First,  is  there  any 
averment  that  the  depositors  suffered  injury?  and  next,  is  there 
any  averment  that  the  false  representations  were  made  in 
order  that  depositors  might  make  deposits,  and  the  Company 
thereby  benefit?  My  lords,  it  is  a  remarkable  fact  that,  from 
first  to  last  of  this  indictment,  if  you  except  a  statement  in  sub- 
division eight,  which  I  have  already  submitted  is  bad,  there 
is  not  anywhere  an  averment  that  this  Company  is  insolvent ; 
there  is  not  anywhere  even  an  averment  that  it  has  stopped 
payment ;  and  that  being  so,  the  question  arises  whether 
the  averment  that  by  means  of  these  false  balance  sheets 
depositors  were  induced  to  deposit  money  in  a  bank  which 
for  anything  alleged  is  perfectly  solvent  is  an  averment 
which  implies  injury  to  the  depositors.  In  regard,  therefore, 
to  the  depositors,  the  averment,  I  submit,  fails  in  respect  there 
is  no  averment  of  patrimonial  injury  sustained.  But  apart  from 
that,  there  is  another  point.  As  I  have  already  observed,  it  is 
necessary,  in  order  to  found  a  criminal  charge  upon  a  false 
representation,  that  not  only  shall  certain  results  be  produced, 
but  also  that  it  shall  appear  that  the  false  representations  were 

34 


Discussion  on  Rele 


vancy. 


made  for  the  purpose  of  producing  those  results.      Now,  where  Mackintosh 

is   it  here   averred   that  the   Directors   of   the   Bank   published 

these  balance  sheets  for  the  purpose  of  inducing  depositors  to 

deposit   with   them,    or   for  the   purpose   of   otherwise   inducing 

any   patrimonial   gain   to   themselves   or   the   Company?       The 

only   averment   on   that   subject  is   in   the    middle    of   page    5, 

where  it  is  said  in  general  terms  that  the  balance  sheets  were 

issued  "  for  the  pui-pose  of  concealing  and  misrepresenting  the 

true    state    of    the    Company's    affairs."       But    this    is    not    an 

averment  that  the  Directors  had  it  as  their  purpose  to  induce 

depositors  to  make  deposits.     My  present  point  is  that,  assuming 

that    the    falsehood    is   relevantly    alleged,    and    assuming   that 

the  results  which  the  law  requires  for  the  constitution  of  the 

crime    are    also    relevantly    alleged,    yet    there    is    no    relevant 

averment  of  connection  between  the  issuing  of  the  fraudulent 

statements   and   the   fraudulent  results,   for  your  lordship   laid 

down,  in  the  case  of  Wilhie,  as  a  matter  of  familiar  law,  that 

you  require  to  show  that  falsehood  was  used  in  order  to  obtain 

the  benefit  in  fact  obtained.      A  man  goes  into  a  lodging-house 

and  makes  a  false   statement  about  his  affairs,  and  about  the 

purpose  for  which  he  is  in  the  place,  and  as  a  result^ — not  the 

indirect  but  the  direct  result  of  this   false  statement — he  gets 

food    and    lodgings ;    there    it    might    be    thought    the    offence 

was  complete,   but  your  lordship  held  that  unless  it  could  be 

shown  that  the  man  intended   to  obtain   these  results   by   the 

false  statements  it  was  no  crime.      The  peculiarity  of  all  these 

cases  is  that  they  cannot  be  other  than  crimes  against  property, 

and   when   that   is   once   recognised,    it   follows   as   a   necessary 

consequence,  that  all  such  cases  necessarily  involve  the  element 

of  patrimonial  loss  on  the  one  hand,   and  patrimonial  gain  on 

the  other. 

My  lords,  in  regard  to  the  innominate  charges  in  the 
major  proposition,  my  case  is  this.  I  said  at  the  outset 
that,  according  to  the  construction  put  upon  the  language  used 
in  the  major,  the  innominate  charges  might  either  amount  to 
falsehood,  fraud,  and  wilful  imposition,  or  might  resolve  into 
no  crime  at  all ;  and  I  explained  that  the  question  between 
these  two  constructions  would  depend  very  much  on  what  was 
found  in  the  amplified  statement  in  the  minor  proposition.  I 
now  say,  as  the  result  of  my  examination  of  the  minor,  that 
the  indictment  throughout,  both  in  the  major  and  in  the 
minor,  must  be  construed  as  omitting  the  elements  of  patri- 
monial gain  or  patrimonial  loss,  and  as  therefore  failing  to  set 
forth  what  is  necessary  in  order  to  constitute  an  offence  of  the 
class  libelled,  viz.,  an  offence  asrainst  property.  I  have  further, 
however,  to  point  out  in  regard  to  the  innominate  charges  in 
the  major,  that  it  is  an  essential  part  of  those  charges  as  laid 
that  "  members  of  the  Company "  are  defrauded ;    and  as  the 

35 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Mackintosh  ^^^Y  I'^spect  in  which  members  of  the  Company  are  said  to  be 
'  defrauded  is  by  their  being  induced  to  retain  their  shares,  it 
will  follow,  if  my  argument  as  to  the  irrelevancy  of  the  part 
of  the  minor  is  successful,  that  the  innominate  charges  in  the 
major  must  fall,  upon  the  separate  ground  that  in  any  view 
there  is  no  relevant  case  stated  of  fraud  committed  on  "  members 
of  the  Company."      But  I  pass  now  to  the  remaining  charges.* 

T  „t!;2''ri«..,L-  The  Lord  Justice-Clerk  (to  the  Lord  Advocate) — On  the 
first  of  the  objections,  namely,  the  question  oi  speciiication 
under  the  first  head,  especially  as  regards  the  eighth  sub-division 
of  that  part  of  the  indictment,  we  should  like  to  have  a  few 
observations.  In  regard  to  the  relevancy  of  the  innominate 
offence,  and  in  regard  to  the  charge  of  theft,  while  we,  of  course, 
do  not  at  all  shut  out  any  further  observations  that  may  be 
hereafter  made  on  the  part  of  the  prisoners,  we  do  not  at 
present  wish  your  lordship  to  say  anything. 

Advocate.  '^^^  Lord  Advocath — After  what  your  lordship  has  just  said, 
I  apprehend  that  my  duty  is  a  very  simple  and  very  short 
one,  because  I  am  no  longer  bound  to  argue  against  what 
appeared  to  me  to  be  really  one  of  the  most  serious  contentions 
for  the  accused — serious,  not  as  involving  a  difficult  question  of 
law  or  libel,  but  as  involving  veiy  serious  consequences  to  the 
prisoners  and  also  the  public,  viz.,  the  contention  that  what  is 
set  forth  in  the  major  and  minor  propositions  of  the  libel  in 
its  first  three  counts  constituted  merely  an  exaggerated  instance 
of  moral  delinquency,  and  not  a  grave  commercial  crime.  In 
regard  to  that  one  point,  the  eighth  particular,  if  I  may  call  it  so, 
I  shall  be  glad  to  save  the  time  of  the  Court  by  consenting  to 
its  being  struck  out.  It  is  a  question  which  I  cannot  promise 
your  lordships  you  will  get  rid  of  altogether,  because  it  may 
turn  out  that,  on  an  examination  of  the  books,  what  appears 
there  may  yet  be  made  matter  of  discussion.  But  as  constitut- 
ing a  separate  statement  I  withdraw  it,  because  I  do  not  know, 
and  I  cannot  tell  at  this  moment  precisely,  quo  andmo  the 
manipulation  or  fabrication  of  the  accounts  connected  with  this 
proceeded,  and  it  may  be  that  the  £2,000,000  odds  understated 
in  stating  the  amount  of  debts  due  to  the  Bank  may  have  been 
intended  to  include  bad  debts. 

Mr.  Guthrie  Smith  and  Mr.  Trayner  both  addressed  the  Court 
on  the  relevancy  of  the  second  charge — that  of  permitting 
overdrafts.  As,  however,  that  charge  was  withdrawn,  the  learned 
counsels'  arguments  are  omitted.  Mr.  Balfour  followed,  and 
argued  that  as  the  eighth  particular  in  the  charge  relative  to  the 

*  As  the  remaining;  charges  were  withdrawn  by  the  Lord  Advocate  at 
the  close  of  the  evidence  for  the  Crown,  no  evidence  having  been  led  with 
respect  to  them,  the  argument  of  the  learned  counsel  bearing  on  them  has 
been  omitted  brevitatis  causa. 

36 


Decision  on  Relevancy. 


falsification  of  the  balance  sheet  had  been  withdrawn  by  the 
Lord  Advocate,  it  followed  that  the  sixth  and  seventh  particulars 
must  necessarily  fall  with  it. 

The  Lord  Justice-Clerk,  in  delivering  judgment,  said — The  Lord 
question  we  have  to  decide  is  whether  the  public  prosecutor  -^"stiee-aepk. 
has  stated  in  this  indictment  facts  which  are  relevant  to  go  to 
proof — whether  the  facts  stated  here  are  tO'  be  inquired  into 
by  a  jury.  My  lords,  a  great  many  important  and  serious 
matters  were  raised  by  the  counsel  for  the  prisoners.  Many  of 
them  were  considerations  of  very  great  weight,  which  will 
require  to  be  carefully  dealt  with  when  the  case  goes  to  the 
investigation  of  the  facts,  and  for  that  reason  I  think,  probably, 
it  will  be  desirable  not  to  enter  at  length  into  these  considera- 
tions, which,  though  they  had  a  material  bearing  upon  the 
question  of  relevancy,  will  have  also  a  material  bearing  upon 
the  question  of  the  facts  when  disclosed ;  and  at  a  later  stage  of 
these  proceedings,  it  may  be  necessary  to  resume  them  at  length, 
but  in  the  meantime  I  shall  simply  announce  my  own  opinion, 
and,  I  believe,  that  of  your  lordships,  on  the  various  objections 
that  have  been  taken  to  the  different  heads  of  this  indictment 
in  their  order.  The  indictment  itself  deals  substantially  with 
three  classes  of  offences.  I  forbear  at  present  to  go  into  them 
technically,  but  I  simply  state  them  as  they  appear  upon  the 
general  complexion  of  the  indictment.  The  first  of  these  is 
the  falsification  of  the  balance  sheets  of  this  joint  stock  banking 
company,  and  the  making  of  false  statements  to  the  shareholders 
of  the  Bank  and  the  public.  The  second  is  the  obtaining  of 
advances,  on  the  part  of  the  Directors,  of  the  funds  committed 
to  their  care,  for  the  purposes  of  the  banking  company,  on 
terms  and  conditions  not  authorised  by  the  duty  which  they 
held  towards  the  company ;  and  the  third  is  the  theft  of  certain 
bills  of  exchange  which  were  entrusted  and  confided  to  the 
Directors  for  the  purpose  of  collection  by  creditors  in  these 
bills.  To  the  charges,  under  these  three  heads,  objections 
have  been  taken  in  this  discussion  on  the  relevancy.  In  regard 
to  the  first  of  them,  which  is  a  charge  of  falsifying  the  state- 
ments made  to  the  shareholders  of  the  state  of  the  finances 
of  the  Bank,  the  main  objection  that  was  taken  in  regard  to  the 
specification  of  the  offence  related  to  the  eighth  sub-division  of 
the  first  charge,  wliich  embraces  the  accounts  for  the  year  1876, 
the  other  charges  for  the  other  succeeding  years  being  in  the 
same  terms.  That  eighth  section  charges  the  whole  of  the 
Directors  with  falsely  stating  the  bad  and  irrecoverable  debts 
to  an  amount  far  exceeding  the  whole  capital  stock  of  the 
Bank.  It  was  admitted  that  the  debts  were  not  specified.  The 
objection  certainly  appeared  to  be  formidable,  and  the  Lord 
Advocate  has  accordingly  expunged  that  charge  from  his  indict- 
ment.     What  the  effect  of  that  may  be  upon  the  evidence  in 

37 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

J  tl^°''ci  k  support  of  that  charge  is  a  question  on  which  I  do  not  at 
'  present  give  any  opinion.  But  it  was  objected  by  Mr.  Balfour 
that  if  that  sub-division  of  the  eighth  charge  were  missed  out, 
it  would  then  be  necessary  also  to  omit  others  of  the  charges 
that  are  contained  there,  because,  he  says,  when  the  figures  are 
looked  to,  they  will  be  found  to  be  inconsistent  with  each  other. 
My  lords,  I  think  it  was  very  plain,  upon  Mr.  Balfour's  own 
statement,  that  that  was  a  matter  for  proof,  and  not  a  matter 
of  relevancy.  We  cannot  sit  here  and  judge  without  evidence 
of  the  effect  of  the  manipulation  of  the  figures  which  is  here 
in  question.  It  may  quite  well  be  that  the  affairs  of  the  Bank 
have  been  entirely  misrepresented,  and  yet  when  you  come 
to  add  the  misrepresentations  together,  the  sum  total  may  be 
the  same,  or  nearly  the  same.  For  instance,  it  is  not  the  same 
thing  to  say  that  there  were  eight  millions  of  floating  assets 
and  no  bad  or  irrecoverable  debts,  and  to  say  that  there  were 
eleven  millions  of  floating  assets  and  a  large  amount  of  irre- 
coverable debts.  These  are  two  different  things.  I  give  no 
further  opinion,  but  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
objection  taken  by  Mr.  Balfour,  whatever  weight  it  may  have 
when  the  facts  come  to  be  ascertained,  is  not  truly 
an  objection  to  the  relevancy.  Then  it  was  said  by  Mr. 
Mackintosh,  still  farther  on  this  head,  that  there  was 
not  a  sufficient  specification  of  injury  done  to  the  share- 
holders by  the  alleged  falsehood,  and  that  it  was  a  falsehood 
without  injury.  My  lords,  I  think  that  that  was  pei-haps  not 
the  most  forcible  part  of  the  observations  of  my  learned 
friend,  because  it  really  comes  to  this — if  a  man  is  entrusted 
with  the  business  of  another,  and  makes  false  reports  to  him 
as  to  the  amount  of  his  finances,  he  suffers  nothing.  Mr. 
Mackintosh  said  that  the  shares  would  not  have  been  saleable 
if  the  truth  had  been  known.  My  lords,  I  don't  think  that 
goes  far.  It  is  quite  clear  that  every  shareholder  was  entitled 
to  know  how  the  finances  stood  in  order  that  he  mi^ht  know 
how  he  stood  himself ;  and  what  was  the  effect  of  the  false 
statement  upon  the  different  shareholders,  and  of  the  reliance 
which  they  necessarily  placed  upon  these  false  reports,  it  is 
impossible  for  us  now  to  say ;  but  it  must  be  quite  manifest 
that  a  very  large  and  important  patrimonial  interest  was 
thereby  endangered ;  and  that  is  alleged  in  the  indictment. 
So  much  for  the  first  part  of  these  charges ;  and  the  same 
considerations  apply  to  the  charges  as  to  1877  and  1878. 

Then  we  come  to  a  very  important  part  of  this  indictment, 
which  has  given  us  a  great  deal  of  anxiety.  These  charges  are 
directed  against  individual  Directors,  and  are  contained  in  the 
sixth  and  seventh  charges  of  the  indictment.  They  are  charges 
against  individual  Directors  of  obtaining  or  taking  from  the 
Bank  certain  large  advances  by  way  of  overdrafts  on  their  own 

38 


Decision  on  Relevancy. 


individual  accounts  out  of  the  moneys  with  which  they  were  t^^^ri 
entrusted  for  the  purposes  of  the  Bank.  There  is  no  doubt 
that  that  is  a  most  important  portion  of  this  very  formidable 
indictment,  and  I  am  anxious  not  to  say  more  upon  it  at 
present  than  is  necessary  for  the  discharge  of  the  immediate 
duty  on  hand,  and  the  decision  of  the  question  of  relevancy. 
It  is  quite  manifest  that  it  embraces  many  topics  of  immense 
importance  to  the  prisoners  at  the  bar,  and  also  of  immense 
importance  to  the  public.  I  must  own  that  I  have  had  a 
great  deal  of  difficulty  in  regard  to  the  question  of  relevancy 
here,  as  I  believe  your  lordships  have  also  had.  I  think  I 
may  say  without  speaking  too  strongly  on  the  subject  that 
perhaps  the  use  of  more  precis©  and  definite  expressions  might 
have  saved  some  at  least  of  the  difficulties  that  we  have  felt. 
My  general  opinion  upon  the  matters  submitted  for  discussion 
yesterday  is,  that  it  is  not  eveiy  violation  or  excess  of  the 
I'iglits  of  directors  or  persons  in  that  position  of  trust  which 
will  ground  a  criminal  prosecution.  It  may  quite  well  be  that 
directors  violate  the  conditions  on  which  they  hold  their  office 
by  doing  acts  which  are  not  sanctioned  by  the  terms  of  their 
appointment.  Such  cases  occur  every  day  in  the  civil  Courts, 
and  if  directors  in  that  position  act  beyond  their 
powers,  or  in  violation  of  their  powers,  they  will  be 
responsible  in  the  civil  consequences,  and  their  acts  will 
not  have  the  validity  of  legal  acts  of  directors.  But  before 
this  can  be  raised  into  a  criminal  offence  and  be  the  subject 
of  a  criminal  indictment,  there  must  be  superadded  to  the 
illegality  of  the  act — the  invalidity  of  the  act — some  element 
of  bad  faith,  some  corrupt  motive,  some  guilty  knowledge, 
some  fraudulent  intent,  which  shall  raise  that  which,  although 
illegal,  was  not  a  crime,  into  the  category  of  a  crime.  These 
are  familiar  and  elementary  principles ;  and  in  cases  of  that 
kind  the  corrupt  motive,  the  bad  faith,  is  essential  to  the 
crime  itself,  and  without  it  there  is  no-  crime.  Now,  here  I 
should  not  have  been  satisfied,  although  the  duty  of  the  Directors 
had  been  clearly  charged,  and  the  trust  reposed  in  them  clearly 
expressed,  and  the  obligation  not  to  allow  overdrafts  on  open 
account  without  security  quite  precise,  and  the  insufficiency 
of  the  security  on  which  these  advances  were  made  clearly 
alleged,  unless  there  had  appeared  in  the  charge  something 
beyond  these  elements,  namely,  an  element  of  want  of  faith, 
which  would  give  a  colour  and  character  to  all  the  rest. 
I  must  fairly  say  that  I  could  have  wished  that  this  had  been 
more  clearly  and  specifically  expressed,  nor  do  I  altogether 
gee  why  it  was  not  so.  But,  my  lords,  upon  further  considera- 
tion of  the  whole  of  that  argument,  I  am  satisfied  that, 
assuming  those  principles  which  I  have  now  announced,  and 
which  I  consider  both  elementary  and  important,  such  is  not 

39 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  truly  the  nature  of  the  charge  that  is  made  here,  because 
'  there  are  some  words  which  override  all  the  facts  alleged, 
and  seem  to  me  completely  to  raise  the  element  of  bad  faith 
throughout  the  whole  transaction,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing, 
to  exclude  the  good  faith  of  the  parties  in  the  proceeding,  and 
that  is,  that  these  advances  were  obtained  by  taking  advantage 
of  the  position  of  the  accused  as  Directors.  Now,  no  doubt 
that  places  upon  the  prosecutor  a  very  heavy  burden  of  proof, 
but,  I  take  it,  these  words  signify  that  the  Directors  obtained 
these  advances  under  conditions  in  which,  but  for  their  character 
as  Directors,  they  could  not  have  obtained  them ;  in  other 
words,  that  they  used  their  character  as  Directors  to  obtain 
advantages  in  regard  to  the  money  entrusted  to  themselves 
which  an  ordinary  customer  could  not  have  obtained.  That  is 
the  element  which  has  led  me  to  come  to  be  of  opinion  that 
there  is  a  sufficiently  relevant  case  stated  under  these  charges 
for  investigation  by  a  jury.  Doubtless  the  public  prosecutor 
has  a  heavy  task  before  him,  because  he  must  not  only  prove 
the  trust,  and  prove  the  duty  as  he  alleges  it,  and  prove  that 
the  security  which  was  offered  or  existed  was  manifestly  insuffi- 
cient, but  he  must  also  prove  what  he  has  alleged,  I  think  in 
sufficient  language,  that  all  these  things  were  done  solely  and 
entirely  by  taking  advantage  of  the  position  of  a  Director, 
and  abusing  that  position  to  the  effect  of  a  result  for  which 
it  never  was  conferred.  If  these  things  are  proved — if  it  be 
shown  that  these  advances  were  not  in  the  ordinary  course  of 
business,  and  were  not  made  in  good  faith,  but  were  made 
solely  and  entirely  in  consequence  of  the  position  which  the 
Directors  had  on  that  Board — if  it  be  proved  that  these  were 
advances  which  no  ordinary  customer  could  have  obtained, 
and  which  therefore  no  Director  was  in  good  faith  to  accept, 
I  think  that  the  logic  of  the  indictment  on  this  head  is  sufficient. 
There  is  a  minor  point  upon  two  of  these  charges,  in  relation  to 
Mr.  Inglis  and  Mr.  Wright,  which  is  of  this  nature.  It  would 
rather  appear  from  the  statement  in  the  charge  against  Mr. 
Inglis,  that  some  part  at  all  events  of  these  advances  had  been 
obtained  prior  to  his  becoming  a  Director  of  the  concern.  We 
are  of  opinion  that  the  advances  to  that  extent  are  not  pro- 
perly or  relevantly  brought  within  the  charge  stated  in  the 
indictment,  and  that  therefore  it  will  be  necessary  in  Mr. 
Inglis'  indictment  to  expunge  the  words,  "  or  did  allow  the 
overdrafts  on  the  said  accounts  in  name  of  you  and  of  your 
said  firm  to  be  continued  and  increased  "  ;  and  in  the  case  of 
Mr.  Wright,  the  words,  "  or  did  allow  the  overdrafts 
of  your  said  firm  to  be  continued  and  increased." 
In  other  words,  we  do  not  hold  that  this  charge 
can  apply  to  advances  which  had  been  already  made 
when     the    accused    became     a    Director.         Of    course,     any 

40 


Decision  on  Relevancy. 


increase  in  the  advance  is  another  matter.      That  is  a  question  justice-Clerk. 
that  will  arise  upon  the  proof ;   but  in  the  meantime  we  think 
that  these  words  are  not  relevant,  and  therefore  they  must  be 
expunged. 

My  lords,  the  only  other  point  relates  to  the  charge 
of  theft,  of  a  number  of  bills  mentioned  in  the  indictment. 
The  distinction  between  theft  and  breach  of  trust  is  a 
very  fine  and  subtle  one,  and  I  think  depends  more  upon 
words  than  upon  substance ;  but  I  have  no  doubt  at  all  that 
the  .species  facti  alleged  in  this  particular  case,  if  proved  in 
its  terms,  amounts  to  theft.  One  can  quite  well  see  that  there 
are  elements  contained  in  it  that  might  come  to  have  a  very 
material  bearing  on  the  question  whether  it  did  or  did  not 
amount  to  theft.  But  as  stated,  it  is  nothing  but  this,  that 
the  Bank  Directors  having  been  entrusted  with  certain  bills 
of  exchange  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  these  bills — that  is 
to  say,  of  obtaining  payment  for  the  creditor  when  due,  as 
mandatories  of  the  creditor — used  the  bills  for  their  own  purposes 
by  endorsing  them  to  correspondents  and  creditors  of  the  Bank 
— viz.,  the  London  Bank.  Now,  that  case  taken  by  itself, 
on  that  bare  statement  of  it,  is  simply  the  same  thing  as  if, 
instead  of  being  a  bill  of  exchange,  it  had  been  a  bond  or 
any  other  document  of  obligation,  which,  having  been  put  into 
the  hands  of  a  man  for  the  puipose  of  making  it  effectual 
against  the  debtor  for  the  benefit  of  the  creditor,  is  used  directly 
for  his  own  purposes,  to  increase  his  own  credit.  It  was  said 
in  the  argument,  and  of  course  it  will  have  great  weight  when 
we  come  to  the  inquiry,  that  what  is  alleged  here  was  in  truth 
done  in  the  process  of  collection,  and  for  no  other  object.  But 
that  does  not  appear  on  the  indictment,  nor  can  we  assume  it ; 
and  consequently  at  the  present  stage  I  am  not  prepared  to 
say  that  that  charge  is  irrelevant,  although  very  important 
matters  will  remain  for  the  investigation  when  we  come  to 
the  jury.  My  lords,  these  are  the  views  upon  which,  to  the 
extent  which  I  have  now  indicated,  I  am  prepared  to  sustain 
the  relevancy  of  this  indictment. 

Lord  Mure  and  Lord  Craighill  concurred. 


41 


CHAPTER    IV. 
Evidence  for  the  Prosecution.* 

EVIDENCE  OF  THE  INVESTIGATORS. 

Dp.  Alexander  Bennbt  M'Grigor,  LL.D. 

M'Gpigor. 

Bt  the  Lord  Advocate — I  am  a  writer,  carrying  on  business  in 

Glasgow,  and  a  partner  of  the  firm  of  M'Grigor,  Donald  &  Co. 

My  firm  have  acted  as  agents  for  the  Royal  and  British  Linen 

Company   Banks.       On   2nd    October,    1878,    I    got   a   message 

asking  me  to  meet  the  Directors  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank 

in  Mr.  Potter's  offices  in  Gordon  Street.      I  went  there.      There 

were  present^ — Mr.  Potter,  Mr.  Wright,  Mr.  Stewart,  Mr.  Inglis, 

Mr.    Taylor,    Mr.    Leresche,    the    Secretary   of    the    Bank,    and 

afterwards   Mr.    Stronach.       Mr.    William    Anderson,    C.A.,    was 

present  at  the  commencement  of  the  interview.      I  found  him 

there.       Some   of    the    Directors    mentioned    that    of    course    I 

understood   the  painful   circumstances   under   which   they   were 

met,  and  a  somewhat  general  conversation  took  place  as  to  the 

course   that  should  be  followed,   and  as   to   the  propriety  of  a 

meeting    of    the    shareholders    being    called    at    once.       I    was 

consulted  as  to  these,  and  as  to  the  propriety  of  such  a  meeting 

being  called,   and   then   I  was  asked,    in  conjunction  with   Mr. 

Anderson,  to  prepare  a  balance  sheet  of  the  affairs  of  the  Bank, 

in  order  that  it  might  be  submitted  to  such  a  meeting.      That 

request  was  preferred  to  myself  and  Mr.  Anderson  jointly,  and 

I  cannot  say  that  any  one  of  the  Directors  more  than  another 

preferred  it ;   it  was  a  general  request.      They  all  took  part  in 

the  conversation.      Mr.  Stronach  came  into  the  room  apparently 

from  a  side  room,  I  think  about  five  minutes  after  I  arrived. 

We  had  been  conversing  in   regard   to   the  state   of  the   Bank 

before  he  arrived.       I   can  hardly  say  that  he   took  any  part 

in  the  conversation.      He  seemed  completely  overpowered,   and 

almost  unable  to  speak.      Mr.   Leresche  did  take  part,  and  he 

appeared — if   one   may   use   the   erpression — to   have   more   his 

wits  about  him   than   any   one   else   in   the   room.       I   at  first 

demurred  to  acting  in  the   preparation  of  a  balance   sheet,   in 

*  The  evidence  of  the  purely  formal  witnesses  and  of  those  of  minor 
importance  has  been  generally  omitted. 

42 


Evidence  of  Investigators. 


consequence  of  my  connection  with  those  other  banks ;    and  I  M'Ck-Igor. 

may  say  that  I  would  almost  have  been  glad  of  any  excuse  to 

get  rid  of  what  promised  to  be  a  very  painful  piece  of  business. 

It  occurred  to  me  that  there  might  be  some  complication  arising 

from  the  fact  that  my  firm  acted  for  those  two  banks ;    but  I 

was    very    urgently    pressed,    and,    after    consulting    with    Mr. 

Anderson,    I    said    I    would    communicate    with    those    banks. 

I  subsequently  did  so,  and  they  thought  there  was  no  objection 

to  my  acting  in  the  way  proposed.      I  doubt  if  I  was  with  the 

Directors  on   the  occasion  I  have   mentioned  for  more   than  a 

quarter   of   an   hour   or   twenty  minutes    altogether.       At   that 

meeting  nothing  definite  was  said  while  I  was  there  as  to  the 

state   of   the   Bank ;    the   conversation   proceeded   on   a   general 

assumption   that   the   crisis   was   very    serious — that   there   was 

something  very  far  wrong.       None  of  the  Directors  present  at 

that  time  entered  upon  any  explanation  of  the  causes   of  the 

crisis.      I  left  the  meeting  in  company  with  Mr.  Anderson,  and 

having  telegraphed  to  Edinburgh  for  the  opinion  of  the  cashier 

of  the  Royal  Bank,  and  received  the  assurance  from  those  banks 

that   there    was   no    objection    on   their   part   to   my   acting,    I 

proceeded  to  make  an  investigation  for  the  purpose  of  drawing 

up  a  balance  sheet  and  report  to  be  laid  before   the  meeting 

of    shareholders.       I    went    down    immediately    that    afternoon 

to  the   Bank,   and   I   may   say   that  Mr.   Anderson   and   I   were 

there   continuously  from   that  day  until  we   issued  our  report, 

which  was  on  the  18th  of  October.      Mr.  Anderson  and  I  worked 

into   each   other's   hands,    doing   particular   parts   of   the   work. 

Of  course,  what  may  be  called  the  general  accountant's  part  of 

the   work  devolved   upon  him  and  his  partner.       With   respect 

to  my  portion  of  the  work,  in  the  first  instance,  having  heard 

that  a  statement  had  been  prepared  as  to  some  leading  accounts, 

and  submitted   through   Mr.   Auldjo  Jamieson   (now  one   of  the 

liquidators)  to  the  Scotch  banks,  I  telegraphed  to  Mr.  Jamieson 

to   send  me  that  statement,   and  I  received  it   from  him   that 

evening.      I  took  that  statement  merely  as  a  guide  in  my  own 

investigation.       I    cannot   say    whether    or    not    it   was    at    the 

meeting  with   the   Directors  that  I  had  learned   Mr.   Jamieson 

had   been   furnished   with   that  information  ;    I   rather   think   it 

was   at   the   British   Linen   Company's   Bank.       Upon   receiving 

Mr.    Jamieson's    notanda,    Mr.    Anderson    and    I    proceeded    to 

investigate  for  ourselves.      We  looked  over  these  notanda,  and 

found   that   they    embraced    a    note    of    four   leading    accounts, 

which    had    been   the    subject    of    conversation    with    the    Bank 

Directors.        These    were    the    accounts    of    James    Morton    & 

Co.,     Smith,     Fleming     &     Co.,     James     Nicol     Fleming,     and 

John      Innes     Wright     &      Co.         The      statement     embraced 

the  balances  at  the  debit  of  these  several   accounts,   and   the 

securities  held  against  them,   and  as  I  understood  that   these 

43 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

--,jP^'  securities  were  put  down  at  the  valuations  which  the  Bank 
*  itself  had  furnished,  we  took  the  deficit  as  showing  the  minimum 
deficit.  We  very  roughly  endeavoured  to  correct  off-hand  the 
value  of  the  securities  from  such  facts  as  were  patent  upon  the 
face  of  the  accounts,  and  upon  that  information  we  became 
satisfied  next  day  that  we  must  advise  the  Directors  at  once 
that  there  was  no  hope  of  the  Bank  continuing  business.  Within 
a  day  of  receiving  these  notanda  and  examining  them  in  the 
way  I  have  described,  I  came  unhesitatingly  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  Bank  could  not  possibly  go  on — ^that  it  was  hopelessly 
insolvent.  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  is  the  firm  of  which 
the  panel  Mr.  Wright  is  a  partner,  and  he  is  a  Director  of  the 
Company.  There  was  enough  in  the  indebtedness  of  these 
firms  to  make  it  impossible,  in  our  judgment,  for  the  Bank 
to  go  on. 

After  that  we  proceeded  to  make  farther  inquiry  about  those 
accounts.  In  conjunction  with  Mr.  Muir  I  made  a  detailed 
precognition  of  Mr.  Morison,  the  accountant  of  the  Bank,  and 
obtained  from  him  a  number  of  documents,  in  particular  certain 
abstract  balance  sheets.  These  documents  were  given  to  me 
by  Mr,  Morison  out  of  his  custody,  as  an  official  of  the  Bank, 
and  I  got  him  to  initial  and  mark  them  as  he  gave  them.  These 
documents  are  Nos.  124,  125,  127,  and  128,  and  they  were 
marked  A,  B,  C,  and  D.  From  the  time  they  were  given  to 
me  by  Mr.  Morison,  they  remained  in  my  special  custody  until 
21st  October,  when  I  handed  them  over  to  the  Procurator- 
Fiscal.  So  far  as  we  had  time  between  the  receipt  of  Mr. 
Jamieson's  notes  and  the  issuing  of  our  report,  we  proceeded 
to  check  his  notes  upon  those  accounts  to  the  best  of  our 
ability,  and  likewise  to  check  the  general  abstract  balance 
sheet  for  1878^  which  I  received  from  Mr.  Morison.  When  I 
say  the  general  abstract  balance  sheet,  I  do  not  mean  the 
balance  sheet  that  was  published.  I  mean  the  scroll  abstract. 
That  is  the  abstract  which  has  just  been  shown  to  me. 

The  prospects  of  the  Company  did  not  get  brighter  as  our 
examination  proceeded.  In  the  course  of  our  examination  we 
came  upon  some  facts  which  apj^eared  to  us  so  peculiar  and  likely 
to  lead  to  such  consequences  in  the  way  of  charges  against 
the  Directors'  management,  that  we  felt  we  would  not  be 
justified  in  putting  these  into  print  without  intimating  to  them 
their  nature  and  character,  and  I  consequently  asked  the 
Directors  individually,  one  by  one,  to  meet  me,  and  narrated 
to  them  the  conclusions  at  which  we  had  arrived.  I  com- 
municated with  Mr.  Stronach  on  the  same  subject.  The  report 
was  published  on  the  evening  of  Friday,  the  18th,  and  I  think 
it  would  be  about  the  Tuesday  or  Wednesday  preceding  that 
these  communications  were  made.  In  conversation  with  some 
of   the   Directors    previously,    I   had    strongly    urged    them    to 

44 


Evidence  of  Investigators. 


employ  an  agent  of  their  own,  not  only  for  their  own  private  jyiigJiiop 
interest,  but  likewise  an  agent  who  could  advise  them  in  the 
management  of  the  Bank,  because  the  disposition  at  first  was 
to  consult  Mr.  Anderson  and  myself  about  a  great  number  of 
questions  that  necessarily  occurred  immediately  after  the 
stoppage,  and  we  found  that  we  had  really  no  time  to  give  to 
these.  I  communicated  with  each  Director  separately  in  the 
beginning  of  the  week  which  ended  on  19th  October.  There 
was  no  joint  communication  made  to  more  than  one  of  the 
Directors  at  that  time.  In  the  case  of  Mr.  Stronach,  I  said 
to  him  that  I  was  going  to  put  various  questions  to  him  in 
regard  to  subjects  which  would  come  up  in  this  report,  and 
we  thought  it  our  duty  to  put  those  before  him  as  we  had 
put  them  before  the  other  Directors,  but  that  it  was  for  him 
to  consider  whether,  as  I  knew  he  was  then  in  the  hands  of  a 
private  agent,  it  would  not  be  right  that,  before  entering  on 
this  matter,  he  should  consult  his  agent.  He  said  he  would  do 
so,  and  would  see  me  next  day.  I  saw  him  next  day,  and  he 
then  said  that  he  had  been  advised  that  perhaps  under  the 
circumstances  the  less  he  said  the  better.  I  said  that  still 
I  would  not  feel  myself  quite  clear  to  publish  this  report  until 
I  had  gone  over  the  various  items  of  it  with  him,  not  asking 
him  to  make  any  remark  unless  he  chose,  and  I  did  go  over 
the  items  with  him.  He  made  no  remark,  but  remained  silent ; 
but  I  am  bound  in  justice  to  Mr.  Stronach  to  say  that  he  was 
thoroughly  and  entirely  broken  down  during  this  period.  I 
was  not  in  the  least  surprised  at  the  state  in  which  he  appeared 
to  be  ;  he  had  been  confined  to  bed  for  several  days.  When 
I  had  those  meetings  with  the  Directors  singly  I  did  not  meet 
Mr.  Inglis,  as  he  was  in  Edinburgh  at  the  time ;  but  after 
meeting  the  other  Directors  singly,  I  had  a  meeting  with  the 
whole  of  them  collectively,  including  Mr.  Inglis.  I  think  that 
was  on  the  morning  of  the  day  of  the  publication  of  the  report^ — 
Friday,  the  18th.  The  Board  was  assembled,  and  the  object 
of  my  going  up  was  this :  we  saw  that  we  would  be  in  a 
position  to  issue  our  report  late  that  evening.  We  were  satis- 
fied that  it  was  very  desirable  the  report  should  be  in  the 
hands  of  the  shareholders  a  day  or  two  before  the  meeting, 
which  had  l^een  summoned  a  week  previously  for  Tuesday,  the 
22nd,  and  my  object  in  going  up  to  that  meeting  was  to  ask 
their  permission  to  publish  the  report  the  moment  it  was  ready. 
We  had  received  our  commission  to  prepare  the  balance  sheet 
for  them,  and  we  felt  technicallv  that  we  must  get  their 
permission  before  we  could  make  it  public.  They  gave  their 
consent.  While  I  was  there,  one  or  other  of  them — I  cannot 
remember  which  it  was — said  that  I  had  been  going  over  various 
items  with  them  singly,  and  it  would  be  better  that  I  should 
go  over  them  with  the  whole  Board  collectively.      I  happened 

45 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

M'Gr^eoF  ^°  have  the  rough  draft  of  the  printed  report  in  my  hand.  I 
*  had  not  been  in  communication  with  Mr.  Inglis  previously  upon 
this  subject.  Taking  the  rough  draft,  I  went  over  item  by 
item  the  notes  on  that  draft  which  appeared  to  me  to  affect 
the  Directors  personally.  I  did  so  without,  so  far  as  I 
remember,  any  remark  being  made ;  and  the  moment  I  had 
finished  I  was  very  glad  to  take  the  opportunity  of  leaving  the 
room,  from  the  unpleasant  nature  of  the  affair.  No  one  spoke, 
unless  there  may  have  been  an  exclamation  or  two  of  astonish- 
ment. They  all  appeared  to  be  very  much  surprised  and 
astonished  at  the  various  items  to  which  I  referred,  but  there 
was  no  distinct  or  definite  remark  with  which  I  can  charge  my 
memory.  Mr.  Stronach  was  present.  He  was  in  the  same 
state  in  which  he  had  previously  been.  This  meeting  took 
place  in  a  small  room  in  the  Bank's  premises. 

At  this  time  we  had  not  checked  or  finally  ascertained  the 
precise  amount  of  the  deficit,  according  to  our  calculation ;  the 
figures  were  not  added  up.  Before  I  left  the  room  I  undertook 
to  inform  the  Directors  of  the  amount  the  moment  we  had 
ascertained  it.  We  did  ascertain  it  about  half-past  three  the 
same  afternoon  (Friday),  and  I  went  up  to  the  Board  room  with 
a  slip  of  paper,  on  which  were  the  words,  as  nearly  as  possible — 
"  Deficit,  upwards  of  five  millions  " — which  I  handed  to  Mr. 
Naismith,  who  was  acting  as  agent  for  the  Directors.  And 
that  was,  in  point  of  fact,  the  actual  deficit,  so  far  as  I  could 
ascertain  it.  That  result  was  never  challenged  by  any  of  the 
Directors  as  being  an  incorrect  representation  of  the  state  of 
matters.  I  knew  the  abstract  that  had  been  published  by  the 
Directors  on  5th  July,  1878  ;  we  published  that  abstract  as  part 
of  our  report.  It  showed  that  the  Bank  had  assets  exceeding 
liabilities  to  the  amount  of  a  million  and  a  half  in  round 
numbers.  Our  report  brought  out  a  balance  of  loss  of 
£5,190,000,  so  that  the  difference  between  the  two  results — 
the  one  brought  out  in  their  report  to  the  shareholders  on  5th 
July,  and  the  other  in  our  report  on  18th  October  in  the  same 
year — was  something  over  six  and  a  half  millions.  No.  576 
is  a  copy  of  our  report.  We  retained  the  Bank's  books  in  our 
possession  until  we  gave  them  over  to  the  Crown.  For  con- 
venience' sake  we  continued  to  enter  the  operations  of  the  Bank 
in  these  books.  We  found  it  would  have  put  a  practical  stop 
to  the  liquidation  if  they  had  started  a  new  set  of  books  at 
once ;  but  I  arranged  with  Mr.  Brown  a  stamp  which  should 
be  put  at  the  end  of  every  entry  in  a  book  that  was  in  use, 
marking  the  time  when  the  liquidators  began,  so  that  the  books 
bear  evidence  of  that  wherever  there  was  an  entry  made  in 
continuation  of  the  Bank's  own  operations.  I,  as  law  agent 
of  the  liquidators,  was  in  possession  of  certain  of  the  muniments 
of  the  Bank.  The  contract  of  copartnery  of  the  City  of  Glasgow 
46 


Evidence  of  Investigators. 


Bank,  No.  299,  was  given  over  by  me  to  the  Crown ;  and  also  ^'c^^gor. 
the  supplementary  contract,  of  dates  from  22nd  May,  1843, 
to  20th  June,  1844,  No.  301,  and  the  supplementary  contract, 
of  dates  from  26th  June,  1844,  to  28th  September,  1849,  No. 
302.  No.  300  is  a  print  which  was  prepared  containing  these 
three  documents  in  full. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  Tratner — Mr.  Anderson  and  I  took 
sixteen  days  to  make  up  the  report  which  we  issued  on  18th 
October.  During  these  sixteen  days  we  were  very  busy  the 
whole  day,  and  more  than  the  day,  with  the  Bank's  affairs. 
We  had  other  accountants'  assistance  besides  the  personal 
labour  of  Mr.  Anderson.  All  the  partners  of  Mr.  Anderson's 
finn  were  employed,  I  may  almost  say  continuously,  and  two  at 
least  of  my  own  partners ;  and  we  had  a  staff  of  our  own.  We 
had  a  large  number  both  of  Mr.  Anderson's  clerks  and  of  mine 
employed  during  the  whole  time.  I  saw  Mr.  Stewart  several 
times  between  2nd  October  and  the  publication  of  our  report. 
On  2nd  October,  I  met  him  and  all  the  other  Directors,  as  I 
have  already  mentioned.  He  did  not  say  anything  on  that 
occasion  indicative  of  his  acquaintance  with  the  Bank's  books 
or  the  entries  therein. 

Then  the  information  which  the  Directors  gave  you  then, 
that  there  was  a  crisis  at  hand,  was  information,  I  suppose, 
just  as  general  in  their  minds  as  the  expression  you  have 
mentioned  to  us  now? — Very  much  so. 

And  no  details  were  gone  into  to  show  you  that  Mr.  Stewart 
or  anybody  else  knew  what  was  the  exact  nature  of  the  crisis 
that  was  expected? — None. 

That  disposes  of  the  2nd  of  October ;  what  was  the  next 
occasion  on  which  you  saw  Mr.  Stewart?^ — I  must  have  seen 
Mr.  Stewart  at  the  first  meeting  or  two  of  the  Bank  Directors, 
but  no  particulars  with  regard  to  these  meetings  dwelt  upon  my 
mind.  The  first  time  that  I  remember  Mr.  Stewart  saying 
anything  to  me  individually  upon  the  subject  was  when  I  met 
him  one  day  at  the  door  of  the  Bank.  That  was  before  our 
report  had  been  completed,  and  before  I  had  spoken  to  the 
Directors  privately. 

What  took  place  between  you? — It  was  a  mere  shaking  of 
hands;  and  he  hurrying  past  in  a  state  of  great  excitement, 
and  saying  that  he  was  a  broken-hearted  man,  and  perfectly 
astounded  at  the  state  in  which  the  Bank's  affairs  were  found 
to  have  been. 

Then,  after  that,  you,  I  suppose,  met  him  when  you  went 
over  the  draft  report  with  him,  as  you  did  with  each  of  the 
Directors? — ^I  sent  for  him  to  come  down  to  my  room,  and 
he  came  down  alone,  and  I  went  over  the  various  points  with 
him.  He  stated  then  that  he  was  entirely  and  totally  ignorant 
of  every  fact  that  I  brought  before  him.      I  believed  him.      I 

47 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

M-Q^\'       must   say   that   I   always   looked   upon   him   as   an  essentially 

'  honourable  man  in  every  respect,  and  not  a  man  who,  so  far  as 

I  could  judge,  would  be  likely  to  fabricate  or  falsify  accounts. 

I  knew  him  to  be  a  man  reputed  to  be  of  large  means,  and 

one  who  held  a  position  of  esteem  in  Glasgow. 

^Vhat  opinion  have  you  formed  with  regard  to  Mr.  Stewart's 
character  as  an  accountant'.' — I  can  only  give,  in  the  most 
general  terms,  my  own  inipiession,  and  that  is  that  I  should 
think  he  had  a  peculiarly  bad  head  for  figures. 

What  was  Mr.  Stewart's  appearance  when  you  told  him  at 
that  private  meeting  the  results  of  your  investigation? — I  should 
say  something  like  horror. 

Did  you  at  all  suppose  him  to  be  feigning  an  ignorance  which 
was  not  the  fact? — No  ;  I  did  not. 

In  short,  from  what  he  stated,  and  from  his  manner,  you 
believed  his  statement  that  your  revelations  were  perfectly  new 
to  him?— I  did. 

George  Auldjo  Jamieson. 

G.  A.  ,  . 

Jamieson.  By  the  Lord  Advocate — I  am  a  chartered  accountant  m 
Edinburgh.  I  am  now  one  of  the  liquidators  of  the  City  of 
Glasgow  Bank.  On  the  30th  of  September,  1878,  I  was  sent 
for  by  the  cashier  of  the  Royal  Bank,  and  was  told  that  my 
services  were  required  by  himself  and  the  other  banks  to 
investigate  as  well  as  I  could,  in  a  short  time,  the  affairs  of 
the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  which  had  applied  to  the  other 
Scots  banks  for  assistance.  I  was  informed  that  the  state  of 
affairs,  so  far  as  disclosed,  had  occasioned  considerable  alarm 
to  the  other  banks.  I  met  the  managers  of  the  Scots  banks 
that  evening,  and  next  morning  (Tuesday,  1st  October)  I  went 
to  Glasgow.  Mr.  Fleming,  the  cashier  of  the  Royal  Bank,  had 
handed  to  me  certain  papers  which  had  been  left  with  him 
by  the  representatives  of  the  City  Bank.  On  arriving  at 
Glasgow  I  went  to  the  office  of  Messrs.  Stewart,  Pott  &  Co., 
and  afterwards  to  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank.  I  went  alone 
to  the  Bank.  I  met  there  the  Manager  of  the  Bank,  Mr. 
Stronach,  and  Mr.  Potter,  a  Director.  I  also  saw  the  accountant 
of  the  Bank,  Mr.  Morison,  and  the  Secretary,  Mr.  Leresche. 
Mr.  Potter  was  very  strong  in  giving  directions  to  the  officials 
of  the  Bank  that  every  possible  information  and  explanation 
should  be  afforded  to  me  ;  and  these  directions  were  thoroughly 
carried  out  by  the  officials.  Mr.  Potter  and  Mr.  Stronach  were 
together,  but  Mr.  Potter  was  spokesman.  I  asked  for  the 
balance  sheet  of  the  year  to  5th  June,  1878.  [Shown  No.  124.]  I 
forget  at  this  moment  whether  there  were  red  ink  figures  on 
the  balance  sheet  shown  to  me ;    my  impression  is  they  were 

48 


Evidence  of  Investigators. 


all  in  black ;  but  this  balance  sheet  was  certainly  shown  to  me.  jamieson. 
If  there  be  a  balance  sheet  showing  these  results  in  black 
figures,  it  was  that  which  was  shown  to  me.  [Shown  No.  12  5. J 
That  is  the  one  I  saw.  I  asked  explanations  at  the  officials, 
especially  as  to  gold.  From  the  materials  put  into  my  hands 
by  Mr.  Fleming,  I  had  an  index  by  which  to  examine  the 
matters  in  the  balance  sheet,  and  making  use  of  that,  I  put 
the  necessary  questions  to  the  officials.  I  also  examined  some 
of  the  accounts  in  the  books.  Some  were  large  accounts.  I 
went  into  the  discount  ledger  and  some  of  the  other  ledgers 
with  the  view  of  taking  out  and  making  notes  on  the  largest 
and  most  important  accounts  I  there  found.  In  the  course  of 
the  afternoon  Mr.  Stewart  and  Mr.  Innes  Wright,  two  of  the 
Directors,  came  to  see  me,  and  to  see  what  was  going  on. 
Mr.  Potter  had  been  there  during  a  considerable  part  of  the 
day,  and  was  there  when  they  arrived.  They  were  anxious 
to  know  the  result  of  my  investigation,  so  far  as  it  had  gone. 
I  did  not  communicate  the  result  definitely  to  them,  because 
I  had  not  completed  it.  They  asked  me  to  communicate  what 
would  be  the  probable  tenor  of  the  report  I  should  make  to  the 
banks  in  Edinburgh  that  afternoon,  and  I  told  them  that  I 
could  hold  out  no  expectation  that  I  could  recommend  the  banks 
to  afiford  any  assistance,  because  I  had  satisfied  myself  that  the 
amount  of  probable  loss  greatly  exceeded  anything  that  the 
banks  would  venture  to  face.  That  conclusion  was  based  on 
the  rapid  view  which  I  had  been  enabled  to  take,  by  the  informa- 
tion so  readily  supplied  to  me,  of  the  position  of  the  Bank 
with  reference  to  important  accounts,  and  to  the  disclosure  of 
the   affairs  of  the  Bank  contained  in  the  balance   sheets. 

In  speaking  of  important  accounts,  do  you  mean  advances, 
and  to  whom?  [Objected  to.  Objection  repelled.] — I  mean 
entries  in  the  balance  sheet  itself,  and  advances  mad©  to 
specific  customers  of  the  Bank,  as  laid  before  m©  at  that  time 
by  the  officials,  and  in  the  documents  then  submitted  to  me. 
These  specific  customers  of  the  Bank  were  James  Morton  &  Co., 
Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  J.  Nicol  Fleming,  and  John  Innes 
Wright  &  Co.  As  I  made  them  up  at  that  hurried  time,  the 
advances  shown  to   these  four  firms   amounted  to   £5,870,000. 

Was  it  in  respect  of  these  advances  that  you  formed  your 
estimate  that  the  Bank  would  not  be  able  to  go  on? — That, 
combined  with  some  of  the  other  elements  in  the  balance  sheet 
of  the  Bank.  I  intimated  my  opinion  to  Mr.  Wright,  Mr. 
Stewart,  and  Mr.  Potter.  I  stated  to  them  the  advances  as 
being  about  five  millions.  They  appeared  to  be  surprised  at 
the  amount,  and  I  recollect  Mr.  Potter  turned  to  the  Manager 
and  said,  "  Is  it  possible  " — I  forget  whether  he  said  "  we  " 
or  "  you  " — "  have  given  so  much  to  those  firms  ? "  One  of  the 
firms  was  Mr.  Wright's  own.  He  did  not  make  any  observation 
D  49 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

G.  A.      about  the  amount — not  that  I  can  recollect.      Mr.   Stronach, 

Jaraieson.  -^^  answer  to  Mr.   Potter,   said  he   feared  it  was  too   true.       I 

don't   think   Mr.    Stewart   said   anything.       He   appeared   to   be 

very  much   distressed  and  disturbed   by  the   state   of   matters, 

but  I  cannot  recollect  that  he  said  anything. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Distressed  by  your  information? 
— By   my   information. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — ^Do  you  mean  that  he  beti-ayed 
that  state  of  mind  upon  receiving  your  information;  or  do 
you  mean  that  he  was  in  that  state  before  he  received  it? — I 
should  say  partly  both.  I  took  it  for  granted  that,  having 
asked  me  to  give  an  indication  of  the  report  which  I  was  to 
make  to  the  banks — on  which  so  much  depended — he  was 
distressed  at  finding  that  I  was  not  prepared  to  report  favour- 
ably. I  returned  to  Edinburgh  and  laid  my  statement  before 
the  managers  of  the  banks,  who  afterwards  resolved  to  give 
no  assistance.  I  was  appointed  a  liquidator.  We  have  made 
no  final  estimate  of  the  assets  and  liabilities.  The  officials 
of  the  Bank  and  the  books  have  been  taken  up  so  much  in 
connection  with  the  investigations  for  this  trial  that  it  has 
been  impossible,  as  yet,  to  complete  such  estimate. 

James  Muip.  James  Muir. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — I  am  an  accountant  in  Glasgow,  and 
'a  member  of  the  Institute  of  Accountants  and  Actuaries  there. 
After  the  2nd  October,  1878,  I  aided  in  an  investigation  into 
the  books  and  accounts  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  more 
recently  I  have  been  engaged  by  the  Crown  to  make  certain 
further  investigations  into  these  books.  The  whole  of  the 
books  at  the  Bank  were  placed  at  my  disposal  for  that  purpose, 
and  I  examined  them  in  Glasgow,  within  the  premises  of  the 
Bank.  I  examined  the  balance  sheets  printed  and  circulated 
among  the  shareholders  for  the  years  1876,  1877,  and  1878, 
along  with  the  annual  report.  I  also  examined  the  books  of 
the  Bank  as  at  the  periods  of  the  balances,  for  the  purpose 
of  ascertaining  whether  and  how  far  these  tallied  with  the 
books.  I  made  out  corrected  balances  of  my  own  for  each  of 
these  periods.  I  also  compared  these  balance  sheets  with  the 
book  entitled  "  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  balance  ledger.  No.  3." 
That  is  a  book  containing  the  signatures  of  the  Directors,  and 
it  is  No.  12  of  the  inventory.  I  also  prepared  states  showing 
the  difference  between  the  entries  contained  in  the  balance 
sheets  as  published  and  the  books  of  the  Bank.  The  credit  and 
debit  sides  are  differently  stated  in  the  balance  ledger  and  in 
the  published  abstracts. 

What  is  the  difference? — In  the  published  balance  sheet  the 
liabilities  are  on  the  left-hand  side,  and  in  the  balance  ledger 
SO 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

they   are   upon   the   right-hand   side ;    that    is   a   matter   of   no  James  Muir. 
moment,   but   it  must   be  kept  very   strictly   in  view   to   avoid 
confusion. 

Look  at  No.  28,  being  a  scroll  balance  sheet  for  1876,  and 
also  at  the  published  abstract  as  printed  in  the  indictment,  and 
state  in  detail  the  discrepancies  ? — >0n  the  debtor  or  liability  side, 
head  I.  in  the  published  sheet,  "  Deposits  at  the  head  office  and 
branches,  and  balances  at  the  credit  of  banking  correspondents," 
is  as  published,  £8,364,056 ;  in  the  bank  ledger  it  is  £9,370,273. 
In  the  published  sheet  it  is  therefore  understated  to  the  extent 
of  £1,006,216.  Taking  the  second  item  on  the  debtor  side, 
the  "  Bank  notes  in  circulation "  are  properly  stated  on  both 
sheets.  Taking  the  third  item,  "'  Drafts  outstanding,  due,  or 
with  a  currency  not  exceeding  twenty-one  days,  £326,853 
14s.  Id."  ;  and  item  four,  "  Drafts  accepted  by  the  Bank  and 
by  its  London  agents  on  account  of  home  and  foreign  con- 
stituents, £988,520  3s.,"  these  are  understated  to  the  extent 
of  £973,300  in  the  published  sheet.  The  other  items  on  the 
debtor  side  of  the  sheet  are  coirectly  stated. 

Did  you  examine  the  books  of  the  Bank  with  the  view  of 
tracing  that  deduction  of  £973,300?— I  did. 

Wliat    did    you    find? — I    found    an    entry    in    the    private  ' 

cash  book  on  4th  June,  1873.  [Shown  excerpt  2a  from 
the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  cash  book,  private,  No.  6.]  The 
entry  that  I  found  in  the  cash  book  on  the  debtor  side 
is  "  Foreign  and  colonial  credits  No.  2,  for  the  following 
credits  to  be  retired  as  they  mature,  and  debited  under 
the  respective  accounts  to  credit  accounts  No.  2,  against 
which  securities  are  now  held  by  the  Bank,  and  in  process  of 
realisation  and  payment  of  proceeds,  £973,300  "  ;  and  on  the 
other  side  the  entry  is,  "  Bills  payable  No.  2,  for  the  following 
amounts  under  acceptance  at  this  date,  to  be  retired  by  the 
Bank,  under  special  arrangements  with  the  parties,  of  date 
1st  June,  1873,  against  which  certain  securities  are  now  held 
by  the  Bank,  and  in  process  of  realisation  and  payment  of  the 
proceeds,  £973,300." 

Wliat  arrangement,  according  to  your  view,  was  indicated  by 
these  entries? — It  would  appear  to  me  that  if  this  entry  were 
a  true  entry 

Assume  it  to  be  so  ? — ^Some  arrangement  must  have  been  come 
to  with  certain  parties  who  had  obtained  advances  from  the  Bank, 
and  who  had  lodged  securities  against  these  advances,  the  nature 
of  the  arrangement  being  that  these  securities  were  to  be,  and, 
in  point  of  fact,  were  at  that  moment  in  process  of  realisation, 
and  that  the  bills  with  which  the  advances  had  been  financed 
wore  to  be  paid  off  at  their  maturity  by  the  proceeds  of  the 
realisation. 

By  the  Lord  Juptice-Clerk — Are  the  debts  enumerated  which 
stood  in  that  position  ? — They  are  not ;  there  are  no  details. 

SI 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Muir.  By  the  Lord  Advocate — They  are  slumped  on  both  sides. 
No  details  are  given,  either  of  the  advances  or  of  the  supposed 
securities. 

Did  you  find  that  that  sum  of  £973,000,  according  to  that 
arrangement,  was  kept  in  the  books  down  to  the  balance  of 
1878  ? — It  was.  We  found  it  there  in  October,  at  the  time  of 
the   investigation. 

Wliat  was  the  effect  of  iti — The  effect  of  it  was^  as  used  in 
the  published  balance  sheets,  to  make  it  appear,  not  that  the 
securities  were  to  be  realised,  but  that  they  had  been  realised, 
and  that  the  bills  to  a  corresponding  amount  were  not  to  be 
paid  off,  but  that  they  had  actually  been  paid  off. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — It  is  not  set  forth  twice  in  the 
balance  sheet.  There  is  not  a  cross  entry ;  it  is  deducted 
from  both  sides,  so  that  it  reduces  the  assets  on  the  one  side 
and  the  liabilities  on  the  other. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — In  other  words,  is  the  effect  of  it  in 
the  balance  sheet  not  precisely  the  same  as  if  these  advances 
to  the  extent  of  £973,000  had  been  paid  in  cash? — Exactly. 

Upon  the  day  the  entry  was  made  in  1873? — And  not  only 
so,  but  that  it  was  employed  to  retire  the  Bank's  acceptances 
for  an  equal  amount. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — And  therefore  that  they  were  not 
to  be  regarded  as  bills  payable? — Precisely. 

And  the  amount  was  reduced  to  that  extent? — Exactly. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — That  was  entered  as  an  actual  pay- 
ment which  was  only  an  anticipated  payment,  and  was  not  got 
during  the  five  years  afterwards?^ — ^Yes,  it  seems  as  much  an 
anticipation  at  October,   1878,  as  it  was  in  June,  1873. 

So  far  as  the  books  go? — So  far  as  the  books  go. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Do  you  find  any  trace  at  all  in 
the  books  of  what  that  sum  of  £973,000  originated  in? — I 
did  not  find  anything  in  the  books,  but  I  have  seen  a  document 
which  explains  it.  But  I  may  say  that  it  does  not  explain  it 
to  my  satisfaction.  I  wish,  my  lord,  to  impress  it  very  strongly 
upon  you,  that  no  entry  in  a  book  can  possibly  take  a  bill 
payable  off  the  circle,  although  some  people  seem  to  have 
thought  differently. 

Can  you  conceive  any  object  in  a  trading  company  dealing 
in  money  as  banks  do  making  an  entry  of  that  kind? — 
Yes  ;  it  is  obviously  veiy  important  that  the  acceptances 
of  the  Bank  should  be  made  to  appear  in  the  balance  sheet 
as  small  as  possible.  A  large  amount  of  acceptances  published 
in  the  balance  sheet  would  militate  against  the  possibility 
of  discounting  the  bills  of  the  Bank  in  the  brokers'  offices  in 
London. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — Proceed  with  your  examination  of 
the  other  side  of  the  abstract  for  1876? — On  the  credit  side 

52 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

of  the  balance  sheet,  as  published  at  7th  June,  1876,  the  first  James  Muir. 

head    is    '"  Bills    of    exchange,    local    and    country    bills,    credit 

accounts,  and  other  advances  upon  security,"  £8,787,804.     That 

is  understated  in  the  published  balance  sheet  to  the  extent  of 

£2,698,539.     Then,   "  Cash  on  hand,   that  is   to  say,   gold  and 

silver  coin,  and  notes  of  other  banks  at  head  ofiice  and  branches," 

head  III.  of  the  published  sheet,  £862,812,  is  overstated  £29,095. 

The  next  head,    "  Government  stocks,   exchequer   bills,   railway 

and    other   stocks    and   debentures,    and    balances    in    hands   of 

banking    correspondents,"    were    overstated    to    the    extent    of 

£753,211. 

Could  you  ascertain  what  that  consisted  of? — Yes;  I  have 
ascertained  it. 

In  what  way? — By  looking  at  No.  128  of  the  inventory,  which 
is  apparently  the  scroll  of  the  balance  sheet. 

Well,  do  not  assume  that  in  the  meantime? — It  is  overstated 
to  that  amount ;  but  without  looking  at  this  scroll,  it  cannot 
be  found  to  be  so  by  the  books. 

Then,  except  for  the  existence  of  scroll  No.  128,  the  books 
of  the  Bank  proper  do  not  disclose  whence  came  that  over- 
statement ? — ^No. 

But,  in  point  of  fact,  if  you  had  nothing  but  the  books  to 
go  by,  they  simply  show  an  over-statement  of  that  amount, 
without  anything  to  account  as  to  where  it  came  from? — 
Quite  so. 

I  suppose  it  is  quite  possible  to  conceal  a  good  deal  by 
making  deductions  on  both  sides  of  a  balance  sheet,  leaving  the 
result  the  same  as  it  originally  stood? — .Yes. 

In  point  of  fact,  I  presume  that  the  balance  sheet  of  a  bank 
ought  to  show  their  whole  outstanding  liabilities  and  their 
whole  outstanding  assets? — ^Undoubtedly. 

Is  it  possible  otherwise  to  forai  an  accurate  conception  of  the 
kind  of  trading  they  are  engaged  in,  or  what  loss  would  result? — 
Quit-e  impossible. 

To  take  six  or  eight  millions  off  each  side  of  this  account 
would  not  alter  the  balance  ? — Certa,inly  not. 

But  it  would  alter  the  apparent  character  of  the  Bank's 
transactions  ? — Entirely. 

Now  turn  to  the  next  abstract  balance  sheet  for  1877.  I  ask 
you  in  the  meantime  to  lay  out  of  view  these  scroll  sheets,  and 
to  confine  yourself  to  a  comparison  between  this  abstract  and 
the  books  of  the  Bank,  beginning  again  with  the  liabilities? — 
At  6th  June,  1877,  the  published  sheet  disclosed  under  head  I. 
of  liabilities,  "  Deposits  at  the  head  office  and  branches,  and 
balances  at  the  credit  of  banking  correspondents,"  £8,382,711. 
That  was  understated  to  the  extent  of  £1,151,518. 

With  reference  to  that  under-statement,  leaving  out  of  view 
those  abstracts  that  I  was  speaking  of,  is  there  anything  what- 

53 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Muip.  ever  to  give  a  clue  to  the  particular  assets  that  had  been 
deducted  in  making  up  this  abstract? — Yes,  there  is. 

What  is  that? — ^There  are  two  books  specially,  one  of  which 
is  called,  "  Balances  of  deposit  accounts,"  and  the  other, 
"Balances  of  credit  accounts,"  which  show  the  true  balances 
of  deposit  and  credit  accounts  which  ought  to  have  been  entered 
in  this  balance  sheet. 

That  is  perfectly  true ;  but  supposing  the  question  were  put 
to  you,  which  part  of  their  assets  were  deducted,  is  there  any 
means  of  telling  that  from  the  books  themselves? — ^There  is  no 
means  of  comparing  the  books  themselves  with  the  published 
sheet,  simply  for  the  reason  that  there  are  no  details  in  the 
published  sheet. 

Precisely  so,  and  therefore  you  cannot,  by  looking  at  the 
published  sheet,  and  then  looking  at  the  books  of  the  Bank, 
tell  whether  the  deduction  was  made  from  deposits  or  credits? — 
No,  or  whatever  it  may  be,  you  cannot  tell  the  precise  nature  of 
the  debt  which  was  omitted. 

You  may  speculate  as  to  why  it  was  made,  and  how  it  was 
made,  but  there  is  no  possibility  of  obtaining  infomiation  as 
to  that  from  the  books? — No,  in  consequence  of  the  absence  of 
details  from  the  published  balance  sheet. 

Then  what  is  the  next  item? — The  next  item  on  the 
liabilities  side  is  head  II.,  "  Bank  notes  in  circulation  in 
Scotland  and  the  Isle  of  Man."  That  is  understated  to  the 
extent  of  £76,110.  The  next  item,  "Drafts  outstanding,  due, 
or  with  a  currency  not  exceeding  twenty-one  days,  and  drafts 
accepted  by  the  Bank  and  by  its  London  agents  on  account  of 
home  and  foreign  constituents,"  £1,350,335,  as  published,  is 
understated  to  the  extent  of  £1,330,712,  just  about  one-half. 
The  other  items  on  that  side  are  perfectly  correct  as  published, 
according  to  the  books. 

Then  take  the  other  side? — 'The  first  item  on  the  other 
side,  "  Bills  of  exchange,  local  and  countiy  bills,  credit  accounts, 
and  other  advances  upon  security,"  £8,758,838,  is  understated 
to  the  extent  of  £3,227,154.  Then  "  Cash  on  hand,  gold  and 
silver  coin,  and  notes  of  other  banks  at  head  office  and  branches," 
is  understated  to  the  extent  of  £30,000.  Then  "  Government 
stocks,  exchequer  bills,  railway  and  other  stocks  and  debentureSi 
and  balances  in  hand  of  banking  correspondents,"  £2,187,896, 
as  published,  is  overstated  to  the  extent  of  £751,775. 

I  sujopose  that  from  the  books  themselves  you  have  no  means 
of  tracing  that  over-statement?  I  mean  from  comparing  the 
books  themselves  with  the  published  sheet,  you  have  no  means 
of  finding  the  items? — No,  none  whatever. 

Now,  assuming  that  the  books  are  true,  and  that  in  publishing 
the  result  of  the  books  there  is  a  departure  from  them  to  the 
extent  shown   in   this  abstract,  do  you  think   it   could   be   said 

54 


Evidence  for  Prosecution, 

that  this  abstract  tnily  sets  forth  the  condition  of  the  Bank? —  James  Mulr. 
Certainly  not. 

What  do  you  think  the  effect  would  be  of  understating  the 
third  article  on  the  debtor  side  by  one-half — the  bills  payable — 
or  by  its  own  amount? — What  I  have  already  said — it  would 
make  the  bills  which  were  offered  to  the  London  brokers  for 
discount  all  the  more  marketable. 

And  I  presume  a  good  deal  of  the  effect  of  such  an  under- 
statement might  depend  upon  who  were  known  to  be  the 
customers  of  the  Bank'.^ — Undoubtedly. 

Now,  take  the  next  abstract  balance  sheet  for  the 
year  1878? — On  the  liabilities  side,  head  I.,  "Deposits 
at  the  head  office  and  branches,  and  balances  at  the 
credit  of  banking  correspondents,"  £8,102,001,  is  understated  to 
the  extent  of  £941,284.  "  Bank  notes  in  circulation  in 
Scotland  and  the  Isle  of  Man,"  £710,252,  as  published,  is  under- 
stated to  the  extent  of  £89,031.  "  Drafts  outstanding,  due, 
or  with  a  currency  not  exceeding  twenty-one  days,  and  drafts 
accepted  by  the  Bank  and  by  its  London  agents  on  account  of 
home  and  foreign  constituents,"  £1,488,244,  ought  to  be 
£2,881,252,  leaving  an  under-statement  on  that  head  of 
£1,393,008,  again  nearly  one-half.  Then,  on  the  other  side, 
the  first  item  of  assets,  "  Bills  of  exchange,  local  and  country 
bills,  credit  accounts,  and  other  advances  upon  security," 
£8,484,466,  is  understated  £3,520,913.  The  "Cash  on  hand," 
£845,963,  is  overstated  to  the  extent  of  £219,522.  The  "  Gov- 
ernment stocks,"  etc.,  published  at  £2,296,839,  are  overstated 
to  the  extent  of  £926,764. 

Do  you  say  the  same  as  to  the  impossibility  of  getting  the 
details  of  these  under  the  particular  statements  from  the  books  1 
—I  do. 

Now,  will  you  take  the  balance  accounts  in  the  "  Balance 
ledger  No.  3,"  or  excerpt  No.  12a?  Take  the  year  1876.  I 
wish  you  to  contrast  the  entries  in  the  balance  ledger  with 
the  entries  in  the  books,  and  state  what,  if  any,  discrepancies 
you  find  there? — We  will  take  this  time  the  credit  side  of  this 
document  first,  beinc:  the  liability  side.  In  the  first  place, 
there  is  "Bills  payable,  £1,315,373."  It  ought  to  be 
£2,288,673  ;  the  difference  is  the  £973,300. 

Then  the  difference  between  the  two  entries  tallies  with  the 
£973,300? — Yes  ;  and  I  find  the  true  amount  of  the  bills  cuiTent 
in  the  "  Bills  payable  progressive  ledger,"  No.  40  of  the 
inventory. 

But  I  mean  to  say  that  the  entry  in  the  balance  ledger  will 
tally  with  the  entries  in  the  books  if  you  give  effect  to  that  as 
a  liquidating  arrangement? — Yes. 

If  you  treat  unpaid  debts  to  that  extent  as  paid? — Yes. 

Is  there  any  other? — Yes.      Four  or  five  entries  further  down, 

55 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Muir.  deposit  accounts  are  entered  at  £3233 ;  that  ought  to  be 
£455,444. 

Will  you  look  at  No.  128?  That  is  the  scroll  abstract  of 
accounts  for  1876? — It  appears  to  be  so. 

Is  it  not  titled  so? — No;  it  does  not  say  "scroll,"  it  says 
"  abstract,"  but  it  appears  to  be  the  scroll  of  the  published 
abstract.  I  see  it  says  "  scroll  "  on  the  back  ;  I  was  not  aware 
of  that. 

That  is  a  document  written  partly  in  black  and  partly  in 
red  ink? — Yes. 

Does  that  appear  to  you  to  have  been  the  scroll  from  which 
the  abstract  was  made  up? — It  does. 

From  what  does  it  so  appear?^ — I  find  that  the  slump  totals 
under  the  various  heads  correspond  with  the  slump  totals  under 
the  various  heads  in  the  published  sheet. 

You  see  there  an  entry  of  "  Drafts  outstanding,  due,  or 
with  a  currency,"  under  head  III.  1 — Yes ;  it  is  "  Drafts  out- 
standing, due,  or  with  a  currency,  bills  payable  No.  1  " — that 
is  extended  into   a  creditor  column — £2,288,673    17s.    Id. 

That  tallies  with  the  books  ? — Yes ;  and  then,  a  little  lower 
down,  there  is  another  entry,  "  Bills  payable,  No.  2,"  and  there 
is  a  sum  extended  into  a  debtor  column,  £973,300,  which  sum 
is  deducted  from  that  I  have  just  given.  The  difference, 
£1,315,373,  is  entered  into  a  column  called  "  Creditor  balance," 
and  that  is  the  sum  which  is  published  in  the  balance  sheet. 

So  that  if  that  be  correct,  that  would  explain  the  way  in 
which  the  sum  of  £973,300  has  been  deducted  and  the  balance 
sheet  made  up?^ — 'Yes. 

Will  you  refer  again  to  the  balance  ledger  No.  3?  Is  the 
state  of  deposit  accounts  correctly  given? — No.  The  amount 
inserted  in  the  balance  ledger  on  the  creditor  side,  on  the  leftr 
hand  side,  is  £3233.      That  ought  to  be  £455,444. 

Just  explain  how  you  come  to  that  conclusion? — I  find  that 
that  is  the  amount  of  deposits  at  the  head  office  by  looking 
at  the  book,  "  Balances  of  deposit  accounts,"  which  is  No.  59 
of  inventory,  and  that  book  corresponds  with  the  deposit  ledger 
kept  at  the  head  office  of  the  Bank. 

That  book  shows  in  separate  columns  both  the  balances  due  to 
the  Bank  by  overdrafts  and  the  balances  due  by  the  Bank  to 
depositors  ?— It  does. 

These  are  crossed? — Yes,  and  the  difference  alone  extended. 

Do  you  think  that  is  a  correct  operation? — Not  except  in 
cases  where  the  debtor  and  creditor  are  precisely  the  same. 

Where  there  are  cross  accounts  with  the  same  person  or 
firm? — ^Yes,  and  representing  the  same  interest.  The  same 
man  may  be  rejaresenting  different  interests,  and  it  would  be 
most  improper  to  cross  such  accounts. 

In  the  scroll  abstract  how  is  that  item  dealt  with  ? — It  appears 

56 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

in  the  books  as  two  entries,  one  of  £455,000,  and  the  other  of  James  Muip. 
£452,211. 

These  are  made  to  extinguish  each  other,  and  bring  out  the 
balance  ledger.^ — 'Yes,  and  £1346  is  put  in  on  the  other  side  in 
the  published  sheet. 

WTiich  head  would  that  fall  under  / — Head  I.,  on  the  left-hand 
side  of  the  published  sheet.  This  balance  ledger  is  not  classified 
at  all. 

It  appears  in  the  book  as  two  sums  due  by  the  Bank  to 
depositors,  and  due  by  depositors  to  the  Bank  on  overdraft? — 
It  does. 

The  difference  only  to  the  extent  of  £3000  odds  is  entered 
in  the  balance  ledger? — That  is  so. 

In  what  account  does  this  item  appear  in  the  scroll  balance 
sheet? — It  appears  on  the  other  side  altogether,  £1346  16s.  8d. 
And  that  is  the  item  which  is  given  effect  to  in  bringing  out 
the  total  represented  in  the  published  sheet? — That  is  so. 

So  that  it  appears  in  three  different  forms — first  in  the  books ; 
then  a  different  sum  in  the  balance  ledger;  and  thirdly,  a 
reduced  sum  in  the  scroll  abstract? — That  is  so;  and  that 
has  arisen,  I  may  explain,  to  some  extent  from  certain  entries 
having  been  made  in  the  cash  book  subsequently,  apparently, 
to  this  scroll  having  been  made  up. 

It  may  be  accounted  for  from  that  ? — Yes,  it  is  so  ;  and  the 
balance  ledger  is  in  conformity  with  the  books  after  these 
entries  have  been  made,  but  not  the  scroll. 

There  is  nothing  of  the  same  kind  to  account  for  the  change 
in  the  scroll? — Nothing  whatever. 

In  the  "  Balance  ledger  No.  3 "  come  to  "  credit  accounts, 
creditor  balances  "1 — ^That  is  omitted  altogether  from  the  balance 
ledg:er.  I  find  on  looking  at  a  book  called  "  Balances  of  credit 
accounts,"  No.  58  of  the  inventory,  that  there  were  such  balances 
to  the  extent  of  £147,468.  These  are  entirely  omitted  from  the 
balance  ledger. 

Was  that  a  correct  omission? — Certainly  not. 
By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — What  is  that  sum  of  £147,468? 
— These  are  balances  standing  at  the  credit  of  what  are 
called  "  Credit  accounts."  It  is  a  little  confusing.  They 
are  at  the  creditor  of  what  are  called  the  credit  accounts — 
a  "  credit  account "  being  an  account  which  generally  has  a 
balance  at  the  debtor  of  it.  A  "  cash  credit  account "  is  the 
ordinary  name  for  it. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — But  upon  these  balances  the  Bank 
was  the  debtor? — It  was. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — ^They  were  balances  due  to 
customers  upon  their  credit  accounts? — ^Yes.  Instead  of  over- 
drawing their  credit  accounts,  they,  in  fact,  had  deposited  a 
little. 

57 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Muir.  These  are  omitted  altogether? — Yes;  they  are  altogether 
omitted ;   they  are  not  in  the  balance  ledger  at  all. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — And,  of  course,  they  are  not  to  bo 
found  at  all  in  the  scroll  abstract? — In  the  scroll  abstract  they 
are  not  to  be  found. 

And  accordingly  they  did  not  pass  into  the  published  abstract? 
—They  did  not. 

Is  there  any  other  discrepancy  between  the  books  and  the 
balance  ledger  of  that  year? — There  is  another,  "Adjusting 
account  of  interest,"  the  correct  state  of  which  I  find  from  No. 
144  of  process ;  there  is  an  omission  there  to  the  extent  of 
£11,405.  These  are  all  the  discrepancies  I  find  between  the 
books  and  the  balance  ledger. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Are  these  accidental  errors,  or 
do  you  think  they  were  systematically  done? — They  were  quite 
systematically  done,  but  whether  with  an  intention  to  defraud 
or  not,  I  don't  know. 

But  do  they  appear  to  have  been  accidental  errors,  or  do 
they  seem  to  have  been  systematically  done?  —  Quite 
systematically. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — Turn  to  the  creditor  side  of  the 
scroll  abstract  of  accounts  for  1878,  and  point  out  how  far 
it  is,  if  it  be,  in  disconformity  with  the  books  of  the  Bank? 
— Being  the  scroll  of  the  published  sheet,  it  is  disconform 
to  the  books  of  the  Bank  precisely  to  the  same  extent  as 
the  published  sheet  is. 

It  is  just  the  same  in  result  ? — The  same  in  result  as  I  have 
already  given. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — That  gives  the  key  to  these 
discrepancies,'  does  it  not? — Yes,  it  gives  the  actual  details, 
and  enables  me  to  say  how  the  thing  was  done. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — Go  now  to  the  debtor  side  of  the 
balance  ledger,  and  contrast  it  first  with  the  entries  in  the 
books  of  the  Bank,  and  then  tell  me  how  far  it  coincides  with 
the  debtor  side  of  the  scroll  abstract? — ^The  first  item  on  the 
debtor  side  of  the  "  Balance  ledger  No.  3  "  which  is  wrong  is 
"Credit  accounts  No.  1,  £1,981,9.34."  That  ought  to  be 
£2,129,403.  It  is  understated  £147,468,  and  it  was  the  under- 
stated amount  that  went  into  the  scroll  abstract.  The  next 
item  is  "  Foreign  and  colonial  credits,"  £1,304,873,  which  ought 
to  be  £2,278,173,  understated  by  the  £973,300,  and  it  was  the 
understated  sum  which  was  carried  into  the  abstract.  That  is 
carried  also  into  the  scroll  abstract  of  the  published  sheet. 
Tlie  next  entry  is  "  Deposit  account,  debtor  balances,"  being  the 
indebtedness  of  the  Bank  to  depositors  at  the  head  office, 
£452,211,  which  is  entirely  omitted  from  the  balance  ledger. 
It  is  also  omitted  in  the  scroll  abstract.       Then  the  "  Adjusting 

58 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

account  of  interest  "  is  stated  in  the  balance  ledger  at  £19,696,  James  Muir. 
which  ought  to  be  £31,101.       It  is  understated  £11,405 

Do  these  omissions  appear  to  you  to  be  accidental  or  inten- 
tional ? — I  cannot  say  that  they  were  accidental ;  they  seem  to 
me  to  be  perfectly  intentional. 

Do  you  observe  any  transferences  in  the  scroll  abstract  No. 
128  which  would  account  for  the  over-statement  under  the  third 
head  of  what  appears  as  assets  in  the  published  sheet,  and  what  is 
there  represented  as  Government  stocks  1 — I  find  that  deductions 
are  made  from  head  I.,  which  head  is  appropriated  in  the 
published  sheet  to  the  ordinary  debts  due  to  the  Bank.  I  find 
the  following  entries  deducted  from  that  head  : — "  S.  F.  k  Co." 
(Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.),  £200,875;  "J.  N.  F."  (James  Nicol 
Fleming),  £100,300;  "J.  M.  &  Co."  (James  Morton  k  Co.), 
£450,600 — together,  £751,775.  I  find  that  brought  down  to 
head  III.,  and  there  represented  to  be  "  Investments  in  Govern- 
ment and  other  stocks,"  and  to  precisely  a  similar  amount. 

That  sum,  made  up  of  these  three  sums,  deducted  from  their 
indebtedness,  when  added  to  "  Government  stocks  and  others  " 
as  really  appearing  in  the  books,  makes  up  the  sum  stated 
in  the  abstract? — It  does. 

Was  that  a  correct  statement? — Certainly  not. 

Can  you  conceive  any  object  or  purpose  in  making  such  an 
addition  ? — Yes. 

What  would  the  natural  efi'ect  of  it  be? — The  natural  effect 
of  it  would  be  to  make  the  public  have  greater  confidence  in  the 
Bank,  as  possessing  a  large  amount  of  easily  realisable  securities. 

Is  there  at  that  date  a  "  Suspense  account "  in  the  books  ? — 
There  is. 

Explain  what  a  "  Suspense  account  "  means  ? — It  may  mean 
a  great  many  things  ;  but  in  this  case  it  means  a  lot  of  bad 
debts  collected  into  an  account. 

How  does  that  appear? — It  appears  in  the  ledger  of  the  Bank. 
These  debts  are  collected  under  this  account,  apparently  being 
in  process  of  being  wiped  out  at  the  rate  of  £10,000  a  year, 
the  whole  sum  to  start  with  being  £300,000.  It  would  have 
taken  thirty  years  to  wipe  that  out. 

The  only  operation  upon  these  debts  amounting  to  £300,000 
was  that  the  Bank  were  writing  them  off  by  degrees? — ^By 
degrees,  at  the  rate  of  £10,000'  a  year. 

Is  there  any  entry  in  the  scroll? — In  the  scroll  there  is  only 
£50,000,  which  is  under  the  head  of  "  Bad  and  doubtful  debts." 
The  reason  why  there  is  not  £300,000'  is  that  the  entries  in  the 
private  cash  book  rearing  up  this  "Suspense  account"  were 
made  subsequently  to  the  writing  of  the  scroll,  but  prior  to  the 
making  up  of  "  Balance  ledger  No.  3." 

So  that  in  point  of  fact  the  statement  contained  those? — 
It  did. 

59 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Muir.      To  the  amount  of  £250,0001 — Yes;  and  represented  as  good 
debts  to  the  extent  of  £300,000. 

I  thought  you  said  that  in  the  scroll  £50,000  was  taken  oflE  1 — 
That  was  so.  £50,000  was  included  in  the  scroll,  but  the 
remaining  £250,000  was  included  also  in  the  scroll,  under  a 
different  title. 

They  appeared  as  good  in  the  scroll  to  the  extent  of  £250,000, 
and  as  bad  and  doubtful  to  the  extent  of  £50,000? — But  even 
this  bad  and  doubtful  sum  was  entered  as  a  good  debt  in  the 
published  account. 

It  was  carried  into  the  summation  of  the  assets? — It  was. 

Now  go  to  the  balance  account  for  1877.  Have  you  got  the 
corresponding  balance  ledger  for   1877? — I  have. 

Give  us  the  entries  appearing  in  the  ledger,  beginning  with  the 
creditor  side? — On  the  creditor  side  I  find,  in  "  Balance  ledger  No. 
3,"  under  date  6th  June,  1877,  "Bills  payable,"  £1,707,748; 
that  ought  to  be  £2,681,048.  The  difference  is  the  £973,300. 
The  next  item  is  "  Deposit  accounts,"  stated  at  £35,488.  That 
ought  to  be  £485,181. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — That  is  done  just  in  the  same 
way  as  in  the  previous  year. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — Then  I  find  from  No.  58  of  inven- 
tory, being  a  book  entitled  "  Balances  of  credit  accounts,"  that 
at  6th  June,  1877,  there  were  balances  at  the  credit  of  those 
accounts  to  the  extent  of  £220,683  entirely  omitted  from  the 
"  Balance  ledger  No.  3."  Then  there  is  a  trifling  sum  of 
£59  16s.,  being  the  "Credit  accounts  No.  2,"  which  is  also 
omitted.  Then  there  is  the  "  Adjusting  account  of  interest  " 
omitted  to  the  extent  of  £11,008.  That  is  all  upon  that  side. 
On  the  other  side,  "  Credit  accounts  No.  1  "  are  entered 
£1,806,987  in  the  balance  ledger.  They  should  be  £2,027,670. 
The  under-statement  in  the  balance  ledger  is  £220,683. 
Then  there  is  the  same  trifling  error  of  £59  16s.  Then 
from  No.  59  of  inventory  I  find  that  "  Deposit  accounts " 
were  due  to  the  Bank  at  that  time  to  the  extent  of  £449,692. 
These  are  omitted.  Then  "  Foreign  and  colonial  credits," 
stated  in  the  balance  ledger  at  £1,710,048,  ought  to  be 
£2,683,348,  an  under-statement  of  the  old  £973,300. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — That  was  in  the  balance  ledger 
as  well? — ^Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — Then  the  "  Adjusting  account  of 
interest  "  is  in  the  balance  ledger  £19,858,  and  it  ought  to  be 
£30,867,  understated  in  the  balance  ledger  £11,008.  These 
are  all  the  discrepancies.  I  have  compared  these  with  No.  127 
and  No.  131  ;  there  are  two  scroll  abstracts  for  this  year. 

Are  the  discrepancies  that  occur  between  the  books  and  the 
balance  ledger  carried  into  these  drafts? — They  are. 
6o 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Are  they  all  reproduced  there? — They  are.  James  Muir. 

Does  the  draft  or  abstract  No.  127  give  you  any  clue  to  the 
soui'ce  from  which  these  under-statements  were  taken? — Both 
No.  127  and  No.  131  must  be  taken  together,  and  they  do  show 
that. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Does  it  occur  to  you  that 
the  entry  in  the  balance  ledger  was  made  after  the  balance  sheet 
had  been  prepared,  or  before?  In  other  words,  was  the  balance 
sheet  made  from  the  ledger,  or  the  ledger  from  the  balance 
sheet? — The  balance  sheet  had  evidently  been  made  from  the 
ledger,  undoubtedly. 

What  you  mean  is  that  the  entry  of  £973,000  was  given 
effect  to  in  the  balance  ledger? — Yes. 

It  must  have  been  there  before  the  balance  sheet  was  pre- 
pared?— ^It  appears  as  an  open  balance  in  the  ledger,  but 
instead  of  being  allowed  to  remain  at  the  amount  at  which  it  is 
in  the  ledger,  when  we  come  to  the  balance  it  is  found  deducted 
from  another  account,  and  the  difference  alone  is  given. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — In  the  abstract  it  appears  that 
certain  debts  on  open  account  are  brought  down  under  the  head 
of  "  Government  stock  and  other  stocks  "  ? — Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — If  the  abstract  of  the  balance 
sheet  had  been  correctly  made  from  the  balance  ledger,  that 
sum  of  £973,000  could  never  have  appeared  as  it  is  now? — 
No,  it  would  not. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — Would  these  sums  have  appeared 
as  brought  down?  If  it  had  been  made  from  the  balance 
ledger,  would  these  sums  have  appeared  as  brought  down  under 
the  head  of  Government  stocks  ? — Certainly  not ;  there  is  no 
such  entry  in  the  books  to  substantiate  it. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — I  suppose  whatever  was  the 
fact  about  these  de'bts  and  the  securities  for  them,  they  never 
should  have  come  under  that  heading? — Most  undoubtedly  not. 
The  heading  was  entirely  reserved  for  absolute  investments. 

These  were  permanent  investments? — Yes. 

Over  which  the  Bank  had  complete  control? — Yes,  and  which 
they  had  paid  for  with  their  own  money. 

And  not  security  for  outstanding  debts? — No. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — In  the  scroll  abstract  or  draft  for 
1877,  does  the  £973,300  appear  as  before? — No,  in  neither 
127  nor  131  does  it  appear.  The  amount  of  bills  payable 
account,  after  having  the  £973,000  deducted,  is  carried  into 
this  scroll,  but  it  has  been  scored  out,  as  if  some  new  idea  had 
occurred  to  them — another  way  of  doing  it ;  and  I  find  in  No. 
131  a  pencil  jotting  which  shows  the  new  method  that  was 
adopted  of  falsifying  the  accounts. 

Of  something  substituted  for  the  £973,000?— Yes. 

What  is  substituted? — I  find,  opposite  the  words  "Bills  pay- 

6i 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Muip.  able,"  entered  £2,683,348.  That  is  wrong  to  the  extent  of 
£2300.  Then  from  that  is  deducted  "Cash  lodged  on  D/A," 
£94,368  ;  "  Anticipations,"  £527,940  ;  "  S.  F.  &  Co.,"  £552,704  ; 
and  "J.  N.  F.,"  £158,000^together  £1,333,012  19s.  Id.;  differ- 
ence, £1,350,335,  which  was  the  sum  stated  in  the  published 
balance  sheet. 

Is  there  any  trace  of  these  deductions  to  be  found  in  the 
books  ? — None. 

Have  you  examined  the  balance  ledger  for  1878? — ^I  have. 

Is  it  in  conformity  with  the  books? — It  is  not.  Taking 
first  the  creditor  side,  "  Bills  payable "  are  stated  at 
£1,907,952.  That  ought  to  be  £2,881,252.  The  differ- 
ence is  again  the  £973,300.  Then  "  Deposit  accounts " 
are  stated  at  £33,959.  The  real  liability  in  deposits  then 
was  £474,698.  The  balance  ledger  is  understated  to  the 
extent  of  £440,738.  Then  the  "Credit  accounts"  are 
omitted  altogether  to  the  extent  of  £346,336,  and  a  small 
sum  of  £119  12s.  The  "Adjusting  account  of  interest"  is 
also  omitted  entirely,  £9825.  These  are  all  the  discrepancies 
on  the  credit  side.  Then  on  the  debtor  side,  "Credit  accounts, 
No.  1  "  appear  in  the  balance  ledger  at  £2,009,752.  That 
ought  to  be  £2,356,088.  It  is  understated  in  the  balance 
ledger  by  £346,336.  "Credit  accounts,  No.  2"  are  under- 
stated by  the  £119  12s.  Then  "Deposit  accounts,"  £440,738, 
are  entirely  omitted  from  the  balance  ledger.  Then  "  Foreign 
and  colonial  credits,"  £1,907,952,  ought  to  be  £2,881,252. 
The  difference  is  the  £973,300.  The  "Adjusting  account  of 
interest "  appears  in  the  balance  ledger  £27,405 ;  this  should 
be  £37,230;   under-statement,  £9825. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — That  is  contrasting  the  balance 
ledger  with  the  books?— Yes,  and  these  under-statements  are 
also  given  effect  to  in  the  published  sheet. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — Look  at  No.  124  of  process  ;  that 
is  the  draft  or  scroll  abstract  for  1878? — Yes. 

Do  the  details  there  agree  with  the  published  abstract? — 
They  do. 

The  details  there  given  show  the  method  by  which  the 
alterations  or  the  discrepancies  as  between  the  published  balance 
sheets  and  the  books  might  be  effected?^ — That  is  so. 

In  fact  all  these  scrolls  that  you  have  seen  exhibit  a  method 
by  which  that  end  might  be  attained? — That  is  so. 

I  suppose  precisely  the  same  results  in  the  abstract  might 
have  been  attained  in  a  great  variety  of  other  ways? — Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Then  as  far  as  the  errors  in 
the  balance  ledger  are  concerned  this  is  consistent  with  it? — 
Yes. 

But  there  are  additional  errors? — There  are  additional  errors 
62 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

— additional  falsifications.      In  this  case  they  could  not  possibly  James  Muip. 
be  errors. 

But  the  balance  ledger  was  erroneous  in  the  particulars  you 
have  mentioned? — Yes. 

And  this  transcribes  the  eiTors,  but  adds  some  in  addition? — 
Yes,  to  a  very  large  amount. 

That  is  to  say,  those  you  have  gone  over  already — the 
transferences  of  those  balances  of  Smith,  Fleming  &,  Co., 
and  the  others  down  to  "  Govermnent  stocks "  1 — 'Yes ; 
and  there  is  a  very  serious  deduction,  further  than  the 
£973,000,  of  £419,000  made  from  the  "  Bills  payable,"  which 
is  a  most  absurd  and  stupid  entry.  They  say,  "  Amount  of 
bills  on  the  circle,  and  against  which  an  equal  sum  is  at  the 
credit  of  J.  M.  &  Co.  on  D/A.,  £419,708."  That  is  made  a  deduc- 
tion from  the  liabilities  of  the  Bank.  Now,  if  there  was  any 
"  sum  at  the  credit  of  James  Morton  &  Co.,"  it  was  also  a 
liability;  and  they  would  seem  therefore  to  reduce  their 
liabilities  by  deducting  other  liabilities  from  them — the  most 
absurd  and  illogical  thing  I  ever  saw. 

Is  that  the  sum  on  the  right-hand  side,  £419,000? — Yes. 

And  what  do  you  say  that  is? — It  is  stated  in  this  scroll,  No. 
134,  to  be  "  Amount  of  bills  on  the  circle,  and  against  which  an 
equal  sum  is  at  the  credit  of  J.  M.  &  Co.  on  D/A."  Now  that  was 
a  liability  of  the  Bank,  and  the  bills  payable  were  also  a 
liability  of  the  Bank,  and  yet  they  deducted  the  one  from  the 
other. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — That  is  a  very  easy  way  of  getting 
rid  of  liabilities? — No  doubt  of  it. 

A  man  owes  two  sums  of  £1000  each,  and  he  deducts  the  one 
from  the  other,  and  the  result  is  he  owes  nothing !  Is  not  that 
practically  what  was  done? — Apparently  so.  Besides  which, 
I  want  to  state  that  at  that  time  there  was  no  such  "  sum  at 
the  credit  of  James  Morton  &  Co."  They  really  owed  the  Bank 
£480,000. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — And  whether  that  was  true 
or  false,  that  was  not  the  way  in  which  it  should  have  been 
dealt  with? — Certainly  not. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — There  is  also  an  addition  of  £200,000 
to  the  gold  held?— Yes. 

Which  is  ear-marked  along  with  another  sum  of  £480,000, 
and  together  making  up  £680,000?— Yes,  in  branch  one. 

Written  off  to  cash  account  ? — Written  off  "  Credit  accounts 
No.  1." 

And  by  that  process  converted  into  gold? — Yes.  I  was  asked 
to  examine  into  the  accounts  of  eight  debtors  to  the  Bank,  viz. : 
— 1,  James  Morton  <fe  Co.,  and  the  partners ;  2,  Smith,  Fleming 
<fe  Co.  ;  3,  James  Nicol  Fleming ;  4,  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.,  and 
Mr.  Potter ;  5,  Matthew  Buchanan  &  Co. ;  6,  John  Innes  Wright 

63 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Muir.  ^  q^^  and  the  partners ;  7,  W.  Glen  Walker ;  8,  The  Edinburgh 
Pastoral  Association.  These  parties  were  indebted  to  the 
Bank  in  various  forms.  I  was  struck  with  the  very  large 
amount  of  their  debits  in  the  various  forms,  as  compared  with 
the  debits  of  the  ordinary  customers  of  the  Bank. 

What  were  the  forms  of  indebtedness?^ — Cash  credits,  over- 
drawn deposits,  bill  credits,  or  foreign  and  colonial  credits, 
as  they  were  called,  and  discounts. 

By  cash  credits,  what  do  you  mean? — Hard  cash  lent  by  the 
Bank  to  them. 

Either  with  or  without  security? — Either  with  or  without 
security. 

What  are  "  Overdrawn  deposits  "  ? — It  is  just  another  name 
for  the  same  thing. 

It  is  just  a  deposit  account  which  happens  to  be  overdrawn? 
—Yes. 

It  is  a  current  account  to  which  the  debtor  may  pay  in — a 
current  account  overdrawn  at  the  time? — Yes. 

There  were  bills  accepted  on  what  are  called  "  Open  and 
marginal  credits "  ? — ^Yes  ;  and  which  are  styled  in  the  ledger 
"  Foreign  and   colonial   credits." 

But  they  were  in  both  of  these  shapes? — That  is  so. 

State  the  total  indebtedness  of  Morton  &  Co.  and  James 
Morton  to  the  Bank  in  the  years  from  1873  to  1878  inclusive? 
— James  Morton  &  Co.  :  — 

1873, £1,379,400 

1874,  ------    1,399,140 

1875,  ------    1,380,000 

1876,  ------    1,855,000 

1877,  ------    1,771,000 

1878,  ------    2,173,000 

In  the  case  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  the  corresponding  figures 
are — 

1873,  ------  £1,136,000 

1874,  ------  1,340,000 

1875,  - 1,661,000 

1876,  - 1,777,000 

1877,  ------  1,903,000 

1878,  - 1,968,000 

James  Nicol  Fleming — 

1873, £738,000 

1874,  ------  861,000 

1875,  ------  1,005,000 

1876,  ------  1,136,000 

1877, 1,188,000 

1878,  ------  1,238,000 

64 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.,  which  includes  Mr.  Lewis  Potter—  James  Muir. 

1873, £78,000 

187i, 109,000 

1875,  ------  76,000 

1876,  ------  75,700 

1877,  ------  64,000 

1878,  ------  108,000 

Matthew  Buchanan  &  Co. — 

1873,  ------  £31,000 

1874, 7,000 

1875,  ------  17,000 

1876,  ------  7,700 

1877,  - 17,000 

1878,  ------  17,600 

John  Innes  Wright  &  Co. — 

1873,  ------  £251,000 

1874,  ------  368,000 

-1875, 392,000 

1876, 431,000 

1877,  ------  398,000 

1878,  - 485,000 

Glen,  Walker  &  Co.,  which  does  not  appear  till  1875 — 

1875,  - £4,465 

1876,  ------  3,600 

1877,  ------  30,000 

1878, 26,000 

Edinburgh  Pastoral  Association,  which  appears  first  in  the 
balance  of  1877 — 

1877, £30,000 

1878, 75,200 

In  1873  the  amount  lent  to  the  whole  customers  of  the  Bank 
on  cash  credit  or  overdrawn  deposits,  excluding  foreign 
and  colonial  credits,  which  form  another  branch, 
was      -------         -      £4,402,659 

Of  that  there  was  lent  to  the  eight  firms  before 
mentioned,  excluding  foreign  and  colonial 
credits,  and  to  the  Manager,  Directors,  and 
Secretary,     -------         1,339,348 

Leaving   the    amount   lent    to    ordinary 

customers,       -----      £3,063,311 

B  65 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Muir.  1874.     Total  amount  lent,  as  before,     -         -         -      £4,723,608 

Lent  to  eight  firms  before  mentioned, 
and  to  Manager,  Directors,  and 
Secretary,       -         -         -         -         -         2,125,244 


Leaving  for  ordinary  customers,      -         -      £2,598,363 

Or  little  more  than  half. 

1875.     Total  amount  lent,  as  before,     -         -         -      £4,649,526 
Lent    to   eight   firms    before   mentioned, 
and    to    Manaacer,     Directors,    and 
Secretary,        -^      -         -         -         -         2,414,335 


Leaving  for  ordinary  customers,     -         -      £2,235,190 

Or  less  than  one-half  of  the  whole. 

1876.     Total  amount  lent,  as  before,     -         -         -      £5,507,857 
Lent    to   eight   firms    before    mentioned, 
and     to     Manager,     Directors,     and 
Secretary,  six-elevenths  of  the  whole,        3,044,106 


Leaving  for  ordinary  customers,     -         -      £2,463,751 

1877.     Total  amount  lent,  as  before,     -         -         -      £5,436,835 
Lent   to   eight   firms    before   mentioned, 
and    to    Manager,     Directors,    and 
Secretary, 2,965,424 


Leaving  for  ordinary  customers,      -         -      £2,471,411 

About  the  same  proportion  as  the  previous  year. 

1878.     Total  amount  lent,  as  before,     -         -         -      £5,639,292 
Lent   to   eight   firms    before    mentioned, 
and     to     Manager,     Directors,     and 
Secretary,  about  three-fifths  of  the 
whole,    -.-...         3,377,636 


Leaving  for  ordinary  customers,      -         -      £2,261,656 


I  have  made  out  similar  details  in  regard  to  the  foreign  and 
colonial  credits.      These  figures  are  taken  as  at  the  period  of  the 
balance  for  the  year  prior  to  that  period.      I  have  not  taken 
the  period  subsequent  to  the  balance  of  1878. 
66 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


In  1873  the  total  amount  lent  by  the  Bank  upon  foreign  and  James  Mulp. 
colonial    credits — bill    credits — that    is    to    say,    the    Bank 
granted   its  acceptances  to   that   extent,         -      £2,132,453 

Of  that,  the  eight  firms  I  have  already  mentioned 

got 2,111,697 


Leaving  for  general  customers  about, 


£20,000 


1874.     Total  amount  lent,  as  before,     - 
Lent  to  the  eight  firms, 

Leaving  for  general  customers. 


£1,897,729 
1,866,252 

£31,476 


1875.     Total  amount  lent,  as  before. 
Lent  to  the  eight  firms, 

Leaving  for  general  customers. 


£2,124,880 
2,106,536 

£18,344 


1876.     Total  amount  lent,  as  before,     -         -         -      £2,278,173 
Lent  to  the  eight  firms,        -         -         -         2,252,071 

Leaving  for  general  customers  about      -  £26,000 


1877.     Total  amount  lent,  as  before,     - 
Lent  to  the  eight  firms. 

Leaving  for  ordinary  customers, 


£2,683,346 
2,589,148 

£94,201 


1878.     Total  amount  lent,  as  before,     -         -         -      £2,881,252 
Lent  to  the  eight  firms,         -         -         -         2,848,839 

Leaving  for  ordinary  customers  about     -  £32,000 


If  you  add  to  the  foreign  and  colonial  credits  of  these  eight 
firms  in  1878  the  amount  which  T  gave  as  lent  to  these  firms 
and  to  the  Manager,  Directors,  and  Secretary  on  cash  credits 
and  overdrawn  deposits,  it  brings  out  a  sum  of  upwards  of 
£6,000,000.  I  was  asked  to  examine  and  to  give  for  1876  the 
applications  made  for  credits.  So  far  as  I  can  discover,  there 
were  (1)  credits  given  upon  applications  which  mentioned 
securities ;    (2)   credits  given  upon  applications  which  did   not 

67 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Muir.  mention  securities ;  and  (3)  credits  given  for  which  no  applica- 
tion appeared  either  in  letters  of  application  or  in  the  minutes. 
Of  the  £2,252,071  of  "  foreign  and  colonial  credits  "  granted  to 
the  eight  firms  before  mentioned  in  1876,  I  find  that  £1,358,431 
was  granted  upon  letters  of  application  mentioning  securities, 
£359,500  upon  letters  which  did  not  mention  securities,  and 
£534,140  without  any  writing  at  all.  As  regards  1877,  of 
the  £2,589,146  lent  to  these  firms,  £1,493,936  was  under  the 
first  of  these  classes,  £323,000  under  the  second  class,  and 
£772,210  under  the  third  class.  In  1878,  of  the  £2,848,839 
lent  to  these  firms,  £1,808,910  was  under  the  fii'St  class, 
£156,000  under  the  second  class,  and  £883,928  under  the  third 
class — without  any  application  letters  at  all. 

By  the  Dean  of  Faculty — That  is,  letters  you  did  not  see? — 
Exactly ;  I  neither  found  them,  nor  did  I  see  any  allusion  to 
them  in  the  minutes. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — The  debtor  balance  standing  against 
Mr.  John  Stewart  at  the  balancing  period  was — ■ 

In  1873,        ------  £5,994 

1874,  ------  10,040 

1875,  ------  13,348 

1876,  ------  12,198 

1877, 18,085 

1878,      ------  8,956 

Against  Stewart,  Pott  &  Co.,  which  begins  in  1875 — 

1875,  ------   £12,877 

1876,  ------     16,463 

1877,  ------     17,674 

1878,  ------     19,826 

Henry  Taylor  &  Son — in  1873  there  was  a  balance  at  their 
credit  of  (if  I  recollect  aright)  £675,  and  the  debtor  balance 
against  them  was — 

In  1874,       - £17,673 

1^75,      ------  35,945 

1876, 38,829 

1877,  ------  55,295 

1878,  - 72,266 

Against  John  Innes  Wright,  whose  balance  begins  in  1876 — 

1876.  -         -  '-        -        -        -         £2,797 

1877,  ------  2,787 

1878, 2,771 

That  was  being  gradually  diminished  owing  to  the  dividend  on 
the   Bank   stock   being   credited  to   a  larger  extent   than    the 
interest  which  was  debited. 
68 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Against  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co. — 

1875,  -         -         -         - 

1876,  -         -         -         - 

1877,  -         -        -         - 

1878,  -        -        -        - 


James  Muir. 


£217,707 
254,211 
239,496 
334,783 


As  regards  this  firm,  they  had  also  credits  of  another  description, 
but  1  find  these  had  run  off  by  1875. 


Against  Henry  Inglis — 

1873,  - 

1874,  - 

1875,  - 

1876,  - 

1877,  - 

1878,  - 


Against  H.  &  A.  Inglis — 

1873,  - 

1874,  - 

1875,  - 

1876,  - 

1877,  - 

1878,  - 


£30,088 
37,552 
38,556 
39,598 
41,368 
44,430 


£298 
1,799 
3,346 
2,931 
6,007 
5,455 


By  Mr.  Tratner — ^My  reason  for  selecting  the  year  1873  as 
that  with  which  to  commence  Mr.  Stewart's  private  account 
was  that  I  had  made  an  investigation  of  the  books  from  the 
date  when  the  £973,000  entry  was  made.  I  had  no  other 
reason.  I  cannot  tell  when  Mr.  Stewart's  private  account  com- 
menced. I  did  not  think  it  right  or  necessary  for  my  purpose 
that  I  should  ascertain  that.  I  do  not  know  when  Mr.  Stewart 
became  a  Director.  I  did  not  apply  myself  to  find  whether  he 
had  had  advances  before  he  became  a  Director  or  not.  I  think 
Stewart,  Pott  &  Co.'s  account  began  in  1875  ;  the  first  balance 
I  have  is  in  that  year.  I  cannot  tell  how  that  account  com- 
menced. I  have  dealt  with  the  accounts  entirely  at  the 
balancing  periods.  I  do  not  know  what  sort  of  a  business 
Stewart,  Pott  &  Co.'s  was  ;  I  believe  they  had  some  connection 
with  the  wine  trade.  I  was  bona  in  Glasgow.  I  am  thirty-nine 
years  of  age.  I  know  Mr.  Stewart  personally,  but  I  never  was 
in  his  office  in  my  life,  and  I  know  nothing  whatever  about  the 
nature  or  extent  of  his  business. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — My  evidence  is  given  entirely  as  that  of  an 
accountant.  At  the  request  of  the  Crown,  I  made  an  examina- 
tion of  the  books  and  documents  of  the  Bank,  and  I  deduce  my 
results  entirely  from  these.  I  had  previously  been  engaged  as 
the  coadjutor  of  Mr.  Anderson,  one  of  the  liquidators.     There 

69 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Muir.  are  a  veiy  large  number  of  books  employed  in  the  current 
business  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank — so  many  that  I  really 
could  not  approximate  the  number.  It  may  be  twenty,  thirty, 
forty,  or  fifty.  It  is  quite  possible  there  are  a  great  many 
more ;  the  number  is  very,  very  large.  There  are  a  great  many 
separate  departments.  I  should  think  there  must  be  sixty  or 
eighty  officials,  including  clerks,  at  the  head  office.  In  short, 
it  was  a  very  large  establishment,  with  a  very  large  number  of 
books  in  use.  In  the  course  of  our  investigation  we  had  the 
aid  of  the  staff  of  the  Bank  which  has  i-emained  on  since  the 
stoppage.  We  had  also  the  aid  of  the  staff  of  our  own  firm, 
which  is  a  large  one.  We  had  such  assistance  as  we  desired 
from  the  clerks  of  Dr.  M'Grigor's  firm,  which  is  a  very  large 
legal  firm.  They  were  principally  engaged  in  looking  into 
securities  and  things  of  that  kind.  We  had  every  possible 
facility  for  making  an  examination.  With  all  these  facilities, 
we  found  it  a  very  laborious  one,  because  we  went  into  very 
great  detail,  counted  every  bill  in  the  Bank,  and  looked  at  every 
balance  of  every  separate  account  recorded  in  the  books. 
Besides,  a  considerable  amount  of  time  was  lost  in  getting  the 
returns  from  the  branches  as  to  the  state  of  the  accounts  there. 
There  are  about  133  branches,  and  we  got  the  accounts  from 
them  also.  The  investigation  with  a  view  to  making  the  report 
was  conducted  in  the  way  I  have  mentioned.  The  evidence  I 
have  given  to-day  has  been  entirely  from  my  own  checking  of 
the  books,  with  very  little  assistance  from  clerks  at  all,  because 
I  thought  it  very  important  that  I  should  not  give  evidence 
about  what  I  had  not  personally  seen. 

You  have  used  the  exjjression  repeatedly  in  the  course  of 
your  evidence  that  certain  sums  in  the  published  abstract  were 
understated  or  overstated? — That  is  so. 

In  so  speaking  of  under-statement  or  over-statement,  did  you 
take  as  your  standard  the  books  of  the  Bank? — I  did. 

And  it  means  under  or  over  certain  entries  in  the  books  of 
the  Bank? — Yes,  that  is  so. 

You  also  said,  I  think,  that  you  found  what  you  regarded  as 
errors  in  the  balance  ledger? — Yes,  under-statements. 

In  using  that  expression,  have  you  regard  still  to  the  other 
books  of  the  Bank? — That  is  so. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Under-statements  and  omissions? 
—Yes. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — That  is  to  say,  things  which  you  would 
have  expected  to  be  brought  in  from  other  books  of  the  Bank  ? — • 
That  is  so. 

This  balance  ledger  purports  to  set  out  the  results  brought 
from  a  very  large  number  of  accounts  in  other  books? — Yes  ; 
the  whole  books  of  the  Bank,  credit  and  deposit  ledgers,  discount 
ledgers,  and  all  the  books  of  the  Bank. 
70 


/' 


-^ 


i* 


P/Wto.] 


[./.   lldraburijh. 


Mr.  Balfour, 
Counsel  for  Lewis  Potter. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

You  would  assume,  I  suppose,  from  looking  at  it,  that  the  James  Muir. 
results  of  these  different  departments  must  have  been  given  to 
some  official  who  made  up  the  balance  ledger? — Undoubtedly. 
That  would  naturally  fall  under  the  department  of  the  accountant 
in  such  a  Bank.  It  was  his  duty  to  make  up  the  balance  ledger. 
The  entry  of  £973,000  was  raised  in  June,  1873,  on  the  two 
sides  of  a  book,  the  entries  in  which  I  have  already  read,  and 
also  on  the  two  sides  of  the  ledger. 

But  it  was  originally  raised  in  the  cash  book? — The  cash 
book  entry  was  the  subsidiaiy  entry  to  what  ultimately  appeared 
in  the  ledger. 

It  was  the  first  entry  'I — Yes ;  that  entry  has  remained  in 
the  private  cash  book  and  in  the  ledger  ever  since  it  was  raised 
there  in  June,   1873. 

So,  from  1873  down  to  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank,  that  was 
an  entry  appearing  throughout  the  books  of  the  Bank? — It  was 
so ;  but  it  was  omitted  from  the  balance  ledger. 

But  it  was  in  the  books  of  the  Bank? — Yes.  I  have  not 
seen  all  the  weekly  balances  applicable  to  the  head  office, 
but  I  have  generally  glanced  at  them.  I  know  the  principle 
on  which  they  are  made  up.  The  weekly  balance  applicable 
to  4th  June,  1873  (No.  13),  was  the  first  weekly  balance  after 
the  entry  of  £973,000  was  raised.  On  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  sheet,  in  the  creditor  column,  I  find  an  entry  of  £2,128,686 
lis.  9d.  That  is  "Credit  account,  bills  payable  No.  1,"  as 
appearing  in  the  other  books.  In  the  debtor  column  I  find  an 
entry  of  £973,000.  What  is  carried  out  to  the  balance  is  the 
difference,  being  £1,155,386  lis.  9d. 

Has  that  been  the  principle  upon  which  this  sum  has  been 
dealt  with  ever  since  June,  1873? — I  believe  it  has;  in  fact,  I 
know  it  has.  It  has  entered  every  weekly  abstract  balance 
since  that  time,  and  has  been  regularly  deducted  on  each  of 
these  occasions,  and  the  balance  carried  out. 

Have  you  observed  whether,  in  the  balance  ledger  applicable 
to  the  different  years,  what  has  been  entered  under  "  Bills 
payable  "  has  been  the  difference  between  what  you  say  is  the 
true  amount  and  that  sum  ? — Exactly  :  in  fact,  this  sum  in  the 
creditor  column  is  the  amount  of  the  balance.  That  course 
has  been  uniformly  followed  since  1873. 

Suppose  that  the  principle  upon  which  the  Directors  checked 
the  balance  ledger  was  by  the  Director  watching  the  entries,  and 
the  accountant  reading  off  the  coiTesponding  entries,  what  the 
accountant  would  read  off  and  the  Director  would  see  would  be 
the   difference  ? — Simply. 

And  the  Directors  so  checking  the  balance  ledger  would  have 
no  cognisance  of  that  fact  ? — No,  unless  they  had  the  sheet  before 
them. 

But  assuming  it  was  done  as  I  have  said,  the  Directors  would 

71 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Muir.  not  see  that  entry,  but  would  merely  have  the  difference  read 
out  1 — Certainly. 

Do  you  find  that — except  in  1877,  about  which  there 
was  something  special — in  making  out  the  scroll  abstracts  for 
the  yearly  balances,  the  £973,000  has  been  treated  just  as  it 
was  treated  throughout  the  books  of  the  Bank  and  the  relative 
balance  sheets  / — Precisely,  the  relative  weekly  abstracts. 

Is  it  plain  that  from  the  first  scroll  of  these  abstracts  that 
sum  has  been  so  treated  in  all  those  different  years  except  1877  'I 
— I  do  not  know  whether  these  red-inked  documents  are  the 
first  scrolls  or  not. 

But  from  anything  you  have  seen? — Yes. 

The  earliest  extant  scrolls  of  these  abstracts  have  this  treated 
exactly  as  it  is  throughout  the  other  books  and  papers  of  the 
Bank  for  those  six  years? — So  far  as  I  have  seen  them. 

Then  it  is  plain,  reading  these  documents,  that,  unless  it 
be  in  1877,  there  has  not  been  any  change  in  the  mode  of 
treating  that,  induced  by  after-suggestion? — ^None  whatever. 

Are  these  entries  simply  passed  into  the  ledger  'I — They  are  so. 

So  that  the  ledger  entries  applicable  to  that  will  just  be 
the   same   as  these  1 — ^Yes. 

With  no  details  ? — With  no  details. 

Then  the  way  in  which  it  is  entered  in  the  weekly  balance 
sheet  is  in  this  form  [showing]? — Yes. 

And  it  has  been  so  fifty-two  tmies  every  year  since  1873? — 
Precisely. 

In  each  year  from  1873,  do  you  find  that  what  is  carried 
into  the  balance  ledger  is  the  total  sum,  what  you  think  the 
true  sum  of  bills,  minus  the  £973,300?^ — That  is  so. 

In  short,  the  figuring  which  is  in  the  right-hand  column 
is  what  is  uniformly  can-ied  into  the  balance  ledger  in  those 
years? — The  figuring  which  is  in  the  right-hand  column  of  this 
sheet  [showing]. 

Exactly  ;  and  in  like  manner  in  the  abstract  which  ultimately 
becomes  the  published  abstract,  or  the  circulated  abstract,  is 
it  treated  in  the  same  way? — Except  in  1877. 

In  the  way  in  which  the  balance  ledger  is  framed  as  regards 
the  head  office,  does  it  bring  into  one  the  results  of  all  the 
accounts  as  appearing  in  the  balance  of  the  week  in  which  it 
occurs  1 — Precisely. 

Then  as  regards  the  branches,  all  that  appears  in  the  balance 
ledger  is  the  total  balance  every  year  against  the  branch? — 
Yes. 

Whereas,  as  regards  the  branches  in  the  abstract  for  publica- 
tion, the  transactions  of  the  Bank  are  brought  under  the  different 
headings? — Yes,   of  the  customers   at  the  branch. 

So  that  there  is  a  different  principle  for  that,  and  I  suppose 
properly,  in  making  up  the  balance  of  the  two  accounts? — .Quite 

72 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

properly.     The  details  are  contained  in  abstracts  which  are  sent  James  Muip. 
in. 

You  do  not  complain  of  thati — Not  at  all. 

Then  what  I  come  to  is  this,  if  what  the  Directors  had  before 
them  was  the  balance  ledger,  and  they  only  heard  what  was 
read  off  from  it,  they  would  not  know  of  the  £973,300  .< — They 
would  not. 

Then  I  ask  you  again,  are  you  perfectly  satisfied,  from  your 
examination  of  the  different  scroll  abstracts  which  you  have 
seen,  that  the  £973,300,  except  in  1877,  has  been  treated  just 
as  it  is  in  the  books  of  the  Bank,  the  original  deduction.' — 
Just  as  it  is  in  the  weekly  balance  sheets,  but  not  as  it  is  in 
the  books  of  the  Bank. 

But  as  it  is  in  the  weekly  balance  sheets? — Yes. 

You  don't  find  any  change  in  the  abstracts  after  the  first 
scroll  had  been  made  up? — I  do  not  quite  follow  you. 

What  I  mean  is  this,  it  appears  to  have  been  part  of  the 
original  scheme? — No  doubt  of  it. 

You  next  gave  us  some  answers  about  the  balances  which  you 
disapproved  of.  In  particular,  you  pointed  out  what  appears 
under  the  head  "  Debtor  accounts " ;  that  is,  the  balance  of 
£1346  16s.  6d.  in  the  balance  of  1876.  That  is  the  first  you 
spoke  of? — Are  you  talking  now  of  the  balance  ledger? 

No;  I  am  speaking  of  the  scroll  balance,  No.  128a.  Would 
you  also  look  at  No.  59a,  excerpts  from  "  Balances  of  deposit 
accounts."  In  the  right-hand  column  of  that  paper,  under  7th 
June,  1876,  does  the  sum  of  £1346  16s.  6d.  appear  as  the 
difference  between  the  debtor  and  creditor  accounts  ? — That  is  so. 

Therefore  that  sum  of  £1346  16s.  6d.  is  a  balance,  whether 
rightly  or  wrongly  taken,  still  taken  from  the  book  of  the  Bank 
appropriate  to  these  accounts? — Undoubtedly. 

Would  you  also  look  to  the  balance  ledger  for  the  same  time, 
No.  12a.  In  the  balance  for  June,  1876,  I  observe  under  the 
head  "Deposit  accounts"  £3233,  being  a  different  figure?^ 
That  is  so. 

Going  back  again  to  No.  59a,  do  you  find  how  that  arises? 
—Yes. 

It  has  been  done  in  this  way.  After  apparently  a  summation 
bringing  out  £1346  16s.  6d.  has  been  made,  there  has  been  an 
additional  sum  brought  in? — ^Yes.  There  was  an  entry  made 
in  the  cash  book  subsequently  to  this  scroll  being  made  up,  as 
I  have  twice,   I   think,   referred   to. 

And  you  think  you  can  perfectly  see  how  the  sum  of  £4579 
16s.  lOd.  was  entered? — Yes. 

Then  the  £3233  is  the  difference  which  appears  in  the  balance 
ledger  ? — Yes. 

And  whether  the  principle  is  right  or  wrong,  that  amount  is 

73 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Mulr.  a  true  entry  brought  from  the  book  of  the  Bank  applicable 
to  such  accounts? — That  is  so. 

Do  you  find  that  throughout  the  balance  ledger  the  principle 
followed  as  regards  "  Deposit  accounts  "  has  been  to  bring  the 
balance  only  between  the  total  of  the  two  sides? — Yes,  in  the 
balance  ledger. 

Throughout? — Throughout  as  regards  "  Credit  accounts  "  and 
'■  Deposit  accounts." 

As  regards  both? — As  regards  both. 

Whether  that  is  good  or  bad  bookkeeping,  what  has  been 
done  has  been  to  bring  tiTie  entries  from  the  proper  books  and 
enter  them  here? — To  enter  the  mere  differences. 

I  mean  they  are  not  fictitious  entries? — ^Certainly  not. 

They  are  true  balances  brought  from  their  appropriate  books, 
and  entered  in  the  balance  ledger? — That  is  so. 

And  that  is  the  practice  which,  whether  by  good  or  bad 
bookkeeping,  has  been  pursued  throughout? — Yes. 

How  far  do  you  find  that  practice  to  have  been  carried? — 
As  far  back  as  I  have  gone,  1873. 

You  have  not  gone  any  further? — I  have  not  in  that  part  of 
the  investigation  gone  any  further. 

Then  you  do  not  find  any  book  in  which  that  pi-actice  has 
not  been  followed? — No. 

It  was  nothing  new  in  1876? — Nothing  new. 

And  the  way  in  which  the  £973,000  was  treated  then  was 
nothing  new  in   1876? — It  was  not. 

You  said  there  were  some  things  that  you  disapproved  of  in 
the  balance  ledger ;  did  you  find  that  these  things  existed  in 
all  the  balance  ledgers  that  you  examined? — From  1873. 

And  you  examined  no  earlier? — No. 

So  that  whether  they  were  right  or  wrong,  that  has  been  a 
scheme  followed  so  far  back  as  your  examination  goes? — That 
is  so. 

There  was  no  novelty  in  1876  about  these  matters? — No, 
not  as  to  these  special  matters. 

Then  you  gave  an  answer  to  the  Lord  Advocate  about  cross 
accounts.  You  said,  I  think,  that  where  the  same  person  had 
more  accounts  than  one  in  the  same  interest,  the  crossing  of 
accounts  was  quite  proper? — Yes.  It  is  not  a  usual  thing  to 
be  done,  I  believe,  in  a  large  establishment  like  a  bank,  but 
it  is  quite  legitimate. 

It  is  quite  proper? — Perfectly  proper. 

You  have  nothing  to  say  against  it? — Nothing  whatever. 

I  suppose  the  accountant  who  was  responsible  for  and  in 
charge  of  these  books  would  know  better  than  you  would  do 
what  were  proper  cross  accounts? — Well,  I  have  asked  him  the 
question,  and  he  was  utterly  unable  to  explain  the  entry  to  me. 

74 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

But  the   accountant   is   the   responsible   official   in  charge   of  James  Muip. 
that  class  of  work? — Yes. 

And  he  would  be  the  natural  person  to  know  what  were  cross 
accounts? — He  would  be  the  natural  person  to  know.  I  don't 
know  whether  he  would  know  better  than  I  would  do. 

You  gave  some  evidence  with  regard  to  the  "  Suspense 
account."  The  suspense  account  appears,  I  think,  in  1876  as 
£300,000  ?— Yes. 

And  then  it  gradually  goes  down  £10,000  a  year? — Yes. 

Did  it  appear  to  you  from  your  examination  of  the  books 
that  the  suspense  account  had  been  raised  between  the  time 
of  the  scroll  abstract  being  prepared  and  the  time  of  the  balance 
ledger  being  prepared? — It  undoubtedly  had. 

That  was  clear?— Quite  clear  to  the  extent  of  £250,000. 

You  told  us  how  the  £50,000  was  treated? — Yes. 

That  being  so,  it  would  not  surprise  you  that  you  found  the 
suspense  account  in  the  balance  ledger  although  you  did  not 
in  the  scroll  abstract? — No. 

It  would  suggest  that  it  had  occurred  to  the  officials  that  these 
accounts  were  proper  to  be  in  suspense  in  the  interval  between 
the  two? — Yes. 

I  suppose  the  idea  of  a  "  suspense  account "  is  an  account 
which  contains  debts  which  may  or  may  not  be  good  ? — "  Sus- 
pense accounts  "  are  of  a  very  miscellaneous  kind.  A  "  susioense 
account "  may  mean  a  great  many  things ;  it  is  a  very  dangerous 
class  of  account. 

But  is  not  that  the  natural  meaning  of  a  "  suspense  account," 
an  account  that  is  neither  clearly  good  nor  clearly  bad? — No. 

Is  it  not  in  "  suspense"? — That  is  so. 

And  in  doubt? — No,  not  necessarily. 

But  perhaps  ?— Perhaps  ;  but  I  should  say  that  if  the  suspense 
account  is  being  written  off  at  a  cei'tain  rate  per  annum,  that 
clears  up  the  doubt  at  once. 

If  an  account  was  doubtful,  and  not  improving,  it  would  be 
proper  to  reduce  it  by  degrees ;  if  it  was  clearly  l)ad,  it  should 
all  go  at  once? — Yes,  it  ought,  and  I  say  that  £300,000  should 
have  gone  at  once. 

Because  you  think  it  was  bad? — .Yes. 

But  if  it  was  only  doubtful,  was  not  the  proper  way  to  treat 
it  to  reduce  it  by  degrees? — No. 

Would  you  have  kept  it  all  up? — I  would  have  been  disposed 
to  have  written  it  off,  even  although  it  had  been  doubtful. 

Even  if  it  was  only  doubtful  and  not  bad.  you  would  have 
been  disposed  to  have  written  it  off? — If  it  had  been  so  doubtful 
that  I  did  not  charge  interest  on  it. 

But  is  it  not  the  case  that  if  it  were  bad  you  would  write  it 
off,  and  if  it  were  doubtful  you  would  reduce  it? — If  it  was 
doubtful  I  don't  know  if  I  would  reduce  it. 

But  that  is  a  matter  which  it  was  proper  for  the  accountant 

75 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Muir.  to  know? — Yes,  or  for  a  person  who  knew  the  facts  about 
the  account. 

That  would  depend  on  extraneous  knowledge,  which  you  have 
not? — And  which  those  who  are  in  immediate  contact  with  the 
account  ought  to  have  known  thoroughly.  They  were  the  people 
who  naturally  ought  to  know. 

The  officials  in  charge? — ^Yes.  [Shown  No.  131.]  There  is 
a  great  deal  of  pencil  figuring  on  that. 

Do  you  also  see  traces  of  there  having  been  previous  pencil 
figuring  which  has  been  rubbed  out? — Not  on  this  sheet,  I 
think. 

But,  at  any  rate,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  pencil  figuring, 
containing  veiy  elaborate  calculations  ?— That  is  so. 

It  would  require  an  accountant  of  some  skill  to  make  calcula- 
tions like  these,  would  it  not? — It  would.  It  caused  me  very 
great  difficulty  in  tracing  what  they  meant. 

Even  with  your  skill  j^ou  found  it  difficult? — Very  difficult 
indeed. 

So  that  you  are  quite  satisfied  that  the  man  who  was  figuring 
with  the  pencil  must  have  been  an  accountant  of  considerable 
skill  ? — Well,  I  know  who  the  accountant  was,  and  I  really 
must  not  commit  myself  to  saying  that  he  is  an  accountant  of 
any  skill. 

But  this  is  evidently  the  work  of  a  skilled  accountant,  is  it 
not? — It  is  rather  the  work  of  a  bungling  person  who  seemed 
to  be  trying  to  get  at  a  result. 

But  evidently  an  accountant? — Undoubtedly. 

And  you  see  the  kind  of  result  that  he  got  at? — ^Yes. 

You  gave  an  opinion  about  a  sum  of  £419,000.  Did  you  find 
that,  with  respect  to  Mr.  Morton,  there  had  been  a  system  of 
issuing  second  sets  of  acceptances  to  retire  the  first? — That 
was  so. 

Did  you  identify  this  entry  of  £419,000  with  the  dealings 
with  the  second  sets  of  acceptances? — ^I  could  not.  I  tried  to 
do  so,  but  I  could  find  no  details. 

You  merely,  looking  as  an  accountant,  and  without  extraneous 
knowledge,  cannot  tell  whether  that  may  have  been  the  discount 
money  of  the  second  set  to  retire  the  first  or  not? — No,  I 
cannot. 

It  may  have  been? — It  may. 

Or  it  may  not? — ^Yes ;  but  I  see  distinctly  from  the  books 
that  the  um-educed  amount  of  the  bills  payable  was  on  the 
circle  at  that  date. 

No  doubt  that  would  be  so  during  the  days  before  the  first 
set  were  retired  and  after  the  second  set  were  out? — ^Both  the 
first  and  second  sets  were  current  at  the  same  time. 

No  doubt  that  would  be  so  if  the  transaction  was  such  as  I 
have  put  to  you? — That  would  be  the  result. 

76 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — I  suppose  the  system,  whether  James  Mulr. 
it  is  a  good  one  or  not,  implies  drawing  bills  and  putting  them 
in  the  circle  before  the  old  ones  are  retired  ? — Yes,  and  also  that 
the  bills  would  have  to  be  given  to  Mr.  Morton  to  give  him  time 
to  discount  them,  and  get  the  proceeds  into  his  hands  before  the 
first  set  became  due. 

So  that  the  first  set  are  current  while  the  others  are  also 
current  ? — Yes. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — And  you  found  that  that  also  had  been 
put  into  the  deposit  account? — No;  I  did  not. 

I  thought  you  said  so  ? — No ;  I  said  that  Mr.  Morton  at  that 
time  was  owing  the  Bank  £480,000  on  overdrawn  deposit  and 
credit  accounts. 

Did  you  find  that  in  any  account? — No  ;  I  could  not  trace  that 
in  any  account.  In  order  to  trace  that  I  would  have  had  to 
know  the  particulars  and  the  amounts  of  each  of  the  several  bills 
constituting  the  £419,000,  but  I  did  not  know. 

And  therefore  the  books  of  the  Bank  did  not  enable  you  to 
say  what  that  £419,000  was? — They  did  not. 

But  you  gave  an  opinion  that  that  was  a  man  really  reducing 
his  liabilities  by  taking  one  from  another? — Taking  one  liability 
from  another,  but  simply  from  the  wording  of  the  sheet. 

But  suppose  that  the  transaction  was  that  it  was  discount 
money  got  in  to  take  up  the  first  set  of  bills,  it  was  quite  proper 
to  treat  them  as  they  are  treated  here? — Certainly  not. 

Why  not?  Both  sets  of  bills  appear  in  the  aggregate  of  the 
bills?— Yes. 

So  that  if  the  aggregate  stood  as  it  was,  it  would  have  the  bills 
for  the  same  amounts  in  twice? — No  doubt  it  would,  for  both 
sets  were  in  the  hands  of  the  public. 

And  no  doubt  the  Bank  was  liable  to  the  public  for  both  sets  ; 
but  if  the  Bank  had  got  in  discount  money  to  take  up  the  first 
set,  was  it  not  a  perfectly  proper  deduction  to  make  from  the 
liabilities  on  bills? — Certainly  not. 

Whether  it  was  a  proper  deduction  to  make  from  the  liability 
on  bills,  it  was  a  proper  deduction  to  make,  was  it  not,  in  ascer- 
taining the  Bank's  aggregate  liability? — Certainly  not. 

You  did  not  find  the  cash  entering  the  deposit  account? — I 
could  not  for  a  single  moment  imagine  that  £419,000  was  paid 
in  to  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  without  being  credited  to  some 
account. 

It  was  not  treated  as  cash  in  hand? — It  must  have  been  in 
the  cash  chest  at  that  moment. 

But  you  do  not  find  that  sum  of  £419,000  carried  in  to  reduce 
any  other  account? — It  must  have  been.  If  paid  in  by  James 
Morton  it  must  have  been  credited  to  James  Morton. 

Instead  of   saying  what  must  have   been,   t^ll  us  what  you 

77 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Muir.  found? — I  have  told  you  that  I  have  been  unable  to  trace  the 
money,  because  I  could  not  tell  the  amount  of  the  bills. 

Did  you  find  that  £4:19,000  employed  to  reduce  any  account 
except  the  bill  account? — I  did  not  specially  find  that  sum.  I 
could  not  trace  the  amounts  that  were  got  by  the  discounts 
of  these  bills. 

Then  your  answer  is  that  you  did  not? — I  did  not ;  but,  in  any 
view,  I  would  say  that  it  was  most  improjaer  to  make  that 
deduction  from  the  bills. 

You  said  that  you  found  obligations  with  Potter,  Wilson  & 
Co.'s  name  on  them.  Did  you  see  that  these  obligations  had 
been  undertaken  on  behalf  of  the  Bank  by  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  ? 
— I  did  not. 

You  don't  know  whether  these  were  obligations  undertaken  by 
them  with  respect  to  the  purchase  of  New  Zealand  properties  ? — 
It  was  not  on  the  face  of  them.  The  Bank  had  money  invested 
in  its  own  stock.  This  appears  in  the  abstract  under  the  first 
head.  If  it  had  been  put  under  the  third  head,  it  should  have 
appeared  there  under  a  separate  line.  It  would  have  been 
very  impi'oper  to  represent  it  as  "  Government  stock." 

Do  you  read  the  third  head  as  containing  nothing  but  "  Govern- 
ment stock  "  ? — No,  I  do  not.  It  also  says  "  Stocks  of  other 
companies,"  but  you  could  hardly  call  the  Bank's  stock  the  stock 
of  another  company. 

Still  it  was  an  investment ;  it  was  not  a  debt? — Certainly  not. 

Nor  was  it  security  for  an  advance? — No. 

It  was  an  asset  of  the  Bank,  with  nothing  against  it? — 
Provided  the  Bank  was  solvent. 

By  Mr.  Ashbr — You  know  the  balance  account  in  the  balance 
ledger  which  is  docqueted  once  a  year  by  the  Bank  Directors  ? — 
Yes. 

Are  you  acquainted  with  three  classes  of  books — the  "  weekly 
balance  book,"  the  "  branches  book,"  and  the  "  correspondents' 
balance  book  "  ? — I  have  generally  examined  them. 

Do  the  balance  accounts  in  the  balance  ledger  for  1876,  1877, 
and  1878  correctly  record  the  balances  in  the  three  subsidiary 
balance  books  I  have  mentioned  ? — The  "  branches  balance  book  " 
contains  the  accounts  made  up  on  a  different  principle. 

Does  the  balance  account  correctly  record  the  balances  for 
these  three  years  in  the  three  balance  books? — It  correctly 
records  them,  but  on  a  different  principle  as  regards  the  branches. 

Does  the  balance  account  in  the  balance  ledger  docqueted  by 
the  Directors  contain  the  names  of  the  several  branches? — 
It  does. 

And  opposite  each  branch  there  is  the  sum  at  the  debit  or  the 
credit  of  that  branch? — Yes. 

Is  that  sum,  appearing  in  the  balance  account  book  opposite 
each  branch  docqueted  by  the  Directors,  the  same  as  the  sum 

78 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

appearing  in  the  branches  balance  book  opposite  that  branch?  James  Muip. 
— I  am  not  quite  certain  of  the  book  you  refer  to,  but  if  it  is  the 
branch  abstract  of  balances,  the  sum  that  there  appears  is  the 
indebtedness  to  the  Bank  of  its  depositors,  or  vice  versa. 

Do  you  find  anything  wrong  in  the  balance  account  docqueted 
by  the  Directors  in  so  far  as  they  are  entries  with  regard  to  the 
branches  ? — Nothing  whatever. 

And  in  other  respects  the  balances  appearing  in  that  docqueted 
account  are  correct  as  compared  with  the  weekly  balance  book 
and  the  correspondents'  balance  book? — That  is  so. 

You  find  fault  with  the  balance  book  with  regard  to  deposits  in 
respect  there  was  not  an  entiy  in  regard  to  deposits  on  both 
sides  1 — Yes. 

Do  you  find  in  the  balance  account  which  is  docqueted  by  the 
Directors  any  account  entered  on  both  sides? — I  would  not 
anticipate  finding  an  account  entered  on  both  sides. 

I  understand  you  to  object  to  the  balance  of  the  deposits  being 
entered  in  this  balance  account  instead  of  the  sum  at  the  debit 
of  deposit  accounts  on  the  one  side  and  at  the  credit  of  deposit 
accounts  on  the  other? — Yes. 

Is  that  a  fault? — It  is  a  fault  unless  the  debtors  and  creditors 
are  the  same. 

Is  not  the  purpose  of  a  balance  account  merely  to  show  the 
balance  on  the  whole  deposits  of  the  Bank? — No. 

Do  you  find  in  this  balance  account  any  entiy  of  an  accoxmt 
on  both  sides  ? — What  I  complain  of  is  that  it  does  not  show  the 
balance  of  the  deposit  accounts  of  the  Bank. 

But  is  the  balance  account  not  made  up  for  the  special  purpose 
of  showing  the  balance  on  the  several  accounts  there  mentioned  ? 
— A  balance  account  ought  to  be  made  up  with  the  view  of 
showinef  the  debts  and  the  liabilities  of  the  Bank — the  one  on 
the  one  side  and  the  other  on  the  other. 

The  abstract  of  accounts  is  made  up  for  that  purpose? — The 
balance  book  ought  to  be  made  up  for  that  purpose  also. 

But  is  not  the  balance  account  intended  to  show  the  balance 
on  the  whole  accounts  in  the  Bank  ? — It  is  intended  to  show  that, 
but  it  does  not  show  it. 

You  think  it  should  show  the  amount  at  the  credit  of  the 
deposit  account  on  the  one  side,  and  at  the  debit  of  the  deposit 
account  on  the  other? — Undoubtedly. 

Then  it  would  not  show  the  balance  of  the  deposit  accounts  ? — 
It  would. 

You  would  have  to  take  the  two  entries  on  the  two  sides,  and 
compare  them,  in  order  to  find  out  the  exact  balance  of  the 
deposit  accounts  of  the  Bank,  would  you  not? — No.  You  would 
have  to  do  that  in  order  to  find  out  the  difference  between  over- 
drafts and  deposits. 

And  to  find  out  the  exact  balance  on  the  deposits? — Certainly 

79 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Muip.  not ;    the   balance   on  deposit  accounts  is   the   balance   without 
deducting  the  overdrafts. 

Your  view  is  that  the  balance  is  not  the  balance  of  deposits, 
but  the  balance  of  both  sides? — I  say  it  is  the  balance  of  the 
deposits  that  should  appear. 

The  published  abstract  is,  of  course,  quite  a  different  document 
from  the  balance  account  ? — That  is  so. 

And  it  is  not  made  up,  I  believe,  from  the  balance  account? — 
It  appears  to  be  so  to  a  large  extent. 

I  mean  the  published  extract? — That  appears  to  be  so  to  a 
large  extent,  except  as  regards  the  branches. 

Don't  you  require  to  add  what  appears  in  the  large  number  of 
books  connected  with  the  branches?^ — ^No  ;  two  books. 

Is  not  every  item  in  the  balance  account  varied  by  having 
incorporated  with  it  the  corresponding  item  from  the  branches 'i 
— Certainly  not. 

Take  the  deposits  ;  do  you  find  the  deposits  in  the  balance 
account  the  same  as  the  deposits  in  the  printed  abstract? — Yes; 
I  understand  you  are  talking  of  the  scroll  abstract  ? 

I  am  speaking  now  of  the  abstract  which  is  published — the 
annual  balance  sheet,  of  the  Bank? — They  are  amalgamated 
there. 

And  therefore,  on  looking  at  the  two  documents  together, 
you  find  they  are  utterly  different ;  the  one  is  not  made  up  from 
the  other? — No. 

You  cannot  compare  the  one  with  the  other  without  the  aid 
of  a  large  number  of  books  ? — No,  three  or  four  books ;  not  a 
large  number. 

But  books  which  go  to  disclose  the  whole  business  of  the 
agencies? — That  is  so. 

Are  the  totals  of  the  two  items  necessarily  different? — They 
are. 

So  that,  even  to  look  at  the  summation  of  the  balance  account 
docqueted  by  the  Directors,  you  would  not  expect  it  to  tally 
with  the  summation  of  the  printed  abstract? — It  does  not. 

And  it  should  not  do  it? — From  the  manner  in  which  the  books 
were  kept,  and  as  regards  the  branches,  it  should  not  do  it. 

By  Mr.  Mackintosh — Would  you  refer  to  your  statement 
of  the  account  of  Taylor  &  Son  with  the  Bank  ?  What  sum  wa-s 
at  the  debit  of  their  account  on  31st  December,  1876? — I 
cannot  tell.  I  directed  my  attention  solely  to  the  accounts  at 
the  balancing  periods.     I  have  not  got  the  book  here. 

Can  you  tell  whether  it  is  or  is  not  the  fact  that  during  1877 
— between  1st  January,  1877,  and  1st  January,  1878 — Taylor 
&  Son's  overdraft  was  considerably  diminished? — No,  I  cannot 
tell.  From  my  statements  I  only  find  that  it  was  increased 
about  £17,000  between  the  balance  of  1877  and  the  balance  of 
1878. 

8o 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

But  it  is  quite  consistent  with  that,  is  it  not,  that  it  had  been  James  Muir. 
diminished  in  1877? — Yes,  temporarily. 

Is  it  quite  consistent  with  the  account  as  at  1st  January,  1878, 
having  been  considerably  less  overdrawn  than  it  was  at  Ist 
Januar}^,  1877? — I  am  talking  really  about  what  I  have  not 
examined,  but  there  is  nothing  inconsistent  in  it. 

Is  it  not  consistent  with  your  knowledge  that  since  1st  January, 
1878,  there  has  been  no  operation  upon  the  account  at  all  in 
the  way  of  drawing  out? — I  cannot  speak  to  1st  January,  1878, 
as  I  have  not  specially  examined  it. 

You  have  not  got  it  with  you? — No. 

Can  you  tell  me  whether  it  has  fluctuated  a  good  deal  during 
its  later  period? — I  did  not  look  into  it. 

Can  you  tell  me  whether  it  was  squared  up  during  its  period  1 
— I  cannot. 

Did  you  not  inquire  into  these  matters? — No. 

Were  you  not  asked  to  inquire  into  them  ? — No. 

Did  you  not  think  it  material  to  inquire? — I  did  not.  I 
looked  at  the  indebtedness  of  Mr.  Taylor  when  the  crash  came. 
I  did  not  think  it  was  material  whether  it  was  ever  squared  or 
not. 

You  stated  the  amount  so  as  to  make  it  appear  to  have  con- 
tinuously increased  ? — Oh,  no  !  I  must  not  have  any  motive 
imputed  to  me. 

But  its  result? — Yes.  The  result  was  increased  in 
the  balance  sheet  at  the  various  balancing  periods,  for 
which  I  am  not  responsible.  I  did  not  inquire  or 
examine  the  books  to  ascertain  how  long  Messrs.  Taylor 
&  Son  had  been  customers  of  the  Bank.  I  cannot  tell 
whether  Mr.  Taylor  had  got  accommodation  from  the  City  Bank 
prior  to  his  becoming  a  Director,  or,  if  so,  to  what  extent.  I 
was  not  asked  to  inquire  into  that  ;  but  I  find  that  their  over- 
drafts appear  to  have  begun  in  1874,  because  in  1873,  as  I 
said  before,  I  think  there  was  a  little  credit  balance.  I  have 
not  examined  the  account  prior  to   1871. 

By  Mr.  Smith — Mr.  Innes  Wright's  private  account  begins  with 
his  being  debited  with  the  sum  of  about  £2700.  There  has 
been  no  other  operation  upon  that  account,  except  the  crediting 
of  interest  upon  stock  and  debiting  interest  upon  the  account. 
That  sum  seems  to  have  been  the  price  of  the  shares  purchased 
to  give  him  a  qualification  as  Director.  He  has  never  drawn 
any  dividend.  The  dividend  is  placed  to  his  credit,  and  he  is 
debited  with  interest,  the  result  of  which  would  have  been  that, 
if  it  had  gone  on  long  enough,  Mr.  Innes  Wright  would  have 
had  his  share  for  nothing. 

Would  the  shares,  in  your  opinion,  be  a  security  for  the 
advance  ? — If  the  Bank  was  solvent. 

You     stated     that     at     5th     June,     1875,     the     sum    due 

^  8z 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Muir.  by  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co. — the  debtor  balance — ^was  £217,707. 
Is  that  sum  composed  of  the  balances  on  credit  accounts  and 
deposit  accounts  brought  together'/ — It  is.  It  includes  the 
amount  standing  at  the  debit  of  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  on  deposit 
account,  amounting  to  £133,241.  The  amount  standing  on  the 
same  account  at  5th  June,  1878,  is  £150,795. 

What  was  the  accruing  interest  in  the  interval  between  2nd 
June,  1875,  and  5th  June,  1878? — I  cannot  tell  you  unless  you 
show  me  the  ledger. 

Would  it  be  over  £20,000?— It  would. 

So  the  result  is  that  in  the  interval  the  sum  paid  in  was 
greater  than  the  sum  drawn  out? — No,  it  could  not  be  over 
£20,000.  It  could  not  be  more  than  £5000  or  £6000 ;  but  the 
ledger,  which  is  in  the  inventory,  will  show  it. 

The  sum  at  5th  June,  1878,  was  how  much?— £150,000.  I 
cannot  tell,  without  looking  at  the  ledger,  how  much  of  that  was 
interest.       I  did  not  anticipate  this  line  of  examination. 

Is  it  the  case  that  the  sum  paid  in  in  the  interval  between  1875 
and  1878  was  gi-eater  than  the  sum  drawn  out? — I  cannot  tell; 
the  ledger  will  show  that.  The  amount  due  at  5th  June,  1878,  in 
all,  was  £334,783.  The  difference  between  that  and  the 
£217,707  in  1875  is  (roughly)  £117,000.  I  cannot  tell  how 
much  of  that  was  interest ;  it  will  be  seen  from  the  ledger.  The 
balance  of  £334,783  in  1878  includes  two  sums,  the  one  of 
£32,233,  and  the  other  of  £47,601.  These  two  sums  appear  for 
the  first  time  in  that  year. 

Do  you  know  what  the  £32,233  was? — Yes,  it  has  something 
to  do  with  an  account  called  "  Wool  lien  account." 

Was  that  an  account  which  had  been  opened  on 
behalf  of  Glen,  Walker  &  Co.? — Yes,  it  is  so  stated  in  the 
ledger,  I  think.  That  account  is  not  closed.  The  £47,601  was 
the  balance  standing,  at  the  balancing  period  of  1878,  at  the 
debit  of  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  for  their  short  accountings  upon 
the  £100,000  of  Glen,  Walker  &  Co.'s  drafts  substituted  for 
those  of  Holmes,  White  &  Co. 

Short  accountings  upon  the  discount  account? — Not  that,  but 
short  accounting  of  proceeds  of  bills  which  had  been  given  to 
them  for  the  purpose  of  discounting. 

Was  that  an  overdraft  T — I  would  not  like  to  characterise  it. 
It   is   not  an   overdraft? — I  must  say    I   would   use   a  much 
stronger  expression  than  that  if  I  were  asked  what  it  was. 

If  that  sum  of  £32,000  odds  was  accouHted  for.  and 
the  £47,000  was  out  of  the  account,  and  the  interest  taken 
off,  would  the  sum  standing  at  the  debit  in  1878  be  greater  or 
less  than  it  was  in  1875? — I  have  said  I  do  not  know  the 
amount  of  the  interest,  so  that  I  cannot  answer  the  question. 
But  assuming  that  the  interest  was  £33,000,  would  that  be 

82 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

sufficient  to  account  for  the  difference,  with  the  other  figures?  James  Muir. 
—Within  £4000  of  it. 

Can  you  give  me  the  details  of  the  sum  of  total 
indebtedness  that  you  make  out  against  Innes  Wright 
&  Co.  in  1875,  £.392,000  ?— Yes.  There  is,  first,  cash  credits 
and  overdrawn  deposits,  £217,707  :  then  there  is  William  Scott's 
indebtedness,  £121,801  ;  then  there  are  bills  discounted  by 
John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  with  the  Bank,  £40,678 ;  and  there 
are  acceptances  by  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.,  discounted  with 
the  Bank  by  third  parties,  £12,324.  I  think  you  will  find  that 
makes  up  the  sum. 

As  regards  the  charge  for  "  bills  discounted,"  £40,678,  and 
"  acceptances,"  £12,324,  do  you  know  if  that  sum  was  reduced 
in  1878.^ — Yes,  very  materially  reduced. 

What  does  it  stand  at  in  1878?— In  1878,  you  may  take  it 
that  the  bills  discounted  by  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  were  then 
reduced  to  £24,500 ;  William  Scott's  discounts  were  then  £9198  ; 
and  the  acceptances  of  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.,  discounted  with 
the  Bank  by  third  parties,  were  £4304. 

Mention  has  been  made  of  the  Edinburgh  Pastoral  Association  ; 
do  you  know  who  they  were? — I  do  not.  I  do  not  know  who 
constituted  the  Association.  It  seemed  to  me  to  be  very  much 
an  affair  of  the  Bank's  own. 

Was  it  not  simply  the  Bank? — Well,  it  has  all  along  struck 
me  to  be  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — I  omitted  to  ask  you  in  what  way 
interest  receivable  or  received  by  the  Bank  is  dealt  with  in  the 
profit  and  loss  account? — It  is  credited  to  profit  and  loss,  in  a  line 
called  "  Interest  received." 

I  show  you  No.  146,  yearly  balance  sheet  at  5th  June,  1878  ; 
and  I  also  refer  you  to  No.  2a  private  cash  book.  No.  6.  It  is 
entered  there  also,  is  it  not? — That  is  so. 

Just  explain  to  us  how  it  is  dealt  with? — The  interest 
received  or  receivable  by  the  Bank  on  account  of  the 
debtors  to  the  Bank  was  debited  once  every  year.  The 
resulting  sum,  or  rather  the  resulting  sums,  are  all  added  to- 
gether, and  credited  to  profit  and  loss  account  through  the  cash 
book  to  which  you  have  referred ;  and  I  find  it  here  [showing] 
£330,000  in  this  sheet  as  being  one  of  the  earnings  of  the  Bank 
for  that  amount. 

Refer  to  the  cash  book  also,  and  see  if  the  same 
entries  pass '  through  it  ? — On  the  debtor  side  of  the  cash 
book  of  that  date  there  is  an  entry  ''  Profit  and  loss  account, 
balances  transferred  from  the  following  accounts :  — Interest  re- 
ceived," and  figures  that  I  have  previously  given,  £330,849  5s.  6d. 
Then  there  are  several  other  items  coming  up  to  £398,743,  and 
on  the  other  side  there  is  "  Interest  received,  balance  transferred 
to  profit  and  loss,"  £338,549  5s.  6d.,  and  so  on. 

83 


James  Muir. 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

The  sum  of  interest  received  there  stated  ought  to  represent 
the  earnings  of  the  Bank  upon  its  debts  for  the  year  1 — That  is  so. 

Does  that  sum  of  £330,000  include  the  interest  upon  those 
eight  large  debts  that  you  spoke  of  ? — It  does,  every  penny  of  it. 

Which  were  not  received ;  at  least,  the  books  do  not  show  that 
they  were  received,  but  the  contrary? — Quite  so. 

Does  that  occur  in  each  of  the  three  years? — It  does.  I  was 
very  much  struck,  my  lord,  with  this,  that  the  interest  upon  these 
eight  accounts  in  1878  amounts  to  £125,875,  v/hile  the  total 
amount  of  the  clear  balance,  stated  of  profit  for  that  year,  is 
£125,094,  being  £780  less  than  the  interest  on  these  balances. 

And  which,  of  course,  was  not  made  if  it  was  not  got? — No, 
assuredly  not.  Besides  which,  in  1878,  they  carried  to  credit  of 
profit  and  loss  account  the  sum  of  £12,000,  which  had  been  added 
to  the  value  of  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  stock  beyond  what  they 
had  paid  for  it  in  the  market. 

In  1877,  what  was  the  figure  of  interest  that  was  so  dealt  with? 
— In  1877  the  interest  upon  these  eight  debtors  was  £128,900, 
and  the  available  balance  of  profit  for  that  year  appearing  in  the 
balance  sheet  was  only  £128,413,  being  less  than  the  interest 
charged  to  the  debtors  by  £487.  Then  in  1876  the  amount 
charged  to  the  debtors  was  £125,763,  and  the  apparent  available 
balance  of  profits  was  £125,762,  a  difference  of  about  £1. 

You  were  examined  on  cross  with  regard  to  retiring  one  set  of 
bills  by  another.  Suppose  there  are  a  set  of  bills  for  £200,000 
acceptances  of  the  Bank,  and  that  a  fresh  set  for  the  same  amount 
are  issued  to  retire  those,  and  the  proceeds  are  received,  is  it 
a  correct  thing  to  treat  the  first  set  of  bills  as  paid  until  that 
money  has  been  actually  applied  in  extinction  of  them,  and  the 
bills  withdrawn  from  the  circle? — It  is  so  utterly  absurd  that 
I  can  hardly  conceive  of  any  one  imagining  that  such  a  thing 
could  possibly  be  done. 

Until  the  money  received  by  discount  is  actually  applied  in 
payment  of  the  bills,  there  are  two  sets  of  liabilities  floating 
against  the  Bank? — Undoubtedly. 

In  regard  to  the  scroll  balance  sheets,  you  said  that  these 
looked  like  the  work  of  an  accountant ;  what  do  you  mean  by 
that  precisely? — ^They  look  like  the  work  of  a  man  who  could 
say  two  and  two  are  four,   but  that  is  about  the  extent  of  it. 

Did  you  mean  to  suggest  that  none  but  an  accountant  could 
bring  down  these  sums  from  the  balance  at  the  "  Credit  account  " 
to  the  heading  under  "  Stocks  "  ? — Certainly  not.  When  I  used 
the  word  accountant,  I  did  not  mean  a  professional  accountant. 

Did  you  intend  to  suggest  that  it  required  an  accountant  to 
convert  £200,000  of  that  into  surplus  gold  in  the  coffers  of  the 
Bank? — Certainly  not. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Did  you  mean  that  you  did  not 

84 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

think  it  looked  like  the  hand  of  a  professional  accountant  1 — It  James  Muir. 
simply  looked  like  a  man  who  understood  arithmetic. 

But  was  your  impression,  from  the  look  of  it,  that  it  had  been 
done  by  a  professional  accountant  ? — I  knew  that  it  was  the  work 
of  the  accountant  of  the  Bank. 

It  was  not  merely  the  work  of  a  man  who  knew  that  two  and 
two  made  four,  but  the  calculations  were,  in  fact,  the  work  of  the 
accountant  of  the  Bank  ? — There  is  no  question  of  that  whatever. 

I  asked  you  yesterday  if  you  could  make  me  out  a  balance 
sheet,  as  you  think,  on  the  lines  of  the  balance  abstract,  as  it 
should  have  been  made  out? — I  have  prepared  some  such  state- 
ment, and  my  clerk  is  now  copying  it. 

In  the  meantime,  would  you  take  the  indictment,  and  turn  to 
the  statement  of  the  errors  on  page  -i.  In  the  first 
place,  you  have  been  able  to  trace  the  system,  rather  than 
the  principle,  on  which  these  statements  proceeded  i — I  have, 
and  the  statement  which  I  have  prepared  will  bring  that  out. 

In  regard  to  the  amount  of  deposits  at  the  head  office,  they  are 
understated  in  the  balance  for  1876  to  the  extent  of  a  million 
and  some  odds.  Now,  wherein  does  that  mis-statement  consist  1 
— There  are  deposit  accounts  omitted  altogether,  £455,444. 

That  is  the  balance  due  to  customers  which  you  told  us  of 
yesterday  ? — Yes.  Then  a  debtor  balance  is  made  to  appear  where 
no  such  balance  ought  to  be,  amounting  to  £1346.  That  is  a 
debtor  balance  appearing  as  if  the  customers  owed  the  Bank 
that. 

That  depends  upon  the  controversy  between  you  and  Mr. 
Balfour  about  the  balances  being  taken  instead  of  both  sides  of 
the  account? — Quite  so.  These  credit  accounts  are  omitted  alto- 
gether, £147,468.  There  are  balances  standing  at  the  credit  r,f 
parties  who  have  paid  in  sums  of  money  to  the  creditor  side  of 
their  "  credit  accounts."  They  are  just  another  name  for 
a  kind  of  deposit.  They  are  omitted  altogether.  Then  London 
and  provincial  and  foreign  correspondents  are  omitted,  £14,216. 

Where  do  you  find  that? — In  the  balance  ledger.  Then 
adjusting  account  of  interest  is  omitted,  £11,405.  I  find  that  in 
the  balance  sheet  of  profit  and  loss.  No.  144  of  inventory. 

But  that  is  nowhere  correctly  entered? — Not  in  the  balance 
ledger. 

In  any  of  the  books  ? — It  is  correctly  entered  in  the  profit  and 
loss  balance  sheet. 

Is  there  anything  more? — The  true  amount  of  branch  liabili- 
ties appearing  in  the  book  called  abstract  of  branch  balances  is 
£8.163,311.  In  the  scroll  the  figures  representing  that  are  in 
red  ink,  and  amount  to  £7,786,977.  The  difference  imder- 
stated  is  £376,334.  I  cannot  tell  what  that  under-statement 
consists  of.  That  brings  up  the  amount  to  the  sum  stated  in 
the  indictment. 

85 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Muir.  Then  the  amount  of  "  Drafts  outstanding  "  is  the  £973,000 
which  we  have  heard  so  much   about? — Yee. 

These  figures  make  up  the  sum  short  in  the  first  item  ;  the 
second  is  the  sum  of  .£973,000.  In  regard  to  that,  can  you  tell 
me  when  was  the  first  appearance  of  that  sum  in  anj  of  the 
books  of  the  Bank  except  the  private  cash  book? — It  never 
appeared  anywhere  till  it  appeared  in  the  private  cash  book  on 
4th  June,  1875. 

After  that,  when  did  it  first  appear  in  the  other  books? — It 
continuously  appeared  in  the  ledger  of  the  Bank  from  that  date 
till  this  date,  an  open  balance  appearing  there  ever  after. 

Did  it  anywhere  appear  as  deducted  from  the  head  of  the 
"Drafts  outstanding"  and  the  other  things  under  that  head? — 
Not  in  any  of  the  books  of  the  Bank  except  the  balance  ledger, 
where  it  did  appear  so  deducted. 

Then,  third,  the  Bills  of  exchange  ''  you  say  are  understated 
to  the  extent  of  £698,000;  where  do  you  find  that? — In  the 
first  place,  credit  accounts  are  understated  to  the  extent  of 
£147.468. 

Does  the  balance  which  you  have  prepared  show  all  these? — 
It  does. 

[The  witness  here  handed  to  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk  the  documents 
printed  on  pages  88,  89,  90.] 

Among  other  things  I  wanted  to  know  was  what  the  result 
of  the  corrections  would  have  been  upon  the  statement  to  the 
shareholders  of  the  position  of  the  Bank? — I  have  not  yet 
made  it  up  in  that  form,  but  I  will  be  very  glad  to  do  so  ;  I  did 
not  quite  understand  your  object. 

That  was  my  object,  because  the  allegation  is  that  they  made 
a  false  statement  to  the  shareholders,  and  I  want  to  know  what 
would  have  been  the  true  statement  on  the  lines  of  this  abstract. 
I  can  understand  that  you  might  go  back  on  the  books  and 
make  a  totally  different  statement ;  but  if  they  had  stated  the 
figures  correctly  in  the  abstract  balance  sheet,  what  would  have 
been  the  result  presented  to  the  shareholders? — Perhaps  I  could 
answer  the  question  in  this  way,  by  saying  that  the  result  .")f 
correcting  the  figures  would  have  had  no  effect  whatever  upon 
the  capital  or  the  profit  and  loss  or  upon  the  reserve  fund, 
because  what  was  deducted  from  one  side  was  also  deducted  from 
the  other. 

Does  that  apply  to  the  whole  of  them? — ^To  the  whole  of 
them. 

That  it  would  have  had  no  efifect  at  all? — It  would  have  had 
no  effect  on  the  capital  as  stated. 

If  you  assume  that  the  bad  and  doubtful  debts  are_  correctly 
estimated  there,  is  that  so  ? — That  is  so  ;  but  the  effect  would 
86 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

have  been  to  impress  the  raind  of  the  public  with  the  fact  that  James  Mair. 
the  Bank  had  lent  so  much  less  money. 

The  effect  on  its  credit  would  be  entirely  different,  but  Hie 
ultimate  result  on  the  profit  and  loss  would  be  the  same? — 
Precisely  the  same. 

I  suppose  the  principal  errors  in  this  are  the  £97-3,000, 
which  apparently  has  no  foundation  at  all,  and  the 
£751,000.  which  is  taken  down  from  the  credit  account?  and 
inserted  imder  investments? — And  also  the  gold,  £200,000, 
and  also  the  deduction  of  the  £419,000,  which,  as  I  have  said,  is 
perfectly  absurd.      I  cannot  be  too  strong  upon  that. 


87 


CD 
00 


CO  ■*  i-H 
O  lO  C5 


rH^^ 

<N 

"*  O 

O 

lO«D 

m 

a  la 

U3 

.-1 « 

no 

rH 

C4 

1/2 

O 

re 

OS 

o 

o 

1-6 

re 

(M 

1>4 

m  o  ;o  r- 

C5  t'  ^O  CM 

05t-  CD  Tj* 


00  r-t  O  O  O  U3  X> 

CO  i-t  o  o  o  r-  00 
-d^c-i  CO  o  c  r^  o 

C+J  ^-T  <N  00  O"  O"  rH  Cft 
■^  iC  t>-  Ui  lO  LO  o 
rH  -^  O?  (N  <N  i-^  •* 


00 

CO 


1  CO  1— I  CO  O  o 

I        o  i-ir-  o  c 

I  -^  C<J  rH  o  o 

■^  oroTco  o  o" 
OJ  lO  t--  o  o 

tH  ">*»  (N  CO  CO 


CO  r-  :D 
Ci  O  Oi 
CO  lO  C-l^ 

t-    .  o 

rH    i^  tH 


CO 
CO 


W   0)      . 


o  Js  c»  o  o 


'=*i:5- 


r-'O- 


O  ■*  X) 

lO  t-- o 

:  oo'o'm' 

■^  l-H  -^ 


lO  lO  CD        tH 

c:  t'  ic      r^ 

OS  t-  ^  T-H 


c  o 


■^2 

eg  ■-- 
o  o 

©5 


"5  5 

X  *  ci 

'^    Jh    O    C 

-1^     >•     O     -     "     Q 

go  g  tSTS   " 
O^    ^    CD  P- 

.■S  ^  .£F  £  5  ? 

■<!   S   <B   O   S   i-   " 


P. 
S 


J 


c 

r-     "■'     ~ 


=*     rt     2 

>-  O  cS 


OM 
S<<  it  -  n 

°    03    S    " 

"  c  o  c 
'^  5  p-=^ 


is 

>     -w    O 

-  c    S  a> 


•a 


a      -s^ 


.5  ft 


IB 

o 
<  a. 


'S  eg 

^        ai  C   c^ 

^■^ -2  Sir 

^   -^  C;   ci>   — 


^ 

fi 

o 

ce 

s 

w 

n 

-t^ 

Ti 

. 

EC 

o 

e 

a 

■« 

:^ 

n 

i-i-? 

>■ 

-*-»  r—  .«      l^ 

g|s.s 


^  Sia.' 


3= 


r^-^OO     ft 


d  b.  Id 
Q-C  g-o 


■^  eg  O  - 

— <  ^  *^    CC 

"ecu 
jT!  t-  a>  .^ 


IS*" 


P  C':  o 

p   «   0)"*- 

P-P  -^  S 

P  -  I-     - 
o  P  aj.-H 

^        hyJ        /-5    •^- 

J3.S-B  P 

cp^   P- 

p£ 


O    ,    P 

p        o^ 
O    .  -tj 


IB 

>■ 
O 


e 


^  p 


S  p. 


^S  »- 


cS  O 

o 


®  > 


O  i^  E, 

a 


--    ^p 

P  P       o 

p 
o 


•   to 

S 
<I> 

-a 

TH   CU 
P    P    c      -^ 

3  P  g  0  « 

-s^  a  p  2 

P  J,  kS  P< 


^ 


;35  =  ^ 


-*  00  CO  o  -* 

'^  CO  rH  O  CO 

-*  -Tj"  C^  ■^  CO 

''■jH  lOt^  ^r-Tcd" 

m  ■-*  1-H  rH  r- 
"*  rH  CO 


CO 
-«* 
CO 


J 


5-^ 


■2s «!  2 


■*  00         CO  iO  f-H 
-f  CO  T-H  O  ^H 

■*  ^         C-1  ^  CO 


CO 
00 


T3  t^ 

^  .    .  .s 

o  J^- 


co  o 

00  W3 

co'oo" 

C-1  QO 

eooi 


a 
b 

3 
3 


p 

it 


c 
ce 


:wC^  p  c3 
ggog 

J-  be 


P 


or  o 


p 


o  >  ^ 


a 


"e 

P  o 

o  - 

p 
o 

hi 


5  <»p  g  ce   .£ 

OS        ce  t:  o  » 


-PP-SM^P'^        S 

op.xc^^-'^ce^    .     „ 
p  !»-5-.cesti  ?;  S-gci     S 


^^-iSe.^'S'^ 


CO 

p 
p^i' 

o  ■» 
H 


a 


s 

o 

a 

<a 

cS 


P 

P40 
a> 

o  " 

H 


88 


3 

a 

T- 

a 

Tl 

o 

>* 

5 

3 

C 

o 

o 

J 

t3 

(5 

::1 

C3 

^ 

=*J 


1-H 
CO 

S 

OJ 

OJ 

'M 

M 

m 

U3 

00  o;  lo  1-H  i-H      -^ -^  t>. 

CD  CO         t^  i-<         00  C"U>^ 
t-  O  lO 


N  -^  CO  Tjt 


Tf 

1-^ 

1-H    1 

>o 

to 

to  ' 

»H 

CO 

C3 

t^ 

(M 

C-1 

(N 

>o 

lO 

CJ 

m 

*5 


O  (M 

;0^0 


1:^  00  00 

t^  "*  x> 
to  CO  CO 


coco  CO 

C5  00  CO 
COi-H 


'^■£-=^^ 


1~  o  » 
i-t  C^  lO 
CC  CO  O^l 


.-TO         rH- 


GO 


13 


:  ce 


o   - 


©  o 


T3 
O  ® 


_-  ^ 


.  ^2 


3 


c   r  • 
0  6  o 

O 

o 

•  cS-u> 

woCo 


c 

% 

n 

o 

4^ 

CJ 

n» 

Zi 

o 

x: 

m 

m 

13 

o 

o 

c? 

r; 

•*-> 

? 

n^ 

o 

<aj 

P^PhM 

•■S.B 

ego 
'^  o  K 
0)  S   " 

•^  o  a 


»         o 
M-i   <A 

01  "3 -G 

.2—  o 

-4-J  ^^ 


3 


t=fe.S       O 


§1 


"2.2  » 
if  S  2 

(»   D  2 

o  2* 


13 

.a 


&> 

e 


13 
IS 

Si 


3 


s.    s 

1^     s 


09 


3 
P. 


S 


a. 

2 
c 

0) 

s 

3 

Ol 

g 

o 

f-i 
o 

Hi 

1? 

a  3 

"cS 

.a 
to 

3 

'i^ 

o 

fi-c 

O 

o 

H 

<i;5 

H 

^ 

H 

aa 

ao 

P5 

a 


c 

J= 

o 

?? 

^ 
S 

^ 

in 

« 

-n 

9> 

cs-*^ 

jii 

=ti 


•M  «  05 
OS  00  lO 
CO  CO 


<N  O 


o 
m 
m 


N  MO 
C5  00  »n 
CO  CO 

irt  oTc 
111  (N 


o 
o 

00 


O    9 


•a 

<4^ 


CO 


t3        O 

*s    - 
•    •    •    o^ 

3  1* 

.    .  d  s-g  « 

«  O    3    K 

O 


3 
ft  . 


.as  c 


—  cc 


C  £-5  n  3  li^ 


to 

3^- 

i^J3 
O  " 

H 


.a 
a 


3 


•a 


3 


og 

WO 

a 


3 


iSJ3 
o  « 


.;;      3 


a 
P. 


a 


o 

H 


89 


00 

00 


5»  . 


g 


CO    <N 

o  o 


^  00  C-1 
.-I  0O5O 
CO  00  (N 

o"qo  t^ 
00  ■*  o 

Tt*  T-H  CI 


„=5 


CO 
C<5 
CO 

CO 


•^  GO  i-t  ^-        r-< 


^    CO 

o 

o 

Oi    ft 

05 

m 

to    CR 

CO 

00   o 

UC 

!X1 

■^i*   c^ 

■<*< 

-rti 

i£> 

Ico* 

lO  -o 

00  ^ 

m 

OOl 

o 

^  t^ 

■*  ^ 

00 

o  ■ 

C4jOC 


CO 

U3 

a:  (M 

m 

lO 

00  CO 

00 

ir>w 

CO 

Ir-t- 

CO 

l-H 

o  o 

o  ^ 

oo 

r-  00 

OU3 

00  o 

o  oo 

^  03 

O  CO 

eo(M 

IM  00 

"  2  S  o 

O  eg    CQ  .*^ 

.  c3  .-*£  C  -3 

■»^  m  taoo) 

HO  QfeO 

III 


c 

cS 
^    . 

o  r 

AM 
cS>rt 

'   So 


I 
IS 

c; 

c« 


o 


c 
Q 


1-    c 


o 

o  o  S 

HH  P 

3 


CCS 
.^  a>  ij 


-<   OQ   <U° 


o 

■=-^  • 

•4-)        . 

ca  o) 


13 


=!    cS 


ft 


o3 

s 

o 


C 
o 

P5 


c 


O 


c  a, 
,  —  o  J 

c-c  ri  a) 


■^ 


00  coo 

CO  CO  rH 
l^CO  rH 

-*  CO 


co" 


m  o 
-as 


00  CO  <35 
CO  CO  rH 
I^  CO  — * 


StJ  O  CO 
■^  CO 


tS  —  ^  2 


O 


9 


CJ      - 

.2  ai 

^   CO 


:i5«  c 


O'w'S  5::: 


CD 
-3 


C 
P. 


OU2 
O   c« 

cS-" 


.2     g 

Is    a 


00_ 


■H  OJ 


•T3  2      i-t  C      T3 


c 

3. 


I 


o 


o  ' 


P" 

Hn 


o 


90 


CHAPTER  V. 

Evidence  of  the  Accountant,  Secretary,  and 
Superintendent  of  Branches. 

William  Morison.  Wm.  Morison. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — I  was  accountant  of  the  City  of 
Glasgow  Bank  from  1871  to  its  stoppage.  I  had  previously  been 
a  clerk  in  the  same  department.  I  succeeded  Mr.  R.  S.  Stronach 
(afterwards  manager)  as  accountant.  I  had  charge  of  all  the 
clerks  in  the  accountant's  department,  and  of  the  ledgers  and 
other  books  in  which  the  transactions  of  the  Bank  were  entered. 
I  had  charge  of  the  private  cash-book,  the  general  ledger,  the 
weekly  balance  book,  the  balance  ledgei',  and  the  contingent 
account  ledger.  The  cash  balance  book  was  not  kept  by  me, 
but  I  made  certain  entries  in  it,  showing  the  amount  in  my 
genei-al  ledger.  I  kept  a  number  of  subsidiary  books  ;  amongst 
others  a  book  titled  "  Credit  accounts,  Nos.  3  and  4."  [No.  31 
of  inventory.]  That  book  contains  entries  of  cash  advances  to 
Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  and  James  Nicol  Fleming.  There  is  also 
an  account  in  that  book  under  the  head  "  New  Zealand  and 
Australian  Land  Co.  Stock."  I  began  to  keep  that  book  in  June, 
1875.  The  annual  balance  of  the  Bank  was  struck  on 
the  first  Wednesday  of  June,  in  terms  of  the  contract. 
The  contract  was  followed  so  long  as  I  was  an  officer 
of  the  Bank.  The  general  meeting  of  the  shareholders  took 
place  on  the  first  Wednesday  of  July  each  year.  The  prepara- 
tion of  the  balance  and  report  of  the  affairs  of  the  Company 
for  the  preceding  year  had  to  be  completed  between  these  two 
dates.  It  was  my  duty  as  accountant  to  take  part  in  the  pre- 
paration of  the  annual  balance.  I  had  to  bring  down  balances 
from  the  general  ledger,  and  the  branches  general  ledger,  and 
the  correspondence  general  ledger,  into  the  balance  ledger.  This 
was  finished  about  ten  days  after  the  annual  balance.  When 
prepared,  I  submitted  it  to  the  Manager.  [Shown  No.  130.] 
That  is  a  scroll  abstract  of  the  accounts  at  the  head  office  for 
the  year  ending  7th  June,  1876.  It  was  prepared  in  the  head 
office.  No.  133  is  an  abstract  of  the  accounts  at  the  branches 
for  the  same  period.  It  was  prepared  under  the  superintendence 
of  Mr.  Miller,  superintendent  of  branches  department.       These 

91 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  MoFison.  two  abstracts  showed  the  whole  operations  of  the  Bank  of  that 
class  requiring  to  be  brought  into  the  balance  sheet  for  the  year  ; 
and  the  full  balance  sheet  required  to  be  made  up  from  these. 
[Shown  No.  128.]  That  is  titled  on  the  back  "  Scroll  abstract 
of  accounts."  It  was  prepared  in  the  office.  The  black  ink 
figures  on  it  bring  together  the  two  abstracts  I  have  just  spoken 
to.  They  bring  together  the  whole  operations  of  the  Bank  and 
their  results,  at  the  head  office  and  branches.  As  originally 
prepared  by  me,  the  figures  in  red  ink  were  not  on  No.  128  ;  but 
No.  128  was  not  the  first  scroll.  There  may  have  been  more 
than  one  scroll  before  it.  It  was  the  final  scroll.  The  black 
and  red  ink  figures  were  put  on  No.  1 28  at  the  same  time. 

You  start  with  an  abstract  for  the  head  office  and  an  abstract 
for  the  branches ;  when  you  bring  these  two  together  you  have  a 
new  scroll] — Yes. 

When  you  had  simply  brought  the  two  together  on  the  face 
of  the  sheet,  what  did  you  do  with  that? — Submitted  it  to  the 
Manager. 

When  you  submitted  it  to  the  Manager,  what  was  done  I — There 
was  an  arrangement  made  that  Mr.  Potter,  one  of  the  Directors, 
should  meet  the  Manager  and  go  over  the  separate  items. 

You  are  speaking  of  the  balance  sheet  of  1876? — Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — You  arranged  that  with  the 
Manager  ? — Yes. 

Did  Mr.  Potter  meet  the  Manager? — ^Yes. 

And  yourself? — Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — What  happened  at  the  meeting? — 
No.  128  was  the  result. 

Were  the  red  ink  marks  put  on  at  that  meeting,  or  had  they 
been  put  on  before? — This  [No.  128]  is  the  effect  of  what  was 
done  at  the  meeting,  but  I  cannot  say  that  it  is  the  scroll  that  it 
was  done  on. 

Were  the  red  ink  marks  on  before  the  meeting? — Not  before 
the  meeting. 

The  red  ink  marks  represent  the  result  of  what  was  settled  at 
that  meeting? — Yes. 

Added  to  what  you  had  prepared  ? — Yes. 

The  black  ink  marks  show  what  you  have  prepared  ? — ^Yes. 

And  the  red  shows  what  was  agreed  on  at  the  meeting? — 
Partly  so. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — The  red  ink  marks  are  in  my 
writing. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — Is  the  whole  of  it  in  your  writing  1 — 
Yes,  the  whole  of  it. 

Were  the  alterations  made  on  it  in  red  ink  made  out  of  your 
own  head,  or  upon  instructions  ? — By  instructions. 

Whose  instructions? — Mr.  Potter's  and  the  Manager's. 

92 


Photo.] 


\J.    noi:ihiiiiili. 


Mr.   J.   P.   B.   Robertson, 
Counsel  for  Henry  Inglis. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution, 

Did  these  two  gentlemen  go  over  that  sheet  for  1876  item  by  Wm.  Morison. 
item  ? — Yes. 

Is  that  document,  as  it  stands,  giving  effect  to  the  alterations 
which  you  were  instructed  to  make,  in  accordance  with  the  books 
of  the  Bank  that  were  under  your  chai'ge? — No. 

Was  the  abstract  which  you  formerly  spoke  of  [No.  130]  in 
conformity  with  the  books  of  the  Bank  / — Yes. 

But  the  result  of  the  instructions  you  got  from  Mr.  Potter 
and  Mr.  Stronach  was  to  make  the  balance  sheet  which  you 
framed,  with  red  figures  on  it,  disconform  to  the  books  of  the 
Bank  ?— Yes. 

What  did  you  do  with  the  altered  abstract  after  it  was  adjusted 
with  Mr.  Potter  and  the  Manager? — It  formed  the  annual  report. 
The  annual  report  was  made  out  from  it.  • 

Did  you  prepare  the  abstract  and  send  it  to  the  printer? — I 
prepared  the  annual  report  and  sent  it  to  the  printer.  A  proof 
of  the  report  was  sent  to  the  Directors. 

Was  it  the  practice  that  when  a  final  proof  of  the  balance 
sheet  was  adjusted,  it  was  laid  before  a  meeting  of  the  Directors? 
— I  don't  know  as  to  that. 

Did  Tou  not  attend  the  meeting? — No. 

Did  you  not  attend  for  the  purpose  of  having  the  balance  ledger 
adjusted  and  docqueted? — Yes. 

When  was  that  done,  and  for  what  purpose? — For  the 
purpose  of  going  over  the  books — to  compare  them,  and  see  that 
they  were  the  same  as  the  balance  ledger.  This  took  place 
probably  on  the  Wednesday  or  Thursday  before  the  annual  meet- 
ing day. 

Was  there  any  document  intermediate  between  the  abstract 
No.  128  and  the  abstract  published  to  the  shareholders  in  1876? 
—No. 

How  long  were  Mr.  Potter  and  Mr.  Stronach  and 
you  engaged  in  revising  that  balance  sheet,  resulting 
in  the  red  figures  being  put  on? — Perhaps  an  hour  or  two. 
On  the  left-hand  side  of  No.  128  there  are  entries  S.  F.  &  Co. 
(Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.),  £200,875;  J.  N.  F.  (James  Nicol 
Fleming),  £100,300  ;  and  J.  M.  &  Co.  (James  Morton  <fe  Co.), 
£450,600.  These  were  credit  accounts,  entered  in  that  part 
of  the  abstract  which  contains  advances  on  credit. 

But  you  bring  them  down  and  insert  them  among  what? — 
Government  stocks,  railway  stocks  and  debentures,  and  other 
securities. 

In  the  abstract  for  1876  there  is  an  entry  under  assets,  "  Gov- 
ernment stock.  Exchequer  bills,  railway  and  other  stocks  and 
debentures,  and  balances  in  hands  of  banking  correspondents, 
£2,218,868  13s.  7d."  ;  so  that  the  effect  of  that  change  was  to 
represent  that  a  debt  due  on  credit  account  by  these  firms  to 
the  amount  of  £751,775  was  either  a  Government  stock  or  a 

93 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm  Mopison.  security   on   a   balance  in  the  hands   of   correspondents   of   the 
'Bank'?— Yes. 

By  whose   instigation  were  these   sums  brought  down? — Mr. 
Potter's. 

Was  it  by  his  directions  it  was  done? — Yes. 
Did  he  assign  any  reason  or  justification  for   it? — That   the 
Bank  held  certain  stocks  against  the  debt  of  £751,775. 

By    the    Lord    Justice-Clerk — And   therefore   treating    them 
as  good  assets? — Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — Did  Mr.  Potter  seem  to  understand 
the  different  items  that  they  were  considering? — Apparently  so. 
Did   he    appear    to  be   quite    conversant  with    them? — Quite 
conversant. 

Did  the  books  of  the  Bank  correctly  show  the  operations  of  the 
Bank?— Yes. 

Were  they  in  conformity  with  the  actual  fact? — ^Yes. 
How  were  the  debts  to  the  extent  of  £751,775  represented  or 
stated  in   the   abstract  prepared  by  you.  No.    130? — As  credit 
accounts. 

Which  they  were? — ^Which  they  were — in  the  books. 
In  No.  130  there  is  an  entiy  on  the  right-hand  side, 
"  Deposit  accounts,  £455,444  5s.  lOd.,"  shown  as  due 
by  the  Bank,  and  on  the  other  side  there  is  an  entry  of 
"  Deposit  accounts,  £1346  16s.  6d."  due  to  the  Bank.  These  are 
correctly  stated  in  No.  130.  They  are  not  correctly  stated  m 
the  revised  abstract.  The  £1346  16s.  6d.  only  is  put  in  it. 
The  effect  of  this  was  to  reduce  the  liabilities  by  the  difference 
between  £455,444  5s.  lOd.  and  the  debtor  balance  of 
£1346  16s.  6d.  In  No.  128,  on  the  debtor  side,  under  the  head 
"  Foreign  and  colonial  credits,"  there  is  an  entry  of 
£2,278.173  5s.  lOd.  That  is  the  actual  amount,  but  £973,300 
is  deducted  from  that,  leaving  only  £1,304,873  l7s.  Id. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — It  is  reduced  by  nearly  a  million. 
By  the  Lord  Advocate^ — Shown  No.  39a  [excerpt  from  progres- 
sive ledger,  foreign  and  colonial],  and  asked,  why  was  the  sum 
of   £973,300  deducted  from    the  foreign    and   colonial    credits  1 
Depones — Because  there  was  a  credit  account  to  that  extent. 

Did  you  get  instructions  from  anybody  to  deduct  it  ? — No ; 
it  was  in  the  ledger. 

Why  did  you  put  it  in  the  ledger? — In  June,  1873, 
there  was  an  entry  made  by  the  instructions  of  the  late 
Manager,  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach,  which  appears  in  the  book 
titled  "  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  cash  book,  private.  No.  6," 
extracts  from  which  are  contained  in  No.  2a.  I  made  that 
entry.  It  is  in  the  following  terms  :  — "  Foreign  and  colonial 
credits.  No.  2.  The  following  credits  to  be  retired  as  they 
mature,  and  debited  under  the  respective  accounts  to  '  Credit 
accounts  No.   2,'  against  which  securities  are  now  held  by  the 

94 


Ov 


'?  Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Bank,  and  in  process  of  realisation  and  payment  of  the  proceeds,  Wm.  Horison. 

£973,300."       That  deduction  from  foreign  and  colonial  credits 

was  carried  on  in  the  books  and  in  the  balance-sheets  from  year 

to  year  thei'eafter  down  to  1878  inclusive,  without  any  change 

being  made.      There  was  a  note  written  by  the  late  Manager 

giving  the  particulars   of   that  deduction,   but  I  never  got   the 

particulars. 

By  the  Lord  Justicb-Clerk — Was  it  a  right  deduction? — I 
would  not  like  to  say  so.  I  would  not  like  to  give  an  opinion 
upon  that. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — The  entry  "  Foreign  and  colonial 
credits  "  represents  the  liability  side  of  the  acceptances  sent  out 
by  the  Bank — what  the  customer  was  due  in  respect  of  accep- 
tances granted  to  him  by  the  Bank. 

So  that,  taking  off  £973,300  from  that  amount  simply  repre- 
sented, amongst  other  things,  that  there  were  £973,300  less  of 
the  Bank's  acceptances  afloat  or  in  the  circle  than  was  really  the 
case  ? — Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — The  foreign  and  colonial  credits 
represented  a  sum  of  more  than  two  millions? — Yes. 

Then  in  1873  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach  directed  that  this 
£973,300  should  be  deducted  in  the  books  from  these  debits  to 
the  foreign  and  colonial  customers  ? — Yes. 

That  represented,  I  presume,  on  the  books  so  much  security 
held  by  the  Bank  against  the  two  millions,  and  was  therefore 
deducted  ? — ^Yes. 

Can  you  go  further  and  say  what  the  £973,300  was  composed 
of?— No. 

You  just  took  it  from  the  notandum  of  Mr.  Alexander 
Stronach  ? — Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — Being  shown  the  book  No.  2,  from 
which  the  excerpts  No.  2a  were  taken,  depones — There  are  two 
entries,  one  on  each  side  of  this  book.  There  is  on  the  one 
side  the  entry  I  have  already  read  ;  on  the  other  there  is  the 
following  entiy  : — "  Bills  payable  No.  2.  The  following  amounts 
under  acceptance  at  this  date  to  be  retired  by  the  Bank  under 
special  arrangements  with  the  parties,  of  date  1st  June,  1873, 
against  which  certain  securities  are  now  held  by  the  Bank,  and 
in  process  of  realisation  and  payment  of  proceeds,  £973,300." 
Tlie  date  of  that  is  4th  June,  1873,  and  the  entry  has  been  kept 
up  for  every  successive  year  since  that  date.  I  am  not  aware 
whether  there  has  been  any  realisation  of  securities  held  by  the 
Bank  against  the  bills  ;  but  if  so,  it  has  not  been  taken  off  this 
entry.  The  entry  has  never  been  taken  out  of  the  books  by  any 
other  entry  applicable  to  this  or  any  part  of  it. 

Therefore  the  floating  acceptances  of  the  Bank,  whether  covered 
or  not,  have  been  yearly  understated  to  the  amount  of  £973,300? 
—Yes. 

95 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Morison.  gy  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Unless  there  are  securities  for 
that  amount? — I  don't  know  about  that.  I  cannot  say  that 
there  are  such  securities,  or  that  there  are  not. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — I  had  no  charge  of  the  securities. 

Did  you  feel  comfortable  in  making  that  entry  in  the  books  1 
—No. 

Why  not? — Because  I  had  no*  the  particulars  of  the  entry  in 
my  cash  book.  I  had  no  means  of  knowing  whether  it  was 
a  correct  entry  or  not. 

Had  you  any  written  authority  or  evidence  of  who  had  autho- 
rised you  to  make  it  ? — I  got  a  note  or  slip  from  the  late  Manager 
to  make  the  entry. 

Did  you  speak  to  him  about  it  frequently? — At  the  annual 
balance  I  would  speak  of  it. 

Did  you  ever  speak  about  that  entry  in  going  over 
abstract  D  with  Mr.  Potter  and  Mr.  Robert  Stronach 
in  1876? — They  would  see  it,  and  I  have  no  doubt  I  would 
speak  of  it.  I  recollect  speaking  of  it  to  Mr.  Potter.  I 
recommended  to  Mr.  Stronach  that  it  should  be  taken  out. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — "Why? — Because  there  wei'e 
no  particulars  in  my  cash-book  of  the  entry.  I  had  no  particu- 
lars of  it. 

Was  it  not  because  you  did  not  believe  there  were  these 
securities? — No,  that  was  not  the  reason. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — It  was  an  unvouched  entry  so  far 
as  you  were  concerned? — I  had  a  voucher  for  it,  or  rather  I 
was  aware  that  the  late  Manager  had  a  statement  of  it.  I  have 
seen  it.  It  was  a  memorandum,  not  of  securities,  but  of  the 
entry. 

But  did  you  ever  see  securities  or  anything  of  that  sort  that 
would  have  warranted  you  at  your  own  hand  in  making  such  an 
entry? — No.  When  I  spoke  to  Mr.  Robert  Stronach 
about  having  the  entry  taken  out,  I  think  he  said  it  was  there 
before  he  was  appointed,  and  it  would  be  better  to  leave  it  in  the 
meantime.       That  took  place  in  1876. 

Was  that  the  occasion  when  Mr.  Potter  was  present? — I  could 
not  say  that. 

On  the  creditor  side  of  the  abstract  No.  130  (scroll  abstract  of 
accounts  at  head  office  on  7th  June,  1876),  at  what  sum  are  the 
liabilities  of  the  Bank  under  credit  accounts  stated? — At 
£147,468  16s.  lid.  That  sum  is  altogether  omitted  from  the 
scroll  abstract  No.  128,  the  result  being  to  understate  the 
liabilities  to  that  extent.  I  cannot  tell  why  it  was  left  out.  I 
left  it  out  of  the  statement  in  consequence  of  instructions  given 
to  m©  by  Mr.  Potter  and  the  Manager.  I  have  no  recollection 
whether  they  gave  any  reason  for  leaving  it  out. 

On  the  creditor  side  of  the  abstract  No.  130,  what  amount  is 
there  taken  from   the  books   and   represented   as   due   by   the 

96 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Bank    to    London,    provincial,    and    foreign    correspondents? —  Wm.  Morlson. 

£378,4:81  8ii.  5d. 

Is  that  sum  correctly  transferred  to  the  abstract  No.  128? — 
No.  The  amount  there  is  £364,264  13s.  3d.,  being  a  difference 
of  £14,216  15s.  2d. 

How  is  that  managed/ — The  lesser  amount  is  simply  the 
balance  betwixt  the  different  amounts. 

Was  that,  in  point  of  fact,,  an  under-statement  of  indebtedness 
to  that  amount? — Not  of  indebtedness. 

What  then  ? — Well,  if  you  look  at  it  in  that  light,  it  was. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Does  that  mean  a  balance  due 
to  the  London  and  provincial  correspondents,  or  a  balance  due 
by  them? — The  larger  amount  is  the  balance  due  by  them. 
The  original  sum  was  the  correct  one,  and  therefore  the  last  sum 
is  wrong  to  the  extent  of  £14,216. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — At  the  time  you  were  adjusting  the 
balance  for  1875,  had  you  anything  to  do  with  ascertaining  the 
amount  of  bad  debts .' — I  was  sent  for  by  the  Manager — Mr. 
Potter  was  there — and  I  was  asked  to  make  up  a  statement  of  the 
bad  debts.  I  told  him  it  was  not  for  me  to  make  ujd  a  stale 
of  the  bad  debts,  but  that  I  would  make  up  a  statement  of 
accounts  that  were  not  bearing  interest^ — that  is,  on  which  no 
interest  was  charged.  That  suggestion  was  adopted,  and  I  made 
up  such  a  statement. 

Had  you  any  interview  with  the  Directors  about  that,  or  any 
of  them  ? — I  saw  Mr.  Potter  repeatedly  about  it.  I  went  to  his 
ofl&ce  and  saw  him  there. 

What  was  done  as  the  result  of  that? — 'My  figures  to  the  extent 
of  £250.000  were  adopted. 

How  much  did  you  make  it? — It  was  either  £300,000  or 
£350,000,  but  I  think  it  was  £300,000. 

And  how  did  you  deal  with  them  in  the  abstract? — They  are 
entered  as  assets. 

How  much  was  entered  as  assets? — There  was  a  balance  of  an 
old  bad  and  doubtful  debts  account,  and  that  was  amalgamated 
with  the  £250.000,  making  up  altogether  £300,000,  which  was 
entered  in  my  abstract  under  the  heading  of  "  Suspense  account." 

How  much  of  that  £300,000  was  stated  in  the  abstract  from 
which  the  report  was  made  up  as  bad  and  doubtful  ? — You  will  find 
under  the  heading  of  bad  and  doubtful  debts  £50,000.  The 
difference  of  £250,000  you  will  find  entered  amongst  the  other 
accounts  in  the  abstract  as  good  assets.  That  £250,000  con- 
sisted entirely  of  debts  on  which  no  interest  had  been  paid  ;  I 
could  not  say  exactly  offhand  for  how  long,  but  perhaps  for  five 
or  six  years. 

Did  you  make  it  known  to  Mr.  Potter  and  Mr. 
Stronach  tliat  these  accounts  had  not  borne  interest  for  that 
time? — Yes  ;  they  were  quite  aware  of  it.  The  three  sums  of 
G  97 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.Mopison.  £200,875,  £100,300,  and  £450,600  already  referred  to  as  having 
been  taken  down  from  head  I.  to  head  III.  were  not  taken  out  of 
the  public  books  of  the  Bank  in  1876. 

Did  Mr.  Robert  Stronach,  in  1875,  give  you  directions  with 
regard  to  certain  accounts  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  ? — ^Yes  ;  that 
was  at  2nd  June,  1875. 

What  were  you  directed  to  do  with  regard  to  them? — The 
accounts  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  in  credit  accounts  were  trans- 
ferred to  credit  accounts  No.  3  to  the  extent  of  £761,265  19s.  9d. 
The  effect  of  that  was  to  take  them  out  of  credit  accounts  where 
they  were  seen  by  the  clerks  in  the  cheque  box,  and  put  them 
into  credit  accounts  in  No.  3  ledger,  which  was  kept  by  me,  and 
was  accessible  only  to  the  Manager  and  Directors. 

Why  was  that  transfer  made? — I  presume  to  bring  all  the 
accounts  together. 

Did  no  other  reason  suggest  itself  to  you  at  the  time? — It 
would  have  the  effect  of  keeping  the  accounts  quiete-r. 

What  do  you  mean  by  keeping  the  accounts  quiet  1^ — It  would 
have  the  effect  that  no  person  would  see  them  except  myself, 

And  fewer  people  would  know  of  the  extent  of  the  indebtedness 
to  the  Bank  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  ? — ^Yes. 

That  was  the  amount  in  which  they  were  indebted  at  that 
time,  upon  accounts  kept  in  books  to  which  the  clerks  had  access  ? 
—Yes. 

These  accounts  were  closed,  and  the  accounts  trans- 
ferred to  a  book  which  was  patent  only  to  you  and 
the  Manager? — ^Yes.  They  were  taken  out  by  means  of  a 
cross  entry.  These  accounts  have  since  been  kept  by  me,  and 
they  are  entered  in  the  same  way  yet.  The  balance  sheet  for 
1877  was  prepared  on  the  same  principle  as  the  other,  so  far 
as  making  up  abstracts  went.  [Shown  No.  129,  weekly  balances 
in  general  ledger,  5th  June,  1878.]  That  was  prepared  in  the 
same  way  from  two  abstracts,  and  then  it  was  altered  as  before. 

By  whom  was  it  altered,  or  by  whose  directions,  in  1877? — I 
cannot  recollect  about  1877  very  well. 

But  so  far  as  you  do  recollect  ? — They  were  gone  over  by  the 
Manager,  but  I  have  no  recollection  of  meeting  any  other  person. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — There  are  a  number  of  altera- 
tions. 

Did  you  prepare  it  according  to  the  alterations  of  the  year 
before? — ^I  prepared  it  in  the  usual  way — the  correct  way. 

So  the  same  alterations  would  require  to  be  made  again? 
—Yes. 

And  they  were  made? — ^Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — These  are  shown  partly  in  red  ink 
and  partly  in  pencil  on  this  sheet. 

Do  I  understand  you  to  say  that,  so  far  as  it  is  yours,  it  is 
taken  from  your  abstract,  which  is  correct? — Yes. 

98 


Evidence  for  Prosecution, 

And  that  so  far  as  it  differs  from  those  two  abstracts  which  Wm.  Morison. 
"were  brought  forward  by  you,  it  is  owing  to  the  directions  of 
others  ? — lYes. 

But  you  cannot  say  who  the  others  were  1 — With  the  exception 
of  the  Manager. 

You  cannot  mention  any  other  person  than  the  Manager? — I 
hare  no  recollection  of  that  year.  The  deposit  and  credit 
accounts  were  dealt  with  on  the  same  principle  as  they  had 
been  in  the  year  before. 

Was  the  £973,300  odds  kept  up  again? — There  is  one  of 
the  sheets  from  which  I  can  show  that.  I  refer  to  No.  131. 
[Abstract  of  accounts  at  head  office  on  6th  June,  1877.]  In 
making  up  the  statement  the  £973,300  is  set  aside,  and  certain 
other  sums  are  deducted. 

Instead  of  putting  in  that  £973,000  as  a  cross  entry, 
what  did  you  do  on  both  sides? — There  was— cash  lodged 
in  C/A,  £94,368  Ms.  lid.:  anticipations,  £527,940;  S.,  F. 
&  Co.,  £552,704  4s.  2d.;  J.  N.  F.,  £158,000;  making 
altogether,  £1,333,012  19s.  Id.  "Cash  lodged  in  credit 
^.ccount"  would  represent  renewals  of  bills  given  out  and 
the  cash  paid  in.  "  Anticipations,"  I  understand,  were  bills 
given  out  in  the  same  way — anticipations  of  credit;  that  is 
to  say,  two  sets  of  bills  given  out — bills  upon  which  the  Bank 
were  debtors. 

And  in  anticipation  of  credit  coming  in? — In  anticipation 
of  other  bills  to  the  same  extent  falling  due ;  and  in  order 
to  meet  those  bills  when  they  did  fall  due,  a  second  set  of  bills 
would  be  given  out.  "  S.,  F.  &  Co."  means  Smith,  Fleming 
&  Co.  The  £552,704,  I  presume,  would  be  bills  payable 
that  they  would  get.  "  J.  N.  F.,  £158,000,"  would  represent  bills 
given  out  to  him. 

Was  there  anything  in  your  books  to  indicate  these  entries, 
or  in  any  books  you  had  access  to ;  or  were  they  merely  sug- 
gestions?— There  were  no  entries  made  for  these  alterations. 
They  were  not  made  from  any  entries  or  any  heading  in  the 
books. 

Are  they  purely  fictitious? — There  are  no  entries  for  them. 

Then  are  they  not  fictitious  entirely  ? — So  far  as  I  know.  The 
£1,333,012  19s.  Id.  was  deducted  from  the  amount  of  the  bills 
payable  by  the  Bank — the  Bank's  acceptances.  The  Bank's 
acceptances  that  year  amounted  to  £2,683,348  Os.  2d.,  so  that 
that  took  off  about  one-half.  That  was  what  was  substituted 
in  the  year  1877  for  the  £973,300. 

The  old  £973,000  disappeared,  and  this  new  invention  was 
substituted? — Yes.  In  my  own  abstract  there  is  a  clerical 
error  to  the  effect  of  understating  the  amount  of  bills  payable. 
I  again  prepared  balance  sheets  in  1878  with  a  view  to  the  annual 

99 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Moplson.  public  abstract  as  in  previous  years.  [Shown  No.  124,  abstract 
of  accounts  at  5th  June,  1878.]  That  is  the  result,  after  adjust- 
ment— the  red  ink  draft.  My  own  abstract  was  taken 
correctly  from  the  books.  The  abstract  I  prepared  as  the 
basis  of  No.  124  was  correctly  made  up  from  my  own 
abstract  and  that  furnished  by  Mr.  Miller,  superintendent  of 
branches,  and  was  in  conformity  with  the  books.  Alterations 
were  made  upon  that  abstract  of  1878.  These  are  shown  upon 
the  document  before  me.  They  were  made  by  directions  of  the 
Manager,  Mr.  Robert  Stronach. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — I  made  them. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — 'There  was  no  other  person  concerned 
in  it. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — These  alterations  were  almost 
on  the  same  lines  as  before. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — ^Only  you  have  the  £973,000  back 
again  instead  of  the  sum  in  the  previous  year? — Yes.  A  clean 
copy  of  that  abstract  was  made,  by  instructions  of  Mr.  Stronach, 
after  it  was  red-inked.  He  did  not  say  for  what  purpose  it  was 
wanted.  After  it  was  made,  Mr.  Stewart,  Mr.  Potter,  and  the 
Manager  met  in  the  Manager's  room,  and  went  over  it.  I  was 
present,  but  I  did  not  go  over  it  with  them.  I  was  in  the  room. 
I  do  not  think  the  annual  abstract  issued  to  the  shareholders 
had  been  printed  at  that  time. 

Did  these  three  gentlemen  not  compare  the  clean  document 
with  the  abstract? — They  compared  the  clean  document  with 
the  abstract  published  in  the  previous  year's  report.  [Shown 
No.   125.]      That  is  the  clean  copy  which  was  made. 

In  the  abstract  balance  sheet  issued  to  the  shareholders 
at  5th  June,  1878,  the  first  item  on  the  debtor  side  is  "  Deposits 
at  the  head  offices  and  branches,  and  balances  at  the  credit 
of  banking  correspondents,  £8,102,001  Os.  4d."  That  is  not 
correctly  stated  as  from  the  books  of  the  Company.  It  is 
understated. 

To  what  extent,  and  in  what  particulars? — ^Deposit  accounts,. 
£440,738  lO.s.  9d.  [see  abstract  of  accounts  at  5th  June,  1878]; 
credit   accounts,   £346,336   6s.    9d.      Both   these  were  due  by 
the  Bank. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — In  other  words,  there  were- 
deposits  to  the  extent  of  £440,000  due  by  the  Bank  which  were 
not  entered  in  the  balance  sheet? — Yes. 

Is  that  all  the  deficiency? — No. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — You  had  entered  these  sums  as  part 
of  the  liabilities  of  the  Bank  in  your  abstract? — ^Yes. 

Point  out  on  the  altered  scroll  balance  sheet  how  they  were 
got  rid  of? — Both  sums  are  put  into  a  debtor  column  on  the 
creditor  portion  of  the  state. 

100 


II 

1  I 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

In  fact,  they  were  taken  out  by  a  cross  entry? — Not  by  an  Wm.  Moriion. 
«ntiy. 

The  amount  of  bank  notes  in  circulation  is  stated  in  the 
published  balance  sheet  at  £710,252  ;  was  that  correct? — There 
is  an  under-statement  of  .£89,031. 

The  next  item  in  the  balance  sheet  is  "  Drafts  outstanding 
due,  or  with  a  currency  not  exceeding  twenty-one  days,  and 
drafts  accepted  by  the  Bank  and  its  London  agents  on  account 
of  home  and  foreign  constituents,  £1,488,244  18s.  6d."  ;  is  that 
sum  correct  according  to  the  books? — No. 

To  what  extent  is"  it  incorrect  ? — There  is  the  bills  payable 
credit  account  of  £973,300  deducted. 

That  is  the  old  entry? — Yes;  and  there  is  also  £419,708 
deducted. 

[Shown  No.  39a.]  That  is  an  extract  from  the  foreign  and 
colonial  credits  progressive  ledger  No.   1? — ^Yes. 

What  was  the  true  amount  at  that  date? — £2,881,252  18s.  6d. 

That  item  in  the  published  abstract  was  reduced  by  about 
one-half  ? — Yes. 

These  amounts  are  entered  in  the  scroll  abstract  No.  124? — 
Yes.  In  that  abstract  there  is  a  note  in  red  ink,  "  Amount  of 
bills  on  the  circle,  and  against  which  an  equal  sum  is  at  the 
credit  of  J.  M.  &  Co.  on  D/A."  That  note  is  in  my  handAvriting. 
"  J.  M.  &  Co."  are  James  Morton  &  Co.  I  was  directed  to  make 
that  entry  by  the  Manager.  I  understood  the  note  to  mean 
that  two  sets  of  bills  would  be  out  for  the  same  amount,  and 
that  the  first  set  of  bills  would  be  discounted,  and  the  proceeds 
paid  in  to  the  credit  of  James  Morton  &  Co. 

That  is  what  you  call  anticipation? — Yes. 

What  was  the  course  of  dealing  in  the  case  of  these  anticipa- 
tions ? — I  cannot  speak  personally  as  to  that ;  I  could  only 
speak  from  hearsay.  On  the  creditor  side  of  the  published 
balance  sheet  for  1878  the  first  entry  is,  "  Bills  of  exchange, 
local  and  country  bills,  credit  accounts,  and  other  advances 
upon  security,  £8,484,466  9s.  2d." 

Was  that  sum  fully  and  coiTectly  stated? — No. 

What  was  wrongfully  deducted  from  it? — ^Under  the  head  of 
credit  accounts  there  is  a  sum  of  £680,614.  That  is  written 
-off  upon  the  abstract  in  red  ink. 

Then  there  is  a  sum  of  ?— £346,336  6s.  9d. 

That  is  written  off  credit  accounts,  creditor  balances? — Yes. 

Then  there  is  the  cross  entry?— There  is  first  £440,738 
lOs.  9d. 

That  same  sum  occurred  on  the  other  side  of  the  account, 
but  it  was  written  off  by  being  entered  on  both? — Yes.  Then 
there  is  a  sum  of  £973,300,  which  was  also  a  cross  entry  : 
and  then  £419,708,  also  a  cross  entry.  Then  there  is  a  sum  of 
-£148,888  deducted  from  credit  accounts  No.   3.      These  were 

lOI 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wmt  Mopison.  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.'s  accounts.  They  stood  in  credit  axjcount 
ledgers  Nos.  3  and  4.  The  total  of  their  indebtedness  is  shown 
in  the  entry  opposite,  in  black  figures,  on  the  left  hand,  as 
£891,762  ;  and  that  was  reduced  by  deducting  from  it  that 
Bum  of  £148,888.  These  were  sums  due  by  them  on  credit 
account.  Below  the  last-mentioned  sum  there  is  a  sum  written 
off  (in  red  figures)  of  £297,232.  That  is  deducted  from  the 
sum  (in  black  figures)  of  £512,192  12s.  6d.,  which  was  taken 
from  credit  accounts  No.  4.  That  was  the  balance  due  by 
James  Nicol  Fleming.  All  these  sums  are  deducted  from 
head  I.  on  the  assets  side  of  the  abstract  balance  sheet.  Refer- 
ring next  to  head  III.  in  the  abstract  sheet,  there  is  the  item, 
"  Cash  on  hand,  viz.,  gold  and  silver  coin  and  notes  of  other 
banks  at  head  office  and  branches,  £845,963  Is." 

What  was  stated  by  you  as  at  that  date  as  the  tioie  amount  in 
your  own  figures? — £845,963  Is. 

Was  that  correct  according  to  the  information  from  the 
books  of  the  Bank?^ — With  the  exception  of  the  same  entiy  of 
£89,031,  which  was  on  the  other  side. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Where  in  your  own  abstract,, 
before  it  was  altered,  do  you  find  that  sum  of  £845,963  Is.? — 
Under  head  III. 

The  sum  of  £596,623  6s.  lid.  is  given  there?— Yes;  that  is,, 
at  the  head  office.  Then  you  have  to  add  the  branches,. 
£249,339  14s.  Id. 

And  that  makes  the  £845,963  Is.  ?— Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — Then  there  is  a  deduction  made 
from  that  of  £89,031;  is  that  a  proper  deduction? — ^Well, 
I  consider  it  so.  It  was  Company's  notes  received  at  the 
exchange  on  the  following  morning  before  the  commencement 
of  business.  I  did  not  receive  that  information  until  after  I 
had  made  up  my  abstract.  If  I  had  received  it  the  night 
before,  I  would  have  given  effect  to  it  then. 

Then  there  is  still  an  over-statement,  according  to  your 
statement,  of  £200,000  as  to  the  gold ;  is  that  the  sum  which 
is  interlined  in  red  ink  in  the  scroll  abstract? — ^Yes. 

There  is  a  cross  in  red  ink  opposite  to  it,  and  there  is  also 
a  cross  opposite  the  sum  of  £480,614  a  short  way  below? — ^Yes. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  that? — It  is  to  connect  these  two 
sums,  which  together  make  up  the  sum  of  £680,614. 

Have  these  two  sums  any  connection  with  the  other  sum  of 
£680,614  deducted  from  credit  account  balances  No.  1? — ^Yes. 

So  that  the  operation  you  performed  there  was  to  bring  down 
£680,614  which  was  due  upon  credit  accounts,  and  to  enter 
£200,000  of  it  as  gold  in  the  coffers  of  the  Bank  .'—Yes. 

The  remaining  £480,614  is  represented  in  the  abstract  issued 
to  the  shareholders  as  Goveniment  stocks,  Exchequer  bills,  rail- 

102 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


way  and  other  stocks  and  debentures  in  the  hands  of  the  Bank  Wm.  Morison. 
and  coiTBspondents  / — Yes. 

These  sums  of  £200,000  in  gold,  £480,614,  £148,888,  and 
£297,262  are  all  included  in  the  third  item  of  the  balance 
sheet  ? — Yes. 

Was  that  a  correct  statement  in  the  published  balance  sheet  ?— 
So  far  as  regards  the  deductions  from  the  credit  accounts,  if  thej 
held  absolutely   the   stocks   that  represented  these   amounts,   I 
do  not  see  much  wrong  in  it. 

Would  it  not  have  been  more  correct,  even  if  they  held 
securities,  to  state  the  amount  that  was  due  to  them  upon  open 
account,  and  then  to  state  also  the  securities  held? — If  they 
had  made  an  entiy  through  the  books,  I  would  have  considered 
it  quite  right  if  they  had  done  so. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — If  they  held  sufficient  security, 
you  think  there  is  not  much  wrong  in  the  entry? — No. 

What  about  the  £200,000  in  gold? — I  cannot  say  anything 
about  that ;  I  cannot  justify  that. 

What  did  it  represent — anything? — Yes,  the  balance  of  the 
£600,000. 

But  was  there  any  balance ;  I  mean,  did  it  represent  any  gold 
and  silver  I — Not  that  I  know  of. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — Just  take  this  case.  Suppose  a  bank 
to  have  £100,000  due  to  them  upon  open  account,  and  that 
they"  hold  securities  against  it,  do  you  think  it  is  right,  instead 
of  stating  that  there  is  a  '"lebt  of  £100,000  due  to  them,  and 
stating  the  securities  covering  it,  that  they  should  state  that 
they  have  an  asset  of  the  value  of  £100,000  without  disclosing 
the  debt  or  the  security  ? — It  would  be  the  coiTect  way  to  disclose 
both,  but  it  is  only  figures  that  go  into  the  report. 

I  suppose  that,  even  according  to  your  view,  if  assets  to  that 
full  value  were  not  held,  that  was  a  false  entry? — Yes;  but,  as 
I  said  yesterday,  I  had  no  means  of  knowing  personally  whether 
such  securities  were  held  or  not. 

Was  any  assurance  given  to  you  when  you  got  directions  to 
make  these  entries  that  such  securities  were  held? — From  the 
conversation  I  understood  so. 

But  what  I  want  to  know  is  whether  you  were  simply  directed 
to  do  this,  and  inferred  from  what  you  were  told  that  there 
were  securities,  or  were  you  distinctly  given  to  understand 
that  such  things  existed? — I  was  never  told  that  such  things 
existed ;   I  was  told  to  make  the  alteration. 

And  you  fancied  that  it  was  an  honest  transaction,  at  least 
that  it  had  some  degree  of  honesty  about  it,  and  inferred  that 
there  were  securities? — Exactly  so.  The  alterations  which  I 
made  upon  these  three  abstracts  prepared  by  me  in  1876,  1877, 
and  1878  were  all  veiy  much  of  the  same  class. 

Did  you  receive  any  more  explanations  on  any  one  of  those 

103 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

iTm.  Morison.  occasions  than  on  another? — I  remember  the  Manager  stating 
to  me  that  he  hoped  this  would  be  the  last  time  that  he  would 
require  to  do  such  a  thing.  It  was  in  the  year  1878  that  he 
said  so,  and,  I  presume,  about  the  time  we  were  making  up 
the  balance  sheet.  I  have  no  recollection  of  anything  of  that 
sort  being  said  to  me  by  the  Manager  or  Mr.  Potter  in  1876. 
With  regard  to  the  clean  copy  of  the  abstract  of  1878,  of  which 
I  spoke  in  my  evidence  yesterday,  it  is  not  so  easy  on  that  copy 
to  trace  the  under-statements  and  over-statements  as  in  the  red 
ink  copy  before  me. 

Whose  duty  was  it  to  convert  that  clean  copy  of  the  document 
before  you  into  the  abstract  that  was  published  to  the  share- 
holders, and  who  did  it? — ^I  would  take  the  figures  after  they 
were  examined  by  the  Directors  and  would  get  them  printed ; 
I  mean  get  the  report  printed.  I  see  the  entries  of  "  Reserve 
gold  in  cash  chest,"  and  "  Gold  and  silver  coin  on  hand  in  the 
cash  chest,"  in  No.  125.  The  reserve  gold  in  cash  chest, 
£200,000,  was  part  of  the  sum  due  by  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co., 
from  the  credit  ledger. 

Why  do  you  call  it  reserve  gold? — The  Bank  is  bound  to  hold 
a  certain  quantity  of  gold  against  its  issue.  That  is  what  is 
meant  by  reserve  gold. 

Does  this  mean  that  £200,000  was  held  against  issue,  and 
that  "  gold  and  silver  on  hand  "  was  held  for  other  purposes  ? — 
No ;  they  are  both  held  against  the  issue. 

But  what  is  the  difference  between  having  gold  on  hand  and 
having  reserve  gold? — I  do  not  think  there  is  anything  in  the 
phrase  at  all. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — I  had  no  such  heading  as 
"  Reserve  gold  "  in  the  original  abstract  I  prepared. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — At  the  foot  of  the  left-hand  page  of 
No.  124,  on  the  debtor  side,  the  three  sums  of  £480,614, 
£148,888,  and  £297,262,  are  entered  as  balances  brought  down 
from  credit  accounts.  They  are  not  represented  as  Government 
stocks  or  anything  else — simply  as  credit  account  No.  1  balance, 
and  so  on. 

By  whose  authority  were  these  represented  in  the  abstract 
as  being  Government  stocks,  or  something  of  that  kind? — It 
was  a  simple  continuation  of  the  arrangement  made  in  1876. 

Who  made  the  arrangement  in  1876,  that  although  these 
appeared  as  credit  balances  in  the  scroll  balance,  they  were  to 
be  represented  as  Government  stocks  or  debentures,  or  some- 
thing of  that  kind  in  the  abstract? — Mr.  Potter  and  Mr. 
Robert  Stronach,  the  Manager. 

And  in  transferring  them  and  calling  them  Government  stocks, 

debentures,  or  something  else,  you  were  merely  following  out  in 

1877   and   1878  the  instructions  you  had   got  in   1876?— Yes. 

When  the  clean  copy,  without  the  red  ink  marks,  was  submitted 

104 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

to  the  Manager,  Mr.  Stewart,  and  Mr.  Potter,  I  was  in  the  room  wm.  Morison. 
to  give  any  information  wanted. 

Were  you  asked  to  give  information  about  anything? — The 
only  information  I  was  asked  for  was  to  compare  the  1877 
rejDort  with  the  1878  one. 

Which  report? — I  mean  the  annual  balance  sheet.  I  was 
asked  to  do  so,  I  presiune,  in  order  to  compare  the  different 
sums,   the  one  year  with  the   other. 

Simply  for  the  purpose,  I  suppose,  of  stating  what  was  the 
difference  in  the  trading  of  the  Bank  between  these  two  years? 
— Yes.  I  was  not  asked  to  explain  any  entiy  in  this  account, 
merely  to  compare  results.  The  time  occupied  in  that 
examination  by  the  Manager  and  those  two  Directors  was  perhaps 
an  hour — not  so  much. 

Since  you  became  the  accountant  of  the  Bank,  has  the  Bank 
been  in  the  habit  of  dealing  in  its  own  stock? — Yes.  The  entry 
-of  gold  in  the  abstract  which  I  prepared  was  taken  from  the 
cashier's  ledger.  [Shown  No.  95.]  I  did  not  take  it  from 
there ;  I  would  get  the  amount  from  the  cashier.  There  is  a 
slip  of  paper  in  No.  95,  which  states  the  amount  of  gold  at 
5th  June,  1878,  as  £338,500.  It  was  the  duty  of  the  Directors 
to  count  the  gold  in  the  safe  for  the  annual  balance.  That 
entry  is  initialed  by  a  Director.  It  was  usual  that  this  should 
be  done.  I  think  that  entry  bears  Mr.  Stewart's  initials,  but 
1  am  not  confident.       I  cannot  say  what  the  initials  are. 

But  do  vou  know  that  they  are  initials? — They  are  checked 
off. 

B}-  Mr.  Balfour — The  only  balance  signed  by  the  Directors 
was  the  balance  in  the  balance  ledger.  That  balance  in  the 
balance  ledger  was  brought  out  by  taking  the  sum  of  all  the 
separate  heads  of  accounts  appearing  at  the  head  office  and 
branches. 

All  the  separate  accounts  appearing  at  the  head  office  had  their 
"balances  brought  into  the  balance  ledger? — ^Yes. 

And  as  regards  the  branches,  the  balance  due  by  or  to  the 
Bank  upon  each  branch  was  brought  in  separately? — As  a 
branch,  yes. 

The  distinction  is  this,  is  it  not,  that  in  the  case  of  the  head 
office  you  had  the  balances  of  the  separate  heads  of  account; 
in  regard  to  the  branches  you  had  just  the  aggregate  balance 
of  the  branches? — Yes. 

And  the  sum  total  appearing  on  each  side  of  the  balance 
ledger  was  just  the  addition  of  these  different  items? — Yes. 

And  the  balance  ledger  was  the  same  in  principle  in  each  of 
the  years? — Yes. 

There  were  a  large  number  of  separate  heads  of  accounts  kept 
in  the  head  office? — Yes. 

105 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Mopison.  You  did  not  bring  in  the  balances  from  the  individual 
accounts,  but  only  from  the  classes? — From  the  general  accounts. 

Look  at  the  balance  ledger  for  1878  (12a)  ;  there  appear  to 
be  about  sixty  separate  heads  on  the  left-hand  of  the  debtor 
side? — About  that. 

Besides  that,  you  have  on  the  left-hand  side  also  five  branches^ 
Dumfries,  Dundee,  etc.,  which  appear  to  have  been  debtors  at 
that  time? — Debtors  to  the  head  office. 

On  the  other  side  you  have  first  on  the  creditor  side  some- 
where about  thirty-eight  heads  before  you  come  to  the  branches  ? 
—Yes. 

Then  you  have  balances  brought  in  from  the  branches :  you 
had  about  133  branches? — ^Yes. 

What  was  signed  by  the  Directors  was  just  the  addition  of 
these  two  sides? — Yes. 

Take  an  example :  the  second  entry  on  the  creditor  side  of 
the  balance  is  notes  issued,  £7,864,500? — Yes. 

That  was  the  summation  taken  from  the  book  applicable  to 
notes,  of  all  the  notes  that  had  been  issued? — It  was  taken  from 
the  general  ledger,  which  would  correspond  with  that  book. 

You  took  it  directly  from  the  general  ledger,  and  indirectly 
from  the  book  where  it  was  entered? — Yes.  This  referred  to 
all  the  notes  that  had  been  issued  from  the  beginning  of  the 
Bank.  On  the  debtor  side  there  is  an  entry  of  notes  burned, 
£5,700,710.  These  were  burned  when  worn  out.  The  difference 
between  the  £7,800,000  odds  and  the  £5,700,000  odds  was  the 
actual  number  of  notes  in  existence,  whether  in  actual  use  at 
the  time  or  not. 

That  £5,000,000  swelled  the  total  sum  at  the  end  of  each 
side  of  that  account  ? — Yes,  it  was  summed  in. 

Therefore,  though  that  was  a  cross  entry,  it  swelled  the  total 
on  each  side? — Yes.     The  total  on  each  side  is  £16,189,231. 

There  are  upwards  of  two  millions  of  notes  shown  to  be  in 
existence  ? — Yes. 

Some  of  these  might  be  in  the  coffers  of  the  Bank,  either 
at  the  head  office  or  branches? — Yes. 

But  if  you  wished  to  show  the  shareholders  or  the  public  the 
amount  of  notes  that  were  out,  you  would  require  to  make  a 
further  deduction  for  those  from  the  two  millions? — Yes. 

I  suppose  it  would  have  been  perfectly  useless  and  misleading 
to  bring  into  the  abstract  balance  sheet  such  entries  as  these 
cross  entries  applicable  to  burned  notes? — Quite  so. 

There  may  be  other  instances  of  the  same  kind  of  thing  in 
the  balance  ledger? — There  may;  I  don't  know. 

I  suppose  that  was  quite  a  correct  kind  of  balance  for  the 
purposes  for  which  it  was  made,  of  showing  the  actual  results 
of  balances  standing  in  the  books? — Yes. 

If  you  wished  to  give  information  to  the  shareholders  or  the 
io6 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

public,  first  deducting  the  notes  burned  and  no  longer  in  use,  Wm.  Morlson. 
and  then  the  notes  which  were  not  actually  out,  but  which  were 
in  the  coffers  at  the  head  office  or  branches,  the  difference  would 
be  what  ought  to  go  into  an  abstract? — Yes. 

And  accordingly  the  amounts  which  we  see  in  any  of  the 
published  abstracts  are  very  much  smaller? — Yes. 

Being  what  were  the  notes  out? — -What  were  in  the  hands  of 
the  public. 

Deducting  those  burned  or  in  the  hands  of  the  Bank  ? — Yes. 

Still,  talking  of  the  balance  ledger,  look  on  the  creditor  side 
to  the  heading  of  deposit  accounts,  eight  or  ten  entries  down ;  do 
you  see  the  entry  "Deposit  accounts,  £33,959  1-is.  8d."? — ^Yes. 

Is  that  entry  the  balance  which  is  brought  out  on  the  deposit 
account,  after  crossing  the  different  entries  on  the  two  sides  of 
that  account? — Quite  so. 

So  that  this  balance  ledger,  from  its  frame  and  the  scheme 
on  which  it  is  made  up,  does  not  profess  to  show  the  details 
on  the  two  sides,  but  merely  to  bring  in  a  balance  ? — Simply  the 
balance  found  in  the  ledger. 

You  see  credit  accounts  No.  1  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  same 
sheet,  £2,009,072  ?— Yes. 

Is  that  also  a  balance  arrived  at  by  crossing  the  two  sides  of 
credit  account  No.  1  ? — Yes ;  a  balance  found  in  the  general 
ledger. 

It  does  not  profess  to  show,  and  does  not  show,  the  aggregates 
of  the  two  sides,  but  merely  the  balance  brought  out  by  deduct- 
ing the  one  from  the  other? — Yes. 

When  these  different  balances  had  thus  been  brought  into 
the  balance  ledger,  they  were  presented  to  the  Directors? — Yes. 

Assembled  at  a  meeting? — Yes. 

And  was  the  manner  in  which  they  were  treated,  by  an  official 
of  the  Bank — I  think  yourself — going  with  the  weekly  balance 
book,  so  that  they  might  check  the  one  against  the  other? — Yes. 

You  had  a  weekly  balance  book,  one  applicable  to  the  head 
office,  another  to  the  branches,  and  another  to  correspondents? 
—Yes. 

And  the  Directors  got  the  balance  ledger  placed  before  them, 
did  they  not,  and  you  read  off  from  these  balance  books  the 
items  which  appear  in  it? — Yes. 

The  Director  having  his  eye  on  the  balance  ledger,  and  you 
reading  off  from  these  balance  books? — Yes. 

That  was  the  way  in  which  the  balance  ledger  was  checked? 
— Yes. 

All  you  read  off  in  such  cases  as  I  gave  you  was,  of  course,  the 
balance? — Of  course  the  balance. 

Checking  by  that  method,  the  Directors  did  not  see,  and, 
indeed,  had  not  the  means  of  seeing,  the  details,  but  just  the 
balances? — Simply  balances. 

107 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Mopison.       Take  as  an  instance  the  weekly  balance  oi  the  general  ledger 
'  of  June,  1878.     [Shown  No.  129a.]     Is  that  the  weekly  balance 
applicable  to  the  head  office,  from  which  you  read  oS  the  corre- 
sponding entries  to  the  Directors  when  they  checked  the  balance 
of  June,  1878?— Yes. 

That  is  the  way  that  the  balance  ledger  was  checked,  by  the 
weekly  balance  applicable  to  the  last  week  referring  to  the  head 
office  being  taken? — Yes. 

And  the  branches? — Yes;  it  is  the  head  office  balances  with 
reference  to  branches. 

But  they  were  separate  accounts? — Yes. 

The  head  office  account  was  one  and  the  branches  another? — 
I  see  the  item  about  half-way  down  the  left-hand  page  (129a), 
"  Foreign  and  colonial  credits,"  and  the  sum  £2,881,252  odds. 
That  is  a  debtor  entry. 

Against  that,  under  the  creditor  column,  you  have  the  sum 
of  £973,-300?— Yes. 

And  you  bring  out  as  the  balance  of  those  two,  deducting  the 
latter  from  the  former,  £1,907,952?— Yes. 

Then,  looking  to  the  balance  ledger,  the  entry  under  foreign 
and  colonial  credits  is  the  balance  of  £1,907,952? — Yes. 

That  was  the  amount  you  read  oflf  when  the  balance  ledger 
was  under  the  eyes  of  the  Directors? — Yes. 

So  that  when  the  balance  ledger  was  under  their  eyes  you 
did  not  read  off  the  £2,881,000,  or  the  thing  you  deducted 
from  it?— No;  only  the  £1,907,000. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — I  read  nothing  but  the 
£1,907,000. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — The  balance  ledger  having  been  checked 
in  that  way,  it  was  signed  by  the  Directors.  I  did  not  sign  it, 
but  I  had  read  off  the  different  items  in  the  way  I  have 
explained.  The  docquet  which  the  Directors  signed  was  a 
docquet  certifying  that  the  whole  is  correctly  stated,  and  they 
do  hereby  approve  and  confirm  the  same,  being  satisfied  that 
the  whole  is  in  accordance  w^ith  the  Bank's  books. 

And  it  was  in  accordance  with  the  Bank's  books,  although 
what  it  brought  in  were  balances  in  such  accounts  as  I  have  put 
to  you,  and  not  the  aggregates  of  the  two  sides? — Yes.  The 
balance  ledger  was  the  only  thing  the  Directors  signed  that  I  am 
aware  of,  or  that  they  examined  at  that  time. 

The  abstract  of  accounts  which  was  to  be  put  before  the 
shareholders  was,  I  suppose,  intended  to  show  the  state  of  the 
Bank's  business  as  a  going  business? — Yes. 

That  was  your  understanding  of  its  object  ? — Yes. 
I  suppose  it  was  not  intended  to  show  obsolete  entries,  like 
those  five  millions  of  burned  notes,   or  anything  like  that? — I 
should  think  not. 

Was   the   abstract  for   the   shareholders    prepared   from    the 
io8 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

weekly   states — froin   the   states   apiDlicable    to   the   head   office,  Wm.  Morison. 
the  branches,  and  the  correspondents? — Yes. 

Apparently  to  some  extent  that  abstract,  from  its  purpose, 
was  upon  a  different  principle  from  the  balance  signed  by  the 
Directors  ? — ^Yes. 

And  necessarily  so  1 — Necessarily  so. 

It  did  not  profess  to  be  an  abstract  of  what  was  in  the  balance 
ledger? — It  corresponded  with  the  balance  ledger. 
In  result? — ^Yes,  in  result. 

But  it  contained  in  some  cases,  did  it  not,  the  totals  of  the 
entries  in  the  accounts  instead  of  containing  merely  balances 
as  they  appear  in  the  balance  ledger? — ^Yes. 

In  some  cases  it  contained  balances? — In  certain  cases  it  did. 

But  where  it  contained,  instead  of  balances  as  they  were  in 
the  balance  ledger,  the  aggregates  of  the  two  sides,  it  necessarily 
was  on  a  different  principle  from  the  balance  ledger? — Yes. 

And  properly  so  for  its  purpose? — Properly  so,  I  think. 

Which  was  to  give  information  to  the  shareholders  of  the  Bank 
as  a  going  concern? — ^Yes. 

[Shown  No.  124:A,  abstract  of  accounts  at  5th  June,  1878.] 
Were  all  the  figures  that  appear  in  black  ink  upon  that  balance 
written  by  you  before  you  say  you  took  it  to  the  Manager? — 
Yes. 

All  of  them?— All  of  them. 

Nothing  that  is  in  red  ink  was  put  on  before  you  took  it  to 
the  Manager,  you  say? — This  is  not  the  first  sheet  that  I  pre- 
sented to  the  Manager. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — This  is  the  balance  sheet  of  1878. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — What  I  want  to  know  with  regard  to  No. 
124a  is — was  everything  in  black  ink  put  on  by  you  before  you 
took  it  to  the  Manager,  and  was  everything  that  appears  in  red 
ink  put  on  after,  or  at  the  meeting? — This  is  not  the  sheet  that 
I  presented  to  the  Manager ;  it  may  or  it  may  not  be.  I  may 
have  made  up  five  or  six  before  I  was  done  with  it. 

Is  it  or  is  it  not  the  sheet  you  laid  before  the  Manager? — 
I  could  not  say. 

Have  you  no  idea? — No. 

I  must  really  ask  you  to  try  and  recollect  this ;  it  is  very 
rital.  Is  this — which  I  understood  you  in  your  evidence  to 
represent  as  altered  at  a  meeting  with  the  Manager — is  it  or  is 
it  not  the  sheet  you  had  with  you  before  the  Manager? — I  could 
not  say. 

Do  you  think  it  was  or  it  was  not? — It  is  very  probable  it 
was. 

But  only  probable? — There  might  have  been  four  or  five 
written  out  for  all  that  I  recollect. 

I  don't  want  to  know  how  many  were  written  out;  I  want 

109 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Morison.  to  know  whether  that  is  the  sheet  you  had  before  the  Manager, 
or  is  it  not? — I  could  not  say. 

Is  it  so  long  ago  that  you  have  forgotten  ? — I  don't  recollect. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — You  said  before  that  these  altera- 
tions were  made  by  the  directions  of  the  Manager;  was  that 
so?— Yes. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — Then,  if  these  alterations  and  deletions  were 
made  at  that  meeting,  this  must  have  been  the  sheet  that  you 
had  before   the  Manager? — That   is   the  effect  of  the  meeting. 

But  I  want  to  know  were  they  made  at  the  meeting  or  not  ? — 
Do  you  mean  did  T  put  these  red  ink  figures  in  when  I  was 
along  with  the  Manager? 

I  want  you  to  tell  me,  if  you  can  recollect,  whether  that  is 
the  paper  that  you  had  before  the  Manager  or  not? — I  cannot 
bring  it  to  my  memory.  Would  you  show  me  the  original? 
[Shown  No.  124.] 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — You  prepared  that  abstract  in 
1878,  on  the  same  principles  as  that  which  you  prepared  in 
1876?— Yes. 

And  it  was  again  altered  in  red  ink  figures,  on  the  same 
lines,  as  you  expressed  it  yesterday? — Yes. 

Had  you  any  meeting  for  the  purpose  of  going  over  that 
abstract  before  it  was  altered? — Several  meetings — often. 

With  whom? — With  the  Manager. 

Was  the  alteration  made  before  the  first  of  these  meetings, 
or  afterwards? — After  the  meetings. 

Were  they  all  made  at  the  same  time? — T  should  think  not. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — Then  do  you  mean  to  say  that,  with  regard 
to  this  important  matter,  which  happened  in  June  of  last  year, 
you  cannot  say  whether  that  (No.  124)  is  the  paper  you  had 
before  the  Manager  or  not? — No;  I  cannot  say. 

Have  you  any  recollection  of  putting  away  any  other  paper 
that  was  before  the  Manager  in  1878? — No. 

I  do  not  mean  putting  away  in  the  sense  of  wilfully  destroy- 
ing; but  have  you  any  recollection  of  laying  any  other  paper 
before  him  which  was  not  preserved  ? — No ;  I  have  no  recollec- 
tion of  it ;  but  I  might  have  done  it. 

Do  you  not  think,  when  you  look  at  that  paper,  and  see  that 
a  great  many  of  the  black  ink  entries  are  scored  out,  and  red 
ink  entries  substituted,  that  that  must  have  been  the  paper  that 
you  had  before  the  Manager? — I  don't  see  it. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — It  must  have  been;  you  would 
never  think  of  making  a  new  copy  of  your  black  ink  original 
abstract  after  the  red  ink  alterations  were  made?— But  there 
might  have  been  two  or  three  different  sheets  before  all  these 
alterations  were  made.  These  (showing  on  paper)  might  have 
been  put  in  after  these  red  ink  figures  on  the  same  line. 

Of  course  they  might,  have  been  put  in  after,  but  that  is  not 
the  question.  You  made  up  an  abstract  of  the  Company's 
no 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

affairs ;  did  you  make  more  than  one  for  the  Manager  before  Wm.  Morison. 
it  was  altered? — No;  one. 

Then,  where  is  that  one? — I  have  not  got  it. 

Just  consider  for  a  moment.  Have  you  any  doubt  that  that 
of  which  the  lithograph  is  a  copy  is  your  original  abstract? — 
I  have  no  doubt  that  this  abstract  was  before  the  Manager, 
but  whether  that  was  the  first  one,  or  the  fifth,  or  the  sixth, 
I  cannot  tell  you.     But  that  one  would  be  before  him. 

You  did  not  make  more  than  one,  did  you? — I  may  have  made 
half  a  dozen  ;  I  don't  recollect. 

But  did  you  make  more  than  one  identical  copy  of  your 
original  abstract  ? — Yes. 

For  what  purpose? — Because  there  might  have  been  altera- 
tions going  on. 

But  an  unaltered  copy  is  what  you  were  asked  about.  The 
question  is  whether  that  is  the  abstract  that  you  laid  before 
tihe  Manager.  Do  you  mean  to  say  you  made  various  copies 
of  the  same  abstract? — I  made  various  copies  of  the  abstract 
with  the  alterations. 

That  is  not  the  question.  The  question  is  whether  you  made 
more  than  one  copy  of  your  original  abstract  unaltered? — I 
cannot  answer  that. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — Are  you  not  satisfied  that  if  there  were 
any  alterations  on  any  previous  scrolls  to  this,  you  would  give 
effect  to  them  in  black  ink  when  you  wrote  out  this? — No. 

Then  it  comes  to  this,  you  cannot  say  whether  that  (No.  124) 
is  the  document  or  not? — No.     It  is  one  of  them. 

Can  you  tell  me  now,  were  all  the  figures  that  are  in  black 
ink  upon  that  paper  written  upon  it  by  you  before  you  took  it 
to  the  Manager? — Yes. 

You  are  quite  sure  of  that? — Perfectly. 

With  reference  to  the  first  particular  in  connection  with  the 
balance  sheet  of  1878,  mentioned  on  page  10  of  the  indict- 
ment, amounting  to  £941,284  13s.  5d.,  is  that  sum  made  up 
of  the  following  sums: — First,  the  sum  of  £440,738  10s.  9d., 
entered  in  red  ink  in  the  debtor  column  on  the  right-hand  page 
of  the  abstract  [see  abstract  for  1876] ;  second,  the  sum  of 
£346,336  6s.  9d.,  entered  in  red  ink  immediately  below 
that,  these  two  sums  added  together  amounting  to  £787,074 
17s.  6d. ;  third,  the  sum  of  £154,090  3s.  lid.,  entered  in  red  ink 
opposite  "  Cross  accounts  "  in  the  middle  of  the  page ;  and  a 
further  sum  of  £119  12s.  which  does  not  appear  there? — Yes. 

What  does  the  sum  of  £440,738  consist  of? — Deposit  accounts, 
debtor  balances. 

What  is  the  £346,336? — Credit  accounts,  creditor  balances. 

I  suppose  the  debtor  balances  on  deposit  accounts  are  over- 
drafts— that  is,  sums  due  to  the  Bank  by  depositors  on  current 
account  who  have  overdrawn  ? — Yes. 

Ill 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Morlson.  Accordingly  the  £787,074  is  the  addition  of  overdrawn 
accounts  of  these  two  classes — the  deposit  accounts  and  the 
creditor  balances ?— Yes.  The  £787,074  is  the  sum  of  these 
two  which  I  have  explained. 

Let  there  be  no  mistake.  What  is  the  £440,000  ?— That  is  in 
the  debtor  column ;  these  are  deposit  accounts— debtor  balances. 
Debtor  balances  are  overdrafts  on  current  accounts. 

What  is  the  £154,000? — Cross  accounts  at  Edinburgh 
branches,  £148,939  18s.  lid.  In  the  business  of  the  Bank  we 
have  instances  of  the  same  customers  having  different  accounts 
with  the  Bank.  For  example,  coalmasters,  who  have  businesses  in 
different  places,  or  companies,  have  sometimes  different  accounts 
in  the  head  office.  Where  that  is  the  case,  the  Bank  is  in  the 
way  of  crossing  these  respective  accounts  and  bringing  forward 
only  the  balance.  That  is  when  the  same  man  is  both  debtor 
and  creditor.  It  would  be  idle  to  bring  down  the  particulars  of  a 
man's  account  in  two  separate  columns,  and  so  we  bring  down 
his  balance  in  a  slump. 

Does  that  £787,000  contain  a  large  number  of  cross  entries 
of  that  kind? — Yes,  I  would  say  so.  In  1878,  I  would  say,  about 
£300,000  of  that  sum  consisted  of  proper  cross  accounts  in 
the  head  office  alone. 

Then  was  it  perfectly  proper,  in  dealing  with  that  item  of 
the  account,  to  cross  at  all  events  the  accounts  where  the  same 
person  was  debtor  and  creditor? — ^Yes. 

And  it  would  be  absurd  to  do  anything  else? — I  would  say  so. 

You  have  crossed  the  whole  of  them  here? — Yes. 

Why  did  you  cross  the  whole,  and  not  limit  that  to  about 
£300,000,  which  you  think  was  at  the  head  office,  instead  of 
the  £440,000? — The  crossing  here  has  the  effect  of  simply 
leaving  the  balance  in  the  general  ledger  where  it  was,  and 
takes  the  balance  of  a  deposit  ledger. 

There  is  nothing  wrong  in  that,  is  there? — So  far  as  regards 
assets  and  liabilities,  I  should  say  it  was. 

As  regards  the  £300,000,  if  the  man  owes  money  on  one 
account  to  you,  and  you  owe  him  money  on  the  other,  is  the 
natural  and  proper  thing  to  cross  it? — So  far  as  the  cross 
accounts  are  concerned. 

And  there  is  about  £300,000  in  the  head  office  alone? — Yes. 

In  so  far  as  that  consists  of  cross  accounts,  it  is  all  right? — 
I  should  say  so. 

You  cannot  see  anything  to  be  said  against  it? — Nothing.  As 
regards  the  £154,000,  that  is  out  of  my  personal  knowledge, 
with  the  exception  of  £5000  at  the  Glasgow  West  End  branch, 
which  I  happen  to  know  about. 

But  the  £148,939  was  given  to  you  as  proper  cross  accounts 
by  the  Edinburgh  officials? — By  Mr.  Miller,  superintendent  of 
branches.     He  gave  me  that  as  proper  cross  accounts.     I  know 

112 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

that  the  West  End  branch  had  cross  accounts  to  the  amount  of  Wm.  Mopison. 

£5150.  ^    ^     ^. 

Then,  was  it  perfectly  right  that  those  cross  accounts  to  the 
amount' of  £154,090  should  be  crossed  as  they  are  here?— That 

is  my  opinion. 

And  if  you  add  that  to  the  sum  of  about  £300,000  of  crosses 
at  the  head  office,  that  would  give  you  about  £454,000  odds  of 
properly  crossed  accounts? — Yes. 

And,  so  far  as  you  can  see,  there  is  no  objection  to  the 
balance  sheet,  so  far  as  that  is  concerned  ?— Not  as  regards  the 
cross  accounts. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Do  you  mean  that  to  that 
extent  the  red  ink  alterations  are  a  proper  rectification  of  your 
original  account  ? — Yes. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — With  regard  to  the  second  particular  on 
page  10  of  the  indictment,  that  "the  amount  of  bank  notes  in 
circulation  under  article  two  on  the  debtor  side  was  understated 
to  the  extent  of  £89,031  or  thereby,"  and,  looking  again  to  the 
abstract  balance,  that  sum  of  £89,000  odds  is  made  up  of  two 
sums,  one  of  £41,085,  and  the  other  of  £47,946,  which  appear 
on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  abstract  in  pencil,  and  on  the  right- 
hand  side  in  red  ink.  This  balance  sheet  professes  to  show 
the  balance  of  gold  and  silver  coin,  notes  of  other  banks  on 
hand,  and  also  your  own  circulation? — Yes.  In  the  course  of 
banking  we  come  to  be  possessed  of  the  notes  of  other  banks, 
and  at  regular  intervals  we  exchange  these  for  our  own  notes. 

Was  that  done,  at  the  time  this  balance  was  prepared,  between 
business  closing  on  Wednesday,  5th  June,  and  business  beginning 
on  Thursday,  6th  June? — It  would  be. 

About  nine  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  6th? — Yes. 

Then  is  it  the  fact  that  before  business  hours  on  the  6th, 
though  after  business  hours  on  the  5th,  you  got  back  at  the 
head  office  in  exchange  from  other  banks  £41,085  of  your 
own  notes? — Yes. 

And  you  got  back  at  the  branches  £47,946? — Yes. 

So  that  the  £89,031  complained  of  by  the  Crown  in  item  two 
of  the  indictment  was  notes  of  your  own,  which  were  back  into 
the  Bank  in  the  way  I  have  stated  between  the  afternoon 
of  the  5th  and  the  beginning  of  business  on  the  6th? — Yes. 

Although  this  abstract  relates  to  the  5th  of  June,  was  it 
written  up  in  the  course  of  a  week  or  so  after  5th  June? — After 
5th  June. 

You  could  not  write  it  up  on  that  day,  because  you  had  not 
all  the  particulars  in? — Quite  so. 

So  before  any  part  of  the  abstract  was  written  the  notes 
■would  be  all  back  ? — They  would  be  all  back. 

They  would  be  back  by  nine  o'clock  on  the  morning  of   the 

«  113 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Morlson.  6th,  although  you  did  not  actually  write  up  even  the  original 
edition  of  this  bill  after  that  ? — Quite  so. 

Now,  as  these  notes  were  back  into  the  Bank  before  business 
began  for  the  new  year,  was  it  not  quite  right  to  make  this 
deduction? — I  think  so. 

Because,  before  business  began  after  the  new  year,  they 
were  not  in  circulation,  but  were  back  into  the  Bank? — Quite  so. 

Why  was  that  entry  not  made  at  the  beginning  when  you 
wrote  it  out? — The  reason  why  a  number  of  these  alterations 
were  made  in  red  ink  was  simply  to  show  that  the  alterations 
were  not  made  in  the  books. 

Was  it  merely  to  keep  yourself  in  recollection? — Quite  so. 

Then,  was  it  not  the  case  that  from  the  first  time  you  did 
make  up  this  abstract  you  did  enter  these  notes? — Yes. 

In  pencil  first  ? — I  presume  so ;  I  cannot  say.  Being  referred 
to  the  left-hand  side  of  the  abstract,  opposite  the  word 
"  branches,"  I  see  figures  there  in  pencil  to  the  same  amount. 
These  are  just  the  same  figures. 

I  suppose  you  would  write  in  pencil  before  you  wrote  in  ink  ? — 
Very  likely.  The  next  item  in  red  ink,  still  on  the  left-hand 
side,  is  £41,000  odds  deducted  from  £75,000  odds. 

That  is  the  notes  at  the  head  office ;  and  you  see  again  £47,000 
deducted  from  £77,000?— Yes. 

And  it  is  the  differences  which  make  the  £89,000? — Yes. 
These  figures  appear  again  on  the  right-hand  side  of  the  same 
page. 

Were  these  entries  about  the  notes  not  made  by  yourself  from 
the  very  beginning? — Yes. 

Before  you  went  to  the  Manager  at  all? — ^Yes. 

And  they  were  quite  right  entries  ? — I  consider  them  so. 

And  you  merely  made  them  in  red  ink  as  a  notandum,  and 
to  keep  yourself  in  mind  that  they  did  not  go  into  the  books  ? — 
Yes. 

Then  that  was  not  an  entry  made  to  falsify  the  balance  sheet, 
and  the  Manager  had  nothing  to  do  with  it? — I  beg  your 
pardon. 

You  have  told  us  that  these  entries  were  made  at  your  own 
instance,  and  that  you  think  them  right? — Yes. 

And  that  they  were  made  from  the  first  in  red  ink  merely  to 
keep  yourself  in  mind  of  what  they  were  ? — Yes ;  and  in  order 
to  keep  in  my  memory  that  there  was  no  entry  made  through 
the  books  for  tihe  alteration. 

Then  it  is  not  the  case  that  everything  that  appears  here  in 
red  ink  was  made  at  the  request  of  the  Manager? — In  this 
instance  it  was  not. 

Was  there  anything  else  in  red  ink  made  of  your  own  motion 
by  yourself? — No,  nothing  else.     I  am  quite  sure  of  that. 

Did    you    make    these   entries    before    you    went    in    to    the 
114 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Manager,  or  after  ? — I  would  say  they  would  be  made  from  the  Wm.  Morlson. 

-very  first. 

So  when  you  took  this  in  to  the  Manager  it  was  partly  black 
and  partly  red? — If  this  is  the  same  sheet. 

And  if  it  was  the  predecessor  of  this  sheet,  it  was  red  from 
the  first  as  regards  the  notes? — It  would  be. 

Does  the  fact  of  your  finding  these  calculations  about  the 
notes  jotted  here  in'  pencil  not  rather  suggest  to  your  mind 
that  this  was  the  first  sheet  on  which  these  were  made? — No. 

Did  you  copy  your  pencil  as  well  as  your  writing? — These 
might  have  been  made  after — long  after. 

i  thought  you  said  you  entered  the  notes  in  red  ink  on  the 
first  abstract  you  made  up? — There  were  so  many  people  using 
these  sheets  that  in  order  to  show  the  alterations  these  might 
have  been  put  down  in  pencil  long  after. 

What  was  in  pencil  might  have  been  long  after,  but  what 
was  in  red  ink  was  there  from  the  first? — Yes. 

And  if  this  was  not  the  original  sheet,  it  was  also  in  red  ink 
on  its  predecessor? — I  should  say  so. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — What  I  mean  to  say  is  this,  that 
the  pencil  marks  might  have  been  put  on  the  sheet  after  the 
stoppage  of  the  Bank,  because  there  were  so  many  people 
inquiring  into  these  sheets  that  they  might  have  been  put  down 
to  explain  the  matter. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — But  the  red  ink  was  there  from  the  first? — 
Yes. 

Then  that  is  article  two  of  the  indictment,  which,  in  your 
judgment,  is  all  right? — Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — The  notes  on  hand  of  other 
banks  represent  what  was  actually  in  the  Bank  at  the  time. 
Then  when  the  £41,000  of  returned  notes  came  into  your  hands, 
did  you  make  any  allowance  for  the  notes  of  other  banks 
returned  at  the  same  time? — The  same  amount  was  deducted 
on  the  one  side  as  there  was  on  the  other  side. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — Is  it  this,  that  near  the  foot  of  the  left- 
hand  page  you  have  notes  of  other  banks  on  hand,  £75,000? — 
Yes. 

You  deduct  from  that  £41,000,  and  £34,000  is  the  balance?— 
Yes. 

So  with  respect  to  notes  of  other  banks  and  the  branches  you 
have  £77,000,  and  you  deduct  from  that  £47,000,  and  carry 
across  the  balance? — Yes. 

And  so  the  matter  was  made  right  on  both  sides  of  the 
account? — I  think  so. 

You  did  not  make  it  appear  that  while  you  had  called  in 
£89,000  of  your  own  issue  you  had  a  corresponding  amount  of 
the  issue  of  other  banks? — No. 

Then  that  entry  is  all  right  on  both  sides? — Yes.     The  black 

"5 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Morlson.  ink  was  all  written  first,  and  the  red  ink  all  written  afterwards. 
Being  referred  to  the  creditor  column,  top  of  right-hand  page, 
I  see  a  summation  in  black  ink  of  £1,448,453.  That  summa- 
tion includes  two  sums  in  red  ink  of  £440,000  odds  and 
£346,000.  It  is  also  the  case  that  there  are  black  summations 
below  which  include  what  is  written  in  red  ink. 

How  is  it  possible  that  you  summed  up  in  black  ink  something 
that  was  only  written  on  afterwards  in  red? — Because  this  will 
be  simply  a  copy  of  some  other  sheet.  I  cannot  tell  where  that 
is.  With  regard  to  the  third  particular  of  the  indictment, 
"  Amount  of  drafts  outstanding,"  etc.,  understated  to  the  extent 
of  £1,393,008  or  thereby,  that  amount  is  the  summation  of 
£973,300  and  £419,708.  The  £973,300  is  an  entry  which 
was  raised  in  the  books  by  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach's  orders  in 
1873,  and  which  was  carried  forward  and  received  effect  in  the 
balance  sheets  always  after  that,  except  in  1877,  when  the 
exact  amount  was  varied. 

In  preparing  your  balance  sheet  for  your  abstract  or  scroll 
balance  for  each  year,  did  you  give  effect  to  that  without  any- 
body's instructions  1 — Yes. 

You  had  it  in  the  books? — Yes. 

And  if  you  had  not  given  effect  to  it  in  the  scroll  balance, 
you  would  have  been  missing  out  something  which  was  in  the 
books  1 — Yes. 

And  that  is  the  history  of  it,  that,  having  been  raised,  and 
appearing  in  the  books  from  1873,  it  received  effect  ever  after 
without  your  getting  or  needing  to  get  anybody's  instructions 
for  it? — Yes.  [Shown  No.  129a,  weekly  balances  in  general 
ledger  on  5th  June,  1878.]  Being  referred  to  the  foreign  and 
colonial  credits  on  the  debit  side  of  that  weekly  state,  there  is 
a  sum  of  £2,881,000  odds,  from  which  there  is  deducted  the 
£973,000.  I  only  read  out  the  balance,  £1,907,952,  to  the 
Directors. 

Then  the  Directors  would  not  know  or  see  from  what  you  read 
out  that  that  balance  was  reached  by  deducting  the  £973,300? — 
Not  from  reading  it. 

That  is  the  head  office  weekly  abstract  for  1878? — Yes. 

Was  that  a  correct  statement  of  the  weekly  balance  ending 
with  5th  June,  1878? — A  correct  statement  of  the  general 
ledger  according  to  the  books. 

And  without  giving  effect  to  anybody's  alterations,  for  there 
were  none? — Quite  so. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — You  told  us  yesterday  that  in 
consequence  of  the  directions  of  Mr.  Potter  and  Mr.  Stronach 
you  made  an  alteration  upon  the  original  sums  that  you  brou<yht 
out  in  your  black  ink  abstract  in  1876.  Now,  was  that  sum  of 
£2,800,000  consistent  with  your  original  black  ink  abstract,  or 
Ii6 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Avas  it  consistent  with  the  red  ink  alterations  of   1876? — The  Wm.  MorUon. 
£2,800,000  was  quite  in  accordance  with  the  books. 

With  the  books  of  1876?— Yes. 

"Was  efifect  given  in  the  weekly  balance  ledger  to  the  altera- 
tions that  you  made  in  1876? — No. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — Accordingly,  from  1873  onwards,  with  the 
exception  of  one  year,  was  the  £973,300  treated  just  as  it  is 
here? — Quite  so. 

And  treated  just  as  it  is  here,  not  only  in  the  weekly  balance 
for  the  week  ending  in  June,  but  in  the  same  way  in  the  weekly 
balance  of  the  other  fifty-one  weeks  of  the  year? — Yes. 

In  short,  for  the  whole  fifty-two  weeks  of  the  year,  that  was 
treated  just  in  the  same  way? — Yes. 

And  that  was  correct  according  to  the  books? — Yes. 

Can  you  say  that  before  you  had  the  meeting  with  Mi'. 
Potter  and  the  Manager  in  1876  you  had  given  effect  to  the 
entry  of  £973,300  as  usual,  just  as  it  had  been  for  the  three 
years  then  past? — Yes. 

So  they  had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  mode  of  treating 
the  £973,300?— No. 

Neither  in  1876  nor  at  any  time? — No. 

It  was  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach,  and  nobody  else  ? — Just  so. 

You  understood  the  reason  for  Alexander  Stronach  giving  that 
direction  to  be  that  there  was  cash,  or  that  there  were  securities 
in  course  of  realisation,  to  work  off  those  credits? — The  entry 
in  the  cash  book  represents  that.  Mr.  Stronach  also  had  some 
slips  which  bore  to  show  that^ 

If  that  was  the  case,  was  there  anything  wrong  with  the 
entiy — if  these  were  in  the  course  of  realisation  ? — It  was  an 
anticipatory  entry. 

And  dependent  upon  whether  the  anticipations  were  realised 
or  not  ? — Quite  so. 

With  regard  to  the  other  item  of  £419,780  the  Bank,  as  I 
understand,  had  granted  acceptances  which  were  out  in  the 
circle  to  a  certain  amount? — Yes. 

These  acceptances  were  about  to  mature? — Yes. 

With  the  view  of  taking  up  these  acceptances,  were  other 
acceptances  issued  ^^hich  it  was  intended  to  discount  to  lift 
the  first  set? — I  understand  so. 

Was  that  done  within  a  few  days  before  the  first  set  of 
acceptances  matured  ? — I  cannot  tell  you  that ;  I  cannot  speak 
personally  of  it. 

But  it  would  be  done  within  a  few  days? — I  cannot  say. 

So  that  for  a  time  there  were  two  sets  of  bills  in  the  circle 
applicable  to  the  same  amounts? — Yes. 

That  is  to  say,  during  the  time  between  the  maturity  and 
the  retirement  of  the  first  set  of  bills — before  that,  and  after 
the  second  set  to  lift  them  had  been  put  out? — Yes. 

117 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Mopison.  Now,  the  aggregate  from  which  you  deduct  the  £419,000 
comprehends  both  of  those  sets  of  bills  which  were  so  out  for 
a  short  tinie? — ^The  larger  amount  includes  ])oth  sets. 

Which  were  out  for  a  short  time  though  representing  the 
same  debt? — Yes. 

Would  the  total  amount  of  the  double  set  be  just  about 
£419,000? — That  was  the  amount  I  got  as  being  out. 

Now,  if  it  is  the  case  that  the  second  set  of  bills  were  applied 
to  the  purpose  for  which  they  were  issued — that  is,  to  be  dis- 
counted and  lift  the  first  set — and  if  the  Bank  had  got  the 
money  so  raised,  was  that  entry  quite  right  1 — If  the  money  was 
in  the  cheque  box. 

If  the  discount  for  the  second  set  had  been  got  to  lift  the  first, 
1hat  entry  was  right? — If  that  money  had  been  lodged  in  the 
cheque  box. 

Do  you  know  of  your  own  knowledge  whether  that  money 
was  not  in  the  cheque  box? — -I  do  not  know  it  was  not  in  it. 
That  was  not  a  thing  within  my  department. 

Therefore  you  cannot  say  whether  that  entry  of  £419,000  odds 
was  right  or  wrong,  because  you  do  not  know  whether  the 
discount  money  had  come  in  or  not? — Yes.  With  regard  to  the 
fourth  head  of  the  charge,  "  Amount  of  bills  of  exchange,  local 
and  country  bills,  credit  accounts  and  other  advances  under 
article  one  on  creditor  side,  understated  to  the  extent  of 
£3,520,913  lis.  8d.,  or  thereby" — and  being  referred  to  the 
left-hand  side  of  the  scroll  124a,  the  first  matters  that  enter 
into  that  are  the  entries  of  £346,336  and  £440,738.  I  treated 
these  as  cross  entries.  The  very  same  considerations  which  I 
have  already  given  in  dealing  with  the  same  entries  on  the 
other  side  would  again  apply  here.  In  so  far  as  they  were 
[troper  cross  entries  they  were  not  understated  in  the  one  place 
any  more  than  in  the  other. 

That  is,  to  the  extent  of  about  £445,000?— Yes.  The  next 
item  complained  of  on  that  head  is  what  is  called  the  bringing 
down  of  the  balances  from  the  three  credit  accounts.  The 
amounts  as  they  originally  appear  at  the  top  of  the  page 
contain  the  total  amount  of  the  overdrafts  on  the  credit  accounts 
there  mentioned.  What  was  done  was  to  deduct  a  part  of  that 
and  to  bring  it  down  under  the  general  head  where  securities 
come. 

If  it  was  the  case  that  to  the  extent  of  the  sums  so  brought 
down  there  were  securities  held  against  that  part  of  the  accounts, 
was  there  anything  wrong  in  bringing  them  down? — I  should 
say  not.  I  do  not  know  whether  or  not  there  were  securities 
held  against  these. 

Were  you  led  to  suppose  there  were  securities  held  against 
these? — In  so  far  as  that  there  were  certain  securities  valued. 

Was  this  the  scheme  of  the  alteration  that  the  unsecured  part 
1x8 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

of  the  overdraft  was  left  at  the  top,  and  that  the  part  for  which  Wm.  Morison. 
securities  were  held  was  taken  down  with  its  securities  under  the 
head  of  securities? — It  does  not  follow. 

Was  that  what  was  done? — The  balance  might  have  been 
covered  as  well. 

But  was  that  what  was  done — it  was  broug^ht  down  under 
the  head  of  securities? — I  understood  that  the  portion  that  was 
brought  down  was  covered  by  stocks. 

And  if  it  was  covered  by  stocks  it  was  all  right? — I  consider 
so,  in  my  opinion. 

The  other  might  be  covered  by  personal  obligations,  cash 
credits,  bills,  or  securities  other  than  stocks? — Quite  so. 

The  Lord  Advocate  put  it  to  you  once  or  twice  that  these 
were  Government  stocks  and  the  like.  I  observe  in  the  pub- 
lished balance  issued  the  enumeration  is  not  limited  to  Govern- 
ment stocks;  it  is  Government  stocks,  Exchequer  bills,  railway 
and  other  stocks.  If  there  were  stocks  held  against  the  parts 
which  were  so  brought  down,  was  it  not  quite  a  ijroper  denomina- 
tion to  put  them  under  other  stocks? — I  consider  so. 

Did  any  of  the  alterations  which  you  have  described  and 
explained,  or  any  of  the  alterations  which  were  made  upon 
your  scrolls,  affect  the  profit  and  loss  at  all? — No. 

They  did  not  affect  the  result  of  the  accounts  or  the  balance 
of  the  accounts  as  to  profit  and  loss? — No. 

Or  as  to  reserve? — Or  as  to  reserve. 

Or  as  to  capital? — Or  as  to  capital. 

So  from  what  you  have  said,  the  alterations  which  were 
made  did  not  affect  one  of  the  amounts  which  entered  the 
published  balance  as  liabilities  to  partners? — Quite  so. 

Now,  those  three  things  which  you  say  were  not  affected 
by  the  alterations,  viz.,  the  capital  account,  £1,000,000,  the 
reserve  fund,  £450,000,  and  the  profit  and  loss,  £142,095,  are 
the  same  in  the  published  abstract  as  they  are  in  the  balance 
ledger  signed  by  the  Directors? — The  same.  They  were  not 
affected  in  any  way  by  any  of  the  things  which  I  have  explained. 
I  signed  the  pulilislied  balance  as  correct  in  1877  and  1878. 
That  balance  was  what  I  may  call  an  abstract  of  the  original 
scroll  abstract. 

That  is  to  say,  it  epitomised  further  what  had  been  already 
epitomised  in  the  scroll  abstract? — Just  so. 

Is  it  the  case  that  you  have  lost  the  sheet  of  the  balance 
applicable  to  1877? — Yes,  that  is  a  clean  copy;  I  cannot  find  it. 

Are  you  able  to  give  the  same  full  explanations  about  1877 
that  you  have  now  given  about  1878? — Not  so  well. 

Have  you  any  doubt  that  the  explanations  which  I  have  now 
got  from  you  as  to  the  different  entries  I  have  asked  you  about 
■would  be  equally  applicable  to  1877? — On  the  same  lines. 

By   the   Lohd   Justice-Cleuk — Are   you   (juite   sure   that   the 

119 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Mopison.  entries  were  on  the  same  lines  in  18771  You  said  otherwise 
yesterday.  If  the  £973,000  was  treated  in  the  same  way  in 
1877  as  in  1876  you  may  be  right? — The  explanation  that  I 
made  was  that  the  first  sheet  was  ignored,  that  is  to  say,  the 
£973,000  was  ignored,  and  the  other  sums  put  in. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — ^With  that  exception,  was  there  any  other 
difference  in  the  principle,  except  that  the  £973,000  was  treated 
as  you  have  explained? — Not  that  I  recollect  of;  and  I  may 
add  that  the  sums  that  were  put  in  were  simply  following  out 
the  £973,000  entry. 

Did  they  include  it? — They  must  have  done  so. 
Did  it  receive  effect  in  1877,  although  it  received  effect  with 
something  added  to  it?     Is  that  it? — Quite  so. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — You  told  us  yesterday  that  the 
figures  that  were  inserted  in  1877  in  order  to  fill  the  place  of 
the  £973,000  were  not  in  the  books?— Yes. 

And  they  were  not  in  the  books? — They  were  not  in  the 
books. 

Therefore  that  sum  was  not  stated  in  the  same  way  as  in 
1876?— Quite  so. 

Therefore  you  must  qualify  your  answer  to  that  effect? — 
Quite  so. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — Subject  to  that  qualification  they  were  on 
the  same  lines? — Yes. 

By  the  year  1878  had  you  not  for  the  first  time  got  prepared 
a  general  printed  scroll  sheet  to  fill  up  the  various  items? — 
For  1877. 

For  the  first  time? — For  the  first  ?ime. 

And  it  was  upon  that  sheet  that  you  made  the  entries  which 
you  have  explained  to  us  in  1878  and  also  in  1877? — Quite  so. 

By  1876  you  had  not,  I  think,  got  that  large  and  complete 
sheet  prepared? — No. 

And  in  1876  was  your  general  balance  got  by  superinducing 
the  balances  from  the  branches  and  the  correspondents'  books 
on  to  the  head  office  weekly  balance? — Quite  so. 

The  principle  of  making  out  the  balance  was  still  the  same? — 
Still  the  same. 

The  total  balance  of  the  Bank  was  got  from,  first,  the  weekly 
balance  at  the  head  office;  second,  the  weekly  balance  at  the 
branches;  and  third,  the  information  from  correspondents? — 
Yes. 

But,  not  having  the  big  sheet  in  1876,  you  wrote  the  entries 
applicable  to  the  two  latter  heads  on  to  the  weekly  balance  of 
the  head  office  ? — Yes ;  wrote  them  together  on  the  one  sheet. 

The  totals?— Yes.  [Shown  No.  130.]  That  is  the  head 
office  weekly  balance. 

And  it  was  the  basis  on  which  the  others  were  superinduced? 
—Yes. 


120 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

What  is  No.  133? — The  branch  weekly  balance.  Wm.  Morison. 

What  was  the  paper  from  which  you  got  the  entries  applicable 
to  the  correspondents? — That  is  embraced  in  130. 

Does  it  come  to  this,  that  the  weekly  balance  applicable  to 
branches  has  also  upon  it  the  information  relative  to  corre- 
spondents ? — Yes. 

So  that  your  balance  of  1876  was  made  up  from  130  and 
133?— Yes. 

Now,  I  want  to  know  a  little  more  particularly  about  128 
[abstract  of  accounts  at  head  office  on  7th  June]  and  its  pre- 
decessors. You  said  yesterday  that  you  took  the  scroll  abstract 
to  a  meeting  at  which  Mr.  Potter  and  the  Manager  were  present? 
—Yes. 

Was  the  scroll  abstract  which  you  took  to  that  meeting,  as 
prepared  by  yourself,  written  entirely  in  black  ink  ? — It  was. 

You  have  no  doubt  about  that? — I  have  no  doubt  about  it. 

That  the  scroll  abstract  that  you  took  to  those  gentlemen 
was  written  entirely  in  black  ink? — ^Yes. 

You  said  that  alterations  were  made  upon  it  in  red  ink? — 
Not  at  the  meeting;  I  did  not  say  that. 

Did  the  scroll  abstract  which  you  so  took  to  the  meeting, 
and  which  was  written  entirely  in  black  ink,  contain  the  entries 
brought  from  the  sheet  applicable  to  branches  and  to  corre- 
fipondents  ? — Yes. 

So  that  it  focussed  in  black  ink  all  the  entries  applicable 
to  head  office,  branches,  and  correspondents? — Yes. 

Where  did  that  meeting  take  place? — In  the  Manager's  room. 
No  one  was  present  but  Mr.  Potter,  the  Manager,  and  myself. 
The  meeting  took  place  between  the  annual  balance  day  and 
the  annual  meeting  day — that  is,  between  the  first  Wednesday 
of  June  and  the  first  Wednesday  of  July.  I  cannot  give  the  date 
more  particularly. 

Were  any  alterations  made  in  writing  on  that  document  at 
that  meeting? — I  would  take  the  different  alterations  and  give 
effect  to  them  in  the  balance  sheet. 

Were  any  alterations  made  in  writing  at  that  meeting  upon 
the  black  ink  scroll  that  you  took  to  it? — Yes. 

What  alterations  were  made,  and  in  what  kind  of  ink? — The 
sheet  is  not  here  at  all. 

Do  you  not  recollect? — It  would  be  all  in  black  ink  or 
pencil. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — The  alterations? — Yes. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — I  thought  you  said  yesterday  that  the 
alterations  were  made  in  red  ink? — No;  I  said  the  effect  of 
the  alterations. 

Are  you  satisfied  now  that  the  alterations  made  on  the  black 
ink  scroll  were  made  in  black  ink  or  pencil,  and  not  at  all  in 
red  ink  ? — Yes. 

X2Z 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Morison.  Was  it  done  in  black  ink  at  the  meeting,  or  in  pencil  at  the 
meeting,  or  do  you  not  recollect  which  ? — I  have  no  recollection. 

Then  you  don't  recollect  whether  it  was  done  in  black  ink 
or  pencil,  or  partly  in  the  one  and  partly  in  the  other? — Quite 
so ;  it  mitrht  have  been  either ;  I  would  rather  say  pencil. 

Or  botii?— Or  both. 

Now,  where  is  that  document  which  you  say  you  took  to  that 
meeting? — It  would  be  destroyed  when  this  one  was  made. 

Then  128  is  not  the  document  that  you  had  at  that  meeting? — 

Oh,  no. 

Do  you  recollect  what  became  of  that  document? — I  have  no 
doubt  it  would  be  destroyed  when  a  clean  copy  was  made. 

You  have  no  doubt,  but  do  you  recollect  ? — I  have  no  doubt  I 
destroyed  it. 

Who  would  destroy  it? — I  would  destroy  it. 

Do  you  recollect  of  that,  or  do  you  merely  suppose  it? — 
I  remember  I  did  destroy  it. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — From  what  is  the  lithograph 
taken?— From  this  (128). 

When  was  it  made? — After  the  meeting. 

Did  you  write  out  again  your  black  ink,  and  then  put  on  it 
the  red  ink  alterations? — ^Yes. 

That  is  what  you  did  ? — Yes. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — Does  it  come  to  this,  that  128  shows  ia 
black  ink  what  you  took  to  the  meeting,  and  the  one  you  say  you 
destroyed,  and  what  is  shown  in  red  ink  on  128  shows  the 
alterations  that  were  made  at  the  meeting? — I  think  there  was 
a  mistake  made  yesterday  as  to  the  red  ink  markings  on  this 
sheet  (128).  The  red  ink  markings  simply  bring  the  two 
abstracts  together. 

Do  you  say,  or  do  you  not,  that  128  contains  in  black  ink 
what  was  in  the  abstract  you  took  to  the  meeting  in  black  ink, 
and  that  the  red  ink  on  128  shows  the  alterations  that  you  were 
directed  to  make?     Do  you  now  say  that? — No. 

Then,  does  128  show  anything  in  red  ink  which  was  altered 
in  black  ink  at  the  meeting  which  you  say  you  had  with  Mr. 
Potter  and  the  Manager? — This  sheet  (128)  is  the  effect  of  the 
meeting. 

Do  the  red  ink  markings,  or  any  of  them,  on  128  show  the 
alterations  made  at  the  meeting? — They  must  have  been  brought 
together  before  that  time. 

Are  not  the  entries  applicable  to  the  branches  only  brought 
in  in  red  ink  on  128? — ^Yes. 

Is  not  this  just  what  you  explained  a  little  ago — that  the 
abstract  of  1876  was  made  by  taking  as  the  basis  the  weekly 
abstract  of  the  head  office,  and  superinducing  the  entries  relative 
to  the  branches  and  correspondents? — Quite  so. 

122 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

And  are  not  those  entries  relative  to  the  branches  and  corre-  Wm.  Morison. 
spondents  superinduced  in  red  ink  upon  128? — Yes. 

Then  your  evidence  yesterday  was  not  correct? — Will  you 
allow  nie  to  explain  that  we  were  referring  to  the  three  sums 
of  £200,000,  £100,000.  and  £450,000? 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clbhk — You  told  us  yesterday  that  your 
original  black  ink  abstract  which  you  took  to  the  meeting  was 
a  proper  abstract  made  up  from  the  books,  and  was  correct. 
Do  you  still  say  that? — Yes;  this  one. 

And  all  the  red  ink  alterations  were  made  upon  the  instruc- 
tions of  Mr.  Potter  and  the  Manager? — In  so  far  as  these  figures 
are  concerned— the  £200,000,  the  £100,000,  and  the  £450,000. 

There  were  other  alterations  made  in  red  ink  which  you  made 
yourself,  in  order  to  make  your  original  abstract  entirely 
accurate? — In  order  to  bring  the  two  abstracts  together. 

Which  two? — The  branches  one  and  the  head  office  one. 

You  had  done  that;  this  original  abstract  was  bringing  them 
together? — Oh,  no. 

I  understood  yesterday  you  told  us  the  way  in  which  you 
prepared  your  abstract  for  the  Directors  was,  first,  that  you 
prepared  the  abstract  of  the  balances  at  the  head  office,  and  then 
the  superintendent  of  branches  prepared  his  abstract.  Did  you 
take  the  two  and  put  them  together  in  a  general  abstract  which 
you  took  to  the  Directors? — Yes. 

The  thing  you  took  to  the  Directors  was  the  general  abstract 
embracing  both  branches  and  head  office? — Yes. 

And  on  that  the  red  ink  alterations  were  made? — Yes. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — Do  you  desire  to  correct  anything  you  said 
yesterday  or  not? — I  think  I  said  yesterday  that  the  alterations 
on  the  figures  w^ere  made  in  red  ink.  If  I  said  that  these  figures 
—£200,000,  £100,000,  and  £450,000— were  made  in  red  ink 
I  made  a  mistake. 

You  have  told  us  that  what  you  took  to  the  Directors  con- 
tained both  the  entries  as  to  the  branches,  and  the  other  entries 
in  black  ink? — Yes. 

128  contains  the  entries  relative  to  the  branches  in  red  ink  ; 
why  is  that? — This  is  not  the  sheet  submitted. 

But  if  you  had  the  entries  relative  to  the  branches  in  black 
ink  on  the  original  scroll,  why  did  you  put  the  entries  relative 
to  the  branches  in  red  ink  in  the  second  scroll? — In  order  to 
make  it  more  distinct. 

For  whom? — For  myself. 

Did  you  not  know  what  related  to  the  branches  without 
putting  it  in  red  ink? — But  it  was  clearer;  it  brought  out  where 
the  two  were  put  together  easier. 

If  it  was  clearer  to  have  it  in  red  ink  in  the  second  scroll  for 
yourself,  why  did  you  put  it  in  black  ink  for  the  Manager  and 

Z23 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Mopison.  Mr.  Potter  ? — It  was  quite  a  different  sheet  altogether,  the  one 
presented  in  1876. 

Was  not  this  (128)  the  first  scroll  you  ever  made  out? — Not 
the  one  I  submitted  to  the  Directors. 

Then,  did  you  copy  in  red  ink  on  128  about  the  branches 
what  you  had  written  in  black  ink  on  the  original  scroll? — Yes. 

Have  you  no  further  explanation  of  why  you  did  that  than 
that  it  was  clearer  for  yourself? — No. 

You  say  the  thing  you  were  told  to  do  was  to  bring  down 
£200,876,  £100,300,  and  £450,000  from  the  top  of  the  page 
to  the  bottom? — Yes. 

That  alteration  you  have  shown  on  128  not  in  red,  but  in 
black  ink? — Yes. 

Then  does  it  come  to  this,  that  you  have  not  shown  anywhere 
in  red  ink  the  alterations  which  you  say  were  made  by  direction 
of  the  Manager  and  Mr.  Potter? — There  is  nothing  here  (128) 
in  red  ink  that  I  was  desired  to  alter. 

Then  upon  any  sheet,  either  the  first  or  the  second,  none  of 
the  alterations  were  carried  out  in  red  ink? — No. 

And  the  only  thing  that  is  in  red  ink  is  what  relates  to  the 
branches,  which  was  not  an  alteration? — Quite  so. 

Did  you  not  say  yesterday  that  some  part  at  all  events  of 
the  alterations  had  been  given  effect  to  in  red  ink? — On  this 
sheet  ? 

Upon  any  sheet?— Not  in  1876. 

I  am  only  speaking  of  1876? — There  is  no  alteration. 

But  neither  upon  the  original  sheet  nor  upon  this  sheet  have 
you  given  effect  to  any  of  the  alterations  that  you  were  directed 
to  make  in  red  ink? — Quite  so. 

Do  you  adhere  to  the  statement  that  this  is  not  the  first 
abstract  you  made? — Yes. 

What  is  it  that  is  different  in  black  ink  in  128  from  what 
you  took  to  the  meeting  in  black  ink  on  the  scroll  which  you  say 
you  tore  up?— These  amounts  are  brought  down  from  credit 
accounts. 

The  three  sums  which  I  have  mentioned? — Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk— If  that  is  not  the  thing  you  took 
to  the  meeting  in  1876,  what  is  it,  and  when  did  you  make  it? — 
This  was  copied  after  the  meeting. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — What  led  to  its  being  made  ? — This  was  the 
first  year  that  I  had  got  it  printed. 

Why  did  you  not  just  give  effect  to  the  alterations  in  red  ink 
on  the  black  ink  scroll  which  you  took  to  the  meeting  in  the 
game  way  that  you  did  in  1878? — It  was  simply  for  my  own 
information  that  I  put  them  in  red  ink  at  any  time. 

And  the  only  thing  you  put  in  red  ink  here  was  what  you  had 
put  in  black  at  the  first? — Yes. 
124 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

You  did  not  put  in  red  anything  you  were  told  to  alter  1 —  Wra.  Moplson. 
Not  in  the  1876  one. 

Were  not.  these  three  amounts  which  appear  here  in  black  ink 
also  written  originally  in  that  place  in  black  ink  in  the  scroll 
you  took  to  the  Directors? — No;  they  were  not  there  at  all 
in  the  scroll  I  took  to  the  Directors. 

I  think  you  said  that  another  particular  in  which  this  scroll 
differs  from  the  scroll  that  you  took  to  the  Directors  was  in 
bringing  out  on  the  right-hand  page  only  balances  instead  of  the 
£455,000  on  the  line? — Yes. 

You  said  you  had  in  the  original  the  items  which  the  Lord 
Advocate  put  to  you,  and  that  here  you  brought  out  a  balance 
of  £1346  16s.  6d.?— Yes. 

What  is  that  balance? — The  balance  in  general  ledger  on 
deposit  accounts,  and  the  total  amount  of  deposit  receipts. 

Then  is  that  entry  of  £1346  a  correct  balance  taken  from 
the  books  ? — It  is  taken  from  the  general  ledger. 

Does  that  correspond  to  the  sum  which  I  read  out  to  you  from 
the  statements  of  1878  of  £33,000  odds? — Yes;  it  is  on  the  same 
principle.     It  is  the  balance  from  the  general  ledger. 

So  that  this  is  an  entry  brought  from  the  books  of  the  Bank  ? 
—Yes. 

And  showing  correctly  the  balance  by  deducting  the  larger 
from  the  smaller  sums  of  the  debtor  and  creditor  sides? — Quite 
so. 

Then,  as  to  the  sum  which  you  say  was  carried  down ;  that, 
I  think,  is  just  brought  down  to  the  head  of  securities  in  the 
same  way  as  the  corresponding  items  I  asked  you  about  in  1878? 
—Yes. 

Did  you  understand  that  there  were  securities  held  for  these 
amounts? — From  the  conversation  I  understood  so. 

And  if  there  were  securities  held  for  these  amounts,  was  it, 
in  your  judgment,  quite  right  so  to  bring  them  down? — Quite 
right. 

Securities  of  the  nature  of  stocks? — Securities,  and  held 
absolutely  by  the  Bank,  so  that  they  could  sell  them  at  any  time. 

And  if  there  were  securities  of  the  nature  of  stocks  held  for 
those  sums,  it  would  be  quite  proper  to  class  them  under  other 
stocks  in  the  printed  balance  sheet? — Yes. 

So  that  whether  that  was  right  or  wrong  depends  upon  a 
matter  that  you  don't  know? — Yes. 

On  the  right-hand  page  of  the  scroll  abstract  for  1876,  Dr. 
No.  2,  I  see  you  have  a  good  deal  of  figuring,  by  which  you  brintr 
out  a  result  of  £860,355  ?— Yes. 

Is  that  the  entry  which  was  carried  into  the  printed  balance 
under  head  II.  of  the  debtor  side — bank  notes  in  circulation  in 
Scotland  and  the  Isle  of  Man? — Yes. 

Then  that  is  quite  correct? — Quite. 

125 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

m.  Morison.  In  the  red  ink  figuring  under  Dr.  No.  3,  near  the  foot  of 
the  left-hand  page,  and  at  the  right-hand  side  of  the  page,  there 
is  a  sum  of  £29,095.  Does  that  sum  represent  your  own  notes 
which  had  been  got  in  exchange  for  the  notes  of  other  banks 
between  the  afternoon  of  the  Wednesday  and  the  commencement 
of  business  on  the  Thursday,  as  you  explained  with  reference  to 
the  £89,031?— No. 

What  is  it  ? — There  is  a  reference  here  to  it,  "  Notes  remitted 
by  branches." 

Was  that  sum  remitted  from  the  branches? — I  have  no  doubt 
of  it. 

But  were  these  notes  then  in  the  hands  of  the  Bank? — They 
would  be  in  transmission. 

That  means  going  from  the  branches  to  the  head  office? — 
Yes,  and  belonging  to  the  head  office. 

But  when  a  note  is  passing  from  a  branch  to  the  head  office, 
it  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Bank ;  it  is  not  in  circulation  ? — No. 

Then,  if  these  notes  were  in  that  position,  was  it  not  a 
perfectly  proper  deduction  to  make? — I  should  say  so. 

If  you  had  stated  these  notes  as  in  circulation  you  would  have 
stated  what  was  wrong,  if  they  were  going  between  a  branch  and 
the  head  office? — That  is  my  opinion. 

I  suppose  that,  notwithstanding  any  alterations  that  were 
made  upon  the  scroll  sheet,  the  profit  and  loss,  the  capital,  and 
the  reserve  fund  are  unaffected,  just  as  you  explained,  as  to 
1878  and  1877?— Yes. 

If  the  notes  were  actually  in  transit,  they  were  more  clearly 
out  of  circulation  than  those  of  the  £89,031,  which  were  with- 
drawn?— Yes.  I  was  a  shareholder  of  the  Bank,  and  continued 
to  be  so  till  its  stoppage. 

By  Mr.  Asher — The  books  were  balanced  annually  as  at  the 
first  Wednesday  in  June.  The  first  Wednesday  in  June,  1876, 
was  the  7th,  in  1877  the  6th,  and  in  1878  the  5th.  I  wrote  up 
the  entries  in  the  balance  ledger,  which  was  docqueted  by  the 
Directors.  The  balance  so  entered  in  the  balance  ledger  showed 
the  balances  appearing  in  three  separate  books — the  weekly 
balance  book,  the  branches  balance  book,  and  the  correspondents' 
balance  book.  In  that  balance  each  branch  was  treated  as  a 
debtor  to  or  creditor  of  the  Bank  merely.  There  was  only  one 
sum  entered  opposite  the  name  of  each  branch,  representing  the 
amount  at  the  debit  or  at  the  credit  of  that  particular  branch. 
There  did  not  appear  in  that  balance  ledger  the  amount  of 
deposits  at  any  branch,  the  bills  discounted,  or  the  cash  in  hand. 
By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Nor  the  transactions  generally? 
—No. 

It  was  only  the  result  that  you  entered  in  your  books? — 
Yes ;  simply  the  balance  between  the  head  office  and  the  branch 
as  a  branch. 

126 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

As  if  they  had  beeu  customers  of  the  Bank  1 — Yes.  Wm.  Morison. 

By  Mr.  Asher — You  prepared  the  abstract  of  accounts? — Yes. 

The  balance  ledger  which  I  have  just  mentioned  was  the  thing 
which  was  docqueted  by  the  Directors? — Yes. 

And  to  examine  it,  it  was  merely  necessary  to  examine  the 
balances  in  the  three  subordinate  books  I  have  mentioned? — 
Yes. 

Did  any  one  of  the  subordinate  books  show  the  state  of 
accounts  between  the  Bank  and  any  individual  customer  1 — No. 

You  were  present  at  the  examination  of  books  by  the 
Directors  ? — Yes. 

Did  the  examination  mentioned  in  the  docquet  refer  merely 
to  a  comparison  of  the  balances  in  the  balance  ledger  with  the 
balances  in  the  Aveekly  balance  book,  the  agents'  balance  book, 
and  the  correspondents'  balance  book  ? — Quite  so. 

That  was  the  only  examination  made? — The  only  one. 

And  with  regard  to  1876,  1877,  and  1878,  I  understand  you 
to  say  that  the  docquet  is  correct  in  saying  that  everything  in 
the  balance  ledger  is  in  accordance  with  the  Bank's  books? — 
Yes.  I  prepared  the  abstract  of  accounts.  In  1876  I  would  com- 
mence the  preparation  of  the  abstract  immediately  after  7th 
June,  when  the  books  were  balanced,  and  the  abstract  would  be 
completed  within  perhaps  a  fortnight  afterwards. 

In  making  up  that  document  did  you  make  it  from  the 
balance  ledger  which  had  been  docqueted  by  the  Directors,  or 
from  other  books? — From  the  weekly  balance  book  and  other 
books. 

The  balance  ledger  alone  would  not  enable  you  to  make  up 
the  abstract  of  accounts? — No. 

You  required  to  take  the  books  showing  the  details  of  business 
at  the  various  agencies,  did  you  not ;  because  in  these  abstracts 
you  classed  the  deposits  at  the  agencies  along  with  the  deposits 
at  the  head  office,  and  the  cash  in  hand  at  the  agencies  along 
with  the  cash  in  hand  at  the  head  office? — Yes. 

And  so  with   regard  to  bills  and  other  accounts? — Yes. 

Therefore  the  abstracts  presented  the  state  of  the  Bank's 
affairs  as  if  the  whole  business  at  the  head  office,  correspondents' 
offices,  and  agencies  had  been  carried  on  under  one  roof? — Yes. 

The  draft  abstracts  were  prepared  in  the  form  you  have 
spoken  to,  and  they  were  further  epitomised  for  publication? — 
Yes.  In  1876  the  whole  of  the  work  of  making  up  the  balance 
and  preparing  the  abstract  balance  sheet  for  publication  was 
completed  before  the  annual  meeting.  The  annual  meeting  took 
place  on  the  first  Wednesday  of  July,  which  was  the  5th. 

Was  the  balance  ledger  generally  docqueted  by  the  Directors 
between  the  date  down  to  which  the  books  were  balanced  and 
the  date  of  that  meeting? — If  I  had  got  them  to  sign  it. 

127 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

^m.  Morison.  And  they  generally  were  got  to  sign  it  at  some  time  during 
that  interval,  were  they  not? — If  possible. 

You  attended  at  the  meeting  at  which  the  books  were 
examined  ? — Yes. 

If  a  Director  happened  to  be  absent  from  the  meeting  at 
which  the  examination  of  the  books  took  place,  did  he  generally 
sign  the  balance  sheet  after  he  came  back  1 — Yes. 

Was  there  any  separate  attendance  of  officials  for  the  purpose 
of  his  making  an  examination  if  he  had  been  absent  before, 
or  did  he  generally  just  attach  his  name  to  where  the  other 
Directors  had  signed?— He  just  signed  the  balance  ledger  at  the- 
usual  place. 

There  was  no  second  examination  made  by  the  Director  who 
happened  to  be  absent  when  the  examination  took  place? — No. 
In  1877  also  the  abstract  would  be  prepared  within  fourteen 
days  after  the  first  Wednesday  of  June,  which  was  on  the  6th. 
The  annual  meeting  in  that  year  was  on  the  first  Wednesday 
in  July,  which  was  on  the  4th.  In  1878,  in  like  manner,  the 
abstract  would  be  prepared  within  a  fortnight  after  the  date 
when  the  books  were  balanced.  The  annual  meeting  in  that  year 
was  on  3rd  July.  When  the  abstract  balance  which  was  to  be 
published  had  been  prepared,  it  was  generally  put  into  print, 
and  I  understand  that  a  copy  was  sent  to  each  Director. 

But  it  was  not  the  practice,  I  believe,  to  conmiunicate  the  draft 
to  the  Directors? — In  1876  and  in  1878  were  the  only  times  when 
I  met  the  Directors  for  such  a  purpose. 

You  did  not  meet  Mr.  Salmond  in  1876  or  1878  for  that 
purpose? — I  never  met  Mr.  Salmond. 

Or  showed  him  the  abstract  balance  sheet? — No. 

Whom  do  you  mean  by  the  Directors  that  you  met  in  1876 
and  1878?— In  1876  Mr.  Porter,  and  in  1878  Mr.  Stewart  and 
Mr.  Potter. 

With  that  exception,  was  there  ever  submitted  to  any  Director, 
to  your  knowledge,  anything  except  the  abstract  printed  for 
publication  with  the  report? — No;  not  to  my  knowledge. 

And  you  were  the  person  who  was  engaged  in  the  preparation 
of  the  draft,  and  converting  it  into  the  form  in  which  it  was 
published  ? — Yes. 

And  you  held  your  position  of  accountant  from  1871  down 
to  the  close? — ^Yes. 

You  were  the  custodier  of  the  books  of  the  Bank,  except  at 
the  time  when  the  weekly  balance  book,  the  branch  balance  book, 
and  the  correspondents'  balance  book  were  submitted  to  the- 
Directors  for  comparison  with  the  balance  ledger  once  a  year ; 
were  the  Directors  in  the  habit  of  examining  the  details  of  the 
books  of  the  Bank? — Not  that  I  know  of. 

And  you  were  the  custodier  of  the  books? — Of  the  one  I  was. 

Of  which  one? — Of  the  weekly  balance  book. 

128 


Photo. 


[J.   lloixirirgh. 


Mr.   Asher, 
Counsel  for  Robert  Salmoiul. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

So  that  the  weekly  balance  book  was  not  submitted  at  the  Wm.  Morison. 
weekly  meetings? — Not  that  I  am  aware  of. 

You  spoke  of  a  private  cash  book.  No.  6,  in  which  an  entry 
of  £973,300  was  made;  were  you  the  custodier  of  that  book? — 
Yes. 

Did  you  ever  show  that  book  to  Mr.  Salmond  ? — No. 

Did  he  ever  see  it,  so  far  as  you  know? — Not  that  I  know  of. 

Or  any  of  the  Directors? — No;  I  don't  think  they  did. 

Do  you  happen  to  know  that  during  the  years  1876,  1877, 
and  1878  Mr.  Salmond  was  much  in  the  country,  and  was  fre- 
quently absent  from  the  meetings  of  the  Bank? — He  was  for  a 
year  or  so,  but  I  could  not  mention  the  dates. 

During  these  years  did  you  see  him  at  the  Bank  at  all,  except 
when  he  was  there  at  the  weekly  meetings  he  attended? — Very 
seldom. 

You  ai'e  aware  that  he  resided  in  Ayrshire? — Yes. 

Do  you  remember  that  Mr.  Salmond  was  not  at  the  Bank  at 
the  time  the  books  were  examined  in  1878  by  the  other 
Directors? — I  am  quite  certain  he  was  not. 

And  do  you  remember  that  he  did  not  come  to  the  Bank  until 
after  the  general  meeting? — Yes. 

Then,  I  see  his  name  attached  to  the  docquet  in  the  books  in 
1878 ;  was  his  signature  put  there  at  the  same  time  as  those  of 
the  other  Directors  in  that  year? — Mr.  Potter  and  Mr.  Salmond 
signed  that  docquet  both  on  the  same  day. 

When  was  that? — I  would  say  it  would  be  after  the  annual 
meeting. 

Was  there  any  examination  of  the  books  made  then? — No. 

I  believe  you  cannot  remember  as  to  the  years  1876  and  1877? 
Your  memory  does  not  enable  you  to  say  whether  Mr.  Salmond 
was  there  at  that  time  or  not  ? — No ;  I  cannot  recollect  about 
that. 

By  the  Dbak  op  Faculty — Mr.  Kobert  Stronach  became 
Manager  of  the  Bank  in  1875.  I  cannot  give  the  month.  I 
cannot  recollect  whether  it  was  at  the  end  of  the  year. 

You  mentioned  yesterday  the  transference  of  an  account  of 
Smith,  Fleming  &,  Co.  from  one  heading  to  another,  which 
brought  it  under  your  jurisdiction  :  that  took  place  in  June, 
1875?— It  was  of  that  date. 

You  stated  certain  reasons  for  that  transference  which  seemed 
to  me  to  be  suppositions  on  your  part? — Quite  so. 

Were  you  inforaied  in  any  way  of  the  reason  of  the  trans- 
ference ? — No. 

Were  you  aware  that,  about  that  time,  an  agreement  had  been 
come  to  between  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  and  the  Bank,  whereby 
their  account  was  put  upon  a  new  footing,  under  which  they 
were  to  pay  a  certain  percentage  upon  the  debt? — I  have  heard 
so.  I  know  of  that  from  having  made  up  an  account  with  that 
statement  in  it. 

I  129 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Morison.  Was  the  entering  into  that  agreement  the  ground  for  the 
change  in  the  heading  of  the  account,  and  the  transference  of 
it  from  the  cheque  box  to  the  accountant's  department? — I 
cannot  say. 

The  knowledge  of  such  agreements  did  not,  except  incidentally, 
come  before  you  1 — No. 

[Shown  No.  127,  abstract  of  accounts  in  general  ledger  on  6tli 
June,  1877.]  In  that  paper  you  have  got  print-ed  matter, 
figures  in  black  ink,  figures  in  red  ink,  and  figures  in  pencil. 
Is  the  whole  of  the  writing  and  the  whole  of  the  figuring  in 
that  paper  in  your  handwriting/ — lYes. 

Is  that  paper  the  first  scroll  that  was  prepared  of  the  abstract 
of  accounts  for  the  year  1877? — ^Yes. 

Did  you  submit  it  to  the  Manager  and  the  Directors? — Not 
to  the  Directors — to  the  Manager. 

Did  you  write  what  we  have  here — the  black  and  the  red — 
before  you  had  any  consultation  with  the  Manager  or  the 
Directors  ? — ^No. 

What  do  the  calculations  in  pencil  on  the  right-hand  side  refer 
to? — There  is  a  part  of  it  apparently  in  connection  with  the 
heading  I.  of  the  assets  in  the  abstract. 

Can  you  tell  me  from  that  paper  what  was  the  amount  of 
City  Bank  notes  in  circulation  in  Scotland  in  1877? — Yes; 
£840,004. 

And  the  amount  that  was  published  in  the  abstract  was 
£763,894?— Yes. 

There  was  thus  a  difference  between  the  fact  and  what  was 
stated  in  the  abstract  of  £76,110? — I  will  take  it  for  granted; 
I  cannot  check  it  here. 

You  prepared  that  abstract? — ^Yes. 

And  you  inserted  these  figures,  £763,894? — Yes. 

Where  did  you  get  them? — I  would  require  to  get  the  other 
sheet  before  I  could  tell  you  that. 

I  think  you  will  be  able  to  get  it  from  this  sheet  (No.  127, 
abstract  for  1877),  all  of  which  contains  your  own  figuring. 
About  three-fourths  down  the  right-hand  page  of  that  abstract 
you  have  the  true  figures,  £840,004.  A  little  above  that  you 
will  find,  also  in  your  own  figures,  £860.355,  and  underneath 
that  you  put  £840,004,  being,  as  we  have  seen,  the  true 
circulation  for  1877.  The  first  of  the  figures  now  given, 
£860,355,  was  the  circulation  for  the  previous  year ;  and  in 
comparing  the  two  vou  find  that  there  is  a  difference  of 
£20,355  ?— Yes. 

Thereafter,  if  you  refer  to  the  black  ink  markings  in  the 
middle  of  the  same  page,  under  the  heading  "  Circulation,"  you 
seem  to  have  gone  on  to  compare  the  four  years  1874,  1875, 
1876,  and  1877?— Yes. 

When  did  you  make  the  pencil  markings  on  that  sheet? — I 

130 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

could   not  well   tell   you   that.       I   presume   the   most   of   them  Wra.  Morison. 
had  been  made  when  consulting  with  the  Manager. 

Was  not  the  whole  of  this  calculation,  until  you  brought  out 
the  sum  that  is  published,  gone  through  by  you  before  you 
consulted  with  a  human  being?  Is  it  not  the  result  of  the 
working  of  your  own  mind  ? — No  ;    certainly  not. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — When  do  you  say  you  made  these 
pencil  markings? — I  could  not  say  for  the  whole  of  them. 

Was  it  after  the  general  meeting  or  before? — It  would  be 
long  before  the  general  meeting. 

By  the  Dean  of  Faculty — To  the  left  of  the  black  ink  figures, 
under  the  heading  "  Circulation,"  in  the  middle  of  the  page,  are 
certain  red  ink  fitrures,  214m,  etc.,  meaning  £214,000,  £176,000, 
£197,000,  and  £126,000;  what  are  these  figures  ?— That 
appears  to  be  the  difference  betwixt  the  circulation  on  the 
Saturday  and  the  circulation  as  shown  on  each  annual  balance 
day.  The  red  figures  under  "  Circulation  "  on  the  right-hand 
side  of  No.  127a  indicate  the  Saturday  issue  of  notes.  The 
Wednesday  issue  is  in  black  ink  figures,  £840,000  for  1877. 
I  deducted  the  £714,000  from  the  £840,000,  bringing  out 
£126,000.  I  see  the  entry  of  £21,000  in  pencil  below  the 
£714,000.  I  don't  think  that  £21,000  represents  the  entry 
further  up,  "  B  of  M  actual  issue."  I  cannot  say  what  that  is. 
It  has  no  relation  to  the  Bank  of  Mona. 

Is  that  £21,000  the  £21,000  which  you  have  added  in  pencil 
below  the  £714,000?— I  cannot  follow  it.  I  deducted  the 
£7.35,000  from  the  £840,004,  bringing  out  £105,000. 

Then  you  say  this — "  Say,  make  it  £100,000  less  " ;  were  you 
experimenting  then? — ^Probably  so. 

What  did  you  mean  by  "  make  it  £100,000  less"?— I  cannot 
tell  you ;   it  was  not  I  that  was  experimenting. 

But  it  is  your  writing? — Yes,  it  is. 

And  it  is  your  thinking  which  this  writing  indicates? — No. 

Wliose  thinking  is  it? — The  Manager's. 

Was  the  Manager  looking  over  your  shoulder  and  telling  you 
to  write  "  make  it  £100,000  less  "?— Yes. 

Then  this  paper  was  made  in  the  Manager's  presence? — Lots 
of  it,  and  that  amongst  it. 

Do  you  swear  that,  Mr.  Morison? — I  do. 

Is  there  anything  here  your  own  original  composition? — The 
black  figures  are  taken  from  the  books. 

That  is  all  you  acknowledge  to  as  being  your  own? — Yes. 

Now,  if  you  go  to  the  right-hand  side  of  the  same  page, 
immediately  above  the  red  ink  figures  £840,004,  you  will  find 
an  experiment  of  deducting  the  £100,000? — Yes. 

And  there  is  brought  to  the  left  £740,000  ?— Yes. 

Tliat  was  trying  to  see  how  it  would  look  by  taking  off 
£100,000?— It  must  have  been. 

I3X 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Morison.  Apparently  you  di'opped  that  experiment,  and  you  took  to 
another ;  for  if  you  look  down  on  the  right-hand  page,  about 
three  inches  from  the  bottom,  you  will  find  in  pencil  the  true 
figure  £840,004,  and  there  is  deducted  from  that  £46,110?— 
Yes. 

What  is  that  £46,110? — Notes  received  at  exchange  on 
Thursday  morning  in  Glasgow. 

And  you  deducted  that  from  the  true  sum  in  circulation? — 
Yes. 

And  you  brought  out  £793,894,  the  sum  published  in  the 
abstract  being  £763,894.  Now,  how  was  £30,000  taken  off 
the  £793,000  ? — I  cannot  explain  that. 

Did  you  not  sign  the  balance  sheet  as  connect.' — Yes. 

On  the  left-hand  page  you  will  find,  under  head  III.,  "  gold 
and  silver  coin  on  hand,  and  notes  of  other  banks  on  hand," 
bringing  out  a  total  of  £921,018  Os.  2d.?— Yes. 

And  there  is  this  pencil  marking  in  your  handwriting,  "Why 
should  this  be  so  much  ?  "  Did  that  occur  to  your  own  mind, 
or  was  it  suggested  to  you  by  anybody? — It  was  suggested  to  me. 

And  you  wrote  it  down? — Yes. 

"  Why  should  this  be  so  much  ?  " — Oh  !  I  beg  your  pardon  ; 
I  understand  what  you  mean  now  ;  I  was  astonished  to  see  the 
amount  of  gold  and  silver  at  the  branches  when  it  should  have 
been  at  head  office. 

Then  this  astonishment  was  j'^our  own? — It  was. 

You  see  £30,000  in  pencil  deducted  from  the  £921,018?— 
Yes. 

Bringing  out  £891,018?— Yes. 

Wliere  did  you  get  that  £30,000  ?— I  got  it  from  the  Manager. 

Wliat  is  it? — I  cannot  tell. 

Is  it  not  an  answer  to  your  own  question,  why  this  should 
be  so  large? — No. 

Did  you  not  mean  that  it  should  be  made  less  when  you 
expressed  your  astonishment? — I  simply  did  what  I  was  told. 

Did  you  ask  the  Manager  where  the  £30,000'  came  from? — 
No. 

Did  you  form  an  idea  at  the  moment  whether  it  was  an 
invention  of  his,  or  whether  it  represented  an  existing  sum  of 
money? — All  that  I  know  about  it  is  that  it  is  taken  off  both 
sides. 

Did  you  not  ask  him  what  the  £30,000  represented  which  is 
deducted  from  the  com  in  hand? — There  might  have  been  a 
conversation,  but  I  cannot  i-ecollect  about  it. 

You  certified  that  tnat  £30,000  was  conect  when  you  signed 
this  abstract? — Yes. 

Then  you  took  the  £30,000  from  the  left-hand  side  to  the 
right-hand  side,  and  deducted  it  from  the  £793,894,  and  brought 
out  the  published  sum  of  £763,000?— That  is  sa. 

132 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

And    then    you    deduct    £30,000    from    the    coin    on    hand,  Wm.  Mopison. 
£921,018,  and  bring  out  £891,018  as  the  coin  on  hand?— Yes. 
That  was  published  in  the  abstract  balance  sheet. 

And  that  is  less  than  the  true  amount  bv  £30,000? — Yes. 

Now,  I  ask  again,  is  not  the  paper  that  I  hold  in  my  hand 
the  working  out  of  the  operations  of  your  own  mind  before  a 
human  being  saw  it? — No. 

And  were  not  all  these  experiments  yours,  and  no  other 
person's  ? — No. 

The  paper  is  witliout  any  sunnnation ;  it  never  was  presented 
complete  to  anybody/ — Oh,  yes,  it  is  summed  up.  Both  sides 
of  it  are  summed  up.  I  cannot  tell  when  it  was  summed  up 
without  going  over  the  summations. 

You  have  said  that  the  Manager  told  you  to  put  in  certain 
things,  and  that  certain  things  were  your  own  ;  why  did  you 
tell  Mr.  Balfour  that  you  did  not  remember  anything  about  the 
balance  of  1877? — I  did  not  say  I  did  not  remember  anything 
about  it. 

You  said  there  was  a  sheet  wanting,  and  you  could  not  give 
any  explanations  ? — Yes. 

I  show  you  the  abstract  for  1878  ;  at  the  left-hand  you  see 
a  number  of  pencil  iigurings  not  obliterated  yet,  in  the  fourth 
column ;  these  figures  are  yours  ? — Yes. 

Was  this  paper  covered  with  calculations  of  the  same  sort 
that  we  see  in  1877? — I  cannot  tell  you. 

Any  figuring  that  was  here  was  in  your  handwriting? — 'Yes. 

You  recollect  about  1878  ;  do  you  recollect  of  making  cal- 
culations in  regard  to  the  various  items  to  be  entered  in  the 
abstract  ? — Yes  ;   I  made  calculations. 

And  they  were  upon  this  paper? — Yes. 

Who  obliterated  the  pencil  markings  here? — I  cannot  tell 
you. 

Did  you  do  it? — I  might  have  done  it;  I  cannot  tell. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — I  understand  that  in  the  balance 
abstracts  furnished  to  you  by  the  superintendent  of  branches 
there  were  entered  the  whole  deposits  at  the  branches,  the  bills 
floating,  and  all  other  details? — Yes. 

The  same  as  in  the  case  of  the  head  office? — Yes. 

And  you  carried  all  these  deposits,  and  bills,  and  others,  into 
the  final  balance  sheet? — Yes. 

But  in  the  balance  ledger  nothing  is  given  except  the  balance 
at  each  branch  ? — Yes ;   the  item  of  balance  at  each  branch. 

Not  the  details  bringing  it  out? — Not  the  details. 

Did  you  at  the  making  up  of  any  of  these  three  balance  sheets 
for  1876,  1877,  or  1878,  of  your  own  accord  alter  the  balances 
so  as  not  to  l>e  in  conformity  with  the  books  under  your  charge? 
— That  is  personally  you  mean? 

Yes?— No. 

133 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Morison.       You  were  responsible  for  keeping  the   books  1 — Yes. 

But  did  you  ever  make  up  or  complete  a  balance  sheet  with- 
out the  aid  and  sanction  of  the  Manager? — ^Never. 

In  bringing  down  to  the  heading  No.  III.  the  balances  from 
credit  accounts  and  others,  I  think  you  said  that  you  had  no- 
knowledge  which  would  have  enabled  you  to  say  that  that 
was  a  right  thing  to  do  ? — I  had  no  knowledge  of  the  securities. 

Or  whether  there  were  securities  1 — fOr  whether  there  were 
securities. 

But  you  certified  the  abstract  as  completed,  bringing  these 
down,  although  you  had  not  that  knowledge  ? — Yes. 

Upon  what,  then,  did  you  rely  in  signing  that  abstract  or 
balance  sheet  containing  such  entries? — I  relied  on  the  altera- 
tions made  by  the  Directors. 

Including  the  Manager? — Including  the  Manager,  of  course. 

The  Directors,  so  far  as  you  have  spoken  to  them? — Yes. 

You  have  said  that,  in  your  opinion,  where  a  debt  is  due  in 
the  form  of  an  overdraft  upon  a  cun-ent  account  or  a  bill,  and 
there  is  security  held  by  the  Bank  sufficient  to  cover  that,  in 
making  out  a  balance  sheet,  the  Directors,  or  the  Manager,  or 
yourself,  would  be  warranted  in  entering  that  not  as  a  debt 
on  the  one  side,  with  security  upon  the  other,  but  simply  as  an 
asset  of  that  amount? — Simply  an  asset. 

Do  you  think  that  would  fairly  inform  a  shareholder  of  the 
Bank  of  the  state  of  the  Bank? — Do  you  refer  to  the  sums 
taken  down? 

Yes? — They  were  simply  taken  down  from  the  one  heading 
to  the  other ;  the  securities,  if  any,  would  still  have  been 
there. 

Suppose  the  Bank  had  lent  five  millions,  and  they  held  five 
millions  of  securities,  would  it  be  right  to  enter  these  as  five 
millions  lent,  with  securities  against  them,  or  simply  as  an 
asset  of  five  millions? — As  an  asset. 

Of  five  millions  ? — ^They  are  all  assets  ;  all  that  side  are 
assets. 

You  see  no  difference  between  these  two  things? — No. 

Suppose  the  security  were  turning  out  bad  within  a  week 
after  the  publication  of  the  balance  sheet,  would  the  balance 
sheet  be  true  in  that  case? — ^It  would  not  be  true  after  they 
were  bad. 

You  said  that  the  alterations  you  made  upon  the  accounts 
did  not  alter  the  balance  ? — They  did  not  alter  the  stock  account, 
profit  and  loss,  and  reserve. 

Do  you  think  that  an  entry  in  a  balance  sheet  is  legitimate, 
leaving  out  entries,  so  long  as  you  don't  affect  the  result? — Oh, 
no. 

Those  entries  that  were  taken  down,  I  understand,  only  appear 

134 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

as    so    taken    down    in    that    scroll    balance    sheet,    and    in    the  Wm.  Morison. 
abstract  which  you  published  I — Yes. 

Do  they  anywhere  appear  in  the  books  of  the  Bank  as  so 
dealt  with? — No. 

Or  in  the  balance  ledger? — No. 

You  said  Mr.  Stronach  made  a  remark  to  you  in  1878  that 
he  hoped  it  would  not  be  done  again,  or  that  he  would  not 
require  to  do  it  again  ;  what  did  he  refer  to  ? — I  understood  it 
to  l>e  some  settlement  of  James  Morton  &  Co.'s  affairs. 

What  was  it  that  it  would  not  be  necessary  to  do  again? — 'To 
understate  the  bills  payable,  and,  of  course,  the  foreign  and 
colonial  credits. 

Did  you  understand  why  he  hoped  it  would  not  be  necessary 
to  do  it  again? — I  understood  that  it  was  to  be  a  settlement  of 
James  Morton  &  Co.'s  affairs. 

Did  you  think  he  was  doing  a  right  thing  in  so  understating 
the  bills  payable  and  the  foreign  and  colonial  credits? — No. 

Why  did  you  think  it  was  not  right? — Because  the  amount 
in  the  balance  sheet  did  not  correspond  with  the  sum  in 
the  books. 

Did  you  believe  that  he  held  securities  against  it  ? — Yes. 

Was  it  a  wrong  thing  to  enter  the  bills  payable  so,  even  if  he 
held  securities? — Yes,  in  so  far  as  it  did  not  correspond  with 
the  Bank  books. 

And  did  you  understand  him  then  to  allude  only  to  its  not 
corresponding  with  the  Bank  books? — Quite  so. 

If  you  are  right  in  your  view,  why  did  its  non-correspondence 
with  the  Bank  books  make  it  a  wrong  thing  to  tell  a  share- 
holder?— Because  the  amount  shown  to  the  shareholders  differed 
from  what  was  in  the  books. 

If  you  wore  right  in  your  view,  what  harm  did  the  share- 
holders take  from  not  seeing  what  was  in  the  books,  and  seeing 
what  was  in  the  abstract  instead? — It  understates  their 
Ifabilities  to   the  public. 

It  concealed  their  liabilities  from  the  public  ? — It  certainly 
concealed  them. 

Do  you  think,  or  do  you  not  think,  that  it  is  of  importance 
to  the  public  or  to  shareholders  to  have  a  truthful  statement 
of  the  liabilities  of  a  bank? — A  truthful  statement. 

According  to  the  books? — According  to  the  books. 

Is  it  important  to  them  or  not? — It  should  be  important  ;  it 
must  be. 

Important  as  influencing  their  judgment  as  to  the  state  of  the 
Bank? — Quite  so. 

Does  the  amount  of  these  things  not  affect  the  credit  of  the 
Bank? — I  should  say  so. 

And  do  you  still  say  that  it  was  a  legitimate  thing  to  reduce 

135 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Mopison.  them,  although  there  was  security  held .' — You  mean  the  bills 
payable  ? 

Do  you  still  say  that  it  was  a  right  thing,  assuming  there  was 
security,  to  make  them  disconform  to  the  books? — I  never  said 
that  it  was  right. 

In  regard  to  bills  payable  ;  but  do  you  say  it  is  a  right  thing 
in  regard  to  these  credit  balances  to  take  them  down  in  the 
way  that  was  done — as  securities  ;  is  it  a  right  thing  for  the 
public  or  the  shareholders? — I  see  no  reason  why  they  should 
not  have  been  taken  down  if  they  held  securities. 

And  entered  in  the  books? — And  entered  in  the  books. 

Is  it  a  right  thing  to  take  them  down  withovit  that  appearing 
in  the  books,  or  the  security  appearing  in  the  books  as  against 
them? — The  practice  was  not  to  bring  them  down. 

But  you  departed  from  the  practice.  Was  that  departure, 
in  your  opinion,  justifiable  when  there  was  no  entry  in  the 
books  to  show  it? — I  should  have  prefeiTcd  an  entry. 

Why  should  you  have  preferred  that  ? — Because  it  would  have 
made  the  amount  agree  with  the  sreneral  ledger. 

Not  because  it  was  right,  but  only  because  it  would  make  the 
amount  agree  with  the  general  ledger? — ^Because  the  amount 
would  then  agree  with  the  general  ledger. 

Who  suggested  that  departure  from  the  general  practice? — • 
In  1876,  Mr.  Potter. 

And  thereafter? — It  was  continued. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — I  made  up  an  abstract  balance 
for  the  head  office,  and  the  superintendent  of  branches  made  it 
up  for  the  branches.  I  then  made  up  a  draft  of  a  full  abstract, 
combining  the  results  of  these.  I  then  submitted  that  to  the 
Manager.  I  did  so  in  1876.  I  became  accountant  in  1871. 
In  1876,  at  the  annual  balance.  I  had  a  conversation  with  the 
Manager  and  Mr.  Potter,  and  certain  alterations  were  made 
at  their  suggestion. 

Was  that  the  first  time  that  any  such  interview  had  taken 
place? — ^Yes. 

Were  these  alterations  consequent  on  an  examination  of  the 
books,  or  how  did  Mr.  Potter  and  the  Manager  get  at  the  sums 
you  have  mentioned? — They  got  certain  statements  from  me 
or  some  of  the  other  gentlemen. 

Had  they  anybody  else  at  the  meeting  with  them  t — ^No. 

Had  they  come  prepared  with  figures? — They  had  no  figures. 

Then  the  figures  that  appear  in  red  ink  were  not  suggested  by 
them? — All  the  alterations  were  suggested  by  them. 

Had  they  any  figures  to  give  you  ? — ^Yes. 

Your  statement  is  that  they  mentioned  sums  to  you  which 
they  instructed  you  to  put  into  your  abstract? — ^Yes. 

Were  these  sums  which  they  had  already  jotted  down,  or 
which  they  had  in  their  heads,   or  were  they  derived  from  an 

136 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

'examination  of  the  books  at  the  time  'I — I  got  certain  infonnation  Wm.  Mopison. 
for  them  from  certain  of  the  clerks. 

You  mean  that  at  that  meeting  they  asked  you  for  some 
information  1 — Yes. 

And  that  you  went  and  got  it? — 'Yes. 

Now,  what  infonnation  was  that? — As  to  the  amount  of  the 
bills  payable.  The  full  amount  of  them  was  in  my  abstract, 
but  they  wanted  infonnation  as  to  the  separate  accounts 
forming  the  gross  amount  of  which  this  sum  was  composed. 

For  what  purpose? — It  must  have  been  in  order  to  see  if 
they  could  make  any  deductions  from  it. 

Was  it  to  see  whether  your  sum  total  was  correct  or  not? — 
Oh,  no. 

You  understood  at  the  time  that  it  was  to  see  if  they  could 
make  any  deduction  from  it? — At  the  time. 

And  you  did  get  the  details  of  the  bills  payable? — Yes. 

Did  they  make  a  deduction  from  the  bills  payable? — They  did. 
They  deducted  the  £973,000. 

What  was  the  whole  amount?— £2,288,673  l7s.  Id.  That 
was  the  amount  appearing  in  my  abstract,  as  taken  from  the 
books. 

When  did  that  £973,000  first  appear,  and  what  was  the 
history  of  it  up  to  1876? — It  was  an  entry  or  entries  made  in 
Mr.  Alexander  Stronach's  time  in  June,   1873. 

Where  was  it  made? — First  in  the  private  cash  book,  and  then 
in  the  general  ledger,  and  then  in  the  weekly  balance  book. 

What  was  it? — I  never  got  the  particulars  of  it. 

You  said  you  were  told  to  get  the  details  of  bills  payable, 
and  you  understood  the  reason  why  they  wanted  the  details 
to  be  that  they  might  make  some  deduction  from  them.  You 
also  said  that  when  you  came  back  with  the  information  they 
directed  you  to  deduct  £973,000.  Is  that  right?— That  is 
right. 

Then  what  was  that  £973,000? — You  cannot  reconcile  the 
figures  as  any  portion  of  the  £2,288,673. 

But  what  did  the  £973,000  represent?  WTiat  was  the  original 
of  it? — It  was  an  entry  made  the  same  as  if  certain  bills  payable 
had  been  taken  out  of  the  circle. 

Wlio  were  the  debtors  in  them  ? — I  cannot  speak  to  that  unless 
I  saw  the  memorandum,  which  is  still  to  be  found. 

Surely  you  know  well  enough  what  it  was? — No,  I  don't. 

Well,  the  result  was  that  they  told  you  to  strike  out  that 
£973,000  from  bills  payable,  and  you  did  so? — Yes. 

What  was  the  effect  of  that  on  your  abstract? — To  reduce  the 
bills  payable  by  that  amount. 

And  the  effect  on  the  abstract  was  to  diminish  the  liabilities 
x)f  the  Bank  to  that  extent? — To  that  extent. 

137 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Morison.  Now,  you  are  quite  sure  that  you  were  told  to  do  that  by  the 
Manager  and  Mr.  Potter? — Yes. 

And  did  you  do  it  in  red  ink? — ^No. 

Why? — Because  the  amount  was  in  the  general  ledger. 

It  was  only  the  things  that  were  not  in  the  books  that  you 
put  into  red  ink? — ^Yes. 

Was  there  anything  else  they  told  you  to  do? — There  are  the- 
three  entries  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  etc.  These  stood  in 
my  abstract  as  credit  accounts.  That  was  the  place  I  thought 
they  ought  to  be  in.  They  directed  me  to  take  down  £751,775- 
of  them.  They  were  in  their  right  place  under  credit  accounts, 
and  this  corresponded  with  the  books. 

What  was  their  reason  for  putting  that  under  the  other  head? 
— I  understood  it  was  because  they  held  certain  stocks  to  that 
extent. 

You  mean  that  it  was  a  good  asset  to  the  extent  of  the  security 
held?— Yes. 

And  that  they  thought  the  £751,000  represented  the  security? 
—Yes. 

Would  that  have  been  the  right  way  of  doing  it  if  that  had 
been  the  case,  or  were  they  not  properly  charged  as  in  the 
credit  accounts,  whether  there  was  security  or  no? — It  would 
have  been  quite  right ;  at  least  I  don't  see  anything  wrong  in 
it  had  they  made  the  entry. 

Was  the  proper  way  of  entering  it  as  you  did  it  at  first  ? — The 
amount  was  in  the  credit  accounts  ledger  as  at  7th  June. 

How  wei-e  you  in  the  habit  of  dealing  with  suras  appearing 
in  the  credit  accounts  where  there  was  security  granted  for 
them? — ^The  cash  drawn  out  is  simply  shown. 

But  in  your  abstracts  of  the  balances  did  you  enter  nothing 
under  your  credit  account  for  which  security  was  held?-^We 
understand  that  all  credit  accounts  are  covered  by  security. 

Then  why  should  the  fact  of  there  being  security  for  this 
part  of  the  credit  account  alter  the  way  of  stating  it? — I  under- 
stood it  was  for  stocks  that  were  easily  convertible  into  cash. 

Is  that  any  reason  why  it  should  not  appear  in  the  credit 
accounts  ? — None. 

Was  the  reason  not  to  reduce  the  apparent  amount  of  the 
credit  accounts? — It  had  that  effect. 

Was  that  not  the  object? — I  cannot  say. 

Was  that  not  your  impression? — It  increased  the  amount  of 
advances  which  were  easily  convertible  into  cash,  and  reduced 
the  amounts  under  the  heading. 

The  effect  was  to  reduce  the  apparent  amount  of  the  sums 
under  credit  accounts? — 'That  was  the  effect  of  it. 

So  that  the  shareholders  should  not  see  that  that  £751,000  had 
been  advanced  under  credit  account ;  that  is  the  effect  of  it  ? — 
That  is  the  effect  of  it. 

138 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

You  won't  say  that  that  was  the  reason  of  it? — I  could  not  Wm.  Morlson. 
say. 

Did  the  Manager  or  Mr.  Potter  suggest  any  other  reason  for 
it? — That  is  the  only  one  that  I  mentioned  before — that  it 
would  be  brought  down  under  the  heading  of  stocks,  thereby 
increasing  the  apparent  assets  under  that  head. 

Do  you  know  of  any  other  instance  where  sums  advanced  on 
credit  accounts  with  security  were  placed  under  that  head? — 
Not  taken  from  credit  accounts  in  the  same  way. 

It  is  the  only  time  you  ever  knew  it  done? — The  only  time. 

You  are  quite  sure  that  that  was  directed  by  the  Manager 
and  Potter? — Perfectly. 

Did  you  make  that  alteration  in  red  ink? — It  is  not  made 
here  in  red  ink. 

Where  is  the  alteration? — [Shown.]  It  is  just  under  the 
heading  "  Railway  and  other  stocks  and  debentures."  It  is  in 
black  ink  there. 

Then  you  say  that  this  thing  upon  which  the  red  ink  marks 
are  is  not  the  original  abstract  that  you  made? — 'No. 

Not  the  one  that  was  altered  in  terms  of  their  instructions? 
—No. 

And  you  don't  know  where  it  is? — No,  I  do  not. 

What  is  this  [No.  127]? — It  is  the  clean  copy  of  it.  It  would 
be  made  as  soon  after  the  other  as  I  could. 

You  made  it  up,  and  altered  it  in  red  ink  yourself  in  order 
to  be  ready  for  the  ultimate  abstract? — Yes.  The  red  ink 
markings,  you  will  observe,  are  simply  bringing  the  head  office 
abstract  and  the  branches  abstract  together. 

Were  you  told  or  did  you  understand  that  this  conversation 
with  the  Manager  and  Potter  was  to  be  confidential? — I  never 
was  instructed  so.      Nothing  was  said  to  me  on  the  subject. 

You  did  not  make  any  alteration  on  those  accounts  in  the 
books  that  you  have  spoken  to  in  consequence  of  what  the 
Directors  or  the  Manager  had  said  to  you  in  1876? — No. 

But  in  1877  you  did  not  repeat  in  your  abstract  the  entry 
of  the  sum  of  £97.3,.300?— No. 

You  onjitted  it? — 'Yes. 

Why? — Because  there  were  other  sums  adopted  instead  of  it. 

I  want  to  know  why  you  omitted  the  £973,300,  and  why  you 
put  in  new  sums?  Were  you  told  to  do  it? — Yes,  by  Mr. 
Stronach.  I  would  not  like  to  say  Mr.  Potter ;  I  am  not  certain 
of  that  for  1877. 

Had  you  any  meeting  in  1877,  as  you  had  in  1876,  with  the 
Manager  or  Potter? — I  am  not  certain  of  1877  ;  I  would  not 
like  to  speak  to  it. 

But  that  alteration  in  1877  was  made  by  the  directions  of 
Stronach  ? — Yes. 

And  no  reason  was  given  for  it? — No. 

139 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Morison.       Are  you  sure? — There  was  no  special  reason  given  for  it. 

But  the  effect  was  that  these  sums  were  entered  in  the  book 
and  substantially  filled  up  the  amount  of  the  £973,300,  although 
apparently  under  different  heads? — Quite  so. 

Did  these  new  sums  represent  any  new  transactions  I — ^Yes ; 
a  certain  amount  deducted  from  the  bills  payable. 

But  the  sums  which  you  put  in  in  order  to  deduct  it  from 
the  bills  payable,  did  they  represent  any  real  debts'?  You  said 
yesterday  they  were  not  altogether  fictitious? — The  first  amount 
deducted  was  cash  lodged  on  credit  account,  £94,368  lis.  Id. 

I  don't  want  you  to  go  through  the  whole  of  it,  but  the  effect 
was  that  £1,333,000  was  deducted  from  the  bills  payable 
instead  of  the  £973,000?— Yes. 

Next  year  the  £973,000  was  restored,  and  this  sum  of 
£1,333,000  disappeared  from  the  abstract? — ^Yes. 

All  that  was  by  direction  of  the  Manager? — Yes. 

With  regard  to  the  cross  entries,  the  sum  of  £973,300  appears 
on  both  sides  of  the  account?^ — Yes. 

What  is  the  effect  of  that? — It  reduces  the  amount  of  the 
indebtedness  of  the  Bank  to  that  extent,  and  on  the  other  hand 
it  reduces  the  amount  of  the  assets. 

They  balance  each  other? — Yes. 

But  if  they  are  correct  entries,  you  say  they  are  rightly  entered 
in  the  abstract  ? — ^They  are  in  the  abstract  because  they  are  in 
the  general  ledger. 

What  was  the  general  effect  of  the  alterations  in  1876  on 
the  position  of  the  Bank? — By  putting  in  the  balance,  or  balances 
rather,  of  the  deposit  accounts,  and  the  balance  of  the  credit 
accounts,  reducing  on  the  one  side  the  assets  of  the  Bank,  and 
on  the  other  the  liabilities.  The  £973,300  entry  did  the 
same  on  both  sides. 

It  was  to  show  a  smaller  amount  of  assets,  and  a  smaller 
amount  of  liabilities  than  the  actual  fact? — Yes. 

Not  affecting,  however,  the  profit  and  loss  account? — No. 
Of  course  the  £751,000  entiy  did  not  alter  the  liabilities  at  all. 

With  regard  to  securities,  I  suppose  that  sums  that  were  fully 
covered  are  entered  as  assets  in  the  credit  accounts? — They  are 
entered  whether  they  are  secured  or  not. 

Then  what  notice  do  you  take  of  securities  in  your  abstracts — 
in  your  balances  ? — They  are  not  referred  to  at  all ;  there  are 
simply  the  figures  given. 

When  a  debt  is  wholly  unsecured,  and  the  debtor  is  not  sup- 
posed to  be  good  for  it,  it  goes  into  bad  or  doubtful  debts,  I 
suppose? — It  should  do. 

Or  suspense  account  ? — ^Or  suspense  account. 

But  no  notice  is  ever  taken  of  securities  in  the  abstract? — No. 
There   is  a  i-egister   of   securities,   but   I   do  not  consult  it   in 
making  up  my  abstract.      I  have  no  concern  with  it  whatever. 
X40 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Therefore,  whether  there  were  or  were  not  securities  for  the  Wm.  Morison. 
suras  you  have  been  speaking  to,  you  had  no  means  of  knowing? 
— None. 

Could  you  have  ascertained  from  the  securities  book,  if  you 
had  chosen,  whether  there  was  security  for  the  £973,300  ? — If 
the  law  secretary  had  shown  me  the  book,  but  I  don't  know 
that  he   would  have   shown  it   to   me.       The   book   was   in  his  < 

custody. 

Charles  Samuel  Leresche. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — I  have  been  secretary  of  the  City  C.s.Leresehe. 
of  Glasgow  Bank  since  1870.  I  was  appointed  in  October,  1870, 
and  took  charge  in  December.  The  Directors  at  the  time  I  was 
appointed  were  Mr.  Inglis,  Mr.  Potter,  Mr.  Salmond,  Mr. 
AJexander  Stronach,  Mr.  Lorraine,  and  Mr.  James  Nicol 
Fleming.  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach  resigned  as  a  Director  and 
also  as  the  Manager  of  the  Bank  in  1875,  and  he  was  succeeded 
as  Manager  by  his  brother  Kobert,  who  was  a  Director  ex  officio. 
Mr.  Lon-aine  died  shortly  after  I  left  the  Bank,  in  the  beginning 
of  1871.  Mr.  Mackinnou  had  retired  from  the  Bank  a  few 
months  prior  to  my  entering,  and  there  were  two  Directors 
elected  shortly  before  the  next  annual  meeting.  They  were 
Mr.  Stewart  and  Mr.  Taylor.  I  could  not  tell  from  raemoiy 
when  James  Nicol  Fleming  retired,  but  he  was  succeeded  by 
Mr.  Wright.  My  predecessor  as  secretary  was  Mr.  Low,  who 
is  now  dead.  When  I  entered  on  my  duties  in  1870,  Mr. 
Alexander  Stronach  spoke  to  me  in  a  very  marked  mannei',  and 
told  me  that  my  predecessor,  Mr.  Low,  had  made  himself 
obnoxious  to  the  Directors  by  pushing  himself  forward,  and 
asking  for  information  about  accounts  which  were  in  no  way 
connected  with  his  department,  and  that  the  feeling  was  so 
strong  at  the  last  that  a  letter  which  he  had  handed  in  to  the 
Board  in  connection  with  these  matters  the  Directors  had  refused 
to  receive. 

What  effect  had  that  on  you  or  on  your  course  of  conduct 
after  you  became  secretary? — Mr.  Stronach  spoke  to  me  very 
plainly,  and  told  me  it  was  his  own  wish,  as  also  the  wish  of 
the  Directors,  that  I  should  just  confine  myself  to  my  own 
department.  The  duties  of  the  office  of  secretary  were  to  take 
charge  of  the  general  correspondence  of  the  Bank  ;  to  keep  the 
minute  book  of  the  Directors,  and  to  enter  therein  the  minute 
of  the  weekly  meeting  of  the  Board  ;  to  take  charge  of  certain 
properties  in  the  Western  States  of  America  in  which  the  Bank 
at  that  time  was  largely  interested  ;  and  to  answer  inquiries 
from  correspondents  as  to  the  financial  position  of  local  firms. 
The  meetings  of  the  Directors  were  held  once  a  week.  There 
was  an  agenda  book  kept,  in  which  the  business  to  l>e  done 

141 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

C.S.Leresehe.  was  put  on  the  one  side,  and  the  deliverance  upon  it  in  a  rough 
form  on  the  other.  [Shown  Nos.  554  and  556.]  No.  554  is 
the  agenda  book  commencing  on  30th  July,  1874,  and  No.  556 
is  the  agenda  book  commencing  on  7th  December,  1876,  and 
coming  down  to  the  date  of  the  closing  of  the  Bank.  [Shown 
Nos.  100  and  101.]  These  are  the  minute  books  applicable  to 
the  period  from  1st  December,  1870,  when  the  first  of  them 
commences,  down  to  the  closing  of  the  Bank.  The  usual  course 
of  proceeding  with  regard  to  business  to  be  brought  before  these 
meetings  was  that  I  went  down  to  the  Manager  on  the  morning 
of  each  Thursday,  and  would  ask  him  what  business  he  would 
have  to  bring  before  the  Board  that  day.  He  would  tell  me 
whether  there  were  any  letters  of  credit  or  cash  credits  or 
anything  connected  with  the  branches,  whatever  the  business 
was ;  and  he  would  give  me  the  letters  and  any  papers  con- 
nected therewith.  I  would  take  these  and  commence  entering 
them  in  the  agenda  book,  and  afterwards  bring  the  book  with 
them  to  the  meeting.  After  the  meeting,  those  letters  that 
were  connected  with  letters  of  credit,  such  as  Smith,  Fleming 
&  Co.'s,  I  would  generally  take  in  to  Mr.  Morris ;  and  sometimes 
I  would  take  them  back,  and  leave  them  with  the  Manager. 
Mr.  Morris  was  the  private  secretary  of  the  Manager.  Where 
it  is  stated  in  any  of  the  minutes  that  a  letter  was  read,  it  was 
the  practice  when  I  was  present  really  to  have  the  letter  read. 
That  was  always  done.  It  was  my  duty  as  secretary  to  be 
present  at  the  meetings.  The  names  of  the  Directors  present 
at  the  meetings  were  generally  put  down  in  the  agenda  book 
by  the  chaiiToan  for  the  time  being.  I  see  from  the  agenda 
book  that  the  Directors  present  at  the  meeting  on  23rd 
December,  1875,  were  Mr.  Taylor,  Mr.  Stewart,  Mr.  Wright, 
Mr.  Inglis,  and  Mr.  Salmond.  Mr.  Robert  Stronach,  who  was 
then  Assistant  Manager,  was  also  present.  Mr.  Taylor  was 
the   chairman.       I  remember  about  that  meeting. 

What  was  the  usual  concluding  part  of  the  business  at  these 
meetings? — The  reading  of  what  was  called  the  abstracts  and 
statements. 

Was  there  not  the  burning  of  notes  which  were  to  be  caxi- 
celled  ?— -That  was  done  at  any  time. 

When  that  required  to  be  done  was  it  not  the  last  piece  of 
formal  business? — ^Yes. 

On  that  occasion,  23rd  December,  1875,  were  there  notes  which 
ought  to  have  been  burned? — Yes. 

What  happened  when  that  item  of  business  came  on? — So 
far  as  I  can  remember,  when  tliese  notes  came  forward  to  be 
burned  they  would  say  to  me,  "  We  will  not  take  these  up 
this  week  ;  we  have  some  matters  to  talk  over,  and  it  can  be 
postponed  for  another  week."  I  would  then  retire  from  the 
meeting. 

142 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Was  it  at  their  request  that  you  retired? — It  was  never  said  c.S.Leresehe. 
in  80  many  words,  but  the  usual  custom  was,  after  I  had 
finished  reading  the  abstracts  and  statements,  I  would  say 
to  the  chairman,  "  That  is  all  the  business  I  have  to  bring 
forward,"  and  the  chairman  would  bow  me  out,  and  I  would 
retire.  It  was  an  understood  custom.  When  there  was  nothing 
else  to  be  done,  I  would  take  the  agenda  book  away  with  me ; 
but  on  other  occasions  they  would  say  they  had  some  matters 
to  talk  over,  and  would  ask  me  to  leave  the  agenda  book. 
That  was  done  on  23rd  December,  1875.  I  would  be  called 
in  afterwards.  [Shown  No.  206.]  That  is  a  letter  which 
was  handed  to  me  when  I  came  back,  and  which  I  was  instructed 
to  have  engrossed  in  the  minutes.  It  is  a  letter  from  Mr. 
Alexander  Stronach  containing  his  resignation  on  account  of 
ill-health.  At  the  meeting  on  30th  December,  1875,  there  were 
present  Mr.  Taylor,  Mr.  Potter,  Mr.  Stewart,  Mr.  Salmond, 
Mr.  Inglis,  and  Mr.  Wright.  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach  having 
retired,  that  was  the  whole  Board  at  that  time.  On  that 
occasion  the  burning  of  notes  was  again  adjourned,  and  I 
again  left  the  room,  but  I  cannot  say  whether  I  left  the  agenda 
book  behind  me  or  not.  The  Board  had  a  long  deliberation 
that  day.      I  should  say  it  must  have  been  two  hours. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Are  you  speaking  from  recollec- 
tion' alone? — I  remember  it,  because  30th  December  was  the 
occasion  when  the  letter  of  the  Manager  was  read  accepting  the 

appointment. 

By  the  SoLiciTOR-GEKERAi^Shown  Nos.  208  and  209.] 
When  I  came  back  the  letter  No.  208  and  the  corresponding 
envelope  No.  209  were  handed  to  me  by  the  chairman,  who  was 
Mr.  Taylor.  It  is  a  letter  from  Mr.  Robert  Stronach  to  the 
Directors.      [Letter  read.] 

City  of  Glasgow  Bank, 
Glasgow,  28th  December,  1875. 

The  Chairman  and  Directors  of  the 
City  of  Glasgow  Bank. 

Gentlemen,— In  thanking  you  for  the  offer  of  the  managership 
of  this  Bank  which  you  have  kindly  made  to  me,  I  beg  to  state 
my  willingness  to  accept  it.  But  before  undertaking  this  re- 
sponsibility, T  deem  it  prudent  to  ask  the  Board  to  minute  its 
approval  of  the  policy  which  has  been  pursued  of  supporting  several 
accounts  of  an  unsatisfactory  character  since  my  brother  discon- 
tinued personally  to  manage  the  Bank  ;  and,  further,  to  appoint  a 
committee  to  investigate  and  place  on  record  what  may  be  found 
to  have  been  the  exact  position  of  these  accounts  and  advances 
generally  when  my  brother  ceased  to  be  Manager,  and  also  to  act 
and  guide  me  in  any  important  detail  therewith  connected,  as  I 
am  in  no  wise  responsible  up  to  this  date  for  the  state  of  certain 
advances  which  T  need  not  here  particularise. 

You  will,  T  hope,  admit  the  reasonableness  of  the  precaution 
•which  this  request  involves ;  and  I  feel  you  will  the  more  readily 

143 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

C.S.Leresehe.  do  this  when  you  consider  that  whilst  we  are  ail  hopeful  that  those- 
advances  may  eventuate  without  loss,  yet  the  working  out  of  them 
must  of  necessity  be  a  work  of  some  time.  And  when  you  also- 
consider  that  there  may  be  changes  in  the  Board  during  this  time, 
and  I  should  have  to  explain  to  new  Directors  what  you  know 
regarding  my  connection  with  the  inception  of  these  advances. — 
I  am,  gentlemen,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  Stbonach. 

Since  that  letter  was  read  to  the  Board  of  Directors  there 
has  been  no  change  in  the  directorate/  The  gentlemen  who  sat 
that  day,  with  the  exception  of  Mr.  Robert  Stronach,  are  the 
gentlemen  at  the  bar? — Yes.  Mr.  Stronach's  name  is  not  in 
the  agenda  book  that  day,  but  I  see  from  the  minute  book  that 
he  was  present.      [Shown  No.  205.] 

Is  that  a  draft  resolution  which  was  handed  to  you  by  the 
chairman  on  the  same  occasion  after  you  were  recalled"? — Yes. 
The  first  part  of  it  is  in  Mr.  Taylor's,  and  the  last  of  it  in  Mr. 
Inglis's  handwa'iting.  It  is — "  A  letter  was  read  from  Mr. 
Robert  Summers  Stronach,  of  date  28th  December,  1875,  accept- 
ing the  office  of  Manager  of  the  Bank,  and  the  same  having  been 
considered  and  approved  of,  is  ordered  to  be  recorded  in  the 
minute  book,  and  appoint  all  the  members  of  the  Board  of 
Directors  a  committee  to  comply  with  his  request.  The 
Directors  wish  also  to  record  on  their  own  behalf  the  fact  that 
the  matters  alluded  to  in  the  letter  in  question  were  not  at  any 
time  brought  before  them  by  their  late  Manager."  The  three 
■words  "  and  approved  of "  in  the  first  part  of  the  document 
are  also  in  Mr.  Inglis's  handwriting,  besides  the  part  at  the 
end.  In  the  agenda  book,  under  date  18th  Februaiy,  1875, 
there  is  an  entry — ■"  Appoint  Messrs.  Potter  and  Salmond  a 
committee  to  assist  the  Manager  in  aiTanging  the  securities 
and  advances  connected  with  the  late  firm  of  James  N.  Fleming 
&  Co.,  Calcutta,  and  Smith,  Fleming  <fe  Co.,  London,  with  full 
powers." 

Was  that  deliverance  agreed  to  in  your  hearing,  or  after  you 
had   retired? — After   I   had   retired. 

Was  it  handed  to  you  to  be  entered  ? — On  this  occasion  I  would 
be  called  up.  That  deliverance  in  the  agenda  book  is  in  Mr. 
Taylor's  handwriting.  Being  refeired  to  agenda  book  under 
date  1st  June,  1876 — there  were  present  that  day  Mr.  Taylor, 
Mr.  Potter,  Mr.  Salmond,  Mr.  Inglis,  Mr.  Wright,  and  the 
Manager.  There  is  an  entry  on  the  right-hand  page,  near  the 
bottom,  as  follows: — "The  committee  appointed  18th  February, 
1875,  to  look  into  the  accounts  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  and 
J.  N.  Fleming  &  Co.,  reported  that  they  had  seen  that  these 
accounts  had  been  put  into  shape."  That  entry  was  made  by 
me.      I  vras  told  to  make  it.      Mr.  Taylor  was  chairman. 

Did  he  tell  you  to  record  it? — 'No  :    my  recollection  is  that 

144 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Mr.  Potter  said  the  committee  had  looked  into  these  accounts,  c.  S.  Leresehe. 
and   had   put    them    into   order,    and   he   wished   to   have   that 
recorded ;  and  this  minute  I  took  down  probably  from  what  Mr. 
Potter  said. 

You  heard  Mr.  Potter  make  that  statement,  but  do  you 
remember  whether  the  direction  was  given  more  specially  than 
that,  or  not.^ — It  was  just  given  verbally — "We  wish  to  have 
that  inseited  in  the  minutes."  It  was  inserted  in  the  minutes 
from  the  agenda  book.  I  did  not  ask  that  a  draft  should  be 
made  out;  I  just  wrote  it  down.  That  deliverance  is  engrossed 
in  the  minute  book  of  the  Directors  of  the  same  date.  In 
the  agenda  book  on  22nd  June,  1876,  the  sederunt  is  Mr. 
Taylor,  chairman,  Messrs.  Stewart,  Wright,  and  Potter,  and 
the  Manager.  The  last  item  of  business  on  the  left-hand  page 
is  "  Appointment  of  committee  to  examine  into  the  old  accounts." 
The  corresponding  entry  in  the  minutes  of  22nd  June  is 
engrossed  as  folloAvs :  — "  It  was  resolved  to  appoint  Messrs. 
Taylor  and  Potter  a  committee  to  examine  into  certain  old 
accounts  of  the  Bank,  and  to  assist  the  Manager  in  arranging 
these  under  one  general  heading,  with  full  power."  I  cannot 
tell  how  that  matter  came  up  at  the  meeting  of  22nd  June  ; 
it  came  up  after  I  retired.  Either  the  book  had  been  left,  or 
I  had  brought  up  the  book. 

Do  you  remember  the  Manager  saying  anything  while  you 
were  present  on  that  occasion  to  the  effect  that  he  wished  those 
old  accounts  looked  into? — I  do  remember  now.  I  would  write 
this  in  probably  just  at  the  time  when  I  was  at  the  meeting. 
I  do  not  recollect  anything  more  that  took  place  on  that  occasion. 
The  Manager  was  desirous  that  certain  old  accounts  of  the  Bank 
should  be  looked  into. 

It  was  on  the  suggestion  of  the  Manager  that  the  committee 
was  appointed? — Yes. 

Was  any  specification  given  of  the  accounts  referred  to,  or 
were  they  just  spoken  of  in  that  way? — Just  in  a  general  way. 
In  the  agenda  book,  under  date  13th  July,  1876,  there  were 
present  Messrs.  Inglis,  Potter,  Taylor,  Stewart,  and  Wright. 
The  sederunt  is  taken  in  pencil  by  myself ;  it  had  been  omitted 
by  the  chairman.  [Shown  No.  213.]  That  is  a  letter  by  Mr. 
Scott,  marked  "  Private,"  and  addressed  to  Mr.  Stronach,  dated 
12th  July,  1876.  It  was  read  at  the  meeting  of  the  13th. 
Mr.  Scott  is  a  partner  of  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  "  J.  I.  W. 
<fe  Co."  in  that  letter  is  intended  for  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co. 
The  deliverance  of  the  Board  upon  that  letter,  in  the  agenda 
book,  is  in  the  handwriting  of  Mr.  Inglis,  and  it  is  as  follows:  — 
"  Mr.  Potter  and  Mr.  Wright  appointed  a  committee  with  full 
powers  to  confei-  with  the  Manager  as  to  the  proposed  re-arrange- 
ment, which  is  considered  an  advisable  step  ;  the  committee  to 
report  to  the  Board  when  they  consider  necessary."      The  Mi*. 

K  I4S 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

C.S.Lepesche.  Wright  there  referred  to,  and  appointed  a  member  of  the 
committee,  is  a  member  of  the  firm  of  John  Innes  Wright  & 
Co.  In  the  agenda  book,  under  date  3rd  August,  1876,  there 
were  present  Mr.  Stewart,  chainnan,  .Messrs.  Potter,  Wright, 
and  Taylor,  and  the  Manager.  [Shown  Nos.  214,  letter,  W. 
Glen  Walker  &  Co.  to  J.  Innes  Wright,  dated  26th  July,  1876, 
and  215  and  216.]  No.  215  is  a  letter  from  John  Innes 
Wright  &  Co.,  dated  2nd  August,  1876.  I  cannot  say  in  whose 
handwriting  it  is;  it  appears  to  be  in  the  same  handwriting 
as  the  letter  read  at  the  previous  meeting.  That  was  the 
first  piece  of  business  that  followed  upon  Mr.  Scott's  letter  as 
to  establishing  a  new  firm.  No.  216  is  a  letter  from  Mr.  James 
Morton,  dated  2nd  August,  produced  and  read  at  that  meeting. 

Was  there  any  discussion  of  these  letters  in  your  hearing,  or 
were  they  simply  handed  to  you  to  be  engrossed? — They  were 
simply  handed  to  me  to  be  put  up  with  the  other  letters  referred 
to.  In  the  agenda  book,  under  date  17th  August,  1876,  there 
were  present  Mr.  Stewart,  chainnan,  Messrs.  Wright,  Taylor, 
and  Potter,  and  the  Manager.  [Shown  Nos.  217,  218,  two  letters, 
W.  Glen  Walker  to  R.  Stronach,  dated  14th  August,  1876,  and 
219,  letter,  James  Morton  to  the  Bank,  dated  16th  August, 
1876.]  These  are  letters  which  are  referred  to  in  the  agenda 
book,  under  the  date  of  that  meeting,  at  the  foot  of  the  left-hand 
page.  I  do  not  remember  hearing  those  letters  read  at  that 
meeting.  [Shown  No.  198.]  That  is  a  draft  resolution,  dated 
21st  August,  1876,  in  the  handwriting  of  Mr.  Robert  Stronach, 
the  Manager. 

Was  that  handed  to  you  by  the  Manager? — Yes;  my  recollec- 
tion of  it  is  that  I  was  called  down  some  days  after  the  meeting 
of  the  I7th  into  the  Manager's  room,  and  I  was  handed  this 
draft  resolution.  I  was  asked  to  bring  my  agenda  book  down, 
and  enter  it  therein  as  under  the  date  of  the  l7tli.  So  far  as  I 
recollect,  Mr.  Taylor  and  Mr.  Inglis  were  present  when  Mr. 
Stronach  handed  it  to  me;  and  my  memory  is  confirmed  by  the 
fact  that  there  are  in  Mr.  Taylor's  handwriting  the  words  "  Read 
and  agreed  to,"  and  in  Mr.  Inglis's  handwriting,  "  Insert  in 
minutes  deliverance  of  Board." 

So  you  have  no  doubt  that  those  two  gentlemen  were  the  two 
Avho  were  present? — That  is  the  impression  I  have  at  present. 
The  words  at  the  side  of  the  memorandum,  "  As  referred  to  in 
the  minute  of  30th  December,  1876,"  and  "  as  referred  to,"  are 
in  my  handwriting.  The  whole  of  the  body  of  it  is  in  the  hand- 
writing of  Mr.  Stronach,  except  two  lines  which  come  in,  "  And 
previously  brought  under  the  consideration  of  the  Board  by 
the  present  Manager,"  which  is  in  the  liandwriting  of  Mr.  Inglis. 
In  the  minutes  of  17th  August  that  memorandum  is  engrossed 
in  full  as  I  got  it.  There  were  present — Messrs.  Stewart, 
Wright,    Taylor,    Potter,    and    Stronach.       That    minute    was 

146 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

approved  of  at  next  meeting,  at  wliicli  were  present — Mr.  Inglis,  C.S.Leresehe. 
chairman,   Messrs.   Potter,  Stewart,   Salmond,   Wright,   Taylor, 
and  Stronach.     Referring  to  the  agenda  book,  under  date  24th 
August,  1876,  the  ordinary  business  of  that  day  closed  with  the 
appointment  of  an  agent  at  the  Brechin  branch. 

How  do  you  know  that  1 — In  this  instance  there  are  the  initials 
of  the  chairman,  Mr.  Inglis.  Then  there  follows: — "Report  by 
John  Innes  Wright  and  Lewis  Potter  in  connection  with  deliver- 
ance at  meeting  of  13th  July."  [Shown  Nos.  192  and  193.] 
No.  192  is  the  report,  and  No.  193  is  the  envelope  in  which  it 
was  kept.  I  was  not  present  when  that  report  was  brought 
before  the  meeting  and  considered;  I  had  left  after  the  business 
of  the  Brechin  branch  was  over.  It  was  afterwards  handed  to 
me  to  be  engrossed.  On  19th  October  there  were  present — 
Messrs.  Inglis,  Potter,  Salmond,  Stewart,  Wright,  and  Taylor, 
and  the  Manager.  There  is  a  note  in  the  agenda  book  in  the 
following  terms  :  — "  Referred  to  Manager,  after  having  heard 
the  observations  of  the  Board."  That  is  in  the  handwriting  of 
Mr.  Inglis. 

Wliat  was  it  about  which  observations  had  been  made  by  the 
Board ;  you  heard  them  1 — I  believe  I  did  in  this  case. 

Was  it  the  credits  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.? — [No  reply.] 
[Shown  Nos.  194  and  195.]  No.  194  is  a  report  by  Messrs. 
Taylor,  Stewart,  and  Potter;  it  must  have  been  handed  in  in  a 
rough  draft  by  them  at  that  meeting. 

Was  the  report  handed  to  you  afterwards  in  the  form  in 
which  you  see  it  there? — My  recollection  of  this  is  that  it  was 
a  rough  draft  report  which  was  handed  in,  and  I  was  asked  to 
copy  it  fair,  which  I  did.  It  is  in  my  handwriting.  After  it  was 
written  out  from  the  rough  scroll  it  was  signed  by  Messrs. 
Taylor,  Stewart,  and  Potter.  No.  195  is  the  envelope  in  which 
it  was. 

Does  that  recall  to  your  recollection  what  was  the  matter 
that  was  referred  to  the  Manager  on  19th  October?  Look  at 
the  agenda  book ;  does  that  bring  it  to  your  recollection  ? — I  do 
not  know  it  has  any  connection  with  this. 

Had  you  to  retire  from  that  meeting? — I  cannot  recollect 
anything  in  regard  to  this  particular  credit  of  Smith,  Fleming 
it  Co.  In  the  agenda  book,  under  date  11th  January,  1877, 
there  were  present — Messrs.  Inglis,  chain iian.  Potter,  Salmond, 
Stewart,  Wri<rht,  and  Taylor,  and  the  Manager.  The  ordinary 
business  of  that  meeting  was  closed  by  a  letter  from  Mr.  Bain, 
and  the  initials  of  Mr.  Inglis  are  after  thai  piece  of  ])usiness. 
The  Board  remained  in  deliberation  after  that  for  a  considerable 
time. 

A  long  time? — Yes.  I  was  called  in,  and  a  draft  resolution 
was  handed  to  me  to  be  entered  in  the  book.     I  cannot  recollect 

147 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

C.S.Leresehe.  in  whose  handwriting  it  was;  probably  it  was  in  that  of  Mr. 
Inglis. 

It  was  not  preserved? — I  have  no  knowledge  of  it.  On  the 
left-hand  side  in  the  agenda  book  is  an  entry — "  Morton's 
account " — in  the  handwriting  of  Mr.  Inglis.  It  is  put  in  as 
a  separate  piece  of  business  from  what  had  been  made  up  by 
me  for  the  use  of  the  meeting.  Morton's  account  was  never 
spoken  of  in  my  presence.  On  18th  January,  1877,  Morton's 
account  appears  again.  Mr.  Inglis  was  in  the  chair,  and  there 
were  also  present — Messrs.  Inglis,  Potter,  Taylor,  Wright,  and 
the  Manager.  I  was  not  present  then  when  Morton's  account  was 
taken  up.  On  8th  March,  1877,  there  were  present — Mr.  Inglis, 
chairman,  Messrs.  Potter,  Salmond,  Stewart,  Wright,  and 
Taylor.  An  application  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  for  credit  was 
brought  up  that  day. 

Were  you  present  when  that  was  discussed? — I  think  I  must 
have  been.  [After  a  short  pause]  No;  the  probability  is,  I 
should  not  have  been  present  at  that  time. 

Were  you  ever  present  at  the  discussion  of  credits  of  Smith, 
Fleming  &:  Co.  ? — Yes ;  I  was  present  at  the  discussion  of  many 

of  those  to  Law,  Brown  &;  Co.,  and  also  to '     I  wish  to  say 

about  this,  that  on  reconsideration  I  believe  I  would  be  present 
at  this  meeting  when  this  credit  was  brought  up. 

On  8th  March? — Yes;  when  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.'s  was 
brought  up. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — I  was  generally  present  when  an 
application  from  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  for  a  cash  credit  was 
discussed.  I  never  was  present  when  there  was  such  an  applica- 
tion from  Morton  or  Wright  &  Co.,  and  never  heard  any 
discussion  about  that.  That  may  be  taken  as  applicable  to  all 
the  minutes.  I  think  on  this  occasion  I  must  have  been  present, 
because  I  do  not  remember  a  credit  to  Law,  Brown  &  Co.  when 
I  was  not  present. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — I  remember  the  meeting  of  21st 
June,  1877,  when  the  accounts  for  the  year  were  taken  up,  and 
the  dividend  for  1877  was  fixed.  I  was  not  present  when  the 
dividend  was  fixed.  The  dividend  was  increased  1  per  cent,  as 
compared  with  the  previous  year.  It  had  been  11  per  cent,  in 
1876,  and  it  was  raised  to  12  per  cent. 

Was  there  a  discussion  upon  that  matter  in  private  that  day? — 
The  only  knowledge  I  have  about  it  is  that  the  Manager  said 
he  was  going  to  bring  up,  on  the  morning  of  21st  June,  the 
annual  returns  for  the  year  to  6th  June,  and  asked  me  to  put 
that  into  the  agenda  book,  but  that  he  would  not  bring  up  the 
other  statements  as  to  the  annual  report  as  usual.  At  that 
meeting  on  21st  June  Messrs.  Inglis,  Potter,  Salmond,  Stewart, 
Wright,  and  Taylor,  and  the  Manager  were  present.  I  got 
from  the  Manager,  after  they  had  met  in  private,  the  details 
148 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

necessary  to  enable  me  to  make  out  the  minute.     [Shown  Nos.  C.S.Leresche. 

235,  236,  and  237.]     No.  235  is  a  letter  from  W.  C.  Smith  to 

Kinross  I'c  Co.,  dated  18th  September,  1877;  No.  236,  a  letter 

from  W.  C.  Smith  to  John  Hunter,  20th  September,  1877;  and 

No.  237,  a  letter  from  W.  C.  Smith  to  C.  Smith,  28th  September, 

1877.    These  three  letters  were  read  at  the  meeting  of  Directors 

on  8th  November,  1877.     The  letters  related  to  purchase  of  land 

in  New  Zealand.     At  the  meeting  on  26th  July,  1877,  I  see  from 

the  agenda  book  that  Mr.  Stewart  was  chairman,  and  Mr.  Potter, 

Mr.    Inglis,    Mr.    Wright,    Mr.    Taylor,    Mr.    Salmond,    and    the 

Manager  were  present^ — a  full  Board.     That  was  not  the  first 

meeting  at  which   anything   took  place   as   to   the   purchase  of 

property  in  New  Zealand  or  Australia.    That  had  been  referred 

to  as  early  as  17th  August  of  the  previous  year.     At  the  meeting 

on  26th  July,  1877,  there  was  a  deliberation  by  the  Directors,  at 

which  1  was  not  present.     There  is  an  entry  in  the  agenda  book 

in  the  handwriting  of  Mr.  Inglis — "'  Purchase  of  property  in  New 

Zealand   and   Australia."     When   I   was   called   in    I   received  a 

draft  resolution  which  I  would  be  instructed  to  engross  in  the 

book,  and  it  is  initialed  by  the  chairman.     It  is  as  follows:  — 

"  With  reference  to  the  purchase  of  property  in  New  Zealand 
and  Australia,  an  authority  was  given  to  Mr.  Potter,  Mr.  Stewart, 
and  the  Manager,  on  the  21st  June  last,  in  the  following 
terms  :  — 

"  '  City  of  Glasgow  Bank, 

"  '  Glasgow,'  21st  June,  1877. 

"  *  Dear  Sir, — As  authorised  by  the  meeting  of  Directors  held 
of  this  date,  you  will  be  so  good  as  instruct  Messrs.  Potter  and 
Stewart,  two  of  our  number,  to  purchase  freehold  land  in  New 
Zealand,  on  behalf  of  this  Bank,  to  the  extent  of  £50,000. 

"  '  Yours  truly, 

"  '  Henry  Inglis,  Chairman. 

"  '  Robert  Stionach,  Esq.,  Manager ; ' 

and  on  more  mature  consideration  it  was  resolved  that  the 
power  to  purchase  land  should  be  extended  to  Australia,  and 
the  sum  to  be  invested  in  behalf  of  the  Bank  to  be  increased, 
if  considered  necessary,  by  them  and  hj  Mr.  Taylor,  whose  name 
is  added  as  formerly  to  this  acting  committee,  to  i  100,000. 
These  resolutions  are  adopted  as  a  sequence  to  the  Board's 
minute  of  17th  August,  1876.  The  usual  abstracts  and  state- 
ments were  read  to  the  Board."  [Shown  No.  230.]  That  is  a 
letter  of  29th  August,  1877,  from  Mr.  Glen  Walker  to  the 
Manager,  which  was  read  at  the  meeting  of  30th  August,  1877. 

149 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

CS.L©resehe.  Glasgow,  29th  August,  1877. 

The  Manager  of  the 

City  of  Glasgow  Bank, 
Glasgow. 

Dear  Sir,— A  week  ago  I  had  a  telegram  from  my  partner  asking 
that  the  City  Bank  should  request  the  agency  of  the  Commercial 
Banking  Conipany  of  Sydney — address,  39  Lombard  Street,  London 
— to  wire  to  Sydney  an  extension  of  the  credits  which  remain  in 
the  colony,  and  which  expire  about  this  time. 

There  will  be  considerable  sums  to  pay,  for  account  of  the  recent 
purchase,   and  my  partner's  only  resource  is  these  credits. 

Please,  therefore,  do  not  delay  arranging  that  this  credit  be 
extended,  or  that  it  be  allowed  to  lapse  and  a  new  one  wired 
through  the  bank  referred  to. 

You  know  my  partner  is  not  much  accustomed  to  finance,  and 
should  be  kept — strong.  If  a  new  credit  be  sent,  I  think  it  better 
be  for  £20,000.-1  am,  faithfully  yours, 

W.  Glen  Walker. 

Mr.  Stewart,  chairman.  Mr.  Potter,  Mr.  Wright,  and  the 
Manager  were  present  at  that  meeting.  At  the  meeting  on  6th 
September,  1877,  Mr.  Stewart,  chairman,  Mr.  Potter,  Mr.  Inglis, 
Mr.  Wright,  and  Mr.  Taylor  were  present. 

Was  anything  brought  up  by  any  one  at  that  meeting  about 
further  investments  in  New^  Zealand  or  Australia? — Yes. 

By  whom? — By  Mr.  Potter.     I  was  present. 

What  was  suggested? — Mr.  Potter  just  said  that  the  com- 
mittee considered  it  advisable  to  authorise  a  further  sum  of 
£150,000  to  be  invested  in  property  in  New  Zealand  or  Australia, 
and  requested  that  that  should  be  minuted,  and  I  took  it  down 
from  their  dictation. 

Was  there  any  discussion  before  it  was  agreed  to? — No;  the 
chairman  just  said,  "  I  suppose  that  this  is  agreed  to."  That  was 
all  that  passed.  It  was  put  down  as  agreed  to.  Mr.  Potter 
dictated  the  minute.  The  minute  is — "  It  was  considered  advis- 
able to  authorise  the  committee  to  invest  a  further  sum  of 
£150,000  in  property  in  New  Zealand  or  Australia.  This  invest- 
ment, in  addition  to  the  sums  already  authorised,  will  now 
therefore  amount  to  about  £400,000  ;  and  this,  in  addition  to 
the  interest  of  about  £100,000  already  held,  completes  an 
investment  to  about  £500,000 — say,  five  hundred  thousand 
pounds."  On  1st  November,  1877,  there  were  present  Mr. 
Stewart,  chairman,  Mr.  Potter,  Mr.  Wright,  Mr.  Inglis,  and  the 
Manager.  I  was  absent  from  the  meeting  when  some  deliberation 
took  place  in  connection  with  these  properties.  [Shown  No. 
196.]  That  is  the  report  signed  by  Messrs.  Inglis,  Taylor,  and 
Salmond,  which  is  engrossed  in  that  minute.  On  15th  November, 
1877,  there  were  present — Mr.  Stewart,  chairman,  Mr.  Potter, 
Mr.  Salmond,  Mr.  Inglis,  Mr.  Wright,  Mr.  Taylor,  and  the 
Manager.  I  was  absent  from  the  meeting  during  the  latter  part 
ISO 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

of  it,  when  they  were  deliberating  on  the  New  Zealand  matters.  C.S.Leresche. 
Afterwards  I  was  called  in,  and  recorded  the  deliverance. 

After  you  had  engrossed  the  Board's  deliverance  about  the 
New  Zealand  and  Australian  advances,  did  the  Manager  say 
anything  in  your  hearing  to  the  Directors? — Yes.  He  said  he 
wished  that  a  committee  of  the  whole  Board  should  sit 
periodically  to  consider  the  various  accounts  of  the  Bank. 

Did  you  hear  what  passed  on  that  suggestion? — Yes.  It  was 
agreed  to,  and  I  then  entered  in  this  resolution — "  It  was 
resolved  that  a  committee  of  the  whole  Board  should  sit 
periodically  to  consider  the  position  of  the  various  accounts  of 
the  Bank."  A  conversation  then  arose  as  to  whether  the 
Manager  wished  this  to  be  done  at  once,  and  a  suggestion  was 
made  that  it  should  begin  six  months  afterwards. 

Who  said  that? — I  cannot  remember  who  said  it. 

Was  it  Mr.  Stronach,  or  some  one  else? — It  would  not  be  Mr. 
Stronach.  It  would  be  one  of  the  Directors;  and  afterwards  it 
was  suggested,  so  far  as  I  can  recollect,  by  Mr.  Taylor  that  it 
should  be  four  months. 

What  was  to  be  done  in  four  months? — The  looking  into 
these  securities. 

The  sitting  of  this  committee? — Yes. 

And  accordingly  it  was  minuted — "  This  not  to  take  place  for 
four  months"? — No,  I  think  that  took  place  afterwards. 

I  was  referring  to  what  appears  in  the  agenda  book,  while  I 
think  you  are  referring  to  the  minute  book.  Would  you  read 
what  is  written  in  the  agenda  book? — It  says,  ''  This  not  to  take 
place  for  four  months." 

In  whose  handwriting  is  that  entry  in  the  agenda  book — "  It 
was  resolved  that  a  committee  of  the  whole  Board  should  sit 
periodically  to  consider  the  position  of  the  various  accounts  of 
the  Bank"? — It  looks  like  Mr.  Taylor's  handwi'iting. 

That  entry  is — "  It  was  resolved  that  a  committee  of  the 
whole  Board  should  sit  periodically  to  consider  the  position  of 
the  various  accounts  of  the  Bank.  This  not  to  take  place  for 
four  months  "  ? — Yes. 

How  was  the  entry  made  in  the  minute  book? — It  was  entered 
in  the  minute  book — "  It  was  resolved  that  a  committee  of  the 
whole  Board  should  sit  periodically  to  consider  the  position  of 
the  various  accounts  of  the  Bank."  I  put  nothing  more  in 
it,  and  then  the  usual  abstract  and  statements  were  read  to  the 
Board.  I  did  not  put  in  that  part  of  it  about  the  four  months, 
but  when  the  minute  came  before  the  Board  at  their  meeting 
on  the  22nd,  they  said  it  was  agreed  that  that  should  not  take 
place  for  four  months.  I  gave  some  explanation  that  I 
thought  that  was  more  an  understanding  than  a  resolution, 
but  they  told  me  I  had  better  engross  it,  and  therefore  it  appears 
as  it  was  entered  afterwards. 

151 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

C.S.Leresehe.  That  was  inserted  on  revisaH — ^Yes.  It  says — "The  com- 
mittee of  inquiry  above  mentioned  will  meet  not  later  than  four 
months  from  this  date." 

When  did  that  committee  meet  for  the  lirst  time? — I  have 
no  knowledge  of  that  committee  meeting.  About  four  months 
from  that  date  I  think  you  will  find  that  there  was  another 
committee  formed. 

You  don't  know  of  your  own  knowledge  whether  that  com- 
mittee met  or  not? — No. 

On  28th  Februaiy,  1878,  there  was  a  discussion  in  private 
that  day — I  mean  a  discussion  at  which  you  were  not  present — 
with  regard  to  Innes  Wright  &  Co.'s  affairs? — Yes.  A  draft 
was  afterwards  handed  to  me  to  be  put  in.  It  was  handed  to 
me  on  the  Wednesday  before  the  following  meeting — after  they 
had  deliberated  in  private — and  it  was  in  the  handwriting  of 
the  Manager.  Referring  to  the  minute  of  meeting  of  21st 
March,  1878,  I  find  there  a  reference  to  a  committee  appointed 
on  Morton's  account. 

Had  any  such  committee  been  appointed  when  you  were 
present  at  the  previous  meeting,  or  were  the  instructions  to 
Avrite  the  minute  given  to  you  aftei-wards  ? — This  here  would  be 
given  me  probably  after  the  meeting. 

But  you  were  not  present  ? — No  ;  I  would  be  called  up  and 
would  engross  it  at  the  time,  as  it  is  initialed.  Being  referred 
to  minute  of  30th  May,  1878,  and  shown  No.  191c — That  is  a 
letter  from  Mr.  Stronach,  the  Manager,  to  John  Fleming,  of 
London,  dated  23rd  May,  1878. 

Was  that  letter  brought  up  at  the  meeting  while  you  were 
there  on  the  30th  ?— Yes. 

Was  that  letter  or  any  answer  to  it  by  Mr.  John  Fleming 
brought  up  while  you  were  present? — I  do  not  recollect  that 
I  was  present  then.  On  6th  June,  1878,  the  minute  bears 
that  proceedings  took  place  in  regard  to  Innes  Wright  &  Co.'s 
accounts.  I  was  not  jaresent  when  Innes  Wright  &  Co.'s  affairs 
were  discussed  that  day.  On  20th  June  what  appears  in  the 
agenda  book,  and  is  recoi'ded  in  the  minute,  took  place  after 
I  had  left  the  meeting.  A  rough  memoiandum  was  given  to  me, 
as  had  been  done  on  former  occasions.  In  the  minute  of  1st 
August,  1878,  a  resolution  appears  as  having  been  formed  on 
that  date.  That  was  done  after  the  formal  business  had  been 
brought  to  a  close  and  the  agenda  book  initialed.  I  was  not 
present  at  what  appears  after  the  initials  of  the  chairman ; 
that  was  just  given  me  to  enter  in.  Since  I  was  appointed 
secretary  I  have  regularly  attended  the  annual  meetings  of 
the  shareholders,  at  which  the  election  of  the  Directors  took 
place.  I  kept  the  minute  book  containing  the  reports  of  the 
annual  meetings.  That  is  No.  102  of  the  inventory.  It  contains 
a  correct  record  by  me  of  what  passed  at  the  meetings  up  to  the 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

date  of  the  last  annual  meeting.      The  minute  is  subscribed  by  c.  S.  Leresehe. 

the  chairman,  and  the  copy  of  the  report  is  subscribed  by  all 

the  Directors.      I  never  was  present  at  any  discussion  that  took 

place   in   regard   to   advances   that  had    been   made   to   James 

Nicol  Fleming.     I  never  was  present  at  any  discussion  that  took 

place    in   regard   to    advances    that   had    been    made    to    John 

Innes  Wright  &  Co.      I  never  was  present  at  any  discussion  in 

regard  to  James  Morton  &  Co.'s  advances. 

You  said  yesterday  that  you  were  present  when  Smith, 
Fleming  &  Co.'s  affairs  came  up  ;  were  you  ever  present  when 
any  discussion  took  place  in  regard  to  their  existing  debts  to 
the  Company,  or  was  it  only  in  regard  to  proposed  new  credits? 
— ^I  don't  remember  saying  that. 

I  think  you  said  you  were  present  when  Smith,  Fleming  & 
Co.'s  accounts  came  up? — No;  when  the  applications  of  Smith, 
Fleming  &  Co.  for  those  letters  of  credit  came  up  I  was  genei-ally 
present.  I  never  was  present  when  any  discussion  or  delibera- 
tion took  place  in  reference  to  the  state  of  Smith,  Fleming  & 
Co.'s  account. 

On  those  occasions  when  the  Board  deliberated  in  private, 
and  you  afterwards  were  called  in  or  received  a  draft  to  insert, 
did  the  sederunt  of  the  meeting  remain  the  same  during  the 
private  deliberations? — I  cannot  speak  to  that. 

Do  you  remember  on  any  occasion  when  you  were  recalled 
of  the  sederunt  being  different  from  what  it  was  when  you 
opened  the  meeting?  I  do  not  ask  you  to  speak  to  every 
individual  case,  but  was  it  usual  that  the  whole  Board  remained 
for  those  private  deliberations  after  you  retired? — Yes,  it  was 
usual ;  that  is,  I  would  leave  the  whole  of  the  Board  there. 
There  were  some  exceptions,  in  the  case,  for  instance,  of  Mr. 
Taylor.  He  had  to  attend  some  insurance  meeting  on  the  same 
day,  the  Thursday,  and  he  may  have  had  to  go  away  on  many 
occasions.  [Shown  Nos.  604,  605,  and  606.]  These  are  the 
annual  reports  by  the  Directors  of  the  Bank  to  the  shareholders 
for  the  years  1876,  1877,  and  1878.  These  are  prints  which 
were  circulated  by  me  as  secretary  as  the  annual  report  of  the 
Directors.  [Shown  No.  95.]  That  is  the  cashier's  ledger, 
commencing  6th  June,  1866.  Being  refen-ed  to  the  slip  fastened 
into  the  board  of  the  book,  stating  the  amount  of  cash  under 
date  5th  June,  1878 — that  slip  is  initialed  by  Mr.  Stewart. 
The  entry  is  dated  5th  June,  1878,  and  is  as  follows:  — 

"  Cash  in  cashier's  hands — 

"  £100  notes, £68,000 

"£5  notes, 163,500 

"£1  notes, 190.000 

"Gold, 338,500 


» 


Total,  ....      £760,000 

153 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial 

C.S.Leresche.  Below  there  is  a  detail  of  the  gold  as  follows:  — 

"In  original  safe,      -         -         .         .      £149,000 
"  In  new  safe  below,  -         -         -  62,500 

"  In  new  safe  above,  .         .         _         109,000 

"In  new  safe  top,      -         -         -         -  18,000 


"Total,  .        -        .         _      £338,500" 

That  memorandum  is  in  the  handwriting  of  Mr.  Tumbull,  the 
cashier.  Mr.  Stewart's  initials  in  the  first  of  these  statements 
are  placed  to  each  item,  so  far  as  the  notes  are  concerned,  but 
apparently  not  to  the  gold  ;  but  they  are  placed  to  each  item 
of  the  gold  in  the  detailed  list. 

By  Mr.  Trayner — [Shown  cashier's  ledger].  That  book  is 
kept  by  Mr.  Tumbull,  the  cashier.  Being  referred  to  page  376, 
I  see  there  an  entry  of  the  money  as  ending  5th  June,  1878. 
That  corresponds  exactly  with  the  statement  initialed  by  Mr. 
Stewart,  to  which  I  have  been  already  referred — £338,500. 
The  next  entry  beginning  the  account,  cash  in  hand  as  at  the 
year  beginning  6th  June,  1878,  commences  again  with  that 
exact  sum. 

By  Mr.  BALForR — You  were  asked  with  regard  to  the  agenda 
for  18th  February,  1875,  and  you  read  a  note  as  to  what  was. 
to  be  brought  before  that  meeting ;  I  should  like  to  ask  your 
attention  to  the  terms  of  the  whole  of  that  minute? — It  is  as 
follows  :  — •'  Notice  of  dissolution  of  partnership  between  James 
Nicol  Fleming  and  William  Grant,  under  the  firm  of  J.  Nicot 
Fleming  &  Co.,  Calcutta,  having  been  reported  to  the  Board,  it 
was  resolved  to  appoint  Messrs.  Potter  and  Salmond  a  com- 
mittee to  assist  the  Manager  in  arranging  the  securities  and 
advances  connected  with  the  late  firm  of  J.  Nicol  Fleming  & 
Co.,  Calcutta,  and  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  London,  with  full 
powers."  I  saw  from  the  documents  given  to  the  Bank  that 
there  had  been  a  dissolution  at  that  time,  which  made  such  a 
re-arrangement  necessary.  That  was  the  cause  of  this 
re-arrangement. 

By  Mr.  AsHER — ^Being  referred  to  the  agenda  book,  I  observe 
that  the  sederunt  of  1st  June,  1876,  includes  the  name  of  Mr. 
Salmond.  Tlie  date  of  the  next  meeting  at  which  his  name 
is  entered  as  present  is  20th  July,  1876.  There  had  been 
meetings  in  the  interval  on  8th,  22nd,  and  28th  June,  and 
5th  and  13th  July,  at  none  of  which  Mr.  Salmond  was  present. 
The  meetings  last  mentioned  were  the  meetings  at  which  the 
l)usiness  connected  with  the  annual  balance  was  dealt  with. 
Mr.  Salmond  was  again  absent  on  3rd  and  l7th  August  following. 
Looking  at  the  same  book  for  1877,  I  find  that  Mr.  Salmond  was 
absent  on  18th  January,  7tli  and  14th  June,  12th  July,  30th 
August,    6th    September,    1st   and   29th    November.       In    1878 

154 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

he   was  absent  an   10th   January   and   28th   March.      He   was  c.S.Leresehe. 

present  on   16th  May.      The  next  meeting  after  that  at  which 

he   was   present   was    11th   of   July.       Between    16th    May   and 

11th  July  there  had  been  meetings  on  2;3rd  and  30th  May,  and 

6th,   20th,   and  27th   June,   from   all   of  which   he   was   absent. 

These  last-mentioned  meetings  were  the  meetings  at  which  the 

business    connected    with    the    annual    balance   was    transacted. 

The  sederunt  was  noted  in  the  agenda  book  by  the  chairman. 

When  business  connected  with  your  department  had  been 
transacted,  you  were  in  the  habit,  you  told  us,  of  withdrawing 
from  the  meeting.^ — Yes,  after  I  had  read  the  abstracts  and 
statements. 

With  regard  to  any  business  in  the  agenda  book  not  con- 
nected with  your  department,  I  suppose  you  cannot  say  whether 
all  the  Directors  mentioned  in  the  sederunt  continued  to  be 
present  when  that  was  being  done  ( — I  cannot  say  that. 

In  short,  with  regard  to  the  Dii-ectors  who  were  present, 
your  sole  means  for  giving  evidence  here  is  that  you  find  their 
names  noted  in  the  sederunt  in  the  agenda  book? — Yes. 

To  what  extent  they  took  part  in  the  business  noted  in  the 
agenda  book,  or  whether  they  were  present  throughout  the 
whole  meeting  or  only  a  part,  of  course  you  are  unable  to  say? — 
I  am  unable  to  say. 

It  was  the  custom  of  the  Bank  Board  to  divide  the  business 
to  some  extent  amongst  the  Directors.  Can  you  tell  me  which 
of  the  Directors  were  the  committee  on  branches  during  1876, 
1877,  and  1878? — 'There  was  no  committee  fonned  to  my  know- 
ledge during  those  years. 

Was  there  not  an  acting  committee  during  those  years — ^a 
standing  committee? — No,  I  have  no  knowledge  of  that. 

Perhaps  that  was  not  within  your  department? — There  was 
no  minute  of  it. 

But  if  there  had  been  a  committee  appointed  before  these 
years  which  continued  to  act,  that  would  not  fall  within  your 
knowledge,  I  suppose?  You  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  it, 
unless  it  was  in  the  minutes? — Nothing  to  do  with  it  except  it 
was  in  the  minutes. 

There  was  no  meeting  of  the  Directors,  I  suppose,  at  some 
part  of  which  you  were  not  present?  You  were  always  present, 
I  suppose,  at  some  part  of  their  meetings? — Except  during  my 
holidays. 

You  prepared  a  note  of  the  business,  I  believe,  which  came 
before  each  meeting  of  the  Directors? — Yes. 

The  Directors  met  weekly,  on  Thursdays,  at  twelve  o'clock? 
—Yes. 

So  that  you  were  familiar  with  the  regular  business  that  came 
before  each  meeting  of  the  Directors? — Yes. 

Had    you    auy    knowledge    that    there    was    anything    wrong 

155 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

C. S. Leresche.  with  the  Bank  until  its  suspension? — I  had  no  knowledge  at  all 
that  there  was  anything  wrong  with  the  Bank  until  a  few  days 
before  the  suspension. 

By  Mr.  Mackintosh — You  mentioned  that  Mr.  Taylor  was  in 
the  way  of  leaving  your  meetings  to  attend  insurance  meetings? 
• — Occasionally  he  was. 

Was  not  that  the  case  very  generally? — I  could  not  remember 
of  it  myself  more  than  four  or  five  times. 

But  it  may  have  been  oftener? — It  may  have  been  of tener ; 
some  of  our  meetings  were  short.  My  recollection  is  that  his 
insurance  meeting  was  held  at  one  o'clock  ;  our  meeting  was 
held  at  twelve.  Our  office  was  in  Virginia  Street ;  his  insurance 
company  was,  I  think,  the  Scottish  Imperial ;  their  office  is  in 
West  George  Street,  about  ten  minutes'  walk  distant. 

By  Mr.  Robertson — You  have  been  referred  to  the  meeting 
of  15th  November,  1877,  already  read.  If  you  go  on  four 
months,  that  brings  you  to  the  middle  of  March,  1878.  Look 
at  the  minute  of  14th  March,  1878  ;  at  the  end  of  it  you  will 
see  this — "  In  connection  with  the  minute  of  15th  November 
last,  it  was  agreed  that  Messrs.  Stewart,  Potter,  and  Salmond 
be  appointed  a  committee,  along  with  the  Manager,  to  examine 
the  advance  accounts  at  head  office  weekly,  and  to  deal  in 
particular  with  the  account  of  Messrs.  James  Moiton  &  Co."? 
—Yes. 

Were  you  present  when  that  resolution  was  adopted? — No. 

But  as  matter  of  fact,  was  there  ever  any  committee  of  the 
whole  Board  sitting  on  that  subject  to  your  knowledge  at  this 
time,  or  did  not  the  resolution  of  March,  1878,  supersede  so 
far  the  resolution  of  November,  1877? — This  was  griven  to  me 
after  the  meeting  to  be  entered.  It  must  have  been  some 
days  after  the  meeting.  The  probability  is  that  it  would  be 
as  late  as — I  think  myself  it  was  even  on  the  Thursday  of  the 
next  meeting. 

But  my  question  is,  as  matter  of  fact,  no  committee  of  the 
whole  Board  sat  on  that  subject  to  carry  out  the  resolution  of 
15th  November? — Not  to  my  knowledge. 

By  the  Dean  op  Faculty— You  have  read  the  minute  of  18th 
February,  1875,  where  notice  is  taken  of  the  dissolution  of 
partnership  between  James  Nicol  Fleming  and  William  Grant, 
and  arrangements  were  made  to  appoint  a  committee  to  assist 
the  Manager  in  arranging  the  securities  and  advances  con- 
nected with  the  late  firm  of  J.  Nicol  Fleming  &  Co.,  Calcutta. 
Do  you  know  that  an  agreement  was  entered  into  during  the 
same  year — 1875 — in  the  month  of  August,  between  the  Bank 
and  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  of  Calcutta  and  London,  whereby 
their  account  was  put  on  a  new  and  distinct  footing? — I  have  no 
knowledge  of  that,  except  from  seeing  it  referred  to  in  the 
minute  book. 

156 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

You  do  see  it  referred  to  in  the  books? — I  think  I  have  seen  c.s.Leresehe. 
it  in  the  minute  book,  but  I  have  no  knowledge  of  it  myself. 
[Shown  Nos.  18,^  and  189.]  No.  189  is  a  letter  dated  26th  ; 
the  rest  of  the  date  is  torn  off.  No.  188  is  a  letter  dated  24th 
August,  1875,  signed  by  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  John  Fleming, 
R.  M'llwraith.  and  W.  Nicol,  and  there  is  a  schedule  of  properties 
that  follows. 

The  opening  passage  of  that  letter  begins — '"  Referring  to 
the  interview  which  the  writer  had,"  etc.  ;  then  there  is  a  long 
agreement,  consisting  of  no  less  than  ten  articles,  whereby  you 
see  that  Smith.  Fleming  &  Co.  agree  to  pay  3^  per  cent,  for 
their  account,  and  to  hand  over  various  securities,  of  which 
there  is  a  schedule  appended? — ^Yes,  I  see  that  under  Article 
No.  6a  they  are  to  pay  interest  at  the  rate  of  3h  per  cent,  per 
annum  upon  the  £100,000  as  aforesaid. 

Then  the  next  item  is  to  "  pay  the  whole  surplus  interest 
arising  from  the  stock,  after  meeting  the  charge  for  interest  as 
above,  to  the  credit  of  our  account  with  the  Bank,  and  in  the 
event  of  a  sale  to  apply  the  proceeds  first  in  liquidation  of  the 
foresaid  advance  of  £100,000,  the  whole  of  the  surplus  over  and 
above  the  said  advance  being  put  to  the  credit  of  our  account 
with  the  Bank"?— Yes. 

I  am  putting  these  questions  with  reference  to  the  transference 
of  the  account  in  August,  1875,  from  the  cheque  box  to  the 
accountant's  office.  If  you  will  turn  to  the  end  of  the  letter, 
after  the  signatures  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  and  their  partners, 
you  will  find  a  schedule  of  property  belonging  to  Smith,  Fleming 
&  Co.  which  was  lodged  as  security  in  the  City  of  Glasgow 
Bank.  Did  vou  know  anvthing  about  this  agreement  at  the 
tune  it  was  entered  into? — No  ;  I  never  saw  this  letter  before. 

You  came  to  a  knowledge  of  it  through  the  books? — I  saw 
from  some  minutes  that  there  had  been  some  agreement  entered 
into. 

Do  you  know  whether  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.'s  account  was 
changed  from  the  ordinary  open  credit  account  dealt  with  in 
the  cheque  box  to  the  accountant's  department  after  this  agree- 
ment was  entered  into? — No;  I  have  no  knowledge. 

In  the  minute  of  22nd  June,  1876,  to  which  you  have  already 
spoken,  the  concluding  paragraph  is — "  It  was  resolved  to 
appoint  Messrs.  Taylor  and  Potter  a  committee  to  examine  into 
certain  old  accounts  of  the  Bank,  and  to  assist  the  Manager 
in  arranging  these  under  one  general  heading,  with  full  powers." 
You  told  us  yesterday  that  the  Manager  had  required  that  these 
old  accounts  should  be  investigated  into? — Yes. 

Can  you  tell  what  old  accounts  were  there  referred  to? — I 
have  no  knowledge. 

Were  you  present  when  this  resolution  was  come  to? — I  think 
not.      I  don't  think  I  would  be  present  then. 

I* 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

C.S.Leresche.  Can  you  tell  me  the  meaning  of  these  words,  "in  arranging 
them  under  one  general  heading  "  1 — No ;  this  would  be  a  draft 
that  would  probably  be  written  out  and  handed  to  me. 

Can  you  give  me  any  notion  of  what  general  heading  they 
were  to  be  put  under  1 — No  ;  I  have  no  knowledge  whatever. 

Did  the  Manager  speak  to  you  about  his  anxiety  to  have  these 
old  accounts  looked  into? — No,  not  to  me  personally. 

You  had  no  conversation  with  Mr.  Stronach  about  the  matter? 
—No.      [Shown  minute  of  17th  August,  1876]:  — 

Having  in  view  the  position  of  certain  old  accounts,  and  looking 
to  the  whole  circumstances,  and  particularly  to  the  fact  that  the 
contemplated  arrangements  for  the  working  of  the  credits  are 
largelj'  part  of  transactions  in  existence  for  many  years,  and 
previously  brought  under  consideration  of  the  Board  by  the  present 
Manager,  the  Board  deem  it  expedient  to  come  to  their  present 
decision,  as  referred  to  in  minute  of  30th  December,  1875. 

I  cannot  tell  what  are  the  old  accounts  there  referred  to ;    I 
have  no  knowledge  of  that. 

Can  you  tell  me  when  it  was  that  the  Manager  brought  these 
•  old  accounts  under  the  consideration  of  the  Board? — I  would 
understand  from  this  that  it  was  on  30th  December,  1875 ;  but 
the  minute  reads  in  this  way,  "  brought  under  consideration 
of  the  Board  by  the  present  Manager,  the  Board  deemed  it 
expedient  to  come  to  their  present  decision,  as  referred  to  in 
minute  of  30th  December,  1875." 

You  think  it  refers  to  his  remonstrances  of  30th  December, 
18751 — I  cannot  say  whether  there  was  any  remonstrance  then. 

You  think  it  refers  to  what  took  place  at  the  meeting? — I 
infer  so ;  but  I  have  no  knowledge  beyond  the  minute. 

In  the  minute  of  30th  December,  1875,  there  is  engrossed  a 
letter  from  Mr.  Stronach  accepting  the  office  of  Manager ;  where 
is  that  letter  now  ? — It  is  produced. 

Was  that  the  first  letter  that  Mr.  Stronach  submitted  to  the 
Directors  with  reference  to  his  acceptance? — The  first  that  I 
am  aware  of. 

Did  you  see  a  draft  of  another  letter? — No;  I  have  no 
knowledge  of  that. 

Did  you  see  a  draft  of  any  letter? — No ;  I  have  no  recollection 
of  that. 

Was  this  the  only  letter  of  Mr.  Stronach  that  you  knew  of  as 
having  been  laid  before  the  Directors? — On  that  occasion? 

Yes? — That  was  the  only  one. 

Did  any  of  the  Directors  speak  to  you  about  another  having 
been  laid  before  them? — On  that  occasion? 

Yes?— No. 

On  any  occasion  do  you  know  of  any  other  letter  by  Mr. 
Stronach  to  the  Directors  in  reference  to  these  accounts? — No; 
nothing  but  what  is  minuted. 

158 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Did  Mr.  Gleu  Walker  speak  to  you  about  another  letter  that  C.S.Leresche- 
■was  given  by  Mr.  Stronach  to  the  Directors  ? — No ;   I  have  no 
recollection  of  anything. 

Had  you  any  talk  with  any  of  the  officials  in  the  Bank  about 
this  letter  of  Mr.  Stronach's  when  you  first  saw  it? — No ;  I  have 
no  recollection  of  it. 

Who  gave  it  to  you  to  engross  in  the  minutes? — The  chairman, 
Mr.  Taylor. 

Did  he  make  any  remark  when  he  gave  it  to  you  ? — No  ;  he 
merely  told  me  that  it  had  been  handed  in  by  the  Manager ; 
he  made  no  remark  as  to  the  contents  of  the  letter.  I  was  not 
present  at  the  meeting  when  the  letter  was  considered. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — You  have  no  recollection  of  hear- 
ing of  any  other  letter  addi-essed  to  the  Directors  by  Stronach 
in  regard  to  these  accounts  at  that  time,  or  about  that  time? — 
No,  I  have  no  recollection  of  that  at  all. 

William  Morison,  recalled. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — On  your  first  examination  we  Wm.  Morison. 
were  led  to  understand  that  the  document  No.  128,  of  which  we 
have  a  lithograph,  was  the  original  abstract  of  accounts  which 
you  first  submitted  to  the  Manager  and  Mr.  Potter ;  that  is  to 
say,  without  the  red  ink  markings,  and  that  the  red  ink  mark- 
ings denoted  the  alterations  which  you  were  instructed  to  make. 
Yef5terday  you  corrected  that,  and  you  told  us  that  this  abstract, 
so  far  as  it  appears  in  black  ink,  was  not  the  thing  which  you 
submitted  to  the  Manager,  but  was  another  copy  made  after 
your  interview  with  the  Manager.      Is  that  so? — Yes. 

Now  tell  me  exactly  what  the  figures  are  on  No.  128 — go 
over  them  seriatim — which  you  were  instructed  to  alter,  and 
which  appear  as  altered  on  the  document  as  it  now  stands? — 
There  is  first  the  entry  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  £200,875  on 
the  left-hand  side  ;  J.  N.  F.,  £100,300;  J.  M.  &  Co.,  £i50,600. 

Amounting  in  all  to  £751,000?— Yes. 

That  originally  appeared  in  a  larger  sum ;  what  was  its 
amount?— £3,467,689  Us.  lid. 

And  that  £751,000  is  deducted  from  that  on  the  face  of  this? 
—Yes. 

And  the  balance  of  £2,715,000  is  carried  out? — Yes. 

What  becomes  of  the  £751,000? — It  is  brought  down  under 
the  third  heading. 

In  what  sum  is  it  included,  and  under  what  head? — It  is 
under  the  third  head,  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  stocks,  £200,875; 
James  Nicol  Fleming,  stocks,  £100,300;  James  Morton  &  Co., 
stocks,  £450,600. 

That  is  included  in  the  Government  stocks,  railway  stocks  and 

XS9 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Morison.  debentures,    London    and    provincial    correspondents ;    you    had 
originally  an  abstract  of  the  accounts  under  that  head? — Yes. 

Where  did  you  get  it?  From  what  materials  did  you  make  it 
up  ? — From  the  general  ledger  or  the  weekly  balance  book. 

And  these  books  contain  all  the  accounts  which  ovight  to  be 
under  that  head? — All  the  accounts. 

The  head  "  Government  stocks  and  other  securities "  means 
investments  by  the  Bank? — Government  stocks,  Nos.  1  and  2. 

These  are  investments  made  by  the  Bank? — By  the  Bank. 

And  held  by  the  Bank? — Held  by  the  Bank,  I  understand. 

They  don't  mean  securities  held  for  advances  or  open  accounts  1 
—No. 

Or  with  credit  ? — I  can  only  speak  from  what  I  have  heard ; 
I  don't  know  personally  about  the  securities. 

But  you  know  what  the  book  means? — I  understand  they  are 
held  by  the  Bank. 

The  book  from  which  you  made  up  that  part  of  head  No.  III. 
was  a  book  which  contained  nothing  but  investments  by  the 
Bank? — I  understand  so. 

You  understood  so  when  you  made  it  up? — Yes. 

You  said  yesterday  that  it  might  be  right  to  put  these  accounts 
into  that  head  of  the  abstract? — Yes. 

Knowing  that  if  they  were  securities,  they  were  securities 
for  advances  upon  credit? — Yes. 

Why  did  you  say  that? — 'At  the  time  of  the  alteration,  from 
the  conversation  betwixt  Mi'.  Potter  and  the  Manager,  I  under- 
stood that  these  stocks  were  held  by  the  Bank. 

Did  you  understand  that  these  were  not  advances  on  credit 
to   these   firms? — They  were  under  the  heading  in  the   credit 
,     accounts  ledger  as  advances  to  these  firms. 

And  therefore  they  were  properly,  in  your  opinion,  entered  in 
that  account  ? — In  the  credit  accounts. 

What  difference  did  it  make  that  there  were  securities  held 
for  them? — It  made  no  difference  so  far  as  regarded  the  credit 
accounts. 

What  difference  did  it  make  in  regard  to  the  place  in  the 
abstract  in  w^hich  they  should  be  entered? — By  bringing  them 
down  here,  it  put  them  under  the  heading,  or  one  portion  of 
the  heading,  of  cash  held. 

They  were  represented,  in  short,  as  being  investments  held 
by  the  Bank?— Yes. 

Which  they  were  not? — I  cannot  tell  you  that. 

If  they  were  ci'edit  advances,  were  they  properly  investments 
held  by  the  Bank?  You  gave  an  opinion  yesterday  that  if 
there  were  securities  held  for  these  credits,  they  might  be 
properly  entered  under  the  investments  of  the  Bank.  Is  that 
so? — With  the  addition,  I  said,  that  if  an  entry  had  been  passed 
through  the  books. 
i6o 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Then  you  did  not  mean  to  say  that  that  might  be   a  right  Wm.  Morison. 
entry? — This  entry  here? 

Yea'l — Unless  an  entry  had  passed  through  the  cash  book 
and  general  ledger. 

You  did  not  mean  to  say  it  was  right  as  it  stands? — No. 

Wliat  was  the  next  alteration  which  the  Directors  directed 
you  to  make  on  this  sheet,  still  dealing  with  the  debit  side? — 
Under  the  heading  of  heritable  property  account  there  is  a 
sum  of  £30,000  deducted. 

You  were  directed  to  do  that? — ^Yes. 

Is  that  in  red  ink  or  black  ink? — Black  ink. 

Then  that  must  have  been  done  after  the  meeting? — Yes. 

Is  there  not  before  that  a  sum  of  £430,000  struck  out? — No. 

Well,  what  next? — Under  the  heading  of  foreign  and  colonial 
credits  there  is  a  sum  of  £973,300  deducted  from  bills  payable. 

And  that,  you  told  us,  reduced  the  apparent  amount  of  bills 
payable? — For  foreign  and  colonial  credits  in  the  meantime. 

By  nearly  a  million  of  money  ? — Yes ;  with  the  explanation 
that  that  £973,000  entry  was  in  the  general  ledger. 

Is  there  anything  else  material  in  that  state  which  you  were 
directed  to  alter  by  the  Directors? — Thei'e  is  the  same  £30,000 
that  was  deducted  from  the  heritable  property  account  brought 
down  under  the  No.  II.  heading,  "  Advances  on  heritable  property 
and  value  of  Bank  buildings  and  furniture." 

Anything  else? — There  is  a  sum  of  £29,095  added  to  the 
amount  of  notes  of  other  banks  on  hand. 

Are  these  the  material  alterations  which  you  were  told  to 
make  ?— Then  there  are  the  £200,875,  £100,300,  and  £450,600 
brought  down  that  I  spoke  of  before. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — Under  the  first  head  from  which  these  items 
were  brought  down  is  there  not  an  entry  "  City  of  Glasgow  Bank 
stock,  £356,825."  Was  that  an  investment  of  the  Bank  in  its 
own  stock?— Yes. 

And  yet  that  appeared  under  the  first  head? — ^Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — [on  the  suggestion  of  a  jury- 
man]— You  have  said  that  the  effect  of  these  alterations  was 
to  show  a  larger  amount  of  assets  and  a  smaller  amount  of 
liabilities  than  your  original  abstract  would  have  shown,  or 
than  the  books  would  have  shown,  and  at  the  same  time  you 
said  that  the  alterations  did  not  affect  the  profit  and  loss  for 
the  year  or  the  reserve  fund.  Can  you  explain  that? — If  the 
assets  were  reduced  the  liabilities  were  reduced.  I  did  not 
say  the  liabilities  were  reduced  and  the  assets  enlarged.  They 
are  both  reduced. 

You  mean  that  the  amount  of  assets  is  reduced,  and  the 
amount  of  liabilities  is  reduced,  and  therefore  the  amount  of 
transactions  is  made  apparently  less  than  in  point  of  fact  they 
were.     Is  that  so? — Yes. 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Miller.  William   Miller. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — I  was  for  some  years,  and  down  to 
the  stoppage  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  superintendent  of 
its  branches.  I  was  so  from  1862.  My  duty  was  to  conduct 
correspondence  with  the  branches,  and  to  examine  the  advances 
made  at  the  branches,  and  report  on  them  to  the  Manager; 
also  to  take  a  general  oversight  of  the  business  transacted  at 
the  branches.  My  duties  never  brought  me  into  contact  with 
the  Board  of  Directors. 

Were  you  ever  present  at  their  meetings? — I  have  been  asked 
to  come  in  to  answer  a  question  occasionally,  but  I  was  not 
there  habitually — very  seldom — only  when  a  question  or 
explanation  was  asked  as  to  something  in  my  department.  On 
the  occasion  of  the  annual  balance  being  prepared  there  was 
a  form  prepared  and  given  to  us  by  Mr.  Morison,  on  which  we 
entered  the  figures  from  our  own  books,  and  returned  the  sheet 
to  Mr.  Morison.  The  branch  balance  sheets  for  the  years  1876, 
1877,  and  1878  were  prepared  in  that  way  under  my  superin- 
tendence. They  contained  a  correct  statement  of  the  balances 
of  the  branches  for  these  years.  We  got  weekly  returns  from 
each  branch,  and  the  accuracy  of  these  was  checked  by  our 
inspectors.  In  each  of  these  three  years  about  £10,000  was 
written  off  for  bad  debts  at  the  branches.  I  have  made  an 
analysis  of  that  for  the  past  five  years,  and  I  find  that  the 
average  sum  so  written  off  for  bad  debts  was  £10,900  per 
annum.  The  business  done  at  the  branches  was  a  very  profit- 
able one — averaging  £70,000  a  year,  after  deducting  the  bad 
debts. 

By  Mr.  Asher — At  the  annual  balance  Mr.  Morison,  the 
accountant,  sent  me  a  form  of  abstract  to  be  filled  up  in  con- 
nection with  the  branches — a  form  having  the  same  heads,  I 
believe,  as  there  are  in  the  balance  ledger  at  the  head  office. 
We  allocated  the  returns  from  the  branches  under  these  various 
heads.  We  gave  back  the  form  to  Mr.  Morison,  to  be  incor- 
porated in  the  general  absti-act,  as  I  understood.  I  understood 
that  the  branch  business  and  the  head  office  business  were 
brought  together  in  that  form  only  once  a  year. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — Was  it  part  of  that  return  to  show  the 
cross  accounts  which  existed  at  the  branches? — Yes. 

What  did  you  return  as  the  cross  accounts  for  1878? — I  don't 
remember. 

The  amount  entered  in  No.  124a — the  abstract  for  1878 — 
under  the  head  "  Cross  accounts "  is,  "  Edinburgh  branch, 
£148,939  18s.  lid."  Have  you  any  doubt  that  that  was  the 
amount  you  returned  as  the  cross  accounts  of  that  branch? — 
I  have  no  doubt  that  is  correct,  but  I  have  no  means  here  of 
testing  it. 

162 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Did  you  return  the  amount   of  cross   accounts  for    1876? — Wm.  Miller. 
I  don't  remember  as  to  1876;  there  was  as  to  1877  and  1878, 
"but  I  am  not  sure  that  form  was  prepared  before   1877. 

Have  you  no  books  here  that  would  refresh  your  recollection 
about  that? — I  don't  think  there  are  any.  I  have  seen  the 
abstracts  of  branches  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  Brown.  The  abstract 
branches  account  of  1876,  now  shown  me,  has  been  filled  up 
by  one  of  our  inspectors  of  branches.  I  have  no  doubt  it  is 
quite  correct.  The  amount  of  cross  accounts,  branches,  in  1876, 
was  £376,334  5s.  3d.  No.  134  is  the  abstract  of  accounts  of 
branches  for  June,  1877.  There  is  entered  there  under  the 
head  of  cross  accounts — "  Edinburgh  branch,  £268,692  8s.  3d." 

Before  you  go  further,  will  you  explain  to  the  jury  what  is 
the  meaning  of  cross  accounts  as  appearing  in  these  branches 
abstracts? — -They  belong  entirely  to  the  accounts  of  the  North 
British  Railway.  The  North  British  Railway  Company  kept 
several  accounts  for  their  own  purposes;  some  of  them  were 
debtor  and  some  were  creditor.  The  mode  of  bringing  out 
these  was  by  deducting  the  debtor  from  the  creditor  balance, 
treating  it  as  one  account.  I  think  that  is  a  perfectly  proper 
book-keeping   operation. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — The  amount  brought  out  for 
1876  in  that  way  was  £376,000  odds. 

It  is  the  balance  of  a  debtor  and  creditor  account? — You 
deduct  the  one  from  the  other,  and  bring  out  the  sum  that 
should  come  in  here. 

By  Mr.  Balfour— The  only  instance  in  which  we  so  crossed 
accounts  was  in  connection  with  the  North  British  Railway. 
We  never  did  it  anywhere  but  at  Edinburgh,  and  in  connection 
with  the  North  British  Railway. 

Is  there  not  a  similar  entry  applicable  to  the  West  End 
branch,  Glasgow? — Yes;  that  was  a  fictitious  entiy  returned  by 
me  to  the  head  office  for  the  following  purpose: — The  West 
■Calder  Oil  Company  owed  £5150.  That  originated  at  the  West 
End  branch,  where  they  kept  their  account.  Tliere  was  also 
a  debit  account  in  the  head  office  of  the  same  kind ;  and  it  was 
resolved  to  bring  up  the  West  End  balance  to  the  head  office, 
because  I  understood  the  head  office  had  securities  against  these 
advances.  Subsequently  it  was  sent  back  to  the  West  End 
branch,  in  order  that  they  might  make  a  cross  entry  in  their 
books  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  the  debt  before  them.  Had 
that  not  been  deducted  the  debt  would  have  been  entered 
twice.  It  was  perfectly  necessary  and  proper,  having  regard 
to  the  manner  in  which  these  accounts  at  the  two  offices  were 
kept,  to  make  that  entry.  The  amount  of  cross  accounts,  as 
shown  by  No.  134,  for  the  week  ending  Wednesday,  6th  Juno, 
1877,  was— Edinburjrh  branch,  £268,692  8s.  3d.;  West  End 
blanch,  Glasgow,  £5150  5s.  In  1878,  as  shown  by  No.  135, 
the  cross  accounts  nmounted  to — Kdinburgh  branch,    f  148,939 

163 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Miller.  18s.  lid.:  West  End  branch,  Glasgow,  £5150  5s.;  totals 
£154,090  .3s.  lid.  [Shown  No.  1.3-3— Abstract  of  accounts  at 
branches  on  Thursday,  1st  June,  1876.]  That  is  the  printed 
form  which  Mr.  Morison  supplied  to  us  in  order  that  we  might 
fill  in  these  returns. 

By  the  Dean  of  Faculty — I  have  been  inspector  of  branches 
since  1862.  In  conducting  the  business  of  my  department 
with  the  head  office  I  dealt  only  with  the  Manager.  I  never 
came  in  contact  with  the  accountant  except  when  giving  him 
these  returns ;  I  had  no  occasion  to  do  so.  Since  Mr.  Robert 
Stronacli  was  appointed  Manager  I  have  seen  him  every  day, 
and  several  times  every  day.  I  thought  him  a  particularly 
careful  Manager  in  all  advances  that  we  had  to  do  with.  I 
found  him  very  careful,  and,  I  would  say,  very  strict  in  inves- 
tigating into  securities  for  proposed  credits.  I  thought,  up 
to  1st  October,  1878,  that  he  was  a  perfectly  conscientious, 
honourable  gentleman — a  man  whom  I  would  not  have  suspected 
of  doing  anything  wrong. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — The  sum  of  £376,334  in  1876  was 
applicable  entirely  to  the  accounts  of  the  North  British  Rail- 
way. I  may  explain  that  it  to  a  large  extent  consisted  of  twa 
accounts — the  one  called  a  general  account  and  the  other  an 
interest  and  dividend  account.  The  general  accovmt  was  gener- 
ally creditor,  because  into  that  went  all  the  moneys  lodged, 
and,  as  these  came  in  from  day  to  day  and  week  to  week,  they 
were  put  to  that  credit.  Then  when  interest  and  dividends 
were  paid,  they  were  debited  to  the  other  account  in  the  first 
place.  It  was  really  a  debtor  and  creditor  account  kept  in  the 
form  of  two  accounts — the  one  containing  debit  and  the  other 
credit  entries.  With  regard  to  the  two  sums  in  each  of  the 
years  1877  and  1878,  the  larger  of  these  was  entirely  applicable 
to  the  North  British  Railway,  and  the  smaller  to  the  West 
End  branch  relative  to  the  West  Calder  Oil  Company.  I  had 
nothing  whatever  to  do  with  credits  granted  or  transactions 
of  any  kind  at  the  head  office.  I  knew  nothing  that  was  done 
at  the  head  office. 

You  had  no  means  of  ascertaining  on  what  terms  money  was 
given  there  1 — Certainly  not ;  and  I  never  wished  to  know,  that 
was  more ;  not  that  I  suspected  anything  wrong,  but  I  did  not 
want  to  be  bothered  about  it ;  I  had  plenty  to  do  with  my  own 
business,  and  wished  to  keep  myself  entirely  to  that.  I  never 
asked  a  question  about  the  head  office. 

What  do  you  mean  by  saying  that  the  Manager  was  very 
strict? — I  mean  to  say  that  when  any  proposal,  for  a  credit 
account,  for  instance,  or  an  advance  of  any  kind,  came  up  to 
me  and  I  showed  it  to  him,  he  was  particularly  careful  in  seeing 
what  he  believed  to  be  proper  security  lodged  before  it  could 
be  granted,  and  he  was  in  the  habit  of  investigating  the  returns 
of  the  advances  himself,  and  looking  at  them. 
164 


CHAPTER  VI. 
Evidence  of  the  Manager's  Clerk  and  the  Cashier. 

William  Morris. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — 1  was  in  the  emplojiueut  of  the  City  wm.  MoppIs, 
of  Glasgow  Bank  from  the  year  1864  down  to  the  time  of  its 
stoppage,  in  various  capacities.  I  was  at  first  in  the  account- 
iint's  department,  and  in  1871  I  was  appointed  private  clerk  to 
the  Manager,  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach.  I  acted  in  that  capacity 
until  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach  resigned,  and  on  the  appointment 
of  Mr.  Kobert  Stronach  I  continued  to  act  under  him  in  the  same 
capacity.  Alexander  Stronach  ceased  to  attend  the  Bank  about 
December,  1874. 

Was  he  umch  about  the  Bank,  or  was  he  absent  altogether 
from  the  Bank  from  that  date  down  to  December,  1875.' — He 
was  absent  altogether.  During  that  period  his  brother,  Mr. 
Robert  Stronach,  performed  the  duties  of  Manager.  My  duties 
as  private  clerk  to  the  Manager  were  to  attend  to  the  Manager's 
correspondence. 

Were  you  employed  by  him  to  write,  or  did  you  merely  write 
from  his  scroll  or  dictation  '. — Both  from  scroll  and  to  dictation. 

You  were  not  employed  in  any  other  sense  to  conduct  corre- 
spondence.' — Well,  there  were  official  letters  as  well,  such  as 
Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.'s. 

But  what  I  want  to  know  is  this,  Avere  you  employed  merely 
to  write  what  was  dictated  or  given  you  to  copy,  or  were  yoxi 
employed  to  write  letters  from  information  given  you? — Latterly, 
with  Mr.  Robert  Stronach,  from  infonnation  given  me.  Before 
that  date  I  wrote  principally  from  scroll,  with  Alexander 
Stronach.  With  Robert  Stronach  I  wrote  from  information 
given  me.  The  official  letters  of  the  Bank  were  generally 
addressed  to  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank.  These  letters,  I  under- 
stand, were  opened  by  Mr.  Leresche.  When  letters  were 
addressed  to  the  Manager  by  name,  they  were  delivered  to  the 
Manager  himself. 

Were  there  any  particular  letters  which  came  addressed 
always  to  the  Manager? — ^Yes,  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co's.  I  wrote 
the  replies  to  those  letters.  I  had  an  apartment  adjoining  that 
of  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach.       Shortly  after  I  became  his  private 

i6S 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Morris,  clerk  I  directed  a  duplicate  set  of  books  to  be  kept  by  the  bill 
clerk,  Mr.  Laing.  The  two  sets  of  books  were  a  little  differently 
ai-ranged.  but  the  results  were  the  same.  These  books  included 
a  book  titled  on  the  back,  ''  Ledger  A,  Open  credit,  No.  3 "  ; 
another  book,  titled  "  Ledger  B,  Open  or  marginal  credits.  No. 
3  "  ;  and  a  third  book,  ""  Ledger  C,  Open  or  marginal  credits.  No. 
3."  The  entries  contained  in  Ledger  A  were  the  credits  granted 
to  James  Morton  &  Co.,  Matthew  Buchanan  &  Co.,  and  Potter, 
Wilson  &  Co.  Ledger  B  contained  credits  granted  to  Smith, 
Fleming  &  Co.  and  .James  Nicol  Fleming.  Ledger  C  contained 
miscellaneous  credits,  including  credits  granted  to  Glen  Walker 
«k  Co.  and  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.,  amongst  others.  In  work- 
ing these  ledgers  I  kept  a  book,  titled  "  Daily  list  of  bills 
payable."  That  contained  a  list  of  the  bills  payable  by  the  Bank 
as  they  matured  from  day  to  day  under  each  of  the  credits  in 
these  books. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — The  books  were  confined  to  the 
particular  accounts  I  have  mentioned.  The  duplicate  set  was 
applicable  only  to  those  accounts. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — These  credit  accounts  were  accounts^ 
which  involved  acceptances  by  the  Bank,  on  which  the  Bank's 
credit  was  intei-posed.  Ledger  C  includes  acceptances  by  the 
London  Joint  Stock  Bank  on  behalf  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank. 

How  would  vou  describe  the  character  of  the  credits  entered 
in  Ledger  A  J — Running  credits.  Bv  a  running  credit  I  mean 
a  credit  that  has  been  renewed  and  is  kept  renewed,  kept 
continuing  upon  the  circle,  renewed  from  day  to  day. 

Where  the  Bank  issue  new  acceptances  to  retire  those  that  are 
in  the  circle  when  they  come  due  I — Precisely. 

Do  you  apply  the  term  "open  credits"  also  to  these? — Yes, 
they  are  classed  amongst  the  open  credits. 

What  was  the  common  practice  of  the  Bank  in  granting  such 
credits — how  did  it  begin? — By  a  letter  of  application  from  the 
person  requiring  the  credit. 

And  then,  I  believe,  it  was  usual  to  issue  a  letter  of  credit? — 
Sometimes  it  was  and  sometimes  it  was  not. 

Was  it  not  invariably  the  course  pursued  with  the  ordinary 
creditors  of  the  Bank  to  require  an  application  in  writing? — 
It  was. 

Was  that  com-se  pursued  with  the  credits  that  are  entered  in 
Ledger  A? — In  some  instances  it  was,  in  others  not.  Ledger  B 
contains  open  and  marginal  credits  together.  A  marginal  credit 
is  almost  a  similar  document  to  an  open  credit.  A  marginal 
credit  is  a  margin  attached  to  a  bill  instead  of  a  letter  being 
granted  ;  it  is  a  set  of  bills,  and  the  obligation  of  the  Bank  is 
attached  to  the  bill,  like  a  counterfoil,  the  obligation  of  the  Bank 
being  to  accept  the  bill  when  presented  against  produce.  In 
the  case  of  marginal  credits  the  bill  attached  to  the  counterfoil 
sets  forth  the  sum  that  it  is  drawn  for.     In  the  case  of  an  open 

i66 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

credit,  Avliere  there  is  a  letter  of  credit,  say,  for  £50,000,  the  Wm.  Morris. 

customer  can  draw  for  any  amount  that  suits  his  jmi-pose  up  to 

the  limit   of   £50,000   in   bills   of   any  amount.        But  when   a 

niai-ginal  credit  is  granted,  we  issue  five  bills  of  £10,000  each. 

There   were    a  number    of   firms    connected   with    James    Nicol 

Fleming   and    Siiiith,    Flenaug  &   Co.    who    operated    upon   the 

credits  given  to  them.       These  were  James  Nicol  Fleming  & 

Co.,  Calcutta;  William  Nicol  &  Co.,  Bombay;  Todd,  Findlay  & 

Co.,   Rangoon ;    Fleming  &   Co.,   Kurrachee ;    and   there   was  a 

Colombo  credit  that  was  operated  upon  by  Fowlie,  Richmond  & 

Co.  at  one  time,  but  that  firm  came  to  grief  along  with  Messrs. 

Collie  in   1875,   and  since   then  that   credit  has   been  operated 

upon  by  William  Nicol  &  Co.,  Bombay.     Ledger  A  showed  that 

the  operations  of  James  Morton  &  Co.  under  these  credits  were 

very  large.     With  the  view  of  keeping  up  my  information  on  the 

subject,  I  prepared  folio  sheets  from  month  to  month,  showing 

James  Morton  &  Co.'s  liabilities  as  at  the  beginning  of  each 

month,    on   credits    and   discounts,    past    due    bills,    and    open 

accounts.      My  object  in  ascertaining  Morton  &  Co.'s  liabilities 

at   the  beginning   of  each   month   was   to   keep    the   Manager 

supplied  with  information ;   it  was  such  a  large  account  that  I 

thought  that  necessary.      These  sheets  were  submitted  to  him 

monthly. 

Did  you  keep  them  after  you  had  prepared  them,  or  how  did 
you  deal  with  them? — The  book  lay  with  the  Manager,  and  I 
was  in  the  habit  of  getting  it  at  the  beginning  of  each  month  to 
post  up.  It  lay  with  him  during  the  intei-vening  month,  and  I 
got  it  back  from  him.  It  was  to  Mr.  Robert  Stronach  that  I 
supplied  that  information — not  to  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach.  I 
cannot  remember  whether  it  was  his  suggestion  or  mine  that 
these  monthly  sheets  should  be  prepared.  [Shown  Nos.  122, 
analysis  of  securities,  Jame.s  Morton  &  Co.,  commencing 
2Gth  September,  1876,  and  123.]  No.  123  is  titled  "Weekly 
abstract  of  credits,  S.,  F.  &  Co.  and  J.  N.  F."  It  contains 
a  weekly  abstract.  It  is  one  of  my  own  books,  kept  in  the 
room  I  occupied.  It  was  not  patent  to  the  other  officers  of  the 
Bank.  The  weekly  abstracts  show  in  cumitio  the  state  from 
week  to  week  of  the  credits  to  those  firms,  as  operated  upon  from 
the  different  places  I  have  mentioned.  The  special  credits 
giaTited  to  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  were  not  entered  in  that 
book  at  all.  They  were  never  put  through  an  abstract.  The 
sheets  produced  here  are  only  a  part.  No.  122  goes  back  to 
1S76.  I  retained  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.'s  sheets — No. 
123.  I  also  kept  a  book  (No.  120),  titled  "Special  securities, 
J.  N.  F.,  S.,  F.  &  Co.,  J.  M.  &  Co.,  and  others."  These 
initials  mean  James  Nicol  Fleming,  Smith,  Fleming  ct  Co., 
and  James  Morton  &  Co.  That  book  was  made  up  by 
me  in  June,  1877.  I  had  no  special  instructions  to  make 
it   up.       These   things   were   recorded   in   loose   sheets,   and    I 

167 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Morris,  thought  it  proper  to  have  them  embodied  in  a  book.  It  shows 
the  amount  of  liabilities  by  these  parties,  and  the  securities 
supposed  to  be  held  against  these  liabilities. 

Did  you  always  receive  from  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  application 
letters  for  credits  granted  to  them? — As  a  rule. 

Do  you  say  the  same  thing  with  regard  to  the  credits  granted 
to  Mr.  Morton? — No. 

Were  there,  as  a  rule,  letters  there? — As  a  rule  there  were 
letters,  but  there  were  three  or  four  credits  without  le^tters  of 
application. 

In  some  of  Mr.  Morton's  applications  he  asks  credit  against 
securities  annexed? — He  does. 

Were  securities  annexed  in  these  cases? — Sometimes,  and 
sometimes  not. 

How  did  you  account  for  that?  What  occurred  to  you  at  the 
time  as  his  reason  for  not  annexing  the  securities? — I  cannot 
say ;  I  have  no  idea. 

Did  Mr.  Morton  deposit  securities  from  time  to  time  without 
applying  for  a  credit  at  the  time? — Well,  probably  he  did, 
before  my  time  ;   sometimes. 

You  kept  another  book,  I  believe,  containing  the  entries  in 
connection  with  foreign  and  colonial  credits,  and  the  acceptances 
maturing  of  foreign  and  colonial  bills? — I  don't  remember  that 
book. 

When  applications  were  sent  in  to  the  Manager  by  Morton  & 
Co.  or  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  after  the  Manager  opened  these 
letters,  what  did  he  do  with  them — to  whom  did  he  give  thera? — 
He  sent  them  upstairs  to  me,  or  I  called  for  them  and  got  them 
in  the  Manager's  room. 

Were  they  given  to  Mr.  Leresche? — Sometimes  they  were. 

Was  that  the  general  rule  ? — No. 

Were  applications  for  credits  from  these  firms  handed  to  Mr. 
Leresche? — Yes,  latterly  they  were.  The  application  letters  for 
the  special  credits  were  handed  to  him. 

But  was  the  correspondence  with  regard  to  the  credits  other 
than  special  handed  to  Mr.  Leresche? — ^No. 

Was  there  any  document  or  letter  sent  from  your  office  or 
from  the  Manager  with  your  knowledge  to  Mr.  Leresche  which 
could  inform  him  of  the  amount  of  Morton's  credits  or  liabilities? 
—No. 

But  you,  as  private  clerk,  had  information  upon  the  subject? 
—I  had.  [Shown  Nos.  185  to  188  inclusive.]  No.  188  is 
a  letter,  dated  24th  August,  1875,  from  Smith,  Fleming  & 
Co.  to  R.  S.  Stronach.  I  am  familiar  with  that  letter ;  I  have 
seen  it. 

You  saw  it  at  the  time,  didn't  you? — Probably  I  did.  NovS. 
185  to  187  are  letters  from  John  Fleming  to  the  Manager,  and 
which  were  received  by  him.  I  never  saw  the  minute  books. 
[Shown  No.  215.]       That  is  a  letter  from  John  Innes  Wright  & 

i68 


Photo.] 


[J.  Horsburglu 


Lord  Craighill. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

€o.  to  the  Manager,  R.  S.  Stronach,  dated  2nd  August,   1876,  Wm.  Morris. 
in  the  following  terms  :  — > 

115  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow, 
2nd  August,  1876. 
R.  S.  Stronach,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,— Referring  to  the  letter  addressed  to  you  by  th«' 
writer  on  12th  ulto.,  we  now  beg  to  apply  foi'  marginal  credits  as 
undernoted,  for  one  hundred  thousand  pounds  (£100,000  stg.),  to  be 
drawn  by  Messrs.  Glen  Walker  &  Co.,  of  Melbourne,  the  partners 
of  which  are  Wm.  Glen  Walker,  Wm.  Geddes  Borron,  and  Ferdi- 
nand Spiro. 

In  security  for  same,  we  engage  to  hold  for,  or  lodge  with  you, 
the  documents  for  wool  and  other  produce  sent  to  us  by  Messrs. 
G.  W.  &  Co.  as  received  (stipulating  that  the  same  represents  an 
excess  of  20  per  cent,  over  the  amounts  drawn),  or  we  shall  pay 
you  cash  to  the  amount  of  your  acceptances. 

We  beg  to  enclose  copy  of  letter  received  from  W.  G.  Walker, 
Esq.,  requesting  the  creclits  now  applied  for,  and  who  purposes 
leaving  this  for  Melbourne  in  a  few  weeks  for  the  purpose  of  giving 
the  business  his  personal  attention. — W^e  remain,  dear  sir,  yours 
faithfully, 

John  Innes  Wright  &  Co. 

Marginal  credits  at  4  or  6  m/  st.  Payable  in  London.  In  force 
for  one  year.     In  20  bills  for  £5000  each,  and  in  triplicates. 

"  Triplicates  "  means  in  sets  of  three. 

You  did  not  see  the  minutes,  I  believe? — I  did  not. 

But  you  became  aware,  by  the  issuing  of  bills,  that  that  credit 
had  been  granted? — Yes. 

Was  the  security  mentioned  in  that  letter  given  to  the  Bank? 
— Not  that  I  am  aware  of.  The  £100,000  marginal  credit 
was  drawn  upon  to  the  extent,  I  think,  of  £57,000.  £25.000 
■was  paid  in  in  cash  by  John  Innes  Wright  &  Company,  and  the 
balance  was  paid  by  the  Bank. 

How  did  they  deal  with  it  in  their  books  on  retiring  the  accept- 
-ances? — It  would  go  into  the  debit  of  John  Innes  Wright  & 
Co.'s  open  balance. 

To  the  extent  of  £32,000? — Yes.  [Shown  minute  of  Directors 
of  I7th  August,  1876,  in  the  following  tenns]  :  — 

A  letter  from  Messrs.  James  Morton  tt  Co.,  and  two  letters  from 
Mr.  W.  Glen  Walker,  dated  respectively  Glasgow,  the  16th  and 
14th  instant,  in  regard  to  the  drawing  of  credits  in  lieu  of  those 
now  drawn  by  Messrs.  Holmes,  White  &  Co.,  and  others,  and  one 
of  the  latter  as  to  the  acquisition  of  certain  pastoral  properties, 
were  brought  under  the  notice  of  the  Board  ;  after  full  considera- 
tion the  Board  came  to  the  resolution  that  it  was  advisable  to 
adopt  generally  the  suggestions  contained  in  these  letters,  and 
they  accordingly  requested  the  Manager,  associated  with  Messrs. 
Potter,  Stewart,  and  Taylor,  to  arrange  with  Mr.  Walker  as  to 
all  details.  While  arriving  at  this  resolution,  the  Board  were 
fully  sensible  of  the  undesirableness  of  such  investments  as  the 
purchases  proposed  in  the  letters;  but  having  in  view  the  position 
of  certain  old  accounts,  and  looking  to  the  whole  circumstances, 
and  particularly  to  the  fact  that  the  contemplated  arrangements 
for  the  working  of  the  credits  are  largely  part  of  tiansactiona  in 

169 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Moppis.  existence  for  many  years,  and  previously  brought  under  considera- 
tion of  the  Board  by  the  present  Manager,  the  Board  deemed  it 
expedient  to  come  to  their  present  decision,  as  referred  to  in 
minute  of  30th  December,  1875. 

You  were  not  cognisant  of  the  terms  of  the  minute  at  the 
time? — I  was  not. 

But  you  knew  the  transactions  to  which  it  related  I — I  did. 

There  was  a  credit,  No.  24/6,  for  £235,000?— There  was. 

In  whose  favour?  Explain  what  you  know  about  it? — The 
credit  was  granted  to  James  Morton  &  Co.,  and  was  drawn 
under  in  favour  of  Holmes,  White  &  Co.,  of  Melbourne.  The 
limit  of  the  credit  was  £235,400,  but  the  credit  was  reduced  to 
the  extent  of  £100,000  by  the  drafts  of  Glen  Walker  &  Co. ; 
and  the  same  securities  that  were  held  against  24/6  were 
put  up  as  a  secm-ity  against  the  new  credit  for  £100,000.  That 
was  the  credit  38/47. 

Then  was  the  oi-iginal  sum  reduced? — The  original  sum  of  the 
credit  was  reduced  by  £100,000  by  the  opening  of  the  new 
credit. 

That  had  just  the  effect  of  splitting  it  into  two,  had  it  not? 
— Precisely. 

I  should  have  read  you  the  other  minute  of  11th  January, 
1877:  — 

It  was  proposed  and  agreed  to  that  the  Bank  should  accept 
drafts  by  Glen  Walker  &  Co.  to  the  extent  of  £20,000,  in 
renewal  of  those  retired  for  a  like  amount  due  1st  instant  on  a/c 
Glen  Walker  &  Co.,  Melbourne,  per  minute  of  30th  December, 
1875. 

Also,  that  the  Bank  should  accept  drafts  by  Glen  Walker  &  Co. 
to  the  extent  of  £100,000,  to  retire  a  like  amount,  drawn  by 
Holmes,  White  &  Co.,  of  Melbourne,  on  account  of  James  Morton 
it  Co.  The  securities  at  present  held  against  Holmes,  White  & 
Co.'s  drafts  to  be  placed  as  security  against  the  drafts  of  Glen 
Walker  &  Co.  Letter  to  be  obtained  from  James  Morton  &  Co. 
to  this  effect,  and  no  drafts  to  be  accepted  until  this  letter  is  in 
possession  of  the  Bank. 

The  original  credit  vou  say  was  for  £235,000  to  James  Morton  «fe 
Co.  ?— Yes. 

It  was  operated  upon  by  Holmes,  Wliite  &r  Co.  ? — It  was. 

And  that  was  reduced  to  £135,000  by  taking  Glen  Walker  & 
Co.'s  bills  for  Holmes,  White  &  Co.'s? — Precisely.  Glen  Walker 
&  Co.'s  acceptances  were  discounted  by  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co., 
and  the  proceeds,  so  far  as  received  by  the  Bank,  were  paid  into 
the  credit  of  credit  38/47.  That  was  one  of  the  credits  into 
which  24/6  was  split. 

Did  Inne^  Wright  &  Co.  account  to  the  Bank  for  the  amount 
of  these  drafts?— Not  for  the  whole. 

Who  came  to  the  Bank  with  regard  to  these  drafts? — Mr. 
Inglis,  a  clerk  of  Potter,  Wilson  &  Company. 

Did  Inglis  explain  to  you  how  he  was  taking  charge  of  the 

170 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

matter  ? — He  said  he  had  a  general  supervision  over  that  credit  Wm.  Morris, 
of  £100,000. 

But  he  came  on  behalf  of  Inues  Wright  &  Co.? — On  behalf 
of  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co. 

Was  it  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  who  were  taking  the  super- 
vision of  that  / — Yes. 

Did  you  call  the  attention  of  the  Manager,  Mr.  Robert 
Stronach,  to  these  short  payments  on  the  part  of  Innes  Wright 
&  Co.?— I  did. 

Did  he  make  any  observation  ? — He  was  very  much  displeased. 

Were  you  sent  by  him  on  more  than  one  occasion  to  Innes 
Wright  &  Co.  to  inquire  about  it ! — -Yes ;  and  I  also  spoke 
to  Mr.  Inglis,  Potter's  clerk,  regarding  the  matter,  complaining 
of  the  short  payments ;  for  example,  if  they  got  drafts  for 
£10,000,  perhaps  Mr.  Scott,  of  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.,  would 
only  pay  one-half  of  that  instead  of  paying  in  the  £10,000. 

Instead  of  paying  in  the  proceeds  that  they  got  by  discounting 
the  bills,  they  only  paid  in  a  part  1 — Yes. 

And  you  were  sent  by  Mr.  Stronach  to  remonstrate  against 
that  proceeding? — Yes. 

And  you  did  so,  both  to  Mr.  Inglis,  who  was  supervising,  or 
at  least  who  was  saying  he  was  supervising,  on  behalf  of  Potter, 
Wilson  &  Co.,  and  also  to  Innes  Wright  &  Co.? — I  did. 

Whom  did  you  see  on  these  occasions  when  you  went  to  Innes 
Wright  &  Co.  ? — Mr.  Scott,  as  a  rule ;  sometimes  I  saw  Mr. 
Wright  also. 

WTiat  did  Mr.  Scott  say  when  you  saw  him  on  these  occasions, 
and  you  complained  of  him  retaining  these  moneys? — He  made 
excuses,  and  said  that  he  was  waiting  telegraphic  advice  or  such 
like  from  London. 

What  did  Mr.  Innes  Wright  say  about  it  when  you  saw  him  ? — 
He  stated  that  Mr.  Scott  generally  took  charge  of  these  things. 

Was  that  all  he  said  I — There  was  one  occasion  when  Mr.  Scott 
was  from  home  in  London,  and  Mr.  Wright  said  that  when  the 
short  payments  were  made  he  was  waiting  till  he  got  telegraphic 
advice  from  Mr.  Scott ;   the  drafts  had  not  been  placed. 

Did  he  seem  to  be  aware  that  short  payments  had  been  made? 
— Oh,  yes !  [Shown  account  No.  399.]  I  have  seen  that 
account  before.  It  is  an  account  current  between  Glen  Walker  & 
Co.  and  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  and  the  Bank.  I  think 
it  was  Mr.  Inglis,  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.'s  clerk,  who  brought 
it  to  the  Bank.  It  refers  to  the  drafts  on  38/-±7,  and  the 
payments  made  to  the  Bank  against  them.  The  last  date 
in  the  series  is  25th  January',  1878.  The  accounts  are  signed 
by  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  The  firm's  signature  there 
is  in  Mr.  Scott's  handwriting.  The  ultimate  debit  against  the 
firm  of  short  payments  retained  by  them  is  £48,668  Is.  2d., 
being  money  belonging  to  the  Bank  which  they  had  received  and 

171 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Morris,  failed  to  pay  into  the  Bank.  The  date  of  the  beginning  of  the 
account  is  March,  1877.  [Shown  minute  of  Directors  dated  14th 
March,  1878,  and  referred  to  the  following  passage]:  — 

With  reference  to  the  minute  of  28th  February  last  in  regard  to 
accounting  by  Messrs.  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  of  proceeds  of 
drafts  in  connection  with  the  credits  therein  named,  Messrs. 
Stewart  and  Potter,  the  committee  appointed  to  deal  with  the 
matter,  reported  that  they  had  had  an  interview  with  Mr.  Wm. 
Scott,  of  the  firm  of  Messrs.  John  lunes  Wright  &  Co.,  and  had 
arranged  for  a  settlement  by  cash  and  securities  to  be  completed 
by  21st  March  current,  as  detailed  in  the  statement  now  submitted, 
and  which  was  ordered  to  be  lodged. 

and  also  the  minute  of  21st  March,  1878,  containing  the  follow- 
ing passage  :  — 

Mr.  Stewart  reported  that,  as  appointed  by  last  meeting,  Mr. 
Potter  and  he  had  had  an  interview  with  Mr.  William  Scott,  of  the 
firm  of  Messrs.  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.,  which  resulted  in  his 
piomise  to  send  to  the  Bank  acceptances  by  his  London  firm  to  the 
extent  of  £10,000  additional  to  those  already  held  by  the  Bank  ; 
to  realise  forthwith  sugar  to  the  extent  of  from  £7000  to  £8000, 
to  be  paid  to  the  Bank ;  and  to  meet  the  committee  again  on 
Wednesday  next  at  twelve  o'clock  for  further  and  final  arrange- 
ments. 

I  was  aware  that  that  committee  had  been  appointed,  although 
I  had  not  seen  the  minutes,  and  I  was  present  at  a  meeting  of  the 
committee  which  was  held  in  Mr.  Potter's  office  in  Gordon  Street. 
There  were  present  at  that  meeting  Mr.  Stewart,  Mr.  Potter,  and 
Mr.  William  Scott,  of  John  Innes  Wright  &  Company.  [Shown 
No.  400.]  That  statement  was  produced  at  the  meeting.  it 
was  drawn  up  by  me.  It  contains  a  statement  of  the  short 
payments,  £48,000,  and  a  list  of  the  payments  to  be  made,  and 
of  the  security  to  be  lodged  against  the  debt.  The  document 
is  in  the  following  terms  :  — 

J.  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  1st  March,  1878. 

Arrangement  as  to  settlement  of  G.  W.  &  Co.'s  balance. 
Dr. 
To  balance,  say £48,000 

Cr. 

London   firm's   acceptances  already   in  Bank's   posses- 
sion, viz.  : — 
1st   acceptances   due  26th  April,    1878,    -         -         -         -  3,000 

„  26th    July         ,,       -         -         -         -  5,000 

,,  26th    Oct!;  ,,       -         -         -         -  7,000 

26th  Jan.,   1879,     ...         -  7,000 

~£22,000 
2nd  Cash  to  Account  on  or  before  21st  March,  -  -  10,000 
3rd  ,,  or     other     approved     mercantile 

security,     on     or     before     21st 

March, 7,500 

4th  London  firm's  acceptances,  due  end  of  June,  to  be 

handed  to  Bank  on  or  before  21st  March,  -         -  2,500 

5th  Cash  or  securities  before  date  above  mentioned,       -  6,000 

£48,000 
172 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

"London  firm's  bills  to  be  given  to-day  for  £10,000.  Wm.  Wm.  Morris. 
Scott  to  give  orders  for  sale  of  sugar  to-da}-.  Mr.  Scott  meets 
us  on  Wednesda}^  to  arrange  the  remainder.''  There  are  two 
different  handwritings  on  that  document.  The  body  of  it,  down 
to  the  summation  of  £48,000,  was  written  by  me.  The  words, 
"London  firm's  bills  to  be  given  to-day  for  £10,000.  Wm. 
Scott,  to  give  orders  for  sale  of  sugar  to-day.  Mr.  Scott  meets 
us  on  Wednesday  to  arrange  the  remainder,"  are  in  Mr,  Stewart's 
handwriting.  There  was  considerable  discussion  at  the  meeting 
about  this  matter.  Mr.  Stewart  took  the  leading  part  in  the 
conversation  for  the  Bank. 

"\Miat  did  he  say?  Did  he  make  any  observation  after  that 
etatement  was  produced  ? — Yes ;  he  remarked  to  Mr.  Scott  that 
it  was  a  very  ugly  matter  indeed,  and  he  could  only  characterise 
it  by  one  name,  and  so  long  as  he  held  the  onerous  and  honour- 
able position  of  the  Chairman  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  he 
would  not  allow  such  a  thing  to  be  permitted. 

As  so  dealing  with  the  funds  of  the  Bank  ? — As  so  dealing  with 
the  funds  of  the  Bank. 

After  he  said  that,  did  Mr.  Scott  make  any  suggestion? — Mr. 
Scott  wished  evidently  to  make  some  remark,  and  he  asked  me 
to  retire.      I  retired,  with  Mr.  Stewart's  permission. 

Did  Mr.  Stewart  seem  to  be  really  in  earnest,  and  angry? — 
Yes,  he  was ;  he  was  very  much  heated.  I  remained  out  of  the 
room  for  about  ten  minutes,  when  I  was  recalled,  I  think  by 
Mr.  Potter. 

When  you  returned  to  the  room,  how  were  the  three  parties 
then  engaged  ;  what  were  they  doing  ? — They  were  on  their  feet, 
apparently  dismissing.  Mr.  Stewart  made  a  remark  to  me. 
He  said  that  I  need  not  take  any  notice  of  what  had  passed. 

Did  he  say  what  had  passed  ?  Did  he  refer  to  it  in  any  other 
terms? — The  heat  of  the  meeting — that  I  need  not  take  any 
notice  of  the  heat  of  the  meeting  while  I  was  in  the  room. 

Were  these  the  words  he  used — that  you  need  not  take  any 
notice  of  the  heat  of  the  meeting? — ^Yes. 
Did  he  say  why? — I  forget  now. 

Did  he  say  that  they  had  come  to  any  arrangement  or  any- 
thing of  that  kind? — Yes,  that  the  matter  had  been  arranged 
satisfactorily. 

Did  he  say  with  whom  ?— With  Mr.  Scott.  I  then  left.  The 
Bank  at  that  time  had  in  its  possession  £22,000  of  the  accept- 
MDces  of  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.'s  London  firm — drafts 
by  the  Glasgow  firm  accepted  by  the  London  firm. 

One  of  the  things  to  be  given  in  settlement  was  cash  to 
account  on  or  before  21st  March,  £10,000;  did  the  Bank  get 
that?— No. 

Did  they  get  anything  instead  of  it?^ — They  got  an  additional 
£10,000  of  the  London  acceptances  of  John  Innes  Wricht  & 
Co. 

173 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Moppis.      More  paper  ? — ^More  paper. 

Did  the  Bank  get  the  items  3,  4,  and  5,  approved  mercantile 
security,  and  so  forth? — Not  that  I  am  aware  of. 

You  never  saw  or  heard  of  it? — No. 

And  it  never  was  credited  to  them  1 — No. 

Mr.  Stewart  says  in  his  note,  "  Wm.  Scott  to  give  orders  for 
sale  of  sugar  to-day  ' ;  I  suppose  you  don't  know  wliether  he 
gave  the  orders  or  not? — I  am  not  aware. 

But  did  any  proceeds  of  such  a  sale  come  to  the  Bank  1 — No. 

Has  any  part  of  that  =£48,000  been  paid  to  this  day,  so  far  as 
you  are  aware,  or  had  any  part  of  it  been  paid  at  the  stoppage  of 
the  Bank? — There  was  £8000  of  the  acceptances  paid,  leaving 
£40,000. 

I  believe  from  their  failure  to  pay  that  money  the  Manager 
removed  the  conduct  of  the  management  of  the  £100,000  credit 
from  them  altogether? — Yes. 

He  did  not  entrust  them  with  discounting  any  further? — No. 

In  what  capacity  were  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  superin- 
tending that  credit — in  the  interest  of  the  Bank  or  whose? — ^The 
credit,  of  course,  was  a  portion  of  James  Morton  &  Co.'s 
credit. 

I  know,  but  they  took  charge  of  it? — They  took  charge  of  that 
portion  of  it. 

The  £100,000  being  one  of  the  portions  into  which  the 
£235,000  was  split?— Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Justicb^Clerk — For  their  own  interest,  or  Mor- 
ton's interest,  or  the  Bank's  interest? — I  presmne  for  Morton's 
interest. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — Did  they  charge  commission? — I  am 
not  aware. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — As  I  understand  this  marginal 
credit,  the  Bank  undertook  to  accept,  within  a  certain  margin, 
the  drafts  of  the  customer,  which  were  to  be  discounted  and  the 
proceeds  paid  into  the  account? — Yes. 

Innes  Wright  &  Co.  were  employed  to  do  that? — They  were 
employed  to  discount  the  bills. 

And  they  only  paid  part  of  the  discount  received,  and  retained 
the  rest? — Precisely. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — [Shown  No.  191.]  That  is  a  letter 
written  by  the  Manager,  Mr.  Robert  Stronach,  and  addressed  to 
John  Fleming,  Esquire,  dated  21st  December,  1875,  in  the  follow- 
ing terms :  — 

City  of  Glasgow  Bank, 
C41asgow,  21st  December,  1875. 

My  Dear  Sir, — I  have  your  private  note  of  yesterday,  and  am 
sorry  to  hear  that  the  indulgence  shown  by  the  Directors  respecting 
the  Brown  pro-note  for  £5000  has  not  been  sufficient  to  the  require- 
ments of  the  case.  I  can,  thei-efore,  only  bring  the  matter  up 
again  for  the  consideration  of  the  Directors  on  Thursday,  but  1  do 

174 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

so  very  reluctantly,  I  assure  you,  knowing  the  feeling  which  existed  wm.  Morris, 
among  them   when  the   matter  was   put   before  them   last   week, 
and  of  which  you  are  aware. 

Referring  to  the  amount  we  have  come  under  cash  advance  to 
you  on  the  No.  2  cash  account,  £27m/  or  thereby,  and  should  be 
very  glad  if  you  could  arrange  to  relieve  us  of  this  or  part  at  your 
earliest  convenience. — Yours  faithfully, 

R.  S.   Stbonach. 

John  Fleming,  Esq.,  London. 

p., S.— Please  send  me  the  two  acceptances  of  Mr.  Brown  p. 
£2o00  each  in  the  meantime. 

The  body  of  the  letter  is  in  my  handwriting.  The  P.S.  is  in 
the  Manager's  handwriting.  Letter  No.  191c,  Mr.  Sironach  to 
John  Fleming,  23rd  May,  1878,  read  as  follows:  — 

City  of  Glasgow  Bank, 
Glasgow,  23rd  May,   1878. 

My  Dear  Sir, — I  brought  up  your  application  for  a  renewal  of 
credits  38/5  p.  £15,000  and  39/47  p.  £25,000  at  our  meeting  to-day ; 
and,  as  I  anticipated,  great  dissatisfaction  was  expressed  that  no 
tangible  reduction  was  made  upon  the  former,  and  that  you 
should  approach  at  all  for  a  renewal  of  the  latter,  which  was  quite 
a  temporary  transaction,  and  only  to  remain  in  force  until  such 
time  as  the  mails  assumed  their  normal  condition.  And  as  we 
presume  this  diflSculty  has  now  been  got  over,  it  is  very  much  to 
be  regretted  indeed  that  you  should  find  it  necessary  to  ask  for 
an  extension  of  this  credit.  Just  to  show  you  that  the  Directors 
have  good  cause  for  being  aggrieved  at  the  very  marked  manner  in 
which  your  credits  on  the  circle  have  been  growing  these  few  years 
past,  I  send  you  a  comparative  statement  herewith  of  the  amounts 
on  the  circle  at  the  beginning  of  the  Bank's  financial  year  since 
1875,  which  be  good  enough  to  peruse  carefully  and  return  with 
any  comments  you  may  think  necessary  to  make  upon  the  antici- 
pated accounts  and  those  informal  in  other  respects. 

Particularly  I  would  call  your  attention  to  anticipations  on 
Bombay,  Rangoon,  Fowlie's  credit,  and  the  two  credits  under 
consideration  to-day. — Yours  very  truly, 

R.   S.  Steonach, 
Manager. 

John  Fleming,  Esq., 
London. 

p. ,9. —Please  let  me  have  a  formal '  application  for  the  Mail 
Credit,  dated  Tuesday,  and  restrict  it  to  £25m/. 

That  letter  and  the  postscript  are  in  my  handwriting.  It  is 
signed  by  Mr.  Stronach,  the  Manager.  [Shown  No.  186,  letter, 
John   Fleming   to   Mr.    Stronach,    12th    April,    1875.]       Letter 

read  as  follows  :  — 

17  and  18  Leadenhall  Street,  London,  E.C. 
12th  April,  1875. 
R.  S.  Stronach,  Esq., 
City  of  Glasgow  Bank,   Glasgow. 

Dear  Sir,— Referring  to  the  meeting  I  had  with  your  Directors 
and  vourself  on  Thursday,  the  1st  inst.,  respecting  the  state  of  our 
accoiint  with  the  Bank,  I  now  beg  to  detail  the  terms  of  the  agroo- 
raent  come  to  as  J  understood  them. 

175 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  MoriLs.  1-  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  as  a  firm,  and  the  partners  as  indi- 
viduals, pledge  themselves  to  abstain  absolutely  trom  all  specula- 
tive operations  unless  specially  sanctioned  by  the  Bank. 

2.  They  are  to  hold  all  property  belonging  to  the  firm,  as  per 
annexed  statement,  as  security  or  cover  to  the  Bank  for  its  various 
advances  to  them  ;  but  inasmuch  as  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance 
that  the  credit  of  the  firm  should  not  be  injured,  but  be  carefully 
maintained,  no  public  transfer  of  the  property  is  meanwhile  to  be 
made.  The  realisation  of  the  property  is  to  be  left  in  S.,  F.  & 
Co.'s  hands,  who  undertake  faithfully  to  account  for  and  pay  over 
to  the  Bank  the  whole  proceeds  of  all  property  realised. 

3.  The  Bank's  charge  for  commission  for  all  the  credits  issued 
for  S.,  F.  &  Co.'s  accommodation,  as  per  list  herewith,  shall  be  at 
the  rate  of  J  per  cent,  per  annum,  and  this  arrangement  is  to  be 
retrospective  as  from  1st   January,  1875. 

4.  The  Bank's  charge  for  interest  on  all  cash  advances  to  S.,  F. 
&  Co.  shall  be  at  the  rate  of  3J  per  cent,  per  annum  as  from  1st 
January,  1875. 

A  statement  of  the  balances  of  various  accounts,  as  on  31st 
March  last,  is  appended. 

5.  The  Bank  shall  advance  the  sum  of  £100,000  at  the  rate  of  3i 
per  cent,  per  annum,  for  the  acquisition  of  £100,000  of  the  stock 
of  the  Canterbury  and  Otago  Company,  £7800  of  which  is  to  be 
provided  by  me,  credit  for  the  equivalent  of  (£7800)  being  given 
to  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  in  account  with  the  Bank  at  1st  January, 
1875. 

6.  The  £100,000  of  stock  as  above  shall  be  held  by  trustees  in 
trust  for  the  following  purpose.s : — 

(1)  To  pay  inteiest  at  the  rate  of  3^  per  cent,  per  annum  to 

the  liank  for  the  £100,000  advanced  for  the  purchase  of 
the  stock. 

(2)  To.  pay  the  whole  of  the  surplus  income  arising  from  the 

stock,  after  meeting  the  charge  for  interest  as  above,  to 
the  credit  of  S.,  F.  &  Co.'s  account  with  the  Bank,  and 
to  continue  doing  so  until  all  S.,  F.  &  Co.'s  debts  to  the 
Bank  have  been  liquidated. 

(3)  Nothing  was  agreed  as  to  the  ultimate  disposition  of  the 

stock  upon  the  final  liquidation  of  all  S.,  F.  &  Co.'s  obli- 
gations to  the  Bank,  but  I  venture  to  suggest  that  in  that 
event  the  trustees  be  directed  to  re-transfer  the  stock  at 
cost  price  (viz.,  par)  to  the  parties  who  furnished  it,  or 
their  assignees  or  heirs. 

7.  A  comparison  of  the  charges  on  S.,  F.  &  Co.'s  debt,  with  their 
probable  incomings  from  all  sources,  as  per  memo,  herewith,  shows 
they  have  the  command  of  an  annual  surplus  amounting  at  present 
to  £25,000.  applicable  to  the  reduction  of  their  debts  to  the  Bank. 
They  accordingly  undertake  to  pay  £25,000  per  annum  in  reduction 
of  their  debt  to  the  Bank,  in  addition  to  paying  punctually  all 
charges  for  interest  and  commission. 

The  reduction  is.  in  the  first  place,  to  be  made  on  the  credits, 
and  as  these  involve  an  annual  charge  of  5  per  cent,  for  commis- 
sion, stamps,  exchange,  and  discount,  each  reduction  will  be 
attended  with  a  corresponding  saving  in  future  annual  charges, 
which  saving  shall  be  applied  in  further  reduction  of  the  principal 
of  the  debt  :  and  thus,  starting  with  an  annual  payment  of  £25,000 
applied  to  the  reduction  of  the  credits,  which  involve  an  annual 
charge  of  5  per  cent.,  there  should  be,  in  course  of  fourteen  years, 
an  aggregate  reduction  in  the  debt  of  half  a  million  sterling. 

The  credits  beine  dnlr  Unqidated  shall  be  followed  by  the  liquida- 
tion of  the  cash  advances. 

176 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

8.  Regarding  the  credits,  W.  Nicol  &  Co.  have  undertaken  to  Wm.  MoitU. 
pay  off  the  Bombay  credit,  now  amounting  to  about  £260,000,  at 
the  rate  of  £20,000  per  annum ;  and  Fleming  &  Co.  have  under- 
taken to  liquidate  their  credit,  now  amounting  to  £60,000,  at  the 
rate  of  £5000  per  annum  ;  and  they  have  undertaken  to  hold  the 
properties  enumerated  in  the  statement  herewith  under  lien  to  the 
Bank  as  security  for  these  credits. 

Todd,  Findlay  &  Co.,  of  Rangoon  and  Moulmein,  have  under- 
taken to  come  under  obligation  for  the  Rangoon  credit,  amounting 
to  £90,000,  and  to  liquidate  the  same  at  the  rate  of  £15,000  per 
annum,  but  I  am  unable  to  place  their  undertaking  in  j-our  hands 
until  arrangements  now  in  progress  for  retiring  certain  acceptances 
of  ours  to  Todd,  Findlay  &  Co.  against  the  debt  to  you  as  by  the 
old  firm  of  Todd,  Findlay  &  Co.  (i.e.,  before  Mr.  Mair  became  a 
partner).  I  am  in  correspondence  with  Mr.  Morton  about  this 
matter,  which,  I  have  not  the  slightest  doubt,  will  be  shortly  ar- 
ranged, when  I  shall  be  at  liberty  to  place  in  your  hands  Mr. 
Mair's  obligation,  which  is  already  in  mine. 

I  shall  be  glad  to  learn  whether  I  have  correctly  stated  the 
understanding  come  to,  and  whether  it  be  desired  that  it  be  reduced 
to  a  formal  agreement. — I  am,  dear  sir,  yours  faithfully, 

John  Fleming. 

1. 

Property    belonging    to    Smith,    Fleming    &    Co.,    pledged    as    security 
to  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank. 

Tarapore  Tea  Gardens. 

108  British  India  Steam  Co.  Shares. 

150  Shares  Great  Eastern  Telegraph  Shares. 

300  Shares  West  Calder  Oil  Co. 

50  Shares  North  British  and  Mercantile  Insurance  Co. 
400  Shares  Universal  Marine  Insurance  Co. 
100  Shares  Ocean  Marine  Insurance  Co. 

19  Shares  Tuticorin  Press  Co.  Shares. 

10  Shares  North  China  Insurance  Shares. 
City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Stock,   £1000. 
Antwerp  Tool  Factory. 
R.  Duckworth  &  Co.'s  debt. 
Gorst  &  Lance's  debt. 
T.  D.  Findlay  &  Co.'s  p/notes,  £80,000. 
13th  April,  1875. 

2. 

Credits  issued  by  the  City  of  61a.sgow  Bank  as  on  Smith,  Flemin"- 
&  Co.'s  account,  31st  March,    1875.  '^ 

Bombay, £254,564     3  5 

Kurrachee, 60,000     0  0 

Rangoon, 87,390  15  7 

Colombo, 90,500     0  0 

33/50  our  account,          -         -  60,000     0  0 

36/35  Sawmill  Shares,  -         -  lOJOOO     0  0 

£562,454  19    0 

Then  there   is    No.    3— Cash    advances    to    Smith,    Fleminrr    k 
Co.  amountinor  to  £771,581  ISs.  2d. 


M 


177 


Wm.  Morris. 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

4. 

Estimate  of  Debt  Charges  and  Incomings. 

Credits    aggregating    £570,000    will    cost    per 
annum  for  commission,  stamps,  exchange,  and 
discounts,  5  per  cent.,     -----       £28,500 
Cash  advance,  say  £770,000  at  3 J  per  cent.,  -  23,485 

Premium  of  insurance  on  J.   Fleming's  life,   -  4,000 

£55,985 

Incomings. 
Bombay    and    Kurrachee,    interest    on    partners' 

capital  and  on  balances,         -         -        -         -  £13,000 
Proportion    of   profits,    ------      28,000 

£41,000 

Home  securities,  -        -         -         -         ".        '."         "      10,500 

Interest  on  money  engaged  in  working  this  business,       -        3,500 

Todd,  Findlay  &  Co., 15,000 

Fowlie, 1,000 

£71,000 
Probable  surplus  from  Canterbury  and  Otago  stock,  -         -        9,000 

£80,000 
Charges   as   above, 55,985 

£24,015 

13th  April,  1875.  John  Fleming. 

The  total  indebtedness  of  Smith,  Fleminsr  &.  Co.,  as  at  31st 
March,  1875,  was  £1,334,000;  and  at  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank 
£1,900,000  or  thereby. 

Do  you  see  pencil  marks  on  that  document? — ^Yes. 

In  whose  handwriting?  Some  in  Mr.  Stronach's? — Some  in 
Mr.  Stronach's. 

What  are  they?  Mention  one  or  two  of  them? — "The  power 
to  continue  the  credits  from  time  to  time." 

At  page  6  do  you  see  another  handwriting  on  it,  near  the 
foot? — "  Five  years  to  hold  securities,  then  sell  if  required;  £25 
when  due." 

In  whose  handwriting  is  that  addition? — Mr.  Potter's. 

On  the  nest  page  is  there  not  another  addition  in  Mr.  Potter'8 
handwriting? — ^Yes,  "Life  Policies." 

In  the  minute  of  the  directors  of  date  11th  January,  1877,  it 
is  said: — ■ 

It  was  proposed  and  agreed  to  that  the  Bank  should  accept 
drafts  by  Glen  Walker  &  Co.  to  the  extent  of  £20,000  in  renewal  of 
those  retired  for  a  like  amount  due  1st  instant  on  account  Glen 
Walker  &  Co.,  Melbourne,  per  minute  of  30th  December,  1875. 

Also,  that  the  Bank  should  accept  drafts  by  Glen  Walker  & 
Co.  to  the  extent  of  £100,000  to  retire  a  like  amount,  drawn  by 
Holmes,  White  &  Co.,  of  Melbourne,  on  account  of  .James  Morton 
&  Co.  The  securities  at  present  held  against  Holmes,  White 
t%  Co.'s  drafts  to  be  placed  as  security  against  the  drafts  of  Glen 
Walker  &  Co.  Letter  to  be  obtained  from  .James  Morton  &  Co. 
to  this  eflFect. 

178 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


I  also  read  the  minute  of  30th  December,  1875,  there  referred  Wm.  Morris, 
to:  — 

A  letter  was  read  from  Mr.  W.  Glen  Walker  applying  for  an  open 
letter  of  credit  for  £20,000  in  favour  of  Messrs.  Glen  Walker  & 
Co.,    Melbourne,    to    be    drawn    at    or   under    6    mos/st.,    and    de- 

Eositing  stock  of  the  New  Zealand  and  Australian  Land  Company, 
limited,  in  security.       The  application  was  granted  on  the  usual 
terms  and  conditions,   the  details  being  left  to   the   Manager   to 
arrange. 
"Was  that  credit  granted? — It  was. 

Was  that  New  Zealand  stock  referred  to  in  the  minute  of 
December  lodged? — No. 

The  security  stipulated  was  not  lodged? — It  was  not  lodged. 

Was  any  other  security  lodged  in  lieu  of  it? — Not  that  I  am 
aware  of. 

Did  the  Bank  ultimately  come  under  cash  advance  for  the 
•whole  of  these  credits? — It  did. 

To  whom  was  the  cash  advanced  by  the  Bank  debited? — 
£20,000  was  debited  to  W.  Glen  Walker. 

I  call  your  attention  to  a  minute  of  28th  February,  1878:  — 

A  letter  was  read  from  Messrs.  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  dated 
London,  26th  February,  1878,  applying  for  letters  of  credit  for 
£25,000  in  favour  of  Messrs.  W.  Nicol  &  Co.,  Bombay,  to  be  drawn 
as  3  mos./st.,  m  terms  of  their  letter;  the  application  was  granted 
on  the  understanding  that  the  drafts  are  to  be  retired  at  maturity. 
The  Manager  reported  that  the  Bank  had  recently  been  brought 
into  cash  advance  to  the  extent  of  £48,000  from  the  proceeds  of 
drafts  being  short  accounted  for  by  Messrs.  J.  Innes  Wright  &  Co. 
in  connection  with  the  credit  of  £100,000  granted  to  Glen  Walker 
<fe  Co.  per  minute  of  11th  January,  1877,  and  also  £18,000  in  the 
placing  of  the  drafts  of  J.  Nicol  Fleming  in  liquidation.  It  was 
resolved  to  appoint  Messrs.  Stewart  and  Potter  a  committee  to  deal 
with  this  matter,  and  to  report. 

Was  the  credit  authorised  by  that  minute  carried  out? — The 
credit  of  £25,000  was. 

Will  you  explain  what  you  know  of  the  shortcoming  of 
£18,000  in  regard  to  the  drafts  of  Nicol  Fleming? — These  were 
Calcutta  drafts  accepted  by  the  Bank  and  discounted  by  John 
Innes  Wright  &  Co.  ;  £18,000  is  the  sum  short  paid  from 
the  draft  they  got  away  from  the  Bank. 

Their  duty  was  to  pay  the  proceeds  of  the  bills  they  got? — 
Yes. 

Into  the  Bank  to  the  account  of  J.  Nicol  Fleming? — Yes,  to 
retire  old  drafts  maturing. 

And  they  failed  to  account  for  £18,000?— Yes. 

What  was  the  date  of  that  failure?  About  what  time  did 
they  discount  these  bills? — It  was  over  a  long  period — through- 
out a  considerable  period. 

For  a  considerable  period  prior  to  that  report  in  1878? — 
Precisely. 

179 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Morris.       Had  you  been  sent  to  remonstrate  against  that  shortcomings 
of  £18,000?— Yes,  I  had. 

Sent  by  Mr.  Stronach? — By  Mr.  Stronach. 

And  whom  did  you  see  when  you  went  to  remonstrate  with 
Innes  Wright  &  Co.?— Mr.  Scott. 

Did  you  see  Mr.  Innes  Wright? — I  may  have  seen  him,  but 
I  don't  recollect. 

What  excuse  was  given? — The  excuse  that  he  gave  in  regard 
to  Glen  Walker  &  Co.'s  drafts  was  he  was  waiting  telegraphic 
advice  from  London,  or  some  such  excuse. 

I  suppose  the  Bank  had  to  retire  the  whole  of  these  accept- 
ances eventually  1 — Yes. 

No.  400  is  a  pencil  jotting  by  Mr.  Scott  of  the  liabilities  of 
his  firm? — Yes. 

He  there  enters  the  shortcoming  of  £18,000  as  due  by  the 
firm? — He   does. 

Read  it. — "  J.  N.  F.  account,  £18,000,  securities  for  same 
will  be  handed  to  Mr.  11.  S.  S.  on  or  before  21st  March,  1878, 
William  Scott,  2/3/78;  21st  March,  78.  This  has  not  been 
done." 

In  whose  handwriting  are  the  words  "  This  has  not  been 
done  "  1 — Mr.  Robert  Stronach,  the  Manager's. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — What  was  the  date  of  the 
meeting  you  described  with  Messrs.  Stewart,  Stronach,  and 
Potter  about  Scott's  short  payment? — About  the  beginning  of 
March   last. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — [Shown  No.  120] — Where  was  that 
book  kept? — As  a  rule,  the  Manager  had  it  in  his  possession. 
It  was  made  up  by  me.  So  far  as  I  am  aware,  it  was  not  com- 
municated to  Mr.  Morison,  the  accountant,  or  to  any  of  the 
other  officials  of  the  Bank.  It  is  titled  on  the  outside — "  Special 
securities,  J.  N.  F.,  S.,  F.  &  Co.,  J.  M.  &  Co.,  and  others."  The- 
initials  are  those  of  James  Nicol  Fleming,  Smith,  Fleming  & 
Co.,  and  James  Morton  &  Co.  That  book  was  made  up  at  the 
balancing  period  of  June,  1877.  It  contains  statements  in  either 
ink  or  pencil  of  the  whole  indebtedness  to  the  Bank  of  James 
Nicol  Fleming,  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  and  James  Morton  & 
Co.  It  includes  their  whole  indebtedness,  whether  on  open 
credits,  cash  advances,  or  past  due  bills.  It  also  contains 
statements  of  the  securities  held  against  these  credits  in  the 
case  of  each  of  them.  James  Nicol  Fleming's  account  appears 
in  that  book  as  at  6th  June,  1877.  His  total  indebtedness  upon 
cash  credits,  bills,  and  otherwise  at  that  date  was  £1,142,480 
lis.  7d.  The  summation  of  the  securities  stated  to  be  held 
against  that  is  £1,142,480  lis.  7d.     The  two  sides  balance. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Do  you  mean  that  the  securities 
were  exactly  equal  in  value  to  the  debt? — Yes,  it  is  so  stated. 
i8o 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

That  is  the  meaning  of  the  entry,  as  I  read  it.     I  made  the  Wm.  MoppIs. 
•entry  myself. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — The  total  indebtedness  of  Smith, 
Fleming  &  Co.  at  the  same  date  was  £1,070,643,  and  the 
special  securities  stated  to  be  held  against  that  amount  to 
£1,114,710,  so  that  the  advances  were  uncovered  to  the  extent 
•of  (in  round  numbers)  £560,000.  The  total  indebtedness  of 
James  Morton  &  Co.  at  the  same  date  was  £1,858,29-4  lis.  6d., 
and  the  securities  are  entered  at  £1,018,807,  leaving  a  deficit 
(in  round  numbers)  of  £840,000.  Taking  these  three  firms 
together,  the  Bank  was  in  advance,  or  had  given  credit  to  them 
to  the  amount  of  (in  round  numbers)  £4,670,000,  and  against 
that  the  Bank  are  stated  in  that  book  to  hold  securities  to 
the  amount  of  £3,275.000,  leaving  a  total  deficit  of  securities 
as  against  advances  of  £1,395,000.  The  date  at  which  that  is 
taken  is  as  at  the  commencement  of  June,  1877.  With  regard 
to  the  securities  stated  to  be  held  against  James  Nicol  Fleming's 
indebtedness,  the  capital  invested  in  his  Manchester  and  Cal- 
cutta business  is  put  down  as  a  security  granted  to  the  Bank. 
The  amount  of  that  was  £40,000.  The  Bank  did  not  hold  the 
capital  embarked  in  his  business,  or  any  title  to  it.  There  is  also 
entered  a  sum  held  in  security  by  the  British  Linen  Co.  in 
■course  of  being  reduced,  to  the  amount  of  £5814.  The  Bank 
had  no  title  to  that.  Then  there  is  an  item  of  policies  on  Mr. 
Fleming's  life,  stated  as  a  security  for  £100,000 — ^that  is,  the 
■  total  amount  of  the  policies.  These  were  only  realisable  to 
that  extent  on  Mr.  Fleming's  death;  there  is  no  deduction 
made,  and  no  estimate  of  their  surrender  or  selling  value.  These 
are  the  insurances  for  which  £4000  of  premium  appeared  in  a 
former  account. 

There  is  a  sum  of  £796,000  brought  out  there  among  these 
securities ;  how  do  you  get  that  out  of  the  stocks  that  are 
stated  there  ? — The  stocks  were  valued  at  400  per  cent,  premium, 
in  order  to  make  the  two  sides  balance.  These  stocks  consisted 
of  New  Zealand  and  Australian  Land  Company  shares.  Their 
par  value  was  £62  10s.  I  am  not  aware  of  their  ever  having 
reached  400  per  cent,  premium. 

But  that  was  done  for  the  purpose  of  making  the  two  ends 
meet  ? — Yes. 

The  securities  and  the  advances? — Yes. 

Who  directed  that   to  be  done? — Probably  I   did  it  myself. 

Without  directions? — Without  directions. 

W^hen  you  say  that  probablj'  you  did  it,  do  you  mean  you 
may  not  have  done  it  yourself? — I  did  it  myself;  I  may  have 
got  instructions  from  the  Manager. 

What  were  your  instructions  in  regard  to  the  preparation  of 
that  statement  of  advances  and  securities? — I  don't  think  I 
had  any  particular  instructions. 

i8i 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Win.  Morris.       Had  you  any  instructions  in  regard  to  it  after  you  had  begun 
the  work? — No,  I  don't  remember. 

Did  you  show  Mr.  Stronach  your  valuation? — Yes,  I  think 
I  did. 

And  you  gave  him  the  book? — He  had  the  book. 

In  fact,  he  kept  it  after  you  made  it  up? — Yes. 

How  did  you  come  to  make  the  securities  balance  with  the 
amount  due  in  the  case  of  James  Nicol  Fleming  and  not  in 
the  others? — I  cannot  remember;  I  don't  recollect  why  that 
was  done.  James  Nicol  Fleming's  account  was  in  liquidation 
at  the  time ;  I  mean,  we  were  realising  the  securities  as  fast 
as  we  could. 

Did  you  expect  to  get  400  per  cent,  premium  for  those 
stocks  in  realising  them? — I  had  no  idea  of  the  value  of  the 
stocks. 

Did  you  think  at  the  time  you  made  the  entry  that  they 
would  ever  realise  400  per  cent,  in  liquidation  then? — No. 

Why  did  you  put  them  at  400  per  cent,  when  making  up  that 
account  as  in  liquidation  ? — I  cannot  tell. 

In  point  of  fact,  when  you  made  that  entry,  did  you  believe 
these  stocks  would  bring  that  in  liquidation  at  the  time? — No, 
I  did  not. 

But  you  thought  the  account  would  look  better  if  the  two  sides 
balanced? — Probably.  Taking  next  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.'s 
account,  there  are  entered  as  securities  policies  of  insurance 
on  the  life  of  John  Fleming  to  the  amount  of  £100,000.  In 
the  previous  account  the  policies  were  on  the  life  of  James  Nicol 
Fleming.  The  policies  on  the  life  of  John  Fleming  are  also 
stated  at  their  full  value  as  realisable  at  his  death.  Another 
special  security  stated  is  the  estimated  capital  upon  which 
Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  were  trading,  £254,000.  That  is  put 
as  a  special  security  held  by  the  Bank  against  those  advances. 
It  was  not  held  by  the  Bank.  They  were  supposed  to  be  trading 
with  it. 

There  is  another  special  security  in  that  list — a  debt  due 
of  £60,000  ;  by  whom  was  that  due? — By  William  Nicol  & 
Co.  and  Fleming  &  Co.,  of  Bombay  and  Kurrachee  respectively, 
to  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.    That  is  included  in  the  £254,000. 

In  the  £254,000  trading  stock  of  those  people  which  the 
Bank  are  stated  to  hold  as  security,  how  many  elephants  are 
included  ?— There  were  six  elephants  upon  a  schedule  attached 
to  the  Rangoon  security.  With  regard  to  Morton  &  Co.'s 
account,  theire  are  included  as  special  securities  life  policies  to 
the  amount  of  £48,000  and  £17,000;  in  all,  £65,000.  These 
are  estimated  at  full  value  in  the  same  way  as  the  other  policies. 
Was  there  not  £125,000  of  policies? — I  was  not  aware  there 
was  £125,000.      I  observe  in  this  book  an  entry  of  £25,000, 

182 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

and  another  of  £120,000   in  pencil.        That  £120,000   is   not  Wm.  Morris, 
included  in  the  total  summation. 

By  Mr.  Smith — I  know  that  Mr.  Wri^rht  has  two  firms — one 
in  Glasgow  and  the  other  in  London.  I  believe  they  are  different 
firms.  Mr.  Scott  is  a  partner  of  the  Glasgow  firm.  As  a  rule, 
it  was  Mr.  Scott  whom  I  saw  in  my  interviews  about  the 
accounts  of  the  firm.  The  bills,  I  believe,  were  handed  to  the 
firm  for  the  purpose  of  discounting.  I  am  not  aware  how  they 
were  discounted.  I  know  they  were  sent  by  Mr.  Scott  to  his 
brother  in  London.  I  am  not  aware  whether  they  received  a 
commission  for  these. 

But  they  were  given  to  Wright  &  Co.  in  order  that  Mr. 
Scott  might  send  them  to  his  brother  in  London  to  be  dis- 
counted?— Yes;  or  to  some  other  broker. 

Then  Wright  &  Co.  acted  the  part  of  bill-brokers  in  the 
matter? — Yes.  [Shown  No.  215,  letter,  J.  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  to 
K.  S.  Stronach,  dated  Glasgow,  2nd  August,  1876.]  That  letter 
is  in  the  handwriting  of  Mr.  Scott.  It  is  apparently  written 
on  behalf  of  Glen  Walker  it  Co.,  of  Melbourne.  The  purpose  of 
the  transaction,  I  understood,  was  to  enable  Glen  Walker  & 
Co.  to  buy  produce  in  Melbourne,  which  was  to  be  shipped  to 
this  country.  The  proceeds  were  to  go  to  pay  these  drafts. 
The  application  is  for  £100,000.  Of  these  bills  there  were 
returned  £40,000,  and  £3000  lapsed — that  is  to  say,  were  not 
presented  for  acceptance. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — To  the  extent  of  £43,000  they 
were  never  turned  into  money. 

By  Mr.  Smith — That  left  £57,000  under  this  application 
which  was  actually  used.  That  account  was  entered  in  the  books 
of  the  Bank  under  the  name  of  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co. 

Was  there  anything  else  at  the  heading  of  the  account? — 
Yes;  "Wool  Liens."  Referring  to  the  account,  I  find  the  drafts 
are  favouring  Glen  Walker  Sz  Co.,  Melbourne. 

That  is  to  say,  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  were  the  primary 
debtors  to  the  Hank  under  this  letter,  but  Glen  Walker  &  Co, 
were  debtors  also? — Yes,  as  being  the  drawers  of  the  drafts. 

So  that,  failing  Wright  &  Co.,  the  Bank  would  have  a  claim 
against  Glen  Walker  Sz,  Co.  ? — I  presume  so. 

Do  you  know  if  £35,000  of  these  drafts  was  used  in  the 
purchase  of  wool? — I  cannot  answer  that. 

Do  you  know  that  £25,000  was  got  upon  wool  liens  to  the 
value  of  £35,000,  and  paid  into  the  Bank? — John  Innes  Wright 
paid  into  the  Bank  £25,000,  but  I  am  not  aware  if  it  was  got 
upon  wool  liens. 

Do  you  know  if  Glen  Walker  <t  Co.  paid  for  some  land  with 
these  drafts  by  instructions  of  the  Bank? — I  believe  £17,000 
was  used  by  Glen  Walker  &  Co.  for  the  purchase  of  land  on 

183 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Morris,  behalf  of  the  Edinburgh  Pastoral  Association.     I  was  not  aware 
at  that  time,  but  I  now  know  that  that  was  the  Bank. 

Do  you  know  also  if  a  further  sum  was  used  in  the  purchase 
of  tin  and  tallow? — Yes;  I  have  seen  such  a  sum  in  Walker's 
Btatements  to  the  amount  of  about  ,£7000. 

Was  it  not  £8465? — Perhaps  so.  I  cannot  tell  whether  that 
tin  and  tallow  was  sent  direct  to  Wrio-ht  &  Co.,  London.  The 
undertaking  in  the  letter  is  to  pay  in  the  proceeds  of  the 
produce  actually  shipped  to  account  of  drafts.  I  am  not  aware 
whether  there  was  any  loss.  With  regard  to  the  original 
credit  of  £235,000,  the  application  letter,  I  think,  is  dated  in 
August,  1871.  That  credit  was  opened  in  favour  of  Holmes, 
White  &  Co.,  who,  I  believe,  were  merchants  in  Melbourne. 
Their  drafts  were  accepted  by  the  Bank,  and  were  discounted 
by  James  Morton  &  Co.  The  £100,000  in  favour  of  Glen 
Walker  &  Co.  was  in  substitution  of  part  of  these  drafts. 

So  it  was  really  the  substitution  of  Glen  Walker  &  Co.  for 
Holmes,  White  &  Co.  to  the  extent  of  £100,000  of  the  original 
credit  opened  in  1871? — Yes.  These  drafts  were  handed  to 
Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  for  the  purpose  of  discounting.  Potter, 
Wilson  &  Co.  handed  them  over  to  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  to  be 
discounted.     They  were  drawn  by  Glen  Walker  &  Co. 

Whom  did  they  represent? — James  Morton  &  Co.,  I  should 
tliink. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — It  was  on  behalf  of  James  Morton 
&  Co.'s  credit  that  Glen  Walker  &  Co.  did  it. 

By  Mr.  Smith — You  understood  that  Glen  Walker  &  Co.  were 
the  same  as  Morton  &  Co. — were  acting  on  behalf  of  Morton  & 
Co.  ?— Yes. 

Was  there  anjrthing  on  the  face  of  the  bills  to  show  that  such 
was  their  true  character? — No. 

Or  anywhere  else  1 — No  ;   I  think  not. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Why  were  Glen  Walker  &  Co.'s 
bills  given  to  Potter?^ — Potter  apparently  was  financing — was 
arranging.      He  held  the  drafts. 

As  the  financial  agent  of  Glen  Walker  &  Co.  in  this  countiy. 
Was  that  so? — I  don't  know,  I  am  sure,  whether  they  were 
financial  ag^ents  or  not. 

Why  did  you  give  Glen  Walker  &:  Co.'s  bills  to  Potter  &  Co.? 
— I  cannot  say  why  they  were  given ;  they  were  given  for 
discount  to  replace  drafts  maturing  under  Morton's  credit. 

Wliy  were  they  given  to  Potter's  firm?  Were  they  acting 
for  the  Bank,  or  were  they  acting  for  the  customer.  Glen 
Walker  &  Co.  ? — ^I  cannot  say  who  they  were  acting  for. 

But  the  fact  is,  the  drafts  were  given  to  Potter's  firm,  and 
they  gave  them  to  Innes  Wright  &  Co.? — Yes. 

To   discount? — To   discount. 

By  Mr.  Smith — What  is  the  shortcoming  upon  these  discounts 
184 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

at   this    date?        How   much    is    it   reduced    to? — Upwards    of  Wm.  Monrfs. 
£40,000  now. 

There  were  some  bills  granted  by  the  London  firm  in  reduc- 
tion of  this  balance? — Yes. 

To  what  extent? — About  £34,000  altogether,  I  think. 

Supposing  these  London  bills  were  paid,  what  would  be  the 
balance?— £26,000. 

Is  it  not  £16,000?— Yes,  £16,000. 

Did  any  one  tell  you  if  Wrig^ht  &  Co.  had  authority  to  retain 
any  portion  of  these  discounts? — Yesj  I  understood  that  they 
were  allowed  to  retain  £15,000. 

So  that  it  comes  to  this,  that  if  the  bills  were  paid,  the  sum 
due  now  would  just  be  £1000  in  excess  of  the  svun  they  were 
allowed  to  retain? — ^Yes ;  but  the  sum  they  were  allowed  to 
retain  was  while  they  had  the  credit — while  they  were  dis- 
counting the  drafts,  and  not  after. 

How  was  this  account  entered  in  the  Bank  books  ? — I  cannot 
say ;  the  check  clerk  could  answer  that. 

And  you  don't  know  how  the  account  was  closed? — The 
account  is  not  closed ;  there  is  still  a  balance  standing. 

A  balance  at  the  debit  of  whom  ?  Glen  Walker  &  Co.  ? — I  am 
not  sure  whether  it  is  Glen  Walker  &  Co.'s  name  that  is  the 
title  of  the  account  or  not. 

Wright  (fe  Co.  had  various  accounts  opened  subsequently  to 
June,   1875?— Yes. 

If  we  except  the  wool  lien  credit  and  these  discounts,  are 
these  accounts  now  all  closed? — No. 

Wliich  of  them  are  open? — There  are  a  ereat  number  of 
accounts  open  of  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  still. 

Are  there  any  of  the  accounts  which  have  been  opened  since 
1875  still  open? — Yes,  they  are  still  open. 

The  credit  accounts? — The  credit  accounts  are  open — that 
•is  to  say,  the  cash  credits  are  still  open  ;  you  are  perhaps 
confounding  them  with  the  foreign  and  colonial  credits. 

There  are  no  foreign  and  colonial  credits  which  have  been 
opened  since  1875  now  open? — No. 

Do  you  know  the  indebtedness  of  Wright  &  Co.  in  June, 
1875?— I  think  it  is  upwards  of  £400,000. 

If  you  exclude  the  interest  upon  that  sum,  the  wool  lien 
■credit,  and  these  discounts,  is  the  indebtedness  now  less  or  more? 
— Do  you  mean  less  on  the  present  balance? 

That  is  what  I  mean  ? — I  cannot  say  whether  it  will  be  less 
on  the  present  balance  or  not  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  ])alance  at 
the  stoppage  of  the  Bank. 

Do  you  know  when  the  debt  of  £18,000  arose — the  short- 
coming in  connection  with  J.  Nicol  Fleming's  account  1 — I  think 
it  commenced  about  1876.      It  arose  from  short  payments  of 

i8S 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm,  Morris,  the    Bank's    acceptances    which    they    got    from    James    Nicol 
Fleming  to  discount. 

What  was  the  fonii  of  these  bills? — ^They  were  John  Innes 
Wright's  bills. 

Was  he  drawer  or  acceptor? — They  were  drawn  upon  the 
Bank ;  they  were  all  Bank's  acceptances. 

Were  they  given  to  Wright  &  Co.? — Yes;  throug-h  J.  Nicol 
Fleming. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — They  were  to  have  the  bills  dis- 
counted. I  understood  they  were  discounted ;  I  believe  they 
were  sent  to  London. 

By  Mr.  Smith — Did  these  bills  not  come  to  Wright  &  Co. 
from  Nicol  Fleming? — Yes. 

Then  Wright  &  Co.  will  be  responsible  to  Nicol  Fleming  for 
these  bills  ? — Yes  ;  I  should  say  so. 

By  Mr.  Trayner — No.  400  contains  a  statement  of  "  arrange- 
ment as  to  settlement  of  G.  W.  &  Co.'s  balance,"  and  it  is 
headed  "J.  Innes  Wright  &  Co."?— Yes. 

In  whose  handwriting  is  that  account  down  to  the  summation 
of  £48,000? — In  my  own  handwriting.  It  was  written  out 
by  me  prior  to  the  meeting  with  Mr.  Scott  in  Mr.  Potter's 
office.  It  is  dated  1st  March,  1878.  I  cannot  say  on  what 
day  the  meeting  was  held — perhaps  the  day  after  the  preparation 
of  this  document.  The  portion  of  it  "  London  firm's  bills  to 
be  given  to-day  for  £.10',000.  Wm.  Scott  to  give  orders  for- 
sale  of  sugar  to-day.  Mr.  Scott  meets  us  on  Wednesday  to 
arrange  the  remainder,"  is  in  Mr.  Stewart's  handwritinjr.  I 
had  that  document  with  me  at  the  meeting. 

Was  that  last  portion  added  by  Mr.  Stewart  after  he  had 
spoken  in  the  angry  terms  in  which  you  described  him  as 
having  spoken  to  Mr.  Scott? — I  cannot  say.  It  was  not  on  the*- 
paper  when  I  took  it  to  the  meeting.  I  did  not  get  it  back 
from  Mr.  Stewart  after  I  returned  to  the  room.  I  next  saw 
it  sometime  after  ;  I  may  not  have  got  it  back  till  after  the 
stoppage ;  I  don't  know  when  I  got  it  back.  When  I  next 
saw  it,  it  had  that  last  portion,  "  London  firai's  bills,"  etc.,  on 
it  in  Mr.  Stewart's  handwriting. 

Had  you  become  aware  that  that  was  the  arrangement 
before  you  saw  that  writing  by  Mr.  Stewart? — Yes. 

Have  you  any  doubt  that  that  is  just  the  embodiment  by 
Mr.  Stewart  of  the  an-angement  that  took  place  when  you 
were  asked  to  retire? — No. 

Along  with  that  state  there  is  a  pencil  slip,  "  J.  N.  F.'s  account, 
£18,000.  Securities  for  same  will  be  handed  to  Mr.  R.  S.  S. 
on  or  before  21st  March,  1878";  that  related  to  the  same 
business,  did  it  not? — 'No,  it  did  not. 

Was  that  given  by  Scott  on  the  same  date  when  the  other 
arrano-ement  was  entered  into? — I  cannot  say. 

i86 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Had  you  that  before  you  when  you  prepared  this  statement  Wm.  Morris, 
which  was  laid  before  the  meetino'? — No;  I  think  not. 

The  next  letter,  No.  401,  by  Mr.  Scott  to  Mr.  Stewart,  dated 
21st  March,  1878,  says — "This  is  the  Greenock  Fast>day,  so 
the  sugar  market  is  closed.  Business  will,  no  doubt,  go  on 
as  usual  on  Monday  or  Tuesday  first."  Does  that  not  enable  you 
to  come  nearer  the  date  of  the  meeting  at  which  Mr.  Scott 
undertook  'to  give  orders  for  sale  of  sugar  to-day"? — Yes; 
it  must  have  been  about  the  20th,  apparently. 

From  this  letter  you  think  the  meeting  with  Mr.  Stewart 
and  Mr.  Scott,  to  which  you  spoke,  must  have  taken  place 
about  20th  March? — Evidently  from  this  letter. 

The  postscript  is,  "  The  above  was  sent  us  in  reply  to  our 
order  to  sell  a  cargo  to-day " ;  so  that  Mr.  Scott  had  sent  to 
Greenock  an  order  to  sell  in  terms  of  his  undertaking? — 
Apparently  so. 

And  the  reply  comes  back  that  it  is  the  Fast-day,  and  so  h& 
excuses  the  non-fulfilment  of  it  that  day.  That  is  what  it 
comes  to,  is  it  not? — Yes. 

By  Mr.  Mackintosh — Do  you  remember  anything^  about  the 
meeting  referred  to  by  Mr.  Fleming  in  his  letter  to  Mr.  Stronach 
of  12th  April,  1875  (No.  186),  "Referring  to  the  meeting  I 
had  with  your  Directors  and  yourself  on  Thursday  "  ? — No  ;  I 
remember  there  was  such  a  meeting. 

Look  at  the  letter  No.  78,  from  Mr.  Stronach  to  John  Fleming, 
5th  April,  1875,  "  In  terms  of  the  arrangement  concluded  at 
the  meeting  of  the  committee  of  Directors,"  etc.  Does  that 
refer  to  the  same  meeting? — I   should  think  so. 

You  see  from  that  letter  that  the  meeting  referred  to  in  the 
letter  of  12th  April  as  a  "meeting  of  your  Directors"  was  a 
meeting  with  the  "committee  of  Directors"? — ^Yes.  I  do  not 
know  who  were  the  members  of  that  committee.  I  believe  that 
will  appear  from  the  minutes. 

By  the  Dean  op  Faculty — Was  the  arrangement  in  the  letter 
of  12th  April  for  the  adjustment  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.'s 
account  carried  out? — I  believe  it  was. 

Was  the  account  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  taken  from  the 
current  accounts  on  which  customers  were  operating,  and  put 
into  the  accountant's  department  in  consequence  of  that  arrange- 
ment?— I  am  not  aware  whether  it  was  in  consequence  of  that 
arrangement  or   not. 

But  it  was  done  at  that  time? — There  was  a  sum  transferred 
about   that  time. 

Do  you  remember  writing  the  letter  of  20th  April,  1875,  Mr. 
Stronach  to  John  Fleming,  "  I  would  suggest  with  reference 
to  the  accounts,  and  the  majority  of  which  appears  to  be  donnant, 
that  the  inoperative  should  be  consolidated,  and  that  one  or 
two  having  occasional  operations,  such  as  the  No.   1  cash  and 

i87 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wm.  Morris,  the  No.  1  trust,  to  remain  as  they  are  for  working  purposes. 
This  arrangement  would  simplify  our  working  considerably  here, 
and  would,  no  doubt,  I  think,  be  equally  advantageous  to  you  "  ? 
— I  remember  something  of  that  letter.  The  dormant  accounts 
were  those  upon  which  there  were  few  or  no  operations  going 
on.  These  were  put  in  the  accountant's  department.  I  cannot 
give  the  indebtedness  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  James  Nicol 
Fleming,  and  Morton,  as  at  1st  January,  1876,  or  at  June,  1876. 

What  induced  you  to  make  up  the  indebtedness  as  at  June, 
1877?^ — Because  previously  these  accounts  were  all  kept  upon 
sheets,  and  that  was  the  date  at  which  the  book  was  made 
up ;  the  balance  was  made  up  as  at  June,  1877.  The  sheets 
are  still  in  existence ;  some  of  them  may  have  been  destroyed. 

Did  Morton's  indebtedness  arise  before  January,  1876? — Yes. 

He  was  very  heavily  indebted,  was  he  not,  at  the  time  jou 
became  Manager's  clerk  even  1 — Yes  ;  even  then. 

But  still  had  not  Morton  in  Australia  and  New  Zealand 
properties  that  were  looked  on  as  exceedingly  valuable? — Yes, 
he  had  properties. 

Have  you  not  heard  deliberations  ^oing  on  either  amongst 
the  Directors,  or  between  the  Directors  and  Mr.  Stronach,  as 
to  the  probability  of  these  properties  rising'  very  largely  in 
value,  and  clearing  off  the  whole  of  his  debt? — Yes ;  not  clearing 
off  the  whole  of  his  debt. 

But  clearing  off  a  great  part  of  it? — ^Yes. 

Down  to  what  date  did  you  hear  these  deliberations? — The 
properties  were  always  considered  valuable.  I  heard  that  they 
were   always   considered  valuable. 

Had  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  any  Australian  and  New  Zealand 
properties? — Yes;   there  were   1003  shares,  I  think. 

I  suppose  you  looked  upon  that  property  as  having  the  same 
prospects  as  to  rise  as  the  property  belonging  to  Morton? — 
Yes. 

Had  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  not  pledged  to  the  Bank  properties 
at  Bombay,  Kurrachee,  and  in  Rangoon? — Yes. 

And  these  were  only  taken  as  security  for  debt  after  valuation 
made? — Yes.  I  believe  part  of  these  properties  has  been 
realised  in  Bombay.  Some  of  it  has  not  been  realised.  Their 
property  in  Rangoon  was  valued  in  the  books  at  £86,000,  I 
think.  I  am  not  aware  that  any  of  the  Rangoon  property  has 
been  sold. 

At  the  time  you  made  up  that  book  in  June,  1877,  was  the 
New  Zealand  stock  quoted  in  the  market  lists  ? — No  ;  I  think 
not.  I  quoted  it  at  par.  I  cannot  at  present  state  the 
indebtedness  of  Smith,  Fleminfy  &  Co.,  as  at  1st  January, 
1876. 

At  the  end  of  1875  had  there  been  incurred  by  Smith,  Fleming 
&  Co.  nine-tenths  of  that  debt  which  they  were  owing  to 
i88 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

the  Bank  when  it  stopped? — I  should  think  so.      The  greater  Wm.  Morris, 
portion  of  James  Nicol  Fleming's  debt  was  incm'red  before  1876. 
I  don't  think  there  was  any  advance  made  to  him  from  the 
beginning    of    1876    onwards,    except    in    connection    with    the 
Australian  and  New  Zealand  properties. 

The  Bank  ordered  these  properties  to  be  bought  in  Australia 
and  New  Zealand  as  a  speculation  of  their  own? — I  don't  know 
that. 

But  you  know  that  they  ordered  these  properties  to  be  bought  ? 
— No,  I  did  not. 

Don't  you  know  that  they  did  buy  property  in  Australia  and 
New  Zealand? — Not  on  behalf  of  James  Nicol  Fleming. 

Did  they  buy  property  on  their  own  account,  in  their  own 
name,  or  in  the  name  of  others  in  trust  for  them? — ^Yes.  I 
had  no  particular  instructions  to  make  up  the  book  in  June, 
1877. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — I  made  it  up  for  the  information  of 
the  Manager,  and  to  keep  the  state  of  accounts  before  him. 

You  said  you  heard  some  persons,  in  connection  with  the 
Bank,  speculating  as  to  the  probable  rise  of  Morton's  securities? 
—Yes. 

Who  were  these  individuals? — The  Manager. 

Any  other? — And  Mr.  John  Hunter. 

But  none  of  the  Directors  of  the  Bank  ? — And  Mr.  Potter  too, 
I  think,  was  very  sanguine  as  to  the  properties. 

Are  you  making  that  statement  from  what  you  heard  Mr. 
Potter  say  in  your  presence? — Yes. 

What  was  Mr.  Potter  discussing  at  the  time  he  made  that 
statement  as  to  his  being  sanguine,  and  with  whom  was  he 
discussing? — He  was  discussing  in  regard  to  the  New  Zealand 
shares,  a  statement  of  which  was  before  him  and  the  Manager. 

Were  these  the  shares  that  the  Bank  themselves  held? — Yes, 
or  were  supposed  to  have  held. 

Was  it  in  regard  to  their  own  shares  that  he  expressed  that 
hope,  or  was  it  both  in  regard  to  their  own  shares  and  those 
they  held  in  security? — I  understood  the  observation  as  applying 
to  both. 

At  the  time  he  expressed  a  hope  that  the  shares  would  rise, 
did  he  say  anything  as  to  how  far  they  would  extinguish  Morton's 
indebtedness,  or  not? — 'No;  he  said  nothing  about  that.  He 
spoke  generally  about  the  probability  of  the  shares  rising. 
About  1875  certain  accounts  were  dormant — that  is,  inoperative. 
There  were  debtor  balances  upon  the  y.'holc  of  them. 

And  by  dormant  you  mean  that  the  debtor  was  not  paying 
what  was  due  to  the  Bank? — Yes. 

Was  the  interest  not  accumulating? — ^Yes,  I  believe  so  ;  I  am 
not  aware  whether  interest  was  added  when  they  were  trans- 
ferred or  not. 

189 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  TriaL 

Wm.  Morris.  You  don't  know  whether  it  was  entered,  but  I  suppose  you 
knew  it  was  bearing  interest  I — Yes. 

Then  what  you  meant  by  dormant  was  that  the  debtor  was 
not  paying,  but  that  interest  was  accumulating  and  the  debt 
swellino-  ? — ^Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — In  dormant  accounts,  which  I 
suppose  mean  accounts  where  there  are  no  operations,  is  interest 
charged  generally? — It  is. 

Is  it  kept  on — charged — year  after  year  in  the  account? — 
Yes. 

Or  does  it  after  a  time  cease  to  be  charged  ? — No  ;  I  think  not. 
It  is  continued  to  be  charged. 

This  additional  set  of  books — who  directed  you  to  keep  them? 
• — 'Mr.  Alexander  Stronach. 

Why? — For  his  own  convenience. 

With  regard  to  these  particular  debts? — Yes. 

Where  did  you  ^et  the  material  that  enabled  you  to  keep  the 
books? — I  got  it  from  the  register  downstairs,  kept  in  the 
public  office. 

It  was  a  duplicate  you  say? — Yes. 

So  I  suppose  the  same  persons  had  their  accounts  in  the 
ordinary  accounts  who  had  their  accounts  in  your  books? — 
Yes  ;   precisely. 

Were  they  the  same? — They  were  differently  arranged — a 
little. 

But  the  materials  were  substantially  the  same? — Precisely 
the  same. 

How  did  you  come  to  value  these  securities  at  your  own 
hand  in  the  case  of  James  Nicol  Fleming? — I  did  not  value  the 
whole  of  the  securities  for  James  Nicol  Fleming.  It  was  only 
the  stock  that  I  extended  in  a  pencil  jotting. 

I  think  you  said  that  the  value  you  attributed  to  the  security 
in  the  book  was  exactly  the  same  as  the  amount  of  indebted- 
ness ? — Yes. 

Why  did  you  do  that?  Had  you  any  means  of  ascertaining 
that  the  value  was  the  same,  or  that  the  securities  were  worth 
that  amount? — No,  I  had  not. 

Was  it  a  mere  random  thing  ? — Yes ;  a  mere  random  thinp;. 
It  was  done  upon  the  principle  of  making  the  two  sides 
correspond. 

Is  that  the  only  random  sum  in  your  book? — No. 

There  may  be  others  ? — Yes ;  there  are  securities  that  really 
did  not  exist. 

And  that  was  done  entirely  at  your  own  hand? — It  was  done 
from  infonnation  obtained  from  the  Manager's  sheets. 

Without  instructions? — Yes;  from  di'afts  made  out  by  the 
late  Manager. 

Would  you  have  made  any  of  these  entries  without  authority 
from  the  Manager? — Oh,  no. 

190 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

You  had  authority  for  them  all  ? — Yes.  Wm.  Moppis. 

Including  that  one  of  the  valuation  of  the  securities? — Well, 
nothing  was  said  when  the  book  was  lyin^  with  the  Manager — 
nothing  was  said  with  regard  to  the  extension  of  the  value  of 
the  stock. 

But  you  assumed  that  was  what  you  were  meant  to  do? — ^Yes. 

When  you  said  that  you  made  these  entries  from  sheets  made 
up  by  the  late  Manager,  to  whom  did  you  refer? — Mr.  Alexander 
♦Stronach. 

It  was  from  these  sheets  you  made  these  entries  ? — Yes ; 
with  respect  to  Smith,  Fleming  &:  Co.  and  James  Morton  &  Co. 

Where  were  these  sheets  when  you  made  up  the  book  in 
1877? — They  were  in  my  possession. 

Was  Mr.  Robert  Stronach  aware  that  you  had  these  things? — 
Yes  ;  I  think  so. 

He  had  seen  the  sheets? — Yes. 

Just  explain  to  me  a  little  more  distinctly  about  these 
marginal  credits  and  the  bills  that  were  wranted  under  them. 
If  I  rightly  follow  the  course  of  the  transaction  it  was  this, 
that  in  consideration  of  securities  the  Bank  undertook  to  accept 
bills  to  a  sj^ecific  amount,  granting  a  variety  of  bills  with  the 
precise  amount  of  the  credit  attached  to  them? — Precisely. 

These  bills  being  granted  to  the  drawer  and  accepted  by  the 
Bank,  he  then  proceeded  to  discount  them  ? — Yes  ;  but  they  were 
not  always  granted  to  the  drawer. 

But  sometimes  with  the  drawer's  name  on  them,  they  were 
given  by  the  Bank  to  be  discounted,  and  the  proceeds  to  be 
paid  to  them? — Yes. 

Was  that  uniform,  that  the  proceeds  of  the  discount  were  to 
be  paid  to  the  account  of  the  drawer  in  the  Bank? — Not  of  the 
drawer — ^to  the  endorser  of  the  bill  or  the  applicant  for  the 
credit. 

But  that  was  the  mode  of  dealings? — It  was. 

In  this  case  the  bills  were  drawn  in  favour  of  Glen  Walker 
&  Co.,  of  Australia? — Yes. 

They  were  accepted  by  the  Bank,  and  handed  to  Potter, 
Wilson  &  Co.  for  the  pui-pose  of  discounting  them,  and  paying 
in  the  proceeds  to  the  Bank? — Yes. 

And  they  again  employed  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  to  get  them 
discounted  ? — Yes. 

Innes  Wright  &  Co.  sent  them  to  their  London  fii-m.  Are 
the  London  firm  brokers? — Not  to  the  London  firm. 

Where  did  they  send  them?— To  H.  C.  Scott,  I  think,  as  a 
rule. 

As  a  bill  broker? — Yes. 

In  ordej-  that  he  mio-ht  discount  them  in  London,  and  trans- 
mit the   proceeds  here? — Yes. 

And  that  he  failed  to  do  to  a  certain  extent  ? — Yes. 

191 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

J.  Turnbull.  Johx  Turnbull. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — I  have  been  cashier  to  the  City 
of  Glasgow  Bank  for  about  eighteen  years,  and  I  was  accountant 
before  that.  I  have  been  in  the  seiTice  of  the  Bank  since  1843. 
When  I  became  a  servant  of  the  Bank  Mr.  Robert  Salmond  was 
the  Manager.  He  ceased  to  be  Manager  about  1858,  when  the 
Bank  resumed  after  the  stoppage  in  1857.  I  cannot  tell  how 
long  Mr.  Robert  Stronach  was  in  the  employment  of  the  Bank. 
He  was  there  before  the  stoppage  in  1857.  It  was  my  duty 
as  cashier  to  take  charge  of  making  up  the  weekly  returns 
of  gold  and  silver  coin.  I  kejDt  two  books — ^the  cashier's  ledger 
and  the  circulation  ledger.  [Shown  Nos.  95  and  96.]  These 
are  the  books  which  I  kept.  The  cashier's  ledger  (No.  95) 
contains  entries  showing  day  by  day  the  reseiTe  stock  of 
money  as  represented  by  gold  and  silver  and  bank  notes ;  that 
is,  the  n-old,  silver,  and  bank  notes  which  were  not  out  in  issue 
or  in  the  hands  of  the  tellers.  The  entries  in  that  book  are 
all  correct.  No.  96  is  the  circulation  ledger,  in  which  should  be 
shown  the  gold  and  silver  lying  at  the  head  office  as  against 
notes  issued  in  excess  of  the  authorised  circulation. 

In  the  beginning  of  1878,  did  you  find  the  Bank's  credit 
being  strained  .' — Yes. 

Did  you  find  renewals  of  bills  being  refused  in  London  1 — Yes. 

Did  that  necessitate  gold  being  sent  to  London  from  the 
Bank? — Yes.  During  the  week  ending  5th  January  there  had 
been  £60,000  in  gold  sent  to  London. 

From  whom  did  you  get  the  directions  to  send  it  up? — 
From  the  Manager,  through  Mr.  Murdoch,  who  is  my  assistant. 

In  making  up  the  statement  or  figures  of  the  entries  for  that 
week,  was  the  amount  correctly  stated  of  what  was  in  your 
hands? — No. 

What  was  the  incorrectness? — £60,000. 

The  £60,000  which  was  sent  to  London  was  not  deducted? — 
No. 

Explain  to  me  how  that  came  about  ? — I  cannot  give  you  any 
explanation  further  than  the  fact. 

Who  suggested  it  to  vou? — ^I  must  do  it.  We  are  bound  to 
do  it  to  agree  with  the  issue  of  notes. 

Did  you  speak  to  Mr.  Stronach  about  that? — Not  upon  that 
particular  occasion. 

Did  you  speak  to  him  when  you  had  to  make  the  return  to 
the  Commissioners  of  Stamps  and  Taxes? — Not  on  that  occasion. 

When  did  you  speak  to  him? — Several  times  afterT\ards — 
frequently  aften^-ards. 

Had  you  sent  several  returns  to  the  Commissioners  of  Stamps 
and  Taxes,  stating  the  sum  at  the  full  amount  without  taking 
off  the  £60,000,  before  you  spoke  to  him? — I  may  have. 
192 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

When  did  you  speak  to  hiui  first  about  it? — I  cannot  give  the  J.  TurnbuU, 
date  oi  that. 

But  nearly? — I  really  cannot  give  the  date.  It  may  have 
lK?en  a  week  or  a  fortnight. 

But  a  very  short  time  after  the  thing  was  done? — Yes. 

What  did  you  say  to  him? — ^I  expressed  my  regret  that  the 
thing  should  have  l)een  necessary  or  should  have  been  done — 
that  it  was  wrongs  to  do  it. 

What  did  he  say  ? — That  it  could  not  be  helped. 

Anything  more? — I  think  not — not  at  that  time.  After- 
wards he  said  of  course  that  he  was  responsible  for  it. 

Between  that  date  in  January,  1878,  and  down  to  the  stoppage 
of  the  Bank,  in  how  many  weeks  was  the  amount  of  gold 
overstated  in  the  returns  made  ? — I  think  during  the  whole  time, 
except  two  weeks,  these  two  weeks  being  the  week  ending  16th 
February  and  the  week  ending  16th  March. 

That  was  down  to  28th  September,  which  was  the  last,  about 
which  I  will  ask  you  more  particularly.  Was  the  amount  of 
over-statement  increasing  during  that  time? — It  varied. 

But  did  it  gradually  increase?  Did  it  gradually  come  up  to 
£293,182  at  the  end? — Yes;  about  that. 

Will  you  look  at  the  book,  and  say  whether  under  the  head 
of  the  amount  of  gold  each  day  during  these  months  there  is 
not  a  double  entry  made? — There  is  an  interlining. 

Tliat  is  to  say,  within  the  space  for  the  entry  of  gold  for 
that  day  there  is  an  interlinino- ? — Yes. 

Does  the  large  figure  give  the  amount  that  was  returned? — 
No ;  it  gives  the  actual  cash,  and  the  other  gives  the  shortage. 

Do  those  inserted  figures  give  correctly  the  amount  of  shortage 
in  each  case  ? — Yes ;  the  last  return  that  was  made  was  for  the 
week  endmg  28th  September,  1878.  The  amount  in  that 
return  was  stated  correctly  according  to  the  amount  in  the 
coffers  of  the  Bank.  I  did  not  sign  that  last  return.  I  had 
signed  all  the  previous  ones,  and  sent  them  in. 

Wliy  did  you  not  sign  the  last  one? — I  had  various  reasons. 
I  wished  that  the  last  return  should  not  'have  been  sent  at 
all. 

Because  it  corrected  the  previous  ones? — Not  only  that; 
but  the  Bank  had  stopped  payment,  and  the  right  of  issue 
was  lost,  and  there  was  nothing  to  be  gained  by  sending  the 
return. 

But  the  return  was  quite  contradictory  of  the  previous  ones? 
— Of  course  it  was. 

Who   signed  it? — The  Manager.      I   remember  of  a  meeting 
of   the    Board    on    11th    October,    1878,    after    the    Bank    had 
stopped.       I  was  called  in  l)efore  the  Directors  that  day. 
Who  spoke  to  you? — The  Chairman,  I  think. 
Who  was  the  Chairman? — Mr.  Salmond,  I  think. 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

J.  Tarnbull.  What  did  he  ask  you? — He  asked  my  reasons  why  the  return 
had  not  been  made  of  the  last  week  that  the  Bank  was  open. 
I  am  not  sure  it  was  Mr.  Salmond  that  spoke  to  me ;  but  I  think 
so;  he  was  in  the  chair.  [Shown  No.  317.]  That  is  a  letter 
dated  the  same  day,  and  addressed  by  me  to  Mr.  Cousins, 
Inland  Revenue  Office,  London.     It  is  as  follows  :  — 

City  of  Glasgow  Bank, 

11th  October,  1878. 
W.  W.  Cousins,  Esq., 

Inland  Revenue,  London. 
Dear  Sir, — I  beg  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  your  letter  of  the  7th 
instant  and  to  inform  you  that  immediately  on  receipt  I  handed  it 
to  the  Manager  of  the  Bank,  under  whose  instructions  I  have 
hitherto  made  the  returns  to  your  office.  You  may  probably  be 
aware  that  the  Bank  has  stopped  payment,  and  that  its  affairs 
are  under  investigation. — I  am,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

John  Turnbull. 

Did  you  lay  that  letter  before  the  meeting  of  Directors? — 
I  sent  them  a  copy. 

You  gave  them  a  copy  of  it? — Yes. 

Was  the  statement  in  that  letter  true  as  to  the  instructions 
under  which  you  had  made  the  returns  as  you  had  made  them? 
— Quite  true. 

Did  anything  else  pass  between  the  Directors  and  you  after 
you  showed  them  that  letter? — No,  nothing  more. 

By  Mr.  Ashbr — I  think  you  said  that  it  was  in  January,  1878, 
that  the  gold  was  overstated  for  the  first  time  in  the  return 
to  the  Inland   Revenue? — Yes. 

And  that  return  was  so  made,  you  said,  by  the  instructions 
of  the  Manager? — All  the  returns  were. 

Did  you  get  any  instructions  from  the  Directors  with  regard 
to  that  matter? — None. 

"When  did  the  Directors  first  know  that  the  gold  had  been 
overstated  in  the  return  ? — I  don't  think  they  knew  at  all  until 
after  the  Bank  had  stopped.  I  have  been  cashier  of  the  Bank 
for  about  eighteen  years ;  and  before  that  I  was  in  the  employ- 
ment of  the  Bank  for  about  seventeen  years.  As  cashier  I  had 
charge  of  several  of  the  securities. 

When  did  you  first  suspect  that  anything  was  wrong  with  the 
Bank? — Never  until  the  gold  was  meddled  with. 

Until  the  error  was  made  in  the  return  of  the  gold  in 
January,  1878,  you,  as  cashier,  had  no  reason  to  suspect  that 
there  was  anything  wrong  with  the  Bank  ? — None  whatever. 

And  the  error  in  the  return  of  the  gold  was  your  only  reason 
then  for  suspecting  ;  is  that  so  ? — That  is  so.  I  am  a  shareholder 
of  the  Bank  for  £1000  of  stock.  I  still  hold  that  stock.  I 
have  known  Mr.  Salmond  for  a  long  time.  He  has  lived  in 
the   country,    in   Ayrshire,    for   many   years.      I   cannot   give   a 

194 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

date   when    he    went    to    reside    there,    but    I    should    think    it  J.  Turnbull. 
must  be  twelve  or  fifteen  years  ago — probably  more.     I  think 
he  has  not  had  a  house  in  Glasgow  for  a  number  of  years. 

So  that  he  came  up  from  the  country  for  the  weekly  meetings 
of  the  Bank  when  he  was  able  to  attend? — Yes. 

How  long  did  the  weekly  meetings  last? — I  cannot  tell  that; 
I  was  never  present  at  any  of  them.  I  should  think  about 
an  hour  usually,  or  an  hour  and  a  half. 

Was  it  only  for  the  weekly  meetings  that  Mr.  Salmond  had 
been  in  the  habit  of  coming  to  the  Bank  for  a  number  of 
years? — I  think  so. 

By  Mr.  Tratner — Would  you  look  at  some  papers  that  are 
att-ached  to  the  circulation  ledger,  in  the  inside  of  it?  You  will 
find  there  the  amount  of  cash,  as  at  5th  June,  1878,  initialed 
by  Mr.  Stewart? — Yes. 

And  different  sums  are  distinguished  thei'e  as  being  situated 
in  different  safes? — Yes. 

Was  that,  as  initialed,  a  correct  state  of  the  cash  in  the 
Bank  at  the  time? — Perfectly  correct. 

You  were  cashier,  and  you  know  that  that  is  in  point  of  fact 
the  correct  amount  of  cash  that  was  in  the  different  safes  as 
there  put  down? — Perfectly  correct. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — Did  Mr.  Stewart  take  that  upon 
your  statement  without  counting  the  gold  himself  or  turning 
it  out  at  all? — He  counted  the  notes. 

But  he  did  not  count  the  gold? — Not  in  1878. 

Did  he  take  it  on  trust  from  you? — Entirely. 

And    he    initialed    the    amount    that    you    had    put    down? 

Yes. 

Were  you  aware  at  the  end  of  1877  that  the  Directors  of 

the  Bank  had  advanced  over  five  millions  to  three  firms James 

Nicol  Fleming,   Smith,   Fleming  &  Co.,   and  James  Morton   & 
Co.  ?— No. 

You  knew  nothing  about  the  internal  affairs  of  the  Bank? 

No. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk— Why  was  it  on  that  particular 
occasion  in  1878  that  Mr.  Stewart  took  your  reason  for  not 
counting  the  gold?— There  are  a  number  of  reasons.  It  was 
generally  done  at  the  close  of  the  business  of  the  year,  and  of 
the  day  late  in  the  afternoon ;  and  the  safe  was  a  very  small 
safe,  and  it  was  a  very  troublesome  thing  to  take  out  such 
a  large  quantity  of  gold  as  that.  It  cost  us  a  great  deal  of 
trouble;  that  was  one  reason.  I  volunteered  to  turn  the  gold 
out  if  Mr.  Stewart  wished  it,  but  he  was  satisfied. 

You  would  have  turned  it  out  if  he  had  wished  it,  but  it  was 
quite  a  correct  state,  you  .say? — Yes,  quite  a  correct  state. 

When  was  the  gold  first  short?— On  5th  January,  1878,  or 
about  that  date. 

195 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

J.  Turabull.      And  you  were  aware  when  you  made  the  return  that  it  wa& 
in  excess  of  what  you  had? — Yes,  perfectly. 

And  you  continued  to  do  that  until  the  end? — Yes. 

Was  there  no  check  upon  the  amount  of  gold  in  the  ordinary 
management  of  the  Bank  ? — There  was  a  check  at  the  close  of 
each  year  in  the  Directors  counting  it. 

But  did  the  Directors  count  the  gold?~In  1877,  in  1876,  and 
previous  years,  it  was  all  counted. 

They  did  so?— Yes. 

Did  they  do  it  in  1878?— They  did  not  count  it  in  1878. 

Why? — They  took  it  upon  my  word. 

But  how  did  they  come  to  give  up  the  practice? — There  were 
several  reasons. 

Was  it  your  doing? — No. 

Then  how  did  they  come  to  give  up  the  practice? — Well,  I 
cannot  tell.  It  used  to  be  taken  out  and  laid  upon  the  floor 
of  the  Manager's  room,  but  in  consequence  of  some  alterations 
in  the  office  the  Directors  came  to  sit  in  the  Manager's  room, 
and  they  had  their  large  table  in  the  middle  of  the  room. 

Was  there  any  reason  in  1878  why  they  should  not  have 
done  the  same  thing  that  they  did  in  1877? — That  was  one 
reason. 

Was  that  a  reason  applicable  to  1878  only? — To  1878  only. 

However,  the  fact  is  that  they  did  not  count  it? — They  did 
not   count  it. 

The  first  short  return,  you  say,  was  on  5th  January,  1878? — 
I  think  so. 

What  had  been  returned  the  week  before? — In  January,  1878, 
the  total  amount  of  gold  and  silver  in  hand  was  £577,76-3 ;  in 
the  previous  week  it  was  £557,015. 

What  is  the  difference  ?— About  £20,000. 

By  Lord  Chaighill — What  was  the  amount  of  gold  that  was 
returned  to  the  Inland  Eevenue  office  in  the  week  before  5th 
June,  1878? — The  amount  of  gold  and  silver  returned  on  1st 
June,  1878,  was  £613,642. 

And  the  amount  initialed  by  Mr.  Stewart  was  what? — 
£338,500. 

When  had  that  gold  been  counted? — It  was  counted  by  the 
Directors  the  previous  year. 

But  when  had  that  gold  been  counted,  the  sum  of  which  you 
gave  to  Mr.  Stewart? — It  was  counted  at  various  times  since 
I  took  it  in. 

When  had  it  been  last  counted?— The  previous  year. 

Not  since  the  previous  year? — No. 

On  what  did  you  proceed  in  making  your  returns  to  the 
Inland  Revenue? — The  returns  to  the  Inland  Revenue  at  that 
point  show  £200,000  of  gold  improperly  stated. 

But  on  what  did  you  proceed  in  making  your  returns  to  the 

196 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Inland  Revenue?     Were  the  sums  all  the  same  every  week? — J.  Tumbull. 
They  were  altering  every  -week. 

On  what  did  you  proceed  in  making  the  alterations? — I  don't 
understand  your  question. 

How  did  you  come  to  know  what  was  in  the  coffers  of  the 
Bank? — By  it  being  in  my  own  possession. 

When  was  it  counted? — By  me? 

Yes? — I  counted  it  every  day  as  the  gold  came  in  and  went 
out. 

Was  one  of  your  reasons  for  not  having  the  gold  counted 
before  Mr.  Stewart  on  5th  June,  1878,  that  you  were  aware 
of  the  deficiency? — No. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — I  understand  that  the  return 
you  made  to  the  Inland  Revenue  was  a  thing  you  did  yourself — 
the  Directors  had  nothing  to  do  with  it? — Nothing  whatever. 

And  you  did  not  communicate  with  them  before  you  made 
it? — No;  never. 

Then  the  only  thing  that  was  wrong  was  the  return  you 
made  ? — Yes. 

And  you  returned  it  as  if  nothing  had  been  taken  out? — Yes. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — The  amount  that  was  wrong  stated 
has  been  entered  in  the  space  for  the  statement  of  the  true 
figures  every  week  in  your  book? — Yes. 

The  erroneous  figure  has  been  put  into  the  book,  and  it  is 
the  adding  of  the  true  figure  and  the  erroneous  figure  that 
made  up  the  amount  sent  in  the  return? — Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — That  is  the  interlineation? — 
Yes. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — What  book  is  it  in  ? — The  circula- 
tion book. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — So,  as  I  thought  before,  there 
is  a  double  entry  in  your  circulation  book — one  of  which  repre- 
sents the  actual  gold,  and  the  other  represents  the  deficiency? — 
Yes. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — For  example,  on  1.3th  April,  1878, 
the  amount  put  down  on  the  blue  line  is  .£:n  6,500,  and  above 
that  there  is  put  £120,000?— Yes. 

And  the  return  you  made  was  the  two  together? — Yes:  it 
embraced  them  both. 

And  wherever  that  occurs  it  is  the  same  thing? — Yes. 

That  is  in  the  circulation  ledger? — Yes. 

By  Mr.  Tr.\tner — Is  it  not  in  the  cashier's  ledger? — This  [No. 
95]  is  the  cashier's  ledger ;  it  contains  what  is  right. 

That  is  the  book  that  Mr.  Stewart  initialed? — Yes. 

It  is  right? — Yes. 

And  there  are  no  interlineations? — No. 


197 


CHAPTER    VII. 

Evidence  of  the  Manager  of  the  Bank  of  Scotland 
and  of  Directors'  Partners. 

Jas.  Wenley.  Jambs  Wbnlet. 

By  the  Solicitor-Geimekal — I  am  manager  of  the  Bank  of 
Scotland  in  Glasgow.  On  the  morning  of  Friday,  27th  Septem- 
ber last,  I  met  Mr.  Davidson,  treasurer  of  the  Bank  of  Scotland^ 
to  arrange  with  him  that  I  should  call  upon  Mr.  Stronach.  I 
was  to  refer  Mr.  Stronach  to  the  conversation  which  Mr. 
Davidson  had  with  him  on  11th  September,  when  Mr.  Davidson 
urged  upon  him  the  necessity  of  taking  up  a  large  amount  of 
the  acceptances  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  as  they  fell  due, 
and  further,  to  state  to  him  that  in  consequence  of  the 
rumours 

Was  there  anything  about  the  number  being  now  greater 
than  when  that  conversation  took  place? — No;  and  with  refer- 
ence to  that  conversation  to  say  that,  in  consequence  of  the 
rumours  affecting  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  which  had  pre- 
vailed on  the  two  previous  days,  Mr.  Davidson  thought  that 
the  necessity  of  taking  up  the  acceptances  of  the  Bank  as  they 
fell  due  was  greater  now  than  it  had  been  at  the  interview  to 
which  I  have  referred.  I  called  upon  Mr.  Stronach  at  the 
Bank,  and  communicated  the  message  to  him.  He  received  it 
in  silence,  and  said  nothing  for,  I  should  think,  two  or  three 
minutes. 

Who  spoke  first? — I  spoke  first. 

What  did  you  say? — The  pause  was  painful,  and  I  referred 
to  the  cruelty  of  setting  afloat  such  reports  as  had  been  pre- 
valent for  the  previous  two  days. 

And  which  had  driven  your  bank  to  take  this  step? — And 
which  had  driven  our  bank  to  take  this  step.  He  said  nothing, 
I  think,  for  another  minute  or  two,  and  then  he  remarked,  in 
the  possible  event  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  asking  the 
other  banks  for  assistance,  whether  I  thought  that  assistance 
would  be  given  to  them.  I  said  I  had  no  authority  to  speak 
on  behalf  of  the  other  Scotch  banks,  but  that  I  had  no  doubt 
the  Bank  of  Scotland  would  be  quite  willing  to  give  the  City 
of  Glasgow  Bank  any  reasonable  assistance  upon  two  conditions 

198 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

— First,   that   they   were   shown   to    be   in    a   sound   state ;    and  j^s.  Wenley. 

secondly,   that   they  gave   security.     Just   about   this   time  Mr. 

Potter  entered  the  room,  and  shortly  afterwards  Mr.   Salmond. 

I  stated  to  both  of  them  what  had  taken   place — what  I  had 

said  to  Mr.  Stronach,  and  they  all  objected  to  an  examination 

into  the  Bank's  ati'airs,  on  the  ground  of  the  risk  of  publicity. 

1   said   that   I   thought   the   object   might    be   attained   if   some 

individual  in  whom  we  all  hud  confidence  examined  the  books 

and  said  that  he  was  satisfied. 

Without  revealing  anything? — Without  revealing  anything. 
I  suggested  that  without  giving  any  details,  if  such  a  person 
examined  the  Bank's  books,  and  sim}>ly  said  he  was  satisfied  as 
to  the  position  of  the  Bank,  that  that  might  be  enough. 

"What  did  they  say  to  that? — They  did  not  assent  to  this 
suggestion. 

Was  anything  said  about  how  much  would  be  needed,  if  they 
were  to  get  assistance,  to  pull  them  through  the  difficulty? — 
At  first  the  amount  named  as  likely  to  meet  the  case  was  from 
ii200,000  to  £300,000,  but  afterwards  a  larger  sum  was  spoken 
of,  and  £500,000  was  named  as  likely  to  meet  the  case.  I 
asked  Mr.  Stronach  whether,  in  the  event  of  their  having  such 
a  sum  as  that,  it  would  take  all  Morton's  acceptances  out  of 
the  way,  and  he  answered    "  No." 

Did  Mr.  Potter  say  anything  about  that? — No. 

Was  there  anything  else  said  before  you  parted  company 
with  them? — Mr.  Potter  said  to  me  that  he  hoped  that  an 
examination  of  the  Bank's  affairs  would  be  dispensed  with.  I 
immediately  called  on  Mr.  Gairdner,  of  the  Union  Bank,  and 
told  him  what  had  taken  place.  Mr.  Gairdner  and  I  went  to 
Edinburgh,  and  had  a  consultation  with  Mr.  Uavidson,  of  the 
Bank  of  Scotland.  Mr.  Fleming,  of  the  lloyal  Bank,  was  unfor- 
tunately out  of  town  in  the  afternoon,  and  could  not  be  got. 

As  the  result  of  your  consultations,  were  you  authorised  to 
see  Mr.  Potter? — It  had  been  arranged  that  Mr.  Potter  was  to 
call  for  me  at  the  Bank  of  Scotland  in  Glasgow  next  morning 
and  heiir  the  result. 

I  want  to  know  what  you  conveyed  to  Mr.  Potter  when  he 
called  upon  you? — I  was  authorised  to  say  to  Mr.  Potter  that, 
with  regard  to  an  examination  of  the  books,  if  each  of  the 
JiirecUjrs  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  would  give  his  own 
individual  and  personal  assurance  that  the  cai)ital  of  the  Bank 
was  intact,  we  thought  that  possibly  an  examination  of  their 
affairs  might  be  dispensed  with.  I  told  that  to  Mr.  Potter.  He 
said  ikiiiit  he  himself  could  not  give  that  assurance. 

Did  lie  say  anything  about  the  position  of  the  Bank? — lie 
said  he  would  not  like  to  say  anything  with  regard  to  the 
position  of  the  Bank  that  he  could  not  iinswer  for  afterwards 
both  to  God  and  man. 

199 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Jas.  Wenley.  Did  he  express  any  opinion  about  the  position  of  the  Bank? 
— He  said  that  things  were  in  such  a  critical  state  that  even 
on  that  day  they  might  have  to  do  something.  I  deprecated 
any  hasty  action  on  thedr  part,  being  ertremely  desirous  that 
no  hasty  step  should  be  taken  by  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank 
without  the  other  Scotch  banks  being  consulted. 

Did  he  say  anything  about  a  meeting  that  had  been  called 
that  day? — He  said  that  a  meeting  of  the  Directors  had  been 
called  that  day  at  twelve  o'clock  in  Mr.  Stewart's  oflfice. 

Did  you  offer  to  go  and  see  them  all? — He  complained  with 
a  good  deal  of  emotion  of  the  whole  responsibility  being  thrown 
upon  him,  and  I  offered  to  go  to  this  meeting  of  the  Directors 
and  communicate  to  the  whole  of  them  the  message  I  had 
brought. 

But  they  did  not  send  for  you,  I  believe? — They  did  not. 
Mr.  Potter  called  on  me  that  day,  but  unfortunately  I  was  out. 
I  saw  him  afterwards  at  his  own  office. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — This  was  on  Saturday,  28tli 
September. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — I  saw  him  about  one  o'clock. 

And  I  think  it  was  arranged  that  he  and  Mr.  Stronach  should 
meet  Mr.  Davidson,  Mr.  Fleming,  and  Mr.  Gairdner  in  Edin- 
burgh at  the  Bank  of  Scotland  on  the  Monday? — Just  so. 

Did  he  say  anything  at  that  meeting  about  Morton's  accept- 
ances?— He  said  that  the  acceptances  on  account  of  Morton 
alone  amounted  to  £1,200,000.  I  had  a  consultation  with  Mr. 
Gairdner,  Mr.  Davidson,  and  Mr.  Fleming  in  Edinburgh  in  the 
afternoon ;  and  in  consequence  of  that  meeting  I  called  on  i 
Mr.  Potter  at  his  own  house  in  the  evening,  and  conveyed  to 
him  what  had  been  arrived  at  at  the  meeting  with  Mr.  Fleming, 
Mr.  Gairdner,  and  Mr.  Davidson.  I  told  Mr.  Potter  that  we 
thought  that  the  sum  of  £500,000  which  had  been  named  was 
quite  inadequate  to  meet  the  purpose  in  view,  and  I  requested 
that  he  should  on  Monday  bring  with  him  the  last  detailed 
balance  sheet  of  the  Bank,  and  also  information  as  to  the 
total  amount  of  their  acceptances,  and  state  what  acceptances 
were,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business,  for  mercantile  pur- 
poses, and  what  were  for  financing  purposes.  On  Monday  at 
twelve  o'clock  a  meeting  took  place  in  Edinburgh.  There  were 
present — Mr.  Davidson,  Mr.  Fleming,  of  the  Koyal  Bank ;  Mr. 
Gairdner,  of  the  Union  Bankj  Mr.  Stronach,  Mr.  Potter,  and 
myself.  At  that  meeting  the  state  of  the  Bank  was  unfolded — 
the  large  accounts  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  James  Nicol 
Fleming,  Morton,  and  Inues  Wright  &  Co.,  and  also  the  large 
sum  lent  to  the  American  railway,  and  other  matters.  It  was 
arranged  at  a  meeting  of  the  Scotch  banks  that  evening  that 
Mr.   George  Auldjo  Jamieson  should  be  asked   to  go  and  look 

200 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

into  the  books,  aud  see  if  it  was  possible  to  do  anything.     He  jas.  Wenley. 
made  a  report. 

By  Mr.  Ashkr — At  the  meeting  on  27th  September  I  believe 
it  was  I  who  spoke  first  of  a  sum  of  £200,000  or  .£300,000.  Mr. 
Stronach  replied  to  that  remark,  aud  spoke  as  if  it  would  be 
sufficient.  Aher  Mr.  Potter  and  Mr.  Salmond  came  in,  the  sum 
of  £500,000  was  mentioned.  Mr.  Stronach  mentioned  it  as 
being  amply  sufficient  to  take  the  Bank  out  of  its  difficulties. 
Mr.  Potter  asked  him,  '■  Are  you  quite  sure  that  that  sum  will 
be  sufficient?"  and  after  some  consideration,  Mr.  Stronach  said 
that  he  thou^'ht  it  would. 

Jambs   Paul.  James  Paul. 

By  the  Lonu  Advocate — I  was  formerly  a  merchant  in 
Glasgow.  I  retired  from  the  firm  of  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  in 
1876.  I  had  been  a  partner  in  that  firm  from  March  or  April, 
1863.  At  that  time  the  partners  of  the  firm  were  John  Innes 
Wright,  William  Scott,  and  myself.  All  three  of  us  continued 
to  be  partners  down  to  187G.  There  were  no  other  partners  in 
the  house  during  that  period.  While  I  was  a  partner  there  was 
a  London  house  connected  with  the  firm,  not  as  partners,  but 
as  correspondents.  The  business  of  our  firm,  when  I  joined  it 
in  1863,  was  that  of  East  India  merchants  and  commission 
uiercliants,  shipping  goods  to  the  East  India  markets,  and 
receiving  consignments  of  cotton  and  other  East  India  produce, 
-which  we  realised  in  this  country  on  behalf  of  clients  in  Bomljay. 
ft  Our  business  promised  very  fair  for  the  first  two  or  three  years. 
W'e  then  began  to  lose  money.  I  think  at  the  close  of  1865 
or  1866  we  were  beginning  to  feel  that  we  were  losing  money. 
Our  first  connection  with  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  began,  I 
think,  about  midsuimner  of  1866.  Mr.  William  Scott  took 
charge  of  the  financial  department  of  our  firm.  I  took  a  general 
supervision  of  the  export  department  from  this  side  as  regaids 
goods  shipped  by  us,  conducting  correspondence  relating  thereto, 
and  80  forth.  Mr.  Innes  Wright,  the  senior  partner,  looked 
more  immediately  after  the  import  department^ — consignments 
from  abroad,  and  the  realising  of  them.  I  think  our  first 
transaction  with  the  Bank  consisted  in  discounting  a  batch  of 
mercantile  bills. 

I  suppose  you  had  a  deposit  and  discount  account  in  the 
ordinary  form'? — Quite  so;  it  amounts  to  that.  From  1866 
down  to  1870,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  business  matters  did  not 
improve  with  us.  They  L'ot  slightly  worse.  I  think  wo  were 
getting  some  assistance  from  the  Bank  previous  to  1870,  but 
I  cannot  condescend  upon  the  particular  time. 

But  about  1870  you  began  to  need  advances  from  the  Bank? 
—We   began    to  get   advances   about   that   time.      Mr.    William 

201 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Paul.  Scott  negotiated  these  advances ;  it  was  his  special  department. 
I  was  occasionally  asked  specially  by  Mr.  Scott  to  go  to  the 
Bank  about  these  advances,  and  I  went  at  his  instance.  I 
ihink  in  almost  every  case  in  which  I  was  sent  by  Mr.  Scott 
I  got  the  money.  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach  was  Manager  at 
that  time.  I  made  no  communication  to  him  as  to  the  state 
of  my  affairs,  or  the  affairs  of  our  firm  on  these  occasions ; 
I  simply  went  with  my  message,  as  it  were.  On  almost  every 
occasion  that  I  remember  being  sent  to  the  Bank  I  got  a  note 
from  Mr.  Scott  to  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach  relating  to  my 
mission. 

And  your  mission  was  for  money  1 — Yes  ;  and  along  with  that 
I  understood  there  was  the  usual  cheque,  as  it  were,  for  the 
amount,  signed  by  the  firm — Mr.  Scott.  Sometimes  I  did  not 
get  the  money  at  that  particular  visit,  and  had  to  go  back. 

I  supjiose  you  understood  that  it  was  an  advance  you  were 
getting  from  the  Bank? — Clearly. 

It  was  not  a  cheque  drawing  your  own  money  out  of  the 
Bank? — Clearly.  The  largest  sum  I  ever  got  on  any  of  these 
occasions  was,  I  think,  £16,000.  I  got  it  in  notes  or  cash  slips 
— bank  slips,  as  they  are  called ;  either  notes  or  an  equivalent. 

And  you  have  frequently  got  sums  of  £10,000  and  £12,000? 
— Yes;  I  cannot  swear  to  the  particular  sum  of  £16,000,  but 
the  che(iue  will  show  what  it  was.  Personally  I  did  not  communi- 
cate to  Mr.  Stronach  any  impression  that  our  firm  was  in 
difficulties  at  that  time.  Mr.  Stronach  must  have  known  it. 
Mr.  Scott  and  he  had  so  many  interviews  that  I  always  under- 
stood Mr.  Stronach  knew  it.  I  never  required  to  say  anything. 
Mr.   Stronach  never  asked  me. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — I  think  he  could  not  fail  to  know 
it. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — A  balance  sheet  of  the  firm  was 
struck  in  1866.  After  1866,  and  down  to  the  time  I  left  the 
firm  in  1876,  there  was  no  balance  sheet  struck.  The  transac- 
tions with  the  Bank  were  always  recorded  by  Mr.  Scott,  whose 
special  department  it  was,  in  the  cash  book;  but  up  to  a  certain 
time — subsequent  to  1871,  I  think — I  found  Mr.  Scott  was 
keeping  his  cash  on  small  slips  or  memoranda.  After  1866  I 
never  saw  an  account  oi'  balance  of  the  affairs  of  the  firm,  or 
anything  like  an  account  of  the  state  of  the  firm's  liabilities. 

But  you  knew  that  you  were  in  difficulties? — Clearly. 

In  deep  water? — In  deep  water. 

What  did  you  do  with  the  money  which  you  got  from  the 
Bank  on  those  occasions?  Did  you  apply  it  yourself? — I  always 
returned  with  the  money  and  handed  it  to  Mr.  Scott,  who  was 
the  financial  man — who  had  the  conduct  of  the  business. 

Did  you  ever  see  any  of  the  Directors  on  these  occasions?— 
Never. 

202 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

You  have  been  speaking  hitherto  of  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach  ?  james  Paul. 
—Yes. 

After  he  ceased  to  be  Manager,  and  his  brother,  Eobert 
Stronach,  took  his  place,  did  you  pay  visits  to  the  Bank  as 
before? — Occasionally — much  on  the  same  footing. 

And  did  you  get  the  money  from  him  on  these  occasions  in 
the  same  way  as  you  got  it  from  Alexander  Stronach  previ- 
ously?— Yes,  I  got  it — always  with  a  grudge,  of  course. 

But  you  did  get  it  ? — I  think  so ;  I  might  have  been  defeated 
in  getting  it  once  or  twice,  but  I  know  I  got  money  on  several 
occasions. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — From  Mr.  Robert  Stronach? — 
From  Mr.  Robert  Stronach. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — But  unwillingly,  and  with  a  grudge? 
— Mr.  Stronach  naturally  did  not  give  the  money  without 
expostulating  as  to  why  we  needed  it,  and  so  forth. 

You  were  not  giving  the  Bank  security  as  against  these 
advances? — I  did  not  give  the  Bank  security. 

Did  you  understand  that  your  firm  were  giving  any? — I 
understood  that  they  had  got  certain  securities ;  the  nature  of 
them  or  the  true  value  of  them  I  could  not  condescend  on ;  and 
all  thene  securities  were  arranged  for  and  sent  by  Mr.  Scott. 

But  you  were  quite  cognisant  that  these  advances  were  being 
got  ? — Yes  ;  I  got  some  of  them  personally. 

Was  your  partner,  Mr.  Innes  Wright,  cognisant  of  these 
advances  being  got? — I  believe  so.  We  kept  no  cash  book  or 
tinance  books.  The  books  connected  with  my  own  department 
and  with  Mr.  Wright's  department  were  all  in  perfect  order 
up  to  the  time  I  left  the  firm,  but  the  finance  books  never  were. 

After  1870,  or,  say,  after  1871,  down  to  the  time  you  ceased 
to  be  a  partner,  were  you,  or  were  you  not,  aware  that  the 
Bank  was  very  heavily  in  advance  to  your  firm? — I  was  aware 
that  the  Bank  must  be  in  advance,  but  I  had  no  earthly  idea 
as  to  the  extent  of  it.  I  frequently  wishe<d  to  know  from  Mr. 
Scott,  but  never  could  ascertain  what  the  amount  was — not. 
even  the  probable  amount. 

On  those  occasions,  taking  1871  and  subsequently,  when 
you  -went  to  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach,  and  also  to  Mr.  Robert 
Stronach,  in  order  to  get  money,  did  you  ever  allude  to  the 
necessity  of  your  having  to  stop  if  you  did  not  get  it?— Very 
likely  I  did. 

But  did  you?  Trj'  to  recollect  that? — Oh!  I  must  have  said 
so. 

That  if  you  did  not  get  the  advance  you  must  stop? — Yes. 

I  suppose  that,  having  said  so,  it  was  the  fact — that  if  you 
had  not  got  it,  you  must  stop? — Undoubtedly. 

Did  you  ever  consider  or  say  anything  about  the  effect  that 
might  have  upon  the  Bank  on  these  occasions? — Never;  I  never 

203 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Janriei  Paul,  could  fancy  that  our  indebtedness  was  of  such  a  nature  that  it 
could  materially  affect  the  Bank. 

From  what  you  saw  of  the  operations  of  your  firm  from  1870 
down  to  1876,  was  it  your  belief  or  understanding  that  you 
were  getting  into  a  better  position  pecuniarily,  or  into  a  worse? 
— I  was  daily  growing  in  the  belief  that  we  were  getting  into  a 
worse  position.  I  recollect  Mr.  Innes  Wright  becoming  a 
Director  of  the  Bank. 

Did  the  fact  of  his  becoming  a  Director  strike  you  at  the 
time? — Yes;  it  struck  me  at  the  time. 

What  occurred  to  you  at  the  time  in  reference  to  it? — That 
it  was  a  somewhat  irregular  thing  Mr.  Wright  being  asked  to 
be  a  Director. 

Did  it  not  occur  to  you  that  there  might  be  an  irregularity 
in  his  consenting  to  be  a  Director  when  asked? — Yes. 

You  thought  so? — I  thought  so;  Mr.  Wright,  however,  was 
asked  to  be  a  Director  long  before  that. 

But  he  declined? — He  declined  positively.  This  was  in 
January,  1871. 

Had  anything  occurred  since  January,  1871,  that  made  it 
more  proper  for  him  to  accept  in  1875? — Not  that  I  know  of. 

Did  you  speak  to  Mr.  Wright  on  the  subject  in  1876,  when  he 
became  a  Director? — Mr.  Wright  was  my  informant  as  to  his 
having  been  asked  to  be  a  Director. 

Did  he  state  whether  he  would  accept  it  or  not? — No,  he  did 
not;  evidently  from  the  tenor  of  the  conversation,  it  was  under 
consideration  by  him. 

Did  he  tell  you  who  had  asked  him  to  be  a  Director? — He 
told  me  the  first  intimation  he  got  on  the  subject — the  first 
approach  on  the  subject — was  by  Mr.  Robert  Stronach. 

Tell  us  what  he  said? — And  on  a  subsequent  day  he  had,  I 
was  told — by  him,  I  think — a  visit  from  Mr.  Salmond,  following 
up  the  proposal.  Mr.  Wright,  evidently,  had  doubts  about 
accepting  it. 

Did  you  express  any  opinion  to  him  at  the  time  as  to  your 
view  of  his  accepting  it  ? — I  said,  "  How  far  is  it  right — how  far 
is  it  proper  to  accept  a  Directorship,  Mr.  Wright,  in  the  state 
of  our  account  ?  " 

What  did  he  say  to  that? — "I  am  alive  to  that,  Mr.  Paul; 
Mr.  Stronach  tells  me  that  that  will  be  no  difficultv ;  he  will 
arrange  all  that." 

Mr.  Robert  Stronach ? — Mr.  Robert  Stronach. 

What  was  he  to  arrange,  did  you  understand? — That  the 
indebtedness  was  to  remain  in  abeyance,  I  suppose,  and  that 
the  fact  of  our  indebtedness  would  be  made  no  disqualification. 

Had  Mr.  Wright  any  shares  in  the  Bank  at  that  time — when 
he  was  applied  to? — Not  previously,  that  I  know  of. 

Had  he  any  money  to  buy  them  with,  that  you  knew  of  % — No. 

204 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

In  1875,  when  Mr.  Wright  became  a  Director,  had  the  James  Paul, 
character  of  your  business  remained  the  same  as  when  you 
started  the  firm  originally  in  186:3? — Not  quite.  At  the  outset, 
it  was  purely  a  commission  business,  or  nearly  so.  About 
1870  or  thereby  the  Suez  Canal  and  the  telegraph  to  and  from 
India  came  into  operation,  and  consequent  upon  that,  that 
description  of  commission  ])usiness  gradually  subsided,  and  we 
assumed  a  position  from  that  time  onwards  more  as  merchants, 
along  with  such  commission  business  as  could  be  got. 

Had  it  not  become  very  much  a  finance  business  at  that 
time — in  1875? — There  was  a  good  deal  of  finance,  which  was 
becoming  more  a  feature  in  the  business.  Under  the  contract 
of  copartnery  each  partner  had  a  monthly  allowance  of  £60. 
That  was  always  paid  by  Mr.  Scott — monthly. 

Did  yuu  ever  speak  to  Mr.  Wright  about  the  position  of 
your  affairs? — Mr.  Wright  himself  had  frequent  conversations 
about  it,  and  more  particularly  about  the  disordered  state  of 
the  books.  He  could  not  understand  our  position.  Mr.  Wright 
knew  more  about  the  position  of  the  firm  than  I  did. 

Did  he  not  know  that  you  were  in  difficulties? — He  knew 
we  were  in  difficulties,  but  he  had  no  earthly  idea,  I  am  pretty 
confident,  about  the  extent  of  them — consequent  on  Mr.  Scott's 
mode  of  doing  business. 

But  he  knew  that  you  were  in  considerable  difficulties? — 
Quite  so. 

And  that  the  Bank  were  under  heavy  advances? — Quite  so. 

But  he  did  not  know  the  full  amount? — I  think  not.  So  far 
as  1  am  concerned,  I  did  not :  and  I  think  Mr.  Wright  could 
not  have  known  either,  for  we  had  several  conversations  on 
the  point. 

From  1870  downwards,  while  you  were  a  partner,  were  you 
ever  doing  anything  but  making  losses? — Well,  it  was  the 
exception  to  make  profit.  Of  course,  there  were  individual 
operations  that  were  profitable ;  but,  on  the  whole,  we  were 
apparently  going  behind. 

You  knew  that  the  result  of  your  trading  was  that  you  were 
realising  losses? — Quite  so. 

And  I  suppose  tliat  you  knew  then  that  the  money  you  got 
to  meet  your  liabilities  must  come  from  some  other  (juarter 
than  the  profits  upon  youi'  trade? — Yes. 

And  that  (juaiter  was? — The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank.  Mr. 
Wright  succeeded  .fames  Nicol  Fleminfr  in  the  Directorate.  I 
was  acquainted  with  .Mr.  Fleming.  Tlu-re  were  business  con- 
nections between  him  and  his  firm  and  ours. 

He  was  connected  with  various  finns,  I  l)elieve,  under 
different  names.  With  which  of  his  firms  did  you  trade? — With 
James  Nicol  Fleming  A-  Co.,  Calcutta.  He  was  not  a  partner 
of  Smith,  Fleming  A-  Co. 

aos 


The  City   of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Paul.  By  Mr.  GuTHRiE  Smith — Who  provided  the  capital  for  the 
firm  of  Wright  &  Co.  when  the  firm  started? — Mr.  Wright.  To 
the  best  of  my  belief  we  started  with  a  capital  of  some  £44,000 
or  £45,000,  and  Mr.  Wright  supplemented  it  afterwards  with 
some  further  payments,  but  I  cannot  give  the  particulars  of 
these.  The  capital  all  came  from  him.  According  to  the 
contract  of  copartnery,  the  allowance  drawn  by  each  partner 
was  £60  per  month.  That  always  came  through  Mr.  Scott. 
I  don't  think  Mr.  Wright  ever  exceeded  that  allowance.  He 
lived  in  his  own  house,  and  very  plainly  indeed.  Mr.  Scott 
had  been  a  clerk  in  Mr.  Wright's  employment.  He  was  assumed 
as  a  partner  on  the  same  day  as  myself,  in  1863.  After  1863 
each  of  us  had  a  special  department  of  the  business  to  attend 
to.  The  whole  of  the  finance  business  and  the  relations  with 
the  Bank  were  managed  by  Mr.  Scott.  Mr.  Wright's  department 
was  the  produce  department.  The  whole  of  the  books  con- 
nected with  it  were  properly  kept  down  to  the  time  when  I  left. 

Was  the  borrowing  of  money  from  the  Bank  always  done 
by  Mr.  Scott? — It  was  always  negotiated  by  Mr.  Scott. 

You  had  no  knowledge  of  the  extent  of  your  indebtedness 
to  the  Bank? — Never  at  any  time. 

You,  I  believe,  frequently  urged  Mr.  Scott  to  give  you  par- 
ticulars ? — Frequently,  and  Mr.  Wright  also  did  the  same  thing. 

But  without  effect? — Without  effect.  It  brought  forth  no 
actual  result. 

By  the  Dean  of  Faculty — You  have  told  us  that  after  Mr. 
Alexander  Stronach  ceased  to  be  Manager,  you  had  called  at 
the  Bank  and  had  seen  Mr.  Robert  Stronach.  How  often  did 
you  see  him? — That  goes  over  a  period  of  years;  I  could  not 
tell  you.  I  was  at  the  Bank  on  an  average  once  a  week 
at  any  rate  on  some  business  or  other. 

He  became  Manager  in  December,  1875,  and  you  ceased  to 
be  a  partner  of  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  in  1876? — Yes,  on  19th 
March,  1876. 

Can  you  tell  how  often  you  saw  Robert  Stronach  on  these 
occasions  when  you  called  there  asking  for  money? — That  is 
a  very  difficult  question  to  answer. 

More  than  twice  ? — Oh  !  more  than  twice  or  thrice. 

You  stated  that  he  expostulated  with  you  when  you  made 
your  request.  What  was  the  nature  of  his  expostulation? — 
Simply  that  he  could  not  give  the  money;  that  he  had  made 
no  arrangement  with  Mr.  Scott  to  give  the  money,  and  so  forth. 
My  message  was  done. 

Did  he  ask  for  security? — I  cannot  say. 

Additional  security  ? — No ;  I  always  understood  he  was 
"  nagging  "  at  Mr.  Scott  for  securities.  Whether  he  succeeded 
in  getting  any  at  the  various  times  I  could  not  state.  I  never 
was  entrusted  with  any  securities  to  give  to  Mr.  Stronach. 

206 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

No;   but  did  he   speak  to   you   in   this   way   that  he  wanted  James  Paul, 
inore 'security  before  he  would  make  an  additional  advance? — 

Yes. 

Did  you  carry  that  message  back  to  Mr.  Scott? — \es. 

And  did  you  get  sometimes  additional  security  from  Mr. 
Scott  to  give  him?— No;  if  securities  were  given,  they  were 
given  liv  Mr.   Scott,   not  by  me. 

Then  you  cannot  tell  me  what  the  securities  were  which  the 
Bank  had  against  the  indebtedness  of  John  Innes  Wright  tt 
Co.? — Yes;  the  securities  mainly  consisted  in  shares  in  joint 
stock  companies — such  as  Glasgow  Jute  Company  and  Marbella 
Iron  Ore  Company. 

Was  the  produce  of  imported  goods  sometimes  assigned  over 
to  the  Bank? — No,  not  in  my  day. 

Were  bills  drawn  by  your  firm  as  against  cargoes  coming 
home  in  favour  of  the  Bank? — No,  not  in  my  day. 

I  understand  you  to  say  that  you  never  knew  the  amount 
of  your  debt  to  the  Bank?— I  never  knew  up  till  the  hour  I 
left  the  office  what  our  indebtedness  to  the  Bank  was. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — You  saw  either  Mr.  Alexander 
Stronach,  when  he  was  Manager,  or  Mr.  Robert  Stronach? — 
Yes. 

Was  Mr.  Robert  Stronach  in  the  management  for  the  most 
part  from  1874? — Mr.  Robert  Stronach  did  not  take  the 
management  at  the  Bank,  I  think,  until  about  January  or 
so,   1875. 

But  Alexander  Stronach  had  ceased  to  act,  had  he  not,  before 
that? — Yes. 

Then  before  the  formal  appointment  of  Robert  Stronach, 
whom  did  you  see  when  you  went  to  the  Bank? — Failinjr  Mr. 
Alexander  Stronach,  I  next  fell  upon  Mr.  Robert.  Stronach.  I 
never  saw  a  Director  or  was  brought  into  contact  with  a  Director. 

You  saw  either  one  or  other  of  the  Stronachs? — Quite  so. 

John   Fleming.  John  Fleming. 

By  the  Soucitor-General — I  am  a  member  of  the  finn  of 
finiith,  Flomintr  cV  Co.,  carryini.'  on  Itusiness  in  Leadenhall  Street, 
London.  The  firm  is  now  in  liquidntion  on  our  petition.  It 
has  been  in  existence  since  1860.  The  partners  were  then  Mr. 
John  Smith,  myself,  and  Mr.  James  Nicol  Fleming.  I  have 
also  had  to  do  with  the  firms  of  William  Nicol  iV  Co.,  of  Bombay, 
and  Fleming  &  Co.,  of  Kurrache'A  I  am  a  partner  of  these 
firms.  The  partners  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  were  all  partners 
of  those  firms  ;  but  there  wore  also  other  partners  in  them — 
Mr.  Hamilton  Maxwell  and  Mr.  (Jiliimre  Hall — ^wlio  \vor<>'  not 
members  of  Smith,  Fleming  ife  Co. 

Since  about    1865  have  you   li;ul   intimate  business  relations 

207 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

John  Fleming,  with  Todd,  Findlay  &  Co.,  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.,  and 
Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.?— With  Todd,  Findlay  &  Co.  yes;  less 
so  with  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  ;  not  at  all  at  that  date  witli 
Potter,  Wilson  &  Co. 

When  did  you  begin  to  have  business  relations  with  Potter, 
Wilson  &  Co.'/ — Subsequent  to  1870;  I  cannot  fix  the  date 
exactly. 

When  with  James  Morton  &  Co.? — Shortly  after  1865 — about 
1866  or  1867. 

And  with  Law,  Brown  &  Co.  more  recently? — Yes  ;  in  1875. 

Previous  to  1866,  had  you  many  transactions  with  the  City 
of  Glaso^ow  Bank,  or  were  they  quite  exceptional? — They  were 
very  few,  I  think  scarcely  any,  before  that. 

But  since  then  your  transactions  have  been  frequent? — They 
have. 

Your  brother,  James  Nicol  Fleming,  was  a  member  of  the 
Directorate  for  a  good  many  years?— He  was. 

What  was  the  whole  of  your  indebtedness  to  the  Bank  at 
the  stoppage  in  October? — Something  over  £1,800,000 — between 
£1,800,000  and  £1,900,000— the  exact  figures  I  do  not 
remember. 

How  much  of  that  is  on  cash  advances  by  the  Bank? — About 
one-half  of  it.      I  have  not  the  figures  with  me. 

How  were  the  cash  advances  obtained — I  mean  by  what  form 
of  procedure?  Were  there  special  credits  obtained  from  time 
to  time? — Some  of  these  cash  advances  arose  in  this  way,  that 
ori<rinally  bill  credits  were  granted,  and  these  bills  were  paid 
oft'  by  the  Bank,  and  converted  from  the  form  of  bills  into 
that  of  cash  advanced. 

The  Bank  had  to  meet  their  own  acceptances? — ^They  met 
their  own  acceptances. 

And  accordinjrly  debited  you  with  the  cash  as  advanced  by 
them  ? — Yes. 

Were  there  other  sums  advanced  directly  in  cash  ? — Yes ;  in 
some  cases  there  were. 

Which  you  were  allowed  to  draw  by  cheque? — Yes. 
What  security  had  the  Bank  for  that  sum,  which  we  will 
take  at  one-half — or  call  it  £900,000,  in  the  meantime — what 
security  had  the  Bank  for  that?  Or  tell  me  first  what  was  the 
whole  amount  of  securities  that  the  Bank  had  in  its  absolute 
control  for  the  advances  made  to  your  firm? — There  was  very- 
little  in  the  absolute  control  of  the  Bank. 

What  was  the  total  amount  that  was  in  any  way  secured  to 
them? — The  nominal  value  of  the  securitv  was  about  £800,000 
or  £900,000. 

As  against  £1,800,000  or  £1,900,000?— Yes. 
When  you   say  the   nominal  value,   I   suppose   the  realisable 
value  would  be  a   very  great  deal  less  than  that? — Well,  the 

208 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

circumstances   at    present   are   adverse   to    the   realisation   of   a  John  Fleming, 
good  many  of  the  securities. 

Are  there  a  great  many  of  them  worth  nothing  at  all? — No. 

You  think  they  are  all  valuable"? — All  more  or  less  so. 

Take  it  in  1876,  what  do  you  say  would  be  the  amount 
actually  secured  of  the  £1,900,000? — I  should  not  like  to  give  a 
definite  answer  to  that  without  looking  over  the  securities. 

Would  it  come  up  to  one-half? — I  should  say  so. 

About  one-half? — ^Yes. 

In  whose  possession  were  the  securities? — Most  of  them 
in  our  own  possession.  Let  me  just  modify  that  answer.  Part 
of  them  also  were  in  the  possession  of  Todd,  Findlay  &  Co. — a 
considerable  proportion. 

Was  there  any  substantial  part  of  those  securities  to  which 
the  Bank  had  a  le^al  title  at  all? — Not  a  large  part. 

I  mean  such  a  title  as  gave  the  Bank  a  right  to  use  the 
security  without  the  consent  of  others? — There  are  a  good  many 
questions  as  to  the  right  and  title  of  the  Bank  to  securities 
at  present  pending  which  have  been  raised  since,  and  which  I 
was  ignorant  of  at  the  time. 

But  I  want  you  to  tell  me  how  much  they  had,  about  which, 
in  your  view,  no  such  question  could  be  raised? — ^Well,  a 
number  of  questions  which  were  quite  new  to  me  have  been 
raised  since  my  stoppage,  and  I  find  with  regard  to  things  which 
I  believed  to  be  theirs,  the  title  to  them  is  now  questioned. 

I  suppose  every  question  has  been  raised  that  can  be  raised 
within  the  last  three  months,  but  you  can  tell  me  how  much  of 
the  securities  no  question  has  been  raised  about? — 'A  very  small 
proportion. 

Suppose  the  securities  are  all  good  to  the  Bank,  how  much 
are  they  worth  now? — It  was  estimated  by  my  trustee  that 
there  would  be  from  £500,000  to  £600,000  worth  now. 

That  is,  assuming  all  questions  to  be  decided  in  favour  of  your 
assignee? — ^That  I  understand. 

Up  to  July,  1870,  had  you  any  advances  from  the  Bank  which 
were  not  properly  covered? — None. 

All  the  indebtedness  has  arisen  since  then  ? — ^All  the  uncovered 
indebtedness. 

How  were  your  applications  for  advances  generally  made? — 
By  letter  addressed  to  the  Manager. 

In  July,  1870,  did  you  see  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach,  Mr.  Potter, 
and  Mr.  Salmond  about  the  state  of  your  affairs? — I  saw  Mr. 
Alexander    Stronach   and   Mr.    Potter. 

And  Mr.  Salmond? — I  believe  Mr.  Salmond,  but  I  am  not 
quite  so  sure  about  him. 

Was  your  brother  present? — ^My  brother  was  present. 

Where  did  you  meet  them? — At  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank. 

How  many  meetings  had  you  with  them  at  that  time? — I 
think,  at  intervals  of  a  week  or  ten  days,  two  meetings. 
o  209 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

John  Fleming.  You  say  you  are  not  so  sure  of  Mr.  Salmond  being  present, 
but  you  think  he  was.  You  are  not  sure  about  the  first  meeting  ; 
was  he  present  at  the  second  meeting?^ — ^My  impression  is  that 
he  was  present  at  one  or  other  of  the  meetings,  but  I  am  not 
prepared  absolutely  to  swear  that. 

At  those  meetings  what  did  you  say  to  them  with  regard  to 
the  state  of  affairs — I  mean  did  you  say  anything  particular 
to  them  about  the  state  of  affairs? — I  told  them  that  we  were 
face  to  face  with  a  very  heavy  loss  through  the  difficulties  which 
had  arisen  to  our  Liveipool  agents,  Nicol,  Duckworth  &  Co., 
and  that  it  was  necessary  that  we  should  stop. 

What  was  said  in  answer  to  that? — That  it  was  unnecessary — 
that  assistance  would  be  provided. 

By  whom  ? — ^By  the  Bank. 

How  did  you  stand  with  the  Bank  at  that  time?: — We  had 
cash  advances  and  credits  at  the  moment  to  about  £150,000, 
roughly — all  covered. 

Did  you  make  it  plain  to  them  that  you  could  not  go  on  as 
you  stood? — I  desired  to  do  so;  I  believe  I  did.  My  brother 
took  part  in  the  meeting.  He  was  of  the  same  opinion,  I 
believe.  There  was  a  good  deal  of  discussion.  The  discussion 
was  as  to  the  means  of  rendering  us  assistance. 

Who  proposed  plans  for  that? — I  cannot  permit  myself  now 
to  say  who  proposed  them ;  various  plans  were  proposed. 

Did  the  proposals  come  from  others  at  the  meeting  than  from 
you? — From  others,  not  from  me.  One  proposal,  and  the 
proposal  which  ultimately  in  a  certain  shape  was  carried  out, 
was  the  immediate  formation  of  a  new  Liverpool  firm,  which 
should  accept  bills  to  be  discounted  and  used  for  our  relief.  I 
said  that  I  did  not  consider  that  such  a  plan  would  be  successful ; 
I  thought  it  would  be  fatal.  I  expressed  myself  pretty  strongly 
upon  that.  I  said  it  would  bring  discredit  upon  us,  and 
that  without  the  maintenance  of  our  credit  there  was  no  chance 
of  our  retrieving  our  position  and  getting  out  of  our  difficulties. 
The  proposal  was  pressed  upon  me.  This  was  at  the  first 
interview. 

Did  you  get  rather  hot — angry — upon  the  subject? — I  felt 
that  it  was  trifling  with  a  very  big  and  difficult  matter. 

How  much  did  you  state  to  them  was  really  the  amount 
involved  in  the  question  of  your  failing  or  your  being  kept 
up  ? — I  don't  exactly  understand  the  question ;  the  word 
"  involved  "  means  something  outside  of  us. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — ^We  required  over  half  a  million 
of  money  to  put  us  rig'ht. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — ^I  told  them  that. 

When  they  pressed  it  upon  you,  how  did  you  receive  the 
pressure? — The  plan  as  proposed  by  them  seemed  to  me  to  be 
quite  ineffectual,   and   I   said   there  was   no   use   discussing   it 

210 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


further.      I   then  proceeded  to  leave  the  room.       When   I   got  John  Fleming. 
out  into  the  hall  of  the  Bank,  I  was  brought  back  again.      It 
was  Mr.  Potter  who  brought  me  back. 

What  happened  when  you  got  back? — It  was  then  promised 
that  the  Baiik  would  assist,  and  if  the  proposed  bills  were  not 
acceptable,  if  they  were  not  negotiable,  the  Bank  would  discount 
these  bills,  so  that  we  would  not  be  forced  into  bankruptcy. 
I  cannot  say  they  said  anything  about  what  effect  our  stoppage 
would  have  if  we  did  stop. 

In  short,  did  it  come  to  this,  that  they  undertook  to  pull  you 
"through  if  the  plan  proposed  could  not  be  effected  as  they 
suggested? — That  was  what  in  effect  was  come  to. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Do  you  mean  the  bills  drawn  by 
the  new  company? — Drawn  on  the  new  company. 

That  if  these  could  not  be  discounted  through  the  new 
-company,  the  Bank  would  do  it? — Yes. 

By  the  Solicitor-General, — ^Was  that  carried  out  by  credit 
being  given  to  Brown  &  Co.  to  the  extent  of  £.300,000,  and 
about  £100,000  of  securities  belonging  to  your  brother,  which 
were  held  for  you  by  the  Bank,  being  transferred  to  them? — 
Our  firm  in  Liverpool,  in  accordance  with  that  arrangement, 
entitled  A.  &  A.  G.  Brown,  was  formed,  and  security  for 
£300,000  was  provided  for  them,  of  which  about  £100,000, 
belonging  to  my  brothei',  and  held  by  the  Bank  for  me,  was 
lent  by  the  Bank.  The  handing  over  of  securities  to  the 
Liverpool  firm  was  not  spoken  of  at  the  meeting  I  have  men- 
tioned ;  that  was  an  arrangement  of  detail,  settled  afterwards. 

When  the  acceptances  of  the  Liverpool  firm  were  got  in 
order  to  raise  money,  did  you  find  them  acceptable? — To  a  very, 
very  limited  extent.  That  was  exactly  what  I  had  expected. 
I  found  the  attempt  to  negotiate  them  injurious  to  our  credit. 
That  also  was  what  I  had  expected.  As  the  result,  the  Bank 
had  to  make  the  advances  on  the  bills  themselves. 

Did  the  Bank  get  back  the  securities  which  had  been  sent 
to  Brown  &;  Co.  ? — Ultimately  those  which  had  not  been  realised 
and  applied  to  the  reduction  of  the  credit  were  returned  to  the 
Bank.  Let  me  say  this,  that,  as  regards  James  Nicol  Fleming, 
any  realisations  that  took  place  during  the  existence  of  the 
credit  were  placed  by  the  Bank  to  the  credit  of  James  Nicol 
Fleming,  and  not  to  our  credit.  By  the  end  of  1870'  the  Bank 
had  advanced  to  us,  in  consequence  of  this  new  arrangement, 
roundly,  about  half  a  million  of  money — nearly  so,  I  think. 

To  what  extent  was  the  Bank  covered  for  that  half-million? — 
I  cannot  speak  off-hand ;  I  cannot  positively  say. 

Would  it  be  more  than  £200,000? — Certainly;  I  should  say 
it  would  be  very  nearly  fully  covered,  but  I  speak  just  now 
very  broadly — three-fourths  probably.      During  the  years  since 

211 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

John  Fleming.  1870,  down  to  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank,  I  have  kept  the  Bank 
informed  of  the  state  of  our  affairs  from  time  to  time. 

Have  you  periodically  submitted  a  balance  sheet  to  them  of 
your  affairs? — I  have  submitted  balance  sheets  of  our  affairs 
in  London,  Bombay,  and  Kurrachee.  Latterly  I  have  submitted 
monthly  statements  of  bills  payable.  That  has  been  going  on 
for  several  years ;  I  cannot  precisely  say  how  long.  From  1870 
down  to  the  present  date  I  have  been  obliged,  in  the  course  of 
working  the  business,  to  support  the  firms  of  Todd  &  Findlay, 
and  my  brother's  firm  of  James  Nicol  Fleming  &  Co.,  and  also 
the  firm  of  Fowlie,  Richmond  &  Co.  I  have  kept  the  Bank 
informed  that  I  was  supporting  these  firms. 

Were  many  of  the  credits  specially  applied  for  by  you  to 
support  these  firms? — They  were  applied  for  to  relieve  the 
cash  advances  which  we  were  under  on  account  of  these  firms. 

And  applied  for  nominatim  for  that  purpose? — Certain  of 
them  were. 

In  regard  to  your  affairs,  have  you  seen  Mr.  Potter  frequently 
about  them? — I  have  seen  him  occasionally. 

In  consultation  about  them  ? — Yes  ;  I  saw  him  at  the  Bank. 

Has  Mr.  Salmond  made  inquiry  at  you  about  your  affairs? — 
Not  for  some  years. 

How  lon^  is  it  since  he  ceased  to  make  inquiry? — I  cannot 
precisely  say. 

But  roughly? — For  the  last  three  or  four  years.  Previous 
to  that,  when  in  London,  he  used  to  call  and  ask  generally  about 
our  affairs. 

Did  you  inform  him? — ^Yes,  I  did. 

How  thinofs  stood? — That  is,  generally. 

Did  vou  inform  him  that  vour  debt  and  difficultv  were  larsrelr 
increasing? — No,  I  did  not  do  so.  He  came  to  ask  about  our 
matters — just  how  we  were  o-etting  on. 

Did  you  tell  him  the  truth  about  them  ? — I  did. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — ^What  did  you  say  when  you 
were  asked  about  your  affairs? — Sometimes  I  told  him — as  wa-s 
the  fact — that  perhaps  things  were  looking  better;  sometimes 
it  was  that  matters  were  rather  bad. 

By  the  Solicitok-Ge^teral — Did  you  gather  from  him  whether 
he  knew  the  amount  of  the  advances  of  the  Bank  to  you? — 
No  ;  there  was  no  indication  of  any  precise  knowledge  of  that 
nature. 

Was  there  an  arrangement  made  in  March,  1875,  in  regard 
to  your  firm's  affairs  with  the  Bank  ? — Yes  ;  although  not  finally 
concluded. 

But  an  arrangement  was  discussed  and  ^one  over? — ^Yes. 

And  acted  upon? — It  was  subsequently  acted  upon. 

What  was  the  arrangement  of  March.  1875? — To  give  us 
relief,  the  rate  of  interest  charged  upon  our  cash  account  was 

212 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

to  be  reduced  from  5  per  cent,  to  3^ ;  the  commission  upon  the  John  Fleming, 

credits  which  were  granted  to  us  for  our  accommodation  was  to 

be  reduced  from  2   per  cent,   to  ^  per  cent,   per  annum ;    and 

an  arrangement  to  acquire  ii  100,000  worth  at  par  of  the  stock 

of  the  Canterbury  Company,  upon  which  we  were  to  have  an 

advance  of  £100,000  at  3^  per  cent.      The  effect  of  this  was 

that    if   this    Canterbmy    stock   yielded   dividend   in    excess    of 

3|  per  cent.,  that  excess  would  go  to  the  benefit  of  our  account. 

These  are  the  salient  points  of  the  arrangement. 

Did  you  at  that  time  lay  before  them  a  statement  of  your 
position? — I  did. 

Whom  did  you  give  it  to  / — I  had  been  in  correspondence  with 
Mr.  Alexander  Stronach  for  some  time  previously.  [Shown 
No.  186.]  That  is  a  letter  from  me  to  Mr.  Robert  Stronach, 
12th  April,  1875.      The  first  paragraph  is — 

Referring  to  the  meeting  I  had  with  your  Directors  on  Thurs- 
day, the  1st  inst.,  respecting  the  state  of  our  account  with  the 
Bank,  I  now  beg  to  detail  the  terms  of  the  agreement  come  to  as 
I  understood  them. 

"Who  were  present  at  the  meeting  you  refer  to  in  that  letter? — 
I  am  unable  to  recall.  I  saw  that  letter  this  morning,  but 
I  am  unable  to  recall  who  were  present  on  that  occasion.  The 
meeting  was  held  in  Glasgow,  in  the  Bank's  premises. 

Was  it  a  meeting  of  Directors,  though  you  cannot  remember 
who  were  present? — I  cannot  remember.  I  have  seen  that 
letter  during  the  last  few  months  in  going  through  my  corre- 
spondence. 

But  had  you  a  meeting — though  you  cannot  specify  the 
individuals  who  were  present — with  several  of  the  Board  upon 
this  matter? — Yes,  I  had. 

By  the  Loed  Justice-Clerk — I  understand  the  arrangement 
proposed  was  to  give  you  relief  in  three  ways — (first)  in  regard 
to  the  interest  upon  your  bills,  (second)  in  regard  to  the  amount 
of  the  Bank's  conmiission,  and  (third)  a  new  advance  ? — That 
is  so. 

In  return  for  that  was  the  Bank  to  receive  any  security  or 
any  advantage? — The  object  was  to  make  it  possible  for  us 
to  go  on. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — At  this  time,  of  course,  we  could 
jiot  go  on  if  we  were  not  helped ;  but  the  load  was  almost 
imbearable. 

Did  you  explain  that  to  those  who  were  at  the  meeting? — 
It  was  well  known — quite  recognised. 

Do  you  remember  if  Mr.  Potter  was  present  at  the  meeting? 
— I  do  not  remember  the  details  of  that  meeting  at  all ;  I  cannot 
remember  them. 

Did  you  make  any  proposals  for  relieving  your  position;   or 

213 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

John  Fleming.  wLo  made  them? — I  had  some  time  previously  appealed  to 
Alexander  Stronach  to  reduce  the  interest  and  to  reduce  the 
commission,  but  it  was  in  the  form  of  a  suggestion  or  appeal^ 
a  considerable  time  previous  to  that. 

But  at  the  meeting  were  any  suggestions  made  to  you  as 
to  what  should  be  done? — I  don't  remember  that.  I  remember 
there  was  a  meeting,  but  I  don't  remember  the  details  of  it. 

But  referring-  to  your  letter,  of  which  I  read  you  the  first 
paragraph,  have  you  any  doubt  now  that  that  is  a  perfectly 
correct  statement  of  your  understanding  at  the  time  of  what 
had  been  agreed  to? — I  feel  quite  certain  that  that  is  a  correct 
statement.  [Shown  letters  Nos.  185  to  188  from  John  Fleming 
to  R.  S.  Stronach,  dated  3rd  March,  12th  April,  21st  April,  and 
24th  August,  1875,  the  latter  signed  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.] 

Taking'  the  four  letters  together,  they  embody  in  writing 
practically  what  came  to  be  agreed  to? — Yes,  they  did. 

As  regards  this  period,  did  you  ever  come  into  contact  with 
Mr,  James  Morton  in  any  of  the  discussions  with  the  Directors 
in  regard  to  this  matter? — I  don't  remember  James  Morton 
having  been  ever  present  with  any  Directors,  but  he  was  in 
the  habit  of  seeing  me  in  London. 

In  what  capacity  did  you  understand  he  came  to  you? — He- 
came  as  the  confidant  of  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach. 

Has  Mr.  Morton  not  been  present  along  with  you  and  Mr. 
Potter  when  your  affairs  were  discussed? — I  cannot  be  quite 
sure.  He  may  have  been,  but  I  don't  remember  any  particular 
occasion. 

Try  to  recollect  t — I  cannot  so  that  I  could  swear  to  it. 

But  was  he  a  medium  of  communication  between  you  and  the 
Bank  when  he  came  to  see  you  in  London? — ^Yes. 

He  conveyed  messag'es  from  you,  and  brought  messages  to 
you  ? — ^Yes. 

As  part  of  the  arrangement  for  relieving  your  position,  was 
Mr.  Morton  to  do  anything? — I  did  not  know  absolutely  that 
he  was  to  do  anything.  I  believed  that  he  jvas  to  provide  some- 
of  the  stock. 

Out  of  his  superfluity,  I  suppose? — That  was  what  I 
understood. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — You  believed  that — why? — It 
was  he  who  originally  suggested  the  arrangement  many  months 
previously  to  its  being  made,  and  he  spoke  to  it  as  a  means  of 
helping  us — ^encouraging  us  to  face  a  difficult  struggle. 

By  the  Solicitor-Generai. — You  mean  that  he  would  provide 
a  good  handsome  sum  to  help  you? — ^That  ho  would  provide  the 
stock  at  par. 

Why  was  he  to  provide  the  stock  at  par? — The  stock  was  sup- 
posed to  be  worth  a  great  deal  more  than  par,  if  not  immedi- 
ately,  at   all   events   prospectively.      It  was   yielding   a   return/ 
214 


Photo.] 


[./.   llorslmtfih. 


Mr.   J.    Guthrie   Smith, 
Counsel  for  Jolm  Innes  Wriglit. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

much  larger  than  the  interest  which  we  were  to  pay  for  the  John  Fleming, 
advance. 

You  understood  yourself  to  be  under  the  engagements  to  the 
Bank  contained  in  these  letters,  and  acted  upon  them? — 'We 
did. 

And  you  got  the  advantages  w'hich  you  were  to  get  in  con- 
sequence of  entering  into  the  engagement? — We  did. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Can  you  tell  me  the  amount  of 
the  indebtedness  of  your  firm  to  the  Bank  at  the  date  of  this 
arrangement? — About  £1,300,000.  I  think  the  amount  of 
credit  was  £562,000,  and  the  cash  advance  £773,000. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — In  August,  1875,  did  you  make  a 
representation  to  Mr.  Robert  Stronach  about  the  impossibility 
of  carrying  out  the  arrangement'/ — In  consequence  of  difficulties 
which  had  arisen  in  connection  with  Collie's  stopj^age,  I  foresaw 
that  we  should  be  unable  at  the  close  of  the  year  to  carry  out 
our  engagements. 

What  did  Mr.  Robert  Stronach  reply  to  you  about  that? — I 
don't  remember  the  exact  reply.  I  remember  being  asked  by 
Mr.  Robert  Stronach  to  come  to  Glasgow,  and  to  have  a  meeting 
with  the  Directors  in  the  month  of  July  last  year.  By  that 
time  the  amount  of  indebtedness  had  considerably  increased. 

How  did  you  come  to  be  able  to  carry  on  after  Collie's  failure 
tUl  the  meeting  of  July,  1878? — ^When  we  needed  help  we  got  it. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — From  the  Bank? — From  the 
Bank. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — And  in  consequence  your  indebted- 
ness was  always  increasing,  from  that  time  onwards,  down  to 
the  last? — It  was  so.  In  July,  1878,  I  was  asking  for  an  advance 
of  £25,000.  I  went  to  Glasgow,  and  met  Mr.  Robert  Stronach, 
Mr.  Potter,  and  Mr.  Stewart. 

Was  your  indebtedness  to  the  Bank  referred  to  at  that  meet^ 
ing — the  amount  of  it?^ — No. 

Was  it  spoken  of  as  being  very  large? — The  state  of  our 
accomit  as  being  very  unsatisfactory  was  spoken  of.  The  amount 
was  not  discussed. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — What  was  said  about  the  statei 
of  your  account? — It  was  alluded  to  as  being  very  unsatisfactory. 

Try  to  remember  what  was  said? — I  cannot  recall  the  exact 
expressions  used,  but  it  was  spoken  of  as  an  unsatisfactory 
account,  and  that  it  was  most  unsatisfactory  that  the  indebted- 
ness had  been  increasing  instead  of  diminishing ;  and  I  explained 
with  reference  to  that,  that  the  condition  of  trade  for  several 
years  past  had  been  deplorably  bad. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — Was  anything  said  about  adding 
to  the  indebtedness  by  giving  you  more  money? — ^Very  great 
reluctance  to  increase  the  debt  was  expressed. 

215 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

John  Fleming.      How  long  were  you  with  them? — Probably  three-quarters  of 
an  hour  or  half  an  hour;  certainly  within  an  hour. 

Did  you  get  the  money? — The  credit  I  asked  for  was  granted. 

Did  you  state  to  them  whether  you  could  go  on  without  the 
money? — I  said  I  could  not  go  on  without  the  money.  [Shown 
letters  185,  186,  187,  188.]  Those  are  the  letters  I'have  seen. 
[Shown  Nos.  189,  letter,  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  John  Fleming, 
R.  RTllwraith,  and  W.  Nicol,  to  R.  S.  Stronach  ;  190,  191a,  191b, 
three  letters,  John  Fleming  to  R.  S.  Stronach,  dated  27th 
August,  1875,  and  5th  May  and  26th  November,  1877;  285, 
letter,  John  Fleming  to  Lewis  Potter,  dated  6th  March,  1877  ;  and 
289,  letter,  John  Fleming  to  James  Morton,  dated  2nd  August, 
1876.]  I  identify  all  these.  [Shown  No.  397.]  That  is  a 
letter  from  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  signed  by  me,  dated  24:th 
January,  1876.  [Shown  No.  398,  letter  to  R.  S.  Stronach,  dated 
20th  December,  1875.]  That  is  a  letter  from  my  firm,  signed 
by  me.  [Shown  Nos.  402  to  421  inclusive,  letters,  Smith, 
Fleming  &  Co.  to  R.  S.  Stronach,  of  various  dates,  between  1st 
September,  1875,  and  4th  May,  1878.]  These  are  letters  from 
Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  all  sig-ned  by  me.  [Shown  No.  444.] 
That  is  a  letter  from  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  signed  by  me. 
[Shown  No.  191c.]  That  is  a  letter  from  Robert  Stronach  to 
myself. 

By  Mr.  Tratner — My  meeting  with  the  Directors  in  July, 
1878,  was  on  a  Tuesday;  I  think  it  was  on  the  29th,  but  at  all 
events  it  was  on  the  last  Tuesday  of  the  month.  I  had  never 
met  Mr.  Stewart  in  my  life  before  that  meeting.  He  was  not 
present  at  my  meeting  with  the  Directors  in  March,  1875. 
I  never  saw  him'  in  my  life  till  the  meeting  at  the  end  of  July, 
1878. 

At  the  meeting  in  July,  1878,  do  you  remember  referring  to 
some  property  of  yours  that  was  expected  to  be  very  productive 
and  profitable  ? — I  brought  down  some  specimens  of  gold  which 
had  been  brought  home  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  from 
Wynaad  by  an  engineer — an  expert — whom  we  had  sent  to 
India. 

Specimens  of  gold  found  on  a  property  belonging  to  you  or 
your  firm  in  India? — Yes. 

And  from  that  you  expected,  I  believe,  to  realise  considerable 
and  valuable  results? — ^What  I  said  was,  that  it  was  the  only 
ray  of  hope  in  our  affairs. 

But  it  was  at  that  time  a  very  brilliant  ray  in  your  mind? — 
Well,  this  much  had  occurred,  that  a  few  days  previously  a 
Californian  of  great  experience,  the  agent  of  Messrs.  Rothschild, 
had  seen  these  specimens,  and  had  heard  from  my  partner  the 
circumstances  under  which  they  had  been  collected ;  and  he 
said,  that  if  the  facts  were  as  stated  to  him,  there  was  probably 
something  very  great  in  it. 

2l6 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

And  you  communicated   these  facts  and  these  hopes  to  the  John  Fleming, 
meeting  that  was  held  in  July,  1878? — I  did. 

As  also,  I  think,  your  expectation  that  some  arrangement 
might  be  made  with  reference  to  it  between  you  and  the  Messrs. 
Eothsohild? — My  partner,  Mr.  M'llwraith,  had  been  in  com- 
munication with  the  Messrs.  Rothschild  concerning  these 
matters,  and  he  had  a  hope  that  they  might,  if  satisfied  of  the 
genuineness  of  the  matter,  render  assistance. 

And  you  communicated  that  to  the  meeting  in  July,  1878? — 
I  did. 

B}^  Mr.  AsHBR — I  saw  Mr.  Salmond  occasionally  in  London. 

Did  he  call  to  ask  how  business  was  getting  on  generally? — 
Yes. 

Not  as  an  emissary  of  the  Bank  with  reference  to  your 
account  ? — No ;  he  called  in  a  friendly  way,  and  made  inquiries 
concerning  the  account. 

Your  conversations  related  to  business  in  the  country  gener- 
ally, did  they  not? — The  conversation  generally  passed  into 
general  topics. 

Can  you  be  more  precise  in  regard  to  the  number  of  years 
that  have  elapsed  since  you  comnmnicated  with  Mr.  Salmond 
in  regard  to  your  bank  matters? — I  cannot  say  more  than  that 
several  years  have  elapsed. 

When  you  went  to  the  Bank  in  1870  your  indebtedness,  you 
have  said,  was  about  £150,000,  fully  covered  by  security? — 
Yes. 

So  that  the  reverses  which  came  upon  you  then  did  not  affect 
the   Bank? — That   is   so. 

For  what  purpose  did  you  go  to  the  Bank? — I  was  asked 
to  go  to  the  Bank  before  stopping. 

Who  asked  you? — My  brother  asked  me. 

He  was  a  Director  of  the  Bank  at  the  time? — Yes. 

That  is  Mr.  James  Nicol  Fleming? — Yes. 

Did  he  explain  to  you  why  he  wished  you  to  come  to  the 
Bank  before  stopping? — No;  he  said  before  coming  to  a  final 
decision  he  wished  me  to  come  to  Glasgow  and  see  the  Bunk 
Manager. 

What  did  you  understand  to  be  his  purpose  in  requesting 
you  to  do  that  before  stopping? — In  case  the  Bank  might  be 
willing  to  render  assistance. 

Did  you  go  with  the  view  of  getting  the  Bank  to  make 
arrangements  wliich  would  render  your  stoppage  unnecessary? 
— I  went  with  the  view  of  laying  my  matters  before  the  Bank, 
and  of  getting  assistance  if  they  were  willing  to  give  it. 

Did  you  think  that  if  you  got  assistance  your  matters  would 
right  themselves?- — I  believed  it  was  possible;  our  earnings 
•during  previous  years  had  been  large. 

217 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

ohn  Fleming.      The  sum  you  said  you  would  require  to  put  you  right  would 
be  about  £500,000?— About  that. 

You  were  engaged  in  business  to  a  very  large  extent,  I  believe? 
— Yes. 

What  was  the  largest  sum  which  your  firm  had  earned  as 
profit  in  your  various  businesses  in  any  one  year? — Our  profits 
during  1862  and  1863  were  very  large;  they  were  hundreds 
of  thousands  in  those  days ;  but  in  the  three  years  immediatoly 
preceding  1870  the  average  earnings  of  our  three  firms  in 
London,  Bombay,  and  Kurrachee  had  exceeded  £90,000  per 
annum. 

It  was  chiefly  a  commission  business? — Largely. 

And  these  facts,  I  jDresume,  would  be  explained  to  the  Bank? 
— ^Yes,  certainly. 

For  the  purpose  of  satisfying  them  that  they  would  be  safe 
to  make  advances  to  your  firm? — That  there  was  a  possibility 
of  redeeming  our  position. 

Your  commission  connection  at  that  time  was  still  intact? — 
Yes. 

So  that  if  you  could  tide  over  your  difliculty  you  had  no 
reason  to  doubt  that  a  very  valuable  commission  business  would 
remain  with  your  firms? — That  was  what  I  believed. 

And  your  brother,  I  jDresume — the  Director — ^was  fully  awar& 
of  these  circumstances? — Fully  aware. 

Was  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach  an  intimate  personal  friend  of 
yours? — Not  at  all;  not  beyond  business. 

At  no  time? — At  no  time. 

You   are  John   Fleming? — Yes. 

And  your  place  of  business  is  Leadenhall  Street,  London? 
—It  is. 

You  are  the  Mr.  Fleming,  I  suppose,  who  corresponded  on 
behalf  of  your  firm  with  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach  as  repre- 
senting the  Bank? — Yes. 

Were  you  in  the  habit  of  exchanging  letters  with  Mr. 
Alexander  Strouadh,  marked  private,  with  reference  to  the 
Bank?— Yes. 

To  your  knowledge  were  burdens  undertaken  by  Alexander 
Stronach  for  you  on  behalf  of  the  Bank  without  the  knowledge 
of  his  Directors? — I  was  not  aware  of  it,  excepting  thus  far, 
that  I  was  aware  from  his  correspondence  that  sometimes  he 
had  done  things  in  anticipation  of  obtaining  the  assent  of  the 
Directors. 

Did  you  not  know  that  the  fact  that  he  had  made  you 
advances  without  the  knowledge  of  his  Directors  was  pressing 
heavily  on  his  mind? — Previously  to  1875  some  of  the 
advances,  I  understood,  were  unknown  to  them. 

At  any  time  during  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach's  management 
of  the  Bank  did  you  not  know  that  it  was  so? — He  represented 

2l8 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

to   me  that  he  had   made  advances   without  the  knowledge   of  John  Fleming, 
the  Directors,  but  required  me  to  put  matters  into  such  a  form 
that  he  might  put  them  before  the  Directors. 

Did  you  not  know  that  the  fact  that  he  had  done  so  was 
pressing  heavily  on  his  mind? — Yes;  I  am  bound  to  say  that 
I  did. 

When  did  that  system  begin  which  caused  him  that  mental 
anxiety? — That  I  cannot  tell.  It  was  only  latterly  that  I  knew 
that  he  had  not  fully  disclosed  all  my  affairs  to  the  Bank. 

I  show  you  a  print  for  the  defenders.  Be  kind  enough  to  look 
at  the  first  letter  in  that  print,  dated  3rd  April,  1872,  addressed 
by  Alexander  Stronach  to  you,  and  marked  private:  — 

Private. 

3rd  April,  1872. 

My  Dear  Sir, — I  am  sorry  to  obsei-ve  by  your  letter  of  yesterday 
that  you  think  you  have  reason  to  complain  of  my  want  of  apprecia- 
tion of  your  position  generally,  and  that  if  I  had  more  sympathy 
with  you  under  your  burden  1  would  not  have  hesitated  in  comply- 
ing with  your  demands  in  the  present  case.  I  can  only  appeal  to 
the  past  as  counterbalancing  that  statement,  which,  although  you 
have  given  expression  to  it,  I  cannot  believe  that  you  seriously 
entertain  that  opinion.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  I  fear  that 
in  looking  so  earnestly  at  your  own  position  and  burdens  you  are  in 
some  danger  of  forgetting  mine.  My  position  is,  and  has  through- 
out been,  an  anomalous  one,  because,  as  you  are  awaie,  I  could 
not  share  the  burden  with  my  Directors,  and  it  has  pressed  upon 
me  accordingly  with  tremendous  severity,  without  exciting  much 
sympathy ;  at  least,  very  little  has  been  done  in  any  way  to  lighten 
my  burden.  I  have  borne  it,  however,  patiently,  and  continue  to 
do  so  uncomplainingly.  The  esteem  and  regard  I  have  for  your- 
self and  your  brothers  first  induced  me  to  undertake  it,  and  now 
advises  me  to  continue,  and  although  no  other  consideration  on 
earth  would  induce  me  to  bear  up  under  the  severity  of  the 
pressure. 

I  feel  it  is  not  quite  considerate  in  you  (however  lucrative  the 
result  may  appear  to  be  in  prospect)  to  press  on  me  so  heavy  an 
addition  to  existing  burdens,  and  on  so  very  sudden  a  call,  par- 
ticularly at  a  time  when  1  have  other  very  heavy  calls.  I  think 
you  must  yourself  admit  the  difficulty  of  my  position  in  the  matter, 
and  I  trust  that  in  any  similar  case  you  will  either  give  me  an 
opportunity  of  judging  whether  I  can  give  it  or  not,  or  present  the 
proposal  in  .such  a  shape  as  I  can  get  the  Board  to  share  the 
responsibility  of  a  transaction  of  such  magnitude,  however  safe  it 
may  be. 

I  have  renewed  the  anticipated  credits  p.  £30m,  and  send  them 
to-night,  and  shall  arrange  a  cash  advance  on  special  account  p. 
£34m  further,  for  which  please  send  me  a  cheque  to  be  paid  into 
the  first  trust  account.  I  note  that  the  latter  will  be  paid  next 
month.  I  am  sorry  the  drafts  didn't  mature  before  our  balance. 
— Yours  very  truly, 

Alexandkr  Stronach. 

John  Fleming,   Esq., 

71  Threadneedle  Street,  London. 

^Vhat   did   you   understand  Mr.    Stronach   to  refer   to  when   he 
mentioned  the  esteem  and  regard  for  you  and  your  brothers 

219 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

fohn  Fleming,  inducing  him  to  undertake  a  burden  which  no  other  considera- 
tion on  earth  would  induce  him  to  bear  up  under  the  pressure  of  ? 
— I  consider  that  in  writing  that  he  was  putting  his  own  view 
of  the  case  before  me,  because  it  was  at  his  instigation  that  I 
went  on.  In  the  month  of  September,  1870,  I  wished  to  stop, 
and  pressed  my  stoppage,  and  he  came  up  to  London  and 
reproached  me  for  wavering  in  my  intention  of  going  on. 

Did  you  repudiate  the  expression  of  esteem  and  regard  for 
you  and  your  brothers  which  he  there  indicated? — No,  I  did 
not. 

Did  you  reciprocate  it? — I  should  like  to  see  what  I  wrote 
before,  and  what  I  wrote  after,  before  I  answer  that  question. 

Have  you  any  reason  to  doubt  the  truth  of  that  statement, 
that  he  could  not  share  the  burden  with  his  Directors,  and  had 
to  bear  it  himself? — I  understood  that  his  Directors  did  know, 
to  a  large  extent,  what  was  going  on. 

Did  you  challenge  the  accuracy  of  his  statement? — That  I 
don"t  remember.     I  have  not  got  my  answer.     Is  it  here? 

Look  at  the  letter  printed  at  the  foot  of  page  31,  and  at  the 
top  of  page  32,  dated  30th  September,  1873,  and  addressed 
by  Alexander  Stronach  to  you  :  — 

My  Dear  Sir, — I  wrote  you  a  few  lines  yesterday,  enclosing  Mr. 
Aikman's  notes  and  memo.,  and  shall  be  glad  to  have  your  reply 
thereto  at  your  early  convenience.  Mr.  Paul,  I  presume,  will 
now  be  due,  when  the  financial  statements  will  also  be  got  ready. 
Yours  of  yesterday  I  received  this  morning,  and  telegraphed  in 
reply  that  as  this  was  your  mail  day  (which  I  suppose  you  had  for- 
gotten last  week  in  fixing  Tuesday)  to  postpone  our  meeting  till 
to-morrow  at  11-15,  and  which  I  hope  \^ill  be  suitable  for  you.  At 
same  time,  I  feel  that  my  time  here  is  gliding  past,  and  that 
we  have  made  little  or  no  progress  in  furtherance  of  the  main 
object  which  brought  and  keeps  me  here.  We  have  much  to  talk 
over  and  much  to  do  in  resolving  on  a  proper  basis  in  connection 
with  your  future  business  arrangements ;  and  I  feel,  as  I  daresay 
you  do  also,  that  we  are,  up  to  this  time,  very  much  where  we 
were  when  we  met  in  Glasgow  at  the  end  of  July  or  beginning  of 
August. 

I  feel  the  distance  between  us  is  too  great,  as  I  feared  it  would 
be ;  and  I  think  I  must  therefore  revert  to  my  former  proposal  to 
get  a  house  of  call  in  the  city  somewhere  convenient  and  accessible, 
where  we  could  meet  daily,  or  every  second  or  third  day,  as  our 
business  required,  until  the  whole  was  completed,  and  our  arrange- 
ments finally  matured.  I  had  letters  recently  from  Mr.  Potter  to 
inquire  what  progress  we  had  made,  and  I  feel  rather  ashamed 
to  answer  him. 

That  was  a  proposal  with  a  view  to  Mr.  Stronach  and  you 
meeting  daily  in  the  city  of  London,  to  confer  in  regard  to  your 
affairs ;  Mr.  Stronach  was  living  at  the  south  side  of  London 
at  that  time,  I  believe? — He  was  living  at  Norwood. 

And  it  had  reference  to  your  affairs? — It  was  with  reference 
to  our  affairs  that  he  wished  to  have  more  intercourse  with  me. 

220 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

He   wished   to  have   facilities   for   talking  daily  with  you   in  John  Fleming, 
regard  to  your  affairs  with  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank? — ^Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — That  is  to  say,  when  he  says, 
"  where  we  could  meet  daily,  as  our  business  requires,"  he 
meant  in  reference  to  the  affairs  of  your  firm? — Yes. 

By  Mr.  AsHER — At  page  148  there  is  a  letter  from  you 
addressed  to  Mr.  R.  S.  Stronach :  — 

Western  Club,  Glasgow, 

Thursday  Evening. 

My  Dear  Sir, — Just  a  line  to  tell  you  that  Salmond  got  hold  of 
me  here  and  asked  me  what  was  the  meaning  of  my  being  in  such 
close  consultation  with  Mr.  Potter  to-day,  and  I  thought  the  best 
thing  to  say  was  that  he  had  been  talking  of  one  of  his  sons  join- 
ing us  in  Bombay. 

He  rather  closely  questioned  me  on  the  subject,  but  I  told  him 
our  conversation  was  quite  general.  I  think  it  right  to  mention 
this  in  case  he  should  allude  to  the  matter  to  you. — Yours  very 
truly, 

John  Fleming. 

Why  did  you  think  it  right  to  mention  that  to  Mr.  Robert 
Stronach? — I  never  wrote  such  a  letter  to  Mr.  Robert  Stronach. 

The  principal  is  No.  296?  [Shown  No.  296.]— This  letter 
must  have  been  written  to  Alexander  Stronach,  not  to  Robert 
Stronach. 

Why  did  you  think  it  right  to  mention  the  matter  referred 
to  in  that  letter  to  Mr.  Stronach,  in  case  Mr.  Salmond  should 
allude  to  it  to  him? — I  wished  to  let  him  know  that  Mr. 
Salmond  had  questioned  me  about  the  matter. 

"Why  did  you  wish  to  let  him  know  that? — I  conceived  that 
Mr.  Salmond  was  not  fully  informed  about  the  matters  that 
we  were  discussing — that  is,  the  full  state  of  our  account. 

And  it  was  to  put  Alexander  Stronach  on  his  guard  in  case 
Mr.  Salmond  spoke  to  him  on  that  subject;  is  that  not  so? — 
Yes;  that  I  had  been  discussing  with  Mr.  Potter  and  Mr. 
Alexander  Stronach  the  question  of  the  reconstruction  of  our 
firm  with  reference  to  the  state  of  our  accounts. 

Did  you  intend  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach  to  withhold  from 
Mr.  Salmond  knowledge  as  to  the  state  of  your  account  ? — No ; 
I  had  no  desire  that  he  should  withhold  it. 

Why  put  him  on  his  guard? — Simply  that  he  might  know 
that  Salmond  had  been  inquiring. 

And  might  judge  of  the  expediency  of  telling  him  or  not? — 
Truly  so. 

Look  at  the  letter  at  foot  of  mge  2.'5  of  the  print.  There 
is  a  letter  there  dated  14th  June,^  1873,  addressed  by  you  to 
Alexander  Stronach? — There  is  only  a  little  fragment  of  the 
letter  here  printed. 

The  excerpt  is  the  postscript.  The  letter  is  dated  14th  June, 
1873;    the   postscript   is — "I   trust   this  will   find   you   better. 

221 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

John  Fleming.  I  fear,  however,  it  is  ease  of  mind  you  need,  and  it  is  a  terrible 
thought  that  it  is  we  who  keep  you  on  the  rack  "  t — No  doubt 
I  had  that  feeling,  but  I  should  prefer  that  the  whole  letter 
was  read.  The  whole  letter  will  show  that  there  was  distress 
of  mind  on  both  sides. 

Do  you  wish  it  read? — I  prefer  that  you  should  read  the 
whole  letter,  though  I  don't  know  that  it  is  material. 

Witness   read  the  letter  as  follows  :  — 

Hill  Hall,  Epping, 

14th  June,  1873. 

My  Dear  Sir, — I  have  your  letters  of  Thursday  and  yesterday. 
I  attempted  to  take  up  your  memo,  to-day,  but  a  bursting  head 
compelled  me  to  give  it  up.  I  came  away  at  two  o'clock.  I 
hope  to-morrow's  quiet  will  enable  me  to  take  it  up  and  go  through 
with  it  on  Monday.  With  reference  to  your  Thursday's  note,  I 
welcome  the  idea  of  any  arrangement  by  which  you  can  become 
more  thoroughly  and  continuously  informed  as  to  our  affairs. 
Indeed,  it  was  in  my  mind  to  propose  something  of  the  kind,  but 
I  could  not  see  a  way  through  the  difficulty  of  having  some  one 
in  the  office  on  behalf  of  the  Bank  without  exposing  our  situation 
and  causing  great  danger.  I  am  very  grieved  to  hear  of  your 
state,  but  quite  understand  it.  If  you  come  to  the  south  near 
London,  there  should  be  no  great  difficulty  in  frequently  seeing 
you  at  your  house  without  exciting  comment,  and  it  would  not 
be  absolutely  necesisary  to  have  Bell  or  any  other  intermediate.  I 
say  this  not  objecting  to  Bell,  but  am  doubting  whether  James 
can  dispense  with  him  in  Glasgow,  and  whether  it  is  quite  polite, 
at  the  moment  at  least,  for  James  to  open  a  separate  establishment 
here.  Findlay  writes  that  of  the  £28,000  said  by  Meyer  to  be  at 
credit  of  Todd,  Findlay  &  Co.,  in  Glasgow,  £13,000  is  credited 
merely  by  a  cross  entry,  and  of  the  balance,  £9500  has  been  re- 
turned in  various  ways,  and  £5000  paid  to  us. 

Will  you  have  the  kindness  to  return  me  the  accounts  I  sent  you 
from  Mair  to  see  how  they  bear  out  this? 

I  quite  agree  with  you  that  the  Glasgow  house  of  Findlay's 
should  be  closed.  The  explanations  I  get  seem  always  straight, 
but  I  don't  get  the  money,  which  I  know  has  been  made. 

I  don't  quite  understand  the  suggestion  that  Mair  should  assume 
so  much  of  the  burden.  When  he  joined  Todd,  Findlay  &  Co., 
it  was  under  an  express  agreement,  which  we  guaranteed,  that  he 
should  be  kept  clear  of  all  liability  in  respect  of  the  debts  of  the 
concern  before  he  joined. 

The  letter  you  say  is  so  clear,  showing  I  was  all  right  again,  was 
written  with  my  head  feeling  as  if  it  were  bursting.  It  is  this 
sort  of  feeling  that  comes  on  one  just  now  when  I  begin  to  think 
earnestly  about  anything,  and  it  paralyses  me.  I  am  quite  well 
in  body,  and  after  my  examination  before  the  committee,  which  I 
believe  is  to  take  place  on  Tuesday,  I  shall  have  but  the  one 
matter  to  attend  to,  and  hope  I  shall  be  out  of  it. — Yours  very 
truly, 

John  Fleming. 

Alex.  Stronach,  Esq. 

Part  of  the  body  of  that  letter  refers  to  a  request  by  Mr. 
Stronach  1 — Yes. 

The  last  paragraph  on  page  20  of  the  print  for  the  defence 

222 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

forms  part  of  the  letter  of  12tli  June,  1873,  that  Mr.  Alexander  John  Fleming. 
Stronach    wrote    you,    and    which    is    acknowledged    in    the 
beginning  of  the  letter  you  have  just  read? — ^Yes. 

I  believe  this  is  the  statement  in  Mr.  Si:ronach's  letter  to 
which  you  refer  in  your  reply :  — 

My  doctor  seems  determined  that  I  shall  go  away  for  some  time, 
and  he  says  that  the  neighbourhood  of  London  would  do  as  well 
as  anywhere  else.  I  am  fully  alive  to  the  non-desirability  of 
coming  to  your  office  at  all  just  now.  But  it  has  occurred  to  me 
that  as  James  has  been  desiring  to  open  a  London  office,  he  could 
transfer  Bell  up  to  an  office  near,  and  then  our  meetings  theie 
or  at  my  house  would  not  be  questioned,  seeing  the  connection  that 
subsists  between.  Besides,  I  am  desirous  to  have  his  own  matters 
with  us  also  put  into  better  shape,  and  which,  from  his  continued 
absence  in  Manchester,  I  cannot  get  done  satisfactorily.  This 
much,  however,  between  ourselves. 

Now,  returning  to  the  P.S.,  you  were  aware  that  at  that  time 
Mr.  Stronach,  to  use  your  own  words,  was  "  kept  on  the  rack  " 
through  the  state  of  your  affairs? — No  doubt  of  it. 

And  didn't  you  know  that  his  mental  anxiety  on  the  subject 
was  aggravated  then  bv  the  knowledge  that  his  Directors  did 
not  know  what  had  been  done? — I  was  not  aware  that  his 
Directors — at  all  events,  T  believe  that  some  of  his  Directors 
were  aware  of  the  state  of  matters.  I  was  not  aware  that  they 
were  wholly  ignorant. 

At  that  time? — At  that  time. 

Just  reflect  for  one  moment.  You  were  aware  that  Mr. 
Alexander  Stronach  was  merely  Manager? — I  was  aware  of 
that. 

If  he  had  been  acting  under  the  orders  of  his  Directors  in 
what  had  happened,  why  should  he  be  on  the  rack? — Because 
our  account  was  a  very  heavy  account,  and  an  increasing 
account. 

If  he  had  simply  obeyed  the  orders  of  his  Directors  why 
should  that  put  him  on  the  rack? — I  should  fancy  that  he 
took  such  an  interest  in  the  affairs  of  the  Bank  that  he  should 
be  distressed  about  our  account,  a  large  account  going  bad. 

If  he  had  done  it  without  the  sanction  of  his  Directors  you 
have  no  doubt,  I  suppose,  that  he  would  be  on  the  rack? — If 
he  had  done  it  without  the  sanction  of  the  Directors  I  have  no 
doubt  that  would  aggravate  his  distress  of  mind. 

I  think,  if  you  will  look  at  the  immediately  succeeding  letter 
to  which  this  is  a  reply,  you  will  find  that  he  had  been  acting 
without  the  sanction  of  his  Directors.  In  a  letter  to  you  of 
13th  June,  1873,  page  23  of  the  same  print,  one  of  the  two 
acknowledged  by  you  in  the  one  from  which  the  excerpt  is 
made,  he  says  in  the  third  last  paragraph — "  So  soon  as  the 
terms  of  our  arrangements  are  adjusted,  and  the  whole  scheme 
and  securities  are  ready,  I  am  desirous  to  place  it  before  the 

223 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

John  Fleming.  Board,  with  the  view  of  getting  their  sanction  to  it,  and  my  own, 
exoneration  and  relief  accordingly."  You  must  have  known, 
therefore,  when  you  wrote  the  excerpt  of  14th  June  that  your 
affairs  had  not  been  before  the  Directors? — That  our  com- 
plete affairs  had  not  been  put  before  the  Board — that  I  under- 
stood; but  that  they  were  j^artially  before  the  Board,  I  believe. 

When  you  made  the  arrangement  of  1875  with  the  Bank  did 
you  expect  to  be  able  to  carry  it  out? — At  the  time  I  made  it? 

Yes?— Yes. 

And  did  you  think  that  through  the  means  of  that  arrange- 
ment you  would  be  able  to  liquidate  your  debt  to  the  Bank? — 
I  stated  exactly  what  I  expected  to  be  able  to  do  in  my  letter. 

Did  you  state  that  if  the  Bank  would  assent  to  that  arrange- 
ment you  had  no  doubt  you  would  be  able  to  liquidate  your 
debt  to  them? — I  stated  in  that  letter  that  I  expected  that  in 
the  course  of  fourteen  years  I  should  be  able  to  pay  off  half  a 
million  out  of  our  indebtedness  of  over  £1,300,000. 

I  think  one  of  the  conditions  of  the  agreement  was  that 
you  should  confine  yourself  to  the  extremely  lucrative  commis- 
sion business  which  your  firms  had,  and  not  enter  on  speculation 
at  all?— Yes. 

The  arrangement  was  made  in  April,  1875? — Yes. 

Would  you  look  at  the  letter  on  page  85  of  the  same  print; 
that  is  a  letter  from  you  on  24th  July,  1875,  to  Mr.  Robert 
Stronach,  and  I  ask  your  attention  to  a  portion  of  it,  com- 
mencing at  the  third  paragraph  on  that  page.  The  arrange- 
ment there  referred  to  is  the  arrangement  of  April  preceding? 
— Yes. 

You   there  say — 

I  feel  very  confident  that  we  can  work  the  arrangement  through. 
The  experience  of  the  past  year's  careful  non-speculative  business 
shows  me  that  we  can  depend  upon  an  income  which  will  enable  us 
to  carry  through  the  arrangement  with  the  Bank,  provided  we  are 
not  liampered  with  embarrassments  arising  out  of  old  financial 
entanglements. 

I  am  anxious  to  start  clear,  and  shrink  from  the  idea  of  raising 
any  part  of  the  money  required  for  the  first  payment  to  the  Bank 
by  floating  paper. 

The  only  modification  I  see  in  the  arrangement  is  that  we  be 
permitted  to  delay  the  first  payment  in  reduction  of  the  debt  to 
the  Bank  until  June,  1876. 

Although  Morton  has  advised  me  not  to  write,  I  think  it  very 
much  better  that  I  should  tell  you  the  truth  as  it  appears  to  me, 
and  I  ask  your  kind  advice. 

The  object  of  the  arrangement  is  to  repay  the  debt  to  the  Bank^ 
and  if  a  scrambling  effort  to  keep  to  the  letter  of  the  engagement 
as  present  made  is  calculated  to  impair  our  credit,  and  so  diminish 
our  ability  to  earn  money  for  future  payments,  I  submit  it  will  be 
much  better  to  postpone  our  first  payments  for  a  few  months. 

I  will  be  guided  by  your  kind  advice. 

The  arrangement  is  a  most  favourable  one  for  us,  and  I  have  no 
fear  about  being  able  to  carry  through  our  part  of  it,  provided  we 
get  a  fair  start. 
224 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Did   that    letter    correctly   express   your  state   of   mind    at   the  John  Fleming. 
time  with  regard  to  the  arrangement  with  the  Bank? — It  did. 
And  have  you  any  doubt  that  you  set  out  the  considerations 
there  stated  to  the  Bank  as  the  inducement  to  them  to  enter 
into   that  arrangement? — Which  letter  do  you  mean? 

The  considerations  referred  to  in  that  letter? — Do  you  mean 
in  the  letter  you  have  '  read  1 

Yes;  that  is  written  after  the  arrangement  was  made,  you 
will  observe? — The  arrangemeoit  had  not  been  finally  concluded 
until  24th  August. 

I  observe  that  that  letter  is  addressed  to  Mr.  Stronach,  and 
is  marked  "  confidential  "  ? — Yes. 

Amongst  the  securities  made  over  to  the  Bank,  I  think  there 
were  shares  in  the  Canterbury  and  Otago  Company.  Is  that 
so? — There  were  some  shares  belonging  to  myself  which  I  made 
over  to  the  Bank. 

The  written  arrangement  between  you  and  the  Bank  contains 

the    following    article ? — Is   it    the   arrangement    as    finally 

understood,  and  which  is  dated  24th  August,   1875? 

Yes.  In  that  agreement  there  is  an  article  in  the  following 
terms :  — "  We  append  a  statement  D  showing  the  charges  on 
our  debts  and  our  probable  income  with  its  sources,  by  which 
it  appears  that  we  have  at  present  the  prospect  of  an  annual 
surplus  of  about  £25,000  applicable  to  the  reduction  of  our 
debts."  That  statement  was  true? — That  statement  was  true. 
In  1875  there  was  £100,000  advanced  as  part  of  the  arrange- 
ment. Was  that  advance  s:iven  against  a  security? — Which 
£100,000  is  that? 

Part  of  the  agreement  of  1875?— If  you  refer  to  the  £100,000 
advanced  upon  the  security  of  Canterbury  stock  we  were  debited 
with  £100,000  by  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  in  account  with 
the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  for  the  acquisition  of  a  corresponding 
amount  of  Canterbury  stock. 

That  was  to  be  ajiplied  in  the  acquisition  of  that  stock? — 
Yes. 

And  at  that  time  was  that  stock  regarded  as  a  highly  lucrative 
investment? — It  was  not  paying  well  at  the  time,  but  prospec- 
tively it  would  be  so. 

That  is  what  I  mean— it  was  an  investment  which  prospec- 
tively would  become  highly   remunerative? — Yes. 

And  I  suppose  you  explained  that  at  the  time  when  the 
advance  was  giveai? — The  proposal  came  from  the  other  side, 
not  from  me. 

As  an  additional  security  to  the  Bank? — As  an  additional 
security  to  the  Bank  to  help  my  account. 

In  short,  it  was  regarded  as  an  increase  of  the  Bank  security 
to  have  £100,000  of  that  stock  bought  by  you  as  in  lieu  of 
£100,000  of  your  account? — Yes;  and  it  was  also  expected  that 

r  225 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

John  Fleming,  it  would  produce   an   income  larger  than   the   interest  charged 
against  me  for  advance. 

And  in  that  way  it  would  lighten  the  burden  of  the  accruing 
interest  on  your  accounts? — Yes. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — You  told  us  there  had  been  a  proposal 
for  the  reconstruction  of  your  firm ;  was  that  about  the  end  of 
1874  or  early  in  1875? — I  think  it  was  in  the  autumn  of  1874. 

Was  the  idea  at  that  time  to  get  in  a  young  partner  possessed 
of  money? — The  idea  was  to  get  one  or  more  partners  in  with 
money. 

And  was  it  proposed  that  Mr.  John  Potter,  the  son  of  Mr. 
Lewis  Potter,  should  be  assumed  as  such  a  partner? — It  was 
so  suggested. 

As  a  partner  possessed  of  money? — Yes. 

Did  you  think,  from  the  state  of  your  business  at  that  time, 
that  if  you  got  one  or  more  partners  possessed  of  money  you 
would  be  able  to  conduct  the  business  to  advantage  and  with 
success? — I  was  of  opinion  that  if  we  could  get  one  or  more 
partners  possessed  of  money  introduced  into  our  business,  and 
that  our  business  should  at  the  same  time  be  purged  of  all 
finance,  we  had  a  prospect  of  doing  well ;  Ijut  it  was  an  essential 
part  of  the  thing  that  there  should  be  a  purging  of  finance. 

And  I  suppose  you  were  ready  to  purge  it  of  finance  if  you 
could  get  in  a  moneyed  partner? — No;  I  could  not  get  a 
moneyed  partner  in  without  getting  it  first  purged  of  finance. 

But  you  wished  first  to  purge  it  of  finance,  and  then  to 
get  a  moneyed  partner  in,  and  you  believed  all  would  be  well? 
— I  believed  so. 

Did  you  at  that  time  see  the  elements  of  a  good  London 
business   in   your   transactions? — Yes. 

And  had  you  particularly  in  view  the  advantage  it  would 
be  to  that  London  business  of  which  you  saw  the  good  elements 
if  you  got  a  moneyed  partner? — Yes. 

And  was  it  with  reference  to  that  proposal  that  you  Avere 
talking  to  Mr.  Lewis  Potter? — It  was. 

I  suppose  that  if  his  son  was  to  come  in  with  money,  that 
money  must  have  been  got  from  Mr.  Potter,  his  father? — I 
understood  so. 

That  was   the  subject  of  your   conversation  ? — That  was  so. 

And  that  was,  of  course,  a  matter  which  nobody  else  had 
anything  to  do  with? — No. 

By  Mr.  Mackintosh — Do  you  know  Mr.  Taylor? — I  have 
never  seen  Mr.  Taylor  to  my  knowledge  before  to-day. 

Had  you  any  communication  with  him,  directly  or  indirectly, 
with  regard  to  your  affairs? — Never. 

Or  the  affairs  of  the  Bank? — Never. 

By  Mr.  Robektson — Looking  back  over  the  negotiations  you 
had  with  the  Bank  with  regard  to  your  affairs,  did  you  ever 
meet  Mr.  Henry  Inglis  on  Bank  business? — Never. 
226 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

By  the  Dean  of  Faculty — My  brother,  James  Nicol  Fleming,  John  Fleming. 
left  the  firm  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  in  1862. 

You  have  been  asked  how  much  your  firm  made  in  the  year 
1870  of  income,  and  you  have  told  us  £90,000  a  year? — Not 
in  1870.  I  said  the  average  income  for  the  three  years  pre- 
ceding 1870  was  over  £90,000.     It  was  very  nearly  £9-3,000. 

And  in  1875,  the  year  preceding  the  arrangement  that  you 
came  to  with  the  Bank,  how  much  wore  you  making  in  your 
London  house  and  in  your  foreign  houses? — I  cannot  say.  In 
the  year  closing  in  1875  we  earned  £28,000  of  commission  in 
London. 

Of  commissions  in  your  London  house  alone? — Yes,  alone. 

And  the  foreign  houses  were  doing  well  also? — Yes. 

I  suppose  your  house.  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  had  the  best 
commission  agency  business  in  London? — Oh,  no,  I  don't  say 
that. 

But,  at  all  events,  a  most  excellent  commission  agency 
business? — We  had  a  good  business. 

After  Alexander  Stronach  ceased  to  be  Manager,  and  the 
office  was  taken  up  by  Robert,  did  you  find  him  more  strict 
to  deal  with  than  his  brother  had  been? — Yes. 

You  did  not  get  advances  so  easily? — No. 

Would  you  look  at  page  60  of  the  print  for  the  defence,  and 
read  the  letter  addressed  by  Robert  Stronach  to  you,  dated 
22nd  January,  1875? — [Witness  reads  the  following]:  — 

Private. 

22nd  January,  1875. 

Dear  Sir, — In  answer  to  your  private  note  of  yesterday,  and 
accompanying  official,  applying  for  an  extension  of  part  of  the 
Bombay  Saw  Mill  Company's  credit,  31/38,  for  £30,000  to  the 
extent  of  one-third,  under  the  same  terms  and  conditions  as  before, 
I  regret  that  this  application  did  not  reach  me  in  time  for  con- 
sideration at  yesterday's  Board  meeting ;  and  as  I  cannot,  on  my 
own  individual  responsibility,  grant  the  extension  your  friends  ask, 
it  will,  I  fear,  require  to  remain  over  for  another  week. 

In  the  meantime,  please  let  mc  know  if  you  have  any  advice  that 
this  is  to  be  done.  It  will  be  well  for  you  to  understand  that  all 
matters  of  this  description  must  go  befoi'e  the  Board  in  future. — 
Yours  faithfully, 

R.  S.  Stronach, 
Assistant  Manager. 

John  Fleming,  Esq. 

You  see  there  that  Robert  Stronach  says  he  won't  do  any- 
thing upon  his  own  responsibility? — Yes. 

And  that  all  this  must  go  before  tlie  Board  ?— Yes. 

In  all  your  dealings  with  him,  did  you  ever  find  that  he  made 
any  advance  upon  his  own  responsibility? — I  am  not  aware 
that  he  ever  did. 

You  have  told  us  the  amount  of  the  indebtedness  of  your 
firm   at   the   stoppage    of    the   Bank,    and    the   amount   of   the 

227 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

John  Fleming,  indebtedness  at  the  date  of  the  arrangement  in  August,  1875, 
there  being  an  increase  between  the  two  periods,  between  187& 
and  1878.  Was  a  portion  of  that  increase  due  to  the  accumvila- 
tion  of  interest,  and  to  the  adding  up  of  the  payments  that 
you  ought  to  have  made,  but  did  not  make,  in  the  interim 
upon  the  old  debt? — To  the  accumulation  of  interest,  and  also 
to  the  addition  of  .£100,000  advanced  upon  Otago  stock. 

Just  so  ;  but  you  have  explained  to  us  in  regard  to  that 
£100,000  that  the  security  was  given  at  the  time  in  August, 
1875,  and  was  then  looked  upon  as  perfectly  sufficient  to  meet 
it?— Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Juf^TiCE-CLERK — You  have  not  quite  answered  the 
question  whether  the  additional  amount  between  1875  and  1878 
was  caused  mainly  or  larg'ely  or  considerably  by  the  accumula- 
tion of  interest,  and  the  payments  which  you  were  bound  to 
make  under  the  arrangement  on  the  old  debt? — The  payments 
that  I  was  bound  to  make  and  did  not  make,  would  not  add 
to  my  debt,  but  the  accumulation  of  interest  added  to  it,  and 
there  was  also  this  £100,000  advanced,  and  there  were  also 
additional  amounts  which  we  had  to  receive  to  help  us  along. 

Wliat  the  Dean  of  Faculty  wishes  you  to  tell  him,  I  suppose, 
is  how  much  was  due  to  the  accumulation  of  interest  and  the 
£100,000 — what  proportion  of  the  difference? — I  cannot  tell. 

By  the  Dean  of  Faculty — But  it  was  a  large  sum  ? — Yes  ;  a 
sum  probably  of  £100,000. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — That  is  to  say,  about  £200,000 
out  of  six? — Out  of  five. 

By  the  Dean  op  Faculty — In  the  letter  which  Mr.  Asher  read, 
of  24th  July,  1875,  page  85  of  the  same  print,  third  paragraph 
from  the  foot,  you  begin  thus — "  The  object  of  the  arrangement 
is  to  repay  the  debt  to  the  Bank."  That  was  the  arrangement 
at  that  time? — 'Yes. 

And  that  was  to  be  done  by  paying  £25,000  a  year? — Yes. 

Had  you  any  doubt  at  that  time,  looking  to  your  business, 
that  you  would  have  a  surplus  available  for  that  purpose  to 
that  amount? — I   believed  that  we  should  have. 

You  did  get  advances  from  the  Bank  subsequent  to  that 
period  ? — ^Yes. 

Turn  to  page  103  of  the  same  print;  there  is  a  letter  there, 
dated  1th  May,  1876,  from  your  firm  to  Mr.  Stronach,  in  the 
following  tenns :  — 

With  reference  to  credit  No.  37/25  for  £20,000  granted  in  favour 
of  Messrs.  Todd,  Findlay  &  Co.  under  our  application  of  1st  Sep- 
tember. 1875,  and  of  which  £10,000  only  is  now  current,  we  would 
feel  obliged  hy  your  accepting  the  enclosed  drafts  for  £5000  under 
same  credit :  and  as  security  for  the  same  we  engage  to  hold  to 
vour  order  the  proceeds  of  133  tons  cutch,  p.  "  Mandalay,"  value 
£2600:  255  b.  hides,  do.  £3200;  and  to  keep  you  free  from  cash, 
advance  in  respect  of  such  advance. 

228 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Tou  got  that  advance,  and  you  gave  the  security  of  the  produce  jphn  Fleming. 
upon  it? — Yes. 

Turn  next  to  page  107  of  the  same  print ;  there  is  an  excerpt 
there  from  a  letter  by  you  to  Mr.  Eobert  Stronach,  dated  8th 
August,  1876,  in  the  following  terms  :  — 

I  can  quite  understand  the  disappointment  felt  at  the  absence  ot 
progress  in  our  affairs  ;  but  if  the  very  general  and  extreme  badness 
of  trade  be  considered,  and  the  special  difficulties  we  have  had  to 
contend  with,  through  Collie's  stoppage,  and  the  subsequent  de- 
rangement of  credit,  I  do  not  think  there  is  any  reason  to  be  dis- 
sati.:fied  with  our  position  as  compared  with  what  it  was  twelve 
months  ago,  nor  to  be  discouraged  as  to  the  future. 

You  entertained  these  hopes  at  that  time? — I  did. 

You  did  lose  something  by  Collie's  stoppage? — ^Yes. 

But  still  trad©  looked  well  for  you  at  that  timel^ — I  hoped 
there  might  be  a  i-evival  of  trade. 

Look  at  page  112  of  the  same  print;  you  got  another  advance 
from  the  Bank  under  the  following  letter  of  l7th  October,  1876, 
from  your  firm  to  Mr.  Robert  Stronach  :  — 

We  beg  to  apply  for  a  credit  to  be  operated  under  by  Messrs.  W. 
Nicol  &  Co.  or  Messrs.  Todd,  Findlay  &  Co.,  at  six  months'  sight, 
to  extent  of  £25,000;  and  as  security  for  same  we  engage  to  hold 
at  your  order  the  following  shipments,  the  proceeds  of  which  to  be 
applied  to  the  retirement  of  your  acceptances :- 


Balance  of  teak  shipments  to  Mauritius, 

-      £5400 

Do.         rice  p.   "  Cambay," 

2070 

Do.          do.   p.   "  Harriet   M'Gilvray," 

1000 

Do.          do.  p.   "  Superbe  Richesse," 

1400 

Do.          do.  p.  "Rubino," 

1200 

Do.          do.   p.   "  Caterine  Doge," 

1100 

11,870  B      do.  p.   "  Rangoon," 

5500 

1145  tons     do.  p.   "  Annati," 

5800 

NK/10,   1  box  pearls,       -         -         -         . 

2200 

£25,670 
We  further  engage  to  keep  you  free  from  cash  advance  in  respect 
of  such  credit. 

You  got  that  advance  and  you  gave  the  security? — We  did. 

Let  VIS  pass  on  to  page  125  of  the  same  print.  You  have 
another  letter  there  of  the  same  kind,  dated  10th  April, 
1875:  — 

Dear  Sir, — We  beg  to  apply  for  a  credit  in  favour  of  Messrs.  W. 
Nicol  &  Co.,  Bombay,  at  6  m/st.,  to  extent  of  £15,000,  and  as 
security  for  the  same  we  engage  to  hold  on  your  account  the 
proceeds  of — 

And  then  you  give  the  proceeds  of  eight  different  ships  to  that 
extent  i — Yes. 

Then  on  page  126,  under  date  5th  May,  1877,  you  write — 

I  see  no  reason  to  modify  the  views  I  personally  expressed  to 
you  ;  indeed,  later  advices  confirming  the  expectation  of  short  ship- 
ments during  the  next  six  weeks  from  India  strengthen  my  belief 
in  the  certainty  of  a  rise  in  the  value  of  cotton. 

229 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

John  Fleming,  You  did  entertain  that  belief  and  those  hopes  1 — ^Yes. 

Every  day  the  situation  is  getting  stronger.  The  stock  from 
this  time  onward  will  be  daily  lightened,  and  as  these  speculative 
transactions  are  settled,  the  cotton  passes  into  strong  hands. 

I  may  mention  also  that  I  know  that  several  of  the  large  specu- 
lators who  last  autumn  were  buyers,  but  turned  round  in  January 
and  became  sellers,  and  have  continued  so  until  lately,  are  now  on 
the  buying  tack   again. 

So    that    at   that    time    trade   was    hopeful    and   good? — In    the 
matter  of  cotton  there  was  an  expectation  that  there  would  be 
a  rise  in  the  price  of  cotton. 
Now,  look  at  page  127 — 

We  beg  leave  to  apply  for  a  credit  in  favour  of  Messrs.  W.  Nicol 
&  Co.  to  extent  of  £15,000  sterling,  to  be  drawn  under  at 
sis  months'  sight,  and  in  renewal  of  credit  No.  38/5  of  a  similar 
amount  now  current ;  and  we  engage  to  put  you  in  funds  to  retire 
the  same  at  maturity. 

That  was  a  renewal  of  an  old  debt — it  was  not  a  new  ti'ans- 
action  ? — No  ;  that  was  not. 
Look  at  page  131 — 

Dear  Sir, — We  beg  to  apply  for  a  credit  in  favour  of  Messrs.  W. 
Nicol  &  Co.,  Bombay,  to  extent  of  £8500  in  renewal  of  No. 
36/35  for  a  similar  amount  now  current,  and  on  the  security  of  50 
shares  in  the  Bombay  Saw  Mills  Company,  Ltd.,  standing  in  the 
name  of  John  Hunter,  Esq.,  and  50  shares  in  the  same  company 
registered  in  the  name  of  James  Morton,  Esq. 

We  engage  to  keep  you  free  from  cash  advance  in  respect  of  all 
drafts  accepted  under  such  credit. — We  are,  dear  sir,  yours  faith- 
fully, 

Smith,  Fleming  &  Co. 

You  gave  these  securities  1 — They  held  these  securities ;  that 
was  a  renewal  of  an  old  transaction. 

And  you  got  a  renewal  of  it,  and  declared  that  the  old 
securities  should  be  applied  to  it? — ^Yes. 

Am  I  right  in  saying  that  in  regard  to  all  advances  that  were 
made  upon  new  transactions  subsequent  to  the  arrangement  of 
August,  1875,  you  gave  to  the  Bank  securities  of  one  kind 
or  of  another,  generally  produce  and  shipments  then  on  their 
way? — They  were  not  all  secured. 

Was  the  greater  part  of  them  secured  in  that  way? — Yes. 

Look  at  page  132,  letter  of  27th  September,  1876,  from 
Stronach  to  you — 

While  it  is  very  gratifying  to  learn  that  you  have  been  arranging 
most  desirable  connections,  which  you  anticipate  will  add  consider- 
ably to  your  emoluments  in  the  future,  it  is  to  be  regretted  that 
you  have  been  unable  in  some  measure  to  realise  the  expectations 
of  the  spring,  and  make  a  tangible  reduction  of  your  debt  to  the 
Bank.  The  Directors  are  of  opinion  that  there  is  still  a  con- 
siderable saving  might  be  effected  in  the  expenditure  of  the  several 

230 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

drafts  of  your  business  at  home  and  abroad.     Please  look  into  this,  John  Flemingt 
and  let  me  have  your  report  soon.     I  need  not  point   out  to  you 
that  even  a  saving  of  £5000  in  this  way  would  cover,  at  the  reduced 
rate  of  interest  charged,  about  £150m. 

You  had  been  arranging  new  connections  ? — Yes  :   in  Ceylon. 

Opening  up  a  new  trade? — At  least  adding  to  an  existing 
trade. 

Wherebj^  you  would  get  additional  commissions  to  the  £90,000 
you  had  already  got? — ^Yes. 

The  Bank  held  from  your  firm  as  security  property  at  Ran- 
goon?— Todd,  Findlay  &  Co.  undertook  to  hold  certain  property 
for  the  Bank  at  Rangoon. 

AVhat  were  those  properties  valued  at  at  the  time  when  an 
advance  was  made  as  ag'ainst  them? — I  don't  remember  what 
figures  wei'e  put  down  ;  but  roughly,  I  believe,  about  £90,000. 
A  ])ortion  of  those  properties,  which  stood  in  the  books  of 
Todd,  Findlay  &  Co.  at  102,000  rupees,  subject  to  a  mortgage 
of  £5000,  was  sold  last  week  for  250,000  rupees  ;  and  if  you 
deduct  the  mortgage,  which  is  equal  to  about  65,000  rupees, 
that  leaves  a  surplus  of  90,000  rupees  over  the  valuation  in 
the  books. 

By  the  Lord  Ju.'«tice-Clbrk — At  the  present  rate  of  exchange 
that  is  not  so  much  as  £9000,  but  taking  the  rupee  at  2s.  it 
is  £9000. 

By  the  Dean  of  Faculty — We  had  property  also  at  Kurrachee 
which  was  made  the  subject  of  security. 

There  is  a  railway  now  being  made  to  Kurrachee? — There  is  a 
railway  now  made ;  the  Indus  Valley  line  was  completed  this 
year.  I  fully  expect  that  that  will  greatly  increase  the  value  of 
property  there. 

Then  the  sum  at  which  the  Kurrachee  security  was  valued  is 
not  the  real  sum  it  will  bring? — Well,  I  am  not  sure  about 
that ;  that  is  a  very  difficult  question.  At  the  present  moment 
it  would  not  realise  what  it  is  valued  at.  The  railway  has  just 
been  opened,  and  the  expectation  is  that  there  will  be  a  larp^e 
increase  of  trade  at  Kurrachee,  and  that  consequently  all 
landed  and  house  property  will  increase  in  value. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — Your  attention  has  been  called 
to  some  letters  which  were  passing  pretty  early,  the  first  being 
in  April,  1872.  Look  at  page  5,  letter  from  Alexander  Stronach, 
7th  October,  1872— 

I  am  being  a  little  ti  oubled  just  now  with  Directors  who  have  come 
on  as  a  comniitteo  on  head  office  advance  accounts,  and  who,  having 
come  across  your  produce  advance  debit,  wish  more  information 
than  I  can  exactly  give  them.  They  have  seen  the  mode  it  works 
with  us,  but  they  are  not  at  all  pleased  with  its  size,  and  especially 
at  the  sudden  large  jump  it  has  taken  without  their  having  been 
consulted  beforehand  ;  and  all  the  more  that  the  securities,  or  many, 
of  them,  don't  come  into  our  hands  at  all,  or  are  seen  by  us.     I 

231 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

ohn  Fleming,  have  detailed  to  them  that  they  are  all  regularly  put  up  separately 
from  your  own  securities  in  a  box  which  is  held  in  trust  for  us  in 
your  safe,  and,  like  your  ticketed  bills,  for  which  the  account  was 
first  substituted,  belongs  to  us  exclusively  against  this  balance. 
Personally,  I  know  it  will  be  in  perfect  order,  and  it  is  because  I 
believe  it  to  be  so  that  I  ask  you  now  to  detail  the  arrangements  in 
connection  with  these  securities,  and  how  they  are  kept  for  us,  and 
ca,n  easily  be  recognised  as  ours  as  distinct  from  your  own.  All 
will  come  right,  doubtless,  by  the  end  of  November  as  stated,  when 
the  reduction  then  expected  takes  place ;  but  meanwhile  you  will 
require  to  be  more  specific  as  to  what  you  propose  to  put  in  during 
the  next  two  weeks  for  these  gentlemen's  information. 

Look  at  page  7,  lOtli  January,  1873,  Alexander  Stronach  to 
you — 

In  these  circumstances,  I  don't  well  see  how  I  can  substitute  for 
these  occasional  drafts  a  permanent  increase  to  the  Bombay  credits, 
as  you  seem  to  point  at,  the  more  especially  as  these  latter  drafts 
are  already  so  largely  in  excess  of  the  authorised  limit,  and  the 
Directors  who  know  of  the  matter  are  pressing  to  get  them  reduced 
as  soon  as  possible,  instead  of  increasing  them. 

Now,  look  at  page  18 — 

Some  of  the  Directors  have  already  gone  over  this  memo.,  and  I 
shall  be  glad  to  have  your  views  and  criticisms,  if  you  have  any 
specially  to  offer,  at  your  earliest  convenience. 

Then  on  page  19  there  is  another  letter  by  Alexander  Stronach, 
11th  June,  1873,  in  which  he  says — 

I  shall  be  glad  how  soon  you  can  make  it  convenient  to  be  in 
this  city,  in  accordance  with  your  previous  arrangements  for  coming 
north,  as  I  should  like  to  have  some  further  discussion  on  the 
subject-matter  of  our  recent  interviews  here,  along  with  Messrs. 
Potter  and  Fleming,  and  the  memo,  which  I  enclo.sed  for  your  care- 
ful consideration  yesterday,  and  remarks. 

Does  that  refer  to  a  meeting  that  had  been  held  with  Mr. 
Potter,  Mr.  Fleming,  and  Alexander  Stronach  and  you? — It 
must  be  so.      Look  at  next  page,  12th  Jime,  187.3 — 

The  impression  has  been  growing  very  strongly  upon  me  of  late 
(and  the  same  idea  has  been  mooted  by  Mr.  Potter  without  any 
cornmunication  with  me),  that  you  and  I  should  become  more 
intimately  acquainted  with,  or  rather  communicative,  as  to  what 
is  doing  from  week  to  week,  and  that  we  f^hould  be  more  in  con- 
sultation on  the  financial  position  and  prospects  of  the  concern 
generally,  seeing  that  we  have  so  deep  an  interest.  Infancy  I 
could  be  of  essential  service  to  both  parties  if  allowed,  and  cer- 
tainly it  would  be  much  more  satisfactory  to  the  Directors  (who 
must  have  the  matter  in  charge  now)  that  I  were  able  to  report 
upon  any  application  requiring  to  be  made  from  my  personal 
knowledge  of  the  circumstances. 

Mr.  Balfour — Would  you  read  the  first  half  of  the  letter? 
232 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

The  SoucitoRtGeneral — It  is  as  follows  :  —  John  Fleming. 

I  am  sorry  to  hear  by  yours  of  yesterday  that  you  are  not  feeUng 
so  well  at  present.  I  have  also  myself  been  much  knocked  up  of 
late,  and  had  at  last,  in  something  like  desperation,  to  send  for 
the  doctor  last  night.  This  morning,  from  the  application  he 
has  given  me,  I  feel  rather  better,  but  he  will  not  hear  of  my  going 
out  for  some  days,  and  insists  on  my  going  off  at  once  for  some 
months'  rest.  I  fear  that  those  heavy  and  unexpected  demands  you 
have  been  making  on  us  (and  of  which  I  had  no  indication  when  you 
were  here,  curiously  enough),  although  not,  perhaps,  the  cause, 
have  had  their  own  effects  in  putting  me  in  the  horrors  for  the 
last  week  or  so,  and,  I  have  no  doubt,  have  made  me  write  you 
morbidly  on  the  subject.  Now,  however,  that  I  know  you  are  ill 
and  unable  to  write  for  a  few  days,  I  will  wait  patiently  till  you 
are  able  to  write  me  fully,  not  only  as  to  the  past,  but  also  as  to 
the  future,  and  the  prospects  of  greater  ease,  and  being  able  to 
recoup  me.  You  know  that  I  am  wholly  in  the  dark,  and,  in 
present  circumstances,  apparently  must  always  remain  so  as  to 
what  is  coming,  unless  some  change  in  this  respect  can  be  effected. 

And  later  on  in  the  lettei'  lie  says — 

I  am  far  from  despairing  as  to  the  future,  but  it  is  clear  that 
the  change  of  policy  which  you  have  lately  introduced  is  the  only 
sound  one  in  present  circumstances,  and  the  only  one  likely  to  lead 
you  out  of  your  difficulties  ultimately. 

Then  look  on  page  22,  13th  June,  1873— 

Meantime,  I  speak  for  the  memo.  I  enclosed  to  you  the  other  day 
your  calm  and  earnest  attention,  as  you  will  at  once  see  it  is 
based  entirely  upon  what  passed  at  our  meetings,  at  which  Mi'. 
Potter  and  Mr.  J.  N.  F.  (Directors)  were  jjartly  present,  and  that 
all  I  have  done  in  embodying  the  substance  in  this  form  of  a  memo, 
was  simply  to  amplify  some  of  the  details  from  the  papers  already 
in  my  hands,  so  as  to  meet  the  circumstances  and  the  fact.s. 

Look  at  page  25,  8th  July,  1873 — 

Referring  to  our  interview  yesterday,  Mr.  Potter  has  been  with 
me  to-day,  and  we  have  fully  gone  ovei-  the  ground  we  traversed 
yesterday,  making  him  aware  of  all  that  passed  between  us.  J 
have  also  discussed  with  him  very  fully  the  proposed  separation  of 
the  firms  (in  which  he  takeii  a  deep  interest),  and  after  looking 
carefully  at  the  views  you  propounded  as  to  the  practical  uselessnoss 
and  inexpediency  of  such  a  change,  we  have  failed,  either  of  us,  to 
see  any  valid  objection  to  the  proposal  itself,  or  how  you  can  by 
any  other  means  effect  the  same  object,  and  give  the  Bank  an 
equally  good  security,  which  we  believe  that  you  are  in  earnest  in 
trying  to  provide  for  us.  At  the  same  time  we  see  strong  and 
very  forcible  reasons  why  you  should  meet  our  views  in  perfecting 
the  securities  to  the  utmost  of  your  power,  notwithstanding  that 
the  mode  proposed  may  soon  be  repugnant  to  all  your  prejudices 
and  feelings,  which  I  scarcely  believe  it  is. 

And  in  the  same  letter — 

On  that  subject,  as  well  as  on  the  nature  of  the  bnsine-s  which 
is  to  be  done  and  what  is  to  be  avoided  in  tlm  future,  I  have  again 
read  over  your  letter  with  Mr.  Potter,  and  we  are  both  of  opinion 
that  it  would   greatly   strengthen   our   hands  in   presenting  your 

233 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

ohn  Fleming,  applications  to  the  Board  and  getting  them  adopted,  if  you  would 
write  us  such  a  letter,  signed  by  yourself  and  partners,  which  can 
be  read  at  the  meeting,  embodying  very  much  what  you  have 
already  written  me  on  both  these  subjects,  and  which  you  are  in 
future  resolved  to  abide  by. 

These  letters  w-ere  all  received  by  you  from  Alexander 
Stronach  1 — I  believe  so. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — And  you  assumed  the  statements 
of  fact  in  them  to  be  correct,  and  acted  upon  them? — I  did. 

B}^  the  Solicit  OR- General — From  1873  downwards  were  you 
ever  able  to  present  any  substantial  change  that  had  taken 
place  in  your  affairs  to  the  Manager  or  Directors  of  the  Bank? — 
Do  you  mean  an  improvement? 

Yes?— No. 

Hopes  always,  ])ut  nothing  more? — Hopes,  but  nothing  more. 

And  the  only  bright  ray  you  have  had  for  some  years,  I 
think,  was  the  ray  last  year  about  the  gold  in  this  field? — Yes. 

Did  the  Bank  at  any  time  from  1873  downwards  decline  to 
give  you  any  advance  that  you  asked? — Never;  never  finally 
declined. 

Once,  I  think,  it  was  temporarily  declined,  but  granted  at  the 
following  meeting  t — Yes. 

On  all  other  occasions  was  it  granted  at  your  first  application? 
— It  was  granted ;  I  am  not  prepared  to  say  on  the  first 
application,  but  ceiiainly  it  was  granted. 

And  without  any  additional  security  given  from  the  time  of 
the  agreement?^ — ^No,  no. 

What  additional  security  was  given  from  the  agreement  of 
1875.' — There  have  been  advances  upon  sundry  securities — 
Ijalances  of  shipments,  and  certain  property.  For  instance, 
when  the  credit  was  given  which  formed  the  subject  of  the 
interview  in  July  last  year,  there  were  securities  specified  against 
it. 

So  against  some  of  them  there  were  securities,  and  some  not? 
—Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — ^What  was  the  nature  generally 
of  the  securities  that  were  granted  for  the  fresh  advances  after 
1875?— Generally  shipments  of  produce,  or  portions  of  ship- 
ments, or  debts  due  to  us. 

Can  you  tell  us  the  proportion  of  unsecured  advances  from 
that  date? — I  think  the  only  specific  uncovered  advance  was  one 
of  £65,000  originally,  and  from  the  commencement  uncovered. 

You  think  tlie  rest  of  the  advances  were  covered? — At  one 
time,  when  the  produce  of  shipments  was  given  in  security,  th& 
proceeds  were  a^jplied  to  payment  of  the  Bank's  acceptances. 


234 


CHAPTER   VIII. 

Evidence  of  Glasgow  Merchants  and  of  an 
Edinburgh  Director. 

William  Glen  Walker.  w.  g.  Walker. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — I  am  a  merchant  and  Australian 
sheep  farmer,  living  in  Surrey.  I  am  principal  partner  of  Glen 
Walker  &  Co.,  merchants,  Melbourne.  That  is  principally  an 
agency  for  land  and  sheep  farms. 

There  is  a  company  called  the  Australian  and  New  Zealand 
Land  and  Investment  Trust,  Limited,  carrying  on  business  in 
London.  How  was  that  company  formed? — That  company  was 
formed  to  amalgamate  ceitain  properties  that  belonged  to  the 
City  of  Glasgow  Bank  and  myself. 

That  is  to  say,  certain  propei'ties  called  the  Edinburgh  Pastoral 
Association? — Properties  that  belonged  to  the  Edinburgh 
Pastoral  Association,  that  being  another  name  for  the  Bank. 

How  long  is  it  since  the  amalgamation  was  carried  on  ? — The 
company  is  still  an  inchoate  company.  I  think  it  was  registered 
in  February  last.  A  p^ood  many  years  ago,  my  firni  had  been 
acting-  as  agents  in  Australia  for  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co. 

And  you  were  also  at  one  time  connected  with  the  firm  of 
Morton  &  Co.? — ^Merely  as  their  agent,  at  the  same  time  that 
I  was  agent  for  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach 
was  my  brother-in-law ;  we  married  sisters. 

Do  you  remember  his  speaking  to  you  at  one  time  about 
becoming  a  partner  of  Smith.  Fleming  &  Co. — Yes  ;  that  arrange- 
ment was  once  proposed.  That  was  in  1873.  I  asked  to  see 
their  position — how  they  stood.  I  found  a  very  large  balance 
sheet,  which  was  very  difficult  to  understand ;  and  I  found  an 
entry  which  was  explained  to  me  to  mean  that  they  were 
behind  (if  I  remember  aright)  from  £150,000  to  £200,000— 
about  <£1 70,000,  I  think — ^but  I  speak  from  recollection,  and 
have  not  had  an  opportunity  of  reviving  my  recollection. 

During  these  negotiations  about  your  entering  the  firm  of 
Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  had  you  a  meeting  with  Alexander 
Stronach  and  two  other  people  about  it? — Yes  ;  the  two  others 
were  Mr.  Potter  and  Mr.  Morton.  The  meetino-  took  place  in 
the  Bank's  office,  Virginia  Street.      This  was  in  1873. 

235 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

J.  G.  WalkcF.  What  was  the  nature  of  the  conversation  that  took  place  at 
that  meeting'? — The  essence  of  the  conversation  simply  meant 
that  it  Avould  be  very  desirable,  in  the  interest  of  the  Bank, 
if  I  would  join  that  firm. 

Was  anything  said  about  the  position  of  the  Bank  in  regard 
to  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.'s  deficit? — I  do  not  recollect  it  at 
that  meeting,  but  there  was  subsequently. 

Had  you  other  meetings  with  Potter,  Morton,  and  Alexander 
Stronach? — I  think  I  had;  I  certainly  had  with  Alexander 
Stronach,  and  I  think  I  had  with  the  others,  but  I  am  not 
quite  sure. 

I  believe  at  the  first  meeting  Mr.  Taylor  came  in  about  the 
end  of  the  meeting? — He  did  not  come  in;  he  merely  came  to 
the  door.  He  had  no  part  whatever  in  the  meeting.  I  did  not 
know  Mr.  Taylor  then. 

What  was  the  object  of  the  discussion  at  the  meeting  upon 
the  part  of  the  others  towards  you?  What  did  they  want? — 
They  wanted  me  to  join  the  firm,  and  it  was  a  question  of 
terms. 

What  were  you  informed  was  the  Bank's  object  in  wishing 
you  to  become  a  partner? — To  have  through  me  a  better 
control  over  the  business;  they  believed  the  business  to  be  an 
excellent  one.  They  wanted  me  to  join  on  the  basis  of  adopting 
that  deficit,  and  they  represented,  and,  I  believe,  honestly 
believed,  that  the  goodwill  of  the  business  was  worth  a  great 
deal  more  than  that  deficit. 

But  you  did  not  see  your  way  to  that  at  the  time? — The 
negotiation  broke  through,  not  altogether  on  that  ground, 
but  also  because  I  wanted  an  undeitaking  from  the  Bank 
that  it  would  carry  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  through,  whatever 
the  consequences  might  be. 

When  Robert  Stronach  became  the  Manager  of  the  Bank 
did  he  communicate  with  you  about  joining  anybody  as  a 
partner? — He  suggested  that  I  should  join  James  Morton  & 
Co.  I  came  down  from  London  and  had  an  interview  with 
him.  Potter,  and  Morton  at  the  Bank  on  that  subject. 

Who  took  the  principal  part  in  the  conversation? — Almost 
exclusively  Mr.  Potter,  myself,  and  Mr.  Morton. 

Had  you  several  conversations  with  them? — I  had  several 
conversations — I  believe  I  had  two  or  three  conversations  with 
them.     I  had  a  long  conversation  with  Morton. 

And  with  Potter  had  you  several  conversations? — Yes;  but 
only  incidentally. 

How  long  did  this  interview  last  at  which  Stronach,  Potter, 
and  Morton  were  present?- — Probably  half  an  hour. 

What  did  you  say  to  them  would  be  necessary  before  you 
could  make  up  your  mind  on  the  subject? — I  wanted  to  know 
Morton's  position,  and  I  also  wanted  to  know  what  policy 
236 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

would   be   adopted  as   regards   Morton's  large   landed   interests  W.  G.  Walker, 
in  New  Zealand. 

Did  the  value  of  the  shares  he  possessed  in  these  companies 
come  up? — Not  at  that  meeting,  but  I  was  asked  to  meet 
Morton  in  the  evening,  and  spend  a  night  with  him  discussing 
these  questions,  and  he  then  assured  me  that  his  position  was 
this,  that  he  was  able  to  cover  the  Bank's  account  by  the  shares 
in  the  New  Zealand  companies  with  which  lie  was  connected 
at  par.  He  told  me — it  was  about  the  same  time  that  Stronach 
became  Manager  of  the  Bank,  either  a  fortnight  or  so  before 
or  after,  I  cannot  quite  fix  the  date — he  asserted  that  he  had 
promised  Mr.  Stronach  to  reduce  his  account  by  £400,000  as 
a  means  to  induce  him  to  become  the  Manager,  and  he  had 
also  promised  him  to  cover  his  account  by  stock  at  par. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — This  was  about  the  time  that 
Mr.  Robert  Stronach  became  Manager.     I  cannot  fix  the  date. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — But  going  back  to  the  meeting 
with  Potter  and  Morton,  do  you  remember  anything  being 
said  about  a  premium  on  Morton's  shares? — Yes. 

By  whom? — By  Potter,  but  that  premium  simply  meant  par. 

What  was  it  he  said? — He  asked  if  I  would  be  prepared 
to  join  the  firm  on  the  basis  of  taking  over  Morton's  shares 
at  60  per  cent,  premium ;  and  that  60  per  cent,  is  what  I  now 
mean  by  par. 

Would  you  explain  that  to  the  jury? — It  was  in  contempla- 
tion that  the  two  companies  in  which  Morton  was  largely 
interested  should  be  amalgamated,  and  it  was  believed  that  the 
basis  of  the  amalgamation  would  be  the  watering  of  that  stock 
to  the  extent  of  60  per  cent.  It  was  supposed  that  the  stock 
was  very  much  under-valued  before. 

Would  you  explain  to  the  jury  the  expression  you  used  just 
now — watering  the  stock? — It  simply  meant  a  re- valuation  of 
the  property. 

Giving  it  a  rosy  effect? — No,  I  don't  say  that;  these  pro- 
perties we  are  now  speaking  of  have  been,  and  are,  rapidly 
increasing  in  value.  At  the  inception  of  these  companies  the  pro- 
perties were  valued  at  what  was  supposed  to  be  the  then  existing 
price  or  value.  At  the  new  arrangement  they  had  largely 
increased  in  value,  and  this  watering  the  stock  was  required 
to  give  them  what  then  was  supposed  to  l)e  the  real  value. 

After  Robert  Stronach  accepted  the  Managcrsliip  had  you  and 
he  conversations  about  Smith,  Fleming  iV  Co.'s  affairs? — Very 
little  indeed;  I  don't  say  we  never  spoke  about  them. 

I  don't  mean  that  you  spoke  much,  but  I  want  to  know 
whether,  from  conversations  with  him,  you  learned  anythin"^- 
about  the  amount  in  danger  on  James  Nicol  Fleming's  account? 
— I   did  not  directly   through  Mr.   Stronach;   I   would   not   like 

237 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

w.  G.  Walker,  to  swear  that  I  did  from  Mr.  Stronach,  though  I  may  have 
done  so,  but  I  certainly  did  fi'om  Mr.  John  Hunter. 

Did  you,  after  hearing  something  from  Mr.  Hunter,  speak 
over  the  matter  about  J.  Nicol  Fleming's  account  with  Potter 
and  Hunter? — It  was  quite  understood  between  Potter  and 
Hunter,  and,  I  believe,  by  the  others,  as  my  relations  with 
the  Bank  will  show,  that  there  was  a  deficit  upon  Nicol 
Fleming's  account.  I  understood  that  deficit  to  be  about 
£200,000.  I  believe  that  deficit  Avas  covered  by  promissory 
notes  which  Nicol  Fleming  or  his  firms  had  granted,  and  that 
these  promissory  notes  again  were  represented  by  the  goodwill 
of  his  different  businesses. 

Was  any  proposal  made  for  the  purpose  of  overcoming  that 
deficit  ? — There   was. 

What  was  it? — I  was  instructed  to  buy  those  properties 
you  have  already  referred  to  as  belonging  to  the  so-called 
Edinburgh   Pastoral   Association. 

For  the  purpose  of  endeavouring  to  cover  possible  losses 
through  J.  Nicol  Fleming's  account? — For  the  purpose  of 
covering  those  two  deficits  of  which  I  have  spoken. 

Did  you  understand  from  Potter  as  to  whether  there  was 
any  hope  of  recouping  the  deficit  with  some  such  soheme? — 
I  understood  from  Potter  that  Nicol  Fleming  had  not  been 
a  successful  man,  and  that  he  did  not  like  to  rely  upon  the 
success  of  these  businesses,  and  that  he  wanted  additional 
security.  [Shown  No.  217,  letter.  Glen  Walker  &  Co.,  to 
Robert  Stronach,  dated  14th  August,  1876,  as  follows]:  — 

Glasgow,  14th  August,  1876. 
Pastoral  Properties  in   Australia. 
R.  Stronach,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir, — In  continuation  of  conversations  with  yourself j  and 
other  gentlemen  connected  with  the  Bank,  I  would  now  place  in 
writing  the  suggestions  which  we  have  been  discussing  towards 
increasing  income,  and  recouping  deficits  by  the  judicious  acquire- 
ment of  pastoral  properties. 

More  than  one  member  of  your  Board  are  connected  with  New 
South  Wales  properties,  which  have,  on  an  average  of  many  years, 
I  am  assured,  paid  a  net  return  upon  present  values  exceeding  16 
per  cent,  per  annum. 

The  purchase  price  usually  is  paid  by  partly  a  cash  deposit  and 
the  balance  by  bills,  extending  over  several  years.  It  is  easy  to 
finance  against  them  in  the  colony,  and  if  40  per  cent,  of  the  price 
was  provided  here,  the  remainder  could  be  arranged  in  the  colony 
without  further  aid  from  this. 

If  arranged  in  this  way,  finance  probably  would  cost  for  interest 
an  average  of  6  per  cent,  per  annum,  and  there  would  remain,  on 
the  basis  of  the  experience  referred  to,  as  net  profits,  10  per  cent, 
per  annum. 

The  suggestion  is  that  the  Bank  grant  credits  to  the  extent  of 
from  £100m  to  £150m  towards  the  acquirement  of  pastoral  inter- 
ests in  Australia. 

238 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

For  example,  if  a  value  of  £2o0m  was  acquired,  there  should  be  w.  G.  Walker, 
a  net  profit  of  £25m  yearly,  but  £2om  yearly  will  in  fourteen  j-ears 
repay  £2o0ni,  and  5  per  cent,  interest,  so  that  thus,   by  compara- 
tively a  very  small  outlay,  a  large  amount  can  be  recouped. 

Mr.  Borrou  and  myself  will  be  glad  to  be  interested  in  the  pro- 
ject, and  to  manage  its  detail,  and  finance  can,  in  the  Bank's 
option,  be  arranged  either  by  cash  advance  or  entirely  by  credit. — 
I  am,  &c., 

W.  Glen  Walker. 

Now,  was  that  letter  written  on  the  suggestion  of  any  one  ? — 
That  letter  was  written  as  the  result  of  a  long  negotiation,  the 
principal  parties  to  which  were  Mr.  Hunter,  Mr.  Potter,  and 
nijself. 

Was  it  written  on  the  suggestion  of  any  one? — On  the  sugges- 
tion of  some  of  us  three,  I  cannot  say  which. 

Was  it  your  suggestion? — It  was  intended  to  place  on  record 
that  which  we  practically  then  had  agreed  to  do. 

Was  it  on  your  suggestion,  or  on  the  suggestion  of  one  of  the 
other  two? — I  cannot  recollect. 

But  it  was  agreed  between  you  that  ^uch  a  letter  should  be 
written? — It  was  agreed  between  us  that  such  a  letter  should  be 
written. 

Did  you  see  Potter  frequently  at  his  own  office  on  the  sul;ject 
Ijefore  this  letter  was  written? — My  principal  negotiations  were 
with  Mr.  John  Hunter.     I  sometimes  called  upon  Mr.  Potter. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — And  you  embodied  in  that  letter 
the  result  of  your  conference  ? — That  is  so. 

By  the  Solicitor-Gbnerai, — And  in  consequence  you  or  your 
firm  bought  properties  for  the  Bank  in  Australia  ? — I  did. 

And  subsequently  to  that  did  you  also  purchase  for  them  other 
properties  in  Australia  from  the  Australian  and  New  Zealand 
Land  Company? — I  did. 

Were  these  bought  for  the  same  purpose? — Partly  for  the 
same  purpose,  but  principally  for  another  purpose. 

Wlaat  other  purpose? — That  requires  some  explanation.  The 
Bank  were  veiy  largely  interested  indirectly  in  the  New  Zealand 
Company. 

How? — Through  Morton's  account,  and  I  suppose  through 
Fleming's  account  also.  I  suppose  two-thirds  of  the  whole 
lielongings  of  the  New  Zealand  and  Australian  Company,  as  I 
}iow  know,  practically  belong  to  the  Bank.  At  the  time  I  knew 
of  their  large  interest,  but  I  did  not  know  it  was  so  large  as  I 
now  know. 

How  did  they  practically  belong  to  the  Bank? — I  now  find 
that  these  men  are  bankrupt,  and  that  the  assets  of  these  men 
])ractically  belong  to  the  Bank. 

As  at  that  time? — No.  I  say  the  assets  of  tliese  firms,  James 
Morton  &  Co.  and  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  practically  belong  to 
the  Bank,  and  these  men  are  the  owners  of,  I  believe,  from  one- 

239 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

w.  G.  Walker,  half  to  three-fourths  of  all  the  shares  in  that  company.  The 
Bank  had  discovered  that  these  stations  in  Australia  had  been 
very  badly  managed — ^that  a  drunkard  had  been  managing  them 
for  some  years.  "  They  had  learnt  that  from  their  agents  in 
Australia,  and  they  wanted  to  get  these  properties  into  better 
management.  That  was  the  real  reason  for  buying  these 
properties. 

And  in  order  to  cover  their  advances'? — ^Well,  I  have  already 
said  it  was  for  two  purposes,  that  being  the  principal  purpose ; 
but  also  incidentally  for  the  same  purpose  as  the  other  places 
were  bought  for — that  is  to  say,  to  have  properties  paying  a  high 
rate  of  interest;  the  difference  between  the  rate  of  interest 
current  in  this  countr^^  and  that  higher  rate  of  interest  to  be  used 
to  mortise  these  two  deficits  of  about  £150,000  and  £200,000. 

These  two  objects — to  recoup  deficits  and  cover  advances — the 
principal  object  being  to  recoup  -the  deficits? — The  principal 
object,  as  I  have  said,  with  regard  to  one  of  them  was  so ;  and 
as  regards  the  other,  to  get  these  properties  into  proper  manage- 
ment. 

As  regards  the  price  of  the  lands,  of  the  first  lot  that  you 
bought  after  the  arrangement  of  August,  1876,  how  was  the  price 
paid? — Partly  by  money,  and  partly  by  my  promissory  notes. 

How  much  has  the  Bank  paid? — I  really  forget  without  refer- 
ring to  the  accounts.  In  the  inception  of  the  transaction  I  paid, 
I  think,  £30,000  or  £40,000;  but  subsequently  I  have  been 
converting  leasehold  into  freehold  property.  A  portion  of  that 
was  leasehold  property,  and  I  have  been  converting  it  into  free- 
hold property  :  and  I  should  fancy  the  advances  have  amounted 
altogether  to  about  £130,000  or  £140,000. 

Were  the'^e  moneys  paid  out  by  you — the  £130,000  to  £140,000 
— for  the  Bank? — Certainly. 

And  you  got  tlie  money  from  the  Bank? — I  got  credits  from 
the  Bank,  which  I  converted  into  money. 

The  advances  that  you  made  were  simply  as  agent  for  the 
Bank  ? — Certainly. 

How  was  the  rest  provided? — The  rest  was  provided  by  my 
promissory  notes. 

They  also  being  granted  for  the  Bank? — Certainly. 

And  for  which  they  are  liable? — Certainly,  I  believe  so.  The 
liquidators  say  no. 

Did  you,  in  any  Avay,  throughout  the  whole  proceedings,  act 
for  yourself,  or  did  you  act  entirely  as  agent  for  the  Bank? — The 
Directors  intended,  and  I  intended,  that  I  should  act  as  agent  for 
the  Bank. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — That  seems  to  be  a  question? — 
The  question  has  been  raised  by  the  liquidators  as  to  the  purchase 
from  the  New  Zealand  Company  being  ultra  vires. 

240 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

But  the  character  in  which  you  understood  you  were  acting  was  W.  C.  Waikep, 

that  of  agent  for  the  Bank'/ — Certainly. 

By  the  Solicitor-Genekal — You  were  to  be  remunerated  for 
what  you  did  I — I  was  to  charge  a  reasonable  coTnmission. 

Which  was  ? — It  would  depend  upon  what  I  would  charge  it. 

Was  it  never  settled? — Never  settled. 

Had  you  no  interest  except  the  commission? — None  whatever. 
I  hoped  to  have,  but  I  never  have  had. 

How  much  were  you  in  advance  upon  acceptances  or  promis- 
sory notes  for  account  of  these  properties? — I  think  at  the 
present  moment  about  £80,000  or  £90,000. 

Look  at  the  letter  No.  218,  dated  14th  August,  1876,  the  same 
date  as  the  other,  and  addressed  also  to  Mr.  Stronach — 

Glasgow,  14th  August,  1876. 
R.  S.  Stronach,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir, — It  seems  right  that  securities  should  be  specially 
held  by  the  Bank  as  a  basis  for  any  drafts  by  my  firm  in  substitu- 
tion for  others,  and  T  suggest  that  you  place  to  a  special  account 
such  securities  as  are  required  fairly  to  cover  the  drafts  about  to 
be  substituted,  or  to  obtain  any  others  for  a  like  purpose. 

I  should  say  that,  personally,  I  am  content  without  this  ;  but  I 
will  require  to  explain  the  transaction  to  partners,  and  then  mu.st 
justify  it  by  explaining  how  the  Bank  is  covered  by  securities. — 
I  am,  &c., 

W.  Glen  Walker. 

Just  explain  in  your  own  words  the  purpose  of  that  letter? — This 
letter  refers  to  a  totally  different  transaction  from  what  we  have 
been  speaking  about,  but  it  has  some  reference  to  the  same  trans- 
action also.  Mr.  John  Hunter  had  at  that  time  the  management 
of  the  liquidation  of  Nicol  Fleming's  account.  That  account,  I 
was  informed,  as  I  have  stated,  by  Mr.  Hunter,  showed  an  un- 
covered deficit,  uncovered  except  by  goodwill,  and  I  think  a 
policy  of  insurance,  he  said,  to  the  extent  of  a  couple  of  hundred 
thousand  pounds.  At  the  same  time  Nicol  Fleming's  name  had 
been  to  some  extent  discredited  ;  and  Mr.  Hunter  suggested  that 
it  would  be  very  desirable  if  my  finn's  name  could  be  substituted 
as  drawers  of  drafts  upon  the  Bank  in  substitution  of  £100,000 
of  Nicol  Fleming's.  I  agreed  to  the  arrangement  conditionally 
upon  securities  being  placed  to  cover  those  drafts  for  which  I 
was  becoming  responsible  ;  and  an  arrangement  was  made  by 
which  £100,000  of  stock  which  belonged  to  Morton,  over  which 
the  Bank  held  security,  should  be  placed  as  a  special  security 
against  these  drafts  when  put  in  circulation. 

How  much  of  paper  did  you  agree  to  allow  your  name  to  be 
used  for?— £100,000. 

And  were  drafts  signed  by  your  partner,  Mr.  Brown,  who  was 
then  in  Glasgow? — My  partner  signed  blank  drafts,  and  left 
them  with  the  Manager  to  be  filled  up  in  terms  of  that  an-ange- 
ment,  and  used  as  he  wanted. 

Q  241 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

.  G.  Walker.  Was  anybody  present  when  the  drafts  were  signed  blank  and 
left  with  the  Manager  except  the  Manager  and  you? — I  cannot 
tell  you  that ;  but  I  was  present  when  the  Manager  and  Mr. 
Potter  looked  over  the  drafts. 

Were  these  drafts  of  your  firm  used  for  that  purpose  1 — I  under- 
stand they  were  subsequently.  By  the  by,  I  am  wrong  in 
saying  I  did  understand  they  were  ;  I  have  l^een  shown  a  minute 
in  which,  instead  of  being  used  to  reduce  Nicol  Fleming's 
account,  they  were  used  in  substitution  of  another  account,  but  it 
was  quite  immaterial  ;  it  did  not  make  any  matter  to  me.  I 
considered  they  had  a  perfect  right  to  use  them  as  they  pleased. 
As  matter  of  fact,  were  they  used  for  the  purpose  of  retiring 
the  Bank's  acceptances  to  Holmes,  White  &  Co.? — I  know 
nothing  more  excepting  that  Mr.  Brown  has  shown  me  the  minute 
you  are  now  reading  from.       I  was  in  Australia  myself  at  the 

time. 

There  is  a  minute  of  the  Board  of  Directors  with  regard  to  an 
application  by  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  on  24th  August,  1876, 
for  marginal  credits  to  the  extent  of  £100,000,  to  be  drawn  by 
Messrs.  Glen  Walker  &  Co.,  Melbourne,  against  shipments  of 
wool  and  other  produce.  Can  you  tell  me  anything  about  that? 
— I  arranged  with  Mr.  Scott,  of  Innes  Wright  &  Co.,  that  he 
should  procure  for  my  firm  credits  to  be  used  in  the  ordinary 
course  of  business  for  granting  advances  upon  wool,  or  for  the 
purpose  of  sending  produce  to  this  country.  He  obtained  from 
the  Bank  £100,000  of  these  credits,  and  he  sent  them  to  my 
firm  ;  that  was  all. 

How  did  that  arrangement  come  to  be  proposed? — I   don't 

know  that. 

Had  it  anything  to  do  with  improving  John  Innes  Wright  & 
Co.'s  position  with  the  Bank? — I  did  not  know  at  the  time  if  it 
was  so.  I  believed  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  to  be  a  sound  and  solvent 
concern. 

Was  that  arrangement  acted  upon? — It  was  partly  acted  upon 
and  partly  not.  I  found  that  the  credits  were  of  no  use  to  me, 
but  I  required  some  moneys  for  the  purposes  of  the  Bank  in  con- 
nection with  those  land  purchases  that  I  had  orders  to  buy,  and 
I  used  a  portion  of  the  credits  for  that  purpose,  and  I  sent  the 
bulk  of  them  home.  I  used  a  few  thousand  pounds — I  think 
£7000,  if  I  remember  right — in  sending  home  produce;  but  I 
could  draw  from  the  colony  on  my  own  credit  quite  as  well  as 
using  the  Bank's  credits,  and  consequently  I  returned  them. 
j  Shown  No.  .390,  twenty-four  blank  drafts.]  The  blank  drafts 
signed  Glen  Walker  &  Co.  contained  in  that  envelope  were  signed 
by  my  partner,  Mr.   Brown. 

Were  these  part  of  the  bills  that  were  left  blank  at  that  time? 
That  I  cannot  swear  to,  but  they  are  similar.       The  arrange- 

242 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

ment  was  that  if  Mr.  Strouach  wanted  some  more  he  was  to  write  W.  G.  Walker. 
to  my  partner  for  them. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — I  have  been  a  good  deal  in  Australia,  and  T 
am  pretty  familiar  with  that  colony  and  its  prospects  and  trade. 
As  far  back  as  twenty  years  ago  I  acted  for  Mr.  Potter's  firm  in 
Australia. 

Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  trade  with  Australia  as  merchants  and 
also  as  commission  agents? — They  were  about  the  largest  firm 
connected  with  Australia  in  those  days. 

And  have  they  long  been? — I  presume  they  are  still. 

And  also  as  shipowners? — They  were  in  those  days  very  large 
shipowners. 

So  that  they  had  intimate  relations  with  Australia — an  inti- 
mate knowledge  of  it? — Certainly. 

And  also  with  New  Zealand  1 — Certainly. 

Did  they  also  trade  with  New  Zealand  in  a  like  capacity? — 
They  did. 

Had  you  also  a  knowledge  of  New  Zealand  from  having  been  in 
the  adjoining  colony? — I  have  been  in  New  Zealand,  but  I  have 
not  gone  over  the  properties  in  which  Mr.  Potter  is  interested, 
although  I  have  made  most  minute  inquiries  about  them. 

But  I  suppose,  through  having  been  in  Australia,  and  your 
mercantile  relations  there,  you  were  familiar  with  New  Zealand 
and  its  prospects? — Yes. 

You  mentioned  that  you  had  had  a  meeting  with  Mr.  Potter, 
and  I  think  ?.Ir.  Morton  and  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach,  and  that 
the  first  matter  you  spoke  of  was,  I  think.  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  s 
debt,  and  the  proposal  that  you  should  join  them  ? — Yes. 

On  the  occasion  of  these  meetings,  was  the  business  of  Smith, 
Fleming  <t  Co.  spoken  of  as  one  of  great  value? — Undoubtedly 
it  was. 

Of  great  eaniing  power? — Undoubtedly. 

What  was  the  annual  sum  that  was  named  as  their  profits? — ■ 
The  commissions,  not  their  profits,  were  talked  of  as  £100,000 
a  year  easily. 

These  were  mere  commissions? — Yes. 

And  that  is  the  safest  of  all  kinds  of  business? — There  is  no 
doubt  about  it. 

Was  it  evident  to  you  that  Mr.  Potter,  Mr.  Morton,  and  Mr. 
Stronach  believed  that? — Most  certainly. 

And  regarded  it  as  a  business  of  great  value? — When  the 
arrangement  with  me  fell  through,  Mr.  Potter  intended  to  put 
his  own  son  into  the  business. 

Was  that  Mr.  John  Potter? — I  don't  know. 

But  you  know  that  after  the  arrangement  with  you  fell 
through  Mr.  Potter  intended  to  put  his  own  son  in  ? — Yes. 

It  was  desired  at  that  time,  was  it  not,  to  purge  the  business 
of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.   of  finance,  and  reduce  them   to  the 

243 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

W.  G.  Walker,  safe  business — to  the  commission  business  ? — It  was  intended  to 
purge  the  business  of  everything  except  commission  business. 

It  was  evidently"  the  desire  of  these  gentlemen  to  accomplish 
that?— That  is  so. 

And  if  that  was  accomplished,  did  they  appear  to  be  satisfied 
that  it  would  be  greatly  for  the  advantage  of  the  Bank? — I 
think   so. 

You  mentioned  that  it  appeared  from  the  statement  shown 
tO'  you  that  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  were  a  good  deal  behind — 
in  debt.  Did  you  understand  that  their  debt  to  the  Bank  was 
covered  by  securities,  or  was  that  not  gone  into? — The  question 
of  their  debt  to  the  Bank  never  arose. 

It  was  their  total  debt,  was  it  ? — No  ;  it  was  their  deficit. 

And  that  was  what  was  spoken  to  in  the  communication  with 
you? — No;  certainly  not  at  the  meeting  with  Mr.  Potter  in 
the  Bank,  but  I  had  been  with  Mr.  Stronach  in  London,  and  in 
Loudon  we  had  gone  narrowly  into  these  questions.  Subse- 
quently this  meeting  took  place,  and  it  was  assumed  that  I 
knew  everj'thing. 

Then  the  question  of  the  deficit  was  not  gone  into  with  Mr. 
Potter  and  you,  but  had  been  gone  into  previously,  apart  from 
Mr.  Potter,  with  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach  in  London? — I  believe 
that  is  the  fact. 

Now,  although  the  deficit  that  was  spoken  of  by  Alexander 
Stronach  and  you  was  considerable,  was  it  such  as  a  very 
lucrative  business  like  that  might  have  been  expected  to  wipe 
off  in  a  short  time? — Certainly.  If  the  business  was  paying 
£100,000  a  year  of  commissions,  £150,000  would  very  soon  be 
wiped  out. 

The  deficit  was  only  a  year  and  a  half's  income  from  the 
commissions '! — Yes. 

The  deficit  was  about  £150,000,  and  you  were  led  to  suppose 
that  they  were  earning  about  £100,000  of  commissions? — ^Yes. 
Mr.  John  Fleming  has  stated  to  me  within  the  last  month  that 
during  the  last  year  his  commission  account  came  to  £50,000 
on  his  foreign  businesses  alone. 

And  therefore  I  suppose  you  were  not  suiprised  that  Mr. 
Potter  was  willing  to  put  his  own  son  into  a  good  thing  like 
that?— There  is  no  doubt  that  Mr.  Potter  at  that  time  was 
perfectly  sincere  in  his  belief  that  it  was  a  first-class  business. 

The  next  thing,  I  think,  that  you  told  us  was  about  Mr. 
Morton.  Is  Mr.  Morton  a  gentleman  who  is  also  well  acquainted 
with  the  Australian  and  New  Zealand  colonies ;  has  he  com- 
mercial relations  with  them? — He  has  had  very  old  relations 
with  these  colonies,  but  I  don't  think  he  has  ever  been  in  the 
colonies. 

But  to  your  knowledge  has  he  had  for  long  intimate  com- 
mercial relations  with  these  colonies? — Yes,  undoubtedly. 

244 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

And  are  you  aware  from  your  coiiiumnications  with  him  that  W.  G.  Walker, 
he  placed  a  veiy  high  value  upon   the  land  in   these  colonies 
and  its  prospects? — I  know  that  })erfectly  well.      He  is  a  very 
sanguine  man,  and  always  spoke  in   the   most  sanguine   terms 
of  these  properties. 

And  as  if  he  believed  it.' — ^As  if  he  believed  it,  most  certainly. 
I  believe  he  does  believe  it. 

With  regard  to  Morton  and  the  shares  he  held,  you  used  the 
expression  "'  watering  the  stock  of  the  two  companies."  Was 
that  done  on  the  occasion  of  two  companies  which  had  formerly 
been  separate  beino-  amalgamated/ — That  was  so. 

And  when  these  two  companies  were  amalgamated,  was  the 
stock  of  each  respectively  put  at  the  par  value,  which  was  then 
believed  to  be  its  true  value? — I  l>elieve  that  was  the  intention. 

And  that  is  what  you  used  the  phrase  of  ''  watering "  in 
respect  to?^ — The  valuations  were  very  much  too  low  before,  and 
they  were  put  more  nearly  the  correct  value. 

And  was  that  a  perfectly  fitting  and  proper  thing  to  be  done 
when  the  reorganisation  was  taking  place,  and  the  two  being 
united  I — Perfectly. 

And  has  subsequent  experience  jiroved  that  the  valuations 
they  made  were  not  too  high,  but  were  fair? — I  can  only  answer 
that  by  saying  that  any  valuation  of  colonial  properties  at  the 
present  moment  would  probably  not  exceed  one-half  or  two- 
thirds  of  their  intrinsic  value ;  certainly  not ;  and  that  these 
properties  have  recently  been  valued  at  more  than  these  watered 
values. 

Subsequent  experience  has  jiroved  that  the  values  were  not  too 
high  which  were  placed  upon  them  at  that  time? — Certainly  not. 

Did  you  believe  that  the  proposal  embodied  in  the  letter  of 
14th  August,  1876,  was  a  judicious  one? — I  believed  that  if 
you  can  get  over  the  difficulty,  or  if  it  was  determined  to  get 
over  the  difficulty  of  the  Bank  adopting  an  ex])edient  that  was 
not  banking  business,  no  better  expedient  could  have  been 
devised. 

Was  that  the  kind  of  thing  that  a  prudent  man  managing 
his  own  affairs,  and  wishing  to  do  the  best  for  himself,  would 
naturally  have   gone  into? — A   prudent  man — certainly. 

You  said,  with  respect  to  the  getting  of  the  property  into 
the  hands  of  the  Bank  that  there  had  been  an  unsatisfactory 
manager  in  charge? — That  was  so. 

And  with  a  view  to  unshipping  him,  and  putting  a  right  man 
in  his  place,  the  next  step  was  taken? — Tlie  Bank  at  that  time 
wanted  to  increase  this  kind  of  investment ;  they  thought  they 
had  not  quite  enough,  and  I  recommended  them  not  to  sell 
those  properties  which  the  company  intended  to  sell,  but  to  buy 
them  from  the  company.  I  told  them  there  were  no  better 
properties  in  Australia  than  these. 

245 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

W.G.Walker.       And  when  you  gave  them  that  advice  you  believed  it  to  be 
sound? — I  know  it  is  true. 

If  you  had  been  acting  in  your  own  interests  and  affairs,  would 
you  just  have  done  the  thing  that  the  Bank  did  there? — Most 
certainly. 

Was  it  the  best  way  of  getting-  the  most  value  out  of  their 
securities? — Most  certainly,  always  assuming  that  they  were 
prepared  to  spend  some  money  upon  them. 

To  lay  out  some  present  expenditure  as  a  means  of  getting 
the  most  out  of  them? — Exactly. 

And  was  it  with  that  view  that  the  credits  which  you  have 
described  were  raised  and  operated  on  ? — The  i^art  of  the  credits 
which  I  have  spoken  of  as  representing  the  £130,000  or  £140,000 
that  have  been  spent  has  been  spent  upon  these  properties. 

Wliich  are  still  held  by  the  Bank,  I  think,  or  for  them  at 
all  events? — They  oug-ht  to  be,  I  say  ;  the  liquidators  say  no. 

With  i-espect  to  the  next  arrangement  that  was  gone  into 
under  the  letter  of  14th  August,  1876,  did  it  appear  to  you  also 
that  that  was  a  thing  that  a  prudent  man  managing  his  own 
affairs  would  have  done  for  his  own  advantage?  You  said, 
"  I  suggest  that  you  place  to  a  special  account  such  securities  "  ? 
— It  was  prudent  for  me  to  get  the  securities  evidently.  I 
think  it  was  a  prudent  thing  for  the  Bank  to  have  done,  seeing 
that  they  had  the  finance  existing  already.  It  was  a  prudent 
thing  to  put  it  in  a  name  that  was  not  discredited  rather  than 
in  a  name  that  was. 

Does  it  come  to  this,  that  Nicol  Fleming's  name  having  sunk 
in  credit  rather,  it  was  better  to  have  them  transferred  to  and 
worked  in  a  better  name? — Exactly. 

By  Mr.  SMrrn— Was  the  credit  of  £100,000,  which  was  asked 
for  on  your  behalf  by  Mr.  Scott,  on  2nd  August,  your  first 
connection  with  Wright  &  Co.? — I  think  it  was. 

And  was  that  the  only  credit  which  you  got  for  yourself  from 
the  Bank? — I  got  one  for  £20,000.  The  one  was  for  my  firm, 
the  other  was  for  me  as  an  individual. 

You  say  part  of  the  £100,000  was  not  used? — I  sent  it  back. 

How  much  was  used  altogether? — It  is  very  difficult  to  speak 
accurately  from  memory. 

Was  it  only  £57.000? — Mv  memorv  is  that  I  sent  back  about 
£43,000. 

That  left  £57,000  to  be  used  in  Australia?— Yes. 

According  to  your  recollection,  how  was  that  employed? — My 
recollection  is  that  £25,000  and  £17,000  were  used  on  account 
of  the  Bank,  speaking  from  meraorj^ ;  £7000  or  £8000  were  sent 
home  in  produce ;  £10.000  more  was  advanced  upon  a  wool  lien. 

Was  the  £17,000  which  was  used  for  the  Bank  used  in  acquir- 
ing land  for  the  Bank? — It  was  expended  upon  improvements, 
purchasing  land,  or  making  improvements  upon  the  Bank's  land. 
246 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Therefore  of   that   the   Bank   got   the  benefit   themselves? — W.G.Walker. 
Altogether. 

How  was  the  £25,000  used? — It  was  used  in  the  same  way,  or 
in  keeping  up  the  Bank's  properties. 

Was  there  some  employed  also  in  the  wool  lien  ? — I  have  said 
there  was  £10,000  of  it;  there  was  practically  £35,000,  but 
£25,000  of  this  wool  lien  was  for  the  Bank. 

If  the  Bank  then  are  debiting  Wright  &  Co.  with  anything  of 
that  wool  lien,  that  is  an  error  on  the  part  of  the  Bank? — No 
doubt  it  would  be. 

And  there  was  about  £7000  sent  home  in  produce  ? — So  far  as 
I  remember. 

Then  the  result  of  it  all,  I  think,  is  that  if  that  £7000  of  ship- 
ment of  produce  was  accounted  for,  the  whole  of  this  advance 
has  been  accounted  for  to  the  Bank;  they  got  value  for  it? — 
That  I  cannot  tell  you.  I  cannot  answer  that  question.  The 
arrangement  was  that  I  did  not  get  these  credits  from  the  Bank. 
I  got  them  from  Iniies  Wright  &  Co.  Innes  Wright  &  Co. 
instructed  me  to  send  the  proceeds  in  the  shape  of  produce  to 
Innes  Wright  &  Co.  I  did  so,  and  how  tbey  have  accounted  with 
the  Bank  I  do  not  know. 

That  £7000  was  sent  in  produce,  but  if  that  were  accounted 
for  the  rest  is  all  accounted  for? — No  ;  because  I  sent  home  pro- 
duce representing  the  £35,000. 

Which  had  been  spent  on  the  wool  lien? — Yes;  I  believe  the 
wool  lien  turned  out  deficient. 

Was  there  a  loss  on  it? — Not  a  loss  exactly.  £25,000  of  it 
was  invested  upon  a  wool  lien,  of  property  belonging  to  the  Bank. 
After  this  had  been  done  there  was  a  very  severe  drought  in 
Australia,  and  a  very  large  number  of  the  sheep  perished  in 
Australia ;  during  that  time  ten  millions  of  sheep  died.  About 
50,000  of  these  sheep  belonged  to  the  Bank.  The  wool  which 
ought  to  have  been  shorn  from  these  sheep  did  not  come  forward, 
and  consequently  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  received  less  wool  than 
the  wool  lien  represented. 

That  was  the  Bank's  wool? — It  was  the  Bank's  wool. 

By  the  Dean  of  Faculty — When  was  the  proposal  that  you 
should  become  a  partner  with  Morton  made  to  you? — About  the 
time  that  Robert  Stronach  became  the  Manager. 

Before  he  became  the  Manager? — I  have  been  trying  to  recol- 
lect. I  think  it  must  have  been  before  ;  but  it  was  within  a 
fortnight  before  or  after. 

Did  you  find  that  Robert  Stronach  was  very  reluctant  to  take 
tho  office  of  Manager? — He  had  been  extremely  reluctant. 

You  said  something  about  a  promise  from  Morton  to  reduce  his 
debt  by  £400,000  '/—Morton  told  me  tliat  it  had  been  very  diffi- 
cult to  get  Stronach  to  accept  the  position,  and  one  of  his  reasons 
was  that  Morton's  account  was  a  very  large  one,  and  because  he 

247 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

W.  G.  Walker,  had  not  his  securities  in  proper  order ;  and  Morton,  towards  in- 
ducing him  to  accept  the  position,  promised  him  that  he  would 
reduce  his  account  by  £400,000,  and  place  securities  which  he 
had  elsewhere  with  the  Bank,  so  that  his  account  should  be  fully 
covered  at  par. 

It  was  after  getting  that  promise  from  Morton  that  Stronach 
accepted  the  office? — Undoubtedly  so. 

I  am  going  to  show  you  a  letter,  print,  page  107? — I  know 
this  letter  quite  well. 

28th  December,  1875,  by  Mr.  Stronach  to  the  Directors.  Did 
you  know  that  Mr.  Stronach  sent  that  letter  to  the  Directors? — I 
was  shown  by  Mr.  Stronach  the  draft  of  a  letter  something  like 
this,  and  he  subsequently  told  me  that  he  had  sent  that  letter 
to  the  Board  somewhat  modified  from  what  I  had  seen. 

Can  you  tell  me  wherein  the  draft  differs  from  the  letter  which 
we  have  here  printed? 

Mr.  Balfour  objected  to  the  question. 

By  the  Dean  op  Faculty — Was  this  letter,  which  you  call  a 
draft  letter,  copied  out  and  sent  in  its  original  shape  and  in  its 
original  terms  to  the  Directors  l — I  was  not  present  at  the  Board, 
and  I  can  only  speak  as  to  what  I  saw.  The  draft  which  I  did 
see  contained  the  names  of  Morton  and  Fleming. 

Mr.  Balfour  objected. 

The  Lord  Justice-Clerk  (to  witness) — Don't  tell  us  what 
the  draft  contained,  but  tell  us  what  you  saw  done. 

By  the  Dean  of  Faculty — Do  you  know  what  Mr.  Stronach 
did  with  that  letter? 

By  Mr.  Bauour — From  your  own  knowledge? — Not  from  my 
own  knowledge,  because  I  was  not  present  at  the  Board. 

By  the  Dean  op  Faculty — What  did  he  do  with  it  so  far  as 
you  saw  ? — He  informed  me  that  he  intended  to  deliver  it. 

Mr.  Balfour — Never  mind  "  informed." 

By  the  Dean  op  Faculty — "WTiat  did  he  say  he  intended  to  do 
with  that  draft? — To  place  it  before  the  Board.  He  said  he 
would  not  accept  the  position  of  Manager  unless  the  Board 
relieved  him  of  the  responsibility  of  these  accounts. 

Did  he  mention  what  the  accounts  were? — Morton's  and 
Fleming's — 

Mr.  Balfour  objected  to  this. 

By  the  Dean  op  Faculty — Mr.  Stronach  wrote  a  draft  of  a 
letter — not  this  one — did  he? — He  wrote  the  draft  of  a  letter, 
and  he  wrote  a  letter  other  than  this  one. 

That  is  to  say,  he  copied  over  the  draft  that  he  had  made,  and 
turned  it  into  a  letter? — Certainly. 

Had  that  letter  reference  to  the  conditions  upon  which  he 
was  to  accept  the  office  of  Manager? — Certainly;  upon  which  he 
was  willing  to  accept  it. 

Were    you    at   the    preparation  of  that    letter? — I    was    not 

248 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

present  when  the  draft  was  written,  but  I  was  present  when  the  W.  G.  Walker. 
letter  was  written,  and  I  saw  the  letter. 

By  Lord  Craighill — Was  this  in  the  Bank  ? — No,  it  was  in  his 
own  house. 

By  the  Dean  op  Faculty — What  did  he  do  with  the  letter? — 
Took  it  to  the  Bank,  I  suppose. 

What  did  he  do  with  the  letter  after  he  had  written  and  signed 
it? — I  saw  him  a  day  or  two  afterwards. 

You  were  present  when  he  wrote  it ;  what  did  he  do  with  it? 
Did  he  put  it  in  his  pocket  and  leave  the  house  with  it? — 1 
believe  he  did. 

Then  ? — I  believe  he  did  ;  I  did  not  see  him  actually  put  it  in 
his  pocket.,  but  he  certainly  took  it  to  the  Bank  with  him. 

He  carried  it  away  with  him.  and  he  was  going  to  the  Bank  ; 
is  it  not  so? — Certainly. 

Did  you  ever  see  that  letter  again? — Yes,  I  did. 

Where  did  you  see  it? — I  saw  it  in  his  house. 

When  ? — That  night,  I  believe. 

What  was  done  with  that  letter  ? — That  I  don't  know. 

Was  it  destroyed? — That  I  don't  know. 

Did  he  tell  you  what  he  had  done  with  the  letter  when  he  took 
it  away  with  him  and  took  it  to  the  Bank  that  day? 

Mr.  Balfour  objected. 

By  the  Dean  of  Faculty — Well,  he  brought  it  back  that  night 
to  his  house? — That  is  so. 

Was  the  second  letter  written  then  ? — Xo,  it  was  not. 

When  was  the  second  letter  written? — That  I  cannot  tell 
you. 

Were  you  present  at  the  writing  of  it? — No,  I  was  not. 

Did  you  assist  him  in  the  preparation  of  it? — No,  I  did  not — 
not  this  second  letter. 

Is  the  second  letter  in  terms  more  modified  than  the  first? 

Mr.  Balfour  objected. 

By  the  Dean  of  Faculty — The  first  letter  is  gone,  is  it  not? — 
The  first  letter  was  nmch  more  specific,  and  pointed  to  names, 
which  this  does  not. 

Do  you  know  what  became  of  the  first  letter? — No,  nor  did  I 
see  this  second  letter  for  a  year  or  eighteen  months  afterwards. 

Do  you  know  if  tlie  first  lettiM-  is  destroyed? — I  have  been 
told  so,  but  I  do  not  know  it  of  my  own  knowledge. 

Did  Mr.  Stronach  tell  you  anything  as  to  its  fate? 

Mr.  Balfour  objected. 

By  the  Dean  op  Faculty — Did  he  tell  vou  what  became  of 
the  first  letter? 

Mr.  Bat,four  objected. 

By  the  Dean  of  Faculty — What  did  he  say? 

Mr.  Balfour  objected. 

By   the   Dean  op  Faculty — You   transacted   a  good  deal   of 

249 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

W.  G.  Walker,  business  at  this  Bank  of  various  kinds  personally  before  you 
went  to  Australia  ? — Not  a  great  deal  of  business  ;  I  had  relations 
with  the  Bank,  but  not  of  a  large  character. 

Did  you  transact  business,  on  any  occasion  before  you  went 
to  Australia,  with  the  Directors  without  the  intervention  of 
Mr.  Stronach? — The  only  business  connected  with  these  matt-ers 
in  which  I  had  any  relations  with  the  Bank  before  I  went  to 
Australia  was  the  business  that  I  have  already  testified  to. 

Did  you  come  in  contact  with  the  Directors  before  you  went 
to  Australia? — I  came  in  contact  with  Mr.  Potter  only,  I  think. 
There  are  one  or  two  of  the  minutes  which  refer  to  that  time, 
from  which  it  would  appear  that  a  committee  of  the  Board 
had  made  various  arrangements  with  me.  Now,  that  minut-e 
is  all  nonsense  ;  there  were  no  such  negotiations. 

What  minute  was  that? — Mr.  Taylor,  Mr.  Stewart,  and  Mr. 
Potter  are  represented  as  a  committee. 

What  is  the  date  of  that? — It  is  in  1876;  it  is  the  one  in 
which  they  form  themselves  into  a  committee  to  arrange  with 
me  as  to  buying  properties  in  Australia. 

Is  that  the  minute  of  l7th  August,  1876,  referred  to  on  page 
109?— 

A  letter  from  J.  M.  &  Co.,  and  two  from  W.  Glen  Walker,  dated 
16th  and  14th  inst.,  in  regard  to  the  drawing  of  credits  in  lieu  of 
those  now  drawn  by  Holmes,  White  &  Co.  and  others,  and  one  of 
the  latter  as  to  the  acquisition  of  certain  pastoral  properties,  were 
brought  under  the  notice  of  the  Board  ;  and  after  full  considera- 
tion, the  Board  came  to  the  resolution  that  it  was  advisable  to 
adopt  generally  the  suggestions  contained  in  these  letters,  and 
they  accordingly  requested  the  Manager,  associated  with  Messrs. 
Potter,  Stewart,  and  Taylor,  to  arrange  with  Mr.  Walker  as  to  all 
details. 

That   is   the   first,    and   there   is   a   subsequent  letter  referring 
to  the  same   subject. 

Then  there  is  a  report  by  these  o-entlemen  stating  that  ''  in 
terms  of  the  minute  appointing  us  to  arrange  with  Mr.  Walker 
in  regard  to  the  acquisition  of  certain  pastoral  properties  in 
Australia,  we  have  to  report  that  we  then  authorised  an  invest- 
ment to  the  value  of  £120,000  or  £130,000,"  and  so  on;  what 
is  wrong  with  that  report? — I  say  it  is  untrue.  I  say  I  never 
met — at  least,  to  the  best  of  my  belief — either  Mr.  Taylor  or 
Mr.  Stewart  on  that  subject.  There  are  many  other  minutes 
with  which  I  am  connected  that  are  untrue,  or  at  least  mis- 
leading. 

But  I  suppose  this  is  quite  true,  that  you  were  authorised 
to  invest  to  the  value  of  from  £120,000  to  £130,000  as 
stated  in  this  report? — Yes;  but  not  by  Messrs.  Stewart  and 
Taylor.  I  received  instructions  to  buy  these  properties  after 
a  long  negotiation  with  John  Hunter  ;  I  saw  Mr.  Potter  once 
or  twice,  but  it  was  princijially  John  Hunter.  I  had  scarcely 
any  discussion  with  any  one  else  on  the  subject. 
250 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

But   I    suppose   you   have    seen    both    Mr.    Stewart   and    Mr.  W.  G.  Walker. 

Taylor? — I  don't  believe  I  did.  I  don't  think  I  ever  met  these 
gentlemen. 

With  regard  to  Mr.  Stronach,  was  he  a  man  of  a  yielding 
disposition,  and  one  that  would  be  easily  influenced  by  men 
of  a  more  decided  character  and  positive  views? — Yes ;  he 
was  the  most  credulous  and  facile  man  I  ever  met  in  my  life. 

However,  did  he  seem  anxious  to  do  the  best  he  could  for 
the  interests  of  this  Bank? — Undoubtedly. 

Do  you  know  whether  the  condition  of  some  of  these  accounts 
was  a  source  of  affliction  and  misery  to  him? — Latterly,  there 
cannot  be  a  doubt  about  it ;  but  when  he  became  Manager  he 
expected  they  would  come  all  right. 

After  he  got  that  promise  of  the  paying  up  by  Moi-tou  of 
£400,000,  he  thought  all  the  rest  would  come  right? — I  think  so. 

Did  you  know  that  Smith,  Flemino*  &  Co.'s  account  had  been 
put  on  a  more  distinct  footing  in  August,  1875? — I  knew  nothing 
of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.'s  account  after  I  returned  from  Australia 
in  August,  1877.  I  was  always  led  to  believe  that  the  account 
was  keeping  all  right.       I  was  in  Australia  until  August,  1877. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — Let  us  understand  about  that  first  letter 
or  draft ;  I  wish  to  distinguish  exactly  what  you  saw  from 
what  was  said  to  you  or  from  your  inferences  about  it? — I 
said  I  did  not  actually  see  it  put  in  his  pocket. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — But  your  firm  conviction  is  that 
he  did  take  it  away  with  him? — ^Yes. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — The  last  place  you  saw  it  was  in  his  house? 
—Yes. 

And  what  he  did  was  not  matter  of  observation,  but  matter 
of  inference  or  information? — I  was  not  in  the  Bank. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — I  think  you  said  that  you  saw 
the  letter  which  was  laid  before  the  Directors  about  a  year 
and  a  half  afterwards? — No;  I  saw  a  cojsy  of  it.  Mr.  Stronach 
showed  it  to  me  in  his  house. 

Would  you  tell  me  the  names  of  the  Directors  with  whom 
you  have  met  in  regard  to  the  purchase  of  these  Australian 
properties? — Do  you  mean  since  the  purchases  or  before? 

At  any  time? — I  met  Mr.  Potter  before  their  purchase  ;  I 
believe  I  only  met  Mr.  Potter.  After  the  purchases  I  think 
I  met  them  all. 

Do  you  mean  after  the  purchase  of  them  all? — No;  I  mean 
all  the  Directors. 

But  you  did  not  see  anybody  but  Mr.  Potter  before  the 
purchases? — To  the  best  of  my  belief  I  did  not. 

Do  you  mean  before  all  the  purchases  or  before  the  first  of 
them? — I  mean  before  the  first  purchase. 

With  regard  to  that  report  of  19th  October,  1876,  which 
reports  an  authorisation  by  Mr.  Taylor,  Mr.  Stewai-t,  and  Mr. 

251 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

W.  G.  Walker.  Potter,  you  say  that  you  never  met  Mr.  Taylor  or  Mr.  Potter 
upon  that  subject?^ — To  the  best  of  my  belief  I  never  did.  I 
am  surprised  to  see  it  here,  because  I  think  I  did  not  know 
them  to  speak  to  till  I  came  home  from  Australia. 

Did  you  meet  any  committee  of  the  Directors  upon  the 
subject  of  purchase  of  Australian  property? — Subsequent  to  my 
first  purchase  I  met  a  committee  with  reilerence  to  the  second. 

Who  were  the  committee? — Mr.  Stewart,  Mr.  Taylor,  and,  if 
I  remember  right,  Mr.  Salmond. 

Was  it  not  Mr.  Inglis? — I  beg  your  pardon  ;  it  was  Mr.  Inglis 
instead  of  Mr.  Stewart.  I  saw  Mr.  Stewart  afterwards,  but 
that  committee  consisted  of  Mr.  Inglis,  Mr.  Taylor,  and  Mr. 
Salmond.      I  met  them  two  or  three  times. 

Would  you  consider  it  would  be  a  prudent  thing  for  a  bank 
to  do  to  make  those  purchases  in  Australia? — I  did,  considering 
all  the  circumstances. 

Would  you  consider  it  would  be  a  prudent  thing  for  a  Bank 
to  make  such  purchases  except  for  the  purpose  of  recouping 
a  deficit? — ^I  think  exceptional  difficulties  require  exceptional 
expedients. 

That  is  not  quite  an  answer  to  my  question.  Would  it  be  a 
prudent  thing  except  for  the  purpose  of  recouping  a  deficit? — 
There  might  be  other  good  reasons  for  doing  so. 

Of  a  similar  kind? — Or  other  kinds. 

What  other  kind  except  for  the  purpose  of  meeting  a  loss 
already  niade  ? — I  know  banks  that  build  railways  ;  it  is  quite 
common  for  banks  to  sfo  into  unusual  transactions  like  this, 
though  not  a  common  thing  for  Scotch  banks  to  do  so. 

John  Hunter.  John  Hunter. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — I  am  a  merchant  in  Glasgow,  and 
a  partner  of  Buchanan,  Wilson  &  Co.  I  dealt  at  one  time, 
from  1858,  with  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank.  I  was  acquainted 
with  the  present  Manager,  Robert  Stronach,  as  well  as  with 
his  predecessor,  Alexander  Stronach. 

In  the  course  of  time  you  came  to  hold  certain  lands  in 
Australia,  or  shares  in  hand  in  Australia,  in  trust  for  the  City 
Bank  I— Yes. 

Will  you  explain  the  origin  of  the  transaction  by  which  you 
came  into  their  possession? — The  shares  in  my  own  name,  or 
in  my  name  alonjip  with  others? 

Well,  both  ;  which  was  first  in  point  of  time? — The  first  in 
point  of  time  are  those  in  my  name  along  with  others  in  trust. 
The  firm  of  Potter,  Wilson  k  Co.,  Morton  &  Co.,  and  my  own 
firm,  were  jointly  interested  in  transactions  in  Australia  and 
New  Zealand.  These  properties  were  ultimately  merged  in 
the  New  Zealand  and  Australian  Land  Company. 
252 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

These  were  held  by  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.,  Morton  &  Co.,  John  Hunter. 
and  yourself? — Yes.  There  was  a  "[uaranteed  dividend  secured 
when  we  made  them  over  to  the  association.  So  lono:  as  that 
guarantee  subsisted  the  shares  were  held  by  the  three  parties 
interested  whom  I  have  named.  They  were  held  in  name  of 
partners  of  the  three  firms.  The  three  partners  held  them  in 
trust,  representing  all  the  interests  of  the  three  firms.  After 
the  expiry  of  the  guarantee.  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  and  my 
own  firm  g-ot  their  interests  into  their  own  possession.  The 
interest  of  the  third,  Morton  &  Co.,  remained  still  invested  in 
ti'ustees. 

I  believe  you  were  asked  to  give  a  letter  stating  that  you 
held  these  in  trust  for  the  City  Bank,  or  part  of  them? — Yes. 

Part  of  them  were  similarly  secured  to  Overend  &  Gurney? 
—Yes. 

I  suppose  your  understanding  was  that  you  held  these  to 
cover  advances? — I  had  no  knowledge  what  they  were  held  for. 

What  was  the  origin  of  your  connection  with  Potter? — I  was 
connected  with  him  in  these  New  Zealand  and  Australian 
matters,  but  besides  that  we  were  partners  together  in  a  coal 
company.  He  was  also  one  of  the  trustees  in  whom  the  shares 
were  originally  vested  for  joint  behoof.  I  had  nothing  to  do 
with  the  financing  either  of  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  or  Morton  k 
Co.  At  the  request  of  the  late  Alexander  Stronach  I  took 
over  fifty  shares  of  the  Sawmill  Company,  Bombay,  on  account 
of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  The  object  of  that  was  not  explained 
to  me  ;  I  was  merely  asked  to  be  allowed  to  put  them  into  my 
name. 

You  were  asked  by  the  Manager,  Alexander  Stronach,  to 
permit  them  to  be  transferred  to  your  name? — Yes. 

Were  you  in  any  other  way  connected  with  James  Nicol 
Fleming,  or  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.'s  securities? — I  never  had 
any  connection  with  James  Nicol  Fleming's  securities. 

Prior  to  November,  1874,  did  the  Manager  of  the  Bank  ever 
consult  you  or  any  person  else  with  reference  to  advances  to 
Morton  &  Co.  and  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.? — No. 

Was  it  known  outside  the  Bank  that  these  firtDs  had  advances 
from  the  Bank? — I  think  it  was.  Some  time  in  1874 — early 
in  the  year,  I  think — Alexander  Stronach  asked  me  if  I  would. 
in  confidence  and  as  a  friend,  look  into  Nicol  Fleming's  matters, 
as  he  was  not  satisfied  with  the  working  of  his  account  in  the 
Bank.  He  did  not  say  to  me  whether  the  account  was  bad 
or  not.  I  at  first  told  him  I  had  no  knowledge  of  the  nature 
of  Nicol  Fleming's  business,  and  did  not  feel  competent  to  give 
a  sufficient  report,  but  that,  if  he  really  wished  me  to  do  so, 
and  Fleming  concurred,  I  had  no  objection  to  give  him  my 
opinion.  Mr.  Fleming  invited  me;  and  I  asked  him  to  show 
me  one   or   two  of  his   Calcutta   balance   sheets,   the   result   of 

253 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

John  Hunter,  which  was  that  I  reported  to  Alexander  Stronach  that  they 
were  doinp:  an  unsatisfactory  business,  and  that  I  did  not 
think  it  could  be  made  satisfactory  in  the  way  they  were 
doing,  and  I  recommended  him  to  get  rid  of  the  account  as  soon 
as  possible. 

All  the  information  the  Manager  gave  you  was  that  the 
account  was  unsatisfactory? — Yes.  I  don't  remember  the  exact 
date  when  I  made  my  report  to  Alexander  Stronach,  but  I 
think  it  must  have  been  in  the  spring  or  early  summer  of 
1874.  From  my  examination  of  Mr.  Fleming's  balance  sheets 
on  that  occasion — which  I  assumed  to  be  correct — so  far  as  I 
examined  them,  which  was  for  three  years,  he  seemed  to  have 
been  going  backwards. 

That  is  to  say,  as  time  went  on  he  was  getting  worse? — 
Well,  the  firm  had  made  nothing  for  the  three  years  of  which 
I  saw  the  balances.  I  had  no  knowledge  whatever  of  Fleming's 
indebtedness  at  that  time ;  I  did  not  know  that  he  owed  any- 
thing. I  had  nothing  to  do  except  with  the  state  of  his  business. 
Mr.  Fleming  was  a  Director  of  the  Bank  at  that  time.  I  made 
a  communication  to  him  also  as  to  the  unsatisfactory  state  of 
his  balance  sheets,  and  at  the  same  time  I  spoke  to  him  about 
his  position  as  a  Director. 

By  the  Lord  Jus'ncB-CLBRK — This  was  in  1874. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — I  told  him  I  considered  it  was  not 
consistent  with  the  position  of  his  affairs  that  he  should  con- 
tinue a  Director  of  the  Bank.  He  did  not  view  that  as  I 
did,  and  seemed  rather  disappointed  at  the  prospect  of  his 
not  continuino-  a  Director.  I  reported  verbally  to  Alexander 
Stronach,  in  the  Bank,  when  I  advised  him  to  get  rid  of  this 
account.  I  don't  remember  that  he  mad©  any  particular 
remarks  when  I  made  that  communication  to  him,  but  he  did 
not  seem  to  look  upon  the  account  as  so  bad  as  I  made  it  out 
to  be. 

That  is  to  say,  he  did  not  seem  to  think  that  Nicol  Fleming 
was  in  quite  so  bad  a  state  commercially  as  you  reported? — ■ 
Yes.  Nothing  more  that  occurs  to  my  memory  passed  on  that 
occasion.  Alexander  Stronach  was  in  failing  health  about  that 
time.  Subsequently,  for  a  considerable  period,  he  did  not 
attend  the  Bank,  but  lived  at  his  house  near  Biggar.  I  saw 
him  there  upon  the  subject  of  Nicol  Fleming's  account.  I 
merely  confirmed  what  I  had  said  before. 

Repeated  it? — Repeated  it.  He  said  then  that  he  did  not 
believe  that  it  was  so  bad  as  I  represented  it  to  be.  I  said 
I  only  dealt  with  the  figures  I  got  from  Nicol  Fleming  himself 
or  his  clerk,  and  could  not  make  it  better  than  I  had  represented. 
He  did  not  say  whether  or  not  he  had  seen  Nicol  Fleming's 
balance  sheet.  He  said  that  if  he  were  better  he  was  quite 
sure  h©  would  make  the  account  right  in  a  year  or  two.      That 

254 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

was  the  last  occasion  on  which  he  looked  at  a  statement  of  John  Hunter. 
Nicol  Fleming's  account  or  went  into  it.  I  saw  him  again 
when  he  was  rather  seriously  ill,  when  he  repeated  the  same 
observation.  I  did  not  give  him  any  details  on  that  last 
occasion.  I  did  so  upon  the  previous  occasion — I  explained  the 
grounds  upon  which  I  had  come  to  my  conclusion.  On  the 
occasion  when  he  made  the  observation  I  have  mentioned, 
when  he  was  not  so  seriously  ill,  I  spoke  to  him  about  Morton's 
account. 

What  led  you  to  do  so .' — Nothing-,  except  the  knowledge  that 
Morton  had  a  large  account  with  the  Bank,  and  I  asked  him 
how  it  was  working. 

How  did  you  come  to  know  it  was  a  large  account? — It  was 
very  generally  known,  I  think,  in  Glasgow,  that  it  was  a  large 
account. 

How  did  it  come  to  be  generally  known? — It  was  generally 
known  he  was  discounting  a  laro-e  amount  of  City  of  Glasgow 
Bank  bills.  I  think  that  was  perfectly  well  known.  Morton 
was  a  great  deal  about  the  Bank  at  that  time.  When  I  spoke 
to  Alexander  Stronach  about  Morton's  account,  he  said  it  was 
working  off  all  right  ;  but  on  that  occasion  he  asked  me  if 
I  would  speak  to  Mr.  Morton,  and  endeavour  to  get  some 
additional  security  from  him.  I  asked  him  to  write  such  a 
letter  as  I  could  read  to  Morton,  which  he  did.  I  read  it  to 
Morton,  and  the  security  he  asked  for,  I  believe,  was  given. 
Alexander  Stronach  ceased  to  take  any  active  part  in  the  manage- 
ment of  the  Bank,  I  believe,  for  a  considerable  time  before 
his  death.  Mr.  Robert  Stronach  acted  in  his  room  during 
that   time. 

During  that  time,  before  Ro1)ert  Stronach  became  Manager 
himself,  had  you  any  conversation  with  him  in  regard  to  Nicol 
Fleming's  account? — I  merely  stated  to  him  what  I  had  stated 
to  his  brother. 

Did  you  state  to  him  all  that  you  had  stated  to  his  brother? — 
I  think  T  did. 

Did  you  speak  to  him  about  Nicol  Fleming's  continuance  as 
a  Director? — I  don't  quite  remember  whether  I  did  or  not. 

Try  to  recollect  that.  You  spoke  about  that  to  Alexander 
Stronach? — No;  I  spoke  about  it  to  Nicol  Fleming. 

Did  you  not  speak  to  Alexander  Stronach? — I  cannot  remem- 
ber whether  it  was  to  Alexander  Stronach  or  Robert  Stronach  ; 
I  don't  remember  when  Alexander  Stronach  left  the  Bank. 

Whether  it  was  Alexander  Stronach  or  Robert  Stronach,  did 
he  take  the  same  view  as  Nicol  Fleming  himself  about  his  con- 
tinuing a  Director? — No;  whichever  it  was,  he  quite  acquiesced 
in  the  view  I  took  that  he  should  not  be  a  Director. 

He  agreed  that  his  position  was  inconsistent  with  his  con- 
tinuing a  Director? — Yes. 

255 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

John  Hunter.      By  Lord  Craighill — This  was  in  the  end  of  1874. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — I  continued  to  press  upon  Robert 
Stronach  the  state  of  Fleming's  affairs.  I  advised  him,  as  I  had 
done  his  brother,  that  the  finn  should  be  put  into  liquidation 
and  wound  up.  His  brother  did  not  act  upon  that,  but  Robert 
Stronach  immediately  acted  upon  it,  and  the  firm  was  put 
into  liquidation  in  the  end  of  1874.  I  do  not  know  whether 
he  had  become  Manager  at  that  time,  but  he  was  acting  as 
Manager.  James  Nicol  Fleming  had  a  partner  in  Calcutta. 
That  partnership  was  dissolved.  That  was  the  partnership  that 
was  liquidated.  He  started  himself,  along  with  another  party, 
a  new  firm  on  1st  January,  1875. 

After  it  was  resolved  to  liquidate,  were  you  consulted  about 
the  realisation? — From  time  to  time  I  was  consulted  as  to  the 
realisation. 

You  became  cognizant  of  what  was  done? — Well,  I  never  saw 
Nicol  Fleming's  books.  I  merely  gave  advice  as  to  the  realisa- 
tion when  I  was  consulted  by  his  clerks. 

A  list  of  the  securities  was  furnished  to  you,  was  it  not? — 
Yes. 

And  you  gave  instructions  for  the  realisation? — Yes. 

By  what  time  was  the  realisation  practically  concluded? — 
There  were  some  assets  in  India  that  were  a  long  time  after 
1st  January,  1875,  before  they  were  concluded.  It  must  have 
been  some  time  in  1876 — the  end  of  1876,  I  should  think. 

Or  1877?— Or  1877. 

There  was  an  exception,  however,  in  the  realisation  in  the  case 
of  certain  Australian  land  shares? — ^Yes.  So  far  as  I  am  aware 
there  are  certain  securities  not  realised  yet — a  part  of  the  New 
Zealand  shares. 

Was  the  liquidation  satisfactory  in  point  of  results  ? — No. 

Did  it  leave  a  large  balance  unsecured? — Yes. 

Were  the  times  bad  for  realising  that  particular  security,  or 
how  did  that  arise? — I  don't  know  that  it  was  altogether  on 
account  of  the  times.  There  were  not  very  many  securities 
to  realise. 

Did  you  communicate  information  to  any  of  the  Directors  of 
the  Bank,  other  than  Mr.  Stronach,  in  regard  to  Fleming's  liqui- 
dation— I  mean  upon  either  of  these  points,  the  state  of  Nicol 
Fleming's  business  which  led  you  to  recommend  liquidation,  in 
regard  to  the  fact  of  liquidation,  or  the  unsatisfactory  results  of 
the  liquidation?  Had  you  any  communication  with  any  other 
Director  than  Mr.  Stronach  upon  that  point? — I  think  I  must 
have  named  it  to  Mr.  Potter  ;  and,  although  the  amount  was 
never  named,  subsequently,  to  my  knowledge,  it  became  known 
to  Mr.  Taylor  and  Mr.  Stewart ;  but  I  don't  think,  never  in  my 
presence,  did  they  know  the  amount. 

Just  repeat  that,  so   that  the  juiy  can  hear  it.— I  think  I 

256 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

mentioned  it  to  Mr.  Potter,  and  subsequently,  to  my  knowledge,  John  Huator. 
Mr.   Taylor  and  Mr.    Stewart  became   aware   that   there  was   a 
balance  upon  the  account,  but  the  extent  of  it  I  am  not  aware 
that  they  ever  knew,  any  of  them. 

Nothing  passed  in  your  presence  which  could  suggest  that  they 
knew  the  t^xtent  of  unsatisfactoriness  ? — No. 

When  was  it  that  you  came  to  know  that  Mr.  Stewart  and  Mr. 
Taylor  did  know  something  about  the  fact  of  there  being  a 
balance  ?  You  say  "  afterwards.''  I  want  you  to  fix  the  period 
a  little  more? — It  must  have  been  in  1876,  I  think. 

Was  it  not  in  1877,  after  the  liquidation,  or  was  it  whilst 
it  was  in  progress? — It  was  whilst  it  was  in  progress. 

What  was  the  extent  of  your  communication  with  Mr.  Potter 
upon  the  subject? — Simply  that  there  was  a  large  uncovered 
balance.       I  don't  know  that  I  ever  told  him  the  exact  amount. 

Simply  that  there  was  a  large  uncovered  balance  upon  that 
account  ? — Yes. 

How  did  you  come  to  give  that  information  to  Mr.  Potter? 
Did  you  meet  him  casually,  or  upon  the  business  of  the  Bank  ? — 
No.  I  was  in  the  habit  of  meeting  him  frequently  ;  we  were 
connected  in  business. 

Then  it  was  casually  mentioned? — Casually  mentioned. 

When  were  these  communications  with  Mr.  Potter  that  you 
have  just  referred  to  now?  Were  they  during  the  liquidation  of 
1876? — No;  I  think  it  must  have  been  in  1875. 

You  became  aware  of  the  acquisition  of  certain  lands  in  New 
Zealand  ? — Yes. 

That  was  about  eighteen  months  or  two  years  ago? — Yes, 
about  two  years  ago. 

At  that  period,  when  that  transaction  was  being  carried 
through,  or  after  it,  had  you  any  further  communication  with  the 
Directors  or  any  of  them  in  regard  to  the  state  of  Nicol 
Fleming's  account? — It  was  on  that  occasion  that  I  understood 
that  Mr.  Taylor  and  Mr.  Stewart  became  aware  of  the  state  of  the 
account. 

That  was  the  occasion  that  you  previously  informed  us  of 
about  their  general  knowledge  ?— Yes. 

Did  you  meet  them  on  business  at  that  time? — I  was  invited 
to  meet  them. 

For  the  purpose  of  giving  information  upon  that  point? — For 
giving  my  opinion  as  to  the  value  of  Australian  and  New  Zealand 
property. 

You  were  at  that  time,  and  had  been  previously,  a  director  of 
the  New  Zealand  and  Australian  Land  Company,  Limited? — 
Yes. 

And  you  were  conversant  with  that  species  of  property  ? — Yes. 

Were  you  given  to  understand  at  that  time  that  the  Bank 
had  in  contemplation  to  acquire  lands  there? — T  understood  so. 

K  257 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

John  Hunter.  You  were  given  to  understand  that  ? — I  was  given  to  under- 
stand that. 

And  were  you  given  to  understand  what  purpose  they  had  in 
view  in  buying  land? — I  don't  know  that  I  ever  heard  of  the 
purpose  they  had,  but  I  understood  it  was  for  Nicol  Fleming's 
account — to  cover  it.  I  understood  it  was  for  the  purpose  of 
making  Nicol  Fleming's  account  right,  to  cover  whatever  dis- 
crepancy existed  upon  it. 

That  is  to  say,  by  making  a  protit  on  the  Australian  land  they 
would  cover  any  loss  upon  his  account? — Yes. 

Were  you  not  given  to  understand  by  two  of  the  Directors  that 
it  was  for  that  purpose? — I  quite  understood  it  was  for  that 
purpose. 

Wlio  gave  you  to  understand  that? — I  don't  know  that  it  was 
ever  in  so  mar)y  words  said  it  was  for  that,  but  I  considered  it 
was  the  fact  of  my  looking  into  Nicol  Fleming's  accounts  that  led 
to  my  being  consulted. 

With  whom  had  you  communication  about  it  chiefly? — Mr. 
Stronach  and  Mr.  Potter,  and  Mr.  Taylor  and  Mr.  Stewart 
occasionally. 

With  whom  chiefly? — There  was  not  much  difference  as  to 
that. 

With  all  four?— With  all  four. 

Did  you  see  them  together  or  separately? — I  saw  them  to- 
gether from  time  to  time,  but  at  long  intervals.  T  had  very  few 
meetings  with  them  altogether. 

Where  did  these  meetings  take   place? — In   the   Bank. 

Had  you  not  a  meeting  with  Mr.  Graham  at  Potter,  Wilson  <^ 
Co.'s  office?— Yes. 

What  is  Mr.  Grahain  .' — Mr.  Graham  is  a  member  of  the  firm 
of  Graham  &  Co.,  of  Poverty  Bay,  New  Zealand. 

Were  you  told  how  the  Bank  were  to  work  the  investment 
they  proposed  to  make  in  New  Zealand  and  Australia,  the  pur- 
chase through  Mr.  Graham  ? — I  understood  it  was  to  be  drawn  in 
drafts  of  Graham  &  Co.  from  New  Zealand  to  a  certain  extent, 
and  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  were  to  manage  the  rest  of  it. 

Did  any  of  the  Directors  in  these  conversations  which  you  had 
with  them  refer  to  the  large  returns  that  were  expected  from 
these  investments? — I  don't  remember  whether  they  referred  to 
that  or  not,  but  it  was  quite  understood  that  they  expected  large 
returns. 

When  you  say  it  was  quite  understood,  do  you  mean  that 
nobody  said  a  thing  about  it,  or  that  it  was  obvious  from  what 
they  did  say  that  they  assumed  that  would  be  the  case? — No  ;  I 
mean  that  I  may  have  said  to  them,  that  there  would  be  large 
returns  from  Australia  and  New  Zealand  properties  if  they  were 
properly  pvirchased. 

258 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

You  were  asked  to  advise  whether  there  would  be  large  returns  John  Hunter 
or  not? — Yes. 

And  you  said,  if  properly  purchased,  it  was  your  opinion  that 
there  would  be? — Yes. 

Was  nothing  said  by  the  Directors  I  Was  no  hope  or  expecta- 
tion expressed  that  these  larg;e  returns  would  be  sufficient  to 
extinguish  Mr.  Nicol  Fleming's  debt? — Yes,  that  was  said. 

By  whom }  Was  that  hope  not  expressed  by  one  or  other  of 
them  in  presence  of  the  whole  gentlemen  you  have  named? — I 
cannot  remember  whether  it  was  or  not  in  presence  of  the 
whole;  but  I  have  no  doubt  that  it  was  mentioned. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Was  it  by  one  of  them  or 
by  you? — I  think  it  would  be  by  nie. 

Hy  the  Lord  Advocate — Did  they  acquiesce  in  your  view? — 
Yes. 

From  what  passed  on  these  occasions,  when  you  were  dis- 
cussing this  matter,  would  it  not  have  been  plain  to  any  third 
person  who  was  there,  that  the  purpose  of  making  these  invest- 
ments was  to  wipe  out  that  liability? — I  don't  know  if  any 
stranger  had  been  present  that  that  would  have  been  apparent, 
but  it  was  apparent  to  me,  because  I  understood  how  matters 
stood. 

Then  probably  you  were  advising  the  Bank  before? — Yes. 
Mr.  Stronach  ? — Yes. 

Did  you  meet  the  Directors  along  with  Mr.  Graham  in  Potter's 
office? — No. 

Had  you  been  previous  to  this  consulted  about  other  pastoral 
properties,  as  they  are  called,  in  Australia  ? — Yes ;  I  was  con- 
sulted about  those  which  were  purchased  through  Glen  Walker. 
Which,  if  any,  of  the  Directors  did  you  meet  with  regard  to 
that  matter  ? — The  same  as  in  the  case  of  the  other — Mr.  Potter, 
Mr.  Taylor,  Mr.  Stewart,  and  the  Manager. 

What  did  you  understand  as  to  the  purpose  for  which  these 
acquisitions  were  made? — I  quite  understood  that  it  was  in 
connection  with  Nicol  Fleming's  matter.  I  knew  that  they 
did  make  a  purchase  at  that  time.  I  frequently  met  Mr. 
Glen  Walker  on  the  subject. 

Who  is  entitled  to  the  credit  of  the  name  "  Edin- 
burgh Pastoral  Association "  ? — I  really  don't  know  who 
originated  that  name.  I  don't  know  what  was  the 
object  in  giving  it  that  name.  I  did  not  think 
of  it  at  the  time.  In  1871  I  was  asked  by  Alexander 
Stronach  to  go  to  Bombay  in  connection  with  William  Nicol  & 
Co.'s  affairs.  He  said  he  would  like  if  I  would  go  out  and 
look  into  their  matters,  as  they  were  interested  in  Smith, 
Fleming  &  Co. ;  that  they  were  all  right,  but  he  believed  that 
there  was  great  extravacrance  going  on,  and  he  wished  me  to 
go  out  to  try  if  I  could  put  it  right. 

259 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

John  Hunter.  Would  you  repeat  that  answer  so  that  the  jurj^  may  hear  it? — 
He  asked  me  if  I  would  go  out  to  look  into  William  Nicol  A: 
Co.'s  matters,  as  the  Bank  were  interested  in  Smith,  Fleming  & 
Co. ;  that  there  was  nothing  wrong  with  them,  but  he  thought 
there  was  great  extravagance  g-oing  on,  and  he  wished  me  to 
go  out  and  put  it  risfht.  I  declined  to  g-o,  and  I  heard  nothing 
more  of  the  matter. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Who  made  that  offer] — Mr. 
Alexander  Stronach. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — Do  you  recollect  of  being  applied  to 
in  February,  1875,  by  Mr.  Robert  Stronach  in  connection  with 
some  stock  which  he  wished  to  be  held  in  the  name  of  third 
parties? — Yes;  not  in  1875.      It  was  in  1877. 

The  date  is  not  material,  but  you  recollect  of  it? — I  do 
recollect. 

What  was  the  proposal? — He  told  me  that  he  wished  to  take 
in  some  stock,  and  he  would  be  obliged  if  I  would  allow  him 
to  put  it  in  my  name  for  a  short  time.  I  consented.  There 
was  a  transfer  sent  to  me  which  I  executed.  I  afterwards 
waited  upon  Mr.  Stronach  before  the  annual  balance,  and 
requested  him  to  take  my  name  out  of  the  books,  as  I  did  not 
wish  it  to  go  forth  to  the  public.  That  was  before  the  annual 
meeting  in  July,  1877.  He  agreed  to  do  so.  I  examined  the 
list  of  shareholders  which  was  issued  afterwards — the  published 
list  of  shareholders — and  found  that  my  name  was  not  there. 
I  did  not  examine  the  register  of  shareholders  in  the  Bank.  I 
never  got  notice  after  that  to  attend  meetings  or  anything  of 
that  kind.  I  have  discovered  now  that  my  name  is  on  the 
stock  ledger  for  that  stock,  and  has  been  so  all  along.  I  had 
no  intention  whatever  then  of  becoming  a  shareholder  of  the 
Bank. 

Would  you  have  become  a  shareholder  at  that  time? — Well. 
I  don't  know.  At  that  time  I  would  not  have  become  a  share- 
holder in  any  bank. 

I  mean  in  1877? — Yes  :  I  would  not  have  become  a  shareholder 
in  any  bank  at  that  time,  because  my  funds  were  otherwise 
taken  up. 

Would  your  knowledge  of  Nicol  Fleming's  account  have 
affected  you?  [Objection  taken  and  question  withdrawn.] — I 
don't  remember  whether  I  read  the  balance  sheet  of  1878.  The 
stock  of  the  Australian  and  New  Zealand  Land  Company  has 
never  been  quoted  on  the  Exchange. 

Are  the  shares  depreciated  at  present? — I  cannot  say,  because 
there  have  been  no  sales. 

I  suppose  you  regard  the  intrinsic  value  as  being  as  good  as 
ever? — I  do. 

Is   it   an    investment   that    is    easily    realised? — The    land    is 

260 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

easily  enough  realised,  but  the  shares  are  not  so  easily  realised,  John  Hunter, 
because  they  are  not  upon  the  Stock  Exchange. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — Do  I  understand  that  your  communications 
with  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach  ul)Out  1874  were  as  his  private 
friend  with  regard  to  the  matters  you  have  explained'/ — Yes. 

You  had  his  confidence  with  regard  to  the*^e  matters,  which 
I  need  not  say  you  respected? — Yes. 

You  also  were  asked  with  regard  to  the  accounts  of  Mr.  Morton 
and  Mr.  Nicol  Fleming.  Were  you  satisfied  that  Mr.  Alexander 
Stronach  believed  that  Morton's  account  would  come  out  all 
right? — He  said  so  to  me  on  more  than  one  occasion,  quite 
emphatically,  and  that  it  gave  him  no  concern. 

You  believed  him  that  that  account  was  not  a  cause  of  anxiety 
to  him  ? — I  believed  him. 

With  regard  to  Mr.  Nicol  Fleming's  account,  you  have  also 
given  us  some  answers.  I  think  you  did  not  like  some  of  the 
operations  in  which  Mr.  Nicol  Fleming  was  engajr^ed? — No,  I  did 
not.  I  advised  hiiu  ihat  the  nature  of  his  transactions  was  such 
that  I  did  not  think  the  firm  could  be  successful. 

And  you  communicated  that  view,  which  you  arrived  at  by 
an  examination  of  the  books,  to  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach? — By 
an  examination  of  Mr.  Nicol  Fleming's  balance  sheets — not 
the  books. 

You  were  still  in  these  communications  acting  as  the  con- 
fidential friend  of  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach  ? — Yes. 

You  were  advising  him   confidentially? — ^Yes. 

Did  you  find  that  Mr.  Nicol  Fleming  had  a  lucrative  com- 
mission business? — Yes. 

And  that  if  he  stopped  speculative  business  and  confined 
himself  to  commission  business,  he  might  do  well  ? — He  might 
do  well.       He  had  a  good  commission  business. 

Then  in  the  result  you  advised  that  Nicol  Fleming  should  be 
put  into  liquidation,  which  I  think  was  done  at  Robert  Stronach's 
instance  about  the  beginning  of  1875? — Yes. 

Was  there  a  new  firm  constituted  as  part  of  that  arrangement? 
— There  was. 

It  was  to  take  up  the  commission  business,  which  was  reg^arded 
as  good  and  sound? — Yes.  I  made  out  that  it  was  worth  about 
£20,000  a  year,  so  far  as  I  could  judge,  and  the  result  of  the 
first  year's  operations  of  the  new  firm  seemed  to  confirm  that. 

That  was  clear  profit  from  commissions  alone? — ^Yes. 

Was  it  part  of  the  arrangement  under  which  the  liquidation 
was  agreed  to  and  a  new  firm  constituted  that  any  sum  should 
be  paid  annually  to  the  Bank? — There  was  an  arrangement  by 
which  Mr.  Nicol  Fleming  was  to  give  the  whole  of  his  profits 
from  that  now  firm  and  from  a  firm  in  Manchester  with  which 
he  was  connected  towards  the  payment  of  his  debt  to  the  Bank. 
At  the  same  time  he  insured  his  life  for  £100,000.  and  I  believe 

261 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

John  Hunter,  he  assigned  the  policies.  I  had  no  knowledge  of  that,  but  I 
believe  they  were  assigned.  He  also  made  over  additional 
shares  in  the  New  Zealand  Company. 

What  was  the  amount  that  was  expected  to  be  annually  paid 
to  the  Bank  in  redemption  of  the  debt  if  that  arrangement  was 
faithfully  carried  out  by  Nicol  Fleming? — So  far  as  I  remember, 
I  think  it  was  expected  that  there  would  be  sufficient  to  pay 
interest  upon  the  balance  due  to  the  Bank,  and  over  a  period 
of  years  that  the  principal  would  be  redeemed. 

And  have  you  any  reason  to  doubt  that  if  Mr.  Nicol  Fleming 
had  kept  clear  of  speculative  business  and  stuck  to  his  com- 
mission business  that  result  would  have  been  realised? — T 
think  it  was  very  likely  to  be  realised. 

But  he  did  not  aftei'wards  keep  clear ;  he  resumed  specula- 
tion ? — Yes.  After  the  first  year  he  himself  went  out  to  India 
and  went  into  speculative  transactions. 

He  went  into  some  shipping  transactions? — Yes. 

And  in  consequence  of  his  not  having  done  what  he  promised, 
the  expectations  were  not  realised? — No. 

You  were  also  asked  with  regard  to  the  New  Zealand  Land 
Company's  shares.  I  think  jou  have  been  in  the  colonies,  and 
have  yourself  gone  over  the  ground  belonging  to  the  Company? 
— T  have.  I  did  so  in  1869  and  1870 — both  the  Australian  and 
the  New  Zealand  land.  I  am  a  large  holder  in  that  company  ; 
Mr.  Potter  is  also  a  lai'ge  holder  in  it. 

You  need  not  give  names  ;  but  are  there  many  others  of  the 
best-known  commercial  men  and  bankers  in  the  country  holders 
in  it? — ^There  are. 

Are  you  still  satisfied  that  these  shares  have  a  very  large 
intrinsic  value? — I  am.  1  think  there  is  a  good  prospective 
value  in  them. 

From  your  communications  with  Mr.  Morton,  did  you  form 
any  opinion  as  to  what  he  thought  of  these  prospects? — He  had 
a  very  high  opinion  of  them. 

And  did  you  believe  an  honest  opinion  on  his  part? — Perfectly 
honest  on  his  part. 

Whether  it  was  a  too  sanguine  opinion  may  be  a  matter  as  to 
which  people  may  differ? — Yes. 

Was  Mr.  Morton  a  man  who  had  great  force  of  character  and 
power  of  impressing  his  views  upon  others? — ^Yes,  he  had  great 
force  of  character. 

From  your  knowledge  of  the  value  of  land  in  the  colonies,  did 
you  think  that  the  purchases  gone  into  through  Glen  Walker  and 
Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  would  likely  accomplish  the  ends  which  you 
have  explained  they  were  intended  to  achieve? — Yes;  I  think 
they  would,   if  judiciously  managed  and  kept  for  a  few  years. 

You  think  they  would  have  accomplished  what  they  were  in- 
tended  to  do? — Yes,  to   reduce   Nicol   Fleming's   account.        I 

262 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

believe  the  value  of  these  lands  has  risen,  notwithstanding  the  John  Hunter, 
prevalent  depression  of  trade  over  the  world.  I  am  acquainted 
with  Mr.  Lewis  Potter.  I  have  known  him  for  a  great  many- 
years — over  twenty  years.  He  and  I  were  fellow-directors  of  the 
New  Zealand  Land  Company.  We  were  also  partners  in  the 
Hamilton  Coal  Company.  I  have  had  occasion  to  see  a  good 
deal  of  Mr.  Potter  in  business. 

What  opinion  have  you  formed  with  regard  to  his  business 
qualities?  I  mean  what  kind  of  departments  of  a  business  has 
he  made  his  own.  and  what  does  he  leave  to  others? — So  far  as 
my  experience  of  Mr.  Potter  goes,  he  never  would  go  into  details, 
but  took  a  broad  view  of  matters,  and  where  he  had  confidence 
he  was  perfectly  satisfied  to  take  for  granted  a  great  deal  that 
was  put  before  him. 

Have  you  found  that  to  be  the  case  in  those  companies  that 
you  have  been  concerned  with  him  in? — ^Yes. 

As  regards  general  experience  and  judgment  he  was  able  and 
sound  / — Yes. 

But  rather  keeping  ojff  details? — ^Yes. 

Is  he  a  man  who  goes  into  books  or  any  detail? — No. 

Ts  that  a  kind  of  thing  which  he  leaves  to  the  officials  of  the 
companies  that  he  is  connected  with,  so  far  as  you  have  seen? 
—Yea. 

Is  he  much  of  a  book-keeper  at  all,  do  you  think? — I  don't  think 
he  is. 

Have  you  always  found  him  honest  and  upright  and  honour- 
able in  his  dealings? — Invariably. 

And  is  that  the  repute  that  he  has  always  enjoyed? — So  far 
as  I  know,  it  is. 

By  the  Dean  of  Faculty — I  have  known  Mr.  Robert  Stronach 
for  nearly  twenty  years,  I  think. 

Before  his  brother's  illness,  what  position  did  he  hold  in  the 
Bank? — I  am  not  quite  sure.  I  think  it  was  joint  manager,  but 
I  am  not  quite  sure  as  to  that. 

Before  his  brother's  illness  was  he  not  a  clerk  in  the  Bank,  an 
assistant? — I  did  not  know  him  when  he  was  a  clerk  in  the  Bank. 
I  may  be  wrong  as  to  the  lenjrth  of  time  I  have  known  him.  but 
h(>  was  in   a  position  in  the  Bank  then. 

What  kind  of  disposition  is  he  of?  Is  he  a  man  of  a  yielding 
disposition  ;  would  he  give  up  his  own  opinion  to  a  person  of 
more  decided  views? — Yes,  T  think  he  would  be  influenced  by 
people  of  more  decided  views. 

Was  the  gradation  of  rank  of  the  officers  in  the  Bank,  first  the 
manager,  then  the  cashieiv  then  the  accountant? — I  cannot 
answer  that  ;   I  don't  know. 

Did  Robert  Stronach  hold  a  subordinate  position  in  the  Bank 
before  his  brother's  illness? — Yes,  but  I  don't  know  exactly  what 
it  was. 

263 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Jobn  Unnter.  By  the  Lord  Advocate — I  suppose  you  don't  know  where  Mr. 
Nicol  Fleming  got  money  to  speculate  with — whether  he  got  it 
from  the  Bank  or  from  any  other  source? — No,  I  don't  know  that. 

But  you  know  that  he  did  speculate  unprofitably  ? — Yes. 

And  you  think  he  ought  not  to  have  done  it?  You  think  he 
ought  not  to  have  engaged  in  that  speculation  at  all? — I  think 
so. 

You  say  he  had  a  very  good  commission  business? — Yes. 

Had  he  a  very  bad  other  business? — Yes. 

He  had  a  big  good  business,  but  a  bigger  bad  one? — Un- 
doubtedly ;  but  the  bad  one  could  be  stopped  at  any  time ;  it 
was  mere  speculation. 

It  could  be  wound  up  ? — Yes,  he  had  simply  to  cease  the  opera- 
tions. 

But  in  point  of  fact  it  was  not  stopped  ? — It  was.  Mr.  Robert 
Stronach  stopped  it. 

Do  you  think  that  there  would  have  been  a  reasonable  prospect 
of  making  a  large  profit  on  tliese  Australian  lands  or  shares  except 
by  holding  them  for  some  years  to  come — I  mean  some  years 
from  the  date  of  the  investment  ? — They  would  require  to  be  held 
for  some  years  to  com©  to  make  a  large  profit. 

They  could  not  in  any  view  be  regarded  as  an  immediately 
realisable  security? — They  were  immediately  realisable,  but  not 
to  realise  a  large  profit. 

They  were  not  realisable  for  the  purpose  for  which  the  invest- 
ment was  made? — No. 

Did  you  ever  meet  with  Mr.  Potter  on  business  which  required 
him  to  go  into  details  of  books? — Yes. 

And  he  never  did  so  ? — He  never  did  so. 

Was  he  an  intelligent  man  of  business? — Yes. 

Did  he  understand  what  a  deficit  was  upon  a  large  account  due 
to  him  ? — I  have  no  doubt  he  did. 

And  I  suppose  he  was  capable  of  looking  after  the  question 
whether  he  held  securitv  for  it  or  not? — I  should  think  so. 


A.  P. 
Somerville. 


A.     F.     SOMERVILLB. 

By  Mr.  Burnet — I  am  a  paperaiaker  at  Lasswade.  I  am  a 
shareholder  in  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank.  I  hold  110  shares — 
£11,000  of  stock.  It  cost  me  £24,000  at  any  rate.  I  first 
became  a  shareholder  about  twenty-six  years  ago.  I  was  made 
an  Edinburgh  Director  about  1871.  Mr.  Inglis  was  on  the 
Edinburgh  Board  when  I  joined  it.  He  was  also  one  of  the 
Gla!5gow  Board  at  the  time.  I  did  not  know  anything  about 
the  Bank  purchasing  property  in  New  Zealand  or  Australia. 

Mr.  Inglis  never  mentioned  anything  of  that  kind  to  you? — 
No ;    I   think  not.       I  met  him  regularly  once  a  week  at  the 
Edinburgh   meetings. 
264 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Did  you  know  whether  the  Bank  were  in  the  habit  of  pur-  A.  F. 
chasing  their  own  stock  to  a  considerable  extent? — No.  About  ^omerville. 
the  end  of  January,  1877,  I  asked  Mr.  Usher  to  join  the  Edin- 
burgh Board.  He  agreed  at  first,  but  afterwards  withdrew 
on  account  of  some  rumours  which  he  had  heard.  In  con- 
sequence of  what  Mr.  Usher  said  to  me,  I  went  to  the  Bank  office 
in  Glasgow  and  saw  Mr.  Stronach  and  Mr.  Potter.  I  spoke 
to  them  about  Mr.  Usher's  objections.  I  told  Mr.  Stronach 
that  one  reason  why  Mr.  Usher  objected  to  join  the  Board  was 
that  he  had  heard  they  had  made  a  loss  through  a  person 
named  Binning,  and  that  he  had  also  heard  reports  that  the 
Directors  had  been  getting  advances.  I  said  for  these  two  reasons 
he  would  not  join  the  Board.  I  had  told  Mr.  Usher  that  I 
thought  his  information  was  wrong — as  I  believed  it  to  be  at  the 
time — but  that  I  would  go  to  Glasgow  and  examine  into  the 
matter,  and  report  to  him  (Mr.  Usher)  the  result.  Mr.  Stronach 
at  once  acknowledged  Binning's  debt,  but  said  it  was  all  written 
off,  and  that  the  position  of  the  Bank  was  not  affected  in  the 
very  smallest  at  that  time. 

What  was  said  about  the  advances  to  the  Directors? — I  put 
the  question  to  Mr.  Potter,  and  he  said  it  was  not  the  case, 
and  that  so  far  as  he  was  concerned  he  had  never  got  a  sixpence 
of  advance,  and  he  appealed  to  Mr.  Stronach  that  he  was  correct 
in  saying  so,  and  Mr.  Stronach  said  he  was  quite  right. 

Your  question  had  reference  to  advances  to  all  the  Directors? 
— Yes,  not  all ;  it  was  some,  Mr.  Usher  said. 

But  it  was  not  Mr.  Potter  alone? — No. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — The  information  you  had  got 
from  Mr.  Usher  was  that  some  of  the  Directors  had  been  getting^ 
advances  ? — Yes. 

And  Mr.  Potter  said  that,  so  far  as  he  knew,  that  was  not  the 
case  ? — Yes. 

By  Mr.  Btrnet — And  Mr.  Stronach  confirmed  it? — Yee.  I 
returned  to  Edinburgh  perfectly  satisfied  that  the  statements 
made  to  me  in  Glasgow  were  true,  and  I  told  Mr.  Usher  so,  but 
he  would  not  join. 

Had  you  ever  any  conversation  at  the  meetings  of  the  Edin- 
burgh Board  with  Mr.  Inglis  about  Nicol  Fleming's  responsibili- 
ties to  the  Bank? — Yes;  we  spoke  of  that,  and  Mr.  Inglis,  I 
think,  stated  to  me  that  they  had  ample  security  for  the  account, 
that  it  was  being  lessened,  and  that  in  the  course  of  time  it 
would  \ye  all  right.  I  cannot  give  the  exact  date  of  that. 
During  the  whole  time  I  sat  at  the  Board  with  Mr.  Inglis,  from 
1871  to  1878,  he  never  indicated  to  me  that  the  Bank  was  in 
difficulties ;   the  very  opposite. 

By  Mr.  Robeiitson — The  duties  of  the  Edinbiu-gh  Board  were 
to  attend  to  overdrafts  or  cash  credits,  and  give  an  opinion 
upon  any  point  that  the  Manager,  Mr.  Bain,  might  think  it  his 

265 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

A.  F.  duty  to  bring  before  us.  Our  duties  were  confined 
SomepvUle.  ^.^  ^^^  branch  at  Edinburj^-h.  We  had  no  concern 
with  the  general  affairs  of  the  Bank.  I  am  aware  of  the 
declaration  subscribed  by  the  Directors  under  the  Bank's  con- 
tract, to  the  effect — "  We  pledge  ourselves  not  only  to  do  so," 
that  is,  to  perfoi-m  the  duties  of  the  office,  "  but  also  to  observe 
strict  secrecy  with  regard  to  the  transactions  of  the  Company 
with  their  customers,  and  the  state  of  the  accounts  of  individuals, 
and,  in  g-eneral,  with  relation  to  the  business  of  the  Bank." 
That  applies  to  communications  both  to  partners  of  the  Bank 
and  to  the  outside  public. 

There  was  nothing  in  the  position  or  duties  of  the  Edinburgh 
Directors  which  entitled  them  to  more  communications  from 
the  general  Board  of  Directors  thap  the  other  partners? — No. 
Mr.  Bain  held  the  position  of  Edinburgh  Manager  during  the 
whole  period  of  my  directorate.  We  did  not  charge  ourselves 
with  the  duty  of  checking  or  ascertaining  the  position  of  any 
of  the  accounts  of  customers. 

Did  you  do  more  in  fulfilling  the  duties  of  Director  than 
merely  to  attend  to  such  business  as  the  Manager  laid  before 
you  ? — No. 

And  you  considered  that  to  be  sufficient  fulfilment  of  your 
duties? — Yes.  It  was  arranged  when  the  Edinburgh  Board  of 
direction  was  formed,  that  the  Edinburgh  Directors'  accounts 
should  be  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Glasgow  Board,  and 
not  of  the  Edinburgh  one. 

When  you  went  to  Glasgow  on  the  occasion  you  have  men- 
tioned, did  you  yourself  investigate  into  the  affairs  of  the 
Bank  so  far  as  you  could  in  one  day? — I  went  for  a  special 
object,  and  that  object  being  attained  I  did  nothing  else.  I 
had  no  documents  put  before  me.  I  contented  myself  with 
the  statements  there  made.  I  have  met  Mr.  Inglis  regularly 
during  the  period  of  our  joint  direction.  T  have  never  found 
him  deficient  in  candour  or  fair  dealino-.  As  regards  the  per- 
formance of  his  duties  as  a  Director  towards  myself,  my  opinion 
is  that  he  was  higlily  honourable  in  every  respect.  I  could 
not  conceive  that  Mr.  Inglis  would  do  anything — that  was  the 
opinion  I  always  formed  of  him — unbecoming  a  gentleman  ; 
and  that  is  my  opinion  at  the  present  moment,  and  after  all 
that  has  happened. 

By  the  Dean  op  Faculty — When  T  went  to  Glasgow  I  made 
no  special  inquiry  about  advances  to  Nicol  Fleming.  His  name 
was  never  spoken  of. 

Was  it  not  about  advances  to  him  that  you  made  special 
inquiry? — No  ;  I  went  through  for  the  special  purpose  of  getting 
infonnation  on  the  two  points  mentioned.  There  was  no  other 
business  talked  of.  I  was  not  told  then  that  Nicol  Fleming 
had   got  advances.       I   cannot   say  when    I   was   told   that.       I 

266 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

heard  he  had  got  some  advances.      Mr.   Inglis  mentioned  that,        A.  F. 
but  said  that  it  was  all  right,  as  I  said  before.      No  Directoi-s'  Somervilie. 
names  were  mentioned  at  that  interview  between   Mr.   Potter, 
Mr.  Stronach,  and  me.      I  put  no  question  about  who  they  were. 

John  Gillbspie.  J.  Gillespie. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — I  am  a  Writer  to  the  Signet  in 
Edinburgh.  I  have  been  a  Director  on  the  Edinburgh  Board 
of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  since  1862.  I  continued  in  office 
until  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank.  The  other  Directors  were 
Mr.  Inglis,  Mr.  Somerville,  and  Mr.  Craig.  Mr.  Bain,  who 
was  the  Manager  of  the  Edinburgh  branch,  attended  oui 
meetings  as  such.  The  business  brought  before  the  Board 
referred  exclusively  to  the  business  of  the  Bank  in  Edinburgh 
and  the  immediate  neighbourhood,  and  the  looking  into  the 
books  of  the  Hanover  Street  business  from  time  to  time.  The 
business  in  our  branch  showed  a  steady  increase  in  profit.  I 
am  satisfied  it  was  a  safe  and  profitable  banking  business. 
Our  balance  sheets  were  transmitted  to  Glasgow  half-yearly, 
for  the  making  u})  of  the  general  balance  of  the  Bank.  I  think 
we  were  twice  consulted  about  fhe  fixing  of  the  dividend — in 
1876,  and  once  before  that.  We  had  nothing  to  do  with  the 
making  up  of  the  report  to  the  shareholders.  I  don't  think 
any  change  was  made  on  the  dividend  in  1876.  I  think  it 
is  about  ten  years  since  the  arrangement  was  made  of  having 
a  member  of  the  Edinburgh  Board  and  a  member  of  the 
Glasgow  Board  iu  one  person.  I  tliink  that  was  arranged 
on  a  suggestion  of  my  own,  that  we  might  have  an  opportunity 
of  getting  such  information  as  we  wished  as  to  the  general 
progress  of  matters  connected  with  the  Bank.  Mr.  Inglis  was 
accordingly  appointed  a  member  of  the  Glasgow  Board;  he 
was  the  only  one  of  our  number  who  ever  sat  in  Glasgow.  At 
our  Board  meetings  I  and  the  other  Directors  present  spoke 
now  and  then  to  Mr.  Inglis  about  matters  coTinected  with  the 
general  business  of  the  Bank. 

Do  you  remember  inquiries  being  made  at  Mr.  Inglis  about 
any  particular  accounts  of  tirms  in  Glasgow  or  London  ? — I  do 
not  recollect  any  inquiries  being  luade  particularly.  Certain 
accounts  were  now  and  then  named — James  Nicol  Fleming,  and 
Smith,   Fleming  ct  Co. — James  Nicol  Fleming  notably. 

What  did  Mr.  Inglis  tell  you  about  the  advances  to  Nicol 
Fleming? — The  general  impression  conveyed  to  us  was  that  his 
advances  were  covered  by  sufhcient  securities  of  various  kinds. 
At  our  weekly  meetings  it  was  my  custom  to  read  out  the 
exchanges  from  the  clearing-house  returns  and  the  bills  of  the 
week,  and  latterly  these  exchanges  were  very  nmch  against 
us.     That  caused   us   some   little  anxiety,   and  we  used   to  ask 

267 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

J.  Gillespie,  information  how  that  occurred,  and  why  it  was  so  constantly 
on  our  side.  That  was  spoken  about  much  more  frequently 
than  Nicol  Fleming's  account.  We  were  told  by  Mr.  Inglis  that 
it  was  of  paramount  importance  to  maintain  large  reserves  in 
London,  and  Ihat  it  was  owing  to  that  that  these  exchanges 
were  so  much  against  us;  and  specially,  I  recollect,  we  were 
told  on  one  occasion  that  there  was  a  large  shipping  account 
kept  in  Glasgow,  that  large  wages  were  paid  in  Glasgow,  the 
price  of  the  ships  being  paid  in  London,  and  that  accounted 
so  far  for  these  exchanges  being  adverse  to  us  in  Scotland. 

May  I  take  it  generally  that  any  explanations  made  here 
at  the  Edinburgh  Board  regarding  the  general  business  were 
made  by  Mr.  Inglis? — They  must  have  been,  because  no  other 
one  had  any  knowledge.  We  heard  about  American  securities, 
chiefly  in  connection  with  difficulties  before  the  stoppage  of 
1857.  Mr.  Inglis  told  us  that  these  were  improving  very  much, 
and  though  not  immediately  realisable,  they  were  now  yielding 
a  fair  return,  and  would  probably  by  and  by  be  got  out  without 
loss.  I  recollect  6  per  cent,  being  at  one  time  named  as  the 
return,  but  I  cannot  tell  upon  what  security.  On  the  day 
before  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank  occurred,  the  Tuesday — that 
being  the  day  of  our  Board  meeting — there  was  a  general 
feeling  of  anxiety,  I  cannot  tell  very  well  how,  and  I  remarked 
that  we  still  retained  the  confidence  of  the  public,  because  our 
shares  maintained  their  price  in  the  market,  unless,  I  said, 
the  Bank  are  buying  them  in.  I  asked  Mr.  Inglis  if  they 
were  doing  so,  and  he  gave  me  to  understand  they  were  not. 
In  the  course  of  making  new  arrangements  for  bringing  one 
of  my  sons  into  the  business,  my  partner,  Mr.  Paterson,  and  I, 
in  the  last  week  of  July  or  the  first  week  of  August,  1878, 
purchased  each  £500  stock  in  the  Bank,  at,  I  think,  £236,  or 
within  a  pound  of  that.  The  purchase  was  made  through  Mr. 
Bain,  and  the  transfer  was  signed  by  Mr.  Tod,  of  Peebles. 
Before  that  I  held  £2000  stock,  part  of  which  I  held  from 
1859.  Besides  the  information  I  got  from  Mr.  Inglis,  I  was 
in  the  habit  now  and  then  of  speaking  to  Mr.  Bain  about  the 
state  of  matters  generally,  and  getting  certain  information  from 
him  such  as  he  had.  I  had  no  means  of  getting  information 
except  from  Mr.  Inglis  or  Mr.  Bain.  I  cannot  tell  whether 
Mr.  Bain  had  any  direct  knowledge  of  the  state  of  the  Bank 
in  Glasgow. 

By  the  Lord  Justicb-Clbrk — Had  you  any  anxiety  to  get 
further  information  about  the  Glasgow  proceedings? — Now  and 
then,  in  the  course  of  the  period  we  sat  there,  we  had;  and 
on  one  occasion  Mr.  Somerville  went  to  Glasgow  to  make 
inquiry,  and  on  his  return  he  told  us  he  was  satisfied,  or  at 
least  I  understood  he  was  satisfied. 

By  Mr.  Robbrtson — My  inquiries  were  not  intended  to  elicit 

268 


Photo.] 


[J.  Horsburgh. 


Lord  Mure. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

speciiic  information  i'rom  Mr.  luglis  as  to  the  accounts  I  men-  J.  Gillespto. 

tioned;  it  was  general  conversation  with  regard  to  their  position. 

I  was  quite  aware  it  was  the  duty  of  the  Directors  to  observe 

strict  secrecy  with  regard  to  the  transactions  of  the  Bank  with 

its  customers  and  the  state   of  accounts   of  individuals ;  but  I 

was  not  aware  any  obligation  to  that  effect  was  signed. 

But  you  would  not  have  desired  or  expected  Mr.  Inglis  to 
communicate  to  you  particular  information  regarding  accounts 
which  were  in  a  critical  position  1 — I  don't  know ;  I  think  the 
purpose  of  his  double  appointment  was  to  keep  us  pretty 
much  informed  on  the  same  questions  as  the  Glasgow  Directors. 
I  am  not  aware  there  was  any  special  appointment  of  him  as 
holding  the  double  office.  The  information  he  gave  us  was 
in  general  terms ;  we  never  heard  anything  of  figures. 

At  this  distance  of  time  can  you  charge  your  memory  ■vritK 
more  than  the  result  upon  your  mind  that  there  was  no  reason 
for  alarm? — No,  I  cannot.  The  subjects  for  the  deliberation 
of  the  Board  were  brought  before  us  by  the  Manager,  who 
had  a  note  of  any  matters  he  wanted  to  bring  before  us,  and, 
after  these  were  disposed  of,  it  was  my  custom  to  read  the 
bills,  exchanges,  and  variations  on  deposits  and  cash  accounts 
during  the  week.  Then  once  a  month  we  were  in  the  habit 
of  counting  the  cash. 

But  as  to  accounts,  it  is  the  case  that  the  Manager  took  the 
initiative  in  selecting  such  accounts  as  required  the  attention 
of  the  Board? — Certainly.  I  have  asked  questions  about  certain 
accounts  without  my  attention  being  called  to  them,  but  that 
was  not  the  practice.  If  anything  had  attracted  my  attention, 
I  should  certainly  have  brought  it  before  my  colleagues  or 
Mr.  Bain.  It  was  very  rarely  that  anything  of  that  kind 
occurred. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — So  far  as  I  knew,  we  had  no 
debtors  owing  large  sums  about  which  I  was  not  sure  whether 
they  would  be  paid. 

If  you  had  heard  of  such,  you  would  have  made  very  careful 
inquiry? — I  hope  I  would. 

If  you  had  heard  of  such  a  thing  as  an  arrangement  being 
required  to  recoup  a  deficit,  you  would  have  looked  very  care- 
fully into  it? — Well,  I  ought  to  have  done  so. 

Alexander  Suthhrland.  A.s«theria«d. 

By  the  Solicitor-Genbhal — I  am  sole  j)artner  of  the  firm  of 
Reid  &  Co.,  stockbrokers,  Glasgow.  I  have  done  business  as  a 
stockbroker  for  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank. 

What  instructions  had  you,  and  from  whom,  about  the  pur- 
chase and  sale  of  stock? — The  instructions  for  the  most  part, 
I  think,  were  from  the  Manager  of  the  Bank. 

269 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

A.  SuiheFland.  And  for  the  less  part'^ — All  the  instructions  came  from  the 
Manager.  My  firm  has  acted  for  the  Bank  for  about  thirty 
years.  I  have  myself  acted  for  it  for  about  twenty  years.  The 
Manager  when  I  first  began  to  act  for  it  was  Mr.  Sahnond,  then 
Mr.  Alexander  Stronach,  and  then  Mr.  Eobert  Stronach.  Mr. 
Salmond  ceased  to  be  Manager  sliortly  after  the  Bank  opened 
again  after  the  stoppage  in  1857.  I  have  frequently  bought 
stock  for  the  Bank.  I  have  done  so  during  the  whole  period, 
I  think.     I  bought  stock  for  the  Bank  in  1876,  1877,  and  1878. 

When  you  bought  stock  for  the  Bank,  how  did  you  let  them 
know  that  you  had  bought  it'l — By  sending  them  the  contract 
note,  in  the  same  way  as  to  any  other  client. 

Then  if  you  had  bought  for  the  Bank,  did  you  in  regular 
course  get  the  funds  from  them  for  the  day  of  settlement  as 
stated  in  the  contract  note? — ^Yes. 

In  any  case,  where  you  purchased  on  the  instructions  of  the 
Manager  during  1875,  1876,  1877,  or  1878,  was  the  name  of  the 
Bank  disclosed  as  being  the  purchaser? — No,  in  no  case. 

How  was  it  arranged  that  the  name  of  the  Bank  should  not 
appear? — I  simply  got  names  from  the  Manager,  in  the  same 
way  as  I  got  them  from  any  other  client. 

The  Bank  sent  you  the  names  into  which  the  transfers  were 
to  be  made  out? — Yes.  I  was  once  or  twice  made  a  transferee 
myself.  The  transfers  were  sometimes  made  out  in  name  of 
Thomas  Matthew  in  trust.  [Shown  Nos.  458  and  456.]  No. 
458  is  a  bundle  of  seven  sheets,  being  a  transcript  from  my  finn's 
ledger.  The  ledger  itself  is  No.  456.  These  detail  the  pur- 
chases and  sales  made  through  my  firm  on  the  instructions  of 
the  Bank,  commencing  10th  Februaiy,  1875.  Between  28th 
September  and  2nd  October,  I  negotiated  the  purchase  of  over 
£10,000  worth  of  stock  for  the  Bank,  just  before  the  Bank 
stopped. 

How  much  stock  stands  in  the  registei-s  in  name  of  Thomas 
Matthew? — I  cannot  give  you  that. 

Look  at  the  sheets  (No.  462)  and  see  if  I  give  you  the  figures 
correctly.  For  1875  was  the  amount  £9314? — The  document 
that  I  have  got  is  simply  a  copy  of  our  register,  and  the  summa- 
tion is  not  made  in  it. 

Well,  I  will  take  it  generally.  Were  the  purchases  of  much 
larger  amount  than  the  sales  in  name  of  Thomas  Matthew? — So 
far  as  passing  through  our  books,  they  were. 

On  some  occasions  were  the  purchases  in  one  year  approaching 
to  £10,000,  and  no  sale  at  all? — There  may  have  been  that 
arnoimt  of  stock  transferred.  In  those  cases  where  I  was  made 
a  transferee  myself,  I  did  not  get  any  certificate  showing  me  io 
be  the  holder  of  the  stock,  nor  did  I  receive  any  dividends. 
[Shown  Nos.  463,  464,  465,  466,  and  467.]  The  first  four  of 
these  are  letters  or  memoranda  received  by  me  from  Mr.  Robert 

270 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Stronach.       The  date  of  the  memorandum  No.  463  is  about  12th  A.  Sutherland. 
May,  1875.       It  says — "  I  can  take  £800  of  the  Bank  stock  at 
£233.       Please  let  me  know  the  result. — Sincerely  yours,  R.  S. 
Stronach."        The    second,  No.    464,   which    is   written    on    the 
outside  of  an  envelop,  is  dated  about  20th  May,  1876,  and  is  us 
follows :  — "  Sorry  to  get  such  a  tremendous  amount  of   stock. 
Don't  take  more.       Who  is  the  selling  broker?- — ^R.  S.  S."       The 
third,  No.  465,  is  a  letter  dated  10th  November,  1876,   in  the 
following  terms: — "My  dear  sir, — In  the  hurry  when  I  saw  you 
this  forenoon.  I  omitted  to  ask  you  to  write  to  Mr.  Bell,  Edin- 
burgh, and  ask  why  he  was  pressing  the  sale   of  the  stock  so 
much,  and  unduly  throwing  down  the  price  to  £223.       Perhaps 
you  could  ascertain  the  names  of  the  sellers.        Kindly  let  me 
know  before  the  close  as  to  the  amount  of  stock  in  the  market, 
etc. — ^Yours  sincerely,  R.  S.  Stronach."       The  fourth  document. 
No.  466,  is  a  letter  dated  2nd  August,  1877,  from  Mr.  Stronach, 
in  the  following  terms: — "My  dear  sir, — I  have  your  note  of 
to-day's   date,  and   will   let  you  have  the    £400   stock    for   the 
several  parties  noted. — Yours  sincerely,  R.  S.  Stronach."       No. 
467  is  a  bundle  of  four  receipts  for  moneys  realised  by  me  on  the 
sale  of  stock,  and  signed  "  for  R.  S.  Stronach,  John  Wardrop." 
The  dates  are  4th  October,  1875  ;  5th  October,  1875  ;  5th  Novem- 
ber, 1877;   and  22nd  July,  1878.       I  think  these  were  all  my 
transactions  by  way  of  sale  for  the  Bank  during  those  years. 

By  the  Dean  of  Faculty — I  am  aware  that  by  the  contract  of 
copartnery  of  the  Bank  the  Directors  had  full  power  to  purchase 
for  behalf  of  the  company  any  of  the  shares  of  the  capital  stock 
which  might  be  offered  for  sale.  I  understood  it  was  under 
that  article  of  Ihe  contract  that  I  so  acted  as  directed  by  Mr. 
Stronach. 

James  Smith.  Jamos  Smith. 

By  Mr.  Pearson — I  am  a  partner  of  Mevssrs.  James  Watson 
&  Smith,  stockbrokers  in  Glasgow.  My  firm  bought  stock  of 
the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  for  the  Bank  in  1875,  and  also  in 
1878.  We  completed  in  all  five  transactions.  These  transac- 
tions were  carried  out  by  the  instructit'iis  of  Mr.  Robert  Stronach, 
communicated  to  me  verbally.  On  28th  September,  1878,  on 
Mr.  Stronach's  instructions,  I  purchased  £2020  stock,  part  at 
£236,  part  at  £237,  and  part  at  £238.  The  price  of  the  stock 
rose  that  day  from  £236  to  £238.  These  purchases  have  not 
been  carried  out  in  consequence  of  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank. 
The  other  transactions  which  I  have  carried  out  on  Mr.  Stronach's 
instructions  are  as  follow: — In  1875  I  purchased  £1231  stock 
at  a  cost  of  £2823,  and  £900  stock,  costing  £2068— in  all, 
£4892.  Then  there  was  nothing  more  till  Febioiary,  1878,  when 
I  bought  £500  stock  at  £239.  costing  £1207  ;  in  April,  £1841 

271 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

James  Smith,  stock  at  £237,  costing  £4:4:08;  and  29th  May,  £1400  stock  at 
£237^,  costing  £3360— total,  £8976.  The  price  of  those  stocks 
was  paid  to  me  in  the  usual  way- — by  a  cash  slip  handed  over  the 
counter   by  the  teller. 

By  the  Dean  of  Faculty — Besides  these  transactions  I  bought 
and  sold  stock  of  other  companies  for  the  Bank — Chathams, 
Great  Eastern,  Caledonian,  Metropolitan,  East  London,  North 
British,  Metropolitan  District  Preference,  and  so  on.  In  the 
case  of  purchases  they  were  paid  for  and  taken  by  the  Bank ; 
but  in  the  case  of  sales  the  Bank  held  them.  It  was  generally 
from  the  stock  clerk  or  transfer  clerk  that  I  got  the  name  of 
the  transferee  for  the  Bank's  own  stock. 

Dngald  Bell.  DuGALD    BblL. 

By  the  Lokd  Advocate — I  am  a  book-keeper.  Till  lately  I 
resided  in  London.  I  am  now  in  Glasgow.  I  was  secretary  of 
the  Australian  Land  and  Investment  Trust,  Limited,  till  lately. 
I  ceased  to  hold  office  in  December.  I  was  at  one  time  clerk 
to  James  Nicol  Fleming.  I  entered  his  employment  when  he 
opened  his  office  in  Glasgow  in  February,  1863.  I  remained 
in  his  employment  till  the  end  of  1877.  I  was  in  Calcutta  for 
about  a  couple  of  years. 

But  till  April,  1875,  when  you  went  to  India  on  account  of 
Mr.  Fleming,  you  were  continuously  in  Glasgow,  as  a  clerk  in 
his  office? — That  is  so. 

Were  you  acquainted  with  Mr.  Fleming  when  you  became 
his  clerk? — No,  I  had  only  heard  of  him. 

Did  Mr.  Fleming,  shortly  after  you  entered  his  employment, 
open  an  account  with  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  ? — Yes ;  he 
took  me  to  the  Bank  and  introduced  me  to  Mr.  Alexander 
Stronach,  the  then  Manager,  so  that  I  might  be  known  as  his 
(Mr.  Fleming's)  agent,  and  operate  on  his  account. 

Mr.  Fleming's  business  was  not  successful,  I  believe,  even- 
tually?— It  was  not.  I  recollect  Mr.  John  Hunter,  merchant, 
Glasgow,  inquiring  into  Mr.  Fleming's  affairs.  This  was  early 
in  1874.  I  never  saw  any  report  by  him.  No  one  communicated 
to  me  the  result  of  his  inquiry. 

What  followed  on  his  inquiry,  to  your  knowledge? — -I  under- 
stood that  Mr.  Fleming's  affairs  were  put  in  liquidation,  and 
I  was  sent  out  to  Calcutta  shortly  afterwards. 

By  the  Loud  Justicb-Clerk — Was  that  in  1874  or  1875? — 
1875. 

By  the  Loud  Advocate — Mr.  Fleming  traded  under  the  firm 
of  Nicol  Fleming  &  Co.? — In  Glasgow  it  was  simply  James 
Nicol  Fleming. 

What  were  his  other  firms? — In  1868  I  think  the  tinn  of  J. 
Nicol   Fleming  &   Co.   was   started   in    Calcutta.      [Shown   book 

272 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

No.   370.]     That  is  J.    Nicol  Fleming's  private   ledger;   it  was  Dugald  BeJi. 
kept  by  me  down  to  1877.     It  is  all  in  my  handwriting  down 
to  the  end  of  1877. 

It  was  opened  at  the  time  that  he  started  that  second  firm 
in  Calcutta  in  1868?— About  that  time. 

What  is  the  state  of  Mr.  Fleming's  capital  account  as 
stated  in  that  ledger,  when  it  begins  on  31st  January,  1868? — 
It  begins  on   1st   February,   1867. 

At  1st  February,  1867,  what  was  the  state  of  it? — On  this 
point  I  am  in  the  hands  of  the  Court.  I  wish  to  state  that, 
although  I  have  no  knowledge  of  Mr.  Fleming's  movements  or 
intentions,  yet  I  suppose  it  is  quite  probable  that  he  may  yet 
come  forward  to  speak  for  himself,  and  per^haps  that  should 
be  kept  in  view  in  any  questions  that  may  be  asked  me.  I 
am  quite  prepared  to  go  into  it  if  the  Court  shall  so  rule. 

The  Lord  Justice-Clerk — I  think  you  are  bound  to  disclose 
any  knowledge  that  you  may  have. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — In  February,  1867,  the  balance  at 
the  credit  of  Mr.  Fleming's  capital  account  was  £48,239. 

Had  there  been  a  gain  or  loss  upon  capital  account  from  the 
time  you  joined  him  down  to  that  date? — There  had  been  a  loss 
in  round  numbers  of  about  £212,000  from  1863. 

So  that  at  the  time  you  joined  there  must  have  been  about 
£260,000   of   capital?— Yes. 

Of  which  about  £212,000  had  been  lost  in  1867?— Yes;  the 
balancing  period  in  the  book  was  31st  January.  At  31st 
January,  1868,  the  balance  to  the  credit  was  reduced  to  £25,818. 
It  remained  very  nearly  the  same  at  the  balancing  periods  of 
1869  and  1870.  At  31st  January,  1871,  the  balance  was  at  the 
debtor  of  capital  account  to  the  extent  of  £7716. 

That  is  to  say,  the  capital  was  all  lost  that  he  had  begun 
■with,  and  a  debt  of  the  amount  you  have  mentioned  was  left 
instead? — Yes;  at  the  balancing  period  in  1872  that  debit 
balance  was  increased,  and  it  then  amounted  to  £35,383.  At 
the  balancing  period  in  1873  the  debit  balance  was  still 
increasing ;  it  then  amounted  to  £84,420.  In  1874  the  balance, 
still  on  the  same  side,  was  £104,300.  In  1875  the  balance  was 
£213,588,  still  to  the  debit. 

What  was  that  last  increase  of  upwards  of  £100,000  owing 
to? — It  was  owing  to  a  number  of  old  accounts  having  been 
closed  in  that  year  before  I  left  for  Calcutta,  and  the  debits 
carried  to  profit  and  loss. 

How  much  was  the  amount  carried  from  profit  and  loss  that 
year  against  capital  in  closing  these  accounts? — £86,131.  Some 
of  those  accounts  had  been  open  for  a  considerable  time,  in 
the  hope  of  making  something  out  of  them.  There  was  always 
something  expected  to  come  in  from  them ;  but  nothing  came, 

s  273 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Dugald  Bell,  and  so  they  were  closed  and  carried  to  the  debit  of  the  capital 
account.     I  went  out  to  India  in  April,   1875. 

When   did   you   bring   up   these   balances   in   the   book  after 
wards? — After    I    returned    in    1876.      In    January,    1876,    the 
balance  is   £248,905   to  the  debit.        In   1877  it  is  £322,-366, 
and  by  the  end  of  1877  it  is  £365,143. 

So  that  in  that  business  h©  had  lost  £365,143  plus  the 
£48,000  you  told  us  that  stood  at  the  credit  during  these 
years  from  1868? — ^Yes. 

Therefore,  between  1868  and  the  end  of  1877  he  had  lost 
£413,383?— Yes. 

Does  that  represent  the  whole  of  Mr.  Fleming's  tradings  and 
losses  during  that  period?- — No,  it  does  not. 

It  was  just  one  branch  of  them? — Just  one  branch. 

On  whose  instruction  did  you  proceed  to  Calcutta  in  1875, 
and  how  long  did  you  remain  there? — Mr.  Fleming  spoke  to  me 
first  about  going,  and  afterwards  Mr.  John  Hunter  and  the 
Manager,  Mr.   Robert  Stronach,   spoke  to  me. 

You  understood  the  estate,  or  part  of  it,  was  in  liquidation 
then? — ^Yes,  I  understood  the  old  firm  of  J.  Nicol  Fleming 
&  Co.  had  gone  into  liquidation. 

For  whose  behoof?— For  behoof  of  the  Bank. 

And  I  suppose  it  was  because  of  the  Bank's  interest  in  the 
liquidation  that  Mr.  Stronach,  the  Manager,  and  Mr.  Hunter 
came  to  you? — -I  understood  so. 

You  understood  so  at  the  time? — Yes. 

What  was  your  object,  or  w<hat  were  your  duties  to  be  in 
Calcutta  when  you  went  out  in  1875? — I  was  to  realise  the 
assets  of  the  old  firm  as  speedily  as  I  could  without  sacrificing 
them,  and  remit  home  the  proceeds. 

To  whom  were  you  to  remit  the  proceeds? — To  Mr.  Hunter. 

How  long  were  you  out  there? — About  a  year. 

Did  you  find  the  duty  of  realising  an  easy  or  a  difficult  one? 
— Well,  I  found  matters  had  been  going  behind,  and  that 
there  was  very  little  to   realise. 

In  fact,  you  found  assets,  but  you  found  debts  too? — I  found 
large  debts. 

Bad  ones? — Yes. 

There  were  some  coals,  were  there  not? — That  was  the  prin- 
cipal asset ;  a  large  claim  we  had  upon  a  native  firm  for  coals. 
Nothing  came  of  Ihat  so  far  as  I  know.  We  could  not  get 
anything  out  of  it. 

Did  you  realise  anything  really  to  send  home  in  that  year? — 
No.  After  paying  some  of  the  debts  of  the  firm,  there  was 
really  nothing  to  send  home. 

Were  you  a  good  deal  down  at  the  premises  of  the  City  Bank 
before  you  went  out  to  Calcutta? — ^Yes  ;   I  was  frequently  down 
at  the  Bank, 
274 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

In   relation   to   this   matter   of   the  liquidation? — 'In   relation  Dugald  BelL 
to  Mr.  Fleming's  business  generally. 

Including  the  liquidation  ? — Yes. 

Were  you  not  there  almost  daily  for  a  time? — I  daresay  I 
was,  for  some  time  before  I  went  to  Calcutta. 

What  individuals  did  you  come  in  contact  with  on  these 
occasions  when  you  were  at  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank? — Very 
seldom  any  one  else  than  the  Manager. 

That  is  to  say,  generally  you  saw  Robert  Stronach  ? — Yes. 

Whom  did  you  see  besides  Robert  Stronach  upon  these 
matters ;  I  do  not  mean  simply  that  you  saw  them,  but  who  did 
you  meet  or  converse  with  on  the  subject  of  James  Nicol 
Fleming  or  his  liquidation  ? — I  saw  Mr.  Hunter  frequently  before 
going  out,  of  course. 

Anybody  else  ? — Mr.  Potter  spoke  to  me  about  it  also. 

Was  Mr.  Robert  Stronach  the  Manager  at  that  time? — No,  I 
think  not.  I  think  he  was  Assistant  Manager  only.  I  think 
his  brother  was  absent,  and  he  was  actinjo-  as  Manager,  I 
understood. 

Did  you  see  Mr.  Potter  at  his  own  office  in  Gordon  Street 
about  it? — His  office  was  then  in  Great  Clyde  Street,  I  think. 
I  saw  him  there  twice,  I  think.  He  removed  to  Gordon  Street 
while  I  was  away. 

When  you  saw  Mr.  Potter  at  his  office,  did  you  see  him  alone 
on  any  occasion  ? — Yes.      Mr.  Hunter  came  in  upon  one  occasion. 

What  was  the  object  of  your  conferences  with  Mr.  Potter? — 
Mr.  Potter  impressed  upon  me  the  necessity  of  doing  all  I 
could  to  send  home  remittances — to  realise  the  assets  and  send 
home  remittances.  I  went  to  see  Mr.  Potter  by  arrangement, 
at  the  suggestion  of  Mr.  Hunter.  Mr.  Hunter  suggested  that  I 
should  go  to  see  Mr.  Potter  about  my  going  out  to  Calcutta. 

For  what  purpose? — He  did  not  say  for  wliu^  pui-pose.  He 
just  suggested  that  I  should  see  Mr.  Potter,  and  I  did  so.  Mr. 
Potter  inculcated  upon  me  the  necessity  of  realisation  and 
sending  home  remittances  to  be  put  to  Mr.  Fleming's  credit 
and  to  reduce  his  debt. 

Did  he  seem  anxious  that  as  much  as  possible  should  be 
realised? — Yes;   he  impressed   that  upon  me  veiy  clearly. 

That  you  must  do  your  very  best  to  get  money  out  of  the 
realisation  ?— Yes.  [Shown  No.  31.\,  excerpt  from  credit 
accounts  Nos.  3  and  4.]  I  obserwe  the  balance  of  £487,006 
carried  over  to  the  debit  of  James  Nicol  Fleming.  I  should 
say  that  is  a  balance  due  in  respect  of  cash  advances,  as  at 
June,  1876.  I  have  no  doubt  it  was  the  l^alance  carried  over 
.after  my  realisations  in  Calcutta. 

By  the  Lord  Justic-e-Clerk — It  was  the  balance  at  his  debit 
after  all  realisations  up  to  that  time. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — I  saw  that  account  in  the  ledger  with 

275 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Dugald  Bell.  Mr.  Morison.  When  1  went  down  to  see  it  I  became  aware 
it  was  transferred  to  the  private  book,  from  which  No.  31a  is 
an  excerpt. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — The  date  of  the  balance  is  7th 
Jmie,  1876. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — I  did  not  understand  the  reason  for 
so  transferring-  the  account  at  the  time.  I  understood  that 
the  effect  of  that  entry  would  be  to  take  it  out  of  the  cheque 
box.  I  knew  Mr.  Fleming  had  other  indebtedness  than  repre- 
sented by  that  balance,  but  I  knew  the  details  of  that  balance 
better  than  I  knew  the  details  of  any  other. 

Were  there  any  business  relations  during  the  time  you  were 
in  Fleming's  office  between  James  Nicol  Fleming  &  Co.,  started 
in  1868,  and  the  firm  of  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.? — ^Yes.  These 
continued  during  our  liquidation.  There  were  certain  credits 
that  had  been  granted  by  the  Bank  to  James  Nicol  Fleming  A: 
Co.,  which  were  continued  during  the  liquidation.  These  were 
drawn  upon  by  bills  from  Calcutta.  The  acceptances  were  by 
the  Bank.  They  were  discounted  by  various  parties — some  by 
James  Morton  &  Co..  others  by  Innes  Wright  &  Co.,  and  others 
I  discounted  myself  at  different  banks.  These  bills  were  sent 
to  this  country  from  abroad.  They  were  all  sent  for  acceptance. 
Their  currency  was  six  months  after  acceptance. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — These  bills  began  shortly  after 
the  Calcutta  house  was  opened,  or  perhaps  about  the  year  1870. 
Were  they  carried  on  to  a  larger  extent  during  the  liquidation  1 
— Not  to  a  larger  extent  :   they  were  decreasing. 

They  were  mere  renewals  l — Yes  ;  they  were  renewals. 
By  Mr.  Smith — I  knew  Mr.  Wright.      I  formed  a  g-ood  opinion 
of  him.      His  partner  was  Mr.   Scott. 

Was  it  Mr.  Scott  who  conducted  the  affairs  of  the  firm? — Yes. 
It  was  Mr.  Scott  chiefly  whom  I  saw  in  regard  to  the  matters 
about  which  I  called.  What  brought  me  in  contact  with  the 
firm  was  chiefly  the  discounting  of  bills — I  handing  the  billa 
to  them  for  discount,  and  they  handing  me  the  proceeds. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — When  Mr.  Potter  impressed  on  me  the 
propriety  of  realising  what  I  could,  I  understood  it  was  with 
the  view  of  reducing  Nicol  Fleming's  debt  to  the  Bank.  It 
was  quite  plain  that  Mr.  Potter  was  desirous  to  do  his  best  for 
the  Bank. 

By  the  Dean  of  Faculty — The  liquidation  of  the  Calcutta, 
finn  began  in  January,  1875.  The  liquidation  in  Glasgow  had 
been  going  on  for  some  time  previously.  By  liquidation  I 
mean  turning  the  securities  which  the  Bank  held  into  money, 
and  applying  that  to  the  reduction  of  J.  Nicol  Fleming's  debt. 
I  don't  think  that  process  of  liquidation  is  finished  yet.  The. 
realisation  account  goes  on  after  June,  1876,  over  1877  and  1878. 
I  obtained  various  sums  of  money  from  property  belonging  to 
276 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Mr.    Fleming    and    dividends.        He    had    New    Zealand    and  Dugaid  BelU 
Australian  Company  stock.       I  do  not  know  if  it  is  sold.      My 
accounts  during   1877   contain  entries  of  the  dividends  I  drew 
from  that  stock  and  elsewhere. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — Did  you  meet  Mr.  Innes  Wright  about 
the  discounting  of  these  bilk  as  well  as  Mr.  Scott? — Occasion- 
ally; chiefly  when  Mr.  Scott  was  from  home. 

John  Inglis.  '  John  Inglis. 

By  the  SolicitoRtGeneral — I  am  a  clerk,  formerly  in  the 
employment  of  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  I  was  with  them  for 
about  fifteen  years,  up  till  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank.  I  was 
book-keeper.  There  were  a  great  number  of  bills  between  Potter. 
Wilson  &  Co.  and  James  Morton  &  Co.  They  were  accommoda- 
tion bills  principally. 

And  for  a  good  many  years  had  there  been  anything  but 
accommodation  bills  between  them? — For  a  good  many  years 
there  had  been  nothing  but  that. 

Were  any  of  the  bills  ever  paid  during  the  time  that  you 
were  there? — Rarely;   but  sometimes  they  were. 

Did  you  ever  know  Morton  pay  a  bill  ? — No ;  I  never  knew 
Morton  pay  a  bill  in  his  life. 

The  whole  time? — Scarcely  ever. 

Where  were  all  these  bills  discounted .' — ^A  large  number  of 
them  w^ere  discounted  by  Mr.  Morton.  They  were  our  accept- 
ances to  James  Morton  &  Co. 

Was  there  a  larsre  number  of  bills  discounted  with  the  City 
Bank  '—No. 

What  bank  did  you  get  any  of  these  bills  discounted  at  ? — ^We 
discounted  very  few  of  them.  They  were  our  acceptances  to 
James  Morton  &  Co.,  who  discounted  them,  I  think,  principally 
in  London. 

Were  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  correspondents  of  Holmes,  White 
&  Co.,  of  Melbourne? — They  were. 

During  the  time  you  were  with  them  did  drafts  for  lar^e 
amounts  come  home  to  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  from  Holmes, 
White  &  Co.?— Yes. 

Drawn  in  favour  of  James  Morton  &  Co.  and  Potter,  Wilson 
&  Co.  ?— Yes. 

On  whom  ? — The  Cit}'  of  Glasgow  Bank. 

Who  got  the  proceeds? — In  cases  in  which  I  had  to  do 
with  the  discounting,  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  got  the 
proceeds. 

Do  you  know  what  happened  in  cases  that  you  had  not  to  do 
with  ?— No. 

Have  you  heard  Mr.  Lewis  Potter  saying  anything  about  these 
credits? — Will  you   explain? 

277 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

John  Inglis.  About  the  year  1870,  what  were  the  relations  between  Potter, 
Wilson  &  Co.  and  Morton  &  Co.  and  the  Bank  so  far  as  you  knew  1 
— I  scarcely  understand  the  question. 

You  had  an  account  in  your  ledger  at  that  time  called  the 
City  of  Glasgow  discount  account? — ^Yes  ;  I  opened  that  account. 

When  you  discounted  Holmes,  White  &  Co.'s  bills,  what  was 
done  with  the  proceeds? — When  I  discounted  Holmes,  White  & 
Co.'s  bills,  I  credited  the  City  of  Glasgow  discount  account  with 
the  amount,  and  I  debited  that  account  with  the  proceeds  of  the 
discount,  which  squared  the  transaction. 

Who  in  your  firm  took  the  management  of  all  these  affairs? — 
Mr.  Lewis  Potter. 

Had  he  blank  forms  ? — He  had. 

From  Holmes,  White  &  Co.  ? — From  Holmes,  White  &  Co. 

Signed  by  them  ? — Signed  by  them. 

Were  these  used  as  required  by  filling  them  up  as  bills  drawn 
by  Holmes,  White  &  Co.  ?— That  "is  so. 

What  was  on  the  bills  written  out  when  Mr.  Potter  got  themt 
What  was  added  in  to  what  was  printed  ? — The  amount,  the  date, 
the  currency,  and  the  place — Melbourne. 

Was  all  that  put  on  in  Glasgow? — It  was  all  put  on  in 
Glasgow. 

Nothing  but  the  signature  was  put  on  in  Mr.  Potter's  office? 
— Nothing  but   the  signature  and  the  lithographed  form. 

As  regards  the  putting  of  tlie  dates  on  these  bills,  were  they 
put  on  of  the  date  on  which  the  date  was  written  ? — No  ;  they 
were  put  on  as  at  a  mail  date. 

You  mean  a  date  which  would  correspond  with  their  having 
made  a  journey  from  Melbourne? — Yes.  [Shown  Nos.  372  to 
389 ;  eighteen  books,  each  containing  fifty  blank  drafts,  un- 
stamped, by  Holmes,  White  &  Co.  on  the  Bank,  of  which  fifty 
had  been  used,  and  the  counterfoils  alone  remained.] 

Are  these  books  of  bills  signed  by  Holmes,  White  &  Co.  ? — Yes, 

Blank,  ready  for  use? — ^Yes. 

Where  were  these  kept? — Mr.  Lewis  Potter  kept  them. 

In  his  own  private  possession? — Yes. 

When  they  were  to  be  handed  out  for  use,  what  was  done? — 
James  Morton  &  Co.  applied  by  a  memorandum  for  certain 
credits.  There  was  a  memorandum  book  kept  by  me. 
I  looked  and  compared  these,  anticipating  certain  bills — a  bill 
due  on  such  a  date,  perhaps  eight  days  forward.  I  checked  this 
by  Mr.  Potter's  orders,  to  see  that  on  no  account  was  Morton  to 
be  allowed  to  anticipate.  I  then  explained  that  it  was  correct 
to  Mr.  Potter,  who  handed  out  the  drafts,  and  they  were  filled  up 
and  handed  to  James  Morton  &  Co. 

Who  were  they  filled  up  by? — Sometimes  by  me,  and  some- 
times  by   other  clerks. 

Do   you  remember,   in   Mai-ch,    1877,    of   any   communication 

278 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

coming  from  Holmes,  White  &  Co.  about  the  protracted  use  of  John  Inglis. 
these  bills? — I  cannot  speak  as  to  the  date;  it  must  have  been 
prior  to  that. 

They  objected  to  their  name  being  so  freely  used? — A  number 
of  years  prior  to  that  they  did. 

But  did  they  particularly  object  in  the  beginning  of  1877? — 
Not  that  I  am  aware  of. 

They  had  been  objecting  prior  to  that? — Yes. 

Who  told  you  that  ? — I  saw  it  in  their  letter. 

Did  Mr.  Potter  speak  to  you  about  it? — Mr.  Potter  at  all 
times  was  very  averse  to  these  bills  being  given  out  by  us  at 
all. 

Did  he  speak  to  you  about  Holmes,  White  &  Co.  objecting  to 
so  many  bills  being  issued  ? — He  did  not. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Why  did  he  give  them  out? — 
I  cannot  say  that. 

What  do  you  mean  by  objecting? — He  gave  them  out  with  the 
greatest  reluctance. 

How  did  he  show  that?  Was  he  under  obligation  to  give 
them  out  ? — Not  that  I  am  aware  of. 

By  the  Soucitor-Gbneral — Were  you  told  anything  by  Potter 
about  an  arrangement  that  was  made  in  1877  for  substituting  a 
new  credit? — Yes.  Mr.  Potter  called  me  into  his  room  in 
Gordon  Street,  I  think  early  in  January,  1877,  and  told  me  that 
it  had  been  arranged  that  a  portion  of  credit  24/6,  presently 
financed  by  James  Morton  &  Co.,  was  to  be  transferred  to 
another  credit  to  be  financed  under  the  name  of  Glen  Walker 
&  Co.,  that  I  was  to  take  charge  of  it,  that  it  was  to  be  apart 
from  our  firm,  and  that  I  was  to  call  upon  the  Manager  of  the 
Bank,    Mr.   Stronach. 

Was  anything  said  as  to  who  was  to  have  the  management 
of  that? — The  bills  were  to  be  drawn  under  Glen  Walker  &  Co.'s 
credits  in  favour  of  Innes  Wright  &  Co.,  who  were  to  account 
to  the  Bank.  I  superintended  the  operation  of  that  account  for 
about  ten  months. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — You  say  they  were  to  be  drawn 
in  favour  of  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  on  the  Bank? — ^Yes. 

By  the  SoLaciTOR-GENERAL — Had  Mr.  Potter  blank  forms  for 
these  bills? — Yes,  in  the  same  way  as  the  others. 

Did  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  fall  short  in  accounting  for  the  pro- 
ceeds of  these  bills? — They  did.  Mr.  Potter  spoke  to  me  about 
that,  and  also  Mr.  Stronach  frequently. 

And  ultimately  was  the  discounting  of  bills  to  Innes  Wright 
&  Co.  stopped  ? — It  was  stopped. 

Who  got  the  financing  after  that? — I  think  it  was  Mr.  Morton. 
With  regard  to  these  shortcomings  by  Innes  Wright  &  Co.,  I 
frequently  saw  William  Scott  about  them — almost  constantly.     T 

279 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

John  Inglis.  also  saw  Mr.  Wi-ight  in  Mr.  Scott's  absence,  and  complained 
about  it  several  times. 

Was  he  quite  aware  of  these  shortcomings  when  you  spoke  to 
him  ? — He  seemed  to  be  quite  aware. 

By  Mr.  Smith — The  bills  were  handed  to  Wright  &  Co.,  as  bill 
discounters.  The  business  was  practically  managed  by  Mr. 
Scott.  He  rendered  accounts  to  me,  which  I  examined,  and 
then  submitted  them  to  the  Manager  of  the  Bank. 

Up  to  November,  1877,  what  was  the  shortcoming  as  shown 
in  these  accounts? — I  am  merely  speaking  from  recollection, 
but  there  was  a  letter  which  I  receivd  from  Mr.  Scott,  in  which 
he  promised  to  make  me  a  payment  of  £38,000  during  that  week. 

Was  he  to  be  allowed  to  have  a  margin  to  any  extent  .< — 
At  first  he  was  not,  but  it  was  always  told  me  by  the  Manager 
that  he  would  be  allowed  a  margin  of  £15,000  to  enable  him  to 
finance  such  a  large  amount. 

When  you  saw  Mr.  Wright  on  the  subject,  did  he  say  anji;hing 
about  Mr.  Scott  managing  it? — I  met  him  as  a  partner  of  the 
finn,  and  I  spoke  to  him  concerning  a  subject  which  they  were 
both  cognizant  of. 

But  did  he  say  anything  about  Mr.  Scott  having  charge  of 
that  business? — He  did.  He  said  that  Mr.  Scott  took  the  entire 
charge  of  all  these  matters. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  carried  on  a  very  large 
business  both  as  shipowners  and  as  commission  merchants.  They 
had  intimate  relations  with  the  New  Zealand  and  Australian 
colonies.  They  were  the  agents  in  this  country  for  Holmes, 
White  &  Co.  during  all  the  time  to  which  my  evidence  applies. 
The  bills  drawn  under  the  credits  that  I  have  spoken  to  appli- 
cable to  Holmes,  Wliite  &  Co.  were  sent  home  with  Holmes.  White 
&  Co."s  name  upon  them  as  drawers  to  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.,  to 
be  used  as  occasion^  required,  and  they  remained  to  be  used  by 
Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.,  as  the  agents  of  Holmes,  White  &  Co. 

When  the  time  came  for  using  these  bills,  did  Mr.  Potter  fill 
up  the  date  so  as  to  have  the  same  effect  as  if  it  had  been  dated 
before  coming  from  the  colony? — ^Yes. 

Did  it  make  the  least  difference  whether  these  bills  drawn  in 
the  colony  were  sent  home  with  authority  to  Mr.  Potter  to  fill 
up  that  date,  or  whether  the  date  was  written  in  the  colony? — 
No  ;  it  made  no  difference,  in  my  estimation. 

Then  were  these  bills  treated  by  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  in 
accordance  with  the  mandate  or  authority  which  they  had  from 
their  constituents.  Holmes,  White  &  Co.  ? — They  were. 

Did  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  get  any  sort  of  benefit  by  them? — 
None. 

Were  they  merely  executing  their  agency  in  the  ordinary  way 
of  business  ? — Precisely. 

Not  for  their  own  benefit? — No. 

Was  there  anything  in  the  least  irregular  in  that?       They 

280 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

were   executing   it   in   the   ordinary  way,   you  have   told   us  1 —  John  Inglis. 
I  would  not  care  to  pass  an  opinion  upon  that. 

Does  your  evidence  apply  to  the  whole  of  the  credits  you 
have  spoken  to  in  which  Holmes,  White  &  Co.  were  interei?ted? 
—Yes. 

The  City  Bank  were  the  acceptors  of  the  bills  drawn  under 
these  credits? — They  were. 

And  the  money  was  applied  for  its  proper  purposes? — Yes. 

And  before  Mr.  Potter  gave  out  any  bill  was  the  application 
always  initialed  by  the  proper  officer  of  the  Bank? — It  Avas 
invariably ;  he  would  not  give  them  out  without. 

Then  you  spoke  about  certain  bills  to  which  Morton  was  a 
party,  or  in  which  Morton  was  interested  :  I  believe  you  called 
them  accommodation  bills  ? — Yes ;  they  were  entirely  for 
Morton's  acconunodation.  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  got  no  benefit 
from  theiu.  They  were  the  acceptors  for  Morton's  accommoda- 
tion, but  for  that  alone. 

You  spoke  about  a  credit  which  was  transferred  from  being 
worked  by  Morton  to  be  worked  l^y  Glen  Walker  &  Co. :  was 
that  the  credit  known  as  24/6? — Yes. 

Do  you  know  that  the  Bank  held  securities  against  that 
credit  ? — I  was  informed  so,  both  by  the  late  Manager  and  his 
brother,  and  also  by  Mr.  Potter.  Tliat  credit  was  entirely  for 
Morton's  benefit.  I  cannot  say  why  it  was  transferred  to  Glen 
Walker  &  Co. ;  I  was  not  informed  of  the  reason.  I  was  simply 
told  that  the  securities  for  that  £100,000  were  transferred  from 
24/6  to  38/47. 

You   also   mentioned   the   transaction    with    Innes   Wright    tt  ' 
Co.  when  they  failed  to  account  for  the  money  they  had  raised 
by  discount,  the  £48,000.     ^^%en  they  so  failed  to  account  for 
that  money,  was  Mr.  Potter  displeased ?^ — Very  much  so. 

And  he  expressed  his  displeasure  at  that  impropriety? — Yes. 

What  did  he  do  in  consequence  of  that? — He  told  me 
frequently  to  call  for  Mr.  Scott,  and  urge  upon  him  the  pro- 
priety of  making   payments. 

To  pay  up  that  £48,000?— It  was  not  always  £48,000;  it 
fluctuated. 

But  to  pay  up  the  balance  which  Scott  was  short  of  the 
sum  he  had  got  by  discount? — Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clekk — That  was  a  defalcation  on  Scott's 
part  ? — Yes. 

By  Mr.  BALFOtfK — And  whicli  Mr.  Potter  did  his  best  to 
recover? — ^Yes;  both  Mr.  Potter  and  Mr.   Stronach. 

Were  there  other  credits  which  Potter,  Wilson  il'  Co.  worked? 
—Yes. 

Were  they  worked  for  behoof  of  the  Bank? — Yes. 

And  that  alone? — And  that  alone,  with  one  exception — our 
own  credit. 

281 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

John  Inglis.  What  was  the  one  exception  1 — We  had  a  credit.  Speaking 
from  recollection,  I  think  we  had  an  advance  of  about  £9000. 

How  long  was  that  ago? — Just  at  the  time  of  the  stoppage 
of  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.     40/11  was  the  credit,  I  think. 

Was  that  the  only  credit  in  which  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  had 
any  personal  interest? — It  was  the  only  credit  in  which  we  had 
any  interest.  There  was  one  credit  for  £10,000,  a  wool  credit; 
I  cannot  say  whether  the  £5000  that  was  running  at  the  time 
of  my  leaving  is  still  in  existence  or  not. 

Then  these  are  different  credits  from  any  you  have  spoken 
to?— Yes. 

Were  these  credits  covered  by  securities  in  the  regular  way? 
— All  that  we  had,  with  the  exception  of  this  wool  credit  and 
the  £9000,  were  amply  covered  by  securities. 

So  that,  in  the  credits  you  were  examined  about  by  the 
Solicitor-General,  did  Mr.  Potter  get  any  sort  of  benefit  from 
any  one  of  them? — No.  The  regular  banking  business  of  Potter, 
Wilson  &  Co.'s  firm  was  done  with  the  British  Linen  Company, 
and  also  with  the  National  Bank,  both  of  Glasgow.  These 
banks  always  gave  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  any  banking  facilities 
that  they  required  for  their  business.  We  never  found  any 
difficulty  about  that.  I  always  looked  ujDon  these  as  our  regular 
bankers. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Their  transactions  with  both  of 
these  banks  were  to  a  larffe  amount. 


'to^ 


J.  Wapdrop,  JoHN  Wardrop. 

By  the  Solicitor-General — I  was  lately  transfer  clerk  in  the 
City  of  Glasgow  Bank  at  Glasgow.  I  held  that  situation  for  four 
years. 

What  was  the  procedure  in  purchases  of  stock  for  the  Bank; 
did  the  broker  send  you  in  a  contract  note? — He  sent  it  to  the 
Manager.  The  broker  who  had  bought  the  stock  for  the  Bank, 
on  the  name  day  of  the  Stock  Exchange,  called  at  the  Bank 
for  the  name  of  the  purchaser.  The  Rank  supplied  that 
name.  After  that  a  letter  came  in  from  the  seller's  broker 
giving  the  particulars.  That  letter  would  come  to  Mr. 
Leresche,  and  he  would  hand  it  to  me  if  it  came  in  during  the 
week  before  the  Thursday.  I  would  hand  the  whole  letters 
to  Mr.  Leresche,  with  a  list  of  the  transfers  to  be  laid  before 
the  Board.  None  of  the  Directors  took  charge  of  the  transfer 
business,  so  far  as  I  know. 

Who  were  buying  for  the  Bank,  and  commg  to  the  Bank  to 
get  the  names  of  purchasers  to  hold  for  the  Bank  ? — Mr.  Drew, 
Mr.  Sutherland,  and  Watson  A-  Smith.  As  a  rule,  since  I 
went  there,  the  name  of  the  purchaser  generally  given  was 
Thomas    Matthew.      When    the   names    were    given    it    was    my 

282 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

duty  to  get  the  parties  to   sign   the  transfers.      I   usually  got  J.  Wardrop. 
the  name  signed  by  the  person  given  out  by  the  Bank  as  the 
purchaser.     I  never  had  any  difficulty  in  getting  their  signature ; 
they  signed  without  remark. 

These  persons  were  entered  in  the  ledger  as  holding  in 
trust  1 — Thomas  Matthew  was  ;  I  don't  exactly  know  the  heading 
in  the  ledger.  It  would  not  appear  in  the  stock  ledger  that 
that  stock  was  held  in  trust  for  the  Bank.  It  was  entered  just 
as  "  in  trust  "  during  the  time  I  kept  the  stock  ledger. 

Did  the  stock  thus  purchased  for  the  Bank  enter  the  balances 
of  the  Bank  ? — I  gave  a  note  to  the  accountant  of  these  amounts 
of  stock  on  the  balance  day  of  each  year.  I  don't  know  what 
he  did  with  it.  Mr.  John  Innes  Wright  became  a  partner  of 
the  concern  by  purchasing  stock  in  1875,  when  he  became  a 
Director.  The  first  stage  of  the  transfer  to  him  was  gone  into 
on  the  day  he  was  elected.  There  was  a  transfer  of  £1200  stock 
to  him,  the  first  stage  of  which  was  entered  upon  about  one  hour 
before  the  meeting.  I  don't  think  John  Innes  Wright  held 
any  stock  previously  to  that.  The  amount  of  stock  held  by  the 
Bank  in  1876  was  i:140,751 ;  Mr.  Drew,  £2970;  Thomas 
Matthew,  £9216;  William  Scott,  £1300;  John  Innes  Wright, 
£2681;  total,  £156,962.  Total  in  1877,  £185,721;  in  1878, 
£202,312.  In  January,  1878,  Mr.  Stewart  sold  £5000  stock. 
The  Bank  purchased  it.  Mr.  Stronach  gave  me  instructions 
about  the  transfer.  Latterly  the  dividends  upon  all  stock  held 
by  Drew,  Matthew,  and  others,  in  trust  for  the  Bank,  were 
credited  to  an  account  headed  "  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  stock 
account."  They  were  not  paid  over  to  any  one.  That  applies 
to  the  last  three  half-years. 

By  Mr.  Tkayner — The  proceeds  of  the  stock  held  by  Mr. 
Stewart  were  paid  in  to  the  credit  of  Mr.  Stewart's  account. 
No  money  was  paid  to  him ;  it  was  paid  in  to  his  credit  in  the 
account  he  had  then  running  with  the  Bank. 

By  Mr.  Smith — The  qualification  for  a  Director  is  the  holding 
of  £900  stock.  I  think  £1200  stock  was  found  for  Mr.  Wright 
to  qualify  him  for  a  seat  at  the  Board.  Mr.  Wright  held  £2681 
stock  for  the  Bank.  I  think  the  transfer  of  that  stock  was  made 
shortly  after  he  became  a  Director  in  1875.  I  don't  know 
through  whom  his  consent  was  asked.  I  don't  know  if  a  clerk 
was  sent  from  the  Bank  to  ask  his  consent.  I  don't  think  there 
is  any  other  Director  who  holds  stock  in  trust  for  tihe  company. 
Mr.   Wright  still  holds  that  stock. 

By  Mr.  Asher — Mr.  Salmond  holds  £2200  stock.  Prior  to 
1873  he  held  £1800,  and  in  1873  he  took  £400  of  new  stock. 
Since  then  he  has  held  £2200  down  to  the  close.  He  holds  also 
£360,  as  trustee  for  a  Mr.  Thomson.  With  regard  to  the 
purchases  of  stock  for  the  Bank,  it  was  with  Mr.  Stronach  that 
T  communicated.     None  of  the  Directors  ever  spoke  to  me  on 

283 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

J.  Wardrop.  the  subject.  None  of  them  ever  asked  to  see  the  stock  ledger 
or  the  transfer  ledger.  So  far  as  I  recollect,  Mr.  Salmond  has 
the  largest  holding  of  stock  amongst  the  Directors.  I  don't 
think  he  ever  sold  a  share  all  the  time  he  was  connected  with 
the  Bank. 

By  Mr.  Mackintosh — Mr.  Taylor  at  the  date  of  the  stoppage 
held  £1800  stock  ;  his  son  and  partner,  Mr.  Henry  Taylor,  .£500; 
and  his  brother  and  former  partner,  Mr.  Patrick  Taylor,  ,£500. 
I  cannot  say  whether  Mr.  Taylor  was  an  original  shareholder 
of  the  Bank,  or  whether  he  accepted  an  allotment  of  new 
stock  in  1864:.  I  am  aware  he  got  £300  new  stock  allotted 
to  him  in  1873.  The  same  year  he  bought  £120'  to  make  his 
holding  even.  Neither  Mr.  Taylor  nor  any  of  his  family  ever 
sold  a  share  since  they  became  connected  with  the  Bank. 

By  Mr.  Darling — Mr.  Stronach  holds  £900  stock.  Of  that 
he  acquired  £800  in  August,  1876.  Previously  he  had  held  only 
£100. 

J.  Button.  Jambs   Hutton. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — I  am  a  chartered  accountant  in 
Glasgow.  I  have  had  submitted  to  me  the  balance  abstracts 
published  by  the  Directors  to  the  shareholders  of  the  City 
Bank  for  June,  1876,  1877,  and  1878.  I  have  also  had  access 
to  all  the  books  of  the  Bank,  and  I  have  examined  these  so  far 
as  is  necessary  for  ascertaining  how  far  the  published  abstracts 
coincide  with  the  entries  in  the  books.  [Shown  published 
abstract  as  at  7th  June,  1876.]  This  document  is  headed 
"  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  Abstract  Balance  Sheet  as  at  7th  June, 
1876."  On  the  assets  side  there  is,  first,  "Bills  of  exchange, 
local  and  country  bills,  credit  accounts,  and  other  advances 
upon  security,''  £8,787,804  l7s.  9d.  These  assets  were  under- 
stated to  the  extent  of  £2,698,539  Os.  4d.  The  correct  amount, 
according  to  the  books  of  the  Bank,  is  £11,486,343  18s.  Id. 
With  regard  to  the  details  of  that  under-statement,  I  find  from 
the  scroll  aljstract  of  accounts  that  the  bad  debts  are  only 
stated  at  £50,000,  while  in  the  books  of  the  Bank  they  appear 
at  £300,000.  1  further  find  that  the  credit  accounts,  amounting' 
to  £147,468  16s.  lid.,  are  entirely  omitted  from  the  abstract 
of  the  Bank.  I  further  find  that  the  deposit  account  balances, 
amounting  to  £452,211  5s.  6d.,  are  entirely  omitted  from  the 
abstract  of  the  Bank.  The  sources  from  which  I  have  got  that 
information  are  the  scroll  abstracts  for  the  year  1876,  and 
from  the  general  ledger.  I  find  that  foreign  and  colonial  credits 
are  understated — entirely  omitted — to  the  extent  of  £973,300. 
They  appear  in  the  abstract  at  £1,304,873  l7s.  Id. ;  and  the 
true  amount  was  £2,278,173  l7s.  Id.  I  find  that  there  has 
been  transferred  from  this  first  br-anch  of  the  assets  to  the 
284 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

third  branch  of  the  assets  a  sum  of  £751,775,  consistin*?  of  J.  Hutton. 
three  items,  marked  with  the  initials  S.  F.  &  Co.,  £200,875  : 
J.  N.  F.,  £100,300;  J.  M.  &  Co.,  £430,600:  in  all.  £751.775. 
The  practical  effect  upon  the  statement  of  assets  of  bringino- 
down  that  amount  from  head  I.  to  head  III.  is  to  convert  what 
might  be  considered  a  doubtful  asset  into  what  would  be  con- 
sidered by  the  shareholders  and  the  public  an  asset  that  was 
very  assured — that  is  to  say,  to  convert  an  asset  that  miprht  be 
doubtful — an  asset  that  might  not  have  been  paid  at  all  into  an 
asset  that  is  beyond  doubt — assured,  in  the  nature  of  a  Govern- 
ment stock  or  other  stock — a  good  investment  held  by  the 
Bank.  The  next  item  in  error  is  an  item  deducted  as  cross 
accounts— £373,334  5s.  3d.  The  next  item  is  £32.751  17s.  lid. 
— the  balances  on  remittances  outstanding  between  branches 
and  branches  and  the  head  office. 

I   understand   you   are  taking  your   information   as   to   these 
from  the  scroll  abstract  and  the  books? — Yes. 

And  assuming  the  scroll  abstract  as  the  basis  of  the  abstract 
published? — Yes.  The  gross  of  what  I  have  just  read  out 
amounts  to  £2,983.841  5>;.  7d.,  but  there  are  several  over- 
statements in  the  abstract  balance  sheet.  Past  due  bills  appear 
in  the  scroll  abstract  at  £248,500  13s.  6d..  and  they  appear 
in  the  books  at  £174,393,  being  a  difference  of  £74,106.  The 
contingent  account  has  a  credit  balance  of  £2507.  while  in  the 
books  there  was  a  debit  balance  of  £10,747,  a  further  error  of 
£13,254.  Credit  accounts  No.  2  appear  in  the  scroll  at 
£143,087  18s.  7d.,  while  in  the  completed  balance  sheet  from 
the  ledger  they  only  amounted  to  £100,296  5s.  2d.,  being  a 
difference  of  £42,791.  Heritable  property  appears  in  the  first 
branch  of  the  abstract,  but  should  have  appeared  in  the  second 
—£119,541.  Adjusting  account  of  interest,  £35.6l)7  13s.  8d. 
That,  it  appeared,  was  only  the  difference  between  the  interest 
due  by  the  Bank  and  the  interest  due  to  the  Bank.  These 
gross  over-statements  amount  to  £285,302  5s.  3d.,  and  deducted 
from  the  previous  omissions,  amounting  to  £298,384  5s.  7d., 
it  shows  an  under-statement  on  the  first  branch  of  the  balance 
of  £2,698,539.  Second  branch — heritable  property,  advances 
on  heritable  property,  etc.,  appear  in  the  books  at  £319,949  5s., 
and  in  the  abstract  at  £256,650  10s.  Id.,  givintr  a  difference 
of  £63,283  15s.  Under  the  third  head,  "  Cash  in  hand,  gold 
and  silver  coin  and  notes  of  other  banks  at  head  offico  and 
branches,"  £862,812  4s.  4d.,  there  is  a  deduction  from  this 
head  of  £29,095.  Goveniment  stocks,  exchequer  bills,  railway 
and  other  stocks,  £2,218,868  13s.  7d.  ;  there  is  the  transfer 
I  have  already  referred  to  of  £751,775.  There  is  an  oTiiission 
of  the  remittances  outstanding  between  branches  and  branches 
of  £3356  16s.  lid.  ;  there  is  an  item  due  by  Irvin  «fe  Co.  of 
£11,991    9s.    9d.,   which,   before   the   balance   closed,   had   been 

285 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

J.  Hutton.  wiped  off  to  suspense  account,  and  these  deductions  amount  to 
£753,211  2s.  6d.,  accounting  for  the  difference  of  £792,306 
2s.  6d.,  which,  deducted  from  the  former  sum  mentioned,  leaves 
a  balance  of  £197,516  12s.  lOd. — the  difference  between  the 
assets  as  published  and  the  assets  that  were  disclosed  in  the 
books  of  the  Bank. 

They  are  understated  to  that  extent? — ^Yes.  The  amount 
in  the  balance  sheet  is  £12,126,151  5s.  9d.,  and  the  true  amount 
is  £14,105,667  18s.  7d.  The  result  is  that  about  two  million 
is  taken  off  each  side  of  the  account,  and  with  under  and  over- 
statements upon  both  sides  of  it.  There  is  under-statement  of 
certain  items,  over-statement  of  certain  others,  and  a  general 
deduction.  Coming  to  the  liabilities,  the  first  branch  is — 
"  Deposits  at  head  office  and  branches,  and  balance  at  credit 
of  banking  correspondents,"  £8,364,056  18s.  5d.  That  is  under- 
stated to  the  extent  of  £1,006,216  12s.  lOd.,  arising  in  the 
following  way: — I  find  that  the  deposit  account  balances  have 
been  entirely  omitted,  amounting  to  £455,444  5s.  lOd.  I 
find  that  deposit  accounts  credited  are  deducted  in  error  in 
the  abstract,  £1346  16s.  6d.  Credit  account  balances  have  been 
entirely  omitted,  £147,468,  16s.  lid.  Balance  due  to  London 
and  Provincial  Banks,  £14,216  15s.  2d.  ;  that  has  been  omitted. 
Adjusting  account  of  interest  due  by  the  Bank,  £11,405  13s.  2d. 
has  been  omitted  entirely. 

You  are  giving  us  what  makes  up  that  total  of  £1,006,000'? — 
Yes.  I  find  that  cross  accounts  have  been  deducted  in  error, 
amounting  to  £376,334  5s.  3d.— making  in  all  £1,006,216  under 
the  first  branch.  There  is  nothing  wrong  under  the  second 
branch — "  Bank  notes  in  circulation  in  Scotland  and  the  Isle 
of  Man."  Third  branch — "  Drafts  outstanding,  due,  or  with 
currency  not  exceeding  twenty-one  days,"  etc.,  £1,315,373 
17s.  Id.,  are  overstated  to  the  extent  of" £973,300.  I  find  no 
explanation  at  all  in  the  books  of  that  £973,300.  These  two 
sums  amount  together  to  £1,979,516  12s.  lOd.,  which  are  the 
total  under-statements  of  the  liabilities  of  the  Bank  at  this 
balance.  There  is  stated  as  at  profit  and  loss  in  the  balance 
sheet  £136,365  lOs.  3d. 

Have  you  any  obsei-vations  to  make  upon  that  item .' — In  the 
first  place,  of  that  sum  there  was  drawn  forward  from  the 
previous  balance  the  sum  of  £10,602  16s.  2d.,  leaving  as  the 
revenue  of  the  year  £125,762  14s.  Id.  I  get  that  from  the 
profit  and  loss  account  in  the  books  of  the  Bank,  showing  the 
earning'S  derived  from  the  use  of  capital.  I  made  up  a  memo- 
randum of  interest  chargeable  to  the  eight  largest  debtors  of  the 
Bank.  The  amount  of  interest  is  £125,763  12s.  8d.,  being 
about  18s.  7d.  under  what  the  sum  declared  as  dividend  was 
that  year. 

Did  it  appear  from  the  books  of  the  Bank  that  this  interest 
286 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

had  been  paid  upon  the  accounts? — No.      They  were  added  to  J.  Button, 
the  debts   of  the   parties. 

In  the  profit  and  loss  account,  which  showed  the  trade  profits 
of  the  Bank  for  the  year,  were  they  entered  as  profits  received? 
— They  first  came  in  under  a  g-eneral  entry  in  that  way  as 
interest  received,  but  it  really  was  a  general  entry  of  interest 
added  to  the  debts  of  the  various  parties,  and  transfen-ed  to 
the  credit  of  profit  and  loss  account. 

So  that,  in  point  of  fact,  the  divisible  profit  and  loss  would 
be  payable  out  of  capital? — It  seems  so. 

Leaving"  a  claim  against  these  parties  for  the  profit  supposed 
to  have  been  made? — Undoubtedly — added  to  their  debts. 

Is  the  interest  upon  the  accounts  of  these  firms  dealt  with  in 
precisely  the  same  way  in  the  profit  and  loss  account  and  in  the 
balance  sheets  in  the  next  two  years? — In  precisely  the  same 
way  all  through. 

It  is  distributed  amongst  the  shareholders  as  if  it  were  money 
earned  and  in  hand? — It  is,  indeed. 

Although  it  only  subsisted  as  a  debt  against  these  men? — It 
only  subsisted  as  a  debt — increasing  the  liability. 

Are  the  alterations  made  on  the  balance  sheets  of  subsequent 
years  much  the  same  as  in  1876? — They  are  all  entirely  on 
the  same  lines,  with  the  aggravation  at  the  ultimate  balance 
of  heavier  sums  transferred  in  the  same  way. 

And  for  the  first  time  in  that  balance  sheet  there  is  a  con- 
version— if  you  follow  the  scroll  a1)stract — of  balances  on 
credit  account  into  gold  in  the  Bank's  coffers? — ^Yes ;  to  the 
amount  of  ,£200,000'. 

What  was  the  reserve  fund  in  1876? — The  amount  of  the 
reserve  fund  in  the  balance  sheet  published  to  the  shareholders 
was  £450,000.  That  was  raised  from  time  to  time  by  any 
surplus  that  may  have  been  at  the  credit  of  profit  and  loss 
transferred  annually  to  the  fund  called  Reserve  Fund ;  but  I 
am  prepared  to  submit  to  you  that  it  is  an  entirely  fictitious 
entry  of  the  amount  now  stated  in  the  balance  sheet  for  1876 
at  £450,000. 

On  what  ground  do  you  come  to  that  conclusion? — On  the 
ground  that  there  has  been  transferred  to  interest  account  sums 
of  interest  on  assets  that  were  yielding  no  return  at  all,  and 
a  sum  equivalent  to  the  amount  said  to  be  at  the  credit  of  this 
account. 

You  are  still  speaking  of  1876  .'—Yes.  In  the  balance  ledger 
for  1876  there  is  at  the  credit  of  what  they  call  a  railway  and 
del)onture  account  a  large  sum,  and  of  that  there  is  a  sum  of 
£351,330  of  interest  debited  to  it  that  had  really  never  been 
earned,  but  simply  charged  upon  this  account.  In  1862  there 
has  been  charo>ed  to  this  railway  and  debentui-e  account  a  sum 

287 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

J.  Hutton.  of    £16,046    Os.    6d.  :    in    1863,    £20,551    10s.    lOd.  ;    in    1864, 
£22,492  5s.  3d. 

By  the  Lord  Ju.stice-Clerk — Are  these  sums  carried  to  the 
reserve  fund,  which  in  reality  has  no  existence  at  all? — Not 
directly  to  the  reserve  fund,  but  they  are  interest  charged  on 
these  inoperative  accounts  ;  and,  in  process  of  time,  transferred 
to  profit  and  loss  account,  and  then  from  profit  and  loss  account 
to  the  reserve  fund. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — There  having  been  no  receipts  during 
the  period? — None. 

What  is  the  total  of  them .' — For  the  last  three  years  there  are 
receipts — for  1871,  £45,762  15s.  lid.,  when  there  was  earned 
£16,009  12s.  Id.;  for  1872,  £46,325  18s.  lOd.,  when  there  was 
eamed  £17,280  14s.   lid. 

When  you  say  eamed,  what  precisely  do  you  mean ! — The 
natural  dividend  accniing-  upon  this  stock.  In  1873,  £47,820 
2s.  8d.,  when  there  was  eamed  £16,744  l7s.  The  gross  receipts 
from  1862  to  1873  only  amount  to  £50,090  18s.  lOd.,  while 
the  g'ross  debits  to  interest  account  amount  to  £401.421  Os.  lOd., 
leaving  a  net  ovei'charge  of  £351,330  2s. 

Do  you  mean  that,  in  point  of  fact,  they  credit  themselves 
as  if  they  had  £400,000  coming  from  that  source  ? — That  is  so. 

"Whilst  in  point  of  fact  only  £50,000  came  from  iti — That  is 
so.  The  next  item  is  that  the  Bank  held  stock  of  their  own, 
and  from  time  to  time  revalued  their  own  stock,  and  this 
revalue  they  transferred  in  the  same  way  to  interest  account, 
then  to  profit  and  loss  account,  and  ultimately  to  reserve 
fund.  In  1864  thev  revalued  the  stock,  and  transferred 
£15,858. 

You  need  not  give  the  details? — Well,  between  1864  and 
1875  the  gross  is  £128,854  7s.  Id.  :  and,  added  to  the  interest 
on  the  railway  debenture  account,  the  gross  sum  is  £480,184 
9s.   Id.,  entirely  absorbing  the  reserve  fund. 

Look  at  the  published  balance  sheet  for  1877,  and  beginning 
with  assets,  head  No.  I.,  tell  me  what  over  or  under-statement, 
if  any.  there  were? — For  the  balance  sheet  of  1877  the  under- 
statements amount  to  £3,227,154  12s.  8d. 

That  is  the  total  under-statement  of  what? — Of  the  assets 
under  the  first  branch— £3,227,154  12s.  8d.,  the  balance  sheet 
disclosing-  £8,758,838  l7s.  8d.,  while  the  true  amount  was 
£11,985,993  10s.  4d.  Tlien  head  II.  of  the  assets  in  the  balance 
sheet  is  understated  to  the  extent  of  £52,961  19s.  lOd.  Head 
III.,  under  the  gold,  was  understated  to  the  extent  of  £30,000, 
and  the  credit  accounts  still  have  a  transfer  from  branch  one 
to  branch  three  of  the  three  items  form.erly  referred  to,  amount>- 
ing  to  £751,775. 

Done  just  as  in  the  previous  year? — Yes  ;   making  the  gross 
under-statement  of  the  year  to  be  £2,558,341  12s.  6d. 
288 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

About   half   a   million   more   under-statement   than    the   year  J.  Hutton 
before? — That  is  so. 

The  actual  amount  of  their  transactions  was  increasing  by 
half  a  million,  but  it  is  brought  down  to  about  the  same  level? — 
Yes.  Then  the  liabilities  were  understated  to  the  extent  of 
£1,151,518  1.3s.  5d. 

That  is  the  first  head  ? — Yes ;  the  balance  sheet  disclosing 
£8,382,711  12s.  lOd.,  while  the  true  amount  was  £9,534,230 
63.  3d.  From  the  second  branch  there  is  deducted  £76,110 — 
understated  to  that  extent ;  and  from  the  third  branch  there  is 
a  sum  of  £1,330,712  19s.  Id.,  making  the  difference  between 
the  published  abstract  and  the  true.  The  liabilities  in  the 
published  abstract  are  £12,095,442  6s.  5d.,  while  the  true 
amount  was  £14,653,783   18s.   lid. 

How  about  profit  and  loss  in  this  year.^ — The  profit  and  loss 
disclosed  at  the  credit  in  the  published  balance  sheet  was 
£148,501  12s.  6d.,  but  of  this  there  was  brought  forward  from 
last  year  £19,990  10s.  3d.,  leaving  as  the  natural  revenue  of 
the  year  £128,511  2s.  3d.,  and  the  interest  on  the  same  eight 
chief  debtors  amounts  to  £128,998  19s.  9d.,  being  more  by 
£487  17s.  6d.  than  the  dividend  declared. 

Is  the  reserve  fund  in  1877  brought  out  in  the  same  way 
as  you  have  explained? — It  was  entirely  absorbed  in  1876,  and, 
of  course,  continues  to  be  so  until  now.  Then  in  1878,  the 
first  branch  of  the  assets  is  understated  to  the  extent  of 
£3,520,913  lis.  8d.,  the  balance  sheet  disclosing  £8,484,466 
98.  2d.,  while  the  true  sum  is  £12,005,380  Os.  lOd.  The  second 
branch  has  an  under-statement  of  the  heritable  ])roperty, 
amounting  to  £48,698  7s.  6d.  The  third  branch  this  year 
has  a  transfer  from  the  credit  accounts  of  £200,000  as  reserve 
gold,  and  the  former  entries  of  £751,000  now  appear  as 
£926,764,  the  gross  difference  being  £1,146,286  5s.  lOd.,  and 
the  difference  between  the  true  and  the  published  assets  being, 
the  balance  sheet  disclosed,  £11,892,593  lis.  8d.,  while  the  true 
sum  is  £14,315,917  5s.   Id. 

The  two  sides  of  the  account  were  larger  really  in  this  than  in 
any  of  the  two  previous  years? — Yes  ;  the  transactions  were  all 
larger. 

Whereas,  in  point  of  fact,  they  are  shown  on  the  whole  to 
have  been  the  same,  or  nearly  £300,000  less? — Yes.  Then  on 
the  liabilities  side  in  1878,  the  liabilities  under  the  fii-st  l)ranch 
are  understated  to  the  extent  of  £941,284  13s.  5d.  The  balance 
sheet  discloses  £8,102,001  Os.  4d.,  while  the  true  sum  is 
£9,043,285  13s.  9d.,  errors  in  the  same  line  as  those  I  have 
read  out  from  the  first  balance  sheet.  Under  the  second  branch 
there  is  deducted  notes  in  error,  amounting  to  £89,031.  Under 
the  third  branch  there  is  omitted  entirely  the  difference  between 
the  true  and  the  published  amount  of  bills  payable,  £1,393,008, 

T  289 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

J.  Hutton.  the  actual  amount  being  £2,881,252  18s.  6d.,  while  the  abstract 
only  discloses  £1,488,244  18s.  6d.,  g'iving  the  difference  referred 
to  of  £1,393,008.  The  profit  and  loss  for  this  year  instructs 
that  there  was  a  credit  entry  of  £142,095  12s.  lOd.,  whereof 
there  had  been  transferred  from  last  year's  account  £17,001  12s., 
leaving  only,  as  the  natural  revenue  of  the  year,  £125,094 
Os.  4d. ;  and  the  interest  upon  the  eight  larg'e  debts,  already 
referred  to,  for  the  year  amounts  to  £125,875  98.,  being  an 
excess  of  the  dividend  declared  of  £781  8s.  8d.  , 

Is  that  an  ordinary  mode  of  dealing  with  a  profit  or  loss 
account? — Quite  an  ordinary  mode. 

To  enter  in  it  interests  not  received? — Quite  a  usual 
circumstance. 

Was  it  a  correct  entry  in  this  case? — I  think  it  was,  if  it  had 
been  paid. 

But  that  is  just  what  I  wanted  to  know.  I  asked  you  if 
it  was  a  correct  entry  to  insert  in  a  profit  and  loss  account 
that  which  had  not  been  paid? — At  this  particular  balance  I 
should  have  said  it  was  a  correct  entry ;  but,  looking  to  the  fact 
that  for  the  previous  years  the  interest  had  not  been  paid,  it 
was  not  a  correct  entry.  But  for  any  one  year  by  itself,  it  is 
quite  a  correct  entry  to  transfer  to  interest  account  the  interest 
upon  any  debt. 

But  not  in  a  case  where  the  interest  is  standing  out  unpaid 
from  year  to  year,  and  simply  made  an  addition  to  the  debt? — 
I  should  say  not,  where  it  has  been  continued  from  year  to 
year  unpaid. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — I  suppose  you  merely  examined  these  books 
and  the  abstracts  as  an  accountant  does,  and  not  having  that 
knowledge  extrinsic  of  the  books  which  the  officials  of  the  Bank 
might  have? — I  certainly  did  it  as  an  accountant,  but  I  got 
all  the  knowledge  that  the  officials  could  give  me. 

But  at  all  events  you  did  it,  merely  taking-  the  books  of  the 
Bank  on  the  one  part  and  the  abstracts  on  the  other? — 
Entirely  so. 

About  this  manner  in  which  interest  was  treated,  I  understand 
you  to  say  that  if  it  had  not  been  that  the  accounts  had  not  been 
producing  interest  in  previous  years  you  would  have  thought 
it  was  quite  right  to  charge  interest  upon  them,  and  to  bring 
that  into  profit  and  loss  ? — Yes ;  but,  of  course,  I  have  the 
knowledge  here  that  they  were  not  paying  the  interest,  and 
that  they  were  not  paying  the  principal,  but  both  principal  and 
interest  were  being  accumulated  to  an  enormous  amount. 

In  other  words,  you  formed  the  opinion  that  these  were  bad 
or  doubtful  debts? — I  certainly  did. 

And  it  is  upon  the  view  that  these  were  bad  or  doubtful  debts 
that   you    think   interest    was   wrongly   charged    upon    them? — 
Entirely  so. 
290 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Apart  from  that  view,  and  but  for  that  view,  what  was  done  3.  Hutton. 
would  have  been  quite  right? — I  should  say  so.       If  the  debt 
was  to   be  paid,   and   the   interest   was   to   be   paid,   it   was  all 
in  order. 

And  I  suppose,  in  the  books  of  the  Bank,  the  interest  was 
caiTied  from  profit  and  loss  in  the  way  you  have  described? — 
It  is  so. 

Being  the  usual  way? — The  usual  way. 

So  that,  with  regard  to  the  manner  of  treating  the  interest, 
there  is  not  a  disconformity  between  the  abstract  and  the  books 
of  the  Bank? — Not  in  the  very  least.  On  the  contrary,  they 
agree. 

And  if  the  abstract  had  not  treated  the  interest  in  the  way 
you  have  described,  it  would  have  departed  in  that  matter  from 
the  books  of  the  Bank? — No  doubt  it  would. 

You  said  something  about  the  American  debentures,  that 
arrears  of  interest  were  charged  upon  these? — Yes;  all  through 
the  years  that  I  deponed  to. 

Did  you  find  from  the  books  of  the  Bank  that  these  debentures 
had  betjun  to  pay  interest  latterly? — Yes,  1  see  that  now. 
I  saw  it  for  the  last  three  years.  They  have  been  producing  a 
very  fair  return,  but  they  are  not  producing  the  return  by 
one-half  that  is  charged  in  the  books  of  tho  Bank  against 
them. 

That  may  be,  but  they  have  begun  now  to  produce  a  retuni ; 
and  whether  the  whole  may  be  paid  or  not  is  a  matter,  I  suppose, 
beyond  your  knowledge? — I  could  not  say. 

By  Mr.  Mackintosh — I  know  Mr.  Taylor.  I  have  known 
him  for  a  very  long  time — for  upwards  of  fifteen  years.  I  have 
been  in  the  way  of  meeting  him  very  frequently  in  business. 

What  opinion  do  you  hold  as  to  his  character? — Do  you  mean 
in  the  light  of  the  present  case,  or  prior  to  the  present  case? 

I  mean  as  a  man  of  integrity? — Well,  1  think  a  very  great 
deal  of  Mr.  Taylor.  I  always  considered  him  to  be  a  very 
honourable  and  a  very  upright  gentleman,  and  it  was  a  very 
great  pleasure  to  me  to  meet  Mr.  Taylor  at  any  time. 

By  the  Dean  op  Facultt — Has  there  been  any  interest  charged 
upon  these  American  bonds  except  the  £40,000  that  was  re- 
mitted home  from  America  in  payment  of  the  interest? — Yes. 

During  the  last  three  years? — No,  not  during  the  last  three 
years ;  but  there  was  a  number  of  years  when  there  was  no 
interest  got  at  all,  and  it  was  charged  then. 

But  there  has  been  nothing  charged  during  the  last  three 
years  except  what  was  actually  got? — Ob.  no.  There  is  a 
r^ular  charge  in  the  books  of  the  Bank  for  interest. 

But  not  in  excess  of  what  was  got? — It  is  in  excess  of  what 
was  got. 

291 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

J.  Hutton.  During  the  last  three  years? — During  the  last  three  years 
it  is  in  excess  of  what  was  got. 

Just  explain  that  to  me.  There  was  7  per  cent,  of  a  return 
obtained.  Is  there  anything  else  charged? — I  am  not  aware 
that  there  was  7  per  cent,  obtained. 

Is  there  anythino-  more  than  7  per  cent,  charged? — I  will  read 
each  item  for  the  last  three  years.  In  1871  there  is  charg^ed 
in  the  books  of  the  Bank,  and  credited  to  interest  account— 

I  am  not  speaking  of  1871.  I  am  speaking  of  the  last  three 
years,  and  I  ask  you  to  keep  to  them?— I  never  made  a  single 
reference  to  the  interest  of  this  account  since  1873.  I  only 
quoted  to  the  Lord  Advocate  up  to  1873,  because  since  1873 
they  have  been  drawing  a  very  fair  return. 

And  there  is  nothing  more  charged  in  the  books  than  what 
they   drew? — Nothing   since   1873. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — What  you  said  was  not  that  during 
the  years  1876,  1877,  and  1878,  there  was  not  a  dividend  due 
upon  that  stock  from  America  ? — No  ;  I  did  not  quote  anything 
in  these  years. 

I  understood  not ;  but  what  you  stated  as  to  the  three  years, 
as  earnings  that  ought  not  fairly  to  have  been  entered  in  the 
books,  was  the  interest  upon  this  large  account,  amounting  to 
about  £125,000? — Yes:    in  almost  every  year. 

You  stated  that  you  thought  that  ought  not  to  have  been 
brought  into  profit  and  loss,  because  it  was  not  in  course  of 
being  received  by  the  Bank  ? — Certainly  not  ;  but  that  neither 
the  debt  nor  the  interest  has  been  paid  for  some  years. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — How,  in  your  opinion,  ought  they 
to  have  dealt  with  the  principal  and  interest? — I  think  there 
was  nothing  to  hinder  them  from  adding  interest  to  the  debt 
that  was  due ;  but  I  think  they  should  not  have  transferred 
that  to  a  divisible  account,  and  paid  it  away  when  they  knew 
that  they  were  not  getting-  in  the  money.  In  course  of  time 
their  coffers  would  have   been  empty. 

Would  you  have  carried  it  to  bad  and  doubtful  debts,  or  to 
a  suspense  account  ? — I  would  have  carried  it  to  "  Suspense 
account.  No.   2,"  in  the  special  circumstances  of  the  case. 


The  Lord  Advocate  stated  that  this  closed  the  evidence  for 
the  Crown,  and  intimated  that  he  confined  the  charges  against 
the  panels  to  the  first  three  charges  in  the  indictment. 


292 


CHAPTER    IX. 

Evidence  for  Defence. 

FOR  MR.  STEWART. 

Alexander   Moore. 

By  Mr.  MacLban — I  am  a  chartered  accountant  in  Glasgow, 
and  a  partner  of  the  firm  of  Moore  &  Brown,  accountants  and 
stockbrokers  there.  I  know  Mr.  Stewart.  I  first  became 
acquainted  with  him  about  twelve  years  ago.  I  was  employed 
at  that  time  professionally  to  adjust  accounts — family  accounts 
— in  which  his  brother  and  he  were  interested.  These  accounts 
had  been  kept  by  one  of  his  brothers,  Mr.  Robert  Stewart,  and 
I  was  called  in  to  adjust  matters  between  them.  Mr.  Stewart, 
up  to  1874,  was  the  leading  partner  in  the  firm  of  John  Stewart 
&  Co.  That  was  a  very  old-standing  firm  in  the  wine  trade, 
and  one  which  has  done  a  very  considerable  business  for  many 
years. 

Were  you  called  in  at  any  tiiiie  to  deal  with  the  accounts 
of  that  drm'l — I  was  called  in,  in  the  year  1872-3,  to  adjust  the 
partnership  accounts  on  a  dissolution.  The  partners  up  to 
that  time  were  Mr.  Stewart,  his  brother,  and  Mr.  Stewart's 
own  son.  The  dissolution  of  the  firm  was  carried  through  in 
the  year  1874-5.  Since  that  date  the  firm,  which  is  now 
Stewart,  Pott  &  Co.,  has  consisted  of  Mr.  Stewart  and  his  son. 
Upon  a  dissolution,  Mr.  Robert  Stewart  took  over  a  portion  of 
the  business,  the  distillery  portion,  into  his  own  hands.  Since 
the  dissolution  I  have  audited  the  balance  sheets  of  the  new 
firm  yearly.  Under  the  old  firm  of  John  Stewart  Si  Co.,  I  think 
the  book-keeping  department  was  principally  under  the  super- 
vision of  Mr.  Robert  Stewart.  For  the  firm  of  Stewart,  Pott 
&  Co.  I  have  merely  audited  the  balance  shoots  since  the 
dissolution.  I  have  done  so  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  partners, 
but  chiefly,  I  think,  from  Mr.  Joliu  Stewart's  want  of  knowledge 
of  book-keeping. 

Is   he  deficient  in  his   knowledge  of   book-keeping? — Ho  has 
often  expressed  himself  so  in  my  hearing. 

Had  you  any  reason  to  doubt  that? — I  believe  he  is  deficient 
altogether   in   the  knowledg-e   of   figures   and   accounting. 

293 


Alex.  Moore. 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Alex.  Hoore.  Apart  from  that,  did  he  show  a  desire  that  everything  should 
be  correct  and  properly  stated? — He  was  always  extremely 
anxious  that  eveiy thing  should   be   ri^ht. 

You  have  had  occasion,  in  consequence  of  the  employment 
you  have  spoken  of,  to  meet  with  him  often? — Very  often. 

What  opinion  have  you  formed  of  him? — That  he  was  a 
highly  honourable  man. 

Upon  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank  Mr.  Stewart  and  his  firm, 
as  we  know,  were  indebted  in  certain  sums  of  money  to  the 
Bank? — They  were. 

He  had  a  personal  account,  and  his  firm  had  the  firm's 
account,  in  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank? — ^Yes. 

Has- Mr.  Stewart  assigned  to  you  investments  of  considerable 
value  to  meet  the  claim? — Immediately  on  the  stoppage  of  the 
Bank,  he  assigned  to  me  investments  to  the  amount  of  his 
liability  to  the  Bank  as  a  debtor,  and  his  firm's  debt  as  well. 

So  that  upon  these  overdrafts  the  Bank  will  not  lose  one 
shilling  ? — I  cannot  say  as  to  that.      They  are  not  realised  yet. 

But  so  far  as  appears? — The  amount  was  equivalent,  so  far 
as  appeared,  to  the  debt. 

Mr.  Stewart  remains  a  shareholder.  Deducting  what  he  has 
assigned  to  you  in  satisfaction  of  the  overdrafts,  what  property 
remains  to  Mr.  Stewart  to  meet  the  calls  which  will  be  made 
upon  him  as  a  shareholder  ? — I  may  say  that  Mr.  Stewart 
executed  a  trust  assignation  in  my  favour.  Taking  his  invest- 
ments in  the  New  Zealand  Land  Company  at  their  par  value, 
I  estimate  that  Mr.  Stewart's  assets  exceeded  his  liabilities  by 
£85,000  at  that  date. 

And  is  it  consistent  with  your  knowledge  that  Mr.  Stewart 
has  been,  durino-  all  the  years  that  you  have  known  him,  a 
comparatively  rich  man,  and  with  his  means  steadily  increasing? 
— I  examined  as  to  his  means  in  the  year  1871,  and  the  result 
then  was  made  about  the  same  as  it  was  at  October,  when  the 
Bank  stopped,  £85,000. 

Then  he  has  been  worth  about  £85,000  during  all  the  time 
he  has  been  a  Director  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank? — Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Justicb-Clerk — Did  I  understand  the  £85,000 
to  be  over  and  above  the  securities  assigned  to  you  for  the 
advance  from  the  Bank  ? — No  ;  the  total  value  of  his  assets  over 
his    whole   liabilities. 

How  much  is  the  balance  for  which  you  had  securities 
assigned?— £44,000. 

By  Mr.  MacLean — And  over  and  above  that  he  has  a  fortune 
of  £85,000?— No. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — No;  £45,000.  His  fortune,  I 
understand,  was  £85,000  altogether? — Yes. 

But  he  owed  £45,000  odd  to  the  Bank? — Yes;  for  which  he 
assigned  security. 

294 


Evidence  for   Defence. 


And  his  fortune  is  the  balance? — Yes.  Alex.  Moore. 

By  Mr.  MacLean — Let  us  understand  about  this — is  it  after 
making  provision  for  the  payment  of  the  overdrafts  that  the 
balance  of  £85,000  remains? — It  is. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — You  said  the  reverse  just  now. 
I  asked  you  whether  out  of  the  £8."), 000  the  amount  due  to 
the  Bank  must  come? — After  paying  the  Bank  there  is  £85,000 
remaining. 

You  have  got  securities  for  the  amount  of  the  Bank's  debt, 
and  over  and  above  that  there  is  a  fortune  of  £85,000.  Is  that 
so? — The  Bank  is  secured  out  of  a  certain  portion  of  these 
assets. 

Will  you  answer  my  question?  You  have  got  securities  to 
the  extent  of  the  Bank's  debt,  and  Mr.  Stewart  has  over  and 
above,  when  the  Bank  is  paid,  £85,000? — Yes. 

By  Mr.  MacLeais' — Then  it  follows,  from  what  you  have  just 
said,  that  his  fortune  in  1871,  which  you  stated  at  £85,000, 
had  been  increased  by  the  £44,000 1 — Not  at  all.  Mr.  Stewart's 
total  assets  in  October  last  amounted  to  £120,000;  his  total 
liabilities  amounted   to   £34,000. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — How  much  did  he  owe  to  the 
Bank? — Of  these  assets  he  assigned  to  the  Bank  £44,000  odds, 
in  security  of  his  personal  debt  and  of  his  firm's  debt. 

By  Mr.  MacLean — As  an  individual,  and  as  representing  the 
Company,  the  amount  owing  to  the  Bank  was  what? — It  was 
£44,000  altogether. 

Now,  go  back  and  give  us  the  assets  and  liabilities  as  at 
1871? — In  1871  Mr.  Stewart's  total  assets  amounted  to  £91,000, 
and  his  personal  liability  to  the  Bank  at  that  time  was  £5300. 
Mr.  Stewart  had  opened  his  account  with  the  City  of  Glasgow 
Bank  a  very  long  time  back.  I  don't  know  how  long.  [Shown 
Bank  book.]  I  see  from  that  book  that  the  account  was 
opened  on  23rd  July,  1868,  with  a  sum  placed  to  his  credit  of 
£5600.  The  account  of  Stewart,  Pott  &  Co.  with  the  City 
of  Glasgow  Bank  was  opened  in  June,  1874.  They  had  pre- 
viously dealt  with  the  Commercial.  The  account  there  was 
closed  by  a  payment  to  the  Commercial  of  £18,008.  The 
average  value  of  the  stock  in  trade  of  Stewart,  Pott  &  Co. 
was  about  £10,000,  and  their  outstanding  debts  £20,000.  Their 
sales,  on  the  average  of  the  last  three  years,  have  exceeded 
£60,000. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — You  say  there  was  £34,000  of 
indebtedness  against  £120,000  of  assets.  Was  any  part  of 
that  £34,000  Bank  debt?— Yes. 

To  what  extent? — £11,000,  which  is  the  balance  of  his 
private  account. 

After  deducting  that  £34,000  of  liabilities,  that  left  about 
£85,000  ? — Yes ;  New  Zealand  land  shares  are  what  is  assigned 

295 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

AJex.  Moore,  in  security  of  the  debt  which  he  owed  to  the  Bank,  and  the 
debt  which  his  firm  owed  to  the  Bank. 

Covering  the  debt  which  is  included  in   the  £34,000? — Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — The  whole  amount  of  Mr. 
Stewart's  indebtedness  as  an  individual  is  £34,000  odds.  The 
debts  of  the  firm  are  about  £45,000,  in  addition  to  the 
£34,000.  I  do  not  take  the  assets  of  the  firm  into  calculation 
in  the  £120,000;  I  take  Mr.  Stewart's  capital  into  account. 

James  Hay  JambS    Hat  StewaRT. 

Stewart. 

By  Mr.  Tratner — I  am  joint  manager  of  the  Commercial  Bank 
at  its  head  office  in  Glasgow,  and  have  been  so  since  February, 
1865.  I  know  Mr.  John  Stewart.  I  knew  his  firm  of  John 
Stewart  &,  Co.  It  had  an  account  in  our  bank,  which  was  closed 
in  1874.  That  account  had  been  in  the  bank  from  February, 
1840.  Throughout  the  whole  period  of  my  acquaintance  with 
that  account,  it  was  a  most  satisfactory  account  to  the  bank. 

Was  it  an  account  which  in  1874  your  bank  would  have  been 
very  glad  to  have  retained? — Yes;  I  rather  think  we  regretted 
the  fact  of  its  leaving  us.  At  that  date  there  was  an  overdraft 
of  above  £18,000.  That  overdraft  was  not  one  to  cause  us  any 
uneasiness  in  the  least,  looking  to  the  persons  with  whom  we 
were  dealing,  and  to  their  business.  We  had  no  security  for  it, 
except  the  credit  and  responsibility  of  the  partners  of  the  firm. 

William  William  M'Kinnon. 

M'Kinnon. 

By  Mr.  Tratner — I  am  a  chartered  accountant  in  Glasgow.  I 
was  one  of  the  liquidators  of  the  Western  Bank,  and  I  was  asked 
to  be  one  of  the  liquidators  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  biit  I 
declined.  I  have  looked  at  the  books  of  the  City  of  Glasgow 
Bank,  with  the  view  of  giving  certain  infonnation.  I  have  seen 
the  balance  ledger  which  is  signed  and  docqueted  by  the  Direc- 
tors. It  is  annually  docqueted.  T  have  looked  at  the  accounts 
for  1876,  1877,  and' 1878  respectively. 

Are  these  accounts,  docqueted  for  these  respective  years  in  the 
balance  ledger,  correct  according  to  the  entries  in  the  Bank's 
books? — They  are  quite  conform  to  the  books  of  the  Bank. 

And,  as  a  balance,  are  they  framed  upon  correct  principles? — 
Yes  ;  I  believe  them  to  be  so. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — I  suppose,  when  you  say  that,  you 
mean  that  they  correctly  give  effect  to  the  entries  in  the  books  of 
the  Bank? — Precisely. 

You  are  not  indicating  any  opinion  as  to  the  correctness  of 
the  entries  in  the  books  of  the  Bank  ? — No :  I  am  giving  an 
opinion  upon  the  balances  that  appear  in  the  balance  ledger. 

But  it  reflects  what  is  in  the  books? — Quite.      I  have  not  found 

296 


Photo.] 


[J.  Ilorsburgh. 


Mr.   Trayner, 
Counsel  for  John  Stewart. 


Evidence  for  Defence 

any  entry  of  £973,000  in  the  balance  ledger.       I  have  seen  it    William 
in  the  cash   book  of  1873.  M'Kinnon. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — It  is  quite  traceable.  It  is  very 
difficult  to  say  what  it  is. 

By  the  Loud  Advocate — But  you  say  you  can  trace  it? — Yes; 
I  can  trace  it  in  the  books  quite  well.  It  represents  a  credit 
entry.  It  represents  in  the  books  a  credit  entry  as  regards 
bills  payable  for  £973,000. 

On  what  debts? — On  bills  payable  to  the  Bank,  and  also  on 
foreign  and  colonial  credits. 

Is  it  so  dealt  with  in  the  abstract  of  the  balance? — The  weekly 
abstract. 

The  abstract  balance,  and  in  the  weekly  abstract ;   how  is  it 
dealt  with  there? — It  is  dealt  with  there  as  a  debit  and  a  credit- 
That  is  to  say,  it  is  taken  out  altogether? — The  effect  is  to 
take  it  out  of  both  sides. 

Then  what  do  you  gather  from  that  fact  was  the  nature  of 
this  sum  of  £973,000? — The  effect  of  it  is  to  decrease  the  foreign 
and  colonial  credits. 

But  what  do  you  gather  was  the  nature  of  the  transaction  out 
of  which  it  arose — are  the  bills  retired  ? — No ;  it  is  a  decrease  of 
the  bills  payable.  I  cannot  tell  why  it  was  put  there.  I 
cannot  find  anything  in  the  books  to  account  for  its  being  there. 
When  a  debt  is  irrecoverably  bad,  it  should  be  written  off  alto- 
gether ;  that  is  to  say,  when  the  Directors  come  to  be  satisfied 
that  it  is  hopeless. 

'V\1iere  the  Manager  or  Directors  of  a  bank  are  not  satisfied 
that  a  debt  is  hopeless,  and  hope  it  may  be  paid,  but  where  there 
is  no  incoming  for  two  or  three  years,  what  is  the  proper 
way  of  dealing  with  it? — I  should  say  that  suspense  would  be 
the  proper  way  to  deal  with  it. 

A  suspense  account? — Yes. 

You  would  not  carry  the  interest  on  such  debts  to  profit  and 
loss  in  the  first  instance? — No  ;  unless  there  was  some  very  good 
reason  for  so  treating  it. 

But  on  the  whole  the  projier  way  would  be  not  to  write  it  off 
altogether  ? — No. 

But  to  put  it  into  suspense?-— Yes. 


EVIDENCE  FOR  MK.   POTTEH. 

Cunnlnerham 

CuNNiNGH.\M  Smith.  ""'^  ' 

By  Mr.  Balfk)Ur — I  am  a  merchant  in  Glasgow.  I  am  a  son 
of  the  late  William  Smith  of  Carbeth-Guthrie  (who  was  at  one 
time  Lord  Provost  of  Glasgow)  and  nephew  of  llie  Inte  Mr.  James 
Smith  of  Jordanhill.  I  am  a  partner  of  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co., 
merchants,  Glasgow.  Mr.  Lewis  Potter  is  the  senior  partner. 
I  joined  the  firm  in  1853,  and  h.ave  continued  to  be  Mr.  Lewis 

297 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Cannln^ham  Potter's  partner  ever  since.       The  business  we  have  carried  on 
■       has  been  pi'incipally  a  commission  business.     It  has  been  very 
extensive  and  very  lucrative. 

What  was  Mr.  Lewis  Potter's  share  of  the  profit  of  that  busi- 
ness of  late  years? — £5000  or  £6000  a  year. 

From  that  business  alone? — Yes.  He  was  also  a  partner  of 
the  sepai'ate  business  of  Lewis  Potter  &  Co.,  owners  or  agents  for 
a  line  of  steamers  trading  between  Dublin  and  Liverpool.  I 
believe  that  also  was  an  extensive  and  lucrative  business.  I 
have  been  told  that  Mr.  Lewis  Potter's  average  income  from  that 
business  was  £3000,  but  I  have  no  means  of  knowing.  I  know 
that  he  is  possessed  of  a  valuable  landed  estate- — Udston.  I  do 
not  know  the  return  from  it.  I  am  aware  that,  besides  its  land 
rent,  it  is  a  valuable  mineral  estate.  It  is  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Hamilton.  There  is  a  very  valuable  coal-field  opening 
up  there  now. 

As  to  Mr.  Potter's  business  qualities,  what  departments  of  the 
business  has  he  directed  his  attention  to,  and  what  has  he  left 
to  others  ? — Latterly  he  left  the  details  of  the  business  very  much 
to  myself  and  to  his  son. 

And  in  what  respects  has  he  taken  part  in  the  business? — For 
some  years  he  has  taken  very  little  part  in  the  business.  He 
has  been  gradually  withdrawing  from  an  active  share  in  the 
business. 

And  has  he  avoided  going  into  details? — Very  much. 

As  regards  figures,  was  that  a  matter  that  he  concerned  himself 
with,  or  did  he  leave  that  to  the  subordinates? — Always  to  the 
subordinates. 

As  regards  his  style  of  living  and  expenditure,  was  he  very 
moderate  with  reference  to  his  means? — Very  moderate  indeed. 

With  what  banks  were  your  firm's  account  or  accounts  kept? 
— The  British  Linen  Company,  the  National  Bank  of  Scotland, 
and  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank. 

How  long  has  the  firm  kept  an  account  with  the  British  Linen? 
— Ever  since  I  joined  it ;  and,  I  believe,  ever  since  it  was  com- 
menced. 

Did  they  keep  an  account  there  from  1846? — I  believe  so. 

Down  to  the  present  time? — Yes. 

Was  there  any  particular  reason  why  an  account  was  kept 
with  the  British  Linen? — I  fancy  because  Mr.  Patrick  Brodie, 
agent  of  the  Bank  in  Glasgow,  was  a  brother-in-law  of  Mr.  Wilson, 
the  original  partner  of  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co. 

How  loner  has  the  firm  kept  an  account  with  the  National 
Bank? — When  I  joined  there  was  an  account  kept  for  the  Clyde 
and  Australian  Shipping  Company,  of  which  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co. 
were  the  agents.  After  that  company  was  dissolved  wo  were 
requested  by  the  Bank  to  continue  our  account  on  our  own 
account. 
298 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Were  some  of  the  partners  of  the  Clyde  and  Australian  Ship-  Cunningham 
ping  Company  interested  in  the  National  Bank? — Yes.  Smii. 

And  that  led  to  its  being  kept  there? — Yes. 

And  it  has  been  continued  ever  since  1 — Yes. 

When  did  it  begin  to  be  kept  at  the  National  Bank? — Before 
1853  ;  how  long  before  I  cannot  tell.  I  recollect  Mr.  Potter 
becoming  a  Director  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank.  After  that, 
as  before,  the  accounts  with  the  British  Linen  and  National  Banks 
continued  to  be  kept. 

Did  the  requirements  of  your  business,  or  any  requirements  of 
Mr.  Potter's,  as  far  as  you  know,  make  the  City  Bank  of 
importance  to  your  firm  ? — Not  at  all. 

You  did  not  need  anything  of  it? — No. 

After  he  became  a  Director  of  the  City  Bank,  did  the  officials 
express  a  desire  to  have  a  share  of  his  business  or  of  the  business 
of  the  firm  ? — I  believe  so. 

And  was  there  an  account  opened  there  also? — Yes. 

Kept  first  at  the  West-End  City  Branch? — When  I  first  joined. 

And  afterwards  transferred  to  the  head  office? — Yes. 

Was  that  a  drawing  account  or  a  discount  account? — The  West^ 
End  was  entirely  a  drawing  account,  so  far  as  I  recollect. 

After  the  Bank  asked  and  got  a  share  of  the  business,  had 
your  firm  sometimes  credits  from  them? — Sometimes. 

Had  you  credits  of  the  sazne  kind  from  the  British  Linen? — 
At  one  time. 

Was  anything  that  you  had  in  the  way  of  credits  given  in  the 
ordinary  way  of  banking  business? — Yes. 

Is  that  a  lucrative  branch  of  a  bank's  business? — I  believe  so. 

Are  you  aware  that  there  were  certain  accounts  standing  un- 
settled between  Mr.  Potter,  or  the  firm  of  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co., 
and  Morton  <fe  Co.  ? — Yes.  They  were  under  reference  for  many 
years.  An  award  has  been  pronounced  very  lately  by  Mr. 
Hunter. 

Upon  those  accounts  was  your  firm  a  considerable  creditor  of 
Morton's  ? — Yes. 

Did  you  ever  have  a  conversation  with  Mr.  Potter  from  which 
you  could  form  an  opinion  as  to  whether  he  was  uneasy  as  to 
Morton  or  his  credit? — Yes.  Mr.  Potter  seemed  to  believe  that 
Morton's  share  in  the  New  Zealand  and  Australian  Land  Company 
would  more  than  cover  all  his  liabilities. 

Did  he  appear  to  be  at  all  uneasy  about  getting  all  his  debt 
paid? — No,  I  think  not — in  time.  I  knew  that  Mr.  Potter  him- 
self was  a  large  shareholder  in  that  Land  Company,  and  a 
Director. 

So  that  he  had  the  means  of  forming  an  opinion  as  to  the  value 
of  its  shares? — Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — I  do  not  know  to  what  extent 
he  was  a  shareholder  in  that  company. 

299 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Cunningham       By  Mr.  Balpour — From  youi-  intercourse  with  Mr.  Potter,  can 
™  ^'      you   say  whether  he  thought  highly   of   the  present  value  and 
future  prospects  of  the  stock  of  that  company  ?— Yes. 

Did  the  business  relations  which  his  firm  had  with  the  colonies 
give  him  good  opportunities  of  knowledge  on  that  subject? — 
Very  good. 

In  certain  business  transactions  on  the  part  of  your  firm  did 
you  sometimes  have  occasion  to  get  guarantees / — ies. 

And  have  you  sometimes  had  guarantees  from  the  City  of 
Glasgow  Bank  ? — We  had. 

Was  your  object  in  getting  guarantees  to  have  the  caution  of 
some  person  or  body  which  was  regarded  as  safe? — Exactly. 

And  were  these  taken  as  being  so? — Yes. 

From  your  connection  with  Mr.  Potter  in  regard  to  these, 
could  you  form  an  opinion  as  to  his  view  of  the  worth  of  the 
guarantee  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  ? — He  seemed  to  consider 
that  it  was  quite  safe. 

Then  whenever  he  got  the  guarantee  of  the  City  Bank,  he  felt 
that  he  was  quite  safe? — Yes. 

You  have  had  twenty-five  years'  experience  of  Mr.  Potter. 
Have  you  always  found  him  an  honourable,  upright,  and  straight- 
forward man  in  his  dealings? — Quite  so. 

Not  a  man  who  would  be  guilty  of  any  impropriety  or  fraud ? — 
Certainly  not. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — Had  you  any  knowledge  of  the  inter- 
nal management  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank? — None  whatever. 
I  should  think  Mr.  Potter  was  a  Director  of  it  nearly  the  whole 
time  of  our  business  connection,  but  I  am  not  quite  sure  when  he 
joined. 

Did  he,  or  did  he  not,  take  an  interest  in  the  management  of 
the  Bank? — He  attended  the  meetings  regularly;  I  know  no 
more. 

You  know  nothing  of  his  connection  with  the  Bank  except  the 
fact  that  he  went  to  the  meetings? — Nothing. 

That  is  all  you  know? — That  is  all  I  know. 

Did  your  firm  have  any  transactions  which  might  be  called 
financing  on  account  of  the  City  Bank? — Yes. 

Did  Mr.  Potter  know  of  it? — Yes. 

Did  he  take  any  interest  in  that? — Yes. 

Much? — He  knew  of  it ;  it  was  done  with  his  knowledge. 

Who,  on  behalf  of  your  firm,  transacted  in  regard  to  these 
matters  with  the  Bank?  Was  it  you  or  Mr.  Potter? — I  did 
principally. 

With  whom  did  you  transact? — With  the  Bank. 

Can  you  not  name  anybody?— I  scarcely  ever  had  any — with 
Mr.  Stronach  if  with  any  one  ;  l)ut  merely  with  the  officials  of  the 
Bank  as  oflficials. 

But  who  arranged  the  matter  between  your  firm  and  the  Bank  ? 
300 


Evidence  for  Defence. 


— The  matter  was  arranged  first  by  Mr.  Potter.     I  took  charge  of  Cunningrham 
the  details  after  it  was  arranged.  Smith. 

You  said  Mr.  Potter  did  not  know  much  about  details? — I 
took  all  the  details;   he  arranged  the  matter  first. 

Had  he  knowledge  sufficient  tor  that? — I  t^hould  think  so ;  but 
he  never  interfered  with  the  details. 

But  he  had  quite  sufficient  knowledge  to  arrange  the  transac- 
tion beforehand? — He  arranged  the  transaction  beforehand. 

Do  you  think  he  undei'stood  the  transaction  which  he  arranged? 
— Certainly. 

But  you  did  not  think  him  capable  of  going  into  the  details  ci 
it ;  do  you  mean  to  say  that  1 — I  did  not  mean  to  say  that ;  I 
say  he  did  not  actually  do  so. 

But  do  you  mean  to  convey  the  impression  that  Mr.  Potter, 
though  capable  of  arranging  a  transaction,  was  unable  to  under- 
stand the  details  of  it? — No;  I  simply  said  that  he  practically 
did  not  attend  to  the  details  of  it. 

What  was  the  character  of  those  financing  transactions  of  which 
you  conducted  the  details? — The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  bought 
certain  shares  in  the  New  Zealand  and  Australian  Land  Company 
from  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  and  Holmes,  Whit©  &  Co. 

And  it  was  to  enable  the  Bank  to  meet  their  acceptances 
against  these  shares  that  you  financed  for  them? — Yes. 

Tell  us  how  that  financing  was  carried  out  in  detail  ? — The  City 
of  Glasgow  Bank  accepted  drafts  by  Holmes,  White  &  Co.,  of 
Melbourne,  in  Potter.  Wilson  &  Co.'s  favour ;  the  bills  were  dis- 
counted by  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co. 

Where  did  these  bills  come  from? — From  Melbourne. 

Who  signed  them  there? — Holmes,  White  &  Co. 

As  drawers? — As  drawers. 

And  then  they  were  sent  home? — -Yes. 

What  became  of  them  when  they  came  home  signed  by  Holmes, 
White  &  Co.?     Where  were  they  put? — They  were  discounted. 

Where  were  they  kept  after  they  came  home? — They  were 
kept  by  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co. 

Where  were  they  kept? — In  their  office. 

Who   kept   them? — I   kept   them. 

How  many  came  home  at  a  time? — Fifty  or  a  hundred. 

Did  not  Mr.  Potter  keep  these  himself? — Sometimes — partly  ; 
they  were  kept  in  the  office. 

Had  you  a  bundle  apiece? — No. 

What  did  you  do  with  them? — After  they  wore  acrcptod  by 
the  Bank,  they  were  discounted,  and  the  proceeds  paid  intx)  the 
Bank. 

What  was  done  before  they  were  presented  to  the  Bank  for 
acceptance? — I  don't  understand  you. 

By  the  Lord  Justicb-Clerk — They  were  filled  up? — They  were 
filled  up. 

301 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Cunningham      By  the  LoRD  Advocate — Was  there  a  date  put  in? — Certainly. 
Smith.  gy  ^j^Q^^  ?_One  of  our  clerks. 

Under  whose  directions? — Under  my  direction. 

What  did  you  make  him  put  in  ? — The  date  the  mail  left  Mel- 
bourne. 

The  date  about  two  months  before? — Yes. 

And  then  they  were  presented  to  the  Bank  for  acceptance,  and 
then  you  discounted  them? — Yes. 

What  did  you  get  for  all  that  trouble  ? — Nothing. 

Had  you  no  commission  upon  it? — None. 

What  was  the  object — there  must  have  been  some  object — in 
dating  these  bills  a  month  or  two  back,  so  as  to  make  it  appear 
that  they  had  been  diavsm  in  Melbourne?  Vvliy  did  you  do  that? 
— To  save  trouble  ;  the  bills  came  home  in  batches  of  that  kind, 
and  we  filled  them  up  as  if  they  had  come  from  Melbourne  by 
that  mail,  which  they  would  have  done  otherwise. 

Suppose  you  had  filled  in  the  date  when  the  bill  was  pre- 
sented to  the  Bank,  what  would  have  been  the  consequence? — 
I  cannot  say. 

Do  you  say  that  seriously? — I  don't  understand  you. 

I  am  sorry  for  it,  sir.     Would  you  have  had  any  difficulty  in 

discounting  them  if  you  had  not  put  in  a  mail  date  prior  to 1 

— Probably. 

Did  you  not  anticipate  that  you  would  have  had  difficulty, 
sir?— I  never  thought  of  a  difficulty;  it  never  struck  me. 

Why  did  you  not  put  in  the  real  date? — Because  it  was  the 
natural  date  at  which  the  bills  should  have  come  forward. 

Did  you  not  wish  to  conceal  that  the  bills  were  really  filled 
up  in  this  country? — Yes. 

Why  did  you  wish  to  conceal  that?  Was  it  for  no  reason; 
and  if  it  was  for  a  reason,  be  so  good  as  to  state  it?  Why 
did  you  wish  to  conceal  it? — I  can  hardly  explain  it,  it  seems 
to  be  so  natural.  The  bills  were  filled  up  at  the  date  at  which 
they  ought  to  have  come  from  Melbourne,  to  save  the  trouble 
of  having  them  sent  out  and  back  again  every  mail. 

But  what  would  have  gone  wrong  if  he  had  known  that  they 
had  not  gone  out  to  Melbourne,  for  that  was  the  thing  that  you 
wanted  to  conceal? 

Mr.   Balfour — That  was  the  Lord  Advocate's  expression. 

The  Lord  Advocate — The  witness  assented  to  it. 

The  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Was  that  what  you  meant  to  say? 
— That  we  did  not  wish  it  to  be  known. 

That  the  bills  came  blank,  and  you  filled  them  up? — Yes. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — What  was  there  which  might  have 
followed,  if  it  had  been  known,  which  led  you  to  desire  that  it 
should  not  be  known? — Possibly  there  might  have  been  difficulty 
in  discounting  them. 

302 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Why? — Because   the   bankers  might  have   thought  that  they  Cunningham 
were  finance  bills.  ^'"''''• 

They  were  finance  bills? — They  were  finance  bills  as  far  as 
the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  was  concerned. 

And  you  did  not  wish  any  suspicion  of  that  fact  io  get  abi-oad? 
—No. 

Now,  I  ask  whether  you  do  not  know  the  fact  that  these 
bills  were  filled  up  in  your  office,  and  dated  at  your  office, 
in  case  the  clerks  at  the  Bank  should  see  it  done,  or  know  that 
it  was  done? — No,  I  do  not. 

You  don't  know  that? — I  do  not  know  that. 

In  point  of  fact,  they  were  filled  up  at  your  office? — Yes. 

And  not  at  the  Bank  ? — Not  at  the  Bank. 

Laud  was  purchased  by  the  Bank  in  or  near  Poverty  Bay? — 
Yes. 

And  that  land  was  taken  in  the  names  of  the  individual 
partners  of  your  firm  ? — Yes. 

Was  that  purchase  made  truly  on  behalf  of  the  Bank? — Yes. 

And  did  you  finance  the  purchase  money  there  too? — Yes. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — Were  your  firm  of  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  the 
agents  in  this  country  for  Holmes,  White  c^  Co.  ? — They  were. 

And  were  those  bills  sent  home  by  Holmes,  White  &  Co.  to 
your  firm  as  their  agents? — Yes. 

And  was  what  you  did  done  as  their  agents? — Yes. 

With  their  authority? — With  their  authority. 

Did  it  in  the  least  matter  whether  the  bill  sent  home  to  be 
treated  as  you  treated  these  had  the  date  filled  up  in  blank, 
and  was  then  put  out,  or  whether  it  was  allowed  to  remain  in 
Melbourne,  and  the  date  written  on  there,  and  then  set  home?^ — 
Certainly  not. 

Did  it  matter  in  the  slightest  degree  to  any  human  being? — 
Not  in  the  slightest  degree. 

Mr.  Balfour — I  can  give  your  lordship  the  information  which 
you  asked  as  to  the  amount  of  the  Land  Company  stock  in  the 
individual  name  of  Mr.  Lewis  Potter.  It  was,  of  ordinary  stock, 
£37,608 ;  and  of  A  preference  stock  (4  per  cent.),  £25,07.'}. 
Then  there  is  some  held  by  him  and  Hunter  and  Morton  in 
trust. 

By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk — (On  the  suggestion  of  the  Lord 
Advocate) — Is  your  firm  sequestrated? — It  is. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — [Shown  list  of  proprietors  in  the  Land 
Company] — I  have  seen  this  list. 

It  includes  the  names  of  a  number  of  the  best  mercantile 
men  and  bankers,  does  it  not? — Yes. 

Mention  some  of  them? — Colonel  Hamilton,  Mr.  Campbell  of 
Camis  Kskan,  Mr.  Davidson,  of  the  Bank  of  Scotland ;  Mr. 
Ducroz,  of  London ;  Mr.  Robert  Ewing,  the  late  Mr.  Alexander 
Ewing,  Mr.  Gourlay,  and  many  other  names  that  I  know. 

303 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Cunningrham  By  the  Lord  Advocate — How  many  shares  does  Colonel 
Smith.  Campbell  hold? — Ordinary  stock,  £2783;  four  per  cent,  pre- 
ference, £1856. 

And  Mr.  James  Morton? — I  know  nothing  of  this,  except 
from  what  has  been  handed  to  me.  James  Morton  and  James 
Nicol  Fleming,  merchants,  Glasgow,  are  put  down  at  £23,825. 

And  there  are  a  good  many  City  Bank  names — Matthew  and 
Hunter  ? — -Yes. 

James   Nicol   Fleming? — Yes. 

And  Mr.  Potter?— Ye«. 

By  Mr.  Balfouk — Mr.  Davidson,  of  the  Bank  of  Scotland, 
is  there  ? — Yes ;  he  seems  to  be  there. 

For  how  much? — £3340  ordinary  stock,  and  £2227 
preference. 

And  Mr.   Henry  Davidson,  his  brother,  also? — Yes,    £11,805. 

Mr.  Gairdner,  of  the  Union  Bank,  and  others? — Yes. 


John  A. 
Pottep. 


John  Alexander  Potter. 

By  Mr.  Balfour — I  am  a  son  of  Mr.  Lewis  Potter,  and  a 
partner  of  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.  Both  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co. 
and  Lewis  Potter  &  Co.  have  been  very  long  established  firms, 
and  successful. 

What  were  your  father's  profits  from  Lewis  Potter  &  Co.? — 
From  £2500  to  £3000  a  year,  I  believe. 

So  that  he  had  about  £8000  a  year  from  his  business? — Yes. 

Is  he  proprietor  of  the  lands  of  Udston,  Greenfield,  and 
Burnbank,  near  Hamilton? — Yes;  previous  to  his  sequestration. 
He  bought  Udston  in  1853,  Greenfield  in  1857,  and  Burnbank 
in  1859.  They  cost  a  little  under  £40,000  altogether.  There 
has  been  a  great  rise  in  their  value  since  he  bought  them. 
Minerals  have  been  discovered  in  them,  and  are  being  worked. 
The  properties  were  valued  lately  at  £120,000.  My  father 
has  been  receiving  a  return  of  about  £8000  a  year  from  his 
land,  including  minerals,  and,  I  should  say,  about  £2000  from 
other  investments.  He  was  a  man  with  an  income  of  from 
£17,000  to  £18,000  a  year  at  the  time  the  Bank  stopped.  His 
expenditure  never  exceeded  £3000  a  year,  which  included  the 
expenditure  of  those  members  of  his  family  whom  he  supported. 
He  is  a  brother-in-law  of  Mr.  Bain,  who  was  the  manager  of 
the  Edinburgh  branch;  Mr.  Bain  is  married  to  his  sister.  Mr. 
Bain  has  been  a  shareholder  of  the  Bank  for  some  time,  and 
to  the  extent,  I  believe,  of  £1200  stock.  A  sister  of  Mr.  Potter, 
Mrs.  Davidson,  was  also  a  shareholder  at  the  time  of  the 
stoppage  to  the  amount  of  £1450  stock.  To  both  of  these 
persons  the  stoppage  has  been  ruin. 

By  the  Lord  Advocate — When  did  your  father  acquire  his 

304 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

shares  in  the  City  Bank  ? — I  understand  he  had  some  before  John  A. 
the  stoppage  of  the  Bank  in  1857.  Potter. 

And  then  he  had  some  when  he  became  a  Director? — I  think 
he  had  his  Director's  qualification  at  that  time,  because  he  was 
made  a  Director  shortly  after  the  resuscitation  of  the  Bank 
in  1857. 


EVIDENCE  FOR  MR.  TAYLOR. 

Henry  Taylor. 

By  Mr.  Mackintosh — I  am  a  son  of  Mr.  William  Taylor,  and  Henry  Taylor, 
a  partner  with  him  in  the  firm  of  Henry  Taylor  &  Sons,  grain 
merchants.  The  firm  was  formed  in  1835.  The  partners  at 
that  time  were  my  grandfather,  Henry  Taylor;  my  uncle, 
Henry  Taylor;  and  my  father,  William  Taylor.  I  went  into 
the  business  in  1861,  and  I  was  assumed  a  i)artner  on  1st 
January,  1868.  The  partners  at  that  time  were  my  father  and 
my  uncle,  Patrick  Taylor ;  my  other  uncle  and  my  grandfather 
having  previously  died.  Patrick  Taylor  retired  on  1st  January, 
1873,  and  since  then  my  father  and  I  have  been  the  sole 
partners.  Our  business  has  been  a  large  one.  During  the  last 
five  years  the  average  turn-over  of  the  firm  would  be  about 
£650,000  per  annum.  Our  business  consists  in  importing  grain 
from  abroad,  and  selling  it  to  our  customers.  Our  books  have 
always  been  regularly  kept  from  the  time  I  first  entered  the 
business.  They  have  been  regularly  balanced  at  31st  Decemljer. 
Bad  debts  have  invariably  been  written  off,  and  for  doubtful 
ones  provision  was  made.  We  have  had  no  speculative  transac- 
tions in  connection  with  our  business ;  we  have  confined  our- 
selves to  the  legitimate  business  of  buying  and  selling.  W© 
have  never  had  any  accommodation  bills  at  all. 

When  did  your  firm  become  customers  of  the  City  of  Glasgow 
Bank? — We  have  had  an  account  with  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank 
ever  since  the  formation  of  the  Bank.  When  I  went  into  the 
business  in  1861  we  had  a  regular  account  current,  and  a  No.  2 
account,  which  was  the  acceptances  of  the  City  Bank  or  the 
London  Joint-Stock  Bank,  to  our  foreign  correspondents.  Our 
ordinary  current  account  was  kept  in  the  Argyle  Street  (West 
End)  branch.  That  account  has  continued  to  be  kept  there 
ever  since  till  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank.  Considerable  sums 
have  frequently  been  at  our  credit  there.  Account  No.  2  has 
been  in  operation  during  the  last  twenty  years,  to  a  greater 
or  less  extent.  In  1869  another  account.  No.  3,  was  opened. 
That  was  an  account  on  which  wo  subsequently  obtained  over- 
drafts. It  continued  in  operation  until  the  beginning  of  1878. 
Prior  to  my  father  becoming  a  Director  of  the  Bank  we  had 
occasionally  and  repeatedly  obtained  large  advances  from  it. 

u  305 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Henry  Taylor.  How  much? — Sometimes  we  would  have  £50,000  or  £60,000 
of  unsecured  indebtedness  to  the  Bank. 

How  long  might  that  unsecured  indebtedness  last? — For 
several  months  frequently. 

The  Bank,  having  accepted  drafts  on  your  account,  gave 
you  up  the  documents? — Yes. 

And  that  was  under  No.  2  account? — Yes;  we  had  also  had 
advances  on  No.  3  account  previous  to  1871.  At  31st  December, 
1876,  there  was  a  balance  at  the  debit  of  No.  3  account  of 
£73,850,  including  interest.  There  was  paid  into  the  credit  of 
that  account  during  1877  £19,000  odds,  and  there  was  drawn 
out  £14,000,  so  that  the  debit  was  reduced  by  £5000.  In 
1878  nothing  was  drawn  out  of  that  account  at  all.  The  account 
frequently  fluctuated  from  time  to  time.  It  was  squared  off 
more  than  once.  We  had  a  discount  account  with  the  City 
of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  also  a  discount  account  with  one  of  the 
other  Scotch  banks  in  Glasgow.  In  February,  1878,  we  had 
£110,000  of  bills  discounted  with  that  other  bank,  and,  at 
the  stoppage  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  we  had  £75,000 
of  bills  discounted  there.  In  the  spring  of  1877  we  had  bills 
discounted  with  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  to  the  amount  of 
about  £110,000.  At  the  time  of  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank 
that  had  been  reduced  to  about  £90,000. 

I  believe  some  of  the  officials  of  the  Bank  had  suggested 
it  had  better  be  curtailed  ? — Yes ;  we  were  asked  by  Mr. 
Stronach  and  Mr.  Murdoch  on  one  or  two  occasions  to  reduce 
our  discount  account.  The  reason  they  gave  was  just  that 
they  wished  all  their  discount  accounts  reduced.  We  accord- 
ingly reduced  our  account  to  the  amount  I  have  stated.  My 
father  joined  the  Board  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  in  1871. 
At  that  time  there  was  standing  at  his  credit  in  the  books 
of  our  firm  £22,085.  His  private  estate  over  and  above 
amounted  to  £10,100 — valuing  his  securities  at  market  prices. 
I  can  give  the  details  if  required.  There  was  stock  of  the 
Glasgow  and  South-Western  Railway,  and  some  heritable  pro- 
perty, and  other  assets.  He  was  worth  at  that  time  about 
£32,000.  That  was  exclusive  of  my  own  assets  and  the  assets 
of  my  uncle  Patrick.  The  business  of  the  firm  continued  very 
profitable  down  to  1874.  In  1874  we  made  heavy  losses. 
These  losses  were  not  of  an  amount  sufficient  to  exhaust  our 
means;  we  had  always  a  large  surplus  of  assets  over  liabilities. 

And  in  1876  and  1877  did  you  make  considerable  profits? — 
Yes;  we  made  good  profits  during  those  years. 

At  1st  January,  1878,  what  would  be  your  father's  total 
means?  What  was  the  balance  at  his  debit  in  the  firm's  books; 
was  it  £6507? — Yes;  there  was  at  the  debit  of  partners  alto- 
gether £11,900  odds.  The  private  estates  of  the  partners 
amounted  to  £22,000.     I  have  details  of  that  if  necessary. 

306 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

For  instance,  there  is  Langbank,  your  father's  estate ;  that  Henry  Taylor, 
was  sold  lately  for  £6500? — Yes;  it  was  bonded  to  the  extent 
of  £4000.  There  was  also  stock  of  the  Glasgow  and  South- 
western Railway  of  the  value  at  market  price  of  £2600  odds. 
There  were  shares  in  the  Glasgow  Corn  Exchange  then  worth 
£300.  There  was  a  life  policy  with  the  Scottish  Amicable 
Society  of  old  date,  the  surrender  value  of  which  Avas  then 
£400  odds.  Then  there  was  a  share  in  a  certain  ship,  for  which 
my  father  paid  £1000,  and  it  was  worth  fully  that  in  1878. 
Then  there  was  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  stock  worth  £5000, 
taking  it  at  its  market  value.  There  were  also  Scottish  Imperial 
Insurance  Company's  shares,  worth  about  £1700;  and  shares 
of  the  Glasgow  Storage  Company,  Limited,  £2000 — that  is  a 
very  good  concern.  There  were  some  shares  of  the  State  Line 
Shipping  Company  in  liquidation,  and  also  some  shares  of  the 
new  company  as  well.  We  valued  the  shares  of  the  old  com- 
pany at  £1  each,  which  was  about  £500,  my  father  having  paid 
a  great  deal  more  for  them,  and  he  paid  for  the  new  shares 
£5000,  and  these  were  valued  at  their  cost  price.  Over  and 
above  these  there  was  furniture,  etc.  The  total  of  his  estate 
was  £20,000,  and  there  was  £2000  of  my  own,  made  up  of 
City  Bank  stock  and  my  own  dwelling-house. 

So  there  was  £22,000,  from  which  the  balance  at  the  debit 
of  the  capital  fell  to  be  deducted,  leaving  a  surplus  of  £10,000, 
according  to  the  books? — Yes;  in  addition  to  that  there  was 
a  sum  of  £6000  put  aside  in  suspense  account.  The  reason  for 
that  was  that  in  the  end  of  February,  before  our  balance  had 
been  finally  adjusted,  there  were  some  bad  debts  that  seemed 
likely  to  be  made  in  Belfast,  and,  as  we  could  not  at  that  time 
exactly  ascertain  what  the  amount  of  these  might  be,  we  put 
£6000  to  suspense  account  to  meet  any  contingencies  that 
might  arise.  Our  firm  possessed  a  large  property  in  Hope 
Street,  Glasgow,  for  which  they  paid  £40,000,  and  they  expended 
£14,000  additional  upon  it.  That  was  bought  in  1874.  It  was 
valued  in  our  books  at  £54,000,  cost  price.  Property  in  that 
part  of  Glasgow  rose  very  materially  in  value  between  1874 
and  1878,  and  in  the  beginning  of  1878  we  considered  that 
property  worth  £16,000  more  than  the  sum  at  which  it  stood  in 
our  books.  That  fell  to  be  added  to  the  sum  I  have  mentioned ; 
and,  taking  in  the  profit  upon  that  property,  the  total  balance 
in  favour  of  my  father  and  me  would  be  about  £32,000.  Our 
firm  lost  largely,  through  customers  becoming  insolvent,  directly 
after  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank. 

IIow  did  it  happen  that  you  came  first  to  obtain  this  over- 
draft from  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank? — In  1874,  or  towards 
the  beginning  of  1875,  there  was  a  change  in  the  mode  of 
conducting  the  American  business,  in  which  we  were  largely 
engaged.      Up  to  that  time  the   drafts   of  our  American   cor- 

307 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

lenry  Taylor,  respondents  were  invariably  passed  upon  us  free — that  is  ta 
say,  the  documents  were  sent  to  ourselves  direct,  and  the 
drafts  were  drawn  at  sixty  days'  sight;  but  owing  to  the  com- 
mercial panic  in  America  the  system  was  changed,  and  all 
documents  were  attached  to  the  drafts,  and  required  to  be 
paid  for  before  we  could  get  possession  of  any  of  the  goods  at 
all. 

In  fact,  you  had  to  pay  cash  instead  of  getting  credit? — Yes; 
it  was  in  connection  with  that  change  of  circumstances  that 
we  got  our  overdraft.  The  advances  from  the  Bank  were  got 
in  the  usual  way.  Either  I  or  my  father  arranged  them ;  but 
I  generally  got  them — either  ourselves  or  our  cashier.  In  the 
beginning  of  January,  1878,  we  had  a  large  stock  of  grain  in 
hand — not  less,  I  think,  than  from  £50,000  to  £60,000  worth. 
It  was  entirely  unburdened.  Mr.  Stronach  knew  that  we  held 
grain   largely. 

Had  you  any  debts  to  speak  of  except  your  debt  to  the 
Bank? — Almost  nothing  at  all. 

Your  stock  was  free,  and  your  assets  generally  were  free? — 
Yes.  My  father  was  an  original  shareholder  of  the  City  of 
Glasgow  Bank.  He  held  at  first,  I  think,  £1080  stock.  He 
accepted  an  allotment  of  £.300  stock  additional  in  1866,  for 
which  he  paid  £390.  In  1873  he  accepted  a  further  allotment 
of  £300  stock,  for  which  he  paid  £600 ;  and,  in  order  to  square 
his  holding,  he  purchased  £120  stock,  for  which  he  paid  £232, 
which  altogether  made  up  £1800  stock.  He  continued  to  hold 
that  till  the  Bank  stopped.  He  never  sold  a  Bank  share.  I 
purchased  £500  stock  in  1873,  for  which  I  paid  £1000.  I 
did  so  on  my  father's  recommendation.  My  uncle  Patrick  at 
the  same  time  bought  £500  stock,  for  which  he  paid  £1000. 
He  and  I  have  continued  to  hold  our  stock  until  now.  Mr. 
Stronach  was  aware  we  had  the  Hope  Street  property.  He 
knew  of  our  expenditure  upon  it.  He  never  asked  to  have  a 
formal  conveyance  of  it  to  the  Bank.  If  he  had  we  would  not 
have  objected  to  grant  a  formal  conveyance.  My  father  handed 
to  Mr.  Stronach  all  the  scrip  in  his  possession,  Glasgow  and 
South-Western,  and  other  scrip.  My  father  has  for  a  number 
of  years  past  been  much  occupied  with  public  matters  in 
Glasgow.  At  the  date  of  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank  he  was  a 
director  of  the  Scottish  Imperial  Insurance  Company,  and  of 
the  State  Line  Steam  Shipping  Company ;  he  was  chairman  of 
the  Glasgow  Storage  Company ;  a  director  of  the  Glasgow  Corn 
Exchange ;  a  trustee  of  the  Clyde  Navigation ;  a  member  of  the 
Glasgow  School  Board;  chairman  of  the  High  School  Com- 
mittee; and  a  member  of  the  Mearns  School  Board.  He  had 
previously  been  preceptor  of  Hutchesons'  Hospital  for  some 
years,  and  a  magistrate  of  Glasgow.     He  was  also  a  director 

308 


Evidence  for  Defence. 


of  several  charitable  and  benevolent  institutions.     His  time  was  Henry  Taylor. 

very  largely  occupied  in  connection  with  these  offices.     I  should 

think  that  for  the  last  fifteen   or  sixteen  years  he  must  have 

spent   not   less   than   four   or   five   hours   every   day   on    theee 

matters. 


Peter  Clouston,  residing  in  1  Park  Terrace,  Glasgow,  deputy- 
lieutenant  for  the  County  of  Lanark,  Lord  Provost  of  Glasgow 
from  1860  to  1863 ;  George  Wilson  Clark,  merchant  in 
Glasgow;  Robert  Tod,  grain  merchant  and  miller  at  the  Leith 
Flour  Mills,  and  also  in  Glasgow ;  and  the  Rev.  Frederick 
LocKHART  Robertson,  minister  of  St.  Andrew's  Church, 
Glasgow ;  concurred  in  stating  that  they  had  known  Mr.  Taylor 
intimately  for  a  great  number  of  years,  that  he  was  in  their 
opinion  a  man  of  thorough  integrity  and  probity,  and  incapable 
of  falsifying  a  balance  sheet  wilfully. 

EVIDENCE  FOR  MR.  WRIGHT. 

Patrick  Platfair,  residing  at  Woodside  Terrace,  Glasgow, 
retired  merchant,  and  Lord  Dean  of  Guild  of  Glasgow;  and 
Michael  Connal,  a  member  of  the  firm  of  William  Connal  &:  Co., 
merchants,  Glasgow,  and  chairman  of  the  School  Board  of 
Glasgow;  concurred  in  stating  that  they  had  known  Mr.  Wright 
for  many  years,  and  that  he  was  a  man  of  singular  simplicity 
of  character,  and  in  their  opinion  a  man  of  honour,  incapable 
of  being  a  party  to  the  issuing  of  a  false  balance  sheet. 

EVIDENCE   FOR    MR.    INGLIS. 

Lauderdale  Maitland,  proprietor  of  Eccles,  in  Dumfriesshire, 
stated  that  he  had  been  acquainted  with  Mr.  Henry  Inglis  very 
nearly  since  they  were  boys,  that  he  was  a  man  of  very  great 
cultivation  and  literary  taste,  and  a  man  of  scrupulous  honour. 

EVIDENCE  FOR  MR.  STRONACH. 

John  Cowan,  a  Writer  to  the  Signet  in  Edinburgh,  and  one 
of  the  trustees  under  the  ante-nuptial  marriage-contract  of  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Robert  Stronach  ;  William  Borland,  agent  in  Glasgow 
for  Mr.  Robert  Stronach  ;  and  Samuel  Raleigh,  manager  of 
the  Scottish  Widows'  Fund,  and  one  of  the  liquidators  of  the 
Western  Bank ;  testified  to  the  uprightness  of  Mr.  Stronach 'e 
character,  and  their  confidence  in  his  moral  integrity  and  good 
intention. 

309 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 


EVIDENCE  FOR  MR.  SALMOND. 

Richard  Hughes  Evans,  secretary  of  the  Netherlands  Indian 
Steam  Navigation  Company,  Austin  Friars,  London  ;  Michael 
CoKNAL,  formerly  a  merchant  in  London  and  in  Glasgow ;  and 
Allan  Sandilands,  manager  of  the  Palace  Hotel,  Buxton,  in 
Derbyshire ;  were  called  to  prove  the  special  defence  for  Mr. 
Salmond  intimated  at  the  beginning  of  the  trial,  and  they, 
along  with  Richard  Raimes,  the  senior  partner  of  the  firm  of 
Raimes,  Blanchard  &  Co.,  of  Leith;  and  David  Cowan,  chartered 
accountant  in  Glasgow;  testified  to  their  belief  in  Mr.  Salmond 
as  an  upright  and  honourable  man. 

Mr.  Asher  put  in  execution  of  citation  against  Henry  Hall, 
manager  of  the  Burlington  Hotel,  London,  and  stated  that 
although  it  had  been  intimated  by  telegraph  that  Mr.  Hall 
had  left  London  the  previous  evening,  he  had  not  yet  appeared 
in  Court.  The  facts  which  Mr.  Hall  was  intended  to  prove  were 
that  Mr.  Salmond's  name  appeared  in  the  bed-book  of  the 
Burlington  Hotel  as  having  slept  there  on  the  following  dates  :  — 
Every  night  from  5th  to  11th  June  inclusive,  1876;  every  night 
from  3rd  to  13th  June  inclusive,  1877;  and  from  6th  to  13th 
July  inclusive,  1877;  and  every  night  from  25th  May  to  19th 
June  inclusive,  1878. 

The  Lord  Advocate  agreed  to  give  an  admission  of  these 
facts. 

[Evidence  closed.] 


310 


CHAPTER  X. 

Addresses  to  Jury. 

THE    LORD    ADVOCATE.  Lord 

Advocate. 

May  it  please  your  lordships,  gentlemen  of  the  jury, — You 
have  listened  to  evidence  in  this  case  in  very  great  detail ;  and 
the  time  has  now  come  when,  with  the  aid  of  addresses  for  the 
Crown,  whom  I  represent,  and  also  for  the  panels  at  the  bar,  you 
must  make  up  your  minds,  with  the  further  assistance  of  the 
bench,  as  to  the  true  result  of  that  evidence  upon  the  guilt  or 
innocence  of  the  prisoners.  The  charge  which  is  brought  against 
them  in  the  libel  before  you  is,  I  need  not  say,  a  very  serious  one. 
The  only  points  which  you  have  to  consider  are  the  first  three 
in  this  indictment,  in  relation  to  balance  sheets  published  in  the 
years  1876,  1877,  and  1878.  But  before  saying  a  word  as  to 
the  particulars  of  the  charge,  I  desire  to  say  to  you,  once  for  all, 
that  even  in  this  Court  it  is  impossible  to  disguise  the  fact  that 
the  unfortunate  state  of  the  City  of  GlasgoAv  Bank  has  been  for 
months  past  the  subject  of  private  conversation  and  of  public 
comment  throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land ;  and  I 
say  so  for  this  reason,  in  order  that  I  may  call  your  attention  to 
the  object  of  this  prosecution  at  the  instance  of  the  Crown. 
It  is  to  lay  before  you  that  which  those  who  conversed  about  it 
and  wrote  about  it  have  not  been  thoroughly  conversant  with — 
the  real  facts  of  the  case  ;  and  I  shall  ask  you,  and  I  trust  you 
will  make  it  your  honest  endeavour  in  considering  the  facts  of 
this  case,  to  dismiss  entirely  from  your  minds  what  mav  have 
beien  said  or  written  or  printed  out  of  doors  that  is  in  the  least 
degree  calculated  to  prejudice  in  your  estimation  the  prisoners  at 
the  bar,  and  to  endeavour  to  come  to  a  disj)assioiiate  judgment 
upon  the  facts,  and  nothing  but  the  facts,  which  have  now  been 
for  the  first  time  put  in  evidence  before  you. 

Gentlemen,  the  charge  is  based  upon  the  fact  that  certain 
abstracts  were  published  from  year  to  year  purporting  to  repre- 
sent the  true  state  of  affairs  of  the  Bank,  and  that  the  abstracts  so 
published  were  in  point  of  fact  not  true,  but  false  ;  and,  in  the 
second  place,  that  tlie  falsehood  of  tliese  abstiacts  was  not  more 
matter  of  chance  or  accident,  but  the  result  of  intention  or  design 
to  conceal  from  the  shareholders  and  from  the  public  the  true  state 
of  affairs  of  the  Bank.       In  each  of  these  years  you  will  find, 

3" 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  gentlemen,  that  there  is  a  double  charge — there  is  an  alternative 
Advocate,  charge — and  I  had  better  explain  to  you  precisely  the  effect  of 
that.  There  is  a  charge,  in  the  first  instance,  against  each  and 
all  of  the  panels  of  having  been  art  and  part  in  fabricating  these 
balance  sheets  with  the  intention  of  deceiving,  concealing,  and 
misrepresenting  the  true  state  of  the  Bank's  affairs.  If  they 
had  merely  prepared  a  false  balance  sheet,  and  had  done  nothing 
with  it  but  laid  it  aside  or  put  it  in  the  fire,  that  would  not  have 
constituted  a  crime  according  to  the  law  of  Scotland,  because  it 
would  merely  have  been  a  guilty  intention  abandoned  on  second 
thoughts.  The  whole  gravamen  of  the  charge  is,  that,  having 
prepared  it  with  that  purpose,  the  purpose  was  put  into  execution 
by  issuing  that  false  and  fabricated  balance  sheet  to  the  share- 
holders of  the  Bank.  But  then,  under  the  second  alternative,  it 
is  not  necessary,  in  order  to  constitute  the  guilt  of  the  accused, 
that  they  should  have  been  parties  to  the  fabrication  of  the 
balance  sheet.  It  is  quite  sufficient  to  constitute  the  alternative 
offence  if,  knowing  that  it  was  a  false  balance  sheet,  and  that 
it  had  been  fabricated  or  prepared  for  the  purpose  of  concealing 
the  true  state  of  the  Bank,  they  lent  their  names  and  authority 
to  the  issuing  of  it  to  the  shareholders  and  the  public,  with,  of 
course,  the  same  intention  to  deceive. 

Now,  gentlemen,  I  think  it  would  be  as  well,  in  the  course 
of  the  observations  which  I  have  to  address  to  you,  to  consider, 
in  the  first  place,  whether  there  was  falsification  of  all  or  of  any 
of  these  balance  sheets ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  to  consider 
whether  that  was  intentional  and  with  a  design  to  conceal  and 
misrepresent  the  true  state  of  the  Bank.  I  cannot  deal  with 
that  second  question  without  some  inquiry  into  the  state  of  the 
Bank,  and  that  involves,  perhaps,  a  still  more  important  question 
for  you  to  consider — Whether,  assuming  the  state  of  the  Bank, 
it  was  known  to  the  Directors  and  to  each  of  them.  And,  lastly, 
if  you  are  satisfied  that  the  balance  sheet  was  prepared  falsely — 
that  the  Bank  was  in  a  condition  i-equiring,  in  their  opinion, 
misrepresentation,  and  if  they  did  issue  these  abstracts  with  the 
view  of  misrepresenting  the  position  of  the  Bank,  then  you  have 
to  consider  which  of  these  persons  at  the  bar  you  are  to  hold 
guilty  of  the  crime.  Now,  in  regard  to  the  published  balance 
sheets,  the  abstracts  which  you  have  upon  pages  3,  6,  and  9  of 
the  indictment,  I  do  not  think  it  can  for  one  moment  be  doubted, 
in  the  face  of  the  evidence  you  have  heard,  that  they  are  false 
and  fabricated.  I  am  not  going  into  details  upon  this  matter ;  I 
shall  have  a  word  to  say  upon  it  by  and  by.  But  just  let  me  call 
your  attention  to  the  balance  sheet  of  1876,  and  point  out  to 
you  che  general  character  of  the  alterations  that  were  made  in 
order  to  lay  a  false  state  of  affairs  before  the  shareholders, 
because  it  humbly  appears  to  me  that  the  very  character  of  those 
alterations  is  exceedingly  suggestive  of  the  object  and  purpose 
312 


Photo.] 


[J.  lliirKhunjh. 


The  Lord  Advocate  (Watson) 
Counsel  for  Prosecution. 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


for  which  they  were  made.  In  the  first  place,  the  general  result  Lord 
of  these  is  to  reduce  both  sides  of  the  account,  and,  speaking  in  ■Advocate, 
round  figures,  the  result  of  the  alterations  in  each  of  the  years  in 
question  is  to  reduce  the  assets  of  the  Bank  by  a  couple  of 
millions  or  upwards,  and  to  reduce  the  liabilities  of  the  Bank 
by  a  couple  of  millions  or  upwards.  A  question  or  two  was  put 
in  the  course  of  the  evidence  which  seemed  rather  to  sucrerest 
that  some  reliance  was  to  be  placed,  on  the  part  of  the  accused, 
upon  the  fact  that  the  manipulation  of  both  sides  of  the  balance 
sheet  resulted  in  the  same  figures  standing  at  balance,  as  capital, 
reserve  fund,  and  profit  and  loss.  That  is  no  test  whatever  of 
the  truth  or  falsity  of  a  balance  sheet.  The  purpose  of  such  a 
balance  sheet  or  abstract  is  to  disclose  honestly  to  the  share- 
holders and  the  public  the  amount  of  business  tlie  Bank  is  doing, 
their  turnover,  the  extent  of  their  transactions ;  and  it  must  be 
obvious  to  you  that  they  might  have  altered  the  balance  sheet 
by  six  or  eight  millions  more,  by  taking  that  sum  off  both  sides, 
with  precisely  the  same  result  of  leaving  those  figures  standing 
at  balance  as  information  to  the  public.  But  would  that  have 
been  a  right  or  proper  thing  to  do — to  suggest  that  the  Bank 
was  carrying  on  a  business  of  precisely  half  the  extent  with  pre- 
cisely half  the  amount  of  money  got  upon  deposit  with  which 
they  were  entrusted?  It  is  a  question  for  you,  and  I  rather 
think  that  when  you  come  to  examine  into  details  you  will  find 
that  the  general  purpose  of  representing  that  the  Bank  was  doing 
a  much  smaller  trade  than  it  really  was  doing  in  money,  was 
coupled  with  this,  that  it  was  also  intended  and  calculated  to 
represent  that  they  were  doing  a  much  better  and  a  much  sounder 
trade  than  they  actually  had.  Because  they  diminished  the 
amount  of  their  liabilities  by  cutting  off  large  sums — in  this  case 
we  are  always  dealing  with  large  sums,  nothing  short  of  hundreds 
of  thousands  and  millions — on  both  sides  of  the  account ;  and 
thus  they  put  out  of  sight  an  enormous  quantity  of  bill  transac- 
tions which  might  give  a  clue  to  the  public,  who  knew  in  a  general 
way  the  amount  of  the  dealings  of  some  whom  I  shall  call  the 
leading  customers  of  the  Bank — the  gentlemen  who  nbsnrltod  a 
great  deal  of  its  capital  from  1870  onwards,  and  who,  at  the  time 
the  Bank  stopped,  had  had  advanced  to  them  about  three-fifths 
of  the  whole  money  the  Bank  had  lent.  That  was  one  object 
gained  ;  but  in  order  to  keep  the  two  sides  of  the  account  square 
they  had  to  diminish  the  assets — that  is  to  say,  what  they  held 
in  the  shape  of  debts  due  to  them  and  in  the  shape  of  invest^ 
ments  and  other  securities.  And  how  is  that  side  r>f  lho  account 
dealt  with  ?  Of  course,  at  first  it  looks  a  very  fair  thing  to  reduce 
assets  ;  but  this  is  done  in  order  to  preserve  the  balance  on  the 
two  sides  of  the  account;  and  then  this  foatui-e  is  vcr>'  skilfiilly 
introduced — if  you  look  at  the  top  of  the  left  hand  page,  Article 
1,  on  the  credit  side — they  frame  their  abstract  so  as  to  reduce 

3^3 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  bills  of  exchange  and  so  forth,  and  that  kind  of  stock-in-trade 
Advocate,  jg  j-gfjucgfj  j^  1878  by  about  three  millions,  which  is  more  than 
the  deduction  from  the  other  side  of  the  account ;  but  then  they 
compensate  for  that  by  turning  credit  accounts — outstanding 
sums  due  them  by  customers — a  portion  of  them,  into  Govern- 
ment stock,  Exchequer  bills,  railway  and  other  stocks,  debentures 
and  balances  in  the  hands  of  foreign  correspondents.  In  other 
words,  while  they  diminish  their  assets  upon  the  credit  side  of  the 
account,  they  perform  this  further  operation  on  the  credit  side  of 
the  account  that  they  take  off  some  from  an  inferior  class  of 
assets  and  add  these  to  assets  of  a  better  class,  thereby  leading' 
any  one  who  examined  the  balance  sheet  to  believe  that  the  Bank 
had  £700,000  or  £800,000  more  of  good  investments  than  they 
in  reality  held,  and  about  two  millions  less  of  floating  bills  and 
credit  accounts,  which  they  might  or  might  not  recover.  And 
I  need  hardly  suggest  to  you,  who  are  conversant  with  mercantile 
affairs,  that  assets  in  the  shape  of  outstanding  securities  and 
balances  due  by  firms  of  large  dealings,  like  Smith,  Fleming  & 
Co.,  James  Nicol  Fleming  &  Co.,  Morton  &  Co.,  and  Innes  Wright 
&  Co.,  are  not,  on  the  whole,  such  good  assets  or  reliable  assets  as 
Government  stocks  and  balances  in  the  hands  of  correspondents. 
So  much  for  these  two  sides.  But  that  is  not  quite  all.  They 
have  a  resei-vo  fund  every  year  of  £450,000,  and  that  seems  to 
have  been  a  sort  of  stock  reserve  fund  that  is  carried  along. 
Well,  it  was  explained  to  you  by  the  gentlemen  who  have  ex- 
amined the  books  of  the  Bank  how  that  fund  was  raised.*  There 
were  sums  credited  which  they  had  not  got — in  other  words,  they 
professed  to  have  received  interest  which  they  had  not  got.  They 
got  a  lower  rate  of  interest  or  none  at  all,  and  what  they  had 
not  got  they  carried  into  profit  and  loss  account,  and  finally  into 
a  reserve  fund — consisting  of  what  they  never  had  got,  and  what, 
according  to  all  human  probability,  they  had  not  the  slightest 
chance  of  ever  getting.  Then  the  next  profit  and  loss  in  the 
balance  sheet  for  1876  is  £136,000.  These  items  are  made  up 
and  dealt  with  in  precisely  the  same  way  throughout  all  the 
three  years  and  the  three  balances  with  which  we  are  dealing. 
Now,  how  was  that  profit  and  loss  account  got  up?  I  am  certain 
you  will  accept  the  statements  made  in  regard  to  it,  because, 
being  quite  distinctly  and  plainly  stated  and  explained  to  you 
by  the  accountants  who  appeared  as  witnesses  for  the  Crown,  not 
one  single  word  was  put  in  cross-examination  by  any  one  of  my 
numerous  friends  who  represent  the  panels  at  the  bar  tending  to 
shake  or  discredit  the  statements  which  they  made.  They  said, 
"  That  which  you  are  dividing  as  profit  and  loss  year  by  year  was 
really  never  earned  at  all."  You  must  know  very  well  that  the 
profit  and  loss  account  for  a  year  amounts  to  the  earnings  for 

*  See  the  evidence  of  Dr.  M'Grigor  and  Messrs.  Jamieson  and  Muir. 
314 


Addresses   to  Jury. 

the  year ;  and  it  would  not  be  a  matter  of  imputation  against  any  Lord 
banker  who  was  making  up  a  balance  sheet  that,  in  stating  his  Advocate, 
account  of  profit  and  loss,  he  should  include  in  it  interest  which 
was  regularly  paid,  although  it  had  not  come  to  hand.  There  is 
nothing  whatever  wrong  in  that.  If  their  income  was  coming 
in  steadily  each  year,  they  had  quite  a  right  to  regard  it  as  earn- 
ings and  income,  and  to  distribute  it.  But  that  is  not  what 
was  done  here.  They  bring  into  this  account  interest  upon  out- 
standing and  unpaid  balances.  The  principal  was  not  paid, 
the  interest  was  not  paid,  and  they  were  speculating  in  Aus- 
tralian stock  to  recoup  their  deficit  upon  these  transactions  ;  and 
in  that  state  of  matters  they  all  speak  hopefully  as  to  the  ultimate 
profit  to  be  obtained  from  that  source.  But  how  about  the  im- 
mediate distribution?  And  they  actually  go  on  dividing  and 
paying  dividends,  rising  from  11  per  cent,  in  the  year  1876  to  12 
per  cent,  in  1877  and  1878  ;  whereas,  if  they  had  struck  oflf  the 
smu  of  £125,000  odds,  calculated  as  interest  due  on  those  debtor 
balances,  there  would  not  have  been  a  sixpence  to  divide.  If 
there  had  been  any  reasonable  gi-ound  for  so  putting  it,  that 
might  have  been  some  justification ;  but  it  humbly  appears  to  me 
that  it  was  just  as  unjustifiable  as  it  would  be  in  any  man  who 
had  £50,000  lent  to  a  debtor  who  was  unable  to  repay  him  to  go 
on  spending  interest  which  he  had  not  got,  and  which  there  was 
Tery  little  probability  he  would  ever  get,  as  his  yearly  income. 
The  result  is  perfectly  plain.  That  money  was  divided  among 
the  shareholders.  That  money  was  not  in  the  Bank.  It  stood 
in  the  books  as  due  upon  those  book  balances  which  they  were 
speculating  to  recoup,  and  therefore  they  paid  it  away  out  of 
some  other  asset ;  and  when  they  were  paying  away 
those  dividends  they  were  simply  eating  into  the  capital  of  the 
Bank,  and  paying  the  shareholders  dividend  out  of  their  own 
stock,  if,  indeed,  there  was  any  stock  to  pay  it  out  of  at  all,  which 
is  very  doubtful. 

Now,  gentlemen,  there  are  in  process,  and  these  have  been 
adverted  to  in  the  evidence,  some  very  remarkable  documents, 
which,  I  understand,  you  will  be  allowed  to  examine  for  yourselves 
at  a  future  stage  of  this  case.  I  refer  to  what  are  called  the 
scroll  abstracts  for  the  years  1876,  1S77,  and  1878.  Let  me 
tell  you  that  you  must  not  be  misled  into  the  view  that  these 
things  constitute  the  crime  which  the  Crown  says  the  panels  have 
committed.  The  crime  which  the  Crown  alleges  lias  been  com- 
mitted is  that  these  abstract  balances  in  the  indictment  before 
you,  being  false,  were  given  to  the  public  as  true,  with  the  view 
of  misrepresenting  the  state  of  the  Bank.  There  is  no  cliarge 
founded  upon  these  scroll  abstracts,  but  they  are  very  important 
links  of  evidence  in  the  present  case.  They  show  the  hand  of 
the  fabricator  ;  they  are  the  key  to  his  work.  You  can  reduce 
these  balance  sheets  in  the  way  they  have  done,   with   similar 

315 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  results,  in  millions  of  different  ways,  by  taking  figures  of  a  certain 
voeate.  -^[^^^  away  here  and  putting  figures  of  a  certain  kind  on  there. 
But  this  is  one  way  of  attaining  the  end  to  be  attained,  to  reduce 
the  two  sides  of  the  balance  sheet,  to  magnify  the  character  of 
the  assets  by  giving  them  a  character  which  they  had  not,  and  to 
conceal  the  amount  and  character  of  the  liabilities  by  striking 
them  off  wholesale — a  practice  carried  so  far  that  in  1878  the 
credit  account  on  bills  outstanding  and  due  was  represented  to 
the  extent  of  £200,000  as  solid  gold  in  reserve  in  the  coffers  of 
the  Bank.  It  was  only  that  year  that  it  occurred.  That  is 
the  end  to  be  attained ;  and  these  scroll  abstracts  will  show  you 
one  way  of  doing  it,  and  they  show  very  probably,  indeed  almost 
certainly,  the  way  in  which  it  was  done.  But  it  has  no  more 
connection  with  the  charge  which  is  before  us  than  the  very  com- 
mon case  which  occurs  in  forgery,  where  you  find  A's  name  at  a 
bill  written  by  B,  in  order  to  represent  A's.  The  bill  passes  into 
currency,  and  when  A  refuses  to  pay  it  because  it  is  forged,  you 
find  a  sheet  of  paper  in  the  handwriting  of  B,  the  forger,  with 
all  sorts  of  signatures  of  A  written  upon  it,  so  as  to  make  the 
forger  sufficiently  expert  to  commit  the  final  act.  There  is 
just  the  same  kind  of  connection  here.  You  can  trace  the 
mind  and  intent  of  the  forger  in  the  one  case  because  he  is  trying 
to  acquire  sufficient  expertness  to  enable  him  to  fabricate  the 
signature  of  another.  And  in  this  case,  in  the  same  way, 
you  can  see  the  steps  by  which  the  ultimate  results  which  are 
embodied  in  those  balances  have  been  attained — by  a  process  of 
calculation,  making  the  two  false  ends  fit  in — a  process  which 
is  very  easily  performed  when  you  come  to  deal  with  figures. 

If  that  is  so — and  I  think,  upon  the  face  of  these  balance  sheets, 
if  I  have  correctly  represented  them,  and  I  shall  be  in  your  judg- 
ment if  I  have  not  done  so — the  next  question  is,  what  was  the 
purpose  of  doing  it?  It  could  hardly  be  accidental.  Mistakes 
will  often  occur  in  matters  of  figures,  but  a  mistake  that  goes 
two  millions  wrong,  or  four  millions,  taking  the  two  sides  of  the 
transactions,  and  yet  brings  out  a  consistent  and  even  sum  total 
on  both  sides,  is  not  one  of  the  kind  of  freaks  generally  played 
by  fortune  or  chance.  I  am  going  to  take  just  now  the  effect 
of  the  untrue  balances.  I  shall  ask  your  attention  by  and  by  to 
the  persons  who  are  responsible  for  it.  It  is  impossible  to  dis- 
sociate the  one  thing  from  the  other ;  and  in  dealing  with  its 
truth  or  falsehood,  when  we  come  to  the  state  of  the  Bank,  it  will 
be  very  necessary  for  you,  in  the  narrative  which  I  shall  be  com- 
pelled to  submit  to  you  in  order  to  make  the  case  intelligible,  to 
keep  in  view  who  are  the  parties  that  appear  xipon  the  scene, 
and  what  is  their  connection  with  it,  and  what  their  amount  of 
knowledge  of  the  state  of  the  Bank.  The  charge  in  the  libel 
before  you  is  that  the  balances  were  fabricated  in  order  to  conceal 
the  true  state  of  the  Bank's  affairs.  Of  course,  that  is  a 
316 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


meaningless  and  idle  proposition,  unless  it  be  the  fact  that  the  Lord 
Bank's  affairs  are  tliereby  concealed,  or  that  they  stood  in  need  of  Advocate, 
concealment.  You  might  have  alterations  upon  a  balance  sheet, 
and  it  might  turn  out  upon  an  examination  of  the  affairs  of  the 
Bank  that  the  Bank  was,  on  the  whole,  better  than  the  balance 
sheet  showed.  That  would  be  to  a  jury  conclusive  evidence  that 
there  was  no  intention  to  misrepresent.  But  I  am  afraid  that 
you  will  hardly  be  able  to  come  to  that  lenient  conclusion  on  the 
facts  of  the  present  case.  Because  what  was  the  state  of  the 
Bank?  I  must  make  some  observations  upon  the  state  of  the 
Bank  at  the  time  of  its  stoppage,  because  there  is  some  reflex  light 
thrown  by  it  upon  the  actual  state  during  the  period  in  question  ; 
but  I  beg  you  to  keep  in  view,  in  fairness  to  the  panels  as  well 
as  for  the  ends  of  justice — on  the  part  of  the  Crown  I  ask 
you  to  keep  in  view  that  that  is  not  the  question  as  against  the 
panels ;  the  question  as  against  them  is — the  state  of  the  Bank 
now  Vieing  ascertained  to  be  so  and  so,  wliat  did  they  know, 
whilst  the  Bank  was  caiTying  on  business,  as  to  the  results  which 
are  stated  in  those  abstract  balance  sheets?  We  know  now  that 
in  July,  1876-77-78 — for  that  is  the  date  of  the  annual  meetings 
at  which  those  abstracts  were  published — this  Bank  was  repre- 
sented by  those  placed  in  the  conduct  of  its  affairs  as  a  solvent 
and  prosperous  concern,  able  to  pay  11  or  12  per  cent,  dividend 
to  its  shareholders,  and  with  brilliant  prospects  for  the  future. 
These  prospects,  according  to  the  representation  of  the  balance 
sheet,  never  were  fairer,  never  more  prosperous,  than  as  at  the 
balance  of  5th  June,  1878  ;  and  we  know  that  in  four  months 
from  that  date  the  Bank  was  bankrupt,  and  its  losses  were  roughly 
estimated  by  a  professional  qrentleinan  who  looked  into  its  affairs 
at  millions  sterling — I  need  hardly  tell  you  the  amount.  You 
heard  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Jarnieson,  who  made  an  investigation 
on  behalf  of  the  other  banks,  who  refused  their  aid,  and  refused 
it — it  is  not  by  any  means  unimportant  to  know — the  nionient 
they  saw  the  enormous  amount  of  the  dealings  of  the  Bank  with 
certain  firms,  to  whose  transactions  I  shall  have  to  refer  you  more 
particularly.  I  quite  admit  that  the  failure  and  stoppage  of  the 
Bank  on  the  2nd  of  October  nii<_dit  well  bo  a  surprise  to  tlie 
Directors  ;  but  it  does  not  in  the  slightest  degree  follow  that  they 
were  ignorant  of  the  position  of  the  Bank,  or  the  position  of  its 
accounts,  or  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  these  l)alanoe  sheets  were 
entirely  false  and  fabricated.  It  is  a  strange  thing  that  when 
they  first  begged  assistance,  and  when  Mr.  Wenley  was  in  com- 
munication with  them,  they  were  exceedingly  unwilling  to  have 
any  examination  of  the  books — exceedingly  unwilling.  Necessity 
drove  them  ultimately  to  show  their  whole  hand  ;  it  would  not 
hide.  But  they  declined  at  first  even  to  let  a  neutral  man  in  a 
confidential  position  make  an  inquiry  in  the  interest  of  both 
parties ;  and  he  was  merely  to  state  the  result  without  givinir  the 

.317 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  figures  from  tho  books,  or  exposing  any  secret,  or  telling  with 
Advocate.  ^i^Qm  they  were  dealing.  When  the  Directors  found  that  inquiry 
had  come  to  be  inevitable,  and  Mr.  Wenley  was  taking  his  leave, 
Mr.  Potter  exjDressed,  in  marked  terms,  the  hope  that  an  exami- 
nation of  the  books  would  be  dispensed  with,  and  that  the  banks 
would  give  assistance  without  it.  In  one  point  of  view,  if  the  state 
of  the  Bank  was  known,  it  is  not  surprising  that  they  should  be 
unwilling  that  the  books  should  be  gone  into,  because  the  books 
would  have  exposed  the  position  of  matters,  and  at  that  date — I 
don't  want  to  take  all  the  firms,  but  I  shall  take  three,  the  worst 
of  them,  viz.,  Morton  &  Co.,  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  and  James 
Nicol  Fleming — at  that  moment  the  advances  from  the  Bank  were 
to  the  following  extent: — Morton  &  Co.,  £2,173,000;  Smith 
Fleming  &  Co.,  £1,968,000 ;  and  James  Nicol  Fleming,  who  has 
been  liquidating  for  several  years — that  is  to  say,  paying  off  his 
debts — at  least,  that  is  the  general  meaning  of  the  word — ^had  the 
modest  sum  of  £1,238,000  ;  making  for  these  three  firms  the 
respectable  total  of  indebtedness  to  the  Bank  of  £5,317,000,  and 
that  was  a  state  of  matters  that  had  been  growing  gradually ;  it 
was  nothing  new.  In  1875 — ^that  is,  before  the  period  of  dealings 
of  the  present  Directors  began,  because  the  Board  has  remained 
constituted  as  at  present  since  the  accession  of  Mr.  Wright,  who 
came  in  the  place  of  Mr.  James  Nicol  Fleming,  and  Mr.  Stronach, 
who  became  Manager  in  place  of  his  brother  in  December,  1875 — 
when  the  Board,  as  constituted  at  the  date  of  the  stoppage,  began 
its  operations,  the  state  of  these  accounts  was  as  follows :  — 
Morton  &  Co.  had  £1,380,000;  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  had 
£1,661,000;  James  Nicol  Fleming  had  £1,005,000— in  all, 
£4,046,000 ;  so  that  the  increase  of  their  indebtedness  between 
the  time  of  the  Directors  entering  on  office  and  the  stoppage  of 
the  Bank,  or  in  three  years,  amounted  to  £1,333,000.  It  may 
have  been  that  to  a  person  who  knew  these  figures  the  stoppage 
of  the  Bank  could  hardly  be  a  surprise;  on  the  other 
hand,  it  might  be  a  surprise,  and  yet  these  Directors 
might  have  had  quite  sufficient  knowledge  of  the  state  of  the 
Bank  to  have  made  it  an  entirely  wrong  and  criminal  thing  for 
them  to  sanction  the  issue  of  such  a  balance  sheet  as  any  one  of 
these  three.  They  may  have  believed  that  Australian  land  would 
so  richly  repay  the  investments  that  they  had  made  in  it  as  to 
recoup  their  deficits ;  but  even  on  the  very  best  of  the  evidence 
that  we  have  had  upon  this  point,  either  in  cross-examination 
by  the  panel's  counsel  or  in  chief  from  their  own  witnesses,  it  only 
comes  to  this,  that  it  was  a  matter  in  the  future.  It  was  a 
matter  of  hope  and  expectation ;  it  was  net  a  case  of  holding 
security,  and  ample  security,  against  a  present  debt.  The 
failure  of  the  Bank  may  have  surprised  them,  because  they  may 
have  hoped,  by  more  speculations  of  that  sort,  by  getting  another 
£500,000  to  invest  here  or  there,  to  be  able,  some  day  or  other, 

318 


Addresses   to  Jury. 

to  put  these  accounts  into  what  they  were  trying  to  do — a  state  Lord 
of  order.  But  the  mistake,  and  worse  than  mistake,  committed  Advocate, 
throughout  all  those  years  of  management — and  you  will  see  who 
were  responsible  for  it,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  it — was  this, 
that  they  treated  these  as  good  assets,  assuming  that  there  were 
good  securities  against  them,  whereas  they  knew — at  all  events, 
whether  they  knew  the  full  amount  in  £  s.  d.  is  not  a  material 
thing — that  there  were  deficits  so  serious  and  so  extensive  that  to 
enable  the  Bank  to  recoup  them  they  were  obliged  to  enter  into 
transactions  which  they  themselves  recorded  on  the  face  of  their 
own  minutes  as  not  being  legitimate  banking  transactions. 

Now,  gentlemen,  I  shall  proceed  to  inquire  as  to  the  histoiy  of 
these  three  accounts,  and  I  shall  take  them  because  they  are  quit€ 
sufficient  of  themselves  to  account  for  the  insolvency  of  the  Bank  ; 
and  I  shall  just  ask  you  to  follow  me  through  some  details  in 
order  to  see  whether  it  be  the  fact  that  the  Directors  of  the 
Bank  did  not  know  of  them.  Now,  if  they  did  know  of  them, 
they  knew  the  cause  of  the  rottenness  of  the  Bank  ;  because  it  can 
hardly  be  suggested  for  one  moment  that  all  that  enormous  deficit, 
which  became  apparent  whenever  there  was  an  impartial  investi- 
gation— ay,  and  a  very  hurried  one  in  the  month  of  October, 
1878 — it  can  hardly  be  suggested  that  all  that  enormous  loss  of 
millions  occurred  between  5th  June,  1878,  and  the  2nd  October 
of  that  year.  I  have  not  heard  such  a  suggestion,  and  I  can 
hardly  think  that  you  will  be  asked  to  believe  that  it  occurred  in 
four  months,  when  the  facts  clearly  show  that  it  was  not  so.  And 
I  think  they  also  clearly  show  that  the  Directors  knew  very  well 
about  these  accounts,  knew  that  they  were  very  bad  accounts, 
knew  that,  instead  of  reducing  these  bad  accounts,  they  were 
going  on  increasing  more  and  more.  It  may  be  that  they  were 
flinging  good  money  after  bad  in  the  hope  of  recouping  them- 
selves in  the  end ;  but  they  knew  they  were  sending  that 
money  after  the  bad  in  the  hope  of  getting  it  back  ;  and  they 
must  have  known  that  these  accounts,  so  enormous  as  they  wore 
in  extent,  must  have  seriously  affected  the  state  of  the  Bank. 
At  least  it  is  for  you  to  judge  whether  it  would  have  been  possible 
for  any  man,  knowing  their  extent,  not  to  know  at  the  same  time 
that  they  placed  the  Bank  in  a  position,  if  not  of  ruin,  at  least  of 
the  most  imminent  peril.  It  is  all  very  well  to  say,  and  I  have 
no  doubt  it  will  be  said,  that  these  gentlemen  did  not  attend  io 
details  of  business,  that  they  managed  large  transactions,  but  did 
not  go  into  details,  and  therefore  must  not  be  judged  hardly  about 
their  knowledge  of  results  and  about  what  you  discover  from  llie 
books  of  the  Bank.  Why,  Mr.  Jamieson  only  made  a  rough  esti- 
mate after  he  had  been  four  hours  at  work,  and  it  took  the 
investigators,  with  the  aid  of  a  large  staff  of  clerks,  a  fortnight  to 
^ork  it  out.  But  what  were  they  doing?  They  were  unravoUing 
the  transactions  for  years  back,  which   these  gentlemen   dnring 

319 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  these  years  were  canying  on  with  their  open  eyes,  from  Board 
Advocate,  ^j^^  ^^  Board  day,  in  the  management  of  the  Bank.  It  is  one 
thing  to  spend  so  many  hours  in  investigating  the  acts  of  a  body 
of  Directors  from  what  is  recorded  in  their  minutes  and  ledgers, 
and  quite  another  thing  to  be  one  of  the  body  of  Directors  from 
day  to  day,  and  from  week  to  week  canying  on  these  transactions- 
— refusing  advances  to-day  and  giving  them  to-morrow.  All 
that  an  accountant  can  do  is  to  try  to  discover  from  the  books 
what  the  Directors  had  been  about ;  and  therefore  it  will  never 
do  to  say  to  you,  who  have  a  general  knowledge  of  business,  that 
a  body  of  Directors  are  to  be  held  as  justified  in  giving  persons 
enormously  indebted  to  the  Bank,  Board  day  after  Board  day,, 
more  credits  and  more  money,  until  the  advances  come  up  to 
millions,  and  then  turn  round  and  say,  "  We  really  are  very 
simple,  quiet,  honest  fellows ;  we  did  not  look  into  details  ;  two 
millions  are  gone,  but  how  were  we  to  know?  "  Well,  gentlemen, 
keep  this  other  fact  in  view,  in  justice  to  a  certain  portion  of  the 
servants  of  the  Bank.  The  City  Bank  was  not  all  bad  manage- 
ment. On  the  contraiy,  there  was  one  portion  of  its  affairs  that 
was  exceedingly  well  managed — I  refer  to  the  business  of  the  Bank 
conducted  at  its  branches  in  Scotland.  You  have  it  in  evidence 
from  the  inspector  of  branches,  Mr.  Miller — against  whose 
evidence  there  is  no  suggestion,  because  it  is  founded  upon  the 
most  explicit  facts — that  for  years  past  the  average  actual  earn- 
ings of  the  branches  of  the  Bank  were  £70,000  per  annum.  That 
was  made  after  writing  off  about  £10,000  a  year  for  bad  debts. 
But  there  was  another  cause  of  the  prosperity  of  the  branches.  It 
was  very  well  explained  by  more  than  one  witness.  In  dealing 
with  advances  at  the  branches,  the  Manager  (Mr.  Miller  says)  was 
very  strict  about  getting  security.  He  was  very  strict  about 
parting  with  a  penny  in  the  way  of  loan  at  the  branches  until  it 
was  covered  by  money's  worth  ;  and  the  result  of  it  is,  as  I  have 
stated  to  you,  that  the  earnings  or  legitimate  profits  of  the  Bank 
at  its  branches  in  Scotland  during  many  years  of  its  trading 
before  its  stoppage,  were  enough  to  pay  a  dividend  of  7  per  cent, 
on  its  paid-up  capital  of  one  million.  So  that  if  the  company 
had  traded  through  its  branches  alone,  and  instead  of  dealing  with 
Morton  &  Co.,  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  and  Nicol  Fleming,  had 
simply  deposited  the  money  they  had  in  Glasgow  with  another 
bank,  and  had  got  deposit  receipt  rates  upon  it,  they  would  have 
saved  their  capital  and  their  money,  and  would  have  been  able 
to  pay  a  dividend  of  7  per  cent,  to  their  shareholders.  But  that 
illustrates  and  very  strongly  brings  out  this  point,  that  if  the 
management  at  the  branches  was  good,  the  management  at  the 
head  office,  which  is  responsible  for  all  the  enormous  losses  of  the 
Bank,  was  as  bad  as  that  of  the  branches  was  good.  We  shall 
see  whether  there  was  the  same  strictness  there  in  parting  with 
money.  I  have  not  the  least  doubt  of  the  perfect  accuracy  of 
320 


Addresses  to  Jur 


7' 


Mr.  Miller's  statement  tiiat  the  Mauager,  Mr.  Strouach,  was  ex       Lord 
ceedingly  strict  in  getting  proper  security  from  a  poor  fellow  in  Advocate, 
the  country  who  wanted  to  get  a  little  money  in  advance ;  and  if 
they  had  only  applied  the  same  rule  to  some  of  those  so-called 
capitalists,  who  indulged  in  those  firm-names  I  have  repeated  so 
often,  it  would  have  been  a  great  deal  better  for  the  Bank. 

Now,  gentlemen,  to  return  to  those  advances,  and  to  the 
period  to  which  I  will  direct  your  attention,  namely,  the  period 
of  the  present  management.  In  the  evidence  of  John  Fleming 
there  was  a  good  deal  to  suggest  that  Alexander  Stronach  did  not 
always,  in  giving  him  advances,  take  the  Bank  Directors  into  his 
confidence,  and  that  specially  applies  to  John  Fleming's  evidence 
about  the  transactions  of  the  years  1870  and  187i.  That  is 
quite  possible.  But  we  have  no  question  here  about  Alexander 
Stronach.  The  case  I  put  to  you  is  this,  that  whatever  Alexander 
Stronach  may  have  done,  his  successor,  Robert  Stronach,  the 
prisoner  at  the  bar,  did  not,  in  that  respect,  follow  his  example. 
On  the  contraiy,  I  think  you  will  find  that  he  was  aware  of  the 
nature  of  those  accounts  and  their  danger,  that  he  was  so  im- 
pressed with  the  character  of  those  accounts,  and  the  deadly  peril 
to  the  existence  of  the  Bank  that  their  continued  indebtedness 
involved,  that,  like  a  sensible  man,  and  acting  the  part  of  an 
honest  man,  he  brought  that  fact  clearly  before  the  Directors 
before  he  would  accept  office,  and  accepted  office  only  upon  this 
condition — that  the  Directors  would  act  with  him  and  keep  him 
right  and  help  him  -with  these  accounts.  Tlie  Directors  accepted 
upon  that  condition,  and  I  venture  to  say  this,  that  it  will  require 
on  the  part  of  the  Directors,  other  than  the  Manager,  some 
much  plainer  testimony  than  any  evidence  in  this  case  affords 
that  they  departed  from  that  arrangement — that  Robert 
Stronach,  instead  of  enforcing  fulfilment  of  the  sole  condition 
upon  which  he  accepted  office,  took  the  whole  responsibility  of 
these  accounts  upon  himself,  and  managed  them  at  his  own  luind. 
concealed  them  from  the  Directors,  so  that  these  gentlemen,  only 
having  heard  the  note  of  warning  in  1875,  entirely  forgot  it,  and 
lapsed  into  a  state  of  belief  tliat  there  was  nothing  wrong  with 
these  accounts  at  all.  The  thing  is  hardly  credible  that  when  a 
Manager  comes  forward  and  says.  "  I  will  try  to  help  you  out  of 
this  ugly  position  into  which  the  Bank's  affairs  have  got,  provided 
you  will  apply  yourselves  to  giving  me  efficient  aid  in  dealing  with 
these  accounts,"  he  should  all  at  once  have  resiled  from  (hat 
position,  and  declined  their  aid  and  taken  the  whole  responsibility 
upon  himself,  and  that  they  should  have  foigntton  all  about  it  oi- 
been  ignorant  of  it.  I  venture  to  say  that,  after  the  plain  terms 
in  which  that  was  brought  ])efore  them,  it  would  have  been  the 
grossest  breach  of  duty  on  the  part  of  each  and  all  of  those  irentle- 
men  if  they  had  not  criven  the  Afana'jer  the  assistance  he  desired  : 
still  more   a   breach   of  duty  if,    knowing   the   danger   of  those 

X  321 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  accounts,  and  knowing  how  they  affected  the  position  of  the 
Advocate,  gank,  they  stood  by  for  three  years,  knowing  that  there  was  a 
mine  beneath  them  that  might  explode  at  any  moment,  without 
being  at  the  trouble  to  inquire  how  those  accounts  were  going  on. 
Gentlemen,  that  this  was  brought  before  them,  and  most  distinctly 
brought  before  them,  very  plainly  appears  from  the  letter  of  the 
Manager,  and  I  must  ask  you  to  permit  me  to  read  it :  — 

City  of  Glasgow  Bank, 

28th   December,    1875. 

Gentlemen, — In  thanking  you  for  the  offer  of  the  management 
of  this  Bank  which  you  have  kindly  made  to  me,  I  beg  to  state 
my  willingness  to  accept  it.  But  before  undertaking  this  re- 
sponsibility, I  deem  it  prudent  to  ask  the  Board  to  minute  its 
approval  of  the  policy  which  has  been  pursued  of  supporting  several 
accounts  of  an  unsatisfactory  character  since  my  brother  discon- 
tinued personally  to  manage  the  Bank ;  and,  further,  to  appoint  a 
committee  to  investigate  and  place  on  record  what  may  have  been 
the  exact  position  of  these  accounts  and  the  advances  generally 
when  my  brother  ceased  to  be  Manager,  and  also  to  act  and 
guide  me  in  any  important  detail  therewith  connected,  as  I  am  in 
no  wise  responsible  up  to  this  date  for  the  state  of  certain  advances 
which  I  need  not  here  particularise. 

You  will,  I  hope,  admit  the  reasonableness  of  the  precaution 
which  this  I'equest  involves ;  and  I  feel  you  will  the  more 
readily  do  this  when  you  consider  that  whilst  we  are  all  hopeful 
that  these  advances  may  eventuate  without  loss,  yet  the  working 
out  of  them  must  of  necessity  be  a  work  of  some  time.  And  when 
you  also  consider  that  there  may  be  changes  in  the  Board  during 
this  time,  and  I  should  have  to  explain  to  new  Directors  what  you 
know  regarding  my  connection  with  the  inception  of  these 
advances. 

Gentlemen,  that  was  a  communication  surely  calculated  to 
make  the  Directors  consider  seriously  their  position,  whatever 
may  have  been  their  knowledge  of  there  being  unsatisfactory 
accounts  before.  It  gave  them  distinct  warning;  it  gave  them 
this  warning,  that  although  the  accounts  might  eventuate 
without  loss,  that  was  a  matter  which  only  time  could  decide. 
And  he  says  that  he  did  not  need  to  particularise  them.  I 
don't  think  you  will  have  any  difficulty  in  making  up  your  minds 
as  to  the  meaning  of  that  word — saying,  in  other  words,  as 
plain  as  language  could  put  it,  "  I  won't  recapitulate  these 
accounts  here,  because  you  know  them  well  enough."  I  need 
not  tell  you  this,  that  if  the  Directors  had  not  known  what 
these  accounts  were  that  were  indicated  in  that  letter,  it  was 
the  gravest  matter  of  duty  to  the  Bank  that  they  should 
instantly  require  an  explanation,  and  ask,  what  are  those  accounts 
referred  to  in  that  statement — what  are  those  accounts  which 
may  eventuate  without  loss,  but,  of  course,  may  eventuate  in 
loss — what  are  those  accounts  which  will  take  a  long  time  to 
realise  before  we  know  whether  there  will  be  loss  or  not? 
But  it  was  obviously  quite  unnecessary  for  them  to  make  any 

322 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


such  inquiry,  and,  accordingly,  they  made  none,  but  took  the      Lord 
matter  into  their  full  consideration.     Accordingly,  Mr.  Leresche,  Advocate. 
at  p.  75,  G 

Lord  Justice-Clerk — Don't  you  think  you  had  better  take 
the  minutei  along  with  the  letter? 

Lord  Advocate — I  am  going  to  take  it  along  with  the  letter. 
Mr.  Leresche's  account  of  what  took  place  at  the  meeting  on 
the  30th  December,  1875,  is — "  There  were  present  Messrs. 
Taylor,  Potter,  Stewart,  Salmond,  Inglis,  and  Wright.  Mr. 
Alexander  Stronach  having  retired,  that  was  the  whole  Board 
at  the  time.  On  that  occasion  the  burning  of  notes  was  asrain 
adjourned,  and  I  again  left  the  room ;  but  I  cannot  say  whether 
I  left  the  agenda  book  behind  me  or  not.  The  Board  had  a 
long  deliberation  that  day.  I  should  say  it  must  have  been 
two  hours."  Your  lordship  in  the  chair  put  a  question  to 
Mr.  Leresche,  "Are  you  speaking  from  recollection  alone?" 
and  his  reply  was,  ''  I  remember  it,  because  the  .'iOth  was  the 
occasion  when  the  letter  of  the  Manager  was  read  accepting 
the  appointment."  Then  he  is  recalled  after  the  whole  of  the 
Directors,  with  the  exception  of  Mr.  Stronach,  had  considered 
the  matter.  Mr.  Leresche  is  recalled — because  he  was  not 
permitted  to  be  present  at  important  deliberations  upon  these 
matters.  They  had  a  very  singular  way  in  that  Bank  of 
dealing  with  their  Secretary.  The  Manager  conducts  his  private 
correspondence,  not  through  the  Secretary  of  the  Bank,  who 
ought  to  be  trusted  officially  in  such  a  case,  but  through  a 
private  clerk,  who  communicates  directly  with  the  Manager, 
and  conceals  a  lot  of  information  in  regard  to  these  matters 
that  would  otherwise  in  the  course  of  bank  management  have 
gone  to  the  Secretary.  And  I  must  do  him  (the  Manager)  the 
credit  to  say  that  the  Directors  pursued  precisely  the  same 
course  in  regard  to  Mr.  Leresche,  because  as  soon  as  an  impor- 
tant question  like  this  came  up — you  will  see  one  or  two 
instances  of  it  by  and  by — again  the  Secretary  of  the  Bank 
gets  the  hint  that  his  room  would  be  rather  more  desirable 
than  his  company.  Out  he  walks,  and  the  Directors  deliberate; 
and  then  they  write  up  their  own  result  of  the  deliberations 
that  take  place  in  the  absence  of  the  Secretary,  and  liand  it 
over  to  Mr.  Leresche  in  order  that  it  may  be  engrossed  in  the 
minutes.  There  was  a  book  called  the  agenda  book  that  was 
prepared  by  Mr.  Leresche  for  the  meeting.  He  noted  down  the 
business  that  he  knew  of  that  was  to  come  before  the  meeting, 
and  then  the  chairman,  or  some  other  component  member  of 
the  meeting,  wrote  oi)posite  that  piece  of  business  the  way  in 
which  it  had  been  disposed  of.  On  this  occasion,  at  the  end 
of  two  hours,  the  doors  of  the  council  chamber  are  opened,  and 
Mr.  Leresche  is  called  in,  and  the  result  of  their  deliberations 
upon   the  Manager's   most    important   letter    is   liandod    to    Mr. 

323 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord       Leresche  in  the  form  of  a   resolution  on  a  slip.     It  is  in  the' 
Advooate.  handwriting   of   two   of   the    Directors — the   first   part   of   it   ia 
in  Mr.   Taylor's,   and  the   last  part   of  it   in  Mr.   Inglis',  hand- 
writing; and  that  was  embodied  by  Mr.  Leresche  in  the  minute 
of  the  meeting  of  the  Directors.     I  must  ask  you  to  attend  to 
its  terms.     This  is  the  result  of  their  deliberations.     Mind  that 
Stronach  was  not  there.     They  cannot  say  it  was  Stronach  this 
time.     I  have  no  doubt  they  will  say  it  was  Stronach  on  some 
other    occasions,    but    they    cannot    say    it    was    he    this    time, 
because  he  was  not  there.     The  result  of  their  deliberations  was 
embodied  in  this  document,  which  was  under  the  hand  of  two 
of   themselves — Mr.    Taylor,    the   chairman   of    the    Board,    and 
Mr.   Henry   Inglis.      The   minute,   which   is  just  a   copy   of  the 
resolution,    is    as    follows :  — "  A   letter   was    read    from    Robert 
Summers  Stronach,  of  date  28th  December,  1875,  accepting  the 
office  of  Manager  of  the  Bank,  and  the  same  having  been  con- 
sidered and  approved  of,  is  ordered  to  be  recorded  in  the  minute- 
book  ;  and  all  the  members  of  the  Board  of  Directors  a  com- 
mittee to  comply  with  his  request."     And  then  they  add — "  The 
Directors   wish   also   to   record,    on   their   own   behalf,    the   fact 
that  the  matters  alluded  to  in  the  letter  in  question  were  not 
at  any  time  brought  before  them  by  the  late  Manager."     Does 
not  that  resolution  assume,  from  beginning  to  end  of  it,   that 
all   these    gentlemen    knew    the   matters   alluded   to,    knew    the 
unsatisfactory  nature   of  these  accounts'?        They  consider  this 
letter,  and  approve  of  it ;  and  the  only  thing  they  take  exception 
to   is  a   statement   to  the   effect — or   rather   they   guard   them- 
selves against  a  statement — that  these  matters  had  been  brought 
before  them   by  the   former  Manager.      With   the  exception   of 
that   single  point  they  accept   the  letter.      They  do  not   for  a 
moment  dispute  their  knowledge  of  the  matters  to  which  the 
letter   refers ;   and   in   order  that   these   accounts  may  be  con- 
sidered  with   the   aid   of   all,    instead   of   remitting  the   subject 
to   a    small   committee,    they    appoint    the    whole    body    of   the 
Directors  to  act  as  a  committee  with  Mr.  Stronach.     Therefore, 
I   think  it  quite  impossible  for  any  one  to  suggest  that  these 
Directors  had  no  knowledge  at  that  time  of  the  accounts — no 
^    knowledge   as    to   what    was    the    character    of    those    accounts, 
or  to  deny  the  desire  of  Mr.  Stronach  to  be  aided  with  them. 
Now,   in   what  follows,   gentlemen,    I  am   sorry  to   say  we   are 
left  to  evidence  from  the  records  of  the  Directors  themselves. 
It  is  most  important  in  this  case  to  know  what  was  the  state 
of  the  Bank,  what  was  the  knowledge  of  the  state  of  the  Bank, 
and    one    of   the    most   important    questions    is    how    far,    after 
they  had   come   to   that    resolution    to   aid   Mr.    Stronach,    the 
Directors  continued  to  have   knowledge   of  these  accounts.      I 
shall  go  over  what  took  place  in  the  interval  between  that  letter 
and  the  last  balance  sheet  and  the  stopjiage  of  the  Bank  as 

324 


Addresses  to  Jury. 

shortly  as  I  can  consistently  with  bringing  the  details  before      Lord 
you,  because  it  humbly  appears  to  me  that  this  is  a  very  vital  Advocate, 
part   of   the   case,   because,   as   I   have   said   before,   without   a 
knowledge  that  the  state  of  the  Bank  required  misrepresenta- 
tion and  concealment,  I  could  hardly  ask  you  to  return  a  verdict 
of  guilty  against  any  one  of  the  accused.     I  think,  however, 
that  a  consideration  of  the  different  steps  that  took  place  after 
the  date  of  that   appeal  made   to  them  by  the  Manager  will 
show  very  clearly  that  they  did  continue  in  the  knowledge  of 
these   accounts.        You   already   have   known    that   these   grew 
enormously,   and   you   will   see  how   they   grew.      Take   Morton 
&  Co.  for  instance.       Morton  stands  at  £1,380,000  in  1875 ;  in 
1876  (which  was  just  the  year  after  this  point  had  been  brought 
up  by  the  Manager)  he  mounts  up  to   £1,885,000;  in  1877  he 
is   reduced  a  little  bit — to  £1,771,000;   and   then   in   the  year 
1878  he  is  up  a  long  way — ^to  £2,173,000;  or,  in  round  numbers, 
he  had  got  £900,000  more  of  the  Bank's  money  than  he  had  in 
1875.      Now,   I  don't   think  there  will  be  any  attempt   in   this 
case    to    suggest    to    you    that    these    gentlemen    covered    their 
indebtedness  to  the  Bank — that  either  Mr.  Morton  or  any  one 
of  them  did  so.     There  is  no  suggestion  of  it.     You  might  as 
well  suggest  that  there  ought  to  be  no  liquidation  and  no  calls 
because  there  is  no  deficit,  and  the  Bank  is  really  a  healthy 
concern,   if   they  could   only   realise   their  Australian   land   and 
shares.     But  you  have  a  curious  insight  into  what  was  known 
about  that  in  the  book  kept  by  Morris,  the  private  secretary, 
who    superseded    the    most    important    part    of   Mr.    Leresche's 
functions — the    private    securities    book,    in    which    there    was 
kept   a  note  of  the  special  securities  held  against  cash   credit 
advances  and  bills,  and  which  was  brought  to  a  kind  of  balance 
in   1877.     It  was  spoken  to  by  Morris.     There  were  three  big 
accounts  in  it — Nicol  Fleming's;  Smith,  Fleming  ct  Co.'s;  and 
Morton  &  Co.'s.     That  certainly  was  a  very  wonderful  illustra- 
tion of  the  kind  of  business  which  the  Bank   was  doing  with 
these  peo])le  at  that  time.     There  were  securities  statetl  by  Mr. 
Nicol  Fleming  equal  to  the  amount  of  his  indebtedness,  which 
was  very  large.     But  when  you  come  to  look  at  the  securities, 
they  consisted,  as  they  did  in  every  case,  to  a  large  extent  of 
this— £200,000  or  £300,000  as  the  stock  of  the  linn  indebted ; 
and  that  was  dealt  with  as  a  special  security  available  to  the 
Bank.     But  the  idea  of  taking  a  man's  stock,  with  which  you 
permit   him   to   trade,   as   a   s]>ecial   security,    is   a   nio.st    i-xtni- 
ordinary  fallacy,  and  that  must  have  been  known  to  these  men. 
You  take  the  security  of  a  man's  stock  in  case  of  his  failure  to 
pay;    but    suppose    he    fails    and    loses    his    stock-in-triHle,    the 
security  is  also  lost  with  the  stuck-in-trade.     Then,  again,  they 
insure  his  life  for  £100,000;  but  unless  they  intend  to  poison 
him   in    the   Bank    parlour,    and    realise    in    that    way,    I    don't 

335 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  see  how  they  were  entitled  to  set  that  down  as  a  cover  to  the 
Advocate,  extent  of  £100,000.  And  then  there  was  what  I  have  no  doubt 
was  done  in  perfect  good  faith,  but  it  just  exposes  the  inadequacy 
of  the  whole  thing ;  it  was  explained  by  Morris  that  there 
was  a  quantity  of  shares  at  par  value  of  £62  10s.,  and  by  a 
calculation  which  he  made  he  found  out  that  if  he  added  400 
per  cent,  to  the  value  of  these  shares,  he  brought  up  the  total 
to  between  £700,000  or  £800,000,  and  covered  Mr.  Fleming's 
indebtedness.  It  was  only  in  that  way  that  Fleming's  indebted- 
ness was  covered.  But  even  in  that  book  there  was  not  the 
slightest  attempt  to  represent  Morton's  advances  as  covered, 
and,  accordingly,  his  securities,  which  include  £65,000  of 
insurance,  bring  out  a  deficit  of  £840,000  upon  his  account, 
even  supposing  his  capital  was  realised  as  well  as  his  life  policy. 
That  word  "  deficit "  has  a  considerable  deal  of  meaninp-  in 
this  case.  This  much  must  be  said  of  Mr.  Morton  that,  although 
he  had  enormous  dealings  with  the  Bank,  he  is  a  gentleman 
who  keeps  very  much  in  the  dark,  and  the  way  in  which  the 
Bank  dealt  with  him  was  not  calculated  to  relieve  his  ongoings 
from  that  obscurity.  He  is  found  in  connection  with  all  con- 
cerns and  things.  When  you  are  going  to  make  a  Pastoral 
Association  by  way  of  a  little  bank  speculation  in  Australia, 
when  you  are  going  to  buy  shares  or  going  to  Poverty  Bay  or 
elsewhere  with  a  view  to  recoup  the  losses  of  the  Bank,  Mr. 
Morton  is  always  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  is  a  large  holder; 
but  I  am  sorry  to  say  he  is  a  large  debtor  to  the  Bank  himself. 
Morton's  account  does  not  appear  much,  but  it  does  appear, 
and  it  was  treated  with  very  great  secrecy  by  the  Directors. 
You  have  in  the  minute  of  11th  January,  1877 — "It  was  pro- 
posed and  agreed  that  the  Bank  should  accept  drafts  by  Glen 
Walker  &  Co.  to  the  extent  of  £100,000  to  retire  a  like  amount 
drawn  by  Holmes,  White  &  Co.,  Melbourne,  on  account  of  James 
Morton  &  Co.  The  securities  at  present  held  against  Holmes, 
White  &  Co.'s  draft  to  be  placed  as  security  against  the  drafts 
of  Glen  Walker  &  Co.  Letter  to  be  obtained  from  James 
Morton  &  Co.  to  this  effect,  and  no  drafts  to  be  accepted  until 
this  letter  is  in  possession  of  the  Bank."  There  were  present 
at  the  meeting— Mr.  Inglis  in  the  chair,  Mr.  Potter,  Mr. 
Salmond,  Mr.  Stewart,  Mr.  Wright,  Mr.  Taylor,  and  Mr. 
Stronach.  Then  on  the  18th  of  the  same  month — "With  refer- 
ence to  the  minute  of  11th  January  authorising  the  Bank  to 
accept  the  drafts  of  Glen  Walker  &  Co.  to  the  extent  of 
£100,000,  so  as  to  rejDlace  a  like  amount  drawn  by  Holmes, 
White  &  Co.,  it  was  considered  that  the  letter  of  Messrs.  James 
Morton  &  Co.,  dated  16th  August,  1876,  and  referred  to  in 
Bank's  minute  of  17th  August,  1876,  was  sufficient  authority 
to  the  Bank  to  adopt  the  securities  which  were  held  against 
Holmes,  White  &  Co.'s  drafts  as  applicable  to  the  new  arrange- 
326 


Addresses   to  Jury. 

ment."     The  letter  referred  to  is  a  letter  on  page  32  of  the      Lord 
smaller  print  of  documents,  to  the  following  effect : Advocate. 

In  consideration  of  your  arranging  with  Messrs.  Glen  Walker 
&  Co.,  of  Melbourne,  or  any  other  firm,  for  the  drawing  of  credits 
to  take  place  of  a  like  amount  at  present  discounted  by  us,  we 
hereby  authorise  you  to  transfer  to  a  separate  account  in  security 
for  same  a  proportionate  amount  of  the  securities  held  by  you  on 
our  account— it  being  understood  that  our  account  is  to  be  credited 
with  the  amount  of  the  credits  given  out  during  this  arrangement, 
and  advising  us  of  same. 

Jas.    Morton.         Jas.   Morton  &  Co. 

Now,  gentlemen,  that  account  was  under  the  consideration 
of  the  Bank,  and  I  must  ask  you  to  attend  to  what  Mr. 
Leresche,  in  his  evidence,  says — "  In  the  agenda  book,  under 
date  11th  January,  1877,  there  were  present — Mr.  Inglis  (chair- 
man), Messrs.  Potter,  Salmond,  Stewart,  Wright,  Taylor,  and 
the  Manager.  The  ordinary  business  of  that  meeting  was  closed 
by  a  letter  from  Mr.  Bain,  and  the  initials  of  Mr.  Inglis  are 
after  that  piece  of  business.  The  Board  remained  in  deliberation 
after  that  for  a  considerable  time — a  long  time.  I  was  called 
in,  and  a  draft  resolution  was  handed  to  me  to  be  entered  in 
the  book.  I  cannot  recollect  in  whose  handwriting  it  was — 
probably  it  was  in  that  of  Mr.  Inglis.  Q.  It  was  not  preserved? 
— A.  I  have  no  knowledge  of  it.  On  the  left-hand  side  in  the 
agenda  book  is  an  entry,  '  Morton's  account,'  in  the  handwriting 
of  Mr.  Inglis.  It  was  put  in  as  a  separate  piece  of  business 
from  what  had  been  made  up  by  me  for  the  use  of  the  meeting. 
Morton's  account  was  never  spoken  of  in  my  presence."  Mr. 
Leresche  makes  up  the  list  of  subjects  to  come  before  the 
Board  for  discussion  on  that  day.  Mr.  Inglis  initials  that  as 
chairman,  and  then  proceeds  to  enter  in  the  agenda  book  that 
new  piece  of  business  to  which  I  refer,  which  he  enters  under 
the  title  of  "  Morton's  account."  Out  goes  the  Secretary  as 
usual,  and  they  consider  that  in  private,  and  then  he  is  called 
in,  and  the  terms  of  the  minute  which  I  have  read  to  you  are 
given  to  him  as  adjusted.  Then  on  18th  January  you  have  the 
letter  I  have  already  read.  Shortly  after  that  date  there  follows 
another  very  important  minute.  The  date  of  it  is  15th  Novem- 
ber, 1877.  The  Directors  present  were  Mr.  Stewart  (chairman), 
Mr.  Potter,  Mr.  Salmond,  Mr.  Inglis,  Mr.  Iniies  Wriirht,  Mr. 
Taylor,  and  Mr.  Robert  Stroiiach.  At  that  meeting  (lie  Manager 
was  requested  to  lay  before  the  Board  at  their  next  meeting 
a  vidimus  of  the  securities  held  by  the  Bank  in  connection  with 
the  Australian  and  New  Zealand  advances,  and  then  (InMe  is 
this  part  of  the  minute  to  which  I  must  ask  your  j)ait icular 
attention — "  It  was  resolved  that  a  committee  of  the  wliole  Hoard 
should  sit  periodically  to  consider  the  position  of  the  vaiious 
accounts  of  the  Bank.     The  committee  of  imiuiry  ai)ovo   men' 

327 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  tioned  will  meet  not  later  than  four  months  from  this  date." 
dvocate.  jsj^^^  gentlemen,  there,  upon  those  matters  coming  before  them, 
this  resolution  is  come  to,  that  a  committee  of  the  whole  house 
shall  sit  upon  the  position  of  the  various  accounts  of  the  Bank. 
Can  there  be  any  doubt  or  hesitation  as  to  what  those  accounts 
of  the  Bank  were  that  a  committee  of  the  whole  Directors  were 
to  consider?  It  was  what  they  had  pledged  themselves  to  do 
in  favour  of  their  Manager  by  the  minute  of  December  when 
they  accepted  his  letter.  It  plainly  refers  to  the  same  matter; 
but  there  is  a  very  singular  addition  here.  The  committee  of 
inquiry,  as  entered  in  the  minute,  ''  will  meet  not  later  than 
four  months  from  this  date."  Now,  on  this  occasion  I  think 
you  will  find  from  Mr.  Leresche's  statement  that  the  desire  of 
the  Manager  was,  when  he  brought  this  matter  before  them^ 
that  the  Board  should  sit  at  once  and  consider  these  accounts. 
That  did  not  seem  very  palatable  to  some  of  them,  and  one 
of  them  makes  a  motion  not  unlike  in  form  to  what  occurs 
elsewhere.  When  the  opponents  of  a  disagreeable  and  dis- 
tasteful measure  object  strongly  to  it  in  either  House  of  Par- 
liament, it  is  customary  to  move  that  it  be  read  that  day  six 
months  or  three  months ;  and  here  the  motion  of  one  of  the 
Directors  is  very  much  equivalent  to  that — that  these  accounts 
be  considered  that  day  four  months.  Mr.  Leresche  says  that 
at  this  meeting  on  1.5th  November,  1877,  there  were  present 
Mr.  Stewart  (chairman),  Mr.  Potter,  Mr.  Salmond,  Mr.  Inglis, 
Mr.  Wright,  Mr.  Taylor,  and  the  Manager — the  whole  of  them 
again.  "  I  was  absent,"  he  says,  "  from  the  meeting  during 
the  latter  part  of  it,  when  they  were  deliberating  on  the  New 
Zealand  matters.  Afterwards  I  was  called  in  and  recorded  the 
deliverance.  Q.  After  you  had  engrossed  the  Board's  deliver- 
ance about  the  New  Zealand  and  Australian  advances,  did  the 
Manager  say  anything  in  your  hearing  to  the  Directors? — 
A.  Yes.  Q.  Did  you  hear  what  passed? — A.  He  said  that  he 
wished  that  a  committee  of  the  whole  Board  should  sit 
periodically  to  consider  the  various  accounts  of  the  Bank.  Q. 
Did  you  hear  what  passed  on  that  suggestion? — A.  Yes;  it  was 
agreed  to,  and  I  then  entered  this  resolution — '  It  was  resolved 
that  a  committee  of  the  whole  Board  should  sit  periodically  to 
consider  the  accounts  of  the  Bank.'  A  conversation  then  arose 
as  to  whether  the  Manager  wished  this  to  be  done  at  once, 
and  a  suggestion  was  made  that  it  should  begin  six  months 
afterwards.  Q.  Who  said  that? — A.  I  cannot  remember  who 
said  it.  Q.  Was  it  Mr.  Stronach,  or  some  one  else? — A.  It 
would  not  be  Mr.  Stronach;  it  would  be  one  of  the  Directors; 
and  afterwards  it  was  suggested,  so  far  as  I  can  recollect,  by 
Mr.  Taylor,  that  it  should  be  four  months.  Q.  What  was  to 
be  done  in  four  months? — A.  The  looking  into  those  securities. 
Q.  The  sitting  of  this  committee?- — A.  Yes."  And  accordingly 
328 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


it  was  minuted  that  this  should  not  take  place  for  four  months.      Lord 
In  the  afreuda   book  it   is  entered   in  what   ajijiears  to  be  Mr.  Advocate. 
Taylor's  handwriting,   that  "  it  was   resolved  that  a  committee 
of    the   whole    Board    should    sit    periodically    to    consider    the 
position  of  the  various  accounts  of  the  Bank.     This  is  not  to 
take  place  for  four  months."     Now,   it   is  perfectly  plain  that 
the  Manager  again  on  this  occasion  brings  these  accounts  before 
the  Board,  and  he  is  met  by  this,  "  in  six  months,"  then  "  in 
four    months,"    then    "  not    later    than    four    months."        Now, 
gentlemen,    is    it    possible    to    say    that    those    men    had    not 
Morton's  account  in  view,   that  they  were  not  prepared  when 
called  upon   then   to   fulfil  the   undertaking  they  had  given   to 
their  Manager  in  the  end  of  1875,  to  the  effect  that  they  would 
lend   their   aid   to  look  after   these   accounts?     Is   it  not  clear 
that  the  Manager  then  thought  things  were  not  straight  with 
these  accounts,  and  that  they  ought  to  be  looked  into;  and  is 
it  not  equally  plain  that   the  Directors  nmst  have  known  that, 
and  must  have  known  it  even  although  they  desired  to  put  it 
aside  as  not  a  very  convenient  and  pleasant   thing?     It   must 
have   interfered  with   dreams  of    12   or    li   per   cent,    dividend, 
and  probably  that  was  not  a  pleasant  consideration ;    but   the 
thing  was  there,   and  pressed  upon  them;  and  I  ask  whether, 
in  the  face  of  that,  you  are  to  assume  that  in  that  long  discus- 
sion  the   Manager's   desire   for   aid   was   the   merest    sliam   and 
quibble,    and   that   these   gentlemen   knew   nothing   of   his   real 
desire  to  have  those  matters  investigated  with  their  assistance; 
and   investigated   why?     Because,   according  to   the   fact,   these 
accounts  which  were  unsatisfactory — the  chance  of  putting  them 
right  merely  a  hope,  a  scintilla  of  hope,  in  December,   1875 — 
were  getting  a  great  deal  worse  at  the  date  when  he  made  that 
request  in   1877.     Then,  again,  we  have  no  trace  of  a  meeting 
of  that  committee.     In  fact,  it  seems  to  have  been  to  a  consider- 
able extent  shelved  by  that  adroit  movement.     But,  again,   on 
Hth  March,  1878,  you  have  the  matter  up.     It  is  brought  before 
them  again;  and  upon  that  occasion  "  it  was  agreed  that  Messrs. 
Stewart,  Potter,  and  Salmond  be  appointed  a  committee,  along 
vfith  the  Manage!',  to  examine  the  accounts  at  the  head  otHce 
weekly,   and   to  deal   in   paiticulur   with    the  account    of  Janice 
Morton  «fc  Co."     That  is  their  own  record  of  a  meeting  where 
there  were  present  Messrs.   Stewart,   Salmond,   Wright,  Taylor, 
Potter,   and  Stronach — all  except  Mr.   Inglis.      But   that  comes 
up  again  at  the  next  meeting,  when  Mr.  Inglis  is  present,  for 
this   appears — '"In   regard  to   the   committee  ajipointed   at    the 
last  meeting  as  to  Morton's  account,  consisting  of  tlie  foregoing 
gentlemen,     along    with     Mr.     Salinond,     Mr.     Stewart     furl  her 
reported    Mr.    Morton's    engagement    to    realise    as    tjuickly    us 
possible,    consistent   with    prudence,    his   4    jier   cent,    preference 
stock  of  the  New  Zealand  and  Australian  Land  Company  held 

329 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord       in    security   by   the   Bank " — and   at   that    meeting   there   were 
Advocate,  present  Mr.  Stewart,  Mr.  Sahnond,  Mr.  Taylor,  and  Mr.  Inglis, 
the  last  of  whom  had  not  been  at  the  previous  meeting. 

Now,  gentlemen,  are  we  to  assume — and  you  will  be  asked 
to  assume — that  these  gentlemen  were  ignorant  of  Morton's 
account  and  its  state?  No  matter  what  the  Manager  warns; 
no  matter  his  repeated  request  that  they  would  fulfil  their 
pledge ;  no  matter  that  a  committee  is  appointed — they  knew 
nothing  about  it — the  Manager  or  some  inferior  official  of  the 
Bank  is  responsible  for  all  that,  and  for  the  state  of  Morton's 
account.  That  you  will  hear  that  argued  I  have  not  the 
slightest  doubt.  It  is  very  difficult  to  get  into  their  Board-room 
when  Mr.  Leresche  was  shut  out ;  but  surely  you  are  not  going 
to  hold  that  what  passed  in  the  Board-room,  and  the  minutes 
made  and  written  in  the  hands  of  Directors  at  the  Board,  are 
to  be  treated  as  a  mere  mockery  and  a  delusion — that  such 
things  never  took  place,  that  the  account  was  not  discussed, 
that  their  deliberations  were  a  farce,  and  that  nothing  earthly 
was  done  about  Morton  or  disclosed  about  his  position?  Unless 
you  are  prepared  to  accept  that — to  accept  a  suggestion  coming 
from  counsel  as  an  answer  to  a  deliberately  recorded  resolution 
at  the  time,  you  will,  I  venture  to  say,  have  great  difficulty 
in  coming  to  the  conclusion — if  it  is  possible  for  you  to  come 
to  it — that  these  gentlemen  were  not  one  and  all  aware  of 
Morton's  increasing  indebtedness,  and  aware  that  the  huge 
account  to  which  their  attention  was  called  in  1875  was  grow- 
ing like  a  snowball  from  year  to  year  under  their  manage- 
ment. And  it  was  not  Morton's  account  only.  Any  one  of 
them  was  big  enough  to  frighten  a  prudent  man — but  just 
take  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.'s ;  and  it  is  very  curious  in  itself — a 
very  curious  specimen  of  the  career  of  a  mercantile  man,  who 
makes  a  large  fortune,  and  loses  a  large  fortune,  and  gets  pulled 
through  by  the  Bank,  leaving  the  Bank  and  himself  a  great 
deal  the  worse  of  the  operation.  In  1870  Mr.  John  Fleming 
told  you  his  agents,  Duckworth  &  Co.,  failed,  and  the  result  of 
Duckworth's  failure  was  that  he  became  embarrassed,  and,  find- 
ing he  could  not  go  on,  he  at  that  time  came  to  Glasgow  to  see 
if  arrangements  could  be  made  with  the  City  Bank.  There 
seems  to  have  been  faith  everywhere  in  the  City  Bank,  but 
I  do  not  know  that  any  one  had  more  implicit  confidence  in  the 
City  Bank  than  those  impecunious  gentlemen  who  were  con- 
stantly drawing  upon  its  funds,  and,  to  use  language  that  appears 
elsewhere,  "  absorbed  " — a  word  very  characteristic  of  the  fact — 
the  greater  part  of  the  Bank's  capital.  They  had  implicit  faith 
in  the  Bank,  and  their  faith  was  justified.  He  comes  down 
to  the  Bank.  He  owed  them  then  £150,000,  and  he  says — 
I  have  no  doubt  he  believed  it,  whether  it  was  precisely  the 
fact  or  not;  we   need  not   take   him   too   strictly  to   task — he 

330 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


believed  it  was  well  covered.  Well,  let  it  be  so.  But  it  is  quite  Lord 
obvious  that  £150,000  did  not  altogether  disclose  the  extent  Advocate, 
of  Mr.  John  Fleming's,  or  rather  the  state  of  his  finu's, 
indebtedness  at  that  period,  because  the  modest  sum  which  he 
names  as  absolutely  necessary  to  pull  him  through  in  the  crisis 
of  his  fortunes  in  the  beginning  of  1870  was  £500,000  cash. 
Well,  it  is  said,  "  You  may  do  this  in  various  ways,"  but  he 
says,  "  Oh,  no,  I  object  to  the  way  proposed  by  the  Bank ;  I 
won't  hear  of  a  new  firm  in  Liverpool  drawing  upon  me :  it 
would  destroy  my  credit."  Accordingly  he  objected;  and  the 
Liverpool  firm  did  not  prove  successful  after  all,  and  he  said 
(I  have  no  doubt  with  perfect  truth),  "  If  you  do  not  give 
me  £500,000,  what  I  will  do  is,  I'll  come  down-;  I  will  fail,  and 
go  into  the  Gazette.'''  That  seems  to  have  been  a  very  alarming 
threat;  why  it  should  have  been  it  is  not  very  easy  to  see.  But 
it  seems  to  have  given  great  alarm  to  some  of  the  Directors 
of  the  Bank,  because  when  Mr.  Fleming  was  leaving  the  room, 
Mr.  Potter  rushed  after  him  and  brought  him  back.  They  would 
not  let  him  come  down,  and  the  result  was  that  he  was  as 
handsomely  treated  then  as  at  subsequent  periods.  He  got  his 
£500,000  from  the  Bank  to  pull  him  througli — at  least  some- 
thing like  it,  because  at  the  end  of  that  year  the  Bank  was 
in  advance  £500,000.  It  is  right  to  say  that  Mr.  Fleming 
thought  they  were  covered  to  the  extent  of  three-fourths  of 
that  debt.  Here  is  a  man  on  the  verge  of  bankruptcy,  who 
must  come  down  if  the  Bank  will  not  give  him  £500,000,  and 
to  keep  him  up  the  Bank  are  in  advance  to  him  at  the  end  of 
that  year  to  the  extent  of  £125,000  of  balances  uncovered. 
That  seems  to  have  been  the  whole  advantage  the  Bank  got 
out  of  the  transaction — that  whereas  they  were  covered  at  the 
first,  they  were  uncovered  to  the  extent  of  £125,000  at  the 
end  of  the  year.  And  that  was  the  beginning,  so  far  as  Smith, 
Fleming  &  Co.  were  concerned,  of  that  deficit  which  the  Bank 
were  straining  every  nerve  to  recoup  at  a  later  period  of  tlieir 
history.  Because,  unfortunately,  John  Fleming's  ditHculties  did 
not  end  there.  They  recurred  in  1875,  if,  indeed,  he  was  ever 
free  from  them.  He  never  seems  to  have  rejiaid  the  B.iiik  ; 
but  in  1875,  in  the  beginning  of  the  year,  he  is  in  difiicuhies 
again,  and  he  has  been  trading  pretty  largely  on  his  credit 
with  the  Bank ;  because  when  these  difficulties,  as  lie  was 
pleased  to  call  them,  overtook  him  in  the  begiiming  of  1S75, 
the  state  of  his  account  with  tiio  Hank  stood  thus — lie  liad  got 
upon  bill  credits  £562,000,  and  he  had  got  in  cash  advances 
£773,000,  making  in  all  £1,. "555,000.  And  Ihon.  being  in 
difficulties,  he  proposes,  and  tiierc  is  made,  an  arrangemeiit. 
Now,  gentlemen,  I  think  you  will  find  that  at  this  stage  the 
arrangement  and  the  position  of  Smith,  Fleming  <V  Co.  wore 
known    to    the   Directors.      The    arrangement    was   made     it    is 

331 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  called  the  arrangement  of  March,  1875,  in  the  evidence  before 
Advocate,  ^q^^  g^j^^j  -^  ^^^  embodied  in  a  letter  by  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co., 
part  of  which  I  shall  read,  written  by  Mr.  John  Fleming  on 
the  12th  April,  1875,  but  it  was  not  adhered  to,  for  this  reason, 
that  Collie's  failure,  of  which  you  may  have  heard,  took  place 
shortly  afterwards,  and  once  more  Mr.  Fleming  was  overtaken  by 
difficulties,  and  consequently  the  arrangement  of  March  was 
modified  in  August  of  that  year.  That  failure  affected  the 
credit  and  cash  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  and  the  result  was 
that  a  new  arrangement  had  to  be  made.  The  fact  of  this 
arrangement  is,  however,  let  me  say,  by  no  means  so  important 
as  this  other  fact,  that  the  Bank  and  certain  of  the  Directors 
at  least  who  are  sitting  at  the  bar,  knew  quite  well  about  these 
things.  Mr.  John  Fleming  in  his  evidence  undoubtedly  told 
you  that  he  was  obtaining  advances  from  Stronach,  which  were 
not  known  to  the  Directors;  and  notwithstanding  the  air  of 
moral  dignity  with  which  Mr.  Fleming  emitted  his  deposition 
before  you,  I  do  not  think  it  was  a  very  straight  action  on  his 
part  to  help  to  keep  those  facts  from  the  Directors.  He 
obviously  did  so;  because  when  one  of  the  Directors,  Mr. 
Salmond,  called  and  asked  questions,  he  gave  him  at  least  an 
evasive,  if  not  an  untrue,  reply,  and  then  he  wrote  a  warning 
note  to  Mr.  Stronach,  in  case  Mr.  Stronach  should  give  a  true 
and  therefore  a  different  reply,  and  involve  him  with  the 
Directors.  It  was  not  straight  sailing  by  any  means,  and  I  do 
think  it  can  be  said  that  until  1875  these  matters  were  really 
divulged  to  the  Directors ;  but  he  stated  with  equal  emphasis — 
and  the  correspondence  to  which  he  was  referred  by  Mr. 
Stronach's  counsel  in  cross-examination  entirely  bore  out  the 
statement — he  stated,  I  say,  that  that  was  not  the  case  when 
Mr.  Robert  Stronach  came  to  be  Manager,  and  that  one  of  the 
first  acts  of  Stronach  in  January,  1876,  after  he  became  Manager 
of  the  Bank,  was  to  inform  him  (Mr.  John  Fleming)  distinctly 
in  writing  that  he  would  not  personally  give  him  any  advances 
without  the  knowledge  and  sanction  of  his  Board.  And  so  far 
as  Mr.  Fleming  knew  and  understood,  he  never  from  that 
date  till  the  Bank  closed  its  door  got  a  sixpence  from  Mr. 
Stronach  individually  without  the  knowledge  of  the  Directors. 
But  now  about  the  letter  of  arrangement — which,  of  course, 
was  Stronach  again,  according  to  one  view  of  this  case,  but  we 
shall  see  about  that.  As  to  the  arrangement  of  March,  1875, 
Mr.  Fleming  wrote  to  Mr.  Stronach  on  the  12th  April,  in  the 
following  terms  :  — 

Referring  to  the  meeting  I  had  with  your  Directors  and  yourself 
on  Thursday,  1st  inst.,  respecting  the  state  of  our  account  with 
the  Bank,  1  now  beg  to  detail  the  terms  of  the  agreement  come 
to  as  I  understood  them  : — (1)  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  as  a  firm,  and 
the  partners  as  individuals,  pledge  themselves  to  abstain  absolutely 

332 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


from  all  speculative  operations,  unless  specially  sanctioned  by  the      Lord 

Bank.     (2)  They  are  to  hold  all  property  belonging  to  the  firm  as  Advocate. 

per  annexed  statement   as  security  or   cover   to  the   Bank   tor   its 

various  advances  to  them  ;    but  inasmuch  a>   it  is  ot   the  greatest 

importance  that  the  credit  of  the  firm  should  not  be  injured,   but 

be    carefully    maintained,    no    public    transfei'    of    the   property    is 

meanwhile  to  be  made.       The  realisation  of  the  property  is  to  be 

left  in  S.,  F.  &  Co.'s  hands,  who  undertake  faithfully  to  account 

for  and  pay  over  to  the  Bank  the  whole  proceeds  of  all   property 

realised.        (3)   The  Bank's   charge   for   commission    for  all   credits 

issued  for  S.,  F.  «&  Co.'s  accommodation,  a.>  per  list  herewith,  shall 

be  at  the  rate  of  J  per  cent,  per  annum,  and  this  arrangement  is 

to  be  retrospective  as   from  l.st  January,   1875.       (4)   The   Bank's 

charge  for  interest  on  all  cash  advances  to  S.,  F.  &  Co.  shall  be  at 

the   rate  of  SJ   per  cent,   per  annum,  as   from   1st   January,   1875. 

A  statement  of  the  balances  of  various  accounts  as  on  31st  March 

last  is  appended.       (5)  The  Bank  shall  advance  the  sum  of  £100,000, 

at    the    rate    of   3i    per   cent,    per  annum,    for    the  acquisition    of 

£100,000   of    the    stock    of  the    Canterbury    and  Otago    Company, 

£7800  of  which  is  to  be  provided  by  me,  credit  for  the  equivalent 

of  £7800  being  given  to  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  in  account  with  the 

Bank  as  at  1st  January,  1875.       (6)  The  £100.000  of  stock  as  above 

shall  be  held  by  trustees  in  trust  for  the  following  purposes : — (1) 

To  pay  interest  at  the  rate  of  3^  per  cent,  per  annum  to  the  Bank 

for  the  £100,000   advanced  for  the  purchase  of  the   stock  :   (2)   to 

pay  the  whole  of  the  surplus  income  arising  from  the  stock,  after 

meeting  the  charge  for  interest  as  above,  to  the  credit  of  S.,  F.  <^ 

Co.'s   account  with   the  Bank,   and  to   continue  doing  so   until  all 

S.,  F.  &  Co.'s  debts  to  the  Bank  have  been  liquidated  ;  (3)  nothing 

was   agreed   as  to  the  ultimate  disposition    of  the  stock  upon   the 

final   liquidation   of  all  S.,    F.  &   Co.'s  obligations  to  the  Bank,  hut 

I  venture  to  suggest  that  in  that  event  the  trustees  be  directed  to 

re-transfer  the   stock   at  cost  price  (viz.,   par)  to  the  parties  who 

furnish  it,  or  their  assignees  or  heirs. 

That  letter,  which  states  the  arranjjement,  has  appended  to  it 
a  statement  of  his  indebtedness  to  the  Bank,  which  is  stated  at 
the  fisrures  I  gave  you,  namely,  bill  credits  to  the  amount  of 
£562,000  odds,  and  cash  advances  to  the  extent  of  £771,000 
odds.  And  here  you  have  a  sort  of  indication,  befrinninp:  even 
then,  of  the  kind  of  way  which  the  Bank  take  to  recoup  these 
losses.  Such  a  balance  is  due,  and  here  is  how  they  try  to 
make  it  up.  It  is  a  very  prenerous  course  of  procedure,  but  a 
very  sino^ular  one.  Your  debtor  owes  you  a  ])alance  which  he 
cannot  pay  up,  and  you  say  to  him,  "  Very  well,  you  owe  me 
£100,000,  and  are  not  able  to  pay  it.  That  is  perfectly  true. 
But  here  I  have  jrot  another  £100,000  in  my  pocket,  and  I  will 
lend  it  to  you,  and  you  will  o-o  and  buy  stock  and  sharos  in 
New  Zealand,  which  will  yield  8  jior  cent.  That  will  enaldo 
you  to  pay  me  back  3i  per  cent,  on  llic  old  dcbf,  nnd  you  will 
pay  in  the  balance  of  the  8  per  cent,  towards  li(]uidat ion." 
But  then  you  don't  even  settle  who  is  to  fjot  (he  bal.Mict^  of  tho 
capital  over  £100,000,  if  it  should  turn  out  well.  The  chnnco 
of  gain  is  left  in  the  most  generous  manner  to  your  debtor 
instead  of  making  a  profitable  investment  for  yourself — a  very 

333 


Advocate 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  handsome  way  of  doing,  but  surely  suggestive  of  this,  that 
there  was  something  very  far  wrong  with  a  balancing  requiring 
to  be  recouped  by  such  a  mode  of  speculation  on  the  part  of 
the  Bank.  Well,  after  the  Collie  disaster,  a  new  arrangement 
is  made,  and  the  chief  feature  of  that  arrangement  is 
the  way  in  which  they  deal  with  the  realisation  of 
the  security  which  is  to  be  bought  with  the  new 
loan  of  the  Bank.  The  letter  says — "  In  the  event " — 
they  had  not  quite  settled  how  the  surplus  was  to  be  dealt 
with  if  those  shares  were  realised ;  but  in  this  letter  of  August 
the  conditions  are  made  more  tig'ht  in  favour  of  the  Bank, 
for  this  reason,  that  their  debtor  had  become  so  much  worse 
by  reason  of  Collie's  failure,  being  involved  in  it,  and,  accord- 
ingly, it  is  stipulated  in  this  letter — "  In  the  event  of  a  sale, 
to  apply  the  proceeds  first  in  liquidation  of  the  foresaid  advance 
of  £100,000,  the  whole  of  the  surplus  over  and  above  the 
said  advance  being  paid  to  the  credit  of  our  account  with 
the  Bank.  The  Bank  shall  have  the  power  to  direct  the 
trustees  to  realise  the  stock  at  such  times,  and  on  such  terms, 
as  they  (the  Bank)  may  think  proper.  It  is  nevertheless 
understood  and  agreed  that  the  Bank  shall  not  exercise  its 
power  to  sell  or  order  a  sale  of  the  stock  until  the  expiry  of 
five  years  from  this  date,  when  the  Bank  shall  have  the  power 
and  option  to  dispose  of  the  stock  for  the  sum  of  £300,000, 
or  to  continue  to  hold  it  for  two  years  longer,  in  which  case 
the  interest  to  be  charged  upon  the  advance  shall  be  at  the  rate 
of  5  per  cent.,  instead  of  3i  per  cent."  Now,  there  is  a  remark- 
able circumstance  with  respect  to  that  letter,  at  least  so 
far  as  regards  one  of  the  prisoners  at  the  bar,  to  whom  I 
shall  specially  refer  before  closing — I  mean  Mr.  Potter — because 
Mr.  Potter  undoubtedly  does  appear  throughout  all  these  trans- 
actions of  the  Bank  more  prominently  than  any  other  Director. 
And  not  only  so  but  he  comes  upon  the  stage  at  critical  periods, 
and,  I  think,  himself  gives  impulse  to  very  decisive  action.  He 
disappears  as  fast  as  he  appears,  but  not  till  he  has  set  the 
machine  in  motion.  In  this  instance  you  have  a  very  singular 
illustration  of  it.  I  don't  know  whether  he  means  to  say  that 
he  knew  nothing  about  these  accounts.  I  don't  know  whether 
the  evidence  of  yesterday,  relating  to  his  general  incapacity 
for  or  neglect  of  details,  is  to  be  held  as  excusing  him  from 
the  knowledge  of  the  indebtedness  to  the  Bank.  But  here 
he  is  in  1875  obviously  a  party  to  this  aiTangement,  because 
upon  the  first  of  these  letters  is  an  important  alteration, 
evidently  made  to  adjust  it  in  terms  of  the  second.  Both  Mr. 
Stronach  and  he  were  parties  to  it.  Mr.  Morris  speaks  to  that. 
He  is  shown  the  letter  of  April,  and  is  asked,  do  you  see  certain 
marks  on  the  document — in  whose  handwriting  are  these?  He 
says — "  Some  in  Mr.  Stronach's."     Then  he  is  referred  to  another 

334 


Addresses   to  Jury. 


addition — '"  Five  years  to  hold  securities,  then  sell  as  required ;       Lord 

£25  when  due."      This  is  just  the  substance  of  the  alteration  Advocate. 

made  upon  the  agreement  of  March  by  the  subsequent   agiee- 

ment  of  August.      Mr.  Morris  is  asked — "  In  whose  handwriting 

is  that  addition? — A.  Mr.  Potter's.      Q.  On  the  next  page  there 

is   another   alteration    in    Mr.    Potter's   handwriting? — A.    Yes; 

life  policies."      He  is  dealing  with  that  arrangement,  and  that 

arrangement  depends  for  its  substance  upon  the  advances  which 

had  been  made  at  that  date,   amounting  to  £1,300,000   odds. 

Can    it    be   suggested    that   with    that    information — when    Mr. 

Potter  is  told  that,  amongst  other  accounts,  Smith,  Fleming  it 

Co.'s  is  a  source  of  suoh  anxiety  to  Mr.  Robert  Stronach  that 

he  cannot  accept  the  responsibility  of  becoming  Manager  unless 

he  has  the  aid  of  the  Directors  in  attending  to  that  account — 

<;an  it  be  said  that  Mr.   Potter  did  not  fully  understand  the 

effect  of  the  appeal  that  was  made  to  him  by  Mr.   Stronach? 

It  is  a  wearisome  task,  and  one  I  need  not  try  to  pursue,   to 

trace   from   that   date,    the   agreement   of    1875,    down   to   the 

final  consummation,  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank,  the  course  of 

this  account.      It  is  very  graphically  described  by  John  Fleminor 

himself,  who  knew  perfectly  well  the  whole  details  of  it.      lie 

says  he  remembers  being  asked  by  Robert  Stronach  to  go  to 

Glasgow,    to   meet    with    the    Directors    in    July    of    last   year. 

"  By  that  time  the   amount  of  indebtedness   had   considerably 

increased.      Q.  How  did  you  come  to  be  able  to  carry  on,  after 

Collie's  failure,  till  the  meeting  of  July,   1878?—^.  When  we 

needed  help  we  got  it."     Then  his  lordship  in  the  chair  put  the 

question,  "  From  the  Bank? — A.  From  tlie  Bank."    Tliat  account 

went   on   from   bad  to  worse.       The   result   of   it    was,    as   Mr. 

Fleming   very   fairly    said,    that,    talking    in   round    numl)ors — 

because   gentlemen   like   Mr.   Fleming   deal    with    large   figures, 

and  don't  content  themselves  with  merely  £5000,  or  anything 

like  that — at   the   date   of   the   stoppage  he   was   owing   from 

£1,800,000  to  £1.900,000.       "  (?.  "V^Tiat   were  your   securities? 

— A.  About  £450,000,  if  the  Bank  gets  all,  which   it  may  not 

•do,  as  there  is  a  dispute  about  them."      And  that  is  the  result 

of  it — a  result  which   it  was  pretty  plain   to  see,   because  this 

is  a  gentleman  who  was  always  liquidating  and  trying  U)  ]'ay  ; 

and  what  is  called,  or  seems  to  have  been  called,  in  the  books 

of  the  Bank,  and  according  to  the  management  of  the  Bank, 

"liquidation,"  is  the  most  extraordinary  jjroccoding  that  I  ever 

heard  of  as  contrasted  with   what   is   popularly   understood   by 

liquidation.       The   usual    process   in   liquidating   an   account   is 

to  sell  off  the  securities  and  ascertain  the  balance  ;    but  in   tho 

ease  of  Mr.  John  Fleminjy  there  was  nothing  to  sell.      Liciuida- 

tion,  if  you  go  to  the  root  of  the  word,  means  "  melting."  and 

the  idea  is  that  you  are  to  melt  down  the  man's  means  and 

pay  off  his  liabilities.      But  in  this  case  there  were  two  licjuida- 

335 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  tions  going  on.  They  were  melting  down  his  securities  whert 
Advocate.  ^^^^^  could,  but  the  Bank  funds  were  melting  just  as  fast, 
because  what  came  from  the  Bank  and  went  to  Fleming  flowed 
a  great  deal  faster,  and  in  much  larger  quantities,  than  anything 
that  ever  came  from  Fleming-  to  the  Bank.  As  showing  how 
they  were  dealing,  and  how  true  the  statement  of  Mr.  Fleming 
is  that  the  Directors,  and  not  Mr.  Stronach,  or  rather  both 
together,  sanctioned  his  advances  after  1875,  let  me  refer  to 
another  minute,  because  it  shows  how  they  dealt  with  Smith, 
Fleming  &  Co..  and  it  shows  the  lamentable  straits  to  which 
the  fostering-  of  these  enormous  credits  on  the  part^  of  one  or 
two  houses  had  placed  the  Bank,  when  it  came  face  to  face 
with  a  legitimate  mercantile  transaction.  I  refer  to  the  minute 
of  the  Directors'  meeting  of  11th  May,  1876,  at  which  there  wer© 
present — ^Mr.  Taylor  (in  the  chair),  Mr.  Potter,  Mr.  Salmond, 
Mr.  Stewart,  Mr.  Innes  Wright,  and  Mr.  Stronach — "A  letter 
was  read  from  Messrs.  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  dated  London, 
4th  May,  1876,  applying  for  an  open  letter  of  credit  for  £10,000 
in  favour  of  Messrs.  W.  Nicol  &  Co.,  Bombay,  to  be  drawn 
at  6  mos/st.  against  the  security  of  goods  and  produce  detailed 
in  said  letter.  The  application  was  agreed  to  on  the  usual 
terms  and  conditions.  A  letter  was  read  from  Messrs.  Smith, 
Fleming  &  Co.,  dated  London.  4th  May,  1876,  for  an  open 
letter  of  credit  for  £5000  in  favour  of  Messrs.  Todd.  Findlay  & 
Co.,  Rangoon,  to  be  drawn  at  6  mos/st.  against  produce  as 
detailed  in  said  letter.  The  application  was  agreed  to  on  the 
usual  terms  and  conditions.  A  letter  was  read  from  Messrs. 
Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  dated  London,  20th  December,  1875, 
intimating  that  owing  to  the  failures  that  occurred  during  the 
last  crisis  " — Mr.  John  was  always  o^etting  into  a  crisis — "  and 
to  general  derangement  of  credit  consequent  thereon,  they  are 
unable  to  fulfil  their  engagements  to  the  Bank,  entered  into 
in  March,  1875.  without  some  temporary  assistance  being 
granted,  and  asking  that  a  special  credit  be  opened  in  their 
favour  to  the  extent  of  £45,000,  to  enable  them  to  do  so, 
and  undertaking  to  liquidate  " — liquidation  again — ■"  the  new 
credit  in  the  course  of  the  year  1876.  After  explanation  hj 
the  Manager,  it  was  agreed  to  grant  the  credit  by  accepting 
the  drafts  of  Messrs.  W.  Nicol  &  Co.,  Bombay,  to  be  drawn 
at  6  mos/st.  to  the  extent  of  the  credit  asked,  the  proceeds 
of  the  said  drafts  to  be  applied  in  payment  of  (1)  the  interest 
amounting  to  '£25.033  12s.  lOd.,  due  at  31st  December  last, 
on  the  Bank's  cash  advances  to  Messrs.  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.' ; 
and  (2)  the  special  cash  advances,  amountinix  to  £20,000.  made 
to  them  during  the  months  of  October  and  November  last,  it 
being  understood,  at  the  same  time,  that  this  temporary  arrange- 
ment is  not  to  interfere  with  or  supersede  the  arrange- 
ment  of   March,    1875."       Did    the   gentlemen   who   stipulated 

336 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


that  that  was  not  to  supersede  the  arrangement  of  March,  1875.  Lord 
not  know  what  the  arrangement  of  March,  1875,  was/  dj^  ^'^^'°'^*^*- 
they  not  consider  it  when  they  expressly  stipulated  that  it  was 
not  to  be  superseded,  and  especially  when  they  wei-e  considering 
it  with  the  view  of  doing  what  they  did  with  their  eyes  open, 
which  was  simply  to  give  the  Bank's  name  and  liability  to  the 
extent  of  £45,000,  to  enable  John  Fleming  to  pay  his  debt 
to  the  Bank — a  sort  of  transaction  again  of  the  most  singular 
character — to  keep  up  his  credit?  It  is  just  the  same  as  if  your 
debtor  came  to  you  and  said,  "  I  undertook  to  pay  you  £45,000 
to-day,  28th  January-,  1879  ;  I  undertook  to  do  that  last  Novem- 
ber, but  I  cannot  do  it.  I  cannot  meet  my  obligation ;  give  me 
£45,000  to  pay  you."  And  you  give  it  to  him,  and  he  pays  his 
debt,  and  the  thino-  is  satisfactorily  squared  off.  Could  that 
deceive  any  man  sitting  at  the  Board,  even  men  who  don't  go 
into  details,  and  who  only  deal  in  large  and  general  transactions? 
If  they  choose  to  go  into  that  agreement  of  1875,  the  sums 
were  big  enough  to  satisfy  a  mind  more  ambitious  of  large 
transactions  than  even  Mr.  Potter's  appears  to  have  been. 
Then,  as  a  contrast  to  that,  we  have  instances  showing  what 
was  the  real  effect — that  they  were  strict  at  the  branches,  and 
sometimes  at  the  head  office  too.  They  had  no  money  except 
for  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  "  A  letter  was  read  from  J.  C 
Cuninghame,  applying,  on  behalf  of  Merry  &  Cuninghame, 
for  an  overdraft  of  £150,000  on  the  security  of  his  estate  of 
Foyers  and  the  St.  Vincent  Street  property  belongino-  to  the 
firm,  and  intimating,  at  the  same  time,  that  it  was  the  intention 
of  the  firm  to  transfer  their  working  account  to  this  Bank 
and  its  branches."  But  £150,000  upon  good  heritable  security 
in  Scotland  was  far  too  big  a  transaction  for  the  City  of 
Glasgow  Bank.  "  The  Directors,  after  mature  consideration, 
while  feeling  gratified  that  the  proposal  slioukl  have  l)een  made 
to  them,  felt  that  the  transaction  was  too  extensive  to  be 
entertained  as  a  fixed  loan."  Then,  again,  as  to  this  arrange- 
ment, and  as  showing  the  knowledge  of  all,  there  is  a  minute, 
and  an  important  one.  On  10th  May,  1877,  there  is  an 
application  by  Mr.  John  Fleming.  There  are  plenty  of  appli- 
cations by  him  through  the  minutes,  but  I  need  not  weary 
you  with  them  all: — "10th  May,  1877.— Present,  Mr.  Stewart 
(in  the  chair),  Mr.  Potter,  Mr.  Salmond,  Mr.  Wright,  Mr.  Taylor, 
and  Mr.  Stronach " — all  present  except  Mr.  Inglis.  "The 
application  by  Mr.  John  Fleming  for  letters  of  credit  for 
£20,000,  to  be  used  in  connection  with  cotton  purchases,  wliich 
was  before  the  Board  at  their  last  meeting,  was  again  brought 
up,  and  an  explanatory  letter  from  Mr.  inomincr,  dattxl  London. 
5th  May,  1877,  having  been  road,  llio  application  was  granted — 
this  being  special,  but  not  to  exceed  six  months;  and  this  not 
to  interfere  further  with  the  terms  of  the  original  ngrecment, 

Y  337 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord      dated    24th    August,    1875."       Again   we   have   the    agreement 
*  before   them ;    recognising  the   agreement,    they   say   it   is   not 
to  be  departed  from,   and  yet  I  fancy  the   suggestion  will   be 
made — unless  I  mistake   the  line   of   the  examination  pursued 
in  the  course  of  the  evidence  in  this  case — the  suggestion  will 
be  seriously  made  to  you,  that  these  simple  gentlemen  knew 
nothing    whatever    about    the    arrangement,    or    about    Smith, 
Fleming   &   Co.'s   debts.       Then,    again,    in   the   minute   of    1st 
August  you  have  embodied  the  result  of  Mr.   John  Fleming's 
visit  to  Glasgow,  as  he  told  you.      On  that  day  their  business 
largely    consisted    again    of    Smith,    Fleming    &    Co.'s    credits. 
They   asked   for   a   renewal    of   £18,500    against   shipments    of 
shellac.      The  persons  present  were  Mr.  Salmond  (in  the  chair), 
Mr.    Stewart    Mr.    Potter,    Mr.    Inglis,    Mr.    Wright,    and    Mr. 
Stronach.       Letters    were    read    from    Smith,    Fleming    &    Co., 
dated  London,  24th  July,  applying  for  £15,000  credit  in  favour 
of  W.  Nicol  &  Co.,  Bombay,  and  £10,000  credit  for  the  same 
firm,    all    of   which    were    granted    on   the   usual    terms.       "  In 
regard  to  these  various  applications  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co., 
the  Manager  reported   that  he  had  requested  a  meeting  with 
Mr.    John   Fleming,   who   came   to  the  Bank   on   Tuesday  last, 
30th   July,   and  had   an   interview  with  him   and   Mr.    Stewart 
and   Mr.   Potter.       Very   full   explanations   were   given    by   Mr. 
Fleming,  and  the  Directors  on  the  whole  thought  it  proper  to 
agree    to   the    advances."       Mr.    Taylor   was    absent    from    the 
meeting,  but  Mr.  Stewart  was  there,  and  he  does  not  challenge 
the   statement  and  report  of  the  Manager.       And  if  you   will 
allow  me  to  refer  to  the  account  of  the  meeting  given  by  Mr. 
Fleming,   I  think  there  are  two  important  considerations   that 
may  be  derived  from  it,  viz.,  that  this  account  was  represented 
to  be,  and  considered  at  that  meeting  to  be,  in  a  very  unsatis- 
factory state,  and  that  the  cause  of  its  being  unsatisfactory  was 
that  the  indebtedness  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  was  being  con- 
stantly added  to.      "  In  July,  1878,"  Mr.  John  Fleming  says — 
"  I  was  asking  for  an  advance  of  £25,000.      I  went  to  Glasgow, 
and  met   Mr.   Robert   Stronach,   Mr.   Potter,   and  Mr.    Stewart. 
Q.  Was   your   indebtedness   to   the  Bank   referred   to   at   that 
meeting — the  amount  of  it?^ — A.  No.      Q.  Was  it  spoken  of  as 
being  very  large  ?^ — A.  The  state  of  our  account  as  being  very 
unsatisfactory  was  spoken  of ;    the  amount  was  not  discussed." 
Then  he  is  examined  by  his  lordship  in  the  chair.      "  What  was 
said  about  the  amount  of  your  account? — A.  It  was  alluded  to 
as  being  very  unsatisfactory.      I  cannot  recall  the  exact  expres- 
sions used,  but  it  was  spoken  of  as  an  unsatisfactory  account, 
and  that  it  was  most  unsatisfactory  that  the  indebtedness  had 
been  increasing  instead  of  diminishing,   and   I  explained,  with 
reference  to  that,  that  the  condition  of  trade  for  several  years 
past  had  been  deplorably  bad."      Well,  that  may  be  so.      Bad 

338 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


trade  may  have  accounted  for  the  want  of  money  on  the  part  Lord 
-of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  but  it  does  not  account  for  the  fact  Advocate, 
that  these  accounts,  bein^  in  the  view  of  the  Directors  unsatis- 
factoiy,  should  have  had  their  indebtedness  added  to.  And  if 
the  Directors  had  any  knowledge  of  these  balance  sheets,  how 
did  they  come  to  deal  with  a  bad  account,  which  was  being 
added  to,  as  an  account  that  was  paying  interest  divisible 
among  the  shareholders.^  Now,  gentlemen,  that  is  another  of 
these  accounts ;  but  Mr.  Nicol  Fleming''s  was  not  a  whit  better. 
The  sums  were  hardly  so  large,  but,  on  the  whole,  his  credit 
was  even  worse  than  that  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  This  account 
of  Mr.  James  Nicol  Fleming,  or  James  Nicol  Fleming  &  Co. — 
because  it  assumes  two  shapes  in  the  course  of  these  transactions 
with  the  Bank — is  an  important  account,  for  this  reason,  that 
it  seems  more  immediately  to  have  led  to  the  attempt  to  recoup 
deficits  by  means  of  investments  in  Australian  and  New  Zealand 
land  shares.  Mr.  Nicol  Fleming's  final  indebtedness  to  the 
Bank  was  £1,238,000,  having  grown  to  those  dimensions  from 
£1,005,000  in  1875,  and  it  attained  that  growth  and  magnitude 
notwithstanding  the  fact  that,  durino-  that  period,  Mr.  Fleming 
was  practically,  from  first  to  last,  if  you  accept  the  statements 
made  as  true,  in  liquidation.  In  other  words,  he  was  recognised 
as  a  bad  debt,  requiring  to  be  paid  off,  but  only  likely  to  be 
paid  off  if  the  realisation  of  his  assets  went  on  slowly.  Now, 
you  heard  no  further  back  than  yesterday  the  evidence  of  Mr. 
Dugald  Bell,  his  clerk,  who  managed  one  part  of  his  transactions 
in  Glaso-ow.  ^Vhat  Mr.  Bell  knew  did  not  represent  the  whole 
of  his  indebtedness,  but  I  think  his  evidence  discloses  very 
clearly  the  very  rapid  way  in  which  Mr.  Nicol  Fleming,  from 
1868  onwards,  was  going  down  hill.  He  had  started  about  1863 
in  his  Glasgow  business  with  something  like  .£260,(X)0  of 
capital,  and  in  1868  the  capital  at  his  credit  was  £4:8,239,  so 
that  he  had  lost  in  the  interval  about  £212,000.  On  the  31st 
January',  1868,  the  balance  at  his  credit  was  reduced  to  £25,818. 
It  remained  verj'  nearly  the  same  down  to  1870,  but  at  31st 
January,  1871,  the  balance  Avas  turned,  and  began  with  a 
debit  of  £7716.  In  other  words,  he  not  only  lost  all  his  capital 
of  £260,000,  but  £7000  more.  In  1872  the  loss  on  capital 
account  was  £35,000;  in  1873,  £84,000;  in  1874.  £104,000; 
and  in  1875,  £213,000  upon  that  account  alone ;  and  I  think  you 
will  not  be  surprised  when  you  find  that  ho  went  practically 
into  what  is  called  liquidation.  There  was  another  witness 
(Mr.  Hunter)  who  spoke  upon  this  matter.  He  was  consulted 
about  the  liquidation,  but  Mr.  Bell,  the  clerk,  was  selected  to 
liquidate  in  Calcutta  on  behalf  of  the  Bank,  so  tliat  ho  wont 
out  for  both  interests.  Any  man  who  knew  tlio  result  of  that 
liquidation  in  Calcutta  must  have  known  how  hopeless  thin 
balance  of  Nicol  Fleming's  had  become.      Just  take  Mr.  Boll's 

339 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

^^Lopd      account  of  it.      He  was  asked,  "  Wliat  were  your  duties  to  be- 
*  in  Calcutta  when  you  went  out  in    1875?"   and  he   answered, 
"  I  was  to  realise  the  assets  of  the  old  firm  as   speedily  as  I 
could  without   sacrificing  them,   and  remit  home  the   proceeds. 
Q.  To  whom  were  you  to  remit  the  proceeds? — A.  To  Mr.  Hunter. 
Q.  How  long  were  you  out  there? — A.  About  a  year.      Q.  Did 
you  find  the  duty  of  realising  an  easy  or  a  difiicult  one? — A. 
Well,  I  found  matters  had  been  ^oing  behind,  and  that  there 
was  very  little  to  realise.      Q.  In  fact,  you  found  assets,  but 
you  found  debts  too? — A.  I  found  large  debts.      Q.  Bad  ones? 
— A.  Yes.       Q.  There  were   some  coals,   M^ere   there   not? — A. 
That  was  the  principal   asset ;    a  large   claim  we  had   upon  a 
native  firm  for  coals.      Nothing  came  of  that,  so  far  as  I  know. 
We   could    not   get   anythino^    out    of   it.       Q.  Did   you    realise 
anything  really   to  send   home   in  that  year? — A.  No.       After 
paying  some  of  the  debts  of  the  firm,  there  was  really  nothing 
to  send  home."      And  that  gentleman,  before  he  went,  was  in 
communication  with  the  Bank  and  in  communication  with  Mr. 
Potter    about    this    realisation.       The    counsel    for    Mr.    Potter 
elicited  from  the  witness  this  statement,  that  "  when  Mr.  Potter 
impressed  upon  me  the  propriety  of  realising  what  I  could,  I 
understood  it   was  with  the  view   of  reducing  Nicol   Fleming's 
debt  to   the  Bank.       It  was   quite   plain   that   Mr.   Potter  was 
desirous  to  do  his  best  for  the  Bank."      I  do  not  doubt  for  one 
moment  that  Mr.  Potter  was  desirous  that  by  that  liquidation 
Nicol  Fleming's  debt  to  the  Bank  should  be  reduced  ;  but  that 
surely  infers  knowledge  on  the  part  of  Mr.   Potter  that  there 
was  a  debt  to  be  reduced,  and  the  more  startling  the  amount 
of  that  debt  the  greater  the  necessity  that  there  should  be  a 
g-ood  realisation.      It  is  an  ample  explanation  of  his  desire  for 
a  good  liquidation  that  there  was  a  big  debt,  and  it  is  absurd 
to  speak   of  his   desire   that  it   should  realise  a   great   deal   if 
Mr.    Potter  was   not   aware   that   there   was    a    debt,    and   was 
not   aware   of   its   magnitude    and   importance.       But    did    Mr. 
Potter  fail  to  inform  himself  of  the  result  of  the  liquidation? 
Can  you  take  it  that  he  ever  knew,  or  had  reason  to  suppose 
for  one  moment,  that  the  liquidation  of  those  coals  or  anything 
else — which  came  to  nothing,  as  Mr.  Bell  told  you — satisfied  in 
any  way  that  large  debt  he  was  so  anxious  to  meet?      There 
is   nothing   to   suggest    that.       On    the   contrary,    there   is   the 
clearest    evidence    offered    by    those    witnesses    who    came    in 
contact  with  him,  and  by  the  way  in  which  that  debt  is  dealt 
with  in  the  minutes  of  the  Directors,  to  show  that  there  was 
knowledge  again  on  their  part  of  the  amount  of  the  indebtedness. 
Then,  in  the  same  way,  Mr.  Hunter  supervised  the  liquidation 
on  behalf  of  the  Bank,  and  he  formed  a  bad  impression  of  the 
debt,  and  recommended  liquidation.      Whatever  might  be  the 
knowledge  derived  from  his  report,  he  gave  a  xerj  bad  account 

340 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


of  it,  and  recommended  a  liquidation,  which  practically  ended      Lord 

in  nothing,  meaning  by  that,   that  they  failed  to  reduce  the '*^^°'='^*«- 

debt,   and   that  the   realisation  of   assets   in   India   turned   out 

to  be  a  simple  farce.      But  what  is  perhaps  the  most  important 

.part  of  this  is,  that  the  Directors  seem  to  have  been,   about 

the  end  of  that  liquidation,   or  even  whilst  it  was  going  on, 

thoroughly  aware   not  only   of  the  extent  of  these  accounts — 

unsatisfactory  accounts — to  which  the  Mana^-er  on  taking  office 

had  called  their  attention,  but  had  obviously  come  to  know  this, 

that  upon  these  accounts  there  was  a  very  serious  deficit,  and 

that  unless  some  other  means  than  those  which  had  been  taken 

up  to  that  time  were  resorted  to,  the  end  would  be  certain  loss 

to  the  Bank.       They  became  aware  of  the   deficit,   and  they 

resorted  to  means  to  meet  it. 

Now,  were  those  means,  let  us  consider,  of  a  kind  sufficient  to 
warrant  them,  or  to  wan-ant  anybody,  in  treating  these  as  good 
debts  that  would  bear  interest — in  treating  these  as  debts  covered 
by  securities,  so  that  they  might  fairly  bring  them  down  as  assets 
held  by  the  company,  and  not  as  debts  without  security  against 
them  ?  Very  far  from  it.  The  fact  of  their  resorting  to  unusual, 
and,  in  ordinary  circumstances,  illegitimate  speculation — that  is 
their  view,  gentlemen,  not  mine  only — for  the  purpose  of  recoup- 
ing or  satisfying  these  debts,  plainly  shows  a  knowledge  of  the 
deficit,  and  the  intention,  if  possible,  to  meet  it.  But  how  was  it 
intended  to  meet  it?  By  investing  either  directly  or  indirectly 
in  land — not  with  the  expectation  even  of  immediate  paynient, 
but  in  the  hope  that,  some  day  or  other,  when  Australian  or  New 
Zealand  property  increased  in  value,  the  return  from  it,  or  the 
proo€^eds  of  it,  would  enable  them  to  meet  their  obligations. 
With  all  those  deficits  staring  them  in  the  face,  what  was  the 
plain  duty  of  the  Directors  to  dof  which  course  weie  ihey  to  take 
■with  that  knowledge  before  them?  which  was  the  only  honest  and 
fair  course  to  take  as  regards  the  shareholders  and  the  pul)lic — 
to  treat  these  as  debts  covered  by  securities  at  that  time,  so  well 
secured  that  tlie  interest  they  were  yearly  adding  to  them  was 
to  be  regarded  as  recoverable  and  divisible  profit;  or,  on  the 
other  hand,  to  set  them  aside  in  a  suspense  account  as  debts  which 
might  one  day  be  recovered  and  re]);»id,  but  deltts  which  c-ould 
not  be  recovered  and  repaid  until  a  number  of  years  had  passed, 
and  a  good  realisation,  which  was  a  matter  of  speculation,  had 
rendered  them  able  to  meet  these  accounts?  Well,  they  applird 
to  Mr.  Glen  Walker,  and  Mr.  Hunter  was  also  employed  on  tlie 
-subject,  and  he  saw  a  number  of  gentlemen  in  connection  with  it, 
^amongst  others,  Mr.  Stronach,  Mr.  Potter,  Mr.  Taylor,  and  Mr. 
Stewart.  I  take  Mi-.  Hunter's  statement  upon  this  point  :  -"  Q. 
Were  you  given  to  understand  what  purpose  they  had  in  view  in 
ibuying  land? — A.  I  don't  know  that  I  ever  heard  of  the  purpose 
Ahey  had,  but  I  understood  it  was  for  Nicol  Fleming's  account,  to 

341 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

L&rd  cover  it.  I  understood  it  was  for  the  purpose  of  making  Nicol 
Advocate,  Fleming's  account  right,  to  cover  whatever  discrepancy  existed 
upon  it.  Q.  That  is  to  say,  by  making  a  profit  on  the  Australian 
land,  they  would  cover  any  loss  upon  his  account? — A.  Yes.. 
Q.  Were  you  not  given  to  understand,  by  two  of  the  Directors, 
that  it  was  for  that  purpose? — A.  I  quite  understood  it  was 
for  that  purpose.  Q.  Who  gave  you  to  understand  that? — 
A.  I  don't  know  that  it  was  ever  in  so  many  words  said  it  was  for 
that,  but  I  considered  it  was  the  fact  of  my  looking  into  Nicol 
Fleming's  accounts  that  led  to  my  being  consulted.  Q.  With 
whom  had  you  communication  about  it  chiefly? — A.  Mr.  Stronach 
and  Mr.  Potter,  and  Mr.  Taylor  and  Mr.  Stewart  occasionally." 
The  result  of  these  communications  was  an  arrangement,  em- 
bodied in  a  letter  by  Mr.  Glen  Walker,  who  addressed  the  Manager 
upon  14th  August,  1876,  in  these  terms:  — 

Dear  Sir,— In  continuation  of  conversation  with  yourself  and 
other  gentlemen  connected  with  the  Bank,  I  would  now  place  in 
writing  the  suggestions  which  we  have  been  discussing  towards 
increasing  income  and  recouping  deficits  by  the  judicious  acquire- 
ment of  pastoral  properties.  More  than  one  member  of  your 
Board  are  connected  with  New  South  Wales  properties  which  have 
on  an  average  of  many  years,  I  am  assured,  paid  a  net  return 
upon  present  values  exceeding  16  per  cent,  per  annum.  The 
purchase  price  usually  is  paid  by  partly  a  cash  deposit,  and  the 
balance  by  bills  extending  over  several  years.  It  is  easy  to 
finance  against  them  in  the  colony ;  and  if  40  per  cent,  of  the  price 
was  provided  here,  the  remainder  could  be  arranged  in  the  colony 
without  further  aid  from  this. 

If  arranged  in  this  way,  finance  probably  would  cost  for  interest 
an  average  of  6  per  cent,  per  annum,  and  there  would  remain  on 
the  basis  of  the  experience  referred  to  as  net  profits  10  per  cent. 
per  annum.  The  suggestion  is  that  the  Bank  grant  credits  to  the 
extent  of  from  £100,000  to  £150,000  towards  the  acquirement  of 
pastoral  interests  in  Australia. 

For  example,  if  a  value  of  £250,000  was  acquired  there  should  be 
a  net  profit  of  £25,000  yearly,  but  £25,000  yearly  will  in  fourteen 
years  repay  £250,000  and  5  per  cent,  interest,  so  that  thus,  by 
comparatively  a  very  small  outlay,  a  large  amount  can  be  recouped. 

Mr.  Borron  and  myself  will  be  glad  to  be  interested  in  the 
project,  and  to  manage  its  details]  and  finance  can,  in  the  Bank's 
option,  be  arranged  either  by  cash  advance  or  entirely  by  credit. 

Then  that  letter,  which  is  of  date  the  14th  August,  came  before 
the  Board  upon  l7th  August.  1876,  and  this  is  how  it  was  dealt 
with — "  A  letter  from  Messrs.  James  Morton  &  Co.,  and  two 
letters  from  Mr.  W.  Glen  Walker,  dated  respectively  Glasgow, 
the  16th  and  14th  inst.,  with  regard  to  the  drawing  of  credits  in 
lieu  of  those  now  drawn  by  Messrs.  Holmes,  White  &  Co..  and 
others,  and  one  of  the  latter,  as  to  the  acquisition  of  certain 
pastoral  properties,  were  brought  under  the  consideration  of  the 
Board,  and,  after  full  consideration,  the  Board  came  to  the  con- 
clusion that  it  was  advisable  to  adopt  generally  the  suggestions 
contained  in  these  letters ;   and  they  accordingly  requested  the- 

342 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


Manager,  associated  with  Messrs.  Potter,  Stewart,  and  Taylor,  to  Lord 
arrange  with  Mr.  Walker  as  to  all  details.  "While  arriving  at  this  Advocate, 
resolution,  the  Board  were  fully  sensible  of  the  undesirableness  of 
such  investments  as  the  purchases  proposed  in  the  letters  ;  but 
having  in  view  the  position  of  certain  old  accounts,  and  looking  to 
the  whole  circumstances,  and  particularly  to  the  fact  that  the 
contemplated  arrangements  for  the  working  of  the  credits  are 
large  part  of  transactions  in  existence  for  many  years,  and 
previously  brought  under  the  consideration  of  Uie  Board  by  the 
present  Manager,  the  Board  deemed  it  expedient  to  come  to  their 
present  decision — as  referred  to  in  the  minute  of  30th  December, 
1875."  Now,  the  persons  present  at  that  meeting  were  Mr. 
Stewart  (in  the  chair),  Mr.  Wright,  Mr.  Taylor,  Mr.  Potter,  and 
Mr.  Stronach.  In  connection  with  this  it  is  important  to  observe 
that  though  Mr.  Inglis  was  not  present,  he  not  only  saw  that 
minute,  but  made  an  alteration  upon  it  in  his  own  handwriting, 
putting  in  the  words  "  previously  brought  under  consideration  of 
the  Board  by  the  present  Manager."  Mr.  Salmond  was  present 
at  the  meeting  when  it  was  read.  Mr.  Leresche,  being  shown  a 
draft  resolution  in  the  handwriting  of  Robert  Stronach,  says — 
"  My  recollection  is  that  I  was  called  down  some  days  after  the 
meeting  of  the  l7th  into  the  Manager's  room,  and  I  was  handed 
this  draft  resolution.  I  was  asked  to  bring  my  agenda  book 
down,  and  enter  therein  as  under  the  date  of  the  17th.  So  far  as 
I  recollect,  Mr.  Taylor  and  Mr.  Inglis  were  jjresent  wlien  Mr. 
Stronach  handed  it  to  me,  and  my  memory  is  confirmed  by  the 
fact  that  there  are  in  Mr.  Taylor's  handwriting  the  words,  '  read 
and  agreed  to,'  and  in  Mr.  luglis's  handwriting,  '  insert  in 
minutes,  deliverance  of  Board.'  Q.  So  you  have  no  doubt  that 
those  two  gentlemen  were  the  two  who  were  present? — A.  Tliat  is 
the  imp/ession  I  have  at  present.  The  words  at  the  side  of  the 
memorandum,  '  as  referred  to  in  the  minute  of  .'JOth  December, 
1875,'  and  '  as  refen-ed  to,'  are  in  my  handwriting.  The  whole 
body  of  it  is  in  the  handwriting  of  Mr.  Stronnch,  except  two  lines 
which  come  in,  '  and  previously  brought  under  consideration  of 
the  Board  by  the  present  Manager,'  which  are  in  the  handwriting 
of  Mr.  Inglis."  So  that,  when  about  to  recoup  the  deficit  by 
Australian  loans,  it  is  done  for  the  jturpose  of  recouping  it  ujion 
those  veiy  accounts  which  are  again  in  the  hands  of  the  Board, 
and  which,  as  recorded  by  them,  had  been  brought  under  their 
consideration  by  the  Manager  in  1875,  when  ho  (nok  ottice. 

Gentlemen,  I  do  not  need  to  say  much  more  upon  this  matter 
of  investment  in  land.  It  is  for  you  to  judge,  not  so  much 
whether  it  was  a  legitimate  investment — tliat  is  not  the  <]uos»ion 
that  is  before  you  just  now — ^you  are  not  here  asked  to  say 
whether  the  management  of  the  Board  was  prudent  or  ixsckless, 
was  right  or  wrong — you  are  here  to  ascertain  what  were  tlio 
facts  connected  with  that  management — what  was  the  knowlodgo 

343 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  of  the  panels  at  the  bar  in  regard  to  it — did  they  know  the  state 
Advocate,  of  the  Bank  arising  from  these  accounts,  or  did  they  not? — that  is 
the  question  for  you — not  what  was  the  cause  of  the  Bank  getting 
into  that  condition  ;  through  whose  weakness  or  leniency  towards 
debtors — that  is  not  the  question  ;  the  question  is,  did  they  know 
the  state  of  the  Bank? — the  next  question  being,  if  they  knew  it, 
what  did  they  know  of  the  issuing  of  those  false  abstracts  to  the 
shareholders '/  Now,  whatever  may  be  said  on  the  part  of  one  of 
those  gentlemen — I  refer  to  Mr.  Salmond — as  an  inference  to  be 
drawn  from  the  circumstance  that  he  was  absent  about  the  period 
when  that  annual  balance  was  prepared  and  published,  I  say 
nothing  at  present,  but  I  think  it  will  be  very  obvious  to  you 
that  nothing  which  may  be  said  upon  that  point  can  in  the  least 
degree  touch  or  affect  his  knowledge  of  the  state  of  these  accounts, 
because  throughout  the  whole  of  those  proceedings  he  is  a  party 
along  with  the  other  Directors,  and  shares  with  them  the  know- 
ledge which  theyi  obviously  possess ;  and  although  he  does  not 
admit  it  in  his  declaration,  the  words  that  he  there  uses  go  very 
far  to  suggest  that  if  he  did  not  know  it  at  all  he  was  shutting  his 
eyes  to  the  fact.  The  statement  he  makes  about  it — and  you  will 
bear  in  mind  that  he  was  an  old  bank  manager,  and  tolerably  well 
understood  the  w^ay  to  govern  the  affairs  of  a  bank — is  as  fol- 
lows :  — "  I  first  came  to  know  that  the  Bank  was  not  in  an  easy 
condition  some  three  or  four  years  ago  " — just  when  Mr.  Stronach 
told  him — "  but  I  thought  nothing  of  it,  believing  that  it  would 
all  come  right  in  a  short  time  "  ;  and  here  he  states  what  I  do  not 
dispute — 

The  real  cause  of  the  unsatisfactory  state  of  the  Bank  was  the 
absorption  of  the  capital  by  the  foresaid  advances ;  and  though  I 
did  not  know  the  amount  of  the  advances,  I  was  satisfied  that  the 
accounts  must  have  been  in  a  very  unsatisfactory  state  to  require 
such  absorption.  I  suspected  or  inferred  that  there  was  something 
wrong  with  these  advances,   without  knowing   what  it  was. 

Declares  further — As  regards  what  took  place  at  the  weekly 
meetings,  I  explain  that  the  advances  made  to  the  parties  before 
mentioned  came  up  in  the  ordinary  way,  but  were  not  specially 
stated.  They  came  up  just  in  the  ordinary,  general  way,  the 
same  as  advances  to  other  customers. 

But  they  were  dealt  with  very  differently ;  for  whilst  the  other 
customers  got  theirs  on  the  usual  and  proper  terms,  those  other 
firms  got  theirs  on  very  different  ones.  But  you  can  hardly  take 
from  Mr.  Salmond  the  statement  that  he  knew  these  accounts 
were  unsatisfactoiy  because  they  had  absorbed  the  capital  of  the 
Bank,  and  yet  that  he  did  not  know  that  it  was  a  wrong  thing, 
or  at  least  a  thing  involving  the  Bank  in  danger,  to  continue 
giving  those  firms  further  advances,  instead  of  seeing  that  the 
accounts  were  placed  on  a  satisfactory  footing.  Upon  the  matter 
of  these  Australian  advances,  you  have  a  report  by  Mr.  Taylor, 
Mr.   Stewart,  and  Mr.  Potter,  and  another  by  Mr.   Inglis,   Mr. 

344 


Addresses  to  Jury. 

Taylor,  and  Mr.  Salmond,   which  show  clearly  that  they  were      Lord 
employed  in  this  matter,  and  were  presumably  conversant  with  it.  '**voeatei 
The  first  is  dated  19th  October,  1876,  and  is  as  follows  :  — 

In  terms  of  the  minute  of  the  Board  of  Directors,  of  date  17th 
August,  1876,  appointing  us  to  arrange  with  Mr.  "Walker  with 
regard  to  the  acquisition  of  certain  pastoral  properties  in  Aus- 
tralia, we  have  to  report  that  we  then  authorised  an  investment  to 
the  value  of  £120,000  to  £130,000,  and  have  granted  letters  of 
credit  m  favour  of  Messrs.  Glen  Walker  &  Co.,  Melbourne,  for 
£45,000  for  the  first  paj-ment,  the  balance  to  be  financed  by  them, 
and  the  property,  as  acquired,  to  be  held  in  trust  by  Messrs.  Borion 
&  Co.,  and  by  them  registered  in  such  names  as  the  Bank  may 
instruct.       (Signed)  Wm.  Tatlor,  J.  Stewart,  and  Lewis  Potter. 

The  next  is  dated  24th  October,  1877 — another  transaction  of 
precisely  the  same  class  for  recouping  the  deficit :  — 

The  committee  appointed  by  the  Board  to  communicate  with  Mr. 
Glen  Walker  as  to  the  purchase  from  the  Australian  and  New 
Zealand  Land  Company  of  their  Queensland  properties,  have  had 
various  meetings  with  Mr.  Walker,  and  beg  to  report  tliat  they 
have  confidence  in  his  knowledge  and  discretion,  and  recommend 
the  Directors  to  authorise  him  to  acquire  the  properties  in  question 
at  the  price  of  about  £150,000,  on  the  best  terms  which  he  can 
accomplish,  looking  to  his  own  memorandum,  marked  H.  I,,  24th 
October,  and  to  the  letter  from  Mr.  Mackay  similarly  marked  and 
dated.     (Signed)  Henrt  Inglis,  Wm.  Taylor,  and  Rob.  Salmond. 

Now,  these  appear  to  me  conclusively  to  show  this,  as  the  result 
■of  the  examination  of  these  accounts,  that  their  character,  their 
unsatisfactoiy  character,  was  disclosed  to  the  Directors  by  Mr. 
Stronach  when  he  took  office  in  the  end  of  1875 — so  unsatisfac- 
tory that  Mr.  Stronach  would  not  undertake  the  position  of 
Manager  unless  he  was  to  be  relieved  of  the  load  of  responsibility 
which  a  struggle  to  put  such  accounts  into  shape  would,  neces- 
sarily involve  ;  that  they  knew  it ;  that  they  agreed  to  help  him  ; 
that  they  went  on  dealing  with  those  accounts  from  month  to 
month,  and  from  year  to  year  ;  dealing  with  those  accounts  which 
were  becoming  moi'e  unsatisfactory  than  ever,  even  liquidation 
producing  nothing,  but  always  giving  more  and  more  ;  and  yet  I 
presume  that,  in  the  face  of  these  facts  recorded  in  their  minutes 
and  correspondence,  the  Directors  would  fain  turn  rouiul  now  and 
say,  "  Entirely  the  Manager's  doing.  Some  of  us  dcm't  vuider- 
stand  the  details  of  business  ;  none  of  us  knew  these  details  ;  we 
were  innocent  of  that  knowledge  which  niighf  have  led  us  to 
suspect  that  something  was  seriously  wrong  with  the  Rank." 
"Gentlemen,  that  is  a  matter  for  you.  If  you  can  accept  that 
explanation  as  a  fair  and  true  explanation,  it  would  give  a  very 
different  complexion  to  this  case.  I  can  hardly  conceive  that  you 
can  arrive  at  that  result — that  you  will  take  it  off  tlio  lutiids  of 
■gentlemen  who  have  undertaken  to  aid  the  Manager  in  regard  to 
these  accounts,  who  deal  with  these  accounts,  who  continue  to 

345 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  TriaL 

Lord  treat  with  these  customers,  tha^t  they  knew  nothing  of  the  charac- 
Advoeate.  ^gj,  qJ  ^}^g  debt ;  that  they  knew  nothing  of  the  increasing  loss 
and  risk  to  the  Bank ;  and  that  they  did  not  know,  and  had 
nothing  to  suggest  to  them  that  it  was  not  a  legitimate  thing  to 
treat  those  bad  and  uncovered  accounts  as  solid  assets,  and  to 
deal  with  those  profits  in  the  air,  which  never  came  to  them, 
and  consisted  of  nothing  but  an  entry  in  the  books,  as  actual 
earnings,  to  be  paid  over  to  the  deluded  shareholders  in  the  shape 
of  12  or  13  per  cent,  dividend. 

I  had  hardly  intended  to  meddle  with  any  except  these 
accounts ;  but  there  is  one  other  account  which  I  caimot  fail  to 
notice,  because  it  comes  very  near  to  one  of  the  panels — I  mean 
Mr.  Innes  Wright.  Mr.  James  Nicol  Fleming  was  a  Director  in 
1875,  and  when  Mr.  Hunter  began  to  look  into  Mr.  James  Nicol 
Fleming's  affairs  he  came  to  the  conclusion,  which  I  think  any 
honest  man  would  have  arrived  at,  that  a  person  who  was  getting- 
advances  to  the  tune  of  hundreds  of  thousands  of  pounds  from  the- 
Bank,  and  who  was  constantly  wanting  more,  was  not  Just  the 
sort  of  person  who  ought  to  sit  as  a  member  of  the  Board  of 
Directors.  He  was  too  good  a  customer  of  the  Bank — from  his 
own  point  of  view,  not  the  Bank's — to  be  really  in  the  position  of 
a  Director,  especially  after  he  had  come  to  occupy  in  reality  the 
position  of  a  Director  who  could  not  pay.  Mr.  Nicol  Fleming 
did  not  quite  see  it  in  that  light.  I  suppose  he  thought  his 
account  would  probably  be  better  if  he  remained  a  Director  to 
look  after  it.  But  at  length  he  goes  ;  and,  having  got  rid  of  a- 
member  of  the  Board  placed  in  that  ambiguous  and  veiy  painful 
jjosition  towards  the  Bank  and  its  shareholders,  they  made  a  new 
acquisition  in  the  shape  of  Mr.  Innes  Wright  to  supply  his  place. 
Mr.  Innes  Wright  was  asked  to  become  a  Director.  He  says  so, 
and  it  does  not  appear  to  be  contradicted  anywhere  in  the 
evidence.  I  do  not  know  what  made  the  presence  of  Mr.  Innes 
Wright  at  the  Boai'd  of  Directors  such  a  desirable  thing  in  the 
intei'ests  of  the  Bank.  I  have  gone  over  the  evidence  in  this 
case  most  carefully,  and  I  have  utterly  failed  to  find  any  qualifica- 
tion that  Mr.  Innes  Wright  had  for  becoming  a  Director  of  the 
Board  at  that  time,  except  these  three — ^lie  was  not  a  shareholder, 
he  had  not  a  penny  to  buy  a  share  with,  and  his  firm,  of  which  he- 
was  the  leading  partner,  was  owing  the  Bank  about  £334,000 
sterling.  These  wei'e  his  qualifications.  How  and  why  he 
became  a  member  of  the  Board  is  a  matter  of  speculation.  He 
knew  something,  at  all  events,  about  the  indebtedness  of  one  firm 
to  the  Bank,  and  I  think  you  will  agree  with  me  in  holding  that  he 
became  equally  acquainted  with  the  indebtedness  of  these  other 
fij-ms.  His  admission  to  the  Board  was  managed  in  a  very  snug 
and  comfortable  way,  apparently  with  general  consent.  This  is 
what  he  says  about  it: — "I  had  not  the  necessary  qualification 
of  stock  when  I  was  elected  a  Director.       I  stated  this  to  the; 

346 


Addresses  to  Jury, 


Manager,  but  I  obtained  the  qualification  a  few  days  aftei-wards.  Lord 
I  also  urged  the  condition  of  my  firm's  account  as  a  reason  against  Advocate, 
my  having  any  connection  with  the  Board.  Strouach  was 
apparently  anxious  that  I  should  be  a  Director,  and  Mr.  Salmond 
also  urged  me  to  consent.  The  request  to  be  a  Director  came  to 
me  quite  unexpectedly,  and  I  am  not  aware  what  reason  induced 
them  to  make  the  request."  The  question  arises  here,  what  on 
earth  induced  him  to  accede  to  the  request  when  it  was  made  1 
"  The  stock  necessaiy  for  my  qualitication  was  acquired  for  me  by 
the  Bank.  No  cash  passed,  but  I  gave  a  cheque  for  the  amount, 
and  that  cheque  stands  against  my  account  with  the  Bank  to  the 
present  day."  He  knew  the  state  of  his  firm ;  but  just  let  me 
give  it  to  you,  because  it  is  in  more  correct  language  than  mine 
would  be,  from  the  nai'rative  given  by  Mr.  Paul,  who  was  a  partner 
of  the  firm,  but  whose  functions  seemed  to  come  to  an  end  because 
the  character  of  the  firm  changed  from  an  exporting  business  to 
a  sort  of  financing  business,  in  which  he  had  little  to  do,  and  he 
retired  from  the  firm  in  1876.  This  is  the  account  which  he 
gives  of  that  flourishing  concern,  the  senior  member  of  which 
became  a  Director :  — "  Q.  Did  he  tell  you  who  asked  him  to 
become  a  Director.? — A.  He  told  me  the  first  intimation  he  got 
on  the  subject,  the  first  approach  on  the  subject,  was  by  Mr. 
Eobert  Sti'onach,  the  Manager.  Q.  Tell  us  what  he  said/ — 
A,  And  on  a  subsequent  day  he  had,  I  was  told — by  him,  I  think 
— a  visit  from  Mr.  Salmond,  following  up  the  proposal.  Mr. 
Wright  evidently  had  doubts  about  accepting  it.  Q.  Did  you 
express  any  opinion  at  the  time  as  to  your  view  of  his  accepting] 
— A.  I  said,  '  How  far  is  it  right,  how  far  is  it  proper,  to  accept  a 
Directorship,  Mr.  Wriirht,  in  the  state  of  our  account] '  Q.  What 
did  he  say  to  that? — A.  He  said,  '  I  am  alive  to  that,  i)ut  Mr. 
Stronach  tells  me  that  will  be  no  difficulty ;  he  will  arrange  all 
that.'  Q.  What  was  he  to  arrange,  did  you  understand? — 
A.  The  indebtedness  was  to  remain  in  abeyance,  i  suppose,  and 
that  the  fact  of  our  indebtedness  would  be  made  no  disqualifica- 
tion." Now,  as  to  the  state  of  the  firm,  he  says: — "  Q.  From 
1870  downwards,  while  you  were  a  partner,  were  you  ever  doing 
anything  but  making  losses? — A.  Well,  it  was  the  exception  to 
make  profit.  Of  course,  there  were  indivluual  operations  that 
were  profitable ;  but,  on  the  whole,  we  were  apparently  going 
behind.  Q.  You  knew  the  result  of  your  trading  was  that  you 
were  realising  loss? — A.  Quite  so.  Q.  And  I  supjjose  you  knew 
then  that  the  money  you  got  to  meet  your  liabilities  must  have 
come  from  some  other  quarter  than  the  profits  upon  your  trade? 
— A.  Quite  so.  Q.  And  that  quarter  was?  " — the  old  answer — 
"A.  The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank."  Now,  what  did  these  gentle- 
men want  to  have  this  impecunious  shareholder  as  a  Director  for? 
To  aid  them  at  the  Board  in  putting  those  accounts  right?  And 
what  did  that  debtor  want  at  the  Board  in  the  way  of  legitimato 

347 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  management  of  the  concerns  of  the  shareholders  ?  It  is  an  ugly 
Advocate,  feature  in  the  Board  of  Direction.  That  he  was  tolerated  would 
be  bad  enough ;  that  he  was  required  is  worse  still  ;  and  that  he 
went  is  bad  enough  too.  I  don't  think  you  covild  expect  much 
reduction  of  accounts  by  a  man  who  did  not  want  to  reduce  his 
own,  who  wanted  to  put  his  own  account  into  that  pleasant  state 
that  was  described  by  his  partner  as  in  abeyance.  What  is 
abeyance?  That  the  Bank  is  not  to  be  paid  till  it  meets  their 
convenience,  if  it  should  ever  be  convenient  for  them  to  pay — 
that  is  the  plain  English  or  Scotch  of  it,  whichever  you  like. 
And  in  the  meantime  these  accounts  which  were  elsewhere  heard 
of  in  the  course  of  evidence  as  dormant^ — a  very  good  expression, 
too,  because  they  simply  slept  on  without  either  being  paid  or 
bearing  any  fruit — remained  unpaid.  And  if  you  want  a  picture, 
there  is  the  state  of  the  Bank.  I  should  like  very  much  to  know 
what  inference  can  be  drawn  as  to  those  who  really  thought  that 
such  a  man,  in  that  position,  would  be  a  viseful  aid  in  performing 
the  task  which  the  Directors  had  undertaken  to  their  Manager  in 
December,  1875.  What  was  the  honesty  of  the  intention  as 
regarded  his  account — ay,  and  as  regarded  those  other  accounts, 
because  I  think  it  matter  of  considerable  doubt  whether  they  were 
to  be  sepai'ately  treated?  But,  gentlemen,  it  is  matter  of  no 
small  comfort  to  me  that  these  are  questions  with  which  you  must 
deal,  and  not  I.  It  is  my  duty  to  lay  these  considerations  before 
you,  and  to  ask  you  to  consider,  upon  the  whole  matter  of  these 
recorded  transactions — and  these  accounts  as  I  have  given  them 
to  you  from  their  proceedings  and  minutes  from  first  to  last, 
whether  there  was,  on  the  part  of  all  or  any  of  those  Directors,  a 
knowledge  of  the  state  of  the  Bank  which  came  to  light  so  late  as 
October,  1878  ?  Their  own  books  show  that  they  had  looked  into 
the  matter,  that  they  had  suspicions.  If  they  really  and  truly 
knew  that  things  were  wrong,  they  were  not  entitled  to  shut  their 
eyes  and  not  look.  A  man  may,  through  negligence  or  careless- 
ness of  habit,  or  from  want  of  intellectual  perception,  fail  to  see 
a  thing,  and  he  could  not  be  held  criminally  liable  for  such 
failure ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  I  venture  to  tell  you  that 
shutting  your  eyes  against  what  you  know  to  be  a  fact,  not 
because  you  do  not  know  it,  but  because  you  do  not  want  to  see 
it,  and  do  your  duty  by  it,  infers  criminal  intention  just  as 
surely  as  if  you  kept  your  eyes  open,  and  discredited  or  refused 
to  recognise  the  fact. 

Now,  gentlemen,  if  the  state  of  the  Bank  was,  as  I  have  repre- 
sented, generally  known — not  in  precise  details,  but  the  actual 
fact  in  general  terms,  known  to  those  gentlemen — I  put  the 
question  to  you  next,  are  those  al)stracts  before  you,  which  are,  as 
I  pointed  out  to  you,  in  essential  particulars  false,  calculated  or 
not  calculated  to  conceal  and  misrepresent  the  true  state  of  the 
Bank?      If  so,  if  you  have  actual  misrepresentation,  you  have  a 

348 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


motive  for  misrei)resentatiou,  because  there  was  something  to  Lord 
conceal.  Do  you  think,  if  the  truth  had  been  made  known  as  to  Advocate, 
the  real  state  of  matiers— that  they  had  never  <rot  a  penny  of 
these  accounts  ;  that  their  reserve  account  was  made  up  of  unpaid 
and  hopelessly  lost  interest ;  if  they  had  told  the  truth  as  to  the 
actual  amount  of  the  better  class  of  assets  they  had,  and  disclosed 
the  enormous  amount  of  bad  assets  they  had  in  the  shajie  of 
finance  paper — if  they  had  not  concealed  these  facts,  would  not 
things  have  taken  a  different  course?  Mr.  Cunningliain  Smith 
yesterday  was  very  unwilling  to  admit  that  there  was  any  distinc- 
tion in  the  market,  or  according  to  public  view,  between  legiti- 
mate transactions  in  the  shape  of  bills  coming  from  Australia  and 
drawn  against  produce,  and  bills  kept  in  a  bundle  in  a  safe  in 
Mr.  Potter' sj3r  his  partner's  room,  and  brought  out  and  ante-dated 
a  month  or  two,  to  make  it  appear  that  they  were  actually  drawn 
by  an  Australian  house  upon  their  correspondents  or  the  Bank  in 
Glasgow.  But  he  partly  admitted  it,  though  he  unfortunately 
seemed  to  labour  somewhat  under  a  defect  in  his  moral  vision, 
which  did  not  enable  him  thoroughly  to  appreciate  the  distinction. 
But,  then,  if  that  had  come  out,  would  it  not  have  been  known, 
and  did  they  not  wish  to  conceal,  that  the  Bank  were  financing  at 
their  own  hand  through  Mr.  Morton,  Mr.  Potter,  and  others?  In 
other  words,  they  were  using  bills  to  pay  their  debts,  while  all 
the  time  they  were  liable  under  these  bills,  and  it  was  not  an 
unuseful  thing  to  cut  off  the  enormous  amount  of  indebtedness 
upon  such  bills,  because  you  must  bear  in  mind  that  a  liill  is  a 
liability  as  well  as  an  asset.  If  A  owes  £1000  and  pays  you, 
you  are  £1000  the  richer;  but  if  A  gives  you  his  bill,  and  you 
discount  it  with  your  name  upon  it,  and  you  get  your  £1000  in 
the  meantime,  it  does  not  follow  you  are  much  the  richer  man, 
because  if  A  does  not  meet  the  bill  you  will  Iiave  to  do  it  ;  and 
accordingly  under  an  asset  of  that  kind  there  always  lurks  a 
liability.  If  the  other  names  on  the  bill  are  good,  you  get  the 
money ;   but  if  they  are  bad,  you  pay  the  money  yourself. 

Well,  then,  gentlemen,  I  repeat  that  tliere  is  a  distinct  connec- 
tion between  the  state  of  the  Bank  and  those  misrepresentationfi 
or  falsifications  that  are  introduced  into  the  balance  sheet.  I 
have  not  the  slightest  hesitation  in  asking  you  as  a  jury  to  hold 
this,  that  whoever  may  have  been  the  person  or  persons  who 
executed  those  fabrications,  who  falsified  the  balance  sheet,  and 
issued  it  in  that  false  and  fabricated  state  to  the  pul)lic.  he  knt>\v 
the  state  of  the  bank,  and  did  it  because  he  wished  that  state 
to  be  concealed.  Wliat  earthly  puqiose  could  there  ])e,  if  the 
Bank  were  not  in  that  state,  in  misrepresent infr  one  sindo  it<'in 
in  this  balance  sheet  as  taken  from  those  books?  If  the  Bank 
were  really  and  truly  doing  a  business  so  good  that  it  had  earn- 
ings sufficient  to  pay  a  dividend  of  12  per  rent,  on  its  capital, 
if  its  capital  was  intact,  if  it  had  a  reserve  fund  of  £4r)0,(iO(),  and, 

349 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  moreover,  ample  assets,  and  good  assets,  to  meet  all  its  obliga- 
Advoeate.  ^JQj^g^  -^yj^y  q^  earth  should  that  state  of  matters  have  been  con- 
cealed— what  earthly)  reason  not  to  disclose  the  whole  assets  and 
the  whole  obligations  ?  But  it  was  not  so,  and  I  do  not  say  that 
you  will  ever  get  at  the  true  balance  sheet  by  making  corrections 
on  the  errors  so  plain  on  the  face  of  this.  The  whole  thing  was 
intended  as  falsification — falsification  in  order  to  make  things 
better  than  they  really  were — and  better  than  they  even  ap- 
peared in  their  books  by  any  fair  interpretation — simply  to  still 
those  rumours  that  might  aripe  when  accounts  like  Morton's  and 
others  were  talked  about  outside  the  Bank,  or  the  finance  paper 
was  discovered,  or  anything  arose  which  would  disclose  the 
character  of  the  investments  they  were  going  into,  and  which  are 
so  carefully  concealed  upon  the  face  of  this  absti-act.  There  is 
not  a  word  about  heritable  property  in  Australia  here — not  a 
syllable.  They  know  how  to  describe  heritable  property  when 
they  find  it  in  Scotland,  but  they  cannot  find  a  name  to  cover 
heritable  property  in  Poverty  Bay  or  in  Australia,  except  by 
calling  it  Government  stock  or  balances  in  the  hands  of  foreign 
correspondents ;  and  it  is  for  you,  gentlemen,  to  say  why.  I  am 
not  saying  one  word  about  individuals  at  this  moment,  but  it  is 
impossible  to  dissever  the  preparation  of  this  false  balance  sheet, 
made  up  within  the  walls  of  the  Bank,  from  a  knowledge  on  the 
part  of  him  who  made  it  up  of  the  true  state  of  the  Bank,  and  a 
desire  for  the  purpose,  by  publishing  it  in  all  its  falsity,  to 
conceal  and  misrepresent — to  draw  a  red  herring  across  the  track 
of  those  persons  outside  who  might  otherwise  have  got  a  clue 
to  the  utterly  rotten  condition  of  the  Bank. 

Well,  then,  who  did  it,  and  who  are  responsible  for  it,  is  the 
serious  question  which,  if  you  agree  with  me,  so  far  as  I  have 
gone  into  the  facts  of  the  case,  it  is  next  your  duty  to  face.  And 
I  here  repeat  that,  in  order  to  a  conviction  of  any  one  of  the 
panels  upon  the  charges  which  this  indictment  contains,  it  is  not 
necessary  that  he  should  have  had  an  active  hand  in  the  pre- 
paration of  that  false  abstract.  It  is  not  necessary  that  he 
should  either  have  guided  the  pen  or  directed  the  calculations  of 
the  man  who  made  up  the  scroll  abstracts  and  transferred  them 
from  that  to  the  published  balance  sheets.  It  is  not  necessary, 
in  order  to  convict  a  panel  of  the  alternative  offence  charged, 
that  he  should  have  known  every  particular  item  of  the  arith- 
metical mode  by  which  these  results  were  attained,  so  as  to  make 
the  sheet  balance.  It  is  enough  if  he  knew  and  was  aware  that 
the  balance  sheet  was  not  a  true,  but  a  false  balance  sheet — if 
he  knew  and  was  aware  that,  being  false  and  untrue,  it  was  given 
out  to  the  public  for  the  purpose,  not  of  honestly  informing  the 
shareholders  and  the  public,  but  of  misleading  them  as  to  the  true 
character  of  the  Bank's  position  and  assets  and  trading.  On 
this  part  of  the  case  I  cannot  help  saying  to  you  that  it  is  wholly 

350 


Addresses  to  J 


ury. 


a  jury  question.  You  cannot  expect  from  the  Crown  evidence  of  Lord 
all  that  transpired  within  the  walls  of  the  Bank,  all  that  took  Advocate, 
place  at  the  councils  of  these  Directors,  because  necessarily  these 
operations  are  conducted  in  secret.  The  deliberations  of  the 
Board  are  conducted  in  seci-et — in  the  present  case  with  a  privacy 
unusual  in  Boards ;  because  whenever  you  touch  upon  the  tender 
and  diseased  parts  of  the  Bank's  trading,  there  is  no  secretary 
"there — the  Directors  only.  Whenever  these  things  come  up,  bear 
in  mind,  the  door  opens,  and  out  goes  Mr.  Leresche,  and  the  door 
closes  whilst  the  deliberation  goes  on,  and  until  it  is  finished. 
Tou  cannot  therefore  expect  in  this  case  direct  testimony.  The 
little  shred  that  would  have  been  left  is  cut  away  Vjy  the 
act  of  the  Directors  themselves,  and  they  cannot  be  heard  to 
•complain  of  the  want  of  it.  Their  act  has  made  direct  testimony 
impossible,  and,  that  being  so,  you  will  judge  them  upon  what 
they  have  done  and  recorded.  And  you  are  at  perfect  liberty, 
in  the  whole  circumstances  of  the  case,  to  determine,  so  long  as 
you  do  it  honestly,  according  to  your  conscientious  belief,  whether 
•each  or  any  of  them  was,  or  was  not,  connected  with  this  crime, 
either  as  an  active  participant  in  the  preparation  of  these  falsified 
balances  or  as  an  assenting  party  to  their  being  issued  to  the 
public  for  the  purpose  of  deceit.  It  is  impossible  to  disguise 
that  between  certain  of  the  panels  who  sit  at  the  bar  there  is  this 
great  distinction — Messrs.  Potter  and  Stronach  occupy  the  one 
•class,  and  the  remainder  of  the  Directors  the  other,  for  this  simple 
reason,  that  so  far  as  the  fabrication  of  those  balance  sheets  is 
concerned  the  evidence  against  them  is  quite  different.  It  is  most 
distinctly  deponed  to  by  the  witness  Morison,  the  accountant  of 
the  Bank,  who  prepared  these  false  abstracts — I  fear  I  cannot  say 
unknowingly — but  bear  this  in  mind,  tliat,  although  Morison  must 
at  least  have  strongly  suspected,  if  he  was  not  fully  aware  of, 
their  falsity,  yet  he  had  not  the  information  in  his  possession 
which  could  either  have  induced  him  to  fabricate  them  himself, 
or  have  enabled  him  to  know  where  the  shoe  pinched,  and  what  it 
was  that  the  false  representations  should  hide.  He  had  not  the 
securities  book ;  he  had  no  access  to  the  cheque  box  ;  ho  hnd  to 
take  the  statements  of  Mr.  Potter  or  Mr.  Stronach  for  the  fact 
that  there  were  securities  standin<r  against  this  or  that,  or  that 
these  were  such  utterly  good  securities  that  they  might  even  l)e 
treated  as  gold.  There  are  one  or  two  passages  of  Mr.  Mori  son's 
evidence  which  I  should  like  to  bring  to  your  rrcdlli'ction  upon 
this  very  matter  of  the  preparation  of  those  scrolls  and  balance 
sheets.  Take  the  balance  sheet,  of  IHTfi,  for  I  ou'jlit  to  exi>lain 
that  whilst  Mr.  Morison  distinctly  says  that  Mr.  Pottor  was  tluTO 
in  1876,  and  advised  and  directed  the  scheme  of  falsification, 
that  scheme  was  followed  implicitly,  with  a  small  v;iriation  in 
regard  to  the  £973,000  in  tho  years  1877  and  1878.  Tlie 
©vidence  runs  : — "  Q.  How  long  were  Mr.  Potter  and  you  engaged 

351 


Advocate 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  in  revising  that  balance  sheet,  resulting  in  the  red  figures  being 
put  on? — A.  Perhaps  an  hour  or  two.  On  the  left  hand  side  of 
No.  128  there  are  entries  S.,  F.  &  Co.  (Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.), 
£200,875  :  J.  N.  F.  (James  Nicol  Fleming),  £100,300  ;  and  J.  M. 
&  Co.  (James  Morton  &  Co.),  £450,600.  These  were  credit 
accounts,  entered  in  that  part  of  the  abstract  which  contains 
advances  on  credit.  Q.  But  you  bring  them  down  and  insert 
them  among  what?— ^.  Government  stocks,  railway  stocks  and 
debentures,  and  other  securities.  Q.  In  the  abstract  of  1876 
there  is  an  entry  under  assets,  '  Government  stocks.  Exchequer 
bills,  railway  and  other  stock  and  debentures,  and  balances  in 
the  hands  of  banking  correspondents.'  Was  the  effect  of  that  to 
represent  debt  due  on  credit  account  by  those  firms,  to  the 
amount  of  £751,000,  as  either  a  Government  stock  or  security? — 
A.  Yes.  Q.  By  whose  instigation  were  these  sums  brought  down? 
— A.  Mr.  Potter's.  Q.  Was  it  by  his  directions  it  was  done? — ■ 
A.  Yes.  Q.  Did  he  assign  any  reason  or  justification  for  it? — 
A.  That  the  Bank  held  certain  stocks  against  the  debt  of 
£751,000.  By  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk^^.  And  therefore 
treating  them  as  good  assets? — A.  Yes."  Examination  continued 
— "  Q.  Did  Mr.  Potter  seem  to  understand  the  different  items  they 
were  considering ? — A.  Apparently  so.  Q.  Did  he  appear  to  be- 
quite  conversant  with  them? — A.  Quite  conversant."  Now, 
gentlemen,  it  may  be  suggested — it  is  just  possible  that  it  may 
— that  Mr.  Morison,  the  accountant  of  the  Bank,  did  all  that  out 
of  his  own  head  ;  and  for  what  purpose  ?  I  can  hardly  conceive 
such  a  suggestion  seriously  made  as  that  a  man  in  his  position, 
with  the  limited  knowledge  in  which  he  was  kept  in  regard  to 
the  affairs  and  ti'ading  of  the  Bank,  should  set  to  work  for  some 
purpose  or  other  to  falsify  the  accounts,  as  if  he  had  been  really 
able  to  divine  the  state  of  the  Bank.  That  is  something  perfectly 
incredible.  But  if  not,  were  Mr.  Potter  and  Mr.  Stronach  not 
there?  If  they  were,  you  have  evidence  upon  which  you  are 
entitled  to  rely — if  you  think  it  reliable — directly  connecting 
them  with  the  fabrication  ;  and,  if  so,  I  think  you  will  have  little 
doubt  as  to  the  i-esult  of  the  evidence  in  this  case,  so  far  as  these 
two  gentlemen  are  concei-ned.  So  far  as  the  other  panels  are 
concerned,  you  must  keep  in  view  that  they  had  that  knowledge 
of  the  affairs  of  the  Bank,  according  to  the  assumption  of  my 
argument — and  you  will  judge  how  far  it  is  well  founded — which 
certainly  should  have  made  any  man  of  ordinary  knowledge  and 
common  sense  aware  that  that  was  not  a  true  abstract  which  was 
issued  to  the  shareholders.  I  do  not  say  that  the  mere  fact  of 
suspicion  that  it  was  untrue  is  enough  to  entitle  you  to  convict 
them  of  that  alternative  charge.  But  if  they  knew  that  the 
balance  sheet  had  been  altered  so  as  to  make  it  false,  and  if  they 
also  knew  that  the  purpose  of  doing  so  was  to  conceal  the  state 
of  the  Bank,  and  allow  that  to  go  forth  to  the  shareholders,  I  tell 

352 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


you — under  correction  of  his  lordship — that  thej  are  guilty  of  Lord 
that  alternative  charge.  It  is  for  you  to  consider  the  case  of  Advocate, 
each  one  of  these  five  prisoners  separately  and  apart,  to  consider 
what  they  jointly  knew,  and  to  consider  the  extent  and  means 
of  knowledge  which  they  separately  had,  and  to  come  to  an 
independent  conclusion  in  each  case.  If  you  can  arrive  at  the 
result  that  they  had  the  knowledge  I  have  suggested,  I  ask  you, 
because  I  am  entitled  to  it,  for  a  verdict  against  them  upon  the 
alternative  charge.  I  ask  it  on  behalf  of  the  Crown  and  in  the 
name  of  justice.  But  equally  in  the  name  of  justice,  if  you  are 
honestly  unable  to  arrive  at  that  conclusion,  you  will  give  the 
prisoners  the  benefit  of  the  doubt,  and  a  verdict  which  at  least 
will  have  the  effect  of  dismissing  them  from  the  bar.  Gentlemen, 
I  have  only  one  word  to  say  in  conclusion,  and  I  regret  that  that 
word  should  have  been  forced  upon  me  by  the  enormous  mass  we 
have  had  in  the  present  case  of  evidence  of  character.  I  don't 
ask  you  to  lay  aside  for  one  moment  the  fact  that  these  were 
gentlemen  of  position  and  of  high  repute.  They  are  entitled  to 
any  fair  presumption  arising  from  their  having  such  repute  ;  but 
to  press  that  evidence  to  the  length  to  which  it  has  been  pressed 
by  witness  after  witness  in  that  box,  is  the  most  preposterous  thing 
I  ever  heard  in  a  Court  of  justice.  If  it  be  true  that  not  one  of 
them  is  capable  of  committing  such  an  offence,  nobody  did  it — a 
very  singular  result.  Evidence  of  character  in  connection  with 
certain  offences  is  a  valuable  ingredient  in  determining  the  guilt 
or  innocence  of  the  accused  ;  but  I  tell  you,  in  a  charge  of  this  sort 
evidence  of  character — although  it  is  not  to  be  laid  aside — means 
that  you  are  not  to  treat  them  as  if  they  were  men  of  bad  charac- 
ter ;  it  amounts  to  no  more  ;  I  tell  you  that  an  offence  such  as 
this  is  impossible  except  to  a  man  of  good  character.  If  a  man 
has  not  a  good  repute — if  a  man  has  a  bad  repute — you  will 
never  find  him  in  the  position  of  a  Director  of  a  great  bank, 
entrusted  with  millions  by  the  public,  or  in  a  position  to  work 
that  wreck  upon  any  institution  which  has  befallen  the  City  of 
Glasgow  Bank. 


353 


CHAPTER  XL 

Addresses  on  behalf  of  the  Prisoners. 

Mr.  Traynep.  MR.  TRAYNER  FOR  MR.   STEWART. 

Mr.  Trayner  said  he  rose  to  address  the  jury  with  a  feeling 
of  great  anxiety,  because,  owing  to  the  wide  publicity  and 
misery  which  had  attended  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank,  public 
clamour,  sometimes  unreasonable,  but  always  powerful,  had  at 
once  raised  its  cry  for  immediate  vengeance  and  execution  of 
sentence  against  those  who  were  believed  to  be  the  authors  of 
that  misfortune,  without  waiting  to  hear  what  might  legitimately 
and  forcibly  be  said  in  their  defence.  But  he  reminded  them  they 
were  entitled  to  convict  the  prisoners  at  the  bar  only  if  they 
were  satisfied  upon  the  direct  evidence  submitted  to  them, 
not  of  their  foolishness  or  even  of  their  sinfulness,  but  only  of 
their  actual  guilt  of  the  charge  laid  against  them.  How  neces- 
sary this  caution  was  was  to  be  seen  from  the  fact  that,  although 
the  Crown  originally  charged  the  prisoners  not  only  with  theft, 
fraud,  and  fraudulent  manipulation,  but  with  the  uttering  of  false 
balance  sheets,  the  Lord  Advocate  had  abandoned  all  the  graver 
charges,  leaving  only  the  charges  connected  with  the  balance 
sheets.  His  client  was  a  man  of  honour  and  high  personal 
character,  a  man  held  in  universal  esteem,  as  testified  by  Dr. 
M'Grigor,  the  Crown's  own  witness;  and  he  reminded  them 
of  what  Mr.  Stewart  stood  to  lose  personally  and  joecuniarily, 
apart  from  the  loss  of  his  good  name,  by  lending  himself  to 
the  fabrication  and  utterance  of  false  documents.  The  Lord 
Advocate  had  utterly  failed  to  establish  any  reasonable  motive 
to  prompt  Mr.  Stewart  to  commit  the  crimes  he  was  charged 
with.  Now,  gentlemen,  proceeded  Mr.  Trayner,  I  am  going  to 
relieve  you,  so  far  as  I  am  concerned,  from  any  discussion  of 
the  question  whether  or  not  the  balance  sheet  was  true.  I  shall 
assume,  for  the  purpose  of  the  argument,  that  it  was  not.  The 
Lord  Advocate  may  make  it  as  false  as  he  will;  I  shall 
assume  it  to  be  false,  for  I  knew  nothing  of  its  falsity.  Upon 
the  subject  of  whether  it  was  false,  or  whether  the  alterations  in 
it  were  justifiable,  you  will  have  argument  from  other  gentle- 
men who  are  to  follow  ;  but  for  Mr.  Stewart  the  defence  is 
simply  this,  that,  be  it  false  or  not,  he  knew  nothing  about  it. 
There  are  three  charges  in  the  indictment,  relating  respectively 

354 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


to  the  years  1876,  1877,  and  1878,  and  you  heard  the  evidence  Mr.  Trayner. 
of  Mr.  Morison  in  regard  to  the  manner  in  which  these  docu- 
ments had  been  prepared,  and  I  desire  to  say  a  word  in  case 
my  silence  on  the  subject  should  be  misinterpreted — not  because 
of  anything  the  Lord  Advocate  said  in  reference  to  it,  because 
I  think  the  Lord  Advocate — I  was  going  to  say  with  generosity, 
but  certainly  with  fairness — did  not  press  upon  your  considera- 
tion a  circumstance  relative  to  Mr.  Stewart  which  does  not  tell 
against  any  of  the  other  Directors  except  Mr.  Potter  and  Mr. 
Stronach.  In  1876  the  balance  sheet  is  not  brought  home  to 
the  knowledge  of  any  Director  except  Mr.  Potter  and  Mr. 
Stronach.  In  1877  the  same  observation  applies.  In  1878  you 
undoubtedly  have  the  balance  sheet  of  that  year  laid  before  Mr. 
Stewart.  I  am  not  anxious  to  shirk  the  consideration  of  that 
subject,  and  let  me  take  from  the  Crown  the  evidence  in  regard 
to  what  took  place  on  that  occasion.  The  evidence  is  Mr. 
Morison's — "  A  clean  copy  of  that  abstract  was  made  by  instruc- 
tions of  Mr.  Stronach  after  it  was  red  inked."  [Balance  sheet 
with  red  ink  and  pencil  markings  exhibited  to  the  jury.]  I 
do  not  say  that  these  alterations  are  not  quite  justifiable. 
Upon  that  I  have  nothing  to  say.  But,  then,  when  you  have 
seen  this  balance  sheet  in  its  altered  condition,  you  see  how 
very  unlikely  it  was  to  attract  Mr.  Stewart's  attention  when 
it  was  presented,  or  rather  how  much  less  likely  it  was  to  attract 
attention  when  presented  in  the  shape  of  a  clean  copy.  Now, 
that  is  the  document  which  was  shown  to  Mr.  Stewart.  Mr. 
Morison  says,  that  after  he  had  made  the  one  with  the  red  ink 
alterations  he  got  instructions  from  Mr.  Stronach  to  make  a 
clean  copy.  He  says — "  After  it  was  made  Mr.  Stewart,  Mr. 
Potter,  and  the  Manager  met  in  the  Manager's  room  and  went 
over  it.  I  was  present,  but  I  did  not  go  over  it  with  them.  I 
was  in  the  room.  I  do  not  think  the  annual  abstract  issued 
to  the  shareholders  had  been  printed  at  that  time.  Q.  Did 
these  three  gentlemen  not  compare  the  clean  document  with 
the  abstract? — A.  They  compared  the  clean  document  with  the 
abstract  published  in  the  previous  year's  report."  Then,  just 
one  other  sentence  from  the  same  witness — "  When  the  clean 
copy  without  the  red  ink  marks  was  submitted  to  the  Manager, 
Mr.  Stewart,  and  Mr.  Potter,  I  was  in  the  room  to  give  any 
information  wanted.  Q.  Were  you  asked  to  give  information 
about  anything? — A.  The  only  information  I  was  asked  for 
was  to  compare  the  1877  report  with  the  1878  one.  Q.  Which 
report? — A.  I  mean  the  annual  balance  sheet.  I  was  asked 
to  do  so,  I  presume,  in  order  to  compare  the  different  sums,  , 
the  one  year  with  the  other.  Q.  Simply  for  the  purpose,  I 
suppose,  of  stating  what  was  the  difference  in  the  trading  of 
the  Bank  between  these  two  years? — A.  I  was  not  asked  to 
explain  any  entry  in  this  account,  merely  to  compare  results." 

355 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Mp.  Trayner.  And  then  he  said  the  time  occupied  was  not  an  hour.  Now^ 
in  the  first  place,  that  document  shown  to  Mr.  Stewart 
contains  on  the  face  of  it  nothing  whatever  to  attract  the 
attention  of  a  man  who  was  even  a  better  bookkeeper  than  Mr. 
Stewart  was.  He  was  not  there  for  the  purpose  of  testing  the 
balance  sheet,  it  was  not  his  business  to  make  up  or  test  the 
balance  sheet.  Whatever  is  the  duty  of  a  Director — and  I  shall 
have  a  word  to  say  upon  that  by  and  by — it  was  not  the  duty 
of  the  Directors  unquestionably  to  make  up  the  balance  sheet 
for  the  year.  Well,  then,  as  regards  1878,  I  do  not  believe 
you  will  be  disposed  to  think — the  Lord  Advocate  evidently 
was  not  disposed  to  think — that  the  mere  fact  that  Mr.  Stewart 
was  in  the  room,  and  looked  at  this  clean  copy  which  had  been 
made,  was  in  itself  any  indication  that  he  was  in  the  guilty 
knowledge  that  this  was  the  result  of  manipulation  and  had  been 
cooked.  Gentlemen,  I  must  say  this  for  Mr.  Stewart,  that  if 
the  account  of  which  this  is  the  clean  copy  was  manipulated 
and  false,  it  is  quite  obvious  that  he  was  not  a  party  to  the 
falsification.  He  was  not  allowed  to  see  the  balance  sheet  till 
all  the  traces  of  the  red  ink  marks  and  the  alterations  had  been 
removed.  He  is  not  called  in  to  consider  whether  any  altera- 
tion should  be  made  or  not ;  and  so  far  from  being  called  in  to 
consider  whether  those  alterations  were  right  or  prudent  in 
the  circumstances  of  the  Bank,  he  is  excluded,  then  and  at  every 
other  time,  from  the  consideration  of  a  balance  sheet  when 
that  balance  sheet  was  undergoing  preparation.  The  Lord 
Advocate  said  that  it  is  not  in  this  abstract  that  the  offence 
consists;  the  offence  consists,  according  to  his  lordship,  in  the 
abstract  which  was  published  to  the  world.  Well,  I  look  at 
the  abstract  published  to  the  world ;  I  look  at  this  which  was 
the  abstract  of  the  affairs  of  the  Bank  shown  to  Mr.  Stewart, 
and  I  compare  them,  and  you  will  compare  them  for  yourselves. 
They  are  identical,  and  if  the  balance  that  was  presented  to 
Mr.  Stewart  by  the  Manager  and  Mr.  Potter  was  a  true  balance 
sheet,  then  the  abstract  published  to  the  world  was  true.  If 
it  was  not  a  true  balance  sheet,  Mr.  Stewart  was  deceived,  and 
not  deceiving.  It  will  not  prove  that  Mr.  Stewart  was  in  the 
guilty  knowledge  that  this  was  a  cooked  and  manipulated 
balance  sheet  to  say  that  he  was  present  at  the  meeting  when 
it  was  gone  over  and  looked  at.  On  the  contrary,  you  must 
infer  that  he  regarded  it  as  true  and  honest,  because  he  was 
a  party  to  the  publication  of  the  report  which  went  forth  to 
the  public  in  1878.  I  could  quite  understand,  if  the  published 
abstract  had  been  in  any  material  respect  different  from  the 
figures  shown  in  the  balance  sheet,  that  it  might  have  been 
said,  "  Mr.  Stewart,  how  could  you  publish  that  when  you  had 
seen  this?"  But  you  cannot  presume  that  there  was  anything 
wrong  with  what  was  published  to  the  world  so  far  as  Mr. 
Stewart  was  concerned,  so  long  as  you  find  that  the  only  means 

356 


Addresses   to  Jury. 


of   knowledge  which   Mr.    Stewart   had   was   entirely  consistent  Mr.  Traynep. 
■with  the  results  and  the  figures  published  to  the  company  and 
to  the  public. 

I  come  now  to  a  question,  gentlemen,  which  is  of  some 
importance.  The  balance  sheet  which  you  see  before  you, 
«,nd  which  was  subsequently  epitomised  and  issued  to  the 
public,  is  said  to  have  been  manipulated  and  cooked.  Now, 
what  was  Mr.  Stewart's  duty,  or  the  duty  of  any  Director,  in 
regard  to  that  I  The  balance  sheet,  observe,  so  far  as  laid 
before  the  Directors  at  all,  is  the  work  of  the  functionaries 
•charged  with  that  particular  duty.  It  is  not  a  Director's 
duty  to  make  up  a  balance  sheet,  or  to  keep  any  of  the  books 
of  the  bank  ;  but  when  that  balance  sheet  is  laid  before  him,  is 
there  any  duty  upon  Mr.  Stewart,  or  any  director  of  any  bank, 
to  test  its  accuracy  by  looking  into  the  bank  books?  I  refer 
to  the  case  of  Adie  v.  The  Western  Bank,  reported  in  III. 
Macpherson.  From  the  evidence  it  appeared  that  the  pursuer 
had  been  a  partner  of  the  Western  Bank  since  1848,  and  that 
he  had  received  the  annual  report  from  the  Directors.  He  made 
the  purchases,  knowing  that  the  Bank  was  the  seller,  upon  the 
faith  of  these  reports  and  the  i-epresentation  of  its  manager  at 
Coatbridge,  and  on  the  faith  of  the  Bank  being  in  a  position 
to  pay  a  dividend  at  the  rate  of  8  per  cent. ;  and  the  report 
in  May,  1855,  contained  a  false  statement  of  the  position  of  the 
bank,  large  debts  being  included  in  the  assets,  which  the  books 
and  documents  showed  to  be  bad.  There  was  nothing  in  that 
false  statement  in  the  report  and  balance  sheet  of  the  Western 
Bank  which,  according  to  the  statement  of  the  Lord  Advocate, 
is  not  to  be  found  existing  in  the  present  case.  The  assets  were 
misrepresented,  the  debts  were  misrepresented,  and  altogether 
there  could  be  scarcely  anything  nearer  a  jiarallel  than  what 
was  proved  in  Adies  case  to  that  which  is  stated  by  the  Lord 
Advocate  to  have  occurred  here.  In  that  case  the  Lord  Pre- 
sident, charging  the  jury,  said — ''  It  is  not  incumbent  on  the 
Directors  personally  to  go  through  the  books  to  test  their 
accuracy  or  the  results  brought  out  from  them.  It  is  not  to  be 
expected  or  supposed  that  the  Directors  had  done  so,  and 
their  report  is  not  to  be  taken  as  importing  or  implying  that 
they  did  so.  They  are  entitled  to  rely  on  the  iiifoiinat ion 
furnished  to  them  by  the  ofhcials  to  whom  the  dutails  of  the 
business  is  committed,  and  in  whom  confidence  is  placed.  That 
affords  reasonable  ground  for  believing  in  the  truth  of  the 
results  and  the  inference  reasonably  deduced  fioni  tlieni,  and 
if  it  should  unfortunately  turn  out  that  the  information  so 
furnished  to  the  Directors  was  false,  by  reason  of  the  negligence 
or  fault  of  those  whose  duty  it  was  to  furnish  correct  informa- 
tion, the  Directors  who  honestly  received  it,  and  thus  were 
deceived  by  it,  cannot  be  held  to  have  j)racti8ed  any  fraud  on 
the  shareholders  or  the  public."    I  will  not  detain  you  by  reading 

357 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Mp.  Tpaynep.  further  from  the  report  of  that  case,  because  that  expression 
of  opinion  by  the  Lord  President,  in  charging  the  jury,  was  taken 
exception  to  by  counsel,  and  the  matter  underwent  discussion 
in  the  First  Division  of  the  Court  of  Session,  and  the  judges 
of  that  Division,  and  particularly  Lord  Curriehill,  concurred  in 
the  view  which  the  Lord  President  had  stated — that  it  is  no 
part  of  the  duty  of  Directors  to  look  into  the  books  of  the  bank 
to  ascertain  whether  the  balance  sheet  or  abstract  report  is 
correct  or  not.  They  are  to  apply  for  information  to  the  par- 
ticular officials  charged  with  the  duty  of  making  up  the  accounts, 
and  when  they  get  it,  they  are  entitled  to  rely  on  that.  If 
that  be  the  duty  of  Directors,  I  ask — What  is  the  fault  of  Mr. 
Stewart?  This  balance  sheet  is  put  before  him,  and  he  says — 
"  Well,  I  see  it  brings  out  a  profit  of  so  much  per  annum,  and 
I  see  it  is  absolutely  conform  to  this  which  is  published  to  the 
world."  Is  he  to  look  into  that  account  to  check  its  accuracy? 
How  many  items  does  that  cover  1  The  first  entry  is  "  Local 
bills."  Well,  to  satisfy  himself  of  the  figures  brought  out 
there  (£766,878)  involves  an  investigation  into  a  number  of 
bills  which  might  take  him  a  month  merely  to  count — it  may 
be  so — or  it  may  be  that  the  bills  are  few  in  number,  and  of 
laro;e  amount.  But  all  he  has  to  do  is  to  ask  the  accountant 
of  the  Bank  to  be  honest  and  truthful  in  making  up  the  ledger, 
and  to  put  before  him  and  his  brethren  in  the  direction  the 
results  of  the  Bank's  books.  And  what  is  most  remarkable  in 
this  case  is,  that  if  Mr.  Stewart  and  his  brother  Directors  had 
gone  to  the  books  to  test  the  accuracy  of  the  balance  sheet, 
they  would  have  found  nothing  wrong.  The  balance  ledger 
which  they  docquet  is  exactly  conform  to  the  other  entries  in 
the  books  from  which  these  results  are  taken. 

Gentlemen,  it  would  only  weary  you  and  occujiy  time  to 
go  into  all  the  questions  of  the  different  accounts  to  which  the 
Lord  Advocate  has  alluded.  There  is  only  one  of  them  further, 
as  bearing  upon  Mr.  Stewart's  case,  which  I  should  like  to  say 
a  word  about.  You  remember  that  when  one  of  the  clerks  in 
the  Bank  brought  the  attention  of  the  Manager  and  the 
Directors  of  the  Bank  to  the  fact  that  Mr.  Innes  Wright's 
partner  (Mr.  Scott)  was  not  accounting  for  the  discounts  which 
he  ought  to  have  accounted  for,  it  was  arranged  that  Mr.  Stewart 
and  Mr.  Potter  should  go  and  see  Mr.  Scott  on  the  subject. 
They  met  Mr.  Scott,  and  Mr.  Stewart  told  him  that  his  conduct 
could  only  be  designated  by  one  name.  Mr.  Stewart  was 
indignant,  honestly  and  fairly  indignant,  at  Mr.  Scott's  conduct, 
and  he  showed  it  both  by  his  manner  and  by  his  language  on 
that  occasion.  Does  not  that  show  you  that  the  only  time 
in  which  Mr.  Stewart  ever  came  face  to  face  with  a  proper 
defalcation — what  he  knew  was  a  defalcation — he  at  once 
resented  it  as  an  honest  man  would  have  done?     And  just  as 

358 


Addresses  to  Jury. 

certainly  as  he  insisted  upon  an  arrangement  being  made  by  Mr.  Trayner. 
•which  Mr.  Scott  should  hand  over  the  money  which  he  had 
improperly  retained — just  as  certainly  would  Mr.  Stewart  have 
insisted  upon  an  arrangement  with  Fleming  ct  Co.,  and  every- 
body else,  if  he  had  known  that  things  had  gone  the  length  to 
which  we  are  now  told  they  had  gone.  Can  you  say  that  Mr. 
Stewart  has  acted  criminally  here?  What  can  lead  you  to  that 
conclusion?  Has  anything  in  the  whole  course  of  his  actings 
indicated  criminal  intention  or  criminal  purpose?  Has  anything 
been  brought  home  to  him  which  would  warrant  you  in  branding 
him  with  the  name  either  of  thief,  swindler,  or  liar?  Do  you 
believe  that  he  ever  put  his  pen  "  to  a  pap:e  that  registered  a 
lie"?  Do  you  believe  he  told  a  lie,  verbally  or  in  writing,  to 
the  public?  If  he  did,  was  it  not  very  inconsistent  with  the 
whole  of  the  rest  of  that  man's  conduct  ?  He  had  hitherto, 
as  far  as  we  have  seen,  acted  uprightly  and  honestly  with  all 
nien ;  and  while  he  may  have  been  foolish,  reckless,  or  ignorant 
in  the  fulfilment  of  his  duties  in  the  Bank  parlour,  you  cannot 
say  he  ever  acted  dishonestly  or  falsely.  Do  you  believe  Dr. 
M'Grigor  when  he  tells  you  that  Mr.  Stewart  appeared  astounded 
at  the  information  he  got  from  him?  Do  you  believe  that  Mr. 
Stewart  was  sincere  when  he  rushed  past  Dr.  M'Grigor  at  the 
Bank  door  wringing  his  hands,  and  declaring  he  was  a  broken- 
hearted man?  I  believe  Dr.  M'Grigor.  Have  you  any  reason 
to  doubt  him?  But  if  Dr.  M'Grigor's  evidence  is  worth  listening 
to,  the  result  of  it  is  to  prove  that  the  revelations  brought  to 
light  in  the  report  which  Dr.  M'Grigor  and  Mr.  Anderson  issued 
were  new  to  Mr.  Stewart.  And  not  only  by  the  evidence  of 
Dr.  M'Grigor  is  that  made  plain,  but  Mr.  Jamieson,  one  of  the 
liquidators,  tells  you  that  a  day  or  two  before  the  stoppage  of 
the  Bank  he  went  through  to  Glasgow  to  see  whether  any 
arrangement  could  be  made  by  which  the  Bank  nught  be  carried 
on,  and  that  when  he  told  Mr.  Stewart  the  result  of  his  investiga- 
tion Mr.  Stewart  was  distressed  by  the  information,  and  seemed  • 
to  be  greatly  put  about.  Corrupt  motive  in  Mr.  Stewart's  case 
there  was  none.  I  say  emphatically  there  was  none ;  and  I  liave 
listened  to  the  Lord  Advocate  to  find  wherein  he  imputed 
corrupt  motive  to  Mr.  Stewart.  Guilty  knowledge  certainly  was 
not  brought  home  to  him;  and  the  suggestion  that  ho  is  guilty 
of  the  crime  laid  to  him  is  just  about  as  much  brought  home 
to  him  as  it  is  brought  home  to  you.  I  am  not  going  to  detain 
you  at  any  further  length  in  reference  to  this  case.  You  ciinnol 
convict  Mr.  Stewart  unless  you  are  satisfied  that  he  iNsue(l  the 
balance  sheet  of  the  Bank  in  the  guilty  knowledge  of  itH  lK>ing 
false.  What  does  that  involve?  That  this  man,  from  1H76 — 
for  he  is  charged  with  this  as  much  as  with  the  act  of  1877 
and  1878 — knew  the  Bank  was  in  a  rotten  and  tottering  state, 
and  might  any  day  come  down,  and  yet  he  left  his  fortune  at 

359 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Mp.  Trayner.  its  risk.  He  knew  that  Bank  to  be  in  a  rotten  state,  hopelessly 
insolvent,  and  not  paying  anything,  and  yet  he  continued  in  its 
direction  and  allowed  himself  to  be  re-elected  in  the  month  of 
June,  1878,  when,  if  he  had  had  guilty  knowledge,  and  had 
aught  of  intelligence  above  the  veriest  idiot,  he  would  have 
hurried  from  the  Board  and  saved  everything  he  could.  That 
was  not  the  case  with  any  one  of  them.  Foolish  they  may  have 
been,  reckless  they  may  have  been,  bad  managers  to  the  last 
extent  they  may  have  been,  but,  gentlemen,  I  think  you  will 
search  this  proof  in  vain  for  guilty  knowledge,  and  without  guilty 
knowledge  there  is  no  crime.  Unless  you  are  satisfied  that 
Mr.  Stewart  has  been  guilty  of  criminal  intent  to  defraud 
some  one  and  to  benefit  himself — ^^that  he  knew  these  falsehoods 
were  in  the  balance-sheets,  and  that  he  issued  them  for  the 
purpose  of  deceiving  the  public,  when  he  had  no  motive  to 
deceive  the  public,  and  no  personal  object  in  view ;  unless  you 
can  assert  all  these  things  as  the  result  of  the  evidence,  you 
must  not  find  him  guilty.  Therefore,  gentlemen,  I  ask  you  to 
proceed  upon  the  evidence,  and  if  you  proceed  upon  the  evidence 
in  the  case,  you  will  acquit  Mr.  Stewart. 

Mf.  Balfour.  Mr.  Balfour  addressed  the  jury  on  behalf  of  the  prisoner 
Potter.  After  referring  to  the  serious  and  momentous  nature 
of  the  charge  preferred  against  Mr.  Potter,  and  to  the  depth 
and  strength  of  public  feeling  that  had  been  aroused  all  over 
the  country  by  the  failure  of  the  Bank,  which  he  cautioned  the 
jury  to  dismiss  from  their  minds  in  weighing  the  evidence  to 
which  they  had  listened,  Mr.  Balfour  adverted  to  the  fact  that 
the  prosecution  had  had  to  abandon  the  more  serious  charges 
of  embezzlement  and  theft,  which  the  jury  would  now  treat  as 
if  they  had  never  existed.  He  then  pointed  out  that  even 
at  the  first  there  had  been  no  allegation  that  Mr.  Potter  had 
used  his  position  as  a  Director  to  obtain  a  single  sixpence  of 
advantage  for  himself.  The  question  really  before  the  jury  was, 
in  the  first  instance,  whether  the  balance  sheets  of  the  Bank  in 
the  years  1876-77-78  were  false,  and  then  whether  they  were 
false  in  the  knowledge  of  the  accused,  and  whether  they  were 
uttered  by  them  for  the  purpose  of  perpetrating  the  frauds 
alleged.  He  did  not  go,  and  did  not  care  to  go,  into  the  question 
whether  the  balance  sheets  were  false  in  the  sense  that  they 
were  not  entirely  correct  from  a  book-keeper's  point  of  view. 
He  was  willing  to  assume,  for  the  purposes  of  argument,  that  a 
skilled  accountant  would  have  made  them  up  on  a  different 
principle.  But  he  utterly  denied  that  the  prosecution  had 
proved  that  Mr.  Potter  either  fabricated  them  or  sent  them 
out  with  a  knowledge  that  they  were  false.  To  convict  the 
accused  it  would  be  necessary  to  prove  something  more  than 
neglect  or  omission  of  duty,  errors  of  book-keeping,  or  errors 
of  judgment.     Guilty  mind  and  intention  must  also  be  proved; 

360 


Addresses   to  Jury. 


and  these,  as  he  contended,  tlie  Crown  had  absolutely  failed  Mr.  Balfour, 
to  prove.  The  Lord  Advocate  had  confessed  tliat  he  could  not 
establish  his  case  by  direct  evidence,  but  he  had  arp;ued  that 
the  Bank  was  in  an  unsound  condition  to  the  knowledsre  of  the 
Directors ;  that  the  unsoundness  gave  a  motive  for  conceal- 
ment ;  that  the  balance  sheets  did,  in  fact,  conceal  that  unsound 
condition,  and  tlierefore  he  asked  the  jury  to  convict  the  accused. 
That,  to  his  (Mr.  Balfour's)  mind,  was  a  very  unsatisfactory 
process  of  logic.  The  Lord  Advocate  ought  to  have  shown  what 
part  the  Directors  had  in  making  up  the  balance  sheets,  and 
how  the  particulars  mentioned  in  the  indictment  as  false  could 
be  known  by  them  to  be  false.  Mr.  Balfour  described  the  way 
in  which  the  weekly  balances  were  prepared  by  Mr.  Morison, 
the  accountant  of  the  Bank,  and  the  l)alance  ledger  which  he 
kept  was  checked  by  the  Directors.  That  was  the  only  book 
which  the  Directors  did  check,  and  a  very  large  proportion  of 
what  were  said  to  be  fraudulent  alterations  in  the  balance  sheet 
existed  in  the  balance  ledger  before  the  abstract  was  made  uj) 
at  all.  After  specifying  these  Mr.  Balfour  argued  that  the 
Directors  had  no  means  of  knowing  them  to  be  incorrect.  They 
were  put  in  the  balance  ledger  by  a  responsible  official  of  the 
Bank,  and  something  must  be  trusted  to  officials.  As  to  the 
allegation  that  entries  were  made  of  reserve  fund  and  receipts 
to  profit  and  loss  which  did  not  really  exist,  those  entries 
appeared  in  the  books  of  the  Bank  and  in  the  weekly  state- 
ments, and  how  could  it  be  a  fraudulent  act  on  the  part  of  the 
Directors,  in  that  case,  to  admit  them  into  the  balance  sheet? 
With  respect  to  errors  which  were  not  in  the  balance  ledger, 
but  made  their  appearance  for  the  first  time  in  the  bulauco 
sheets,  Mr.  Balfour  submitted  that  the  Directors  could  not 
have  detected  these  by  any  process  short  of  turning  themselves 
into  auditors,  and  stopping  the  business  of  the  Bank  for  a  week 
or  a  fortnight  while  they  examined  the  books ;  but  nobody  said 
it  was  part  of  their  duty  to  do  any  such  thing.  The  reason  why 
it  was  said  to  be  wa'ong  to  keep  up  a  reserve  fund,  and  to  carry 
certain  sums  of  interest  to  the  credit  of  profit  and  loss,  was 
because  there  was  a  number  of  accounts  which  were  alK'g«.'<I 
by  the  prosecution  to  have  Iteen  in  a  very  doubtful  pfisitidii, 
and  upon  which  no  interest  had  actually  been  paid  for  years. 
But,  the  learned  counsel  contended,  it  was  surely  only  at  the 
worst  a  matter  of  judgment  whether  the.se  accounts  were  bad 
or  not,  and  the  accused  could  not  be  charged  with  fraud  l)ecauso 
they  refused  to  treat  them  as  irrecoveral)le,  and  continued  to 
charge  interest  upon  them.  He  denied  that  there  li.id  <>veii 
been  an  error  of  judgment,  because  some  invest monts  to  which 
interest,  though  charged,  had  not  been  paid  for  yearN,  lu-gjin 
after  that  to  pay  interest  again.  Mr.  Balfour  next  dealt  with 
the  charge  against  Mr.  Potter  of  having  assisted  in  fabricating 

361 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Mr.  Balfoup.  the  balance  sheet  of  1876.     The  only  evidence  in  support  of  this 
grave  charge  was  that  of  Morison,  the  accountant.     The  evidence 
of  one  witness,  even  if  trustworthy,   was  not  enough  to  prove 
the  charge  without  corroboration,   and  Morison's  evidence  had 
not  received  a  shred  of  corroboration,  while  it  was  impossible 
to  place  any  trust  in  his  evidence.     Mr.  Balfour,  at  some  length, 
subjected  Mr.  Morison's  evidence  to  a  most  searching  analysis, 
with    the   view    of   showing   that   it   was   inconsistent   and   self- 
contradictory,  and  that  it  would  be  unsafe  to  trust  either  to  Mr. 
Morison's  accuracy  or  to  his  veracity.     Turning  to  the  question 
of  the  knowledge  which  Mr.  Potter  had  of  the  accounts  of  Smith, 
Fleming  &  Co.,  J.  Nicol  Fleming,  and  Morton  &  Co.,  Mr.  Balfour 
said  he  would  not  dispute  that  Mr.  Potter  had  some  knowledge 
of  these  accounts  before  1875,  and  that  after  1875  he  had  gener- 
ally a  knowledge  of  their  state ;  but  he  contended  that  Mr.  Potter 
had  also,  along  with  the  other  Directors,  an  honest  belief,  not 
without  warrant,  that  these  accounts  might  in  the  end  be  wound 
up  satisfactorily  for  the  Bank.     In  support  of  this  contention, 
Mr.  Balfour  reviewed  the  history  of  these  accounts.     In  conclu- 
sion (said  Mr.  Balfour),  I  would  ask  you  to  consider  this — What 
motive  or  inducement  had  Mr.  Potter  to  be  guilty  of  the  fraud 
with  which  he  is  charged?     In  any  question  of  crime  it  is  of  the 
utmost  importance  to  see  whether  a  man  has  a  motive  to  do 
the  thing  he  is  said  to  have  done.     Even  in  crimes  of  violence, 
or   sudden   passion   or   impulse,   it   is   always   important  to   see 
whether  there  is  a  motive.      Sometimes  it  is  difficult  to  trace 
motives  in  cases  of  that  kind;  but  where  you  have  a  crime  like 
this,   which   is  in   the  nature   of  a   commercial  fraud,   you   will 
necessarily  have  motive,  foresight,   reasoning,  and  scheming  to 
gain   some   end.      I   never  knew   of   a  man  who   was   guilty  of 
deliberate  and  persistent  fraud  without  something  to  gain.       I 
ask  you,  what  suggestion  is  there  of  any  such  motive  on  the 
part  of  Mr.  Potter?     I  showed  you  at  the  outset  that  from  the 
beginning  to   the  end  of  this  indictment   the   Crown  make  no 
charge  against  Mr.  Potter  of  having  overdrawn  his  account,  or 
of  taking  advantage  of  his  position  to  benefit  himself.     What  was 
Mr.   Potter's  financial  position  at  this  time?     He  was  a  man, 
as  you  had  proved  to  you,  at  the  head  of  two  leading  businesses. 
The  one  was  that  of  Potter,  Wilson  &  Co.,  from  which  he  was- 
deriving  an  income  of  £5000  a  year.     The  other  was  the  great 
shipping  firm  of  Lewis  Potter  &  Son,  from  which  he  was  deriving 
an  income  of  about  £3000.     That  was  £8000  a  year  from  the 
two  businesses.     But  he  had  also  valuable  lands  worth  £120,000; 
from  which  he  was  getting  a  profit,  including  the  minerals,  of 
about  £10,000.      So  that,  whatever  else  may  be  said  about  Mr. 
Potter,  he  was  not  a  needy  speculator,  or  one  who  wanted  the 
money  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  or  any  other  bank.     He 
had  an   income   of   £17,000   or  £18,000  a  year.      The   City  of 

362 


Addresses   to  Jury. 


Glasgow   Bank   were   not   even   his   liankers.      His   bankers   for  Mr.  Balfour. 

many   years   had   been    the   British    Linen,    apparently    because 

one  of  his  partners  had  been  a  friend  of  the  manager,  and  the 

National  Bank,   because  he  was  associated  with   an   Australian 

Company,  which  was  in  some  way  friendly  to  that  bank.     From 

these  two  banks  any  accommodation  that  Mr.  Potter  needed,  if 

he  needed  any,  was  got;  and  it  was  only  at  the  request  of  the 

City  of  Glasgow  Bank  that  it  got  a  share  of  his  l)usiness.     There 

had  not  only  been  a  failure  to  prove,  but  there  had  been  no 

attempt  to  prove,  that  Mr.  Potter  had  the  slightest  thing  to  gain, 

either   by  his  connection   with   the   Bank,   or  anything  he   did 

in  regard  to  it.     You  had  also  proved  to  you  that  Mr.   Bain, 

the  manager  of  the  Edinburgh  branch,  was  his  brother-in-law. 

His  sister  was  Mrs.  Davidson.     Both  of  them  were  shareholders 

of  the  Bank,   and  Mr.  Pott^-r  was  a  shareholder  himself.     Yet 

what  he  is  accused  of  in  this  indictment  is  of  fabricating:  and 

publishing    false    balance    sheets    to    defraud    the    shareholders, 

including   his   brother-in-law,    his    sister,    and   himself.      If   you 

think  you  can  by  shadowy  and  slender  inferences  drawn  from  a 

perusal   of   the  minutes,   instead  of   looking   at   the  solid   facts 

in    the    case,    examining   how    the    balance    sheets    were    made, 

examining    the    knowledge    which    the    Directors    had,    seeing 

whether  they  were  too  sanguine  about  these  accounts — if  you 

say  in  the  absence  of  all  motive  that  Mr.  Potter  is  guilty  of 

all  these  things,  I  think  it  will  be  matter  for  great  surprise.     I 

am  not  going  to  make  any  appeal  to  your  feelings  on  the  part 

of  Mr.  Potter.     From  beginning  to  end  I  have  gone  through  this 

matter  as  a  matter  of  business,  because  I  can  confidently  api)eal 

to  the  facts  in  these  documents,  and  I   don't  require  to  luako 

any  appeal  to  your  feelings.     I  do  think,  however,  it  would  1)6 

impossiljle  for  you  or  anyone  else  to  witness  without  a  certain 

degree  of  emotion  a  man  of  seventy-two  years  of  age,  after  his 

laborious,   successful,   and   honoured   life,    brought   to   sit   there 

on   a  charge   of   this  kind.      I   am  sure   you   will   not,   without 

much   clearer   reason   than   anything   we  have   hoard,   tin<I   In'tn 

guilty  of  that  crime.     I  don't  a})peal  to  your  feelings,  but    I  do 

appeal  to  your  reason  and  your  sense  of  honour  in  this  matter — 

I   appeal   to  your  judgment.      I  have  gone   lliiougli    the   faits, 

and  I  say,   treating  this,  not  as  a  matter  of  feeling,  but   us  a 

matter  of  judgment,   that  the  fair  inference  and  conclusion   to 

be  drawn  from  the  evidence  is  a  conclusion  for  innocence,  and 

not  for  guilt.     Therefore  I  ask  you  for  a  verdict  of  ac(iui(tal. 

Mr.  AsHEK  next  addressed  the  jury  on  liclialf  of  the  prisoinT  Mr.  Ashor. 
Salmond.  At  the  outset  he  severely  ceiisuicd  (lie  conduct  of 
the  Crown  authorities  in  bringing  against  the  accused  charges 
which  prevented  their  being  al)k-  to  claim  release  on  bail  ns  a 
matter  of  right,  and  yet  abandoning  those  charges  when  the 
time  came  to  prove  them.     The  elTect   of   this  proceeding  hnd 

363 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Mr.  Asher.  been  to  inflict  on  the  accused  three  months'  imprisonment  before 
trial,  and  to  do  them  a  great  wrong  which  no  verdict  of  the 
jury  could  repair.  In  regard  to  the  specific  charges  now  urged 
against  his  client,  his  defence  was  not  a  denial  that  the  balance 
sheets  of  the  Bank  were  false  and  fabricated,  but  a  simple 
declaration  that  his  client  had  nothing  to  do  with  them  in  any 
way,  and  was  as  innocent  and  as  ignorant  of  the  falsification 
as  any  of  the  jury  when  they  entered  the  box.  In  support 
of  this  contention,  Mr.  Asher  pointed  to  the  evidence  adduced, 
which  showed  that  on  the  occasion  both  of  the  preparation 
and  of  the  issuing  of  the  three  balance  sheets  in  question,  Mr. 
Salmond  was  absent  from  Glasgow,  and  therefore  could  not 
possibly  have  had  any  part  in  the  falsification.  Was  he  con- 
nected in  any  way  with  the  false  balance  sheets  directly?  He 
appended  his  name  to  the  balances  for  each  of  the  three  years  no 
doubt ;  but  he  did  it  as  a  matter  of  form,  finding  that  his  fellow- 
Directors  had  done  it  also ;  and  from  an  examination  of  the 
balance  book  he  could  not  possibly  have  detected  the  falsifica- 
tion, while  it  was  no  part  of  his  duty  to  institute  a  general 
examination  of  the  books  of  the  Bank.  Then  in  regard  to  Mr. 
Salmond's  knowledge  of  the  doubtful  state  of  certain  accounts, 
that  ground  of  accusation  had  been  reinforced  by  the  prosecution 
by  an  allegation  that  certain  items  of  profit  said  to  have  been 
earned  by  the  Bank  were  not  so  earned,  because  they  were 
made  up  of  sums  of  interest  on  these  bad  accounts  that  had 
never  been  paid.  This  Mr.  Asher  characterised  as  a  revival 
in  another  form  of  the  eighth  particular  under  the  first  head 
of  the  indictment,  which  the  prosecution  had  been  obliged  to 
abandon,  and  he  therefore  objected  to  it  on  that  ground.  He 
admitted  that  Mr.  Salmond  had,  as  he  averred  in  his  declara- 
tion, some  knowledge  of  the  doubtful  accounts,  but  it  was  only 
of  a  general  kind ;  and  because  he,  in  advanced  old  age,  allowed 
it  to  remain  so,  and  did  not  of  his  own  motion  originate  an 
investigation  into  the  affairs  of  those  firms  which  had  large 
advances  from  the  Bank,  was  he  to  be  convicted  of  having  had 
a  guilty  knowledge  of  the  false  entries  in  the  balance  sheets? 
I  am  sure  (said  Mr.  Asher  in  concluding  his  address),  as  men 
of  sense,  you  will  accept  no  such  extravagant  view.  It  is  out 
of  the  question  to  say  that  the  failure  to  set  in  motion  all  the 
organisation  which  would  have  been  required  to  clear  up  in  the 
light  of  day  the  position  of  these  large  accounts  in  1875 — that 
the  inability  of  my  client,  physically  or  mentally,  to  enter 
upon  the  task,  is  now  to  be  imputed  as  evidence  of  guilty  motive 
for  a  crime.  I  fear  I  have  detained  you  too  long,  but  I  trust 
to  your  indulgence  considering  the  magnitude  of  the  issues 
which  are  involved.  It  is  impossible  to  disguise  the  seriousness 
of  the  issues  Avith  regard  to  a  person  at  the  advanced  age  of 
my  client,  and  I  ask  you  to  bear  in  mind,  notwithstanding  what 

364 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


the  Lord  Advocate  has  said,   that  his  lonp:  life,   which  is  now  Mr.  Asher. 

drawing   to   a   close,    has   been   spent   by   securing   to   him    the 

esteem  and  regard  of  all  with  whom  he  was  associated.     I  ask 

you  to  bear  in  mind  that   he  was  a  shareholder  of   the   Bank 

to  an  extent  which,  if  the  prediction  of  the  Crown  proves  true, 

involves  ruin  to  himself;  that  he  held  these  shares  throughout, 

never  selling  a  single  one,  and  taking  an  additional  allotment 

in   1873 ;   that  he  has  throughout  the   later  years   of  his   life, 

in  respect  of  failing  vigour,   been   necessarily  absent  from  the 

Bank   to  an   extent   which   distinguishes   his   case   in   the   most 

marked  degree  from  the  case  of  the  men   who  sit  there  with 

him.     You  cannot,  as  men  of  sense,  look  at  his  past  position, 

and   take   these   circumstances   along   with    it,    without    coming 

to  the  conclusion  that,  whatever  may  be  the  result  of  this  trial 

in  regard  to  others,   so  far  as  he,  at  least,  is  concerned,  you 

will  in  justice  and  fairness  give  him  a  verdict  which  will  leave 

him  to  spend  the  remainder  of  his  days,  not  in  the  squalor  of 

a  prison,  but  in  the  society  of  his  friends ;  and,  gentlemen,  you 

will    do    more    than    that — you    will    dismiss    him    from    this 

bar  with  his  character   unstained  and  his  honour  unsullied. 

Mr.  Mackintosh  addressed  the  jury  in  defence  of  the  prisoner  Mr. 
Taylor.  He  pointed  out  that  his  client  was  put  on  the  conunittee  ™^cklntosh. 
for  managing  the  branches  of  the  Bank  as  soon  as  he  joined 
the  Directorate,  continued  on  that  committee  to  the  end,  and 
was  so  little  mixed  up  in  what  might  be  termed  the  "  inner 
circle  '  of  the  Bank's  transactions,  that  John  Fleming  did  not 
even  know  him  by  sight.  He  contended  that  Mr.  Taylor  could 
have  had  no  means  of  detecting  the  false  statements  in  the 
balance  sheets,  inasmuch  as  they  were  in  conformity  with  the 
books  of  the  Bank.  He  evidently  had  faith  in  the  balance  sheets, 
and  that  being  the  case,  the  jury  must  acquit  him,  unless  they 
were  prepared  to  affirm  one  or  other  of  two  propositions — either 
that  it  was  Mr.  Taylor's  duty  personally  to  audit  the  books  of 
the  Bank,  or  that  it  had  been  proved  that  Mr.  Taylor  had  had 
it  brought  to  his  knowledge  that  those  books  were  falsified  or 
manipulated.  Both  those  propositions,  the  loarned  counsel  main- 
tained, were  extravagant  and  unteii;ilile,  and  he  entered  at  some 
length  into  argument  to  show  that  Mr.  Taylor  had  never  hud 
before  him  materials  for  knowint:  that  the  hooks  were  falsilied. 
In  conclusion,  Mr.  Mackintosh  said— I  know  that  in  dealing 
with  the  question  whether  Mr.  Taylor  has  or  has  not  been  ii 
party  to  this  falsification,  you  will  give  the  evidence  of  character 
which  was  submitted  its  full  weight.  I  have  said  that  thin  is 
an  anxious  case.  I  feel  it  to  be  a  painfully  anxious  ease.  To 
a  gentleman  in  Mr.  Taylor's  position  we  know  what  an  ndverso 
verdict  means.  I  feel  it  is  truly  a  matter  of  life  und  deatli. 
I  know  t<hat  if  he  leaves  this  bar  branded  by  youi-  vei<iiet  as 
guilty  of  this  crime,  time  to  him  can  bring  no  solace,  and  life 

365 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Mp.  for  him  can  retain  no  cliarm.  But  I  decline  in  this  case  to  appeal 
Mackintosh.  |-q  your  feelings,  or  to  demand  your  sympathy.  Such  appeals  may 
be  useful  in  turning  the  balance  of  a  doubtful  case;  but  here 
I  am  content  to  ask  for  simple  justice.  I  ask  you  to  be  dis- 
passionate, and  to  dismiss  from  your  minds  all  prejudice.  I 
ask  you  to  discard  all  vague  surmises,  and  all  far-fetched 
suspicions,  and  to  judge  upon  the  evidence;  and  if  you  do  so, 
I  have  no  fear  of  the  result. 

Mp.  Mr.   J.   P.   B.  Robertson  next  addressed  the  jury  on  behalf 

of  the  prisoner  Inglis.  He  urged  that  all  the  evidence  against 
his  client  which  was  of  any  value  whatever  was  contained  in 
the  minute  book  of  the  Directors'  proceedings,  and  he  pro- 
ceeded to  discuss  the  part  which,  as  revealed  in  that  book,  Mr. 
Inglis  played  in  the  management  of  the  Bank,  with  the  view 
of  showing  that,  practising,  as  he  did,  his  profession  of  the 
law  in  Edinburgh,  he  was  really  ignorant  of  the  details  about 
the  bad  accounts,  and  never  acquired  more  knowledge  about 
them  than  that  they  were  unsatisfactory,  but  not,  in  the  view 
of  his  co-Directors,  hopeless.  What  Mr.  Inglis  had  been  guilty 
of  was,  as  he  himself  said,  "  the  most  entire  confidence  in  every 
statement  and  every  figure  that  was  laid  before  him."  Guilty 
of  that,  guilty  of  remissness — the  consequences  of  which  to  his 
friends  must  have  been  so  stupendous  that  it  must  cast  a 
shadow  upon  the  remainder  of  his  life — guilty  of  that;  but  of 
falsehood  and  fraud,  of  any  crime  contained  in  that  indictment 
of  sin  against  honour,  or  an  offence  against  the  law,  not  guilty. 

Mp.  Smith.  Mr.  Guthrie  Smith  spoke  in  defence  of  the  prisoner  John 
Innes  Wright.  He  regretted  for  Mr.  Wright's  own  sake  that 
that  gentleman  had  not  refused  the  invitation  to  join  the 
Directorate  of  the  Bank  in  1875;  but  he  argued  that  Mr. 
Wright  was  entirely  ignorant  of  the  state  of  the  Bank  when 
he  joined  it;  that  he  remained  in  that  ignorance  throughout; 
that  he  had  no  personal  motive  in  becoming  a  Director,  as  he 
had  no  overdraft  on  his  account,  and  that  of  his  firm  was  in 
fact  gradually  diminishing;  and  that  the  large  credits  advanced 
to  his  firm  were  arranged  by  Mr.  Scott,  and  were  in  that 
gentleman's  knowledge  only,  as  he  had  the  management  of  the 
finance  department  of  Mr.  Wright's  firm.  There  is  nothing 
that  I  can  see  (said  Mr.  Smith)  from  beginning  to  end  connect- 
ing Mr.  Wright  in  any  way  with  the  administration  beyond  this, 
that  he  attended  Directors'  meetings ;  and  you  are  asked  to  say, 
upon  the  most  shadowy  evidence,  that,  having  a  seat  at  the 
Board,  he  had  there  the  means  of  acquiring  information  which 
he  failed  to  use.  In  a  serious  charge  of  this  kind  that,  in  my 
humble  opinion,  is  not  sufficient.  It  is  insufficient  to  convict 
him  of  guilty  knowledge.  It  certainly  cannot  be  alleged  against 
Mr.  Wright  that  there  was  any  intention  to  commit  the  serious 

366 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


crime  that   is  here  laid  to  his  charge.     All  through   life   his  Mr.  Smith, 
character   has   been   entirely   without   reproach ;   and   therefore, 
gentlemen,  without  fatiguing  you  further  at  this  late  hour  of 
the  evening,  I  confidently  submit  that,  so  far  as  Mr.  Wright  is 
concerned,  the  evidence  wholly  fails. 

The   Dean   of   Faculty   (Mr.    Frasbr)   proceeded   to   address  Mr.  Fraser. 
the  jury  on   behalf  of  the  prisoner   Stronach,   the   Manager   of 
the  Bank.     At  the  outset  he  complained  bitterly  of  the  conduct 
of   the   prosecution   in   bringing   charges   of   embezzlement    and 
theft  against  the  Directors,  and  then  withdrawing  them  after 
they    had    served    their    purpovse.      On    these    two    charges    he 
insisted  on  the  jury  pronouncing  a  verdict — a  verdict  of  "  not 
guilty."       The    needless    imprisonment    of    the    Directors    had 
prevented  counsel  getting  at  the  facts  of  the  case,  or  learning, 
until  they  heard  the  figures  from  the  accountant  for  the  Crown, 
what  was   the   misstatement  of  which   they  were  accused;   and 
if  their  counsel  failed   in   satisfying  the  jury  as  to  the  entire 
innocence   of   these   men    of   all   intent   to    defraud,   he   begged 
them   to   make   allowance    for   the   disadvantages    to   which    he 
referred.     The  learned  Dean  then   proceeded  to  deal  witli   the 
evidence  as  it  affected  Mr.   Stronach,   whose  brother  had  been 
Manager  of  the  Bank,  and  who  was  apparently  a  man  of  great 
energy   and    ability.      He    had    conducted    the    business    of   the 
Bank   from   the  period  of   Mr.    Salmond's   resignation  down    to 
1875.     Robert  was  a  clerk  in  the  Bank  when  his  brother's  illness 
came    on — an    illness   caused   by   the   anxiety   of   two   or   three 
large  accounts.     He  breaks  entirely  down,  and  retires.     Robert 
was  asked  to  take  his  place,  and  did  so  apparently  from  fraternal 
affection  rather  tlian  from  love  of  office.      And  then  he  became 
acquainted   with   the   position   of  certain   accounts,   which   have 
been  so  often  referred  to.     He  hesitated  to  take  the  duties  of 
a  position  so  full  of  anxiety;  but  at  last,  through  the  entreaties 
of    some   and    the    remonstrances   of    others,    he    is    induced    to 
accept  the  appointment,  after  getting  the  promise  from  Morton 
that  he  would  reduce  his  account  by  a  payment  of  .£100,000. 
But  he  is  still  in  great  anxiety;  and  ho  writes  two  lettcis   to 
the   Directors   in   answer   to   their   offer — the   second   of   which 
was  preserved  in  the  Directors'  minute  book.     In  the  meantime 
Stronach  steadfastly  refused  to  advance  a  sixpence  on  his  own 
responsibility;   and  the  fact  applied  to   the   other  prisoners  iis 
well  as  to  him,  that  from  the  time  of  his  appointnjeut  nothing 
was  advanced  to  Morton,  to  Nicol  Fleming,  or  to  Smith,  Flem- 
ing &  Co.,  except  upon  good,  tangible  security.     The   Dean  of 
Faculty  therefore  held  that  the  Lord  Advocate's  remark  about 
Stronach's  unwillingness  to  advance  a  little  money  to  some  poor 
fellow  in   the  country,  while  he  was  pouring  it  out   like  water 
to  these  firms,  was  unfair  and  unfounded.     With   lo'jraicl  to  the 
Australian    and    New    Zealand    land    speculations,    it    inusl    be 

367 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Mr.  Fraser.  remembered  that  Stronach  had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with 
them;  but  at  the  same  time  he  saw  nothing  in  those  invest- 
ments that  was  not  legitimate,  and  the  evidence  had  been 
to  the  effect  that  they  were  exceedingly  wise  investments,  and 
likely  to  prove  the  most  valuable  asset  held  by  the  liquidators 
of  the  Bank.  Coming  to  the  question  of  the  balance  sheets, 
the  learned  counsel  asked  if  there  was  any  evidence  to  show, 
not  that  they  were  false,  but  that  they  had  been  falsified  by 
the  accused  for  purposes  of  fraud.  It  must,  in  the  first  place, 
be  borne  in  mind  that  these  balance  sheets  were  the  work  of 
Mr.  Morison,  the  accountant  of  the  Bank,  and  the  prima  facit 
responsibility  for  them  must  rest  on  their  author.  The  Dean 
of  Faculty  went  on  to  analyse  Morison's  evidence,  and  to  trace 
from  the  lithographed  scroll  abstract  of  1876  what  he  said  was 
the  method  on  which  Morison  had  gone  to  work  in  the  altera- 
tions he  made.  Those  alterations  were  made  by  him  only,  and 
he  was  telling  an  untruth  when  he  said  that  everything  he  did 
was  by  the  direction  of  others.  He  was  afraid  that  he  might 
get  into  trouble  himself,  and  so  he  laid  it  all  on  the  Manager. 
After  urging  that  Morison  was  unworthy  of  belief,  the  Dean 
of  Faculty  said  the  next  question  was  whether,  even  if  they 
held  Stronach  responsible  for  all  these  alterations,  the  balance 
sheets  were  actually  false.  The  accountants  called  for  the  Crown 
said  they  were;  they  glibly  rattled  off  the  figures  of  what  they 
called  under-statements  and  over-statements ;  but  what  it  all 
came  to  was  this,  that  what  was  called  a  fraud  was  simply  a 
system  which  did  not  commend  itself  to  the  enlightened  and 
impartial  mind  of  Mr.  Muir.  He  proceeded  to  contend  that 
the  system  followed  in  the  Bank  was  simply  that  of  entering 
the  balance  for  or  against  the  Bank  under  each  separate  head 
of  account,  instead  of  entering  the  whole  amount  of  the  assets 
on  the  one  side  and  of  the  liabilities  on  the  other.  In  order 
to  establish  this  contention,  the  learned  counsel  quoted  numerous 
figures  from  the  balance  sheet,  and  argued  that  the  charges  of 
under-statement  were  quite  incorrect,  because  all  that  had  been 
done  had  been  to  deduct  the  sum  due  to  the  Bank  from  the 
sum  owing  by  it  on  each  account,  or  vice  versa,  and  bring  out 
in  the  balance  sheets  simply  the  net  result.  The  evidence  of 
the  Crown  accountants  with  regard  to  these  entries  he  charac- 
terised as  "  one  of  the  most  audacious  pieces  of  impudence  that 
he  ever  heard  attempted  by  skilled  witnesses."  With  regard  to 
the  item  of  £973,300,  it  had  been  put  aside  by  Alexander  Stronach 
as  a  sum  that  was  absolutely  secured,  and  all  the  accused  did 
about  it  was  to  go  on  treating  it  as  it  had  been  treated  for  years 
before.  They  had  no  intention  of  concealing  it  from  the  public, 
or  mis-stating  it  with  intent  to  defraud.  As  to  the  bringing 
down  of  certain  items  from  the  heading  of  credit  advances  to 
Morton  k  Co.,  Nicol  Fleming,  and  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  and 
placing  them  under  the  head  of  Government  and  other  securi- 

368 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


ties,  thev  had  only  Mr.  Morison's  explanation  as  to  how  that  was  Mr.  Fraser. 
done ;  but,  however  it  was  done,  Morison  himself  evidently 
regarded  it  as  a  proper  thing  to  do,  and  he  (the  Dean  of  Faculty) 
could  not  for  the  life  of  him  see  there  was  anything  wrong, 
and  at  all  events  it  was  perfectly  capable  of  an  innocent  inter- 
pretation. Then  with  regard  to  the  crediting  of  interest  on 
the  accounts  of  the  three  firms,  he  argued  that  the  Directors 
were  perfectly  warranted  in  doing  so — that  they  were  hopeful 
that  these  accounts  would  ultimately  turn  out  all  right ;  and, 
besides,  the  accused  could  not  be  convicted  of  fraud  because 
they  were  too  hopeful.  In  conclusion  the  learned  Dean  said — 
Mr.  Stronach  was  not  a  man  like  any  of  the  other  gentlemen 
at  the  bar.  He  was  not  a  merchant  with  vast  connections  in 
every  country  in  the  globe,  but  he  occupied  the  humbler  position 
of  an  official  with  this  Bank.  His  own  fortune  when  he  became 
a  shareholder  was,  as  was  stated  yesterday,  £11,000;  and  he 
loses  everything ;  but  he  must  submit  to  that  like  every  person 
involved  in  this  vast  calamity.  Notwithstanding  the  misery 
caused  by  the  collapse  of  this  Bank,  you  are  not  entitled  to 
intensify  its  horrors,  as  you  would  do  by  a  conviction  for  crime 
where  there  was  nothing  criminal.  It  would  not  be  asserting 
rational  justice,  but  giving  vent  to  the  wild  fury  of  exasperated 
feeling.  The  calamity  is  one  which  includes  the  largeness  of 
national  and  the  individuality  of  private  interests ;  and  certainly 
it  would  be  a  sad  thing  if  one  had  to  say  that  a  verdict  was 
delivered  against  these  men,  whose  conduct  when  analysed  was 
compatible  with  the  purest  innocence,  and  which,  I  think,  is 
incompatible  with,  and  cannot  be  construed  into  anything  like 
guilt.  I  do  not  ask  you  to  rise  above  the  prejudices  of  society, 
not  to  put  into  your  verdict  the  exasperated  feelings  that 
may  arise  from  the  misfortunes  that  have  overtaken  the  share- 
holders in  this  Bank — the  jury  are  men  under  rational  influences 
and  positive  habits  of  thought — I  do  not  ask  you  to  do  more 
than  this — to  give  a  fair  consideration  to  what  I  have  now  laid 
before  you,  and  the  analysis  I  have  made  of  the  charges  brouglit 
by  the  Lord  Advocate  in  these  various  particulars.  I  du  nut 
go  into  the  years  1877  and  1878,  because  they  are  upon  the 
same  lines,  and  are  capable  of  tlie  same  explanations  as  the 
year  I  have  treated.  But  I  think  I  have  done  enougli  to  show 
that  if  there  is  anything  chargeable  against  me,  it  is  not  the 
oflfence  of  falsifying  a  balance  sheet,  but  simply  the  offence  of 
making  up  that  balance  sheet  upon  a  wrong  system,  or  nt-cord- 
ing  to  principles  not  approved  by  the  prosecution. 


lA  369 


CHAPTER     XII. 
Justieercierk.  The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

Gentlemen  of  the  jury, — We  are  now  nearing  the  close  of  this 
very  long,  painful,  and  important  investigation.  It  has  occupied 
a  time,  I  believe,  unexampled  in  the  annals  of  this  Court,  as  the 
occasion  of  it  is  without  precedent  in  the  history  of  the  country. 
You  have  listened  with  attention,  and  have  directed  your  minds 
and  intelligence  to  evidence  from  witnesses  lasting  over  this  long 
time,  and  you  have  had  your  attention  called  to  a  great  variety  of 
documents,  accounts,  figures,  balances,  and  results,  which  during 
that  long  period  cannot  fail  to  have  perplexed  you,  as  I  must  own 
they  have  perplexed  me,  and  to  leave  you  in  considerable  doubt 
as  to  what  the  result  of  the  investigation  was.  I  am  glad,  how- 
ever, to  think  that,  as  the  case  went  on,  and  with  the  assistance 
of  addresses  from  the  bar  on  both  sides,  of  which  I  can  only  say 
that  they  were  well  worthy  of  the  renown  of  the  body  to  which 
those  gentlemen  belong,  and  well  worthy  of  the  occasion  on  which 
they  were  delivered — I  am  glad,  I  say,  to  think,  now  we  have 
really  approached  the  kernel  of  the  question  which  is  at  issue 
before  you,  that  I  shall  be  able,  within  a  reasonable  compass,  to 
winnow  the  case  from  a  good  deal  of  those  surroundings  which 
served  to  make  it  more  intricate  than  it  need  have  been,  and  to 
present  for  your  consideration  a  few  simple  questions  of  fact 
which  it  remains  for  you  to  determine. 

Something  has  been  said  by  the  counsel  for  the  prisoners  at  the 
bar — not  too  much  nor  too  urgently  pressed — on  two  topics  that 
cannot  fail  to  be  present  to  your  minds.  In  the  first  place,  the 
country  is  suffering  under  a  great  and  unexampled  calamity. 
This  fabric,  this  joint-stock  company  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank, 
has  met  with  an  overwhelming  catastrophe.  Hundreds  of  families 
have  been  reduced  from  affluence  or  competence  to  poverty,  and 
it  is  not  wonderful  that  the  feeling  to  which  the  learned  counsel 
have  alluded  should  have  prevailed  in  many  quarters,  viz.,  a 
desire  that  the  conduct  of  those  in  whose  hands  the  calamity 
occurred,  and  under  whose  administration  the  institution  was 
brought  to  ruin,  should  become  the  subject  of  judicial  inquiry. 
That  has  been  done.  The  inquiry  has  been  full,  and,  as  far 
as  the  Crown  authorities  could  make  it,  complete.  The  whole 
facts  connected  with  this  most  lamentable  affair  are  now  before 
you,  and  your  verdict  on  it,  whatever  it  may  be,  will  undoubtedly 

370 


Photo.]  t-^-  tIorKhur,jh. 

Lord  Justice-Clerk  (Lord  Moncreiff). 


The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

command  the  respect  to  which  it  is  entitled.  On  the  other  hand,  Lord 
gentlemen,  there  is  no  doubt  that  very  large  issues  personal  to  J"*i'ce-Clerk. 
the  prisoners  at  the  bar  are  in  your  hands.  They  are  placed 
there — persons  who  have,  during  a  long  life,  held  a  high  position, 
enjoying  the  respect  and  confidence  of  their  friends  and  the  com- 
munity— placed  now  in  hazard  of  fame  and  fortune,  and  position, 
and  good  name,  and  liberty.  These  are  the  issues,  no  doubt, 
which  depend  upon  your  verdict.  But,  gentlemen,  I  have  men- 
tioned these  things,  as  you  may  well  suppose,  for  the  purpose  of 
your  laying  them  entirely  aside.  What  may  be  thought  of  our 
proceedings,  what  may  be  thought  of  your  verdict  out  of  doors, 
can  be  of  no  moment  whatever  either  to  you  or  to  me.  We  are 
to  deal  with  this  case  as  if  there  were  no  such  external  surround- 
ings, simply  as  a  matter  of  proof  and  evidence,  and  to  deal  with 
it  as  we  should  with  a  case  which  excited  no  interest  or  sympathy 
in  any  quarter.  Whether  it  be  the  one  consideration  or  the  other, 
they  are  equally  foreign  to  the  walls  wherein  we  sit.  We  know 
of  no  such  consideration  save  this,  that  the  momentous  issue 
which  is  now  before  you  must  lead  you,  as  it  will  lead  me,  to 
weigh  still  more  scrupulously  the  facts  that  have  been  proved  in 
the  scales  of  even-handed  justice,  and  to  discard  from  nur  con- 
sideration every  other  topic. 

Now,  having  said  so  much,  let  me  commence  my  remarks  by 
referring  you  to  the  questions  that  are  raised  in  this  indictment.  . 
It  is  an  indictment  which  substantially  contains  three  branches  of 
imputation  against  the  prisoners  at  the  bar.  The  prisoners  are 
the  Directors  and  the  Manager  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  ; 
and  it  was  originally  alleged  against  them,  first,  that  they  had 
fabricated  and  falsified  on  three  several  occasions  the  balance 
sheet  for  the  year  which  they  issued  to  the  shaieholders  of  the 
Bank — that  they  had  done  so  in  certain  particulars  which  arc 
specified  in  the  indictment.  The  second  charge  which  the 
indictment  contained  was  one  directed  against  certain  of  the 
individual  prisoners  ;  and  it  was  said  that  they,  being  Directors, 
had  availed  themselves  of  their  position  as  Directors  to  obtain 
advances  from  tlie  Bank  in  breach  of  their  trust,  and  had  em- 
bezzled the  amount.  The  third  charge  was  a  charge  of  fhofi.  for 
having  improperly  taken  possession  of  bill;;  sent  to  them  for  col- 
lection, and  used  them  for  the  i)urpose  of  paying  the  debts  of  the 
Bank.  Gentlemen,  doubtless  in  any  view  which  can  betaken  of 
it,  these  were  very  serious  imptitations  indeed.  Ilnwcvcr,  the 
Lord  Advocate,  although  we  had  sustainwl  the  relevancy  of  these 
two  charges — and  I  need  not  go  back  to  the  views  wliich  were 
then  expressed — after  the  evidence  had  b«vn  led,  and  lookinL'  fo 
the  facts  at  his  command,  and  the  expression  of  oiiinioii  wliich  fell 
from  us,  came  to  the  conclusion  that  his  duty  would  be  sutVicIently 
discharged  by  abandoning  the  second  and  third  cliHrgi>s,  and 
confining  his  attention  and  yours  to  the  three  charges  of  fabri 

371 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord         eating  these  balance  sheets.       Something,  gentlemen,  has  been 
Justice-Clerk,  gg^j^j  regarding  the  course  so  followed  by  the  public  prosecutor. 
On  that  I  have  not  a  single  remark  to  make.       I  have  made  it 
a  rule  from  the  bench  never  to  form  a  judgment  on  the  course 
followed  by  the  public  prosecutor  in  the  exercise  of  the  discretion 
which  the  law  vests  in  him,  for  this  simple  reason,  that  the  Court 
are  not  in  possession  of  the  information  which  would  be  necessary 
to  form  a  judgment  on  that  matter,  and  that  the  Lord  Advocate 
exercises  his  discretion  under  a  sense  of  his  public  responsibility, 
and  may  always  be  made  responsible,  although  not  to  this  Court. 
I  cannot  doubt,  and  I  assume  that  the  grounds  on  which  the  Lord 
Advocate  proceeded  were  grounds  which,  to  his  mind,  were  satis- 
factory.      He  is  quite  able  to  form  an  opinion,  and  quite  able  to 
maintain  it ;    and   therefore,   gentlemen,  I  don't  make  a   single 
remark  on  the  course  which  has  been  followed,  excepting  to  draw 
your  attention  to  the  fact  that  these  two  charges  of  embezzlement 
and  theft  are  no  longer  presented  to  you  for  your  consideration. 
Laying,  therefore,  that  matter  aside,  and  addressing  ourselves 
to  the  questions  that  are  raised  under  the  three  charges,  viz.,  the 
charges  of  falsifying  the  balance  sheets  for  the  years  1876,  1877, 
and   1878,  you  will   observe   still  further  that  the  Crown  have 
departed  from  the  eighth  head  of  the  alleged  falsification.       The 
falsifications  are  alleged  to  have  taken  place  in  regard  to  eight 
specific  sums.       The  last  of  these  ran  originally  in  this  form — 
"  Bad  and  irrecoverable  debts  to  an  amount  far  exceeding  the 
whole  capital  stock  of  the  Bank  were  included  under  article  1 
on  the  creditor  side,   and  so  treated  as  subsisting  and  available 
assets  of  the  company."       That  item  has  been  struck  out,  and  the 
effect  of  that  I  may  have  occasion  to  say  a  word  upon  by  and  by. 
Now,  gentlemen,  you  will  observe  that  the  charge  which  is 
made  against  these  Directors  and  the  Manager  is  "  that  you  did, 
all  and  each  or  one  or  more  of  you,  wickedly  and  feloniously,  with 
intent  to  defraud  the  members   of  the  said  company  and  the 
|)ublic.     for  the  purpose  of  concealing  and  misrepresenting  the 
true  state  of  affairs  of  the  company,  concoct  and  fabricate,   or 
cause  or  procure  to  be  concocted  and   fabricated,   a  false  and 
fictitious  abstract  balance  sheet  or  statement  of  affairs  "  ;   then 
follows  the  statement  of  affairs  on  page  3  ;  and  then,  after  the 
specification  of  the  particulars,  in  which  it  is  said  that  the  balance 
sheet  was  false,   it  is  set  out  farther  that  "  the  said  prisoners 
did  each,  with  intent  to  defraud,  use  and  utter  the  said  false  and 
fabricated  abstract  balance  sheet  or  statement  of  affairs  as  true, 
well  knowing  it  to  be  false  and  fabricated,  and  for  the  purpose  of 
concealing  and  misrepresenting  the  true  state  of  the  said  com- 
pany's   affairs."        There  is   a   similar  charge  in   regard  to  the 
balance  sheets  of  1877  and  1878,  but  I  need  not  go  over  it  in 
detail. 
Now,  gentlemen,  that  being  the  state  of  matters,  there  are  three 

372 


The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

questions  that  arise  on  each  of  these  three  charges,  and  vou  must  Lord 

keep  them  clearly  and  distinctly  in  mind — first,  whether  iht-se  Jusilce-Clerk. 
balance  sheets  are  false  ;  secondly,  whether  the  prisoners,  each  of 
them  or  any  of  them,  was  in  the  knowledge  that  they  were  false  ; 
and  thirdly,  whether  what  they  did  with  the  balance  sheet — 
namely,  the  circulation  and  publication  of  the  report  with  the 
balance  sheet — was  with  the  intention  of  deceiving  the  share- 
holders and  the  public.  These  are  three  matters  that  will  require 
to  be  very  carefully  kept  in  mind,  and  kept  separate,  during  the 
whole  course  of  the  inquiiy  into  which  I  now  shortly  propose  to 
lead  you. 

But  upon  these  three  heads  I  shall  make  these  general  remarks. 
The  prisoners  at  the  bar  are  the  Directors  and  the  Manager  of  a 
joint-stock  bank.  You  have  heard  a  good  deal  about  what  the 
duties  of  a  Director  of  such  an  institution  are  :  and  from  the  views 
that  were  quoted  to  you  by  my  learned  friend  Mr.  Trayner  as 
having  been  expressed  by  the  Court  in  former  cases  1  have  nothing 
to  suggest  in  the  way  of  dissent.  A  Director  is  generally  a  man 
who  has  other  avocations  to  attend  to.  He  is  not  a  professional 
banker.  He  is  not  expected  to  do  the  duty  of  a  professional 
banker,  as  we  all  know.  He  is  a  man  selected  from  his  position, 
from  his  character,  from  the  influence  he  may  bring  to  be«r  upon 
the  welfare  of  the  bank,  and  from  the  trust  and  confidence  which 
are  reposed  in  his  integrity  and  in  his  general  ability.  But  I 
need  not  say  that  it  is  no  part  of  his  duty  to  take  charge  of  the 
accounts  of  the  bank.  He  is  entitled  to  trust  the  officials  of  tho 
bank  who  are  there  for  that  purpose,  and  as  long  as  he  has  no 
reason  to  suspect  the  integrity  of  the  officials,  it  can  be  no  matter 
of  imputation  to  him  that  he  trusts  to  the  statements  of  the 
officials  of  the  bank  acting  within  the  proper  duties  of  the  depart- 
ment which  has  been  entrusted  to  them.  You  may  assuujc  that. 
It  will  not,  however,  follow  from  that,  that  where  special  circum- 
stances arise  to  bring  under  the  notice  of  the  directors  particular 
interests  connected  with  the  joint  stock  company  tliore  may  not 
ensue  an  obligation  of  inquiiy  and  an  obligation  of  action  which 
might  not  be  necessarily  infen-ed  from  the  nature  of  ilie  position 
which  they  hold.  We  must  look  this  matter  plainly  in  the  face 
as  it  actually  occurs  in  practical  life,  neinark  li;is  liccii  inadoon 
the  amounts — the  extraordinary  amounts — disclosed  in  tliis  case 
— amounts  that  take  one's  breath  away  as  applied  to  ordinary 
commercial  concerns ;  but  we  must  not  assume  that  in  tho  incep- 
tion of  the  sad  history  which  we  have  had  detailed  here  during 
the  last  fortnight  there  was  anything  abnormal  whatever.  (Jreat 
mercantile  success  necessarily  produces  great  mercantile  trniiKnc- 
tions.  Where  you  have  merchants  who  count  their  jirofii.^  f)y 
a  hundred  thousand  pounds  a  year  they,  of  course,  must  liav.-  the 
same  banking  facilities  that  a  man  requires  who  only  counts  them 
by  a  thousand.       The  proportion  will  be  larirer,  but  the  nature  of 

373 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  them  will  be  precisely  the  same  ;  and  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  a 
Fustiee-Clerk.  ^^nk  that  secures  for  its  customers  persons  in  that  enormous 
scale  of  business  also  secures  for  its  shareholders  unusually  large 
profits.  But  then,  gentlemen,  with  the  magnitude  of  the  trans- 
actions there  comes  a  magnitude  of  danger  also,  for  the  mer- 
chant, although  on  that  large  scale,  is  subject,  of  course,  to  those 
fluctuations  that  have  the  effect  of  tying  up  a  man's  money 
temporarily,  and  depriving  him  of  the  use  of  it  that  he  expected, 
and  for  these  temporary  occasions,  of  course,  the  millionaire,  as 
well  as  the  poorer  merchant,  requires  or  requests  from  those  with 
whom  he  does  his  monetary  transactions  temporaiy  assistance, 
and  he  gets  it,  with  security  that  is  reckoned  to  be,  and  is  properly 
valued  at,  quite  sufficient  to  keep  the  bank  safe.  But  then, 
gentlemen,  comes  the  crash.  A  war,  a  famine,  a  drought,  a 
strike  may  make  the  whole  of  that  edifice  tumble  down.  The 
debt  and  the  security  go  together.  What  is  the  bank  to  do'/ 
Then  it  is  that  the  unprofessional  Director  finds  himself  face  to 
face  with  an  emergency  which,  beyond  all  question,  it  is  difficult 
and  hard  to  meet.  The  question  for  him  then  is,  is  he  to  bring  the 
bank  down  by  bringing  down  the  debtor,  or  is  he  to  carry  on  the 
debtor  in  the  hope  of  the  vessel  getting  into  calmer  water  and 
righting  herself  in  a  smoother  sea  ?  We  all  know  that  that  kind 
of  question  has  been  presented  too  often  in  our  commercial 
experience.  But,  gentlemen,  there  is  one  rule  which  a  Director 
is  bound  to  follow.  In  that,  as  in  every  case,  honesty  is  the  only 
policy,  and  neither  the  interests  of  the  shareholders  nor  the 
chances  of  recovering  the  debt,  nor  any  of  those  considerations 
which  doubtless,  when  one  is  in  the  middle  of  them,  seem  to  be 
almost  overwhelming,  can  for  a  moment  justify  or  excuse  or  palli- 
ate the  deliberate  statement  of  what  is  known  to  be  false. 
I  will  not  say  what  course  the  Directors  of  this  institution 
could  or  might  have  followed.  All  I  can  say  is,  that,  whatever 
their  difficulties  and  whatever  their  temptations,  there  is  nothing 
in  the  circumstances  in  which  they  were  placed  which  can  in  the 
least  degree  palliate  the  offence  with  which  they  are  charged  if  in 
reality  they  are  found  to  be  guilty  of  it.  So  much,  gentlemen, 
for  the  offence. 

Secondly,  as  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Directors — as  to  their 
knowledge  that  these  balance  sheets  were  fabricated.  Now,  what 
the  prosecutor  has  undertaken  to  prove,  and  says  that  he  has 
proved,  is  not  that  these  Directors  were  bound  to  know  the  falsity 
of  the  statements  in  the  balance  sheets — not  that  they  lay  under 
obligations  to  know  it,  not  that  they  had  the  means  of  knowledge 
— but  that,  in  point  of  fact,  they  did  know  it ;  and  that  is  what 
you  must  find  before  you  can  convict  the  prisoners  of  any  part  of 
the  offences  attributed  to  them.  You  must  be  able  to  affirm  in 
point  of  fact,  not  that  they  had  a  duty  and  neglected  it,  not 
that  they  had  the  means  of  information  within  their  power  and 

374 


The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

failed  to  use  them,   but  that,   as  a  matter  of   fact,   when  that  Lord 

balance  sheet  was  issued  they  knew  that  the  statements  contained  Jui^'ce-CIepk. 
in  it  were  false.  I  say  that,  because  there  has  been  some 
phraseKjlogy  used  in  the  course  of  this  trial  that  would  seem  to 
indicate  that  a  constructive  knowledge  was  all  that  was  required 
for  such  a  case.  Constructive  knowledge  might  be  quite  suffi- 
cient if  we  were  dealing  here  simply  with  an  action  for  civil  debt 
or  civil  reparation  ;  for  what  a  man  is  bound  to  know  he  shall  he 
held  to  have  known.  But  that  has  no  place  at  all  when  a  man 
is  charged  with  crime.  His  crime  is  his  guilty  knowledge,  and 
nothing  else.  He  is  charged  with  i)ersonal  dishonesty,  and  you 
must  be  able  to  afl^rm  that  on  the  evidence  before  you  can  convict 
him.  But  while  I  say  that,  gentlemen,  I  by  no  means  mean 
to  say  that  the  knowledge  which  you  must  find  must  nece«.sarily 
be  deduced  from  direct  evidence  of  it.  You  are  not  entitled  to 
assume  it ;  but  you  are  entitled  to  infer  that  fact,  as  you  are 
entitled  to  infer  any  other  fact,  from  facts  and  circumstances 
which  show  and  caiTy  to  your  mind  the  conviction  that  the  man 
when  he  circulated,  or  when  he  made  that  balance  sheet,  knew 
that  it  was  false.  You  must  be  quite  satisfied,  however,  before 
you  can  draw  tliat  conclusion,  not  merely  that  it  is  prol)al)lf,  or 
likely,  or  possible  that  he  knew,  but  that  he  did.  in  point  of  fact, 
know  the  falsehood  of  which  he  is  accused. 

Then,  gentlemen,  lastly,  on  the  question  of  intent  or  motivo — 
the  fraudulent  use  only  of  this  document,  for  that  is  of  the  essence 
of  the  crime — it  is  said  to  have  been  issued  and  circulated  for 
the  purpose  of  deceiving  the  shareholders  and  the  public  as  to 
the  true  state  of  the  Bank.  Of  that  you  must  also  be  satisfied  ; 
for  it  would  be  of  no  moment  that  these  statements  were  not  in 
themselves  accurate,  unless  they  were  put  there  for  a  fraudulent 
and  dishonest  purpose.  It  may  be  suggested  that  the  ond 
which  the  Directoi-s  intended  to  serve  was  not  to  injure  any  one ; 
that  their  real  object  was  in  the  meantime  to  keep  the  Hank 
afloat,  until  better  times  should  relieve  their  securiti(*s  and  their 
debtors,  and  enable  them  to  pay  their  way.  Gentlemen,  I  have 
to  tell  you  that,  so  far  from  that  l>eing  a  sufficient  defence,  it  is 
exactly  the  offence  and  the  motive  descril)ed  in  the  indictment, 
because  if  they  intended  to  givn  the  Bank  breathing  time  by 
inducing  the  shareliolders  to  imagine  it  was  more  prospc>nius 
than  it  was,  then  that  is  precisely  the  intent  to  deceive  which  is 
libelled  in  the  indictment,  for  they  put  in  haziird  <>xa((Iy  'h»» 
same  interests  which  would  have  been  imperilled  if  they  had  been 
actuated  by  the  strongest  and  most  malignant  motive.  The 
men  who  were  induced  to  hold  on  and  tlio  men  who  were  indiictxi 
to  buy  are  just  ruined  precisely  as  they  would  have  biM-n  if  that 
had  been  the  result  intended  by  the  Directors.  Did  they  moan 
to  deceive?  If  they  mean)  to  represent  the  Bank  as  being 
in  a  more  prosperous  condition  than  it  was,  and  if  (hey  mnnnr 

375 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  the  shareholders  to  believe  that,  then  they  intended  to  run  the 

stice-CIerk.  j.^^]^  ^f  ^^  ^^^  results  that  might  follow  from  that  deception. 
And,  accordingly,  I  could  not  certainly  say  to  you  that  even  if 
you  were  satisfied  that  that  was  the  real  object  which  the 
Directors  had  in  view,  it  would  tend  in  the  slightest  degree  to 
take  off  from  the  motive  or  intent  that  is  here  libelled.  On 
the  other  hand,  you  must  be  quite  satisfied  that  there  was  an 
intention  to  deceive  on  the  part,  of  the  prisoners  before  you  can 
find  them  guilty^  And,  gentlemen,  to  conclude  these  general 
remarks,  I  can  only  say  that  the  offence  with  which  they  are 
charged  is  not  only  a  crime — not  only  comes  within  the  compass 
of  the  criminal  law,  but,  if  deliberately  committed,  is  in  truth  a 
crime  of  very  great  magnitude.  I  need  not  say  that  the  larger 
the  interests  committed  to  their  charge  the  more  they  were 
bound  to  absolutely  honest  administration. 

And,  gentlemen,  having  said  those  things,  let  us  now  turn  to 
the  first  of  these  balance  sheets.  And  first,  as  to  the  falsehood. 
1  have  endeavoured,  as  far  as  I  could,  by  assiduous  attention  to 
the  evidence  while  it  was  being  delivered,  and  also  by  devoting 
such  spare  time  as  I  could  to  the  comprehension  of  it,  to  arrive 
at  some  clear  and  definite  result  upon  the  figures  submitted  to 
you,  and  the  arguments  that  have  been  raised  upon  them.  I  am 
not  by  any  means  confident  that  I  have  succeeded  in  that  task ; 
and  I  am  the  less  solicitous  about  it  because  I  have  no  doubt  at 
all  that  there  are  those  of  your  number  who  are  not  unaccus- 
tomed to  inquiries  of  this  kind,  or  at  least  to  deal  with  figures  of 
a  somewhat  analogous  kind.  But  it  seems  to  me  that  the  result 
of  the  evidence  which  we  have  has  now  reduced  this  case  to  a 
very  simple  issue.  Mr.  Muir  made  out  some  states  showing 
the  results  of  his  evidence  in  regard  to  the  different  balance 
sheets,  and  I  have  requested  that  copies  should  be  made  for  the 
jury,  because  it  will  greatly  shorten  my  exposition  of  the  evidence 
in  regard  to  that  matter,  and  will  show  you  at  a  glance  the  result 
of  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Muir  in  regard  to  the  alleged  falsification 
of  the  balance  sheets.  There  are  three  of  them — one  applicable 
to  each  year.  I  intended  them,  however,  more  to  assist  your 
private  deliberations  after  I  have  finished  my  remarks  than 
to  be  the  subject  of  comment  at  present.  [They  are  handed 
to  the  jury.]  These  documents  are  simply  the  result  of  Mr. 
Muir's  evidence,  and  they  show  the  alleged  over-statements 
and  the  alleged  under-statements  brought  into  a  very  clear  and 
intelligible  form. 

I  shall  begin  with  the  balance  sheet  of  1876  ;  and  first  let  me 
call  your  attention  to  what  Mr.  Morison  described  as  the  mode 
in  which  these  balance  sheets,  or  abstracts  rather,  which  are 
ultimately  reported  to  the  shareholders,  are  made  up.  The 
head  office  keeps  its  own  books — its  weekly  balance  book  and  its 
general  balance  ledger ;  and  when  a  balance  is  to  be  struck,  there 

376 


The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

is  obtained  from  the  brauches  a  statement  of  the  balances  on  Lord 
their  accounts,  and  the  accountant,  having  received  from  the  Justice-Clerk. 
-inspector  of  branches  his  statement  of  balances,  goes  over  the 
whole  and  makes  up  a  general  balance  sheet  showing  the  result 
of  the  Bank's  transactions.  In  the  balance  ledger  of  the  Bank 
these  transactions  are  entered,  showing  the  balance  on  the  year. 
He  explained  to  you  tliat  he  took  the  balance  as  appearing  upon 
the  last  weekly  balance  sheet ;  that  he  read  over  the  items  to  the 
Directors,  who  had  the  balance  ledger  before  them  ;  and  that 
they  checked  how  far  the  entries  in  the  balance  ledger  corre- 
sponded with  what  was  read  to  them  by  the  accountant,  Mr. 
Morison,  from  the  weekly  states  and  other  documents.  And 
then  that  balance  is  abstracted.  Mr.  Morison  makes  up  his 
abstract ;  he  has  it  revised,  as  he  explained,  by  the  Manager  ;  and 
then  it  is  laid  before  the  Directors  and  adopted.  The  weekly 
balance  book  contains  the  balances  at  the  head  office  from  week 
to  week — I  may  leave  the  branches  out  of  view  in  the  meantime 
— the  last  weekly  balance  is  the  one  taken  for  the  entry  of  the 
balance  in  the  balance  ledger ;  and  then  the  balance  ledger  is 
the  foundation,  but  only  the  foundation,  of  the  abstract  which  is 
laid  before  the  shareholders  of  the  Bank.  That  is  proved  to  be 
the  course  of  procedure. 

Now,  it  is  said  that  this  balance  sheet  is  defective  in  seven 
particulars,  and  those  seven  particulars  consist  of  sums  which 
are  said  to  have  been  overstated  or  understated  for  the  purpose 
of  deceiving  the  public.  I  shall,  meanwhile,  speak  of  the  tin^t 
five  of  these  sub-divisions.  The  first  is  the  amount  of  deposits, 
which  is  said  to  be  understated  by  one  million  odds  ;  the  second 
is  the  amount  of  drafts  outstanding,  which  are  said  to  be  under- 
stated ;  third,  the  amount  of  bills  of  exchange  said  to  be  under- 
stated ;  and  then  you  have  over-statements  on  the  other  side 
consisting  of  £29,000  cash  on  hand  and  £753,000  of  investments. 
Now,  you  have  had  a  long  and  anxious  inquiry,  and  a  great  deal 
of  most  acute  and  powerful  observation  on  the  items  contained  in 
these  five  articles  of  the  indictment.  But  I  am  glad,  for  your 
convenience,  to  think  that  in  the  view  which  I  take  of  this  matter 
it  will  not  be  necessary  for  me  to  dwell,  at  all  events  at  any 
length,  on  any  but  two  of  these  sums,  which  were  the  suliject  of 
dispute.  It  was  observed  from  the  bar,  and  observed  quite 
rightly  and  correctly,  that  these  alleged  over-statiMiicnts  and 
under-statements  consist  of  two  classes — one  class  is  at  variance 
with  the  books,  and  the  other  class  is  in  conformity  with 
the  books.  Now,  in  the  meantime,  if  you  please,  I  Khali  contino 
myself  entirely  to  two  of  these  alleged  mis-statements,  misrepro- 
sentations,  or  falsifications  which  are  not  in  confonnity  with  the 
books.  I  think  you  will  see  immediately  the  reason  of  that 
observation.  These  two  falsifications  or  misrepresentations  are 
two  that  you  have  heard  a  great  deal  about,  and  which   it   will 

377 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  not  be  necessary  for  me  to  explain  to  yiou  in  any  great  detaiL 

stiee-Clerk.  rjij^g  balance  sheet,  it  is  said,  contains  on  both  sides  the  sum  of 
£973,000  as  a  deduction  from  the  transactions  of  the  year.  It 
also  contains,  under  the  head  of  Government  securities,  the  sum 
of  =£751,000.  .£751,000  was  the  original  sum,  but  it  is  raised: 
to  £753,000  in  this  particular  article.  It  contains  that  sum  in- 
cluded under  Government  securities  and  other  investments, 
which  in  reality  ought  to  have  been  placed  in  the  credit  accounts. 
And  the  first  matter  that  I  shall  ask  your  attention  to — and  you 
will  find  it  to  be  one  of  very  great  moment  in  this  inquiry — is, 
putting  aside  altogether  for  the  present  the  criticism  on  the  other 
items  contained  in  these  specified  charges,  to  consider  these  two 
alleged  misrepresentations  by  themselves,  and  let  us  see  how  the 
evidence  applies  to  them. 

Gentlemen,  I  take  the  sum  of  £973,000  first ;  and  it  is  right 
that  you  should  understand  what  will  come  out  still  more  clearly 
when  I  go  to  the  other  charges,  that  the  charge  under  these  heads 
is  not  so  much  of  falsifying  results  as  of  falsifying  amounts.  The 
sides  of  the  account  will  balance  precisely  in  the  same  way  after 
the  operation,  which  was  alleged  to  be  performed,  had  been  per- 
formed as  it  would  before.  But  in  regard  to  this  £973,000, 
its  eft'ect  is  simply  this — to  represent  the  transactions  of  the  Bank 
on  floating  debt  to  be  just  a  million  less  than  it  was.  Gentle- 
men, it  is  said  that  this  sum  of  £973,000  was  introduced  into  the 
books,  and  that  it  was  to  be  found  in  the  weekly  balance  book 
and  in  the  balance  ledger  ;  and  that  is  quite  true,  and  if  that  had 
been  consistently  followed  out  it  would  have  been  a  veiy  im- 
portant fact.  But  the  main  thing  in  this  sum  of  £973,000  for 
you  to  consider — for  it  is  entirely  in  your  hands — is,  was  there 
any  truth  or  honesty  in  that  sum?  Did  it  ever  represent  any- 
thing? There  is  not  a  vestige  or  a  trace  of  it  in  the  general 
books  of  the  Bank ;  and  you  have  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Morison, 
and  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Muir,  and  the  evidence  of  every  man  who 
has  looked  at  the  books,  and  the  entire  silence  of  those  who  could 
have  cleared  it  up,  which  corroborate  beyond  all  question — at 
least  you  must  consider  whether  it  does  or  does  not — the  fact 
that  this  sum  of  £973,000,  whoever  is  responsible  for  it,  is  in 
truth  an  interpolation  without  any  substance  on  which  to  rest, 
I  shall  read  to  you  what  Mr.  Morison  says  about  it.  I  shall 
have  occasion  to  remark  upon  his  evidence  afterwards,  as  much 
comment  has  been  made  upon  it ;  but  in  the  meantime  I  shall 
refer  you  to  what  he  says  as  to  what  he  knew  about  this,  and  if 
Mr.  Morison  can  tell  us  no  more,  I  think  you  may  assume  that 
there  was  no  more  to  be  told.  He  was  asked — "  Why  was  the 
sum  of  £973,000  deducted  from  the  foreign  and  colonial  credits? 
— A.  Because  there  was  a  credit  account  to  that  extent.  Q. 
Did  you  get  instructions  from  anybody  to  deduct  it? — A.  No  ;  it 
was  in  the  ledger.     Q.  Why  did  you  put  it  in  the  ledger? — A^ 

378 


The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

In  June,  1873,  tli&re  was  an  entry  made  by  the  instruction  Lord 
of  the  late  Manager,  Mr.  Alexander  Stronach,  which  appears  J"stic«-cierk. 
in  the  book  titled  '  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Cash  Book,  jn-ivate. 
No.  6,'  extracts  from  which  are  contained  in  No.  2a.  I  made 
that  entry  ;  it  is  in  the  following  terms: — "Foreign  and  colonial 
credits  No.  2,  the  following  credits  to  be  retired  a^  they  mature, 
and  debited  under  the  respective  accounts  to  credit  a/c  No.  2, 
against  which  securities  are  now  held  by  the  Bank,  and  in  process 
of  realisation  and  payment  of  the  proceeds — £973,000.'  "  That 
entry  does  unquestionably  occur  in  the  private  ledger  which  is 
referred  to.  Mr.  Morison  proceeds — "  That  deduction  from 
foreign  and  colonial  credits  was  carried  on  in  the  books  and  in 
the  balance  sheets  from  year  to  year  thereafter  down  to  1878 
inclusive,  without  any  change  being  made.  There  was  a  note 
written  by  the  late  Manager  giving  the  particulai-s  of  that 
deduction,  but  I  never  got  the  particulars."  Then  he  is  asked— 
"Was  it  a  right  deduction?"  and  he  says,  "I  would  not  like 
to  say  so."  Now,  gentlemen,  the  fact  unquestionably  remains 
that  that  entry  having  been  made  by  Alexander  Stronach  in  1873, 
there  is  not  a  trace  in  the  books  of  any  such  sum  being  repre- 
sented by  securities  or  by  anything  else.  It  is  for  you  to  judge, 
but  the  question  is,  whether  it  was  not  a  sum  written  off  without 
there  being  anything  to  represent  it,  in  consequence  of  the  fear 
that  the  Manager  then  had  that  the  transactions  of  the  Bank 
would  be  considered  too  large  for  their  position,  and  his  anxiety 
to  reduce  the  apparent  amount.  Gentlemen,  I  am  not  desirous 
at  all  of  casting  imputations  on  the  memory  of  men  who  can 
no  longer  defend  themselves,  but  the  fact  remaining  that  nobody 
can  account  for  that  sum  of  £973,000  is  certainly  one  from  which 
you  are  entitled  to  draw  your  own  inferences.  It  is.  unfortu- 
nately, only  too  true  that  in  1873  we  have,  in  the  correspondence 
under  Alexander  Stronach's  own  hand,  the  fact  of  his  intense 
solicitude  about  the  advances  which  had  been  given,  which,  it  is 
plain  from  his  own  letters,  he  had  not  taken  the  Directors  into 
counsel  about,  for  he  says  so  in  the  plainest  terms.  You  will 
consider,  therefore,  whether  it  can  be  doubted  that  that  sum  of 
£973,000  was  not  a  correct,  but  was  a  false  deduction  from  the 
transactions  of  the  Bank.  You  will  find  it  in  the  slip  that  I 
have  given  you,  placed  on  either  side  of  the  account.  It  makes 
no  difference  at  all  upon  the  ultimate  result.  Tlie  difference  it 
does  make,  and  the  difference  intended,  according  to  the  prosecu- 
tor— it  is  for  you  to  say  if  you  adopt  it — was  to  diminish  fhe 
amount  of  the  liabilities  or  the  contingencies  of  the  Bank  by  tlie 
amount  of  £973,000.  I  say  nothing  at  this  moment  as  to  who 
is  responsible  for  that.  The  first  question  you  have  to  consider 
is,  whether  you  are  satisfied  that  thjit  is  a  false  deduction. 

The  second  question  relates  to  the  sum  of  £751,000,  which  Mr. 
Morison  says  was  taken  out  of  the  amount  of  the  credit  advances, 

379 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  and  was  inserted  in  the  balance  sheet  anions  the  Government  and 


ustiee-CIerk 


other  securities,  the  meaning  of  which  is,  according  to  the  allega- 
tion, that  it  was  taken  out  of  those  credit  advances  which  were 
dependent  for  their  realisation  on  the  debtors  to  whom  the  ad- 
vances had  been  made,  and  represented  that  sum — amounting  to 
three-quarters  of  a  million — as  being  invested  in  securities  for 
behoof  of  the  Bank.  Gentlemen,  these  are  not  indifferent  things. 
If  a  man  borrows  or  obtains  upon  overdraft  an  advance  of  one 
or  two  thousand  pounds,  that  is  one  thing  ;  if  the  Bank  invests  its 
surplus  profits  to  the  extent  of  one  or  two  thousand  pounds  in 
Government  or  other  securities,  that  is  a  totally  different  thing. 
It  is  not  an  advance  ;  it  is  a  transaction  of  an  entirely  different 
kind.  Now,  it  is  said,  and  that  you  must  assume  as  true,  for 
there  has  been  no  evidence  led  on  the  other  side  to  impugn  that 
result,  although  there  have  been  strong  comments  made  in  regard 
to  it — I  say,  assuming  that  this  ought  to  have  been  charged 
against  the  debtors  in  the  advances — that  is  to  say,  in  their 
name — as  expected  assets  coming  from  debtors  to  whom  advances 
had  been  made,  it  is  impossible  to  say  that  it  is  consistent,  with 
any  imaginable  principle  of  stating  accounts,  to  take  that  out  of 
the  account  in  which  it  stood  in  the  books,  and  to  place  it  where 
it  did  not  stand  as  a  Government  security,  or  a  security  of  any 
kind.  Nor  would  it  make  the  smallest  difference,  I  think  you 
will  be  of  opinion,  whether  security  had  been  taken  for  the  ad- 
vance or  not.  The  fact  remained  that  it  was  not  an  investment. 
That  was  not  the  banking  term  for  it,  nor  did  it  express  the 
nature  of  the  transaction.  It  was  an  advance — ^whether  an 
advance  on  security  or  an  advance  without  security  is  of  no 
moment.  It  was  under  the  right  title  in  the  books ;  it  comes 
under  the  wrong  title  in  the  balance  sheet. 

Now,  gentlemen,  it  is  for  you  to  consider  that,  and  be  satisfied 
about  it ;  but  it  has  this  element,  which  is  very  important,  that 
there  is  no  such  entry  in  the  book  under  the  account  or  the 
title  under  which  it  appears  in  the  abstract,  and  that  therefore 
the  alteration  which  was  made  on  the  abstract  makes  the  abstract 
disconform  to  the  books.  In  the  view  which  I  take  of  this  case 
that  is  most  important ;  for  it  is  one  thing  to  say,  "  You  made 
up  this  abstract  from  the  books,  but  the  books  were  wrong."  and 
quite  another  thing  to  say,  "  You  had  the  books  in  your  hand, 
and  you  deliberately  altered  what  you  found  there,  making  it  not 
only  inaccurate  itself,  but  disconform  to  the  accurate  entry  which 
you  had  before  you  when  you  made  it."  And  therefore,  gentle- 
men, upon  the  first  question,  whether  these  two  sums  of  £973,000 
and  £751,000  were  entered  falsely  in  this  balance  sheet  for  1876, 
you  will  consider  whether  the  evidence  has  satisfied  you  that  such 
was  the  fact. 

Gentlemen,  there  have  been  a  variety  of  other  sums  called  in 
question  in  this  balance  sheet,  and  after  a  good  deal  of  evidence 

380 


The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

and  a  grood  deal  of  discussion  it  has  at  last  come  to  tbit;,  that  tliesi  Lord 

sums  which  are  called  in  question  are  accurately  taken  from  tht  Jusiice-Clerk. 
books — I  mean  from  the  books  from  which  they  ought  to  have 
been  taken — the  balance  ledp^er  and  the  weekly  balances.  It 
would  have  saved  a  good  deal  of  trouble  if  it  had  been  brought 
out  a  little  more  clearly  at  first  :  but  the  complaint  really  is  this, 
that  these  are  not  balances,  but  differences,  and  that  instwid  of 
giving  the  credit  and  debit  balance  of  the  accounts  to  which  they 
relate,  more  than  one  account  is  taken,  and  they  are  set  against 
each  other,  and  where  the  Bank  is  debtor  in  one  account  and 
creditor  in  another,  then  only  the  difference  is  inserted  in  the 
balance  ledger,  instead  of  both  sides  of  the  account.  Now,  that 
is  all.  There  is  no  controversy  as  to  figures.  There  is  no  con- 
troversy as  to  the  truth  of  the  sums  in  question.  There  is  no 
controversy  that  that  is  the  balance  of  these  cross  accounts.  The 
controversy  relates  to  this,  whether  it  was  properly  entered,  not 
so  much  in  the  balance  sheet  as  in  the  balance  ledger.  Gentle- 
men, I  by  no  means  say  that  if  this  entry  in  the  balance  ledger 
was  an  erroneous  entry  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Directors,  they 
are  not  guilty  of  falsifying  the  balance  sheet  if  they  transfer  that 
erroneous  entry  to  the  balance  sheet.  But  you  will  at  once  see 
that  it  makes  a  very  different  kind  of  allegation  from  that  which 
was  the  subject  of  my  former  remarks.  It  may  be  quite  tnie — I 
think  we  are  bound  to  hold  that  it  is  true,  because  such  evidence 
as  we  have  from  Mr.  Muir  and  Mr.  Hutton  unquestionably  points 
at  that  result — that  these  balances  ought  not  to  have  been 
carried  into  the  balance  ledger  in  that  way,  but  that  both  sides 
of  the  accounts  should  have  been  taken.  That  may  have  been 
the  correct  form  of  book-keeping,  and  therefore,  if  that  was  so, 
then  you  may  say  that  to  that  extent  the  balance  sheet  does  not 
truly  represent  the  balance  which  ought  to  have  been  entered 
in  a  different  way  in  the  balance  ledger.  I  must  own,  gentleman 
— ^and  I  don't  hesitate  to  tell  you — that  I  should  have  been  much 
better  satisfied  if  the  true  nature  of  the  crime  alleged  had  been 
more  clearly  evinced  in  the  indictment,  because  in  those  cases  it 
must  be  manifest  to  you  that  the  true  falsification  was  of  the 
books  and  not  of  the  balance  sheet.  But  I  don't  think  it  neces- 
sary to  go  into  that  at  any  length,  because,  if  it  came  to  this 
question  of  book-keeping,  the  next  question  would  be.  is  there 
evidence  to  show  that  this  was  done  with  a  fraudulent  intent  ? 
and  in  order  to  ascertain  that  it  would  have  been  iitvossaiy,  in 
my  view,  to  have  shown,  not  that  in  this  particuhir  veai'  the 
abstract  balances  were  so  carried  down,  but  to  have  shown  what 
the  ordinaiy  practice  of  the  Bank  was.  and  that  it  was  depiirti><l 
from  with  an  object.  I  am  unabk>  to  judge  whether  the  crossing 
of  particular  accounts  is  or  is  not  a  jtroper  banking  operation  in 
the  balance  ledger  of  the  Bank  itself.  I  can  conceive  casos  in 
which  it  might  be  convenient  ;  but,  on  the  nthor  Ii.iiul.  it  might 

381 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 


Lord  be  the  instrument  of  great  fraud,  as  it  is  said  to  be  here.  That 
appears  to  nie  to  be  doubtful,  but  it  is  entirely  in  your  hands. 
You  may  dismiss  altogether  the  controversy  about  the  figures. 
They  are  there  at  your  hand,  and  all  I  have  to  tell  you  about 
them  is  that  these  are  the  true  balances,  or  rather  the  rectifica- 
tion of  the  two  sides  of  the  account.  And,  accordingly,  it  is 
quite  unnecessary  that  you  should  pursue  the  investigation  into 
the  figures  which  has  formed  the  subject  of  so  much  remark  from 
the  bar.  The  real  question  is  whether  you  can  say,  in  the  first 
place,  upon  the  evidence  that  you  have,  as  a  matter  that  has 
been  demonstrated  to  your  satisfaction,  that  to  carry  the  balances 
of  separate  accounts  into  the  balance  ledger,  and  not  the  two  sides 
of  the  account,  is  a  false  operation ;  and  in  the  second  place, 
whether  you  think  the  evidence  sufficient  to  show  that  that  was 
done  in  these  three  years,  with  the  fraudulent  object  of  it  bemg 
copied  by  the  accountant  of  the  Bank  into  the  balance  sheet  and 
promulgated  by  the  Directors.  The  question  of  how  far  the 
Directors  were  in  the  knowledge  of  it  relates  to  a  subsequent  part 
of  the  inquiry.  But  on  the  whole  matter,  gentlemen,  it  rather 
seems  to  me — I  don't  withdraw  it  from  your  consideration — but 
it  seems  to  me  that  it  will  lighten  your  labours,  and  really  relieve 
you  of  some  amount  of  obscurity  which  may  still  hang  over  this 
troublesome  part  of  the  case,  if  you  dismiss  it  from  your  mind. 
If  on  the  first  two  branches  which  I  have  referred  to  you  shall 
find  that  the  abstract  balance  sheet  was  falsified  to  the  extent  of 
a  million  and  three-quarters,  it  does  not  seem  to  me  that  we  need 
engage  in  book-keeping  controversies,  or  that  you  need  pay  any 
great  regard  to  these  other  less  important  items.  Some  of  them 
are  large  beyond  a  doubt  ;  but  you  will  consider  the  whole  of 
that  matter. 

Before  going  farther,  I  may  make  a  remark  on  the  two  balance 
sheets  for  1877  and  1878.  There  is  a  veiy  remarkable  entiy  in 
the  balance  sheet  for  1877  ;  and  probably  you  will  come  to  be  of 
opinion  that  it  has  a  very  strong  bearing  on  some  of  the  remarks 
which  fell  from  my  learned  friend,  the  Dean  of  Faculty,  in  his 
very  admirable  address  of  yesterday.  The  £97.3,000  does  not 
appear  on  the  balance  sheet  of  1877  ;  but  instead  of  that  there 
are  some  new  entries  which  had  never  appeared  before,  and  which 
made  up  a  sum  somewhat  larger,  amounting  to  £1,300,000. 
This  is  spoken  to  both  by  Mr.  Morison  and  by  Mr.  Muir ;  and 
they  both  say  the  same  thing  about  it ;  indeed,  you  will  find  it 
in  the  red  ink  balance  sheet  for  1877,  on  which  I  am  going  to 
say  a  word  byi  and  by.  But  Mr.  Muir  is  asked,  "  In  the  scroll 
abstract  or  draft  for  1877,  does  the  £963,000  appear  as  before?  " 
and  he  says,  "  No  ;  in  neither  127  nor  131  does  it  appear.  [131 
is  the  red  ink  scroll.]  The  amount  of  bills  payable  to  account, 
after  having  the  £973,000  deducted,  is  carried  into  this  ledger, 
but  it  has  been  scored  out,  as  if  some  new  idea  had  occurred  to 
382 


The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

them — another  way  of  doing  it;  and  I  find  in  No.  131  a  pencil  Lord 
jotting  which  shows  the  new  method  that  was  adojited  of  J"sUce-cierk. 
falsifying  the  accounts.  Q.  Of  something  substituted  for  the 
£973,000?—^.  Yes.  Q.  What  is  substituted  ?— J.  1  find  oppo- 
site the  words  '  Bills  payable '  entered  £2,683,348.  That  is 
wrong  to  the  extent  of  £2300.  Then  from  that  sum  is  deducted 
cash  lodged  on  D/A,  £94,368  ;  anticipations,  £527,940  ;  S.,  F. 
xfe  Co.,  £552,704;  and  J.  N.  F.,  £158.000^together,  £1,333,012 
19s.  Id.;  difference,  £1,350,335,  which  was  the  sum  stated  in 
the  published  balance  sheet.''  I  should  have  reminded  you, 
under  my  remarks  on  the  balance  of  1876,  that  the  £751,000 
taken  out  of  the  credit  advances  and  placed  under  Government 
securities  was  a  part  of  the  debt  due  by  these  three  finns, 
Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  James  Nicol  Fleming,  and  James  Morton 
&  Co.  That  has  a  considerable  bearing  on  some  other  parts  of 
the  case,  and  I  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  of  it  afterwards. 
Here  we  have  the  interpolation  in  a  new  form  ;  that  is  to  say, 
the  £973,000  does  not  appear,  but  these  three  items  appear, 
amounting  together  to  £1,350,000,  including  cash  on  deposit 
account,  £94,000;  anticipations,  £527,000;  brought  down  from 
Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.,  £552,000 ;  and  from  Nicol  Fleming, 
£158,000.  Gentlemen,  you  will  consider  the  effect  of  the  fact 
of  that  alteration  on  the  balance  sheet.  Morison  says,  "  There 
were  no  entries  made  for  these  alterations.  They  were  not 
made  from  any  entries  or  any  heading  in  the  books."'  Then  he 
is  asked,  '"  Are  they  purely  fictitious?"  and  he  says,  "  There  are 
no  entries  for  them.  Q.  Then  are  they  fictitious  entirely/ — 
A.  So  far  as  1  know."  So,  gentlemen,  whoever  made  that  entry 
or  made  up  that  balance  sheet  was  certainly  of  opinion  at  that 
time  that  the  sum  of  £973,000  ought  not  to  enter  the  balance 
sheet,  and  that  those  other  sums  ought  to  enter  the  balance  sheet. 
You  will  con.sider  what  effect  that  fact  has  when  you  come  to 
consider  whether  the  sum  of  £973,000  was  or  was  not  an  entry 
believed  to  be  honest.  I  pass  over  tlio  other  items  ;  thev  are  so 
analogous  to  tho.se  of  1876  that  they  don't  require  more  observa- 
tion from  me,  although  you  will  keep  in  n)iiid  all  that  has  \>cen 
addressed  to  you  from  both  sides  of  the  bar  on  that  subject. 
In  the  year  1878  the  sum  of  £973.000  again  appi-ars — also  a 
fact  not  without  its  significance.  But  in  that  balance  shi>ot 
there  is  a  sum  of  £200,000  added  for  what  is  called  reserve  gold, 
which,  it  is  said  by  Morison,  and  apparently  tlu-rc  is  no  dispiite 
about  it,  was  purely  fictitious,  and  was.  in  fact,  taken  off  the  dei»t 
of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  These  are  the  fnlKificutionH  and  fabri- 
cations to  which  I  think  your  attention  liad  bi'tt-er  Ik?,  if  not 
confined,  at  all  events  chiefly  directed. 

But  then,  gentlemen,  I  approach  tht>  nuich  more  delicate  and 
difficult  question — who  is  re8ponsil)le  for  that  falne  HtAtoment  in 
the  balance  sheet?       And  in  this  instance,  as  regards  those  two 

383 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  sums,  and,  indeed,  as  regards  all  that  I  have  spoken  to,  we  are 

Justiee-CleFk.  ^^^^  without  information,  provided  it  is  information  on  which  you 
can  rely,  in  regard  both  to  the  manner  in  which  the  alteration  of 
falsification  was  made  and  the  object  of  it.  And  this  leads  me 
now,  gentlemen,  to  deal  with  the  account  which  Morison  gives  of 
this  matter ;  and  I  must  ask  you  to  give  to  the  subject,  which  I 
am  now  about  to  enter  on,  your  most  anxious  attention,  because 
it  truly  depends  on  the  credibility  of  the  witness,  and  that  is  so 
eminently  a  matter  for  you,  so  entirely  a  matter  within  your 
province,  that  you  will  i-equire  to  make  up  your  minds  upon  it 
with  caution,  and  care,  and  intelligence,  but  to  come  to  a  con- 
clusion on  that  question  whether  you  think  Morison's  evidence  is 
to  be  relied  on  or  not.  A  great  deal  hangs  upon  it,  and  I  must 
now  address  myself  to  it.  Gentlemen,  it  cannot  fail  to  have 
struck  you — it  struck  me  very  painfully — a  painful  incident  in  a 
very  painful  proceeding — that  of  all  these  officials  of  the  Bank — 
and  I  am  bound  in  justice  to  the  accused  to  say  so — Mr.  Leresche 
was  the  only  one  who  did  not  come  here  to  admit  that  he  had 
committed  a  fraud.  Of  Mr.  Leresche's  evidence,  I  am  bound  to 
say  that  it  was  given  with  great  candour,  with  great  sincerity, 
and  I  think  was  in  every  way  worthy  of  credit.  I  did  not  intend 
to  include  Mr.  Miller  in  my  obsen^ations,  but  the  three  sub- 
ordinate officials.  Mr.  Miller's  evidence  was  in  the  highest 
degree  creditable  to  him.  Nothing  could  have  been  clearer  or 
more  explicit.  But,  gentlemen,  Mr.  Morison  came  here  to  say 
that  he  himself  was  the  man  who  perpetrated  this  fraud,  no 
doubt,  as  he  says,  at  the  instigation  or  by  the  direction  of  his 
superiors,  but  that  he  did  it.  Morris,  Stronach's  confidential 
clerk,  admitted  to  you  that  in  keeping  the  private  ledger  he 
valued  James  Nicol  Fleming's  securities  at  par — he  said,  in 
order  to  make  the  thing  square — without  any  authority,  and  with- 
out the  slightest  foundation  for  the  entry.  And  then  you  have, 
I  regret  to  say,  the  fact  brought  out  that  another  witness.  Turn- 
bull,  admitted  that  in  his  return  of  the  gold  in  the  Bank  coffers 
for  1878  he  stated  it  at,  I  think,  twice  the  amount  that  was 
actually  there.  Gentlemen,  I  think  I  should  not,  in  the  dis- 
charge of  my  duty,  avoid  remarking  on  that  matter.  It  is 
impossible,  in  any  inquiry  of  this  kind,  not  to  feel  and  not  to 
express  the  reprobation  which  acts  of  that  kind  deserve.  Nor 
does  it  make  it  at  all  l)etter  that  they  were  the  sen^ants  of  a  man 
that  they  say  wished  them  to  betray  their  trust  and  falsify  the 
accounts.  The  same  excuse  might  be  open  to  every  official  in 
any  position  of  life.  And  therefore,  gentlemen,  you  will  take 
along  with  you  that  element,  and  it  is  not  without  its  importance 
in  this  matter.  But,  gentlemen,  at  the  same  time,  the  prosecu- 
tion can  only  work  with  the  materials  which  are  open  to  it.  It 
might  have  been  impossible  to  detect  this  fraud  without  the  evi- 
dence of  some  one  who  had  complicity  with  it.       And  although 

384 


The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

the  obsei-vation  made  by  some  of  the  counsel  for  the  prisonen;  is  Lord 
one  not  to  be  lightly  treated  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  avowal  J"stice-Clerk. 
and  confession  which  Morison  had  to  make,  vou  will  recollect 
that  still  it  is  a  question  for  yourselves,  and  that  which  satisfies 
your  minds  on  the  fact  is  that  which  is  evidence  of  the  fact  id 
the  case.  Now,  gentlemen,  I  must  fairly  own  that  this  evidence 
of  Morison  in  some  respects  stands  on  a  very  insecure  and  un- 
satisfactoiy  basis.  I  shall  read  to  you  a.  few  passages  from  his 
evidence  if  you  desire  it,  or  probably  I  can  state  it  quite  accu- 
rately, unless  you  would  rather  hear  his  words. 

A  Juror — If  you  state  it,  my  lord,  it  will  be  quite  sufficient. 

The  Lord  Justice-Cleek — When  Mr.  Morison  was  first  in  the 
witness-box,  I  certainly  took  up  the  impression,  although  he  did 
not  say  it  absolutely,  and  was  not  altogether  consistent  in  his 
statement — I  understood  that  what  he  said  was  this :    He  first 
described  the  mode  in  which  the  balance  sheets  were  made  up,  as 
to  getting  in  the  balances  from  the  branches,  and  then  he  made 
up  a  scroll  abstract.       That  scroll  abstract  he  wrote  out  in  black 
ink,  and  took  it  to  the  Manager.       He  said  it  was  arranged  that 
the    Manager  and  Mr.   Potter   should   meet   and   go   over   that 
abstract,  and  that  they  did  so,  and  that,  in  consequence  of  their 
instructions,  he  made  the  entry  of  £97.3,000,  or  rather  that  he 
made  the  entry  of  the  sum  of  £751,000.       He  admitted  after- 
wards that  he  had  taken  the  figure  from  the  balance  ledger.       He 
said  he  made  the  red  ink  alterations  on  the  black  ink  scroll  which 
he  had  taken  with  him,  and  then  from   that  he  made  out  the 
clean  copy  of  the  balance  sheet  for  the  Directors.       But,  gentle- 
men, it  turned  out  that  there  was  no  foundation  at  all  for  that 
statement,  as  far  as  the  particular  document  was  concerned.     I 
rather  think  the  Crown  originally  supposed,  as  I  certainly  sup- 
posed, that  the  document  with  the  red  ink  markings  on  it  was 
the  original  scroll — the  one  which  he  took  to  the  meeting  with 
Potter  and    Stronach — and    that  the   red   ink    marks   were   the 
alterations  which  Potter  and  Stronach  directed  to  be  made.     And 
that  would  have  made  a  very  clear  case  of  it  as  far  as  his  t^vidonce 
was  concerned.       But,  gentlemen,  he  did  not  stand  to  tliat :   and 
after  a  good  deal  of  confusion — I  don't  think  it  nece«ssarT  to  use 
a  stronger  word,    because,  in   my  opinion,   Morison   was   a   vcrv 
confused  witness — I  don't  think  he  kept  his  presence  of  mind 
well  in  the  witness-box  ;  he  was  agitated,  and,  moreover,  he  was 
not  by  any  means  a  willinir  witness  for  the  Crown  ;  I  think  there 
were  plain  indications  of  that  ;   but  at  last  it  came  (o  <his,  that 
that   was  not   the   document    wliich  he    took    to   the    meeting: 
that    the    red    ink    marks  were    not    put    on    n(     that    time: 
and     at     last     he     said     he     rcmonibore<l     tliat     he     destroyed 
the    black    ink    scroll   which    he   took    to   the     meeting.       And 
therefore,  gentlemen,  you  may  discard  that  evidence  nltogethor. 
except  for  this  purpose — you  have  a  copy  of  the  scroll,  and  it  is 
2  a  385 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lopd  not  difficult  to  see  what  was  in  the  mind  of  the  man  who  made 

Justice-Clerk,  ^p  these  alterations — whether  he  did  that  by  direction  or  not 
by  direction,  you  see  the  fact.  The  Dean  of  Faculty  yesterday 
most  ingeniously  went  through  what  he  said  was  a  demonstratioil 
that  Morison  was  really  the  author  of  all  these  alterations  himself. 
His  argument  was  chiefly  confined  to  the  scroll  of  1877,  but  you 
heard  it — it  was  very  ingenious,  very  powerfully  put,  and  yoU 
will  consider  what  effect  it  produced  upon  your  own  minds ;  but 
this,  at  all  events,  is  certain,  that  the  theory  with  which  the 
Crown  started  upon  Morison's  evidence  gave  way,  and  that 
whoever  made  these  alterations,  or  rather  whoever  instructed 
them  to  be  made,  the  document  now  produced  is  not  the  original 
document  which  Morison  j^resented,  as  he  alleged.  There  is  a 
little  more,  gentlemen,  before  I  come  to  the  main  and  direct 
question  here.  I  asked  Morison  how  Potter  and  Stronach,  who 
he  said  gave  these  directions  at  that  meeting,  got  the  figures. 
He  said  they  had  no  figures  and  no  books,  and  that  he  had  to 
go  and  get  the  information  and  the  particulars  of  bills  payable, 
and  also  to  get  the  details  of  the  credit  advances,  in  order,  he 
said,  to  see  if  any  deduction  could  be  made  from  them,  and  that 
he  went  and  got  information  from  the  other  officials.  I  suppose 
none  was  available  ;  but  it  certainly  would  have  been  satisfactory 
if  there  had  been  some  collateral  evidence  from  these  officials 
about  this  matter.  There  is  no  doubt  the  evidence  of  the 
abstract  itself,  which,  as  far  as  corroboration  is  concerned,  ia 
strong  corroboration  of  the  res  gestce — the  substance  of  what 
Morison  speaks  to.  The  fact  that  the  balance  sheet  was  altered 
is  a  very  strong  circumstance  in  support  of  the  allegation  which 
Morison  makes ;  but  still,  as  upon  his  evidence  a  very  important 
matter  hangs,  it  certainly  would  have  been  to  be  desired,  if 
Morison  really  went  from  the  meeting  to  the  officials,  that  some 
corroborative  evidence  of  that  should  have  been  at  hand.  Now, 
gentlemen,  I  have  made  the  observations  I  thought  right  in  the 
direction  of  the  defence,  on  Morison's  testimony.  But  upon 
the  main  matter  of  fact  he  was  clear  enough,  that  he  had  a  meet- 
ing with  Stronach  and  with  Potter,  and  that  they  directed  him 
to  make  that  alteration  of  the  £751,000.  The  question  is 
whether  that  carries  conviction  to  your  minds — and  I  need  not 
say  that  in  regard  to  Potter  it  is  of  the  most  vital  consequence. 
If  you  believe  Morison,  if  you  think  his  evidence  satisfactory  and 
conclusive,  if  you  think  it  is  sufficient  on  which  to  find  that  Mr. 
Potter  was  not  only  cognisant  of  that  falsification,  but  directed 
it,  then  I  need  not  say  that  there  is  no  alternative  in  this  matter. 
And  thus,  on  that  question  of  the  £751,000,  it  rests  upon  the 
evidence  of  Morison  ;  but  if  his  evidence  is  believed,  then  Stronach 
and  Potter  directed  that  alteration.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  you 
should  think  that  Morison's  evidence  is  not  to  be  implicitly  relied 

386 


The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

upon,  then  Potter  will  remain  in  the  same  position  as  the  other  Lord 

prisoners  at  the  bar  in  relation  to  those  two  sums.  Jusilce-Clerk. 

But,  gentlemen,  what  are  we  to  say  of  Stronach's  position  in 
regard  to  this  particular  part  of  the  imputation  /  You  have  evi- 
dence from  Morison  that  the  £973,000  had  been  the  subject  of 
conversation  with  him.  He  called  his  attention  to  it  standing 
in  the  book  at  one  time,  and  Stronach  said  it  was  there  Ijefore  he 
came,  and  that  it  had  better  not  be  meddled  with  ;  and  that  he 
said  in  1878  that  he  hoped  that  would  be  the  last  time  that  he 
would  require  to  make  such  an  entry.  Of  course,  these  matters 
depend  on  the  same  question  of  credibility  as  the  others  to  which  I 
have  referred  ;  but  even  if  Morison  had  not  said  so — even  if  you 
had  no  proof  that  Stronach  was  aware  of  that  sum  of  £973,000 
which  was  there,  and  which  he  inherited  from  his  predoeessor, 
you  could  hardly  fail  to  infer  that  an  entiy  of  that  kind  in  the 
private  cash  book  was  known  to  the  Manager.  I  don't  say  that 
the  mere  duty  to  know  would  convict  him  of  knowing,  but  it  ia 
for  you  to  consider  whether  it  is  or  is  not  proof  of  the  fact  tha* 
he  was  cognisant  of  that  £973,000  entiy,  that  it  stood  in  that 
private  cash  book,  and  that  there  was  no  entry  of  any  kind  or 
description  which  could  be  found  in  any  of  the  books  to  justify  or 
explain  it.  Gentlemen,  that  is  a  matter  on  which  you  also, 
painful  as  it  is,  must  make  up  your  minds.  I  shall  say  no  more 
about  it  on  that  part  of  the  case.  It  is  a  matter  entirely  in  your 
hands.  If  you  shall  be  of  opinion  that  the  evidence  is  not 
sufficient,  even  against  Stronach,  that  any  such  meeting  took 
place,  or  that  he  knew  that  the  alteration  had  been  made,  then, 
of  course,  you  will  give  him  the  benefit  of  any  doubt  that  rests 
upon  your  minds  on  that  subject.  But  it  must  be  plain  to  you 
that  tile  position  of  the  Manager  of  the  Bank  is  entirely  different 
from  that  of  the  Directors,  and  that  things  that  you  could  not 
infer  as  matters  of  fact  as  regards  the  Directors,  it  may  be  that 
you  find  yourselves  compelled  to  infer  in  regard  to  the  man 
who  was  professionally  charged  with  the  knowledge  and  the  keojv 
ing  of  the  whole  accounts  of  the  Bank. 

Now,  gentlemen,  there  is  a  tliird  jioint.  Whether  Putter  was 
or  was  not  cognisant  of  this — whether  the  evidence  is  sufficient 
against  Stronach  or  not,  what  is  to  be  said  ot  the  other  Directors 
as  regards  these  sums?  On  that  matter,  gentlemen,  I  don't  think 
it  necessary  to  trouble  you  much.  For  my  own  part,  I  do  not 
see  that  the  knowledge  of  these  two  fabricated  entries  is  brought 
home  to  them — at  least  I  do  not  know  any  of  the  evidence  which 
leads  to  the  conclusion  that  they  knew  that  that  sum  nf  £9r):?.000 
was  a  fictitious  entry,  or  that  they  know  that  the  sum  of  £751 .000 
was  transferred  from  the  one  account  to  the  other.  You  liad  it 
explained  by  Morison  that  when  he  went  over  tlie  weekly  balances 
and  read  them  over  to  the  Directors,  they  checking  the  entries 
in  the  balance  ledger,  he  only  read  the  l)alances.  and  did  not  rend 

387 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  the  details,  and,  in  particular,  that  he  did  not  read  the  sum  of 

astice-cierk  £973,000,  and  did  not  read  the  sum  of  £751,000,  so  that  in  their 
operations  in  making  up  the  balance  sheet  there  is  no  special 
knowledge  traced  to  them  of  either  the  one  entry  or  the  other. 
And  the  same  obsei-vation,  if  it  were  necessary  to  enlarge  upon  it, 
would  apply  with  still  more  force  to  those  entries  which  not  only 
appeared  in  the  balance  ledger,  but  which  are  so  far  supported 
by  the  whole  system  of  book-keeping.  Even  supposing  it  were 
the  case  that  the  crossing  of  these  accounts,  and  the  taking  of 
their  difference  as  representing  a  balance,  were  not  true  bank- 
ing, or  were  not  consistent  with  book-keeping — nay,  even  that  it 
was  done  with  a  fraudulent  intent,  I  do  not  see  that  in  the  cir- 
cumstances that  we  have  heard,  the  other  prisoners,  apart  from 
Potter  and  Stronach,  are  necessarily  involved  in  it.  You  are 
the  judges  of  it,  but  that  is  the  impression  that  I  have  foiined 
upon  the  evidence.  If  you  think  otherwise,  of  course,  you  will 
give  effect  to  your  view. 

Now,  gentlemen,  so  much  for  the  first  branch  of  this  case, 
which,  as  I  have  already  said,  I  think  truly  resolves  practically 
into  the  question  whether  these  two  sums  were  or  were  not 
inserted  in  the  balance  sheet  falsely,  and  in  the  knowledge  of 
the  defenders  that  they  were  so  inserted  falsely.  But  then 
comes  the  question  of  the  object  or  motive  ;  and  here,  I  think, 
you  must  keep  in  mind  what  has  been  explained  frequently  in 
the  course  of  the  trial,  but  still  what  it  is  rather  difficult  to 
apprehend,  that  the  mode  of  deception  is  said  to  have  been,  not 
to  make  the  balance  false,  but  to  make  the  materials  for  striking 
the  balance  false,  so  that  the  public  and  the  shareholders  and  the 
London  banks  should  believe  that  the  amount  which  the  Bank 
had  out  at  hazard  was  less  than  in  reality  it  was,  and  that  their 
assets  were  better  secured  than  in  reality  they  were.  That  was 
the  motive,  or  the  imputed  motive,  of  putting  in  the  sum  of 
£973,000,  and  for  transferring  the  £751,000  from  the  doubtful 
category  of  advances  into  the  certain  categoiy  of  investments  or 
securities.  And  therefore,  on  that  part  of  the  question,  if  you 
are  satisfied  upon  the  falsehood,  and,  secondly,  on  the  authors 
of  the  falsehood,  I  do  not  think  on  the  last  of  these  that  there  is 
much  room  for  doubt.  And  that,  gentlemen,  concludes  the  first 
part  of  my  observations  on  this  important  case.  And  to  suni 
up  the  matter  as  it  stands  now,  it  appears  to  me  that  the  main 
gravamen  of  the  charge  which  is  made  against  these  two  prisoners 
consists  of  their  falsifying  the  balance  sheet  in  the  two  respectt^ 
that  I  have  mentioned ;  and  that,  you  will  observe,  applies  to  all 
the  three  years,  for  it  certainly  does  not  make  it  better,  but 
makes  it  considerably  worse  that  that  £973,000  was  missed  out 
of  the  second  of  the  three  balance  sheets,  and  a  separate  but 
equally  false  sum  inserted.  And  in  regard  to  the  knowledge  of 
the  Directors  and  the  motive,  you  will  consider  whether  you  think 

388 


The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

that  Mr.  Morison's  evidence  is  sufficient  to  fix  Mr.  Potter  witli  Lord 

the  part  which  he  is  said  to  have  played  in  refjard  to  this  matter.  Justice-Clerk. 
If  it  is  sufficient,  then  there  can  be  no  question  as  to  the  object 
with  which  the  alteration  was  made.  It  is  in  vain  to  say  that 
it  was  an  innocent  alteration  if,  in  point  of  fact,  it  was  done  in 
the  way  that  Morison  suggests.  If  you  should  think  his  evidence 
sufficient — and  I  cannot  tell  you  that  it  is  not  evidence  on  which 
you  are  entitled  to  judge,  for,  as  I  have  said,  it  is  corroborated  by 
the  balance  sheet  itself,  and  by  these  scrolls  very  strongly — if 
you  should  think  it  sufficient,  then  I  fear  that  Mr.  Potter  is 
implicated  in  this  matter.  But.  on  the  other  hand,  you  will 
keep  in  mind  that  there  have  been  the  most  sei'ious  imputations 
upon  that  testimony ;  you  have  heard  it,  and  I  have  made  the 
observations  that  I  think  right  upon  it.  You  will  consider 
whether  these  observations  had  or  had  not  foundation,  or 
whether  the  foundation  which  you  think  they  had  is  sufficient  to 
discredit  his  testimony.  You  will  see  it  is  a  very  serious  matter, 
and  you  will,  I  have  no  doubt,  give  it  serious  attention.  Then, 
as  regards  Stronach,  that  arises  in  different  circumstances.  If 
you  shall  be  of  opinion  that  the  entry  of  £973,000  was  a  fraudu- 
lent entry,  you  will  consider  whether  Stronach's  knowledge  of  it, 
even  without  Morison's  evidence,  is  not  liable  at  all  events  to  a 
very  strong  presumption,  or  inference  rather,  arising  from  tht 
circumstances,  and  whether,  with  Morison's  evidence,  you  can 
have  much  doubt  that  he  w^as  cognisant  of  that  entry.  And  as 
to  the  other  sum  of  £751,000,  you  must  judge  for  yourselves. 
You  have  hoard  the  case.  Stronach  was  the  man  who  ought  to 
have  checked  these  accounts.  It  is  possible,  if  you  don't  believe 
Morison,  that  the  £751.000  might  have  escaped  his  observation, 
charged  though  he  was  with  the  Bank's  l)ooks.  But  that  is  all 
in  your  hands.  I  don't  think  that  I  can  add  to  the  materials 
that  you  have  by  any  further  observations  on  this  branch  of  tht 
case. 

I  have  now  concluded  the  observations  which  I  think  it 
necessary  to  address  to  you  on  the  first  five  sub-divisions  of  the 
charges  in  regard  to  the  alistract  balance  sheets  of  1870,  1S77, 
and  1878.  They  are  substantially  the  same,  and  excepting  in 
the  particulars  that  I  have  already  mentioned,  the  obsorvationR 
which  apply  to  the  year  1876  are  equally  applicable  tr>  tlu>  other 
years.  But  there  remain  two  charges  in  tlio  indictnuMit-  two 
sub-divisions  of  the  narrative,  or  specification  of  the  particulars, 
in  which  these  abstract  balance  sheets  were  falsified  and  fabri- 
cated. The  last  of  thcTii,  as  I  have  said,  as  to  tin*  l>a(l  and 
irrecoverable  debts,  is  no  longer  a  subji-ct  for  inquiry.  Tliat 
is  to  say,  the  public  prosecutor  docs  not  allege  that  the  Directora 
were  in  the  knowledge  that  there  w(mv  bad  and  irr.H-ovornhle 
debts  beyond  those  specified  in  the  abstract.  But  ho  says  in 
Article   VI.    and   Article   VII.    that   the  eaniings   of    the    Bank 

389 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord         during  the  year  were  overstated  under  the  head  of  profit  and 
ustlce-Clerk.  ioj5^   to   the   extent   of   £125,763,    and   then   he   says   that   the 
reserve   fund_  to   the   extent  of   £450,000   was   also   overstated. 
We    may    dismiss    the    reserve    fund,     because     the    reserve 
fund,      as     I     understand     it,     and     as     was      explained      to 
you,      consists      of      the     excess      of      the      profit      and      loss 
account;    that  is  to   say,   whatever  is  not  divided  as  dividend 
is  carried  into  the  resei-ve  fund.      The  real  question  raised  here 
is  whether  the  amount  stated  to  the  credit  of  profit  and  loss 
was  or  was  not  a  false  entry  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Directors 
for  a  fraudulent  object.      Gentlemen,  this  part  of  the  case  has 
given   me   a   great   deal   of   anxiety   in   relation   to   the   proper 
function  that  I  and  my  colleagues  have  to  discharge.       It  was 
objected,  and  I  am  now  ta,king  up  the  observations  which  Mr. 
Asher  made,   and  made  very  powerfully,   in  the  course   of  his 
address — it   was    objected   to    the    indictment   before   you   were 
sworn    that   the    eighth    charge    was    bad,    because    it    did   not 
contain  a  specification  or  enumeration  of  the  debts  said  to  be 
bad  and  irrecoverable,  but  not  made  allowance  for  in  the  abstract 
balance  sheet.      On  that  objection  no  judgment  was  pronounced ; 
but  the  public  prosecutor  struck  the  charge  out  of  the  indict- 
ment,   and   the   result    of   that   was,    as    I    have    said,    that   he 
precluded    himself    from    alleging    that    bad    and    iiTecoverable 
debts  to  a  larger  extent,    in   the   knowledge   of  the   Directors, 
were  given  credit  for.      The  trial  proceeded,  and  the  objection 
was  also  extended  to  Nos.   6  and   7,  because,   said  the  counsel 
for  the  prisoners,   "You  cannot  allow  the  prosecutor  to  go  to 
proof  that  the  earnings  of  the  Bank  were  less,  for  that  is  just 
another  way   of   proving   that   so  many   more   debts  were   bad 
and   irrecoverable."       Well,    manifestly,    we   could    not    sustain 
that  objection,   because  it  did  not  appear  on  the   face   of   the 
indictment  that  the  earnings  of  the  Bank  might  not  have  been 
falsified  and  fabricated,   although  there  were  no  bad  and  irre- 
coverable   debts.       We    could   not   exclude    the   evidence;    and, 
on  the  other  hand,  we  declined  to  exclude  the  evidence  as  to 
bad  and  irrecoverable  debts,  although  the  charge  founded  upon 
it  was  withdrawn,   because   it   was   necessary   that  you   should 
know  what  the  true  state  of  the  Bank  was,  which  the  Directors 
wished  to  conceal.      But  now  it  is  said,  and  I  am  not  quite  sure 
that  that  was  the  original  conception  when  the  evidence  began, 
that    the    debts    to    which    No.    6    refers    were    not    bad    and 
irrecoverable,   but  that  they  were   debts   which,   at   all   events, 
were  temporarily  unprofitable,  and  that,  therefore,  the  interest 
upon   them    ought   to   have   been    carried,    not    into   the   profit 
and  loss  account,   but  the  debts   themselves,   and  the   interest 
charged  on  them  should  have  been  carried  to  suspense  account, 
and  ought  not  to  have  been  entered   into  the  profit  and  loss 
account  until   the   debts   again  became   profitable   and   advan- 
390 


The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

tageous.      It  is   said   that  the  earnings   of  the  Bank   in   that         Lord 

way  wore   swelled   by   the   amount  of  the  interest  upon   these  •'"'^''=*-^'*'"*'- 

outstanding  debts,  whereas,  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Dire<n<frs, 

not  only  had  the  interest  not  been  paid,  but  in  all  probability 

it  might  never  be  paid.      Now,  it  has  been  said,  and  I  am  very 

far  from  saying  that  there  was  not  force  in   the   observation, 

that  that  is  in  another  shape  reviving  the  question  about  bad 

and    irrecoverable    debts.       But    on    the    best    consideration    I 

can  give  to  that  question,  with  the  assistance  of  their  lordships, 

I  have  come  to  be  of  opinion,   that  even   if  the  o])jectif.n   had 

been  taken  upon  Article  VI..  that  it  did  not  specify  the  particular 

debts,  I  should  not,  in  a  question  of  that  kind,  have  felt  myself 

bound   to   hold    the   indictment    irrelevant.       The   objection    is 

substantially   this,    that   profits    were   alleged    in    this    abstract 

balance  sheet  and  credit  was  taken   for  an   amount  of  profit, 

which,  in  point  of  fact,  never  was  earned.      That  is  a  different 

thing  from  saying  that  there  were  bad  and  in-ecoverable  debts. 

But  if  the  directors   of  a  bank   allege   that  they  have  profits 

when  they  know  that  they  have  none,  I  am  not  prepared  to  say 

that  it  is  necessary  that  there  should  be  a  specification  of  the 

particulars  which  might  hava  led  to  the  representation  of  profit. 

It  is  enough  to  allege  that  there  were  none,  and  to  prove   it. 

I  must  own  that  the  indictment  is  not  conceived  in  that  respect 

in   the   terms   in    which   I   think   it   should,    for   clearaess   and 

distinctness,  have  been  expressed.      If  the  Crown  meant  to  say 

that  these  debts,  although  not  bad  and  irrecoverable,  were  still 

of  so  contingent  a  nature  that   they  could  not  with  propriety 

be  carried  into  profit  and  loss,  I  think  it  would  have  been  better 

if   that   had    appeared    more   distinctly   upon    the    face    of   the 

indictment. 

But,  gentlemen,  with  that  observation — and  the  only  weight 
it  can  receive,  so  far  as  you  are  concerned,  is  that  you  should 
hold  the  Crown  very  strictly  to  the  proof  of  what  they  now 
undertake  to  establish — I  must  now  ]»roceed  to  consider  lnnv 
far  there  is  any  ground  for  the  allegation  that  this  abstract 
balance  sheet  was  fabricated  or  falsified  in  respect  of  the  entry 
to  profit  and  loss  which  stands  in  Arti(^lo  IV.  of  the  abstract, 
page  3  of  the  indictment.  Gentlemei!,  this  leads  us  into 
another  and  a  larger  field  of  inquiry.  Wo  have  hitherto  bi>on 
considering  simply  the  mode  in  whicli  this  balance  sheet  of  1876 
and  the  other  balance  sheets  were  tnado  up.  The  question 
that  is  now  raised  is  of  a  different  description.  It  is  not 
denied  that  in  the  books  of  the  Bank  the  profit  and  loss  stood 
precisely  as  it  is  represented  in  the  abstract  balnncc  slnH»t. 
That  account  of  profit  and  loss  was  prepared  l)y  the  jiroper 
officials  of  the  Bank,  and  during  these  three  years  the  snnie 
course  has  been  followed  in  regard  to  the  amount  carried  to  it  ; 
while   it   is   not   denied    that    the    interest    on    the   debts    I    nni 

39» 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  now  going  to  speak  of  does,  in  point  of  fact,  form  part  of  the 
Justiee-Clepk.  apparent  surplus  which  appears  in  the  account  of  profit  and 
loss,  although  that  could  not  be  ascertained  on  the  face  of  the 
balance  ledger.  Now,  I  am  going  to  show  you  shortly  how, 
in  point  of  fact,  those  debts  on  which  interest  is  so  charged 
and  can-ied  to  profit  and  loss  stood ;  and  then  we  must  go  on 
to  inquire  what  was  the  proper  mode  of  dealing  with  them, 
what  the  intent  with  which  they  were  dealt  with,  and  what 
the  knowledge  of  the  Directors  themselves.  Gentlemen,  the 
accountants  spoke  of  eight  accounts  as  being  accounts  that  were 
material  in  this  investigation,  but  it  appears  to  me  that  it 
would  be  more  accurate  and  quite  sufficient  for  our  purpose  to 
confine  our  attention  to  four  of  the  eight,  for  four  of  the  eight 
absorb  nine^tenths  of  the  whole  amount  of  the  alleeed  deficiencv. 
They  are  the  accounts  of  James  Morton  &  Co.,  Smith,  Fleming 
&  Co.,  James  Nicol  Fleming,  and  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  You 
have  the  amounts  which  stood  at  their  respective  debits  in  the 
evidence  of  Mr.  Muir,  and  I  shall  shortly  state  to  you  what 
they  were.  In  1878  Morton  &  Co.  were  due  £2,173,000  ;  Smith, 
Fleming  &  Co.  were  due  .£1,900,000  in  round  numbers;  James 
Nicol  Fleming  was  due  £1,200,000  ;  and  Innes  Wright  &  Co. 
were  due  £485,000.  So  that  the  whole  amount  is  as  near  as 
may  be  four  millions  and  a  half.  Interest  was  charged  on  these 
accounts,  and  it  is  the  interest  charged  on  these  accounts  that 
is  the  subject  of  this  challenge  on  the  part  of  the  Crown. 
Gentlemen,  the  history  of  these  four  accounts  is  undoubtedly 
a  very  remarkable  one.  As  I  said  in  the  outset  of  my  observa- 
tions, the  mere  amount  of  loss  is  not  quite  the  test  of  the 
character  of  the  transactions  on  which  the  loss  was  created. 
You  must  look  at  the  extent  of  the  operations  as  well  as  the 
extent  of  the  loss,  and  see  what,  in  point  of  fact,  was  the 
origin  of  those  remarkable  and  extraordinaiy  advances  being 
given  to  those  four  debtors. 

I  shall  begin  with  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  Mr.  Fleming  was 
examined,  and  he  jjave  his  evidence  with  singular  clearness  and 
lucidity — ^with  great  candour  I  think  you  will  admit — and  the 
story  that  he  told  had  a  certain  flavour  of  romance  about  it, 
but  it  was  a  very  remarkable  history  of  the  career  of  a  Scottish 
merchant.  He  said  that  when  he  and  his  brother  entered  into 
business,  or  were  in  business,  in  1863,  they  were  counting  their 
profits,  as  he  expressed  it,  by  hundreds  of  thousands  a  year ; 
and  that  was  a  business  which  apparently  was  not  mere  specula- 
tion, but  was  that  solid  class  of  business  which  consists  in 
commission  agency.  It  seems  that  between  1863  and  1870 
they  had  suffered  very  much  by  the  failure  of  a  Liverpool 
correspondent ;  and  although  he  was  actually  making  £93,000 
a  year  for  the  three  years  previous  to  1870,  Mr.  Fleming  came 
to  Glasgow  in  that  year,  having  had  some  connection  with  the 

392 


The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

€ity  of  Glasgow  Bank  before,  and  told  Alexander  Stronach  that  Lord 
unless  lie  was  assisted  he  had  resolved  to  stop  payment.  He  J"»ticc-Clerk. 
t-ells  us  that  his  loss  was  not  created  at  all  V)v  the'  debt  to  the 
Bank,  which  amounted  to  something;  like  £150,000:  but  it  was 
a  debt  created  by  the  failure  of  his  Liverpool  conespondent, 
and  that  £500,000  would  be  necessary  to  set  him  afloat  aeain. 
Gentlemen,  Alexander  Stronach,  in  an  evil  hour  for  himself 
and  for  the  Bank,  set  his  face  aprainst  the  resolution  of  John 
Fleming  to  stop  payment,  and  promised  that  the  Bank  would 
support  him.  I  think  there  is  evidence  that  ^fr.  Potter  was 
also  in  council  in  that  matter,  and  at  that  time  I  think  James 
Nicol  Fleming  was  a  Director  of  the  Bank.  Well,  gentlemen. 
it  was  proposed  to  John  Fleming,  much  against  the  grain,  that 
a  new  firm  should  be  created  in  Liverpool,  and  that  the  bills 
drawn  by  John  Fleming,  and  accepted  by  the  new  firm,  should 
be  discounted  by  the  Bank,  and  in  that  way  credit  to  the  amount 
of  £500,000  should  be  created.  John  Fleming  did  not  mucli 
like  that,  and  he  said  he  did  not  expect  that  it  would  succeed, 
but  still  he  renounced  the  intention  of  suspending  payment, 
and  agreed  to  go  into  the  proposal  with  great  reluctance,  for 
he  says  that  he  was,  in  fact,  hurt  and  iiTitated  by  the  proposi- 
tion that  was  made,  that  he  left  the  room,  and  he  thinks  he 
was  brought  back  by  Potter.  Gentlemen,  as  to  what  the 
inducement  was  on  the  part  of  Alexander  Stronach  to  take 
this  strong  step  in  regard  to  one  of  the  Bank  customers,  we 
are  left  entirely  in  the  dark.  The  Bank  was  covered,  so  John 
Fleming  says  :  and  the  mere  fact  of  his  suspension  of  payment 
would  have  led  to  no  loss,  or,  at  least,  only  to  an  insignificant 
loss.  He  said  distinctly  that  his  debt  to  the  Bank  was  covered 
by  securities,  and  what  interest  beyond  that  there  existed  on 
the  part  of  Alexander  Stronach  to  prevent  the  stoppage  of  John 
Fleming  &  Co.  does  not  appear.  But  this  does  ajipear  in  the 
subsequent  correspondence,  that  he  took  a  great  interest  in 
the  two  Flemings — that  he  evidently  was  anxious  to  jironiofe 
their  intere.sts  and  prevent  their  ruin  ;  and  that  intcre><t  he 
showed  very  clearly  by  his  substHjutMit  pnK-eediiigs.  It  was 
arranged,  therefore,  on  the  part  of  the  Bank  at  that  time, 
that  a  credit  of  £500,000  should  bo  rais.-u  in  the  wnv  that  T 
have  described.  The  way  is  not  very  material  to  I  lie  j^resonl 
question.  But,  gentlemen,  it  appears  quite  clear  that  from 
that  day  forward  Alexander  Stronach  began  a  course  of  con- 
cealed advances  to  John  Fleming — concealed  from  his  own 
Directors — for  you  have  that  alluded  to  over  and  over  npn'm 
in  the  correspondence  of  Alexander  Stronach  :  and  it  is  possible 
that  you  may  find  in  that  the  s(N-n4  of  the  entn-  about  which 
so  much  has  btH'n  spoken;  for  his  letters  in  1S7.'?  and  1S71 
are  those  of  a  man  who  is  f>venvhebned  with  a  burdi>n  that  ho 
•  cannot  shake  off.      But  that  these  debts  were  not   disrlosiHl  at 

393 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  that  time  to  the  Directors  is  clear  from  his  own  statement. 
Justiee-Clerk.  ^j^^j  ^q  ^j-^^  matter  goes  on,  until  in  1875  Mr.  Robert  Stronach 
is  appointed  in  his  place.  In  that  year  Mr.  Robert  Stronach 
was  appointed  Manager  of  the  Bank.  He  was  most  reluctant 
to  accept  the  office.  I  don't  wonder  that  he  was.  He  says 
in  his  letter  to  the  Directors  that  Alexander  Stronach  had 
withheld  his  confidence  from  him.  I  think  that  very  likely, 
but  I  think,  at  the  same  time,  that  he  can  hardly  have  failed 
to  see  very  good  reason  for  the  disinclination  which  he  evinced. 
He  says,  and  there  is  evidence  of  that  elsewhere,  that  James 
Morton  &  Co.  had  promised  to  pay  £400,000  in  diminution  of 
their  debt  if  he  would  become  the  Manager  of  the  Bank,  and 
he  did  become  Manager  on  a  condition  ;  and  that  is  a  condition 
to  which  I  shall  immediately  ask  your  attention.  But  such 
was  the  state  of  matters  in  1875,  before  the  first  of  those 
years  when  John  Fleming's  affairs  came  to  a  crisis.  He  had 
still  a  large  commission  business.  I  think  there  is  evidence 
that  he  made  £50,000  a  year  by  his  own  personal  commission 
business,  besides  his  partner's ;  but  these  old  debts  still  hung 
round  him ;  the  Bank  were  pressing,  and  accordingly  he  came 
to  an  arrangement  in  August,  1875,  which  was  the  commence- 
ment of  a  career  of  irregular  operations  on  the  part  of  the 
Bank,  which  ultimately  assumed  still  larger  dimensions.  The 
result  of  that  arrangement  in  1875  was  this  :  the  Bank  agreed 
to  give  up  so  much  of  their  interest  and  commission,  and  to 
reduce  the  interest  from  5  to  3J  per  cent.,  with  a  corresponding 
reduction  in  the  commission  which  they  charged ;  they  were 
to  advance  £100,000,  which  was  to  be  secured  upon  shares  tO' 
be  purchased  by  the  Bank  in  the  Otago  Land  Company,  the 
I'ate  of  interest  in  the  colony  being  apparently  so  much  in 
advance  of  that  at  home  that  it  was  calculated  that  by  that 
manipulation  a  considerable  saving  would  be  effected.  Wlien 
all  that  was  done  it  was  calculated  by  John  Fleming — and  he- 
told  you  that  he  thought  his  calculation  an  accurate  one — that 
he  would  be  able  to  pay  the  whole  interest  and  commission 
chargeable  by  the  Bank,  and  £25,000  a  year  in  reduction  of 
the  principal  debt.  In  that  way,  in  1875,  it  was  calculated 
that  in  fourteen  years  one-half  of  the  debt  would  be  entirely 
extinguished.  Gentlemen,  that  ai-rangement  was  made  by 
the  Directors  of  the  Bank  at  that  time,  and  the  shares  were 
purchased,  the  £100,000  of  credit  was  obtained,  the  interest 
was  reduced,  but,  unfortunately,  the  £25,000  a  year  was  not 
realised,  and  was  not  paid.  And  in  the  end — for  there  is  not 
much  in  the  interval  between  1875  and  1878 — it  turned  out 
that  the  debt  of  John  Fleming,  instead  of  being  diminished, 
was  largely  increased.  It  was  £1,300,000  in  1875  when  this 
aiTangement  was  made,  and,  as  I  have  told  you,  in  1878  it  was 
£1,960,000,    and    that    is    the    figure    at    which    it    ultimately 

394 


The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

remained.      There  was   a  meeting   in    1878,   after   the   balance         Lord 
sheet  had  been  prepared  and  published,  but  apparently  that  was  J"stlce-Clerk 
too  late  to  be  of  any   moment  in  this  inquiry.      And   that   is 
the  history  of  one  of  these  debts.      The  amount  is  aljout  two 
millions. 

The  second  of  the  debtors,  James  Nicol  Flemin":.  had  a  career 
very  similar.  He  was  a  Director  of  the  Bank,  and  he  resigned 
in  1874.  He  also  had  been  a  successful  man  in  his  day,  but 
at  the  date  which  we  are  speaking  of — Ijetween  1870  and  1875 
— things  had  gone  greatly  against  him,  and  it  is  proved  by 
his  own  clerk  that  he  had  lost  all  the  capital  with  which  he 
started,  and  therefore  had  nothing  but  borrowed  money  to 
trust  to.  He  had  a  large  commission  business,  and  he  had 
veiy  large  schemes  afloat.  He  was  making,  even  later  than 
that,  £20,000  a  year,  but  then  these  old  encumbrances  were 
still  round  him,  and  in  1875  he  was  owing  the  Bank  £1,005,000. 
There  were  securities  doubtless  held  for  that,  but  that  ^Yas  the 
sum  at  which  he  stood  in  the  books  of  the  Bank.  Gentlemen, 
it  is  needless  to  disguise  that  when  Robert  Stronach  succeeded 
to  the  management  of  this  Bank  he  succeeded  to  a  very  anxious 
and  troublesome  legacy.  These  debts  were  none  of  his  creating. 
There  were  advances  made  by  the  Directors  afterwards,  but 
these  were  as  a  drop  compared  with  the  accumulation  which 
existed;  and  when  he  succeeded,  therefore,  to  the  office  of 
Manager,  he  succeeded  his  relative,  who  had  been  going  on  with 
a  syst€.m  of  concealed  advances  until  they  reached  that  very 
serious  and  alanning  amount.  Mr.  Hunter,  who  was  also 
examined  before  you,  and  whose  evidence  was  of  the  clearest 
and  most  satisfactory  kind,  described  to  you  the  negotiations 
that  took  place  to  see  whether  some  means  could  not  be  found 
of  enabling  James  Nicol  Fleming,  who  still  had  a  large  and 
valuable  connection,  to  go  on.  The  result  was  that  Mr.  Hunter 
recommended  Stronach  to  get  rid  of  this  account  a^s  soon  as  he 
could.  And  accordingly,  in  1875,  the  account  was  put  into 
liquidation — by  which  is  meant  that  the  account  is  no  longer 
to  go  on,  that  there  are  to  be  no  further  operations  ujion  it, 
but  that  the  securities  are  to  be  realised  and  placed  to  the 
credit  of  the  account.  In  the  meantime  James  Nicol  Fleming 
started  a  new  Indian  and  Australian  concern,  by  which  lie 
hoped,  along  with  the  securities  which  the  Bank  held,  to  be 
able  to  redress  his  balance.  Some  little  lime  after  that  the 
Bank  lighted  ujion  a  scheme  which  was  explaincnl  to  you  in 
detail,  and  which  I  don't  mean  to  go  into  at  any  I.ul'Oi. 
but  which,  beyond  all  doubt,  was  beyond  the  palo  <.f  ii-gular 
banking.  But  as  I  have  said  to  you  before,  and  I  lliink  it 
necessary  to  tell  you  again,  we  are  not  concerned  hero  nt  nil 
with  the  question  whether  the  proceedings  of  the  Directors  in 
these  matters  were  beyond  their  contract  or  within   llii«ir  con- 

395 


Justice-Clerk 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lopd^^  ,  ■t^^ct'-  We  are  dealing  with  the  question  of  personal  dishonesty, 
and  not  of  civil  liability,  and  although  this  scheme  that  I  am 
now  going  to  describe  might  be  subject  to  great  obseiTation 
in  any  question  in  regard  to  civil  right,  or  the  rights  of  securities 
obtained  under  it,  that  is  not  a  matter  that  can  affect  this  case, 
or  the  charge  that  is  now  made,  except  as  part,  of  the  history 
of  the  case.  But  so  it  is,  that  Mr.  Potter  had  very  large  and 
valuable  connections  in  Australia.  Mr.  Glen  Walker  seems  to 
have  been  brought  into  council  at  this  period  of  the  Bank's 
history,  and  the  result  of  the  whole  matter  was  this,  that  the 
Bank  undertook,  through  Mr.  Glen  Walker,  to  make  purchases 
in  New  Zealand  or  Australia — in  New  Zealand,  I  think — of 
land  which  was  to  be  held  in  property  by  the  Bank,  or  at  least 
for  them,  in  the  hope  and  expectation  that  the  rise  in  the 
value  of  that  land,  which  they  thought  to  be  pretty  secure,  in 
a  few  years  would  wipe  off  the  indebtedness  of  James  Nicol 
Fleming.  And  in  the  meantime,  they  proposed  to  carry  on 
the  operations  by  a  system  of  double  discount — by  drawing 
bills  upon  the  Bank  which  were  to  be  acceiDted  by  the  Bank 
and  then  discounted,  and  before  the  currency  of  these  bills 
expired  another  set  of  bills  was  put  in  the  circle,  the  discount 
being  used  to  retire  them.  Gentlemen,  some  questions  have 
arisen  in  regard  to  these  bills,  but  with  these  I  do  not  think  it 
necessaiy  to  trouble  you.  It  was  a  question  of  accounting 
which  Mr.  Muir  raised  as  to  whether,  when  both  sets  of  bills 
were  discounted,  and  the  proceeds  paid  into  the  Bank,  it  creat/ed 
one  debt  or  two.  In  the  view  that  I  have  taken  it  is  not 
necessaiy  that  we  should  decide  that  matter,  though  undoubtedly 
I  should  have  thought  that  Mr.  Muir's  view  of  it  was  right. 
The  main  matter  is  this,  that  that  singular  and  very  irregular 
proceeding  was  adopted — 'for  a  bank  is  incorporated  not  for 
the  pur]3ose  of  buying  land  or  speculating  in  land,  but  for  the 
proper  and  legitimate  objects  of  banking — I  say  such  was  the 
proceeding,  and  such  was  the  endeavour  that  the  Bank  made 
to  shake  themselves  clear  of  this  unfortunate  encumbrance. 

Now,  gentlemen,  the  third  debtor  was  James  Morton.  We 
have  heard  very  little  about  him,  and  I  have  it  not  in  my  power 
— ^because  there  was  not  evidence  to  enable  me  to  do  it — to 
explain  to  you  the  fluctuations  and  vicissitudes  of  that  account, 
but  it  was  one  of  the  largest,  and  it  ended  with  a  balance  of 
£2,170,000.  What  the  operations  upon  it  had  previously  been 
we  have  had  no  evidence  to  show  ;  and,  for  my  own  part,  I 
should  certainly  have  preferred  that  we  had  seen  Mr.  Morton 
or  some  one  connected  with  the  firm,  because  it  is  plain  from 
the  correspondence,  which  I  don't  weary  you  by  going  over, 
that  all  these  firms  were  intimately  connected,  and  that  Potter, 
Wilson  <fe  Co.,  and  Lewis  Potter  &  Co.,  and  Morton,  and  Innes 
Wright,  and  the  two  Flemings,  had  more  or  less  business  con- 

396 


The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

cerns  together,   and  were  in  fact,  to  a  certain  extent,   in  the         Lord 
same  interest.  Justice-Clerk. 

The  fourth  account  stands  in  a  singular  position,  and  we  have 
very  little  information  about  it  also.  You  will  recollect  the 
evidence  about  it;  I  shall  have  to  refer  to  it  before  I  conclude. 
But  the  fourth  account  was  the  account  of  John  Innes  Wright 
&  Co.,  which  amounted,  in  1878,  to  £485,000 — nearly  half  a 
million.  It  had  not  increased  materially  since  Mr.  Wright 
became  a  Director  in  1875,  but  you  had  his  partner,  Mr.  Paul, 
who  told  you  plainly  that  the  other  partner,  Scott,  managed 
the  whole  financial  affairs  of  the  company,  that  he  never  could 
get  an  account  from  him,  that  he  was  entirely  and  absolutely 
ignorant  of  the  amount  of  the  advances  from  the  Bank,  and 
he  was  not  even  able,  at  the  time  that  he  was  examined,  to 
give  a  clear  financial  history  of  the  affairs  of  the  firm.  And  I 
may  here  take  the  opportunity  of  saying  that  it  appeared  to 
me  that  Mr.  Guthrie  Smith  succeeded  in  showing  that  the 
balance  which  comes  out  in  1878,  which  is  nearly  £100,000 
larger  than  that  of  1877,  was  truly  not  on  a  proper  company 
account  at  all.  £33,000  of  it,  he  said,  was  the  result  of  a  wool 
lien — a  transaction  between  Glen  Walker  &  Co.  under  the 
arrangement  which  had  been  made.  £46,000  of  it  arose  in  this 
w^ay — in  a  way  which,  in  the  particular  matter,  can  scarcely 
be  an  element  against  Mr.  Wright,  for  Scott  had  been  entrusted 
by  the  Bank,  not  in  the  way  of  an  advance  for  his  personal 
benefit,  but  entirely  as  attorney  or  agent  for  the  Bank  itself, 
to  discount  the  Bank's  acceptances  and  remit  to  them  the 
discoimt.  Scott  did  not  do  so,  and  was  a  defaulter  to  the 
extent  of  £46,000.  Whatever  importance  may  be  attached 
to  that  fact  now,  I  think  it  only  right  to  say  that  I  think  it 
was  satisfactorily  established.  I  shall  say  a  word  ujton  Mr. 
Wright's  personal  interest  in  that  matter  by  and  by. 

Now,  gentlemen,  there  were  you  see  four  accounts,  the  balances 
on  which  amounted  altogether  to  four  millions  and  a  half.  And 
how  were  they  secured/  That  is  a  questi(m  on  wiiich  our 
information  is  imperfect,  because  these  securities  have  not 
been  realised,  and  their  value  has  not  l>een  ascertained.  It  is 
but  fair  to  the  defenders  to  say  that,  although  these  accounts 
were  of  enormous  amount,  at  the  same  time  the  earning  power 
of  John  Fleming  &  Co.  and  James  Nicol  Fleming,  and  Morton  iV 
Co.,  that  is  to  say,  their  business  coimoction — tlioii-  knowledge 
of  the  trade  in  which  they  were  embarked,  the  conTKhMici'  whii  li 
foreign  merchants  had  in  them,  still  ren)aintxl  as  a  vuluulde 
asset,  if  it  could  only  be  made  available.  So  say  the  defenders, 
and  I  think  they  established  that.  They  then  say  Hiaf  .lolni 
Fleming  was  quite  confident,  in  1875,  that  he  would  l)e  able 
to  pay  the  interest,  and  would  also  in  fourletMi  v<vn-H  b(»  al)le 
to  clear  off  the  main  part  of  the  debts  due  to  the  H.nik,   and 

397 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  that  he  had  no  doubt  at  all,  if  he  confined  himself  to  his  proper 

Justiee-Clerk.  commission  business,  he  could  without  difficulty  clear  off  that 
debt  and  start  again  without  encumbrance.  Nor  was  he  alone 
in  that,  for,  if  I  don't  mistake,  some  observation  of  the  same 
kind  was  made  by  Mr.  Hunter.  On  the  other  hand,  in  regard 
to  the  account  of  James  Fleming  &  Co.,  Mr.  Glen  Walker  was 
very  confident  that  in  the  end,  if  he  had  gone  on,  the  New 
Zealand  and  Australian  lands  would  become  of  immense  value. 
And  perhaps  they  may  also  say  that  the  fact  of  the  stoppage, 
which  in  truth  did  not  directly  result  from  these  debts,  has 
depreciated  the  securities,  as,  of  course,  it  would,  far  below 
what  they  might  have  been  valued  at  if  the  Bank  Had  been 
going  on,  and  their  debtors  consequently  allowed  to  go  on  too. 
Now,  gentlemen,  so  stands  that  part  of  the  case. 

There  are  four  questions  which  then  arise  for  your  considera- 
tion. First,  did  the  Directors — the  prisoners  at  the  bar — 
know  the  condition  of  these  accounts?  Second,  if  they  did 
know  it,  what  was  the  proper  mode  of  dealing  with  them  in  the 
balance  sheets  which  were  to  be  laid  before  the  shareholders? 
Third,  were  the  Directors  personally  aware  of  the  mode  in  which 
the  accounts  were  dealt  with  in  the  Bank?  And  lastly,  sup- 
posing that  they  didn't  know  these  things  directly,  had  they 
such  information  as  must  have  put  them  in  bad  faith  to  state 
that  amount  of  profit  as  having  been  earned  within  the  year? 

Gentlemen,  in  regard  to  the  first  of  these  questions,  viz.,  the 
knowledge  of  the  Directors  generally,  and  of  Stronach,  the 
Manager,  as  to  the  state  of  these  accounts,  I  don't  think  that 
that  is  a  matter  which,  taken  as  a  general  statement,  can  be 
doubted.  I  don't  say  that  they  knew  the  details  of  accounts 
in  1878  ;  perhaps  not  either  in  1876  or  1877 ;  but  you  heard  in 
the  course  of  the  evidence,  and  there  is  no  denial  of  the  fact, 
that  Robert  Stronach  would  not  take  office  until  he  had  some- 
body to  share  with  him  the  anxiety  of  this  horrible  legacy 
that  had  been  left  him  by  his  predecessor,  and  although  the 
accounts  are  not  named  in  the  letter  which  has  been  read  to 
you  more  than  once,  he  distinctly  says — ."  I  take  office  on  the 
condition  that  the  Directors  will  look  into  these  old  accounts, 
and  will  take  measures  in  order  to  their  liquidation."  And, 
gentlemen,  they  did  take  measures.  I  thought  the  remarks  of 
the  Dean  of  Faculty  very  well  founded  upon  that  matter.  They 
were  not  debts  of  their  incurring.  They  had  no  responsibility 
about  them.  They  were  debts  which  were  incurred  by  the 
former  Manager,  without  their  knowledge ;  but,  as  the  Dean  of 
Faculty  has  said,  they  set  to  work  manfully  to  devise  some 
means  of  lightening  the  burden  for  the  Bank,  and  removing  it 
from  the  shoulders  of  the  shareholders.  Up  to  that  point 
there  is  nothing  to  say  against  what  they  did.  And  here  I 
take   the  opportunity  of   saying  that   I   think   the  remarks   on 

398 


The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

the  part  of  the  prosecutor  as  to  the  course  which  tliey  followed         Lord 

in  their  deliberations — now  that  we  see  all  round  this  matter Justice-Clerk. 

were  pressed  somewhat  more  strongly  than  the  facts  altogether 
warranted.       I   don't   think   the    Directors   wanted   to   postpone 

the  evil  day  in  this  matter.      A  postponement  for  four  months 

as  appears  in  one  of  the  minutes — was  not  an  unrea-sonablo 
thing,  looking  to  the  large  ventures  that  were  still  unascertained. 
I  don't  think  that  the  fact  that  Mr.  Leresche  was  asked  to 
leave  the  room  when  these  matters  were  discussed  argued 
anything;  for  what  were  the  Directors  doing  but  endeavouring 
to  make  an-angements  by  which  the  debt  should  be  liquidated? 
I  think  it  is  no  part  of  this  case,  and  you  may  dismiss  that  from 
your  minds  altogether — at  least  I  think  so — that  there  was  any 
hidden  conspiracy  on  the  part  of  the  Directors  to  ruin  the 
Bank  for  their  own  advantage.  There  was  nothing  of  that 
kind.  The  charge  of  crime  against  the  Directors  is  of  a 
different  description  altogether,  and  the  motive  is  different  tot>. 
But  the  importance  of  the  inquiiy  that  I  am  now  going  into 
is  the  fact  that  the  Directors,  as  a  body  and  individually,  were 
in  cognisance  of  the  fact  that  the  debts  were  so  doubtful 
that  it  was  necessary  to  take  some  step  for  the  purpose  of 
bringing  them  into  shape. 

Gentlemen,  in  regard  to  the  secretary  being  present  at  the 
meetings,  of  course  every  bank  has  its  own  more  secret  delibera- 
tions— its  own  more  difficult  and  delicate  accounts — and  we 
are  not  going  to  press  hardly  upon  gentlemen  who  have  such  a 
herculean  task  to  perform  as  to  clear  off  debts  amounting  to 
about  four  millions,  which  they  had  not  incurred  themselves. 
For  my  own  part,  as  far  as  that  is  conceraed,  I  think  every 
one  must  sympathise  with  the  difficulty  of  the  position.  But 
then,  gentlemen,  most  undoubtedly  in  1875  the  Directors,  when 
they  set  their  shoulders  to  the  task,  must  have  been  aware  of 
the  position  in  which  these  debts  stood.  In  1875  they  made 
the  arrangement  with  John  Flomine-  Well,  John  FhMiiing 
says  he  expected  that  that  would  enaljlo  him  to  pay  £25,000 
a  year,  after  paying  the  interest  and  the  commission.  The 
Directors  may  have  thought  s  ►.  It  is  for  you  to  consider  what 
was  the  true  conclusion  that  ou<'lit  to  have  been  derived  from 
that  position.  At  the  same  time,  the  arrangenu'nt  was  one  tliut 
obliged  the  Bank  to  go  out  of  its  ordinai-v  course,  and  In  take 
shares  in  a  trading  company  in  Australia,  which  uiidoiibtiMlly 
was  not  the  ordinary  procedure,  nor  an  ordinary  course  tn 
follow  under  the  Bank  contract.  And  that  went  on.  Tliore  are 
a  variety  of  meetings.  I  am  not  going  to  trouble  you  liy 
reading  the  minutes  over  airain.  I  will  f>nlv  sav  fin's,  that 
I  think  the  result  of  them  all  is  tliat  Mr.  Stronacli  did  do  wliat 
he  said  ho  intended  to  do — that  he  brought  the  state  of  ilio 
accounts  before  the  Directors,  and  they  took   up   the  accounf^s. 

399 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  They  seem  to  have  settled  the  arrangement  with  John  Flemings 

Justice-Clerk.  -^^    1375^    ^^    ^^    ^g7g    ^^^^    p^^    j^^^^^    -^-^^j    Fleming    into 

liquidation.  There  he  remained,  and  as  far  as  that  account  i& 
concerned,  I  don't  find  in  the  minutes  that  anything  took  place 
until  the  land  speculation  of  Glen  Walker  came  up.  Beyond 
all  question — it  is  needless  to  disguise  it — this  was  not  legitimate 
banking,  although  it  might  be  the  most  likely  way  of  relieving 
themselves  of  their  advances.  This  land  speculation  led  to- 
further  advances,  to  double  sets  of  bills  accepted  by  the  Bank 
for  that  purpose — all  most  iiregular  banking  unquestionably, 
and  all  most  certainly  foreshadowing  the  ruin  that  ultimately 
came.  It  was  possible,  undoubtedly,  that  if  the  commercial 
crisis  had  passed  over,  and  a  sudden  rush  of  advance  on  securities 
had  taken  j^lace,  and  the  cloud  which  has  been  overhanging 
this  couutiy  for  so  many  years  had  dispersed — it  was  within 
the  chapter  of  accidents  that  things  would  have  come  right. 
In  short,  they  were  precisely  in  the  position  that  I  have 
described  to  you  in  the  outset  of  my  remarks,  and  were  brought 
face  to  face  with  it.  They  had,  perhaps,  the  alternative  of 
either  closing  the  Bank  doors,  or  doing  what,  in  point  of  fact, 
was  done.  But  between  these  two  things  there  could  be  no 
legal  choice  at  all.  They  had  a  deficit  of  four  millions,  though 
covered  by  securities  which  still  remained  doubtful.  No  doubt 
if  they  stopped  and  closed  the  Bank  doors,  or  took  away  their 
assistance,  the  securities  would  crumble  into  nothing,  and  it 
might  be  a  dead  loss  to  the  shareholders  ;  and  so  it  would. 
But,  in  the  meantime,  the  question  is  whether  they  were  aware 
of  the  state  of  these  accounts  at  the  date  of  the  first  of  these 
balance  sheets.  I  think,  gentlemen,  without  holding  that  they 
were  aware  of  all  the  steps  and  proceedings  in  regard  to  the 
accounts ;  without  knowing  how  the  arrangement  of  1875,  in 
John  Fleming's  instance,  had  succeeded ;  without  knowing 
whether  the  New  Zealand  speculation  was  a  profitable  or  promis- 
ing one  or  not,  they  did  know  that  these  large  accounts  were 
outstanding,  and  that  the  realisation  of  them  was  still  a  matter 
of  question.  So  much  for  the  first  of  these  questions.  It  is 
not  of  any  importance  to  go  into  the  question  who  was  present 
at  this  meeting,  and  who  was  present  at  that.  The  conclusion 
that  I  think  you  will  come  to  is,  that  there  was  enough  known 
to  the  Bank  Board  to  fix  the  general  knowledge  of  the  position 
of  the  accounts  on  all  the  Directors. 

But  then,  gentlemen,  comes  the  next  question.  It  is  conceded 
by  the  Crown,  and  the  Crown  have  no  power  to  withhold  the 
concession,  that  they  do  not  say  that  the  Directors  knew  these 
debts  to  be  bad  and  irrecoverable.  I  don't  think  they  were 
bad  and  iiTCcoverable.  I  think  that  was  not  the  category  under 
which  they  should  have  been  classed.  I  think  they  were  very 
hazardous.      But  in  the  question  whether  they  are  to  be  sent 

400 


The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

to  the  suspense  account  or  to  be  carried  in  the  ordinary  way  Lord 
into  profit  and  loss,  there  arises  a  question  very  much  for  you.  -Justice-cierk. 
It  is,  as  the  counsel  said,  to  a  certain  extent  a  matter  of  opinion. 
I  should  have  said  that,  looking  to  the  position  in  which  the 
accounts  stood,  the  only  safe  way  for  the  shareholders  was, 
in  the  meantime,  not  to  calculate  on  their  being  profitable. 
But  you  must  keep  in  mind  what  the  ordinani'  practice  is,  and 
it  is  this  :  when  a  debt  is  bearing  interest,  the  interest  on  it 
when  charged  in  the  account  is  carried  to  profit  and  loss, 
whether  it  be  paid  or  not,  provided  there  is  a  reasonable 
prospect  that  it  will  be  paid.  And,  accordingly,  Mr.  Hutton 
explained  that  if  these  large  accounts  had  been  only  for  a  year, 
he  would  have  seen  nothing  wrong  in  carrying  the  interest  to 
profit  and  loss  ;  but  he  said  if  the  interest  has  not  been  paid 
for  several  years,  then  he  would  think  it  wrong  to  do  anything 
but  put  it  in  the  suspense  account.  Gentlemen,  that  is  a  matter, 
in  the  first  place,  as  a  mattei-  of  proper  banking,  which  you 
must  decide.  It  was  said  by  the  counsel  for  the  prisoners, 
and  said  truly,  that  some  of  these  accounts  which  are  said 
to  have  been  properly  the  subject  of  suspense  accounts  were, 
in  point  of  fact,  not  in  tliat  position.  It  does  appear  that  in 
1876  James  Morton  <k  Co.  paid  up  £80,000  of  the  principal 
debt,  and  that,  of  course,  included  the  payment  of  the  previous 
interest.  It  also  appears,  I  think,  that  Innes  Wright  »t  Co.  in 
one  year  did  the  same.  The  smaller  accounts  of  Matthew, 
Buchanan  &  Co.,  and  Glen  Walker  &  Co.,  are  liable  to  the  same 
observation.  They  were  not  dormant  accounts  ;  and  apparently, 
fiom  John  Fleming's  account,  the  advances  w-hich  he  got  Ijetween 
1875  and  1878  were,  to  a  certain  extent,  covered  by  securities 
which  were  actually  paid  in.  Now,  that  is  what  the  defenders 
say,  and  I  have  thought  it  right  to  bring  it  under  your  notice. 
You  have  heard  the  evidence,  and  you  can  judge  for  yourselves. 
What  they  substantially  say  is  this:  that  in  1875  and  1876  tlie 
accounts  of  the  two  Flemings  were  not  materially  in  hazard, 
and  might  have  done  very  well  if  the  Bank  had  been  able  to  go 
on,  and  that  therefore  there  was  nothing  wliich  cfniipoUed  tlie 
Directors  to  go  out  of  the  ordinary  course,  and  to  cari-y  tlie 
interest  upon  these  debts  to  suspense  nccount.  Now,  gentlcinen. 
if  you  shall  think  that  that  was  clearly  a  Tnatter  of  ctpinion, 
and  that  although  your  own  opinion  is  the  jjroper  and  true 
opinion  as  regards  the  administration  ()f  the  Bank,  if  you  sliall 
yet  think  that  the  opposite  course  couhl  have  biHMi  followed  in 
good  faith,  although  wrongly — even  foolishly — then  you  raniiot 
find  that  there  was  any  fraudulent  intent  in  oariying  this  sum 
to  the  credit  of  profit  and  loss.  But  if  you  shall  think  lli;il, 
looking  to  the  circumstances  as  you  have  heard  tlu'in  dotailiMi. 
no  prudent  man — no  man  in  his  senses — would  have  held  out 
that  sum  of  £125,000  as  profit  made  in  tin-  year,  if  it  truly 
3  A  401 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  consisted  of  nothing  but  tlie  interest  on  these  debts  which  had 
Justiee-Clerk.  never  been  paid,  then  I  am  afraid  that  will  come  to  be  a  serious 
matter,  and  that  is  a  matter  that  really  I  must  leave  entirely 
in  your  hands.  It  is  right  to  say  here  that  during  1878 
£74,000  of  profit  was  realised  by  the  branches  alone.  That, 
however,  applies  to  the  nest  jDoint  that  I  am  going  to  refer  to. 
If  you  shall  think  that  the  Directors  ought  not  to  have  cairied 
this  to  profit  and  loss,  but,  on  the  contrary,  must  have  known 
that  they  were  wrong  in  doing  so,  I  don't  know,  gentlemen,  what 
you  are  to  make  of  the  fact  that  they  actually  increased  the 
dividend  that  year  over  the  year  before.  But,  gentlemen — 
and  this  brings  me  to  the  testing  and  the  touching  point  of 
that  part  of  the  case — this  sum  of  £125,000  stands  in  the  books 
at  the  credit  of  profit  and  loss  ;  and,  of  course,  when  the  balance 
was  made  up,  what  the  officials  of  the  Bank  were  bound  to  do, 
and  were  wont  to  do,  was  to  take  the  balance,  transcribe  it  first 
into  the  balance  ledger,  and  then  pass  it  into  the  abstract 
balance  sheet.  That  is  the  ordinary  course.  When  the 
Directors  saw  the  £125,000  at  the  credit  of  profit  and  loss,  it 
did  not  appear,  on  the  face  of  that  document,  how  that  £125,000 
was  entered  in  the  books ;  and  it  is  said — and  that  is  really 
the  most  important  considei-ation  on  this  head  that  you  have — 
it  is  said  it  is  quite  true  the  Directors  may  have  known  all 
about  these  accounts,  but  they  had  no  reason  to  suppose  that 
when  the  books  of  the  Bank  were  balanced,  and  £125,000  of 
profit  was  shown,  any  part  of  that  or  the  whole  of  it  consisted 
of  interest  on  these  accounts.  They  did  not  know  how  the 
accounts  were  dealt  with  in  the  books,  but  they  were  entitled 
to  assume,  as  they  could  not  be  constantly  examining  the  books, 
that  the  officials  of  the  Bank  had  not  played  them  false. 

Gentlemen,  that  is  the  defence  of  the  Directors  on  this  part 
of  the  case.  The  observations  that  I  have  made  about  the 
Manager,  I  am  afraid,  apply  to  this  part  of  the  case  also  ;  and 
I  am  afraid  I  must  add  another  remark  in  regard  to  Mr.  Potter, 
because,  although  the  other  Directors,  the  members  of  com- 
mittees, and  those  present  at  Board  meetings  when  these  accounts 
w^ere  overhauled,  might  after  all  have  a  very  slight  and  shadowy 
acquaintance  with  the  details  of  the  accounts  and  the  details 
of  the  arrangements,  I  am  afraid — and  it  is  only  right  that  I 
should  say  so,  and  I  regret  to  say  it. — ^that  Mr.  Potter  throughout, 
from  first  to  last,  apart  altogether  from  his  position  as  a 
Director  of  the  Bank,  was  cognisant  of  all  the  proceedings  that 
were  taken  for  the  purpose  of  liquidating  the  debts  of  these 
firms.  I  am  far  from  imputing  that  to  Mr.  Potter  as  of  itself 
derogatory  to  him.  I  am  going  to  make  a  remark  upon  the 
personal  position  of  all  the  seven  prisoners  at  the  bar  before 
I  conclude.  Only  I  fear  that  it  will  hardly  be  possible  for  Mr. 
Potter  to  say  that  he  was  not  aware  of  the  position  of  the 
402 


The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

accounts.       It    is    another    question — and    that    is    for   you    to         Lord 
consider — whether,  althoujrh  he  knew  the  position  of  the  accounts  J"stice-Clerk. 
intimately,  he  was  aware  that  the  profit  and   loss  was   struck 
after  crediting  the  amount  of  interest  on  these  accounts. 

But,  gentlemen,  there  is  a  concluding  question,  and  with  that 
I  shall  very  nearly  terminate  the  obsei-vations  which  I  have  to 
make.  Apart  from  Potter  and  Stronach,  do  you  think  that, 
in  1876,  1877,  and  1878,  any  of  the  Directors  of  this  Bank 
thought  that  a  dividend  of  12  per  cent.,  or  a  profit  of  £125,000, 
had  been  earned  from  the  business?  If  you  should  come  to  be 
of  opinion  that  the  position  of  the  accounts  was  such,  in  their 
knowledge,  that  whatever  the  details  of  the  accounts  might 
have  been,  that  was  a  result  which  could  not  possibly  be  accurate, 
then  I  fear  you  have  a  serious  duty  before  you.  I  have  stated 
to  you,  as  fairly  as  I  am  able,  the  grounds  upon  which  I  think 
your  judgment  must  proceed.  If  you  think  there  are  the  means 
of  discrimination  between  the  prisoners,  you  are  quite  entitled 
to  use  your  own  judgment  on  that  matter.  It  certainly  strikes 
one  now,  at  the  end  of  the  day,  as  not  a  favourable  fact  in 
this  case  that  with  all  the  knowledge  which  the  Directors  had, 
and  the  actual  fact  of  these  liabilities  before  them,  that  know- 
ledge found  no  expression  whatever  in  their  balance  sheet.  At 
the  same  time,  I  have  only  to  repeat  that  what  you  have  to 
find  is  not  general  suspicion  or  impression,  but  you  must  bo 
satisfied  that  they  knew  that  this  statement,  like  the  others, 
-was  unfounded  in  fact,  and  that  it  was  fraudulently  made. 

Gentlemen,  I  said  that  before  I  concluded  I  should  think  it 
right  to  make  an  observation  upon  each  of  the  prisoners  at  the 
bar,  and  in  the  first  place  on  the  case  of  Mr.  Stewart.  Now, 
it  is  quite  certain  that  Mr.  Stewart  was  on  more  than  one  occasion 
brought  into  direct  communication  with  the  actors  in  the  matters 
that  I  have  referred  to.  John  Fleming  said  he  h.ad  never  seen 
him,  but  I  think  Mr.  Hunter  or  Mr.  Glen  Walker  said  they 
had  ;  and  it  is  also  certain  that  Mr.  Stewart  went  over  the 
draft  of  the  report  for  1878  and  compared  it  with  the  alistract. 
Gentlemen,  I  don't  put  much  stress  upon  that  any  more  than 
I  put  much  stress  upon  the  fact  that  a  man  sits  in  the  chair 
at  a  Board  meeting,  hears  things  read,  and  takes  part  in  the 
formal  business.  I  don't  put  much  stress  upon  it,  unless  it 
had  been  shown  that  Mr.  Stewart  really  was  perfectly  informed 
as  to  the  matters  with  which  they  were  dealing.  Mr.  Potter 
stood  in  a  different  i)osition,  for  ho  understood  the  \vhol(«  of 
the  negotiations  quite  well.  But,  in  tlie  meantime.  I  am  talking 
of  Mr.  Stewart,  and  as  far  as  his  personal  actings  are  concenied, 
while  I  think  you  cannot  relieve  him  of  the  knowledge  of  (he 
general  position  of  those  accfumts,  probably  ho  was  not  particu- 
larly conversant  with  their  details;  and  as  to  the  IxMiks  of  the 
Baiik,   you   certainly   caimot   charge   liim    with    any    knowhnlgo 

403 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord  of  them  at  all.      I  think  it  right  to  say  that  I  don't  wonder 

ustlce-C  epif.  |.j^^|.  ^^  Stewart's  counsel  rather  protested  against  the  allega- 
tions that  were  originally  made  in  the  indictment ;  and  I 
think  it  right  in  justice  to  him  to  call  attention  to  the  fact, 
that  not  only  could  it  not  have  been  said,  as  the  case  turned 
out,  that  he  had  been  guilty  of  embezzling  the  funds  of  the 
Bank,  but,  in  point  of  fact,  he  was  a  man  in  such  circumstances 
that  he  was  able,  out  of  his  means,  to  have  paid  his  obligations 
to  the  Bank  twice  over.  I  think  that  is  a  fair  observation  to 
make  on  the  par-t  of  Mr.  Stewart.  On  the  other  hand,  while  I 
bring  that  before  you,  you  will  not  forget  that  if  you  are  of 
opinion  that  all  the  Directors  were  aware  generally  of  the 
position  of  these  accounts,  I  have  already  gone  over  the  views 
that  occur  to  me  as  to  the  result  of  that  knowledge. 

As  to  Mr.  Potter,  I  have  made  some  observations  upon  his 
knowledge  and  proceedings  already,  but  there  are  one  or  two 
remarks  that  I  think  it  is  only  reasonable  and  right  to  make. 
If  you  believe  Mr.  Morison  that  Mr.  Potter  was  a  party  to  the 
falsification  of  the  abstract  balance  of  1876,  it  is  impossible  to 
disguise  the  gravity  of  the  offence  thereby  committed.  In 
regard  to  the  rest,  I  think  it  is  quite  true  that  Mr.  Potter  was 
very  cognisant  of  all  these  matters  from  beginning  to  end,  and 
on  the  whole  I  am  not  disposed  to  think  that  he  was  acting 
for  any  particular  benefit  of  his  own.  The  Bank  was  not  in 
advance  to  him  substantially;  he  was  a  man  worth  £16,000 
a  year,  quite  able  to  meet  any  liability  that  could  come  upon 
him  at  that  time ;  and,  moreover,  it  is  so  far  in  his  favour, 
and  in  favour  of  the  confidence  of  the  Directors  in  these  firms, 
that  it  does  appear  that  his  son,  John  Potter,  had  proposed 
to  join  the  firm  of  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  just  at  the  very 
crisis,  and  in  the  very  middle  of  their  embarrassments.  That 
is  a  fact,  and  it  is  only  due  to  the  prisoner  to  say  so.  I  have 
read  through  the  correspondence  very  carefully,  and  I  have 
not  found  in  any  portion  of  it  any  indication  of  a  personal 
interest — I  mean  a  corrupt  personal  interest — on  the  part  of 
Mr.  Potter,  but,  on  the  contrary,  I  have  seen  several  indications 
of  good  feeling  and  friendliness. 

As  to  the  case  of  Mr.  Salmond,  I  think  he  has  established 
that  when  the  negotiations  about  the  adjustment  of  the  balance 
sheets  were  going  on  in  the  months  of  June  and  July,  in  these 
three  years  he  was  for  the  most  part  out  of  Scotland  for  the 
benefit  of  his  health.  Whether  he  has  absolutely  established 
such  an  alibi  as  would  have  enabled  him  to  escape  in  a  trial 
of  a  different  kind  is  not  quite  the  question.  But  I  think 
you  may  give  some  weight  to  the  fact  that  he  was  not  at 
hand  for  consultation.  He  was  not  there.  He  not  only  could 
not  consult,  but  he  could  not  be  consulted,  because  he  was  not 
at  home.      I  don't  think  it  necessary  to  go  into  the  particular 

404 


The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

details  which  were  so  clearly  explained  by  his  counsel ;   and  no         Lord 

very  specific  observations  were  made  against  that  view  by  the    "^  *'®"    *''  * 

Lord  Advocate,   who   rather  seemed  to   say  that   that   was  not 

the  kind   of   plea   that   could   be  very  available   in  an   inquiry 

like  this.       Gentlemen,   you   must   consider  that.       Lord   Mure 

reminds   me   of   an   incident   in   the   history   that   I   gave   you, 

where  John   Fleming  writes   to   Robert  Stronach  to   warn   him 

that  he  had  seen  Salmond  in  communication  with  Mr.  Potter, 

and  to  warn  him  not  to  be  too  communicative  to  Salmond  if 

he  should  speak  on  the  subject.      That  was  at  the  time  there 

was  a  proposal  that  John  Potter  should  join  the  firm. 

The  Dean  of  Faculty — That  was  a  letter  to  Alexander 
Stronach. 

The  Lord  Justice-Clerk — The  letter  bears  to  be  to  Robert 
Stronach,  but  the  witness  Fleming  corrected  that,  and  said 
it  was  written  to  Alexander.  It  is  of  no  moment  to  which  of 
them  it  was  written ;  the  point  is  as  it  affects  Salmond. 

Gentlemen,  in  regard  to  Taylor,  there  was  evidence  led  that 
he  was  quite  above  the  world ;  and  although  his  indebtedness 
to  the  Bank  was  considerable — to  the  extent  of  some  £70,000 
— ^he  had  had  a  large  business — he  had  had  large  operations 
on  the  Bank — debits  and  credits — and  that  there  was  nothing 
in  his  position  which  should  have  given  him  any  object  what- 
ever in  being  a  party  to  a  fraud  for  any  possible  personal 
advantage  that  he  could  get  from  it. 

The  account  of  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  is  certainly  not  a 
satisfactory  element.  Mr.  Wright  became  a  Director  when 
James  Nicol  Fleming  retired  ;  and  his  partner,  Mr.  Paul,  told 
him  that  he  should  not  take  the  office.  I  think  you  nmst 
be  quite  satisfied,  and  I  fear  Mr.  Wright  must  be  quite  satisfied, 
that  that  judgment  was  perfectly  sound.  It  was  not  desirable 
that  the  partner  of  a  firm  indebted  in  over  £300,000  to  the 
Bank  should  be  a  Director.  On  the  other  hand,  it  does  seem, 
as  I  have  already  said,  that  the  financial  affairs  of  the  firm 
were  not  in  his  hands  at  all,  and  his  personal  advances  from 
the  Bank  were  nothing,  excepting  the  price  advanced  to  purchase 
his  qualification  as  a  Director. 

Mr.  Inglis  states  in  his  own  vindication  that  he  was  resident 
in  Edinburgh,  and  not  a  Glasgow  man  at  all ;  that  he  did  his 
best  to  attend  the  meetings  of  the  Board,  and  that  he  neither 
did  nor  could  undertake  to  investigate  the  details  of  any  of 
the  accounts.  As  to  the  advances  which  appear  in  the  indict- 
ment, there  is  no  allegation  now  made  that  these  were  impro- 
perly obtained,  and  his  counsel  chose  to  rest  his  view  on  this, 
that  he  was  not  bound  to  enter  into  Mr.  Inglis'  private  pecuniary 
affairs,  if  no  charge  was  made  on  that  subject. 

As  regards  Mr.  Stronach,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  weight 
of    this    blow    comes    very   heavily    upon    him.       His    position, 

405 


rustiee-Clerk. 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

LoFd_  _^  unquestionably,  was  a  very  painful  and  a  difficult  one ;  but  that 
will  not,  as  I  have  said  more  than  once,  in  any  degree  remove 
the  consequences  of  the  truth  of  such  a  charge  from  his  shoulders. 
Mr.  Salmond  was,  I  think,  the  largest  shareholder  amongst  the 
Directors,  and  he  held  his  shares  to  the  end.  So  did  Mr. 
Stronach,  and  so  did  Mr.  Taylor.  And,  indeed,  there  is  nothing 
in  the  conduct  of  the  prisoners  at  the  bar  to  indicate  that  they 
were  making  ready  to  quit  a  falling  house,  or  that  they  were 
making  preparations  for  a  catastrophe  that  they  thought  was 
at  hand.  Mr.  Stronach  had  quite  means  enough  to  meet  any 
advances  that  he  had  received  ;  and,  indeed,  it  was  proved  that 
he  has  been  able  to  pay  the  first  call  now  due  upon  his  shares. 

Gentlemen,  I  have  now  discharged  the  very  painful  duty 
that  has  been  imposed  upon  me,  and  which  has  now  occupied 
our  time  and  attention  for  so  many  days.  I  have  never, 
since  I  had  a  seat  on  the  bench,  experienced  so  much  feeling  of 
pain,  of  regret — I  had  almost  said  of  mortification.  The  cir- 
cumstances that  we  have  been  inquiring  into  have  a  large 
significance  outside  these  walls.  I  need  not  allude  to  them 
again.  But  I  have  only  in  conclusion  to  say,  as  I  said  at  the 
beginning,  that  we  have  nothing  but  an  ordinary  duty  to  perform 
here,  which  is  to  weigh  the  evidence  that  has  been  led,  and 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  right,  and  justice,  and  conscience 
dictate.  You  will  give  the  prisoners  the  benefit  of  evei-y  reason- 
able doubt,  as  all  prisoners  are  entitled  to  have.  You  will  take 
into  view  their  character,  as  you  would  take  into  view  the 
character  of  any  prisoner  accused  of  a  crime  at  this  bar.  But 
if  you  shall  be  satisfied  that  the  prosecutor  has  established  his 
charge,  then  you  will  deliver  the  verdict  which  your  conscience 
may  dictate ;  and  whether  your  verdict  be  to  convict  or  to 
acquit,  it  will  be  enough  for  you,  doubtless,  that  your  own 
consciences  approve ;  but  I  think  I  may  safely  say  that,  be  it 
what  it  may,  it  will  carry  with  it  the  respect  and  the  approbation 
of  the  country. 

The  jury  retired  at  ten  minutes  to  four,  and  returned  into 
Court  at  a  quarter  to  six  o'clock. 

The  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Gentlemen,  what  is  your  verdict? 

The  Foreman  of  the  Jury  (Mr.  Jamieson) — The  juiy  unani- 
mously find  the  panels  Lewis  Potter  and  Robert  Summers 
Stronach  guilty  of  the  charges  as  libelled  ;  and  find  the  panels 
John  Stewart,  Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis, 
John  Innes  Wright,  guilty  of  using  and  uttering  a  false  abstract 
balance  sheet  or  statement  of  the  affairs  of  the  City  of  Glasgow 
Bank. 

The  Lord  Justice-Clerk — Then,  gentlemen,  you  will  formally 
find  the  four  panels  who  are  charged  with  embezzlement  not 
guilty,    and   the   panels    charged   with    theft    not   guilty,    those 
charges  having  been  withdrawn. 
406 


The  Lord  Justice-Clerk's  Charge. 

The  Verdict  was  recorded  as  follows  : — "  The  jury  unanimously  Lord 
find  the  panels  Lewis  Potter  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach  Justice-Clerk, 
guilty  of  the  first,  second,  and  third  charges,  as  libelled,  and  find 
them  not  guilty  of  the  remaining  charges  ;  and  find  the  panels 
John  Stewart,  Robert  Salmoud,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis, 
and  John  Innes  Wright,  guilty  of  using  and  uttering,  as  libelled, 
under  the  first,  second,  and  third  charges,  and  find  them  not 
guilty  of  all  the  remaining  charges.'" 

The  Lord  Justice-Clerk  (to  the  Jury) — I  have  to  thank  you 
for  the  great  attention  you  have  paid  to  this  very  important 
case  ;  and  to  announce  that  in  respect  of  your  sei-vice  on  this 
occasion  you  will  not  again  be  required  to  act  as  jurymen  for 
the  next  five  years. 

The  Lord  Justice-Clerk  then  intimated  that  sentence  would 
be  pronounced  next  day  at  half-past  ten  o'clock. 

At  the  meeting  of  the  Court  on  the  following  day,  the 
Lord  Justice-Clerk,  addressing  Lewis  Potter  and  Robert 
Stronach.  said — Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Stronach,  the  jury,  after 
a  long  investigation,  and  after  full  deliberation,  have  found  you 
guilty  on  the  first  branch  of  the  three  charges  of  falsifying  and 
fabricating  the  balance  sheets  of  the  Bank.  I  think  it  is 
proper  to  say,  in  explanation  of  the  sentence  which  must  now 
follow  upon  that  verdict,  that,  had  the  other  two  charges 
contained  in  the  indictment,  or  eithei"  of  them,  been  proved  to 
the  juiy,  it  would  have  imposed  upon  us  the  duty  of  inflicting 
a  very  severe  punishment,  because  not  only  would  these  charges 
liave  inferred  a  crime  of  very  great  magnitude,  but  they  would 
have  brought  into  the  case  the  element  of  personal  advantage 
as  the  motive  of  the  act  which  you  committed ;  and  I  am 
desirous  to  say  that,  as  the  case  now  stands,  the  act  which  was 
done  by  both  of  you  did  not  necessarily  involve,  and  probably 
was  not  actuated  by,  any  design  or  desire  of  personal  advantage, 
but  was  a  criminal  act  conmiitted,  as  you  thought,  for  the 
benefit  of  the  Bank.  That  does  not  remove  it  from  the  category 
of  crime — .very  far  from  it — but  it  does  remove  from  the  crime 
of  which  you  have  been  convicted  the  element,  as  I  have  said, 
of  corrupt  personal  motive  for  personal  ends.  That  consideration 
has  weighed  with  the  Court  in  the  sentence  which  I  am  now 
to  pronounce,  being  short  of  one  of  penal  servitude.  The 
sentence  of  the  Court  on  you,  Lewis  Potter,  and  on  you,  Robert 
Stronach,  is  that  you  be  imprisoned  for  the  period  of  eighteen 
calendar  months. 

The  Lord  Justice-Cleuk  (addressing  the  other  prisoners) — 
The  jury  have  found  all  of  you  guilty,  not  of  fabricating  or 
falsifying  the  balance  sheets,  but  of  uttering  and  publishing 
them,  knowing  them  to  be  false.  We  have  considered  also  your 
case,  and  looking  to  the  crime  of  which  you  have  been  convicted, 

407 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Lord         and  the  distinction  that  may  be  drawn  between  you  and  the 
ustice-Clerk.  Q^j^^r  two  prisoners,  and  considering  that  you  have  been  in  jail 
now  since  the  month  of  October,  the  sentence  of  the  Court  is 
that  you  be  further  imprisoned  for  eight  calendar  months. 

The  Lord  Justice-Clerk  added — It  has  been  represented  to  me 
that,  in  my  observations  in  charging  the  juiy  yesterday,  I  made 
some  remarks  upon  the  officials  of  the  Bank  that  might  be 
raisundei'stood.  Some  of  the  gentlemen  who  were  witnesses, 
at  least  one  who  was  a  witness  at  the  trial — I  mean  Murdoch — 
it  has  been  said,  might  possibly  feel  hurt,  and  might  be  injured 
if  my  remarks  were  intended  to  apply  to  him,  and  I  wish  it, 
therefore,  to  be  clearly  understood  that  in  the  remarks  that 
I  made  about  the  officials  of  the  Bank  I  referred  to  three  of  the 
witnesses,  viz.,  Morison,  the  accountant ;  MoitIs,  the  private 
clerk  ;  and  Turabull,  who  gave  the  false  return  to  the  Inland 
Revenue. 


408 


APPENDIX   I. 

The  Complaint  by  the  Procurator-Fiscal,  on  which 
the  Directors  were  originally  arrested. 

Glasgow,  29th  October,  1878. 

Unto  the  Honourable  the  Sheriff  of  Lanarkshire,  or  his  Sub- 
stitutes, the  PETITION  of  William  Alexander  Browis, 
Advocate,  Procurator-Fiscal  of  Court,  for  the  public  interest, 

Humbly  sheweth — 
That  from  information  received  by  the  petitioner,  it  appears, 
and  accordingly  he  charges,  that  Robert  Salmond,  Lewis  Potter, 
William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  and  John  Stewart,  all  at  present 
prisoners  in  the  prison  of  Glasgow,  having  been  Directors  of  the 
City   of  Glasgow  Bank,   incorporated   under  Act  of   Parliament 
from  and  since  the  year  1872,  and  John  Innes  Wright  and  Robert 
Summers   Stronach,   also   presently   prisoners   in   the   prison   of 
Glasgow,  having  been — the  said  John  Innes  Wright,  a  Director, 
and   the   said   Robert    Summers   Stronach,   a    Director   and   the 
Manager  of  the  said  Bank,  from  and  since  the  year  1875,  and 
Charles  Samuel  Leresche,  also  presently  a  prisoner  in  the  prison 
of  Glasgow,  having  been  Secretary  of  said  Bank  from  and  since 
the   year   1870,   and  the   said   Bank  having   been   in   the  years 
1877  and  1878,  and  also  during  the  years   187:5,   1874,   1875, 
and    1876,    or    one    or   more    of   said   years,    by    reason    of   the 
culpable,   reckless,  and  fraudulent   trading  and  mismanagement 
by  the  Directors  thereof,  in  a  state  of  hopeless  insolvency  and 
unable  to  meet  its  liabilities,  and  the  fact  of  the  said  insolvency 
of   the   said   Bank    being    well   known    during   the   years    187.'5, 
1874,   1875,   1876,  and  1877,  and  the  bypast  part  of  1878,  or 
one  or  more  of  said  years,  to  the  said  Robert  Salmond,  Lewis 
Potter,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Stewart,  and  Charles 
Samuel  Leresche,  and  to  the  said  John  Innes  Wright  and  Robert 
Summers  Stronach,  during  the  years  1875,  1876,  and  1877,  and 
the   bypast   part   of   1878,   or   one   or  more   of   said  years,   and 
more   particularly    the    said    Bank    being — as    the    said    Robert 
Salmond,    Lewis    Potter,    John    Innes   Wright,    William    Taylor, 
Henry    Inglis,    John    Stewart,    Robert    Summers    Stronach,    and 
Charles  Samuel  Leresche  well  knew — as  at  5th  Juno,    1878,   in 
a  state  of  hopeless  insolvency  and  unable  to  meet  its  liabilities, 

409 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

and  the  said  Robert  Salmond,  Lewis  Potter,  John  Innes  Wright, 
William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Stewart,  Robert  Summers 
Stronach,  and  Charles  Samuel  Leresche,  or  one  or  more  of  them, 
having,  on  or  about  the  dates  set  forth  in  the  first  column  of 
the  schedule  hereunto  attached,  at  the  offices  of  the  said  Bank 
described  in  the  second  column  of  said  schedule,  received  from 
the  respective  persons,  firms,  and  companies  mentioned  in  the 
third  column  of  said  schedule,  the  several  bills  of  exchange, 
specified  in  the  fourth  column  of  said  schedule,  for  the  special 
and  sole  purpose  of  collecting  payment  of  the  same  when  due 
from  the  debtors  therein,  on  behalf  of  the  said  persons,  firms, 
and  companies  mentioned  in  the  third  column  of  said  schedule, 
none  of  whom  were  at  the  time  indebted  or  under  any  obliga- 
tion to  the  said  Bank,  and  the  said  Robert  Salmond,  Lewis 
Potter,  John  Innes  Wright,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Liglis,  Jolm 
Stewart,  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  and  Charles  Samuel 
Leresche,  not  being  entitled  to  make  use  of  the  said  bills  of 
exchange  for  any  other  purpose  than  that  of  collecting  payment 
thereof  when  due,  yet  nevertheless  the  said  Robert  Salmond, 
Lewis  Potter,  John  Innes  Wright,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis, 
John  Stewart,  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  and  Charles  Samuel 
Leresche,  or  one  or  more  of  them,  did,  actors  or  actor  or  art 
and  part,  in  pursuance  of  a  wicked  conspiracy  devised  by  them 
to  continue  the  business  of  the  said  Bank  and  make  it  appear 
to  the  shareholders  and  creditors  thereof  and  the  public  as  a 
solvent  concern,  for  accomplishing  their  own  personal  and 
pecuniary  ends,  time  or  times  and  place  or  places  above  libelled, 
wickedly  and  feloniously  steal  and  theftuously  away  take  the- 
said  several  bills  of  exchange,  for  sums  amounting  in  all  to 
i:23,693  lis.  7d.  sterling  or  thereby,  the  property  of  the  said 
several  persons,  firms,  and  companies  mentioned  in  the  said 
third  column  of  said  schedule,  and  did  endorse  and  make  over 
the  said  several  bills  of  exchange  before  they  had  become  due  to 
the  London  Joint-Stock  Bank,  London,  in  order  that  the  proceeds 
thereof  might  be  credited  to  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  in  account 
between  them  and  the  said  London  Joint-Stock  Bank,  and  the 
same  were  accordingly  credited  by  the  said  London  Joint-Stock 
Bank  as  payments  made  on  behalf  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow 
Bank. 

May  it  therefore  please  your  Lordship  to  grant  warrant 
to  search  for  and  apprehend  the  said  Robert 
Salmond,  Lewis  Potter,  John  Innes  Wright,  William 
Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Stewart,  Robert  Summers 
Stronach,  and  Charles  Samuel  Leresche,  and  to  bring 
them  for  examination,  and  thereafter  grant  warrant 
to  imprison  them  within  the  prison  of  Glasgow, 
therein  to  be  detained  for  farther  examination,   or 

410 


Appendix   I. 

till  liberated  in  due  course  of  law  ;  farther,  grant 
warrant  to  search  the  persons,  repositories,  and 
domiciles  of  the  said  delinquents,  and  the  house  or 
premises  in  which  they  may  be  found,  and  to  secure 
for  the  purpose  of  precognition  all  articles  found 
therein,  importing  guilt  or  participation  in  the  crime 
foresaid ;  and  to  cite  all  persons  likely  to  have  know- 
ledge of  the  premises,  in  order  to  be  precognosced 
thereanent,  and  to  make  production  for  the  purposes 
foresaid  of  such  writs  and  evidents  pertinent  to 
the  case  as  are  in  their  possession  ;  and  recommend 
to  the  judges  of  other  counties  and  jurisdictions 
to  grant  the  warrants  of  concurrence  necessary  for 
enforcing  that  of  your  Lordship  within  their  respec- 
tive territories. 

According  to  Justice,  etc., 

W.  A.  Brown,  P.F. 


411 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 


»^ 
P 

P 

0 


1* 

o 

N  (M  O 

O  C:  C  O  O       O 

30O 

■o     o      o 

t.* 

-* 

t~ 

M  ^  O 

rH  rH 

ooooo     o 

mo 

■H       o       o 

rH           rH 

(M 

I-H 

IM 

^C5  O 

C  OO  O  O        lO 

oo       t~       C<1       o 

CO 

(N 

lO 

C5  00  O 

ooooo         (N 

30         CO         O 

o 

CO 

CI 

Tf   TJ4  O 

ooooo      o 

moo 

-^        1.-J        ti 

to 

=4j 

CO 

CO  CO  CO  CO  CO 

co" 

o 

o 
"a 

•   ■  • 

M  cC  tD  iC  bc'-S        S 

eg       O 

O    1 

_C 

I      ■      • 

.S.S.5.S.S  i  '  ^ 

.  B.ti 

.  £  .  a  . 

1 

o 
.  -is  tc 

.Is 

*-3  '*3  '-I3  *^  "3  5       c 

S  5  S  S  5p     ° 

;:  3  S  S  S  B    .  o 
c  o  o  o  o  cS   ■  ^ 

CO          03 

.-5  .o  . 

0) 

1— 1 

1" 
P. 

2  ■ 

i 

1 

o 
p. 

s 

IB 

S  S  S  S  E^-     ,. 

c5  03  ci  c^  rf  ."S      ^ 

a=  sTse  sc  se  "2  '  o 

o  o  o  o  oO   ,  i^ 
fc  p!  ^  6:  ■=  ^  ^ 
ce  os  os  ce  cs  g"     oi 

i§ 
•  ft'j 

o  a 
.  O  "J^ 

•  -a    ■    ct    . 

a     ft 
"     S 

t  **-•   •  o   , 

o      o 

i 

g 

•a 

'^ 

5g 

^  ^H  t-  ;-  t-  5        ^. 

cs  rt  ce  ce  ce  =<!      5 

X  ><  X  ^  ><  -UJ    .  n 

ijM 

■|'§" 

P. 

S  oS 

■  "Sle 

03          03 

&c1 

o 

3 
< 

Bill 

a) 

iS  ■ 
o 
Q  _ 

1 

^11 

'2'S'2'22t-5    ^ 
'S'5'S'S'c5  .     . 

tc  tn  X  M  tc  ^    ^    >» 

'a'3'w TJ'a-a   '   a> 
a>  0)  QJ  0)  oj  a>      -*-• 

03 -^i^ 
.a  a  03 

0) 

■S  ° 

JS 

■*:3 

-fci  -k^  .*->  -iJ  -iJ  .tj            Q. 

^1 

0. 

C- 
e 
u 
o 

c  a>  <i3 
5  o  o 

"-*    o    Cj 

ftftftftftO.       c 
OJ   <D   QJ    cp    (D    qT        o 

o  o  o  o  ;^  cj       1^ 
o  o  cj  o  o  o       ce 

S  ft«- 

§88 

ilill 

c3 

C   o   9) 

ce  ce  ce  ce  c3  Jj 

o^ce 

H   ©    » 

oce.2  5^1 

a   03  S   03  c 

s  te 

£3 

C 

CCCCCC-^C 

<e  c  a 

ce  a  ce  a  ^3 

O 

o 

O 

"oo 

OCOOOO     O 

oo 

o    o 

S 

^ 

fe 

ft 

fr^>.>^  >>>.£? 

a     ■« 

P 
'S 

s 
s 

'■3 

m 

£ 
o 

S  o 

«^ 

11 

ftftftftftg- 
sssssi 

O    O    O    O    Or? 

ooooo'-'     "C 

■d-B 

0)  » 

a  a 

p.  o 

Mo 
^1 

CO 

g 
ce 

c 
■§ 

ego 

"3  "3  "£  "S  "3  ^     '-^ 

r-    r-    C    ^    C                  C 

5  ?  S  £  2  c    .  ® 
oSocoocS 
OOOOO^ o« 

£K    CC    X    T:    33         ^2 

cecececece  —  "__g> 
ooooo-g^^. 

.2.2 
a  a 

03    03 

ss 

m  cfi 

>.>, 

a  a 
ce  cs 
ftft 

03   03 

0-3   "^ 

ass's 

in 

o 

05 

2  m  S 

SS 

o  o 

oo 

fc 

£  c 

ID 

2J^ 

®(Da>®a)OHj© 

03    © 

-a  ?  a  S 

o*" 

J5 

J3^J=J=^J3^^ 

o  **  S-* 

1? 

1-5 

H 

HO 

HHt-ir-r-H      H 

HH 

1-5        l-s 

°-s 

r— '       " 

.  t^   ^^        - 

^ 

.J^  ""^ 

-a 

t;  o  oj  c 

■d'diS'C'd.S      TS 

•d'd 

-3     id 

"d 

0) 

O           MO 

OI  O)  O)  a>  oj  ce       0) 

03    03 

03         03 

$ 

^^     ^     tK   -4J 

c  c  c  =  a  oj     e 

a  a 

a     a 

> 

•sl 

_o 

o  c  c  o  o        .  o 

oo 

o       o . 

\       « 

t^ 

!*J  +J 

*i       .*J 

Rec 

M-^ 

|M^ 

s 

a  a 

a     a 

o    - 

0) 

B^J 

aj(ucDa>«„ma) 

03   03 

03          © 

13  O 
c«  on 

S 

SSSESSgS 

a  a 

s    s 

•a 

111 

ce  ce  ce  ce  ceO  ce  ^ 

+3  +s 

II 

c3     oe 

1- 

CO  is        « 

kT  ^^ --^ -^  ^^  ^^        en -^ 
^  Q>  D  OJ  a>  fU--^  ce  © 

03    03 

03          03 

71 

<D 

^C^OC.iCJO;L     „o 

^ce  cs  cej  ce  gj<!_ce 

cj  :3 

_^_ce 

C3          O 

_ce       oi 

W^ 

"-§ 

rf  ft 

ft^3g 

ce  ftftft ft ftS  c  ft 

'ft'ft 

ft    ft 

S 

^o 

g|Mb^ 

03    03 

O         CO 

j3     .a 

<i! 

^ 

H 

H-j! 

HHHHH*i!     H 

HH 

H     H 

CO 

U5 

rH          CO 

S5S 

;     -     -S      '^ 

r-t    03 

(M         rH 

00    to 

1-H 

t— < 

ftSP 

-     '(M      -CI 

CO^ 

s 

.2 

:      : 

<^ 

1-5 

►^ 

!»•< 

OS 

412 


APPENDIX  II. 
The  Indictment. 

John  Stewart,  now  or  lately  residing  in  Moray  Place,  Edin- 
burgh, and  Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor, 
Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach, 
all  now  or  lately  prisoners  in  the  prison  of  Glasgow,  you  are 
indicted  and  accused,  at  the  instance  of  the  Right  Hon.  William 
Watson,  Her  Majesty's  advocate  for  Her  Majesty's  interest :  that 
albeit,  by  the  laws  of  this  and  of  every  other  well-governed  realm, 
falsehood,  fraud,  and  wilful  imposition ;  as  also  the  wicked  and 
felonious  fabrication  and  falsification,  by  Directors  or  officials 
of  a  joint-stock  banking  company,  of  any  balance  sheet  or  state- 
ment of  affairs  for  the  purpose  of  concealing  and  misrepresent- 
ing the  true  state  of  the  company's  affairs,  with  intent  to 
defraud,  and  wickedly  and  feloniously  using  and  uttering  the 
same  as  true,  for  said  purpose,  with  intent  to  defraud,  and 
whereby  members  of  the  Company  and  of  the  public  are 
deceived,  imposed  upon,  and  defrauded;  as  also  the  wickedly 
and  feloniously  using  and  uttering,  as  true,  by  the  Directors 
or  officials  of  a  joint-stock  banking  company,  any  fabricated 
and  falsified  balance  sheet  or  statement  of  affairs,  knowing  the 
same  to  be  fabricated  and  false,  for  the  purpose  of  concealing 
and  misrepresenting  the  true  state  of  the  Company's  affairs, 
with  intent  to  defraud,  and  whereby  members  of  the  Company 
and  of  the  public  are  deceived,  imposed  upon,  and  defrauded  * ; 
as  also  theft ;  as  also  breach  of  trust  and  embezzlement,  are 
crimes  of  an  heinous  nature  and  severely  punishable  :  yet  true 
it  is  and  of  verity,  that  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis 
Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John 
Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach  are,  all  and  each 
or  one  or  more  of  you,  guilty  of  the  crimes  above  libelled,  or 
of  one  or  more  of  them,  actors  or  actor,  or  art  and  part. 

In  so  far  as  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter,  Robert 
Salmond,  William  Taylor,  and  Henry  Inglis  having  been,  during 
the  years  1876,  1877,  and  1878,  and  during  several  previous 
years.  Directors  of  a  joint-stock  banking  company,  registered 
under  the  Companies  Acts,  1862  and  1867,  and  carrying  on  the 
business  of  banking  in  Glasgow  and  elsewhere  throughout 
Scotland  under  the  name  or  firm  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Rank, 
with  a  paid-up  capital  of  £1,000,000  sterling;  and  you,  the  sai<l 
John  Innes  Wright,  having  been,  during  the  years  1875,  1876, 
1877,  and  1878,  a  Director  of  the  said  Company,  and  you,  the 
said  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  having  been,  during  the  years 

*  These  two  are  the  so-called  "  iimominate  "  charges  and  were  the  only 
charges  on  which  evidence  was  led,  and  the  prisoners  ultimately  convicted. 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

1876,  1877,  and  1878,  Manager,  and  also  ex  officio  a  Director 
of  the  said  Company;  and  it  being  your  duty,  as  Directors  and 
Manager  aforesaid  respectively,  to  see  that  regular  books  were 
kept  for  the  business  of  the  Company,  in  which  all  its  trans- 
actions, affairs,  and  obligations  were  duly  entered ;  and  it  being 
farther  your  duty  to  see  that  every  year  a  true  and  accurate 
abstract  or  statement  of  the  Company's  affairs,  made  up  from 
the  Company's  books,  as  balanced  on  the  first  Wednesday  of 
June  in  each  year,  was  prepared  and  duly  examined,  and  there- 
after at  each  annual  general  meeting  of  the  members  of  the 
Company,  held  on  the  first  Wednesday  of  July  in  each  year, 
reported  for  the  satisfaction  of  all  concerned : 

Yet,  nevertheless  (I.),  on  one  or  more  days  in  the  month  of 
June,  1876,  or  of  May  immediately  preceding,  or  of  July  immedi- 
ately following,  the  time  or  times  being  more  particularly  to  the 
prosecutor  unknown,  in  or  near  the  head  office  of  the  City 
of  Glasgow  Bank  in  Virginia  Street,  Glasgow,  or  elsewhere  in 
or  near  Glasgow,  to  the  prosecutor  unknown,  you,  the  said 
John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor, 
Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach 
did,  all  and  each  or  one  or  more  of  you,  wickedly  and  feloniously, 
with  intent  to  defraud  the  members  of  the  said  Company  and 
the  public,  and  for  the  purpose  of  concealing  and  misrepre- 
senting the  true  state  of  the  affairs  of  the  said  Company, 
concoct  and  fabricate,  or  cause  or  procure  to  be  concocted  and 
fabricated,  a  false  and  fictitious  abstract  balance  sheet  or  state- 
ment of  affairs,  purporting  to  represent  the  true  condition  of 
the  Bank's  affairs  as  at  7th  June,  1876,  in  the  following  or 
similar  terms,  videlicet :  — 

CITY   OF  GLASGOW  BANK.— ABSTRACT  BALANCE  SHEET, 
AS  AT  7th  JUNE,    1876. 

Dr.  Liabilities. 

I.  Deposits  at  the   head   office   and   branches,   and 

balances  at  the  credit  of  banking  correspondents,      £8,364,056  18     5 
II.  Bank  notes  in  circulation  in  Scotland  and  the  Isle 

of  Man, -  860,355     0     0 

III.  Drafts  outstanding,  due,  or 
with  a  currency  not  exceed- 
ing 21  days,  -  -  -  £326,853  14  1 
Drafts  accepted  by  the  Bank 
and  its  London  agents  on 
account  of  home  and  foreign 
constituents,       -         -         -  988,520    3     0 


1,315,373  17     1 


Liabilities  to  the  public.  -         -         .         -    £10,589,785  15     6 
IV.  Capital  account,     -         -         -        £1,000,000     0     0 
V.  Reserve  fund,  -         -         -  450,000     0     0 

VI.  Profit  and  loss,       -         -         -  136,865  10     3 

Liabilities  to  partners, 1,586,365  10    3 


£12,126,151     5     9 


414 


Appendix   II. 


Cr.  Assets. 

I.  Bills  of  exchange,  local  and  country  bills,  credit 

accounts,  and  other  advances  upon  security,      -      £8,787,804  17     9 
II.   Advances  on  heritable  property,  and  value  of  Bank 

buildings  and  furniture, 256,665  10     7 

HI.  Cash  on  hand — viz.,  gold  and 

silver  coin  and  notes  of  other 

banks    at    head    office    and 

branches,     -         -         .         .  £862,812     4     4 

IV.  Government  stocks,  Exchequer 

bills,     railway     and     other 

stocks  and  debentures,  and 

balances  in  hands  of  banking 

correspondents,  -         -         -         2,218,868  13     7 

3,081,680  17  11 


£12,126,151     5     9 


which  abstract  balance  sheet  or  statement  of  affairs  was  false 
and  fictitious,  and  was  known  by  you  to  be  so,  in  the  following- 
particulars  or  part  thereof,  videlicet: — (1)  The  amount  of 
deposits  at  the  head  oifice  and  branches,  and  balances  at  the 
credit  of  banking  correspondents,  under  Article  I.  on  the  debtor 
side,  was  understated  to  the  extent  of  £1,006,216  12s.  lOd.  or 
thereby;  (2)  the  amount  of  drafts  outstanding,  and  drafts 
accepted  by  the  Bank  and  its  London  agents,  under  Article  III. 
on  tile  debtor  side,  was  understated  to  the  extent  of  £97-3,300 
or  thereby;  (3)  the  amount  of  bills  of  exchange,  local  and 
country  bills,  credit  accounts,  and  other  advances  under  Article 
I.  on  the  creditor  side,  was  understated  to  the  extent  of 
£2,698,539  10s.  4d.  or  thereby;  (4)  the  amount  of  cash  on 
liand,  viz.,  gold  and  silver  coin  and  notes  of  other  banks,  under 
Article  III.  on  the  creditor  side,  was  overstated  to  the  extent 
of  £29,095  or  thereby;  (5)  the  amount  of  Government  stocks. 
Exchequer  bills,  railway  and  other  stocks  and  debentures,  and 
Ijalances  in  hands  of  banking  correspondents,  under  Article 
III.  on  the  creditor  side,  was  overstated  to  the  extent  of 
£753,211  2s.  6d.  or  thereby;  (6)  the  earnings  of  the  Bank 
during  the  year  were  overstated,  under  the  head  of  profit  and 
loss,  to  the  extent  of  £125,763  12s.  8d.  or  thereby;  (7)  a 
reserve  fund  to  the  extent  of  £450,000  was  stated  to  exist,  while 
in  reality  no  such  fund  existed  * ;  (8)  bad  and  irrecoverable 
debts  to  an  amount  far  exceeding  tlie  whole  capital  stock  of 
the  Bank  were  included  under  Article  I.  on  the  creditor  side, 
and  so  treated  as  subsisting  and  available  assets  of  the  Com- 
pany. Farther,  on  or  about  the  5th  day  of  July,  1876,  in  or 
near  the  Chamber  of  Commerce,  in  or  near  West  (ieorge  Street,! 
Glasgow,    you,    the    said    John    Stewart,    Lewis    Potter,    Robert 

*  Witlidrawn. 

tSee  Mr.  Mackintosh's  speech  on  the  relevancy,  and  tiic  Lord  Advocate's 
reply,  when  he  consented  to  strike  it  out. 

415 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes  Wright,  and 
Robert  Summers  Stronach,  did,  all  and  each  or  one  or  more  of 
you,  wickedly  and  feloniously,  and  with  intent  to  defraud,  use 
and  utter  the  said  false  and  fabricated  abstract  balance  sheet 
or   statement  of  affairs   as   true,   by   then  and  there   reporting 
the  same  to  the  members  of  the  said  Company  at  their  annual 
general  meeting,  along  with  a  report  on  the  Bank's  affairs,  in 
which    you    did,    wickedly    and    feloniously,    and    falsely    and 
fraudulently,  represent  and  pretend  that  the  said  Company  was 
in   a   sound  and   prosperous   condition,   and  capable   of   paying 
to  its  members  a  dividend  at  the  rate  of   11   per  centum  per 
annum,  free  of  income  tax,  and  of  carrying  forward  to  the  credit 
of  the  next  year's  profit  and  loss  account  a  sum  of  £21,365 
10s.  3d.,  and  by  thereafter  causing  the  said  report  and  abstract 
balance  sheet  or  statement  of  affairs  to  be  printed  and  published 
and  circulated  throughout  Scotland ;  and  all  this  you  did,  well 
knowing  the  said  abstract  balance  sheet  or  statement  of  affairs 
to  be  false  and  fabricated,  and  for  the  purpose  of  concealing 
and  misrepresenting  the  true  state  of  the  said  Company's  affairs ; 
by  all  which,  or  part  thereof,  you  did,  wickedly  and  feloniously, 
deceive,  impose  upon,  and  defraud  members  of  the  said  Com- 
pany and  of  the  public,  and  induce  said  members  of  the  Company 
to   retain   the   stock   held   by  them   therein,   and   many   of   the 
public,  including  Robert  Craig,  papermaker,  residing  at  Craigesk 
House,  in  the  parish  of  Newbattle,  and  county  of  Edinburgh ; 
the  Rev.  John  Pulsford,  Dalrymple  Crescent,  Edinburgh ;  James 
Ritchie,     stationer.     High     Street,     Edinburgh ;     and     Thomas 
Brownlee,  Gresham  Cottage,  Uddingston,  Lanarkshire,  to  acquire 
stock  in  the  said  Company,  and  others  of  the  public,  including 
Thomson    &    Porteous,    tobacco    manufacturers    in    Edinburgh; 
Honeyman  &  Wilson,  wholesale  grocers  in  Edinburgh;  Hamilton 
&  Inches,  jewellers  in  Edinburgh ;  Mossman  &  Watson,  provision 
merchants     in     Edinburgh ;     Renton     &     Kerr,     stockbrokers 
in      Edinburgh ;      and      Robert      Christie,      grocer      in      Edin- 
burgh, to  deposit  money  in  the  said  Bank,  to  the  great  loss  and 
prejudice  of  the  said  members  of  the  Company  and  of  the  public. 

Likeas  (II.),  on  one  or  more  days  in  the  month  of  June,  1877,^ 
or  of  May  immediately  preceding,  or  of  July  immediately  follow- 
ing, the  time  or  times  being  more  particularly  to  the  prosecutor 
unknown,  in  or  near  the  said  office  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank 
in  Virginia  Street,  Glasgow,  or  elsewhere  in  or  near  Glasgow, 
to  the  prosecutor  unknown,  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis 
Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John 
Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  did,  all  and  each 
or  one  or  more  of  you,  wickedly  and  feloniously,  with  intent 
to  defraud  the  members  of  the  said  Company  and  the  public, 
and  for  the  purpose  of  concealing  and  misrepresenting  the  true 
state  of  the  affairs  of  the  said  Company,  concoct  and  fabricate, 

416 


Appendix  II. 


or  cause  or  procure  to  be  concocted  and  fabricated,  a  false  and 
fictitious  abstract  balance  sheet  or  statement  of  affairs,  purport- 
ing to  represent  the  true  condition  of  the  affairs  of  the  said 
Bank  as  at  6th  June,  1877,  in  the  following  or  similar  terms, 
videlicet :  — 

CITY   OF    GLASGOW  BANK— ABSTRACT   BALANCE  SHEET, 

AS  AT  6th  JUNE,    1877. 
Dr.  Liabilities. 

I.  Deposits  at  the  head   office   and   branches,   and 
balances  at  the  credit  of  banking  correspondents, 
II.  Bank  notes  in  circulation  in  Scotland  and  the  Isle 

of  Man, 

III.  Drafts  outstanding,  due,  or  with  a  currency  not 
exceeding  twenty -one  days,  and  drafts  accepted 
by  the  Bank  and  its  London  agents  on  account 
of  home  and  foreign  constituents, 


£8,382,711   12  10 
703,894     0     0 


Liabilities  to  the  public,  -         -         .         . 

IV.   Capital  account,     -         -         -       £1,000,000    0    0 

V.   Reserve  fund,         -         -         -  450,000    0    0 

VI.  Profit  and  loss,       -         -         ^  148,501   12     6 

Liabilities  to  partners, 


1.350,335     1     1 
£10,496,940  13  11 


1,598,501  12     6 
£12,095,442    6    5 


Cr.  Assets. 

I.  Bills  of  exchange,  local  and  country  bills,  credit 

accounts,  and  other  advances  upon  security, 
II.   Advances  on  heritable  property,  and  value  of  Bank 

buildings   and    furniture    at    head    office    and 

branches,    ----.... 
III.  Cash  on  hand — viz.,  gold  and 

silver  coin  and  notes  of  other 

banks  at  the  head  office  and 

branches,    -         -         -         .  £891,018     0     2 

IV.  Government  stocks, Exche(|uer 

bills,     railway     and     other 

stocks  and  debentures,  and 

balances  in  hands  of  banking 

correspondents,  -  2,187,896    8     1 


£8,758,838  17     8 


257,689    0    6 


3,078,914    8    .-J 
£12,095,442     6     5 


which  abstract  balance  sheet  or  statement  of  affairs  was  false 
and  fictitious,  and  was  known  by  you  to  be  so,  in  the  following 
particulars,  or  part  thereof,  videlicet  : — (1)  The  amount  of 
deposits  at  the  head  office  and  branches,  and  balances  at  the 
credit  of  banking  correspondents,  under  Article  I.  on  the  debtor 
side,  was  understated  to  the  extent  of  £1,101,518  \'.\s.  Hd.  or 
thereby;  (2)  the  an)ount  of  bank  notes  in  circulation  under 
Article  II.  on  the  debtor  side  was  understated  to  tlie  extent 
of  £76,110  or  thereby;  (3)  the  amount  of  drafts  outstanding, 
and  drafts  accepted  by  the  Bank  and  its  London  agents,  under 
4  A  417 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Article  III.  on  the  debtor  side,  was  understated  to  the  extent 
of  £1,330,712  18s.  Id.  or  thereby;  (4)  the  amount  of  bills 
■of  exchange,  local  and  country  bills,  credit  accounts,  and  other 
advances  under  Article  I.  on  the  creditor  side,  was  understated 
to  the  extent  of  £3,227,154  12s.  8d.  or  thereby;  (5)  the  amount 
of  cash  on  hand,  viz.,  gold  and  silver  coin  and  notes  of  other 
banks,  under  Article  III.  on  the  creditor  side,  was  understated 
to  the  extent  of  £30,000  or  thereby;  (6)  the  amount  of  Govern- 
ment stocks,  Exchequer  bills,  railway  and  other  stocks  and 
debentures,  and  balances  in  hands  of  banking  correspondents, 
under  Article  III.  on  the  creditor  side,  was  overstated  to  the 
extent  of  £751,775  or  thereby;  (7)  the  earnings  of  the  Bank 
during  the  year  were  overstated,  under  the  head  of  profit  and 
loss,  to  the  extent  of  £128,998  19s.  9d.  or  thereby;  (8)  a  reserve 
fund  to  the  extent  of  £450,000  was  stated  to  exist,  while  in 
reality  no  such  fund  existed ;  (9)  bad  and  irrecoverable  debts 
to  an  amount  far  exceeding  the  whole  capital  stock  of  the 
Bank  were  included  under  Article  I.  on  the  creditor  side,  and 
so  treated  as  subsisting  and  available  assets  of  the  Company. 
Farther,  on  or  about  the  4th  day  of  July,  1877,  in  or  near  the 
Trades  Hall,  Glassford  Street,  Glasgow,  you,  the  said  John 
Stewart,  Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry 
Inglis,  John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  did, 
all  and  each  or  one  or  more  of  you,  wickedly  and  feloniously, 
and  with  intent  to  defraud,  use  and  utter  the  said  false  and 
fabricated  abstract  balance  sheet  or  statement  of  affairs,  last 
above  libelled,  as  true,  by  then  and  there  reporting  the  same  to 
the  members  of  the  said  Comiiany  at  their  annual  general 
meeting,  along  with  a  report  on  the  Bank's  affairs,  in  which  you 
did,  wickedly  and  feloniously,  and  falsely  and  fraudulently, 
represent  and  pretend  that  the  said  Company  was  in  a  sound 
and  prosperous  condition,  and  capable  of  paying  to  its  members 
a  dividend  at  the  rate  of  12  per  centum  per  annum,  free  of 
income  tax,  and  of  carrying  forward  to  the  credit  of  next  year's 
profit  and  loss  account  a  sum  of  £18,501  12s.  6d.,  and  by 
thereafter  causing  the  said  report,  and  the  said  abstract  balance 
sheet  or  statement  of  affairs,  last  above  libelled,  to  be  printed 
and  published  and  circulated  throughout  Scotland  ;  and  all  this 
you  did,  well  knowing  the  said  abstract  balance  sheet  or  state- 
ment of  affairs  to  be  false  and  fabricated,  and  for  the  purpose 
of  concealing  and  misrepresenting  the  true  state  of  the  said 
Company's  affairs,  by  all  which,  or  part  thereof,  you  did, 
wickedly  and  feloniously,  deceive,  impose  upon,  and  defraud 
members  of  the  said  Company  and  of  the  pul)lic,  and  induce 
said  members  of  the  Company  to  retain  the  stock  held  by  them 
therein,  and  many  of  the  public,  including  James  and  William 
Russell,  residing  in  Carrick  Park,  in  or  near  Ayr;  Peter  Hume, 
"warehouseman,    residing    in    Salisbury    Place,    Great    Western 

418 


Appendix  II. 


Koad,  Glasgow;  Matthew  Jarvis  Dick,  book-keeper,  residing  at 
Glenclelland,  in  the  parish  of  Shotts,  Lanarkshire ;  Hobert  Dick, 
coahnaster,  residing  in  Garturk  Street,  Govanhill,  in  or  near 
Glasgow;  and  Edward  M'Callum,  residing  at  Plewlands  House, 
Spylaw  Road,  in  or  near  Edinburgh,  to  acquire  stock  in  the 
said  Company;  and  others  of  the  public,  including  the  said 
Thomson  &  Porteous,  Honeyman  &  Wilson,  Hamilton  &  Inches, 
Mossman  &  Watson,  Renton  &  Kerr,  and  Robert  Christie,  to 
deposit  money  in  the  said  Bank,  to  the  great  loss  and  prejudice 
of  the  said  members  of  the  Company  and  of  the  public. 

Likeas  (HI.),  on  one  or  more  days  of  the  month  of  June, 
1878,  or  of  May  immediately  preceding,  or  of  July  immediately 
following,  the  time  or  times  being  more  particularly  to  the 
prosecutor  unknown,  in  or  near  the  said  office  of  the  City  of 
Glasgow  Bank,  in  Virginia  Street,  Glasgow,  or  elsewhere  in 
or  near  Glasgow,  to  the  prosecutor  unknown,  you,  the  said 
John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor, 
Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach, 
did,  all  and  each  or  one  or  more  of  you,  wickedly  and  feloniously, 
with  intent  to  defraud  the  members  of  the  said  Company  and 
the  public,  and  for  the  purpose  of  concealing  and  misrepresenting 
the  true  state  of  the  affairs  of  the  said  Company,  concoct  and 
fabricate,  or  cause  or  procure  to  be  concocted  and  fabricated,  a 
false  and  fictitious  abstract  balance  sheet  or  statement  of  affairs, 
purporting  to  represent  the  true  condition  of  the  affairs  of  the 
said  Bank  as  at  5th  June,  1878,  in  the  following  or  similar 
terms,  videlicet :  — 

CITY  OF    GLASGOW  BANK— ABSTRACT    BALANCE  SHEET, 

AS  AT  oTH  JUNE,    1878. 

Dr.  Liabilities. 

I.  Deposits  at  the  head  office  and 
branches,   and    balances   at 
the  credit  of  banking  corre- 
spondents,   -         -         -         -      £8,102,001     0     4 
II.  Bank    notes   in  circulation   in 

Scotland  and  the  Isle  of  Man,  710,252     0     0 

III.  Drafts    outstanding,    due,    or 

with  a  currency  not  exceed- 
ing twenty-one  days,  and 
drafts  accepted  by  the  Bank 
and  its  London  agents  on 
account  of  home  and  foreign 
constituents,        -         -         -  1,488,244  18     6 

Liabilities  to  the  public, £10,.SOO,497  18   10 

IV.  Capital  account,     -         -         -       £1,000,000     0     0 
V.  Reserve  fund,         -         -         -  450,000     0     0 

VI.  Profit  and  loss,       -         -         -  142,095  12  10 

Liabilities  to  partners, 1,592,095  12  10 


£11,892,593  11    j 
419 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Cr.  Assets. 

I.  Bills  of  exchange,  local  and  country  bills,  credit 

accounts,  and  other  advances  upon  security',      -      £8,484,466     9     2 
II.  Advances  on  heritable  property,  and  value  of  Bank 
buildings    and    furniture    at    head    office   and 
branches,    --------  265,324     9     0 

III.  Cash  on  hand — viz.,  gold  and 
silver  coin  and  notes  of  other 
banks   at    head    office    and 
branches,    -         -         -         -  £845,963     1     0 

Government  stocks.  Exchequer 
bills,  railway  and  other 
stocks  and  debentures,  and 
balances  in  hands  of  banking 
correspondents,  -         -         -  2,296,839  12     6 


3,142,802  13    6 
£11,892,593  11     8 

which  abstract  balance  sheet  or  statement  of  affairs  was  false 
and  fictitious,  and  was  known  by  you  to  be  so  in  the  following 
particulars,  or  part  thereof,  videlicet: — (1)  The  amount  of 
deposits  at  the  head  office  and  branches  and  balances  at  the 
credit  of  banking  correspondents,  under  Article  I.  on  the 
debtor  side,  was  understated  to  the  extent  of  £941,284  13s.  5d. 
or  thereby;  (2)  the  amount  of  bank  notes  in  circulation,  under 
Article  II.  on  the  debtor  side,  was  understated  to  the  extent 
of  £89,031  or  thereby;  (3)  the  amount  of  drafts  outstanding, 
and  drafts  accepted  by  the  Bank  and  its  London  agents,  under 
Article  III.  on  the  debtor  side,  was  understated  to  the  extent 
of  £1,393,008  or  thereby;  (4)  the  amount  of  bills  of  exchange, 
local  and  country  bills,  credit  accounts,  and  other  advances, 
under  Article  I.  on  the  creditor  side,  was  understated  to  the 
extent  of  £3,520,913  lis.  8d.  or  thereby;  (5)  the  amount  of 
cash  in  hand,  viz.,  gold  and  silver  coin  and  notes  of  other  banks, 
under  Article  III.  on  the  creditor  side,  Avas  overstated  to  tho 
extent  of  £219,522  5s.  lOd.  or  thereby;  (6)  the  amount  of 
Government  stocks,  Exchequer  bills,  railway  and  other  stocks 
and  debentures,  and  balances  in  hands  of  banking  corre- 
spondents, under  Article  III.  on  the  creditor  side,  was  over- 
stated to  the  extent  of  £926,764  or  thereby ;  (7)  the  earnings 
of  the  Bank  were  overstated,  under  the  head  of  profit  and  loss, 
to  the  extent  of  £125,875  9s.  or  thereby;  (8)  a  reserve  fund, 
to  the  extent  of  £450,000,  was  stated  to  exist,  while  in  reality 
no  such  fund  existed;  (9)  bad  and  irrecoverable  debts  to  an 
amount  far  exceeding  the  whole  capital  stock  of  the  Bank  were 
included  under  Article  I.  on  the  creditor  side,  and  so  treated  as 
subsisting  and  available  assets  of  the  Company.  Farther,  on 
or  about  the  3rd  day  of  July,  1878,  in  or  near  the  Trades  Hall, 
Glassford  Street,  Glasgow,  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis 
Potter,   Robert   Salmond,   William  Taylor,   Henry  Inglis,   John 

420 


Appendix  II. 


Innes  Wiio-ht,  and  Robert  Suniiiiers  Stionach,  did,  all  and  each 
or  one  or  more  of  you,  wickedly  and  feloniously,  and  with  intent 
to  defraud,  use  and  utter  the  said  false  and  fal)ricated  abstract 
balance  sheet  or  statement  of  affairs,  last  above  libelled,  as  true, 
by  then  and  there  reportincr  the  same  to  the  members  of  the 
said  Company  at  their  annual  general  meetin<r,  along  with  a 
report  on  the  Bank's  affairs,  in  which  you  did,  wickedly  and 
feloniously,  and  falsel}^  and  fraudulently  represent  and  pretend 
that  the  said  Company  was  in  a  sound  and  prosperous  condition, 
and  capable  of  paying  to  its  members  a  dividend  at  the  rate 
of  12  per  centum  per  annum,  free  of  income  tax,  and  can-ying 
forward  to  the  credit  of  the  next  year's  profit  and  loss  account 
a  sum  of  £13,222  12s.  lOd.,  and  by  thereafter  causing  the  said 
report  and  the  said  abstract  balance  sheet  or  statement  of 
affairs,  last  above  libelled,  to  be  printed  and  published  and 
circulated  throughout  Scotland,  and  all  this  vou  did,  well  know- 
ing  the  said  abstract  balance  sheet  or  statement  of  affairs  to 
be  false  and  fabricated,  and  for  the  purpose  of  concealing  and 
misrepresenting  the  true  state  of  the  said  Company's  affairs ; 
by  all  which,  or  part  thereof,  you  did,  wickedly  and  feloniously, 
deceive,  impose  upon,  and  defraud  members  of  the  said  Com- 
pany and  of  the  public,  and  induce  said  members  of  the 
Company  to  retain  the  stock  held  by  them  therein,  and  many 
of  the  public,  including  John  Gillespie,  Writer  to  the  Signet 
in  Edinburgh  ;  Thomas  Paterson,  Writer  to  the  Signet  in  Edin- 
burgh ;  Alexander  Fergusson,  treasurer  to  the  Caledonian 
Railway  Company,  residing  in  Elmbauk  Crescent,  Glasgow ; 
William  Shearer,  storekeeper,  residing  at  Chapel,  in  the  parish 
of  Cambusnethan,  Lanarkshire ;  William  Howe,  residing  at  Fern- 
dean  Cottage,  Uddingston,  Lanarkshire  ;  and  James  Drummond, 
residing  at  Mollinsburn,  in  the  parish  of  Cadder,  Lanarkshire ; 
to  acquire  stock  in  the  said  Company,  and  others  of  the  public, 
including  the  said  Thomson  iV  Porteous,  Honeyman  it  Wilson, 
Hamilton  &  Inches,  Mossman  k,  Watson,  Kenion  k  Kerr,  and 
Robert  Christie,  to  deposit  money  in  the  said  Bank,  to  the  great 
loss  and  prejudice  of  the  said  members  of  the  Company  and  of 
the  public* 

Likeas  (IV.),  you,  the  said  John  Stevvart,  having  been  during 
the  years  1874,  1875,  1876,  1877,  and  1878  a  partner  of  tlie 
firm  of  Stewait,  Pott  ct  Co.,  wine  merchants,  Glasgow,  and  also 
a  Director  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank ;  and  you,  the  said 
John  Stewart,  and  the  said  firm  of  Stewart,  Poft  it  Co.  respec- 
tively, having  had  during  tlie  said  period,  or  ]>art  thereof,  an 

*  These  three  charges  of  fabricating  and  uttering  false  balance  slieots  for 
the  years  1876,  1877,  and  1878  were  the  only  charges  on  whicli  evidence 
for  the  pro.secution  was  led,  all  the  remaining  charges  being  abandoneil  by 
the  Lord  Advocate  at  the  close  of  the  cvidcuc(^  for  tlie  prosecutioji. 

43Z 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

account   or  accounts  current,   or  a   credit  account   or  accounts, 
with  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  it  being  your  duty  as 
Director  foresaid  not   to  allow  overdrafts  on  such  accounts  to 
be    made    without    any    security,    or    upon    wholly    inadequate 
security,  and  in  particular,  not  to  allow  any  such  overdraft^  to 
be  made  without  security,  or  upon  wholly  inadequate  security, 
as  aforesaid,   by  you,   the   said  John   Stewart,   or  by  any  firm 
whereof  you  were  at  the  time  a  partner ;  and  you,  the  said  John 
Stewart,   having   in   your   capacity   as    Director   foresaid,   along 
with  the  other  Directors  and  officials  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow 
Bank,   received  from  the  depositors  and  other  creditors  of  the 
said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  been  entrusted  by  them  with 
large  sums  of  money  in  order  that  the  same  might  be  employed 
in   the   ordinary   business   of  banking :    Yet,   nevertheless,   you, 
the  said  John   Stewart,   did,   taking  advantage   of  your   official 
position  as  Director  foresaid,  on  several  or  one  or  more  occasions 
during  the  years  1874,  1875,   1876,   1877,  and  1878,  the  time 
or  times   being  more   particularly   to  the  prosecutor  unknown, 
in  or  near  the  head  office  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow   Bank, 
in   or   near   Virginia   Street   foresaid,    ov   elsewhere   in   or   near 
Glasgow,    to    the    prosecutor    unknown,    overdraw,    or    cause    or 
procure    to  be   overdrawn  —  (1)    the    account    current   or   credit 
account    standing   in    the   books   of    the   said    City    of   Glasgow 
Bank  in  the  name  of  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  to  the  extent 
of   £11,521   3s.    lOd.   or   thereby;   and   (2)  the   account  current 
or   credit   account    standing   in   the   books   of   the   said   City  of 
Glasgow  Bank  in  the  name  of  the  said  firm  of  Stewart,  Pott  & 
Co.,   to  -the   extent   of   £23,717    7s.    4d.    or   thereby,   and   that 
without    any    security,    or    at    least    upon    wholly    inadequate 
security;  and  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,   did  thus,  then  and 
there,    wickedly    and    feloniously,    and    in    breach    of    the    trust 
reposed   in   you   as   aforesaid,   and   in   breach   of  your   duty  as 
Director  foresaid,  embezzle  and  appropriate  to  your  own   uses 
and  purposes,  or  to  the  uses  and  purposes  of  the  said  firm  of 
Stewart,  Pott  &  Co.,  of  which  you  were  at  the  time  a  partner, 
the  said  sums  of  £11,521  3s.  lOd.  and  £23,717  7s.  4d.  sterling, 
or  thereby,  or  part  thereof,  received  by  and  entrusted  to  you 
as  aforesaid,  the  property  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  or 
of  the  depositors  and  other  creditors  of  the  said  Bank. 


Likeas  (V.),  you,  the  said  William  Taylor,  having  been  durin^ 
the  years  1874,  1875,  1876,  1877,  and  1878  a  partner  of  the 
firm  of  Henry  Taylor  &  Sons,  grain  merchants,  Glasgow,  and 
also  a  Director  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  ;  and  the  said 
firm  of  Henry  Taylor  &  Sons  having  had  during  the  said  period, 
or  part  thereof,  an  account  or  accounts  current,  or  a  credit 
account  or  accounts  with  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  it 
being  your  duty,  as  Director  foresaid,  not  to  allow  overdrafts 

422 


Appendix   II. 


on  such  accounts  to  be  made  without  any  security,  or  upon 
wholly  inadequate  security;  and  in  particular,  not  to  allow  any 
such  overdraft  to  be  made  without  security,  or  upon  wholly 
inadequate  security,  as  aforesaid,  by  you,  the  said  William 
Taylor,  or  by  any  firm  whereof  you  were  at  the  time  a  partner ; 
and  you,  the  said  William  Taylor,  having,  in  your  capacity  aa 
Director  foresaid,  along  with  the  other  Directors  and  officials 
of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  received  from  the  depositors 
and  other  creditors  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  been 
entrusted  by  them  with  large  sums  of  money,  in  order  that  the 
same  might  be  employed  in  the  ordinary  business  of  banking  : 
Yet,  nevertheless,  you,  the  said  William  Taylor,  did,  takings 
advantage  of  your  official  position  as  Director  foresaid,  on  several 
or  one  or  more  occasions  during  tl;ie  years  1874,  1875,  1876, 
1877,  and  1878,  the  time  or  times  being  more  particularly  to 
the  prosecutor  unknown,  in  or  near  the  head  office  of  the  said 
City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  in  or  near  Virginia  Street  "foresaid,  or 
elsewhere  in  or  near  Glasgow,  to  the  prosecutor  unknown,  over- 
draw, or  cause  or  procure  to  be  overdrawn,  the  account  or 
accounts  current,  or  credit  account  or  accounts,  standing  in  the 
books  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  in  the  name  of  your 
said  firm  of  Henry  Taylor  &  Sons,  to  the  extent  of  £7.'?, 460 
19s.  3d.  or  thereby,  and  that  without  any  security,  or  at  least 
upon  wholly  inadequate  security ;  and  you,  the  said  William 
Taylor,  did  thus,  then  and  there,  wickedly  and  feloniously,  and 
in  breach  of  the  trust  reposed  in  you  as  aforesaid,  and  in 
breach  of  your  duty  as  Director  foresaid,  embezzle  and  appro- 
priate to  your  own  uses  and  purposes,  or  to  the  uses  and  pur- 
poses of  the  said  firm  of  Henry  Taylor  &  Sons,  of  which  you 
were  at  the  time  a  partner,  the  said  sum  of  .£73,460  198.  3d. 
sterling  or  thereby,  or  part  thereof,  received  by  and  entrusted 
to  you  as  aforesaid,  the  property  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow 
Bank,  or  of  the  depositors  and  other  creditors  of  the  said  Bank. 

Likeas  (VI.),  you,  the  said  Henry  Inglis,  having  been  during 
the  years  from  1862  to  1878,  both  inclusive,  a  partner  of  the 
firm  of  H.  &.  A.  Inglis,  Writers  to  the  Signet,  Edinburgh,  and  also 
a  Director  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  you,  the  said 
Henry  Inglis,  and  the  said  iirm  of  H.  il'  A.  Inglis  resjtectively, 
having  had  during  the  said  period,  or  part  thereof,  an  account 
or  accounts  current,  or  a  credit  iiccount  or  accounts  with  the 
said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  ;  and  it  being  your  duty,  as  Director 
foresaid,  not  to  allow  overdrafts  on  such  accounts  to  be  made 
or  continued  without  any  security,  or  upon  wholly  inadequate 
security;  and  in  particular  not  to  allow  any  such  overdraft  to. 
be  made  or  continued  without  security,  or  upon  wholly  inade- 
quate security  as  aforesaid,  by  you,  the  said  Henry  Inglis,  or 
by  any  firm  whereof  you  were  at  the  time  a  partner;  and  you,, 

423 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

the  said  Henry  Iiiglis,  having,  in  your  capacity  as  Director 
foresaid,  along  with  the  other  Directors  and  officials  of  the  said 
City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  received  from  the  depositors  and  other 
creditors  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  been  entrusted 
by  them  with  large  sums  of  money,  in  order  that  the  same  might 
be  employed  in  the  ordinary  business  of  banking :  Yet,  neverthe- 
less, you,  the  said  Henry  Ingiis,  did,  taking  advantage  of  your 
official  position  as  Director  foresaid,  on  various  occasions  during 
the  years  from  1862  to  1878,  both  inclusive,  the  times  being 
more  particularly  to  the  prosecutor  unknown,  in  or  near  the 
said  head  office  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  or  elsewhere 
in  or  near  Glasgow,  to  the  prosecutor  unknown,  or  in  or  near 
the  branch  office  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  in  or  near 
Hanover  Street,  Edinburgh,  overdraw,  or  cause  or  procure  to 
be  overdrawn — (1)  the  account  or  accounts  current  or  credit 
account  or  accounts  standing  in  the  books  of  the  said  City  of 
Glasgow  Bank  in  the  name  of  you,  the  said  Henry  Ingiis,  to 
the  extent  of  £44,625  16s.  2d.  or  thereby;  and  (2)  the  account 
or  accounts  current,  or  credit  account  or  accounts  standing  in 
the  books  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  iri  the  name  of  the 
said  firm  of  H.  &  A.  Ingiis,  to  the  extent  of  £7125  3s.  lOd.  or 
thereby,*  or  did  allow  the  overdrafts  on  the  said  accounts,  in 
name  of  you  and  of  your  said  firm,  to  be  continued  and  increased 
to  the  said  amounts  respectively,  and  that  without  any  security, 
or  at  least  upon  wholly  inadequate  security ;  and  you,  the  said 
ilenry  Ingiis,  did  thus,  then  and  there,  wickedly  and  feloniously, 
and  in  breach  of  the  trust  reposed  in  you  as  aforesaid,  and  in 
breach  of  your  duty  as  Director  foresaid,  embezzle  and  appro- 
priate to  your  own  uses  and  purposes,  or  to  the  uses  and  purposes 
of  the  said  firm  of  H.  &  A.  Ingiis,  of  which  you  were  at  the  time 
a  partner,  the  said  sums  of  £44,625  16s.  2d.  and  £7125  3s.  lOd. 
sterling  or  thereby,  or  part  thereof,  received  by  and  entrusted 
to  you  as  aforesaid,  the  property  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow 
Bank,  or  of  the  depositors  and  other  creditors  of  said  Bank. 

Likeas  (VII.),  you,  the  said  John  Innes  Wright,  having  been 
during  tlie  years  1875,  1876,  1877,  and  1878  a  partner  of  the 
firm  of  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.,  merchants,  Glasgow,  and  also 
a  Director  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  ;  and  you,  the  said 
John  Innes  Wright,  and  the  said  firm  of  John  Innes  Wright  & 
Co.  respectively,  having  had,  during  the  said  period,  or  part 
thereof,  an  account  or  accounts  current,  or  a  credit  account  or 
accounts,  with  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  it  being  your 
duty,  as  Director  foresaid,  not  to  allow  overdrafts  on  such 
accounts  to  be  made  or  continued  without  any  security,  or  upon 
wholly  inadequate  security ;  and  in  pai'ticular  not  to  allow  any 

*  Disallowed  on  relevaiicj'. 
424 


Appendix   II. 

such   overdraft   to   be   made   or  continued  without   security,   or 
upon  wholly  inadequate  security  as  aforesaid,  by  you,  the  said 
John   Innes  Wright,  or  by  any  firm  whereof  you  were  at   the 
time  a  partner ;  and  you,  the  said  John  Innes  Wright,  having, 
in    your   capacity   as    Director    foresaid,    along    with   the   other 
Directors  and  officials  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  received 
from    the   depositors   and    other   credilors   of   the   said   City   of 
Glasgow  Bank,   and   been   entrusted   by  them   with  large   sums 
of  money,   in   order  that   the   same  might  be  employed  in   the 
ordinary  business  of  banking  :    Yet,  nevertheless,  you,  the  s;iid 
John  Innes  Wright,  did,  taking  advantage  of  your  official  posi- 
tion as  Director  foresaid,  on  several  or  one  or  more  occasions, 
•during   the  years    1875,    1876,    1877,    and    1878,    the   time   or 
times  being  more  particularly   to   the   prosecutor   unknown,   in 
or  near  the  said  head  office  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank, 
-or  elsewhere  in   or  near  Glasgow,  to  the  prosecutor   unknown, 
overdraw,  or  cause  or  procure  to  be  overdrawn — (1)  the  account 
■current   or   credit    account   standing   in   the   books   of   the   said 
City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  in  the  name  of  you,  the  said  John  Innes 
Wright,  to  the  extent  of  £2746  8s.  id.  or  thereby ;  and  ('i)  the 
accounts   current   or   credit  accounts   standing   in   the  books   of 
the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  in  the  name  of  the  said  firm 
of  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.,*   or  did  allow  the  overdrafts  of 
your  said  firm  to  be  continued  and  increased  to  the  amount  of 
k.j40,210  7s.  3d.  or  thereby,  and  that  without  any  security,  or 
at   least   upon   wholly   inadequate   security ;    and   you,    the   said 
John   Innes   Wright,    did   thus,    then    and   there,    wickedly   and 
feloniously,  and  in  breach  of  the  trust  reposed  in  you  as  afore- 
said, and  in  breach  of  your  duty  as  Director  foresaid,  embezzle 
and  appropriate  to  your  own  uses  and  purposes,  or  to  the  uses 
and  purposes  of  the  said  fiini  of  John  Innes  Wright  A-  Co.,  above 
designed,   of  which  you  were  at   the   time  a  partner,   the  said 
sums    of    £2746    8s.    4d.    and    £340,210    7s.    3d.    sterling    or 
thereby,   or  part  thereof,  received  by  and  entrusted  to  you  us 
aforesaid,  the  pro]ierty  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  or  of 
the  depositors  and  other  creditors  of  the  said  Bank. 

Likeas  (VIII.),  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter, 
Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes 
Wright,  and  Kobert  Summers  Stronach,  or  one  or  more  of  you. 
liaving,  on  the  11th  day  of  July,  1878,  or  on  one  or  other  of  the 
days  of  that  month,  or  of  June  immediately  preceding,  or  of 
August  immediately  following,  in  or  near  the  branch  office  of  the 
said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  in  or  near  Argyle  Street,  Glasgow, 
received  from  John  Kamsay  of  Kildalton,  Islay,  distiller  in  Islar 
:and  Glasgow,  and  now  or  lately  residing  at   Kildalton  afore^iiid, 

*  Disallowed  on  relevancy. 

425 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

and  been  entrusted  by  him  with  a  bill  of  exchange  for  the  sum  o£ 
£252  7s.  sterling,  dated  Glasgow,  13th  June,  1878,  drawn  by  the 
said  John  Ramsay  upon,  and  accepted  by,  the  firm  of  Edward 
Young  it  Co.,  then  and  now  or  lately  spirit  merchants,  Seal 
Street,  Liverpool,  and  payable  four  months  after  date,  at  the 
office  of  Williams,  Deacon  &  Co.,  bankers,  London,  for  the  special 
and  sole  purpose  of  retaining  the  said  bill  in  your  custody  till 
due,  and  of  collecting  payment  of  the  same  when  due  from  the 
debtors  therein  on  behalf  of  the  said  John  Ramsay,  who  was  not 
then  or  afterwards  indebted  or  under  obligation  to  the  said  City 
of  Glasgow  Bank  ;  and  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter, 
Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes 
Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  not  having  authority  to 
make  use  of  the  said  bill  of  exchange  above  libelled  for  any  other 
purpose  than  that  of  collecting  payment  thereof  when  due  as 
aforesaid :  Yet,  nevertheless,  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis 
Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes 
Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  did,  all  and  each  or  one 
or  more  of  you,  on  the  11th  day  of  July,  1878,  or  on  one  or 
other  of  the  days  of  that  month,  or  of  June  immediately  preceding, 
or  of  August  immediately  following,  in  or  near  the  said  branch 
office  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  in  or  near  Argyle  Street, 
Glasgow,  or  in  or  near  the  said  head  office  of  the  said  City  of  Glas- 
gow Bank,  wickedly  and  feloniously  steal  and  theftuously  away 
take  the  bill  of  exchange  for  the  sum  of  £252  7s.  above  libelled, 
the  property  of  the  said  John  Ramsay  ;  and  did  endorse  and  make' 
over,  or  cause  or  procure  to  be  endorsed  and  made  over,  the  said 
bill  of  exchange  above  libelled,  before  it  had  become  due,  to  the 
London  Joint-Stock  Bank,  London,  in  order  that  the  proceeds 
thereof  might  be  credited  to  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  in 
account  with  the  said  London  Joint-Stock  Bank,  as  a  payment 
made  on  behalf  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  the  said  pro- 
ceeds were  credited  accordingly  ;  or  otherwise,  you,  the  said  John 
Stewart,  Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry 
Inglis,  John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Sunnners  Stronach,  did, 
all  and  each  or  one  or  more  of  you,  time  and  place  last  above 
libelled,  wickedly  and  feloniously,  and  in  breach  of  the  trust 
reposed  in  you  as  aforesaid,  embezzle  and  aii]>ropriate  to  your 
own  uses  and  purposes,  or  to  the  uses  and  purposes  of  the  said 
City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  the  said  bill  of  exchange  last  above- 
libelled,  received  by  and  entrusted  to  you  as  aforesaid,  or  the 
proceeds  of  tlie  said  bill,  the  pro])erty  of  the  said  John  Ramsay. 

Likeas  (IX.),  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter, 
Robert  Salmond.  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis.  John  Innes 
Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  or  one  or  more  of  you, 
having,  time  last  above  libelled,  in  or  near  the  said  branch  office 
of  the   said   City  of  Glasgow  Bank,    in   or  near   Argyle   Street, 

426 


Appendix   IT. 


Glasgow,  received  from  John  IJainsay  above  designed,  and  been 
entrusted  by  liim  with  a  bill  ot"  exchange  for  the  sum  of  £496 
12s.  2d.  sterling,  dated  Glasgow,  26th  June,  1878,  drawn  by  the 
said  John  I'amsay  upon,  and  accepted  by,  the  firm  of  W.  &  A. 
Gilbey,  then  and  now  or  lately  wine  and  spirit  importers.  Pan- 
theon, Oxford  Street,  London,  and  payable  four  months  after 
date  at  the  Bank  of  England,  Western  Branch,  London,  for  the 
special  and  sole  purpose  of  retaining  the  said  bill  in  your  custody 
till  due,  and  of  collecting  payment  of  the  same  when  due  from  the 
debtors  therein,  on  behalf  of  the  said  John  Kamsay,  who  was  not 
then  or  afterwards  indebted  or  under  obligation  to  tlie  said  City 
of  Glasgow  Bank  ;  and  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter, 
Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes 
Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  not  having  authority  to 
make  use  of  the  said  bill  of  exchange  last  above  libelled,  for  any 
other  purpose  than  that  of  collecting  payment  thereof  when  due 
as  aforesaid  :  Yet,  nevertheless,  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis 
Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John 
Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  did,  all  and  each 
or  one  or  more  of  you,  on  the  11th  day  of  July,  1878,  or  on  one 
or  other  of  the  days  of  that  month,  or  of  June  immediately  pre- 
ceding, or  of  August  immediately  following,  in  or  near  the  said 
branch  otKce  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  in  or  near  Argyle 
Street,  Glasgow,  or  in  or  near  the  said  head  office  of  the  said  City 
of  Glasgow  Bank,  wickedly  and  feloniously  steal  and  theftuously 
away  take  the  bill  of  exchange  for  the  sum  of  £496  12s.  2d., 
above  lilelled,  the  property  of  the  said  John  Rainsay,  and  did 
endorse  and  make  over,  or  cause  or  procure  to  be  endorsed  and 
made  over,  the  said  bill  of  exchange  last  above  libelled,  before  it 
had  become  due,  to  the  Londoti  Joint-Stock  Bank,  London,  in 
order  that  the  proceeds  thereof  might  be  credited  to  the  said 
City  of  Glasgow  Bank  in  account  with  the  said  London  Joint- 
Stock  Bank,  as  a  payment  made  on  behalf  of  the  said  City  of 
Glasgow  Bank,  and  the  said  proceeds  were  credited  accordingly  : 
or  otherwise,  you,  the  said  John  Stewart.  Lewis  Potter, 
Robert  Salmond.  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes 
Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  did,  all  and  each  or  one 
or  more  of  you.  time  and  place  last  above  libelled,  wickedly  and 
feloniously,  and  in  breach  of  the  trust  reposed  in  you  as  aforesaid, 
embezzle  and  appropriate  to  your  own  uses  and  i)Ui])oses,  or  to 
the  uses  and  purposes  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  the  said 
bill  of  exchange  last  above  libelled,  received  by  and  entrusted  to 
you  as  aforesaid,  or  the  proceeds  of  the  said  bill,  the  projierty  of 
the  said  John  Ramsay. 

Likeas    (X.),    you,   the    said    John     Stewart,    Lewis    Potter, 
Robert    Salmond,    William    Taylor,    Henry   Inglis,    John    Inneii 

427 


1  he  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  or  one  or  more  of  you, 
having,  on  the  3rd  day  of  September,  1878,  or  on  one  or  other 
of  the  days  of  that  month,  or  of  August  immediately  preceding, 
in  or  near  the  said  branch  office  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow 
Bank,  in  or  near  Argyle  Street,  Glasgow,  received  from  John 
Kamsay,  above  designed,  and  been  entrusted  by  him  with  a  bill 
of  exchange  for  the  sum  of  £489  14s.  2d.  sterling,  dated  Glasgow, 
Sith  July,  1878,  drawn  by  the  said  John  Ramsay  upon,  and 
accepted  by,  the  said  firm  of  W.  &  A.  Gilbey,  and  payable  four 
months  after  date,  at  the  Bank  of  England,  Western  Branch, 
London,  for  the  special  and  sole  purpose  of  retaining  the  said 
bill  in  your  custody  till  due,  and  of  collecting  payment  of  the 
same  when  due  from  the  debtors  therein,  on  behalf  of  the  said 
John  Ramsay,  who  was  not  then  or  afterwards  indebted  or  under 
obligation  to  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank ;  and  you,  the  said 
John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor, 
Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach, 
not  having  authority  to  make  use  of  the  said  bill  of  exchange  last 
above  libelled,  for  any  other  purpose  than  that  of  collecting  pay- 
ment thereof  when  due  as  aforesaid :  Yet,  nevertheless,  you,  the 
said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor, 
Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach, 
did,  all  and  each  or  one  or  more  of  you,  on  the  3rd  day  of 
Seyitember,  1878,  or  on  one  or  other  of  the  days  of  that  month, 
or  of  August  immediately  preceding,  in  or  near  the  said  branch 
office  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  in  or  near  Argyle  Street, 
Glasgow,  or  in  or  near  the  said  head  office  of  the  said  City  of 
Glasgow  Bank,  wickedly  and  feloniously  steal  and  theftuously 
away  take  the  bill  of  exchange  for  the  sum  of  £489  14s.  2d. 
above  libelled,  the  property  of  the  said  John  Ramsay ;  and  did 
endorse  and  make  over,  or  cause  and  procure  to  be  endorsed  and 
made  over,  the  said  bill  of  exchange  last  above  libelled,  before  it 
had  become  due,  to  the  London  Joint-Stock  Bank,  London,  in 
order  that  the  proceeds  thereof  might  be  credited  to  the  said  City 
of  Glasgow  Bank,  in  account  with  the  said  London  Joint-Stock 
Bank,  as  a  payment  made  on  behalf  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow 
Bank,  and  the  said  proceeds  were  credited  accordingly ; 
or  othei-wise,  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter, 
Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes 
Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  did,  all  and  each  or  one 
or  more  of  you,  time  and  place  last  above  libelled,  wickedly  and 
feloniously,  and  in  breach  of  the  trust  reposed  in  you  as  aforesaid, 
embezzle  and  appropriate  to  your  own  uses  and  purposes,  or  to 
the  uses  and  purposes  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  the  said 
bill  of  exchange  last  above  libelled,  received  by  and  entrusted  to 
you  as  aforesaid,  or  the  proceeds  of  the  said  bill,  the  propei-ty  of 
the  said  John  Ramsay. 
428 


Appendix   11. 


Likeas  (XI.),  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter, 
Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis.  John  Innes 
Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  or  one  or  more  of  you, 
having,  on  the  20th  day  of  August,  1878,  or  on  one  or  other  o£ 
the  days  of  that  month,  or  of  July  immediately  preceding, 
or  of  September  immediately  following,  in  or  near  the  Anderstou 
branch  office  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Batik,  in  or  near 
Anderston,  Glasgow,  received  from  Charles  Connell  &  Company,, 
then  and  now  or  lately  shipbuilders,  Scotstoun,  Whiteinch,  near 
Glasgow,  or  from  Charles  Connell,  the  only  partner  of  said  firm, 
then  and  now  or  lately  residing  at  Rozelle,  Broomhill  Drive,  Par- 
tick,  in  the  county  of  Lanark,  and  been  entrusted  by  them,  or 
him,  with  two  several  bills  of  exchange,  each  for  the  sum  of 
£3000  sterling,  and  each  dated  Glasgow,  3rd  April,  1878,  drawn 
by  the  said  Charles  Connell  &  Company  upon,  and  accepted  by, 
the  firm  of  Alexander  &  Radcliffe,  then  and  now  or  lately  ship- 
owners, Liverpool  and  London  Chambers,  Exchange,  Liverpool, 
and  each  payable  six  months  after  date  at  the  office  in  London 
of  Barnetts,  Hoares  &  Company,  bankers  there ;  and  having, 
time  and  place  last  above  libelled,  received  from  the  said  Charles 
Connell  &  Company,  or  from  the  said  Charles  Connell,  and  been 
entrusted  by  them,  or  him,  with  two  several  bills  of  exchange, 
each  for  the  sum  of  £3000  sterling,  and  each  dated  Glasgow, 
28th  May,  1878,  drawn  by  the  said  Charles  Connell  &  Company 
upon,  and  accepted  by,  the  said  firm  of  Alexander  &  Radclift'e 
above  designed,  and  each  payable  six  months  after  date  at  the- 
office  in  London  of  Barnetts,  Hoares  &  Company,  above  designed  ; 
and  having,  on  the  26th  day  of  August,  1878,  or  on  one  or  other 
of  the  days  of  that  month,  or  of  September  immediately  follow- 
ing, in  or  near  the  said  Anderston  branch  office  of  the  said  City 
of  Glassrow  Bank,  received  from  the  said  Charles  Connell  k  Com- 
pany,  or  from  the  said  Charles  Connell,  and  been  entrusted  by 
them,  or  him,  with  two  several  bills  of  exchange,  each  for  the 
sum  of  £3000  sterling,  and  each  dated  Glasgow,  2nd  June,  1878, 
drawn  by  the  said  Charles  Connell  &  Company  upon,  and  accejjted 
by,  the  said  firm  of  Alexander  &  Hadcliffe,  above  designed,  and 
each  payable  six  months  after  date  at  the  office  in  London  of 
Barnetts,  Hoares  &  Company,  above  designed,  all  for  the  special 
and  sole  purpose  of  retaining  the  said  l>i!ls  in  your  custody  till 
due,  and  of  collecting  payment  of  the  same  when  due  from  the 
debtors  therein,  on  behalf  of  the  said  Charles  Connell  &  Com- 
pany, or  of  the  said  Charles  Connell,  neither  of  whom  was,  at  the 
dates  when  the  said  six  bills  of  exchange  last  above  libelled  were 
respectively  received  as  aforesaid,  or  afterwards,  indebted  or 
under  obligation  to  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  liank  ;  and  you.  the 
said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William 
Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers 
Stronach,  not  having  authority  to  make  use  of  the  said  six  bills 

439 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

■of  exchange  last  above  libelled,  or  any  of  them,  for  any  other  pur- 
pose than  that  of  collecting  payment  thereof  when  due,  as 
aforesaid :  Yet,  nevertheless,  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis 
Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Hemy  Inglis,  John 
Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  did,  all  and  each 
or  one  or  more  of  you,  on  the  20th  day  of  August,  1878,  or  on 
one  or  other  of  the  days  of  that  month,  or  of  July  immediately 
preceding,  or  of  September  immediately  following,  as  regards 
the  four  first  above  mentioned  of  the  six  bills  of  exchange  last 
above  libelled,  and  on  the  26th  day  of  August,  1878,  or  on  one 
or  other  of  the  days  of  that  month,  or  of  September  immediately 
following,  as  regards  the  two  last  above  mentioned  of  the  six 
bills  of  exchange  last  above  libelled,  in  or  near  the  said  Anderston 
branch  office  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  or  in  or  near  the 
said  head  office  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  wickedly  and 
feloniously  steal  and  theftuously  away  take  the  six  bills  of  ex- 
change last  above  libelled,  or  part  thereof,  the  property  of  the 
said  Charles  Connell  &  Company,  or  of  the  said  Charles  Connell, 
and  did  endorse  and  make  over,  or  cause  or  procure  to  be  endorsed 
and  made  over,  each  of  the  said  six  bills  of  exchange  last  above 
libelled,  before  it  had  become  due,  to  the  London  Joint-Stock 
Bank,  London,  in  order  that  the  proceeds  thereof  might  be 
credited  to  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  in  account  with  the 
said  London  Joint-Stock  Bank,  as  a  payment  made  on  behalf 
of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  the  said  proceeds  were 
credited  accordingly ;  or  otherwise,  you,  the  said  John  Stewart, 
Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Salmond.  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis, 
John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  did,  all  and 
■each  or  one  or  more  of  you,  time  or  times  or  place  or  places 
respectively  above  libelled,  as  regards  the  six  bills  of  exchange 
last  above  libelled  respectively,  wickedly  and  feloniously,  and  in 
breach  of  the  trust  reposed  in  you  as  aforesaid,  embezzle  and 
appropriate  to  your  own  uses  and  purposes,  or  to  the  uses  and 
purposes  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  the  six  bills  of 
exchange  last  above  libelled,  or  part  thereof,  received  by  and 
entrusted  to  you  as  aforesaid,  or  the  proceeds  of  the  said  bills,  oi 
part  thereof,  the  property  of  the  said  Charles  Connell  &  Com- 
pany, or  of  the  said  Charles  Connell. 

Likeas  (XII.),  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter, 
Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes 
Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  or  one  or  more  of  you, 
having,  on  the  21st  day  of  August,  1878,  or  on  one 
or  other  of  the  dajTs  of  that  month,  or  of  July  im- 
mediately preceding,  or  of  September  immediately  follow- 
ing, in  or  near  the  said  head  office  of  the  said  City  of 
Glasgow  Bank,  received  from  the  Marbella  Iron  Ore  Companv, 
Limited,  having  its  registered  office  in  London,  and  been  entrusted 

430 


Appendix  II. 


hj  the  said  Marbella  Iron  Ore  Company,  Limited,  with  a  bill  of 
exchange  for  the  sum  of  £525  sterling,  dated  London,  7th  July, 
1878,  drawn  by  the  said  Marbella  Iron  Ore  Comyjany,  Limited, 
upon,  and  accepted  by,  the  tirm  of  E.  J.  Waite  &  Company.  Bute 
Docks,  Cardiff,  and  payable  four  months  after  date  at  the  office 
of  Glyn,  Mills,  Currie  &  Company,  bankers,  London,  for  the 
special  and  sole  purpose  of  retaining  the  said  bill  in  your  custody 
till  due,  and  of  collecting  payment  of  the  same  when  due  from 
the  debtors  therein  on  behalf  of  the  said  Marbella  Iron  Ore  Com- 
pany, Limited,  which  was  not  then  or  afterwards  indebted  or 
under  obligation  to  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  ;  and  you, 
the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William 
Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes  Wright,  and  Kobert  Summers 
Stronach,  not  having  authority  to  make  use  of  the  said  bill  of 
■exchange  last  above  libelled  for  any  other  pui-pcse  than  that  of 
collecting  payment  thereof  when  due  as  aforesaid  ;  yet,  neverthe- 
less, you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter.  Kobert  Salmond, 
William  Taylor,  Hemy  Inglis,  John  Innes  Wright,  and  Kobert 
Summers  Stronach,  did,  all  and  each  or  one  or  more  of  you.  on 
the  21st  day  of  August,  1878,  or  on  one  or  other  of  the  days  of 
that  month,  or  of  July  immediately  preceding,  or  of  Se])tember 
immediately  following,  in  or  near  the  said  head  office  of  the  said 
City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  wickedly  and  feloniously  steal  and  theftu- 
ously  away  take  the  bill  of  exchange  for  the  sum  of  £525  above 
libelled,  the  property  of  the  said  Marbella  Iron  Ore  Comjiany, 
Limited,  and  did  endorse  and  make  over,  or  cause  or  procure  to 
be  endorsed  and  made  ovez',  the  said  bill  of  exchange  last  above 
libelled,  before  it  had  become  due,  to  the  London  Joint-Stock 
Bank,  London,  in  order  that  the  proceeds  thereof  might  be 
credited  to  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  in  account  with  the 
said  London  Joint-Stock  Bank,  as  a  payment  made  on  behalf  of 
the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  the  said  ])rocee<ls  were 
■credited  accordingly  ;  or  otherwise,  you,  the  said  John  Stewart, 
Lewis  Potter,  Kobert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis, 
John  Innes  Wright,  and  Kobert  Summers  Stronach,  did.  all  and 
each  or  one  or  more  of  you,  time  and  place  last  above  libel K'd. 
wickedly  and  feloniously,  and  in  breach  of  the  trust  reposed  m 
you  as  aforesaid,  embezzle  and  appropriate  to  your  own  uses  and 
purposes,  or  to  the  uses  and  purposes  of  the  said  City  of  (ilas<:o\v 
Bank,  the  said  bill  of  exchange  last  above  libelled,  received  liy 
and  entrusted  to  you  as  aforesaid,  or  the  proceetls  of  the  said  bill, 
the  property  of  the  said  Marbella  Iron  Ore  Comftany,  Lijnitcd. 

Likeas  (XIII.),  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter, 
Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor.  Henry  Inglis,  John  Inn«'s 
Wrieht,  and  Kobert  Summers  Stronach,  or  one  or  moro  of  you, 
liaving,  time  and  place  last  above  libelled,  received  from  the  said 
Marbella  Iron  Ore  Company,  Limited,  and  been  entrusted   l)y 

43X 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

them  with  a  bill  of  exchange  for  the  sum  of  £358  13s.  8d.  sterlingj^ 
dated  London,  13th  August,  1878,  drawn  bj  the  said  Marbella 
Iron  Ore  Company,  Limited,  upon,  and  accepted  by,  the  Panteg 
Steel  Works  and  Engineering  Company,  Limited,  Panteg,  near 
Pontypool,  Monmouthshire,  and  payable  four  months  after  date- 
at  77  Lombard  Street,  London,  E.C.,  Messrs.  Fuller,  Banbury, 
Nix  &  Mathieson,  for  the  special  and  sole  purpose  of  retaining  the 
said  bill  in  your  custody  till  due,  and  of  collecting  payment  of 
the  same  when  due  from  the  debtors  therein,  on  behalf  of  the 
said  Marbella  Iron  Ore  Company,  Limited,  which  was  not  then  or 
afterwards  indebted  or  under  obligation  to  the  said  City  of 
Glasgow  Bank ;  and  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter,. 
Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes 
Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  not  having  authority 
to  make  use  of  the  said  bill  of  exchange  last  above  libelled  for 
any  other  purpose  than  that  of  collecting  payment  thereof  when 
due  as  aforesaid :  Yet,  nevertheless,  you,  the  said  John  Stewart, 
Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor.  Henry  Inglis, 
John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  did,  all  and 
each  or  one  or  more  of  you,  time  and  place  last  above  libelled, 
wickedly  and  feloniously  steal  and  theftuously  away  take  the  bill 
of  exchange  for  the  sum  of  £358  13s.  8d.  above  libelled,  the 
property  of  the  said  Marbella  Iron  Ore  Company,  Limited,  and 
did  endorse  and  make  over,  or  cause  or  procure  to  be  endorsed 
ajid  made  over,  the  said  bill  of  exchange  last  above  libelled,, 
liefore  it  had  become  due,  to  the  London  Joint-Stock  Bank. 
London,  in  order  that  the  proceeds  thereof  might  be  credited  to 
the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  in  account  with  the  said  London 
Joint-Stock  Bank,  as  a  payment  made  on  behalf  of  the  said  City 
of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  the  said  proceeds  were  credited  accord- 
ingly ;  or  otherwise,  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter, 
Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes 
Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  did,  all  and  each  or  one 
or  more  of  you,  time  and  place  last  above  libelled,  wickedly  and 
feloniously,  and  in  breach  of  the  trust  reposed  in  you  as  aforesaid, 
embezzle  and  appropriate  to  your  own  uses  and  purposes,  or  to 
the  uses  and  purposes  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  the  said 
bill  of  exchange  last  above  libelled,  received  by  and  entrusted  to 
you  as  aforesaid,  or  the  proceeds  of  the  said  bill,  the  property 
of  the  said  Marbella  Iron  Ore  Company,  Limited. 

Likeas  (XIV.),  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter, 
Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes 
Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  or  one  or  more  of  you, 
having,  on  the  31st  day  of  August,  1878,  or  on  one  or  other  of 
the  days  of  that  month,  or  of  July  immediately  preceding,  or  of 
September  immediately  following,  in  or  near  the  said  head  office 
of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  received  from  the  said  Marbella 
432 


Appendix  II. 


Iron  Ore  Company,  Limited,  and  been  entrusted  by  theui  with  a 
bill  of  exchange  for  the  sum  of  £800  sterling,  dated  London,  1-ith 
July,  1878,  drawn  by  the  said  Marbella  Iron  Ore  Company, 
Limited,  upon,  and  accepted  by,  the  said  firm  of  E.  J.  Waite  & 
Company  above  designed,  and  payable  four  months  after  date 
at  the  office  of  Glyn,  Mills,  Currie  &  Company,  bankers,  London, 
for  the  special  and  sole  purpose  of  retaining  the  said  bill  in  your 
custody  till  due,  and  of  collecting  payment  of  the  same  when  due 
from  the  debtors  therein,  on  behalf  of  the  said  Marbella  Iron 
Ore  Company,  Limited,  which  was  not  then  or  afterwards  in- 
debted or  under  obligation  to  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  ; 
and  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Salinond, 
"William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert 
Summers  Stronach,  not  having  authority  to  make  use  of  the 
said  bill  of  exchange  last  above  libelled  for  any  other  purpose 
than  that  of  collecting  payment  thereof  when  due,  as  aforesaid : 
Yet,  nevertheless,  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter, 
Robert  Salraond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes 
Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach.  did,  all  and  each  or  one 
or  more  of  you,  on  the  31st  day  of  August,  1878,  or  on 
one  or  other  of  the  days  of  that  month,  or  of  July  immediately 
preceding,  or  of  September  immediately  following,  place  last 
above  libelled,  wickedly  and  feloniously  steal  and  theftuously 
away  take  the  bill  of  exchange  for  the  sum  of  £800  above  libelled, 
the  property  of  the  said  Marbella  Iron  Ore  Company,  Limited, 
and  did  endorse,  and  make  over,  or  cause  or  procure  to  be  en- 
dorsed and  made  over,  the  said  bill  of  exchange  last  above  libelled 
before  it  had  become  due  to  the  London  Joint-Stock  Bank, 
London,  in  order  that  the  proceeds  thereof  might  be  credited  to 
the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  in  account  with  the  said  London 
Joint^Stock  Bank,  as  a  payment  made  on  behalf  of  the  said  City 
of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  the  said  proceeds  were  credited  accord- 
ingly;  or  otherwise,  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter, 
Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes 
Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  did,  all  and  each  or  one 
or  more  of  you,  time  and  place  last  above  libelled,  wickedly  and 
feloniously,  and  in  breach  of  the  trust  reposed  in  you  as  aforesaid, 
embezzle  and  appropriate  to  your  own  uses  and  purjtoses,  or  to 
the  uses  and  purposes  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  the  said 
bill  of  exchange  last  above  libelled,  received  by  and  entrusted  to 
you  as  aforesaid,  or  the  proceeds  of  the  said  bill,  the  property  of 
the  said  Marbella  Iron  Ore  Company,  Limited. 

Likeas  (XV.),  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter, 
Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Heniy  Inf^lis,  John  Innes 
Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  or  one  or  more  of  you, 
having,  on  the  5th  day  of  September,  1878,  or  on  one  or  other 
of  the  days  of  that  month,  or  of  August  immediately  preceding. 
5  a  433 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

place  last  above  libelled,  received  from  the  said  Marbella  Iron 
Ore  Company,  Limited,  and  been  entrusted  by  them  with  a  bill 
of  exchange  for  the  sum  of  £1187  lis.  3d.  sterling,  dated  London, 
10th  July,  1878,  drawn  by  the  said  Marbella  Iron  Ore  Company, 
Limited,  upon,  and  accepted  by,  the  Ebbw  Vale  Steel,  Iron,  and 
Coal  Company,  Limited,  Ebbw  Vale  Works,  Monmouthshire,  and 
payable  four  months  after  date  at  the  office  of  the  Consolidated 
Bank,  London,  for  the  special  and  sole  purpose  of  retaining  the 
said  bill  in  your  custody  till  due,  and  of  collecting  payment  of 
the  same  when  due  from  the  debtors  therein,  on  behalf  of  the 
said  Marbella  Iron  Ore  Company,  Limited,  which  was  not  then  or 
afterwards  indebted  or  under  obligation  to  the  said  City  of 
Glasgow  Bank ;  and  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter, 
Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes 
Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  not  having  authority 
to  make  use  of  the  said  bill  of  exchange  last  above  libelled  for 
any  other  purpose  than  that  of  collecting  payment  thereof  when 
due  as  aforesaid :  Yet,  nevertheless,  you,  the  said  John  Stewart, 
Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis, 
John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  did,  all  and 
each  or  one  or  more  of  you,  on  the  5th  day  of  September.  1878, 
or  on  one  or  other  of  the  days  of  that  month,  or  of  August  im- 
mediately preceding,  place  last  above  libelled,  wickedly  and 
feloniously  steal  and  theftuously  away  take  the  bill  of  exchange 
for  the  sum  of  £1187  lis.  3d.  above  libelled,  the  property  of  the 
said  Marbella  Iron  Ore  Company,  Limited,  and  did  endorse  and 
make  over,  or  cause  or  procure  to  be  endorsed  and  made  over, 
the  said  bill  of  exchange  last  above  libelled  before  it  had  become 
due  to  the  London  Joint-Stock  Bank,  London,  in  order  that  the 
proceeds  thereof  might  be  credited  to  the  said  City  of  Glasgow 
Bank,  in  account  with  the  said  London  Joint-Stock  Bank,  as  a 
payment  made  on  behalf  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  and 
the  said  proceeds  were  credited  accordingly ;  or  otherwise,  you, 
the  said  John  Stewart.  Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William 
Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers 
Stronach,  did,  all  and  each  or  one  or  more  of  you,  time  and 
place  last  above  libelled,  wickedly  and  feloniously,  and  in  breach 
of  the  trust  reposed  in  you  as  aforesaid,  embezzle  and  appropriate 
to  your  own  uses  and  purposes,  or  to  the  uses  and  purposes  of  the 
said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  the  said  bill  of  exchange  last  above 
libelled,  received  by  and  entrusted  to  you  as  aforesaid,  or  the 
proceeds  thereof,  the  property  of  the  said  Marbella  Iron  Ore 
Company,  Limited. 

Likeas  (XVI.),  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter, 
Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes 
Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  or  one  or  more  of  you, 

434 


Appendix   II. 


having,  on  the  13th  day  of  September,  1878,  or  on  one  or  other  of 
the   days  of   that  month,  or  of  August  immediately   preceding, 
place  last  above  libelled,  received  from  James  Baird,  merchant 
at  St.  John's,  Newfoundland,  and  then  residing  in  Glasgow,  and 
been  entrusted  by  him  with  a  bill  of  exchange  for  the  sum  oi 
i;700  sterling,  dated   St.  John's,    Newfoundland,    21st   August, 
1878,   drawn  by  Walter  Grieve  &  Company,  merchant*  at  St. 
John's  aforesaid,  upon  Walter  Grieve,  Son  &  Company,  merchants, 
Greenock,  and  payable  in  London  sixty  days  after  sight,  to  the 
order  of  the  Union  Bank  of  Newfoundland,  and  endorsed  by  the 
said  Union  Bank  of  Newfoundland  to  the  said  James  Baird,  and 
accepted  by  the  said  Walter  Grieve,  Son  &  Company,  of  date  2nd 
September,  1878,  as  payable  at  the  Union  Bank  of  London,  and 
that  for  the  special  and  sole  purpose  of  retaining  the  said  bill 
in  your  custody  till  due,  and  of  collecting  payment  of  the  sanie 
when  due  from  the  debtors  therein,  on  behalf  of  the  said  James 
Baird,  who  was  not  then  or  afterwards  indebted  or  under  obliga- 
tion to  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  ;   and  you,  the  said  John 
Stewart,  Lewis  Potter,  Kobert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry 
Inglis,  John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  not 
having  authority  to  make  use  of  the  said  bill  of  exchange  la'it 
above  libelled  for  any  other  purpose  than  that  of  collecting  pay- 
ment thereof  when  due,  as  aforesaid  :  Yet,  nevertheless,  you,  the 
said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor, 
Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach, 
did,  all  and  each  or  one  or  more  of  you,  on  the  13th  day  of  Septem- 
ber, 1878,  or  on  one  or  other  of  the  days  of  that  month,  or  of 
August  immediately  preceding,  place  last  above  libelled,  wickedly 
and  feloniously   steal    and    theftuously   away    take   the    bill    ol 
exchange  for  the  sum  of  £700  above  libelled,  the  property  of  the 
said  James  Baird,  and  did  endorse  and  make  over,  or  cause  or 
procure  to  be  endorsed  and  made  over,  the  said  bill  of  exchange 
last  above  libelled  before  it  had  become  due  to  the  London  Joint> 
Stock  Bank,  London,  in  order  that  the  proceeds  thereof  might  be 
credited  to  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  in  account  with  the 
said  London  Joint-Stock  Bank,  as  a  payment  made  on  behalf  of 
the    said   City   of   Glasgow   Bank,  and    the   said    proceeds  were 
credited  accordingly ;   or  otherwise  you,  the  said  John  Stewart, 
Lewis  Potter,   Robert  Salmond,   William   Taylor,    Henry   Inglis, 
John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  did.  all  and 
each  or  one  or  more  of  you,  time  and  place  last  above  libelled, 
wickedly  and  feloniously,  and  in  breach  of  the  trust  reposed  in 
you  as  aforesaid,  embezzle  and  appropriate  to  your  own  uses  and 
purposes,  or  to  the  uses  and  purposes  of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow 
Bank,  the  said  bill  of  exchange  last  above  libelled,  received  by 
and  entrusted  to  you  as  aforesaid,  or  the  ))roceed8  of  the   said 
bill,  the  property  of  the  said  James  Baird. 

435 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Likeas  (XVII.),  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter, 
Robert  Sahnond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes 
Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  or  one  or  more  of  you, 
having,  on  the  21st  day  of  September,  1878,  or  on  one  or  other 
of  the  days  of  that  month,  or  of  August  immediately  preceding, 
place  last  above  libelled,  received  from  John  MTherson  &  Com- 
pany, then  and  now  or  lately  engineers  and  ironfounders.  Mount 
Blue  Works,  Camlachie,  in  or  near  Glasgow,  and  been  entrusted 
by  them  with  a  bill  of  exchange  for  the  sum  of  £562  10s. 
sterling,  dated  Hong  Kong,  9th  August,  1878,  drawn  by  the 
Chartered  Bank  of  India,  Australia,  and  China,  Hong  Kong,  upon 
the  Chartered  Bank  of  India,  Australia,  and  China,  Hatton  Court, 
Threadneedle  Street,  London,  and  payable  thirty  days  after 
sight  to  the  order  of,  and  endorsed  to  the  said  John  M'Pherson 
&  Company,  and  accepted  by  the  said  Chartered  Bank  of  India, 
Australia,  and  China,  Hatton  Court  aforesaid,  of  date  23rd 
September,  1878,  as  payable  at  the  City  Bank,  London,  and  that 
for  the  special  and  sole  purpose  of  retaining  the  said  bill  in  your 
custody  till  due,  and  of  collecting  payment  of  the  same  when 
due,  for  the  debtors  therein  on  behalf  of  the  said  John  MTherson 
&  Company,  which  firm  was  not  then  or  afterwards  indebted 
or  under  obligation  to  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  ;  and  you, 
the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Salmoiid,  William 
Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers 
Stronach,  not  having  authority  to  make  use  of  the  said  bill 
of  exchange  last  above  libelled  for  any  other  purpose  than  that 
of  collecting  payment  thereof  when  due  as  aforesaid  :  Yet,  never- 
theless, you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter,  Robert 
Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes  Wright, 
and  Robert  Summers  Stronacli,  did,  all  and  each  or  one  or  more 
of  you,  on  the  21st  day  of  September,  1878,  or  on  one  or  other 
of  the  days  of  that  month,  or  of  August  immediately  preceding, 
place  last  above  libelled,  wickedly  and  feloniously  steal  and 
theftuously  away  take  the  bill  of  exchange  for  the  sum  of 
.£562  10s.,  above  libelled,  the  property  of  the  said  John  M'Pher- 
son &  Company,  and  did  endorse  and  make  over,  or  cause  or 
procure  to  be  endorsed  and  made  over,  the  said  bill  of  exchange 
last  above  libelled,  before  it  had  become  due,  to  the  London 
Joint-Stock  Bank,  London,  in  order  that  the  proceeds  thereof 
might  be  credited  to  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  in  account 
with  the  said  London  Joint-Stock  Bank,  as  a  payment  made  on  be- 
half of  the  said  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  the  said  proceeds  were 
credited  accordingly;  or  otherwise,  you,  the  said  John  Stewart, 
Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis, 
John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  did,  all 
and  each  or  one  or  more  of  you,  time  and  place  last  above 
libelled,  wickedly  and  feloniously,  and  in  breach  of  the  trust 
reposed  in  you  as  aforesaid,  embezzle  and  appropriate  to  your 

436 


Appendix  II. 

own  uses  and  purposes,  or  to  the  uses  and  jiurposes  of  the  said 
City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  the  said  bill  of  exchange  last  above 
libelled,  received  by  and  entrusted  to  you  as  aforesaid,  or  tlie 
proceeds  of  the  said  bill,  the  property  of  the  said  John  M'Pher- 
8on  it  Company;  and  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  having  been 
apprehended  and  taken  before  Francis  William  Clark,  Esq., 
advocate.  Sheriff  of  Lanarkshire,  did,  in  his  presence  at  Glasgow, 
on  the  22nd  and  29th  days  of  October.  1878,  respectively, 
emit  and  subscribe  a  declaration ;  and  you,  the  said  Lewis  Potter, 
having  been  apprehended  and  taken  before  the  said  Francis 
William  Clark,  did,  in  his  presence  at  Glasgow,  on  the  22nd, 
2oth,  and  29th  days  of  October,  1878,  respectively,  emit  and 
subscribe  a  declaration ;  and  you,  the  said  Robert  Salmoud, 
having  been  apprehended  and  taken  before  the  said  Francis 
William  Clark,  did,  in  his  presence  at  Glasgow,  on  the  22nd 
and  29th  days  of  October,  1878,  respectively,  emit  and  sub- 
scribe a  declaration;  and  you,  the  said  William  Taylor,  having 
been  apprehended  and  taken  before  the  said  Francis  William 
Clark,  did,  in  his  presence  at  Glasgow,  on  tlie  22nd,  ami  on 
two  several  occasions  on  the  29th  days  of  October,  is78, 
respectively,  emit  and  subscribe  a  declaration  ;  and  you,  the  said 
Henry  Inglis,  having  been  apprehended  and  taken  before  the  said 
Francis  William  Clark,  did,  in  his  presence  at  Glasgow,  on  the 
22nd,  and  on  two  several  occasions  on  the  29th  days  of  October, 
1878,  respectively,  emit  and  subscribe  a  declaration;  and  you,  the 
said  John  Innes  Wright,  having  been  apprehended  and  taken 
before  the  said  Francis  William  Clark,  did,  in  his  presence  at 
Glasgow,  on  the  22nd,  and  on  two  several  occasions  on  the  29th 
days  of  October,  1878,  respectively,  emit  and  subscribe  a 
declaration ;  and  you,  the  said  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  having 
been  apprehended  and  taken  before  the  said  Francis  William 
Clark,  did,  in  his  presence  at  Glasgow,  on  the  22nd  and  29th 
days  of  October,  1878,  respectively,  emit  and  subscribe  a 
declaration,  which  several  declarations  being  to  be  used  in 
evidence  against  each  of  you  by  whom  the  same  were  respec- 
tively emitted,  as  also  the  books,  letters,  documents,  excerjits, 
prints,  and  other  articles  enumerated  in  an  inventory  thereof, 
hereunto  annexed  and  referred  to,  being  to  be  used  in  evidence 
against  all  and  each,  or  one  or  more  of  you,  the  said  Jnhn 
Stewart,  Lewis  Potter,  Robert  Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Iknry 
Inglis,  John  Innes  Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  at 
your  trial,  will  for  that  purpose  be  in  due  time  lodged  in  the 
hands  of  the  Clerk  of  the  High  Court  of  Justiciary,  lioforo  which 
you  are  to  be  tried,  that  you  may  respectively  have  an  oppor- 
tunity  of  seeing  tlie  same,  all  which,  or  part  tliL'ieof,  being  found 
proven  by  the  verdict  of  an  assize,  or  admitted  by  the  respective 
judicial  confessions  of  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter, 
Robert    Salmond,    William    Taylor,    Henry    Inglis,    John    IiinoB 

437 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Wright,  and  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  before  the  Lord  Justice- 
General,  Lord  Justice-Clerk,  and  Lords  Commissioners  of 
Justiciary,  you,  the  said  John  Stewart,  Lewis  Potter,  Robert 
Salmond,  William  Taylor,  Henry  Inglis,  John  Innes  Wright,  and 
Robert  Summers  Stronach,  ought  to  be  punished  with  the  pains 
of  law  to  deter  others  from  committing  the  like  crimes  in  all 
time  coming. 

(Signed)     John  Burnet,  A.D. 


438 


APPENDIX  III. 
The  Declarations  of  the  Prisoners. 

First  Declaration  of  John  Stewart. 

At  Glasgow,  the  twenty-second  day  of  October,  eifrhteen 
hundred  and  seventy-eight,  in  presence  of  Francis  William  Clark, 
Esquire,  advocate,  Sheriff  of  Lanarkshire. 

Compeared  a  prisoner,  and  the  charge  against  him  having 
been  read  over  and  explained  to  him,  and  he  having  been 
judicially  admonished  and  examined,  declares  and  says — My 
name  is  John  Stewart.  I  am  a  native  of  Glasgow,  sixty-one 
years  of  age,  and  I  reside  at  34  Moray  Place,  Edinburgh.  I 
am  a  wine  merchant. 

I  declare  that  I  am  not  guilty  of  the  charge  of  falsehood, 
fraud,  and  wilful  imposition  preferred  against  me,  of  having 
falsified  the  books  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  prepared 
and  issued  false  and  fabricated  balance  sheets,  during  the  years 
from  1873  to  1878  inclusive,  while  the  Bank  was  in  a  state 
of  insolvency,  and  well  known  to  me  to  be  so,  so  as  to  conceal 
the  true  state  of  the  affairs  of  the  Bank  from  the  shareholders 
and  creditors,  and  of  declaring  false  dividends,  in  order  to 
deceive  said  shareholders,  creditors,  and  the  pul)lic. 

I  farther  declare  that,  as  I  have  been  advised,  I  decline  at  this 
stage  to  make  any  farther  statements,  or  answer  any  farther 
questions.     All  which  I  declare  to  be  truth.     One  word  deleted. 

Second  Declaration  of  John  Stewaht. 

At  Glasgow,  the  twenty-ninth  day  of  October,  eighteen 
hundred  and  seventy-eight  years,  in  presence  of  Francis  Willian* 
Clark,  Esquire,  advocate.  Sheriff  of  Lanarkshire. 

Compeared  John  Stewart,  presently  prisoner  in  the  prison 
of  Glasgow,  and  a  charge  of  theft  now  preferred  against  him 
having  been  read  over  and  explained  to  him,  and  be  having 
been  judicially  admonished  and  examined,  declares  and  says — 
I  am  not  guilty  of  the  charge  made  against  me  of  stealing 
a  number  of  bills,  amounting  to  twenty-three  thousand  six 
hundred  and  ninety-three  pounds  twelve  shillings  and  seven- 
pence,  or  thereby. 

439 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

I  am  advised  to  make  no  farther  statement  at  this  stage 
than  that  I  am  not  guilty.  All  which  I  declare  to  be  truth. 
Three  words   deleted. 

First  Declaration  of  Lewis  Potter. 

At  Glasgow,  the  twenty-second  day  of  October,  eighteen 
hundred  and  seventy-eight  years,  in  presence  of  Francis  William 
Clark,  Esquire,  advocate,  Sheriff  of  Lanarkshire. 

Compeared  a  prisoner,  and  the  charge  against  him  having 
been  read  over  and  explained  to  him,  and  he  having  been 
judicially  admonished  and  examined,  declares  and  says — My 
name  is  Lewis  Potter.  I  am  a  native  of  Falkirk,  seventy-one 
years  of  age;  and  I  reside  at  No.  7  Claremont  Terrace,  Glasgow. 
I  am  a  retired  merchant. 

I  declare  that  I  am  not  guilty  of  the  charge  of  falsehood,  fraud, 
and  wilful  imposition  preferred  against  me,  of  having  falsified 
the  books  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  prepared  and  issued 
false  and  fabricated  balance  sheets  during  the  years  from  1873 
to  1878  inclusive,  while  the  Bank  was  in  a  state  of  insolvency, 
and  well  known  to  me  to  be  so,  so  as  to  conceal  the  true  state 
of  the  affairs  of  the  Bank  from  the  shareholders  and  creditors, 
and  of  declaring  false  dividends  in  order  to  deceive  said  share- 
holders, creditors,  and  the  public. 

I  have  nothing  farther  to  say  in  the  meantime,  and  I  decline 
to  answer  any  questions  that  inay  be  put  to  me.  All  which  I 
■declare  to  be  truth. 


Secoxd  Declaration  op  Lewis  Potter. 

At  Glasgow,  the  twenty-fifth  day  of  October,  eighteen 
hundred  and  seventy-eight  years,  in  presence  of  Francis  William 
Clark,  Esquire,  advocate.  Sheriff  of  Lanarkshire. 

Compeared  Lewis  Potter,  presently  prisoner  in  the  prison  of 
Glasgow,  and  the  declaration  emitted  by  him  before  the  said 
Sheriff,  of  date  the  twenty-second  day  of  October  current,  having 
been  read  over  to  him,  and  he  having  been  judicially  admonished 
and  examined,  declares  and  says — 

I  am  now  brought  before  the  Sheriff  at  my  own  request. 

I  considered  that  the  City  Bank  was  in  a  solvent  state  when 
the  last  balance  sheet  was  struck.  I  was  under  the  impression 
that  all  the  securities  were  sufficient.  I  signed  the  last  balance 
sheet.  I  did  this  under  the  impression  that  it  was  correct.  It 
Avas  done  while  I  and  the  other  Directors  were  at  luncheon,  and 
I  signed  it  at  their  request.  I  think  I  had  just  come  from  Ayr 
at  the  time,  where  my  time  was  spent  in  country  quarters, 
and  my  mind  was  entirely  off  business.  Before  signing  I  had 
not  examined  any  of  the   books  or  documents,   so  as  to  test 

440 


Appendix   III. 


the  accuracy  of  the  balance  sheet.  I  acted  on  the  impression 
that  others  had  done  so. 

Shown  a  document,  titled  on  the  back,  "  City  of  Glasgow  Bank, 
Abstract  of  Accounts  at  June  5,  1878,  B."  I  cannot  say  whether 
I  had  seen  that  before  I  signed  the  balance  sheet  or  ledger. 
I  don't  recollect  of  going  over  the  foresaid  document  along  with 
Mr.  Stewart  and  Jilr.  Robert  Stronach  before  signing  the  balance 
sheetw     I  may  have  seen  it  at  the  Bank.     It  is  likely  I  did. 

I  observe  that  in  the  foresaid  document  the  indebtedness  of 
the  Bank  is  stated  under  '■  Bills  payable  "  at  £2,881,2r)2  IBs.  6d., 
and  that  there  is  deducted  from  that,  under  "  Bills  payable." 
a  sum  of  £973,300.  I  don't  know  why  that  was  done,  and  I 
understand  nothing  about  it. 

On  the  other  side  of  the  document  I  see  an  entry  showing 
the  amount  lent  by  the  Bank  on  credit  accounts  No.  1,  a  sum 
of  £2,009,752  lis.  2d.,  and  that  there  is  deducted  from  that  a 
sum  of  £680,614.  I  do  not  know  how  that  was  done,  and  I  dout 
understand  it. 

Interrogated — Did  you  think  it  was  properly  donel  Declares 
— I  cannot  say.  I  am  unable  to  give  explanations  regai'ding  the 
said  document,  because,  though  I  may  have  seen  it,  I  have 
never  thoroughly  examined  it. 

I  have  been  about  twenty  years  a  Director  of  the  City  Bank. 
I  came  into  the  direction  soon  after  the  stoppage  in  1856.  I 
did  this  at  tdie  urgent  request  of  parties. 

I  do  not  think  I  or  my  firms  were  indebted  to  the  Bank  at 
that  time.  Ever  since  that  time,  and  certainly  latterly,  I  and 
my  firms  abstained  from  doins?  business  with  the  Bank.  What 
business  we  did  was  almost  all  transacted  with  the  National 
Bank  and  the  British  Linen  Company.  We  got  some  credits 
from  the  City  Bank,  but  I  think  these  did  not  exceed  £30,000  at 
the  outside.  I  explain  that  we  have  considerable  credits  from  the 
Bank,  but  these  are  principally  on  its  own  account. 

The  City  Bank  wished  to  acquire  certain  lands  in  New 
Zealand,  and  they  gave  us  credits  to  pay  for  the  same,  to  be 
held  on  their  account. 

I  have  no  doubt  this  proposal  originated  at  a  meeting  of 
Directors,  and  was  sanctioned  by  them,  and  I  suppose  will 
appear  in  the  minutes.  I  know  tliat  lands  were  bouglit,  but 
-cannot  say  as  to  the  form  of  the  title.  I  don't  think  the  Bank 
has  any  title  to  the  lands.  These  purchases  were  made  within 
the  last  six  or  nine  months,  ;ind  we  should  be  glad  to  givo  up 
the  titles  to  the  Bank  as  soon  as  the  credits  are  paid. 

The  Bank  also  wished  my  firm  to  acquire  shares  for  tliein 
in  the  New  Zealand  and  Australian  Land  Company,  and  tliey 
gave  us  credits  in  order  to  purchase  these.  The  (itle  was 
taken   in  name   of  my   son,   John   Alexander,   and  Cunningham 

441 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Smith,  both  partners  of  Potter,  Wilson  iV.  Co.     There  were  also^ 
some  shares  taken  in  my  own  name. 

Interrogated — Why  were  those  titles  not  taken  directly  to 
the  Bank  instead  of  you  and  your  partners'  names?  Declares 
— I  cannot  explain  that.  I  and  my  partners  have  held  these 
shares  for  about  five  years.  We  have  not  disposed  of  them  or 
trafficked  in  them.  They  were  held  by  us  for  the  Bank  in  the 
hope  that  a  large  profit  might  be  secured  for  the  Bank  in  a 
short  time. 

During  the  time  of  our  holding  the  only  securities  held  by 
the  Bank  against  us  I  believe  to  be  letters  which  have  passed 
between  us  and  the  Bank.  These  letters,  if  they  existed,  were 
addressed  by  us  to  the  Directors  or  the  Manager.  I  don't 
suppose  such  letters  came  before  the  weekly  meetings  of  the 
Bank,  but  I  am  not  sure.  The  transaction  was  perfectly  well 
understood,  and  it  was  unnecessary  to  revert  to  it  at  the  meetings. 
Even  in  the  event  of  the  stoppage  of  my  firm,  the  Bank  would 
suffer  no  prejudice,  because  I  suppose  the  minutes  would  bear 
that  such  shares  or  property  were  held  hj  us  from  the  Bank, 
and  my  private  estate  remained  accountable.  I  suppose  even 
yet  I  shall  have  a  considerable  reversion. 

I  do  not  know  personally  of  any  advances  made  by  the  Bank 
to  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  without  the  sanction  of  the  Board. 
There  may  have  been ;  and,  if  so,  that  was  the  Managei  's 
affair. 

I  know  nothing,  even  yet,  about  the  amount  of  advances  to 
James  Morton  &  Co.,  but  I  was  aware  that  advances  had  been 
made.  The  advances  to  that  firm  were  never  brought  before 
us,  to  the  best  of  my  belief. 

I  never  knew  anything  of  the  amount  of  advances  to- 
John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  till  shortly  before  the  stoppage,  but 
I  knew  that  some  advances  had  been  made. 

It  certainly  was  our  duty  as  Directors  to  inquire  into  the 
advances  which  we  knew  were  being  made  to  the  above  firms, 
but  we  did  not  do  so,  from  the  faith  we  had  in  the  Manager. 
For  all  that  I  knew,  the  Bank  might  have  advanced  ,£2, 000,000 
to  James  Morton  &  Co. 

I  understood  they  had  securities,  but  I  knew  nothing  of  their 
amount. 

Interrogated — Do  you  consider  that  £2,132,453  was  a  large 
or  moderate  sum  for  the  Bank  to  be  liable  in  on  acceptances? 
Declares — I  think  moderate,  considering  the  probability  that 
a  good  part  of  that  was  for  its  own  benefit. 

Shown  a  book,  titled  on  the  back  "  City  of  Glasgow  Bank 
Cash  Book,  Private,  No.  6,"  and  being  referred  to  the  cross 
entries  under  heads  "  Foreign  and  Colonial  Credits,  No.  2," 
and  "  Bills  payable.  No.  2  " — I  never  saw  those  entries  before, 
and  was  confounded  when  I  saw  a  reference  to  them  in  the 

442 


Appendix  III. 


investigators'  report.  I  dou't  think  I  knew  that  such  a  book 
existed  before.  I  can  give  no  explanation  of  how  in  the  balance 
ledger  of  the  Bank,  under  date  4th  June,  1873,  foreign  and 
colonial  credits  are  only  entered  to  the  amount  of  £1,159,153 
28.  3d.  I  was  not  aware  of  the  fact  that  in  the  balance  ledger 
of  the  Bank  they  were  so  credited. 

At  the  date  of  the  stoppage,  I  think  I  held  about  twelve 
shares.  The  shares  were  converted  into  stock  about  1856.  I 
don't  think  I  ever  held  more. 

I  do  not  think,  and  never  considered,  that  the  Bank  was  in 
an  insolvent  state  till  its  stoppage. 

About  a  month  before  I  thought  I  saw  tightness  in  money. 
I  was  present  at  the  meeting  in  Edinburgh  which  resolved  on 
stoppage.  The  meeting  in  Edinburgh  was  composed  of  myself, 
Mr.  Stewart,  and  the  Manager,  as  deputed  by  the  Board.  We 
resolved  on  stoppage,  for  want  of  the  usual  facilities  to  cany 
on  the  business.  It  had  been  arranged  by  the  Directors  in 
Glasgow  that  a  stoppage  should  take  place  if  we  failed  to  get 
facilities.  The  account  of  Smith,  Fleming  it  Co.  was  talked  of 
among  the  Directors  before  the  stoppage. 

The  immediate  want  of  money  was  the  cause  of  the  stoppage. 
Latterly  the  Manager  found  it  difficult  to  negotiate  the  Bank's 
paper  in  the  market.  I  do  not  know  any  reason  why  the 
Bank  lost  its  credit,  unless  it  were  the  undue  amount  of  credit 
given  to  customers. 

From  1873  to  1878  I  have  not  taken  a  greater  amount  of 
interest  in  the  Bank  than  the  other  Directors.  We  were  all 
much  the  same  in  that  respect. 

James  Nicol  Fleming  did  not  take  a  greater  share  in  the 
management  than  other  people. 

I  cannot  say  that  during  the  years  from  1873  downwards 
I  have  made  no  examination  of  the  Bank  books.  I  have  not 
had  conferences  with  the  Manager  in  going  over  the  books. 

I  don't  think  there  is  a  special  meeting  of  the  Directors 
generally  called  to  go  over  the  balance  sheet,  but  I  think  they 
should  see  it  is  correct.  We  had  full  faith  in  the  Manager  when 
he  presented  a  document. 

Very  likely  w^e  went  over  it  in  a  sort  of  way  ;  but  latterly 
I  was  getting  old,  and  was  not  attending  to  business  as  formerly. 
Since  I  became  a  Director  1  never  said  to  any  one  that  I  liad 
suspicions  of  the  Bank's  stability. 

The  foresaid  declaration,  document,  and  i)rivate  cash  book 
No.  6,  are  docqueted  and  subscribed  as  relative  hereto.  All 
of  which  I  declare  to  be  truth.       Five  words  deleted. 

Thhid  Declaration  of  Lewis  Potter. 

At    Glasgow,    the    twenty-ninth    day    of    October,    citihteen 

443 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

hundred  and  seventy-eight  years,  in  presence  of  Francis  William 
Clark,  Esquire,  advocate.  Sheriff  of  Lanarkshire. 

Compeared  Lewis  Potter,  presently  prisoner  in  the  prison 
of  Glasgow,  and  a  charge  of  theft,  now  preferred  against  him, 
having  been  read  over  and  explained  to  him,  and  he  having 
been  judicially  admonished  and  examined,  declares  and  says — 
I  am  not  guilty  of  the  charge  preferred  against  me  of  stealing 
a  number  of  bills,  amounting  to  twenty-three  thousand  six 
hundred  and  three  pounds  twelve  shillings  and  sevenpence,  or 
thereby. 

I  was  not  aware  that  the  City  Bank  was  in  the  habit  of 
receiving  bills  for  collection,  and  endorsing  and  handing  them 
over  to  the  London  Joint-Stock  Bank  before  they  had  become 
due. 

These  bills  received  for  collection  were  not  the  property  of 
the  Bank,  and  therefore  the  Bank  was  not  entitled  to  retain 
them,  or  have  them  discounted  on  their  own  account. 

As  a  Director,  I  could  not  know  that  any  such  practice  was 
followed  in  the  Bank.  We  had  such  full  confidence  in  the 
Manager  that  we  never  thought  he  would  do  such  a  thing. 
We  only  discovered  after  the  stoppage  that  such  things  had 
been  done,  and  we  were  recommended,  to  the  best  of  my  belief, 
by  our  law  agent  not  to  interfere. 

If  any  such  practice  as  that  above  referred  to  existed,  and 
known  to  the  Directors  to  exist,  it  would  never  have  been 
sanctioned  l>y  the  Directors,  but  would  have  been  repudiated 
with  indignation.  All  which  I  declare  to  be  truth.  Two  words 
deleted. 

First  Declaration  op  Robert  Salmond. 

At  Glasgow,  the  twenty-second  day  of  October,  eighteen 
hundred  and  seventy-eight  years,  in  presence  of  Francis  William 
Clark,  Esquire,  advocate.  Sheriff  of  Lanarkshire. 

Compeared  a  prisoner,  and  the  charge  against  him  having 
been  read  over  and  explained  to  him,  and  he  having  been 
judicially  admonished  and  examined,  declares  and  says — My 
name  is  Robert  Salmond.  I  am  a  native  of  Inveraray,  seventy- 
four  years  of  age,  and  I  reside  at  Rankinston,  Ayrshire.  I  am 
Director  of  several  concerns  in  England. 

I  declare  that  I  am  not  guilty  of  the  charge  of  falsehood,  fraud, 
and  wilful  imposition  preferred  against  me,  of  having  falsified 
the  books  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  prepared  and  issued 
false  and  fabricated  balance  sheets  during  the  years  from  1873 
to  1878  inclusive,  while  the  Bank  was  in  a  state  of  insolvency, 
and  well  known  to  me  to  be  so,  so  as  to  conceal  the  true  state 
of  the  affairs  of  the  Bank  from  the  shareholders  and  creditors, 
and  of  declaring  false  dividends  in  order  to  deceive  said  share- 
holders, creditors,  and  the  public. 

444 


Appendix  III. 


To  the  best  of  my  recollection  I  was  appointed  Director  of  the 
Bank  about   1861   or  1862. 

Interrogated — Did  you  consider  the  Bank  in  a  solvent  condi- 
tion when  the  last  balance  sheet  was  issued?  Declares — 
Certainly  I  did  so,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  and  belief.  I 
signed  it  after  the  meeting  was  over,  and  the  dividend  declared 
twelve  or  fourteen  days  after.  I  had  been  absent  from  Glasgow 
and  the  Bank  while  the  balance  sheet  was  being  prepared. 
Before  signing  the  balance  sheet  I  did  not  examine  the  accounts 
of  the  Bank  to  ascertain  if  they  were  correct.  I  signed  in  the 
full  belief  of  the  accuracy  of  the  statements  made  in  the 
})alance  sheets.  Ever  since  my  appointment  as  Director  I  have 
pursued  the  same  course.  My  attendance  at  the  examination 
of  the  books  was  more  a  matter  of  form  than  anything  else. 
The  only  thing  I  examined  specially  was  the  branch  accounts 
or  returns,  and  that,  I  think,  only  on  two  occasions.  The 
Manager  was  perfectly  aware  that  I  did  not  examine  the  books 
or  accounts ;  and  the  other  Directors  acted  as  I  did  myself, 
confiding  in  our  innocence  and  honour,  and  in  the  statements 
of  the  Manager.  I  think  it  was  through  my  recommendation 
that  Mr.  Innes  Wright  became  a  Director.  I  am  not  aware  that 
I  ever  asked  any  one  to  take  shares. 

I  think  the  shareholders  might  have  regarded  my  name  as  a 
guarantee  for  the  Bank,  and  for  its  being  properly  conducted. 

Being  shown  a  book  titled  on  the  back  "  City  of  Glasgow 
Bank  Cash  Book,  Private,  No.  6,"  and  my  attention  drawn  to 
- —  two  entries,  dated  respectively  "  June  4,  1873,"  under  the  heads 
"Foreign  and  Colonial  Credits,  No.  2,"  and  "Bills  Payable, 
No.  2  " — I  declare  I  knew  nothing  about  these  entricvs,  and 
never  saw  them  until  they  were  in  the  hands  of  the  investigators 
some  days  ago  when  they  showed  them  to  me. 

During  the  years  1873,  1874,  and  1875  I  subscribed  the 
"^  balance  ledger  before  the  balance  sheets  were  issued  to  the 
)  shareholders.  The  accounts  therein  ai)pearing  were  all  summed 
up  by  the  Directors,  and  found  to  be  arithmetically  correct ; 
but  beyond  that  we  made  no  inquiry.  I  now  see  my  name 
at  the  annual  balances  in  the  current  balance  ledger,  commencing 
"June  4,  1873."  Shown  a  document  titled  on  the  back  "City 
of  Glasgow  Bank  Abstract  of  Accounts,  5th  June,  1878,  A.," 
I  never  saw  tliat  until  I  saw  it  in  the  hands  of  Mr.   MGrigor. 

It  is  quite  useless  to  ask  me  any  questions  relative  to  the 
books  of  the  Bank,  as  I  know  nothing  about  them. 

My  present  indebtedness  to  the  Bank  will  range  between 
£130,000  and  £140,000,  but  this  is  entirely  covered  by  my 
securities,  to  the  extent  of  about  £200,000,  which  are  first- 
class. 

I  did  not  advise,  nor  was  I  ever  consulted,  in  relation  to  the 
advances  by  the  Bank  to  James  Morton  &  Co.,  Smith,  Fleming 

445 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

&  Co.,  James  Nicol  Fleming,  and  John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.  I 
was  not  aware  that  such  advances  had  been  made  till  eighteen 
months  ago.  The  names  had  often  been  before  me,  but  I  was 
not  aware  till  that  time  that  the  advances  had  been  made. 

At  the  striking  of  the  last  balance  sheet  I  knew  that  some 
advances  had  been  made  to  these  parties,  but  I  had  no  doubt 
that  ultimately  they  would  prove  quite  good.  There  was  some 
concealment  regarding  the  advances  to  James  Morton  &  Co., 
which,  so  far  as  I  was  concerned,  was  never  cleared  up  till  very 
recently. 

Before  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank  I  was  never  aware  that  its 
capital  had  been  lost. 

I  was  aware  of  the  extent  to  which  the  Directors  were  buying 
their  own  stock,  but  I  understood  that  this  was  done  under 
the  provisions  of  the  contract  of  copartnery. 

Meetings  of  the  Directors  were  held  once  a  week.  I  regularly 
attended  them.  At  these  meetings  the  advances  made  to  the 
afore-mentioned  parties  were  not  specially  stated.  The  state^ 
ments  were  merely  pro  for  in  a  bills,  discounts,  deposits,  and 
the  like. 

The  first  Manager  of  the  Bank  was  Henry  Paul.  I  succeeded 
him  in  1842,  and  remained  Manager  till  1861  or  1862,  when 
Alexander  Stronach  succeeded  me. 

I  am  not  an  annuitant  of  the  Bank.  I  left  the  management 
without  claiming  anything. 

I  first  came  to  know  that  the  Bank  was  not  in  an  easy 
position  some  three  or  four  years  ago,  but  I  thought  nothing 
of  it,  believing  it  would  all  come  right  in  a  short  time.  The 
real  cause  of  the  unsatisfactory  state  of  the  Bank  was  the 
absorption  of  the  capital  by  the  foresaid  advances ;  and  though 
I  did  not  know  the  amount  of  the  advances,  I  was  satis- 
fied that  the  accounts  must  have  been  in  a  very  unsatisfactory 
state  to  require  such  absorption.  I  suspecte^d  or  inferred  that 
there  was  something  wrong  with  these  advances,  without  know- 
ing what  it  was. 

Declares  farther — As  regards  what  took  place  at  the  weekly 
meetings,  I  explain  that  the  advances  made  to  the  parties 
before-mentioned  came  up  in  the  ordinary  way,  but  were  not 
specially  stated.  They  came  up  just  in  the  ordinary  general 
way,  the  san^e  as  advances  to  other  customers. 

The  book,  entries,  and  document  before  referred  to  are  now 
docqueted  and  subscribed  as  relative  hereto.  All  which  I  declare 
to  be  truth.     Two  words  deleted. 

Second  Declaration  of  Egbert  Sat.mond. 

At  Glasgow,  the  twenty-ninth  day  of  October,  eighteen 
hundred  and  seventy-eight  years,  in  presence  of  Francis  William 
Clark,  Esquire,  advocate.  Sheriff  of  Lanarkshire. 

446 


Appendix   III. 

Compeared  Robert  Salraond,  presently  prisoner  in  the  prison 
•of  Glasgow,  and  a  charge  of  theft  now  preferred  against  him 
having  been  read  over  and  explained  to  him,  and  he  having 
been  judicially  admonished  and  examined,  declares  and  says — 
I  am  not  guilty  of  the  charge  preferred  against  me  of  stealing 
a  number  of  bills,  amounting  in  the  aggregate  to  the  sum  of 
twenty-three  thousand  six  hundred  and  ninety-three  pounds 
twelve  shillings  and  sevenpence,  or  thereby. 

I  explain  that  I  never  even  heard  of  the  existence  of  such 
bills  until  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank,  and  even  then  I  only 
heard  of  them  from  the  fact  that  inquiries  were  made  regarding 
them. 

Interrogated — Were  you  aware  that  it  was  the  practice  of 
the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  to  receive  bills  of  exchange  from 
customers  of  the  Bank  for  the  special  and  sole  purpose  of 
collecting  payment  of  the  same,  and  thereafter  endorsing  and 
making  over  said  bills  before  they  had  become  due,  in  order 
that  the  proceeds  thereof  might  be  credited  to  the  City  of 
Glasgow  Bank?  Declares — I  knew  that  this  was  the  practice  of 
all  the  banks  in  Scotland,  but  I  was  not  aware  that  theio 
was  any  speciality  in  the  practice  of  the  City  Bank  in  this 
respect.  I  cannot  say  whether  any  discrimination  was  made 
by  the  City  Bank  between  bills  for  collection  and  bills  for 
discount  sent  up  to  London.  I  consider  that  the  City  Bank 
was  quite  entitled  to  follow  this  practice  in  relation  to  bills 
received  by  them  for  collection.  There  was  no  other  way  by 
which  said  bills  could  be  collected  in  London. 

Interrogated — What,  then,  is  the  position  of  the  creditors  in 
these  bills,  now  that  the  Bank  is  stopped?  Declares — That  is 
a  very  awkward  question,  insomuch  that  I  consider  the 
liquidators  bound  to  pay  back  the  money  so  received.  I  think 
that  such  moneys  never  were  the  property  of  the  Bank.  All 
•which  I  declare  to  be  truth. 

First  Declaration  of  William  Taylor. 

At  Glasgow,  the  twenty-second  day  of  October,  eighteen 
hundred  and  seventy-eight  years,  in  presence  of  Francis  William 
Clark,  Esquire,  advocate,  Sheriff  of  Lanarkshire. 

Compeared  a  prisoner,  and  tlie  charge  against  him  having 
been  read  over  and  explained  to  him,  and  he  having  been 
judicially  admonished  and  examined,  declares  and  says — My 
name  is  William  Taylor.  I  am  a  native  of  Glasgow,  sixty-six 
years  of  age;  and  I  reside  at  Langbank,  Mewton-Mcarns. 

I  am  a  merchant  in  Glasgow. 

I  am  not  guilty  of  the  charge  of  falsehood,  fraud,  and 
wilful  imposition  preferred  against  me,  of  having  falsified 
the  books  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  prepared  anrl  issued 

447 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

false  and  fabricated  balance  sheets  during  the  years  from  1873 
to  1878  inclusive,  while  the  Bank  was  in  a  state  of  insolvency, 
and  well  known  to  nie  to  be  so,  so  as  to  conceal  the  true  state 
of  the  affairs  of  the  Bank  from  the  shareholders  and  creditors, 
and  of  declaring  false  dividends  in  order  to  deceive  said  share- 
holders, creditors,  and  the  i)ublic. 

I  believed  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  to  be  solvent  when  the 
last  balance  sheet  was  issued,  and  since  I  became  a  Director  I 
believed  all  the  balance  sheets  to  be  correct  that  were  issued.  I 
always  believed  the  statements  put  before  us  by  the  Bank  officials 
to  be  correct.       I  never  heard  anything  to  the  contrary. 

I  don't  exactly  know  who  constituted  the  officials,  except  that 
they  included  Mr.  Leresche,  Mr.  Turnbull,  and  Mr.  Murdoch.  Mr. 
Aikman,  the  accountant,  and  Mr.  Mon-is  were  probably  con- 
versant with  the  details.  I  have  been  a  Director  since  1872, 
I  think. 

I  don't  think  we  ever  compared  the  balance  sheets  with  the 
Bank  books,  so  as  to  test  their  accuracy.  We  just  took  the 
statements  of  the  officials  on  trust. 

No  books  were  ever  submitted  to  us  along  with  the  balance 
sheets.  We  subscribed  the  latter  on  the  faith  of  the  representa- 
tions made  to  us  by  the  officials. 

I  don't  think  I  ever  examined  any  of  the  Bank  books  with  the 
view  of  testing  the  accuracy  of  the  balance  sheets.  I  did  not 
think  it  my  duty  as  a  Director  to  do  so.  Such  an  examination 
would  have  involved  the  work  of  an  accountant.  My  duty  as 
a  Director,  I  thought,  consisted  in  attending  the  weekly  meetings 
and  dealing  with  the  questions  submitted  for  our  consideration. 

I  would  add  that  shortly  after  my  appointment  as  Director 
Mr.  Stewart  and  I  were  detailed  to  take  charge  of  the  branches, 
and  to  visit  them  occasionally,  and  this  we  did.  At  each  weekly 
meeting  a  book  was  brought  up  showing  a  statement  of  all  the 
branch  accounts,  with  the  deposits  and  advances  in  detail.  We 
examined  these  items,  and  if  in  any  case  a  branch  seemed  to 
exceed  their  limit  of  advances  we  took  a  note  of  it,  and  their 
attention  was  called  to  it.  At  the  time  when  we  were  detailed 
for  this  duty,  which  was  in  1872,  Mr.  Salmond  and  Mr.  Potter 
were  appointed  to  take  charge  of  the  head  office  accounts. 

Sometimes  they  made  reports  to  the  officials,  w^hich  were 
brought  up  as  part  of  the  weekly  business,  and  sometimes  they 
drew  the  attention  of  the  meeting  to  anything  special  in  relation 
to  the  accounts. 

My  finn  was  indebted  to  the  Bank  at  the  time  of  the  stoppage 
about  £70,U0O.  That  represented  advances  made  by  the  Bank 
at  different  times  to  our  firm.  We  did  not  make  application  to 
the  Directors  for  those  advances.  I  understood  they  were 
arranged  with  the  Manager,  Mr.  Stronach,  and  he  would  aftei-- 
448 


Appendix  III. 


wards  report  them  to  the  Directors  individually,  but  not  at  a 
meeting  of  the  Board. 

The  Bank  never  held  any  securities  against  those  advances. 
Mr.  Stronach  knew  personally  that  I  and  my  firm  held  property 
in  Hoj^e  Street,  in  relation  to  which  we  laid  out  part  of  tht: 
advances ;  but  there  was  no  mortgage  or  other  security  created 
over  such  property  in  favour  of  the  Bank.  I  also  gave  Mr. 
Stronach  some  scrip  of  the  South-Western  Raihvav  to  the  value 
of  £2500. 

Interrogated — Were  you  ever  aware  that  the  Bank  had  made 
heavy  advances  to  the  firms  of  James  Morton  &  Co.,  Smith, 
Fleming  &  Co.,  James  Nicol  Fleming,  and  Potter,  Wilson  ife  Co.  1 
Declares — No.  On  Mr.  Stronach's  appointment  as  Manager,  he 
called  the  attention  of  the  Directors  to  certain  advances  or 
accounts  which  had  been  gone  into  in  his  brother's  time,  which 
he  said  were  covered  by  securities,  but  for  which  he  did  not  wish 
to  be  held  responsible. 

These  had  been  gone  into  before  my  time,  and  that  was  the 
first  notice  I  got  of  them. 

I  think  the  minutes  of  the  Directors  will  show  what  was  done 
with  those  accounts  when  brought  under  the  notice  of  the  Board 
by  Mr.  Stronach. 

With  the  exception  of  certain  advances  made  to  Smith,  Fleming 
&  Co.  since  1876,  and  which  in  the  aggregate  might  amount  to 
£75,000,  and  against  which  there  were  special  securities,  I  am 
not  aware  of  any  advances  made  to  the  above-mentioned  firms 
since  that  time. 

InteiTogated — Can  you  explain  how  one  of  these  firms  comes 
to  be  indebted  to  the  Bank  in  a  sum  amounting  to  nearly 
£2,000,000,  and  another  in  a  sum  of  over  £2,000,000?  Declares 
— I  an)  unable  to  explain  that.  The  Directors  never  in  my  time 
authorised  such  advances.  There  were  never  any  applications 
to  the  Board  for  advances  such  as  those  ;  and  if  they  were  got  I 
am  unable  to  explain  how. 

I  was  not  aware  of  the  Bank  being  in  difficulties  until,  at  the 
farthest,  ten  days  before  its  stoppage.  I  first  heard  of  it  at  a 
meeting  of  Directors  called  to  consider  a  statement  by  Mr.  Morton 
that  the  Bank's  acceptances  could  not  be  discounted  in  London. 

It  was  then  stated  that  some  £500,000  would  tide  over  tho 
difficulty. 

I  w^as'  quite  certain  that  if  that  money  could  be  got  the  Bank 
would  go  on,  and  I  thought  that  but  for  that  (lini.nliy  tht"  Bank 
was  in  a  most  prosperous  condition. 

Until  the  very  morning  when  the  Bank  stopped,  I  was  not 
aware  that  a  stoppage  was  contemplated.  The  very  day  l)efi>ro  T 
directed  some  £700  or  £800  to  be  deposited  in  the  Bank.  Tliat 
sum  belonged  to  my  firm  ;  and  as  we  had  an  account  with  the 
Union  Bank  I  should  have  deposited  there  if  I  lind  had  any  doubts 
6a  449 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

of  the  City  Bank.  All  the  Directors  were  present  at  the  meet- 
ings which  took  jilace  in  Glasgow  before  the  stoppage  of  the 
Bank,  with  the  exception  of  one,  at  which  I  think  Mr.  Inglis  was 
not  present. 

From  what  passed  at  the  meetings,  it  seemed  to  be  the 
impression  of  the  Board,  as  certainly  it  was  my  own,  that  if  we 
had  got  assistance  from  the  Edinburgh  banks  we  should  have  been 
able  to  go  on. 

The  Directors  did  not  latterly  give  orders  for  the  purchase 
of  the  Bank  stock  by  the  Bank  itself.  I  was  not  aware  of  such 
a  practice.  I  did  not  know  who  the  brokers  for  the  Bank  were  in 
such  purchases  till  after  the  stoppage. 

To  the  best  of  my  recollection,  I  held  stock  in  the  Bank  at  its 
stoppage  to  about  £2200. 

I  beg  to  explain  that  I  have  been  a  shareholder  in  the  Bank 
since  its  commencement,  and  added  to  my  stock  in  1856. 

I  again  took  additional  stock  when  the  new  stock  was  issued 
in  1874.  At  the  same  time  my  son  and  my  brother,  on  my 
recommendation,  took  five  shares  each. 

I  have  never  sold  a  share  since  I  was  connected  with  the  Bank. 

I  did  not  know  of  any  gold  being  sent  to  London.  All  which 
I  declare  to  be  truth.     Two  words  deleted. 

Second  Declaration  of  William  Taylor. 

At  Glasgow,  the  twenty-ninth  day  of  October,  eighteen  hundred 
and  seventy-eight  years,  in  presence  of  Francis  William  Clark, 
Esquire,  advocate,  Sheriff  of  Lanarkshire. 

Compeared  William  Taylor,  presently  prisoner  in  the  prison 
of  Glasgow,  and  the  declaration  emitted  by  him  before  the  said 
Sheriff,  of  date  the  twenty-second  day  of  October,  having  been 
read  over  to  him,  and  he  having  been  again  judicially  admonished 
and  examined,  declares  and  says — I  am  now  brought  before  the 
Sheriff  at  my  own  request,  and  wish  to  explain  that  when  J 
formerly  stated  that  I  had  not  examined  any  of  the  books  of  the 
Bank,  I  should  have  added,  what  I  now  recollect,  that  I  had 
looked  over  the  balance  ledger,  but  not  critically,  and  that  I  took 
the  statements  in  it  as  being  substantially  correct,  coming  as 
they  did  from  the  officials. 

The  aforesaid  declaration  is  docqueted  and  subscribed  as  rela- 
tive hereto.      All  which  I  declare  to  be  truth. 

Third  Declaration  of  William  Taylor. 

At  Glasgow,  the  twenty-ninth  day  of  October,  eighteen  hundred 
and  seventy-eight  years,  in  presence  of  Francis  William  Clark, 
Esquire,  advocate.  Sheriff  of  Lanarkshire. 

Compeared  William  Taylor,  presently  prisoner  in  the  prison 

450 


Appendix  III. 


of  Glasgow,  and  a  charge  of  theft  now  preferred  against  him 
having  been  read  over  and  explained  to  him,  and  he  having  been 
judicially  admonished  and  examined,  declares  and  says — I  am  not 
guilty  of  the  charge  preferred  against  me  of  stealing  a  number 
of  bills  amounting  to  twenty-three  thousand  six  hundred  and 
ninety-three  pounds  twelve  shillings  and  sevenpence  or  thereby. 
I  was  not  aware  that  such  bills  had  been  sent  to  London.  If 
such  bills  were  sent  to  London,  it  was  without  the  authority  of 
the  Board  entirely.  Bills  left  for  the  purpose  of  collection  were 
not  the  property  of  the  Bank,  and  the  Bank  had  no  right  to 
dispose  of  them  in  that  manner.  I  know  that  the  London  Joint- 
Stock  Bank  were  agents  in  London  for  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank, 
but  beyond  this  I  did  not  know  of  the  details  of  the  transactions 
between  them.     All  which  I  declare  to  be  truth. 

First  Declaration  op  Henry  Ixgus. 

At  Glasgow,  the  twenty- second  day  of  October,  eighteen 
hundred  and  seventy- eight  years,  in  presence  of  Francis  William 
Clark,  Esquire,  advocate,  Sheriff  of  Lanarkshire. 

Compeared  a  prisoner,  and  the  charge  against  him  having  been 
read  over  and  explained  to  him,  and  he  having  been  judicially 
admonished  and  examined,  declares  and  says — My  name  is  Henry 
Inglis.  I  am  a  native  of  Edinburgh,  seventy-two  years  of  age, 
and  I  i-eside  at  No.  1  Great  Stuart  Street,  Edinburgh.  I  am  a 
Writer  to  the  Signet. 

I  declare  that  I  am  not  guilty  of  the  charge  of  falsehood,  fraud, 
and  wilful  imposition  preferred  against  me,  of  having  falsified 
the  books  of  the  Bank,  and  prepared  and  issued  false  and  fabri- 
cated balance  sheets  during  the  years  from  1873  to  1878  in- 
clusive, while  the  Bank  was  in  a  state  of  insolvency,  and  well 
known  to  me  to  be  so,  so  as  to  conceal  the  true  state  of  the 
affairs  of  the  Bank  from  the  shareholders  and  creditors,  and  of 
declaring  false  dividends,  in  order  to  deceive  said  shareholders, 
creditors,  and  the  public.  Further,  I  beg  to  say  that  about  nine 
years  ago  or  thereby  I  was  requested  to  become  a  Director  of  the 
City  of  Glasgow  Bank.  I  accepted  the  office,  and  upon  taking 
my  seat  at  the  Board  I  found  that  my  co-Directors  aj>peared  to 
me  to  bo  a  bfKly  of  Glasgow  gentlemen  irreproachable  in  cliiirac- 
ter  and  in  position.  I  also  found  that  the  Manager  of  the  Bank 
at  that  period  was  an  officer  who  possessed  their  entire  confidence, 
and  that  confidence  gradually  extended  itself  to  myself  witliout 
any  restriction  whatsoever.  I  have  only  to  add  that  my  crime, 
if  crime  it  be,  was  the  possession  of  the  most  entire  confidence  in 
eveiy  statement  and  in  eveiy  figure  which  was  laid  before  mc. 
Not  having  the  minute  book  of  the  Directors  before  me  at 
present,  I  do  not  feel  myself  justified  in  saying  more,  and  I  do 
not  at  present  wish  to  answer  any  questions  with  reference  to 
the  charge.     All  which  I  declare  to  be  truth. 

451 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 


Second   Declaration  of  Henry  Indus. 

At  Glasgow,  the  twenty-ninth  day  of  October,  eighteen  hundred 
and  seventy-eight  years,  in  presence  of  Francis  William  Clark, 
Esquire,  advocate,  Sheriff  of  Lanarkshire. 

Compeared  Henry  Inglis,  pi'esently  prisoner  in  the  prison  of 
Glasgow,  and  the  declaration  emitted  by  him  before  the  Sheriff, 
of  date  the  twenty-second  day  of  October  current,  having  been 
read  over  to  him,  and  he  being  again  judicially  admonished  and 
examined,  declares  and  says — I  am  now  brought  before  the  Sheriff 
at  my  own  request,  as  I  wish  to  state  that  during  one  of  the  years 
embraced  in  the  charge  I  was  absent  for  many  months  from  the 
Board  of  the  Bank.  The  particular  year  I  cannot  specify  at 
present,  but  it  can  be  easily  ascertained  from  the  minute  book 
of  the  Directors. 

During  that  year  or  period  I  was  absent  in  Portugal,  where  I 
was  attacked  by  a  disease  called  gangrenes  erysipelas,  and 
operated  upon  severely  and  dangerously  by  Dr.  Barboza,  of 
Lisbon.  On  retuz'ning  home  I  was  confined  to  the  house. 
Thereafter  I  was  further  attacked  by  severe  neuralgia  in  the  face, 
and  thereafter  by  congestion  of  the  brain  and  congestion  of  the 
left  lung.  These  circumstances  will  account  for  my  absence  from 
the  Glasgow  Board,  and  I  think  it  right  to  state  them.  All 
which  I  declare  to  be  truth. 

The  foresaid  declaration  is  now  docqueted  and  subscribed  as 
relative  hereto. 

Third  Declaration  of  Henry  Inglis. 

At  Glasgow,  the  twenty-ninth  day  of  October,  eighteen  hundred 
and  seventy-eight  years,  in  presence  of  Francis  William  Clark, 
Esquire,  advocate,  Sheriff  of  Lanarkshire. 

Compeared  Henry  Inglis,  presently  prisoner  in  the  prison  of 
Glasgow,  and  a  charge  of  theft  now  preferred  against  him  having 
been  read  over  and  explained  to  him,  and  he  having  been  judi- 
cially admonished  and  examined,  declares  and  says — 

I  am  not  guilty  of  the  charge  preferred  against  me  of  stealing 
a  number  of  bills,  amounting  to  twenty-three  thousand  six  hun- 
dred and  ninety-three  pounds  twelve  shillings  and  sevenpence  or 
thereby,  and  I  take  the  liberty  of  saying  that  I  consider  the 
charge  so  absurd  that  I  am  constrained  to  believe  that  it  has  been 
made  for  some  purpose  which  the  prosecutor  deems  necessary,  but 
which  is  not  known  to  me. 

I  was  not  aware  of  any  practice  in  the  Bank  of  sending  bills 
got  for  collection  before  they  became  due  to  London,  and  I  was 
only  made  aware  of  the  circumstance  alluded  to  by  being  told  of 
it  after  the  stoppage  by  one  of  the  investigators,  Mr.  M'Grigor. 

I  do   not  know   whether   it  is   proper  to  send  such   bills  to 

452 


Appendix   III. 


London  before  they  become  due.  That  and  all  other  banking 
details  were  matters  for  the  Manager  to  consider,  and  they 
never  came  before  the  Board  of  Directors.  All  which  I  declare 
to  be  truth.       Three  words  deleted. 

First  Declaration  op  John  Innes  Wright. 

At  Glasgow,  the  twenty-second  day  of  October,  eighteen  hundred 
and  seventy-eight  years,  in  jiresence  of  Francis  William  Clark, 
Esquire,  advocate,  Sheriff  of  Lanarkshire. 

Compeared  a  prisoner,  ajid  the  charge  against  him  having  been 
read  over  and  explained  to  him,  and  he  having  been  judicially 
admonished  and  examined,  declares  and  says — My  name  is  John 
Innes  Wright.  I  am  a  native  of  Glasgow,  sixty-eight  years  of 
age,  and  I  reside  at  10  Queen's  Terrace,  Glasgow.  I  am  a 
merchant. 

I  declare  that  I  am  not  guilty  of  the  charge  of  falsehood,  fraud, 
and  wilful  imposition  preferred  against  me,  of  having  falsified 
the  books  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  prepared  and  issued 
false  and  fabricated  balance  sheets  during  the  years  from  1875 
to  1878  inclusive,  while  the  Bank  was  in  a  state  of  insolvency, 
and  well  known  to  me  to  be  so,  so  as  to  conceal  the  true  state  of 
the  affairs  of  the  Bank  from  the  shareholders  and  creditors,  and 
of  declaring  false  dividends  in  order  to  deceive  said  shareholders, 
creditors,  and  the  public. 

When  the  last  balance  sheet  was  issued  to  the  shareholders,  1 
believed  the  Bank  to  be  in  a  solvent  condition.  I  signed  that 
balance  sheet  and  all  balance  sheets  since  1876.  I  became  a 
Director  in  1875. 

It  is  the  duty  of  the  Directors  to  make  such  an  examination  of 
the  Bank  books  as  to  ascertain  that  the  balance  sheet  is  correct. 
With  relation  to  all  the  balance  sheets  which  I  signed  as  a 
Director,  I  examined  all  the  books  that  were  laid  before  me. 
There  was,  I  think,  a  special  meeting  always  held  in  relation  to 
the  balance  sheet.  So  far  as  my  ex]ierience  goes,  that  was  the 
practice  of  the  Bank.  I  think  it  was  the  accountant  of  the  Bank 
that  laid  the  books  before  us.  The  cashier  may  also  have 
brought  some. 

I  suppose  it  was  the  Manager,  and  not  the  Directors,  who 
desired  these  books  to  be  laid  before  us.  I  understand  that  the 
Manager  would  tell  the  accountant  what  were  the  proper  books 
to  lay  before  us.  I  cannot  at  present  recollect  what  the  books 
were,  a  Bank  has  so  many  kind  of  books.  I  havo  no  recollection 
of  seeing  discount  ledgers  and  abstracts  thereof  on  such  occasions. 

I  never  saw  the  credit  ledgers  containing  a  record  of  the  cash 
credits  granted  by  the  Bank. 

I  understood  the  cash  credits  were  secured,  but  I  did  not 
ascertain  that  from  the  books. 

453 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

When  cash  credits  came  before  us,  it  was  generally  stated 
what  were  the  relative  securities.  We  learned  this  from  the 
applications  which  were  read  by  the  secretarJ^  I  never  took 
any  means  to  ascertain  whether  the  securities  possessed  the  values 
put  upon  them.  I  was  new  to  the  direction,  and  leant  veiy 
much  on  the  older  members. 

The  only  ledger  we  saw,  so  far  as  I  recollect,  was  the  balance 
ledger.  I  never  saw  the  register  of  securities  held  by  the  Bank, 
nor  the  circulation  register,  to  the  best  of  my  recollection. 

I  do  not  recollect  of  having  seen  a  document  entitled  "  Abstract 
of  Accounts." 

The  balance  sheets  were  coi-rect  according  to  the  books  laid 
before  me.  Beyond  that  I  did  not  think  it  requisite  to  inquire. 
I  trusted  very  much  to  the  good  faith  of  the  Manager  and  the 
Bank  officials. 

I  did  not  become  aware  of  the  Bank  capital  having  been 
lost  till  the  investigators'  report  was  drawn  out.  I  may  say 
that  I  did  not  know  the  true  state  of  affairs  till  it  was  issued.  I 
never  suspected  until  then  the  loss  of  the  capital. 

I  was  not  aware  that  the  Bank  was  to  be  stopped  until  I  read 
the  stoppage  in  the  morning  newspapers.  I  believed  or  thought 
up  till  that  time  that  the  Scottish  banks  would  come  fonvard 
and  enable  the  City  Bank  to  go  on. 

I  don't  know  who  decided  on  the  stoppage.  It  was  done  in 
Edinburgh.  I  was  not  there,  and  was  not  consulted.  I  was  a 
party  to  the  communings  of  the  Directors  which  immediately 
preceded  the  stoppage.  It  was  first  intended  to  applv  to  the 
London  Joint-Stock  Bank  for  aid.  If  we  did  not  get  aid,  it  was 
quite  believed  that  we  should  have  to  stop. 

The  principal  or  only  thing  that  would  render  a  stoppage 
necessary  was,  so  far  as  I  know,  the  difficulty  of  discounting  the 
Bank's  acceptances  in  London.  I  am  unable  to  say  what  was 
the  amount  of  those  acceptances.  At  one  of  the  meetings  before 
the  stoppage  it  was  supposed  that  £500,000  would  tide  us  over 
the  difficulties.  It  might  be  a  year  or  more  before  the  stoppage 
when  I  became  aware  that  the  Bank's  paper  was  not  so  readily 
taken  as  that  of  other  banks. 

When  I  became  a  Director  in  June,  1875,  my  firm  was  in- 
debted to  the  Bank  somewhere  about  £400,000.  My  firm  was 
John  Innes  Wright  &  Co.,  and  William  Scott  was  the  partner  who 
took  charge  of  the  finance.  To  the  best  of  my  belief,  our  in- 
debtedness to  the  Bank  at  the  time  of  the  stoppage  was  not  more 
than  £403,000.  That  indebtedness  was  the  result  of  advances 
by  the  Bank  to  our  firm.  The  Bank  had  certain  securities 
against  those  advances ;  for  example,  shares  in  companies.  I 
did  not  consider  the  Bank  wholly  secured.  Tlie  stocks  of  all 
kinds  for  some  years  past  had  very  much  depreciated.  I  don't 
think  the  Bank  was  ever  entirely  secured  for  the  advances  made? 

454 


Appendix   III. 


to  us,  but  I  cannot  say  to  what  extent  they  were  unsecured,  even 
ai)proximat'ely. 

During  the  term  of  my  Directorship  those  advances  were  not 
brought  under  the  notice  of  the  weekly  meetings  until  latterly, 
perhaps  within  six  or  nine  months  of  the  stopjiage. 

Before  that  they  might  have  been  talked  of  occasionally. 

I  can't  say  whether  the  advances  to  my  firm  were  made  without 
the  authority  of  the  Directors.  They  might  have  been  consulted 
privately  without  my  knowledge  ;  and,  in  point  of  fact,  these 
advances  were  substantially  made  before  I  became  a  Director. 

I  understood  that  the  Bank  had  granted  open  and  marginal 
credits  to  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  and  Potter,  Wilson  it  Co.,  or  their 
agents  in  Australia.  These  credits  were  to  a  certain  extent 
brought  under  the  notice  of  the  Directors.  I  did  not  know  the 
full  extent  of  those  credits.  They  may  have  exceeded  what 
came  befoi'e  us.  If  there  was  any  excess,  it  must  have  been 
granted  by  the  Bank  officials  unknown  to  me.  All  those  open 
and  marginal  credits  ought  to  have  proceeded  on  application  to 
the  Board  of  Directors,  and,  of  course,  the  Directors  would  know 
the  amounts  contained  in  these  applications. 

I  had  no  idea,  at  the  time  of  the  stoppage,  of  the  extent  of 
indebtedness  of  these  firms  as  now  brought  out  in  the  report 
by  the  investigators.  Certain  securities  were  held  against  these 
credits.  We,  the  Directors,  as  far  as  we  could,  endeavoured  to 
ascertain  the  value  of  these  securities.  We  went  very  much  on 
the  statements  of  the  parties  themselves.  Of  course,  we  had  a 
general  idea  of  their  value  ourselves.  £1200  is,  as  I  understand, 
the  qualification  for  a  Director.  I  only  held  £1200  Bank  stock 
in  my  own  name,  but  I  held  about  £2600  in  trust.  I  never  held 
more  than  £1200  stock  in  my  own  name. 

Being  shown  a  book,  titled  on  the  back  "  City  of  Glasgow 
Bank  Cash  Book,  Private,  No.  6,"  and  my  attention  drawn  to 
two  entries,  dated  respectively  ''  June  4,  1873,"  under  the  heads 
"  Foreign  and  Colonial  Credits,  No.  2,"  and  "  Bills  pavable. 
No.  2," 

I  have  never  seen  these  entries  until  now,  and  I  am  unable  to 
explain  their  meaning. 

I  was  not  aware  that  these  sums  of  t97'\,W()  were  jvgularly 
annually  repeated  since  the  year  1873,  until  I  was  told  so  by 
Mr.  M'Grigor. 

Shown  an  entry  dated  Juno  4,  1873,  "  By  cash  per  casli  book, 
,£973,300,"  at  page  87  <>f  the  volume  titkxlon  llu'  back  -  City  of 
Glasgow  Bank  Ledger  General  Accounts,  1872-3." 

That  entry  is  quite  beyond  my  comprehension. 

I  make  the  same  remarks  as  touching  the  entry  June  4th,  1873, 
"To  cash  p.  cash  book,  i:'.)r3,300,"  at  page  95  of  tiie  wiid  hisl- 
mentioned  volume.       I  have  no  recollection  of  ever  having  seen 

455 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

the   books   at  the   Bank   containing  an  abstract   of  the   weekly 
balances. 

The  foresaid  entries  and  volume  referred  to  are  now  docqueted 
and  subscribed  as  relative  hereto.  All  which  I  declare  to  be 
truth.       Eight  words  deleted. 

Secois'd   Declaration  of  John  Innes  Wright. 

At  Glasgow,  the  twenty-ninth  day  of  October,  eighteen 
hundred  and  seventy-eight  years,  in  presence  of  Francis  William 
Clark,    Esquire,    advocate,    Sheriff   of   Lanarkshire. 

Compeared  John  Innes  Wright,  presently  prisoner  in  the 
prison  of  Glasgow,  and  the  declaration  emitted  by  him  before 
the  Sheriff,  of  date  the  twenty-second  day  of  October  current, 
having  been  read  over  to  him,  and  he  being  again  judicially 
admonished  and  examined,  declares  and  says — I  am  now  brought 
before  the  Sheriff  at  my  own  request,  as  I  wish  to  state  distinctly 
that  when  I  became  a  Director  in  1875  I  owed  the  Bank 
nothing  as  an  individual.  I  succeeded  James  Nicol  Fleming 
as  a  Director. 

Prior  to  my  becoming  a  Director,  my  firm,  John  Innes  Wright 
&  Co.,  had  had  business  relations  wnth  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co., 
London,  and  Nicol,  Fleming  &  Co.,  Calcutta,  but  to  a  con- 
siderable extent  our  relation  with  Smith,  Fleming  &  Co.  and 
their  foreign  correspondents  had  been  broken   off. 

I  had  not  the  necessary  qualification  of  stock  when  I  was 
elected  a  Director.  I  stated  this  to  the  Manager,  but  I  obtained 
the  qualification  a  few  days  afterwards.  I  also  urged  the 
condition  of  my  firm's  account  as  a  reason  against  my  having 
any  connection  with  the  Board. 

Mr.  Stronach  was  apparently  anxious  that  I  should  be  a 
Director,  and  Mr.   Sahnond  also  urged  me  to  consent. 

The  request  to  be  a  Director  came  to  me  quite  unexpectedly, 
and  I  am  not  aware  what  reason  induced  them  to  make  the 
request.  The  stock  necessary  for  my  qualification  was  acquired 
for  me  by  the  Bank.  No  cash  passed,  but  I  gave  a  cheque  for 
the  amount,  and  that  cheque  stands  against  my  account  with 
the  Bank  to  the  present  day. 

I  am  not  aware  of  a  similar  course  being  followed  in  the 
case  of  any  other  Director. 

The  foresaid  declaration  is  docqueted  and  subscribed  as 
relative  hereto.     All  which  I  declare  to  be  truth. 


Third   Declaration   op   John   Innes   Wright. 

At  Glasgow,  the  twenty-ninth  day  of  October,  eighteen 
hundred  and  seventy-eight  years,  in  presence  of  Francis  William 
Clark,   Esquire,    advocate,    Sheriff   of   Lanarkshire. 

456 


Appendix  III. 


Corapeared  John  Innes  Wright,  presently  prisoner  in  the 
prison  of  Glasgow,  and  a  charge  of  theft  now  preferred  against 
'him  having  been  read  over  and  explained  to  him,  and  he  having 
been  judicially  admonished  and  examined,  declares  and  says — 

I  am  not  guilty  of  the  charge  made  against  me  of  stealing 
a  number  of  bilk,  amounting  to  twenty-three  thousand  six 
hundred  and  ninety-three  pounds  twelve  shillings  and  seven- 
pence  sterling,  or  thereby. 

Bills  sent  in  for  collection,  as  these  apparently  were,  never 
came  before  the  Directors  at  all.  They  were  received  by  the 
officials  ajid  forwarded  in  the  usual  way,  as  we  understood, 
but  they  did  not  come  under  the  cognisance  of  the  Directors. 

I  was  not  aware,  until  after  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank,  of 
any  bills  sent  in  for  collection  having  been  forwarded  in  this 
irregular  way.  The  matter  came  before  us  after  the  stoppage ; 
and  Mr.  Stronach  then  informed  the  Board  that  these  bills, 
along  with  various  others  sent  in  the  usual  way  of  business,  had 
been  forwarded  to  London  without  his  being  aware  that  a  portion 
of  the  bills  were  for  collection  merely. 

I  am  not  aware  that  bills  sent  in  for  collection  merely  have  a 
different  marking  from  other  bills.  All  which  I  declare  to  be 
truth. 

First  Declaration  of  Robert  Summers  Stronach. 

At  Glasgow,  the  twenty-second  day  of  October,  eighteen 
"hundred  and  seventy-eight  years,  in  })resence  of  Francis  William 
Clark,   Esquire,    advocate.    Sheriff   of   Lanarkshire. 

Compeared  a  prisoner,  and  the  charge  against  him  having 
been  read  over  and  exjjlained  to  him,  and  he  having  been 
Judicially  admonished  and  examined,  declares  and  says — 

My  name  is  Robert  Summers  Stronach.  I  am  a  native  of 
Lonmay,  Aberdeenshire,  fifty-two  years  of  age;  and  I  reside  at 
I-')  Crown  Gardens,  Dowanhill,  Glasgow.  I  am  a  banker  in 
Glasgow. 

I  am  not  guilty  of  the  charge  preferred  against  me  of  lalse- 
hood,  fraud,  and  wilful  imposition,  in  having  falsilicd  the  books 
of  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  and  prepartnl  and  issued  false 
-and  fabricated  balance  sheets  during  the  years  from  1875  to 
1878  inclusive,  while  the  Bank  was  in  a  state  of  insolvency,  and 
when  I  was  well  aware  of  that,  fact,  so  as  to  conceal  the  true 
state  of  the  affairs  of  the  said  Bank  from  ^he  shareholders  and 
creditors,  and  in  declaring  false  dividends  in  order  to  deceive 
said  shareholders,  creditors,  and  the  jiuhlic.  I  declare  further 
that,  from  the  state  of  my  health,  and  my  mind  being  worn 
out  by  the  anxieties  of  the  last  twelve  months,  I  do  not  at 
present  feel  myself  in  a  position  to  make  exjjlanations  or  answer 
<luestions  relative  to  the  charges  made  against  me. 

457 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

Further,  I  desire  to  add  that  Mr.  Leresche,  Secretary  to  the- 
Bank,  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  balance  sheets,  but  that  he 
simply  appears  at  the  annual  meetings  and  reads  the  minutes, 
which  is  simply  a  matter  of  form.  All  which  I  declare  to  be 
truth.     One  woid  deleted. 


Second  Declaration  of  IiObert  Summers  Stronach. 

At  Glasgow,  the  twenty-ninth  day  of  October,  eighteen, 
hundred  and  seventy-eight  years,  in  presence  of  Francis  William 
Clark,    Esquire,    advocate,    Sheriff   of   Lanarkshire. 

Compeared  Robert  Summers  Stronach,  presently  prisoner  in 
the  prison  of  Glasgow,  and  a  charge  of  theft  now  preferred 
against  him  having  been  read  over  and  explained  to  him,  and 
he  having  been  judicially  admonished  and  examined,  declares 
and  says — I  decline  to  make  any  statements  or  answer  any 
questions  with  reference  to  the  charge  made  against  me  of 
stealing  a  number  of  bills,  amounting  to  twenty-three  thousand 
six  hundred  and  ninety-three  pounds  twelve  shillings  or  thereby. 

I  am  satisfied  that  I  shall  be  able  to  clear  myself  of  the 
same  at  the  proper  time.  All  which  I  declare  to  be  truth.  One 
word  deleted. 


( 


458 


APPENDIX    IV. 

KEPORT  by  Messrs.  Kerr,  Andersons,  Muir  &  Main,  Chartered 
Accountants,  Glasgow,  and  Messrs.  M'Grigor,  Donald  <t 
Co.,  Solicitors,  Glasgow,  in  reference  to  Bai^vnce  Sheet  of 
the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank,  as  at  1st  October,  1878. 

On  the  2nd  instant  we  were  instructed  by  the  Directors  of  the 
City  of  Glasgow  Bank  to  prepare  a  balance  sheet  of  the  Bank, 
as  at  1st  October,  1878,  to  be  submitted  to  the  shareholders 
un  the  earliest  possible  day. 

For  reasons  that  will  sufficiently  appear  in  the  course  of  this 
report,  we  have  felt  it  necessaiy  to  prefix  to  tliis  balance  sheet 
a  statement  explanatory  of  the  system  adopted  by  us  in  pre- 
paring it,  and  of  the  leading  points  in  which  it  contrasts  with 
the  balance  sheet  issued  by  the  Board  of  Directors  as  of  5th 
June  last. 

On  receipt  of  the  instructions  referred  to,  we  at  once  pro- 
ceeded to  make  an  investigation  of  the  books  at  the  head  ottice 
of  the  Bank,  and  gave  directions  for  the  necessary  statements 
and  returns  being  procured  from  the  branches.  For  the  lirst 
few  days  it  was  extremely  difficult  to  uuikL'  any  real  progress. 
The  immediate  result  of  the  stoppage  of  the  Bank  was,  as  might 
be  expected,  a  temporaiy  disorganisation  of  the  working  staff, 
and,  besides,  the  incessant  demands  made  upon  us  to  reply  to 
inquiries,  and  to  advise  as  to  questions  calling  for  immediate 
decision,  greatly  interfered  with  the  steady  prosecution  of  tlie 
investigation. 

By  the  afternoon  of  the  ith  instant,  however,  we  became 
satisfied,  from  what  we  had  even  then  learned  of  the  position 
of  the  Bank,  that  there  was  no  reasonable  probability  of  its 
being  able  to  resume  business,  and,  witli  the  view  of  jirotecting 
the  interests  of  the  shareholders,  we  reported  to  the  Directors 
that  it  was  not  advisable  to  delay  any  longer  calling  them 
together.  It  seemed  to  us  to  be  of  less  importance  that  an 
exhaustive  examination  of  the  l)ooks  should  take  ])laco  (a  matter 
which  would  have  involved  weeks,  if  not  months  of  delay), 
than  that  a  vidimus,  however  rough,  showing,  even  approxi- 
mately, the  real  state  of  matters  should  be  laid  before  tlio 
shareholders,  in  order  that  tliev  should  Iiave  the  power  of  at 
once  deciding  on  the  course  to  be  followed,  and,  if  they  should 

459 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

see  fit,  of  appointing  competent  parties  with  the  requisite 
authority  to  preserve  and  administer  what  remained  of  the 
Bank's  pi^opeily  and  assets.  In  the  ordinary  case,  the  resolu- 
tions passed  at  such  a  meeting  of  shareholders  would  have 
required  confirmation,  involving  altogether  a  delay  of  four  weeks, 
but  by  taking  advantage,  as  has  been  done  (under  the  advice  of 
counsel),  of  the  3rd  sub-section  of  the  129th  section  of  the 
Companies  Act,  1862,  a  fortnight  will  have  been  saved  in  the 
event  of  liquidation  being  resolved  on. 

The  time  at  our  disposal  has  thus  been  proportionately 
abridged,  and  we  have  not  aimed  at  producing  anything  like 
an  exhaustive  examination  of  particular  details,  which,  under 
the  circumstances,  would  have  proved  utterly  futile.  We  have, 
at  the  same  time,  been  careful  to  indicate  below  the  various 
elements  of  imcertainty  which  appear  to  us  to  attach  to  in- 
dividual items  on  each  side  of  the  balance  sheet.  In  framing 
this  balance  sheet  and  report,  no  avoidable  delay  has  been 
incuiTed,  and  the  work  has  been  proceeded  with  as  rapidly  as 
was  consistent  with  the  circumstances,  which  demanded  the 
fullest  investigation  possible,  independent  altogether  of  data 
voluntarily  submitted  to  us. 

The  books  which  more  immediately  came  under  our  cognis- 
ance, as  containing  a  record  of  the  transactions  of  the  Bank, 
were  as  follows  :  — 

1.  Discount  ledgers  and  abstracts  thereof,  showing,  in  detail, 
all  the  current  bills  discounted  at  the  head  office,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  those  having  not  more  than  seven  days  to  run. 

2.  Deposit  ledgers  and  interest  registers,  containing  the 
accounts  of  all  depositors  who  are  creditors  of  the  Bank  on 
current  or  deposit  accounts,  or  debtors  to  the  Bank  on  cash 
overdrafts. 

3.  Credit  ledgers,  containing  a  record  of  the  cash  credits 
granted  by  the  Bank,  whether  secured,  partially  .secured,  or 
wholly  unsecured. 

4.  Returns  from  the  various  branches,  133  in  number,  con- 
taining, as  regards  these  branches,  the  same  information  as  the 
foregoing  books  supply  with  regard  to  the  head  office. 

5.  General  ledgers  and  abstracts  thereof,  showing  the  results 
of  the  business  of  the  Bank  upon  discounts,  interests,  and  com- 
mission. These  ledgers  also  contain  an  account  raised  out  of 
profit  and  loss  account  to  the  amount  of  £450,000  as  a  reserve 
fund  against  losses,  and  a  contingent  account  having  at  the 
credit  a  sum  of  £18,036  lis.  9d.,  and  consisting  of  the  accumu- 
lation of  certain  other  sums  set  aside  from  time  to  time  out  of 
the  profit  and  loss  account. 

6.  Balance  books,  which  contain  a  complete  statement  of  the 
balances  in  the  general  ledgers,  and  which  were  annually 
docqueted  by  the  Directors,  or  a  majority  of  their  number. 

460 


Appendix  TV. 

7.  Abstract  of  accounts  made  up  annually,  in  which  the  vearly 
result  of  the  transactions  recorded  in  the  Bank  books  are 
brought  into  a  focus,  and  from  which  the  printed  balance  sheet 
issued  to  the  shareholders  is  epitomised. 

8.  Registers  of  securities  held  by  the  Bank,  of  which  one  was 
kept  by  the  law  secretary,  and  another,  containing  a  record  of 
securities  held  against  advances  on  certain  special  accounts, 
by  the  pi-ivate  clerk  of  the  Manager. 

9.  Cashier's  ledger,  containing  a  record  of  notes  issued,  or  in 
reserve,  and  of  coin  in  possession  of  the  Bank. 

10.  Circulation  ledger,  containing  a  daily  record  of  the  Bank's 
circulation,  the  coin  on  hand  at  the  head  oflSce  and  branches, 
and  of  the  monthly  average,  and  from  which  the  weekly  returns 
forwarded  to  Government  were  made  up. 

Besides  the  above,  we  have  incidentally  examined,  as  occasion 
seemed  to  require,  many  of  the  other  books  necessary  for  the 
carrying  on  of  the  business  of  the  Bank,  such  as  tellers'  cash 
books  and  jotting  books,  and  monthly  and  weekly  abstracts 
of  individual  accounts  made  up  by  the  private  clerk  of  the 
Manager,  besides  drafts  of  the  more  recent  abstracts  of  accounts 
(No.  7  above  referred  to),  and  memoranda  and  jottings  by  the 
late  Manager  of  the  Bank. 

We  have  likewise  availed  ourselves  of  all  the  information 
we  could  procure  from  the  sub-officials  of  the  Bank,  which  has 
been  readily,  and  we  believe  frankly  and  fully,  accorded  to  us. 

At  an  early  stage  in  our  inquiry,  it  became  apparent  that 
questions  seriously  affecting  the  course  of  management  by  the 
Directors  and  Manager  of  the  Bank  wei'e  involved  in  the  investi- 
gation, and  we  have  felt  it  our  duty,  while  soliciting  from  these 
gentlemen  explanations  as  to  certain  particular  items,  to  bring 
under  their  notice  the  serious  nature  of  the  questions  refen-ed 
to.  In  most  instances  we  were  told  that  the  explanations  we 
invited  related  to  points  which  were  as  new  and  as  startling  to 
the  parties  interrogated  as  to  ourselves. 

We  shall  now  proceed  to  refer  to  certain  items  in  our  detailed 
statement  of  liabilities  and  assets  which  seem  to  call  for  6i)ecial 
explanation  or  remark. 

I.— LIABILITIES. 
(D.)  Acceptances  bt  the  Bank  past  due  or  current. 

In  the  general  ledger  of  the  Bank  there  is  an  account  under 
the  heading  of  "Bills  payable,"  which,  on  4th  June,  187."$, 
showed  a  balance  at  the  debit  of  the  Bank  of  £2,12.^^.6.^6  lis.  9d. 
In  the  cash  book  under  the  same  dat«  is  the  following  entry, 
creatin"'  and  forming  the  single  entry  in  a  new  account  entitled 
"  Bills  payable  account.  No.  2  "  :  — 

"Bills  payable  account,   No.   2.       To   the   following  accounts 

461 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

under  acceptance  of  this  date  to  be  retired  by  the  Bank  under 
special  arrangement  with  the  parties  of  date  1st  June,  1873, 
against  which  certain  securities  are  now  held  by  the  Bank 
and  in  process  of  realisation  and  payment  of  proceeds,  £973,300." 

There  is  likewise  in  the  general  ledger  another  account 
■entitled  "  Foreign  and  colonial  credits,"  which  on  4th  June 
showed  a  balance  at  the  credit  of  the  Bank  of  £2,132,452  2s.  3d. 
In  the  cash  book  under  the  same  date  the  following  entry  was 
also  made,  creating  and  forming  the  single  entry  in  a  new 
account  entitled  "Foreign  and  colonial  credits.  No.   2":  — 

"  Foreign  and  colonial  credits,  No.  2.  For  the  following 
credits  to  be  retired  as  they  mature  and  debited  under  the 
respective  accounts  to  credit  accounts,  No.  2,  against  which 
securities  are  now  held  by  the  Bank  and  in  process  of  realisation 
and  payment   of  the  proceeds,   £973,300." 

No  details  were  specified  under  either  of  these  headings,  and 
the  slump  sums  were  carried  to  the  general  ledger,  and  there 
simply  entered  as  "  to  cash  per  cash  book,"  and  "  by  cash  per 
cash  book,"  respectively. 

In  the  weekly  balance  book  this  £973,300  is  entered  and 
deducted  from  the  "  bills  payable "  account,  and  from  the 
"  foreign  and  colonial  credits "  account,  the  balances  being 
carried  to  the  balance  book  annually  docqueted  by  the  Directors. 

Since  1873  this  system  has  been  regularly  adhered  to,  the 
sum  of  £973,300  having  been  annually  deducted  from  each  of 
these  accounts. 

In  the  printed  balance  sheet  issued  by  the  Board  for  this 
year,  the  sums  at  the  credit  and  debit  of  these  accounts  respec- 
tively are  included,  the  one  under  the  head  of  "  Bills  outstanding 
due  or  with  a  currency  not  exceeding  twenty-one  days,  and 
drafts  accepted  by  the  Bank  and  its  London  agents  on  account 
of  home  and  foreign  constituents,"  and  the  other  under  "  Bills 
of  exchange,  local  and  country  bills,  credit  accounts,  and  other 
advances  upon  security." 

The  consequence  of  this  has  been  that  the  shareholders  have 
been  led  to  believe — ■ 

(a)  That  the  Bank  had  lent  on  foreign  and  colonial  credits  less  than 
was  the  fact,  by  the  amount  of  -         -         -         -         -     £973,000 
(h)  That  the  Bank  had  accepted  fewer  bills  payable  than 

was  the  fact,  to  tlie  amount  of £973,000 

(E.)  Bills   parted   with. 

Of  the  £149,435  9s.  of  bills  entered  under  this  head,  we 
have  reason  to  believe  that  £64,595  12s.  9d.,  although  handed 
to  the  Bank  for  collection  or  retention,  have  been  forwarded 
to  London,  and  either  discounted  or  placed  to  the  credit  of  a 
"  No.  2  account "  with  the  London  Joint-Stock  Bank,  which 
was  held  by  that  Bank  as  a  security  for  any  advances  under 
which  they  might  come  to  the  City  of  Glasgow  Bank. 

462 


Appendix  IV. 

II.— ASSETS. 

(A.)  Ca^h. 

"The  amonnt  of  gold  and  silver  in  the  hands  of  the  cashier  at  the  head 
office  on  the  1st  inst. ,  as  entered  in  the  cashier's  ledger,  which  appears 
to  have  been  correctly  kept,  was £231,500    0     0 

To  this  falls  to  be  added  the  amount  in  the  hands  of  the 
tellers  at  that  date,  ascertained  from  their  cash  books 
and  jotting  books,  .......  12,156     6     0 

And   at   the   branches,  ascertained  from  the  register  of 

notes  and  specie  in  hand  at  branches,    -         -         -         -         49,889     0     0 

Making  in  all,  -         .         -         -     £293,545     6     0 

The  coin  at  the  branches  is,  however,  only  returned  once  a 
Tveek,  and  the  above  item  of  £49,889  consequently  represents 
what  was  actually  in  hand  at  the  28th  September. 

As  the  authorised  circulation  of  the  Bank  was  only          -       .£72,921     0     0 
The  addition  of  this 293,545     6     0 


Would  only  have  justified  an  issue  of        -         -         -         -     £366,466     6     0 
But  the  circulation  of  the  previous  Saturday,  as  vouched 

by  the  circulation  ledger,  was       -----       604,196     0     0 

The  explanation  of  the  discrepancy  is  to  be  found  in  the 
circulation  ledger  itself,  from  which  it  appears  that  since  the 
commencement  of  this  year  it  had  been  the  habit  to  add  to 
the  weekly  return  of  bullion  made  to  Government  under  8  &  9 
Vict.  cap.  38,  an  imaginary  sum,  less  or  more,  according  to 
the  emergencies  of  the  period,  beginning  with  £60,000  under 
the  first  week  in  January,  and  fluctuating  weekly  until,  on 
the  2 let  September,  when  the  last  return  was  made,  it  reached 
£300,000.  The  additions  thus  made  are  openly  and  regularly 
entered  in  the  circulation  ledger  in  smaller  figures  over  the 
amount  of  gold  really  in  hand  at  Glasgow. 

The  summations  of  the  entries  in  this  ledger,  vitiated  Ijy 
these  additions,  were  weekly  returned  to  Government,  and  the 
Bank  have  thus,  under  the  14th  section  of  the  Act,  become 
subject  to  very  heavy  penalties,  which,  however,  under  the 
circumstances,  we  have  not  thought  it  right  to  bring  into  the 
balance  sheet. 

(B.)  Balances  on   Current  Accounts  for  Credits  and   (^ver- 

DR.\FTS    considered    GOOD. 

We  have  recovered  the  draft  of  the  abstract  of  accounts  for 

1878.      In  it  there  is  an  cntiy  taken  from  tlie  general  lodK'or. 

under  the  heading  "  Credit  accounts,   Dr.   balance,   .£2,009,702 

lis.  2d."      In  the  revision  of  this  draft  it  would  appear  that,  to 

lessen    the    apparent    amount    of    this    account,    the    sum    of 

46^ 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

£926,724  was  deducted  from  its  total,  and  transferred  from  tlie^ 
first  head  of  the  abstract,  under  which  it  was  grouped,  to  the- 
third  head,  under  the  new  headings,  "  Credit  accounts,  Nos.  1, 
3,  and  4,  balance."  A  further  reduction  of  £200,000  was  made 
from  the  same  account  by  transferring  that  amount  to  a  new 
enti-\'  under  head  No.  3  in  the  abstract,  entitled  "  reserve^ 
gold/' 

As  all  accounts  grouped  in  the  abstract  under  head  No.  1  are- 
in  the  printed  balance  sheet  included  under  the  heading  "  Bills 
of  exchange,  local  and  country  bills,  credit  accounts,  and  other 
advances  upon  security,"  and  all  accounts  under  head  No.  3,. 
under  the  heading  "  Cash  in  hand,"  and  entered  under  two 
divisions,  viz.,  "  Gold  and  silver  coin,  and  notes  of  other  banks 
at  head  office  and  branches,"  and  "  Government  stocks.  Exchequer 
bills,  railway  and  other  stocks  and  debentures,  and  balances  in 
hands  of  banking  coiTespondents,"  the  practical  result  of  this 
was  that  the  shareholders  have  been  led  to  believe — 

(a)  That  the  Bank  had  lent  upon  credits  less  than  was  the  fact,  by 
the  amount  of £1,126,764 

(?>)  That  the  Bank  had  in  their  hands  good  securities 
belonging  to  themselves  absolutely,  more  than  was 
the  fact,  by      -         - 926,764 

(c)  That  the  Bank  had  in  their  cash  chest  more  reserve 

gold  than  was  the  fact,  by 200,000' 

(C.)  Bills  ox  Hand. 

After  deduction  of  all  bills  believed  to  be  bad,  amounting 
to  £307,416  15s.  7d.,  a  deduction  of  £5  per  cent,  has  been  made- 
from  the  balance  of  bills  on  hand  at  the  head  office,  and  of  £2 
per  cent,  from  the  balance  of  country  bills  sent  to  the  head, 
office,  which  it  is  believed  will  cover  any  reasonable  risk  of 
loss.  No  deduction  has  been  made  from  exchange  bills,  or 
bills  received  for  collection. 

(E.)  Business  Premises  of  the  Bank. 

The  premises  belonging  to  the  Bank  in  Virginia  Street  and 
Glassford  Street  (the  latter  in  course  of  erection),  the  Gorbals 
branch  office,  and  the  offices  at  Greenock,  Paisley,  and  Edin- 
bui-gh,  have  been  valued  for  us  by  Mr.  Thomas  Binnie  at 
£98,340.  It  has,  of  course,  been  impossible  to  overtake  a 
detailed  valuation  of  all  the  branch  premises  belonging  to  the 
Bank  throughout  the  countiy ;  but  from  an  estimate  prepared 
by  him,  founded  on  the  original  cost  of  these,  the  population 
of  the  towns  in  which  they  are  situated,  and  the  fact  that  a 
considerable  number  will  fall  to  be  taken  over  by  other  banks 
as  places  of  banking  business,  we  have  felt  justified  in  putting 
down  their  probable  value  at  £100,775  4s.  9d. 
464 


Appendix  IV. 


Heritablb  Property  in  Glasgow. 

The  items  under  this  heading  have  been  taken  from  a  record 
in  the  books  of  properties  practically  belonging  to  the  Bank. 
To  a  large  extent  we  have  taken  these  at  the  valuations  in  the 
books,  but  in  many  instances  where  sales  have  been  effected, 
or  satisfactory  information  furnished  to  us,  we  have  rectified 
these  valuations.  In  this  case  the  amount  brought  out  by  us 
exceeds  the  amount  in  the  books  by  £10,407  lis.  9d. 

Heritable  Property  in  the  Colonies. 

These  properties,  consisting  of  lands  in  New  Zealand  (North 
Island)  and  Australia,  have  been  entered  at  the  price  which  the 
Bank  have  paid  for  them  within  the  last  two  years. 

They  comprise — 

(1)  40,024  acres  of  freehold  land  in  the  province  of 
Poverty  Bay,  purchased  in  October,  1877,  on  a  Goverament 
title,  at  12s.  6d.  per  acre,  and  11,808  acres  of  leasehold  land 
adjoining,  with  the  stock  thereon,  the  lease  being  for  eighteen 
years,  and  the  price  £11,628.  Since  the  purchase  of  the 
freehold,  £3433  has  been  expended  in  the  purchase  of  stock. 
Since  the  acquisition  of  the  leasehold,  the  Bank  agents  were  in 
course  of  acquiring  from  the  natives  the  freehold  right  thereof, 
and  have  expended  towards  this  a  further  sum  of  £1350.  The 
balance  is  in  the  hands  of  the  agents,  or  in  materials  purchased 
for  the  use  of  the  station. 

We  consider  that  we  are  entitled  to  take  this  at  least  at 
the  cost  price,  as  we  believe  it  would  realise  that  now,  and, 
besides,  it  has  the  prospect  of  materially  increasing  in  value. 

(2)  The  property  in  New  South  Wales  and  Queensland,  the 
cost  of  -which  we  are  informed  has  been  £368,000,  including 
outlay  on  improvements  and  stocking.  Of  this  there  appears 
to  have  been  paid  by  the  acceptances  of  the  Bank,  which  are 
still  current,  £130,000,  the  balance  of  £238,000  being  met  by 
the  promissory  notes  of  Mr.  Walker,  the  agent,  who  alleges 
that  the  Bank  are  bound  to  relieve  him  of  this  amount,  but 
as  we  have  not  as  yet  been  able  to  verify  this  statement,  and 
have  consequently  not  put  this  item  into  the  liabilities,  we  have 
estimated  the  value  of  this  asset  at  the  £130,000  above 
referred  to. 

(F.)  Furniture. 

A  rough  estimate  of  the  value  of  the  funiiture  at  the  head 
oflSce  has  been  made  for  us  by  Messrs.  Hutchison  &  Dixon. 
The  value  of  furniture  at  the  branches  has  been  based,  as  far 
as  possible,  on  reports  from  the  several  branches. 

7  a  46s 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

(G.)  Shares  and  Debentures  in  other  Companies,  apart  prom 
Shares  in  the  New  Zealand  and  Australian  Land 
Company,  Limited,  held  absolutely  by  the  Bank. 

Under  this  item  we  have  included  all  the  various  items  we 

have  been  able  to  discover  which  are  embraced  under  the  two 

following  headings  in  the  abstract  of  accounts  from  which  the 

balance  sheet  of  June  last  was  framed :  — 

"  Railway  and  other  stocks  and  debentures,   -£1,023,699     7  10" 
"  General  securities' stocks,     -        -        -         .  67,475  16  10" 


In  all, 


£1,091,175    4    8 


The  items  are  as  follows  :  — In  the  beginning  of  the  year  the 
Bank  held  $2,910,000,  in  7  per  cent,  bonds  of  SlOOO  each  of 
the  Western  Union  Railway  of  America,  which,  from  inforaiation 
received  from  New  York,  we  value  at  75  per  cent.,  representing 
£436,500.  On  the  18th  May  last,  bonds  representing  $1,500,000 
were  sent  by  the  Bank  to  the  General  Credit  and  Discount 
Company,  London,  for  the  purpose  of  raising  money  thereon, 
and  on  these  £90,000  was  raised,  the  balance  being  retained 
"  for  further  instructions." 

We  have  accordingly  valued  this  item  as  follows  :  — 
$2,910,000  at  75  per  cent.,        .        -         .         .         £436,500    0    0 
Less  advance, 90,000    0    0 


Besides  these  the  Bank  hold  of  the  stock  or  shares 
of  the  Western  Union  Railway,  $1,992,340  = 
£398,468  sterling  at  par,  but  which,  from  the 
information  we  have  received,  is  only  worth 
They  further  hold  in  connection  with  the  above 
railway  company  (wlio  have  the  option  of 
purchasing  it  under  arbitration),  the  property 
of  the  Racine  Warehouse  and  Dock  Company, 
acquired  at  a  cost  of  $300,000,  but  which  we  are 
advised  is  now  worth  only  $30,000,  or 
They  also  hold  3273  shares  of  $100  each  in  the 
Milwaukie  and  St.  Paul  Railway,  which,  at 
31  per  cent.,  the  present  selling  price,  represent 

$101,463,  or         

They  hold,  besides,  the  following  shares,  which 
we    have    put    down    at    the    present    market 
value  : — 

180  shares  Marbella  Iron  Ore  Company,  - 
150  shares  Glasgow  Jute  Company, 
£85,000   Grand   Trunk    Railway   of    Canada 
ordinary,       --.... 

430   shaves    Erie   Railway   preferred   capital 
7  per  cent.,  ------ 

£10,000   Grand   Trunk    Railway    of    Canada 
3rd  preference,      ----- 

18  shares  Upper  Assam  Tea  Company,    - 

In  all,  .... 


£346,500    0    0 


11,950    0    0 


6,000    0    0 


20,292    0    0 


495  0  0 

0  0  0 

5,525  0  0 

2,279  0  0 

1,187  10  0 

1,840  0  0 

£396,068  10  0 


466 


Appendix  IV. 


(H.)    GOVERXMBNT    StOCKS. 

These   in    the   abstract    balance   sheet    of   June   last    are   put 
down  as — 

Government  Stocks,  No.  1,         -      £1,857    6    6  and 
Government  Stocks,  No.  2,        -        7,751  15    9 


In  all,        -        -        -      £9,609    2    3 

The  stocks  answering  to  this  description,  so  far  as  we  are  aware,  held  by 
the  Bank,  consist  of  East  India  Government  4  per  cent,  promissory 
notes,  in  two  lots  of  10,000  and  50,000  rupees  respectively,  which,  at 
Is.  9d.,  give £5,250     0     0 

And  £2000  British  3  per  cent,  annuities,  worth,  say,    -  1,857     6    6 

In  all, £7,107    6    6 

Estimated  Value  of  Securities  held  against  Bad  Debts. 

The  total  amount  represented  by  bad  debts,  which  we,  as  at 
1st  October,  have  estimated  at  £7,345,357  15s.  6d.,  the  Bank 
have  been  in  the  habit  of  treating  in  the  balance  sheets  as  an 
available  asset. 

Among  the  debtors  included  under  this  head  are  four,  of 
which,  owing  to  the  magnitude  of  the  amounts,  we  think  it 
right  to  append  separate  notes. 


LiAVtilitie-. 

FroUible  \'aluo  of  Securities  hrld. 

UcfKit. 

1. 

£2,320,591   18 

9 

-      £688,184  19  11       - 

£1,632,406  18 

10 

11. 

1,864,627     2 

4 

452,582  12    9      - 

1,412,044    9 

7 

111. 

1,142,987  18 

4 

310,532  17     7       - 

832,455     0 

9 

IV. 

464,186  19 

5 

71,135    6     9       - 

393,051   12 

8 

This  deticit,  however,  is  exclusive  of  any  return  that  may  be 
received  from  the  estates  of  the  debtors  themselves,  or  from 
the  estates  of  parties  who  have  suspended  payment,  but  against 
whom  the  Bank  will  have  a  ranking  in  regard  to  these  debts. 

It  would  appear  that  up  to  the  time  when  the  books  of  thf 
Bank  were  put  into  our  hands,  no  attempt  had  been  made  to 
value  the  securities  held  in  reference  to  these  four  assets  (any 
more  than  the  other  securities  held  by  the  Bank),  which  are 
entered  in  the  security  ledger  at  sums  which  appear  to  liavo 
been  indicated  by  the  debtors  themselves.  It  was  upon  ft 
statement  of  these  accounts,  in  which,  as  we  arc  infoniiod, 
these  securities  were  accepted  at  the  latter  figure,  that  the 
banks  consulted  before  the  stoppage  resolved  that  it  would 
not  be  expedient  to  assist  the  City  Bank.  Since  then,  the 
examination  we  have  instituted  into  the  real  value  of  the 
securities,  superficial  as  it  has  necessarily  been,  has  shown  that 
the  estimate  thus  put  uj)()n  thorn  was  enormously  oxaggi'iatvil, 
and  it  is  by  no  means   impioliahle  that  our  own   estimatv   is 

467 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

beyond  the  mark,  as  the  Bank's  title  to  much  of  what  we  have 
entered  as  good  is  of  a  very  imperfect  description. 

Life   Policies. 

The  Bank  held  life  policies  against  the  debts  which  we  have 
dealt  with  as  bad  for  an  amount  in  all  of  £611,051  13s.  5d. 
These  have  been  entered  at  the  surrender  value,  £74,014 
14s.  lid.  The  annual  premiums  due  upon  them  amount  to 
£17,214  14s.  8d. 

Shares  in  New  Zealand  and  Australian  Land  Company, 

Limited. 

Under  this  item  are  included  all  the  shares  of  the  New  Zealand 
and  Australian  Land  Company,  Limited,  to  which  the  Bai.k 
appear  to  have  right.  The  position  of  the  Bank  in  regard  to 
a  large  number  of  these  shares  is  not  so  satisfactory  as  might 
be  desired,  many  of  the  transfers  not  being  completed,  but  it 
is  believed  that  their  right  to  the  whole  can  be  vindicated. 

We  have  dealt  with  the  Bank  as  holding  £219,052  of  A 
preference  stock  and  £912,079  of  ordinary  stock.  The  pre- 
ference stock  being  4  per  cent,  stock,  we  have  taken  it  at  £80 
—£175,242.  As  to  the  ordinary  stock  we  have  had  some 
difficulty.  It  yields  at  present  only  3  per  cent.,  but  its  main 
value  is  prospective,  and  we  do  not  believe  that  voluntary 
sellers  would  be  disposed  to  part  with  it  under  par.  If  held 
for  a  period  of  years,  it  will  in  all  probability  realise  a  much 
higher  figure;  but,  again,  were  so  large  a  quantity  forced  on 
the  market  at  once,  it  is  difficult  to  say  what,  on  an  average, 
it  might  bring.  On  the  whole,  we  have  thought  it  reasonable 
to  value  the  ordinary  stock,  for  the  purpose  of  the  present 
statement,  at  £80,  like  the  preference,  which  gives  £729,662, 
or,  in  all,  £904,904. 

It  is  right  to  mention  that,  besides  this  sum,  there  are  a 
number  of  shares  in  this  company  belonging  to  parties  whose 
liabilities  to  the  Bank  are  so  heavy  that  nearly  the  whole  pro- 
ceeds will  probably  fall  into  the  funds  of  the  Bank.  The  amount 
of  such  shares  we  make  out  to  be  £9406  preference  and  £76,770 
ordinary — in  all,  £86,176,  which,  at  £80,  gives  a  possible 
additional  asset  of  £68,941. 

Heritable  PROPERxrES  held  in   Security. 

To  the  extent  of  £176,320  this  item  is  composed  of  the  value 
of  properties  at  Rangoon,  Kurrachee,  etc.,  as  to  which  we  have 
acted  upon  the  best  information  we  have  been  able  to  receive. 
We  cannot,  however,  declare  that  in  any  case  the  title  of  the 
Bank  to  these  securities  is  at  all  satisfactory. 
,,68 


Appendix  IV. 


It  is  hardly  necessary  for  us  to  say  that,  in  making  this 
item,  we  have  not  had  it  in  our  power  to  avail  ourselves  of 
the  assistance  of  professional  valuators. 

The  various  items  specially  above  referred  to  will  go  far 
to  explain  the  diflEerence  between  the  results  brought  out  by 
the  balance  sheet  of  June  last  and  the  estimate  of  assets  and 
liabilities  now  submitted. 

We  must,  however,  in  addition  explain  that  two  items  are 
entered  in  the  abstract  of  accounts  from  which  the  June  balance 
sheet  was  prei:)ared  as  assets,  which  we  have  been  obliged  to 
reject  in  totn.  One  of  these  in  a  sum  of  £280,000,  entered  as 
an  asset  under  the  head  of  suspense  account,  and  which  we 
have  found  it  necessary  to  include  in  our  estimate  of  bad  debts ; 
the  other  a  sum  of  £96,294  .3s.  6d.,  entered  as  an  asset  under 
the  head  of  '"  Credit  Account,  No.  2,"  but  which  is  made  up  of 
balances  so  hopelessly  bad  that,  as  we  are  informed,  they  were 
specially  removed  under  this  heading  to  prevent  the  possibility 
of  interest  being  calculated  on  them  from  year  to  year. 

We  are  fully  conscious  of  the  numerous  defects  in  the  present 
statement,  and  we  cannot  but  anticipate  that  many  errors  and 
omissions  may  become  apparent  from  day  to  day.  The  valua- 
tions conducted,  as  we  have  been  forced  to  conduct  them,  in 
most  cases  without  the  aid  of  skilled  valuators,  and  under 
the  urgency  of  continued  and  increasing  pressure,  can  hardly 
fail  to  be  very  incomplete ;  but  we  believe  that  those  who  are 
most  conversant  with  the  nature  and  details  of  such  a  duty  as 
has  been  imposed  upon  us,  will  be  most  ready  to  make  allowance 
for,  and  to  excuse  the  imperfections  of,  the  results. 

As  the  form  in  which  the  statement  of  liabilities  and  assets 
has  been  prepared  is  different  from  that  of  the  printed  annual 
balance  sheets,  we  have  thought  it  right  to  append  an  abstract 
of  the  results  at  which  we  have  arrived  under  the  headings 
adopted  in  the  latter,  and,  for  the  convenience  of  comparison, 
we  have  placed  above  it  a  copy  of  the  Ijalance  sheet  which  was 
laid  before  the  shareholders  at  their  meeting  on  :hd  July  last. 

(Signed)         KERK,  ANDEHSOXS,  MUIIJ  A-  MAIN, 

Chartered  Jccouii fonts. 

M'G RIGOR,  DONALD  it  CO., 

Solicitors. 

Glasgow,  ISth  October,  1878. 


469 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 

ABSTRACT  BALANCE  SHEET  as  at  5th  JUNE,  1878. 
As  issued  by  the  Bank,  and  stihmitted  to  Annual  Meeting,  3rd  July,  1878. 

LIABILITIES. 

I.  Deposits  at  the  head  office  and  biunches,  and  balances  at  the  credit  of  banking 

correspondents, £8,102,001    0   4 

[I.  Bank  notes  in  circulation  in  Scotland  and  the  Isle  of  Man, 710,252    0   0 

[I.  Drafts  outstanding,  due,  or  with  a  currency  not  exceeding  21  days,  and  drafts  accepted 

by  the  Bank  and  its  London  agents  on  account  of  home  and  foreign  constituents,    -  1,488,244  18   6 

Liabilities  to  the  public, £10,300,497  18  W 

:V.  Capital  Account, £l,000,Oi  0    0    0 

V.  Reserve  Fund, 450,000    0    0 

»'I.  Profit  and  Loss, 142,095  12  10 

Liabilities  to  partners, 1,592,095  12   0 


£11,892,593  11    8 


ASSETS. 


I.  Bills  of  exchange,  local  and  country  bills,  credit  accounts,  and  other  advances  upon 

security, £8,484,466    9    2 

[I.  Advances  on  heritable  property,  and  value  of  Bank  buildings  and  furniture  at  head 

office  and  branches, 265,324    9    0 

[I.  Cash  on  hand — viz.,  gold  and  silver  coin  and  notes  of  other  banks  at 

head  office  and  branches, -        -         £845,963    1    0 

Government  stocks,  Exchequer  bills,  railway  and  other  stocks  and 

debentures,  and  balances  in  hands  of  banking  correspondents,    -        2,296,839  12    6 

3,142,802  13    6 

£11,892,593  11    8 


ABSTRACT  BALANCE  SHEET  as  .\t  Ist  October,  1878. 
Prepared  in  conformity  with  subjoined  State  of  Liabilities  and  Assets. 

LIABILITIES. 

I.  Deposits  at  the  head  office  and  branches,  and  balances  at  the  credit  of  banking 

corr  spoiidents, £8,708,788  13    4 

I.  Bank  notes  in  circulation  in  Scotland  and  the  Isle  of  Man. 863,403    0    0 

I.  Drafts  outstanding,  due,  or  with  a  currency  not  exceeding  21  days,  and  drafts  accepted 

by  the  Bank  and  its  London  agents  on  account  of  home  and  foreign  constituents,    -  2,742,105  14  11 

£12,404,297    8    3 

ASSETS. 

I.  Bills  of  exchange,  local  and  country  bills,  credit  accounts,  and  other  advances  upon 

security, £5,996,792    3    0 

I.  Advances  on  heri':able  property,  and  value  of  Bank  buildings  and  furniture  at  head 

office  and  branches, -  211,074  10    8 

I.  Cash  on  hand — viz.,  gold  and  silver  coin  and  notes  of  other  banks 

at  head  office  and  branches, £418,363  16    4 

Government  -tocks,  Exchequer  bills,  railway  and  other  stocks  and 

debentures,  and  balances  in  hands  of  banking  correspondents,   -  587,083    7    0 

1,005,447    3    4 

Balance,  hein":  Loss, 5,190,983  11    8 

£12,404,297    8    3 

Note. — To  the  above  balance  of  lo.ss, £5,190,983  11    3 

Falls  to  be  added  the  capital, 1,000,000    0    0 

Making  the  total  Io>s, £6,190,98    11    3 

470 


Appendix  TV. 

BALANCE   SHEET,   1st  OCTOBER,    ISTS. 

LIABILITIES. 

Ordinary,  viz.  :— 

(A)  Bank  Notes  in  the  Hands  of  the  Public,         -        -    £863,403    0    0 
'(B)  Current  Deposit  Accounts,  viz.  :— 

1.  At  Head  Office,        -        -        -    £361,544  19    1 

2.  At  Branches,   ....    o  903,525    1  11 


•(C)  Interest  Receipt.s,  viz.  :-- 

1.  ."Vt  Head  Office,       -        .        .    £485,132    3    8 

2.  At  Blanches,   ....    6,345,135  15    1 


2,565,070    1    0 


5,830,267  18    9 


(D)  Acceptances  by  the  Bank— Current,        .        .        .    2.742  10.^14  11 

(E)  Bills  Lodged  with  the  Bank  and  Collected 

or  Parted  n  ith,  viz.  :— 

1.  At  Head  Office,        -        -        .    £143,630    8    9 

2.  At  Branche.s,   ....  5,80.5    0    3 


(F)  Balances  due  to  other  Brinks  and  Banking 

Correspondents — 

1.  At  Head  Office,       .        .        .    £157,906  11  10 

2.  At  Branches,  ....  2,492    0    0 


149,430    9    (I 


160,398  11  10 


(G)  Dividends  past  due  to  Shareholders,  -        -        .  4,519    4    o 

(H)  Due  Stamp  Office  for  Duties— 

1.  At  Head  Office,       .        -        -  £10  1111 

2.  At  Branches,   ....  24  14    8 


35    C    7 
£12,315,235    6 


I.  Contingent  :— 

(I)  Customers'  Bills  Re-discounted  by  the  Bank  and  expected  to 

become  bad  in  the  hands  of  the  Discounters,       ...  -j    2 

-       £12,404.297    8    3 


Note. — Another  co7itinf/ent.  liability  is  the  possible  cost  of  Re-exchaiuje  of  Foreign  liilU. 

*  In  consequence  of  the  limited  time  at  disposal,  interest  has  not  been  credited  upon  Die  deposit  aeeutints  and 
nterest  receipts  for  the  period  between  bth  June  and  1st  October,  1878,  neither  hat  interest  been  debited  to  the  over- 
Irafts  and  credit  accorintsfor  the  same  period. 

ASSETS. 
Estim.\tei>  Good:— 
(A)  Cash— 

(a)  Gold— 

1.  At  Head  Office,        .         £236,840  10    0 
%  At  Branches,    -        .  38,043  10    0 


(6)  Silver  and  copper— 

1.  At  Head  Office,        -  £7,679  17  11 

2.  At  Branches,    -        -  39,189    6    5 


(c)  Notes  and  cheques  of  other  banks— 

1.  At  Head  Office,        -  £18,496    0    0 

2.  At  Branches,    -        -  78,114  12    0 


—    £274,884    0    0 
46,869     4     4 


96,610  12    0 


(B)  Balances  on  Current  Accounts  for  Credits  and  Overdrafts  con- 

sidered good— 

1.  At  Head  Office, »;.'-i26,826  11    4 

2.  At  Branches, I/26S,U«S    3  11 

(C)  Bills  on  hand— considered  nood— 

(a)  Current— Discounted  by  the  Bank,  viz.  :— 

1.  At  Head  Office,        -     £1,073,011    2    8 

2.  At  Branches,    -        -  984,666  16    0 

£2,067,677  18    8 

(ft)  Past  due— Discounted  by  the  Bank,  viz.  :— 

1.  At  Head  Office,  £111,8(53    9    9 

2.  At  Branches,    -        -  49,422    8    1 

141,285  17  1(1 

(D)  Balance.i  due  bv  other  Banks  and  Banking  CorreHpondint.s— 

1.  At  llead  Office, £17tl,H32  10  10 

2.  At  Branches, 210    2    7 


£418,363    10     4 


770,834  i:>    3 


2,198,903  10     0 
177,142  19    5 


Carry  forward, £4,674,:i05    7    0 


471 


The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Trial. 


Brought  forward, 
(E)  Heritable  Property— 

(a)  Business  premises  of  the  Bank 


£4,b74,305    7    6 


At  Head  Office, 
At  Branches, 


£34,500 
164,615 


(6)  Other  Property  held  by  the  Bank— 

1.  In  Glasgow,  -        -        -      £98,259    S    0 

2.  In  the  Colonies,    •        -       176,500    0    0 


£199,115    4    9 


274,759    8    0 


(F) 


Furniture — 

1.  At  Head  Office, 

2.  At  Branches,    - 


£526 
11,433 


0 
11 


(G)  Shares  and  Debentures  in  other  Companies— apart  from  Shares 
in  the  New  Zealand  and  Australian  Land  Company,  Limited 
— held  absolutely  by  the  Bank, 

(H)  Government  Stocks, 

(I)   Miscellaneous  Asspts— 

1.  At  Head  Office, £5,495  ll    3 

2.  At  Branches, 1,268  19  10 


473,874  12    9 


11,959    5  11 


396,068  10 
7,107    6 


6,704  11     1 


£5,470,079  13    9 


i^OIE.— Between  the  evening  of  the  Lst  and  morning  of  the  2/id  October 
there  tvould  be  in  transit  to  the  pay  offices  letters  of  credit 
■jmrchased  by  customers,  and  on  the  other  hand  exchange 
and  other  vouchers,  consisting  of,  for  exatnple,  the  cheques 
of  other  Banks  honoured  on  1st  October  at  Branches  of  the 
City  Bank.  The  full  extent  of  these  operations  ivill,  it  is 
estimated,  result  in  a  balance  in  favour  of  the  City  of 
Glasgow  Bank  of  about  £140,000. 
II   Estimated  Value  of  securities  held  against  Bad  Debts—* 

1.  At  Head  Office— 

(a)  Shares  in  New  Zealand  Land  Company, 

Limited, £904,904    0    0 

(6)  Shares    in    Companies    other    tlian    New 

Zealand  and  Australian  Land  Company, 

Limited, •       126,074  15    0 

(c)  Heritable  Securities, 378,776    6    8 

((/)  Life  Policies,  -------        74,014  14  11 

(e)  Produce,  - 71,750    0    0 

(/)  Shipping, 38,308    6    7 

((/)  Bills  and  Promissory  Notes,  •        92,497  13    6 

(h)  Miscellaneous, 11,000    0    0 

—     £1,697,325  16    S 

2.  At  Branches — 

(a)  Heritable, £30,097    2  10 

{b)  Life  Policies, 13,333    2    3 

(c)  Shares  in  other  companies,    -        -        -        ■       1,658  12  10 

((f)  Shipping, 300    0    0 

(e)  Miscellaneous, 519    8    8 

45,908    6    7 

—        1,743,234    3 

III.  Balance,  being  Deficiency, 5,190,983  ii 


£12,404,297.  8    3 


*  The  above  securities  are  held  against  the  following  debts,  which  are  estimated  bad.    It  is  to  be  noted, 
however,  that  against  other  debts  due  to  the  Bank  it  holds  a  large  quantity  of  securities  which  do  not  appear 
above  the  debts  against  which  these  are  held  being  considered  good. 
1.  Head  Office— 

(«)  Current  accounts  for  credits  and  overdrafts  estimated  bad,  £6,899,912    2    1 
(h)  Discounted  bills  on  hand,  current,  do.  194,856  18    8 

(c)  Do.  do.        past  due,  do.  77,752  12  10 


2.  At  Branches- 

(a)  Current  accounts  for  credits  and  overdrafts  estimated  bad, 
lb)  Discounted  bills  on  hand,  current,  do. 

(c)  Do.  do.       past  due,  do 


Total  estimated  bad  debts, 


£128,028  18 
14,913  15 
19,893    3 


£7,172,621  13    7 


162,830    1  11 
£7,335,357  15    6 


The  Assets  will  he  increased  and  the  loss  proportionally  diminished  by  rvhatever  dividends  are  received  from 
the  estates  of  the  debtors  and  obligants  in  respect  of  the  above  bad  debts. 

472 


THE  LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA 

Santa  Barbara 


STACK  COLLECTION 


THIS  BOOK  IS  DUE  ON  THE  LAST  DATE 
STAMPED  BELOW. 


10»)i-6,"62(Cn7'Jls'l)176D 


UC  SOUTHFRS'  RrniriNAl   i  iRHjdv  ctr..  ,T 


AA    000  519  929    4 


