IRotabIc Brtttsb tTrialg 


Frederick Guy Browne 

and 

William Henry Kennedy 




NOTABLE BRITISH TRIALS SERIES 

General HAREY IlODGE 


Tml 

Mary Queen of Scots 
King Charles L 
The Bloody Assizes 
Captain Porteous 
The Annesley Case 
Lord Lovat 
Mary Blandy 
James Stewart 
Eugene Aram 
Katharine Naim 
The Douglas Cause 
Duchess of Kingston 
Deacon Brodie 
Abraham Thornton 
Henry Fauntleroy 
Thurtell and Hunt 
Burke and Hare 
J* B* Rush 
William Palmer 
Madeleine Smith 
Mrs* M^Lachlan 
Frane Muller 
Dr* Pritchard 
The Wainwrights 
The Staunlons 
E* M* Chantrelle 
Kate Webster 
City of Glasgow Bank 
Charles Peace 
Dr* Lamson 
Adelaide Bartlett 
Mrs. Maybrick 
T. N* Cream 
A, J* Monson 
S. H. Dougal 
AdoH Beck 
Oscar Slater 
H* H. Crippen 
J* A* Dickman 
Steinie Morrison 
The Seddons 
George Joseph Smith 
Sir Roger Casement 
By waters and Thompson 
Ronald True 
H* R* Armstrong 

J* P* Vaquier 

J* D* Merrett 
Browne and Kennedy 


Date oF Trial 

(1586) 

(1649) 

(1678) 

(1736) 

(1743) 

(1747) 

(1752) 

(1752) 

(1759) 

(1765) 

(176H769) 

(1776) 

(1788) 

(1817) 

(1824) 

(1824) 

(1828) 

(1849) 

(1856) 

(1858) 

(1862) 

(1864) 

(1865) 

(1875) 

(1877) 

(1878) 

(1879) 

(1879) 

(1879) 

(1882) 

(1886) 

(1889) 

(1892) 

(1893) 

(1903) 

(1904) 

(1909) 

(1910) 

(1910) 

(191X) 

(1912) 

(1915) 

(1916) 

(1922) 

(1922) 

(1922) 

(1924) 

(1927) 

(1928) 


Editor 

A. Francis Steuart 
J. G. Muddiman 
J. G. Muddiman 
William Roughead 
Andrew Lang 
David N. Mackay 
William Roughead 
David N. Mackay 
Eric R, Watson 
William Roughead 
A. Francis Steuart 
Lewis Melville 
William Roughead 
Sir John Hall. Bt. 
Horace Bleackley 
Eric R. Watson 
William Roughead 
W, Teignmouth Shore 
Eric R. Watson 
F. Tennyson Jesse 
William Roughead 
H. B. Irving 
William Roughead 
H. B Irving 
J. B Allay 
A. Duncan Smith 
Elliott O’Donnell 
William Wallace 
W. Teignmouth Shore 
H. L. Adam 
Sir John Hall, Bt, 

H. B. Irving 
W, Teignmouth Shore 
J. W. More 
F. Tennyson Jesse 
Eric R. Watson 
William Roughead 
Filson Young 
S. O. Rowan-Hamilton 
H. Fletcher Moulton 
Filson Young 
Eric R. Watson 
George H. Knott 
Filson Young 
Donald Carswell 
Filson Young 


JR. H. Blundell 
\R. : 


E. Seaton 
William Roughead 
W. Teignmouth Shore, 


IN PREPARAriON. 


Captain Kidd 
Dr* Smethurst 
Harold Greenwood 
Field and Gray 


G, Chapman 
Queen Caroline 
Gardiner (Peasenhall) 


Wm* Hodso ^ Co„ Ltd*. Edinburgh and London 



Mri Justice Avory. 



TRIAL OF 


Frederick Guy Browne 

and 

William Henry Kennedy 


EDITED BY 

W. TEIGNMOUTH SHORE 

EDITOR OF THE TRIALS OF CHARLES PEACE, 

NEILL CREAM, AND JAMES BX-OMFIELD RUSH 


ILLUSTRATED 


AUSTRALIA mW ZEALANX> mX>U 

BUTTERWORTH & CO BUTTERWORTH & CO. BUTtERWORTH CO, 
(AUSTO, LTD. CAUST.). LTD, (INDIA). LTD. 


170 KING STREET 40/61 BALLANCE STREET 6 HASTINGS STREET 
SYDNEY, N.S.W. WELLINGTON CALCUTTA 



JIADE AND PSINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 
BY 

WILLIAM HODGE AND COMPANY, LIMITED 
GLASGOW AND EDINBURGH 
Felrmry, 1930 



2>e&(cate& 

IN GRATITUDE TO EACH OF THE MANY KIND FRIENDS 
WHO HAVE SO GFNERDUSLT AIDED ME IN THE PREPARATION OF THIS VODUME, 
THE FAULTS IN WHICH, HOWEVER, ARE MINE 



Introduction, 
Leading Dates, 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

1 

28 


The Thial— 


First Day— Monday, 23rd April, 1928 


The Indictment, - - - - - 

Application by the Prisoner Browne, - 
Application by the Prisoner Kennedy, 
The Solicitor-Generars Reply, - 
Opening Speech for the Prosecution, - 


Evidence, for Prosecuticn 


Frederick Masters, 

Eustace Charles Wyrall, - 
Mrs Rose A E Gutteiidge, 
Sydney James Tayloi , 

William Alec Wai cl, - 
Alfred Perritt, - - - - 

John Crockford, 

Alfred Norman, 

Dr, Robert Arnold Woodhousc, - 
William M ‘Bride, 

Dr. Robert Arnold Woodhouse 
(recalled), - - - - 


52 

52 

52 

53 
53 
54. 

55 

56 

57 
59 

59 


Mrs. Mary Eliza Siddals, 
John Fredei ick Dyson, 
George Townson, 

Cyril Albert Dads well, 
Benjamin iStow, 
Baymonde le Fevro, - 
Thomas George Wilson, 
William Ernest Stevens, 
Albert John M'Dougall, 
Alfred Edmonds, 

Charles Hearn, - 


31 

31 

39 

40 

41 


61 

62 

03 

63 

64 

64 

65 
65 

67 

68 
68 


Second Day— Tuesday, 24tii April, 1928. 
Eindenee for Prosecution {continued). 


John Miller, - - - - 70 

William Barker, ‘ “ 4? 

Frank Bevis, - - - - 75 

Albert Fames, - - - - 77 

John Harris, - - - - 78 

Harold Hawkyard, - - - 83 

Dr. Gerald Roche Lynch, - - 86 

Dr. Edward Richardson Lovell, - 86 

Owen Jones, - - - - 90 


-John Harris (recall cd), ' - 90 
Eliza Trewiii, - - - - 91 

John Pearce, - - - - 91 

William Ernest Stone, - - 91 
Joseph Thomas, - - - 92 

David Staunton, - - - 92 

William Guthrie Mabtinaoii, - 92 
Alberc Kirschnor, - - - S)7 

James Berrott, - - - - 98 


Third Day— Wednesday, 25tii April, 1928. 

Evidence for Probecution (co7icluded)* 

George Henry Ibbitsr n, - - 105 1 William Fox, - - - - 108 

Robert Churchill, - - - 107 | George Henry l^erry, - - 109 



X 


CONTENTS. 


OpeniDg Speech for the Prisoner Kennedy, 
Opening Speech for the Prisoner Browne, - 


Prederick Guy Browne, 
William Geddes, 

Mrs. Annie Kemp, 


Evidtnct Jot the Defence 


115 

151 

152 


Lillian Miller, - 
Aithnr Theodore Finch, - 
Mrs. Carohne Ann Browne, 


PAGE 

109 

113 


152 

152 

153 


Fotjbth Day— Thursday, 26th April, 1928. 


Evidence for Defence {concluded), 

Mrs. Caroline Ann Browne (recalled), 156 

Evidence for Accused Browne closed, 159 

John Harris (recalled), - - 159 

Statement hy Accused Kennedy, - 160 

John Frederick Dyson (recalled), - -161 

Closing Speech for the Accused Browne, - - - - * - 163 

Closmg Speech for the Accused Kennedy, . - - - - - 165 

Closing Speech for the Crown, 168 

Fifth Day— Friday, 27th April, 1928 

Charge to the Jury, - - 169 

Verdict, - - 187 

Sentence, 188 


APPENDICES. 

A. Proceedings before the Magistrates, - - 193 

B. The Appeal, 208 

0 Kennedy’s last Letter to his Wife, 213 

D. From The Morning Postt 4th October, 1929, 217 



LIST OF ILLUSTEATIONS. 


Mr. Justice Avory, 

Fig. 1 Breech shield of Browne’s revolver, - - - - facing page 23 

Fig 2. Base of the cartridge and bullets, ... - 24 

Fig 3 Breech shield of revolver and base of cartridge, - ,, 25 

Mr E. F. Lever, ,, 33 

Scene of the murder, . - - .... 43 

Plan of neighbourhood, ,, 53 

Browne’s stockingette mask, „ 73 

Mr. H. D. Roome, ,, 83 

Chief Inspector James Berrett, ,, 99 

Mr. Frank J Powell, ,, 109 

Frederick Gruy Browne, ,, 113 

Room in Browne’s Garage, ,, 145 

William Henry Kennedy, ,, 160 

Facsimile of portion of Kennedy’s last letter to his wife, - ,, 213 



BROWi^E AND KENNEDY. 


INTRODUCTION. 


1 . 


The Murder. 

Police Constable Gutteridge, a member of the Essex Con- 
stabulary, was stationed at Stapleford Abbotts, half-way, that is 
to say, five miles each way, between Romford and Ongar, where 
he resided with his wife ^ In the evening of Monday, 26th Sep- 
tember, 1927, he was on duty, and also had to go out again early 
the next morning to meet another constable, Sydney James Taylor, 
also of the Essex Constabulary, who was stationed at Lambourne 
End. The meeting, at what is designated a. " conference point, 
was near Grove House, Howe Green, on the Romforcl-Ongar road. 
The neighbourhood is rural, lonely, and quiet, well away from 
the main road between London and Chelmsford, unlit at night, 
little frequented by traffic. The two men met at three o'clock, 
parting some half-hour later, Taylor returning to his home with- 
out misadventure. 

Shortly before six o'clock Gutteridge's dead body was dis- 
covered lying beside the road, some 600 yards away from the 
spot where he had met Taylor and about a mile from his own 
home. He had been shot, and a trail of blood led from the other 
side of the road iO' the bank against which he liad fallen. Close 
to his helmet, which was lying on the ground beside him, lay 
his notebook, his pencil being gripped in his right hand. There 
were no evidences of a struggle, and it seemed that he must have 
been about to take particulars from some person or persons whom 
he had met. As his torch was in his pocket, and there was no 
lamp-post anywhere near, he must have been writing by a light 
that, presumably, came from some vehicle. There were the marks 
of the wheels of a motor car that had run against the bank, and 

1 Th© story is made clear by the plan, p. 53. 

B 


1 



Browne and Kennedy. 

close to this he must have been standing. He had been shot four 
times, twice in the cheek, one of these wounds being euch as would 
cause death almost immediately, and, with singular brutality, 
a bullet had been fired into each eye 

Somewhere about half-past two that morning a Morris-Cowley 
ear had been stolen from the garage of Dr. Lovell at Billericay. 
It was a four-seated touring car, index mark T W. 6120, painted 
blue, 192T model, chassis No. 160534, engine No. 183965. Evi- 
dence was soon forthcoming that tended to prove that this car 
had been driven away toward London, not along the direct route, 
but by one that led to the Komford-Ongar road, and so past the 
spot where the murder had been committed. At seven o'clock that 
morning the car was found abandoned at Biixton In it was 
discovered a spent cartridge case and on the running board were 
marks of blood. 

As it was not until January of the following year that the 
police were able to collect sufficient evidence to justify them in 
bringing an accused before a magistrate, the public very naturally 
concluded that here was another murder mystery which would 
not be solved. 

A man named Browne was carrying on business at a garage 
near Clapham Junction, and on 20th January he was arrested 
and charged with stealing a motor car in the previous November. 
When he, his car, and his premises were searched, articles were 
found that immediately confirmed the vague suspicions which had 
long been aroused that he was connected with the murder of 
Gutteridge. Chief Inspector Berrett, of ^ the C I D., New Scotland 
Yard, informed Browne that he would have to account for his 
time during the night of 26th September of the previous year. 

A man named Kennedy was arrested at Liverpool, on the 
charge of being concerned with Browne in the theft of the car. 
He was brought to London, and on 2Sth January made an 
important statement to Chief Inspector Berrett at New Scotland 
Yard. He admitted that he had been with Browne at Billericay 
on the night of the murder, denying that he had taken any active 
part in the crime, and asserting that it was solely the work of 
Bro-wne. 

It is unnecessary to pursue the story further, as it is so 
clearly and fully set forth in the trial. But it will be well to 
examine the careers and character of the two men, 

2 



Introduction. 


IL 


Browne- 

Frederick Guy Browne was not despicable; he had in him 
the makings of a Kobin Hood or a high-grade bushi anger. Had 
he been caught young, placed in helpful and suitable sur- 
roundings, and led by decent company, his good qualities and 
physical gifts would have suited him for service in, say, a mounted 
police force or for frontier work. As it was, he grew up a 
desperado and an outlaw, his powers being degraded into 
ferocities. One who came into close contact with him before and 
during his trial says that apart from his violence there was 
very much to be admired in his character; he was in all respects 
' a man.’ I do not think he was the kind of man to fire the shots 
which entered the murdered man’s eyes. . . , When ho was 

found guilty, I looked reluctantly towards him, and he tnot me 
with a kind smile and a reassuiing wave of the hand. The 
memory of his conviction and of the crime he committed must 
always be qualified and softened by that incident.” 

Leo Brown, or Guy Frederick Browno as he is Icnown to 
infamy, was born in Cafcford in the year 1881, of working-class 
parents. In 1909 he was living with his widowed mother at 
Eynsham, Oxfordshire, carrying on a bicycle repairing business, 
trading as Brown Brotheis. To hivS ostensible employment ho 
added the secret practice of bicyclo stealing. His method was 
to steal a bicycle, smuggle it home at night, pull it to pieces, 
file away any significant numbers, then reassemble parts of <Uf- 
ferent machines, and sell the outcome at markets in Oxfordshire, 
Buckinghamshire, and Gloucestershire. Once, unfortunately for 
him, he omitted to obliterate the maker’s number on an inner 
tube, with the result that he received twelve months’ hard labour. 
It is said that he was out and about at all times of the night, always 
carrying a loaded revolver, and his declaration at the trial that 
he had never fired a pistol cannot bo credited. In 1910 he was 
convicted at Abingdon Police Court for carrying firearms ; on 
the 10th November, 3911, he w^as sentenced at the Oxford City 
Police Court to several months’ hard labour for larceny; on the 
12th April, 1912, at the Bucks Quarter Sessions to a year’s hard 
labour for burglary; in April, 1913, he was arrested for receiv- 
ing a stolen bicycle, on the 3rd May, in the same year, at 

3 



Browne and Kennedy. 

the Oxford City Quarter Sessions receiving twelve months' hard 
labour for the offence. 

From a statement made by Mrs. Browne/ we gather that 
she first met with Browne at Eynsham in 1910, and was married 
to him on the 4th September, 1915, at Clapham, where she resided 
with^ him. After many years of married life her verdict was : 
With all his faults, my husband has been decent to me.'^ 

After holding various situations with motor engineering firms, 
toward the end of 1916 he joined up under Lord Derby's scheme, 
and was with the Koyal Engineers at Longmoor Camp.^ He did 
not serve overseas, and was demobilised after the Armistice, His 
discharge runs thus : 

Sapper Frederick Guy Browne, R E 

Attested at Wandswcith, l7tli May, 191G. 

Mobilised, 5th March, 1917- 

Posted to RE., 9th March, 1917. 

Discharged on conviction by Civil Power, Hants, 5th November, 1918. 

Character, indifferent. 

He had got into trouble at Petersfield, receiving a sentence of 
ten months- After this he worked in a garage at Clapham until 
late in 1921. 

He then went to live at Eastwood, near Southend, where he 
worked " at stealing and altering motor cars and illegally 
drawing insurance upon the same. On Christmas Eve, 1923, 
he, with others, was arrested on account of these fraudulent claims, 
and on the 20th February following was sentenced at the Central 
Criminal Court to four years' penal servitude. It was during 
his stay at Eastwood that he became familiar with the country- 
side that was afterward to be the scene of his fatal crime. As 
he said in a statement made after his last arrest “I know 
Romford, Brentwood, Shenfield, Billerioay, Wickford, and 
Rayleigh, because for some time I lived in a bungalow in East- 
wood, which is between Southend and Rayleigh, and when I lived 
there five years ago 1 used to come to London to work, when I was 
at 's garage, High Street, Clapham." 

He began to work out his sentence at Parkhurst Convict 
Prison, where he soon made a name by the violence of his conduct, 
assaulting warders, breaking up his cell, and being generally 

® 21st January, 1928. 

* In the Railway Operating Department, 

* At Tooting Police Station, 2lBt January, 1928, 

4 



Introduction. 


riotous. He and his neighbour in the adjoining cell having ,dug 
out some of -the bricks in the wall between them, were .able to 
enliven their loneliness with edifying conversations. Kef using 
to do any hard labour/' for fifty-seven days he was on bread 
and water diet. Eventually he was transferred to Dartmoor 
Convict Prison to be tamed. It is stated that it was there that 

he first met Kennedy. He was released on 30th March, 1927. He 

told his wife and others that he had served every day of his term, 
because he did not want to have to report to the police after he 
came out. He was a stickler for freedom ! 

He now set out on the wild career of burglary and car- 
stealing which landed him on the gallows. Starting business at a 

garage at Clapham, he did legitimate work with lock-up garages 
and car repairs, but, unfortunately, did not confine himself to 
this. 

The simplest way to present his career of crime is to tabulate 
his misdoings, his convictions, and some of the performances in 
which he was undoubtedly mixed up ■ 


Sentence 

AT 

Bate 

Oppence. 

llULBASBl). 

AEUS. 

1 and 2 months’ 
hard labour, 
consecutive. 

Oxford 

City 

Police 

Court. 

10/11/11. 

stealing 

bicycle. 

26/1/12. 

Loo Brown, 
though this 
was probably 
his rightful 
name. 

12 months’ hard 
labour. 

Bucks 

Sessions. 

12/1/12. 

Burglary. 

11/2/13. 

>> 

12 months’ hard 
labour. 

Oxford 

Sessions. 

3/5/13. 

Stealing 

bicycle. 

4/3/14. 


10, 10, and 10 
months’ hard 
labour, con- 
current. 

Hants 

Assizes. 

6/11/18. 

Stealing 

motor 

bicycle. 

17/11/19. 

Frederick Guy 
Browne, 

4 years’ penal 
servitude. 

Central 

Criminal 

Court. 

20/2/23. 

Conspir* 
acy to 
dci raud 
and 

forgery. 

30/4/27. 

99 


Also, he was fined upon two occasions for discharging a pistol within fifty foot 
of the road, and for having it in his possession without a Uconco. 


DATB OrPJKNCK, 

1927. 

7th-8th October. Burglary. Stealing safe, with jewellery, cash, A;o,, 

from Mrs. Martha Botts, Upper Tooting Koad. 
Evidently the work of exports. 


6 



Browne and Kennedy. 


DATE. 

1927. 

30tli-31st October. 


12tli-13th November. 


25th November, 

4th-5th December. 


7th~8th December. 

llth-12th December. 

1928. 

19th January. 


Offence. 

r 

Breaking into office and. atealmg cigarettes, &c., value 
£20, Tooting Junction Railway Station. Again, 
evidently the work of experts. 

Breaking into garage and stealing Vauxhall motor car, 
index number Y.E 8722, from Mrs. Hulton, at 
Tooting This was the famous car recovered at 
Sheffield, for the theft of which Browne and Kennedy 
were arrested and charged The number plates were 
found in Browne’s possession ’ The owner went to 
Sheffield on ISth January, 1328, but was unable 
definitely to identify the car there shown her by the 
police. 

Stealing a Singer car, the property of a gentleman at 
Tooting This Singer was found at Browne’s garage 
in process of “transformation ” 

Eynsham Railway Station was broken into, and a 
number of parcels and a Smith-Premier typewriter 
carried off ; also, an attempt was made to remove the 
safe. The thieves, Browne and another, were seen 
by a porter, whom they carried into the office, where 
they bound his hands and legs, then carrying him 
along the line to a shed. Both men were armed. 
The car used by the thieves was driven for several 
miles along the Ime betw^eeu the metals, and the 
tyres corresponded with those of Browne’s Angus- 
Sanderson. 

After Browne’s arrest at his garage, the station- 
master recognised his typewriter among the property 
there, also a quantity of tobacco. 

Browne seems to have had a mania for preserving 
evidence against himself ! 

A Buick car was stolen at Seven Sisters Road, Harrin- 
gay, and was found in Browne’s garage in process of 
“ transformation.” 

The office at TSordon Railway Station, Hants, was 
broken into, and a safe with £363 4s 3d., some 
cigarettes, and 19 parcels containing property to the 
value of £500 taken. Part of the “ swag ” was found 
at Browne’s garage. 

A shop at Herne Hill was broken into, and some of the 
property stolen was found in Browne’s garage. 


To* conclude this intentionally bald but surely not uncon- 
vincing narrative, here follows : — 

Browne’s Conviction Form. 

Name: Frederick Guy Browne. 

Alias : (Probably his real name) Leo Brown. 

Born : London, 1881. 

Height ; without shoes, 6 ft. 7i ius. 

Complexion: Dark. 

Hair: Dark brown, going thin on top. 

Eyes: Grey. 


6 



Introduction. 


Elsewhere he is described as '' a tall, well-built, dark-coniplesioued 
man, with heavy moustache/’ He was endowed with great 
physical strength, which he sometimes displayed by dispensing 
with a jack and raising a car by his own unaided muscular power. 

In many ways he was unlike the typical ruffian of fiction and 
public imagination, being a non-smoker and a teetotaller, not a 
hail-fellow-well-met with all and sundry, not a man of many 
friends, but staunch to those whom he did like, passionately 
fond of his little daughter and faithful to his wife. 

On 21st October, 1925, at the Taunton Assizes, a man named 
Frederick Counter was convicted of burglary and sentenced to 
three years’ penal servitude, which he served at Daidmoor. He 
was a friend of Browne, who had made his acquaintance when ho 
himself wa,s sojourning in that gloomy moral-health resort. On 
the Wednesday before his arrest, Browne, in his Angus- Sanderson 
car, set out to meet his friend on his release, with the intention 
of driving him back to town There was some misunderstanding 
as to dates, and Browne telegiaphed from Yelverton to his wife 
to say that he had started a day too soon, and so would not 1>6 
back until a day later than ho expected. Counter was released 
at 7 a.m on Friday, 20th January, going by train from Prince- 
town to Yelverton, where he was surprised to see Browne clad as 
a chauffeur He was on his way to pay a visit to some friends at 
Exeter, so he arranged to meet Browne again at Sidmouth Junc- 
tion later on. They drove to London, arriving at abotit 7.30 
in the evening, Browne dropping his friend near New Scotland 
Yard, where he had to report himself at the Convict llogistration 
Office, himself proceeding to his garage, where, to his intense 
astonishment, the police awaited his arrival wilh open arms. 

As we have seen, a Vauxhall car had been stolen at Tooting; 
at the same time a small nickel revolver had l>eon tak^en, which 
figured prominently at the trial of Browne and Kennedy. It 
was on account of this car theft that the two wore arrested and 
brought before the magistrate. The car had been liought by a 
man at Sheffield from Browne, who received for it -sBlOO and the 
Angus-Sanderson car, of which so much is heard. The police in 
London had also received information that led them to suspect 
that he might be concerned in the Gutteridge murder- 


7 



Browne and Kennedy. 

III. 

Kennedy. 

Patrick Michael William or William Henry Kennedy was born 
in 1891 or 1892 in Ayrshire, of Irish parents, his father being 
James Kennedy, a mining engineer. He went to Liverpool when 
quite young, being there apprenticed as a compositor. In 1903 
he enlisted in the Loyal North Lancashire Regiment as “ William 
Herbert,'^ serving until 1911, when, as a lance-corporal, he was 
transferred to the Army Reserve with an indifferent ” character. 
During 1911-1913 he resumed his occupation as a compositor, and 
contrived to acquire a reputation for inebriety and immoral 
conduct. In May of 1911 he was sentenced to two months’ hard 
labour for indecent exposure, and in October of the succeeding 
year to four months for theft. Twelve months later, at Carnarvon 
Assizes, he was given four months’ hard labour for thieving as 
“ Henry le Fever e.” 

Until the lurid end his criminal career was not on© of high 
achievement. In May, 1913, h© was fined lOsi at Liverpool City 
Police Court as Henry Jones ” for being drunk and dis- 
orderly”; in June he got a month’s hard labour at Stockport 
Borough Police Court as William Kennedy ” for indecent ex- 
posure; in August, at Wallasey Borough Police Court, on© day for 
loitering! Then in October, with his full name, William Henry 
Kennedy, three years’ penal servitude and three years’ concurrent 
at Liverpool City Assizes for housebreaking and larceny. 

On his release in April, 1916, he enlisted again, and his 
military achievements may be summarised thus : 

Kennedy’s Military Service. 

Private, Hussars of the Line. 

Ist Engagement ; 

Called up, London, 20/4/1916. 

Posted to Hussars, 22/4/1916. 

Deserted, 17/8/1916. 

2nd Engagement : 

Fraudulently enlisted at Dublin as Patrick 
Mane Fitzpatrick into King’s Liverpool 
Regiment, 25/8/1916. 

Convicted by Civil Power at Oswestry® of 
theft. Six months. Then transferred 
to Portland to serve remainder of former 
sentence of penal servitude, - - - 22/5/1917. 

Released from Portland, - . . , 11/9/1917. 

Deatrted, 4/10/1917. 

®For stealing a bicycle. 

8 



Introduction. 


In April, 1916, Kennedy declared former service with the South 
African Imperial Forces, namely, the Kimberley Town Guard 
and Natal Carabineers, and in August he declared two and a 
half years' service with the South African Light Horse. There 
seems to be no doubt that he was serving in South Africa in 1902-3. 

Still eager for military glory, in October, 1917, he rejoined 
the King’s Liverpool Regiment at Bandon, County Cork, as 
'' Michael Sullivan,” being discharged with ignominy and his 
medals forfeited, whereupon he went again to Liverpool, taking up 
the double profession of crime and hawking fruit. His sordid 
performances may be summarised thus • 


Batk 

1st June, 1920. 

5th January, 
1921. 

28th September, 

1921. 

15th August, 

1922. 

5th April, 1923. 

lith February, 
1924. 

17th April, 1924. 
30th June, 1924. 


AT 

Liverpool City Police 
Court. 

Liverpool City 
Sessions. 

Do. 


Liverpool City Police 
Court. 

Livorpofil City 
Scfiflions. 

Livetpool City Police 
Court 

Do. 

Chester Quarter 
Sessions. 


Okfenck. 

Four cases of in- 
decent exposure. 

KouscIh faking. 

Stealing bicycle. 

Stealing six pairs of 
trousers. 

Housebreaking. 

Stealing a bicyclo, 

“ Frequenting.’' 

Stealing a bicycle ; 
was armed with a 
loadf«l revolver. 


Sentknck. 

3 months’ hard 
labour, 

9 mouths’ hard 
labour. 

12 months’ bard 
labour. 

3 months’ hard 
labour 

12 months’ hard 
labour. 

1 month’s hard 
labour. 

1 month’s hard 
labour. 

3 years' penal 
servitude. 


His cronies dev^tignaied him “ The Fnirhaired Sniper ” and 
'' Two-gun Pat '' 1 TTo wuh wont to boast of having been a Sinn 
Feiner and of having picked oil ” two of the Black and Tana. 
So he can scarcely bo said to have made his appearance at the 
Central Criminal Court without a stain on his character,” and 
was wise to avoid the ordeal of cross-examination. 

In June or July, 1927, the dale being his own statomont and 
near enough to accuracy, he went to work with Browne in his 
garage, from which he took his departure in December, once again 
going to Liverpool, He returned to London on the 13th January 
of the following year, marrying on the 18th. Then on the 21st, 
being soared by the news of Browne's arrest, he thought it well 
to make himself scarce as far as I.iondon was concerned, evidently 
thinking he would be safer in Liverpool, 


9 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Shortly after half -past seven he and his wife set out in a 
tasi for Euston Railway Station, saying that they* were bound 
for Ireland. His London landlady describes him as '' Com- 
pletion florid, hair light to sandy, bald in front, clean shaven, 
full face/^ and as speaking with an Irish accent.’’ Leaving for 
Liverpool by the night train, they lodged there at Copperas Hill, 
Kennedy being arrested on 25th January. The remainder of his 
biography is given in the evidence produced at the trial. 


IV. 

The Statements of Browne and Kennedy. 

To enable the reader to follow the story and to appreciate 
many of the arguments raised before the magistrate and at the 
trial, it is convenient to give here in full the important state- 
ments made by Browne and Kennedy, the last being practically a 
confession and seriously implicating Browne. 

A 

Frederick Gut Browne, 33a Sisters Avenue, Clapham, 

Moto-r Engineer 

Tooting Police Station, 21st January, 1928 

I think I was born in 1881, and am a motor engineer. I came 
to London after being in the country in March last. 

I have been told by Chief Inspector Berrett that he is making 
inquiries respecting the murder of P.C Gutt Bridge at Stapleford 
Abbotts, Esses, on the night of 26th September, 1927. He has 
cautioned me that anything I say will be taken down in writing 
and may be given in evidence, and I have been asked to account 
for my movements on the night of 26th September, 1927. 

I came to London from the country about end of March or 
beginning of April. I visited a bro^er-in-law of mine at Buck- 
hurst Hill, and I later visited my wife and looked for a garage 
or some premises suitable for one, and eventually found a place 
at 7a Northcote Road, Clapham Junction. This would be, I think, 
in June, and documents will show the exact date. I took the 
premises from Mr. David Mistlin, the proprietor of the cinema 
next door. 

10 



Introduction. 


When I took the place it was simply a lean-to shed in the 
yard, and I set about to iinpiove the premises and make it into 
a garage, and I let space for four cars to other people for 
10s. 6d. and three to people for 7s. 6d, per week. At this time 
I was alone in the business, but after the garage was completed 
I employed another man to keef) my books. I do not wish to 
give his name, but I got him from the Salvation Army to give 
him a start. Ho left me and went tO' Liverpool just before 
Christmas. Since then I have had no one permanently employed 
by me, but other men have done odd jobs for me. I have also 
been friendly with the operator at the cinema. He is known as 
Fred, and he on one occasion has driven my car, as I thought 
it would be useful later for him to help me with hire work, as I 
then had five cars. 

During the time I had the man working for me he slept in 
the garage, but befoie he came to work for mo, which wUvS during 
the time I was getting the garage straight, I slept there. I 
cannot say the exact date when I took the man on, but you can 
tell that by his handwriting in the books, and from that date t 
slept at Sisters Avenue 

The books have not been kept since the man left, but I have 
kept my business on bits of paper and by my own method. 

Since the man left me just before Christmas I have slept with 
my wife as above 

The only time any one else slept at the garage was when a 
man named Dyson slept al the garage — ho was working for mo. 

I have been away from the garage and from my homo for about 
three or font occasions, twice to Rhoflleld, once to Dartmoor; and 
on another occasion T went to a fair in the country with a man 
named Dyson and atayod Iho night. They arc the only (im^s I 
have stayed away from the garage or my homo at night. 

I have never slept at my brothor-in-law^s house at Buokhurst 
Hill since I had the garage at Northcote Road. 

I know Romford, Brentwood, Shenfiold, Billericay, Wiokford* 
and Rayleigh, because for some time I lived in a bungalow at 
Eastwood, which is between Southend and Rayleigh, and when I 
lived ther^ five years ago I used to come to I^ondon to work when 

I was working at 'a garage, High Street, Clapham. 

I have visited Eastwood on two occasions since April last, 
in the daytime, and went to see a man named J. Wilson, jun., a 

n 



Browne and Kennedy. 

motor engineer. I cannot say if I was there during the month of 
September, but I certainly have not been there on any night. 

I have heard of Stapleford Abbotts, but* don’t remember 
ever having been through it I heard most about it when the 
murder took place I think the first time I heard about the 
murder was when a policeman came to my garage and passed 
some remark, I do not take newspapers in, because I do not read 
them. I have not the patience. My wife has a picture paper each 
day, and I think she passed some remark about them. 

I have been asked by Chief Inspector Berrett to account for 
the Webley revolver found in my possession which was loaded in 
six chambers. I wish to say I have never fired the revolver since 
I first had it. I got it some time in April last. I gave £3 for 
it down at Tilbury Docks from a sailor man whose name I do not 
know, neither can I describe him He was an ordinary seaman. 
It was unloaded when I bought it. The ammunition with which 
it is loaded I obtained from another man, together with a number 
of other cartridges shown to me, which were found in my hip 
pocket. I knew the man I got the ammunition from in the Army 
I don’t wish to say who the man is. The ammunition is very 
old in type, and was made previous to the war. They are in the 
same condition now as when I obtained them 

Shortly after I got the revolver it began to go rusty, but I 
kept it well oiled I have never used it. I loaded it so that it 
would frighten any one in case they interfered with me, and the 
reason I carried the weapon was because at the beginning of the 
war, and when I was working for Pytehley Auto Car Co., Great 
Portland Street, W., delivering cars by road in different parts 
of the country, on two occasions, once when I was going through 
Gloucester to S. Wales and a man at dusk signalled to me when 
I was driving the car to stop As I slowed down in accordance 
with his signal, and I was engaged on the near side speaking to 
him, two other men jumped on the offside running board and 
demanded money. I was unprepared, and gave them what little 
money I had. 

Some six weeks after that occasion, when going to Bourne- 
mouth with another car, the same ]|tind of thing happened to me 
with a man calling on me to stop, but I declined. After this I 
made up my mind to be armed when taking cars to the country, 
and I purchased a revolver with a long barrel, but I had not 
ammunition. 

12 



Introduction. 


I later joined the Army, but have never been threatened since. 
The reason I* had it on me to-day was because I had been on a 
country run to Devon. 

I have been shown two pairs of plier tweezers, which I use 
in my garage 

I have also been shown a quantity of lint bandages and 
tweezers, and a tube of freezing fluid, which I keep in the garage 
for cases of injury to my hands I have also seen a bottle of 
high volatile spirit. These things are kept in the garage for cases 
of emergency and accidents, and I bought thorn from various 
chemists, some I bought at Sheflfield at a chemist^H near the 
Infirmary — opposite, in fact. 

I have also seen and been shown an insiiootion lamp, with 
battery attached. It liears the words Ranoylight on the barrel. 
I bought it at a street mavkol. I have added to the torch to reduce 
the light to a point. 

The black gloves shown to me were issued to mo in the Army 
so far as I reinomber for driving, but now that I try them on- 1 
think they are too big for me, and (lon^t remcml>or whore I got 
them 01 much about them. I have been told they were found in 
the top right-hand drawer in the chest of drawers in the sitting 
room at my house. 

I have never been out in Ussox nt night driving motor 
oars or taking pari in stealing motor cars. 

I have had no connection with the mur<lor of P.C. Gutteridge, 
and personally I am not interested in it, because it, does not 
interest me. 

This has been road to me, and it is true to the best of my 
belief. (Signed) P, G. Biiow™, 


B. 

PREDntttOK Gut Bbownb, 

Tooting Station, 22nd January, 1927. 

I have again been cautioned by Chief Inspector Berrett that 
anything I say will be taken down and may be given in evidence. 

I have been shown a metal ease fastening with a catch in the 
centre. I have only got to say that this is a box in which I keep 
my files. I got it with a lot of other stuff. I don't wish to say 
where. I know the tin was kept in my garage. 

la 



Browne and Kennedy. 

The revolver shown to me, a Smith <fe Wesson, which I am 
told was loaded and was found on top of the cupboard in my 
room, I also recognise. 

I have also been shown a Webley revolver, which I know was 
a second one found in the Angus-Sanderson car fully loaded 

I have also seen twenty-four cartridges in a handkerchief 
found in my rooms, eleven cartridges found in my house ,45 
calibre, and two packets of 46 ammunition, and sixteen cartridges 
found on the dresser of the inner office at my garage. 

I admit they were where you said they were found, and I 
admit having them, but I decline to give any explanation of where 
I got them. 

Tou won^t find any more firearnxs in or around my premises 
either at my house or garage. 

There is one more revolver, but I won^t tell you where it was, 
as I might have sent you on a fooFs errand. It was hidden some- 
where, but whether some one has found it or no-t I cannot say, 
as I have not been to look, as I heard one was found on the 
Embankment 

All the ammunition you have got of .46 calibre I got from 
the soldier I mentioned in my first statement 

The revolver I hid looked of the Webley type, but not 
service pattern, and was unloaded, and I hid it about last April, 

I wish to say that I took my flat on 24th September, 1927, 
which I am being told was the date — a Saturday — I know I went 
in on a Saturday — I am confident I did not miss sleeping thei^'e 
for any night for some weeks. 

I have been shown a receipt for my rent, which shows that 
it was the 24th September, 1927, that I went to 33a Sisters 
Avenue. 

This statement was read over to me, and is true. 

(Signed) F. G. Browne 


C. 

William Hbnrt Kennedy, no fixed abode. Compositor, age 37* 
New Scotland Yard, 26th January, 1928. 

Who saith: 

About 11.30 p.m., 26th January, 1928, I was arrested at 
Liverpooi^ on a charge of being concerned in stealing a motor 
14 



Introduction. 


car I have to-night, 26th January, 1928, at 8 p.m., been inter- 
viewed by Chief Inspector Berrett, and told he is making inquiries 
respecting the murder of P C. Gutteridge at Stapleford Abbotts, 
Essex, on the morning of 27th September, 1927, and asked if I 
can give any information respecting it. 

I wish voluntarily to fell you what I know about the matter, 
having been cautioned that what I do say will be taken down in 
writing and may be given in evidence. 

(Signed) W. Kbotedt. 

At the end of either June or July, whilst I was at work on a 
farm at Cheshire, after my release from prison in November, 
1926, I received a letter from a man known as Fred. Browne, 
which letter I have destroyed or handed to Lhe representative of 
the Central Association in Liverpool.’' 

In the letter he told me he wasi ]ust starting a garage in 
Battersea — 7a Northoote Koad — and invited me to come down and 
act as manager. He said he would probably have a number of boys 
under him later, and that he would want me to look after them 
whilst he was away on repaii jobs. Ho said he could not oflor 
me much money at first, but it would cost me nothing for board 
and lodgings, as I could live at his garage 

He sent me my fare, exact amount, and I borrowed 10s. from 
the representative, to whom I think I gave the letter. I came to 
London and slept on the premises at 7a Northcote Hoad, at the 
back of Lhe place used as an oflice. 

My duties consisted of attending to correspondence, keeping 
the books, making and dealing with accounts. The man Fred. 
Browne was also sleeping on the premises at the time. 

After this had been going on, I think, till about the end of 
August, Browne went to live with his wife at 2 Huguenot Place, 
East Hill. The wife had been in service. 

He used to come to the works each day at various times from 
8 to 11 a.m. and stayed fill all hours, usually about 9 p.m., but 
sometimes later than that. 

We had a fair amount of work as repairs, and wo wore 
assisted in this by a man named Dyson, who was employed by 
Browne as a general handyman, and paid a wage of 25s. per 
week. We all worked together, and made look-up garages to be 
let to other people. 

’ The Discharged Prisoners’ Association. 

15 



Browne and Kennedy. 

I remained sleeping at the garage till December, and used 
to go out on occasions on motor rides with Browne* on ordinary 
and various business journeys, and once or twice we called at his 
sister’s place at Buckhurst Hill 

I well remember the day of 26th September He suggested 
that I should accompany him to Billericay, to assist him in 
stealing a Ealeigh car at the end of the High Street, away 
from the station. We went to a place which faces a large, empty 
house standing in its own grounds. Browne entered the grounds 
of the house where the Raleigh car was supposed to be. We 
went to Billericay by rail from Liverpool Street, which I think 
was shortly after 7 p.m., because we left the garage at 6 30 p m. 

I accompanied Browne into the grounds. Browne opened the 
door of the garage, I think with a key, and examined the 
Raleigh car, and we then left the garage and grounds, and hid 
in the grounds of the empty house and waited until the 
people owning the Raleigh car went to bed. 

Browne told me to wait in the grounds of the empty house, 
and Browne went to the garage where the car was stored. A dog 
came out, and, starting to bark, it made Brown leave and join 
me, and he said, It’s no good here We can’t get back by 
train, so we’ll try somewhere else ” The time was then, I should 
think, about 11 p.m. We walked through the village again and 
came to a spot, which I now know is the doctor’s house, on a 
sharp bend at the opposite end to where the Raleigh car was, 
and on the main London Road. 

We saw the garage at the end of the doctor’s house, and we 
went into the field opposite, and sat on some old palings or gates, 
and waited till the lights went out in the doctor’s house. It was 
getting late, and must have been after midnight 

After the lights went out Browne and I went to the garage, 
which IS a wood structure, and he forced the doors with, I think, 
a small tyre lever or tool of some kind, which he took with him. 

The door was opened easily. 

He first examined the petrol tank and make of car, and told 
me there was plenty of petrol in the tank. He told me it was a 
Morris- Cowley. It ran down on its own weight to the road, 
and we pushed it along about a hundred yards in the opposite 
direction, or at right angles to the main road. Browne said, 
We will go by the by-ways and escape the main road.” We 
16 . 



Introduction. 


then went for a long run round country lanes at great pace at 
different time^. We got to several crossroads and corners, where 
it was necessary for us to examine the signposts, hut eventually 
we got on to a kind of mam road on the way to Ongai When 
we got some distance up on this road we saw some one who stood 
on the hank and flashed his lamp as a signal to stop. We drove 
on, and I then heard a police whistle, and told Browne to stop. 
He did so quite willingly, and when the person came up we saw 
it was a policeman, Browne was driving, and I was sitting on 
his left in the front. The policeman came up close to the car 
and stood near Browne and asked him where he was going and 
where he came from. Browne told him we came from Lea Bridge 
Road garage, and had been out to do some repairs. The police- 
man then asked him if he had a card. Browne said, No.” 
He then asked Browne, '' Have you a driving licence.” Biowne 
again said, No.” The policeman then again asked him where 
he came from, and Browne stammeied in his answei, and the 
policeman then said, ” Is the car yours? ” I then said, ” No; 
the car is mine.” The policeman flashed his light in both our 
faces, and was at this time standing close to the running board 
on the off side. He then asked me if I knew the number of the 
car, and Browne said, You'll see it on the front of car.” The 
policeman said, ” I know the number, but do you? ” I said, 
” Yes, T can give you the number,” and said T.W.6120.” He 
said, ” Very well. I'll take particulars,” put his torch back in 
his pocket, and pulled out his notebook, and was in the act of 
writing when I heard a report, quickly followed by another one. 
I saw the policeman stagger back and fall over by the bank at 
the hedge. I said to Browne, What have you done? ” and 
then ^aw he had a large Webley revolver in his hand He 
said, Get out quick.” I immediately got out and went round to 
the policeman, who was lying on his back, and Browne came over 
and said, ” I'll finish the bugger,” and I said, ” For (rod's sake 
don't shoot any more, the man's dying,” as he was groaning. 

The policeman's eyes were open, and Browne, addressing him, 
said, What are you looking at me like that for? ” and, stoop- 
ing down, shot him at close range through both eyes. There were 
only four shots fired. Browne then said, “ Let's get back into 
the car.” We had driven close into bho bank, and backed out a 
little, and drove on in the direction of Ongar. He gave me the 
revolver, and told me to load it while he drove on. I loaded it, 
0 17 



Browne and Kennedy. 

and in my excitement I dropped an empty shell in the car. The 
other three I threw away into the roads. We flrove at great 
pace through many villages, the names of which I do not know, 
but I know we went through Buckhurst Hill, and then Bow 
and the Elephant and Castle, and while on this journey Browne 
said, Have you loaded that gun again? If you have, give it 
me back.’' I gave it to him, and he kept in on the seat by his 
right-hand side. He wanted to take the car to the garage, but 
I persuaded him to have nothing to do with the garage. We 
drove to Brixton, and went up a road I don't know the name of, 
and drove into a cul-de-sac at about 5.30 a.m. We left the car 
and came out into the main road, and came by tramcar back to 
the garage, bringing with us two cases out of the car containing 
doctor's instruments. These, or the majority of them, were 
smashed up, and the cases were out up into small pieces, which 
Browne later took out in his car and distributed about various 
roads in the country, so as to destroy all evidence, and I did not 
know that he retained any of the doctor's property. I forgot to 
mention that on our journey, after shooting the policeman, Browne 
turned into a tree owing to fog at a gate. The fog was very 
dense at that time. I think he damaged the near side front 
wing. I was very excited at the time. We returned to the 
garage about 6 a.m., and commenced our work. 

Dyson arrived at his usual time about 8 a.m., and business 
carried on as usual. I suggested to Browne that we should go 
right away from London, as I knew inquiries were sure to be 
made. Browne said there was no danger, and induced me to 
stop, and said if I made up my mind to leave him he would 
blow my brains out. He had the Webley revolver in his 
hand when he said this, and, as I knew it was loaded, I thought 
he would. I then later went to a newspaper shop and purchased 
.the various editions of the papers, and in one I found that Scot- 
land Yard was supposed to have found finger prints, and again 
wanted to leave, and he said, No, you don't; you'll stop here 
and face it out with me. If any one comes up here there will be 
a shooting match." 

I remained in the garage till December, and we saw news- 
papers on different dates relating to the crime, and saw the account 
of the renewed inquest in November, and the reward in the 
News of the World, and Browne said, They're still harping on 
that thing yet." 

18 



Introduction. 


In Decernber I told Browne I was going away, and he made 
no objection then, and drove me to Euston in the oar about, 1 
think, 17th December, 1927. 

I then went to West Kirby, Liverpool, to an address I don't 
want to mention, and remained until 13th January last, when I 
returned to London with the woman I have married, and I have 
lived at 2 Huguenot Place till last Saturday, 21st January, 1928, 
when I left and went again back to Liverpool, where I was 
arrested. 

Since I came to London on 13th January I have called at 
the garage on two occasions, and he said, '' Hullo, you've come 
back." On the first occasion no mention was made of the crime. 

On 17th January, 1928 — a Tuesday — ^he wanted me to go to 
Devonshire with him in a car, but my wife persua^ded me not to, 
and told me that, whatever he was going for, I was better out 
of it. I think Browne went, and I left. 

' I went to the garage again at 2 p.m,, Saturday, 21st January, 
1928, and when I got to the entrance I found the gate locked, and 
saw two men, who I took to be detectives, and suspected something 
was wrong. I went to my wife and told her to pack, as we were 
going away, giving her no reason. I went to Clapham Common 
and sent a bogus telegram to myself saying some one was ill. This 
was an excuse I made to explain our leaving, and also I hoped 
to get some of the rent back I had paid, and the landlady gave 
me back three weeks' rent. I then went to Euston, and left for 
Liverpool by the midnight train, and was arrested, as previously 
stated. 

I have seen Browne in possession of two Webley revolvers, 
which were always kept loaded, and he had plenty of ammunition. 
He also told me he had a Smith & Wesson, but 1 never saw 
it. I believe he kept it at home. He also had a small nickel .22 
revolver, which was also kept at home. 

I have been worried ever since the murder of the constable, 
and at times I became desperate, expecting I should be arrested, 
and not knowing what to do. 

I have made this statement quite voluntarily, after being 
cautioned, and am prepared to give it in a Court of law if 
necessary. 

It has been read over to me, and all I have stated is the 
whole truth of what took place on the night of 26th-'27th Septem-* 
her, 1927. (Signed) W, Khnnbdt. 

19 



Browne and Kennedy. 


D. • 

William Henry Kennedy. 

New Scotland Yard, 26tli January, 1928. 

Who saith : 

I have been shown two Webley revolvers. The one, No. 
351931, is, I think, the one that Browne had on the night that 
the policeman was shot; and the one, No. 299431, is the one he 
had when he threatened me if I went away. 

On the night of the murder I was dressed in a grey suit, thick 
brown overcoat, and Trilby hat, a brown one, and he was dressed, 
to the best of my recollection, in a light rain coat, dark fawn 
in colour, and a Trilby hat. 

The letter shown me by Chief Inspector Berrett is the one 
I received from Browne. It is headed '' Monday evening, 
London,^' and referred to in my statement. 

The pistol found in my possession and the ammunition was 
given me by Browne some short time before I left London. 

This has been read over to me and is true. 

(Signed) W. Kennedy. 


V- 

After their Arrest. 

Following their arrest, Browne and Kennedy were charged at 
the South-Western Police Court with the stealing of the Vauxhall 
car, but on 13th February this charge was dropped, that of 
murdering Constable Gutteridge being substituted, or added, to 
be meticulously correct. 

Sir Travers Humphreys conducted the case for the Crown, 
The evidence produced was practically the same as that later 
adduced at the trial, but there are some points of interest which 
must be noted. First, the argument for and against the admis- 
sion as evidence of the statements made by Browne, when he had 
been asked by Inspector Berrett if he could satisfactorily account 
for his time on the night of the murder. On behalf of Browne, 
it was urged that he had been improperly questioned, and that 
20 



Introduction, 


inducements were held out to persuade him to speak*® The 
magistrate ruled that the statements had been properly obtained 
and were clearly admissible. 

Next came the question of the admission of Kennedy's long 
statement, which might well be dubbed a confession, and which 
was of vital importance to Browne. If that statement could be 
kept out of Court and out of the newspapers, the case for the 
prosecution against Kennedy, and more especially against Browne, 
would be seriously weakened. Two lines of objection to its admis- 
sion were argued. The magistrate, as afterwards the judge at 
the trial, admitted that Kennedy's statement could not be accepted 
as evidence against Browne. The more general aspects of this 
point are referred to later on in this Introduction. On behalf 
of Kennedy it was urged that the statement was not voluntary, 
and that it was forced by the police from Kennedy when he was 
in such a state of mental helplessness that he did not know 
what he was doing or signing." It had been taken from him at 
New Scotland Yard the day after his arrest at Liverpool, whence 
he had come in the afternoon, arriving in London about 6 o'clock 
p.m. It was alleged that he had not been allowed to obtain 
adequate rest and had not been given sufficient food. Further, 
the " statement had been pumped out by four hours of inter- 
rogation, of promises, hopes, and threats." For the Crown it 
was urged that the statement was voluntary, and had been 
secured in a perfectly proper and legal manner. The magistrate 
decided, and no one can question the propriety of his decision, 
that the statement should he admitted. The serious allegations 
made against the police in this connection were so flimsily sup- 
ported that they were dropped and were not renewed at the trial. 

The rest of the magisterial proceedings were occupied with 
evidence which on all vital points is the same as that produced 
at the trial, which is there given in full. 

On 3rd April both men were committed. 

At the inquest on Gutteridge, opened at Romford on 30th 
September, 1927, concluding on 26th November, the verdict had 
been returned of murder by some person or persons unknown. 


®The arguments and evidence on these and other points are ixiren in 
Appendix A. jt © m 


21 



Browne and Kennedy. 


VI. 


The Trial. 

The trial opened on Monday, 23rd April, 1928, at the Central 
Criminal Court, before Mr. Justice Avory and a jury, a True Bill 
having been returned by the Grand Jury on the 17th against both 
the accused. The case presents one point of legal interest, the 
applications made and refused for separate trials. To make a 
pr4cis here of the evidence, which was materially the same against 
both the accused, would be but a dreary reiteration of what has 
already been stated in the preceding pages, and would gravely 
detract from the interest of the gripping story told by the witnesses 
at the Old Bailey. Two questions only were raised at the appeal,^ 
that the refusal of a separate trial had resulted in a miscarriage of 
justice, and that the judge's summing up as a whole had led to 
a verdict that should not be allowed to stand; in short, that there 
had been misdirection." The appeal in both cases was em- 
phatically rejected. 

But there is one matter brought forward in evidence which 
calls for consideration. Bullets had been found in and near the 
body of the murdered man and an empty cartridge case in the 
stolen car. The problem set the C.I.D. was to find the revolver 
from which the cartridge was fired. Sir Wyndham Childs, then 
Assistant Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police, at once fixed 
his attention upon the unusual character of the cartridge, which 
was one that had been withdrawn from the Army in 1914. Marks 
upon the body proved that one of the bullets that had been fired 
into the dead man's eyes had been propelled by black powder, an 
explosive that had not been employed since 1894. All this, and 
more, was fully dealt with at the trial in the evidence of experts. 

It was necessary, therefore, to find a man who not only was 
in possession, or had been in possession, of similar ammunition, 
but who owned the pistol that had fired the cartridge, Kevolver 
after revolver that fell into the hands of the police was tested, 
but the one looked for did not appear. Then came the arrest of 
Browne; suspicious ammunition was found on him and at the 
garage; also, a Webley revolver, which was proved to be the one 
that had fired the cartridge. 


^ See Appendix B. 
22 




Fig. 1. Photograph of the breech shield of Browne’s revolver, magnified, 
portion marKed off by dots is that reproduced in figure. 





Introduction. 


The firearm from which a particular loullet has been fired can 
be identified *beyond question, and it is curious that this aid to 
the work of the detective was not perfected sooner. The fact at 
the back of these identifications is that no two natural or man- 
made objects are ever precisely the same. To the unaided eye 
they may often appear to be so, but with the assistance of the 
microscope they are shown to be difierent. To the naked eye 

the edges of all razor blades look to be the same; actually, no 

two are or can be precisely the same, and the microscope shows 
them to be saw-edged, that is, serrated. In no two rifle barrels 
are the riflings ever precisely the same, because they have been 
cut by tools the edges of which change slightly with every use 
made of them. The markings on the breach shield of, say, a 
revolver, against which the cartridge rests and against which it 
is forced with tremendous power when fired, cannot be precisely 
the same in any two weapons, because they are made by hand 

with the use of a file. The human hand can never twice do 

exactly the same work. 

So it comes to this : a bullet or shell invariably liears marks, 
which may be called equivalent to finger prints,’^ distinctive 
of and peculiar to the barrel of the weapon from which it has 
been fired. Why not call it a “gun print ^ ''I The scratches 
round the firing pinhole of the breach shield of a revolver are 
imprinted on the base of every cartridge fired from it; a cart- 
ridge bearing that imprint can have been fired from that “ gun '' 
only. 

Therefore, when it is suspected that a certain bullet was fired 
from a certain gun,'' other bullets are fired from it, and the 
marks upon them' made by the rifling and the marks upon the 
base of the cartridges made by the breach are microscopically 
examined and compared with those upon the bullet and the cart- 
ridge case to be identified. Enlarged photographs of both are 
made so that the identification can be seen by the naked eye, and 
these photographs are exhibited " to all whom they may con- 
cern. Here, therefore, as in many other directions, the camera 
of the photographer is of inestimable aid to the scientific 
detective. 

Of course, this is no more than an outline of an intricate 
and difficult, but always precise, process. 

In a Court of law the procedure, roughly, is this ; in the 
case of a bullet the expert witness will describe to the jury the 

n 



Browne and Kennedy. 

way in which the barrel of a firearm is rifled, explaining why 
it is impossible that the rifling of any two barrels can be exactly 
alike in the minute details^ and that, therefore, an identifiable 
“ finger print is impressed upon every bullet fired. Similarly 
he will explain the print ’’ made by the breach shield upon the 
base of the cartridge case. 

A trouble that has often to be faced is that it is not always 
easy to find the gun from which the bullet was fired; had Browne 
got rid of his pistol, he would probably still be alive and dangerous 
to society. Further, often the bullet has been deformed by con- 
tact with some hard substance, such as a bone, or badly handled 
by the surgeon. Here the cartridge will save the situation. 

Find the bullet, or the cartridge case, and the gun that 
fired it can be identified. But — ^first catch your gun i 

In this Browne-Kennedy case, the problems to be solved by 
the police and the experts, and then to be made clear to the 
Court and the jury, were : 

I Who fired the bullets that killed Gutteridge^ From what make and 
calibre of pistol were they fired ? 

II. Where was that pistol and to whom did it belong on the night of the 
murder ? 

III. When the gun was found it was in the possession of Browne. The 
bullets had been so badly deformed that identification was not 
absolutely immaculate, as it must be in a case of life and death. 

ly. But a cartridge case had also been found, and it was easy to prove 
beyond question that it had been fired from Browne's weapon, and 
that it could not have been fired from any other. 

After having read the above, it may be helpful to peruse the 
evidence given by the various experts on p. 106 ff. Also, 
the meaning of the illustrations opposite pp. 23, 26, and 27 will 
now be clear, these being exhibits submitted to the Court and 
the jury. 

Fig. I. shows the breech shield of Browne’s revolver. 

Fig. n. is a photograph of the base of the cartridge found in the car in 
which the murderers drove from Billericay to London on the night, 
or rather the morning, of the murder. 

Fig, III, On the right hand is shown a portion of the breech shield of 
Browne's revolver and on the left a portion of the base of the 
cartridge. It will be seen how exactly the marks on the right side 
;; of the cartridge case corresponds with those on the left hand of the 

shield. The identification is unmistakable. 

It may be noted here that not one finger print of either Browne 
■or Kennedy was found upon the car, doubtless owing to both wear- 
ing gloves. Browne would naturally not have driven without 
them. 





Introduction. 


VII. 

The Conclusion. 

On 31st May, at 9 a.m., Browne waa executed at Pentonville 
Prison and Kennedy at Wandsworth. 

Highly coloured melodrama flooded the press while the 
murderers were awaiting execution : letters, confessions, poems, 
memoirs, and much descriptive matter, in which fragments of 
truth wei’e swamped by masses of fiction. These productions have 
little historical value, and therefore do not concern us.^ 


VIII. 

Summing Up, 

To the student of crime this case presents little of interest; 
it was a murder committed by two outlaws when interfered with 
by authority. The criminals were no more than rebels against 
the hampering restraints of the law; in short, as I have said, 
they were outlaws ” — ^brigands and gunmen. What the char- 
acter of each was has been shown already. 

But there are several features in the trial, indeed in the 
whole case, which raise the question : could not and should not 
our English system of criminal legal procedure be bettered 1 
Are not what amount to a triple trial in capital cases super- 
fluous, dilatory, and clumsy? No one would suggest abolishing 
the application to a magistrate by the police, asking that the 
accused be committed for trial. But is anything gained for justice 
by the previous and often prolonged proceedings in the Coroner'e 
Court? Of course, as the law now stands, if a Coroner hears that 
some person has been charged with, say, murder, unless there is 
any reason to the contrary, he must adjourn the inquest until 
after the criminal proceedings are concluded. But too often this, 
automatic closure is too late. Also, is it not an impropriety that 
the Coroner should be free to accept, even to ask for, as he often 
does, evidence which could not be presented in a Criminal Court?* 

1 For Kennedy’s last letter to his wife, see Appendix 0. 

^In Scotland the pre-trial procedure is different and, in the opinion of 
some, much more satisfactory p 

2 $ 



Browne and Kennedy. 

But there is a far more important matter. Should not what 
is called trial by newspaper be made a criminal offence, and 
the publication forbidden of the evidence brought forward before 
the magistrate and the Coroner? In the interests of public 
morality the publication of evidence in divorce cases is not per- 
mitted. Is it not equally important that persons accused of 
criminal offences should be protected? 

The Browne and Kennedy case is one only of many that could 
be cited in regard to this point- Again and again during the 
course of this trial the judge and counsel urged upon the jury 
that they must put out of mind and refrain from being in any 
way influenced by anything they might have heard or read con- 
cerning the murder and the accused, that they must arrive at 
their verdict solely upon the evidence put before them by the 
prosecution and the defence. Was that not making a demand 
impossible to meet? Asking men and women to be superhuman? 
Was it possible for the presumably innocent Browne to be fairly 
tried by jurymen and jury women who must almost certainly — 
some, if not all — ^have read and discussed the statement, tanta- 
mount to a confession, made by Kennedy to the police, which 
implicated Browne? Even if that possibility existed, this state- 
ment was produced and read in Court on behalf of the prosecution ! 
Was it not a farce for the judge to tell the jury that they must 
eliminate that statement from their minds because it was not 
evidence against Browne — a farce such as may one day result 
in a tragic miscarriage of justice? Can the judge himself be 
unaffected by such evidence? If that statement had not been pub- 
lished, and if Browne had been tried separately and first, there 
would have been better compliance with the demands and dictates 
of justice. It is nothing to the point that Browne was undoubtedly 
guilty. 

Then this : until an accused is proved to be guilty the law 
assumes that he is innocent. Yet, often after commitment by 
the magistrate, he is kept in durance for a considerable period 
before he is brought to trial. Browne and Kennedy were thus 
under lock and key for some three months 1 Theirs is not an 
exceptional case. Is not this procedure a stain upon what, as 
a whole, is the finest judicial system in this world? Is it impos- 
sible to revise our criminal procedure so that commitment is im- 
mediately followed by trial? Is not the assize system, convenient 
still in many ways, unsatisfactory in regard to capital cases? 

26 



Introduction. 


Torture is illegal. Yet we often add to capital punishment mental 
torture of a terrible character. When the accused is condemned, 
should he not be executed immediately after the appeal, if there 
is one? 

These questions raise a misgiving as to whether those arraigned 
on capital charges do always receive the consideration demanded 
by justice, based upon humanity, to which they have a right. 


27 



Leading Dates in the Browne and Kennedy Trial. 


1927. 

June. Browne takes the Garage at Clapham, 

26th-27th September. Murder of Pohce-Constable Gutteridge. 

55 „ Dr. Loveirs Car stolen at Billericay. 

27th September. Dr. Lovell's Car found at Brixton. 


1928. 


20th January. 
25th 


23rd April. 


27th 


9) 


22nd May. 
31st ,, 


Browne arrested. 

Kennedy arrested. 

Trial opens at the Central Criminal Court. 
“ Guilby." 

Appeals dismissed. 

Browne and Kennedy executed. 


28 



THE TRIAL 


WITHIN THB 

CENTRAL CRIMINAL COURT, 

Old Bailey, London, 

MONDAY, 23ed APRIL, 1928. 

Judge — 

Mr. JUSTICE AVORY. 

Counsel for the Crown — 

The Solicitor-General (Sir Boyd Merriman, E:.C., M.P.), 
Mr. H. D. Roome and 
Mr. G. B. M'Clurb. 

Counsel for the Prisoner Frederick Quy Browne — 

Mr. E. F. Lever and 
Mr. Walter B. Frampton. 

Counsel for the Pneoner William Henry Kenned/y — 
Mr. Frank J. Powell and 
Mr. Charles Abbott. 

29 



First Day— Monday, 23rd April, 1928. 

The Clerk df Court — ^Fiederick Guy Browne and William 
Henry Kennedy, you aie charged on indictment^ that on the 
27th day of September in last year you murdered George William 
Gutteridge. Frederick Guy Browne, are you guilty or not 
guilty ? 

Browne — I am not guilty. 

The Clerk of Court — ^William Henry Kennedy, are you 
guilty or not guilty? 

Kennedy — N ot guilty. 


Application by the Prisoner Browne. 

Mr. Lever — My lord, on behalf of Browne, I have an appli'ca- 
,tion to make, and I think possibly the present is the correct 
moment for making it. It is a most important application from 
the point of view of the man I defend. It is that your lordship 
should order a separate trial in this case. I have had an inter- 
view with the learned Solicitor-General in order to elicit his 
views on the matter, because I was quite sure he was not anxious 
to take any legal advantage which might work against either of 


1 The Full Indictments ran thus : — 

I. That they on 27th September, 1927, being concerned together, did at a 
spot on the Romford -Ongar road, in the pariah of Stapleford Abbotts, Essex, 
kill and murder George William Gnttcndge, a polio© constable of the Essex 
Constabulary, by shooting him with a revolver. 

(Against the peace.) 

II. Being concerned together, did on the 27th September, 1927, feloniously 

break and enter a look-up garage adjoining Shirley, London Road, Billericay, 
Essex, and steal therein a Morris-Cowley motor car, value £175, the property of 
Edward Richardson Lovell (pariah of Billericay). (Contrary to section 26 
Larceny Act, 1916.) ' 

III. Against Browne, only. For that ho on 29th January, 1928, at 7a 
Northcote Road, Clapham Junction, did have in his possession and under his 
control four revolvers and a quantity of ammunition with intent to endanger 
life. (Contrary to section 7, Firearms Act, 1920, and section 3, Explosive 
Substances Act, 1883.) 

(Parish of Wandsworth.) 

ly. Against Kennedy only For that he on 25th January, 1928, at 
Copperas Hill, Liverpool, did attempt to discharge a loaded automatic pistol 
with intent to murder William Guthrie Mattinson, a detective sergeant, 
Liverpool City police. (Contrary to section 14, Offences against the Person Act, 

loul.) 

V. For that he on the 25th January, 1928, at Copperas Hill, Liverpool, did 
have in hia possession and under his control a loaded automatic pistol with intent 
to endanger life. 


31 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr Lever 

the defendants in a trial of this kind, and the Solicitor-General 
sees no reason why the trials should he taken separately, and on 
that point I must make the application, because I feel personally 
a great difficulty if these trials are taken together, and I think 
the interests of Browne would be best concerned by invoking your 
lordship's power, which you have in cases of this kind, to order 
a separate trial, I cannot conceive any case in which the indica- 
tions are more clear than that a separate trial should be had 
than in the present case, and I cannot conceive of any case where 
such an application as I am making could be made if this is not 
the case. 

I propose to enumerate quite shortly a few of the, peihaps 
all, the mam grounds on which I base my application, and I 
will refer your lordship to certain authorities which I have no 
doubt are familiar to you, but I want to accentuate a few of the 
judgments which seem to me to be particularly apt to this case 
in which I appear. Now, my lord, the facts on which I rely 
are these : First of all, this is the most serious charge known 
to the law, the charge of murder, and, therefore, it is a charge 
in which the Court would be superlatively careful, I am certain, 
that nothing should he done in the conduct of the proceedings, 
or in the matter of procedure, which would by any conceivable 
chance work harm to either of the accused. The second ground 
is this — and in this respect I will endeavour to differentiate this 
case and cases where applications have been refused — it is a case 
where the incidents of the alleged murder are in a very small 
compass, that is to say, it does not depend on anything in the 
nature of conspiracy between the two accused; it does not depend 
on any facts which surround a domestic tragedy where the parties 
have been living together where they are mutually associated over 
some time and there is a course of mutual conduct conducive to 
the final tragedy ; it is simply a separate incident which therefore 
does not call for this, that the jury should have any special 
information in order to enable them to understand the case clearly 
as to the relationship existing between the parties relevant to 
the final act of the tragedy, it is quite a separate and distinct 
matter. The next point, of course, is this : As your lordship 
no doubt is aware, a statement has been made by Kennedy which 
is of a very special character; it is a statement which in its terms 
incriminates the accused for whom I am appearing, and it is rather 
more than that, because I am quite aware that on that ground 
alone 1 do not think this application could be supported — it is 
not only a statement which contains matter adverse to my client, 
it is a statement which really includes the very salient points of 
this case; that is to say, it describes the dramatic final incidents, 
and in doing so it describes them in a perfectly graphic way — 
whether true or false an absolute graphic way, and they are 
incidents of such a character that they must stamp themselves 
upon the minds of the jury; they must, I submit, undoubtedly 




Mr. E. F. Lever. 




Application by Prisoner Browne. 

Mr Lever 

stamp thBmse].ves, and my contention is that even a jury all 
composed of trained lawyers could not get their minds in con- 
formity with the legal reqirements of this case — I am assuming, 
of course, your direction from the bench will be perfectly clear 
and perfectly cogent; but my contention is that it is not within 
the human nature of a jury called from the outside world to 
eliminate from their consideration, not only a statement which 
is against the accused Browne, but which is so graphic, so salient, 
standing absolutely alone in the evidence. If your lordship is 
at all acquainted with the evidence which has been given, I think 
I may say this quite generally that, apart from that statement, 
there is nothing which brings Browne into the district, but in 
that statement the very scene of the tragedy is set forth, and I 
submit when you get a statement like that, standing perfectly 
alone in a different class from all the rest of the evidence, and 
of such a very special nature, although it is possible in certain 
cases, in oases of different statements, for the jury to eliminate 
the statement of one accused when they are trying the innocence 
of one or the other; but as to this statement, having regard to 
'the clear description which is contained in the statement, and 
all the other evidence, it would be impossible for the jury to 
dismiss that The matter does not rest there, because it is quite 
obvious that this statement is not only one which contains much 
which is adverse to my client, hut without reading any of the 
depositions I can refer your lordship to the deposition in which the 
inspector — think one of the police inspectors — gives his account 
of how this statement was arrived at. Now, merely just referring 
only to the point I want to make; it is this, that apparently 
before making the statement Kennedy is apparently considering 
what course he shall take, and he is distinguishing in his mind 
between being convicted for murder and being convicted as an 
accessory after the fact, and the statement is prefaced from that 
consideration, that he prefers a conviction of himself as an 
accessory after the fact to a conviction as a principal in murder, 
and it is on those grounds that the statement proceeds, and that 
is the express motive of the statement. It is essential for the 
defence of Kennedy that he shall establish, or there shall be estab- 
lished, the fact of my client’s guilt as a principal, because it is 
only on that assumption that this desire to be convicted as acces- 
sory is based, and, therefore, he comes before the Court not only 
as a person who has made a statement containing matters adverse 
to my client, but he comes to the Court on the express grounds 
that he wishes my client to be convicted as a principal, in which 
case he hopes to be convicted as an accessory only, and in those 
circumstances I submit those statements must be prejudicial against 
one accused, and certainly against my client. Kennedy^ will he 
called as a witness in the case, and Kennedy will be giving evi- 

^ In the event he was not bo called. 


33 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr Lever 

deuce ; what sort of evidence? If the prosecution were calling 
Kennedy, I anticipate that Kennedy’s status would be established 
one way or the other before he was called. That would, at any 
rate, be very largely in accordance with the very great majority 
of the practice, and Kennedy would then be standing as a person 
whose status was disclosed, and we would know how to deal with 
it; he would be called by the prosecution, and his evidence would 
be the evidence of the prosecution, and they would not have, as 
they now have under these present circumstances, all the advan- 
tages which lie in cross-examination; he would be their witness, 
and they would be obliged by the rules of evidence when eliciting 
the evidence from their own witness; but now, although he is 
practically their witness, and although he is nominally not a 
witness against me, they would have all the advantages of cross- 
examining this man who is not called as their witness but whose 
evidence should weigh because he is going to try and establish 
part of what they are going to try to establish. I shall have to 
deal with that in some sort of way, and I do not want to meet 
Kennedy in the box under those circumstances — ^the mixture of 
statements and the doubtful nature of the position ; and the 
obscurity which probably will and must supervene on that in 
the minds of the jury is an obscurity from which my client has 
everything to suffer. As I say, I do not think I could elaborate 
any one of those points, but I submit that it, standing alone, is 
strong and cumulative, and it makes it all the more necessary 
for the exercise of that discretion which your lordship is well 
aware you possess. I want to assist the Court as far as I can, 
although I am sure the Court needs very little assistance from 
me, but I have looked up the authorities, with the assistance of 
my learned junior, Mr. Frampton, and there are certain ex- 
pressions in some of the judgments which seem to me to support 
the very circumstances which I am relying on to indicate that 
this is a case in which such an order as I am asking for should 
be made. I am not dealing with the earlier of the cases, and 
I will not go back further than the case of The King v. Bywaters,^ 
which is reported in the Criminal Appeal Reports, vol. 17. That 
case in its nature was very, very different to this case. As your 
lordship no doubt remembers, the accused were jointly indicted, 
and there were letters which had been written by the female 
accused, Mrs. Thompson, to the male accused, Bywaters, and those 
letters contained, among other things, inducements to commit a 
crime such as both of them were eventually convicted of. In 
that case the Lord Chief Justice said, at p. 68: Many of her 
letters have been preserved, and those letters were certainly used 
as some material to help the jury to arrive at a true conclusion 
with regard to this appellant. It is not necessary, in 
dealing with this appeal, to enter further into the nature 

® See the volume in Notable British Trials.” 

34 



Application by Prisoner Browne. 

Mr Lever 

of the contents of the letters, but it was said by counsel that it 
was wrong for the appellant and Mrs. Thompson to be tried 
together. That was the first ground of the appeal. Decisions 
have been given again and again by this Court — the cases are 
so numerous that it is not necessary to refer to them — that it is 
a matter of judicial discretion whether two persons should or 
should not be tried separately. In this case the learned judge, 
exercising his discretion, decided that the present appellant and 
Mrs. Thompson should be tried together. In the opinion of this 
Court there is no ground at all for unfavourable criticism of 
that decision. On the contrary, this was clearly a case in which, 
in the interests of justice, it was desirable that the two accused 
should be tried together. It was said that the effect was that 
many of the letters written by Mrs. Thompson to the appellant 
were used as material from which the jury might form an un- 
favourable conclusion with regard to Bywaters, but exactly the 
same thing would have happened if the accused had been tried 
separately. In the one case, as in the other, the letters would 
have been given in evidence. It was further said that the result 
of the trial of the two accused together was that Mrs. Thompson 
became, as otherwise she might not have been, a witness in 
the case against By waters. No doubt, if the result of trying 
together two persons who might have been tried separately had 
been a miscarriage of justice this Court would interfere. But 
what is meant by miscarriage of justice? It means that a person 
has been improperly found guilty. It is idle to suppose that a 
miscarriage of justice has taken place if an accused person against 
whom there is overwhelming evidence suffers some further evi- 
dence because another accused person goes into the witness-box.'' 
I do not for a moment stop to say I am making this applica- 
tion not as an application to the Court of Criminal Appeal on 
the question of the miscarriage of justice in the evidence which 
will arise, because no evidence has been given; I am making 
this application to a Court of first instance, and I am not making 
it on the evidence which will be given, but on the probable course 
the trial will take. The Lord Chief Justice says: No doubt, 

where the defence of one accused person is to incriminate another, 
that is a good reason for not trying them together." It is on 
that expression of opinion rather than decision that I rely in 
quoting that particular case. 

The next case that I call your attention to is the case of Tht 
Kim,g v. Dorothy Lee and Florence Farhes^ and that is reported 
in 13 Criminal Appeal Reports, at p. 39. The head-note in that 
case is : " When it appears that the defence of each of two per- 
sons jointly indicted is incrimination of the other, the Court 
favours a separate trial of each." In that case the appellants 
were convicted of manslaughter of a child that died from starva- 
tion. Lee was the mother of the child and Parkes was the mid- 

35 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr Lever 

wife who had care of her^ and each was iiicriminathig'‘th 0 other 
as to the providing of food for the child, and Mr. Justice Darling 
says* ‘‘ The Court is of opinion that the appeals of both appel- 
lants should be dismissed At the same time, we desire to express 
the opinion that it would have been better if the tiial judge had 
acceded to the application of counsel for sepaiate trials. That 
is all that is said theie, but the Court of Appeal was, of course, 
deciding against the appeal on the general grounds on which 
they were entitled to decide against the appellants. There is an 
expression of opinion in a case which I submit is not so strong 
where the two people were providing the food; they were living 
in the same home or house, and it might have been said that 
it was necessary really for the understanding of the case for 
there to be a joint trial, but in spite of that the Court held, on 
the ground that there was incrimination one against the other, 
that the trials should have been separated, and it is in that 
general form* ‘‘When it appears that the defence of each of 
two persons jointly indicted is incrimination of the other, the 
Court favours a separate trial of each.^' That came into ques- 
tion in a subsequent case reported in the same volume at p. 134-, 
the case of Walter G^hhins and Bd%th Rose Frootor, In that case 
the man and the woman he was living with were jointly indicted 
for the murder of his child by his wife, and Lee and Parkes is 
quoted there, and Mr. Justice Darling said: ''The head-note 
there goes beyond the decision of the Court, which laid down no 
rule of general application.^' That is a criticism of it (it is not 
a general application, of course), that each case must depend on 
its own circumstances. Then the decision is at p. 136 * " When 
they were put on their trial both counsel applied that the accused 
should be tried separately. Thereupon Mr. Justice Roche said, 
in answer to the suggestion that it would be impossible to separate 
the evidence against the two, ' I have no doubt it will be done, 
can be done without any detriment.' The trial proceeded after 
that. The rule is that it is a matter for the discretion of the 
judge at the trial whether two people jointly indicted should be 
tried together or separately. But the judge must exercise his 
discretion judicially. If he has done so this Court will not 
interfere, but that is subject to this qualification. If it appeared 
to this Court that a miscarriage of justice had resulted from the 
accused being tried together it would quash the conviction. Here 
it is clear that Mr. Justice Roche exercised his discretion; he 
separated the defences carefully, pointing out what was evidence 
against one accused and not against the other. It is not enough 
to say that counsel could have defended them more easily if they 
had been tried separately. There is no ground for thinking that 
there was any miscarriage of justice. There may have been many 
things made clear to the jury which would not have been made 
clear if the prosecution had been embarrassed by having to deal 
36 



Application by Prisoner Browne. 

Mr Lever 

with the tw® cases separately. The whole story was before the 
jury of what went on in the house where the two appellants lived 
together.'^ I was referring rather to this when I pointed out 
that in this particular case that is before your lordship no con- 
sideration of that kind arises, and in this case the two parties 
were living together, and the method of their living together 
with reference to what happened subsequently was important, as 
was explained at the trial, and that is what Mr. Justice Darling 
was referring to when he said; The whole story was before the 
jury of what went on in the house where the two appellants lived 
together. There is no ground for thinking that either of them 
was improperly prejudiced by their being tried together.’’ Tha 
last case, and the most recent case, I think, that is reported — I 
am not aware of a more recent one — is The King v. William 
Segmour; it came before the Couit of Criminal Appeal on 18th 
August, and is in the present volume of the Criminal Appeal 
Keports at p. 98. 

Mr. Justice Avobt — What is the number of the report? 

Mr. Lever — Volume 20, p. 98. The head-note is : When 

a statement by one defendant intended to be put in evidence 
implicates another the Court of trial should consider whether they 
should not be tried separately.” That was a case in which a num- 
ber of people were charged together with receiving certain stolen 
property, and one of them, a man named Fowler, had made a 
statement about the receiving which contained matters strongly 
against the appellant Seymour, and in the course of the argu- 
ment, which is stated at p. 99, there is this : '' Only one point 
calls for report; the co-defendant, Fowler, who was ultimately 
convicted, when arrested by the police, made a statement which, 
if true, was conclusive of appellant’s guilt. This statement was 
given in evidence.” Mr Harris explained that the jury were 
warned by the Court and by counsel on both sides that this state- 
ment was only admissible against Fowler.” Mr. Justice Wright 
said : Was there any application to try the defendants 

separately? Mr. Armstrong — No. Fowler had been of great 
assistance to the police, and he could have been called against 
Seymour Mr. Justice Wright — The proper course was to try 

Fowler first and then call him.” Dealing with that part of the 
case, before stating the facts — I do not think the facts are very 
material — I will only just say generally that some stolen articles 
were packed in a barrow, and on the barrow was some green stuff, 
and Seymour’s defence was that he bought some green stufi on 
the barrow and did not know what was underneath it, and Fowler 
made a statement dealing with the thing. In the judgment Mr. 
Justice Branson says: ‘‘Now, it appears to us that putting 
together the whole of the evidence it does not amount to enough 
to justify a verdict against the appellant ; it amounts to sus- 
picion and no more, and we think that it is unsatisfactory that 

37 



Mr Lever 


Browne and Kennedy. 


a conviction should have been arrived at by the jm-y upon the 
evidence, and the more so because, owing to the fact ihat all these 
accused persons were tried together, it became necessary for the 
prosecution to read before the jury the statement made by Fowler 
containing a considerable amount of detail about what Seymour 
was alleged to have done in taking part in receiving and dis- 
posing of these stolen goods, and, though counsel warned the 
jury and the Deputy-Recorder warned the jury that what Fowler 
said in his statement was only evidence against Fowler himself, 
and not against the other accused persons, it is plain that an 
atmosphere of suspicion against Seymour must have been created 
by the reading of the statement, and, coupling that fact with the 
absence of any real conclusive evidence against Seymour, we think 
that the proper course is to allow this appeal and quash the 
conviction against the appellant ’’ The Court there was proceed- 
ing on the ground of miscarriage, but the observations of the 
learned judge are certainly intended, I submit, to be a guidance 
to a Court of first instance when without knowing what the evi- 
dence is and what the results of it may be as regards its weight 
and tendency, and so on. In a Court of first instance as a 
first step an application is made that these two accused should 
be tried separately. Another decision which my learned friend, 
Mr. Frampton, junior, has found for me is an Irish decision, 
and it is rather shortly stated, but I think I ought to bring it 
to your lordship’s notice It is the case of Tht Kvng v. Taylor 
and Mary Baly, reported in the lr%s}h Times Law Reports at p. 
28, vol. 3'7 : A and B were jointly indicted for the murder of 
C. The deposition disclosed statements made by A in the absence 
of but incriminating B, Held that the proper course was to try 
the accused persons separately.” Taylor and Daly were jointly 
indicted for murder. Mr Justice Kenny in his judgment : 

, . the arguments I do not think I need read; it was 

argued by the prosecuting counsel that the cases were so closely 
connected that they should be tried together.” The judgment says 
that : “ The jury would probably be influenced as against both 
accused by statements which were evidence against one and not 
against the other. They could hardly be expected to keep distinct 
as they should in a joint trial the legal weight to be attached 
to the statements as regards each accused. A learned colleague, 
one of the greatest lawyers on the bench, concurs in the view 
that the accused could not be fairly tried together, but should be 
tried separately.” 

That is the whole of the decisions applicable to the present 
contention. On these decisions I would suggest there is a broad 
line to be drawn for the purpose of the guidance of the learned 
judge to whom such an application as this is made, and the cases 
are very clearly distinguished into two broad classes : first, the 
class in which there is a statement containing matter which is 
38 



Application by Prisoner Browne. 

Mr Lever 

adverse to the .other accused in which, apart from other circum- 
stances, there is no such strong call for separation of the two 
cases; and the other broad class of cases are those in which there 
is direct hostility between the accused, direct incrimination the 
one of the other, and that, apart from other circumstanes, I 
submit strongly calls for a separation of the defence. Still, of 
course, the matter is within the judicial discretion, but when 
you get that direct incrimination the one of the other, and the 
other circumstances which I need not go into, but which I have 
called your lordship's attention to in the application, I do ask 
that your lordship should make the order I pray for in this 
case, an order that these accused persons should be tried separately. 


Application by the Prisoner Kennedy. 

Mr. Powell — If your lordship pleases : I desire to make a 
similar application on behalf of Kennedy. My learned friend has 
dealt fully with the law on the subject, and there is only one case 
I would like to call your lordship's attention to, and that is the 
case of Jackson and Another, reported in Cox's Criminal Cases at 
p. 357, tried in the year 1857. The head-note reads as follows : 
“ Murder — Accused charged with a joint offence; separate trials — 
common and unlawful object. Wheie two persons charged with 
murder by the same indictment had made statements implicating 
one another, and those statements were evidence for the prosecu- 
tion, the Court, upon the application of the counsel appearing 
for one accused, allowed them to have separate trials.'’ The sub- 
mission made to the Court there was . "It appears upon the 
depositions that the two accused have respectively made state- 
ments implicating one another as being connected with the charge 
which is to be inquired into. One of those statements was made 
by the accused Jackson when befoie the magistrates, and the other 
was made by the accused Brown to an inspector of police. They 
will be given in evidence on behalf of the prosecution, and will 
necessarily influence the minds of the jury. It is suggested, 
therefore, that the only way to ensure a fair trial is to try the 
accused separately, so that the statement of the one may not be 
in evidence before the jury upon the trial of the other. Baron 
Bramwell — I have spoken to my brother Mai tin, and we think 
that, if it is wished that the accused should be tried separately, 
it ought under the circumstances to be allowed." That is the only 
reference in the case to the question of separate trials. The 
grounds of my application — it may be that I have not such strong 
grounds as my learned friend, but the ground of my application 
would be that it is necessary in the interest of justice A good 
deal of what my learned friend said under that heading applies 
to my case, and I will not add to it. My submission is, your 

39 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr Powell 

lordship having* read the ‘deposition will be familiar with the 
evidence, that there is a good deal of evidence m this case to be 
given against Browne which is not evidence against Kennedy, 
and, human nature being what it is, the members of the jury 
will be in a difficulty in preserving that nice' distinction between 
those two sets of evidence which they might be expected to preserve 
in other cii cumstances, and on the basis that prevention is better 
than cure, and in oider to prevent there being any possibility 
of a miscarriage of justice, I ask your lordship to exercise your 
discretion in this case and say there shall be a separate trial. 

Mr. Justice Avort — What do you say, Mr. Solicitor ? 


Reply by the Solicitor-General. 

The Solicitor-General — It is admitted in this case that the 
mere fact that there is a statement made by one accused implicai 
ing the other is not a ground for asking your lordship to exercise 
the discretion which you are asked to exercise. Of course, the 
cases cited by my learned friend. Mi. Lever, say it is a matter 
for the Court to consider. Here it is not a question of one being 
charged as a principal and the other as an accessory after the fact ; 
both are being charged as principals. The case for the Crown is 
that they weie commonly engaged together on a joint purpose 
which resulted in the murder 

Mr. Justice Avort — ^And that they were together at the time? 

The Solicit OR- General — And that they were together at the 
time. I cannot accept the implication in what was said by niy 
learned friend, Mr. Lever, that, except for various statements, 
there is no evidence bringing the accused Bro^vne to the scene 
of the murder. On the contrary, my lord, I am going to invite 
the jury to consider a great deal of circumstantial evidence which 
in our submission tends to show conclusively that he was at the 
scene of the murder, and our case is that they were j'ointly con- 
cerned, as I say, in pursuance of a common purpose. My lord, 
my submission is that it would be farcical and redundant for a 
considerable mass of detailed evidence, apart from this statement, 
to have to be rehearsed twice over before two juries. It is said 
this is one of the cases like the case of Lee and Parhes and The 
Queen v, Jackson and Brown, where there has been mutual re- 
crimination, one defendant saying that the other man was guilty, 
and vice versa. My lord, that is not so; the fact clearly is that 
one man has made a statement which does not in itself exculpate 
him; on the contrary, the Crown say it implicates him, although 
incidentally no doubt it inculpates the other man. On the other 
hand, although the statement has been in the hands of the other 
accused for some time, there has been no corresponding state- 
ment made by him, so it is not therefore a case of mutual re- 

40 



Reply by Solicitor-General. 

The Solicitor-General 

crimination. In my submission, if there ought to be separate 
trials of this case, it is rather difficult to imagine a case in which 
two persons alleged to be jontly concerned should not be tried 
separately merely because one man has made a partial confession 
to some extent implicating the other. My lord, I oppose this 
application. 

Mr Justice Avory — Do you wish to say anything moie? 

Mr, Lever — I have only one observation to make upon the 
remarks of the learned Solicitor-Greneral, and it is this, that I 
feel quite sure he did not in any way at all press the observa- 
tion that one of the grounds on which he opposed this application 
was that it would be inconvenient; that is to say, it would be 
inconvenient because a good deal of evidence would have to be 
given twice and time would be wasted. I do not think he meant 
at all to press that, and, apart from that, I submit the submis- 
sion I have made and the observations I have made would allow 
your lordship to grant the application. 

Mr. Powell — The learned Solicitor-General points out this 
is not a case of recrimination. I would like to point out that the 
Lord Chief Justice in Bywatei's^ case said : No doubt, where the 
defence of one accused person is to incriminate another, that is 
a good reason for not trying them together,'' and, therefore, in 
mv submission, it is not necessary for me to show they are mutual, 
ic is sufficient if one, and one only, had made a statement. 

Mr. Justice Avory — In my opinion no sufficient reason has 
been shown for making the order which has been asked for in 
this case, and I must refuse the application. 

[The jury were duly sworn.] 

The Clerk op the Court — Members of the jury, the accused, 
Frederick Guy Browne and William Henry Kennedy, are charged 
on indictment that on the 27th day of September last they 
murdered George William Gutteridge. To this indictment they 
have severally pleaded not guilty, and it is your charge to say, 
having heard the evidence, whether they, or either of them, be 
guilty or not. 


Opening Speech for the Prosecution."^ 

The Solicitor-General— On 27th September, 1927, between 
3.30 and 6 a.m., on a quiet spot on a road between Komford and 
Ongar, Essex, Police Constable Gutteridge, of the Essex Constabu- 
lary, was murdered as the result of four separate wounds caused 
by shots from a revolver which fired service ammunition. In 

^ This and some portions of the other counsels’ speeches are an amalffam of 
various newspaper reports. 


41 



Browne and Kennedy. 

The Solicitor-General 

all probability, at the time he was killed, he was standing quite 
close to the driver^ s seat of a Morris-Cowley motor car, which 
had belonged to Dr. Lovell, of Billericay, and had been stolen 
earlier on the same morning, and was about to record certain 
particulars in his notebook in the execution of his duty. 

On 20th January, 1928, Browne was arrested at his garage, 
the Globe garage, at Lavender Hill, Clapham, London, S.W., after 
he had alighted from an Angus-Sanderson car. Immediately after 
his arrest there were found in the car, in the garage or on his 
person, various medical instruments and appliances similar to 
those which had been left by Dr Lovell in his car on the night 
before it was stolen, and which were not in the car when it was 
recovered. In the Angus-Sanderson car, in a pocket at the light- 
hand of the driver’s seat, a fully loaded Webley revolver was 
found, and Browne admitted that he had had it in his possession 
since the previous April. It was submitted that at least one of 
the shots which killed Gutteridge had been fired from that 
revolver. 

On 26th January Kennedy was arrested at Liverpool after a 
scuffle, in which he attempted to shoot with an automatic pistol 
the police officer who was effecting the arrest. On 26th January 
Kennedy made a statement at Scotland Yard. Let me say at 
once, and forgive me if I repeat it again, that that statement 
is evidence against Kennedy alone. It is not to be taken as 
evidence against Browne. In that statement Kennedy admitted 
that he was a party to stealing Dr. Lovell’s car, and that he was 
present when Gutteridge was murdered, but he attempted to ex- 
culpate himself from participation in the actual murder. The 
case for the Crown is that Police Constable Gutteridge was shot 
by one or both of these men, and that, even if it is left uncer- 
tain whether the actual shooting was done by one or by both 
of them, if you are satisfied that both, being jointly engaged in 
stealing that Morris-Cowley car, were united in the common 
resolution to resist by violence any one who should oppose them, 
and if the murder were committed in pursuance of that common 
resolution, both the prisoners were guilty, although one only may 
have fired the shots. 

In September, 1927, Kennedy was employed by Browne at the 
Globe garage. There was nothing — and it might be important to 
remember this later — so far as he could see, to show that Kennedy 
ever drove a car. He appeared to have managed the garage, 
looked after the books, seen customers, and so on. He lived at 
that time in the office belonging to the garage, where actually 
a few days before Browne himself had also lived. Browne had 
recently moved from the garage where he had been living to 33a 
Sisters Avenue, Lavender Hill, London, S.W. He then wore 
a flowing moustache, which a few days later was observed to 
have been closely clipped. 

42 




The Scene of the Murder. 

The hocly found on the left hand, agaiii-t the hank, looking tol^alds the pietiiie 


opening Speech for Prosecution. 

The Solicitor* General 

At 6.30 a.m. on 27th September Gutteridge was found Ijing 
on the offside of the road, some 630 yards nearer to his home 
at Stapleford Abbotts than a point at which he had parted from 
a brother constable at 6 a.m. His notebook was on the ground 
beside him, and his pencil was clutched in his right hand. On 
the near side of the road was a tyre mark close against the 
bank. Six feet nearer the constable was a pool of blood, whence 
led a trail of blood to the point wheie the constable was stretched. 
It was the kind of trail which might be made if a man, who had 
been shot where the pool of blood was, had staggered backwards 
and fallen against the side of the road with the blood spurting 
from his head. There were two sets of wounds. Two were 
through Gutteridge’s left cheek and two were through his eyes. 
The suggestion which the Crown makes is that the first two 
wounds were received while Gutteridge was standing at the spot 
indicated by the pool of blood, and that the two wounds through 
the eyes were received while he was lying prostrate on the ground 
by the side of the road. ^ 

Of the bullets which had caused Gutteridge' s death, one was 
a Mark I," Koyal Laboratory, Woolwich, service bullet fired 
from a cartridge loaded with cordite. That type of bullet was 
obsolete and extremely rare. Through the left eye a Mark II " 
or Mark IV " bullet had been fired, '' Mark IV " also being 
obsolete and rare. Through the right eye had been fired a 
“ Mark I " bullet from a cartridge loaded with black powder. 
At 7.30 a.m. on 27th September Dr. Lovell's car was found in a 
drive between^ two houses at Brixton. On the off-side running 
board the police found spots of human blood, while in the car 
was the shell of a spent cartridge fired from a service revolver 
and marked IV " from the Eoyal Laboratory. The prosecution 
regarded that as most cogent and conclusive evidence. It was 
not left there by Dr. Lovell. Like other members of his profes- 
sion, he is more concerned with healing than with lethal weapons* 
That cartridge case is a small clue, but impidnted upon it is the 
most cogent and conclusive evidence in this case. 

When Browne was arrested on 20th January a pair of artery 
forceps were found in his possession similar to those which Dr. 
Lovell had left in his car. Browne said that he did not know 
where he had got them. In his hip-pockot there were found 12 
service revolver cartridges, one of them being a Mark IV." 
The only charge which had at that time been made against Browne 
was that of stealing a Vauxhall motor car, hut Browne said : 
" That's done it. Now you have found them, it is all up with 
me." A stockinette mask was also found on him.^ In a pocket by 
the driver's seat of the Angus-Sanderson car was found a Webley 
service revolver, fully loaded with six Woolwich Mark IV " 
bullets. Browne said : "Ah, you have found that, have you? I 




® See illuatration opposite p. 73. 



Browne and Kennedy. 

The Solicitor- General 

am done for now.’' In the office of the garage 16 more service 
cartridges were found, seven of which were “ Mark IV " cart- 
ridges* Bandages, gauze, lint, another pair of forceps, a tube 
of ethyl chloride, all being similar to articles left in Dr. Lovell's 
car, were also found in the office. 

At Browne’s house were found a lens, an ear speculum, and 
a roll of plaster, all similar to articles lost by Dr. Lovell. There 
were also two packets of 23 “ Mark IV " revolver cartridges, 11 
separate cartridges of Mark IV " ammunition, other cartridges, 
another service revolver fully loaded with '' Mark IV " cartridges, 
and a smaller revolver, also fully loaded. When told of these 
finds, Browne said . ''If you had stopped me while I was in 
the car I should have shot five of you and saved the other one 
for myself." Later on he said: "From what I can see of it I 
shall have to have a machine-gun for you bastards nest time." 
On 21sL January Browne’s car was searched again, and in a cup- 
board behind the driver’s seat was found another Webley service 
revolver fully loaded, two of the cartridges being " Mark I " 
cartridges, one of which was loaded with black powder and the 
other with cordite. 

In the submission of the Crown it is impossible to overrate 
the significance of the fact that there was in Browne's car a 
revolver loaded in two chambers with ammunition bearing all 
the characteristics and of the make and loaded with the very 
powder associated with the bullets which inflicted two of the 
four wounds in the dead constable’s head. 

On 21st January Browne made a statement in which he said 
that he was born in 1881, that he was a motor engineer, and 
that he had come to London from the country in March, 1927 
It continued : 

" I have been away from the garage and from my home for 
about three or four occasions, twice to Sheffield, once to Dart- 
moor; and on another occasion I went to a fair in the country 
with a man named Dyson and stayed the night. They are the 
only times I have stayed away from the garage or my home at 
night. 

" I have heard of Sbapleford Abbotts, but don’t remember 
ever having been through it. I thiuk the first time I heard about 
the murder was when a policeman came to my garage and passed 
some remark. I do not take newspapers in, because I do not 
read them. I have not the patience. My wife has a picture paper 
each day, and I think she passed some remark about it. 

" I have been asked by Chief Inspector Berrett® to account 
for the Webley revolver found in my possession, which was loaded 
in six chambers. I wish to say I have never fired the revolver 
sfnce I first had it. 


® Chief Inspector Berrett, of New Scotland Yard, was in charge of the 
invest! £?ationB. 


U 



Opening Speech for Prosecution. 

The Solicitor<General 

‘‘ I got it some time in April last. I gave .£3 for it down at 
Tilbury Docks from a sailorman whose name I do not know, neither 
oan I describe him. The ammunition with which it is loaded 1 
obtained from another man, together with a number of other 
cartridges shown to me, which were found in my hip-pocket 

‘‘ I knew the man I got the ammunition from in the Army. I 
do not wish to say who the man is. The ammunition is veiy old 
m type 

Shortly after I got the revolver it began to go rusty, but I 
kept it well oiled I have never used it 

** I loaded it so that it would frighten any one in case they 
interfered, and the reason I carried the weapon was because at the 
beginning of the war, when I was working for Pytchley Auto Car 
Co., Great Portland Street, W., delivering cars by road . . 

once when I was going through Gloucester to South Wales, a man 
at dusk signalled to me when I was driving the car to stop . . . 

and as I was engaged on the near side speaking to him, two 
other men jumped on the off side running board and demanded 
money. I was unprepared, and gave them what little money 
I had. 

Some sis weeks after that occasion, when going to Bourne- 
mouth with another car, the same kind of thing happened to me 
with a man calling on me to stop, but I declined. After this I 
made up my mind to be armed when taking cars to the country, 
and I purchased a revolver with a long barrel, but I had no 
ammunition. I later joined the Army, but have never been 
threatened since. The reason I had it on me to-day was because 
I had been on a country run to Devon. 

I have never been out in Esses at night driving motor 
cars' or taking part in stealing motor cars.^’ 

Browne also said that the lint, bandages, tweezers, and ethyl 
chloride were kept in the garage in case of accidents, and he 
had bought them from various chemists. On 22nd January he 
was asked about the other weapons which had been found, and he 
made a further statement, in which he said — 

The revolver shown to me, a Smith & Wesson, which I am 
told was loaded and was found on top of my cupboard in my 
room, I also recognise. I have also been shown a Webley revolver, 
which I know was a second one found in the Angus- Sanderson 
car fully loaded. I have also seen 24 cartridges in a handkerchief 
found in my rooms, 11 cartridges found in my house 46 calibre, 
two packages of .46 ammunition, and 16 cartridges found on the 
dresser of the inner office of my garage. 

1 admit they were where you said they were found, and I 
admit having them, but I decline to give any explanation of 
where I got them. 

There is one more revolver, but I won’t tell you where it 
wae, as I might have sent you -on a fool’s errand. It was 

45 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Th^ Solicitor-General 

hiddBn somewhere, but whether some one has found it or not I 
cannot say, as I have not been to look, as I heard one was found 
on the Embankment. 

'' I look my flat on 24th September, 1927 . I am con- 

fident I did not miss sleeping theie for any night for some weeks. 

On 26th January Kennedy was arrested at Liverpool On 
being arrested he shouted to Detective Sergeant Mattinson, Stand 
back, or Til shoot you,'' and presented an automatic pistol. He 
pulled the trigger, but the safety catch was down, and, although 
fully loaded, the weapon did not go ofl. On the way to the police 
station in the custody of several ofiicers Kennedy said, It is 
all up now you've got me. How many more of you'* " The 
significance of that statement, having regard to the fact that 
not a word had been said about the murder charge — or, in fact, 
any charge — was apparent when taken in conjunction with what 
he said later to Detective Mattinson That officer had collapsed 
during the struggle, and, coming into the room where Kennedy 
was, the latter said, “ I'm sorry. I've no grudge against the 
police, hut you should be in Heaven by now, and there was one 
for me." 

Nest day Kennedy was charged with being concerned with 
the theft of a Vaushall car. He replied : Yes, I had a 

premonition something was going to happen to me to-day, and 
I intended going. You are lucky to get me While T was in the 
house I heard a tasiman being told to drive to the next street, 
and that gave me the tip," He was told he was going to be 
taken to London. 

When he was taken to London he was brought to Scotland 
Yard, and there he saw Chief Inspector Berrett, who told him : 
"You are detained on a charge of being concerned with stealing 
a Vauxhall motor car, and I have been making inquiries for some 
time past respecting the murder of P.C. Gutteridge. Can you 
give me any information about the occurrence? " Kennedy 
replied, " I may be able to tell you something, but let me con- 
sider," He sat with his head on his hands, his elbows resting on 
the table, and then said, " Can I see my wife? " She had come 
up to London with him, and was brought into the room. " Well, 
my dear," he said to her, " when I was arres^ted in Liverpool 
yesterday I told you there was something more serious at the back 
of it. Well, there is. These officers are making inquiries about 
that policeman who was murdered in Essex." Mrs. Kennedy 
said, "Why, you didn't murder him, did you?" “No, I 
didn't," he replied, " but I was there and know who did. If I 
am charged with the murder and found guilty I shall be hanged, 
and you will be a widow. On the other hand, if I am charged 
and found guilty of being an accessory after the fact I shall 
receive a severe sentence of penal servitude and be a long time 
from you. Will you wait for me?" She said, "Yes, love, I 
will wait for you any time." Kennedy said, " Well, what shall 

46 



Opening Speech for Prosecution. 

The Solicitor-General 

I do then? Mrs. Kennedy replied, Tell these gentlemen the 
truth of what took place.'" He said, All right, I will," and, 
turning to Inspector Berrett, he remaiked, " You can take down 
what I want to say and I will sign it." 

The statement was a long one, but it was made — as will 
appear by the evidence of the inspector — after very careful con- 
sideration. It was in the following terms — 

About 11.30 pm, 25th January, 1928, I was arrested 
at Liverpool on a charge of being concerned in stealing a motor 
car. I have to-night, 26th January, 1928, at 8 p.m., been inter- 
viewed by Chief Inspector Beriett, and told he is making inquiries 
respecting the murder of P.C. Gutter idge at Stapleford Abbotts, 
Essex, on the morning of 27th September, 1927, and asked if I 
can give any information respecting it. 

I wish voluntarily to tell you what I know about the 
matter, having been cautioned that what I do say will be taken 
down in writing and may be given in evidence. 

At the end of either June or July, whilst I was at work on a 
farm at Cheshire, after my release from prison in November, 
1926, I received a letter from a man known as Fred. Browne, 
which letter I have destroyed or handed to the representative of 
the Central Association in Liverpool.’’ 

In the letter he told me he was just starting a garage in 
Battersea — 7a Northcote Road — and invited me to come down 
and act as manager. He said he would probably have a number 
of boys under him later, and that he would want me to look after 
them while he was away on repair jobs. He said he could not 
offer me much money at first, but it would cost me nothing for 
board and lodgings, as I could live at his garage. 

“ He aent me my fare, exact amount, and I borrowed 10s 
from the representative,® to whom I think I gave the letter I 
came to London and slept on the premises at 7a Northcote Road, 
at the back of the place used as an oflfice. My duties consisted of 
attending to correspondence, keeping the books, making and deal- 
ing with accounts. The man Fred. Browne was also sleeping on 
the premises at the time. 

After this had been going on, I think, until about the end 
of August, Browne went to live with his wife at 2 Huguenot Place, ^ 
East Hill. The wife had been in service. He used to come to 
the works each day at various times from 8 to 11 a.m , and stay 
till all hours, usually about 9 p.m , but sometimes later than that. 

'' I well remember the day of 26th September. He suggested 
that I should accompany him to Billericay to assist him in 
stealing^ a Raleigh car at the end of the High Street, away from 
the station. We went to a place which faces a large empty house 
standing in its own grounds. Browne entered the grounds of 

’ The Discharged Prisoners’ Association. 

® Of the Association. 


47 



Browne and Kennedy. 

The Solicitor-General 

the house where the Raleigh car was supposed to be. We went 
to Billericay by rail from Liverpool Street. 

I accompanied Browne into the grounds. Browne opened 
the door of the garage, I think with a key, and examined the 
Raleigh car, and we then left the garage and grounds, and hid 
in the grounds of the empty house and waited until the people 
owning the Raleigh car went to bed. Browne told me to wait in 
the grounds of the empty house, and Browne went to the garage 
where the car was stored. A dog came out, and, starting to bark, 
it made Browne leave and join me, and he said, ' It's no good 
here. We cannot get back by train, so we'll try somewhere 
else.' 

The time was then, I should think, about 11 p.m. We 
walked through the village again and came to a spot, which I now 
know is the doctor’s house, on a sharp bend at the opposite end 
to where the Raleigh car was, and on the main London road. We 
saw the garage at the end of the doctor’s house, and we went 
into a field opposite, and sat on some old palings or gates, and 
waited till the lights went out in the doctor’s house It was 
getting late, and must have been after midnight. 

'' After the lights went out Browne and I went to the garage, 
which IS a wood structure, and he forced the doors with, I think, 
a small tyre lever or tool of some kind which he took with him. 
The door opened easily. He first examined the petrol tank and 
make of car, and told me it was a Morris- Cowley. It ran down 
on its own weight to the road, and we pushed it along about 100 
yards in the opposite direction, or at right-angles to the main 
road. Browne said, ' We will go by the by-ways and escape 
the main road.’ 

We then wenL for a long run round country lanes at great 
pace at different times. We got to several crossroads and corners 
where it was necessary for us to examine sign-posts, but even- 
tually we got to a kind of main road on the way to Ongar. When 
we got some distance up this road we saw some one on the bank 
who flashed his lamp as a signal to stop. 

‘‘ We drove on, and I then heard a police whistle, and told 
Browne to stop. He did so quite willingly, and when the person 
came up we saw it was a policeman. Browne was driving, and I 
was sitting on his left in the front. The policeman came up 
close to the oar and stood near Browne and asked him where h© 
was going and where he cam© from. Browne told him we came 
from Lea Bridge Road garage, and had been out to do some repairs. 
The policeman then asked him if he had a card. Browne said, 

* No.’ He then asked Browne, ' Have you a driving licence? ’ 
Browne again said, ' No/ 

“ The policeman then again asked him where he came from, 
and Browne stammered in his answer, and the policeman then said, 

* Is the car yours?’ I then said, ‘No; the car is mine.’ The 

iS 



Opening Speech for Prosecution, 

The Solicilor- General 

policeman flashed his light in both our faces, and was at this time 
standing close to the running board on the ofl-side. He then 
asked me if I knew the number of the car, and Browne said, 

' You’ll see it on the front of car.’ The policeman said, ' I 
know the number, but do youl ’ 

I said, ‘Yes; I can give you the number,’ and said 
‘ T.W.6120.’ He said, ‘ Very well, I’ll take paiticulars,’ put his 
torch back in his pocket, and pulled out his notebook, and was 
in the act of writing when I heard a report, quickly followed by 
another one. I saw the policeman stagger back and fall over by 
the bank at the hedge. I said to Browne, ‘ What have you done? ^ 
and then saw he had a large Webley revolver in his hand. 

“ He said, ‘ Get out quick.’ I immediately got out and went 
round to the policeman, who was lying on his back, and Browne 
came over and said, ‘ I’ll finish the bugger.’ And I said, ‘ For 
God’s sake don’t shoot any more, the man’s dying,’ as he was 
groaning. 

“ The policeman’s eyes were open, and Browne, addressing 
him, said, ‘ What are you looking at me like that for ? ’ and, stoop- 
ing down, shot him at close range through both eyes. There were 
only four shots fired. Browne then said, ‘ Let’s get back into 
the car.’ We had driven close into the bank, and backed out a 
little, and drove on in the direction of Ongar. He gave me the 
revolver, and told me to load it while he drove on. I loaded it, 
and in my excitement I dropped an empty shell in the car. The 
other three I threw away into the roads. 

“ We drove at great pace through many villages, the names 
of which I do not know, but I know we went through Buckhurst 
Hill, and then Bow and the Elephant and Castle, and while on 
this journey Browne said, ‘‘Have you loaded that gun again? 
If you have, give it me back.’ I gave it to him, and he kept it 
on the seat by his right-hand side. He wanted to take the car 
to the garage, but I persuaded him to have nothing to do with 
the garage. 

“ We drove to Brixton and went up a road I don’t know the 
name of, and drove into a cul-de-sac at about 6.30 a.m. We left 
the car and came out into the main road, and came by tramcar 
back to the garage, bringing with us two cases out of the car con- 
taining doctor’s instruments. These, or the majority of them, 
were smashed up, and the cases were cut up into small pieces, 
which Browne later took out in his car and distributed about 
various roads in the country, so as to destroy all evidence, and 
I did not know thab he retained any of the doctor’s property. 

“ I forgot to mention that on our journey, after shooting the 
policeman, Browne turned into a tree owing to fog at a gate. The 
fog was very dense at that time. I think he damaged the near- 
side front wing. I was very excited at the time. We returned to 
the garage about 6 a.m. and commenced our work. Business 
1 49 



Browne and Kennedy. 

The Solicitor* General 

carried on as usual. I suggested to Browne that we should go 
right away from London, as I knew inquiries were sure to be made. 
Browne said there was no danger and induced me to stop, and 
said if I made up my mind to leave him he would blow my brains 
out. He had the Webley revolver in his hand when he said this, 
and, as I knew it was loaded, I thought he would. 

I then later went to a newspaper shop and purchased the 
various editions of the papers, and in one I found that Scotland 
Yard® was supposed to have found finger prints, and again wanted 
to leave, and he said, ' No, you don't; you'll stop here and face ib 
out with me. If any one comes up here there will be a shooting 
match.' I remained in the garage till December, and we saw 
newspapers on different dates relating to the crime, and saw 
the account of the renewed inquest in November, and the reward 
. and Browne said, ' They are still haiping on that thing 

yet ' 

“ In December I told Browne I was going away, and he made 
no objection then, and drove me to Euston in the car about, I 
think, I7th December, 1927. I then went to West Kirby, Liver- 
pool, to an address I don't want to mention, and remained until 
13th January last when I returned to London with the woman 
I have married, and I have lived at 2 Huguenot Place till last 
Saturday, 2Ist January, 1928, when I left and went back to Liver- 
pool, where I was arrested. 

Since I came to London on 13th January I have called at 
the garage on two occasions, and he said, ^ Hullo, you've come 
back.' On the first occasion no mention was made of the crime. 
On 17th January, 1928 — a Tuesday — he wanted me to go to Devon- 
shire with him in the car, but my wife persuaded me not to, 
and told me that, whatever he was going for, I was better out of 
it. I think Browne went, and I left 

I went to the garage again at 2 p.m., Saturday, 2lBt 
January, 1928, and when I got to the entrance I found the gate 
locked, and saw two men, who I took to be detectives, and sus- 
pected something was wrong. I went to my wife and told her to 
pack, as we were going away, giving her no reason. I went to 
Clapham Common, and sent a bogus telegram to myself saying 
some one was ill. This was an excuse I made to explain our 
leaving, and also I hoped to get some of the rent back I had 
paid, and the landlady gave me back three weeks' rent. I then 
went to Euston and left for Liverpool by the midnight train, 
and was arrested, as previously stated. 

'' I have seen Browne in possession of two Webley revolvers, 
which were always kept loaded, and he had plenty of ammunition. 
He also told me he had a Smith & Wesson, but I never saw it. I 

® New Scotland Yard possessed both Browne's and Kennedy’s finger prints ; 
but none were found on the car that were identifiable as theirs. 

50 



opening Speech for Prosecution. 

The Solicitor General 

believe he kept it at home. He also had a small nickel .22 re- 
volver, which was also kept at home. 

I have been worried over since the murder of the constable, 
and at times I became desperate, expecting I should be arrested 
and not knowing what to do.^ I have made this statement quite 
voluntarily, after being cautioned, and am prepared to give it 
in a Court of law if necessary. It has been read over to me, and 
all I have stated is the whole tiuth of what ^ook place on the 
night of 26th-27th September, 1927.^^ 

The Solicitor-General then described how the revolver found 
in Browne's Angus- Sanderson car was identified as the weapon 
used in the murder. An examination of the revolver, he said, 
showed certain peculiarities which, on microscopic examination, 
were found to tally with a spent shell or cartridge discovered near 
the scene of the murder.^ When a cartridge was fired the pressure 
was 6^ tons to the square inch, and the effects of firing would be 
explained in detail to the jury, who would have the assistance of 
photographs and enlargements. 

In conclusion the Solicitor-General said : There is Kennedy's 
statement implicating him as clearly as words can make it, in his 
presence at the time at the place of the murdei. And though, 
as I say, he expressly disclaims any part in the shooting, there 
are surely two things in that statement of which it might occur 
to you that no satisfactory explanation is given." 

He referred to the alleged admission by Kennedy that ho re- 
loaded the revolver after Biowne had shot the constable, and 
asked, What possible inference can you draw from that, except 
that then and before then, as I suggest to you, these two men 
were determined by any means to resist anybody who opposed 
their escape? 

" Try to picture to yourselves the mentality of a man who, 
according to his own statement, had seen a fellow-man murdererl 
in cold blood and is prepared to reload the revolver and hand it 
back to the man sitting next to him in the driver's seat of the 
car." 

The Solicitor-General also referred to the alleged attempt tf) 
shoot Detective Sergeant Mattinson at Liverpool, and said that 
the attempt only failed because Kennedy had not the time to 
operate the safety catch of his revolver. 

" Is that an incident, or is it not, consistent with these men 
in common with each other on 27th September being united in 
the common purpose of resisting all who should oppose them ? 

" The Webley revolver was found on the right-band of the 
seat of the car from which Browne had just stepped at the moment 

^ This is typical of the mentality of the murderer ; fear of arrest and 
punishment, but no remorse. 

® It was found m the car at Brixton. 


51 



Browne and Kennedy. 

The Solicitor-General 

of his arrest. The cartridge case was found in the motor car 
stolen on the evening of the murder. 

“ Kemember that this cartridge was the comparatively rare 
Mark IV, and ask yourself this question : ^ How does Browne^ 
account for the possession of that weapon, how does he account 
for the possession of that sort of raie ammunition, some of which 
was used in the perpetration of the murder, except on the footing 
of his own complicity in the murder, at which Kennedy confessed 
himself to have been present? ^ 


Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Frederick Masters, examined by Mr. Roome — I am a police 
constable and am accustomed to preparing plans. I prepared 
exhibit No. 46, which is a plan showing a portion of the road 
between Romford and Ongar.^ I was shown a spot on the road 
marked in the lower section of that plan as the spot where 
the body was found. It is not so marked on the plan, but it is 
where the width is written as 17 feet 6 inches. From that spot 
to the conference point at Grove House is a distance of 638 
yards. From that spot to P.C Gutteridge’s house is a distance 
of 1680 yards. From the conference point to P.C. Taylor^s 
bouse is a distance of 1 mile 1533 yards 

Cross-examined by Mr Lever — ^A.t the spot where I was told 
the body was found there is an upper giadient in the dii action 
of Ongar of about 1 in 30. On the side of the road where the 
body was found the bank is about 3 feet in height, and is 
divided from the fields by a hedge. The bank is almost perpen- 
dicular; it is soft earLh and hollowed out. The width of the 
road at that point, as I have already said, is 17 feet 6 inches, 

Eustace Charles Wtrall, examined by Mr. Roome. — ^I am 
a photographer, and I live at Ilford. On the 27th of September 
last I went to the spot on the Romford-Ongar road, where there 
was blood on the roadway, and I took a photograph of the road 
looking in the direction of Romford. It was looking downhill. 
The white line across the road is the carbolic powder, which was 
sprinkled on the line of the trail of blood from the pool of blood 
to the side of the road.^ 

Mrs. Rose Aotette Emelihb Gutteridgb, examined by Mr. 
Roomb — I am the widow of P.C. Gutteridge, and I lived with 


^See plan, p, 53. 

®S©B illustration opposite p. 43. 




Evidence for Prosecution. 

Mrs Rose A. E Gutteridge 

him at Townley Cottages, Stapleford Abbotts, up till the 26th 
of September last. He returned from duty on the 26th Sep- 
tember at about six o'clock. I remember going to the mortuary 
at Eomford and identifying my husband's body. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lever — Do you know a man named 
Fairchild ^ — No. My husband did not have any quarrel with 
any man at our house just before he met his death. ^ 

Sydney Jambs Taylor, examined by Mr. M'Clurb — I am a 
constable in the Essex Constabulary stationed at Lambourne End. 
In the early morning of the 27th September last it was my duty 
to make a conference point with PC. GutLeridge, and for that 
purpose I left my home at about half -past one in the early morn- 
ing of the 27th I went along Hook Lane towards the point. 
The point was at Howe Green outside Grove House. 1 had to 
be there at three o'clock. I met P.C. Gutteridge within 100 
yards or so of the point, and we went there together. Wo stood 
' there until we passed a remark about the time, which was twenty 
minutes past three, and we remained talking a few minutes after- 
'ftrards. I left P C Gutter ildge ishortly after twenty-five past 
three and went towards my home. P C. Gutteridge was standing 
opposite *Grove House when I left him. I got home about twenty 
minutes past four. My house is barely 2 miles from Grove House. 

Cross-examined by Mr Lever — Constable Gutteridge's duties 
did not cease to exist at the conference point; they continued 
until he arrived home It was not an exceptionally dark night, 
but it was fairly dark. There was a fog, or what I would describe 
as a summer mist, in certain of the lower places in my district, 
but not on the high hill. I could not say whether there was any 
at Howe Green when the murder look place. I did not go down 
there. I do not know a man named Fairchild. I was not with 
P.C. Gutteridge when he had an altercation with any one. I 
did not know of any altercation between him and a man Fair- 
child, living at Brentford, who had been in a lunatic asylum. 

William Aleo Ward, examined by Mr. Roome — ^I atn a motor 
engineer. On the morning of the 27th September last I was con- 
veying mails from Romford to Abridge, I first of all made a 
call at Havering. I was driving a touring car. I left a mail 
bag at Havering at about twenty minutes to six. My next call 
was at Stapleford Abbotts. The posb ofiice there is near Townley 
Cottages. I handed in a bag there, and then went on towards 
Stapleford Torney. Near Howe Green I came to a bend in the 
road as I was going up a slight incline, and when I turned the 


^Ineffeotual efforts were made to attach guilt to others than the acotuped*' 
All were completely exonerated. 


m 




Browne and Kennedy. 

WUliam Alec Ward 

bend I noticed a huddled-np form at the side of the road on my 
right. 

As you got nearer, what did you seel — Two legs towards the 
centre of the load. It was P.C Gutteridge 

By Mr. Justice Ayort — D id you know him before? — ^Tes 

Examination continutd — The legs were protruding right out 
towards the middle of the road. 

Did you call to him'Z — ^Yes. I then got out. He was lying 
in a sort of semi-sitting position resting against the bank. Hie 
left hand was closed. I took hold of his hand, and it was cold. 
In his right hand there was a pencil. I also noticed a pocket 
book on the ground and his helmet. I immediately went to a 
cottage near by and fetched the occupier, Mr. Perritt. Mr. 
Perritt and I then returned to the body. We met a bus driver 
named Warren and spoke to him. Later on I went to Staple- 
ford Torney and telephoned to Romford Police Station. I did 
not see any sign of life in P.C. Gutteridge that morning. I 
did not notice any mark on either side of the road in the nature 
of the mark of a vehicle. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Eeveb — My car probably made a 
mark on the near side of the road where it stopped. Speaking of 
the near side of the road I mean the near side going from 
Romford towards Ongar — ^the side opposite to where the constable’s 
body was lying. When I noticed the body protruding into the 
road I naturally drew in on my near side, and the mark on the 
bank on the near side, I should imagine, would be caused in 
that way. As far as I know, I was the first person to see the 
body of P.C. Gutteridge on that morning after his death. As I 
have already said, he was in a semi-sitting position with his back 
against the bank. If at a later stage he was lying on the road 
full length, or lying not in a semi-sitting position, the body 
must have been moved after I saw it first. I did not notice any 
marks indicating that he had tried to get up, or anything of 
that kind. 

It looked as if upon being shot he had died in a semi-sitting 
position? — I did not know he had been shot. 

No,' but that was the impression he gave? — ^Yes. I know 
the roads about there. I should say that going by road the dis- 
tance from that spot to Billericay would be about 13 or 14 miles. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Powell — I did not examine the road 
to see if there were any marks on the road. 

Alfred Perritt, examined by Mr. Roome — ^I am> an insur- 
ance agent, and I live at Rose Cottage, Howe Green. On the 
morning of the 27th September last, about six o’clock, I was 
wakened by Mr. Ward knocking at the door. I at once dressed, 
and, in consequence of what he told me, I went out with him in 

54 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


Alfred Perritt 

the direction of Komford about 250 yards from my house. It 
is downhill. As we went along, I saw the body of P.C. Gutteridge. 
He was lying on his bach with his head downhill. I moved 
the body; I got hold of his ankles and lifted liis feet towards 
the hedge to pi event any vehicles going over them. His head was 
lying near to the hedge. After I had moved the body the legs 
were slightly uphill! and the head rather downhill I saw no signs 
of struggling on the road I saw blood. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lever — I saw a large splash of blood 
in the centre of the road, but that was not the only blood I 
observed; there were splashes of blood across to where the body was 
lying in a pool of blood. When I first came up to the body the 
shoulders, I believe, were lying on the bank, which would make it 
look as if it was in a semi-sitting position. The right shoulder 
was resting on the bank. The legs were lying uphill in the direc- 
tion of Ongar at an angle of 45 degrees. I moved them from that 
position into what I would call the gutter of the road In other 
words, I moved the body so that it was lying parallel with the 
hedge instead of being across the road. 

John Crookford, examined by Mr M'Clure — I am a detective 
inspector in the Essex Constabulary stationed at Romford. At 
about 7.45 in the early morning of 27th September I left my station 
in a car and went to the spot where I found P.C. Gutteridge^s 
body When I reached the body it was lying by the side of the 
road I noticed a notebook lying close to the body. A little farther 
up the hill his helmet was lying in the road. I noticed blood on 
the road. The blood started 6 feet from the near side of the road 
as you go uphill till you came to the deceased's head. It was a 
continuous trail of blood At the place whore the head itself lay 
there was a pool of blood. There i's no entry in the pocket book 
relating to this charge. The constable was wearing his cape. I 
examined the body. 

I think you found two wounds in the cheek and two other 
wounds in the eyes? — At that stage the eye wounds were not 
noticeable. 

Did you notice anything about his dress, about the buttons on 
his tunic; were they all buttoned? — The two buttons of his tunic 
were undone, and his whistle was hanging from his pocket on his 
chain. It was outside his pocket. His pencil was in his right 
hand between his thumb and linger. The whisLle is generally 
carried in the pocket His truncheon was m his truncheon pocket 
on his right-hand side. His torch was also in his pocket. I 
examined his cape and the collar of his tunic. I found there was 
a ragged cut on the right-hand side of the collar of his tunic, 
immediately on the numbers. There was also a tear on the back 
of his cape at the back slightly on the right-hand side. 


55 



Browne and Kennedy. 

John Crockford 

Was there any mark on the cape close to where the markings 
of the tunic would be? — A slight cut. 

By Mr, Justice Avory — ^In the back of the cape ? — On the back 
of the cape. 

Examination uontinued — ^About what size would the cutting 
be in relation to the size of the bullet^ — I can only say it would 
be consistent with the cut of some bullet or some sharp instrument. 
I sent for a doctor, and Dr. Woodhouse arrived at nine o’clock. 
The body was then removed to the cart-shed at the Royal Oak 
public-house, and the next day it was removed to Romford 
Mortuary. After the body had been removed I went back to the 
spot where I found the constable, and I saw Detective Norman, 
and he handed me two bullets. I handed them to Chief Inspector 
Berrett. There is always a police officer on duty at night at 
Brentford on the London-Chelmsford road 

Cross-examined by Mr. Powell — Did the fact that the police 
officer’s whistle was hanging loose indicate to you that he had 
probably blown it** — It did cross my mind at the time. It was 
consistent with that. The whistle is usually cariied, I think, in 
a breast pocket on the right. 

If Kennedy says the whistle was blown, that would be con- 
sistent with that statement ? — Yes. 

If Kennedy says the officer put his torch back in his pocket, 
that would be consistent with what you found? — ^Yes. I did not 
find any of the bullets personally, but I found the collar of the 
tunic and the cape damaged as if by a bullet. 

Alfred Norman, examined by Mr. MTlure — I am a detective 
in the Essex Constabulary. On the 27th September, 1927, I went 
to a place on the Romford Ongar road, where I saw some blood 
It would be about 9.30 a.ni. when I arrived there. By the time 
I arrived the body had been taken away. I saw a pool of blood at 
the roadside. I searched about at the spot. The pool of blood 
I have referred to was close to the bank I found a bullet embedded 
in the road about a quarter of an ihch in the softer substance of 
the road. It was underneath the pool of blood. Police Constable 
Saich was with me at the time, and I saw him find this other 
bullet He found it about 2 to 3 inches from where I found the 
first It was not embedded in the ground ; it was lying on the 
top. The two bullets were parallel with the edge of the road. I 
handed these two bullets tO' Inspector Crockford 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lever — ^From the position in which 
you found these bullets I suppose you would come to the con- 
clusion that they had been fired substantially close together, at 
the same time? — ^Well, I did not com© to any conclusion, 

Mr. Justice Avort — It would have been very rash if you had. 

Cross-examination continued — ^At any rate, they were within 
56 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Alfred Norman 

2 to 3 inches of each other? — ^Yes. They were both lying in the 
same pool of blood 

So that if on© of these bullets had been fired when the 
oonstable wras standing up somewhere I'n the middle of the road, 
and the other fired into his eye while he was lying on the ground, 
by some means or other these two bullets had got to the place 
where you found them'? — ^Tes, 

But you did not speculate about them? — No. 

Do you know that one of the bullets that were fired into the 
man’s head was found in his eye afterwards? — ^Yos, I did hear 
that. 

So that one apparently of these bullets had been fired into 
his eye and one some way away? — Appaiently so, yes. 

And so, somehow, they must have come together? — They were 
there. When I got there the body had been removed; I did not 
see the body. 

Cross-examined by Mr Powell — With regard l,o the two bullets 
you found in the pool of blood, one was embedded in ihe road, 
would that be consistent with the bullet having been fired while 
the unfortunate officer’s body was on the road, and that caused it 
to be embedded? — I could not say as to that. 

But with regard to the other one, that may have dropped 
from the collar of his cape? — It may be so. 

At any rate, it was not embedded, as if ifc had been fired at 
that spot? — It was not embedded, nb. 

Dr, Robert Arnold WoonnoasE, examined by the Solioitou- 
GrENERAL — I am a registered medical practitioner, and I reside at 
75 South Street, Romford. I was called to ihe spot where P.C. 
Gutteridge’s body was lying about nine o’clock on the morning 
of the 27th September last. Life was cxLinct when I arrived. An 
far as I could judge, he had been dead between four and five 
hours. The next day I made a post-mortem examination. There 
were altogether seven wounds in Ihe head. As far as I could see, 
there were four entrance wounds and three exit wounds. The four 
entrance wounds have been divided into two groups, those in the 
cheek and those through the eyes, two of each. With regard to 
the wounds through the cheek, it was the left cheek, and they 
were in a line with the lobe of the oar, one an inch and a quarter 
from the lobe of the ear, and the other three-quarters of an inch 
from the lobe of the ear As regards the one which was furihesb 
from the lobe of the ear, T was able to trace the exit; T was able 
to pass a probe through it out at the other side. The exit was at 
the level of the ear about an inch in front of it, the track of that 
wound having risen an inch. It had gone through the palate and 
out through the jaw bone at the side, fracturing it as it came 
out. That wound taken by itself would not necessarily have been 
fatal. As regards the second wound, the wound nearer the ear, 

57 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Dr Robert A. Woodhouse 

I also tried that wound with a probe and found that it cams out 
on the right side of the neck 2 inches below the mastoid process 
on the right side. The track of that wound had fallen 2 inches. 

When you talk about the track rising an inch or falling 2 
inches, was there anything to show one way or the other whether 
the track of the bullet was in a direct straight line from the entry 
wound to the exit wound? — It was in a straight line; the probe 
went through straight fiom the entry to the exit. As regards the 
second wound I have just ref ei red to, in its passage it cut through 
the right internal carotid artery, and death from that wound 
would have taken place very probably in the space possibly of a 
minute or a minute and a half from haemorrhage It is the sort 
of wound from which blood would be spurting. Coming now to 
the wounds, the skin round the wounds showed a large number 
of small black specks There was a wound in each eye, through 
each eyelid, the one on the right being a trifle higher than the 
one on the left. The actual skin of the eyelids was broken as if 
something had been driven through it, and there was what I would 
call peppering ’’ lound the wounds It was the same on both 
sides of the face, only it was more marked in the case of the 
right eye than the left They were bullet wounds somewhat oval 
in shape and scorched round the edges That was in addition to 
the black marks I have referred to I was only able to trace the 
exit wound of the wound in the right eye. I was able to get a 
probe in through underneath the right eye, and it came out through 
a large wound in the back of the head. In the case of the left 
eye the probe could not go through; it came to a dead stop. Later 
I examined the brain, and in the brain I found a distorted bullet 
It was on the left side of the brain. That is consistent with it 
being the bullet which went through the eye The bullet is 
considerably distorted; it is flattened at the nose That must 
have been caused by it coming in contact with something In 
my opinion, death was due to haemorrhage and laceration of the 
brain caused by bullets 

Cross-examined by Mr Lever — Is it your view that one of the 
bullets passing in through the cheek would cause death, as I 
understand it, in about a minute and a half from haemorrhage? — 
That is so. 

And, with regard to the shots through the eyes, one of those 
would cause instantaneous death? — ^Tes; either would produce that. 

He did not move at all after that shot through the eyes? — ^Not 
voluntarily, no. 

May I take it your view is this, that first there was a shot 
through the left cheek, which went slightly upwards, about an 
inch upwards,, and then a shot through the left cheek which went 
about 2 inches downwards; and then two shots in the eyes after- 
wards? — Yes. I cannot give an opinion with regard to the first 
two — as to in what order they were fired; I do not think I could 
58 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Robert A. Woodhouae 

decide which one of those two was fired first. They seemed as if 
they had been fired at a distance of about 10 inches from the man. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — Those in the cheek, you mean? — ^Tes. 
They had an area of scorching round of about one-eighth of an 
inch. 

Cross-examination continu\ed — Your theory is that the gun 
would be about 10 inches from hilm'2 — ^Yes, as near as I can say. 

Inspector William McBride, examined by Mr Roome — I am 
a detective inspector of New Scotland Yard I produce a book 
of nine photographs taken by me The first one shows the entrance 
to a passage between Nos 19 and 21 Foxley Road, Brixton, which 
is the place wheie the car was standing. Then there are five 
photographs of Dr. LovelFs Morris-Cowley car in difierent 
positions. 

Dr. Robert Arnold Woodhouse (recalled), further cross- 
examined by Mr Lever — ^You see there the light on the front 
wheel of the mudguard [in this photogiaph], also the driver’s seat 
and wheel. Assuming that a constable was standing near the front 
light there, in order to be shot by the driver of the car, the driver 
really would have to shoot through the windscreen, would ho 
not 

Mr Justice Avort — That is, if he was standing immediately 
in front of the car. 

Mr. Lever — If he was standing in front of the light. 

The Witness — There is an alternative, of course, that he 
might reach round the edge of the windscreen and fire in that way. 

Cross-examination continued — Otherwise, he would have to 
fire through the windscreen ^ — ^Yes 

Suppose, on the other hand, the constable was standing up 
in the road by the driver of the car, that would necessitate, for 
the driver to shoot him, that the pistol would have to be held up 
at a considerable elevation, would it not? — No; I do not know 
about that 

[Shown photograph of the car.] You know this Morris- 
Cowley car, I suppose. Don’t you agree that if a constable is 
standing up there the driver is at a considerable lower elevation 
sitting in the seat? — ^Yes, he is lower. 

And therefore the pistol would have to be in an elevated 
position? — If the constable was standing up. 

And if he was standing up in that position you would expect 
the wound to have a much higher elevation? — ^Yea; the track would 
rise more. 

As it is, we know one simply rose 1 inch and the other went 
downwards 2 inches? — ^Yes; but it is possible the person shot 
might be stooping. 


59 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Dr Robert A Woodbouse 

He would have to be stooping in some position close to the 
driver ? — ^Yes. 

And, of course, at some distance from the side light by the 
driver ? — ^Yes. 

If the driver took out a revolver to shoot in that position, 
it would be quite easy for anybody next to him to see that going 
on, would it not? It would lake some appreciable time to draw 
and level the revolver? — I do not think it would be very appreci- 
able; it would be very quick. 

You would expect a man speaking to him to see if that were 
done? — If he was looking at him, yes 

It looks as if the first wound and the second wound you have 
described were fired by somebody standing on a level with the 
constable? — Not necessarily, but it is possible. 

Judging from the position of the wounds, and the direction 
of the wounds, which go from the side of the head, is not the 
probability that they were caused by somebody standing? — I do 
not think it is a probability; it is a possibility. 

But is not it the more likely position, judging from the posi- 
tion of the wounds? — I do not think I can say that 

Is not this what you would have said : “It does look as^ if 
the wound I have first described was fired by some one standing 
— or standing on something — on the left-hand side of the con- 
stable ? — That is a possibility. 

You adhere to that? — As a possibility, yes. 

I have not considered the question of the deflection of the 
bullets, because I understand in a case of this kind that would 
not make any appreciable difference? — No. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Powell — Looking at the evidence you 
gave at the Police Court, did you say this in re-examination in 
answer to my learned friend, Mr. Eoome : “ There is nothing in 
the nature of the first two wounds to make it impossible that 
they were fired by the driver of the car — That is eo. 

And you definitely say that? — That is possible, 

I think you also said this: “ The constable would have had 
to be stooping. He could have got in a position consistent with 
those wounds being fired by the driver — That is so. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — When you say “ Nothing inconsistent 
with their being fired by the driver,’' you mean the driver of the 
car sitting down? — ^Yes, sitting down 

CrosR-exarmnation continued — ^And assuming that the police 
officer came up on the off side of the car and stood by the driver, 
he would have to bend his head down to sort of look under the 
hood, would he not? — ^Yes. 

So that he would have to stoop? — ^Yes, he would have to stoop. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — ^In order to speak to the driver, you 
mean? — In order to speak to the driver, my lord. 

60 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Pr Robert A. Woodhoiise 

(7ross-6^z;am^?^cl^^07^ conivtiutd — In view of your evi dance that 
one of the first two bullets would cause instantaneous bleeding — 
having regard to that fact, and assuming the further fact that 
a bullet was found on the running board by the diiver’s seat — 
would that suggest to you that in fact the ofldcer was speaking 
to the driver at the moment that first shot was fired which caused 
the instantaneous spurt of the blood — Yes. 

And if Kennedy says it was while the officer was speaking to 
the driver that he heard the revolver fired, would that be con- 
sistent with what you have heard in the case? — That is so 

By Mr. Justice Avout — Are you able to express an opinion 
as to the position in which the deceased constable was when those 
wounds were inflicted in the eyes? — It is my opinion that they 
wei-e fired when he was lying on his back. 

You think both thosci wounds in the eyes were fired as he 
was lying on his back? — That is my opinion. 

Cross-examination conUnued — ^We know that two bullets were 
found in the pool of blood under the constable's head, that one 
bullet was found in the brain, and one bullet is missing. Which 
of the bullets through the left cheek would meet with the most 
resistance in travelling through the face? — The one travelling 
through the cheek that struck bone. The other did not. 

Two bullets were found under the officer on the ground. 
Assuming that he was shot, two wounds, standing up in the road, 
would that be inconsistent with this, that one bullet fired through 
the left cheek got caught up and only fell to the ground when 
he fell to the ground? — That is a possibility. There is another 
possibility, that his head fell over and that bullet fell into his 
cape, or whatever article it came up against, but the other did not 
strike anything at all and went straight through. 

I suggested to the other witness that that bullet might have 
got caught in the cape even though that bullet was fired when 
the constable was in the road talking to the driver of the car? — 
Yes, that is quite possible. 

Mrs. Mart Eliza Siddals, examined by Mr. Roome — ^I live 
at 33a Sisters Avenue, Lavender Hill In September last I 
advertised part of my flat to let. The accused Browne called at 
my flat. He said that he was called Browne, and that he was a 
motor engineer and had garageKS to let. He and his wife took 
two rooms in my flat, and they moved in on Saturday, 24th Sep- 
tember. I noticed that he had a very heavy moustache when he 
came first of all, and I noticed the next time'he had clipped it off. 
By the next time I mean the next' time I saw him, which 
would he a week or ten days after they moved into my flat. It was 
on Saturday, the 17th of September, that I saw him with a heavy 
moustache. I saw him between the 17th and the 24th of Sep- 
tember when he brought some things on his motor bike. He had 

61 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mrs Mary E. Siddals 

still got a heavy moustache. I cannot tell how many days after 
the 17th it was; it might have been ten days or a fortnight, or it 
might not have been so much, I would not be quite sure. The 
next time I saw him his moustache was close clipped; he was not 
clean shaven. I think I saw the accused Kennedy once when 
he called at my flat to see Mrs. Browne. I cannot tell how long 
after the 24th of September that was; it might have been a fort- 
night, or it might have been even longer. Browne and his wife 
occupied the two rooms there until his arrest I let the rooms to 
them on the 24th of September, and I went to Devonshire at the 
end of October. I received the rent fortnightly in advance. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lever — I noticed nothing irregular 
about their occupation of my house. I thought they were very nice 
tenants, some of the best. 

They occupied the rooms in the ordinary way, sleeping there? — 
As far as I know, that is quite right. 

And you were actually living there till the 24th of October? — 
Yes ; I was in residence all the time till then I just kept one 
room to myself, and they had two rooms on the same floor At 
least they were only two steps down. 

So you would be able to form a very good opinion as to how 
they were behaving in occupying the two rooms? — Yes. 

As I understand, the moustache was never quite shaved off? — 
No. 

But it became less luxuriant; it was cropped? — ^Yes. 

Whether that happened before the 24th or some time after- 
wards, perhaps you cannot be quite sure? — I remember it was a 
day or two before the 24th I saw him, either the Friday or the 
Thursday, with a heavy moustache, and I did not see him again 
for a little while. 

So you cannot be sure when it was the moustache had been 
cropped ? — No. 

Did he tell you at the time there had been a lamp explosion 
which had singed his eyebrows and his moustache? — ^No; I did 
not speak to him very much. I did not hear anything about an 
explosion of a lamp. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — They had only one key between them 
until I left on the 24th of October, and then I gave them a second 
key. 


John Frederiok Dyson, examined by the Solicitor-General — 
I litve at 6 Shirbrooke Road, Fulham. In August, 1927, I went as 
handyman to the Globe garage. The accused Browne engaged me. 
I stayed until December. During the time from August to the 
September I saw the accused Kennedy there. As far as I know, he 
was the clerk. I never saw him drive a car. He slept in the 
garage, I never went into the inner oflSce. It was always kept 
shut, as far as I know. "When both the accused went out in a oar 
62 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

John Frederick Dyson 

together the garage was locked up. The keys were not left with me. 
Kennedy worked in the office. When I went there first Browne 
had an ordinary full moustache. It was not till about November 
that I noticed a change; he had shaved it ofi. 

Cross-esamined by Mr. Lever — I do not remember saying at 
the Police Court that it was the end of August or the beginning of 
September when I noticed the change. I remember asking Browne 
what he shaved it for, and he told me he had had an accident, 
and had it burned; he said it was an accident with a spirit lamp 
which burned part of it off, and he had to finish it off to make 
himself look respectable. He also told me at the time that he had 
singed his eyebrows I noticed that his eyebrows were off I was 
at liberty to go anywhere in the yard, but not into the office. 
The only time I went into the office was when it was empty, to 
whitewash it before any one lived in it When Browne was about 
the garage the office was not locked up, I could have gone in 
then if I had any business to go in, but I had no business to go 
in about. Apart from the office there was a workshop. I was 
working there. I did not notice any tin cases on the bench with 
files or forceps in them. I know a Mrs. Michael, one of the 
tenants. She had a small oar. I never saw Kennedy drive it. 
Kennedy slept in the room just at the back of the workshop 

Cross-examined by Mr. Powell — I was the only man working 
there. There was a little boy between eleven and twelve called 
Curly Billy, who used to come about the workshop to see what 
he could pick up. There were no other people coming about the 
workshop between August and September. I had nothing to do 
with the clerical duties. 

George Townson, examined by Mr Roome — I am a partner 
in Townson & Co., motor contractors, Battersea. I garaged ono 
of my vans with Browne at the Globe garage. I have paid my 
rent to both Browne and Kennedy. I have hired out one of my 
lorries to Kennedy. It was on a Saturday, but I could not give 
the month; it was before Christmas of last year. On that occa- 
sion Kennedy asked if he could hire a lorry to go to Romford on 
the following day, the Sunday. I agreed that he could have the 
lorry. I also saw Browne the same evening. He asked if the 
lorry had been ordered, and I told him it had. Kennedy told 
me he would be back by dinner-time. Kennedy also told 
me that he was going to Romford to look at a oar. T do not 
remember seeing them after it had been returned on the Sunday. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lever — I do not know that Browne 
hired a lorry to go to Eastham to move his things. 

Cyril Albert Dadswell, examined by the Solicitor-GeotraTj 
—I am a motor driver, and I live at 32 Harbutt Road, Battersea. 

63 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Cyril Albert Dadswell 

I drive a van belonging to the last witness. That is the van that 
he used to garage at the Globe garage. I remember it being 
hired by Browne for a Sunday, but I cannot fix the date. I have 
seen Kennedy at the garage when I have been there I have never 
seen him drive a car. My van was kept at the Globe garage the 
whole time I was employed by Mr. Townson. During that time 
Browne had a medium moustache He shaved it off, I should say, 
three months before Christmas, if I can remember right I will 
not swear to the date, however. I was engaged by Mr. Townson 
about the end of August. 

About how long was it after your engagement you first noticed 
the moustache was shaved off? — I cannot fix dates. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lever — The van was painted just 
before Christmas Browne had a moustache when he hired the 
van, but I do not think he had a moustache when the van was 
painted. 

So before the van was painted he had a moustache, and 
just before Christmas you noticed he had not one, is that right? — 
Yes. 

And then it gradually began to grow again? — ^Tes. Browne 
did not tell me that he had had an accident and had it singed. 
I did not hear that from anybody. 

You were about the garage pretty often, were you? — Only 
to collect the van in the morning and bring it back at night, 

Benjamin Stow, examined by Mr M'Cltjre — I am a butcher 
at 66 Bayland Street, Sheffield I know the accused Browne. I 
remember buying a car from him in November last I paid him 
a sum of money, and in part exchange I gave him an Angus- 
SandeiBon car which had been mine. I next saw that Angus- 
Sanderson car in the police garage, bearing the number it had 
on it when I had it, the number being C W. 3291. 

Katmonde le Fbvrb, examined by Mr. Roome — I am a 
domestic servant employed by Mr and Mrs Pitcher at Bell House, 
which is on the Southend road, Billericay. Mr. Pitcher has a 
Raleigh motor car, which he keeps in his garage near his house, 
I remember the night Police Constable Gutter! dge was shot. Mr. 
Pitcher’s car was in the garage that night The door was not 
locked with a key, just shut. We do not have a dog in the house, 
but a dog comes every night round to the dustbin in the garden. 
Opposite Bell House there is an empty house. 

Cross-examined by Mr Powell — I do not remember the dog 
icoming and barking about eleven o’clock that night. If some- 
body says he was near the garden about eleven o’clock that night 
.and the dpg barked, I expect that would be true. 

64 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Thomas Gsorge Wilson 

Thomas George Wilsoh, examined by the Solicitor-General 
— I live at a house named Ridgways on the London road at 
Billericay. It is about eighty paces from Dr. LovelPs house, which 
IS also on the London road. On the night of the 26th or 27th 
September I was awakened about half -past two by the noise of a 
car being started up. The noise came from immediately beside 
my own house, between Dr Lovelks and my own house. The car 
went off down the Mountnessing road. I could tell that from the 
sound. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lever — ^Was the starting up a parti- 
cularly big noise for starting up a light car like that? — ^Yes. 

Starting up as if the man who was starting it was not very 
well used to it? — I could not say that. I am not an expert. 

But it was particularly noisy for starting up a light car? — 

Yes. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Powell — My house is, roughly, about 
100 yards from Dr. Lovelks. I should say the car was being 
started up midway between Dr. LovelPs house and iny house. 

William Ernest Stevens, examined by the Solicitor- 
General — I am an insurance official, and I live at Barr ass, Mount- 
nessing road, Billericay. I remember the night the police con- 
stable was murdered I remember being awakened during the 
night by a passing car. It was the head light that wakened me 
up, and I heard the car passing. The Mountnessing road goes 
off the main Billericay road in a north-westerly direction. The 
motor car whose head lights woke me would be travelling towards 
Mountnessing from the main road. It was the light flashing 
across the window that woke me. My house is perhaps a quarter 
of a mile from the junction of the Mountnessing road and the 
London road. 

Have you got any idea of what car this was, what sort of a 
car? — ^Yes; I recognised it as Dr. LovelPs car. 

You recognised the very car? — I recognised the sound of the 

car. 

How were you able to do this? — Well, I was familiar with it. 
I know Dr. Lovell very well, and I am acquaihted with the car. 
It frequently^ passes our house, and there is not a lot of traffic 
on that particular road. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lever — There is a probability, is 
there not, if you hear a light car passing, that you might think 
it probably is Dr. Lovell's car? — ^Not quite that. 

Are you an expert in deciding what a car is from the sound 
it makes? — ^No; I am not a motorist even. 

There are some hundreds of different makes of cars. Do you 
pose as being able to tell us you can tell a car from its noise? 



Browne and Kennedy. 

William Ernest Stevens 

Noj Tout I am satisfied that was Dr. LoTell’s car passing without 
being an expert. 

I suggest there is nothing extraordinary or peculiar about 
the sound of Dr. Loveirs car? — I do not suppose there is, but 
one gets familiar with a car going past. 

Is this what you said before, There is nothing peculiar 
about the sound of Dr. LoybITs car ? — I do not think I said that, 
did I? 

You said, There is nothing peculiar about the sound of 
Dr. LovelTs car; one is used to the sound of it I am very 
familiar with it.'^ When you said there was nothing peculiar 
about the sound of Dr LovelTs car did you mean by that that 
it could not be distinguished from the sound of a similar light 
car? — No; I meant it was really undefinable; it was a sound you 
could not define 

An undefinable something about the sound of Dr. LovelTs 
car; it is the sound of an ordinary M or r is- Cowley ? — Yes; but cars 
differ in the sound they make. 

But you know those cars are made by massed production, 
thousands of them? — ^Yes. 

Do you suggest there is something peculiar in the sound of 
those cars? — It is not for me to suggest anything. 

What is that peculiar something which sounds in Dr. LovelTs 
car? — I said it was undefinable 

Let me put it to you this way . you are sometimes wakened 
by Dr. LovelTs car passing there, and does it not come to this, 
that, living in this neighbourhood and hearing a light car pass 
by, you jump to the conclusion that it is Dr. LovelTs? — Not 
necessarily. 

You cannot tell me what there was beyond that that made 
you think it was Dr. LovelTs car? — Except that the sound it 
made impressed it on my mind that it was Dr. LovelTs car, I 
cannot describe any peculiarity of it. 

Is not your evidence absurd? I ask you as a fair-minded 
man? — I do not think so at all. 

And yet you cannot tell me any characteristics of the sound? 
— I cannot tell you any characteristics of the sound at all. As 1 
have already said, I was awakened by the light of the car. I 
should say a fair number of cars pass along that road at night. 
I did not trouble myself about the lights of the passing car, except 
that I thought the doctor was unlucky in being called out. I 
went ofi to sleep at once. 

Re-examined by Mr. Rooms — Is yours a road where many 
cars pass at night after you have gone to bed? — No; it is a quiet 
road, really. 

How long have you known Dr. LovelTs car? — The car he has 
now I think he has had for a year or more. 

How many time® do you suppose that car has passed your 
house? — That is really difficult to say. He has night calls, 
66 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

William Ernest Stevens 

and h© is there in the daytime, and I am not there in the daytime, 
and do not hear much of it. 

Give us some idea. How many days a week do you hear 
it coming or going 1 — I suppose I hear it daily, once or twice a day. 

And at night — Not so often. 

Have you any doubt in your mind that it was Dr. Lovell's 
car you heard that night “2 — I have no doubt at all. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — ^You have not given us any idea of 
the time? At what time did you go to bed that night? — Some 
time after midnight. 

Had you been to sleep before this incident happened? — Oh, 
yes; I had been to sleep. 

Have you any means of fixing the time approximately? — ^No 
means at all. I had been to sleep, but I could not say how long 
it was. 

Albert John M‘Dougall, examined by Mr. MTlurb — I am 
a clerk, and I live at 21 Foxley Eoad, Brixton. I leave home 
in the mornings about half-past seven. I go out of our back- 
door which leads into a little passageway where there are two iron 
gates before you get to the road. I left on the 2'rth September 
as usual by that door. As I came out of my door I found a 
Morria-Cowley car drawn up within about 4 to 6 inches of my house 
wall, and within 5 to 6 feet from the gates at the end of the 
passage. On account of my disability I put my hand on the 
radiator to get round the car. It was very warm. When I 
arrived home that evening between a quarter to six and six 
o'clock the car was still there, I took the number when I came 
home It was T.W.6120. I gave the car a rough examination 
in the evening I noticed that the near side front mudguard 
was sheered o0 from the running board. I reported the matter 
to a policeman on duty in Brixton Road. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lever — ^You told us you put your 
hand on the radiator and found it was very warm? — Yes. 

It appeared to you, I think, as if the car had been running 
up to within half an hour or so of your touching it? — I formed 
that opinion at the time. 

Br Mr. Justice Avort — Have you any experience of that to 
go by? — No; it was a very cold morning with a mist, and T 
could not conceive that it could have been in that condition 
when I found it if it had been there longer than half an hour. 
It was a very, very cold morning. 

Cross-exaTmnation conUnued — ^I gather you did not pay 
much attention to it in the morning; you were probably hurrying 
to your business? — Yes, that was so. When I came back at night 
I had a fair look round the car. 

You noticed a pump, I think, and a small apple in the oar, 
but you did not notice any cartridge? — No, I did not. 


67 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Albert John M‘Dousall 

And you did not notice any blood on tbe off side running 
board or on the machine at all? — ^No, none whateyer, I walked 
into Brixton Boad and found a police constable there. I do not 
know his name. He came back with me to the car and he gave 
it a fair look over. 

Did he point out any blood to you, or a cartridge, or any- 
thing of that sort? — ^No. 

Did you remain there with him afterwards until a detective 
came? — ^Yes; the police constable went and telephoned for the 
detective, and I remained in the passage to see that nobody took 
the car while he went The detective also had a good look at the 
car. It was getting dusk then. He did not point out any blood 
to me or any cartridge. The detective drove the car away. 

Police Constable Alfred Edmonds, examined by Mr. M'Clure 
— am police constable 686 of the W Division I was on 
duty at Brixton at 6.10 on the evening of the 27th September, 
when M'Dougall, the last witness, came up to me I went back 
with him to 21 Foxley Boad, and I there saw a Morris-Cowley 
motor car, T.W.6120. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — The passage that has been referred 
to is a passage that leads off the pavement to the entrance to the 
previous witness’s house. It is not a roadway. In order to get 
the car into the position in which it was when I saw it it had to 
be driven over the pavement. 

Exaimnation conUnued — ^I telephoned to the Brixton Police 
Station and waited the arrival of Sergeant Hearn. Before he 
came I just took the number of the car, and opened the door to 
see if there was anything inside. I did not make an exhaustive 
search of it. I waited till the sergeant came. 

Cross-examined by Mr, Lever — I did not find anything in 
the car. 

Sergeant Charles Hearn, examined by Mr. Boomb — I am 
a detective sergeant of the W ” Division. On the evening 
of the 27th September, about a quarter to seven, I went to 21 
Foxley Boad, Brixton, and there in the gravel passageway 
between 19 and 21 I saw a Morris-Cowley car, the index number 
being T.W 6120. It was coloured blue. I examined it carefully. 
I found that the near side mudguard was damaged and bent 
inwards. I examined the dumb irons, the front springs, I 
noticed on the nuts of the dumb irons there was some substance 
which had the appearance of bark of a tree. I scraped some of 
it off after I drove the car to the police station. At the station 
I examined it again Amongst other places I looked under the 
front seats. I found an empty cartridge case It was under 
the near side seat. By the near side seat I mean the front seat 
on the near side, next the driver. The cartridge case is marked 
on the cap B.L.IV ’’ I handed it to Detective Inspector Jones, 

68 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Sergeant Charles Hearn 

and saw it placed in th© safe at the police station. The next 
day I saw it handed to Chief Inspector Berrett. 

When you examined the car did you notice anything in the 
appearance of the running board? — ^Yes j there were spots and 
splashes which had the appearance of blood. They were on the 
left side, by the side of the driving wheel On the 11th of October 
I removed the running board and also the near side front wing 
and packed it carefully in brown paper, and kept it until the 
8th February of this year. On that date I took it to St Mary’s 
Hospital, Paddington, and handed it to Dr. Roche Lynch. I 
received it back from him on the 11th February. On the first 
evening when I drove the car to Brixton Police Station, 27th 
September, I examined the speedometer for the mileage. The 
total mileage recorded was 65484 3 On the 11th October the 
mileage was the same The car had not been used. I drove 
it on the 11th October to Billericay, passing through Abridge 
and Stapleford Abbotts. I drove it by the spot where the constable 
had been murdered, with Chief Inspector Berrett. I stopped at 
Dr. Lovell’s house. The mileage added on was 36 8 miles. 

Cross-examined by Mr Levee — ^When I drove the car from 
Foxley Road to Brixton Police Station I drove it into the station 
yard. I then sent an officer into the station for an electric torch, 
as it was dark. When he brought the torch I then 
examined it. It was Detective Hawkyard who brought the 
torch. He assisted me to examine it. He was present when the 
cartridge was found. As we lifted up the seat Detective Hawk- 
yard picked up the cartridge and handed it to me. I handed it 
to Inspector Jones, who came down into the yard. I found that 
the car actually belonged to Dr. Lovell when I got back to Brixton 
Police Station. It had been damaged. 

^ How is it that this board was not submitted to the expert 
until February? — I was acting under instructions with regard to 
that It was kept in the office at the police station from the 
time I took it off the car. 

Could you tell whether the blood was fresh or not at the time 
you examined it yourself? — I could not say it was damp or any- 
thing like that — just ordinary spots of blood. 

I suppose you thought it was not pressing to send it to the 
expert? — I would not say that; I was acting under instructions. 

Under whose instructions ? — Chief Inspector Berrett’a. 

But you yourself could not detect any dampness of the blood 
at the time? — No. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — ^You did not see it till the evening? 
— ^No. 

Gross-exammaiion continued — The cartridge case was handed 
to Chief Inspector Berrett, but what was don© with it after that ? 
— I could not say. 


The Court adjourned. 



Second Day— Tuesday, 24th April, 1928. 


John Miller, examinod by Mr. Eoome — I am a detective 
sergeant of the W Division. On the 20th January of this 
year I was keeping observation on the Globe garage at 7a North- 
cote Road, Battersea At ten minutes to eight in the evening 
of that day I saw a grey car, an Angus-Sanderson make, C.W.3291, 
drive into the entrance to the garage. The driver of the car 
was the accused Browne. He was dressed in a chauffeur’s uniform 
— a blue coat and peaked cap A few minutes later I entered 
the inner office belonging to the garage with Inspector Barker, and 
I was present when Inspector Barker arrested Biowne and searched 
him. Later that evening I, along with Mrs. Browne, Detective 
Sergeant Foley, and Detective Haines, went to 33a Sisters Avenue, 
and went to a back bed-sitting-room on the first floor. In that 
room I found in a right-hand top drawer a small nickel -plated 
revolver. It had cartridges in it. It holds six cartridges 

By Mr. Justice Avort — ^By whom was that room pointed out 
to you ? — Mrs. Browne. 

BxaminobUon zontvnued — produce the cartridges which were 
iln the revolver. There are six cartridges altogether. I also 
produce a black leather holster in which there was one loose 
cartridge. The cartridge I found in the holster was a live cartridge 
After finding these things I returned to the garage, and later on 
we took the accused Browne to Tooting Police Station. It would 
be about half -past ten or a quarter to eleven when w© took him 
to the police station. 

At the police station did you show Browne the nickel-plated 
revolver — ^Tes; I took it out of my pocket, and laid it on the 
charge-room talole, where Browne was sitting beside me and Detec- 
tive Hawkyard. 

Did Brown© say anything when he saw the revolver*? — Yes; 
Browne said, Oh, you’ve found that, have you? That’s no good; 
it would only tickle you unless it hit you in a vital part. If you 
had stopped me when I was in the car I should have shot five of 
you and saved the other one for myself.” About a minute later 
he said, What I can see of it, I shall have to have a machine gun 
for you bastards next time.” 

By Mr. Justice Avort — Do you mean a few minutes after? — 
Just about perhaps half a minute. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lever — I seei you are refreshing your 
memory from a note that you made in the course of your duty, 
no doubt. Could you tell me exactly when it was you made the 
note? — ^About five or ten minutes afterwards at Tooting Police 
Station. 

70 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


John Miller 

Where was the accused then? Had he been taken away? — 'No j 
he was in the charge room. I made the note on the desk in the 
charge room. 

I see^ judging from your evidence, it purports only to record 
the remarks that the accused made, not the remarks made by any- 
body else^ — That i's all; nothing was said by myself 

I was going to inquire about that. Am I to take it this was 
really an entirely one-sided conversation? — ^Yes 

How many ojBdcers would there be in the room at the time? — 
At that time there was Detective Hawkyard and myself. 

While you were at Tooting Police Station only you two were 
in the charge room? — ^Tes, at that particular time; there were 
several in and out. 

Am I really to infer that everybody was quite mum, said not a 
— There were only two of us there when that happened. 

And that neither of you said anything at all? — No. 

I do not suggest that anything wrong was said by any of 
you, but there was a man who was making observations. Did not 
you say anything at all? — ^No. 

I am not challenging very substantially what you say, but I 
suppose you have got down there in substance what you can remem- 
ber. You do not perhaps suggest that every word is exactly as 
he said them, do you ? — I do in this particular case, yes 

I am putting it to you that something of that kind is the 
substance; it is not very material? — No. 

Just try to help me out If you can, I am sure you will 
When you produced that little revolver was not there some laugh- 
ing ? — No. 

I put it to you there was a bit of talking about it, and in 
the course of it my client did say, ‘‘ Well, that would only tickle 
you.^^ Was that the way it occurred? — No; no laughing at all. 

At that time there had been no charge made against him of 
shooting anybody? — No; not a suggestion. 

Of course, my client did not make a note, as you can under- 
stand, but this is what I suggest occurred, namely, that the first 
thing was, as I have suggested to you, the little revolver , and 
then one of the officers said, ‘‘ What would you have done, Browne, 
if W0 had tried to get you in the car? — No. 

You do not remember that being said, at any rate, in your 
presence? — No. I was in charge of Browne until such time as he 
was removed to the cells, and that conversation never took place. 

You did not hear Browne then say, ‘‘ I do not know what I 
should have done; I have never been put to the test ^'? — No. 

Did you at any time hear any of the officers say this, A 
good thing you are not put to the test, as there would be very 
little of you left,"' or something of that kind. “ We can use 
guns as well as you can? — ^No. 

Did you hear him say, Why all this precaution? ” — I heard 

71 



Browne and Kennedy. 

John Miller 

him say that at the garage. He asked to go to the lavatory, and 
he was accompanied by about four officers, including myself, and 
he said, Why all this precaution? I have never seen so many 
officers before in my life.’" 

Were there a good many officers besides the four? There 
were quite a lot of them about? — ^About ten to a dozen about that 
time. 

Did he not add, '' Why bring all that lot to pinch me? ” — ^No; 
he did not 

Did he not say anything further than I have never seen 
so many police officers.” Did he say, Good heavens! do you 
think I am superhuman”? — ^No. 

And then did he say, It would take a machine gun to fight 
a lot like you ”? — No; the first I heard of the machine gun was 
at Tooting Police Station. 

You did not hear anything said at the garage about a machine 
gun ? — No. 

Did he at the police station say it would take a machine gun 
to fight such a lot of you? — ^No; what he did say was, I shall 
have to have a machine gun for you bastards nest time.” 

I have put to you what he suggests he said, and that he said 
nothing more than I have put to you. You do not agree with 
that ? — No. 

Re-examined by the Solicitor-General — Is that revolver only 
a toy or is it an effective weapon? — An effective weapon. In fact, 
I know of a case where a taxi driver was killed by the same calibre 
bullet. 

William Barker, examined by the Solicitor-General — I am 
a detective inspector of the W ” Division. At eight o'clock on 
the 20th of January I went with the other officers to arrest the 
accused Browne. I actually effected the arrest. I did not see 
him get out of the Angus-Sanderson car, but I saw the car in the 
yard. 

Where did you go to arrest him? — Into a workshop on the 
left-hand side of the entrance, and it was in a room behind that 
workshop where I saw him and arrested him on a charge which 
has not been pursued, namely, of stealing a Vauxhall oar from 
Franciscan Road, Tooting, in November, 1927 

What did he say in answer to that? — What do I know about 
stealing the car? ” 

Just to dispose of that, he has always denied the stealing of 
that car, and the charge has not been pursued? — ^He has denied 
it, yes. I cautioned him after he said, What do I know about 
stealing the car? ” Detective Inspector Leach arrived about half- 
past eight, and Browne was ordered to be searched. When he was 
told he would be searched he asked if he could go to the lavatory 
first, but I searched him before he was allowed to do so. In hia 

72 I 





Browne’s StocKingette MasH. 

(Woin by a membei of tUti Cl D , Nb-w SuotUutl VtUcl ) 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

William Barker 

waistcoat pocket I found tke motor driving licence, in the name 
of Frederick Eric Harris, 176 Shandon Road, Clapham, South- 
West, issued on the 25th November, 1927. I found the artery 
forceps in his left-hand waistcoat pocket with a skeleton key 
shank. 

Did he say anything about the artery forceps? — He said, 
^‘Ohl they are useful/' I said, Where did you get them 
from? " He said, “ I have had them a long time; I do not know 
where I got them." In the back hip pocket of his trousers I found 
twelve cartridges. They were .45 cartridges, such as are fired 
from Webley revolvers. 

Did he say anything with regard to them? — ^Yes. He said, 
That's done it; now you've found them, it's all up with me." 

You have told us that the only chaige that had been men- 
tioned was this charge of stealing a car? — That is so. 

Had anything been said by way of suggestion or hint about 
any crime of violence'? — Nothing whatever. 

Did you find something m hjs right-hand jacket pocket? — 
Yes; a stockinette mask which draws ovei the head, with apertures 
for the eyes, ears, and mouth. ^ 

What did Browne say when you found that? — ‘‘ There you 
are, you've got it now, that's the lot; you won't find anything else." 
I also' found some money on his parson, but nothing that I con- 
sidered worth making an exhibit. At that moment Detective Bevis 
came to us from the yard, and spoke to Inspector Leach in my 
hearing. Bevis was holding a Webley revolver in one hand and six 
cartridges in the other. They are the same as the other cartridges 
I have just referred to They are flat-nosed bullets. 

As Bevis brought in the revolver in one hand, and the car- 
tridges in the other, what did he say*? — He said, I just found this 
fully loaded in the offside pocket by the driver’s seat in the Angus- 
Sanderson car outside." Browne looked at it, and said, ‘‘Ahl 
you've found that, have you; I am done for now." 

Again I want to ask you up to that moment had there been 
any hint of a charge of murder? — Nothing whatever. He was 
then allowed to go to the lavatory, and on his return he was told 
that his house would be searched. He said, If you are going 
to search my rooms I want my wife to be present, but you won't 
find anything there." Mrs. Browne was allowed to go with the 
party to conduct that search. I remained with Browne. After 
the party had left Browne said that the Vauxhall car had been 
honestly come by. He said, '' Well, you cannot prove I stole it," 
meaning the Vauxhall. ‘‘ I did sell it, and had the Angus- 
Sanderson car I have just got out of in part exchange." I then 
searched the inner room of the office in Browne's presence, and 
found the sixteen cartridges. That was the room in which I 
arrested him. These cartridges would also fit a Webley revolver, 


^The handiwork of Mrs. Browne. iSeo opposite page. 


73 



Browne and Kennedy. 

William Barker 

They are of three different marks. The cartridges were wrapped 
in some white paper, loosely wrapped in the paper Then I found 
some medical appliances. I found a pair of dissecting forceps 
on the first shelf of the dresser. There was a roll of bandage, 
which I found on the dresser shelf. There was an ethyl-chloride 
spray. Lastly, a large roll of lint, which I found in the drawer of 
an iron safe, which was lying on the floor It consists of two rolls 
of bandages, a piece of bandage, a roll of white gauze, and a piece 
of lint. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lever — Just one word about the state- 
ment made about the Angus-Sanderson car. You told us some- 
thing that was said about it, but I think, in addition to what he 
said, he also said that he had paid a fair price for the car? — 
That is so, yes. 

And that charge, as we undeistand, has been diopped. Now, 
this inner room of the office, i's that a sort of living-room with a 
bed in it? — ^Yes. 

Was there a bed in any other room of the garage*? — No; there 
was no other room in the garage. That was the only bed I saw 
The sixteen cartridges found in the inner room were found on a 
shelf of the dresser They were not locked up at all 

That, as I understand, contains a mixed lot of cartridges? — 
Yes. I am informed it contains three different lots. There are 
some Mark IV, some III, and some Mark Eley. Whether they 
are black powder or cordite I do not know 

You have told us you went to the garage simply to arrest 
this man on a charge of selling a car ? — I did. 

You had not gone there in connection with any alleged murder 
at all? — ^No; solely to arrest him for stealing a Vauxhall car 

And there was not, in fact, a word said about the Gutteridge 
murder on that occasion? — ^Nothing whatever was said. 

When you found the firearms do I understand Browne said 
'' Well, that^s done it when the first revolver was produced? — 
When it was shown to him. 

You know it is an offence to be in possession of firearms with- 
out a licence, is it not? — ^Yes. 

And Browne had no licence, had he? — He never produced 
one to me; I never asked him. 

As far as you are aware, you are not aware of his having any 
licence ? — I do not believe he had a licence. 

So that the finding of the firearms in his possession and with- 
out a licence would in itself constitute a criminal offence? — ^Yes, 
but not a serious one. 

It would make one liable in itself to arrest, would it not? — No. 

In a charge of having firearms without a licence, you have 
no power to arrest for that? — ^Unless the person refuses his name 
and address, or we think he will abscond. 

At any rate, you found there the firearms, and your belief 

74 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

William Barker 

is that he had no licence, so that his observation that he was done 
for would, at any rate, clearly relate to a charge of that kind; 
he was done for so far as a charge of that kind was concerned, was 
he not** — I cannot say what he had in his mind. 

At the time when he was arrested did he appear to be calm 
and collected *2 — He seemed to be boiling inwardly, holding him- 

self in. • 1 

He did not manifest any outward signs of excitement, did 

2 — To some extent he did. 

What were the signs? — He went pale and gripped his hands 
tightly together as though he was trying to master his feelings; 
but, apart from that, nothing else 

Was he, in fact, making cocoa in that inner room? — No. 

And drinking it? — No. 

Are you quite sure about that? — Not at the time I arrested 

him 

After the discussion had taken place did he not drink some 
cocoa? — I am informed he did, but he did not do so in my 
presence 

With regard to these things that you found, there apparently 
was no effort to conceal them at all, was there? — One would have 
to go into the garage and into the inner room through a work- 
shop to see them. 

But they were not locked up, were they? — Not in the actual 
room itself. 

They were not locked up at all; there was not one of these 
things under lock and key, was there? — Not so far as the actual 
room was concerned. 

By Mr Justice Avort — Had the door a lock to it? — The garage 
had double gates across the entrance to it, and the door of the 
workshop bears a padlock, rather a substantial one, but the door 
of the inner one does not. 

Cross-examination conHnwed — But you walked into the garage, 
did you not, without any difficulty? — I did. 

The gates were not locked ? — They were not. 

Nor was the door of the worlvshop nor the inner room looked? 
—No. 

So that there really was no effort to keep these from being 
observed by anybody who was coming into the garage and into 
the room? — ^No; anybody going into that inner room would see. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Powell — I understand you found the 
inner room quite open when you walked in? — ^Yes 

Am 1 right in saying there was no lock upon it? — As far as 
my memory serves me, I do not think there was a lock. It seemed 
to be a temporary arrangement, the door. 

Frank Bbvis, examined by the Solicitor- General — I am a 
detective of the W '' Division. I was one of the party who 

75 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Frank Be via 

went to effect Browne's arrest on the 20th of January. While the 
others were in the office I searched the Angus-S and arson car. It 
was I who found the revolver and the cartridges. I found them in 
a pocket on the off side of the car, the side of the driver's seat. 
The cartridges were in the revolver. The pocket to which I refer 
is more or less an open pouch into which the right hand can be 
easily placed. There is a small flap over the pocket, but that was 
folded inside, and you had only to put your hand straight into 
the pocket and take out the revolver. The butt of the revolver 
was upwards There was nothing else in the pocket to prevent 
the revolver being readily diawn if a man put his hand in. I also 
found the forceps. They were in a canvas bag underneath the 
revolver, together with several skeleton keys and a wooden wedge 
I took the revolver straight inside into the office. I had taken the 
cartridges out for safety. I heard Biowne make the remark, 
Ah' you've found that, have you; I'm done for now." I went 
as one of the party to search at 33a Sisters Avenue. We were 
accompanied by Mrs. Browne. 

I want you to tell us what you found there? — At 11.30 pm. 
I found in the top left-hand drawer of the living-room of Mrs. 
Browne's rooms twenty-four .22 cartridges wrapped in a handker- 
chief. .22 is much smaller than service ammunition. These 
cartridges fit a small nickel-plated revolver, which was found 
by another officer. That was all I found in the house. There 
were other officers searching at the house. The next morning 
I made a further search in the Angus-Sanderson car at the 
garage in Northcote Road, and found another Webley service 
revolver behind a panel at the rear of the driver's seat. There 
were six service cartridges in the revolver. There were three 
different marks in those six The revolver was in a small cupboard 
which is covered by a panel right at the back of the driver's seat. 
It could be got at by turning round in the driSver’s seat and 
leaning over into the back of the car. 

Was it quite obvious, or had you to search for it? — I had 
to search for it. The panel is not very obvious at all. 

And has it got to be opened in some way before you can get 
at the revolver? — ^Yes; there are two small locks which fasten the 
panel, but they are not noticeable. The panel is let right into 
the back of the seat. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — ^When you say locked do you mean 
they have to be unlocked with a key? — ^Yes. 

And did you unlock them with a key? — No. 

How did you open them? — ^With a screwdriver, forced it. 

Examination continutd — ^At any rate, for any one to get at 
it, whether it was the driver or not, it would take a certain 
amount of undoing? — Quite a lot. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lever — About this little conversation, 
this remark that Browne made about being done for, how long 
76 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Frank Bevia 

after the interview was it that you made your notes? — About ten 
minutes or a quarter of an hour. 

Did you compare it with any one else’s notes? — ^No. 

You see, I find that Inspector Barker has exactly the same 
words. Are these the words, ** Ah! you’ve found that, have you; 
Tm done for now.” Is that right? Just tell me from your 
memory? — Ah 1 you’ve found that, have you; I’m done for now,” 
were his words. 

Did you check the two statements? — I have not done so. 

Did Inspector Barker in your piesence check the two state- 
ments ? — No. 

It simply happens to be chance, does it ? — They were the actual 
words used. 

You remembered each of those words, even the '' Ah I you’ve 
found that,” actually until you put them down about a quarter 
of an hour after ? — ^Yes. I made a note of the time when we went 
to the house at, 33a Sisters Avenue My note is that it was 11.30 
p.m. That note was made at about ten minutes or a quarter to 
twelve 

Were you with Mrs. Browne? — I conveyed Mrs. Browne and 
the other officers by car in the first instance to her house, but I 
did not enter on that occasion 

I made a note here ofl what you said, that you went in a car? 
— I conveyed Mrs. Browne by car with other officers on an earlier 
occasion to the house, and it was the second time that I went to 
the house that I found these cartridges. 11.30 was the second 
time. The first time was somewhere about a quarter past ten. I 
did not enter on the first occasion. 

Mr. Powell — No questions. 

Albert Haines, examined by Mr. Roomb — I am a detective 
of the W ” Division. On the 20th of January, at about nine 
o’clock in the evening, I went with Sergeants Miller and Foley 
and Mrs, Browne to 33a Sisters Avenue, and searched a living- 
room on the first floor. I found the revolver in the leather case. 
1 found it on the top of the wardrobe cupboard It is a Smith 
ife Wesson service revolver. It was fully loaded with six cartridges. 
They are all Mark IV, flat nosed. In the same place where I found 
the revolver I also found eleven loose Mark IV cartridges. I 
also found two packages of similar cartridges One of the packages 
was unopened Altogether there are twenty-three cartridges 
in those two packets In the bottom of the wardrobe I found a 
convex lens. During the whole time I was searching and finding 
those articles Mrs. Biowne was present The following morning 
I went to the Globe garage, and I found on the bench in the 
workshop the metal case There were four small files in it when 
I found it. 

Cross-examined by Mr, Lever — This case could be easily 

77 



Albert Haines 


Browne and Kennedy. 


seen from the yard, could it not] From the open yard there you 
could see into that worlishop. There is a big window in the plan, 
I see] — You could from the door; from the entrance to the office 
you could see in there. 

And that workshop is before you come to the living-room at 
all] — It is. You go through the workshop to the living-room. 

And that case that you have told us of was on the bench which 
could be seen really before entering into the workshop] — Ulo} not 
before entering the workshop, before entering the living-room. 

Which bench was it on? There are two benches there? — The 
bench on the left-hand side before going into the living-room or 
the office. 

On the left-hand side as you go towards the living-room? — 

Yes. 

That bench is close to the back window in the yard? — do 
not remember a window. 

Mr. Powell — No questions. 

John Harris, examined by Mr. M'Clurb — I am a detective 
sergeant at New Scotland Yard. On the 20th of January, at five 
minutes before midnight, I went to 33a Sisters Avenue. Mrs. 
Browne was there. I searched the room in which she was. I 
found an ear speculum attached tO' a Sancy light. I found these 
in the top right-hand drawer of a chest of drawers. In the same 
room on the mantelpiece I found a roll of plaster. It has been 
partly used It is the ordinary type of adhesive plaster On 
the 9th February I went from the address in Brixton, 21 Foxley 
Road, to Biller icay, to Dr. Lovell’s house. It was a test drive 
with regard to the mileage from this place to the doctor’s house. 
It was the place where the car was left. On the first journey 
we went by the main road passing through Romford and 
Brentford, turning ofi at Shenfield That is the most direct 
route we could discover going by main roads. The mileage 
was exactly 27 miles Before we made the return journey we 
set the speedometer at zero, and returned to the place we had 
started from by quite another route. On that occasion we 
went down the Mountnessing road past the spot where Gutteridge’s 
body was found, and thence to Abridge, Chigwell, Woodford, 
and Buckhurst Hill to Stratford, and we there rejoined the 
main road and travelled the same route as before, continuing 
to Aldgate and the Elephant and Castle to 21 Foxley Road. When 
we stopped at Foxley Road the mileage was 42.1 miles. Then 
there was 1.2 on to the Brixton Police Station to complete the 
journey where Dr. Lovell took his speedometer. That made a 
total of 43.3 for the total journey. On the same day, the 9th 
February, I tested by going different routes the distance, and the 
way of getting from Foxley Road to Browne’s garage. The dis- 
tance varied between 3.8 and 4.1 miles. I travelled over four 
78 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


John Harris 

different routes. These distances were done by car in order to get 
the approximate mileage. On the 10th February, at 5.30 in the 
morning, I went again from 21 Foxley Road to Browne's garage, 
both walking and taking trams. Starting at 5 30 in the morning 
I walked to Kennington Oval from Foxley Road. I then got on 
a car as far as the Plough, Clapham Common, where I changed, 
and then took another tram to Clapham Junction, where I dis- 
mounted and then walked to the garage. I arrived at the garage 
at two minutes past six, it having taken me thirty-two minutes. 

Mr. Lever — No questions. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Powell — ^Was the object of the test* 
to check the statements made in Kennedy's statement to see if 
they were approximately true? — I should think so. I was told 
to do that. 

Having compared your results with your statement, it 
transpires that your experience corroborates what he says. Is that 
the case? — Practically. He said half an hour, and I made it 
thirty-two minutes in one instance. 

Mr. Powell — ^Now, my lord, I must ask this witness some 
questions about matters as to which he has given no evidence, but 
as to which Inspector Barrett only has given evidence, and I would 
like Inspector Berrett not to be in Court whilst I am asking 
Sergeant Harris these questions. I was asked if I had any objec- 
tion up to this point, and I had no objection. 

Mr. Justice Avort — Very well, he is leaving the Court now. 

Mr. Powell — It is as to Kennedy's written statement, which, 
as your lordship knows, I have not objected to. {To Witness ) — 
Did you actually write the statement that Kennedy made at Scot- 
land Yard on the 26th January? — ^Tes. 

Was this the position, that you sat at the table with pen and 
ink? — ^Yes. Kennedy was sitting at the table also Inspector 
Berrett moved about. 

The position was that Inspector Berrett and yourself were 
wanting very naturally, as police oflScers, to find out who had 
murdered P.C. Gutteridge? — That is natural. 

That was the state of mind of both of you, and you would, no 
doubt, I suppose, consider it your duty in the public interest to 
ask any questions which might elucidate information about tho 
matter ? — Oh, no, I cannot go quite as far as that. I would not 
ask any questions. 

You know that this statement that you wrote down is divided 
up into a number of paragraphs? — Certainly. 

Each paragraph deals with a specific subject? — I do not think 
so. Since it was put in Court I have not seen the statement. 

Who decided when a new paragraph was tO' be commenced? 
— My own common sense I have taken thousands of statements 
since I have been in the police. 


79 



Browne and Kennedy. 

John Harris 

Until he began to makei each part of the statement you would 
not know it was to b© a new subject-matter, would you? — ^Well, 1 
have a certain amount of common sense, surely, and I knew the 
events that had happened, having been engaged with Chief* 
Inspector Berrett since the 27th September on the inquiry. 

Do not think that I am going to suggest to you or to Inspector 
Berrett that either of you said or intended to do anything that 
was wrong. I do not suggest that for one moment? — Thank you, 
sir. 

I want to put my instructions to you. You do not suggest 
that no question at all was put to Kennedy, do you, before he 
made any written statement? — He was told that Chief Inspector 
Berrett was making inquiries. 

By Chief Inspector Berrett? — Certainly. He was told why he 
was brought there. 

Did Chief Inspector Berrett ask him to give any information 
he could? — He said, “Can you give me any information? 

That IS a question, is it not, obviously? — I have a note of 
what I took down. 

I am accepting what is down in the written statement, which 
says, “ I have been asked if I can give any information respecting 
it ; so he was asked, was he not? — That is so, as regards that, 
yes. 

The reason I am putting this question to you is that it has 
been made a matter of complaint against Kennedy that his state- 
ment is not full enough, and does not explain certain matters, say, 
what happened. Then when he had signed what I may call the 
preamble, which finishes, “ I wish voluntarily to tell you what I 
know about the matter — I am not suggesting it was not a volun- 
tary statement, I quite agree it was — “ having been cautioned 
that what I do say will be taken down in writing and may be given 
in evidence,'' he signed that? — That is so. 

And then he starts off with what I may call the general story? 
— ^Yes. 

Was he asked how it was he cam© to go to Browne's place at 
all?— No. 

Was he asked if he had received a letter from Browne? — No; 
the letter was shown to him at the end of the statement. 

At the moment he referred to the letter he did not know that 
you and Inspector Berrett had the letter, did he? — I should not 
think so 

I mean you never produced it to him then. He referred to 
this letter without knowing that you had got it ? — That is so. 

Mr. Justice Avory — ^You see his own statement here is “ which 
letter I have destroyed," or something else. 

Cross-exaimnaUon conUnued — Or handed it to some on© in 
Liverpool. He was under the impression when he wrote that 
that the letter could not be traced ? — That is right. 

80 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


John Harris 

Being under that impression he purports to set out a sum- 
mary of the letter 1 — ^Yes 

Later on the letter was produced to him. Would it be fair 
to him to say that, without knowing you had got the letter, in 
describing the contents of it he described it accurately ? — I should 
say so. 

So that it is quite clear that in stating the contents of the 
letter, believing it was destroyed, and could not be found, he 
was speaking the tiuth? — ^Absolutely. 

Was he not asked what hapi^ened after getting the letter 1 
I mean, the sort of question I suggest Inspector Berrett put to 
him was, Well, what happened after that? — No. 

Then when he stopped again another question would be put, 
“ What next,” and that sort of thing? — No 

Then he describes in the second paragraph how he came to 
London and went to Browne's garage? — ^Yes. 

He sets out his duties I need not go through it paragraph 
by paragraph, but what I suggest is that when one topic was 
finished he wasi then asked, What happened then? ” or Where 
did you go then? ” or words to that effect? — ^No; that is not quite 
right, because when he had finished, what he used tO' do was, he 
would stop and think, or he sometimes asked me to read over 
what had been taken down, and I used to do so 

Perfectly pr opei ly — On other occasilons I had to ask him 
perhaps to slow up — I should think once or twice — and Ihen after 
I had read what had been wiiiten down 1 would say, Is that 
right? " but beyond that not a question. That is the only sort 
of question that was asked. Beyond that nothing else was spoken 
to him ; he watched my pen. 

It is a very orderly statement for a man who is in a serious 
position?^ — He is an orderly man; a man of education. 

Even though he was in the grave position he was iu, the 
whole matter is in chronological older. It deals wilh all the ques- 
tions that you police officers would naturally want to know in 
the interests of justice, doe,s it not? — ^Absolutely. 

And has got nothing that is irrelevant, or nothing that is 
idle in it; it is all to the point? — ^Yos 

Every question you could have desired to have answered is 
answered ? — No. 

Every question about the murder? — ^Yes; I suppose so, about 
the actual murder. 

Do you really say 

By Mr. Justice Avort — Stop a moment. Are you saying that 
every question was put to him? — No. 

With regard to the murder? — Oh, no. 

is more than likely that Kennedy had carefully thought out the story 
he meant to tell. Also, as for the most part, he was giving a narrative of what 
did take place, why should not his statement be orderly ? 

G 


81 



John Harris 


Browne and Kennedy. 


That is what learned counsel asked? — I understood learned 
counsel to say that every question we could have desired was 
answered. 

Mr. Powell — ^Tes; I did not put it that every question was 
put to him; what I was suggesting was that it happened to be 
the fact that the statement is exhaustive of material matters about 
the murder. 

The Witness — ^Yes. 

Mr. Justice Avory — That may be a matter of opinion. 

Mr Powell — ^Yes; I agree respectfully. 

The Solicitor- General — I wonder if my friend would make 
it clear before he goes on whether he was suggesting that questions 
were put elucidating this infoimation? 

Gro^s-examinaUon continvftd — I am not taking objection to 
the statement' — I am not seeking or asking for the statement to be 
ruled out — ^but what I am suggesting is that as paragraph after 
paragraph was recorded by you, if he stopped and seemed to have 
no more to say, then the sort of question would be put to him, 
'' What next? ” What happened then? and that sort of thing? 

Did you see any revolver? and that sort of question — No. 

In this statement in one paragraph he tells the story about 
a dog coming out to bark on the night of the crime. “ A dog 
came out, and, starting to bark, it made Browne leave and join 
me, and he said '' 

By the Solicitor-General — It is the passage beginning 
“ Browne told me to wait in the grounds of an empty house — 
I think that is it. 

Gross-exarmnation continued — He had no knowledge then 
from the police, had he, that evidence was going to be called that 
a dog did come out and bark? — ^At that time the police had no 
knowledge. 

And it now turns out he made a true statement about that ? — 
Absolutely. 

One other thing I just want to put to you : before he made 
this statement his wife was called into the room ? — ^Yes. 

And you were able to see the state of affairs that existed be- 
tween Kennedy and his wife? — ^Yes; they seemed very fond of 
each other. 

And would you agree with me it was his wife who urged 
hm to tell the truth ? — She told him to ; whether he required that 
urging or not, of course, I do not know. 

Quite right Do you know that they had only been married 
then about eight days? — The 18th January — ^that is right. 

Did it not appear to you from what you observed in the room 
that he was very much under the influence of his wife? — have 
held that opinion ever since 

And seemed, so far as you could judge, to be writing the 
statement at the request of his wife?— Well, I do not think I can 
answer that. 

82 





LiVioto. bij Walter Tkomm 


Mr. H. D. Koome. 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Harold Hawkyard 

, Harold Hawkyard, examined by Mr. Roome — I am a detec- 
tive officer of '' W Division On the 20th January of this year 
I was present when Inspector Barker searched the accused. 

When the cartridges were found in Browne's hip pocket what 
did he say*? — He said, '' That's done it; now you have found them, 
it's all up with me." 

When the mask was found did he say anything *2 — ^Yes; he said, 
'' There you are, you have got the lot now; you won't find any- 
thing else." 

By Mr Justice Avort — Did you yourself make the note at the 
time? — Not at the time. 

How soon after ? — At Tooting Police Station. 

Examination continued — How long after ? — About ten o'clock 
or just after ten. It would be about two hours afterwards. I 
was present when Detective Bevis came in with a Webley revolver 
and sis cartridges. 

When Browne saw those, what did he say? — Ah ! now you've 
found that, I’m done for." 

About nine o'clock the same evening were you standing beside 
Browne in the garage? — I was. 

Did he say anything then that you heard? — ^Yes ; he said, 
** How many of you were there? All you lot to pinch me 1 It's 
a good job you did not collar me when I was in the car or some 
of you would have gone west, and me after you I have seen a 
man shoot six down with a gun like that, and you can take it from 
me they didn't get up." I was present later the same evening 
at Tooting Police Station when the small nickel-plated revolver 
was placed nn the table in Browne's presence 

Did Browne say anything then in your hearing? — Yes; he 
said, '‘Oh! you've found that; that's no good. It would only 
tickle you unless it hit you in a vital part. If you had stopped 
me in the car I would have shot five of you and saved one for 
myself." 

Did you hear Browne say anything else? — ^Yes; shortly after- 
wards he said, " What I can see of it I shall have to get a machine 
gun for you bastards next time." 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lever — ^You have told us that you made 
this note at about ten o'clock? — ^Yes. 

The words were actually spoken shortly after eight o'clock? — 

Yes. 

So there is practically two hours' interval between your making 
the note lhat you are refreshing your memory from and the time 
the words were spoken ? — That is so. 

We will take the first statement when the cartridges were 
found : " That's done it; now you've found them, it's all up with 
me." Are you aware that word for word with every shortening 
of each word and every exclamation, verbatim, your account ia 
exactly the same as Inspector Barker's? — I did not know tlxat. 

83 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Harold Hawkyard 

You took your note two hours afterwards? — ^Yes. 

Do you really wish the Court to believe that you remembered 
every little word of that sentence, and so wrote it down as to be 
exactly the same two hours later ? — That is what I remembered that 
he said when the cartridges were shown to him. 

1 do not wish in the slightest to complain, but is there not 
some sort of explanation of that except your wonderful memory ? — 
No; I do not think so. 

Now, we will take the next When did you make the note 
when the Webley and the cartridges were produced and Browne 
made another exclamation ? — I made that at Tooting Police Station 
at the same time. 

There, you know, you have got exactly the same as Barker 
word for word. Ah; now youVe found that, I^m done for — 
every word the same. Do you really say again this was merely 
a record of your memory? — That is what I remembered he said. 

Is there not any other explanation? I want to put it to you 
quite frankly — I am not saying for any unlawful purpose — ^but 
did not you see Barker’s notebook or anything of that kind? — No; 
I never saw it at all- 

Did you not check it with anything? — No. 

You have got a wonderful memory? — I do not think so. 

What was the first question that my learned friend asked you 
to-day? — He said, Your name is Harold Hawkyard.” 

Yes, that is very good; that is quite excellent. After getting 
your name, what did he say to you first? — He asked me if I was 
present when Inspector Barker searched the accused Browne at 
the garage. 

And what? — ^When he found the cartridges. 

He asked you if you found the cartridges? — No; he asked me 
if I was present when Inspector Barker found the cartridges. 

And what was the next question after that? — He said, What 
did Browne say when the cartridges were shown to him? ” 

Let me put to you a further question. When back in Tooting 
Police Station, who was present at the charge room besides Browne 
and yourself when the conversation took place about the machine 
gun, and so on? — Sergeant Miller. 

‘Was there any one else present except you and Sergeant Miller? 
— ^I do not remember. There may have been one or two walking 
through, but I think Sergeant Miller and I were with Browne 
most of the time. 

Was there anybody else actually remaining in the room except 
you and Sergeant Miller? — I do not think so. 

And were you there during the whole time the statement was 
made ? — ^Yes. 

The Solioitob-Genebal — ^B efore my friend pursues his cross- 
examination, I wish to correct him. He has told the jury that 
the words this witness used were word for word the same as were 
84 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

iHaroId Hawkyard 

used by the other witness even to the exclamation. The two state- 
ments are this. Barker said, Ah' you’ve found that, have you; 
I’m done for now.” This witness said, “ Ah! now you’ve found 
that, I’m done for.” 

Mr. Justice Avort — That is in accordance with my note. 

Mr. Lever — I accept that, of course, but I thought it was 
verbatim the same. We have got the evidence also of Bevis, of 
course, about that, and my recollection at present is that Bevis 
and this man are verbatim the same. Barker and Bevis, accord- 
ing to my recollection, are exactly the same. 

Mr Justice Avort — ^Yes, they are. 

Mr. Lever {to Witness ) — ^You say, “ Ah I now you’ve found 
that,” wheieaa Barker and Bevis both say in the same words 
as each other, '^Ahi you’ve found that now, have you”; and 
then you say, I’m done for,” and they say, ” I’m done 
for now.” I put it as a very remarkable coincidence that in 
the first place you are exactly the same as Barker, and the 
same exclamation word for woid, and in the second place, with 
one or two slight alterations, exactly the same. Is that really 
your memory, or is it that you have in some way talked it over — I 
do not mean wrongly? — No; I made these notes at Tooting Police 
Station as soon as I got back. 

Let us get to Tooting Police Station, when you say that you 
and Miller were present when that was said about the machine 
gun. Is this what you say he said, What I can see of it, I 
shall have to get a machine gun for you bastards next time ”? — 
Yes. 

That is, with the exception of one word, verbatim the same 
as Miller has got. You see Miller has got, What I can see of it, 
I shall have to have a machine gun for you bastards next time.” 
You say, ” What I can see of it I shall have to get a machine gun 
for you bastards next time.” There is only the one word have ” 
instead of get ” which is different in all that sentence. Is that 
again merely the wonderful recollection of you two ? — That is what 
I remembered he said. 

You were with Miller in the room when this was said at the 
Tooting Police Station? — ^Yes. 

Did you see Miller make his note of the conversation? — No, 
I saw him writing something at Tooting Police Station in his note- 
book. I had not my notebook out then I wrote mine afterwards 
in the police station. I think Miller was still there with the 
accused when I wrote mine. 

First he wrote his note in the police station, and then you 
wrote your note? — I do not know that he wrote his first; I saw 
him writing something. 

And did he finish, and then you began to write yours> or what? 
— No. 

Did you begin to write whilst he was writing? — ^No. 


85 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Harold Hnwkyard 

Were you writing it before he had written, or what'? — do not 
know. I was writing something there in the early part of the 
evening just after I got there. 

After this conversation you were recording it? — I recorded it. 

You have told me in the charge room you saw Miller writing 
something in his notebook? — ^Yes; h© was writing something 

Was it then that you started writing in your notebook? — No. 

Was it after he had finished? — Some time after, I think. 

But was he still there, or not? — He was still there, yes. 

So that you were both writing notes in your notebooks in the 
same room. He finished his first and then you started yours. 
Why did you wait till he had finished his before you started yours? 
— I do not know. 

Did you have a look at what he had written? — No. 

Did you mention it to him? — I did not, no. 

There you were, both of you, sitting quite silent in the same 
room recording conversations, and they are verbatim the same? 
— I did not know what he was writing. 

You have told us that when you were standing in the garage 
with Browne about nine o’clock Browne said, How many of you 
were there ” ? — ^Yes. 

Miller has said the same thing. Then you say he went on to 
say, All you lot to pinch me ”? — ^Yes. 

That is correct, is it not? — ^Yes. 

I put it to Miller and he told me that was not said — ** All 
you lot to pinch me 1 ” — ^but you say it was? — He said that to me. 

Mr. Justice Avort — ^Now you are finding fault with him for 
differing from Miller. 

Mr. Lever — ^Yes; he possesses both faults, not unnaturally. 
The object of my cross-examination is to show that there is no 
infallibility in these verbatim records. I say no more than that, 
and I am not casting any blame on anybody; I am saying what 
their value is 

Mr. Powell — ^No questions. 

Dr. Gterald Roche Lynch, examined by the Solioitor- 
Gbnbral — I am Senior Official Analyst to the Home Office. On 
the 8th February I received the offside running board of Dr. 
Lovell’s car. I tested three places on that running board for 
human blood, and I found human blood to be present. The 
blood-stained areas are on the rubber which I have outlined in 
blue pencil, and in addition I found human blood on the white 
metal skirting somewhere about the middle of the board. There 
is a great deal more blood, but I tested only three spots which I 
am sure were all human blood. 

Dr. Edward Richardson Lovell, examined by the Solicitor- 
General — reside and am in practice at Billericay. I am the 
owner of the blue Morris-Cowley car, T.W.6120. My garage is 
86 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Edward R. Lovell 

just alongside the house. I personally put away my Morris- 
Cowley car in that garage on the evening of the 26th September. 
I identified my car at the police station, Brixton. I put the car 
away about 7 30 on Monday night, the 26th September, and I 
locked the door in the usual way. I did not have any occasion 
to take it out again that night. I left cases containing surgical 
instruments and dressings in the car when I locked it up that 
night. There were two cases of instruments and a small case 
with a few drugs in it. In the morning after breakfast, when I 
went into the garage, I found that the door had been forced, and 
the car was not there. That would be about 9.15 in the morning. 
I reported the matter to the police As I have already said, I 
was eventually summoned to identify the car. I make a habit of 
noting the mileage shown on my speedometer each day. 

From the time that you noted it on the 26th to the time that 
you saw it at the Brixton Police Station, what was the difference 
in the mileage'^ — I had not made a note of the mileage on the 
26th. The last time I made a note was on the Sunday when I put 
the car away in the garage, and I put it in my diary, and the 
terminal numbers then read 25.9 miles. I estimate the mileage 
which I did on the Monday to be 15 miles, so that the speedometer 
should have read approximately on the night of ihe 26th September 
as 25 9 plus 15, or a total of 40 9. 

And what was the difference between that and the figure 
shown when you saw the carl — It was, roughly, about 42 miles, I 
think, I did not make a note of the reading at Brixton myself. 
The figure registered at Brixton was 6684.3, which showed a 
difference of 43.6 miles. 

You have told us what you left in the car. I just want to 
ask you this, did you leave a spent cartridge in the car'? — No. 

So far as you know, was there any blood on the off running 
board! — No. 

Was the near side wing damaged? — Not buckled up as it 
was when I found it. It had a few scratches. 

Did you see the buckling? Was that present when you left it 
on the night of the 26th? — ^No; there was no sign of it. 

And, so far as you know, was there any bark adhering to 
the dumb irons? — No; no bark, because I had washed the car 
down on the Saturday previously. 

When you saw the car at Brixton were any of your medical 
appliances left in the car? — None at all. 

Were the bags there? — They had all gone. 

Would you look at some of these which have been produced? 
This case was found on the bench of the garage workshop by 
Haines j what do you say about that? — It^ i's exactly like a case 
which was in the car at the time containing scalpels, I cannot 
be positive about it as a single exhibit, but it is exactly like mine.® 

At Tooting Police Station on 22nd January. 


87 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Dr Edward R. Lovell 

Look at these Spencer Wells aitery forcepa. These were 
found on the accused Browne by Inspector Barker What do 
you say about those? — Those are exactly like a pair of Spencer 
Wells forceps that were in my car at the time it was stolen. 

Look at these, which have been called dissecting forceps. They 
were found in the inner room of the office of the garage by Barker. 
What do. you say about those? — They are exactly like a pair which 
were iln the car before it was stolen. 

Look at this; these are forceps which have apparently been 
filed at the point, and were found in the back of the Angus- 
Sanderson car by the driver’s seat, by Bevis? — These are similar 
to a pair that were in my car at the time it was stolen, except 
that the points of the forceps have been filed down. 

By Mr- Justice Avort — ^What differ ence does it make in their 
use, if any? — ^Well, it spoils their use as a surgical instrument, 
but it appears that it has been made to form a key to open 
something. 

Examination continued — ^Here is a roll of bandage, here is 
the ethyl chloride, and this consists of two rolls of bandages 
and a piece of bandage. I suppose that the white gauze, and so 
forth, are of a pretty common form of stuff, are they not? — ^Yes; 
they are all more or less the same type. 

What about the tube of ethyl chloride? — There was a tube 
of a similar make of ethyl chloride in the car at the time. The 
only difference between this and the one that I lost is that that 
one had an ordinary stick-on label on the tube, and this one is 
just plain glass. 

Was thati a label which could be removed? — It was a label 
which would come off with water, a paper label. Ethyl chloride 
is used as a local anaesthetic for freezing the skin. 

Look at this, a convex lens. This was found by Haines in 
the bottom of the wardrobe in the upstairs living-room at Sisters 
Avenue? — There was a similar lens to this in my car at the 
time, with the exception that mine had a twisted wire frame 
round the lens, and a handle to hold it by. 

Are there any marks or scratches on that lens ? — On the surface 
of the lens there are a few scratches. My lens had on it the 
ordinary scratches which would be the same quality and fineness 
as the ones on this lens. 

As regards the speculum, that is an instrument for looking 
into the ear, is it not ? — Yes ; it is the speculum part. 

Something has happened to it, has there not? Do you say 
that any part of that is a speculum? — The monocle portion is an 
old ear speculum, and round the rim of the instrument a thin 
band of metal with a thread has been attached and soldered in, 
while on the outer rim there is a mark where something has 
been filed away, which would correspond in position with where 

88 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Edward R. Lovell 

a small bar was attached to the speculum I lost for attaching to 
it the remainder of the instrument. 

So far as you can see from the part that remains, does that 
resemble the one which you lost? — It resembles the one which I 
lost, with the attachment filed off and tlie remainder added. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — The fact of the alteration is to make 
it useless as an ear speculum'^ — I cannot see any use for it now 
it is altered. 

Exaimnaiio^ corvtimitd — It would sciew on to this, which is 
a battery and Sancy light, and this i!s ordinary adhesive sticking 
plaster? — I had a roll of plaster with llanges on it in Ihe car. 
The flanges on this exhibit appear to liave been cut away. 

I have dealt with those individually. Taking them collec- 
tively, what do you say about them as a body of articles? — They 
are all mine. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lever — Is the real exact position 
this, that each of those articles is similar, so far as you are aware, 
to the articles which were in the car? — ^Yes 

But you cannot positively swear that any of them is the 
identical article? — Not a solitary exhibit only 

Wait a minute. You cannot swear that any single exhibit is 
the identical article? — No. 

But that in view of the cumulative effect, you are of the 
opinion that they are your goods? — ^Yes. The instruments were 
in two cases. Some of the forceps were in a small case made of 
wash leather, and then there was an atlaclni case and brief bag in 
which the whole were placed. 

What other medical things were there in the car? — There was 
another pair of forceps, there was a probe, there was a special 
knife, a scalpel known as a Bard Parker scalpel, and there would 
be some dressings. The dressings would be of the same char actor 
as those pioduced. They are one of the most common type of 
medical dressinofs. T gave a list of tlie things T missed at the 
time when I went to Brixton Police Station to identify the car. 
I have not seen the case nor the brief bag again. 

[Referring to list.] Taking these things together, is it fair 
to say that they form the ordinary kind of kit belonging to a 
country practitioner? — Instruments of that nature would possibly 
be carried by every country practitioner, but the actual size of the 
instruments would hardly agree. 

Would you take any well-known instiument maker in London, 
St. Bartholomew's Hospital, or any of those well-known places. 
Have you not just got to go i!n and get one of those forceps, and 
they are part of the usual stock? — ^You could buy almost any 
instrument in that way by walking in. 

There is nothing extraordinary about them; they are part 
of the usual stock which you buy? — >The only extraordinary part 

8d 



Browne and Kennedy, 

Dr Edward R. Lovell 

about those is that they ai'e being carried round by a medical 
practitioner. 

The extraordinary thing would be carrying them about, but 
in themselves there is nothing extraordinary about them; they 
might have been obtained anywhere in London'* — ^At any 
instrument maker's, yes. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Powell — Do you know what would be 
the height from the ground to the end part of the hood of your 
car? Would it be 4 feet 11 J inches or thereabouts? — Thereabouts, 

I should think. You have to stoop to get in the car; at least, 

I have to stoop. I am 5 feet 11 inches. 

I believe Constable Cutteridge's height was about 6 feet. It 
would follow that anybody that height would have to stoop to talk 
to the driver if standing in the road on the ofEside? — ^Yes; he 
would have to bend down. 

Some cars have lights on the dash board by the driving wheel. 
Did yours have one? — It has a dash-board light, yes. 

It is not a brilliant light, I suppose? — It is enough to light 
the whole of the dash board, and enable you to read the figures. 

By Mr. Justice Avory — The juiy want one question answered. 
Is ethyl chloride a thing that can be bought by any person at a 
chemist's, as far as you know? — As far as I know, yes, but I 
cannot see any point in an ordinary person buying it. It is not 
a dangerous drug. 

But it is not the kind of thing you would expect to be used 
in a garage? — I cannot conceive of any use for it in a garage. 

At what time did you go to bed on the night of the 26th 
September ? — ^About half -past twelve. 

Up to that time would you have heard anybody taking your 
oar out of the garage ? — I think so, because there is a gravel drive 
up to the garage. 

Where were you sitting? — ^We were sitting in the front of the 
bungalow. 

You were sitting in a room near the garage? — Yes. 

Arid did you, in fact, hear any disturbance at all? — None at 
all. 


Owen Jones, examined by Mr. M^Clure^ — ^I am an executive 
officer of the General Post Office, Newbridge Street House. I pro- 
duce the original of a telegram, which was handed in on the 
21st January of this year at 1 3 p m. at Clapham Common Post 
Office. It is addressed to Kennedy, 2 Huguenot Place, Wands- 
worth." I cannot identify the person who handed in the telegram. 
It reads, Come at once, sister seriously ill. Stay indefinite. 
Kitty." 

Detective Sergeant John Harris (recalled), further examined 
by Mr. McClure — I have seen the accused Kennedy write. I know 
90 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

John Harris 

his handwriting. The words “ Come at once, sister seriously ill. 
Stay indefinite. Kitty.’' in the telegram are in Kennedy's hand- 
writing The address is written in block letters 

Cross-examined by Mr. Powell — Kennedy in his statement 
refers to that telegram ? — ^Yes. 

Would you agree with me that it is quite obvious that his 
references to that telegram in this statement are quite tiue? — 
Absolutely. 

Eliza Trbwin, examined by Mr. M'Clurb — I live at 2 Hugue- 
not Place, Wandsworth, and I let out apaitments there. 1 know 
the accused Browne. [Witness identified the accused Browne in 
Court.] Browne and his wife lodged with me in the latter part 
of last year. It might have been in September or October. They 
were only with me for a few days, not quite a week They stayed 
with me until they were suited with a small fiat. I should think 
it would be nearer the end of September. I also know the accused 
Kennedy. [Witness identified the accused Kennedy in Court.] 
Kennedy and his wife stayed with me from the 14th till the 21st 
of February. He was alone when he took the i*oom, but he brought 
his wife later in the day He paid mo a fortnight’s rent in 
advance I remember a telegram coming on the 21st of February. 
After the telegram they packed up their things and left me. They 
left the same evening. 

John Pearce, examined by Mr. Roome — I am a shop assistant 
to Francis & Sons, Ltd., of Clapham. I remember on Saturday, 
21st January, taking a Tate sugar box from my firm’s store, and 
making a lid for it, and taking it to 2 Huguenot Place. I got 
there about 5,30 in the evening, I first of all saw a woman, and 
then I went away and came back in about half an hour, and saw 
a man. The man was the accused Kennedy. He told me he 
worked for the Free Stale Government, and was going back to 
Ireland that night. ^ When I left the house Kennedy invited me to 
a public-house, and I went with him. Before we went into the 
public-house he showed me a revolver. It was similar to ibat. 
He took it from his overcoat pocket. 

Hid he give you any reason for showing it to you? — He 
mumbled something about his wife, about taking care of herself 
with it, but what the words were I could not tell. 

William Ernest Stone, examined by Mr. Rooms — I am a 
garage proprietor at Wandsworth. I remember a job on Satur- 
day, the 21st January of this year, when I drove a man and a 
woman to Euston in the evening. I picked them up at Kenley 
House, 2 Huguenot Place, Wandsworth, about 7.30, I believe, in 
the evening. 


^Kenuody was possessed of a marked brogue. 


91 



Browne and Kennedy. 

William Emesl Stone 

Do you remember any part of the luggage 1 — ^Yes; the luggage 
consisted of four pieces that I handled. 

Among the luggage was there a Tate sugar box 1 — white deal 
box very similar to a Tate sugar box 

Joseph Thomas, examined by the Solicitor-General — I live 
at the Crack Hotel, 13 Rice Street, Liverpool. My wife is 
licensee of the hotel. I know the accused Kennedy, and I have 
known him for some time. He came to the hotel about the middle 
of December, 1927. He told me he was a compositor. He also 
told me he was manager of a garage in London. He showed me an 
automatic revolver This one, which is now shown to me, is the 
revolver I refer to. It is a Savage. He asked me if I could 
get him some ammunition. He showed me the ammunition which 
was in the revolver. The revolver was loaded when he showed it 
to me. He asked me to get him some similar ammunition, fifty 
or a hundred rounds He gave me one cartridge as a pattern. 
I did not get any ammunition for him; I had no intention of 
doing so. I saw him again about the 24:th January, 1928. He 
was not staying at my hotel in December ; he was just in for a 
drink, and then went out When he came on the 23rd or 24:th 
January he asked me if I had got them, and I said, No.'' 

Cross-examined by Mr. Powell — I think you and Kennedy 
were old friends, were you not? — ^Yes. 

And it was in the course of conversation that a revolver 
cropped up ? — ^Yes. 

And IS it the fact that when you and he were in South Africa 
together you both had firearms? — ^Yes. 

There is nothing strange connected with the possession of 
firearms? — Not a bit. 

Or in anybody having a firearm who intends to go abroad? — 
Of course, we weie issued out with the firearms during the African 
War 


Davib Staunton, examined by Mr. Rooms — I live at 119 
Copperas Hill, Liverpool. I know the accused Kennedy. I let 
him a room in my house on the Sunday previous to his arrest. I 
am not sure of the date. He came with his wife. [Shown 
a pistol magazine.] I saw Sergeant Mattinson pick something 
similar to that in my room, but I could not say it was this, as 
my sight is defective It was on the night of his arrest that it 
was picked up. 

William Guthrie Mattinson, examined by the Solicitor- 
General — I am a detective sergeant of the Liverpool City Police 
Force. On the 25th January I was in company with Inspector 
Kirschner and other ofidcers round 119 Copperas Hill, Liverpool, 
when about twenty minutes to 12 p.m. I saw a man walking along 
92 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

William Guthrie Mattinson 

th© street I followed him. I recognised him when I overtook 
him about 150 yards from the scene wheie I first saw him. H© 
was walking quickly and steadily along St Andrew’s Street. He 
had the collar of his overcoat turned up, and the front of the 
brim of his trilby hat turned down with his left hand over his 
face. When I got close to him I recognised him to be the accused 
William Henry Kennedy. 1 approached him on his left-hand side. 
As I drew up to him I just said, “ Come on, Bill. Now, then, 
come on, Bill.” 

Just tell us what happened then? — I was then about 2 feet 
from him. He swerved suddenly round, facing me. At the same 
time he drew his hand out of the right-hand pocket of his over- 
coat, and thrust the muzzle of a pistol beneath the point of my ribs. 

Did you hear anything? — ^Yes; I heard a distinct click. 

What did you do? — immediately closed with him and grasped 
his right hand, which held the revolver, with my left hand, and 
twisted his arm up into the air, and afc the same time with my 
right hand hit him in the left side of the face. 

Did you lose anything from your coat in the course of the 
struggle? — I later discovered that a button had been torn from my 
overcoat, together with the piece of cloth to which it was stitched, 
I am a plain clothes officer, and I was in plain clothes at the 
time. When I struck him in the side of the neck it knocked him 
partially ofi his balance, and it gave me the opportunity of wrench- 
ing the revolver out of his giasp with my left hand, and I got 
him by the back of the coat collar with my right hand. 

You have told us what he did. Did he say anything at all 
when he turned round on you? — He said, Stand back, Bill, or 
I’ll shoot you.” That was when he was in the act of pulling the 
revolver from his pocket. 

What happened next ? — I thrust the revolver into his ribs and 
began shoving him back up St. Andiew’s Street, shouting at the 
top of my voice. I pushed him round into Copperas Hill, where 
he had come from, and after I proceeded some distance down 
Copperas Hill I was met by Inspector Kirschner, Sergeant Duncan, 
of the Metropolitan Police, and Chief Inspector Koberts, of the 
Liverpool Police. 

Up to that moment you had been single-handed, had you? — 

Yes. 

Did they then take charge of the accused? — ^Yes; they took 
hold of Kennedy, but just before they did so I held the pistol 
up in my hand, and shouted to them, “ It’s all right, I’ve got it.” 

Then what happened to you ? — I went sick and partially sank 
to the floor. [Shown an automatic pistol.] That is the automatic 
pistol that Kennedy pushed into my ribs. There is a safety catch 
on it. When I was all right again I went to the police station 
and saw the accused Kennedy in the guard room. 


93 



Browne and Kennedy. 

WiUiam Guthrie Mattinson 

Did he say anything to you as he went in? — ^As I passed him 
he looked up at me and said, “ I am sorry; I have no grudge 
against the police, but you should be in heaven now, and there 
was one for me.^' 

What did you say? — I looked at him and said, I did not 
expect that from you Later, I went back to 119 Copperas Hill, 
and met a sergeant. It was shortly after midnight on the morn- 
ing of the 26th. I found the magazine of an automatic pistol on 
a shelf of a chest of drawers, which corresponded with the magazine 
which I have ]ust removed from this pistol It was an empty 
magazine. 

CioBS-examined by Mr. Powell — The house I was searching 
was a house over a shop at a corner of a street, the side street 
being Hart Street and the frontage being Copperas Hill. I did 
not see the accused Kennedy come out of the door; I just saw him 
in Copperas Hill. I was standing at the corner of Greek Street 
and Copperas Hill. Greek Street is a street which runs parallel 
with Hart Street When I first saw Kennedy he had partly passed 
me on the opposite side of the road. I was standing with other 
officers. He had got probably 10 yards past us when 1 detached 
myself from the group and began to follow him. 

He was obviously under the impression that he was being 
watched from his manner ? — From his attitude, yes. 

When you detached yourself from the group he was then on 
the pavement on the other side of the road? — He was. 

So that there would be, I suppose, about 30 or 40 feet at least 
between you? — There was. 

When you detached yourself from the group and came after 
him, at any moment of time before you actually touched him he 
could have fired at you if he wished to, assuming, of course, he 
knew he was being followed? — ^I could not say that. 

What was there to prevent him firing at you as you were 
following him if he saw you ? — I do not know that he did see me. 

I am asking you to assume that. Was it about 100 yards 
from the house he had left where you actually stopped him ? — ^Yes, 
it would be. 

Mr. Justice Avoet — Mr. Powell, I do not want to stop you, but 
you must bear in mind that the accused is not now being tried 
upon any charge of shooting or attempting to shoot this officer. 

Mr. Powell — My lord, I am very much obliged to your lord- 
ship, because I have been wondering how to deal with it. I am 
much obliged, because your lordship remembers I had proposed to 
make that point to the jury, but I was not exactly certain what 
the true position was. The learnod Solicitor-General in opening 
referred to this matter. 

Mr. Justice Avort — Undoubtedly. I am not saying it is not 
evidence; the conduct of a man when he is arrested may be very 

94 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

William Guthrie MattinsoD 

matBrial. All I am pointing out to you is the details of the con- 
duct can only be relevant upon a charge of shooting or attempting 
to shoot this officer, and he is not being tried for that. 

Mr. Powell — I am most anxious to be in order, as your lord- 
ship appreciates. 

Mr, Justice Avort — I do not want to stop you at all. 

Mr. Powell — I want not to waste time. I do not want to 
ask one question more than is necessaiy, but at the same time I do 
not want to miss something out I want to put. I was wanting to 
put to the officer that Kennedy never made any attempt to shoot 
him, but I do not want to avoid that cross-examination, and have 
it put against me afterwards that I did not cross-examine on those 
lines. 

Mr. Justice Avort — By all means put any question you like 
on that point. There is no evidence that he did make any attempt 
to shoot him until the moment when the officer spoke to him. 

Mr Powell — ^Yes, my lord I was rather going to lead up to 
the argument that he never made any attempt at the time, and 
the best evidence that he made no attempt at the time is the fact 
that he never shot when he had the opportunity of doing so at the 
time. {To Witness) — It is the fact, is it not, that the safety catch 
was up*^ — I do not know that. 

Did not you examine iti — ^No. 

You know from your brother officer to whom you handed it 
that it was up ? — I do not know that. 

You are not going to suggest that it was down^ — I do not 
know whether it was up or down. If it had been down 

What is the name of the officer who took it ? — Inspector 
Kirschner. 

Do not you know quite well he says it was up ? — I do not know 
that he has ever said it was up. 

Has he never told you? — No. 

And you have never asked him? — No. 

And you do not know that he gave that evidence at the Police 
Court ? — No. 

You really ask the jury to believe that a brother officer who 
took this weapon from you has never told you whether the safety 
catch was up or down? — No, he did not. 

Is not what you heard the pistol against that button of yours ? 
— ^It might have been. 

Have you any doubt whatever that it was the pistol catching 
against that button that tore the button off ? — I could not say that. 
I do not know. 

Do not think that I want to detract from your plucky 
behaviour in the slightest degree, but you will be fair to Kennedy, 
will you not? — Certainly. 

Was there anything the matter with your button or your coat 
before you met him in the street ? — Nothing. 


95 



Browne and Kennedy. 

W]Hia.m Guthrie Matting on 

And after this incident the button dropped o£E, having been 
torn by some sharp instrument obviously? — I could not say that. 
It had evidently become detached in the struggle. 

I suggest to you that just before you got to Kennedy he 
turned round and saw you, and if he had wanted to shoot you he 
could easily have done so ? — He did not. 

At any rate, what you say he said was, '' Stand back, Bill 
or ril shoot you — He did 

You did not stand back, did you? — No. 

And he did not shoot? — He tried to. 

How could he try to shoot without putting the safety catch 
down ? — I do not know that. 

By Mr. Justice Avory — How long does it take to put the safety 
oatch down ? — The fraction of a second, my lord. 

CroBs-QXamination continued — I suggest to you either that 
noise (demonstrating a click with the safety catch in drawing the 
pistol from the pocket without having the finger on the trigger) 
or the pistol striking against that big button of yours is all you 
ever heard, and it is gross exaggeration to say that he tried to 
shoot you? — ^Well, I believe he did. 

I suggest what he did to you was mere bluff fco try and 
frighten you, and, as my lord has pointed out, there is no 
charge 

Mr. Justice Avory — You are beginning to realise that now. 

Mr. Powell — My lord, I have realised it before, but I find 
it difficult to know how to deal with the incident without dealing 
with it fully. [To Witness) — You 'say that at the police station 
he said to you, “ I am sorry, I havei no grudge against the police, 
but you should have been in heaven now, and there was one for 
— ^Yea; that is what he said. 

Do you really say he said that? — ^Yes. 

Was there anybody else present? — ^Yes. 

Who? — ^Probably about a dozen officers. 

And, how many of the dozen are witnesses in this case? How 
many ought to have heard it if it was uttered having regard to 
their nearness to Kennedy when you say he made the statement? — 
Any of them that were round about him. 

But how many do you say there were round about him? — 
Well, immediately round about him, four or five. 

I suggest that all he said was, I have no grudge against 
the police — ^No; he said what I say he said. 

Ke-examined by the Solicit or- General — Did you say what 
you said that you said, I did not expect that from you.^^ When 
you said that did you or did you not believe at the time that he 
meant to shocit you? — I did. 


96 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Albert Kzrschner 

i 

Albert Kirschner, examined by the Solicitob-Qeneral — I 
am a detective inspector of New Scotland Yard. I went to Liver- 
pool for the arrest of the accused Kennedy, and I was present in 
the neighbourhood of 119 Copperas Hill the time he was arrested. 

I think that the moment at which you came up was when 
the last witness was bringing Kennedy back struggling to the 
house'? — I heard a shout from Sergeant Mattinson I was then 
with Sergeant Duncan and Chief Inspector Eoberts, of the Liver- 
pool Police Force We rushed to where the sound came from, 
and saw Sergeant Mattinson struggling with the accused Kennedy. 

What was happening at the moment when you got there*] — I 
saw Sergeant Mattinson had charge of the accused Kennedy. He 
had hold of him by the collar of his coat by the right hand, and 
in his left hand he held a pistol. We all three rushed over, that 
is to say, Chief Inspector Eoberts, myself, and Sergeant Duncan. 
At that moment Sergeant Mattinson staggered back, and fell into 
the arms of a uniformed constable, who had then come up. 
Mattinson had in his left hand a pistol Seigeant MatLinson pro- 
duced the pistol to me at the Warren Street BrMewelL At the 
moment that Sergeant Mattinson fell back he said, Fve got 
it.’’ At the same time he had in his left hand this pistol. We con- 
veyed the accused to the Wairen Street BrMewell, which was close 
by While taking him to Ihe bridewell no charge was mentioned 
to the accused at all, but he said, ‘‘ It’s all up now, you have 
got me How many more of you want to hold me"? ” When 
Sergeant Mattinson handed ihe pistol to me at the station there 
was a cartridge in the breach, and it was fully loaded, as far 
as I could judge The safety catch was at safety I searched 
Kennedy I found nothing connected with ihe automatic pistol 
in his possession He was dressed in an overcoat, an undershirt, 
and pair of trousers The trousers were undone in the front; 
his boots were unlaced, and he had no nvershirt, he simply had 
an undershilrt. He asked for his shirt and collar to be feiched 
for him. I charged him 

I think in the first instance at Liverpool he was charged simply 
with this Vauxhall car affair? — ^Yes. About 1.30 a m. I returned 
to Warren Street after going to the rooms he occupied at 
Copperas Hill, and when I returned to Warren Street, I said, I 
am Inspector Kirschner, from Scotland Yard. I am going to 
arrest you upon a charge of being concerned with a man named 
Browne, now in custody, of stealing a Vaushall car from Tooting, 
London, in November last, and shall take you to London.” , I 
cautioned him. He was then taken in a motor car to Daile Street 
Police Station, which is the head police station in Liverpool, and 
on the way he said, '‘Yes; I had a premonition something was 
going to happen to ine to-day, and I intended going. You are 
lucky to get me. While I was in the house I heard the taxi man 
being told to drive to the next street. That gave me the tip.” 

® 97 



Browne and Kennedy. 

^berfc Kirschner 

Had any incident like that happened? Had any ofidcers 
driven np in a tasi? — ^Tes. 

And the tasi man was told to drive to the next street ? — ^Tes. 
I did not see him any more that night. The next I saw of him 
was when I took him over to the Daile Street Bridewell at ahont 
a quarter to four in the morning. That was for the purpose of 
taking him over to the cells. Nothing of importance happened 
then. From that time I did not see him again until just before 
his departure for London next day. His wife accompanied him 
to London. I took him up to London. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Powell — I should think it was a 
matter of minutes after I arrived at the station that Sergeant 
Mattinson came in with the pistol and handed it to me. There 
were a number of officers there at the time. 

Did he ever have the curiosity to ask if the safety catch was 
up or down when he handed it to you? — No; I saw that it was, 
and I did not tell him. 

Did you ever tell him ? — No. I do not think I had any con- 
versation at all with Sergeant Mattinson either then or afterwards 
at the Police Court or anywhere else. 

And at no time, I understand, at Liverpool, was anything 
said to Kennedy about the murder of P.C. Gutteridge? — ^Not to 
my knowledge 

James Berbett, examined by the Solicitor-General — I am a 
Chief Inspector of Police. On the 21st January, at 12 46 am., I 
saw Browne in detention. I had Sergeant Harris with me. I 
said to Browne, ** I am Chief Inspector Berrett. I have been 
making inquiries respecting the murder of P.C. Gutteridge at 
Stapleford Abbotts, Essex, on the night of the 26th September, 
1927. Will you account to me for your movements on the night 
of the 26th September and early morning of the 27th September, 
and for your po^ession of the Webley revolver and ammunition? 
1 caution you that anything you say will be taken down and 
may be given in evidence. Browne replied, Why should I 
tell you anything? But, there, I might as well tell you about 
myself.' ' He then made a statement which was reduced to writing 
by Sergeant Harris in my presence. It was read over to him, 
and he signed it as being correct. 

[At this stage the Clerk of Court read the statement 
referred to.®] 

The next day I saw Browne again at 9.30 p.m. In the meantime the 
Smith Wesson revolver, the small silver-plated revolver, and 
the Webley revolver found at the back of the driver's seat had 


® See p 10. 
98 





Evidence for Prosecution. 

James Berrett 

been brought to my notice, also tbe metal case, which was found 
on the bench in the workshop 

Did you ask him if he wished to furnish particulars about 
those? — ^Yes. I brought him to the charge room, and the articles 
which have just been mentioned were placed upon the charge- 
room table. I said to him, I again caution you/' and then I 
showed him the two further revolvers and ammunition that had 
been found, the additional ammunition, and the white metal bos, 
and said, would you like to furnish me with particulars as to 
how they came into your possession? " The accused said, “ I 
will tell you something about them; you can put it down." He 
then made a statement, which was reduced to writing taken down 
by Sergeant Harris in my presence, read over to him, and signed 
as correct 

[The Clerk of Court read the statement referred to.®] 

On the 26th January I saw tbe accused Kennedy at New Scotland 
Yard at 7 p.m. I said to him, I am Chief Inspector Berrett, 
and this officer is Sergeant Harris " — ^that is the officer thati was 
with me — you are detained on a charge of being concerned in 
stealing a Vauxhall motor car, but I have been making inquiries 
for some time past respecting the murder of P.C. Gutteridge at 
Essex. Can you give me any information about the occurrence? " 
Kennedy replied, ‘‘ 1 may be able to tell you something, but let me 
consider awhile." He then held his head with both hands, his 
elbows resting on the table. After some minutes in this position 
he said, '' Can I see my wife? " I said, " Yes," as she was in 
the building at the time. His wife was brought to the room by 
Inspector Kirschner, and he said to her, Well, my dear, you 
know when I was arrested at Liverpool yesterday I told you I 
♦thought there was something more serious at the back of it. 
Well, there is. These officers ai*e making inquiries about that 
policeman murdered in Essex, Mrs. Kennedy exclaimed, Why, 
you didn't murder him, did you? " Kennedy replied, No, I 
didn't, but I was there, and know who did. If I am charged with 
murder and found guilty I shall bo hanged, and you will be a 
widow. On the other hand, if I am charged and found guilty 
of being an accessory after the fact I shall receive a long sentence 
of penal servitude, and be a long time away. from you. Will you 
wait for me? " Mrs. Kennedy said, Yes, love, I will wait for 
you any time." Kennedy said, " Well, what shall I do then? " 
Mrs Kennedy said, ‘‘ Teil these gentlemen the truth of what took 
place." Kennedy replied, All right, I will." He then said to ' 
me, " You can take down what I want to say, and I will sign it." 

I then cautioned him, and he made a lengthy statement. 

I want you to tell me about how long you were engaged in 

® See p. 13. 

m 



James Berrett 


Browne and Kennedy. 


taking that statement? — I should think from just about seven 
o'clock. I suppose it would be about ten minutes or a quarter of 
an hour, perhaps^ whilst he was sitting there thinking and resting 
his elbows on the table before he asked for his wife to be brought 
in. I should think the statement might have started somewhere, 

1 cannot say exactly, somewhere about a quarter-past seven to 
half-past seven, and I suppose it was finished somewhere about 
half-past ten; I cannot say. 

That is tlaee hours or so? — It was, I should think, a little 
more. 

Did he make it carefully and deliberately? — He hesitated a 
very great deal at different times. During the whole course of 
my experience I have never taken a statement from a man who 
exercised such care 

Did he make any corrections either in the course of it or 
after it had been read over? — ^At different times he would have 
portions of the statement read over to him before he continued, 
and after it was completed and read over he made certain altera- 
tions which he initialled, and, in fact, he cut one passage out 
altogether which he initialled 

[The Clerk of Court read the statement referred to.'^] 

After that did Kennedy ask to be shown the revolvers? — ^Yes; 
and I showed them to him. He examined both the Webleys, he 
broke them, and after breaking them both he referred to the first 
one that was found in the possession of Browne and said, “ That 
is the one, in my opinion, that I reloaded," and he made a state- 
ment to that efiect. 

I think that he made a further statement which was taken 
down in writing in the same way as the other ? — Exactly. It was 
signed in the same way as the other. And here is the letter he 
had already referred to in his earlier statement which had been 
found in the interval 

[The Clerk of Court read the statement and letter referred 

to.s] 

On the 6th February I saw both accused together at Lavender Hill 
Police Station, and charged them formally with the murder. I 
said, " I am Chief Inspector Berrett. Ab 5.30 p.m, on the 27th 
September we saw the dead body of George William Gutteridge, 
a police constable of the Essex Constabulary, in a coach-house 
attached to the Royal Oak at Stapleford Abbotts, he having died 
as the result of bullet wounds. Since that date I have been engaged 
with other officers of the Metropolitan and the Essex police making 
inquiries respecting his death, and as a result of my inquiries, 

See p. 14, 

® See p 20. 

lOO 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


James Berrett 

statements taken, and information I have received, I am now going 
to charge yon both with being concerned with the murder of George 
William Gutteridge by shooting him in the head with a revolver 
on the Romford and Ongar road at Stapleford Abbotts between 
3.30 aan and 6 a m on the 26th September, 1927. I caution you 
both that anything you say will be taken down and may be given 
in evidence. Browne said, “ You are charging me with murder; 
it^s absurd, I know nothing about it.’^ Kennedy made no reply. 
They were then charged, and the charge lead over to them again 
by the officer making the charge, and they made no leply 

Immediately, or shortly after, I think you spoke to each of 
them separately and handed each copies of the statement made by 
the other one'? — Yes. 

Did you tell each of them that if they wanted to say anything 
about the other man’s statement they could send for you? — ^Yes. 

Has either of them done so, in fact'? — No I waited there an 
hour in the accuseds’ inteiests, hut neither of them sent for me, 
and I waited till their solicitor arrived, and I heard nothing 
further. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Leveb — ^You have told us that Browne 
said in answer to the charge, I know nothing about it ” ? — ^Yes. 

And that is the attitude that he has maintained from first to 
last about this murder*? — ^Yes 

He made two statements, you have told us T take it that 
those were made absolutely voluntarily on his part? — Quite so. 

They were not, of course, promoted by questions, but they 
were given, I take it, voluntarily and without aiiy hesitation what- 
ever ? — ^Yes. 

At that time I gather that you had not formed any suspicion 
in your mind against Browne in reference to the Gutteridge 
murder^ — In taking the second statement I perhaps had a little 
suspicion, but T had not made up my mind. 

I am very much obliged. Then it was when Sergeant Harris 
was taking at Browne’s dictation the second statement that a sus- 
picion began to dawn in your mind ? — ^It did 

Up to that time there was no suspicion of any connection with 
the murder? — Well, suspicion — of course I had suspicion more of 
a minor kind for some time of many people, but it was then, when 
taking the second statement, that my suspicion appeared more 
founded. 

I notice that in the statements of Browne there are certain 
names not disclosed? — ^Yes. 

One of them, I think, is he employed a man, meaning, of 
course, you have found since, Kennedy? 

Mr. Powell — object. 

The Witness — ^It was within my knowledge then, sir, that he 
was employing more than one man at that place, and I did not 
know whether it was Kennedy or any one else. 


101 



Browne and Kennedy. 

James Berrett 

Cross-examiMaUon continued — He did not, at any rate, disclose 
the name at that time? — He did not. 

And there are other cases we have heard of in the statement 
where he does not disclose the name? — That is so. 

With reference to the statement that Kennedy made to you, 
were you cross-examined about that at the Police Court? — ^Yes. 

By the legal representative of the accused Kennedy at the 
time ? — Yes. 

And were you asked when you first saw Kennedy if he was 
rational and normal ? — ^Yes. 

And were you asked whether he was a sick man and tired, and 
so on? — ^Yes. 

Were you asked whether he was taken to your room to be 
examined — ^Yes. 

And whether Superintendent Savage said to the accused in 
your presence, Tell us what you know about it ? — I was asked 
that; I was examined about that. 

You denied that? — ^Yes. 

And you were asked whether Kennedy replied, '' What are 
you talking about? '' and whether Superintendent Savage did not 
say, You bloody well know, we are talking about a shot police- 
man ^^? — I was asked all that. 

You were asked, weie you not, whether you said to Kennedy, 
''You did it? — I was asked that. 

And you denied it? — I did. 

Were you asked whether Kennedy was kept in the room for 
hours before his wife came in? — ^Yes. 

And whether Kennedy was not interrogated for four hours by 
yourself and Superintendent Savage? — ^Yes 

Were you asked if Kennedy declined to make a statement? — 
That is so. 

And were you asked if Superintendent Savage said, " You 
will swing if you don^t own up, because Browne has told us you 
have done it? — I was asked that. 

And were you asked if Kennedy said, " I donH know what you 
are talking about/’ and that Superintendent Savage said, " You 
know about a shot policeman.” You were asked those questions? — 
I was asked that. 

Were you asked whether Superintendent Savage did not say, 
" If you don’t open your mouth you will swing. Driscoll swings 
to-morrow, and if he had opened his mouth he would not have 
swung. We have got enough evidence now to swing the pair of 
you ” ? — was asked all kinds of things like that. 

You were asked a number of questions, at any rate, to show 
the statement Kennedy made was unreliable and not voluntary? — 
Yes. 

Were you asked whether you said, " Who was it shot him? 
We know you can^t drive, and it was the driver who shot him. 

102 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


JacneA Berrett 

I think you will come out of this all right. You have no need to 
fear. You will not have the capital charge made against you, 
Browne is a desperate gunman, and has probably led you away, 
because he told us that had he got hold of his revolver when arrested 
he would have shot the lot, and by God he would have done it. 
Browne is the dominating mind; he has dominated the minds of 
several people."' Those questions were put to you as to what you 
said about Biowne? — ^Yes. 

Did you, in fact, say any of those things'? — None at all. 

Your answer was the whole of that was imagination and inven- 
tion*? — Yes, absolutely. 

That was the first attitude that was adopted by Kennedy's 
adviser. Then this statement we have now heard read? — Those 
questions I was asked, yes. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Powell — ^What you say, I under- 
stand, is that it was a voluntary statement? — Absolutely. 

And do you agree it was made immediately his wife ordered 
him to speak the truth*? — ^Within a couple or three minutes, I 
should think. 

And did you form the impression that they were very fond 
of each other from what you saw going on*? — ^Well, they kissed 
each other as soon as they met, and remained like that until I 
commenced the statement 

When his wife said, Tell the gentlemen the truth," he 
said, ‘‘I will"? — Yes, at once 

And then began the statement? — Yes. 

Would it be right to say that when he was making the state- 
ment he was not asked to explain why he reloaded the revolver 
after the officer was shot? — never pul any question to him. 

He was not asked to explain that at all? — Not at all. 

Nor was he asked to explain anything about his arrest at 
Liverpool ? — No. 

Now, I want you to understand that I am not suggesting for 
one minute that anything improper was done at all, but is not 
there some possibility that during all those hours you may possibly 
now and again have said, " Well, what next " or '' Do you 
remember a certain date"? — ^There was no occasion for that, 
because, as I have said before, this was a man who sometimes 
spoke very quickly, and the writing had to be put down very 
quickly. Other times he stopped, and you had to wait for him 
until he made another statement. 

I will just give you one illustration of what I mean. There 
is a paragraph here commencing “ I well remember the day of 
th^ 26th September.” Is it possible that you said to him, ” Do 
you remember the 26th September ”? — I never put such a question 
to him at all. 

Ke-examined by the Solioitor-Gbneral — W ith regard to these 

103 



James Berrett 


Browne and Kennedy. 


two cross-examinations, I want to clear this point up. Were you 
present in Court when this case was first opened at the Police 
Court 1 — ^Yes. 

And were you present when Sir Travers Humphreys, now 
Mr. Justice Humphreys, was proposing to read this statement 
of Kennedy's 2 — ^Yes. 

Was a statement made about that by the solicitor who was 
representing Kennedy? — ^Yes. 

And was the reading of the statement objected to? — At the 
last moment, at the request of the solicitor, it was argued on both 
sides for some time, and at the last moment the magistrate said 
to Sir Travers, Would it embarrass you, Sir Travers, if you 
did not insist upon putting the statement in now? " 

Yes, but I was not asking about that; I was asking about 
that objection which was taken before that ruling was made? — 
Yes; the ruling for it to go in was not made till the following 
week. 

And what was the ground on which the statement was objected 
to? — ^Because it had been extorted by threats and favours. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — ^Who was it raised the objection? — 
The solicitor, my lord 

For whom? — On behalf of Kennedy, and, in fact, both — a 
little on the other side as well. It was more or less jointly, but 
forcibly by Kennedy's solicitor. 

Ee-exarmnaUon continued — Do you remember the actual word 
that was used with reference to the statement as to how it had 
been obtained? — Pumped out," I think it was. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — They objected to the statement being 
put in on the ground that it had been improperly obtained? — ^In 
every possible way, my lord. 

Be-exarmnaUun continued — Among other things, was it sug- 
gested that Kirschner and the inspector, whom I have examined 
to-day, had kept him starved on the way up from Liverpool? — Yes. 

And for that reason were two officers examined the next week, 
whom I have not found it necessary to call to-day, to prove that 
that was entirely untrue? — ^Yea; and that clothing was not taken 
away from him, that he was given proper accommodation in regard 
to his bedclothes at Liverpool whilst detained. 

At( any rate, for the space of a week or so, the attitude of the 
defence was that that statement ought not to be allowed in on 
grounds of that sort? — ^Yes. 

Of course, you have heard, as everybody else has heard, what 
my friend has just said about it. Were you in Court at eight 
minutes past twelve this morning when, in the cross-examination 
of Mr. Harris, Mr. Powell said, I am not suggesting it was not 
a voluntary statement; I quite agree it was "? — was requested 
to leave the Court ; I was not present. 

Adjourned till to-morrow at 10.30. 


104 



Third Day —Wednesday, 2Sth April, 1928. 

George Hbnrt Ibbitson, examined by the Solicitor-General 
— was foimerly a lieutenant in the Royal Artillery, and I am 
assistant insiiecior of small arms ammunition, Royal Arsenal, 
Woolwich. I am thoroughly familar with small arms ammuni- 
tion [Shown the sux cailridges found in the Webley revolver 
in the cupboard at the back of the drivei’s seat.] These cartridges 
consist of two Mark I, one Mark II, and three Mark III Mark 
II ammunition i,s Royal Laboialory Woolwich ammunition, and 
can be identified at a glance by the letters R.L with a broad 
arrow between the two letteis Mark II is a common type of 
small arms ammunition Maik III cartridges are Woolwilch 
ammunition. The Mark III ammunition is a rare type It 
has a hollow nose That sort of ammunition was made many 
years ago, say, twenty-five years ago. As regards the Maik I 
cartridges, one is a Woolwich cavlridge, and the other Messrs. 
Kynooh’s I would describe them as rather pointed-nosed 
bullets. So far as the Arsenal is concerned, that Mark I type was 
last made about 1898, I believe. You do not find much of it 
about nowadays. The same remarks would apply to the Kynoch 
bullet. The Arsenal Mark I bullet is loaded with cordite, and 
is smokeless The Kynoch Mark I is loaded with black powder 
and is not smokeless At close range both would give very decided 
signs of peppering. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — ^Would there be a difference in the 
colouring ? — There is a difference rather in the shape of the marks 
caused by the propellant and a difference in colouring The black 
powder, by the fact of it being a smoke powder, would leave 
evidence of, I would describe it as, charcoal. In the case of the 
other, the propellant is in the form of a cylinder, and the pepper- 
ing from that at very short range is symmetrical, rather in the 
shape of a long score than the heterogeneous shapes that powder 
would produce. Putting it in a colloquial way, the black powder 
would give the blackest effect [Shown the bullet which was 
found in the ground underneath the constable’s head ] In my 
opinion, that is a Mark I black powder bullet. [Shown the 
bullet found loose in tlie road, eu])posGd to have come out of the 
right side of the neck ] That is a Maik I bullet. It was prob- 
ably fired with cordite. [Shown the bullet found in the 
left aide of the brain ] That i’r either a Mark II or 
a Mark IV bullet It was mado by the Royal Laboratory, 
and fired wiih cordite in all probability The difficulty 
of being certain whether it is a Mark II or a Mark IV 
bullet is due to the fact that the after-part of Mark 11 and 
Mark IV bullets are very, very similar ; it ils only the front part 

m 



Browne and Kennedy. 

George Henry Ibbttson 

of the bullet, where there is a very decided difference between 
Mark II and Mark IV, that has been obliterated by impact The 
nose has disappeared entirely [Shown the twelve cartridges 
which were found in Browne’s pocket on his arrest ] There 
are sis R L. Mark III, one R L. Mark IV, and five cartridges 
of Messrs. Eley’s manufactuie, 45 calibre as opposed to 455, 
which is the strilct definition of the service type The 45 fires 
from the Webley revolver. There is just that fraction of a 
difference, but it functions perfectly well from the Webley service 
revolver [Shown the six cartridges found in the Webley revolver 
in the lower pocket at the right-hand side of the driver’s seat ] 
These cartridges are all marked R.L Mark IV. Mark IV. 
ammunition is rare ammunition; it was last made towards 
the end of 1914. August oi September, I believe, was the 
actual month when it was finished. Tt is ammunition that was 
abandoned on or about the outbreak of war. I have to test a 
great many rounds in the course of a year. Speaking roughly, 

I have had as many as eight millions. Taking the last four or 
five years, the proportion of Mark IV cartridges that would come 
under my observation would be something like 1 per 10,000, prob- 
ably rarer than that. [Shown the sixteen cartridges which were 
found on the dresser ] These consist of two R L Mark III, 
seven R L Mark IV, and seven of Eley’s .45 I cannot recall 
ever getting a Mark III sample for experimental purposes; it is 
an extremely rare type. [Shown the six cartridges which were 
found in the Smith & Wesson revolver on the top of the wardrobe 
cupboard.] A Smith & Wesson fires a service cartridge [Shown 
the eleven cartridges found loose in the wardrobe ] These consist 
of eleven R L Mark IV cartridges. [Shown the twenty-three cart- 
ridges, twelve in a closed packet and eleven in a packet from 
which one had been removed, also found on the wardrobe ] There 
is an original packet of twelve R.L Mark IV cartridges which 
has not been opened since it was packed in 1913. It is marked 
19/4/1913 R.L Mark IV.” The other packet with one missing 
is similarly marked with the same date. All of the cartridges 
I have examined could be fired from a Webley revolver [Shown 
the cartridge shell found in the doctor’s car.] That is R L. 
Mark IV. I have compared the base stamp maik with the stamp 
mark on the other Mark IV cartridges, and in my opinion they 
were all stamped with the same tool [Shown the cartridge case 
and the Webley revolver ] In my opinion, that case was fired 
from that revolver. 

What is it looking at that which makes you say that^ — The 
shield of the revolver and the breech on which the base of the case 
is driven when the round is fired, 

Mr. Lever — No questions. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Powell — [Shown the automatic pistol.] 
106 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

George Henry Ibbttson 

That is the pistol which was found on Kennedy when he was 
arrested — ^Yes 

Am I right in saying that none of the service bullets you have 
referred to could have been fired from that revolver 1 — ^Yes. 

Egbert Churchill, examined by Mr. Eoome — I am a gun- 
maker in business in Leicester Square. 1 have had a life-long 
experience of firearms. [Shown thiee bullets I have previously 
examined those bullets They aie veiy badly damaged, but there 
iis sufldcient rifling left upon them to indicate fiom what type of 
revolver they have been fired. They have all been fired from a 
Webley revolver. The marks of the rifling are impressed on the 
bullet as it tiavels down the barrel of the levolver. [Shown a 
spent cartridge case ] This is .455 service ammunition. I have 
examined the two Webley revolvers I have compaied both of 
them with the spent cartridge case. 

Are you able to form an opinion as to whether that cartiidge 
case was fired by either of these levolvers^ — ^Yes; the cap of the 
cartridge case takes the imprint of the breech shield of the 
revolvei, and under microscope examination it is possible for me 
to see that this particular cartridge was fired from this Webley 
revolver, and could not have been fired from any other revolver. 
I have made experiments in firing shots out of both these revolvers 
against a pigskin target at close lange This is the target I used. 
I fired three shots out of each revolver at distances of 3 inches, 
6 inches, and 12 inches from the target I have compared the 
peppering on that target with the photograph of the wounds 
on the face of P C. Gutteridge First of all, with regard to 
the two wounds in the left cheek, there is hardly any marking 
at all, and there is no doubt those two shots were fired with 
cordite smokeless powder. Cordite causes a slight peppering, 
but it does not cause the tattooing or marking black powder does 
From the absence of tattooing on the photograph I conclude that 
the two shots in the cheek were fired with cordite With regard 
to the wounds under the eyes, from the considerable amount of 
tattooing particularly in the wound under the right eye it is evi- 
dent that black powder was used for one of those shots, namely, 
the one under the right eye. The tattooing is more marked 
under the right eye. The left eye was a cordite shot, in my 
opinion. This Savage automatic pistol was handed to me on the 
27th January by Sergeant Harris It was fully loaded I unloaded 
it There was a cartridge in the barrel. There were seven similar 
cartridges in the magazine. They are 380 calibre automatic 
ammunition. The safety catch was at safety. In the case of 
this safety automatic pistol the safety catch is at the rear position, 

^See illustration, p. 25. 

® Tho reader may be helped to grasp what follows if he refers to the matter 
upon p. 23. 


107 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Robert Churchill 

and it is necessary to slightly relax the grip or use the other 
hand to put it on ; it does not work any too freely. Some safety 
catches are forward, so that one can use the thumb to put them 
on, but this is right back, and one relaxes his grip slightly to 
put it on, or els© uses the other hand. 

Apart from the safety catch being a little stiff, was the pistol 
in perfect woiking order*? — In perfect working order. I have 
fired several shots with it. 

Mr. Lever — N o questions. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Powell — Do you mean to say it is 
necessary to use both hands to operate that safety catch? — I said 
slightly relax your grip or use the other hand 

I thought I pulled it all right last night with my right hand. 
Cannot you do it with one hand? Just try? — I know, but not in 
a hurry. If I relax my grip I can. 

It can be done with one hand? — Not whilst you are gripping 
itj with some safety catches you can by moving the thumb. 

Is it possible, for instance, if you had that in your overcoat 
pocket, holding it in your hand, just to raise your thumb and 
pull it down 2 — ^Yes ; while it is in your pocket. 

It can be done? — ^Tes. 

William Fox, examined by the Solicitor-General — I am the 
chief examiner of small arms at the Arms Inspection Department of 
the Royal Small Arms Factoiy, Enfield Lock. I have had twenty- 
seven years' experience of examining small arms. 1 examined the 
cartridge case, and compared it with the Wcbley revolver 

Does your examination enable you to express an opinion as 
to the revolver with which that cartridge was fired? — Not only 
give an opinion — I do not give an opinion : I say that case was 
fired from that revolver. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — ^You mean to say that without doubt? — 
Absolutely, my lord. 

Examination continued — What is it on the breech shield which 
has attracted your attention, and which enables you to say that ? — 
On the breech shield just above the hammer nose hold there are two 
indentations^ overlapping; each indentation is really the result 
of a succession of blows; therefore the surface or cavity of the 
indentation and outline are very irregular as the result of having 
been produced by a succession of blows. Those two are at twelve 
o’clock, and on the cartridge case at a similar position there are 
obviously comparable embossings, not complete, for this reason, 
that the copper cap shell is doped before insertion, and even with 
the terrific pressure developed upon firing it is not sufficient to 
blow back the copper cap perfectly flat. Therefore, there is a 
certain portion of the surface deficient owing to that at the edge 

108 





Mr. FranK J. Powell. 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


William Fox 

of the radial domed ’cap, but the embossings are very comparable 
with the indentations at twelve o’clock. When I say twelve o’clock 
I mean the position where twelve would come, 

[At this stage the witness explained the meaning of his 
evidence to the jury, the jury being handed a micro- 
scope in order to examine the cartridge.] 

There is also another indentation at seven o’clock, but that is not 
perfectly reproduced on the cap shell — not completely reproduced 
owing to the fact that the hammer nose protruded through and 
prevents the full set-back of the cap during fire The hammer 
base bears some peculiar chai acteristics, the result of a succession 
of blows, which are rather difihcult to describe, only they are 
peculiar in form and shape. 1 have examined the whole stock of 
revolvers waiting lepair, numbering IST't, so see if I could find a 
levolver that was similarly marked to this one, but I failed to do 
so. I took half-a-dozen similarly damaged to the range and fired 
them, and the impressions on the cartridges were by no means 
comparable with this case. I have fired a similar revolver to this 
one to see how quickly it could be fired. Two rounds can be fired 
in one second 5 feet from the target. I also saw an expert firing 
it, and he got the whole rounds ofi in If seconds. 

Gtborge Henry Perry, examined by the Solicitor-General — 
I am a War Department chemist at the Koyal Arsenal, Woolwich, 
I have compared the cartridge with the revolver, and ,I have 
observed the characteristics which have already been pointed out 
and described by the last witness. I have taken photographs which 
enable them to be appreciated very easily by means of enlarge- 
ments.® The marks of the breech shield of the revolver are repro- 
duced on the case Tn both revolvers I found traces of the residue 
of smokeless powder. CordiHe is the most common smokeless 
powder. 

[At this stage the photographs were exhibited and 
explained to the jury ] 

The Solioitor-General — ^Lly lord, both the accused made short 
statements before the magistrate, and, subject to that, that is the 
case for the Crown. 

Evidence for the prosecution closed. 


Opening Speech for the Prisoner Kennedy, 

Mr. Powell — If your lordship pleases, I desire to make a 
submission to your lordship that there is no case for Kennedy to 
answer for the following reasons : — I submit that there is one 


®See illustration, pp. 23, 25, and 27. 


109 



Mr Powell 


Browne and Kennedy. 


essential ingredient in the evidence alleged against Kennedy that 
has not been proved, and no facts have been proved from which 
the jury could, as a matter of law, draw the inference that the 
ingredient exists. What I refer to is, I submit that in a charge 
of this sort, even though it is proved pmma facie that the two 
derendtiuts were together at the time, it must be proved by the 
proseoution that Kennedy knew that Browne had a revolver and 
woubl use it uiion the night in question. In support of that sub- 
mission I would respectfully refer your lordship to the case of 
the I\ m<j V Lincoln and Stewart, tried before Mr. Justice Talbot 
on 20t,li January, 1926, at the Wiltshire Assizes at Devizes The 
only ro])ort 1 have been able to find is in The Times newspaper 
of \bo 2lRt January, 1926. It reads as follows — The trial 
began before Mr. Jiustice Talbnt at Wiltshire Assizes at Devizes 
yesleiday of Jan Ronald Maxwell Stewart (20) and John Lincoln 
(23), of ‘ 111 ^ Ball.ory, Royal Horse Artillery, for the murder of 
Kdwin Charles Ingram Richards, a brewer's traveller, who was 
fouml shot in liis garden at Trowbiidge in the early hours of 
Christmas Kvo. In addition to the capital charge against the 
two men, the indictment contained second counts alleging robbery 
with violeneo The grand jury returned true bills on both 
counts. Both the accused ])loadod not guilty. At the close of 
tlio ciiso for the prosooution counsel for Stewart submitted that 
there was no case on the indictment of wilful murder against 
Stewart, and, on the direction of the judge, the jury returned 
a vertlic.t of not. guilty on that indiistment as against that de- 
fondantu The trial of Lincoln on the murder charge was 
adjourned till the morning. Counsel were — For the Crown, Mr. 
Raynor Coildard and Mr Walter Spencer; for the defence of 
Stewart., Sir Henry Curtis Bennett, K.C., and Mr. F. J. Tucker; 
and for rn’uoolu, Mr. F. (1. TTemmerde, K.C., Mr. Fred Wiltshire, 
and Mr. F, Cyril Williams. Case for the Crown. Mr. Rayner 
Coddard, K.C., opening the case for the Crown, _ said that the 
murder allogod was (‘.onimitted without any eye-witnesses, but he 
submitted that the eircumstauces pointed irresistibly to the accused 
tiaving boi*n at( Richard's house on the night of the tragedy, and 
to iboir having been res]ionsible for his death. The murdered' 
man was freipiuntJy in possession of largo sums of money, collected 
on behalf of his employers, and, having apparently no safe in the 
house, he was in the balnt of carrying a revolver. The suggestion 
I tnake on behalf of the prosecution, said counsel, is that these men 
here are the two men who wont to Richard's house for the purpose 
of robbery, that t.hey knew that ho carried a revolver, and for 
tiiat reason they t.ook a firearm or firearms with them. Counsel 
went on to relate the circumstances already detailed before the 
magistratoH, in whuih Richards was found dying in his gai*den 
after he liad rol-urned from Bath in the early morning of 24th 
December. He was grasping a revolver from which some small 

no 



opening Speech for Prisoner Kennedy. 

Mr Powell 

shot had been discharged, and a bullet still remained in the 
weapon. Seven cartridge cases were found exactly similar to 
those afterwards discovered with Lincoln’s automatic pistol at 
Trowbridge Barracks Whether Eichards fired the first shot was 
a matter which could only be known to those improperly in the 
house and to Eichards himself. It might be that Eichards fired 
first,' but one could then see that somebody in the kitchen fired in 
the direction of the back door which Eichards would be entering. 
Whether Eichards, after one shot, went and roused Mr. Stourton, 
his sub-tenant, they did not know. They knew that six more shots 
were fired, and they seemed to have been fired first from the back- 
door, and then by some one advancing up the path. It might be 
supposed from the nature of Eichards’ wounds, seven shots being 
fired at him, that he did not have an opportunity of defending 
Himself by firing the ball cartridge with which his revolver was 
loaded and afterwards found to be undischarged After repeat- 
ing the description given in the Police Court of Lincoln’s move- 
ments immediately before the shooting, Mr. Goddard said that since 
the case was before the magistrates a complete change had come 
over it so far as Lincoln was concerned, because, while on remand 
in Shepton Mallett Prison on 9th January he wrote a letter to the 
young woman whom he was courting, and in whose company he 
had been on the night of the crime. In this Lincoln gave an 
account of what he did on the night of 2 3rd /24th December, and 
he admitted that it was he who fired the fatal shot. Counsel read 
the letter ” — I need not read the letter, iny lord, it is only an 
admission he fired the shot on the night in question. '' Counsel 
submitted that in law if two persons were out together on an 
unlawful enterprise, and the one caused the death of a person, 
the two were equally guilty.” 

Mr. Justice Avort — Is that Mr. Goddard’s submission? 

Mr. Powell — That is Mr. Eayner Goddard’s submission, my 
lord, and respectfully I do not quite agree with that; but, how- 
ever, it goes on : ‘‘It might be submitted in the defence that 
Lincoln fired in self-defence, because Eichards fired first. That 
submission could not be upheld for one moment. Sometimes the 
argument arose as to the right of a householder to shoot at a 
burglar; but nothing could justify a burglar shooting at a house- 
holder, and, if he shot at a householder in order to be able to 
get away or to scare the householder or to assist the purpose of 
robbery, he was, counsel submitted, guilty of murder if he killed 
him.” Now, my lord, I come to the important part: “With 
regard to Stewart, counsel further submitted that the jury would 
have to consider whether that night he went out to rob, 
and to rob with violence; and if the jury thought that he 
meant to rob that night, knowing that Lincoln was carrying a 
pistol, Stewart was guilty of murder. 'At the conclusion of 
counsel’s speech evidence was called for the prosecution ” ; and 

111 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr Powell 

then there is the evidence of the doctor who said he was a pro- 
fessor of pathology and bacteriologist of Bristol University Then 
there was called William Warren, who gave evidence that Stewart 
and Richards, the deceased, in company with himself and others, 
met at a Bath hotel on the evening of 19th December. After- 
wards Richards took the witness and Stewart to his home at 
Victoria Road, Trowbridge, where they had supper, and then 
played cards. Cross-examined by Sir Henry Curtis Bennett, the 
witness said that until 19th December Stevrart did not know 
Richards to speak to.'’ Then Mrs Brown gave evidence that the 
two accused men “ left her house about 11 45 on the night of 
23rd December, Stewart having called on his motor cycle for 
Lincoln " Then the sentry gave evidence that Stewart returned 
to the barracks at 1.5 am, and then the governor of the prison 
gave evidence to prove the letter which was written, and then 
there was an argument about the admissibility of the letter, and 
then the case for the prosecution was closed, and then Sir 
Henry Curtis Bennett, addressing the judge, submitted that there 
was no evidence against Stewart on the indictment for wilful 
murder. The judge said that he did not see how any jury could 
convict Stewart on the indictment for murder. He pointed out 
that there was still another indictment which had not been placed 
before that jury — ^my lord, exactly the position here. Mr. 
Goddard : In view of your ruling, my lord, I will not carry the 
matter further on the indictment for murder, but I shall have to 
consider my position in regard to the other charge Addressing 
the jury, the judge said the question was whether there was any 
proof that Stewart knew that Lincoln was armed on this night, 
and that firearms would be used. Having listened to the argu- 
ments, he (the judge) saw no such proof, and in these circum- 
stances he did not think the jury would he acting rightly if they 
found Stewart guilty of murder. If that was so, Stewart was 
entitled to a verdict of not guilty before the case went further,” 
and, being so directed, they returned a verdict of not guilty. 

Now, my lord, I submit that in this case the prosecution 
have not any stronger case than was proved there I concede 
for the purpose of this argument the prosecution have proved 
association between the two men before the date of the crimes 
they have proved from Kennedy's statement that at the time 
the crime was committed Kennedy was present, and that was 
also proved in the case I cited, and in my submission as a 
matter of law those facts do not constitute facts which can go to 
the jury from which the jury are entitled to infer this guilty 
knowledge on the part of the other man. 

Mr. Justice Avory — ^What is the proposition of law that you 
say was laid down in this case of Stewart and Lincoln? 

Mr. Powell — That the onus is upon the prosecution to prove 
that Stewart in that case — in this case I submit Kennedy — ^was 

112 





FredericK Guy Browne. 


Opening Speech for Prisoner Kennedy. 

Mr Powell 

not only present, but knew that the other man was armed and 
— “ and/^ my lord, to use his lordship’s words, to be accurate, 
‘‘ and that firearms would be used ” — ^to use his lordship’s 
actual words. I submit that is not proved here, and if the 
case was to go to the jury it would not be safe, it would not 
be right, to allow a man to be placed in peril of his life on the 
facts proved before your lordship. When the case was opened 
for the Crown the learned Solicitor-General referred to two 
matters which he intimated were the two most important matters 
against Kennedy. He said in Kennedy’s statement there was 
the fact that he said he had loaded a revolver after the com- 
mission of the offence. In my submission any act done after 
the tragedy is completed goes only to the question of accessory 
after the fact; it does not go to the question of a person being 
a principal; and I submit it would not be right for that matter to 
be pressed against Kennedy for the reason I have stated The 
other fact the learned Solicitor-General relied on in his opening 
was that on the 26th January, some months afterwards, Kennedy 
was found with a loaded revolver. That question is very em- 
barrassing for the defence, but the defence often have embarrassing 
matters in this respect. That is a matter of a separate indict- 
ment which has not yet been tried, and it is the subject-matter 
of a definite charge against Kennedy, and yet the learned Solicitor 
craves it in aid, not on a charge of attempting to shoot the officer, 
but on a charge of wilful murder which took place months before. 
I ask your lordship to say there is no substantial difference 
between the case I have cited and the case you are now trying, 
and to say that there is no case for Kennedy to answer on a charge 
of wilful murder. 

Mr. Justice Avobt — I think it better to say no more than to 
say there is, in my opinion, a case against Kennedy for Kennedy 
to answer. 


Opening Speech for the Prisoner Browne. 

Mr. Lever — The defence of Browne may be put in a few 
words. The words are not my words. They are not words which 
have been arranged or concocted or discussed between solicitor and 
counsel as showing the best answer to the evidence that has already 
been given in the depositions by the prosecution. They are un- 
sophisticated words coming from the mouth of Browne himself, 
when he had no legal advice and was unable to consider the 
bearing, one way or another, they would have on the course of 
the case. Buu if those words are established, they establish that 
Browne iei absolutely innocent of the charge that is brought 
against him. On 6th February, when Browne was formally 
charged with this crime, his answer to Chief-Inspector Berrett was 
I X13 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr Lev«r 

this : ‘'You are charging with murder. It is absurd I know 
nothing about it.^’ It is under that flag that we now stand. 
It is that attitude that Browne adopted in the first instance. It 
is the attitude in which he has persisted, and it is the attitude 
in which we now sink or swim. When I come to analyse the 
evidence which has been given, you will find excellent reason for 
saying that this short, pregnant statement is true. You can 
hardly believe now that Browne knows nothing about this matter, 
but I will show you why you can believe that statement and act 
on it in acquitting Browne of the charge against him. When I 
come to analyse the evidence you will be surprised how small is 
the amount of it which affects Browne out of all the troupe of 
witnesses who have gone through the witness-box. I do not find 
difficulties in the evidence, but I do find them in something which 
must be present in your minds, and it is my terribly difficult 
duty to extract from your minds the impression created by the 
statement made by Kennedy. That is a great difficulty which 
overshadows my appearance here and that of my client. But I 
am delighted that there is one difficulty which I have not got. 
Although it is a policeman who was murdered, cruelly and cal- 
lously murdered, the police witnesses have never shown any symp- 
tom of their indignation, no unfairness, no hostility. Neither 
I nor Browne has any complaint to make against any police 
witness in the case. We have been treated fairly, and I will 
loyally abide by that statement even if ever it works against me. 
We — all of us — are proud to have such a police force in this 
country I am not claiming sympathy for my client. If he com- 
mitted this murder he is a monster rather than a man, for it 
transcends in its cruel and callous details almost anything re- 
corded in the history of modern crime I do not ask for sympathy. 
I demand justice. It may be impossible for you to grant my 
demand, but I demand it. On the night of the crime, continued 
counsel, Browne was at home with his wife. The remarks which 
he made when he was arrested about shooting, and so on, were 
doubtless in bad taste, but they were in the nature of banter, 
and were, perhaps, to some extent caused by anger or resent- 
ment. But those expressions were the very last which would be 
used by a man who knew that he might be charged with murder 
by shooting. They touched the topic which, above all others, 
he would have avoided, but they would naturally rise to his lips 
when the revolvers were taken from the car if he had no licence 
for them, and was, therefore, committing a criminal offence by 
their very possession. The medical instruments about which Dr. 
Lovell had given evidence would be accounted for. Browne would 
tell the jury where he had got them from. If he had been guilty 
of the murder he would have destroyed all those articles. He 
could not have gone on working and living with the evidence that 
he had committed murder always in front of him. Undoubtedly 
114 



Opening Speech for Prisoner Browne. 

Mr Lever 

Browne owned the revolvers which had been produced. But who 
was the man who had used them? Browne^s reticence about 
where he obtained the revolvers might reflect to his credit as a 
man, and not to his discredit. With regard to the Webley 
revolver which undoubtedly shot the constable, and the cartridges 
used, Browne^s explanation was that he never fired that par- 
ticular weapon and that he possessed both Webleys for his own 
protection. My client kept a garage, and he sometimes came 
in contact with persons who did not belong to the most exclusive 
clubs in London To own a revolver is one thing. To use a 
revolver is an entirely difierent thing. I have enough on my 
shoulders now, and I am not making any accusation against 
Kennedy or saying that he committed this murder, but when 
Kennedy accuses my client of committing the crime then I am up 
against Kennedy — ^but no more than that. Browne would tell 
the jury — and the dates were significant — that on 24th Sep- 
tember he and his wife went to live at 33a Sisters Avenue, and 
from that time they slept in and occupied that house, through 
October and so on, a period which absolutely covered the night 
on which he was supposed to be away on the terrible errand with 
Kennedy. Browne and Mrs. Browne would tell the Court that 
they both occupied the house on the night the murder was com- 
mitted. You are asked to believe that this man has two char- 
acters, so cautious that he shaves ofi his moustache to avoid re- 
cognition and so rash that he keeps all these things round him 
to provide evidence of his guilt. Where is the cogent evidence 
against this man apart from a cloud of suspicion? 


Evidence for the Defence. 

Fiibdeiuck Guy Bbowne (accused) — (On being handed the card 
from which to read the oath) : Your lordship, I want to swear to 
this difierent to this; it says here, “ The whole truth I shall 
never know the whole truth about this; how can I swear to the 
whole truth? 

Mr. Justice Avort — A re you going to take the oath or not? 

The Accused — ^Yes; but I do not know the whole truth; I 
cannot tell the whole truth 

Mr. Justice Avort — ^You will either take the oath in that form 
or not at all. 

The Accused — It is awkward; how can I tell the whole truth; 
I can only tell the whole truth as far as I am concerned. 

Mr. Justice Avort — ^You must make up your mind; you will 
either take the oath in that form or not at all. 

The Accused— It seems wrong. That is what I am looking at. 

116 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

Mr. Justice Avort — I will not have any more time wasted; 
you must do one thing or the other. 

The Accused — If I take it is it on oath? 

Mr, Justice Avort — That is the oath which you are required by 
law to take if you intend to give evidence upon oath; if you do 
not 

The Accused — I do not intend to give evidence on this oath. 

Mr. Justice Avort — If so 

The Accused — I do on oath 

Mr. Justice Avort — Then you must take the oath in that form. 

The Accused — I do. I swear by Almighty God that the 
evidence ” — ^that is not right. 

Mr. Justice Avort — ^You can read, can you? 

The Accused — I can read distinctly — quite clear. 

Mr. Justice Avort — Very well, read that 

The Accused — '' I swear by Almighty God that the evidence 
which I shall give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing 
but the truth.’" 

Examined by Mr. Lever — ^Frederick Guy Browne, you might 
just explain to the jury why you did not approve exactly the 
words, will you; what was your objection? — It says, Tell the 
truth.” I can tell the truth, but how can I tell the whole truth 
of something I do not know? I can tell the Court as much of the 
truth as I know, and nothing but the truth. 

Mr. Lever — That, I think, the jury will now quite understand. 

Mr. Justice Avort — Do not make these observations. It is 
not for you to say whether the jury will understand. I do not 
understand it. 

The Witness — I will explain to the jury first, my lord. 

Mr. Lever — If your lordship does not understand it, I think 
I ought to ask him further to explain. 

Mr. Justice Avort — No; I do not want him to. 

Mr Lever — Now, then, Browne 

The Witness — ^Wait a minute; does the jury thoroughly 
understand ? 

Mr. Justice Avort — No, no. 

The Witness — Do they understand I cannot talk about the 
truth of something I know nothing about ; how do I know the truth 
of the thing? 

Mr. Justice Avort — ^You are not to make speeches to the jury; 
attend to the questions and answer them. 

Examination continued — ^Frederick Guy Browne, you are a 
motor engineer, and you were residing at 33a Sisters Avenue until 
the date of your arrest; is that so? — ^Yes. 

You were arrested, we know, on the 21st January, 1928. You 
were carrying on business at a garage; you rented a garage, I 
think, at 7a Northcote Eoad, Clapham. Is that so? — Yes. 

From whom did you take those premises? — I took them from 

116 



Evidence for Defence. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

the proprietor of the picture house attached to the same yard. I 
was at the back. It is Mr. Mistlin, the Globe Picture House. 

What was the condition of. the place when you took it ; I think 
you took it in March, you say *2 — It was a very big yardj alongside 
there was an open shed which had been built. That is to say, there 
was a back wall, an end wall, a roof, and nothing else. 

What were you doing with the premises? — I partly rebuilt it. 

In what sort of way — for what purpose 1 — I turned it into a 
garage. It had been a milk yard belonging to Devenports, and 
I turned it from a milk yard into an ordinary repair and motor 
garage and paint shop. 

About how many people weie storing their cars there? — I built 
seven places. One was an ofiice, four were where people garaged 
their cais at 10s. 6d. a week, one was turned into the paint shop, 
and there was a fitter ^s shop. 

I think you employed a man. At first you were alone in the 
business, I think? — ^Yes. 

And then I think you employed another man, and that was 
Kennedy ? — ^Yes. 

I think you told us in your statement that you got him from 
the Salvation Army to give him a start? — I did. 

About what time was it ? When was it Kennedy came to you ? 
— Well, it was after I got the place started, and it took me some 
time to start it. I cannot tell dates; I cannot remember dates. 

About how long would it be before the 26th of September, do 
you think, before the date of this occurrence? — I should say he 
came in the beginning of June or somewhere round that date. 

Somewhere in the summer time, June. Where used you to 
sleep ? Before you moved out of the garage where did you sleep ? — 
While I was building it I built a back place and furnished it good 
enough for me anyhow, because I was working there all hours of 
the day right up till it was dark. 

I think at that time your wife was in a position of cook- 
housekeeper living in the house? — ^Yes; somewhere else. 

You slept in the garage ? — ^Yes. 

When Kennedy came where did you sleep? — Slept in the 
garage. 

So the two of you were sleeping there for a time? — For a time, 

yes. 

Which was the first place you and your wife took before going 
to 33a Sisters Avenue? — I think it is called the top of East Hill. 
I know it is opposite a sort of London Council Hall building. It 
is called Huguenot Place. 

How many days were you there? — ^It was a week. 

From there where did you go to? — ^We took this place while we 
looked for a place, and then we just got in and settled down, and 
1 found a place, the place I wanted, at 33a Sisters Avenue. 

Will you tell me on what date it was that you moved into 33a 

117 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

Sisters Avenue? — 1 know it was on a Saturday, but since I have 
been arrested for this I have been informed it was on the 24th. 

I do not remember the date, but I know it was on a Saturday. 

Which you have now fixed as the 24th September? — Yes; I saw 
the rent book since. 

From the 24th September where did you sleep? — Since I took 
the place? 

Yes? — ^At the place, of course, with my wife and daughter. 

I want to particularly ask you about this night of the 26th 
September Where were you sleeping that night** — At home. 

Was your wife also there? — ^Yes. 

And for some considerable time, weeks, and so on, after that 
where were you sleeping? — At home inside; at home all the time. 

Did you go out on that night to Essex or any place on the 
26th September ? — No. I will tell you what happened I took the 
place on the Saturday. I took the car and I removed Mrs. Browne 
from one place to the other place — ^that was to 33a Sisters Avenue 
— and I left her there while I went back to the garage. Some time 
in the evening she came down to the garage and said, I do not 
like being in a strange place by myself all this time ; I will come 
down with you.*' I said Right-ho ; so she stopped in the 
garage. That was Saturday night, Saturday evening, and I went 
back to the flat, that is 33a Sisters Avenue. While we were down 
in the garage and when we got back to the flat it was arranged 
I should go and fetch a lot of stufi. 

I will ask you about that later. What I was asking you was 
this : On this important night, the 26th September, did you go to 
Essex? — ^No; I did not leave town. I have not been out of town. 

Is there any truth in all that statement that you went to 
Billericay? — It is a horribly concocted statement that has taken 
hours to consider That is my opinion. There is not one word 
of truth in it, except this, that I did hire a van, and I did send 
Kennedy to arrange it, but what he said I do not know 

Now I will ask you about that incident about the hiring 
of the van. From whom was the van hired? — ^I do not know. 

“ Townson is on the van. There are two fellows in the busi- 
ness, and I really do not know who is the boss of that. 

Who are the two? — They call it Townson & Co., and the man 
who did the ofiice part 

Dadswell, is that the man ? — ^I do not know that. I have 
heard the name. It was “ Townson they had on the vans. They 
garaged them in my garage, and I hired the smaller of the two. 

It is suggested that the idea of that hiring of that van was 
to take you into Romford ? 

Mr. Justice Avort — Mr. Lever, would you ask first who in 
fact hired it? 

Mr. Lever — I think he has already told us; I will ask him. ' 

The Witness — I actually hired it; I actually paid the money, 

118 



Evidence for Defence. 

Frederick Guy Bro'wne 

but it was done through the agent, or through an office man or 
office boy, whatever you like to call it. It was conveyed by 
Kennedy, but I hired it. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — What do you mean by “ conveyed by 
Kennedy — I arranged with Kennedy j I wanted the van, and 
I sent Kennedy up to see whether he could hire that van, and the 
answer came back, “ Yes.” 

When did you send him? — I sent him on the Saturday morn- 
ing, the 24th, I have found out since, of September. 

To Townson, I understand? — Townson & Co. 

Examination ^onUnued — Now, what did you hire that van 
for? — For the express purpose of going to East Ham, where my 
little daughter was, and bringing her back and a quantity of 
stuff, nearly a van full 

What is the address in East Ham? — ^It is 45 Colvin Road, East 
Ham. 

What day was it that you actually used the van? — Early on 
the Sunday morning ; that was the day after I had taken the place, 
and that would be the 25th. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — How early, what time? — Early in the 
morning j I was to meet somebody else. 

I asked you what time ? — I am getting to it ; I arranged to be 
down at the garage and meet somebody at six o’clock, and there- 
fore I must have left the house before 6 a.m. 

Examination continued — Did you meet somebody? — I did; 
when I got to the garage at six o’clock to get the car ready there 
was a young lad there waiting to come with me. 

Who was that? — We called him Billy; but I suppose his name 
was really William Geddes, 

Billy ? — always called him Billy, because he is a young lad. 

What was his position there; had he to do with the garage? — 
Hie father is a blacksmith, and he wanted him to pick up the 
motoring as soon as he could, and I said, ” Yes, any time you 
are on a holiday or a week-end you can come and learn,” and 
in exchange for the learning I did not pay any wages to him. 

You met him there, and what was done in reference to this 
small lorry; just tell us what happened? — I tried to get into the 
garage to wake Kennedy up, because he was sleeping in there, but 
he was too fast asleep, I suppose. It was shut from the inside, 
and I could not go in, not into the office part, so I started this 
van and drove it out and locked the garage and went to East 
Ham — that is, Geddes and I. 

When you got to Colvin Road what did you do? — Of course, 
I made myself known. They knew we were coming — ^the lady there, 
that is my wife’s sister, knew we were coming — and had got all the 
things ready, and I had only got to load it. 

What did you load it with? — I loaded it with a bicycle be- 
longing to the little girl ; I loaded it with a lot of boxes which 

110 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

had been packed with things for some time that had been stored 
there, and a big bed and bedding, and a lot of other private 
stuff, chiefly packing cases with a lot of stuff packed in them. 

When you loaded it up like that where did you go? — Turned 
round and came back again straight to the garage — ^no, I came 
back nearly to the garage, and turned off and then went to Sisters 
Avenue. 

When you got to 33a Sisters Avenue what did you do with 
the things ? — My wife knew what time I should be back, and I un- 
loaded the things and took them in. 

Was any one there to receive you when you got back to 33a 
Sisters Avenue ? — ^Yes ; Mrs.^ Browne was there, and there was 
another lady there, but I did not know what she was doing ; she 
was a stranger. 

Have you seen her since? — I have seen her since. 

What is her name ? — Mrs. Kemp. 

About what time was it when you got back to 33a Sisters 
Avenue?- — ^^Well, I do not know. I think it was five past eight 
when I passed the Plough clock, and I reached the new home, 33a 
Sisters Avenue, about a quarter past or twenty-five past eight, and 
then I went down to the garage — ^well, it took some time to unload. 

By Mr. justice Avoet — In the morning you mean?- — A.m., yesj 
it had taken about two and a half hours to go there and back; 

Examination continued — ^Was the boy Billy still with you? — 

/Yes. 

Did you ever take that lorry on any other journey, further 
than you have told us to East Ham?— No; I have never used it 
again before or since. 

What did you pay for the hire ?— Kennedy told me the price 
was arranged at 7s. 6d., and 7s. 6d. was paid, but not by me. 

These boxes that you brought back, just tell us what was 
contained in them with reference to this charge?— Well, some of 
the boxes were my wife’s private stufl, and a lot of it was heavy 
with my stuff. It was collections of a previous works that I had 
had, a garage and repair shop, and you see there is a great difier- 
ence in an ordinary mechanic and a motor engineer. I profess 
to be a motor engineer, and my instruments, I say, are far dif- 
ferent to the average garage man; that is to say, I do better-class 
work, finer things, and I need different instruments to what the 
average man would use, and I have used them, and, as I cannot 
buy the things always new, I make a habit if ever I go to the 
Caledonian Market, or have the chance— there is a similar market 
in: our own road^and if I see anything worth buying I buy it. 

Let me ask you with reference to these boxes first. What 
articles were in those boxes in connection with the charge ?^Inside 
that box there 1 had a number of instruments; amongst those 
instruments that I remember distinctly was a pole finder which 

120 



Evidence for Defence. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

I valiiod veiy much, and an inspection lamp May I handle the 
exhibit ? 

Including a pole findei ; what is the other thing? — An inspec- 
tion lamp for inspecting the inside of cylindeis of a car when 
you do the plugs out. May I handle it? 

Which is the one? — Theie it is, the one they have turned round 
and said it is an ear speculum. I want to show you how it was 
and how it should have been produced in Court [Handed to 
witness ] You see they have altered these things. They have 
pulled part of an instrument to pieces and say one-half belongs 
to something else and the other part does not* Aiiybody looking 
at this can see it is all one part of the same instrument. This is 
not a doctor^s instrument; you never see a doctor driving about 
with one of these, I know. Look here, I do not know whether the 
date IS on the batteiy, I have not looked here, but the battery is 
old, the battery is five years old; the thing is five years old; I 
have had it in my possession for five years. When they pioduced 
it in Court they did not pioduce it as they found it; they pulled 
it apart, but Dr. Lovell does not say any part of this is his. He 
said his did not screw on, he had something that slipped on; this 
is the part he tries and says is his. Have I been and purchased 
something at a later date to fit this; this I have had five years, and 
it fits so beautifully. 

By Mr. Justice Avoky — Is that what you call the inspection 
lamp ? — That is the inspection lamp for the purpose of screwing 
the plugs out of a motor cai and seeing if it needs decarbonising 
or otherwise. It is to save pulling the engine to pieces unneces- 
sarily, and this is the battery. That is one of the things that 
was in the box. 

ExaminaUon con-tvmitd — I want to ask you this question about 
that : You see it was suggested in the evidence that that little 
funnel-shaped pait at the end had been altered by you in two 
ways, namely, by taking ofi a little bar that was originally on 
it and by soldering on a screw-thread thing; did you do either of 
those things? — T have not cut anything off since I had it, but I 
have soldered the r'ing, because where the thread had been cut on 
the inside of the screw top I think whoever turned it had cut the 
thread too deep, so that when I went to use it it gave way, and 
to put the thing back I had to solder it on again. 

When was it you made that alteration? — T cannot say when 
it is — long ago, I have been using these things when I was tun- 
ing, and a lot of it I used in tuning oars at Brooklands for Mr. 
Aldridge, one of the racing men. 

Was that last year or before then ? — Tt is quite a year ago or 
more. 

And since then has it been in that very condition that you 
find it in now? — ^Yes. 

You have told us about that inspection lamp; what else was 

121 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

there in this luggage that you were removing to 33a Sisters Avenue 1 
— There was a metal tin full of small commutator files; it was full 
of little files when I had it, but there is nothing in it now. 

Those are very, very fine files in order to file the commutator? 
— ^Yes; and the reason you have to keep them in a box like that 
is if anything rests on them they snap like a carrot, and that is 
the reason why I packed them away. 

The commutator is a magneto? — ^Yes ; there is a commutator 
or a magneto on any electric motor or generator. 

By Mr. Justice Avory — ^Where did you say that was, in the 
money box ? — ^Yes ; if you call it a money box, in the same box. 

Examination continued — Then the case was in that box? — ^Yes. 

Had it ever got a rack in it for keeping the things separate, 
or was it always as it is now? — ^Just as it is now when I had it, 
never, never different. I have never seen it any different. 

This is the case that was found by the police on a bench in 
your workshop? — On the work bench. 

Was it in any way hidden from view to anybody? — No; left 
on the bench open; it would not be moved unless I was going 
to pack and carry the files away. While the box was on the bench 
there it was left open and the things lying in it. 

What do you say with reference to some forceps that were 
produced? — ^Well, I had two pairs. 

And where were the forceps? — In the money box. They are 
used for a specific purpose. Dr. Lovell is right in saying they 
were designed for doctors, but they were used for other things. I 
use them more particularly for putting the fuses in the jets and 
for getting about dynamos; you cannot get in with your fingers, 
they are too small, and a small screw. The reason when I saw 
them I purchased them was for this purpose : if I want to get a 
screw into a part of a car where I cannot get my fingers I can fix it 
in there and the screw does not fall off. Once I have got the screw 
in I can release it, otherwise you have to pull the car to pieces to 
get the screw in. 

There are generally three or four jets in a carburettor? — Some 
have; some have one or two, but these are fitted to screw out the 
jets if when you are on the road you find the jets choked. 

By Mr. Justice Avory — understand all three of those forceps 
you found useful in your business ? — No; wait a minute, my lord. 
These I have had for years in the box with tEe tin and the inspec- 
tion lamp and the pole finder. These are practically new; I have 
only had these since I have had a lot of damage with my hand. 

Give us some date? — Since Marcli, not this year, March, 1927. 
Now I will tell you something about these. You can go to Woolworth’s 
and buy a pair of tweezers very similar to these for 3d. ; they are 
no good, they would not answer my purpose. I bought a better 
pair, and if you go to a shop called Tyzack^s, you can go to 
Tyzack’s and buy these for Is. 3d., and they are specially made 

122 



Evidence for Defence. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

with a rivet and a pin in the hole to stop the point from wobbling; 
an ordinary pair of tweezers will wobble about; when you go to 
grip anything you cannot get hold of it, so I selected a better pair, 
and, instead of paying 3d., I paid Is. 3d.; they are for pulling 
bits of steel out; you have just got to put a screw in and you get 
a bit of steel out. 

Examination continued — Where did you buy this? — At 
Tyzack's; they are big tool makers. 

How much did you give for them? — Is. 3d. These are only 
since March, you know; it was the time when I was having a lot 
of trouble with this hand. 

March of 1927? — 1927, yes, and that is why I bought a better- 
class pair, so I could make sure of catching hold of the steel. 

Did you on one occasion go to your brother-in-law’s house at 
Buckhurst Hill ? — I have been lots of times. 

What is the name of your brother-in-law? — Mr. Finch. 

I want you to tell us about a visit to your brother-in-law with 
reference to something in the charge; just tell us about that? 

Mr. Justice Avoet — When ? 

Examination continued — When was that about? — It was after 
March, and some time possibly in April, I do not remember the 
date. I only know it is only a short distance, and I can run over 
in the car, but one day when I went over there, I do not know 
how it came about, but anyhow, I happened to see a box of mixed 
chemicals and bottles of liquid, and I asked him what they were, 
and he told me not to let the children get at them, because he 
thought they were poison. I asked him to let me have a look at 
them; I smelt them and examined them, and found it was a box 
full of all sorts of medical stuff. One thing I took particular 
notice of was a long cylinder of liquid with a trigger on it like 
a syphon of soda, and that is the same thing I found them playing 
with. 

Let him have that. Was that in the box, one of the articles? 
— ^Tes; you see it has a trigger on it; I did not know 
what it was at the time till T smelt it. If you get a thorn 
in your hands or a steel, they are tender, and they make you 
feel sick in pulling them out, and if you put some of this stuff 
round it and get the tweezers you can pull it out with impunity. 
I asked him if I could have it, and he said, “ Tou can have the 
lot, but I said I did not want the lot; and he said, Ton can 
take them away; the children might have it,’^ and I had this 
stuff in particular, with the first-aid box. 

Did you take the thing? — I had the box. I did not take it 
down to the garage; I did not' take those to the garage; this was 
not in the garage. 

Did you take that from your brother-in-law's with the thing 
in it? — ^Yes; but it was put on one side because it was no use to 
me; it was only this I wanted, and I took it down to the garage 
to put with my stuff. 


123 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

Just look at that lint and those bandages; what do you say 
about those? — Well, this stuff Mrs. Browne bought in a box; it 
was in a square box when I kept it ; it was to put hot fomentations 
on my poisoned hand, and this lint and stuS — have been to two 
hospitals with the one hand, and I ought to have gone back; one 
was the cottage hospital I went to two cottage hospitals on that 
in conneLtion with my hand; I said, I won't keep coming; I 
am at work " ; and they said, ‘‘If it is all right, do it yourself " ; 
they supplied me with the bandage, so I could do it without 
coming back. I went down to Sheffield — I do not know when it 
was, some time afterwards — Sheffield Hospital, and they gave me 
a package of stuff, and I leave it lying about, and I had to go to 
the chemist for some more. 

Are those the bandages you got for your hand? — ^Yes; this 
is the stuff I had at the garage; I saved it especially for my hand 
for iniuries. I cannot say this is the particular one; all I have 
seen have been wrapped up in blue paper. 

Are any of those Dr. Lovell's? — I have had them too long 
for that * I have had injuries. I have had it stored away in the 
garage in a little box on the shelf. I had it too long before then. 

Now, this roll of plaster. [Handed ] — This is not taken out 
of my garage at all; this happens to be taken from Mrs Browne. 
She visits — I do not know what you call it, something where they 
have their feet done — a place, and she goes there ever so often 
and she has her feet done. This is stuck down; they bind her 
with it. 

Was that Dr Lovell's stuff? — ^No ; they took it out of her bed- 
room. It is nothing to do with it ; it is not the same. 

I will just ask you generally, were any of those ten or twelve 
things that Dr. Lovell says in his opinion were exactly like what 
he had lost — ^were they, any of them, Dr. Lovell's things ; just 
answer yes or no? — It would be impossible, because I had them 
long before the date he states he lost his, so they cannot be one 
and the same. 

I want you to tell us whether or not Kennedy was able to 
drive a car; just tell us about that? — He came to me. He could 
not drive a car when he first came, not to my knowledge, but then 
I taught him. I first taught him on a Kover car, but it is of no 
consequence, because he soon left ofi learning. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — ^Do not mutter there; speak up; what 
are you saying? — I first taught him on a Rover car, but it is of 
no consequence, because he did not continue to drive it, but I 
taught him later on another one. . 

Examination continued — ^What was the other one you taught 
him? — In the garage was a Morris belonging to Mrs. Michels, and 
it was convenient, and she wanted waiting on, and it was not 
always convenient for me to bring it in and out and look up after- 
wards, and I taught him. 

124 



Evidence for Defence. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

Have you or have you not seen him driving that Morris oar ? — 
I have. 

What was it, a Morris-Oxford or a Morris- Cowley ? — I cannot 
tell you if it was a Morris-Oxford or Cowley now; it was a Morris 
saloon, brown. 

Have you seen him or not driving any other car? — ^Yes; he 
drove a Wolseley belonging to the landlord of the place. 

That is Mr. Mistlin? — Yes. 

What about a driving licence? — Well, he took a driver’s 
licence after I taught him to drive the Kover. I told him it is no 
good him pottering about, he is sure to make a moss in the traffic ; 
‘"You had better get a licence,” so he got a licence; but there 
was something about the licence I cannot explain to you ; I do 
not know about the truth of it; there was some query. 

You saw the licence *2 — ^Yes ; a little licence book like my own; 
they are blue — London Council ones. 

Now, the Webley revolvers, the two Webley revolvers: whore 
were those generally kept? — Well, I kept them when Kennedy was 
in the garage in the back room. 

Is that the room in which Kennedy was sleeping? — ^Yes ; where 
he slept and where he lived; there was a cooking range and comfort 
and everything. It was a little tiny place where I kept these 
other things on the shelf. 

Now, tell us exactly with reference to the newer one; where 
did you get that, and tell us all about that? — I got it from a 
sailor down at Tilbury Docks for £ 3 . 

And about what time, what month? — Some time in April. 

In April? — ^Yes. 

Well,^ then, the other revolver, the older revolver, that you 
declined in your statement to give any explanation of; do you 
wish to give an explanation about it or not? — No; I am not going 
to say any more, except I have been dealing in the stuff, and I 
am not going to say where it came from or goes to. 

That is the second revolver which was in the room Kennedy 
was sleeping in? — ^Yes 

Was there any difficulty in his getting access to them or using 
them? — No; they were there all night when I was out, whenever 
he was there 

Had you any knowledge that either of those revolvers went 
on an expedition tcy^Essex ? — It is not to my knowledge they ever 
left, except when I took one of them. I left them in the office 
and the ammunition out of reach. 

When you were arrested on the 22nd January, you had just 
come in the Angus car from Devonshire? — ^Yes. 

And in the car with you in a pocket at the right hand was 
the new revolver? — ^Yes. 

And behind the driving seat the Webley? — ^Tes, quite correct. 

Tell the jury why you had the revolvers with you? — I had 

125 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

them for two reasons At that time there was nobody left in the 
garage, and it was not safe for me to leave them there; they 
would have been found I had no licence for them for a start, 
and it would also tell them I was dealing in the stuff, and that 
is another reason The reason why the one was so handy in the 
pocket was I went down to Devon on the 18th; I slept in the 
car on the moors, because a man had not come down on the train 
I expected him, and I slept in the car. I do not take lodgings, 

I do not like strange places, and I slept in the car on the moors 
with the revolver handy, and that was there on the 18th. 

By Mr Justice Avory — The 18th of what? — 18th January, 
1928, that IS this year. That was on the 18th, the night of the 
18 th 

' You slept on the moors, I did not catch where? — On the moors 
at Dartmoor. 

Examination continued — Did you send ? — ^Wait a minute 

I went on the 18th, not expecting to see the man on the ISth, 
but early on the 19th; on the 19th he did not turn up, I was a 
day too soon; according to the way I read the letter he said, 

Come on the 19th/20bh,'' and I thought I was to pick him up 
on the 19th I slept in the car on the moors I sent a telegram 
to my wife on the 19th, and I said I was a day loo soon. I think 
the police have got the telegram — I forget the exact wording — 
and it was to tell her I would be away that night, and again I 
slept on the moors in the car till the morning of the 20th, when 
I drove straight back to the garage into the hands of the police. 

You told in your statement some experiences you had when 
you went on your journey? — That was the outcome really of getting 
the first revolver. I do a lot of driving; I do thousands of miles; 
I do more miles than the average man, because the average man 
will stop at night to put up and garage, and I do not : I keep 
straight on I am not interested in stopping on the way. When 
I worked up in Great Portland Street, the firm I worked for was the 
Pytchley Autocar Co , and they used to entrust new cars to me 
to deliver, because they knew I should not go on the drink, and 
on one occasion I was on my way to Llanelly to deliver a car 
and teach a man, and I had been given just enough money for 
expenses, and I was stopped. I was signalled up. I often pick 
people up, or used to-, and one night going along I was stopped, 
and as I stopped to lean over to speak to the man two other 
men came up and they took the money, and I had a job to 
get on. I told the firm about it. When I got to Llanelly they 
gave me some money, and I cam^ back and brought the old one 
there for the new one, and I told the firm about it, and they did 
not say much about it, they only laughed; they did not think 
much of it; they thought I was frightened. 

On the way down to Bournemouth did you have the same 
thing? — ^Yes; I was driving a car about of the same make, and 
126 



Evidence for Defence. 

Frederick Gay Browne 

the same thing was tried aloout giving them a lift, but I did 
not stop, and I did not give them anything. 

I want to ask you about Kennedy's statement Is there any 
truth in that as far as it concerns you? — No; it is a fairy 
tale from the beginning to the end; it is a concoction. I do not 
know how it starts or how he brings it about, but I can tell you 
a very good reason why 

I do not want you to get excited about this, just answer the 
questions shortly. I want to ask you this ; there is a statement 
in Kennedy's statement to the effect that you threatened to shoot 
him, and so on, more than once; is there any truth in that? — 
I never said that I would do anything except that if he persistently 
got drunk I would sack him; that is the only thing, if he gets 
drunk I will not have him in the place. He is a persistent 
drunkard; I tried all I could; I kept him short of money. I 
watched him from half-past nine to ten at night, and I could not 
stop him from drink, and I gave him the sack. 

What was the cause of his leaving ? — ^Drink, drink. The whole 
lot was drink. 

Mr. Justice Avoet — ^We have not heard he left you? 

Examination continutd — ^About when did he leave you? — Some 
time before Christmas. I will explain to you the conditions under 
which he left, if you desire to hear. 

Do not go into anything except what 1 ask you, because you 
travel over so much ground, answer what I ask you. 

By Mr. Justice Avoet — ^You say some time before Christmas? 
— ^Yes; some time before Christmas; it might be three weeks before 
or something like that. The police have got the books; they will 
give the exact day, because his handwriting stops. 

Examination continued — ^All right, so long as you are assisting 
us, that is all we can ask you. In January did he return to 
the garage? — Yes. 

Did he appear to be in fear of your shooting him? — No. I 
was surprised to see him again, because I told him not to come 
near the place again on account of the drink, and he came back. 

Did he come on more than one occasion to the garage? — He 
came twice. On the first occasion he insinuated would he come 
back to the garage, and I would not have anything to do with 
him. On the second occasion he wanted to know if he could come 




Browne and Kennedy. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

^vhere I started, that wag Telverton Station, and I had not stopped 
all the way on the road I went straight into the garage. When 
I said I had not stopped, I had; I stopped to drop the man at 
Westminster and brought his luggage on. I went into the garage 
and saw a light in there, and found Mrs Browne there She 
said, I thought you would be back soon/' and I said, I've 
brought the man's luggage," and I went out to get the luggage — 
that was a big case and a .small case — and I put it in the ofl&ce. 
I started talking to my wife, and, well, in rushed a man who was 
— I will tell you it was a detective, and behind him rushed a lot 
more. I really do not know what happened, because I had my back 
to him, but anyhow he caught hold of me and said, I am going 
to charge you with stealing a Vauxhall car " I said, '' I know 
nothing about a Vaushall car," and that is all I troubled. Then 
he went on to explain I got a car and sold it, and then I knew 
the car he was referring to was a car I sold to a butcher at 
Sheffield. I then said to him, '^Tes; I sold the car, but why 
say I stole it; I got the car and paid a fair price for it " — 
words very similar to that — and I sold it " — and then I do not 
know, there was some argument about it, and I said, Well, 
anyhow, I was going to make myself cocoa, because I have had a 
long run and I have had nothing " He said, Well, wait a 
minute, I am going to search you " I had these cartridges in 
my pocket, and I^' d i n ^ nr ot-^'^ant him to see them I made an 
excuse I wanted to go to the lavatory, and I did not want to, I 
wanted to get rid of the cartridges. He got the cartridges, and 
I said,‘ ‘‘That's done it now"; the atmosphere was changed. 

^ They were first of all going to charge me with a car that I could 
* prove I sold legitimately, or got a fair price for it, but they 
could not prove anything against me. As soon as they got twelve 
cartridges from me I knew they would say, “ Here is a man with 
twelve cartridges; he does not carry cartridges for any other 
reason than to fire a revolver," and I knew*' that had done it when 
they took the cartridges 

Have you got any licence at all? — ^No; not to keep them or 
to deal with them. \ 

Were you dealing with them? — ^Yes; either C9llecting them 
or passing them on; but that has nothing to do With this case; 
I am not charged with dealing with firearms. Presently this 
revolver was brought in, and I said, “It is all up now," because 
I knew they would have me for having firearms and ammunition 
and no licence, and I knew it would lead to these others, and they 
would say, “ This man is gun-running," and it was all up; they 
could have me for that alone. 

Was anything at all said to you about Gutteridge's murder? — 
No; they said nothing about it. 

Was anything said about it at the time of your arrest? — ^No; 
ifchey did not say anything about that; they simply came on the 

128 



Evidence for Defence. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

car, I knew I was now liable for gun-running, and that is the long 
and short of it. 

You were taken away to the station 1 — ^Yes; that is quite right. 
The police said only two men took me. I know five took me. Any- 
how, I went there; I was taken there m a motor car. 

What conversation took place there, as far as you can remem- 
ber? — They were quite decent; they put me in a big room with 
a big table, and they weie laughing about something about, You 
won^t go for a 200-mile run,'' or something like that; there was 
a lot of chatter. They did not charge me with anything, and in 
the midst of it in comes another detective with a little revolver. 
He put it down on this table, and he passed some remark — I do 
not know what he said; I could not tell you exactly what he said. 
Anyway, they were laughing about it, and I said, ‘‘ Oh, yes, you 
can laugh about it, you think it is a toy, but it would not only 
tickle you " — that is referring to this little baby revolver. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — You said, “ It would not only ? 

— It would not only tickle you — ^they were playing with it — 
because I knew when I left it there was something in it. 

Examination continued — Did you say anything to the effect 
that if they had stopped you in the car you would have shot five 
and saved another for yourself? — No; I had no occasion. Why 
should I say anything of the kind. On the other hand, why 
should I select five? 

Tell us, to the best of your recollection, what was said, as 
nearly as you can remember? — ^When I was entering the garage 
I stopped the engine, and the detectives — ^they told me this after — 
told me they watched me get out of the car, they watched me start 
the engine and drive into the yard, and they were talking about 
it, and then one of them said to me, after these revolvers had been 
found — I think the man with the little plated one was there — ^he 
said, A good thing " — it was the little one, they called him 
by his name — at any rate, he said, ''It is a good thing I did not 
let you go near him when he was in the oar " They explained 
they wanted to get me while I was in the car, and one said, " No, 
wait until he is in the garage." I did not hear this; this was 
explained to me. And one said to me, " What would you have 
done, Browne, if I had stopped you in the car? " I said, " I do 
not know; why? " Then they got this revolver, and he said some- 
thing about "You are not the only one who has got these things. 
We can use gats " — ^that is an American name, and I thought they 
were used to American gunmen — and he said, " What would you 
have done if we had stopped you while you were in the car ? 
and I said, " I do not know." He said, " Perhaps you would 
have stopped us," and I said, " I have not been put to the test; 
I cannot say." 

By Mr. Justice Avort — ^Tou are going so quickly I cannot 
follow you. What do you say? — He said to me, "What would 
K 129 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

you have done if we had stopped you while you were in the 
car % 

I have heard that twice over? — Right. The next thing was, 

I said, do not know.^' 

Examination continued — ^Was anything said about a machine 
gun, something about that? Go on and tell us? — There was some- 
thing. I said, I do not know,'^ and something or other cropped 
up and I said, I have never been put to the test but what 
filled in that gap I do not know; there was such a jumble. There 
was a lot of them larking about; I could not tell. Then it came to 
my knowledge that there were ten men who had come to arrest 
me — ^ten ! I did not hear this until after, but it went on at the 
station, and all those ten men were armed, and they said, Had 
you — had you tried it, or something, had you attempted, I can- 
not remember the exact words, but it was to the efiect that they 
would have blown me to pieces if I had shown any resistance. 
That is what it amounted to, but they were good tempered; they 
laughing about it, but it was to the effect, There would have 
been little of you left, Browne, if you had used it.’' The 
absurdity of the thing, to think there were ten men to come and 
arrest a man because he had a revolver. I said, Good heavens, 
ten; why, it would take a man with a machine gun to cope with 
you.” Those were the words; ten to one was too much. 

In fact, with all this great talk about shooting, have you ever 
fired a single shot from any of these revolvers ? — No : I have never 
fired any shot, not from these revolvers or any other. I have had 
several years in the Army — not as a gun-man — I was an instructor 
in the Army down at Aldershot. I could instruct, but I have 
never had occasion to fire one; I have never had any occasion to. 

One of the detectives is under the impression you had told 
him you had seen six men shot and never get up ? 

Mr. Justice Avort — ^Do not say under the impression”; 
he has sworn to it. 

The Witness — ^What? 

Mr, Lever — ^Yes, it was his impression. If he swore to it 

Mr. Justice Avort — It is something more than an impression. 

The Witness — But, my lord, one cannot expect a man to swear 
to a thing like that, surely? I have never been out of England 
in my life. Can you tell me of any history where six men were 
shot down with a revolver? 

Examination continued — Have you ever known of such a 
case ? — ^No. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — The only question is whether you said 
it? — ^I did not say it. 

Very well, then, that is an answer. 

Mr. PowBLii — My lord, I do not propose to ask this witness 
any questions, provided it is understood that I do not admit his 
allegations that Kennedy drove a car. 

130 



Evidence for Defence. 

Frederick Guy Browne 


The Witness — Prove it. 

Mr. Justice Avort — I do not understand your attitude at all. 
If you dispute, or Kennedy is going to dispute, what he says, it is 
your duty to testify it by some cross-examination. ^ 

Mr. Powell — Very well, my lord. 

Cross-examined by Mr Powell — ^You say you have seen 
Kennedy drive a car? — ^Yes. 

I put it to you, you have never seen him do anything more 
than sitting on a seat in the garage yard and working up the 
mechanism ? — I have seen him drive three different cars and deliver 
stuff. To my knowledge, I know the car went out, and I could 
not be at both ends at once. He delivered stuff from 2a North- 
cote Koad, Battersea Kise, to 33a Sisters Avenue, Clapham 
Common. 

When was that? — I cannot say the month exactly, but I should 
say it was within six weeks, or a little over, after he first came 
with me. He came with me, I believe, in June, and that would 
be some time in August. I have also had a complaint made by 
one of my tenants that garages her saloon car — a Morris — ^that 
she caught Kennedy out in her Morris car. 

I suggest that is quite untrue. Tell me when was it you first 
tried to teach him to drive? — ^A little time after he came to the 
garage; if you refer to the book it will give you the date. 

You cannot give any date to that? — cannot state the date, 
no. 

How long after that was it you say you tried to teach him to 
drive another car? — They were all about the same time, as I was 
pottering about in the garage. 

It is very vague, you know? — It is vague. I will tell you 
why. The place is only half-built; it was not half-built. 

Was it a matter of months? — Well, over all periods. 

You state you first of all tried to teach Kennedy to drive one 
kind? — ^Yes; that was a Kover. 

And then another? — That was a Morris. 

What was the interval of time between the times you tried 
to teach him? — No interval at all. When you are thinking about 
driving a car, it is not only teaching him to drive, it is the car. 
I am working in the garage, and I am explaining to him. 

After you showed him the Rover car did he say he could drive 
it ? — He has driven it, hut not straight oS. 

Do you say your attempt to teach him was a success, and 
then he was a driver ? — ^I did ngt say I taught him ; I was teaching 
him to drive a car. 

How long after you started was it that he could drive a car ? — 
Pretty quick. 

Pretty quick does not convey much to me? — Three weeks; 
that is pretty well for a man who has not driven a car before. 

131 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

I put it to you that he has never driven a car at alH ^You 

can put it to me. I will put it to you, why does he take a driver’s 
licence out] People do not take a licence out to drive wheel- 
barrows. 

Mr, Levee — Just answer the question. 

Cross-examinaUon continu^td — I put it to you, you have never 
seen him with a driver’s licence] — I have I can tell you the 
hall he took it out at. 

Mr. Powell — My lord, there is a matter of law that I should 
have got your ruling on I did not like to take a certain course 
unless I have rightly understood an Act of Parliament I do not 
think I can make my submission, unless to your lordship alone. 

Mr. Justice Avort — What is the question I do not under- 
stand your difficulty. 

Mr Powell — It is a question of how far I can go without 
certain consequences. 

Mr. Justice Avort — In the cross-examination of this witness? 

Mr. Powell — ^Yes, my lord. 

Mr. Justice Avort — ^You mean putting some question to the 
witness, and whether you are entitled to put it - is that what you 
mean? 

Mr. Powell — There might be a certain consequence in putting 
that question. 

Mr. Justice Avort — It is too vague for me to deal with on 
that statement. 

Mr. Powell — I could make it quite plain to your lordship. 

Mr Justice Avort — ^You may come round and tell me what 
is your difficulty. I do not want to disturb the Court by asking 
the jury to retire. 

[Mr. Powell consulted his lordship.] 

Cross-examination continued — Is it not a fact, Browne, that 
after the 26th September you told Kennedy that if he left you 
would blow his brains out? — I read all that in the statement. I 
never said nothing of the kind. I suggested turning him out if 
he persisted in getting drunk. The greatest threat I threatened 
that man was to clear out; he must work. Drunkenness is no 
good to me. That is the greatest threat I used to him If I 
threatened to- shoot, which I did not do, why should he, after he 
goes to Liverpool and I rigged him out as I did — why should he 
return voluntarily and visit me twice, which he persisted in? 

I suggest when you made that threat you had a loaded 
revolver in your hand? — ^You can suggest just as you like, but 
I never did anything of the kind. I will make it more clear 
if you like. 

Mr. Lever — Just only answer the questions. 

Cross-exarm/nation eontirmed — ^I suggest it was because he 
was terrified of you that he stayed with you after the 26th 

132 



Evidence for Defence. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

September*? — He stayed with me because he could not very well 
go back to the Salvation Army Home, where I dragged him out 
to give him a start in life. That is where he was; he had 
nothing to depend on, and if I wanted to turn him out he had 
nowhere to go I fetched that man from the Salvation Army. 

Mr. Lever — ^Do, please, just answer the questions, and do 
not go beyond that. 

The Witness — I did not threaten him with anything but 
the sack. 

Mr Powell — Does your lordship's ruling cover all the facts 
of Kennedy's statement? 

Mr. Justice Avort — Y es. 

Mr. Powell — If your lordship pleases 

Mr. Justice Avort — ^Y ou are entitled to cross-examine him 
about any of the facts which are there stated. 

Mr. Powell — If your lordship pleases, {To Witmss) — I put 
it to you that on the 26th September you asked Kennedy to go 
with you to Billericay*? — I did not ask anything of the kind. I 
had something very special to do, as you will find out if my wife 
is allowed to come ; you will find out how busy I was. 

Mr. Lever — Just answer the question only. 

The Witness— I did not suggest anything of the kind. 

CToss-examination Had you not by some means 

or other got to hear about a car? — I had not heard anything 
about a car of any kind outside my business; I was not buying 
any, nor selling, at that stage. 

And that you went off together for the purpose of stealing 
that car? — I have just now stated I did not go out anywhere, as 
I was busy shifting into the flat. 

And that the whole of the story told by Kennedy in his state- 
ment is untrue? — It is one pack of wilful or imaginative lies, either 
wilfully told or misled by some kink of the brain, I should 
think I cannot explain myself. I cannot imagine anything 
outside of a penny dreadful that could have been written with 
so much care. As Chief Inspector Berrett said, it took him three 
hours to concoct it — ^he did not say “ concoct," he said, study 
it." I put it down to concoction. He says three hours thinking — 
thinking what he could say next. 

You were not there, you know? — ^No, I was not. I have had 
it explained to me. I have had it all explained to me; I was not 
there. 

As you were not there, I will not put several statements to 
you ? — I do not know anything about it 

I suggest to you that you shot the officer? — Me? 

Yes? — I see. 

You were absolutely raving mad? — ^You mean to say you are 
trading on what I say now; you come to the conclusion that I 
am a little bit fiery, and I should say so. I have had three months^ 
waiting. I have never been out, as I told the inspector in the 

133 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

first plaDe. I have never shot a man in my life. How could I 
shoot a man when I have never fired a revolver in my life !! 

I suggest you took the revolver out on the spur of the moment, 
and shot him'* — I am not in the habit of pulling revolvers out 
on the spur of the moment. Has any one ever seen me pull one 
out on the spur of the moment, or seen me fire one? 

Kennedy said immediately you had done that, Good God, 
what have you done? — That is very nice. It is all laid to me; 
they can absolutely tell you what I said before. 

You got violently excited, and in stale of frenzy? — I am not — 
who with** 

Kennedy '* — ^When ? 

When you went towards the officer he made a move to stop 
you, and bagged you not to shoot again? — It is no good. How 
can you say I did this? You are first of all building on a rotten 
foundation; you are building on a foundation of lies. How can 
you expect me to answer such questions as these? 

Did you not say, I will shoot the bugger? — That is all 
imagination on the part of the man; it is all lies. What can 
you put it down to? 

When this unfortunate man lay on his back, did you not say, 
** What are you looking at me for? — ^It is no good going on 
like that. If I have answered the first question and I was not 
there, how could I shoot an officer while he was on his back? 

Then you shot him between the eyes? — I have never shot a 
revolver in my life. How could I have shot any man? 

I will not go through it. — ^As I told Mr. Berrett in the first 
place 

I will put this to you, that you both got into the car, and 
you were then in a state of frenzy, and this man was frightened 
and did not know what he was doing? — ^You had better start on 
a different basis of fact. Scratch out the name of Browne, and 
put in the name of his confederate he was boozing with. Scratch 
out the word Browne,” and it is quite possible that statement 
is genuine; I do not know -whether it is. 

What statement may be genuine? — The statement Mr. Berrett 
got from him, but with this difference; you must scratch my 
name out and put a different one in, if he has made one. 

I suggest to you he was under your control, that if he had 
not done what you wanted you would have blown his brains out ? — 
He was not under my control at the garage. 

Not at the garage, but when you shot the officer? — I have 
never shot an officer. I have never fired a revolver to start with. 
I have never been out in Essex, and I have never been on a long 
run with Kennedy. 

And that, when you got back to the garage the next morning, 
he wanted to go away, but you would no-t let him? — The next 
morning when I got to the garage — I can recall it to a certain 
extent by the late time I was with my wife the night before — he 

134 



Evidence for Defence. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

had the roost of his opportunity while I was away to have a 
hearty good drink and a late sleep, and the consequence was the 
work was not done when I was a little late. That is how 
it is the man is tyrannised of me like this; I am the master, and 
he is tyrannised of me when he is drunk, but he is not tyrannised 
when he was not drunk. 

Do you remember one day he said he would far soonei leave 
you % — No. 

Did you not say, You stop here and face it out with me. 
If any one comes here theie will be a shooting match ^ — My dear 
sir, you do not seem to understand. I had a difficulty to get 
rid of this man, not a difficulty to keep him I found out my 
blunder when I had him. 

Ton did not want him to go*^ — ^Yes; I wanted him to go a 
long time. 

When ^ — If you want me to tell you the truth 

When did you fiist want him to go*? — ^Very soon after I found 
out his habits. 

Do you think if you wanted Kennedy to go you would have 
let him stop there longer*^ — Listen. Out of consideration, know- 
ing him, I took him out of the street to help him; he was on the 
rocks, and I thought I would wait till I could start him, and 
as soon as I coxild start him I did everyihing, and put him on 
his feet, and what was the consequence'? If you want me to 
explain to you, I will. 

Mr. Powell — I do not want you to explain any further. My 
lord, I will leave it to the learned Solicitor-General. What I 
meant, my loi d, was the difficulty I felt in asking any questions 
was that I was treading on the province of the Solicitor-General. 

The Solicitor-General — My friend must not say that; I am 
taking my own course with the witness I am not affected by his 
cross-examination in any way. 

Mr. Justice Avort — C ertainly not. 

Cross-examined by the Solicitor-General — ^You said a 
moment ago you had never been out with Kennedy on a long jobi — 
Yes. 

You told us of one case where he drove the car from Clapham 
to Battersea? — ^Yes. 

Can you recall any time when he drove a car about the country 
in the dark at night 2 — No ; I cannot think anything of that, 
because if he was in a car with me at night I should take the 
wheel; I would not let him drive in the dark, I should think. 

That is what I thought. I was going to ask you the question, 
if you two were in the car at night in the dark, you would drive? — 
Yes, I would drive. 

When you wbre in the car at night did you ever trust him 
to drive you about the country at night? — I have not trusted the 
car to him, but I have not stopped him. Ybu see after ten o'clock 

135 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

I leave my garage and he is in charge, but I know on more than 
one occasion when a car has been out, but whether he has driven 
it or somebody else I do not know. 

I am only asking you about him. Can you tell me, yes or no, 
do you know of any occasion when he has driven your car, or any 
car with which you were entrusted, round the country at night? — 
No, not at night. 

Now, I want to ask you next about some of these revolvers. 
You do not dispute, I understand, that both the Webley revolvers 
were yours? — 1 do not dispute it, no. 

And you do not dispute that the Smith Ss Wesson was yours? 
— do not dispute they were all mine; I will go to the extent of 
saying the ammunition as well. 

I was going to ask you that next. All the ammunition was 
youis too? — ^It was. 

We will begin with the ammunition. When did you get the 
ammunition? — I cannot tell you, but I am going to tell you this, 
after March, and possibly in April, 1927. 

Did I understand you to say that you had been a rifle instruc- 
tor ? — ^No, not a rifle instructor. 

What sort of instructor *2 — ^An instructor in the R.O.D.R.E.'s, 
but I have mended those sort of things. 

What sort of mechanic were you ? — I was a mechanical trans- 
port instructor, when the men were transferred when they started 
to alter petrol tractors on the same rails. 

But in the course of your Army training I suppose you went 
through a certain amount of musketry drill, did you not? — was 
never a soldier; I was a worker in khaki. 

By Mr. Justice Avobt — In the Labour Corps? — ^In the Royal 
Engineers. 

Gross-examination continued — ^We will not pursue your mili- 
tary history any further. You know perfectly well these are 
service revolvers and service ammunition? — ^Yes, I know that. 

Do you know amongst your store of ammunition there were 
several different marks? — ^Yes; I know there was all sorts of old 
stuff swept up. I know what it is ; it is the clearings out of a rifle 
range. The whole lot is the clearings out of a rifle range. ' 

When was the rifle range cleared ? — I cannot tell you when, 
but I think it was April. 

April, 1927? — ^Yes. 

Somehow or other it came into your possession? — I purchased 
it, yes. Mind you, I am not going to swear to that particular 
date; I say I think it was in April.' 

If it was not in April, was it near April? — Yes. It could not 
be very far off. 

Do you know a great deal of the ammunition was old bullet 
stuff ? — ^Yes. 

136 



Evidence for Defence. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

How did you know that"? — ^Becauso of the type — ^the type of 
amniunition tells you. 

Had you possessed any revolver ammunition before then ] — 
Yes; I have always played with them. 

You have had some ammunition before that^ — I have always 
had something of the kind playing about with them, but I have 
not used them. 

I am not talking about using them ; I am asking you, have you 
always had revolver ammunition before this? — ^Yes; I always had 
some playing about. I have to admit, because I will tell you why; 
it is quite likely the police will say, Were you not summoned 
for having in your possession so and sol 

Browne, don^t. You have told me you had in your posses- 
sion always ammunition? — ^Yes. 

Have you always had a revolver in your possession? — ^Yes; I 
have really since the trouble. 

Since when? — Since the beginning of the war. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — Since 1914 do you mean? — ^Yes, 1914 
and 1916. I will tell you; when I started to go down to South 
Wales on an occasion I was robbed. 

Gross- examination continued — was going to ask you about 
that; I was a little puzzled about that and when it was you told 
this story to the police. Tell us with regard to this pistol; only 
one revolver had been produced; the one found in the car at your 
right hand? — ^Yes. 

And it was with regard to that revolver you were giving the 
explanation? — ^Yes; before I had seen it. 

Yes; but it was with regard to one revolver which had been 
found in the car? — ^Yes. 

You say before you had seen it, but you knew Bevis brought 
it straight into the room? — ^Yes. 

With the cartridges in one hand and the revolver in the 
other? — ^Yes; to the door of the garage, and I am in the inner 
ofidee. 

But, so far as you had seen, it was one of your Webley re- 
volvers? — ^Yes; I admit that one. 

And it was a revolver, and you were told 'where it was found? 
— ^Yes. 

And it was with regard to that revolver that you were making 
statements to Mr. Berrett? — was referring to one revolver only. 

Now you see what puzzled me about that statement, and I want 
to make it clear — ^no other revolver had been mentioned. What 
you said was that you were .frightened into buying a revolver 
by something which happened to you in 1914? — did not say I 
was frightened. 

I withdraw the word frightened, but you were induced 
to buy a revolver by something which happened to you in 1914! 
—Yes. 


137 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

You said it nevar happened again since 1914 ? — ^No. 

And you went on to say because of that you bought a revolver 
in April, 1927 ^ — No; in consequence of that I bought a revolver, 
and I have had one ever since. 

I suggest you meant Mr. Berrett to understand that you had 
a series of revolvers, of which this one bought in April happened 
to be the last? — ^Tes; just go a bit further. I did not say a long 
barrel; these have not a long barrel at all. Did I not say I did 
not know where it is; did I not say I had hidden it? 

I will read you the passage: I have been asked by Chief 

Inspector Berrett to account for the Webley revolver found in my 
possession which was loaded in six chambers I wish to say I 
have never fired the revolver since I first had it. I got it some 
time in April last. I gave £3 for it down at Tilbury Docks, from 
a sailor man whose name I do not know, neither can I describe 
him. He was an ordinary seaman. It was unloaded when I 
bought it. The ammunition with which it is loaded I obtained 
from another man, together with a number of other cartridges 
shown to me, which were found in my hip pocket. I knew the 
man I got the ammunition from in the Army. I donH wish to say 
who the man is. The ammunition is very old in type, and was 
made previous to the war. They are in the same condition now 
as when I obtained them — Yes. 

Then you go on to describe ? — ^Is that the finish of it? 

That is the finish? — Eight. 

After that you say, Some six weeks after that occasion,'^ 
that is the occasion when somebody tried to stop you? — ^Yes. 

Some six weeks after that occasion, when going to Bourne- 
mouth with another car, the same kind of thing happened to me^ 
with a man calling on me to stop, but I declined on this occasion 
to stop. After this second occasion I made up my mind to be 
armed when taking cars to the country, and I purchased a re- 
volver with a long barrel, but I had no ammunition — ^Yes; is 
that the end of the statement 

Yes, for this purpose? — That is the end of it, yes. 

You mean the revolver with the long ban el was something 
different from the one you are describing? — ^Yes; I will have to 
go a step further. The police took it away from me afterwards, 
and when I got another I had to hide that; they know it. 

"When did you get the other Webley and Smith & Wesson ? — 
Since. 

Yes; I have since bought two have got them from time 

to time; I cannot tell you the exact dates. 

Try? — ^it is no good me trying. I will tell you this, I have 
got them all between 

I am not in the least interested in any other revolver. I am 


^It is uncorroborated statements such as this that hang murderers. 
138 



Evidence for Defence. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

not interested in other revolvers. Tell me when you got that other 
Webley 

By Mr. Justice Avory — What is that you are looking at? — 1 
am looking at a date. 

Who wrote it? — I did, in the dock 

You mean during the trial? — This morning. They take them 
away from me when I go in 

Does that enable you to answer the questions? — I was trying 
to think of some dates. 

You anticipated you were going to be asked this question, 
and you made a note for the purpose of answering it? — You can 
read it, my lord, if it is of any assistance; you can read anything 
there 

I thought you were going to answer the questions by the aid 
of the notes? — I jotted down the dates when I first started- I 
bought the revolver in April, and I was arrested in January this 
year, and between those two dates I bought all those revolvers. 

Gross-examwation zontinm^d — Let us try to get a little closer 
to it than that. Try and tell me not the exact date, but about 
when you bought the revolver, if you did buy it, or where you 
got it? — I could not tell you; if I guessed, I could only guess 

Try about the Smith & Wesson? — It is no good. I could not 
tell you, I cannot eay. I could not tell you the month I bought 
these at all, if ever I bought them I bought them whenever I 
got them ; if I had the chance of buying fifty I bought fifty 

Let us go on to another one When did you get the automatic? 
That is a little different from the other? — ^When did I get it? 

Yes? — ^You are certain I did get it? 

No; I am asking you did you not get the automatic? — I did 
not say I got it. 

No, I am asking you; just answer the quesij'on. Did you not 
get the automatic? — I did. 

Did you give the automatic to Kennedy? — 1 did 

Did you give the auiomatic to Kennedy before he left? — 1 did. 

When did you eet the axitomatic? — On the 7th October, or 
thereabouts ; it may be a day either way 

By Mr. Justice Avory — ^You say you got it? — ^Yes; on the 7th 
October, or perhaps a hi tie afior ; I am not going to say the day- 
You \xnderstand it is an illogitiinato thing we are buying, and 
there were no books kept to the effect . 

Groi^^-^txamvnaiion (^ontuiued — ^Very well, the 7ih October. 
Now, tell me, when you gave lb© automatic to Kennedy, did he 
give you any weapon in exchange? — I expect he did. ' I expect 
you know what he gave me ; .what is the good of going beating 
abouip the bush when you know jolly well what he gave me for it. 

Now, Browne, will you answer my question? Did Kennedy 
give you any weapon in exchange, and, if so, what? — ^Tes; you 
might as well read it oxit from the statement; you might as well 
read it. 


139 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

By Mr. Justice Avort — Will you answer the question? — It is a 
waste of time ; the answer is there before it was put. 

What did he give you? — A revolver. 

What did he give you in exchange*? — That revolver. He had 
a new revolver and I wanted it, and I got an automatic and so 
we made a swap/’ and that is the long and short of it; he had 
got a new one, and I had an old one, and I wanted the new one, 
and so I gave him the automatic. 

Gross-examination conUn'ued — I want to get that a little 
clearer. Was it any of the three revolvers we are talking about 
here? — ^Tes, it is; of course it is. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — ^You must answer the question pro- 
perly? — I am sick of it. I have been there for three months for 
no grounds. 

Mr Justice Avort — ^Tou must answer the questions properly, 
or I shall order you to return to the dock. 

Cross-examination continued — Tell me quite quietly what 
weapon you say Kennedy gave you in exchange for the automatic? 
— He gave me the new revolver. What is the good*? There is an 
old one and a new one; I wanted the new and he gave it to me, 
and I got it. 

You know, Browne, let us understand what you mean about 
this. On 7th October you say that Kennedy handed you the 
revolver ? — ^Which revolver ? 

The one that the shots were fired with*? — I said nothing of 
the kind. It is no good your twisting it round like that. I said 
I got the automatic on the 7th October. Is that correct? 

By Mr. Justice Avort — When did you give it to Kennedy? — 
That is a different thing altogether. I did not mention anything 
about giving it to him. 

Answer the question; when did you give that to Kennedy? — 
Before he went to Liverpool. 

How long before? — Not long. 

How many days'? — I could not say. I could not say how 
long I knew he was going, I suppose. 

Cross-examination continued — ^Do- you mean in December, 
when he left you first? — He went to Liverpool in December, three 
weeks before Christmas. 

Yes? — Some time before that. 

Some time before that you gave him the automatic and got 
the new revolver in exchange? — ^Yes. 

Having yourself obtained the automatic on the 7th October, 
is that right? — ^Yes, or thereabouts;.! do not know the exact date. 

What had happened to the Webley between April when you 
bought it and December; in whose possession had it been*? — In both. 

What? — In both possessions. When Kennedy gave it to me 
it was his first and mine afterwards, so it was in both our 
possessions. 

140 



Evidence for Defence. 

Frederick Guy Brewne 

You bought it yourself in April, 19271 — ^Which; which did 
I buy in April, 1927? 

This Webley^^ — Who said I did? 

By Mr. Justice Avort — I do not think he said he bought 
that one? — I said I bought one that went rusty. Is there any 
sign of rust on that one? You look at the revolver with the rust 
on it, beginning to go rusty. 

There is really no confusion about this at all? — Then why 
mix them? 

Just follow: the only revolver which had been shown to you 
at the time when you made the first statement about buying the 
revolver in April, 1927, was this Webley, which had just been 
picked up by Bevis out of the right-hand pocket of the car? — 
It was a revolver, a Webley revolver. There is ample proof of 
that, your lordship. Surely you can see by the very next words 
I uttered. 

By Mr Justice Avory — ^You are confusing yourself by being 
in a hurry? — I am not. 

Just listen: the revolver which was found in the pocket of 
the Angus car, and which was brought into the garage was this 
one? — How am I to know that? 

You must take it it is so? — It is not very fair to me, is it? 
** I must take it for granted."' 

It has been proved that it was this one Your attention 
is called to the fact when you are asked by the inspector to account 
for that particular revolver you said you had bought it at Tilbury 

Docks on ? — The next thing shows I know what I was referring 

to. I knew there were two revolvers in the case, and I was 
referring to the one that was going rusty, and why do I refer to 
the rust? 

Cross-examination continued — Just follow me : if there is 
any mistake you must have the benefit of it, but are you saying 
to the jury that you do not know which revolver it was that 
was at your right hand in the car? — ^Yes; I did not know which 
revolver it was, because they are both alike, except this is older 
than the other They are identically the same. They were both 
kept in the back of the car, but kept hidden in the back of the 
panel, but when I arrived at Devonshire and went to sleep I 
took one out I did not take any notice which one it was; I 
had no occasion. I put it in the pocket, and there it stopped 
till the police came. 

Let us get it clear ; I do not want you to be trapped by any 
mistake, if mistake was made.. What you mean is that the one 
you identified as being this one here, bought in April, 1927, 
was the one at the back of the car. Is that right? — You let the 
jury see the revolver, and the very next time I open my mouth 

®Tlie pistol with which Gutteridge was shot. 

141 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Frederick Gu7 Browne 

shows what I am saying. I am referring to the old revolver which 
began to go rusty, and I had to oil it. Will you, for my benefit, 
show it to the jury to show the distinction"? You are making use 
of the statements; then why not use them to show my statement 
is correct? 

Very well, of course, at the time when you identified that, 
as you have already told me, you were only talking about one 
revolver, and you did not know, of course, at that time that 
it could be proved that this cartridge which was found had been 
fired from it? — That part does not interest me; I had nothing to 
do with firing. Why should I be interested? I do not care whether 
the revolver had been firing cartridges or not, it is nothing to do 
with me. 

Do you swear that now? — I am on oath. 

Are you swearing now that you had not got this particular 
Webley at the end of September? — September? 

Yes? — September? [After a pause] : I got one in April, did 
I not? I have told you that that is clear. Some time after that 
I got an automatic; I gave you a date. 

Let us get it clear. The revolver which was in fact found in 
the right-hand pocket — ^where was that revolver, so far as you 
know, on the night of the 26th-27th September, 1927? — I expect 

it was in if it was in Kennedy’s possession it would be in his 

bag of tools, I expect. I do not know. It was not hanging up 
where the other one was I kept. The other one was hanging up in 
the garage, the old one I cannot tell you 

You want the jury to understand that the revolver was not 
in your possession on the 26th September; it was in Kennedy’s. 
Is that right ? — do not want them to understand anything of the 
kind, because I did not know it was in Kennedy’s possession. 

Do you want them to understand it was not in your posses- 
sion? — ^Yes, not in my possession; I have only one revolver, and 
it was going rusty, and they have not looked at it yet. 

Tell me, when did you first see this Webley? — Shortly after 
Kennedy came, and I do not remember when he came. They are not 
assisting me; they have got the books. Why do they not give me 
the date? 

I can tell you; Kennedy came about the end of June. Tell 
me when you first' saw this revolver in his possession? — After he 
got more familiar with me. That is all I can tell; and that would 
take about a month, I suppose. 

Try and fix the date; I do not mean the day of the week or the 
month, but which month. When did you first see it, and where 
was it? — ^It was in the garage. 

Where? — In Kennedy’s hands; I do not know where he got 
it from. 

Before or after the police constable was murdered? — Oh, before 
that. 

U2 



Evidence for Defence. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

Mr. Justice Avort — Mr. Solicitor, there is some confusion 
here with the evidence given in chief by the witness, unless my 
note is entirely in erior. My note of what he said in chief is, 

I kept the two Webley revolvers at the garage I was referring 
to the older when I said it would go rusty; I was referring to the 
newer one when I said I got it from a sailor ; you said that in your 
evidence. 

The Witness — I did not; I said the one that began to get 
rusty I got from the sailor ; if you have twisted it round it is not 
my fault. 

Mr. Justice Avort — Do not talk to me about twisting it round ; 

I have taken down what you said. 

The Solicitor-General — Mr. Roomers note is, The one I 
got in April was a new one. The one I got from Tilbury was a new 
one for £3 from a sailor.'' 

The Witness — Is that how you are going to have it? 

Mr. Justice Avort — And he added, That one I have had from 
April." 

The Witness — Which one is that, the one that went rusty? 

Mr. Justice Avort — I am not going to bandy words with you. 

Cross-examinaUorb conUnued — ^You see the object of the cross- 
examination which I have been putting to you for some ten minutes, 
and I am afraid it is dijBficult to follow you, but I will put it to you 
plainly to show the jury that this suggestion that Kennedy had the 
revolver on the 26th September is an after-thought invented since 
you knew the significance of that revolver ? — By me ? 

Yes ? — Oh, I see. I did not understand what you were trying 
to twist round, but it is not anything of the kind. 

I am going to suggest to you the date when that idea came 
into your head, because I think it is fair to Kennedy. Your wife 
visited you in prison on the 10th ApriH — ^Yes. 

Do you know a family named Currie in Sheffield? — -Yes. 

Did you write something in invisible ink? — ^Yes. 

On the back of the letter ? — ^Yes. 

Which your wife was going to write to a member of the Currie 
family ? — ^Yes. 

I think, as a matter of fact, your wife wrote to Miss Mabel 
Currie ? — ^Yes. 

Who is a child of eleven years of age? — ^Yes. 

And told her, amongst other things, that she had not made her 
fortune on the Grand National, and on the back of that you wrote 
in invisible ink an inquiry? — ^Yes, about this particular revolver. 

Yes. Let us see what it says. We had better have th© 
original. [Produced ] Look at the back where the invisible ink 
has been developed. Can you tell me the date when Pat. Kennedy 
divided a small heap of jewellery in two, and I tossed up to see 
which I should take " — in brackets he the other Will you 
let me know by return the date it was that I exchanged revolvers 

143 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

with Kennedy after he may have shot blank. Just quote 

date as near as possible. Fred.'^ 2 — ^Yes. 

That apparently miscarried, and you sent another one to the 
same effect on the back of a letter written on the 16th April ? — ^Tes. 

I want you to tell me, was it then for the first time that it 
occurred to you to suggest that you were not the man who pos- 
sessed this Webley on the 26th September? — No; I did not suggest 
anything of the kind. 

If I may just ask you one other question before you go on; 
with this now in your mind, would you mind telling the Court 
how you came, not only to make misstatements to Mr. Berrett, 
but in the evidence-in-chief which my lord has read to from his 
note? — ^About what, the revolver? 

That you had the revolver from April onwards? — I do not 
know; I had the one at the beginning go rusty, and that is all 
I am referring to. Why should I add to that statement at the 
time, and this is long before I was charged with the crime? Why 
should I add to that part? You do not dispute it is in the state- 
ment, and you do not dispute that Webley there has not gone rusty; 
do you doubt that? Why do not you let the jury see the two 
revolvers. 

The jury will see all the revolvers and see the statement, 
anything they want to see. I want to know again now, contrast- 
ing what you have said with what you wrote in invisible ink on 
the 11th April, why even in your evidence to-day you state you 
had got this particular Webley on a shelf, if I remember right, 
together with the other Webley revolver ?— Now you are going it. 

From April onwards^ — I do not say I had two revolvers in 
April at all ; I never said anything of the kind. You cannot find 
where I said I had two revolvers in April. 

I may be all wrong, but my recollection is this, that you said 
you kept them in the room where Kennedy slept?— In April— he 

was not there. i -rr j 

No, you kept them in the garage in the room where Kennedy 
slept— both revolvers?— Well, I am not denying it, am T? I told 
you the date when I changed revolvers, and since that date they 
^ere not kept in the garage except when he was away and I was 
away. What is the date? I told you the date, did I not? Did 
the answer come back to that letter giving the date? 

Mr Justice Avobt — ^You must not ask questions. 

Gross-exdmindtion continued — The date your jewellery was 
divided was the 7th October ?— Where did I get the revolver from? 
That was the cause of the question being asked. 

I do not want to know anything more about that; you asked 
me about the date? — I told you. 

The date was the 7th October? — ^Yes. 

Is there anything else you want to eay about this particular 
Webley? — ^I told you I did not have it before that date. 

^ m 





Evidence for Defence. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

Before what date? — The 7th October. Since the 7th October 
I kept the two of them in the garage. 

What? You kept the two Webley revolvers in the garage 
since the 7th October ? — Yes j until Kennedy went away. 

I thought you told us just now that Kennedy did not give 
you the second Webley until just before he went away, and when 
he gave it to you it was in exchange for the automatic? — ^You call 
it when I got the automatic. The 7th October is when I got 
the automatic. 

What you said a moment ago was you kept the two Webley 
revolvers from the 7th October. What I am pointing out is 
that what you have sworn is you did not get the second Webley 
until Kennedy left in December, and then he gave it to you in 
exchange for the automatic? — They were kept in the garage just 
the same. Whether it belonged to me or Kennedy they were both 
kept in the garage from when I first saw them after I got familiar 
with him, and although he did not give it to me it was kept in 
the garage after that, and even before that; but after I did not 
sell them they were still kept there. They changed ownership, but 
they had not changed position. 

Was it ever moved? — ^When Kennedy moved I suppose they 
were. 

Did you see it moved at any time at the end of September? — 
I do not know they were moved ; they were hanging on a nail with 
a soldier's coat over the top of them. I did not see them every 
day; I did not take particular notice. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — Were they both hanging on one nail, 
do you mean? — No; they were hanging up behind soldiers' coats. 

Were they hanging on separate nails? — Of course they were; 
they were too heavy for one nail, two revolvers of that weight. 

Gro^^- examination continued — ^Now, tell me, why did you buy 
artery forceps^ — Simply because they are long-nosed pliers, and 
pliers were more adapted to the job, and they were cheap. 

I was going to ask you about that artery forceps. Surgical 
instruments are rather more expensive than the ordinary forceps 
that you buy in a shop? — No, not where I bought those ; I bought 
those, as I said, from Caledonian Market years ago, and they are 
cheaper. They are far better steel; they are more useful, that is 
to say, they answer the purpose better than a pair of pliers made 
of sheet iron. 

You bought them because they were cheaper ? — Seeing the size 
of them, I had a good use for them if I could get them, and I 
bought them because they were cheap. 

Just give me the Sancylight. [Handed.] I want you to tell 
me about this. You said you bought this battery at least five 
years ago? — ^Yes. 

Do you say at the time you bought it, not that some cap was 
n 146 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

on it, but that that particular cap was on it? — Just on it, except 
this, that it was broken and I did put it on. 

Yes, I know. Do you say that that particular bit of tubing 
was attached to this light when you bought it five years ago? — 
Yes, I do say so. 

I am not talking about the screw? — I am talking about the 
lot. 

I am talking about this part of it ? — One cannot buy one with- 
out the other. 

I understand that. Now, do you say five years ago that bit 
of metal that is on it was on it when you bought it? — ^Yes 

It IS not the same metal as the lamp itself ? — It is. 

You think it is? — I am positive. If you test it with a saw 
and a file it will show you it is, and I can show you the metals. 

You have never seen that in the form of an ear speculum,* 
you have never seen it as a separate thing? — ^No. 

You did not tell us, when you were giving evidence about the 
lens, where you got the lens? — I paid fourpence for it. 

Where? — Down York Terrace, and that was from a Disposal 
Board, and that was since I started the garage 

When? — Since I opened the garage about April. When I 
started to collect the stuff all together I went down there for two 
boxes, and I saw it at the shop. 

What did you want it for ? — I use that when I am getting out 
tiny splinters under the nails, to magnify; it was all kept together. 

Now, about the bottle of ethyl chloride. I understand you to 
say it was in this tin? — ^Yes 

The tin in the shape of a book? — ^Yes. 

These things were in it too ? — ^All, I think, except those bottles 
— ^those bottles were lying on some medical books 

These things — ^they were both in here ? — They were all jumbled 
up. There is a little brown box. You see that little brown box 
like a cigar case; that was outside with this; it was all loose in a 
hamper. These things were all jumbled up and some books. 

Where was the ethyl chloride? — In the box. 

From whom did you obtain this book-shaped box? — From my 
brother-in-law. 

You observed the title of the book; you noticed that, did you? 
— No, I did not, only it is a medical book. 

It appears to be a treatise on weapons of precision ? — ^But that 
is not a book; that is a tin. 

Weapons and precisions ? — That is not the book I am talk- 
ing about ; I say the medical book. I am not referring to that as 
a medical book. 

No; but you say it was in this ‘‘ tin shaped like a book,^' the 
actual words were? — It was in the box. Put the ethyl chloride in 
the box and you will see. 

Would you mind putting it in for me? — Do you say it will 

146 



Evidence for Defence. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

not go in? Is that what you are trying to twist round? If it 
does not go in it must 

Does it go in with all those other things? — I do not say this 
was in it or this. I told you how it waSj and this is how it was 
packed up There was some cotton wool, but it has gone. 

What else was in with the ethyl chloride; just put the things 
in'? — I do not know ; it was packed up. It was in a tin box. What 
was actually in it I do not know. It might have been opened by 
my brother-in-law and turned out, I do not know. There was 
more than that in it. [The witness examined the box.] I know 
when I opened it it was quite full ; I do not know whether it was 
only packed with cotton wool, and perhaps that was the matter. 
There were other bottles lying idle — I mean lying loose. 

Very well. Now, I want to ask you about one other thing, 
Browne. You have told us about some of the statements you made 
when you were arrested ; I want to ask you about one iti par- 
ticular. When he brought the revolver in, whoever it was, and 
said that it had been found in the pocket of the car, did you say, 
''Ah* youVe found that, have you, Tm done for now? — ^Yes. 

You did; what did you mean by that? — They would have me 
for trading in firearms That was all I had no charge against 
me. They could have taken me, that is true, but I should have 
come back ; I should have known where I got the car from and all 
about it, but I could not explain how I was in possession of fire- 
arms and ammunition and no licence, and trading in them — not a 
legal one. 

You have mentioned several times about trading in firearms. 
Just tell me why that Webley levolver was loaded in the car with 
six cartridges, and why the other one was also loaded with six 
cartridges in the panel behind the seat. Was that for threatening? 
— Why they were all loaded? 

Tell me? — It keeps them better from rust. They said they 
were heavily greased, and if you keep them* heavily greased and 
loaded it keeps them free from rust, and that is what I have done. 
I have kept them loaded, and they have not gone rusty since. That 
is one of the precautions against the rust. 

Ee-examined by Mr. Lever — I want to ask you one or two 
questions, and they are with reference to these two revolvers. Did 
you identify the two revolvers by their numbers as exhibits? — No, I 
recognised them by their appearance; one is new and one is old. 
One is all oxidised and new, and the other is not. 

Just follow me. When you took this Angus car down to 
Devonshire, where were those two revolvers when you started out 
on your journey? — Both in the panel at the back of the car. 

When you sLayed for the night what did you do with the 
revolvers, or either of them? — ^I made a sort of bed of the rugs and 
coats I had got. They were in the big cupboard, and they are not 
concealed, and I took one out and put it down. 


147 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

Did you notice or have any idea which of the two you took 
out? — did not take any notice, and I will tell you one thing; 
it was as much as I could do to get down to the moors at all, 
because the fog was so thick I had to crawl. 

Just answer my question. You say you did not notice which 
of the two you took out? — I did not take any notice. 

It might be the old one or the new one'* — It might be either. 

What did you do with it when you took it out'? — I put it in 
the driver’s seat. 

When you got back did you know wdiich was the one in the 
pocket and the one at the baok^ — ^No; I never looked at it. I had 
no use for them on the journey. 

When you were arrested, where were you? — In the inner room. 

When Bevis came in with the revolver from the car, how did 
he show you the revolver he had taken from the car^ — He never 
showed it to me. To tell the truth, I never saw it; the place was 
full of police officers, and one officer was saying about collecting 
up the revolvers, only he used the word gats,” and this man in 
the middle walked as far as the outer door. 

Where were you then? — ^I was in the inner office. 

Is that all you saw of the revolver at that time? — ^Yes; he said 
what he had found: ” I have just found this in the car.” 

Were you able to see whether it was the new or the old revolver ? 
— could not tell it was a revolver really; he had his hands out, 
and the office was full of men. I could not say that really. 

When you made the statement about buying a revolver in 
April, what revolver were you in your mind referring to ? — The 
old one that became rusty. 

You went on in your statement to say it went rusty? — ^Yes. 

Did the new one get rusty? — ^No, it could not; it is oxidised, 
you see. 

So it was the old one you were referring to'* — ^Yes. 

When you made your further statement as to another revolver, 
was that the old one or the new one? — ^When I said that I was 
referring to the new one. 

So in your first statement you were first referring to the old 
revolver, and in your second statement you were referring to the 
new revolver? — ^Yes. 

You declined to give the name of the man you got it from? — 
Yes; I was not going to say anything about it; I did not know 
what the police knew. 

Leaving out the question of the old revolver, I want to ask 
you about the new revolver. As near as you can tell, when was it 
you got the new revolver? — I bought some stuff from a man, and 
among this stuff were two revolvers; one was the electro-plated 
one, and the other the automatic one; I do not know the date of 
that, but I wrote to my wife 

Never mind about that; you bought two revolvers? — ^Yes; one 

148 



Evidence for Defence. 

Frederick Gay Browne 

was the automatic one you have there, and the plated one, and 
I exchanged the automatic one for the new one, with Kennedy. 

Which IS the one you got from Kennedy? The oxidised 
Webley ^ — ^Yes. 

That IS to say, the newer one of the two we have been speak- 
ing of^ — ^Yes. 

I want from you the answer, as near as you can tell, when 
was it you got that new revolver from Kennedy? — After the 7th 
October when I got the automatic. 

The new revolver was when you got the automatic? — ^Yes; I 
did not do the change the same hour I got the stuff. 

This letter which has been written, which has been read, was 
written originally in invisible ink by you? — ^Yes. 

That IS inquiring from some one when the exchange was made? 
— That was only a name I asked my wife. The prison officials 
read everything and test them. 

That was the letter by which your wife was to get the infor- 
mation about this exchange? — ^Yes; I did not remember that date. 

You became the owner of the new Webley, and Kennedy became 
the owner of the automatic? — ^Yes. 

Had you been the owner of that new Webley until some time 
after the 7th October? — I am awfully sorry, I was not listening 
to what you said; I was thinking of something else. 

I quite understand; you told us that on the 7th October you 
got the automatic, and that after that date you exchanged the 
automatic with Kennedy for the Webley? — ^Yes, I did. I said that 
before. 

I am asking you now, on this important date, the 26th Sep- 
tember, when the tragedy took place, to whom did the Webley 
belong? — It was Kennedy's property, but I saw it in the garage 
hanging on the nail. 

I want to know, apart from the question, of ownership, where , 
used it to be? — It was kept in the garage, and over the bed is a 
row of clothes, and you keep them there a little bit out of sight. 

Was Kennedy sleeping in the bed? — ^Yes; and if the nails gave 
way they would have fallen on him. 

And, as I understand, on those nails there were the two 
Webleys, the old one belonging to you and the new one belonging 
to Kennedy, and they remained there till the exchange was made? 
— ^Yes. 

Is that all you know about those revolvers? — ^Tes — ^not all. 

Enough perhaps for the occasion? — ^Yes; and the only thing 
I do know is before I got the automatic I could not get Kennedy to 
exchange with my old one. 

Tell us about that. Had you offered to exchange with 
Kennedy? — ^Yes; and I wanted to buy it from him. They are 
both so much alike I can only explain the difference that one is 
rusty. 


149 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

We call them the old and the new one. You were saying you 
were wanting to buy a revolver from Kennedy; which one*? — The 
new Webley. 

When was it you were trying to buy that from him, about 
what time? — First of all, when I first saw it after I had got 
familiar with him. 

That is to say, after he came? — It might be in July. 

Would he at that time sell you that revolver? — No; he would 
not, and did not. 

So the ownership remained, you owning the old one and 
Kennedy the new one? — ^Yes. 

It was not until after the 7th October he acceded to the ex- 
change ? — ^Yes. 

And in the meantime the tragedy had taken place*? — Yes. 

Of which you swear you know nothing ? — I know nothing about 

that. 

Mr. Justice Avory — ^You are making a series of statements 
and asking your witness to agiee with them; that is not the proper 
way. 

Mr. Lever — That was the evidence that was given. 

Mr. Justice Avory — If it was, then theie is no need to repeat it. 

Mr. Lever — Theie is one question I ought to have asked in 
chief, perhaps, if I may ask it now, it is quite a minor matter, 
and that is whether Browne ever wore a light fawn-coloured over- 
coat — there is something in Kennedy's statement and I forgot it. 
(To the Witness) — ^What do you say about that, a light fawn- 
coloured overcoat — raincoat? — I wear a light mackintosh, but I 
usually wear a motor coat. 

This is the point I want you to answer quite truly. Kennedy 
says that on this night you wore a light fawn-coloured raincoat. 
I do nqt know whether you had or have such a thing. Had you 
such a thing at that time ? — I never wear light clothes at all ; I 
get them so dirty and greasy. I do not have them in my house at 
all. I particularly do not buy light clothes; they show the dirt. 

Had you a light coat*? — ^No. 

By Mr. Justice Avory — Do you say you have a mackintosh? — 
have some mackintoshes. 

Light colour ? — Yes ; there are some light ones ; they are light. 

The jury some time ago wanted to ask you about that pair 
of forceps which have been filed? Did you do the filing? — ^Yes. 

What for? — To get them into the carburettor which I use them 
for. 

The jury want to know whether that instrument now would 
fit any lock on this car? — do not quite understand; what sort 
of lock? 

That depends on what sort of lock it is. You know what sort 
of lock was on the car. The jury ask, would that instrument, now 

150 



Evidence for Defence. 

Frederick Guy Browne 

it is filed, fit any lock on the Angus car ? — Perha]ps they mean the 
jets; is that what they mean? 

The Foreman of the Jury — The cupboard, my lord. 

Mr. Justice Avort — I know what you mean. 

The Witness — I could not say. I had a key of the cupboard; 
the police have it now. 

You have a separate key ? — ^Yes, along with my other keys. 

One other thing I would like to ask you; what time do you 
say you got back to the garage on the morning of the 27th Septem- 
ber ? — Which morning — when I went with the van. I do not know 
which morning you are talking about really yet. 

Just think; try and remember. The morning of the 27th Sep- 
tember last year ^ — That would be after I had helped my wife one 
night unpacking, and I was a bit late going to bed, and late down 
at the garage. I do not know. I might have been down there a 
little before nine o’clock 

Did 1 understand you to say on that morning you got there 
you found Kennedy still asleep? — No, your lordship, there is a 
little bit wiong there; I am talking about when I went with the 
boy to the garage to get the van That was on the 25ih. 

On the 27th when you arrived about nine o’clock was Kennedy 
there? — ^Yes; I did not remember anything unusual, so I should 
say he was. 

Did you look to see if he had apparently slept there or not 
on that night? — I took it for granted he had; I did not take par- 
ticular notice Why take particular notice? 

Did you notice whether the Webley revolvers were there? — 
did not see that they were both hanging up because of the clothes, 
and I never looked for them. 

Did you go into the inner office on the morning of the 27th? — 
Yes; later on in the ordinary way when lunch time came. 

You did not notice whether both revolvers were still hanging 
up there? — No; I did not take any notice of them. 

[The accused returned to the dock.] 

William Geddes, examined by Mr. Lever — I live at No. 18 
Rathbone Road, Battersea Rise. I am a schoolboy between twelve 
and thirteen years of age. I know the garage at Northcote Road. 
I am called Billy there. My father is a blacksmith nearby. I 
used to do some odd jobs now and again for Mr. Browne at the 
week-ends, learning what I could about motor cars. I remember 
one Saturday at the end of September Mr. Browne asking me if I 
would go with him next morning to East Ham, and I agreed to 
go. I met him early in the morning of that day. It was a Sunday 
morning towards the end of the month. I met him at the garage 
quite early in the morning, and we got on to the lorry belonging 
to Mr, Townson. Mr. Browne drove the lorry, and I sat by his 
side. We drove to a place in East Ham, but I do not remember 

151 



Browne and Kennedy. 

William Geddes 

the name of the road. When we got there some parcels and a bos 
were put into the lorry. We had a cup of tea there, and Mr. 
Browne drove the lorry back to 33a Sisters Avenue. There was 
also a little girl on the lorry. It was about half-past eight when 
we got back to Sisters Avenue. We had started about five minutes 
past sis in the morning. I saw the things taken out of the lorry 
and put into the house at Sisters Avenue. I did not see a Mrs. 
Kemp there at the time The boxes and the bicycle, and so on, 
were taken up to the flat I was with Mr. Browne the whole 
time, we did not lose sight of each other. 

Mrs. Aotie Kemp, examined by Mr. Lever — I am a married 
woman, and I live at 33a Sisters Avenue. I remember one Sunday 
morning at the end of September being there after the Brownes 
moved there. I went downstairs to the scullery and saw Mr. 
Browne coming into the passage with a parcel that looked like 
a bed. It was about half-past eight or nine o'clock in the morn- 
ing. I did not see any lorry. I saw the little girl coming upstairs, 
and I spoke to her I did not see the bicycle 

Cross-examined by the Solicitor-General — I was living at 
33a Sisters Avenue in September. I am a lodger there. The 
Brownes had only been in the house from the Saturday at the end 
of September onwards. I occupied the top front room, and Mrs. 
Browne occupied the back room. I could not tell you whether 
Browne ever slept away from home I do not know of any occasion 
when he was away for a night. 

Re-examined by Mr. Lever — ^You do not remember his being 
away for a night at the end of September, or part of that time'? — 
No. 


Lillian Miller, examined by Mr. Lever — I live at 167 
Lavender Hill, Clapham Junction. I am a cashier employed at the 
Globe Cinema, which is next to the garage in Northcote Road. I 
knew Browne and Kennedy pretty well. I never saw any revolvers 
or firearms in Browne's possession. I remember Browne once 
having his moustache ofl. I cannot remember the date. His eye- 
brows and eyelashes were also singed 

Arthur Theodore Finch. 

The Witness — I wish to affirm, my lord. 

Mr. Justice Avort — On what ground do you wish to affirm? 
la it contrary to your religious belief to take the oath? 

The Witness — ^I have a conscientious objection to- taking the 
oath. 

Mr. Justice Avort — ^Is it because it is contrary to your 
religious belief to take the oath? 

The Witness — I am an agnostic, and I am against taking the 
oath. 

152 



Evidence for Defence. 

Arthur Theodore Finch 

Mr. Justice Avort — ^You can only refuse on one of two grounds 
— either it is contrary to your religious belief, or you have no 
religious belief, 

The Witness — Well, my lord, I have a conscientious objection 
to taking the oath. 

Mr. Justice Avort — ^You have already said that, but you have 
not answered my question yet. Is it contrary to your religious 
belief, or have you no religious belief? 

The Witness — I have told you, my lord, I am an agnostic. 

Mr. Justice Avort — I may not know what an agnostic is. 

The Witness — A person who has doubts as to the existence of 
a divine being, my lord. 

Mr Justice Avort — I only said I might not know, and I am 
asking you, is it contrary to your religious belief, whatever it is? 

The Witness — ^Yes, my lord. 

Mr. Justice Avort — ^Very well 

[The witness was duly affirmed.] 

Examined by Mr. Lever — I am a brother-in-law of the accused 
Browne, and 1 live at Buckliurst Hill, Essex Mrs. Browne's 
sister is my wife. [Shown the ethyl chloride spray.] This exhibit 
seems to be an article which was in a package which I had in my 
possession in 1922. 

What package was it in? — It was in a tin box of a green 
colour, one of those imitation Shakespeare books. [Box produced 
and identified by witness.] 

What other articles were in the box? — There were a number 
of doctor's pills, and there were also other substances. I remember 
there was a little tube of ether, and there was also a tube of a sub- 
stance which I was not supposed to possess, and which I destroyed 
at the time. It seemed to contain opium, and so forth. [Shown 
medical books produced ] I got those at a sale which was held on 
the 25th of April, 1922, in Buokhurst Hill Hall in Queen's Koad, 
Buckhurst Hill. It was a sale on behalf of a local hospital. The 
auctioneers were Ambrose <fc Son. These articles remained in my 
house for at least five years. In 1927 Mr. Browne came to stay 
at my house for a time, and I told him what a curious thing it 
was that I^ had these things. Mr. Browne took away the tube of 
ethyl chloride amongst other things. I said it was only the books 
that interested me. 

Cross-examined by the Solioitor-GtENBRal — ^I am quite certain 
that amongst the assortment of tabloids and drugs of various sorts 
that Browne took away with .him there was this tube of ethyl 
chloride. 

Mrs. Caroline Ann Browne, examined by Mr. Levee — I am 
the wife of the accused Frederick Guy Browne, and I reside still 
at 33a Sisters Avenue. I have a child, a little girl. Until some 

153 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mrs Caroliae Axin Browne 

time in September, 1927, I had a situation as cook-housekeeper, 
and I was living in at the house where I was serving. After that 
I lived with my husband at 2 Huguenot Place. We were there 
from about the 20th to the 24th of September. On the 24th Sep- 
tember we went to 33a Sisters Avenue. From the 24th September 
onwards my husband was only away during the night on three 
occasions. One occasion was when he had to go to Sheffield about 
the Vauxhall car, I believe As near as I can lemember, it must 
have been the end of October. Another occasion was when he went 
to a fair with a Mr. Dyson. That would he in November, I think. 
The third occasion was when he went to Devonshire to fetch a man 
hack. That was just before his arrest. Apart from those occasions 
there was never any other occasion when he was away from me for 
the night 

Particularly, I put it to you, on the 26th of September, the 
night of this terrible occurrence, where was your husband'? — At 
work; he returned from work between nine and ten that night. 

And then*? — ^He was at home all night. 

And after that, until he went this journey you told us of 
about the Vauxhall car, at the end of October, where was he sleep- 
ing each night?— At 33a Sisters Avenue. On Sunday, 25th Sep- 
tember, when we moved into 33a Sisters Avenue, my husbaAd 
leturned with the van about half-past eight or nine on the Sunday 
morning There were several large boxes, a bicycle, and a bed- 
stead on the van. They also biought my little girl back. The 
little hoy Billy Geddes accompanied my husband on the lorry that 
morning. I know Kennedy, who used to work at the office in my 
husbands garage. 

I want you to tell us, can he, or could he, drive a motor car? 
—Yes. 

Can you tell me anything about any occasion when you saw 
him actually drivings? — On one occasion he came up to my house 
with a Wolseley motor car and brought me some firewood. 

Do you remember any other occasion when he drove for your 
convenience somewhere? — No; he only took my little girl back to 
school with him on one occasion. It was Mr. Mistlin s car Mr. 
Mistlin is the owner of the Globe Cinema. I know that Kennedy 
had a driving licence; I have seen his motor licence. When the 
bicycle, boxes, (kc., arrived at 33a Sisters Avenue on Sunday, the 
25th, I unpacked the boxes. [Shown a box.] That was one of 
the boxes that came 

Will you tell us as nearly as you can what was in that box ? — 
There were lots of small electrical fittings and a thing called a pole 
finder in a metal box, and some forceps [Witness^ identified the 
box and forceps referred to.] I was present at Colvin Street, East 
Ham, some years ago when these things were stored at my sister^ s 
house there. They were in the box exactly as I found them after- 
wards. 

154 



Evidence for Defence. 

Mrs Caroline Ann Browne 

About the bandages, can you tell us anytliing about those ? — 
Yes; they are like something which I bought Tor redressing my 
husband’s hand, which ho hail poisoned. 

Where was he treated tor his hand? — At Buckliurst Hill, I 
believe, at a cottage hospital. 

Did you also assist in redressing him'? — Yes; ho would persist 
in working and got bis bandages so dirty, and 1 ledresserl them. 
As regards the tape, I bought that, astar as I can remember, in July, 
for the purpose of restiapping iny feet after I had them sieii to. 

I want you to tell us about this luuustarhe business? — About 
the end of October 1 went to the garage and I noticed my husband 
had singed his eyebrows and his moustache at one side He 
clipped his moustache down voiy, very close with some scissors. 
That was done in my presence. 

After that, was anything further done, or was it allowed to 
grow? — Just allowed to grow. With regard to what hapj^ened 
when my husband was anesled, I rememliev Mr Barker coming 
in and ariestiug my husbaml for stealing a Vauxhall car, and 
my husband sairl, How can you aoense me of stealing a car when 
I paid a fair [iiice for it? ’’ I jemenibcr iiuiting the kellle on to 
boil, and my husband made some cocoa liimself. He drank the 
cocoa then. I cannot remember hen, ring any more conversation 
between my husband and the oflicors at that tJuie. 

The Couit adjourned. 


155 



Fourth Day—Thursday, 26th April, 1928* 


Mrs. Caroline Ann Browne (recalled), cross-examined by 
Mr. Powell — Did you know from your husband or from Kennedy 
that he had taken out a licence in August for the purpose of 
learning to drive? — Noj I thought Kennedy could drive. 

You say you saw him on one occasion bring some firewood. 
Did you say you heard him or you saw him^ — No; he brought the 
firewood. 

Did you see him? — ^Yes. 

I suggest to you it was your husband who brought the fire- 
wood rounds — Noj it was Kennedy. 

Cross-examined by the Solicitor-General — Were you present 
in the Police Court when the various stages of the evidence were 
being taken ^ — ^Yes, I was there. 

It was not until the very last day, was it, the day when the 
two accused were committed for trial, that the evidence was given 
about the revolver and the cartridges? — I cannot quite follow you 

You know that evidence has been given in this case by some 
experts to say that a Webley revolver was the revolver which 
fired the cartridge found in the car? — Yes 

That evidence was given for the first time, was it not, on 
3rd April, the day on which they were committed for trial? — I 
cannot state the date, but it was the last day. 

And it was on the 10th April after that evidence had been 
given that you visited your husband in prison? — ^Yes. 

When you wrote a letter to the little girl Mabel Currie? — 
Yes 

On the back of it your husband asked a question from Currie 
designed to find out "the dale on which he said he had changed 
revolvers with Kennedy? — Yes 

Had you before that dale asked any questions from Currie 
about changing revolvers? — had not. 

You remember the day, I have no doubt, very well on which 
your husband was arrested? — ^Yes; the 20th January. 

On the morning of the 21st, when he was at Tooting Police 
Station, were you there? — I was there at eleven o'clock. 

And were you asked by Detective Sergeant Harris if' you 
would give the police some information about your life with your 
husband? — ^Yes; by Inspector Harris and Inspector Leach. 

I think you said that you would? — Yes. 

Let us just get the time and place clear. It was in the 
billiard room at the police station, was it not? — I believe it was. 

And at the time that you were asked to give the statement 
all the things that had been found were put out on the billiard 
table? — They were on the table 

156 



Evidence for Defence. 

Mrs Caroline Ann Browne 

As a matter ol fact, they were photographed on the table 
while you' were in the room? — "No; only the revolver, as far as 
I know. 

Some of them, at any rate, were photographed on the table 
while you weie in the room? — Yes 

I only want to ask you about one or two points I think it 
is fair to say the statement was not read over to you, nor were 
you asked to sign it? — No. 

But it was taken down by Sergeant Harris while you were 
there ? — ^Yes. 

Is it fair to say you made it quite voluntarily? — ^Yes. 

And were quite a considerable time in making — Yes. 

I think he asked you questions about the points they would 
like you to deal with? — ^Yes 

Do you remember their asking you something to this effect 
— ^whether you could remember whether your husband slept at 
your new home, 33a Sisters Avenue, for the first three nights 
after you had moved there? — ^Yes 

And this is what you said, I left my situation on the 20th 
September, 1927, so that we could set up house again. We moved 
to 33a Sisters Avenue on the 24th September. We moved in at 
midday, and he went back to the garage. As far as I can 
recollect, he slept at home that night and on the Sunday, but 
occasionally, if any one was coming into the garage late, so as 
not to disturb me, he slept at the garage, where he still had his 
bed ^’?— Yes 

You said that — ^Yes. 

And was that true? — ^Yes. 

Then were you asked about the various medical appliances 
which were on the table? — 1 do not think I was, not on that day. 

Let me try to remind you. Were you not asked about the 
lint, and did not you say that you had bought it? — Oh, yes. 

And was there not a bottle of iodex?. You remember the 
bottle of iodex? — ^Yes. 

You were aBl?:ed about these things that were all in the group 
together? — Yes; I had forgotten. 

Now that I have reminded you, let me see if this is what 
you said, My husband told me he had bought the lint because 
they were always cutting their hands ’’? — ^Yes; but some T had 
bought myself. 

I am going on It is quite right. Did you say you had 
bought some lint? — ^Yes. 

I have not got that down. At any rate, it is right, is it, 
that you said your husband told you he had bought the lint, or 
some lint? — ^Tes, 

Because they were always cutting their hands. A bottle of 
iodex I bought for my feet about last July.'' You said that, did 
you? — ^Yes. 

Be careful about this See if this is right, But with regard 

157 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mrs Caroline Ann Browne 

to the surgical instruments and other property taken possession 
of by the police I do not know anything about them. I remember 
he had an electric torch for examining the little parts of the 
car — I cannot remember saying the hist part which you have 
mentioned 

Just let us see. They asked you about the lint and the bottle 
of lodex, and theie were the surgical things and other things on 
the table, the forceps'^ — ^Yes 

Now, do you not think they must have asked you about them? 
— They may have; but if I had answered I must have said I 
had ihem. 

I have not put the whole of the rest of this long statement to 
you, because if I did we could check it all through and see 
how accurate it was as a whole, but so far ujd to this, would you 
have agreed that everything I have read to you w*as accurate? — 
Tes; up to the point of the surgical instruments 

Do you not think you must have said it on the 21st January? 
I am not suggesting you may not have said something else later 
on. On the 21st January, when they asked you about the surgical 
instruments, did you say, I do not know anything about them, 
I remember ho had an electric torch for examining little parts of 
the car — I could not have said anything about I did not 
know anything about the forceps,^' because I knew that he had 
them 

Perhaps this will help you. Did you point to one pair of 
scissors or forceps — I dare say they were called scissors — and say, 
‘‘ I notice a pair of scissors he had for some time — Well, they 
were an ordinary pair, quite a proper kind of scissors. 

Were they*? — ^What I saw. 

Would you be able to identify what you call a pair of 
scissors'? — ^Tes, if they were shown to me 

[Shown three pairs of forceps produced.] Was it any of 
these ? — No. 

Something quite different, was it^ — ^Tes; quite an ordinary 
pair of scissors. 

Now, the end of the sentence is right and the middle of the 
sentence is right. Are you not sure the beginning of the sentence 
is not right? — ^No ; I could not have said “ I do not know anything 
about these,’" because I knew that he had them. 

PiB-examined hy Mr. Lever — ^Tou were not asked to sign the 
statement, I understand? — ^No 

Was it read to you, the whole of it? — Not to my remembrance. 

Were these things taken up by you separately and examined 
one by one? — No. 

They were all on the table? — All on the table. 

^ To your recollection and remembrance did you say anything 
different about any of these things to what you have sworn in the 
witness-box to-day*? — ^No. 

158 



Evidence for Defence. 

Mrs Caroline Ann Browne 

By Mr. Justice Avobt — ^D id you give evidence at the Police 
Couifc? — No, sir. 

Do you remember Monday morning, the 26th September — 

Yes 

Do you remember what time your husband Browne went to 
the garage that morning? — To my remembrance it was about 
eight o’clock. 

Do you know what had been his habit? — Usually it was eight 
o’clock 

Accoiding to your recollection, did he never go earlier than 
that"? — Not often. 

Sometimes? — I have known him go at half-past seven, except 
on the Sunday morning he went to the garage early, on Sunday, 
the 25th 

What time did he go then? — ^About half -past five. 

And what time did he go on Tuesday morning, the STth^ — 
It must have been between nine and ten o’clock. 

Why was he so late*^ — Because on ,the Monday night we 
unpacked our boxes, and we were rather late in going to bed, 
and that is why he went rather late on the Tuesday morning 

]Mr Leveu — T hat is my case, my lord. 

Evidence for the accused Browne closed 

The Solicitor-General — My lord, I ask leave to recall 
Sergeant Harris with regard to one point at issue with regard to 
the statement made by the last witness. 

Mr. Justice Avort — Y es. 

John Harris (recalled), examined by the Solicitor-General — * 
It appears to be agreed, so I need not put it in detail to you, that 
Mrs. Browne gave you a statement on the m^^rning of the 2ist of 
January at the Tooting Police Station? — Yes; in the billiard room. 

At the time when you asked her for that statement had any 
charge of murder been made against her husband? — It was never 
mentioned there. 

I think you took down, as she made it, a statement which in 
length is some five and a half closely typed sheets? — ^Yes, sir. 

I do not want to go through any part of it at all, except the 
part 1 elating to the things which were on the billiard table. She 
has told us that the revolvers were there. Which of the medical 
appliances, if any, were there? — All that are now exhibits, and 
the bottle of iodex, which was not made an exhibit. The pair of 
scissors that she referred to were the long forceps. 

By Mr. Justice Avort — ^Did she call it scissors? — She called 
it scisBOis, my lord. Actually there were no ordinary scissors 
found or on' the table. 


159 



Browne and Kennedy. 

John Harris 

ExaTmnaUon continued — [Handed original statement in wit- 
nesses own handwriting]. Will you just tell us what you asked 
her and what she said with regard to those instruments and 
appliances 1 — The lint was on the table with the other stuff, as also 
were the surgical instruments and the others. She got up from 
her seat which was at the side of table, looked over the various 
exhibits that were there then, and spoke about them, and I wrote 
down, as she spoke, her remarks about them. We asked her 
previously if she could tell us anything about them, where they 
came from, and, as she replied, I wrote it down, and that is con- 
tained in this paragraph commencing My husband told me he 
bought the lint because they were always cutting their hands. The 
bottle of iodex I bought for my feet about last July, but with regard 
to the surgical instruments and other property taken possession of 
by the police I do not know about them, except I remember he had 
an electric torch for examining little parts of the car; I notice a 
pair of scissors he has had for sometime.’' [Referring to a pair of 
forceps.] The electric torch is the Sancy light. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Lever — ^You did not get her to sign 
the statement, and you did not read it over ? — Parts were read, not 
as a whole. 

Mr. Justice Avort — Now, Mr. ■'Psowell, what do you propose 
to do. 

Mr. Powell — My lord, the defendant Kennedy wishes to make 
a statement to the jury from the dock, and I call no evidence,^ 

Mr. Justice Avort {to Kennedy ) — ^You must speak loudly and 
clearly, because it is very difidcult for me to hear anything that h 
said from that part of the Court. 


Statejnent by Accused Kennedy. 

Accused KBJSTNBnT — Ladies and gentlemen, the statement whid 
I made to Inspector Berrett is absolutely true. I answered all th 
questions^ put to me at the time by Inspector Berrett, and th 
answers were dictated to Sergeant Harris, who wrote them dowr 
It has been mentioned by the prosecuting counsel that there ar 
one or two points which I had to explain. Had I been questione 
about them at the time I would have given the explanation I prt 
pose to give to you now. I had not the slightest idea on the nigl 
of the murder that Brown was carrying a revolver. The fin 

ilf Kennedy had gone into the witness-box his past life would have bei 
exposed under cross- examination. On the second day of the Trial Mr. Lev 
had told Mr. Powell that in Browne’s interest he would be bound to croi 
examine Kennedy on his ** record.” 

2 So emphatically contradicting Inspector Berrett’s evidence ! 

160 





Statement by Accused Kennedy. 

Accused Kennedy 

intimation I got of it was when I heard the first two shots fired. 
It was too late then for me to do anything to stop itj but I said. 
My Grod, what have you done? He told me to get out of the 
car quick, and then he walked over to the body of the constable, 
who was lying on his back at the hedge, and I endeavoured to 
push Browne away. Before I could get to him the second two 
shots were fired. The man was in an absolute mad frenzy. It was 
that that caused me to reload the revolver, I was so terrified by 
the way he acted and spoke, and I was in such a state of mental 
agitation by what I had seen, that I really did not know what I 
was doing. With regard to the automatic pistol found in my 
possession, it is perfectly correct, as I said in my statement, it was 
given to me by Browne before I left for Liverpool in December. 
My intention was to go abroad, as soon as I could raise the capital, 
to Africa, a country I knew very well, and there the pistol would 
have been specially useful for me in the wilds of Africa. I knew 
the police were after me in Liverpool, and my intention was to 
take the revolver out and lose it, because I thought that had it been 
found in my house my wife would have been implicated in some 
way, and that I wished to avoid. I was carrying it in my over- 
coat pocket, and when I was seized from behind by Sergeant 
Mattinson ray hand was jerked from the pocket, and the click that 
he described was undoubtedly, as described by the prosecuting 
counsel at the opening of the case at the Police Court, a click 
caused caused by the muzzle of the automatic striking on the 
button. That is no doubt what it was. I only intended to frighten 
him. I did not say to Sergeant Mattinson, Stand back, Bill, 
or ITl shoot you,’^ nor did I say to him at the police station, 
“ You should be in heaven now, and there was one for me.*^ This 
remark was overheard by Inspector Kirschner at Liverpool, who 
in his evidence at the Police Court distinctly said he heard me 
state I had no grudge against the police.’^ No reference to the 
other remark, " You should be in heaven npw, and there was one 
for me.'^ The reason I did not give information to the police 
about the murder was I was so terrified and I thought that had 
it been known that I was present at the time of the murder I 
would have been accused of it, although I was completely innocent 
of it. I can only now express my deep regret to Mrs* Gutteridge 
that I should have been in the car on the night of the crime. 

Mr. Powell — That is my case, my lord. 

Mr, Justice Avort — Is the witness Dyson still in attendance? 

The Solicitor-General — ^Yes, my lord. 

Mr. Justice Avort — Let him come back. 

John Frederick Dyson (recalled), further examined by Mr. 
Justice Avort — ^You are the man who was employed at the garage? 
— ^Yes, my lord. 

"V^at time did you usu^illy get there in the morning? — Eight 
o^cIock. 

M 


161 



Browne and Kennedy. 

John Frederick Dyson 

Was that your regular time? — ^Yes; except on two occasions I 
had to get there early to let two cars out. 

Were those any particular occasions? Do you remember 
when those were? — No, sir, I never took that much notice. 

But before the 26th November, were they? — ^No; I do not 
think they were, sir. 

Then when were they? — They would be in October, as far 
as I can recollect. 

Do you recollect Monday, the 26th September ? — No, I cannot. 

I have been trying to, but I cannot. 

Did you hear of the murder of Gutteridge — Only by reading 
the papei*. 

How soon did you hear it? — I could not possibly say. You 
read different cases eveiy night in the paper of some sort. 

Was it not in the newspapers very soon after it happened? — I 
could not say that, sir, but I remember reading it. 

Just take your mind back to the time when you first heard of 
it? — It would be on the Sunday after the murder. 

Not before? — No, my lord. 

Well, the Sunday after? — read it in the News of the World, 

I am positive of that, the Sunday after the murder, my lord. 

According to your recollection, were you there at the garage 
on the Tuesday morning of that week at the usual time? — ^Yes, 
my lord, all the week 

The usual time? — The usual time. 

Try and recollect. When you arrived there on the Tuesday 
morning was there anybody else there at the garage? — ^Yes; both 
the accused were at work when I arrived. 

Mr. Justice Avoet — ^D o either of you wish to ask any ques- 
tions on that? 

Mr. Lever — If I may, my lord, I should like to. 

Further cross-examined by Mr. Lever — I think you have told 
us that the first you noticed of the murder was when you read it in 
the News of the World. Would that be the Saturday or the 
Sunday? — On the Sunday after. 

As for a particular day of that week from the Sunday until 
you read about the thing in the newspaper, as far as you are con- 
cerned, can you remember anything extraordinary about those 
days? Was everything going on as usual? — ^Everything was going 
on as usual as far as I am aware. 

You did not take, I suppose, any particular notice of the 
times when anybody came in or went out? — No; not without I had 
instructions to take anything during the day. 

So when you are asked at what particular time Browne or 
Kennedy came in on any moiming you are not able to say? — I 
would not be near the office to see. 

Kennedy, we know, was sleeping there most of the time any- 
how ? — ^Yes. 

162 



Evidence for Defence. 

John Frederick Dyson 

But you cannot, can you, give any information at all to the 
Court as to the time Browne came in on any particular day ? — No, 
not a particular day. 

I mean, if you can help the Court you will ? — Certainly. 

Can you give any of us the slightest help as to anything about 
the time when Browne was there working or came in to work on 
any of those days? — As far as I can say he was always at work at 
the same time as I was every morning, unless he told me he would 
be a quarter of an hour or half an hour late. 

Whether it happened in that week you cannot say? — I cannot 

say. 

Further cross-examined by Mr. Powell — Until you answered 
my lord I suppose you did not know 'what you weie saying was 
exactly what Kennedy said in his statement to the police? You 
did not know that? — No, sir. 

Mr. Justice Avort — T hat will do. 


Closing Speech for the Accused Browne.^ 

Mr. Lever said when they had all read of the murder a 
picture rose before them which they could not forget. They had 
all felt angry at what had happened. When they read of 
Kennedy’s confession, they all said, They have got the right 
men, and Browne is the worst of them.^’ But, according to the 
law, that conclusion was hopelessly wrong. I am standing here 
to vindicate the law, as distinguished from sympathy. The law 
is not an ass it is a collection of the wisdom of centuries, 
and the law is that all that has been said against Browne in 
Kennedy’s statement is not evidence against him. The name of 
Browne appears in that confession some forty times, but it is 
not Browne so far as the law is concerne^A. And yet you and 
we felt it was Browne, that it was convicting Browne. 

Referring to the published reports of the police court pro- 
ceedings, he said: I would suggest humbly that any Govern- 

ment might well considei this question of whether preliminary 
proceedings should be published in full in a case of this kind — 
fair and accurate in a sense as they are — or whether it wouhl not 
be better that the jury should come into Court not informed as 
you wore, but should come fresh, with a fresh case, a fresh issue 
for trial, which is particularly vital to the man himself. The 
evidence against Browne is pitiful in its want of solidity, bub 
side by side with it is this horri^ilc statement in detail, a statement 
so cogent, so definite and dramatic, of the incident. You cannot 
get it out of your minds. It would^have been better for the jury 
if the judge had acceded to his application for a separate trial.’’ 

^ This, Mr. PowelFs, and the Solicitor- General’s speeches are considerably 
condensed. 


163 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr Lever 

Mr. Justice Avort — ^You have no right to say that. If our 
positions were reversed you would be entitled to say it. 

Mr. Lever said that he did not wish to make any personal 
attack on the judge^ but he would have been relieved to some 
extent of the one real difficulty in the way of Browne^ s defence — 
the statement made by Kennedy — if the cases had been tried 
separately. 

It is Kennedy's case that he did not shoot the constable But 
he says he was there, and somebody did the shooting. Would it 
have been listened to had he said he did not know who it was? 
Here in Browne was a man provided — a victim to his hand. 
Kennedy said he was at the murder, and I do not deny it. I do 
not say he committed the murder. I will not attack Kennedy 
any more than I am obliged. His position is bad enough as it is. 
That statement is a puzzling one. It is like a historical romance 
where you get partly fact and partly fiction to suit the person 
to whom the writer is appealing. But after Kennedy had made 
this Frankenstein he was afraid of the devil he had created. At 
the police court it was suggested that the statement had been 
obtained by threats. Now there is a complete volte-face, and 
nothing is said about the way it was obtained. 

The evidence showed that Kennedy had concocted a lot of 
lies to save his neck without any consideration for anybody else. 

Have you ever read a more lying, subtle, or incredible docu- 
ment than this is? He makes himself out as a mere lamb. 1 
will content myself by mentioning his arrest by Sergeant Mattin- 
son. An automatic pistol with which he tried to shoot the detec- 
tive is surely a curious fang for a lamb to show. Ask yourself 
whether Kennedy was a lamb or whether he is that most treacherous, 
most dangerous of all animals, a wolf in sheep's clothing. 

He submitted that when Dr. Lovell's motor car was found in 
Foxley Koad, Brixtop., it had marks upon it to show that it had 
been in collision probably twice. This car was brought back 
by an unskilled driver," he said, and that driver was Kennedy.'^ 

Keferring to the fact that Kennedy had not given evidence in 
the box and submitted himself to cross-examination, Mr, Lever 
declared — “ He has taken all the advantage of a coward's screen 
by the panel of the dock." 

When Browne was in the box the jury had seen human 
nature at the roots. He is not a lovable man ; he begins with 
quibbling over the words of the oath. He is a man whose appear- 
ance and demeanour I should think would not endear themselves 
to anybody. But you have to judge him, not as lawyervS, and you 
will remember the strain he has passed through. A man perhaps 
never of the sweetest disposition, his temperament has been in- 
jured, and he must appear at his worst in the ordeal which he 
had the courage to face, although others might shrink from it. 
That explains his fighting attitude. He wants no sympathy, and 

164 : 



Closing Speech for Accused Browne. 

Mr Lever 

I should say he is the type of man who would treat it with 
contempt. 

He urged that the irresistible inference was that the weapon 
from which the shots were fired was the property of Kennedy and 
not Browne. Of the two pistols which were found in his car^ one 
belonged to Kennedy on 27th September, 1927. Where Browne 
got the other he declined to say, not as a cur but as a man. There 
was no evidence that Browne had used the levolver which killed 
Gutteridge — a revolver which Browne neither owned noi possessed 
at the time. The medical instruments and appliances which were 
found in Browne’s possession were the ordinary things that one 
would expect to find in a country doctor’s “ kit.” They were 
produced in large quantities, and they could be obtained anywhere. 
No attempt w|ls made by Browne to conceal those articles, which 
it was inconceivable, if they had come into his possession in the 
way in which the prosecution suggested, that he should keep lying 
about for months. All the efforts made by the prosecution had 
failed to produce the slightest evidence that Browne was anywhere 
near the scene of the murder on the night of 26th September. 

And now, members of the jury, my work in this case is 
finished. It has been made tolerable only by your great patience, 
for which I thank you. The frail shield which I have been able 
to hold before my client must now be laid aside. He stands face 
to face with you, with each man and woman of you. No one 
must come between you, not any counsel nor any judge. He 
stands before you in his rights of a man, a human being like your- 
selves, endowed with the same faculties, crowned with the same 
spiritual attributes, but near him hovers the dark angel of death. 
He asks you for no sympathy, but he does demand justice, and 
if you can throw off this burden of prejudice, if you can by a 
superhuman effort rise to the high plane of abstract justice, he 
will await your decision not in despair, but*.in hopeful anticipation 
of receiving at last, at long last, a verdict of acquittal at your 
hands.” 


Closing Speech for the Accused Kennedy. 

Mr. Powell said Kennedy had not gone into the witness-box 
because, when the time came for him to decide whether he should 
do so or not, all the evidence which he required to prove his 
innocence was before the Court. ^ Witness after witness for the 
prosecution had proved Kennedy’s innocence. The question which 
had to be decided was not how Kennedy’s statement came into 
existence, but whether it was true. If he had spoken the truth 
in that statement, what need was there that he should say it all 

^ Surely the reason why Kennedy was nob put into the witness-box was that 
he dared not face cross-examination. 


165 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr Powell 

over again on oath? The truth was as valuable whether it were 
given on oath or in any other way. Kennedy’s statement was 
made before he had had any opportunity of consulting with his 
legal advisers. Even if there were a revolver in Browne’s garage 
on 26th September, what evidence was there that Kennedy knew 
that Browne had it in his pocket on the fatal night? The jury 
were not to guess about his knowledge. Kennedy’s life was not 
to depend on a guess. It was for the prosecution to prove that 
Kennedy knew that Browne had the revolvei and acquiesced in 
its use, and this the prosecution had failed to prove It was 
not enough for the Ciown to make out a case of suspicion. He 
said he was not only attacked by the prosecution, but he was 
more or less forced into the position of prosecuting Browne. 

It IS a most unhappy position to be in, but it^is not a posi- 
tion of my choosing. But at any rate I have the satisfaction 
that Kennedy’s attitude was declared and his defence put forward 
before any lawyer had any communication with him. 

To establish Kennedy’s guilt it was necessary to prove that 
Kennedy knew when he went out that night that Browne had a 
revolver. 

Mr. Justice Avort pointed out that if Kennedy knew at any 
moment before the shots were fired, and was a party to the shoot- 
ing, he would be guilty. 

Mr. Powell — My case is that Kennedy, as he has told you 
from the dock, did not know Browne had a revolver till he heard 
the two shots. It follows that he could not have been a party 
to the shooting. The letter written by Browne in invisible ink 
was a cunning plot on the part of Browne to incriminate Kennedy. 
In that letter he asked for the date when he changed revolvers 
with Kennedy with which he may have shot the policeman.” Did 
you notice, in one of Browne’s rambling replies to the Solicitor- 
General, he said, ” 06 course the officials found it out I knew 
they always read letters ” ? 

Browne’s story about his having received the service revolver 
from Kennedy in exchange for an automatic pistol some time in 
November or December was a cunning plot to inculpate Kennedy. 
When Browne wrote the message in invisible ink on the back 
of the envelope on 10th April he knew that it would be seen by 
the prison authorities, and it was reasonable to infer that he 
wanted it to be seen. What happened when Kennedy was arrested 
at Liverpool occurred too long after the murder for it to be p*ut 
into the scales against Kennedy on the present charge. In sug- 
gesting that Kennedy had really .tried to shoot him Detective 
Sergeant Mattinson had exaggerated. It was clear that Kennedy 
had done nothing more than to try and bluff the ofiicer. Kennedy 
was absolutely conversant with the pistol, which had been in his 
possession for some time. He could have pressed down the safety- 
catch while the pistol was in his pocket. He was stated to have 

. 16a 



closing Speech for Accused Kennedy. 

Mr Powell 

said to the sergeant^ Stand back, or I will shoot! The 
sergeant did not stand back, and Kennedy did not shoot, and 
when he was searched the pistol was found in his pocket with the 
safety-catch still up The quality of your merciful considera- 
tion will not be strained in a matter of this sort. Is there not 
room for Kennedy’s veision about that — ^that it was all bluff, that 
he never intended to shoot the officei, and that if he had wanted 
to shoot him he could have done so. Passage after passage in 
Kennedy’s statement had been corroborated by witnesses called 
for the prosecution. On 26th September Kennedy said that he 
and Browne went to Billericay by train to steal a Baleigh car. 
Then came the incident of a dog and a dustbin — an incident 
which was of fundamental impoitance in considering whether 
Kennedy knefvv that Browne was cariying a revolver. Kennedy 
said in his statement, A dog came out and, staiting to bark, 
it made Browne leave and join me, and he said, ' It’s no good 
here. We cannot get back by train, so we will try somewhere 
else.’ ” 

Referring to Kennedy’s statement that he told Biowne to 
stop when they met the policeman, he said, I cannot under- 
stand myself why they did stop. I should have thought they 
would have gone on, but perhaps they were afraid of the police- 
man’s whistle.” 

When Browne left the box he had proved that he was a person 
on whose word not an atom of teliance could bo placed. Browne’s 
evidence added nothing in weight against Kennedy. I have never 
heard a case in a criminal court where the prisoner’s story is so 
much corioborated by the prosecution itself. 

Quoting Kennedy’s statement that he begged Browne not to 
shoot a second time — Does that show the monster and the callous 
brute? Does it not show that although he may bo a burglar he 
is not a murderer? If Browne could behave as he did in the 
witness-box, with everything calculated to put him on Ins best 
behaviour, how did the jury think he would act on the occasion 
of the murder? How many times did they think they ought to 
magnify his mad conduct in the witnoss-box? Can you not 
jdeture the state of terror and anxiety in which Kennedy lived 
during this time from the moment the fatal shots were fired? 
With this dread secret which Brown© would have holding over 
his head, do you not think that Kennedy might be terrified of 
going away lest Browne should accuse him of having committed 
the murder? I suggest that ^ Browne did shoot the officer. Did 
Kennedy agree with Browne that in stealing the car firearms 
should be used? I submit that the prosecution have not proved 
that. If you believe that, there is not one of you who would be 
prepared to take the first step in ushering this man into eternity. 


167 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Closing Speech for the Crown. 

The Solicitor-General said that the two real points with 
which Browne was concerned and with which the jury had to deal 
were the possession of the critical revolver and of the doctor’s 
property. The man who was in possession of that property had been 
in possession of the car in which the property was. Don’t forget 
that the motor car was never in possession of anybody except the 
doctor until between seven o’clock of the night of 26th September 
when the doctor locked it up and about 6 p.m. the next day 
when it was taken to Brixton Police Station. 

Where was the second Webley revolver? You have no evi- 
dence about that from anybody. Do you think that going out on 
an expedition like this — I am assuming that you have accepted 
the fact that Browne was the second man on this expedition — do 
you think that with at least two revolvers on the premises at home 
he would have gone on this car-stealing expedition content to be 
the only one armed? Was that his way? Do you think, to use 
a military metaphor, that Browne would have been content to 
leave his left flank unguarded? 

He pointed out that there was nothing in Kennedy’s state- 
ment about Browne handing Kennedy any ammunition for re- 
loading the revolver after the crime. Referring to Kennedy’s 
declaration from the dock that he reloaded the revolver because 
he was terrifled of Browne, he suggested that he had reloaded it 
for one purpose only — ^to resist any one who should oppose their 
escape. There is only one charge, aye or no. Was Kennedy 
guilty of murder ? If you think he was not, say so. Similarly 
in regard to Browne, if you think these matters or circumstantial 
evidence — putting aside Kennedy’s statement as having nothing to 
do with Browne — are inconclusive, and do not satisfy you he was 
the man who fired th^ shots, don’t hesitate to say so. I am 
bound to submit on behalf of the prosecution that there is abun- 
dant evidence on which you should infer the guilt of both these 
prisoners. 

Mr. Justice Avort said that it was too late to start summing 
up. 

The Court adjourned. 


168 



Fifth Day—Friday, 27th April, 1928. 


Charge to the Jury. 

Mr. Justice Avort — Members of the ]ury, at the outset of the 
observations which I am going to make to you I would remind 
you, although it may be superfluous to do so, of the principles 
which must guide you in the determination of this case. First of 
all, it must be determined upon the evidence and the arguments 
which you have heard in this Court and not influenced by any 
prepossession •or ideas that you may have entertained before you 
came into that jury-box; and by the evidence I mean, of course, 
that which is legal evidence against either of the accused. In 
this connection I would remind you once more, although you 
may be tired of hearing it, that the statement made by the accused 
Kennedy is evidence against Kennedy alone, and is not evidence 
against Browne. The second principle which should guide you is 
that you must deliver your verdict without regard to the con- 
sequences of it, the responsibility for which is in other hands. 
You have heard expressions from the learned counsel representing 
the accused of this nature, ** That the angel of death is hovering 
near one of them,’' and That each one of them is fighting for 
his life.” Those are expressions which are not infrequently used 
in grave cases of this description ; they are calculated to deter you 
from doing your duty, which in this case is the same as in any 
criminal case, namely, to return a true verdict according to the 
evidence. The third principle which must guide you, and which, 
above all, you must bear in mind, is that the burden of proof 
in this case is upon the prosecution to satisfy you that the accused, 
and each of them, are guilty, and it is not for them to satisfy 
you that they are innocent. 

I will now say one word about the application that was made 
to me to order a separate trial in this case, and I should not have 
thought it necessary to make any further observation upon it, but 
from what fell from the learned counsel, Mr. Lever, who told you 
that in his opinion it would have been better if I had granted 
that application instead of refusing it. I presume he meant that 
in his view it would have been better for him if I had done so, 
but you know the views of learned counsel, either for the 
defence or for the prosecution/ often do not coincide with the views 
of the presiding judge, and you may remember that, when making 
this application, he stated in your hearing that the accused Ken- 
nedy would in the ordinary course be called as a witness in this 
case, and the learned counsel who represented Kennedy concurred 
in the application and made no protest against that statement. 

169 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr JusLice Avory 

Mr. Powell — Would your lordship allow me if I iniervene? 

I ought to say that my learned friend made that statement entirely 
on his own responsibility, and had no sort of authority from me 
and nothing from me at all to suggest it. I had decided from the 
beginning that I was not going to call Kennedy. 

Mr. Justice Avory — 1 have not said otheiwise, Mr. Powell. 

Mr. Powell — My fiiend spoke entirely on his own respon- 
sibility j he did not have it from me, my lord. 

Mr. Lever — never pretended to do anything else. 

Mr. Justice Avory — Members of the jury, the learned counsel 
in his address to you also told you that he could not doubt that 
before you ever came into that box you already were well 
acquainted with the statement which Kennedy had made. That 
may be true or it may not, but in any event, looking at all that 
has transpired in this case, I lemain of the same opinion, that I 
did not err in refusing that application, and I have sufficient con- 
fidence in your sense of justice to know that the accused Browne 
will not he prejudiced in this case by the fact that both of them 
have been tried together. 

The rule of law which determines that the statement made by 
Kennedy behind the hack of Browne is not evidence against Browne 
is, after all, only a rule of common sense, and you must be per- 
fectly well aware that no man ought to be prejudiced whether in 
or outside a Court of law by a statement which is made behind 
his back and which he has no opportunity at the time of refuting. 

With those preliminaiy observations let me now suggest to 
you it will he for your convenience in arriving at your con- 
clusipn that you should consider this case in the light of four 
questions. Please understand that I am not inviting you to 
return specific answers to these questions; I am only suggesting 
them as a convenient mode by which you may deliberate and arrive 
at youi conclusion. They are — (1) Was Police Constable 
Grutteridge murdered by some person or persons on the night of the 
26th September, 1927? (2) Was the murder committed by the 

person or persons who had stolen Dr. LovelPs car ? (3) Were these 

two persons in Dr. LovelFs car at the time when the murder was 
committed? and (4), if so, if they were in that car, which of 
them shot him; if only one, were they acting together with a 
common purpose to prevent their detention or arrest? 

Mr. Lever — My lord, with very great deference might I, 
without disrespect, suggest that the question as to whether the 
accused were in the car should be divided into two ; first, was 
Browne in the car, and, secondly, . was Kennedy. Might I sug- 
gest that, my lord. 

Mr. Justice Avory — You may suggest it, hut it is quite un- 
necessary; the jury, I am quite sure, are of sufi&cient intelligence 
to understand when they ask themselves whether the accused were 
in the car, whether there were both of them or only one. 

170 



Charge to the Jury. 

IVlr Justice Avorsr 

Members of the juiy, now upon the first question : 'was Police 
Constable Gutteridge murdered on the night of the 26th September 
— ^because that, of course, is the foundation of this chai’i»o — you 
have the fact that at tweniy-five minutes past tluee in the morn- 
ing of the 27th, or about half-past three, the police constalde was 
on duty at the conference point 'where Police Constable Taylor 
met him; he was then well and apparently in good heallh and in 
the execution of his duty. At six o'clock that morning his body 
was found 638 yards fium that conference point killed by bullet 
wounds, and learned counsel for the defence in this case ’aave 
themselves used the expression that ‘‘ he was there found brutally 
and foully murdered.'^ He was found in a reclining position 
against the bank by the side of the loatl with a trail of blood 
starting about six feet from the opposite side of the road and 
extending to the spot where he lay; his helmet was off, lus pocket 
book was close to the body, and in lus right hand, between his 
finger and thumb, was his jioncil. Can you doubt, that after he 
was upon his back the person or persons who shot him deliberalely 
tired those two shots into each of his eyes 

That is all it is necessary foi me to say to enable you to 
answer the first question whether he was in fact murdered between 
the hours of half-jiast three and six o’clock on that mtaming. 
That he was in the execution of his duty at the time you ]>robably 
will not doubt, whet.her it was some footpassenger or w'liether it 
was some peison or poisons in a vehicle or motor car l.hat he was 
taking particulars from. 

One observation was made by Mr, INnvell yesterday, wlieii he 
said, I think inadvertonlly, siioaking on behalf of Kennedy 
(assuming that Kennedy was the person who was in the t^.ar at 
the time), that, the felony of stealing t.ho car was theji coinjileted. 
Well, that was quite erroneous. Jf, in fact, this c.onstable was 
taking particulars from some povsou who had stolen that car from 
Dr. Lovell the felony of stealing t.he oar was still in progress; 
whoever the persons wore they wore still stealing the oar at- the 
time the constable stopped them, if he did slop tho persons in the 
car, and any one who was stealing that car would have lieen liable 
to be arrested and charged in any place through which he passed 
on the way to London. Thai is only by t.he way; I only thought 
it necessary to correct, an olisorvation which was probably in- 
advertently made. 

Now, passing to tho next question : if you are satisfied he 
was murdered, was the murder coinmitt.ed by tho person or persons 
who had stolen Dr, LovelTs <5ar? You know that that car was 
stolen some time after half-past twelve on the morning of the 
27th, because Dr, Lovell did not go to bod till half-past twelve 
or later, and there was no sound of any disturbance such as he 
would probably have heard if anybody had been breaking into 
that garage before he went to bed, A witness named Wilson has 

171 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr Justice Avory 

told you that somewhere about half-past two on that morning he 
was awakened by the noise of a car being started up somewhere 
between his house and Dr. Loveirsj and you know from the descrip- 
tion given by Dr. Lovell that the car would run down of its own 
weight from the garage to the road, because it was there upon an 
incline. Therefore any persons who broke into that garage and 
stole the car might, and probably would, run it down to the road 
before starting it up, particularly if they were anxious to avoid 
making the noise of starting it up at the house. And another 
witness named Stevens has told you that on that night, he having 
gone to bed some time after midnight and gone to sleep, was 
awakened by the flash of the light of a car passing and going 
towards the Mountnesaing Road, and, he being familiar with the 
sound of Dr. Lovell's car at the time, recognised ^and believed 
that it was Dr. Lovell's car that was passing his house That 
stolen car arrived the next morning, the same morning rather, at 
21 Foxley Road, Brixton, at some time before seven o'clock in 
the moining, because, as you remember by the evidence of the 
witness who came out of his house at half-past seven, he found 
the car there, in the passage with the radiator still warm, and 
to arrive at Foxley Road, Brixton, that car in the ordinary course 
on its way to London might have passed the spot where the dead 
body of Police Constable Gutteridge was found. Further, there 
is evidence that on the ofE-side of the running board of that car 
were found spots of human blood in a position on that running 
board where they might have been caused, if the police constable 
was standing by the side of the car at the time when he was shot, 
bearing in mind that the wounds which injured or severed the 
carotid artery would have caused much spurting of blood. And, 
further, in that car at 6 45 in the evening of that same 27th 
September there was found the empty cartridge case which is now 
identified beyond dispute as the cartridge case which had been in 
the revolver which is called exhibit 17, the revolver upon which so 
much turns in the case of Browne as distinguished from the case 
of Kennedy. So far as Kennedy is concerned, the question whether 
the murder was committed by persons or by a person who stole 
Dr. Lovell's car is, of course, beyond controversy, because he 
admitted in his statement that he was party to the breaking into 
that garage and to the stealing of that car, and that he was in 
that stolen car at the time when the police constable was shot j 
that is only as far as Kennedy is concerned. I have been point- 
ing out the other facts in the case to enable you to come to the 
conclusion, apart from Kennedy's . statement, whether you can 
entertain any reasonable doubt that the murder was in fact com- 
mitted by some person or persons who had stolen Dr. Lovell's car. 

Now we come to the third question : were the accused, both 
of them, in Dr. Lovell's car at the time when the murder was 
committed? As I have just observed, it is admitted by Kennedy 
172 



Mr Justice Avory 


Charge to the Jury. 


that he was there in the car at the time when the police constable was 
shot. What IS the evidence upon which you are invited to come 
to the conclusion that Browne was also there? On the 20th 
January of this year Browne is found in possession of a revolver, 
from which the cartridge was fired, and at that time on the 20th 
January he is found in possession of ammunition similar to that 
with which the wounds in the police constable were caused. Three 
bullets weie found which had wounded the constable. One bullet 
was found in the ground under the police constable's head, and is 
identified as what is called a Mark I E.L. (Iloyal Laboratory), 
and it was a bullet which had been fired with black powder. 
Another bullet was also found iia the road, and is the bullet which 
had come out of the neck of the constable, and that is identified as 
also a Mark I bullet, and had been fired with cordite. The third 
bullet was feund actually in the brain of the dead man, and is 
identified as being either a Mark IT or a Mark IV, also fired with 
cordite. On the 20th January Browne is found, as I have told 
you, in possession of ammunition which corresponds with that. 
The revolver which was found in the back of the Angus-Sander- 
son car that Browne was driving, and drove into the garage on 
the 20th January, was loaded with six cartridges; two of those are 
Mark I, one of them is a Mark II, and, of the two which arc 
Mark I, one is loaded with cordite and the other is loaded with 
black powder, so that you find him on the 20th January — ^but it 
may be a coincidence only, that is for you to judge — ^but you 
find him actually in possession of a revolver loaded with two cart- 
ridges, at all events, corresponding with those with which the 
constable had been murdered; and in the revolver which was found 
in the pocket of the Angus car — ^that is the revolver upon which 
so much depends — in that revolver there were found six cart- 
ridges, all Mark IV. So that it is clearly established, and I have 
said it may be a mere coincidence, but it is established that on 
the 20th January Browne was in possession of the revolver from 
which the cartridge found in the car had been discharged, and he 
is in possession of ammunition which had undoubtedly been used 
in the murder of the police constable. 

Now we come to what is undoubtedly, so far as Browne's case 
is concerned, a crucial question, and thab is, was Browne in 
possession of that revolver on the night of the 26th September? 
Early on the morning of the 21st January, soon after his arrest, 
Browne made a statement to the inspector. At that time when 
he made his statement at 12.4,5 in the morning of the 21st January 
the only revolver which had been found was the revolver from, 
which that particular cartridge had been fired; that had been 
found in the pocket of the Angus-Sanderson car in the right-hand 
or off-side pocket by the driver's seat, and that was the only one 
which at that time had been found and the only one of which the 
inspector who was taking this statement had any knowledge, and 

173 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr Justice Avory 

in the course of his statement Browne said this — remember it 
had been not only found, but produced, brought in to where the 
inspector was and produced, and Browne said: I have been 

asked by Inspector Berrett to account for the Webley revolver 
found in my possession which was loaded in six chambers. I wish 
to say I have never fired the revolver since I first had it. I got 
it some time in April last. I gave <£3 for it down at Tilbury 
Docks from a sailor man whose name I do not know, neither can 
I describe him. He was an ordinary seaman. It was unloaded 
when I bought it. The anununition with which it is loaded I 
obtained from anothei man, together with a number of other 
cartridges which were found in my hip pocket. I knew the man 
I got the ammunition from in the Army. I do not wish to say 
who the man is. The ammunition is very old in type, and was 
made previous to the war. Shortly after I got thtj revolver it 
began to go rusty, and I kept it well oiled. I have never used 
it. I loaded it so that it would frighten any one in case they 
interfered with me, and the reason I carried the weapon was 
because at the beginning of the war, when I was working for the 
Pytchley Autocar Company, deliveiing cars by road in different 
parts of the country, I was stopped on two occasions, once when 
I was going through Gloucester to South Wales and a man at 
dusk signalled to me when I was driving the car to stop. As I 
slowed down in accordance with his signal, and I was engaged on 
the near side speaking to him, two other men jumped on the ofi- 
side running board and demanded money. I was unprepared, 
and gave them what little money I had. Some six weeks after 
that occasion, when going to Bournemouth with another car, the 
same kind of thing happened to me with a man calling on me to 
stop, but I declined on this occasion to stop. After this second 
occasion I made up my mind to be armed when taking cars to the 
countiy, and I purchased a revolver with a long barrel, but I 
had no ammunition.’^ TN’ow, can you doubt — in view of the fact 
that Browne professes to know the difference between these two 
revolvers, the one which he says went rusty and the other which 
is called the newer one — can you doubt, seeing that the one which 
was produced at that time about which he was being asked was 
the newer one, that Browne was in fact referring to that when he 
said that he had had it since April, and that he had bought it 
from a sailor at Tilbuiy Docks? He now says that he was not 
referring to that one which was then produced, but referring to 
the other one which had not then been found. 

After this statement had been taken, another police officer, 
I think his name is Bevis, made another examination of the Angus- 
Sanderson car, and he then found in that little cupboard at the 
back of the driver’s seat the second revolver, also loaded with six 
cartridges, and he brought that into the place where the inspector 
and Browne were, and said at the time in the presence of Browne — 
174 



Charge to the Jury. 


Mr Justice Avory 

he came in holding the revolver m his hand, and said he had found 
it in the car. And that having taken place, on the following day, 
the 22nd January, the inspector had another interview with 
Browne, at which Browne was again cautioned that anything he 
said would be taken down and might be given in evidence, and 
he said then, with reference to this second revolver, which you 
know is the one called the older one : I have also been shown a 
Webley revolver, which I know was a second one found in the 
Angus-Sanderson car fully loaded. I have also seen 24 cartridges 
in a handkerchief found in my rooms, 11 cartridges found in my 
house, .45 and two packets of .45 ammunition, and 16 cartridges 
found on the dresser of the inner ojBfice at my garage I admit 
they were where you said they were found, and I admit having 
them, but I decline to give any explanation where I got them.’’ 
Now, in view^of the fact that that second revolver which was pro- 
duced to him on the 22nd January is the oldei revolver, again 
you must ask youi selves whether you can doubt that on the previous 
day Browne was refeiiing to the newer revolver, the one from 
which the cartridge had been fired that was found in the car, 
and that he was saying on the 21st January that he had bought 
that revolver in April from a seaman and had had it in his pos- 
session since that time 

We will turn now to his evidence in the witness-box upon 
this point. In his examinalion-in-chief he said : I kept the 

two Webley revolveis at the garage I was referring to the older 
revolver when I said it began to go rusty. I was referring to the 
newer one when I said I got it from a sailor.’’ There is his 
admission in the plainest possible terms when he was giving his 
evidence, examined by his own counsel, that when he spoke of 
purchasing a revolver from a sailor man in April of last year he 
was referring to the revolver from which that cartridge had been 
discharged. And he emphasised it by adding: The latter ” — 
that is this pistol — I have had since April.” Then he was cross- 
examined, and he was asked about the automatic pistol which you 
remember was found in the possession of Kennedy at the time 
when he was arrested on the 25lh January. Browne said : I got 
this automatic pistol on or about the 7th October, and I gave it 
to Kennedy, and he gave me in exchange the new revolver. I 
gave it to him just before he went to Liverpool in December. I 
was refen ing to the older revolver when 1 said to Inspector Berrett 
that I had bought it in April from a sailor.” Now, it is for you 
to judge whether, in view of the statement which he had made to In- 
spector Berrett, and in view of the evidence which he gave in his 
examination-in-chief, you can .have any doubt that Browne said 
originally that he had had that revolver since April in his pos- 
session, and that he had bought it off a sailor, but that, when 
he began to be pressed in cross-examination, he, for the first time, 
altered that story and said that he had not had it at the crucial 

175 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr Justice Avory 

time, namely, on the 26th September — altered his story into one 
putting the responsibility on Kennedy for the possession of that 
revolver, and suggesting for the first time that on the 26th Septem- 
ber Kennedy, and not he, was the person who was in possession of 
that revolver. This story of the exchange with Kennedy on or 
after the 7th October is one which you heard and which no one 
else ever heard befoie. Browne was in that witness-box the day 
before yesterday. Why, if it is true, did not it appear in the 
statement which he was making to Inspector Berrett, and why, if 
it is true that on the 21st January he was referring to the older 
revolver and on the 22nd January was referring to the newer 
levolver — ^why was he saying at that time that he declined to 
give any explanation of wheie he had got it? BLis learned counsel 
has suggested to you that the reason why he said on the 22nd 
January that he would not tell wheie he got it was because he 
was shielding Kennedy, and I think it was in that connection that 
the learned counsel said : ‘'He is not a cur like Kennedy, at that 
time he was saying this to shield Kennedy,'^ in other words, that 
he did not want to disclose to the inspector that he had received 
that revolver from Kennedy. Ask yourselves why should he he 
shielding Kennedy at that time, shielding him from what? What 
was there at that time, on the 22nd January, that required that 
he should shield Kennedy? What can it mean unless it means 
that he knew at that time that Kennedy had had some part in the 
killing of that constable with that particular revolver, and, if 
that is what it means, how did Browne at that time, on the 
22nd January — how did Browne know that Kennedy had had any 
part in the killing of that constable with that revolver? Now, the 
matter does not stop there with regard to this revolver. On the 
3rd April in this year evidence was given at the police court for 
the first time that the cartridge found in the car had undoubtedly 
been fired from what has been so often referred to as the new 
revolver. On the 10th April Mrs. Browne visited Browne in 
prison. She apparently took with her to the prison a letter which 
Sie had written to “ Miss Mabel Currie, 18 Douglas Terrace, Park- 
wood Springs, Sheffield, an ordinary letter to which no objec- 
tion, of course, would be taken if it was found upon her when 
she went into the prison. A friendly letter addressed “ Dear 
Mabel. Sorry I did not answer your letter, but I have been so 
busy, also I did not realise it was such an expensive journey. I 
hope you are all keeping well. Needless to say, I did not make 
my fortune on the Grand National; hope some of you did. Will 
you let me hear from you by return if possible. Tours sincerely, 
C. A,"' — or C. F. — “ Browne And although no explanation has 
been given of how this came about, I presume you will probably 
presume that Mrs. Browne must have taken to Browne some ink — 
I presume it is not a thing prisoners are supplied with in prison — 
and on the back of this letter Browne wrote in invisible ink these 

176 



Mr Justice Avory 


Charge to the Jury. 

words: Can you tell me the date when Pat Kennedy divided 

a small heap of jewellery — (if you have a copy, just check me, 
because it is difficult to read) — '' divided a small heap of jewellery 
in two and I tossed to see which I should have 

Mr. Roome — “ Which I should take/' I think it is, my lord. 

Mr. Justice Avort — Which I should take, he the others. '' 
Now, these are the important words . ''Will you let me know by 
return the date it was that I exchanged levolvers with Kennedy 
after he may have shot P.C. Just quote date by return as near 
as possible, Fred." No explanation has been given as to who it 
was who was expected to quote the date when revolvers were 
exchanged. This letter apparently went to some girl we are told 
of eleven years of age, named Miss Mabel Currie ! What did she 
know about the date when the revolvers were exchanged? If she 
did know an'y thing about it, why has not she been called to tell 
us? It is for you to judge. The prosecution, you know, suggest 
that after the evidence had been given on the 3rd April, from 
which apparently there appeared to be no escape, namely, that 
that cartridge found in the car had been discharged from that 
particular revolver, and Browne having up to that time told the 
police that he had had that revolver himself since April, there 
IS here for the fiist time on the lOth or 11th April in this year 
being made a suggestion that he had got it in exchange from 
Kennedy. Now, you have got to consider the circumstances of the 
arrest of Browne on the 20th January, bearing in mind you are 
not to convict Browne or Kennedy, or any man, upon the ground 
that you think from his conduct he is a person likely to commit a 
particular crime, but in a case of this description, particularly in 
view of the statement made by Biowne that he has never fired a 
revolver in his life, that he only keeps revolvers loaded, at least 
four — ^that he only keeps them loaded in order to prevent them 
going rusty — in view of those statements . in particular it is im- 
portant that you should consider the circumstances which occurred 
at the time of his ariest. Detective Sergeant Miller, who arrested 
him, who saw him drive the Angus- Sanderson car into the garage 
at ta Northcote Road, Battersea, tells you that he had, after 
Browne had been taken into custody, gone to 33a Sisters Avenue, 
where Browne at that time was living, and, in a room pointed 
out by Mrs. Browne as their room, he found a small nickel-plated 
revolver fully loaded with six cartridges, and at the police station 
he put that revolver on the table before Browne, and Browne 
said, " You have found that, have you, that is no good, it would 
only tickle you unless it hit you in a vital part. If you had 
stopped me when I was in the car I should have shot ^jT 
you and saved one for myself,” and half a minute after he s^ii, 
" From what I can see of it I shall have to have a machine-gun 
for you bastards next time.” The inspector who had Browne in 
charge on that evening, and who, as you know, had charged him 

N 177 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr Justice Avory 

only -with stealing a Vauxhall car, found in Browne^s pocket a 
driver’s licence in the name of Frederick Harris, and Browne said, 

That is a dud in case I am stopped.’^ The inspector adds that 
when they found in Browne’s trousers’ pocket twelve cartridges, 
servic'e cartridges which can be fired from a Webley revolver, 
Browne said, '' That’s done it; now you have found them, it’s all 
up with me,” nothing at that time having been said about any 
crime of violence. And they found in his pocket a mask, which 
was produced, and Browne said, “ There you are, you have got 
it now; that’s the lot, you won’t find anything else.” It was upon 
that that Detective Bevis came in with the new ” Webley re- 
volver in his hand and the six cartridges which he had taken out 
of it, and Detective Bevis said, I have just found this fully 
loaded in the off-side pocket by the driver’s seat of the Angus 
car outside,” and Browne said, You have found thtit, have you; 
I am done for now.” Hawkyard, another detective, has sworn he 
heard Browne say, That’s done it; now you have found them, 
it’s all up with me,” and when the mask was found he said, 

There you are, you have got the lot now,” and when Bevis 
brought in the revolver Browne said, Now you have found that, 
I am done for,” and at nine o’clock that evening Browne said, 
‘‘ How many of you were there? All you lot to pinch me? It’s 
a good job you didn’t collar me when I was in the car or some 
of you would have gone west and me after you. I have seen a 
man shoot six down with a gun like that, and you can take it 
from me that they didn’t get up.” He also heard Browne say 
when the nickel -plated revolver was produced, That’s no good, 
it would only tickle unless it hit you in a vital part. If you had 
stopped me in the oar I would have shot five of you and saved 
one for myself,” and later on he heard him say, From what I 
can see of it I shall have to get a machine-gun for you bastards 
next time.” Now, thos^ are the things alleged to have been said 
by Browne at the time when he was found in possession of at 
least four revolvers all fully loaded, and, in view of those state- 
ments — in view of the statements that he is prepared to shoot 
down anybody who attempts to stop him when he is in the car — 
you must judge whether you believe him when he says in that 
witness-box that he has never fired a revolver in his life, and 
that he only keeps them loaded in order to prevent them going 
rusty. Browne has disputed that he said some of these things; 
he has admitted that he said otheis of them; and the explanation 
which is offered to you of his saying the others is that he thought 
at the time he might he charged with being unlawfully in posses- 
sion of firearms without a licence. Tt is for you to judge whether 
yoii .think that affords a reasonable explanation of the statements 
thaV he made, It is all up with me,” ” I am done for now,” 
te is simply going to be charged with an offence for which 
Hoe is liable to a fine. The next matter — and the learned counsel, 
178 



charge to the Jury. 

Mr Justice Avory 

Mr. Levgr^ who never shirks responsibility, has frankly admitted 
that the next matter I am going to deal with is one which does 
call for ample explanation on the part of Browne — is his posses- 
sion of instruments and other things which are alleged to have been 
in that car at the time when it was stolen on the early morning 
of the 27th September. Dr. Lovell has given evidence that, 
although he is not prepared to swear to any one of those things 
being his, he is prepared to say that, looking at them as a whole, 
he is satisfied that they were his, and were in that car on the 
early morning of the 27th September. It is for you to judge 
whether that identification is not more satisfactory than if he had 
purported to identify one or two of them by some dent or little 
mark upon it. Is it not at least a most extraordinary coincidence 
that Dr. Lovell should have had in his car a collection of instru- 
ments and o^her things, and that you should find in Ihe possession 
of Browne on the 20th January a collection of things which looked 
at as a whole Dr. Lovell is able to say I am satisfied they are 
mine.” And it being admitted, therefore, that Browne is called 
upon to give some satisfactoiy explanation of his possession of 
these' articles, let us now turn to Browne's evidence with regard 
to it. He says on Sunday, the 25th September, he went to the 
garage at six o’clock in the morning, and there met the boy Billy 
Geddes, and went with him to 36 Colvin Road, where his wife's 
sister lived, and that he brought away from there a number of 
boxes and a bicycle and some bedding, and took them to 33a 
Sisters Avenue, where he was then living, and it is said that they 
arrived there about 8.25 in the morning, and among the things 
which he brought was a wooden box, which is there before you, 
which looks like a collecting box, and that box had in it a number 
of instruments, including a pole finder and an inspection lamp, 
and that he had had that for five years, and that he soldered it, 
as it appeals, five years ago or more, and" that inside that wooden 
box was the metal box, that white metal box which contains some 
files ^ and he says the forceps which were found he had for use 
in his business as a motor engineer or motor mechanic; one par- 
ticular pair of forceps he has only had since March of 1927. With 
regard to the botile of ethyl chloride, he says that was given to 
him by his biotber-in-law at Buckhurst Hill in April of 1927 
with other things in the green box which is an imitation of a book. 
It happens to bear the title Weapons of Precision.” The 
bandages, &c., he said he had for injuries to his hands, but he 
had them long before the 26th September. The strapping plaster 
was his wife's, and none of these articles were Dr. Lovell’s. That 
evidence with regard to fetching the things from Colvin Road and 
from Buckhurst Hill is corroborated by the witnesses who have 
been called, by the little boy Geddes, who merely proves that he 
did fetch something from that address, and by a witness named 
Kemp who saw the little girl arrive and some bedding arrive 

179 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr Justice Avory 

on that morning, and by the witness Arthur Theodore Finch, 
the brother-in-law of the accused, the gentleman you remember 
who had some difidculty apparently in making up his mind whether 
his religious belief prevented him taking the oath or not, and 
he gives a very curious account of that bottle of ethyl chloride. 
He says it was in his possession in 1922, with other things in the 
green box produced, and that Mrs. Finch had bought them at 
a sale. Mrs. Browne has been called to corroborate this evidence 
about these articles, and she says that ‘‘ on the 25th September,’ ' 
that is the Sunday when these things were fetched, when the 
things were unpacked ” — ^you notice that, that they were un- 
packed on the Sunday, and it may be important in view of another 
statement she has made, which I will come to presently — on 
Sunday, the 25th, when the things were unpacked,’’ she says, I 
saw the wooden box produced, which contained the nfetal box and 
some of the forceps,” and the bandages, she said, are like those 
that she had to bandage his hand with after he poisoned it. 

Now you must turn your attention to the statements which 
Browne had made, before this case came to trial, to the inspector 
with reference to these articles, or some of them. On the 2lBt 
January Browne said, I have been shown two pair of what we 
call plier tweezers,” which you know now are forceps, which I 
use in my garage. I have also been shown a quantity of freez- 
ing fluid which I keep in the garage for oases of injury to my 
hands ; I have also seen a bottle of high volatile spirit — ^these things 
are kept in the garage for cases of emergencies and accidents, and 
I bought them from various chemists, some I bought at Shefl&eld 
at a chemist’s near the Infirmary, opposite in fact. I have also 
seen and been shown an inspection lamp, with battery attached. 
It bears the words ^ Sancylight ’ on the barrel. I bought it at 
a street market. I have added to the torch to reduce the light 
to a point.” One of the things you know which Dr. Lovell lost 
is what you call an ear speculum, and it is suggested that metal 
article there which is now fitted to the tube is in fact the ear 
speculum which was lost. That is the statement Browne made 
on the 21st January, that those things, including the bottle of 
high volatile spirit, were bought by him at chemists. 

Now we come to the question of that white metal case, which 
Dr Lovell said was exactly like his, and which contained at the 
time it was stolen a number of pairs of forceps, medical forceps. 
What did Browne say on the 22nd January about them? You 
know what he has said here is that it was in that wooden box 
which he fetched from his sister-in-law’s house on the 25th Sep- 
tember. On the 22nd January Inspector Berrett showed that to 
him and Browne said, I have been shown a metal case fasten- 
ing with a catch in the centre; I have only got to say that this 
is a box in which I kept my files; I got it with a lot of other 
stufi, I do not wish to say where. I know the tin was kept in 

180 



charge to the Jury. 

Mr Justice Avory 

my garage. Why did he not wish to say where ? If, in fact, he 
had obtained it, as he now says, from his sister-in-law only on 
the 25th September, why did he not wish on the 22nd January to 
say where he had got that metal case? 

Finally, with regard to Brown’s case, you have, of course, 
to consider the evidence given by his wife, Mrs. Browne, that 
he in fact was sleeping at home on the night of the 26th September, 
and Browne’s evidence to the same effect, Browne’s answer, you 
know, to this case as a whole is that he was never out on that 
night of the 26th September, but that he was at home at 33a 
Sisters Avenue, and that he went to the garage in the morning 
about nine o’clock Mrs. Browne’s evidence is that he went 
between nine and ten, and you may have to consider — in fact, 
you will have to consider — upon that point the evidence of the 
man Dyson,* whom I recalled for the purpose of asking a question. 
First of all, what does Mrs. Browne say on that subject? Having 
told you here in the witness-box definitely that Browne was at 
home that night and left in the morning between nine and ten 
to go to the garage, she is cross-examined on a statement which 
she made on the 2Bth January at Tooting Police Station when she 
was asked if she could give some account of Browne’s movements, 
and she said this, and admits that she said this, I left my 
situation on the 20th September, and we went,” aa she told you, 
” on the 24th into residence at 33a Sisters Avenue. So far as I 
can recollect, he slept at home on Saturday and Sunday, the 26th, 
but occasionally if any one was coming late to the garage, so as 
not to disturb me, he slept there, where he still had his bed.” 
You will bear in mind that, although Mrs. Browne was at the 
police court and knew, and Browne and his advisers knew, the 
essential importance of the question of whether he was out pn that 
night of the 26th September or not, she was not called at the 
police court. She is called here for the iirst time, and you must, 
in considering her evidence, bear in mind what she said on the 
21st January. There is nothing there to the ejBPect that he was 
sleeping at home on the 26th; on the contrary, giving, apparently, 
some reason why he might have been absent from home on that 
night, because she said, But if any one came late to the garage 
he slept there, where he still had his bed.” You must also- bear in 
mind, in considering her evidence with regard to these forceps, 
surgical instruments. Detective Sergeant Harris has been recalled, 
and he told you he was the person who took the statement from 
Mrs. Browne on the 21st January, and that when those forceps, 
those surgical instruments, were produced she said she knew 
nothing about the surgical 'instruments, except she remembered 
that he had an electric torch, referring to that which is called 
the Sancylight. 

Now, members of the jury, I pass to the fourth question. 
If upon this evidence as a whole you come to< the conclusion that 

181 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr Justice Avory 

Browne in fact was one of the persons in that stolen^ car on 
the early morning of the 27th September, and that Browne was 
the person whO' fired the shots or any of them at the police 
constable — if you come to that conclusion, then the final question 
for your determination in this case is was the accused Kennedy 
present at the time aiding and abetting Browne in the killing 
of the police constable in order to prevent his, or their, arrest? 
You will bear in mind, upon this indictment Kennedy cannot 
be convicted merely as an accessory after the fad An accessory 
after the fact is one who, knowing that a felony has been com- 
mitted, renders assistance to the felon after the crime has been 
committed to enable him to escape, or who harbouis him, con- 
ceals him, in order tO' prevent his arrest ; that is an accessory 
after the fact. But Kennedy is not charged in this indictment 
with being an accessory after the fact, he is chargeJ with being 
a party to the actual murder, and in law, in the way in which 
the case is presented to you by the prosecution, he is what is 
called a principal in the second degree, that means a person 
who is present at the time when the felony is committed, who 
is present aiding and abetting in the commission of the crime. 
A person may be a principal in the second degree, even though 
he be not actually at the spot where the crime is committed, if he 
be near enough to render assistance to enable the crime to be 
committed. The case for the prosecution here is that Kennedy 
was in fact present with Browne in the car, and the case for the 
prosecution is that Kennedy was actually aiding and abetting in 
the commission of this crime, and, if you are satisfied of that, 
then he is liable to be convicted o-n this indictment of actual murder 
just as much as if it was his hand that fired the shots. I was 
compelled to interrupt the learned counsel who has defended 
Kennedy — I concur with the learned Solicitor-General in saying 
that he has defended hnn with great discretion and most tem- 
perately — ^but I was obliged to- correct him when he told you, and 
apparently he had been under the impressiion, that to' justify the 
conviction of Kennedy upon this indictment you would have to 
be satisfied that he knew that Browne had started out on that 
night with the revolver in his pocket or in his possession, and 
that he knew beforehand that Browne was going to use that 
revolver, was going to- shoot any police constable who interrupted 
him. That is not the law. If Kennedy, at the time when that 
police constable was shot, knew that he was being shot — ^knew 
that he was being shot in the execution of his duty — and if you 
are of opinion that Kennedy was a party acting in concert with 
Browne in shooting that constable in' order to prevent their arrest 
or further detention, then he is liable to be found guilty on this 
indictment. It is not true to say that you cannot judge by his 
conduct after the event, after the actual shooting, whether he 
was a party to the crime You may judge of a man^s attitude 
182 



Charge to the Jury. 

Mr Justice Avory 

of mind at a particular moment just as much by his conduct 
immediately after as by his conduct immediately before. It is 
quite unnecessary in this case that you should be of opinion 
that before — if you think Browne and Kennedy were both in this 
car — ^that you would be of opinion that before they met the 
constable they had agreed or had &,ny conversation together on 
the subject of what would happen if they did meet a constable. 

Membeis of the jury, it becomes necessary now that I should 
juiSit once more refer to the statement which Kennedy mad© to the 
police and to the statement which he ha® made from the dock I 
need not go through it, but, coming tO' the crucial time, and again — 

I am in fact almost tired myself of repeating this observation — 
while I read this remember that it is evidence only against 
Kennedy, and I am now dealing with Kennedy's case alone “ I 
remember the day of the 2Gth September. He (that is Browne) 
suggested I should accompany him to Billericay tO' assist 
him in stealing a Kaleigh car at the end of the High Street,” 
and you know he goes on to describe how they went tO' this place 
to steal the Ealeigh car and were startled by a dog barking and 
so left it, and then they went through the village to the doctor's 
house, and that they there broke open the garage and took 
the car out, and that it ran down on its own weight to the road, 
that they then pushed it about 100 yards, and that Browne said 
he would go by by-ways and escape the main road, and then 
went for a long rxin round country roads at a great speed, and 
then eventually got on tO' a main road, on the road to Ongar, 
that is the road where the constable was When w© got some 
distance up on this road we saw some one who stood on the 
bank and flashed his lamp as a signal to stop. We drove on, 
and I then heard a police whistle and told Bi’owne to stop He 
did so quit© willingly, and when the person came up we saw it 
was a policeman. Browne was driving, -and I was sitting on his 
left in the front The policeman came up close to the car and 
stood near Biowne, and asked him wheie he was going and where 
he cam© from. Brown© told him h© cam© from Laa Bridge Eoad 
garage, and had been out to do some repairs The policeman 
then asked him if he had a card Brown© said 'No.' He then 
asked Biowne, ' Have you a driver's licence? ' Brown© again 
said 'No.' The policeman then again asked him where he cam© 
from, and Brown© stammered in his answer, and Ih© policeman 
then said Is the car your's? ' I then said, ‘ No; the car is 
min© ' The policeman then flashed his light in both our faces, 
and was at this time standing close to the running board at 
the ofl-side, and then he asked me if I knew the number of the car, 
and Browne said, ' You'll see it on the front of the car ' The 
policeman said, ' I know the number, but do you? ' I said, 
^ Yes; I can give you the number,' and I said ‘ T.W.6120.' He 
said, ' Very well. I'll take particulars,' pnt his torch back in his 

183 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr Justice Avory 

pocket, and pulled out kis notebook, and was in the act of writing 
when I heard a report, quickly followed by another one. I saw 
the policeman stagger back and fall over by the bank at the 
hedge I said to Browne, ^ What have you done? ^ and then saw 
he had a large Webley revolver in his hand. He said, ‘ Get cut, 
quick,' and I immediately got out and went round to the police- 
man, who was lying on his back, and Browne came over and 
said, ‘ ril finish the bugger.’ I said, ' For God’s sake, don’t 
shoot any more, the man’s dying,’ as he was groaning. The 
policeman’s eyes were open, and Browne addressing him said, 

‘ What are you looking at me like that for? ’ and, stooping down, 
shot him at close range through both eyes. There were only four 
shots fired Browne then said, ' Let’s get hack into the car.’ 
We had driven close into the bank, and backed out a little and 
drove on in the direction of Ongar He gave me 'che revolver 
and told me to load it while he drove on I loaded it, and in 
my excitement dropped an empty shell in the car The other 
three I threw away into the roads We drove at great pace 
through many villages, the names of which I do not know, hut 
I know we went through Buckhurst Hill, and then Bow, and the 
Elephant and Castle, and while on this journey Browne said, 

‘ Have you loaded that gun again; if you have, give it me back.^ 

I gave it to him, and he kept it on the seat by his right-hand 
side. He wanted to take the car to the garage, but I persuaded 
him tO' have nothing to do with the garage. We drove to Brixton, 
and went up a road I do not know the name of and drove into 
a cul-de-sac at about 6.30 a.m. We left the car and came out into 
the main road, and came by tramcar back to the garage, bringing 
with us two cases out of the car containing doctors’ instruments. 
These, or the majority of them, were smashed up, and the cases 
were out up into small pieces ” — ^you observe the majority of them 
were smashed up — the .majority of them were smashed up, and 
the cases were cut into small pieces, which Browne later took out 
in his car and distributed about the various roads in the country 
so as to destroy all evidence, and I did not know that he 
retained any of the doctor’s property. I forgot to mention that 
on our journey after shooting the policeman Browne turned into 
a tree owing to fog — at a gate. The fog was very dense at 
that time. I think he damaged the near side front wing. I 
was very excited at the time We returned to the garage about 
6 a.m. and commenced our work Dyson arrived at his usual 
time about 8 a.m., and business carried on as usual. I suggested 
to Browne that we should go right away from London, as I knew 
inquiries were sure to be made. Browne said there was no danger, 
and induced me to stop, and said if I made up my mind to leave 
him ha would blow my brains out. He had the Webley revolver 
in his hand when he said this, and, as I knew it was loaded, I 
thought he would, I then later went to* a newspaper shop, and 
184 



charge to the Jury. 

Mr Justice Avorr 

in one I found that Scotland Yard was supposed to have found 
finger pAnts, and again wanted to leave, and he said, ^ No, 
you don^t, you’ll stop here and face it out with me; if any one 
comes here there will be a shooting match.” And then he says 
he remained in the garage until December, and then he went 
off to' West Kirby in December, and he remained till the 13th 
January, when he came back and lived at Huguenot Place till 
the 21st January, when he went away again back to Liverpool. 
Now, that is his description, and he has made a statement from 
the dock in which he has in effect reaffirmed the statement which 
he made. That statement also, I tell you, which he makes from 
the dock is not evidence against Browne; it was made after 
Browne’s case was closed, and Browne was not entitled to make 
any observation upon it. But, in considering the case of 
Kennedy, yeu cannot shut out from your minds the fact that, 
having the opportunity of going into the witness-box and con- 
firming the statement which he made to the police constable on 
oath, he has abstained from going into the witness-box, and 
thereby has escaped the ordeal of cross-examination, and you 
must ask yourselves, in considering whether Kennedy was a party 
to the shooting of this constable acting in concert with the man 
who did shoot him, if Kennedy himself in fact fired no shot — 
you must ask yourselves what do you think of his conduct imme- 
diately after, can you reconcile that with the statement that he 
has made that he was at the time protesting against the constable 
being shot, that he was objecting to it ^ For what' purpose do 
you suppose he reloaded that revolver? We have had no explana- 
tion where he got the ammunition from to reload it His own 
statement is that Browne said to him, Load the revolver,” 
and he did so at once, that Browne handed him the revolver 
for the purpose, and he did it. That he kept it apparently for 
some little time after he reloaded it himself, and then, when 
Browne said to him, ” If you have reloaded that revolver, give 
it me back again,” Kennedy handed it back to him. What for? 
Can you doubt that Kennedy was handing that revolver back 
to Browne reloaded in order that if they met another policeman 
along the road the revolver might be used in the same way as 
it had already been used on Police Constable Gutteridge? 
Kennedy’s statement is repeated in the dock, that he was so 
terrified of Browne that he reloaded the revolver merely because 
he told him so. If he was so terrified of Browne when Browne 
is in possession of a loaded revolver, why did not he throw it 
away directly Browne handed it to him? If he had not been a 
party to the shooting, and was anxious that no other crime of a 
similar nature should be committed, why did he not refuse to 
hand it back to Browne when Browne asked him for it? If ho 
did not throw it away, why did not he refuse to hand it back, 
and why did not he keep it himself, if he was a man who was 

185 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr Justice Avory 

not a party to and did not approve of policemen being shot, or 
anybody else being shot who might interrupt them* on their 
journey back to London? 

Now, it is said by his learned counsel that the statement by 
Kennedy in all its details has been proved to be true in the 
material details about their movements on that night, and the 
learned counsel says, “ If you find in the statement made by a 
person containing, say, for the purpose of argument, twenty-one 
different statements of fact, and you find twenty of those state- 
ments of fact are true, you ought to believe the whole twenty-one, 
and therefore you ought to believe Kennedy in that statement 
when he says, ‘ I was no paity to the shooting, I was objecting 
to it/ But is that a sound proposition? Just consider the 
circumstances under which Kennedy made this statement on the 
26th January at Liverpool. Browne had been arrested on the 
21st January, and news does not take long tO' reach Liverpool. 
Is it not at least probable that Kennedy, when he made that 
statement on the 26th, Imew that Browne had been already 
arrested? May it not have occurred to' Kennedy: “Browne is 
in custody- I do not know what he may have said of this murder ; 
it may be that I shall have no answer so far as being in the car 
on that night is concerned, and therefore it is necessary for 
me to find some other answer if I am charged with the murder 
of Gutter idge ? May it not be that it occurred to Kennedy 
to say, “ Well, I will admit the stealing of the car : I will admit 
being in the car, but when it comes to the actual shooting the 
only possible answer I can have to it is to' say that I was not 
a party to it, and, having made that statement, I will remain 
safely within the four corners of that document and I will not 
run the risk of having questions put to me in cross-examination,^’ 
such as the questions I have alieady referred to, namely, if 
Kennedy had been in that witness-box he would have been asked, 
and he must have been asked, “ For what purpose do^ you suppose 
that revolver was being reloaded? and “ If you objected to 
P,C Gutteridge being shot, when you were asked to reload the 
revolver, why did not you throw it away? and “ Where did 
you get the ammunition from? ” and Kennedy would have been 
asked, “ If the rest of your statement is true, will you tell us 
who took the revolver out on that night, the 26th? ” We have 
been told that both the Webley revolvers were hanging on pegs, 
or nails, in the room in the office where Kennedy slept, and 
Kennedy would have been asked, “ Before you started out that 
night were both or was only one of those revolvers taken out, 
and who took it? ” 

Now, that is the case which you have to consider with regard 
to Kennedy, and I do not think, particularly having regard to 
the commendable attention with which you have listened to all the 
details in this case, that I can assist you further, Tou must now 

186 



Charge to the Jury. 

Mr Justice Avory 

tak.6 th 0 whole of it — and look at the case as a whole — into your 
consideration If you are left in any rea,sonahle doubt as to 
the guilt of both or either of these accused men, then do not 
hesitate to say that they are not guilty, do not be deterred by 
the view of what public opinion in this case may be — ^public 
opinion is often, like rumour, a lying jade — if, on the other hand, 
you are siatisfied beyond reasonable doubt that both of these 
accused men were guilty of shooting that police constable while 
he was in the eisecution of his duty, then, equally fearlessly, do 
not hesitate to say so, and if you can see reason to distinguish 
between them, equally fearlessly do not hesitate tO' say so. 

Will you now consider your verdict? You may, of course, 
take with you any of the exhibits which you should desire 

The Foreman of the Jury — ^We should like them, my lord. 
(Handed.) 

At 12 52 the jury retired, a bailiff being sworn to take 
charge of them, and returned into Court at 3.10. 

The Clerk op the Court — Members of the jury, have you 
agreed upon your verdict. 

The Foreman of the Jury — We have. 

The Clerk op the Court — ^Do you find the accused Frederick 
Guy Browne guilty or not guilty of the murder of George William 
Gutt Bridge? 

The FoREikCAN — Guilty, sir. 

The Clerk of the Court — ^Do you find the accused William 
Henry Kennedy guilty or not guilty of the murder of George 
William Gutteridge? 

The Foreman — Guilty 

The Clerk of the Court — ^Tou say they are both guilty, 
and that is the verdict of you all. Prisoners at the bar, you 
severally stand convicted of murder; have you, or either of you, 
anything to say why the Court should not give you judgment of 
death according to law? 

Prisoner Browne — I have something to say, but it is not 
according to the law of the Court; shall I say it? 

Mr. Justice Avory — ^Yes; I will hear anything you wish to 

say. 

Prisoner Browne — The Court, as you eay, according to the 
law, has found me guilty of ‘wilful murder; I cannot alter the 
Court, I would not desire to. I admit here now that counsel 
has acted very nicely and very fairly, as far as I am concerned, 
I admit. I would not wish to he tried by a better judge, but the 
jury have had stuff given to them that is not genuine; it is the 

187 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr Justice Avory 

fault of the way it has been put together. It will com© out 
later on that I had nothing to do with it, but I am •not going 
to argue the point, I am not going to try to prove it to you, 
because the simple reason is there is something hanging over my 
head, that if I got off this I should get penal servitude for some- 
thing else, which is far worse than what is offered me. I am 
quite content to leave it, but I am not guilty according to the One 
above that knows I am not guilty, but the Court says I am. 
I am quit© content, my conscience is clear. 

Prisoner KBimEDT — My lord, nothing I can say now will alter 
the verdict which has been arrived at. I am going to say this, 
it is pre-ordained, it was fate, and you, my lord, however fairly 
you may have tried me, and members of the jury, are mere 
accessories of that fate. I say it in no mere spirit of bravado 
when I say I am not afraid to die, but I meet it willingly, because 
I have the certain knowledge that in the hereafter I will be 
re-united for all eternity to the one darling girl who has stuck 
to me all through this trouble. I wish to return my thanks for 
the able way in which I have been defended. There is one final 
request I want to make, may I have an interview with my wife ? 

Mr. Justice Avobt — I will consider that. 


Sentence. 

Mr. Justice Avort — Frederick Guy Browne and William Henry 
Kennedy, the jury have found you both guilty of a murder which 
your learned counsel have both been constrained to describe as a 
most foul and brutal murder. The jury have found that verdict 
without knowing anything about your previous characters,^ and 
without knowing anything of any particular offence that either 
of you may have committed before this crime was committed. The 
sentence of the Court upon you, and each of you, is that you be 
taken to a lawful prison and thence to a place of execution. That 
you be there each of you hanged by the neck until you be dead, 
and that your bodies respectively be buried within the precincts 
of the prison in which you shall have been last confined before 
your execution, and may the Lord have mercy upon your souls. 

The Chaplain — ^Amen. 

Mr. Justice Avort — ^And it is further ordered by the Court 
that you, Frederick Guy Browne and William Henry Kennedy, do 
stand committed to the custody of the Sheriff of the county of 
Essex, who is hereby charged with the execution of this judgment. 

The prisoners left the dock. 

^The reference to his leaving prison, &c., in Kennedy’s statement was not 
read by any of the counsel. 

188 




Sentence. 


Mr. Powell — May I make an application that Kennedy may 
see his wi?e, if it is in accordance with your lordship's wishes 1 

Mr. Justice Avort — That depends on whether it is in accord- 
ance with the Prison Regulations, and only in that event. 

Mr. Powell — If your lordship pleases. 

Mr. Lever — My lord, I make the same application with regard 
to Browne. 

Mr. Justice Avort — Same answer. 

Mr. Roome — My lord, I am instructed by the Director of 
Public Prosecutions respectfully to invite the attention of your 
lordship to the meritorious services rendered in this case by Chief 
Superintendent Berrett and the officers under his command, in- 
cluding the officers of the Essex Constabulary, particularly in view 
of the allegations made against Superintendent Berrett and his 
officers with regard to obtaining Kennedy’s statement; I do not 
mean at this Court. 

Mr. Justice Avort — First of all, I think it right to say that 
in my opinion there never was any foundation for the suggestions 
which were made against either Inspector Berrett or any of the 
police officers that the statement made by Kennedy had been 
obtained by any improper means; whether the suggestions which 
were made in cross-examination at the police court were due to 
the ingenuity or the imagination of the advocate who there put 
those questions, or whether they were in fact inspired by Kennedy 
himself, I am satisfied that there is no foundation for them. 

Mr. Powell — May I say that the solicitor who appeared at 
the police court is the solicitor who is instructing me to-day, and 
has informed me that the questions were put upon instructions 
which were in writing and exist at this moment. 

Mr. Justice Avort — I accept that. It was obvious that in 
the interest of Kennedy at that time he should, if possible, pre- 
vent that statement from being put in evidence, and those sug- 
gestions were no doubt made with that object. With regard to 
the conduct of the police generally, the result in this case is the 
best testimony to the great ability which has been shown by all 
of them, and all those who have been concerned in this investiga- 
tion are, in my opinion, deserving of the highest commendation. 


m 




APPENDICES 




APPENDIX A. 


Before the Magistrate. 

Following their arrest Browne and Kennedy appeared at the 
South-Western Police Court, charged with the stealing of the Vaux- 
hall car, this charge, on 13th February, being dropped for that of 
murdering Police Constable G-utteridge at Stapleford Abbotts on 
27fch September, 1927. 

The opening stages of the proceedings were interesting, the 
question of the jurisdiction of the Court and of the admission in 
evidence of the statements made by Browne and Kennedy to the 
police being argued for and against. 

With Sir Travers Humphreys (now Mr. Justice Humphreys) 
for the prosecution was Mr. PT. D. Eoome; Mr. Edmond O’Connor 
appeared for Browne; and Kennedy was defended by Mr. 0. B. 
Tompkins, solicitor. Sir Archibald Bodkin, Director of Public 
Prosecutions, had a seat beside counsel. On the bench beside Mr. 
Sandbach, K.C., were Captain J. A. Unett, Chief Constable for 
Essex, Captain F. H. L. Stevenson, Governor of Brixlon Prison, 
and Dr. Watson, medical officer of the prison.^ 

Sir Travers Humphreys, opening the case for the prosecu- 
tion, said he did not propose now to proceed further with the 
charge of stealing the Vauxhall motor car, though it would be 
necessary for the magistrate to hear something of what the 
prisoners said when that charge was made, bearing on the charge 
of murder which was the one on which he proposed to proceed. 
He continued ; 

I propose, therefore, to confine the evidence in this case to 
such evidence as will be relevant to the charge of murder. That 
evidence will of necessity disclose other charges against them. 
The murder of Police Constable Gutteridge took place in Essex. 
One of the further charges I refer to is a charge against Browne 
under section 7 of the Firearms Act, 1920, of having in hie pos- 
session firearms and ammunition with intent by means thereof to 
endanger life. That charge arose in London in the Jurisdiction 
of this Court and of the Central Criminal Court. There will be a 
further charge against Kennedy of a similar character under the 
same section. That arose in Liverpool. There will be a further 
charge against both of them of stealing a Morris-Cowley motor 

^ These excerpts are taken from Tht 14th February, 1928. 

0 193 



Browne and Kennedy. 

car. That occurred in Essex. There will be a further charge 
against Kennedy of attempting to murder William Guthrie Mattin- 
son, a detective sergeant of the Liverpool Police. That occurred in 
Liverpool. All these matters will be necessarily introduced in 
the evidence on the charge of the murder of Police Constable 
Gutteridge in Essex. 

In these circumstances section 11 of the Criminal Justice Act, 
1925, seems to be material, that section providing that a person 
charged with any indictable offence may be proceeded against, 
tried, and punished in any county or place in which he was appre- 
hended or is in custody. Sub-section (2) of that section further 
provides that where a prisoner is charged with two or more in- 
dictable offences he may be indicted in respect of them in any 
place in which he could be indicted in respect of any one of them. In 
these circumstances the prosecution will invite you to commit these 
two persons on these charges to the Central Criminal Court. I 
now hand in to you that which requires no proof but is a neces- 
sary part of the case under the Firearms Act — ^the certificate of 
the Attorney-General of these two charges having been made. 

The Magistrate — ^Before we consider that, have you, Mr. 
O'Connor, or you, Mr. Tompkins, any observations to offer as to 
whether I have jurisdiction in this case? 

Mr. O'Connor — In my opinion you have not. I propose to 
draw your attention to what I see to be relevant on that point. 
The charges against Kennedy are regarding offences committed 
in Essex and in relation to offences committed in Liverpool. In 
some portion of this case I shall have to raise the point of the 
desirability of these two defendants being tried separately. The 
reason for that will become apparent later on when, as I pre- 
sume, my friend in the course of his opening will refer to state- 
ments in possession of the prosecution. I should take exception 
to these statements being read, and I shall apply that defendants 
be tried separately. 

[Mr. O'Connor quoted from the comparatively recent case of 
King v. Seymour. Here it was stated that where a statement by 
one defendant, intended to be given in evidence, implicated 
another, the Court of trial should consider whether they should 
not be tried separately.] 

Mr, Sandbach — ^What have you to say about my jurisdiction? 

Mr. O'Connor — ^At the present moment I say Kennedy is not 
in custody within the jurisdiction of this Court at all. He was 
taken into custody at l 4 iverpool in respect of offences there. 

Sir Travers Humphreys — ^Tou are wrong in your facts. He 
was taken in charge in Liverpool for stealing a Vauxhall motor 
car. 

Mr. O'Connor — ^Which is now abandoned. If my friend 
keeps to that charge I cannot raise any objection, but he has 
abandoned that charge. There is nothing on which Kennedy 
can be tried here. 

194 



Appendix A. 

In reply to the magistrate, Mr. Tompkins said he had no 
objection^ to offer. 

Sir Travers Humphreys — With regard to your jurisdiction, I 
might remind you that years before that Act was passed you had 
always jurisdiction. The only necessity for that statute and that 
section at all was to give you jurisdiction to commit to the 
Central Criminal Court rather than to three or four different 
Courts. 

Mr. Sandbach (after consulting a copy of the Act) — I am 
against you, Mr. O^Connor. 

Sir Travers Humphreys then outlined the case for the Crown. 
After describing the crime and the arrest, he said : 

Chief Inspector Berrett, who had been in charge of the in- 
quiries, was informed when Browne was detained on a charge 
of stealing ^he motor car. He told Browne he had been making 
inquiries concerning the murder of Police Constable Gutter! dge, 
and asked him if he could account for his movements on the night 
of 26th September. Browne gave him some account in a state- 
ment which I will not read now. He said, however, he had been 
since about June 

Mr. O'Connor — take exception to this statement on the 
ground that it is not admissible. In my submission the onus is 
upon the prosecution to show that any statement taken was made 
without any improper inducement to the man when he made it. 
Then you can give it in open Court. In my submission no police 
ofl&cer has any right to ask any man any question at all once 
already arrested, either on that matter, the matter for which he 
was arrested, or any other. 

[Mr. O'Connor quoted authorities in support of his objection, 
and read a portion of Browne’s statement that said, ‘‘ I was told 
by Chief Inspector Berrett that he was making inquiries in regard 
to the murder of P.C, Gutteridge. He has cautioned me that any- 
thing I say will be taken down and may be given in evidence." 
Mr. O’Connor submitted that that was not a proper caution, as 
it did not conclude with the words " against you.’’] 

Sir Travers Humphreys said it should be known in these 
days that there was no such thing as unfairness on the part of the 
prosecution. He read rules approved by His Majesty’s judges, 
stating that the caution should end with the words, “ and may be 
used in evidence," and that care should be taken to avoid any 
suggestion that the person’s answers could only be used in evidence 
against him. 

The Magistrate ruled that the statement was clearly admis- 
sible. 

Sir Travers Humphreys — Kennedy was brought to London, 
and on 26th January he was seen by Chief Inspector Berrett. Mr. 
Berrett told him he would be charged with stealing a Vauihall 
motor car, adding, I have been making inquiries for some time 

m 



Browne and Kennedy. 

past respecting the murder of P.C. G-utteridge. Can you give me 
any information about that occurrence? Kennedy •answered, 
I may be able to tell you something. Let me consider. Can I 
see my wife? ’’ He was told be could. His wife came in and 
to her Kennedy said, You know, my dear, that when I was 
arrested at Liverpool yesterday I told you I thought it was some- 
thing more serious than stealing a car. These officers are inquir- 
ing about that’ policeman murdered in Essex. His wife said, 
You didn^t murder him, did you? Kennedy replied, “ No, 
I didn’t, but I was there, and know who did.” Then he said. 
If I am charged with murder and found guilty I shall be hanged 
and you will be a widow. On the other hand, if I am charged 
and found guilty of being an accessory after the fact I shall re- 
ceive a long sentence of penal servitude and I shall be a long 
time away from you. Will you wait for me? ” TIr answer of 
the wife was, ''Yes,” and Kennedy said, " What shall I do 
then? ” She said, ” Tell these gentlemen the truth.” Kennedy 
said, " All right,” and then turning to Inspector Barrett, with- 
out any request from the inspector, said, " You can take down 
what I want to say and I will sign it.” He then made a state- 
ment. 

Mr. Tompkins objected to the statement being read. What 
was said in one statement, he urged, was not evidence against the 
other defendant, and it should not be read if it implicated him. 

The Magistrate — ^Any statement made by Kennedy is evi- 
dence against Kennedy alone. I shall not accept it as evidence 
against Browne, and if the only evidence against Browne is a 
statement by Kennedy I shall not commit Browne for trial. 

Mr. Tompkins said there was another point he wished to raise 
— a very serious one. He suggested that the document was not 
evidence even as against Kennedy. He did not want to read 
any part of the document, but he had underlined eight words in 
the second line,^ 

Sir Travers Humphreys read the portion indicated, and said 
he did not propose to read that. He was going to read the whole 
except those words. 

Mr. Tompkins next raised the point whether the statement 
was a . voluntary one. He said it was not. When it was taken 
down my client was in such a state of mental helplessness that 
he did not know what he was doing or signing. He had been 
arrested at 11.30 on the evening of 26th January at Liverpool. 
He had been interrogated. He had not slept. His bed was taken 
away from him that night. He was kept in a cell until two 
o’clock the next day, when he was put on a train for London. 
He arrived in London about six o’clock, having had no sleep and 
nothing to eat. He was then driven straight away to Scotland 

^ These words will be found on p. 15, line 11. 

196 



Appendix A. 

Yard, where he remained until this document was eventually 
obtained.* 

On the evidence in my possession it is quite clear tjaat this 
man was not in a fit state to make any statement. This state- 
ment was pumped out and 

Sir Travers Humphreys — ^What did you say? 

Mr. Tompkins — Pumped out. 

Sir Travers Humphreys — How? 

Mr. Tompkins — ^By four hours of interrogation^ of promises, 
hopes, and threats. 

The Magistrate — If I am persuaded that threats or promises 
or hopes of special favour were held out to him, I shall agree 
with you that it would be inadmissible as evidence. I shall want 
evidence as to how it was taken. 

Sir TrIvers Humphreys said Kennedy's statement was taken 
in the presence of his wife, and Kennedy said, I want to 
take down what I am going to say." This was how it began: 

“ About 11,30 p.m. on 25th January I was arrested at 
on a charge of being concerned in stealing a motor car. 1 
to-night, 26th January, at B p.m., been interviewed by 
Inspector Berrett, and told that he is making inquiries into the 
murder of P.C. Gutteridge at Stapleford Abbotts, and ask®d it 
I can give any information respecting it. I wish voluntary to 
tell you what I know, having been cautioned that what I 
may be taken down in writing and may be given in. evid®^^®‘ 
That is taken down, and is signed by him. 

Mr. O'Connor then proceeded to argue that the prison^® 
should be tried separately, and that the statement could 
given in evidence against anybody because, he suggested, 
made in response to interrogation by police officers- 
relevancy of that statement was, he understood, not in so as 
it affected Kennedy himself, but in so 'far as Kennedy ^ 

description which would be urged against Browne. If yo^ 
had that statement before you, you would see at once that, so far 
as Browne is concerned, it is impossible to estimate the damage 
that may be done to him by this statement. I do not object to any 
portion of that statement going into evidence so far as it goes into 
matters which Kennedy deals with prior to certain matters which 
implicate Browne. 

After further argument the Magistrate said he would 
to the circumstances in which the statement was given in evidence, 
and then would give his ruling. 

Sir Travers Humphreys— I was going to suggest th© same 
course. I will say a few words of explanation when th© state- 
ment is put in. 

^ [Curiously, he was unable to do so, as before the Count met 
again he was raised to the bench. On the resumption, ou 2lBt 
February, Mr. H. D. Roome conducted the case for the Crowu-J 

197 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr. Roome^ — A t the last hearing objection was taken to the 
production of a statement made by Kennedy on the ground that 
Kennedy had been kept without food or sleep, and that the state- 
ment had been pumped out of him by promises, hopes, and threats. 
These allegations, which were made on the responsibility of the 
solicitor representing Kennedy, naturally received wide publicity, 
and I propose, sir, to-day to turn aside for a while from the chrono- 
logical order of evidence in order to call evidence before you as to 
the history of Kennedy’s movements and the manner in which he 
was looked after from the time of his arrest down to the moment 
when he made his statement. I shall submit to you that this evi- 
dence will establish that he had several hours’ sleep, that he had all 
the food he desired, that the statement was made at his own 
request after being cautioned, and that he made it at leisure, 
and that after he had finished it he made several alterations, and 
finally signed it as representing what he wished to say. Then 
I shall submit, sir, that the statement is admissible in evidence. 

Detective Inspector Kirschner, of Scotland Yard, the first 
witness, said that on 24th January last he went to Liverpool, 
and the next day, at 11.20 p.m., after keeping watch on a house 
in CoppBias Hill, along with other ofldoers, he say Kennedy 
struggling in the street with Sergeant Mattinson, of the Liverpool 
City Police. He heard Sergeant Mattinson shout, and with other 
officers he ran to where Mattinson was holding Kennedy, and as 
they did so- Mattinson fell backwards, at the same time holding 
an automatic pistol above his head. 

[At this point the pistol was produced from a packet of 
exhibits which are to be shown in the case. It is a black, ugly- 
looking weapon. It was passed to Inspector Kirschner, who 
examined it and said, “ That is the one.”] 

Sergeant Mattinson just managed to call out, ” I have got 
it,” and then collapsed in the arms of another officer who had 
come up. Three of us then took Kennedy to Warren Street 
Bridewell, close by On the way he said, ” It’s all up now. You 
have got me. How many more of you want to hold me? ” At 
the station I was handed the automatic pistol produced by Ser- 
geant Mattison, who came to the station shortly after we had 
arrived. 

Mr. Roomb — ^D id you examine it? 

Inspector Kirschner — I examined the automatic. It was 
loaded, and the cartridge case was observable in the breech. The 
safety catch was up — ^that is, at safety. I searched the prisoner, 
and then had him detained at Warren Street Station. 

Did you find anything on him? — ^Yes, sir. One five-pound 
Bank of England note, a ^£1 note, five 10s notes, 9s. in silver, 

2 This account ie taken from the report that appeared in the SIvming 

198 



Appendix A. 

and an electric pocket lamp. Nothing connected with the revolver 
was found. Kennedy was only partially dressed, and asked for 
some of his other clothing. I went back tO' the address in 
Copperas Hill I later saw Kennedy at 1 30 a m on 26th 
January at Warren Street Police Station, and said to him : I 
am a detective officer from Scotland Yaid. I am going to arrest 
you on a charge of being concerned with a man named Browne, 
now in custody, in stealing a Vauxhall motor car from Tooting 
in November last, and I shall take you to London. I cautioned 
him, and he was then taken by motor oar from Warren Street 
to Dale Street Police Station. On the way he said . Yes; I had 
premonition that something was going to happen to me to-day, 
and I intended going. You are lucky to* get me. While I wag 
in the house I heard the taziman being told to drive to the next 
street, ant^ that gave me the tip.^* He was later taken to the 
cells in Dale Street He gave his name as William Henry Kennedy, 
aged forty-two, of no fixed abode, compositor.’' 

By Mr. Roome — Was he allowed to see his wife? — ^Yes, sir. 

At what time that morning did you see him? — About 3 45 a.m. 

When did you see him again? — When he was conveyed to the 
train by motor car about 1.30 p.m. on the 26th 

Inspector Kirschner — Kennedy travelled to London by the 
two o'clock train from Lime Street, and his wife accompanied 
him On the journey he had sandwiches, cakes, and tea soon 
after leaving Liverpool, and again before reaching Euston. From 
Euston he was taken by car to Scotland Yaid. At no time on the 
journey was any reference made to the murder of P.C. Gutteridge. 
Afterwards he was removed from Scotland Yard to Cannon Row 
Police Station That would be at about 12.30 in the morning* 

By Mr. Roome — ^Did he say anything to you about the treat- 
ment he had received? — He thanked us. He made no complaints. 

Cross-examined by Mr. O'CoisnsroR*— You went to* Liverpool 
with the intention of arresting Kennedy for the theft of a Vaux- 
hall car only? — ^Yes Those were my instructions. 

Was he ever charged with any offence at Liverpool at any 
of the police stations? — No. The intention was not to charge 
him with the offence until he was in London. 

And if the charge was to be one in connection with stealing 
a motor car at Tooting, the proper station would be at Tooting? 
—Yes. 

You never took him to Tooting? — ^No; he was detained at 
Cannon Row during the night. 

Why was he taken to Scotland Yard or Cannon Row and not 
to Tooting? — He was brought to Scotland Yard and seen by Chief 
Inspector Berrett. 

Why was not the usual procedure followed? Why was he 
talien to Scotland Yard and not to Tooting? — ^For the purpose 
of being seen by Chief Inspector Berrett. 


199 



Browne and Kennedy. 

[Browne here turned right round in the dock and smiled 
broadly at Chief Inspector Berrett.] 

Cross-examination continued — Is it usual, when a man is 
taken into custody, to charge him with the offence for which he 
has been arrested at a police station as soon as possible? — It is 
usual. 

Do you know as a fact that Kennedy was not charged with 
being concerned in stealing that motor car until forty-eight hours 
after his arrest ? — ^As far as I know, that is true. 

And do you know that in between the time of his arrest at 
Liverpool and the time the charge was made against him on 
27th January a signed statement was taken from him? — I know 
that on the evening of the 26th a signed statement was taken 
from him. 

By Mr. Oscar Tompkins — The first time I saw Kenedy was 
when he was in the custody of Sergeant Mattinson. I did not 
see him actually until I saw him struggling with Sergeant Mattin- 
son, but I know now that he was in the house. 

You agree that Mattinson had a revolver in his left hand? — 
Yes, he had when I saw him, 

I put it to you that Sergeant Mattinson came up behind 
Kennedy with a revolver in his left hand, grabbed Kennedy by 
the collar, and struck him with his other hand? — I did not see 
that. There might have been twenty policemen engaged in watch- 
ing for Kennedy. 

Was he- kept in the room at the station with six or seven 
officers until 4. 16 in the morning? — No. I told him the charge 
and took him to Dale Street Station, which is the chief police 
station. 

I suggest that is not so, but that his wife was taken to Dale 
Street? — She was brought there after him. 

I suggest that you and five or six officers interrogated Kennedy 
from 11.46 p.m. till 4.16^am. ? — No. 

And during that time Mrs. Kennedy was being interrogated 
in another room? — A statement was being taken from Mrs. 
Kennedy in a different part of the building altogether. 

No statement was asked from Kennedy, but during that 
time one was taken from Mrs. Kennedy? — Yes. 

I put it to you that at 4.15 in the morning Superintendent 
M^Coy came in to where you and Kennedy and five or six other 
officers were and started to question Kennedy? — Not to my know- 
ledge 

And that the interrogation went on until five o’clock in the 
morning? — ^No. 

You say that on the way to the station Kennedy said, “ It’s 
all up now,* you have got me. How many more do you want to 
hold me? ” What was that in answer to? — It was merely a state- 
ment made to me We were going along then to Warren Street. 

200 



Appendix A. 

Inspector Roberts, myself, and Sergeant Duncan had hold of 
him, and several others came up. 

You 'Tsay nothing whatever was said to him? — Yqb. 

I suggest it was five o'clock in the morning on the 26th 
when he was taken to the cell ? — In my recollection it was 
about 3 45. 

Will you tell me what he was doing between 11 30 and 3.46? — 
He was detained at Warren Street while I was making an examina- 
tion of his room and getting possession of his property 

That took you three hours. What were you doing between 1.30 
and 3 30? — A statement was being taken from his wife. He was 
in a room upstairs. 

Was he given any bedding? — I cannot say 

Can you tell me why Mrs Kennedy was asked for a state- 
ment? Was it at that time contemplated making any charge 
against ITrs. Kennedy? — Oh, no. 

Do you know if that statement was one regarding the Gutter- 
idge murder?— No, it was not 

He had said when he went to the station, ‘‘ I have no grudge 
against the police " ? — ^Yes, I heard him make that statement. 

He did not resist in any way? — ^He had little chance to 
resist then He was resisting Mattinson until he got up. 

He did not struggle? — No; three of us had hold of him. 

When you said you were going to arrest him for stealing a 
Vauxhall car did you then invite him to make a statement? — 
No, sirj I cautioned him 

During the whole time he was at Warren Street” and at Dale 
Street no statement was asked for? — No', sir. 

You really mean that? — ^Absolutely. 

How did you caution him? — I told him, I must caution 
you that anything you say may be given in evidence.'' 

You did not 'say, You are not obliged to say anything? — 
No. 


Constable McNeil, a warder at Bridewell (the chief police 
station at Liverpool) said he was on duty when Kennedy was 
brought in at five minutes to four in the morning. He was 
placed in No. 1 safety cell, where there was a wooden bed, and 
he was supplied with two blankets. 

By M]‘. Roome — When next did you visit him? — ^About ten 
minutes past four. 

What was he doing? — ^He was sound asleep. He was snoring. 
I visited Kennedy at regular intervals of half an hour until 
five minutes to six, and he was asleep all the time. While in 
my charge Kennedy was not interrogated by any one. 

Constable John Charles Davis, another Liverpool warder, 
said that he saw Kennedy lying on the wooden bed in the cell 
apparently asleep. At 8.30 he gave him a pint of cocoa, which 

201 



Browne and Kennedy. 

he drank, but he r ©fused to have any bread Every half-hour 
afterwards, when he looked through the observation window of 
the cell, Kennedy still seemed to be slumbering. At f.lO p.m. 
he took to Kennedy the regulation dinner of 2 ounces of cooked 
meat, boiled potatoes, meat extract, and bread, three-quarters of 
which he ate. 

Chief Inspector Berrett was then recalled. He said that at 
7 p.m. on 26th January he was at Scotland Tard with Detective 
Sergeant Harris and saw Kennedy detained there. I said, I 
am Chief Inspector Berrett, and this is Sergeant Harris. You 
are detained on a charge of being concerned in stealing a Vauxhall 
motor car, but I have been making inquiries for some time past 
respecting the murder of P.C. Gutter idge in Essex Can you 
give me any information about the occurrence? ” Kennedy said, 
** I may be able to tell you something, but let me consider a 
while. He then held his head with both hands, his elbows resting 
on the table. After being in that position some time he said, 
'' Can I see my wife? ’’ I said, “ Yes, she is in the building,” 
His wife was brought into the room by Inspector Kirschner, 
and when Kennedy saw her he said, Well, my dear, you know 
when I was arrested at Liverpool yesterday I told you I thought 
there was something more serious at the back of it. Well, there 
is. These officers are making inquiries about that policeman 
murdered in Essex.” Mrs. Kennedy exclaimed, “ Why, y?ou 
didn^t murder him, did you? ” Kennedy replied, ” No, I didn't, 
but I was there and know who did. If I am charged with murder 
and found guilty I shall be hanged and you. will be a widow. 
On the other hand, if I am charged and found guilty of being 
an accessory after the fact, I shall receive a long sentence of 
penal servitude and be a long time away from you Will you 
wait for me?” Mrs. Kennedy said, ‘‘Yes, love, I will wait 
for you any time.” Kehnedy said, “ Well, what shall I do 
then? ” Mrs. Kennedy said, “ Tell these gentlemen the truth 
of what took place.” Kennedy replied, “ All right, I will.” 
He then said to me, “ You can take down what I want to say, 
and I will sign it.” I then duly cautioned him, and he made 
a statement, which was taken down by Sergeant Harris. 

By Mr. Roome — ^What was his appearance with regard to 
being upset or distressed? — Quite normal in every way. Quiet, 
rational. He thought very deeply indeed before he said anything 
at all. 

Was he hurried in any way over his statement? — Not in 
the least. I have never taken a statement from any person who 
exercised more care 

About how long was he in making it? — I should think he 
began about ten minutes or quarter past seven and finished 
about eleven. 

202 



Appendix A. 

By Mr Sandbach — ^Was there anything in the nature of sug- 
gestion or cross-examination by you or any other officers? — ^During 
that time^he would keep having half -sheets or full sheets read over 
to him, and I had to wait until he had decided what else to say. 
He was most careful in considering everything he said I never 
put questions to him in any shape or form. 

Did any other officer ? — Not at all. 

By Mr. Roome — Did he make any corrections? — After the 
long statement he wanted to amend it with reference to the two 
Webley 

[Mr. Roome interiupted to point out that he was referring 
to the long statement. 

Inspector Berrett then said that Kennedy amended portions 
which he initialled. There were 19 pages in all.] 

Mr Rjoome submitted he had now proved there were no cir- 
cumstances which prevented that stalomont from being admissible 
in evidence. 

By Mr. O’Connor — Browne was one of many people ho had 
been wanting to inteiview to account for his movements on the 
night of the Gutteridge murder, and as soon as he knew Browne 
was in custody he took advantage of the fact. 

Did the statements with regard to iiieiirnm and aiunnuiilion 
alleged to have been made by Browne when ho was arrested 
convey anything to your mind with regard to the Cluilcridge 
murder? — Not at first. 

May I take it that you did not regard those wlatcmonlw in 
any light as an admission by Brtnvne that ho was implicated in 
that particular murder? — I took two slaietneuis from him: one 
on the night of his arrest with regard to the first Webley found, 
ammunition, and certain surgical inwtnuncntH. As a rowult of 
two other revolvers and animuniiion being foimil subsoquently 
I took another statement from him. I had a suspicion then that 
he might have been connocled with tlie* fiutl(U'i(lgc murder. 

If I may say so, you handled ihe case with exireme tact, 
but I have to ask you whether you had any direct, suspicion that 
the man brought back from Liverpool by Inspedor Kirschnor was 
the man who worked in Browne’s garage? — T had; bni, there 
were other men employed in Browno’a garage. It hiul io be 
proved which man was taking a particular |lurt ihero. It had 
to be cleared up. 

I suppose Inspector Kirstbner is right when he says lie wae 
told to bring Kennedy along to Scotland Yard when ho got him 
to London? — Certainly. 

That was so that he might lie inlorviewed with regard to 
the Gntteridge murder? — Certainly. 

That is not the normal course <if ihings in the case of a 
charge like the stealing of a tnot(>r oar?~lt is in some coses. 
I have charged a man at Sutton who ought to have been charged 
at Croydon, The charge can \>o taken at various places, 


m 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Tompkins — I suggest to you that 
Kennedy was brought straight from the station into your room 
at Scotland Yard^ where you were sitting with Inspector Savage? 
— That is not so. I was having tea in Whitehall when Kennedy 
arrived, and there was no Inspector Savage at the Yard. He 
was Superintendent Savage. 

Will you swear Superintendent Savage was not there? — Just 
after I had begun to interview Kennedy I think Superintendent 
Savage came in and spoke to me on another matter. Nothing 
to do with this case at all 

Who was present when this statement was taken ^ — Sergeant 
Harris Nobody else Mrs. Kennedy was brought in and she 
was in the room kissing her husband, and he was kissing her 
for some minutes, but she was not in the room while the state- 
ment was taken, Kennedy was normal and rational* in every 
way. If he was worried he was not showing it outwardly. 

When he arrived at Scotland Yard he was a sick and tired 
man? — Not in any way whatever. 

Why could not this statement wait till the following morning? 
— ^Why should it wait? 

Because, answering your questions, he was a tired man? — ^He 
wasi not tired. If I thought a man was not in a fit state to 
make a statement I should have been the last person in the world 
to have had it taken. 

It would not have mattered much if he had been put in a 
cell till next day ? — Well, it was not done, 

Kennedy did not leave Scotland Yard till 12.30 a.m. ? — That 
was because he wanted to have another hour with his wife, 
which was granted to him. 

Was it not because he was being interrogated? — Not at all. 
He made a request to be allowed to see his wife, and he was 
with her for about one hour. 

When Kennedy arrived was it not Superintendent Savage 
who spoke first? — Superintendent Savage has not spoken to 
Kennedy as far as I know 

I suggest that Superintendent Savage said to Kennedy, Tell 
us what you know about it?’' — I have said once that to my 
knowledge Superintendent Savage has never spoken to the 
prisoner. 

Did not Kennedy say, What are yo<u talking about? ’’ and 

Superintendent Savage replied, “ You well know what we’re 

talking about — ^the shot policeman”? — I can only deny it. No 
question was ever put to prisoner by. Superintendent Savage in 
my presence. 

Was Kennedy not in the room four hours before he asked 
to see his wife? — Mrs. Kennedy could satisfy you as to that if 
she could be called. 

204 



Appendix A. 

The statement was not taken until 10.16 ? — ^Do you suggest 
that thos^ 19 sheets could be taken between 10 15 and 11.30 — 

I say it IS incorrect. 

I must formally put it that after, first of all, refusing to 
make a statement, Kennedy was addressed by Superintendent 
Savage, who said, “You will swing if you donH own up, be- 
cause Browne has told us you have done it — He never refused 
to make a statement, and Superintendent Savage never said such 
a thing. 

Did not the following conversation take place : — 

“ Kennedy — I don^t know what you are talking about. 

“ Superintendent Savage — ^You know about the shot 
policeman. 

“^Kennedy — I don’t. 

“ Superintendent Savage — If you don’t open your mouth 
you will swing. Driscoll [the Cardiff murderer] swings to- 
morrow, and if he had opened his mouth he would not 
have swung We have got enough evidence now to swing the 
pair of you ” ? 

— I do not agree with this version given by Kennedy of the 
interview. 

Did you say, “ Kennedy, who was it shot him? — Untrue, 
absolutely untrue. 

And did you say, “ We know you can’t drive, and it was 
the driver who shot him ” ? — ^Untrue, untrue. 

Did you add, I think you will come out of it all right. 
You have no need to fear. You will not have the capital charge 
made against you. Browne is an expert gunman”? — Untrue, 
absolutely untrue. I said nothing of the kind. 

Did you say, And he has probably led you away because 
he told us that had he got hold of his^revolver when arrested he 
would have shot the lot of us, and by God he would have done 
2 — Chief Inspector Berretb shook his head. 

Did you say that Browne was the dominating mind, that he 
had dominated the minds of several people? — ^Nothing of the 
kind. 

The whole of that is pure fabrication? — ^All imagination and 
invention. No such thing was said in my presence. 

I suggest to you that these threats were uttered, these pro- 
mises were made, and that the interrogation went on from 6.30 
until ten o’clock? — ^Nothing of the kind. 

And that first of all you would have ten minutes of ,it, and 
then Superintendent Savage would take it up, and so on alter- 
nately ?— Sergeant Harris was writing down the statements from 
about a quarter past seven until ten minutes past eleven, and 
no other person entered that room. 


206 



Browne and Kennedy. 

I suggest to you that as threats appeared to have no effect 
on Kennedy, hut that his resistance being pretty broken — 

almost to breaking point — ^that you then played your last card 
and you tried playing on his feelings in this way. You said, 
‘‘Tour wife is outside”? Perfectly untrue I would not take 
such a liberty with a prisoner. 

Did you know he had been married recently*? — ^Yes. 

I suggest you said, “ Your wife is outside, and if you don't 
open your mouth you will have to tell her you will be charged 
with murder ” *? — Nothing of the kind 

And then you said, “ But if you make a statement you will 
only be charged as an accessory after the fact.” You are on 
your oath, and you want to be fair to this man? — I am always 
fair. 

And will you swear you said nothing like thisi — Nothing 
at all. 

Did not Kennedy thereupon say, “ Can I see my wife ” ? — I 
was astounded when I heard him addressing his wife and telling 
her about an accessory after the fact, of which he appeared to 
have a great knowledge 

I suggest he first asked to see his wife about 10.15 am ? — 
Nothing of the kind. 1 am convinced I have given a true account 
of the conversation which Kennedy had with his wife when she 
came into the room. I am also certain that Kennedy definitely 
used the words “ I was there ” when he said he knew who had 
shot P.C. Cutteridge. 

Where do you think he got that expression, that legal term, 
“accessory after the fact”? — The only explanation I can give 
is that he may have got it from some other source. I don't know 
what books he reads. He is a compositor. He certainly could 
have read everything about it in the papers. He astounded me 
when he made that statem&nt to his wife. 

The statement “ accessory after the fact ” is not a well- 
known term to some lawyers Do you think the man in the street 
knows about it? — I think the man in the street knows a great 
deal more than he is credited with. 

I don't quite understand why Mrs. Kennedy was taken to 
Scotland Yard? — ^Because she explained to the police at Liver- 
pool that she was stranded. This is not the first time we have 
taken wives under our wing, so to speak, and found shelter for 
them. 

Shelter at Scotland Yard? — No. Only until lodging could be 
found for them. 

Was she there to induce her husband to make a statement? — 
That may be the construction put upon it by the defence, but 
certainly it was never in the minds of the police oflBicers. Kennedy 
had asked to see his wife. 

206 



Appendix A. 

He knew she was there? — She had travelled with him. 

Don't you think it would have been better if he had seen a 
solicitor ?'^If he had asked to see a solicitor every facility would 
have been given. 

Do you think it was wise to allow this conversation to go 
on with regard to the statement? 

By the Magistrate — Should you have had any right to stop 
the conversation? — I should not think of stopping such a thing. 

[The statement alleged to have been made by Kennedy was 
then read ] 


207 



APPENDIX B. 


The ApPBxiL. 

The appeals made by Biowne and Kennedy weie heard on 
22nd May in the Lord Chief Justice^s Couit by the Lord Chief 
Justice (Lord Hewart), Mr. Justice Salter, and Mr Justice 
Branson. The Solicitor-General, Mr. H. D. Roome, and Mr. G, 
B. MTlure appeared for the Crown; Browne was represented by 
Mr. Frank Powell and Mr. Charles Abbott; Kennedy by Mr. E. 
F. Lever and Mr. Walter B Frampton. The appeals jvere heard 
separately, that of Kennedy being taken first. 

The following report is taken from The Times of 23rd May : — 

Mr. Powell, in opening the appeal, said that the grounds of 
appeal raised two questions. The first question was : '' Did the 
refusal of Kennedy’s application for a separate trial result in a 
miscarriage of justice'?” The second question was: ” Taking 
the summing-up as a whole, ought the verdict to be allowed to 
stand? ” 

The Lord Chief Justice — ^D o you mean that there was mis- 
direction? — ^Yes, my lord. 

Counseh, continuing, said that if Kennedy had been granted a 
separate trial, he could have gone into the witness-box and given 
evidence in his own defence. No one would have been present to 
put his bad record before the Court, whereas at the joint trial 
he was unable to give evidence on oath and repeat the contents 
of the statement which he had made to the police, in which he 
had accused Browne of thg murder, except with the certain know- 
ledge that Browne’s counsel would bring out his (Kennedy’s) 
previous convictions and bad character. 

The Lord Chief Justice — How can you say^ that? 

Mr. Powell replied that on the day on which an application 
was made to fix the date of the trial he had a few words with Mr. 
Lever to see whether they could come to any understanding about 
the case. They both came to the conclusion that, in view of the 
gravity of the issues, it was impossible to have any understand- 
ing or an agreement of any sort, and that each of them should be 
free to conduct his defence in the best interests of his client without 
regard to the eSect on the other prisoner. 

On the second day of the trial- Mr. Lever told him that if 
Kennedy were called as a witness, and gave evidence that Browne 
had committed the murder, he (Mr. Lever) would be bound in 
Browne’s in,terest to take advantage of his legal rights under 
the Criminal Evidence Act, 1898, and to bring out Kennedy’s bad 

208 



Appendix B. 

record. Mr. Lever further informed him that if, on the other 
hand, Kennedy did not offer himself as a witness, he would also 
take advaiStage of the legal position and comment in no measured 
terms on Kennedy's absence from the witness-box. 

Your lordships will see at once the appalling position in 
which Kennedy was placed. He was on the horns of a dilemma. 
If he went into the witness-box the whole of his bad record would 
be made known to the jury, and the jury would have been so 
prejudiced against him that there would have been no reasonable 
chance of any explanation which he might give about the case 
being accepted. On the other hand, if he did not give evidence 
he had certain knowledge that Mr. Lever would make the com- 
ments to which he had referred, and, in fact, Mr. Lever did 
make some strong comments. There was a further possibility 
of the judge himself commenting on his absence from the witness- 
box, and that might turn the scale against him. It occurred to 
me that there was a possibility that, in view of the fact that 
this embarrassing position was caused by the joint trial, Mr. 
Justice Avory might direct the jury that there were reasons why 
Kennedy's absence from the witness-box was consistent with inno- 
cence, His lordship did not take that course, and the Court 
knows the way in which he commented on Kennedy's absence from 
the witness-box. 

The two matters which transcended all others in the case against 
Kennedy, and which, it was reasonable to suppose, caused his 
conviction, were, first, his absence from the witness-bpx, coupled 
with the judge's criticism on it; and, secondly, Mr. Justice Avory’s 
directing the jury about two revolvers being at Browne's garage 
on the night of the crime without pointing out that the evidence 
was that of an accomplice (Browne), who had perjured himself on 
the most crucial matter, namely, the ownership of the fatal re- 
volver. Not only did Mr. Justice Avory not give to the jury any 
proper direction regarding the value of the evidence of an accom- 
plice, but he gave no direction at all. Those matters could never 
have arisen if Kennedy had had a separate trial. 

If Kennedy had had a separate trial he would not have been 
giving evidence “ against any other person charged with the same 
offence " so as to permit his being cross-examined with regard 
to his character under section 1 (f) (iii) of the Criminal Evidence 
Act, 1898. Browne would not have been before the Court, and 
what Kennedy said on his own trial would not have been evidence 
against Browne in another Court on another trial. A state of 
affaire had been brought into existence from which Kennedy was 
entitled to be relieved. 

The Loed Chief Justice — If I follow you, the underlying 
doctrine of this is that if two persons of bad character are engaged 
in committing a crime together they must never be tried together 
because the character of the one may hurt the other. They should 
have thought of that before they set out to do what they did, 

^ 209 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Mr. Powell — You have to imagine a case where one of the 
prisoners is innocent of the crime for which they are ])oth tried. 

How much of the summing-up could have been delivered if 
there had been sepaiate Inals? The whole of the judge's comments 
about Kennedy’s not going into the witness-bos would have had to 
be deleted. The whole of the judge's direction relating to the 
two revolvers being at the gaiage would have had to be deleted. 
And those were matters which were most stiongly put forward 
by the judge against Kennedy. Kennedy never had a leal oppor- 
tunity to give evidence, the sort of opportunity which the law 
allowed anybody who was charged with a criminal offence. His 
dilemma was too acute. 

Counsel further submitted that the case against Kennedy 
should have been withdrawn from the jury at the end of the 
case for the prosecution. When the evidence for ihe j)rosecution 
was concluded the case against Kennedy was no stronger than had 
been the case against Stewart in Rtx v. BHimrt and Lincoln {The 
Times, 21st January, 1926). Stewart and Lincoln went to a house 
to rob, and one of them took a revolver. Stewart was 
present and assisted at the robbery, but the judge held that 
it was necessary for the prosecution to prove that he knew 
that Lincoln was armed and that firearms would be used, and, in 
the absence of such evidence, he withdrew from the jury the case 
against Stewart. 

The Lord Chief Justice — ^We cannot examine another case 
without having before us all the materials in that other case. The 
question is whether in this case there was sufficient material to go 
to the jury. That question is not illuminated by a sketchy 
examination of some other case. 

Mr. Powell said that that was why he had wished to go 
into the facts of Stewart’s case. In the present case the prosecu- 
tion did not prove facts from which the jury were entitled to 
infer Kennedy's guilt. The prosecution proved that Kennedy and 
Browne had been associated before the crime, that they were 
together when the murder was committed, that Kennedy was present 
when the fatal shots were fired, and that after the murder he con- 
tinued to associate with Browne, but those facts did not justify 
any conviction of Kennedy either of being guilty of constructive 
murder or of aiding and abetting. 

On the question of constructive murder, there was no evidence 
that when Browne fired the shots a felony was being committed. 
The stealing of Dr. Lovell’s motor car (in which, it was alleged, 
the men were at the time of the murder) had ceased before they 
met Police Constable Grutteridge. 

The Lord Chief Justice — The 'old words are ‘ ' steal, , take, 
and carry away.” Were they not in the very act of “taking away”? 

Mr. Powell replied that there must be some limit to the act 
of stealing. Otherwise, if a man stole a thing and kept it in 
his possession for six months, he would still be stealing it in 
the sense of taking and carrying it away.'^ 

210 



Appendix B. 

The Lord Chief Justice — When do you say that the act of 
stealing ceases? 

Mr. Powell — say that the taking and carrying away is 
finished the moment the thief has don© all that which is nec'essary 
to justify a charge against him of stealing. 

Continuing, counsel contended that there was no evidence of 
any circumstances which rendered the murder necessary. 

The Lord Chief Justice — ^When is murder necessary? 

Mr. Powell — I meant, of course, only in the sense of neces- 
sary to enable wrongdoers to escape from the police. 

The Lord Chief Justice — We have heard much recently of the 
defence of irresistible impulse. In the future we may hear of the 
defence of the necessity of murder. 

Mr. Lever, on behalf of Browne, submitted that there had been 
a miscarriage of justice owing to the fact that the two appellants 
had been tried jointly. The real issue between Browne and the 
prosecution was whether he was in the motor car at the time of 
the murder. 

That issue depended on three matters — the evidence with 
regard to the possession of the fatal revolver at the time of the 
crime, Browne's statements at and about the time of his arrest, 
and the evidence that he was found to be in possession of a number 
of surgical instruments and appliances which had belonged to Dr. 
Lovell. The evidence about the revolvers which had been men- 
tioned in a case was in a terrible muddle, but there emeiged from 
it the probability that Browne's statement that he had obtained 
the fatal revolver from Kennedy in exchange for an automaLic 
pistol some time after the murder was true. When allowance was 
made for the confusion which had arisen it was open to the Court 
to infer that Browne was not consciously lying about the revolvers 
at all. There was certainly not to be extracted from his evidence 
any proof that he was the owner of the fatal revolver at the time 
of the murder. When he was arrested Browne made a number 
of observations of a more or less violent character with reference 
to shooting. The jury had heard Browne give evidence and had 
been able to form an opinion of him and whelhei ho was a man 
likely to make hasty, groundless, and violent stutementa. It must 
be remembered that Browne was arrested after he had been out 
for two days in his car, and when ho was hungry and labouring 
under very strong irritation. Doubtless what he had said was 
violent and injudicious, but it referred to the last topic on which 
a man would enter if he were conscious that he had shot a police 
constable and that trouble might arise in connection with that 
crime. The evidence given of the identity of the instruments and 
appliances found in Browne's possossion was inconclusive. 

If the evidence on those matters had stood alone and the 
prisoners had been convicted it would have been impossiblo to say 
that there had not been a miscarriage of justice, but in addition 
to it there was the statement which had been made by Kennedy. 

211 



Browne and Kennedy. 

The effect of that statement was overwhelming. It trammelled 
both prisoners in their defence. It contained the name of Browne 
in forty places. He (Mr. Lever) had to test it, anch he cross- 
examined to a number of incidents in it, but his cross-examination 
failed because the statement, except for its central he, was true. 
At the trial he had characterised it as a historical novel. It was 
partly true, but there was fiction woven into it, the lie that 
was presented in its most misleading form. It was carefully con- 
structed and terribly damaging. Mr. Justice Avory had told the 
jury over and over again not to pay any attention to it as far 
as Browne was concerned. But he was telling them to do some- 
thing which was impossible. 

Kennedy was in the dock standing side by side with Browne, 
and to the last moment he was persisting in his statement that 
Browne was guilty. Instead of a Court, the scene became one 
of an arena with a gladiatorial show in it. The jury "were look- 
ing on and expecting to see these two men fly at each other and 
fight to the death. It became an indecent spectacle, and in my 
experience one which has never been equalled in any Court. 

Counsel for the Crown were not called on to argue. 

The Lord Chief Justice, in giving the judgment of the Court, 
said that both Browne and Kennedy had appealed against their 
convictions on grounds which involved solely questions of law, and 
they had also applied for leave to appeal on questions of fact. In 
those circumstances neither was entitled to be present, but both 
had been given an opportunity of being present at the hearing 
of their appeals. It had been urged that Mr. Justice Avory was 
wrong in refusing the application which was made at the outset 
of the trial that the cases against the two appellants should be 
tried separately. The law with regard to that matter was well 
settled. It was stated, for instance, in Eex v. Gihhins, 13 
Crim.App.Rep. 134, where the Court said ; 

" The rule is that it. is a matter for the discretion of the 
judge at the trial whether two people jointly indicted should be 
tried together or separately. But the judge must exercise his 
discretion judicially. If he has done so this Court will not inter- 
fere, but that is subject to this qualification. If it appeared to this 
Court that a miscarriage of justice had resulted from the prisoners 
being tried together it would quash the conviction.^' 

In the present case the experienced judge who had tried it 
had exercised his discretion judicially, and there was not the 
faintest ground for the suggestion that any miscarriage of justice 
had resulted from his decision. On the contrary, the evidence 
was overwhelming. It was as plain as a pikestafl, and it would 
have been as plain as a pikestaff if the appellants had been tried 
separately. There was nothing in the criticism that the summing- 
up was not fair. He must repeat what he had so often said, 
namely, that there was nothing in the appeals except that they 
were in a case of murder* 

213 





Facsimile of portion of Kennedy's last letter to his wife. 



APPENDIX C. 


Kennedy's Last Letter to His Wipe. 


Students of the psychology of the murderer will be interested by 
the following letter, written by Kennedy within a few hours of 
his execution. While in the condemned cell he was converted-ig 
Roman Gatholicism. Is this lucubration sincere? I think so, but 
whether this frame of mind would have survived a free pardon is 
very doubtful. Looked out of harm’s way and out of the way of 
doing harm, Kennedy had to blow off his emotional steam, and 
this is the way he did it, probably greatly to his relief and peace 
of mind. 


In replying to this letter, please write on the envelope: — 
Number 5528 ^ame Kennedy 

Wandsworth 

The following reguldtwns as to communications, hy Visit or 
Letter, between prisoners and their friends are notified for 
the information of their correspondents. 

The permission to write and receive letters is given to 
prisoners for the purpose of enabling them to keep up a connection 
with their respectable friends. ^ 

All letters are read by the Prison Authorities. They must be 
legibly written and not crossed. Any which are of an objection- 
able tendency, either to or from prisoners, will be suppressed. 

Prisoners are permitted to receive and to write a letter at 
intervals, which depend on the rules of the stage they attain by 
industry and good conduct; but matters of special importance to a 
prisoner may be communicated at any time by letter (prepaid) to 
1j;^e Governor, who will inform the prisoner thereof, if expedient. 

In case of misconduct, the privilege of receiving and writing 
a letter may be forfeited for a time. 

Money, Books, Postage "Stamps, Food, Tobacco, Clothes, Ac., 
should not be sent to prisoners, for their use in Prison, as nothing 
is allowed to be received at the Prison for that purpose. 

Persons attempting to communicate with prisoners contrary 
to the rules, or to introduce any article to or for prisoners, are 

^13 



Browne and Kennedy. 

liable to fine or imprisonment, and any prisoner concerned in such 
practices is liable to be severely punished. 

Prisoners' friends are sometimes applied to by ungfuthorised 
persona to give or send money, under pretence that it will be for 
the benefit of the prisoners. The people who make these requests 
are trying to get money for themselves by fraudulent pretences. 
If the friends of a prisoner are asked for money, either verbally or 
by letter, they should at once inform the Governor of the prison 
about the matter, and send him any letter they have received. 

Prisoners are allowed to receive visits from their friends, 
according to lules, at intervals which depend on their stage. 

When visits are due to prisoners, notification will be sent to 
the friends whom they desire to visit them. 


Wednesday night 31st/5, 1928. 
Pat, my Brave, my faithful Darling, 

It is with very mixed feelings that I write this, my last earthly 
letter to you. Feelings of anticipation, feelings of eagerness, feel- 
ings of sadness, but thanks to Our Blessed Lady, I can honestly 
say, no feelings of fear. Feelings of anticipation and eagerness, 
darling, because I am eager to be once more near you, feelings of 
anticipation because I anticipate an eternal happiness when you 
join me. And no feelings of fear, my sweetheart, for I have the 
promise of Our Blessed Lady that we %hall again be together. A 
promise renewed this morning again at Benediction. It is now 
10.30 p.m. Fr. Douch has not long gone. We said the rosary 
(sorrowful mysteries) and recited the way of the Cross. At about 
nine p.m, I could hear you most distinctly calling to me “ Oh, 
Billy, Billy, my darling, I love you." Darling, my whole mind 
is concentrated on you. Gfin you feel me with you, I wonder? 

The flowers are lovely, mj^darling. They were divided into 
three lots. One on the statue of Our Lady, one on the Sacred 
Heart, and the third on the little altar which has been placed 
in my room, and is in front of me as I write. 

Sweetheart, I hope you were not offended at the return of 
the photos. I thought you might like to have and keep them, 
because they had been in my possession. They have been well 
kissed, my darling. If you look you will no doubt see the marks. 
You will keep them in memory of me, sweetheart, will you noU 
The other one, propped up in front of me, I have requested shall 
be buried with me. It may cheer you a little, or rather it may 
comfort you, to know that although T shall be buried inside the 
prison walls, it will be with all the rites of Mother Church, and 
the grave will be blessed and consecrated first. But the earthly 
clay only shall be here. My soul or spirit shall be with you^ 
my darling. Night and day I shall be with you, and if there be 

2U 



Appendix C. 

a possible way, I shall let you know it. Earthly vision is poor, 
iny darling, and it may be that although I can see, hear, and 
touch you will be able neither to see, hear, nor feel me. 

But, darling, 1 sliall he there. And, sweetheart, I shall certainly 
find your dear mothei, and join with her in helping and guiding 
you. Our prayers shall be combined to Our Blessed Lady that 
you may receive strength and comfort. 

Darling, you have told me over and over again that no 
other man shall fill my place, and that you will remain faithful 
to me in thought, word, and deed. Sweetheart, I thank you and 
believe you. But my own, when you praise me for giving you 
one week of happiness — well, darling, I am afraid there waS' ncu 
virtue about giving you that, for, darling, in making you happy, 
I was conferring happiness upon myself. No, that is not quite 
correct That seems to imply that anybody else could have given 
me the same happiness. Nobody could have done that but you, 
the sweetest girl on earth. Sweetheart, if I told you that I had 
never fane%ed myself in love before, it would be an insult to your 
intelligence. I have^ from my earliest days, but, sweetheart, 
when 1 met you, then I knew that X had found the pure gold, and 
the rest was but glittering tinsel. Oh, my sweetheart, the 
wondrous feeling that I had. And when you told mo that you 
loved me, then, darling, my cup of happiness was filled. And 
nobly, my sweetheart, have you proved your love for me. Alas I 
sweetheart, I have not been able to give you any proof of my 
love, except my word, and that I again give you. Xou and you 
alone, darling, are the only true love of my life — this life and 
the next. Sweetheart, once again I must thank you for the 
magnilicent way in which you have stood by me, stood by me in 
face of temptations which I know have besot you on all sides. 
How 1 regret that / too have been unable to give a tangible proof 
of my love, I did what I could, sweetheart, as you know by 
now. Sweetheart, you have been wonderfully brave. To-day of 
course you were upset. So was If^lihough I think I hid it from 
you. But, sweetheart, when I asked permission this morning, for 
you know what, and was refused, I bore a brave face in front 
of the officers, but when the priest came in, and he and I were 
alone together, I cried. I could not help it, darling, the dis- 
appointment was so great. Oh, sweetheart, sweetheart, come to 
me quickly. 1 want you, darling, I want you. Those, darling, 
are the feelings of sadness. Not that we shall be parted, for 
death of one but separates us for a time, but that we can not 
be knowingly with each other until you are freed. Do not be 
long, my soul-mate. I shaljl wait so eagerly. And then, then, 
my own precious girl, what happiness shall be ours. Such happi- 
ness — ^for all eternity — as will make our week on earth fade into 
insignificance. Sweetheart, you do believe it. It will not be my 
fault if I cannot give you some proof. Your undivided love 

m 



Browne and Kennedy. 

will be necessary, my own. Pat, my darling, yon pleased me 
to-day when you told me your plans, and also that you intended 
to go to Holy Communion every week. Adhere to that, •my love, 
and you will not do any great wrong. Sweetheart, you will try 
and keep my last wish, won^t youl / know the temptation there 
is, darling, and the temporary satisfaction there may be. There 
may be no harm, my darling, but / know how men talk (and 
women too, I suppose.) I know what the opinion of men is, and, 
darling, your dear mother and myself will be watching over 
you, and you know how it would hurt us if you were talked about 
in that way. Will you try, dailing** But I know you will. 

- * "If you attend those meetings, darling (and I shall know), do 
not forget what was agreed on, and do not tell anybody, nor 
allow them to press you for money by spurious promises. Isn^t 
it strange, darling, that as yoto weie thinking about Jhe thing 
agreed on I also should get the idea. And yet, perhaps not so 
strange, because continually I have found our thoughts inter- 
mingling. I know, darling, you have a hard task to face — 
harder perhaps than mine. I have but to die, and by the time 
you receive this, my task will be over, whilst you — oh, my darling, 
my darling, my heart bleeds to leave you behind to face every- 
thing yourself. Would to Grod you were coming with me, my 
own. Pat, my darling, my soul-mate, my own, come, come 
quickly. I want you, darling, I want you. You will come 
quickly, won^t you, and there you will find me waiting. My 
sweetheart, I shall not say good-bye — except in the old sense of 
the word — God be with ye. Our word is au revoir. Because we 
iihall see each other again, and that perhaps very shortly. Au 
revoir, my own brave, faithful little wife. God comfort you. 

Your own loving, worshipping, and resigned husband, 

Billy. 

xxxxxxxxxxxx 

Thursday morning. 

Time is getting short, sweetheart, and still I feel that strange 
calm and confidence of our reunion j perhaps the worst is to know 
the exact hour, and yet perhaps the best. Au revoir, my precious 
Pat. I love you, and my last thoughts are for y<m^ my own 
darling. Billy, x x x x x x 

I have been re-reading finally all the letters you wrote me here, 
darling, and have, with all reverence, burnt them. These wei;^ 
too sacred to fall into other hands. 

Darling, my last word. I again assert that I had no previous 
knowledge of what was going to happen that night. I go to my 
death knowing that and that my statement was true, and that 
my own darling believes me. B. x x x x 


216 



APPENDIX D. 


Gtutteridge Murder Echo. 

Police and Seized Motor-car. 

Restoration to its Former Owner, 

(From The Morning Post, 4th October, 1929.) 

m 

Mrs. Browne, the widow of Frederick Guy Browne, who, with 
William Kennedy, was executed for the murder of Police Constable 
Gutter! dge, was a party to a case heard at South Western Police 
Court yesterday. 

Mr. Benjamin Stowe, of Wadsley Lane, ShejBfield, summoned 
the Commissioners of Police to show cause why an Angus-Sander- 
son motor-car should not be handed over to him as his property. 
The car is the one which Browne was driving into a garage at the 
time of his arrest, and Mrs. Browne claims that it is her property. 

Mr. E. W. S. Isaac, in making the application, stated that 
Mr. Stowe was a butcher carrying on business in Sheffield. On 
15th June, 1927, he bought an Angus-Sanderson car in Sheffield 
for £66. In the following March something went wrong with the 
car, and Browne, who was in Sheffield, told him what was wrong 
and ofiered to put it right. 

Browne put it right, and was paid for his work. Early in 
November Browne came to his shop with a Vauxhall car, and this 
he offered to Mr. Stowe for £1Z5. '“Mr. Stowe eventually agreed 
to give Browne £100 and his Angus-Sanderson for the renovated 
Vauxhall. 

On 10th November Browne delivered a Vauxhall — not the same 
Vauxhall — and received his £100 and the Angus-Sanderson. A 
few days later Mr. Stowe was informed that the police suspected 
the Vauxhall was stolen. Mr. Stowe gave it up, and had not seen 
it since. The Vauxhall turned out to be stolen, and it was returned 
to its owner. 

The Angus-Sanderson was retained by the police, and Mr. 
Slowe lost his £100 as: well as his Angus-Sanderson and the Vaux- 
hall. 

Detective-Sergeant Akthurst, on behalf of the Commissioner, 
said that the Commissioner had no objection to any order the 
magistrate might make. 

Q 


217 



Browne and Kennedy. 

Inspector Barter said that the police took possession of all the 
property in Browne's garage, including the Angus- Sander son and 
five other cars. Three of the six cars proved to have be^ stolen, 
and wer^e restored to their rightful owners. 

Mr. Campion, the magistrate, said that he found as a fact 
that the Yauxhall was a stolen car. The question then remained 
whether the property of the Angus-Sanderson was vested in Browne 
or Mr. Stowe. 

Mr. O'Connor, for Mrs. Browne, said that he was not claim- 
ing the car for Mrs. Browne, but he was disputing the right of 
Mr. Stowe to it. I never claimed it," added Mr. O'Connor, 
V simply because Mrs. Browne wanted to forget all about this 
business, but there has come a time when she feels bound to assert 
her rights in the matter." 

The magistrate ordered the car to be delivered to Mr. JStowe. 


218 



