u-eiwat, Editor BABBIT 



Trial 

Mary Queen of Scots 
Guy Fawkes 
King Charles I 
The Bloody Assises 
Captain Kidd 
Jack Sheppard 
Captain Porteous 
Tlie Attnesley Case 
Lord Lovat 
Mary Blandy 
James Stewart 
Eugene Aram 
Katharine Nairn 
The Douglas Cause 
Duchess of Kingston 
Deacon Brodie 
44 Bounty" Mutineers 
Abraham. Thornton 
Henry Fauntferoy 
Thttrtell and Htrnt 
Burke and Hare 
J* B t Rush 



Okie of Trial 

(1586) 



, 
ne Smitfi 



Mrs* M 4 Lachlan 
Franz IVEuller 
Dr Pritchard 
The Wainwrights 
The SfauntqnV 
_E* M* Chantrefle 
Klate Webster c 

City of Glasgow Ban! 
Charles Peace 
E>r. Lamson , 
Adelaide Bartiett 
Mrs* Maybrick 
J* W* Latirie 
The Baccarat Case 
T. N* Cream 
A. J* Monson 
W* Gardiner (Peasenhall) 
G Cftiafw^^T 1 ' 
S. H. Douga.1 
Adolf Beck 
Oscar Slater 
Jrx H* Crippen 
J* A- Dicfcman 
Stebaic Morrison 
The Seddons 
George Joseph Smith 
Sir Roger Casement 
Harold Greenwood 
i lyrv^tters and Thompson 
Donald True 
'tULi *v xVrn^strong 
" Va^tiier 
IVferrett 

and Kennedy 



(1649) 
(1678) 
(1701) 
(1724) 
(T736) 
(1743) 
(1747) 
(1752) 
(1752) 
(1759) 
(1765) 
(1761-1769) 
(1776) 
(1788) 
(1792) 
(1817) 
(1824) 
(1824) 
(1818) 
(1849) 
(1856) 
(1858) 
(1859) 
(1*62) 
( 



(1875) 
(1877) 
(1878) 
(1879) 
(1879) 
(1879) 
(1882) 
(1886) 
(1889) 
(1889) 
(1891) 
(1892) 
(1893) 
(19O3) 
(1903) 
(1903) 
(1904) 
(1909-1928) 
(1910) 
(1910) 
(1911) 




(1920 } ) 
(1922) 
(1922) 
(1922) 
(1924) 
(1927) 
(1928) 
(1928) 
(1929) 
(1931) 
(1931) 



Editor 

^A. Francis Steuart 
Donald Carrwell 
J. G. Muddiman 
J. G. Muddiman 
Graham Brooke 
S. M. Ellis 
William Roughead 
Andrew Lang 
David N. Mack ay 
William Roughead 
David N. Mackay 
Eric R, Wataon 
William Roughead 
A. Francis Steuart 
Lewis Melvillo 
William Roughead 
Owen Rutter 
Sir John Hall. Bl. 
Horace Bleackley 
Eric R. Wataon 
William Roughead 
W. Tevgnmouth Shore 
Eric R. Watson 
F. Tennyson Jcwe 
L . A. Parry 
William Roughead 
H. B. Irving 
William Ronfehead A 
H. B. Irving 
J. B. Atlay 
A. Duncan Smith 
Elliott O'Donnell 
William Wallace 
W. Teignmouth Shore 
H. L. Adam 
Sir John Hall, Bt. 
H. B. Irving 
William Roughead 
W. Teignmouth Shore 
W. Teignmouth Shore 
J. W. More 
William Henderson 
H. L. Adam 
F. Tennyson Jesse 
Eric R. Watson 
William Roughead 
Filson Young 
S. O. Rowan -Hamilton 
H. Fletcher Monlton 
Filson Young 
Eric R. Watson 
George H. Knot! 
Winifred Duke 
Filson Young 
Donald Carswell 
Filson Young 
R. H. Blundcll 
William Roughead 
W. Teignmouth Shore 
Albert Lieck ** 
F. Tennyson Jesse 
Helena Normanton - 
Colliu Brooks 




[Resell, London 



Mr. Justice Humphreys 



TRIAL OF 

Alma Victoria Rattenbury 

and 

George Percy Stoner 



EDI.TED BY 



F, Tennyson Jesse 

Author of *' Murder and its Motives," &c. 



ILLUSTRATED 



AUSTRALIA N&W Z&ALAN& tffDXA 

SUtTEBWORTH * CO. BUTTERWORTH * CO. BVTTERWQRTH * CO. 

(AUST.X LTIX (AUST.), LTD (INDIA). LTD* 

SV0NEY AND WELLINGTON AND CALCUTTA, BOMBAY 

MELBOURNE AUCKLAND AND MADRAS 

U.S.A. 

BUTTERWORTH & CO* 

(PUBLISHERS), LTD, 

LONDON 



MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 

BY 

WILLIAM HODGE AND COMPANY, LIMITED 
GLASGOW AND EDINBURGH 

December, 1935 



TUB DEAR MKMORY OF 

H, SOMERS JAMES 

IJAURISTKR-AT-LAW 
WHO WOULD HAVK -inUGKI) NO HUMAN 

WITHOUT MBRCY AND ALL WITH HUMOUK 



PREFACE. 

MY thanks are due to Mr. T. J. O'Connor, K.C., M.P., and to Mr. 
J. D. Casswell and Mr. R. Lewis Manning for the help they have 
given me in editing this book. My thanks are also due to Dr. 
William O'Donnell and Mr. A. Basil Eooke, F.R.C.S., for the 
information without which my account would necessarily be much 
less complete. I am indebted to Mr. R. P. Groom- Johnson, 
K.C., M.P., for the revisal of his speeches, and to His Lordship, Mr. 
Justice Humphreys, for consenting to read over his Charge to the 
Jury. The medical witnesses have also been good enough to read 
over their evidence, and to them I wish to tender my thanks. Miss 
Irene Riggs was my informant as to much of the domestic life at 
Villa Madeira and to her also my thanks are due. 

3. TENNYSON JESSE. 



LONDON, December, 19$$. 



LONDON, 



CONTENTS. 





PAGE 
1 

- 41 




THE TKTAII 


FIKST DAY MONDAY, 27Tii MAY, 1935. 


- 49 


Evidence for the Prosecution. 


Harold R, Homewood, * - 54 Elizabeth A. Stevens, 
Arthur E, Punter, ... 54 Richard E. Stevens, - 
Frederick Clements, - - 54 Irene Riggs, 


55 
- 57 
58 


SECOXU BAY-TUESDAY, 28TH MAY, 1935. 




&Vwfance,/br ike Prostration (continued). 




William G. Budden, (K* Sydney G. Bright, - 
Irene Rij^s (recalled) 9H ] Oeargo H, Gates, 
I)r. W. O'Donnell, 94 Walter C. Jones, - 
Alfred B Rooke, 112 Harrold Simmons, - 
Arthur E, flagweil, 118 Edward M. Tregunnin, 
William J. Miila, 123 William G. Carter (recalled), 
William G, Carter, 129 


140 
142 
143 
144 
145 
146 


THIRD DAY WEDNESDAY, 20TH MAY, 1935. 




Evidence for tfw Prowcwiion (continued). 




Arthur E. Bagwell (recalled), 147 Dan Da vies, 
Dr. Roche Lynch, 148 Ernest C. Massey, 
Dr. H, A* Orierson, 156 Albert J. Jarvis, 
Dr. 8. W. Mann 159 Danby C. Dobson, 
Alee A. Asaireili, 159 James N. Westcott, 
Edward C. Wright, 160 


160 
161 
161 
162 
162 


ftvidem for the Accused Ratt&nbury. 


- 163 
- 176 
* 177 
- 203 


ISmdmefar the Prosecution (continued). 


flvid&nce for the Accused Ratteribury, 


Bviduut for the Prosecution (continued). 

TV V. W Mann /rfi^HftdV 



CONTENTS. 

PAUE 

FOURTH DAY-THUKSDAY, 3toH MAY, 1935, 



Dr. H, A, Grieraon (recalled), '-204 

Alfred B.Rooke (recalled), 204 

Evidence for tb Accused Stoner* 

George Stoner, 206 

Mrs, Olive M, Stoner, 208 

Dr.LionelA.Weatherly, 208 

Mrs, Louise M. Price, 214 

Dr, Robert D. Gillespie, !i!4 



Mr,J,D,Casswell, 

Glomg Speech for the froion. 
Mr. E, P, Groom-Johnson, 



Closmg Speech for the Primer fattenbury. 
Mr.T.J.O^Connor, - 241 



Mr. Justice Humphreys, 246 

The Verdict, - ' 287 

The Sentence, 288 

APPENDICES, 

1 Court of Criminal Appeal-Rex v. Stoner, 291 

H Inquest on Mrs. Alma Victoria Rattenbury, 294 

HI, Statement by Mrs. Alma Victoria Rattenbury, 297 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



Mr. Justice Humphreys, 

Villa Madeira, Bournemouth, 

Mr, R. P. Groom- Johnson, K.C. 

George Percy Sterner, 

Ahna Victoria Rattenbury, - 

Mr. T. I). Caaewell, 

Mr. T, J. O'Connor, K.C., - 



- Frontispiece 

facing 'page 34 

54 

Oti 

t w 

164 
222 
244 



EATTENBUKY AND STONER 



INTRODUCTION. 

On 25th September, 1934, the following advertisement 
appeared in The Bournemouth Daily Echo: ts Daily willing 
lad, 14-18, for housework. Scout-trained pref erred. " 

This advertisement had been inserted by a Mrs. Batten- 
bury, of Villa Madeira, Manor Park Eoad, and was answered 
by a youth called George Percy Stoner. Since he was of 
an age to drive a car, and his previous employment had been 
in a garage, he was engaged as chauffeur-handyman. 

On Monday, 27th May, 1935, Alma Victoria Eattenbury 
and George Percy Stoner were charged at the Central Criminal 
Court with the murder of the woman's husband, Francis 
Mawson Eattenbury. Both the accused pleaded not guilty. 

Mrs. Eattenbury was thirty-eight years old, and Stoner 
a chauffeur in her husband's employ had attained the age of 
eighteen in November of 1934. Mrs. Eattenbury and Stoner 
had become lovers soon after Stoner was taken into Mr. 
Eattenbury's employ in September of that year. 

Both Mr. and Mrs. Eattenbury had been previously 
married; he once and she twice. Mr. Eattenbury had a 
grown-up sou; and Mrs. Eattenbury, a little boy called 
Christopher, born in 1922. The marriage of Francis Eatten- 
bury and Alma Victoria took place about 1928, and a boy, 
John, was born a year after. Since the birth of this child 
Mr. and Mrs. Eattenbury had not lived together as husband 
and wife, Mr. Eattenbury was sixty-seven years old and 
not a young man for his age. He was an architect of dis- 
tinction, and had lived most of his working life in Canada, 
but when he retired in 1928, he and his wife came to live 
in Bournemouth. Eventually they took a little white house 
called Villa Madeira in a pleasant suburban road near the 
sea, shaded by pin#. A companion-help, Miss Irene Eiggs, 

s 1 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

came to live with them. Little John went to school, but 
came home every week-end, and Christopher, the child of 
Mrs. Rattenbury 's second marriage, spent his holidays at 
Villa Madeira. 

When Stoner was first employed at Villa Madeira, he 
lived at home and went to his W9rk by day, but in November, 
he took up his residence in the house. He had become Mrs, 
Rattenbury's lover before that, 

On the night of Sunday, 24th March, 1935, Mr. Batten- 
bury was attacked from behind as he sat sleeping in an arm- 
chair in the drawing-room. It was never in dispute that 
the weapon employed was a carpenter's mallet, which Stoner 
had fetched from his grandfather's house that afternoon. 

The events that night, as they first were made known in 
the newspapers, were as follows : 

Mrs. Rattenbury declared that at about 10.30, after she 
had gone to bed, she heard a groan from the room below, 
that she went downstairs, and found her husband in the 
easy-chair, unconscious, with blood flowing from his head- 
She called Irene Riggs, her companion-maid, and told her 
to telephone for Dr. O'Donnell, who was her doctor. Dr. 
O'Donnell arrived and found Mrs. Rattenbury very drunk, 
and Mr. Rattenbury unconscious with blood flowing from his 
head. Mrs. Rattenbury said: "Look at him look at the 
blood someone has finished him/ 1 

Dr. O'Donnell telephoned for Mr. Rooke, a well-known 
surgeon* Mr. Rooke arrived and found it impossible to 
examine the patient as Mrs. Rattenbury was very drunk 
and excitable, and kept getting in his way. The ambulance 
was sent for, and the patient removed to Strathallen Nursing 
Home. After his head had been shaved in the operating 
theatre, Mr. Rooke and Dr. O'Donnell saw three serious 
wounds on the head, that could not have been self-inflicted, 
and, accordingly, they communicated with the police. 

Mr. Rooke operated on Mr. Rattenbury, and Dr. O'Donnell 
between 3.30 and 4 a.m. returned to Madeira Villa. He 
found Mrs. Rattenbury running about extremely intoxi- 
cated, four, or five police officers in the L$use (some of whom 

2 



Introduction. 

she was trying to kiss), the radio-gramophone playing and 
all the lights on. He gave Mrs. Eattenbury half a grain 
of morphia, and put her to bed. During the hours of pro- 
gressive drunkenness Mrs. Eattenbury had kept on making 
statements to the effect that she had killed her husband. The 
nest morning she repeated her assertions in a slightly varied 
form and she was taken to the Bournemouth Police Station 
and charged with doing grievous bodily harm with intent to 
murder. When she was charged Mrs. Eattenbury said: 
'* That is right I did it deliberately, and would do it again," 

Such was the terrible case for the prosecution against 
Alma Victoria Eattenbury, and the picture that had inevitably 
formed itself before the public mind was revolting. 

There was probably no one in England, and no one in 
Court when the trial opened, save Mrs. Eattenbury, her 
solicitor and counsel, Stoner and his solicitor and counsel, 
and Irene Biggs, who did not think Mrs. Eattenbury was 
guilty of the crime of murder. In everyone's mind, including 
that of this Editor, there was a picture of Mrs. Eattenbury 
as a coarse, brawling, drunken and callous woman. But 
life is not as simple as that, and very often an accurate 
report fails to convey truth, because only certain things have 
been reported. The form of the English oath has been very 
wisely thought out " the truth, the whole truth, and nothing 
but the truth/' It is possible to give an erroneous impression 
by merely telling the truth and nothing but the truth. The 
" whole truth " is a very important factor. The whole truth 
about Mrs. Eattenbury came out during the trial, and the 
woman, who at first seemed so guilty, was seen to be 
undoubtedly innocent. This was not merely because there 
proved to be no evidence beyond her own drunken utterances, 
but because of her own attitude in the witness-box. For 
there is no test of truth so relentless as the witness-box 
it is deadly to the guilty, and it may save the innocent. 

In most criminal trials the pattern is set at the beginning 
and merely strengthens as the trial progresses. In the Eatten- 
bury case the evidence which seemed so damning on the 
first day: completely-- altered in character; what had seemed 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

to be undoubted fact proved to be an airy nothing and the whole 
complex pattern shifted and changed much as the pattern 
of sand changes when it is shaken, and, like sand, it slipped 
away between the fingers, leaving a residue of grains of truth 
very different from the pile that the prosecution had originally 
built up. Even at the end of the trial, so rigid is the 
English fashion of thinking or rather feeling, for it is not 
as careful or accurate a process as thought on sexual matters, 
that many people still considered Mrs. Rattenbury morally 
damned. That worst of all Anglo-Saxon attitudes, a con- 
temptuous condemnation of the man and woman, but more 
particularly the woman, unfortunate enough to be found out 
in sexual delinquency, never had finer scope than was pro- 
vided by the Rattenbury case. 

Mrs. Rattenbury was born Alma Victoria Clark, in 
Victoria, British Columbia, and was the daughter of a printer 
in quite humble circumstances. She was extremely talented 
musically. The cheap strain in her came out in the words 
of her lyrics, but she was a really fine pianist. She grew up 
to young womanhood just before the War, already well known 
in Western Canada as a musician, and, although not strictly 
speaking pretty, very attractive to men. In the witness-box 
she still showed as a very elegant woman. She was well and 
quietly dressed in dark blue. She had a pale face, with a 
beautiful egg-like line of the jaw, dark grey eyes, and a 
mouth with a very full lower lip. She was undoubtedly, and 
always must have been a femme au& Jiommes. That is to 
say, that although she had women friends, and was a generous, 
easy, kindly, sentimental creature, she was first and foremost 
a woman to attract men and be attracted by them. She first 
married a young Englishman called Caledon Dolly, who 
joined the Canadian forces on the outbreak of War, and was 
transferred to England. She followed him and obtained 
employment in Whitehall. She was very devoted to her 
husband, but he was killed in action. This was the only 
completely happy relationship with a man which Mrs. Ratten- 
bury was ever to know. She joined a Scottish nursing unit, 
and then became a transport driver, and worked hard through- 



Introduction. 

out the War. After the Armistice she married, for the second 
time, a man whose wife divorced him, citing Alma Victoria 
Dolly. She married this second husband in 1921, and the 
child of that union was born the following year. The 
marriage was unhappy, and she returned to the house of an 
aunt in Victoria, and there she met Mr. Eattenbury. Mr. 
Eattenbury was married himself at the time, but fell very 
much in love with Alma Victoria, and his wife divorced him, 
citing her. At this time Mr. Eattenbury was about sixty 
years of age, and Mrs. Eattenbury thirty-one. Life was 
not too easy for Mr. Eattenbury and his new wife in a country 
where everyone knew of the scandal of the divorce, and this 
was the chief reason why the Eattenburys came to England 
to settle in Bournemouth, 

Mrs. Eattenbury was a highly sexed woman, and six years 
of being deprived of sexual satisfaction had combined with the 
tuberculosis from which she suffered, to bring her to the verge 
of nymphomania. Now nymphomania is not admirable, but 
neither is it blameworthy. It is a disease. In spite of the 
urgency of her desires, which must have tormented her, Mrs. 
Eattenbury had not, as far as is known, had a lover since 
the birth of little John. She certainly had had none the four 
years she had lived in Bournemouth, and she had no abnormal 
tendencies. She was fond of her husband in a friendly fashion, 
and he was devoted to her, very interested in her song-writing 
and anxious for her to succeed. He would often talk to Irene 
Eiggs about his wife, and dwell on the unhappy life she had 
led, and he never in these conversations said anything against 
her. Miss Eiggs, one of my informants as to these matters, 
also said that Mrs. Eattenbury was very kind to her husband, 
that she was, indeed, kind to everyone. The household was 
not an unhappy one, but neither was it happy. For one thing, 
Mrs. Eattenbury was a gregarious creature, and her husband 
was of an unsociable frame of mind. He knew hardly anyone 
of his own station in life, except Dr. O'Donnell and Mr. Jenks, 
a retired barrister who had an estate at Bridport. But Mrs. 
Eattenbury was very different from her husband ; she had that 
lavish, easy, friendliness which one associates with music-hall 

5 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

artistes, and she could not live without affection. When she 
made a friend of Irene Biggs, she did so because it was her 
nature to be friendly with the people who surrounded her. 
She was fond of Irene Biggs, who, on her side, was devoted 
to her employer, in spite of the latter's impatient temper. 
Any little outing to London, any treat, such as a theatre, 
Mrs. Eattenbury shared with Irene Biggs, and the girl has 
remained attached to the memory of the kindest person she 
ever met, who helped anyone in need that she came across. 
But the chief devotion of Mrs. Battenbury's life was for her 
children. No one denies that she was a good and loving 
mother. Dr. O'Donnell and Miss Biggs both say that Mrs. 
Battenbury thought nothing too good for her children, and 
that there was nothing she would not hate done for them. 
She was for ever thinking and talking about them, and 
occupying herself in practical ways for their welfare. 

The Battenburys lived peaceably as a rule, but sometimes 
they had quarrels these were about money. Mr. Battenbury , 
like a great many men, was generous in big matters, but 
difficult in small ones. He allowed his wife 1000 a year, 
and many newspapers reported this fact in such a manner that 
the reading public might easily have imagined that this sum 
was hers for herself alone. As a matter of fact, out of it she 
paid for the food for herself, her husband, the domestics and 
the children when at home, and for one of the boys' schooling. 
She also paid for Mr. Battenbury's clothes and for her own, 
and she paid the servants' wages. Mr. Battenbury was a 
heavy drinker of whisky, and every few weeks Mrs. 
Battenbury would drink more cocktails than would be good 
for her, so that the bill for drinks alone must have amounted 
to a good deal. It will be seen that 1000 a year, nowadays, 
is not too large a sum out of which to support and clothe a 
household and educate a child. Mrs. Battenbury herself had 
very little money sense, and her husband had every reason 
to fear her lavish spending. About twice a year Mrs. 
Battenbury would coax an extra sum out of him ; a large sum, 
over 100, but this he parted with much more easily than 
he would have parted with small sums 'more often. Mrs 



Introduction. 

Eattenbury did not pretend that she told her husband true 
stories to induce him to give her this extra money. She 
admitted she invented whatever story would be the most likely 
to achieve the desired result. Mr. Eattenbury was frequently 
very depressed about financial matters; like everyone else he 
had suffered in the slump, and he was apt, during his moods of 
depression, to threaten to commit suicide. One day in July, 
1934, he harped on this threat at greater length than usual, 
and his wife lost her temper, and told him it was a pity that 
he did not do it, instead of always talking about it. Mr. 
Eattenbury in his turn then lost his temper and hit his wife, 
giving her a black eye. She sent for Dr. O'Donnell, who found 
her very agitated and upset. Her husband had left the house, 
and she feared that he really had gone to kill himself. Mr. 
Eattenbury did not, in fact, return till about two in the 
morning, by which time Dr. O'Donnell also was extremely 
anxious. Mrs. Eattenbury was by then so ill that he injected 
a quarter of a grain of morphia, and she slept for twelve 
hours. After that, life went on as usual with the Eattenbury s. 
She bore him no grudge for having struck her. She was a 
person of quick temper herself, but generous in what children 
call " making it up." This was the only serious quarrel 
between the Eattenburys that Dr. O'Donn-ell or Irene Eiggs 
knew of in four years. In the box, Mrs. Eattenbury was 
asked whether her married life was happy, and she answered : 
" Like that . . . ! " with a gesture of her hand. A gesture 
that sketched the married life of the larger part of muddled 
humanity. 

Life might have gone on in the usual pedestrian fashion 
at Villa Madeira for ever, but George Percy Stoner joined the 
household, and Mrs. Eattenbury fell in love with him. 

The expression " falling in love " is an attempt to define 
something which escapes definition. Mankind has a natural 
weakness for labels, for they simplify life, and though this 
particular label is one of the most pernicious which have been 
evolved, it must be remembered that it covers not only a 
multitude of sins, but of virtues. Perhaps no two people would 
give quite the same definition of its meaning. Very few people 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

trouhle to try. Mrs. Battenbury herself was a woman who 
dealt in labels, and she accepted the expression " falling in 
love." She wrote cheap little lyrics of the more obvious 
variety, and she herself would never have questioned what < * in 
love " meant. She was " in love " with Stoner, who, except 
for his virility, was not a particularly interesting or attractive 
person. Indeed, lack of taste is one of the chief charges 
against Mrs. Battenbury, both in her work and in her life. 
She was very uncontrolled emotionally. Her lyrics were 
appalling. She was subject to drinking bouts, which added 
to her natural excitability. She had not scrupled, twice, to 
take other women's husbands away from them, and she seems 
to have been, to use a slang phrase, a natural born bad picker. 
When she took Stoner as her lover, she said to Dr. O'Donnell : 
" There is something I want to tell you. I am afraid you 
will be shocked and never want to speak to me again." Dr. 
O'Donnell replied that there were very few things he had not 
been told in the course of his life, and that he was not easily 
shocked. She then told him the step she had taken, and he 
spoke to her seriously, warning her that she was probably 
being very unwise. But she was too far gone in love by then 
to heed any advice he gave her. She merely reiterated that 
she was in love with Stoner. 

One of the things that told most strongly against Mrs, 
Rattenbury's moral character, was that, in the witness-box, 
she admitted that she had connexion with her lover when 
little John was asleep in his bed in the same room. This was 
to many people in Court, including myself, a very shocking 
statement. However, it must be admitted in fairness that 
there are unfortunately thousands of families in England 
where the same thing goes on. I myself have come across 
such families, and I consider the practice to be none the less 
shocking because the parents happen to be married. There is 
no doubt that an innocent child, awakening and seeing what 
was going on, would get an impression of something ugly and 
terrifying, even unnatural, which might do him harm for the 
rest of his life. But it is only fair, al$o, to add that Dr, 
O'Donnell has assured me he never knew a child who skat 

8 



Introduction. 

as soundly as little John. If the Doctor and Irene Biggs were 
attending Mrs. Rattenbury when she happened to be ill, 
John would sleep undisturbed throughout the visit. I should 
also add that relations of Mr. Rattenbury, who took Mrs. 
Rattenbury into their house after her acquittal, told me that 
she said: "I can't think what made me say that in the 
witness-box about Stoner making love to me when little John 
was in the room. He didn't. I got bewildered, and lost my 
head, and heard myself saying it." There is, of course, no 
means of knowing whether Mrs. Rattenbury was speaking the 
truth when she made this remark. I can only say that I think 
it unlikely, for the reason that she gave the impression 
throughout her evidence of being a witness of truth, of being 
so terrified of what might be the result if she diverted from 
the truth, that she dared not do so, even when it told against 
her. It may be thought that the solution to the riddle is 
that, generally, she did go into Stoner's room when little John 
was at home, but that on some occasions connexion had taken 
place in the room where the child was. If so, Mrs. 
Rattenbury's bad taste is again manifest. 

The obvious solution to the question as to what love meant 
for her, is that it meant physical satisfaction. Yet, if it 
had meant only this, it would have deserted her when she 
stood in peril of her life. It did not do so, and neither 
did Stoner's love for her. Stoner refused to go into the box, 
and told his counsel he did not deny having attacked Mr. 
Rattenbury. The woman for weeks insisted, to her solicitor 
and counsel, that she wished to take the blame, so as to 
save Stoner. Mr. Lewis-Manning, her solicitor, made it clear 
to her that, if she lied, her story would not stand the test of 
the witness-box, and that she would only hang herself without 
saving Stoner. But not till Christopher, the little boy of her 
second marriage, was sent to her in prison to plead with her to 
tell the truth, did she give way. And, afterwards, in the 
witness-box, she said as little against her lover as possible, 
making light of certain alleged attacks of violence towards 
herself, attacks which had frightened her so much, that, long 

before the murder, she consulted Dr. O'Donnell abojit them* 

9 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Indeed, one of the most interesting points in this case is, that 
it is the only one, as far as I am aware, where two people have 
been charged together on the capital indictment when neither 
of the accused has abandoned the other in a scramble for 
safety. Milson and Fowler, Field and Gray, Gabrielle 
Bompard and Eyrand, Mr. and Mrs. Manning, Kuth Siiyder 
and Judd Gray, to remember only a few at random, all tried 
to throw the blame on the partner in crime. Mrs. Thompson, 
terrified and conscious of her own innocence of murder, never 
gave a thought to the safety of her lover, Bywaters. Mrs. 
Eattenbury was willing and anxious to take the whole 
blame if by so doing she could save her lover. It is Mr. Lewis- 
Manning's considered opinion that Mrs. Eattenbury was not 
merely in a condition of exaltation that would have failed 
her at the last pass, but that she would have hanged without 
a tremor if by so doing she could have saved Stoner. 

The story of Mrs. Eattenbury 's life is a mingling of 
tragedy and futility. It is easy to be sentimental and see 
only the tragedy. It is easy to be stupid and see only the 
futility- The truth is, that it is always easy to label people, 
but because a thing is easy, it is not necessarily accurate. 
No human being is simple. Stoner may have seemed simple 
enough to his family; he had always been a quiet boy who 
did not make .friends, but his quiet appearance concealed 
stormy adolescent yearnings. He had the dramatic instincts 
natural to the young, and, unfortunately, circumstances thrust 
him into real drama before he could tell the difference between 
what was real and what was make-believe. Physically, he 
was very passionate, and nothing in his mental training had 
equipped him to cope with the extraordinary life to which 
it had pleased Mrs. Eattenbury to call turn, 

Francis Eattenbury, that outwardly quiet man, is a 
pathetic figure in retrospect. Mr. Justice Humphreys referred 
to him as being " that very unpleasant character for which, 
I think, we have no suitable expression, but which the French 
call ' a mari complaisant. ' A man who knew that his wife 
was committing adultery ; and had no objection to it." Mrs. 
Ratteabury said, in the box, that she thought her husband 

10 



Introduction. 

knew because she had told him she was living her own life. 
But she may well have told him that without his taking in 
the meaning 1 of her words. He was completely incurious, 
and he lived not in the present, but in regrets for the past 
and anxieties for the future. 

Irene Riggs, Dr. O'Donnell, and, indeed, everyone 
acquainted with the household to whom this Editor has spoken, 
was of the opinion that Mr. Rattenbury was not aware that 
his wife and his chauffeur were lovers. But when I saw 
Villa Madeira, I thought this difficult to credit. It is so 
small as to be remarkable, small as the witch's cottage in 
" Hansel and Gretel." On the ground floor are the kitchen, 
drawing-room, dining-room, and a room that Mr. Rattenbury 
used as a bedroom, and which opened off the drawing-room. 
Is it possible that a man, in a house as small as Madeira 
Villa, would not hear the footsteps over his head whenever 
Stoner came into Mrs. Rattenbury's room, and that he would 
not hear the occasionally loud quarrels which took place 
between them? Looking at Villa Madeira, the answer would 
seem to be that it would be quite impossible. And yet Mr. 
Itattenbury's known character and habits supply a different 
answer. Every night Mr. Rattenbury drank the bes-t part 
of a bottle of whisky. He was a man brilliant in his pro- 
fession, with many excellent qualities, and he was not a 
drunkard, but he was not a young man, and he was very 
deaf. The alcohol which he consumed every night explains 
why he no longer lived with his wife, why he was completely 
incurious as to her doings, and why he heard nothing of 
what was going on over his head. He was not, in the opinion 
of all who knew him, the doctor, his own relations, and 
Irene Biggs, who lived in the house, the character stigmatised 
by Mr. Justice Humphreys as a " mari complaisant, not a 
nice character/' He was a quiet, pleasant man whose finances 
worried him, and whose emotional relationships had dis- 
appointed him. 

A man in Mr. Rattenbury's condition, and of his age, 
is apt to forget the power that the natural inclinations 
of the flesh had over him in youth and middle age, and 

11 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

he may fail to realise that it is still a factor in the 

life of anyone else. As far as Mr. Rattenbury knew, he was 

a good husband to his wife. He admired her, was genuinely 

fond of her. There was nothing within his power that he 

would not have done for her, and Mrs, Rattenbury was astute 

enough to take advantage of this whenever possible. In 

regard to his wife, his chief anxieties were financial, and 

after he had started to take his prolonged night-cap each 

evening, the rest of the world existed very little for him. 

The passions, the jealousies of a decade earlier, had ceased, 

not only in the present, but even as a memory of the past. 

The chief tragedy in life is, not what we are but what we 

have ceased to be, and Mr. Rattenbury was an example of 

this truth. It is easy to say that a man who knows his wife 

is committing adultery and has no objection, is not a nice 

character. But it is not necessarily the truth. It is possible 

that a man who no longer leads a normal life with his wife, 

yet thinks of her, not as his property, but as a human being 

who belongs to herself, and has a right to a normal life. 

I do not say that this was Mr. Rattenbury 's attitude (although 

Mrs. Rattenbury said that it was), I merely say that it 

would not necessarily have been a despicable attitude. But, 

of course, the judgment of the man in the street is the same 

as that of Mr. Justice Humphreys, It is an Anglo-Saxon 

attitude. Another Anglo-Saxon attitude, accepted by the 

learned Judge, by counsel on both sides, and by the British 

public, was that, because of her greater age, Mrs. Rattenbury 

dominated her young lover. It was this same assumption 

which hanged Mrs. Thompson. There has been a growing 

consensus of public opinion ever since the Bywaters-Thompson 

trial, that the female prisoner was wrongly convicted; ami 

the memory of the earlier trial haunted the Court-room like 

a ghost. The Rattenbury case seemed like an echo of that 

tragedy, and it is not fanciful to say that Mrs. Thompson's 

fate did much to save Mrs. Rattenbury. A judge who knew 

how to point out firmly and clearly to the jury that a woman 

must not, because of her moral character, be convicted of 

murder, and a jury, who were determined that ao confusion 

12 



Introduction. 

of thought or prejudice should lead them into giving a wrong 
verdict, were two great safeguards for Mrs. Battenbury, and 
the uneasy memory of Edith Thompson, was yet a third. 
Nevertheless, the assumption of the Bywaters-Thompson case, 
that an elderly woman dominates her young lover, still 
obtained at the Rattenbury trial. The actual truth is that 
there is no woman so under the dominion of her lover as the 
elderly mistress of a very much younger man. The great 
Benjamin Franklin knew this, and there is extant a letter 
of advice written by him to a young man, which is a model 
of clear thinking. The original belongs to the U.S. Govern- 
ment, and is in the custody of the Librarian of Congress at 
Washington, B.C. This copy was taken from the original 
letter, and has not hitherto been published in England. 

June 25th, 1746. 
My Dear Friend, 

I know of no medicine fit to diminish the violent nocturnal 
inclinations you mention, and if I did, I think I should not 
communicate it to you. Marriage is the proper remedy. 

It is the most natural state of man, and therefore the state 
in which you are most likely to find solid happiness. Your 
reasons against entering it at present appear to me not well 
founded, The circumstantial advantages you have in view of 
postponing it are not only uncertain, but they are small in 
comparison with that of the thing itself the being married 
and settled. 

It is the man and woman united that make the complete 
human being. Separate, she wants his force of body and strength 
of reason; he, her softness, sensibility and acute discernment. 
Together they are most likely to succeed in the world. A single 
man has not nearly the value he would have in a state of union. 
He is an incomplete animal; he resembles the odd half of a 
pair of scissors. If you get a prudent healthy wife, your 
industry in your profession, with her good economy, will be 
a fortune sufficient. 

But if you will not take this counsel, and persist in thinking 
a commerce with the sex inevitable, then I repeat my former 
advice, that in your amours you should prefer OLD WOMEN TO 

13 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

YOUNG ON&S. You call this a paradox, and demand reasons. 
They are these : 

First. Because they have more knowledge of the World, 
and their minds are better stored with observations; their con- 
versation is more improving and more lastingly agreeable. 

Second. Because when women cease to be handsome, they 
study to be good. To maintain their influence over men they 
supply the diminution of beauty by an augmentation of utility. 
They learn to do a thousand services, small and great, and are 
the most tender and useful of all friends when you are sick. 
Thus they continue amiable, and hence there is scarcely such 
a thing to be found as an old woman who is not a good woman. 

TMrd. Because there is no hazard of children, which 
irregularly produced, may be attended with much inconvenience. 

Fourth. Because, through more experience, they are more 
prudent and discreet in conducting an intrigue to prevent 
suspicion. The commerce with them IB therefore safe with 
regard to your reputation, and with regard to theirs. If the 
affair should happen to be known, considerate people might 
be rather inclined to excuse an old woman who would kindly 
take care of a young man, form his manners by her good 
counsels, and prevent his ruining his health and fortune among 
mercenary prostitutes. 

Fifth. Because in every animal that walks upright the 
deficiency of the fuid that fills the muscles appears but on 
the highest part. The face first grows lank and wrinkled, then 
the neck, then the breast and arms the lower parts continuing 
to the last as plump as ever; so that, covering all above with 
a basket, and regarding only what is below the girdle, it is 
impossible of two women, to know an old from a young one. 
And as in the dark all cats are grey, the pleasure of corporal 
enjoyment with an old woman is at least equal and frequently 
superior; every knack being, by practice, capable of improve- 
ment. 

Sisetk* Because the sin is less. The debauching a virgin 
may be her ruin and make her life unhappy. 

Seventh. Because the compunction is less. The having made 
a young girl miserable may give you frequent bitter reflections, 
none of which can attend the making an Old woman Happy* 

Eighth <md Lastly. They are so grateful. 
14 



Introduction. 

This much for my paradox, but still I advise you to marry 
immediately, being sincerely, 

Your affectionate friend, 

(Signed) B. FRANKLIN. 

"Eighth and lastly " is worthy of the consideration of 
English lawyers and the English public when a Thompson- 
Bywaters or Rattenbury-Stoner case is under consideration. 
Once Stoner had become Mrs. Battenbury's lover, she 
worshipped him. It was before the consummation of her desire 
that she was the dominating character, and to that extent she 
was responsible for the whole tragedy, but to that extent only. 
She felt this responsibility deeply, and it was remorse as well 
as love that made her eager and willing to save Stoner even 
at the cost of lier own life. It was, indeed, a terrible responsi- 
bility in view of the events. She could not know that Stoner 
would be wild with jealousy, but she must have known, had 
she paused to think, that a lad of Stoner's age and antecedents 
would lose all sense of values when he became the lover of 
his social superior, who dazzled him with a whole new mode of 
life. If Stoner's first love-affair had been with a girl of his 
own class, no ill need have come of it. Nevertheless, another 
strange assumption was made that it is somehow harmful for 
a young man of eighteen to have sexual connexion. Dr. 
Gillespie, physician for psycho-medicine at Guy's Hospital, a 
witness for the defence, was asked in cross-examination by 
Mr. Groom- Johnson, whether " regular sexual intercourse with 
a member of the opposite sex by a boy of eighteen or onwards, 
would be likely to do him good or harm? " Dr. Gillespie 
replied that it would not do him good ' e if a moral point of 
view were meant." Mr. Oroom-Johnson said that he was not 
talking from a moral point of view, that he was asking him as 
a doctor. Still Dr. Gillespie wisely refused to commit himself. 
" Do you think it would likely be good for his constitution 
a boy of eighteen just think what you are saying, 
Doctor? ** " I am not saying that it is good for his con- 
stitution, but I am saying that if it were occurring with such 

frequency as my Ior4 has said, namely such as nature would 

is 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

permit, it would not necessarily show the effects in his external 
appearance. 11 " Take the ordinary case the ordinary boy, 
not somebody very strong, talking about the ordinary English 
youth of eighteen do you really find yourself in any difficulty 
in answering the question P " "I find difficulty," replied the 
Doctor, " in answering the question as I believe you expect it 
to be answered." Doctors, as a rule, make excellent witnesses, 
and in this little cross-examination, Dr. Gillespie was no 
exception to the rule, but with what frank, Homeric laughter 
the question would have been greeted in a Latin country ! In 
England it is apparently impossible to admit the simple truth 
that a young man of eighteen is an adult who would normally 
take a mate, were it not that economic conditions render it 
impossible. 

Mrs. Eattenbury was a good witness, and in nothing more 
notably so than in her simple acceptance of the values of life 
as she knew it. " You have told us that on the Sunday night 
Stoner came into your bedroom and got into bed with you. 
, Was that something that happened frequently? " asked Mr. 
Groom-Johnson. " Oh, yes," replied Mrs, Eattenbury simply. 
And later on: "Did it occur to you that if you went to 
Bridport, Mr. Eattenbury might want to treat you as his 
wife? " " No, if I had thought it was going to happen like 
that I would never have suggested going." " It never 
occurred to youP " " No." " You know what I mean by 
saying ' treat you as his wife '? " " Yes, exactly," replied 
Mrs. Eattenbury, as though mildly surprised that there could 
be any mistake about it. 

Mrs. Eattenbury's vagueness about money matters and her 
lavish spending came out as clearly in the witness-box, as her 
attitude towards sensual matters. In answering to a question 
as to her habit of giving away cigarette holders, she said, 
" That is nothing for me. If anyone sees a cigarette holder 
and likes it, I always say ' take it.' It is my disposition " ; 
and later: "I am very vague about money." This was 
certainly true* Mr. Groom-Johnson asked her in cross- 
examination how much money her husband let her have in 
the course of a year, to which she Replied she " really 

16 



Introduction. 

couldn't say." "Hundreds "? "I suppose so," said Mrs. 
Rattenbury. " About how much, a year did lie let you have? " 
" He used to give me regularly 50 a month, and I was 
regularly overdrawn." " 50 a month would be 600 a 
year? " " I see," said Mrs. Eattenbury; and one received 
the impression she had not worked out this fairly simple sum 
for herself ever before. " In addition to that," went on Mr. 
Croom- Johnson, "about 150 on each of two occasions?" 
" Yes, I daresay." Later, cross-examining her about the 
clothes she had lavished on Stoner in London, Mr. Groom- 
Johnson said: "You used the words f that he required 
clothes'?" "Yes, I considered so." "Silk pyjamas at 
60s, a suit? " " That might seem absurd, but that is my 
disposition." And certainly it was her disposition. 

So, as we have seen, Mr. Eattenbury was reserved, kindly, 
but rather mean in money matters. Mrs. Eattenbury was 
unreserved, also kindly, but in a more indiscriminate fashion 
than her husband, and her generosity was indiscriminating 
also. Irene Eiggs liked both of them, but her loyalty was 
naturally for the mistress who had been kinder to her than any 
human being she had ever met. 

Irene Eiggs was not as happy after S toner's arrival as she 
had been before. Mrs. Eattenbury told her about the liaison, 
and Irene was too fond of her to blame her, but nevertheless 
she felt uneasy about the affair, and sorry that Mrs. Eatten- 
bury could not have found happiness with someone more of her 
own age and class. Though Miss Eiggs and Stoner did not 
like each other, they got on together well enough. He was 
a very quiet boy ; she also was quiet, self -effacing and efficient. 
She was shocked when Mrs, Battenbury first told her the truth, 
but human nature quickly adapts itself to knowledge, and 
Miss Eiggs very rightly felt that it was not for her to praise or 
to blame. She stayed behind when, on 19th March, Mrs. 
Eattenbury arranged to take Stoner with her on a trip to 
London, because Stoner was very jealous of any third person, 
and the charm of the little friendly expeditions that had been 
the high lights in Irene Biggs's life before the coming of 
Stoner was gone. In London Mrs. Eattenbury and Stoner 

o 17 



Rattenbmy and Stoner. 

stayed at the Royal Palace Hotel, Kensington, and spent their 
days in shopping 1 and going about London. Mrs. Rattenbury 
explained this trip to her husband by saying she was going 
to have an operation (she had had several minor operations in 
the preceding years), and he gave her the generous sum of 
250 for this purpose. Mrs. Rattenbury used a large part of 
this sum to pay outstanding housekeeping bills, and the rest 
she spent wildly upon the London trip and presents for Stoner. 
The importance of the expedition to London lies in the fact 
that, for four or five days, Stoner was accepted by the little 
world about him as Mrs. Rattenbury's social equal. He did 
not go to the Royal Palace Hotel as her chauffeur, but as her 
brother. They had two rooms opposite each other, and he had 
free access to his mistress. He was called "Sir" by the 
servants, and every day Mrs. Rattenbury bought him presents 
which to his simple mind must have appeared equivalent to 
Danae's golden shower. Crepe-de-chine pyjamas at three 
guineas a pair and a made-to-measure suit, must have seemed 
to the young man, who was a labourer's son, most exciting 
luxuries. 

The learned Judge referred to the *' orgy in London/' It 
is difficult to imagine an orgy at the Royal Palace Hotel at 
Kensington, and, indeed, this Editor has never been able to 
discover of what an " orgy " consists. It is associated, more or 
less vaguely, in the popular mind with the " historical " 
productions of Mr. C. de Mille; glasses of wine, dancing girls, 
tiger skins and cushions are some of its component parts. The 
private coming together of a pair of lovers and their normal 
physical ecstasies, however reprehensible these may be 
morally, do not seem well described by the word " orgy," 
Even shopping at Harrods does not quite come under this 
heading. However, in this trial, as in all others of the same 
nature, the stock phrases were used of which most people are 
heartily tired. " Adulterous intercourse," " illicit union," 
" this wretched woman " and the like, all have a very familiar 
ring. They are cliches, and come to the lips of those concerned 
in the administration of the law as inevitably as the adjective 
"fashionably dressed" is attached to flie noun "woman" 

18 



Introduction. 

in any reporter's account of the female spectators at a murder 
trial. Leaving these cliches, the fact, nevertheless, remains 
that Stoner's trip to London must have thoroughly unsettled 
him. He was happy enough at Villa Madeira, where the social 
regime was easy and pleasant for such as he. 

Mrs. Eattenbury affected no superiority with anyone in 
humbler circumstances of life than her own, and Mr. Eatten- 
bury had lived for years of his life in the democratic country 
where Mrs. Eattenbury was born. Stoner often played cards 
with him in the evening, and Mr. Eattenbury, Stoner, and 
Miss Eiggs took their meals together. Therefore, merely to 
have returned to Villa Madeira, to continue its pleasant, easy 
life, would not necessarily have upset Stoner. But this 
was not exactly what happened. The lovers arrived back 
late on Friday evening. Mr. Eattenbury, already having 
imbibed his night-cap, asked no questions; even next 
day, according to Mrs. Eattenbury, and as far as Irene 
Eiggs's knowledge went, he never inquired about the 
operation his wife had ostensibly been to London to 
undergo. The Saturday found him in one of his worst fits of 
depression. A scheme for building some flats, of which he was 
to have been the architect, was hanging fire, owing to the 
financial depression, and Mrs. Eattenbury tried to cheer him 
up in vain. 

On the Sunday, Mr. Eattenbury was still more depressed. 
In, the morning Mrs. Eattenbury took him for a drive. After 
lunch Mr. Eattenbury slept. They had tea together, little 
John with them. Mr. Eattenbury had been reading a book, 
a novel in which there was a perfect holocaust of suicides, and, 
according to Mrs. Eattenbury, he expressed his admiration for 
anyone who had the courage to make an end of himself. Mrs. 
Rattenbury suggested that she should ring up their friend, 
Mr. Jenks, at Bridport, and ask whether they could go over 
on the Monday. She did indeed telephone, and Mr, Jenks 
said he would be pleased to see them, and asked them to spend 
the night, an invitation which they accepted. The telephone 
was in Mr, Eattenbury's bedroom, which opened off the 
drawing-room. Mr. Eattenbury remained in the drawing- 

19 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

loom, but Stoner came into the bedroom, and overheard the 
arrangements which Mrs. Rattenbury was making. He was 
frightfully angry and threatened Mrs. Rattenbury with an 
air pistol, which he was carrying in his hand, and which she 
took to be a revolver. He told Mrs. Rattenbury that he 
would kill her if they went to Bridport. Mrs. Rattenbury, 
nervous lest Mr. Rattenbury should overhear the conversation, 
though, as she said, " He never really took very much 
notice/- urged Stoner into the dining-room, and went there 
with him. Once there he accused her of having had connexion 
with her husband that afternoon an accusation entirely base- 
less and said that, if the Bridport plan were carried out, he 
would refuse to drive. Stoner said that at Mr. Jenks's 
house the Rattenburys would have to share a bedroom, but 
Mrs. Rattenbury assured him that would not be so, and what 
she said she knew to be the truth, for she and her husband 
had stayed with Mr. Jenks before, and had had two rooms. 
Stoner, though he appeared to be pacified, continued to brood 
over the matter in his mind, and at about eight o'clock that 
evening, he went to the house of his grandparents, sat and 
chatted, apparently normally, with his grandmother for some 
time, and borrowed a carpenter's mallet, but borrowed it 
perfectly openly. He went back to Villa Madeira and Mrs. 
Rattenbury noticed nothing abnormal about him. 

That same evening Mrs. Rattenbury sat and played 
cards with her husband, kissed him good-night, and 
went upstairs. It was Irene's evening out, and Mrs, 
Rattenbury passed the time by getting together her things 
for Bridport. She had already put out Mr. Rattenbury's 
clothes in his bedroom downstairs. Irene came in at 
about 10.15, and went straight to her room. Some ten minutes 
later she went downstairs, either to see if all was well or to 
get something to eat there seems a slight discrepancy in her 
evidence here. When she was downstairs, in the hall, she 
heard a sound of heavy breathing, and putting her head into 
Mr. Rattenbury's bedroom, she switched on the light. He was 
not there, and the sound of breathing came from the drawing- 
room, the door between that and the Itedroom being open. 

20 



Introduction. 

Miss Biggs concluded that he had, as he so often did, fallen 
asleep in his chair, and she went upstairs again into her bed- 
room. A few moments later she went out again to go to the 
lavatory, and found Stoner leaning over the banisters at the 
head of the stairs, looking down. She said, " What is the 
matter? " He replied, " Nothing, I was looking to see if 
the lights were out." Then about a quarter of an hour later 
Mrs. Eattenbury came to Irene's room and told her about the 
expedition to Bridport. Mrs. Eattenbury then went to her 
own room, and about ten minutes later Stoner came and 
slipped into her bed. He seemed very agitated and upset. 
She said, " What is the matter, darling? " He replied that 
he was in trouble, but that he could not tell her what it was 
about. She replied that he must tell her, that she was strong 
enough to bear anything, and he then said, " You won't be 
going to Bridport to-morrow." He went on to say that he had 
hurt " Eatz." He said that he had hit him over the head 
with a mallet, which he had since hidden in the garden, Mrs. 
Eattenbury definitely conveyed the impression from the box 
that it was possible that the idea in Stoner's head was merely 
to injure Mr. Eattenbury, so that the proposed expedition 
could not take place. " I thought," she said, " he was 
frightened at what he had done, because he had hurt Mr. 
Eattenbury. ... I thought he'd just hurt him badly enough 
to prevent him going to Bridport, and when I said fi I'll go 
and see him,' he said ' No, you must not; the sight will upset 
you,' and I thought all I had to do was to fix Eats up, and 
that would put him all right." 

It may be that this was the only idea in Stoner's 
unbalanced and ill-educated mind, but that he found it 
impossible to stop after the first blow, and administered 
two more. Or it may be that, in his disturbed and 
jealous state, he would have done anything sooner than 
allow the Bridport trip to take place. If Stoner had driven 
the Eattenburys to Bridport, he would have had to do so in his 
capacity of chauffeur. He would have stayed there in the 
same capacity, eaten in the servants' hall, not had access 
to his mistress, anct ranked as a domestic with the other 

21 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

domestics. The thought of the expedition to Bridport, coining 
as it would have, directly after the " orgy " in London, was 
unbearable. It may be argued that as a motive, this distaste 
for going to Bridport was very inadequate. But all motives 
for murder are inadequate. Men have murdered for smaller 
sums than an embezzler would plot to obtain. Directly the 
sense of what Stoner was telling her penetrated to Mrs. 
Rattenbury's mind, she jumped out of bed and ran downstairs 
as she was, in her pyjamas and bare feet. A minute later, 
Irene Biggs, who had not yet fallen asleep, heard her mistress 
shrieking for her. Miss Biggs ran downstairs and found Mr. 
Rattenbury leaning back in an armchair, as though he were 
asleep. There was a large pool of blood on the floor, and one 
of his eyes was very swollen and discoloured, and she thought 
he had a black eye, but this was, in reality, " contrecoup " 
the effect upon his eye of the blows on the back of his head. 
Mrs. Rattenbury asked Irene to telephone for the doctor at 
once, telling her to hurry and, to use Miss Riggs's own 
expression, went " raving about the house.' 1 " Oh! poor Ratz. 
Poor Ratz! " she kept repeating, " can't somebody do some- 
thing? " Mrs. Rattenbury drank some whisky; she was 
violently sick, and drank more whisky. She kept on telling 
Miss Riggs to wipe up the blood because she said little John 
must not see any blood. 

Now there is no doubt Mrs. Rattenbury knew from the 
moment she set eyes on her husband that Stoner's talk upstairs 
had not been a mere attempt to attract her interest and atten- 
tion. She knew that he had injured her husband in a terrible 
fashion, and that tragedy, which she could not control, had 
suddenly taken possession of her life. Her first thought was 
for her husband, her second for little John. Her third was for 
Stoner, and this thought persisted, and deepened in intensity, 
during the hours that followed. 

Dr. O'Donnell arrived at Villa Madeira at about 11.45, 
in answer to the telephone call. Mrs. Rattenbury was, in 
his opinion, already very drunk. Mr. Rooke, the surgeon, 
arrived at the house about five minutes after midnight, and 
he also was of the opinion that Mrs. Rattenbury was drunk. 



Introduction. 

Dr. O'Donnell and Mr. Eooke decided that, largely owing 
to the excited condition of Mrs. Eattenbury, the only proper 
place for her husband was in a nursing home. They took him 
there, shaved his head, and discovered three wounds, which 
were obviously the result of external violence, and of three 
separate blows. Dr. O'Donnell telephoned the Central Police 
Station, about ten minutes' walk from the nursing home and 
two minutes by car, and said: " Dr. O'Donnell speaking from 
Strathallen Nursing Home, Manor Eoad. Mr. Eooke and 
myself have just taken Mr. Eattenbury from 5 Manor Eoad 
to the nursing home. On examination we find three serious 
wounds on the back of his skull, due to external violence, 
which will most probably prove fatal." Central Police Station 
replied : " You want an officer? " Dr. O'Donnell said " Yes, 
at once." But it was half an hour before the constable 
arrived. The constable then said he must get an inspector, 
and at about 3.15 a.m. Inspector Mills, who had already been 
at Villa Madeira, arrived. At 3.30 Inspector Mills, Mr. 
Eooke, and Dr. O'Donnell left the nursing home. Stoner was 
sleeping peacefully outside in the Eattenbury car, and he 
drove Dr. O'Donnell back to Madeira Villa, following the 
police car. 

When Dr. O'Donnell got out of the car, he was struck by 
the fact that every light in Villa Madeira was on, the door 
was open, and the radio-gramophone was playing. There 
were four police officers in the house. Mrs. Eattenbury was 
by now extremely drunk. A constable, who had arrived at 
3 o'clock, had observed then that Mrs. Eattenbury was under 
the influence of alcohol, but, as he put it, " to a mild extent." 
One has, of course, to realise that the police standard of 
drunkenness is very high ; as Mr. Justice Humphreys phrased 
it " drunk in the police sense seems to mean hopelessly 
drunk." 

At 3.30, according to Dr. O'Donnell, Mrs. Eattenbury was 
past knowing what she was thinking or saying. Dr. 
O'Donnell, very shocked, turned off the radio-gramophone, 
and tried to explain to Mrs, Eattenbury the gravity of her 
husband's condition? but she could not take in what he was 

23 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

saying. Inspector Mills agreed that Mrs. Battenbury was 
more under the influence of drink than when he had seen 
her at 2 a.m. He said to her: " Tour husband haa been 
seriously injured, and is now in the nursing home/' To 
which Mrs. Battenbury replied : " Will that be against meP " 
Inspector Mills then cautioned her, and apparently was satis- 
fied that she understood the meaning of the caution. Then 
she made a statement. "I did it. He has lived too long. 
I will tell you in the morning where the mallet is. Have 
you told the Coroner yetP I shall make a better job of 
it next time. Irene does not know. I have made a proper 
muddle of it. I thought I was strong enough." Dr. 
O'Donnell, who considered that Mrs. Battenbury was unable 
to understand what was said to her, or to know what she 
was saying, pointed out that she was in no fit condition to 
be asked anything, and took her up to bed. He administered 
half a grain of morphia a large dose and went downstairs 
again. After a few minutes he went into the sitting-room 
and found that Mrs. Battenbury had managed to get down- 
stairs again and was again being questioned by the police. 
Inspector Mills said to her: " Do you suspect anyone P " 
and she replied: " Tes. I think so. His son." 

Dr. O'Donnell, who was aware that Mr. Battenbury's 
son lived abroad, knew that Mrs. Battenbury had no idea 
of what she was saying, and he said to the Inspector : " Look 
at her condition she is full of whisky, and I have just given 
her a large dose of morphia. She is in no condition to make 
any statement." He then took her by the arm and helped 
her upstairs again. Then (it was by now after 4 a.m.), Dr. 
O'Donnell went home. At 6 a.m. Inspector Carter arrived 
at the house, where some members of the police had remained 
all night. He went into Mrs. Battenbury's room and stated 
in evidence that she woke up. This was not unnatural, in 
view of the fact that the police had been in that very tiny 
house all night, perpetually going up and down stairs. 
Inspector Carter realised that Mrs. Eattenb\iry was ill, and 
in no fit condition to make a statement, and he told Miss Biggs 
to prepare some coffee. When the coffee came the saucer shook 

24 



Introduction. 

so in Mrs. Rattenbury 's hand that she could not hold it. 
She managed to swallow it, but retched and said that she 
wanted to be sick. The Inspector telephoned for a police- 
matron, who arrived and helped Mrs. Rattenbury downstairs 
to her bath and helped her to dress. This matron was not 
called as witness, but it is reasonable to conclude that she 
thought Mrs. Rattenbury a sick woman. Yet, according 
to Inspector Carter, Mrs. Rattenbury, who had been drinking 
steadily from about 11 o'clock the night before till 3.30 in 
the morning (quite undeterred by the police), who had then 
been given half a grain of morphia which she had not been 
allowed to sleep off, was by 8.15 competent to make a state- 
ment! The statement which she then made to him, after 
being duly cautioned, and which he wrote down in his note- 
book, read as follows: " About 9 p.m. on the 24th March 
I was playing cards with my husband when he dared me to 
kill him, as he wanted to die. I picked up a mallet and 
he then said : ' You have not the guts to do it ! ' I then 
hit him with the mallet. I hid the malle-t outside. I would 
have shot him if I had had a gun." Inspector Carter deposed 
that Mrs. Rattenbury read the statement over aloud and 
clearly and then signed it. He then took her to Bournemouth 
Police Station, where she was charged. Before she left the 
house she had a moment alone with Miss Riggs and said: 
" You must get S toner to give me the mallet/' This is 
important, and it will be found, on reading Mrs. Ratten- 
bury's progressive statements all through the night, that, even 
in her befogged condition, there was one thread of continuity 
a desire to help Stoner, and to get hold of the mallet with 
which he told her he had hit Mr. Rattenbury, and then hidden 
in the garden. At the Police Station, about 8.45, Mrs. 
Rattenbury was formally charged, and said: " That is right. 
I did it deliberately, and would do it again." The police 
did not, at the hearing at Petty Sessions, mention the fact 
that Mrs. Rattenbury had been drunk, and Mr. Rooke, 
noticing this omission, communicated the fact to Mrs. Ratten- 
bury's solicitors. Had it not been for Mr. Rooke and Dr. 
O'Donnell, the fact 4;hat Mrs. Rattenbury had been in no fit 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

condition to make a statement, to know what was said to her, 
or to know what she herself was saying, would not have been 
given in evidence. Mr. O'Connor, in his cross-examina- 
tion of Inspector Carter, said: "Dr. O'Donnell has told 
us in his evidence that no reliance can be placed on 
any statement made by Mrs. Eattenbury at 8,15 in the 
morning." " No," agreed the Inspector. " Do you say 
she was normal at 8.15 P " ce Tes. She was not normal when 
she first woke up, but I waited till 8.16." " Do you know 
that the medical officer at Holloway Prison has reported that 
she was still under the influence of drugs three days later? " 
" He has never reported it to me." " Is your evidence 
to the jury that, from the time you began to take her state- 
ment until she left your charge, she did not appear to you 
to be under the influence of drugs? " " She did not." " Not 
at any time? " " Not at any time." Tet Mrs. Eattenbury 
was, during the whole of the time Inspector Carter had to 
do with her, non compos mentis from morphia! 

Later in the trial Mr. Justice Humphreys, turning over 
the pages of Inspector Carter's notebook, was struck by the 
fact that there was an entry that had not been put in evidence. 
This consisted of a statement that Mrs. Eattenbury made 
directly she woke up at 6 o'clock. The learned Judge drew 
Mr. O'Connor's attention to the fact that there was something 
which had not yet been observed in the notebook. Mr. 
s Connor was handed the notebook, read the entry through to 
himself, and expressed his gratitude to the learned Judge. 
Indeed, Mr. Justice Humphreys had made one of the most 
important points for the defence that were made in the case, 
as was shown when Inspector Carter was recalled to the box. 

By the Judge: ''Did Mrs. Eattenbury make any state- 
ment to you about this alleged crime before 8.15P " " No 
statement to me, my lord. Mrs. Eattenbury said the words 
that I have written in that book, while she was lying on 
the bed, directly she woke up. I did not put them down 
in statement form. I did not refer to it in my evidence 
for this reason. When Mrs. Eattenbury woke up, I said in 
my evidence that, in my opinion, she was Jiot then 'in a normal 



Introduction. 

condition and I did not caution her, and for that reason 
I made no reference at all to these remarks that I put down 
in my book that she said. That is why I omitted to aay 
anything at all about it in my evidence in chief. I was 
not entitled, in my opinion, to give anything in evidence if 
I had not previously administered a caution, and, in my 
opinion, she was not in a condition normally to make a state- 
ment/' By the Judge: " Then in your opinion she was not 
in a condition to make a statement at 6.15? " " At 6.10, 
no, my lord." By the Judge: te Then what was said at that 
time was something said by a woman who was not in a 
condition to make a statement that can be acted upon? " 
" Not in my opinion, my lord." 

There was no doubt that Inspector Carter was actuated 
by an admirable sense of fair play, and the learned Judge, 
in his summing up, said: " I think there is no ground 
for complaining of his conduct or saying that he acted 
improperly here, although, I think, he was mistaken . . . 
he made a mistake in not informing the Director of Public 
Prosecutions that that statement had been made by the 
accused, and that he had it in his notebook. It is not for 
the police officers to decide . . . what is admissible in 
evidence and what is not, or what should be given or what 
not. Their duty is to give all material to the authorities, 
and let them decide." Now, the important point about the 
first entry in Inspector Carter's notebook the entry he did 
not put in evidence, that he wrote at 6.15 and the one 
which he wrote down after cautioning her at 8.15, is this, 
the two statements are practically identical. At 6.15 when, 
according to Inspector Carter, she was not fit to make a state- 
ment, she said : " I picked up the mallet and he dared me 
to hit him. He said ' You have not guts enough to do it. 1 
I hit him. I hid the mallet. He is not dead, is he? Are 
you the Coroner?" At 8.15 she said: "He dared me to 
kill him. He wanted to die. I picked up the mallet, and 
he said c You have not guts enough to do it. 3 I hid the 
mallet outside the house." It will be seen at once that, with 
the exception of the -words, " He is not dead, is he? Are you 

27 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

the Coroner? " the statements are the same, except that at 
8.15 she used the word " kill," and at 6.15 the word " hit. 35 
To put it concisely: she made the same statement when, 
according to the Inspector, she was fit to make a statement, 
that she had made two hours earlier, when eveu he had 
considered her totally unfit ! It was to all intents and purposes 
the same statement. The importance of this is obvious 
Mrs. Rattenbury no more knew what she was saying at 8.15 
than she did at 6.15, and the second statement was of no 
more value than the first. At one o'clock oi that day, when 
Dr. O'Donnell saw her at the police station, he says she 
was supported into the room, that she could not stand without 
swaying, that she looked dazed, and had contracted pupils as 
a result of the morphia. Three days later Dr. Morton of 
Holloway Prison considered that she was still suffering from 
" confusion of mind, a result of alcohol, and possibly a large 
dose of morphia. She kept repeating the same sentences 
over and over again." From the 28th March she was better 
and appeared to have forgotten what she had said and how 
she behaved on the previous days since her reception. It 
is perfectly obvious that police officers are not fit judges of 
when a person is under the influence of morphia or not. There 
is no reason why they should be. But they are judges of 
drunkenness, and Mrs. Rattenbury should not have been 
allowed to go on drinking, or have been questioned during 
the Sunday night. Dr. O'Donnell, as the learned Judge 
pointed out, knew much more of these matters than the police 
officer, and much later on Monday, after she had been taken 
to the Police Court, he declared that it would still be unsafe 
to attach any importance to anything that Mrs. Rattenbury 
said. 

Now Mrs. Rattenbury was not used to drugs, in spite 
of suggestions made to the contrary ; she had, indeed, a horror 
of drugs, and the only time previously in her life that any 
had been administered to her was when Dr. O'Donnell in 
July, 1934, had administered a quarter of a grain of morphia, 
when she was ill and excited. On that occasion she was 
allowed to have her sleep out, and she had indeed slept 

28 



Introduction. 

for some twelve hours. When the stronger dose of half a 
grain of morphia was given to her on the night of Sunday, 
24th March, she had no chance of sleep. It is not suggested 
for a moment that the police tried to awaken her. But 
' Villa Madeira is a tiny house. Stoner and the police were up 
and down and about it all night long. Now, anyone who has 
had to have morphia knows that if he is not allowed to sleep 
off the effects his condition is far worse than if it had never 
been administered. This was the case with Mrs. Eattenbury, 
and, according to the experienced Dr, Morton, she still was 
suffering 1 from the effects of the morphia three days later. 
Many people felt that even if Mrs. Eattenbury did not know 
what she was saying when she was drunk and when she was 
drugged, yet what she said came from her subconscious self, 
and hence was true. This is an error, as any doctor knows. 
What does come through all her statements, if they are care- 
fully analysed, is her anxiety for Stoner, and her wish to 
take the blame. Another strong point for the defence, besides 
the undoubted one that Mrs. Eattenbury was quite unfit to 
make statements, was the complete blank in her memory when 
she emerged from her drugged state into ordinary conscious- 
ness at Hollo way Prison. Mrs. Battenbury remembered 
nothing from the time when she began to drink after discover- 
ing her wounded husband, until the 28th March at Holloway 
Prison. Many people, as a result of drinking, " pass out " 
as it is called. Mrs. Eattenbury did so, and the result of 
the morphia's effect being thwarted, was that she stayed 
" out " f or a very long time. Mrs. Eattenbury remembered 
nothing from when she first became drunk on the Sunday 
night. As far as her mind was concerned, she knew nothing 
about the interrogations, nothing about the injection of 
morphia, nothing about the police-matron having helped to 
get her up. She did not remember being taken away from 
Villa Madeira in a car by the police; the only thing that 
swam up at all in her recollection was Stoner 's farewell 
kiss in her room, and the face of little John at her door. 
Mr. Groom- Johnson, in cross-examination, asked her: " About 
conversations, your* mind is a complete blank? " 

29 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

"Absolutely. 1 ' " About incidents? " " Yes. It might 
be somebody else you are talking- about." " Is your mind a 
complete blank about making the statement to Inspector Carter 
which he wrote down in this little book? " " I cannot 
remember that. I have tried and tried and tried yesterday, 
and last night I tried to remember again. " The notebook 
was handed to her, and Mr. Groom-Johnson asked her whether 
the signature at the bottom of the statement was hers, and 
she said that it was. " It is my signature, but I do not 
remember it." Now it is natural for the layman to feel 
that loss of memory is a convenient form of defence, but 
Mrs. Rattenbury could not have deceived medical men as 
highly trained and as astute as Mr. Eooke, Dr. O'Donnell, 
and Dr. Morton the last-named accustomed to all the tricks 
of delinquent women. 

The prosecution took the unusual step of allowing the 
defence to recall one of the Crown witnesses, Mr. Eooke, and 
this courteous gesture was a great help to Mrs. Rattenbury. 
Mr. Eooke deposed that in his experience patients often talked 
long and lucidly when under morphia, but when the effects 
of the drug had worn off their minds were a complete blank 
regarding anything they had said. When it is considered 
that Mrs. Eattenbury was not only suffering from the morphia, 
but that before the morphia had been administered she had 
temporarily lost her mind through drink, I think it is clear 
that no reliance can be placed on anything that she said. 

Mrs. Eattenbury was removed to Holloway Prison in 
London, and Stoner and Miss Biggs were left in the house at 
Manor Eoad. But Miss Riggs had no intention of being left 
alone with Stoner. She knew that Mrs. Eattenbury was 
innocent, not only of striking the blows, but of complicity ia 
the assault. One of Mrs. Eattenbury's most striking charac- 
teristics was her horror of cruelty. She could not have hurt 
anything. Therefore Irene Eiggs thought that either a 
burglar had broken in, or that Stoner must have been Mr. 
Rattenbury's assailant. Irene's mother and brother moved 
into Villa Madeira and stayed there with her until Stoner 
was arrested on Thursday, 28th March! The story of those 



Introduction. 

days between the commission of the crime and the arrest of 
Stoner is a curious one. Dr. O'Donnell had been asked by 
relations of Mr. Eattenbury to keep Villa Madeira under his 
eye, and the Doctor accordingly called there on the Monday, 
Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday. On the three first days 
he tried to see Miss Eiggs alone, but found it impossible as 
Stoner did not leave them. On Wednesday Miss Eiggs was 
nearly distracted with anxiety, and felt she must talk about 
the case to someone. She still felt herself the custodian of 
Mrs. Eattenbury's secret love affair, and she never discussed 
her even with her relations. Although not a Catholic, she 
went to see a priest, because she knew that what she told a 
priest would be safe. She came back at about 10.30 that night 
and her mother opened the door to her. Mrs. Eiggs told her 
that Stoner was very drunk, that he had been going up and 
down the road, shouting " Mrs. Eattenbury is in jail, and 
I've put her there." He had been brought back by two taxi 
drivers. Irene Eiggs telephoned to the police and two plain- 
clothes men arrived. Stoner was in bed and seemed very 
drunk. This was very unusual for him, for he not only never 
drank himself, but objected to Mrs, Eattenbury drinking, and 
had a good influence on her in this respect. On the morning 
of Thursday, 28th March, Dr. O'Donnell called at Yilla 
Madeira. Irene Eiggs opened the door. It had always been 
Stoner who had opened it up to then. Dr. O'DonneU asked 
where Stoner was, and she told him that he had gone to 
Holloway to see Mrs. Eattenbury. Dr. O'Donnell then said 
that Mrs. Eattenbury was the best mistress that Miss Eiggs 
had ever had, or that she was ever likely to have, and if there 
was anything she could tell the police, it was her duty to do 
so. Poor Miss Eigg-s, still loyal to her employer, said she 
could not let Mrs, Eattenbury 's secret out, but Dr. O'Donnell 
very sensibly said that a secret was nothing when a life was 
at stake. He pointed out that if she was put in the witness- 
box, and then had the story of Mrs. Eattenbury's liaison 
dragged out of her, she herself would be implicated if she had 
concealed her knowledge. He asked Miss Eiggs whether she 
thought Mrs. Eatterfbury had murdered her husband, and 

31 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Irene Riggs replied: "I know she did not do it." Dr, 
O'Donnell asked her how she knew, and she replied that Stoner 
had confessed it to her. He had told her that there would 
be no finger prints on the inallet as he had worn gloves. Dr. 
O'Donnell rang up Bournemouth Police Station, and said that 
Miss Biggs wished to make a statement, and that Stoner had 
confessed to her. Dr. O'Donnell added that Stoner had left 
for London, and that no time should be lost in taking Irene 
Riggs's statement. At 2.30 the police arrived and Irene Riggs 
told them what she knew. Stoner was arrested at the station 
on his return to Bournemouth that evening, and this time the 
charge was murder, for Mr. Rattenbury had died. 

The very fact that both Stoner and Mrs. Rattenbury 
refused to inculpate each other was a source of great difficulty 
to their defenders. Stoner further complicated his counsel's 
very difficult task, by injecting into his defence the curious 
suggestion that he was a cocaine addict, which there was no 
evidence to bear out, and which Mr. Justice Humphreys 
disposed of in no uncertain fashion in his summing-up. The 
Judge pointed out that there was one human being, and one 
only, who knew whether Stoner was in the habit of taking 
cocaine, and whether he took it on the afternoon of Sunday, 
24th March, and that was Stoner himself. Stoner was an 
available witness, and had he wished to prove that he had ever 
taken cocaine, or was under the influence of cocaine, he could 
have gone into the box to say so. " What," remarked the 
learned Judge, " seems to me in the circumstance of this case 
a fact of the utmost significance, is that Stoner prefers not to 
give evidence." Stoner had told Mrs. Rattenbury a long time 
before the murder that he took drugs. She was so worried 
about this that she confided it to Dr. O'Donnell, although she 
was not at all sure for in spite of her headlong infatuation 
she had a certain shrewdness that Stoner had not invented 
the whole thing so as to make himself interesting to her. Dr. 
O'Donnell, at Mrs. Rattenbury's request, had interviewed 
Stoner and asked him what drug he was taking. Stoner told 
him that it was cocaine, and that he had found it in his 
father's house. To anyone who had soen Stoner's father in 



Introduction. 

the witness-box, the suggestion was not only cruel, but absurd. 
Mr. Stoner was a self-respecting, honest, hard-working man. 
It detracts somewhat from what has been called the chivalry 
of Stoner's conduct that he should have been able to make such 
a suggestion about his father. Stoner was certainly not a 
drug addict. Whether he was a cinema addict I do not know, 
but this fantastic story might well have emanated from a 
cinema-nourished mind. Had he not confused his defence by 
insisting on this fairy tale, his counsel would have been able to 
present a much more sympathetic picture of a boy crazy with 
love and wild with unreasoning jealousy, who had hit without 
knowing what he did. The cocaine story was too far-fetched. 
When Stoner was asked to describe what cocaine looked like, 
he replied that it was brown with black specks in it, evidently 
describing the only sort of things he knew, such as household 
pepper or influenza snuff. 

During the trial Stoner sat unmoved in his corner of the 
dock, with his elbow on the ledge, and his cheek on his hand. 
His eyes were downcast and his face remained immovable. 
Mrs. Rattenbury also was perfectly calm, but it was a frozen, 
and not an apathetic, calm. Her physical aspect changed, 
without any movement on her part, in a curious manner. By 
Friday she looked twenty years older than she had on Monday. 
On the last day even her hands changed colour, and were a 
livid greenish white. She was an excellent witness. Her 
voice was low and rich. She gave a great impression of truth- 
fulness, and she was astonishingly self -controlled. Only a 
nervous tick in the side of her face, which jerked perpetually, 
betrayed the tension of her mind. Mr. R. Lewis-Manning, her 
solicitor, was impressed throughout all his conversation with 
her, by her veracity. He, as did Mr. O'Connor, felt a terrible 
responsibility. Mr. Lewis-Manning was certain that Mrs. 
Rattenbury was not pretending when for several weeks she 
insisted that she would not implicate Stoner, but preferred to 
hang rather than he should come to any harm. Unlike Mrs. 
Thompson, she had immense physical courage. It was the 
thought of her children, and what a fearful heritage would be 
theirs if she were foifiid guilty, that eventually made her tell 



Ratt^nbury and Stoner. 

the truth. It is easy to say that all this could have been a 
pretence on her part, but it would not have been easy, indeed, 
it would not have been possible for her to make this pretence 
appear the truth to Mr. Lewis-Manning and Mr. O'Connor. 

The behaviour of a certain section of the press during the 
course of the trial, had it been made public, which for obvious 
reasons it was not, would have caused an uneasy feeling in 
the public mind. Someone engaged in the case was 
telephoned to on the Monday when the case opened, and 
offered 500 as his " rake-off," if he would get Mrs. Ratten- 
bury to write her life-story. Then, as the unexpected angle 
that the case was assuming became visible, the press raised 
its offer. By Thursday this gentleman, engaged in the case, 
who was a man of honour, was offered 3500 as his " rake-ofi," 
and one paper was foolish enough to put this offer in writing ! 
It is needless to say that none of the offers was considered for 
a moment, and would not have been if the wealth of the 
world had been offered. 

Mr. Casswell was handicapped in his defence of his client 
Stoner, by the fantastic nature of the story which Stoner had 
told. Mr. O'Connor was in no such invidious position ; he had 
a very clear notion of the mentality of his client, and he was 
able to give full play to his sympathetic interpretation of 
that mentality. There were cases, Mr. O-'Connor pointed out, 
when the accused person had a record and history which might 
inspire the jury with a revulsion against that person's 
character. " It is in this case, perhaps," he continued, " that 
the task of the jury is most difficult of all the task of separat- 
ing from their minds the natural revulsion they feel against 
behaviour which nobody would seek to condone or commend. 
I am not here to condone, still less to commend, her conduct, 
I am not here to cast one stone against that wretched boy whose 
position there in the dock may be due to folly and self* 
indulgence on her part, to which he fell a victim." Mr, 
O'Connor went on to say that the jury must not imagine that 
the two defences had been arranged in concert were connected 
in any way. Each defence was in its water-tight compart- 
ment. " I will say no more," continued Mr. O'Connor, 

34 





Villa Madeira, Bournemouth 



Introduction, 

" about what is past in Mrs. Eattenbury's life. I would only 
say that if you may be tempted to feel that she has sinned, 
that her sin has been great and has involved others who would 
never otherwise have been involved, that you should ask your- 
selves whether you or anybody of you are prepared first to 
cast a stone." Having pleaded one of the greatest of speeches 
for the defence ever uttered and the deathless words " cast a 
stone " sounded through a hushed Court Mr. O'Connor went 
on to give a very good description of the mentality of the 
accused person who was not his client. He said of Stoner: 
" Can you doubt seduced ; raised out of his sphere ; taken away 
to London ; given a very high time there ; a lad who was melo- 
dramatic and went about with a dagger, violent sometimes, 
impulsive, jealous, his first love; a lad whose antecedents had 
been quiet, whose associations had been prosaic ; never mixed 
with girls ; flung into the vortex of this illicit love ; unbalanced 
enough, and, in addition to all these things, either endeavour- 
ing to sustain his passion with cocaine or already an addict 
of drugs. You may as moral men and women, as citizens, 
condemn her in your souls fgr the part she has played in 
raising this position. She will bear to her grave the brand of 
reprobation, and men and women will know how she has acted. 
That will be her sorrow and her disgrace so long as she lives. 
You may think of Mrs. Eattenbury as a woman, self -indulgent 
and wilful, who by her own acts and folly had erected in this 
poor young man a Frankenstein of jealousy which she could 
not control.*' 

Mr. Justice Humphreys^ summing-up was a brilliant 
exposition of the law. There is no judge more capable of 
weighing evidence, and the right value was given to every 
piece of evidence that had come before the Court. But the 
Anglo-Saxon assumption, unfortunately, still is that women, 
whatever their circumstances, want to be married, and Mr. 
Justice Humphreys was no exception to this assumption. He 
spoke, in his summing-up, of the period (the " orgy ") which 
Mrs, Eattenbury and Stoner spent in Kensington. The 
learned Judge said : " Bo you believe that while they were in 
London, the future was not discussed? What they were going 

3$ 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

to do when they got back? Could life go on in the same way? 
"Would not something have to be done with or to Mr. 
Rattenbury? Would he not ask 'What about my 250? 
How much did the operation cost you? Did you have the 
operation? If so, where? I hope you are better for it.' Or, 
if he was so callous and disinterested a husband that he would 
not be expected even to ask about the operation, at least as a 
mean man would not you expect him, and would not they 
expect him that is the point to make some inquiries about 
the money? Do you think that these two persons in London 
imagined that life could go on just the same after their 
return, after an absence of four days, as before? " 

The learned Judge went on to quote Mrs. Rattenbury 's 
account of the events of Saturday. He quoted Mrs. Ratten- 
bury's evidence; " I think we played cards. I think it was 
just the same as any other night." The learned Judge asked : 
" Do you believe that? Do you believe that after an absence 
of four days Mr. Rattenbury never asked a question as to 
what happened in London? " 

. Let us consider the history and mentality of these people 
as we know them through the medium of the trial. Ill- 
balanced as she was, Mrs. Rattenbury was a woman of the 
world. The last thing she would have wanted was to have 
married a chaufieur, twenty years younger than herself; she 
was again to use a slang expression, but slang fits Mrs. 
Rattenbury's career " sitting pretty." She had a kind 
husband who allowed her to live her own life. She had a 
young and ardent lover who satisfied her emotionally and 
physically. She had two children to whom she was passionately 
devoted. She was being supported as extravagantly as she 
could have hoped for, all the circumstances considered. She 
was, as she rather pathetically said in evidence, " happy 
then." For her husband, she had a maternal affection it 
must be remembered that in all her loves Mrs. Rattenbury 
was essentially maternal. She spoiled and protected Stoner; 
she adored her children; she comforted her husband; she 
tried to give Irene Riggs as good a life as possible; she was 
kind to every stranger who came within Tier gates. The one 

36 



Introduction. 

thing that would Lave been impossible to Mrs. Rattenbury, 
amoral, casual, unbalanced, and passionate as she was, would 
have been to have taken part in harming another human 
being. Mrs. Rattenbury, both as a humane woman and a 
completely amoral woman, did not desire her husband- s death, 
and did not wish to marry her lover, and there is no evidence, 
and none was ever brought forward, that she had ever desired 
either of these things. The unfortunate Stoner, with a much 
simpler experience of life and with that adolescent urge to 
heroics, which is a hang-over from infantilism, could not see 
that there was no need for any drama of jealousy at all. The 
boundary line between drama and reality was obscure for him, 
and living entirely in an unintelligent world of crude emotion, 
he hit out almost blindly. And this gesture, conceived in an 
unreal world, materialised in a world of actual facts. Our 
prisons are of course full of sufferers from infantilism, and 
what goes on in their heads bears no relation at all to real life, 
as it has to be lived, though it could not possibly be said they 
were not sane. 

The jury were out for forty-seven minutes, and they 
returned the only possible verdict to which they had been 
admirably directed upon the evidence. They found Mrs. 
Rattenbury not guilty, and Stoner, guilty, adding a recom- 
mendation to mercy. Mrs. Rattenbury stood immovable while 
the verdict of not guilty was returned, but when the foreman 
of the jury pronounced the word " guilty " in respect of 
Stoner, she gave a little moan and put out her hand. She 
was led away, and Stoner received his sentence without flinch- 
ing. He spoke for the first time when asked by the Clerk of 
the Court whether he had anything to say why the Court 
should not give him judgment of death according to law, 
Stoner replied in a low voice " Nothing at all." He was then 
taken below, and Mrs. Rattenbury was brought back to plead 
to the accusation of being an accessory after the fact. She 
could not speak she could not make any sound at all, her 
mouth moved a little and that was all. The Clerk of the Court 
informed the jury that the prisoner at the Bar had pleaded 
not guilty. The prosecution said that they proposed to offer 

37 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

no evidence, and Mr. Justice Humphreys instructed the jury 
to return a verdict of not guilty, which they did. Mrs. 
Rattenbury was discharged, 

Mrs. Rattenbury had an admirably fair trial. She was 
not, of course, bullied by the prosecution, as she would have 
been in France or the United States. In fact, Mr. Croom- 
Johnson could, even within the limits allowed to the Crown, 
have been more severe than he was. Mr. Justice Humphreys 
told the jury unmistakably that even though they might feel 
they could not possibly have any sympathy for the woman, it 
should not make them any more ready to convict her of the 
crime. It should, if anything, make them less ready to accept 
evidence against her. This is admirable, and in the best tradi- 
tion of the English law. Unfortunately, there is a custom in 
the Courts that is not nearly so admirable, to animadvert upon 
the moral qualities, or lack of them, in a person accused of a 
crime. I am, of course, using the word merely in the only 
sense Anglo-Saxons seem to use it, with reference to sexual 
morality. Mrs. Rattenbury, at the time that the learned Judge 
was making his remarks about her moral character, was a 
woman at the extreme edge of what it was possible to bear and 
go on living. But she had to listen to the dread voice of the 
Judge, as he said: " Members of the jury, having heard her 
learned counsel, having regard to the facts of this case, it may 
be that you will say that you cannot possibly feel any sympathy 
for that woman; you cannot hwue any feeling except disgust 
for her."* More could hardly be said of George Joseph Smith, 
or of a systematic poisoner, or a baby-farmer. 

This may show a very lofty and moral viewpoint, but we 
are often told that a criminal Court is not a court of morals, 
In this trial apparently it was. And strange as it may seem, 
there are some of us, though apparently regrettably few, who 
are so constituted that we cannot see a fellow-human in the 
extreme of remorse, shame and despair, without feeling pity 
as well as disgust. Indeed, it is quite possible for the disgust 
to cease to exist because of the overwhelming nature of the 
pity. Mrs. Rattenbury was in some ways a vulgar and a 

* Italics mine. ED. 



Introduction. 

silly woman, but she was a generous, kindly, lavish creature, 
capable of great self-sacrifice. She was innocent of the crime 
of which, entirely on the strength of her own drunken 
maunderings, she was accused, but, nevertheless, though her 
life was handed back to her, it was handed back to her in 
such a shape that it was of no use to her. " People " that 
dread judgment bar of daily life known as " people " would 
always say: " Of course she told him to do it. And, anyway, 
she was a dreadful woman." For the world has progressed 
very little since Ezekiel wrote: " And I will judge thee as 
women that break wedlock and shed blood are judged, and 
I will give thee blood in fury and jealousy." Such was 
the judgment of society on Mrs. Eattenbury, and she knew it. 

Her husband's relatives took her away with them, but 
the press besieged the flat where they gave her refuge. The 
doctor who had been called in to attend her, removed her to 
a nursing home, pursued by newspaper men, one of whom 
called out to the doctor escorting her: " If you take her 
to Bournemouth we'll follow you." A horrible example of 
what the demands of his newspaper can do to a young man 
who probably started as a decent human being. 

Mrs. Eattenbury was by now very ill, physically and 
mentally. And, in her fear and grief for Stoner, in her 
misery for her children, in her remorse and shame, she wanted 
to be alone. She left the nursing home; and of what she 
did during the nightmare hours that followed we only know 
from the tragedy that followed. She must have bought a 
knife and taken a train down to that part of the world where 
she had been happy in what was stigmatised as an " adulterous 
intercourse." And there, beside the placid waters of a little 
stream, she sat and wrote, feverishly and passionately, on 
the backs of envelopes and odd bits of paper, the reasons 
for the terrible deed that she was about to do. She referred 
to the assumption that she dominated Stoner, and declared 
that no one could dominate him, and that whatever he wanted 
to do he always did. She repeated that if she had not been 
made to tell the truth, she would never have given Stoner 
away. She complained about the press dogging her footsteps, 

39 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

and she wrote of the scathing attack on her character. How, 
indeed, was it possible for her ever to make a home for her 
little boys, to watch them at play, to invite other children 
to play with them? She must have known it would be worse 
for her children if she lived than if she died. Her writing 
finished, she thrust the knife six times into her breast. The 
blade penetrated her heart thrice. She fell forward into 
the water, dead. When an ancient Boman killed himself, 
he inserted the tip of the sword between two ribs, and fell 
upon it; he called it " falling upon his sword." He knew 
that the shrinking of the flesh was such that it was almost 
impossible to drive a knife steadily into the breast. Mrs. 
Rattenbury drove it in six times. 

The Rattenbury case had revealed a strange and unlovely 
mode of life, but the woman's last act raised it sharply to 
higher issues. Most people in England, especially women, 
seem easily able to feel superior to Mrs. Rattenbury. She 
had had " adulterous intercourse "; she had taken for her 
lover a boy, young enough to be her son; and the boy was 
a servant. That out of this unpromising material she had 
created something that to her was beautiful and made her 
happy, was unforgivable to the people of England. Her 
life had been given back to her, but the whole world was 
too small a place, too bare of any sheltering rock, for her 
to find a refuge. 

Stoner lost his appeal, but he was reprieved, and the 
sentence of death commuted to penal servitude. Blind and 
muddled humanity had been even more blind and muddled 
than usual, and everyone concerned had paid a terrible price 
for the sin of lack of intelligence. 



40 



Leading Dates in the Rattenbury and Stoner Case. 



"Seven or eight years Mr. and Mrs. Battenbury married, 
ago" 

Mrs Rattenbury. 

1928. 



1931. 

9th July, 1934. 



September, 1934. 

November, 1934. 
22nd November, 1934. 

18th March, 1935. 
19th to 22nd March. 



24th March, 1935. 
4 o'clock p.m. 

4.30-5.30. 



7. 



Mr. Rattenbury retired and came from Canada to 
live in Bournemouth, 

Irene Biggs engaged by Mrs. Eattenbury as com- 
panion-help. 

Mrs. Rattenbury sent for Dr. O'Donnell at mid- 
night. She told him Mr. Battenbury had left 
the house threatening suicide. She had a black 
eye and a cut over her eye, and was much 
distressed. (Quarter of a grain of morphia 
administered by Dr. O'Donnell, the first of the 
only two occasions on which he gave her 
morphia.) 

Stoner engaged as chauffeur-handyman. At first 
he lived out. About 

He took up residence in the house. 

Stoner first had intercourse with Mrs. Battenbuvy, 
Mrs. Battenbury said it was before he began 
living in the house. 

Mr. Rattenbury 's cheque for 250 paid into Mrs. 
Rattenbury's account, which was considerably 
overdrawn. Cheque drawn for 50 which Stoner 
took to the bank and cashed. 

The " orgy " at the Boyal Palace Hotel. 

They return to the Villa on Friday evening, 22nd. 



Irene Biggs leaves 5 Manor Boad. 

(Mrs. Rattenbury's story) She had tea with her 
husband upstairs in her bedroom. Stoner served 
tea, Mr. and Mrs. Battenbury had a discussion 
about a book Mr. Battenbury was reading. 

Mr. Battenbury was depressed and gloomy. His 
wife suggested going to Bridport the next day, 
and telephoned to Mr. Jenks accordingly, While 
she was telephoning Stoner came into the room 
with " a revolver in his hand." He was angry 
and said he would kill her if she went to Brid- 
port. " He accused me of living with Mr. 
Battenbury that afternoon with the bedroom door 
closed." 



7.45. 



Mrs. Battenbury put the boy John to bed. 



41 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

8 to 8. 30. (Evidence of his grandparents) Stoner called at 

109 Pine Vale Crescent, Ensbury Park (their 
house), and borrowed a mallet. 

Before 9.30. (Resuming Mrs. Rattenbury *s story) She let her 

dog Dinah out and closed the french window. 

Nine-thirty. She went to bed. Later, after she had been to see 

Riggs, Stoner came into her bedroom : " told me 
he had hurt Ratz." (Note apparently she snelt 
it like this.) She went down to the drawmg- 



10.15. 

10, 45 or 11. 



11.30. 



11,45. 

25th March. 
12.5 a.m. 

Before 1. 



2. 
3.15. 



6. 

7. 
8.15. 

1 p.m. 

26th March. 
27th March. 



Irene Riggs returned to the Villa. 

Mrs. Rattenbury went into Riggs's room, and retired 
to her own room about ten minutes later. Then, 
after ten more minutes, Irene Riggs heard Mrs. 
Rattenbury call " Irene." She went down into 
the drawing-room. 

Riggs telephoned for Dr. O'Donnell and called 
Stoner. 



Dr. O'Donnell arrived at 5 Manor Road. He tele- 
phoned for Mr, Rooke. 

Dr. Rooke came. 

They took Mr. Rattenbury to the nursing home. 
Telephoned the police. 

Police arrived at 5 Manor Road. 

Dr. O'Donnell left the nursing home and returned 
to Manor Road. 

Mrs. Rattenbury given half a grain of morphia and 
put to bed. 

Inspector Carter, two other policemen, and Riggs 
present when Mrs. Rattenbury woke up. 

The police-matron came. Mrs. Rattenbury given 
a bath. 

Inspector Carter found her in her bedroom, dressed 
and " normal," and took a statement from her. 
He took her to the police station. 

Dr. O'Donnell saw Mrs. Rattenbury at the police 
station. 

Irene Riggs went with Stoner to Wimborne on 

business, 

Riggs left 5 Manor Road during the evening and 
returned at 10.30. Stoner, who appeared to be 
drunk, told her that Mrs. Rattenbury was in 
jail, that he had put her there, and that he 
was going up the following morning to see her 
and give himself up. 



Leading Dates. 



28th March. 



18th April. 

27th May. 
31st May. 
3rd June. 
6th June. 
24th June. 
25th June. 



Stoner left the house about ten minutes to seven 
in the morning, and returned ten minutes after- 
wards. He left again soon afterwards. 

Mrs. Rattenbury wrote to Stoner from Holloway 
the " Please write to me, This is the third 
letter I have written " letter. 

Death of Mr. Rattenbury. 
Stoner arrested. 

Letter written to Riggs from Holloway Prison 
" S's feelings must take some weighing up." 

First day of trial. 

Stoner convicted and sentenced to death. 

Mrs. Rattenbury commits suicide. 

" Suicide while of unsound mind." 

Stoner 's appeal dismissed. 

Stoner reprieved. 



43 



THE TRIAL 

WITHIN THE 

CENTRAL CRIMINAL COURT 

OLD BAILEY, LONDON, 
MONDAY, 27TH MAT, 1935. 

Judge 
ME. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS. 



Counsel for the Grown 

Mr. R. P. GROOM-JOHNSON, KC. 
Mr. ANTHONY HA.WKE. 
(Instructed by the Director of Public Prosecutions.) 



Counsel for the Prisoner Alma Victoria Battenbury 
Mr, T. J, O'CONNOR, K.C, 
The HON, EWEN MONTAGU. 
Mr. MIDFORD. 

(Instructed by Messrs. Other, Manning & Boileau- 
Tredinnick, Solicitors,) 



Counsel for the Prisoner George Percy Stoner 

Mr. T. J. CASSWEIX. 
(Instructed by Mr. E. W. Marshall Harvey.) 

45 



First Day Monday, 27th May, 1935. 

An USHER OP THE COURT If any one can inform my Lords, 
the King's Justices, or the King's Attorney-General, ere this 
inquest be taken between our Sovereign Lord the King and the 
prisoners at the bar, of any treasons, murders, felonies, or mis- 
demeanours, done or committed by the prisoners at the bar, let 
them come forth, and they shall be heard; for the prisoners now 
stand at the bar on their deliverance. And all persons who are 
bound by recognizance to prosecute or give evidence against the 
prisoners at the bar, let them come forth, prosecute, and give 
evidence, or they shall forfeit their recognizances. God save the 
King." 

The CLERK OF THE COURT Alma Victoria Rattenbury and 
George Percy Stoner, you are charged with the murder of Francis 
Mawson Rattenbury on 28th March last. Alma Victoria R,atten- 
bury, are you guilty or not guilty? 

The PRISONER RATTENBURY I plead not guilty. 

The CLERK OF THE COURT George Percy Stoner, are you guilty 
or not guilty? 

The PRISONER STONER I plead not guilty. 

(One juror was duly sworn.) 

Mr. CASSWELL My lord, there is one application which I 
think I should make to the Court before the jury is sworn, which 
is that these two persons be tried separately. 

Mr, JUSTICE HUMPHREYS It would have been better if you 
had made it before any of the jury were sworn. I will hear your 
application now. Which accused do you appear for? 

Mr. CASSWELL I appear for the accused Stoner. It is an 
application which perhaps had better be made in the absence of the 

jury. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Well, if you think so, 

(The jury retired,) 

Mr. CASSWELL My lord, my application is that in this case 
the accused should be tried separately, and it is for this reason, 
If your lordship would be good enough to look at the last piece 
of additional evidence of which notice has been given, it consists 
of a letter, dated 18th April, written by the accused Rattenbury 
from Holloway Prison. The part of it I would like to refer your 
lordship to is the part beginning " S.'a feelings must take some 
weighing up." In mysubmission, that shows a distinct intention 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

to throw the responsibility upon the other accused. This docu- 
ment, if the prosecution were to rely upon it in any way, cannot 
be evidence against the other accused, but if it is brought out 
it may have a very bad influence upon the minds of the jury, 
and it would be difficult, in my submission, to disabuse their minds 
of it. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS It appears to be in that respect in 
the same category as would be the rest of the documents. There 
are a number of statements in this case made by one accused in 
the absence of the other, which I shall have to tell the jury at the 
proper time would not be evidence against the other accused. 

Mr. CASSWELL There is that statement in which there is the 
suggestion by the accused Rattenbury that she throws the respon- 
sibility on my client. It is, in my submission, strictly not 
evidence against anyone; it cannot be said that it is a confession, 
and it cannot be evidence against my client. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Are you asking me to exclude the 
evidence now? 

Mr. CASSWELL Either to exclude it or to grant a separate 
trial if my learned friend, Mr. Groom-Johnson, intends to rely 
upon it, 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Mr. O'Connor, you appear for whom? 

Mr. O'CONNOR I appear for Mrs. Rattenbury. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Do you want to take any part in this 
application 1 

Mr. O'CoiTNOR My lord, separate trials are a matter for your 
lordship's discretion. The matter has been considered in a very 
large number of cases, and if there were any case in which a 
strong application could be made for a separate trial, especially by 
the accused Stoner, in my submission, this is the case. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Are you supporting this application 
or opposing it, or taking no part in it? 

Mr. O'CONNOR My lord, I do not oppose the application. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Mr. Groom- Johnson, I must ask you 
one question. Are you proposing to use this piece of additional 
evidence? 

Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON My lord, the difficulty that I feel about 
it is this : those who instruct me feel that this letter having been 
written, the manifest thing to do was to call the attention of 
those who represent each of the accused to that fact. In my 
respectful submission, it is no different from the other evidence 
in this case, Tour lordship, I have no doubt, if I may say so 
with respect, will direct the jury upon that, and, indeed, I had 
in mind saying something myself to the jury when I came to open 
the case, but it is entirely in your lordship's discretion. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS No, Mr. Groom- Johnson, it is for 
you to decide whether any particular matter brought to my atten- 
tion is admissible in evidence or not. It* is not for a judge to 



Opening Speech for the Crown. 

advise either side how they should conduct their case, but all the 
cases here, both Crown and defence, are in the hands of able and 
experienced counsel. I much rather prefer to leave them to 
conduct the case themselves, and I am in a position, so to speak, of 
an umpire, not a person representing any side. Very well, I am 
much obliged, I see no ground for directing that there should be 
separate trials in this case. The only matter which is relied upon 
by Mr. Casswell is a letter written by the female accused to one 
of the witnesses, in which she mentions the name of the other 
accused. When that letter is tendered in evidence, I will rule 
whether it is evidence or not, but in any event such a document 
can, in my judgment, form no ground for granting the applica- 
tion for a separate trial. 

(The jury returned to Court and the eleven jurors 
who had not been sworn were duly sworn.) 

The CU-IUK (IF TUB Cuarr Members of the jury, the prisoners 
at the Bar, Alma Victoria Rivrtenbury and Uuorge 1'urcy Stoner, 
are charged with the murder of Francis Mawson Rattenbury on 
28th March last, To this indictment they have separately pleaded 
not guilty, and it is your charge to say, having heard the evidence, 
whether they or either of them be guilty or not. 



Opening Speech for the Crown, 

Mr. R. P. CuooM-JoiiNSON May it please your lordship and 
members of the jury, the charge against the accused is that they 
'murdered Mr. Francis Mawson Rattenbury, a retired architect, 
by an attack made upon him on 24th March at the Villa Madeira, 
5 Manor Road, Bournemouth, [The learned Counsel describes the 
premises from a plan and photographs.] The accused Stoner was 
employed at that house as a chauffeur and handyman. Both Mr. 
and Mrs. Ruttenbury had been previously married. By his first 
marriage Mr. Battenbury had two children. He had been married 
many years ago, and both these children are now grown up. Mrs. 
Rattenbury had had a son by her first marriage, and by her 
marriage to Mr, Rattenbury she also had a son a boy named 
John. He is now about six years of age. About 1928 Mr, Ratten- 
bury, who had been working in Canada, retired and came to live 
in Bournemouth. In September, 1934, Stoner was taken into 
Mr. Rattenbury's employ. At first he appears to have lived outside, 
but shortly afterwards he took up residence in the house, On 
24th March, therefore, the people living at the Villa Madeira were 
Mr. and Mrs. Rattenbury, Miss Irene Riggs, who was employed 
as a companion-help to Mrs- Rattenbury, Stoner, and the boy 
John. 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr R. P. Groom-Johnson 

Apparently Mrs. Rattenbury had a banking account of her 
own. It was fed from time to time by payments into it, usually 
of round sums like 40 or 50, from Mr. Rattenbury's account, 
On 18th March last her account was substantially overdrawn, 
For some reason, on 18th March, a sum of 250, much in excess 
of anything paid in for some time, was paid into Mrs. Rattenbury's 
account from Mr. Rattenbury's account, and on the same day Mrs. 
Rattenbury drew a cheque for 50, which Stoner took to the bank 
and cashed, The next day Mrs. Rattenbury and Stoner came to 
London, and stayed in adjoining bedrooms in the Royal Palace 
Hotel, Kensington, passing as brother and sister. They went 
shopping, and Mrs. Rattenbury purchased a large number of 
articles, apparently for Stoner, including pyjamas, underclothing, 
suits of clothes, and boots, and Stoner also purchased for himself 
a diamond ring for 15 10s., while at the same time Mrs. 
Rattenbjiry appears to have given him a gold watch. 

It is the submission of the prosecution in this case that the 
relationship between Mrs. Rattenbury and Stoner had ceased to be 
that of the wife of the employer and the man employed but had 
become an adulterous intercourse. On their going back to the 
Villa Madeira, where Mr. Rattenbury, the somewhat elderly 
husband, was residing, the situation was likely to be one of some 
difficulty, and the prosecution submits that Mr. Rattenbury stood 
in the way of their indulgence in this guilty passion. But, coming 
to the 24th March, the day on which Rattenbury was injured, 
you will hear from the evidence that the injuries to him were 
inflicted with a mallet which was borrowed on that evening. Miss 
Riggs, the companion-help, had gone out of the house that after- 
noon about four o'clock; she did not return until 10.15 in the 
evening, and it is submitted that, somewhere between these times, 
the crime was committed. A few moments after Irene Riggs 
returned from her day out, she went to her bedroom, and she saw 
Stoner leaning over the banisters looking down into the hall. He 
said he was looking to see that all the lights were out. Later, 
when going to the kitchen, Miss Riggs, in passing the drawing-room 
door, heard the sound of heavy breathing. The prosecution suggests 
that that was the heavy breathing of a man who had suffered tho 
injuries you will hear about. 

After Irene Riggs had got into bed, Mrs. Rattenbury came into 
her room and talked to her for about ten minutes or so, saying 
that she had arranged to go, apparently with Mr. Rattenbury., 
on the following day to visit a Mr. Jenks, who was a business friend 
of Mr. Rattenbury, living at Bridport. I suggest that Mrs. Ratten- 
bury made these statements to Irene Riggs to prepare the notion* 
which was to be developed later, that some unknown person had 
come into the house and committed an assault upon Mr, Rattenbury, 
and that she knew nothing about it. Immediately afterwards, Mrs. 
Rattenbury went to her room and almost directly somebody was 
50 



Opening Speech for the Crown. 

Mr R. P. Groom-Johnson 

heard going downstairs : it was Mrs. Rattenbury, because immedi- 
ately afterwards she was heard calling "Irene, Irene!" Miss 
Riggs heard her cries, and she went downstairs. She found 
Mrs. Rattenbury in the drawing-room dressed in her pyjamas, 
Mr. Rattenbury was sitting in an armchair, and Miss lliggs 
noticed at once that he had what appeared to be a black eye. 
On the instructions of Mrs. Rattenbury 3 she telephoned for Dr. 
O'Donnell, and a little while afterwards she called Stoner down. 
He went off in the car with a view to fetching the doctor more 
quickly. Stoner, therefore, on this night and 1 want you to 
appreciate the full force of this from the moment he is seen lean- 
ing over the banisters is only on the scene for a few minutes 
comparatively late in the story, Mrs. Rattenbury apparently not 
having called Stoner, the man who in the circumstances you might 
have supposed she would have called if it were nothing more 
than a case of illness. But Stoner goes off to fetch the "doctor. 
He is seen some time later asleep in the car, but, as far as the 
evidence for the prosecution goes, he does not return to the house 
again until 3.45 in the morning. 

When Dr. O'Donnell arrived a good deal had already been done 
to remove traces of blood, Mrs. Rattenbury explaining that she 
desired to get rid of it because she did not want John to see it in 
the morning. There were three wounds on Mr. Rattenbury's head, 
and these three wounds had been caused by a heavy instrument. I 
suggest that the instrument which caused these wounds that Dr, 
O'Donnell found on Mr. Rattenbury's head was a mallet which 
Stoner had borrowed from the house of his grandparents by saying 
that he wanted to drive some pegs in the garden. The mallet had 
been borrowed that evening, and it was found in the garden next 
morning by a police officer. There were human hairs adhering 
to it and also a piece of skin. It is my duty to submit that 
there can be no doubt that the hairs found adhering to the 
mallet were hairs from the head of Mr. Ratlenbury. 

(Here a mallet was handed to counsel, who held it up 
for the jury to see.) 

After examining the injured man, Dr. O'Donnell decided that 
it was a case for a surgeon, and he accordingly telephoned for a 
Mr. Rooke. It was while they were waiting for Mr. Rooke to arrive 
that Mrs. Rattenbury made the first of a series of statements. She 
was hysterical, and she held in her hand a tumbler of whisky and 
soda. The first thing she said, apparently, was, " Look at him. 
Look at the blood. Someone has finished him." She then told 
Dr. O'Donnell that she and her husband had spent a happy evening 
together planning a visit to Bridport, and that they had read a 
passage in a book about suicide. She said she went to bed early, 
and was awakened by f a noise or cry, and she ran downstairs and 

51 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

Mr R, F. Groom-Johnson 

saw her husband in the chair. Now, at 2 a.m., after Mr. Ratten- 
bury had been removed to a nursing home, Police-constable Bagwell 
arrived at the house and saw Mrs. Rattenbury. There is no doubt 
that she was then under the influence of drink, She certainly was 
very excited, but not incoherent, and she said to Police-constable 
Bagwell, " I was playing cards with my husband until nine o'clock. 
I then went to my bedroom. At about 10.30 I heard a yell, and 
came downstairs into the drawing-room. I saw my husband sitting 
in the armchair, and sent for Dr. O'Donnell." 

After this Mrs. Rattenbury told Inspector Mills that she had 
heard someone groaning and found her husband unconscious, with 
blood flowing from his head. Inspector Mills thereupon noticed 
that the french windows were open, and he asked ii' they were 
open when she came downstairs for the first time. Her answer 
was, " No, they were shut and locked.' 5 If that is right it would 
preclude the possibility of a person with murderous intention 
having come in through the window to administer the blows and 
afterwards to escape through the window into the garden. A 
search of the garden was then made, but Police-constable Bagwell 
remained in the house, and while he was there Mrs. Rattenbury 
made another statement. She said, " I know who did it." The 
officer cautioned her, and Mrs. Rattenbury went on, "I did it 
with a mallet. It is hidden. Ratz (referring to her husband) 
has lived too long." She then corrected herself, and said, " No, 
my lover did it. I will give you 10. No, I won't bribe you." 
It may be suggested that Mrs. Rattenbury was distraught and 
hysterical, that she had been drinking, and did not know what she 
was saying. At 3.30 Inspector Mills told her that Mr. Rattenbury's 
condition was critical, and she asked, " Will this be against me? " 
Having been cautioned by Inspector Mills, she said, " I did it. He 
gave me the book. He has lived too long. He said, ' Dear, dear.' 
I will tell you in the morning where the mallet is." She then added, 
" I shall make a better job of it next time. I made a proper 
muddle of it. I thought I was strong enough. Irene does not 
know." In the submission of the prosecution, if those words are 
right, blows were struck, according to this statement, by Mrs. 
Rattenbury, arid the reason why they had not killed Mr. Ratten- 
bury outright was that her physical strength was not sufficient. 
She was, when she made these statements, in a state of hysteria and 
semi-collapse, and the doctor thought, it right to give her an 
injection of morphia. She was put to bed, but apparently came 
round later, and said, " I know who did it his son." The 
inspector asked how old this son was, and she replied, " Thirty- 
two, but he is not here." 

When Inspector Carter came to interview Stoner, the latter said 
that he was aroused that night by Mrs. Rattenbury shouting, and 
he came downstairs to find Rattenbury in the armchair with blood 
flowing from wounds in his head. At that time Stoner had no 



Opening Speech for the Crown. 

Mr R, P. Groom-Johnson 

idea that any statements had been made by Mrs. Rattenbury. 
Then there followed an interview between Inspector Carter, and 
Mrs. Rattenbury, and in the course of this interview she marie a 
written statement which ran : " About 9 p.m. on Sunday, 24-th 
March, 1935, I was playing cards with my husband when ho dared 
me to kill him, as he wanted to die, I picked up a mallet. He then 
said, ' You have not guts enough to do it. 5 1 then hit him with 
the mallet. I hid the mallet outside the house. I should have shot 
him if I had a gun." When Mrs. Rattenbury was leaving with 
Inspector Carter, she was met by Irene Rigga and Stoner, to whom 
she said, " Don't make fools of yourselves." Stoner replied, " You 
have got yourself into this mess by talking too much." Later, when 
charged at the police station, Mrs. Rattenbury said, *' That is 
right. I did it deliberately, and would do it again." 

Stoner was not arrested until 28th March, and meanwhile Mrs, 
Rattenbury was in Holloway Prison. On the 27th she wrote to 
Stoner from Holloway, saying, " I must see you, darling. Please 
write to me. This is the third letter 1 have written. Hope you 
receive this. I hardly know how to write now. Let me know how 
' Ratz ' is getting on. No more now. God bless you. My love 
be with you always, Lozanne." And there is this addition, " Have 
you talked with Dr. O'D. about how * Ratz ' is? Goodness. There 
is so much I want to know. Please ask Irene to give you a I'ew 
bobbing pins for my hair. I think they will be allowed." 

On 28th March, after Stoner had been arrested, he said to a 
police officer, " Do you know Mrs Ratteubury had nothing to do 
with this affair? M The police officer cautioned him, and he then 
said, " When I did the job I believe he was asleep. I hit him and 
then went upstairs and told Mrs. Rattenbury. She rushed down 
then. You see, I watched through the french window, and saw 
her kiss him good-night, and then leave the room. I waited, 
and crept in through the french window, which was unlocked . 
Still, it ain't much use saying anything. I don't suppose they 
will let her out yet." 

Ladies and gentlemen, it looks as though Stoner, having 
borrowed the mallet, which undoubtedly was the instrument used 
to inflict the head injuries, brought it back, naming some purpose 
or other, to the house, and it is the contention of the prosecution 
that one or other of the accused delivered a blow or blows at the 
head of Mr. Rattenbury; and, if that is right, the prosecution 
suggests for your consideration that these two people, Mrs. Ratten- 
bury and Stoner, with one common object and one common design 
set out to get rid of Mr. Rattenbury, who, as I suggested earlier, 
stood in their way. That, members of the jury, is the conten- 
tion of the prosecution in this case. 

53 



r* 

Rattenbury .and Stoner. 

Harold R. Homcwood 

Evidence for the Prosecution. 

HAEOLD ROBERT HOME WOOD, examined by Mr. HAWKE I um 
assistant to the Borough Engineer of the Bournemouth Corpora- 
tion. On 26th March I went to 5 Manor Road, Bournemouth, 
the house where Mr. and Mrs. Rattenbury had been living, and 
I made a survey of the premises. I produce a plan which I made 
from that survey, Exhibit 1. 

ABTHUR EDWARD PUNTER, examined by Mr. HAWKE I am a 
constable in the Hampshire Constabulary. On 28th March I went 
to 5 Manor Road, Bournemouth, and took some photographs of 
the outside and inside of the house. I produce the positives which 
were taken from the negatives that I took. They are "Exhibit 2. 

FREDERICK CLEMENTS, examined by Mr. HAWZE I am a retired 
police-sergeant and I live in Ensbury Park, Bournemouth. I have 
known the accused Stoner personally for four years. On the 
evening of Sunday, 24th March, I was walking down Redhill 
Drive, Ensbury Park, and I saw Stoner driving a dark saloon 
car. That was at 8 p.m. He was driving in a northerly direction 
when he passed me, about 100 yards from his parents' home. I 
noticed that he stopped his car outside his parents' house and 
got out of the car and went into the house. I know people called 
Mr. and Mrs. Stevens. They live in the same building; the 
houses adjoin. , There are five different houses there. They live 
close to the house I saw Stoner going into, which is his parents' 
house. Mr. and Mrs. Stevens are Stoner's grandparents. I should 
think that Ensbury Park, Redhill Drive, would be about three 
and a half miles from* J5 Manor Road. 

Cross-examined by Mr. CAS SWELL Did you often see the. 
accused Stoner 'before he went to Rattenbury's ? I used to see 
him almost daily, at least three or four times a week. 

He was a decent and respectable boy, was he not? Quite. 

He bore the highest character? Yes. 

And you give him that character after knowing him, as you 
say, for four years, since he was about fourteen? Yes, quite. 

The Stoners* house faces the road in which you were, does it 
not? Yes. 

And is the Stevens 's house, that is his grandparents' house, 
down that road which turns to the right? It is the first house 
round the corner; Pine Vale Crescent is the name of it. 

Do you know the geography behind these houses? Yes. 

Do you know where the workshop is behind ? Yes. 

There is a passage by which anybody can go straight into that 
part without applying to anybody? Yes, there is a gate, but it 

54 




(Elliott 4 JPry 



Mr. R. P. Groom-Johnson, K.C. 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Frederick dementi 

is not locked. It is usually closed. It leads to the back of Stoner's 
house. 

What I am suggesting is that if anybody wanted to borrow a 
mallet, and did not want people to know that he was going to 
do it, his easiest way would be to walk through that gate and 
round the back rather than apply to anybody 1 ? Yes, it is quite 
easy. 

ELIZABETH AUGUSTA STEVENS, examined by Mr. HAWKB I am 
the wife of Samuel Richard Stevens, and I live with him at 1109 
Pine Vale Crescent, Ensbury Park. The accused George Percy 
Stoner is my grandson. I saw him on Sunday, 24th March. He 
came to my house between eight and 8.30. 

Did he say anything to you? He said, " Mother, will dad 
lend me a mallet 1 " And I said, " Yes, dad will." 

Did he say what he wanted it for? To drive in some pegs as 
he was going to erect a tent. 

You knew where the mallet was kept? Yes, quite. 

Did you go and get it? I did. 

Will you just look at it (shown mallet produced)? Yes, that 
is the one. 

You got it and you handed it to the accused Stoner? Yes, 

I did. . .- . 

What did he do with it? He took it, and in a few minutes 
he was going away. 

Then he left the house ? Yes. - 

He took it with him? He took it with him, 



Cross-examined by Mr. O'CoNNOB How long was he with you 
1 altogether? Do you mean from the time he came into the house 
until he went away? 

Yes? Well, 1 could not say exactly to the minute, but it was 
gone eight, and it was just on half -past eight when he went out, 
and the bus was coming down. He must have met the bus as he 
was going out of the gate, and that is five minutes after every 
hour and every half -hour. 

So that he was with you between five and twenty minutes to 
half an hour? He would be there quite five and twenty minutes, 
I suppose. 

And seemed to be going to catch a bus? The bus must have 
passed him as he was going out. 

Cross-examined by Mr. CASSWELL Did this boy Stoner live 
with you? He lived with me for the biggest part of his life. 

He actually lived with you in part of your house? Yes. 

Was that when his mother and father were living next door ? 
Well, his mother was there, but his father was away working 
during part of the time, and when they were both away he used 

to stay with me. 

55 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Elizabeth A. Stevens 

He would sleep in the house? Oh, yes. 

He is an only boy, is he not? He is. 

How young was he when you knew him first? He was about 
two or three years old when he came to me first. 

He was very backward in some ways, was he not? Yes, very 
backward in his education for one thing, and he was backward 
in his growth. 

Am I right in saying that as a baby he did not walk until 
he was over three ? No, he did not. 

That is a bit backward, too, is it not? Very, very backward. 
Well, for one thing, he had something the matter with his legs 
when he came to me. 

Was he staying with you or not when he first went to the 
Kattenburys? Oh, he was working for my husband and my son 
before he went to the Kattenburys. 

Your husband and yo.ur son have a shed behind, have they 
not? They have, 

Do you know whether when he first went to the Kattenburys 
he lived in or not? No, he did not live in then not for two 
months, I should think. 

He used to come back every night? Yes. 

And then he went to live in at the Rattenburys? Yes. 

What sort of lad was he? A good lad, sir, an extraordinarily 
good boy he was. 

Never known to be rough, I think? Never. He never wanted 
to go out on to the road to play with other children ; he would 
always stay in and mess about with his old bicycle doing repairs, 
or making up things to try and get electricity. 

Did he ever go about with the girls much? Never; I have 
never known him to go about with a girl. 

Did you ever know him to drink at all before he went? Never; 
he never drank. In fact, he was very prejudiced against it. 

Did you notice any difference in him after he had gone to the 
Kattenburys ? I noticed that he was very pale, and I put it down 
to them giving him too much work driving the car about. 

At any rate, you noticed he was pale? Yes, and I said so to 
his mother. 

We cannot have what you said to people, but that is what you 
noticed ? Yes, that is what I noticed. 

There was nothing else you noticed in his behaviour at all? 
No, I did not notice anything. 

On this evening, 24th March, he came, I understand, and asked 
if he could borrow a mallet? Yes. 

Did he ask that as soon as he came? Yes, when he came in he 
stood up just for a second or two, and he said, " Mother, can dad 
lend me a mallet? I want to drive some pegs in as I am going to 
put up a tent." 

56 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Elizabeth A, Stevens 

Then did he get it straight away or did you get it for him? 
I went out to the shed to get it for him. 

Did he stop talking for a bit with you? Just for a minute or 
two long enough for me to go and get it and bring it back. That 
was all. There was nothing in it. 

I thought you said he stayed in your house about twenty-five 
minutes altogether? Yes, it would be that time by the time he came 
in and the time he went away; by the time I went out to the shed 
and found the mallet it would take about that time. Of course, it 
was dark, and you have got to grope about in the dark. That is 
how you take a long time ; you have not. got much to see by. 

I suppose there are lots of things like that in the shed, are there 
not? Yes, plenty. 

Implements of that sort? You would find every kind of tool in 
the shed. 

When he took it away, did he put it in a bag or anything? No* 
I did not see him do anything with it. 

Y"ou did not see him put it in any paper? No, I did not see it 
in paper, because he walked out and was going to put it in his car. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS He had his car outside? I suppose 
he had a car. I did not see the car. 

Gross-examination continued You would not see the car from 
your house? No. 

EIOHARD EDWARD STEVENS, examined by Mr. HAWKK I am the 
son of Mrs. Stevens who has just given evidence. I keep a mallet 
in the shed outside the house where my mother lives (shown Exhibit 
7). That is the mallet. The last time I used it would be somewhere 
about last Christmas. 

Cross-examined by Mr. CASSWELL Is the mallet, Exhibit 7, 
what you call a jobbing builder's mallet? No* 

It is the sort of thing one uses to drive in tent pegs with, is it 
not ? -Yes. 

I think you have known Stoner for some time. I suppose you 
have known him almost as long as your mother has? Oh, yes. 

What sort of a lad was he? A good honest boy, and the best 
boy that I have ever seen in my life. 

Did he go about with the girls much 1 I have never seen him in 
my life. 

Did you know of him going about drinking at Jill? Never. 

Did he go about with boys very much? Very seldom. 

Have you ever heard of him having fits? No. 

What I mean is fainting fits? Yes. 

Have you ever heard of him having fainting fits? Once. 

When was that? When he hurt himself on the scaffolding of a 
building, the last hous I built, 

57 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Richard E. Steven* 

How long ago was that! Was it one, two, three, or how many 
years ago? No, more than two years ago. 

Were you there at the time? I came on the scene soon after. 

What had happened to him? I think he had hurt himself in 
some way. 

That is all you know about it personally? Yes. 

Have you seen this lad much since he went to the Rattenburys 7 
Very often. 

Did you notice any change in him after he had been at the 
Rattenbury's some time? Since Christmas I have known a big 
change in the colour of his face; he looked very, very white. 

Was there any other thing you noticed ? No, because I have not 
been very close to him, except to shout out, cc How do you do? " 

But you did definitely notice this difference of colour of his 
face, did you? Yes. 

IRENE RIGGS, examined by Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON I live at 394 
Holdenhurst Road, Bournemouth. I am a spinster. In March, 
1935, 1 was living with Mr. and Mrs. Rattenbury at 5 Manor Road, 
Bournemouth. I had been living there about four years. I was 
employed as a companion-help. I know the accused George Percy 
Stoner. He was employed at the same address as chauffeur -handy- 
man. I think he came there first in September of last year. He 
lived in after he had been in employment there about two months. 
In March, 1935, there were living at 5 Manor Road Mr. and Mrs. 
Rattenbury, myself, Stoner, and little John, Mrs. Rattenbury's 
boy. John was five years of age. He used to go away to school and 
he came home just for the week-ends. He came home on the Satur- 
day and went to school on the Monday. There was another son 
belonging to Mrs, Rattenbury who was away at a boarding-school 
in the ordinary way. I used to do a good deal of the work in the 
house. I slept in the little room over the kitchen and Stoner 
slept in the front bedroom over the dining-room. Mrs, Ratfun- 
bury slept in one of the back bedrooms over the drawing-room. Mr. 
Rattenbury slept downstairs in the next room to the drawing-room* 
When little John came home for the week-ends he slept in Mrs. 
Rattenbury's bedroom. Mr. Rattenbury owned a motor car which 
was kept in a garage at the side of the house. Mr. Rattenbury 
sometimes drove it and Stoner also drove it. I remember Sunday, 
24th March. I went out that afternoon about four o'clock, which 
was part of the ordinary routine. I do not know what time I was 
expected back, but it was about ten o'clock, I should say. When 
I left for my afternoon and evening off, I left behind in the house 
Mr. and Mrs. Rattenbury, little John, and Stoner. When I left, 
as far as I know, Mr. Rattenbury was in the drawing-room and 
Mrs. Rattenbury had just gone down the stairs. I believe Stoner 
was in the kitchen. My parents live in the neighbourhood of 
Bournemouth, and I spent the day with tliem. Later on in the 

68 



Evidence for Prosecution, 

Ire 

day I returned to No. 5 Manor Road. It would be about 10.15 
when I got in. There was just one key for the house, and we had 
a place where we knew we could find it. I opened the front door 
with the key and went to my bedroom. 

When you got in through the front door, was there any light on 
downstairs that you can remember 1 Not that I remember. 

Did you go straight up to your bedroom? Yes, 

How long did you remain in your bedroom before the next 
thing happened? I cannot rightly say about five or ten minutes. 

Then did you leave your bedroom? Yes. 

When you left your bedroom, who was the next person that you 
saw in the house? Stoner, 

Where did you see him? Hanging over the banisters at the 
top of the stairs. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Was that before you went down- 
stairs or when you went downstairs 1 I am not definite about that. 

Examination continued About the time that you left your bed- 
room and you were going downstairs 1 Yes. 

Could you see in which direction he was looking? He was 
looking down the stairs. 

Did you speak to him? Yes. 

What did you say? I said, " What is the matter? " 

What did he say? He said, " Nothing; I was looking to see if 
the lights were out." 

Were the lights out at that time? Yes. 

When you saw him there, did you go on downstairs, or did you 
go back to your room, or what did you do? I went back to my 
room. 

A little later on, did you leave your room again? Yes. 

About how long after you had seen Stoner and spoken to him 
was that? That, again, I should say was about five or ten minutes. 

Where did you go on this occasion? Well, I am afraid it is 
going a little bit backward ; I went downstairs once, but on the 
first occasion something happened when I went downstairs, and then 
I went back upstairs again and came out of my room, and that is, 
I think, when I saw Stoner. 

You think on the first occasion you went downstairs and then 
you got back again , and it was when you got back again that you 
saw Stoner ? Yes. 

And then you went to your room? Yes. 

Then you went downstairs a second time. Is that right? No, 
I went downstairs the first time and nothing happened. 1 got back 
into my room. I left my room again, presumably to go along the 
landing, and I saw Stoner hanging over the stairs. 

Then did you go on downstairs that time? No, I did aot go 
the second time. 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

Irene Ritss 

When you were downstairs, on whichever occasion it was, wore 
there any lights on downstairs? No. 

Which room did you go into downstairs ? I went to go into the 
kitchen, but I did not go. I heard heavy breathing. 

What did you do when you heard heavy breathing? 1 listened 
at both the drawing-room and bedroom doors, and I could not make 
out where this breathing was coming from, so 1 switched on Mr. 
Rattenbury's bedroom light, and he was not in bed, so 1 came to 
the conclusion he must have fallen asleep in the drawing-room. 

At all events, this sound of breathing had called your attention ? 
Yes. 

Was it after you had switched on the light in his bedroom, 
according to your recollection now, and went upstairs that you 
saw Stoner leaning over the banisters? As far as I can remember* 

When you got back into your bedroom after you hud been 
along the landing, as you described it to us is the lavatory along 
the landing? Yes. 

Did you then go back into your own bedroom? Yes. 

And go to bed? Yes. 

Who was the next person you saw that night ? Mrs. Rattenbury. 

It is very difficult, but I know you will do the best you can. 
About how long was it that you had been in bed before you saw 
Mrs. Rattenbury? I cannot really say, but I should say again 
about five to ten minutes. 

Were you in bed ? Yes. 

Did she come into the bedroom ? Yea. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Could yon give us within a 
quarter of an hour or so the time when you think she came? I 
cannot really say at all. I should say half an hour all the time. 

Half an hour after what? A quarter-past ten eleven o'clock, 
perhaps. 

Somewhere round about eleven o'clock? Yes, a quarter to 
eleven or eleven. I have no idea at all. 

Examination continued What my lord is asking you about i 
a quarter-past ten to the time when Mrs. Rattenbury came into 
your room. About how long had you been in, do you suppose? 
About three-quarters of an hour. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS I understand. She is not to be 
pinned down to a time at all. It is only a vague idea round about 
eleven o'clock. It may have been earlier or later? Yes. 



continued I suppose you were not taking parti- 
cular notice of the time. You had just gone to bed ? Yes. 
Were you asleep when she came into your room or not? No. 
Is there electric light in your room ? YOB 
60 



Evidence for Prosecution, 

Irene RISK* 

When she came in, was it on or oil' 1 / 1 cannot remember. 

Did Mrs. Rattenbury have a talk with you ? Yes. 

What did she talk about? Well, she was telling me how she had 
made some arrangements for the Monday to go and see some friend 
of hers at Bridport. 

Did she give you the friend's name 'I Yes, Mr. Jenks. 

Did you know who Mr. Jenks was 1 / Yes. 

Who was he 1 / Well, a business friend of Mr. Kattenbury's. 

Did she mention Stoner's name at all U> you in this connexion? 
Yes, she just said she did not know whether Mr. Hattenbury or 
Stoner would be driving, but Mr. and Mrs. Hattenbury were going 
to visit Mr. Jenks. 

1 suppose there was other conversation before she left 1 Yes, 

But nothing of any importance? Nothing at till, no. 

Then did Mrs. Hattenbury go out and leave you in bed 2 Yes. 

And so far as you know at that time that was the last you were 
going to see of anybody that night? Yes. 

What was the next thing that happened that night, so far as 
you were concerned 'I I heard a noise of someone going downstairs* 
and immediately after I heard Mrs. Rattenbury call for me. 

Can you help us again as to how long it was before you heard 
somebody going downstairs after Mrs. Rattenbury had left your 
room 1 Well, I should say about five or ten minutes. 

You say Mrs. Hattenbury called you. How did she call 1 She 
called "Irene." 

Once or more than once? I could not say really. 

Had you been to sleep? No. 

What did you do ? I rushed downstairs into the drawing-room. 

Why did you go into the drawing-room? Because Mrs. 
Rattenbury went into the drawing-room. 

How were you dressed J In my night clothes. 

When you got into the drawing-room, who was there? Mrs. 
Rattenbury and Mr. Rattenbury, 

Tell us first of all about Mr. Rattenbury. Where was he in 
the drawing-room? Mr, Rattenbury was sitting in his armchair 
near the fireplace as if he was asleep. 

Will you take the bundle of photographs and just look at the 
first picture in the book 1 (handed book). Do you see in the picture 
the chair on which Mr. Rattenbury was sitting! Yes. 

Which of them \vas it ? The one near the fireplace. 

Did you observe how he was sitting ? He looked quite ordinary, 
sitting in the chair. 

Did you notice anything particular about any part of him? 
Yes, I noticed what I thought to be a black eye, 

Do you happen to remember which eye it was? Yes, it was the 
left eye. 

You have told us that he was sitting quite ordinarily. Would 

01 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Irene Riffs a 

you just describe that a little bit more for us 1 Well, just leaning 
back on the back of the chair as if he was asleep. 

Was he dressed in his ordinary clothes 1 Yes. 

And, seated in the chair, of course it would follow that his back 
would be towards the french windows 1 Yes. 

And his face would be facing towards the door of the room 'I 
Yes. 

Did you notice anything else on the floor or round about the 
chair? Yes, there was some blood on the floor. 

On which side? On the left-hand side as you jait in the chair. 

That was Mr. Rattenbury's left-hand side? Yes. 

Was there much blood or little blood ? Yes, much, 1 should say. 

How about Mrs. Rattenbury ; how was Mrs. Rattenbury dressed ? 
In her pyjamas. 

Anything on her feet? No. 

Anything over the pyjamas? No. 

When Mrs. Rattenbury came into your bedroom and had the 
talk with you while you were in bed, how was she dressed then ? 
In the same clothes, pyjamas. 

Without a dressing-gown? I could not say. 

What about her feet ? She had nothing on her feet. 

When you went out in the afternoon at four o'clock, do you 
recollect how Mrs. Rattenbury was dressed? In her pyjamas. 

Without a dressing-gown? Yes. 

And with nothing on her feet? I could not say about her feet 
in the afternoon. 

But otherwise is it right that in the afternoon when you went 
out Mrs. Rattenbury was in her pyjamas? Yes. 

With or without a dressing-gown? Without, I think. 

You have told us about Mrs. Rattenbury's clothing. What state 
was she in herself when you went down into the drawing-room nftor 
she had called youl In a very terrified state. 

And thereupon what was the first thing that happened after you 
got there and just took in the scene like that? I rushed to the 
phone to ring for the doctor. 

Had anybody told you to do that? Yes, Mrs. Rattenbury, 

Did you know which doctor to phone for? Yes, Dr. O'DonneH. 

Had he been attending at the house before for some ailment or 
other ? Yes. 

Where is the telephone in the house? In Mr. Rattenbury's 
bedroom. 

After telephoning, what did you do next? I fetched a bowl and 
a cloth to bathe Mr. Rattenbury's eye. 

^Where did you get those from? One from the bathroom down- 
stairs and one from the kitchen. 

Then did you bathe his eye ? Yes. 

After you had bathed his eye did you call somebody else? 
Yes. I called for Stoner. 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Irene 

Did he come when you called? Yes. 

How soon after you called? Almost immediately. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHEBTS Did you call for Stoner of your 
own accord, or did somebody suggest you should? I think Mrs. 
Rattenbury had previously called. We both called at the same time 
practically. 

Examination continued You think you both called ? Yes. 

Are you quite sure about that ? Yes. 

At all events, you did? Yes. 

And he came down almost immediately? Yes. 

How was he dressed ? As far as I can remember, in trousers and 
a shirt, I suppose. I do not know just trousers but no coat on. 

You said something about a shirt? Well, a shirt on, I suppose. 

When he came down what happened next? Then we all three 
helped to carry Mr. Rattenbury into his own bedroom. 

When you got him into the bedroom, where did you put him ? 
On his bed. 

What did you do next? I believe the doctor came then. 

Before the doctor came, did you try to undress him? Yea, 

Did you take off any particular garment that you can 
remember ? Yes, we succeeded in getting off his trousers. 

In the meantime while you were doing that, the doctor came ? 
Yes. 

When the doctor came, where was Stoner? I do not know; I 
cannot remember. 

Was he there, as far as you can recollect? Yes, he was around 
somewhere there. 

After the doctor arrived, did you then proceed to clear up some 
of the mess in the drawing-room? Yes. 

Who told you to do that? Mrs. Rattenbury. 

Did she say why? She did not want little John to see it in the 
morning. 

Did you first of all try to get rid of the blood on the carpet ? 
Yes. 

Was there any blood that you could see on anything else 
besides the carpet? On the chair. 

In the condition in which the chair is in the photograph that 
you have looked at, the chair appears to have a cover, not a loose 
cover ? It did have a loose cover. 

Had it, in fact, a cretonne covering? Tea. 

Was there blood on the cretonne covering of the chair? Yes. 

Which portion of the cretonne covering had blood on it? On 
the left arm and on the back of the seat. 

Do you mean the place where your head would rest if you were 
resting in the chair, or what do you mean by the back of the seat? 
The seat of the chair at the back. 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Irene Ri* 

Look at Exhibit 36. Is that the cretonne covering? Yes, 

What did you do to the cretonne covering? I took it oif ihe 
chair. 

When you took it off, what did you do with it?- 1 put it on the 
floor of the drawing-room near the door. 

Did you notice anything else about the cretonne covering when 
you took it off anything else besides blood? Just wet. 

Where was that? On the seat. 

When you were helping with Mr. Rattenbury, did you touch 
his clothes at all besides his trousers? Yes, afterwards. 

First of all, about the trousers, how were they wet or dry ? 
Wet. 

And his coat and waistcoat? They were blood-stained. 

Just tell me about the coat and waistcoat. Later on, as we 
shall hear, they were found in the bathroom. Do you know who 
took them into the bathroom? No. 

At all events, you did not? No. 

And finding them in the bathroom, did you try and clean them 
in some way? Yes. 

What did you do? I had some water in the bath and I put 
them in, just the tops. 

Was that done of your own accord, or had you been told to do 
that? No, quite of my own accord. 

At the time you did that, had two doctors arrived ? Yes. 

But I think no policemen had come at that time? No, 

You were there, were you not, when Mrs. Rattenbury was 
arrested ? Yes. 

The next morning some time? Yea. 

Did you continue to live at the house after Mrs. Rattenbury had 
been arrested? Yes. 

Were you there when Mr. Rattenbury was taken away in the 
ambulance ? Yes. 

After Mrs, Rattenbury had been arrested, you say you con- 
tinued living there. What about Stoner? And Stoner. 

The day we have been talking about was the Sunday and tho 
early morning of Monday, the 25th. On the next day, the Tuesday, 
did you go out anywhere with anybody? Yes. 

Who did you go with? Stoner. 

Where did you go to? To Wimborne. 

How did you go? By car Mr. Rattenbury's car. 

Having gone to Wimborne, on the way back from Wimborne 
did Stoner point anything out to you? Yes. 

What did he point out? First of all, he pointed out a house 
where he said an ex-something or other lived an ex-soldier or an 
ex-policeman, or something. 

Did he point out anything else to you 1 He pointed out another 
fcouse where his mother lived, and his own house where, he lived, 

When he pointed out the ex-police officer's house to you, did he 

64 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Irene 

say anything to you about the police officer 1 Yes, he told me how 
he could say he was out that way at half-past eight on Sunday 
evening. 

Do you know the name of the district where he pointed that 
out to you ? I believe they call it Ensbury. 

You told us that he pointed out his grandfather's house to you, 
Did he tell you about any visit or anything of that sort to his 
grandfather's house? Yes, he said that was where the workshop 
was where he fetched the mallet. 

" He " being Stoner? Yes. 

The next day, Wednesday, was that your evening out? Yes. 

Did you go out as usual? Yes. 

What did you do? I just went out on a short visit in the 
evening. 

About what time did you come home? About 10,30. 

When you got back, where was Stoner ? In his bedroom. 

Did he speak to you ? After a bit, yes. 

What did he say? Well, he was in a very peculiar state, and 
he wanted to speak to me on my own very quietly. 

Will you say that again? He was in a very peculiar state and 
he wanted to tell me something. He said how Mrs. Rattenbury 
was in jail and he had put her there, and he was going up on the 
following morning to see her and to give himself up. 

Did he give you any instructions or make any request of you as 
to what he wanted you to do in the morning ? Yes, he told me 
to be sure and not let him oversleep because he wanted to get away 
early. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS I thought you said something 
about his being in a peculiar state that night ? Yes. 

What do you mean by that? What state was he in? Well, in 
appearance, drunk. 

Examination continued He appeared to be drunk, Did you 
have any talk with him that night after he had said those things 
or not? No. 

Did you go to bed ? Yes. 

And the next morning did you get up early, at half -past six? 
Yes. 

Did you go to see if he was getting up? Yes. 

Was he? He was. 

What time did he leave the house that morning? About ten to 
seven. 

Did he come back again ?~Yes. 

About how long afterwards ? About ten minutes. 

How long did he stay in the house when he came back again ? 
Not long. 

Then did he go away again ? Yes. 

' 65 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Irene RIMS 

Did he tell you where he was going? Yes. 
What did he say? Well, he did not tell me where he was going. 
I knew because 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Because of what he had said the 
night before? Yes. 

Examination continued He did not tell you anything more? 
No. 

And he left the house the second time, and that was the last 
time you saw him until you saw him at the Police Court? Yes. 

I want to go back a little bit, because we left out of account 
some of the events of Monday, the 25th. After Mrs. Rattenbury 
had been arrested in the early morning of Monday, the 25th, or the 
morning of the 25th, were you and Stoner in the house alone 
together ? We were in the house together, yes. 

Did Stoner say anything to you about what had happened, do 
you recollect, on the Monday morning? If you cannot remember, 
just say so? No, I do not remember now. 

Look at Exhibit 3. Do you recognize that watch? Yes. 

Do you know whose it is? Mrs. Rattenbury's. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS It is a man's watch, is not it? 
How do you know it is hers? Have you seen her wearing it? I 
think it belonged to her father or grandfather, or somebody. 

Where have you seen it? On her dressing-table. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS It is not a watch, obviously, a woman 
would wear; it is a very big, heavy, man's watch. 

Mr. GROOM- JOHNSON A heavy hunter. 

Examination continued Look at Exhibit 4, which is an 
envelope. Do you know Mrs. Rattenbury's handwriting ? Yes. 

In whose handwriting is the address on that envelope? It is 
similar to Mrs. Rattenbury's, but it is not like her ordinary hand- 
writing. 

It is not like her ordinary handwriting, but it is similar to her 
handwriting ? Yes. 

Is that envelope addressed, " Mr. George Stoner, Villa Madeira, 
5 Manor Road, Bournemouth "? Yes. 

And is it postmarked " Holloway 27th March, 1935, N.7 "f 
Yes. 

Look at Exhibit 5. In whose handwriting is that? I say the 
same as the envelope. 

Does that document bear this upon it : "No. 880 : Name, A. V. 
Rattenbury, Holloway Prison, 27,3.1935. I am trying to have the 
lawyer's letter I received to-day sent to you, darling, so that you 
can make arrangements to come up with him, or make arrange- 

66 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Irene 

ments yourself with the governor. But I must see you darling. 
Please write to me. This is the third letter I have written. Hope 
you receive this. I hardly know how to write now. Let me know 
how Katz is getting along. No more now. God bless you, My 
love be with you always. Lozanne."? Yes. 

" Have you talked with Dr. O'Donnell about how Ratz is? 
Goodness, there is so much I want to know. Please ask Irene to 
give you a few bobbing pins for my hair. I think they would 
be allowed." Do you know who " Eatz ;; is? Mr. Rattenbury, 

How do you know that? It was Mrs. Rattenbury' s name for 
him. 

While you have been employed by Mr. and Mrs. Rattenbury, 
has there ever been a tent in the garden 1 A sun shelter. 

I will ask you about that in a moment, but has there ever 
been anything which had to be kept up with guy ropes- and pegs, 
or anything of that sort? No. 

Is a sun shelter put up with pegs? Yes. 

What sort of pegs ? Just little wooden ones. 

Ones, as far as you could see, that would be easily driven in? 
Yes. 

Had that sun shelter been used the previous summer when 
you were there? Yes. 

How late the previous summer had that sun shelter been up in 
the garden? It was on a very hot day we had it, but I cannot 
remember how late. 

Did you receive yourself a letter from Mrs. Rattenbury after 
she was arrested? Yes. 

Just look at that document (handed document). In whose hand- 
writing is that letter ? The same as the others. 

Mr. CASSWELL My lord, if it is proposed to put this letter 
in, in my submission, it is not evidence. We have now come to 
that piece of additional evidence which I have already drawn 
your lordship's attention to before. In my submission that is 
not evidence; it cannot be evidence either against Mrs. Rattenbury 
or against my client Stoner. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS It quite clearly cannot be evidence 
against your client, and nobody suggests it will, I gather. Why 
do you say, if it is necessary for you to argue it, it is not evidence 
against the person who wrote it? 

Mr. CASSWELL Because in my submission there is nothing in 
that that can be evidence against her in any sense of the word, and 
therefore in my submission that letter ought not to go in. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Surely it is not a reason for exclud- 
ing evidence because there is nothing whatever in it. That is for 
the jury, if it is about this case at all. 

Mr. CASSWELL My lord, if the reading of that letter is in any 
way going to prejudice cay client then it ought not to be read. 

67 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Irene Rigg 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Of course, it will not prejudice your 
client. It is not evidence against him. The letter is prima facie 
admissible in evidence against Mrs. Rattenbury if it is a letter 
in her handwriting. It may help her or be against her one does 
not know anything about it at present. Obviously it is not; no 
objection is taken. 

Mr. GROOM- JOHNSON My learned friends have got a copy of 
this. There is a great deal in it dealing with all sorts of personal 
details about wearing apparel and the like, If either of my 
learned friends want me to read the whole letter, I will do so. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Mr. O'Connor, this is a matter for 
you. Your client is concerned with it, Would you like it all 
read 9 

Mr. O'CONNOR I should like it read from the words, <A Oh 
Lord, and to-morrow Good Friday." 

Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON That is about two-thirds of the way down 
the first page? 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Members of the jury, you under- 
stand that the letter is now in evidence, therefore it will be avail- 
able for you when the time comes for you to read it. You will 
be entitled to look at all of it; there is nothing in it that anybody 
wants to keep away from you. The reason it is not being read 
is that both counsel agree that it is immaterial; it is about clothes, 
or something of that sort. It has nothing to do with this case, 
and that is all; it is not being kept away from you at all, and 
when the time comes, if you like, you can read it all if it interests 
you. 

Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON Perhaps I might just read three lines 
before that, because it will give the jury some sort of indication 
as to what sort of letter it is. It begins : " No. 880. Name : A. 
Rattenbury. Holloway Prison. 18.4.35. Darling. Was glad to 
see you looking so nice, also your M. and F. I wrote you dozens 
of letters in my mind last night, and have nothing but an empty 
box on top this morning. Will you hand to Mrs. Grieg (wardress 
at B.P.S.) to give me before I go to Court .a pair of tweezers, 
Yvettes' rouge, things to do my nails with, and liquid polish, 
light colour. I think the perfume in small bottles would last longer, 
also that grey or fawn pair of slippers (same colour you were 
wearing), in case the brown suede are not O.K. and I can in that 
case change over. The brown shoes with laces would be best. On 
second thoughts perhaps the crocodile pair would be best, Yo.u 
might tell Mrs. Grieg how much I appreciate her kindness, which 
has been most considerate. Oh darling, I hardly know how to 
write. My mind is frozen. When Manning advised me to write 
about nothing but clothes, <fec., it almost made one smile. I can 
hardly concentrate on even them. I think my macintosh would 
help. Also that red woollen dress the skirt needs a hook on or 

68 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Irene Rign 

something, and if I haven't a red belt; you might get a wide one. 
Oh Lord, and to-morrow Good Friday and I dare not think of the 
children. I even pretend I haven't any here. If one thought for 
five minutes they'd go mad. I saw nothing in the papers yesterday 
except what was cut outj I seem to see nothing but the missing 
parts. Darling, will one ever be happy again? Friday will be 
like Sunday here. Of all days in the week Sunday is the worst. 
I have to control my mind like the devil to not think of little 
John. Yes, take him out on Sundays, darling. C. was awfully 
pleased to hear from you. I cannot understand my M. not doing 
anything, can you? Messages of love are not much use to me 
now, when I wanted her help with Long, &c. However, if I feel 
awfully sad, being separated in such a ghastly way from every- 
thing one loves, S.'s feelings must take some weighing up, but 
he'll be the same and not allow himself to think. Should think 
his remorse at what he's brought down on my head, the children's, 
&c. smashed lives would drive him a raving lunatic a frightful 
responsibility to hold in one person's hands. God deliver me from 
such a hellish responsibility. I co.uldn't have courage to bear that 
pain m , my own is more than enough in a hundred lifetimes as it is. 
Two times have found my feelings very hard and bitter Oh, my 
God, appallingly so but have managed to drown these feelings 
and get one's heart soft again. Darling, God bless you, bless us 
all and get us out of this nightmare. My love to your M. and F. 
My love be with you always. Lozanne." 

Examination continued Miss Biggs, was that name 
" Lozanne " a name that was used in the house for Mrs. Ratten- 
bury? No. 

Until you saw it in this letter, had you ever addressed her 
as Lozanne ? I personally never called her Lozanne. 

Or anybody else? I do not know. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Now that letter must be made an 
Exhibit. 

(Letter put in and marked Exhibit 43.) 

Cross-examined by Mr. 0' CONNOR As the letter shows, you were 
on terms of the greatest friendship with Mrs. Rattenbury? Yes. 

You had been with her for four years, and the relations in 
the house were extremely pleasant between everybody, were they 
not? Yes. 

You were something more than a maid, a companion and help, 
and Stoner also was a member of the household ? Yes. 

During the whole of these four years that you have belonged 
to that household, have Mrs. Rattenbury's relations with her 
husband been perfectly friendly ? Yes. 

With the exception of one trivial quarrel, have you ever known 
them to have a quarrel? Just little funny affairs, but nothing* 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Irene Riggi 

Just little twopenny-ha'penny affairs? Yes. 

You have known for some time, have not you, that the relations 
between Mrs. Rattenbury and Stoner were those of a woman and 
her lover? Yes. 

There was no mystery abo.ut that either, was there? No. 

The suggestion that seems to have been made this morning is 
that that relationship had struck up within the last week or 30. 
There is no foundation for that; it had been going on for a 
considerable time ? Yes. 

And did Mrs. Rattenbury tell you that her life had been 
threatened by Stoner more than once? Yes. 

Was there an occasion 

Mr. CASSWELL My lord, I object. This apparently is evidence 
of something which was said to this lady by one of the accused. 

Mr. JUSTIOB HUMPHREYS Well? 

Mr. CASSWELL It does not appear to have been said in his 
presence, and in my submission it cannot be evidence against him, 
and there is no purpose in bringing it out at all unless it is evi- 
dence against him. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS I am not concerned with the object of 
learned counsel in bringing out something which in my view is 
clearly admissible in evidence for or against his client. I will 
tell the jury now, if you like, but I have not a shadow of doubt they 
thoroughly understand it. Members of the jury, documents written 
by " A " in the absence of " B " are never evidence against " B," 
merely because " B ' ' happens to be sitting in the dock and is being 
tried with "A." Statements made by " A " under these circum- 
stances are not admissable against " B " for the same reason. 
Therefore, when evidence of this sort is being given, whether for 
the prosecution or defence, of some statement made by one of the 
persons in^the absence of the other, you will understand that state- 
ment is evidence in regard to I do not say for or against; it does 
not matter that particular person who made the statement. It is 
not evidence against his or her co-defender. I hope that is very 
clear. I have very little doubt you have understood it already. I 
cannot fail to admit the evidence merely because it is not evidence 
against one of the two accused. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. O'CoNNOB Did you say 
that on two or three occasions she told you that he had threatened 
her life? Yes. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Not two or three. I do not think 
she said that. 

Mr. O'CoNNOB More than once. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. O'CoNNOE About how 
many times, Miss Riggs 11 cannot say, 
70 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Irene Rim 

You know we are not pinning you down to a week or so, but, 
roughly, how long before 24th March was the first time when Mrs. 
Rattenbury told you she had been threatened? Two or three 
months. 

Was there an occasion in February when you heard a quarrel 
going on between them? Yes. 

What time of day or night was that ? At night, between eleven 
and twelve. 

Where was the quarrel going on ? First, in Mrs. Rattenbury's 
bedroom, and then they went along the landing to Stoner's bedroom. 

Did you go out to see what was happening? I went into 
Stoner J s bedroom. 

What did you find was happening? Well, Stoner had hold of 
Mrs. Rattenbury. 

Of what part of Mrs. Rattenbury did he have hold? I could 
not definitely say. 

Could you see if it was the throat or the arm ? Was it a firm 
hold that he had of Mrs. Rattenbury? Yes. 

Who separated them? I separated them. 

What was her state of mind on that occasion ? She was rather 
scared. 

Used Stoner to carry a dagger about with him ? Yes, 

What kind of length was it? A blade about four inches. 

Do you remember the Monday after the 24th? That would be 
the 25th. Did Stoner take away some belongings with him? Yes. 

Among those belongings was there a bos labelled " Air pistol " ? 
Yes. 

You saw it yourself ? Yes. 

Was it the general practice that the key for the front door of 
the house used to be kept outside somewhere? Yes. 

And anybody of the household knew where to find the key? Yes, 

So that on the Sunday night which was your ordinary evening 
off, you came in and unlocked the door, and I suppose put the key 
back in the same place where you had found it? Yes. 

And I suppose Stoner knew where it was too ? Yes. 

Did Mrs. Rattenbury usually keep her bedroom window closed 
until after she was undressed? She never had the window open. 

There was a little dog, was there not, " Dinah "? Yes. 

I think the practice about the dog was it was let out for a run 
at night? Yes. 

Who used to let it out as a rule ? Mrs. Rattenbury. 

Where did they usually let it out ? Out of the f rench doors in 
the drawing-room. 

Who used to let it in again? As a r.ule, Mr. Rattenbury. 

So Mrs. Rattenbury would let it out and go off to bed, and her 
husband would let the dog in later on ? Yes. 

Mr. and Mrs. Rattenbury sometimes used to go away together 
in the motor car or by* train, did they not? Yes. 

71 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

. Irao* Riesa 

And sometimes Mrs. Rattenbury would get her husband's clothes 
ready for him for the next day ? Yes. 

Was it her habit to put out a suit or two suits for him in his 
bedroom ready for packing the next morning? Yes. 

How about money? Used you to cash cheques for Mrs. Ratten- 
bury sometimes? Yes. 

Used she to make them payable to yourself and you cashed thorn 
and handed her the money ? Yes. 

YIOU have been asked about this gold watch that you have seen 
in front of you. Had Stoner had that watch for a considerable 
time? I do not know. 

Do you remember when first you saw it in his possession, if you 
ever did? I can remember seeing him have it once, but I cannot 
say when it was. 

Once before the 24th? Yes. 

Was Mrs. Rattenbury a very highly strung and excitable ladyl 
Yes, very. 

Easily put into a state of great excitement ? Very easily. 

Sometimes she used to have a bout of a day or so when she 
drank a great deal. Was that so? Yes. 

But I do not think she was a consistent drinker, was she? No. 

But any sudden or violent happening would throw her into a 
state of very great excitement? Yes. 

Now, I want to ask you in a few questions about the night of 
the 24th. You have told us that you came in and went straight 
upstairs. There were no lights on downstairs when you came in, 
were there ? Not to my knowledge. 

If there had been any lights, you must have seen them? Yes, 

Were there no lights upstairs either? Yes. 

There were some lights upstairs? Yes. 

In which room were the lights upstairs ? The light was in the 
hall upstairs, always burning. 

That is on the landing? Yes. 

You went to your room and came out, and, as you have told us 
I want to have N it quite clear it was only once that you came 
downstairs? Yes. 

But you came out of your room twice, and on one of the 
occasions, when you came out, you saw Stoner, but you are not 
quite sure which it was ? Yes. 

How was he dressed when you saw him? In his pyjamas. 

When you saw him later on. he was in trousers and possibly a 
shirt? Yes. 

But when you first saw him on the landing he was in pyjamas? 

^ifiS. 

Whenever you came down, whether it was before seeing Stoner 
or afterwards, you looked in Mr. Rattenbury's bedroom, did you 
not? Yes. 

72 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Irene Rigffi 

Did you see there a suit of clothes put out for him in the way 
that was habitual when he was going away 1 Yes. 

Miss Riggs, had you an uneasy feeling that made you come down 
that night? I had. 

You felt uncomfortable 1 Yes. 

As I understand it, you went up to your room, and I imagine 
Stoner was still somewhere on the stairs, was he? I do not know 
where Stoner was. 

You did not see him when you went back? No. 

I suppose you must have been accustomed in the course of the 
time that Stoner had been there to find him going in and out o( 
Mrs. Rattenbury's room? Yes. 

There was nothing very remarkable in finding him on the land- 
ing. Mrs. Rattenbury shortly afterwards came into your room. 
Was she perfectly normal, so far as you could see, in every way 
when she came in to talk to you? She was just excited, a little 
excited. 

What was she excited about? About the preparations she had 
made for the Monday. 

That was about going away? Yes. 

She told you she was going off with her husband to stay with Mr. 
Jenks. Was there anything unusual about her? No. 

Did she look as though she had just had a great shock or heard 
something very terrible? Nothing at all. 

Did she look as though she had any knowledge at that time that 
her husband was down below struck with a blow upon his head? 
No. 

It was not an unusual thing for her to come and have a chat 
with you before going to bed, was it? No. 

She often used to come, I suppose? Very often. 

For a chat with you about what was happening, and on this 
occasion they were going away the next day, and she told you it was 
not quite certain whether her husband was going to drive or Stoner ? 
Yes. 

Did she tell you whether she had been telephoning to Jenks or 
not? Yes, she told me she had telephoned. 

And then subsequently she left you after five or ten minutes, or 
whatever it was, and went back, as far as you can make out, to her 
room? Yes. 

_ You said you heard someone going downstairs. Was it someone 
going down very quickly? It seemed to be, yes- 

Somebody rushing downstairs? Oh, in a hurry. 

In a hurry, and then almost immediately afterwards the cry of 
" Irene "I Yes. 

Were you down in the drawing-room within a few seconds of 
that cry? Yes. 

What was her condition then? She was in a terrified state. 

73 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Irene Rig** 

Was her condition then like the condition that you had seen a 
few moments previously in your bedroom? Nothing at all like it. 

Was she a changed woman ? A changed woman absolutely. 

Had she obviously had a sudden and terrifying experience? 
Yes. 

She had no slippers on, you have told us? No. 

And in her pyjamas, which you say, I imagine, she wore about 
the house sometimes in the afternoon? Yes. 

She told you to telephone for the doctor? Yes. 

She told Stoner after you had telephoned to hurry up in the 
car to see if he could be fetched a little quicker ? Yes. 

So that no moment should be wasted? Yes. 

Incidentally, Stoner had no collar on, had he? I do not know. 

What was she saying to her husband, or her unconscious 
husband, all the time? Well, she was raving. You could not make 
out what she was saying " Oh, poor Ratz." 

It was dreadful, and you could not make out what she said, 
but she said, " Oh, poor Ratz." Did you hear her say, " What 
have they done to you? "? " What has happened? " 

I am asking now about the time when you came down and found 
her with her husband in the drawing-room? Yes. 

You understand that that is the time I am addressing your 
mind to? Yea. 

She was very impatient with you? Yes. 

What did she think you ought to have done quicker ? She was 
telling me to hurry " Can't somebody do something? " 

How did she tolerate the time that elapsed between the telephon- 
ing for the doctor and the time he came ? Raving about the house. 

Was she drinking? Yes. 

Drinking continuously or not? She came out for some whisky, 
Yes. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Was she drinking whisky con- 
tinuously? Well, she kept going backwards and forwards for some. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. O'CONNOR Was it neat 
whisky or not? No, she had soda with it. 

Then Dr. O'Donnell finally came, and I just want to know this : 
did Stoner return to the house soon after Dr. O'Donnell arrived? 
I did not see. 

You told me a moment ago that Mrs. Rattenbury was not 
satisfied with phoning, but she sent Stoner away with the car to 
see if he could get Dr. O'Donnell quicker ? Yes. 

Did he go? Yes. 

Can you remember, did he come back with Dr. O'Donnell? 
No. 

How soon did he return after Dr. O'Donnell arrived? I did not 
see him return. 

74 



Evidence for Prosecution, 

Irene 

When did you nest see him? Did you see him at any time 
while Dr. O'Donnell was there? Yes, he was about after that all 
the time. 

What I want to be quite clear about is this : Dr. O'Donnell, 
as I think we shall find, arrived somewhere about half -past eleven? 
Yes. 

And after that Dr. Rooke came, did he not? Yes. 

And after Dr. Rooke came Mr. Rattenbury was taken away 
to the nursing home? Yes. 

During the time that Dr. O'Donnell and Dr. Rooke were there 
Stoner was in the house, was he not? Yes. 

Did he go out again so far as you know 1 Yes, he went to the 
nursing home. 

So that he was in the house while Dr. Rooke and Dr. O'Donnell 
were there. Did he take Mr. Rattenbury and the doctors to the 
nursing home? No, Mr, Rattenbury went in the ambulance. 

Did he take Dr. O'Donnell? I cannot say. I think he must 
have done. 

Can you tell me when next he came back? When Dr. O'Donnell 
came back, I think it was. 

When Dr. O'Donnell came back the second time? Yes, 

So that he was there at some period of the time while Dr. 
O'Donnell was there first, and he came back with Dr. O'Donnell 
when the doctor came back the second time? Yes. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS The second time that Dr. O'Donnell 
came, I understood, was about four o'clock in the morning. 
Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON Half-past three to four o'clock, 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. O'CONNOR What was Mrs. 
Rattenbury's condition when the police first arrived ? I think they 
arrived about two o'clock? Yes, she was still in a terrified state. 

Was she playing the radio-gramophone? No. 

Did you hear that played at all during the night? No, 

Was she " making-up " to the police? Yes. 

Trying to kiss them? Yes. 

Did one of the police officers complain to you about her trying 
to kiss them? He did not complain, but I heard about it. 

Well, he said something about it. What did he say, and, if 
you remember who it was, tell me? Well, he simply went out of the 
house, the police officer. 

Did he say anything to you about it? He said he was going to 
fetch another police officer, 

Did he say why? To stay in the house with him, I suppose. 
He did not say why. 

Do you know why that was ? I do not know why, but I suppose 
it was because of Mrs, Rattenbury. 

Because of what you had seen her trying to kiss him ? Yes. 

75 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Ifcn RififffB 

After the police went away, we know that Police-constable 
Bagwell came at first and then Mr. Mills, and then they went away 
again, did they not? Yes. 

And that left only you and Mrs. Rattenbury in the house ? Yes. 

You did not see Stoner then, did you? No. 

What did she try to do when you and she were alone in the 
house? She tried to rush out of doors. She went to different doors 
trying to get out, and I locked them and took the keys. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Do you mean the front door? 
All the doors. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. O'CONNOR All the doors 
in the house, front and back. How did you keep her in? By 
taking the keys out and sitting on her in the dining-room. 

You put her down in the dining-room chair and sat on her? 
Yes. 

When the police came back, did they begin to ask her questions? 
Yes. 

What was she talking to them about ? Was she talking anything 
that you could understand ? At times you could make out what she 
was saying, but at others you could not. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS What time are you speaking of 
now? This was before the doctors came back from the nursing 
home. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. J CONNOR Just let me get 
the sequence right, The times will be fixed by later witnesses for 
the prosecution. I think the police came first about two o'clock 
in the morning. Is that what you recollect? I recollect no time 
whatever. 

About how long were they there when they came there first? 
Well, there was somebody there all the time. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS There was a time, was there, 
when there were no police there and no doctors? Yes. 

After Mr. Rattenbury had been taken away? Yes. 

So that the only people in the house were you and Mrs. Ratten- 
bury? Yes. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. O'CONNOR As I under- 
stand it, that was the time when she was trying to get out of the 
house? Tea. 

And when you had to put her sitting down in a chair, sit on 
the top of her, and hide the keys? Yes. 

Have you any doubt about it, first of all, that there were no 
police in the house when that was happening? No doubt at alL 

76 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Irene Rigz 

And, secondly, that was after the police had been there the 
first time? After the police had been there. 

Is that after Bagwell had been there? Yes. 

If you can remember, for how long were you in this uncomfort- 
able predicament you alone with this lady in the house? About 
ten minutes to a quarter of an hour. 

That helps us a great deal. That means at the end of this 
ten minutes or quarter of an hour the police came back again? 



Who came back this time? Two or three policemen, I think. 
Was that the time when they came back the second time ? Was 
it that time you were talking about when you told me a moment 
ago that you could not understand what she was saying? Yes. 

Did they begin to ask her questions!? Yes. 

Just to make it perfectly clear, I will go back for a moment 
to this occasion when you took the keys out of the door. She was 
not trying to escape, was she? No, she was trying to get out 
after the policeman. 

When they were asking her questions on this second occasion 
when they came back, what was she talking to them about. Did 
you hear her mention her son? She mentioned Mr. Kattenbury's 
son. 

There was one question I am afraid I have missed which I 
have taken out of its order I ought to have asked you before 
a rather important one. When you came down to the drawing- 
room for the first time that evening and found Mrs. Rattenbury 
with her husband, did you notice anything about the blood that 
was on his head? I saw no blood on his hair. 

Blood on the chair? On the chair. 

And the carpet? Yes. 

In what condition was the blood? Well, not fresh. 

Thick and congealed, was it? Yes. 

Now, we have got to the second visit of the police when they 
were with you for some time. Some police were there in the 
house for the rest of the night, were they? Yes. 

After they had come back that time? Yes. 

How soon after the police had arrived for the second time did 
Dr. O'Donnell return? I cannot say. 

Can you give us an estimate? Would it be half an hour, 
three-quarters, or what? I think it was some time after. 

Did he take her upstairs? Yes. 

Did you know what he had taken her upstairs to do with her? 
To give her an injection. 

You knew that he was going to give her an injection? Yes. 

In what condition was she before he took her upstairs? In. a 
terrible condition. 

Did she stay upstairs? No. 

77 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Irene Rigga 

How long after he had taken her up did she come back again 7 
Not long. 

Five minutes? Yea. 

Was she then talking to one of the police officers again? Yes. 
Did you hear Dr. O'Donnell warn the police officers that she 
was not in a fit condition to make a statement? Yes. 
And did he take her up to bed again? Yes. 
Did you help her up that time? 1 went upstairs, yes. 

Could she get upstairs easily? No. 

Was she falling on the stairs? She was nearly asleep on the 
stairs. 

And did a police officer call out, "Look out, she is nearly 

_ '? Yes. 

A~nd then she went to bed? Yes. 

You did not go to bed, did you? No. 

We shall find out later on what time it was when ehe was 
put to bed like that, but after that did the police ask you several 
times whether she was awake? Yes. 

About how many times? Once or twice, I should say. 

Did you go with one of the police officers to her room between 
six and half -past? Yes, 

That would be after she had only been in bed for a couple 
of hours, I suppose? I do not know what time it was. 

At any rate, not more than three hours? No. 

Was that for the purpose of getting her up? To see if she 
was awake. 

Did she say anything? Yes. 

Could you make out what she was saying? No, you could not 
exactly say what she was saying. 

Did she want to be sick? Yes. 

Did she recognize you ? I do not know. 

Did she appear to recognize you? No. 

And did a police officer come into her bedroom? Yes* 

What did he say? I do not know. 

Did she say anything about not wanting to get up ? She said 
that she did not want to get up, she had not had her coffee yet. 

Do you know which officer it was ? It was a plain-clothes officer. 

The one who came in plain clothes? There were three. 

A plain-clothes officer who was, I think, Inspector Carter. He 
was very anxious to get her up, was he not? Yes. 

Was he the one who asked you two or three times to get her 
up? -Yes. 

And when you spoke to her she said that she had not had her 
coffee yet? Yes. 

Did the officer tell you to go and get her some coffee? I went 
to get her some coffee, yes. 

Were you told to do so? Perhaps you cannot remember? No 
I do not remember. 

78 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Irene 

When you brought the coffee, could she hold the saucer? No. 

Could she drink it? In a fashion. 

Had a police-matron arrived by this time? Yes. 

What part was she playing? What was she there for? She 
said she was there to get her up. 

There was yourself, Inspector Carter, and a police-matron 
trying to get this woman up 1 There were three men in the room. 

Would this be about half -past six in the morning? No, it 
was later when the police-matron arrived. 

She arrived about seven? Yes. 

Did she ask for a bath? Mrs. Rattenbury said she would have 
a bath. 

The bathroom is on the ground floor, of course? res. 

How did she get down to the ground floor? Staggered down. 

Was she helped? Yes. 

Had she to be helped back again? I think so, yes. I was 
not with her. ' 

You can only tell us, of course, what you saw. She had to 
be helped down to the bath, and she had her bath, and then 
subsequently did you hear her say whether she wanted to go 
to sleep or not? Yes, she said she wanted to go to sleep. She 
just said she wanted to go to sleep. 

After she had had her bath? Yes. 

Would you by any stretch of imagination describe her con- 
dition at that time as normal? By no means normal. 

When she was going away finally to the police station, did 
she say anything to you about what you were to tell Stoner? 
Yes. 

Just try and recollect her exact words as she was being taken 
away to the police station. What did she say? She whispered 
to me and said, *' Tell Stoner he must give me the mallet. " 

Did Stoner afterwards on some occasion or other say anything 
to you about the mallet] Did he say anything about fingerprints? 
Yes, I asked Stoner would not there be his fingerprints on the 
mallet. He said no, he wore gloves. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Would you just ask her what time 
she is speaking of when she says Stoner made this observation to 
her? Was it some days afterwards? 

Mr. O'CONNOR That, I think, was a day or so later. 

Oross"6ssamination continued by Mr. O'CoNNOB Was it the 
next day, the Monday, or the Tuesday ? About the gloves, do you 
mean? 

Yes? It was on the Tuesday that happened. 

You were in the house with Stoner for four or five days after 
the death? I was in the house. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS What I really wanted to know 

79 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Irene Riggs 

was this ; getting this message on the morning of the 25th, the 

Monday, " Tell Stoner he must give me the mallet," did you tell 

Stoner that? Yes. 

When? Just after Mrs. Rattenbury told me. 

Was it then that anything was said about fingerprints? No, 

What did he say when you gave him the message? Well, I 

realised when I asked him the police had already found the mallet? 

Gross-examination continued by Mr. 0* CONNOR The police had 
already found what ? After I had told Stoner I realised the police 
had already found the mallet, and he answered nothing. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS I still should like to know from 
you what Stoner said when you gave him Mrs. Rattenbury ; s 
message, which was, " Tell Stoner he must give me the mallet "I 
Well, he did not have a chance to answer me, because I realised 
the police had got the mallet. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. J CONNOR He did not 
have a chance to answer. Did you say, " Oh, I see the police 
have got the mallet " ? I just remembered the police had the 
mallet. 

You said that to Stoner ? Yes. 

By Mr, JUSTICE HUMPHREYS So that he did not answer? No. 

Gross-examination continued by Mr. 0' CONNOR Let us get 
this perfectly clear about what you said to Stoner about the 
mallet. The moment you had spoken to him, you added to him 
that the police had got it. Is that right? Yes. 

You never got a chance of saying that to Mrs. Rattenbury, did 
you ? No. 

So that it was not on that occasion that Stoner said anything 
about the fingerprints and gloves? No. 

That occurred on what would be the following day, on the 
Tuesday? It was the Tuesday following when he showed me the 
house that that happened. 

The conversation about the mallet occurred on the morning 
when Mra. Rattenbury was being taken to the police station ? Yes. 

And the conversation with Stoner, I suppose, took place the 
next day? Yes, that is so, 

That was Tuesday, the 26th the same day as you went to 
Wimborne, I think? Yes. 

There is just one other little matter that I want to ask you 
as to something that Stoner said to you. Did he say to you on 
some occasion after the Sunday. " I suppose you know who did 
it?" Yes. 

Was that on the Monday morning? That was on the Monday 
morning. 

80 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Irene Riggs 

What did you say to that? I answered, " Well? " 

Was anything more said? Nothing more was said. 

Was that before or after Mrs. Rattenbury was taken away? It 
was before. 

While she was either having a bath or dressing or asleep ? 
Yes. 

It was some time, you think, during that time? Yes, and there 
was something else on the Tuesday, I remember? I asked Stoner 
why he had done it. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Wait a minute. Do you want to 
put any further questions, Mr. O'Connor? 

Mr. O'CONNOR My lord, I think I will follow this up, if I 
may. 

The WITNESS I should have siaid it when he asked me another 
question. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. 0' CONNOR What was it? 
On the Tuesday I asked Stoner why he had done it. 

What did he say? He said because he had seen Mr. Rattenbury 
living with Mrs. Rattenbury in the afternoon. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Let me have this. On the 
Tuesday, was it? Yes. 

Was he sober when he said that? Quite. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. O 3 CONNOR Was that on 
the Tuesday when you had been to Wimborne? Yes. 
Was it while you were in the car? Yes. 

Cross-examined by Mr. CASSWELL You, had lived in this house- 
hold for about four years before Stoner ever came to it, had you 
not? Yes. 

Had you been in previous households? Yes. I was in one 
situation for five years and another for three. 

Then you went to Villa Madeira? Yes. 

Did you find it a very curious atmosphere there indeed ? It was 
just a little unusual. 

Had Mrs. Rattenbury been on the stage, do you know? Not 
to my knowledge. 

Did she ever tell you that she was a child impresario? The 
concert stage. 

Not, so far as you know, the actual stage? No. 

She used to do strange things, did she not, sometimes walk 
abo.ut the garden late at night in her pyjamas? No, I did not 
think it strange. 

Did she sometimes stay up all .night playing the gramophone? 
Yes. 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Irene Riggs 

Did you think that was strange? No, because I used to be 
with her. 

All night long? Yes. 

In those days you often went about with her, did you not? 
Yes. 

In the car? Yes. 

And you stayed with her at a London hotel? Yes. 

I mean as a friend? Yes. 

In fact, in the summer of 1934 you were staying with her at a 
hotel, were you not? I do not remember the year now, but I did 
stay with her. 

I suggest to you it was shortly before Stoner went to work at 
the Villa Madeira? Well, I had been away once or twice to stay 
at a hotel. 

When you went away, you went more as a sort of friend than 
companion-help ? Yes. 

Did that atop when Stoner came? Yes. 

From the time that Stoner appeared you did not go away with 
Mrs. Rattenbury so much? Not quite so much. 

Not at all, in fact? I did, yes, 

You never went away and stayed with her? I did. 

Where ? We went to Oxford. 

That was in November, was it not? I do not recollect the 
month. 

I suggest to you it was about a month after Stoner had first 
been engaged? Yes. 

You and Mrs, Rattenbury and Stoner went and stayed at the 
Randolph Hotel at Oxford? Yes. 

How many rooms did you have? Two well, three with 
Stoner 1 

Are you sure it was three ? Quite sure. 

Did Stoner and Mrs. Rattenbury then have inter-communicating 
rooms? No. 

Did you know even then, or did you know from that day 
onwards, they were sleeping together? Yes, but they did not at 
the hotel. 

You were sleeping with Mrs. Rattenbury at a hotel, were you? 
I was in a communicating room to Mrs. Rattenbury's. 

Are you quite sure that they did not sleep together on that 
night ? Quite sure. 

Was not it almost as soon as that trip was over, that Stoner 
came to live in the house, the Villa Madeira ? Yes. 

Did you approve of that? I did not mind him living in the 
house. 

You- did not mind him being in the house, but you knew he 
was always going into her bedroom, did you not? Yes. 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Irene Riggs 

Did you approve of that? Well, it was not my duty to approve 
or disapprove. It just hurt me. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHBETS How did it hurt you? Well, just 
because Mrs. Rattenbury, shall we say, hurt my feelings. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. CAS SWELL You were not 
pleased, were you perhaps naturally having been a close friend 
of Mrs. Rattenbury' s for about four years that suddenly this lad of 
seventeen should come in? No. 

You were not pleased about it, were you? Not very. 

I mean before that you used to call her " Jack," did you not? 
Call her what? 

II Jack " ? Never. 

What did you call her? I had no special name for her. I used 
to call her darling. 

You have said that Mrs. Rattenbury and her husband got on 
well together except on one occasion. On that occasion did Mrs. 
Rattenbury have a black eye? She had an injured eye, yes. 

Had Dr, O'Donnell to be sent for? Yes. 

Had she bitten her husband's arm very badly? Yes. I do 
not know whether she bit him, but she did something to his arm. 

Because he was a quiet old gentleman, was he not? He seemed 
to 'be, yes. 

Did he not show you his arm and show how it was bitten? He 
showed me his arm. 

It was bitten, was it not? I do not know. 

And he said it was done by Mrs. Rattenbury, did he not? Yes. 

Dr. O'Donnell will perhaps be able to tell us the date. He was 
called in, was he not? Yes. 

Am I right in thinking that Mrs. Rattenbury kept to her room 
for about three days after that? Yes. 

And would not speak to her husband? I do not know about 
not speaking to her husband. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHBBTS This was at the same time when 
Mr. Rattenbury said that his wife had bitten his arm she had a 
black eye? Yes. 

Did she say he had given her the black eye? No, I do not 
remember. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. CAS SWELL Have you any 
idea about what time of the year that happened? About a year 
or more ago, I should think. 

Do you know a Mrs. Price who is the owner of the Villa 
Madeira? Yes. 

Do you remember her coming round to lunch one day and 
being asked to dinner,, and when she arrived you said something 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Irene Rir 

funny had happened to Mrs. Rattenbury? Do you remember that 
about October, 1933 1 I can remember telling Mrs. Price that Mrs. 
Rattenbury was not at all well and could not see her. 

Something suddenly had happened between tea and dinner, had 
it not? I do not remember. 

Just try. Mrs. Price was there in October, was she not? She 
was often there 1 Yes. 

She was there to lunch and tea one day, and coming back to 
dinner when she was met by you to say that something had happened 
to Mrs. Rattenbury? I do not remember her coming back to late 
dinner, 

Do you remember her having dinner alone with Dr. O'Donnell 
at the Villa Madeira because Mrs. Rattenbury was not there? I 
remember that night. 

Where was Mrs. Rattenbury? In bed. 

Had she had a sudden attack 1 Yes. 

What sort of attack? I do not quite know what it was. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS I do not quite know what you want 
me to take out of this. All I have got is on a day which may 
have been in October, 1933, Mrs, Rattenbury had some sort 
of attack, apparently, because she was in bed. Is that all? 

Mr. CAS SWELL No, my lord. What I am suggesting to this 
witness is that Mrs. Price had been there already that day most of 
the afternoon. 

The WITNESS Yes, but I do not recall it, 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. CASSWBLL Do you recall 
a day when Mrs. Price was there to lunch, and then came back to 
dinner and found that something had happened to Mrs. Ratten- 
bury? If you do not, say so? No. I remember her coming to 
lunch, but not coming back again. 

Was that the day you were thinking of when something 
happened to Mrs. Rattenbury and she had a sudden attack ? Yes. 

Let me see if I can suggest to you what these sort of attacks 
were that suddenly she became very excited and used to run 
about a good deal? Yes. 

And that would last for a bit of time and then she perhaps 
would get drowsy and go to sleep? She would always be in bed, 
yes. 

What I am suggesting is that every now and again she had 
sudden attacks and got very excited? Yes. 

And ran about ? Yes. 

Just as if she had taken something? Yes. 

And then at the end of the attack she would go to bed, would 
she? Yes. 

And that used to happen, say, two or three times a month, did it 
not? Not quite so often as that. 

84 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Irene Riggs 

Do you remember when there was a chef there called Davis 1 
No, I do not remember him. He was not there in my time. It 
was before my time. 

Before Stoner came, I suppose there was a chauffeur, was there? 
No. 

Who drove the car then? Mr. RattenBury, 

Did anybody else come and drive it sometimes 1 ? No. 

You have evidently given a statement to someone, have not you 
a very long statement? All I said in my statement was what T 
have given to the police. 

Do you mean to say that you have given your statement to no 
one but the police? Yes. 

Are you sure of that that you gave a statement to no one 
except the police? I have made no written statement to anyone. 

Have you made a statement by words to somebody else than 
the police? Yes, of my own accord, but I cannot say when. 

You say you left the Villa Madeira that afternoon about four 
to half-past? About four o'clock. 

Mrs. Rattenbury was in her bedroom? Yes, 

Had she only got her pyjamas on? Her pyjamas were a three- 
piece suit, rather a pyjama suit top and a long Yvonne three- 
quarter coat. 

Was that what she used to go about in ? Yes, frequently. 

It did not mean she was ready for bed ? Not necessarily. 

Could you tell us whether she had on anything underneath or 
not ? I could not say. 

This was March,, was not it 24th March? Yes. 

Was it usual for her to go about in her pyjamas in the house 
during the day? Quite usual. 

When you saw her at night, was she in the same pyjamas? Yes. 

You came back, as I understand, about 10.15 at night? Yes. 

You let yourself in, went upstairs, and then went downstairs. 
You said you were going to the kitchen. What were you going to 
the kitchen for? For something to eat, I expect. I do not 
remember. 

But you never got to the kitchen, did you ? No, 

You were stopped, as I understand, because you heard some- 
what unusual breathing? Yes. 

And you listened to see if you could find where it came from ? 
Yes. 

Then you went into Mr. Rattenbury J s room and switched on 
the light? Yes. 

Was that a usual thing for you to do? No, unusual. 

Why did you do it then? Because I had a premonition that 
something was wrong. 

Had you ever done it before? No. 

When you turned up the light you saw that he was not in bed, 
,and the bed had not been slept in, I suppose? Yes. 

85 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Irene Riga 

And the drawing-room door was open 1 I do not know. 

Do you not know whether it was open or shut? I cannot say. 

Did you not listen at HI Oh, the inside drawing-room door 
was open a little. 

Having had a premonition, and having heard this unusual 
breathing, you did what you had never done before, you went into 
your master's room and turned up the light? It was not necessary 
to go right in. I looked round the door. 

Why did you not go into the drawing-room ? Because I thought 
he was asleep in the chair, and I did not want to disturb him. 

Did your premonition stop then? You thought it was all right? 
~-Yes, it relieved me a bit. 

Did you go after seeing that there was no one in his room 
and listen at the drawing-room door ? Well, I could hear, I just 
wanted to see which room the breathing was coming from. They 
are quite close together and I could not tell which it was. 

But having turned up the light you were quite sure it was not 
coming from his bedroom. Did you go into the kitchen then ? No. 

Were you quite satisfied that all was well? Yes. 

You forgot all about what you were going to have to eat and 
went upstairs? I did, 

As I understand it, it was after that that you came out of your 
room again and saw Stoner in his pyjamas? Yes. 

He had not been wearing his pyjamas all day, had he? No. 

And I suppose you had been making a certain amount of noise 
downstairs, had you not? No, I was very quiet. 

When you first saw him, was he just coming out of Mrs. Ratten- 
bury'e room? I do not know where he came from. 

Did you suspect that he had come from there? No, I did not 
give it a thought. 

It would not be unusual, would it? No. 

He was very fond of Mrs. Rattenbury, was he not? Yes, 

Had you ever heard him have any sort of row with Mr. Ratten- 
bury? No. 

Was there ever any suggestion that Mr. Rattenbury knew what 
was going on between his wife and this lad ? Not that I know of. 

He slept downstairs, did he not? Yes. 

So far as you know, Mr. Rattenbury was making no trouble 
and there was no difficulty ? No. 

Am I right in saying that Stoner used to play Patience with 
him? I do not know. 

He used to go in and sit with the old gentleman sometimes, 
did he not ? He may have done that when I was not there. 

It was suggested by learned counsel for the prosecution that 
Stoner disappeared off the map almost. As a matter of fact, after 
you had gone down and found Mrs. Rattenbury in this very excited 
state both of you called for Stoner? Yes. 

And it did not take long for him to come down, did it? No. 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Irene Rigzs 

And by that time he had got trousers on, at any rate? Yes. 
By that time you had phoned to Dr. O'Donnell? The first 
time, yes. 

And Stoner went off in the car to try and hurry him up ? Yes. 
I think I understood you to say that you did not quite realise 
how soon Stoner had come back. I suggest to you that he came 
back very shortly after having arrived at Dr. O'Donnell's. Find- 
ing that the doctor had left, Stoner came back soon after him 1 It 
could not have been long after. 

Then it is quite clear, is it not, that when Dr. O'Donnell made 
his examination Stoner took him to the Strathallen Nursing Home 1 
I do not know about that. 

It is suggested to you that perhaps Dr. O'Donnell went in the 
ambulance and Stoner followed on, but you do not know? No, I 
would not be sure. 

When Dr. O'Donnell came back there was an astonishing state 
of affairs going on 3 was there not? Yes. 

The radio-gramophone blaring full on, was it not? Not to my 
knowledge. 

Do you say it was never played that night? I did not hear it. 

I suggest when Dr. O'Donnell came back from the Strathallen 

Nursing Home that the gramophone was blaring away playing 

" Dark Haired Mary," or something like that? I did not hear it. 

After Stoner had brought the doctor back, or appeared soon 

after the doctor came from Strathallen, Stoner was there all the 

rest of the night, was he not? Yes. 

Were not you and he in the kitchen ? We may have been. 
Cannot you remember ? No. We were all round the house that 
night. 

But there is no suggestion Stoner was keeping away; he was 
there just as much as you, was he not? Yes. 

With regard to the question of the mallet, do you remember a 
Mrs. Almond being there as a nursemaid 1 She was there up to a 
day or two before Stoner went, was she not? Yes. 

During her time, whatever it was, a canvas sun shelter was 
put up, was it not? I expect it would be. 

That was about the 24th or 25th of September, and was it not 
a great nuisance keeping the pegs in ? They would slip out, yes. 
At that time there was no mallet on the premises, was there? 
No. 

Mrs. Rattenbury was the sort of lady who would put up a 
. shelter in March, when others would not put it up till June ? No, 
she would only put it up on very hot days when the little boy 
could sleep out. 

Was the 24th of March quite a hot day? I do not know; I 
cannot remember. 

You cannot remember that morning, perhaps, but you went out 

87 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Irene Riggs 

in the afternoon. I suggest it was one of the first hot days this 
year? I do not know; I cannot remember. 

You have told us, of course, something which is not evidence 
against Stoner, but which was brought out by my learned friend 
Mr. O'Connor for some reason or other he himself knows, and 
that is, as Mrs. Rattenbury went out of the door, when Stoner was 
not there, she whispered to you something about, " Tell Stoner 
to give me the mallet JJ ? Yes. 

" He must give me the mallet "? Yes. 

And you say also that she was not herself at the time? Not 
quite herself, no. 

She was going away to the police station, was she not? Yes. 

How could anyone bring a mallet to the police station? I 
suppose she wanted it before she left. 

She wanted it before she left, but it was not until she was 
being taken away by the police-matron and the police officer 
that she told you to tell him he must give her the mallet? It was 
when the police were outside the room. 

When the police-matron was outside the room? When she was 
getting ready; she was not quite ready to go. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS There was no policeman actually 
in charge of her at that moment? No, nobody knew she said it 
to me. 

Gross-e&amination continued by Mr. CASSWBLL Did you tell 
the police about it? No. 

Why not? I did not remember it at the time I was giving my 
statement. 

Afterwards you said to Stoner something about fingerprints 
on the mallet? Yes. 

Did you know at that time that he had brought that mallet, 
had collected it at his grandmother's and brought it back in the 
car with him? Yes. 

Did you know also that fingerprints would last for a long time 7 
I heard they would. 

So when you asked him about fingerprints he may have thought 
of that time, may not he? I do not know. 

Did he wear gloves as a chauffeur? Yes. I do not know 
whether he always wore them, but he had them. 

Just one other thing. Mrs. Rattenbury came into your room 
that night. It was quite a usual thing for her to do, I under- 
stand?- -Yes. 

You had then been in the house for about a quarter of an hour 
or twenty minutes? About that. 

Were you asleep? No. 

Are you quite sure of that? Quite sure. 

88 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Irene Rigga 

Then the next thing you heard was somebody rushing down- 
stairs in a hurry? Yes. 

Did you hear a sudden yell a groan before those steps went 
downstairs 2 No. 

Re-exainined by Mr, GROOM- JOHNSON Go back to the occasion 
when you say you went along to Stoner'a bedroom to see what was 
happening between Mrs. Rattenbury and Stoner, the occasion when 
they had started quarrelling in Mrs. Rattenbury J s bedroom, You 
told my learned friend, Mr. O'Connor, that when you got there 
Stoner had hold of Mrs. Rattenbury? Yes. 

Can you recollect on that occasion how the two of them were 
dressed? She had her kimono on, a dressing-gown. I think he 
was fully dressed in his outdoor clothes. 

Just tell me about this three-piece suit. Are there pyjama 
trousers ? Yes. 

And a pyjama coat? Top coat, yes. 

What is the third garment? Like a jumper arrangement not 
a blouse, but like a jumper arrangement. 

Like the little thing you see ladies wearing on the beach some- 
times, a little short coat? No 3 quite a long coat. 

With sleeves or without sleeves? Without sleeves. 

When you switched up the light in Mr. Rattenbury 's bedroom, 
you saw a suit of clothes on the bed? No, hanging up in the 
wardrobe, as far as I can remember. 

Is that a place where suits of clothes were frequently hung up 
in Mr. Rattenbury's bedroom? Only when he was going away. 

Did they often go away? Mr. Rattenbury went more often by 
himself. 

Can you give us any sort of idea when Mr. and Mrs. Ratten- 
bury had been away together last before the day when they were 
supposed to be going, which would have been 26th March? No, 
I cannot recall that. 

Had they been away together since Stoner had come to live at 
the house ? I do not think so. 

Before that, used they to go together frequently or not ? Well, 
not very frequently. 

And you thought when Mrs. Rattenbury came into your room 
she was a little excited ? Yes. 

As if there was something a little unusual, do you mean, or 
what 7 -Yes. 

You do not mean excited by drink or anything of that sort? 
No. 

(At this stage the articles of clothing referred to as 
the three-piece suit were exhibited to the jury 
and marked Exhibit 44.) 

You knew Mrs. Rattenbury pretty well. Can you give the 



Rattenbary and Stoner. 

Irene RIEE 

members of the jury any assistance as to whether she usually, when 
she wore those three articles of clothing, wore anything under- 
neath them? Yes, sometimes she wore a little woolly \est, and 
perhaps a brassiere as well. 

\Vas that in the daytime? Yes. 

On this .night when you found her in the drawing-room with 
Mr. Rattenbury late at night, as far as you co.uld see had shu got 
anything on underneath those garments or not'/ Well, one could 
not tell. 

According to your recollection, did tStoner come back between 
the time when he went off to bring the doctor back and the time 
when Dr. O'Donnell returned to the house about a quarter to four? 
He was back, I feel sure, before Dr. O'Donneil. 

I want you to tell us, one way or the other, whether you observed 
Mrs. Rattenbury have any conversation with Stoner '4 No, 1 do 
not recollect. 

According to you there was a time when there were neither 
police officers nor doctors in the house. Does that mean that 
there were police officers outside the house, or that they had gone 
away altogether? Well, outside the house somewhere, 1 suppose. 

And it was during that time you say that she tried to get 
out of the house? Yes. 

You said she was trying to get after the policeman? Yes. 

What policeman do you mean? The one policeman that was 
left in the house. 

Did you hear her have a conversation with the policeman the 
first time that he arrived? Yes. 

Did you hear her say anything to the policeman about a sum 
of money? No. 

You think that at the end of ten minutes or a quarter of 
an hour the policeman came back again? Yes. 

You told us that Stoner had said to you that he had seen Mr. 
and Mrs, Rattenbury live together that Sunday afternoon? Yes. 

Did he tell you anything more about it than that 1 No. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS You have told the jury that Mrs. 
Rattenbury was sometimes excitable, and sometimes drank too much 
alcohol ? Yes. 

And that she had drinking bouts. How long had that lasted 
all the time you were there? Yes. 

About how often did she have drinking bouts? Sometimes she 
would go a month or so without having one. 

And sometimes it was more often than once a month ? Yes. 

You also told the jury that at times she had what you call 
sudden attacks .when she got very excitable and ran about, and 
afterwards used to go to bed and sleep. Were those occasions when 
she had been drinking? Yes, more or less. 

Did it seem to you that her condition at those times was due 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Irene Riggt 

to drink 5! Yes, I always thought so. 

That is what it seemed like. Did you ever know her take 
drugs. Things like cocaine, morphia, and heroin? No, not to my 
knowledge. 

With regard to Stoner, you have told us that after this tragedy 
on at least one occasion he was drunk. Had you ever seen him 
drunk before the 24th of March, or under the influence of drink 
at all? No. 

No sign of it at all ? No-. 

On the night of the 24th, or the early morning of the 25th, 
did you notice him as being under the influence of drink? No. 

When did you first notice him as being in that condition? 
On the Wednesday before he went away. 

He was arrested on the Thursday, was he not? Yes. 

That was the day before his arrest? That was the only time 
I ever saw him drunk. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS I think I am right in saying that 
somebody else says on the night of the 24th or the morning of 
the 25th he was in that condition. It may be that I am mistaken. 

Mr. O'CoNNOB No, my lord. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Then that is the only time, on the 
Wednesday, that you saw him under the influence of drink t Yes. 

All the time you have known him? Yes. 

You knew Mr. Rattenbury quite well? Yes. 

Was he an invalid? No. 

Was he a healthy man of sixty-seven ? As far as I know, yes. 

He was able to walk about? Yes. 

Did he seem to enjoy himself? Yes. 

Did he go about like an ordinary person and take enjoyment 
in things? He did not go away so much, but he enjoyed himself 
in a quiet way. 

He was not confined to his room or the house, or anything of 
that sort? No. 

I want you to tell me the date as near as you can when Mrs. 
Rattenbury told you that Stoner threatened her life. When did 
ahe tell you that? I have really no idea. 

No idea of what? I could not possibly to a day. 

You cannot give me a date? No. 

You see Stoner only came there in September, did he not? 
Yea. 

And this happened in March. He was only there about six 
months? Well, we will say about two months ago from March. 

That was after Christmas ? Yes. 

Did she tell you that oice or more than once? More than once. 

And at that time you knew they were living in an improper 
way together, misbehaving? Yes. 

91 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Irene Riggi 

Did you ask her what the explanation was? I told her not 
to be so silly. 

You did not take it very seriously? Not very not till after- 
wards. 

Further cross-examined by Mr. CAS a WELL About the box which 
was labelled " Air pistol, " did you ever see a pistol in that box? 
No. 

So all you saw was a box going out with " Air pistol " on 
the outside of it? Yes. 

Had you any reason to believe there was a pistol in it? None 
whatever. 

The Court adjourned. 



92 



Second Day Tuesday, 28th May, 1935. 

WILLIAM GEORGE BUDDEN, examined by Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON I 
am a police officer in the Hampshire Constabulary, stationed at 
Bournemouth. On the evening of 2nd April, 1935, acting on 
instructions, I went to No. 5 Manor Road, Bournemouth, accom- 
panied by a solicitor representing the solicitor who was acting 
for the accused Btoner. I made a search of the premises. Among 
other articles I found a hypodermic syringe. I produce it. I 
found it in a small washstand cupboard which apparently had 
been used as a medicine chest. It was in the bedroom occupied 
by Mrs. Rattenbury (marked Exhibit 46). I also found a writing 
pad in Mr. Rattenbury's room, and a sketch in Mrs. Rattenbury's 
room upstairs (sketch marked Exhibit 46). 

Cross-examined by Mr. CASSWELL In that case containing the 
hypodermic syringe there are needles as well, are there not? Yes. 

And, as regards the sketch, was that found in the chest of 
drawers together with some other drawings? Yes, 

In Mrs. Rattenbury's room? Yes. 

It is a sketch, is it not, ol' a boy sitting up in bed holding 
up a sixpence? Yes. 

And there is a man leaning over him threatening him with 
a stick, and it looks aa if the man has put a long hypodermic 
needle right through his arm? That is so. 

IRENE RIGQS further cross-examined by Mr. CASSWELL (Shown 
the hypodermic syringe). We have been told that that was found 
in something in the nature of a medicine chest in Mrs. Ratten- 
bury 'e room. Have you seen that before? Yes. 

Where did you see it? It has always been at the very back 
of the cupboard, and was never used, to my knowledge. 

Have you never seen it used? Never. 

In that cupboard were there medicines that were used? Yes, 
for everybody to use. 

You mean to say that no attempt was made to hide that 
case J No, no attempt at all. 

Was the case shut (referring to the case containing the hypo- 
dermic syringe)? Yes, the lid was on. 

Did you know what was inside it? I guessed what was inside 
it. I always have known. 

How did you know? You do not use a cupboard and not 
know what is in a thing. 

Will you repeat that? I said, as a rule, ^ as you turn out 
a cupboard, you cannot very well pick up a thing and not know 
what it is. 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Irene Rigga 

When you pick it up, you naturally look in it to see what 
it is? I do not remember looking inside. 

You knew what was inside? Yes. 

(Shown sketch). Have you seen that before? I cannot say 
I have actually seen it before, but there are lots in the house 
similar. 

Do you mean there are lots of drawings of that sort of subject ? 
Yes all weird. 

What? All the boy's drawings were weird. 

Whose boy's drawings? Mrs. Rattenbury'a boy's drawings. 

Do you know what boy did them? The elder boy, Christopher. 

He is the one about thirteen or fourteen, is he not? Yes. 

Can you remember any other drawing which had a hypodermic 
syringe in it? No, but it is just the type of thing he naturally 
would do. 

It may be that you know. If so, tell me why Christopher should 
know about a hypodermic syringe ? I have no idea. He has been 
in a nursing home. 

Lately? Not so very long ago. 

Further cross-examined by Mr. O'CoNNOB You told us that the 
little case used to stand at the back of the medicine chest. Did 
you ever see it out on Mrs. Rattenbury ; s table, or anywhere about 
the room? No. 

Did you ever see any indication that it had been opened or 
used during the whole of the four years you were with Mrs. Ratten- 
bury? Never. 

Christopher was the boy who was at school. Do you know 
whether he has had any injections or not while he has been at 
home? Yes, he did have injections in his leg. He had a bad leg 
and I believe he had injections for his leg. 

Who gave those injections? I cannot recall. 

About how long ago was that? About a year or two ago. 

Dr. WILLIAM O'DONNELL, examined by Mr. HAWKB I am 
a registered medical practitioner in practice in Bournemouth, 
I had attended Mrs. Rattenbury and her children for two and a 
half years. On Sunday, 24th March, I got a telephone call at half- 
past eleven at night, and in consequence of that call I went to 
Villa Madeira, 5 Manor Road. I arrived there at 11.45. The door 
was open. When I got in, I went to Mr. Rattenbury's room, which 
was down at the end of the passage the hall. I walked straight 
down into the room. I think there was only Mrs. Rattenbury there 
when I first went in. The deceased, of course, was there. He was 
lying on his bed. Mr. Rattenbury was partially dressed. He had 
some bedclothes over him, and in removing his coat and waistcoat 
I found that his trousers had been removed. There was a blood- 
stained towel wrapped round his head. His head was bathed in 

94 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr William O'Donnell 

blood, which was clotted and clinging to his hair, and I could 
not make any proper examination there. He was unconscious 
laboured breathing. His left eye was very contused, purple, and 
swollen. His pulse was slow and very irregular, 

You told us Mrs. Rattenbury was there? Yes. 

What condition was she in? Very excited and inclined to be 
intoxicated. 

Had she got any materials for becoming inclined to be intoxi- 
cated with her? Yes. 

What had she got? She had a whisky and soda in a glass in 
her hand. 

How was she dressed 1 ! In her pyjamas without any shoes. 

Had she anything over the pyjamas? No. 

Did you speak to her when you saw her? I did. 

What did you say? I asked her what had happened. 

What did she say? She said, " Look at him, look at the blood; 
somebody has finished him." There is a surgeon in Bournemouth 
called Mr. Rooke, and I thought it was a case for Mr. Rooke's 
immediate attention. I rang him up on the phone and told him 
I was sending my taxi on for him, would he come at once. That 
would be about five minutes to twelve. Meanwhile I helped to 
remove Mr. Rattenbury's coat and waistcoat. The taxi-driver and 
Mrs. Rattenbury were then present. After we had taken off his 
coat and waistcoat, I went out of the bedroom into the sitting-room 
or drawing-room. When I went into the drawing-room there were 
Irene Riggs and Stoner there and Mrs. Rattenbnry who had come 
out of the bedroom with me. I think Stoner came in when I was 
there. I could not say whether Stoner remained in the drawing- 
room for any length of time. At any rate, I am sure that he came 
back into the drawing-room after I was there. There was some 
conversation between Mrs. Rattenbury and the maid while I was in 
the drawing-room. Mrs. Rattenbury was telling the maid to wash 
up the blood which was on the carpet. Most of it appeared to have 
been washed up before I got there. The blood on the carpet was by 
the side of his chair. That is the armchair by the fireside. There 
was also blood on the chair. I think the cover of the chair was 
removed while I was there. 

Did you discuss with Mrs. Rattenbury, or did she discuss with 
you, anything that had happened that evening before you arrived? 
Yes. She told me that she and Mr. Rattenbury had had a very 
happy evening, that they had arranged to go down to Dorset the 
following day. Monday, to stay with a Mr. and Mrs. Jenks, and 
that Mr. Rattenbury was very happy at going away on the Monday. 

Did she draw your attention to anything in the room while she 
was talking to you? She did. She told me that he had given her 
a passage in a book to read about suicide. 

A passage about suicide? Yes. She tried to show me the book 
which was then on the piano in the sitting-room, and I told her I 

95 



Ratten bury and Stoner. 

Dr William O'Donnell 

did not wish to see it, that I had not the time to bother about it 
(shown Exhibit 6). That appears to me to be the book. I did not 
read the title. It is a similar sort of book to the one I saw. The 
book was shut when she was drawing my attention to it. She 
opened it, and then I said, " I do not wish to see it," and she 
closed it and put it back on the piano. 

Did she say how she came to find Mr. Rattenbury in the con- 
dition that she found him in? Yes. She told me that she had 
gone to bed early. I do not think she mentioned the time. She 
told me that she had been aroused by, I understood her to say, a 
cry or a noise, but I would not swear which it was, and that she 
had run downstairs. 

Did she say what she found? That she found him lying back 
in his chair, with a pool of blood on the carpet by his chair, and 
his artificial teeth had fallen out on the carpet. 

You telephoned to Mr. Rooke? Yes. 

What time did he arrive? I should think it was about twelve 
o'clock, or five minutes past twelve. I would not be certain. 

When he came I think you made a superficial examination of 
Mr. Rattenbury. You could not do much at the time? Yes. We 
were waiting for the ambulance to come. Mr. Rooke went away to 
get his instruments ready and I waited and went in the ambulance. 

When you got to the nursing home, was Mr. Rattenbury taken 
straight to the operating theatre? He was. 

And was he there examined by Mr. Rooke and yourself? Yes. 
Mr. Rooke shaved his head. It was necessary to do that to find 
out the damage that wag done. That was because of the matted 
blood and hair about the head. 

Did you notice after his head was shaved that he had injuries 
on hi? head ? I noticed that he had three distinct separate wounds 
on the back of his head. 

We will get the details of them from Mr. Rooke, but where were 
they, so that the jury may know? There was one on the left side, 
there was another not quite in the median line, and another a 
little farther over on the right. 

Were they serious injuries ? Yes. 

When you saw those injuries, did you telephone to the police? 
Yes, I could see it was external violence and not due to accident. 

Later, after you had telephoned to the police, did you return 
to Manor Road ? I did. Stoner drove me back in Mr. Rattenbury^ 
car at 3.30 a.m. 

Do you know how Stoner got to the nursing home? Yes, he was 
to have driven me to the nursing home, and after I was finished 
at the nursing home he was to have driven me back, but as he did 
not know where the nursing home was he followed the ambulance 
in Mr. Rattenbury's car and waited outside while we were inside* 

At what time did you get back to 5 Manor Road? About 3.30 
a.m. 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr William O'Donnell 

Did you see Mrs. Rattenbury ? I did. 

How was she dressed then 1 ? She was dressed in her pyjamas, 
with a light dressing-gown or a dressing- jacket and shoes slippers 
or shoes. 

What sort of condition was she in by this time? Very 
intoxicated. 

Did you give her any treatment? I did. I sent her up to bed 
and gave her half a grain of morphia. 

Hypodermically ? Yes, in the arm. 

After you put her in bed, what did you do 1 I went downstairs. 

Did Mrs. Rattenbury stay in bed? No. I went downstairs to 

the kitchen and I was talking to Riggs and Stoner to see if I 

could find out anything, and then after, I should say at a guess 

five minutes, I returned to the sitting-room. 

When you got back to the sitting-room, who was in there? I 
found Mrs. Rattenbury had left her bed and come down to the 
sitting-room. 

Was anybody else there? Yes, P.-C. Bagwell, I think, and 
Inspector Mills. 

Was any conversation going on? Yes. 

Who was speaking? Inspector Mills. 

Who was he speaking to ? To Mrs. Rattenbury. 

What did he say? He asked her, " Do you suspect anybody? " 
Her reply was, "Yes." He asked, " Whom do you suspect?" 
atfd she replied, " I think his son did it." 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS At this time she was, as I under- 
stand your evidence, unquestionably very much under the influence 
of drink? Yes. 

Actually intoxicated? Actually intoxicated, and at this time 
she had had one half -grain of morphia. 

Examination continued Did Inspector Mills say anything when 
she said that? Inspector Mills asked, " What age is his son? " 
and her reply was, " Thirty-six years of age." Inspector Mills 
then asked her, " Where is his son? " and she said, " I do not 
know." 

Did you take any part in this conversation? I did. 

What did you say? I asked Inspector Mills if he had cautioned 
this lady, and his reply was, " No." I then said, " Look at her 
condition. She is full of whisky and I have given her a large dose 
of morphia. She is not fit to make a statement to you or to anybody 
die." 

Did you then put her to bed ? I sent her up to bed. 

And this time she stayed there and you left the house ? I left 
the house after that. 

Cross-examined by Mr. O'CoraoR Can you give me as nearly as 
H 97 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Dr William O'Donnell 

possible the time of the last conversation you had with Inspector 
Mills? It must have been before four o'clock in the morning. 

So that it was at four o'clock in the morning that you had 
come to the definite conclusion that she was not fit to make a 
statement to him or anybody else in the world? Yes. 

You have known Mrs. Rattenbury for a number of years, I 
think since 1932, two and a half years? Yes. 

During that time you have attended her continuously, I think, 
as her medical attendant? Yes. 

And you have had the advantage of seeing X-ray photographs 
of her chest and lungs, and so on ? Yes, I had them done. 

Because she has suffered, I think, chronically from chest trouble 1 
Yes. 

During the whole of that period have you ever seen the slightest 
sign or indication of any description that she was a drug addict? 
I have not. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS When you gave her the hypodermic 
injection, did you notice any sign that she was in the habit of 
using a hypodermic syringe? No, 

Cross-examination continued by Mr, 0* CONNOR You have 
examined her body on several occasions? Many occasions. 

Have you ever seen any sign or suggestion of any sort that 
there were marks of a hypodermic needle? Never. 

Did you attend Mr. Rattenbury sometimes? No. 

Did yot tear'^tNiny time that he had threatened suicide? He 
told me that he hid'^any times thought of committing suicide. 

Was there one /Occasion at least on which Mrs. Rattenbury 
told yo,u that her husoand had left the house threatening suicide? 
Yes, <rn,9th Juljrf 1934. 

WaS'jgher <Us5r$Bsed on account of those threats? No. 

She waTliot distressed? I will not say that, but I think it 
requires explanation, 

What is the explanation? I was sent for on the evening of 
9th July at twelve o'clock midnight, and I found Mrs. Rattenbury 
very distressed. I fo.und her with a black eye and a cut over her 
eye. I asked her what was the matter, and she told me that Mr. 
Rattenbury had struck her. I dressed her eye and sent her to bed 
and gave her a quarter of a grain of morphia to quieten her so 
that I might be able to get out to see if I could find Mr. 
Rattenbury. 

You told my friend she was very distressed ? Yes. 

I think you thought sufficient of what she reported of the threat 
to go and see the police about it? I hunted about the cliffs myself 
with Miss Riggs and could not find him. 

Was that the only occasion, except the night of the 24th, on 
which you have injected a drug into Mrs. Rattenbury? Tee. 




George Percy Stoner 



, Union 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr William O'Donnell 

That was a quarter of a grain of morphia? Yes. 

What was her reaction to that injection? She had about eight 
hours' sleep after it. 

Did you see her after she woke up? I saw her the next 
morning. 

What was her condition then? Peaceful and calm. 

Clear-headed? Yes. 

After eight hours of sleep? Yes. 

Speaking generally, how would you describe her temperament? 
Uneven. 

Excitable? Yes, very. 

As her medical attendant, and one who has had every oppor- 
tunity of seeing her temperament at close quarters, do you think 
it would be possible for Mrs. Rattenbury to take part in a crime 
of this description and then act perfectly peacefully and normally 
with her maid? I do not consider it possible. 

Have you ever seen her in a condition as excited as she was on 
that night? No. 

What were her habits as regards drink? Occasionally she had 
too much. 

She was not a chronic drunkard, but had bouts? No occa- 
sionally. 

Did she tell you that Stoner was her lover 1 She did. 

What date was that? 12th February, 1935. 

Did she tell you of anything thft 'Stoner had tried to do to her ? 
Yes. 

What did she say? She told me that he had tried to strangle 
her. 

That was on this occasion of 12th February, 1935? Yes. 

Did she tell you anything that Stoner had told her about what 
he did? She told me that she believed he must be taking drugs. 
She told me that he had gone to London that day she believed to 
try and procure more drugs. 

In consequence of what she told you, did you see Stoner? 
She asked me to see Stoner, and, if possible, find out what drugs 
he was taking, and to warn him of the effects. 

Did you see Stoner the following day? I did. 

What did you say to him, and what did he say to you? I 
told him that I was informed that it was believed that he was 
taking drugs, and asked him if he would tell me what drug he 
was taking, and he said, " Yes, cocaine." 

Did you ask him where he had picked up this habit? I asked 
him where he had learned this habit, and he told me that he had 
found some cocaine at home, that he had sampled it, that it gave 
him pleasant sensations, and that he had carried on with it when 
he could get it. 

Did you warn him? I did, and offered him help if he wished 
to give it up. 

99 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Dr William O'Doonell 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHBEYS Did he accept your help? No, my 
lord. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. O'CONNOR Going back to 
the night of the 24th, you arrived in a taxi, and, as I understand 
your evidence, the taxi-driver helped you to get off Mr. Ratten - 
bury's coat and waistcoat? Yes. Mr. Rattenbury was heavy, and 
I sent out for the taxi-driver to assist me. 

When you arrived there, Stoner was not in the house } he, as 
we know, had gone to fetch you, and you had come separately? 
He had called at my house while I was away. I ascertained that 
later. 

About how long after you arrived did Stoner turn up ? I could 
not say exactly. 

Was it many minutes 1 Not very long. 

You, I suppose, were at that time chiefly concerned about Mr. 
Rattenbury? Yes. 

There has been some suggestion that it would not appear that 
his injuries were very serious when you first saw him. What view 
did you form of his injuries when you saw him? I thought of the 
possibility of his having fallen and hit his head against the piano, 
or some article of furniture. 

Was it quite clear that his injuries were serious? Well, he 
was unconscious. Yes, I looked on it as serious. 

When Stoner arrived, had he got a collar on? No, I do not 
think he had. 

How was he dressed with the exception of not having a collar 
on? He appeared to me to have a grey suit on. 

It was not that he had just got a pair of trousers on and a 
shirt? No. 

Mrs. Rattenbury, I imagine, was in the way ; she was not 
much help to you in the examination you were making? No. 

She was intoxicated? Yes. 

Was she playing the gramophone? Not when I arrived there 
at first. 

Was she in a wildly excited condition? Yes. 

Was she talking coherently? She was talking about poor Ratz, 
her husband, and she talked about sending him to a nursing home 
coherently, yes. 

Had she a bottle or a glass of whisky in her hand? Yes, a 
tumbler of whisky and soda. 

And was she drinking it from time to time? Yes. 

More or less continuously? I will not say continuously. She 
had one while I was there. 

Mr. Rattenbury was in the bedroom when you got there? He 
was there when I got there. 

About 'how long were you in the house before Mr. Rooke came ? 
I should imagine less than a quarter of an hour. 

100 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr William O'Donnell 

During that time was Mrs, Rattenbury in und out of the room ? 
Yes. 

She was not in the room all the time? No. 

After Stoner arrived, she was not in the room all the time, 
nor was Stoner? I do not think so. 

So that there was an interval before Mr. Rooke arrived when 
neither Stoner nor Mrs. Rattenbury wasi under your observation? 
That is possible, yes. 

How long was Mr, Rooke in the house before you went with 
the ambulance to the nursing home? Mr. Rooke went before the 
ambulance took Mr. Rattenbury away. I should think it would 
be about half an hour, 

So that there was half an hour during which, I suppose, 
you and Mr. Rooke were in the bedroom with Mr. Rattenbury? 
No, I do not think Mr. Rooke was half an hour in the bedroom. 

Until the time that Mr. Rooke left to go and get his instruments, 
were you and he in the bedroom together with Mr. Rattenburv? 
Yes. 

Was anybody else there during that time? Mrs. Rattenbury 
was there. 

All the time, or in and out? All the time, I think. 

You were chiefly preoccupied, naturally, with your patient? 
Yes. 

During that time did you see Stoner? I saw him pass down 
the passage, and I saw him pass out of the sitting-room. 

I do not suppose you could s.wear to it that Mrs. Rattenbury 
was not in and out of the room? No, I could not swear to it. 

Then the arrangement was, I think, that you should go in the 
ambulance and that Stoner should follow in the house car for 
the purpose of bringing you back? That was my own direction. 

To whom did you give that direction, to Mrs. Rattenbury or 
to Stoner ? To Mrs, Rattenbury and Stoner. They were both there 
at the time. 

Mr. Rooke went away. You do not happen to remember the 
time you arrived at the nursing home, do you? Before one, I 
think it was. 

How far away is it? About half a mile. 

You went in the ambulance so it would be a matter of a 
minute or so. It must have been a few minutes before one when 
you left the house? Something like that. I would not swear. 

And you remained at the nursing home until a minute or so 
before half -past three? No, 3.15. I noticed the clock on the stairs 
as I was leaving the nursing home. 

At 3.15 or thereabouts at the nursing home did you and Mr. 
Rooke see Inspector Mills? Yes. 

On the stairs, I think? No, in the ante-room to the operating 
room. 

101 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Dr William O'Donnell 

Did he say anything to you about Mrs. Rattenbury's condition T 
Yes. 

What did he say? He said, "I have been down to Manor 
Road. That woman ia drunk." 

That was just as you were going back. You went back with 
Stoner? I went back with Stoner, 

Do you remember when you got to the car outside the nursing 
home whether Stoner was awake or asleep? He was awake. He 
opened the door for me. 

When you got back to Manor Road at half-past three, describe 
what Mrs. Rattenbury 's condition then was ? She was very excited. 

Was the gramophone playing? The radio-gram. She was 
running about in the passage when I arrived there. 

Running about? Yes, staggering about. I counted four 
officers in the house, and she was running about amongst them 
from one room to another. 

Talking to them sensibly, or incoherently, or what? I tried 
to explain to her the condition her husband was in, and she 
could not take it in. 

And it was that that drove you to the conclusion that the 
only right thing to do was to give 'her half a grain of morphia 
and put her to bed? I thought the only thing to do to stop 
the exhibition was to give her half a grain of morphia and send 
her to bed. 

Half a grain is a very substantial dose? Yes. 

A dose which is likely to be effective, and which would persist 
for some considerable period of time? It should do. 

Would you be surprised in the case of Mrs. Rattenbury to 
know that the effect persisted for as long as three or four days? 
No, I would not. 

She came downstairs after you had given her this dose? Guess- 
ing the period, five minutes afterwards. I cannot say when she 
came down. I was not there. 

You had gone into the kitchen, and you found her when you 
came back into the room? I found her there about five minutes 
afterwards. 

And that was the last you saw of her? Yes, after she went 
to bed for the second time : I saw her up to bed. 

Was she able to walk easily? No, she had to be led up the 
stairs. 

Did you see her the next day? I did, at one o'clock in the 
afternoon. 

Tell my lord and the jury in what condition you found her 
at one o'clock on the following afternoon? She could not walk, 
she had to be supported into the room where I was, a police- 
matron supporting her on the one side and Inspector Carter on 
the other. 

102 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr William O'Donnell 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Where did you see her? At the 
police station. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. 0' CONNOR Did she try 
to vomit? She could not stand; she tottered when she tried to 
stand. 

Did she sway about? She swayed about. 

Was she trying to vomit? She tried to be sick. 

What were her reactions to light? The only thing I noticed 
was her pupils were contracted. 

At that time, one o'clock on the following afternoon, was she 
dazed? Yes. 

Was she in a fit condition then to make a statement? I do 
not consider so. 

What do you say as to her fitness to make a statement at six, 
seven, or eight o'clock that morning previous to your examination '4 
I should not place any credence on a statement given under 
such circumstances. 

By any stretch of imagination, from what you saw of her at 
3.30 and at one o'clock the following day, would it be true to 
say that at six o'clock that morning she could have been normal? 
I should say no. 

Or at eight o'clock? No. 

Speaking generally, Mrs. Rattenbury was devoted to her 
children, was she not? Most devoted. 

There was nothing at all out of keeping with her general 
attitude that she should desire to clean up the blood? She said 
that night, " Wash it up, wash it up. I cannot have little John 
frightened by the sight of blood." 

That seems to be the one thing that she was quite clear about? 
Yes. 

Cross-examined by Mr. CASSWELL May I take it that you 
were not only medical adviser but a friend of Mrs. Rattenbury? 
Yes. 

Did you visit the villa socially as well as professionally? I 
might have visited there once or twice socially, but always pro- 
fessionally. 

I notice, on looking through Mrs. Rattenbury's banking account 
from the early summer until February, your fees came to BO. 
Is that so? My fees were more than that. 

How much would that work out a visit? It all depends on 
the circumstances. If I had to give an anaesthetic, as I did 
on four occasions, the fee would be larger than if I paid an 
ordinary visit. 

How much would it be when you had to give her the anaesthetic 
on four occasions? A guinea each time. 

And on the other occasions how much? Half a guinea. 

103 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Dr WiUiam O'Donneil 

Do you mean to say that you saw her about seventy times? 
I saw her over a hundred times. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS When you said, " I saw her over 
a hundred times," what period were you thinking of? From 
August, 1932, until March, 1935. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. CAS SWELL My note is that 
between 20th March, 1934, and February, 1935, your fees came 
to fifty guineas in less than a year 1 It is possible. 

May I take it that in less than a year you had been there about 
seventy times at least? Yes, it is quite likely. 

I understand you to say definitely that you never treated Mrs. 
Rattenbury for drug taking? I did say so, and I say it again now. 

Was she an extraordinarily excitable woman ? Hi times, yes. 

I am not suggesting by these questions that in a fit of excite- 
ment she did what she is accused of, but I want to know what sort 
of atmosphere there was in that house. To what did you put down 
these sudden fits of excitement of hers? Sometimes to too much 
alcohol. 

What did she drink, do you know? Cocktails. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHBBTS You had better let him finish his 
sentence. You said sometimes to too much alcohol? Other times, 
if there was any upset or if she was cross. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. CAS SWELL So when she 
was upset or when she was cross she sent for you, did she? If it 
was necessary she did so. If I may put it this way, on the 
occasions that I saw her it was necessary for me to do so. 

Simply because of an upset or crossness ? Yes. 

It was nearly all temperament, was not it? No, illness. 

What illness? The condition that I attended her for since 1932 
was one of pulmonary tuberculosis. 

Did you send her away anywhere for treatment? I sent her to 
a nursing home. 

When was that? In 1932. 

For how long? A fortnight, for observation, 

Did she ever go away for treatment after that? I cannot say. 
I do not know. 

Not under your orders ? Not under my orders. 

Was the result of that observation that she had tuberculosis or 
not? That she had. I had her X-rayed, and the X-ray report 
definitely diagnosed the case. 

What treatment did you order ? Open air. 

Simply that? Yes. 

When you went round on those four occasions and anaesthetised 
her, what was that for? Tubercular glands. 

104 



\& 

'Dnim.llX* VI I 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr William O'Donnell 

What? Suppurating glands. I had Mr. Rooke in in consulta- 
tion to operate. 

Did you sometimes have to go round there in order to put her 
to bed in a state of excitement ? No, never, except the morning of 
the happening. 

What about the occasion of the black eye. Had you forgotten 
that? Yes, I had forgotten that. 

On that occasion did you see Mr. Rattenbury? No, not that 
night. I saw him the next day. 

Did he show signs of injury? No, not that he showed to me. 

Did you examine him? No. I apologised to him for having 
notified the police, and he said that was all right. 

Here we have a house where there was a very excitable woman 
who was often up very late at night, was she not? I could not 
say that. I do not know. 

Drinking to excess on occasion? I will not say to excess. I 
put it she had perhaps more than would be judicious. I do not 
call that to excess. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Being a person suffering from 
tuberculosis, did you recommend any alcohol to her? No, I did 
not. 

Did you advise her about alcohol? I tried to. 

What was your advice 1 My advice was to lead a quite life and 
not to drink. 

At all? Practically to give it up. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. CAS SWELL With regard 
to Stoner, a boy of seventeen and a half, was that the sort of 
atmosphere that you would put a boy in ? Well, it is very easy to 
be wise after the event, I should say no to that question. 

If you had had the regulation of that household, you would not 
have had him sleep there in that household, would you? I could 
not say no to that. 

No, you could not say no, I agree. Then the time comes in 
February when you are asked to speak to him because you are told 
that he takes cocaine? Yes. Of course, he told me 

She told you ? No, she did not tell me he took cocaine. 

She told you she thought he was a drug addict 1 Yes. 

That is a rather terrible thing to be told about a lad just over 
eighteen, is it not? Yes. 

Because one does not know where it will lead, does one? 
Decidedly. 

Have you had much experience of cocaine poisoning? No, I 
am thankful to say I have not. 

I noticed that when you were asked before whether you knew 
what the cocaine bug was you said you had never heard of it? Yes, 
I have yet to learn of, or see, the cocaine bug mentioned in a text- 
book. 

105 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

Dr William O'Donnell 

Have you read the book of Henderson and Gillespie? No. 

Are they not two of the foremost experts on psychiatry? Yes, 
that may be. 

You know of Dr. Gillespie, do you not? No. 

Do you know of Dr. Henderson? No. 

So I may take it that you have never read that book? I have 
said so. 

Do you know of Dr. Simmons's " Method of Pharmacology ;J 1 
No. 

Do you know of " Morphinism and Narcomania " by Carruthers? 
No. 

Do you know what narcomania means ? No. 

Do you know Dr. Weatherly of Bournemouth? I do. 

He is a man of considerable experience, is he not? In mental 
diseases, yes. 

Would you agree with him if he says that what is known as the 
cocaine bug is one of the most difficult symptoms of cocaine poison- 
ing? I said I do not know anything about the cocaine bug, but 
if you will allow me to ask you if it is that which is mentioned in 
some textbooks as a condition of worms existing under the skin, I 
will answer the question. If you will accept that as cocaine bug, 
I will answer the question. The condition of worms under the 
skin, I understand, exists in chronic cases of cocainism. 

And is typical? After prolonged taking and in large doses, 

What is it due to? It is due to the abuse of cocaine. 

Is it due to a hallucination of touch ? It is due to nerve sensa- 
tions, from the abuse of cocaine. 

Do you suggest that there is anything there under the skin ? 
No. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHBBTS I am not sure that I follow this. 
Is this what you have told us, that people who take cocaine in 
large quantities for a prolonged period may get a sensation as 
though there were worms under their skin ? Yes. 

And, in fact, there are no worms under the skin? No. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. CAS SWELL Do you know 
enough about it to say yes to this 1 Does cocaine lead to hallucina- 
tions of hearing? I do not know. 

Here in February last a man of just eighteen was brought to 
you? No, he was not. 

You were asked to speak to him, and the suggestion was that he 
was already a drug addict? That he was taking drugs. 

Yes, taking drugs, if you please, and, as a result, was becoming 
violent? Yea. 

You yourself had very little experience of cocaine or drugs? 
That is right the abuse of them. 

106 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr William O'Donnell 

What symptoms did you look for? I did not look for any 
symptoms. 

But you asked him, and he said he had been taking cocaine 1 
Yes. 

Did you believe him? Well, I suppose I did. 

Did you ask him whether he had been up to London to try and 
get it? He told me he had been up to London the day before to 
get it. 

Did he say whether he had managed to get it or not? No, he 
said he had failed. 

Did he tell you where the money had come from to get it? He 
did not. 

Did you ask him? No. 

So the steps you took on his behalf were to warn him of the 
dangers of cocaine ? That is so. 

Do you think it is much good to warn a cocaine taker of the 
dangers of cocaine ? No, I do not think it is. 

What report did you make to Mrs, Rattenbury about this? 
I reported to Mrs. Rattenbury that he had told me that he was 
taking cocaine. 

Is that all? I told her where he had suggested he had got it 
from to commence with. I told her I had warned him of the evil 
effects and implored him to give it up. 

He suggested to you that he had first found it at his home? 
Yes. 

A working man's home is not the sort of place where you would 
expect to find cocaine, is it? No. 

Did you ask him where he had got it since ? No. He told me 
he had been up to London the day before I saw him. 

And that he had managed to get it? No, that he did not 
manage to get it. 

He did get it somewhere? I cannot say. 

You did not ask him that? No, 

You only knew that he had an abortive visit to London which 
did not result in his getting any? I asked him if he would tell me 
where he attempted to get it in London, and he refused. 

I suppose you would agree with me that if you have someone 
who is taking cocaine you do not want to give him any more money 
than you can help, do you ? Naturally, if you want to try to stop 
him. 

Cocaine dealers, or whatever you like to call them, are rather 
inclined to charge heavily, are they not? I cannot say. I have 
never dealt with them. 

That is a very fair answer. Did you ask him how much he 
took in a dose? No. 

Did you ask him how often he managed to get it? No. 

I find from your statements that you were first telephoned on 

107 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Dr William O'Donnell 

the night of 24th March, according to you, at 11.30 p,m 1 
Absolutely at 11.30 p.m. I looked at my watch. 

And when telephoned to from that house you generally went in 
a hurry? Yes, when I got night calls. 

At any rate, you did it extraordinarily quickly that night. You 
got there at about 11.45? That is right. 

When you got there at 11.45 was Stoner downstairs, do you 
know ? No, Stoner in the meanwhile, while I was on the road, had 

fne to fetch me in a car. He came into the sitting-room while 
was there. 

Had you any special reason to observe him? No. 

Did you take any notice of him ? No. 

Did you speak to him at all until he followed you and the 
ambulance in the car? Yes; I think I gave him a pound note to 
pay for my taxi. 

Otherwise, did you speak to him at all? No. 

Mr. Rooke, I think, placed the time of the examination in the 
operating theatre at 12.45 a.m. Would you agree to that? It is 
only a guess if I say yes. 

That would mean just about an hour after you first arrived at 
the Villa Madeira you were at the nursing home in the operating 
theatre? I think that would be very fair. 

As far as you know, Stoner had followed you in the car there ? 
Yes. 

When you came out of the nursing home, there was Stoner still 
outside waiting ? Yes. 

Did you have any conversation with him as you came back from 
the nursing home to the Villa Madeira? No. 

You were probably thinking of anything else but Stoner, were 
you not? I had a conversation with him. I think he said the 
second gear of his car would not work. 

Did he seem agitated in any way? No. 

Or apprehensive? No. 

Then, no doubt, your principal interest was to see that this 
excited and drunken woman was got to bed as soon as possible? 
Yes. 

You gave her a fairly large dose of morphia? I did. 

Half a grain ? Half a grain, yes, not the usual dose. 

But, in spite of that, you know that in about two hours she was 
up and about again? So I have been told. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS She was up and about in five minutes. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. CASSWBLL Yes, in five 
minutes. Would it have time to take effect in five minutes? 
Within five to ten minutes morphia will begin to have effect, if 
left quiet. 

108 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr William O'Donnell 

Was it Stoner who carried her up to bed ? She was not carried 
up. 

On the first occasion? No, I did it myself. 

Then she was up again for a short time and you managed to get 
her back to bed again 1 Yes. 

That was the time I was talking of. It must have been about 
half -past four, must it not 1 ? Approximately; possibly before that. 

Because, apparently the next time I have is 4.30, when Inspector 
Carter was at the villa? I do not know anything about that. I 
had gone. 

By 6 a.m. they had got this unfortunate woman up again? So 
I was told. 

That was two and a half hours after? So I was told. 

If she woke then, the half grain of morphia did not have very 
much effect? I cannot say. I do not know. It should have taken 
effect. 

Do you think, by any chance, she took some sort of drugs with- 
out your knowing it? I do not think so, As a matter of fact, she 
was averse to any treatment which she considered dope. 

Of course, the normal way to take cocaine is by snuffing, is it 
not? So I understand. 

That would leave no mark? No, unless you get a mark on the 
septum of the nose. You do get a perforation of the septum of 
the nose from cocaine taking. 

That would be on the inside of the nostril? Yes. 

You would not notice it unless you were told about it? No, 
unless you examined for it. 

Re-examined by Mr. CROOM-JOHNSON Does what you have had 
to eat or drink before you are given morphia have any effect or the 
effect of the drug itself on the patient? I do not think so. 

Assuming that this lady had drunk sufficient to become intoxi- 
cated, would the effect of half a grain of morphia pass off more 
quickly than if she was quite sober when the drug was administered 1 
I do not think so, 

Does the drug react on different constitutions in different ways? 
Yes. 

Is coffee a thing which might assist in getting rid, temporarily 
at all events, of the effect of a drug? Coffee, walking about, and 
a bath. 

A hot bath? Yes. 

Would that, temporarily at all events, get rid of the effect? It 
would all help, 

I have used the expression " temporarily. " Do you think it 
helps temporarily or permanently to get rid of the effect of morphia? 
I am thinking of poisonous doses when I make these statements. 
It will help in that way, and possibly save a life, 

109 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Dr William O'DonncIl 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHBBTS I do not think counsel is talking 
about poisonous doses. 

Re-examination continued I am talking about the dose you 
actually gave? Yes, it probably would have. 

Coffee would assist by itself? Yes. 

Walking about would assist by itself ? Yes. 

A hot bath would assist by itself 1 Yes. 

By " assist/' do you mean would assist in causing the effect of 
the drug to disappear more quickly? No. 

What do you mean? I mean it would keep them wakeful. 

Is the effect of morphia, as a rule, to make you sleepy? Yea. 

What other effect does morphia have on the patient besides 
making the patient sleepy? It makes them fuddled and muddled 
and not able to think properly. 

Not able to tell a coherent story? Yes. 

You appreciate what I mean by a coherent story I just want 
you to understand what I mean a story which is coherent as a 
whole, not a story which is merely untrue ? Yes. 

Unable to tell a coherent story? The brain will not function 
properly. 

So that you would not expect anybody under the influence of 
morphia to be able to tell a coherent story at all? No, I should 
think not. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Would you like to place any 
reliance at all on any statement made by a person under the 
influence of morphia? No, my lord. 

He-examination continued Mrs. Rattenbury was saying on the 
occasion when you gave her half a grain of morphia that her 
husband had struck her? I did not give her half a grain that 
night. 

A quarter of a grain? Yes. 

That her husband had struck her? Yes. 

Did she tell you anything more about the circumstance? of 
the striking than that? No. 

What sort of ^man was Mr. Rattenbury? Was he a quiet manT 
A very charming, quiet man. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Did you go into the matter any 
more than that when you were told this very charming, quiet 
man had given his wife a black eye? Did you ask how it came 
about? No. 

Did it surprise you? It did. I saw Mr. Rattenbury the next 
day. 

Re-examination continued You have told us what happened 
after, and I will not ask you about it, but will you just teli 
110 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr William O'Donnell 

my lord and the members of the jury this : up to that time had 
you seen any signs of any violent disposition on the part of Mr. 
Rattenbury? No. 

Now let us see about Stoner and the cocaine. When was it, 
as nearly as you can recollect, that Mrs. Rattenbury came to you 
and told you that she believed that Stoner was taking drugs 1 On 
12th February she asked me to go and see her, and she told me. 

How soon after 12th February was it that you saw him ? Was 
it the same day 1 No, the next day. 

Did he tell you how long before that it was that he had experi- 
mented with cocaine and found it gave him a pleasant sensation? 
No. 

I gather you did not inquire? I did not inquire. 

He told you that he had been in London the previous day, 
was it? That day the day that I saw Mrs. Rattenbury first, on 
12th February. 

And had failed to get it? Yes. 

Did you make any inquiry from him as to whether he had 
made other journeys to London or not? No. 

Did he tell you whether he had made other journeys to London 
to get cocaine? No, 

Did you make any inquiry as to how often he had taken cocaine 
since he had discovered that it gave him a pleasant sensation ? No. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Or as to how long it had been 
going on? No, my lord. 

Does that mean that you did not gather from him whether 
it was a matter of a week or of five years? That is so. I did 
not ask him. 

Re-examination continued You did not ask him? I was only 
asked to find out what drug he was taking and to warn him 
about it. 

I gather you have no experience of people who are taking 
cocaine? No. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Surely your experience is enough, 
is it not, to know that it is important to find out whether a 
person has been taking it for a week or for five years? He 
appeared perfectly normal to me that day. I had no reason to 
believe he was taking large doses of cocaine. 

Or that he had been taking it for some time? I could not 
say that he had taken any from what I saw that day. 

He said he had ? Tea, he told me he had. 

He said he had been up to London to get it the day before? 
Yes. 

Did you understand from him whether that was the first time 
that he had been up to London to get it, or not? No, I did 
not ask him. 

Ill 



Dr William O'Dnnll 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 



continued You just said he seemed to you to 
be perfectly normal? That day, yes, 

How often had you seen Stoner to talk to before 13th February, 
1935? Three or four times. 

He went there first, we were told, in September, 1934? I 
cannot say. 

You may take it that date is approximately the time when 
his employment there commenced. Had you seen him at ail last 
year to talk to during the three months of last year? I may 
have seen him once or twice when I called at the house. 

As far as you could see, on 13th February, 1935, did he 
appear to be a normal young man of his age? Yes. 

Did you observe while you were talking to him any sign 
that he needed any medical attention, or anything of that sort? 
No. 

You do not know the usual method of people who do take 
cocaine. Is it sometimes prescribed? Yes. 

Very small doses? Very small doses. 

The only other thing I want to ask you about is this, You 
were asked whether Stoner did not carry Mrs. Rattenbury up to 
bed? Yes. 

And your answer was, " I did it myself "? I did not carry 
her up. I took her arm. 

Was that on the first occasion when she went up? Yes. 

Then she came down in a few minutes, five minutes or some- 
thing? I do not know. I went into the room in about five minutes 
and found her there. When she came down to the room I cannot 
say, 

When she came down, between the first time that she had been 
taken up to bed and the second time, did she seem less mistress 
of herself than when she went up? Getting less. 

Was the drug taking effect? Yes. 

ALFRED BASIL ROOEE, examined by Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON I am 
a medical practitioner and I practise as a surgeon at IS Wharn- 
diffe Road, Boscombe. On the night of 24th March, 1935, I 
received a telephone message from Dr. O'Donnell. It was exactly 
five minutes to twelve. As the result of that telephone message I 
went at once to 5 Manor Road, Bournemouth, and I got there 
approximately a few minutes after twelve. On entering the house, 
I went to a bedroom on the ground floor and I there saw Mr. 
Rattenbury. He was lying on his side on the bed. He -was 
incompletely dressed. I made a cursory examination sufficient 
to show that he was seriously injured. It was entirely impossible 
at the time to make a thorough examination. In the first place, 
his hair was matted over his head, there was a mass of blood 
and hair which made it impossible to see the exact nature of 
the wounds. In the second place, there was such a disturbance 

112 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Alfred B. Rooke 

going on in the room that it was almost impossible to concentrate 
on the patient. Mrs. Rattenbury and Dr. O'Donnell were in the 
room. My impression was that Mrs. Rattenbury was there when 
I went in, or she came in immediately after I got there. I 
saw enough to see that he had wounds in the head. Mrs. Rattenbury 
was pressing attentions upon the patient to such an extent that 
I was unable to make an examination. She was trying to remove 
some of his clothing; she was calling for scissors to cut his fihirt 
off. She was making remarks which struck me as being utterly 
incoherent. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHBETS She was in a very abnormal state, 
I suppose? She was in a very abnormal state; but may I just 
add the conditions appeared to me to be such that one would 
expect an abnormal state in a person of her temperament. I had 
seen her before. 

Was she naturally an excitable woman 1 Yes, and in conditions 
which justified great excitement. 

Examination continued I came to the conclusion that the 
only thing to do was to have the patient removed to a nursing 
home. There was a telephone in the room and we made arrange- 
ments to have him taken away immediately. I went home to get 
my instruments and go to the nursing home. I examined Mr. 
Rattenbury in the operating theatre at the nursing home at about 
a quarter to one in the early morning of Monday, the 25th. As 
I shaved away the hair and got the blood cleaned up, I was able 
to see the nature and the character of the wounds. There were 
three wounds on the head. One wound was above the ear on 
the left-hand side. That one had irregular jagged edges. It 
would be, I should say, three to three and a half inches long. 
The bone was exposed in the deep parts of the wound, and there 
was an obvious depressed fracture of the skull. I was able to 
feel where the bone had been driven into the brain. The next 
wound would be approximately in the midline at the back of the 
head. That was a lacerated wound that reached down to the bone. 
I was unable to feel any fracture beneath it. The third one was 
similar to the second, situated a little further round to the right. 
I was not able to feel any fracture there. 

I think you removed the largest piece of bone from the place 
where the depressed fracture was? I first of all cleaned up the 
wound, excised the edges, and when I had sewn up all the wounds 
I turned the flap down to expose the skull beneath, because I 
knew there was pretty extensive bone condition there. 

Having examined the wounds, did you form an opinion as to 
how they were caused? I formed the opinion that the injuries 
had been caused by three separate blows with some blunt instru- 
ment. 

i 113 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Alfred B. Rook* 

Did you form an opinion as to whether the blows had been 
struck from the front or from behind? From behind, 

(Shown Exhibit 7) Did you examine that mallet for the first 
time at the police station ? Yes. 

How long after this examination at the nursing home? I 
cannot say, but between my operation and Mr. Rattenbury's death, 
I did not take a note of the exact date. 

Somewhere between 25th March and the time when he died on 
Thursday, the 28th? Yes. 

Were the wounds that you saw in your opinion capable of being 
administered by such an instrument as that? They were. 

When you examined that mallet, did you observe anything 
particular about it? I observed on one aide of it some hairs, and 
a fragment of dried skin. 

Did you examine the hairs? I noticed that they resembled 
Mr. Rattenbury's hair in texture and in colour. 

Did you observe anything about the eyelids of the patient that 
night? I did. I observed that the left eye was completely bunged 
up, to such an extent that one was unable to separate the lids 
to examine the condition of the pupil beneath. 

From your general examination can you tell how that condi- 
tion was brought about? Well, haemorrhage proceeding from 
behind forward into the orbit. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Not a separate blow? No, it 
was simply the haemorrhage passing forward inside the skull into 
the orbit. 

Examination continued Inside the skull into the orbit of the 
eye ? Yes. 

Not external is the point that I am ,upon? Not external. I 
was present during part of the post-mortem examination of the 
head which was made by Dr. Harold Simmons on 28th March, 
I was not present at the death, but I saw him the evening before 
and shortly after. The deceased died on 28th March about half- 
past eight in the morning. 

Look at these photographs Nos. 6 and 7. Are those photo- 
graphs showing a part of the cap of the skull of the late Mr. 
Rattenbury? They are. 

Were you present when Dr. Harold Simmons removed the 
skull cap, as it is called? I was. 

I observe from looking at No. 6 that it shows a large orifice 
in the skull cap ? -Yes. 

Is that the one which proceeds from the wound over the left 
ear? Yes. (At this stage the witness indicated on the photo- 
graph the part representing the true wound and explained that 
the rest of it was his enlargement of it.) 

Was the wound enlarged for the purpose of the post-mortem 1 

114 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Alfred B. Rooke 

No, the wound was enlarged for the purpose of getting fragments 
of bone from the brain. 

(At this stage the jury were handed the mallet for 
the purpose of feeling the weight of it.) 

Are yo,u able to say yourself what the cause of death was? 
Yes, the cause of death was injury to the brain which produced 
oedema of the brain and death. I removed a portion of the hair 
of the head of the deceased immediately after his death at the 
nursing home and handed it either to Inspector Carter or to 
Inspector Mills, I cannot be certain which, 

Cross-examined by Mr. O'CONNOR The most serious injury was 
the one to the left of the skull 1 That was the most serious. 

So far as one could apportion the cause of death, that prob- 
ably was the wound which caused HI The injuries associated 
with that wound were, in my opinion, the cause of death. 

It was a very formidable wound, was it not? A very formid- 
able wound. 

And must have been caused by a blow delivered with such 
force that it caused contrecoup on the other side of the brain ? 
Yes. 

Which presupposes great violence on the left? Not very great 
violence. 

A considerable degree of violence? Yes. 

Mrs. Rattenbury was a patient of yours, was she not? No. I 
had attended her in consultation with Dr. O'Donnell on four 
occasions. 

That is what I mean. You have, 'in fact, been present on 
three occasions when she has had an anaesthetic? Yes. 

And noticed the way in which she received an anaesthetic? Yes, 

Have you ever seen any signs about her that she was a drug 
taker? It never occurred to me. I had never looked for signs 
of it. 

Did she take an anaesthetic in the way that you expect a drug 
taker to take it? She was exceedingly excitable; she took it badly. 

Was that the way in which a person who sometimes took too 
much alcohol might? Yes, 

It was consistent with a person who abused the use of alcohol ? 
Yes, or sometimes with a merely highly excitable temperament you 
get it. 

You told us she had a highly excitable temperament. There 
was an answer of yours which I did not quite catch, but I think 
it amounted to this, that her condition when you arrived at the 
house showed just the degree of reaction that you would have 
expected from somebody of her temperament in the circumstances? 

X15 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Alfred B, Rooke 

It showed a degree that I thought was compatible with the 
ordinary reactions of a very highly strung person. 

To the horrible situation in which she found herself ? Exactly. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS In association with alcohol? 
Yes. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. O'CONNOR She was a 
perfect nuisance when you arrived? She made an examination 
impossible. 

Making utterly incoherent remarks, but nevertheless solicitous 
for her husband's welfare? So solicitous that when I was making 
futile efforts to conduct my examination I said, " If you want to 
kill him you are going the right way to do it. Do let me get 
near him and attend to him." 

JEmbarras de richessel Exactly. 

You have no doubt it was done with the sincere wish to help ? 
I cannot speak for the sincerity. There was the apparent wish to 
help. 

Your main preoccupation was with your patient? It was my 
entire preoccupation. 

I suppose you could not say whether she was in the room all 
the time or not? I believe that she was. 

Do you not remember the time when she was not there? I do 
not remember being able to carry on an examination without 
disturbance. 

How long were you there altogether? We know that yo,u left 
before the ambulance arrived ? I cannot tell you exactly how long 
I was there, but I can give you the approximate times. I started 
from my house a few minutes after the receipt of the telephone 
call. The taxi would take three or four minutes to get there, so 
I should be there some time between seven or ten minutes of the 
receipt of the call. I returned to my house at half-past twelve. 

That fixes the time? I was there about twenty minutes* 

Just a few minutes before half-past twelve you left the house f 
Exactly. 

And you arrived at the nursing home? The nursing home is 
exactly opposite my house. 

You simply picked up your bag and walked into the nursing 
home 1 Exactly. 

Did you arrive at the nursing home before or after the ambu- 
lance? Before. I waited there a quarter of an hour. 

You did tell the police that at five minutes past twelve Mrs. 
Battenbury was drunk? Yes. 

Did you say she was very drunk? No. 

You did not see the police, I think, until much later than 
five-past twelve? I saw the police before I left the nursing home. 

You told the police when you saw them at the nursing home 

116 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Alfred B. Rooke 

that at five minutes past twelve Mrs. Rattenbury was in your 
opinion drunk? I do not remember if I told them then. 

When did you tell them? When I made my statement to the 
police the next day. 

That waa not what I was referring to? I cannot remember 
whether I said she was drunk then or not. I was thinking of the 
patient then. 

Cross-examined by Mr. CASSWELL Look at the photograph 
No. 7. As I understand you, it was that lower part which was 
the actual fracture (indicating)? It was a part of the actual 
fracture. 

Where was the point of impact 1 The point of impact was along 
the lower edge. The principal impact was there because the frac- 
ture was driven into the brain in that direction, the lower end 
being more driven into the brain than the upper end. 

Was that very near to the top of the left ear ? It would be a 
matter of from one inch to one and a half inches above it. 

Why do you say it was a blow from behind? I feel justified in 
swearing to it being a blow from behind because of the direction 
of that blow absolutely shown by the contrecoup. 

The contrecoup is the injury which occurs to the part of the 
brain opposite to that which receives the blow? Diametrically 
opposite. 

And it is caused, if I may put it in ordinary layman's language, 
because the brain is simply in a bag there floating in water, and 
if you hit it on one side it comes up against the other? Exactly. 

Why cannot I hit a man from the front behind his ear with 
that mallet and cause a contrecoup in that way? Because your 
position makes it mechanically impossible. 

Assume that the patient is sitting in a chair 2 (Witness demon- 
strated on himself how in his opinion the blow was delivered.) 

Have you ever swung a hammer? I have. 

One swings it almost towards one, does one not, as if driving 
in something? Yes, but I think the swinging of a hammer is 
rather a different thing from this; the action is different, 

It has a longer handle, of course? Very much. 

One further point about the direction of 1ihe blow. I think 
it is important whether the blow was struck from in front or 
behind? 

Mr. JUSTICE* HUMPHREYS All that the doctor has said is that 
the direction of the blow waa from behind. 

Mr. CASSWELL I understood him to say that the person who 
delivered it was standing behind. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS With great respect to him, he is 
not in a position to say. 

Mr. CASSWELL That is the whole point of my inquiry. 

117 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Alfred B, Rooke 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS It is not a medical question at all. 
It is a surgical question what was the direction of the instrument 
that caused the injury, and that he said most distinctly came 
from the back towards- the front. Whether it is possible for a 
man who is standing in front of another who is sitting to hit 
that man a blow with a weapon which comes from the back to 
the front, the jury know as well as any surgeon does. 

Mr. CASSWELL I understand the witness to say it waa in his 
view struck by a person standing behind. 

The WITNESS I do not think I said that. I said the direction 
of the blow, by which I mean the direction of the force. 

Cross-e&amwation continued by Mr. CASSWBLL I was trying 
to make you understand that might be the direction of a blow 
from someone standing in front, and I understand you do not 
agree with me? No. 

Do you or do you not agree with me ? I do not agree with you. 

Then it comes to this, that you say that it was struck by 
somebody standing behind? The direction of the force was from 
behind. 

Still you will not answer me? I cannot say more than that 
the direction of the force was from behind. 

Do you say it was possible to have caused the blow standing 
in front? - 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Or at the side? 
The WITBTESS From the side, yes, but, from the front, I 
cannot stretch my imagination sufficiently. 



continued by Mr. CAS SWELL What you are 
in fact saying is that you, who are a medical man, who have seen 
the marks on the skull and the cracks in the skull, and have 
seen the contrecoup, cannot stretch your imagination to that blow 
having been struck by somebody standing in front of the victim? 
I cannot, 

ARTHUR ERNEST BAGWELL, examined by Mr. HAW KB I am a 
constable in the Hampshire Constabulary stationed at Bournemouth, 
On 25th March in the early morning I went to the Strathallen 
Nursing Home at Boscombe in answer to a telephone call. I 
got there about 1.30. When I got there I saw Mr. Rattenbury. 
He was on the operating table. After I had seen him I went 
to No. 5 Manor Road, and I got there about 2 a.m. I was in 
uniform. I was admitted by Mrs. Rattenbury. Mrs. Rattenbury 
and the maid were at the door together. I am not certain who 
opened the door, but they were there together. Mrs. Rattenbury 
was dressed in her pyjamas, and I believe she had a light cape 
on, or something like that. 

118 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Arthur E. Bavwell 

By Mr. JUSTIOE HUMPHREYS A dressing-gown or dressing- 
jacket? Something like that, my lord. 

Examination continued I went into the drawing-room. I 
noticed that Mrs. Rattenbury was at that time under the influence 
of drink to a mild extent. When I got into the drawing-room, 
I said to her, " I have just come from the Strathallen Nursing 
Home where your husband has been taken this evening, where 
he is suffering from serious injuries. Can you furnish me with any 
particulars as regards how he came by them? " She said, " At 
about 9 p.m. I was playing cards with my husband in the drawing- 
room, and I went to bed. About 10.30 I heard a yell. I came 
downstairs into the drawing-room and saw my husband sitting in 
the chair. I then sent for Dr. O'Donnell. He was then taken 
away." Up to that time I was alone in the house with her 
and Miss Riggs. Inspector Mills came shortly after that and 
we examined the premises. I saw a stain on the drawing-room 
carpet. It was near the side of the armchair. It was on the 
right-hand side as you look at the chair. There were other marks 
on the back and on the arm. I noticed the seat of the chair. 
There were slight stains on the seat, and it appeared to have 
been washed. The seat of the chair smelt of urine. We then 
went to the bathroom and found a coat and waistcoat that had 
been washed. They had been taken off Mr. Rattenbury. We 
also found a blood-stained collar in the dustbin outside the back 
door of the house. After that inspection Inspector Mills left the 
house, and after he left I was alone in the house again with 
Mrs. Rattenbury and Miss Riggs, of course. 

Did Mrs. Rattenbury say anything to you after Inspector Mills 
had gone? Yes. 

Where was that said? In the drawing-room. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS At what time? That would be 
about 2.30, my lord. 

Examination continued -Was she alone in the room with you 
then? Yes. 

What did she say? She said, " I know who done it. 1 ' I then 
immediately cautioned her. She said, " I did it with a mallet. 
Ratz has lived too long. It is hidden. No, my lover did it. 
It is urine on the chair. I would like to give you 10. No, 
I won't bribe you." Inspector Mills had gone back to the nursing 
home, and returned about 3.30. I was there when he came 
back. He spoke to Mrs. Rattenbury. He said, " I have just 
come from the Strathallen Nursing Home where your husband 
has been taken seriously injured. Can you give me any particulars 
as to how it happened? " She made a statement then. Inspector 
Mills cautioned Mrs. Rattenbury. In the statement she made 

119 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Arthur E. Btywell 

to me, when she said, "It is hidden, " that appeared to be 
referring to the mallet. I searched for the mallet and I found 
it outside the front door on the east side. That is where the 
trellis work is. The mallet was hidden behind a box behind the 
trellis work (shown photograph No. 2 in the book of photographs). 
As you look at the front door there is some trellis work to the 
left of it. It was behind that that I found the mallet. It was 
about 6.15 a.m. when I found it. I examined the mallet and I 
found a piece of flesh and hair on it. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Have a look at it. There is a 
little hair on it now, Was there more when you found it? Yes, 
my lord, 

Cross-examined by Mr. O'CONNOR Look at photograph No. 2. 
In order to get to the place where the mallet was found, you have 
to bend down and get under an overhanging tree? Yes. 

And the ground there looks pretty rough? Yes. 

Do you have to squeeze through a narrow passage? Well, it is 
a bit narrow there, yes. 

The gap between the trellis work and the wall is pretty narrow ? 
Yes. 

It is not the sort of expedition that anybody would be likely 
to undertake in their bare feet, in their pyjamas? The ground 
is quite even. 

Do you think it is ? Yes. 

Whoever went would have to crush in between the trellis work 
and the wall? They would have to just bend down. 

You found a blood-stained collar somewhere. Was it a man's 
collar? Yes. 

That was on the opposite side of the house? That is right, 
outside the back door. 

Did you see Stoner that evening ? Yes. 

He was not wearing a collar, was he? I cannot remember. 

Where is the collar? What happened to it? I do not know. 

The collar has just disappeared. We have heard nothing of 
it at all, Do you know what has happened to it? What did you 
do with it? It was taken away, I believe. 

You know nothing more about it except -that you handed it 
over to one of your superior officers? I believe Inspector Mills 
took charge of it. 

Was there a lot of blood on it? Yes, saturated. 

I am told the collar is somewhere in the neighbourhood, 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS If you want it, you can have it, I 
suppose. The man who suffered those injuries would have blood on 
his neck, I suppose. 

120 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Arthur E. BaeweU 

Mr. O'CONNOR I thought it was on the assumption that it was 
Mr. Rattenbury 's collar. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Nobody has suggested it belonged to 
your client. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. 0' CONNOR As regards the 
first statement Mrs. Rattenbury made to you, did she say that she 
had gone to bed or that she had gone to her bedroom? She may 
have said she had gone to her bedroom. I cannot exactly remember, 

You gave evidence about that at the Police Court? Yes. 

Did you say then she said, " I went to my bedroom "1 Yes, 
she may have said that. 

You are not quite sure which it was? No, not quite sure. 

Was she very drunk? Not when I first arrived on the scene. 

She was very drunk later on, of course? Well, you would not 
actually say very drunk, not incapably drunk. 

She was not incapably drunk according to you at any time ? I 
should not say so. 

Was she trying to kiss you? Yes. 

Did you have to leave the house because of her attentions? No, 
I did not leave because of her attentions. 

Did you tell Miss Riggs that was why you were leaving ? No, 
I told Mrs. Rattenbury that I was going outside. 

Because she was pestering you with her attentions ? No, I told 
Mrs. Rattenbury I was going outside, that I might find another 
officer, because I thought that might calm her a bit. 

Did you hear any disturbance going on in the house while you 
were outside? None whatever. 

How long were you outside? About three minutes. 

You did not keep a check of it by your watch, I suppose? I 
went outside really for a natural purpose. 

You know that Miss Riggs has said that you went outside 
because you said that you would not stay in the house as she was 
trying to kiss you? No. 

Is that true? No. 

Do you know that Miss Riggs says that while you were outside 
she had to lock all the doors of the house to prevent Mrs. Ratten- 
bury trying to get out to find you? The front door was never 
locked. 

Then what Miss Riggs says about that is not true? The front 
door was not locked. 

She says that during that time she had to put her down into 
a chair and sit on her to prevent her breaking out of the house. 
Is that all untrue? I could not say. 

You heard no sound coming from the house? No. 

Was the gramophone playing 1 She played one record while 
I was in the house. 

121 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Arthur E, Baawell 

You did not hear any of the kind of disturbance that I have 
been describing] No. 

And you say you were only out for a few minutes? That is 
all. 

I suggest to you, you were out a considerable time, and you came 
back with another officer? I was never away from the house for 
more than three minutes. 

Did you come back alone? There was another officer. I 
happened to see him. That was the officer on the beat. 

So you did bring another officer in with you? He just came 
to the door. 

It was just coincidence that he happened to be on the beat. It 
was not as Miss Rigga said, that you told her you would go to 
fetch another officer ? I knew possibly there would be other officers 
outside. 

Was it a coincidence, or did you go to fetch the other officer? 
It was a coincidence. 

Why go out for natural purposes ? Are there not two lavatories 
in the house? It was impossible for me to go to the lavatory. This 
lady was pestering me the whole of the time. 

Was it an hour after the statement, " I did it with a mallet. 
It is hidden. Eatz has lived too long," before Inspector Mills came ? 
Yes. 

The second time? Yes. 

Who was in the house during the whole of that hour ? I was. 

Only you ? Me and Miss Biggs and Mrs. Rattenbury. 

Except for that time when you went out? That is right. 

Much occurred during that interval ? I went out shortly before 
Inspector Mills came back. 

Were Inspector M ilia's questions asked before Dr. O'Donnell 
arrived or after? Before Dr. O'Donnell arrived. 

Long before? About ten minutes or a quarter of an hour 
before. 

Then after Dr. O'Donnell arrived and put her upstairs and 
gave her morphia, she was still talking to Inspector Mills at a 
later moment? She came down immediately behind Dr. O'Donnell. 

Did you help to get her to bed? No. 

Did you see her helped to bed? I believe Stoner carried her 
upstairs on one occasion. 

Were you there the whole night ? Until about seven o'clock in 
the morning. I went immediately after the police-matron had 
taken over. 

During the time that you were there, did you go into Mrs. 
Rattenbury's bedroom to try to wake her ? No, not to try to wake 
her. I made a search under the bed while she was there. 

While she was in the bed ? While she was in the bedroom. 

Was she in bed ? No. 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Arthur E, Bagwell 

What time was that? I cannot remember. I should say it 
may have been four o'clock, or something like that. 

After Dr. O'Donnell had given her morphia? Yes. 

Was she undressed or lying on the bed, or what was she doing? 

She was just in her pyjamas and a light dressing-gown. 

What was she doing walking about? Yes. 

Was there anybody else there ? Yes, Miss Riggs was there, and 
Stoner, I believe. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Wait a minute. I am not sure 
that you and the learned counsel are quite at one. This is some- 
thing quite new. Were you there when the doctor gave her an 
injection in her arm? No. 

May the time you are speaking about when she was walking 
about her room have been before or after the doctor did that? It 
was after the doctor had given her morphia. 

Did the morphia seem to have any effect upon her ? Not until 
some time afterwards. 

Do you mean just for a few minutes she was walking about 
there ? I should say it may have been ten minutes or quarter of an 
hour. 

What did she do after that? I believe someone put her to bed. 
I was not there when they put her in bed. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. O'CoNNOB You were in 
her bedroom at some time after, so far as you know, the doctor had 
given her morphia? Yes, 

How long were you in the bedroom ? A few minutes, 

Just looking for something under the bed 1 Yes. 

Were you in the bedroom again between that time and the time 
the police-matron came? No. 

Where were you the rest of the night ? I was downstairs search- 
ing the grounds and the rooms inside. 

Cross-examined by Mr. CAS SWELL (Shown collar marked 
Exhibit 47). That collar is very badly covered with blood on the 
left-hand side, is it not? Yes. 

It looks as if it was the collar that was worn by the man who 
was injured, does it not? Yes. 

Re-examined by Mr. CROOM-JQENSOW I want you to look at 
one thing on that collar. Look inside. Does it bear the name of 
the shop at which it was purchased? Look at the end which is not 
covered with blood? Yes, "Hope Brothers, Ludgate Hill, 
London." 

WILLIAM JAMBS MILLS, examined by Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON I am 
an inspector in the Hampshire Constabulary stationed at Bourne- 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

William J. Mill* 

mouth. In the early morning of Monday, 25th March, I went to 
5 Manor Road, Bournemouth, about two a.m. When I got there 
I saw the accused Rattenbury. She was very excited and appeared 
to have been drinking. I saw her in the drawing-room. I aaid 
to her, " What has happened? " She aaid, " I was in bed when 
I heard someone groaning. I came downstairs and found my 
husband in the easy-chair. He was unconscious and blood was 
flowing from his head." While I was in the room, I observed 
some french windows. I noticed that the left-hand one, as you 
look out, was open. I asked Mrs. Rattenbury, " Was this window 
open when you came down?*' and she said, "No, it was shut 
and locked." I noticed the blood stain on the carpet by the side 
of the chair. I have seen the photograph which shows the position 
of the chair in the room (shown photograph No. 3 in Exhibit 2). 
The chair was in the position shown in the photograph when I 
went into the room that night. There were blood stains on the 
left arm of the chair and on the back. In the bathroom we fojind 
a man's coat and waistcoat. They were sopping wet as though 
they had been washed and wrung out. The bathroom was o.n the 
ground floor. I was with P.-C. Bagwell when he took the collar 
from the dustbin, We also found the cretonne cover which has 
been produced in the case. There was a small table in the drawing- 
room. I saw a book on that table (shown Exhibit 6). That is the 
book. It was open at page 296. It was face downwards. I then 
went to the -Strathallen Nursing Home. Outside the nursing home 
I saw the accused Stoner. He was sitting in the front seat of a 
motor car. That would be about a quarter to three, but I would 
not swear to it. I did not look at the time. He was sitting in 
the left-hand front seat as you face the engine. He was apparently 
asleep. I had not seen him before that night. I arrived at the 
house shortly after two and left round about quarter to three, and 
I had not seen Stoner at the house at all up to that time. I 
returned to No. 5 Manor Road about half-past three in the police 
car. When I got back to the house I saw the accused Rattenbury. 
She was in the hall. She was in a very agitated condition and 
under the influence of drink. I spoke to her. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Was she better or worse than 
she had been at two o'clock? Slightly worse. 

Examination continued I said to her, " Your husband has 
been seriously wounded and is now in a critical condition/' She 
said, " Will this be against me? " When she asked me that 
question I cautioned her. I said, " I caution you; you are not 
obliged to say anything unless you wish to do so, but whatever you 
do say will be taken down and may be given in evidence." 

Did she appear to understand? Yes, I was satisfied she under- 
stood. 

124 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

William J. Mill* 

After yo.u had cautioned her, did she apeak to you again 1 Yes, 

immediately. 

What did she say? She said, " I did it; he gave me the book." 

Did you know what book she was referring to ? No. 

What else did she say? " He has lived too long. He said 
' Dear, dear ' " 

Did those two sentences follow on one another? Yes, " I will 
tell you in the morning where the mallet is." 

Up to that time had anybody mentioned a mallet in your 
hearing? No one at all. 

Did she say something else? Yes. " Have you told the Coroner 
yet? I shall make a better job of it next time. Irene does not 
know. I made a proper muddle of it. I thought I was strong 
enough." 

At the time she made that statement to you, did you know who 
Irene was? Yes, Miss Riggs. 

What was the next thing that happened? The accused Stoner 
and Dr. O'Donnell came back into- the house. How long was that 
after Mrs. Rattenbury had made this statement to you? About 
ten minutes, I should think. 

When Dr. O'Donnell came into the house, were you in the room 
then? No, in the hall. 

What happened next? The accused Rattenbury rushed towards 
him when she heard his voice. 

What did he do, if anything? He went upstairs with her. 

What happened after that? Some time afterwards Dr. 
O'Donnell came down again, and he then said, " She is quiet; I 
have given her morphia." 

When did you next see Mrs. Rattenbury? About a minute 
after the doctor came into the drawing-room. 

Did she come back into the drawing-room? She did. 

Did she speak to anybody? Yes, immediately she said, "I 
know who did it his son." I said, " How old is he? " She 
replied, " Thirty-two, but he is not here." 

At that time in her presence did Dr. O'Donnell say something 
to yo.u ? Yes. 

Wliat did he say? He said, " I have given her morphia. I 
do not think she is fit to make a statement." 

And then what happened? With some difficulty we got her to 
bed. 

What was the difficulty? Well, it was like getting anyone to 
bed when they were under the influence of drink; they will not 
do what you want them to. 

Was that the last you saw of her on that night ? Yes. 

Cross-examined by Mr. O'CONNOB On the occasion of the first 
statement to you, was Bagwell present ? Yea, he was there. 

125 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

William J. Mills 

You did not make a note of any of those statements, I suppose 1 
Not the first one. 

Did you make a note of the second? I made a note of the one 
I have got here. 

The one you gave us the effect of a few minutes ago? Yes. 

You say you arrived about two o'clock. Bagwell has told us 
that he arrived about two o'clock, so that you must have been really 
on each other's heels? Yes. I think there was about two minutes' 
difference. 

Meanwhile she had made a statement to him, so he has told 
us? I do not know about that. 

Anyhow, the statement that she made to you was in Bagwell's 
presence? Yes. 

Bagwell has put the time that you left at about half -past two. 
At any rate, he has put it this way, that by half-past two you had 
gone. Would that be right? It may be. I said about quarter to 
three I got to Strathallen. It may have been twenty-to when I 
got to the nursing home. 

You cannot tell to ten minutes or quarter of an hour how long 
it was? No. 

When you got to the nursing home, did you tell Dr. O'Donnell 
that Mrs. Rattenbury was drunk? No, I said she had been 
drinking. 

On your return to the house how long had you been in the 
house before you told Mrs. Rattenbury what you said about her 
husband being in a serious condition? About five minutes. 

She was obviously very much worse then? Slightly worse. 

Very much worse, I suggest? No. 

That statement, you say, you made a note of 1 That is right. 

At the time or the next day? At the time. 

Did you follow the statement up? In what way? 

She said, " I will tell you in the morning where the mallet is.* 1 
Did you ask her where it was? No, I did not question her, 

Why not? I did not question her at all. 

Did you not question her because you did not think she was 
in a fit condition to give intelligent answers? No, not at all. 

Why did you not-I had taken that statement. 

Was this the first you had heard of a mallet? That is right. 

You knew this man had been very seriously injured with some 
heavy weapon, and here was this woman telling you, " I will tell 
you in the morning where the mallet is," I am suggesting tha 
only reason you did not follow that up was because you thought 
yo.u could not place any reliance on her statement? Not at all. 
I started searching for the mallet. 

Why did you not ask her where it was? I did not ask her. 

That would have helped, if she knew? Yes. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Do you really suggest, Mr. O'Connor, 

126 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

William J. Mills 

if after a woman has said believe it or .not that she was a party 
to a crime like this, the police officer would be justified in cross- 
examining her at all? 

Mr. O'CONNOR I accept your lordship's suggestion at oace, 
and apologise for the question. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. O'CONNOR I am not blam- 
ing you for not having pursued the point. How soon after that did 
Dr. O'Donnell arrive? About ten minutes * 

When did Dr. O'Donnell first tell you that he had given her 
morphia] Was it immediately he came down and while Mrs. 
Rattenbury was upstairs, or was it later ? That was the first time, 
and then he repeated it when she was making statements. 

How long was she in the drawing-room, with you before Dr. 
O'Donnell joined you? Dr. O'Donnell was there first. 

He says he was not 1 He is mistaken. 

Are you quite sure of that 1 Absolutely. 

I do not think you were in Court when he gave his evidence. 
He said, " I was in the kitchen with Stoner and Miss Riggs and I 
came into the drawing-room and found Mrs. Rattenbury talking 
to Inspector Mills " 1 That is wrong. 

Tour recollection is different from that? Mine is correct. 

You say he was in the room at the time when she came in ? 
Yes, but he had hardly finished saying to me, " I have given her 
morphia/' when she rushed into the room and began making this 
statement about " I know who did it his son." 

And then you were checked from making any further inquiries 
by what Dr. O'Donnell said to you? Yes. 

Were you there when she left for the police station ? No. 

What time did you leave? About quarter to half -past seven. 
As the police-matron arrived I went out. 

Did you go into Mrs, Rattenbury's bedroom while she was 
asleep ? I only looked in just as a precautionary measure. 

Did any police officer, so far as you know, go in? Not to my 
knowledge. 

How was it that she was roused? Was it on your instructions 1 
No. 

Were you anxious to get her up? No. 

Who suggested sending for coffee? I do not know. 

You knew that she had some coffee? I knew she had some coffee, 
I did not see her drink it. 

It was not on your instructions that it was made? No. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS When did Inspector Carter 
arrive? Round about 4.30. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. O'CONNOR He was there 
all the time after that, was he? That is right. 

127 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

William J. Mills 

Cross-examined by Mr. Casswell As far as Stoner was con- 
cerned, did you see him for the first time that night outside Strath- 
alien Nursing Home ? Yes. 

You did not attempt to take any statement from him there ?~ No. 

Was that because, to the best of your belief, he was then asleep ? 
Y0s. 

He came back, I think you have told us, with Dr. O'Donnell? 
Yes. 

You, no doubt, were very busy looking after Mrs. Rattenbury ? 
Yes. 

Did you have any further conversations with Stoner ? Yes, I 
asked him if he had seen a mallet about the place. He said no, 
he had never seen one. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS When was this] Was it when Dr. 
O'Donnell returned with him? Yes, after he had returned. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. CASSWELL About what 
time would that be? It would be after Mrs. Rattenbury was got 
to bed. 

It was after she had said some thing about a mallet 1 Yes. It 
would be between four and half -past. 

When Mrs. Rattenbury had made the statement about a mallet, 
Stoner was not there, was he ? No. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS If you can, use the exact words. 
What was it you asked Stoner about the mallet? I asked him if 
he had seen a mallet about the place. 

You did not tell him why you wanted to know? No. Mr. Carter 
arrived on the scene then and I think he interviewed him. 

His answer was no, he had not seen one? That is right. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. CASSWELL Did Inspector 
Carter take charge when he arrived? He did. 

Can you tell me where Stoner was from 4.30 until 7.30 when 
you left? Walking about in all the rooms. He was sometimes in 
the drawing-room, sometimes in the kitchen, and sometimes out in 
the hall. 

And you did not try to take any statement from him during 
that time? No. 

Re-examined by Mr. CHOOM-JOHNSON During that period when 
Stoner was walking about, Mrs. Rattenbury was in her bedroom t 
That is right. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Was there any reason connected 
with his condition why you did not take a statement from him? 
No. 

He was in a fit condition to make a statement? Yes. 

128 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

William G. Carter 

WILLIAM GOLDSWOETHT CARTER, examined by Mr. GROOM- 
JOHNSON I am a detective-inspector of the Hampshire Constabu- 
lary stationed at Bournemouth. On 25th March 1 went to 5 Manor 
Road at about 4,30 a.m. I went into Mrs. Rattenbury 's bedroom 
first, the room on the first floor at the rear of the house, immediately 
over the drawing-room. Mrs. Rattenbury was asleep. I also saw 
the accused Stoner and the maid Riggs. They were in the dining- 
room on the ground floor. I then went into the drawing-room. 
Later on I made an examination of the house and grounds. I was 
in Mrs. Rattenbury's room when she woke up at 6 a.m. 

What was the first thing that you did when she woke up? I 
simply stayed there and watched her. I did not say anything at 
^11. I said nothing at all for about ten minutes. Then I called 
her maid Riggs and asked her to get her mistress some coffee. It 
was my idea. The coffee was brought and she was served with it. 
She had one cup, not quite the size of a breakfast cup, something 
similar to a tea cup. I sent for the police-matron and she came 
about 7 a.m. After that the accused Mrs. Rattenbury had a bath. 
She requested a bath before the police-matron arrived, and I sent 
for the police-matron and she had one then. Afterwards she 
dressed and while she was dressing I went in the kitchen. 
I saw there the accused Stoner. I asked him if he 
could tell me anything concerning the affair that evening 
whereby Mr. Rattenbury had received his injuries. In response to 
that invitation he made a statement to me and I wrote it down in 
my book as it was made. I produce my book (marked Exhibit 39). 
The statement that I took down is contained on pages 64, 65, the 
back of 65, and concludes on page 66. Before he signed it, I read 
it over to him and asked him if it was correct, and I asked him if 
the 8.5 p.m. referred to by him referred to Sunday, 24th March, 
1935, and he said it did. I put Sunday, 24th March, 1935, in, 
and he then signed the statement. I also produce a copy of the 
statement Exhibit No. 40. The copy is a true and accurate copy 
of the statement which appears in my book. The statement is in 
the following words: "Hants Constabulary. Bournemouth Divi- 
sion. 30th March, 1935." The date is when the copy was made, 
** Greorge Percy Stoner states : I am a chauffeur handyman em- 
ployed by Mr. Rattenbury of 5 Manor Road, Bournemouth. I 
retired to my bedroom about 8.5 p.m. on Sunday, 24th March, 
1935, leaving Mr. and Mrs. Rattenbury and the boy John in the 
drawing-room. About 10.30 p.m. I was roused by Mrs. Rattenbury 
shouting to me to come down. I came down into the drawing-room 
and saw Mr. Rattenbury sitting in the armchair with blood run- 
ning from his head. Mrs. Rattenbury was crying and screaming, 
and said to me, ' Help me to get Ratz into bed, he has been hurt.' 
I then took the car and went to Dr. O'Donnell's house. He had 
left before I got there. When I returned, I cleaned the blood from 
the floor on the instructions o Mr.s. Rattenbury. Mrs. Rattenbury 

K 129 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

William G. Carter 

was sober, and, as far as I know, she had not been drinking. \Vhen 
I went to bed, she was in a normal condition, 1 have never seen u 
mallet on the premises. Until I was aroused, I heurd no sounds 
of a quarrel or a noise of any kind. Since September, 193-i, 1 
have been employed by Mr. and Mrs. Rattenbury. They have 
been on the best of terms. I said to her, How did this happen '? ' 
She said, ' I don't know. J Mr. liattenbury was fully dressed in 
the armchair and Mrs. Rattenbury was dressed in pyj amas and bare 
feet." It was about 7.30 a.m. when that statement was taken down 
by me from Stoner. At 8.15 a.m. I went into Mrs. Rattenbury 's 
bedroom. 

Had she been downstairs at all that you had seen from the 
time when the police-matron had arrived and she had requested 
a bath? Yes, she went downstairs to the ground floor to have a 
bath. She had returned and dressed then. When I went into 
her bedroom, she wasi fully dressed, with the exception of her 
coat and hat. She appeared to me to be definitely normal. I 
was in plain clothes. I told her who I was. I told her I was 
a police officer and cautioned her. She appeared to understand. 
After I had cautioned her, I charged her. 

What did you say to her when you charged her ? I said to her, 
" I charge you that you did, by wounding, do grievous bodily 
harm to one Francis Mawson Rattenbury in an attempt to murder 
him on Sunday, 24th March, 1935." At this time Mr. Rattenbury 
waa still alive. When I charged her, she made a statement to 
me and I took it down as she made it. 

Before we read what she said, did she speak coherently? 
Yes, she spoke with deliberation. 

Had you any difficulty in understanding what she was saying] 

None whatever. 

Did you ask lier any question while she was speaking? I did 
not. I put it down as she made the statement. 

Could she see that you were writing down what she was saying ? 
Yes, I wrote it in front of her. 

After you had written down what she said in your book, did 
you read it over to her? I did. 

When you read it over to her, did she ask you something? 
Yes, she made a request to read it herself. 

Thereupon did you hand her the book? I did. She read it 
for herself; she read it aloud. Afterwards she signed it. Exhibit 
41 is a copy of the statement which she made, 

Where did she sign this? In the bedroom, sitting on the bed. 

Where was the book when she signed? She was holding the 
book in one hand and writing with the other. She was not resting 
it on anything. This is what she said: "About 9 p.m. on 
Sunday, 24th March, 1935, I was playing cards with my husband 
when 'he dared me to kill him as he wanted to die. 1 picked up 
the mallet. He then said, c You have not got guts enough to do 

130 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

William G. Carter 

it. 1 I then hit him with the mallet. I hid the mallet outside 
the house. 1 would have shot him if I had a gun. Alma 
Rattenbury." 

As far as you could tell, did she appear to understand what 
she was saying and doing? She did. I have been twenty-three 
years a police officer, and I have been an inspector nearly five 
years. I have had a good deal of experience in the hearing of 
statements by persons and the taking of statements. 

You have told us that she read it aloud? Yes. 

Did she read it clearly? She did. 

Shortly after that statement was signed, did you leave the 
house with the accused Mrs. Rattenbury? Yes, I did. 

When you were in the hail on the way out, did you see anybody ? 
Yes, the accused Stoner and the maid Riggs, at the bottom 
of the stairs. 

Did Mrs. Rattenbury say anything to them? She did. 

What did she say? " Do not make fools of yourselves." Stoner 
replied, " You have got yourself into this mess by talking too 
much." I then took her to Bournemouth Police Station. She 
did not say anything on the way. At the police station in the 
presence of Superintendent Deacon I cautioned her once again 
and charged her. I charged her with the same charge, the 
attempted murder of her husband. 

Did she make any answer? Yea. She said, " That is right; 
I did it deliberately and would do it again." At half -past nine 
on Thursday, 28th March, I aaw the body of her husband, Francis 
Mawson Rattenbury, at the nursing home, and a little after half- 
past six on the same day 1 was at the Bournemouth Central 
Railway Station and I there saw the accused Stoner. I saw him 
alight from a train arriving from London. 

Did you speak to him? Yes, I went to him and said to him, 
<e You know me to be a police officer." He said " Yes." I 
cautioned him and conveyed him to the Bournemouth Police Station 
where, in the presence of Superintendent Deacon, I charged him 
that he did murder one, Francis Mawson Rattenbury, at Bourne- 
mouth, on Sunday, 24th March, 1935." In answer to that charge 
he said, " I understand." Mr. Rattenbury had died in the 
morning at 8.30 a.m. I searched the accused Stoner and amongst 
other articles I found on him Exhibit 3, a gold watch. I took 
possession of the watch. 

When you took possession of the watch, did he say anything 
to you? Yes, he said, cc Be careful of that watch; it was given 
me by Mrs. Rattenbury and is worth 20." I also found on him 
Exhibits 4 and 5, a letter and envelope. The envelope is addressed 
to " George Stoner, Villa Madeira," and the letter is signed 
" Lozanne." I also found in his possession two photographs of 
Mrs, Rattenbury, Exhibit 42, At 5.40 p.m. on the 29th March 
I saw the accused Mrs. Rattenbury at Holloway Prison in the 

131 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

William G. Carter 

presence of her solicitor. 1 cautioned her. She was charged 
with the murder of her husband at Bournemouth on 24th March. 
She made no reply whatever. On 28th March I received from 
Dr. Harold Simmons a portion of the scalp of the deceased and 
a number of hairs, and on 8th April I handed those to Dr. Roche 
Lynch at St. Mary's Hospital, Paddington. I handed them to 
him in the same condition as I received them. At the same time 
I handed him the mallet, Exhibit 7. I received that from Police- 
constable Bagwell on 25th March. It was in the same condition 
when I handed it to Dr, Lynch as it was when I received it 
from Police-constable Bagwell. Later, on 8th April, I handed 
to Dr. Roche Lynch, at St. Mary's Hospital, Paddington, a 
piece of the scalp of the deceased with some short grey hairs growing 
on it. I had received that from Dr. Simmons. I also weighed 
the mallet. 

Cross-examined by Mr. 0* CONNOR You arrived at this house 
at half -past four in the morning? Approximately half-past four. 

And you were there until she was taken away? Yes. I accom- 
panied her to the police station. 

How long did the journey to the police station take? About 
four to five minutes. 

During the time that you were in the house, what other police 
officers were there? When I arrived there was P,-C. Bagwell, 
another constable, and P.-C. Canfield, with Inspector Mills in 
charge. 

When did Bagwell leave? Seven o'clock in the morning. 

When did Mills leave? Roughly, about the same time. 

When did the other officers leave? He left before them. 

So that at the time the police-matron came there were three 
police there? P.-C. Bright was also with me; he arrived and 
stayed with me. 

There were three or four police officers in the house for the 
whole of the time between 4.30 and seven? Yes. 

Had you ever seen this woman in your life before? Never. 

The first time in your life you ever saw her was when she was 
asleep when you arrived? That is so. 

You took a statement from her at 8.15? Yes. 

And you have told us that she was then normal? I did. 

Did you say at the Police Court that she was then quite normal ? 
I said she was normal, I know. 

Did you say she was quite normal? Possibly I did. 

Was she quite normal? Yes. 

How can you judge whether a person you have never seen 
in your life before was quite normal? I saw Mrs, Rattenbury 
when she woke up at 6 a.m. and she was then not in a normal 
condition, but it was at S.I 5 that I decided that she was in a 
normal condition, before I attempted to take a statement from her. 

132 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

William G. Carter 

So that when you are talking about " normal " you are not 
relating your normality to the moment you saw her at six o'clock 
when she woke up? Yes. 

She was different at 8.15 from what she was at six? She was 
very greatly different. 

You are not suggesting that it is a true test as to whether a 
person is normal whether they are slightly different two hours later ? 
With respect, with my experience as police officer, I consider 
I am a good judge. 

You considered this woman at 8.15 that morning was a quite 
normal woman ? Definitely, yes. 

Do you agree with Dr. O'Donnell that no reliance could be 
placed on any statement taken from her at that time, 8.115? No, 
I do not. 

Do you know she had had half a grain of morphia ? I was told 
she had an injection of morphia. I did not inquire how much it 
was. 

Why not? It did not concern me. 

Did it not concern you, if you were going to take a statement, 
to know how much it was ? No, because if I had not been satisfied 
that she was normal I should not have taken a statement from her. 

Was it not natural to know how much drug she had had in 
order to know whether she was normal or not? To my mind, no. 

Did you find out how much she had been drinking? I was 
told that she had been drinking. 1 was unable to find out, because 
there was none in the house. 

Did you know why she had been given morphia? I was told. 

Because she was not in a fit condition, walking about the house, 
to be left undrugged 1 I was told she was given morphia to quieten 
her. 

So you knew she was so much under the influence of drink that 
she had to be drugged, and also that she had had a considerable 
dose of morphia? Only what I was told. You will appreciate 
that. 

Did she wake, as you put it, at six o'clock? She did. 

Did you waken her ? I did not. 

Did the police constantly go in and out of the room between 4.30 
and six to try and get this wretched woman awake? No. 

Miss Biggs was there? She was in the house. 

Did you send her up to the room several times to see if she 
was wide awake? No. 

Did you go in yourself? I was in and out of the room con- 
tinually. 

Did you send any other constable up to the room to get her 
up? No. 

Did you want to get her up? No. Soon after she woke up, 
she wanted to get up and dress and I would not allow her to. 

133 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

William G. Carter 

Did you want to leave her asleep or get up ? I would not allow 
Mrs. Rattenbury to get up and dress, because I knew as a police 
officer that if she attempted to dress I would have to leave the 
room. Therefore I would not leave her alone until I had sent 
for a police-matron. 

Did you go into the room with Miss Riggs between six and 
half -past? No. I was in the room at six o'clock when I sent 
for Miss Riggs. 

What for? You had seen her asleep at half-past four. You 
knew she had morphia. Did you expect her to wake up in an 
hour and a half? I had no idea when she would wake up. I was 
out ta investigate the cause of the injuries received by Mr. 
Rattenbury. 

And to investigate by asking Mrs. Rattenbury questions about 
them? No, I was not putting any questions about them. 

Had you any intention of asking her about them? No. 

Did you intend, from what you had heard, to arrest her 1 
I had definitely made up my mind to arrest Mrs, Rattenbury. 

And the quicker the better ? No, otherwise I should have done 
that at six o'clock when she woke up first. 

What? Had I had the intention, you said to me, with every 
respect, the quicker the better. I said, " No. If I had been of 
that mind the quicker the better directly she woke up at six 
o'clock, I should have arrested her then " had I been of that 
mind, but I was not. Her condition at that time was not such a 
she could be charged, therefore I did not charge her at that time. 
I took the precaution of sending for coffee, sending her to have a 
bath, and waiting for her to be definitely normal before I charged 
her, and I asked her no question, I charged her immediately, 

You sent her to have coffee and to have a bath so as to make 
some semblance that she was a reasonable woman? So that she 
could understand the charge which I was going to put before her. 

Did you hear her try to vomit? She felt sick, that is correct, 
and I sent for a bowl. Soon after she woke she wanted to vomit. 

Did you see that the wretched woman could not hold the coffee 
cup? To the best of my recollection, she did hold it. I will not 
swear that. 

Did you see that the saucer was shaking in her handl No. 

And that she could hardly drink? No. 

Did you see her that evening when Dr. O'Donnell came to the 
station? Yes. 

She was unable to walk then? No. 

Then Dr. O'Donnell told us that which was untrue? If he said 
that. 

Do you say she was able to walk? She walked from the cells 
to the waiting-room several times that morning. 

Was she swaying about when Dr. O'Donnell examined her? 
He did not examine her. 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

William G. Carter 

Did you notice whether her pupils were contracted at that time 1 
No. 

According to you, she was talking normally? Yes. 

And walking normally? Definitely normal. 

Perfectly normal? I say she was quite normal because of the 
matters she discussed with Dr. O'Donnell, and she had previously 
seen her solicitor and the maid Riggs. 

Do you know that the medical officer at Holloway has reported 
she was still under the influence of drugs three days later? No, 

Have you never heard that until this moment? No. He never 
reported it to me. 

Is it your evidence that from the time you began to take her 
statement until she left your charge she did not appear to you to 
be under the influence of drugs? No, she did not. 

Not at any time? Not at any time. 

Supposing you had seen that woman, and had never seen her 
before, would you have said, Cf This woman is neither drunk nor 
incapacitated in any way from anything I can see"? I should 
say so, yes. 

Did Miss Riggs say, " The woman cannot get up as long as 
three police officers are in the room. Give her a chance "? Not 
to me, and not to my knowledge either, 

Did you hear that she had complained about the officers being 
in the room? No. 

By Mr, JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Who had complained Miss 
Biggs? Yes. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. O'CONNOR Did you hear 
that she had done so? No, I should have been the officer to have 
received that complaint, I was the officer in charge. 

You did not receive it? No, I did not. 

Did the officers retire to the balcony? That was when she was 
dressing. 

When she was dressing, I agree? Yes. That was after the 
police-matron had arrived. We all went out of the room whep 
the police-matron arrived, naturally. 

On to the balcony? No, not on to the balcony. We went out 
of the room, 

Did none of them go on to the balcony ? Not to my knowledge. 
There was P.-C. Bright and I there at that time, and we went o.ut 
of the room on to the landing. 

Did you see her after she had had her bath? Yes, That was 
at 8.15 when I cautioned her and charged her. 

Did she say she wanted to go to sleep ? No. 

Do you swear that? I will swear that* 

Was she able to walk down the stairs without trouble to her 
bath? I do not know. I did not take her down. 

135 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

William G, Carter 

Did she have to be helped? Not to my knowledge. As soon as 
the police-matron arrived I left the room. Before she went down- 
stairs 1 left her in the bedroom, I went down then and I saw 
Stoner. At the time Mrs. Rattenbury came downstairs I was in 
the kitchen on the ground floor. 

Did you see her going back upstairs 1 No. 

So you cannot tell whether she walked with a firm, brisk step, 
or whether she was staggering back? No. I was told she had 
returned to her bedroom and had dressed. 

Where did you get Mr. Rattenbury's full name? I think we 
got it from documents we found at the house, but we got all parti- 
culars of Mr. Rattenbury from a relation. 

But you had not seen the relation on the night of the 24th, 
had you? No. 

You have sworn to the jury that you said to her on that night, 
" I charge you that you did, by wounding, do grievous bodily 
harm to Francis Mawson Rattenbury." Where did you get hi& 
Christian names from ? From the documents in the drawing-room. 

Which documents? In the drawing-room which Mr. Rattenbury 
used to use there was a sideboard and a desk which was full of 
documents dealing with architecture, with his name on them. 

So you got one of those documents before charging her? I 
think, if I am correct, that I asked Irene Riggs if that was hia 
full name. I think I am correct in saying that. 

Not only was this lady in your judgment fully in possession of 
her senses, knowing what she was saying, but she was able to read 
it out -with a clear voice? With deliberation. 

With a clear deliberate voice? Yes, with deliberation. 

None of that incoherence that you would expect from a person 
who had been drunk and drugged within a couple of hours no- 
slurring over or anything? No. 

Who four hours before received half a grain of morphia? I 
did not know anything about the amount she had. 

None of the thick speech which you would expect from somebody 
who had been drunk at half-past three ? No, 

Clear, deliberate expression ? Tea. 

And that confirmed you in your opinion that she was quite 
normal ? Definitely. 

What time did you charge her at the police station? About 
8.35. It was 8,15 at the house, and she had to dress and get down. 

Was she standing or sitting when you took the statement? She 
was sitting on the bed. 

Did she reply in a clear deliberate vqice, " That is right, I did 
it deliberately, and would do it again "? Tea. 

Fully understanding the whole matter? Yes, definitely. 

Do you know that she was saying that the previous evening 
between BIX and seven she had rung up Mr. Jenks. You have known 
at florae time that she made that statement 9 I have known since. 

136 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

William G. Carter 

And you have inquired of Mr. Jenks ? lfcs, and I have verified 
it in other ways and find it is correct. 

Between six and seven she telephoned to Mr. Jenks and said 
that she and her husband would be coming over the following day? 
I did not know that. I know she telephoned to Mr. Jenks, 

Did not Mr. Jenks write to the superintendent of police at 
Bournemouth ? Yes. 

Have you seen the letter ? I do not know what she said. I know 
that Mr. Jenks said that Mrs. Rattenbury had written saying that 
they would be going to Bridport and would probably be calling. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Nobody knows better than you that 
all this is quite irregular. I do not want to stop you, but do not 
go too far, Mr. Jenk's opinions on various subjects do not matter 
at all. 

Mr. O'CONNOR I do not want his opinions at all. I merely 
want a fact. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS The officer says he has ascertained 
that she did telephone that night. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. 0' CONNOR Has this 
mallet been examined for fingerprints? Yes. 

And none have been found? I examined it myself. 

None have been found 1 None have been found. 

Is it a fact that people sometimes do wear gloves to prevent 
fingerprints appearing on things? Very often. 

If it were not a fact that whoever used that mallet had been 
wearing gloves, would you expect to find fingerprints on it? No, 
not on wood of that description. It is a little bit rough. 

None at all ? It depends on ho.w they held it. You could make 
fingerprints and so could I. Some people would hold it in such a 
way that there would be no fingerprints on it. 

But possibly you would find fingerprints 1 They would have to 
be good ones because of the thickness of the wood. 

That means it would have to be held by someone holding a firm 
grip? Yes, 

Someone trying to hit someone with a mallet would take a firm 
grip? It just depends on how they hold it, 

In the sense of firmness? It depends on how they hold it. 

If you hold it normally, you are mor,e likely than not to make 
fingerprints ? Exactly. 

And you found none whatever 1 No. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Did you find Police-Constable 
Bagwell's fingerprints o.n it? No. 

Was he wearing gloves when he picked it up ? I think he was. 
This was early in the morning. 

137 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

William G. Carter 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. O'CONNOR I expect it is 
one of the first things you teach your officers to bo very careful 
not to make fingerprints on articles which they find, and which 
may be made exhibits? Naturally. 

At any rate, he was wearing gloves 'I Yes. 

You agree with me, 1 suppose, that you would expect to lind 
fingerprints rather than not find them? Yes. 

And you have not found them? No. 

Cross-examined by Mr. CASSWELL When you first went to 
Villa Madeira on that morning it was about 4.30, was it not? Yea. 

How soon did you take up your position in Mrs. Rattenbury 's 
bedroom? I went there immediately. That .was the first thing I 
did when I got there. I did not stay there the whole time, but 
I went there first. 

How much of Stoner did you see in the meantime before you 
took his statement at 7.302 Quits a lot. 

Do you mean you spoke to him? No. I saw him in and about 
the house, and when I was looking round the grounds he was also 
there. I did not have anything to say to him at all about anything 
not until I took a statement. He had spoken, of course, to 
several other officers. 

You did not send him to bed, or anything like that? I did not. 
I had no reason to as regards Stoner. 

Was Inspector Mills with you when you took that statement 
from him? No, Detective-constable Bright. 

I was wondering whether anybody said to him, " Did you hear 
a quarrel downstairs" or whether he volunteered it? No. 
As a matter of fact, Stoner was asked a number of questions dur- 
ing the time I took that statement. I did not ask him anything 
personally, but he was asked a number of questions. He was asked 
about a quarrel and he was asked if he had seen a mallet on the 
premises, and several other questions. 

He had been asked certain questions before he made the state- 
ment? Yes, quite. 

Which may account for things like this, " I heard no sounds of 
a quarrel or noiae of any kind " ? Quite. He was asked questions 
of that nature. At that time there was no suspicion of anything 
connected with Stoner in this case. 

And no further statement was taken from him from that time 
until his arrest? None at all. 

May I take it that Irene Riggs rang up the police station at 
some time? Do you mean on that day. 

No, later on? Yea, she did. 

Was it as a result of information received from her that you 
arrested Stoner (That was partly the cause of it, naturally, 

Above the very chair where this man was killed, or badly hurt, 
over the mantelpiece were there two swords hanging up ? Yes. 

138 



Evidence for Prosecution, 

William G Carter 

And also a pistol with a heavy butt? Yes, there was. 

And the pistol with the heavy butt could easily have been 
used to give the man a very bad hit on the head? Yes. 

And yet for some reason or other apparently this mallet was 
used'/ Yes, that is so. 

I suppose there were other things about the premises which 
could have been used? I suppose there were several. 

And when you came to look to see that man's head, as you 
did see it, I think, at the nursing home, there could be no 
doubt whatever that he had had violence done to him by someone] 
I am not in a position to say anything about the head, because 
it was swathed in bandages when I saw him at the nursing home. 

Re-examined by Mr, CJROGM -Joins* SON At seven o'clock in the 
morning when the police-matron arrived, how many police officers 
were on the premises? At that time there would be P.-C. Bagwell, 
Inspector Mills, Detective-constable Bright, and I believe I am 
not positive P.-C. Canfield and myself, making five. 

As soon as the matron arrived, did some of them go awuy'J 
I think I am correct in saying that Inspector Mills, P.-C. Canfield, 
and P.-C. Bagwell left, leaving Detective-constable Bright and 
myself there, and I sent for another detective officer, making three. 

And, of course, the police-matron? Yes, the police-matron. 

Was Detective-constable Bright with you at the time when one 
or other of these statements were made? When they were both 
taken. 

You say that when Mrs. Rattenbury was seen at the police 
station that Monday she waa seen by Dr. O'Donnell? Yea, he 
made a request to see 'her. 

She made a request to see him? No, he made & request to 
see her. 

Had she interviewed her solicitor that morning? Yes. 

Once or more than once? Yes, twice, I think I ana correct 
in saying. 

Do you recollect whether she had been before the magistrate 
that morning? Yes, she had at eleven o'clock. 

At eleven o'clock on Monday, the 25t'h? Yes. 

Then Dr, O'Donneil had requested to see her and did see 
her about one o'clock, was it? Yes, anywhere between 12.30 and 
one. I would not swear to the time. 

You told my learned friend Mr. O'Connor that she discussed 
matters with Dr. O'Donnellt Yes, she did. 

I do not want any detail, but what sort of matters private 
or what? It was regarding the schooling of her children. 

Was it an intelligible conversation? Yes, 

I do not want details. How long was Dr. O'Donnell with her? 
I should think about twenty minutes. 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

William G. Carter 

You had come to the conclusion, I suppose, that a crime had 
been committed by somebody ? When I visited the scene, definitely. 

So far as you were concerned, being there, as you have told 
us already, you had made up your mind that you were going 
to arrest Mrs. Rattenbury? Definitely. 

In pursuance of your duty as a police officer, when you came 
to that conclusion, was it your duty to watch a suspected person 
that you have made up your mind to arrest? It was. 

Was there anything in this case apart from your ordinary duty 
as an ordinary officer that you were doing? Nothing whatever. 

SYDNEY GBOHQE BRIGHT, examined by Mr. HAWKB I am a 
detective-constable in the Hampshire Constabulary stationed at 
Bournemouth, I went to 5 Manor Road, Bournemouth, in the 
early morning of 25th March. I went there to assist Inspector 
Carter. I got there at 5.30 a.m. I assisted Inspector Carter 
in various inquiries he made. I was present in the house when 
Mrs. Rattenbury was taken by Inspector Carter to the police station. 
When they were leaving the house, I was standing in the hall. 
The accused Stoner and the witness Riggs were also in the hall 
at that time. As Mrs. Rattenbury was being taken through the 
hall, she said, " Do not make fools of yourselves/' and in reply 
to that Stoner said, " You have got yourself into this mess by 
talking too much." Three days later, on 28th March, I went 
back to Manor Road and searched Stoner's bedroom. I found 
there the receipt, Exhibit 19. That is a receipt for a diamond 
ring. I also found Exhibit 22, which is a receipted hotel bill 
for the Royal Palace Hotel, Kensington. I also found in a suit- 
case in Stoner's bedroom a pair of shoes. The day after I 
found in Mrs, Rattenbury's bedroom a counterfoil cheque book, 
which is Exhibit 18. I was present on 26th March when a state- 
ment was made to Inspector Carter by Mrs. Rattenbury. I heard 
her make the statement. The statement was made about 8.15 a.m. 

And what condition was she in when she made the statement} 
She seemed quite normal and very deliberate in her manner 
when she made that statement. The statement was taken down 
by Inspector Carter in his notebook as she made it. After it 
was taken down, it was read over to her by Inspector Carter, 
and then Mrs. Rattenbury made a request to read it herself. 
She was handed the notebook. I then left the room to arrange 
for transport. I do not know what -happened when she took the 
statement to read it. 

Cross-examined by Mr. O'CONNOR Tou had never seen her in 
your life before? No. 

Would you agree with Dr. Q'Donnell that no reliance couW 
be placed on any statement she made in her then condition) I 
should not. She appeared to me to be quite deliberate and normal. 

UO 



Evidence for Prosecution, 

Sydney G. Brieht 

Not like a person who had been drugged the night before ? No. 

Although she had been drunk and had half a grain of morphia? 
To me she appeared quite normal. 

Tou are, I suppose, accustomed to see people in the Police 
Courts the day after they have been very drunk and had to be 
arrested ? Yes. 

They do not look their best, or normal? No, 

Would you call those people normal? No. 

May I take it that at 8.15 that morning she was in quite 
a different condition from people who have been arrested in that 
way? Comparing Mrs, Rattenbury's condition when I first saw 
her at six o'clock with when I saw her at 8.15, she was a different 
woman altogether. 

Have you been in Court while Inspector Carter gave his 
evidence? No. 

At six o'clock she had only had a drug an hour and a half ago? 
Yes. 

At a quarter-past eight she was able to stand without being 
helped ? When she made that statement, she was sitting on the bed. 

Did you see whether she was able to stand unassisted? I saw 
her when she came downstairs shortly afterwards. She was assisted 
down, 

Was she swaying about when she stood up? No, I did not notice 
that. 

Did you see her having coffee? Yes, at an early stage. 

She was hardly able to drink that, was she? She drank the 
coffee. I believe she had two cups. 

But she was shaking and she had difficulty in drinking it, 
had she not? I did not notice that. 

You had never seen her before, and you do not know what 
she is like when she is normal, do you? I had never met her 
before that morning. 

At any rate, you are telling my lord and the jury that you 
saw none of the signs that you would expect to find in a person 
who had been both drunk and drugged a few hours previously? 
Not at 8.15. 

Would you have been quite happy to trust her with anything 
she liked? Yes. 

Would you have let her drive a motor car? Well 

Why not, if she was quite normal? But I did not know whether 
she could drive whether she is a fit person to drive a car. 

Assume for a moment that she knows how to drive, what 
would you have done if you had seen her step into a motor car 
and try to drive it away from 6 Manor Road at 8.15 that morningt 
I should have let her go. She was not in such a state that I 
should have thought she was under the influence of drink. 

Do you say you would have allowed her to drive away from that 
door without arresting her? I should, 

Hi 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Sydney G. Bright 

After being helped downstairs ? Yes. She was in such a condi- 
tion that she had to be helped slightly. 

Why should you say that was 2 I could not say what her condi- 
tion was caused by. 

Cross-examined by Mr. CABSWELL It was when she was in that 
condition, whatever it was, that as she went out she said, " Do 
not make fools of yourselves ;; ? That is correct. 

Are you sure she said, " yourselves/' and did not say " your- 
self " ? It was " yourselves, JJ as I heard it. 

As though she was addressing both Stoner and Irene Biggs, 
apparently ? Yes, 

Were there any police officers in the house after you left '/ Yes, 
I believe there was an officer left in the house after we left with the 
accused Battenbury, but I could not say definitely. 

Was there any officer visible in the hall when she went out, 
leaving those two servants together in the house? I cannot 
remember. There were Inspector Carter, myself, and Stoner and 
Miss Biggs there. 

At any rate, the point is that she was talking to both of them 
and said, " Do not make fools of yourselves " as she went out? 
That is so. 

Be-examined by Mr. GROOM- JOHNS ON In accordance with the 
usual practice, have you been out of Court all the time until you 
came into the witness-box? I have. 

GBOBGB HBNBT GATES, examined by Mr. HAWKE I am a 
detective-constable in the Hampshire Constabulary stationed at 
Bournemouth. I was in charge of the accused Stoner on 29th 
March when he was taken to Bournemouth Police Court. At eleven 
a.m. in the morning, or a little after eleven, I was in the detention 
room at the Police Court and Stoner spoke to me. He said, " You 
know Mrs. Battenbury, don't you? J7 I said, " Yes, I do." He 
said, " Do you know Mrs. Battenbury had nothing to do with this, 
affair? " I immediately cautioned him. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS You stopped him then and gave 
him the caution ? Yes. He then said, " When I did the job, I 
believed he was asleep. I hit him and then came upstairs and told 
Mrs. Battenbury. She rushed down then. You see, I watched 
through the french windows and saw her kiss him good-night, then 
leave the room. I waited and crept in through the french window 
which was unlocked. I think he must have been asleep when I 
hit him, still it ain't much use saying anything. I don't suppose 
they will let her out yet. You know there should be a doctor with 
her when they tell her I am arrested, because she will go out of 

142 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

George H. Gates 

her mind. My parents did not stop long, did they? " That last 
remark referred to a visit by his parents to the Court. 

Did you take that statement down in writing 1 I wrote it on a 
piece of paper. 

As he made it ? The best I could, yes. 

Was it a statement that he made of his own accord ? Yes, 

Did you ask him questions while you were taking it? No, I 
allowed him to go along. 

Mr. O'CONNOR 1 have no questions. 

Cross-examined by Mr, CABS WELL This was Friday, was it? 
The morning after his arrest. 

Was it the night before when he was so drunk? On the Wed- 
nesday night he was drunk. 

It was the day he went up to town ? That was on the Thursday, 
the morning after he had the drink. 

And then he was arrested as he came off the train that night? 
I was not present. 

Were you one of the police officers who were in his bedroom 
on the night of Wednesday 1 I was called for. 

He was very drunk indeed, was he not? He was not very 
drunk ; he waa intoxicated. 

Was anything said by him or by any of the officers in your 
presence about taking " snuff " on that occasion? I do not 
remember. 

You know what I mean, do not you, by " taking snuff " ? Well, 
I have seen snuff. 

I mean by snuff, cocaine? No, he said nothing about that. 

Did any of the officers say anything about it while you were 
there? No. 

Are you quite sure? Positive. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS What were the police officers doing 
with him on Wednesday? How did you come to see Stoner on the 
Wednesday? I just arrived home and was at supper when the 
police car called for me, 

Never mind what the police car did ? A request had been made 
by somebody at Madeira Villa for police to be sent, and I was sent 
for and I went. 

Where was Stoner? He was in bed then. 

He was then drunk, was he? Tea, he had vomited on the floor. 

There was no charge as the result of that against anybody? 
None at all. 

WALTER CHARLES JONES, examined by Mr. HAWKE I am a 
detective-constable in the Hants Constabulary. On 28th March, 
1935, I was at the Strathallen Nursing Home when Mr. Eattenbury 

143 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Walter C. Jones 

died. I was actually at his bedside. It was at a quarter-past 
eight in the morning. I went on 5th April to 5 Manor Road with 
Inspector Carter, and I there toqk possession of a parcel which con- 
tained various articles of clothing contained in Exhibit 24, some 
pyjamas, and Exhibit 27, some shirts, and a pair of shoes and 
shoe-trees, Exhibit 29. I also took possession of Exhibit 30, some 
socks, and other articles, and Exhibit 33, a blue suit. They were 
in a parcel which had been sent from Messrs, Harrod's and were 
in the dining-room of 5 Manor Koad. They were all new goods. 

Mr. O'CoNNOK I have no questions. 
Mr. CASSWBLL I have no questions. 

HABROLD SIMMONS, examined by Mr. HAWKB I am a registered 
medical practitioner and police surgeon at Bournemouth. On 28th 
March at five o'clock in the evening I made a post-mortem examina- 
tion of the body of Mr. Rattenbury, Mr. Rooke and Dr. O'Donnell 
were both present. 

As the result of your examination of the nature of the injuries, 
did you come to a conclusion with what sort of force they had 
been inflicted 1 Very considerable force. 

Look at Exhibit 7. Were they injuries which could have been 
inflicted with that? They could have been inflicted with this a 
blunt heavy instrument with a rounded edge. 

Actually how many wounds were there? Three definite wounds 
on the skull. 

How many blows do you think? Those injuries meant three 
separate blows. They could not have been inflicted with less than 
three separate blows. 

What sort of a man was Mr. Rattenbury? He was a well-pre- 
served, strong man for his age, with no evidence in his physique 
of anything like his age. I knew he was sixty-seven or so. He 
was 5 feet 11 in height. 

And the body was healthy, was it? The body was healthy. 

Perhaps I can take it in the form of a leading question, You 
came to the conclusion that there was no evidence of there having 
been any struggle by the dead man before he became unconscious? 
I was quite satisfied there was no evidence of marks of any kind 
of injury on the body such as would indicate a struggle or resist- 
ance except three small bruises in the neighbourhood of the left 
knee which might easily have been caused in moving his body from 
one room to another while he was still alive. 

Is there any possibility of the wounds having been inflicted by 
himself? None whatever. 

There has been some evidence that the seat of the chair in which 
Mr. Rattenbury was accustomed to sit was wet with urine. Is there 
an explanation of that? Yes; immediately following unconscious- 

144 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Harrold Sin 

ness produced by concussion or compression of the brain the 
sphincter muscle of the bladder is relaxed and the urine escapes. 
I think after you had conducted the post-mortem examination 
you took a piece of the scalp on which there was some grey hair 
growing? I did. I handed it to Inspector Carter. I also removed 
the skull cap which I had photographed. 

Mr. O'CONNOR I have no questions. 

Cross-examined by Mr. CASSWELL Did you form any impres- 
sion as to from which direction the blow came over the ear? I 
was quite satisfied it came from behind and above the level of 
the ear. 

EWART MORRIS TREGUNNIN, examined by Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON 
I am chief cashier of Barclay's Bank at their branch in Old 
Christchurch Road, Bournemouth. I live at 13 Kingsbridge Road, 
Park&tone, Dorset. The accused Mrs. Alma Rattenbury has an 
account at our branch. The deceased Francis Mawson Rattenbury 
also had an account. I produce a certificate under the relative 
section of the Companies Act, 1929, relating to Barclay's Bank, 
Exhibit 8. I also produce a copy of the account of Mrs. Rattenbury 
in the books of the bank from 1st September, 1934, to 28th March, 
1935, Exhibit 39. That is a copy of entries in the books of 
the bank. 1 have examined it with the original books, and it 
is correct. It shows that in the year 1934 by 10th December 
Mrs. Rattenbury 'B account was overdrawn by 5 7s. lOd. The 
account remained overdrawn from that time until 18th March, 
1935. The amount of the overdi awing varied from time to time. 
The highest figure of the overdraft was on 26th February when 
it amounted to 93 15s. Id. On 18th March there is a credit to 
that account of a sum of 250. That credit was a cheque for 
that amount drawn by Mr. Rattenbury on the Bank of Montreal 
in favour of Mrs. Rattenbury. On the same day, 18th March, 
1935, there was withdrawn from Mrs. Rattenbury's account the 
sum of 50. I produce a cheque for that amount, Exhibit 10. 
That cheque is signed " Alma Rattenbury." That is the signature 
of the accused Mrs. Rattenbury. The body of the cheque is filled 
in in Mrs. Rattenbury's writing, I think. The accused Stoner 
presented the cheque. The bank paid him the sum of 50. It 
was paid in nine 5 Bank of England notes and five 1 Bank 
of England notes (shown Exhibit 11). That is a true extract 
from the books of the bank showing what the numbers of the 
nine 5 Bank of England notes were. They were numbered 
051J.01486/94. Stoner had cashed cheques payable to himself 
previously. He never cashed cheques drawn on Mr. Rattenbury's 
account to my knowledge. I produce a series of cheques drawn 
by Mrs. Rattenbury, Exhibits 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17. These 

L 145 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Ewart M. Tregunnin 

are all cheques signed by Alma Rattenbury, They are in Mrs. 
Rattenbury's handwriting. They are all made payable to George 
Stoner or order. They are for 1, on the 18th February; 5 
on 4th March; 1 on llth March; 1 on 18th March; 3 on 
25th February; and one for 5 on 25th March. The one dated 
25th March was paid by the bank on 26th March. It was paid in 
cash across the counter. It is payable to George Stoner, the 
accused. I also produce the counterfoils of some of these cheques, 
Exhibit 18, I have counted up and there are between 1st Septem- 
ber, 1934, and 5th April, 1935, 24 cheques made payable to 
Stoner drawn by Mrs. Rattenbury and totalling 37 6s. 5d. (shown 
Exhibit 48). That is a document that I ha,ve not seen before, 
but it purports to be a cheque on our branch, dated 25th March, 
for the sum of 5. The body of that cheque and the signature 
are in Mrs. Rattenbury's handwriting. 

Cross-examined by Mr. CASSWELL It is only fair to say that 
in that account continually we find the name of Stone instead of 
Stoner? Because the writing on the cheque is not very clear, 

WILLIAM GOLDS WORTH CARTER, further examined by Mr. GROOM- 
JOHNSON I have shown to me two cheques, dated 25th March, 
payable one to Stoner and the other to Riggs, each for 5. These 
cheques were signed by Mrs. Rattenbury at Bournemouth Police 
Station on Monday, 25th March, 1935, about twelve noon. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Members of the jury, before you 
separate, I think it may save you looking through them at a 
later stage if you just take these documents now and glance 
at them for your own satisfaction. A great deal has been made 
here about the statement which Mrs. Rattenbury made at 8.15 on 
the morning of 25th March. You will remember all the cross- 
examination, and what the doctor said, and what the police officers 
said. It is a statement which is signed by her, there is no 
question about that, and sometimes you can get some assistance 
from a person's signature as to whether they are capable of knowing 
what they are doing and what they are writing, and whether they 
are in a fit state to write or not. For that purpose I want you 
to look at the signature, which is admittedly hers, " Alma 
Rattenbury," in that little book and compare that with half a 
dozen of the cheques which are also admittedly her ordinary hand* 
writing, Exhibits 17, 48, 12, 13, 14, and 15. You will see that 
two of those were written on the same day at the Police Court. 
Those are ordinary cheques. If you will be good enough to do 
that then it will not be necessary for you to go through it all 
again. 

The Court adjourned. 
146 



Third Day-Wednesday, 29th May, 1935, 

The FOREMAN OF THE JURY May we ask a question 1 We notice 
the head of the mallet is split in two from side to side; the 
bottom half seems to slide easily along the handle. Could we 
know if it was in that condition when found by the police? 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Yes. 

Mr, O'CONNOR I wonder if I may refer at this stage to a 
matter which I mentioned? As I told your lordship last night, 
Dr. Morton is, I am instructed, seriously ill, and it is not possible, 
therefore, to call him to give evidence of a report which he made, 
and of which the prosecution have furnished us with a copy, 
and my learned friend, Mr. Groom-Johnson, has been good enough 
to say he has no objection to my reading it, and, subject to 
your lordship's approval, it should not be taken as depriving 
me of the last word if I do read it. 

Mr. CASSWELL I have had an opportunity of reading it, and 
I wish to do nothing to hinder my friend in his defence in any 
way, I consent to his reading it. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Very well, you shall read it as part 
of your case without proving it. 

Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON I will now proceed to deal with the ques- 
tion asked by the foreman of the jury. 



Evidence for the Prosecution (continued). 

ARTHUR ERNEST BAGWELL, further examined by Mr, GROOM- 
JOHNSON Look at the mallet which you told us you found some- 
where about 6.15 on the morning of Monday, the 25th (shown 
mallet). Do you observe that the head of the mallet is broken 
through? Yes. 

And if you try you will find that the lower half of it nearer 
your hand slides up and down the handle fairly easily. Are you 
able to tell whether the mallet was in that condition when you 
found it, or, so far as you know, was it with the two parts 
adhering together? I did not notice that. I handled it very 
carefully, but I did not examine it to that extent. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS You handed it to whom? I 
handed it to Detective-inspector Carter, in the first place, and 
then on his instructions I took it straight to the police station 
where I lodged it in one of the cells. 

Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON I think we will be able to clear this up 
from Dr. Lynch's evidence. 

147 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

Dr Roche Lynch 

Dr. KOOHE LYNCH, examined by Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON I am a 
registered medical practitioner at St. Mary's Hospital, Paddington, 
and I am Senior Home Office Analyst. I was handed the mallet 
in question in this case by Detective-inspector Carter on 8th April 
of this year. I examined the mallet on the same day and on 
subsequent days. 

Are you able to help his lordship and the jury about the head 
of the mallet? Tou have heard the question which I asked of 
the last witness ? Yes. I can help to this extent : I did not try 
forcibly to separate the two pieces, but they certainly would not 
come apart readily. I did not try to bang it on the bench and 
deliberately force it apart, but there was no evidence to show 
they were readily coming apart, as we have seen this morning. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS You noticed there was a split? 
Yes. 

Examination continued Just take the mallet in your hand 
and see if you can separate the two pieces again. There is a 
crack in the side. Can you say from looking at that crack whether 
it is a crack which has been there for some time? I should say 
yes, it is an old crack. 

On the same day as you were handed that mallet, were you 
handed by Detective-inspector Carter an envelope containing a 
portion of the scalp of the deceased? Yes. 

And an envelope containing hair which had been cut from 
the head of the deceased? Yes. 

Did you weigh the mallet? Yes, the weight of the mallet was 
39 ounces. That is 2 Ibs. 7 ozs. 

On examination of the mallet what did you find? Attached 
to the head of the mallet at the junction of the side and the head 
were a number of hairs and a thin whitish substance which 
resembled a portion of skin. 

(Witness indicated the position on the mallet pro- 
duced to the jury.) 

In the same region did you notice anything else? The mallet 
was stained with human blood. 

Was there suflicient blood for you to be able to distinguish 
to which group it belonged? No. 

What were the hairs? The hairs attached to the mallet were 
human, and appeared to be of three types white hairs, greyish 
and darkish hairs. The hairs were about an inch to two inches 
long, and had been cut at one end. 

Just let us stop there for a moment. When you say cut at 
one end, what did that indicate to you ? That they were ordinary 
abort hairs, probably from the head of a man who had periodically 
visited the barber. 

US 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Roche Lynch 

And at the other end did you notice anything else? Many 
of the hairs revealed the presence of the root, which, when these 
roots were examined, showed that they had been forcibly pulled 
or drawn out of the scalp. 

Did you examine the whitish substance? Yes, Perhaps I ought 
to say here it was rather loosely attached to the head, and as 
I wanted to get at some of the blood underneath I detached it 
and mounted it in a special glass which is here. 

That is the scraping of hair from the mallet? That is the 
hair containing nearly all the whitish substance which I referred 
to as the outer layer of skin (produced and marked Exhibit No. 
49). 

Were you able, to distinguish what that whitish substance was 1 
It was, in fact, outer layers of skin. 

Did you remove that from the mallet in order to enable you 
to obtain samples of the stains of blood underneath the skin, 
in order to distinguish what blood, it was? Yes. 

Could you form any opinion from your examination of the 
mallet and the hairs and the skin how the hairs had become 
detached from the human being? It seemed to me that if this 
mallet was used in striking the skull, and the end of the mallet 
having the grain of the wood cut at right angles, cross-grained, 
a grazing type of blow must have been struck, and the roughness 
of the cross-grain scraped the skull and so detached the thin layers 
of skin and the hairs. 

As regards the amount of blood on the mallet, was that much 
or little? Very little. 

Was there evidence of any attempt to remove the blood from 
the mallet? I found none. 

You were handed also, you told us, an envelope containing 
hairs taken from the head of the deceased. Did you compare 
these hairs with the hairs that you found on the mallet? I did. 

With what result? That the hairs in the envelope were quite 
short hairs, a quarter to three-eighths of an inch long. They 
were human hairs and had been cut at both ends. 

Did that indicate to you that they had been cut from the scalp ? 
Yes, consequently there was no root present. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS You were asked to give your con- 
clusion rather than the steps by which you arrived at it? The 
hairs from the mallet and those cut from the head bore a striking 
similarity, and I am of opinion that the hairs from the mallet 
in all probability came from the head of the deceased. 

Domination continued Were there any haira on the portion 
of the scalp that was handed to you? There were some hairs, 
one or two tiny short hairs, but the material had dried up ao 
much it was quite useless for any examination purposes. 

149 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Dr Roche Lynch 

There is only one other matter I wish to question you about. 
Have you made a study of the properties of the drug called 
cocaine? Yes. 

And are you prepared to give any assistance to the Court on 
that subject if necessary 3 To the best of my ability, yes. 

Cross-examined by Mr. CASSWELL Have you had any experi- 
ence of cocaine addicts? As patients, no. 

In -what capacity or in what position have you examined cocaine 
addicts? I have not really personally examined cocaine addicts. 
My knowledge is based upon what I might call the toxicology 
of cocaine. 

Are you conversant with Dr. Myer's latest book written in 
German, but translated into French, on the subject of cocaine? 
No,, I am not conversant with that book. 

Do you know Dr. Gillespie of Guy's Hospital ? Yes. 

Do you know his book which is called " Henderson and 
Gillespie's Textbook "? Yes. 

It is a well-known book? Yes. 

Am I right in saying that one of the symptoms, or a typical 
symptom, of cocaine is that the patient will tell you that he feels 
moving insects under the skin? He may tell you that in certain 
stages of addiction. 

Some describe it as sand, do they not? Yes. 

Have you come across cases where they thought they saw the 
insects on their skins? I have heard of them. 

Is that a symptom which appears after a considerable amount 
has been taken ? I must qualify that. That symptom is charac- 
teristic in people who have taken cocaine over a long period of 
time what are known as cocaine addictsbut you used the words 
" large dose/' and I thought probably you meant a single large 
dose. 

No; small doses perhaps over a long period of time? A long 
period of time, yes. 

And, therefore, if someone told you of those symptoms, or 
described those symptoms to you, you would naturally think that 
person had been taking cocaine for some length of time? Well, 
it would form a suspicion in my mind, and I should want to 
know a great deal more about the patient before I came to any 
final conclusion. 

And I suppose you would want to know something about the 
early history of the patient? Yes. 

Supposing you found a case of a person who had not walked 
until he was three years of age, would that fact make him a 
little more liable, do you think, to the influence of cocaine? No, 
I should not think so. 

Supposing that, added to that, you find that the whole length 
of his schooling was only three years, and that there was inter- 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Rocbe Lynch 

mittent moving from school to school, and as a result he was back- 
ward in education, would that affect at all his proneness to 
cocaine? I think only to this extent, that if the man is verging 
towards feeble-mindedness he is less capable of resisting the 
addiction to drugs than a normal person. 

Less capable of resisting addiction to drugs than a normal 
person, but, having taken drugs, do you think it would not have 
more effect upon him than upon a normal-minded man? No, I 
do not think so. 

Have you had any experience of such cases? No, except that 
one finds in so far as medicinal doses of cocaine are concerned 
that the more highly educated and more highly strung person 
is more liable to have alarming symptoms than the lower type 
of individual. 

I did not quite catch that. What did you say they were more 
liable to get ? I was speaking of medicinal doses, getting alarming 
symptoms; I mean symptoms of commencing poisoning. 

Do you know Dr. Weatherly, of Bournemouth, the brain 
specialist? I know him slightly. 

Would you agree with him that a typical symptom of cocainism, 
of somebody having taken cocaine continuously, is hallucinations 
of touch? Yes. 

And I suppose hallucination of touch has something to do- with 
this feeling under the skin, has it not? It is all part of what 
I may call disordered sensation. 

Have you heard that called the " cocaine bug " ? The term 
" cocaine bug/' as I understand, was in reference to this alleged 
insect crawling under the skin. 

Quite so, only Dr. O'Donnell has never heard of it, or said 
he had never seen it in any textbook, but it is quite a well-known 
expression, is it not? I think it is an expression which has come 
into use recently. 

Will you agree with Dr. Weather ly that one of the hallucina- 
tions, a marked hallucination, is hallucination of hearing? You 
may get hallucination of hearing. 

And you may get cases of people who have taken cocaine 
frequently and who, under the influence of a dose of cocaine, may 
think that they hear things which are not happening at all? 
That is possible. 

They also think that they see things which are not happening 
at all? That may be. We are now, of course, referring to addicts 
who have taken the drug over a long period of time. 

1 am referring to an addict who describes symptoms of this 
moving insect? Yes, which we find in an individual when it is 
taken over a long period of time. 

Would you agree that one of the principal symptoms is almost 
insane jealousy at times ? Yes, and a suspicion associated with it. 

151 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Dr Roche Lynch 

An unreasonable jealousy? Yes. 

And delusions of persecution ? It has been recorded. 

And, in consequence, the carrying of weapons? Quite possibly. 

Would you agree that cocaine is perhaps the most dangerous 
of drugs in producing violent criminals? I do not know that I 
can answer that question. I do not think I should be inclined 
to say so. 

Would you agree that a person under the influence of cocaine 
is liable to do things very suddenly if slightly irritated? Oh, 
yes, I agree with that. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Is that peculiar to cocaine, or 
does that apply to alcohol? It applies to other drugs as well. 

Cross-easarrmiation continued by Mr. CAS SWELL In that respect 
the results of cocaine are very similar, are they not, to the results 
of alcoholism? Yes, and other drugs too. 

Perhaps I had better put it another way. Would you agree 
that cocaine is perhaps the most rapidly pernicious of all forms 
of addiction? It is a more rapidly acquired habit, possibly, 
than other drugs. 

I was suggesting that it takes effect more rapidly ? You mean 
after an individual dose? 

Yes? It is very rapid in its action. 

And, therefore, because it is an insidious drug, people are 
inclined to become addicts to it more rapidly than to some other 
drugs? They do become addicts very rapidly. 

The reason being, is it not, that they have an impression 
of great well-being while they are under the influence? It certainly 
has that effect, but I do not know that you can necessarily associate 
the two. 

And increased vitality and I suggest they look back and long 
for that condition again? Yes, I think that may be so. 

Have you known instances of a cocaine addict who has done 
something apparently quite foolish? They do foolish things. They 
are more impulsive when under the influence of the drug. 

Does addiction to cocaine lead to facial anaemia? It leads to 
anaemia generally, which is poor blood. 

Would one notice an increasing paleness in the face ? Yes, and 
they get a sallow complexion too. 

But, of course, the face is what one would naturally see? Yes. 

Do you also notice dilatation of the pupils ? You may do. It 
is not always present. 

Not always? And perhaps I ought to add, aa you have 
mentioned anaemia, that addicts become emaciated and thin and 
look miserably ill. 

Would that be after a very long course? Well, it becomes 
progressive as they go. They get worse and worse. 

152 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Roche Lynch 

Can you give us some idea of what period a person would 
have to be an addict in order to become emaciated? Oh, months 
or a year or two. 

Re-examined by Mr. GROOM- JOHNSON Cocaine is, of course, 
given sometimes medicinally 1 Yes. 

Can you tell us what the usual dose is according to the British 
Pharmacopoeia ? Yes, one-eighth to one-quarter of a grain. 

What is the colour '2 It is a colourless, crystalline substance, 
or, when seen in chemists' shops, a colourless white powder, 

Is it sometimes mixed with other substances such as boric 
acid? Yes, it is, more especially when it is used by addictsi for 
snuffing up the nose. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Are you talking about a medicinal 
dose now? 

Mr. CROOM- JOHNSON No, I am talking about the substance 
itself as it is generally known. 

(To witness) Is it sometimes mixed with other substances for 
sale? Yes, that is so. 

Substances of the same colour? Yes. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS You do not mean when it is bought 
from a chemist under a doctor's prescription? No. When addicts 
get hold of it generally by improper means it is very often 
diluted with boric acid and other substances, white crystalline 
substances. 

Re-epamination continued Have you ever known cocaine that 
was brownish in colour? No. 

Or brownish with dark particles in it? No. 

Does that description accord with your experience of cocaine, 
or with any of the substances that are used to dilute it? No. 

If anybody had said that he had had a heaped-up eggspoonful 
of cocaine, could you tell us approximately how many grains 
of cocaine that would contain? A heaped-up eggspoonful of 
cocaine which is about half a teaspoonful contains about 36 
grains of cocaine. 

And would that be a fatal dose? More than a fatal dose. 

And if a spoon of the same size as you have in mind were 
filled up level to the sides of the spoon, about how many grains 
would that contain? About half, 18 grains. 

What would a fatal dose be to someone who is not an addict! 
It is difficult to fix accurately a fatal dose of cocaine, because 
it affects people differently. The lowest recorded dose is two- 
thirds of a grain, and there has been recovery after a very large 
dose. I should be inclined to say in my opinion ten to fifteen 
grains would be the average fatal dose. 

153 



Rattenbury and Stoner* 

Dr Roche Lynch 

But the lowest recorded is two-thirds of a grain? Yes. 

Now, take a person who has taken eighteen grains. That might 
or might not, as I gather from your evidence, be a fatal dose] 
Yes. I think the chances are it would be a fatal dose. 

Would a person who had taken such a dose exhibit any symptoms 
of poisoning? Become desperately ill, yes. 

Within what sort of space of time? Within a short space of 
time within half an hour or less. 

And how long would that condition last? If death takes place, 
death generally takes place within an hour of the taking of the 
poison. If they are going to recover, of course, they will be some 
days before they are completely well again. 

Would they be able to go about? Not for twenty-four hours 
anyhow. 

To drive a motor car within twenty-four hours? No. 

You have been asked a number of questions about the effect 
of cocaine on people who are drug addicts, cocaine addicts. From 
your knowledge and experience, are you able to tell us about 
how long i1j is before the average person can be said to be a drug 
addict, supposing he is taking cocaine? There is no doubt they 
get a craving for it after quite a small number of doses, but the 
picture of the cocaine addict with the symptoms that we have been 
discussing is not acquired for some time. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS What does (t some time " mean? 
Well, I am speaking of the ill health following, which would 
probably be some months the anaemia and the sallow complexion. 

That is not quite what I was thinking about. You spoke about 
persons acquiring disordered sensations, emaciation, hallucinations 
of hearing and seeing, and becoming the subjects of unnatural 
jealousy, suspicion, and so forth? It is very variable in the 
individual, and those symptoms are gradually acquired and slowly 
become worse and worse, and it would probably be some months 
before they were fully developed. 

Ee-eaxiinmation continued Would the question of how much 
was taken at a time affect the progress of the disease? Oh, yes, 
every drug addict has to take more and more of the drug to get 
the same effects, and consequently, as it goes on, he requires larger 
and larger doses. 

Would a person who is an addict and had been suddenly 
deprived of his supply of cocaine show any symptom which an 
ordinary man could detect? He very often becomes very seriously 

Take a person who has become so accustomed to cocaine aa 
to. have arrived at the position when he was suffering from hallucina- 
tions, jealousy, and matters of that sort, would you describe him 
as a cocaine addict? Yes. 
154 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Roche Lynch 

And assume that that person has been deprived altogether of 
cocaine for a period of about two months, would you observe any 
symptoms? Oh, he would become by then, in all probability, 
seriously ill. 

I want you to develop it if you can. What sort of symptoms 
would be observable? He would collapse generally, both mentally 
and physically, and would be profoundly depressed. 

Would you expect such a person to be normal in behaviour? 
No. 

Or rational in conversation? No. 

Would you expect him to sleep normally? No, sleeplessness 
is a very important symptom in addiction. 

Or to take his food normally? No. They generally have very 
poor appetites. 

By a JUROR Would a person using this mallet in the way 
that has been described to us be liable to get blood upon their 
clothing? I think if one single blow were struck it is quite likely 
no blood would be on the clothing of the assailant, but if more 
than one blow were struck it would be quite likely to get on to 
the clothing. On the other hand, I have seen cases where blows 
of this sort had been struck where no blood got on the clothing, 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Does it depend on whether the 
blood spurts out or not? Spurts or splashes. After the first 
blow is struck blood wells on to the scalp, and when the second 
blow is struck it splashes that blood as well as spurts it. 

A JUROR I do not know whether the doctor can tell us anything 
about fingerprints? 

The WITNESS I have no experience at all of fingerprints, 

The JUROR We were told yesterday by Inspector Carter that 
there were no fingerprints upon the mallet. Now, that mallet 
has been handled by the jury and other people in Court. Can 
it be examined now to see if there are anyone's fingerprints upon 
that mallet? 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS I do not think it is any use asking 
this gentleman because it is not his department at all. Perhaps 
some fingerprint expert who really does understand these matters 
will come along and answer the question. 

Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON I have spoken to my learned friend, and 
what I am saying I am saying with, his approval, and I expect 
with the approval of my learned friend, Mr. Casswell. Of course, 
both the accused persons in this case helped Mr. Rattenbury to 
his bedroom when there was any amount of blood about, and it 
has not occurred to the prosecution accordingly that any deduction 
can possibly be drawn adversely to any of the accused on the 
question of blood being on their clothes. 

Mr. O'CONNOR I entirely agree. 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Dr Roche Lynch 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS That is very fair. I daresay it 
answers your question. The probability is you would find blood 
on both of them, and the prosecution say finding it would lead 
to no deduction against them at all because in all probability that 
would come from the handling of the man when he was bleeding. 

Mr. O'CONNOR If I might add something to that, there is 
evidence that there was no blood on the lady's pyjamas. One 
would expect to find some, but in fact there was none. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Yes, very well. Mr. Foreman, you 
asked a question aboub the mallet having been split ; if you would 
like any of the Stevens, whom the mallet belonged to, the grand- 
mother or the uncle, to be asked about that, they shall be brought 
back, because you are entitled to any information you think will 
assist you. 

The FOREMAN OF THE JURY I think it would be just as well in 
this case. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Very well, those persons shall be 
brought back Mrs. Stevens and the young man I think he was 
the uncle of the accused. 

Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON In view of the cross-examination of Dr. 
Lynch, and in view of Dr. Lynch 's last two or three answers about 
the state of a person who has been deprived of cocaine over a 
period of time, I make formal application to your lordship that 
I should be allowed to call Dr. Grierson to help your lordship 
and the jury about this matter. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS I do not hear any objection raised 
to that application. I shall certainly grant it. 

Mr. O'CONNOR I raise no objection. 

Mr. CAS SWELL Neither do I. 

Dr. HUGH ARROW SMITH GRIERSON, examined by Mr. GROOM- 
JOHNSON I am a Bachelor of Medicine, a Bachelor of Surgery, 
and I am senior medical officer at Brixton Prison. Dr. Morton 
is the senior medical officer at Holloway Prison, I identify the 
document shown to me as bearing Dr. Morton's signature, Dr, 
Morton is, to my knowledge, so ill that he is quite unable to attend 
these proceedings. I know the accused George Percy Stoner. He 
was transferred to Brixton Prison from Dorchester Prison on 
Uth May, and he has been under close observation in hospital 
ever since. I have interviewed him on a number of occasions. 

Under your care how has his behaviour been? He has been 
normal in behaviour, rational in conversation, and he has taken 
his food and slept normally. 

Has he been continually under your care and observation from 
the time that he came from Dorchester on 14th May down to 
the present time? Yes. As regards his physical condition, I 
can also add he has gained 8 Ibs. in weight since he came to me. 

156 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Huzh A. Grierson 

Cross-examined by Mr. CASSWELL Have you ever had charge 
of cocaine patients? I have had charge of one, I think one 
that I knew definitely was a cocaine patient. 

Is it true that in some cases, although they are under observa- 
tion, you may not find out what is wrong with them for two 
or three weeks? I cannot say. I have not had sufficient experi- 
ence in cocaine cases to say. 

You know Dr. Gillespie, of Guy's, do you? Yes. 

If he were to say that was his experience, would you be pre- 
pared to refute it? I would not challenge it. 

And, further, that one essential characteristic of a cocaine 
addict is that he tries to prevent your finding out? Well, 1 
do not know. That may be so. 

Do you know Dr. Weatherly, the brain specialist, of Bourne- 
mouth? I have heard of him, and I know him slightly. 

If he says that when he saw Stoner I think it was ten days 
after 24th March he found both pupils dilated and not reacting 
to light, would you think that that was a sign of cocaine? I 
could not say it was definitely a sign of cocaine, because many 
people have normally dilated pupils. 

Have you noticed his pupils now? Yes. 

They show no sign of dilatation, do they? They were normal 
when I saw them. 

And were normal all the time you saw him? Yes. I did 
not take any special notice as to their size, because there was 
nothing special to notice about them. 

He came to you on 14th May? Yes. 

And the day upon which he could have had the last dose would 
have been 28th March? Yes, that was the day of his arrest. 

Do you really say that you would expect to see distinct symptoms 
then? If he was a drug addict, a cocaine addict, I should certainly 
expect to find some signs and some desire for the drug. 

I suggest to you that the desire cornea much earlier than that, 
and fortunately disappears much earlier than the time which, 
elapsed before he came to you? I do not quite understand what 
the question is. 

I suggest to you that the desire for cocaine becomes more violent 
a few days after the effect of the previous dose has worn off? 
T-hat may be so. I do not know. 

Have you any experience of it? No. I do know addicts, if 
they are addicts, certainly crave for the drug. 

'They crave, of course, but I suggest if they are definitely cut 
off from supplies that craving may very soon cease ? I cannot say. 

If that craving had ceased by the time he came to you there 
would be no reason why he should not put on weight under the 
healthy diet and prison life? I quite agree. 

Did he tell you that he had been taking cocaine between slices 
of bread and butter? Slices of bread, not bread and butter. 

157 



Rattenbuiy and Stoner. 

Dr Hugh A. Grierson 

And did he tell you that he took a double dose at about 4.30 
on 24th March? He said he took two eggspoonfuls. 

It has been suggested to Dr. Lynch that two eggspoonfuls 
would be more than a fatal dose. You would agree with that, 
I suppose? Certainly, 

But it would depend upon to what extent that cocaine was 
mixed with some other substance? It certainly would depend on 
the dilution with some other substance. 

Have you had any experience of the sort of cocaine which 
is obtainable otherwise than from chemists you know, by addicts? 
I have seen what is called " snuff." 

In your experience, is that usually extremely diluted? It is 
diluted. 

The more it is diluted the more profit there ia to be made 
by the illicit dealers? That is so. 

So that it might be quite possible that somebody might take 
two eggspoonfuls and still have very much less than a fatal dose? 
Yes, it is quite possible, depending on the dilution. 

You would expect, would you not, that it would be diluted 
rather than pure? Oh, yes, it certainly would not be pure. 

With regard to whether or not he was a good sleeper, was 
that from your personal experience or from what Stoner told 
you ? That is from definite reports. These men are under constant 
observation day and night. All night there is a special officer 
watching these men and noting the exact amount of sleep that 
each man has, and we have a report every morning on every case 
in hospital. 

And he was eating well and sleeping well? Yea, 

And as a result he has put on how much weight? He is 8 Ibs. 
heavier than when he came in. 

Re-examined by Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON The accused told you that 
he had taken two eggspoonfuls about half -past four on the day 
of the crime? Yes. 

Did he tell you what effect it had upon him? Yes. He told 
me it made him excited. In my report I used the word " exalted " ; 
it should have been " excited." That was the effect on that day, 
As a matter of fact, I was going to say something about the 
general effect he told me of cocaine. 

Go on? He also told me the general effect of cocaine on him 
was to make him curse and swear. 

In your experience, are you able to tell us whether that is 
the usual effect of taking cocaine? It ia certainly not, I might 
say, the accepted mental state of a person under cocaine; they 
are usually very happy and contented. 

Has he had any cocaine whilst in Brixton Prison? No. 

Either medicinal or otherwise ? No. 

158 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Hugh A, Grierioo 

Did he tell you anything about the colour of the cocaine that 
he took? Yes, he said it was a brownish powder with black specks 
in it. 

Is that the right colour of cocaine? I have never heard of 
or seen cocaine like that. 

Of that colour 1 Never. Cocaine itself is what might be called 
whitish colourless. 

Mr. GROOM- JOHNSON In view of the cross-examination of this 
gentleman, I will call the medical officer of Dorchester Prison to 
deal with the period between 29th March and 14th May. 

Dr. EDWARD WALLER MANN, examined by Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON 
I am medical officer of His Majesty's Prison at Dorchester. The 
accused George Percy Stoner was admitted to that prison on 29th 
March, and he remained there until he was transferred to Brixton 
on 14th May. During the whole of the time he was at Dorchester 
he was under observation. I saw him frequently. During that 
time I did not notice any sign that he was a person who was a 
drug addict, or cocaine addict, and had been deprived of his 
drug. His behaviour was very good while he was at Dorchester. 
I did not notice anything abnormal in it. He seemed rational 
in conversation, and he slept well. I have no report as to his having 
returned any food. As far as I could see, during the time he 
was at Dorchester Prison he was healthy, and as far as I could 
make out he was normal. 

Mr. O'CONNOR I have no questions. 

Mr, CASSWBLL My lord, this is entirely new evidence of which 
I have had no notice. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Naturally you have had no -notice. 
You can have no complaint about that ; it was you who raised this 
issue. 

Mr. CASSWBLL I am not complaining; I am only asking that 
the crosa-examination of this witness may be postponed until I 
have had an opportunity of consulting with Dr. Weatherly, and Dr. 
Giilespie, who is not here at present. This is a technical question 
I do not feel able to deal with without consultation. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Very well, I grant that application 
until the adjournment. 



ARTHUR ASSIBEI.LI, examined by Mr. HAWKS I am the 
reception clerk at the Royal Palace Hotel, Kensington. I produce 
the receipted bill of the hotel, Exhibit 22, dated 22nd March, 1935. 
The bill is made out to " G. Stone, Esq.," and it is for 3 16s. 3d. 
for accommodation at the hotel from 19th to 22nd March. I also 
produce Exhibit 23, which is a page from the Visitors' Register. 

159 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Alee A. Auirelli 

The fourth entry from the top is " Mrs. Rattenbury and brother, " 
I remember Mrs. Rattenbury coming to the hotel. (Witness 
identified Mrs. Rattenbury in Court, also the accused Stoner as the 
man who was with Mrs. Rattenbury.) The accused Stoner did not 
sign the register as well. Mrs. Rattenbury signed it, " Mr. George 
Stone," or what I took for " Stone," upon my register afterwards. 
I asked her to register his name. The rooms they took were rooms 
630 and 532. They were not adjoining, but they were very near 
each other. The doors were almost opposite each other on the same 
landing, They left the hotel on 22nd March. 

Mr. O'CONNOR I have no questions. 
Mr. CAS SWELL I have no> questions, , 

EDWARD CHARLES WRIGHT, examined by Mr, HAWKE I am a 
salesman employed at Harrod's, Ltd. On 19th March a man and 
woman came to the shoe department where I am employed, and I 
sold the man two pairs of shoes and two pairs of shoe-trees, 
Exhibit 29 is the shoes and the trees. I made out a shopping card 
for the purpose. Exhibit 26 is the shopping card, It is a card 
we give to people who are going to get various things in different 
departments. The first entry is two pairs of shoes. The name on 
the shopping card is Mrs. Rattenbury, Villa Madeira, 5 Manor 
Road, Bournemouth. 

Cross-examined by Mr. O'CONNOR I see on Exhibit 26 " Special 
instructions. Despatch Saturday " ? That was for the second pair 
of shoes which I had not got in stock, and which I had to procure 
and send with one pair of trees. 

And they would be dispatched to the Villa Madeira? Yes, and 
the other pair would be delivered in London. 

But that pair would not be delivered normally till the Monday t 
They were sent by post on the Saturday, and would normally 
be delivered on the Monday. 

Re-examined by Mr. GROOM- JOHNSON There is one document 
which ought to have been put to the witness. (Shown Exhibit 30.) 
Are those the sale notes in respect of the transactions that you 
had with the customer ? There are actually three. 

And is the top one of those signed by the customer ? Yes. 

And does it bear the signature, "A, Rattenbury "1 Tea. 

DAN DAVIBS, examined by Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON I am a sales- 
man employed by Messrs. Harrod's, Ltd. On 19th March, 1935, 
a man and a woman came into my department, which is the 
pyjama department. (Witness identified the accused as the people 
who came into his department.) The woman asked to see some 
men's pyjamas, and I showed them some, and the two persons 

160 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dan Daries 

selected three pairs at 60s. a pair. The material they were made 
of was crepe de chine. I made out an account for sales debit and 
the lady signed one debit. That is Exhibit 25. She had the 
shopping card which has been produced by the last witness, and 
she handed it to me and I put the necessary entries on it. I also 
sold them three shirts, three ties, one dozen linen handkerchiefs, 
and two silk handkerchiefs. All these articles were for men's wear. 
Exhibit 27 is the articles I sold. I produce a sale debit in respect 
of these articles, Exhibit 28, totalling 6 2s. 6d. in respect of 
those articles, and 9 in respect of the pyjamas. Both lots of 
purchases were debited to the account of Mrs. Rattenbury at the 
address she gave me 5 Manor Road, Bournemouth. 

Mr. O'CONNOR I have no questions. 
Mr. CASSWELL I have no questions. 

ERNEST CHARLES MASSEY, examined by Mr. Hawke I am an 
assistant in the men's underwear department at Harrod's. On 
19th March a man and woman came into my department, and 
the woman produced a shopping card, Exhibit 26. I sold them 
three pairs of socks, two pairs of gloves, and two suits of under- 
wear, and the total amount came to 5 10s. 6d. Those articles 
were put to the account of Mrs. Rattenbury, 5 Manor Road, 
Bournemouth. Exhibit 3 is the articles I refer to. I produce the 
debit notes which relate to those transactions. The lady did not 
sign in this case. They were for men's wear. 

Mr. O'CONNOR I have no questions. 
Mr. CASSWELL I have no questions. 

ALBERT JOHN JARVIS, examined by Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON I am 
an assistant at Messrs. Harrod's, My department is the men's 
ready-to-wear clothing department. On 19th March a man and 
woman came to my department. (Witness identified the accused 
as the man and woman in question.) The man asked for a suit. 
I took him to the fitting room and took the usual measurements. 
The two of them chose a light grey suit. I recognise the suit the 
accused is wearing as the suit they chose. They also bought a blue 
suit and a macintosh. Exhibit 33 is the blue suit. That was 
picked out by Mrs. Rattenbury from stock. Exhibit 34 is the 
document dealing with the grey suit. It reads, " One S.B., 
single-breasted, suit, seven guineas," and it is signed by Mrs. 
Rattenbury. The accused Stoner said that he would like to wear 
the suit that day. It had to have some alterations made to it, 
and I arranged for it to be delivered that day at the Royal Palace 
Hotel. Exhibit 35- is the document relating to the blue suit, and 
it is made out to Mrs. Rattenbury, and reads, * c One S.B. suit, 
six guineas; belted mac., 1 17s. 6d." Later I entered those 

M 161 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

Albert J. Jarvis 

articles in the shopping card, Exhibit No. 26. All those articles 
were debited to Mrs, Rattenbury's account. 

Mr. O'CONNOR I have no questions. 
Mr. CAS SWELL I have no questions. 

THOMAS HALL, examined by Mr. HAWKB I am chief inquiry 
officer at Hatred's. It is part of my duty to examine the books 
of Harrod's, Mrs. Rattenbury, of 5 Manor Road, Bournemouth, 
had a deposit account there. I have examined the books and looked 
into the state of that account. On 19th March it was in credit 
just over 1 1 5s. 9Jd. On that day a cheque for 20 was 
paid into the credit of it. On 19th March purchases were made 
to the amount of 40 14s. 6d. They were all articles of male 
apparel. 

Mr. O'CONNOR I have no questions. 
Mr. CASSWELL I have no questions. 

DANBT CHARLES DOBSON, examined by Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON I 
am manager of Messrs. Kirby <fe Bunn, jewellers, 44 Old Bond 
Street, London. (Shown Exhibit 19.) That is an account of my 
firm dated 19th March, 1935, described as a memorandum of 
purchase. It is addressed to, " Mr. G. Rattenbury, 532 Royal 
Palace Hotel, and 104 Redhili Drive, Bournemouth. 1 ' It records 
the purchase of a single-stone diamond ring with diamond 
shoulders, 15 10s., size " N," with compliments. It was the 
male accused who purchased the ring. He paid for it. I did 
not make out the actual receipt, but I handed it to him. It is 
attached to the document produced. It reads, " Received from 
G. Rattenbury, Esq., the sum of 15 10s., 19/3/35." He paid 
it in notes, 5 notes and notes of smaller denominations. I paid 
one of the 5 notes he paid me into my employers' banking 
account at the National Provincial Bank in New Bond Street. 
At the time of payment I asked the accused Stoner for his name 
and address, and it was he who gave me the name " G. Ratten- 
bury " which appears on this document. I asked whether he 
had a permanent address, and it was then he gave me the second 
address, 104 Redhili Drive, Bournemouth. He left the ring to 
be altered in size, and we altered it and sent it that night to 
Mr. G. Rattenbury at the Royal Palace Hotel, Kensington. 

Mr. O'CONNOR I have no questions. 
Mr. CASSWBLL I have no questions. 

JAMES NORMAN WBSOOTT, examined by Mr. HAWKB I am an 
official of the National Provincial Bank, No. 1 New Bond Street. 
I produce Exhibit 20, the certificate of Register of Companies 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

James N. Wescott 

relating to that bank. I also produce Exhibit 21, which is an 
extract from the banknote register. I have compared that with 
the books of the bank, and it is correct. It gives the number 
of a banknote received by the bank on 21st March, 1935, as 
No. OU90. That was a note received from Messrs. Kirby & 
Bunn, jewellers. 

Mr. J CONNOR I have no questions. 
Mr. CASSWELL I have no questions. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS (to the Clerk of Court) Have you 
got the original statements made by the accused? 

Mr. GROOM- JOHN SON Before they are read, I apply for permis- 
sion to hand out to the fingerprint expert the mallet so that he 
may make his tests upon it. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS (to the Clerk of Court) Tou had 
better just read the statements. 

The CLERK OP COURT In answer to the usual caution the 
accused Alma Rattenbury said, ft I am not guilty, and I wish 
to reserve my right to cross-examine and reserve my defence." 
And the accused Stoner said, " I plead not guilty and reserve 
my defence." 

Mr. GROOM- JOHNSON Then, my lord, subject to the recalling 
of the witness, my friend, Mr. Casswell, may want to cross-examine 
later on, and this question of the fingerprint expert, that is 
the case for the prosecution. 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbury. 

Mrs. ALMA VICTORIA RATTENBURY (prisoner on oath), examined 
by Mr. O'CONNOR Mrs. Rattenbury, will you try and help us 
all by speaking up and speaking slowly so that we can all hear? 
Were you married to the late Mr. Rattenbury seven or eight years 
ago] Yes. 

I think you had been married twice before? Yes. 

Your first husband was killed in the War? Yes. 

You had no children by that marriage? No. 

You divorced your second husband? Yes. 

And by him you had a boy, Christopher? Yes. 

How old is he now? Thirteen. 

He is away at school, I think? Yes. 

Just to clear up one matter right away, did he suffer from 
glands some years ago? Yea, 

Was certain treatment prescribed for those glands? Yes, 
arsenic injections. 

Used you to administer those injections? Yes, I went to 
the school to administer them. 

163 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mrs Aim* V. Rattenbury 

They were administered at school? Yes. 

With what instrument ? With a hypodermic syringe needle. 

Is that the hypodermic syringe produced here] Yes. 

Have you ever used that syringe upon yourself? Never. 

So far as you know, has it ever been used for any other purpose 
than for Christopher? Absolutely none. 

Now, a drawing has been produced in Court. By whom ia 
that drawing? By my son. 

Made how many years ago? I am not really certain when that 
was done, because he has been drawing for years. 

Now, there is also a child of your marriage to Mr. Rattenbury 3 
Yes. 

A little boy; I think he is six in June? Yes. 

Since the birth of that child, did you and Mr. Rattenbury 
live together as man and wife? No. 

Did you occupy separate rooms? Yes. 

On what terms were you with your husband? Quite friendly. 

No marital intimacy, but were you cordial? Absolutely. 

Was your married life happy? Like that. (Witness made 
a gesture with her hands.) 

We were told about a quarrel. Were quarrels between you 
and he frequent or not? Not very frequent. 

Were they severe when they occurred, or were they just trifling 
quarrels? It all depended on whether Mr. Rattenbury got in a 
temper or not. He did sometimes. 

One occasion has been spoken about when you received a black 
eye ? Yes. 

I think that was in July of 1934? Yes. 

What was the occasion of that quarrel ? He was queer, morbid, 
and there was the usual talk of committing suicide, so I asked 
him, seeing he was always frightening me that he was going 
to commit suicide, why did he not do it for a change. 

Then how did the blow to your eye occur ? He lost his temper 
and hit me. 

Was that the occasion on which you called in Dr. O'Donnell? 
Yes. 

And told him what he told us you told him; and on that 
evening did he give you an injection of morphia? I cannot 
remember. 

You do not remember anything about that? No. 

What were the relations between you and your husband as 
regards money? Was he free with money? Very close well, 
not very generous. 

Used you to have to say things of which you are ashamed in 
order to get money from him? All my married life, yes. 

Tell him lies? Yes; it saved rows. 

Was Stoner engaged as a houseboy or as a chauffeur ? As a 
chauffeur mostly. 

164 




[Keystone 



Alma Victoria Rattenbury 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbury. 

Mrs Alma V. Rattenbury 

That was in September, 1934? Yes. 

What were his wages? 1 a week, paid on every Monday. 

Did you become Stoner's mistress] In November. 

Was that before or after he had come to live in? Before. 

We know after that that he did come to live in the house? 
Tea. 

Just taking it quite generally, from that time until your 
husband's death did relations take place between you and Stoner 
regularly? Yes. 

In his room, or in yours, or in both? Yes. 

One or the other. What attitude did your husband take towards 
this, if he knew it? None whatsoever. 

Did he know of it? He must have known because he told 
me to live my own life quite a few years ago. 

As I understand it, there was no occasion on which you told 
him about Stoner, but your husband knew about it? No; I told 
him I had taken him at his word and was living my own life. 

Oh, you told him that, did you? Can you tell me when that 
was? No. I would say it was somewhere round about Christmas 
that I told him. 

We have heard evidence given by Riggs of quarrels between 
you and Stoner. Was your husband in the house when these 
quarrels went on? Yes. 

And I think she has told us that they occurred partly in 
your room and partly in Stoner's. Where would your husband 
be at that time? In the drawing-room; he always sat there. 

That is immediately below your room? Yes. 

Used Stoner to change cheques for you at the bank? Yes, 
always. 

How did you pay him his wages as a rule? I paid him 
every Monday 1 a week. Sometimes I would want small cash 
for myself, and then I would make a cheque out for 3 or 5 
and give him 1 out of it and he would give me the change back. 

You had, of course, an account of your own and a cheque 
book of your own? Yes. 

Which we know was overdrawn ? It was always overdrawn for 
years. 

Where was that cheque book kept? In my drawer. No one 
ever saw that cheque book but myself ; it was quite private. 

During the whole of your married life, did your husband ever 
ask to see the stubs, the counterfoils ? No. 

Did he ever ask to see your passbook? No, never. 

It has been pointed out by my learned friend that on the stubs 
of some of the cheques drawn in -Stoner's favour there appears the 
word " self ." What was the object of the entry " self " ? Senti- 
mental reasons only. 

Any attempt to conceal? Absolutely not. 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mrs Alma V, Rattenbury 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Had you any money of your own? 
With writing, yesj I wrote songs, 

I do not find any payment into your banking account? Well, 
because when I received cheques I used to cash them here and 
there and spend the ready cash on the house. 

Your banking account was fed by cheques from your husband? 
Yes, that was for the household account. 

Examination continued by Mr. 0' CONNOR I think you were a 
song writer under the name of Lozanne? Yes. 

And you had some success in broadcasting? Yes. 

I will deal with the week in London in a moment, Tout, speaking 
generally, up to that date what presents had you ever given to 
Stoner? Nothing. The watch I did not really give him. It was 
my father's watch. I told him to carry it for sentiment, you see. 

Did you give him anything at Christmas? I think I gave him 
,10 I am not quite certain but he was to get the children's 
Christmas presents out of that also. 

Make some purchases and keep the rest for himself? Yes, 
exactly. 

Have you ever given him any money for the purpose of buying 
drugs? Absolutely no. 

Was there an occasion in the early part of the year when there 
was a quarrel between you? Stoner and myself? 

Yes? Yes. 

An occasion when Riggs came into the room? I cannot quite 
remember that, but I daresay that is so. 

What can you remember of the quarrel? Well, I wanted to 
sever the connexions on account of the difference in age, if you 
understand, and Stoner said well, he did not want to, and really 
that was all the quarrels were about. 

What did he do on that occasion? Nothing very much. He 
lost his temper, but it was not very 

Was not very serious? No. 

But Riggs came in? As I say, I cannot quite remember that. 

Had Stoner ever threatened your life? Well, yes, but I did 
not take it seriously. 

Did he tell you anything about drugs? Yes. He told me that 
there was something the matter with his head and that he had 
to take medicine twice or three times a year and that was making 
MB head much more normal again. I could not quite understand 
it. 

Did you speak to Dr. O'Donnell about it? Yes. 

And he spoke, he told us, to Stoner? Yes. 

Did Stoner say anything to you about his conversation with 
Dr. O'Donnell ? No, not that I can remember. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Do I understand the only time 
166 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbury. 

Mra Alma V. Raltenbury 

Stoner spoke to you about taking medicine was on this occasion 
when he said that two or three times a year he had to take 
medicine for his head? No, he afterwards changed it and said 
that he was taking drugs, and it was then that I got Dr. O'Donnell. 

Examination continued by Mr. 0' CONNOR There was a time 
when he told you he was taking drugs? Yes. 

Did he mention what drug it was? No. 

He did not mention what it was, and that was the time you 
spoke to Dr. O'Donnell? Yes. 

Have you ever taken drugs in your life? Absolutely no. 

At any time, or description? No. 

We know you were not in the best of health and were under 
Dr. J Donnell's treatment for a number of years? Yes. 

Now, just about this occasion when you went to London. I 
think, as yo.ur banking account shows, you were overdrawn about 
ten days before your husband died, and he gave you 250 which 
went into your banking account to make it solvent? Yes. 

How did you get that money from him ? I got that like I always 
have. I always got extra money from Mr, Rattenbury about twice 
a year when I was overdrawn, and I always had to, what I call, 
make up a different story each time to get it. I asked for, I think, 
more money that time than I had before, but I always got about 
100 or 150 twice a year extra, at Christmas and in June, say. 

What was the pretext on which you got more than you usually 
got? Having been ill I still used that as an excuse. 

You had been ill; you had several operations? Yes; they were 
eo recent that it gave me that for an excuse. 

Gave you that excuse to tell a lie ? 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS What was the lie you told him? 
I said I was going to London to have an operation. 

Examination continued by Mr, J CONNOR You told us you had 
had operations, including one quite recently? Yes. 

How recently was the one prior to your going to London? I 
am so sorry, but I could not tell you that. I think about two 
months, but I am not quite certain. 

Now, did you, having got the 250, have a cheque for 50 
cashed on your own account? Yes. 

By Stoner ? Yes. 

What happened to that money ? Stoner used some of it to get 
me that ring, and he did not 

Did he hand you the notes or did he keep them? No, they 
were spent on shopping, going to cinemas and, you know, like that. 

He retained the notes in his possession ? No, I think I had 25. 

I only want to know where the notes went to when they came 
from the bank? I think I took them and handed him 15 or 20. 

167 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mrs Alma V. Rattenbury 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Was the ring a woman's ring for 
yourself ? Yes. 

E examination continued by Mr. 0' CONNOR Did you go off with 
Stoner to London? Yea. 

I think you started by car and left the car at Southampton ? 
Yes. 

Then yo.u went up and stayed at the Royal Palace in rooms 
quite close to one another, you under his name and he under his ? 
Yes. 

Describing yourselves as brother and sister 1 Yes. 

Were you during that week-end living as man and wife in fact ? 
Yes. 

Now, evidence has been given of clothes that were bought at 
Earrod's, and various things that were in fact ordered by you 
for him. As regards the ring, you have told his lordship that was 
for yourself? Yes. 

He ordered it, and, if my recollection serves me, it was sent 
to G. Rattenbury, to the Royal Palace Hotel? Yes. 

Did you receive the ring? Yes. 

What happened to it? I wore it. 

Did you get back to Manor Road on Friday night, the 22nd ? 
Yes. 

About half -past ten? About that. 

With Stoner? Yes. 

Was your husband in? Yes, in bed. 

Did you see him in his bedroom? Yes, I said goodnight to 
him. 

Did he ask anything about what had been happening? No, he 
always was jolly late at night. 

When you say he was " jolly," I think he used to drink a little 
whisky at night? Yes, always. 

About how much? Well, he drank quite a lot then. 

And I think from time to time you have yourself given way 
to drink? Yes. 

Now, what did you do on the Saturday morning? I went to 
the school to pick little John up. 

You brought him back. Was he to come home for the week-end ? 
Yes, until Monday morning. 

And he returned to school on the Monday morning? Yes. 

Who would generally take him back to school ? Stoner. Some- 
times I would go also. 

On the Saturday afternoon did you take John over to see 
Christopher playing football? Yes, 

Did Stoner drive you ? Yes. 

And your husband stayed behind? Yes. 

That evening, Saturday evening, you brought John back, I 
suppose? Yes. 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbury. 

Mrs Alma V. Rattenbury 

On what terms were you with your husband that evening] 
Quite all right. 

What did you do? I think we played cards. I think it was 
just the same as any other night. 

Now, the Sunday. Was your husband involved in some finan- 
cial worry? Yes, he was rather depressed about his flats, 

When you say about flats he was an architect and interested 
in the erection of buildings, was he not? Yes. 

And his financial affairs had not been going too well? No, 

Is that what he was depressed about? I think so. 

Did you say anything to try and cheer him up? Yes, I was 
very, very nice to him to try and make the " blues " go. He had 
the " blues." 

That was on Sunday morning. Did you take him anywhere on 
Sunday morning? I took him out for a drive and to the kennels 
to see my little dog's puppies, 

I think your bitch had just had a litter of puppies and you 
took him over to see them? Yes. 

And you took him for a drive too? Yes. 

Did that clear up his "blues" at all? No, he was very 
depressed on Sunday. 

Did you lunch together ? Yes. 

After lunch what did you do? After lunch Mr. Rattenbury 
went to sleep, and I played with John you know, the usual Sunday 
afternoon. 

And did you have tea with your husband? Yes, upstairs in 
my bedroom. 

We know that your bedroom had got a balcony. Who brought 
tea to you ? Stoner. 

That was the usual practice, I think, was it not? Yes. 

Of course, Riggs, we know, was out? Yes. 

He brought you tea. Now, can you tell me this : after Stoner 
had brought you your tea what happened to the door? The door 
was always open with a basket in between, but sometimes the 
basket would be moved. John might move it going back and for- 
ward, and it closed. 

On this particular afternoon was the door closed ? For a little 
while. 

The normal thing was that the door to your room should not 
have been closed? Exactly. 

But on this occasion it was closed for a little time? Yes. 

About what time would tea end? I think about 5.30 or a 
quarter to six. 

Was it a substantial tea ? No, sandwiches and cake. 

Was there any other evening meal on Sunday night as a rule ? 
Yes, we always had a lot a high tea later on. 

So this was just an ordinary afternoon tea? Yes. 

169 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mri Alma V. Ratteobury 

After tea where did you go from your bedroom? I cannot 
remember. 

"What did you do 7 You did not stay in your bedroom for the 
rest of the evening? No, I waa downstairs in the drawing-room 
afterwards. 

Was the little boy there or not? No; he was in and out, you 
know, like that. 

We have maintained a discreet silence abo.ut the name, so we 
will not mention the name, but was Mr. Rattenbury reading a 
book? Yes. 

Your husband was reading a book, and in the drawing-room 
did he have a conversation with you about the book ? Yes. 

What did he say to you? He brought a book upstairs when 
we had tea, and whilst we were having tea he read me a page from 
that book. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS What time are you talking about? 
This would be about a quarter to five, I think. 

Examination continued by Mr. O'CONNOR Was that before tea 
or after tea? He read that during tea; you see, we usually had 
tea at 4.30, so I am putting it, roughly speaking. 

You are putting it between 4.30 and five o'clock? Yes. 

Very well. Now, what was he talking about with reference to 
the subject that he had been reading? What was he saying about 
himself? He was quite depressed, and when he read that in the 
book he said he admired a person who could 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS You said he admired a person in 
the book who could do what? What had the person done? The 
person in the book said he had lived too long and before he 
became doddering, as far as I could understand, he finished 
himself. 

Committed suicide? Committed suicide, yes, 

Examination continued by Mr. ; CONNOR He said he admired 
a person who could do that? Yea. 

So he obviously at that time was very depressed and gloomy? 
Exactly. 

Now, what did you do in order to try and cheer him up ? Well, 
I suggested several things, but nothing seemed to cheer him up. 

I want you to follow my question : What did you suggest in 
order to cheer him up ? Did you suggest you should do anything 
or go anywhere? Oh yes; I suggested that we would first of all 
go to London, and he said no. Then I suggested Bridport. 

You suggested going to Bridport 1 Yes, and he said "All 
right " to that. 

170 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbnry. 

Mrs Alma V. Raltenburr 

Why did you suggest Bridport ? Because there was a business 
friend of Mr. Rattenbury's there. 

Is that Mr. Jenks? Yes. 

Was Mr. Jenks associated with him in any way about these 
flats that he was worrying about? Yes. 

And he might have been in a position to help him with regard 
to finance? Yes. 

Now, was anything decided as regards going to Bridport? Yes, 
and I telephoned to Mr. Jenks and made arrangements to go. 

Inspector Carter, I think it is, understands that that was some 
time between half-past six and seven. Is that what you recollect 
waa the time? Yes. I could not say the exact time, 

At any rate, it was after tea? After tea, 

And some time after six o'clock? Yes. 

Between half-past six and seven is the time that has been 
suggested. Where is the telephone? In Mr. Rattenbury's bed- 
room. 

That, of course, is next door to the drawing-room? Yes. 

And any conversation on the telephone, or a conversation which 
took place in the bedroom, could be heard in the drawing-room? 
If the door was open. 

Now, what happened while you were telephoning ? Stoner came 
into the room. 

Had he got anything in his hand? He had a revolver, I think. 
I heard yesterday it waa a toy pistol. I thought it was a revolver. 

He had what you thought was a revolver. You do not know 
what he had, but he had something in his hand you thought was 
a revolver? Yes. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Where was Mr. Eattenbury at 
this time? In the drawing-room. 

Examination continued by Mr. 0' CONNOR In the drawing- 
room, the next room ? The next room. 

What state of mind waa Stoner in? Was he calm, or angry, or 
what? Very angry, 

What did he say he would do to you ? He said he would kill 
me if I went to Bridport. 

Could you go on talking there without being overheard by your 
husband? Yes, practically. One could have, because Mr. 
Rattenbury did not really take very much notice. 

Where did you go to continue the conversation ? In the dining- 
room. 

And had Stoner got the revolver when you went to the dining- 
room? Yes. 

What did he say to you about your relations with your husband? 
He accused me of living with Mr. Rattenbury that afternoon 
with the bedroom door closed. 

171 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr* Alma V. Rattenbury 

What did you say to him about that? I assured him that I 
had not, and he must put that revolver away and not make an 
ass of himself. 

Of course, the little boy was upstairs in the bedroom then? 
Oh, yes. 

What did he say as regards the future? What did he say as 
regards how you were to behave in the future ? 

Mr, JUSTICE HUMPHREYS It is much better she should tell her 
story. You see you are putting it into her mouth; it is really 
much better she should tell it. 

Examination continued by Mr. 0' CONNOR What did he then 
say? Stoner? 

Yes? He told me I must never have that bedroom door closed 
again, and that if I went to Br id port he would not drive. He was 
vary annoyed at my going to Bridport. We had quite an 
unpleasant time about it, but afterwards I thought it was all 
right. 

He said he would not drive to Bridport, and you were not to 
go there. Did he give any reason why you were not to go? He 
did not want me to go with Mr. Rattenbury. 

Did he say why he did not want you to go with Mr. Rattenbury 
to Bridport? He was very jealous of Mr. Rattenbury unneces- 
sarily so. 

What did he say? That is what I want to know? He thought 
I would have to share the same bedroom there. 

When he said that, did you say anything to him about what 
the arrangements were to be? I assured him that I would have 
a separate bedroom. 

What effect did that seem to have on him? I thought that it 
was all right, but I suppose he could not have taken it seriously; 
he did not believe me. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS He seemed to believe you? He 
seemed to believe me, yes. 
And to be all right? Yes. 

Eawmination continued by Mr. O'CONNOR When the conversa- 
tion that you have just spoken of with Stoner was over, where did 
you- go? Back to the drawing-room. 

Was your husband still there? Yes. 

What did you tell him? Oh, I talked about how nice it was 
we w$re going to Bridport the next day, and I still tried to make 
him jolly, you know, and drive away the " blues. " 

Who used to pack for your husband when you went away? I 
usually got his clothes out, and then Irene or Stoner packed. 

What was your practice? When used you to get his clothes 

172 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbury. 

Mr. Alma V. Rattenbury 

out if you were going away the following day? I get them all 
out ready for him then. 

You did that same evening ? Yes. 

Riggs has told us that in his bedroom she saw a suit of clothes 
put out? Yes. 

Hanging up outside the wardrobe? Yes. 

Was that the usual practice? Yes. 

Who put them out that particular night? I did. 

As regards your own things, did you do anything about your 
own clothes ? I started to get ready after I went upstairs at night 
time. 

After you had put out his things, when did little John go to 
bed? It would be about a quarter-past seven when he had his 
bath that night, 

So that he would get to bed somewhere about half-past seven 
to quarter to eight? Yes, exactly. 

Do you recollect seeing Stoner at all after this conversation 
in the dining-room? I cannot remember seeing him after that 
at all. 

Now, having put the little boy to bed, what did you do? 
Played cards with Mr. Eattenbury and talked to him. He was 
quite jolly then. 

You played cards with him then in the drawing-room, I 
suppose ? Yes. 

Was the little dog Dinah in the house? Yes, always. 

Who used to let Dinah out at night? Before I went to bed 
I used to let Dinah out. 

I do not want to take it too quickly. What was the general 
rule? Who usually let Dinah out? I usually let Dinah out. 

Where was she usually let out ? Out of the drawing-room f rench 
window, and I closed her outside, and it was Mr. Rattenbury's 
habit five minutes later to let her in, because if you did not close 
the door she would not stay out. 

The little dog used to come probably and scratch to get let in? 
Yes. 

This night did you let Dinah out through the f rench window 
in the drawing-room? Yes, the same as usual. 

Can you tell me whether you closed it or not? I would auto- 
matically close the door, and then I would say goodnight to Mr. 
Rattenbury and go upstairs. He would go and let Dinah in five 
minutes later, and then she would come upstairs. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS I do pot know what the answer 
is to your question. You asked her whether she closed the window t 
Yes. 

Examination continued by Mr. O'CONNOR Do you remember 

173 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

M Alma V. Rattenbury 

closing the window that night? I would have to, because she would 
not stay out unless I did close the door. 

Can you give me any idea of the time you let Dinah out? I 
went to bed exactly at 9.30. 

After letting Dinah out, what did you say or do to your 
husband ? I did not see him any more. I went to bed. 

But before you got out of the drawing-room, did you say any- 
thing to him but goodnight? I just said goodnight, " Good- 
night, darling " kissed him goodnight, 

You then went upstairs. Did you go direct to your bedroom 
or go anywhere else ? No, I would go to the bathroom and lavatory 
upstairs first. 

Can you remember how long you were there? No, not very 
long, 

Not very long. I mean, you did not have a bath J No. 

When did you next see the dog? Well, when I went to my 
bedroom Dinah was there; just five minutes 

So during the short period that had elapsed between your going 
into the bathroom and coming out the dog had finished her duty 
and had come back into the room? Exactly. 

Now, we have been told that you were in pyjamas from four 
o'clock that day, and the suit has been produced in Court. Were 
you? Yes, but dressed underneath. 

Anything on your feet? Oh, yes, shoes and stockings dressed. 

When you came out of the lavatory, what did you do then 
when you got into your bedroom? I undressed and put the same 
suit on again. 

Took off everything underneath and refitted for bed 1 Exactly. 

You were going away the next day. Did you have any prepara- 
tions to make 1 Yes, quite a few. 

And did you then get into bed? Yes. 

Did you shut the door? Yes, I invariably shut the door. 

Were you expecting anybody to call? Stoner. 

Did you go to sleep or what did you do ? No ; as I would think 
of something else to put into my suitcase I would get out of bed 
again. 

Getting in and out of bed? Yea. 

Had you a book or anything with you ? A magazine. 

Did you hear Riggs come in? No. 

What was the time she did come in? She had a regular time, 
round about ten o'clock, did not she? Ten o'clock. 

Did you go along to see her? Yea. 

Used you often to do that? Very, very often. 

She was a very close personal friend of yours ? Yea. 

She has told us you remained with her for about ten minutes 
or more talking about to-morrow? Exactly, to explain to her 
what I was doing the next day. 

m 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbury, 

Mra AW V. RnUenbury 

Then what did you do when you left Biggs? Went back to 
bed. 

Now, did anybody come in? Stoner came in afterwards. 

About how long after you had got back to bed ? That I am 
not certain about, because I did not look at the clock. 

I mean, was it long; was it minutes, or what? Well, I did 
think it was shortly afterwards, but after hearing the evidence 
here I have become rather confused in time; it seems later than 
I thought it was, 

Had you seen Stoner till he came in 1 Not all the evening. 

Since the time you had seen him in the dining-room? No, not 
all evening, Not that I remember. 

What happened when Stoner came in; what did he look like? 
I did not notice anything at the moment, but a little later I 
noticed he was a little bit queer. 

What did he do? Did he get into bed or not? Yes. 

He did. How was he dressed? In his pyjamas. 

How long had he been in bed before you noticed what you 
were just going to describe? Almost right away. 

What was it? Tell your own story, Mrs. Rattenbury. I do 
not want to lead you at all on this? Well, he seemed agitated, 
and I said, " What is the matter, darling? " and he said he waa 
in trouble, and could not tell me what it was, and I said, " Oh, 
you must tell me," and we went back and forth like that for two 
or three minutes, and he said, no, that I could not bear it. I 
thought he was in some trouble outside, you know his mother or 
like that and then I said I was strong enough to bear anything, 
and he told me he had hurt 

What did he say? Put it in direct language, if you can. 
What did he say to you? He told me that I was not going to 
Bridport the next day as he had hurt Ratz, It did not penetrate 
my head what he did say to me at all until I heard Ratz groan, 
and then my brain became alive and I jumped out of bed. 

Yes? And went downstairs. 

Did you stop to put any clothes on or slippers ? Oh, no. 

Did Stoner ay anything about how he had done it? He said 
he had hit him over the head with a mallet. 

Anything more about the mallet? That he had hidden it 
outside. 

I think you told us that you rushed down to the drawing-room. 
What did you find when you got there? Mr. Rattenbury sitting 
in the chair, and he 

I do not think you jaeed trouble to- describe exactly what you 
saw, but he waa sitting in the chair? I tried to rub his hands; 
they were cold* I tried to take his pulse, and I shook him to try 
and make him speak, 

Did you call for any help? Not right away. I tried to speak 

175 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

MM Alma V. Rattenbury 

to him, and then I saw tkis blood, and I went round the table, 
and I trod on his false teeth, and that made me hysterical, and I 
yelled I cannot remember, only vaguely. I took a drink of 
whisky to stop myself being sick. 

You yelled for whom? Irene. 

Did she come down? Yes. 

Was that the only drink of whisky you had? No, I took one 
drink of whisky neat, and I was sick, and then I remember pouring 
out another one. I cannot remember drinking the next one; I 
tried to become insensible, to block out the picture. 

Do you remember the police officers coming? Absolutely not. 

Do you remember sending for Dr. O'Donnell? I cannot remem- 
ber anything from putting a white towel round Mr. Rattenbury *s 
head and the vomiting, and treading on those 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Do you say you were eick after 
drinking the whisky? Yes, 

Examination continued by Mr. J CONNOR Can you remember 
anything more about the events of that night? No. 

Do you remember the gramophone? No. 

Do you remember the police? Absolutely not. 

Mrs. Rattenbury, did you yourself murder your husband? 
Oh, no. 

Did you take any part whatsover in planning it? No. 

Did you know a thing about it till Stoner spoke to you in your 
bed ? I would have prevented it if I had known half a quarter of 
a minute before, naturally. 

Mr. CBOOM-JOHNBON My lord, I was going to suggest this 
would be a convenient moment to adjourn. Superintendent, 
Baddeley, of the Fingerprint Department of Scotland Yard, has 
made his experiments, and it will not take more than a moment 
or two, and if your lordship approves we might take it now, 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Certainly. Let the witness go back. 

(The accused Rattenbury returned to the dock.) 

HARRY BADDBLEY, examined by Mr. CROOM- JOHNSON I am a 
superintendent of the Criminal Record Department at New Scotland 
Yard, in charge of the fingerprint branch. Amongst other things 
I have had upwards of twenty-seven years' experience in examina- 
tions for the detection of fingerprints. I have examined within 
the last hour Exhibit 7, the mallet in this case. I was not able to 
detect any fingerprints on the surface of that mallet anywhere. 
That includes handle. 

Why ? I might add that it is not a suitable medium for retain- 

176 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbury. 

Harry Baddeley 

ing finger impressions j the surface is not entirely smooth, it is 
grained. As a matter of fact, I attempted to impress my own 
fingers on the surface of the handle gently, and I failed to develop 
anything at all. 

Is there a difficulty, iji your experience, in detecting finger- 
prints on wooden surfaces as compared with others? Yes, the 
surface must be entirely smooth. That is not so in this case. 

Mr. O'CONNOR I have no questions. 
Mr. CASSWBLL I have no questions. 

By a JUROR From what I have seen on the films, I understand 
there is a method of reviving old fingerprints. Is that so? There 
are many. 

And they do not apply to this case ? Yes, they have been tested, 
and carefully tested the whole of the surface. 

Mrs. ALMA VICTORIA RATTENBURY (accused), recalled, cross- 
examined by Mr. CAS SWELL Mrs. Rattenbury, I want you to 
understand from the start that I am not suggesting that you had 
anything whatever to do with what happened on 24th March, or 
that you ever incited Stoner, or knew that h was going to do it. 
What I want to ask you a little about is the time when he first 
came to stay at the Villa Madeira. Have you ever had a man- 
servant before? Yes, several. 

Had you had a chauffeur before? No. 

Had you had a chauffeur and a manservant in the same position 
as Stoner? No always a chef. 

Of course, in the first place, you engaged him to come in by 
the day, did you not? Yes, to take little John to school; he was 
a day boy starting in the pre-prep, and it took too long to go 
in on a tram. 

So he had to be there early enough to take John to school? A 
quarter to eight. 

Well then, you went to the Randolph Hotel at Oxford 2 Yes. 

At that time did you tell your husband that you were going 
to Leeds? I thought of going; we could not get any farther. I 
tried to go there. 

And was it there that you first had connexion with Stoner? 
No. 

Was it before that or after? No, after. 22nd November. 

22nd November was the first day, was it? Yes. . 

How long after that visit to Oxford? I do not know. 

Was it you who suggested it, Mrs. Rattenbury? What going 
to Oxford ? 

No, living with Stoner 1 No, I think it was mutual. 

K 177 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr. Alma V. Rattenbury 

Mutual? Because, you see, he was in the position of a servant, 
was he not? Yes. 

And quite a young man? Yes. 

Did you think that it might have a very deleterious effect on 
him? No, I never would have started it if I had. 

You did not think then? No. 

But you made things easy by having him in the house, did you 
not? Sleeping in? 

Yes? Yes; he used to stay occasionally before then. 

Before he slept in he used to stay occasionally, did he ? Yes, 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS If you want to sit down, you can 
do so? I think I would sooner stand. 

You can do so if you please. You will probably be there some 
time, and if at any time you want to sit down there is a chair 
available? Thank you so much. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. CAS SWELL I suppose you 
told him that you and your husband had not been living as husband 
and wife? It was obvious to anyone living there; they would 
know it. 

He would know it? Naturally. 

Did you tell him you were looking for sympathy? No, most 
decidedly not. 

You were looking for that, were you not, from someone ? No, I 
certainly was not. 

It was just an infatuation, was it not? I think it was more 
than that. 

You fell in love with him? Absolutely. 

Now tell me, when did you first come to the conclusion that 
he was taking drugs? 

Mr. GROOM- JOHNSON She has not said he was. 
The WITNESS He told me about his head, I think, some time 
the beginning of November, but not as if he were taking drugs. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. CAS 9 WELL He said what 
to you? He said he had a bad head, or he had to take medicine 
for his head, or what? Yea, there was something queer about his 
brain, and he would outgrow it if he took this medicine. On 
thinking it over I became rather alarmed; I thought if he were 
taking something to cure his head he might have to keep on 
taking it, so I kept on trying to make him talk to tell me what 
he was taking. 

Now, did you ever see what he was taking for his head? No, 
he never would let me, and I could not force his confidence; he 
would not tell me. 

178 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbury. 

Mrs Alma V. Rattenbury 

What you thought then was that there was a danger of his 
becoming addicted to it? Yes. 

Whatever it was? Yes, but he assured me that he was taking 
it less, and it was only two or three times a year, and that at 
the end of a few years he would not have to take it at all. I could 
not have had him around with the children if he had been like 
that. 

I understood you to say in evidence he said he was taking drugs? 
Yes, later than that. 

Did you believe him then when he said he was taking less 
and less? Did you take no further notice of it in November? 
Well, I watched him, and he seemed quite normal. 

How did you expect to find him abnormal? In what way? 
Well, it is difficult to explain, His temperament he seemed to 
be so absurdly jealous at times, and that made me worried. 

He did not seem quite normal, you mean? No. 

Now, what I want to know is : did he get worse while he waa 
with you? No. 

Did he seem to change from when he first came ? No, I thought 
he was much better. 

Do you mean to say when he first came as a servant he seemed 
to be jealous? No; I did not know him so well then. 

And then you gave him various things, did you not? 
Naturally. 

Cigarette lighters, holders, and things like that? Oh, ones 
that I had in the house I was going to say dozens of them. That 
is nothing for me; if anyone sees a cigarette holder and they like 
it I always say " Take that." It is my disposition. 

Did you buy some from Mrs. Price? We always dealt there. 

You bought some from her for Stoner, did you not? At 
Christmas, I think. 

Mrs. Price was the owner of the Villa Madeira? Yes, that is 
right. 

Now, you told us that you never took drugs yourself at all? 
No, absolutely not. 

You are quite sure of that? Positive, 

From time to time we have heard that you .used to get very 
excited at times and then get drowsy afterwards? Well, all my 
life with Mr. Rattenbury was so what we call monotonous that at 
times I used to take too many cocktails to liven up one's spirits 
take them to excess, say, or wine. 

And you say that was the result of cocktails? Anything like 
that; wines or cocktails not spirits, not like that night, hard 
liquor. 

Did Stoner take them also ? No ; he was very much upset. He 
did not like me taking them; in fact, I stopped taking them after 
he came. 

179 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

Mr* Aim* V. Rattenbury 

Apparently somewhere in February, January or February, you 
went to see Dr. O'Donnell about Stoner, and at that time you had 
become quite frightened, had you not? 

Mr. O'CONNOR il 2th February. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. CAS SWELL 1 thank you. 
12th February ? Very alarmed. 

He had become violent, as I understand, had he not? Yes, I 
was frightfully upset about it. 

And you came to the conclusion that he was violent because he 
had been taking drugs? Yes. I would not say violent exactly 
more agitated. 

Agitated ? Yes. He said he had to go to London that morning 
early to get this drug, and I begged him not to go, but he had to 
go, and when he went I was so upset it was dreadful I tele- 
phoned Dr. O'Donnell to explain everything to him, and said 
could he help this boy, I could not stop him going to London, and 
I explained it all to Dr. O'Donnell to see if he would help him. 

Now, have you any doubt that that boy at that time had such 
a craving that he went to London and nothing you said would 
stop him? To be perfectly candid, I was not certain then, and I 
am not certain now. I cannot answer that and say yes or no. I 
do not know. 

All you know is he was determined to go to London? Exactly. 

And he told you he was going there to get the drug? Yes. 

Now, Dr. O'Donnell has told us what you asked him was to 
find out what drug? Yes, exactly. 

Why did you want to find out what drug? Well, I naturally 
would want to find out, would I not ? 

I do not know, you see, whether one drug would be more dreadful 
than another? Well, no, six of one and half a dozen of another, 
but if you are fond of someone and you know there is something 
wrong you naturally want to find out what it is so that you can 
help him. 

You heard from Dr. O'Donnell, did you not? Yes. 

And he told you the drug was cocaine ? Yes. 

Did you do anything more about it? No, because Stoner was 
better from then onwards, and he said he could not get the drug, 
and I did not want to agitate him in case he was longing for it, 
and we went on just smoothly, and I never brought the subject up 
again. He said he had stopped it from then onwards, and, well, 
everything was all right. I thought he had. 

I do not quite understand. You mean to say from that time 
onwards there were no more threats from him? Not with the 
drugs. 

What with then I No, I am afraid that is a misunderstanding, 
I do not think I used the word " threat." 

180 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbury. 

Mrs Alma V. Rattenbury 

I thought Miss Riggs said I may have been wrong that you 
complained to her on several occasions that Stoner had been 
threatening you? No, I am afraid that is rather an exaggeration, 
to say threatening. 

Not on several occasions? No, he was never like that. 

More than once ? Yes, but just like I said before, I wanted to 
break the connexion, say, on account of the difference in age, and 
that would agitate him; that is all not threatening exactly. 

Just what you took to be ordinary temper, was it? Yes, upset. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Did you know his age when he 
came to you ? I thought he was older. 

Did you ask 1 Yes. 

What did he say? I thought he was twenty-two when he first 
came, and afterwards he said he was nineteen. 

How did you come to think he was twenty-two? Because that is 
what he said. 

He said so 1 Yes. 

When did you learn that his real age was eighteen ? I think 
I am not quite certain on his birthday. 

When was that? 19th November. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. CABS WELL You adver- 
tised, did you not, for a boy between the ages of fourteen and 
eighteen? Yes. 

That was the sort of age that you wanted him? Yes; I had 
always put the advertisement in like that, but I would not take 
any notice of the age. I have often had people come and call 
themselves seventeen when they had been a little older. I would 
not take any notice of that. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS What was the advertisement, Mr. 
Casswell ? 

Mr. CASSWELL An advertisement for a boy between the ages 
of fourteen and eighteen. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS That is right, is it? Yes. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. CASSWELL Did people 
get to know that you seemed to be a little bit too intimate with 
Stoner, do you think? Did anyone talk to you about it? No. 

Do you remember Mrs. Price saying something to you about 
it? She sort of referred to it, but I considered it was none of her 
business to interfere with my private domestic affairs. I think I 
told her so. 

Was there an occasion about a fortnight before this 24th March 
when Mrs. Price rather remonstrated with you and said, " Are 
not you getting too fond of that boy M ? She tried to refer to the 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr* Alma V. Raltenbury 

subject, but, as I say, I politely told her to mind her own business. 

Did you say on that occasion " I told you I would make him 
love me, and I have "? Absolutely not. 

That is not true? Absolutely a falsehood. 

Was it before or after your trip to London that you came to the 
conclusion that you ought to break off the connexion because he was 
so young? Several times since November that subject came up. 

Why did you take him up to London and spend all this money 
on him? Because, having said to Mr. Rattenbury I was going 
away, I had to go, and I took that for an opportunity to get him 
some clothes, which he very much needed. 

You said to Mr. Rattenbury that you had a serious operation, 
did you not? Yes; as I explained before, my whole married life 
was spent twice a year, more or less, telling a lie like that. 

You used to have 50 a month for housekeeping, did you not? 
Yes, but I had to pay for everything out of that, and it never was 
enough. 

Did you ask for 250? Yes. 

You were not overdrawn to that extent at all, were you? No, 
but I thought then I would not have to go through the beastly busi- 
ness of asking again in June, so I would sort of kill two birds with 
one stone, as it were. 

How much of that 250 did you spend up in London? 1 am 
rather vague on money. First, of all, I paid off a lot of debts in 
Bournemouth, and what was over I took to London. There wus not 
much. 

You spent a considerable amount in Harrod's about 50, was 
it not? Yes. 

Did you not get that 250 in order to go to London? 
Absolutely not; to pay my debts in Bournemouth, which I did do. 
You can see by my bank account that ail the shops were paid. 

Why was it necessary to go to London? Well, I could not think 
of any other place to go. I might have gone to Devon. 

That was making out the excuse? To Mr. Rattenbury, yes. 

Would it not have been better if you had found a room for your 
chauffeur somewhere else when you went up there ? Yes ; I wish I 
had since. 

I want to know about the pistol that you say Stoner had when 
he carne in on the night of the 24th. Had you seen that before? 
No. 

What was it like? I did not particularly look at it. I hear it 
is a toy pistol, so I daresay that is what it was. 

There is one pistol that has been talked about, or the box in 
which it was contained, and that was called an air pistol, but you 
did not look at this thing at all? No. It was a small revolver, you 
know, and he had it like this (indicating), and I told him to put 
the beastly thing away; it might go off, 

Did you think it was a real one then? Yes. 

182 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbury. 

Mrs Alma V. Rattenbury 

Did you say anything to anyone about it 1 No, naturally not. 

What did he do with it < Well, he put it in his pocket. 

Do you mean to say you did not take any further steps about 
that? No. Why should I? 

Well, I do not know. You thought it was a real revolver that 
he was brandishing about? Yes, but I did not see Stoner again 
that night after I had sort of, what I call, pacified him. 

But he brought the supper or high tea into the drawing-room? 
Yes, but I could hardly get up and say, " Give me that gun/' 
in front of Mr. Rattenbury, could I ? 

But, in the first place, Mr. Rattenbury was not there at all? 
In the drawing-room. 

When he first produced this revolver? Oh, no. 

Why did you not say to Mr. Rattenbury, " This boy has a 
revolver; take it away from him"? I naturally would not say 
anything about Stoner to anyone else, would I. 

Well, I do not know. Do you say that you really thought it 
might be a real revolver ? Yes, but I could have got that away the 
next day. 

I see, and you thought that all was well. Had you ever seen 
I am not accusing you of. anything had you ever seen this mallet 
in the house before? No, never. 

Had you suggested somebody should get a mallet? Oh, no. 

Had you not? No, absolutely no. 

Cross-examined by Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON Mrs. Rattenbury, you 
appreciate, do you, that there is only one person alive who can 
check your story of what went on in this house from the time that 
Irene Riggs went out until Irene Riggs came back on that Sunday 
evening 2 Yes. 

That person is Stoner? Yes. 

Tell me this : you have been asked already what the point was in 
the journey to London with this boy whose mistress you were. 
What was the point of the journey to London with this boy if, in 
fact, you and he had been living together practically as man and 
wife since 22nd November, 1934 ? I tried to explain that just now ; 
it was all for Mr. Rattenbury's benefit. 

Mr. Rattenbury's benefit? Because I said I was going to Lon- 
don to have an operation, and I had to leave home. 

That was the story you told your husband, who is now dead ? 
Yes, that is the truth. 

What was the point of going on the journey at all ? Because I 
could not stay in that house when he had given me the money for 
the operation. As I say, I might have gone to Cornwall, or any- 
where. 

I want to be fair with you. Before you asked for the money 
from your husband, had you made up your mind to go to London I 
No. 

18* 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

Mrs Alma V. Rattenbury 

You got the money on the same day ? Oh, if 

The same day. Then before you went to your husband for 
money you had made up your mind to go to London ? To go to 
London, yes, because you would naturally say London for an 
operation, you see. 

With Stoner 1 Yes. 

And did you take care, in asking your husband for money, to ask 
him; for enough to enable you to defray the expenses of the journey 
to London? Well, no. When I asked for the 250, I thought it 
would save me the trouble of asking him again in June, and then 
I could get through until next Christmas without asking again. 

When you went to your husband, had you made up your mind 
to fit this boy out with clothes? No, not like that. 

Had you thought about it? No. I was going to get a suit of 
clothes, but when I got there I sort of went ahead and shopped like 
that. 

Had you thought about giving him clothing before you went to 
your husband for money? No. 

Your husband was a man who had retired? For about twenty 
years or more. 

And was living largely, if not wholly, on his means ? Yes. 

Had he got a sufficiency of money? I understood he was very 
well off. 

You had little or nothing ? Exactly, except what I made with 
my writing, and I had cheques from my mother. 

Should I be doing you any injustice if I suggested that you 
had little or nothing? Except odd money from my mother. 

If you please. How much in the year ? I do not know. She- 
would send me at Christmas 25 or 10 something like that, 

Stoner had nothing? No. 

Had the question of money between you and your husband been 
a matter about which you had differences of opinion in the past? 
Oh, yes. 

Am I putting it fairly when I suggest that you were in the habit 
of deceiving your husband in order to get what you regarded as. 
sufficient money for your needs? Absolutely. 

Did you know that your husband's securities had fallen very 
considerably in value? No. He was always talking like that, 
so it was a case of the lamb calling wolf; if it was so, one 
would not have believed him. 

Did you tell him before you asked for the money, or at the* 
time you asked for this 250, that you were going up to London 
to have an expensive operation? Yes. 

Did he tell you that it would be at a considerable sacrifice 
if he gave it to you? Tea, but he always all his life talked 
like that, so that no one ever took him seriously on the point 
of money. 

184 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbury, 

Mrs Alma V. Rattenbury 

Madam, please do not tell me "no one " ; let us confine our 
attention to yourself and your husband. When you say that 
you did not take him seriously ? No, absolutely not. 

About how much money did he let you have in the course 
of a year? Oh, I really could not tell you that. 

Considerable sums in the course of a year ? I could not answer 
that. 

Hundreds? I suppose so. 

With regard to this account that you had in the bank in 
your own name, you paid out of it, I see, Miss Riggs and Stoner ? 
Yes. 

Anything else? Oh, yes. I had to pay all the household 
accounts, and get Mr. Rattenbury's clothes and the children's 
clothes, and their schooling not the schooling for little John. 
It was too much; that was why I was always overdrawn. 

About how much a year did he let you have? He used to 
give me regularly 50 a month, and I was regularly overdrawn. 

50 a month would be 600 a year? I see. 

And in addition to that about 150 on each of two occasions? 
Yes that and more. 

Something over 1000 a year? Yes, I daresay. 

Did you tell your husband that Stoner was going to stay at 
the same hotel with you? I never mentioned it; it was not 
necesisary to lie. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS It was not? It was not necessary 
to lie just nothing was said. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. GROOM- JOHNSON Nothing 
was said? Nothing. 

You, in fact, drove as far as Southampton? And then the 
car broke down. 

And you left the car there and went on by train? Yes. 

Did you ever tell your husband that you were buying clothes 
for Stoner ? I never told my husband I was buying clothes even 
for little John. Expenses were never brought up in my life with 
Mr. Rattenbury. 

These clothes you did buy for him, did you regard them 
aa necessary? You used the words this morning, I observed, that 
he required clothes? Yes, I considered so. 

Silk pyjamas at 60s. a suit? That might seem absurd, but 
that is my disposition. 

During the time that you were in London were you on the, 
what had become, ordinary intimate terms with Stoner ? The same 
as at home, yes. 

What was the last occasion on which you were intimate with 
Stoner ? Saturday. 

185 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mrs AW V. Rattenbury 

You have told us that on the Sunday night Stoner came into 
your bedroom and got into bed with you? Yes. 

Was that something which happened frequently? Oh, always. 

Always? Were you fond of your little boy, John? I love 
both my children. 

Were you fond of John? Naturally. 

Did John sleep in the same room? Yes, but in another bed 
at the other side of the room. 

It is not a very large room? No, but little John was always 
asleep, 

Are you suggesting to the members of the jury that you, a 
mother fond of her little boy of six, were permitting this man 
to come into your bedroom with you, in the same room where 
your little innocent child was asleep? I did not consider that 
was dreadful; I did not consider it an intrigue with Stoner. 

Until Stoner told you during that time and in that bed about 
the mallet and about the hiding of the mallet, can you recollect 
any other occasion that evening when he had that- opportunity? 
No. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS I am not sure I follow that. Do 
you mean that, after you found your husband injured, during 
the whole of that night you were never alone with Stoner? Yes. 

Were you alone with Stoner that night at any time after you 
found your husband injured? No. I cannot remember. 

Cross- examination continued by Mr. CROO-M- JOHNS ON You told 
us thia morning that you did not hear Irene Rigga come in? No. 

There is evidence in the case that after Irene Biggs came in 
Stoner was out on the landing, looking over the banisters? Yes. 

From the time that he got into your bed to the time that 
you jumped out of bed and went downstairs to the drawing-room, 
4id Stoner ever leave your bed? I wasi in bed when Stoner came 
and got into bed. Do you mean, did he get out before me? No, 

Did he remain in bed with you? Yes. 

From then continuously up till the time when you jumped 
out of bed and went downstairs? Yes. 

Did you hear Stoner speak to anybody outside the door or 
on the landing? No. 

Did you know that he was out there at all ? No. 

How soon after you got downstairs that evening and, as 
you say, discovered your husband in the chair did you call out 
for Irene Riggs? I should say it would be about three minutes; 
it would not be very much more two minutes. 

She told us, according to my recollection, almost immediately? 
Yes, I just had time to walk round. 

Was there a great deal of blood when you got down there? 
Yes. 

186 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbury, 

Mrs Alma V. Rattenbury 

On the carpet? Yes. 

Did you notice blood on his clothes and on his collar, which 
had obviously run down from his head 1 Yes j it was his eye that 
I noticed. 

Was it apparent to you when you got down there that he 
must have been bleeding for some time? I never thought one 
thing or the other. 

You saw blood and did not think. Now, do you think from 
the blood that you saw that he must have been bleeding for some 
time? There was just about that much, a spot about that big 
(indicating). 

On the carpet? On the carpet round. 

Soaked in? I do not really know. 

The sight upset you, according to your evidence? Naturally. 

And you took some whisky? Yes. 

Was that before Irene came down or afterwards, as nearly as 
you can recollect? I think it must have been after Irene came 
down . 

Was that neat whisky? Neat. 

How much? Oh, I poured out as much as I could get down. 

And then? I was sick. 

You were promptly sick? Yes, and I poured out another one. 

How long was that before the doctor came? I cannot remember 
the doctor. 

Cannot you remember the doctor coming at all? I have pieced 
together from hearing here 

Are you telling the members of the jury that from the time 
practically that you were sick and poured yourself out a glass 
of whisky your memory does not serve you at all? I can, yes, 
a few things. I remember like in an awful nightmare. 

You remember, as I gather, placing a wet or white towel I 
am not sure which it was round Mr. Rattenbury 's head? Yes, 
and I remember rubbing his hands, and they were so cold, 

Is he still in the chair in the drawing-room? Yes, I wanted 
to get- his teeth in ; I thought he could talk and tell roe what 
happened. 

And according to you that is the last thing that you recollect? 
I remember one or two things more. 

Tell me the things you recollect on that night? Nothing that 
night; it was a shock to me to hear 

Do you recollect Dr. O'Donnell coming? I cannot. 

What? No, I have tried so hard, even with piecing together 
from what I have heard, to remember and I cannot, 

Do you recollect the second doctor arriving? No. 

Dr. O'Donnell was a friend of yours and yo.ur medical 
attendant? Yes. 

As a rule, a person calculated to soothe rather than excite you? 

- T ~ 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mrs Alma V. Rattenbury 

You recollect nothing of Dr, O'Donnell that night? No. As I 
say, I have tried in the last two months very, very hard to 
remember with piecing together, and still I cannot. 

Do you recollect a succession of police officers coming in ? No, 
I could not; not one man could I see in Bournemouth. I tried to 
remember. 

You recollect nothing at all more that night until some iiine 
the next day ? Little John standing in the doorway and his little 
face; I remember that. 

What time of day was that? I do not know. I can remember 
getting into a car, but I do not know what car, and that child's 
face in the doorway. 

Where do you recollect yourself as being when that happened 1 
I was getting into a car, but I cannot remember I had to ask 
what car afterwards. 

Do you recollect arriving at the police station ? No, completely 
nothing. 

Do you recollect being charged at the police station? No, my 
mind has gone, 

Do you recollect being before the magistrates about eleven 
o'clock the next morning? No. 

Do you recollect two interviews with your solicitors that morn- 
ing 7 No. 

In the course of which I suggest you gave them instructions 1 
No. 

Do you recollect seeing Dr. O'Donnell somewhere about one 
o'clock? No. 

What is the last you recollect of Stoner that night ? I remember 
Stoner kissing me goodnight in my bedroom, and I cannot 
remember going downstairs to the car, but I remember little John 
at the door, and those are the only two things at the Villa Madeira 
I remember after that awful night. 

Had you a sunshade put up in the garden the previous year? 
Yes. 

Had you a mallet for that? No, no mallet for that; I think he 
used to put it up with the axe. 

Was there any intention that day, Sunday the 24th, of putting 
up a sunshade in the garden? Not to my knowledge. 

That day you had had tea with your husband? "Yes. 

You never saw the mallet? No. 

What was the sound that you heard, according to you, which 
made you run downstairs? I heard a groan. 

Was it loud enough for anybody else who was awake in the 
house to hear it? Well, my bedroom is right over the drawiag- 
room, and you could hear it quite clearly there. 

You could hear it quite clearly? Yes, but perhaps in Irene's 
room she would not hear that because of the wall. 

188 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbury. 

MM Alma V. Rattenbury 

What sort of groan was it that you heard 1 Can you describe it 1 
A jolly good groan. 

By somebody? Somebody in pain. Just one groan nothing 
eke. 

Not somebody saying, " Dear, dear," or anything like that? 

I do not recollect that I heard, " Dear, dear." 

And Irene came down almost at once I Yes. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Did you find the drawing-room 
door open when you got downstairs? I am sorry, I could not tell 
you that. 

You do not know ? No. I think it would be open, yes. 

I do not want you to tell me what it would be ? It usually was. 

But you do not know? No. 

Waa your bedroom door open when you heard the groan? No, I 
was in bed. 

Was your bedroom door open? Oh, no, it was closed. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. CBOOM-JOHNSON Do you 
recollect whether you put soda in your second dose of whisky or 
not? No, I cannot; I have an idea that I took it neat, but I might 
not have. 

Are you accustomed to drinking whisky? No. 

But you drink cocktails'? Oh, yes, and wines. 

Are you fairly well accustomed to cocktails? Pretty well, yes. 

Do you make them up yourself ? No, we usually buy the made- 
up ones; sometimes we make them up. 

When you used to take cocktails for the purpose of getting 
your spirits up, how many did you take? Two or three. 

Two or three in what period of time? Well, drink one, and 
then have 

Do you mean just before your evening meal? Yes; take one 
and then another, and then take another. 

Two or three ? Yes. 

Just before your evening meal. Might it be more? It might 
be not always but sometimes just one. 

Very frequently? Not very frequently, 

Are you accustomed to consuming wine every day? Not every 
day. 

Most days? No, not most days. 

What I am suggesting to you, you know, Mrs. Rattenbury 
let me make my suggestion quite clear is that you are quite 
accustomed to consuming fairly large quantities of alcohol T Of 
wine, yes. 

And of cocktails? Yes, quite true. 

You agree with me that cocktails are sometimes rather a con- 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr. Alma V. Rattenbury 

centrated form of alcohol? That is why Stoner wanted rue to 
stop them, and I did. 

Stoner had thought apparently that you were drinking too 
much? Yes. 

Very well. Well now, you do not remember Dr. O'Donnell 
arriving? No. 

So that you can give us no help one way or the other as to any 
statements that you are alleged to have made to Dr. O'Donnell 1 
No. 

You are neither in a position to contradict him nor to accept 
what he says. Is that the position? Absolutely; I have to. 

Did you hear Irene call out for Stoner that evening fairly soon! 
No;, I could not tell you whether I called, or whether Irene did. 
I do not really know. 

When Stoner came into your bedroom that night was he dressed 
in his pyjamas? Yes. 

Are you sure he had not his trousers on? No, absolutely 
positive. 

Or a shirt? No, just his pyjamas. He got into bed. 

And when you left the room and went downstairs, if this story 
is right, you left Stoner in your bed in your bedroom? Yes, 

Have you heard it said in the course of the case that when 
Irene called out for Stoner, he came down almost immediately, 
certainly dressed in his trousers? Well, it would be the natural 
thing he would do. 

And it is said a shirt? Yes, but it is the thing, I think, any 
man would do, to put his trousers on, would he not? 

Do you know whether he possessed a dressing-gown? Yes, 

I am suggesting to you, you know, that Stoner had never 
undressed that night? Oh, he was undressed. 

And had never been to bed? Oh, yes; he got into bed. 

Had he got a dressing-gown ? Had he come into your bedroom 
wearing his dressing-gown? No, just pyjamas. 

And then afterwards you do not recollect telling Dr. O'Donnell 
anything about the visit to Bridport? I remember nothing like 
that. 

Have you ever stayed with Mr. and Mrs. Jenks at Bridport 
before ? Yes. 

How long before? I could not really tell you that. 

Have they a large house or a small house? A large house. 

A large number of bedrooms or small? It is quite a large 
house. 

How long before had you stayed at Bridport? Just a night. 

How long before ? Oh, I could not tell you the month we were 
there. 

Before -Stoner had come to the house or afterwards? Oh, yes, 
before Stoner came, 

190 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbury. 

Mrs Alma V. Rattenbury 

Are you suggesting to the members of the jury that you wanted 
to go to Bridport ? That I wanted? 

That you wanted to go to Bridport? No, not I; I wanted to 
cheer Mr. Rattenbury up to make a change for him, and he did 
not want to go to London, so I suggested Bridport. 

Did it occur to you that if you went to Bridport Mr. Ratten- 
bury might want to treat you as his wife 1 No ; if I had thought 
it was going to happen like that, I never would have suggested 
going. 

It never occurred to you? No. 

You know exactly what I mean by saying treat you as his wife] 
Yes, exactly. 

\Vhen had you last been intimate with your husband'] About 
six years ago. 

How old is little John? Yes, that is what I am just taking. He 
is six and a half in June. 

John is six and a half in June ? Yes. 

Are you fond of him? Naturally. 

What? Yes. 

Your husband? No. Did you ask 

Were you fond of your husband? I did not love him, no; I 
was more of a companion than anything. 

If he had wanted his rights as a husband, would you have been 
ready to grant them to him? If he had wanted what oh, no. I 
do not think so. 

In March of 1935? Oh, no, I do not think so decidedly not. 

Were you fond of this boy? I loved him. 

Did it occur to you that if you went to Bridport with your hus- 
band you might possibly sleep together in the same room? Natur- 
ally not, or I would not have suggested going. 

Tell me one other thing about the visit to Bridport. You knew, 
according to your evidence that you have given here, that Stoner 
had refused to drive you to Bridport? Yes, but I thought that he 
would change his mind. 

Do you mean you thought you could persuade him to change it? 
Yes. 

You were not upset when you went into Irene Riggs's room 
that night, were you? No. 

Do you recollect what took place in that room ? Yes } I told her 
about the next day, and that I had had a rumpus with Stoner 
because he did not want me to go away, but I said that it had 
blown over and it was all right, that I was not certain whether 
he was going or not, but I thought I would be able to fix it all right. 

You remember all that? Oh, yes. 

Where was Stoner when you were in Irene Biggs' & bedroom 1 
I do not know. He would be in his bedroom then. 

Used you sometimes to go into Stoner's bedroom? Yes. He 
always undressed in there and came into my room after. 

191 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

MM Alma V. Rattenbury 

You have not followed my question. He always undressed iu his 
room and then came into your room? Yes. 

You told me a moment ago that on the Saturday night Stoner 
was intimate with you ? Yes. 

In your room or in his room? My room. 

With little John in bed in the room 1 But he was sound asleep. 

With little John in bed in the room? Yes; he was sound asleep. 

Just one other thing, Did you ever go into Stoner 7 s bedroom 
when he was there? Oh, yes, frequently. 

Did you ever go into bed in that room? Yes, when my elder 
son was home. 

In bed with Stoner ? Yes, when my elder son was home. 

Was not that, to say the least of it, the more convenient course 
when your little boy was sleeping in your bedroom ? It really had 
not entered my head like that, because I always had my children 
very intimately with me. 

Was there anything that you can think of, if you wanted to 
indulge your passions that night, why you should not have gone 
into Stoner 's bedroom ? No, but there was no reason why I should, 
because I had not ever done it before except when my elder son was 
at home. 

Where was Stoner when you went into Irene's bedroom? I do 
not know; I should think he was in his bedroom undressing, 

In his own bedroom undressing. You see, Irene Biggs has told 
us that she went downstairs and that she came up again and found 
Stoner looking over the landing? Yes. I daresay he was just 
perhaps coming out of his room then to oome into mine. 

And he was leaning over the landing, as he said, to see whether 
the lights were out ? Yes. There would be nothing out of the way 
in that; he would come from his bedroom to mine. 

At that time, as I understand your evidence, he had never come 
into your room, because he never left your bed from the time he 
entered it to the time you went downstairs ? Yes, that is right. 

Irene Riggs then came out again a little later on and went 
along the passage and then went back to her own bedroom? Yes. 

I suggest that you went into Irene Riggs's bedroom to speak 
to her because you had heard her moving about? Oh, no. 

According to your evidence that you have told us this morning, 
you had not heard her come in? No. Well, I daresay I would. I 
was in the habit of going in, and if Stoner was not already in I 
would go in there to tell her what was happening the next day. 
There was nothing out of the way in that. 

Had you not gone into her bedroom to be perfectly certain 
everything was all right t Yes, to explain about the next day. 

Do not misunderstand me. I am suggesting that you had gone 
into her bedroom to see everything was all right and that she had 
not found out what had happened downstairs? No, I could not 
very well do that. 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbury. 

Mrs Alma V. Rattenbury 

Now, I am going to take this as shortly as I can in view of the 
answers that you have given me. You had heard something about 
suicide that evening, according to you 1 Yes, but that was nothing 
out of the way ; I had heard it several times. 

Do you recollect whether you told that to Dr. O'Donnell that 
night ? No. 

What? No; I am sorry. 

Do you recollect being in your bedroom afterwards, first of all 
with the police officer, or more than one police officer, in the room? 
No, I have forgotten. I am very glad I have forgotten a lot of 
these details. 

Dr. O'Donnell has told us that he gave you half a grain of 
morphia ? Yes. 

And that eventually you went upstairs to bed and finally went 
to sleep. Do you recollect being given a cup of coffee in the morn- 
ing! No, I do not. 

And drinking it? No. 

And having a bath ? Mrs. Kattenbury, are you really telling my 
lord and the members of the jury that you do not remember either 
of those incidents the nest morning 1 Absolutely not. 

The next morning at 7 a.m. ? Absolutely not, except little John 
at the door. I cannot remember the car, or how I went anything. 

Do you remember the police-matron in your room? I cannot; 
it has completely gone, that. 

You cannot remember anything else ? Those three things. 

Your mind is a complete blank about conversations? Fortun- 
ately. I have tried to piece it up, but I am glad from what I have 
heard that I have forgotten. 

About conversations, your mind is a complete blank) 
Absolutely. 

About incidents? Yes. It might be somebody else you are talk- 
ing about. 

About people ? Oh, yes, 

About conversations ? Quite. 

All a complete blank? Not to everything there. 

Do you recollect making a statement to Detective-inspector 
Carter ? I remember not one of those policemen. 

Is your mind a complete blank about making a statement to 
Detective-inspector Carter which he wrote down in this little book 
(Exhibit 39)? I cannot remember that. I have tried, tried aixd 
tried; yesterday, last night, I tried to remember again that 

Just look at the little book. Do you recollect the little book 7 
Look at the book first (handed Exhibit 39), and then I will put my 
question next ? Then I might be able to remember. 

Do you see the words " Alma Rattenbury " ? Yes. It is all 
absolute double-dutch to me. 

193 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mra Alma V. Rattenbury 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Just wait for the question. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. CBOOM-JOHNSON Is that in 
your handwriting? Yes, that is my signature. 

That is your writing. Look at it carefully; read it through to 
yourself, and then I will ask you a question. Do you recollect the 
officer reading that out to you ? No. 

Do you recollect your asking the police officer to be allowed to 
read it for yourself ? No ; that was quite a shock to me yesterday, 
hearing that. 

Do you recollect his handing you the book and reading it for 
yourself? No. 

And sitting on the bed holding that book in your left hand and 
putting your signature to it with your right? No. It is my signa- 
ture, but I do not remember it. 

Tell me one thing that I want to get quite clear : according to 
your recollection, as far as you knew, had Stoner come into your bed 
that night before Irene Riggs came in or afterwards 1 After I had 
said goodnight to Irene. 

You see what is said in that little book: " About 9 p.m. on 
Sunday, the 24th March, I was playing cards with my husband 
when he dared me to kill him as he wanted to die " 3 Yes. 

Now, you do recollect the incidents of Sunday evening? Yes. 

Up to the time, at any rate, when you went downstairs and 
found your husband injured? Yes. 

Is it true that at about nine o'clock on Sunday evening you 
were playing cards with your husband ? Yes, I was playing cards 
at nine o'clock that night. 

IB it true that he dared you to kill him ? No. He read me that 
in the day time about suicide ; he had referred to it several times 
in the last few years. 

And that he wanted to die? He had said that in the last few 
years. 

That evening while you were playing cards ? No, not then. In 
the afternoon when he read me that page, 

Is it true, as it is stated in that book, " I picked up the mallet n 
meaning you? It would be an impossibility. Where would I pick 
it up? 

Is it true he then said, " You have not got guts enough to do 
it " ? No, that is what he said in the afternoon when he read it, 
that he did not have guts enough to do it. 

Is it true you then hit him with the mallet? Absolutely not. 

And that you hid the mallet outside the house? I could not. 

You told us this morning of what Stoner told you, that he had 
hidden the mallet outside ? Yes. 

Then the expression, " I would have shot him if I had a gun " 
does that accurately represent your feelings towards your hus- 
band at times? No. I cannot think why I could have said that, 

194 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbury. 

Mrs Alma V. Rattenbury 

except after seeing the revolver in the afternoon and the two made 
my mind go to that, you know. 

There were times when you were very angry with him, were 
there not? Yes, quite. 

Particularly when you were having money difficulties with him? 
Yes; not always money. 

Did you have difficulties with him ? Were you angry with him 
at the time that he struck you and gave you the black eye? Very, 
that night. 

Very angry. Is that the only time that he lost his temper with 
you? No, he had lost it on several occasions. I always kept him 
pacified so as not to rouse his temper. 

Has he lost his temper with you on several occasions since Irene 
Riggs came to live in the house? I do not think many. 

Not many. Had his temper changed about that time? No, he 
was always all right if he was just left to sleep. 

You see, he has been described here, Mrs. Rattenbury, to use 
the exact language, as an amiable gentleman? Yes, quite; when 
he was just like that he was charming. 

Now, I put the suggestion to you that that statement was made 
about 8.15 in the morning, after you had had coffee and a bath. 
Do you recollect going away from the house a little later on and 
seeing Stoner and Irene Riggs in the hall? No, I just remember 
little John at the door. I tried not to remember that. 

It has been sworn to that what you said to Riggs and Stoner was : 
" Do not make fools of yourselves "? Yes. 

Have you no recollection of that? Absolutely none. 

Do you recollect the last thing that your lover said to you before 
you went oS to prison ? No ; I remember him kissing me upstairs. 

The sort of thing that a woman might remember, what her lover 
said to her at the last moment before she was going to prison ? He 
never said anything when he kissed me upstairs. I do not remem- 
ber if he did. 

Just before you were leaving the house, in the hall in custody] 
I do not remember seeing him even, really just little John, 

Do you swear that you do not recollect his saying " You have 
got yourself into this mess by talking too much "? No; I swear 
I do not remember any of that. 

Do you recollect what car you went to the police station in ? 
I have asked and been informed what I went by ; I did not know 
what I went in. 

Did Stoner drive the car in which you were taken to the police 
station? So I have been told. 

Is your mind a blank as to what you said when you were 
charged at the police station about this ? Absolutely. 

According to the sworn evidence in the case, when charged at 
the police station you said this : " That is right; I did it deliber- 

195 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr. Alma V. Rattenbury 

ately and would do it again. ); Have you no recollection of that? 
No, absolutely none, 

At the police station that morning somewhere about half-past 
twelve, do you recollect writing a cheque in favour of Stoner for 
5 1 I remember writing two cheques, one for Irene and one for 
Stoner, but I do not remember who I gave them to. I can remem- 
ber taking my cheque book so that I could send them back cheques 
knowing I was going away. I wrote from Holloway and asked 
whether they got the cheques, but I do not remember who I gave 
them to. 

Mr. O'CONNOR Well, my lord, I should like to see that letter. I 
am told the Crown have that letter. 

Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON If it is here, Mr. O'Connor, you shall 
have it. (To the witness) You wrote a letter 1 Yes. 

Afterwards? Yes, 

To whom? Irene, I think, 

Asking for your cheque book ? No, asking her whether she had 
cashed the cheque, because I did not know whether she had got it. 

How long after these occurrences did you write that letter? 
Oh, I could not say. 

A day or two? Oh, I could not say. 

This much is plain, that when you wrote that letter you had 
quite a clear recollection of having written the two cheques? Yes, 
absolutely. 

On the morning of Monday, the 25tht Yes; I can remember 
sitting and writing them too. 

And how much the cheques were for ? 5 each. 

And who they were for ? Yes, absolutely. 

And you could recollect having handed them to somebody? To 
somebody, I know I cannot even remember that, 

Up to that moment, according to your evidence, your mind is 
a complete blank for many hours? I cannot even remember how 
I got the cheque book, 

Is that the first thing you can recollect after you recollect put- 
ting a wet towel round Mr, Rattenbury J s head 

Mr. O'CONNOR No, she says 

Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON Of course she has, and the jury have 
heard it, Mr. O'Connor. (To witness) Is that really, in substance, 
the first matter that you recollect from the time that you recollect 
putting a wet towel round Mr. Rattenbury's head? Do you mean 
to say, is that the last thing I remember practically doing? 

You have told us that you recollect putting a wet towel round 
Mr. Rattenbury's head 1 And I remember pouring that last glass 
of whisky, but I cannot remember whether I took it. 

196 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbury. 

Mrs Alma V. Rattenbury 

So that from that time onwards do you wish the members of 
the jury to believe that your mind is a complete blank, with the 
exception of one or two trifling things you have told us, until you 
recollect about the two cheques at the police station at half-past 
twelve or thereabouts on the Monday morning 1 ? But that is 
absolutely the truth. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS I want to understand your state 
of mind on the 24th and the early morning of the 25th. Accord- 
ing to what you are presenting to the jury, do you say that you 
have a perfectly clear recollection of what Stoner said to you when 
you were in bed? I think so. 

Well, have you any doubt about it? No. 

You say no? Absolutely. 

You remember even the trivial detail that he mentioned to you 
he had hidden the mallet? Yes. 

You are sure about that? Yes. 

And you are sure that is when you learned that he had hidden 
the mallet? Absolutely. I never spoke to Stoner again. 

Well now, the next morning we have had evidence that you said 
to Irene Riggs, " Tell Stoner that he must give me the mallet." 
Did you say that? I presume I did. 

Do you mean you do not remember? Absolutely not. 

You must have remembered at that time all about it, must you 
not, or you could not have said that 1 I wish I 

Do you really mean that you have no recollection of any con- 
versation you had with anybody? No, 

The whole of the time ? No, I felt as if I were the one who had 
been hit over the head. 

But you remember quite well what was said to you, and every 
word that was said to you by Stoner just before ? Oh, yes. 

In bed? Naturally. 

You say naturally ? Well, I had not had that dreadful shock 
then. We were quite happy : I was quite happy then life was 
different. 

Now, it is quite clear that your evidence to the jury is that you 
do not remember even seeing a police officer that night? No, I 
saw them all for the first time in Bournemouth. 

You do not remember Dr. O'Donnell coming 7 No. 

Did you have anything except whisky that night, except the 
morphia the doctor gave you hours later ? No. 

Nothing else? No. 

Very well. Now, there is another matter I want to understand. 
You say you did not hear Miss Riggs come in? No, I never did; 
she was very quiet. 

She may have come in very quietly? She always did. 

Did you hear while you lay in bed and before Stoner came into 

197 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mrs Alma V. Rattenbury 

the bedroom Miss Riggs and Stoner talking just outside your bed- 
room door 1 No, I heard nothing. 

Did you not hear a word of that? Absolutely not. 

You were not asleep ; can you explain why 1 Well, it would not 
be very easy ; my bed is over towards the window, and if they were 
out on the landing and my door was closed, and they would not 
talk in a loud voice, naturally I do not think anybody could hear 
it there. 

We are told one of them, Stoner, was upstairs outside your room 
calling over the banisters to Miss Riggs who was down below, and 
she answered him, or she called to him and he answered? They 
are very soft spoken. 

You did not hear a word of that? No, absolutely. 

But you did hear your husband in the drawing-room groaning ? 
You could hear every noise in my bedroom from the drawing- 
room quite distinctly. 

When Stoner told you he had done this thing, did you believe 
him ? No. 

When you found your husband, did you believe him? Well, I 
had to believe him then. 
You did 1 I hardly knew what to think. 

Had you any doubt at all when Stoner told you that he had hit 
your husband on the head with the mallet, and you went down- 
stairs and found your husband had been hit on the head, that 
what Stoner had said was true ? Well, one would naturally think 
BO, would you not? 

I do not know. You are here to answer my questions. I 
would like to have a plain answer from you : had you any doubt 
that what Stoner said to you was true ? I did think it was. 

Did you tell anybody of that? No. Do you mean at the timel 

Did you tell anybody that Stoner had done this to your husband 
and you knew it ? Oh, no, unless I said something that night that 
I do not remember.. 

When did you first tell that to anybody? I think my solicitor. 

You told your solicitor? I told him that, yes. 

Re-examined by Mr. O'CONNOR With regard to that last ques- 
tion of my lord as to whether you told anybody, I suppose you 
have no recollection of saying between two and half-past three 
that very morning, " My lover did it " ? Oh, no, naturally not. 

What was the thought uppermost in your mind when you heard 
the news from Stoner? Upstairs? 

Yes? After he had actually told me to try to protect him. 

To protect himthat is Stoner? Yes, Do you mean after I 
had seen Mr. Rattenbury? 

I mean when Stoner told you this story, what did you desire to 
do as regards Stoner ? I thought he was frightened at what he 
had done because he had hurt Mr. Rattenbury. I think he just 

198 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbury. 

Mrt Alma V. Rattenbury 

sort of thought he hurt him bad enough to stop him going to 
Bridport, and when I said, " I will go and see him/' then he 
said, " No, you must not." He said, " The sight will upset you/' 
and I thought all I had to do was to fix Ratz up and that would 
make him all right. 

When you saw your husband, did you make any decision as to 
what you were going to do regarding Stoner 1 No ; he was worse 
than what I anticipated. 

Did you decide to do anything as regards Stoner? No, my 
mind went awful, dreadful. 

Now, my learned friend has put to you a statement that you 
are said to have made at a quarter-past eight in the morning. 
First, of all, have you any recollection of ever having morphia that 
night ? No. 

My learned friend has suggested to you that the statements in 
it are true. I want to ask your views about it. " About 9 p.m. 
on Sunday, the 24th, I was playing cards." It is true you may 
have been playing cards? Yes. 

Would you be playing about nine o'clock? Yes. 

Now, you told us you went upstairs. You let the dog out about 
half -past nine? Yes, I went upstairs at 9.30. 

And up till that time were you playing cards? Yes. 

11 He dared me to kill him as he wanted to die." Had he ever 
dared you to kill him? Suicide has come in several times with 
Mr. Rattenbury. 

Did he ever dare you to kill him? No, not to my knowledge, 
except that he has talked of suicide and the gas oven and things 
like that; that would be a dare. That is why I had that quarrel 
that night, I was getting rather fed up. 

Very well. " I picked up the mallet." Do you have mallets 
lying about in the drawing-room 1 I could not have picked it up ; 
it would be an impossibility to pick up a mallet that was not there. 

What I was asking was, are mallets part of your drawing-room 
furniture? Have you ever seen that mallet before? Never before 
in my life. 

What was the first time you saw it? In Bournemouth. 

When in Bournemouth? At the Police Court? Yes. 

" He then said, f You have not got guts enough to do it,' I 
then hit him with the mallet." Did you hear the police-sergeant 
Bay there was no sign of any struggle on the part of Mr. Ratten- 
bury ? Did you hear that in Court ? Yes. 

Did you hear it said that the blow was probably struck from 
behind ? Yes. 

11 I hit him with the mallet, I hid the mallet outside the house." 
Except from what Stoner told you, had you any idea where the 
mallet was for the rest of the evening? No, I did not know where 
it was, because he said " outside," and I did not know where. I 
asked where it was after I had been to Bournemouth, and they told 

199 



Rattenbmy and Stoner. 

Mra Alma V. Rattenbury 

me where they had found it, and the next thing I wanted to know 
waa by which door they had found it, and then I knew. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS It comes to this, does it : that state- 
ment the witness says is practically true if you substitute 
"Stoner " for "myself." 

Mr, O'CONNOR No, I did not understand that from her. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Somebody picked up the mallet j some- 
body hit him on the head with it } somebody hid the mallet outside. 
If she had said " Stoner " instead of " I did those things, " it 
would have been true. 

Mr, O'CONNOR My lord, with respect, no. You can hardly 
apply that to the story of going and fetching the mallet, four miles 
away, bringing it back to the house and doing the act in that 
way. (To witness) Now, let me ask you this : " ' I know who did 
it his son.' ' How old is he? ; ' Thirty-two, but he is not 
here/ " Do you remember saying anything of that kind to 
Inspector Miles? No. 

We do not want to bring in the whereabouts of the son or any- 
thing, but do you know, is he in England 1 In Canada. 

Was he in Canada on the 24th March? Yes. 

Let me look at another statement. Tell me, you read the news* 
papers sometimes, do you, Mrs. Rattenbury ? I have not since the 
case because they are not allowed. 

I am not talking about that in the ordinary way? Yes. 

Do you know what a Coroner is ? No, I do not absolutely know 
what a Coroner is. 

You have probably read of Coroner's inquests? Yes, that 
would be, because I could not understand how I used the word. It 
puzzled me. 

Then you have heard of Coroner's inquests ? Yes. 

Did you at any time in your life imagine that Coroners sat at 

half -past three in the morning ? No, I could not possibly 

" Have you told the Coroner yet? I will tell you in the morn- 
ing where the mallet is. Have you told the Coroner yet? " Did 
you imagine those important officials were available at half-past 
three in the morning? No, it is too absurd. 

" I will give you 10 no, I won't bribe you." Has it ever 
crossed your mind that you might get ofi a charge of unlawful 
wounding by giving the police 10 ? No, it is all absurd, that, 
written by somebody not myself. 

Now, Mrs. .Rattenbury, there are just one or two questions I 
want to ask you. How often, do you imagine, in the last few 
years have you drunk whisky ? Hardly at all. 

A question about your banking account: you got 250 from 
Mr. Rattenbury on 18th March, and I see that by the 23rd March 
you were overdrawn 1 14s.? Waa I? 



Evidence for the Accused Rattenbury. 

Mrs Alma V. Rattenbury 

Yes. What are these accounts? " Bobbys "1 A dress shop 
in Bournemouth. 

Aish ? Electrical. 

Wimborne? That would be a fruit shop. 

Tucker, eight guineas? Dentist. 

Boots; that is the chemists, I suppose? Yes. 

Tarrants, 25; what are they? A dress shop. 

Plummers, 9 17s. ? Yes. 

What are they? Same thing, a department store. 

A department store. Williamson <Sc Treadgold, 10 1 Grocery. 

Sainsbury the butcher, I suppose? Yes. 

Paarman; do you know who that is? The baker or the milk. 

And those with the exception of 20 to Harrod's and 50 
which you have described was cashed for you by Stoner and taken 
to London with your overdraft of 57 10s., absorbed the whole 
of the 250? Yes. 

Who used to pay for your doctor's expenses? I used to take 
them out of the household accounts sometimes, but other times 
I would take it out of what I made from my music. 

What I mean is, did they come out of your own account? 
Oh, yes. 

There was nothing extra given to you to provide for those 
various operations? I never had enough with Mr. Rattenbury'a 
clothes and everything in the house to pay for. 50 looked very 
ill at times. 

A hundred visits from Dr. O'Donnell; they all came out of 
your own account? Yes, and some of those visits were for the 
children. 

Now, another question on another matter ; I want just to get 
this quite clear, Your bedroom had a french window that opened 
on to the balcony? Yes. 

They opened inwards from the balcony? Yes. 

Did you have another window? Yes, two windows at the side. 

That would be looking out over the balcony, I suppose? Yes, 

On the side of the house? Yes. 

Now, did you ever have the balcony window open at night? 
The balcony door, yes. 

The french windows? Yes, always open at night time. 

Let me get it quite clear : what was your practice at night ? 
Was it to have the doors open or shut? Always open at night 
when I went to bed. 

Were they open while you were undressing? No, they were 
closed then to keep the room warm. 

And when you got to bed they would be open? Yes; I put 
something in the doorway to keep them open. 

What about the windows at the side 1 Never open except in 
the summer time; they made too much draught. 

Can you remember whether on the night of the 24th when 

201 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mrs Alma V. Rattenbury 

Stoner came in those windows were open on to the balcony or 
not? No, they may not have been, because often he would open 
that door before he got into bed. 

The normal plan was that they should be open? Yes, when 
we were in bed. 

And if they were open they would, of course, be over the 
corresponding windows in the drawing-room? Yes. 

Do you know, was it possible to hear from that room what 
was going on in the drawing-room? You could hear in the room, 
but you could not hear from the door of the balcony not, for 
instance, music down below j you could not hear that way but 
you could hear in the room, It was rather singular like that. 

Supposing your window opening on to the balcony and the 
drawing-room french window were open, could you hear a sound 
like talking or a groan from one room to another? One might. 

You do not recollect whether, in fact, it was open or not 
when Stoner came to bed? I should think it would be open when 
he got into bed, because if I did not do it he would. 

Very well; you do not remember? No. 

Now, just one other matter : You were asked about Mr. Jenks. 
He lives, I think, at a house called Flasdene Manor, near BridporH 
Yes. 

Is it a substantial house outside Bridport, with grounds? Yes, 

With a number of rooms, large rooms? Yes. 

You told us you and your husband had stayed there as guests? 
Yes. 

Have you also met Mr. Jenks in London from time to time? 
Yes. 

More than once? Yes. 

Now, my learned friend seems a little surprised about little 
John's sleeping capacity. You heard my learned friend open to 
the jury that, fortunately, he slept during the night? Yes. 

Was he a good sleeper? Oh, a splendid sleeper; nothing 
would waken him. 

And, lastly, I want to read to you a passage from something 
that I am going to read a little later on; I want to ask you 
whether it corresponds or not with your recollection of the days 
after the 24th March. This is what Dr. Morton, the governor of 
Holloway Prison, has written about you: " She was received into 
my custody on the evening of March 25th, and I saw her early 
next morning for the first time, She was very depressed and 
seemed confused and kept repeating the same sentence over and 
over again. On the 28th March she was somewhat better and 
appeared to have forgotten what she had said and how she had 
behaved the previous days since her reception." Does that corre- 
spond with what you recollect about your own mental condition 
during that time? Absolutely. 



Evidence for Defence. 

Edward W. Mann 

Can you remember what you did those first few days after 
you were received into prison? I cannot remember. I think it 
was the second day I started to I do not remember the first. 
I have tried to think of the things I saw, but cannot. 

Can you recollect any conversation you had at Holloway? No. 

Can you recollect the contents of any letter that you wrote 
on the first day or so? No. 

You have told my lord and the jury all that you know about 
the tragedy on the 24th March? Absolutely all. 

EDWARD WBLLER MANN (recalled), cross-examined by Mr. 
CASSWELL You are the medical officer at Dorchester Prison, I 
think? I am. 

And this man, Stoner, came to you. when about the 28th or 
29th? The 29th. 

In the evening was it? Tes. 

And I notice that you made a report on him, the usual prison 
report, and eaid he was fit to plead? Tes, 

Did you have any special observation kept on him with a 
view to detecting symptoms of cocaine? No. 

You did not? No. 

Would you agree with me that sometimes, except for a skilled 
observer, after a few days cocaine is very difficult to discover? I 
have had no experience of cocaine. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS When he was brought in what 
was he charged with? I think he was charged with murder, my 
lord. 

And, that being so, was or was not special observation kept 
upon him? Yes, he was kept under special observation. 

Is that a rule with regard to all persons charged with a capital 
offence? I believe so. 

Well, you ought to know, the medical officer of the prison I 
Yes 

Do you do that with all persons who come in? Yes, my lord, 
all persons charged with a capital offence. 

You do it as a rule? Yes. 

In this case, what you have told us is the result of your own 
observation coupled with the reports which were made to you 
by your officers as to his behaviour when they were there and 
you were not? Yes. 

But he was always kept under observation? Yes. 

You tell the jury, doctor, during the time he was with, you 
he was rational, slept well, took his food well and appeared to 
be healthy? Yes. 

The Court adjourned. 

203 



Fourth Day Thursday, 30th May, 1935. 

Mr. CROOM-JOHNSON My lord, Dr. Grieraon has called the 
attention of those who instruct me to a slip which he made in hiB 
evidence. I think it is desirable, if your lordship will allow me to 
do so, that he should come back and correct it. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Yes. 

Mr. O'CONNOR May I make an application of a similar kind? 
Mr. Rooke has made a statement to the solicitor instructing me, 
and, I understand, also to the director, on a matter which I 
consider important. I would like to ask him questions on it. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Very well 

Dr. HUGH ARROWSMITH GRIERSON (recalled), further examined 
by Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON In the course of my evidence yesterday I 
made a statement as to the increase in Stoner's weight. I wish to 
make a correction in that respect. That increase in Stoner's 
weight of 8 Ibs. dated from his reception into Dorchester the 
actual date of the weight was 29th March and not from the date 
he was first received. Before my report was made I only had him 
about ten days. 

Mr, CAS SWILL I have no questions. 

ALFRED BASIL ROOKE (recalled), further cross-examined by Mr. 
O'CONNOR Have you had experience of people who have been 
given doses of morphia? I have a very considerable experience. 

In your experience, what is the effect, or what may be the 
effect, of a dose of morphia upon the recollection of people who 
have had one? May I just explain the conditions'? 

Yes? I have done a number of operations under spinal 
anaesthesia in which I have given morphia before the patients have 
gone through their operations. I have spoken to them and they 
havie answered intelligently, but the next morning they have 
remembered absolutely nothing; their memory has gone. 

Has the recollection of what occurred before come back to them 
at a later date ? I have known it last as long as two days. 

Do you mean that the recollection of events of two days has 
been blotted out? Has been lost completely. 

Lost permanently? Permanently. 

As regards half a grain of morphia, is that a large dose? The 
cases of which I speak have had a quarter. 

Tou are speaking of occasions where there has been a quarter. 
What do you say to half a grain? Is that a large dose? Yes. 

Mr. CASSWELL I have no questions. 
204 



Evidence for Defence. 

Alfred B, 

Further re-examined by Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON In these 
when you have asked questions, have the questions been coherently 
answered? Coherently and intelligently. 

Do they 'lose memory for events during the time that the drug 
is operating? Yes. 

How far back does that go? Do they lose memory for events 
before the drug is administered, or not? In my experience they 
have not had a retrospective loss of memory. It has been after the 
time that the drug has acted. 

So that the memory of events up to the time when the drug 
is administered remains? It does. 

Mr. CASSWELL My lord, in looking over what I said last night, 
and having read the speech which was made by the prosecution, I 
find that I have omitted one or two points which I ought to have 
put to the jury, and which I think they ought to have before them, 
in order that they may know clearly what issue they have to try. 
It was entirely inadvertence, and I apologise for it, and I ask 
your lordship's indulgence to put them. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS I shall not stop you in a case like 
this. 

Mr. CAS SWELL Members of the jury, I must apologise for 
troubling you once more before I call my evidence, but I am afraid 
I did not quite put before you the position in a case of murder. 
There was a recent decision in the House of Lords in which the 
Lord Chancellor laid this down. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS You are now going to talk of the 
law to the jury, are you ? 

Mr. CASSWELL Just to show the jury what is the issue they 
have to try. When dealing with a murder case, the Crown must 
prove (a) death, as the result of a voluntary act of the accused, 
and (b) malice of the accused. It may prove malice either expressly 
or by implication. Malice is the intention which is in the mind 
of the person who does the act, and the malice which is necessary 
in the case of murder, speaking subject to my lord's correction, 
is the intention either to kill or to do grievous bodily harm. If 
the defence, either from evidence given by the prosecution or from 
evidence called for the defence, shows an explanation which, if 
true, would amount to a good defence, the onus of proof is still 
upon the prosecution to show that that defence is not true for 
instance, if the defence were that the blow was struck by the 
accused, but it was struck accidentally. But there is an exception, 
and it was clearly pointed out in the recent decision of the 
House of Lords that that is still an exception, if the accused's 
defence is : I did the act, but I had not sufficient intent owing to 
a disease of the mind which is the way in which we lawyers speak 
of insanity or of drunkenness or of taking drugs-~-which rendered 
me in such a state that I was incapable of forming that design, 
and it is for the accused to prove 'that. Now, that is the defence 

205 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Alfred B. Rooke 

which is put forward here on behalf of the accused Stoner. On 
his behalf you have now heard the evidence of Mrs. Rattenbury, 
and on his behalf I accept and endorse the whole of her explanation 
of the facts and matters which happened leading up to the day 
of 24th March, and what happened after that day. It necessarily 
follows that she, in my submission, did not commit this act, and 
had nothing to do with it, and the accused does not deny, in fact, 
admits, that it was his hand that struck the blow* In those circum- 
stances, although the onus is on the prosecution to show you that 
it wa-s his hand that struck the blow, you will probably have no 
difficulty in coming to that conclusion. The onus therefore remains 
upon the defence to show you that when he struck the blow he 
was, by reason, as I shall submit to you, of his addiction to cocaine, 
incapable of forming that necessary intent, that is, the intent 
to kill, or the intent to commit grievous bodily harm. I put it 
to you in two ways yesterday : you may find, if you are satisfied 
on my evidence that he was under the influence of this drug at 
the time, either that he was so much under the influence of it that he 
did not know what he was doing, or did not know that what he 
was doing was wrong, in which case a correct verdict would be 
guilty, but insane, or, alternatively, that although he knew he 
was doing the deed, and knew what he was doing, he was so con- 
fused in mind, as the result of the operation of this drug and its 
after effects, that he did not form the intent either to kill or 
to do grievous bodily harm, but the intent merely to prevent the 
trip to Bridport. That is all I wish to say. 



Evidence for the Accused Stoner. 

GBOEGB STONER, examined by Mr. CASSWBLL I am the father 
oi the accused, and I live at 104 Redhill Drive, Bournemouth. I 
am a bricklayer. My son was born on 19th November, 1916. At 
that time I was in the army, in the Machine Gun Corps. The 
accused was my only son. I have no other children. He did not 
walk until he was three years old. He was always backward as a 
boy. He did not seem to be very brilliant in mind at lessons, 
or anything like that. He was very, very backward. He had very 
little schooling, 1 am afraid, because we had to go about so much 
from one place to the other. In my business we have to go from 
one part of the country to the other, and, of course, he was with 
us, and it interrupted his schooling. I should say he could not 
have had much more than two or three, or three or four years' 
schooling altogether something like that. I believe he was in 
standard V when he left, but I am not quite sure on that point. 
He was just about fourteen when he left school. He was always 
a sort of weak boy at one time, until he left school. He began to 

206 



Evidence for the Accused Stoner. 

George Stoner 

improve about that time, probably because he was not forced to 
go to work. I believe he had fainting fits, but I have never seen 
him in one myself. I was affected in that way very much as a boy ; 
I used to have fainting fits frequently. He had an excellent 
character, and I never had any trouble with him. One could not 
wish for a better boy. He had just a few friends round about, 
not very many. He was not a boy to go out at all; he was rather 
keen on staying in rather reserved, I mean. If he had friends 
he would have them rather younger than himself, and he was a 
champion boy for those boys, because if they were oppressed at all he 
would help them out. That was his character right up until 
unfortunately he went to- work. I noticed a difference in his 
appearance after he went to the Rattenburys. He was a 
little while with a motor firm before he went to the Ratten- 
burys, but this was really his first time out. My wife and I spoke 
about the difference in his appearance and demeanour frequently. 
He became pale. I put it down to the fact that perhaps he might 
have been indoors too much, but after looking at him as he lay 
in the chair sometimes (he went to sleep), we used to say that he 
was sunken in the eyes and rather drawn. I noticed that on more 
than one occasion. 

It has been suggested by some witness that your son said he 
found cocaine in your house, and that that first started him, 
Have you ever had cocaine yourself ? No, never. 

As far as you know, has there ever been any in your house? 
There has been no cocaine, or morphia, or any drug of any descrip- 
tion, in my house. 

Cross-examined by Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON You said the boy got 
to look very pale. Can you say you noticed any particular time 
when that commenced? Towards the latter part of November and 
the beginning of December I noticed he was getting pale, but I 
firat noticed his drawn appearance about Christmas. 

You did not know that this boy of eighteen was living on terms 
of sexual intimacy with a woman twice his age? He would not 
have remained there if I had known it. 

Did he go to the Winton Council school? Yes. 

And, later on, to the Moor Down Council school? That is 
correct. 

Where are those two schools situated? I should think some- 
where about three-quarters of a mile away from our house. 

After he left school, did he work with you for some time? Yes. 

Did he work quite satisfactorily? Yes, he worked very well 
indeed. 

Did he work intelligently ? Yes, as a boy. 

Was he a good boy at his work? Yes, he was a very good boy. 

Then, with the exception of the quite short time you have told 
us about when he was with a motor firm, in September, 1934, he 

207 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Olive M. Stoner 

went to this situation as chauffeur-handyman with the late Mr. 
Rattenbury? That is correct. 

OLIVE MATILDA STONER, examined by Mr. CASSWELL I am the 
wife of the last witness and the mother of the accused George Percy 
Stoner. I saw my son on Sunday, 24th March, in the afternoon. 
I was lying down when he came in. I think it would be somewhere 
about three or soon after. I do not know how long he stayed. 
I should say it was just before half-past four when he left. 

Was he talking to you during that time? Well, a little. I 
cannot remember what he said. 

Did you notice anything peculiar about him? No, nothing 
more than he usually is when he comes in. 

Mr. CEOOM- JOHNSON I have no questions. 

Dr. LIONEL ALEX. WEATHEELY, examined by Mr. CASSWELL I 
am a Doctor of Medicine of Aberdeen, a member of the Royal 
College of Surgeons, and I have other qualifications. I was the 
President of the Society of Mental and Nervous Diseases, and was 
the President of the section of Psychology and Neurology at the 
annual meeting of the British Medical Association in 1934, I 
have had sixty-two years' experience as a medical man. During 
that time I was for some years proprietor and residential licencee 
of the Vailbrook House Private Mental Hospital at Bath. I have 
had three cases of cocainism under my care, and several cases 
of other drugs. My experience of mental disease is that I have 
lived among mental cases practically all my medical life. I have 
specialised in that particular branch of medicine. I have done 
no general practice since 1886, I am still in practice. I 
had an interview with the accused Stoner at Dorchester Prison 
on 8th April. At that time I had had the opportunity of 
reading the statements which he had made to the police and the 
depositions which had been made at the Police Court. When I 
interviewed Stoner, I noticed certain physical symptoms. One 
physical symptom which I hardly expected to find so long after the 
last dose of cocaine was a very definite dilatation of both of his 
pupils. I tested them with the ordinary normal light and also 
with electric light, with the result that the pupils did not react at 
all to either normal light or to electric light. That is undoubtedly 
consistent with the taking of cocaine, and it is a very important 
symptom. It is due to a definite cause. I examined him with a 
view to finding out whether he was what can be called mentally 
deficient, and the result of my examination was that he was not 
mentally deficient, but he was backward because his education had 
been interrupted. As regards his physical condition, the boy 
was anaemic and had a poor circulation. I came to a very definite 
conclusion that he was a cocaine addict. I could only form a 



Evidence for the Accused Stoner. 

Dr Lionel A. Weatherly 

conclusion as to how long he had been an addict from what he 
told me himself. I did not discover any physical symptoms except 
the dilated pupils. I asked him to describe any sensations he had. 
As a result, I discovered first of all that he described to me very 
fairly, feasibly, and accurately the effect of cocaine, which lasted 
some hours. The description he gave me tallied with my own 
experience. He described to me a special hallucination, the halluci- 
nation of touch. He described it in a way that I have never heard 
that hallucination described before, but it was very pathognomonic. 
He described it as a rash under his skin, and he added to that, 
" The rash seems to move about." That is a definite hallucination 
of cocaine. How long a person would have to be an addict before 
that hallucination appeared would, I think, depend to a large 
extent upon the constitution of the patient and the amount of drug 
he was taking, and the frequency with which he took it. Supposing 
a man were to take it in fairly large doses about once a week, I 
should think it would take two or three months at the outside. 
When I say outside I mean the least. Other hallucinations may 
occur, and often do occur, as the result of addiction to cocaine, 
such as hallucinations of hearing and hallucinations of sight. I had 
a case under my care of a doctor who took cocaine. He had no 
hallucination of touch, but he had the most horrible hallucination 
of sight; he saw insects crawling over his clothes, over his bed- 
clothes, and it kept him in a terrible state of agitation. That 
is also one of the results of delirium tremens, the result of drink, 
but there was no delirium in his case, and that lasted for some 
time, because one had to leave off the cocaine in his case very 
gradually. He had taken very big doses. As regards the effect 
of cocaine, I think I might put it in this way, that the effect 
of the cocaine at the time, and for some few hours afterwards, 
is, first of all, an exalting effect, the effect of exaltation and well- 
being, and as that passes off comes a feeling of great mental 
irritability. The duration of that varies very much. The influence 
of a dose of cocaine may last for some hours. I should think 
the effect of a drug upon a man's reason and judgment would 
be a very weakening one. By that I mean I think it is quite 
possible that a cocaine addict in the period when he is in a 
condition of great irritability of temper, or of jealousy, might 
have hie reasoning processes almost entirely inhibited. The effect 
of cocaine on the emotions is Very much allied, according to the 
latest authority on cooainism, to the effect that chronic alcoholism 
has. The authority I am referring to is Dr. Meyer, a professor 
of Zurich. When I say the result of cocaine is closely allied to that 
of alcoholism, the result I am referring to is the most insane 
suspicious jealousy. They look out in every conceivable way for 
anything that they can prove to their minds as a reason for being 
jealous, That is the result of my experience of cases of alcoholism. 
I have had some very serious cases, resulting .in murder, from that 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Dr Lionel A. Weatherly 

condition. I understand that Stoner carried a dagger about with 
him for a time. That is one of the common symptoms of 
cooainiam. A cocaine drug addict has besides the hallucinations of 
which I have spoken very definite delusions of persecution, and 
they often carry weapons about with them either to protect them- 
selves or otherwise. I have followed the evidence which has been 
given in this case. I heard the evidence given by Mrs. Rattenbury 
of the occurrences from 4.30 onwards in the Villa Madeira. Her 
description of what Stoner did on that occasion, his sudden threat 
to her with a revolver, and his sudden turn of violence and threats 
when she was telephoning, are consistent with his having taken a 
dose of cocaine that afternoon. 

By Mr. JUSTICE EUMPHBEYS Are they also consistent with his 
not having taken a dose of cocaine, but being very angry and very 
jealous of his mistress? I doubt it. 

Examination continued We have heard from Mrs. Rattenbury 
that he accused her of having connexion with her husband when 
the door was closed, although the young son John was there in the 
afternoon? I consider that entirely a hallucination of hearing, 
arising out of cocainism, and this insane and unreasonable 
jealousy. 

You have heard that the blow struck in this case was struck 
by that big mallet, and you have heard the other evidence about 
where the mallet was put. Is that consistent or not with the 
effects of a dose of cocaine? 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS What on earth does that question 
mean 1 I do not know. 

The WITNESS I think any assault would be consistent with 
the after effects of cocaine if those effects had created an abnormal, 
and unreasonable, and insane jealousy. I heard Dr. Grierson say 
that this lad told him he had taken what he described as two 
eggspoonfuls of cocaine between bread at 4.30 that afternoon. 

Examination continued It has been suggested that two egg- 
spoonfuls of cocaine would have killed the lad. What do you say 
to that? Oh yes, but cocaine as sold is so very grossly adulterated. 

If he had taken a large dose of cocaine at 4,30, would the 
passion he showed this hallucination which you described at half- 
past four be consistent with the taking of that dose? Quite 
consistent. 

Would he be still .under the direct effects of cocaine poisoning? 
Yes. 

We have been told that after he had taken up the tea, which 
was some time after half-past four, he accused Mrs. Rattenbury 
of having had connexion, and said he had heard it going on in 

210 



Evidence for the Accused Stoner. 

Dr Lionel A. Weatherly 

that room. If that was a hallucination, as she says, would that 
be consistent with the taking of a dose at half -past four? Quite. 

After the excitability induced by a dose of cocaine, is it quite 
usual for a person to go into a comatose state? I do not say it is 
usual, but it has happened. 

We have heard that Stoner at, I think, 2.30 in the morning 
was found asleep in the car outside the Strathallen Nursing Home 1 
I am not certain whether Stoner had not taken alcohol before he 
was asleep in the car. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS There is no evidence of it. 
Mr. CAS SWELL No, there is no evidence of that. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS If you found a chauffeur going 
to sleep when he has been kept up to half -past two in the morning 

waiting for his employer ? I do not think that was the result 

of cocaine. 

Examination continued Are there any other conditions which, 
according to you, lead you to believe that Stoner had taken cocaine 
that day, as he says? I do not think anything more than I have 
already said. 

Mr. O'CONNOR I have no questions. 

Cross-examined by Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON Have you known people 
get very, very jealous who were not drug addicts and not suffering 
from acute alcoholism 1 I have only had my experience that I have 
told you of of cases of definite cocaine addictism. I told yoji of 
one case with the hallucination of sight, May I tell you of another 
case that I have had 1 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS No, try and answer the question. 
I am sure you can answer it. Do you know, after sixty-two years 
as a medical man, that some people get very jealous without cocaine 
or drink having anything to do with it ? Of course. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. CROOM- JOHNSON So far 
as pupils reacting or failing to react are concerned, is that quite 
a common symptom of many things besides what you call cocainism ? 
I do not think so. 

Have you given evidence in cases which have had to do with 
neurasthenia? I have given evidence in all sorts of cases in all 
sorts of diseases. * 

Let me put my question in a perfectly plain form. Is not one 
of the symptoms of great nerve shock that the pupils fail to react 
to light? Not in my experience. 

Are there any other things besides cocainism of which a symptom 

211 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Dr Lionel A. W.alherly 

is the failure of the pupils to react to light ? Yes, people who have 
been taking atropine, belladonna or hyoscine. 

Or alcohol? I do not think I would expect to find it in 
alcoholism. I think I would expect to find a contracted pupil. 

Take cases of concussion, are they not also instances where 
you might expect the pupils failing to react to light? Of course, 
there are various diseases in which you may get a dilatation of 
the pupils. There are various diseases in which you get an inability 
to react to light, and also where you get a contracted pupil. 
Take people who are suffering from anaemia 1 Yes. 
What is commonly called very run down. Do you sometimes 
find that their pupils fail to react to light? Yes. 

Take permanent dilatation, do you find that is a symptom of 
many things besides cocainism? If they are taking belladonna, 
atropine or hyoscine they would have dilatation of the eyes. 

Or other things than drug taking? You might get it, but 
the reaction to light was most important. There was no reaction 
to light. May I explain myself a little more? 

Yes? The muscles of the eye which contract and dilate the 
pupil are of two kinds. There are the muscles that contract the 
pupil belonging to the cerebral-spinal system, which are governed 
by the third nerve, but the muscles which dilate the pupil are 
governed by the ganglionic or sympathetic nervous system, and it is 
the sympathetic or ganglionic nervous system that a drug like 
cocaine would have the most serious effect on. 

Would you expect a dose of cocaine to make the person who 
had taken it curse and swear? They get very irritable at times. 
But do they get irritable when they are deprived of their drug 1 
It is a very curious thing with regard to cocaine, which differ- 
entiates it from other drugs, that the influence of cocaine, with 
one or two exceptions, may pass off very quickly and nothing 
objectionable be noticed about the patient. It is quite a different 
thing after drugs like morphia or heroin which last a considerable 
time. It is noticed commonly by all the authorities that the 
influence of cocaine passes off very quickly. 

Is the reason why people take it because the dose is quickly 
followed by a feeling of well-being? That is so. 

During which period the patient feels more active mentally? 
Certainly. 

And the increased mental activity is real ? Yes. 
During that time is the drug addict frequently garrulous in 
conversation? KG may be. 

And witty ? I do not know that. 

Inclined, if he writes, to write a great deal ? It may be. 
Is the effect of the drug really extremely pleasant for the short 
time that it is endured? Yes. 

After that it is extremely difficult to cure a drug addict suffer- 
212 



Evidence for the Accused Stoner, 

Dr Lionel A. Weaiherly 

ing from cocaine poisoning? I do not think it is difficult if you 
take them at an early time. Of course, he had not been taking 
cocaine very long. 

Please do not tell us that. We shall hear that, I assume, from 
somebody who really knows. Is it frequently necessary for a 
person who is a real cocaine addict that he should continue to 
receive doses of cocaine, but decreasing doses with less and less 
frequency? Not always. 

Not always, but generally? I do not know. 

Is this the rule, that with a person who has got to the point 
of being able to take large doses, it is extremely dangerous to 
cut them off altogether and at once? If they have been taking 
large doses. The case I mentioned just now was taking a matter 
of twenty grains a day. 

Would you expect with complete abstinence suddenly to find 
severe gastric disturbances? I should think he would probably not 
sleep well. , 

Almost complete lack of sleep ? No, not almost. 

Very great insomnia? I believe I am not allowed to tell what 
Stoner said about his sleep. 

Would you mind answering my question? Would you expect 
the drug addict suddenly cut off from cocaine to suffer from loss 
of deep? A certain loss of sleep. 

Loss of appetite? No, not necessarily. 

In the normal case would you expect to find those symptoms 
present ? I think the general rule' is, whatever the condition of a 
person is, as a rule, he gains weight soon after he gets to prison. 
That has been my experience. 

In your experience is cocaine an expensive drug? I have heard 
it has been hawked about among country houses and sold in small 
doses for the little sum of 3s. 6d. 

We are not dealing with country houses in this case. As a 
rule, it is an expensive drug? The illicit seller naturally tries to 
get the most he can. 

In the form in which it is usually sold, is it usually mixed with 
other substances of about the same colour and quality? As a rule. 

Re-examined by Mr. CASSWELL You said the influence of 
cocaine passes off quickly? Yes. What I meant by that was only 
after a few hours, but certainly after twenty-four hours or thirty 
hours the cocaine symptoms may absolutely pass off, except the 
one symptom I mentioned of the dilatation of the pupils, and that 
varies very much in the length of its existence. 

Supposing somebody who was a layman like myself was looking 
at a cocaine addict, would he be likely to notice any definite 
symptoms about him? Not at all. You would not notice any- 
thing;. That is laid down by all the authorities, 

213 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Dr Lionel A. Wealherly 

It has been suggested to you that this marked dilatation of the 
pupils may be due to other causes. Did you make an examination 
to see whether there were those other causes or diseases present? 
I could find no other causes for that excepting it was the cocaine. 

What other causes or diseases causing dilatation did you look 
for? I wanted to know naturally if there had been anything 
wrong with his sight, if he had had atropine put in his eyes, or 
anything. There was nothing of the sort. 

It was suggested, I think, that concussion would lead to dilata- 
tion. Was there any sign of concussion, or any evidence of it? 
No. 

Was there any evidence that he had recently taken alcohol in 
prison? No. 

Was there any evidence that he had taken atropine or bella- 
donna? No. 

Was there any evidence that he was in a state of neurasthenia ? 
I have got a very definite understanding what neurasthenia is, 
and I .never deviate from it. I consider neurasthenia as being a 
condition where the fatigue point, whether mental or physical, is 
very quickly reached. That is my definition of neurasthenia. 
Neurasthenia is a word which is used very foolishly and very 
recklessly. 

It was used, I think, neither recklessly nor foolishly by Mr. 
Groom-Johnson, and he suggested that something which he called 
neurasthenia would cause dilatation of the pupils? No. 

Mrs. LOUISE MAUD PRICE, examined by Mr. CASSWELL I live 
at 41 Victoria Avenue, Winton, Bournemouth. I am the owner 
of the Yilla Madeira. I know the accused Stoner. I have seen 
him on several occasions. I keep a tobacconist's shop. He has 
from time to time come into my shop to make purchases. I 
remember an occasion when he came to the shop when I noticed 
something peculiar about him. I should think it would be in 
February. I noticed that he was very pale and looking very 
sleepy. I should think it was in the evening or round about tea 
time when I saw him, but I am not quite certain. 

Did you specially notice that then? Did it seem exceptional 
to you? It did, indeed. 

Mr. O'CONNOR I have no questions. 

Dr. EOBBET DICK GILLESPIE, examined by Mr. CASSWELL I 
reside, at 16 Chester Terrace, Regents Park, London. I am a 
Doctor of Medicine of Glasgow University, a Fellow of the Royal 
College of Physicians, and I hold the diploma of Psychological 
Medicine. I am a physician for psycho-medicine at Guy's Hospital, 
London, and I also hold other appointments. My principal pro- 

214 



Evidence for the Accused Stoner, 

Dr Robert D, Gillespie 

fessional activity is the study of functional and nervous and 
mental diseases. 

In the course of that practice of yours have you come across 
cocaine addicts? I have come across a few. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS You mean you have treated them 
as patients when you say you have come across them? Yes. 

Examination continued In your experience, are cocaine addicts 
frequent? Are there many of them, or few, in England? There 
are few in England, so far as doctors know, but there may be many 
who do not consult doctors. 

Is it easy to discover whether a person is a cocaine addict or 
not? I usually find it extremely difficult. 

I want you to tell us what symptoms you look for in a cocaine 
addict? One looks for inexplicable oscillations of mood, that is 
to say, at one time they are elated and at another time depressed 
without ascertainable reason, and with the elation there goes a 
mental and physical activity which is quite different from the 
lethargy and tiredness and depression of other times, and later on 
as the addiction persists it begins to have more profound physical 
and mental effects. Sleep and appetite are interfered with so- that 
they lose weight. They become pale and emaciated, ultimately, 
and mental symptoms are also more likely to appear than with a 
more healthy mind in the direction of hallucinations, morbid 
jealousy, and impulsive acts. 

Is that your experience? It is more or less. I do not mean 
that I have myself encountered every individual one of those 
symptoms. 

Who is the leading authority, in your opinion, upon cocainism? 
So far as I know, the leading European authority is Professor 
Meyer, of Zurich. 

Is he personally known to- you 1 Yes. 

I want you to describe, if you can, the effects of cocaine on 
somebody who has taken doses before not the effect of a first 
dose, but the effect on a patient who has taken doses before? The 
effects that I have already described, namely, a transient sense of 
well-being, with increased mental and physical activity, lasting 
up to about, as far as the sense of well-being is concerned, two 
hours. Naturally it depends to some extent on the amount of the 
drug that has been taken. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS You were asked to give the effect 
of a dose on a person who is already accustomed to it. You 
gave the first effect. I suppose there is some other effect. It does 
not pass away completely, does it? No. 

I thought the learned counsel was cutting you rather short. 

You said, "At the end of two hours " ? There sets in a period 

215 



Rattenbury and Stonen 

Dr Robert D. Gilleipie 

of depression and morbid irritability, with lack of appetite and 
very often a difficulty in sleeping. 

Examination continued Does the physical and mental state 
of the person taking it have any result on the effect of taking it? 
Perhaps I have not put that well. Are .some people more predis- 
posed than others to be affected 1 Yes, they are. If they are what 
is called psychopathic, that is of an unstable disposition, the drug 
is likely to have considerably more effect. 

You had the opportunity, I think, of interviewing the accused 
Stoner in Brixton Prison last Saturday afternoon? Yes, I did. 

Can you tell us anything which you noticed about him? I 
understand I am precluded from saying anything about his 
previous disposition. 

You are entitled, I think, to give us any symptoms which he 
described? At that time he was very tense and anxious, but I 
do not think it is relevant. 

That is what you would expect, I suppose ? Yes. 

You have heard in evidence that he was the sort of boy who 
kept to himself and had few friends? That is the kind of thing 
which I was referring to when I mentioned a morbid disposition. 
It is one of the most common characteristics of those who ultimately 
develop nervous and mental illness. 

You do not, of course, suggest that he has developed that now ? 
No, I do not. 

Do you think that a person of that mental make-up would be 
likely to fall more quickly to the addiction of cocaine ? That would 
be in accordance with the general experience of addiction in 
general, and Meyer particularly emphasises it in his book. 

We have heard the hallucination of touch referred to from 
time to time as the cocaine bug. Are you acquainted with that ? 
I have met it in literature,, but not in my particular patients. 

Where is that hallucination found ? With someone who has had 
previous doses of the drug, and has been taking it for some time. 
Just what the time limit would be I am not in a position to say. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Is that what you call an addict? 
It depends on how one defines " addiction. " 

That is exactly what I have been wondering. A great many 
people talk about an addict and say an addict does this and that. 
I should like to know from you, as an expert in these matters, 
what you understand by a cocaine addict? If I may attempt to 
define addiction in general, I should say that it was the repeated 
taking of a drug in excess of medical requirements. 

We may take it we are talking of cocaine now? Very well, it 
is the repeated taking of cocaine in excess of any medical require- 
ments for the purpose of the pleasurable effects produced by it, or 
for the purpose, secondly, of avoiding the unpleasant effects of 

218 



Evidence for the Accused Stoner. 

Dr Robert D. Gffleipie 

being deprived of it, and, finally, this repeated taking is one 
which it is difficult to stop without external help. 

Then by an addict you merely mean a person who is repeatedly 
taking cocaine 1 With those qualifications. 

We are not dealing with a person who has had it prescribed 
by a doctor, of course. Have you any particular dose in mind? 
The dosage can vary very much. There have been cases on record 
that have taken up to 150 grains a day, but that, of course, is most 
exceptional. 

Is a person an addict, in your view, whether he has been in the 
habit of taking frequent doses, however small doses, or very large 
doses? It depends entirely what he is taking them for. 

We are assuming that he is taking them for some other than 
medical reasons? Yes, I wo.uld say he was an addict. 

Then it does not matter whether the dose was large or small, he 
would be an addict? 

Examination continued What is the effect of cocaine on the 
sexual male? In the male it produces very definite morbid 
jealo.usy, rather akin to the morbid jealousy of alcoholism, which, 
for example, is described by another authority in this country, the 
late Dr. Sullivan. 

Supposing a person to be under the domination of that morbid 
jealousy, is he likely to misinterpret what goes on around him? 
Extremely likely. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS la not that true of all jealousy? 
Yes, but I should have thought it was more likely to happen 
with a diseased jealousy. 

Have you ever read the play of Othello? I have, a long time 
ago. 

Examination continued After a dose has been taken, and sup- 
posing that he has had this morbid jealousy founded on hallucina- 
tion, what is the next stage? There is a danger then of acts of 
violence occurring against the person who is suspected of treachery 
I beg pardon, against the object of jealousy. 

Would that drug at that stage still be having an effect upon the 
patient's mind? The jealousy, in my opinion, will not disappear 
with the passing off of the stimulant effect for the first hour or 
two ; it is likely to remain for some time afterwards. 

Is the drug still taking effect even after the elatioa has dis- 
appeared? As far as one can tell, certainly the patient is suffer- 
ing from symptoms. 

You have spoken of acts of violence being committed. Do you 
think when those acts of violence are being committed the mind 
is clear and capable of forming an intent ? Consciousness is often 
clear that is from the medical point of view but it is very 

217 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Dr Robert D, Gillespie 

different from being able to come to a balance of judgment, being 
able to weigh the pros and cons of a situation. 

Is a person at the moment of that act of violence likely to think 
much of the consequences, do you think? I should think not. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Can you answer that? Perhaps 
I ought to put it this way and say that he would be less likely 
to think of the consequences than a person who was not under the 
influence of cocaine. 

Cross-examined by Mr. CROOM- JOHNSON Unfortunately, a great 
number of people in this world do not think beforehand of the 
consequences of their acts. Do you agree? I agree. 

Perfectly healthy people? Yes. 

And perfectly normal people? It depends on how you use the 
word " normal," but I suppose in ordinary language it would 
be so. 

You were asked a moment or two ago what effect the taking of 
cocaine had on the sexual life, as I understood the question, of 
the patient. Does it have any effect on the sexual power? Is one 
of the effects of taking cocaine in the male that it very speedily 
produces impotence ? Yes. 

Tell me something from rather a different point of view. IB 
regular sexual intercourse with a member of the opposite sex by 
a boy of about eighteen onwards likely to do him good or harm ? I 
should think that is a very difficult question to answer. I should not 
say that it did him good, if you are thinking of it from the 
moral point of view. 

No, I am not talking from the moral point of view, I am 
talking to you as a doctor. Is it likely to cause him to look pale? 
I should not think that necessarily it would. 

Would you think it likely? It depends on the frequency with 
which it occurred. 

Frequently, is my question ? It depends on what you mean by 
frequently. 

Do you think one would be likely to look sleepy, or have the 
appearance 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS I think you might take it in this 
way. To speak quite plainly, the learned counsel means as 
frequently as the nature of the woman would permit ? In that case, 
unless he was very worried about it, I should think it might not 
have any physical effect, but it would obviously depend upon the 
constitution. 

Cross-eaeamination continued by Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON Do you 
think it would be likely to be good for the constitution of a boy 
of eighteen 2 Just think what you are flaying, doctor ? I am not 

218 



Evidence for the Accused Stoner. 

Dr Robert D. Gilleapie 

saying that it is good for his constitution, but I am saying that 
if it were occurring with such frequency as my lord has said, 
namely, such as nature would permit, it would not necessarily show 
effects in his external appearance. 

Is it likely to induce fatigue? Again the answer is similar to 
what I have just made. 

Take the ordinary case, the ordinary boy, not somebody very 
strong, talking about the ordinary English youth of eighteen, do 
you really find yourself in any difficulty in answering the question? 
I find difficulty in answering the question as I believe you expect 
it to be answered, It is just from my experience. 

As a medical man, do you think it is likely to induce fatigue ? 
It depends on whether the capacity of .nature is exceeded or not. 

Does it make any difference if the person with whom he was 
having intercourse was a person of greater age, a woman of twice 
his age? Would that make any difference, in your opinion? Not 
of itself. 

If people describe him as looking very sleepy, and being pale, 
and that previously, before he had got into this particular employ- 
ment, he wae a healthy boy with a good colour because he had lived 
in the open air, would you draw any inference from that as to 
whether this coition was good for him or bad for him physically? 
I should want to know whether he was up very late at nights or 
not, because that alone would make him look sleepy and pale, if 
it happened often enough. 

Is it possible that a boy who had lived that life may exhibit 
signs of fatigue and paleness ? Yes. 

Is it a probability? I would put it this way rather, that it 
was quite possible. 

Is it probable? Yes, it might be probable. 

You understand the expression neurasthenia which was .used a 
moment ago? I do not know that I understand it in your sense, 
but I shall interpret it as well as I can. 

Nervous exhaustion ? Very well. 

Do people who suffer from nervous exhaustion exhibit a number 
of symptoms which doctors seek to eliminate in making a diagnosis? 
If you suspect that it is nervous exhaustion, are there a number of 
symptoms which you would look for? Yes. 

Just describe what you would look for? The symptoms are 
practically entirely subjective. Neurasthenia is notorious for the 
absence of any physical signs whatever, except very small things 
like lack of appetite, but, again, that is a subjective symptom. 
Perhaps I should explain it by saying what I mean is, if you 
examine them by the ordinary methods, such as examining their 
pupils, and so on, you will not find the aigns which one associates 
with organic disease of the nervous system. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HITMPHBBTS You mentioned the pupils. What 



Ratteiibury and Stoner, 

Dr Robert D. Gille.pio 

makes you think of looking at the pupils of a case of suspected 
nervous exhaustion ? To eliminate the possibility that the brain is 
organically affected. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. GROOM- JOHNSON After 
neurasthenia or excessive fatigue has lasted for some time, do 
you find that the condition of the patient is apt to degenerate; 
the patient gets thin ? That could happen. 

And anaemic 1 Not anaemic not from neurasthenia. He may 
look pale, if that is what you mean. 

That is what I really did mean. As regards your few cases, in 
all of them were they cocaine addicts? Few cases of what? 

I understood you to say you had had a few cases of cocainism? 
Yes, I meant cocaine addicts. 

Had you been called in to treat them? I had. 
Were you able in any of the cases to cut off the drug at once 1 
Yes. 

Wholly] Yes. When I say at once, I ultimately succeeded in 
one or two cases in cutting it ofi suddenly. That is not the same 
as at once. It sometimes took me some weeks to find the source 
of supply. 

It is rather a ticklish business, is it not? It can be. 
And it can be a very ticklish thing to cut oft the supply 
straight away? It can be. It depends on how much has been 
taken j and the frequency of the doses. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS In those cases did you give some- 
thing else ? I did. 

What? One of the other drugs that we fall back on to quieten 
the nervous system. 

Bromide? Yes, bromide, aspirin, <fec. 

Cross-examination continued by Mr. GROOM- JOHNSON Is there 
any instance in your experience in which, having cut off your 
patient from cocaine at once, altogether, you have given no drug 
I will not say in sjibstitution, but for the purpose of treating that 
patient? No. I have always given something, but I am precluded 
in this case, as all doctors in practice are, that we are not 
allowed the complete control over these people, we cannot put 
them in prison, we have to get them in nursing homes tentatively, 
and therefore we have to give them other drugs to substitute. 

And one of the methods of treatment is to give them bromide, 
or something of that sort? Yes. 

Is the sudden withdrawal likely to lead to delirium? It may. 

With hallucinations of the most horrible kind? Yes, that can 



Pould you expect to find loss of sleep in the patient unless you 
prescribed some sedative? I would usually. 
220 



Evidence for the Accused Stoner. 

Dr Robert D. Gillespie 

Would you expect to find loss of weight unless you prescribed 
some sedative? It would depend on how much food one got into 
the patient. They might begin to gain weight from having been 
made to take food for the first time properly for many weeks. 

Would you expect to find loss of appetite? Yes, 

A disinclination for food? Yes. 

Gastric trouble ? Yes. 

Extreme restlessness? That can happen, yes. I should like 

If you want to add something, by all means do so? Where a 
considerable psychic mental shock intervenes which causes the 
supply to stop, many of these effects might be neutralised. I have 
seen that happen, for example, in the case of chronic alcoholism. 

Are you suggesting that you would not expect to find them 
present at all because of the shock? No. I should expect to find 
symptoms of a mental or nervous kind of some sort. 

Re-examined by Mr. CAS SWELL In your experience, has some- 
body who has been cut off from cocaine and been unable to get it 
any more gone for alcohol ? Yes, 

Is that usual? That is quite common. 

By Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Do you know in your experience 
any such case as this : a cocaine addict suddenly cut off from any 
supply, given no drug of any sort or kind to take the place of 
cocaine, and from the day that the supply is cut off, for a period 
of two months, has been a person who can properly be described as 
this way : throughout rational, sleeping well, taking his food well, 
and been perfectly healthy? I should be surprised, except on this 
one condition, that the doses had a considerable space between 
each of them. Then I should not be quite so surprised. 

By a JUBOB For how long after a dose of cocaine would this 
distension of the pupils continue? Quantities of cocaine have 
been found in the pupils as long as twenty-one hours after the 
drug has been taken, but how long still after that it might in 
certain cases be observable, I do not know. 



Closing Speech on Behalf of the Prisoner Stoner. 

Mr. CASSWELL May it please your lordship. Members of the 
jury, you have now heard the evidence against and for the 
defendant Stoner. I think I have made it clear that he does not 
deny that it was his hand that struck the blows. What he does 
deny is that his mind was in such a state at that time that he 
was responsible for striking those Wows. That is the question 
which I wish to discuss at no great length with you to-day. I 

221 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

Mr CaMwell 

am not going to try to persuade you against your will. I 
simply want to talk to you aa business men and women. Is it 
not clear that what I have proved before you shows that this 
cannot have been the act of a sane boy? Is it not clear that the 
taking of drugs, a fact spoken to by other witnesses as well as 
the witnesses for the defence, an issue raised as soon as these 
proceedings were commenced, is the true answer to the question 
which you have to decide ? When one is dealing with the question 
of intent, it is a fact which you, as a jury, are called upon 
to find : aye or no, did this boy have the requisite intent to commit 
this terrible crime, or did he have some sort of an intent merely 
to do something very different 1 It is his mind which you have to 
inquire into, and it is very difficult because none of us can get 
into a man's mind and see what was there. Few of us are suffi- 
ciently skilled in language to describe, perhaps, our own intent or 
our own state of mind, especially at such a time as we are dealing 
with, when we were under the influence of a drug. You have heard 
what has been said here, the evidence which was volunteered by one 
of the medical men for the prosecution, as to what was the result of 
this shot of morphia. With a woman, he says, it would last longer 
than cocaine, but in that case the evidence of the prison doctor 
is that the influence of morphia lasted for four days. The evidence 
of Dr. Rooke is that under that drug he has known people act 
perfectly normally, speak perfectly normally, and yet suffer after- 
wards from an entire fading of memory, which means, of course, 
that while speaking those worda they were acting automatically, 
their reason was not behind them; it was automatically speaking. 
There was no real sanity for which the person speaking those words 
was responsible. 

How are we to find out what was the state of Stoner's mind 
on that day, the all-important day, and how are we to find 
out what were the motives that actuated him when he did this 
act? In my submission to you, it could help you very little indeed 
to have Stoner in the box. Since the year 1898 the defendant 
is entitled to go info the box if he wishes, but in my submission 
that would not have helped you at all. He was under the influence 
of a drug at the time and what he could say and what he would 
know now would be of little assistance to you. Moreover, he* 
is a man with a shadow over him. He stands there in the terrible 
position of a man accused of the gravest crime in our calendar. 
So the evidence I have put before you and the evidence which I 
wish to recall to you as shortly as possible is the evidence that 
one can get from other people. Tou want to know the history 
of the man. Tou want to know all you can about the things 
which bear on the matter, and especially things which happened 
before the 24th March, before anybody heard of the crime, before 
any crime had been contemplated, so that you may have what 
is the best possible evidence. It is evidence uninfluenced by 




[llmanl Qo&ter 



Mr. J. D Casswell 



Closing Speech on behalf of Stoner. 

Mr CasiweU 

emotionalism, evidence uninfluenced by anybody wishing to pervert 
what really happened. When you have looked at that, I shall 
ask you to say that this crime is, in my submission, almost 
inexplicable in a young Englishman you might perhaps expect 
it in a sadist, a man who killed for the joy of killing, a man 
killer you might expect it in a man of hot blood and of a Latin 
race, urged on perhaps by jealousy or some kindred emotion, but 
is it the sort of thing that one expects in a lad of seventeen 
or eighteen and an English lad? I want you to ask yourselves 
that. If you come to the conclusion that it is not the sort of 
thing one expects, then we must look for a reason. Was there 
any reason which made this lad do something which was so 
inconsistent with all that we have heard of him before, so incon- 
sistent with his nature? It is a very, very cruel act which the 
prosecution are asking you to say he committed deliberately, a 
very dreadful act. An old man apparently asleep is hit on the side 
of his head with a heavy mallet and with no sort of urging motive 
of theft, no motive of revenge, no evidence telling of previous! 
quarrelling or of dislike. The evidence before you is that they 
got on extremely well together. I am perfectly certain that before 
you are going to accept the suggestion of the Prosecution that 
you are going to look into it very, very carefully indeed to see 
whether any reason has been given as to why this inoffensive, 
straightforward, honest English boy committed so terrible a crime. 
May I just remind you of a few things? I touched lightly 
upon the question of motive and upon the clumsy incidents of 
this crime when I addressed you before. I know you will forgive 
me if I retrace my steps a bit, but the responsibility upon me 
is eo great that I feel I must leave nothing unsaid, and if there 
is anything which I have left unsaid I do ask you most earnestly 
not to think it is because I have deliberately disregarded it. 
With regard to the question of motive there is no necessity for 
the prosecution to prove motive, but for a jury it is very often 
a very important thing. If you heard that a friend of yours 
who had led an excellent life and held a wonderful character was 
suddenly accused of a crime like this you would say, " Why, there 
must have been some very strong reason if he was sane to make 
him do a thing like that." Therefore, from the jury's point of 
view, I sometimes think that motive is perhaps the most important 
element of all. What could be the motive in this case ? The motive 
suggested by the prosecution is this it was put very forcibly by 
my learned friend and very fairly as he always does" they 
wanted to get him out of the way." Whose way was he in? Here 
was a lad who probably had to look at every sixpence before this 
first job of his; there was nothing to keep him from what has 
been termed an adulterous intercourse; everything was ready for 
him, everything was there. There was no Mr. Rattenbury standing 
in the way. As far as we know, Mr. Rattenbury knew about it as 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Cauwell 

Mrs. Eattenbury said, and did not care, or else he was in entire 
ignorance, and there is no evidence at all before you that here 
was a man in the way whom somebody wanted to get out of the 
way. Why should they need to get him out of the way ? In order 
to live together? As I have pointed out to you already, any 
sane persons who wanted to get somebody out of the way in order 
to enjoy life and possess his money would at any rate take some 
proper precaution to see that he was put out of the way in some 
fashion which would not at once fix the guilt on one or other 
of them. I ask you to disregard that as a motive altogether. 
What other motive was there? There was no trace of quarrelling 
and no trace of ill-feeling between these two people. There was, 
of course, no sign of theft. In my submission the only motive 
that can be assigned here is a motive which was entirely insjiflicient 
for this crime. It was simply the motive to prevent the trip to 
Bridport. I will deal with that a little later. What was the 
method adopted we find there was such absence of motive 
what was the method? The method, I suppose you would agree, 
was the clumsiest method that could possibly be devised. No 
thought for the morrow. There is the hitting over the head of a 
man with a clumsy instrument like a mallet. There is the fetching 
of the same mallet from some way away where it is bound to leave 
a trail. The police were bound to find out who was the owner 
of the mallet, bound to find out there was no mallet on the premises 
before, and there over the very fireplace under which the old man 
died were swords and a pistol with a heavy butt which could be 
.used, and you may be perfectly sure there were other instruments 
which could be used if it were required to hit that man over the 
head. Therefore from that point of view it is the clumsiest crime 
that could possibly be imagined. 

Then there was no chance of an alibi two people in the house 
and a boy the man who performed this crime how on earth was 
he going to fix responsibility on anybody else? How was he going 
to come to the Court with evidence to say " I was miles away at 
the time " ? Think of it this way. Was there any idea of escape? 
There is no evidence of that. Stoner had plenty of means of escape 
that night, but he never made any preparations and never went. 
There was apparently no idea of getting away from it. There is, 
further, this point which seems to show an utter lack of considera- 
tion, an utter lack of thought; what other excuse could be made? 
Could it be suggested that this was a case of suicide? The man was 
actually on the chair. Even if the head had been placed against 
the kerb, which you see in that photograph, nobody on earth 
who considered that injury would accept suicide as an answer. 
The doctors have told you it could not possibly be suicide, and 
nobody in his senses could have hoped to get out of it that way, 
Accident how could it be accident? If you were going to say 
that something had been an accident, you would do it in some way 

224 



Closing Speech on behalf of Stoner. 

Mr Cawell 

with a weapon nearby which the dead man might have used. 
So you get this clumsy crime committed in this clumsy manner 
with no chance of alibi, no attempt to escape, no chance of the 
defence of accident, no chance of a plea that it was suicide. 
Therefore you have u very exceptional case. 

In my submission to you, all of these considerations prove and 
inevitably prove that this was an act on impulse, the act of some- 
body who did not plan it beforehand, who made no necessary provi- 
sion for the future, but acted under an impulse, as I suggest 
to you an uncontrollable impulse. Do not let me lead you astray. 
Uncontrollable impulse is not a defence. There was a committee 
which sat some time ago that recommended that it should be 
accepted as a defence, but it is not a defence and you must 
not accept it. One must go further and prove not only an uncon- 
trollable impulse, but in addition an absence of the necessary 
intent : either that while under that uncontrollable impulse the 
doer wag so confused or diseased in mind as not to understand 
what he was doing or that what he was doing was wrong or else 
that he had not sufficient intent to constitute the crime of murder. 

Let us consider the history of the lad based entirely on the 
evidence that you have heard in this Court. It is said that one 
or other I invite you to say Stoner did this, struck those blows, 
but I think probably you will have no doubt that he struck those 
blows. It is said that he did this terrible thing. Let us see what 
sort of lad it is that we have to deal with. Juries in this country 
are supposed to have terrific memories. You have been here three 
days already. You are not supplied with notepaper or anything 
like that; you are supposed to carry it all in your head. So 
may I remind you of a few things which you may have 
forgotten? I propose only to deal with matters which have 
come before yo,u in evidence during the last three days. First 
frnd foremost, I ask you to remember the character that was 
ffiven to this man by Clements, an ex-police officer ; not only by the 
Stevens, who were relatives and may be biased; and by his own 
parents. They say he was, before he arrived at the Villa 
Madeira, of excellent character. He was straightforward and 
honest, he was never any trouble to- anybody, he was not the 
sort of boy who ran about with girls or with gangs of boys and 
got into trouble that way. He was inoffensive, not pugnacious, 
not the sort of boy who made attacks on others, but rather 
the sort of boy who defended others and acted as their champion. 
You could not have a more exemplary character given to 
a prisoner than that. That is what we have to start off with. 
He was not quarrelsome. Apparently he had no known vices 
such as drink. One would hope that a boy of that age would 
not drink. We know he was a war-time baby, the son of a man 
engaged in the Machine Qua Corps and afterwards in the Tank 
Corps> a boy born in the middle of the war. It may be that 



Rattenbuiy and Stoner. 

Mr Cuswell 

you will give some consideration to that. We know also that 
he was the first child and the only child of that marriage. We 
know that he did not walk until he was three. Perhaps the 
memhers of the jury may know whether that is exceptional \ it 
has been put forward as exceptional, a child not walking till he 
was three it shows a certain backwardness. We know that he 
did not have the advantage that most boys have of attending 
school for five or six years apd perhaps more. His education 
seems to have been about three years. I shall ask you to remember 
that when we come to consider the way in which he got, as I 
am going to suggest, under the domination of Mrs. Rattenbury 
and became infatuated with her. Most of us by nature have 
strong desires, some stronger than others, and whether we give 
way to them or not depends very much upon our upbringing 
and our education, and the amount of braking power which we 
put upon our desires. Here we have a boy without the advantage 
of those restraints, a boy who once his natural desires began to 
well up had perhaps less inhibition as we call it, less chance of 
fighting against natural desires than we, That was the lad you 
heard of, a boy, moreover, whose father had had fainting fits, 
and I think there is some evidence that he had too, a lad not 
very strong constitutionally. It is that boy who suddenly becomes 
plunged into a most extraordinary household. I think you will 
probably come to the conclusion that there could not have been 
a worse environment for any lad of that age than the one in 
which he found himself it would be very difficult to find one. 
It was a household where the husband and wife were not living 
together and had not been living together for some time. It 
was a household where Irene Riggs was employed, and you 
will have but little doubt, having listened to her evidence, that 
she became and was jealous of this new helper in the house. 
It was a household where there was a most extraordinary woman, 
unbalanced, hysterical and apt to fly into fits of excitement, to send 
for a doctor, to be given anaesthetics and be put to bed, the very 
reverse in character to the lad who suddenly found himself in 
her house, because, to use her own words, in order to get the 
money she required she said she had lied all through her married 
life a most unfortunate atmosphere. I do not want to dwell 
on this side of the question. I want to make it quite clear that 
I am not asserting for one moment that this woman had anything 
to do with what happened at the Villa Madeira on 24th March, 
but I do say that when the lad found himself in that sort of 
society it may be that atmosphere which led to the first dose of 
drugs, and it may be that life which increased the effect of the 
drugs and weakened his resistance. 

We know that he went into, that house, I think, on the 24th 
September last year. That in November we find that he ia 
saying to Mrs. Rattenbury and I ask you to accept almost in 



Closing Speech on behalf of Stoner. 

Mr Caaawell 

entirety the evidence of Mrs. Rattenbury because I invite you 
to say that it fits in with the facts as we know them from the 
evidence of the prosecution this at least you will say that she 
has been frank with you in many ways when perhaps it was not 
necessary for her to be so I ask you to accept what she says, 
that in November he told her he had to take something for his 
head, some medicine to make his head normal, and that afterwards 
he told her that it was a drug. You may or may not accept 
it when she says she did not take drugs herself, and that she did not 
know he took drugs, and did not want him to take drugs, and 
did not lead him to take drugs, I think you may be quite 
certain of this, that the drug-taking started in November, or 
thereabouts. As to this, I trust that I can show you, without any 
doubt whatever, that he waa a cocaine addict from the evidence 
apart altogether from statements made by him. When we get to 
November we hear that after two months he is taking something 
for his head, and we know that in that month Mrs. Rattenbury, 
and this boy, and the maid, go away hoping to get to Leeds 
apparently, and they remain at a hotel at Oxford, and we find, 
shortly after they come back from there, that Stoner and Mrs. 
Rattenbury are living together. That has been described by counsel 
for the prosecution as an adulterous intercourse, and no doubt it 
is. But I would ask you not to let that weigh with, you when you 
are considering the case <of this boy : adulterous intercourse no 
doubt from the point of view of the elder party to it, but not 
in the case of the boy? I ask you, gentlemen of the, jury, to look 
back, if you can, to the days when you were seventeen or 
eighteen, and to try and put yourselves in the position of that 
boy who was a servant in the house, the house of a lady who is 
well known, a writer of music under the name of Lozanne, a lady 
who provides him with more money than he ever had before, and 
finally offers herself to him. Do you think that he stopped to 
consider: is this an adulterous intercourse ? He knew that her 
husband and she were not living together. She told him no doubt 
that they were not on terms of love or affection. It would need 
a lad of strong character, would it not, a lad brought up with 
regular inhibitions, a lad who had had good early associations 
with people to tell him what was right, and what was wrong, to 
resist this? Do you remember, perhaps, the glamour of those 
days in the late teens I feel sure that some of you do the 
glamour of a woman for a young man? When a woman offers 
herself to a man who owes his livelihood to her, are you going 
to stress in any way the question of " adulterous intercourse " 
between them? I am sure you will come to the conclusion that 
he never looked at it from that point of view. You will not take 
that into consideration as against him. The boy is taken in 
there to live as a member of the household, and given a bedroom 

227 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr CaBswell 

almost next door to that of Mrs. Rattenbury. Now we come to 
Christmas, and Mrs. Price no, it was February when she saw 
him he came into the shop and there was something peculiar 
about him, and it is suggested that that peculiarity was due to 
his familiarity with Mrs. Rattenbury. It may be, but I ask you 
to say that it was not, but that it was simply one more symptom 
of this cocaine addiction to which he had fallen a victim. 

Then you get the evidence of the Stevens. They say they 
noticed, after he had gone to the Villa Madeira, a paleness, a 
strained look about him. I ask you to say that is more evidence 
that this lad was taking cocaine. But, stronger still, you get the 
evidence of what happened with Dr. O'Donnell, about 12th Febru- 
ary I think it was. By that time not only was the lad taking some 
drug, but he was getting violent, and Mrs. Rattenbury was getting 
frightened about him, BO nervous and so frightened about it 
apparently that she goes to a doctor and says that her lover has 
become an addict to some sort of drug, and she wants him to find 
out what; and not only that, but this chauffeur at 1 a week 
has gone to London for the special purpose of obtaining drugs. 
You have Dr. O'Donnell's evidence and Mrs. Rattenbury's evidence. 
Is it not quite clear what had happened? When Dr. O'Donnell sees 
him the next day, and asks him about it, and asks him what he 
has been taking, he says " Cocaine. That is what I tried to 
get yesterday, but I could not get it." Have you any doubt that 
this lad was taking cocaine? He was sent to the doctor because 
the woman was frightened of him. Irene Riggs said complaints 
were made on three or four occasions of these attacks, and Mrs. 
Rattenbury was saying that the lad was threatening her life this 
lad who up to September had an exemplary character from every- 
body. What had changed him ? What had turned him into a lad 
who rushes up to town, a lad who is getting so dangerous that Mrs. 
Rattenbury sends him to her doctor 1 Why was it 1 Was it not 
addiction, to cocaine? Was it not something which was taken into 
the system which was altering the character of the boy so much ? I 
suggest to you there cannot be any doubt about it. Unfortunately, 
when he goes to the doctor, the doctor does not say : * ' You had 
better get home at once and find another job; get out of this 
hysterical household with people up all night, and all the rest of it ; 
cocktails, drinking to excess, people having to be put to bed and 
that sort of thing; get away from it." No, Dr. O'Donnell seems to 
think he had nothing to do with the boy's future welfare; he just 
reports to Mrs. Rattenbury that the boy is taking cocaine. He told 
you what he said to the boy : *' I gave him a talking to, and advised 
him not to take it." I said: "Is it any good with a cocaine 
addict, to advise him n-ot to take it," and he said: " No, of 
course not." Mrs. Rattenbury said that after that talk the 
boy became less troublesome. At any rate we know that she took 



Closing Speech on hehalf of Stoner. 

Mr Casswell 

him up to London, and she raised quite a lot of money, and spent 
quite a lot of it on this journey to London, the buying; of clothes 
and all the rest of it. Everything seems to be quite normal on 
the Saturday, and on the Sunday the boy goes round to see his 
mother, apparently in a quite normal condition at half-past three, 
and he does not leave her until about half-past four. At half-past 
four he goes back to the Villa Madeira, and there he serves tea; 
it was part of his duty, and there in that room upstairs, for some 
reason or other, the door which is usually left open is closed. Now, 
the boy has told Dr. Grierson that he took a double dose of cocaine 
on the afternoon at half -past four. In my submission you cannot 
have a single doubt that that is true, although none of you can 
know, or will ever know, how much Qocaine was in those .two 
spoonfuls, but I think you will come to the conclusion that it was 
a pretty severe dose. 

What happened then 1 We know nothing more about him until 
we find him downstairs. When Mrs. Kattenbury is telephoning 
to Bridport, the boy has entirely changed, the boy who was quite 
normal when he went round to his mother, and when he took 
the tea up, so that nobody noticed anything; what had happened? 
What had happened to make him suddenly violent, threatening 
with a revolver, saying: " I am going to shoot you if you go to 
Bridport. 1 ' It is suggested that that is the jealousy of a normal 
man. Do you think it is? In my submission it is not, and 
it is not the sort of thing you expect to find in an English 
boy of eighteen. But there it is, this sudden change, the lad 
bringing out the revolver I do not care whether it is a real 
revolver or a toy revolver and threatening to shoot her if she 
goes to Bridport; and saying moreover : " You had connexion with 
Mr. Eattenbury, I heard it going on. What do you mean by that? 
Tpu told me I was your lover. You told me you had never lived 
with him for the last seven years, and that is why you wanted me. 
What do you mean by it? " All hallucination. What caused HI 
It is not quite clear that is the hallucination that Dr. Weatherly 
and Dr. Giliespie have spoken of, the hallucination which follows 
intoxication and cocaine. I ask you to believe that he had taken 
that double dose a few minutes before he listened outside the door, 
that he was under the influence of drug at that time, and hence 
you get this unreasonable fury ; this insane and unfounded 
jealousy. For a time she thinks she has quietened him, but there 
it is still in his mind. Away he goes and gets that mallet and 
commits this insane act; and I ask you tp say that is not the act 
of a normal boy, but that it is the act of somebody acting under 
the impulse of that insane hallucination, that insane jealousy 
which, as Dr. Weatherly has said to you, may so affect his reason 
that he does not think of the consequences, and does not form 
the intent. That is the whole question: what was the state of 
that boy's mind, a boy who was normal at half-past four, and 

229 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Caeawell 

who was doing these extraordinary things at six. What was 
the state of his mind? Are you going to say, in view of all 
that evidence, " this was a normal boy " 2 Are you going to say 
that he knew what he was doing when he did this awful thing 1 Are 
you going to say he appreciated what he was doing, or, if he appre- 
ciated it, he knew that he was doing wrong 1 Even if you think he 
knew what he was doing, and knew that it was wrong, do you 
think he formed the intent to do him grievous bodily harm, or to 
kill him? I suggest to you that the truth came out for the first tim 
in a most illuminating expression used by Mrs. Rattenbury : 
" He came up to me agitated, distressed, and he said " what 
did he say? " ' There is something I cannot tell you about, 
you will not be able to bear it.' ' Oh yes, I can, I can bear 
anything. What was it then 1 ' ' You won't be going to Brid- 
port to-morrow.' " And later on she said I took down her 
exact words: "He gave me the impression that he had hurt 
Batz to stop us going to Bridport." In my submission that is 
the truth of this. In his insane mind he had threatened her 
with the revolver. She is telephoning to somebody : what must 
I do, something to stop that visit to Bridport. In my submission 
to you that was the only intent in that poor lad's mind at nine 
o'clock at the Villa Madeira. 

I think that ,1 have now gone through practically all the 
material evidence, but I want to say a word about the statements 
made by Stoner. You have been told that a person under the 
influence of morphia will make long statements, and be etill under 
the influence for about four days. You will remember what 
happened from about eleven o'clock, his going about in the ordinary 
way from place to place. He drove the car to Dr. O'DonneH's. 
That was at about 111.30, so it would be about two and a half hours 
after the time at which the prosecution place this blow, and I 
think you will accept it as about the time, nine o'clock. At 
11.30 he is driving out to find Dr. O'Donnell, he does not find 
him; he comes back again, and then he follows Dr. O'Donnell to 
the nursing home, and there he is found asleep. It is suggested 
to you that it would be a usual thing for anybody to sleep. Do 
you think it would be usual for somebody who was in a state of 
great fear, wondering what was going to happen to him, whether 
he was going to be arrested, knowing this terrible thing he had 
done? Do you think that such a person would have gone to 
sleep? I put this also before you as worthy of consideration. 
He does not volunteer a-ny statement to clear himself. The first 
statement taken from him is at half-past eeven that morning, 
and then it is a statement which ia obviously untrue. He talks 
about going to bed at five-past eight, and not having the mallet, 
and all the rest of it. I ask you not to hold that against him 
too strongly. It may be that juet at that time he was waking up 
to the terrible danger that hung over his head. By that time 

230 



Closing Speech on behalf of Stoner, 

Mr Caiswell 

he had no means of knowing that the police were suspecting Mrs. 
Rattenbury. There is no evidence that he was ever present when 
those various statements were made by her. The first time that 
he knows they are going to arrest her is probably when the police- 
matron is there, and they fetch her out of her bedroom and take 
her away. Then you get this : Mr. Eattenbury was still alive. 
You have got this boy in this awful position : ' ' they have arrested 
Mrs. Rattenbury. I know she did not do it. What am I to do? " 
He is deprived of the solace, the drug; he gets very, very drunk 
on the Wednesday night, and he tells Miss Biggs : "I have put 
her into prison. I am going up to see her, and I am going to 
give myself up." He did intend to give himself up, but he 
was arrested as he came back, and the next morning he makes 
that rather curious statement to the police. I do not know whether 
you remember that statement which was made by Stoner. It was 
written by Police-constable Gates, Police-constable Gates went to 
see him. You may be sure there was no coercion or persuasion. 
Stoner says this the day after he was arrested, " ' You know Mrs. 
Rattenbury, don't you? ' I said, ' Yes, I do.' He said, ' Do you 
know Mrs. Rattenbury had nothing to do with this affair 1 ' I then 
cautioned him, he then said, ' When I did this job I believe he was 
asleep.' " It is a curious thing, not beginning " I went out to do 
this," but somehow or other laying stress on this: " When I did 
this job I believe he was asleep. I hit him and then came upstairs 
and told Mrs. Rattenbury." That is just what Mrs. Rattenbury 
said. When he came upstairs he told her. Then he said, " She 
rushed down then," so she said she did when she realized he had 
done something. He said, " You see, I watched through the french 
window, and saw her kiss him goodnight, then leave the room. 
I waited and crept in through the french window, which was 
unlocked. I think he must have been asleep when I hit him. Still 
it aint much use saying anything, I don't suppose they will let 
her out yet." It is quite clear he wanted to tell the truth there 
as far as he knew it, and you can see why : he wanted to get this 
innocent person who he knew had nothing whatever to do with 
it out of difficulty. He said, " Still it aint much use saying 
anything, I don't suppose they will let her out yet. You know- 
there should be a doctor with her when they tell her I am arrested, 
because she will go out of her mind." I ask you to say that in 
itself is some evidence that Mrs. Rattenbury's statement, on which 
I have been relying, is the true statement. I have no doubt 
you will have no hesitation in saying who struck this blow. 

I ask you, and I ask you on the facts that I have placed before 
you, on the evidence that I have been able to call before you, the 
evidence of two very eminent mental specialists who have come 
here to assist you to the best of their ability they have not come 
here with the idea of deceiving you, they have come here with 

231 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Casawell 

the result of their great learning, and their great experience o.u 
this one topic, hoping to assist you I do suggest that their 
evidence is o-f the greatest possible assistance to you, that it shows, 
beyond reasonable doubt that that boy was under a heavy dose 
of cocaine that, afternoon, and was still under its influence wheA 
this act was committed. Therefore I ask you to say there are 
three alternatives here you may lind either that this boy deli- 
berately and of malice aforethought was guilty of murder, that is 
one, or you may say, as I ask you to say, the evidence before us 
is sufficient to satisfy us not only from the nature of the act, 
but from what we have heard elsewhere, that boy was not in his. 
right mind when he did this act and did not really understand 
what he was doing at all. If you felt that he did understand 
what he was doing, then, of course, your verdict would be guilty 
but insane. If you feel that you are bound to find that be knew 
something about what he was doing, then I ask you to say I have 
proved facts sufficient to satisfy you that he did not form the 
intent of doing grievous bodily harm to Mr. Rattenbury, in which 
case your verdict should be manslaughter. I say to you as reason- 
able men and women that the verdict which you ought to find 
is one of these two, either he was guilty but insane, or he was 
guilty of manslaughter and of manslaughter only and not of 
murder. 

Adjourned for a short time. 



Closing Speech for the Crown. 

Mr. CROOM-JomrsoN May it please your lordship and members 
of the jury, those of us who come into the Criminal Courts have 
very often very unpleasant, extremely disagreeable, but necessary 
duties to perform. My sole duty on behalf of the prosecution here 
is to put certain considerations to you with, I hope, complete 
fairness to each of tta accused persona, but I should be lacking 
in my duty were I not to submit to you, as I shall have occasion 
to do before I sit down, where in the submission of the prosecution 
the facts proved in this case irresistibly should lead you. If, as 
I eaid when I addressed you laet, you have a doubt, a reasonable 
doubt about either one of these two persons as to whether he or 
she is guilty or not, it will not only be your duty but I expect 
aaid believe it will be your pleasure to give effect to that doubt 
by acquittal. May I say one other thing about the circumstances 
in which this case is being conducted. You have had to listen, 
unfortunately, for some days now to a story which to most of 
you I hope is unusual, but it is a story of immorality and vice. 
The only use which anybody would care to make of those facts ia 
this : that in view of that state of affairs existing, does it throw 



Closing Speech for the Crown. 

Mr Groom-Johnson 

any light one way or another on the facts and circumstances, 
which you are engaged in investigating. From the point ol 1 
view of your verdict, the fact that the two persons are persons 
who have been guilty of immorality in circumstances which you 
may deplore, has nothing to do with the case, but from the point 
of view of enabling you to judge of the truth of the evidence- 
of Mrs. Rattenbury, those facts may be all important. 

It has rather been suggested to you that this is a case in which 
two persons, this woman, whom probably you may think is a woman 
of experience, and this inexperienced boy, had arrived at a time 
when they were obtaining out of their illicit intercourse sufficient 
satisfaction to leave them no motive for getting rid of the husband 
in the case. It is a little difficult, you may think, to square that 
with the fact that only less than a week before that fatal Sunday 
these two people for some reason or other had gooie away together 
on an excursion to London where they were going to stay at the 
same hotel, and you may possibly think that suggests that the 
opportunities which were available to them at the Villa Madeira 
were not sufficient for their purpose. On the other hand, you 
have been told that they went away after the husband had been 
deceived, after he had been tofld by the prisoner Rattenbury a 
lie, a particularly mean lie, you may think. That also may 
suggest that they were anxious for some reason to get away from 
the Villa Madeira where the husband was living. In addition you 
have been told that there was trouble about money, and that there 
had been quarrels about money, and if motive is to assist you at all 
in this case you may think that there is ample evidence available 
with regard to motive. On the subject of motive I may perhapa 
say this to you, to approach it, as I am sure you will desire 
to do, with great caution. Motive in a case of this sort by itself 
proves nothing. The fact that somebody stands to gain or lose 
in one way or another by the death of an individual is not the 
remotest evidence of a desire to murder that individual, but when 
you come to sum up the evidence, when you come to look and 
see what the facts properly amount to, you may then think that 
motive may assist you in judging of those facts. I have said 
all I am going to say on that topic. 

Now let us examine for a few moments together the position 
between Mrs. Rattenbury and Stoner. You must judge the evidence 
from your knowledge of the world and experience. You are not 
supposed, when you enter the jury-box, to leave your knowledge 
and experience of the world outside. One of the great reasons 
and justifications for trial by jury is that twelve of the accused's 
fellow-citizens should come with their knowledge of human nature, 
perhapa not steeped as some of us are perhaps a little apt to be 
in the atmosphere of the Law Courts, I will not say to bring a 
breath of common sense into the matter, but to get the point of view 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

Mr Groom-Johnson 

of ordinary responsible citizens, and testing what you have heard 
in this case in that way, have you any doubts in your own minds 
that Stoner throughout this unhappy story was -dominated by Mrs. 
Rattenbury? I suggest that to you as a key to the solution of 
the problem which you are engaged in salving. 

Now let us see where next we are. Mrs. Rattenbury has told 
you a story of the events of that night. You are the judges, 
having seen her demeanour in the witness-box, having heard what 
she has had to say, as to whether what she has told you is the 
truth or is not the truth, but I must point out to you that she 
is a woman who, upon her own statement and, indeed, upon her 
own conduct, has for some years been engaged in lying to her 
husband about money matters and with regard to her daily life 
for some months past, whether it is from November or from 
Christmas or from February, has been engaged in a constant life 
of the grossest deceit of her husband. You may think that not- 
withstanding those facts you feel yourselves justified in relying 
upon her testimony. If you do so, by all means rely upon it 
and test it and see where it leads. She has told you that her 
memory is a complete blank with regard to everything but the 
most trifling details in the events of that dreadful night after the 
time when she put a towel round Mr* Rattenbury's head. It is 
a matter entirely for you as to whether you accept that. 

1 am just going to remind you in a few moments of the events 
of that night up to the time when she was given a dose of 
morphia, because you will recollect that her loss or alleged loss 
of memory in this case dates not from the time when she was 
given the morphia, but dates from a period long anterior to it, 
comparatively speaking. You heard the evidence of the doctor in 
the witness-box this morning, that people who are given morphia 
do sometimes lose their memory of events which happened from 
the time when the morphia is given for some time afterwards. 
You heard his other answer, that that is not a loss of memory of 
events which preceded the dose. The actual words I think that 
he gave were these: " I have asked questions of persons under 
morphia, I have been answered coherently and intelligently. They 
lose their memory for events which happened while the drug was 
in operation. They have not had a retrospective loss of memory, 
their loss of memory in my experience only applies to events after 
the drug is in operation." The drug was given somewhere about 
half -past three in the morning, or probably a little later, when 
Dr. O'Donnell returned from the nursing home and came to the 
house for the second occasion on that night. The time when the 
towel was placed round the head of the deceased is not fixed, I 
think, with any exactitude, but it must have been at some time, 
you may think, during the time that Mrs. Rattenbury was engaged 
in looking after him, and in that time, that is to say before 

234 



Closing Speech for the Crown. 

Mr Croom-Johnaon 

the dose of morphia had been given, Mrs. Rattenbury had said 
and done a great many things. She had said, I think to Inspector 
Mills first of all I think, to be absolutely fair to her, she had 
made statements to the doctor which are statements which do nox 
involve her in any criminal responsibility whatever. At a little 
later time she had made statements to Constable Bagwell who 
arrived on the scene at two o'clock in the morning. What then 
was the condition of Mrs. Rattenbury during that time? She had 
had a glass of neat whisky; she had thrown it up, had been sick, 
arid therefore that dose of neat whisky you may think could uot 
have affected her mind at all, could not have affected any question 
of memory or any question as to her being completely mistress of 
herself. She tells you, and you must judge whether it is likely 
that a woman who had been sick once after taking a dose of 
whisky could succeed within the next hour in taking other doses 
of whisky which she could keep down. You will judge of that 
from your own knowledge and your own experience. 1 sjiggest 
to you that, although later on she was undoubtedly under the 
influence of drink, that much later on again she was undoubtedly 
seen drinking whisky and soda, there is no real justifica- 
tion for saying that she was in such a condition before 
the morphia was administered that she ought not to remember 
what took place. What did she say during that period of time? 
She said to Bagwell : " I did it with a mallet; it is hidden; Ratz 
has lived too long. No, my lover did it. I will give you 10. 
No, I won't bribe you." That statement is, as you see, two state- 
ments; first of all, that she did it with a hidden mallet, and, 
secondly, that her lover did it. Then later on, and again before 
the morphia injection, when Inspector Mills was there, when he 
went back and told her that her husband was in a critical condi- 
tion, the answer that she made to him was: " Will this be against 
me? " Then she said " I did it; he gave me the book; he has 
lived too long. He said * Dear, dear,' " What do you suppose 
that " Dear, dear " meant; does it sound like the sound of the 
victim as the blow was struck? " I will tell you where the mallet 
is." We have no evidence that she knew where it was except 
that it was outside the house : " Have you told the Coroner yet? *' ; 
nothing inherently improbable, you may think, in her making that 
inquiry. " I shall make a better job of it next time." Then 
the woman who had been her friend came into her mind : " Irene 
does not know." She makes it plain that Irene is not responsible. 
" I made a. proper muddle of it " ; remember that Mr. Rattenbury 
had not been killed outright and that three blows had been 
struck; that is the evidence. " I thought I was strong enough." 
Strong enough for what 7 It IB after that time that she is given 
the morphia, after the doctor arrived and when she is talking 
obviously at that time with the intent of making other statements ; 

285 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

Mr CtQom'Johaaon 

" 1 know who did it, his son,*' and things of that sort, but at 
that time Dr. O'Donnell comes to the conclusion that she is not 
fit to make & statement and gives her morphia. Are you satisfied 
that she is telling the truth when she says her mind is a blank 
about these incidents, even if you accept the medical evidence to 
which you have listened that her mind is a blank with regard to 
what she said and did, and the things that happened after the 
morphia was administered? Are you satisfied that she made the 
statement which they say she made, and to which the only answer 
made by her is not that " I did not make them," but that " I have 
no recollection at all of any of the events of that period "t Dr. 
O'Donnell, it is true, says that up till six o'clock the nest morning 
and even at 8.15 the nest morning he himself would not give 
credence to statements made by her at those times. If you think 
from what you know of the facts there is anything that should 
induce yoji to disregard those statements, then in pursuance of 
your duty you will do so, but recollect Dr. O'Donnell did not see 
her at six o'clock o-r at 8.15; he had gone, and the position with 
regard to the 8.15 matter is this: you have been told that for a 
person who has had a dose of morphia, been walking about, had 
coffee and a bath, each one in its turn would assist in sweeping 
away, so to speak, for some short time the effects of the drug. 
This lady had experienced all three. She tells you that she cannot 
recollect, and the suggestion was that she was ill and unable to 
do anything. She had a bath; she came downstairs and she had 
cofiee, and if you believe the evidence olf the police officers, and 
there is no suggestion so far as I have listened to the case that 
you should not, when that book that the detective-inspector pro- 
duced, a man of responsibility, a man of position in the force 
in which he serves, was read out to her by him, she not only asked 
to see the book but read it out herself and there is her signature 
to the statement in it: " About 9 p.m. on Sunday, the 24th March, 
1935, I was playing cards with my husband when he dared me to 
kill him as he wanted to die. I picked up the mallet; he then said 
' You have not got guts enough to do it.' I then hit him with 
the mallet. I hid the mallet outside the house." Then she adds 
something- which you may think is very significant: " I would 
have shot him if I had had a gun." It is my duty o.n behalf of 
the prosecution to suggest to you that those statements which that 
woman made during that night are the truth. You may think 
that in the state in which she was there is such a thing as remorse 
after you have done something which you have determined to do, 
and that she was telling the truth, and that what she put her 
signature to a signature which, I suggest to you in the circum- 
stances in which it was written, was not suggested that she was 
incapable of understanding when she put her signature to that 
statement she was signing that which was true. Not a word was 



Closing Speech for the Crown. 

Mr Croom-Johnaoa 

mentioned about Stoner during this time. One other piece of 
evidence which it is my duty to submit to you is of the greatest 
importance in the case is that at the moment when she is going 
off to the police station, with Stoner and Riggs in the hall, she 
speaks to them: " Don't make fools of yourselves," and then 
'Stoner says to her: " You have got yourself into this mess by 
too much talking." Does it suggest to your minds that Stoner and 
she had had a common object that night; that Stoner was the 
person who had gone away to fetch the mallet, and that she, 
thinking she was strong enough, had aimed the blow or blows at 
her husband's head but made a muddle of it? For the purpose of 
examining as to whether the facts do not lead to that conclusion 
I suggest for your consideration that you should consider whether 
it is right or not to come to the view on the facts in this case 
that Stoner was a person who was likely, to say the least of it, 
to be acting under her domination. Those are the essential facts 
of the case so far as Mrs. Rattenbury is concerned. 

So far as Stooier is concerned the situation is simplicity itself; 
he saw her go away and said nothing. She would have you believe 
that already that night he had confessed to her that he had done 
hurt to Mr. Rattenbury. You may think that the suggestion is 
inconsistent with his subsequent action, and that he really was in a 
state of mind when according to her he plainly understood what 
he had done, had done it deliberately, and had done it with 
the object of preventing the journey to Bridport. Yet for some 
reason or other he remains quiet and sees her go to jail, and it 
is not until some little time afterwards when he makes first of all 
his statement to Irene Riggs, and later on when he niakee his 
statement to the police officer, that you get any statement 
Incriminating him. Do not forget in that connexion that in the 
meantime Stoner himself the man who according to the powerful 
speech that has just been made to you in his defence by my learned 
friend, Mr. Casswell, was really a person who was not under- 
standing, did not know, was in such a distressed state of mind 
by the taking of cocaine that he was a person who really could 
nob understand had given a detailed statement which was taken 
down and in which he explained what he was doing, putting up 
a story that he had retired to his bedroom at 8,5 p.m. on 
Sunday, the 24th March, leaving Mr. and Mrs. Rattenbury and 
the boy John in the drawing-room. We know it is not until he 
'has been arrested and until he has been in confinement for some 
time, one night at least, that he makes the full statement that you 
'have heard read to you this morning by my learned friend, Mr, 
Casawell. The suggestion to you about that is, that that is the 
truth, coupled with the idea that the circumstances are so exfcra- 
ordinary that it must be that, I rather gathered, is the effect 
of his statement on all the evidence that you have listened to with 

237 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Croom-Johnon 

such attention that Stoner could not have understood what he 
was doing, and that your proper verdict accordingly should be that 
of guilty but insane. 

The evidence to which you have listened as to what this boy 
really did and said, whether you get it from Mrs, Rattenbury if 
you accept that story, or what he said to the police officer when 
he made his statement, or what he said to Mrs. Rattenbury at 
the door; " You have got yourself into this mesa by talking too- 
muoh" if you contrast all those facts with the theories of the 
learned medical gentlemen who have come here, I am bound to 
submit to you indicates a person who was quite understanding 
the position, and a person in the possession of all his ordinary 
faculties when you have regard to the fact that his employer had 
been previously maltreated in the house that night. It is suggested 
to you that you ought to give effect to this theory so far as the 
boy is concerned because you could not expect that an ordinary 
English boy of eighteen would do these things if he was in posses- 
sion of his senses. Unfortunately, you may think in this case 
that what looked at one time to be not merely an ordinary English 
boy of eighteen but an English boy of irreproachable character 
and manifestly, having seen his parents, of good up -bringing, 
that this boy has done a great many things which possibly all 
of you would not expect of a boy of those antecedents to do. It 
is no good trying to suggest otherwise to you; in all humility 
it is no good venturing to look at things through dark spectacles. 
Truth, it is said, is stranger than fiction. Cases that get into these 
Courts are not the ordinary cases of ordinary decent English 
life ; we are dealing with exceptional circumstances and exceptional 
cases. It is no good inviting people to come to a conclusion 
because they may not expect things of this sort to happen : " Guilty 
but insane." His lordship will direct you as to the effect of a 
statement made by Stoner's own counsel that he accepted the 
position that Stoner is guilty, I mean as to what that position 
is so far as it affects the case for the prosecution against Mrs. 
Rattenbury. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS I think I ought to say at once that 
I shall tell the jury that they ought to put out of their minds 
entirely that statement, not only as against Mrs. Rattenbury but 
also as against Stoner. They have to decide the case upon evidence 
and not upon any gtwrf-admissions which counsel may think it 
desirable to make from his point of view. Stoner is the only 
man who can say "I am guilty." His counsel cannot say that. 

Mr. GROOM-JOHNSON If your lordship pleases. I anticipated 
that that would be the direction your lordship would give. 

Now members of the jury, if you are satisfied that this boy 
did not understand the nature and quality of his offence, you 
have to be satisfied by the evidence called on his behalf, and the 
onus of proof in this matter, and in this matter only, is upon 



Closing Speech for the Crown, 

Mr Groom-Johnson 

the defendant who advances that story. You have to be satisfied 
first of all that there is something akin to disease of the mind. 
Remember where his story starts with the cocaine. It starts with 
the statement that he found cocaine in his father's house. We 
are not told with any precision how long before; you are left 
completely in the dark about it. It is nobody's fault. His father 
has told you that he has never had any cocaine in the house. 
The boy has made a statement that on the day of the assault 
at about four o'clock in the afternoon he took two heaped-up tea- 
spoonfuls of cocaine. Assuming that is right, what sort of cocaine 
was it? It is said that the substance he took was a brownish 
substance with dark specks in it. The evidence is that that ia 
cocaine of a sort the gentleman who told us about these things 
had never heard of. Two heaped-up teaspoonfuls would be a very 
considerable quantity, you may think, of this drug, and yet at 
eight o'clock that night this young man who, according to this 
theory, had been acting under an impulse, got into his master's 
motor car, drove some three or four miles, borrowed a mallet, 
had a conversation, came back again for three or four miles with 
the mallet, and, having come back witk the mallet and presumably, 
therefore, having arrived back at the Villa Madeira some time 
after half-past eight, waited two hours before he struck the blows 
which eventually ended fatally, somewhere about half -past ten, 
( aome time just before he got into bed with Mrs. Rattenbury. 

Mr. CASSWELL What story is that? 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS He is talking of the story told by 
Mrs. Rattenbury. 

Mr. O'CONNOR That is not the story told by Mrs. Rattenbury. 

Mr. CASSWELL My lord, there is no evidence of Mrs. Ratten- 
bury that the blow was struck later than nine o'clock, and the 
evidence of the prosecution is that when Miss Riggs went down 
there the blood was clotted as if it had been there some time. 
I hope my friend, if he is going to suggest to the jury that this 
took place at half-past ten 

Mr. CBOOM-JOHWSON I am not. 

Mr. CASSWELL will at any rate put his finger upon the 

evidence upon which he bases that statement. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Go on please, Mr. Croom- Johnson. 

Mr. GROOM- JOHNSON Members of the jury, I am sure jou 
understood me, I was putting the case to- you on the assumption 
that you are to accept the story which has been advanced to 
you upon these points on behalf of the defendant Stoner. I am 
sure you quite understood I was not accepting any part of that 
story except those parts of it which we know of with regard to 
the mallet. The suggestion plainly, I submit to you upon that 
evidence, was that the hurt had been done certainly later than 
half -past nine, because at half -past nine Mrs. Rattenbury , accord- 
ing to her story, had gone to bed leaving Stoner somewhere about 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Groom-Johnson 

I think fihe said she could not tell us where and that very soon 
afterwards, certainly not half-past ten, this man was in her bed, 
in her bedroom telling her that he had done the injuries. That 
suggested to my mind and if it does not suggest it to yours by 
all means give effect to it that the theory advanced was that the 
blow had been recently struck. All those things, in my submission 
to you, do suggest deliberation if that story is true, and do not 
suggest an impulse brought on by a man being reduced into some 
sort of condition of excitement or overweening jealousy or the 
like, as the result of the evils which he suffers from being a cocaine 
addict. The story which I submitted to you in opening the case 
which it is my painful duty to submit to you as the truth, is 
that the mallet having been borrowed between eight and 8.30, 
the blow was struck somewhere about nine o'clock, the time which 
gets into two of the lady's statements although they are not state- 
ments, I agree, in which she said she did any particular act at 
that time. Therefore the position is, when you have regard to 
the state of the blood, the quantity of the blood, the congealed 
condition of the blood at a comparatively early time, the flow 
of blood on to the floor, and poor Mr. Rattenbury *s collar which 
you saw produced as an exhibit in the case, that those facts may 
suggest to your mind that the blows had been delivered long before. 
There is one other cogent piece of evidence on this topic. Irene 
Kiggs came in at 10.15 or thereabouts. The time when she was 
expected in was about ten, and when she goes downstairs she hears 
that sound of heavy breathing. Within a very short time after- 
wards we know Mr. Rattenbury was discovered unconscious with 
all this blood about. The object of my observation when I was 
interrupted by my two learned friends was to point out to you 
that if you accept the suggestions which are made on behalf of 
Stoner they do appear to involve premeditation by him, carried 
out with premeditation over a fairly long time, some hours at 
the very least, and I suggest to you that you should reject those 
suggestions just as I suggest to you that it is your duty in 
pursuance of the oaths you have taken to reject the conclusion 
at which you are invited to arrive based on these hypotheses. I 
think I have said all that is necessary that I should say in the 
case. 

I should like to wind up as I started : if you come to the 
conclusion that these facts are consistent and only consistent with 
the view that is put before you on behalf of the prosecution, that 
this was a crime which was committed by these two people helping 
one another with one common object, if you have no reasonable 
doubt, such a doubt as would induce you to act or refrain from 
acting in your ordinary every-day affairs, then it will be your 
duty in vindication of public justice to say so by your verdict. 
If, in pursuance of your oaths, you can still bring yourselves 
to the view that you are not satisfied, that the case has not been 
240 



Speech for the Prisoner Rattenbury. 



Mr T. J. O'Connor 



made out to your satisfaction, then it would be your duty and 
possibly the pleasure of us all, for you to say that not being 
satisfied, your verdict is a verdict for the defendants, 



Speech for the Prisoner Rattenbury. 

Mr. T. J. O'CONNOR If it please your lordship, Members of the 
jury, nobody who listened to the concluding remarks of my learned 
friend or indeed to the tenor of the whole of his remarks, and 
noticed his conduct of the case can doubt that he has maintained 
the tradition of British justice in the fairness with which he has 
presented the case against these two accused. I ain going to ask 
your indulgence. I am going to address you for some little time 
in the discharge of my duty, and I do so with less reluctance 
because of the way in which patie.ntly and assiduously you have 
now listened from Monday morning until the present moment to 
the whole of the case that has been put before you. We are all 
assisting in our different capacities in the discharge of one of the 
highest functions of citizenship the doing of justice. By English 
law we do not allow in criminal cases evidence to be given of 
previous convictions of an accused person. Presumption of inno- 
cence is at the root of the whole of our legal system, and it is 
only very reluctantly that that presumption is displaced, and it 
has to be displaced by the Crown. When the integrity of a person 
is impeached, when crime is sought to be brought home against 
that person, it is essentially for the Crown to prove guilt beyond 
a reasonable doubt to twelve of that person's fellow-citizens. In 
doing so in any ordinary case no> evidence of previous bad character 
may be given. You cannot say of a person, as perhaps you could 
under other systems of jurisprudence, " this person was a thief 
before, this person has been guilty of assault before, and therefore 
may be guilty again." A jury comes to its task upon the assump- 
tion that there is nothing upon which the person's record can be 
questioned. 

But cases arise in which, through no fault of the prosecution, 
a person comes before you with a record and with a history which 
inspire you with revulsion. It is in those cases perhaps that the 
task of the jury is most difficult of all. They have to separate in 
their minds the natural revulsion which they feel against behaviour 
which nobody would seek to condone or commend, to dissociate in 
their minds evidence of evil character and evil behaviour, of ill 
or damage done to other people to divide all these prejudicial 
elements and features of the case from the crime of which that 
person is being arraigned- I want you in your approach to this 
case, in your consideration of it after I have sat down, and after 
my lord has summed up to you, to begin, each and all of you, 

E 241 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr T. J, O'Connor 

by making quite certain that you have purged your minds of any 
feeling that this woman should suffer because of the woman she has 
been. I am not here to cast one stone against that boy. It is not 
for the defence at any time to satisfy you as to innocence : it need 
only raise a reasonable doubt in your mind. You are not bound 
to accept the story of the defence or of either of the defendants. 
Yo.u may go away from here after your duty is done feeling te we 
do not believe everything that Mrs. Rattenbury has said." That is 
not enough to entitle you to co.nvict her. You have to review the 
whole of the evidence for the prosecution and for the defence, and 
make up your minds on all you have heard, even if you disbelieve 
the defence, even if you feel she has reasons for keeping something 
back. You may think she has reasons which have nothing to do 
with this crime, which perhaps have something to do with some 
attempt to help the boy. You need not believe her statement, yet 
if it leads to a reasonable doubt as to whether it is true, the 
defence is entitled to an acquittal. 

With these general considerations in your mind let us now 
approach the case which is sought to be made by the Crown. I 
want to consider that case first of all without Mrs. Rattenbury 's 
statements; from the point of view of the objective evidence 
produced by the Crown. Mr. Croom- Johnson has spoken to you of 
motive and has suggested that Mr. Rattenbury was in the way. 
Is there any foundation whatsoever for this suggestion] All the 
evidence is to the contrary. Mr. and Mrs. Rattenbury were leading 
the comfortable ordinary life, not very exciting perhaps, which 
you would expect from their disparity of ages. Is it suggested 
that this designing, self-indulgent woman, as the Crown wish to- 
make her out to be, would desire to exchange her comfortable 
middle-class surroundings with her car and villa and reasonably 
ample means for life with Stoner on a pound a week? I venture 
to suggest that the case of motive is so inp alp able and flimsy that 
yoji will discard it out of hand. 

Let us turn then to the actual incidents of the fatal evening 
as they are related by the witnesses for the Crown. The maid 
Riggs hears a cry. Remember, she is put forward by the Crown 
as their witness of truth, She comes down to the drawing-room 
and finds Mrs, Rattenbury prostrated with grief and Mr. Ratten- 
bury a crumpled heap with blood streaming from his head. You 
will have no doubt that the wounds from which he died were 
inflicted by a mallet brought by Stoner from a considerable distance 
away. The medical evidence shows that the blows were inflicted 
from behind. The mallet, as you know, was found concealed out- 
side the house. Riggs found Mrs. Rattenbury slipperless and 
besotted with grief. Riggs had last seen Mrs. Rattenbury when 
the latter had visited her in her bedroom. She was then, according 
to Riggs, cool and collected, she talked cheerfully of the proposed 



Speech for the Prisoner Rattenbury. 

Mr T. J. O'Connor 

visit to Jenks at Bridport on the next day, and said that it was 
uncertain whether Stoner would be driving or not. If the case for 
the Crown is to be accepted, while she was talking to Riggs about 
the morrow's arrangements in this way, she knew that Rattenbury 
was bleeding to death in the room below. You have seen Mrs. 
Rattenbury in the box. Can you credit her with such diabolical 
finesse, with such exact and careful preparations of her defence? 
We know that she did in fact, earlier in the evening, ring up 
Jenks and make arrangements for the visit on the following day. 
We know that she had put out Rattenbury J s clothes, as it was her 
custom to do when they were going away. The suggestion of the 
Crown, of course, is that this was part of a premeditated scheme. 
Can you believe that possible 1 ? Indeed, you must go further than 
that; you must accept her as one of the most superb actresses in 
the world, if you believe Riggs, as the Crown ask youi to do, 
when she says that when she came down into the drawing-room a 
few minutes after the bedroom conversation Mrs. Rattenbury was 
in the extremities of grief, and as she described her " a changed 
woman." 

Remember one or two instances of those first moments in the 
drawing-room which indicate where the truth lies. Mrs. Ratten- 
bury was slipperless. Do you think that she could have possessed 
the cunning to remember to come downstairs slipperless so as to 
give the impression of haste? You remember how Riggs spoke 
about her solicitude for Rattenbury? About her impatience when 
the telephone messages to the doctor did not seem to go through 
fast enough? Must you come to the conclusion that this was all 
exquisite play acting? IB that hypothesis easier to accept than the 
simple story told by Mrs. Rattenbury in the box ? That hearing a 
cry she rushed downstairs and found her husband with blood 
streaming from his head. Again, the truth often emerges irre- 
sistibly through little details. Do you remember how she told 
you in the witness-box that " I found his teeth on the floor and 
put them in so that he could speak." Can you imagine a mind 
so cunning, so deceitful, so careful in its preparation of a defence 
as to invent an incident like that? Members of the jury, I suggest 
to you that upon the objective evidence produced by the Crown no 
jury in the world could convict this woman. 

But the Crown in this case is furnished with material which 
they think far deadlier than the objective evidence. They have 
the statements of Mrs. Rattenbury herself and they invite you to 
say that upon these statements you are entitled to convict her. 
There are seven of them and I want you to consider each of them 
in sequence, bearing in mind the grotesque theory of the prosecution 
that this was on Mrs, Rattenbury 's part a crime of premeditation. 
As this sordid night wore on, the statements became progressively 
more absurd, as her drink-sodden condition blurred the outlines 

243 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr T. J, O'Connor 

of reason and left outstanding and distinct only the growing 
instinct to save her lover at all costs. The first statement is at 
2 a.m., and is in these words: " I was playing cards with my 
husband for a short time until nine o'clock. I then went to my 
bedroom. At about ten-thirty I heard a yell. I came downstairs 
to the drawing-room and saw my husband sitting in the chair. I 
sent for O'Donnell." 

Now what you will ask yourselves is this : If the Crown is right 
in suggesting that Mrs. Rattenbury had carefully prepared a 
defence, the message to Jenks, the putting out of the clothes, the 
conversation with Riggs, and BO forth; how comes it that not one 
word of this carefully prepared defence appears in any of the 
statements, and, most remarkable of all, that nothing of the sort 
appears when her mind is comparatively clear at two o'clock in 
the morning? " 

The second statement is almost exactly the same as the first, 
and both of them are entirely consistent with the story she told 
you in the witness-box. But it is when we come to the third and 
later statements that the Crown asks you to believe that these 
are confessions of guilt. She says to Bagwell at about half-past 
two in the morning : "I know who did it. I did it with a 
mallet. It is hidden. Ratz has lived too long. No, my lover 
did it. It's urine in the chair. I will give you ten pounds. No, 
I won't bribe you.'' A rambling incoherent statement which 
cancels out. It is suggested that this is a confession. But if it 
is a confession, why does it not confess the truth? Why does she 
not say to the police : " I will show you where the mallet is ? " You 
will find, as the statements progress throughout the night, there 
ia one strange .lacuna. % On no occasion does she tell the police 
where the mallet is hidden. Can you imagine any reason for this 
omission other than the fact that she did not know? And as the 
night wore on, and her determination at all costs to take the 
blame and shield her lover takes shape in her fuddled brain, you 
can see that she is beginning to grasp the fact that she cannot 
successfully take that blame unless she can account for the where- 
abouts of the mallet. When she is being taken away to the police 
station, she hisses into Riggs's ear : " You must find out where 
the mallet is." Members of the jury, I suggest that that final 
remark offers you the clearest and most cogent evidence that this 
woman was inventing a confession which she saw to be incomplete 
and which she knew could never be convincing unless she could 
indicate where the weapon was hidden with which the act had been 
done. Look at all these statements. I will not go through them 
in detail with you but ask yourselves, are they the statements 
of a prescient mind or are they rather the rambling incoherent 
Outpourings of a woman sotted with drink and later muddled with 
morphia? Remember what Dr. O'Donnell, another witness for the 
244 




[Lafayette 



Mr, T. J. O'Connor, K.C. 



Speech for the Prisoner Rattenbury. 

Mr T. J. O'Connor 

Crown, has told you: " I told the police at half -past three that 
I had given her a shot of morphia and that she was not fit to 
make a statement." Remember how Inspector Carter and the 
matron have told you that she was swaying and trying to be sick, 
and dazed at one o'clock on the following afternoon. And 
remember, lastly, the evidence of the Governor of Holloway Gaol 
that for some, days after her receptioji into Holloway she was atill 
obviously suffering from the effects of the drug. I suggest with 
confidence that neither upon the objective evidence, nor upon the 
statements made by Mrs. Rattenbury herself, has the Crown made 
out a case which could be acceptable to twelve reasonable men and 
women. 

The Crowii say this was a premeditated crime. If this woman 
had the foresight and cunning to make the preparations of which 
you have heard on the fatal evening, is it conceivable that she 
should have been so clumsy as to bring home for the week-end 
her child who might have remained at school? Can you conceive 
that she would have ordered from Harrod's for her lover to be 
delivered on Monday after the crime those fatally incriminating 
tokens of her affection for Stoner ? If the crime was premeditated, 
can yo.u conceive of Mrs. Rattenbury and Stoner sitting down 
and solemnly deciding upon a mallet for the execution of the 
aoU Why a mallet? Why a mallet borrowed from Stoner's 
parents, the ownership of which could easily be traced? Why not 
a poker picked up from the fireplace if the impression to be 
conveyed was that it was the act of an intruder? Why not one 
of the swords which were hanging over the fireplace? Members of 
the jury, I suggest that the very clumsiness of the crime brands 
it as a crime of impulse. Not necessarily an impulse which 
occurred at the moment before the crime, but an impulse which 
seized this jealous unbalanced boy in the course of that Sunday 
afternoon. And if it be a crime of impulse, it is not difficult 
to understand one impulse resulting in the act, but the theory 
of two synchronised impulses occurring in two different minds is, 
indeed, a difficult one to accept. 

Members of the jury, it appears to me that throughout this 
case the Crown have been asking you to accept the most difficult 
hypothesis instead of the simple one. Is it so hard to see where 
the truth lies here? Perhaps the most horrible part of my task 
is, in the performance of my duty to Mrs. Rattenbury, to have 
to call your attention to facts which clearly indicate that Stoner 
conceived and executed this crime. Biit that duty must be dis- 
charged. Let us consider for a moment the facts which incriminate 
him. Stoner, as you know, is still but a lad ; his upbringing waa 
simple; he had but few friends and no girl friends. He is flung, 
at the age of eighteen, into the vortex of illicit love. The evidence 
shows him to have been an unbalanced melodramatic boy, given to 

245 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr T. J. O'Connor 

violent outbursts. The witnesses for the Crown have proved that 
on previous occasions he had assaulted Mrs. Rattenbury. They 
have also proved that he used to go about with a toy dagger and 
with a toy revolver. An unbalanced, hysterical, melodramatic 
youth. Consider his first associations with passionate womanhood. 
The natural reactions of a jealous youth, possibly, I do not know, 
accentuated by drug taking. He ia taken away from his work as 
chauffeur, stays sumptuously in a west-end hotel for a week with 
his mistress, dressed in silk pyjamas from a west-end store, and 
then brought back to earth and to his drudging duties and sub- 
mitting to the orders of his mistress's husband. 

If you were judging of moral responsibility In this case, your 
task might be a light one, for you ca>nnot resist nausea and disgust 
at the way in which this middle-aged woman has ensnared and 
degraded this hapless youth. But that is not your task to-day. 
If you are tempted to cast moral reproach, I would say to you 
with reverence : " Let him that is without sin cast the first stone." 
Perhaps also you may think that during that fatal night there 
were indications of a belated nobility on Mrs. Rattenbury's part 
in the way in which she sought to shield her lover and in the 
indications of her anxiety at all hazards to take the blame. Too 
late, like Frankenstein, she had discovered that she had created 
a monster which she could not control. 

I beg you, as I began, to discount your horror at her moral 
failure and to remember that the worst misery which you could 
inflict upon this wretched youth would be to convict her of some- 
thing for which he knows she is not responsible. Mercifully 
perhaps you may say to yourselves : " She has been punished 
enough. Wherever she walks she will be a figure of shame." That 
is not your responsibility; that is hers. Weigh carefully all the 
evidence, bearing in mind the considerations I have put before 
you 3 remembering that the Crown must prove its case unerringly 
to your satisfaction, and remembering that if you allow prejudice 
or moral turpitude to cloud your judgment, and to blur the true 
issue, you will not be faithful to your oaths, but you will be 
debauching the law and degrading our conception of justice. 

The Court adjourned. 



Fifth Day-Friday, 3lst May, 1935. 
Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Members of the jury, you have 
listened now for four days with exemplary patience and, as I have 
observed, with the closest attention to a case in which a large 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphrey* 

number of matters have been referred to and discussed, some of 
which may be described, I think, as being on the outside edge of the 
caae, on the fringe of the case, matters which at one time might 
have seemed to be possibly of some importance, but which have 
faded away and have become either matters of common consent or 
of no importance to the case. I do not propose to refer, or to attempt 
to refer, either to every fact which 'has been proved in this case 
or to all the comments which have been made by counsel to you 
upon the evidence. Speeches of counsel are addressed to you 
because you are the judges of the facts and counsel are addressing 
you upon the facts of the case, which it is for you to find. If I do 
not, and I do not intend to refer to all the matters in this case, 
it is not because I invite you to disregard them, but because I leave 
you, who have listened with patience to the addresses of counsel, 
to give such weight as you think right to those observations, and 
particularly those made on behalf of the two accused persons, as I 
am sure you will do. One other word about the observations I am 
going to make to you about the facts. As I have said, you are the 
judges of the facts. In the course of my summing-up I shall make 
observations on the facts, and you may gather the view which I 
take not of the verdict which you should return, but on some 
matters which I think it right to comment upon. Please remember 
this : all questions of facts are for you, the proper inference to be 
drawn from facts is for you and for you only, and while you will 
accept without question my direction to you upon the law, because 
that is my province, you will arrive at the facts upon your own 
interpretation of the facts. Such observations as I make to you 
may or may not meet with your approval. If they do not, dis- 
regard them; if they do, then they will have achieved the object for 
which they are made, and that is to give you some assistance in 
the matter. That is all. 

This case was opened for you on Monday by Mr. Groom- Johnson, 
not in these words but in this way. He said " We believe we shall 
be able to prove to you that Mr. Rattenbury was murdered by 
somebody. We believe we shall be able to establish as against each 
of these persons jointly that they had the opportunity for committing 
that murder, that they had the motive for committing that murder, 
and their conduct was such as to make it, as indeed the prosecution 
suggest, clear that the murder was the result of a joint agreement 
between them." He said to you each of these persons has made 
statements, each of them has made at one time or the other state- 
ments to the effect that they are completely innocent, they had no 
hand in this matter at all, the killing or the injury of Mr. Ratten- 
bury. On the other hand, it is true to say that each of them has 
made at other times a statement to the effect that he or she, as the 
<saae may be, alone was responsible for the injury and death of Mr. 
Rattenbury. Mr. Croom- Johnson said to you " Under those cir- 
cumstances, if we prove that, we shall ask you to say that this is a 

247 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Juat ce Humphrey* 

case in which it is established that the death, the murder of Mr. 
Rattenbury was the result of the joint agreement of the two persona 
who are now being tried together." As a proposition of law that ia 
undoubtedly correct, for the law is this, If two persons agree 
together that a felony, such a felony as the felonious wounding 
and the felonious wounding means wounding with intent either to- 
kill or to do serious bodily injury, which is called grievous bodily 
harm shall be committed upon somebody, and if in pursuance of 
that agreement that felonious wounding is committed by one of 
them and death is caused and ensues as the result of that felonious 
wounding, then each of those persons is equally guilty of murder. 
That is the law, and it matters not by the hands of which of them 
the fatal blow was delivered, and it matters not whether both of 
them were even present at the time when the fatal blow was- 
delivered. Call them A and B for a moment. Supposing that it is 
proved to the jury that A and B agree together that C shall be 
feloniously wounded or killed, and A and A alone kills him, if B 
who has so agreed that the thing shall be done, is present at the time- 
when A carries out that felonious act, then B is said to be a 
principal in the second degree that is the legal term the actual 
person A who commits the crime, whose hand commits the crime, 
being a principal in the first degree, but if B is absent at the time 
when the crime is committed, but yet is proved to have counselled 
and procured, either by conspiring with or advising or suggesting 
the crime, then B is said to be an accessory before the fact, and the 
law in these days, and since the time before in fact I was born, 
has been that principals in the second degree, principals in the 
first degree, accessories before the fact, may all be tried together 
or separately and may be convicted upon an indictment charging 
murder, felony, as having been committed as the indictment in this- 
case does, for these two persons are charged singly and jointly with 
the crime of murder. Now that is the law, that is the law as it 
relates to the case as it was opened. You have since that day had 
before you a good deal of evidence, indeed, some evidence and not 
unimportant evidence has been given in this case which it is quite- 
clear the prosecution were quite unaware of, for at one period of 
this case it seemed that the two accused were instructing their 
respective counsel by no means to help each other, but to bring out 
facts which would be, which perhaps were damaging to the case of 
the other accused. Tou will remember facts were elicited from 
witnesses on behalf of Mrs. Rattenbury as against Stoner and vice 
versa, and it appeared and apparently was so, that the prosecution 
were quite unaware of that evidence. We know that Miss Riggs had 
made a statement to Mrs. Rattenbury's solicitor who is instructing 
Mr. O'Connor, and apparently told that solicitor things which she 
had not thought necessary or proper to tell the police, and you may 
think that as the result of that evidence as a whole the case that is. 
made against these persons now I do not mean made by counsel, but 
248 



Mr, Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

as the evidence rather shapes itself is rather a case in which the 
evidence points, whether it proves is quite another matter, to 
Stoner as being the person whose hand caused the injuries to Mr. 
Kattenbury and that Mrs. Rattenbury was a party to, but not an 
actual assailant of Mr. Kattenbury party to the crime but not an 
actual assailant. If that is so, let me tell you in a word exactly 
how the law stands. It is no different, but 1 will put it in slightly 
different language. If it is proved to your satisfaction that Stoner 
attacked Mr. Rattenbury, attacked him as he sat in his chair 
asleep or awake, without any sort or kind of justification, not 
in self-defence or anything of that sort, but made an attack 
upon Mr. Rattenbury and delivered those three blows upon his 
head, which the doctors spoke of if you come to the conclusion 
that it is proved that Stoner did that and thereby committed the 
wounding, as of course he did there is no doubt about the 
wounding and that that wounding was done with the intention 
of doing that which it did, and that which any person in his 
senses must have assumed it would do, that is, cause grievous 
bodily harm, if not kill perhaps it is a wonder that the man 
did not die even earlier than he did if you come to the conclusion 
that that is proved, then unless something else appears in the 
case Stoner is guilty of murder and no other crime. If you come 
to the conclusion that it is proved that Mrs. Rattenbury was present 
aiding and abetting Stoner in the commission of that crime, or 
that although she was absent or may have been absent at the 
time, yet she had counselled and procured, that is to say, advised, 
agreed with, suggested to Stoner that he should commit that crime, 
then as an accessory before the fact she is equally guilty of that 
murder. 

Now I have used the word " proved " several times, and 
what is meant by that is this. You know, as you know many 
things which I am saying to you and many things which counsel 
has said to you you knew before you ever came into the jury- 
box, but you will understand, I know, that we all have certain 
duties to perform, and we have to perform them even though 
at times it may seem to be a little unnecessary. It is my duty 
to tell you, and I do tell you, that in this as in every other 
criminal case proof must be given by the Crown of every material 
fact which is necessary to prove the crime which they have alleged. 
It is never for the accused person to establish his innocence. It 
is necessary for the Crown to prove his guilt or the jury are 
obliged to say " The guilt is not proved and therefore we say 
not guilty." Not guilty in this country does not mean in the 
least that the person has established his innocence, not in the 
least. Sometimes, of course, it amounts to that, in the case, 
you may say, of a person whose defence is, "I never was near 
the place at all, and I call witnesses to show that I was a hundred 
miles away." It may be said that he has established his innocence. 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

Mr Juitice Humphrey* 

That is not the way we look at it, A verdict of not guilty means 
no more than that the prosecution have failed to establish the 
guilt of that person, and therefore you cannot return a verdict 
of guilty, and the only other verdict is not guilty. The proof 
by the prosecution, it is said, must be proof beyond any reason- 
able doubt. I never think myself that that expression adds any- 
thing to the law as I have stated it to you, for what must be 
done is to prove a person's guilt, and if there is reasonable doubt 
about the matter, then the case has not been proved at all, and 
if the case has been proved the English language is clear enough 
to make it obvious that what is meant is that it has been proved 
beyond reasonable doubt. But it is the practice to say to juries, 
" Remember that the prosecution must prove the case beyond any 
reasonable doubt/' That means, I suppose, that if in considering 
the whole of the matter you say now against this person " There 
is a case of the greatest suspicion, on the whole I think this 
accused person did this or that thing which he is charged with, 
but I do not know, I am not quite sure about it " that means 
a reasonable doubt. The accent on the word reasonable does not 
mean to avoid what must always be a very unpleasant thing for 
a citizen to have to do, join in a verdict of guilty on a capital 
charge. It does not mean that you are entitled to conjure up 
fanciful doubts or say, " After all nobody saw this thing done, 
therefore we cannot say it was done,' 7 or anything of that sort. 
It only means dealing with the matter in the same way that you 
would deal with any important matter in your own life and your 
own affairs. If you say, " I know, I can see, I understand, the 
evidence shows me here the truth is this/' act upon it. If you 
say, " Well, the matter is left in some doubt, I am not sure 
what is the real truth about the matter," then you solve the 
difficulty by saying " The prosecution have not proved the case 
beyond all reasonable doubt and we return a verdict of not 
guilty." That applies, of course, to the case of either of the 
accused. Although they are indicted jointly and have been tried 
together, and I may say that the five days' experience which I 
have had of this case has satisfied me that I was right in ruling 
that they should be tried together as they were jointly indicted- 
although they are being tried together your -verdicts must be 
separate in regard to each of them, because in law it may be 
that on such an indictment as this one is proved guilty and the 
other is not proved guilty or they may both be proved guilty 
or neither may be proved guilty, but you must deliver a separate 
verdict in regard to each of them, and that verdict must be 
based solely on the evidence which is, as I direct you, evidence 
against that particular person, and for that reason we shall have 
a little later to deal separately with the case of Stoner and 
separately with the case of Mrs. Rattenbury, because there are 
statements in this case which have been given in evidence, which 
250 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

are evidence against the person who made them and not evidence 
against the person who did not make them, and in whose presence 
they were not made. But there are, of course, first of all a 
number of facts which are common to the case of both of them. 
The first thing that one, I think, should have in one's mind 
perhaps is this : who- were the persons, what do we know about 
the persons who were living at 5 Manor Road on that fatal 
Sunday, the 24th March, last 5 Manor Road, Bournemouth? 
The deceased man was a gentleman of sixty-seven years of age, 
a retired architect living upon his savings apparently. His 
physical condition is described by Dr. Simmons who made an 
examination of his dead body, and therefore had an opportunity 
of seeing all the organs of his body, and he, as well as those 
who knew him, says he was a big man, just under six feet, strong 
for his age, all his organs were healthy what we call a well- 
preserved man of a time of life when he cannot be called an 
old man, if old indicates decrepit or senile, but of course a man 
well past middle life. That was Mr. Rattenbury. He was described 
by Dr. O'Donnell, who knew him well, as a very charming, quiet 
man, not at all of a violent nature, and by Miss Riggs, who knew 
him, as a man who seemed to enjoy himself thoroughly in 'his 
quiet way. That is her expression. His widow has given us a 
less pleasant picture of her late husband. She says that he was 
mean about money matters that may or may not be and she 
says, moreover, that he was that very unpleasant character for 
which, I think, we have no suitable English expression, but which 
the French call un mari complaisant, a man who knew that his 
wife was committing adultery and had no objection to it not 
a nice character. That is said by Mrs. Rattenbury, and it 
depends upon her statement and her statement alone. The next 
person living in that house is Mrs. Rattenbury herself. She was 
described principally by Dr. O'Donnell, who is the person who 
has given most of the evidence about this matter, as being always 
very excited, unstable that means a little unbalanced when in 
drink wildly excited, or when she was contradicted, if she did not 
get her own way, she would become wildly excited a woman of 
strong will, apparently of strong passions, liable to get very 
excitable and very bad tempered if she did not get her own way, 
and particularly when she was in drink, not a woman who habitu- 
ally drank too much, but a woman who at times had drinking 
bouts when she did drink much too much. She says of herself that 
she was fond of her husband although not intimate with him, and 
she says she was devoted to her children of whom she had two, 
one thirteen years of age by her former husband Mr. Rattenbury 
was her third husband and a little boy of six by Mr, Rattenbury. 
Members of the jury, it is no pleasant thing to have to say 
anything about that woman's moral character, but even her own 

251 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Juatict Humphreys 

counsel addressing you yesterday said things about her which must 
have been very painful for her to hear, if, indeed, she is a person 
who has any moral understanding at all; but it is necessary, 
and I agree with Mr. Croom- Johnson, and, indeed, it was not 
disputed that it is necessary, that you should form an opinion 
in your own minds of that woman's character, the sort of woman 
she is from two points of view. She has given evidence. Of 
the three people concerned in this tragedy one is dead and can 
give no evidence, one has preferred to remain in the shelter of 
the dock, and, although an admissible witness, has preferred not 
to give evidence, and so it/ is that as regards many of the matters 
in this case all that week for my part I think that all the events 
of that week are of the greatest importance in this case I mean 
the week beginning the 18th March and ending on the 24th March 
the only person who has given evidence first hand about the events 
of that week is Mrs. Rattenbury, and therefore it is essential 
that you should make up your minds whether she is a person whose 
evidence you believe. Whether you believe part of it or whether 
you reject the whole of it, that to some extent must depend upon 
the view you take of the sort of woman that she is. It is also 
necessary that you should do that for this reason. It is the case 
for the prosecution, as I understand, that this woman is a woman 
GO lost to all sense of decency, so entirely without any morals 
that she would stop at nothing to gain her ends, particularly 
her sexual gratification, and if that be true, then, say the prosecu- 
tion, do you think that woman would stop at the killing of her 
husband, particularly if she had not to do it herself, if she were 
once satisfied that that would enable her to live the sort of life 
that she was living more comfortably or with less interference 
or prospect of interference. And so it is that it seems to me 
necessary that you should for yourselves have in your minds a 
picture of that woman, and there was one incident in this case 
which you may think ia sufficient to show you the sort of degrada- 
tion to which this wretched woman has sunk. You will remember 
that she gave evidence herself that she was committing adultery 
she is an adulteress of course regularly in bed with her husband's 
servant in her bedroom and that in that bedroom in a little bed 
there was her child of six, and counsel asked her : " Do you really 
mean that you chose that room when if you wanted to gratify your 
passions you could have gone into the man's room which was just 
along the passage and done it there? Did you really choose the 
room where your child was asleep? " And you will remember that 
the woman, who was in the witness-box, seemed surprised that any 
one should put such a question to her and her answer was apparently 
given in perfect good faith, " Why not? The little boy was asleep. 
He was a sound sleeper." Well, there it is. That is the woman, a 
woman who, having ceased, as she says, to have the ordinary 
relations with her husband, chose as her paramour a boy of seven- 
252 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphrey 

teen, almost young enough to be her son she was then thirty-seven. 
I do not pause to deal with the answer which she thought right to 
make or explanation she thought right to give in her evidence, 
" Oh, I thought at that time that he was much older," because she 
had advertised for a boy between fourteen and eighteen, and he had 
answered that advertisement. Do you think it is likely that in 
answering an advertisement which required a boy between fourteen 
and eighteen he would go out of his way to say that he was of an 
age which was unsuitable? It is said that when she found on his 
eighteenth birthday that he was younger than she expected she 
desired to break off their relations. It was after that we have this 
orgy in London. That is the woman a woman who tells you that 
she deceived her husband. She says she had to in order to get 
money, she had to lie to him, and she lied to some purpose at the 
end of March because she got 250 out of him by saying that she 
wanted it for a serious operation which had to be performed on 
herself quite untrue and then spent a great deal of it upon this 
man in a different station in life from herself, buying him such 
things as silk pyjamas at three guineas a pair. Members of the 
jury, having heard her learned counsel, having regard to the facts 
of this case, it may be that you will say you cannot possibly feel 
any sympathy for that woman, you cannot have any feeling except 
disgust for her, but let me say this. That should not make you more 
ready to convict her of this crime; it should, if anything, make you 
less ready to accept evidence against her. If you think there can 
by any explanation consistent with her innocence of that crime, I 
know you will not let it prejudice you against her. So far as it is 
material evidence in the case you must use it, and if it is against 
her, if it shows that she is the sort of woman who might well have 
the motive to do this, then you must use it because that is admis- 
sible evidence, but beware that you do not convict her of this crime 
of which she is accused because she is an adulteress, and an 
adulteress, you may think, of the most unpleasant type. Now that 
is Mrs, Rattenbury. 

The other person in the dock, Stoner, is a person for whom uo 
one can fail to feel regret that at the age of eighteen he should be 
in the position in which he now sits. He is given a good character 
by all those who knew him up to the time when he came across 
Mrs. Rattenbury. He is said to have been at first a backward boy. 
I do not think there is much in that because his father said that 
he improved very much after he left school and became an appar- 
ently strong and healthy boy a quiet and reserved boy, one not 
given to going about with girls a quiet, well-behaved lad. You 
will remember it is my duty to remind you that you must try 
him according to the law of this country just as you must try her 
according to the law of this country. You have no more right to 
refuse to give effect to evidence in his case from motives of pity 
than you have a right to refuse to give effect to evidence in her 

253 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Justice Httmphryi 

case which may be in her favour, because you thoroughly dislike 
her, but it is a pitiable thing that that youth should have been 
brought to this pass, and I do not think I am putting it unfairly 
against even her when I say whatever your verdict may be in this 
case his position is due to the domination of that woman over him. 
It is a pitiable thing that he should be in that position. 

There was one other person living in that house, Miss Riggs. 
You saw Miss Eiggs giving evidence in the witness-box, obviously 
very fond, genuinely fond, of Mrs. Rattenbury, who seems to have 
been \ery kind to her ; indeed, they were rather on the terms of two- 
great friends than the terms of mistress and maid. They called 
each other darling, and Miss Riggs, I do not suppose you will doubt 
again, I do not think I am saying anything unfair to anybody 
when I say it was quite obvious, at least, to me, that she should do 
everything that she could to help and rightly, I am not blaming her 
for it, the woman who had been kind to her, that is Mrs. Ratten- 
bury, She does not like Stoner. She had been there some few 
years, I think, and when Stoner came her position was a little less 
close to her mistress and friend, Mrs. Rattenbury. Stoner rather 
took the place which she had had I am not, of course, talking 
about sexual matters, but took the place in the affection of Mrs. 
Rattenbury which she had got, and it was quite clear, and she was 
quite frank about it, she did not like him. Whether that has 
tinged her evidence in this case or not is entirely for you^to decide, 
but it was suggested by the questions put in cross-examination by 
Mr. Casswellj that that suggestion was made is quite clear. There 
she is and she really is a very important witness in this case. 

In this case murder being charged, the first question you have to- 
decide, obviously, is : are you satisfied that murder was committed 
by anybody? The cause of death in the case of the late Mr. 
Rattenbury was given to you in evidence by Mr. Rooke, the surgeon, 
and he told you that there were three wounds upon his head, one 
was on the left side just above the left ear, an irregular wound with 
jagged edges, 3 inches long, and so severe a blow was it that the 
bone was driven into the brain, the bone of his skull, forming what 
the doctors call a depressed fracture of the skulL That, by itself, 
was quite sufficient to, and did, cause death eventually. There 
was a second wound practically on the mid-line at the back of the 
head. That was a wound which went down to the bone. There 
was a third wound, round to the right, which was of the same 
nature as the. second. That involved, said Mr. Rooke, three separate 
blows from some blunt instrument. The direction of the principal 
wound was such that the direction of the blow was from the back 
to the front : there is no question about that, he says. He gave 
what I have no doubt was most convincing evidence about why it 
must be so. Of course, it is quite possible for a person, ( if he 
wants to do it, to stand in front of somebody, and by reaching his 
arm over that person to deliver a blow like that, which will be a 
354 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphrey* 

blow from back to front; it is perfectly possible. It is not a 
medical question. No doubt you could do it if you wanted to do 
it. But looking at this in the ordinary way and assuming it was 
not a performance by somebody who wished to give a performance 
but something which was a blow by a man who wished to injure Mr. 
Rattenbury, it was done by a man probably behind Mr. Ratten- 
bury or possibly at the side. I do not think it matters in 
the least. The blow was fatal within a few days and it resulted in 
the death of Mr. Rattenbury, just the same whether it was delivered 
from the front or from behind. That was the cause of death and 
there was no other cause of death, and there was no indication 
either there, I mean, upon the body or in the room, of there being 
anything in the nature of a struggle at all, and the picture which 
is presented to you by the prosecution and I have heard nothing 
to the contrary from the defence is a picture of a harmless old 
gentleman sitting in his chair, perhaps asleep, perhaps just dozing, 
perhaps we do not know reading, and this violent attack with 
some heavy instrument three times repeated upon his head, which 
resulted in him dropping like a felled ox, covered with blood ; and 
although everything was done that was possible, that was little, he 
died. He died at half-past eight on the morning of the 28th, that 
is four days after. It depends whether you are calling it night or 
morning, but at all events, the 24th was the date of the injury, in 
the evening, at all events, not earlier than nine and not later than 
half-past ten, and he died at S.30 of the morning of the 28th. 

Now the weapon, the mallet which you have seen and felt, it is 
suggested, was the weapon. That is suggested because there was 
found upon that mallet, not only traces of blood and a piece of 
skin, but hair which can only be identified as hair and can never 
be identified as being the hair of Mr. Rattenbury, but which is 
said to be identical with the hair of Mr. Rattenbury. There is 
other evidence that it was probably the weapon. It was in fact 
hidden by somebody that night, with that blood, that skin and that 
hair upon it, and was found at a quarter-past six or half-past six 
the next morning by a police officer. It is suggested that that is 
the weapon. You have felt the weight of it yourselves and you can 
judge whether you accept the evidence or not of the medical men 
who say that it is such a weapon as would be likely to cause the 
terrible injuries from which this gentleman suffered. The cause of 
death then was in those injuries, You must be satisfied before you 
can convict anybody in the matter that those injuries from which 
this gentleman died were felonious injuries, that is to say, that 
the assailant not only wounded him, but wounded him intending 
to do grievous bodily harm. Members of the jury, you will decide 
the matter for yourselves. I can only say that, to me, it seems 
waste of time to discuss the question of whether anybody could ever 
deliver three blows on the head of a sitting man of that nature, 
without intending to do grievous bodily harm, and there is an end 

255 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

Mr Juitiee Humphrey. 

of it, I am not speaking now of the question whether the man was 
mad, or anything of that sort. I will not say a normal person, 
because normal people do not commit crimes of this sort; but 
assuming he was a person in possession of his senses, can you con- 
ceive any circumstance in which a person could deliver blows of 
that kind without intending to kill a man or, at least, to do him 
serious bodily injury? If he did, then that constitutes the felonious 
wounding, and if from that felonious wounding Mr. Rattenbury 
died (and the doctors said he did) then I say the crime of that 
person is murder. 

This story starts a little earlier than the events of that night 
of the 24th March. We know that on the 18th March Mrs. Batten- 
bury told her husband that she had to undergo a serious operation 
in London, and, for that purpose and also for the purpose of 
paying some bills, but probably for that purpose, she wanted 
an unusually large sum of money. She used to have, I think, 
regularly, 50 a month, and in answer to Mr. Groom- Johnson, 
she said that one way or the other the money that she received 
I do not think she had anything of her own, or only some very 
email amount she got from time to time, presents from her mother 
the amount that she used to receive from her husband was about 
1000 a year, I think that is so. On this occasion she wanted 
250, and she got it from him. We have her own evidence as 
to how she got it. What we have from other people is that she 
did get it, because there is his cheque which goes into her account, 
and on that date she drew on her account that cheque, the 
cheque for 50, which she gave to Stoner, and he cashed it princi- 
pally in 5 notes, and with that money or, presumably, some 
of it, those two go to London together. They stayed under the 
pretence of being brother and sister in two different rooms, but 
in fact they slept together, and on the 19th March they spent 
the day, or part of it, at Harrod's Stores, where there was put 
down to Mrs. Rattenbury's account something over 40-worth 
of clothes of different sorts, which she was providing for this 
joung man, not as her chauffeur but as her lover. Those facts 
are undisputed ; they are proved. They stayed in London together 
for four days, the 19th, 20th, 21st, and 22nd, and in addition 
to the money spent at Harrod'e, apparently, there was a ring 
which was bought for Mrs. Rattenbury, so she says : Stoner bought 
it, but apparently she gave him the money. That appears to 
be the result of the evidence. That brings us to the events of 
the 24th March, but before we come to the 24th March, let me 
-ask you to consider this question : do you believe that you have 
been told the truth and the whole truth about that visit to London 
by anybody ? Here were these two people being absent from Mr. 
Rattenbury and his home for four days. It is true that Mrs. 
Rattenbury has said that he was a man who, although she had 
never told him, yet she believes, suspected her relations with 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

her chauffeur or his chauffeur and raised no objection. He 
was a mean man, she says, about money. Do you think, is 
it even suggested, that he was a man who would willingly find 
large sums of money for her to spend upon her lover? Do you 
believe that while they were in London the future was not discussed ? 
What were they going to do when they got back? Could life go 
on in the same way? Would not something have to be done 
with, or to, Mr. Rattenbury? Would he not ask, " What about 
my 250; how much did the operation cost you; did you have 
the operation; if so, where? I hope you are better for it." Or, 
if he was so callous and disinterested a husband that he would 
not be expected even to asik about the operation, at least, as a 
mean man would not you expect him, and would not they expect 
him that is the point- to make some inquiries about the money? 
Do you think that those two persons in London imagined that 
life could go on just the same after their return, after an absence 
of four days, as before? We have not heard a word about it 
from Mrs. Rattenbury and most remarkable of all, I want to 
remind you now of what she said happened when she got back. 
They got back on the 22nd, the Friday night, I think it would 
be. This is what she said. This was a question put to her and 
her answer : 

" (Q) Did you get back to Madeira Villa on Friday night ? (A) Yes, about 
half-paat ten. (Q) With Stoner? (A) Yea. (Q) Was your husband in? (A) 
Yes, in bed, (Q) Did he ask anything" that was her own counsel putting 
questions " Did he ask anything about what had been happening?" and the 
answer was, " No, he always was jolly late at night. (Q) When you say he was 
jolly" says Mr. O'Connor "I think he used to take a little whisky at 
night? (A) Yes, always. (Q) About how much ? (A) He drank quite a lot" 

Then she went on to describe how on the Saturday she went to the 
school to bring little John home, and in the afternoon she went 
with him to see his half-brother play football, and so forth, and 
she said on the Saturday evening 

" (Q) On what terms were you with your husband on the Saturday evening ? 
(A) Quite all right. (Q) What did you do? (A) I think we played cards: 
I think it was just the same as any other night." 

Do you believe that? Do you believe that after that absence of 
four days Mr. Rattenbury never asked a question as to what had 
happened in London? and if you do not believe it, if it seems 
to you to be utterly incredible, then, has Mrs. Rattenbury told 
you in the witness-box the truth, the whole truth and nothing but 
the truth, or has she not? 

I come to the events of 24th March. Again, it is not important, 
I think, to discuss what happened on the morning. I do not think 
anything happened of importance in the morning, and if it did 
I ehall find it when I come to Mrs. Rattenbury's evidence. I 
do not think there was anything of importance. At four o'clock 

s 257 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Juttice Humphreys 

or so in the afternoon Miss Riggs went out and she did not return 
until a quarter-past ten, so that the persons in the house, apart 
from the little boy and I do not want to refer to the little chap 
again were Mr. Rattenbury, Mrs. Rattenbury, and Stoner. 
Between eight and half-past that night Stoner was at the house 
of his grandparents who, apparently, live a few doors off his 
parents, not fairly close to Bournemouth, 3J miles away, and he 
was borrowing a mallet that mallet which you have seen. He 
said that he wanted it to drive some tent pegs in. We know 
that there was no tent; there was a sort of sun shelter, which 
was used in the summer, and it was not up then, and, said Mrs, 
Rattenbury, there was no attempt to put it up then. It was the 
24th March, mind, not July or August, We know what use was 
made of that thing, which, in fact, was borrowed by someone. 
He left at half -past eight, according to his grandmother, apparently 
returning home. If that is so, he would get back, I suppose 
it is 3^ miles somewhere before a quarter to nine; it would 
not take him very long in the car, and then there would be in 
the house himself, Mrs. Rattenbury, and the deceased Mr. Ratten- 
bury. The case for the prosecution is that the injuries to Mr. 
Rattenbury were occasioned some time between then and a quarter- 
past ten, when Miss Riggs returned. It cannot be proved, in 
the sense of any witness being called to say that was the time. 
It is a matter which you must, if you think it necessary, deal 
with by way of inference from all the facts. I do not know 
that it is really very important to know what time it was, but 
Miss Riggs coming back at a quarter-past ten, let me remind 
you of what she said about this matter. She says " I was expected 
back about ten, in fact, I got back about a quarter-past ten; the 
place was in darkness, everybody gone to bed, or apparently 
gone to bed. There were no lights and I went straight up to 
my room, and after five or ten minutes in my room I left the 
room." If you recollect, she left her room more than once, On 
one occasion she went downstairs. It is not very clear, at least, 
to my mind, on which occasion it was that she saw Stoner, but 
on one of those occasions, in fact, when she was out of her room, 
I think she said the reason was she went downstairs because she 
was rather hungry, and she went down there to get something 
to eat; but on one occasion, when she was out of the room, she 
saw Stoner looking over the banisters, and she said " What is 
the matter; what are you coming out for/' and the answer was 
" Oh, nothing, I was just looking to see if the lights were out." 
Then, she said, she returned to her room if that was the first 
occasion or she had again returned to her room for the second 
time; but on the occasion when she did go downstairs, she was, 
for some reason or another we cannot inquire further a little 
troubled in her mind, a little apprehensive that something had 
happened, and she heard heavy breathing, breathing coming from 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

some room. She was not sure whether it was from Mr. Rattenbury's 
bedroom, which you will remember was next to the drawing-room. 
All those matters I have not troubled to remind you of are in 
your minds. 

I have no doubt, and you have plans and photographs if 
you want to look at them, but it came from the drawing-room, 
and for some reason, perhaps a little oddly, perhaps it was a 
little nervousness, having gone into Mr. Rattenbury's bedroom and 
turned on the light and seen that he was not there, from which 
it would seem to follow that he would be in the drawing-room, 
she did not go into the drawing-room at all, but she went upstairs 
to bed, and she left that heavy breathing apparently going on in 
the drawing-room. She says that it must have been, so far as 
she could calculate, and, of course, she is not to be held, nor are 
we to be held, to any matter of time with any great accuracy, 
but she thinks that would be about three-quarters of an hour after 
she first came in; that would be about eleven o'clock. That is 
her idea, and it was as she got back again and just got into bed, 
or at all events, had only been in bed a short time and had not 
got to sleep, that Mrs. Rattenbury came into her room and spoke 
to her of ordinary household matters, ordinary matters of con- 
versation, and incidentally mentioned that she had arranged to 
go with her husband the next day to Bridport, to stay with a 
gentleman named Jenks, who was a friend of his. There is no 
doubt that she had telephoned to Mr. Jenks and had made that 
arrangement. Whether it was a real arrangement that was to be 
carried out or not, of course, is entirely a matter for you. I 
say nothing about it. She had in fact done that. After a few 
minutes' conversation she left. Then five or ten minutes after 
that, said Miss Riggs, " I heard someone coming downstairs 
hurriedly, and directly after that there was a call from Mrs. 
Rattenbury which brought me out of my room. Instantly I rushed 
downstairs into the drawing-room and there was Mr. Rattenbury 
in his chair injured that one word is sufficient to describe it. 
Mrs. Rattenbury was in pyjamas, no doubt the same dress that 
she had on when she -was talking to Miss Riggs in her room. 
As a matter of fact, she seems to have used those pyjamas, no 
doubt with some underclothing beneath them, during the day, and 
used them as a sleeping-suit at night, the same pyjamas, according 
to Miss Riggs, that she had seen her in at four o'clock in the 
afternoon when she went out. She said she was in a very terrified 
state " and I " said Miss Riggs " at once rushed to the tele- 
phone to call up Dr. O'Donnell, fetched a bowl and a cloth and 
bathed the eyes." She was naturally in the belief that it was a 
blow on the eye that had caused the black eyes, as she called it, 
that he was suffering from. It was not so in fact, but it was 
the result of the injury at the back of the head which tad caused 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Justice Humphrey* 

internal injury to the eye; but that is not material. Then she 
described how both of them called out for Stoner. You may think 
it would be natural to call out; any woman would call out for 
the only man in the house in those circumstances to come and 
help. She says they both did. " Stoner came down and he helped, 
and I rather think the doctor helped too, and I think the taxi-man 
who brought the doctor helped to carry the poor gentleman into 
his bedroom; he was a big, heavy man," and so forth. Then 
something was done to clear up the mess in the drawing-room, 
Mrs, Rattenbury saying that she did not want her little boy to 
see any blood when he came down in the morning. 

That is the account Miss Riggs gives you of the events of 
that night. She gives other evidence which I am not going to 
refer to at the moment, because it relates to statements made 
by one or other of these people in the absence of the other, and 
I am going to deal with those statements (I am just reminding 
you of them) separately as against the prisoner in whose case 
the statement is made. She was cross-examined, first of all, for 
Mrs. Rattenbury. She said, first of all, " we were very happy 
together and Mrs. Rattenbury seemed very friendly with her 
husband. I had known for some time that Stoner was the lover 
of Mrs. Rattenbury." She seems to have made no concealment 
about it. She told Riggs, she told her doctor, " Mrs. Rattenbury 
told me that her life had been threatened by Stoner." You may 
think that really amounts to nothing now. These two people 
quarrelled it would be expected, would it not, that they would 
quarrel, having regard to their relations; the sort of relations 
existing between them lacked the one thing which makes for 
ordinary peaceful happiness between married couples, and that 
is mutual respect, and without it it is not unlikely that 
there would be quarrels between two people under such 
circumstances; and they did quarrel. But you will not 
believe, I think I do not think eventually it was really 
suggested even by Mrs. Rattenbury I do not think you 
will believe as against Stoner, that he ever threatened the life of 
Mrs. Rattenbury, in the sense of making a serious statement that 
he intended to kill her. She speaks of a quarrel in February 
which she says was at night. First of all, there was a quarrel 
in Mrs. Rattenbury's bedroom between these two, and then it 
went on when they both went to Stoner's bedroom. She said 
" Stoner had hold of Mrs. Rattenbury and I separated them, 
and she was rather scared." She said that Stoner used to carry 
a dagger about with him. I do not know what the significance 
of that is, if anything. He certainly never used it or attempted 
to use it, and no- one has suggested he did, It may have been 
a bit of play-acting; we do not know anything about it; Stoner 
has not given us any information about it. All Miss Riggs says 
is that he used to carry a dagger about, whatever that means. 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphrey! 

She says that he, Stoner, took away with him on the 25th March 
(I suppose he went home to see his people) a box which was 
labelled " Air pistol." Whether it had got any air pistol in 
it or not, we do not know. Then she gives evidence about the 
dog being let out at night, the practice being that one of them 
would let out the dog; very likely Mrs. Rattenbury would let out 
the dog and then would go to bed and the husband, if he stayed 
up, would let the dog in and sihut the window. She gives evidence, 
which I have alreay referred to, about Mrs. Rattenbury 's drinking 
habits. She said that Mrs. Rattenbury, when she came into her 
room, was a little excited, apparently excited about preparations 
for Monday. She did not look as if she knew of her husband 
being injured. She said the sound of the person going downstairs 
was the sound of some one hurrying, and it was almost directly 
after that that she heard the call from Mrs. Rattenbury of 
" Irene," and then when she got downstairs, she said Mrs. Ratten- 
bury was in a different condition. She called out, amongst other 
things, " Oh, poor Ratz, what lhas happened? " " She was 
impatient with me." What did not improve -her condition was that 
she was drinking whisky continuously. Then she told ua how Stoner 
was sent for the doctor, and he came back much later; in fact, 
he came back before long, but she did not see him; he did come 
back, in fact, in a short time, although she did not see him 
for some hours apparently. Then she speaks about doctors coming 
and going, and she says when the police arrived Mrs. Rattenbury, 
who had been steadily drinking, was in a terrible state and she 
behaved like a drunken woman. That is all one can say. She 
tried to kiss the policeman, and behaved in that sort of way 
which was compatible with her being at that time in a drunken 
state, as well as, perhaps, very upset. Many people, particularly 
women, are very upsiet by the sight of blood, and there was a 
lot of blood about there, but you may think that drink was 
probably the main cause of her condition. She says " When the 
police came back again late in the morning, I could hardly under- 
stand what Mrs. Rattenbury said at times." She mentioned the 
deceased's son. She speaks about her in the morning not wanting 
to get up until she had some coffee. She said she had some 
coffee; " I made it for her; then I helped her to the bathroom, 
and after having a bath she wanted to go to sleep." Then she 
gave evidence about statements. In cross-examination for Stoner, 
she said " Mrs. Rattenbury sometimes stayed up all night, so 
did I ; I did not think anything of it. I went about with her 
as a friend and we used to stay at hotels until Stoner came; 
then not so much. These two began sleeping together, I think, 
a month after Stoner came. It hurt my feelings. When Stoner 
slept with her I was not pleased." Then she said that on one 
occasion in October, 1933, Mrs. Rattenbury had a sudden attack. 
" She used to have attacks. She was very excitable and ran 

261 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Jiutice Humphrey* 

about and then became drowsy, and then she went to bed." The 
object of those questions, it turned out, was, it was being suggested 
on behalf of Stoner, that Mrs. Rattenbury was addicted to drugs. 
You will remember that afterwards an attempt was made to 
suggest that a little hypodermic syringe, which was found in 
her room, was used by her to give herself injections of some drug, 
cocaine; morphia, or something of that sort, and that a drawing 
which was found somewhere was a drawing showing a person 
who was addicted to drugs. Well, all that comes to absolutely 
nothing. It is only fair to this woman to say there is not a 
rag of evidence that she was ever addicted to drugs, and whether 
Stoner was, or whether he was not, if he was there is certainly 
no evidence that he got the habit from her, because all these 
things I am not going to spend time going through them with 
you you will remember they were ail exploded and it appeared 
perfectly clear that the reason for the hypodermic syringe was that 
their boy of thirteen had to have some injection not this sort 
of thing strychnine or arsenic, or something of that sort, and 
the drawing was not her drawing at all, but it was her son's 
drawing. There is really no evidence at all that this woman 
was addicted to drugs at any time. 

Then she was asked about the events of this night, and she 
eaid, in answer to Stoner 's counsel, " I went into the deceased's 
room because I had an idea that there was something wrong. The 
drawing-room door was open; I did not go in there because I 
thought he was asleep in the chair. 3 ' She said, in answer to 
questions by Stoner 's counsel, (t The deceased, Mr. Rattenbury, 
knew nothing of Stoner 'B relations with his wife/' and then, in 
answer to myself I put a few questions; I did not take down the 
answers at the time, but I think this is sufficiently accurate she 
said she did not take the threats which had been referred to 
seriously at all, the threats which she said she heard Stoner utter 
about Mrs. Rattenbury. 'She said she was satisfied that Mrs. 
Rattenbury's condition on the night of the 24th was due to drink, 
and not to drugs; that she never saw Stoner drunk, except on a 
later occasion which I will refer to; it was two days later. He 
did get very drunk, apparently, but up to that time she had never 
seen him drink at all. She said that the deceased was a healthy 
man who enjoyed himself in his own quiet way. 

I think that ia the whole of the evidence which relates to both 
these people, and I now come to deal with the case of one as 
distinct from that of the other. I think it would be convenient 
if I dealt first of all with Stoner, because he seems to be alluded 
to, at all events in this case, as the person I have referred to> as a 
principal in the first degree. You will remember with regard to 
Stoner that when he caxne down that night he was at once sent 
ofi for the doctor, He did not get the doctor they probably 
crossed each other, the doctor coming in a taxi-cab. So Stoner 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

returned to the house, and he then made himself useful in different 
ways.^ Then he was sent off with the car to the nursing home, but 
he ^ did .not know the way, and he wanted to know the way, 
quite probably to bring somebody back, so he was to follow the 
ambulance. He drove the car to the nursing home and there he 
waited. At 2.45 he was seen by Inspector Mills asleep in this 
car, in the driving-seat of the car. I do not know whether you 
draw any inference of any sort or description from that fact. I 
suppose it is what five out of six chauffeurs would be found to be 
doing if they had been up for some hours at a quarter to three 
in the morning; if a man has been waiting a long time for his 
employer, he just goes to sleep. Perhaps it was referred to upon 
that issue of his being under the influence of cocaine; we have 
heard something about that; there is no reason to- think he was 
at all. He was apparently just asleep, and the police officer saw 
him. At this time there is no doubt of these two things; there 
was not the smallest suspicion on the part of the police that he 
had anything to do with this murder, and he certainly did not 
volunteer anything to the police to that effect. Nobody who saw 
him suggests that he was in other than a perfectly ordinary 
condition; nobody noticed that he was either drowsy or excited 
or noisy, or misbehaving himself in any way, or showing any 
emotion or anything else; he was just the ordinary, well-behaved 
servant, as far as people could judge. He returned from the 
nursing home, bringing Dr. O'Donnell, at half-past three in the 
morning. At half -past three, on his return, he was seen by 
Inspector Mills, who was then making inquiries, and in view of 
a statement which had been made to Inspector Mills, Inspector 
Mills asked him this question: " Have yo.u seen any mallet about 
the house? " The answer was " No, I have not seen any mallet 
at all," which you may think was quite untrue. Then, at half- 
past seven in the morning the inspector, having been watching 
Mrs, Rattenbury for some time and having made up his mind 
I think quite rightly that Mrs. Rattenbury ought not to be ques- 
tioned at all events, any statement she made would be quite 
worthless, having regard to her condition occupied himself there 
taking statements from anybody who could give him information, 
and one of them was Stoner, not in the least as a suspected person, 
and he invited Stoner to give him any information he could. 

That is what Stoner said. The copy is Exhibit 40. The 
original is written down in the inspector's notebook. He said 
" I retired to my bedroom about 8.5 p.m. on Sunday, 24th March, 
193B " 8.5 p.m. you shall have this, members of the jury, if 
you like. Being in writing, it can be given to you. Tou shall 
have copies of it if you do not mind. I would rather you did 
not have it ia the original book. There is a reason why. There 
are things in that book which are not evidence in this case, and 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

Mr Justice Humphrey* 

therefore I do not want you to $ee them, but you shall have 
copies of these statements so far as they are in writing. This is 
what he said: " I retired to my bedroom about 8.5 p.m. on 
Sunday, 24th March, 1935, leaving Mr. and Mrs. Rattenbury and 
the hoy John in the drawing-room. About 10.30 p.m. I was 
aroused by Mrs. Rattenbury shouting to me to come down. I came 
down into the drawing-room," and then he talks about blood 
and so forth. He says " Mrs. Rattenbury was crying and scream- 
ing and said to me ' Help me to get Ratz into bed, he has been 
hurt.' I then took the car and went to Dr. O'DonnelPs house. 
He had left before I got there. When I returned, I cleaned the 
blood from the floor on the instructions of Mrs. Rattenbury. 
Mrs. Rattenbury was sober and as far as I know she had not 
been drinking. When I went to bed, ahe was in a normal condi- 
tion." It is possible that he may have meant by that ** "Up to the 
time I went to bed she was not drunk." He said " I have never 
seen a mallet on the premises. Until I was aroused, I heard no 
sounds of a quarrel or a noise of any kind. Since September, 
1934, I have been employed by Mr. and Mrs. Rattenbury; they 
have been on the best of terms. I said to her " " I," Stoner, 
said to her '* * How did this happen? ' She said ' I don't know.' 
Mr. Rattenbury was fully dressed in the armchair, and Mrs. 
Rattenbury was dressed in pyjamas and bare feet," That was his 
statement at that time. 

The next statement that is attributed to him comes from Miss 
Riggs. Miss Riggs said this. It was in cross-examination, when 
she was being cross-examined on behalf of Mrs. Rattenbury, and 
this fact was brought out, if it is a fact. Miss Riggs said, 
" Quite true that later on " she thinks it was on the Tuesday, 
she is not quite sure " Later on I asked Stoner if his finger- 
prints would be on the mallet, and his answer was ' No, I wore 
gloves.' " She also said " I told Stoner of a message which I had 
to give him from Mrs. Rattenbury." So we must have what Mrs. 
Rattenbury said: " Mrs. Rattenbury said to me ' Tell Stoner he 
must give me or get me the mallet/ " That was when she was 
leaving for the police station. Whether it could have been meant 
or could have been understood to mean " Bring to me at the 
police station the mallet," I do not know, or whether it merely 
means " Get the mallet." At all events that is what the witness, 
Miss Riggs, said she understood Mrs. Rattenbury to be saying, 
" Tell Stoner he must get me the mallet," and so she gave that 
message to Stoner, but then as soon as she had given it, and 
before Stoner could answer, she said, " Oh, I remember now the 
police have got the mallet." They, in fact, had found it. So 
much for that. She also said that on this morning of the 25th 
what I have been referring to was a little out of time in fact, 
it happened on the Tuesday, but on the Monday morning, said 

264 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphrey! 

Miss Riggs, " Stoner said to me, ' I suppose you know who did 
it/ and I said ' Well ' " there it is, cryptic, perhaps you can 
understand it, The next statement in regard to Stoner also comes 
from Miss Riggs <and comes in the same circumstances, cross- 
examined on behalf of Mrs. Rattenbury. She said, " On Tuesday 
I asked Stoner why he did it/' not whether he did it, but why 
he did it, assuming therefore that he had done it, and his answer 
was because he had seen, not heard, the deceased Mr. Rattenbury 
living with Mrs. Rattenbury that afternoon. That is my note. 
If counsel's note does not agree with it, I shall be glad to know 
because the note I took was not " heard " but " seen " because 
he had seen Mr. Rattenbury living with Mrs. Rattenbury that 
afternoon. She says that conversation took place during the drive 
which she had on Tuesday with Stoner when she went to some 
place, Bridport, or some place like that. The importance of that 
perhaps is obvious. 

Mr. O'CONNOR Your lordship is perfectly right. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS I thought so. First of all, you will 
remember a good deal was said to you on behalf of Stoner about 
hallucinations. It was suggested that he suffered from the hallu- 
cination he is a cocaine addict, and the proof of it is he told 
somebody " I heard Mr. and Mrs. Rattenbury living together " 
I understand that meant having connexion " that afternoon." 
It was suggested that must be a hallucination. The point of this 
is, " I saw them." Do you think that is a hallucination? If 
he said that to Miss Riggs, do you think he intended to convey 
to Miss Riggs that " I saw them actually in the act," or did it 
mean that he saw those people together that afternoon and formed 
the opinion that they were behaving as husband and wife? That 
is all. Is it conceivable that he could have intended to convey 
to anybody or thought himself that those two people, husband and 
wife, on a Sunday afternoon were performing the sexual act with 
a door open so that people could look in and see them or in the 
drawing-room where people could come and look through the french 
windows? Is it conceivable? Is not the only feasible explanation 
that the man meant " I saw things which made me believe that 
they were doing that/' and he may well have said on another 
occasion " I heard things which made me believe they were doing 
that? " The importance of the matter, of course, is that if you 
believe Miss Riggs, Stoner is there saying in terms that it was 
he who inflicted these injuries on Mr. Rattenbury, because, in 
answer to a question which assumes that, the question which is 
" Why did you do it? " he gives the reason why he had done it. 
There it is. That comes from Miss Riggs and not from Mrs. 
Rattenbury. 

The next statement which is said to be made by Stoner is also on 
the Tuesday and it also comes from Miss Riggs and this she gave in 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

Mr Jiurice Humphreys 

examination in chief. She said that on the 27th March she went 
out for a short time ; she came back in the evening about half -past 
ten, and she saw Stoner in his bedroom. At that time he appeared 
to be very drunk. I think we have had evidence from a policeman 
that he was actually called in to see Stoner ; he was so drunk. I 
do not think it was explained why he was called in, but he was 
called in and, therefore, was able to see that Stoner was terribly 
drunk that night, and the witness says while in that condition he 
said this: f( Mrs. Rattenbury is in jail and I have put her there 
and I am going to see her to-morrow and give myself up." I 
think we may say that he did go there is evidence that he did, I 
do not think it is disputed to see Mrs. Rattenbury next day. He 
did not give himself up and he did not make any statement to the 
effect that he had done anything for which he should give himself 
up. That is what this lady says. He was, in fact, arrested on 
the 28th March on his return from London, where, as I say, pre- 
sumably he had been to see Mrs. Rattenbury, and upon being 
arrested and told of this charge, his answer was " I understand,'* 

Then on the 29th March, the next day 

Mr. O'CONNOR I think perhaps your lordship made one very 
slight mistake there, if I may correct it at once. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Yes. 

Mr. O'CONNOR I do not think there is any evidence that Stoner 
did see Mrs. Rattenbury in jail. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS No, you are quite right. If there 
is the least dispute about it, I am glad to be corrected. Mr. 
O'Connor is quite right. The evidence is that he said he was going 
to see her in London in prison. He, in fact, went to London, be- 
cause it was on the train that he came back in from London that 
he was arrested. I think probably that was what happened. It 
may not be; he may not have seen her at all. Mr. O'Connor is 
quite right. 

On the 29th we had evidence from Police-constable Gates 
Stoner was then at the Police Court where evidence either had been 
given or was going to be given on the charge, and he, Stoner, said 
to this police officer, *' You know Mrs, Rattenbury, don't you? " 
The officer said "Yes, I do." He said "Do you know Mrs. 
Rattenbury had nothing to do with this affair? " and the officer 
very properly cautioned him, and he went on, " When I did the 
job, I believed he was asleep " that means Mr. Rattenbury ** I 
hit him and then came upstairs and told Mrs, Rattenbury. She 
rushed down then. You see I watched through the french window 
and saw her kiss him goodnight, then leave the room. I waited and 
crept in through the french window which was unlocked. I think 
he must have been asleep when I hit him; still, it ain't much use 
saying anything, I don't suppose they will let her out yet. You 
know there should be a doctor with her when they tell her I am 

266 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

arrested because she will go out of her mind." Then he made a 
reference to his parents. That statement was one made in the absence 
of Mrs. Rattenbury and is not evidence against her, and not 
being evidence against her it is not evidence in her case, but it has 
been read to you by Mr. O'Connor in the defence of Mrs. Ratten- 
bury. I am not troubling about the irregularity of the matter in 
the least, although, strictly speaking, it is not evidence and Mr. 
O'Connor would have been very angry indeed if anybody had tried 
to use it against his client. I am not complaining that he read it 
to you, and although he said he read it for a different purpose, of 
course the importance to Mrs. Rattenbury is that Stoner was then 
saying " Mrs. Rattenbury had nothing to do with this affair." 
Well, there it is. That is the case against Stoner with the excep- 
tion of the evidence of Mrs. Rattenbury, because, although what 
one person says in the absence of another is not evidence against 
that person, any evidence that ia given at the trial on oath is evi- 
dence for all purposes. So when Mrs. Rattenbury went into the 
witness-box, for good or evil, what she said is admissible as evidence 
in the case as a whole. Mrs, Rattenbury, you will recollect, gave 
evidence in regard to Stoner. I will not read you her earlier evi- 
dence, but I will read you that part of her evidence in which she 
speaks of the events of that night so far as Stoner is concerned 
only. She says that after Miss Riggs had come in and spoken to 
her and so forth, " I went back to bed. I was expecting Stoner 
and later Stoner came in. I did not notice anything at the moment 
about him." That means nothing unusual about him. " He got 
into bed with me. He then became agitated and said e I am in 
trouble about something/ I said * What? ' He said ' I cannot tell 
you. 7 I said * You must tell me.' " That went on, she said, back- 
wards and forwards, he saying " I cannot tell you," and she saying 
'" You must tell me," " Then he said that he hurt Ratz." I 
do not follow that was the exact expression. It is not the man's 
expression, it is the woman's expression, that he had hurt Ratz, 
and he said that he had hit him on the head with a mallet which 
he had hidden outside. She was asked " What did you do? " She 
said " Nothing." I think she added that her brain did not seem 
to quite take it in or something of that sort, but very soon after- 
wards she said " I heard Ratz groaning and I at once went down- 
stairs and in the drawing-room I saw my husband in the chair/' 
and so forth. That is her account as to how she got to know of 
this matter, and her account of what she says her fellow-prisoner 
said to her on that night that he had done. I only pause for a 
moment to say ; you will observe there, if her evidence is regarded 
by you as of any value, that she does not suggest any failure on the 
part of Stoner to remember what he had done or any indication 
of his being under the influence of, any drug or anything of the 
sort, Apparently he was making that statement to her. That is 

267 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

what she says. I left out something. I think she said that the 
first thing he said was " You won't go to Bridport to-morrow. I 
have hurt Ratz." That is the case in regard to Stoner until we 
come to the defence. Mr. Casswell said to you, in opening the 
defence of Stoner, that he had a difficult task, and that the solicitor 
instructing him had a difficult task to perform you may well 
believe him and he said to you that the first thing the solicitor did, 
having got Stoner J s story, was to go and see a gentleman who lives 
in Bournemouth and practises there, Dr. Weatherly. It was Dr. 
Weatherly who, I will not say provided, but produced the evidence 
which formed the basis of the defence of Stoner. 

Members of the jury, as I intimated to you yesterday, a little 
mistake was made by those who thought that Mr. Casswell in his 
address to you intended to say that his client admitted striking the 
blow. It would be quite improper for counsel, who was not going 
to call any evidence, to say anything of the sort, and it is not what 
Mr. Casswell meant at all. All he meant was that, it being the 
case for the prosecution that they had proved in one way or the 
other that it was Stoner who struck the blow, he was not in a 
position to, or at all events did not intend to, call evidence to 
contradict it, and therefore that he did not propose to address you 
on that part of the case, and he had to leave it there. That is all 
he meant. Counsel is not in the position in a criminal case when 
-his client has pleaded not guilty to make admissions on his behalf, 
and assuredly not in such a terribly important matter as that his 
client has actually done the thing for which he is being tried, and 
therefore you must pay no attention to that. As I rather expected 
would be the case, I noticed, as I left the Court last night, that 
those newspapers which seem to regard this sort of terrible tragedy 
as a godsend to them had found one thing, and one thing only, in 
the course of the day which was fit to be put upon their posters, 
and that was " Stoner's counsel says he committed the crime." 
That is just the danger of that sort of thing the one thing which 
appeared on the posters. The defence of Stoner, as I understand 
it, is this. First of all, Mr. Casswell says, quite rightly, the prose- 
cution must prove not only that Stoner did deliver these blows, 
but that the wounding which he caused was felonious wounding, 
that is to say, that he intended to do grievous bodily harm at 
least, or else to kill. Mr. Casswell says " I do not complain, I 
cannot contend that you could have any possible doubt about that 
in the case of a person who was in full possession of his senses/* 
And, of course, that is so. As I have already said to you, it would 
be a waste of time to discuss whether you or I hitting a blow like 
that, or rather three blows on the head of a sleeping man, could 
have any other intention than to injure him seriously. Of course, 
'it would be nonsense to suggest anything different, A man is pre- 
sumed to intend the reasonable consequences of his act. Mr. 
Casswell says u I invite you to say that Stoner was in such a condi- 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

tion at that time when he did it " all this is, of course, upon the 
assumption which I am not going to refer to again, that he is 
proved to have done it " was in such a state that he was incapable 
of forming that intention." And he relied upon a decision in a 
case, a very different case from the present one in which it was 
laid down as law, not I think at all for the first time, by the House 
of Lords that if a person is proved to be in such a state of drunken- 
ness, hopeless drunkenness delirium tremens was suggested that 
he was incapable of forming any intention at all, then if he is in- 
capable of forming an intention the jury may say the prosecution 
have not proved that he did form an intention, the intention to 
kill or do grievous bodily harm. It was a case in which a man had 
committed a dreadful rape upon a child and stopped the child 
from crying out by putting his hand upon her mouth, " not be- 
cause this man intended to kill the child, but because he killed that 
child in the course of committing this terrible felony of rape upon 
the child, That is why he is guilty -of murder." And that was 
right, but his defence was " No, I did not because I was so drunk 
that I was incapable of knowing what I was about." The House 
of Lords pointed out in that case that the best proof that the man 
was so drunk was that he did the thing that he meant to do one 
of the best proofs, I will read to you a line or two from the 
judgments in that case. This is what the Lord Chancellor, giving 
his opinion in the House of Lords, said : " Evidence of drunken- 
ness which renders the accused incapable of forming the specific 
intent essential to constitute the crime should be taken into con- 
sideration with the other facts proved in order to determine whether 
or not he had this intent. That evidence of drunkenness, falling 
short of a proved incapacity in the accused to form the intent 
necessary to constitute the crime, and merely establishing that his 
mind was affected by drink so that he more readily gave way to 
some violent passion, does not rebut the presumption that a man 
intends the natural consequences of his acts." In this case it is 
not said that Stoner was drunk, but it is suggested by learned 
counsel I cannot say this was given in evidence by anybody 
that you ought to find as a fact that at that time he was in such 
a state, owing to something which may have taken place in this 
case, drunkenness in that case, here is a drug, that you ought to say 
that he was incapable of forming that intent. That is based upon 
the assumption, first of all, that he is what is called a cocaine 
addict that is a person who has habitually for some time been 
taking doses of cocaine, not of course medically you will under- 
stand that, although the gentleman from Guy's seemed to have some 
little difficulty taking it illicitly in the way that the drug 
addicts do, that he was a drug addict, and, secondly, that he had 
taken a very large dose of it on that afternoon. Here I have to 
point out to you something which you may think is the most 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

important fact about that matter, and perhaps is conclusive, and 
that is that there is one human being who knows whether Stoner 
was in the habit of taking cocaine or whether he was not, and 
whether, if he took it, he took it frequently or once or twice, or 
all the rest of it, and whether he took it on that afternoon, and 
that person is Stoner himself. Nobody suggests that he is insane; 
nobody suggests that he is suffering from the effects of any drug 
at all. He is an admissible and available witness, and if he 
wishes, or those who defend him wish, to prove that he is or was 
addicted to drugs, had ever taken cocaine, was then under the 
influence of cocaine, is there any witness on earth who can do it 
as well as Stoner 1 That is, as it seems to me in the circumstances 
of this case, a fact of the most profound significance : Stoner prefers 
not to give evidence. His learned counsel told you that he had 
decided not to call Stoner indeed, that was obvious, that it was 
upon his advice you may think very good advice too that Stoner 
did not give evidence, because I have no doubt you noticed, 
we all noticed that when learned counsel called " Mr. Stoner/' 
meaning the father, the son stepped out and actually left 
the dock with the permission of the jailer in order to give evidence, 
But there is that fact that the person who of all others could, if 
he desired, give you first-hand evidence on that subject has not 
done so. Now where does this idea of cocaine come from? It 
seems to originate in a statement made by Mrs, Rattenbury to Dr, 
O'Donnell. She told Dr, O'Donnell on a date which I have not in 
mind at the moment somebody can supply me with it. 

Mr. HAWKS February, my lord. 

Mr, JUSTICE HUMPHREYS That Stoner who had been to London 
had told her, first of all, that there was some sort of medicine 
which he had to take a few times a year, two or three times a 
year, to make his head .normal, whatever that may mean, and then 
had told her that he was in the habit of taking cocaine. So she 
told Dr. O'Donnell and Dr. O'Donnell saw Stoner and said to 
Stoner "Is this correct? " and, according to Dr. O'Donnell, 
Stoner said " Yes." It was brought out from Dr. O'Donnell in 
cross-examination on Stoner 's behalf. He said " I saw Sterner 
the next day. He admitted taking cocaine. I offered to help him 
to overcome the habit. He did not accept the offer," and he said 
that he had been up to London the day before to get cocaine, but 
had failed. He refused to say where the place was that he tried 
to get it. He said further "As far as I could judge from his 
appearance and manner, and so forth, Stoner seemed quite 
normal. I saw no indication of his suffering from cocaine poison- 
ing and I made no further inquiry about the matter. I did not 
ask him how long he had been taking it," and so far as one 
could judge the doctor did not think the matter very serious 
because he just left it there. He said " I saw no sign that he 

270 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

was a person given to doping/' You know what that means, 
That is the evidence of Dr. O'Donnell. I am not sure whether it 
was Dr. O'Donnell OT some other witness who said that Stoner 
told him that he had originally acquired this habit from having 
seen cocaine in his parents' house. 

Mr. O'CONNOR Dr. O'Donnell, my lord. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Well, that seems to be quite untrue, 
if you believe the father's evidence, quite .untrue. The next 
person who gave evidence about it was Mrs. Rattenbury, and Mrs. 
Rattenbury said this the first part of the evidence which relates 
to cocaine is that " He told me that he had to take medicine 
three times a year for his head. He also told me that he was taking 
to drugs. Then I spoke to Dr. O'Donnell." Then she says later 
on it is cross-examination on behalf of Stoner she was asked 
about this occasion when cocaine was mentioned and she said 
" It was after November that he first spoke to me about drjiga. 
He had spoken to me about his head in November. He assured 
me when he spoke to me that he was taking less and he seemed 
to get better. He then became jealous. He did not like drink 
and objected to my drinking. On the 12th February I had 
become alarmed because he was agitated and said he must go to 
London to get the drug. He was better after that, although 
he said he could not get it, he had failed to get it; he had 
stopped it," That was Mrs. Rattenbury J ,e evidence about it. 

Now we get to Dr. Weather ly, and Dr. Weatherly is a gentle- 
man of whom nobody would believe for an instant who knows 
him that he would say anything in the witness-box which he did 
not thoroughly believe to be true. He is a gentleman who might 
be described as experienced, because you see he has been for 
sixty-two years practising as a doctor, and he says he has 
specialised in mental diseases. In the course of his life he has 
had three cases of cocaine poisoning to deal with and several cases 
of people suffering from other drugs. In April he saw this 
man when he was at Dorchester Prison. Let me remind you that 
he was at Dorchester Prison from the 29th March when he was 
arrested and kept somewhere else for one night from the 29th 
March up to the iHth May, and it was on the 8th April that he 
saw him at Dorchester. There was a medical officer in charge of 
the prison at Dorchester. No request was made to that medical 
officer to keep an eye upon this young man because it was believed 
that he was a drug addict or to make inquiries of him I mean 
the sort of inquiries which would indicate whether he had a crav- 
ing which is commonly known, and there is evidence in this case 
that it is eo, to be characteristic of a person who has become an 
addict they have a terrible craving for the drug and become 
very ill if they are deprived ,of it. Nothing was said to the 
doctor, and the evidence of the doctor is that he had -not the 

271 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

least reason from this young man's appearance, appetite which 
was good, condition of health which was good, sleep, which is most 
important, which was good not the least reason to suppose that 
he was a person who was suffering from any addiction to a drug 
at all, or otherwise than a perfectly healthy person. But on the 
8th April Dr, Weatherly came. He said " I examined him. I, 
found both pupils were dilated and they did not react to light, 
and that is consistent with cocaine taking. He was not mentally 
deficient, he was a bit backward because his education had been 
neglected. He was anaemic, he had a poor circulation, and I 
definitely concluded he was a cocaine addict." Why do you think 
that gentleman came to that conclusion? He was very anxious 
to tell us all that Stoner had told him that would not be 
evidence Stoner might have told you you might have taken 
that into consideration. In this Court we like to have, and can 
only have, the best evidence. The best evidence here would be 
that of Stoner if he wished to give it but nobody could make him 
give it. He then said " He described the effect of cocaine which 
lasted some hours. He described the hallucination of touch as a 
rash under the skin which seemed to move about. That is typical 
of cocaine. If he took fairly large doses once a week I should 
expect that sort of result " that is that imaginary feeling under 
the skin " in three months. Other hallucinations may occur as 
of sight or of hearing." He is now speaking in general. " Cocaine 
cauises exaltation at first and as that passes off, great mental 
irritability, It would have a very weakening effect on the reason 
and judgment of the person who is addicted to it," .There is no 
one, I suppose, in the medical profession who knows better than 
does this gentleman, Dr. Weatherly, what in law amounts to 
insanity, and this was the most he could say: "It is possible 
that the reasoning processes may be inhibited." That means to 
say that cocaine would have a weakening effect on the judgment 
and reason of the person who took it, and it is possible that the 
reasoning processes may be inhibited, that is to say, lessened or 
may cease altogether. " The effect is similar to chronic alco- 
holism and it may cause unreasoning- jealousy." In cross-examina- 
tion the only note I have got of the answer of the witness was 
that people may get jealous who are not cocaine addicts, and 
that I suppose most of us know. That is the evidence. You will 
observe that it is very general. It shows that, first of all, this 
gentleman came to the conclusion that, partly from what he was 
told by Stoner and partly from what he observed himself, Stoner 
was a person who had been taking cocaine. Whether he would 
have come to that conclusion apart from what he was told by 
Stoner is certainly a different matter, and he says that if it was 
true that he was an addict, which, of course, means something 
more than taking cocaine once or twice, then it may be, he said, 
27$ 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Juitice Humphreys 

that it would probably cause exaltation and it might make him 
very depressed and violent tempered afterwards, and it might 
have a weakening effect on his reason and judgment. Now, in 
all that do you find the slightest justification for saying that when 
Stoner, if he did, struck those three blows on the head of Mr. 
Rattenbury he did not know what the effect was likely to be? 
That is the question. Can you with every desire to do justice, 
with every desire to assist this young man if the law and the 
evidence permit it can you say that there is anything in that 
evidence which would justify you in saying that, although he was 
perfectly sane I am assuming for the moment he is sane I will 
say a word about that that he was at that time in such a 
condition that, although he knew what he was doing and knew 
he was battering the man's head in, he was incapable of forming, 
because he was so drunk in the other case cocaine in this case 
incapable of forming an intention to injure? There it is. That 
is the evidence. 

A gentleman was called from Guy's Hospital, a very dis- 
tinguished gentleman, a psychologist. At Guy's Hospital he says 
he has been given care of a few cocaine addicts as patients. He 
saw this man upon a date which he gave us last Saturday last 
Saturday he saw the accused in Brixton, He was not asked the 
question whether he found any symptoms about him of cocaine 
addiction. Perhaps it is too long ago I do not know. At all 
events he was not asked the question, but he gave you what may 
or may not be interesting evidence to you about people who are 
cocaine addicts. He said the principal symptom of cocaine taking 
is what he called oscillation of moods. It is an odd thing that 
these scientific gentlemen will .use such difficult words. I suppose 
he means a person becomes unstable so that at one moment 
he is violently excited and the next moment violently depressed 
and so is in a state of oscillation. I suppose that is what 
he means. He said " The effect of a dose on an addict would 
be very likely to be exaltation for perhaps two hours and then 
depression and morbid irritability with lack of appetite and 
insomnia.' 1 The whole of the evidence, members of the jury 2 
definite evidence, medical evidence, is that this man never suffered 
from loss of appetite and never suffered from insomnia from the 
moment he was arrested up to the present time. 

Then he said " Hallucination is found in cocaine addicts. 
The effect on a male person is often morbid jealousy. Addicts may 
misinterpret what goes on around them. It may affect the power 
to weigh the pros and cons of the situation/' Then the learned 
counsel got as near as he I will not say dare as he thought 
desirable to the all- important point upon the section of the defence 
which is insanity, and he asked the doctor what would be the 
effect upon the man's mind, what might be the effect on the mind 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

of a cocaine addict of a large dose what about his mind some 
question of that sort and the answer was definite " consciousness 
would be clear," by which I understand the doctor to mean the 
person would be perfectly conscious of what he was doing, but his 
power to weigh the pros and cons of the situation might be lessened 
and an addict would be less likely than another to consider the 
consequences of an act. He also said I do not know whether it 
is of any importance in this case cocaine speedily results in sexual 
impotence. He was then asked about something which perhaps you 
could judge as well as he could, whether regular and repeated con- 
nexion in the case of a boy beginning at seventeen, who had led a 
quiet and decent life from a boy up to then, might account, without 
any question of drugs, for his being pale and seeming tired and so 
forth. You know the sort of life that this young man was leading, 
certainly new to him, this sort of excitement, which you may 
imagine would result from his relations with this woman. Do you 
think you want to go further than that to explain that he looked 
i]l and rather worried 1 Is it not rather to his credit that he should 
be worried? There it is. That is the evidence of this expert. 
There is other evidence : there is the evidence of the doctor at 
Brixton, Dr, Grierson, as to where this idea originated. That 
this young man had had a large dose of cocaine on the afternoon 
of the 24th apparently originated in a statement to Dr. Grierson. 
As I have already said to you, I am afraid more than once, it does 
seem to me to be of paramount importance in this case, if it was 
wanted to be proved that that was true, and it is quite obvious that 
Dr. Grierson said it, there is the person who could .prove it. He 
told to Dr. Grierson an astonishing story. He said that he had 
had two eggspoonfuls of this stuff which he called cocaine. Was it 
cocaine? He was asked to describe it, and he said it was brown 
powder with black specks, and no doctor who has been called in this 
case has ever heard in his life of cocaine, which is a white crystal 
substance or powder, ever being mixed with any brown powder. 
The suggestion is that if it were mixed with a brown powder these 
detestable criminals who go about selling to people at high prices 
in order that they may make illicit profit would cease to make a 
living because people would not buy it : they want *' snow " as they 
call it, they want something which they recognise as cocaine, or 
they would not buy it. Do you think it was cocaine at all that this 
young man had? If so, it is a remarkably bad description that 
he gave of it. Dr. Grierson is only able to say that from the 14th 
May to the present he has shown no evidence of sleeplessness, want 
of appetite, or any of the things that you would expect. Finally, 
he and Dr. Roche Lynch, who has made a study of this as he has 
made a study of many other poisonous substances, because he is an 
analyst, say this: There is one thing which is eminently 
characteristic of a drug addict : if you cut him off suddenly from 
274 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

supplies of the drug which he has a craving for you are bound to 
find an effect upon him at once. He will become, he may become, 
seriously ill; he will show it in loss of appetite, particularly, says 
Dr. Grierson, in loss of sleep that is very important and it 
would be perfectly obvious to any medical man that there is some- 
thing seriously wrong and then you begin to inquire, and so forth. 
There is complete lack of evidence in this case of anything of the 
sort. There it is. So much for the suggestion which you will have 
to deal with, that the prosecution have failed to prove that the 
prisoner, if he was the person who struck these blows, did so with 
intent to do grievous bodily harm. 

Mr. CASBWBLL Your lordship said the basis of this was a 
statement to Dr. Grierson, My lord, the defence did not know of 
the statement to Dr. Grierson until this trial started. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS I thought he told me so. 

Mr. CASSWELL I only say it because your lordship said the 
basis of this statement. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHBETS I mean the members of the jury who 
are trying this case have only one piece of evidence called before 
them which gives the smallest indication that there ever was such 
a dose taken, and that is the evidence of Dr. Grierson who says that 
the prisoner told him that. That is the whole evidence about it. 
That is all that I meant. I think Mr. Casswell agrees that that is 
accurate. With regard to that part of the case I am dealing with 
that very shortly because I have come to the conclusion, and it is 
my duty to deal with the matter, that there is no evidence, and I 
BO direct you as a matter of law no evidence upon which you can 
come to the conclusion in this case that the accused Stoner, if he 
was guilty of this crime, was insane at the time so as not to be 
responsible in law for his actions. The law in regard to this matter 
is that these are a few lines from a judgment of the Court of 
Criminal Appeal upon this very matter ; "the jury ought to be told 
in all cases that every man is presumed to be sane and to possess 
a sufficient degree of reason to be responsible for his crimes until 
the contrary be proved to their satisfaction, and that to establish a 
defence on the ground of insanity it must be clearly proved that at 
the time of the committing of the act the party accused was labour- 
ing under such a defect of reason from disease of mind as not to 
know the nature and quality of the act he was doing, or if he did 
know it that he did not know he waa doing what was wrong." The 
nature and quality of the act have been defined and explained as 
meaning no more than this, that he knew what it was he was doing, 
If a man is so insane that he hits at somebody's head with an axe, 
believing that he is cutting down a tree, then he does not know 
what he is doing, but thinks he is cutting down a tree. That is 
what is meant by not knowing the nature and quality of the act, 
does not know what he is doing. That is the law and you will 

275 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

observe that there must be some evidence from which a jury can 
reasonably draw the conclusion, and it is not right that such an 
iscme should even be left to the jury unless there is some evidence. 
I have looked through this case with care. I cannot find a ray 
of evidence which would justify me in leaving to you the question 
whether it has been proved that this young man was suffering from 
such a defect of reason through disease of the mind that he did not 
know on this occasion what he was doing, and still less any evidence 
to suggest that he thought that what he was doing was a right and 
proper thing to do, that he did not know the difference between 
right and wrong. The nearest person to express any sort of 
opinion about the mallet was Dr. Gillespie. I have read to you 
his answer which makes it quite clear that in his opinion it might 
be said, even assuming everything which is to be assumed in favour 
of this young man about cocaine, that there is no ground for 
supposing that he would not know what he was doing, " conscious- 
ness would be clear," and it is no answer and does not amount to 
insanity in law so as to make a man not responsible for his acts, 
that his resistance should be weakened or that his power of appre- 
ciation should be lessened. Therefore I have to tell you that, so 
far as that defence is concerned, you are bound to reject it upon 
my ruling. That is all I desire to say with regard to Stoner. 

With regard to Mrs. Rattenbury, I can deal with her case, I 
think, shortly now that I have dealt with the many important 
matters that affect her in conjunction with her fellow-prisoner. 
The remaining matters which affect her are merely her statements. 
The first statement which she made about this matter was made to 
Dr. O'Donnell and it was made quite early. Dr. O'Donnell would 
be speaking of the time as nearly as possible of twelve o'clock I 
think after he had rung up Mr. Rooke it does not matter for a 
few minutes, but the first statement is round about twelve o'clock, 
and it was at that time that Mrs. Rattenbury made a statement 
to him as to the events of that evening. At that time it is right to 
say she was, according to the evidence of Dr, O'Donnell, very 
excited and inclined to be intoxicated she then had a whisky and 
soda in her hand and she said this : " We had a very happy 
evening " that means she and her husband " We arranged to 
go next day to the Jenks and Mr. Rattenbury " (her husband) 
" was pleased at the idea of the visit. He showed me a passage 
in a book about suicide," and then she tried to show the doctor the 
passage, but he brushed it aside and said " I am not interested 
in that, I have no time to bother about that," and he did not look 
at the book and he did not look at the passage, so he stopped her, 
It is curious that she referred to that much later on, to his having 
shown her a passage in a book about suicide, but that is all she said 
at the moment. She went on to say " I had gone to bed early and 
was wakened by a cry or noise, I am not sure which." She said 
" I came down at once and found him lying back in his chair with 

276 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

a pool of blood on the carpet," and then she spoke of his teeth on 
the carpet. That is her first account and it seems to be a perfectly 
clear statement. Whether she was or was not really under the 
influence of drink, or to what extent, I do not know you will judge 
but it seems to be a clear connected account and certainly does 
not indicate that she had the least idea when she came down that her 
husband had been attacked by any particular person or that she 
knew all about it, nor does it indicate that she had any part in the 
matter or was in any way blameworthy. 

Now the next one is made to Bagwell, who was the first police 
officer on the scene. He said when he came it was two o'clock, 
two hours later. At that time she was he used that well-known 
police expression under the influence of drink and he asked her 
for information. At that time I do not think he had any ground 
for suspecting anybody particularly, but wanted information and 
she gave him quite readily this information; she said that she 
had been playing cards with her husband that night until about 
nine o'clock, and then she went to her bedroom and at about half- 
past ten she heard a yell. She came down, saw her husband in 
the chair, sent for the doctor and so forth. That is her account 
to him. I think I am right in saying that the next account was 
given to Inspector Mills. I think I said at one time we would 
inquire whether it was the same account heard by two people or 
whether it was not. It is not sufficiently important to- trouble 
about because it is in effect the same thing. Whether told to 
somebody else who gave exactly the same time, two o'clock, a 
few minutes after or before, or whether it is actually the same 
statement does not seem to matter. Mills 's account of it was 
this. He refers to the woman as having been drinking. He says 
her statement was " I was in bed " if you recollect he did not 
hear the first part of it " I heard groaning, I came down, 
found my husband in the easy-chair. He was unconscious with 
blood flowing from his head," and then he asked the question 
whether the window was open or not, and he was told it was 
locked and so forth. So far up to two o'clock in the morning 
she had been perfectly consistent in her statements which amount 
to this: " I know nothing whatever about it. I cannot give you 




she made quite a different statement, one which you will have to 
deal with. She suddenly said to him " I know who did it," 
and then he stopped her and cautioned her, because now she was 
altering from her position of a person who was giving mere 
ordinary information she was saying something about herself 
which made it necessary that she should understand that she was 
not obliged to make any statement at all, and the caution is 

277 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Juitice Humphreys 

given in such terms that it is rather a kindly suggestion, I think, 
that " Perhaps you had better not." That is what it amounts to : 
" You can if you want to, but you had better not." She, how- 
ever, continued: " I did it with a mallet. Ratz has lived too 
long. It ia hidden " that is the mallet " No, my lover did 
it." Then she refers to the chair. She says, " I would like to 
give you 10. No, I won't bribe you." Members of the jury, 
the question is not whether she now remembers having made that 
statement or whether she does not. It does not seem to me, except 
upon the question of credibility, that it matters whether you 
believe her when she says " I have forgotten the earlier state- 
ment." The medical evidence is to the effect that she may well 
have forgotten if she was given, as she was some time after this, 
morphia, but there is no reason to suppose she would forget what 
happened earlier in the evening. It does not seem to me to matter 
from the point of view whether you believe her evidence or not. 
The question is, first of all, did she say this, and, secondly, what 
inference do you draw from it if she said it? Do you draw the 
inference that it was .a true statement made by a person who was 
telling the truth, or that it was a wholly imaginary statement 
made by some person who did not in the least know what she 
waa talking about, or do you come to a conclusion somewhere 
half-way between the two? Let us see what it was. "I did it 
with a mallet." If you accept what may be called, I think, the 
generally accepted evidence in this case, that was untrue. She 
had not done anything with a mallet, but she knew, according 
to her own story, who had done it with a mallet. " Eatz has 
lived too long." Does that indicate to you, if the woman knew 
what she was saying, that she was regretting her husband's death, 
or she could not help it coming out, that she was glad? " The 
mallet is hidden " : she might have known that in many ways. 
She says the only way she knew was that Stoner told her so. Then 
there is the sudden outburst : " No, I did not do it; my lover did 
it." She said " If I said that, I said it because my lover had told 
me upstairs that he had done it." And then the idea of bribing 
the policeman and then saying she would not bribe him, you may 
think is an indication, of which I do not think there is any doubt 
at all, that by this time the woman was in a state it is too 
strong to call it intoxication, but semi-intoxication, not drunk 
in the police sense, which seems to mean hopelessly drunk, but 
suffering from alcohol to such an extent that it would be very 
unsafe to rely in the matter of accuracy upon anything that she 
said the babbling of a drunken person. Whether you draw irom 
that statement, if you are satisfied that she made it of course, 
there is no dispute Bagwell swore to it and made a note of it in 
his pocket book Mrs. Rattenbury says she does not remember 
whether she said it or not if you believe she said it, it is entirely 
278 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

for you what inference yo.u draw from it. You obviously cannot 
draw the inference that she is telling the truth in this statement, 
because there are two directly opposite things in it they cannot 
both be true " I did itno, my lover did it." It is entirely 
a matter for you. That is the statement she made. Then the 
next statement is that which comes from the evidence of Inspector 
Carter. 

Mr. O'CONNOR My lord, there is one to Mills. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS I have dealt with Mills. 

Mr. O'CONNOR There was another one to Mills at 3.30. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS I beg your pardon, yes, there was. 
I am much obliged to you. It is very short. This is at half -past 
three, and she is slightly worse than before, her condition, accord- 
ing to Mills. He said to her " Tour husband is in a critical 
condition," and her answer was "Will this be against me?" 
There is something of importance " Will this be against me? " 
I do not know that you can draw any inference from that one 
way or the other. Then she was cautioned and she did make this 
statement: " I did it. He gave me the book. He had lived too 
long." She said " Dear, dear, I will tell you in the morning where 
the mallet is. Have you told the coroner yet? " She seems to 
have made two or three references to the coroner curious " I 
shall make a better job of it next time. Irene doesn't know. I 
made a proper muddle of it. I thought I was strong enough." 
Now, again, the first question is : are you satisfied that she said 
that? If she did, did she know what she was saying in the 
sense of knowing what words she was uttering? If she did, what 
inference do you draw from the statements? That really is a 
matter for you, and I think it is better I should not comment 
further upon it. One thing, of course, is perfectly obvious, - that 
it is a muddled, inconsistent statement, and comes from the mind 
of a person who, as far as we know we have not any definite 
evidence seems to have been going on drinking since twelve 
o'clock, at all events an individual who was now worse than she 
had been at half -past two or two o'clock, when the inspector had 
Been her she seems to have been pretty far gone in drink. There 
it is. You must draw such inference from it as you think right. 

Then the next thing that happens is that Inspector Carter 
arrived at four in the morning. This woman is given a dose of 
morphia; that was by Dr. O'Bonnell, and about that time, near 
enough I think, she is put to bed. Apparently she sleeps until six 
o'clock in the morning, and then she wakes up and as soon as she 
wakes up she makes a statement. When I say makes a statement, 
I mean she says something which the Inspector writes down in his 
book. Then she is still lying on her bed, apparently it is before 
the restoratives if that word can be used in regard to them the 

279 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

bath and the coffee, walking about and so forth, had been applied. 
She says something to the inspector. I think there is no ground 
for complaining of his conduct, or saying he acted improperly 
here, although 1 think he was mistaken. I think he quite reason- 
ably thought : here is this woman, I was told that something she 
said I must not pay attention to because she has been given 
morphia, and when she began to make a statement Dr. ; Donnell 
said " You cannot take a statement from her now; I have just 
given her morphia and she is not in a fit state to do this." Having 
been given the morphia, you will remember she immediately jumped 
up and followed the doctor downstairs. Having regard to that, 
the inspector said " I do not think it is fair to use it in evidence." 
He made a mistake in not informing the Director of Public Pro- 
secutions that that statement had been made by the accused, and 
that he had it in his notebook. It is not for the police officers to 
decide in a case which has been placed in the hands of a competent 
legal authority like the Director of Public Prosecutions, or in the 
hands of any other, what is admissible in evidence and what is not, 
or what should be given and what should not. Their duty is to 
give all material to the authorities and let them decide. But, 
as I say, I am not blaming the inspector. He thought he did it 
for the best. He thought, quite rightly, that no credence ought to 
be attached to what the woman said under those circumstances; 
but when two hours later, at a quarter-past eight, she was, as no 
doubt she was or certainly appeared to be, better, he thought it 
fair to take a statement from her. I do not think anybody will 
say that that inspector did not honestly believe that the woman 
was in a condition to make a statement, and no doubt she was 
in a condition in this sense. You have seen her signature. 
The evidence is that the statement was read by her, and read out 
to her. She could write perfectly well and she appeared to be all 
right. She signed it, and I think you will agree that her signature 
there is quite as good as, if not better than, some of the signatures 
that one has seen of hers upon other documents. It is not the 
sort of drunken scrawl which sometimes, I do not suppose you have, 
but I have seen as a result of tests made by doctors of people who 
are alleged to be drunk, when they are asked to write their names, 
at the police station. They begin here and end down there. This 
is a very good signature and the inspector thought she was in a 
state to make a statement. Dr. O'Donnell, who knows much more 
about these matters than a police officer, says he saw her he did 
not see her at ^half-past eight, but later in the day, and he says : 
" I, who know that I lad given her half a grain of morphia, say 
to you on my responsibility as a medical man that it would not be 
safe to attach any importance to anything that woman said while 
under the influence of that drug, which I am satisfied as a medical 
man persisted up to and after 8.15 that night." That is his 
evidence and I am quite sure I am voicing the view you yourselves 
280 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

would form that it seems to me that, after that evidence, it would 
be very unfair to form any conclusion against the woman on the 
ground of a statement made in those circumstances. It is quite a 
different statement from the statement which she had made when 
she had merely taken some whisky. She had been intentionally 
drugged with a very large dose, and that is the opinion of that 
medical man, and if it wanted reinforcing, it would be reinforced, 
I think, by the evidence which, unfortunately, we could not have, 
because I am sorry to say that Dr. Morton, who is a distinguished 
public servant, is far too ill to give evidence in this Court. If 
he had been well enough, he, as the most experienced doctor- 
governor of the prison where she had been confined, would have 
given you this evidence (that is why the document was read to 
you). We know he would have given you this evidence, and 
therefore, by agreement with everybody in the interests of the 
accused persons, the rule of evidence has been relaxed, and that 
which normally could not be allowed in evidence has been allowed 
to be given in evidence. What the doctor said was this ; this is his 
report, a report not given on the question of this woman's capa- 
bility of making a statement, but merely because every person 
charged with a capital offence may, and it is the experience of 
judges, very often do, set up, as a defence, insanity. It is becom- 
ing a common defence in cases where the facts do not allow of any 
defence upon the facts; and so there is a rule that the medical 
officer of the prison shall specially watch over a person charged 
with a capital offence, and, finally, make a report to the Court (it 
is not to the authorities; it is to the Court), in order that the 
Court may have material for deciding whether that person is fit 
to plead and stand his trial; or whether a jury ought to be sworn 
oix the question whether he is sane or insane* That is the reason 
for the report. 

After stating some facts, the opinion of Dr. Morton is this : 
" During the first few days of her reception to prison she was 
suffering from some form of confusion of mind, the result of 
alcohol and, possibly, a large dose of morphia. And the confusion 
of mind was that she was confused and kept repeating the same 
sentence over and over again; that being on the 25th March. On 
the 28th March she was better and appeared to have forgotten what 
she had said and how she had behaved on the previous days since 
her reception. " If that had been, as it would have been, the 
evidence of Dr. Morton, I am sure that I am only saying and I 
am not saying it as a legal matter at all, I am only suggesting it to 
you for your consideration that it would be unfair to base any 
verdict against her upon any admission or anything that woman 
had said after she had been givep that dose of morphia and 
before she was taken to prison when, according to Dr, 
Morton, as well as Dr. O'Donnell, she had not recovered 
from the effect of that morphia. Having said that, I have 

281 



Rattenbury and Stoner, 

Mr Justice Humphrey* 

no power and no desire to withdraw that statement from 
evidence; it is in evidence; it is one of the documents 
which you are entitled to have and look at for yourselves. 
You have heard it. If you draw any inference from it, I cannot 
s/iy you are not entitled to, I can only give you such assistance as 
I desire to and I may be able to, which may be of some help to you 
in arriving at a verdict, and it is from that point of view that I 
suggest, it seems to me, not merely as a lawyer, to be something 
that would be not quite acting in accordance with the fairness 
which I suppose, one may say, is characteristic of our Criminal 
Courts. There it is; I say no more about it; I am not going to 
refer to it again, or say anything more about it. There it is and 
it is one of the documents in the case which you are entitled to 
have, if you desire it, and you are entitled to read it. If you read 
it, you are entitled to form such opinion as you think right about 
the statements in it, having regard to what Dr. O'Donnell has said 
and Dr. Morton inferentially had said about that statement. There 
is the statement which she made. Members of the jury, I leave that 
statement. I would just remind you that you have the evidence of 
Police-constable Bright who formed, and it is not remarkable that 
he did form, the same opinion as to the lady's condition as his 
superior officer. You also have the evidence of Miss Biggs. . Miss 
Riggs said, with regard to Mrs. Rattenbury I think it was elicited 
by Stoner's counsel in cross-examination; no, it was apparently 
by Mrs. Rattenbury's own counsel before going to the police 
station, " Mrs. Rattenbury said : ' Tell Stoner he must give me 
the mallet.' " I think I have referred to it already. That is the 
one other statement which she made which has been given in 
evidence. Before you return your verdict, I think it would be right 
in the interests of this woman that I should read to you quite 
shortly the evidence which she herself gave in Court, or my notes 
of it; it is not very long, and as we have now arrived at the ordinary 
hour of adjournment, I think the best course to pursue would be 
that I should reserve that until after you have had your lunch. 
You will necessarily, I think, take some time in considering this 
matter and discussing it among yourselves, and there is no reason 
why you should do that in the ordinary interval. Will you oblige 
me by not talking it over during lunch; do not do that. 
Just talk about other things and then, when I have read to you 
Mrs. Rattenbury's evidence, you will be free to discuss the whole 
matter. 

(Adjourned for a short time.) 



Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Members of the jury, I have been 
reminded, quite properly, that I did not say anything to you about 
what your duty would be if you did not come to the conclusion 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

that although Stoner delivered those blows which killed Mr. Ratten- 
bury, he did so without intending to kill or to do grievous bodily 
harm. Perhaps I ought to have said to you learned counsel was 
quite right; it is material in saying that, under those circum- 
stances, Stoner would not be guiltless, but he would be guilty of 
the crime of manslaughter, because manslaughter consists in the 
crime of unlawfully killing a person, without any intention of 
injuring him seriously, of course, without any intention of killing 
him. Perhaps I ought to have added that to complete the law. 

I am now going to read to you Mrs, Rattenbury's evidence. 
She said " I was twice married before marrying the deceased. 
My boy Christopher was at school; he had glands and had arsenic 
injection for glands, which I gave him. For that purpose I used 
the syringe which has been produced." If you look, incidentally, 
at that syringe, it would appear to you that it had not been used 
for a long time and is entirely unfit for use now. It is not by 
any means clean. It seems to bear out what she said that it was 
used a long time ago and has not been used later. Then the 
drawing was put to her by counsel, and she said that was 
Christopher's drawing. " I have not lived with my husband since 
the birth of the boy John. Our relations were happy and cordial. 
We had quarrels, but not frequent quarrels. In July, 1934, he 
had spoken of suicide. He had often spoken of suicide and I 
said ' Why don't you do it. J He lost his temper and hit me," 
That was in reference to a matter which had been spoken to by 
Dr, O'Donnell, which he saw at that time. She said " My husband 
was not very generous and I used to tell him lies in order to 
get money out of him. In September, 1934, Stoner came as 
chauffeur " I think he was called chauffeur-handyman " at 1 
a week. In November I became his mistress, before he came to 
live in the house. We used regularly to have connexion. My 
husband must have known of it because he told me to lead my 
own life. I told him I was going to lead my own life, and 
later I had said I had taken him at his word and was leading 
my own life." It may be said that she said he told me to lead 
my own life. That is, what she says; she thinks he must have 
known. Then she said : " I used to quarrel with Stoner. I paid 
his wages on Monday. The deceased never asked to see my pass- 
book at all." Then there was something about a man's watch. 
She said " That was my father's watch and I lent it to Stoner ; 
I did not give it to him. I never gave Stoner money to buy 
drugs. Early in the year I wanted to sever our relationships 
because of the difference in our ages. There was no serious threat 
by Stoner to me. He told me he had to take medicine three times 
a year for his head. He also told me that he was taking drugs. 
Then I spoke to Dr. O'Donnell about it. I have never taken 
drugs. On the 18th March I got 250 from the deceased, the 
excuse being that I was going to London to have an operation." 

283 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

Then she was asked about the ring all this is in answer to her 
own counsel the ring, she said, was for me, not for Stoner. 
" We stayed together in London " in fact, sleeping together. 
And there her evidence in chief ends, so far as that visit to London 
is concerned. The next question was " When you got back, did 
you get back on Friday night, 7 ' and the answer was " Yes/' 
" (Q.) Did your husband ask any questions about where you had 
been," and the answer was " No; he was very jolly; my husband 
drank whisky at night; he used to drink a good deal. Little John 
came home for the week-end. On the 24th March, the Sunday " 
she said other things about the week-end, but I will not trouble 
you about them, about football, and so forth, and she said Satur- 
day was just an ordinary normal day, no reference made by 
anybody to what had happened for the last four days. Then, 
" On Sunday morning I was very nice to my husband because 
he was depressed. I took him for a drive; he was still depressed." 
If he did know or suspect what had been happening, perhaps 
it would not be remarkable that he should be depressed, or even 
angry. She said : "I stayed in that afternoon. After lunch 
my husband was asleep in the drawing-room and then we all had 
tea together, brought up by Stoner in my room. The door of 
the bedroom was closed for a time." My impression is that she 
said that that was quite unusual, that the ordinary practice was 
that the door was left open, but for a time on that occasion it 
was closed for a time. She said : " My husband was reading a 
book; this was about a quarter to five, upstairs and he was 
depressed. In the book there ^as a character who was supposed 
to say that he thought of committing suicide, and that that 
would be the best thing to do before he became " I think her 
expression was " doddery " " before he became very old. My 
husband said that he admired a person who could commit suicide. 
I suggested various things to cheer him up, including a visit 
to Mr. Jenks. I, in fact, telephoned to Mr, Jenks and arranged 
that visit. That was after six o'clock. While I was telephoning " 
the telephone in fact was in the husband's bedroom downstairs, 
the room next to the drawing-room ** Stoner came in with some- 
thing in his hand, , which I thought was a revolver. My husband 
was in the drawing-room at that time. Stoner was very angry 
and he said he would kill me not my husband if I went to 
Bridport. We then went into the dining-room together. He 
accused me of living with my husband ^hen the door upstairs 
was closed." My note of her next statement is : "I said ' Put 
that revolver up; do not make an ass of yourself/ " which I 
suppose indicates that she said " Nonsense," or something of that 
sort. She said : " He was very annoyed at my going to Bridport } 
he did not -want me to be with my husband, He was jealous, 
He thought I should have to share the same bed. I assured him 
that I would have a separate room. He then, seemed to believe 
284 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

me and to be all right. I went to the drawing-room to try and 
make him jolly. I then got his clothes out. About half-past 
seven John went to bed. I then played cards with my husband. 
I let the dog out through the french window and then closed the 
window. I went to bed at 9.30 exactly. I kissed him goodnight. 
I went upstairs to the lavatory and when I got back to my bedroom 
the dog was there." That means that the husband must have been 
alive at that time, because he must have let the dog in and closed 
the window afterwards. She said : "I took off my clothes, my 
underclothes, put on my pyjamas, and got out some things for 
packing, I did not hear Riggs come in, so I went to see her 
and I spoke to her of our going to Bridport. Then I went back 
to bed. Later Stoner came in. I did not notice anything at 
the moment about him. He got into bed with me and he then 
seemed agitated." Then I have read to you this next passage, 
but I will read it again. " He said ' I am in trouble.' I said 
' What is it? ' He said ' I cannot tell you. 1 I said ' You must/ 
and that went on. He then said * You won't go to Bridport/ 
and he said he had hurt Ratz. He said that he had hit him on 
the head with a mallet which he had hidden outside. I did nothing 
until I hear Ratz groan, then I went at once downstairs. In 
the drawing-room I saw my husband in the chair." Having 
regard to all the detailed evidence which has been given about the 
blood and so forth, learned counsel quite naturally said we need 
not go all through this again, we can take this part very shortly, 
and all that she said was that she tried to make her husband 
speak. She said: " I yelled for Irene; I took some whisky to 
prevent me from being sick, but I was sick after drinking the 
whisky. 1 do not remember the police coming that night at all. 
I do not remember sending for Dr, O'Donnell and I do not 
remember his coming." I think she added that she remembered 
nothing until after she had been before the magistrates next 
morning. She remembered nothing of the happenings of that 
night after she helped her husband by putting a towel round his 
head. Then she said "I did not know anything of the murder 
until Stoner told me." That means of the assault, * f until Stoner 
told me." She was then cross-examined on behalf of Stoner, 
and she said " It was on the 22nd November, 1934, I first had 
connexion with Stoner." These answers very often are not very 
illuminating, because one has not got the question. It is a 
sort of narrative and it loses a great deal from being read if 
you have the answer only without the question. Some question 
was put to her : " It was you who wanted this young man/' and 
the answer was " No, it was mutual/' That is all I have. " I 
fell in love with him. He told me about drugs some time after 
November. I think in November he told me about his ailment " 
that is to say, taking something three times a year for his 
illness. " He 'assured me he was taking less, and he seemed, to 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

Mr Jurtice Humphreys 

get better. He became jealous. He did not like drink " did 
not care himself, I think that means for drink " and objected 
to my drinking. On the 12th February, 1934, I had become 
alarmed because he was agitated and he said he must go to London 
to get the drug. He was better after that, although he said Jie 
could not get it. He had stopped it. He originally said he was 
twenty-two; I learned his correct age on the 19th November, 1934, 
his birthday/ 1 Then, in answer to learned counsel, she said " It 
is true I advertised for a boy from fourteen to eighteen, and 
Stoner came." 

Then she was cross-examined by Mr. Groom-Johnson, and she 
said " I did talk about the visit to London with Stoner the 
week before. I understood that the deceased was very well off. 
I had little or nothing, except presents from my mother and, 
occasionally, earnings from writing. Stoner had nothing. I had 
differences with my husband about money often, so I deceived him. 
I told him I was going to have an expensive operation. He said 
it was a very great sacrifice, but then he always talked like that, 
I had from him something over 1000 a year. The last time 
I was intimate with Stoner was the 23rd March. Little John slept 
in the same room where we were. He was always asleep." That 
was in answer to a question : " Why did you not go into Stoner ; s 
room? " She went on to say: " I did not hear Riggs come in 
at all. From the time Stoner got in bed with me, he left me 
only when I left him to, run downstairs. I did not hear Stoner 
speak to Miss Riggs outside. It was the sight of blood which 
upset me. After Irene came, I poured out the whisky. I was 
sick and I poured out another. The only thing I can remember 
after that was putting a towel round the deceased's head/' and 
so forth. She said : " I cannot remember Dr, O'Donnell arriving 
or being there. I cannot remember any policeman being there. 
I have no recollection of being arrested or charged, or being before 
the magistrate/' Then she is asked about another matter, and 
she said : " I had no intention of putting up the sunshade in the 
garden. I ran 'downstairs because I heard a groan; I heard it 
quite clearly. The bedroom door was shut at that time; I am 
not sure about the drawing-room. Stoner thought I drank too 
much. I would not have allowed my husband to be intimate with 
me, if he had desired/' She was then asked about two cheques, 
which it is quite clear she wrote, for 5 each, when she was at 
the station. I think that was on the question of her recollection. 
As I have already said to you, it seems to me, the importance 
of the matter, so far as it is important, is not whether she recollects 
now so much, as what was her state of mind at the time. It 
is quite clear that she knew what she was doing at this time, 
because not only was she signing a statement in what you may 
think is her ordinary handwriting, but when she got to the 
station she knew who she wanted to pay money to, she wrote 



Mr. Justice Humphreys' Summing Up. 

Mr Justice Humphreys 

cheques and wrote them quite correctly, or the amount was the 
correct amount, and signed them in her ordinary way. She may 
or may not have forgotten it now. That, in fact, is what she 
did. Then, in re-examination by her own counsel, she said : 
(< My first thought on hearing Stoner 's story was to protect him." 

Members of the jury, that is the evidence in this case. You 
will now be good enough to go to your room and consider your 
verdict. I have told you, and I repeat it, your duty is to 
consider the evidence as a whole. Take the case of each of 
the accused separately. If the prosecution have established to 
your satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt in the case of either 
of these persons that the charge of murder is made out, having 
regard to the direction upon law which I have given you, it 
will be your duty to say so by your verdict. If in the case 
of either of them, the evidence of the prosecution fails to satisfy 
you of the guilt of the accused, do not find that person guilty 
merely because of suspicion, or for any other reason, but say by 
your verdict in regard to that person that the prosecution have 
failed to establish the case, by returning a verdict of not guilty. 
I know you can be trusted to do your duty. Mr. Foreman, would 
you like any of the things that have been produced in this case, 
what I call the Exhibits, I mean statements, so far as they are in 
writing, the mallet, or anything else? 

The FOREMAN OF THE JURY My lord, may we send out for them 
later! 

Mr, JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Yes, send for anything that you 
want. Just make it clear what you want. 

(The jury retired at 2.48 and returned into Court 
at 3.35.) 

The CLERK OF THE COURT Members of the jury, are you agreed 
upon your verdict? 

The FOREMAN OF THE JURY Yes, sir. 

The CLERK OF THE COURT Do you find the prisoner, Alma 
Victoria Rattenbury, guilty or not guilty of murder? 

The FOREMAN Not guilty. 

The CLERK OP THE COURT Do you find the prisoner, George 
Percy Stoner, guilty or not guilty of murder ? 

The FOREMAN Guilty, but we should like to add a rider to 
that; we recommend him to mercy. 

The CLERK OF THE COURT Then you find Alma Victoria 
Rattenbury not guilty and you find George Percy Stoner guilty of 
murder, and that is the verdict of you all ? 

The FOREMAN Yes. 

The CLERK OF THE COURT George Percy Stoner, you stand con- 

287 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

victed of murder : have you anything to say why the Court should 
not give you judgment of death, according to law? 
The PRISONER Nothing at all. 

Sentence. 

Mr, JUSTICE HUMPHREYS George Percy Stoner, the jury have 
convicted you of murder, with a recommendation to mercy. The 
recommendation will be forwarded by me to the proper quarter 
where it will doubtless receive consideration. My duty is to pass 
upon you the only sentence which the law knows for the crime of 
which you have been convicted. 

(Formal sentence of death was then passed.) 

Mr, JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Mr. Hawke, there is another indict- 
ment against this woman. What course do you propose to take ? 

Mr. HAWKB My lord, perhaps in view of the jury's verdict, 
your lordship would think it would be undesirable to proceed 
further upon the second indictment in this case. If your lordship 
approves, I should propose to offer no evidence upon it. 

The CLERK OF THE COURT Alma Victoria Rattenbury, you are 
charged with being an accessory after the fact, knowing that 
George Percy Stoner had wounded Francis Mawaon Rattenbury 
with intent to murder him: are you guilty or not guilty? 

The Prisoner RATTENBXJRY Not guilty, my lord. 

The CLERK OP THE COURT Members of the jury, the prisoner at 
the bar, Alma Victoria Eattenbury, is charged with being an 
accessory after the fact to an offence committed by George Percy 
Stoner who is charged in this indictment with wounding Francis 
Maweon Rattenbury with intent to murder him. To this indict- 
ment she has pleaded not guilty and it is your charge to say, 
having heard the evidence, whether she be guilty or not. 

Mr. HAWKE My lord, I am instructed for the Crown in this 
case and I propose to offer no evidence. 

Mr. JUSTICE HUMPHREYS Members of the jury, you can only 
return a verdict of guilty in any criminal ca&e upon evidence. 
No evidence is offered upon this charge against the woman, and 
therefore the only verdict you can return, and one which I direct 
you to return, is one of not guilty. 

The CLERK OP THE COURT Members of the jury, are you agreed 
upon your verdict? 

The FOREMAN Yes. 

The CLERK OP THE COURT Do you find the prisoner, Alma 
Victoria Rattenbury, not guilty upon this indictment? 

The FOREMAN Yes. 

The CLERK op THE COURT That ia the verdict of you all? 

The FOREMAN Yes, 

Mr. JUSTICE 

288 



APPENDICES. 



APPENDIX I 

REX. v. SIGNER,* 

COURT OP CRIMINAL APPEAL. 

(Before the LORD CHIEF JUSTICE (LORD EEWART), Mr. JUSTICE SWIFT, 
and Mr, JUSTICE LAWRENCE. 

Mr, J. D. Casswell appeared for Stoner; Mr. R .P. Groom-Johnson, E.G., 
and Mr. Anthony Hawke for the Crown, 

Mr. CASSWELL, in opening the appeal, said that the crime was a very 
clumsy one. It was committed with a heavy mallet and apparently with 
complete lack of premeditation and without any thought of the consequences. 
There was no sign of anyone having entered Mr. Rattenbury's house on 
the night of his death, and no one who was in the house attempted to 
prove an alibi. There was no suggestion of either accident or suicide. Nor 
was there any sign of two persons having put their heads together and 
arranged the commission of the crime. 

The two people involved were Stoner and Mrs. Alma Victoria Rattenbury. 
Mrs. Rattenlbury was a neurotic woman who gave way to sudden bursts 
of excitement which were sometimes caused by drink. No boy could have 
been given a better character than Stoner was given by everyone who knew 
him* He appeared to be a model boy. Everyone said that he never gave 
way to excitement or violence, 

Counsel reviewed the evidence which was given at the trial, and sub- 
mitted that there ought to have been separate trials. Mrs. Rattenbury and 
Stoner could not possibly, he said, be tried together without serious fear 
of a miscarriage of justice. 

Up to the time at which Mrs. Rattenbury was arrested, there was no 
evidence against Stoner except that on the evening of the crime he had 
gone perfectly openly and borrowed the mallet from his grandmother, and 
except that Mrs. Rattenbury had said in one of her statements that her 
" lover did it," Subsequently, however, Mrs. Rattenbury stated that she 
14 did it. 1 ' After Mrs, Rattenbury was charged Stoner who had made pre- 
vious statements which did not implicate hun in the crime, proceeded to 
provide evidence against himself. 

When the prisoners were jointly indicted the defence were faced, not 
with the usual position of the two prisoners accusing each other, but with 
that of each prisoner saying : " I did it and I did it alone." 

By being put on trial with Mrs. Rattenbury, Stoner was put in a terrible 
position. So were his legal advisers. Everyone knew that Stoner was com- 
pletely under the domination of Mrs. Rattenbury and that he was deeply 
in love with her. Supposing that he was innocent, what a terrible position 
was that in which he was placed! The prosecution in effect said: "We 
say that one of you is guilty. Now, Stoner, if you want to clear yourself, 
your counsel must cross-examine this woman, and every time he makes a 
point in your favour he makes a point against her. If you go into the 
witness-box and give evidence on your own behalf, you will help to convict 
her/' 

* Reproduced by the courtesy of the Editor of The Times. 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

If Stoner had given his word to Mrs. Rattenbury that he would take the 
blame, could anyone blame him as an honourable man for keeping his word 
and not going into the witness-box? 

It was in the discretion of the Judge at a trial whether or not he should 
grant separate trials to two prisoners who were indicted together, and the 
Court 01 Criminal Appeal had said in a number of cases that separate 
trials should always be granted where there was a likelihood of a mis- 
carriage of justice, that is, of someone being wrongly convicted. In the 
present case there was a very strong likelihood of someone being wrongly con- 
victed. If Mrs. Eattenbury had been tried separately and before Stoner, 
there would no longer have been any need for chivalry on Stoner 's part. 

Mr. JUSTICE LAWBENCE Why do you say that Mrs. Battenbury would 
have been tried first. 

Mr. CASSWELL She was first on the indictment and, while the prosecu- 
tion have a right of election, it is probable that she would have been tried 
first. 

Counsel, continuing, said that Stoner 's being tried with Mrs. Rattenbury 
resulted in his being under the additional handicap that a quantity of evi- 
dence was given when he was in the dock which would have been inadmissible 
if he had been on trial alone. 

Mr. CAS SWELL then asked if he might call Stoner as a witness to give, 
for the first time, his account of what occurred. Mrs. Rattenbury was now 
dead and the necessity which had prevented Stoner giving evidence at the 
trial no longer existed. Stoner did not give evidence at the trial because 
he was afraid of incriminating Mrs. Rattenbury. An unfortunate impression 
might have been created that Stoner's legal advisers had advised him to 
keep put of the witness-box. 

With regard to the defence that Stoner was under the influence of 
cocaine on the day of the crime, counsel submitted that that matter was 
not sufficiently put to the jury by Mr. Justice Humphreys in the summing- 
up. The whole thing was slurred over, although evidence had been pro- 
duced which was proper to be left to the jury, and, finally, the defence of 
manslaughter was not left to the jury at all. 

Mr. JUSTICE SWEPT Where is there any evidence whether Stoner was 
a cocaine addict or whether he was not a cocaine addict that on the night 
of this crime he was in such a condition that he could not form the inten- 
tion, of hitting a man on the head with a mallet with the intention of doing 
him some hurt? The evidence, on the other hand, seems to suggest that 
he was perfectly normal at the time of the offence. 

Mr. CAS SWELL There was very little evidence, but in my submission 
there was just sufficient to be left to the jury. 

Mr. JUSTICE SWIFT said that Stoner's own evidence would have been the 
best possible to establish that he had taken such quantities of cocaine that 
he did not know what he was doing. He could have said that without in- 
volving Mrs. Rattenbury. 

Mr. CASSWELL If he had, he could have been cross-examined at large 
about everything which happened on that day. 

Mr. JUSTICE SWIFT If it were true that he had taken so much cocaine 
that he had no recollection of what had occurred, no one could have got 
anything out of him. 

Counsel for the Crown were not called on to argue. 

JUDGMENT, 

The LOED CHIEF JUSTICE, in giving judgment of the Court, said that it 
was not suggested that there was not abundant evidence on which the jury 
might convict Stoner of wilful murder. It was, however, argued that there 



Appendix L 



ought to have been' separate trials. It was said that the trial of Stoner 
with Mrs. Rattenbury had the effect of putting him in a position of great 
and unnecessary difficulty. It was a well-established rule of the Court 
that the question whether two or more prisoners should be tried separately 
or together was one for the discretion of the Judge at the trial. It was 
within his power, if sufficient reason appeared, to say that prisoners should 
be separately tried. In the_ present case Mr. Justice Humphreys, a Judge 
of great experience in the criminal law, decided that the trials of Stoner and 
Mrs. Rattenbury ought not to be separate. Moreover, when he knew all 
the facts of the case, he expressed the opinion that the trials ought not to 
have been separate. 

In the opinion of the Court it was a matter for the discretion of the 
Judge and that discretion had been rightly exercised. It was apparent that 
substantially the same difficulties confronted the defeqce without reference 
to whether the cases were heard separately or together. 

Secondly, it was contended that the Court ought now to hear Stoner 
give evidence although he had chosen to hold his tongue at the Central 
Criminal Court. As Mr. Justice Bray had said in Rex v. Rose (14 
Crim.App.Rep. 14), the Court would hear an appellant who had n.ot given 
evidence at tho trial only in very exceptional circumstances, otherwise 
defendants would take their chanro of not giving evidence before the jury 
at their trial. A series of authorities was cited in support of that proposi- 
tion and that series could now bo extended. 

In the opinion of tho Court there was no such exceptional circumstances 
in the present case as would justify the Court in permitting Stoner, after 
further consideration, to offer himself as a witness. Indeed, the way in 
which tho request that ho should do so was presented appeared, when one 
examined it, to be almost cynical. It was desired that Stoner should now 
go into the witness-box so thai., after the death of Mrs. Rattenbury, he 
might have an opportunity of swearing that which he was not prepared to 
swear while she was a live. The application for leave to call Stoner as a 
witness must bo refused. 

Thirdly, it was said that justice was not done to what had been called 
the " defence of cocaine," a concise expression for describing the defence 
that, by reason of Stoner 's haying taken large doses of cocaine, he had, 
at the material time, disabled himsplf from forming any intention to commit 
a felonious act. Tho Court had had the opportunity of reading all the 
evidence on that point, and a protracted disquisition on the properties of 
cocaine. If there were any observation to be made with regard to Mr. 
Justice Humphreys's summing-up on that point, it would be that he treated 
with almost excessive respect the suggestion that was put to the jury. 

It was said that the defence of manslaughter was not left to the jury. 
The answer to that was twofold first, that it was so left, and, secondly, 
that tho defence of manslaughter was identical with the " cocaine defence." 
Finally, it was suggested that in some way or other Mr. Justice 
Humphreys did not quite appreciate the evidence. A man who was capable 
of believing that was capable of believing anything. 

11 There is no need," concluded his lordship, " to reiterate the evidence 
of thia sordid and squalid case. There is nothing at all in this appeal except 
that it arises out of a charge of murder. It is a mere waste of time, 

" The fact, if it be a fact, that a lad of good character has been 
corrupted by an abandoned woman, old enough to be his mother, raises no 
question of law, nor can it be employed as a ground of appeal to this Court. 
We have no power, nor have we the inclination, to alter the law relating to 
murder in this respect. The appeal is dismissed." 



APPENDIX II 



INQUEST ON ALMA VICTORIA RATTENBURY.* 

The inquest on Alma Victoria Rattenbury, whose body was found in a 
tributary of the River Avon, near Christchurch, on Tuesday, 4th June, 
1935, with several stab wounds in the chest, was held at Fair-mile House, 
a public institution at Christchurch, on Friday, 8th June, 1935. The 
Coroner, Mr, F. B. Ingoldby, sat without a jury. 

Mr. E. W. Marshall Harvey represented George Percy Stoner; Mr. 
R. H. Lewis-Manning represented the relatives of Mrs, Rattenbury. 

Dr. GBOEFEET AETETJB, JONES said that at 10.15 p.m. on Tuesday, 
4th June, he saw the body at the mortuary at Fairmile House; it was 
the body of a well-nourished woman, aged thirty-five to forty. There 
was a considerable amount of blood on the chest and the woman was dead. 
A superficial examination was not sufficient to ascertain the cause of death. 
On the following morning he carried out a post-mortem examination and 
found two old operation scars as a result, apparently, of appendicitis, and 
six stab wounds on the chest, five large ones and one small one. Five 
of these wounds were in the left breast, and they all passed downwards 
and inwards, Three of the wounds were in the heart. From the shape 
and directions of the wounds, he was of the opinion that she died from 
haemorrhage following wounds self-inflicted by some sharp instrument held 
in the right hand. Death must have been almost instantaneous, and she 
was dead before entering the water. 

Miss IEBNE RIGGS, Mrs. Rattenbury's companion-help, said that she identi- 
fied the body as that of Mrs. Rattenbury, widow of Francis Mawson Ratten- 
bury, a retired architect. She last saw Mrs. Rattenbury alive in London 
on 1st June. She identified a brown handbag as the property of Mrs. 
Rattenbury, and a number of letters as being in Mrs. Rattenbury's 
handwriting. 

WILLIAM CHAELBS MITCHELL, a Christchurch cowman, said that at 
8.30 p.m. on 4th June he was walking across a meadow adjoining Stoney 
Lane, Christchurch. As he approached the railway line he saw Mrs. Ratten- 
bury sitting on the bank of a stream which passes underneath the railway; 
she was smoking a cigarette, and was alone. He crossed the stream by 
the bridge and went down the embankment on the other side. As he 
did so he looked through the rails of the bridge and saw that she was 
standing on the water's edge. She bent down, and he saw a knife in 
her hand. She appeared to fall into the water, He ran up the bank, 
over the bridge, and down the other side, and when he reached the edge 
she was lying face upwards in the water a few feet into the stream. He 
entered the water as far as he could, but was unable to reach her. There 
was ft fur coat lying on the bank, and, taking hold of one end, he threw 
the other end to her. She made no attempt to take hold of it, He then 
eaw blood coming to the top of the water, and as he could do no more 
be ran 'to a cottage and later notified the police. 



* Reproduced by the courtesy of the Editor of The Times, 
294 



Appendix II, 

JAMBS PENNY, a labourer, said that at 8.40 he heard that a woman 
had been found iu the stream. He went as quickly as he could, but 
being unable to reach her with a pole, he returned to his cottage for a 
longer one, and with this recovered the body. 

Police-constable KING said that he arrived at the spot at 9 p.m. Mrs. 
Rattenbury was lying on the bank fully clothed. He found a handbag 
about four yards from her, and inside were letters. Lying close to the 
handbag was a paper bag which contained a dagger sheath. Mrs. Batten- 
bury's hat was also lying close by the bag. He helped to remove the 
body to the mortuary. 

The COEONBE then referred to the letters which Mrs. Battenbury had 
left, and said he did not propose to read them all, but only extracts. 
The first was from a letter dated 4th June 

I want to make it perfectly clear that no one is responsible for 
what action 1 may Lake regarding my life. I quite made up my 
mind at Holloway to finish things should Stoner . . . and it would 
only be a matter of time and opportunity. Every night and minute 
is only prolonging the appalling agony of my mind. 

This letter went into a lot of neurotic statements which he did not propose 
to read. There was another letter, dated 3rd June, written on the back 
of an envelope addressed to the Governor of his Majesty's Prison, Pentonville. 

An extract of this was : 

If I only thought it would help Stoner I would stay on, but it has 
been pointed out to me all too vividly X cannot help him. That is my 
death sentence. 

The next extract, written on an envelope addressed to Mrs. Battenbury, 

read 

Eight o'clock, After so much walking I have got here. Oh, to see 
the fiwans and spring flowers and just smell them. And how singular 
1 should have chosen the spot Stoner said he nearly jumped out of 
the tram once at. it was not intentional my coming here. 1 tossed 
a coin, like Stoner always did, and it came down <Jhristchurch. It 
is beautiful here. What a lovely world we are in! It must be 
easier to be hanged than to have to do the job oneself, especially 
in these circumstances of being watched all the while. Pray God 
nothing stops me to-night. Am within five minutes of Christchurch 
now. God bless my children and look after them. 

The last extract read was written, apparently, on the night of Tuesday, 
4th June. It ran 

I tried this morning to throw myself under a train at Oxford Circus. 
Too many people about. Then a bus, Still too many people about. 
One must be bold to do a thing like thU. It is beautiful here and 
I am alone. Thank God for peace at last. 



McCxt&AN, matron of a nursing home in London, said that Mrs. 
Rattenbury was admitted to the home on Monday, 3rd June, for rest 
and treatment. About 2.50 p.m. on the next day, she borrowed 2 from 
one of the officials of the home and said that she was going out and would 
be back by 9 p.m. on that day, She appeared to be in a fairly normal 
state of health and it was with her doctor's permission that she was allowed 
to go. She did not return. She (the witness) had no power to detain her. 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

The CORONER then read out his verdict as follows: 

" Alma Victoria Battenbury was found dead on the 4th June in 
the Eiver Avon in the parish of Christchurch East. The cause of 
death was haemorrhage from self-inflicted injuries by some sharp- 
pointed instrument held in the right hand, and so I do say that 
deceased, not being of sound mind, did kill herself." 



APPENDIX III 



STATEMENT BY MBS, A. RATTENBURY MADE ON WEDNESDAY 
AND THURSDAY, THE 27m AND 28ra MARCH, 1935. 

I have been married to Mr. Rattenbury for seven or eight years, and 
there is one child of the marriage, John, who is six years old. 

For the past six years I have not lived with my husband as his wife, 
and whilst we have been at 5 Manor Road, he has occupied a separate 
bedroom, which was on the ground floor. 

Apart from minor troubles we have always been the best of friends, 
although my husband did not like me going out, and was rather mean 
towards me, 

In September last we advertised for a houseboy to replace one of 
the maids who had left. I interviewed the applicants, and eventually 
engaged George S toner. Some time after he had been in our employment 
he informed me that he was in the habit of taking drugs, and I consulted 
a doctor about him. I think that he did this with a view to getting 
me to take an interest in him, and I do not think that he does take 
drugs now. 

Some few months ago we started living together and my maid, Irene, 
knew about this. 

On Tuesday, the 19th March, Stoner and I went away together to 
London. I told my husband that I was going down to consult a doctor 
about an operation, and I did this to get some money from him so that 
I could buy some clothes. We started by car, but the car broke down 
at Southampton, and we went on by train. We stayed at the Royal Palace 
Hotel until Friday, when we returned by train to Southampton, picking 
up the car, and arriving at 5 Manor Road at about 10.30 or 10.45 on 
Friday night. 

Whilst we were in London we did nothing in particular except that 
we visited various shows, and I bought some clothes. 

On our arrival at Bournemouth I went into the drawing-room, and, 
said good-night to my husband, and we then went to bed. "-; 

On Saturday morning we fetched John from school, and in the afternoon ; 
he and Stoner and I went to see a football matcfi at Picket Post, where 
nay son was playing. ~ 

In the evening John had his bath and I played with him, -afterwards ; 
having supper with my husband and going to bed^ J ? 

On Sunday morning my husband and John and, I and Stoner wenft* 
to the Tree Top Kennels to see whether Dinah's puppies had bee,n sold. 
We came back for lunch, and in the afternoon I played with John upstairs. 
I had tea with my husband and he said that he was very depressed about 
a scheme for building flats which he had, and that he wished he was 
dead. Frequently he has threatened to commit suicide. I endeavoured 
to cheer him up, and I suggested that we should go and see Mr. Jenks 
at Bridport on the following day and stay the night at his house. After 
tea I telephoned to Jenks and made arrangements for my husband and I 
to go ana stay with him, and I told my husband about it. He seemed 
quite pleased. 

After tea I did not go out, and I played with John and put him to bed* 

I had supper with my husband, and afterwards I played cards with 
him in the drawing-room. I left him at about 9.30 or 9.45 and went 



Rattenbury and Stoner. 

to bed. He was then sitting in his chair near the coal-box with his back 
to the french doors, which were open. These doors were nearly always 
open for Dinah to go out into the garden. 

When I got upstairs Stoner came out of his room and came into my 
room, and we got into bed. John was asleep in the little bed. I believe 
that my window; was open. We had been in bed some time when I heard 
a groan. Stoner heard the groan too, and I said, " What is that? " and 
ran downstairs. I went into the drawing-room, and I found my husband 
with his head on one arm of the chair, and a large pool of blood on 
the floor. I was dressed in pyjamas and a blue kimono, but I had no 
shoes on my feet. As I went across the room towards my husband I 
trod on his false teeth, which had been knocked from his mouth, and 
at the same time I screamed, and Irene, the maid, came downstairs. 

There was an unfinished glass of whisky by my husband's side. I 
also yelled for Stoner to come downstairs top. I did not look into the 
garden, nor did I see any weapon which might have caused the injury 
to my husband's head. I did not inspect the injuries carefully, but I 
saw that he had been hit on the back of the head. 

I took off the blue kimono, and the three of us lifted my husband and 
carried him into his room. I asked Irene to send for Dr. O'Donnell. I 
should think it was some time about a quarter-past ten when I discovered 
my husband. 

I helped myself to whisky, as I felt very upset, and I became very 
excited. Dr. O'Donnell came, and afterwards Mr. Rooke. They moved my 
husband out of the house. I do not remember Dr. O'Donnell going out 
of the house, nor do I remember the police arriving. I remember Mr. Kooke 
telling me to get out of the way when he was looking at my husband. 
I had several drinks. I can remember seeing Dr. O'Donnell again when 
he was trying to give me something. I do not remember him telling the 
police that they should not question me. 

I think Dr. O'Donnell managed to get me upstairs to bed. I cannot 
remember anything more until Irene got me out of bed. I had a bath. 
I do not remember making any statement to the police at all, nor do 
I remember being in Stoner 's room. Before they took me away I remember 
saying goodbye to John at the door. 

I do not remember clearly being charged, when I said that " I did 
it deliberately and would do it again," I remember seeing a mallet. 
It was "shown to me, by, I think, Inspector Carter, and I believe this was 
in the police station, Jsut I am not certain. I had never seen it before. 
They asked me whether that was the mallet, and I said " Yes." I do 
not. think I Bandied itpor that they y .as%Xin^' x to do so. 
I made Hhe~ statement that I had^o^S it'Heli^ately because I thought 
that Stoner had somethmg to do wjjk it, although' J now realise that no 
tune elapsed in which Jt was posfiljle for Mm tqt- have done it. 



