THE  LIBRARY 

OF 
THE  UNIVERSITY 

OF  CALIFORNIA 
LOS  ANGELES 


A?. 


Captain  d^ackr^,  Dimvam. 


IRotable  iSnaltgb  trials 


William  Palmer 


NOTABLE 
ENGLISH   TRIALS. 


The  Stauntons.      Edited  by  J.  B. 
Atlay,  M.A.,  Barrister -at-Law. 

Franz  Muller.      Edited  by  H.  B. 
Irving,  M.A.(Oxon). 

Lord  Lovat.     Edited  by  David  N. 
Mackay,  Solicitor. 

William  Palmer.      Edited  by 
Geo.  H.  Knott,  Barrister-at-Law. 

The  Annesley  Case.      Edited  by 
Andrew  Lang. 

Dr.  Lamson.      Edited  by   H.   L. 
Adam. 

Mrs.  Maybrick.    Edited  by  H.  B. 
Irving,  M.A.(Oxon). 


William  Palmer. 
(From  a  Drawing  by  Joseph  Simpson.) 


Trial  of 

William   Palmer 


EDITED    BY 

George    H.    Knott 

Barrister-at-Law 


PRINTED    BY 

WILLIAM    HODGE   AND    COMPANY 

GLASGOW    AND    EDINBURGH 

1912 


I,,? 


Colleg* 
Library 


K 


To 
SIB  HAREY  BODKIN  POLAND,  K.C., 

WHO    BEABS    THE   NAME,    AND   HAS    CONTINUED  THE    REPUTATION, 
OF    ONE   OF   THE   DISTINGUISHED   COUNSEL    IN    THE   TRIAL   HEREIN 
CONTAINED,   AND    WHO    ALSO    FOR    MANY    YEARS  WAS  THE  REPRE- 
SENTATIVE FIO0RE   IN  THE  COURT  WHERE  THAT  TRIAL  WAS  HELD, 
THIS    BOOK    IS,    BY   HIS    KIND    PERMISSION, 
RESPECTFULLY   DEDICATED 
BY   THE   EDITOR. 


PREFACE. 

IN  preparing  this  report  of  a  trial  more  than  half  a  century  ago, 
the  chief  difficulty  one  might  expect  would  be  to  obtain  an 
accurate  contemporary  account.  A  State  trial  one  knows  where 
to  find ;  but  how  could  newspaper  reports  of  a  trial  lasting 
twelve  days,  and  involving  the  most  technical  evidence  on 
anatomy,  physiology,  and  toxicology,  be  relied  upon  for  anything 
like  accuracy  ?  Fortunately,  if  this  trial  was  not  a  State  trial  in 
the  ordinary  sense,  it  so  seized  the  minds  of  the  country  at  the 
time  that  a  complete  record  is  to  be  found  in  the  "Verbatim 
Report  of  the  Trial  of  William  Palmer,  Transcribed  from  the 
Shorthand  Notes  of  Mr.  Angelo  Bennett,  of  Rolls  Chambers, 
Chancery  Lane,"  and  published  in  1856.  A  copy  is  not  easily 
met  with  now-a-days.  Official  verbatim  reports  of  criminal  trials, 
that  is  made  by  an  officer  of  the  Court  itself,  were  not  then 
known.  I  suppose,  though  it  is  not  so  stated,  that  Mr.  Bennett's 
notes  were  taken  by  him  on  the  instructions  of  the  Treasury  for 
reference  each  day  by  the  Court  and  Counsel.  They  are  the  basis 
of  the  following  report.  Medical  and  medico-chemical  evidence 
constitutes  the  greater  part  of  this  trial ;  it  is  also  far  the  most 
important  part ;  and  in  dealing  with  it  I  have  had  the  benefit  of 
the  professional  skill  of  Dr.  William  Robertson,  of  Leith,  who  has 
read  the  proofs.  Some  of  the  evidence,  as  it  stood,  showed  that 
it  had  been  a  little  too  much  for  the  erudition  of  the  shorthand 
writer,  and  needed  editing.  I  hope  that,  with  the  aid  of  Dr. 
Robertson,  this  appears  now  as  it  was  intended  to  be  by  the 
experts  who  gave  it. 

The  question  of  portraits  has  caused  some  difficulty.  Photo- 
graphs were  not  common,  to  say  the  least,  in  1856.  Most 
woodcuts  met  with  seemed  not  worth  reproduction.  This 
accounts  for  the  few  portraits  which  appear ;  though  the  number 
of  Judges  and  Counsel  was  exceptionally  large.  Palmer  alone  is 
shown  more  satisfactorily  than  any  of  the  others  in  the  well- 
known  figure  at  Madame  Tussaud's.  Their  modeller  was  present 


viii  PREFACE. 

in  Court  and  I  have  seen  his  casts  of  Palmer's  head  and  face  taken 
after  execution.  The  striking  sketch  of  Palmer  by  Mr.  Joseph 
Simpson,  the  well-known  artist,  has  been  made  from  a  photograph 
of  this  figure,  and  from  a  contemporary  print. 

Palmer  has  the  distinction  of  an  article  in  the  Dictionary  of 
National  Biography.  Many  of  the  contemporary  accounts  cannot 
be  relied  on ;  they  are  too  evidently  sensational  and  designed  for 
excited  and  morbid  imaginations.  By  the  kindness  of  Dr.  George 
Fleming,  J.P.,  of  Highgate,  London,  who  is  a  treasury  of  Palmer- 
iana  and  of  Rugeley  tradition,  I  have  been  able  to  use  his 
collection  of  "Jane"  letters.  The  substance  of  these  letters 
appears  in  the  Introduction.  They  reveal  a  sinister  episode  in 
Palmer's  career  not  to  be  found  related  elsewhere.  Moreover,  it 
was  a  real  link  in  the  chain  of  circumstances  that  led  to  Palmer's 
crime  and  his  trial.  The  letter  from  Palmer  to  his  wife  was 
kindly  lent  for  reproduction  by  Dr.  Kurt  Loewenfeld,  of 
Bramhall,  Cheshire. 

G.  H.  K. 


CONTENTS. 


Introduction 

PAOX 

1 

18 
21 

Table  of  Dates           ........... 

List  of  Counsel,        .... 
The  Trial— 

FIRST  DAY  —  WEDNESDAY,  14TH  MAY,  1856. 

Evidence  for  the  Prosecution. 

Ishmael  Fisher,                                    23 
Thomas  Jones,  -         -                  -       26 
George  Reid,                                -      26 

William  Scafe  Gibson, 
Elizabeth  Mills, 

26 

27 

SECOND  DAY  —  THURSDAY,  15TH  MAY,  1856. 

Evidence  for  the  Prosecution  (continued). 

Elizabeth  Mills  (cross-examined)     33 
James  Gardner,                                  37 
Anne  Brooks,                                        37 
Lavinia  Barnes,                                    39 
Anne  Rowley,                                       42 
Charles  Hawley,                                 42 

Sarah  Pond,       .... 
William  Henry  Jones, 
Elizabeth  Mills  (recalled), 
Henry  Savage,  - 
Charles  Newton, 

42 

44 
49 
49 
49 

THIRD  DAY—  FRIDAY,  16TH  MAY,  1856. 

Evidence  for  the  Prosecution  (continued). 

Charles  Joseph  Roberts,    -         -       52 
William  Vernon  Stevens,  -         -       52 
Dr.  John  Thomas  Harland,        -       55 
Charles  John  Devonshire,  -        -      58 
John  Myatt,                                        59 

Samufil  Cheshire, 
Samuel  Cheshire  (recalled), 
Captain  John  Haines  Hatton,    - 
Samuel  Cheshire  (recalled), 
George  Herring,         - 

59 
60 
61 
61 
61 

FOURTH  DAY  —  SATURDAY,  17TH  MAY,  1856. 

Evidence  for  the  Prosecution  (continued). 

George  Bate,                       -        -      63 
Thomas  Blizzard  Curling,           -       63 
Robert  Todd,                               -      64 
Sir  Benjamin  Brodie,          -         -       67 
Henry  Daniel,                                      68 
Samuel  Solly,     ....      69 
Dr.  Robert  Corbett,                    -      70 

Dr.  Watson,       - 
Mary  Kelly, 
Caroline  Hickson, 
Francis  Taylor, 
Jane  Witham,    - 
George  Morley, 
Edward  Duke  Moore, 

70 
70 
70 
71 
71 
72 
74 

FIFTH  DAY—  MONDAY,  19ra  MAY,  1856. 

Evidence  for  the  Prosecution  (continued). 

Dr.  Alfred  Taylor,     ...      75 
Dr.  George  Owen  Rees,      -        -      83 

Professor  Robert  Christison, 

84 

SIXTH  DAY—  TUESDAY,  20-ra  MAY,  1856. 

Evidence  for  the  Prosecution  (concluded). 

T)r.  .John  .Taf.tson. 

8fl 

CONTENTS. 


SEVENTH  DAY — WEDNESDAY,  21ST  MAY,  1856. 
Speech  for  the  Defence. 


Serjeant  Shee, 


EIGHTH  DAY— THURSDAY,  22ND  MAY,  1856. 
Evidence  for  the  Defence. 


Thomas  Nunneley,     -        -        -     161 
William  Herepath,    -  174 

•Julian  Edward  Disbrowe  Rogers,  176 


Dr.  Henry  Letheby, 
Robert  Edward  Gay, 


PAGE 

91 


176 
181 


NINTH  DAY— FRIDAY,  23RD  MAY,  1856. 
Evidence  for  the  Defence  (continued). 


John  Brown  Ross,     -        -  -  183 

Dr.  Francis  Wrightson,  184 

Richard  Partridge,    -         -  -  186 

John  Gay,          -        -        -  -  189 

Dr.  William  M'Donnell,    -  -  192 

Dr.  John  Nathan  Bainbridge,  -  200 


Edward  Austin  Steady,  201 

Dr.  George  Robinson,  •  202 

Dr.  Benjamin  Ward  Richardson,  204 

Dr.  Wrightson  (recalled),  -         -  207 

Catherine  Watson,     -  207 


TENTH  DAY — SATURDAY,  24TH  MAY,  1856. 
Evidence  for  the  Defence  (continued). 


Oliver  Pemberton, 
Henry  Matthews, 
Joseph  Foster,  - 


208 
208 
208 


George  Myatt,  - 
John  Sargent,  - 
Jeremiah  Smith, 


The  Attorney-General's  Address  to  the  Jury, 

ELEVENTH  DAY— MONDAY,  26TH  MAY,  1856. 
The  Lord  Chief-Justice's  Charge  to  the  Jury,  - 

TWELFTH  DAY — TUESDAY,  27ra  MAY,  1856. 
The  Lord  Chief-Justice's  Charge  to  the  Jury  (continued), 
Verdict  and  Sentence, 


209 
210 
211 

214 


266 


275 

285 


II. 


APPENDICES. 

Letter  from  Thomas  Palmer,  brother  of  William  Palmer,  to  the 

Lord  Chief -Justice  Campbell, 

Short  Account  of  the  Judges  and  Counsel  engaged  in  the  Case, 


289 
316 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


William  Palmer, 

Mr.  Serjeant  Shee, 

Note   written   by   Palmer   to   his   Counsel    while    in   the 
dock  at  the  Old  Bailey,        ----.. 

Sir  Alexander  Cockburn, 

Lord  Chief-Justice  Campbell, 

Mr.  Baron  Alderson, 

Letter  from  William  Palmer  to  his  wife,  -        ... 
Facsimile  of  page  from  the  Diary  of  William  Palmer,      - 


Frontispiece 
facing  page    91 

160 
214 
266 
316 
320 
326 


WILLIAM  PALMER. 

INTRODUCTION. 

SIR  JAMES  STEPHEN,  in  his  "History  of  the  Criminal  Law," 
observes  that  he  was  present  at  the  trial  of  William  Palmer, 
and  that  it  made  an  impression  on  him  which  the  subsequent 
experience  of  thirty-four  years  had  only  confirmed  and 
strengthened.  He  considers  that  the  trial,  as  a  whole,  was 
one  of  the  greatest  trials  in  the  history  of  English  law,  and 
eminently  deserving  the  attention  of  students  of  the  law,  and 
we  may  add  of  students  of  human  nature. 

Palmer  was  convicted,  but  there  has  always  been  a  certain 
amount  of  doubt  and  mystery  about  the  trial.  We  can  hardly 
imagine  a  reader  not  being  satisfied  morally  as  to  the  guilt  of 
Palmer,  but  were  he  to  take  the  medical  and  chemical  evidence 
alone,  which  forms  so  large  a  part  of  the  following  report,  we 
could  at  least  imagine  him  holding  his  judgment  in  suspense. 
He  might  well  believe  that  Palmer  administered  poison  to 
Cook,  whom  he  was  charged  with  murdering,  without  admitting 
that  the  poison  was  strychnia.  And  there  remains  the 
ambiguous  language  of  Palmer  himself,  who  neither  positively 
admitted  nor  denied  his  guilt,  but  declared,  "  I  am  innocent 
of  poisoning  Cook  by  strychnia."  Sir  James  Stephen,  who 
will  not  allow  that  the  defence  was  impressive,  is  yet  struck 
with  this  defect  in  the  evidence,  and  suggestsi  that  Palmer 
may  have  discovered  a  method  of  administering  strychnia  so 
as  to  disguise  its  normal  effects.  If  this  is  so,  hi®  secret  has 
never  been  disclosed.  Perhaps  it  is  equally  probable  that  he 
selected  some  poison  allied  to  strychnia — bruchsia,  for  example 
— and  that  the  medical  and  chemical  experts  of  sixty  years 
ago  were  not  sufficiently  acquainted  with  the  strychnoid  poisons- 
to  trace  all  their  differences.  The  evidence  of  the  chemical 
witnesses  suggests  something  of  this  kind,  so  inconsistent  were 
their  opinions ;  and  this  remark  applies  even  more  strongly  to 
the  evidence  of  the  doctors  as  to  the  difference  between  the 
disease  of  tetanus  and  the  effects  of  strychnia.  This  is  one  of 

B  I 


Trial   of  William  Palmer. 

the  great  subjects  of  interest  in  the  report  of  the  trial.  A  con- 
stant and  alert  attention  is  needed  in  reading  it,  and  it  is  a 
professional  discipline  for  either  lawyer  or  doctor. 

Our  personal  opinion  is  that,  had  it  not  been  for  one  or  two 
definitely  known  cases  of  strychnia  poisoning  in  the  human  sub- 
ject, the  prosecution  would  have  failed,  in  spite  of  all  the  experi- 
ments on  animals  from  which  analogies  as  to  Cook's  symptoms 
were  attempted  to  be  drawn.  There  had  been  no  trial  for 
poisoning  by  strychnia  before  Palmer's.  But  it  happened  that 
while  the  Palmer  case  was  pending  Dr.  Dove,  of  Leeds,  was 
accused  of  poisoning  his  wife  by  strychnia,  and  the  symptoms 
of  poison  were  more  certainly  ascertained.  Yet  Dr.  Nunneley, 
of  Leeds,  who  made  a  report  on  this  case,  was  called  for  the 
defence,  not  for  the  prosecution. 

In  this  preliminary  sketch  I  shall  not  attempt  to  convey 
any  idea  of  the  chemical  and  medical  evidence  by  a  formal 
summary.  It  would  be  impossible,  as  Sir  James  Stephen 
remarks,  to  treat  satisfactorily  such  an  extensive,  so  technical, 
and  so  contradictory  a  body  of  testimony,  and  only  such  a 
general  statement  will  be  made  of  the  circumstances  as  will 
enable  the  reader  the  easier  to  follow  the  case  of  the 
prosecution. 

In  the  English  procedure  counsel's  speech  for  the  prosecu- 
tion begins  the  proceedings.  In  the  Scottish  the  evidence  is 
led  at  once.  The  trial  is  treated  in  this  respect  as  if  it  were 
a  Scottish  trial  on  account  of  its  extreme  bulk,  as  it  extended 
over  twelve  days.  Neither  in  the  Scottish  series,  which  are 
already  published,  nor  in  the  English  series,  now  beginning, 
is  there  a  trial  of  equal  length;  nor  do  I  know  any  other 
murder  trial  so  long,  with  the  exception  of  that  conducted  by 
Browning  in  "  The  Ring  and  the  Book."  In  this  trial,  as  in 
every  English  trial,  the  opening  speech  was  intended  to  inform 
the  jury  merely  of  the  facts  and  prepare  their  minds  for  the 
evidence,  and  lucidity  of  statement,  at  the  most,  is  the  only 
forensic  effect  aimed  at.  I  accordingly  omit  the  Attorney- 
General's  speech  qua  speech,  and  found  this  preliminary  state- 
ment on  it.  The  point  of  interest  as  regards  forensic  oratory  is 
reached  with  the  speech  of  Serjeant  Shee,  the  leading  counsel 
for  the  defence.  He  analyses  the  evidence  led  for  the  prosecu- 
tion, challenges  its  cogency,  outlines  the  case  in  reply  which  will 
be  an  answer  to  every  point  made,  appeals  eloquently  and 
pathetically  for  the  prisoner,  and,  we  may  add  incidentally, 

2 


Introduction. 

asserts  his  absolute  belief  in  his  client's  innocence,  thus  bring- 
ing on  himself  the  presiding  judge's  reproof  for  transgression 
of  the  rules  of  advocacy.  The  culmination  is  attained  in 
the  reply  of  the  Attorney-General.  Nothing,  unless  it  is  of 
the  most  temporary  interest,  is  omitted  in  these  two  speeches, 
and  every  reference  and  argument  in  them  -will  be  intelligible 
in  the  light  of  the  examinations  and  cross-examinations  as 
given,  which,  not  less  than  the  speeches,  are  classic  examples  of 
the  forensic  art. 

There  is  a  tradition  that  Palmer,  a  racing  man,  expressed 
his  sense  of  the  deadly  effect  of  Sir  Alexander  Cockburn's 
examination,  cross-examination,  and  speech  in  racecourse 
language,  "  It  was  the  riding  that  did  it." 

With  the  Lord  Chief-Justice's  summing  up  I  have  dealt 
freely.  It  occupied  two  days,  and  the  form  of  it,  to  a  great 
extent,  was  this.  Lord  Campbell  would  say  to  the  jury, 
"  Now,  gentlemen,  I  will  take  the  witness  So-and-So  and  read 
you  his  evidence.  It  is  for  you  to  say  what  the  effect  of 
this  evidence  is."  Then  would  follow  comments  directing 
the  jury's  attention  to  this  or  that  feature.  What  the  jury 
thought  is  not  important  now,  but  what  the  reader  thinks 
with  the  evidence  before  him.  Where  Lord  Campbell  made 
special  comment  on  any  particular  evidence  the  passages  are 
given.  Nothing  material  is  omitted,  and  the  general  effect 
of  his  address  is  preserved. 

The  events  occurred  in  November,  1855,  at  Rugeley,  in 
Staffordshire,  where  Palmer,  who  was  about  thirty-one  years 
of  age,  had  been  a  medical  practitioner  until  two  or  three  years 
previously,  when  he  transferred  his  business  to  the  Mr.  Thirlby 
mentioned  in  the  report.  He  had  abandoned  medicine  for 
the  turf,  kept  racehorses,  attended  race  meetings,  and  betted. 
By  the  year  1853  he  was  in  pecuniary  difficulties,  and  was 
raising  money  on  bills  with  moneylenders. 

Mr.  John  Parsons  Cook,  whom  Palmer  was  charged  with 
poisoning,  was  a  young  man  of  about  twenty-eight  who  had 
been  articled  as  a  solicitor,  but  he  inherited  some  £12,000,  and 
did  not  follow  his  profession.  He  also  went  on  the  turf, 
kept  racehorses,  and  betted,  and  it  was  in  this  common 
pursuit  that  Palmer  and  Cook  became  acquainted. 

Palmer's  pecuniary  circumstances  in  1854  are  important. 
He  had  raised  money  on  a  bill  for  £2000,  and  discounted  it 
with  Padwiok,  a  notorious  moneylender  and  racing  man  of 

3 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

the  day.  He  had  forged  his  mother's  name  as  acceptor,  and, 
as  she  was  wealthy,  the  bill  had  been  discounted  on  the 
security  of  her  name.  It  was  this  bill  and  others  similarly 
forged  which,  according  to  the  prosecution,  led  to  the  murder 
of  Cook. 

Previously  to  this  Palmer  had  only  been  able  to  pay  off 
debts  to  the  amount  of  £13,000  on  bills  which  were  in  the 
hands  of  another  moneylender,  Mr.  Pratt,  who  figures  so 
conspicuously  in  the  trial,  out  of  money  received  on  the  death 
of  his  wife,  whom  he  had  insured  for  £13,000. 

At  the  close  of  1854  he  took  out  another  policy  for  £13,000 
on  the  life  of  his  brother  Walter.  This  policy  was  deposited 
as  security  with  Pratt  to  cover  a  series  of  bills  which  began 
then  to  be  discounted.  These,  by  November,  1855,  amounted 
to  £11,500.  His  mother's  name  as  acceptor  had  also  been 
forged  on  these  bills  by  Palmer. 

In  the  month  of  August,  1855,  Walter  Palmer  died,  but  the 
office  refused  to  pay  on  the  policy,  and  the  question  was  still 
in  dispute  in  November  when  the  death  of  Mr.  Cook  occurred. 
If  the  policy  were  not  paid  Pratt  would  sue  Mrs.  Palmer,  as 
Palmer  himself  had  no  means,  so  that  Palmer  was  in  the 
same  peril  of  being  shown  to  be  a  forger  both  by  Pratt  and 
Padwick. 

This  policy  was  never  paid,  and  we  may  add  that  when 
Palmer  was  tried  for  the  murder  of  Cook  there  were  two  other 
indictments  against  him  for  the  murders  of  his  wife  and 
brother,  but  they  were  not  proceeded  with  as  he  was  convicted 
on  the  Cook  charge. 

What  happened  about  the  bills  was  this.  On  the  6th 
of  November  Pratt  issued  two  writs  for  £4000  against 
Palmer  and  his  mother,  but  withheld  them  from  service  pend- 
ing arrangements  that  Palmer  might  make.  Pratt  wrote  to 
him  on  the  13th  of  November,  a  memorable  day  in  the  history 
of  the  case,  when  "  Polestar,"  Cook's  mare,  won  the  Shrews- 
bury Handicap,  that  steps  would  be  taken  to  enforce  the  policy 
on  Walter  Palmer's  life;  so  that  Palmer's  problem  was  to 
keep  paying  portions  of  the  bills  until  the  question  of  the 
policy  was  settled,  and  thus  keep  Pratt  quiet. 

The  pecuniary  position  of  Cook  is  quickly  explained.  He 
had  practically  nothing  but  what  came  to  him  through  the 
winning  of  "  Polestar "  at  Shrewsbury  on  the  13th  of 
November.  His  betting  book  showed  winnings  which 

4 


Introduction. 

amounted,  with  the  stakes,  to  £2050.  It  was  proved  that 
he  had  £700  or  £800  in  his  pocket  at  Shrewsbury  from  the 
bets  he  actually  drew  there,  and  £1020  remained  to  be  settled 
at  Tattersall's  on  the  following  Monday,  the  19th  November. 

The  evidence  will  show  how  Palmer  obtained  payment  of  the 
bets  with  the  exception  of  £120,  and  applied  them  to  paying 
instalments  on  Pratt' s  bills. 

We  now  come  to  the  circumstances  of  the  illness  and  death 
of  Cook.  Palmer  and  Cook  went  together  from  Rugeley  to 
Shrewsbury  races,  and  stayed  at  the  Raven  Hotel.  On  the 
night  of  the  14th  of  November,  and  the  day  after  "  Polestar  " 
had  won  the  race,  Cook  was  taken  ill  at  the  Raven  with 
severe  retchings  and  vomitings  in  consequence  of  having  taken 
a  glass  of  brandy  and  water  into  which  the  prosecution  alleged 
Palmer  had  put  antimony  in  the  form  of  tartar  emetic.  The 
only  direct  testimony  as  to  this  was  that  of  a  Mrs.  Brooks, 
who  attended  races.  She  knew  Palmer,  and  called  on  him 
at  the  Raven  on  some  business  connected  with  racing.  She 
swore  that,  as  she  turned  into  the  lobby,  she  saw  Palmer 
holding  up  a  tumbler  to  the  light  of  the  gas,  looking  at  it 
"  with  the  caution  of  a  man  who  was  watching  to  see  what  was 
the  condition  of  the  liquid,"  according  to  the  Attorney- 
General's  statement.  Having  looked  at  it  so  he  withdrew  to 
his  own  room,  and  presently  returned  with  the  glass  in  his 
hand,  and  then  went  into  the  room  where  Cook  was,  and 
where  he  drank  the  brandy  and  water.  There  was  much 
evidence  from  other  witnesses  as  to  what  happened  in  con- 
nection with  the  brandy  and  water  incident. 

The  state  of  Cook's  health  previous  to  the  incident  at  Shrews- 
bury was  of  the  utmost  importance.  It  was  admitted  by  the 
prosecution  that  Cook  was  delicate  of  chest,  but  otherwise  he 
was  asserted  to  be  hale  and  hearty.  In  May  of  1855  he  had 
consulted  Dr.  Savage  for  supposed  syphilitic  symptoms.  He 
suffered  from  his  throat,  and  had  some  eruptions  about  his 
mouth,  and  he  had  been  taking  mercury.  Dr.  Savage  stopped 
this  treatment,  and  advised  that  the  symptoms  were  not  those 
of  syphilis.  The  post-mortem  showed  the  cicatrised  wound  of 
an  old  chancre,  but  not  of  anything  recent.  The  defence 
sought  to  show  that  Cook's  death  was  connected  with  his 
history  of  ill-health. 

When  the  races  were  over  Palmer  and  Cook  returned  together 
to  Rugeley — a  curious  fact,  seeing  that  Cook  had  accused 

S 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Palmer  of  putting  something  into  his  glass.  Cook  stayed 
at  the  Talbot  Arms,  which  was  opposite  to  Palmer's  house, 
and  it  was  at  this  inn  that  Cook's  death  occurred.  Their 
arrival  was  on  the  night  of  Thurs'day,  the  15th  of  November. 
When  asked  how  he  was  Cook  said  that  he  was  better  than 
he  had  been  at  Shrewsbury.  Cook  dined  next  day  with 
Palmer,  and  nothing  happened  that  night.  Early  on  Satur- 
day morning  Palmer  saw  Cook  in  his  bedroom,  and  ordered 
him  some  coffee,  which  was  brought  there  by  Elizabeth  Mills, 
the  chambermaid,  who  gave  most  important  evidence  as  to 
the  various  episodes  of  the  illness  until  the  death  on  the 
night  of  Tuesday,  the  20th  November.  The  coffee  was  given 
to  Palmer,  and  he  gave  it  to  Cook,  Mills  having  left.  "  Im- 
mediately after  that  the  same  symptoms  set  in  which  had 
taken  place  at  Shrewsbury,  and  throughout  the  whole  of  that 
day  and  the  next  day  "  (Saturday  and  Sunday)  "the  prisoner 
constantly  administered  everything  to  Cook."  One  incident 
was  a  bowl  of  broth  being  obtained  by  Palmer  through  a 
woman  named  Rowley.  She  was  sent  for  it  to  the  Albion, 
an  inn  in  Rugeley.  She  took  it  to  Palmer's  house  and  put 
it  in  a  saucepan  on  the  kitchen  fire  to  warm.  Palmer,  whilst 
she  was  absent  in  the  back  kitchen,  poured  the  broth  into  a 
basin,  brought  it  to  her,  and  told  her  to  take  it  up  to  Cook, 
and  say  Smith  had  sent  it.  This  was  Jeremiah  Smith,  an 
attorney  in  Rugeley,  a  common  friend  of  Palmer  and  Cook. 
A  spoonful  of  the  broth  made  Cook  sick.  But  the  full 
significance  of  this  intended  inference  is  not  seen  until  we  take 
the  evidence  of  Mills  that  she  drank  a  spoonful  and  became 
sick  in  about  half  an  hour,  and  had  to  go  to  bed. 

And  here  we  may  refer  to  the  evidence  of  this  Jeremiah 
Smith,  who  was  called  as  a  witness  on  behalf  of  Palmer.  His 
cross-examination  was  the  most  dramatic  scene  of  the  trial. 
He  was  shown  to  have  been  concerned  with  Palmer  in  the 
insurance  schemes,  and  not  a  rag  of  his  credit  remained.  But 
Sir  James  Stephen  remarks,  "  No  abbreviation  can  give  the 
effect  of  this  cross-examination.  The  witness's  efforts  to  gain 
time,  and  his  distress  as  the  various  answers  were  extorted 
from  him  by  degrees,  may  be  faintly  traced  in  the  report. 
The  witness's  face  was  covered  with  sweat,  and  the  papers 
put  into  his  hands  shook  and  rustled." 

During  Saturday  and  Sunday  Cook  was   attended  by  Mr. 
Bamford,  a  medical  man  in  Rugeley.       As  Mr.  Bamford's  age 
6 


Introduction. 

gave  rise  to  some  observation,  I  may  mention  that  he  was 
eighty.  He  was  told  by  Palmer  on  the  Saturday  that  Cook 
had  had  a  bilious  attack  owing  to  having  taken  too  much 
wine  at  the  dinner  the  day  before,  but  when  Mr.  Bamford 
mentioned  this  Cook  replied  that  he  had  only  two  glasses  of 
champagne,  and  Mr.  Bamford,  in  fact,  found  that  the  symptoms 
were  not  bilious. 

On  Sunday,  as  the  sickness  continued,  Mr.  Bamford  pre- 
pared two  opiate  pills  containing  half  a  grain  of  morphia,  half 
a  grain  of  calomel,  and  four  grains  of  rhubarb.  The  ingredients 
are  important.  The  following  Monday  is  a  crucial  day. 
Palmer  went  to  London  and  saw  Herring,  a  betting  man,  gave 
him  a  list  of  Cook's  winnings,  and  instructed  him  to  attend 
Tattersall's  and  settle.  Herring  was  not  Cook's  regular  agent, 
but  Fisher,  the  man  to  whom  Cook  had  entrusted  his  money 
at  Shrewsbury  whilst  he  was  ill.  Fisher  declared  that  he  had, 
in  fact,  advanced  £200  on  the  strength  of  the  money  which 
Fisher  expected  to  draw  at  Tattersall's.  This  £200,  at  the 
request  of  Cook,  in  a  letter  written  by  him  from  Rugeley  on 
the  16th  of  November  (Friday),  was  applied  by  Fisher  to 
one  of  Pratt' s  acceptances.  This  letter  was  used  by  the 
defence  to  show  that,  as  Palmer  alleged,  the  bills  were  for  the 
joint  transactions  of  himself  and  Cook,  and  by  parity  of 
reasoning  that  Palmer  had  probably  Cook's  authority  to  draw 
his  bets.  Herring  drew  £900  of  the  £1020  at  Tattersall's, 
and,  as  Palmer  had  instructed  him,  he  paid  £450  to  Pratt. 
He  was  also  instructed  to  pay  Padwick  £350  for  a  bet  which 
Padwick  had  won,  partly  from  Palmer  and  partly  from  Cook, 
but  for  which  Palmer  was  liable :  again  a  suggestion  of  joint 
transactions  between  Palmer  and  Cook.  This  payment  was 
to  be  made,  according  to  the  prosecution,  to  keep  Padwick 
quiet  over  his  £2000  forged  acceptance,  half  of  which  remained 
unpaid.  Herring,  however,  did  not  pay  Padwick.  If  he 
had  done  so  he  would  have  been  out  of  pocket,  as  it  had  been 
agreed  between  him  and  Palmer  that  part  of  the  money  he 
was  to  draw  should  be  applied  to  debts  of  his  own  due  from 
Palmer. 

Palmer  finished  his  business  in  town  by  going  to  Pratt. 
He  paid  him  £50,  so  that  this,  the  £450,  and  Fisher's  £200, 
with  £600  Palmer  had  previously  paid,  wiped  off  £1300.  He 
then  returned  to  Rugeley,  arriving  there  at  an  hour  which 
was  certainly  mistaken  by  the  prosecution,  and  which  derived 

7 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

its  chief  importance  from  the  story  told  by  Jeremiah  Smith  of 
his  meeting  Palmer  returning  much  later,  and  the  account  he 
gave  of  their  movements  together.  If  his  story  were  true, 
that  of  the  witness  Newton,  who  spoke  to  the  purchase  by 
Palmer  from  him  of  strychnia  that  night,  would  be  suspect. 
As  it  was,  doubt  was  cast  upon  it  by  Newton  never  mentioning 
it  until  the  day  of  the  trial.  Cook  during  Palmer's  absence 
had  no  sickness,  though  in  the  morning  Palmer,  who  had  gone 
early  to  the  hotel,  had  given  him  coffee,  and  Cook  had 
vomited.  But  after  Palmer  left  for  London  Mr.  Bamford  had 
come,  and  given  him  a  new  medicine.  It  was  arguable,  there- 
fore, that  the  irritation  of  the  stomach  was  soothed  by  the  new 
medicine.  Cook  dressed,  got  up,  recovered  his  spirits,  and 
saw  and  talked  with  several  people,  and  so  he  continued  till 
night.  This  has  the  most  important  bearing,  as  will  be  seen 
by  the  medical  evidence,  on  the  vital  point  whether  Cook's 
symptoms  were  either  those  of  strychnia  poisoning,  or  idio- 
pathic  or  traumatic  tetanus,  or  of  some  other  form  of  nervous 
disease  with  tetanic  convulsions. 

On  Palmer's  return  to  Rugeley  he  went  to  see  Cook,  and  he 
remained,  going  in  and  out  of  his  room,  until  about  eleven 
o'clock.  He  then  left,  and  about  twelve  the  house  was  alarmed 
by  violent  screams  from  Cook's  rooms.  I  shall  refer  the  reader 
for  the  details  of  this  illness  to  the  evidence. 

According  to  the  prosecution  Palmer  had  gone  previously 
on  that  night  to  Newton,  who  was  the  assistant  of  a  surgeon 
at  Rugeley  named  Salt,  and  had  purchased  three  grains  of 
strychnia.  This  was  Newton's  statement.  Whilst  Palmer 
was  away  in  London  Mr.  Bamford  had  sent  to  the  Talbot 
Arms  the  same  sort  of  pills,  in  which  were  morphia,  calomel, 
and  rhubarb.  They  were  taken  by  the  maid  upstairs,  and 
put  in  the  usual  place  for  Palmer  to  administer,  as  he  had 
done  before. 

The  Attorney-General  put  his  case  thus  to  the  jury,  "  It  will 
be  for  you  to  say  whether  Cook  took  the  pills  prepared  by  Mr. 
Bamford,  and  which  he  had  taken  on  the  Saturday  and  Sunday 
night,  or  whether,  as  this  accusation  suggests,  the  prisoner 
substituted  for  the  pills  of  Mr.  Bamford  some  of  his  own 
concoction  in  which  strychnia  was  mixed." 

On  Tuesday  morning,  the  20th,  the  day  of  his  death,  Cook 
was  comparatively  comfortable  after  his  violent  attack. 

That  same  morning  Palmer  went  to  the  shop  of  a  druggist 
8 


Introduction. 

at  Rugeley,  Mr.  Hawkins.  He  asked  for  six  grains  of 
strychnia,  with  some  prussic  acid  and  some  liquor  of  opium. 
While  Hawkins'  assistant  Roberts  was  putting  up  the  prussic 
acid  Newton  came  into  the  shop.  Palmer  took  him  by  the 
arm,  and  saying,  "  I  have  something  I  want  to  say  to  you,"  led 
him  outside,  and  began  to  talk  to  him  about  an  unimportant 
matter.  While  they  were  talking  a  man  Bassington  came 
up,  and  when  he  and  Newton  were  fully  engaged  in  talk 
Palmer  went  back  into  the  shop,  and  stood  in  the  doorway. 
Palmer  went  away  with  what  he  had  bought,  and  then  Newton 
went  into  the  shop  and  inquired  what  Palmer  had  bought, 
and  was  told. 

At  the  preliminary  inquiry  before  the  coroner  Newton  only 
told  of  this  incident  at  the  shop.  He  did  not  tell  of  Palmer 
having  purchased  strychnia  from  him  on  the  Monday  night 
until  the  day  before  the  Attorney-General  was  making  his 
speech  for  the  prosecution.  An  explanation  will  be  found 
in  Newton's  evidence. 

Before  coming  to  the  actual  circumstances  of  Cook's  death 
on  Tuesday  night  two  other  facts  must  be  mentioned.  On 
the  previous  Sunday  Palmer  wrote  to  Mr.  Jones,  a  medical 
man  living  at  Lutterworth,  with  whom  Cook  lived  when  he 
was  at  home.  He  said  Cook  had  a  bilious  attack  with 
diarrhoea,  and  asked  Jones  to  come  and  see  him  as  soon  as 
possible.  On  Monday  he  wrote  to  him  again  desiring  him 
to  come. 

The  Attorney-General  said,  "  I  should  not  be  discharging 
my  duty  if  I  did  not  suggest  this  as  being  part  of  a  deep 
design,  and  that  the  administration  of  the  irritant  poison,  of 
which  abundant  traces  were  found  after  death,  was  for  the 
purpose  of  producing  the  appearance  of  natural  disease,  which 
could  account  afterwards  for  the  death  to  which  the  victim 
was  doomed." 

The  irritant  poison  referred  to  is  antimony,  but  one  of  the 
main  facts,  if  not  altogether  the  most  important  one,  on  which 
the  defence  relied,  was  that  no  strychnia  was  found  in  the 
body  of  Cook. 

Mr.  Jones  came  on  the  Tuesday  about  three  o'clock,  and 
was  with  Cook  throughout  till  his  death. 

The  other  fact  referred  to  is  that  during  the  same  day 
(Tuesday)  Palmer  sent  for  Cheshire,  the  postmaster  at  Rugeley. 
Palmer  produced  a  paper  and  asked  him  to  fill  in  a  cheque 

9 


Trial   of  William   Palmer. 

on  Messrs.  Wetherby  (of  Tattersall's)  in  Palmer's  favour  for 
£350  (the  amount  of  the  Shrewsbury  Handicap  stakes),  saying 
"  Poor  Cook  is  too  ill  to  draw  the  cheque  himself,  and  Messrs. 
Wetherby  might  know  my  handwriting."  Palmer  was  a 
defaulter  at  Tattersall's.  Cheshire  did  what  he  was  asked 
to  do.  Palmer  took  the  cheque  away.  It  was  sent  that 
night,  and  returned  to  Palmer  by  Messrs.  Wetherby.  Notice 
to  produce  the  cheque  was  given  to  the  defence.  This  was 
not  done,  and  the  prosecution  in  these  circumstances  insisted 
that  Cook's  signature  was  forged  by  Palmer.  If  the  cheque 
had  been  produced,  and  Cook's  signature  proved  genuine,  the 
defence  would  have  had  a  strong  case  that  Palmer  drew  the 
bets  by  Cook's  instruction  for  their  joint  transactions. 

Cheshire  was  brought  from  prison  to  give  evidence.  Palmer 
had  induced  him  to  intercept  letters  addressed  to  Palmer's 
mother  to  prevent  her  becoming  aware  of  the  forged  bills. 
Besides  this,  Cheshire  informed  Palmer  of  the  contents  of  a 
letter  from  Dr.  Taylor,  the  analyst,  who  tested  the  remains 
for  poison  after  the  post  mortem  on  the  coroner's  inquiry. 
This  letter  informed  Mr.  Stevens,  Cook's  stepfather,  that  no 
strychnia  had  been  found,  and  Palmer  was  sufficiently  audacious 
and  foolish  to  write  to  the  coroner,  a  Mr.  Ward,  a  lawyer, 
emphasising  this  fact.  More  foolishly  still  he  sent  the  coroner 
gifts  of  game.  The  prosecution  asserted  that  much  of  the 
evidence  given  by  some  of  the  witnesses,  Mills,  for  instance, 
at  the  trial,  but  not  found  in  the  depositions  at  the  inquest, 
had  not  been  given  there  because  the  coroner  had  conducted 
the  inquiry  so  laxly.  The  defence,  of  course,  disputed  this. 

We  come  to  the  actual  scene  of  Cook's  death  on  the  Tuesday 
night.  There  was  a  consultation  of  the  three  doctors  in  Cook's 
presence  at  seven  o'clock.  Cook  suddenly  said  to  Palmer, 
"Palmer,  I  will  have  no  more  medicine  to-night;  no  more 
pills."  It  was  arranged  that  the  pills  should  be  made  up  as 
before  without  Cook  knowing  what  they  contained.  Palmer 
went  with  Mr.  Bamford  to  the  latter's  surgery  for  the  pills, 
and  Mr.  Bamford  was  surprised  at  Palmer's  asking  him  to 
write  the  directions  on  the  box,  as  Palmer  himself  was  to  give 
the  pills,  but  he  did  so.  Palmer  took  the  pills,  and  they 
were  in  his  possession  three-quarters  of  an  hour  before  he 
returned  to  the  Talbot.  On  opening  the  box  he  called  the 
attention  of  Mr.  Jones  to  the  directions,  saying  "  How  wonder- 
ful it  was  that  a  man  of  eighty  should  write  so  good  and 
10 


Introduction. 

strong  a  hand."  Cook  at  first  refused  to  take  the  pills, 
but  Palmer  insisted,  and  Cook  took  them.  They  were  taken 
about  half-past  ten.  A  little  before  twelve  o'clock  Jones,  who 
was  to  sleep  in  Cook's  room,  came  in  and  undressed,  and 
went  to  bed.  In  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  he  was  roused  by 
a  scream  from  Cook,  who  called  out,  "  For  God's  sake,  fetch 
the  doctor,  I  am  going  to  be  ill  as  I  was  last  night." 

I  shall  not  set  out  the  symptoms  of  Cook  throughout  this 
attack  which  ended  in  his  death.  They  were  the  battle-ground 
of  the  case,  and  the  scientific  evidence  must  be  referred  to 
the  reader's  consideration.  But  the  length  of  time  from  the 
administration  of  the  pills  to  the  first  outcry  of  Cook  must 
be  particularly  noted.  The  defence  urged  that  strychnia  could 
not  possibly  be  so  long  in  taking  effect.  This  and  the  non- 
detection  of  strychnia  in  the  body  were  the  two  chief  difficulties 
of  the  prosecution. 

On  Thursday  or  Friday,  the  22nd  or  23rd,  after  Cook's  death 
Palmer  sent  again  for  Cheshire,  and,  producing  a  paper  with 
Cook's  signature,  purporting  to  be  an  acknowledgment  by 
Cook  that  £4000  worth  of  bills  had  been  negotiated  for  Cook's 
benefit,  asked  him  to  sign  it  as  witness.  Cheshire  refused, 
exclaiming,  "  Good  God  1  the  man  is  dead !  "  The  prosecu- 
tion asserted  Cook's  signature  to  be  a  forgery ;  they  gave 
notice  to  produce  the  document,  and  this  was  not  done. 

We  come  to  the  appearance  in  Rugeley  of  Mr.  Stevens, 
Cook's  stepfather.  His  conversations  with  Palmer  on  money 
matters,  his  suspicions  aroused  by  the  appearance  of  the  body, 
Palmer's  ordering  a  coffin  without  his  orders,  and  especially 
the  fact  that  Cook's  betting  book  and  other  papers  had  dis- 
appeared, with  Palmer's  evasions  about  them,  all  put  him 
on  the  alert.  Besides,  at  the  time,  the  inquiries  by  the 
insurance  office  were  going  on  in  the  neighbourhood  about 
Walter  Palmer's  death.  On  Saturday,  the  24th,  both  Stevens 
and  Palmer  had  left  Rugeley  to  go  to  London,  Stevens  to 
consult  his  London  solicitor,  Palmer  to  pay  Pratt  another 
£100,  he,  as  the  prosecution  pointed  out,  not  having  had  any 
money  at  Shrewsbury,  and  having  lost  on  the  races  there. 
Stevens  and  Palmer  met  in  the  train  on  the  return  journey, 
and  Stevens  told  Palmer  that  he  was  determined  to  have  a 
post-mortem  and  to  employ  a  solicitor  to  investigate. 

The  post-mortem,  the  chemical  analysis,  the  coroner's  inquest, 
and  the  trial  followed.  In  the  meantime  Padwick  had 


Trial   of  William  Palmer. 

arrested  Palmer  for  the  debt  on  his  bills,  the  story  of  his 
mother's  forged  acceptances  became  known,  and  the  Palmer 
case  of  1855-6  became  as  intense  a  source  of  popular  curiosity 
and  excitement  as  the  Crippen  case  of  1910.  To  the  circum- 
stances of  the  Cook  case  were  also  added  the  exhumations 
of  Palmer's  \vife  and  brother,  and  the  public  inquiries  relating 
to  them,  and  the  rumours  that  Palmer  had  poisoned  many 
others. 

I  shall  not  attempt  to  give  the  facts  as  to  the  post-mortem 
and  the  analysis.  It  would  be  a  futile  effort.  Not  a  fact 
•was  undisputed  either  by  one  side  or  the  other,  and  the  value 
of  the  evidence,  for  the  reader,  consists  in  the  exercise  of 
the  patience  and  memory  and  judgment  required  to  master 
their  complicated  details,  and  to  see  the  relations  of  one  fact 
to  another.  In  the  speech  for  the  defence  by  Mr.  Serjeant 
Shee,  and  the  final  speech  by  Sir  Alexander  Cockburn,  he  will 
further  see  how  the  same  facts  may  be  rendered  for  opposite 
purposes  by  advocates  of  the  first  rank. 

The  trial  marked  an  important  step  in  English  criminal 
procedure.  In  the  ordinary  course  Palmer  would  have 
been  tried  by  an  Assize  Court  in  Staffordshire,  but  the 
prejudice  against  him  there  was  so  strong  that  it  was  felt 
he  would  not  have  a  fair  trial.  An  Act  was  therefore  passed, 
the  19  Viet.  cap.  16,  for  enabling  the  trial  to  take  place  at 
the  Central  Criminal  Court  in  London.  Since  then  that  Act 
has  been  available  in  any  similar  circumstances.  To  the 
magnitude  and  difficulty  of  the  Palmer  case  must  be  assigned 
the  reason  for  three  judges,  Lord  Chief  Justice  Campbell,  Mr. 
Justice  Cresswell,  and  Mr.  Baron  Alderson  being  appointed  to 
try  it:  a  very  rare  occurrence  in  England.  The  bar  on  each 
eide  was  remarkably  strong.  Sir  Alexander  Cockburn  became 
the  successor  of  Lord  Campbell;  Mr.  Edward  James,  Q.C.,  was 
one  of  the  most  brilliant  advocates  of  his  day,  and  was  only 
prevented  from  rising  to  the  highest  professional  honours  by 
certain  private  incidents  in  his  career  which  happened  subse- 
quently ;  Mr.  Huddleston  became  Baron  Huddleston ;  Mr. 
Bodkin  and  Mr.  Welsby  were  the  leading  men  of  their  time 
in  the  special  practice  of  the  Old  Bailey.  Mr.  Serjeant  Shee, 
the  leader  for  the  defence,  became  Mr.  Justice  Shee,  and  Mr. 
Grove,  Q.C.,  who  was  one  of  the  most  distinguished  physicists 
of  his  day,  and  wrote  a  famous  book  on  "  The  Conservation 
of  Energy,"  became  Mr.  Justice  Grove.  Mr.  Kenealey  was 

12 


Introduction. 

subsequently  the  famous  Dr.  Kenealey,  the  counsel  for  the 
Tichborne  claimant,  a  man  of  great  learning  and  natural 
genius,  inferior  to  none  of  his  professional  contemporaries. 

In  an  English  criminal  trial  an  inquiry  into  the  family  history 
of  the  accused,  or  into  his  personal  character  and  previous 
career,  has  no  place  unless  insanity  is  in  issue.  Such  matters 
were  rigidly  excluded  from  the  trial  of  Palmer.  This  trial 
as  it  stands  is  simply  a  great  forensic  contest  famous  in  the 
records  of  the  criminal  law.  The  criminal  himself  is,  as  it 
were,  an  abstraction  or  automaton,  his  acts  are  only  taken  into 
account  as  part  of  certain  outward  events  which  enter  into  the 
general  body  of  circumstances  connected  with  the  particular 
case.  The  motive  is  investigated,  but  strictly  in  relation  to 
the  particular  crime ;  and  in  atrocious  crimes  the  pecuniary 
motive  always  seems  inadequate.  Deadly  hate  or  fierce  passion, 
or  an  access  of  unreasoning  fear  in  some  circumstances,  may  be 
more  intelligible.  Yet  such  crimes  seem  always  inexplicable, 
unless  we  can  refer  them  to  some  abnormality  in  the  character 
of  the  criminal  Himself,  and  either  ascribe  it  to  his  ancestry  or 
deduce  it  from  his  own  doings  outside  the  culminating  crime 
which  he  commits.  The  normal  man,  we  say,  does  not  become 
base  at  a  stroke. 

In  Palmer's  case  there  is  available  evidence  of  both  kinds 
bearing  on  abnormality.  It  may  not  amount  to  insanity.  It 
may  be  only  the  "  wickedness  "  of  which  Sir  James  Stephen 
speaks  in  a  quotation  given  below.  Whatever  it  may  be  called, 
it  is  traceable  in  Palmer  throughout  his  life. 

Palmer's  father  was  a  wealthy  man  who  died  worth  £70,000, 
at  Rugeley,  in  Staffordshire,  Palmer's  birthplace.  The  origin 
of  this  fortune  began  with  his  maternal  grandfather,  who  had 
been  associated  with  a  woman  in  Derby  whom  he  deserted, 
taking  with  him  some  hundreds  of  pounds  said  to  belong  to  her. 
In  Lichfield  he  became  prosperous  and  respectable.  His 
daughter  married  the  elder  Palmer,  who  was  at  the  time  a 
sawyer,  a  rude,  uneducated  man.  A  previous  suitor  of  Mrs. 
Palmer  had  been  the  steward  of  the  Marquis  of  Anglesea.  The 
two  men  were  intimate  after  the  marriage,  and  associated  in 
dealings  with  the  Anglesea  timber;  and  to  these  dealings,  and 
similar  ones  with  stewards  of  other  estates,  the  elder  Palmer's 
wealth  was  attributed  by  the  country  tradition.  After  her 
husband's  death  Mrs.  Palmer  used  her  freedom  in  several  love 
affairs  that  caused  scandal.  One  of  these  was  with  Jeremiah 

'3 


Trial   of  William  Palmer. 

Smith,  the  attorney,  Palmer's  associate  in  many  nefarious 
transactions,  who  -was  called  for  the  defence,  and  was  cross- 
examined  mercilessly  by  the  Attorney-General  on  his  relations 
with  Mrs.  Palmer. 

William,  the  Palmer  of  this  trial,  was  the  second  son  in  a 
family  of  five  sons  and  two  daughters.  Of  these,  William,  his 
brother  Walter,  and  a  sister  lived  badly  and  died  miserably. 
Walter  would  have  died  from  drink  if  his  brother  William  had 
not  hurried  him  away  by  poison  for  his  insurance  money.  Other 
members  of  the  family  were  reputable  citizens. 

William  Palmer  was  first  apprenticed  to  a  firm  of  wholesale 
druggists  in  Liverpool.  After  a  time  considerable  amounts 
of  money  sent  through  the  post  by  customers  to  the  firm  were 
lost,  and,  after  much  inquiry,  Palmer  confessed  he  had  stolen 
them,  and  his  indentures  were  cancelled.  His  mother  then 
for  the  first  time  began  to  cover  up  her  son's  misdeeds  by 
advances  of  money.  This  story  runs  throughout  the  trial,  and 
Palmer  fleeced  his  mother  without  compunction. 

At  the  age  of  eighteen  he  was  next  apprenticed  to  Mr. 
Tylecote,  a  surgeon,  near  Rugeley.  In  consequence  of  dis- 
creditable conduct  with  women,  and  in  money  matters,  Palmer 
left,  and  Mr.  Tylecote  refused  to  take  him  back.  He  was  then 
admitted  into  the  Stafford  Infirmary  as  "  a  walking  pupil." 
Four  years  after,  in  1846,  he  was  back  at  Rugeley,  and  there, 
at  an  inquest  held  on  a  man  named  Abley,  it  was  proved  that 
Palmer  had  incited  the  man  to  drink  large  quantities  of  brandy. 
There  was  talk  of  Palmer's  connection  with  Abley's  wife,  and 
a  suspicion  that  the  affair  was  something  more  than  a  "  lark." 

ID  this  year  Palmer  went  to  London  and  joined  Bartholomew's 
Hospital.  He  obtained  his  diploma  of  surgeon  in  August,  and 
returned  to  Rugeley  as  a  medical  practitioner.  A  year  after  he 
married  Annie  Brookes,  a  ward  in  Chancery,  the  illegitimate 
daughter  of  a  Colonel  Brookes,  of  the  Indian  Army,  who  had 
settled  in  Stafford,  and  had  as  housekeeper  Mary  Thornton, 
Annie  Brookes's  mother.  By  his  will  Colonel  Brookes  left 
Annie  Brookes  (or  Thornton)  considerable  property  in  money 
and  houses,  but  his  estate  was  administered  in  Chancery.  The 
guardians  were  opposed  to  the  marriage,  but  it  took  place  in 
1847  by  order  of  the  Court.  One  of  the  love-letters  written 
by  Palmer  and  read  by  Serjeant  Shee  during  the  trial  appears 
elsewhere. 
M 


Introduction. 

Whether  Palmer  intended  or  not  at  first  to  settle  down  to 
his  profession,  he  was  almost  without  practice  in  two  or  three 
years  after  his  marriage.  Horses  and  racing  occupied  him 
in  place  of  medicine.  He  had  means  without  practice,  and,  as 
Rugeley  is  a  great  horse-dealing  centre,  he  was  always  familiar 
with  men  connected  with  horses  and  racing,  and  they  were  his 
chosen  company.  In  1853  he  was  in  pecuniary  difficulties  due 
to  his  racing  transactions,  and  was  raising  money  on  bills  with 
moneylenders. 

Withal  he  kept  up  an  appearance  of  great  outward  respecta- 
bility. Church-going  sixty  years  ago  was  more  than  now 
one  of  its  marks.  In  the  diary,  some  extracts  from  which 
will  be  found  in  the  Appendices,  there  are  references 
in  the  year  when  he  poisoned  Cook  to  attendances 
at  the  Sacrament.  It  is  not  necessary  to  read  into 
this  church-going  anything  more  specific  than  the  radical  falsity 
of  Palmer's  character.  Great  formalism  and  profession  of 
rigid  theological  dogma  were  the  usual  mental  furniture  of  the 
middle  classes  of  Palmer's  day.  After  all  the  disclosures  of 
the  trial  Palmer  used  the  customary  pietistic  phrases,  and  it 
was  characteristic  of  the  times  that,  after  his  conviction,  his 
counsel,  Serjeant  Shee,  sent  him  a  beautifully  bound  copy  of 
the  Bible.  The  profession  of  religion,  indeed,  as  a  cloak  to  evil 
seems  to  have  been  purposeless,  as  he  was  notorious  for  seduc- 
tions, as  well  as  of  bad  odour  in  other  details  of  his  life. 

One  intrigue  of  illicit  gallantry,  which  began  probably  in  the 
lifetime  of  Mrs.  Palmer,  and  was  certainly  going  on  at  the  time 
of  Walter  Palmer's  death,  has  a  sinister  connection  with  the 
death  of  Cook.  It  is  not  mentioned  in  any  account  published  of 
Palmer.  Jane  Burgess,  a  young  woman  of  respectable  position 
living  in  Stafford  in  1855,  left,  at  the  house  where  she  resided, 
a  bundle  of  thirty-four  letters  written  to  her  by  Palmer.  They 
show  that  a  practitioner  in  Stafford,  chosen  by  Palmer,  and 
described  by  him  as  one  "  who  would  be  silent  as  death,"  had 
performed  an  illegal  operation.  On  the  13th  of  November  the 
day  notable  in  the  trial,  when  "Polestar,"  Cook's  racehorse, 
won  at  Shrewsbury,  there  is  a  letter  to  her  from  Palmer,  which 
shows  that  she  had  made  a  demand  for  money  as  a  condition 
of  returning  his  letters.  He  was  surprised,  he  wrote,  to  learn 
that  she  had  never  burned  one  of  his  letters.  He  says,  "  I 
cannot  do  what  you  ask ;  /  should  not  mind  giving  £30  for  the 

IS 


Trial   of  William  Palmer. 

whole  of  them,  though  I  am  hard  up  at  present."  Another  letter 
is  dated  the  19th  November,  the  day  on  which  Palmer  was 
accused  of  administering  strychnia  for  the  first  time  to  Cook. 
He  offers  £40  "to  split  the  difference."  On  the  21st,  the 
day  on  which,  in  the  early  morning,  Cook  had  died,  he  sends 
the  halves  of  eight  £5  notes,  and  on  the  24th  the  remainder. 
The  letters  were  probably  never  returned,  because  the  trouble 
threatened  about  Cook's  death  became  common  talk  in  Rugeley 
and  Stafford. 

Shortly  after  his  marriage  began  a  series  of  suspicious 
deaths  which  were  attributed  to  Palmer  after  investigation 
started  into  the  circumstances  attending  the  death  of  Cook.  An 
illegitimate  child  he  had  by  a  Rugeley  woman  died  after  it  had 
visited  him  Mrs.  Thornton,  his  mother-in-law,  was  persuaded 
to  live  at  his  house,  and  she  died  within  a  fortnight.  Palmer 
acquired  property  from  her  by  her  death.  In  1850  a  Mr. 
Bladon,  a  racing  man,  stayed  for  several  days  with  Palmer, 
who  owed  him  £800  for  bets.  Bladon  died  in  circumstances 
very  like  those  attending  Cook's  death,  and  Palmer  buried  him 
with  the  haste  he  attempted  in  the  case  of  Cook,  and  he 
narrowly  escaped  a  similar  accusation. 

In  1854  Palmer  effected  insurances  to  the  amount  of  £13,000 
on  his  wife's  life.  Within  six  months  she  died  much  as  Bladon 
had  died,  and  as  Cook  was  to  die.  Dr.  Bamford,  a  medical 
man  of  eighty-two,  whom  Palmer  seems  to  have  hoodwinked 
into  serving  his  purposes,  certified  the  death  of  Mrs.  Palmer, 
as  he  had  done  the  death  of  Bladon,  and  as  he  was  to  certify 
a  year  later  that  of  Cook.  Palmer  drew  the  insurance  money 
from  the  offices  concerned.  They  were  influenced  by  the  popular 
suspicions  and  rumours  in  Rugeley  and  in  the  sporting  circles 
Palmer  frequented,  but  they  paid  after  some  hesitation  and 
suggestion  of  inquiry,  and  Palmer  was  freed  from  the  most 
pressing  of  his  liabilities.  His  diary  contains  this  entry — 
"  Sept.  29th  (1854),  Friday — My  poor,  dear  Annie  expired  at 
10  past  1."  Nine  days  after  this — "Oct.  8th,  Sunday — At 
church,  Sacrament."  Nine  months  after  his  maidservant, 
Eliza  Tharm,  bore  an  illegitimate  child  to  him.  Within  three 
months  of  his  wife's  death  Palmer,  with  the  assistance  of  Pratt, 
the  moneylender,  whose  claims  had  been  met  by  the  insurance 
on  Mrs.  Palmer's  life,  was  making  proposals  to  various  offices, 
amounting  to  £82,000,  on  the  life  of  his  brother  Walter.  Ulti- 
16 


Introduction. 

mately  an  insurance  for  £13,000  was  effected,  and  the  policy 
was  lodged  with  Pratt  to  secure  advances.  After  this  the 
rest  of  Palmer's  life-history  is  directly  connected  with  the  story 
of  the  trial.  The  account  we  have  given  will  suggest  the, 
perhaps  unprecedented,  interest  with  which  the  trial  was 
anticipated  throughout  the  Midlands,  and  afterwards  with  what 
absorbed  attention  it  was  followed  by  all  England  as  well  as 
on  the  Continent. 

I  conclude  this  sketch  by  quoting  a  characteristic  descrip- 
tion by  Sir  James  Stephen,  who  knew  Palmer,  had 
studied  the  criminal  type,  and  himself  presided  at  one 
of  the  most  famous  trials  for  poisoning.  lie  says  of 
Palmer — "  His  career  supplied  one  of  the  proofs  of  a  fact  which 
many  kind-hearted  people  seem  to  doubt,  namely,  the  fact  that 
such  a  thing  as  atrocious  wickedness  is  consistent  with  good 
education,  perfect  sanity,  and  everything,  in  a  word,  which 
deprives  men  of  all  excuse  for  crime.  Palmer  was  respectably 
brought  up;  apart  from  his  extravagance  and  vice,  he 
might  have  lived  comfortably  enough.  He  was  a  model  of 
physical  health  and  strength,  and  was  courageous,  determined, 
and  energetic.  No  one  ever  suggested  that  there  was  even 
a  disposition  towards  madness  in  him;  yet  he  was  as  cruel,  as 
treacherous,  as  greedy  of  money  and  pleasure,  as  brutally  hard- 
hearted and  sensual  a  wretch  as  it  is  possible  even  to  imagine. 
If  he  had  been  the  lowest  and  most  ignorant  ruffian  that  ever 
sprang  from  a  long  line  of  criminal  ancestors,  he  could  not 
have  been  worse  than  he  was.  He  was  by  no  means  unlike 
Rush,  Thurtell,  and  many  other  persons  whom  I  have  known. 
The  fact  that  the  world  contains  an  appreciable  number  of 
wretches,  who  ought  to  be  exterminated  without  mercy  when 
an  opportunity  occurs,  is  not  quite  so  generally  understood  as 
it  ought  to  be — many  common  ways  of  thinking  and  feeling 
virtually  deny  it." 


Leading  Dates  in  the  Palmer  Trial. 

1855. 

August  .  Walter  Palmer,  William  Palmer's  brother,  dies. 
Payment  of  policy  on  his  life  for  £13,000 
assigned  to  William  Palmer,  and  held  by 
Pratt,  moneylender,  as  security,  refused  by 
insurance  office.  Negotiations  about  it 
continue  up  to  Cook's  death. 

Nov.  6.  Writs  issued  by  Pratt  against  Palmer  and  his 
mother  for  £4000,  Mrs.  Palmer's  acceptance 
being  forged.  Writs  not  served,  for  Palmer 
to  have  opportunity  of  raising  instalments. 

,,  13.  (Tuesday)  Palmer  and  Cook  go  together  from 
Rugeley  to  Shrewsbury  Races.  Cook's  mare, 
"Polestar,"  wins  Shrewsbury  Handicap, 
and  he  has  in  his  possession,  in  consequence, 
£700  or  £800,  and  is  entitled  to  stakes  of 
£350  and  bets,  to  be  paid  at  Tattersall's  the 
Monday  following,  of  over  £1000. 

„  14.  (Wednesday  night)  Cook  ill  at  the  Raven, 
Shrewsbury,  where  he  and  Palmer  stayed. 
Palmer  is  alleged  to  have  dosed  his  drink. 

,,        15.     Palmer's  horse,   "Chicken,"    beaten   in  his  race, 

and  Palmer  loses  heavily. 

Cook   and  Palmer  return  to   Rugeley,   and  Cook 
puts  up  at  the  Talbot. 

,,  16.  Cook  dines  with  Palmer  and  Jeremiah  Smith. 
Cook  apparently  in  usual  health. 

,,  17.  (Saturday)  Cook  ill  in  bed,  with  the  same 
symptoms  as  at  Shrewsbury. 

,,  18.  (Sunday)  His  illness  continues,  and  during  the 
two  days  Palmer  is  in  constant  attendance, 
and  orders  and  administers  food,  drink,  and 
medicine.  Dr.  Bamford  called  in. 

,,        19.     (Monday)     Palmer  goes  to   London  and  arranges 
with  Herring  to  draw  Cook's  bets  at  Tatter- 
sails  and  make  payments  to  Pratt  and  Pad- 
wick,  the  moneylenders. 
Cook  is  better  all  the  Monday  while  Palmer  is 

away. 
18 


Trial  of   William  Palmer. 

1855. 

Nov.  19.  Palmer  returns  in  the  evening.  Goes  to  Newton, 
the  assistant  of  Mr.  Salt,  surgeon  at  Rugeley, 
and  purchases  3  grains  of  strychnia.  Is  in 
and  out  of  Cook's  room  up  to  eleven  o'clock. 
Gives  Cook  pills,  and  leaves  about  eleven 
o'clock.  These  pills  were  professedly  those 
sent  by  Dr.  Bamford,  but  were  alleged  by  the 
prosecution  to  have  been  substituted  by 
Palmer  with  others  containing  strychnia. 
Jeremiah  Smith  gave  evidence  that  Cook  had 
taken  Dr.  Bamford's  pills  before  Palmer's 
arrival. 

About  twelve  o'clock  Cook  is  taken  ill  with  violent 
spasms,  and  awakens  household  with  violent 
screaming.  Palmer  is  sent  for. 

,,  20.  (Tuesday)  Cook  "  comparatively  comfortable  "  in 
the  morning. 

Palmer  during  the  day  purchases  from  Roberts, 
the  assistant  at  the  shop  of  Mr.  Hawkins, 
druggist  at  Rugeley,  prussic  acid,  6  grains 
of  strychnia,  and  liquor  of  opium. 

Palmer  requests  Cheshire,  the  Rugeley  postmaster, 
to  fill  up  cheque  on  Wetherby  for  Cook's 
stakes  won  at  Shrewsbury. 

Mr.  Jones,  surgeon,  of  Lutterworth,  Cook's  most 
intimate  friend,  comes,  at  Palmer's  request, 
to  stay  with  Cook. 

Pills  again  made  up  by  Dr.  Bamford  at  his  house 
and  taken  away  by  Palmer.  Pills  adminis- 
tered by  Palmer  at  10.30.  Jones  sleeps  in 
Cook's  room.  Cook  taken  ill  again  as  on 
Monday,  about  twelve  o'clock,  and  in  a  few 
minutes  dies.  Palmer  had  been  sent  for,  and 
was  present  at  the  death. 

„  21.  (Wednesday)  Wetherby  declines  to  pay  £350 
cheque,  as  the  stakes  were  not  received  from 
Shrewsbury. 

Palmer    writes    to     Pratt    that    he    must    have 

"  Polestar." 

,,  22.  Palmer  goes  to  London  and  pays  Pratt  £100;  he 
had  no  money  at  Shrewsbury,  and  lost  on  the 
races. 

,,  23.  Palmer  at  Rugeley  again;  sees  Cheshire,  and 
desires  him  to  witness  a  document  purporting 
to  be  signed  by  Cook  acknowledging  £4000 
of  bills  to  have  been  negotiated  by  Palmer  for 
Cook. 

19 


Introduction. 

1855. 

Nov.  23.  Mr.  Stevens,  Cook's  stepfather,  arrives  in  Ruge- 
ley,  sees  Palmer,  and  discusses  Cook's  affairs 
and  the  funeral.  Cook's  betting  book  and 
papers  not  found.  Coffin  ordered  by  Palmer 
without  Stevens's  knowledge.  Stevena 
notices  unusual  appearance  of  the  body; 
returns  to  London  and  consults  a  solicitor, 
who  gives  him  introduction  to  Mr.  Gardner, 
solicitor  in  Rugeley.  Stevens  and  Palmer 
meet  on  the  train  from  London  to  Rugeley, 
and  Stevens  informs  Palmer  that  he  intends 
to  have  a  post-mortem. 

,,        25.     (Sunday)     Palmer  applies  to  Dr.  Bamford  for  death 

certificate,  which  is  given  for  apoplexy. 
Sends  for  Newton,  and  has  a  conversation  about 
the  effects  of  strychnia. 

,,        26.     Post-mortem  examination;  Palmer  is  present,  and 

acts  suspiciously. 

Mr.  Stevens  takes  jars,  with  contents  from  the 
body,  to  London  for  analysis  to  be  made  by 
Professor  Taylor. 

Dec.  6.  Cheshire,  having  opened  Professor  Taylor's  letter 
to  Mr.  Gardner,  containing  account  of 
analysis,  tells  Palmer  strychnia  or  other 
poisons,  with  the  exception  of  traces  of  anti- 
mony, have  not  been  found. 

,,          8.     Palmer    writes    to    the    coroner    as    to    Professor 
Taylor's  letter. 

„        14.     Inquest,  at  which  Professor  Taylor  gives  evidence. 
Verdict  of  "wilful  murder"  returned. 
Palmer,  who  was  in  custody  of  Sheriff's  officer  for 
the  bills,  is  arrested  on  the  verdict  and  taken 
to  Stafford  Gaol. 


20 


THE  TRIAL. 


Within  the  Central  Criminal  Court, 

Old  Bailey,  London. 
WEDNESDAY,  14xn  MAY,  1856. 
The  Court  met  at  Ten  o'clock. 


Judges — 

LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE  CAMPBELL. 
MR.  JUSTICE  CRESSWELL. 
MR.  BARON  ALDERSON. 


Counsel  for  the  Crown — 

THE  ATTORNEY-GENERAL  (Sir  Alexander  Gockburri). 
Mr.  EDWARD  JAMES,  Q.C. 
Mr.  BODKIN. 
Mr.  WELSBY. 

Mr.   HUDDLESTON. 


Counsel  for  the  Prisoner — 
Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE. 
Mr.  GROVE,  Q.C. 
Mr.  GRAY. 
Mr.  KENEALEY. 


ai 


Evidence  for   Prosecution. 

The  prisoner,  William  Palmer,  surgeon,  of  Rugeley,  aged 
thirty-one  was  indicted  for  having  at  Rugeley,  county  of 
Stafford,  on  21st  November,  1855,  feloniously,  wilfully,  and 
with  malice  aforethought,  committed  murder  on  the  person  of 
John  Parsons  Cook. 

On  being  called  upon  the  prisoner  pleaded  not  guilty. 

The  jury  having  been  duly  empanelled  and  sworn,  the 
Attorney-General  opened  the  case  for  the  Crown.1 


Evidence  for  the  Prosecution. 

ISHMABL  FISHER,  examined  by  Mr.  JAMES — I  am  a  wine  ishmaei 
merchant.  I  attend  races  occasionally,  and  knew  the  deceased,  Fisher 
John  Parsons  Cook,  for  about  two  years.  I  was  at  Shrewsbury 
Races  in  November,  1855,  and  I  remember  the  race  for  the 
Shrewsbury  Handicap  won  with  a  mare  called  "  Polestar," 
the  property  of  Mr.  Cook.  That  was  on  Tuesday,  the  13th 
of  November.  I  saw  Mr.  Cook,  the  deceased,  that  day  upon 
the  course.  He  appeared  in  his  usual  health  and  spirits.  At 
Shrewsbury  I  stopped  at  the  Raven  Hotel.  I  know  Palmer,  the 
prisoner,  very  well.  I  have  known  him  a  little  longer  than  I 
have  known  Mr.  Cook.  Mr.  Cook  and  Mr.  Palmer  were  also 
stopping  at  the  Raven  Hotel,  and  were  occupying  a  room  near 
me.  There  was  only  a  wooden  partition  between  my  room 
and  theirs.  Between  eleven  and  twelve  on  the  night  of  Wed- 
nesday I  went  into  the  sitting  room,  in  which  Mr.  Cook  and  Mr. 
Palmer  and  Mr.  Myatt  were.  Myatt  is  a  saddler  at  Rugeley, 
and  is  a  friend  of  Palmer.  They  each  appeared  to  have  some  grog 
before  them.  In  my  presence  Mr.  Cook  asked  Mr.  Palmer  to 
have  some  more  brandy  and  water.  Mr.  Palmer  said,  "  I  shall 
not  have  any  more  till  you  have  drunk  yours."  Mr.  Cook  said 
then,  "  I  will  drink  mine,"  and  he  took  up  his  glass  and  drank 
it  at  a  drop,  or  he  might  have  made  two  drops  of  it.  After 
he  had  drunk  it  he  said,  "  There  is  something  in  it."  He  also 
said,  "  It  burns  my  throat  dreadfully."  Mr.  Palmer  then  got 
up  and  took  up  the  glass.  He  sipped  up  what  was  left  of  the 
glass,  and  said,  "  There  is  nothing  in  it."  There  appeared  to 
be  certainly  not  more  than  a  teaspoonful  left  by  Mr.  Cook.  At 
that  time  a  Mr.  Reid,  whom  I  knew,  came  in.  He  is  a  wine 
merchant,  and  attends  races.  After  Palmer  had  put  his  glass 
to  his  mouth  and  said,  "  There  is  nothing  in  it,"  he  handed  the 
glass  to  Reid,  and  asked  him  if  he  thought  there  was  anything 

1  See  Introduction,  p.  2. 

23 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

ishmaei  in  it.  The  glass  was  also  handed  to  me.  We  each  said  the 
glass  being  so  empty  we  could  not  recognise  anything.  I  said 
I  thought  there  was  rather  a  strong  scent  upon  it,  only  I  could 
not  detect  anything  besides  brandy.  About  ten  minutes  after 
this  Cook  retired  from  the  room.  Cook  then  came  back  and 
called  me  out  of  the  room,  and  I  went  with  him  into  my  sitting 
room.  Cook  at  that  time  was  very  ill.  He  had  been  sick.  He 
said  he  had  been  very  sick,  and  he  thought  that  Palmer  had 
dosed  him.  On  that  occasion  he  handed  me  over  a  sum  of 
money,  between  £700  and  £800  in  bank  notes.  It  was  given 
to  me  to  be  taken  care  of.  He  did  not  say  till  when.  Mr. 
Palmer  and  Mr.  Cook  jointly  occupied  a  sitting  room.  They 
occupied  different  bedrooms.  After  Cook  had  given  me  this 
money  he  was  immediately  seized  with  sickness.  I  saw  him  in 
the  same  room  and  in  his  own  bedroom.  He  again  complained 
of  suffering  during  the  time  he  was  absent,  and  said  he  had 
been  again  very  sick.  He  asked  me  to  go  with  him  to  his 
bedroom,  which  I  did.  A  Mr.  Jones,  a  stationer,  went  with  me 
to  his  bedroom.  While  we  were  there  he  was  violently  vomiting 
again,  so  much  so  that  we  thought  it  right  to  send  for  the 
doctor,  Mr.  Gibson.  We  left  him  that  morning  in  his  room 
about  two  o'clock  or  a  little  after.  Mr.  Gibson  came  about 
half-past  twelve  or  a  quarter  to  one.  I  again  sent  for  Mr. 
Gibson,  as  Cook  was  so  ill.  The  second  time  I  sent  was  about 
one,  as  near  as  I  can  remember.  After  taking  some  medicine 
Cook  became  more  composed.  The  medicine  was  sent  by  Mr. 
Gibson,  but  he  did  not  administer  it  himself.  Mr.  Jones  and 
myself  gave  him  the  medicine.  The  next  morning  about  ten 
o'clock  I  saw  Palmer  in  my  own  sitting  room.  He  was  in  the 
sitting  room  when  I  got  downstairs.  He  said  that  Cook  had 
been  stating  he  had  given  him  something  last  night,  that  he 
had  been  putting  something  in  his  brandy,  or  something  to  that 
effect.  Palmer  said  he  never  played  such  tricks  with  people. 
He  said,  "I  can  tell  you  what  he  was;  he  was  very  drunk." 
Cook  certainly  was  not  drunk.  I  did  not  see  him  at  dinner, 
but  I  saw  him  some  time  after,  and  from  what  I  observed  of 
him  he  was  certainly  sober.  On  the  same  morning  Mr.  Cook 
came  up  to  my  bedroom  after  he  had  got  up.  He  was  looking 
very  ill.  I  gave  him  back  his  money.  On  that  day  (Thursday) 
I  saw  Mr.  Cook  on  the  racecourse  at  Shrewsbury.  It  would  be 
about  three  o'clock.  He  looked  very  ill.  I  frequently  had  been 
in  the  habit  of  settling  his  bets  for  him  when  he  did  not  settle 
them  himself.  I  was  in  the  habit  of  paying  and  receiving  for 
him  at  Tattersall's  and  other  places.  At  Shrewsbury  I  saw 
Cook's  betting  book  in  his  possession.  It  was  a  little  more  than 
half  the  size  of  this  (a  small  memorandum  book).  As  nearly 
as  I  can  remember,  it  was  very  nearly  this  colour  (a  dark 
colour).  On  the  17th,  which  was  Saturday,  I  paid  to  Mr.  Pratt, 

24 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

by  direction  of  Mr.  Cook,  £200  in  a  cheque.     As  his  agent  I  Ishmael 
expected  to  settle  his   Shrewsbury  account  at  TattersalTs  on  Flsher 
the  following  Monday,  and  I  should  have  been  entitled  to  deduct 
the  £200.     That  was  the  course  of  dealing  between  us,  but  I 
did  not  settle  that  account,  as  it  turned  out. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — I  have  known  Mr. 
Palmer  a  little  longer  than  Mr.  Cook.  I  knew  that  they  were 
a  good  deal  connected  with  racing  transactions.  They 
appeared  to  be  very  intimate,  and  were  a  great  deal  together. 
They  generally  stayed  at  the  same  hotels.  I  knew  that  C06k 
won  considerably  at  Shrewsbury.  I  knew  that  "  Polestar  "  was 
his  mare.  I  do  not  know  whether  Palmer  also  won.  I  saw 
Mr.  Cook  after  the  race  on  the  course.  He  appeared  very  much 
elated  and  gratified.  "  Polestar "  won  easily.  In  the  room 
to  which  I  went  in  the  evening,  in  which  Mr.  Cook,  Mr.  Palmer, 
and  Mr.  Myatt  were,  I  remember  seeing  a  glass  before  Mr. 
Palmer  and  before  Mr.  Cook.  I  could  not  answer  for  Myatt's 
glass.  I  believe  there  was  one  decanter  on  the  table.  I  did 
not  observe  sufficiently  the  glasses  to  see  whether  both  had  been 
drinking.  Mr.  Cook  asked  me  to  take  some  brandy.  I  do 
not  recollect  drinking  any,  but  I  cannot  positively  remember. 
I  was  not  tipsy.  I  do  not  think  I  drank  anything.  I  believe 
I  am  a  good  judge  of  brandy  by  the  smell.  I  smelt  this  glass, 
and  said  that  it  had  a  strong  smell  about  it,  but  I  thought 
there  was  nothing  in  it  unlike  brandy.  The  glass  was  perfectly 
empty,  and  had  been  completely  drained.  I  had  been  in  the 
Unicorn  in  the  evening  before  this  occurred.  I  saw  both  Cook 
and  Palmer  at  the  Unicorn  on  Wednesday  night  about  nine 
o'clock,  or  between  nine  and  ten.  I  cannot  say  if  he  was  drinking 
then.  I  do  not  know  that  a  good  number  of  people  happened 
to  be  ill  at  Shrewsbury  on  that  Wednesday  or  Tuesday.  I  had 
a  friend  who  was  rather  poorly  there  from  a  different  kind  of 
illness  to  Mr.  Cook.  Wednesday  was  rather  dull.  I  do  not 
know  that  it  rained,  but  it  was  damp  under  foot  I  remember. 
I  saw  Mr.  Cook  about  the  racecourse  several  times  on  Wednes- 
day. On  Thursday  I  remember  the  weather  was  rather  cold 
and  damp,  but  I  cannot  say  whether  it  rained  or  not.  On  the 
16th  or  17th  of  November  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Cook, 
dated  Rugeley,  16th  November,  1855 — 

Dear  Fisher, — It  is  of  very  great  importance  to  both  Mr.  Palmer 
and  myself  that  the  sum  of  £500  should  be  paid  to  Mr.  Pratt,  of 
Queen  Street,  Mayfair,  to-morrow,  without  fail.  £300  has  been  sent 
up  to-night,  and  if  you  will  be  kind  enough  to  pay  the  other  £200 
to-morrow  on  receipt  of  this,  you  will  greatly  oblige  me.  I  will  eettle 
it  on  Monday  at  Tattersall'a.  I  am  much  better. 

I  received  this  on  the  17th  at  No.  4  Victoria  Street,  London. 
I  considered  that  Palmer  and  Cook  were  for  some  time  jointly 

25 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

connected  \vith  racing  transactions,  but  there  is  no  proof  of 
it.  Cook  was  not  more  elated  after  winning  than  people  usually 
are. 

Thomas  THOMAS  JONES,  examined  by  Mr.  WBLSBT — I  am  a  law 
stationer,  and  was  at  Shrewsbury  Races  last  November.  I 
stayed  at  the  Raven.  On  the  Monday  night  Cook  supped  with 
me  and  some  other  friends.  He  appeared  well  on  that  occasion, 
as  he  also  did  on  the  Tuesday  and  Wednesday.  On  Wednesday 
night,  between  eleven  and  twelve,  Mr.  Cook  came  into  my  room 
at  the  Raven  and  invited  me  into  his.  I  went  there,  and  found, 
amongst  other  people  in  the  room,  Palmer.  After  the  party 
broke  up  Mr.  Fisher  said  something  to  me  about  Cook,  in 
consequence  of  which  I  went  up  to  Cook's  bedroom.  I  found 
him  there,  and  he  complained  of  a  burning  in  his  throat.  He 
was  vomiting.  Some  pills  and  a  draught  were  brought.  Mr. 
Cook  refused  to  take  the  pills,  in  consequence  of  which  I  went 
to  the  doctor,  Mr.  Gibson,  and  got  some  liquid  medicine  from 
him,  which  I  brought  back  and  gave  to  Mr.  Cook.  He  drank 
about  a  wineglassful  of  the  medicine,  and  after  that  he  alsa 
took  some  of  the  pills.  Next  morning,  between  six  and  seven, 
I  again  saw  him.  He  looked  pale,  and  appeared  to  be  unwell. 

George  Reid  GEORGE  REID,  examined  by  Mr.  BODKIN — I  was  acquainted 
with  the  deceased  Mr.  Cook  and  the  prisoner  Palmer.  I  saw 
them  at  Shrewsbury  Races  in  November.  On  the  Tuesday  and 
Wednesday  Cook  appeared  to  be  in  his  usual  health.  On 
Wednesday  night  I  went  into  the  room  at  the  Raven  where 
Palmer  and  Cook  were.  There  was  another  gentleman  present. 
We  had  a  glass  of  brandy  and  water  before  the  time  to  rest. 
Almost  immediately  after  I  arrived  there  I  noticed  that  Cook 
was  in  pain.  I  heard  him  say  to  Mr.  Palmer  there  was  some- 
thing in  the  brandy  and  water.  Mr.  Palmer  handed  me  the 
glass  to  taste  from  it.  I  said,  "What  is  the  use  of  handing 
me  the  glass  when  it  is  empty?  "  The  next  time  I  saw  Cook 
was  about  eleven  o'clock  the  next  morning.  He  said  he  was 
very  ill. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  SHEE — I  should  consider  that 
Cook's  general  state  of  health  was  delicate.  He  always  had  a 
pallid  complexion,  and  did  not  look  like  a  strong  man. 

W.  S.  Gibson  WILLIAM  SCAPE  GIBSON,  examined  by  Mr.  HUDDLESTON — 
I  am  assistant  to  Mr.  Heathcote,  surgeon,  at  Shrews- 
bury. On  14th  November  last,  between  twelve  and  one 
at  night,  I  was  sent  for  to  the  Raven  Hotel,  and 
saw  there  Mr.  Cook  in  his  bedroom.  He  was  not  in  bed.  He 
complained  of  pain  in  his  stomach  and  heat  in  his  throat,  and 

2t> 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

said  he  thought  he  had  been  poisoned.  His  pulse  was  about  W.  S.  Gibson 
90;  his  tongue  was  perfectly  clean.  I  advised  him  to  take  an 
emetic,  which  he  did,  and  he  was  then  very  sick.  Nothing 
came  away  but  water.  I  sent  him  two  pills  and  a  draught. 
The  pills  consisted  of  rhubarb  and  3  grains  of  calomel.  The 
draught  consisted  of  mistura  sennacum.  Later  on  in  the 
same  night  I  gave  Mr.  Jones  some  medicine  for  Cook.  I  never 
saw  Cook  after  that  occasion. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — I  treated  Cook  as  if 
he  had  taken  poison.  I  took  him  at  his  word,  that  he  had 
taken  poison,  not  from  his  symptoms.  He  seemed  a  little 
excited  by  drink. 

ELIZABETH  MILLS,  examined  by  Mr.  JAMES — I  was  E.  Mills 
chambermaid  at  the  Talbot  Arms  at  Rugeley  in  Novem- 
ber last.  I  had  been  there  about  two  years.  I 
knew  the  prisoner.  He  was  in  the  habit  of  coming  to  the 
Talbot  Arms.  I  remember  on  Thursday,  the  15th,  between 
nine  and  ten  at  night,  Mr.  Cook,  along  with  Mr.  Palmer,  came 
to  the  Talbot  Arms.  He  retired  to  rest  between  ten  and  eleven. 
He  said  he  had  been  poorly,  and  was  feeling  poorly  then.  The 
next  morning  he  got  up  about  twelve  o'clock,  and  said  he  felt 
no  worse,  but  still  he  was  not  well.  That  night  he  retired 
to  bed  about  half-past  ten.  He  said  he  had  been  to  Mr. 
Palmer's  and  had  dined  there.  On  Saturday  morning 
about  eight,  Palmer,  who  lived  opposite  to  the  Talbot  Arms, 
came  over.  He  ordered  a  cup  of  coffee  for  Mr.  Cook,  which 
I  believe  I  gave  to  Mr.  Cook  in  his  bedroom.  Mr.  Palmer  was 
in  the  room  at  the  time.  I  did  not  see  Cook  drink  it,  but 
about  half  an  hour  afterwards  I  returned  into  the  room  and 
found  that  the  coffee  had  been  vomited.  On  that  occasion  I 
observed  a  jug  in  the  room  which  did  not  belong  to  the  Talbot 
Arms.  It  was  sent  down  to  me  by  Lavinia  Barnes  to  make 
some  more  toast  and  water.  During  that  Saturday  I  saw  Palmer 
perhaps  four  or  five  times  in  Cook's  room.  I  heard  him  say 
to  Mr.  Cook  that  he  would  send  over  some  broth.  I  did  not 
see  it  brought  over,  but  I  saw  the  broth  in  the  kitchen.  The 
cook  told  me  that  it  had  come  over  from  Mrs.  Rowley.  The 
broth  had  not  been  made  at  the  Talbot  Arms.  Later  in  the 
day  I  took  up  the  broth  to  Mr.  Cook.  About  a  quarter  of  an 
hour  after  the  broth  came  over  I  met  Palmer  coming  up  the 
stairs  to  Cook's  room.  He  asked  if  Cook  had  had  his  broth. 
I  told  him  I  did  not  know  that  any  was  come  for  him.  During 
this  conversation  Lavinia  Barnes  came  forward  and  said  she 
had  taken  up  the  broth  to  Mr.  Cook  as  soon  as  it  had  come, 
and  he  had  refused  to  take  it,  saying  that  it  would  not  stay 
in  his  stomach.  Palmer  said  that  I  must  go  and  fetch  the 
broth,  which  I  did,  and  took  it  into  the  room.  Mr.  Palmer  was 

27 


Trial   of  William  Palmer. 

B.  Mills  there,  and  I  left  the  broth  in  the  room.  About  an  hour  and 
a  half  afterwards  I  went  up  to  the  room  again  and  found  that 
the  broth  had  been  vomited.  About  six  o'clock  that  evening 
some  barley  water  was  made  for  Cook.  I  took  that  up  to  him, 
but  I  cannot  remember  whether  that  stayed  in  his  stomach  or 
not.  At  eight  o'clock  that  evening  I  took  up  some  arrowroot 
to  Cook.  The  first  time  I  saw  Mr.  Bamford  [the  doctor  at 
Rugeley]  was  about  three  o'clock  on  the  Saturday  afternoon. 
Between  seven  and  eight  on  the  Sunday  morning  I  went  into 
Mr.  Cook's  room.  During  the  night  Mr.  Smith,  a  friend  of 
Mr.  Cook,  had  slept  in  the  same  room.  I  asked  Mr.  Cook  if 
he  felt  worse.  He  said  he  felt  pretty  comfortable,  and  had 
slept  well  since  twelve  o'clock.  Upon  the  Sunday  a  large 
breakfast  cup  of  broth  was  brought  to  the  Talbot  Arms  by 
Charles  Hawley.  I  took  some  of  it  up  to  Mr.  Cook's  room  in 
the  same  cup  in  which  it  was  brought.  I  tasted  about  two 
tablespoonfuls  of  the  broth  before  I  took  it  up.  It  was  between 
twelve  and  one,  before  my  dinner,  that  I  tasted  this  broth. 
About  half  an  hour  afterwards  it  made  me  very  sick,  and  I 
vomited  violently  all  the  afternoon  till  about  five  o'clock.  I 
was  obliged  to  go  to  bed.  Up  to  that  time  I  had  been  quite 
well.  I  had  taken  nothing  that  I  am  aware  of  that  had  dis- 
agreed with  me.  In  the  evening  and  on  the  morning  of  the 
Sunday  I  saw  Mr.  Cook  several  times.  He  appeared  to  be 
better  during  that  evening,  and  to  be  in  good  spirits.  The 
last  time  I  saw  him  on  the  Sunday  night  might  be  about  ten 
or  a  little  after  that.  I  saw  him  between  seven  and  eight  on 
the  Monday  morning.  I  took  him  up  a  cup  of  coffee.  He  did 
not  vomit  that.  Palmer  was  there  that  morning  about  a  quarter 
or  half-past  seven.  I  saw  him  coming  downstairs  as  though  he 
had  been  to  see  Mr.  Cook.  Mr.  Cook  got  up  at  one  o'clock 
on  that  Monday.  He  appeared  a  great  deal  better,  and  he 
washed  and  dressed  and  shaved  himself.  He  said  he  felt 
exceedingly  weak.  On  the  Monday  Ashmall,  the  jockey,  and 
Mr.  Saunders,  Cook's  trainer,  visited  him.  As  soon  as  Cook 
got  up  at  one  o'clock  I  gave  him  some  arrowroot,  which  he 
retained  in  his  stomach.  I  believe  he  had  a  cup  of  coffee  about 
four  or  five.  About  eight  o'clock  that  night  Miss  Bond, 
the  housekeeper,  gave  me  a  pillbox  to  take  upstairs 
to  Mr.  Cook's  room,  which  I  did,  and  placed  it  on 
the  dressing-table.  It  was  wrapped  up  in  white  paper. 
I  do  not  know  whether  the  box  contained  pills  or  not.  After 
I  had  placed  the  pillbox  on  Cook's  dressing-table  Palmer 
came,  and  went  into  Cook's  room.  I  saw  him  sitting  down 
by  the  fire  between  nine  and  ten.  I  retired  to  rest  between 
ten  and  eleven.  About  a  quarter  or  ten  minutes  before  twelve 
Lavinia  Barnes,  the  waitress,  called  me  up.  I  heard  a  noise  of 
violent  screaming  whilst  I  was  dressing.  The  screams  came 
28 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

from  Cook's  room.  My  room  is  on  the  floor  above  Cook's  room.  E.  Mills 
I  heard  the  screams  twice,  and  went  down  to  Cook's  room.  As 
soon  as  I  entered  the  room  I  found  him  sitting  up  in  bed.  He 
desired  me  to  fetch  Mr.  Palmer  directly.  I  walked  to  his 
bedside,  and  I  found  the  pillow  upon  the  floor.  There  was  one 
mould  candle  burning.  I  picked  up  the  pillow  and  asked  him 
would  he  lay  down  his  head.  At  that  time  he  was  sitting  up 
and  was  beating  the  bed-clothes,  with  both  his  arms  and 
hands  stretched  out.  He  said,  "  I  cannot  lie  down.  I  shall 
suffocate  if  I  do.  Oh,  fetch  Mr.  Palmer."  His  body,  his 
hands,  and  neck  were  moving  then — a  sort  of  jumping  or 
jerking.  His  head  was  back.  Sometimes  he  would  throw  back 
his  head  upon  the  pillow,  and  then  he  would  raise  himself  up 
again.  This  jumping  and  jerking  was  all  over  his  body.  He 
appeared  to  have  great  difficulty  in  breathing.  The  balls  of 
both  the  eyes  were  much  projected.  It  was  difficult  for  him 
to  speak,  he  was  so  short  of  breath.  He  screamed  three  or 
four  times  while  I  was  in  the  room.  He  called  aloud  "  Murder  " 
twice.  He  asked  me  to  rub  one  hand.  I  found  the  left  hand 
stiff.  It  appeared  to  be  stretched  out  as  though  the  fingers 
were  something  like  paralysed.  It  did  not  move.  It  appeared 
to  me  to  be  stiff  all  the  way  up  his  arm.  I  did  not  rub  him 
very  long.  The  stiffness  did  not  appear  to  be  gone  after  I 
had  rubbed  him.  During  the  time  I  was  rubbing  his  hands 
Palmer  was  in  the  room.  Cook  was  conscious  while  this  jerking 
of  the  body  was  going  on.  He  recognised  Palmer  when  he  came 
in,  and  said,  "  Oh,  Palmer,  I  shall  die,"  or  "  Oh,  doctor,  I 
shall  die."  Palmer  replied,  "  Oh,  my  lad,  you  won't."  Palmer 
then  left  to  fetch  something,  and  asked  me  to  stay  by  the 
bedside  with  him.  He  returned  in  a  few  minutes,  during  which 
time  I  merely  stood  by  the  bedside.  He  brought  back  with 
him  some  pills.  He  gave  him  something  else,  but  whether  he 
brought  it  with  him  or  not  I  do  not  know.  He  gave  him  a 
drop  from  a  wineglass  after  giving  him  the  pills.  Cook,  when 
he  took  the  pills,  said  he  could  not  swallow  them.  At  Palmer's 
request  I  gave  Cook  a  teaspoonful  of  toast  and  water,  which 
he  took.  When  I  gave  it  him  from  the  spoon  his  body  was 
then  jerking  and  jumping.  He  snapped  at  the  spoon  like  that 
[describing  it]  with  his  head  and  neck,  and  the  spoon  was  fast 
between  his  teeth.  It  was  difficult  to  get  it  away.  He  seemed 
to  bite  it  very  hard.  While  this  was  going  on  the  water  went 
down  his  throat  and  washed  the  pills  down.  Mr.  Palmer  then 
handed  him  the  draught  from  the  wineglass.  It  was  something 
liquid,  and  the  wineglass  was  three  parts  full  with  a  liquid  of  a 
dark,  heavy-looking  nature.  Cook  drank  it.  He  snapped  at 
the  glass  just  the  same  as  he  did  at  the  spoon.  He  swallowed 
the  liquid,  which  was  vomited  up  immediately.  I  supported  his 
forehead  with  my  hand  while  he  vomited.  The  stuff  he  vomited 

29 


Trial   of  William   Palmer. 

E.  Mills  smelt,  I  should  think,  like  opium.  Palmer  said  that  he  hoped 
the  pffla  were  not  returned,  and  he  searched  for  the  pills  with 
a  quill.  He  said,  "  I  cannot  find  the  pills."  After  this  Cook 
seemed  to  be  more  easy.  This  second  attack  lasted  about  half 
an  hour,  or  it  might  be  more.  He  appeared  to  be  conscious 
during  the  whole  of  that  time.  He  asked  Palmer  to  feel  his 
heart  after  he  had  got  more  composed.  I  do  not  know  whether 
he  did  so  or  not.  Palmer  made  some  slight  remark  as  to  its 
being  all  right,  or  something  of  that  kind.  I  left  Cook  and 
Palmer  about  three  o'clock  in  the  morning.  Cook  was  dozing 
when  I  left  him,  and  Palmer  was  asleep  in  the  easy-chair. 

I  next  saw  Cook  again  about  six  o'clock  on  the  Tuesday 
morning.  I  said,  "Has  Mr.  Palmer  gone?"  and  he  said, 
"  Yes ;  he  left  a  quarter  before  five."  I  asked  him  how  he  felt, 
and  he  said  he  had  been  no  worse  since  I  left  him  in  the  morn- 
ing. He  asked  me  if  I  had  ever  seen  any  one  suffer  such  agony 
as  he  was  in  last  night,  and  I  said  no,  I  never  had.  I  asked 
"  What  do  you  think  was  the  cause  of  all  that,  Mr.  Cook?  "  and 
he  said  the  pills  that  Palmer  gave  him  at  half-past  ten.  When  I 
saw  Cook  on  the  Tuesday  morning  I  did  not  observe  any  of  those 
jerkings  or  convulsions  about  him.  About  twelve  o'clock  he 
rang  his  bell  and  desired  me  to  send  the  boots  over  to  ask 
Palmer  whether  he  might  have  a  cup  of  coffee.  The  boots 
returned  and  said  he  might  have  a  cup  of  coffee,  and  that  Mr. 
Palmer  would  be  over  immediately.  I  took  the  coffee  up  a 
little  after  twelve.  Palmer  was  in  Mr.  Cook's  room  at  that 
time.  I  gave  the  coffee  to  Mr.  Palmer,  who  tasted  the  coffee 
in  my  presence.  I  then  left  the  room.  Mr.  Jones  arrived 
by  the  three  o'clock  train  that  afternoon.  He  went  and 
saw  Mr.  Cook  upon  his  arrival.  About  four,  or  it  might  be 
between  four  and  five,  I  took  up  to  Mr.  Cook's  room  another 
cup  of  coffee.  At  that  time  I  saw  Palmer  in  the  room.  I  left 
the  room,  and  afterwards  I  saw  Palmer,  who  told  me  that  Mr. 
Cook  had  vomited  the  coffee.  He  spoke  from  the  door  of  Cook's 
room,  but  did  not  call  me  in.  I  saw  Cook  several  times  that 
evening  before  I  retired  to  rest.  He  appeared  to  be  in  very 
good  spirits,  and  talked  about  getting  up  the  next  morning. 
I  believe  I  gave  him  some  arrowroot  that  evening  about  half- 
past  ten.  Palmer  was  with  him  in  his  bedroom  when  I  left 
him.  I  gave  Palmer  a  jug  of  toast  and  water  for  Cook.  Mr. 
Palmer  asked  Cook  if  I  could  do  anything  more  for  him  that 
night,  and  Mr.  Cook  said  he  would  want  nothing  more.  That 
was  about  half-past  ten.  I  did  not  go  to  bed  that  night,  but 
I  remained  in  the  kitchen,  as  I  was  anxious  to  see  how  Mr. 
Cook  went  on.  While  I  was  in  the  kitchen  the  bell  of  Mr. 
Cook's  room  rang  violently  a  little  before  twelve  [Tuesday 
night].  Mr.  Jones  was  sleeping  in  Cook's  bedroom,  which  was 
a  double-bedded  room,  and  where  a  bed  had  been  made  up  for 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

him.  I  went  upstairs  to  Mr.  Cook's  room  on  hearing  the  bell.  E.  Mills 
He  was  sitting  up  in  bed,  and  Mr.  Jones  appeare<f  to  be 
supporting  him.  Mr.  Cook  said,  rt  Oh,  Mary,  fetch  Mr.  Palmer 
directly."  He  was  conscious  at  the  time.  I  went  over  for 
Mr.  Palmer.  I  rang  the  surgery  bell  at  the  surgery  door.  I 
expected  him  to  come  to  the  window  and  as  soon  as  I  stepped 
off  the  step  into  the  road  he  was  at  the  bedroom  window.  He 
did  not  put  up  the  sash.  At  that  time  I  could  not  see  whether 
he  was  dressed  or  not.  I  asked  him  to  come  over  to  Mr.  Cook 
directly,  as  he  was  much  the  same  as  he  was  the  night  before. 
I  then  went  back  to  the  hotel.  Palmer  came  two  or  three 
minutes  afterwards.  I  was  in  the  bedroom  when  Palmer  came, 
and  he  remarked  that  he  had  never  dressed  so  quickly  in  his 
life.  That  was  the  first  thing  he  said  when  he  came  into 
Cook's  room.  Mr.  Cook  was  sitting  up  in  bed,  supported  by 
Mr.  Jones.  After  Mr.  Palmer  came  I  remained  on  the  landing, 
just  outside  the  door.  After  I  had  been  waiting  a  short  time 
Palmer  came  out.  I  said  to  him  that  Mr.  Cook  was  much 
about  the  same  as  last  night,  and  he  replied  that  he  was  not 
so  ill  by  the  fiftieth  part.  He  then  went  downstairs  as  though 
he  was  going  into  his  own  house,  and  after  a  very  short  time 
he  came  back  to  Cook's  room.  After  Palmer  had  returned  I 
heard  Cook  ask  to  be  turned  over  on  his  right  side.  I  was  at 
the  door  at  the  time,  which  was  open.  I  did  not  go  in.  I 
was  not  in  the  room  when  Cook  died.  I  went  in,  I  believe, 
just  before  he  died,  but  I  came  out  again.  I  saw  Mr.  Jones 
supporting  Cook.  Mr.  Palmer  was  then  feeling  Mr.  Cook's 
pulse,  and  he  said  to  Mr.  Jones,  "His  pulse  is  gone."  Mr. 
Jones  pressed  the  side  of  his  face  to  Cook's  heart.  Mr.  Palmer 
asked  me  to  fetch  Mr.  Bamford,  and  I  did  so.  From  the  time 
I  was  called  up,  about  ten  minutes  before  twelve,  till  Cook's 
death  would  be  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour.  Mr.  Bamford 
came  over,  and  I  saw  him  when  he  came  downstairs.  He 
said,  "He  is  dead.  He  was  dead  when  I  arrived."  Mr.  Jones 
came  out  of  the  room  and  told  me  that  Mr.  Palmer  wanted  me. 
I  went  into  the  room  and  saw  Mr.  Palmer.  There  was  no  one 
with  him.  I  said,  "It  is  not  possible  Mr.  Cook  is  dead,"  and 
he  said,  "  Oh,  yes,  he  is  dead."  He  asked  me  to  arrange  about 
laying  out  Cook.  I  had  seen  a  book  in  Mr.  Cook's  room,  a 
dark  book  with  a  gold  band  round  the  edge.  It  had  a  pencil 
going  into  it  on  one  side.  Cook  stopped  at  the  Talbot  Arms 
perhaps  two  or  three  months  before  this  time.  I  saw  the 
Tbook  on  the  Monday  night  before  Mr.  Cook's  death.  He 
wrote  something  in  it,  and  took  from  a  pocket  in  the  book  a 
postage  stamp.  I  placed  the  book  back  at  the  looking-glass 
on  the  dressing-table.  I  have  never  seen  that  book  since 
Cook's  death.  I  have  searched  everywhere  for  it.  When  I 
went  into  the  room  where  Cook's  body  was  lying  Palmer  was 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

B.  Mills  there.     I  noticed  that  Cook's  clothes  were  placed  on  a  chair 
I  saw  Palmer  searching  the  pocket.     That  was  on  the  Tuesday 
night  about  ten  minutes  after  Cook's  death.     He  also  searched 
under  the  pillow  and  bolster.     After  Cook's  death  I  saw  some 
letters  on  the  mantelpiece  which  were  not  there  before. 

The  Court  then  adjourned. 


Second  Day,  Thursday,  15th  May,  1856. 

The  Court  met  at  ten  o'clock. 

ELIZABETH  MILLS,  cross-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — I  E-  Mllls 
had  been  at  the  Talbot  Arms  about  three  years  at  the  date 
of  Mr.  Cook's  death.  He  first  came  to  the  Talbot  Arms  about 
three  months  before  he  died,  and  up  to  the  time  of  his  death 
he  was  constantly  coming  back  and  forward.  During  the 
time  he  was  there  I  never  heard  him  complain  of  anything 
except  a  sore  throat  or  something  of  that  kind  through  cold. 
I  never  noticed  that  he  had  any  soreness  about  his  mouth  or 
that  he  had  difficulty  at  all  in  swallowing.  I  have  seen  him 
with  a  foul  tongue  about  once  or  so.  He  never  complained  in 
my  hearing  of  the  tongue  being  sore  so  as  to  render  it  diffi- 
cult to  swallow.  I  do  not  know  of  caustic  having  been  applied 
to  it  while  he  was  there.  Before  he  went  to  .Shrewsbury  he 
had  not  been  ailing  at  all  to  my  knowledge.  When  he  came 
back  he  said  he  was  poorly.  After  Cook's  death  I  stayed  at 
the  Talbot  Inn  till  the  day  after  Christmas.  I  then  went  to 
my  home  in  the  Potteries,  Shelton.  Since  then  I  have  been 
in  service  in  Dolly's  Hotel,  Paternoster  Row,  London.  I 
stayed  six  weeks  there  as  chambermaid.  About  a  week  after 
I  came  to  London  I  saw  Mr.  Stevens  (the  stepfather  of  Cook) 
about  six  or  seven  times.  Two  or  three  times  I  saw  him 
alone ;  at  other  times  perhaps  Mrs.  Dewhurst,  the  landlady  of 
the  inn,  or  Miss  Dewhurst  was  there.  It  was  not  always  about 
Mr.  Cook's  death  that  he  spoke  to  me.  He  would  merely  call 
to  see  how  I  liked  London,  and  whether  I  was  well  in  health, 
and  all  that. 

Mr.  Stevens  is  a  man  not  in  your  station.  He  is  a  gentle- 
man. Do  you  mean  to  say  he  called  to  see  how  you  liked 
London? — Just  to  see  whether  I  liked  the  place.  I  had  some 
conversation  with  him  at  the  Talbot  Inn  just  before  the  funeral. 
I  really  cannot  remember  what  he  spoke  about  beyond  Mr. 
Cook's  death.  During  the  time  I  was  at  Dolly's  Hotel  I  never 
received  a  farthing  from  him,  and  he  never  made  me  any 
promise  to  get  a  place.  The  last  time  I  saw  him  out  of  Court 
was  on  Tuesday  last  at  Dolly's  Hotel.  He  never  spoke  to  me 
about  Mr.  Cook's  death.  When  I  saw  him  at  that  time  there 
were  other  people  present,  including  Lavinia  Barnes,  Mr. 
Gardner,  and  Mr.  Hatton,  the  chief  officer  of  police  in  Stafford- 
shire. Mr.  Gardner  is  an  attorney  at  Rugeley.  I  cannot 
say  what  all  the  talk  was  about.  Mr.  Cook's  death  might  be 
mentioned.  I  daresay  it  was.  I  will  undertake  to  say  that 
there  were  other  subjects  of  conversation  between  us  besides  the 
subject  of  Cook's  death.  I  do  not  wish  to  mention  what  they 
were.  They  did  not,  so  far  as  I  heard,  talk  about  the  evidence 
D  33 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

E.  Hills  I  was  to  give.  They  did  not  ask  me  what  I  could  prove,  nor 
did  they  read  my  depositions  before  the  coroner  to  me.  There 
was  nothing  read  to  me  from  a  newspaper  or  anything  else. 
Mr.  Stevens  never  at  any  previous  interview  read  anything 
from  a  newspaper  to  me.  He  never  talked  to  me  about  the 
symptoms  which  Mr.  Cook  exhibited  before  his  death.  Before 
last  Tuesday  I  had  seen  Mr.  Hatton  about  twice.  I  saw  him 
once  at  Dolly's,  when  he  dined  there.  I  did  not  wait  upon 
him.  I  merely  saw  him  there.  He  might  have  talked  about 
Mr.  Cook's  death,  but  I  cannot  remember.  I  have  seen  Mr. 
Gardner  there  three  or  four  times  since  Mr.  Cook's  death. 
I  have  seen  him  at  Dolly's,  and  have  met  him  in  the  street. 
I  have  merely  said,  "How  do  you  do,'*  or  "Good  morning." 
I  have  had  no  other  talk  with  him.  I  do  not  remember  to 
have  read  the  case  of  a  Mrs.  Dove  in  the  newspapers,  but  I 
may  have  done  so.  I  have  heard  spoken  of  a  case  that  lately 
occurred  at  Leeds  of  a  lady  who  was  said  to  have  been  poisoned 
by  her  musband,  but  I  did  not  read  it.  It  was  not  mentioned 
to  me  by  Mr.  Stevens,  nor  by  Mr.  Gardner,  nor  by  Mr. 
Hatton. 

Were  you  told  when  you  heard  of  it  what  the  symptoms  of 
Mrs.  Dove  were? — I  think  not.  I  merely  heard  there  had 
been  strychnine  used  at  Leeds,  another  strychnine  case. 

Were  the  symptoms  of  strychnine  ever  mentioned  to  you  by 
any  one? — No,  never. 

When,  and  to  whom,  did  you  first  use  the  expression  "  twitch- 
ing," which  you  mentioned  so  repeatedly  yesterday? — To  the 
coroner,  I  did.  If  I  did  not  mention  twitching,  I  mentioned 
something  to  the  same  effect.  I  will  not  swear  I  used  that 
word  at  the  coroner's.  I  cannot  remember  when  I  first  used 
the  word  "  twitching."  I  cannot  remember  when  I  first  used 
the  word  "  jerking  "  to  anybody.  I  will  undertake  to  swear 
it  has  never  been  used  to  me  by  anybody. 

You  stated  yesterday  that  on  the  Sunday  some  broth  was 
brought  in  a  breakfastcup  between  twelve  and  one  o'clock  ; 
that  you  took  it  up  to  Cook's  bedroom ;  that  you  drank  about 
two  tablespoonfuls ;  that  you  were  sick  the  whole  afternoon, 
and  vomited  till  five  o'clock.  Did  you  state  one  word  about 
that  in  your  deposition  before  the  coroner? — It  never  occurred 
to  me  until  three  days  afterwards. 

Did  you  state  before  the  coroner  that  there  was  nothing 
peculiar  in  the  taste  of  the  broth? — I  believe  I  was  examined 
three  times  before  the  coroner.  My  attention  had  been  called 
to  the  fact  of  broth  having  been  sent  over  on  one  occasion, 
but  I  do  not  remember  whether  it  was  the  first.  I  was  asked 
if  I  had  tasted  it,  and  I  stated  I  had  tasted  it,  and  thought  it 
was  very  good.  It  never  occurred  to  me  to  mention  that  I 
was  sick  and  vomited  frequently  in  the  course  of  the  afternoon. 

You  went  to  bed  in  consequence  of  the  vomiting? — Yes. 

34 


Evidence  for   Prosecution. 

I  suppose  sickness  of  that  kind  repeated  frequently  in  the  E.  Mills 
course  of  an  afternoon  is  not  a  very  common  occurrence  with 
you? — No,  I  have  a  bilious  attack  sometimes,  but  not  such 
violent  vomiting  as  I  had  that  afternoon.  I  could  not  at  all 
account  for  it  at  the  time.  I  only  took  two  tablespoonfuls. 
The  vomiting  came  on  from  half  an  hour  to  an  hour  after  I 
took  them. 

On  the  Saturday  morning  did  Cook  express  a  wish  to  have 
coffee  for  breakfast,  or  was  it  from  Palmer  the  first  you  heard 
that  his  breakfast  was  to  be  coffee? — I  do  not  know  whether 
Palmer  told  me  to  bring  coffee  or  whether  it  was  Cook.  I 
never  knew  Mr.  Cook  to  take  coffee  in  bed  before.  He 
generally  took  tea. 

I  understood  you  to  say  yesterday  Palmer  came  over  at 
eight  o'clock  and  ordered  a  cup  of  coffee  for  Cook.  Do  you 
adhere  to  that? — I  cannot  remember  whether  Palmer  ordered 
it  or  not.  If  I  said  it  yesterday  it  is  correct,  but  I  cannot 
remember  whether  Palmer  ordered  the  coffee  or  not  now.  I 
will  swear  now  that  Palmer  ordered  the  coffee,  and  I  took  it 
and  gave  it  into  Cook's  hands,  and  Palmer  was  there. 

You  swear  to  it  now? — Yes. 

You  doubted  it  a  moment  ago? — If  that  was  stated  yesterday 
I  do  not  doubt  it  was  correct. 

Is  that  your  only  reason  for  stating  it  to  be  correct? — I 
believe  it  to  be  correct. 

Will  you  swear  that  it  is  correct  ? — Yes ;  it  is  no  doubt 
correct  if  I  said  so. 

Why  should  that  make  it  more  correct  if  you  cannot  say  it 
now  from  your  own  recollection? — I  cannot  remember  as  well 
to-day  as  I  did  yesterday.  I  cannot  remember  that  I  stated 
before  the  coroner  that  Cook  had  coffee  for  breakfast  at  eight 
o'clock,  that  he  ate  nothing,  and  that  he  vomited  directly  he 
had  swallowed  it,  and  that  up  to  the  time  I  had  given  him  the 
coffee  I  had  not  seen  Palmer.  I  cannot  remember  whether  I 
stated  before  the  coroner  anything  about  the  pillbox  on  Monday 
night.  It  was  sent  over  wrapped  up  in  paper.  I  will  swear 
that  Palmer  was  there  between  nine  and  ten  o'clock.  He 
brought  a  jar  of  jelly  to  the  Talbot,  and  I  opened  it.  I  should 
say  he  was  there  nearer  to  ten  than  nine.  I  do  not  recollect 
whether  he  was  there  when  I  left  Cook  at  half -past  ten. 

You  stated  yesterday  that  you  asked  Cook  on  the  Tuesday 
afternoon  what  he  thought  the  cause  of  his  illness  was,  and  he 
said,  "  The  pills  which  Palmer  gave  me  at  half -past  ten  "? — 
Yes. 

Did  you  say  that  before  the  coroner? — No. 

Have  you  been  questioned  by  any  one  since  Mr.  Cook's 
death  respecting  what  you  did  say  before  the  coroner  as  to 
when  these  pills  might  have  been  given  or  respecting  anything 
you  have  said  about  these  pills  before  the  coroner? — Yes ;  I  was 

35 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

E.  Mills  questioned  by  Dr.  Collier  at  Hitchingly.  I  did  not  tell  him 
that  the  gentleman  in  London  had  altered  my  evidence  on  that 
point,  and  that  my  evidence  was  now  to  be  that  "  Cook  said 
the  pills  which  Palmer  gave  him  at  half-past  ten  made  him 
ill." 

Did  he  state  anything  about  your  evidence  being  altered 
since  ? — Yes ;  he  said  he  had  not  got  that  down  in  what  I 
had  given  to  the  coroner  in  the  coroner's  papers.  I  said 
"  No,  I  thought  it  was  down  in  some  of  the  papers.  I  had 
given  it  to  a  gentleman  in  London."  The  evidence  has  been 
altered  by  myself  since.  I  do  not  remember  who  the  gentle- 
man was  that  I  had  given  it  to.  I  gave  it  to  him  at  Dolly's. 
The  gentleman  came  to  me  at  Dolly's  and  asked  if  I  would 
answer  him  a  few  questions.  I  said  I  would,  and  I  saw  him 
in  a  sitting-room.  I  was  with  him  about  half  an  hour.  He 
asked  me  not  very  many  questions,  and  during  the  time  I 
was  answering  the  questions  he  was  writing.  He  did  not  tell 
me  who  he  was  or  whom  he  came  from,  but  he  mentioned  Mr. 
Stevens'  name. 

What  did  he  say  about  Mr.  Stevens? — Mr.  Stevens  was  with 
him.  He  called  Mr.  Stevens  by  name. 

Why  did  you  not  tell  us  that  before? — You  did  not  ask  me. 

Then,  although  you  did  not  know  who  he  was,  you  knew  he 
was  an  acquaintance  of  Mr.  Stevens  because  he  came  with  him? 
— He  did.  All  that  I  said  then  was  taken  down.  I  do  not  remem- 
ber saying  before  the  coroner  that  when  Cook  was  ill  on  Monday 
night  and  sitting  up  in  bed  beating  the  bed-clothes  he  said, 
"  I  cannot  lie  down ;  I  shall  suffocate  if  I  do."  I  do  not  remem- 
ber whether  I  mentioned  the  word  "  jerking "  before  the 
coroner. 

Did  you  say  before  the  coroner,  "  He  would  throw  his  head 
back  and  raise  himself  up  again  "? — Yes. 

You  will  say  you  said  that? — Yes.  I  do  not  know  whether 
I  mentioned  the  word  "  jerking."  I  said  the  whole  of  the  body 
was  in  a  jumping,  snatching  way.  I  believe  I  mentioned  it 
was  difficult  for  him  to  speak,  he  was  so  short  of  breath.  I 
did  not  mention  about  him  calling  "  murder  "  twice.  I  do  not 
remember  whether  I  mentioned  before  the  coroner  that  Mr. 
Cook  said  the  pills  stuck  fast  in  his  throat  and  he  could  not 
swallow  them.  I  did  not  answer  the  coroner  anything  more 
than  he  asked  me.  If  he  had  asked  me  I  should  have 
answered  him  as  I  am  answering  now. 

The  first  time  that  you  were  examined  before  the  coroner 
was  Dr.  Taylor  present? — I  believe  he  was. 

Were  you  not  recalled  after  you  had  been  examined  once  for 
the  purpose  of  describing  the  symptoms  for  Dr.  Taylor  to 
hear? — I  was  not.  I  was  never  examined  as  to  the  symptoms 
when  I  knew  the  medical  gentlemen  were  there.  I  cannot 

36 


Evidence   for   Prosecution. 

remember  how  Mr.  Palmer  was  dressed  when  he  came  over  on  E.  Mills 
the  Tuesday  night.  He  had  a  plaid  dressing-gown  on,  but  I 
cannot  remember  what  sort  of  cap  he  had.  When  Mr.  Jones 
asked  me  to  go  into  the  room  after  Mr.  Cook's  death  I  went 
in  at  once,  and  it  was  then  that  I  saw  Palmer  searching  the 
pockets  of  the  coat.  When  I  went  in  he  did  not  seem  at  all 
confused. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  JAMES — I  was  under  examination  before 
the  coroner  perhaps  a  couple  of  hours  on  different  occasions. 
The  coroner  put  the  questions  to  me,  and  the  coroner's  clerk, 
I  believe,  wrote  down  my  answers.  The  coroner  asked  me  if 
the  broth  had  any  effect  on  me,  and  I  said  not  that  I  was 
aware  of. 

By  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — What  brought  to  your  mind  after- 
wards the  vomiting  after  taking  the  broth? — I  do  not  know.  I 
believe  it  was  some  one  else  in  the  house  that  mentioned  my 
sickness  first.  It  did  not  occur  to  me  until  some  one  else 
mentioned  it  about  a  week  after  the  coroner  was  there. 

Re-examination  resumed — I  cannot  remember  who  it  was, 
but  it  was  some  of  my  fellow-servants  in  the  house.  A  person 
of  the  name  of  Dr.  Collier  called  upon  me  and  represented  that 
he  was  for  the  Crown.  He  asked  me  questions  about  the 
inquest  and  about  the  death  of  Mr.  Cook.  That  would  be 
about  three  weeks  or  a  month  ago,  at  Hitchingley. 

JAMES  GARDNER,  examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — I J-  Gardner 
am  an  attorney,  and  attended  for  Mr.  Stevens  at  the  inquest. 
The  inquest  lasted  five  days,  and  on  each  of  these  days  I  had 
several  times  occasion  to  expostulate  with  Mr.  Ward,  the 
coroner,  as  to  questions  which  he  put  or  omitted  to  put,  and 
I  observed  that  the  clerk  omitted  to  take  down  answers  given 
to  the  questions  which  had  been  put. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — A  great  many  ques- 
tions were  put  by  the  jury  after  the  examination  of  the  pro- 
fessional men. 

By  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — The  jury  made  very  strong 
observations  as  to  the  necessity  for  further  questions. 

Objection  to  statement  of  these  observations  allowed. 

Mrs.  ANNE  BROOKS,  examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — I  Anne  Brooks 
live  in  Manchester,  and  am  in  the  habit  of  attending  race  meet- 
ings. I  was  at  Shrewsbury  races  in  November,  1855.  About 
eight  o'clock  in  the  evening  of  Wednesday,  the  14th,  I  met 
Palmer  in  the  street.  I  had  some  conversation  with  him  as 
to  horses  that  were  running  during  that  week  at  Shrewsbury. 
About  half-past  ten  the  same  evening  I  went,  along  with  some 
friends,  to  the  Raven,  where  I  knew  Palmer  was  staying. 
I  had  been  there  frequently  before.  I  left  my  friends  down- 

37 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Aene  Brooks  stairs  and  went  upstairs  to  go  to  Palmer's  room,  which  I  knew. 
As  I  approached  Palmer's  room  a  servant  called  my  attention 
to  Palmer  himself,  who  was  standing  at  a  small  table  in  the  pass- 
age. When  I  first  saw  him  he  had  a  glass  tumbler  in  his  hand, 
in  which  there  appeared  to  be  a  small  quantity  of  liquid  like 
water.  I  did  not  see  him  put  anything  in  the  glass.  I 
saw  him  shaking  up  the  fluid  that  was  in  it.  There  was  a 
light  in  the  passage.  It  was  nearer  to  me  than  to  him.  He 
held  up  the  glass  as  if  he  were  looking  at  the  light  through  it. 
He  then  said  to  me,  "  I  will  be  with  you  presently."  He 
noticed  me  the  moment  I  got  to  the  top  of  the  stairs.  After 
he  made  that  remark  to  me  he  stood  for  a  minute  or  two 
holding  the  glass  in  his  hand  up  to  the  light  once  or  twice 
and  shaking  it  now  and  then.  The  only  observation  he  made 
was  about  the  fine  weather  we  had.  After  this  he  carried  the 
glass  into  a  sitting  room  adjoining  his  own.  The  room,  I 
imagined,  was  empty,  as  I  heard  no  one  speaking.  He  re- 
mained there  two  or  three  minutes,  and  came  out  with  the 
glass  still  in  his  hand,  and  carried  it  into  his  own  sitting  room, 
shutting  the  door  after  him.  Three  or  four  minutes  after- 
wards he  came  out  to  me,  bringing  me  a  glass — it  might  be 
the  same  one,  it  was  very  like  it — with  some  brandy  and  water 
in  it.  I  took  the  brandy  and  water,  and  it  produced  no  un- 
pleasant consequences  in  me.  We  had  some  conversation 
regarding  the  next  day's  racing,  and  he  said  he  should  back 
his  own  horse  "  Chicken."  "  Chicken  "  lost.  Palmer  never 
told  me  afterwards  whether  he  had  won  or  lost  on  the  race. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHBE — I  am  a  married 
woman,  and  am  in  the  habit  of  attending  race  meetings,  but 
my  husband  does  not  sanction  my  going  when  he  knows  about 
it.  Several  people  were  taken  ill  in  Shrewsbury  on  the  Wed- 
nesday. One  of  my  company  was  dreadfully  ill,  and  there 
was  a  wonder  what  could  cause  it ;  we  made  an  observation. 
We  thought  the  water  might  have  been  poisoned.  We  were  all 
affected  the  same  way  by  sickness. 

Can  you  tell  me  in  what  way  it  affected  persons? 

By  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — Any  person  you  saw.  Whom 
did  you  see  yourself  affected  in  that  way? — There  was  a  lady 
that  came  to  meet  me  there ;  she  was  one ;  and  there  was 
another  party  in  my  company  who  was  so  ill  that  he  could  not 
go  to  the  races  on  Thursday. 

By  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — They  were  affected  by  sickness  and 
purging. 

You  saw  Palmer  with  the  glass  in  his  hand? — I  did. 

Did  he  put  it  up  to  the  light? — He  held  it  just  carelessly  up. 
I  did  not  see  any  substance  in  the  glass.  He  was  doing  this 
in  a  passage  that  led  to  a  great  many  rooms.  I  could  not  say 
if  there  was  more  than  one  light  in  the  passage.  I  think  it 

38 


Evidence   for   Prosecution. 

was  a  chandelier.     He  said,    "I  will  be  with  you  presently,"  Anne  Brooks 
when  he  carried  the  glass  into  the  room  which  I  supposed  to 
have  been  unoccupied. 

Did  he  also  say  that  while  he  was  holding  it  to  the  light? — Yes, 
just  in  this  manner,  quite  carelessly. 

And  at  that  time  you  thought  nothing  of  it? — I  thought  he 
was  mixing  up  some  cooling  draught,  and  was  waiting  for  some 
water.  I  was  not  examined  before  the  coroner. 

By  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — The  brandy  and  water  he  gave 
me  was  cold,  not  hot.  I  have  known  Palmer  for  a  great 
number  of  years  as  a  racing  man. 

LAVINIA  BARNES,  examined  by  Mr.  JAMES — In  November,  L.  Barnes 
1855,  I  was  in  service  as  waitress  at  the  Talbot 
Arms.  I  knew  both  Palmer  and  Mr.  Cook.  I  saw 
Mr.  Cook  on  12th  November  on  his  way  to  the 
Shrewsbury  Races.  He  seemed  quite  well  then.  I  saw  him  on 
Thursday,  the  15th,  on  his  return  from  the  races.  On  Friday 
I  saw  him  between  nine  and  ten,  when  he  came  back  after 
having  dined  with  Palmer.  He  was  quite  sober.  I  saw  Mr. 
Cook  twice  on  Saturday.  On  that  day  I  remember  some  broth 
being  sent  over,  which  I  took  up  to  Mr.  Cook.  He  could  not 
take  it,  as  he  said  he  was  too  sick.  I  brought  the  broth  down 
to  the  kitchen.  I  saw  Palmer,  and  told  him  that  Cook  would 
not  take  the  broth,  as  he  was  too  sick.  Palmer  said  he  must 
take  it,  and  it  was  taken  up  again  to  him  by  Elizabeth  Mills. 
I  did  not  see  any  broth  being  brought  over  on  the  Sunday. 
Between  twelve  and  one  on  the  Sunday  Elizabeth  Mills  was 
taken  ill,  and  had  to  leave  her  work  and  go  to  bed.  I  saw 
her ;  she  was  vomiting  violently.  Between  four  and  five 
she  returned  to  work,  and  complained  to  me  of  having  been 
ill  from  the  vomiting.  I  saw  some  broth  in  a  basin  in  the 
kitchen  on  the  Sunday.  I  do  not  know  where  it  was  made. 
It  was  in  a  sick  cup  with  two  handles.  The  cup  did  not  belong 
to  the  Talbot  Arms,  and  it  went  back  to  Palmer's.  Between 
seven  and  eight  on  Sunday  morning  I  heard  Palmer  say  he 
was  going  to  London  on  the  Monday.  On  Monday  I  saw  Cook 
after  dinner.  Mr.  Saunders,  the  trainer,  visited  him,  and  I 
took  up  some  brandy  and  water  to  them.  On  that  night  I 
slept  in  the  room  next  Mr.  Cook's.  I  saw  Palmer  between  eight 
and  nine  that  night  going  upstairs  in  the  direction  of  Cook's 
room.  I  saw  him  in  the  room  afterwards  between  twelve  and 
one  o'clock.  About  twelve  o'clock  I  was  in  the  kitchen,  when 
Mr.  Cook's  bell  rang  violently.  I  went  up  to  his  room,  and 
found  he  was  very  ill.  He  asked  me  to  send  for  Mr.  Palmer. 
He  was  screaming  "  murder,"  and  was  in  violent  pain.  He 
said  he  was  suffocating.  His  eyes  looked  very  wild,  and  were 
standing  a  great  way  out  of  his  head.  He  was  beating  the 

39 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

L.  Barnes    bed  with  his  hands.     I  sent  the  boots  for  Palmer,  and  went 
and  called  Elizabeth  Mills.     After  Palmer  came  I  went  up  to 
the  room  again.     Cook  seemed  to  be  more  composed.     Palmer 
told  him  not  to  be  alarmed.     I  saw  Cook  drinking  a  darkish 
mixture  in  a  glass.     I  cannot  remember  who  gave  it  to  him, 
but  Palmer  was  in  the  room  when  it  was  given.      When  Cook 
put  the  glass  to  his  mouth  he  snapped  at  it.     I  both  saw  and 
heard  him  do  it.     He  vomited  the  black-looking  draught.     I 
left  the  room  between  twelve  and  one,   and  he  seemed  more 
composed  then.      I   saw  him  again   on  the  Tuesday,    and  he 
seemed  to  be  much  better.    A  few  minutes  before  twelve  o'clock 
on  the  Tuesday  night  Elizabeth  Mills  and  I  were  in  the  kitchen. 
Mr.  Cook's  bell  rang,  and  Elizabeth  Mills  went  up  to  answer  it. 
I  followed  her  upstairs,  but  did  not  go  into  the  room.     I  heard 
Cook  scream.     Elizabeth  Mills  went  for  Palmer,  and  he  came. 
He  was  dressed  in  his  usual  way,  with  a  black  coat  on.     There 
was  nothing  peculiar  about  his  dress.     He  wore  a  cap.     After 
Palmer  went  into  the  room  I  remained  on  the  landing.     I  did 
not  hear  what  was  going  on  inside.     Palmer  came  out  and 
went  downstairs  for  something.     When  he  came  out  Elizabeth 
Mills  asked  him  how  Mr.    Cook  was,    and  he  replied,    "  Not 
so  bad  by  a  fiftieth  part."    She  and  I  were  both  together  when 
he  said  this.     I  went  into  the  room  before  Mr.  Cook  died.     Mr. 
Jones  was  there  in  attendance  upon  him.     Before  I  went  into 
the  room,  and  when  Palmer  was  there,  I  heard  Cook  ask  to  be 
turned  over.     After  I  went  into  the  room  I  do  not  remember 
hearing  anything.     I  came  out  again  before  Cook's  death,  and 
did  not  see  him  die.     I  returned  to  the  room  afterwards,  and 
saw  Palmer  there  with  one  of  Cook's  coats  in  his  hands.     He 
was  feeling  the  pockets.     I  also  saw  him  feel  under  the  bolster 
I  left  him  in  the  room  with  the  dead  body.     On  the  Thursday 
following  I  met  Palmer  in  the  hall  of  the  hotel.     He  asked  me 
for  the  key  of  Cook's  room,   and  I  fetched  it  from  the  bar. 
He  said  he  wanted  some  books  and  papers  and  a  paper  knife, 
which  were  to  go  back  to  the  stationer's  where  he  had  them 
from,  or  he  should  have  to  pay  for  them.    I  went  into  the  room 
with  him.     While  there  he  asked  me  to  go  to  Miss  Bond,  the 
housekeeper,  for  some  books  she  had.     I  brought  them  back 
with  me  to  the  room,  and  found  Palmer  there  searching  on  the 
chest  of  drawers  among  some  books  and  clothes  belonging  to 
Mr.  Cook.     I  thought  it  was  the  paper  knife  he  was  looking  for, 
as  he  said*  "  I  cannot  find  the  knife  anywhere."     Miss  Bond 
then  came  into  the  room,  and  I  left.     I  saw  Mr.  Jones,  who  had 
visited  Cook  on  the  Tuesday,  on  the  Friday  with  Palmer.     1 
heard  him  ask  Palmer  if  he  knew  where  Cook's  betting  book 
was.       I  cannot  remember  what  Palmer  replied.       He  said  it 
would  be  sure  to  be  found,  and  asked  me  and  the  chambermaid 
to  go  and  look  for  it.    He  also  said,  "  It  was  not  worth  anything 
40 


Evidence    for   Prosecution. 

to  anybody  but  Cook."    This  would  be  between  three  and  four   L.  Barnes 

o'clock,   and  Mr.   Stevens,  who  was  at  the  Talbot  Arms  that 

day,  left  about  half-past  four.     We  went  to  look  for  the  betting 

book.     Palmer  did  not  go  with  us.     We  searched  under  the  bed 

and  all  round  the  room.     We  did  not  look  in  the  chests  of 

drawers,  of  which  there  were  two  in  the  room,  both  unlocked. 

We  went  downstairs  and  told  Palmer  we  could  not  find  the 

book.     He  said,  "Oh,  it  will  be  found  somewhere;  I  will  go 

with  you  and  look  myself."     He  did  not  go,  but  went  out  of 

the  house,  and  I  did  not  see  him  afterwards.     I  cannot  say 

how  long  Palmer  was  in  the  room  on  the  Thursday.     There 

was  no  reason  why  we  did  not  search  the  drawers  for  the  betting 

book.     There  were  some  people  in  the  room  with  Mr.  Cook's 

corpse,  nailing  the  coffin,   and  they  stood  at  the  side  of  the 

drawers. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — Shortly  after  Cook 
refused  to  take  the  broth,  saying  he  was  too  sick,  Palmer  came 
over  and  said,  "  He  must  have  it." 

Did  he  say  why  he  must  have  it? — No. 

Did  he  say  anything  to  the  effect,  "  Why,  he  has  eaten 
nothing  for  several  days  "? — I  cannot  remember  that  he  did. 

Did  he  ask  whether  anything  had  been  eaten  by  him? — Not 
of  me. 

You  know,  in  fact,  that  Mr.  Cook  had  had  no  substantial 
food? — He  had  some  coffee  and  cocoa,  and  something  like  that. 

You  say  that  on  the  Monday  evening  you  saw  Palmer  between 
eight  and  nine  o'clock  going  upstairs.  Are  you  sure  it  was 
before  nine  o'clock? — I  am  not  quite  certain. 

Are  you  sure  it  was  before  half-past  nine  o'clock? — No,  I  did 
not  pay  particular  attention  to  what  the  time  was. 

Are  you  quite  sure  it  was  before  ten  o'clock? — Yes,  I  knew 
he  had  been  to  London. 

Did  you  know  what  hour  the  train  came  back  from  London  ? 
— I  did  not.  An  omnibus  goes  from  the  hotel  to  the  station, 
starting  from  the  hotel  about  half-past  seven.  It  is  not  one 
mile  from  the  station.  I  can  give  no  notion  of  what  time  the 
express  train  comes  into  Rugeley  from  London,  nor  do  I  know 
if  it  stops  at  Rugeley. 

Do  you  persist  that  it  must  have  been  before  ten  o'clock 
that  you  saw  Palmer  come  in? — I  think  it  was. 

May  it  not  have  been  a  quarter  past  ten  o'clock?  You  can 
easily  have  been  mistaken  about  an  hour ;  are  you  quite  certain 
it  was  before  ten  o'clock? — I  cannot  remember  now. 

You  have  stated  that  when  Palmer  left  on  the  Monday 
evening  he  gave  Cook  something  to  drink  in  a  glass ;  he  snapped 
at  the  glass,  and  you  said,  "  I  cannot  remember  who  gave  it 
to  him";  did  you  see  the  glass  in  Mr.  Cook's  hands? — I  cannot 
remember  whether  I  saw  the  glass  in  Cook's  hands. 

4* 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

L. Barnes  Did  you  see  his  hand  up  to  the  glass? — I  think  I  did.  I 
think  it  was  as  if  he  was  going  to  catch  hold  of  it,  but  somebody 
else  was  holding  it. 

Did  you  see  the  hand  touch  the  glass? — I  cannot  remember 
that.  I  remember  some  one  was  holding  it  for  him. 

Might  he  not  be  holding  it  too? — He  might. 

Anne  Rowley  ANNE  ROWLEY,  examined  by  Mr.  WELSBY — I  live  at  Rugeley, 
and  have  been  employed  by  Mr.  Palmer  as  charwoman.  On  the 
Saturday  before  Mr.  Cook  died  I  remember  being  sent  by  Palmer 
to  Mr.  Robinson,  of  the  Albion,  for  a  little  broth  for  Mr.  Cook. 
The  Albion  is  an  inn  in  Rugeley,  and  a  small  distance  from 
the  Talbot  Arms.  I  brought  the  broth,  which  was  not  warm, 
to  Palmer's  house  and  put  it  by  the  fire.  I  left  it  at  the  fire 
and  went  back  to  my  work  in  the  kitchen.  When  the  broth 
was  hot  Mr.  Palmer  brought  it  to  me  in  the  back  kitchen. 
He  poured  it  into  a  cup,  which  I  held  while  he  did  so.  He 
told  me  to  take  it  across  to  the  Talbot  Arms  for  Mr.  Cook,  and 
to  say  to  whoever  I  gave  it  to  to  ask  Mr.  Cook  if  he  would  take 
a  little  bread  or  a  little  toast  with  it,  and  to  say  that  Mr.  Smith 
had  sent  it.  I  took  it  to  the  Talbot  Arms.  He  did  not  say 
why  I  was  to  say  Mr.  Smith  had  sent  it.  Mr.  Jeremiah  Smith 
is  an  attorney  in  Rugeley.  He  goes  under  the  name  of  Jerry 
Smith,  and  is  a  friend  of  Palmer.  I  gave  the  broth  to  Lavinia 
Barnes. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — Mr.  Smith  was  in 
the  habit  of  putting  up  at  the  Albion,  and  took  his  meals  there 
a  good  deal.  He  was  intimate  with  Mr.  Cook.  I  have  not 
known  them  to  dine  together,  but  Mr.  Cook  was  to  have  dined 
at  Mr.  Smith's  that  day,  but  was  unable  to  do  so.  The  time 
between  the  broth  being  brought  in  to  me  and  the  time  it  was 
taken  to  the  Talbot  Arms  would  be  about  five  minutes. 

C.  Hawley  CHARLES  HAWLEY,  examined  by  Mr.  BODKIN — I  am  a  gardener 
in  Rugeley,  and  was  occasionally  employed  by  the  prisoner  in 
that  capacity.  I  was  in  his  house  on  the  Sunday  before  Mr. 
Cook  died,  between  twelve  and  one,  and  Mr.  Palmer  asked 
me  whether  I  would  take  some  broth  to  Mr.  Cook.  He  gave 
me  some  broth  in  a  small  cup  with  a  cover,  and  told  me  to 
take  it  over  to  the  Talbot  Arms.  I  gave  it  to  one  of  the 
servant  girls,  either  Mills  or  Lavinia  Barnes.  I  cannot  tell 
whether  the  broth  was  hot  or  not. 

Sarah  Bond  SARAH  BOND,  examined  by  Mr.  HUDDLESTON — I  was  house- 
keeper at  the  Talbot  Arms  in  November  last.  I  saw 
Mr.  Cook  on  the  Thursday  after  he  returned  from 
Shrewsbury  Races.  I  heard  him  say  he  was  very  poorly. 
About  eight  o'clock  on  Sunday  evening  I  saw  him  in 
42 


Evidence    for    Prosecution. 

bed.  He  said  he  had  been  very  ill,  but  was  better. 
Soon  after  I  came  into  the  room  I  saw  the  prisoner.  I  asked 
what  he  thought  about  Mr.  Cook,  and  he  told  me  he  was 
better.  On  the  Saturday  night  I  spoke  to  him  about  the 
advisability  of  having  some  one  to  be  with  Mr.  Cook  during  the 
night.  He  said  that  either  he  or  Jerry  Smith  would  be  there. 
I  also  spoke  to  him  about  it  on  the  Sunday  night,  but  he  said 
that  Cook  was  so  much  better  he  would  not  require  any  one. 
He  would  be  much  better  without  it.  I  asked  him  if  Daniel 
Jenkins,  the  boots,  should  not  sleep  in  the  room,  but  he  said 
he  would  much  rather  not.  On  Monday  morning,  a  little 
before  seven,  he  came  into  the  kitchen  to  me.  He  said  Cook 
was  better,  and  asked  me  to  make  a  cup  of  coffee  for  him.  I 
made  the  coffee.  He  remained  in  the  kitchen  while  I  was 
making  it,  and  took  it  from  me  to  give  to  Mr.  Cook.  He 
said  he  was  going  to  London  that  day,  and  he  had  asked  Mr. 
Jones  to  come  to  be  with  Cook  while  he  was  away.  Between 
eleven  and  twelve  on  Monday  night  the  waitress  came  and  told 
me  that  Mr.  Cook  was  very  ill.  I  went  up  to  his  room.  There 
was  no  one  with  him.  He  was  sitting  up  a  little  on  the  bed, 
and  seemed  disappointed  when  I  came  in  that  it  was  not  Palmer. 
He  said  it  was  Mr.  Palmer  he  wanted.  I  did  not  remain  in 
the  room  above  two  or  three  minutes.  I  did  not  go  down- 
stairs, but  remained  on  the  landing,  and  was  still  there  when 
Mr.  Palmer  came.  I  could  see  into  the  room  from  where  I 
was  standing.  Palmer  went  into  the  room,  and  I  heard  he  was 
giving  him  some  pills.  He  then  came  out  to  fetch  some 
medicine,  and  was  not  many  minutes  away  before  he  came 
back.  After  he  returned,  I  heard  Mr.  Cook  was  very  sick  and 
very  ill.  He  told  Mr.  Palmer  he  thought  he  should  die,  and 
he  must  not  leave  him.  Mr.  Palmer  came  out  again,  and  I 
asked  him  if  Cook  had  any  relatives.  He  said  he  had  only  a 
stepfather.  I  saw  Cook  on  Tuesday,  between  three  and  four, 
when  Mr.  Jones  came.  I  took  him  a  little  jelly  shortly  after 
six.  He  seemed  very  anxious  for  it,  and  said  if  he  did  not  have 
something  he  thought  he  should  die.  He  seemed  a  little 
better.  I  did  not  see  him  again  alive. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  GROVE — I  did  not  see  Palmer  on  the 
Monday  evening  until  a  little  before  twelve.  The  last  train, 
which  stops  at  Rugeley  at  eight  o'clock,  is  not  an  express  train. 
The  express  does  not  stop  at  Rugeley,  and  passengers  coming  by 
the  express  have  to  take  some  conveyance  from  Stafford.  I 
cannot  say  when  they  would  arrive  in  the  ordinary  course.  On 
the  Monday  night  when  I  went  up  to  Cook's  room  he  seemed 
disappointed  that  it  was  not  Mr.  Palmer.  He  seemed  to  be  worse 
than  he  was.  At  that  time  Barnes  had  gone  to  fetch  the  doctor. 
Mr.  Palmer  came  directly  I  left  the  room.  I  was  led  to  ask 

43 


Trial   of  William  Palmer. 


Sarah  Bond  what  relatives  the  man  had  as  he  seemed  so  very  ill,  and  i 
heard  him  telling  Mr.  Palmer  he  thought  he  should  die. 

W.H.Jones  jfr  WILLIAM  HENRY  JONES,  examined  by  the  ATTORNEY- 
GEXERAL — I  am  a  surgeon  and  medical  practitioner  at 
Lutterworth,  and  have  been  in  practice  for  fifteen 
years.  I  have  known  the  deceased,  Cook,  intimately  for  nearly 
five  years.  I  have  known  of  his  acquaintance  with  William 
Palmer  for  over  a  year.  He  looked  upon  my  house  at  Lutter- 
worth as  his  home,  and  I  attended  him  if  there  was  anything 
the  matter  with  him.  His  health  was  generally  good,  but  he 
was  not  very  robust.  I  think  he  hunted  and  played  cricket. 
On  the  Tuesday  of  the  Shrewsbury  Races,  the  day  on  which  his 
horse  "  Polestar  "  won,  I  spent  the  day  with  him  at  his  invita- 
tion. We  dined  together  in  the  evening  at  the  Raven  Hotel. 
He  accompanied  me  when  I  left  for  the  station.  On  our  way 
there  we  called  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Fraill,  the  clerk  of  the 
course.  I  was  present  during  a  conversation  they  had  along  with 
Whitehouse,  the  jockey.  Cook  produced  his  betting  book  and 
calculated  his  winnings.  He  had  seven  to  one.  Cook  was  with 
me  till  I  left  the  hotel  at  ten  o'clock.  He  was  not  in  the  least 
the  worse  of  liquor,  and  seemed  to  be  in  his  usual  health.  On 
the  Monday  I  received  the  following  letter  from  Mr.  Palmer:  — 

November  18,  1855. 

My  dear  Sir, — Mr.  Cook  was  taken  ill  at  Shrewsbury,  and  obliged  to 
call  in  a  medical  man;  since  then  he  has  been  confined  to  his 
bed  here  with  a  very  severe  bilious  attack,  combined  with  diarrhoea, 
and  I  think  it  advisable  for  you  to  come  and  see  him  as  soon  as  possible. 

I  was  ill  on  the  Monday  when  I  received  the  letter,  and  did 
not  arrive  at  the  Talbot  Arms,  Rugeley,  till  half-past  three  on 
Tuesday  afternoon.  I  saw  Cook  there,  and  he  expressed  him- 
self as  very  comfortable,  but  said  he  had  been  very  ill  at  Shrews- 
bury. I  examined  Cook  in  Palmer's  presence.  His  pulse  was 
natural  and  his  tongue  was  clean.  When  I  remarked  upon 
this  to  Palmer  he  said,  "  You  should  have  seen  it  before."  I 
prescribed  nothing  for  Cook  at  that  time.  I  visited  him  several 
times  in  the  course  of  that  afternoon,  and  he  seemed  improved 
in  every  way.  I  gave  him  a  little  toast  and  water,  which  was 
in  the  room,  and  which  he  vomited.  There  was  no  diarrhoea 
as  far  as  I  was  aware.  Mr.  Bamford,  who  I  learned  from 
Palmer  had  been  attending,  came  about  seven  o'clock.  He 
expressed  his  satisfaction  with  Cook's  improved  state  of  health. 
Whilst  Bamford,  Palmer,  and  I  were  consulting  what  we  should 
prescribe  for  him,  Cook  objected  to  the  pills  he  had  had  the 
previous  night.  He  said  they  made  him  ill.  The  three  of  us 
then  withdrew,  and  Palmer  proposed  that  Mr.  Bamford  should 
make  up  the  morphine  pills  as  before,  but  not  to  mention  what 

44 


Evidence   for   Prosecution. 

they  contained,  as  Cook  objected  so  much  to  morphine.  Mr.  W. H.Jones 
Bamford  agreed  to  it,  and  went  away.  Palmer  and  I  went 
into  Cook's  room.  I  was  in  and  out  of  the  room  during  the 
whole  evening,  and  he  seemed  very  comfortable.  I  observed 
no  more  vomiting  nor  any  diarrhcea.  There  were  no  bilious 
symptoms  whatever,  nor  were  there  any  signs  of  his  having 
recently  suffered  from  a  bilious  attack.  About  eight  o'clock 
I  went  with  Palmer  over  to  his  house.  I  returned  to  Cook's 
room  in  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  Palmer  came  back  about 
eleven  o'clock  with  a  box  of  pills.  He  opened  them  in  my 
presence  and  showed  me  the  directions'  on  a  slip  of  paper  round 
the  box.  He  remarked,  "  What  an  excellent  hand  for  an  old 
man  upwards  of  eighty  to  write."  It  was  very  good  writing 
indeed.  Palmer  proposed  to  Cook  to  take  the  pills,  but  he 
protested,  as  they  had  made  him  so  ill  the  previous  night. 
Ultimately  he  did  take  them,  and  he  immediately  vomited  into 
the  utensil.  Both  Palmer  and  I,  at  his  request,  searched  the 
utensil  for  the  pills,  but  we  found  nothing  but  the  toast  and 
water,  so  that  the  pills  were  retained.  After  he  vomited  he 
lay  down  very  comfortably,  and  we  left  him.  Before  he  had 
taken  the  pills  he  had  expressed  himself  stronger,  and  had  got 
up  and  sat  in  a  chair.  During  the  evening  he  had  been  very 
jocose,  speaking  of  what  he  should  do  during  the  winter,  and 
of  his  future  plans  and  prospects.  After  he  had  taken  those 
two  pills,  at  eleven  o'clock,  I  went  downstairs  and  had  some 
supper.  I  returned  about  twelve  to  his  room,  had  some  con- 
versation with  him,  and  then  went  to  bed,  it  being  arranged 
that  I  should  sleep  in  his*  room,  which  was  a  double-bedded 
one,  that  night.  At  the  time  I  last  talked  to  him  he  seemed 
rather  sleepy,  but  quite  as  well  as  usual,  and  there  was  nothing 
to  excite  any  apprehension  in  my  mind.  I  had  been  in  bed 
ten  minutes,  and  had  not  gone  to  sleep,  when  he  suddenly 
started  up  in  bed  and  called  out,  "Doctor,  get  up;  I  am 
going  to  be  ill;  ring  the  bell  for  Mr.  Palmer."  I  rang  the 
bell,  and  the  chambermaid  came  to  the  door.  He  himself 
called  out  to  her,  "  Fetch  Mr.  Palmer."  He  asked  me  to 
rub  his  neck.  I  rubbed  the  back  part  of  his  neck  and  sup- 
ported him  with  my  arm  while  doing  so.  There  was  a  stiffen- 
ing of  the  muscles ;  a  sort  of  hardness  about  the  neck.  Palmer 
came  very  soon  indeed ;  two  or  three  minutes  at  the  most.  He 
made  the  remark,  "  I  was  never  so  quickly  dressed  in  my  life." 
I  did  not  observe  how  he  was  dressed,  as  I  was  so  engaged,  lie 
gave  Cook  two  pills,  which  he  said  were  ammonia  pills.  Directly 
he  swallowed  the  pills  he  uttered  loud  screams,  threw  himself 
back  in  the  bed,  and  was  dreadfully  convulsed.  As  the  pills 
had  immediately  before  been  taken,  it  certainly  could  not  have 
been  from  their  action.  He  said  to  me,  "  Raise  me  up  or  I 
shall  be  suffocated."  The  convulsions  lasted  five  or  ten 

45 


Trial   of  William   Palmer. 

W.  H.  Jones  minutes.  It  was  at  the  commencement  of  the  convulsions 
that  he  called  out  to  raise  him  up  or  he  should  be  suffocated. 
All  the  muscular  fibres  were  convulsed ;  there  was  a  violent  con- 
traction of  every  muscle  of  the  body,  and  a  stiffening  of  the 
limbs.  When  he  called  out  to  me  to  raise  him,  I  endeavoured 
to  do  so  with  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Palmer,  but  found  it  was 
quite  impossible  owing  to  the  rigidity  of  the  limbs.  When 
he  found  I  could  not  raise  him  up  he  asked  me  to  turn  him 
over,  which  I  did.  He  was  quite  sensible.  After  I  had 
turned  him  over  I  listened  to  the  action  of  his  heart.  I  found 
it  gradually  to  weaken.  I  requested  Palmer  to  fetch  some 
spirits  of  ammonia  in  the  hopes  of  reviving  him.  Palmer 
fetched  a  bottle  from  his  house.  He  was  not  away  above  a 
minute.  When  he  returned,  Cook's  heart  was  gradually  sink- 
ing, and  life  was  almost  extinct.  He  died  very  quietly.  He 
was  not  able  to  take  the  ammonia,  and  it  was  very  soon  after 
Palmer  returned  that  he  died.  From  the  time  when  he  raised 
himself  in  bed  and  called  upon  me  to  go  for  Palmer  to  the  time 
when  he  died  would  be  from  ten  minutes  to  a  quarter  of  an 
hour.  In  my  judgment,  as  a  medical  man,  he  died  from 
tetanus,  or,  in  ordinary  English  parlance,  lockjaw. 

Does  it  involve,  ordinarily  speaking,  a  mere  locked  jaw? — 
Yes,  that  is  the  common  term.  Locked  jaw  is  one  of  the  symp- 
toms of  tetanus.  Every  muscle  in  the  body  was  affected  in 
the  same  manner. 

How  would  you  express  in  ordinary  English  the  general 
symptoms  of  what  you  call  tetanus  in  one  word? — Violent  spas- 
modic affection  of  all  the  muscles  of  the  body.  That  effects 
the  immediate  cause  of  death  by  stopping  the  action  of  the 
heart,  and  also  the  breath,  from  its  effect  on  the  diaphragm.  It 
affects  the  respiratory  muscles  and  stops  respiration.  It  is 
that  spasm  of  the  respiratory  muscles  which  causes  the  sense 
of  suffocation.  When  death  took  place  he  was  still  upon 
his  side.  He  remained  in  that  position  after  death.  I  did 
not  turn  the  body  upon  its  back.  The  outward  appearance  of 
the  body  after  death  was  very  dark.  As  there  was  only  one 
candle  in  the  room,  I  could  not  make  the  observation  I  other- 
wise should  have  made.  Both  his  hands,  the  left  hand  par- 
ticularly, which  I  had  in  my  hand,  were  clenched.  I  observed 
the  clenching  of  the  hands  immediately  the  attack  took  place, 
when  he  threw  himself  back  immediately  after  taking  the  pills 
Palmer  brought  over.  When  I  was  rubbing  his  neck  I  did  not 
see  the  hands  clenched. 

Did  you  observe  either  before  or  at  the  time  of  death,  or 
immediately  afterwards,  anything  in  the  position  of  the  head 
and  neck? — Yes;  the  head  was  quite  bent  back. 

When  you  say  bent  back,  do  you  mean  bent  back  into  an 
unnatural  position  ? — Yes ;  by  spasmodic  action.     The  body  was 
twisted  back  like  a  bow;  the  backbone  was  twisted  back. 
46 


Evidence   for    Prosecution. 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — When  did  you  observe  that  appearance   W.  H.  Jones 
— immediately   after  death,    or    all   the   time? — Indeed,    after 
throwing  himself  back,   he  was   immediately  drawn  back. 

Examination  resumed — If  I  had  placed  the  body  at  that  time 
upon  the  back,  on  a  level  surface,  it  would  have  rested  upon 
the  head  and  heels.  As  his  face  was  turned  away  from  me, 
I  did  not  observe  anything  immediately  after  or  at  the  time 
of  death  about  the  jaw.  After  death  I  saw  the  jaw  was  not 
in  its  natural  condition;  it  was  all  affected  by  spasmodic 
action.  I  spoke  to  Palmer  about  the  laying  out  of  the  body, 
and  left  him  alone  in  the  room  while  I  went  downstairs  to 
see  Miss  Bond.  I  returned  in  a  few  minutes  and  found  Palmer 
with  Mr.  Cook's  coat  in  his  hand.  He  remarked  that  I,  being 
Cook's  nearest  friend,  should  take  possession  of  his  effects.  I 
did  so,  and  took  possession  of  his  watch  and  his  purse,  con- 
taining five  sovereigns  and  five  shillings.  That  was  all  I  could 
find.  I  did  not  find  any  betting  book  or  any  papers.  After 
that,  before  Palmer  left,  he  said  something  to  me  upon  the 
subject  of  affairs  as  between  Cook  and  himself.  He  said,  as 
near  as  I  can  recollect,  "It  is  a  bad  thing  for  me,  as  I  was 
responsible  for  £3000  or  £4000,  and  I  hope  Mr.  Cook's  friends 
wiU  not  let  me  lose  it.  If  they  do  not  assist  me,  all  my  horses 
will  be  seized."  Nothing  was  said  by  him  about  securities  or 
paper. 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — In  the  consultation  which  we  three 
medical  men  had  on  Tuesday  night  nothing  was  said  about  the 
symptoms,  the  spasms,  which  had  occurred  the  night  before. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — I  know  that  Mr. 
Cook  had  been  under  treatment  by  Dr.  Savage  for  some  time. 

You  knew  he  had  treated  himself  a  good  deal  with  mercurial 
treatment? — No,  not  a  great  deal.  I  know  that  he  had  had  a 
sore  throat  for  two  or  three  months.  In  the  summer  it  was 
bad.  It  was  slightly  ulcerated;  not  a  very  extreme  case;  the 
back  part  of  the  tongue.  He  could  swallow,  but  it  gave  him  a 
little  pain  occasionally.  It  depended  upon  what  he  did 
swallow.  I  knew  he  had  found  it  necessary  to  apply  caustic 
to  his  tongue.  For  two  months  before  his  death  he  had  ceased 
to  do  it.  After  that  he  never  complained  of  occasional  pain 
in  his  throat  or  his  tongue.  I  did  not  see  much  of  him  during 
these  two  months.  He  wasi  attending  most  of  the  races. 

Was  he  apprehensive  about  some  spots  which  appeared  upon 
his  body? — I  never  heard  him  mention  it.  I  had  heard  him 
express  apprehensions  of  his  being  affected  by  secondary 
symptoms  of  venereal  disease.  His  habits  were,  generally 
speaking,  correct,  though  he  may  occasionally  have  gone  astray, 
and  perhaps  was  not  very  particular.  I  do  not  know  that  he 
had  a  chancre  at  the  time  he  died,  although  I  believe  he  had 
one  twelve  months  ago.  I  was  not  present  at  either  of  the 

47 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

post-mortem  examinations.  I  was  at  Shrewsbury  Races  with 
him  on  the  Tuesday,  and  I  knew  he  was  very  anxious,  as  the 
winning  of  the  race  was  of  great  consequence  to  him.  After 
the  race  was  run  he  was  so  excited  that  for  two  or  three  minutes 
he  could  not  speak  to  me.  He  was  elated  and  happy  the  rest 
of  the  day,  but  he  was  not  at  all  intoxicated.  He  was  a  very 
temperate  man.  That  night  when  he  was  first  attacked,  and 
when  Palmer  came,  Cook  said,  "  Palmer,  give  me  the  remedy 
you  gave  me  the  night  before."  I  was  rubbing  his  neck  for 
about  five  minutes,  I  should  think.  After  I  turned  him  over 
on  his  side  to  the  time  of  his  death  three  or  four  minutes  would 
elapse.  He  died  so  very  quietly  that  I  could  hardly  tell  when 
he  did  die.  I  have  seen  cases  of  tetanus  before. 

You  said  nothing  about  tetanus  at  the  inquest? — Yes,  I  did; 
convulsions  and  tetanus. 

Did  you  not  say  at  the  time  it  was  from  over-excitement  that 
he  died? — I  could  not  tell  the  cause.  I  was  so  much  taken  by 
surprise.  I  said  I  had  no  idea  of  the  cause  of  death. 

Whatever  you  said  about  "  violent  convulsions,"  did  you 
say,  ' '  I  could  not  tell  the  cause ;  I  imagined  at  the  time  it 
was  from  over-excitement"? — Yes. 

[The  deposition  of  the  witness  before  the  coroner  was  read.] 

You  say  in  your  deposition  you  had  been  in  your  bed  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  or  twenty  minutes.  Was  it  not  as  much  as 
twenty  minutes? — I  do  not  think  it  was.  I  had  not  begun  to 
dose.  I  do  not  remember  ever  having  stated  I  thought  he 
died  of  epilepsy.  Mr.  Bamford  said  it  was  apoplexy ;  I  said  it 
was  not.  I  could  not  make  up  my  mind  what  sort  of  fit  it 
was.  I  said  it  was  more  like  an  epileptic  fit  than  apoplexy. 

Re-examined — There  was  a  partnership  between  Cook  and 
Palmer  about  the  mare  "  Pereine,"  but  it  was  discontinued  some 
months  before  Cook's  death,  and  the  mare  became  the  pro- 
perty of  Palmer.  I  have  only  seen  one  case  of  traumatic 
tetanus. 

Was  that  from  a  wound? — From  a  wound  in  the  thumb.  It 
ended  in  death. 

How  long  was  the  patient  in  dying  from  the  time  he  received 
the  wound? — Three  days.  The  patient  died  of  lockjaw.  I 
have  seen  cases  of  epilepsy. 

Are  there  any  such  symptoms  in  epileptic  fits  as  those  con- 
vulsive spasms  of  the  muscles  ? — No ;  the  consciousness  is  lost, 
and  there  is  none  of  this  rigidity  of  the  muscles.  In  apoplexy 
consciousness  is  generally  lost  too.  I  am  satisfied  in  my  own 
mind  that  this  case  was  not  apoplexy. 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — Supposing  he  had  any  secondary  symp- 
toms of  syphilis,  do  you  think  they  could  have  produced  the 
symptoms  you  saw  on  the  Tuesday  night? — No,  I  say  not, 

48 


Evidence   for   Prosecution. 

decidedly,   and  for  two  months  before  death  he  was  clear  of  W.  H.  Jones 
them,  and  the  throat  was  well. 

ELIZABETH  MILLS  was  recalled  and  said  that  on  the  Monday  E.  Mills 
morning  Cook  told  her  that  during  the  night  he  had  been 
disturbed.  He  said,  "  I  was  just  mad  for  two  minutes."  She 
asked  him  why  he  did  not  ring  the  bell,  and  he  replied  he 
thought  we  should  all  be  fast  asleep,  and  it  passed  over.  He 
said  he  thought  he  was  disturbed  by  hearing  a  quarrel  in  the 
street. 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — What  did  he  say  about  the  street? — He 
thought  he  was  disturbed  by  hearing  a  quarrel  in  the  street. 
He  was  not  sure  that  it  was  that  which  had  made  him  ill; 
that  he  might  have  been  asleep,  and  the  quarrel  might  have 
disturbed  him.  I  cannot  positively  recollect  whether  he  said 
so  or  not. 

HENRY  SAVAGE,  examined — I  am  a  physician.     I  have  known  H.  Savage 
the  deceased  man  Cook  for  about  four  years.       He  was  not  a 
man  of  robust  constitution,  but  his  general  health  was  good.    In 
the  spring  of  1855  he  consulted  me  about  some  spots  on  his  skin 
— one  on  his  arm  and  one  on  his  forehead.     He  had  two  shallow  * 

ulcers  on  the  tongue  corresponding  to  bad  teeth.  He  thought 
these  spots  and  ulcerations  were  secondary  syphilitic  symptoms, 
and  had  been  undergoing  a  mild  mercurial  course.  I  recom- 
mended its  immediate  discontinuance,  and  prescribed  him 
quinine  as  a  tonic,  and  an  aperient  containing  cream  of  tartar, 
magnesia,  and  sulphur.  I  never  at  any  time  gave  him  antimony. 
He  was  quite  well  by  the  end  of  May.  He  still  continued  to 
see  me,  as  he  was  not  quite  sure  about  the  correctness  of  my 
notions  of  his  not  having  syphilis.  I  examined  him  from  time 
to  time,  and  the  only  thing  the  matter  with  his  throat  was  that 
one  of  his  tonsils  was  slightly  enlarged;  it  was  red  and  tender. 
There  was  nothing  of  a  syphilitic  character  in  the  appearance  of 
his  throat.  I  saw  him  about  a  fortnight  before  his  death, 
when  I  recommended  him  to  go  abroad  for  two  years,  as  I 
wished  to  get  him  away  from  his  turf  associations'.  I  examined 
him  thoroughly  at  that  time,  and  beyond  a  very  shallow  scar 
of  some  former  excoriation,  to  which  he  told  me  he  was  liable, 
there  was  nothing  venereal  about  him.  There  was  no  chancre 
nor  any  sore  on  any  other  part  of  his  body. 

Cross-examined — He  was  a  weak  man,  and  apt  to  take  the 
advice  of  any  person  he  might  be  in  company  with.  The  last 
time  I  saw  him  he  had  a  redness  over  one  tonsil,  showing  there 
was  tenderness.  He  had  three  or  four  superficial  ulcers  on  his 
lips. 

CHARLES   NEWTON,   examined — I    am  assistant   to  Mr.    Salt,  c.  Newton 
E  49 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

C.  Newton  practising  surgeon  at  Rugeley.  On  Monday,  19th  November, 
about  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  Palmer  came  in  to  Mr.  Salt's 
surgery.  He  asked  me  for  three  grains  of  strychnia,  which 
I  gave  to  him.  I  do  not  think  he  was  in  the  shop  above  two 
minutes.  Between  eleven  and  twelve  on  the  next  day  I  saw 
him  again  in  the  shop  of  Mr.  Hawkins,  a  druggist.  He  was 
in  the  shop  when  I  went  in.  He  put  his  hand  between 
my  shoulders  and  said  he  wished  to  speak  to  me.  I  went  to 
the  door  with  him  and  out  into  the  street.  He  asked  me 
when  Mr.  Edwin  Salt,  the  son  of  Mr.  Salt,  was  going  up  to 
his  farm  at  Sudbury.  Palmer  had  nothing  to  do  with  that 
at  all.  While  we  were  talking,  a  Mr.  Brassington  came  up 
and  entered  into  conversation  with  me  about  some  bills  for 
money  he  had  against  my  employer.  Palmer  left  us  and 
returned  to  the  shop,  and  came  out  again  while  we  were  still 
talking.  He  went  in  the  direction  of  his  own  house,  which  is 
between  200  and  300  yards  away.  I  went  into  the  shop  after 
my  conversation  with  Mr.  Brassington  and  saw  Roberts,  who 
was  serving.  I  know  Mr.  Thirlby,  who  deals  in  drugs. 
He  was  formerly  an  assistant  to  Palmer,  and  succeeded  to  his 
business.  He  dispenses  all  Palmer's  medicines  for  him.  About 
seven  o'clock  in  the  evening  of  Sunday,  the  25th  November, 
I  went  to  Palmer's  house  in  consequence  of  being  sent  for  by 
him.  There  was  no  one  else  there.  He  asked  me  what  dose 
of  strychnia  would  kill  a  dog,  and  whether  it  would  be  found 
in  the  stomach.  I  told  him  a  grain,  and  that  there  would  be 
no  inflammation,  and  I  did  not  think  it  would  be  found.  I 
think  he  said,  "  It  is  all  right,"  as  if  speaking  to  himself,  and 
snapped  his  fingers.  I  heard  the  next  day  that  the  post- 
mortem examination  of  Cook's  body  was  to  take  place.  On 
my  way  to  the  post-mortem,  about  ten  o'clock  in  the  forenoon, 
I  saw  Palmer  at  Bamford's,  and  I  told  him  where  I  was  going. 
He,  Dr.  Harland,  and  I  went  down  together  to  the  Talbot  Arms 
for  the  examination.  Palmer  and  I  were  left  alone  together 
in  the  entrance  to  the  hall.  He  remarked  it  would  be  a  stiff 
job,  and  asked  me  to  go  over  to  his  house  for  some  brandy. 
We  did  so.  While  we  were  taking  the  brandy  he  said,  "  You 
will  find  this  fellow  suffering  from  diseased  throat;  he  has  had 
syphilis."  We  then  returned  to  the  Talbot  Arms.  I  was 
examined  before  the  coroner,  but  I  said  nothing  about  giving 
Palmer  the  three  grains  of  strychnia  on  Monday  night. 

Cross-examined — When  I  was  first  examined  on  behalf  of 
the  Crown  I  mentioned  the  circumstance  of  the  conversation 
about  poisoning  the  dog.  Before  that  I  mentioned  it  to  Mr. 
Salt,  but  I  cannot  remember  when.  I  gave  a  statement  to 
Mr.  Gardner  some  time  after  the  inquest.  I  mentioned  about 
the  dog,  but  did  not  speak  about  the  3  grains  of  strychnia. 
I  made  no  mention  about  these  matters  at  the  inquest.  I 

So 


Evidence   for   Prosecution. 

gave  evidence  about  my  conversation  with  Palmer  at  the  door  C.Newton 
of  Hawkins'  shop.  I  knew  my  evidence  was  with  reference 
to  the  supposed  purchase  of  strychnia  by  Palmer  at  the  shop. 
The  first  time  I  informed  the  Crown  with  reference  to  the 
purchase  of  the  3  grains  on  the  Monday  was  on  Tuesday  last. 
At  the  post-mortem  examination  I  did  not  point  out  any 
chancre  to  the  medical  men  there.  It  was  not  mentioned  at 
all,  and  I  did  not  see  one  nor  the  the  marks  of  one. 

Re-examined — The  reason  why  I  did  not  mention  about  the 
purchase  of  the  3  grains  of  strychnia  before  last  Tuesday  to 
the  Crown  was  because  Mr.  Salt  was  not  on  speaking  terms 
with  Mr.  Palmer,  and  I  thought  Mr.  Salt  would  be  angry  at 
my  letting  him  have  it.  I  communicated  the  fact  of  my  own 
accord. 

The  Court  then  adjourned. 


Third  Day,  Friday,  i6th  May,  1856. 
The  Court  met  at  ten  o'clock. 

C.  J.  Roberts  CHARLES  JOSEPH  ROBERTS,  examined  by  Mr.  JAMBS  —  In 
November  last  I  was  an  apprentice  to  Mr.  Hawkins,  a  chemist 
at  Rugeley  I  remember  that  between  eleven  and  twelve 
o'clock  on  Tuesday,  20th  November,  Palmer  came  into  the 
shop  and  asked  me  first  for  2  drachms  of  prussic  acid.  "Whilst 
I  was  putting  it  up  for  him  Mr.  Newton  came  in.  Palmer 
said  he  wanted  to  speak  to  him,  and  the  two  of  them  went 
out  of  the  shop  together.  I  saw  Brassington  come  up  and 
speak  to  Newton  when  Palmer  left  them  and  came  back  into  the 
shop.  I  was  putting  the  prussic  acid  into  the  bottle,  and  he 
asked  me  for  6  grains  of  strychnine  and  2  drachms  of  Batley's 
solution  of  opium.  While  I  was  making  the  things  up  Palmer 
stood  at  the  shop  door  with  his  back  to  me,  looking  into  the 
street.  He  then  took  them  away  and  paid  for  them.  After 
he  left  Newton  came  into  the  shop,  and  I  had  some  conversa- 
tion with  him.  It  would  be  two  years  before  this  transaction 
that  Palmer  bought  drugs  in  our  shop.  He  always  dealt  with 
Thirlby,  who  previously  was  his  assistant,  and  is  now  prac- 
tising as  an  apothecary  in  Palmer's  name. 

Cross-examined — I  did  not  make  any  entry  of  the  transac- 
tion in  our  book.  I  am  not  in  the  habit  of  doing  so  when 
things  are  sold  over  the  counter. 

W.V.Stevens  WILLIAM  VERNON  STEVENS,  examined  by  the  ATTORNEY- 
GENERAL — I  am  a  retired  merchant  living  in  the  city.  I  am 
the  step-father  of  John  Parsons  Cook,  having  married  his 
father's  widow  eighteen  years  ago.  He  did  not  live  with  me, 
but  we  were  always  on  friendly  terms.  He  became  en- 
titled to  property  worth  about  £12,000.  The  last  time  I 
saw  him  alive  was  at  Euston  station  at  two  o'clock  on  the 
afternoon  of  5th  November.  He  looked  better  than  I  had 
seen  him  for  some  time,  and  I  said,  "  My  boy,  you  look  very 
well;  you  do  not  look  anything  of  an  invalid  now."  He 
struck  himself  firmly  on  the  chest  and  said  he  was  quite  well. 
The  next  time  I  saw  him  was  after  his  death,  information  of 
which  I  received  from  Mr.  Jones,  who  came  to  my  house  on 
the  Wednesday.  I  went  to  Lutterworth  on  the  Thurs- 
day to  search  for  a  will  and  any  papers  he  had 
left.  I  found  a  will.  When  I  reached  Rugeley  the 
next  day  I  went  to  the  Talbot  Arms,  and  met  Palmer  in 
the  passage.  I  had  only  seen  him  once  before.  Mr.  Jones 
introduced  us  in  the  inn,  and  we  then  went  up  and  viewed  the 

52 


Evidence  for   Prosecution. 

body.  I  was  greatly  struck  by  the  appearance  of  the  counten-  W.  v.  Stevens 
ance,  the  tightness  of  the  muscles  across  the  face.  We  all 
then  went  down  to  one  of  the  sitting  rooms,  and  I  said  to  the 
prisoner  that  I  understood  from  Mr.  Jones  he  knew  something 
of  my  son's  affairs.  He  replied,  "  Yes,  there  are  £4000  worth 
of  bills  out  of  his,  and  I  am  sorry  to  say  my  name  is  to  them; 
but  I  have  got  a  paper  drawn  up  by  a  lawyer,  signed  by  Mr. 
Cook,  to  show  that  I  have  never  had  any  benefit  from  them." 
I  told  him  I  feared  there  would  be  no  money  to  pay  them,  and 
asked  if  he  had  no  horses  or  property.  He  replied  that  he 
had  horses,  but  they  were  mortgaged.  He  mentioned  one 
debt  of  £300  that  was  owing  to  Cook.  It  had  nothing  to  do 
with  sporting  matters,  and  was  a  personal  debt  from  a  relative 
of  his.  I  then  turned  round  to  Palmer  and  said  that,  whether 
Cook  had  left  anything  or  not,  he  must  be  buried.  Palmer 
immediately  said,  "Oh!  I  will  bury  him  myself  if  that  is 
all."  I  replied  I  could  not  hear  of  that.  Cook's  brother-in- 
law  was  there  at  the  time,  and  he  also  expressed  a  wish  to 
bury  him.  I  said  it  was  my  business,  as  executor,  to  bury  him, 
and  that  I  intended  to  bury  him  in  London  in  his  mother's 
grave,  and  that  the  body  would  have  to  be  at  the  inn  for  a 
day  or  two.  Palmer  said  that  would  be  of  no  consequence  so 
long  as  the  body  was  fastened  up  at  once.  Some  short  time 
afterwards  I  asked  Palmer  for  the  name  of  some  respectable 
undertaker  in  Rugeley,  so  that  I  might  order  a  coffin  at  once. 
He  replied,  "  I  have  been  and  chosen  that.  I  have  ordered  a 
shell  and  a  strong  oak  coffin."  I  expressed  my  surprise,  and 
said  he  had  no  authority  to  do  so.  At  my  invitation,  my  son-in- 
law,  Mr.  Jones,  and  Palmer  all  dined  with  me  at  the  inn. 
We  dined  about  three,  as  I  was  going  back  to  London  by  the 
quarter-past  four  train.  Before  I  left  I  asked  Mr.  Jones  to  go 
upstairs  and  bring  me  Cook's  betting  book  and  any  papers. 
He  went  along  with  Palmer,  and  in  about  ten  minutes  he 
returned,  saying  he  could  find  no  book  or  paper.  I  expressed 
my  astonishment,  and  Palmer  said,  "It  is  of  no  manner  of  use 
if  you  find  it."  I  said  I  was  the  best  judge  of  that,  and  I 
understood  my  son  won  a  great  deal  of  money  at  Shrewsbury. 
Palmer  replied  that  when  a  man  dies  his  bets  are  done  with, 
and  that  Mr.  Cook  had  received  the  greater  part  of  his  money 
on  the  course  at  Shrewsbury.  I  said  that  the  book  must  be 
found,  and  he  replied  in  a  much  quieter  tone,  "  Oh,  it  will  be 
found,  no  doubt."  The  body  was  in  the  shell,  and  I  noticed 
that  both  the  hands  were  clenched.  I  then  returned  to  town. 
The  next  morning  I  communicated  with  the  uncle  of  the 
deceased  and  with  my  solicitor,  who  gave  me  a  letter  to  Mr. 
Gardner,  of  Rugeley.  I  returned  to  Rugeley  by  the  two 
o'clock  train,  arriving  there  about  eight.  Palmer  travelled 
by  the  same  train.  I  met  him  first  at  Euston  station,  when 

53 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

W.  V.  Stevens  he  told  me  he  had  been  summoned  to  London  by  telegraph. 
I  saw  him  again  in  the  refreshment  room  at  Wolverton.  We 
had  some  conversation,  and  I  remarked  that  it  would  be  as 
well  to  know  something  of  the  complaint  of  which  Cook  died, 
and  that  I  should  like  his  body  opened.  Palmer  replied,  "  That 
can  be  done  very  well,"  or  "That  can  be  easily  done,"  or 
something  of  that  sort.  I  saw  him  again  in  the  refreshment 
room  at  Rugby,  and  mentioned  to  him  my  determination  to  see 
a  solicitor  in  Rugeley  about  my  son's  affairs.  From  Rugby  to 
Rugeley  we  travelled  in  the  same  carriage,  but  no  further  con- 
versation took  place.  When  we  arrived  at  Rugeley  he  again 
spoke  about  me  employing  a  solicitor,  and  offered  to  introduce 
me  to  one.  I  refused  his  offer,  and  said  I  would  find  one 
myself.  I  then  immediately  purposely  changed  the  tone  of  my 
voice  and  manner,  and  said,  "  Mr.  Palmer,  if  I  should  call  in 
a  solicitor  to  give  me  advice,  I  suppose  you  will  have  no  objec- 
tions to  answer  him  any  questions  he  might  choose  to  put  to 
you  1  "  He  replied,  with  a  spasmodic  affection  of  the  throat, 
which  was  perfectly  evident,  "  Oh,  no,  certainly  not."  I  also 
expressed  my  desire  of  taking  a  solicitor  to  Hednesford,  where 
Cook's  horses  were  kept.  I  ought  to  say  that,  when  I  first 
mentioned  the  post-mortem,  there  was  not  the  slightest  change 
in  Mr.  Palmer's  manner;  he  was  perfectly  calm  and  collected. 
We  then  parted,  he  to  go  home  and  I  to  go  and  look  for  Mr. 
Gardner.  Later  in  the  evening  Palmer  came  to  me  again,  and 
the  first  thing  he  spoke  about  was  the  bills.  He  said,  "  It  is  a 
very  unpleasant  affair  for  me  about  these  bills."  I  remarked 
that  I  had  heard  a  different  account  of  Mr.  Cook's  affairs,  and 
that  his  affairs  could  only  be  settled  in  the  Court  of  Chancery. 
All  he  replied  was,  "  Oh,  indeed,"  in  a  lower  tone.  The 
next  day,  Sunday,  I  saw  him  again  in  the  coffee  room  of  my 
hotel.  He  advised  me  not  to  take  a  solicitor  to  Hednesford, 
but  I  told  him  I  should  use  my  own  judgment  upon  that.  Later 
in  the  evening,  I  think,  I  saw  him  again.  I  asked  him  who 
the  Mr.  Smith  was  who  had  sat  up  with  my  son,  as  I  wished 
to  make  inquiries  regarding  the  missing  betting  book.  He 
replied  he  was  a  solicitor  of  that  town.  I  asked  him  if  he 
attended  my  son  medically,  and  he  said  no.  He  then  asked 
me  if  I  knew  who  was  to  perform  the  examination,  and  I  told 
him  I  did  not.  On  the  Friday,  when  I  twice  saw  the  body,  I 
did  not  perceive  any  decomposition  or  anything  which  called 
for  its  being  speedily  put  into  a  shell;  on  the  contrary,  the 
body  did  not  quite  look  to  me  like  a  dead  body. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — The  last  time  my 
stepson  stayed  in  my  house  was  for  about  a  month,  in 
January  and  February  of  last  year.  He  had  a  slight  sore 
throat  then,  but  I  do  not  know  that  it  was  continuously  sore. 
He  did  not  complain  of  it.  I  never  noticed  any  ulcers  about 

54 


Evidence    for    Prosecution. 

his  face.     Between  that  time  and  the  5th  November  I  saw  him  W.  V.  Stevens 

several  times,  and  he  did  not  appear  to  be  more  delicate  than 

usual.       The  reason  why  I  mentioned  to  him  on  5th  November 

that  he  was  looking  very  well  was  because  he  had  complained 

of  being  an  invalid  the  winter  before.       His  brother  and  sister 

were  rather  delicate,  and  his  father  died  at  the  age  of  thirty  or 

thirty-one. 

Dr.    JOHN  THOMAS    HARLAND,     examined   by   Mr.    BODKIN —  J.  T.  Harland 

I  am  a  physician  residing  at  Stafford.  On  26th 
November  I  made  a  post-mortem  examination  of  Mr. 
Cook.  I  called  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Bamford,  and  on 
my  way  there  I  was  joined  by  Palmer,  whom  I  had  frequently 
seen  and  spoken  to  at  Rugeley.  He  said,  "  I  am  glad  you  have 
come  to  make  a  post-mortem  examination;  some  one  might 
have  been  sent  whom  I  did  not  know;  I  know  you."  I  asked 
him  what  the  case  was;  that  I  heard  there  was  a  suspicion  of 
poisoning.  He  replied,  "Oh,  no  1  I  think  not;  he  had  an 
epileptic  fit  on  Monday  and  Tuesday  night,  and  you  will  find 
an  old  disease  in  the  heart  and  in  the  head."  Palmer  offered 
to  lend  me  instruments,;  as  I  had  brought  none  with  me.  He 
said  a  queer  old  man  seemed  to  suspect  him.  He  also  said, 
"  He  seems  to  suspect  that  I  have  got  the  betting  book,  but 
Cook  had  no  betting  book  that  would  be  of  use  to  any  one." 
After  we  reached  Bamford' s  house,  Mr.  Bamford  and  I  went  to 
Mr.  Frere's,  a  surgeon  in  Rugeley,  and  from  there  to  the  Talbot 
Arms,  where  the  post-mortem  examination  was  proceeded  with. 
Palmer  and  several  others  were  in  the  room.  Mr.  Devonshire 
operated  and  Mr.  Newton  assisted  him.  The  body  seemed 
to  me  to  be  stiffer  than  bodies  generally  are  six  days  after 
death.  The  muscles  were  strongly  contracted  and  thrown  out, 
which  showed  there  was  a  strong  spasmodic  action  in  the  body 
before  death.  The  hands  were  clenched;  firmly  closed.  The 
abdominal  viscera  were  the  first  parts  of  the  body  examined 
internally.  They  were  taken  out  of  the  body,  and  were  in  a 
perfectly  healthy  state.  The  liver  was  healthy.  The  lungs 
were  healthy ;  there  was  blood  in  them,  but  not  more  than  could 
be  accounted  for  by  gravitation.  The  brain  was  quite  healthy. 
There  was  no  extravasation  of  blood  nor  serum  on  the  brain. 
There  was  nothing  in  its  appearance  that  would  cause  unnatural 
pressure.  The  heart  was  contracted,  and  contained  no  blood. 
This  did  not  appear  to  be  the  result  of  disease,  but  from 
spasmodic  action.  The  stomach  was  taken  out.  At  the  larger 
end  there  were  numerous  small  yellowish-white  spots  about  the 
size  of  mustard  seed.  These  would  not  at  all  account  for  death, 
nor  would  they  have  any  effect  on  the  health  of  any  one.  There 
may  have  been  numerous  follicles,  nothing  more.  The  kidneys 
were  full  of  blood  that  had  gravitated  since  death,  and  had  no 

55 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

J.  T.  Harland  appearance  of  disease.  The  blood  was  in  a  fluid  state,  which  is 
a  rare  occurrence  even  in  cases  of  sudden  death.  About  the 
whole  body  generally  there  was  no  appearance  of  disease  that 
would  account  for  death.  The  lower  part  of  the  spinal  cord 
was  not  minutely  examined  on  this  occasion.  The  upper  part 
presented  a  perfectly  natural  appearance. 

On  the  25th  of  January  the  body  was  again  exhumed,  so  that 
we  might  examine  the  spinal  cord  with  more  attention.  Dr. 
Monckton  and  I  jointly  made  a  report  on  the  matter.  I  am  still 
of  the  opinion  that  there  was  nothing  in  the  appearance  that  I 
have  described  to  account  for  the  death  of  the  deceased.  When 
the  stomach  and  intestines  were  removed  from  the  body  in  the 
first  examination  they  were  separately  emptied  into  a  jar  by  Mr. 
Devonshire  and  Mr.  Newton.  Palmer  was  standing  at  the  right 
of  Mr.  Newton.  When  the  intestines  and  stomach  were  being 
placed  in  the  jar,  and  while  Mr.  Devonshire  was  opening  the 
stomach,  I  noticed  Palmer  pushed  Mr.  Newton  on  to  Mr.  Devon- 
shire, and  he  shook  a  portion  of  the  contents  of  the  stomach  into 
the  body.  I  thought  a  joke  was  passing  among  them,  and  I 
said,  "  Do  not  do  that,"  to  the  whole.  Palmer  was  the  only  one 
close  to  them  when  Mr.  Newton  and  Mr.  Devonshire  were 
pushed  together.  After  this  interruption  the  opening  of  the 
stomach  proceeded.  It  contained  about,  I  should  think,  2 
or  3  ounces  of  brownish  liquid.  It  was  stated  that  there  was 
nothing  particular  found  in  the  stomach,  and  Palmer  remarked 
to  Mr.  Bamford,  "  They  will  not  hang  us  yet."  The  stomach 
was  then  emptied  into  the  jar  along  with  the  stomach  itself.  The 
intestines  were  then  examined,  and  nothing  particular  found 
in  them.  They  were  contracted  and  very  small.  They  were 
placed  in  the  jar,  with  their  contents,  as  they  were  taken  from 
the  body.  I  then  tied  the  jar  over  with  two  bladders  and  sealed 
it,  and  placed  it  on  the  table  beside  the  body.  At  that  time 
Palmer  was  moving  about  the  room.  My  attention  had  been 
called  away  by  the  examination,  and  I  missed  the  jar  for  a  few 
minutes.  I  called  out,  "Where  is  the  jar?"  and  Palmer,  from 
the  other  end  of  the  room,  said,  "  It  is  here;  I  thought  it  more 
convenient  for  you  to  take  it  away."  Palmer  was  standing  a 
yard  or  two  from  a  door  at  that  end  of  the  room.  I  got  the 
jar  from  him.  I  found  there  was  a  cut,  hardly  an  inch  long, 
through  both  bladders.  The  cut  was  quite  clean,  as  if  nothing 
had  passed  through.  I  asked  who  had  done  this,  and  Palmer, 
Mr.  Devonshire,  and  Mr.  Newton  all  seemed  to  say  they  had 
not  done  it.  I  told  Palmer  I  should  take  the  jar  to  Mr.  Frere. 
He  said,  "  I  would  rather  you  take  it  with  you  to  Stafford,  if  you 
would  take  it  there,"  but  I  took  it  to  Mr.  Frere's  house,  tied 
and  sealed  in  the  way  I  have  told.  When  I  noticed  the 
slit  in  the  bladders  I  immediately  cut  the  strings  and  replaced 
the  bladders,  and  tied  them  separately  again,  so  that  the  slit 

56 


Evidence   for   Prosecution. 

was  not  at  the  top.     When  I  returned  to  the  Talbot  Anns  J.  T.  Harland 
Palmer  asked  me  what  I  had  done  with  the  jar.     I  said  I  had 
left  it  with  Mr.  Frere,  and  that  it  would  go  to  either  London 
or  Birmingham  that  night  for  examination. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  SHEE — On  the  occasion  of  the 
first  examination  you  say  you  observed  follicles  under  the 
tongue;  are  those  pustules? — Not  under  the  tongue,  on  the 
tongue.  They  are  not  pustules;  they  are  large  mucous  follicles, 
not  containing  matter. 

Is  it  a  sort  of  thickening,  then,  of  the  skin? — Of  the  mucous 
follicles  at  the  base  of  the  tongue.  They  appeared  to  be  of 
long  standing,  and  were  very  numerous. 

Do  they  indicate  that  there  had  been  much  soreness  there? — 
I  have  no  doubt  they  would  produce  inconvenience.  They  must 
have  given  some  slight  degree  of  pain  in  eating  and  speaking. 

Will  you  undertake  to  say  they  were  not  enlarged  glands, 
enlarged  by  the  irritation  of  disease? — I  do  not  believe  they 
were;  I  have  seen  them  frequently. 

Do  you  adhere  to  your  opinion  that  the  lungs  were  healthy? 
—Yes. 

Did  not  Mr.  Devonshire,  in  your  presence,  express  a  contrary 
opinion,  and  say  they  were  unhealthy? — He  said  he  thought 
there  was  emphysema,  as  well  as  congestion  of  the  lungs. 

Is  that  not  a  diseased  state  of  the  lungs? — Yes,  it  is  an 
abnormal  state.  I  examined  the  white  spots  on  the  wider  part 
of  the  stomach. 

How  did  you  examine  them? — By  removing  the  mucous  that 
was  on  the  surface  of  the  stomach  by  the  finger  or  scalpel.  I 
had  no  lens,  no  glass.  I  should  have  examined  them  with  a 
lens  if  I  had  had  one. 

Was  your  examination  of  these  appearances  satisfactory  to 
you  without  a  lens? — Yes. 

You  said  that  the  brain  was  healthy;  what  sort  of  examina- 
tion did  you  make  of  the  brain  ? — The  brain  was  carefully  taken 
out ;  the  external  part  was  first  of  all  examined ;  the  membranes 
were  examined,  and  slices  were  taken  off  from  the  apex  to  the 
base  of  the  brain.  These  slices  were,  I  should  think,  a  quarter 
of  an  inch  thick. 

Is  that  as  thick  as  it  should  be  to  make  a  full  examination  ? — 
I  think  that  would  show  any  disease  if  there  was  any.  The 
spinal  cord  was  examined  down  to  the  first  vertebra,  and  we 
found  no  appearance  of  disease. 

Supposing  you  had  discovered  a  softness  of  the  spinal  cord 
on  that  occasion,  after  a  full  examination,  might  not  that  have 
been  sufficient  to  account  for  the  death  of  Mr.  Cook? — No, 
certainly  not;  softening  would  not  produce  tetanus  at  all;  it 
might  produce  paralysis. 

Do  not  you  think  in  the  case  of  a  man  dying  by  convulsions, 

57 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

J.  T.  Harland  in  order  to  ascertain  with  any  degree  of  certainty  what  the 
cause  of  his  death  might  be,  it  was  necessary  shortly  after  his 
death  to  make  a  careful  examination  of  the  spinal  cord? — No, 
I  do  not.  It  was  afterwards  thought  desirable.  It  was  first 
suggested  on  26th  December. 

It  was  in  January  the  second  examination  took  place;  sup- 
posing there  had  been  a  softening,  do  not  you  think,  in  order 
to  discover  it,  it  was  necessary  to  examine  the  spinal  cord  at 
an  earlier  period  after  death  than  two  months? — If  there  had 
been  a  softening  it  would  have  been  detected  at  the  second 
examination;  the  body  remaining  unexamined  for  a  long  time 
would  not  produce  hardening  of  the  spine. 

That  is  your  opinion;  might  not  any  softening  at  that  late 
period  be  the  result  of  decomposition? — The  spine  was  very 
little  soft  indeed.  There  were  some  appearances  of  decomposi- 
tion upon  it.  I  examined  him  to  see  if  there  was  any  disease 
on  him  of  the  venereal  kind.  I  observed  there  was  a  loss  of 
substance  from  past  disease.  It  was  cicatrised  over,  and  on 
the  cicatrix  there  was  a  small  abrasion. 

Then  it  must  have  been  in  a  sore  state? — The  excoriation 
might  be  a  little  sore.  It  was  very  small.  It  was  a  mere 
excoriation ;  merely  a  little  of  the  excoriation  rubbed  off. 

Re-examined — There  were  no  chancres,  nothing  beyond  what 
I  would  term  an  excoriation,  except  the  cicatrix  from  the  old 
disease.  There  was  no  symptom  of  ulcerated  throat,  nor  any 
appearance  of  anything  syphilitic  there.  The  follicles  in  the 
tongue  are  often  produced  by  a  disordered  stomach,  and  are  of 
no  serious  consequence  to  health.  The  congestion  of  the  lungs, 
which  Mr.  Devonshire  spoke  about,  was  due,  in  my  opinion, 
wholly  to  the  gravitation  of  blood  after  death.  There  was 
nothing  whatever  in  the  brain  to  indicate  the  presence  of  any 
disease.  Even  if  there  had  been,  I  have  never  heard  or  read 
of  any  diseased  state  of  the  brain  occasioning  death  by  tetanus. 
There  is  no  disease  of  the  spinal  cord  with  which  I  am 
acquainted  which  produces  tetanus  and  that  form  of  death. 
Sometimes  with  inflammation  of  the  membranes  of  the  spinal 
cord  there  is  tetanus;  but  there  were  no  appearances  of 
inflammation  whatever. 

c- J-  Devon-  CHARLES  JOHN  DEVONSHIRE,  examined  by  Mr.  HUDDLESTON — I 
am  an  undergraduate  of  London  University.  I  performed 
the  post-mortem  on  25th  November  at  the  Talbot  Hotel. 
The  body  was  pale.  The  fingers  were  clenched  firmly ; 
the  thumb  of  the  left  hand  was  thrown  into  the  palm, 
and  the  fingers  were  clenched  over.  The  mouth  was  a 
little  contracted.  The  body  was  stiff,  much  beyond  the 
usual  stiffness  of  death.  I  took  out  the  stomach  and  opened 
it  with  a  pair  of  scissors.  As  I  was  opening  the  stomach  there 

58 


Evidence   for    Prosecution. 

was  a  pressure  or  push  from  behind.     I  did  not  pay  any  atten-   C.  J.  Devo»- 

tion  to  it,  and  I  do  not  think  any  of  the  contents  of  the  stomach   s 

escaped.     I  punctured  the  anterior  surface  of  the  stomach,  and 

a  spoonful  of  the  contents  fell  out  on  the  chair.      I  tied  up 

where  it  was  punctured,  and  it  was  put  into  a  jar  and  sealed 

by  Dr.  Harland.     On  the  same  day  I  got  the  jar  at  Mr.  Frere's, 

and  gave  it,  on  the  28th,  to  Mr.  Boycott,  Messrs.   Lander  & 

Gardner's  clerk.     The  body  was  opened  again  on  the  29th  to 

get  the  liver  and  kidneys  and  spleen.     They  were  taken  from 

the  body  with  some  blood,  placed  in  a  stone  jar,  which  I  sealed 

and  handed  to  Mr.   Boycott  on  the  30th.     In  consequence  of 

something  Mr.  Palmer  had  said,  I  examined  the  body  to  find 

if  there  were  any  indications  of  syphilis,  but  I  found  none.     I 

also  took  out  the  throat,  and  found  there  were  natural  papillae 

there;  they  were  larger  than  usual  at  the  base  of  the  tongue. 

JOHN  MY  ATT — I  am  postboy  at  the  Talbot  Arms  at  Rugeley.  j0hn  Myatt 
On  28th  of  November  last  I  was  engaged  to  drive  Mr.  Stevens 
to  Stafford  station.  Before  I  started  Mr.  Palmer  asked  me  if 
I  was  going  to  drive  them  to  Stafford.  I  told  him  I  was.  He 
asked  if  I  was  going  to  take  the  jars.  I  said  I  believed  I  was. 
He  said  there  was  a  £10  note  for  me  if  I  would  upset  them. 
I  told  him  I  should  not.  I  saw  him  next  morning,  and  he  asked 
me  who  went  with  the  fly.  I  said  Mr.  Stevens,  and  I  believed 
one  of  Mr.  Gardner's  clerks. 

Cross-examined — How  did  you  know  what  he  meant  by  "  going 
to  drive  them  to  Stafford  "  ? — I  knew  I  was  going  to  take  some 
one  to  Stafford. 

Did  he  use  the  name  "  Stevens  "  before  he  used  these  words 
to  you? — He  mentioned  Mr.  Stevens  afterwards. 

You  understood  the  word  "  them  "  to  mean  Mr.  Stevens  and 
his  party? — Yes. 

Were  the  words  used  not  to  this  effect,  "  I  should  not  mind 
giving  £10  to  break  Mr.  Stevens'  neck"? — I  do  not  remember 
that. 

The  "  £10  to  upset  him  "? — These  were  the  words  to  the  best 
of  my  recollection. 

When  he  said  "  to  upset  him "  did  he  say  anything  about 
him  at  the  time? — He  did  say  something  about  it,  that  it  was 
a  humbugging  concern,  or  something  to  that  effect.  I  do  not 
recollect  him  saying  he  was  a  suspicious,  troublesome  fellow. 

SAMUEL  CHBSHIHE — I  was  for  upwards  of  eight  years  post-  s.  Cheshire 
master  at  Rugeley.  I  am  now  from  Newgate  suffering  punish- 
ment for  having  opened  a  letter  as  postmaster.  I  know  the 
prisoner  very  well,  he  and  I  having  been  schoolfellows  together. 
I  was  with  him  at  Shrewsbury  Races  the  day  "  Polestar  "  won. 
I  saw  Mr.  Cook  at  the  Talbot  Arms  on  the  Saturday,  17th 

59 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

S.  Cheshire  November.  He  was  in  bed  at  the  time.  On  the  Tuesday 
following  Palmer  asked  me  to  meet  him  at  his  house  and  bring 
a  receipt  stamp  with  me.  I  did  so.  He  said  he  wanted  me  to 
write  out  a  cheque,  which,  he  said,  was  for  money  Mr.  Cook 
owed  him.  He  produced  a  copy  from  which  I  was  to  write, 
and  I  copied  it.  He  gave  me  as  a  reason  why  he  wanted  me  to 
write  it  that  Mr.  Cook  was  too  ill,  and  he  said  Wetherby  would 
know  his  writing.  After  I  had  written  it  I  left  it  with  him, 
and  he  said  he  was  going  to  take  it  over  for  Mr.  Cook  to  sign. 

The  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — We  know  that  it  went  out  of  his 
possession  afterwards,  and  therefore  perhaps  we  ought  to  follow 
it. 

[Evidence  was  then  given  to  show  that  this  cheque  for  £350 
was  sent  to  Mr.  Wetherby,  the  secretary  to  the  Jockey  Club, 
that  it  was  returned  to  Palmer,  that  notice  to  produce  it  was 
given  by  the  prosecution,  and  that  it  was  not  produced.] 

S.  Cheshire  SAMUEL  CHESHIRE,  recalled — After  Mr.  Cook's  death,  on  the 
Thursday  or  Friday,  Palmer  sent  for  me  again.  I  went  to 
his  house  and  saw  him  there.  He  had  a  sheet  of  quarto  paper 
in  his  hand,  which  he  asked  me  to  sign. 

LORD  CAMPBELL — Was  there  anything  written  upon  this  quarto 
sheet  of  paper? — There  was. 

Examination  resumed — I  asked  him  what  it  was,  and  he  said, 
"  You  know  that  Co  ok  and  I  have  had  some  dealings  together, 
and  this  is  a  document  which  he  gave  me  some  days  ago,  and 
I  want  you  to  witness  it."  I  asked  him  what  it  was  about,  and 
he  replied,  "  There  is  some  business  that  I  have  joined  him  in, 
and  which  was  all  for  Mr.  Cook's  benefit,  and  this  is  a  document 
stating  so,"  or  something  of  that  kind.  The  paper  was  a  post 
quarto  paper  of  a  yellow  description.  I  observed  the  writing 
on  it,  and  thought  it  was  Mr.  Palmer's.  I  told  him  I  could  not 
sign  it,  as  I  might  perhaps  be  called  upon  to  give  evidence  in 
the  matter  at  some  future  day.  I  said  I  had  not  seen  Cook 
sign  it,  and  that  the  post  office  authorities  would  not  like  me 
to  be  called  on  to  give  evidence  as  to  a  document  which  took 
place  while  I  was  absent.  Palmer  replied  that  it  did  not  matter 
my  signing  it,  and  he  dared  say  they  would  not  object  to  Mr. 
Cook's  signature.  I  gave  the  paper  back  to  him  and  left. 

(Notice  to  produce  this  paper  was  given,  but  it  was  not 
produced.) 

Palmer  was  in  the  habit  of  calling  for  letters  addressed  to 
his  mother,  and  which  I  gave  to  him.  I  cannot  remember 
whether  during  October  and  November,  1855,  I  gave  him  letters 
addressed  to  his  mother  or  addressed  to  Mr.  Cook.  I  remember 
seeing  Palmer  while  the  inquest  was  going  on.  He  came  to  me 
on  the  Sunday  evening  previous  to  5th  December,  and  asked 
me  to  let  him  know  if  I  had  seen  or  heard  anything  fresh.  I 
60 


Evidence   for   Prosecution. 

understood  that  was  a  temptation  for  me  to  open  a  letter,  and   S.  Cheshire 

I  told  him  I  could  not  do  that      He  said  he  did  not  want  me  to 

do  anything  to  injure  myself.     The  letter  which  I  read,  and 

for  which  I  am  suffering,  was  a  letter  from  Dr.  Taylor  to  Mr. 

Gardner,  the  solicitor.       I  did  not  give  nor  send  that  letter  to 

Palmer.     I  merely  told  him  in  few  words  of  its  contents.     I 

only  read  part  of  the  letter,  and  told  Palmer  the  contents  as 

much  as  I  remembered.     That  was  on  the  morning  of  the  5th 

of  December.     I  told  Palmer  that  I  found  in  Dr.  Taylor's  letter 

that  there  were  no  traces  of  strychnia  found.    I  cannot  recollect 

what  else  I  told  him.     He  said  he  knew  they  would  not,  for 

he  was  perfectly  innocent. 

Captain  JOHN  HAINES  HATTON — I  am  chief  constable  of  the  J-H.Hatton 
police  of  Staffordshire. 

Did  you  obtain  this  letter,  which  I  have  just  proved  to  be  in 
Palmer's  handwriting,  and  envelope  from  Mr.  Ward,  the 
coroner? — I  did;  I  endorsed  it. 

My  dear  Sir, — I  am  sorry  to  tell  you  that  I  am  still  confined  to  my 
bed.  I  do  not  think  it  was  mentioned  at  the  inquest  yesterday  that 
Cook  was  taken  ill  on  Sunday  and  Monday  night  in  the  same  way  as 
he  was  on  the  Tuesday  night  when  he  died.  The  chambermaid  at 
the  Crown  Hotel,  Masters,  can  prove  this.  I  also  believe  that  a 
man  by  the  name  of  Fisher  is  coming  down  to  prove  he  received  some 
money  at  Shrewsbury.  Now  here  he  could  only  pay  Smith  £10  out 
of  £41  he  owed  him.  Had  you  better  not  call  Smith  to  prove  this? 
And  again,  whatever  Professor  Taylor  may  say  to-morrow,  he  wrote 
from  London  last  Tuesday  night  to  Gardner  to  say  "  We  have  this 
day  finished  our  analysis,  and  find  no  traces  of  either  strychnia,  prussic 
acid,  or  opium."  What  can  beat  this  from  a  man  like  Taylor,  if 
he  says  what  he  has  already  said,  and  Dr.  Harland's  evidence?  Mind 
you,  I  know,  and  saw  it  in  black  and  white,  what  Taylor  said  to 
Gardner,  but  this  is  strictly  private  and  confidential,  but  it  is  true. 
As  regards  his  betting  book,  I  know  nothing  of  it,  and  it  is  of  no 
good  to  any  one.  I  hope  the  verdict  to-morrow  will  be  that  he  died 
of  natural  causes,  and  thus  end  it. — Ever  yours. 

SAMUEL  CHESHIRE,  recalled,  cross-examined — I  knew  Cook  s.  Cheshire 
very  well,  but  I  could  not  speak  to  his  handwriting.  I  am 
sure  that  when  Palmer  came  to  me  he  used  the  words,  "  seen 
or  heard  anything."  He  did  not  simply  ask  if  I  had  "heard 
anything."  On  the  Saturday  before  Cook's  death  I  dined  with 
Palmer  and  Mr.  Smith.  Cook  was  expected  to  dine  also,  but 
he  was  too  ill.  Palmer  said  he  must  call  in  Bamford. 

GEORGE  HERRING — I  knew  Mr.  Cook.     I  was  at  Shrewsbury   G.  Herring 
Races  last  November,   staying  at  the  Raven,   and  saw  Cook 
each  day.     I  saw  him  with  money  on  the  Wednesday.     He  was 
counting  up  a  lot  of  Bank  of  England  and  other  notes.     I  could 
not  say  how  many  there  were,  but  there  were  a  considerable 

61 


Trial   of  William  Palmer. 

G.  Herring  number.  He  showed  me  his  betting  book,  containing  entries 
of  bets  made  at  the  races.  On  Monday,  19th  November,  I 
received  a  letter  from  Palmer  asking  me  to  call  upon  him  at 
7  Beaufort  Buildings  at  half-past  two  that  day.  I  called,  and 
he  said  he  wished  to  see  me  about  settling  Cook's  account,  as 
the  physician  had  advised  Cook  not  to  go  out  that  day,  it  being 
damp.  Palmer  had  a  paper  in  his  hand,  and  read  out  from  it 
a  number  of  items  which  he  asked  me  to  take  down.  I  did  so, 
and  I  have  here  the  list  I  made.  He  said — "  Receive  of  Ingham, 
£350;  Barr,  £300;  Green,  £140;  Morris,  £200;  Nelson,  £30; 
pay  yourself  £6  and  Shelley  £30."  I  said  that  made  it  £984, 
and  he  said — "That  is  what  Cook  makes  it;  if  I  give  you  £16 
it  will  make  £1000;  out  of  that  pay  yourself  for  my  bill."  I 
said,  "  I  know  no  difference  between  the  two  bills  " ;  he  said, 
"Pay  Padwick  £550  and  Pratt  £450,  making  £1000."  He 
asked  me  to  send  cheque  for  the  last  two  at  once.  I  refused 
to  do  so,  as  I  had  not  received  the  money.  He  wished  me  par- 
ticularly to  pay  Pratt  the  £450,  as  he  said  it  was  for  a  bill  or 
joint-bill  of  sale  on  the  mare.  I  had  an  account  of  £45  against 
Palmer,  while  he  had  one  of  £40  against  me.  He  settled  this 
£5,  along  with  the  £16  to  make  up  the  £1000  previously  spoken 
to,  by  a  Bank  of  England  £50  note.  I  do  not  know  the  number 
of  the  note.  Before  he  left  he  pressed  me  to  send  the  cheques 
to  Pratt  and  Padwick  immediately  before  the  closing  of  the 
bank.  He  said,  "  When  you  have  settled  this  account  write 
down  word  to  either  me  or  Cook."  I  replied,  "  I  shall  certainly 
write  to  Mr.  Cook,"  because  I  thought  I  was  settling  Mr.  Cook's 
account.  He  said,  "  It  does  not  matter  which."  I  asked  him 
if  I  addressed  the  letter,  "Mr.  Cook,  Palmer,  Rugeley,  would 
that  be  correct,"  and  he  said  "  yes."  I  received  all  the  money 
at  Tattersall's  on  Cook's  account,  except  £110  of  Mr.  Morris, 
who  only  paid  £90  instead  of  £200.  I  sent  a  cheque  for  £450 
to  Pratt  from  Tattersall's.  I  wrote  a  letter  to  Cook  from 
Tattersall's.  The  next  day  I  received  a  telegraphic  message, 
which  I  gave  to  Captain  Hatton  on  the  coroner's  inquest.  In 
consequence  of  this  message  I  wrote  a  letter  the  same  day  to 
Cook. 

(Evidence  was  given  to  show  that  Herring  held  three  bills  of 
exchange,  each  for  £200,  on  which  Cook  and  Palmer  were 
jointly  responsible  to  him.  He  received  £200  from  Cook  on 
one  bill ;  another  £200  bill  he  deducted,  as  instructed  by  Palmer 
from  the  £1000.  The  third  bill  he  paid  himself  for  by  not 
paying  Padwick  as  Palmer  instructed  him.  Besides  these  bills 
Herring  held  a  fourth  for  £500  drawn  by  Palmer  on  his  mother, 
and  endorsed  by  him  and  Cook.  It  was  proved  that  this  accept- 
ance was  not  in  Mrs.  Palmer's  handwriting.) 

The  Court  then  adjourned. 
62 


Fourth  Day,  Saturday,  iyth  May,  1856. 
The  Court  met  at  ten  o'clock. 

GEORGE  BATE,  examined  by  Mr.  JAMES — I  am  a  farmer,  and  George  Bate 
was  in  the  employment  of  the  prisoner  during  September, 
October,  and  November  of  last  year.  I  was  engaged  to  look 
after  his  horses,  and  received  no  stated  salary,  sometimes  two 
sovereigns  and  sometimes  one  sovereign  a  week.  I  remember 
in  the  month  of  September,  1856,  being  in  the  company  of  Mr. 
Cook  and  Mr.  Palmer.  Something  was  said  by  one  of  them 
to  me  about  an  insurance  being  proposed  on  my  life. 

Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE  objected  to  this  evidence,  and  his  objec- 
tion was  sustained. 

Mr.  THOMAS  BLIZZARD  CURLING,  examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-  T.  B.  Curling 
GENERAL — I  am  a  Fellow  of  the  College  of  Surgeons,  and  surge  in 
to  the  London  Hospital.  I  have  published  a  work  on  the  sub- 
ject of  tetanus.  Tetanus  signifies  spasmodic  affection  of  the 
voluntary  muscles  of  the  body.  There  are  two  sorts  of  tetanus, 
idiopathic  and  traumatic.  Idiopathic  tetanus  is  tetanus 
originating,  as  it  were,  as  a  primary  disease,  without  any 
wound.  Traumatic  is  from  a  wound.  During  twenty-two  years 
I  have  been  surgeon  to  the  London  Hospital  I  have  never 
seen  a  case  of  idiopathic  tetanus.  I  have  seen  over  fifty  cases 
of  traumatic  tetanus.  Traumatic  tetanus  first  manifests  itself 
by  a  stiffness  about  the  jaws  and  the  back  of  the  neck ;  rigidity 
of  the  muscles  of  the  abdomen  usually  sets  in;  a  dragging  pain 
at  the  pit  of  the  stomach  is  almost  a  constant  attendant  of  spasm 
of  the  diaphragm,  and  in  many  cases  the  muscles  of  the  back 
are  sensibly  affected.  Then  the  spasms,  though  continuous, 
are  liable  to  aggravation  in  paroxysms.  As  the  disease  goes  on 
these  paroxysms  become  more  frequent  and  more  severe.  When 
they  occur,  the  body  is  drawn  backwards ;  in  some  instances, 
though  less  frequently,  it  is  bent  forwards;  then,  in  an  acute 
case,  a  difficulty  in  swallowing  is  a  very  common  thing ;  a  diffi- 
culty in  breathing  also  during  the  paroxysm,  a  choking  sen- 
sation. The  disease  may  end,  supposing  it  be  fatal,  in  two 
ways;  the  patient  may  die  somewhat  suddenly  of  suffocation, 
owing  to  closure  of  the  opening  of  the  windpipe,  or  the  patient 
may  be  worn  out  by  the  severe  and  painful  spasms,  and  the 
muscles  may  relax  and  the  patient  gradually  sink  and  die. 
Traumatic  tetanus  is  generally  fatal,  and  the  locking  of  the 
jaw  is  an  almost  invariable  symptom.  A  symptom  very  char- 
acteristic of  the  disease  is  a  contracted  condition  of  the  eye- 
lids, a  raising  of  the  angles  of  the  mouth,  and  a  contraction  of 

63 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

T.  B.  Curling  the  brow.  The  lower  extremities  are  sometimes  affected,  and 
sometimes  the  upper;  the  muscles  affected  are  chiefly  those  of 
the  trunk.  I  have  never  heard  of  traumatic  tetanus  being  pro- 
duced from  sore  throat  or  from  chancre.  A  case  of  traumatic 
tetanus  which  ends  fatally  takes  from  one  day  to  four  days,  or 
longer,  before  death  ensues.  I  never  heard  of  a  case  in  which 
a  man  would  be  attacked  one  day  and  then  have  twenty-four 
hours'  respite,  and  be  again  attacked  the  next.  The  symptoms 
of  the  death  of  Mr.  Cook,  given  by  Mr.  Jones,  the  surgeon, 
were  not  consistent  with  any  form  of  traumatic  tetanus  I  ever 
heard  of.  There  was  the  sudden  onset  of  the  fatal  symptoms ; 
in  all  cases  that  have  fallen  under  my  notice  the  disease  has 
been  preceded  by  the  milder  symptoms  of  tetanus.  The 
symptoms  given  by  the  woman  Mills  as  to  the  Monday  night 
were  not  those  of  tetanus.  The  sudden  onset  and  rapid  sub- 
sidence are  not  consistent  with  what  I  call  the  true  form  of 
tetanus.  The  poison,  nux  vomica,  produces  tetanic  con- 
vulsions. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — Any  irritation  of  the 
nerves  proceeding  to  the  spinal  cord  might  produce  tetanus.  I 
agree  with  Dr.  Watson  in  his  "  Lectures  on  the  Principles  and 
Practice  of  Physic,"  that  all  the  symptoms  of  tetanic  convulsions 
may  arise  from  such  slight  causes  as  the  sticking  of  a  fish  bone, 
the  mere  stroke  of  a  whip  lash  under  the  eye,  from  the  cutting 
of  a  corn,  from  the  bite  on  the  finger  by  a  tame  sparrow, 
from  the  extraction  of  a  tooth,  from  the  operation  of  cupping, 
and  simple  things  of  that  character.  Idiopathic  tetanus  would 
not  be  so  likely  to  bring  the  patient  to  the  hospital  as  a  sudden 
wound  leading  to  traumatic  tetanus.  A  syphilitic  sore  would 
not  be  likely  to  lead  to  tetanus. 

Re-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — A  medical  prac- 
titioner who  saw  a  case  of  convulsions  would  be  able  at  once  to 
know  the  difference  between  symptoms  of  general  convulsions 
and  of  tetanus.  One  of  the  characteristic  features  of  tetanus 
is  that  the  consciousness  is  not  affected. 

Robert  Todd  Dr.  ROBERT  TODD,  examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — I 
have  been  in  practice  as  a  doctor  for  twenty-five  years,  and 
have  been  a  physician  to  King's1  College  Hospital  for  many 
years.  I  have  lectured  on  the  disease  called  tetanus,  and 
have  published  the  lectures.  I  have  seen  two  cases  of  what 
seemed  to  be  idiopathic  tetanus.  It  is  a  very  rare  thing.  The 
term  tetanus  ought  not  to  be  applied  to  cases  of  poisoning,  for 
the  symptoms  are  so  essentially  distinct  from  the  disease.  I 
have  had  under  my  own  observation  cases  of  traumatic  tetanus. 
When  once  the  disease  has  begun  there  are  remissions,  but  not 
complete ;  rather  a  diminution  of  the  severity  of  the  symptoms. 
There  are  two  classes — an  acute  class  and  a  chronic  class.  The 
acute  cases  will  terminate  in  the  course  of  three  or  four  days, 

64 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

and  the  chronic  cases  will  go  on  from  nineteen  to  twenty-two  Robert  Todd 
or  twenty-three  days,  perhaps  longer.  Sometimes  epilepsy 
will  produce  convulsions,  and  sometimes  the  convulsions  from 
epilepsy  assume  somewhat  of  a  tetanic  character,  but  they  are 
essentially  distinct  from  tetanus.  When  the  epileptic  con- 
vulsions assume  somewhat  of  the  tetanic  form,  it  is  quickly 
over,  not  continuous.  In  epilepsy  there  is  an  abolition  of  con- 
sciousness for  the  time.  I  have  heard  the  symptoms  described 
which  accompanied  this  gentleman's  seizure  and  death,  and 
also  the  appearances  after  death  and  the  post-mortem  examina- 
tion. I  am  of  opinion  there  was  neither  apoplexy  nor  epilepsy. 
There  are  poisons  which  will  produce  tetanic  convulsions.  The 
chief  of  these  poisons  is  nux  vomica.  I  have  seen  animal  life 
destroyed  by  strychnia,  but  never  human  life.  The  effects  of 
a  large  dose,  such  as  a  grain  of  strychnia  given  in  a  liquid 
form  to  a  cat  or  dog,  would  be  apparent  in  the  course  of  ten 
minutes.  The  symptoms  would  be  spasmodic  action  of  the 
muscles,  chiefly  of  the  trunk,  the  spine,  the  spinal  muscles, 
producing  a  very  marked  opisthotonos,  as  it  is  called,  where 
the  spine  is  thrown  back,  the  head  thrown  back,  and  the  trunk 
bowed  in  a  very  marked  manner.  The  extremities  are  generally 
stiffened,  jerked  out  with  violent  jerks.  The  muscles1  are  ren- 
dered stiff  and  rigid  from  the  spasms.  The  stiffness  remains, 
and  does  not  perfectly  relax.  Fresh  paroxysms  come  in  always 
attended  with  the  peculiar  curving  back  of  the  head  and  neck 
and  spine.  The  extremities  of  the  animals  are  powerfully 
stiffened  out,  distended,  every  now  and  then  powerfully  bent, 
and  jerked  out  again.  Death  ensues  within  half  an  hour, 
unless  it  is  a  small  dose.  There  is  a  marked  difference  between 
cases  where  death  ensues  after  taking  strychnia  and  a  case  of 
tetanus  such  as  I  was  describing  just  now  from  idiopathic  or 
traumatic  causes.  The  continuity  of  the  symptoms  in  strychnia 
poisoning  is  very  characteristic :  as1  long  as  the  poisonous 
influence  lasts,  the  symptoms  last,  but  the  poisonous  symptoms 
will  subside  after  a  time.  The  shortness  of  the  duration  of 
the  symptoms  is  decidedly  in  favour  of  strychnine  poisoning. 
There  are  no  other  poisons  that  I  know  of  that  produce  con- 
vulsions of  a  tetanic  character.  The  symptoms  described  which 
attended  this  gentleman's  death  are  not  referable  to  idiopathic 
or  traumatic  tetanus.  I  have  never  seen  a  person  die  from 
the  administration  of  strychnia,  but  I  have  seen  a  person  suffer 
from  the  consequences  of  an  overdose.  There  was  the  opis- 
thotonos and  there  was  the  consciousness  perfectly  retained. 
There  was  also  dilation  of  the  pupils,  a  peculiar  convulsion  of 
the  muscles  of  the  trunk,  and  the  limba  were  stiffened  out.  Diffi- 
culty of  breathing  is  common  to  both  tetanus  and  to  tetanic 
convulsions  from  strychnia.  In  the  case  of  Mr.  Cook,  I  think 
it  is  an  important  distinction  that  he  seems  to  have  been  able 
F  65 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Robert  Todd  to  swallow  sufficiently  easy,  and  there  was  no  rigidity  of  the 
muscles  of  the  jaw  which  is  characteristic  of  tetanus,  of 
disease,  or  of  wound.  I  think  the  symptoms  in  his  case,  judging 
from  my  own  experience,  were  those  of  tetanus  from  strychnia. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  GROVE — The  proximate  effect  of 
tetanus,  whether  caused  by  idiopathic  or  traumatic  tetanus,  or 
strychnia,  is  probably  the  same  on  the  nerves  leading  from  the 
spine.  The  particular  affection  of  the  nerves  is  unknown.  In 
the  disorder  of  convulsions  there  are  cases  of  very  slight  affec- 
tion, others  more  serious,  and  so  on.  I  adhere  to  the  opinion 
given  by  me  in  my  lectures  on  "  Diseases  of  the  Brain  and 
Nervous  System,"  that  the  results  of  the  administration  of 
strychnine  exactly  imitate  the  convulsions  of  tetanus.  It 
does  not  produce  the  exact  phenomena  of  the  disease  in  a 
clinical  sense.  I  have  no  doubt  the  peculiar  irritation  of  the 
nerves  in  tetanus  is  identical  with  the  peculiar  irritation  of  the 
nerves  in  strychnine  poisoning.  In  traumatic  tetanus  I  do 
not  recollect  any  instance  of  the  limbs  being  affected  before 
the  jaw.  An  examination  of  the  spinal  cord  in  tetanic  affec- 
tions shortly  after  death  is  of  importance.  If  it  were  deferred 
as  late  as  two  months,  there  would  be,  to  a  certain  extent,  a 
fallacy.  There  are  morbid  appearances  produced  by  wounds 
after  death  which  sometimes  simulate  diseased  conditions  before 
death. 

Supposing  the  spine  to  be  affected  by  decomposition,  would 
not  what  may  be  called  the  diseased  softening  of  the  spine 
previous  to  death  be  confused  or  obliterated? — You  would  not 
be  able  to  speak  with  certainty  as  to  simple  softening  if  the 
examination  had  been  long  after  death.  There  is  nothing  in 
the  post-mortem  examination  on  which  any  one  could  positively 
say  that  the  patient  died  from  the  ordinary  disease  of  tetanus. 
I  think  granules  on  the  spinal  cord,  such  as  I  have  heard  of 
here,  are  not  likely  to  cause  tetanus.  In  the  cases  of  the 
animals  to  whom  strychnia  was  administered  they  went  off 
into  a  second  spasm  immediately  they  were  touched.  They 
retained  that  tendency  as  long  as  the  influence  of  the  poison 
lasted.  I  examined  the  animals  that  were  killed  by  strychnia 
anatomically.  The  right  side  of  the  heart  was  not  generally 
full;  it  was  empty,  and  the  heart  contracted.  Death  where 
strychnine  was  administered  is  partly  due  to  the  difficulty  of 
action  of  the  respiratory  muscles,  but  chiefly  to  a  general  nervous 
exhaustion  which  the  violence  of  the  paroxysm  produces. 

Would  not  the  difficulty  of  action  of  the  respiratory  muscles 
producing  death  tend  to  leave  the  heart  full? — I  do  not  think 
it  was  asphyxia. 

Then  I  think  I  may  take  you  as  differing  from  the  great  mass 
of  authorities  on  strychnia  poisoning? — I  don't  know;  I  think 
there  are  differences  of  opinion  on  that  subject.  Persons 
66 


Evidence   for   Prosecution. 

sometimes  have  convulsions  after  poison   by  morphia.        The  Robert  Todd 
time   in   which  convulsive  symptoms   come   on   after   morphia 
would  depend  on  the  dose  entirely.     I  cannot  say  whether  it 
would  be  later  than  strychnia.       It  is  not  a  question  I  have 
devoted  attention  to. 

Re-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — In  death  resulting 
from  tetanus  I  should  not  expect  to  find  anything  peculiar 
about  the  heart.  I  heard  the  evidence  of  the  gentlemen  who 
examined  the  spinal  cord  after  Mr.  Cook's  death.  From  their 
description  it  appeared  to  me  that  those  parts  were  in  such  a 
condition  that  any  indication  of  disease  might  have  been 
discovered. 

Sir  BENJAMIN  BRODIE,  examined  by  Mr.  JAMES — I  was  surgeon  Sir  B.  Brodie 
at  St.  James's  Hospital  for  a  great  number  of  years,  and  have 
had  a  considerable  practice.  I  have  had  many  cases  of  death 
from  tetanus.  Death  from  idiopathic  tetanus  is  very  rare  in  this 
country.  I  heard  the  description  of  the  symptoms  attending  the 
death  of  Mr.  Cook.  As  far  as  the  spasmodic  contraction  of  the 
muscles  is  concerned,  the  symptoms  resemble  those  of 
traumatic  tetanus ;  as  to  the  course  the  symptoms 
took,  that  was  entirely  different.  I  heard  about  the 
attack  on  the  Monday  night  and  its  ceasing,  and  the 
patient  being  comfortable  and  composed  during  the  Tuesday, 
and  then  the  attack  again  about  ten  minutes  before  twelve  on 
the  Tuesday  night.  The  symptoms  of  traumatic  tetanus  always 
begin,  so  far  as  I  have  seen,  very  gradually;  the  stiffness  of 
the  lower  jaw  being,  I  believe,  invariably  the  symptom  first 
complained  of;  then  the  contraction  of  the  muscles  of  the  back 
is  always  a  later  symptom ;  the  muscles  of  the  extremities  are 
affected  in  a  much  less  degree  than  those  of  the  neck  and  trunk, 
except  in  some  cases  where  the  injury  has  been  in  a  limb,  and 
an  early  symptom  has  been  a  spasmodic  contraction  of  the 
muscles  of  that  limb.  I  do  not  recollect  a  case  in  which  in 
ordinary  tetanus  there  was  that  contraction  of  the  muscles  of 
the  hand  which  I  understand  was  stated  to  have  existed  in  this 
instance.  Ordinary  tetanus  rarely  runs  its  course  in  less  than 
two  or  three  days,  and  often  is  protracted  to  a  much  longer 
period;  I  know  one  case  only  in  which  the  disease  was  said 
to  have  terminated  in  twelve  hours. 

LORD  CAMPBELL — Probably  in  that  case  the  early  symptoms 
had  been  overlooked? — I  never  knew  these  symptoms  of  ordin- 
ary tetanus  to  last  for  a  few  minutes,  then  subside,  then  come 
on  again  after  twenty-four  hours. 

Examination  continued — I  do  not  believe  that  death  here 
arose  from  what  we  ordinarily  call  tetanus,  either  idiopathic 
or  traumatic.  I  never  knew  a  death  from  tetanus  to  result 
from  a  sore  throat,  or  a  chancre,  or  any  other  form  of  syphilitic 
disease.  The  symptoms  of  the  death  of  Mr.  Cook  are  not  con- 

67 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Sir  B.  Brodie  sistent  with  a  fit  of  apoplexy.  I  never  saw  a  case  in  which  the 
symptoms  that  I  heard  described  arose  from  any  disease. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — I  remember  one  case 
of  idiopathic  tetanus  in  our  hospital,  but  I  doubted  its  deserving 
the  name  of  tetanus. 

Considering  how  rare  tetanus  is,  would  you  think  that  the 
description  of  a  chambermaid  and  of  a  provincial  medical  man, 
who  had  only  seen  one  case  of  tetanus,  could  be  relied  upon  by 
you  as  to  what  the  disease  observed  was  ? — I  must  say  I  thought 
the  description  very  clearly  given.  I  have  never  seen  the 
syphilitic  poison  produce  convulsions  except  as  a  consequence 
of  disease  in  the  bones  of  the  head. 

Henry  Daniel  Mr.  HENRY  DANIEL,  examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — I 
was  for  upwards  of  twenty-eight  years  surgeon  to  the  Bristol 
Hospital.  I  have  seen  fully  thirty  cases  of  tetanus,  of  which 
two  were  idiopathic.  One  of  these  two  ended  fatally.  Idio- 
pathic tetanus  is  of  very  rare  occurrence.  The  symptoms  are 
not  so  severe  as  those  in  traumatic  tetanus.  The  symptoms 
which  accompanied  the  attack  of  Mr.  Cook  before  his  death 
were  quite  distinguishable  from  those  cases  of  tetanus  which 
have  come  within  my  experience.  In  pointing  out  the  differences 
I  would  repeat  very  probably  the  words  of  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie. 
Tetanus,  so  far  as  my  experience  goes,  begins  with  uneasiness 
in  the  lower  jaw,  followed  by  spasms  of  the  muscles  of  the 
trunk,  and  most  frequently  extending  to  the  muscles  of  the 
limbs.  Lockjaw  is  almost  invariably  a  symptom  of  traumatic 
in  particular.  It  is  one  of  the  earliest  symptoms.  I  have  seen 
the  clenching  of  the  hands,  but  I  do  not  think  it  is  an  ordinary 
symptom  of  common  tetanus.  I  cannot  recollect  a  case  the 
duration  of  which  has  been  less  than  from  thirty  to  forty  hours. 
I  have  never  known  a  syphilitic  sore  producing  tetanus.  The 
symptoms  I  have  heard  described  in  Mr.  Cook's  case  are  not 
referable  to  either  apoplexy  or  epilepsy.  In  both  these  there  is 
a  loss  of  consciousness,  but  in  cases  of  tetanus  that  I  have  seen 
consciousness  has  been  retained  throughout  all  the  period.  In 
my  experience  of  tetanus  the  symptoms  have  been  invariably 
continuous  without  any  interruption.  In  my  judgment  the 
symptoms  of  Mr.  Cook  could  not  be  referred  to  idiopathic 
or  traumatic  tetanus. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  GROVE — I  do  not  know  that  cases 
are  mentioned  in  books  where  there  is  a  long  interval  of  some 
hours  between  the  symptoms.  I  have  not  read  Dr.  Todd's 
book,  nor  Mr.  Curling's  book,  nor  Dr.  Copland's  book  on  the 
subject.  I  have  been  out  of  practice  some  seventeen  or  eighteen 
months,  and  have  not  looked  into  the  reported  cases  of  tetanus 
of  late.  In  my  opinion  the  symptoms  of  tetanic  convulsions 
do  not  vary  much  in  different  cases.  There  may  be  an  affection 
of  a  muscle  in  this  man  that  there  is  not  in  the  other,  in  a  leg 
68 


Evidence    for    Prosecution. 

or  an  arm.     In  tetanic  affections  death  is  caused  by  exhaustion  Henpy  Daniel 
and  suffocation. 

Mr.  SAMUEL  SOLLY,  examined  by  Mr.  WELSBY — I  have  been  Samuel  Solly 
connected  with  St.  Thomas's  Hospital  as  lecturer  and  surgeon 
for  twenty-eight  years.  I  have  either  seen  or  had  under  my  care 
twenty  cases  of  tetanus,  all  of  which  were  traumatic,  except 
one,  in  which  I  was  doubtful  whether  it  was  traumatic  or  idio- 
pathic.  In  the  latter  case  the  symptoms  were  slower  in  their 
progress  and  generally  rather  milder.  The  shortest  period  I  can 
remember  before  the  disease  arrived  at  a  point  is  thirty  hours. 
The  difference  between  Mr.  Cook's  attacks  and  the  cases  I  have 
seen  is  that,  in  my  experience,  there  has  been  a  marked  expres- 
sion of  the  countenance — that  is  the  first  symptom ;  it  is  a  sort 
of  grin,  and  the  symptoms  have  always  been  continuous.  The 
symptoms  in  Mr.  Cook's  case  are  not  referable  to  either  epilepsy 
or  apoplexy,  or  any  disease  that  I  ever  witnessed. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — A  marked  expression 
of  the  countenance,  a  sort  of  grin,  frequently  occurs  in  all 
violent  convulsions,  which  assume,  without  being  tetanus,  a 
tetanic  form  and  appearance.  They  are  not  a  numerous  class. 
It  is  difficult  to  distinguish  between  them  and  idiopathic  tetanus 
in  the  onset,  but  not  in  the  progress.  I  heard  the  account 
given  by  Mr.  Jones  of  the  last  few  moments  before  Mr.  Cook 
died. 

That  he  uttered  a  piercing  shriek,  fell  back,  and  died,  did  he 
not? — Yes. 

The  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — I  beg  your  pardon;  there  was  an 
interval. 

Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — No,  no;  five  or  six  minutes. 

LORD  CAMPBELL — He  died  very  quietly. 

Cross-examination  resumed — I  heard  the  description  of  the 
shriek  with  the  convulsion;  but  it  was  the  shriek  that  called 
the  medical  man  into  the  room.  That  was  at  the  height  of  the 
attack.  In  some  respects  that  last  shriek  and  the  paroxysm 
that  occurred  immediately  afterwards  bear  a  resemblance  to 
epilepsy.  Death  from  tetanus  accompanied  with  convulsions 
seldom  leaves  any  trace  behind;  but  death  from  epilepsy  leaves 
behind  it  some  few  effusions  of  blood  on  the  brain  or  congestion 
of  the  vessels. 

Re-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — Convulsions  that 
take  place  in  epilepsy  are  not  at  all  of  tetanic  character.  I  say 
that  Mr.  Cook  did  not  die  from  epilepsy,  because  there  were 
none  of  the  symptoms  there.  When  a  patient  dies  with 
epilepsy  he  dies  perfectly  unconscious.  Ulceration  of  the 
brain  from  injury,  a  sudden  injury  to  the  spinal  cord,  irrita- 
tion of  the  teeth  in  infants,  all  produce  convulsions.  But  those 
.convulsions  in  their  progress  are  not  similar  to  the  convulsions 

69 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Samuel  Solly  of  tetanus.     There  is  no  progressive  movement  and  no  appear- 
ance about  the  face  or  jaw  of  having  tetanus. 

R.  Corbett  Dr.  ROBERT  COEBETT,  examined  by  Mr.  JAMES — I  am  a 
physician  in  Glasgow.  I  remember  a  patient  of  the  name  of 
Agnes  Sennet  who  died  in  the  Glasgow  Royal  Infirmary  on 
29th  September,  1845,  after  taking  some  strychnia  pills 
intended  for  another  patient.  I  saw  her  while  she  was  under 
the  influence  of  the  poison.  The  symptoms  I  noticed  were 
a  retraction  of  the  mouth,  face  much  suffused  and  red, 
the  pupils  dilated,  the  head  bent  back,  the  spine  curved, 
and  the  muscles  rigid  and  hard  like  a  board.  She  died  about 
an  hour  and  a  quarter  after  taking  the  pills.  There  would  be 
a  quarter  of  a  grain  in  each  of  the  three  pills  she  took. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — The  retraction  of 
the  angles  of  the  mouth  was  continuous,  but  it  was  worse  at 
times.  I  did  not  observe  it  after  death.  The  hands  were 
not  clenched,  but  semi-bent  after  death.  That  semi-bending 
of  the  hand  is  a  very  common  thing  in  cases  of  death  by  violent 
convulsions.  Twenty  minutes  after  taking  the  medicine  she 
was  attacked  by  the  symptoms. 

Dr.  Watson  Dr.  WATSON,  examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — I  am  one 
of  the  physicians  in  the  Glasgow  Royal  Infirmary,  and  attended 
the  case  of  Agnes  Sennet  spoken  to  by  the  last  witness.  I  saw 
her  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  the  symptoms  first  began. 
She  was  in  violent  convulsions ;  her  arms  were  stretched  out 
and  rigid ;  her  feet  and  legs  were  also  rigid.  Just  at  that 
moment  she  did  not  breathe.  That  paroxysm  subsided  almost 
immediately,  and  fresh  ones  came  on  after  a  very  short  interval. 
They  occurred  at  intervals  until  they  destroyed  her.  She  was 
about  half  an  hour  in  dying.  She  seemed  perfectly  conscious 
during  the  time.  At  the  post-mortem  examination  the  spinal 
cord  was  quite  healthy.  The  heart  was  contracted. 

Mary  Kelly  MARY  KELLY,  examined  by  Mr.  BODKIN — I  was  a  patient  in 
the  Glasgow  Royal  Infirmary,  and  saw  Agnes  Sennet  take  the 
pills,  which  were  intended  for  another  patient.  I  saw  her 
take  two  pills  only.  After  taking  the  pills  she  went  and  sat 
down  by  the  fire,  and  in  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  she 
was  taken  ill.  She  fell  back  on  the  floor,  and  a  nurse  and 
I  lifted  her  into  bed.  The  nurse  cut  her  clothes  off,  and  she 
never  moved  after  she  was  put  upon  the  bed ;  she  was  just 
like  a  poker.  She  never  spoke  after  she  fell. 

C.  Hickson      CAROLINE    HiCKSON,    examined    by    Mr.    JAMES — In  October, 

1848,   I  was   nurse   and  lady's   maid   in   the   family  of   Mrs. 

Serjeantson  Smith,  at  Romsey,  in  Hampshire.       On  the  30th 

of   that   month   Mrs.    Smith  was    unwell,    and  some  medicine 

70 


Evidence   for    Prosecution. 

was  sent  to  her  in  the  afternoon,  about  six  o'clock,  by  a  Mr.  C  Hieksoo 
Jones,  a  druggist  in  Romsey.  Shortly  after  seven  o'clock 
next  morning  I  saw  her  take  about  half  a  wineglass  of  the 
medicine.  About  five  or  ten  minutes  afterwards  I  was  sum- 
moned to  her  bedroom,  and  on  entering  I  saw  her  leaning  upon 
a  chair,  and  I  thought  she  had  fainted.  She  appeared 
to  suffer  from  what  I  thought  spasms.  I  went  out  and  sent 
for  Mr.  Taylor,  surgeon,  and  on  returning  to  the  bedroom 
I  found  some  of  the  other  servants  assisting  to  support  Mrs. 
Smith.  She  was  then  lying  on  the  floor  and  screaming  very 
much,  very  loudly,  but  did  not  open  her  teeth.  She  asked 
me  to  have  her  legs  pulled  straight,  and  I  found  them  drawn 
up  very  much.  She  still  screamed  as  if  in  great  agony,  and 
requested  some  water  to  be  thrown  over  her,  which  I  did.  Her 
feet  were  turned  inwards.  I  put  a  hot- water  bottle  to  them, 
but  this  had  no  effect.  Shortly  before  she  died  she  said  she 
felt  easier,  and  her  last  words  were,  "  Turn  me  over."  I 
did  so.  A  few  minutes  after  this  she  died.  She  was  con- 
scious, and  knew  me  during  the  whole  time.  From  the  time 
she  took  the  medicine  until  she  died  would  be  about  an  hour 
and  a  quarter. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  GEOVE — From  the  time  I  first  saw 
her  in  the  spasms  she  could  not  sit  up  at  all.  It  was  a  continu- 
ous, recurring  fit,  and  lasted  about  an  hour.  She  only  seemed 
easy  for  a  very  short  time  before  her  death.  Her  teeth  were 
clenched  during  the  whole  time. 

Mr.  FRANCIS  TAYLOR,  examined  by  Mr.  WELSBT — I  am  a  F.  Taylor 
surgeon  at  Romsey.  I  was  summoned  one  morning  to  the  house 
of  Mrs.  Serjeantson  Smith.  I  arrived  between  eight  and  nine 
o'clock,  shortly  after  she  died.  I  saw  the  body  then.  The 
hands  were  clenched  ;  the  feet  were  contracted,  turned  inwards  ; 
and  the  soles  of  the  feet  were  hollowed  up.  This  appeared  to 
have  been  from  recent  spasmodic  action.  The  limbs  were 
remarkably  stiff.  The  body  was  still  warm.  The  eyelids 
were  totally  adherent,  almost  to  the  eyeballs.  I  made  a 
post-mortem  examination  three  days  after  death.  The  con- 
traction of  the  feet  continued,  but  it  was  gone  off  somewhat 
from  the  rest  of  the  body.  No  trace  of  disease  was  found. 
The  heart  was  contracted  and  perfectly  empty,  and  the  blood 
was  fluid.  I  analysed  the  medicine  Mrs.  Smith  had  taken.  It 
originally  contained  nine  grains  of  strychnia,  and  Mrs.  Smith 
had  taken  one-third.  As  the  truth  was  so  apparent,  only  a 
very  general  examination  of  the  stomach  and  bowels  was  made, 
but  still  sufficient  to  find  traces  of  strychnia. 

JANE  WITHAM,  examined  by  Mr.  JAMES — In  March  last  I  was  JaneWitham 
in  attendance  on  a  lady  who  died.     I  remember  her  taking 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Jane  Witham  some  medicine,  after  which  she  became  ill.  She  first  com- 
plained of  her  back,  and  when  I  went  to  her  I  observed  her 
head  was  drawn  back,  and  I  could  not  get  at  her  back.  She 
was  in  bed.  I  noticed  she  had  twistings  of  the  ankles,  and 
her  eyes  were  drawn  aside  and  staring.  She  first  complained 
of  illness  on  the  25th  of  February,  and  she  died  on  1st  March. 
She  had  several  attacks,  between  each  of  which  she  got  better. 
She  generally  complained  of  a  pricking  in  her  legs  and  twitch- 
ing of  the  muscles  in  the  hands,  and  she  compared  them  to 
a  galvanic  shock.  During  the  attacks  she  requested  her 
husband  to  rub  her  legs  and  arms.  The  first  attack  was  on 
the  Monday,  and  she  died  on  the  Saturday  about  ten  minutes 
to  eleven  at  night. 

(This  case  was  that  of  Dr.  Dove's  wife.) 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — It  was  on  the  com- 
mencement of  the  spasms  that  she  requested  her  legs  to  be 
rubbed.  On  the  Saturday  night  she  could  not  bear  them  to 
be  touched.  On  that  night  the  spasms  were  much  stronger 
than  on  the  other  days.  On  the  Saturday  she  did  not  speak 
but  once  or  twice.  During  the  interval  of  the  spasms  on  the 
Saturday  touching  her  brought  the  spasms  on.  She  could 
swallow  on  each  of  the  days  except  the  Saturday,  when  her 
mouth  was  quite  closed.  After  death  her  body  was  stiff. 

G.  Morley  Mr.  GEOKGE  MOELET,  examined  by  Mr.  WELSBT — I  was  the 
medical  attendant  on  the  lady  referred  to  by  the  last  witness.  I 
had  been  attending  her  for  about  two  months  before  her  death 
for  a  functional  derangement.  I  saw  her  on  the  Monday  before 
her  death  lying  in  her  bed.  I  observed  several  convulsive 
twitchings  of  her  arms.  I  saw  her  on  the  Saturday  about  the 
middle  of  the  day.  She  was  much  better,  and  in  a  composed 
state.  She  complained  of  an  attack  she  had  had  in  the  night, 
and  spoke  of  pains  and  spasms,  affections  of  the  back  and 
neck.  I  and  another  medical  gentleman  made  a  post-mortem 
examination  on  the  Monday.  We  found  no  disease  which 
would  account  for  death.  There  were  no  abrasions,  nor  any 
wound  or  sore.  The  hands  were  semi-bent,  the  fingers  curved, 
and  the  feet  were  strongly  arched.  We  applied  several  colour 
tests  to  the  contents  of  the  stomach  for  the  purpose  of  detecting 
the  presence  of  poison.  On  each  occasion  we  produced  the 
appearance  characteristic  of  strychnia.  After  the  separation 
of  the  strychnine  by  chemical  analysis  we  inoculated  two  mice, 
two  rabbits,  and  one  guinea  pig  with  the  stuff  taken  from  the 
stomach.  We  observed  in  each  of  the  animals  more  or  less 
the  effects  usually  produced  by  the  poison  strychnia — general 
uneasiness,  difficult  breathing,  convulsions  of  the  tetanic  kind, 
muscular  rigidity,  bending  backwards,  especially  of  the  head 
and  neck,  a  violent  stretching  of  the  legs.  In  the  case  of  the 
animals  where  death  resulted  the  muscular  rigidity  continued 
72 


Evidence   for   Prosecution. 

without  any  intermission.  There  was  an  interval  of  relaxation,  G.  Morley 
but  immediately  after  death  the  muscles  became  very  rigid, 
more  so  than  at  rigor-mortis.  We  afterwards  made  a 
similar  series  of  experiments  on  some  animals  with  strychnia 
itself,  both  in  solid  and  liquid  forms.  The  symptoms  and  the 
results  generally  were  exactly  the  same  as  those  I  have  described 
in  the  case  of  the  other  animals. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  GROVE — I  did  not  see  the  patient 
during  any  severe  attack.  I  observed  that  when  the  animals 
were  touched  it  brought  on  the  symptoms.  That  is  a  very 
marked  result.  Directly  they  are  touched  they  give  a 
sudden  start,  and  pass  into  a  severe  spasm.  At  the  post- 
mortem examination  the  lungs  were  very  much  congested.  The 
muscles  generally  were  dark  and  stiff.  There  was  a  decided 
quantity  of  bloody  serous  effusion  over  the  brain.  There  was 
a  notable  quantity,  but  not  a  large  quantity,  of  serum  slightly 
tinged  with  blood  in  the  membranes  of  the  spinal  cord.  The 
large  spinal  veins  were  very  much  congested,  as  were  the 
membranes  of  the  spinal  marrow.  We  opened  the  head  first, 
and  that  led  to  a  great  deal  of  blood  flowing  from  the  head. 
That  would  make  it  uncertain  whether  the  heart  was  full  or 
•empty.  The  right  sides  of  the  hearts  of  animals  that  have 
been  poisoned  by  strychnia  are  generally  full.  From  one  to 
two  hours  is  the  longest  time  in  animals  at  which  I  have  per- 
ceived the  first  effect  of  strychnia  come  on  after  it  has  been 
taken.  I  made  experiments  in  conjunction  with  Mr.  Nunneley, 
and  my  impression  is  that  the  interval  has  been  as  long  as  one 
hour.  I  discovered  strychnia  with  all  the  tests  I  applied  with 
more  or  less  distinctness.  I  have  detected  strychnia  in  the 
stomach  two  months  after  death,  and  after  decomposition  had 
proceeded  to  a  considerable  extent. 

Re-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — I  have  given  to 
the  animals  which  I  have  killed  from  half  a  grain  to  two  grains. 
The  animals  experimented  on  were  cats,  rabbits,  and  dogs. 
The  strychnia,  I  think,  acts  on  the  nerves,  but  a  part  may  be 
taken  into  the  blood  also  and  act  through  the  blood.  The 
poison  is  absorbed.  We  searched  the  stomach  to  find  the 
presence  of  the  strychnia.  The  strychnia  which  we  found  in 
the  stomach  would  be  that  which  was  there  in  excess  beyond 
that  which  had  been  absorbed  in  the  system.  The  strychnia 
that  has  been  absorbed  into  the  system  is  sufficient  to 
destroy  life.  The  excess  that  remains  in  the  stomach 
is  inactive.  I  should  expect  to  fail  sometimes  to 
find  strychnia  in  the  stomach  if  the  minimum  quantity  cap- 
able of  operating  to  the  destruction  of  life  had  been  ad- 
ministered. If  death  resulted  from  a  series  of  minute  doses 
of  this  poison,  administered  for  a  space  of  several  days,  it  is 
my  opinion  that  the  appearances  would  be  likely  to  be  different 

73 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

G.  Morley  after  death  from  what  they  would,  supposing  death  was  pro- 
duced rapidly  by  one  dose. 

Re-cross-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHBE — Is  it  your  theory 
that  in  the  act  of  poisoning  the  poison  is  absorbed  and  ceases 
to  exist  as  poison,  as  strychnia? — I  am  inclined  to  think  so.  I 
have  thought  much  upon  that  question.  I  am  not  decided  in 
my  own  mind. 

What  chemical  reason  can  you  give  for  your  opinion? — My 
opinion  rests  on  the  general  fact  that  organic  substances  acting 
on  the  human  body,  such  as  food  or  medicine,  are  frequently 
changed  in  composition.  It  is  possible  that  strychnia  may 
have  been  discovered  in  the  blood  and  liver  after  effecting  the 
operation  of  poisoning,  but  I  do  not  know  that  it  has. 

Do  you  know  whether  strychnia  can  be  decomposed  by  any 
sort  of  putrefying  or  fermentative  process? — I  have  no  fact  to 
show  that  it  can,  and  I  doubt  if  it  is. 

E.  D.  Moore  Mr.  EDWARD  DUKE  MOORE,  examined  by  Mr.  HUDDLBSTON — I 
was  formerly  in  practice  as  a  surgeon.  About  fifteen  years  ago 
I  was  attending  a  gentleman  for  paralysis,  and  had  been  giving 
him  some  very  small  doses  of  strychnia. .  Subsequently  I  made 
him  up  a  stronger  dose  containing  a  quarter  of  a  grain.  In 
about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  I  was  summoned  to  come  back 
and  see  him.  He  was  stiffened  in  every  limb.  His  head 
was  drawn  back,  and  he  was  screaming,  frequently  requesting 
that  we  should  turn  him,  move  him,  and  rub  him.  His  spine 
was  arched.  We  tried  to  give  him  a  mixture  of  ammonia 
with  a  spoon.  He  snapped  at  the  spoon  with  a  sort  of  con- 
vulsive grasp  to  take  it.  He  was  suffering  about  three  hours 
altogether.  He  survived  the  attack,  and  was  perfectly 
conscious  the  whole  time. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  SHEB — He  recovered  from  the 
spasms  in  about  three  hours,  but  the  rigidity  of  the  muscles 
remained  for  the  rest  of  the  day  and  part  of  the  next  day.  He 
was  completely  recovered  the  next  day  after  the  attack,  and  the 
patient  himself  said  he  thought  his  paralysis  was  better. 

The  Court  then  adjourned. 


74 


Fifth  Day,  Monday,  ipth  May,  1856. 

Dr.  ALFRED  TAYLOR,  examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — I  Alfred  Taylor 
am  a  Fellow  of  the  College  of  Physicians,  a  lecturer  on  medical 
jurisprudence  at  Guy's  Hospital,  and  the  author  of  a  well-known 
treatise  on  poisons  and  on  medical  jurisprudence.  Among 
other  poisons,  I  have  made  strychnia  the  subject  of  my  atten- 
tion. It  is  the  produce  of  the  nux  vomica.  There  is  also  in 
the  nux  vomica  a  poison  of  an  analogous  nature  called  bruchsia, 
which  differs  from  it  only  in  point  of  strength.  The  difference 
of  the  two  poisons  is  relatively  estimated  from  one-sixth  to 
one-twelfth,  bruchsia  being  one-sixth  to  one-twelfth  the  strength 
of  strychnia.  I  have  never  witnessed  an  instance  of  the 
action  of  strychnia  on  the  human  subject.  I  have  tried  a 
variety  of  experiments,  I  think  about  ten  or  twelve,  on  animal 
life  with  strychnia.  Rabbits  have  always  been  used  for  these 
experiments.  The  symptoms  produced  by  the  poison  have  been 
on  the  whole  very  uniform.  I  have  given  a  quantity  varying 
from  one-half  to  two  or  three  grains.  I  have  found  half  a 
grain  sufficient  to  destroy  the  life  of  a  rabbit.  I  have  given 
it  in  both  solid  and  liquid  form.  When  given  in  a  fluid  state  it 
produced  its  operation  in  two  or  three  minutes ;  when  given  in 
a  solid  state,  in  the  form  of  pill  or  bolus,  from  about  six  to  eleven 
minutes,  I  think.  The  time  is  influenced  by  the  strength  of  the 
dose,  and  also  by  the  strength  of  the  animal.  The  poison  is  first 
absorbed  into  the  blood ;  it  is  then  circulated  through  the  body, 
and  the  poison  especially  acts  on  the  spinal  cord.  That  is  the 
part  of  the  body  from  which  the  nerves  affecting  the  voluntary 
muscles  proceed.  The  entire  circulation  through  the  whole 
system  is  considered  to  take  place  about  once  in  four  minutes. 

LORD  CAMPBELL — Are  you  speaking  of  the  human  circulation? 
— Yes;  the  circulation  in  the  rabbit  is  quicker. 

Examination  resumed — How  is  it  the  absorption  would  be 
quicker  in  a  rabbit? — I  think  it  is  from  the  effects  produced; 
that  will  also  depend  on  the  state  of  the  stomach,  as  to  whether 
there  be  much  food  in  the  stomach  and  whether  the  poison  comes 
in  immediate  contact  with  the  inner  surface  of  the  stomach. 
The  poison  must  first,  I  believe,  be  absorbed  before  it  acts  on 
the  nervous  system. 

Will  you  describe  the  series  of  symptoms  from  the  commence- 
ment to  the  close? — The  animal  for  about  five  or  six  minutes 
does  not  appear  to  suffer ;  it  moves  about  freely  and  actively. 
It  then,  when  the  poison  begins  to  act,  suddenly  falls  on  its 

75 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Alfred  Taylor  side.  There  is  a  trembling  of  the  whole  muscles  of  the  body, 
a  sort  of  quivering  motion  arising  from  the  poison  producing 
those  violent  and  involuntary  contractions.  There  is  then  a 
sudden  paroxysm  of  it;  the  fore  legs-  and  the  hind  legs  are 
stretched  out,  the  head  and  the  tail  are  drawn  back  BO  as  to 
give  it  the  form  of  a  bow.  The  jaws  are  spasmodically  closed, 
the  eyes  are  prominent,  protruding.  After  a  short  time  there 
is  a  slight  remission  of  the  symptoms,  and  the  animal  appears 
to  lie  quiet,  but  the  slightest  noise  or  touch  reproduces  con- 
vulsive paroxysms.  There  is  sometimes  a  scream  or  sort  of 
shriek;  the  heart  beats  very  violently  during  the  fit,  and  after 
a  succession  of  these  fits  the  animal  dies  quietly. 

There  is  not  invariably,  immediately  prior  to  death,  a  re- 
mission of  the  symptoms? — I  have  only  known  an  animal  has 
died  by  having  the  hand  over  the  heart.  It  has  been  in  a 
state  of  spasms  at  that  time.  In  one  or  two  cases  the  animal 
has  died  quietly,  as  if  there  was  a  remission;  sometimes  it  dies 
apparently  during  the  spasms  itself. 

What  appearance  have  you  observed  after  death  which  would 
be  different  from  the  ordinary  appearances — the  outward 
appearances?  Are  the  muscles  more  than  usually  rigid? — In 
some  instances  the  animal  has  been  rigid  throughout;  that  is 
to  say,  it  has  died  in  a  spasm,  and  the  rigidity  has  continued, 
the  muscles  so  strongly  contracted  that  for  a  week  afterwards 
it  was  possible  to  hold  the  animal  horizontally  extended  by  the 
hind  legs  without  the  body  falling.  In  an  animal  killed  the 
other  day  the  body  was  flexible  at  the  time  of  death,  but  it 
became  rigid  about  five  minutes  after  death.  I  have  opened 
the  bodies  of  animals  that  have  been  thus  destroyed.  I  have 
found  no  appearances  in  the  stomach  or  intestines  which  would 
indicate  any  injury  there.  I  have  found  in  one  or  two  cases 
congestion  of  the  vessels  of  the  membranes.  In  other  cases  I 
have  not  found  any  departure  from  the  ordinary  state  of  blood. 
The  membranes  of  the  spinal  cord  and  brain  are  a  continuation 
one  of  the  other,  so  that  it  is  not  easy  to  have  congestion  of  one 
without  congestion  of  the  other.  The  congestion  of  those 
membranes  has  been  due  to  fits  which  the  animal  has  had  before 
death.  In  three  out  of  five  cases  I  failed  to  discover  any 
abnormal  condition  of  the  spinal  cord  or  brain.  As  to  the 
hearts  of  animals  thus  killed,  from  all  that  I  have  seen  the 
heart  has  been  congested  with  blood,  the  right  side  especially. 
The  description  given  by  Elizabeth  Mills  and  Mr.  Jones  of  the 
symptoms  which  accompanied  the  attack  on  Mr.  Cook  are 
similar  to  those  I  have  seen  in  animals  to  which  I  have 
administered  strychnia. 

How  long  does  it  take  in  the  case  of  rabbits  to  which  you 
have  administered  strychnia  from  the  time  the  first  symptoms 
manifest  themselves  to  the  time  of  the  death? — They  have 
76 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

died  in  various  periods — one  died  in  thirteen  minutes,  one  in  Alfred  Taylor 
seventeen  minutes;  that,  I  should  mention,  would  be  the  whole 
time.  The  symptoms  appear  more  rapidly  when  the  poison 
is  administered  in  a  fluid  state,  and  death  has  taken  place  in 
five  or  six  minutes  after.  The  experiments  which  I  have  par- 
ticularly noticed  and  performed  lately,  and  which  I  am  about  to 
detail,  have  been  in  reference  to  solid  strychnia.  In  the  first 
the  symptoms  began  in  seven  minutes,  and  the  animal  died 
in  thirteen  minutes  from  the  time  the  poison  was  given ;  in  the 
second  the  symptoms  appeared  in  nine  minutes,  the  animal 
died  in  seventeen  minutes;  in  the  third  the  symptoms  appeared 
in  ten  minutes,  the  animal  died  in  eighteen  minutes;  in  the 
fourth  the  symptoms  appeared  in  nine  minutes,  and  the  death 
took  place  in  twenty-two  minutes;  in  the  fifth  the  symptoms 
appeared  in  twelve  minutes,  and  the  death  took  place  in  twenty- 
three  minutes.  In  the  human  subject,  supposing  this  poison  to 
be  administered  in  the  shape  of  pills,  I  should  expect  it  would 
take  a  longer  period  before  the  poison  began  to  act,  because 
it  requires  that  the  pill  structure  should  be  broken  up  in  order 
to  bring  the  poison  in  contact  with  the  mucous  membrane 
of  the  stomach. 

Given  that  the  poison  is  administered  in  both  cases,  to  the 
rabbit  and  the  human  subject,  in  the  shape  of  pills,  should 
you  expect  a  longer  period  before  it  began  to  act  on  the  human 
subject  than  the  rabbit? — I  do  not  think  we  can  fairly  draw 
any  inference ;  the  circulation  and  absorption  are  very  different. 
It  is  very  probable  that  there  would  also  be  a  difference  between 
one  human  subject  and  another  in  the  power  of  taking  the 
thing  up  with  more  or  less  rapidity.  The  strength  of  the  dose 
would  make  a  difference;  a  large  dose  would  be  more  rapid 
than  a  small  dose.  I  have  experimented  upon  the  intestines  of 
animals  to  reproduce  the  strychnia  or  to  discover  it.  (Dr. 
Taylor  described  the  chemical  tests.)  These  colour  tests,  as 
they  are  called,  are,  I  think,  very  fallacious.  There  are  other 
vegetable  matters  to  which,  if  these  colour  tests  are  applied, 
similar  results  as  to  colour  would  be  obtained.  A  mixture  of 
sugar  and  bile  will  produce  the  purple  and  red  tint,  for  instance. 
Vegetable  poisons  are  more  difficult  of  detection  by  chemical 
processes  than  the  mineral  ones,  and  the  tests  are  more 
fallacious.  In  four  cases  of  animals  destroyed  by  strychnia 
Dr.  Rees  and  I  endeavoured  to  reproduce  the  strychnia,  and 
then  applied  to  it  those  colouring  tests  which  I  mentioned  just 
now.  We  also  tried  the  effect  of  taste.  In  one  case  by  the 
colour  test  we  satisfied  ourselves  of  the  presence  of  strychnia ; 
in  another  there  was  a  bitter  taste  in  the  liquid,  but  no 
indication  of  strychnia  by  the  colour  test.  In  other  two  cases 
there  was  no  indication  at  all  of  the  presence  of  strychnia.  In 
the  first  case  we  had  given  a  dose  of  two  grains  at  intervals; 

77 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Alfred  Taylor  in  the  second  case  one  grain ;  in  the  other  two  cases  one  grain 
and  half  a  grain. 

How  did  you  account  physiologically  for  the  absence  of  any 
indication  of  strychnia  where  you  know  strychnia  to  have  been 
given  and  to  have  caused  death? — By  absorption  into  the  blood 
so  that  it  is  no  longer  in  the  stomach ;  it  is  in  a  great  part  too 
changed  in  the  blood.  In  the  case  of  the  larger  dose  there 
would  be  a  retention  of  some  not  absorbed.  That  would  be  in 
cases  beyond  what  was  required  for  the  destruction  of  life.  If 
the  minimum  of  the  quantity  required  to  destroy  life  was  given, 
I  do  not  think  I  would  find  any.  It  would  be  removed  by 
absorption,  and  no  longer  discoverable  in  the  stomach. 

Are  there  any  chemical  means  you  are  acquainted  with 
whereby  the  presence  of  this  poison  can  be  detected  in  the 
tissues? — There  are  not;  there  is  no  process  I  am  acquainted 
with  when  it  is  in  a  small  quantity ;  so  far  as  I  know  it  cannot 
be  detected. 

In  addition  to  this  distribution  of  the  half  grain,  which  you 
tell  us  is  known  to  have  destroyed  human  life,  over  the  whole 
system,  in  your  opinion  does  it  undergo  decomposition  as 
it  mixes  itself  with  the  animal  tissues? — I  believe  it  undergoes 
some  change  in  the  blood.  That  increases  the  difficulty  in 
detecting  it  in  the  tissues.  I  have  never  heard  of  its  being 
separated  in  a  crystallised  state  from  the  tissues. 

After  the  post-mortem  examination  on  the  body  of  Mr.  Cook 
some  portion  was  sent  up  to  me.  I  experimented  to  ascertain 
if  there  were  any  poison  present.  We  sought  for  prussic  acid, 
oxalic  acid,  morphia,  strychnia,  veratrea,  a  poison  of  white 
hellebore,  the  poison  of  tobacco,  hemlock,  arsenic,  mercury, 
antimony,  and  other  mineral  poisons  generally.  We  only  found 
small  traces  of  antimony.  The  part  which  we  had  to  operate 
upon  was  in  the  most  unfavourable  condition  for  finding 
strychnia  if  it  had  been  there.  The  stomach  had  been  completely 
cut  from  end  to  end;  all  the  contents  were  gone,  and  the  fine 
mucous  surface,  on  which  any  poison  if  present  would  be  found, 
was  lying  in  contact  with  the  outside  of  the  intestines,  all  thrown 
together.  There  was  also  succulent  matter  on  the  surface  of 
the  mucous  membrane,  derived  from  the  intestines,  the  contents 
of  which  partly  escaped.  The  inside  of  the  stomach  had  been 
forced  into  this  mass  of  intestinal  succulent  matter;  at  any 
rate,  it  was  lying  so.  In  journeying  up  to  London  it  must 
have  been  shaken  in  every  possible  way.  The  contents  of  the 
intestines  were  there,  but  the  contents  of  the  stomach  were 
gone.  If  there  had  been  any  of  this  poison  present  I  should 
have  expected  to  have  found  it  in  the  contents  of  the  stomach 
and  on  the  mucous  membrane.  At  my  request  other  portions 
of  the  body  were  sent — the  liver,  the  spleen,  and  the  two 
kidneys ;  in  addition,  a  small  bottle  of  blood,  unlabelled,  giving 
78 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

us  no  idea  whence  it  was  taken.  We  analysed  all  those  portions.  Alfred  Taylor 
We  searched  for  mineral  poison  in  the  liver  and  kidneys,  and 
discovered  antimony  in  an  eighth  part  of  the  liver;  we  analysed 
only  the  left  kidney  and  the  spleen,  and  there  were  traces  of 
antimony  in  each.  The  quantity  was  less  in  proportion  in  the 
spleen  than  in  the  other  parts.  The  blood  contained  antimony. 

Would  its  being  found  in  the  blood  enable  you  to  form  any 
opinion  how  shortly  before  death  the  antimony  had  been  given? 
— It  is  impossible  to  say  with  any  precision,  but  I  should  say 
shortly  before  death — within  some  days ;  the  longest  period 
known  at  which  antimony  has  been  found  in  the  blood,  after 
a  person  has  ceased  to  take  it,  was  eight  days.  I  heard  the 
account  by  the  servant  girls  of  the  vomiting  of  Mr.  Cook;  I 
also  heard  the  account  given  of  his  vomiting  at  Shrewsbury, 
and  by  the  medical  men,  Gibson  and  Jones,  and  Dr.  Bamford's 
deposition  as  to  the  concomitant  symptoms.  In  my  opinion, 
the  vomiting  would  be  such  as  might  be  produced  by  antimony. 
Tartar  emetic  is  soluble  in  fluids,  and  if  mixed  with  broth  or 
toast  and  water  would  not  affect  the  colour. 

From  these  traces  of  the  antimony  can  you  form  any  judg- 
ment as  to  the  time  when  the  antimony  was  taken  ? — It  is  impos- 
sible to  say  with  any  precision,  but  I  should  say  within  two 
or  three  weeks  at  the  outside.  We  did  not  find  any  perceptible 
quantity  dissolved  in  the  fluids  of  the  body  and  the  washings 
of  the  stomach;  therefore  I  should  infer  there  was  no  evidence 
of  any  given  within  some  hours  of  death.  I  think  that  which 
I  found  in  the  liver  might  have  been  administered  within 
eighteen  hours  of  death  or  within  two  days.  I  know  by 
experience  it  takes  a  shorter  time  to  get  to  the  liver.  Antimony 
does  not  affect  the  taste  of  anything  if  it  is  given  in  quantities 
which  would  cause  vomiting.  If  a  large  quantity  was  taken 
at  once  it  might  leave  a  choking  or  constricting  sensation,  as  if 
the  throat  was  contracted.  There  was  no  trace  of  mercury. 
I  should  have  expected  to  find  mercury  according  to  the  quantity 
taken.  If  a  few  grains  had  been  taken  recently  before  death 
I  should  expect  to  find  some  trace  in  the  liver.  Supposing  a 
man  had  been  taking  mercury  for  any  syphilitic  affection  within 
anything  like  a  recent  period  before  death  I  should  expect  to 
find  it.  I  heard  the  evidence  which  was  given  as  to  the  deaths 
of  Mrs.  Smith,  Agnes  French,  and  the  lady  referred  to,  and 
also  the  case  of  the  gentleman  of  whom  Mr.  Moore  spoke. 
Judging  by  the  results  of  my  own  experiments  and  studies,  I 
agree  that  those  deaths  were  occasioned  by  strychnia.  Mr. 
Cook's  attacks  appear  to  me  to  be  of  a  similar  character. 

As  a  professor  of  medical  science  do  you  know  any  other 
cause  in  the  nature  of  human  diseases  to  which  the  symptoms 
of  Mr.  Cook's  death  can  be  referred  except  to  strychnia? — I 
do  not. 

79 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Alfred  Taylor  Cross-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — In  the  course  of  your 
examination  you  have  frequently  used  the  words  "  traces  of 
antimony."  What  was  the  meaning  of  "trace"? — A  very 
small  quantity. 

In  analytical  chemistry  does  it  mean  an  imponderable 
quantity? — I  do  not  apply  it  in  that  shape.  Some  chemists 
mean  that.  I  mean  we  obtained  some  quantity  in  that  sense 
from  many  parts,  and  that  the  quantity  thus  calculated  would 
make  a  ponderable  quantity  in  the  whole.  We  have  about 
half  a  grain. 

You  did  not  actually  ascertain  it  to  amount  to  half  a  grain? 
— No.  I  do  not  think  a  quarter  of  a  grain  would  have  explained 
the  quantity  we  obtained.  I  will  undertake  to  say  there  was 
half  a  grain  to  the  best  of  my  judgment. 

In  all  parts  of  the  body  you  examined? — There  was  more  in 
the  parts  of  the  body  examined,  but  we  extracted  that  quantity. 

In  your  judgment  would  that  be  sufficient  to  cause  death? — 
No.  I  was  first  asked  to  investigate  this  case  on  Tuesday, 
27th  November,  by  Mr.  Stevens.  Either  on  that  day  or 
subsequently  he  mentioned  the  name  of  Mr.  Gardner  to  me. 
After  Mr.  Stevens  spoke  to  me  he  and  Mr.  Boycott  came 
together  with  these  jars. 

You  wrote  a  letter,  the  whole  of  which  I  will  read  to  you. 
It  is  in  reply  to  a  letter  received  from  Mr.  Gardner — 

Dr.  Rees  and  I  have  compared  the  analysis  to-day.  We  have  sketched 
a  report,  which  will  be  ready  to-morrow  or  next  day.  As  I  am 
going  to  Durham  Assizes  on  the  part  of  the  Crown,  in  the  case  of  Reg. 
v.  Wooler,  the  report  will  be  in  the  hands  of  Dr.  Rees,  No.  26  Albe- 
marle  Street.  It  will  be  most  desirable  that  Mr.  Stevens  should  call 
on  Dr.  Reee,  read  the  report  with  him,  and  put  such  questions  as  may 
occur.  In  reply  to  your  letter  received  here  this  morning,  I  beg 
to  say  that  we  wish  a  statement  of  all  the  medicines  prescribed  for 
deceased  (until  his  death)  to  be  drawn  up  and  sent  to  Dr.  Rees.  We 
did  not  find  strychnia  nor  prussic  acid  or  any  trace  of  opium.  From 
the  contents  having  been  drained  away,  it  is  now  impossible  to  say 
whether  any  strychnine  had  or  had  not  been  given  just  before  death. 
But  it  is  quite  possible  for  tartar  emetic  to  destroy  life  if  given  in 
repeated  doses ;  and,  as  far  as  we  can  at  present  form  an  opinion,  in 
the  absence  of  any  natural  cause  of  death,  the  deceased  must  have 
died  from  the  effects  of  antimony  in  this  or  some  other  form. 

Was  that  your  opinion   at  the  time? — It  was.     That  was   all 
we  could  infer  from  the  chemical  analysis. 

Have  you  not  told  me  to-day  that  the  quantity  of  antimony 
that  you  found  in  Cook's  body  was  not  sufficient  to  account 
for  death? — Perfectly  so;  but  what  was  found  in  Cook's  body 
was  not  all  he  took.  We  found  antimony,  and  we  could  not 
account  for  its  being  there.  I  wrote  to  know  whether  antimony 
had  been  given  as  a  medicine,  and  I  considered,  as  people  had 
died  from  antimony,  it  was  necessary  to  have  information  of 
80 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

the  symptoms  connected  with  the  man's  death,  which  I  knew  Alfred  Taylor 
nothing  about   at   the   time;    finding  antimony  there  and  no 
explanation,  I  put  it  as  the  only  hypothesis  to  me  to  account 
for  death. 

Had  you  any  reason  to  think  any  undue  quantity  had  been 
administered  to  him? — I  could  not  speculate  on  that  from  the 
quantity  there,  for  I  did  not  know  at  all  what  quantity  he 
had  taken,  and  whether  it  had  been  prescribed  medicinally. 

May  not  the  injudicious  use  of  quack  medicines  containing 
antimony,  such  as  James'  powder  or  other  mixtures,  have 
accounted  for  as  much  antimony  as  you  found  in  the  body  of 
Mr.  Cook? — Any  antimonial  preparation  would  account  for  it. 
I  knew  strychnia  was  bought  before  we  sent  in  the  report.  Mr 
Gardner  gave  the  information  in  a  letter  in  reply  to  that 
which  has  been  read  that  strychnia,  prussic  acid,  Batley's 
sedative  of  opium,  had  been  bought  by  the  prisoner.  After 
giving  my  evidence  at  the  inquest  I  returned  to  town.  Soon 
after  I  knew  that  the  prisoner  had  been  committed  on  the 
charge  of  wilful  murder. 

You  knew,  of  course,  that  his  life  depended  in  a  great  degree 
on  your  opinion  ? — No ;  my  opinion  was  in  reference  to  the 
death  by  poison ;  I  expressed  no  opinion  of  the  prisoner's 
guilt.  I  knew  I  would  be  examined  as  a  witness  upon  his 
trial.  I  wrote  a  letter  to  the  Lancet  on  the  subject,  contradict- 
ing several  misstatements  which  were  made  regarding  my 
evidence.  I  have  never  had  under  my  own  observation  the 
effects  of  strychnia  on  the  human  body ;  but  I  have  written  a 
book  upon  the  subject. 

Do  you,  from  your  reading,  know  of  any  fatal  case  in 
which  the  patient  under  strychnia  poison  has  had,  while  the 
paroxysm  lasted,  as  much  command  over  the  muscles  and 
voluntary  motion  as  Mr.  Cook  had  on  the  Monday  and  Tuesday 
nights,  according  to  the  evidence  of  Mills  and  Jones? — I  do 
not  see  that  he  had  much  command  over  the  muscles  of  volun- 
tary life.  His  symptoms  are  quite  in  accordance  with  the 
ordinary  action  of  strychnia. 

Can  you  tell  me  a  single  case  of  a  patient  seized  with  tetanic 
symptoms  by  strychnia  poison  sitting  up  in  his  bed  talking? — 
He  was  seized  with  the  tetanic  symptoms  after  he  sat  up  in 
his  bed. 

Do  you  know  of  a  single  case  of  the  symptoms  of  poison 
by  strychnia  commencing  or  exhibiting  themselves  during  any 
time  of  the  paroxysm  by  the  operation  of  beating  the  bed? — 
There  have  been  only  about  fifteen  cases  altogether ;  I  have 
not  heard  of  a  person  taken  ill  in  bed  before. 

Is  not  the  beating  of  the  bed  well  known  under  the  name 
of  malasaux ;    is  it  not  a  very  common  symptom  of  ordinary 
convulsions? — No,  I  do  not  think  it  is  the  case,  not  to  my 
o  8x 


Trial   of   William  Palmer. 

Alfred  Taylor  knowledge.  I  have  not  a  case  of  a  person  sitting  up  in  bed  and 
beating  the  bed. 

Have  you  known  any  instances  in  which  the  patient  has 
screamed  before  he  was  seized  with  the  fit? — No.  That  is 
common  in  convulsions  not  occasioned  by  strychnia  poisoning. 
In  many  cases  they  scream  very  soon  after  the  spasm  sets  in  ; 
the  pain  felt  is  very  severe. 

This  is  before  the  convulsions  begin? — No,  I  have  never 
known  that.  I  have  known  cases  in  which  they  speak  freely, 
but  not  after  the  paroxysm  has  commenced ;  I  do  not  remember 
a  case  at  the  present  time. 

Can  you  tell  me  or  refer  me  to  any  one  case  in  which  the 
effect  of  the  strychnia  affection  or  paroxysm  in  a  fatal  case 
has  been  as  long  after  the  ingestion  of  the  poison  as  in  Cook's 
case  on  Tuesday  night? — Yes.  In  a  case  communicated  to  the 
Lancet  of  31st  August,  1850,  p.  259,  by  Mr.  Bennett,  one 
grain  and  a  half  of  strychnia,  taken  by  mistake,  destroyed  the 
life  of  a  healthy  young  female  in  an  hour  and  a  half,  which 
is  remarkable,  as  no  symptoms  appeared  for  an  hour. 

May  I  take  it  that  is  the  longest  period  which  has  elapsed 
between  the  ingestion  of  the  poison  and  the  commencement  of 
the  symptoms  on  record? — No,  I  think  not. 

Do  you  know  a  single  case  in  which  the  symptoms  have 
manifested  themselves  as  long  as  an  hour  and  a  half  after  the 
ingestion  of  the  poison? — No,  I  do  not. 

Do  you  know  any  case  of  strychnia  poison  in  which  the 
patient  has  recovered  from  a  paroxysm  in  as  short  a  time  as 
Mr.  Cook  did,  he  being  well  before  the  morning? — I  do  not 
remember  any,  but  I  can  conceive  in  medical  practice  such 
cases. 

Do  you  know  any  case  of  strychnia  poison  in  which  there 
was  so  long  an  intermission  of  the  paroxysm  as  between  the 
two  fits  of  Monday  and  Tuesday  night? — No,  I  do  not. 

As  you  choose  to  go  upon  rabbits,  do  you  not  know  that  it 
constantly  happens,  even  in  rabbits,  that  the  spasm  and  the 
contraction  instantly  cease  immediately  with  death,  or  just 
before  death,  and  that  the  body  becomes  perfectly  pliant? — 
No,  I  do  not.  It  does  so  in  some  instances,  in  one  out  of 
five  cases. 

Do  you  agree  in  this  opinion  of  Dr.  Christison — "  I  have 
not  altered  the  statement  as  to  this  point  in  the  former  edition, 
that  is,  that  the  rigidity  supervenes  at  an  early  period  after 
death;  yet  I  strongly  suspect  the  authors  who  describe  the 
spasm  which  precedes  death  to  continue  as  it  were  without 
the  rigidity  that  occurs  after  death  must  have  observed  inaccu- 
rately, for,  in  the  numerous  experiments  that  I  have  made  and 
witnessed  upon  animals,  flaccidity  of  limb  continued  after 
82 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

death"? — Dr.   Christison   speaks  from  his  own  experience;   I  Alfred  Taylor 
speak  from  my  own. 

Have  you  any  reason  to  say  that  the  clenching  of  the  hand 
is  a  distinctive  feature  of  strychnia  poison? — It  is  the  result  of 
violent  tetanic  spasms.  It  occurs  in  other  violent  spasms. 

In  all  forms  of  convulsion? — No;  the  great  point  is  this, 
that  in  tetanus  it  remains  so ;  in  other  convulsions  it  comes 
and  goes. 

Is  it  always  so? — That  is  according  to  my  knowledge. 

Re-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — I  have  met  with 
three  cases  in  a  human  subject  in  which  it  has  appeared  that 
the  heart  was  found  empty  after  death,  where  the  death  had 
taken  place  from  strychnia.  I  think  the  emptiness  of  the  heart 
is  owing  to  spasmodic  affection,  the  effect  upon  the  heart  in  the 
last  moment  of  life.  I  know  of  no  reason  why  that  should  be 
more  likely  to  be  the  case  in  the  human  subject  than  in  a  small 
animal  like  a  rabbit.  The  only  thing  I  would  observe  is,  that 
I  think  the  heart  is  generally  more  affected  by  the  paroxysm,  so 
that  the  blood  accumulates. 

Suppose  the  paroxysms  short  and  violent,  and  cause  death  in 
a  few  minutes? — That  is  the  kind  of  case  in  which  I  should 
expect  to  find  it  empty.  The  rigidity  after  death  in  the  cases 
where  I  found  it  always  affected  the  same  muscles,  the  muscles 
of  the  limbs,  specially  the  muscles"  of  the  back.  In  the  case  of 
poisoning  by  strychnia,  where  the  rigidity  was  relaxed  in  death, 
it  returns  while  the  body  is  warm. 

Would  the  rigidity  of  the  extremities  as  long  as  two  months 
after  death,  the  clenching  of  the  hands,  and  the  twisting  of  the 
feet,  afford  you  any  indication  of  whether  the  person  died  of 
tetanus? — I  have  never  known  such  a  case.  That  would 
indicate,  in  my  opinion,  great  violence  of  the  spasm  with  which 
the  party  died. 

With  regard  to  the  duration  of  time  in  which  the  effects  of 
the  poison  would  begin  to  act,  to  show  itself,  would  it  be 
uniform,  do  you  think,  in  all  persons  to  whom  the  same  quantity 
of  poison  might  be  given? — It  would  vary  according  to  the 
constitution  and  the  strength,  according  to  the  power  of 
absorption. 

Dr.  GEORGE  OWEN  REES,  examined  by  Mr.  JAMES — I  am  a  G.  0.  Rees 
Fellow  of  the  College  of  Physicians,  and  Lecturer  on  Materia 
Medica  at  Guy's  Hospital.  I  believe  strychnia  is  absorbed 
always  before  it  produces  the  symptoms.  If  enough  strychnia 
is  given  to  destroy  life,  that  might  be  done  without  our  being 
able  to  discover  it  after  death.  I  agree  with  Professor  Taylor 
that  it  is  the  excess  that  is  found.  Where  vitality  is  destroyed 
by  the  effects  of  the  poison,  and  an  excess  remains,  I  would 

83 


Trial   of  William   Palmer. 

G.  0.  Rees  expect  with  care  to  discover  that  excess.  The  symptoms  in  the 
cases  of  death  from  strychnia  that  have  been  given  are 
analogous,  in  my  opinion,  to  those  of  Mr.  Cook,  and  to  those 
produced  by  strychnia  in  the  experiments  I  have  seen  made  on 
animals. 

R.  Christison  Professor  ROBERT  CHRISTISON,  examined  by  the  ATTORNEY- 
GENERAL — I  am  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians 
and  Professor  of  Materia  Medica  to  the  University  of  Edin- 
burgh. I  published  in  1845  a  treatise  on  poisons  in  relation  to 
medical  jurisprudence.  Among  other  poisons,  I  have  turned  my 
attention  to  strychnia.  It  acts  upon  the  human  frame  by 
absorption  into  the  blood,  and  then  by  acting  on  the  nervous 
system.  I  have  seen  a  case  of  strychnia  poisoning,  but  not  a  fatal 
one,  in  a  human  subject.  I  have  frequently  seen  experiments 
tried  upon  animals — frogs,  rabbits,  cats,  dogs,  and  one  wild 
boar.  In  most  of  my  experiments  I  have  given  very  small  doses, 
a  sixth  part  of  a  grain,  but  sometimes  as  much  as  a  grain.  The 
first  symptom  that  I  have  observed  has  been  a  slight  tremor 
and  unwillingness  to  move,  then  frequently  the  animal  jerks 
its  head  back  slightly,  and  very  soon  after  that  all  the  symptoms 
of  tetanus  come  on,  which  have  been  so  often  described  in  the 
evidence  of  previous  witnesses.  There  is  occasionally  an  inter- 
mission of  the  spasms  for  a  short  while.  Where  the  poison 
has  been  introduced  into  the  stomach,  between  five  or  six 
minutes  and  twenty-five  minutes  have  elapsed  from  the  com- 
mencement of  the  symptoms  to  the  death  of  the  animal.  From 
the  giving  of  the  poison  to  the  first  symptoms  coming  on,  the 
appearance  of  tremor,  I  have  seen  as  long  as  twelve  minutes 
elapse,  and  from  the  first  commencement  of  the  symptoms  to 
their  termination  in  death  from  five  or  six  minutes  to  twenty  or 
twenty-five  minutes.  The  symptoms  have  always  been  very 
much  the  same.  Where  we  can  trace  it  very  correctly,  I  think 
the  jaws  and  the  back  of  the  neck  are  affected  first,  then  the 
trunk  and  the  extremities  in  such  rapidity  that  it  is  very  difficult 
to  follow  them  in  succession.  I  have  sometimes  observed 
differences  in  individuals  of  the  same  species ;  the  intermission 
sometimes  is  wanting;  some  lie  in  one  long  continuous  spasm, 
with  scarcely  any  intermission,  but  that  is  uncommon.  I  have 
generally  found  that  the  animal  is  in  a  state  of  flaccidity  about 
the  period  of  the  termination  of  life.  I  have  always  observed 
an  interval  before  the  rigidity  that  takes  place  after  death. 
There  is  a  cessation  of  the  symptoms  immediately  before  death ; 
the  rigidity  is  gone,  the  body  is  flaccid.  The  rigidity  is 
renewed  very  soon  after  death.  I  have  frequently  opened  the 
bodies  of  the  animals  that  have  thus  been  killed.  I  never  could 
find  that  the  poison  had  produced  any  apparent  effect  upon  the 
stomach  or  intestines.  I  have  never  found  any  apparent  effect 
84 


Evidence  for   Prosecution. 

on  the  spinal  cord  or  brain  which  I  could  trace  satisfactorily  to  R.  Chrlstison 
the  poison.  I  have  always  found  that  the  heart  of  the  animal 
after  death  contained  blood.  Others  have  found  it  devoid  of 
blood,  but  I  have  not.  In  the  one  case  of  the  human  subject 
which  I  saw  the  symptoms  were  the  fixing  of  the  jaw,  spasmodic 
retraction  of  the  head,  slight  grinning  expression  of  the  mouth, 
and  a  slight  stiffness  of  the  arms  and  legs.  There  was  no 
convulsion  of  the  muscles  of  the  trunk,  nor  any  convulsive 
movement  of  the  arms  and  legs  in  that  case.  I  have  collected 
all  the  cases  that  have  occurred  up  to  the  time  of  the  publication 
of  my  book  as  far  as  I  am  aware.  The  poison  appears  to 
require  a  longer  time  in  producing  its  effect  in  the  larger  animals 
than  the  small.  In  the  case  of  the  wild  boar,  the  poison  was 
injected  into  the  chest.  The  animal  died  in  ten  minutes,  from 
the  third  of  a  grain.  I  think  there  are  cases  where  strychnia, 
given  to  the  human  subject  in  the  shape  of  nux  vomica,  has 
not  operated  for  about  an  hour.  Strychnia  itself  is  generally 
given  in  the  solid  form,  sometimes  in  the  fluid  form.  When 
given  in  the  fluid  form  the  symptoms  are  not  so  long  in  appear- 
ing as  when  given  in  the  solid  form.  When  given  in  the  shape 
of  a  pill  the  time  it  takes  to  act  depends  very  much  upon  the 
material  used  for  making  the  pill.  To  make  the  appearance  of 
the  symptoms  as  late  as  possible  the  poison  might  be  mixed 
up  with  resinous  materials,  which  are  all  difficult  of  digestion. 
Such  materials  would  be  within  the  knowledge  and  reach  of  a 
medical  man,  and  some  are  often  used  for  making  ordinary 
pills.  Absorption  would  not  begin  until  the  pill  came  to  be 
broken  up  or  digested ;  the  less  soluble  the  pill  the  longer  would 
be  the  period  required. 

Now,  independently  of  that,  does  the  state  of  knowledge 
upon  this  subject  enable  you  to  predicate  with  anything  like 
certainty  or  accuracy  the  period  that  would  be  required  in  the 
human  subject  before  such  poison  would  begin  to  operate  after 
it  has  been  taken  into  the  stomach;  does  the  state  of  science 
enable  you  to  form  an  opinion  as  to  the  precise  time,  or  near 
the  precise  time,  that  it  would  require  for  this  poison  to 
operate? — I  do  not  think  we  can  fix  from  our  present  know- 
ledge the  precise  time  for  the  poison  beginning  to  operate. 
When  we  give  poison  to  an  animal  for  the  purpose  of  watching 
the  effect  of  the  poison,  we  give  it  in  a  manner  in  which  it 
would  act  most  rapidly,  whether  in  the  fluid  or  the  solid  form. 
We  take  care  that  the  animal  is  fasting,  and  have  every 
circumstance  favourable  for  the  action  of  poison.  We  mix 
it  up  with  materials  that  are  readily  soluble  in  the  stomach. 
I  have  seen  a  good  many  cases  of  tetanus  arising  from  wounds, 
but  very  few  from  natural  diseases. 

Is  there,  in  your  opinion,  any  marked  difference  between  what 
I  may  call  natural  tetanus  and  the  tetanus  of  strychnia? — I 

8S 


Trial   of  William  Palmer. 

R.  Christison  would  not  rest  much  upon  the  little  difference  of  particular 
symptoms,  but  rather  upon  the  course  and  the  general  circum- 
stances attending  them.  First,  that  in  all  the  natural  forms 
of  tetanus  the  symptoms  begin  and  advance  much  more  slowly ; 
and,  secondly,  they  prove  fatal  much  more  slowly.  When  once 
set  up  in  natural  forms  of  tetanus  there  is  no  intermission. 
Where  the  first  paroxysm  does  not  prove  fatal  there  are  short 
intermissions  in  tetanus  from  strychnia.  I  heard  the  evidence 
given  by  Elizabeth  Mills  of  what  took  place  on  the  Monday, 
and  by  Mr.  Jones  of  what  took  place  on  the  Tuesday  night  when 
Mr.  Cook  died. 

Now,  of  the  two  classes  of  tetanus,  to  which  should  you  refer 
the  spasm  and  other  symptoms  spoken  to  by  those  two  witnesses  ? 
— To  strychnia,  or  one  of  the  natural  poisons  containing  it — 
nux  vomica,  St.  Ignatius's  bean,  snakewood,  and  a  poison 
called  exhetwick.  They  belong  to  different  plants  of  the 
same  genus,  from  all  of  which  strychnia  may  be  obtained. 
There  is  no  natural  disease  that  I  have  ever  seen  or  that  I 
otherwise  know  to  which  I  can  refer  these  symptoms  which  I 
have  heard  described. 

When  death  takes  place  from  tetanus  or  tetanic  convulsions, 
does  consciousness  continue? — As  long  as  one  can  make  an 
observation  upon  it,  it  remains.  When  the  animal  is  in  a  state 
of  strong  universal  spasm  it  is  impossible  to  make  any  observa- 
tion on  its  consciousness.  The  heart  of  a  human  subject  killed 
by  strychnia  has  sometimes  blood  in  it  and  sometimes  not. 
Whether  the  heart  contains  blood  or  not  depends  upon  the 
particular  mode  of  death,  or  the  dose  varying.  Spasms  of  the 
heart  would  expel  the  blood. 

Where  death  has  taken  place  from  strychnia  I  should  not 
expect  to  find  it  where  the  quantity  taken  is  small,  but  where 
there  is  a  considerable  excess  over  the  quantity  necessary  to 
destroy  life  by  absorption  I  should  expect  to  find  it.  Colouring 
tests  are,  I  think,  uncertain  in  some  respects.  Vegetable 
poisons  are  generally  more  difficult  to  detect.  There  is  one 
I  know  for  which  there  is  no  test  I  know  of.  The  stomach  that 
was  sent  to  Dr.  Taylor  to  operate  upon,  from  the  description 
that  he  gave  of  it  to-day,  was  in  a  very  unsatisfactory  condition. 
If  I  had  been  called  upon  to  analyse  such  a  stomach,  I  should 
not  have  entertained  any  reasonable  expectation  of  doing  any 
good  with  it  if  I  had  not  been  informed  that  there  was  a  con- 
siderable quantity  of  strychnia  present.  I  have  no  doubt, 
from  the  evidence  I  have  heard  as  to  the  Leeds  case,  the  Glasgow 
case,  and  the  Romsey  case,  that  they  were  deaths  from  strychnia. 
The  symptoms  in  these  cases  appear  to  me  very  similar  to  those 
of  Mr.  Cook. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  GROVE — From  my  own  observation, 
I  should  say  that  animals  who  die  from  strychnia  die  of  suffoca- 
86 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

tion — asphyxia ;  but  in  another  part  of  my  book  which  is  referred  R.  Christlson 
to,  I  leave  the  question  open.       By  asphyxia  I  mean  stopping 
of  the  respiration. 

Where  is  it  in  your  book? — It  is  under  the  head  of  mix 
vomica,  at  the  bottom  of  page  898. 

I  do  not  find  that  meets  the  case? — It  leaves  the  question 
open;  it  takes  place  through  an  influence  on  the  heart  some- 
times, and  through  an  influence  on  the  respiration;  it  is  now 
more  open,  particularly  from  the  cases  which  have  occurred  of 
death  from  strychnia. 

In  the  animals  poisoned  by  strychnia  that  you  examined 
was  there  blood  in  the  right  cavity? — Yes,  in  both. 

You  state  in  your  book,  and  you  tell  me  that  when  death  does 
not  take  place  suddenly  in  a  fit  of  spasms,  the  person  continues 
to  be  affected  for  twelve  or  fourteen  hours,  with  small  or  milder 
paroxysms.  Is  that  a  statement  which,  according  to  your 
subsequent  knowledge,  is  correct? — I  have  known  the  effects 
cease  in  a  shorter  time. 

You  state  on  page  903,  after  mentioning  a  case  where  the 
body  was  rigid,  "  the  state  of  rigidity,  however,  does  not  in- 
variably occur;  on  the  contrary,  in  animals  the  limbs  become 
very  flaccid  immediately  after  death,  but  the  usual  rigidity 
supervenes  at  an  early  period."  I  presume  the  rigidity  of 
which  you  speak  is  the  rigidity  of  death,  rigor-mortis  ? — Yes. 

You  have  a  note — "  I  have  not  altered  the  statement  as  to 
this  point  in  a  former  edition,  yet  I  strongly  suspect  that 
authors  who  describe  the  spasms  which  produce  death,  and  con- 
tinue the  rigidity  after  death,  must  be  inaccurate.3'  Is  that 
your  present  opinion? — I  think  it  is  very  likely,  the  interval 
being  very  short,  that  the  attention  may  not  have  been 
attracted  to  the  fact  of  there  having  been  an  interval  of 
flaccidity.  There  have  been  some  cases  mentioned,  very 
strong  indications  certainly,  of  the  spasm  having  continued  from 
the  spasm  of  life  to  what  we  call  spasm  of  death;  but  I  still 
think  the  differences  which  are  indicated  in  different  cases  may 
be  explained  on  the  supposition  that  there  has  been  a  want  of 
minute  and  accurate  attention. 

New,  you  mention  a  case  on  page  906,  where  a  boy,  when 
he  was  touched,  was  immediately  thrown  into  a  fit.  Is  it 
your  present  impression  that,  in  cases  of  poisoning  by  strychnia, 
there  is  a  tendency  to  throw  the  patient  into  a  fit  when  touched  ? 
— That  is  the  only  case.  In  animals  it  is  very  remarkable; 
it  is  not  noticed  in  the  generality  of  cases.  I  have  been  struck 
with  the  fact  that  it  has  not  more  often  been  noted.  Dr. 
Watson's  book  mentions  one.  It  isi  not  that  the  absence  of 
it  is  noted,  but  that  it  is  not  mentioned  at  all.  I  have  in- 
variably observed  it  in  animals,  unless  you  touch  them  very 
gently  indeed. 

87 


Trial    of  William  Palmer. 

B.  Chrlstison  You  stated  that  care  was  taken  in  administering  strychnia 
to  animals  to  administer  it  to  them  fasting.  Do  you  think  it 
not  likely  it  would  supervene  more  quickly  if  administered  to 
an  empty  stomach? — Certainly. 

If  resinous  substances  were  used  in  a  pill,  would  they  not  be 
found  in  the  stomach  on  analysis  afterwards? — No;  if  they 
were  not  acted  upon  they  might  pass  into  the  intestines  and  be 
carried  off. 

Then  the  strychnia  would  be  discharged  with  them,  would 
it  not? — Certainly,  or  gradually  acted  upon  with  the  resinous 
substances. 

I  suppose  if  the  resinous  substances  prevented  the  poison 
acting  rapidly,  it  would  prevent  its  absorption  into  the  blood? — 
For  a  time. 

If  so,  the  more  likely  to  leave  portions  of  it  in  the  stomach 
or  intestines  as  the  case  may  be  ? — The  more  likely. 

Re-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — Would  that 
materially  depend  on  the  quantity  of  the  dose? — Both  on  the 
dose  and  on  the  time  during  which  the  pill  was  allowed  to 
remain.  It  appears  that  colour  tests  are  not  to  be  relied  upon 
in  the  case  of  strychnia  in  an  impure  condition.  In  the  first 
place,  you  may  not  find  indications  of  strychnia,  and  secondly, 
they  are  subject  to  fallacy,  even  if  the  strychnia  is  pure,  from 
other  substances  not  containing  strychnia  presenting  similar 
appearances. 

The  Court  then  adjourned. 


Sixth  Day,  Tuesday,  20th  May,  1856. 

The  Court  met  at  ten  o'clock. 

Dr.  JOHN  JACKSON,  examined  by  Mr.  JAMBS — I  am  a  member  John  Jackson 
of  the  College  of  Physicians.  I  have  been  in  practice  for 
twenty-five  years  in  India,  and  have  seen  cases  of  idiopathic 
and  traumatic  tetanus.  Idiopathic  is  more  common  in  India 
than  in  this  country.  I  have  seen  not  less  than  forty  cases. 
It  is  common  with  children.  In  children  there  is  a  more  marked 
symptom  of  lockjaw,  but  in  adults  there  is  no  difference  between 
the  symptoms  of  idiopathic  and  traumatic.  I  have  always  seen 
idiopathic  tetanus  preceded  by  a  peculiar  expression  of  the 
countenance,  stiffness  in  the  muscles  of  the  throat  and  of  the 
jaw.  In  infants  it  will  kill  in  forty-eight  hours;  in  adults, 
arising  from  cold,  it  is  of  longer  duration,  and  may  continue 
many  days,  going  through  the  same  grades  as  the  traumatic 
form. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  SEIUEANT  SHEE — The  patient  always 
appears  uncomfortable  for  some  time  before  the  attack  comes 
on.  His  appetite  and  desire  for  food  are  not  much  affected. 
He  may  take  his  food  as  usual  within  twelve  hours  of  the  pre- 
liminary symptoms. 

During  the  twelve  hours,  supposing  the  attack  to  be  the  first 
one  under  which  he  suffers,  does  he  seem  not  to  relish  his 
ordinary  food? — His  attention  is  more  directed  to  the  stiffness 
of  his  mouth  and  the  stiffness  of  his  neck. 

You  said  to  within  twelve  hours  of  the  attack  he  relishes  his 
food  as  if  no  attack  was  impending,  but  does'  he  not  appear  less 
desirous  of  food  and  less  inclined  to  eat  it? — I  have  never  heard 
that  complaint. 

Re-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — What  interval  has 
occurred  in  those  cases  that  have  come  under  your  attention 
between  the  preliminary  symptoms  and  the  tetanic  convulsions? 
— In  an  infant,  not  more  than  twelve  hours,  and  in  an  adult, 
from  twelve  to  twenty-four  hours ;  sometimes  more  than  that. 

And  from  the  commencement  of  the  tetanic  convulsions  to 
death,  what  time  ? — That  will  vary ;  three  days  to  ten  days ;  it 
may  take  place  early  sometimes,  perhaps  in  two  days,  but  that 
is  early. 

Does  that  apply  to  traumatic  as  well  as  to  idiopathic  tetanus? 
— They  are  both  alike,  when  the  disease  sets  in,  as  regards 
the  course  of  the  symptoms. 

Are  the  symptoms  more  or  less  severe  in  India  than  in  this 
climate? — I  do  not  see  there  is  any  difference;  when  once  set 
up,  the  symptoms  of  tetanus  are  the  same. 

89 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

John  Jackson  In  all  your  experience,  did  you  ever  know  a  case  in  which 
the  disease  ran  its  course  and  ended  in  death  in  the  space  of 
twenty  minutes  or  half  an  hour? — I  have  never  seen  it. 

[The  rest  of  this  day,  after  Dr.  Jackson's  evidence,  was 
occupied  with  taking  evidence  that  there  was  nothing  in 
Palmer's  papers  to  show  joint  transactions  between  him  and 
Cook;  as  to  Pratt's  and  Padwick's  accounts;  as  to  Palmer's 
pecuniary  position  generally;  as  to  the  forgery  of  his  mother's 
name,  and  the  forgery  of  an  endorsement  on  a  cheque  for 
£375  of  Cook's  name,  by  which  he  passed  into  his  own  account 
that  sum  which  was  intended  for  Cook.] 

The  Court  then  adjourned. 


90 


Mr.   Serjeant  Shee. 


Seventh  Day,  Wednesday,  2ist  May,  1856. 

The  Court  met  at  ten  o'clock. 


Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr.  SBKJEANT  SHEE — May  it  please  your  lordships,  gentlemen  Serjeant 
of  the  jury — I  should  pity  the  man  who  could  rise  to  perform  the 
task  which  it  is  now  my  duty  to  attempt  unoppressed  by  an 
overwhelming  sense  of  diffidence  and  of  apprehension.  Once  only 
before  has  it  fallen  to  my  lot  to  defend  a  fellow-creature  upon 
trial  for  his  life;  it  is  a  position,  even  if  the  effort  should  last 
but  for  a  day,  of  a  nature  to  disturb  the  coolest  temperament 
and  try  the  strongest  nerves ;  how  much  more  so  when,  during 
six  long  days,  in  the  eye  of  my  unhappy  client,  I  have  been 
standing  between  him  and  the  scaffold ;  conscious  that  the  least 
error  of  judgment  on  my  part  might  consign  him  to  a  mur- 
derer's doom,  and  that  through  the  whole  time  I  have  had  to 
breast  a  storm  of  public  prejudice  such  as  has  never  before  im- 
perilled the  calm  administration  of  justice !  Gentlemen,  it  is 
useless  for  me  to  conceal  what  you  know  perfectly  well,  what 
your  utmost  endeavours  cannot  wholly  have  effaced  from  your 
recollection,  that  for  six  long  months,  under  the  sanction  and 
upon  the  authority  of  science,  an  opinion  has  universally  pre- 
vailed that  the  voice  of  the  blood  of  John  Parsons  Cook  was 
crying  up  unto  us  from  the  ground,  and  that  that  cry  was  met 
by  the  whole  population  under  an  impression  and  conviction  of 
the  prisoner's  guilt  in  a  delirium  of  horror  and  indignation  by 
another  cry  of  "  blood  for  blood  "  !  You  cannot  have  failed  to 
have  entered  upon  the  discharge  of  the  duties,  which  you  have, 
as  I  have  observed,  most  conscientiously  endeavoured  to  per- 
form, without  having  been  to  a  great  extent  influenced  by  that 
cry  ;  you  could  not  know  that  it  would  be  your  duty  to  sit  in 
that  box  to  pass  between  the  Crown  and  the  prisoner ;  you 
may  with  perfect  propriety,  understanding  that  the  facts  had 
been  ascertained  before  a  coroner's  jury,  and  reading  such 
evidence  as  was  there  taken,  have  formed  an  opinion  upon  the 
question  of  the  guilt  or  innocence  of  the  prisoner ;  but  you 
cannot  but  know  that  whatever  that  opinion  may  have  been  it 
is  your  duty  to  discard  it,  at  least  until  you  have  heard  the 
evidence  on  both  sides. 

Gentlemen,  the  very  circumstances  under  which  we  meet  in  this 
case  are  of  a  character  to  excite  mingled  feelings  of  encourage- 
ment and  alarm.  Those  whose  duty  it  is  to  watch  over  the 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  safety  of  the  Queen's  subjects  felt  so  much  apprehension  lest 
the  course  of  justice  should  be  disturbed  by  the  popular  preju- 
dice which  had  been  excited  against  the  prisoner,  so  much 
alarmed  that  an  unjust  verdict  might  in  the  midst  of  that 
popular  prejudice  pass  against  him,  that  a  resolution  was  taken, 
not  only  by  the  Queen's  Government  and  the  Legislature,  upon 
the  motion  of  the  noble  and  learned  judge,  who  presides  here, 
in  the  House  of  Lords,  that  an  Act  of  Parliament  should  be 
passed  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  the  ordinary  forms  of  law 
being,  in  the  case  of  William  Palmer,  made  the  instrument  of 
popular  vengeance.  The  Crown,  under  the  advice  of  its  respon- 
sible Ministers,  resolved  also  that  this  prosecution  should  not 
be  left  in  private  hands,  but  that  its  own  law  officer,  my  learned 
friend  the  Attorney-General,  should  take  upon  himself  the 
responsibility  of  conducting  it  properly,  at  once  sternly  in  his 
duty  to  the  public  and  fairly  to  the  prisoner  at  the  bar ;  and 
my  learned  friend,  when  that  duty  was  entnisted  to  him,  did 
what  I  must  say  will,  in  my  opinion,  for  ever  redound  to  his 
honour — he  insisted  that  in  a  case  in  which  so  much  prejudice 
had  been  excited  all  the  evidence  which  it  was  intended  on 
the  part  of  the  Crown  to  press  against  the  prisoner  should,  as 
soon  as  he  received  it,  be  communicated  to  the  prisoner's 
counsel ;  everything,  I  must  say  and  tell  my  unhappy  client, 
everything  which  the  constituted  authorities  of  this  land,  every- 
thing which  the  Legislature  and  the  law  officers  of  the  Crown 
could  do  to  secure  a  fair  and  impartial  trial  in  this  case,  has  been 
done,  and  the  whole  responsibility,  if  unhappily  injustice  should 
on  either  side  be  done,  now  weighs  with  terrible  pressure  upon 
my  lord  and  upon  you. 

Gentlemen,  one  great  misfortune  has  befallen  the  accused — 
a  most  able  man  who  had  been  selected  by  him  as  his  counsel 
many  weeks  ago  has  been,  unfortunately,  by  illness  prevented 
from  discharging  that  duty  to  him.  I  have  endeavoured,  to 
the  utmost  of  my  ability,  to  supply  his  place ;  I  cannot  deny 
that  I  am  awed — that  I  am  moved — by  the  task  I  have  under- 
taken ;  but  the  circumstances  to  which  I  have  already  adverted, 
the  national  effort,  so  to  speak,  through  the  Government  of  the 
country,  to  ensure  a  fair  trial  is  a  great  cause  of  encouragement, 
and  I  am  not  dismayed.  I  have  this  further  cause  for  not 
being  altogether  overcome  by  the  duty  which  I  have  of  defend- 
ing the  prisoner  and  of  discussing  the  mass  of  evidence  which 
has  been  laid  before  you,  that  though,  of  course,  like  everybody 
else,  I  knew  generally  and  loosely,  very  loosely  indeed,  the 
history  of  these  transactions  at  Rugeley,  I  had  formed,  when 
the  papers  came  into  iny  hands,  no  opinion  upon  them,  no 
opinion  upon  the  guilt  or  the  innocence  of  the  prisoner  at  the 
bar,  and  my  mind  was  perfectly  free  to  form  what  I  trust  will 
be  declared  by  you  a  right  judgment  in  this  case.  I  com- 
92 


Speech  for  Defence. 


mence  his  defence,  I  say  it  in  all  sincerity,  with  an  entire  Serjeant 
conviction  of  his  innocence.  I  believe  that  there  never  was  Shee 
a  truer  word  pronounced  than  the  words  which  he  pronounced 
when  he  said  "  Not  guilty  "  to  this  charge.  If  I  fail  in 
establishing  that  to  your  satisfaction  I  shall  be  under  a  great 
misgiving  that  my  failure  was  more  attributable  to  my  own 
ability  to  do  justice  to  this  case  than  to  any  weakness  in  the 
case  itself ;  and  I  will  give  you  this  proof  of  the  sincerity  with 
which  I  declare  upon  this  evidence  my  conviction  of  his  inno- 
cence, that  I  will  meet  the  case  of  the  prosecution  foot  to  foot 
at  every  stage.  I  will  grapple  with  every  difficulty  which  haa 
been  suggested  by  my  able  friend  the  Attorney-General.  You 
shall  see  that  I  avoid  no  point  because  I  fail  to  approach  it, 
and  if  you  find  that  I  do  thus  deal  fairly  with  you  from  the 
beginning,  and  it  is  my  duty  to  do  so,  I  hope  I  may  be  sure, 
indeed  I  know  I  may  be  sure,  of  a  willing  and  considerate 
attention  to  an  address  which  must,  I  fear,  be  long,  but  in 
which  there  shall  be  no  observations,  no  tone,  and  no  topic 
of  discussion  which  do  not  properly  belong  to  the  case. 

Gentlemen,  the  case  which  the  Crown  undertakes  to  estab- 
lish against  the  prisoner  at  the  bar,  and  to  support  by  entirely 
circumstantial  evidence,  is,  or  may  be,  shortly  stated  thus. 
They  say  that  the  prisoner  having  in  the  second  week  in 
November  made  up  his  mind  that  it  was  his  interest  to  get  rid 
of  John  Parsons  Cook,  deliberately  prepared  his  body  for  deadly 
poison  by  the  slower  poison  of  antimony,  and  afterwards  de- 
spatched him  by  the  deadly  poison  of  strychnia.  No  jury 
will  convict  a  man  of  the  crime  thus  imputed  to  the  prisoner, 
unless  in  the  first  place  it  be  made  clear  that  he  had  some  motive 
for  its  commission,  some  strong  reason  for  desiring  the  death 
of  Cook ;  unless,  in  the  second  place,  the  symptoms  of  the 
deceased  before  death,  and  the  appearance  presented  by  his 
body  after  death,  were  consistent  with  the  theory  of  death  by 
strychnia  poison,  and  inconsistent  with  the  theory  of  death 
from  other  and  natural  causes ;  unless,  thirdly,  the  circum- 
stantial evidence  against  him  is  such  as  to  be  inexplicable  upon 
the  supposition  of  his  innocence.  Now,  it  is  under  these  three 
heads  that  I  intend  to  discuss  the  evidence  that  you  have  heard ; 
and  it  must  be  plain  to  you  that  if  I  adhere  to  that  order  and 
method  of  treating  the  vast  amount  of  proof  which  has  been  laid 
before  you,  I  must  exhaust  the  whole  argument,  and  leave 
myself  no  chance  without  immediate  detection  of  evading  any 
difficulty  in  the  defence. 

Before,  however,  I  proceed  to  grapple  in  these  close  quarters 
with  the  case  of  the  Crown,  as  made  by  the  Attorney-General, 
allow  me,  that  you  may  at  once  see  the  whole  scope  of  the 
address  with  which  I  have  to  trouble  you,  to  claim  its  proper 
place  in  the  discussion  for  a  fact  which,  though  by  no  means 

93 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

Serjeant  concealed  from  you  by  the  Attorney-General,  yet  appeared  to 
me  in  that  address  by  which  he  at  once  seized  upon  your  judg- 
ment to  have  been  thrown  too  much  into  the  shade,  the  fact 
that  strychnia  was  not  found  in  the  body  of  John  Parsons  Cook. 
If  he  died  from  the  poison  of  strychnia,  he  died  within  two 
hours  of  the  administration  to  him  of  a  very  strong  dose  of  it — 
he  died  within  a  quarter  of  an  hour  or  twenty  minutes  of  the 
effects  of  that  dose  being  visible  in  the  convulsions  of  his  body ; 
the  post-mortem  examination  took  place  within  six  days  of  his 
death — there  is  not  the  least  reason  to  suppose  that  between 
the  time  of  the  ingestion  of  the  poison,  if  poison  was  taken, 
and  the  paroxysm  in  which  he  died,  there  was  any  dilution  of 
it  in  the  stomach,  or  any  ejection  of  it  by  vomiting.  Never, 
therefore,  were  circumstances  more  favourable;  unless  the 
science  of  chemical  analysis  is  altogether  a  failure  for  detection 
of  the  poison  of  strychnia,  never  was  there  a  case  in  which 
it  ought  to  have  been  so  easy  to  produce  it.  Now,  the  fact  is, 
and  it  is  beyond  all  question,  that  it  was  not  found.  What- 
ever we  may  think  of  Dr.  Alfred  Taylor,  of  "his  judgment,  and 
of  his  discretion,  we  have  no  reason  to  doubt  that  he  is  a 
skilful  analytical  chemist — we  have  not  the  least  reason  to 
suppose,  we  know  the  contrary,  that  he  and  Dr.  Rees,  who 
assisted  him,  did  not  do  all  that  the  science  of  chemical  analysis 
could  enable  man  to  do  to  detect  the  poison  of  strychnia.  They 
had  distinct  information  from  the  executor  and  near  relative 
of  the  deceased,  either  personally  or  through  his  solicitor,  that 
he,  for  some  cause  or  other,  had  reason  to  suspect  the  poison 
of  strychnia ;  they  undertook  the  examination  of  the  stomach, 
which,  I  think,  upon  the  whole  evidence,  without  adverting 
to  that  part  of  it  now  in  detail,  you  will  be  satisfied  was  not  in 
an  unfavourable  condition  for  a  sufficiently  accurate  analysis, 
with  the  expectation  that  if  strychnia  had  been  taken  it  would 
be  found,  and  without  any  doubt  as  to  the  efficiency  of  their 
tests  to  detect  it ;  and  yet  in  their  letter  of  the  4th  of  December 
they  say,  "  We  do  not  find  strychnia,  prussic  acid,  or  any  trace 
of  opium ;  from  the  contents  of  the  stomach  having  been  drained 
away  it  is  impossible  to  say  whether  any  strychnia  had  or  had 
not  been  given  just  before  death,  but  it  is  quite  possible  for 
tartar  emetic  to  destroy  life,  if  given  in  repeated  doses  ;  and 
as  far  as  we  can  at  present  form  an  opinion,  in  the  absence 
of  any  natural  cause  of  death,  the  deceased  may  have  died  from 
the  effects  of  antimony  in  this  or  some  other  form."  Having 
afterwards  attended  the  inquest,  and  heard  the  evidence  of 
Elizabeth  Mills  and  Mr.  Jones,  of  Lutterworth,  and  the  evidence 
of  a  person  of  the  name  of  Roberts,  who  spoke  to  the  purchase 
of  strychnia  poison  by  Palmer  on  the  morning  of  the  Tuesday, 
Dr.  Taylor  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  pills  which  were 
administered  to  Cook  on  the  Monday  and  Tuesday  night  con- 

94 


Speech  for  Defence. 


tained  strychnia,  and  that  Mr.  Cook  was  poisoned  by  it ;   and  Serjeant 
he  came  to  that  conclusion,  though  he  had  expressed  an  opinion  Shee 
in  writing  that  he  might — and  these  are  his  very  words — have 
been  poisoned  by  antimony,  of  which  some  trace  was  found  by 
him  in  the  body,  while  no  trace  was  found  of  strychnia. 

Gentlemen,  I  am  not  about  to  discuss  that  part  of  the  case 
in  detail,  but  I  call  your  attention  to  it  for  the  purpose  of 
claiming  for  it  its  proper  place  in  this  discussion,  and  that  you 
may  know  at  the  commencement  of  my  address  what  the  whole 
course  of  my  argument  will  be,  and  not  be  under  the  impres- 
sion that,  because  I  do  not  under  the  three  heads  to  which  I 
have  directed  your  attention  advert  particularly  to  that  head. 
I  intend  to  pass  it  over.  I  tell  you  exactly  what  the  case  for 
the  defence  will  be,  as  to  the  point  that  strychnia  was  not  found 
in  Mr.  Cook's  body.  Let  me  state  it  as  fairly  as  I  can — the 
gentlemen  who  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  strychnia  may 
have  been  there,  though  they  did  not  find  it,  have  arrived  at 
that  conclusion  by  experiments  of  a  very  partial  kind  indeed; 
they  contend  that  the  poison  of  strychnia  is  of  that  nature, 
that  when  once  it  has  done  its  fatal  work,  and  become  absorbed 
into  the  system,  it  ceases  to  be  the  thing  which  it  was  when 
it  was  taken  into  the  system ;  it  becomes  decomposed,  its  ele- 
ments separated  from  each  other,  and  therefore  no  longer 
capable  of  responding  to  the  tests  which,  according  to  them, 
would  certainly  detect  the  poison  of  undecomposed  strychnia ; 
that  is  their  case.  They  account  for  the  fact  that  it  was  not 
found,  and  for  their  still  retaining  the  belief  that  it  destroyed 
Mr.  Cook,  by  that  hypothesis.  Now,  it  is  only  a  hypothesis ; 
there  is  no  foundation  for  it  in  experiment ;  it  is  not  supported 
by  the  evidence  of  any  eminent  toxicologist  but  themselves — 
it  is  due  to  them  to  say,  and  to  Dr.  Taylor  in  particular  to 
say,  because  it  will  be  quite  out  of  my  power  to  speak  of  Dr. 
Christison  through  any  part  of  this  discussion  except  with  the 
respect  and  consideration  which  is  due  to  a  man  of  eminent 
acquirements  and  of  the  highest  character ;  it  is  due  to  Dr. 
Taylor  to  say  that  he  does  propound  that  theory  in  his  book, 
but  he  propounds  it  as  a  theory  of  his  own ;  he  does  not  vouch , 
as  I  remember,  any  eminent  toxicologist  in  support  of  it ;  and 
when  we  recollect  that  his  knowledge  on  the  matter  consists — 
good,  humane  man ! — in  having  poisoned  five  rabbits  twenty- 
five  years  ago,  and  five  since  this  question  of  the  guilt  or 
innocence  of  Palmer  arose,  his  opinion,  I  think,  unsupported 
by  the  opinions  of  others,  cannot  have  much  weight  with  you  ; 
however,  what  I  have  to  say  now  upon  that  point  is,  that  I 
will  call  before  you  many  gentlemen  of  the  highest  eminence 
in  their  profession,  analytical  chemists,  to  state  to  you  their 
utter  renunciation  of  that  theory.  I  will  call  before  you  Mr. 
Nunneley,  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  and  Pro- 

95 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

Serjeant  fessor  of  Surgery  at  the  Leeds  School  of  Medicine,  who  attended 
that  case  of  strychnia  poison  that  took  place  at  Leeds,  and  to 
which  we  have  agreed  that  no  reference  shall  be  made  by 
name.  I  will  call  before  you  Dr.  Williams,  Professor  of 
Materia  Medica  at  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons  in  Ireland, 
and  surgeon  for  eighteen  years  to  the  City  of  Dublin  Hospital, 
who  will  tell  you  that  he  also  entirely  rejects  that  theory,  and 
believes  that  it  has  no  foundation  in  experiment  or  authority. 
I  will  call  before  you  Dr.  Letheby,  one  of  the  ablest  and  most 
distinguished  among  the  men  of  science  in  this  great  city,  Pro- 
fessor of  Chemistry  and  Toxicology  in  the  Medical  College  of 
the  London  Hospital,  and  medical  officer  of  health  of  the  city 
of  London,  who  also  rejects  that  theory  as  a  heresy  unworthy 
of  the  belief  of  scientific  men.  I  will  call  before  you  Dr. 
Nicholas  Parker,  of  the  College  of  Physicians,  a  physician  of 
the  London  Hospital  and  Professor  of  Medicine  to  that  institu- 
tion, who  concurs  with  Dr.  Letheby  in  his  opinion ;  Dr.  Robin- 
son, also  of  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians;  Mr.  Rogers, 
Professor  of  Chemistry  to  St.  George's  School;  and  lastly,  I 
will  call  before  you  probably  the  most  eminent  chemical  analyst 
in  this  country,  Mr.  William  Herapath,  of  Bristol,  who  totally 
rejects  the  theory  as  utterly  unworthy  of  credence — all  of  these 
gentlemen  contending,  and  ready  to  depose  to  it  on  their  oaths, 
that  not  only  if  half  a  grain,  or  the  fiftieth  part  of  a  grain, 
but  I  believe  they  will  go  on  to  say  that  if  five,  or  ten,  or 
twenty  times  less  than  that  quantity  had  entered  into  the 
human  frame  at  all,  it  could  be  and  must  be  detected  by  tests 
which  are  unerring.  They  will  tell  you  this,  not  as  the  result 
of  a  day's  cruelty  for  ever  regretted  on  five  rabbits,  but  upon 
a  large  and  tried  experience  upon  the  inferior  animals,  made 
and  created,  as  you  know  they  were,  for  the  benefit  of  man- 
kind ;  upon  a  very  extensive  experience  in  many  cases,  as  to 
many  of  them,  of  the  effects  of  strychnia  on  the  human  system. 
And  not  to  detain  you  on  this  part  of  the  case,  to  which  I  only 
now  advert,  not  intending  to  press  it  on  you  later  at  any  length, 
that  you  may  see  what  the  nature  of  the  defence  in  point  of  medical 
testimony  will  be,  I  will  satisfy  you  by  evidence  which  I  think 
must  control  your  judgment,  that  the  only  safe  conclusion  at 
which  you  can  arrive  is  that  strychnia  not  having  been  found 
in  Cook's  body,  under  the  circumstances  of  this  case  never  could 
have  been  there.  You  will  find  that  they  all  agree  in  this 
opinion,  that  no  degree  of  putrefaction  or  fermentation  in  the 
human  system  could  in  their  judgment  so  decompose  the  poison 
of  strychnia  as  that  it  should  no  longer  possess  those  qualities 
which  in  its  undecomposed  state  cause  it  to  respond  to  the  tests 
which  are  used  for  its  detection. 

Having  said  so  much  I  will  now  apply  myself  to  what,  in  my 
judgment,    is   an   equally   important,    if   not  more   important, 
96 


Speech  for  Defence. 


question  in  this  case,  one  which  I  approach  with  no  diffidence  Serjeant 
whatever  except  the  distrust  which  I  have,  under  the  circum-  shee 
stances  in  which  I  speak,  of  myself,  and  which,  if  it  were 
possible  for  me  to  write  what  I  think  upon  it  and  then  to  read 
it  to  you,  I  do  not  entertain  the  smallest  doubt  that  you  must 
be  convinced  of  the  innocence  of  this  man — the  question 
whether,  in  the  second  week  of  November,  1855,  he  had  a  motive 
for  the  commission  of  this  murder,  some  strong  reason  for  desir- 
ing that  Cook  should  die.  I  never  will  believe  that,  unless  it  be 
made  clear  to  you  that  it  was  the  interest  of  William  Palmer, 
or  that  he  thought  it  was  his  interest,  to  destroy  Cook — I  never 
will  believe,  till  I  hear  your  verdict  pronounced,  that  a  jury 
can  come  to  the  conclusion  of  his  guilt.  And  it  seems  to  me, 
upon  the  evidence  which  has  been  laid  before  you,  abundantly 
clear  that  it  not  only  was  not  the  interest  of  William  Palmer 
that  Cook  should  die,  but  that  his  death  was  the  very  worst 
calamity  that  could  befall  him,  and  that  he  could  not  possibly 
be  ignorant  that  it  must  be  immediately  followed  by  his  own 
ruin.  That  it  was  followed  by  his  immediate  ruin  we  know. 
We  know  that  at  the  time  when  he  is  aaid  to  have  commenced 
to  plot  the  death  of  Cook  he  was  in  a  condition  of  the  greatest 
embarrassment.  It  was  an  embarrassment  which,  in  its  ex- 
treme intensity,  had  come  but  recently  upon  him,  an  embarrass- 
ment, too,  in  some  degree  mitigated  by  the  circumstance  that 
the  person  upon  whom  these  bills,  which  have  been  stated  to 
you  to  be  forgeries,  purported  to  be  drawn  was  his  own  mother, 
a  lady  of  a  very  large  fortune,  and  with  whom  he  was  on  the 
most  affectionate  terms.  Still,  he  was  in  a  condition  unques- 
tionably of  great  embarrassment.  My  learned  friend  has  raised 
the  hypothesis  of  his  having  a  wish  to  destroy  Cook  upon  the 
ground  of  this  embarrassment.  My  learned  friend  stated  to 
you  that  the  case  of  the  Crown  against  the  prisoner  was  this, 
that,  "  being  in  desperate  circumstances,  with  ruin,  disgrace, 
and  punishment  staring  him  in  the  face,  he  took  advantage  of 
his  intimacy  with  Cook,  when  Cook  had  been  the  winner  of  a 
considerable  sum  of  money,  to  destroy  him  and  get  possession 
of  his  money."  That  is  the  theory  of  the  Crown.  Now,  let 
us  test  it  as  a  matter  of  business,  relieving,  if  possible,  our 
minds  from  the  anxiety  we  must  all  feel  when  the  fate  of  a 
fellow-creature  is  at  stake,  as  if  it  was  a  case  in  a  private  room 
for  the  decision  of  an  arbitrator.  It  is  my  misfortune  not  to 
be  able  at  times  to  speak  otherwise  than  earnestly,  but  let  us 
look  at  it  as  a  matter  of  business  and  scrutinise  it  in  every 
corner.  Was  it  his  interest  that  in  the  second  week  in  Novem- 
ber, 1855,  Mr.  Cook  should  be  killed  by  a  railway  accident? 
If  it  was  not,  we  have  no  motive  to  ascribe  to  it.  If  it  was 
not,  and  more,  if  the  contrary  was  clearly  his  interest,  no 
sensible  man  would  believe  that  he  deliberately  plotted  and 

H  97 


Trial   of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  committed  the  murder.  A  long  correspondence  has  been  put 
in,  the  material  parts  of  which  letters  will,  in  a  subsequent  stage 
of  the  case,  be  called  to  your  attention.  There  is  evidently  a 
great  deal  in  it  that  does  not  touch  the  point  in  the  case,  but  the 
learned  judge,  before  the  end  of  the  case,  will  direct  your  mind 
to  a  correct  appreciation  of  the  contents.  I  watched  them 
with  an  anxiety  which  no  words  can  express.  Having  had  the 
advantage,  for  which  I  shall  ever  honour  my  learned  friend,  of 
reading  the  correspondence  beforehand,  I  found  the  history, 
as  told  by  the  correspondence,  filled  up  by  the  vivd  voce  testi- 
mony which  was  afterwards  given.  I  was  aware,  at  least  I 
firmly  believed,  that  in  that  correspondence  the  innocence  of 
the  prisoner  lay  concealed ;  and  I  think  that  I  shall  be  able  to 
show  you  that  it  is  demonstrative  of  this  proposition  that  he 
not  only  had  no  motive  to  kill  Cook,  but  that  the  death  of 
Cook  was  the  very  worst  kind  of  thing  that  could  happen  for 
him.  I  shall  not  apologise  to  you,  you  would  think  it  very 
inopportune  to  do  so,  for  going  into  the  details  of  this  matter. 
Allow  me,  confining  myself,  as  it  is  my  duty,  to  the  evidence 
in  the  cause,  to  call  your  attention  to  the  position  in  which 
these  two  men  stood  to  each  other.  They  had  been  intimate 
as  racing  friends  for  two  or  three  years ;  they  had  had  a  great 
many  transactions  together ;  they  were  jointly  interested  in  at 
least  one  racehorse  which  was  training  at  the  stables  of  Saunders 
at  Hednesford ;  they  generally  stayed  together  at  the  same 
hotel ;  they  were  seen  together  on  almost  all  the  racecourses 
in  the  kingdom,  and  were  known  to  be  connected  in  betting 
transactions,  and  adventurers  upon  the  same  horses  at  the  same 
races.  It  is  in  evidence  that  just  before  Cook's  death  he  said, 
in  the  presence  of  his  friend  Jones,  addressing  Palmer, 
"  Palmer,  we  have  lost  a  great  deal  of  money  upon  races  this 
year."  And  though  it  is  impossible,  Cook  being  dead,  and 
the  mouth  of  the  prisoner  sealed,  and  transactions  of  this  char- 
acter not  being  recorded  in  regular  books  as  the  transactions 
in  a  merchant's  counting-house  are,  to  give  you  in  the  fulness 
of  evidence  the  actual  state  of  their  relations  to  each  other,  yet 
it  is  abundantly  clear,  and  I  will  make  it  more  clear  to  you 
presently,  that  they  were  very  closely  connected.  When,  in 
the  month  of  May,  1855,  money  was  wanted  either  by  Mr. 
Cook  or  Palmer,  Palmer  applied  to  Pratt  for  it.  He  wanted, 
I  think,  £200  to  make  up  a  sum  for  the  payment  of  a  debt, 
he  having,  I  think,  a  balance  of  £190  in  the  hands  of  Pratt. 
Mr.  Pratt  would  not  lend  it  him  without  security,  and  he  pro- 
posed the  security  of  his  friend  John  Parsons  Cook,  a  gentleman 
of  respectability  and  a  man  of  substance. 

Now,  what  the  exact  state  of  the  affairs  of  John  Parsons  Cook 
at  that  time  was  I  do  not  know.       Such  a  fortune  as  he  had 
might  be  thrown  down  in  a  week  by  the  course  of  life  that  he 
98 


Speech  for  Defence. 


was  leading.  A  young  man  who  is  reckless  as  to  the  mode  Serjeant 
in  which  he  employs  his  fortune,  and  who  has  only  £13,000,  Shee 
may,  if  he  likes,  for  a  year  or  two  pass  before  the  world  as  a 
man  of  much  more  considerable  means ;  it  is  not  everybody 
who  will  go  to  Doctors'  Commons  to  ascertain  what  the  exact 
amount  of  property  he  derived  from  his  grandfather  was.  He 
was  Mr.  Cook,  of  Lutterworth,  a  gentleman  who  had  a  stud  of 
racehorses,  who  lived  expensively,  and  was  known  to  have 
inherited  a  fortune ;  he  was  a  person  whose  friendship  was  at 
that  time  probably,  and  probably  continued  to  be,  a  matter  of 
considerable  convenience  to  Palmer.  You  recollect,  gentle- 
men, I  am  not  defending  Palmer  against  the  crime  of  forgery. 
I  am  not  defending  him  against  the  reckless  improvidence  of 
obtaining  money  at  the  enormous  discounts  at  which  he  ob- 
tained it.  The  question  is,  whether  he  is  guilty  of  murder. 
Palmer  and  Cook  were  then  so  circumstanced  as  early  as  the 
month  of  May,  1855.  They  had  had  another  transaction  pre- 
viously to  the  date  of  November,  1855,  which  I  will  not  advert 
to  now,  because  it  was  taken  second  in  the  case  of  my  learned 
friend  the  Attorney-General ;  but  let  us  see  what  their  position 
was  in  the  second  week  of  November,  1855.  Respecting  that, 
we  have  the  evidence  of  Pratt,  and  from  the  correspondence 
which  he  explained  to  us  there  can  be  no  doubt  upon  our 
minds.  Amongst  a  mass  of  bills,  amounting  altogether  to 
£11,500,  which  had  been  repeatedly  renewed,  there  were  two 
bills  for  £2000  each,  which  became  due  in  the  last  week  in 
October ;  and  there  was  another  bill,  or  two  other  bills,  amount- 
ing to  £1500  which  had  become  due  some  time  before,  but  which 
were  held  over,  as  they  say,  from  month  to  month,  Palmer, 
who  was  liable  upon  them,  paying  for  the  advantage  of  having 
them  held  over  at  the  end  of  every  month,  at  what  they  call 
interest  of  about  60  per  cent.  These  three  bills,  or  sums 
of  £2000,  £2000,  and  £1500  were  the  embarrassments  which 
were  pressing  upon  him  in  the  second  week  of  November ;  and, 
be  it  observed,  though  pressing  upon  him,  they  were  pressed 
upon  him  by  a  man,  who,  no  doubt,  would  have  been  glad  to 
have  got  the  principal,  but  who  would  also  upon  anything 
approaching  to  security  have  been  very  well  pleased  with  the 
interest.  How  can  capital,  if  it  be  secure,  be  better  em- 
ployed than  at  40  or  60  per  cent,  per  annum?  As  long  as 
there  was  a  vestige  of  good  security,  Mr.  Pratt  or  Mr.  Pratt's 
clients  desired  nothing  better  than  that  Palmer  should  continue 
to  hold  the  money. 

Now,  in  that  state  of  things,  on  the  27th  of  October,  Palmer, 
in  answer  to  an  urgent  demand  upon  him  for  money  on  the 
ground  of  the  security  becoming  doubtful,  came  up  to  London, 
and  Pratt  insisted  that,  in  respect  of  one  of  those  bills  of 
£2000  which  had  just  become  due,  as  Palmer  could  not  pay  it, 
he  should  pay  instalments  upon  it  in  addition  to  the  enormous 

99 


Trial   of  William   Palmer. 

Serjeant  interest  which  he  charged ;  and  it  was  agreed  at  that  inter- 
view of  the  22nd  of  October  that  £250  should  be  paid  down, 
£250  paid  on  the  31st  of  October,  and  that  as  soon  after  as 
possible  a  further  sum  of  £300  should  be  paid,  making  in  the 
whole  a  payment  on  account  of  that  bill  of  £800  to  quiet  Pratt, 
or,  as  Pratt  said,  to  quiet  his  clients,  and  induce  them  to  let 
the  bill  stand  over.  On  the  9th  of  November  that  £300  was 
paid,  and,  when  paid,  a  letter  was  written,  which  I  beg  your 
particular  attention  to,  and  you  will  see  how  closely  and  strongly 
it  bears  on  the  point  to  which  I  am  now  entreating  your  most 
anxious  consideration;  a  letter  of  the  13th  of  November,  that 
is  the  day  when  "  Polestar  "  won  the  race,  written  by  Pratt 
to  Palmer,  as  follows: — "Dear  Sir, — Curiously  enough,  I  find 
that  the  great  point  of  the  office  is,  that  your  brother  had 
delirium  tremens  more  than  once,  say,  three  or  four  times 
before  his  life  was  accepted,  and  that  actually  their  medical 
man,  Dr.  Hastings,  reported  against  the  life,  as  well  as  Dr. 
Wardell.  I  think  I  shall  be  able  to  get  a  copy  of  the  proposal 
through  a  friend."  Palmer  did  not  know  what  the  proposal 
was,  and  therefore  probably  it  had  been  made  by  his  brother. 
"  The  opinions  of  several  secretaries  of  insurance  offices  are 
that  the  company  have  not  a  leg  to  stand  upon,  and  from 
the  mere  fact  of  the  enormous  premium,  it  is  plain  that  the 
policy  was  effected  on  an  extra  rate  of  premium  on  account  of 
the  true  statement  of  the  condition  of  health  of  the  assured. 
The  enormous  premium  will  go  a  great  way  to  give  us  a 
verdict."  I  do  not  like  to  read  only  one  passage  from  a 
letter,  lest  by  chance  I  should  mislead,  therefore  I  have  read 
that  portion  of  it;  but  now  attend  to  this — "I  count  most 
positively  on  seeing  you  on  Saturday ;  do  for  both  our  sakes 
try  to  make  up  the  amount  to  £1000,  for  without  it  I  shall 
be  unable  to  renew  the  £1500  due  on  the  9th."  What  does 
that  mean?  Pratt  told  us  yesterday  the  three  sums  of  £300, 
£250,  and  £250,  and  some  other  small  amount,  making  up  the 
sum  of  £800,  were  instalments  payable  on  the  bill  overdue, 
and  upon  which  Pratt  had  threatened  to  issue  writs  against 
Palmer's  mother,  and  Palmer  had  gone  almost  down  on  his 
knees  to  beg  him  not  to  do  so ;  he  said,  "  For  God's  sake, 
do  not  think  of  writs."  Now,  that  £800  being  paid,  Pratt 
said,  "  I  shall  only  credit  you  for  £600 ;  I  must  take  £200  for 
the  interest."  In  his  letter  of  the  13th  of  November  he  says, 
"  Do  for  both  our  sakes  try  and  make  up  the  amount  to  a 
thousand  " — that  is,  make  the  £800  up  to  a  thousand  pounds — 
"  for  without  it  I  shall  be  unable  to  renew  the  £1500. 
must  have  a  larger  instalment,  or  else  I  cannot  keep  this  bill 
afloat  for  you."  He  said  so,  whether  it  was  true  or  not 
does  not  matter  in  this  case ;  that  was  the  representation  which 
he  made,  and  the  duress  which  he  put  on  Palmer  ;  and,  in  truth, 
it  meant  this — Make  it  up  to  a  thousand,  give  me  £200  more,  or 

100 


Speech  for  Defence. 


the  writ  shall  be  served  on  your  mother.  He  does  not  say  Serjeant 
so,  but  he  said  something  to  the  same  effect  before,  and  it  shee 
was  a  representation  that  he  could  not  satisfy  the  people  whom 
he  said  he  represented  without  that  additional  sum.  Observe, 
that  letter  is  written  on  the  13th  of  November,  and  Palmer  gets 
it  at  Eugeley  when  he  arrives  on  that  evening  from  the  race 
at  which  "  Polestar  "  won.  Palmer,  who  was  at  the  races 
the  first  day,  went  away  in  the  evening,  and  went  to  Rugeley  ', 
when  he  gets  to  Kugeley,  early  in  the  morning  of  the  14th,  the 
next  day  probably,  he  gets  this  letter  of  Pratt's  pressing  on 
him  the  necessity  of  paying  a  further  sum  of  £200.  What 
does  he  do?  See  if  it  is  possible  to  doubt  that  at  that  time 
Cook's  life  was  of  the  utmost  value  to  him.  He  instantly 
returns  to  Shrewsbury ;  he  sees  Cook.  They  say  he  dosed  him. 
We  will  see  how  probable  that  is  presently.  He  gets  there 
on  the  Wednesday;  he  sees  Cook.  Cook  goes  to  bed  in  a 
state  which  I  will  not  at  present  describe ;  he  gets  up  much 
more  sensible  than  he  went  to  bed ;  goes  upon  the  race- 
course, and  comes  home  with  Palmer  to  Rugeley  on  the  next 
day,  Thursday ;  he  goes  to  bed  when  he  gets  to  Rugeley ;  he 
gets  up  still  ill  and  uncomfortable,  but  able  to  go  out,  and  he 
dines  with  Palmer  that  day,  Friday. 

Now,  I  beg  your  attention  to  this  letter.  On  that  day,  the 
16th,  Palmer  writes  thus  to  Pratt — "  I  am  obliged  to  come  to 
Tattersall's  on  Monday  to  the  settling,  so  that  I  shall  not  call 
and  see  you  before  Monday,  but  a  friend  of  mine  will  call  and 
leave  you  £200  to-morrow,  and  I  will  give  you  the  remainder  on 
Monday."  That  is  written  on  the  16th,  the  day  they  dine 
together  at  Palmer's  house.  Now,  you  recollect  that  the 
person  who  ordinarily  settled  Cook's  accounts  in  racing  trans- 
actions was  a  person  of  the  name  of  Fisher,  the  wine  merchant, 
in  Shoe  Lane.  He  was  called  as  the  first  witness  on  this  trial. 
That  very  day  Cook  writes  to  Fisher  as  follows  : — "  It  is  of  very 
great  importance  to  both  Palmer  and  myself  that  a  sum  of 
£500  should  be  paid  to  a  Mr.  Pratt,  of  5  Queen  Street, 
Mayfair,  to-morrow  without  fail ;  £300  has  been  sent  up 
to-night,  and  if  you  would  be  kind  enough  to  pay  the  other 
£200  to-morrow  on  the  receipt  of  this,  you  will  greatly  oblige 
me,  and  I  will  give  it  to  you  on  Monday  at  Tattersall's."  Then 
there  is  a  postscript  which  I  will  read,  but  make  no  comment 
upon  it  now — "  I  am  much  better."  What  is  the  fair  inference 
from  these  two  letters?  I  submit  to  you  that  the  inference 
is  that  at  that  date  Cook  was  making  himself  very  useful  to 
Palmer.  Pratt  was  pressing  him  for  an  additional  sum  of 
£200  when  he  had  need  of  all  his  money,  and  Palmer 
having  communicated  his  difficulty  to  Mr.  Cook,  Cook  at  once 
comes  forward  and  writes  to  his  agent  to  pay  that  £200.  And 
the  letter  shows  more — you  may  have  forgottten  that  letter, 

zoi 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

Serjeant  but  it  was  read  in  the  first  hour  after  the  speech  of  my  learned 
Shee  friend  the  Attorn ey- General ;  you  may  have  forgotten  it,  but 
I  read  it  to  you  word  for  word — the  passage,  "  £300  has  been 
sent  up  to-night,"  shows  that  Cook  knew  all  about  it,  and  prob- 
ably had  an  interest  in  Palmer's  transactions  with  Mr.  Pratt ; 
it  was  inserted  merely  for  the  purpose  of  putting  a 
good  fa'ce  upon  it  to  Mr.  Pratt,  as  a  man  does 
who,  not  having  a  farthing  of  the  sum  that  he  wants 
to  pay,  will  pretend  that  he  has  to  pay  more,  in  order 
to  represent  that  he  has  got  a  portion  of  what  he  wants  to  pay, 
and  he  says,  ' '  Will  you  lend  me  a  little  more ;  I  am  not  entirely 
dependent  upon  you  for  the  sum  that  I  have  to  pay  "  ;  or 
it  means  that  on  that  day  £300,  which  had  come  to  their 
hands  in  some  way  or  other,  was  by  Cook  made  applicable  to  the 
convenience  of  Palmer — one  of  those  things  it  means ;  which- 
ever way  you  take  it,  it  proves  to  demonstration  that  Palmer 
and  Cook  were  playing  into  each  other's  hands  in  respect  of 
that  heavy  incumbrance  upon  Palmer ;  and  that  Palmer  could 
rely  upon  Cook  as  a  fast  friend  in  any  such  little  difficulty 
as  that;  and  though  his  difficulties  sound  large  when  we  talk 
of  £11,500,  the  difficulty  of  the  day  was  nothing  like  that, 
because  in  the  spendthrift,  reckless  way  in  which  they  were 
living,  putting  on  bills  from  month  to  month,  and  paying  what 
sounds  an  enormous  interest  per  annum,  the  actual  outlay  on 
the  day  was  not  always  so  considerable.  I  submit  to  you  that 
letter  shows  that  on  the  16th  of  November,  when  they  say  he 
was  poisoning  Cook,  Cook  was  behaving  to  him  in  the  most 
friendly  way,  was  acquainted  with  his  circumstances,  willing 
to  assist  in  the  relief  of  his  embarrassments,  and  actually  to 
devote  a  portion  of  his  earnings  to  the  purposes  of  Palmer.  It 
is  perfectly  plain,  but  I  will  make  it  plainer  if  you  will  attend 
to  me  for  a  moment  longer.  You  will  remember  that  part  of 
the  case  of  my  learned  friend  is  this.  He  says  that  he  intended 
to  defraud  Cook;  that  Palmer  having  left  Cook  ill  in  bed  at 
Rugeley,  ran  up  to  town  on  the  Monday,  intending  to  despatch 
him  on  the  Monday  night  or  the  Tuesday ;  that  he  ran  up  to 
town,  went,  not  to  Fisher,  who  was  the  agent  of  Cook,  but  to 
Herring,  who  was  his  own  agent,  and  told  Herring  that  he  was 
authorised  by  Cook  to  settle  his  Shrewsbury  transactions  at 
Tattersall's,  thereby  getting  command  over  Cook's  winnings ; 
that  he  applied  them  to  his  own  purposes,  and,  having  done  so, 
determined  to  put  Cook  out  of  the  way.  That  is  their  case. 
We  had  the  evidence  of  Fisher  on  the  first  day.  Fisher  is 
evidently  a  shrewd,  intelligent  man;  no  friend  of  Palmer's. 
He  gave,  I  do  not  mean  to  say  improperly,  I  did  not  wish  to 
throw  imputations,  but  he  gave  a  twist  to  the  dosing  at  Shrews- 
bury against  Palmer.  On  the  Monday,  as  on  the  Tuesday, 
Cook,  though  generally  indisposed,  was  during  great  part  of 

102 


Speech  for  Defence. 


the  day  quite  well,  according  to  the  evidence ;  on  the  Monday  Serjeant 
he  saw  his  trainer,  Saunders,  he  saw  his  two  jockeys ;  he  got 
up  and  was  shaved ;  he  was  comfortable  the  whole  day,  and  the 
theory  is  that  he  was  comfortable  because  Palmer  was  not  there 
to  dose  him — you  will  see  how  grossly  absurd  it  is  presently. 
He  was  well  on  the  Monday,  quite  well  on  the  Tuesday ;  now, 
if  Palmer  had  gone  up  to  London,  representing  that  he  would 
do  Cook's  business  for  him  through  Cook's  own  agent,  Fisher, 
Palmer  might  be  perfectly  certain  if  that  was  done  on  the 
Monday  Fisher  would  write  to  Cook  on  that  night  to  pay  that 
the  thing  was  done  and  made  straight ;  Herring,  you  see,  does 
do  it  the  moment  the  thing  is  settled  between  Palmer  and 
Herring;  Herring  represents  Palmer  as  saying,  ''You  must 
write  me  word  about  some  part  of  the  transactions  "  ;  he  says, 
"  No,  I  shall  write  Mr.  Cook  word  at  Eugeley."  Do  not  you 
think  Fisher  would  have  done  the  same?  and  if  Cook  had  not 
known  that  Palmer  intended  not  to  go  to  Fisher  but  to  Herring, 
do  you  not  think  Cook  would  have  been  surprised  on  the 
Tuesday  morning  at  not  hearing  that  he  had  seen  Palmer,  and 
that  the  transactions  were  settled?  Could  Palmer,  as  a  man 
of  business,  have  relied  upon  Cook's  not  being  alarmed  at 
Fisher's  not  doing  it?  We  had  the  evidence  of  Fisher,  who 
says,  "  On  the  17th  of  November,  at  Cook's  request,  I  paid 
£200  to  Mr.  Pratt ;  his  account  in  the  ordinary  course  would 
have  been  settled  at  Tattersall's  on  Monday,  the  19th.  I 
advanced  the  £200  to  pay  Pratt;  I  knew  that  Cook  had  won 
at  Shrewsbury,  and  I  should  have  been  entitled  to  have  de- 
ducted that  £200  from  his  winnings  if  I  had  settled  his  account 
at  Tattersall's;  I  did  not  settle  the  account."  That  explains 
the  whole  transaction.  Cook  and  Palmer  understood  each 
other  perfectly  well ;  it  was  the  interest  of  both  of  them  that 
Palmer  should  be  relieved  from  the  difficulty  of  the  pressure  of 
Pratt,  and  accordingly  Cook  said,  "As  to  the  settlement,  it 
shall  not  go  through  Fisher ;  we  will  have  the  £200  from 
Fisher ;  it  shall  not  be  paid  to  him  on  Monday ;  I  will  let 
Palmer  go  up  and  settle  the  whole  thing  through  Herring." 
And  that  is  what  was  done ;  and  accordingly  Fisher  has  never 
been  paid  since. 

Now,  there  is  a  letter  to  which  I  will  call  your  attention,  of 
the  19th  November,  1855,  from  Palmer  to  Pratt — "  Dear  Sir, — 
You  will  place  the  £50  I  have  just  paid  you,  and  the  £450 
you  will  receive  from  Mr.  Herring,  together  £500,  and  the 
£200  you  received  on  Saturday,"  that  is,  the  £200  that  Fisher 
paid  to  Pratt  at  the  express  request  of  Cook  "  towards  pay- 
ment of  my  mother's  acceptance  for  £2000,  due  25th  October, 
making  paid  to  this  day  the  sum  of  £1300."  Can  you  doubt 
when  you  take  all  that  together — the  dining  together  on  the 
Friday — Cook  writing  that  letter  to  Fisher,  saying  it  was  of 

103 


Trial   of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  the  greatest  importance  to  him  as  well  as  to  Palmer  that  the 
£200  should  be  paid  in  order  to  pacify  Pratt,  can  you  doubt 
that  on  that  day  Cook  was  a  most  convenient  friend  to 
Palmer,  and  that  he  could  not  by  any  possibility  do  without  him. 
But  it  does  not  end  there.  Cook  died  on  the  Wednesday 
morning  early,  the  21st;  if  we  want  to  know  what  effect 
that  death  had  on  Palmer,  and  what  interest  he  had  in  it, 
Palmer's  mouth  being  sealed,  we  must  get  it  from  Pratt. 
Nobody  else  that  we  know  knows  anything  about  it ;  Cook  is 
gone.  On  the  22nd  November,  the  day  after  the  death — 
and  I  am  sure  you  will  make  some  allowance  for  a  day  having 
elapsed  after  the  death  of  Cook  before  he  wrote — Palmer  writes 
thus  to  Pratt — "  Ever  since  I  saw  yoxi  I  have  been  fully  engaged 
with  Cook  and  not  able  to  leave  him."  Now,  unless  he 
murdered  him,  that  is  the  truest  sentence  that  ever  was  ex- 
pressed. He  watched  the  bedside  of  his  friend ;  he  was  with 
him  night  and  day ;  he  attended  him  as  a  brother ;  he  called 
his  friends  around  him ;  he  did  all  that  the  most  affectionate 
solicitude  could  do  for  a  friend  that  was  ill,  unless  he  was 
plotting  his  death — "  And  I  am  sorry  to  say  after  all  he 
died  this  day,  so  that  you  had  better  write  to  Saunders ;  but 
mind,  I  must  have  '  Polestar  '  if  it  can  be  so  arranged ;  and 
should  any  one  call  upon  you  to  know  what  moneys  Cook 
ever  had  from  you  do  not  answer  the  question."  Then  he 
says,  "  I  sat  up  two  full  nights  with  Cook."  That  he  sat 
up  the  whole  of  the  night  may  not  be  true,  but  he  was 
ready  to  be  called  if  Cook  should  be  ill ;  and  Elizabeth  Mills 
says  after  the  first  serious  paroxysm,  when  she  went  to  bed, 
she  left  Palmer  in  the  arm-chair,  sleeping  by  the  man  whom 
they  say  he  intended  to  murder.  No !  murderers  do  not  sleep 
by  their  victims  in  that  way.  What  is  the  answer?  I  read 
it  to  you  in  order  that  you  may  see  what  ruin  Cook's  death 
brought  upon  Palmer.  The  answer  of  Pratt  is — and  you  will 
see  how  much  it  increased  the  difficulties  of  Palmer — "  I  have 
your  note,  and  am  greatly  disappointed  at  the  non-receipt  of 
the  money  as  promised,  and  at  the  vague  assurance  as  to  any 
money.  I  can  understand  that  your  being  detained  by  the 
illness  of  your  friend  has  been  the  cause  of  3*our  not  sending 
up  the  amount."  Attend  to  this  paragraph — "  The  death  of 
Mr.  Cook  will  now  compel  you  to  look  about  as  to  the  payment 
of  the  bill  for  £500,  due  the  2nd  of  December.  I  have  written 
Saunders  informing  him  of  my  claim,  and  requesting  to  know 
by  return  what  claim  he  had  for  keep  and  training  "  ;  so  that 
the  very  first  effect  of  Cook's  death  was,  in  Pratt's  opinion, 
who  knew  all  about  it,  to  saddle  Palmer  alone  with  the  sum 
of  £500.  He  says,  "  The  death  of  Cook  will  now  compel 
you  to  look  about  as  to  the  payment  of  the  bill  for  £500  on 
the  2nd  of  December."  We  will  investigate  the  transaction 
104 


Speech  for  Defence. 


out  of  which  that  bill  arose,  and  you  will  see,  I  venture  to  Serjeant 
say,  that  I  can  satisfy  you  conclusively  that  the  transaction  out 
of  which  that  bill  arose  was  a  transaction  for  Cook's  accommo- 
dation, for  which  Palmer  had  lent  his  name  to  accommodate 
Cook,  and  for  which  upon  Cook's  death  Palmer, became  primarily 
and  alone  responsible.  It  will  be  for  you  to  judge,  if  I  prove 
that  to  you,  whether  it  suited  Palmer  at  that  moment  to 
stand  before  the  holder  of  that  £500  bill — some  client  of 
Pratt's — as  toe  only  man  liable  upon  it,  and  whether  there 
was  the  same  chance,  supposing  it  had  been  for  his  own 
accommodation,  of  putting  it  on,  as  they  call  it,  after  Cook's 
death,  as  there  might  have  been  before.  But  let  me  be  fair 
to  the  prosecution,  and  state  to  you  now  the  view  that  the 
Attorney-General  takes  of  that  £500  transaction.  As  I  told 
you,  I  mean  to  meet  his  case  foot  to  foot,  and  to  show,  and 
I  hope  to  show  him,  that  there  is  nothing  in  it ;  that  if  he, 
as  the  law  officer  of  the  Crown,  had  had  the  option  of  taking 
up  this  case  or  not,  he  would  not  have  taken  it  up ;  that 
the  Crown  never  would  have  appeared  upon  it,  but  because  the 
universal  feeling  of  the  country  was  such  as  to  render  it  impos- 
sible that  the  case  should  not  be  tried  after  the  verdict  of  wilful 
murder  obtained  on  Dr.  Taylor's  evidence ;  and  because  the 
Crown,  having  seen  the  absolute  necessity  of  its  being  tried, 
felt  that  it  would  abandon  the  duty  of  protecting  every  one 
of  the  Queen's  subjects  if  it  did  not  take  care  that  a  man  with 
so  much  prejudice  against  him,  that  man  leading  the  life  that 
Palmer  led,  and  disgraced  by  forgeries  to  a  large  amount, 
as  it  is  said,  and  a  gambler  by  profession,  should  not  have  a 
fair  trial.  There  was  no  other  way  of  securing  a  fair  trial 
for  this  man,  as  the  Attorney-General  at  once  saw — there  was 
no  possibility  of  his  being  saved  but  by  giving  the  counsel 
who  defended  him  all  the  information  that  my  friend  had 
himself.  We  will  see  what  his  view  is.  My  learned  friend 
states  it  upon  his  instruction  in  this  way.  He  is  bound, 
as  I  told  you  in  the  beginning,  in  prosecuting  this  case  to 
prosecute  it  strenuously;  he  is  bound  to  put  the  facts  together 
according  to  his  instructions  in  such  a  way  that,  if  they  will 
and  ought  to  establish  guilt,  it  is  brought  home.  Prosecutions 
must  be  conducted  in  that  way,  or  the  guilty  would  escape  in 
nine  cases  out  of  ten.  And  therefore  my  friend,  upon  the 
view  of  the  evidence — a  comparatively  superficial  one — thinks 
that  this  is  the  theory  upon  which  it  appears  probable  that 
Palmer  plotted  the  death  of  Mr.  Cook.  I  will  read  to  you 
from  my  friend's  speech,  with  reference  to  the  £500  bill 
transaction ;  and,  as  I  understand  it,  it  is  the  greatest  mistake 
that  was  ever  committed,  and  would  not  stand  for  a  moment 
but  for  the  popular  prejudice  against  Palmer.  I  think  I  can 
satisfy  you  that  is  so — "  Pratt  still  declining  to  advance  the 

105 


Trial   of  William  Palmer. 

monev  "—that  is  the  £1000  which  Palmer  wanted  him  to 
advance — "  Pratt  proposed  an  assignment  by  Cook  of  two 
racehorses,  one  called  '  Polestar,'  which  won  the  Shrewsbury 
race,  and  another  called  '  Syrius.'  That  assignment  was  after- 
wards executed  by  Mr.  Cook  in  favour  of  Pratt,  and  Cook  was 
entitled  to  the  money  raised  on  that  security,  which  realised 
£375  in  cash  and  a  wine  warrant."  They  twist  it  in  this  way, 
that  Palmer,  having  forged  the  endorsement  of  Cook,  and  being 
afraid  of  detection,  put  Mr.  Cook  out  of  the  way.  That  is 
the  view  they  take  of  that  case.  I  think  I  can  satisfy  you 
it  is  impossible  that  that  can  be  the  correct  view.  It  cannot, 
by  any  possibility,  as  it  seems  to  me.  It  is  for  you  to  judge. 
We  know  exactly  what  took  place ;  we  had  it  from  Pratt 
yesterday.  What  took  place  was  this.  Palmer  applied  for 
the  loan  of  £1000;  Pratt  said,  "I  can't  let  you  have  it." 
Palmer  said,  "  Will  you  discount  a  bill  for  £500?"  Pratt 
said,  "  Not  without  security."  Palmer  said,  "  What  security 
will  you  take ;  it  is  for  the  accommodation  of  Mr.  Cook  ?  I 
have  undertaken  to  get  the  enclosed  bill  cashed  for  Mr.  Cook ; 
you  had  a  £200  bill  of  his."  He  reminds  him  that  he  had 
been  paid  a  £200  bill,  and  he  says,  "  He  is  a  very  good  and 
responsible  man;  will  you  do  it,  and  I  will  put  my  name  to 
the  bill?"  So  that  it  was  represented  to  Pratt  as  a  trans- 
action for  the  accommodation  of  Cook;  and  Pratt' s  answer  is, 
"  If  Mr.  Cook  chooses  to  give  me  his  security  I  have  no 
objection,  but  he  must  execute  a  bill  of  sale  of  his  two  race- 
horses, '  Polestar '  and  '  Syrius,'  and  he  must  execute  a 
power  of  attorney,  and  signature  to  it  must  be  attested 
by  some  solicitor  in  the  country,  so  that  I  may  be  quite 
sure  that  it  is  really  a  valid  security ;  and  upon 
those  terms,  if  you  will  get  all  that  done,  and  Mr.  Cook 
will  submit  to  all  that,  I  will  give  him  £375  in  money,  £65 
wine  warrant,  charging  him  £10  for  expenses,  and  £50  for 
discount  " — making  up  the  sum  of  £500 ;  that  is  what  Pratt 
is  willing  to  do.  There  is  no  doubt  at  all,  you  know,  that  Cook 
attached  the  highest  value  to  "  Polestar  "  ;  he  was  not  going 
to  execute  a  bill  of  sale  with  a  power  of  attorney  to  enable 
the  mortgagee  or  assignee  to  enforce  it  at  once ;  he  was  not 
going  to  do  that,  and  not  get  any  money  for  doing  it ;  he  knew 
the  value  of  "  Polestar  "  and  "  Syrius  "  \  "  Polestar  "  was  prob- 
ably backed  for  the  engagements  on  which  he  won  the  money  at 
Shrewsbury.  My  friend  says  he  never  received  that  £375 ; 
it  is  in  the  last  degree  improbable  that  he  never  received  that 
money ;  I  put  it  to  you  as  men  of  sense  that  he  must  have 
received  it ;  do  you  think  that  he  remained  after  executing 
the  bill  of  sale  on  the  6th  of  September  the  whole  time  from 
that  day  to  his  death  without  writing  to  Pratt — "  Why,  you 
have  the  bill  of  sale  of  my  two  horses,  and  I  have  not  got 
106 


Speech  for  Defence. 


any  money  upon  them "  ?  Is  it  credible,  can  you  believe  Serjeant 
Cook,  who  was  as  much  in  want  of  money  as  Palmer ;  do  Shee 
you  think  he  would  throw  away  his  property  in  that  way,  and 
let  Pratt  obtain  from  him  a  bill  of  sale  and  get  no  money 
upon  it  1  It  is  incredible ;  the  only  pretence  for  setting  it  up 
is  this,  it  is  a  perfectly  fatal  one  that  will  not  stand  before 
sensible  men  for  a  minute.  Along  with  the  cheque  for 
£375  he  sent  £315  to  Palmer  for  his  own  purposes;  but  my 
friend  says  Palmer,  having  got  this  cheque  for  £375  payable 
to  order,  fraudulently  appropriated  it  to  himself ;  forged  the 
name  of  Cook  upon  the  back  of  it,  and  kept  Cook  in  ignorance 
of  the  transaction.  Is  it  credible,  that  during  three  whole 
months  Cook,  who  knew  that  he  had  executed  a  bill  of  sale 
of  his  two  racehorses,  and  I  will  show  you  was  in  want  of  money, 
should  have  allowed  it  to  remain  so?  Is  it  not  much  more 
probable  that  the  signature  of  Cook  was  put  on  there  with 
his  full  knowledge?  It  is  not  suggested  that  there  was  any 
attempt  at  imitating  his  handwriting.  Is  it  not  more  prob- 
able that  Cook,  who  wanted  the  ready  money,  and  who  would 
probably  be  put  to  inconvenience  if  he  did  not  get  the  ready 
money,  but  only  the  means  of  getting  it  two  days  later — that 
Palmer  should  let  him  have  the  £315  cash  which  was  sent  up, 
and  Palmer  take  the  cheque?  I  will  show  you  there  is  reason 
for  believing  that  to  be  the  case ;  I  will  put  it  to  you,  in  the 
first  place,  whether  it  is  probable  he  would  be  silent  for  three 
months.  Palmer  writes,  "I  will  thank  you  to  let  me  have 
the  £315  by  return  of  post  if  possible;  if  not,  send  it  to  me 
by  Monday  night's  post  to  the  post  office,  Doncaster.  I  now 
return  you  Mr.  Cook's  paper,  and  he  wants  the  money  on 
Saturday  if  he  can  have  it;  I  have  not  promised  it  for  Satur- 
day, so  please  to  enclose  it  with  mine  in  cash  in  a  registered 
letter,  and  he  must  pay  for  its  being  registered."  So  that 
you  see  Palmer  wanted  it  to  be  sent  like  his  own,  and  Cook 
wanted  it  to  be  sent  in  cash.  "  Do  not  let  it  be  later  than 
Monday  night's  post."  Pratt  writes  acknowledging  the  receipt 
of  the  document,  saying  ho  will  send  him  his  money  to  Don- 
caster,  and  endeavour  to  let  Cook  have  his  money  at  the  same 
time.  On  the  10th  of  September  Palmer  writes  to  Pratt  that 
he  must  send  him  for  Mr.  Cook  £385  instead  of  £375  and 
the  wine  warrant,  so  that  he  can  hand  it  to  him  with  the  £385. 
Accordingly,  here  is  an  intimation  that  Cook,  who  wanted 
the  money  on  the  very  day,  was  inconvenienced  by  only  getting 
a  cheque  on  London  which  he  could  not  immediately  change, 
and  therefore  Palmer  gave  him  the  money  and  took  the  cheque. 
It  is  remarkable,  when  we  look  at  the  banking  account  of 
Palmer  at  Rugeley,  the  £375  is  paid  in  by  somebody  to  Palmer  s 
account,  but  the  £315  is  not  paid  into  Palmer's  account 
at  all ;  that  is  the  only  sum  paid  in  on  that  day,  so  that  I 

107 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

Serjeant  put  it  to  you  upon  these  facts,  Pratt  saying  in  a  letter  which 
accompanies  the  money,   "  I  am  obliged  to  send  a  cheque  for 
Mr.  Cook,  for  I  have  not  received  the  money,  which  I  shall  do 
no  doubt  to-morrow  "  ;    so  that  not  being  able  to  send  cash 
to  the  full  amount  he  is  obliged  to  do  that  which   did  not 
suit  Cook;  he  sent  him  a  cheque  which  he  could  not  cash  on 
the  day  he  got  it ;   he  is  obliged  to  send  it  to  London  unless 
he  could  find  some  friend  down  there,  and  that  delays  him  for 
a  whole  day.       I  submit  to  you  as  the  true  version  of  the 
transaction   that  the  bill  was  accepted   for   Cook's   accommo- 
dation ;  Cook  gave  as  security  for  it  the  two  horses,  "  Polestar  " 
and  "  Syrius  " ;  Cook  never  complained  to  Pratt  during  the  rest 
of  his  life  that  he  had  not  received  the  money  upon  it.       It 
appears   in  the   correspondence  that   Cook   wanted   the   ready 
money,   and  that  he  wanted  it  on  Saturday,  and  it  would  be 
probably  inconvenient  if  he  had  got  it  a  bit  later  than  Monday ; 
though  Palmer  would  not  promise  to  get  it  sooner  than  Tues- 
day.      What  says  Palmer  in  his  letter,  which  is  not  written 
for  the  purpose  of  this  case,  but  written  at  the  date  of  this 
transaction,  that  he,  Palmer,  would  let  Cook  have  the  cash  that 
was  sent,  and  he  himself  take  the  cheque  with  Cook's  authority, 
and  put  Cook's  name  on  the  back  of  it ;  and  how  else  can  you 
account  for  the  silence  of  Cook,  for  the  fact  that  the  £375  is 
paid  into  the  account  of  Palmer  at  Rugeley,  and  no  trace  of 
the  other  large  sum  of  £315?       That  is  well  worthy  your  con- 
sideration.   You  cannot  account  by  any  reasonable  mode  for  the 
fact  that  the  security  given  for  that  £500  was  Cook's  horses, 
and  Cook  remaining  quiet  about  it  for  three  months  after  he 
had  executed  a  regular  bill  of  sale,  except  the  supposition  that 
it  was  for  Cook's  accommodation,  and  Cook  got  the  best  part 
of  the  money ;   and,  if  so,  Palmer's  name  being  on  the  bill, 
what  is  the  effect  of  Cook's  death?       Gentlemen,  what  Pratt, 
who  knew  all  about  it,  says  is,    "  The  death  of  Cook  makes 
you  liable  for  that  sum  of  £500  due  on  the  2nd  December." 
I  submit  to  you,  on  the  second  ground  of  motive,  which  my 
learned  friend  suggested,  the  case  has  altogether  failed,   and 
that  it  is  perfectly  clear  that  at  the  date  of  Cook's  death  Pratt 
was  of  opinion  that  the  death  of  Cook  threw  a  further  liability 
on  Palmer  of  £500 ;  he  tells  him  so  in  that  letter.       How  could 
it  be  his  interest  to  kill  him?      We  already  find  the  difficulties 
which  Cook's  death  brings  upon  Palmer ;  the  bill  of  £500,  the 
danger  of  the  loss  of  "  Polestar,"  which  he  wanted  very  much 
to  have,  and  which  Pratt  would,  of  course,  unless  Palmer  paid 
the  £500,   send  to  the  hammer,   and  realise   so   shortly ;    we 
find  that  inquiries  were  at  once  apprehended  on  the  part  of 
Cook's  friends  as  to  the  money  Pratt  had  paid  to  Palmer  out 
of  those  two  bill  transactions,  and  the  value  which  Mr.  Cook 
had  received  for  any  endorsement  which  he  had  given. 
108 


Speech  for  Defence. 

Just  see  another  transaction  of  that  date;  it  is  not  quite  so 
clear,  as  it  strikes  me,  but  yet  it  makes  it  to  my  mind  exceed- 
ingly improbable  that  Palmer  should  have  desired  the  death  of 
Cook.  Exceedingly  improbable!  Mr.  Wetherby  told  us 
to-day  that  though  frequently  stakes  won  at  a  race  were  sent 
up  by  the  clerk  of  the  course  to  the  winner's  bankers  within 
a  week,  it  was  not  always  so,  and  it  would  not  be  a  matter 
of  complaint  if  it  was  not.  On  the  20th  of  November,  the 
day  before  Cook  dies,  and  on  which  he  was  perfectly  comfort- 
able and  happy,  enjoying  the  society  of  his  friend  Mr.  Jones, 
with  whom  he  was  on  terms  of  the  greatest  intimacy,  and  to 
whom  he  could  confide  any  troubles  that  he  had,  and  who 
appears  to  be  a  gentleman  in  every  way  respectable  and  intelli- 
gent— on  that  day  Cook  was  well,  and  Mr.  Jones  was  with  him, 
and  there  is  no  doubt  that  on  that  day,  according  to  the  evidence 
of  Mr.  Wetherby,  he  did  sign  and  give  this  cheque  for  £350. 
If  Palmer  killed  him  that  night,  and  by  any  chance  the  £350 
should  not  have  been  sent  up  by  Mr.  Frail,  so  as  to  be  there 
on  the  next  morning,  he  (Mr.  Wetherby)  would  not  pay  that 
cheque,  and  would  never  pay  it  after  notice  of  Cook's  death, 
though  the  money  should  come  up.  He  never  did  pay  it.  The 
end  of  that  transaction  was  this,  that  Mr.  Frail  did  not  send 
it  up,  but  made  a  claim  upon  Cook  in  respect  of  it.  Cook's 
executors  disputed  that,  and  Cook's  executors  finally  recovered 
the  money,  but  they  did  not  send  it  up  to  Mr.  Wetherby.  I 
do  not  put  it  as  strong  as  the  other  case,  because  Palmer 
might  think  that  the  money  would  be  there ;  but  he  also  might 
think  that  it  would  not  be  there.  It  is  not  at  all  likely  that, 
having  got  the  cheque  for  £350  from  Cook,  he  would  run  the 
risk  of  losing  that  money  by  destroying  him  in  the  night, 
Cook's  friends  being  there,  and  sure  to  institute  an  immediate 
inquiry  into  his  affairs.  Is  that  probable?  I  submit  to 
you  it  is  not.  It  is  not  likely  that  Palmer  could  have  got  a 
cheque  for  £350,  or  Cook  should  have  given  it  to  him,  which 
should  not  be  payable  until  the  next  day,  when  there  might 
be  no  funds  to  meet  it;  and  with  that  uncertainty,  is  it  likely 
that  Palmer  should  destroy  Cook.  That,  therefore,  is  in  the  last 
degree  improbable.  It  does  not  end  there — what  they  have 
said  on  the  other  side  is,  you  know,  that  he  got  this  cheque 
fraudulently — he  got  possession  of  this  money,  and  then,  lest 
Cook  should  detect  it,  he  destroyed  him.  It  is  not  at  all 
probable  that  that  would  answer  his  purpose.  The  moment 
the  breath  was  out  of  Cook's  body  his  friends  would  surround 
the  corpse.  He  might  be  perfectly  certain  that  Mr.  Jones 
would  go  to  Mr.  Stevens,  that  Stevens  and  Bradford,  his 
brother-in-law,  would  be  down,  and  that  a  post-mortem  ex- 
amination would  take  place,  and  instead  of  settling  with  Pratt 
as  to  this  £500  bill  and  the  £350  cheque,  he  would  have  to 

109 


Trial    of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  settle  with  hard  men  of  business,  men  who  cared  nothing  for 
Shee  him,  looked  upon  him  as  a  blackleg,  and  would  care  neither  for 
his  feeling,  his  interest,  nor  anything,  but  would  let  him  go 
to  ruin  which  way  he  liked,  not  stirring  a  finger  to  save  him. 
Do  you  think  that  was  probable?  I  submit  to  you  not.  It 
does  not  end  there.  We  know  from  Herring  that  at  that  very 
time  Herring  held  one  bill  for  £500  on  which  Cook's  name 
was. 

The  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — I  do  not  think  there  is  any  proof 

of  that. 

Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — Whether  it  be  so  or  not  as  to  the  £500, 
he  had  three  £200  bills,  one  of  which,  I  think,  was  drawn  by 
Cook  and  accepted  by  Palmer,  and  the  other  two  drawn  by 
Palmer  and  accepted  by  Cook,  or  the  other  way. 

The  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — You  are  quite  right  as  to  the  £500. 

Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — And  another  bill  of  £500,  which  my 
friend  stated  and  gave  proof  was  not  his  mother's  signature. 
So  that  there  was  a  bill  for  £500  not  in  her  handwriting  to 
which  Cook  was  a  party,  for  all  of  which  Cook  either  in  whole 
or  in  part,  unless  he  rushed  upon  his  own  ruin,  must  provide; 
in  respect  of  which,  for  the  accommodation  of  Palmer  or  not, 
Palmer  could  go  to  Cook  and  say,  "  Now,  Cook,  it  is  true 
enough  all  these  bills  are  for  my  accommodation,  but  what  is  the 
use  of  your  making  a  fuss  about  that?  If  I  cannot  pay,  you 
must,  or  your  stud  will  be  sold  up ;  had  you  not  better  give 
your  name  to  some  more  bills  and  make  it  easy?  "  If  he  put 
Cook  to  death  that  was  gone.  Again,  in  addition  to  the  £500 
bill,  for  which  the  bill  of  sale  on  "  Syrius  "  and  "  Polestar  " 
was  given,  the  bill  for  £500  held  by  Herring  was  a  forgery, 
according  to  their  case,  which  there  would  be  no  excuse  for 
not  meeting ;  a  £500  bill  in  the  hands  of  a  man  who  wants  the 
money  is  not  so  easily  put  on ;  that  £500  bill  would  very  soon 
find  its  way  to  his  mother.  It  would  not  have  suited  Palmer 
that  his  mother  should  know — his  mother  was  a  woman  of 
large  fortune,  a  respectable  person  I  am  told — she  disliked 
his  gambling  propensities  though  she  liked  her  son ;  neither 
did  the  excellent  and  most  honourable  man  his  brother,  before 
me,  who  stands  by  him  now,  but  who  was  estranged  from  him 
simply  because  he  disapproved  of  his  gambling,  neither  would 
he  have  given  to  him  any  countenance.  If  Palmer  was  pressed 
to  pay  that  £500,  and  Cook  was  dead,  there  was  nothing  to 
save  him  from  the  exposure.  Nothing  1  If  you  doubt  what 
I  say  is  the  truth,  look  through  the  whole  of  the  case — find  me 
in  any  portion  of  this  most  voluminous  evidence  the  slightest 
trace  that  there  was  a  man  in  the  world  who  would  lend  his 
name  to  Palmer  to  enable  him  to  get  money.  Is  not  the  fact 
that  he  forged,  if  he  did  forge,  the  name  of  his  mother  con- 
clusive that  he  had  no  other  resource?  Is  there  the  least 
no 


Speech  for  Defence. 


trace  of  evidence  that  he  had  any  other  resource  than  the  Serjeant 
good  nature,  the  easiness,  perhaps  the  folly,  of  Cook,  who Shee 
could  have  renewed  these  bills  for  him — the  three  £200  bills 
and  the  £500 — and  put  them  on  as  they  say?  And  was  it  not 
quite  certain  that  if  Cook,  the  acceptor  of  them,  dropped,  the 
claim  would  come  upon  Cook's  executors,  and  then  the  executors 
would  ascertain  all  about  it  and  sell  him  up?  When  you  come 
to  think  of  it,  is  it  credible  that  the  man  under  those  circum- 
stances should  desire  to  bring  not  merely  the  creditors  and 
executors  of  Cook — who  might  be  supposed,  though  Mr.  Stevens 
is  not  one  of  that  class,  to  have  some  pity  for  Cook's  friend — 
but  men  of  business,  down  upon  him,  who  have  no  right  to  have 
any  pity?  A  man  dies,  his  affairs  are  put  into  the  hands  of 
solicitors;  they  have  a  plain  duty  to  perform,  they  cannot  be 
compassionate,  they  must  be  just ;  they  must  see  the  rights  of 
their  clients  the  executors  established  in  due  course  of  law, 
and  compromise  and  arrangement  with  them  is  wholly  out  of 
the  question.  Can  you  find  in  any  part  of  this  case  a  single 
living  person  who  was  willing  to  have  done  for  Palmer  what 
Cook  had  been  doing  for  him  for  two  or  three  years?  Does 
it  appear  that  there  was  one?  Does  it  appear  that  Cook  was 
a  close-fisted  fellow,  and  did  not  care  to  do  Palmer  a  turn? 
When  Palmer  needed  the  £200,  which  the  harpy  wanted  from 
him,  Cook  at  once  wrote  and  said  it  is  a  matter  of  great 
importance  to  him  as  well  as  Palmer  that  this  £200  should 
be  paid ;  and  he  even  risked  the  displeasure  of  Fisher  in  doing 
it.  Then,  again,  Cook  was  in  his  senses  perfectly  on  the 
Tuesday.  He  cannot  have  been  very  rich  at  that  time.  He 
gave  him  the  cheque  for  £350.  How  is  it  possible  to  conceive 
that  under  those  circumstances  Palmer  should  have  an  interest 
in  the  death  of  Cook,  and  yet  what  is  the  theory  of  the  Crown? 
That  Palmer  was  convinced  that  he  could  settle  his  affairs  as 
to  Cook  better  with  Mr.  Stevens  than  he  could  with  Cook  him- 
self— settle  these  word-of -honour  transactions ;  these  things, 
half  of  which  would  not  bear  inquiry  in  any  way  as  reasonable 
business  transactions,  with  a  shrewd  and  probably  a  penurious 
man — deliberately  thought  that  it  would  answer  his  purpose 
better  to  come  in  contact  with  his  executor,  Mr.  Stevens,  whom 
Mr.  Jones  might  rush  up  to  town  and  bring  down  with  him. 
I  submit  to  you  with  confidence,  though  what  I  say  may  be 
inconsistent  with  the  views  generally  entertained  by  the  public 
— the  public,  however,  have  never  had  an  opportunity  of  looking 
at  all  these  letters — but  it  seems  to  me  as  clear  as  anything 
can  be,  that  it  was  the  manifest  interest  of  Palmer  that  Cook 
should  live.  But,  in  addition  to  its  being  his  interest  that 
he  should  live,  was  it  safe  for  him  that  he  should  die?  Palmer 
was  a  man  who  added  to  a  shrewd  knowledge  of  the  world  a 
knowledge  of  his  profession,  and,  among  other  things,  a  know- 
in 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

Serjeant  ledge  of  chemistry.       Palmer  knew  perfectly  well,  and  he  had 
studied  his  profession  sufficiently  when  he  was  a  young  man 
to  know  perfectly  well,  that,  if  strychnia  was  administered,  it 
would  in  all  probability  throw  the  victim  into  horrible  convul- 
sions in  a  very  short  time,  and  in  a  way  so  striking  as  to  be  the 
talk  of  a  small  neighbourhood  like  Rugeley  for  a  month  or  two, 
which  would  be  time  enough  to  alarm  everybody,  and  to  pro- 
voke inquiries  into  the  circumstances  of  the  death,  which  must 
certainly  end,  or  in  all  probability  end,  if  he  was  guilty,  in 
his  conviction.       If  that  was  so,  was  he  so  circumstanced  at 
that  time  as  to  make  it  safe  for  him  to  run  the  risk  of  such 
suspicions?       His   brother,   Walter   Palmer,    had   died    in   the 
month  of  August,  and  his  only  hope,  unless  his  mother  forgave 
him  or  recognised  those  acceptances,  his  only  hope  of  extrication 
from  his  difficulties  was  the  getting  the  amount  due  by  the 
Prince  of  Wales  Insurance  Company  to  him  as  the   assignee 
of  the  policy  on  Walter  Palmer's  life;  that  was  his  only  chance. 
He  had  a  chance  that  way,  and  it  is  plain  that  it  was  so  good 
a  chance,   as  I  will  show  you  presently,   that  he  refused   an 
offer  of  return  of  premium  from  the  company ;    it  does   not 
appear  what  the  amount  was — and  Pratt,  who  was  his  attorney, 
believed  the  chance  to  be  so  good  that  he  had  actually  got  the 
discounts  of  these  large  sums  of  money  upon  it,  and  had  resolved, 
under  the  directions  of  Palmer,   to  put  it  in  suit.       It  was 
really  the  only  unpledged  property  he  had,   and  how  was  he 
situated   respecting   it?       It   is   plain   from   the  letters   which 
were  put  in  yesterday,  and  it  is  further  plain  from  a  piece  of 
evidence  to  which  you  will,  I  am  sure,  find  it  worth  your  while 
to  pay  great  attention.       We  had  Mr.  Deane  called  yesterday, 
who  is  the  attorney  to  the  Prince  of  Wales  insurance  office  ; 
and  for  some  time — though  it  had  ceased  just  at  that  time — 
but  for  some  time  previously  to  this  month  of  November,  the 
insurance  company,  which,  I  believe,  is  not  a  very  old  insur- 
ance company,  were  annoyed  at  being  called  upon  to  pay  so 
large  a  sum,  and  they  determined  to  do  all  they  could  to  resist 
it.       They  accordingly  sent  down  Inspector  Field  to   Stafford 
and  his  man  Simpson  to  make  inquiries,  which  he  could  not  do 
without  talking  and  insinuating  suspicions  and  raising  a  cloud 
of  doubt  and  conjecture  about  Palmer,  and  this  had  been  going 
on  for  some  considerable  time.       Now,  observe  the  evidence  of 
Deane,  and  you  will  see  if  it  is  not  so.     He  says,  "  The  name 
of  my  firm  is  Chubb,  Deane  &  Chubb.       I  had  been  to  Rugeley 
some   time   previously   to   the   inquest.        I   know   Field,    the 
detective  officer ;    we  were   solicitors  to   the   Prince   of  Wales 
insurance  office ;    it  was  in  our  employment  that  Field  went 
to  Rugeley ;   he  was  at  Rugeley  only  a  part  of  one  day ;   he 
was  at  Stafford  for  three  or  four  days  altogether ;  he  did  not 
see  the  prisoner  Palmer ;  this  visit  had  been  preceded  by  that 

112 


Speech  for   Defence. 


of  another  officer  named  Simpson.  Simpson  went  from  Stafford  Serjeant 
to  Rugeley  with  myself  and  Field ;  he  told  me  he  had  seen  shee 
Palmer;  I  think  he  went  into  Staffordshire  in  the  first  week 
in  October."  Then  my  learned  friend  asked  him  what  they 
went  down  for ;  he  said  that  they  went  down  to  make  inquiries 
as  to  the  habits  of  life  of  Mr.  Walter  Palmer,  of  whose  death 
the  Prince  of  Wales  irisurance  office  had  shortly  before  received 
notice ;  so  that  you  see  just  before  the  death  of  Cook  Palmer 
knew  himself  to  be  an  object  of  suspicion,  but  he  acted  as  if 
he  thought  it  was  the  most  unfounded  and  unwarrantable 
suspicion,  putting  the  policy  of  insurance  into  the  hands  of  an 
attorney  to  enforce  payment  of  it,  and  the  office  meeting  the 
claim  by  insinuations  and  inquiries  which  were  of  a  nature  to 
destroy  his  character  and  to  bring  around  his  head  the  suspicion 
of  another  murder. 

Gentlemen,  that  that  was  so  I  will  show  you  by  the  letters 
which  were  put  in  yesterday.  You  see  that  the  pressure  by 
Pratt  upon  Palmer  to  meet  the  two  £1000  bills  never  took 
place  until  the  office  disputed  the  payment  of  that  policy.  All 
went  as  smooth  as  possible  so  long  as  Pratt  held  what  he  be- 
lieved to  be  a  good  security,  the  policy  upon  Walter  Palmer's 
life,  who  was  dead ;  but  when  they  began  to  dispute  it,  then 
you  will  find  that  Pratt  writes  to  Palmer  and  tells  him  the 
situation  of  things  is  quite  changed ;  he  could  manage  the 
bills  very  well  while  that  policy  was  undisputed ;  but  now  it  is 
disputed  that  quite  alters  the  state  of  things ;  he  says,  as  he  had 
somewhat  anticipated,  he  finds  they  can  do  nothing  till  the 
24th,  that  is  nothing  towards  compelling  the  office  to  pay, 
because  insurance  offices  generally  take  three  months  to  pay; 
and  then,  stating  some  other  circumstances,  he  says,  "  This 
you  will  observe  quite  alters  the  arrangement,  and  I  therefore 
must  request  you  to  make  preparations  for  meeting  the  two 
bills  due  at  the  end  of  this  month  "  ;  that  was  where  the  diffi- 
culty was,  that  was  where  the  pinch  was.  Then,  he  says,  he 
shall  not  flag  in  his  exertions,  and  so  on,  and  he  refers  to  the 
circumstances  connected  with  the  dispute;  Mr.  Pratt  says — 
'  You,  Palmer,  know  whether  they  have  any  ground  to  dispute 
that  policy  upon  your  brother's  life ;  you  are  enforcing  it,  and 
if  you  have  no  right  to  do  it  it  is  at  your  peril."  That  is  what 
it  means,  and  then  he  goes  on  to  say,  "  We  must  try  and  make 
them  pay " — that  was  the  position  in  which  Pratt,  who  was 
acting  for  him,  stood  as  to  this  Prince  of  Wales  insurance 
office.  He  says,  "  In  any  event,  bear  in  mind  that  you  must 
be  prepared  to  cover  your  mother's  acceptances  for  the  £4000 
due  at  the  end  of  the  month  "  ;  there  was  the  pinch,  the  office 
would  not  pay,  the  £4000  was  becoming  due,  the  holder  of 
the  bills  saw  he  was  without  security,  and  if  anything  occurred 
to  increase  the  suspicions  of  the  insurance  office,  which  was 
i  «3 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

Serjeant  very  reluctant  to  pay,  the  £13,000  was  lost  for  ever,  lost  beyond 
hope.  Gentlemen,  that  £13,000  is  sure  to  be  paid  unless  that 
man  is  convicted  of  murder ;  and  that  has  a  great  deal  to  do 
with  the  clamour  and  alarm  which  have  been  excited.  So  sure 
as  that  man  is  saved,  and  saved  I  believe  he  will  be,  that 
£13,000  is  paid;  there  is  no  defence,  no  pretence  for  a 
defence — the  letters  of  the  office  make  that  plain;  they  took 
an  enormous  premium — knowing  that  the  man  was  only  thirty, 
they  took  a  premium  for  a  man  of  fifty. 

Mr.  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — That  is  not  in  evidence ;  do  you 
mean  to  prove  that? 

Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — I  do  not  know  whether  I  can  show  that 
to  be  the  actual  premium,  but  the  letters  which  were  put  in 
show  that  the  premium  was  enormous ;  and  I  say  that  as  sure 
as  he  is  saved  that  £13,000  is  good  for  him,  and  will  pay  all 
his  creditors. 

Now,  observe  the  position  in  which  he  was  at  the  moment — 
all  the  correspondence  turns  upon  that.  This  correspondence 
saves  the  prisoner,  if  there  is  common  sense  in  man. 

Now,  observe,  there  is  another  letter  from  Pratt  containing 
this  passage,  "  I  have  your  note,  acknowledging  receipt  by  your 
mother  of  the  £2000  acceptance,  due  the  2nd  of  October ;  why 
not  let  her  acknowledge  it  herself?  You  must  really  not  fail 
to  come  up  at  once,  if  it  be  for  the  purpose  of  arranging  for 
the  payment  of  the  two  bills  at  the  end  of  the  month ;  remem- 
ber I  can  make  no  terms  for  their  renewal,  and  they  must  be 
paid.  I  will,  of  course,  hold  the  policy  for  as  much  as  it  is 
worth,"  and  so  on.  At  this  time  Simpson  and  Field  were 
making  inquiries  how  a  young  man  of  thirty  had  died,  who  had 
had  delirium  tremens  three  times,  as  their  own  physician,  Dr. 
Hastings,  and  Mr.  Wardell  had  informed  them.  Then  in  a 
postscript  he  says  he  "casts  no  doubt  upon  the  capability  of 
the  company  to  pay,  but  that  in  the  nature  of  things,  with  so 
large  an  amount  in  question,  it  is  not  surprising  that,  if  they 
think  they  have  grounds  for  resisting,  they  should  temporise  by 
delay."  Does  not  that  show  that  at  that  date  at  least,  the 
6th  of  October,  suspicions  were  hanging  in  menacing  meteors 
about  Palmer's  head,  which  would  come  down  with  irresistible 
momentum  and  crush  him  upon  suspicion  of  a  sudden  death  by 
murder?  Do  you  believe  that  a  man  who  wrote  what  the 
effects  of  strychnia  were  in  his  manual  would  risk  such  a  scene 
as  a  deathbed  by  strychnia,  in  the  presence  of  the  dearest  and 
best  friend  of  Cook — a  man  whom  he  could  not  influence,  a 
medical  man,  who  liked  him  and  loved  him  well  enough  when 
he  knew  he  was  ill  to  sleep  with  him  in  the  same  room  that  he 
might  be  ready  to  attend  to  him  in  case  he  wanted  assistance 
during  the  night  ?  Is  that  common  sense ;  are  you  going  to 
endorse  such  a  theory  as  that  upon  the  suggestion  of  Dr.  Alfred 
114 


Speech  for  Defence. 


Taylor  about  the  effects  that  strychnia  produced  upon  his  five  Serjeant 
rabbits  ?  Impossible,  perfectly  impossible  1  as  I  submit  to  you.  Shee 
But  to  proceed — I  will  prove  to  you,  most  clearly,  the  position 
in  which  he  was.  On  the  other  side  of  the  letter  of  the  10th 
of  October  Mr.  Pratt  writes,  "  Copy  of  solicitors'  reply  "  ;  that 
is,  the  solicitors  to  the  Prince  of  Wales  insurance  office.  He 
says,  "  I  may  add  that  I  hear  the  office  have  been  making 
inquiries  in  every  direction."  To  be  sure,  Field  was  em- 
ployed ;  he  is  not  now  in  the  police,  but  he  is  employed  as  a 
detective  officer;  he  was  at  Stafford,  and  was  at  Rugeley,  and 
was  making  inquiries  in  all  directions ;  inquiries  could  be  made 
at  Stafford  as  well  as  Rugeley,  and  all  that  had  taken  place 
at  Rugeley  just  as  easily  ascertained  there  as  at  Rugeley  itself ; 
whatever  had  taken  place  there  would  be  known.  He  says 
they  have  been  making  inquiries  in  all  directions.  It  is  plain, 
then,  that  he  knew  that  suspicions  were  then  rife,  or  that  they 
were  endeavouring  to  create  suspicions,  against  him  about  the 
policy  on  the  life  of  Walter  Palmer.  Here  is  the  very  letter 
which  the  company  wrote  in  answer  to  the  claim,  dated  8th  of 
October,  1855  ;  it  is  from  Messrs.  Chubb,  Deane  &  Chubb,  the 
solicitors  to  the  office,  addressed  to  Thomas  Pratt,  Esq., 
acknowledging  the  application ;  and  shortly  afterwards  Messrs. 
Chubb  send  a  reply  to  the  application — there  is  no  date  to  it, 
but  it  is  enclosed  in  a  letter  of  the  18th  of  October  from  Pratt 
to  Palmer.  After  apologising  for  not  answering  the  letter 
of  the  16th  instant,  owing  to  the  absence  of  Mr.  Deane,  they 
refer  to  the  "  local  investigation  having  been  made,  and 
decline  to  pay  the  claim  upon  the  ground  that  the  facts  dis- 
closed in  the  course  of  the  inquiry  are  such  as  fully  to  warrant 
them  in  doing  so."  These  are  letters  which  my  learned  friend 
thought  it  right  to  put  in  yesterday ;  they  are  evidence  for  the 
Crown,  and  what  is  the  inference  from  them?  Judge,  if  you 
please,  from  some  of  the  letters  to  Pratt,  and  the  one  which 
I  read  first  from  Pratt  to  Palmer.  Palmer  determined  that 
the  policy  should  be  paid ;  he  took  the  advice  of  Sir  Fitzroy 
Kelly.  I  see  here  it  is  said,  "The  case  will  be  laid  before 
Kelly  to-morrow."  This  letter  came  just  before  the  end  of  the 
long  vacation ;  the  time  to  take  proceedings  had  only  just  com- 
menced, in  any  event,  because  the  three  months  had  only  just 
expired.  But  so  sure  as  anything  happened  by  foul  play  to 
Cook,  he  had  no  more  chance  of  getting  the  £13,000  than 
£130,000  from  the  Prince  of  Wales  insurance  office — none  what- 
ever. That  was  the  only  means  he  had  at  that  time  of 
extricating  himself  from  those  incumbrances. 

Gentlemen,  I  have  detained  you  a  long  time  upon  this,  but 
not,  I  trust,  too  long,  if  the  view  I  have  submitted  be  one 
worthy  of  your  consideration.  I  infer  from  all  this  that 
Palmer  had  no  interest  whatever  to  put  Cook  to  death  ;  that  it 
was  contrary  to  his  interest  in  a  pecuniary  point  of  view,  and 

"5 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  brought  claims  upon  him,  some  of  them  small,  others  of  a  larger 
Shee  amount,  of  which  he  might  have  shared  the  liability  with  Cook, 
if  not  have  thrown  it  entirely  upon  Cook ;  that  it  forced  an 
immediate  settlement  of  the  affairs  of  Cook,  not  with  Cook 
himself,  who  was  an  easy  man — it  is  plain  he  was — and  pro- 
bably their  solicitors,  and  that  therefore  in  a  pecuniary  sense 
he  had  every  motive  of  interest  to  desire  that  Cook  should 
live ;  and  further,  he  had  no  chance  of  getting  a  ready  payment 
from  these  documents — but  with  hard  and  exacting  executors- 
of  the  £13,000,  no  chance  of  the  sudden  death  of  Cook  passing 
without  suspicion  and  inquiry,  and  therefore  he  could  not  think 
it  safe  for  him  that  he  should  die. 

I  cannot,  I  think,  be  so  much  mistaken  as  that  a  considerable 
portion  of  these  observations  is  not  well  worthy  your  atten- 
tion. I  humbly  contend  that  the  suggested  motive  altogether 
fails ;  and  I  conclude  that  head  of  the  observations  which  I 
have  to  address  to  you  by  saying  that  I  submit  respectfully 
to  you,  to  the  Court,  and  to  my  learned  friends  that  that 
portion  of  this  case  has  failed.  It  could  not  be  the  interest 
of  Palmer  that  Cook  should  die. 

I  now  proceed  to  the  next  head,  and  it  is  impossible  in  deal- 
ing with  this  evidence  to  observe  altogether  the  order  of  date. 
I  must  group  the  facts  as  well  as  I  can  in  order  to  deal  with 
the  whole  of  the  evidence.  The  question  is  whether  the 
symptoms  of  Cook  before  his  death  and  the  appearance  pre- 
sented by  his  body  after  death  were  consistent  with  the  theory 
of  his  having  died  by  strychnia  poison,  and  inconsistent  with 
the  theory  of  his  having  died  from  other  and  natural  causes. 
It  is  under  this  head,  gentlemen,  that  I  shall  discuss,  I  hope- 
not  at  undue  length,  the  medical  evidence  in  this  cause,  and 
present  to  you  such  observations  as  occur  to  me  upon  the  wit- 
nesses who  have  been  called  to  support  the  view  which  the 
Crown  takes  of  the  effect  of  that  medical  evidence. 

For  this  purpose  let  us  briefly,  in  a  sentence  or  two,  run  over 
the  facts.  Cook  died  on  Wednesday  morning,  the  21st  of 
November,  at  one  o'clock,  in  violent  convulsions  ;  he  died  in 
the  presence  of  Mr.  Jones.  It  was  no  sooner  light  than  Jones 
posted  up  to  town  to  see  Cook's  stepfather  and  executor,  Mr. 
Stevens,  who  came  down,  and  was  introduced  to  Palmer. 
Palmer  took  him  up  to  the  corpse,  and  uncovered  the  corpse  to- 
the  thighs — brave  man  he  must  have  been,  if  he  was  a  mur- 
derer, to  do  that — uncovered  the  corpse  to  the  thighs  before 
him.  Stevens  observed  the  body,  and  wondered  he  could  have 
died,  he  looked  so  calm,  so  composed,  so  well,  so  little 
emaciated ;  he  observed,  indeed,  some  slight  rigidity  about  the 
muscles.  I  refer  to  his  deposition.  I  am  not  sure  whether 
Stevens'  deposition  was  read — but  it  is  evidence  supplied  to  us. 
He  took  his  hand,  and  wondered  that  he  should  have  died  ; 
his  suspicions  were  immediately  aroused.  He  dined  that  day 
116 


Speech  for  Defence. 


at  Rugeley,  and  asked  Palmer  to  dinner  with  him,  and  ques-  Serjeant 
tioned  him  about  the  betting-book ;  got  angry  that  it  was  not  shee 
produced,  dissembled  with  Palmer,  cross-examined  him,  went 
up  to  town,  met  him  afterwards  at  the  station  at  Euston  Square, 
afterwards  at  Rugby,  afterwards  at  Wolverton,  again  at 
Rugeley,  and  at  last  threw  off  the  mask,  and,  addressing  him 
in  a  tone  to  which  I  shall  call  your  attention  presently,  gave 
Palmer  clearly  to  understand  that  he  suspected  him,  and  in- 
tended to  probe  the  whole  matter  to  the  very  core.  He 
resolved  upon  a  post-mortem  examination,  and  a  post-mortem 
examination  took  place.  The  appearances  which  were  pre- 
sented at  the  death  of  Cook  were  such  as  might  have  been 
expected  by  those  who  had  been  acquainted  with  his  course  of 
life  and  his  general  health,  his  pursuits — it  is  a  pity  to  say 
anything  hard  of  him — his  vices — I  will  not  say  more  than  this — 
his  vices,  and  the  company,  the  drinking,  idle,  racing  company 
which  he  kept.  His  father  had  died  at  the  age  of  thirty,  his 
mother  about  the  same  age,  a  year  or  two  after  she  had 
married  Mr.  Stevens ;  his  brother  was  delicate,  his  sister  was 
delicate;  he  was  believed  by  his  physicians  to  have  something 
of  a  pulmonary  complaint,  and,  when  his  body  was  opened, 
his  lungs  were  found  to  be  emphysematous,  that  is,  their  air 
vessels  were  distended  with  air.  On  further  inquiry,  for  I 
take  both  the  examinations  together,  it  was  found  that  for  a 
length  of  time  he  had  been  troubled  with  a  very  ugly  sore 
throat — a  sore  throat  bad  enough  to  render  it  necessary  that  it 
should  be  constantly  touched  with  caustic,  as  well  as  his  tongue  ; 
he  would  not  have  been  able  to  swallow  without  it.  The 
tonsils  of  his  throat  were  at  the  very  time  he  left  for 
Shrewsbury  races,  though  much  better  than  they  had  been, 
sore  and  inflamed — one  of  them  was  very  nearly  gone,  the 
other  was  very  much  reduced  in  size ;  and  he  knew  so  much 
better  about  himself  and  the  cause  of  it  all  probably  than  his 
medical  adviser,  that  he  very  much  preferred  mercury  to  any 
other  specific  for  his  complaint.  He  had,  besides  that,  traces 
about  his  person  which  have  been  so  often  referred  to,  the 
result  of  disease,  that  they  need  not  be  more  particularly  men- 
tioned than  they  have  been  already,  as  to  the  extent  of  which  and 
the  character  of  which  some  little  doubt  exists ;  but  they  did 
not  come  by  an  ordinary  and  chaste  mode  of  life,  you  may 
depend  upon  it ;  and  altogether,  as  far  as  it  went,  he  seems 
to  have  been  about  as  loose  a  young  man  as  one  is  in  the  habit 
of  meeting,  without  being  utterly  lost  to  all  sense  of  honour 
and  propriety,  which  I  do  not  mean  to  suggest  that  he  was. 

His  body  was  opened ;  the  soreness  of  his  tongue  was  mani- 
fest ;  I  rather  collect  that  it  was  not  actually  sore  at  the  time 
of  his  death — yet  that  there  were  what  they  call  follicles,  and 
symptoms,  if  not  recent,  at  least  not  very  ancient,  of  actual 
ulcers ;  the  inside  of  his  mouth,  too,  had  been  ulcerated,  or 

117 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  the  skin  taken  off  by  some  sort  of  soreness  attributed  to 
decayed  teeth.  We  all  of  us  probably  have  decayed  teeth; 
but  that  does  not  happen  to  us  which  happened  to  him — it 
was  sore  on  both  sides.  The  sores  about  his  mouth  he  thought 
himself  were  syphilitic,  and  could  not  be  persuaded  by  the  very 
respectable  gentleman,  Dr.  Savage,  to  attend  readily  to  his 
advice.  He  thought  he  was  not  weak  enough,  I  think  he  said 
fool  enough,  to  take  quack  medicines ;  but  weak  enough  to  take 
the  advice  of  any  medical  quack  who  had  assurance  enough  to 
give  advice  to  him,  believing  that  the  best  thing  for  his  com- 
plaint was  mercury ;  and  he  was  apprehensive,  I  believe,  that 
what  are  the  worst  symptoms  of  that  disease  for  which  mer- 
cury is  given,  namely,  spots  upon  the  body,  would  make  their 
appearance,  and  that  possibly  (I  believe  such  things  do  happen) 
some  day  or  other  he  would  find  on  the  morning  of  a  race  hia 
face  covered  with  large  copper-coloured  blotches,  which  would 
plainly  show  what  life  he  had  been  leading.  That  was  the 
sort  of  man  he  was.  Many  such  a  man  has  reformed  and 
become  a  good  and  respectable  member  of  society.  I  should 
be  sorry  to  say  anything  unduly  harsh  upon  a  man  who  is 
gone;  but  the  state  of  his  health  is  a  material  subject  for  our 
inquiry  here.  It  is  plain  that  he  had  in  his  own  opinion  been 
affected  by  virulent  syphilis,  and  that  that  had  not  corrected  his 
habits,  for  he  had  become  recently  diseased.  The  medical 
men  who  attended  him  before  concurred  in  this  opinion ;  and 
when  his  body  was  opened,  in  addition  to  all  those  plainer 
symptoms  of  illness  to  the  eye,  on  the  second  post-mortem 
examination,  there  was  between  the  delicate  membrane  which 
covers  the  spinal  marrow,  and  which  is  called  the  arachnoid, 
I  believe — I  think  I  am  right — there  was  pressing  upon  the 
arachnoid,  and  embedded  to  some  extent  in  the  next  covering, 
not  so  delicate,  though  still  delicate,  called  the  dura  mater, 
granules,  as  given  in  evidence,  of  such  an  extent  as  I  will  satisfy 
you  by  men  competent  to  inform  you  would,  if  his  body  had 
been  opened  in  the  dead-house  of  any  hospital  in  this  metropolis, 
have  been  said  and  determined  to  be  the  cause  of  his  death. 

Such  was  the  condition  of  Cook,  only  partially  discovered  on 
the  post-mortem  examination  which  took  place  at  the  desire  of 
the  executor,  Mr.  Stevens.  That  examination  was  not  con- 
ducted with  that  entirety,  so  to  speak — with  that  thorough 
determination  to  investigate  the  whole  matter — that  afterwards 
was  thought  to  be  necessary. 

Dr.  Taylor  attends  the  coroner's  inquest,  which  is  held  in 
consequence,  I  presume,  of  his  letter.  I  do  not  know  whether 
that  is  so  or  not,  but  in  consequence  of  suspicions  entertained, 
and  probably  in  consequence  of  the  letter  which  he  sent  in 
answer  to  Mr.  Stevens'  inquiries,  and  he  hears  the  evidence  of 
Jones,  and  of  Mills,  and  of  Roberts,  and  of  others ;  but  I  call 
your  attention  to  the  evidence  of  those  three  witnesses,  because 
118 


Speech  for  Defence. 


I  think,  in  fairness  to  Dr.  Taylor,  it  must  be  presumed  that  Serjeant 
they  principally  influenced  his  opinion.  Now,  then,  I  say  that  Shee 
upon  the  loose  evidence  of  chambermaids,  and  waitresses,  and 
housekeepers,  against  the  opinion  of  the  medical  man  who 
attended  Cook  in  his  last  illness,  or,  at  any  rate,  with  no  en- 
couragement, as  I  will  satisfy  you  presently  (for  there  is  an 
observation  to  be  made  upon  that) — with  no  encouragement  from 
the  medical  man,  Mr.  Jones,  the  surgeon  at  Lutterworth,  who 
was  of  an  age  and  character,  having  seen  the  whole  illness,  to 
form  an  opinion  upon  the  matter — Dr.  Taylor,  having  heard 
the  evidence  of  Elizabeth  Mills,  and  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Jones, 
and  of  Roberts,  came  at  once  boldly  to  the  conclusion  that  his 
notion  that  antimony  was  the  cause  of  death  was  a  mistake ; 
and  he  had  the  incredible  imprudence — an  imprudence  which 
has  led  to  all  this  dreadful  excitement — an  imprudence  which 
has  rendered  it  necessary  that  this  inquiry  should  take  place  in 
this  form  and  in  this  place,  if  at  all — to  state  upon  his  oath 
before  that  jury  that  he  believed  that  the  pills  which  were 
administered  to  Cook  on  the  Monday  and  Tuesday  night 
contained  strychnia,  and  that  Cook  was  poisoned  by  it. 

Allow  me  for  a  moment  to  ask  your  attention  to  what  the 
real  character  of  that  opinion  was.  That  opinion  as  de- 
livered was  irrevocable.  By  it  Taylor's  reputation  was  staked 
against  Palmer's  life.  Instantly  followed  by  the  verdict  of 
wilful  murder  it  flew  upon  the  wings  of  the  Press  into  every 
house  in  the  United  Kingdom.  It  became  known  that,  accord- 
ing to  the  opinion  of  a  man  whose  whole  life  had  been  devoted 
to  science,  a  gentleman  of  personal  character  perfectly  unim- 
peachable, a  man  who  stood  well  with  his  friends  in  the  medical 
profession — that  on  his  opinion,  not  conjectural,  not  delivered, 
as  an  opinion  of  the  kind  might  properly  be  delivered,  in  a 
private  room,  to  persons  on  whose  discretion  reliance  was  placed, 
but  delivered  upon  oath  in  a  public  room,  in  the  public  inn 
of  a  little  village  where  everything  that  took  place  was  known — 
and  he  must  have  known,  I  cannot  but  think,  that  suspicions 
had  been,  as  I  say,  and  as  I  think  you  will  be  satisfied  unduly, 
excited  about  the  death  of  Walter  Palmer — that,  according  to 
his  opinion,  Cook's  death  had  been  caused  by  strychnia.  "  In 
fact,"  said  Dr.  Taylor,  "though  I  find  no  trace  of  strychnia, 
and  though  there  is  nothing  to  induce  me  to  believe  that  there 
is  strychnia  in  the  body,  except  the  suggestion  that  on  the 
Tuesday  Palmer  bought  it  off  Roberts  "  (which  would  not  account 
in  any  way,  supposing  the  mere  purchase  of  strychnia  could 
account  for  anything,  for  the  paroxysm  on  Monday  night),  "  yet, 
having  heard  that  evidence,  knowing  that  I  have  failed  to  dis- 
cover the  presence  of  strychnia,  I  will  undertake  upon  my  oath 
to  say,  and  on  my  credit  publish  to  the  whole  world,  that  the 
pills  which  were  given  to  him  on  Monday  and  Tuesday  night 

119 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  contained  strychnia,  and  that  he  died  from  that  poison." 
Sh*e  Observe  what  it  amounts  to.  It  ascertains,  not  upon  scientific, 
or  well-informed,  or  consistent  testimony,  but  upon  testimony 
ill-informed,  of  the  humblest  class,  the  least  fitted  to  detail 
accurately  the  symptoms  of  such  a  disease  as  it  is  imputed  to 
be,  on  evidence  not  consistent  with  itself,  as  respects  the  evi- 
dence of  Elizabeth  Mills  in  all  particulars,  or  with  the  evidence 
of  a  much  better  informed  person,  Mr.  Jones,  or  with  the 
opinion  of  Mr.  Jones — it  ascertains,  and  pronounces  positively, 
that  the  disease  of  which  Cook  died  was  not  simply  convulsions 
of  a  tetanic  form,  however  violent — not  convulsions  with  many 
features  of  tetanus,  but  that  it  was  actual  tetanus,  and  that 
description  of  it  which  could  only  be  caused  by  one  poison,  and 
that  poison  strychnia.  That  is  the  evidence — he  lays  that 
down  as  a  proposition  on  which  he  is  perfectly  satisfied  to  rest, 
and  on  that  the  verdict  goes. 

Gentlemen,  let  me  ask  you  in  what  position  we  are  placed 
for  the  safety  of  our  lives  and  families  if,  upon  such  evidence 
as  this,  upon  suspicions  so  excited  and  so  sanctioned  by  hasty 
opinions  of  medical  men,  we  are  liable  every  time  a  sudden 
death  takes  place  in  a  family  to  be  put  upon  our  trials  on 
suspicion  of  foul  play  to  those  with  whom  we  live?  In  the 
cases  which  are  usually  discussed  in  this  Court,  witnesses  are 
called  to  give  evidence  respecting  processes  and  means  of  arriv- 
ing at  truth  with  a  knowledge  of  the  facts  in  question,  with 
the  operation  of  which  processes  the  prosecuting  counsel,  the 
judge,  and  the  jurors  are  as  well  acquainted  as  the  witnesses 
themselves.  The  witnesses  come  to  speak  to  facts,  a  great 
portion  of  which  are  within  the  ordinary  knowledge  and  appre- 
ciation of  mankind ;  but  if  science  is  admitted  to  dogmatise 
in  our  Courts — science  not  exact  in  its  nature — science  not 
successful,  but  baffled  even  by  its  own  tests — science  bearing 
upon  its  forehead  the  motto  that  "  a  little  learning  is  a 
dangerous  thing  " — if  that  is  to  be  introduced  to  state  pro- 
cesses of  arriving  at  truth,  conclusive  to  its  satisfaction,  but 
which  we  cannot  follow,  and  opinions  respecting  the  cause  of 
death  which  those  processes  have  not  discovered,  judges  and 
jurors  will  have  an  amount  of  responsibility  thrown  upon  them 
too  great  for  human  nature  to  bear.  This  gentleman,  Dr. 
Taylor,  if  he  had  found  the  poison  by  his  own  tests,  after  long 
experience  of  their  efficacy,  would  have  been  a  very  good  witness 
to  have  proved  unquestionably  that  strychnia  was  there ;  but 
not  having  found  it,  not  having  seen  the  patient,  and  knowing 
nothing  about  him  but  what  Elizabeth  Mills  told  him,  and  what 
he  heard  from  Mr.  Jones,  who  did  not  agree  with  him,  or  who 
gave  no  evidence  agreeing  with  him — with  no  better  means  of 
information  than  that  he  thinks  himself  justified,  upon  his  oath 
in  a  public  Court,  to  say  that  the  pills  administered  by  the 
120 


Speech    for    Defence. 


medical  man  (of  course,  he  did  not  mean  to  impute  any  mis-  Serjeant 
conduct  to  Mr.  Bamford)  contained  strychnia,  that  murder  was  Shee 
committed,  and  Cook  poisoned  by  it.  If  he  is  allowed  to  say 
that,  what  family  and  what  medical  practitioner  is  safe? 
Gentlemen,  I  beg  to  ask  you  on  what  ground  does  he  say  that? 
Not  on  any  peculiar  knowledge,  for  he  has  not  any  knowledge 
as  to  the  effects  of  strychnia  more  than  any  of  us — myself,  if 
you  please ;  for  when  we  come  thoroughly  to  look  into  it  he  does 
riot  appear,  of  his  own  knowledge,  to  have  seen  a  single  case 
of  strychnia  in  the  human  subject;  and  yet  he  has  been  daring 
enough,  knowing  that  the  consequences  would  be  disastrous  to 
this  man — knowing  perfectly  well  that  all  the  world,  or,  at 
all  events,  the  great  majority  of  the  world,  would  take  for 
granted  that  a  medical  man  in  his  position  would  not  give  a 
hasty  opinion — he  has  the  incredible  courage  to  declare,  on  his 
oath,  that  the  pills  that  were  given,  as  far  as  he  knew,  by  Dr. 
Bamford,  contained  strychnia,  and  that  Cook  was  poisoned  by 
them! 

I  have  said  "  a  little  learning  is  a  dangerous  thing,"  and 
it  appears  to  me  that  there  never  was  a  case  in  which  the 
adage  was  so  applicable  as  it  is  in  this.  Of  all  the  works  of 
God,  the  one  best  calculated  to  fill  us  with  wonder  and  admira- 
tion, and  convince  us  of  our  dependence  on  our  Maker,  and  the 
utter  nothingness  of  ourselves,  is  the  mortal  coil  in  which  we 
live,  and  breathe,  and  think,  and  have  our  being.  Every 
minute  of  our  lives  functions  are  performed  at  our  will,  the 
unerring  accuracy  of  which  nothing  but  Omniscience  and 
Omnipotence  could  have  secured.  We  feel  and  see  exactly 
-what  takes  place,  and  yet  the  moment  we  attempt  to  explain 
what  takes  place,  the  instant  we  endeavour  to  give  a  reason  for 
what  we  know,  and  see,  and  do,  the  mystery  of  creation — 
' '  God  created  man  to  His  own  image ;  to  the  image  of  God 
•created  He  him  " — arrests  our  course,  and  we  are  flung  back 
upon  conjecture  and  doubt.  We  know  in  a  sense — we  sup- 
pose— that  the  soft  medullary  substance  which  is  within  the 
cavity  of  the  head  is  the  seat  of  thought,  of  sensation,  and  of 
will.  We  know  that  that  soft  medullary  substance  is  con- 
tinued down  the  middle  of  the  back,  protected  by  a  bony  duct 
or  canal,  within  which  bony  duct  or  canal  it  lies  embedded ; 
and  we  know  that  from  the  sides  of  this  bony  duct  and  from 
this  medullary  substance  proceed  an  infinite  variety  of  nerves, 
the  conduits  of  sensation  from  all  parts  of  the  body  to  the  soul, 
and  of  muscles  connected  and  dependent  on  them,  the  instru- 
ments of  voluntary  motion.  This  we  know,  and  we  know  that 
by  that  process  all  the  ordinary  actions  of  our  lives,  at  our  own 
will,  are  effected  with  the  most  wonderful  precision.  Some- 
times, however,  these  nerves  and  muscles  depart  from  their 
normal  character,  and,  instead  of  being  the  mere  instruments  of 

121 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  the  will  of  the  soul,  become  irregular,  convulsive,  tumultuary, 
vindicating  to  themselves  a  sort  of  independent  vitality,  totally 
regardless  of  the  authority  to  which  they  are  ordinarily  subject. 
When  thrown  into  this  state  of  irritation  and  excitement  their 
effects  are  known  by  the  general  name  of  convulsions.  It  is 
remarkable,  unlike  most  other  fine  names,  they  are  not  a  modern 
adaptation.  The  ancients  had  them  to  express  the  very  same 
thing;  the  spasmodic  and  tetanic  affections  were  known  then, 
and  as  much  about  them  hundreds  and  thousands  of  years  ago 
as  is  known  now.  Tetanic  convulsions  have  in  later  times 
been  divided  into  two  specific  branches  of  tetanus — idiopathic 
and  traumatic.  We  have  heard  a  great  deal  of  these  two 
descriptions  of  tetanus.  One  question  my  lord  asked,  which 
was  answered  by  Dr.  Todd — it  would  have  been  more  satis- 
factory if  my  lord  had  asked  what  the  meaning  of  the  English 
of  "  idiopathic,"  viz.,  self -generating,  was ;  the  answer  given  to 
the  question,  What  does  idiopathic  mean?  was  "constitutional." 
True,  but  that  means  nothing,  or,  if  anything,  it  means 
"  unaccountable." 

LORD  CAMPBELL — Without  external  injury. 

Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — Just  so,  my  lord ;  without  external 
injury,  but  attributable  to  no  known  cause,  unless  in  some  few 
instances,  perhaps,  where  there  is  some  injury  in  the  interior 
of  the  body ;  but  the  meaning  of  the  word  ' '  idiopathic  ' '  is 
unquestionably  what  I  have  stated ;  not  that  it  follows  they 
never  can  be  traced  to  a  cause,  but  that  they  constantly  occur 
in  which  the  cause  may  be  attributed  to  one  thing  or  to  another, 
and  in  that  case  we  say  that  it  is  idiopathic  tetanus,  because  we 
cannot  with  certainty  say  it  is  traumatic,  that  is,  arising  from 
any  external  injury. 

Now,  gentlemen,  we  have  had  a  great  deal  of  evidence  pro- 
duced by  my  friends  directed  to  show — assuming  that  the 
disease  of  which  Mr.  Cook  died  was  tetanus — that  it  must  have 
been  strychnia  tetanus.  It  is  a  mere  assumption  they  begin 
with — the  merest  assumption  in  the  world.  I  will  give  you 
my  reasons  for  saying  so,  and  I  think  I  am  justified  in  so  saying. 
That  the  deceased  died  in  convulsions  is  beyond  all  question, 
or  immediately  after  convulsions ;  that  they  were  convulsions 
that  had  occurred  exactly  or  about  the  same  hours  on  the 
previous  night,  and  something  like  those  which  had  occurred 
on  the  night  preceding,  something  which  he  described  as  mad- 
ness for  two  minutes,  is  beyond  all  doubt.  What  pretence  is 
there  for  saying  they  were  tetanus  at  all?  Mr.  Jones  was 
examined,  and  I  will  read  to  you  presently  what  the  evidence 
he  gave  was.  Mr.  Jones,  in  the  copy  of  the  depositions 
delivered  to  me,  stated  that  Mr.  Cook  died  of  convulsions,  and 
in  the  copy  of  the  depositions,  which  he  signed  and  read  over 
and  corrected,  there  was  not  a  word  of  tetanus.  My  learned 

122 


Speech    for    Defence. 


friend  interposed,  and  said,  on  looking  to  the  original  deposi-  Serjeant 
tions,  it  did  appear  that  he  had  mentioned  it,  and  he  said  so  Shee 
because  in  the  course  of  his  examination  he  found  a  half-written 
word,  "  tetinus  " — he  availed  himself  of  it,  not  unfairly,  to 
suggest,  that  though  he  did  not  positively  say  it  was  tetanus, 
yet  that  what  he  observed  was  something  which  put  him  in 
mind  of  tetanus.  It  bore  some  of  the  characteristics  of  a 
tetanic  convulsion;  but,  gentlemen,  it  may  do  so,  and  yet 
not  be  tetanus ;  and  I  submit  to  you  that  it  is  bad  reasoning, 
and  I  will  prove  it  presently.  I  put  a  question  to  the  witness 
on  the  subject.  It  is  bad  reasoning  to  say  without  positive 
proof  of  the  fact  that  it  was  tetanus,  and  it  cannot  be  trau- 
matic tetanus,  because  it  did  not  appear  it  had  presented  the 
distinct  features  of  traumatic  tetanus,  and  therefore  it  must 
be  tetanus  by  strychnia.  That  is  the  argument.  They 
assume  it  cannot  be  traumatic  tetanus,  they  have  not  discovered 
the  poison,  but  still  they  say  it  must  be  tetanus  by  poison ! 

Let  us  see  whether  there  is  any  pretence  for  saying  anything 
of  the  kind.  My  learned  friends  may  tell  me,  if  you  venture 
to  impeach  the  authority  of  a  man  like  Dr.  Taylor,  who,  though 
he  had  no  knowledge  on  the  subject,  undoubtedly  is  a  gentleman 
of  great  leading  in  his  profession,  and  a  gentleman  who  has 
written  a  book,  which  I  will  not  treat  as  a  book  not  worthy 
of  being  attended  to  because  I  think  it  right  on  this  evidence 
to  attack  a  particular  part  of  it — if  you  choose  to  say  his 
opinion  is  not  to  be  depended  upon,  it  is  incumbent  on  you  to 
suggest  some  other  theory  of  the  cause  of  Cook's  death  which 
will  explain  the  evidence  given,  and  prove  not  merely  negatively 
it  is  not  what  we  say  it  was,  but  prove  affirmatively  it  is  some- 
thing else.  I  say  I  am  not  called  on  to  do  any  such  thing. 
The  Crown  is  the  party,  or  rather  those  out  of  whose  hands 
this  case  has  been  taken  by  the  Crown,  who  have  thought  proper 
to  impute  the  death  of  this  gentleman  to  the  poison  of  strychnia ; 
they  have  followed  the  trail  which  has  been  dragged  before 
them  by  these  toxicologists ;  and,  relying  on  their  judgment 
and  discretion,  they  have  made  quite  sure  they  will  be  enabled 
to  establish  the  fact  that  it  was  not  either  by  traumatic  or  idio- 
pathic  tetanus,  but  by  tetanus  of  strychnia,  that  he  had  died. 
I  say  I  am  not  bound  to  suggest  any  theory  upon  the  subject. 
It  cannot  be  expected  that  in  the  defence  I  should  do  so ;  and, 
in  point  of  logic,  it  is  not  reasonable,  when  we  contradict  the 
fact  which  it  is  for  them  to  prove,  that  our  denial  of  that  fact 
and  our  reasons  should  be  weakened  because  we  cannot  con- 
clusively fix  the  cause  of  death,  or  explain  the  cause  of  death  in 
any  other  way.  If  we  can  satisfy  you  that  into  any  one  of  the 
numerous  varieties  of  convulsions  this  gentleman  might  have 
fallen,  and  might  have  been  either  asphyxiated,  or  by  some 
sudden  spasm  deprived  of  life  in  a  way  different  from  asphyxia — 

123 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  it  is  quite  enough  for  us  to  prove  the  probability  of  that,  unless 
they  show  conclusively  that  the  circumstances  and  symptoms 
which  attended  his  death  are  irreconcilable  with  any  other 
theory  than  that  of  strychnia  poison.  Let  us  see  what  the 
symptoms  were.  I  will  take  the  liberty  of  reading  them  in 
the  first  instance  from  the  depositions,  because  it  is  only  fair 
to  a  person  whose  judgment  I  dispute  that  you  should  have 
placed  clearly  before  you  the  evidence  on  which  they  rely. 

The  Court  here  adjourned  for  a  short  time. 

Gentlemen,  I  have  observed  in  the  course  of  this  inquiry, 
whenever  there  has  been  a  question  of  what  a  witness  has  said 
on  a  previous  occasion  before  a  coroner,  my  lord  has  thought 
it  right  to  have  the  whole  of  the  document  read.  Now,  I 
propose  to  read — unless  I  am  corrected  by  my  lord,  when,  of 
course,  I  shall  immediately  submit — I  propose  to  read,  for  the 
purpose  of  my  present  inquiry,  only  that  part  of  the  deposition 
which  describes  the  symptoms. 

LORD  CAMPBELL — You  may  read  any  part  of  them,  completing 
the  sense  of  the  part  which  you  read. 

Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — I  am  much  obliged  to  your  lordship ; 
and  my  object  in  so  doing  is  this,  I  will  read  all  the  deposition 
of  Mr.  Jones,  though  in  truth,  in  my  view  of  the  case,  the 
deposition  of  Mr.  Jones  is  not  so  favourable  to  my  case  as  his 
evidence  in  open  Court.  If  there  be  a  difference,  the  evidence 
in  open  Court  is  more  favourable  than  the  deposition ;  but 
substantially  they  are  the  same.  What  I  propose  to  do  now  is 
to  call  your  attention  to  the  statements  of  Elizabeth  Mills  and 
Mr.  Jones  before  the  coroner  of  the  symptoms  they  observed 
in  Cook  on  the  Monday  and  Tuesday  nights;  and  having  done 
so,  without  accepting  any  challenge  which  may  be  made  by 
my  friend  to  account  for  the  symptoms,  I  will  submit  to  your 
judgment,  on  authority  which  cannot  deceive  you,  whether 
those  symptoms  are  not  more  probably  accounted  for  by  the 
convulsions  which  are  not  tetanic  at  all,  and  certainly  not 
tetanic  in  its  distinct  character  of  strychnia  tetanus,  but  to  be 
classed  under  those  general  convulsions  by  which  it  constantly 
pleases  Providence  to  strike  man  down  without  leaving  a  trace 
of  their  course  in  his  system. 

Gentlemen,  what  I  have  to  submit  to  you  is  this,  that  the 
symptoms  described  in  the  depositions  of  Elizabeth  Mills  and 
Mr.  Jones  were  such  as  to  make  it  quite  unjustifiable  to  resort 
to  the  hypothesis  of  tetanus  of  any  kind,  much  less  of  strychnia 
tetanus.  You  will  recollect — I  will  not  repeat  it — the 
peculiarity  of  the  constitution  of  this  young  man,  and  the 
evidence  of  occasional  functional  derangement,  not  particu- 
larly at  that  time,  which  involve  grave  consequences,  to  which 
124 


Speech    for    Defence. 


I  have  already  called  your  attention.       I  submit  to  you,   on  Serjeant 
the  authorities  on  matters  of  this  kind,  it  is  much  more  probable  Shee 
that  Cook  died  in  general  convulsions,  not  tetanic  at  all,  than 
that  he  died  from  idiopathic,  traumatic,  or  strychnia  tetanus. 

I  have  mentioned  all  that  I  intend  to  say  about  his  bodily 
infirmities — let  us  now  see  what  has  been  the  state  of  his  mind. 
He  went  to  the  Shrewsbury  races  in  imminent  peril  of  leaving 
them  a  ruined  man.  Mr.  Stevens  told  Palmer,  and  we  have 
heard  nothing  to  the  contrary,  that  if  anybody  had  claims 
upon  him,  there  would  not  be  four  thousand  shillings  to  meet 
them.  We  know,  from  the  necessity  under  which  he  was  to 
raise  sums  of  money  at  exorbitant  interest,  that  he  must  have 
been  in  circumstances  of  the  utmost  embarrassment — that  it 
was  impossible,  morally  speaking,  unless  some  wonderful  success 
on  the  turf  restored  his  fortunes,  that  he  could  stand  his 
ground  at  all;  and  it  is  in  this  state  of  mind,  and  with  health, 
at  all  events,  not  strong,  and  a  constitution  exceedingly  delicate, 
that  he  had  been  for  a  length  of  time  cherishing  the  hope  that 
"  Polestar,"  which  was  hardly  his,  for  it  was  mortgaged,  and 
which  must  become  another  person's  if  it  did  not  win  at  Shrews- 
bury— in  all  reasonable  probability  he  had  been  cherishing  the 
hope  that  "  Polestar "  would  win,  and  that  he  by 
that  winning  would  possess  himself  at  once  of  the 
stakes,  which  my  learned  friend  stated,  and  I  think 
it  was  proved,  amounted  to  nearly  £400,  besides  some  con- 
siderable winnings  to  the  amount  of  £600  or  £700  by  bets  on 
the  mare — upwards  of  £1000  altogether.  That  has  been  men- 
tioned several  times.  Fancy  the  condition  in  which  that 
young  man  rose  from  his  bed  on  the  Tuesday  morning.  He 
must  have  known  and  felt  when  he  went  down  to  breakfast, 
"  This  night  I  am  either  a  beggar,  or  a  man  with  hopes  of 
recovering  myself,  and  with  the  means,  at  least  for  the  time, 
of  keeping  up  my  appearance  of  respectability."  He  goes  to 
the  races — another  race  takes  place  before  his  mare,  "  Pole- 
star,"  is  brought  to  the  goal.  He  waits  for  it  in  a  state  of 
feverish  anxiety  and  expectation — the  hour  that  intervenes 
appears  to  him  everlasting.  At  last  the  horses  start,  and  his 
mare  wins  easily — he  is  the  winner  of  £1000.  We  may  sup- 
pose that  to  be  the  sum.  What  effect  has  it  upon  him?  Mr. 
Jones  tells  us  the  effect.  He  is  unable  to  speak  for  three 
minutes.  He  is  saved,  not  merely  in  purse  but  in  honour  and 
character — saved  before  his  relatives  and  friends.  He  will 
not  be  a  disgrace  to  them  yet,  at  all  events ;  he  may  retrieve 
his  fortunes,  and  become  an  honourable  and  respectable  man. 
Conceive  him  to  be  a  man  with  right  feelings — and  it  is  not 
because  a  man  falls  into  the  ways  of  promiscuous  licentiousness 
that  he  is  devoid  of  all  honourable  feeling — conceive  him  to  be 
an  honourable  man,  a  man  who  loved  the  memory  of  his  father 
and  his  mother,  who  valued  the  respectability  of  his  family, 

125 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  and  who  had  a  desire  to  appear  before  his  sister,  Mrs.  Bradford, 
Shee  as  an  honourable  man,  instead  of  being  known  to  her  as  a 
levanter  and  a  blackleg,  driven  from  all  honourable  society. 
The  effect  of  his  success  is  that  for  three  minutes  he  cannot 
speak,  though  he  is  with  his  intimate  friend  Mr.  Jones.  He 
goes  back  to  the  inn,  though  he  has  to  some  extent  recovered 
himself,  in  a  state  of  elation,  of  which  it  is  my  duty  to  say  that 
one  man  said  he  was  not  more  elated  than  other  people  when 
they  have  won,  but  still,  depend  upon  it,  overjoyed,  and  with  a 
revulsion  from  the  despair  in  which  he  was,  which  must  have 
convulsed,  though  not  in  a  sense  of  immediate  illness,  every 
fibre  of  his  frame.  His  first  and  his  natural  inclination  was 
to  entertain  his  friends,  and  he  gives  a  champagne  dinner. 
The  evidence  is  that  he  did  not  drink  to  excess ;  that  is  the 
evidence — but  he  had  champagne,  and  we  all  of  us  know  that 
when  there  is  champagne  there  are  other  things  besides,  and  it 
very  often  happens  it  is  not  because  champagne  is  drunk  the 
company  do  not  drink  as  much  of  other  wines.  What  in 
ordinary  parlance  is  called  a  champagne  dinner  is  a  good, 
luxurious  entertainment,  in  which  there  is  no  stint  and  not 
much  self-restraint.  I  do  not  mean  to  say  he  was  drunk. 
The  evidence  is  he  rose  from  table  not  drunk,  and  therefore 
it  is  not  for  me  to  say,  and  the  evidence  will  not  justify  me  in 
saying,  he  was.  That  evening  he  did  not  spend  in  the  com- 
pany of  Jones.  I  do  not  think  it  is  very  clear  in  whose 
company  he  spent  it  after  the  dinner  was  over;  but  we  find 
him  the  next  night,  Wednesday,  at  the  Unicorn,  with  Saunders, 
the  trainer,  Mr.  Palmer,  and  a  lady.  The  next  morning 
is  cold  and  wet.  He  went  on  the  ground,  and  was  observed 
by  Herring  standing  in  the  wet,  who  remonstrated  with  him  for 
so  doing.  He  was  taken  ill  that  night,  and  you  will  hear 
what  his  symptoms  were.  I  shall  call  your  attention  to  those 
under  the  third  head  of  what  I  have  to  address  to  you.  He 
sent  for  a  doctor,  who  recommended  an  emetic.  The  poor 
man  seemed  to  know  more  about  it  than  the  doctor.  He  said 
he  could  do  it  with  hot  water  and  a  toothbrush.  Perhaps  he 
had  often  relieved  his  stomach  in  that  way.  He  was  unwell 
that  day,  and  was  ailing  till  his  death  at  Rugeley.  That  is 
the  general  history,  as  far  as  the  mental  excitement  can  be 
referred  to — great  reason  to  apprehend  ruin  when  he  went  to 
Shrewsbury ;  immediate,  sudden,  yet  only  partial  recovery  from 
his  embarrassments  at  Shrewsbury ;  and  home  to  Rugeley  to 
meet  them  again  in  their  full  intensity,  all  the  winnings  and 
twice  the  sum,  unable  to  save  him  from  the  ruin  he  had  brought 
on  himself.  All  the  property  he  appears  to  have  had  at  the  time 
was  "  Polestar  "  and  "  Syrius,"  and  they  were  mortgaged  for 
debts  due  to  Pratt.  He  may  have  had  some  few  hundreds 
in  money.  It  is  with  a  weakened  body  and  an  irritated  and 
126 


Speech    for    Defence. 


excited  mind  that  he  is  affected  with  a  sickness  at  Shrewsbury,  Serjeant 
which  clings  to  a  system  incapable  of  being  recruited  by  the  Shee 
ordinary  necessary  food,  without  which  the  strongest  man 
gives  way,  excites  his  nerves,  and  makes  him  in  imminent 
danger  of  falling  a  victim  to  any  convulsive  attacks  to  which 
his  constitution  would  be  likely  to  be  disposed.  Depend  upon 
it,  the  thoughts  of  that  young  man,  when  he  retired  to  bed, 
were  not  the  thoughts  with  which  you  lay  your  heads  upon 
the  pillow.  He  had  much  to  think  of  which  he  regretted, 
much  to  deliberate  upon  which  was  of  a  nature  to  excite  in  his 
mind  the  most  serious  apprehensions.  There  was  neither 
credit,  nor  honour,  nor  anything  in  his  career  which  would' 
make  him  respect  himself,  or  respectable  in  the  eyes  of  others. 
His  rest  was  only  imperfect  at  the  best,  and  after  the  gratifica- 
tions of  the  animal  appetite  to  which  people  in  some  instances 
resort  to  alleviate  the  unhappy  recollections  of  the  moment,  he 
had  no  resource.  He  desired  no  society  so  much  as  the  society 
of  Palmer.  His  residence  was  at  the  Talbot  Arms,  which 
was,  in  fact,  a  residence  with  Palmer.  He  does  not  appear 
to  have  had  a  sitting-room  to  himself;  he  does  not  appear  to 
have  frequented  the  coffee-room.  He  had  a  bedroom  at  the 
Talbot  Arms,  and  his  real  home,  where  he  often  was,  and 
would  have  been  nearly  altogether  but  for  his  illness,  was 
Palmer's  house  over  the  way.  That  was  his  condition  at 
Rugeley.  He  is  taken  violently  ill  on  Sunday  night.  We 
had  nothing  but  his  own  description  of  it;  but  what  is  that 
description?  He  had  been  poorly  for  some  time.  For  two 
nights  he  had  been  taking  opium  pills  prescribed  by  Mr. 
Bamford.  Mr.  Bamford  is  an  aged  man,  but  there  is  no  doubt 
a  respectable  man,  and  a  man  who  would  be  likely,  I  think  we 
might  fairly  infer,  to  consider  what  the  complaint  was  and 
prescribe  accordingly.  In  the  middle  of  the  night,  at  twelve 
o'clock,  he  was  awakened  from  a  dream  in  a  state  of  affright. 
He  says  he  was  nearly  mad;  he  rang  the  bell,  but  nobody 
would  come. 

LORD  CAMPBELL — He  thought  they  would  not  hear  him ;  he 
thought  they  had  gone  to  bed. 

Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — Yes ;  that  is  BO  ;  I  am  much  obliged 
to  your  lordship.  He  states  he  was  mad  for  two  minutes,  and 
what  did  he  ascribe  it  to?  Nothing  but  sudden  alarm  at  the 
noise  of  a  quarrel  in  the  street.  Does  that  happen  to  us, 
gentlemen?  Does  it  happen  to  those  of  us  who  live  regular 
lives,  and  who  are  of  good  average  constitution?  Do  we 
awaken  in  a  state  that  we  can  describe  as  madness,  and  without 
any  mode  of  accounting  for  the  paroxysm  but  a  quarrel  in  the 
street?  It  must  have  been  a  very  high  state  of  nervous 
excitement.  It  must  have  been  something  violent  while  it 
lasted — transient  in  its  character — but  something  that  arose 

127 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

Serjeant  from  a  disordered  state  of  the  stomach  and  an  agitated  and 
anxious  mind,  probably  in  some  degree  weakened  by  the 
medicine  he  was  taking,  the  calomel  and  the  morphia. 

The  next  day,  the  Monday,  he  was  well  the  whole  day ;  not 
well  in  the  sense  of  being  strong  and  able  to  take  a  walk  in  the 
fields,  or  mount  his  horse  and  gallop  about  the  country,  but 
well  in  the  sense  of  being  able  to  get  up,  after  trying  to  break- 
fast in  bed,  to  talk  of  sending  for  the  barber,  and,  I  believe, 
actually  sending  for  him ;  of  seeing  his  trainer  and  his  jockeys, 
and  discussing  his  plans  for  his  next  campaign — well  to  that 
extent,  but  not  out  of  his  bedroom,  taking  no  substantial  food, 
not  vomiting  much  that  day,  though  a  little  I  think  in  the 
morning,  which  is  ascribed  by  the  theory  of  the  Crown,  or  by 
those  whose  case  the  Crown  has  been  forced  by  public  opinion 
or  by  public  excitement  to  take  up,  to  Palmer's  absence  all  that 
day.       We  do  not  hear  that  Cook  took  anything  solid.       We 
do  not  hear  that  he  lunched  at  one  o'clock,  and  then,  as  most 
probably  he  was  in  the  habit  of  doing,  took  his  beefsteak  and 
his  leg  of  mutton,  or  his  chicken,  at  five  or  six  o'clock.       He 
had   no   insuperable  dislike  to   brandy   and  water;   he  could, 
on   occasion,   take  his  glass   or  two,   though  Palmer  was  not 
there ;  but  he  does  not  appear  to  have  been  in  the  condition,  ill 
as  he  was,  to  have  any  gratification  in  food  or  drink  of  any 
kind ;  and  Palmer  was  in  London  all  the  time.       Then,  in  the 
middle  of  the  night,  at  twelve  o'clock,  he  was  seized  with  a 
paroxysm,  which  Elizabeth  Mills  describes.     We  will  take  her 
description.       That  is  the  account  of  Cook's  illness  on  Monday 
night.       It  might  have  been  a  much  less  serious  fit  than  the 
one  on  the  Sunday  night.       Nothing  took  place  which  could 
justify  any  man  in  saying  that  he  was  mad  for  a  minute — 
nothing  of  the  kind.       But  let  us  be  fair.       Afterwards,   in 
talking  of  it,  he  says,  speaking  to  Elizabeth  Mills,  "  Did  you 
ever  see  anybody  in  such  agony  as  I  was  last  night?  "       We 
have  the  description  of  Elizabeth  Mills,  and  his  own  statement 
afterwards;    "I  saw  him  again  about  seven  o'clock,   and  he 
asked  me  whether  I  ever  saw  anybody  in  such  agony  as  he  was 
the   previous    night."      Not   to    tie    the   young    woman   down 
to  a  word,  the  fair  inference  of  the  whole  of  that  statement  is 
that  for  some  time  during  the  whole  of  that  paroxysm  he  was 
in  pain,  and  in  great  pain,  but  that  he  never  lost  his  senses. 
He  could  not  very  well  be  in  such  a  state  as  that  which  he 
described  on  the  Sunday  night.       Now,  let  us  have  the  state- 
ment of  Mr.  Jones,  who  is,  we  must  take  it,  a  perfectly  com- 
petent man,  and  whose  evidence  must  be  attended  to.       Mr. 
Jones  was  requested  to  go  there  by  Palmer,   Palmer  having 
written  to  him  on  the  Sunday.       He  was  not  able  to  go  then, 
being  himself  indisposed,  and  he  could  not  get  there  till  Tuesday. 
He  went  there  on  the  Tuesday,  and  got  there  by  three  o'clock, 
and  he  was  for  some  time  with  Cook  alone. 
128 


Speech    for    Defence. 


Now,  just  observe  the  consequence  of  that,  looking  at  the  Serjeant 
circumstances  of  this  case.  Mr.  Jones  was  the  most  intimate  ee 
friend,  as  far  as  we  can  judge,  that  Cook  had.  Probably 
he  was.  He  had  a  great  regard  for  Mr.  Stevens,  who  had 
been  the  husband  of  Cook's  mother,  but  he  was  not  so  intimate 
with  Mr.  Stevens.  Mr.  Stevens  was  probably  a  gentleman 
who  did  not  approve — in  fact,  he  frankly  told  us  he  disapproved 
— of  the  course  Cook  was  pursuing.  Probably  he  was  more 
austere  to  him  during  life  than  we  should  imagine  from  the 
way  he  speaks  of  him  after  death.  His  best  friend  seems  to 
have  been  Mr.  Jones.  No  doubt  Mr.  Jones,  though  he  was  a 
respectable  man,  did  not  take  on  himself  to  rebuke  or  reprove 
Cook  for  what  he  might  think  it  not  correct  to  do.  He  lived 
in  his  house  at  Lutterworth,  and  appears  to  have  been  on  such 
good  terms  with  Cook  that  Palmer  knew  it  would  not  be  dis- 
agreeable to  Cook  if  Mr.  Jones  would  come  and  stay  and  sleep 
in  the  same  bedroom,  and  so  long  as  he  required  the  attend- 
ance of  a  friend ;  and,  as  far  as  we  can  understand,  Mr.  Jones 
has  Cook  to  himself  from  three  to  seven  o'clock.  He  has  him  to 
himself  for  some  considerable  time.  You  know  part  of  the 
suggestion  in  this  case  for  the  Crown  is  that  Cook  thought  that 
Palmer  had  played  false  with  him  at  Shrewsbury ;  part  of  the 
suggestion  in  this  case  is  that  Cook  thought  at  Shrewsbury 
Palmer  laid  a  plan  for  circumventing  him,  and  of  getting 
his  money.  Mr.  Jones  had  the  opportunity,  during  the  after- 
noon, if  Cook  had  wished  it,  of  being  the  recipient  of  the  whole 
confidence  of  Cook;  Cook  might  have  said  to  Mr.  Jones,  "I 
am  glad  you  have  come ;  I  have  been  acting  the  fool  with 
Palmer;  I  suspect  him;  I  think  he  means  to  get  my  money." 

The  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — You  must  not  say  that.  You  would 
not  let  me  ask  him  any  questions  about  it. 

Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — I  do  not  say  that  it  did  pass.  I  use 
it  in  this  way,  it  might  have  passed,  and  that  it  did  not  is 
clear,  because  Mr.  Jones  entertained  no  suspicion  of  the  kind; 
he  having  been  with  Cook  during  the  whole  of  the  evening 
shows  that  it  did  not  pass,  and  that  nothing  occurred  in  the 
entire  and  unbounded  confidence  which  may  be  supposed  to  have 
existed  between  Cook  and  Mr.  Jones  to  raise  a  suspicion  in 
the  mind  of  Mr.  Jones  ;  and  so  much  was  that  the  case  that, 
at  the  consultation  which  took  place  between  seven  and  eight 
o'clock  on  Tuesday  evening,  between  Mr.  Jones  and  Palmer 
and  Mr.  Bamford,  as  to  what  the  medicine  ought  to  be,  the  fit 
of  the  Monday  night  was  never  mentioned ;  it  was  not  alluded 
to  at  all. 

Gentlemen,  that  is  a  very  remarkable  fact;  it  is  remarkable 
in  two  ways  ;  the  Crown  might  say  it  is  remarkable  in  this 
sense,  that  Palmer  knew  it,  and  said  not  a  word  about  it. 
But  it  seems  it  was  a  matter,  in  the  opinion  of  Cook,  so  little 
serious,  that  he  never  said  a  word  of  it  to  Mr.  Jones,  because, 
K  129 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  if  Cook  had  thought  that  those  words  which  he  used  to  Eliza- 
beth Mills  were  not  an  exaggerated  description  of  what  had 
occurred,  do  you  not  think,  when  Mr.  Jones  came  to  see  him, 
and  felt  his  pulse,  and  inquired  what  his  symptoms  were,  that 
Cook  would  have  said  (he  being  in  full  possession  of  his 
senses),  "  You  cannot  judge  now  from  my  appearance  how  I 
am — I  was  in  a  state  of  madness  last  night — I  was  in  the 
greatest  possible  agony — I  do  not  know  what  it  was — I  was 
attacked  in  the  middle  of  the  night  in  such  a  way  that  I 
thought  I  was  going  to  die "  1  As  he  had  Mr.  Jones  with 
him,  would  he  not  have  mentioned  that  in  the  conversation? 
My  inference  from  that  is,  that  in  all  probability  this  first 
statement  of  Elizabeth  Mills  was  the  correct  statement  of  what 
occurred ;  and  if  we  find  it  is  consistent  with  what  Mr.  Jones 
says  as  to  what  occurred  the  next  night  in  its  general  character, 
it  would  be  very  nearly  the  same  on  both  nights.  We  may 
reasonably  infer  that  anything  in  excess  of  that,  on  which 
the  medical  evidence  was  given,  has  been  the  result  of  imagina- 
tion, and  not  so  strictly  consistent  with  the  truth  as  the 
original  statement.  Let  us  see  what  Mr.  Jones  says.  (The 
learned  Serjeant  read  a  portion  of  the  deposition  of  Mr.  Jones 
before  the  coroner.)  Observe  the  significance  of  that. 
Palmer,  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Jones,  brings  up  two  pills, 
which  it  is  supposed  were  the  pills  that  poisoned  him — pills 
containing  a  substance  which  sometimes  does  its  work  in  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  which  has  done  it  in  less,  but  never  hardly 
exceeds  half  an  hour ;  and  so  we  are  to  be  asked  to  believe 
that  Palmer,  Jones  being  present,  and  Cook  in  his  presence 
objecting  to  take  the  pills,  positively  forced  them  down  his 
throat,  at  the  imminent  peril  of  his  falling  down,  like  the 
rabbit,  in  two  or  three  minutes  afterwards  in  convulsions 
evidently  and  manifestly  tetanic.  He  states  what  did  take 
place.  (The  learned  Serjeant  read  a  further  portion  of  Mr. 
Jones'  deposition.)  But,  as  I  am  reminded  by  one  of  my 
lords,  that  in  the  course  of  the  examination  of  Mr.  Jones  the 
word  "tetanus"  is  used,  it  is  right  I  should  say  a  word  on 
that,  lest  I  should  forget  it.  The  word  "  tetanus  "  is  not  in 
the  deposition,  and  it  is  very  remarkable  that  the  sugges- 
tion which  has  been  put  forward  by  the  Crown  was  the  sug- 
gestion of  Dr.  Taylor.  I  do  not  think  it  is  impossible  that 
Mr.  Jones,  when  he  gave  that  evidence,  had  in  his  mind's 
eye  what  he  had  seen  that  night  and  not  seen  very  correctly. 
He  had  not  light  enough  to  see  the  patient's  face.  .There  was 
only  one  candle,  and  he  could  not  tell  whether  there  was  any 
change  in  his  countenance  on  the  Tuesday — a  very  important 
symptom.  They  say  it  cannot  have  been  tetanic,  because 
there  is  a  peculiar  expression  in  the  face — a  fact  which  nobody 
observed.  It  was  too  dark,  in  this  case  of  Cook's,  to  take 


Speech    for    Defence. 


notice.  Mr.  Jones  gave  his  evidence,  and  he  is  a  competent  Serjeant 
professional  man,  and  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  notion  of Shee 
tetanus,  tetanic,  tetaniform,  or  something  like  tetanus,  must 
have  entered  into  his  mind,  because  the  clerk  has  put  down 
"  tetinus  "  ;  he  probably  had  not  heard  of  the  word  before, 
and  the  probability  is  something  like  it  was  used.  He  said 
he  did  use  it,  and  afterwards  it  was  struck  out,  and  Mr.  Jones 
corrected  his  deposition,  read  it  all  over,  and  signed  it,  and 
left  it  with  the  word  struck  out.  There  are  strong  symptoms 
of  "compression,"  that  is,  one  word  struck  out;  then  after- 
wards there  is  the  word  "  tetinus,"  and  then  those  two  words 
are  struck  out,  with  Mr.  Jones'  entire  approbation,  because 
otherwise  he  would  have  corrected  it  when  he  signed  it ;  and 
he  said  he  read  it  over,  and  the  words  "  violent  convulsions  " 
were  substituted.  What  is  the  fair  inference  from  that? — 
that  the  man  who  saw  Cook  in  the  paroxysm  did  not  think 
himself  justified  in  saying  it  was  tetanus.  It  might  be  very 
like ;  it  might  have  a  tetaniform  appearance ;  but  it  was  not 
tetanus. 

Gentlemen,  I  will  call  your  attention  to  the  features  of 
general  convulsions.  I  cross-examined  several  of  the  medical 
witnesses  for  the  purpose  of  inducing  what  I  consider  to  be  a 
true  belief  as  to  this  case,  that  the  convulsions  in  which  Cook 
died  were  not  tetanus  or  tetanic  properly  speaking;  but  that 
they  were  convulsions  of  that  strong  and  violent  character 
which  are  tetaniform,  though  not  classed  under  idiopathic  or 
traumatic  tetanus,  but  under  the  head  of  general  convulsions. 

Gentlemen,  I  now  propose  to  read  a  description  of  general 
convulsions  from  the  work  of  Dr.  Copland.  I  called  the 
attention  of  the  very  learned  gentlemen  who  were  examined 
for  the  Crown  to  what  was  laid  down  in  that  work,  which  is 
admitted  to  be  one  of  authority,  and  I  cannot  conceive  how 
you,  to  whom  this  matter  of  fact  is  to  be  submitted,  can  form 
an  opinion  whether  or  not  my  theory,  or  rather  my  belief, 
that  he  died  by  the  visitation  of  God,  in  violent  general  con- 
vulsions, be  a  probable  one,  unless  you  hear  from  what  was  not 
written  for  the  purposes  of  this  case  what  the  features  of 
general  convulsions  are;  so,  if  you  please,  I  will  read  to  you 
what  I  have  myself  copied  from  the  work  of  Dr.  Copland. 
This,  I  may  say,  as  I  am  upon  the  point,  that  the  only  persons 
in  the  profession  who  can  be  supposed  to  have  any  competent 
or  reliable  information  on  the  subject  of  tetanus,  not  trau- 
matic, are  physicians ;  and  not  one  physician — properly  so 
speaking — not  one  of  that  most  honourable  body  of  men  who 
see  the  sudden  attacks  of  patients  in  their  beds,  and  not  in 
hospitals,  has  been  called  to  speak  to  this.  Dr.  Todd  was 
called,  and  Dr.  Todd  gave  his  evidence  in  a  way  to  command 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  the  respect  of  everybody ;  but  Dr.  Todd  is  a  gentleman  whose 
practice  does  not  appear  to  have  been  so  much  that  of  a 
physician  as  that  of  a  surgeon;  he  is  physician  to  the  King's 
College  Hospital,  and  has  held  that  office  about  twenty  years ; 
he  has  lectured  on  diseases  of  the  nervous  system  and  tetanus, 
but  he  does  not  appear  to  have  been  a  physician  in  general 
practice. 

Gentlemen,  I  am  instructed — I  shall  be  able  to  show — by 
eminent  men  that  what  I  am  about  to  read  from  Dr.  Copland's 
book,  as  part  of  my  speech,  is  a  true  description  of  convulsions 
that  are  not  idiopathic  or  traumatic,  but  of  a  general  kind. 
He  first  gives  the  definition  of  "  general  convulsions,"  which  he 
says  are  "  violent  and  involuntary  contractions  of  a  part  or 
of  the  whole  of  the  body,  sometimes  with  rigidity  and  tension 
(tonic  convulsions),  but  more  frequently  with  tumultuous  agita- 
tions, consisting  of  alternating  shocks  (clonic  convulsions),  that 
come  on  suddenly,  either  in  recurring  or  in  distinct  paroxysms, 
and  after  irregular  and  uncertain  intervals."  We  will  see 
what  he  says  about  it — "  If  we  take  the  character  of  the 
spasm  in  respect  of  permanency,  rigidity,  relaxation,  and 
recurrence  as  a  basis  of  arrangement  of  all  the  diseases  by 
abnormal  action  of  involuntary  muscles,  we  shall  have  every 
grade,  passing  imperceptibly  from  the  most  acute  form  of 
tetanus  through  cramp,  epilepsy,  eclompsia,  convulsions,  &c., 
down  to  the  most  atonic  states  of  chorea  and  tremor.  Also 
if  we  consider  the  affections  called  convulsions,  and  which  are 
usually  irregular  in  their  forms,  with  reference  to  the  char- 
acter of  the  abnormal  contraction  of  the  muscles,  we  shall  see 
it  in  some  cases  of  the  most  violent  and  spastic  nature,  fre- 
quently of  some  continuance,  the  relaxations  being  of  brief 
duration,  or  scarcely  observable,  and  in  others  nearly  or  alto- 
gether approaching  to  tetanic.  These  constitute  the  more  tonic 
form  of  convulsions,  from  which  there  is  every  possible  grade, 
down  to  the  atonic  or  most  clonic  observed  in  chorea  or  tremor. 
The  premonitory  signs  of  general  convulsions  are,  inter  alia, 
vertigo  and  dizziness,  irritability  of  temper,  flushings  or 
alternate  flushing  and  paleness  of  the  face,  nausea,  retching 
or  vomiting,  or  pain  and  distension  of  the  stomach  or  left 
hypochondrium,  unusual  flatulence  of  the  stomach  and  bowels, 
and  other  dyspeptic  symptoms.  In  many  instances  the 
general  sensibility  and  consciousness  are  but  very  slightly  im- 
paired, particularly  in  the  more  simple  cases,  and  when  the 
proximate  cause  is  not  seated  in  the  encephalon ;  but  in  pro- 
portion as  this  part  is  affected  primarily  or  consecutively,  and 
the  neck  and  face  tumid  and  livid,  the  cerebral  functions  are 
obscured,  and  the  convulsions  attended  by  stupor,  delirium, 
<fec.,  or  pass  into  or  are  followed  by  these  states.  The 
paroxysm  may  cease  in  a  few  moments,  or  minutes,  or  con- 

132 


Speech    for    Defence. 


tinue  for  some  or  even  many  hours.  It  generally  subsides  Serjeant 
rapidly,  the  patient  experiencing  at  its  termination  fatigue,  Shee 
headache,  or  stupor,  but  he  is  usually  restored  in  a  short  time 
to  the  same  state  as  before  the  seizure,  which  is  liable  to  recur 
in  a  person  once  affected,  but  at  uncertain  intervals.  After 
repeated  attacks  the  fit  sometimes  becomes  periodic  (the  con- 
vulsio  recurrens  of  authors).  The  most  common  causes  are, 
inter  alia,  all  emotions  of  the  mind  which  excite  the  nervous 
power  and  determine  the  blood  to  the  head,  as  joy,  anger, 
religious  enthusiasm,  excessive  desire,  &c.,  or  those  which 
greatly  depress  the  nervous  influence,  as  well  as  diminish  and 
derange  the  actions  of  the  heart,  as  fear,  terror,  anxiety, 
sadness,  distressing  intelligence,  frightful  dreams,  &c.,  the 
syphilitic  poison  and  repulsion  of  gout  or  rheumatism." 

Now,  do  you  believe  that  if  Dr.  Taylor  had  read  that  before 
he  went  to  the  inquest  he  would  have  dared  to  say  that  this 
man  died  of  strychnia  poison?  Is  there  one  single  symptom 
in  the  statement  made  in  the  depositions  of  Elizabeth  Mills  and 
Mr.  Jones  which  may  not  be  classed  under  one  of  the  varieties 
of  the  degrees  of  convulsions  which  Dr.  Copland  describes? 
Now,  it  is  not  for  me  to  suggest  a  theory,  but  the  gentlemen 
whom  I  shall  call  before  you,  men  of  the  highest  eminence  in 
their  profession,  not  mere  surgeons  of  hospitals  who  never  see 
anything  hardly  except  it  is  of  that  nature,  that  is,  of  the 
traumatic  kind — gentlemen,  do  not  suppose  that  I  should  be 
capable  of  speaking  disrespectfully  of  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie, 
or  of  any  of  the  gentlemen  called  except  in  terms  of  the  highest 
respect;  but  they  are  surgeons  of  hospitals,  and  obtain  a 
certain  experience  as  to  those  misfortunes  under  which,  through 
violence,  the  human  frame  suffers ;  who  have  not  so  much 
opportunity  of  witnessing  and  of  knowing  the  symptoms  of 
the  class  of  convulsions  which  constantly  attack  people  in  their 
own  residences  in  the  dead  of  the  night — those  convulsions 
which  heads  of  families  and  brothers  and  sisters  are  most 
anxious  to  conceal  from  anybody  but  the  medical  man — those 
convulsions,  the  known  existence  of  which  deprives  a  young 
woman  of  the  hope,  or  a  young  man  of  the  hope,  of  marriage. 
It  is  the  men  who  have  that  sort  of  experience — the  general 
practitioners — men  who  enjoy  the  entire  confidence  of  numerous 
families,  and  have  the  opportunity  of  visiting,  in  the  way  of 
their  profession,  the  poor  at  their  lowly  dwellings,  suffering 
under  sudden  convulsions  when  affected  by  serious  disease — 
those  are  the  men  that  we  want  to  tell  us  about  convulsions. 
Do  not  let  me  mislead  you  for  a  moment — the  evidence  I  have 
read  to  you  is  not  the  whole  of  the  evidence  of  Elizabeth  Mills. 
There  is  her  evidence,  differing  in  some  material  particulars 
from  the  evidence  given  by  her  before  the  coroner.  As  to 
Mr.  Jones,  the  evidence  does  not  so  much  differ,  though  there 

133 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  may  be  some  particulars  in  which  there  is  a  difference — and 
shee  there  is  one  remarkable  one.  He  said  in  his  depositions,  "  The 
body  was  resting  on  its  head  and  its  heels " ;  but  in  his 
evidence  he  says,  "  It  was  so  bent  that  if  it  had  been  turned 
on  its  back,  it  would,  or  might,  have  rested  on  its  head  and 
its  heels" — that  is,  if  it  did  not  rest  on  the  back;  but  he 
in  substance  says  it  did.  Mr.  Bamford  says  he  found  it 
resting  on  its  head,  its  back,  and  its  heels,  thereby  excluding 
the  supposition  that  a  part  of  the  body  was  not  supported  by 
the  back.  However,  before  I  go  to  that,  perhaps  you  will 
permit  me  to  call  your  attention  to  the  symptoms  of  traumatic 
disease.  My  belief  is,  and  I  submit  it  to  you,  and  it  is  what 
I  shall  hope  you  will  confirm  by  your  verdict,  that  this  com- 
plaint was  not  strychnia  tetanus  at  all,  but  it  was,  according  to 
this  description — the  description  to  which  I  will  call  your  atten- 
tion— it  may  well  have  been  some  form  of  traumatic  tetanus  or 
idiopathic  tetanus — there  being  no  broad  general  distinction  or 
certain  confine  between  idiopathic  or  self-generating  tetanus, 
or  tetanus  not  arising  from  any  extreme  hurt  or  any  violence 
to  the  interior  part  of  the  system ;  and  many  forms  of  convul- 
sions, that  is  tetaniform,  are  pretty  much  the  same  as  idio- 
pathic tetanus,  and  we  have  had  numbers  of  medical  gentle- 
men who  have  told  us  they  never  saw  a  case  of  idiopathic 
tetanus.  The  answer  to  that  is,  you  have  had  very  limited 
experience.  They  are  not  very  frequent ;  but  there  are  gentle- 
men here  who  have  seen  cases  of  idiopathic  tetanus,  and  they 
are  not  of  such  unfrequent  occurrence  by  any  means.  There 
is  one  gentleman  who  is  here,  and  whom  I  will  call  before  you 
— a  gentleman  who  attended  at  the  bedside  of  the  lady  at 
Leeds  who  was  suffering  under  strychnia,  who  has  himself  seen 
four  cases  of  idiopathic  tetanus  ;  and  there  are  other  gentle- 
men here  who  have  seen  them  also — they  are  not  so  rare,  but 
they  very  rarely  fall  under  the  notice  of  surgeons  of  hospitals  ; 
they  are  not  so  frequent  as  traumatic  tetanus.  Cases  of  trau- 
matic tetanus  do  frequently  supervene  from  the  operations  of 
the  surgeons  themselves ;  sometimes  after  operations,  however 
skilfully  performed,  a  lockjaw  is  the  consequence.  The  persons 
to  give  you  information  on  the  subject  are  the  general 
practitioners. 

Now,  we  shall  see  that  none  of  those  symptoms  which  were 
spoken  to  on  the  day  of  the  inquest  by  Elizabeth  Mills  and  Mr. 
Jones  may  not  range  under  one  of  these  forms  of  tetanus,  the 
idiopathic  or  traumatic.  The  idiopathic  mingling  in  all  direc- 
tions with  general  violent  convulsions  is  not  to  be  distinguished 
from  them,  inasmuch  as  convulsions  have  constant  tetaniform 
appearances  ;  and  the  meaning  I  take  it  of  that  is  this,  it  is 
true,  as  Dr.  Watson  says  in  a  passage  which  I  called  to  the 
attention  of  one  of  their  witnesses — it  is  true  that  in  four 

134 


Speech   for    Defence. 


cases  out  of  five  traumatic  tetanus  begins  with  a  seizure  of  Serjeant 
the  lower  jaw,  unless,  as  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  tells  us,  it  may  Shee 
begin,  as  it  did  in  two  cases  which  he  attended  many  years 
ago,  in  the  limbs.  He  told  us  so  when  he  was  here;  it 
began  there  before  it  attacked  the  jaw;  but  generally  trismus 
or  lockjaw  is  the  first  symptom.  But  there  is  a  fifth  case  in 
which  it  is  not,  and  Mr.  Curling  told  us  that  that  was  about 
the  proportion — four  out  of  five;  so  that  even  traumatic,  or 
that  kind  of  tetanus  which  sets  in  after  a  wound,  does  not 
always  begin  with  some  affection  of  the  jaw  or  neck.  Now, 
gentlemen,  having  gone  so  far,  and  having  endeavoured  to 
satisfy  you  that  the  symptoms  which  were  spoken  to  by  those 
two  witnesses  on  the  depositions  may  be  the  symptoms,  as  I 
think — that  is  to  say,  as  I  am  told,  having  no  experience  of 
my  own  in  the  matter — that  these  symptoms  are  rather  refer- 
able to  that  violent  description  of  general  convulsions  than 
to  any  form  of  tetanus,  let  us  go  to  the  question,  whether 
or  not  the  symptoms  are  consistent  with  what  we  know  of 
tetanus  produced  by  strychnia,  because  if  we  are  satisfied  on 
a  full  inquiry  that  they  are  not  consistent  with  the  symptoms 
unquestionably  produced  by  strychnia  tetanus,  then  the 
hypothesis  of  the  Crown  entirely  fails,  and  John  Parsons  Cook 
cannot  have  died  of  strychnia  poison. 

Now,  gentlemen,  whether  that  be  so  or  not  will  depend  in 
a  great  degree,  as  it  strikes  me — but,  of  course,  it  is  entirely 
for  you — on  what  you  think  of  the  evidence  of  Elizabeth  Mills ; 
but  before  I  go  to  the  evidence  of  Elizabeth  Mills  I  will  call 
your  attention  to  what  the  description  of  strychnia  tetanus  is, 
as  given  us  by  two  very  eminent  gentlemen  who  were  called 
the  other  day  for  the  Crown — Dr.  Taylor  and  Dr.  Christison ; 
and  if  we  find  on  looking  at  it  that  that  description  of  the 
poison  of  strychnia  tetanus,  given  by  them,  is  a  different 
thing  from  the  picture  first  given  of  the  complaint,  of  the 
paroxysms  of  John  Parsons  Cook  by  Elizabeth  Mills  and  Mr. 
Jones,  I  think  it  would  be  rather  too  bad  on  their  mere  opinion 
to  say  that  this  is  strychnia  tetanus.  Let  us  take  Dr.  Taylor's 
description  of  strychnia  tetanus — I  am  not  sure  whether  Dr. 
Taylor  stated  he  had  ever  seen  strychnia  tetanus  in  the  human 
subject ;  however,  we  must  be  just  to  Dr.  Taylor.  Dr. 
Taylor  has  had  an  extensive  reading  upon  the  subjects  upon 
which  he  writes,  and  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  Dr.  Taylor 
would  hastily  set  down  in  his  book  what  he  did  not  find 
established  on  high  authority ;  therefore,  though  having  it  at 
second  hand,  Dr.  Taylor  knows  something  upon  the  subject. 

Now,  Dr.  Taylor,  in  his  work  on  strychnia  poison,  has  this 
under  the  head  of  strychnia,  "  that  from  five  to  twenty  minutes 
after  the  poison  has  been  swallowed  the  patient  is  suddenly 
seized  with  tetanic  symptoms,  affecting  the  whole  of  the 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  muscular  system ;  the  body  becomes  rigid,  the  limbs  stretched 
shee  out,  and  the  jaws  so  fixed  that  considerable  difficulty  is  ex- 
perienced in  introducing  anything  into  the  mouth."  On  both 
the  depositions  and  the  other  evidence  it  is  stated  that  Mr. 
Cook  was  sitting  up  in  bed,  beating  the  bed-clothes,  frequently 
telling  the  people  about  him  to  go  for  Palmer,  asking  for  the 
remedy,  and  willing  to  take  whatever  was  given  him ;  there 
was  no  considerable  difficulty  in  introducing  anything  into  the 
mouth,  and  the  paroxysms,  instead  of  beginning  within  from 
five  to  twenty  minutes  after  the  poison  was  supposed  to  have 
been  swallowed,  did  not  begin  for  an  hour  and  a  half  after- 
wards. Dr.  Taylor  further  on  states,  "After  several  such 
attacks,  increasing  in  severity,  the  patient  dies  asphyxiated." 
That  there  were  some  of  these  symptoms  in  this  case  there 
can  be  no  doubt,  and  there  will  be  some  of  them  in  every  case 
of  violent  convulsions,  yet  it  is  not  the  description  of  such  a 
case  as  that  of  John  Parsons  Cook.  Now,  let  us  see  what 
Dr.  Christison  says — "  The  symptoms  produced  by  strychnia 
are  very  uncommon  and  striking — the  animal  begins  to  tremble, 
and  is  seized  with  stiffness  and  starting  of  the  limbs.  Those 
symptoms  increase  till  at  length  the  animal  is  attacked  by 
general  spasms."  Is  that  the  description  of  either  of  these 
paroxysms?  Who  can  say  with  any  degree  of  truth  that  it 
is?  Just  observe  these  last  indications  of  strychnia  tetanus, 
•which  are  consistent  with  all  the  cases  stated  in  their  books. 
It  is  only  justice  to  those  gentlemen  who  have  taken  pains  to 
look  to  the  authorities  to  which  they  refer  to  say  that  the 
statements  which  they  give  of  their  cases  are  in  the  main 
correct,  but  not  in  all  their  details.  The  books  would  be  five 
times  their  size  if  they  were ;  but  they  are  in  the  main  correct, 
when  we  look  to  the  foreign  authorities  on  which  they  are 
founded — "  The  fit  is  then  succeeded  by  an  interval  of  calm, 
during  which  the  senses  are  impaired  or  are  unnaturally  acute  ; 
but  another  paroxysm  soon  sets  in,  and  then  another  and 
another,  until  at  last  a  fit  occurs  more  violent  than  any  that 
had  preceded  it,  and  the  animal  perishes  suffocated."  I  know 
exactly  what  Dr.  Christison  means  by  this,  because  there  is  a 
gentleman  here  who  will  state  an  experiment  which  I  saw 
myself ;  it  was  an  experiment,  and  for  the  purpose  of  this 
case,  and  to  assist  me;  and  I  disagree  with  Dr.  Taylor  that 
there  can  be  a  moment's  hesitation  in  sacrificing  ten  or  twenty 
dogs  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  truth  of  this  theory 
when  a  man's  life  is  involved.  These  experiments  were  per- 
formed by  Dr.  Letheby  while  I  was  there.  I  will  state  them 
to  you,  because  he  will  prove  it  by  and  by.  A  dog  had  some 
strychnia  put  in  his  mouth,  one  grain,  and  then  for  about — I 
cannot  be  sure  as  to  the  time  exactly,  but  about  twenty  or 
twenty-five  minutes — I  cannot  be  sure,  it  might  not  be  so  much 

136 


Speech    for    Defence. 


— the  dog  was  perfectly  well.  There  were  two  rabbits  on  the  Serjeant 
table  which  were  also  about  to  be  subjected  to  the  operation,  Shee 
and  the  dog,  when  the  chain  was  sufficiently  relaxed  to  enable 
him  to  do  so,  showed  all  the  indications  which  a  dog  naturally 
does  to  get  at  the  rabbits;  he  was  pulling  at  his  chain,  and 
was  smelling  and  pawing  and  taking  an  interest  in  the  rabbits  j 
suddenly  it  fell  down  on  its  side,  and  its  legs  were  stretched 
out  in  a  most  violent  way.  It  panted,  and  then  it  remained 
for  some  time — two  or  three  minutes — quiet,  occasionally  a 
little  jerking,  but  generally  quiet.  It  recovered  again  for  a 
time,  got  up  and  looked  at  the  rabbits,  but  was  dizzy,  seemed 
afraid  to  move ;  and,  if  you  touched  it,  shuddered  and  twitched, 
to  use  Miss  Elizabeth  Mills'  description ;  seemed  to  be  afraid, 
and  after  another  moment  down  it  went  again.  It  got  up 
again,  and  down  it  went  again,  and  at  last  it  had  a  tremendous 
struggle,  and  it  died.  That  is  what  Dr.  Christison  means  by 
this  description ;  it  would  be  true  if  the  dose  had  been  a 
strong  one.  If  the  dose  had  not  been  sufficient  to  kill  the 
dog  it  would  probably  be  a  longer  time — at  least,  I  suppose 
so — in  producing  its  effect,  and  the  interval  between  the 
paroxysms,  as  stated  by  Dr.  Taylor  and  Dr.  Christison,  would 
get  longer  and  longer,  until  at  last  the  animal  would  recover. 
If  the  dose  is  strong  enough  to  kill,  the  interval  between  the 
paroxysms  is  shorter,  till  at  last  the  violent  one  comes  which 
destroys  life ;  the  eyes  are  fixed,  and  there  it  lies,  and  just 
before  its  death — and  I  thought  it  was  dead,  but  I  was  told 
immediately  before  its  death — just  before  it  dies,  the  limbs 
become  as  supple  and  as  free  as  it  is  possible  to  conceive  the 
limbs  of  an  animal  to  be ;  whichever  way  you  placed  them 
after  the  animal  is  quite  dead,  if  you  place  them  in  any  form, 
the  rigor-mortis  comes  on,  and  they  remain  in  the  position 
in  which  you  place  them.  Dr.  Christison  says  they  assume 
rigidity.  I  saw  this  operation  performed,  and  also  on  the 
two  rabbits,  and  their  symptoms  were  substantially  the  same, 
and  their  limbs  in  both  cases  were  quite  as  flaccid  immediately 
on  death.  The  animals  during  the  time  of  the  intervals 
between  the  paroxysms  were  exceedingly  touchy,  and  seemed 
afraid  of  being  touched  at  all ;  if  you  were  to  touch  them 
they  would  shrink  away.  It  was  more  so  in  the  dog ;  it 
was,  in  fact,  a  sort  of  shudder — that  is  what  Dr.  Christison 
means. 

Now,  gentlemen,  without  going  through  the  whole  of  these 
details,  I  will  state  to  you  my  reasons  for  saying,  on  the 
authorities  and  from  my  study  of  the  books  of  those  two 
gentlemen,  that,  according  to  their  principles,  this  cannot  have 
been  strychnia  poison.  Now,  I  object  to  the  theory  of  its 
being  strychnia  poison,  first,  on  this  ground,  that  no  case  can 
be  found  in  the  books  in  which  the  patient  while  the  paroxysm 

137 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  lasted  has  had  so  much  command  over  the  muscles  of  animal 
life  and  voluntary  motion  as  Mr.  Cook  had  on  the  Monday  and 
Tuesday  nights.  You  heard  that  Mr.  Cook  was  sitting  up 
in  his  bed,  that  Mr.  Cook  was  beating  the  bed-clothes,  that  Mr. 
Cook  was  talking  and  crying  out  for  Palmer,  and  to  have  the 
remedy  given  to  him;  that  Mr.  Cook,  so  far  from  being  afraid 
of  people  touching  him,  asked  to  have  his  neck  rubbed,  and 
it  was  rubbed.  There  is  not  a  single  instance  in  the  books 
of  Dr.  Taylor,  or  in  the  books  of  Dr.  Christison,  or  any  other 
books  of  any  medical  man  describing  the  symptoms  of  the 
strychnia  poison,  in  which  the  well-known  symptoms  the 
malasaux  took  place — not  one,  and  it  is  inconsistent  with  their 
description,  and  what  I  tell  you  will  be  the  proof  Dr.  Letheby 
will  give  of  the  experiment  that  I  saw,  and  of  many  others  he 
had  performed. 

I  will  go  to  the  nest  point  on  the  ground  of  which  I  say  this 
is  not  strychnia  poison.  I  say  there  is  no  authentic  case 
of  tetanus  by  strychnia  in  which  the  paroxysms  were  delayed 
so  long  after  ingestion  of  the  poison  as  in  this  case.  I  will 
refer,  however,  to  their  own  statements,  knowing  that  they 
are  here.  (Extract  from  Dr.  Taylor's  book  read.)  There 
was  one  case  to  which  his  attention  was  called ;  it  was  not  a 
fatal  one,  but  it  got  better,  and  still  he  says  the  symptoms 
were  those  which  he  described,  and  thought  it  was  too  late  to 
get  the  poison  out  of  the  stomach,  as  in  half  an  hour  it  had 
got  into  the  circulation — what  can  be  more  clear?  it  is  a  broad, 
distinguishing  feature  in  the  strychnia.  The  interval  which 
took  place  between  the  ingestion  of  the  poison  in  Mr.  Cook's 
case  and  the  time  when  the  paroxysm  commenced  was  much 
too  long,  three  times  too  long,  to  indicate  the  effect  of  poison 
by  strychnia.  It  cannot  be  pretended  it  was  a  similar  case, 
if  the  symptoms  are  properly  described,  as  I  will  presently 
call  your  attention  to  them,  by  Elizabeth  Mills  in  her  state- 
ment in  this  Court.  Now,  gentlemen,  thirdly,  I  submit,  and 
T  will  prove,  that  there  is  no  case  in  which  recovery  from  a 
paroxysm  of  strychnia  poison  has  been  so  rapid  as  in  Cook's 
case  on  Monday  night,  or  in  which  a  patient  has  enjoyed  so 
long  an  interval  of  repose  or  exemption  from  its  symptoms 
after  they  had  once  set  in.  It  is  a  very  remarkable  feature, 
if  it  be  true — if  I  am  right  in  saying  that  there  is  no  case 
in  which  recovery  has  been  so  rapid  as  in  Mr.  Cook's  case  on 
Monday  night,  followed  by  so  long  an  interval  of  relief  from 
the  paroxysm.  In  fact,  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Cook's,  on  the  theory 
of  the  Crown,  it  would  not  have  come  on  again  if  a  second 
dose  had  not  been  given.  There  was  an  end  of  it  when 
Elizabeth  Mills  left  Palmer  sleeping  by  the  side  of  his  friend 
in  the  arm-chair.  How  easy  it  would  have  been  for  him  then, 
if  he  had  been  disposed,  when  Elizabeth  Mills  had  gone  to  bed 

138 


Speech    for    Defence. 

and  had  retired  to  her  room,  to  have  called  out  to  her  that  Serjeant 
Mr.  Cook  was  in  another  fit,  and  to  have  killed  him,  almost  Shee 
without  suspicion  on  the  part  of  anybody.  Dr.  Christison  tells 
us  in  general  terms  that  these  convulsions  are  succeeded  by 
intervals  of  calm,  during  which  the  senses  are  unnaturally  and 
unusually  acute;  another  fit  then  begins,  it  subsides,  and  is 
succeeded  by  another  and  another,  till  at  length  a  fit  takes 
place  more  violent  than  any  before  it,  and  the  animal  dies 
suffocated.  Here,  I  submit  to  you,  is  a  distinction  between 
the  case  of  Mr.  Cook  and  that  which  these  gentlemen  state  to 
be  the  distinguishing  feature,  in  that  there  is  no  recurrence. 

Now,  I  will  come  to  another  feature  of  the  disease,  the 
post-mortem  symptoms  of  the  disease.  I  saw  three  animals 
killed,  of  which  I  have  spoken  to  you,  and  Dr.  Letheby  was 
good  enough  to  have  dug  up  from  his  garden  a  rabbit  which 
had  been  killed  by  strychnia,  and  to  open  it  before  me,  to 
examine  the  heart,  and  the  heart  was  full;  the  heart  of  the 
dog  was  quite  full,  and  the  hearts  of  the  two  rabbits  which 
I  saw  killed  were  quite  full — as  full  as  they  could  possibly  be. 
I  am  told  that  the  result  of  an  enormous  proportion  of  such 
examinations  has  been,  and,  if  properly  conducted,  of  all  of 
them,  that  the  heart  is  full  on  the  right  side  invariably.  We 
will  prove  to  you  that  the  heart  of  the  animal  which  was  killed 
by  strychnia  poison  is  invariably  full,  and  it  stands  to  reason 
it  would  be  so. 

Now,  I  have  discussed  what  may  be  said  for  this  purpose  to 
be  the  theory  of  the  matter,  but  I  have  not  yet  met  the  strong 
point  which  will  be  made  for  the  Crown  on  the  evidence  of 
Elizabeth  Mills.  I  am,  on  all  occasions,  most  reluctant  to 
attack  a  witness  examined  on  his  or  her  oath,  and  particularly 
if  she  be  in  a  humble  position.  I  am  very  reluctant  to  impute 
perjury  to  such  a  person.  Let  me  point  out  to  you  what 
occurs  to  me  to  be  the  right  opinion  to  be  formed  of  the  evidence 
of  Elizabeth  Mills.  I  submit  to  you  in  this  case  of  life  and 
death,  or  in  any  one  case  involving  any  question  of  real  im- 
portance to  liberty  or  to  property,  that  that  young  woman's 
evidence  cannot  and  would  not  be  regarded  in  the  ordinary 
administration  of  justice  when  on  material  points  she  has 
stated  two  different  stories.  A  jury  can  really  hardly  believe 
such  a  witness,  and  in  criminal  cases  the  learned  judges  are, 
without  altogether  rejecting  the  evidence  and  withholding  it 
from  the  jury,  in  the  habit  of  pointing  out  to  the  jury  the 
discrepancies  between  the  statements  given  at  different  times, 
and  saying  that  under  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case  it 
would  not  be  safe  to  rely  on  the  testimony  in  the  last  instance, 
if  it  differ  from,  and  probably  is  more  strongly  adverse  to, 
the  party  accused  than  the  statements  made  when  the  impression 

139 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  was  fresh  in  the  witness's  mind.  Now,  observe  that  since  the 
first  time  that  she  gave  her  evidence  she  has  had  the  means 
of  knowing  what  the  case  of  the  Crown  is.  She  has  had  the 
means  of  knowing — I  do  not  mean  to  say  she  has  been  tutored 
by  the  Crown — it  would  be  a  gross  injustice  to  say  so ;  and  I 
know  if  my  learned  friend  thought  that  had  been  done  he 
would  not  have  called  her — or  by  any  of  the  gentlemen  who 
act  for  the  Crown ;  but  since  she  was  examined  at  Kugeley  she 
has  had  the  means  of  knowing,  by  interviews  she  has  had  with 
different  people,  that  the  case  of  the  Crown  is,  that  Palmer, 
having  first  prepared  the  body  of  Cook  for  deadly  poison  by 
the  poison  of  antimony,  afterwards  despatched  him  with  the 
deadly  poison  of  strychnia.  She  has  learned  that  their  case 
is,  that  there  was  an  administration  of  something  which  did  not 
eventually  kill  him,  that  is,  antimony,  but  which  had  the 
effect  of  producing  retching,  and  nausea,  and  irritation  of  the 
stomach,  which  is  attributed,  according  to  the  hypothesis  of 
the  Crown,  to  the  deliberate,  persevering  intention  of  the 
prisoner  at  the  bar  to  reduce  him  bit  by  bit — making  him 
reject  everything  off  his  stomach,  so  that  when  once  the 
ingestion  of  the  poison  occurred  he  was  certainly  dead ;  that 
is  the  case.  In  her  first  evidence  before  the  coroner  she  was 
asked  whether  she  had  tasted  the  broth,  and  she  said  that  she 
had  tasted  the  broth,  and  thought  it  very  good;  she  did  not 
say  a  single  word  about  any  ill  effects  that  broth  had  pro- 
duced upon  her — not  a  single  word.  She  has  since  learned 
it  is  part  of  the  case  for  the  Crown,  or  of  those  out  of  whose 
hands  the  Crown  has  taken  this  prosecution — in  fact,  the 
theory  of  Dr.  Taylor — that  all  this  retching  and  vomiting  was 
the  result  of  a  constant  dosing  with  antimonial  poison,  in 
order  to  prepare  him  for  an  utter  inability  to  resist  the  fatal 
dose  of  strychnia  which  it  was  intended  to  give  him.  Accord- 
ingly, when  she  is  examined  here,  fitting  her  evidence  to  the 
case,  and  probably  after  having  been  asked  many  times  whether 
she  had  not  been  sick  on  some  Sunday  or  another,  she  has 
persuaded  herself,  if  she  has  not  been  persuaded — I  do  not  wish 
to  use  the  word  suborned — that  her  sickness  on  some  Sunday 
afternoon  took  place  on  the  Sunday  afternoon  that  broth  was 
sent,  and  was  caused  by  her  having  taken  two  spoonfuls  of  it. 
She  did  not  say  so  in  the  first  instance  before  the  coroner, 
but  that  "  she  tasted  it,  and  it  was  very  good."  I  ask  you 
to  consider  for  a  moment  whether  it  is  not  to  the  last  degree 
improbable  that  a  man  like  Palmer — a  shrewd,  intelligent, 
clever  man — would  expose  himself  to  such  a  chance  of  detec- 
tion as  the  sending  of  poisoned  broth  made  at  the  Albion  to 
the  Talbot  Arms,  at  the  imminent  risk  of  its  finding  its  way 
to  the  kitchen,  where,  sure  as  fate,  the  cook  would  taste  it. 
Can  you  conceive  a  cook  not  tasting  broth  made  by  another 

140 


Speech    for    Defence. 


cook,  and  sent  over  as  particularly  good  ?  I  submit  to  you  Serjeant 
it  was  such  a  risk  as  no  man  in  his  senses  could  by  any  possi-  Shee 
bility  run.  A  cook  is,  in  the  nature  of  the  thing,  a  taster ; 
she  tastes  everything;  she  does  not  know,  of  course,  if  it  be 
her  own  making,  whether  it  is  good  until  she  tastes  it ;  she 
gets  the  habit  of  tasting — and  as  sure  as  Palmer  sent  the 
broth  to  the  Talbot  Arms,  and  any  part  of  it  reached  the 
kitchen,  so  sure,  if  it  contained  antimony,  would  the  cook  be 
ill.  Is  it  credible  ?  I  submit  to  you,  it  is  not  credible ;  and 
when  you  find  she  did  not  say  a  word  about  it  in  the  first 
instance,  and  that  an  ample  opportunity  was  afforded  for  her 
so  to  do  in  the  way  I  have  described,  I  submit  you  cannot  rely 
upon  her  evidence  here,  as  it  differs  with  her  evidence  before 
the  coroner.  Again,  she  said  that  on  the  Saturday  Cook  had 
coffee  for  breakfast  about  eight  o'clock.  "  He  ate  nothing 
but  he  vomited  directly  he  had  swallowed  it.  Up  to  the 
time  I  had  given  him  the  coffee  I  had  not  seen  Palmer." 
When  she  gave  that  evidence  she  was  not  aware  it  was  part 
of  the  theory  of  the  Crown  that  the  traces  of  antimony  (which 
Dr.  Taylor  says  might  have  killed  him)  were  to  be  made  to 
fit  into  the  theory  of  the  strychnia  poison — that  it  was  a 
gradual  preparation,  by  vomiting,  for  strychnia.  That  chart 
of  the  country  over  which  she  was  to  travel  had  not  Leen 
laid  before  her.  She  did  not  then  know  what  at  the  time 
she  came  here  she  did  know — that  it  was  part  of  the  case  for 
the  Crown. 

The  Attorney-General  opened  the  case  in  that  way  distinctly, 
that  that  was  the  theory  for  the  Crown;  "that  Palmer  had 
ordered  some  coffee  for  Cook  on  the  Saturday  morning ;  it 
was  brought  up  by  the  chambermaid,  Elizabeth  Mills,  and 
given  to  Cook  by  Palmer,  who  had  an  opportunity  of  tamper- 
ing with  it  before  giving  it  to  Cook."  That  was  the  state- 
ment which  the  Attorney-General  was  instructed  to  make. 
There  is  all  the  difference  between  her  first  statement,  that  up 
to  the  time  she  had  given  the  coffee  to  Palmer  for  Cook,  and 
that  Palmer  had  an  opportunity  of  tampering  with  it.  The 
young  woman  would  not  go  so  far  as  that,  but  she  went  to 
this  extent — "  Palmer  came  over  at  eight  o'clock — ordered  a 
cup  of  coffee  for  Cook — I  gave  it  to  Cook — I  believe  Palmer 
was  in  the  bedroom — I  put  it  into  Mr.  Cook's  hands,  but  I  did 
not  see  him  drink  it — I  observed  afterwards  the  coffee  had 
been  vomited."  The  statement  thus  made  by  her  before  you 
was  not  so  strong  as  that  of  the  Attorney-General,  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  was  a  great  deal  stronger  than  the  statement 
she  made  before  the  coroner,  because,  according  to  her  story 
then,  Palmer  had  not  an  opportunity  of  dealing  with  it — she 
"  did  not  see  Palmer  up  to  the  time  she  had  given  him  the 
coffee."  From  the  statement  which  she  made  here  you 

141 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  might   suppose  that  Palmer,    if   he  had   chosen,    might   have 
got  the  coffee  from  Cook — but  that  is  in  the  last  degree  im- 
probable— and  have  done  what  he  wanted  to  do  with  it ;   for 
she  says,   "  Palmer  came  over  at  eight  o'clock  and  ordered  a 
cup  of  coffee,  and  that  when  it  was  made  she  took  the  coffee 
up   into  the   bedroom   and  gave  it  into   Cook's  hands  "    (she 
believed  Palmer  was  there),  "  but  she  did  not  see  him  drink  it, 
and  afterwards   she  observed  the   cofiee  had   been   vomited." 
These   two   statements,    the   one   before    the   coroner   and    the 
other  before  you,   are  essentially  different,   and  the  difference 
between  them  consists  in  this,  that  the  last  one  supports  the 
theory  now  set  up  on  the  part  of  the  Crown,  while  the  first 
one  is  totally  inconsistent  with  it.       Can  you  rely  on  a  woman 
who  has  altered  her  testimony  to  such  an  extent?       But  that 
is  not  all ;  the  case  for  the  Crown  is  that  Cook  was  reluctant 
to  take  the  pills  which  were  given  to  him,  and  that  he  expressed 
a  reluctance  which  Palmer  of  his  own  head  overruled,  and  that 
Palmer  knew  that  Cook  was  angry  with  him,  or,  at  all  events, 
displeased  with  him,  for  forcing  him  to  take  the  pills.       In 
the  first  statement  of  Elizabeth  Mills  before  the  coroner  she 
said  Cook  said  it  was  "  the  pills  that  made  him  ill,  and  that 
he  had  taken  the  pills  about  half-past  ten."       When  she  came 
here  she  swore  that  Cook  said  "  the  pills  which  Palmer  gave 
him  at  half -past  ten  made  him  ill  "  ;  thereby,  you  see,  fixing 
the  fact  that  Palmer  gave  him  the  pills,  and  fixing  the  time  at 
which  Palmer  gave  them  to  him,   she  having  had  an  oppor- 
tunity of  learning  that  the  later  the  pills  were  given  the  more 
favourable  it  would  be  to  the  suspicion  that  death  had  been 
occasioned  by  this  poison.       Before  the  coroner  she  did  not  say 
that   Palmer   was   in   Cook's   bedroom   between   nine   and    ten 
o'clock  on  the  Monday  night,  but  she  did  when  she  was  here. 
You  will  see  that  makes  him  more  about  the  bedside  of  Cook, 
having  more  opportunity  of  dealing  with  the  pills.       By  these 
variances  from  her  first  statement  she  shows  the  animus  which 
now,  for  some  reason  or  other,  actuates  her.       Perhaps  it  has 
been   the    result    of   the    persuasion     that    Palmer    was    the 
murderer  of  Mr.  Cook,  as  Dr.  Alfred  Swayne  Taylor  swore  he 
is,  and  of  her  horror  of  so  great  a  crime ;   that  gives  it  the 
just,   charitable  construction;   still,   I   say,    she  is  not  to   be 
relied  upon.       I  have  mentioned  the  particulars  in  which  her 
statements  vary,  but  these  are  nothing  to  the  important  par- 
ticulars to  which  I  will  now  call  your  attention.       I  impeach 
her  testimony  on  the  ground  that  she  adopted  here  a  manner 
and  a  gesticulation  in  describing  the  symptoms  under  which 
Cook  laboured  which,   if  true,   would  have  exhibited  itself  at 
the  inquest,   and  would  have  at  once  attracted  the  attention 
of  Dr.  Taylor.     The  contortions  into  which  she  put  her  hands, 
and  her  neck,  and  her  mouth,  before  you,  could  not  by  any 
142 


Speech    for    Defence. 


possibility  have  escaped  the  attention  of  Dr.  Taylor.  If  any-  Serjeant 
thing  like  it  took  place  there  it  would  have  been  observed  by  Shee 
him,  and  questions  would  have  been  put  to  reduce,  so  to 
speak,  those  gesticulations  into  verbal  expressions,  that  they 
might  be  recorded  in  the  depositions.  But  that  is  not  all. 
I  am  told,  and  you  will  have  an  opportunity  of  hearing  it 
from  Mr.  Nunneley,  Dr.  Letheby,  Dr.  Robinson,  and  other 
eminent  medical  men,  that  the  description  of  the  symptoms 
which  she  gave  to  you  is  inconsistent  with  any  known  disease — 
that  they  were  grouped  by  her  in  a  manner  so  extraordinary 
as  to  be  quite  inconsistent  with  strychnia  tetanus. 

Let  me  call  your  attention  to  this  part  of  the  evidence. 
You  are  aware  that  in  the  months  of  February  (the  last  week  of 
February)  and  March  a  very  frightful  case  of  strychnia  poison- 
ing occurred  at  Leeds.  It  was  a  case  in  which  a  person,  having 
constant  access  to  the  bedside  of  the  patient,  was  supposed 
to  have  administered  repeated  small  doses  of  strychnia  so  as 
not  at  once  to  strike  her  down,  but  gradually  to  destroy  her ; 
and  that  after  having  kept  her  in  a  state  of  irritation  for  a 
lengthened  period,  he  at  last  consummated  the  work  and  killed 
her.  That  was  the  case.  It  appeared  in  all  the  newspapers. 
The  nurse  who  attended  the  patient  and  the  medical  gentle- 
men spoke  of  symptoms  which  she  exhibited  from  the  24th 
or  25th  February  to  the  1st  of  March,  and  they  described  it 
in  this  way — She  had  "  prickings  "  and  "  twitchings  "  in  the 
legs,  coming  on  without  any  violent  paroxysms  or  spasms,  and 
was  alarmed  at  the  thought  even  of  being  touched  by  anybody 
in  the  intervals  of  the  spasms  which  occurred  from  time  to 
time.  Now,  let  me  call  your  attention  to  the  evidence  before 
you  of  Elizabeth  Mills.  She  says,  "  He  said,  '  I  cannot  lie 
down ' ;  his  body  and  neck  were  moving  and  jerking ;  he 
would  throw  himself  up,  jumping  and  jerking  all  over  his  body 
all  the  time ;  he  asked  me  to  rub  his  hands ;  I  noticed  him 
to  '  twitch  '  while  I  was  rubbing  his  hands."  (The  learned 
Serjeant  read  a  portion  of  the  evidence.)  Now,  I  submit  to 
you  that  some  of  these  expressions,  particularly  the  twitching, 
are  very  remarkable;  and  it  may  well  have  been  that,  this 
case  coming  before  the  public  and  exciting  no  little  degree  of 
attention,  although  not  to  the  same  extent  as  this  Rugeley 
case,  persons  who  had  been  in  the  habit  of  going  to  see  her 
and  conversing  with  her  may  have  been  asking  her  questions 
about  this  case,  of  which  she  admitted  she  had  heard,  "  Did 
you  observe  in  Cook  any  such  symptoms  as  these?"  her 
attention  being  called  to  them  in  such  a  way  as  to  induce 
her  to  alter  the  statement  made  by  her  at  the  inquest.  You 
cannot,  indeed,  account,  as  I  submit  to  you,  for  so  remark- 
able a  difference  between  the  first  and  second  statements, 
without  supposing  something  of  that  kind.  Now,  is  it  im- 

143 


Trial   of  William   Palmer. 

f{^Jeeant  probable  that  that  did  take  place?  From  the  time  she  left 
the  Talbot  Arms  till  she  came  here  she  seems  to  have  been  a 
person  of  very  remarkable  importance.  She  went  to  Dolly's, 
and  Mr.  Stevens  visited  her  six  or  seven  times.  Why  did"  he 
visit  here?  What  for?  Mr.  Stevens  is  unquestionably — and 
if  under  proper  self-restraint,  no  one  can  blame  him  for  it — 
very  indignant  at  what  he  fears  to  have  been  the  foul  play 
of  Palmer  with  Cook.  He  is  not  in  the  same  condition  of  life 
as  Elizabeth  Mills.  Why  should  he  have  gone  to  visit  her 
six  or  seven  times,  conversing  with  her  in  a  private  room? 
She  says,  "He  only  came  to  see  whether  I  liked  the  place; 
he  called  to  inquire  after  my  health."  Gardner  also,  his 
attorney,  saw  her  once,  but  only  asked  her  how  she  was, 
and  they  talked  about  other  things.  She  said  she  gave  the 
last  authentic  account  of  her  evidence  to  a  man  she  did  not 
know — whom  she  had  never  seen  before ;  and  when  I  found 
out,  after  much  questioning,  that  Mr.  Stevens  was  with  him, 
and  asked  her  why  she  had  not  told  me  so,  her  answer  was, 
"  Because  you  never  asked  me."  That  raised  a  laugh,  and 
she  enjoyed  her  triumph.  All  this  looks  like  having  been 
tutored.  I  put  it  to  you  that  you  cannot,  with  any  degree  of 
satisfaction,  rely  on  the  evidence  of  the  young  woman ;  and 
you  will  learn  that  the  confusion  and  the  variety  of  the 
symptoms  she  has  put  together,  taking  them  partly  from  her 
depositions  and  partly  from  this  new  version,  have  made  the 
case  which  she  described  not  only  not  a  case  of  tetanus,  but 
not  of  any  known  disease. 

Now,  on  this  part  of  the  case  I  have  this  observation  to 
make ;  the  illness  of  the  Sunday  night  appears  to  have  been 
a  very  remarkable  occurrence.  It  came  out  in  the  course 
of  the  examination,  as  a  fact  spoken  to  by  Cook,  and  it  will 
be  for  you  to  judge,  after  you  have  heard  the  evidence  of  the 
medical  gentlemen,  whether  the  periodicity  of  the  attacks  does 
not  militate  against  the  theory  of  death  by  strychnia  poison. 
The  illnesses  of  Cook  take  place  three  nights  running,  exactly  at 
the  same  time,  or  if  not  exactly  at  the  same  time,  very 
nearly.  I  find  that  is  a  symptom  of  very  frequent  occurrence, 
that  about  the  same  hour  of  the  night,  or  of  the  week,  or  of 
the  month,  and  very  often  after  the  patient  has  got  to  bed, 
the  thing  occurs.  It  is  about  the  same  hour  in  this  case  of 
Mr.  Cook's.  On  the  question  whether  the  symptoms  were 
such  as  are  consistent  with  the  theory  of  strychnia  poison,  and 
inconsistent  with  the  theory  of  death  from  other  and  natural 
causes,  I  have  only  now  further  to  state  what  I  intend  to 
prove.  I  will  not  go  through  in  detail  what  will  be  better 
stated  by  the  gentlemen  who  will  be  called ;  but  I  shall  call 
a  number  of  most  respectable  physicians,  surgeons,  and  general 
practitioners,  having  extensive  experience  in  our  large  cities, 


Speech    for    Defence. 


who  all  support  the  view  I  have  to  submit  to  you,  and  which  Serjeant 
they  have  suggested   to  me  as  the  probable  one — that  these  Shee 
fits  of  Mr.  Cook  were  not  tetanus,  but  violent  convulsions,  the 
result  of  the  weak  habit  of  his  body,  which  had  been  increased 
by  his  mode  of  life. 

I  propose  now  to  discuss  the  question  whether  the  circum- 
stantial evidence  against  Palmer  be  such  as  to  be  inexplicable 
on  the  supposition  of  his  innocence,  and  if  I  show  you  on  the 
broad  and  salient  features  of  the  evidence  that  it  is  not  (you 
will  not  expect  me  to  go  into  the  more  minute  details),  and 
I  have  succeeded  in  satisfying  you  on  any  considerable  portion 
of  the  points  to  which  I  have  directed  your  attention,  and  if  the 
evidence  comes  up  to  what  I  have  been  instructed  to  say  it 
will,  you  will  be  too  happy,  recollecting  that  you  are  the 
country  in  the  language  of  the  law — that  the  country  out  of 
doors,  in  a  case  of  crime,  of  life  and  death,  is  uninformed, 
without  the  opportunity  of  hearing  the  witnesses  examined  or 
cross-examined  on  their  oaths  to  decide  between  the  Crown 
and  the  Queen's  subject  on  the  evidence  alone.  Every 
word  of  this  evidence  will  be  carried  to  all  the  ends  and  corners 
of  the  earth,  and  it  will  remain  to  be  seen  whether  this  great 
country  of  England,  in  a  paroxysm  or  convulsion  of  prejudice, 
created  by  the  rashness  of  one  scientific  man  who  had  no 
knowledge  of  his  own  about  the  matter,  has  made  up  its  mind 
to  sacrifice  the  life  of  a  fellow-creature  under  circumstances 
which  would  expose  any  person  who  has  ever  been  present 
at  deathbed  convulsions  liable  to  the  same  charge. 

I  say  the  circumstantial  evidence  in  this  case  is  not  such 
as  to  justify  you  in  coming  to  a  conclusion  of  the  guilt  of  the 
prisoner.  I  will  endeavour  in  this  part  of  the  discussion  to 
address  myself  to  those  portions  of  the  case  which  seem  at  the 
first  blush  of  them,  and  on  judicial  consideration  of  them,  to 
require  notice.  I  will  not  avoid  anything  that  is  difficult  or 
that  may  seem  to  you  difficult,  so  that  when  I  sit  down  you  will 
see  that  I  have  discussed  this  great  argument  fully  and  fairly 
in  every  branch  of  it,  and  ask  yourselves,  what  ground  is  there 
for  any  verdict  but  a  verdict  of  "  not  guilty  "1  I  will  avoid 
nothing,  and  proceed  at  once  to  one  of  the  most  salient  points. 
I  will  pass  over,  after  an  intimation  that  was  made  from  the 
bench,  the  point  about  pushing  the  man  at  the  inquest,  or  the 
accident  of  a  slit  in  the  covering  of  the  jar,  which,  sharp  instru- 
ments being  used  by  the  operators,  may  easily  have  occurred, 
or  the  putting  it  in  a  further  corner  of  the  room,  from  which 
there  was  no  possibility  of  its  being  removed.  I  do  not 
believe  that  any  such  circumstances  as  these  would  induce 
you  to  come  to  a  conclusion  against  the  prisoner. 

LORD  CAMPBELL — No  member  of  the  Court,  I  think,  has 
intimated  any  opinion  as  to  the  other  portions  of  the  case; 
merely  as  to  the  pushing. 

L  145 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — I  do  not  wish  to  suggest  anything  which 
is  not  strictly  correct,  and  perhaps  I  ought  not  to  use  what 
was  intimated  from  the  bench  in  any  way,  but  rather  submit 
that,  where  everybody  perfectly  well  knew  Palmer,  in  any  little 
apparent  shove,  so  to  speak,  during  the  course  of  the  post- 
mortem, is  not  to  be  taken  as  an  evidence  of  his  guilt.  It  was  in 
leaning  over,  if  at  all,  to  observe  an  examination  of  considerable 
interest  to  all  persons  present,  and  I  cannot  conceive  that  any- 
thing of  this  kind  can  be  taken  into  consideration.  No  serious 
complaint  was  made  at  the  time.  Mr.  Devonshire  said  nothing 
was  lost  by  it.  He  said  also  the  jar  was  removed  to  a  corner 
of  the  room.  It  was  not  removed  out  of  sight.  It  was  in 
the  broad  daylight.  It  was  impossible  it  could  be  taken 
away  without  observation.  It  would  be  absurd  that  Palmer 
should  be  suspected  of  having  done  so  with  an  improper 
object.  This  we  know,  that  he  was  very  reluctant  to  have 
the  jar  removed  out  of  the  possession  of  those  on  whom  he 
could  rely.  That  is  very  true;  there  were  some  persons  who 
did  not  want  to  pay  him  £13,000;  there  were  some  persons 
who  had  been  doing  all  they  could  to  undermine  his  character 
for  a  very  considerable  time,  imputing  to  him  the  most  wicked 
conduct  respecting  a  near  relation,  which  none  of  his  own 
relations  ever  joined  in,  knowing  that  there  were  many  persons 
at  Rugeley  much  prejudiced  against  him,  and  it  was  in  his 
judgment  of  the  last  importance  that  anything  which  could 
be  brought  against  him  (and  it  was  clear  that  this  post- 
mortem, from  the  conduct  of  Stevens,  was  intended  to  found  a 
charge  against  him),  should  be  kept  in  unsuspected  custody,  and 
that  nobody  should  have  an  opportunity  of  tampering  with  it 
and  its  contents.  When  told  that  Dr.  Harland  is  coming 
to  make  the  post-mortem,  he  says,  "  I  am  glad  of  that,  for 
there  is  no  knowing  who  might  have  done  it ;  and  it  is  a 
satisfaction  that  you,  whom  I  do  know,  are  coming  to  superin- 
tend it."  I  say  that  was  the  conduct  of  a  respectable  man, 
who  knows  that  his  conduct  would  bear  investigation  if  it  were 
properly  inquired  into.  But  we  know  also  that  in  a  town  like 
Rugeley  there  were  a  great  many  serious  people,  who  could 
not  approve  of  his  habits  of  life,  to  whom  his  running  about 
to  races  would  not  much  recommend  him,  and  whom  he  has 
reason  to  know  would  not  very  much  regret  any  injury  which 
might  happen  to  him. 

Is  there  any  other  part  of  his  conduct  connected  with  the 
post-mortem  which  requires  explanation?  When  the  jar  was 
going  to  be  sent  to  town  he  objects  to  its  going  to  Frere's. 
He  had  some  reason  for  that.  He  had  an  assistant  in  his 
service  who  had  been  in  the  service  of  Frere.  We  know  the 
jealousies  that  exist  in  country  towns  between  professional 
men.  We  will  not  do  Mr.  Frere  the  injustice  to  suppose 
146 


Speech  for  Defence. 


he  would  do  so  great  a  wrong  to  Palmer  as  might  result  from  Serjeant 
tampering  with  the  contents  of  the  jar ;   but  still  it  was  right  Shee 
to  be  cautious,  and  Palmer  told  Dr.   Harland,    "  I  want  you 
to  take  it  with  you  to  Stafford,  and  not  let  it  go  to  Frere's 
house."      In  these  minor  incidental  matters  his  conduct  appears 
to  me  perfectly  consistent  with  innocence.       Let  me  call  your 
attention  to  this  more  important  matter,  on  which  my  learned 
friend  in  his  instructions  was  told  to  rely — and  accordingly  he 
did,  in  the  discharge  of  his  duty,  rely  upon  it.       I  will  call 
your  attention  to  what  has  been  stated  by  Myatt,   the  post- 
boy.     His  evidence  was  pressed  into  the  case ;  it  could  not  well 
be  excluded  from  it  as  an  evidence  of  guilt.       Now,  what  did 
it  amount  to?       Before  I  have  done,  under  the  general  head 
of  Palmer's  conduct,  I  will  call  your  attention  to  what  passed 
between   him   and   Stevens.        You   will  find   the   conduct   and 
deportment  of  the  latter  were  such  as  would  make  some  men 
almost  kick  him;  it  was  so  very  provoking,  supposing  Palmer 
was  innocent.       He  dissembled  with  him — pretended  to  take 
his  advice — cross-questioned  him — changed  his  tone  upon  him — 
now  speaking  to  him    mildly,     now   in   a  voice   of  menace — 
threatened  him  with  a  post-mortem  examination — and  evidently 
did  the  whole  thing  hostilely  to  him,   as  if  he  thought  some- 
thing wrong  had  taken  place,  and  it  was  his  duty  not  only  to 
protect  the  property,  but  to  see  any  person  who  had  been  guilty 
of   foul   play   towards   Cook   brought   to   condign   punishment. 
Stevens,   after  poring   over  the  remains   of  the  dead   man   at 
the    post-mortem    examination,    was    ready    to    leave   Rugeley, 
and  a  fly  was  ordered  for  him  and  his  companion,  Mr.  Boycott, 
in  which  they  were  to  proceed  with  the  jar  to  Stafford,   and 
thence  by  rail  to  London.       Now,  if  there  were  anybody  base 
enough,  either  in  support  of  a  theory,  in  support  of  a  reputation 
— God  forbid  that  I   should  suggest  that  to  the  prejudice  of 
Dr.    Taylor! — if  there   were   anybody   capable   of   so   great   a 
wickedness  as  tampering  with  the  jar,  it  might  easily  be  done ; 
and   he   was   anxious   to   have    it   kept   by    Dr.    Harland    and 
not  committed  to  the  custody  of   Stevens.        His  conduct  to 
Palmer  had  been  vexatious  and  annoying  in  the  last  degree  ; 
the  fly  was  being  got  ready  after  Palmer,  we  may  suppose,  had 
dined ;  and  meeting  the  postboy  Myatt,  he  asked  him,  accord- 
ing to  Myatt,  whether  he  was  going  to  drive  Mr.   Stevens  to 
Stafford.        "  I  told  him,"   said  Myatt,   "  I  was.       He  asked 
me  if  I  would  upset  them?"       Now  the  word  "them"  was 
first  used  in  this  Court  to  designate  the  jars.       There  was  only 
one  jar  at  that  time,  so  it  could  not  be  meant  to  apply  to  the 
jars  ;  if  used  at  all,  which  I  think  very  doubtful  for  the  reason 
I  tell  you — at  least  in  a  bad  sense — it  must  have  been  applied 
to  Mr.  Stevens  and  his  companion.       And  now  just  see  if  the 
facts  in  this  case  which  are  undoubted  do  not  give  a  reasonable 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  colour  to  that.  Palmer  (though  I  will  show  you  his  conduct 
She6  to  Stevens  was  exemplary  in  every  respect,  by  putting  the 
dialogue  between  them  before  you  without  making  any  com- 
ment on  it)  must  have  felt  outraged  beyond  all  expression  if 
— knowing  himself  to  be  innocent,  that  he  had  acted  as  a  friend 
and  brother  to  Cook,  and  had  called  his  relations  about  him 
when  he  was  ill — he  found  himself  suspected  of  stealing  a 
trumpery  betting-book,  which  he  knew  was  of  no  use  to  any 
one,  and  charged  of  playing  falsely  and  foully  with  the  life 
of  Cook.  He  had  great  cause  to  be  vexed  and  irritated  with 
Stevens,  and  that  he  was  so  is  plain  from  what  he  said  to  Dr. 
Harland — "  There  was  a  queer  old  fellow,"  he  said,  "  who 
has  been  down  making  inquiries,  who  seemed  to  be  suspicious 
of  my  having  stolen  the  betting-book,  which  everybody  knows 
can  be  of  no  earthly  use  to  anybody."  It  shows  that  his 
mind  was  impressed  with  the  idea  that  he  was  wronged.  He 
may  be  supposed,  communing  with  himself,  to  say,  "  He  has 
ill-treated  me ;  he  has  encouraged  suspicions  which  have  been 
excited  against  me  already,  and  which,  if  he  persists  in  his 
course  of  bringing  another  charge  against  me  in  this  matter, 
will  probably  render  it  impossible  to  get  the  money  from  the 
insurance  company  in  time  to  rescue  me  from  a  position  which 
may  involve  in  ruin  myself  and  some  members  of  my  family." 
That  was  evidently  the  tendency  of  what  Stevens  was  about. 
He  meets  this  postboy  and  asks  him  if  he  is  to  be  ready  to 
drive  the  fly  to  Stafford;  the  boy  says,  "Yes,  I  am."  He 
said,  "  If  I  would  upset  them  there  was  a  £10  note  for  me." 
He  has  been  asked,  "  Had  anything  been  said  about  the  jars?  " 
I  submit  to  you  the  true  construction  of  the  story,  if  it  occurred 
at  all,  is,  that  being  under  a  feeling  of  irritation  against 
Stevens,  and  using  strong  expressions  with  regard  to  Stevens, 
hearing  he  was  going  to  Stafford,  he  said,  "  I  should  not  mind 
giving  £10  to  upset  him."  He  had  been  vexed  at  his  con- 
duct, and  irritated  by  the  perpetual  suspicions  and  inquisitive- 
ness  which  he  had  displayed,  even  when  he  went  up  with  him, 
like  a  friend,  to  show  him  the  corpse,  uncovering  it  down  to 
the  thighs.  Some  previous  suspicion  must  have  existed  in 
Stevens'  mind  ;  but  Palmer  had  no  suspicion  of  this  thought 
that  he  was  guilty  of  so  foul  a  crime  as  that  which  was  imputed 
to  him.  If  that  evidence  be  throughout  true,  it  is  only  true 
in  the  milder  and  innocent  sense,  and  I  have  this  reason  for 
saying  so.  This  man  was  in  the  service  of  the  landlord  of 
the  Talbot  Arms,  and  was  always  about  the  yard ;  he  was 
driving  to  and  from  the  Talbot  Arms  every  day  of  his  life; 
he  must  have  been  there  on  the  day  of  the  post-mortem  ex- 
amination ;  he  must  have  been  a  constant  companion  of  the 
stable  boys  and  labourers  about  the  yard  ;  and  his  observation 
must  have  been  drawn  to  a  thing  so  striking  and  remarkable  as 
148 


Speech  for  Defence. 


a  post-mortem  examination  on  account  of  a  suspicion  of  murder.  Serjeant 
He  was  not  called  before  the  coroner ;  and  nobody  knew,  at Shee 
the  time  the  inquest  was  held,  that  he  had  ever  said  anything 
which  could  be  fairly  taken  in  a  sense  which  would  make  it 
evidence  of  a  guilty  mind  in  Palmer.  But  if  he  had  said  that 
Palmer  said,  "  I  should  not  mind  giving  a  £10  note  to  have 
him  upset;  it  is  a  humbugging  concern,"  and  in  that  manner, 
and  with  the  feeling  I  have  stated,  it  would  not  have  excited 
any  observation  or  suspicion,  and  no  one  would  have  summoned 
Myatt  to  the  inquest.  I  submit  that  is  the  true  version  of  this 
story.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  a  medical  man,  knowing 
that  he  had  given  a  large  dose  of  strychnia,  would  suppose 
that,  by  the  accidental  spilling  of  a  jar,  the  liver  and  spleen 
and  some  of  the  tissues  continuing  untouched,  he  could  have 
escaped  the  detection  of  his  guilt. 

Next  I  shall  call  your  attention  to  the  evidence  of  Charles 
Newton ;  he  is  a  person  who  has  sworn  before  you  that  he  saw 
Palmer  at  Mr.  Salt's  surgery  at  nine  o'clock  on  the  Monday 
night,  and  that  Palmer  asked  for  three  grains  of  strychnia ; 
that  he  weighed  it,  and  gave  it  to  him  in  a  piece  of  paper ;  that 
is  the  first  part  of  what  he  swore  before  you  and  my  lords. 
Now,  I  should  tell  you  how  this  case  has  been  conducted.  As 
soon  as  my  learned  friend  the  Attorney-General,  as  counsel  for 
the  Crown,  was  made  acquainted  with  the  illness  of  my  learned 
friend  Mr.  Serjeant  Wilkins,  with  his  inability  to  conduct  the 
defence  and  that  I  was  to  supply  his  place,  he  desired  that 
every  scrap  of  evidence  against  the  prisoner  should  be  for- 
warded to  me,  and  to  my  learned  friends  near  me ;  and, 
accordingly,  as  soon  as  he  received  this  evidence  of  Newton 
he  forwarded  it  to  me,  and  I  received  it  on  the  day  this  Court 
met.  I  believe  it  was  sent  to  me  late  on  the  previous  night, 
but  I  did  not  see  it  until  the  morning  you  were  sworn ;  so  that 
this  witness  Newton  did  not  bring  this  matter  that  was  in  his 
knowledge  of  the  fact  of  the  purchase  by  Palmer  at  Mr.  Salt's 
surgery  at  nine  o'clock  on  the  Monday  night  of  three  grains  of 
strychnia — he  did  not  bring  that  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Crown 
until  the  night  before  this  trial  commenced.  Now,  he  had 
been  examined  at  the  inquest,  and  he  did  not  tell  before  the 
coroner  the  rest  of  the  story  which  he  told  when  he  was  ex- 
amined here.  (The  learned  serjeant  read  the  examination 
of  Charles  Newton.)  He  did  not  tell  that  to  the  coroner.  All 
he  told  the  coroner  was  that  he  was  present  when  Palmer 
bought  some  strychnia  off  Roberts  on  the  Tuesday  night  in 
the  shop  of  Mr.  Hawkins  ;  he  did  not  speak  to  the  purchase 
of  the  strychnia  on  the  Monday  night ;  he  knew  that  he  was 
called  to  corroborate  a  statement  which  Roberts  had  made  as  to 
the  presence  of  Palmer  at  the  shop,  and  the  purchasing  of  the 
strychnia  on  the  Tuesday,  yet  he  never  said  one  word  at  that 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  time  either  of  the  fact  of  Palmer  having  bought  strychnia  off 
him  on  the  Monday  night  or  of  his  having  asked  him  what 
appearances,  if  a  dog  were  killed  by  strychnia,  would  be  ex- 
hibited on  its  post-mortem  examination.  A  man  who  so  con- 
ducts himself  is  utterly  unworthy  of  credit.  There  is  one 
honest,  laudable  motive  in  a  Court  of  justice,  and  that  is  to 
assist  in  the  administration  of  the  criminal  law  of  the  land. 
If  any  man  had  the  least  hesitation  when  in  Court,  or  to  come 
into  Court  and  take  the  oath  to  depose  to  what  he  knew  were 
the  facts,  we  should  not  be  safe  against  crime  for  a  moment. 
But  you  cannot  justify  the  fact  of  swearing  away  another  man's 
life,  except  under  a  sense  of  duty,  and  for  that  object ;  and 
if  a  man,  knowing  that  he  is  to  be  sworn  touching  so  grave  a 
subject  as  that  of  murder,  the  first  time  he  takes  the  oath 
omits  a  considerable  portion  of  what  he  knows,  and  three  weeks 
afterwards  tells  another  portion,  and  at  a  further  interval  comes 
forward  and  tells  more — enough,  in  his  opinion,  to  drive  the 
guilt  home  to  the  man  who  is  accused — the  witness,  I  say,  who 
conducts  himself  in  that  manner  ought  not  to  be  believed. 
The  prisoner  who  is  convicted  upon  the  evidence  of  such  a 
man  as  that  is  sacrificed  by  a  jury.  But  there  are  other 
circumstances  in  that  statement  which  render  it  in  the  last 
degree  improbable.  That  Palmer  should,  once  in  a  week, 
purchase  strychnia  in  the  town  of  Rugeley  is  not  to  be  won- 
dered at.  Strychnia  is  sold  for  many  purposes,  to  kill  dogs 
and  vermin,  and  Palmer,  as  you  may  recollect,  had  often 
occasion  to  complain  of  the  dogs  from  the  slipping  of  the  foals 
and  the  galloping  of  the  mares.  In  the  course  of  the  evidence 
in  this  case  it  has  been  mentioned  that  strychnia  was  pur- 
chased by  Palmer  twice  within  the  week,  when  the  first  time 
he  had  bought  quite  enough,  and  more,  for  the  purpose  im- 
puted to  him.  But  that  a  person  should  go  and  buy  strychnia 
twice  in  a  week  in  a  small  country  town,  having  bought  enough 
for  all  purposes  the  first  time — that  he  should  go  and  buy  more 
the  next  day  at  the  shop  of  a  rival  tradesman,  with  whom  he 
was  on  bad  terms — is  to  the  last  degree  improbable.  Common 
sense  revolts  at  it;  nobody  can  or  ought  to  be  believed  who 
makes  any  such  statements.  Again,  observe  he  had  been 
to  London  on  the  Monday.  In  London  there  is  no  difficulty 
for  a  medical  man  to  get  anything  of  the  sort  which  he  may 
require.  He  has  only  to  write  it  down  in  the  technical  way, 
so  as  to  give  evidence  of  a  medical  education,  and  it  is  given 
to  him  at  once,  without  a  word.  He  had  been  to  London ; 
and,  again,  if  he  could  not  get  it  there,  he  could  get  it  at 
Stafford.  Why  should  he  get  it  at  Rugeley?  that  is  the  last 
place  that  he  would  have  gone  to  for  it.  It  seems  to  me 
that  it  is  equally  impossible  he  ever  could  have  bought  it  for 
such  a  purpose  as  the  purpose  attributed  to  him,  and  that  he 

150 


Speech    for    Defence. 


would  have  been,  if  really  guilty,  so  unwary  as  to  allow  the  Serjeant 
paper  in  which  the  strychnia  had  been  not  to  be  found  with  Shee 
the  full  quantity  he  had  purchased  in  it;  he  would  not  have 
been  such  a  fool  as  not  to  take  care  that  the  paper  in  which 
it  was   wrapped   was   full  of   strychnia   before   his   house   was 
searched,   so   as  to   make   sure  that  it  should   be   found   that 
nothing  should  appear  to  have  been  used  out  of  it,  and  that 
the  exact  quantity  was  in   the  paper.       I  submit,   therefore, 
it  cannot  be  believed — it  is  not  credible ! 

I  am  now  in  a  condition  to  satisfy  you  that  Palmer  was 
undoubtedly  in  town,  and  that  he  could  not  have  been  there 
at  nine  o'clock ;  that  he  was  in  London  at  a  quarter-past  three 
o'clock,  and  that  he  could  not  have  been  there  by  nine  o'clock 
— the  hours  at  which  the  trains  start  rendered  it  impossible. 
The  thing  is  false — downright  false.  It  is  impossible  to  have 
got  to  Rugeley  before  a  quarter-past  ten,  and  we  will  account 
for  what  he  did  in  a  way  that  will  entirely  satisfy  you.  He 
attended  the  post-mortem  examination,  and  is  it  credible  that 
a  skilful  medical  man,  who  has  studied  at  the  London  hospitals, 
would  have  gone  to  that  dolt  Newton  to  ask  him  as  to  what 
would  be  the  effects  of  strychnia  on  a  dog's  stomach?  Is  it 
credible  that  he  should  go  to  that  stupid  sort  of  fellow,  who 
gave  his  evidence  in  that  dogged,  mulish,  sullen  manner,  which 
often  is  indicative  of  something  else  besides  the  want  of 
understanding,  and  that  he  would  have  gone  and  asked  a  chap 
like  that,  "What  are  the  effects  of  strychnia?"  and  then, 
when  he  had  been  told,  he  would  snap  his  fingers  and  say, 
"  All  right."  It  cannot  be — it  is  impossible.  No  one  would 
believe  it;  and  I  submit  to  you  confidently  that  unless  there 
is  much  stronger  evidence  than  that,  it  is  evidence  on  which 
you  cannot  rely  for  a  moment.  To  show  the  animus  of  this 
Newton  against  Palmer,  I  will  remind  you  of  what  he  stated. 
Palmer  said  that  "  you  will  find  that  he  has  taken  a  great 
deal  of  mercury ;  you  will  find  this  '  fellow  '  died  from  a  diseased 
throat."  When  he  is  questioned  about  it  mildly  and  quietly 
by  my  friend  Mr.  Grove  as  to  what  was  the  exact  term  used,  he 
answers,  "  I  do  not  know  whether  he  said  poor  or  rich  "  ;  just 
as  if  it  could  be  a  question  of  that  kind.  What  we  wanted 
to  know  was  whether  he  had  spoken  of  the  poor  dead  man  in 
a  pitying  way,  or  whether  he  had  spoken  of  him  as  a  disreput- 
able person,  unworthy  of  all  consideration.  As  to  that  part 
of  the  case  I  will  say  no  more,  and  I  will  proceed  to  other 
matters  taking  you  back  again  to  what  occurred  at  Shrewsbury. 

The  case  for  the  Crown  is,  that  as  early  as  the  14th  Novem- 
ber, at  Shrewsbury,  the  scheme — the  plot — of  poisoning  com- 
menced. That  is  the  supposition  of  those  from  whom  the  case 
has  been  taken  by  the  Crown.  Now,  it  is  suggested  that  on 
the  night  of  Wednesday,  the  14th,  Palmer  dosed  this  man 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  Cook  with  something  that  he  put  into  his  brandy,  and  the 
Shee  witness  Fisher  told  us  that  Cook  told  him  so.  If  you  remem- 
ber the  early  part  of  my  address  to  you,  I  read  a  few  words 
at  the  end  of  a  letter  from  Cook  to  Fisher,  in  which,  after 
telling  him  it  was  of  vast  importance  to  him,  as  well  as  to 
Palmer,  that  £500  should  be  paid  to  Mr.  Pratt,  he  adds  in  a 
postscript  "  I  am  better."  These  words  must  have  referred 
to  his  illness  at  Shrewsbury.  The  letter  relates  to  another 
matter  which  is  of  great  importance  to  him  and  to  Palmer,  and 
he  does  not  seem  to  treat  it  as  one  having  in  his  own  mind  a 
belief  that  Palmer  had  drugged  him  with  poison  for  the  purpose 
of  destroying  his  health  at  Shrewsbury.  Then,  again,  on  the 
evidence,  what  does  Palmer  say  himself  about  what  occurred 
at  Shrewsbury?  He  says,  when  it  is  mentioned,  "  Cook  says  I 
have  put  something  in  his  glass ;  I  do  not  play  such  tricks  with 
people  " — taking  it  as  if  it  had  been  never  understood  other- 
wise than  as  a  loose  expression  of  a  man,  perhaps  not  actually 
drunk — the  evidence  does  not  go  to  that  extent — though  I  think 
you  will  be  of  opinion  he  was  very  nearly  approaching  to  that 
condition.  I  could  not  help  being  a  little  amused  by  a  version 
which  I  read  some  time  ago  of  this  portion  of  the  Shrewsbury 
plot.  I  will  read  it  to  you — "After  indulging  freely  in  the 
foreign  wines  of  an  English  country  town,  150  miles  from 
London,  the  owner  of  '  Polestar  '  took  to  brandy  and  water 
to  restore  his  British  solidity.  Tossing  off  his  glass,  he  com- 
plained that  there  was  something  in  it,  for  it  burned  his 
throat.  Perhaps  those  who  have  drunk  strong  brandy  and 
water  with  similar  haste  may  have  experienced  the  same 
sensation ;  perhaps  also,  like  Mr.  Cook,  they  may  have  vomited 
afterwards.  He  bolted  his  brandy  and  water  down  at  Palmer's 
challenge,  and  bolted  it  up  again  when  it  encountered  the 
cold  champagne.  That  night  he  was  very  drunk,  and  very 
sick,  and  very  ill.  His  dinner  he  cast  up  into  a  basin ; 
his  money  he  deposited  with  his  friend  Mr.  Ishmael  Fisher,  a 
sporting  wine  merchant,  of  Shoe  Lane,  Holborn.  To  this 
Mr.  Ishmael  Fisher  the  owner  of  '  Polestar  '  gave  £700  to  keep 
till  next  morning,  expressing  his  belief,  at  the  same  time,  that 
Palmer  had  dosed  him  for  the  sake  of  the  money.  If  such 
had  been  Palmer's  intention,  would  he  have  left  Cook  at  such 
a  moment?  He  neither  followed  him  from  the  room  when 
his  stomach  rebelled,  nor  did  he  go  near  him  all  that  night. 
This  neglect  showed,  indeed,  how  hollow  was  his  friendship, 
but  it  proves  his  innocence ;  guilt  would  have  been  much  more 
officious.  Next  morning  Cook  looked  very  ill,  as  men  are  apt 
to  do  after  excessive  vinous  vomiting ;  but  his  drunken 
suspicions  of  Palmer  had  evaporated  with  the  fumes  of  the 
brandy,  and  they  were  again  friends  and  brother  sportsmen." 
I  believe  that  is  the  true  version  of  the  matter,  and  that 

152 


Speech    for    Defence. 


Cook  believed  it  to  be  so.  He  breakfasted  with  Palmer  the  Serjeant 
next  morning ;  he  was  good  friends  with  him  the  whole  of  the  Shee 
day,  and  went  with  him  to  Rugeley,  and  there  remained  on 
Palmer's  invitation.  In  consequence  of  the  letter  which  Pratt 
wrote  on  the  13th,  and  which  Palmer  got  on  the  14th,  in  which 
they  both  had  an  interest,  Cook  wrote  to  Pratt  to  say  that 
somebody  would  call  on  him  with  £200,  and  he  wrote  to  Fisher 
to  tell  Fisher  to  do  so.  Did  anybody  at  that  time  believe 
that  there  was  any  intention  to  drug  and  poison  this  man? 
Does  not  the  explanation  that  Mrs.  Brookes  gave,  which  I  must 
say  was  exceedingly  creditable  to  her,  the  readiness  with  which 
she  stated  to  me  that  her  husband  did  not  approve  of  her 
attending  races,  that  it  was  disagreeable  to  him;  and  the 
dignity,  if  I  may  say  so,  with  which  she  answered  the  question 
put  to  her  by  my  learned  friend — "  Are  you  intimate  with 
Palmer?"  by  this  other  question,  "What  do  you  mean  by 
intimate  with  him?  I  am  friendly,"  seemed  to  me  to  entitle 
her  to  all  due  respect.  And  when  she,  being  called  for  the 
Crown,  tells  you,  "  That  night  I  heard  in  several  directions 
of  a  great  number  of  people  who  were  purged  and  vomited ; 
there  was  a  general  affection  of  the  kind  amongst  strangers 
visiting  Shrewsbury  on  that  occasion  " — I  submit  to  you  it 
was  to  the  last  degree  improbable  that  anything  of  that  kind 
occurred.  About  the  tumbler  which  she  saw  in  Palmer's  hand 
I  cannot  suggest  any  reason,  because  it  is  not  in  my  instruc- 
tions, but  it  might  probably  be  accounted  for  in  this  way, 
when  he  came  back  from  Rugeley  and  found  all  the  people 
indisposed  he  would  naturally  look  at  the  water  to  see  if  there 
was  anything  to  account  for  its  unwholesomeness.  Mrs. 
Brookes  said,  and  that  is  the  point  to  which  I  wish  to  call 
your  attention,  that  he  was  in  a  passage  under  a  chandelier  ; 
that  the  waiter  pointed  to  him  when  he  showed  her  upstairs ; 
that  he  spoke  to  her  while  holding  up  the  glass  to  the  light, 
and  said,  "  Wait  a  minute,  and  I  will  come  to  you."  Nothing 
can  be  more  natural  than  that;  and  I  submit  to  you  it  is  im- 
possible to  say  that  there  is  anything  to  justify  a  suspicion 
of  poison  in  it.  With  regard  to  the  money  he  gave  to  Fisher, 
I  can  suggest  no  other  reason  than  that,  just  before  being  sick, 
he  gave  his  money  to  Fisher,  feeling  that  it  was  coming  upon 
him,  and  that  his  stomach  was  revolting  at  the  liberties  he 
had  taken  with  it.  He  had  the  good  sense  to  place  his  money, 
when  he  was  still  very  sick,  in  the  hands  of  Fisher,  and  he 
afterwards  went  to  bed.  It  may  have  been  that  he  had  been 
guilty  of  excess  in  eating  and  drinking,  and  it  was  necessary 
to  send  for  the  doctor,  who,  when  he  came,  wished  to  send 
him  an  emetic.  The  young  man  knew  so  well  what  to  do  that 
he  said,  "Oh!  I  can  make  myself  sick  without  an  emetic; 
I  will  put  my  tooth-brush  down  my  throat;  I  can  be  sick 

153 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  without  your  emetic."       He  took  a  pill  when  it  was  recom- 
mended to  him  and  a  black  draught,  and  the  moment  he  laid 
his  head  on  his  pillow  he  was  perfectly  free  from  any  alarm, 
and  he  got  up  the  next  morning  perfectly  well.       Gentlemen, 
that  is  really  too  ludicrous  to  be  worthy  of  a  moment's  con- 
sideration.       Now,    let  us   go  to   certain   other   matters,    and 
more  particularly  to  the  conduct  of  the  prisoner  himself.       I 
would  just  mention  that  there  was  a  person  there  of  the  name 
of  Myatt  in  the  room  at  the  time  they  say  the  brandy  and 
water  was  drugged.       Why  was  he  not  called?       The  others 
came  in  just  before  going  to  bed,   but  Myatt  had  been  there 
the  whole  evening,  and  was  not  a  mere  accidental  visitor  in  the 
room.       You  will  hear  his  version  so  far  as  it  is  necessary. 
They  have  now  got  back  to  Rugeley,  and  then  the  history  of 
the    slow   poisoning   continues.        Cook   and    Palmer   go    back 
together,  and  probably  they  talk  all  the  way  about  Pratt  and 
their   difficulties,   and   the  way   of   getting   out  of   them,   and 
of  the  small  way  that  the  winnings  of  Shrewsbury  will  go  to 
effect  the  object.       They  both  see  ruin  staring  them  in  the  face 
unless  the  Prince  of  Wales  office  can  be  forced  to  pay  the  money 
due  upon  the  policy  of  insurance,   and  they  can  remain  free 
from  all  suspicion  of  insolvency  or  misconduct  in  the  meantime. 
When  they  get  to  Rugeley,  by  sending  up  the  £200  to  Pratt, 
they  provide  for  the  temporary  difficulty.     They  are  on  friendly 
terms,  Palmer  making  use  of  Cook's  things,  and  probably  both 
attaining  their  own  objects,   as  it  would  appear  that  Palmer 
said  directly  Cook  died  that  he  had  some  interest  in  bills  which 
were  outstanding ;  and  that  might  well  have  been,  considering 
they  were  engaged  in  racing  transactions ;  that  they  were  joint 
owners  of  one  horse ;   that  they  had  the  same  trainer,  betted 
for  each  other  at  races,  and  that  they  were  confederates  and 
friends  on  the  turf,  in  that  sort  of  relation  to  each  other  which 
gave  them  a  joint  interest  in  the  same  ventures.       Cook  sat 
at  the  table  of  Palmer  on  the  16th,  and  wrote  up  that  night  to 
Pratt.       Cook  goes  to  bed  late  on  that  evening,  well  enough, 
not  so  drunk  as  to  prevent  his  asking  the  chambermaid  to  give 
him  a  longer  candle,  in  order  that  he  might  read  in  bed.       He 
seems  to  have  had  a  little  champagne,  not  so  much  as  to  have 
made  him  drunk,  yet  perhaps  too  much  for  a  stomach  weakened 
by  the  excess,  if  it  was  excess,  at  Shrewsbury,  or  by  the  vomiting 
which  was  occasioned  by  the  illness  there,  and  the  hot  water 
which  he  had  taken.     He  gets  up  the  next  morning  poorly ; 
he  eats  nothing  that  day  ;   ails  enough  for  Mr.  Bamford  to  be 
called  in  by  Palmer,  and  Palmer  is  unremitting  in  his  attention 
to  him  on  that  day  and  the  Sunday  following. 

Now,  it  is  said  that  that  very  attentiveness  is  evidence  of  the 
prisoner's  guilt.  What,  as  my  friend  here  (Mr.  Grove)  says, 
what  is  a  man  to  do?  Here  is  a  young  fellow's  health  in  very 

154 


Speech    for    Defence. 


considerable  danger.  Cook,  having  a  joint  interest  in  racing  Serjeant 
transactions  with  Palmer,  thinks  it  convenient  to  stop  at Shee 
Rugeley,  where  he  has  no  friend  but  Palmer.  They  are  not 
flush  of  money,  and  Palmer  has  a  house  and  an  establishment 
on  a  moderate  scale  immediately  opposite  the  inn  in  which 
Cook  is  staying.  He  is  enabled  to  send  such  things  over  as 
can  be  got  in  a  private  house,  not  at  hotel  prices,  but  at  a  very 
trifling  expense.  He  was  on  a  visit  to  Palmer,  and  he 
knew  nobody  there  but  Palmer.  He  was  ailing;  and 
as  it  is  very  dull  for  a  man  who  has  no  intellectual 
pursuits  to  be  alone  all  day  when  out  of  health,  Palmer  goes 
over  and  talks  to  him,  and  attends  to  him,  and  gets  him  what 
comforts  he  can.  That  is  what  a  man  would  do  to  a  friend ; 
it  is  precisely  what  a  man  would  do.  If  he  had  not  done  it, 
but  merely  attended  to  him  at  night  when  he  was  taken  ill  on 
the  Monday  night,  without  visiting  him  during  the  day,  it 
might  have  been  said  that  he  was  neglecting  him,  and  only 
attended  to  him  when  he  wanted  to  give  him  another  dose  of 
poison.  That  is  the  way  the  Crown  would  have  put  it  then ! 
He  is  laboriously  attentive  to  him  under  circumstances  which 
can  well  be  accounted  for  by  the  reason  that  he  had  actually, 
if  not  a  sincere  friendship  for  him,  at  least  a  friendly  kind  of 
liking  for  him,  and  an  interest  with  him  on  betting  and  racing 
transactions,  and  could  supply  him  with  several  things  from  his 
house  at  little  or  no  expense.  If  Cook  had  been  well  he  would 
probably  have  had  his  meals  at  Palmer's  house.  He  was  ill, 
and  Palmer  sends  Dr.  Bamford  to  him.  He  saw  him  at  eight 
o'clock  on  Sunday  morning,  and  again  at  six  or  seven  o'clock. 
Cook  told  him  his  bowels  had  been  moved  twice  or  thrice.  That 
is  what  he  told  to  Dr.  Bamford ;  it  may  have  been  known  to 
Palmer  that  it  was  oftener,  and  that  the  truth  was  he  was 
slightly  suffering  under  some  symptoms  of  diarrhoea,  as  he 
afterwards  stated  in  the  letter  to  Jones.  It  was  Cook  himself 
who  told  Dr.  Bamford  about  his  bowels  having  been  moved  ; 
and  on  the  same  day  Palmer  wrote  a  letter  to  Jones,  intending 
to  bring  Jones  there,  he  being  about  to  go  to  London,  and  stated 
"  Cook  had  been  suffering  from  diarrhoea."  It  was  at  Shrews- 
bury, where  everybody  else  had  diarrhoea.  He  took  the  pill 
and  black  draught,  and  their  effects  continued,  probably  to  some 
extent  when  he  was  at  Rugeley.  It  is  absurd  to  pretend  that 
the  suggestion  of  diarrhoea  could  have  any  sinister  object,  as 
Jones  must  have  ascertained  the  truth  as  soon  as  he  arrived 
at  Rugeley. 

I  now  beg  to  call  your  attention  to  the  next  important  fact 
in  this  case.  It  seems  to  me  to  be,  though  I  touch  upon  it 
briefly  here,  one  of  the  very  last  importance,  and  one  which 
ought  to  decide  it  in  the  prisoner's  favour.  The  supposition  of 

155 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  the  Crown  is,  that  Palmer  intended  to  dose  Cook  with  antimony, 
to  keep  his  stomach  in  a  perpetual  state  of  vomiting,  in  order 
the  more  easily  to  despatch  him  by  strychnia;  that  he  began 
the  plot  on  the  Wednesday  at  Shrewsbury  and  continued  it  at 
Kugeley,  and  that  during  the  Sunday  Cook  was  under  the  influ- 
ence of  that  treatment — Sunday  was  the  day  Palmer  attempted, 
as  was  said,  to  force  the  broth  upon  him.  Now,  being  bent, 
as  it  is  supposed,  upon  destroying  Cook,  there  is  one  man  in 
the  world  who  would  be  the  very  last  witness  he  would  select 
as  a  witness  of  his  proceedings.  He  was  a  medical  man,  in  the 
prime  of  life,  intimately  acquainted  with  Cook,  living  in  the 
same  house  with  him,  much  attached  to  him,  at  all  events  suffi- 
ciently attached  to  him  to  come  to  him  as  soon  as  he  had  heard 
that  he  had  had  an  attack  of  diarrhoea — Mr.  Jones,  of  Lutter- 
worth.  Palmer,  intending  to  go  to  London,  and  not  wishing 
to  leave  Cook  alone,  wrote  on  the  Sunday  to  Mr.  Jones,  telling 
him  that  Cook  was  then  ill  with  diarrhoea,  a  statement  which 
is  not  altogether  inconsistent  with  the  evidence  of  Dr.  Bamford 
and  what  Cook  stated,  and  begs  of  him  to  come  over.  I  beg 
of  you  to  pause  here  for  a  moment  in  order  to  appreciate  the 
full  importance  of  this  fact ;  the  more  you  think  of  it  the  more 
profound  will  be  your  conviction  that  it  affords  evidence  irre- 
fragable of  Palmer's  innocence.  The  imputation  upon  Palmer 
is  that  he  intended  to  kill  Cook  to  possess  himself  of  his 
winnings.  Who  was  with  Cook  when  the  race  was  won?  Who 
was  by  his  side  on  Shrewsbury  racecourse  for  the  three  minutes 
that  he  was  speechless  1  Who  saw  him  take  out  his  betting-book 
and  count  his  winnings?  Who  but  Jones — Jones  who  was  his 
bosom  friend,  his  companion,  his  confidant,  and  who  knew  to 
the  last  farthing  the  amount  of  his  gains?  Jones  was,  of  all 
men  living,  the  most  likely  to  be  the  recipient  of  Cook's  con- 
fidence, and  the  man  bound  by  every  consideration  of  honour, 
friendship,  and  affection  to  protect  him,  to  vindicate  his  cause, 
and  to  avenge  his  death.  Yet  this  was  the  man  for  whom 
Palmer  sent,  that  he  might  converse  with  Cook,  receive  his 
confidence,  minister  to  him  in  his  illness,  and  even  sleep  in  the 
same  room  with  him !  How,  if  Palmer  is  the  murderer 
they  represent  him,  are  you  to  account  for  his  summoning  Jones 
to  the  bedside  of  the  sick  man?  If  Cook  really  suspected — 
as  we  are  assured  he  did — that  Palmer  was  poisoning  him,  Jones 
was  the  man  to  whom  he  would  most  willingly  have  unbosomed 
himself,  and  in  whose  faithful  ear  he  would  have  most  eagerly 
disburthened  the  perilous  stuff  that  weighed  upon  his  own  brain. 
Jones,  as  well  as  Palmer,  was  a  medical  man,  and  it  is  not  im- 
probable that,  in  the  course  of  his  studies,  the  former  may  have 
noted  in  his  class-book  the  very  passages  respecting  the  opera- 
tion of  strychnia  which  had  attracted  the  attention  of  the 

156 


Speech    for    Defence. 


latter.  Is  it  conceivable  that,  if  Palmer  meant  to  slay  Cook  Serjeant 
with  poison  in  the  dead  of  the  night,  he  would  have  previously  Shee 
ensured  the  presence  in  his  victim's  chamber  of  a  medical  wit- 
ness, who  would  know  from  his  frightful  symptoms  that  the 
man  was  not  dying  a  natural  death?  He  brings  a  medical 
man  into  the  room,  and  makes  him  lie  within  a  few  inches  of 
the  sick  man's  bed,  that  he  may  be  startled  by  his  terrific 
shrieks,  and  gaze  upon  those  agonising  convulsions  which  indi- 
cate the  fatal  potency  of  poison !  Can  you  believe  it  1  He 
might  have  despatched  him  by  means  that  would  have  defied 
detection,  for  Cook  was  taking  morphia  medicinally,  and  a  grain 
or  two  more  would  have  silently  thrown  him  into  an  eternal  sleep; 
but  instead  of  doing  so,  he  sends  to  Lutterworth  for  Jones.  You 
have  been  told  that  this  was  done  to  cover  appearances.  Done 
to  cover  appearances !  No,  no,  no !  You  cannot  believe  it — 
it  is  not  in  human  nature — it  cannot  be  true — you  cannot  find 
him  guilty — you  dare  not  find  him  guilty  on  the  supposition  of 
its  truth — the  country  will  not  stand  by  you  if  you  believe  it 
to  be  true — you  will  be  impeached  before  the  whole  world  if 
you  say  that  it  is  true — I  believe  in  my  conscience  that  it  is 
false,  because,  consistently  with  the  laws  that  govern  human 
nature,  it  cannot  possibly  be  true. 

Gentlemen,  there  are  other  facts  to  be  adverted  to  before  I 
sit  down  to  which  it  is  necessary  your  attention  should  be  drawn. 
There  was  a  great  stir  at  the  hotel  at  Rugeley  after  Mr.  Jones 
had  returned  from  London  with  Mr.  Stevens,  the  executor. 
Mr.  Stevens  arrives  at  the  inn  with  Mr.  Jones,  has  been  in  con- 
versation all  the  way  down  with  Mr.  Jones,  and  has  heard  from 
Mr.  Jones  all  that  Mr.  Jones  knows,  and  does  not  appear  to 
have  had  anything  communicated  to  him  by  Mr.  Jones  which 
could  justify  any  suspicion  on  his  part.  Mr.  Jones,  when  they 
arrive  at  Rugeley,  introduces  him  to  Palmer,  and  Palmer  at 
once  takes  him  up  to  the  room  of  the  dead  man,  and  uncovers 
the  body  down  to  the  thighs,  and  Mr.  Stevens  looks  at  the 
corpse  and  sees  there  are  no  convulsions  about  the  body  except 
the  clenching  of  the  hands.  He  sees  there  is  no  emaciation,  no 
signs  as  he  thinks  of  illness,  and,  wondering  within  himself, 
says,  "  How  can  you  have  died?  "  or  something  to  that  effect; 
"  How  grievous  a  thing  it  is  that  your  young  life  should  have 
passed  away !  "  I  think  he  said  he  did  not  look  as  if  he  were 
dead.  After  seeing  the  corpse  they  went  down  to  dinner, 
and  he  asked  Palmer  to  dine  with  him,  and  Jones, 
and  Mr.  Bradford,  the  husband  of  Mr.  Cook's  sister. 
He  has  not  been  called ;  he  could  have  told  us  if  there  was 
anything  suspicious  in  the  conduct  of  Palmer,  anything  that 
could  justify  such  conduct  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Stevens.  They 
have  their  dinner,  and  when  their  dinner  is  over,  see  what  takes 
place.  It  is  important  you  should  know  it,  because  I  think 

'57 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  you  will  see  from  the  way  it  occurred  that  the  conduct  of 
Palmer  was  the  conduct  of  a  man  certainly  apprehensive  of 
any  sort  of  vexatious  inquiry  which  might  involve  him  in 
pecuniary  troubles,  and  was  therefore  anxious  to  conciliate  Mr. 
Stevens,  still  comporting  himself  like  one  who  could  firmly  and 
freely  maintain  his  equality  with  Mr.  Stevens  unabashed,  with 
a  clear  brow  and  the  appearance  of  an  innocent  man.  (The 
learned  serjeant  read  a  portion  of  the  dialogue  which  took  place 
between  Mr.  Stevens  and  Palmer.)  He  said,  "  with  a  spas- 
modic convulsion  of  the  throat,"  which  was  perfectly  apparent; 
he  could  not  see  his  face,  but  there  was  a  spasmodic  convulsion 
of  his  throat.  Who  could  believe  such  a  testimony  of  guilt  as 
that?  He  expects  that  Palmer  is  to  be  bound  to  look  after 
everything  of  every  kind  that  was  in  the  hotel  belonging  to 
Cook,  and  because  he  could  not  find  a  trumpery  book,  which 
anybody  might  have  taken  away,  thinking  and  probably  having 
heard  it  was  of  very  little  use,  which  could  not  be  of  the 
slightest  service  in  any  way  to  Palmer  for  any  purpose  what- 
ever, or  to  anybody,  simply  on  that  account,  he  is  to 
indulge  in  this  vexatious  proceeding.  The  last  time  the 
book  was  seen  was  on  the  Monday.  The  last  person  who  saw 
it  was  Elizabeth  Mills,  on  the  Monday,  and  on  that  day  there 
were  several  people  there  with  Cook — Saunders  the  trainer, 
and  the  jockeys ;  after  his  death  the  two  servant-maids  and 
the  housekeeper,  the  three  undertaker's  men,  the  two  women 
who  laid  Cook  out,  and  some  other  persons ;  the  barber  who 
shaved  him  might  have  taken  the  book,  and  having  taken  it 
could  not  return  it;  for  here  again  is  the  effect  of  dishonesty 
as  well  as  falsehood.  Once  done,  you  cannot  repair  it ;  without 
admitting  it  you  cannot  set  it  right  again.  I  throw  imputa- 
tion on  nobody  ;  I  simply  say,  that  as  many  people  had  access 
to  the  room,  it  is  not  fair,  it  is  not  right  under  the  circumstances 
when  a  man  is  charged  in  such  a  case  of  momentous  import- 
ance without  any  assignable  reason  for  his  purloining  the  betting 
book,  to  fix  it  on  him  without  any  proof  that  he  ever  had  it  in 
his  hands,  when  nothing  like  a  proper  search  was  made  for  it 
until  some  time  after  Cook's  death.  I  asked  whether  the 
drawers  were  not  full  of  linen  and  clothes,  the  answer  was  that 
they  were.  It  was  not  seen  immediately  after  the  death,  nor 
was  there  any  search  made  for  it,  nor  was  it  set  aside  and  taken 
care  of  in  the  room,  so  that  it  could  not  have  been  removed 
by  Palmer  with  a  guilty  intention  of  purloining  it.  Let  us  go 
on  for  a  moment  with  this  dialogue — (the  learned  serjeant  then 
read  a  passage  from  the  dialogue  as  detailed  in  the  evidence) — 
and  at  last,  after  goading  and  irritating  the  man  for  all  this 
time,  though  Palmer  was  willing  to  make  explanations  and  pro- 
voke inquiries  into  anything  or  circumstance  which  if  inquired 
into  would  at  once  have  led  to  a  discussion  of  matters  in  a 

158 


Speech  for  Defence. 


fair  and  gentleman-like  manner,  Stevens  snubs  him  by  asking  Serjeant 
him  whether  he  intends  to  be  at  the  post-mortem ;  and  at  last,  Shee 
when  he  says,  "  It  is  a  matter  of  indifference  to  me,"  goads  the 
poor  man  into  saying,  "So  it  is  to  me."  That  is  the  only 
word  of  irritation  that  Palmer — who  kept  his  ground  during 
the  whole  time  and  stood  up  to  this  man — that  is  the  only  word 
of  irritation  that  he  used.  Mr.  Stevens  speaks  to  him  in  a  very 
warm  manner,  yet  Palmer  manifests  the  composure  of  a  gentle- 
man, of  a  man  of  feeling  and  consideration  to  the  father — as 
he  called  himself — but  the  stepfather  of  the  young  man,  and 
that  is  to  be  turned  into  evidence  of  guilt. 

There  is  another  story  made  against  him,  that  he  was  found 
searching  in  the  pockets  of  Mr.  Cook  shortly  after  his  death — 
it  is  the  most  absurd  suggestion  on  their  own  showing.  The 
facts  were  these.  Mr.  Jones,  I  think,  told  the  servants  to  tell 
Palmer  to  come  into  the  room.  I  think  that  was  it — to  tell 
Palmer  to  go  into  the  room ;  and  then  I  think  Mr.  Jones  told 
another  servant  to  follow  him  into  the  room.  Elizabeth  Mills 
is  the  witness  to  that.  She  says,  "  I  went  in,  and  I  saw 
him  looking  about  seeing  if  there  was  anything  in  one  of  the 
coats,  and  he  also  looked  under  the  bolster  of  the  bed,  just  as  a 
gentleman  might  be  looking  for  a  watch ;  and  he  went  on  doing 
so  after  I  got  into  the  room."  It  was  quite  clear  she  sus- 
pected nothing,  and  I  submit  it  is  not  fair  that  any  suspicion 
should  attach  to  him  on  the  subject. 

One  other  circumstance  there  is  on  which  reliance  has  been 
placed ;  and  although  it  has  been  said  great  reliance  is  not 
intended  to  be  placed  upon  it,  I  cannot  tell  what  effect  it  will 
produce  on  your  minds.  I  am  sure  that  when  those  who  have 
promoted  this  prosecution  first  undertook  it  they  intended  to 
rely,  as  proof  of  damning  guilt,  on  the  manuscript  extracts 
about  strychnia  in  these  medical  books.  I  think  it  will  be 
within  your  experience  that  in  youth  and  early  manhood  the 
best  protection  that  a  man  can  have  for  his  honour  and 
integrity  is  the  company  and  society  of  a  wife  whom  he  loves. 
If  you  find  a  man  in  early  youth  attached  to  a  virtuous  young 
woman,  whom  he  loves  with  a  sincere  and  heartfelt  attachment, 
depend  upon  it  he  is  of  a  gentle  nature,  and  little  prone  to  deeds 
of  violence.  They  have  put  in  these  books  to  show  that  Palmer 
had  a  knowledge  of  strychnia  poison,  and  they  are  the  books 
which  he  used  when  a  student  attending  lectures  in  London,  as 
must  have  been  known  to  his  deceased  wife.  I  find,  in  what 
I  am  in  a  condition  to  prove  to  be  her  own  handwriting,  proof 
positive  that  this  was  his  student's  book,  and  that  he  then  and 
long  after  loved  that  young  woman  in  the  way  in  which  it  is 
God's  will,  under  the  sanction  of  His  holy  ordinance,  young 
men  should  love  their  wives.  His  marriage  was  a  marriage  of 
affection ;  he  loved  her  for  herself  and  for  her  person ;  he 

159 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Serjeant  loved  her  as  ardently  as  he  now  loves  her  first-born,  his  only 
surviving  child,  a  boy  of  seven  years  old,  who  waits  with 
trembling  anxiety  for  a  sentence  which  will  restore  him  to  his 
father's  arms,  or  drive  that  father  to  an  ignominious  death 
upon  the  scaffold.  He  loved  her  with  a  pure,  generous  affec- 
tion. There  is  proof  positive  in  this  letter,  copied  in  her  hand- 
writing into  his  notebook,  that  such  a  man  was  William  Palmer 
when  only  a  few  years  younger  than  he  is  now — 

"  My  dearest  Annie, — I  snatch  a  moment  to  write  to  your 
dear,  dear  little  self.  I  need  scarcely  say  the  principal  induce- 
ment I  have  to  work  is  the  desire  of  getting  my  studies  finished, 
so  as  to  be  able  to  press  your  dear  little  form  in  my  arms. 
With  best,  best  love,  believe  me,  dearest  Annie,  your  own 
William." 

Now,  this  is  not  the  sort  of  letter  that  is  generally  read  in 
Courts  of  justice.  It  was  no  part  of  my  instructions  to  read 
it  to  you,  but  that  book  was  put  in  to  prove  that  this  man 
was  a  wicked,  heartless,  savage  desperado,  and  I  show  you 
from  it  what  he  was  when  that  letter  was  written — what  his 
deceased  wife  knew  him  to  be  when  she  copied  it — a  young  man 
who  loved  a  young  woman  for  her  own  sake — loved  her  with  a 
pure  and  virtuous  affection,  such  an  affection  as  would  in  almost 
all  natures  be  a  sure  antidote  against  guilt. 

Such,  gentlemen,  is  the  man  whom  it  is  my  duty  to  defend. 
Upon  the  evidence  which  is  before  you  I  cannot  believe  him 
guilty.  Do  not  suppose  for  a  moment  that  he  is  abandoned 
in  this  dreadful  strait  by  his  family  and  friends.  An  aged 
mother,  who  may  have  disapproved  of  some  parts  of  his  conduct, 
expects  in  an  agony  of  grief  your  verdict.  A  dear  sister  can 
scarcely  sustain  herself  under  the  suspense  which  presses  upon 
her.  A  gallant  and  devoted  brother  stands  by  him  to  defend 
him,  sparing  neither  time  nor  labour  to  save  him  from  an  awful 
doom.  I  call  upon  you  to  expand  your  minds  to  a  capacity  for 
estimating  the  high  duty  that  you  have  to  perform.  You  have 
to  stem  the  torrent  of  prejudice ;  you  have  to  vindicate  the 
honour  and  character  of  your  country ;  you  have  with  firm- 
ness and  courage  to  do  your  duty,  and  find  a  verdict  for  the 
Crown,  if  you  believe  that  guilt  is  proved  ;  but  if  you  have  a 
doubt  upon  the  point,  depend  upon  it  the  time  will  come  when 
the  innocence  of  this  man  will  be  made  apparent,  and  when 
you  will  deeply  regret  any  want  of  due  and  calm  consideration 
of  the  case  which  it  will  be  my  duty  to  lay  before  you. 

The  Court  then  adjourned. 


1 60 


Note  •written  by  Palmer  to  his  Counsel  •while  in  the  dock 
at  the  Old  Bailey 


Eighth  Day,  22nd  May,  1856. 

The  Court  met  at  ten  o'clock. 
Evidence  for  the  Defence. 

Mr.  THOMAS  NUNNELEY,  examined  by  Mr.  GROVE — I  am  a  T.  Nunneley 
Fellow  of  the  College  of  Surgeons,  Professor  of  Surgery  at  the 
Leeds  School  of  Medicine,  and  a  member  of  several  foreign  and 
English  scientific  societies.  I  have  been  in  practice  between 
twenty  and  thirty  years.  I  have  seen  cases  of  both  traumatic 
and  idiopathic  tetanus.  One  of  the  four  cases  of  idiopathic 
tetanus  I  have  seen  did  not  commence  with  the  symptoms  of 
lockjaw,  nor  did  lockjaw  occur  sufficiently  to  prevent  swallow- 
ing during  the  whole  period  of  illness.  I  have  been  present 
during  the  evidence  given  here  as  to  the  symptoms  of  Mr. 
Cook.  I  had  previously  read  the  portions  of  the  depositions 
as  to  the  scientific  and  medical  part  of  the  case.  Judging  from 
the  symptoms  as  described,  and  confining  myself  to  the  evidence 
as  to  the  scientific  part  of  the  case,  my  opinion  is  that  Mr. 
Cook  died  from  some  convulsive  disease.  I  found  that  upon 
the  difference  of  the  symptoms  described  in  the  deposition 
and  on  the  evidence  before  the  Court. 

LOKD  CAMPBELL — This  is  not  satisfactory ;  we  cannot  ask 
witnesses  what  faith  they  give  to  the  evidence  of  the  witnesses 
as  contrasted  with  the  depositions.  This  witness's  opinion 
ought  to  be  founded  on  the  viva  voce  evidence  of  the  witnesses 
given  during  the  trial. 

Examination  resumed — The  previous  state  of  health  of  Mr. 
Cook  had  some  effect  on  my  judgment. 

State  your  own  grounds  in  your  own  way  for  that  opinion? 
— If  I  take  the  evidence  which  has  occurred  in  Court — 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — The  evidence  of  the  symptoms  of  John 
Parsons  Cook  as  stated  by  the  witnesses? — Not  merely  the 
symptoms,  but  the  general  state  of  health. 

But  we  have  nothing  to  do  with  that.  The  witness  should 
give  his  opinion  on  the  symptoms  described,  and  then  state 
what  influences  the  other  facts  may  have  had  on  his  mind. 

By  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — Do  you  remember  the  accounts  that 
were  given  of  what  was  said  or  supposed  to  be  syphilitic  sores? 

The  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — But  there  was  no  such  thing  said. 

Mr.  BARON  ALDERSON — Supposing  a  person  had  syphilitic 
sores,  what  would  you  say  then?  That  is  the  proper  way  of 
putting  it. 

LORD  CAMPBELL —  We  must  take  it  that  medical  men  are  not 
to  be  substituted  for  the  jury. 

Mr.  JUSTICE  CRESWELL — If  I  were  to  suggest  a  mode  of  meet- 
ing the  thing  it  would   be  this — let  the   gentleman   describe 
M  161 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

T.  Nonneley  what  he  assumes  to  be  the  state  of  the  deceased's  health  at  the 
time,  then  the  Attorney- General  may  say  he  is  not  justified  in 
assuming. 

Examination  resumed — Will  you  do  that  having  heard  the 
evidence? — I  assume  him  to  have  been  a  man  of  very  delicate 
constitution ;  that  for  a  long  period  he  felt  himself  to  be  ill, 
for  which  he  had  been  under  medical  treatment ;  that  he  had 
suffered  from  syphilis ;  had  disease  of  the  lungs ;  had  an  old- 
standing  disease  of  the  throat;  led  an  irregular  life;  was 
subject  to  mental  excitement  and  depression ;  that  after  death 
traces  were  found  in  his  body  which  show  this  to  have  been 
the  case ;  there  was  found  an  unusual  appearance  within  the 
stomach ;  the  throat  was  in  an  unnatural  condition ;  the  back 
of  the  tongue  showed  similar  indications ;  the  lungs  were  in  an 
emphysematous  condition,  that  is,  the  air  cells  dilated;  in  the 
lining  of  the  aorta  or  large  artery  of  the  body  there  was  an  un- 
natural deposit;  and  there  was  a  very  unusual  appearance  in  the 
membranes  of  the  spinal  marrow.  These  are  the  indications 
which  are  unnatural  in  the  post-mortem  examination.  I  should 
also  state  it  is  described  by  one  of  the  witnesses  that  there  was 
a  loss  of  substance  of  the  penis.  The  symptoms  on  the  root 
of  the  tongue  and  the  throat  I  ascribe  to  syphilitic  inflamma- 
tion of  the  throat.  From  these  symptoms  I  have  described 
I  should  infer  that  his  health  had  not  been  good  for  long,  and 
that  his  constitution  was  delicate.  It  was  also  stated  that 
his  father  and  mother  had  died  young,  and  that  the  brother 
and  sister  were  both  delicate.  That  being  the  state  of  health 
of  Mr.  Cook,  he  would  be  liable  to  nervous  irritation.  Excite- 
ment or  depression  might  bring  it  on.  Exposure  to  wet  and 
cold  would  have  a  greater  effect  than  on  a  healthy  person.  It 
is  a  condition  of  the  constitution  when  a  convulsive  disease  is 
more  likely  to  supervene. 

What  would  you  infer  from  the  fact,  supposing  it  to  have 
occurred,  that  three  days  before  death  he  suddenly  woke  up 
in  the  middle  of  the  night  in  a  state  described  as  madness,  for 
two  or  three  minutes  1  I  understand  that  he  had  three  attacks 
on  succeeding  nights,  each  occurring  about  the  same  hour. 
Would  you  draw  any  inference  from  that  circumstance? — Yes, 
that  they  were  of  a  convulsive  character,  in  the  absence  of 
other  causes  to  account  for  it.  Convulsive  effects  are  extremely 
variable  in  their  forms  and  degrees  of  violence.  It  is  not 
possible  to  give  a  definite  name  to  every  convulsive  attack. 
There  are  some  forms  of  violent  convulsions,  such  as  hysteria, 
in  which  the  patient  retains  his  consciousness.  It  is  stated 
that  there  are  forms  of  convulsions,  epileptic  in  their  character, 
in  which  the  patient  retains  his  consciousness. 

By  LORD    CAMPBELL — Have    you    met   with    any? — No,    not 
during  a  fit. 
162 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

But  it  is  during  a  state  of  fit  we  are  inquiring  ? — I  have  not.  T.  Nunneley 

Examination  resumed — I  know  by  my  reading  as  a  medical 
man  that  that  does  occur  sometimes.  The  degree  of  conscious- 
ness in  epilepsy  varies  very  much ;  in  some  attacks  the  con- 
sciousness is  altogether  lost.  Convulsive  attacks  are  sometimes 
accompanied  by  violent  spasms  and  with  rigidity  of  portions 
of  the  body.  Convulsions  arising  from  a  convulsive  disease, 
either  from  infancy  or  from  other  causes,  but  not  exactly 
tetanus,  sometimes  assume  something  of  the  complexion  of 
tetanic  affection.  Such  convulsions  might  arise  from  any 
cause — worms  in  children,  affections  of  the  brain  in  adults, 
hysteria,  administration  of  chloroform  to  some  persons.  Indi- 
gestible food  will  sometimes  produce  convulsions  in  adults.  I 
agree  with  Dr.  Copland,  whose  book  was  referred  to  yesterday, 
that  these  convulsions  sometimes  end  immediately  in  death. 
Asphyxia  is  frequently  the  cause  of  death  when  a  man  dies  in 
one  of  these  convulsions.  I  have  seen  convulsions  of  the  char- 
acter I  have  described  recurring  at  various  intervals,  sometimes 
in  hours,  in  other  cases  days.  The  time  also  varies  very  much 
when  a  patient,  suffering  from  a  violent  paroxysm  of  such 
convulsions,  becomes  easier ;  it  may  be  hours  or  minutes. 
When  death  takes  place  in  the  paroxysm  of  such  convulsions  it 
sometimes  happens  in  post-mortem  examinations  that  there 
is  no  trace  of  organic  disease  in  the  body. 

Have  you  known  at  all  or  frequently  in  persons,  not  further 
advanced  in  years  than  the  age  of  twenty-eight,  granules 
between  the  dura  mater  and  the  arachnoid? — They  are  not 
common  to  any  age  that  I  am  aware  of. 

Do  you  know  whether  granules  have  been  part  of  the  symp- 
toms of  tetaniform  convulsions? — I  have  seen  three  prepara- 
tions in  St.  Thomas's  Hospital  museum  where  granules  are 
found  in  the  membranes  of  the  spinal  cord,  in  which  patients 
are  said  to  have  died  of  tetanus.  In  order  to  ascertain  with 
satisfaction  the  nature  and  probable  extent  of  the  injury  of 
such  granules  the  spinal  cord  should  be  examined  immediately 
after  death.  Not  the  most  remote  medical  judgment  could  be 
formed  if  the  examination  was  made  two  or  three  months  after 
death.  If  an  examination  of  the  spinal  cord  is  made  so  long 
after  death,  if  there  had  been  a  large  tumour  or  some  similar 
change,  it  might  have  been  discovered ;  but  neither  softening 
nor  induration  of  the  minute  structure  of  the  cord  could  be 
detected.  The  minute  nervous  structures  change  within  two 
hours  after  death. 

I  have  in  the  course  of  my  experience  had  cases  of  traumatic 
tetanus.  It  generally  begins  by  an  attack  of  the  jaw.  I 
have  had  under  my  personal  observation  four  cases  of  idio- 
pathic  tetanus.  One  of  them  was  my  own  child.  In  three 
cases  the  symptoms  commenced  with  lockjaw.  In  the  fourth 

163 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

T.  Nunneley  case  the  symptoms  commenced  in  the  body ;  the  power  of 
swallowing  easily  was  retained  to  the  last.  Within  the  last 
twelve  months  I  have  made  a  post-mortem  examination  of  two 
women  who  have  died  from  the  poison  of  strychnia.  In  both 
cases  it  was  by  chemical  analysis  that  I  ascertained  the  deaths 
had  been  caused  by  strychnia.  In  one  case  the  post-mortem 
took  place  forty-two  hours  after  death,  in  the  other  case  thirty 
hours. 

(The  witness  produced  his  report  to  the  coroner  on  these  two 
cases.) 

I  have  not  seen  a  fatal  case,  but  several  of  taking  too  large 
a  dose.  One,  a  middle-aged  man,  took  one-sixth  of  a  grain  of 
strychnia,  given  in  solution.  In  a  very  few  minutes  the 
symptoms  manifested  themselves  by  the  want  of  power  of  con- 
trolling the  muscles,  by  twitching  and  rigidity,  with  some 
cramp,  more  violent  in  the  legs  than  any  part  of  the  body. 
He  was  up  and  walking  about.  It  was  not  a  severe  case.  In 
six  hours  the  spasms  entirely  disappeared.  They  were  inter- 
mittent in  character,  every  two  or  three  seconds  at  first.  The 
other  case  was  similar  with  one-twelfth  of  a  grain. 

I  have  experimented  on  upwards  of  sixty  animals — dogs, 
cats,  mice,  rats,  guinea  pigs,  rabbits,  frogs,  and  toads.  After 
the  ingestion  of  the  poison  the  symptoms  appear  from  two 
minutes  to  thirty,  more  generally  about  five  or  six.  The 
symptoms  in  their  order  are — a  desire  to  be  quite  still ;  hurried 
breathing ;  slavering  at  the  mouth  when  given  at  the  mouth ; 
twitching  of  the  ears;  trembling  of  the  muscles;  inability  to- 
walk ;  convulsion  of  all  the  muscles  of  the  body ;  the  jaws  gener- 
ally being  firmly  closed  during  convulsions ;  these  convulsions 
followed  by  a  total  want  of  power  in  the  muscles,  which,  in 
the  last  attacks,  were  thrown  into  violent  spasms  with  a 
galvanic-like  shock  running  through  them.  Spasms  come  on  if 
the  animal  is  either  touched  or  attempts  to  move.  These  spasms 
occur  at  various  periods.  The  animals  die  at  various  periods  up 
to  three  and  a  half  hours.  In  every  case  before  death  the  rigidity 
ceases,  and  the  muscles  are  quite  soft  and  powerless.  The 
longest  intervals  between  the  violent  convulsions  in  the  animals 
to  which  strychnia  has  been  administered  has  been  about  half 
an  hour,  but  that  is  not  common.  After  death  the  hearts  of 
the  animals  have  been  invariably  full  on  the  right  side,  very 
generally  the  left  ventricle  firmly  contracted,  and  the  blood 
usually  dark  and  often  fluid.  There  is  no  particular  appear- 
ance attached  to  the  spine.  I  have  attended  to  the  evidence 
as  to  the  symptoms  of  Mr.  Cook  on  the  Monday  and  Tuesday 
nights. 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — What  do  you  assume  the  symptoms  to 
have  been  on  the  Saturday  night? — A  state  of  great  excitement 
in  a  less  severe  form;  that  Mr.  Cook  described  himself  to  have 
been  very  ill. 

164 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Examination  resumed — What  else? — In   a  condition  that  he  T.  Nunneley 
considered  himself  mad   for  two  minutes,  caused,   he  stated, 
through  some  noise  in  the  street. 

Now,  adverting  to  the  symptoms  described  on  these  three 
occasions  here  in  the  Court,  is  it  your  opinion  that  they  could 
have  been  produced  by  the  poison  of  strychnia? — They  did  not 
resemble  what  I  have  seen  to  follow  it.  He  had  more  power  of 
voluntary  motion — sitting  up  in  bed,  moving  his  hands  about, 
freely  swallowing,  and  asking  to  be  rubbed  and  moved,  and  a 
greater  length  of  time  occurred  from  the  taking  of  the  pills 
supposed  to  contain  strychnia  and  the  occurrence  of  the 
symptoms,  much  greater  than  any  period  that  has  occurred  in 
my  experience. 

Does  any  observation  occur  to  you  on  the  screaming? — The 
screaming  foreran  the  vomiting.  I  have  never  seen  an  animal 
vomit  after  taking  strychnia,  nor  scream  as  an  expression  of 
voluntary  exercise.  Where  there  is  so  much  spasm  there  is  an 
inability  on  the  part  of  the  patient  to  vomit.  I  have  a  case, 
which  is  related  in  the  10th  volume  of  the  Journal  de 
Pharmacie,  in  which  attempts  were  made  to  give  emetics 
without  success. 

With  reference  to  the  post-mortem  observations  of  animals 
poisoned  by  strychnia,  could  you  form  any  opinion  on  the 
post-mortem  examination  of  Mr.  Cook  whether  he  had  been 
under  the  influence  of  poison? — They  differ  materially  in  the 
particulars  I  have  mentioned.  The  heart  is  stated  to  be  empty 
and  contracted,  the  state  of  the  lungs  not  congested,  the  state 
of  the  brain  not  congested. 

In  the  case  of  the  paroxysms  of  the  animals  what  has  been 
the  course  of  the  subsiding  of  the  paroxysm? — Gradual.  I  have 
never  known  a  case  of  a  severe  paroxysm  return,  and  then  a 
long  interval  of  complete  repose  for  several  hours.  I  have 
known  it  for  half  an  hour. 

I  have  experimented  on  the  bodies  of  animals  poisoned  by 
strychnia  with  a  view  of  discovering  the  strychnia  poison  from 
a  few  hours  up  to  the  forty-third  day,  the  body  being  perfectly 
putrid  in  the  latter  case.  In  no  one  case  have  I  failed  to  discover 
the  poison. 

Suppose  a  person  to  have  died  under  the  immediate  effects 
of  strychnia  poison,  in  the  first  paroxysm  after  its  administra- 
tion, and  his  stomach  to  have  been  taken  out  and  put  into  a 
jar  on  the  sixth  day  after  death,  in  your  opinion  must  strychnia 
have  been  found  in  the  body  on  proper  chemical  analysis? — If 
it  were  there. 

Adverting  to  the  statement  about  the  stomach  being  put  in 
a  jar,  brought  up  to  London,  and  then  immediately  submitted 
to  examination,  in  your  judgment  was  that  in  an  unfavourable 
or  favourable  condition  for  ascertaining  whether  the  strychnia 

165 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

T.  Nunneley  was  there? — It  would  give  a  little  more  trouble;  I  do  not  see 
anything  else.  It  is  not  my  opinion  that  the  analysis  may  be 
defeated  or  confused  by  the  existence  in  the  stomach  of  any 
other  substance  which  would  produce  the  same  colours. 

Supposing  death  to  have  been  caused  by  a  dose  of  strychnia 
poison  sufficient,  but  not  more  than  sufficient,  to  destroy  the 
animal,  in  your  judgment  would  it  be  so  decomposed  by  the 
process  of  absorption  as  that  you  would  not  be  able  to  detect 
it  by  those  tests  in  any  portion  of  the  system? — No. 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — It  is  a  question  on  which  toxicologists 
have  entertained  a  different  opinion? — I  believe  they  have. 

Examination  resumed — Have  you  studied  the  question  suffi- 
ciently to  be  able  to  state  reasons  for  thinking  the  minimum 
dose,  after  having  done  its  work,  continues  in  the  system? — I 
believe  the  illustration  given  was  that  as  food  undergoes  a 
change  on  being  taken  into  the  body,  these  substances  also  do. 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — It  has  been  said  that  the  decomposition 
of  food  affords  an  analogy? — It  has.  I  believe  not.  The  change 
in  food  takes  place  during  digestion,  consequently  these  elements 
are  not  found  in  the  blood,  or,  if  the  change  does  not  take 
place  there,  they  remain  unchanged  in  the  blood.  These 
alkaloids  are  absorbed  without  digestion,  and  may  be  obtained 
unchanged  from  the  blood. 

Cross-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — About  half  of  the 
experiments  on  the  sixty  animals  I  spoke  of  were  made  in  con- 
junction with  Mr.  Morley,  the  gentleman  who  was  called  for 
the  prosecution.  A  few  of  these  experiments  were  made  in 
connection  with  this  case,  but  the  great  bulk  certainly  not. 

You  have  not  told  us  what  may  be  material,  the  general  dose 
given? — The  general  dose  given  in  the  experiments  has  been 
from  half  a  grain  to  two  grains.  I  have  seen  a  cat  and  a  dog  die 
from  half  a  grain,  not  always.  There  are  varying  degrees  of 
susceptibility  both  in  animals  of  different  species  and  in 
individuals  of  the  same  species. 

You  say  that  the  symptoms  generally  appear  in  from  two 
to  thirty  minutes ;  Mr.  Morley  states  two  minutes  to  an  hour ; 
will  you  undertake  to  say  there  have  not  been  cases  in  which 
the  first  appearances  have  been  delayed  an  hour? — I  do. 

Have  you  not  known  instances  in  which  you  have  had  to 
repeat  the  doses  of  poison? — When  the  dose  has  not  been 
sufficient  to  kill,  but  to  produce  symptoms,  there  is  a  wide 
difference.  I  have  given  it  three  times.  The  quantity  I  gave 
was  half  a  grain.  That  in  the  solid  state  would  be  a  small  dose 
to  kill  an  old  strong  cat;  a  small  dose  will  suffice  in  the  fluid 
form.  Where  the  half -grain  dose  has  been  given  three  times 
the  reason  was  that  the  cat  did  not  swallow  the  doses. 

With  regard  to  the  symptoms  you  have  described  to  us,  can 
you  tell  me  whether  the  result  of  your  observations  is  that 
1 66 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

these   symptoms   occur   uniformly,    or   at   uniform   periods   of  T.  Nunneley 
time,   or  whether  they  vary  occasionally? — They  certainly  do 
not  occur  at  uniform  periods  of  time.     I  have  not  observed 
considerable  variation  in  the  order,  but  I  have  in  the  time. 

When  the  convulsions  have  once  set  in  have  you  found  con- 
siderable difference  as  to  the  periods  at  which  they  take  place? 
— Some  difference,  with  greater  or  less  intervals. 

Have  you  also  found  that  one  animal  will  have  a  succession 
of  attacks  before  it  dies,  and  another  will  die  after  a  much  less 
amount  of  convulsion? — Yes.  An  animal  seldom  dies  after  one 
convulsion,  generally  four  or  five,  and  often  a  great  many 
more.  I  have  known  one  or  two  instances  in  which  the  animals 
have  died  after  one  convulsion. 

From  a  dose  which  in  the  same  quantity  has  not  produced 
the  same  effect  in  other  instances? — Yes. 

Does  the  order  in  which  the  muscles  of  the  body  are  convulsed 
vary  also? — To  some  extent  it  does.  The  convulsions  are  gener- 
ally simultaneous  in  the  muscles  of  the  trunk  and  those  of  the 
extremities.  I  think  the  limbs  are  generally  affected  first; 
they  may  be  simultaneous ;  but  the  limbs  are  more  easily 
observed. 

Have  you  known  any  instance  in  which  rigidity  greater  than 
is  due  to  the  ordinary  rigor-mortis  has  occurred  after  death? — 
I  do  not  think  there  is  any  difference.  I  have  known  instances 
in  which  they  were  very  rigid,  but  I  have  known  instances  in 
which  the  muscles  were  flaccid.  I  may  state  I  do  not  think 
there  is  any  peculiar  rigidity  produced  by  strychnia. 

With  regard  to  the  lady  whose  case  we  do  not  name,  was  it 
not  the  fact  that,  although  the  muscles  of  the  body  were  flexible, 
the  hands  were  curved  and  the  feet  arched  and  muscles  con- 
tracted?— Not  more  than  is  usual  from  ordinary  causes.  I 
have  said  the  hands  were  curved  and  the  feet  arched  by  muscular 
contraction. 

Do  you  mean  to  say  that  when  you  spoke  of  the  feet  being 
decidedly  arched  that  you  meant  no  more  than  is  due  to  the 
ordinary  rigidity  of  death? — I  do;  that  is  what  I  mean  by 
muscular  contraction. 

Do  you  mean  to  say  that  when  you  signed  this,  "  The  hands 
were  incurved  and  the  feet  decidedly  arched  by  muscular  con- 
traction," you  meant  no  more  than  is  due  to  the  ordinary 
rigidity  of  death? — I  do,  and  stated  so  at  the  time,  not  in  the 
report  I  have  signed,  but  in  conversation  with  the  parties 
engaged. 

You  made  a  report  which  did  not  include  the  whole? — It  is 
stated  in  the  former  part  of  the  report  that  the  other  muscles  of 
the  body  were  so;  that  there  was  a  distinction  between  the 
two  portions  of  the  body — a  statement  of  fact,  but  nothing 
more. 

167 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Mr.  Morley  stated  here  the  other  day  that  in  the  experiments 
he  made  with  you  on  animals  killed  with  the  poison,  that  after 
death  there  was  an  interval  of  flaccidity,  after  this  rigidity 
commenced,  more  than  if  it  had  been  occasioned  by  the  usual 
rigor-mortis ;  you  do  not  agree  with  him  as  to  the  statement  of 
the  fact? — I  do  not;  it  is  a  difference  of  opinion  entirely. 

You  say  you  generally  found  the  heart  full? — Yes,  the 
right  side.  The  fact  of  the  heart  having  been  found  empty  in 
this  case,  amongst  other  things,  leads  me  to  the  conclusion  that 
it  was  not  a  death  by  strychnia  poison. 

Did  you  hear  the  evidence  given  here  the  other  day  of  the 
post-mortem? — I  did.  I  also  heard  this  stated,  "  that  the  heart 
was  contracted  and  empty."  I  believe  I  was  in  Court  when  the 
gentleman  who  conducted  it  gave  his  evidence  of  the  post- 
mortem examination  of  Mrs.  Smyth,  who  died  from  the 
unfortunate  administration  of  strychnia. 

In  those  two  cases  does  the  fact  of  the  heart  having  been 
found  empty  exercise  any  influence  on  your  judgment? — Not 
unless  I  know  how  the  post-mortem  was  made.  If  the  post- 
mortem was  commenced  in  the  head,  the  explanation  is  given 
by  Mr.  Morley  and  myself  in  the  case  at  Leeds.  We  had  no 
doubt  of  the  heart  being  full,  the  blood  being  fluid,  but  the  head 
being  first  opened,  and  the  large  vessels  cut,  the  consequence 
was  that  the  blood  by  mere  natural  physical  causes  drains  away. 
Are  you  aware  how  the  post-mortem  was  made  in  this 
particular  case  of  Mr.  Cook? — It  is  stated  that  the  chest  and 
abdomen  were  opened  before  the  head. 

What  effect  would  that  have? — If  there  were  blood  in  the 
heart  it  ought  to  be  there. 

That  would  not  make  the  difference.  The  head  was  not 
opened  there  in  the  first  instance  ? — No ;  that  is  my  explanation 
of  it. 

How  do  you  account  for  the  emptiness  and  contraction  of 
the  heart  in  Mr.  Cook's  case? — The  heart,  if  empty,  is  usually 
contracted.  I  cannot  account,  from  the  appearance  of  the 
body  after  death,  for  the  emptiness  of  the  heart,  any  more  than 
it  might  be  the  usual  effect  of  death.  It  varies  very  much, 
but,  as  a  general  rule  in  post-mortem  examinations,  we  find, 
if  the  heart  is  empty,  it  is  contracted. 

If  I  understand  you,  the  post-mortem  appearance  of  Cook's 
body,  which  you  say  differs  materially  from  those  you  have 
seen  after  death  from  strychnia,  were  the  emptiness  of  the 
heart,  the  state  of  the  lungs,  and  the  want  of  congestion  in  the 
brain.  What  do  you  say  as  to  the  state  of  the  lungs? — The 
lungs  are  described  as  not  being  congested. 

Do  you  attach  any  importance  to  the  emphysema? — It  is  of 
two  kinds.       One  consists  in  a  dilatation  of  the  cells,  the  other 
1 68 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

in  a  rupture  by  which  the  air,  not  being  in  the  cells,   passes  T.  Nunneley 
amongst  them. 

I  suppose  you  say  it  was  not  from  the  rupture  of  the  cells 
here? — That  I  inferred  from  the  description  given. 

Have  you  not  found  emphysema  in  the  cases  of  the  animals 
that  have  died? — Yes.  It  has  always  been  from  a  rupture  of 
the  cells.  It  could  be  in  no  other  way. 

What  is  there  in  the  statement  of  witnesses  which  makes  you 
think  there  was  emphysema  of  the  other  sort? — There  was 
during  life  a  diseased  condition  of  the  lungs. 

I  am  speaking  of  the  appearance  of  the  lungs  after  death? — 
I  must  put  the  whole  together. 

Would  it  not  have  been  desirable  to  know  whether  this 
emphysema  was  natural  or  whether  it  was  from  rupture?  We 
heard  the  witnesses  here  who  made  the  post-mortem  examina- 
tion?— If  the  question  had  been  put  to  them. 

But  you  were  advising  my  friends  throughout,  while  Dr. 
Harland  was  here,  and  you  heard  what  he  said.  Did  it  occur 
to  you  it  was  proper  to  ask  him  what  was  the  nature  of  those  ? — 
No,  because  I  heard  (which  was  sufficient  to  my  mind)  that 
disease  had  existed.  The  question  was  put,  as  to  the  disease, 
to  Dr.  Savage. 

I  am  speaking  of  this  emphysema  ? — It  did  not  occur  to  me. 

You  have  told  us  the  various  symptoms  about  this  gentleman, 
from  which  you  gather  he  was  of  a  delicate  constitution.  To 
which  do  you  ascribe  these  convulsions  of  which  he  died? — Not 
to  any. 

I  understood  you  to  say  that  the  fact  of  his  having  syphilis 
was  an  important  ingredient  in  your  mind? — Yes,  but  you  ask 
for  convulsions. 

You  have  no  doubt  he  died  of  convulsions? — No. 

You  entered  into  a  long  detail  of  the  various  ailments  under 
which  this  unfortunate  man  suffered,  and  you  say  that  this 
would  predispose  him  to  convulsions.  I  ask  you  which  of 
them? — The  whole;  the  continuation  of  them. 

Amongst  others  you  mentioned  excitement? — Yes,  and  de- 
pression of  spirits. 

What  evidence  is  there,  on  which  you  rely,  of  his  being  a 
man  subject  to  depression  of  spirits? — It  is  stated  by  Mr.  Jones 
that  he  was  subject  to  depression  of  spirits — mental  depression. 
There  was  a  good  deal  of  mental  depression  at  Rugeley. 

Would  you  expect  excitement  to  produce  its  effects  recently 
in  its  existence,  or  after  it  was  totally  and  entirely  gone? — It 
may  induce  that  state  of  brain  in  which  convulsions  will  follow 
at  some  distance. 

Did  you  find  from  the  evidence  that  the  brain  was  perfectly 
healthy? — No,  not  perfectly  healthy.  Mr.  Bamford  said  it 
was  not. 

169 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Do  you  mean,  as  against  the  reputed  testimony,  and  the 
testimony  here  of  Dr.  Harland  and  Dr.  Moncton,  as  well  as 
Mr.  Devonshire,  to  set  up  the  testimony  of  that  old  gentleman, 
Mr.  Bamford? — The  evidence  stated  at  the  inquest  itself  is  put 
in  the  depositions. 

Do  you  mean  to  say,  in  your  opinion,  that  excitement,  pro- 
ducing disease  of  the  brain,  would  bring  on  these  convulsions? — 
I  mean  to  say  this,  that  in  the  condition  of  the  brain,  and  the 
statement  that  has  been  made,  I  believe  it  to  be  quite  probable 
that  convulsions  might  come  on  and  destroy  a  person,  and  leave 
no  trace  behind. 

Do  you  believe  that  this  man  died  of  apoplexy? — I  do  not. 
You  must  bear  in  mind  he  had  taken  doses  of  morphia. 

Do  you  ascribe  his  death  to  morphia? — No,  except  that  it 
would  assist  in  the  convulsive  attack,  and  it  would  affect  the 
spinal  marrow. 

Brought  about  by  the  morphia? — No. 

In  your  opinion  was  morphia  right  treatment  or  wrong? — I 
should  think  not  very  good  in  the  state  of  excitement  he  was 
in  then. 

Do  you  mean  that  there  has  been  anything  to  show  any 
excitement  at  Rugeley? — You  will  not  allow  me  to  furnish  an 
answer.  There  was  no  excitement  at  Rugeley,  but  morphia, 
when  there  is  sickness,  will  sometimes  disagree  with  a  patient 
when  there  is  an  irritable  state  of  the  brain. 

The  stomach  was  irritated,  I  will  allow,  but  where  is  the  evi- 
dence that  there  was  any  excitement  at  Rugeley? — There  is 
none. 

Then  why  was  morphia  a  wrong  treatment? — Because  it  is 
after  sickness,  and  there  is  evidence  of  there  being  an  irritable 
state  of  the  brain.  From  what  he  said  himself,  he  must  either 
have  been  delirious  on  the  Sunday  night,  or  he  must  have  had 
some  attack  similar  to  what  he  had  on  the  Monday  night. 

Do  you  mean  the  attack  of  the  Sunday  night  was  similar  to 
that  on  the  Monday  night? — Less  intensity,  but  I  think  very 
probably  of  the  same  character. 

You  do  believe  there  were  convulsions  on  the  Sunday  night, 
then? — No,  I  do  not. 

He  died  of  convulsions? — Yes,  but  I  say  of  the  same  character. 

Then  you  do  believe  he  had  convulsions? — To  a  certain 
extent,  but  less  in  intensity.  There  was  a  great  deal  of  mental 
and  bodily  excitement. 

On  the  Monday  night? — I  have  stated  to  you  that  he  was  in 
that  condition  which  very  often  precedes  convulsions. 

Will  you  admit  if  a  man  so  under  the  influence  of  morphia 
and  he  is  suddenly  disturbed  by  a  noise,  it  is  likely  to  have  a 
depressing    effect  upon  him? — I    will;   but   there   is    no  proof 
of  a  noise. 
170 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

There  is  no  proof,  except  his  own  statement,  of  any  illness  ?  T.  Nunneley 
— Precisely;  that  is  part  of  my  opinion — that  he  did  not  state 
•what  had  occurred  accurately. 

Do  you  mean  to  say  that  he  did  not  state  that  thing? — No; 
that  he  was  mistaken.  That  is  one  of  the  symptoms.  I 
believe  the  man  to  have  been  delirious  then. 

Now,  be  so  good  as  to  tell  me  what  are  the  convulsions  of 
which  you  gave  some  statement  to  my  friend  which  will  produce 
convulsions  of  a  tetanic  form  1 — Any  irritation  will  produce  it. 

Ending  in  death? — It  may  end  in  death. 

Will  you  tell  me  of  any  convulsions  which  you  have  known 
end  in  death  accompanied  with  what  my  friend  calls  tetanic 
symptoms? — I  have  known  them  in  children.  I  have  never  had 
such  a  case  in  an  adult. 

Has  your  reading  furnished  you  with  any  ? — The  general  state- 
ment of  all  writers  is  that  such  cases'  do  occur. 

Have  you  ever  known  or  read  of  a  case  in  which  the  patient 
was  conscious  to  the  last? — No,  I  have  not.  I  have  seen  it 
stated  so,  but  I  have  never  met  with  it. 

In  epilepsy  you  have  these  tetanic  symptoms? — Yes,  but 
before  death  consciousness  is  gone. 

You  have  had  considerable  experience  in  idiopathic  tetanus, 
and  some  five  or  six,  perhaps,  of  traumatic.  (An  extract  from 
the  evidence  of  Mr.  Jones  was  read.)  I  have  read  to  you  the 
description  of  Cook's  symptoms  as  witnessed  by  Mr.  Jones.  I 
ask  you  to  point  out  any  distinction  between  those  symptoms  and 
the  symptoms  of  tetanus? — Do  you  mean  the  one  paroxysm  or 
the  disease  which  is  called  tetanus? 

I  am  speaking  of  the  paroxysm  of  tetanus? — It  is  very  like. 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — You  say  this  is  not  tetanus  at  all? — It 
is  not.  I  never  saw  a  case  of  tetanus  in  which  the  rigidity  con- 
tinued at  the  time  of  death  and  afterwards. 

Cross-examination  resumed — I  am  asking  you  as  to  symptoms 
of  the  paroxysms.  I  understand  you  to  say  the  symptoms  of 
the  paroxysms  are  not  distinguishable  from  those  of  tetanus? — 
Some  of  them  are  at  the  moment  of  death. 

Give  me  any  of  them? 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — This  is  not  tetanus,  but,  as  far  as  they 
go,  they  coincide  with  the  symptoms  of  tetanus  at  the  moment  of 
death? — Yes. 

Cross-examination  resumed — Observe,  you  have  here  conscious- 
ness to  the  last.  That  before  the  man  dies  he  says,  "  Turn 
me  over,"  and  as  soon  as  they  turn  him  over  he  dies.  Tell  me 
of  any  case  you  know  of  in  which  death  has  ensued  from  con- 
vulsions, where  the  death  was  not  from  tetanus,  in  which  the 
patient  was  conscious? — I  have  already  said  I  do  not  know  of 
such  a  case. 

Let  me  call  your  attention  to  strychnia  tetanus.  Would  you 
call  the  symptoms  tetanic? — They  are  called  so  very  properly. 

171 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

T.  Nunneley  Do  you  agree  with  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  that  while  the 
paroxysms  of  tetanic  convulsions  last  there  is  no  difference 
between  those  which  arise  from  strychnia  and  those  which  arise 
from  tetanus  properly  so  called,  but  the  difference  is  in  the 
course  of  them? — I  think  there  is.  I  think  that  the  hands  are 
less  violently  contracted  and  affected  in  ordinary  tetanus,  and 
that  the  whole  effect  of  the  spasms  is  less  in  ordinary  tetanus. 

You  would  expect  to  find  the  hands  more  firmly  and  tightly 
closed  in  tetanus  from  strychnia  than  in  ordinary  tetanus? — I 
think  it  is  so.  There  is  another  difference,  thut  in  tetanus  the 
convulsions  never  entirely  pass  away. 

That  is  one  of  the  reasons  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  gave  for 
distinguishing  the  course? — In  the  case  at  Leeds  it  was  the 
same. 

I  believe  you  felt  perfectly  prepared  in  that  case,  on  the 
description  of  the  symptoms,  to  come  to  the  determination  that 
it  was  a  death  from  strychnia? — I  thought  it  possible  and 
probable.  I  did  not  come  to  a  determined  opinion.  I  expressed 
an  opinion.  I  did  not  say  I  had  no  doubt  as  to  the  cause  of 
death.  We  had  ascertained  at  that  time  that  there  was 
strychnia. 

After  the  opinion  you  expressed  in  that  case,  is  it  possible 
that  you  can  represent  this  case  of  Mr.  Cook  as  one  of  idiopathic 
tetanus? — I  never  did,  and  you  have  not  heard  from  me  that 
I  infer  that. 

I  have  heard  it  said  in  this  case  that  this  may  have  been 
something  arising  from  a  syphilitic  affection? — Idiopathic  or 
traumatic  tetanus  was  mentioned.  I  do  not  think  it  was  a  case 
of  tetanus  in  any  sense  of  the  word. 

Why  not? — I  have  given  the  description.  Because  it  differed 
from  the  course  of  tetanus  from  strychnia  in  the  particulars 
I  have  already  described. 

Repeat  them  once  more? — The  very  sudden  acquisition  of  the 
convulsions  after  the  first  rousing  of  Mr.  Jones;  his  power  of 
talking. 

Did  you  not  know  that  Mrs.  Smyth  begged  to  have  water 
thrown  upon  her,  and  talked  throughout? — It  did  not  occur 
to  me. 

Are  you  judging  of  the  one  incidental  case,  and  coming  here 
with  conclusions  founded  on  that? — I  think  it  is  an  element, 
the  time. 

Then  let  me  add  the  element,  that  the  lady  continues  to  the 
last  conscious,  and  asks  to  have  her  legs  stretched  just  before 
she  died;  does  that  shake  your  faith? — Yes. 

Do  you  not  know  in  that  case  her  last  words  were  to  turn 
her  over? — Not  at  the  last  moment.     I  do  not  dispute  it  if  it 
is  said  so. 
172 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Were  there  not  here  the  premonitory  symptoms ;  the  animals  T.  Nunneley 
are  affected  about  the  jaws  and  the  ears,   and  Mr.  Cook  has 
stiffness  in  his   neck,   and   asks  to  have  it  rubbed? — It  is   a 
premonitory  symptom. 

Was  it  not  a  symptom  of  the  convulsions,  which  are  not 
distinguishable  from  tetanus? — I  have  said  so.  I  have  stated 
here  that  I  believe  in  cases  of  poison  from  strychnia  it  is  first 
developed  in  the  legs  and  feet. 

You  have  told  us  the  animals  began  to  feel  twitching  in  the 
ears.  This  gentleman  had,  before  the  convulsions  came  on, 
stiffness  in  the  muscles  of  the  neck  and  jaw,  and  begged  to 
have  them  rubbed? — That  might  be  if  it  were  anything  else. 

I  ask  you  now,  is  not  the  difficulty  of  breathing  one  of  the 
premonitory  symptoms?  He  sat  up  in  bed  and  complained  of 
feeling  suffocated? — Yes. 

And  felt  a  stiffness  about  the  neck  and  asked  to  have  it 
rubbed,  and,  as  far  as  we  know,  this  was  the  case  in  all  the 
animals,  though  they  could  not  ask  to  be  rubbed.  I  ask  you 
what  were  these  but  premonitory  symptoms? — In  no  one  single 
instance  could  the  animal  bear  to  be  touched,  and  it  evidently 
was  most  painful  to  it  to  be  touched.  I  know  that  Mrs.  Smyth 
asked  to  have  her  legs  and  arms  straightened. 

Let  me  ask  you  this,  have  you  not  often  found  that  it  was 
prior  to  the  occurrence  of  the  paroxysm,  and  not  after  the 
paroxysm? — No,  I  have  seen  a  paroxysm  brought  on  by  it. 

In  all  cases? — No,  not  in  all  cases.  But  in  the  other  case, 
for  two  hours  before  she  died,  when  she  could  speak,  she  begged 
them  not  to  touch  her. 

Did  she  not  ask  to  have  her  legs  rubbed? — That  was  when 
the  attack  was  slight,  not  during  the  fatal  attack. 

After  the  paroxysms  had  set  in,  did  she  not  request  to  be 
rubbed? — She  did  before  the  convulsions  came  on;  she  liked 
to  have  her  feet  and  legs  rubbed. 

Afterwards  she  could  not  bear  it,  because  it  caused  a  recur- 
rence?— Yes. 

That  was  in  consequence  of  the  twitchings,  was  it  not? — I 
think  not.  It  is  stated  by  all  the  witnesses  she  begged  she 
might  not  be  touched. 

But  for  that  one  thing,  that  the  paroxysms  came  on  so  soon 
after  the  first  premonitory  symptom,  is  there  one  single  point 
in  which  this  differs  from  strychnia  tetanus? — The  power  of 
swallowing  so  lately. 

On  what  does  it  depend,  the  inability  to  swallow? — From  the 
inability  to  move  the  jaw. 

I  ask  you  whether  it  is  not  a  fact  that,  unlike  as  in  natural 
tetanus,  in  tetanus  from  strychnia  lockjaw  is  not  the  last 
symptom,  and  very  often  never  sets  in  at  all? — I  have  never 
seen  an  instance  in  which  it  does  not  make  its  appearance. 

i73 


Trial   of  William  Palmer. 

T.  Nunneley       Is  it  the  last? — I  do  not  deny  that  it  may  be. 

At  what  stage  did  it  come  on  in  the  Leeds  case? — Very  early, 
more  than  two  hours  before  death. 

How  long  did  the  paroxysms  continue  before  death  took 
place? — Two  hours  and  a  half. 

That  was  in  a  case  in  which  very  large  doses  of  strychnia 
were  administered  ? — We  supposed  four  or  five  times  repeatedly. 

In  the  case  of  Leeds  there  were  four  animals  killed  afterwards 
from  the  contents  of  the  stomach  ? — There  were. 

You  state  that  you  have  succeeded  in  every  case  where  you 
have  tried  in  your  experiments  in  finding  the  strychnia? — Yes. 

Did  not  Mr.  Morley  differ  from  you  in  two  cases? — In  one 
he  did.  We  divided  the  poison  which  we  found  in  the  stomach 
into  two  portions,  and  we  adopted  two  different  processes  for 
extracting  it,  and  by  the  one  process  we  were  both  rather 
doubtful,  but  by  the  other  we  produced  it. 

Now,  you  thought  you  found  it,  and  he  thought  you  did 
not? — Not  that  I  recollect. 

Do  not  you  know  that  Mr.  Morley  has  been  rather  doubtful 
as  to  the  results  of  these  experiments? — No.  Mr.  Morley  stated 
differently  in  his  own  examination. 

In  his  examination  here? — Yes;  if  you  refer  to  it,  except  in 
one  case,  and  that  is  the  explanation  I  give  of  it. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — The  Attorney-General 
directed  your  attention  to  your  report  on  one  of  these  cases 
that  the  hands  were  rigid  and  the  feet  incurved.  In  reports 
of  this  kind  do  you  state  only  extraordinary  appearances,  or 
ordinary  appearances  as  well? — Ordinary  appearances  also. 
It  is  a  statement  of  a  fact  without  anything  more. 

W.  Herepath  j^r  WILLIAM  HEREPATH,  examined  by  Mr.  GROVE — I  am  Pro- 
fessor of  Chemistry  and  Toxicologist  at  the  Bristol  Medical 
School.  I  have  been  occupied  in  chemistry  forty  years  and  in 
toxicology  probably  thirty.  I  have  experimented  on  the  poison 
of  strychnia.  I  have  examined  the  contents  of  the  stomach  of 
a  patient  who  died  from  strychnia.  I  discovered  the  strychnia 
in  the  contents  of  the  stomach  three  days  after  death.  I  have 
experimented  upon  eight,  nine,  or  ten  animals.  In  the  case 
of  a  cat,  to  which  I  gave  one  grain  of  strychnia  in  solid  form, 
I  could  not  get  the  animal  to  take  it  voluntarily,  and  I  left  it 
in  meat  at  night.  I  found  the  animal  dead  next  morning. 
The  body  was  dreadfully  contorted — extremely  rigid,  the  fore 
limbs  extended,  the  head  turned  round  to  the  side,  the  eyes 
protruding  and  staring,  the  iris  expanded  so  as  to  be  almost 
invisible.  I  found  in  the  urine  which  had  been  ejected  strychnia, 
and  also  in  the  stomach.  I  gave  the  same  quantity  of  strychnia 
to  another  cat.  It  remained  very  quiet  for  fifteen  or  sixteen 

174 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

minutes,  with  but  few  symptoms  until  thirty-five  minutes.  It  W.  Herepath 
merely  seemed  a  little  restless  with  its  eyes,  the  breathing  a 
little  quickened,  and  at  thirty-five  minutes  it  had  a  terrible 
spasm,  the  four  extremities  and  the  head  being  drawn  together. 
I  watched  it  for  three  hours  more.  After  this  it  had  a  second 
spasm.  A  frothing  saliva  was  dripping  from  its  mouth,  and  it 
forcibly  ejected  its  urine.  It  had  another  spasm  a  few  minutes 
after,  when  I  thought  the  animal  would  die.  It  soon  recovered 
itself,  and  then  remained  quiet,  with  the  exception  of  a 
trembling  all  over.  The  slightest  breath  of  air  would  affect  it. 
It  continued  in  this  state  for  some  time  longer.  During  this 
three  hours  and  a  half,  or  nearly  so,  the  animal  was  in  a 
peculiar  state.  Touching  it  appeared  to  electrify  it  all  through, 
even  blowing  upon  it  produced  the  same  effect.  Touching  the 
basket,  the  slightest  thing  that  could  affect  the  animal,  pro- 
duced a  sort  of  electric  jump.  I  left  it  then,  thinking  it  would 
recover,  but  in  the  morning  I  found  it  dead,  in  the  same 
indurated  and  contracted  condition  in  which  the  former  animal 
was  found.  About  thirty-six  hours  afterwards,  by  chemical 
examination,  I  found  strychnia  in  the  urine,  the  stomach,  and 
upper  intestines,  in  the  liver,  and  in  the  blood  of  the  heart. 
In  my  search  for  strychnia  I  took  extraordinary  means  to  get 
rid  of  the  organic  matter. 

In  all  cases  which  you  have  seen  where  strychnia  has  been 
taken  has  the  examination  been  successful? — Not  only  strychnia, 
but  nux  vomica,  has  been  extracted.  In  one  case  the  animal 
had  been  buried  two  months.  I  have  detected  strychnia  in  cases 
where  it  has  been  mixed  purposely  with  putrid  remains. 

Are  you  of  opinion,  as  a  chemist,  that  where  strychnia  has 
been  taken  in  a  sufficient  dose  to  poison,  it  can  be  detected,  and 
ought  to  be  detected? — Yes,  up  to  the  time  the  body  is  decom- 
posed completely.  Even  where  there  is  putrefaction — where  the 
body  has  become  a  dry  powder.  I  am  of  opinion  that  strychnia 
ought  to  have  been  detected  if  it  had  existed  in  the  jar  con- 
taining the  stomach,  even  in  the  state  it  then  was. 

Cross-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — Until  lately  my 
experiments  for  the  purpose  of  finding  strychnia  have  been 
principally  in  the  stomach.  In  two  cases  I  found  it  in  the 
tissues  of  the  animals.  One  was  the  second  cat,  the  other  a 
dog  to  which  I  gave  the  large  dose  of  one  grain.  Judging  from 
reports  in  newspapers,  I  have  said  in  conversation  that  strychnia 
had  been  given,  and  that  "If  it  was  there,  Professor  Taylor 
ought  to  have  found  it." 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  GROVE — What  is  the  smallest  quantity 
you  have  detected  in  the  tissues  of  the  stomach? — I  am  satisfied 
that  you  could  discover  the  fifty-thousandth  part  of  a  grain 
that  is  unmixed  with  organic  matter.  I  dissolved  the  tenth 
part  of  a  grain  in  a  gallon  of  water,  that  is  1  in  70,000.  I  can 

175 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

W.  Herepath  take  the  tenth  part  of  a  drop  of  the  water  and  demonstrate  the 
presence  of  strychnia. 

What  is  the  smallest  portion  of  strychnia  when  mixed  with 
organic  matter  you  can  detect? — I  took  about  an  eighth  part  of 
the  liver  of  a  dog,  and  from  that  I  had  enough  to  make  four 
distinct  experiments  with  the  four  tests. 

So  that  you  experimented  on  a  thirty-second  part  of  the  liver  ? 
—Yes. 

J. E.D.Rogers  Mr.  JULIAN  EDWARD  DisBROws  ROGERS,  examined  by  Mr.  GRAY 
— I  have  been  sixteen  years  Professor  of  Chemistry  at  St. 
George's  School  of  Medicine,  in  London.  I  made  an  experiment 
with  one  dog  with  a  view  of  extracting  strychnia  from  the  body. 
I  gave  it  two  grains  of  pure  strychnia  between  two  pieces  of 
meat.  Three  days  after  it  was  dead  I  removed  the  stomach 
and  its  contents,  and  took  some  of  the  blood.  I  analysed  the 
blood  ten  days  after  its  removal  from  the  body,  when  it  was 
putrid,  and  found  strychnia  by  the  colour  tests.  About  a 
month  or  five  weeks  afterwards  I  analysed  the  stomach  and  its 
contents,  and  strychnia  was  separated  in  a  large  quantity. 
Having  heard  the  evidence  as  to  the  stomach  and  its  contents 
in  this  case  being  put  in  a  jar  and  sent  to  London,  in  my  judg- 
ment strychnia,  if  it  had  been  administered,  must  have  been 
found  in  the  contents  of  the  stomach. 

Cross-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — I  have  only  made 
one  experiment  with  strychnia  on  this  dog. 

Do  you  think  it  would  make  any  difference  if  the  contents 
were  lost? — If  there  were  no  contents  spread  over  the  intestines, 
then  that  would  make  a  difference.  If  they  had  been  spilt  and 
shaken,  then  it  would  make  no  difference. 

But,  supposing  they  were  not  there? — There  would  be  the 
washings  of  the  stomach.  If  the  stomach  was  sent  me  with 
no  contents,  I  would  wash  the  stomach  and  proceed  with  that. 

If  you  had  tried  on  the  tissues  of  the  deceased's  body  I  sup- 
pose you  would  have  been  able  to  ascertain  whether  there  had 
been  any  strychnia? — That  is  my  opinion. 

So  that  the  time  that  has  elapsed  since  Cook  died  would  not 
matter.  If  you  had  an  opportunity  to  operate  on  it,  you  would 
have  found  the  strychnia  ? — If  it  had  been  there,  I  feel  satisfied 
I  should  find  it. 

LORD  CAMPBELL — Do  you  mean  then  or  now? — I  do  not  see 
that  the  time  would  prevent  it. 

Dr.  HENRY  LETHEBY,  examined  by  Mr.  KBNEALY — I  am  a 
Bachelor  of  Chemistry  and  Professor  of  Medicine  in  the  London 
Hospital;  also  a  medical  officer  of  health  to  the  city  of  London. 
I  have  for  a  considerable  time  studied  poisons.  I  believe  in 
every  case  of  this  kind  tried  in  this  Court  during  the  last  four- 
176 


Evidence  for   Defence. 

teen  years  I  have  been  engaged  on  behalf  of  the  Crown.  I  H.  Letheby 
have  been  present  during  the  examination  of  the  medical 
witnesses  at  this  trial  and  heard  them  describe  certain  symptoms 
attending  the  death  of  Mr.  Cook.  I  have  seen  many  deaths  by 
strychnia  in  the  lower  animals.  I  have  seen  several  cases  of 
nux  vomica  in  the  human  subject,  one  of  which  was  fatal.  The 
symptoms  in  the  animals  do  not  accord  with  the  symptoms  in 
this  case.  In  the  first  place,  I  have  never  known  such  a  long 
interval  between  the  administration  of  the  poison  and  the  coming 
on  of  the  symptoms.  The  longest  interval  has  been  three- 
quarters  of  an  hour,  and  then  the  poison  was  given  in  a  form 
not  easy  of  solution,  and  when  the  stomach  was  full.  I  have 
seen  the  symptoms  begin  in  five  minutes  after  the  poison  was 
administered.  A  quarter  of  an  hour  would  be  the  average. 
Another  reason  is  that  in  all  the  animals  I  have  seen,  and  the 
human  subject  also,  when  under  strychnia,  the  system  has 
been  so  irritable  that  the  very  slightest  excitement,  as  an  effort 
to  move,  a  slight  touch,  a  noise,  or  a  breath  of  air,  will  set  them 
off  in  convulsions.  I  do  not  think  it  at  all  probable  that  a 
person  to  whom  a  dose  of  strychnia  had  been  given  could  rise 
out  of  bed  and  ring  a  bell  violently.  Any  movement  at  all 
would  excite  the  nervous  system,  and  there  would  be  spasms. 
It  is  not  likely  a  person  in  that  state  of  nervous  irritation  could 
bear  to  have  his  neck  rubbed.  Where  poisoning  by  strychnia 
does  not  end  fatally,  the  paroxysm  is  succeeded  by  other 
paroxysms,  which  gradually  shade  themselves  off.  They  gener- 
ally become  less  and  less,  over  a  period  of  some  hours.  My 
experience  agrees  with  Dr.  Christison,  that  it  would  last  over  a 
period  of  sixteen  or  eighteen  hours  before  the  man  gets  better. 
I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  strychnia  is  of  all  poisons  the  most 
easy  of  detection.  I  have  detected  it  in  the  stomach,  in  the 
blood,  and  in  the  tissues  of  animals  in  numerous  instances. 
The  longest  period  after  death  that  I  have  examined  a  body 
has  been  one  month.  The  animal  was  then  in  a  state  of  de- 
composition, and  I  succeeded  in  detecting  very  minute  portions 
of  the  strychnia.  When  the  strychnia  is  pure  it  can  be 
detected  in  a  very  small  portion  of  a  part,  at  least  the  twentieth 
part  of  a  grain.  When  mixed  up  with  other  matter  it  is  a 
little  more  difficult.  I  can  detect  the  tenth  part  of  a  grain  in 
a  pint  of  any  liquid  that  you  put  before  me,  whether  the  liquid 
was  pure  or  putrefied. 

You  have  succeeded  in  detecting  it  in  animals  which  have  been 
killed  a  month,  and  were  in  a  state  of  decomposition.  What 
is  the  dose  you  have  given  them? — I  gave  the  animal,  a  rabbit, 
originally  half  a  grain,  which  killed  it,  and  I  have  the  strychnia 
here  within  a  fraction  of  what  I  gave.  I  lost  about  a  tenth 
part  of  a  grain  in  the  course  of  the  investigation. 

Supposing  a  person  had  taken  strychnia  eight  or  ten  days 

N  177 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

H.  Letheby  before,  and  that  he  died  of  strychnia  poison,  should  you  be 
able  positively  to  say  that  you  could  detect  it? — I  do  say  so 
positively.  I  have  never  failed.  In  the  post-mortem  examina- 
tions I  have  always  found  the  right  side  of  the  heart  full  of 
blood.  The  reason  for  that  is  that  the  death  takes  place  by 
the  fixing  of  the  muscles  of  the  chest  in  spasm.  In  my  opinion 
this  is  invariably  so.  At  that  time  the  blood  is  unable  to  pass 
through  the  lungs,  and  the  heart  cannot  relieve  itself  of  the 
blood  that  is  flowing  into  it.  It  therefore  becomes  gorged.  I 
have  also  observed  that  the  lungs  are  congested,  filled  with 
blood. 

Do  you  agree  in  the  opinion  of  Dr.  Taylor  that  where  strych- 
nia is  administered  as  a  sort  of  pill  or  bolus  it  kills  from  about 
six  to  eleven  minutes? — It  may  do  so.  I  do  not  say  it  would 
always.  I  agree  with  him  that  the  jaws  are  spasmodically 
closed,  and  also  that  the  slightest  noise  reproduces  another 
convulsive  paroxysm.  I  do  not  agree  with  Dr.  Taylor  that 
the  colouring  tests  for  the  discovery  of  strychnia  are  fallacious. 
They  always  succeeded  with  me. 

Dr.  Taylor  has  given  as  a  reason  for  the  non-finding  of  the 
strychnia  that  it  is  absorbed  into  the  blood  and  becomes 
changed? — I  agree  with  its  absorption,  but  I  do  not  agree  with 
its  being  changed. 

Have  you  turned  your  attention  to  the  theory  that  strychnia 
is  decomposed  after  the  poisoning  ? — I  have  examined  the  tissues 
of  the  body  and  I  have  found  it;  and  my  opinion  is  that  it  is 
not  changed  so  as  not  to  be  discoverable. 

Supposing  the  contents  were  put  into  a  jar  and  jumbled  up 
with  the  intestines  and  a  portion  of  the  stomach,  would  that 
prevent  the  discovery  of  strychnia? — It  would  not. 

Supposing  that  all  the  contents  of  the  stomach  were  lost, 
ought  the  mucous  membrane,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things, 
to  exhibit  traces  of  strychnia  ? — I  think  so. 

I  have  also  studied  the  poison  of  antimony. 

Supposing  a  quantity  of  antimony  were  placed  in  some  brandy 
and  water,  and  it  was  drunk  off  at  a  sudden  gulp,  would  the 
immediate  effect  of  that  be  to  burn  the  throat,  or  anything  of 
that  kind? — No.  Not  in  the  form  of  tartar  emetic. 

Cross-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — I  am  neither  a 
member  of  the  College  of  Physicians  nor  of  the  College  of 
Surgeons.  I  do  not  now  carry  on  business  in  the  medical  line, 
but  have  done  so  in  general  practice  for  not  more  than  two 
or  three  years.  I  have  destroyed  about  fifty  animals  by 
strychnia,  some  within  the  last  two  months.  I  have  never 
given  more  than  a  grain.  In  recent  cases  I  have  always 
administered  the  poison  in  a  solid  form — sometimes  made  into 
a  pill  with  bread,  and  at  other  times  put  on  the  tongue  of  the 
animal.  In  one  case  I  gave  it  under  very  disadvantageous 
178 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

circumstances ;  the  dog  had  had  a  very  hearty  meal,  and  it  H.  Letheby 
was  kneaded  up  into  a  hard  mass  with  some  bread,  and  it  took 
three-quarters  of  an  hour  before  the  action  came  on.  There 
was  one  other  case  which  took  about  half  an  hour,  but  the 
poison,  half  a  grain,  was  not  given  in  sufficient  quantity.  We 
gave  it  another  dose,  which  acted  in  about  ten  minutes. 

Dr.  Nunneley  describes  the  symptoms — first,  a  desire  to  be 
still,  then  a  difficulty  in  breathing,  a  slobbering  of  the  mouth, 
twitching  of  the  ears,  trembling  of  the  muscles,  and,  after 
that,  convulsions;  did  you  observe  all  these? — I  cannot  say  all 
of  them  in  that  order.  There  is  an  excitement  manifested  in 
the  animal,  an  indisposition  to  touch,  and  trembling  on  being 
touched. 

I  am  speaking  of  the  symptoms  before  the  convulsions.  The 
touching,  did  that  occasion  a  tremulous  action  of  the  muscles? 
— Yes,  I  have  noticed  that. 

Have  they  come  on  in  regular  order? — No,  I  think  not. 
There  are  some  little  variations. 

After  the  convulsions  have  once  commenced,  is  there  an 
interval? — Yes.  A  breath,  a  sound,  or  a  touch  will  cause  a 
recurrence  of  the  convulsive  symptoms  after  they  have  been 
seized.  This  does  not  apply  where  the  animal  dies  in  the  first 
paroxysm,  and  I  have  known  many  cases  where  an  animal  has 
so  died. 

You  mentioned  a  distinctive  feature  in  this  case  of  Cook. 
You  were  surprised  at  his  manifesting  so  much  power  as  to  be 
able  to  sit  up  in  bed  and  ring  the  bell.  Are  you  aware  that 
that  was  at  the  commencement,  before  any  of  the  convulsive 
symptoms  had  set  in? — Yes,  I  apprehend  that  was  at  the  onset 
or  beginning  of  the  paroxysm. 

Do  you  know  that  he  sat  up  in  bed  and  rang  the  bell,  and 
it  was  not  till  Palmer  had  been  and  had  gone  back  and  brought 
the  pills  that  the  convulsions  came  on? — Yes,  I  do;  and  I  have 
noticed  in  animals  that  the  mere  touch  sends  them  into  con- 
vulsions, and  they  show  an  indisposition  to  move. 

In  the  case  of  the  lady  who  died  near  Romsey,  did  you  hear 
what  the  maid  said,  that  she  discovered,  when  her  mistress' 
bell  rang  violently,  that  she  had  got  out  of  bed  and  was  sitting 
on  the  floor? — It  struck  me  as  inconsistent  with  what  I  have 
seen.  I  have  no  doubt  that  was  a  death  from  strychnia. 

If  that  evidence  be  true,  and  it  is  a  fact  that  she  got  up  and 
rang  her  bell,  does  not  that  shake  your  faith? — No,  it  does 
not.  You  must  compare  it  with  what  I  have  seen.  Both  are 
irreconcilable  with  what  I  have  seen. 

Speaking  of  the  Tuesday  night,  with  the  exception  of  the 
ringing  of  the  bell,  and  that  in  this  case  it  was  an  hour  or  an 
hour  and  a  half  after  the  supposed  administration  of  the  poison, 
can  you  point  to  anything  to  distinguish  the  symptoms  and 

179 


Trial   of   William  Palmer. 

H. Letheby  death  of  Mr.  Cook  from  death  by  tetanus  of  strychnia? — No, 
I  cannot.  It  is  inconsistent  with  what  I  have  seen,  but  it  is 
not  inconsistent  with  what  I  have  heard  in  the  case  of  Mrs. 
Smyth. 

Is  not  one  of  the  symptoms  hard  breathing? — It  is  a  panting 
respiration.  It  is  excitement  of  the  breathing  rather  than 
difficulty.  It  is  in  the  convulsions  that  there  is  a  difficulty 
of  breathing.  If  a  man  were  to  breathe  hardly  it  is  a  position 
naturally  assumed  for  him  to  sit  up.  Until  the  convulsion 
of  the  muscles  comes  on  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  the 
patient  sitting  up. 

If  I  understand  you,  if  I  except  the  delay  and  the  fact  of  his 
sitting  up  in  bed  and  crying  for  help  on  the  Tuesday,  is  there 
anything  to  distinguish  the  convulsions  under  which  this  man 
suffered  and  died  from  the  convulsions  of  tetanus  of  strychnia? 
— It  is  not  perfectly  consistent  with  strychnia,  because  I  say 
that  the  account  which  is  given  of  Mrs.  Smyth  is  what  I  cannot 
reconcile  with  what  I  have  before  observed. 

With  regard  to  the  abrupt  termination  instead  of  the  gradual 
subsidence? — I  have  observed  the  gradual  subsidence  in  man 
as  well  as  in  animals. 

In  the  case  of  the  man — what  dose  had  he  taken  ? — Nearly  a 
grain  and  a  half. 

This  is  a  strongish  dose? — Yes. 

You  might  expect  a  recurrence  of  the  paroxysm? — Certainly. 
The  subsidence  will  not  depend  on  the  strength  of  the  dose ;  it 
will  depend  on  whether  the  individual  is  to  recover  or  not.  I 
have  seen  four  or  five  instances  of  recoveries. 

Is  it  not  generally  known  that  the  effect  of  strychnia  is  very 
varied  in  different  individuals? — No,  I  do  not  think  so.  There 
would  be  a  little  variation  in  time,  but  in  the  main  features  of 
the  case  there  is  no  variation. 

Do  not  you  find  this  difference,  that  from  the  same  dose  in 
the  same  species  you  get  no  paroxysm,  or  you  get  a  series  of 
paroxysms  ending  in  death? — Yes,  that  is  true;  but  the  attacks 
are  the  same  for  all  that.  The  symptoms  are  the  same. 

What  do  you  say  about  the  Sunday  night  fit? — I  was  dis- 
posed to  think  it  was  a  fit.  I  cannot  tell  you  what  it  was; 
I  have  formed  no  opinion. 

What  do  you  ascribe  Mr.  Cook's  death  to? — It  is  irreconcil- 
able with  everything  I  am  acquainted  with. 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — Is  it  reconcilable  with  any  known  disease 
which  you  have  ever  seen  or  heard  of? — No,  my  lord. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — Do  you  mean  to  say  it 
could  not  be  the  result  of  any  variety  of  convulsions,  however 
violent,  though  not  classed  under  a  particular  description  of 
convulsion? — We  are  learning  new  facts  every  day,  and  I  do 
not  conceive  it  to  be  impossible  that  some  peculiarity  of  the 
1 80 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

spinal  cord,    unrecognisable   except  the  examination  be  made  H.  Letheby 
immediately  after  death,  may  produce  symptoms  like  these. 

When  you  say  it  is  irreconcilable  with  anything  you  have 
heard  of,  do  you  include  anything  you  have  heard  of  strychnia 
poison  as  well  as  anything  else? — Certainly  I  do. 

Is  the  vomiting  of  the  pills  just  before  death  inconsistent 
with  what  you  have  known  and  observed  of  strychnia  poison? 
— It  is  not  consistent  with  anything  I  have  observed. 

Have  you  ascertained  whether,  if  you  touch  an  animal  which 
is  beginning  those  minor  premonitory  symptoms,  but  which  as 
yet  has  had  no  paroxysms,  this  brings  the  paroxysms  on? 
— Yes. 

Was  not  the  Romsey  case  exceptional  from  the  manner  in 
which  the  strychnia  was  administered  and  the  quantity  of  the 
dose? — Yes,  it  was.  It  is  quite  consistent  with  all  I  am  saying 
that  the  ringing  of  the  bell  by  the  lady  the  moment  she  felt 
anything  of  uneasiness  would  produce  the  paroxysm  which 
ultimately  was  observed.  In  my  judgment,  it  is  not  safe  to 
argue  from  the  symptoms  of  a  case  in  which  the  paroxysm 
took  place  only  a  few  moments  after  the  ingestion  of  the  poison, 
and  it  was  in  a  fluid  state,  to  what  may  be  the  probabilities  in 
another  case. 

Mr.  ROBERT  EDWARD  GAT,  examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEB — I  R.  E.  Gay 
am  a  member  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons.  In  1855  I 
attended  a  person  named  Foster  suffering  under  tetanus.  He 
had  an  inflammatory  sore  throat,  muscular  pains  in  the  neck 
and  the  upper  portion  of  the  spinal  vertebrae.  He  was  feverish, 
and  had  the  usual  symptoms  attending  catarrh.  On  about 
the  fourth  day  the  muscular  pains  extended  to  the  face.  A 
difficulty  of  swallowing  came  on,  the  pains  in  the  muscles 
covering  the  spinal  vertebrae  and  in  those  of  the  lower  jaw 
increased.  In  the  evening  of  that  day  the  jaw  became  com- 
pletely locked;  the  pain  came  on  in  the  muscles  of  the  bowels, 
the  same  in  the  legs  and  the  arms.  He  became  very  much 
convulsed  throughout  the  entire  muscular  system.  He  had 
frequent  and  violent  convulsions  of  the  arms  and  hands,  and 
afterwards  of  the  legs.  The  difficulty  of  swallowing  increased 
up  to  the  ninth  or  tenth  day.  Not  a  particle  of  food,  either 
solid  or  liquid,  could  be  taken  or  introduced  to  the  mouth.  An 
attempt  to  swallow  the  smallest  portion  brought  on  the  most 
violent  convulsions.  The  convulsions  were  so  strong  through- 
out the  whole  system  that  I  could  compare  him  to  nothing 
more  than  a  piece  of  warped  board  in  shape.  The  head  was 
drawn  back,  the  abdomen  was  forced  forward,  and  the  legs 
were  frequently  drawn  upwards  and  backwards.  The  attempt 
of  feeding  with  the  spoon,  the  opening  of  the  window,  or 
placing  the  fingers  on  the  pulse  frequently  brought  on  violent 

181 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

R.  E.  Gay  convulsions.  He  complained  of  great  hunger.  He  was  able 
to  speak.  He  repeatedly  cried  out  he  was  very  hungry,  what 
would  he  do  if  he  could  not  eat?  and  he  was  kept  alive  till  the 
fourteenth  day  by  injections  of  a  nutritive  character.  He 
screamed  during  these  convulsions,  and  the  noises  he  made 
were  more  like  those  of  a  dying  man.  About  the  twelfth  day 
he  became  insensible.  The  convulsions,  although  very  weak, 
continued  till  the  fourteenth  day,  when  he  died.  He  was  by 
business  an  omnibus  conductor.  He  had  been  ill  some  few 
days — it  might  be  a  week.  He  had  no  other  hurt  or  injury 
to  his  person  of  any  kind  which  would  account  for  these 
symptoms.  His  body  was  not  examined  after  death. 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — What  do  you  call  the  disease? — I  call  it 
inflammatory  sore  throat  from  cold  and  exposure  to  the  weather. 
The  symptoms  became  tetanic  in  consequence  of  an  extremely 
nervous  and  anxious  disposition.  He  had  a  very  large  family, 
and  was  a  very  hard-working  man.  I  did  not  hear  the 
evidence  of  the  witnesses  who  described  the  symptoms  of  Mr. 
Cook. 

Cross-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — That  is  what  you 
call  idiopathic  tetanus? — Yes,  decidedly  so.  I  have  had  a 
vast  number  of  cases  of  inflammatory  sore  throats  and  a  great 
many  anxious,  nervous  patients.  That  is  the  only  case  I  have 
ever  seen  of  idiopathic  tetanus. 

If  I  rightly  apprehend  your  history  of  the  symptoms,  the 
disease  was  altogether  progressive  in  its  character,  and, 
although  there  was  an  occasional  cessation  of  the  more  painful 
symptoms,  there  never  was  a  full  cessation  of  the  symptoms? — 
He  was  not  suffering  from  tetanic  affection.  There  was  a  twitch- 
ing of  the  muscles  going  on,  but  there  was  not  that  violent  con- 
vulsion. The  lockjaw  was  the  first  of  the  more  aggravated 
symptoms  that  presented  itself,  the  muscular  spasms  about  the 
trunk  of  the  body  progressing  onwards  to  the  extremities.  He 
was  conscious  till  the  tenth  day,  when  insensibility  supervened 
while  the  convulsions  were  upon  him.  I  consider  the  brain 
had  been  affected  and  congestion  had  taken  place,  and  that 
produced  insensibility. 

After  that  was  there  some  diminution  in  the  severity  of  the 
convulsions? — Very  great  diminution,  but  they  still  continued. 

Would  that  be  likely  to  take  place  from  the  constant  recur- 
rence of  the  convulsions? — From  the  constant  recurrence  of  the 
convulsions  the  brain  would  be  congested. 

You  would  expect  to  find  a  difference  in  that  respect  in  a 
case  where  a  man  died  very  early  in  such  a  disease,  and  where 
it  was  spread  over  a  longer  period  ? — That  would  depend  greatly 
on  the  violence  of  the  convulsions. 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — And  the  repetition? — And  the  repetition. 

The  Court  then  adjourned. 
182 


Ninth  Day,  Friday,  23rd  May,  1856. 

The  Court  met  at  ten  o'clock. 

Mr.  JOHN  BROWN  Ross,  examined  by  Mr.  GROVE — I  am  house  J- B.Ross 
surgeon  to  the  London  Hospital.  On  22nd  March  a  labourer, 
aged  thirty-seven,  was  brought  to  the  hospital  about  half-past 
seven  in  the  evening.  He  had  had  one  paroxysm  in  the  receiv- 
ing room  of  our  hospital  before  I  saw  him.  He  had  a  rapid 
but  feeble  pulse,  breathing  quickly  though  not  laboriously.  The 
jaws  were  closed  and  fixed,  there  was  an  expression  of  anxiety 
about  the  countenance,  and  the  features  were  sunken.  He  was 
unable  to  swallow,  the  muscles  of  the  abdomen  and  back  were 
somewhat  tense.  After  he  had  been  in  the  ward  about  ten 
minutes  he  had  another  paroxysm  and  opisthotonos,  which 
lasted  about  one  minute.  He  was  then  quiet  for  a  few  minutes ; 
he  had  then  another,  and  died.  He  had  only  been  in  the 
hospital  about  half  an  hour.  An  inquest  was  held  on  the  body, 
but  no  poison  was  found.  I  attribute  the  cause  of  death  to 
tetanus.  There  were  three  wounds,  two  on  the  back  of  the 
right  elbow,  about  the  size  of  a  shilling  each,  and  one  on  the 
left  elbow,  about  the  size  of  a  sixpence.  The  man  told  me  he 
had  had  them  about  twelve  or  sixteen  years.  They  were  old, 
chronic,  indurated  ulcers,  circular  in  outline,  the  edges 
thickened  round,  undermined,  and  covered  with  a  dirty  white 
coating  without  any  granulations.  I  am  unable  to  say  what 
produced  those  ulcers.  I  have  seen  old,  chronic  syphilitic 
wounds  in  the  legs  similar  to  those  in  the  elbow,  but  I  cannot 
say  that  these  were  so.  These  wounds  were  the  only  things 
to  account  for  tetanus.  There  was  no  other  cause  found. 

Cross-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — I  learned  from 
the  man's  wife  that  a  linseed  meal  poultice  had  been  applied 
to  this  ulcer  a  day  or  two  before.  The  jaws  were  completely 
fixed  when  he  came,  so  as  to  render  him  incapable  of  swallowing 
anything.  He  said  he  had  just  been  taken  with  strange 
symptoms  about  the  jaws  at  dinner  that  morning  about  eleven 
o'clock.  He  was  able  to  speak,  though  he  could  not  open  his 
jaw.  That  is  the  case  in  tetanus. 

Were  there  also  symptoms  of  rigidity  when  he  was  brought 
in  about  the  abdominal  and  lumbar  muscles;  did  you  learn 
from  him  how  long  this  rigidity  had  been  coming  on? — Not 
further  than  that  the  first  symptoms  of  the  illness  he  had  felt 
were  that  morning.  He  did  not  say  how  long  he  had  felt  this 
rigidity  about  the  neck.  He  was  seen  by  the  parish  surgeon 
in  the  afternoon  before  coming  to  the  hospital.  I  have  no  doubt 
that  the  disease  had  been  coming  on  from  the  morning. 

183 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

J.  B.  Ross  Though  you  cannot  speak  as  to  the  precise  character  of  these 
sores,  were  they  ugly  sores? — Yes;  sores  of  a  chronic  character 
—ulcers.  The  two  on  the  right  elbow  were  perfectly  running 
into  one  another.  A  piece  of  integument  connected  the  two, 
so  that  they  would  be  likely  to  run  into  one  another  eventually. 
By  saying  that  those  sores  were  undermined  I  mean  that  the 
wounds  continued  under  the  skin.  There  were  no  signs  of 
healing,  and  they  had  the  appearance  of  old,  neglected  sores. 

Were  they  near  the  site  of  any  particular  nerve? — They  were 
near  the  ulnar  nerve,  a  very  sensitive  nerve  connected  with 
what  we  call  the  "  funny  bone." 

How  soon  was  he  seized  with  the  first  paroxysm  after  he  came 
in? — He  had  one  directly  he  came  into  the  hospital,  but  I  did 
not  see  it.  Half  an  hour  from  that  time  he  died. 

Had  he  had  any  paroxysms  before  he  came  to  the  hospital? — 
I  believe  he  had,  all  the  afternoon. 

That  was  not  one  continuous  paroxysm? — No;  there  was  a 
twitching  of  the  muscles  of  the  legs  and  arms. 

What  are  the  particular  symptoms  of  the  case  to  which  you 
refer  as  indicative  of  death  from  tetanus? — From  the  tetanic 
symptoms  and  from  having  wounds. 

Put  aside  for  the  moment  the  fact  of  his  having  the  wounds 
that  would  lead  to  that  inference ;  what  were  the  symptoms  that 
manifested  themselves  previous  to,  or  concomitantly  with,  death 
which  you  would  call  tetanic? — The  tetanic  symptoms  there 
are  the  lockjaw  and  the  muscles  of  the  abdomen  and  the  back 
also  being  rigid;  and  he  complained  of  pain  in  his  stomach,  just 
over  the  stomach.  I  did  not  hear  the  account  given  of  the 
symptoms  of  Mr.  Cook's  death. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  GROVE — Strychnia  was  suspected  in  this 
case  before  the  body  was  examined.  The  nerves  of  the  tongue 
are  very  delicate  ones.  There  are  very  delicate  nerves  at  the 
throat  and  fauces. 

Were  you  here  yesterday  when  a  case  was  described  of  an 
injury  in  the  throat — a  sore  throat  that  caused  tetanus? — I  was. 

Are  you  of  opinion  that  an  irritation  of  the  nerves  of  the 
throat  would  cause  tetanus  as  well  as  the  other  nerves? — That 
was  produced  by  exposure  to  cold;  it  was  therefore  idiopathic. 

Would  any  injury  to  any  delicate  nerves  be  a  cause  of  tetanus  ? 
— Decidedly. 

F.  Wrightson  Dr.  FRANCIS  WRIQHTSON,  examined  by  Mr.  KENEALY — I  was 
a  pupil  of  Liebig.  I  am  an  analytical  chemist  and  teacher  of 
chemistry  at  the  School  of  Chemistry  at  Birmingham.  I  have 
studied  and  made  experiments  in  various  poisons,  including 
strychnia.  I  have  not  found  any  extraordinary  difficulties  in 
the  detection  of  strychnia.  It  is  detected  by  the  usual  tests. 
I  have  detected  strychnia  pure,  and  I  have  also  discovered  it 
184 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

when  mixed  with  impurity,  such  as  bile,  bilious  matter  from  F.  Wrlghtson 
putrefying  blood,  after  having  separated  it  from  the  impurities. 
Strychnia  can  be  discovered  in  the  tissues.  I  have  discovered 
it  in  the  viscera  of  a  cat  poisoned  by  strychnia,  also  in  the  blood 
of  a  dog  poisoned  by  strychnia,  also  in  the  urine  of  another 
dog  poisoned  by  strychnia.  I  have  heard  the  theory  pro- 
pounded by  Dr.  Taylor  as  to  the  decomposition  of  strychnia  by 
the  act  of  poisoning. 

Are  you  of  opinion  strychnia  undergoes  decomposition  in  the 
act  of  poisoning? — I  am  of  opinion  that  it  does  not.  If  it  were 
decomposed  in  the  act  of  poisoning  I  should  say  it  would  not 
be  possible  to  discover  it  in  the  tissues.  Portions  of  strychnia 
can  be  discovered  in  extremely  minute  quantities  indeed.  In 
the  first  case  I  mentioned  of  the  detection  of  strychnia  in  the 
blood,  2  grains  were  given  to  the  dog.  One  grain  was  given 
to  the  second  dog,  in  which  we  detected  it  in  the  urine.  Half 
a  grain  was  attempted  to  be  administered  to  the  cat,  but  a 
considerable  portion  of  it  was  spilt. 

Assuming  that  a  man  was  poisoned  by  strychnia,  and  that 
his  stomach  and  a  portion  of  his  tissues  were  sent  within  eight, 
or  nine,  or  ten  days  after  death  for  analytical  examination,  do 
you  say  you  could  discover  the  poison  of  strychnia  in  his 
remains? — I  should  have  no  doubt  whatever  in  saying  so. 

Cross-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — Suppose  the  whole 
of  this  poison  to  be  absorbed,  where  would  you  expect  to  find 
it?— In  the  blood. 

In  its  progress  to  its  final  destination,  the  destruction  of  life, 
does  it  pass  from  the  blood,  or  is  it  left  by  the  blood  in  the 
solid  tissues  of  the  body  before  it  produces  that  effect? — I 
cannot  tell. 

If  it  has  passed  from  the  stomach  by  absorption  in  the  blood, 
the  whole  dose,  into  the  circulation,  do  you  say  you  would 
still  expect  to  find  any  of  it? — Decidedly  so,  because  I  believe 
it  exists  as  strychnia  in  the  blood. 

Do  you  say  you  would  still  expect  to  find  any  of  it  in  the 
stomach? — In  order  to  be  absorbed  it  must  be  dissolved,  and 
in  that  portion  of  the  fluid  which  surrounds  the  coats  of  the 
stomach  I  should  expect  to  find  it. 

Suppose  the  whole  to  be  absorbed  ? — Then  I  should  not  detect 
it. 

Suppose  the  whole  of  it  has  been  eliminated  from  the  blood 
and  passed  from  the  system? — Certainly  not. 

LORD  CAMPBELL — You  would  expect  to  find  it  elsewhere,  not 
in  the  stomach? — Yes.  I  would  expect  to  find  it  in  the  blood 
and  in  the  tissues. 

Cross-examination  resumed — My  question  only  supposes  the 
minimum  of  the  dose  that  will  destroy  life  to  have  been  given : 
and,  supposing  that  to  have  been  absorbed  into  the  circulation, 

185 


Trial   of  William  Palmer. 

F.  WrlghUon  and  there  deposited  in  the  tissues,  or  part  of  it  eliminated  by 
the  action  of  the  kidneys,  would  you  know  where  to  search  for 
it? — I  should  search  for  it  both  in  the  blood  and  in  the  tissues, 
and  in  the  ejecta  of  the  kidneys;  and  from  my  experiments  I 
should  expect  to  find  it  in  each  of  them,  in  case  the  urine  was 
not  ejected  during  the  time  of  poisoning. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — If  a  man  had  been  killed 
by  strychnia,  administered  an  hour  and  a  half  before  he  died, 
the  poison  would  certainly  be  detected  in  the  stomach  in  the 
first  instance. 

Supposing  it  to  have  been  administered  in  the  shape  of  pills, 
would  it  by  that  time  have  been  all  absorbed  and  circulated 
in  the  system  so  as  to  get  out  of  the  stomach? — I  cannot  tell. 
If  it  were  so  I  would  find  it  in  the  blood,  the  liver,  and  the 
spleen. 

Could  you  form  an  opinion  whether  it  could  be  detected  under 
these  circumstances  on  the  coats  of  the  stomach? — Not  knowing 
the  dose  administered  and  the  powers  of  absorption,  I  cannot 
say  with  absolute  certainty  it  would  be  detected,  but  I  should 
think  it  in  the  highest  degree  probable  if  a  moderate  dose  had 
been  administered. 

Could  you  form  any  opinion  from  the  fact  that  death  had 
taken  place  after  one  paroxysm,  and  in  an  hour  and  a  half 
after  the  ingestion  of  the  poison,  whether  it  was  a  considerable 
or  an  inconsiderable  dose? — I  cannot  give  a  decided  opinion. 

LORD  CAMPBELL — I  cannot  allow  this  gentleman  to  leave  the 
box  without  expressing  my  high  approbation  of  the  manner  in 
which  he  has  given  his  evidence. 

R.  Partridge  Mr.  RICHARD  PARTRIDGE,  examined  by  Mr.  GROVE — I  have  been 
for  many  years  in  practice  as  a  surgeon,  and  am  Professor  of 
Anatomy  at  King's  College.  I  have  heard  the  evidence  as  to 
the  symptoms  of  Mr.  Cook  and  as  to  the  post-mortem  examina- 
tion. In  my  opinion  it  is  most  important  in  a  case  of  convulsion 
that  the  spinal  cord  should  be  examined  after  death.  The  gritty 
granules  that  were  found  would  be  likely  to  cause  inflammation 
of  the  arachnoid  membrane,  which  would  be  discoverable  if  the 
spinal  cord  had  been  examined  shortly  after  death.  If  examined 
nine  weeks  after  it  is  not  likely  it  would  be  discovered. 
Although  I  have  not  seen  such  a  case,  there  are  cases  on  record 
that  such  inflammation,  if  it  existed,  would  be  capable  of 
producing  tetaniform  convulsions.  The  medical  term  for  such 
inflammation  of  the  arachnoid  is  arachnitis,  or  inflammation  of 
the  membrane.  That  disorder  produces  convulsions  and  death. 
I  should  not  say  universally;  sometimes  it  does  not  result  in 
death.  I  could  not  form  any  positive  judgment  as  to  the  cause 
of  death  in  Mr.  Cook's  case.  I  have  heard  the  evidence  as  to 
the  state  of  contraction  after  death.  No  inference  at  all  can 
186 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

be  formed  of  the  degree  of  contraction,  or  the  kind  of  con-  R.  Partride* 
traction,  that  I  heard  described.  If  I  find  the  back  curved 
and  the  body  resting  on  its  back  and  feet  after  death,  I  should 
infer  that  he  died  of  that  form  of  tetanus  which  convulses  the 
muscles  of  the  back.  Various  degrees  and  varieties  of  rigidity 
occur  after  a  natural  death.  The  clenching  of  the  hands  or 
the  semi-bending  of  the  feet  are  not  uncommon  in  cases  of 
ordinary  death. 

Cross-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — The  granules 
from  which  arachnitis  might  have  proceeded  were,  I  understand, 
situated  in  the  inner  surface  of  the  fibrous  investment  of  the 
cord.  They  are  occasionally  found  in  these  parts;  not  com- 
monly. They  are  signs.  Arachnitis,  producing  convulsions, 
has  never  come  under  my  personal  observation,  nor  has  it 
satisfactorily  come  under  my  observation  without  producing 
convulsions.  It  is  a  very  rare  disease. 

Are  you  enabled  to  state  from  the  recorded  cases  the  course 
of  the  symptoms  of  the  disease? — No. 

Do  not  you  know  it  to  be  a  disease  of  considerable  duration? 
— The  cases  have  varied  in  duration;  commonly  days  at  the 
shortest.  Arachnitis  is  accompanied  with  paralysis  if  they  live. 

Would  it,  considering  the  connection  that  there  is  between 
the  spinal  cord  and  the  brain,  affect  the  brain  by  sympathy, 
or  otherwise,  prior  to  death? — No. 

In  these  cases,  where  granules  have  produced  arachnitis,  do 
you  happen  to  know  whether  the  granules  have  been  consider- 
able in  point  of  size? — It  has  varied  in  different  cases. 

Suppose  them  to  be  very  small  and  minute? — I  should  think 
there  would  be  less  likelihood  of  their  producing  inflammation. 

Suppose  an  examination  at  a  longer  interval  than  nine  days 
after  death  failed  to  detect  the  inflammation  of  the  arachnoid, 
that  the  spinal  cord  and  its  integuments  had  not  undergone 
any  decomposition,  and  that  the  appearance  was  perfectly 
healthy,  should  you  be  warranted  in  inferring  there  was  inflam- 
mation?— I  should  not  conclude  there  was  inflammation.  Prior 
to  decomposition  I  should  not. 

The  examination  was  made  by  four  medical  men;  are  you  of 
opinion  that  they  would  be  competent  judges  as  to  decomposi- 
tion?— [The  question  was  objected  to.] 

Does  arachnitis  not  sometimes  extend  to  a  matter  of  months, 
even  where  it  extends  to  death? — It  might  go  on  for  months. 

Does  it  not  affect  the  patient  by  a  series  of  convulsions  at 
recurring  intervals? — That  varies. 

Did  you  ever  know,  or  hear  of,  or  read  of  a  case  in  which 
the  patient  died  after  a  single  convulsion  of  arachnitis? — Not 
a  single  one. 

What  would  be  the  concomitant  symptoms;  would  it  affect 
the  rest  of  the  patient  or  affect  the  general  health  ? — I  cannot  say. 

187' 


Trial   of  William   Palmer. 

B.  Partridge      Do  you  believe  that  a  man  oould  have  twenty-four  hours  of 
complete  repose? — No. 

In  the  interval  between  the  convulsions  could  he  be  quite 
well? — No;  he  would  have  pain  and  uneasiness  according  to 
the  situation  of  the  muscles  convulsed,  the  back  usually. 

You  have  heard  the  symptoms,  and  I  presume  you  have  heard 
from  the  midnight  of  Monday  till  Tuesday  Mr.  Cook  had 
complete  repose.  I  now  ask  you  if,  in  the  face  of  the  Court 
and  of  the  profession,  you  will  undertake  to  say  that  Mr.  Cook's 
death  proceeded  from  arachnitis? — I  should  think  not.  The 
majority  of  the  symptoms  do  not  show  arachnitis. 

You  have  mentioned  that  there  were  one  or  two  of  the  appear- 
ances after  death  in  Cook's  case  which  would  be  common  to 
other  cases,  the  semi-closing  of  the  hand.  Did  you  ever  know, 
except  in  a  case  of  tetanus,  the  hand  so  completely  clenched 
as  to  require  force  to  take  the  fingers  away  from  the  hand? — 
No,  I  do  not. 

Have  you  ever  known  the  feet  to  be  so  distorted  as  to  be 
described  by  a  medical  man  as  assuming  the  form  of  a  club 
foot  ? — Never. 

Did  you  hear  the  description  given  by  Mr.  Jones  that  when 
this  man  died  the  body  was  bowed  so  that,  if  he  had  turned 
it  from  its  side  upon  its  back,  it  would  have  rested  on  its  head 
and  on  its  heels? — I  did. 

Have  you  any  doubt  that  that  indicates  death  from  tetanus? 
— Not  from  some  form  of  tetanic  symptoms.  I  am  only 
acquainted  by  reading  and  hearsay  with  the  symptoms  that 
accompany  death  from  tetanus  resulting  from  the  administration 
of  strychnia. 

From  your  knowledge  of  the  subject,  having  attended  to  the 
symptoms  described  by  Mr.  Jones  from  the  moment  the 
paroxysm  set  in  of  which  Mr.  Cook  died,  and  the  symptoms 
and  appearances  attending  his  death,  does  it  appear  that  these 
symptoms  are  consistent  with  death  by  strychnia? — Some  are 
consistent  and  some  are  inconsistent.  The  long  interval  which 
occurred  after  the  taking  of  the  poison  is  inconsistent. 

What  I  am  asking  you  is,  whether  these  symptoms  on  the 
Tuesday  night,  from  the  time  the  man  was  taken  with  the 
paroxysms  of  convulsions  of  the  muscles  of  the  trunk,  of  the 
legs,  of  the  arms — the  bending  of  the  body  into  a  bow — the 
difficulty  of  respiration — are  consistent  with  what  you  know 
of  death  by  strychnia? — Quite. 

Do  you  agree  that  the  symptoms  in  tetanus  come  on  gradu- 
ally and  progressive;  that,  although  they  are  intermitted, 
the  disease  is  never  wholly  remitted? — I  do. 

What  is  the  shortest  period  in  which  you  have  ever  known 
the   disease  of   traumatic   tetanus   run    its  course  to  death? — 
Never  under  three  or  four  days. 
1 88 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Suppose  a  case  could  be  described  as  of  shorter  duration,  such  R.  Partridge 
as  a  day  or  a  few  hours,   would  your  medical  experience  lead 
you  to  infer  that  the  premonitory  symptoms  had  very  likely 
been  neglected? — I  should  consider  that  probable. 

Bearing  in  mind  the  distinction  between  traumatic  and  idio- 
pathic  tetanus  and  a  case  such  as  has  been  here  described,  have 
you  ever  seen  such  a  death  as  this  was  with  the  symptoms  men- 
tioned proceed  from  natural  causes? — No. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  GROVE — What  are  the  other  symptoms 
which  you  consider  inconsistent  with  strychnia? — The  sickness 
manifested  before  the  attack  came  on ;  the  beating  of  the  bed 
clothes  with  the  arms,  want  of  sensitiveness  to  external  impres- 
sion, and  the  sudden  cessation  of  the  convulsions,  and  apparent 
complete  recovery. 

You  mentioned  previously  the  time  that  occurred  between 
the  ingestion  of  the  poison  and  the  paroxysm  coming  on.  What 
inference  do  you  deduce  from  that? — That  it  is  inconsistent  with 
strychnia. 

As  to  the  mode  in  which  it  came  on  without  premonitory 
symptoms,  do  you  consider  that  is  inconsistent  with  strychnia? 
— There  was  apparently  an  absence  of  the  usual  condition  that 
is  described. 

You  stated  that  the  bent  form  indicated  some  tetaniform 
symptom.  Did  that  answer  apply  to  natural  tetaniform  as 
well  as  to  tetaniform  convulsions  caused  by  strychnia? — Yes. 
The  bent  form  of  the  feet  indicated  tetanic  spasm.  That  would 
be  the  case  whether  it  was  a  tetaniform  spasm  with  poison  or 
without  poison. 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — And  the  other  symptoms  of  rigidity? — 
It  is  rather  a  question  of  degree. 

They  would  be  more  violent  if  from  poison? — No  doubt. 

You  have  stated  in  the  cases  of  tetanus  you  have  seen 
there  was  no  intermission.  Do  you  know,  from  your  reading, 
that  the  intermission  of  the  disease  is  a  frequent  thing? — I 
know  it  occurs,  but  it  is  not  frequent. 

As  to  decomposition  of  the  spine.  Do  you  think  it  could 
remain  for  nine  weeks  undecomposed  ? — I  do  not. 

The  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — I  have  one  question  which  I  would 
put  (this  gentleman  spoke  as  to  vomiting),  whether,  if  the 
stomach  had  been  brought  by  any  other  cause  into  a  state  of 
irritation,  would  he  think  those  causes  inconsistent? 

LORD  CAMPBELL — I  intended  to  put  the  question  myself. 

WITNESS — I  should  think  it  not  inconsistent. 

Mr.  JOHN  GAT,  examined  by  Mr.  GRAY — I  am  a  Fellow  of  the  John  Gay 
Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  and  have  been  for  eighteen  years 
a   surgeon   of  the  Royal  Free  Hospital.     In  the  year    1843   I 
had  under  my  care  in  the  hospital  a  case  of  tetanus  in  a  boy 

189 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

John  Gay  eight  years  old.  He  was  brought  in  on  the  28th  of  July. 
The  accident  occurred  a  week  before.  I  saw  him  on  the  28th 
of  July.  He  could  not  open  his  mouth  at  that  time.  He 
complained  of  great  pain  and  stiffness  about  the  neck.  During 
the  first  three  days  I  saw  him  he  had  unusually  severe 
paroxysms. 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — During  the  first  night  of  his  admission 
he  started  up  convulsed,  and  spasmodically  closed  his  jaw. 
During  the  following  night  he  was  a  good  deal  convulsed  at 
times.  The  abdominal  muscles,  as  well  as  the  muscles  of  the 
neck  and  back,  had  become  rigid  during  the  night.  The 
muscles  of  the  face  were  also  in  a  state  of  great  contraction. 
On  the  following  day  I  found  the  muscles  remained  in  the 
same  state.  In  the  morning  of  that  day,  at  two  o'clock,  on 
visiting  him  I  found  there  was  much  rigidity  of  the  muscles, 
especially  those  of  the  abdomen  and  back.  The  following 
morning  the  muscular  rigidity  had  gone.  He  opened  his 
mouth  as  usual,  and  was  able  to  talk.  The  lad  appeared  to 
be  thoroughly  relieved.  He  had  no  return  of  the  spasms  till 
the  following  day.  At  that  time  he  asked  the  nurse  to  change 
his  linen,  and  she  was  lifting  him  up  in  bed  to  do  so  when 
violent  convulsions  of  the  arms  and  face  came  on,  and  he  died 
in  a  few  minutes. 

Examination  resumed — About  thirty  hours  elapsed  from  the 
time  the  convulsions  of  which  he  died  came  on  and  the  last 
preceding  convulsions.  The  last  paroxysm  before  he  died 
lasted  a  few  minutes.  Before  it  came  on  the  rigidity  which 
I  have  described  had  been  completely  relieved.  At  the  time 
he  was  convulsed  the  nurse  was  lifting  him  up  to  put  on  his 
linen. 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — The  second  day  I  gave  him  small  doses 
of  tartar  emetic  to  produce  vomiting,  but  without  effect.  I 
repeated  them  in  larger  doses  of  2  grains,  but  without  effect. 
I  did  not  repeat  the  dose  after  the  third  day. 

Cross-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY- GENERAL — What  was  the 
accident? — A  large  stone  had  fallen  on  the  middle  of  the  left 
foot  and  had  completely  smashed  it.  The  wound  had  become 
very  unhealthy.  When  I  first  saw  it  it  had  portions  of  bone 
and  cartilage  adhering  to  the  surface.  I  amputated  the  toe. 
When  the  boy  was  brought  in  his  mother  said  he  could  not 
open  his  mouth  so  wide  as  usual.  When  I  saw  him  his 
mouth  was  almost  closed  up. 

On  29th  July  he  slept  but  little  during  the  night,  and  during 
sleep  started  up  convulsed  and  spasmodically  closed  the  jaw. 
The  jaw  remained  closed  until  the  1st  of  August.  It  was 
closed  when  I  administered  tartar  emetic  to  him.  In  all 
these  cases  BO  trifling  a  remedy  as  the  tarter  emetic  is  easily 
given. 
190 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — The  tongue  seems  to  retain  its  powers  ? —  John  Gay 
Yes.     The  case  is  recorded  in  the  Lancet. 

Cross-examination  resumed — After  the  29th  of  July  did  the 
convulsions  continue  throughout  the  30th  and  part  of  the 
31st? — The  convulsions  came  on  during  the  night,  and  they 
appear  to  have  remitted  during  the  day,  except  a  muscular 
rigidity.  The  tetanus  did  remain. 

But  were  there  no  spasms  during  the  daytime? — I  believe 
not. 

In  the  daytime,  although  there  were  no  convulsions,  were 
the  muscles  of  the  body,  of  the  chest,  and  of  the  abdominal 
back  and  neck  all  rigid? — Yes.  That  continued  throughout  the 
two  days  I  administered  tartar  emetic.  The  rigidity  of  the 
muscles  and  of  the  stomach  would  go  far  to  prevent  sickness. 

You  have  no  doubt  that  your  tartar  emetic  would  have  pro- 
duced its  effect  but  for  the  rigidity  of  the  muscles? — I  suppose 
it  would  have  done  so. 

When  did  the  symptoms  begin  to  abate? — On  the  1st  of 
August,  on  the  fourth  day,  and  they  gradually  subsided.  They 
appeared  to  have  subsided  during  the  night.  I  saw  the  child 
during  the  middle  of  the  day,  and  I  found  that  they  had 
subsided,  and  in  fact  had  entirely  gone  off.  I  thought  he  was 
going  to  get  well. 

You  told  us  the  woman  set  him  up  in  bed  for  the  purpose 
of  changing  his  linen.  Would  that  in  any  way  have  brought 
the  toe,  that  part  that  had  been  attacked,  into  any  friction 
with  some  parts  of  the  bed? — It  must  have  done  so.  But  I 
do  not  think  the  simple  irritation  of  the  toe  at  that  part  would 
have  any  effect. 

But  there  not  having  been,  in  your  judgment,  nervous  irrita- 
tion set  up  from  the  original  seat  of  the  disease,  can  you 
account  in  any  way  for  the  nervous  or  muscular  disease  of 
tetanus? — If  the  cause  had  not  entirely  gone  the  symptoms 
were  brought  back  by  the  act  of  sitting  up  in  bed.  My 
impression  is  there  must  be  some  action  about  the  spinal  cord 
as  the  immediate  cause  of  the  symptoms. 

Action  set  up  in  the  spinal  cord  by  irritation  of  the  nerves 
in  the  immediate  site  of  the  laceration  or  wound? — Quite  so. 

May  it  not  be  reasonable  to  infer  that  any  irritation  of  the 
part  originally  injured,  exciting  or  irritating  the  nerve  or  the 
nerves  connected  with  the  part,  may  support  its  action  over 
the  whole  system,  and  so  produce  convulsion? — I  had  removed 
the  end  of  the  diseased  part,  so  I  cannot  conceive  that  the 
same  cause  could  exist. 

If  you  imagine  you  feel  yourself  justified  in  saying  that 
the  irritation  of  the  spinal  cord  once  set  up  continues,  why 
should  you  infer  that  the  irritation  of  the  nerve  may  not  also 
continue? — There  must  be  some  peculiar  irritation  of  the 

191 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

John  Gay  nerve  to  give  rise  to  the  affection  of  the  spinal  cord  from  which 
tetanus  arises.  There  appear  to  be  some  particular  circum- 
stances which  produce  it. 

You  have  no  doubt  the  state  of  the  toe  was  the  original  cause 
of  the  convulsions? — I  have  not. 

And  that  death  took  place  by  something  or  other  distinct 
from  the  first  cause? — Yes. 

Re-exainined  by  Mr.  GRAY — I  think  you  told  my  friend  that, 
with  regard  to  the  convulsions  which  end  in  death,  you  thought 
they  arose  from  some  irritation  set  up  in  the  spinal  cord? — I 
did,  from  that  and  other  causes. 

May  the  causes  of  such  irritation  be  very  various  in  different 
cases?  May  the  cause  of  the  irritation  in  the  spinal  cord  which 
would  end  in  tetaniform  be  very  various? — I  think  so. 

Suppose  in  one  you  have  a  death  accompanied  with  tetaniform 
symptoms  and  opisthotonos,  and  the  various  symptoms  of  a 
tetanic  character ;  in  the  absence  of  any  knowledge  of  the  case — 
of  the  cause  you  state,  probably  the  irritation  of  the  spinal 
cord — do  you  think  it  is  possible  to  ascribe  them  to  any 
particular  cause? — I  think  it  would  be  extremely  difficult  to 
do  so. 

Will  you  give  me  the  proposition  you  lay  down? — In  the 
event  of  a  given  set  of  symptoms,  tetanic  symptoms  I  should 
say,  being  proposed,  it  would  be  extremely  difficult,  if  not 
impossible,  without  some  other  evidence,  or  collateral  evidence, 
to  assign  it  to  any  given  disease. 

LORD  CAMPBELL — Or  cause? — Or  cause. 

M'Donneii  Dr.  WILLIAM  M'DONNELL,  examined  by  Mr.  KENEALY — I  am 
a  licentiate  of  the  College  of  Surgeons  of  Edinburgh,  and  have 
been  in  practice  for  about  eight  years.  I  have  had  practical 
as  well  as  theoretical  knowledge  of  idiopathic  and  traumatic 
tetanus.  Tetanus  will  proceed  from  very  slight  causes.  Almost 
any  internal  disorder  or  alteration  of  the  internal  secretions 
will  produce  idiopathic  tetanus.  Exposure  to  cold  or  damp 
would  produce  it.  Mental  excitement  would  be  a  probable 
cause. 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — Mental  excitement  would  be  the  proxi- 
mate cause  of  tetanus.  The  presence  of  gritty  particles  or 
granules  in  any  part  connected  with  the  nervous  structure,  in 
either  the  spine  or  the  brain,  might  produce  tetanic  convulsions. 
I  have  seen  small  deposits  or  tubercles  in  the  brain,  the  only 
assignable  cause  for  death  terminating  in  convulsions. 

Examination  resumed — In  addition  to  those  slight  causes,  I 
believe  that  tetanic  convulsions  arise  from  causes  as  yet  quite 
undiscoverable  by  science.  I  have  had  many  post-mortem 
examinations  of  patients  who  have  died  of  tetanus,  and  no 
trace  of  any  disease  whatever  could  be  discovered  beyond  the 
192 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

congestion  or  vascularity  of  some  of  the  vessels  surrounding  the  W.  M'Donnell 

nerves.     Though  tetanus  is  not  easily  discoverable,  strychnia 

is  easily  discoverable  by  scientific  men.     I  had  a  case  of  idio- 

pathic  tetanus — a  female,  Catherine  Watson.     I  was  fortunate 

enough  to  restore  her,  and  she  is  here.     (Dr.  M'Donnell  read 

his  notes  of  the  case  of  Catherine  Watson.)    In  her  case  lockjaw 

set  in  about  the  middle  of  the  attack.     She  was  able  to  speak. 

In  acute  idiopathic  tetanus,  ending  fatally,  trismus  is  generally 

a  later  symptom.     I  had  a  case  of  tetanus  which  ended  fatally, 

a  man  named  Copeland.    It  must  have  been  idiopathic,  as  there 

was  no  external  cause.      Death  took  place  in  somewhat  less 

than  half  an  hour.    I  cannot  say  precisely.    He  was  dead  before 

I  could  reach  the  house. 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — Do  you  know  what  the  cause  of  the 
disease  was? — Yes.  I  examined  the  patient  carefully,  and  made 
inquiry  as  to  the  symptoms. 

Examination  resumed — I  have  made  a  number  of  experiments 
on  animals  with  reference  to  strychnia  poison.  I  have  found 
the  muscles  of  the  brain  highly  congested,  the  sinuses  gorged 
with  blood,  and  in  one  case  haemorrhage  from  the  nostrils. 
That  would  indicate  a  very  high  state  of  congestion.  I  have 
found  extravasation  of  the  blood  in  some  cases,  likewise  in  the 
brain.  I  have  cut  through  the  substance  of  the  brain  and 
found  numerous  red  points.  I  have  found  the  lungs  of  these 
animals  either  collapsed  or  congested.  The  heart  has  been 
invariably  filled  in  the  right  side  with  blood,  and  very  often  on 
the  left.  The  liver  has  been  congested,  the  kidneys  normal 
generally,  the  spleen  in  its  ordinary  condition.  I  have  found 
the  vessels  of  the  stomach  on  the  outer  surface  congested,  and 
on  the  mucous  or  inner  surface  highly  vascular.  In  the  spinal 
cord  I  have  found  the  vessels  of  the  membranes  congested,  and 
also  red  points  seen  on  cutting  it  through,  not  invariably,  but 
sometimes.  I  have  experimented  in  many  cases  for  the  dis- 
covery of  strychnia.  You  may  discover  the  smallest  dose  that 
will  kill  the  animal.  If  you  kill  an  animal  with  a  grain  of 
strychnia  you  may  discover  traces  of  it. 

What  do  you  mean  by  a  trace  of  it? — Evidence  of  its 
appearance. 

Does  that  mean  an  imponderable  quantity? — It  may. 

Do  you  mean  by  traces  to  convey  the  idea  that  you  can 
discover  the  smallest  quantity? — That  will  kill. 

What  is  the  smallest  quantity  you  can  discover? — The  fifty- 
thousandth  part  of  a  grain. 

Have  you  actually  experimented  so  as  to  discover  that 
quantity? — Yes. 

You  have  heard  a  theory  propounded  in  the  course  of  this 
inquiry  by  Dr.  Taylor — I  mean  the  destruction  by  the  supposed 
decomposition  of  strychnia — to  your  knowledge  has  any 

o  193 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

M'Donnell  scientific  man  of  eminence  ever  propounded  that  theory  »t  all? 
— I  never  heard  of  it  until  mentioned  in  this  Court.  In  my 
opinion  there  are  no  well-grounded  reasons  for  that  theory.  I 
have  proved  that  that  theory  is  false  by  numerous  experiments. 
I  have  taken  the  blood  of  an  animal  poisoned  with  2  grains  of 
strychnia,  about  the  least  quantity  which  would  kill  an  animal, 
and  have  injected  it  into  the  abdominal  cavities  of  some  animals, 
and  have  destroyed  them,  with  the  symptoms  and  post-mortem 
appearances  of  strychnia.  It  should  not  make  it  any  more 
difficult  to  detect  if  the  strychnia  is  administered  in  the  form  of 
pills.  If  the  pills  were  hard,  and  not  readily  solved,  you  would 
find  it  much  easier,  because  you  might  find  some  remains  of 
the  pill.  I  do  not  agree  with  Dr.  Taylor's  opinion  about  the 
fallacy  of  colour  tests.  I  believe  a  colour  test  is  a  reliable 
mode  of  ascertaining  strychnia.  I  agree  with  Mr.  Herepath 
that  it  is  found  in  urine  that  has  been  ejected.  I  have  found 
it  invariably. 

Does  it  first  pass  into  the  blood  and  then  into  that  watery 
excretion? — Part  of  it  may  be  drawn  off  by  that  means.  It 
is  not  true  that  strychnia  can  be  confounded  with  pyroxanthine. 
In  these  animals  which  I  have  killed  with  strychnia  I  have 
generally  observed  an  increased  flow  of  saliva ;  that  was  a  very 
marked  symptom.  The  animals  were  very  susceptible  to  touch. 
A  stamp  of  the  foot,  a  slight  touch,  or  a  breath,  or  a  sharp 
word,  would  drive  them  into  tetanic  convulsions.  We  recognised 
them  by  the  straightened  condition  of  the  muscles. 

Supposing  that  a  dose  of  strychnia  sufficient  to  kill  a  man 
were  administered  to  him,  do  you  think  he  could  bear  to  have 
his  neck  rubbed? — I  think  it  would  be  very  likely  to  throw  him 
into  convulsions  before  the  paroxysm  came  on. 

By  LORD  CAMPBELL — As  soon  as  the  poison  is  taken  into  his 
system? — No.  It  requires  a  certain  time.  You  must  have  the 
first  symptoms  of  poison  developed.  It  would  be  after  the  first 
symptoms. 

Examination  resumed — What  would  be  the  effect  of  a  man 
pulling  a  bell  violently  if  he  was  poisoned  by  strychnia  ? — I  think 
it  would  be  extremely  probable,  if  the  dose  had  been  sufficient, 
to  destroy  life,  provided  the  symptoms  had  made  their  appear- 
ance. I  quite  agree  with  Mr.  Herepath  that,  if  a  sufficient 
dose  to  poison  has  been  administered,  it  can  and  ought  to  be 
discovered.  I  have  heard  the  medical  evidence  that  was  given 
in  this  case  and  the  evidence  as  to  the  symptoms.  The  symp- 
toms I  attach  very  little  importance  to  as  the  means  of 
diagnosis,  as  you  may  have  the  same  symptoms  developed  from 
many  different  causes.  There  is  one  principal  reason  I  have, 
which  is  this — a  dose  of  strychnia  sufficient  to  destroy  life  in 
one  paroxysm  would  hardly  require  an  hour  and  a  half  or  two 
194 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

hours.      The   cause  of  death   was   from  convulsions,    epileptic  W.  M'Donnell 
convulsions  with  tetanic  symptoms. 

Does  the  interval  of  repose  from  the  Monday  night  to  the 
Tuesday  at  all  operate  on  your  judgment  in  coming  to  that 
conclusion  ? — If  my  opinion  that  it  was  of  an  epileptic  character 
were  correct,  it  would. 

It  is  your  opinion  that  if  that  were  of  an  epileptic  character 
— then  what  follows? — The  intermission  from  the  Monday  night 
would  be  considered  important,  as  epilepsy  seizures  very  often 
recur  about  the  same  hours,  as  I  have  seen  them. 

Assuming  that  a  man  was  in  such  an  excitable  state  of  mind 
that  he  was  silent  for  two  or  three  minutes  after  his  horse 
winning  a  race,  that  he  exposed  himself  to  cold  and  damp,  that 
he  excited  his  brain  by  drinking,  and  he  was  attacked  by  violent 
vomiting,  and  after  his  death  gritty  granules  were  found  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  his  spine,  could  not,  in  the  present 
instance,  such  a  death  as  it  was  arise  from  these  causes? — Any 
of  these  causes  might  aggravate  or  hurry  it. 

You  say  any  one  of  those  causes? — Might  cause  it. 

Cross-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — I  am  a  general 
practitioner  at  Garnkirk,  near  Glasgow,  general  surgeon  to 
the  ironworks,  and  parochial  medical  officer.  I  have  had 
personal  experience  of  two  cases  of  idiopathic  tetanus — this  one 
I  have  recorded  and  another. 

What  you  have  been  telling  us  about  mental  excitement, 
sensual  excitement,  is  not  within  your  own  observation? — This 
case  might  have  arisen  from  those  causes. 

Have  you  any  reason  to  think  it  did? — I  have  no  reason  to 
do  so. 

Then  do  not  tell  us  what  it  might  have  done.  Now,  in  the 
case  of  Catherine  Wilson? — I  saw  her  about  half -past  ten  at 
night.  She  had  been  ill  very  nearly  an  hour  before  I  saw  her. 
She  had  convulsions.  She  had  gone  about  her  usual  duties  up 
to  the  evening.  She  felt  a  slight  lassitude  previous  to  that  time. 
It  was  only  by  close  pressing  that  she  could  call  it  to  mind. 
The  lockjaw,  I  think,  came  on  in  an  hour  or  two;  I  could 
not  be  positive. 

In  the  other  case,  of  Mr.  Copeland? — It  was  a  young  child 
between  three  and  four  months  old. 

Was  that  the  person  of  the  name  of  Copeland? — Yes. 

What  was  the  matter  with  the  child  ? — I  saw  it  in  good  health 
half  an  hour  before  the  attack  came  on.  It  had  an  attack  of 
convulsions  and  opisthotonos.  I  rode  away  from  the  house, 
and  they  supposed  I  had  not  gone  a  couple  of  miles  when  it 
died. 

It  was  seized  with  a  fit? — Apparently  a  spasm,  which  I  con- 
sider to  be  of  the  tetanifonn  character.  I  had  seen  the  child 
half  an  hour  before.  There  was  nothing  the  matter  with  it 

195 


Trial   of  William   Palmer. 

W.  M'Donnell  then.  It  was  in  bed,  I  believe,  with  the  mother,  who  was  laid 
up.  I  did  not  see  its  face.  I  saw  it  lying  in  bed,  but  did  not 
examine  it.  I  judged  it  to  be  asleep. 

With  regard  to  the  animals  that  you  experimented  on  with 
strychnia,  when  did  you  begin  with  them? — I  began  this  series 
of  experiments  for  this  case  in  January. 

Had  you  ever  made  any  before? — Yes;  I  think  eight  or  ten 
years  ago.  The  dose  by  which  I  killed  the  animals  was  from 
If  to  2  grains.  The  animals  experimented  upon  were  dogs, 
cats,  rabbits,  and  fowls.  These  experiments  will  relate  to  dogs. 
A  grain  is  the  smallest  dose  I  administered.  In  four  cases  I 
used  a  grain,  in  five  1J  grains,  in  one,  I  think,  1%  grains,  and 
in  two  2  grains. 

You  never  tried  them  with  half  a  grain? — Yes,  I  did;  I 
did  not  mention  it  before.  I  gave  half  a  grain  for  the  purpose 
of  ascertaining  the  least  dose  that  would  kill. 

Did  you  try  if  you  could  detect  it  afterwards? — How  could 
I  try  before  I  killed  the  dog? 

Do  you  mean  on  your  oath  you  do  not  understand  my 
question?  Show  me  one  instance  where  you  have  given  half 
a  grain? — I  did  not  make  a  note,  because  it  did  not  kill.  I 
have  never  destroyed  a  dog  with  half  a  grain;  I  tried  it,  and 
it  did  not  answer. 

Now  let  us  come  to  your  symptoms.  You  say  you  have 
always  found  the  brain  highly  congested? — By  the  stoppage  of 
the  circulation  in  the  system. 

Have  you  not  found  in  some  cases  that  the  brain  was  not 
congested? — No;  I  think  in  every  case  there  were  more  or  less 
congestion. 

Is  that  greater  in  proportion  to  the  length  of  the  paroxysm? 
— No;  it  is  greatest  where  the  animal  was  young  and  in  a 
full  state  of  health. 

Have  you  ever  seen  any  case  of  traumatic  tetanus? — I  think 
two  in  my  own  practice,  but  I  have  seen  a  few  others  in  hospital. 

Have  you  ever  seen  a  case  of  strychnia  in  the  human  subject? 
— No,  I  have  not. 

I  understand  you  to  say  that,  in  your  opinion,  this  was  a 
case  of  epilepsy  with  tetanic  complications? — As  far  as  I  can 
judge  from  hearing  the  evidence  in  Court. 

What  does  epilepsy  proceed  from? — Nobody  can  answer  that 
question. 

You  have  no  theory  upon  the  subject? — I  have  not  exactly 
arrived  at  any  distinct  theory,  not  quite  as  distinct  as  strychnia 
or  tetanus.  I  have  seen  one  case  of  death  from  epilepsy.  The 
patient  was  not  conscious  when  he  died. 

Can    you    find    me    any   case    in    which    consciousness    has 
preceded  death? — I  cannot  recollect. 
196 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

You  have  studied  on  purpose  for  these  cases  1 — No ;  I  am  W.  M'Donneli 
pretty  well  up  in  most  branches. 

Being  so  universally  proficient  in  the  science  of  your  pro- 
fession, do  you  know  of  any  single  recorded  case  of  conscious- 
ness at  the  time  of  death  ? — I  do  not  from  my  own  knowledge. 
I  have  heard  what  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  said  on  this  subject. 

You  mean  deliberately  to  state  that  you  believe  this  to  have 
been  from  epilepsy? — I  do  state  so. 

Without  being  able  to  refer  to  any  cause  whatever  as  pro- 
ducing the  disease? — When  I  have  told  you  before  that  deaths 
often  take  place  in  idiopathic  tetanus  without  leaving  any 
trace  behind,  I  think  I  may  say 

That  is  idiopathic  tetanus? — They  are  all  of  the  same  class. 
I  think  all  forms  of  convulsions  arise  from  a  decomposition  of 
the  blood,  and,  if  a  person  has  probably  an  incipient  tendency 
to  disease  of  the  brain,  that  it  always  may  be  affected,  and 
that  the  decomposition  of  the  blood  might  set  up  the  diseased 
action. 

Do  I  understand  you  that  mental  excitement  had  anything 
to  do  with  this? — I  do  not  say  it  had.  I  said  it  might  have 
caused  it. 

Do  you  find  any  excitement  in  this  case? — I  find  at  Shrews- 
bury he  was  excited,  and  wherever  you  have  excitement  you 
have  a  consequent  depression. 

Do  you  find  he  was  depressed? — When  you  find  a  man  in 
bed  sick,  he  must  be  depressed. 

I  was  speaking  of  the  depression  consequent  on  these 
symptoms.  Where  do  you  find  any  symptom  of  illness  until 
he  begins  to  vomit? — If  I  have  much  excitement,  if  I  am  up 
all  night,  it  upsets  me  the  next  day,  and  I  generally  vomit 
the  food  I  take.  Cook  was  overjoyed  at  winning  his  race. 

And  you  think  he  vomited  in  consequence? — He  might. 

Do  you  mean  to  swear  that  you  think  the  excitement  of  the 
three  minutes  on  the  course  on  the  Tuesday  accounts  for  the 
vomiting? — I  do  not  mean  to  say  anything  of  the  kind. 

Do  you  find  any  excitement  or  depression  from  that  time  till 
the  time  he  died? — There  is  nothing  reported  that  I  can 
recollect  just  now. 

On  the  contrary,  do  you  not  recollect  that  the  man,  when 
he  was  not  vomiting,  on  that  very  night,  was  joking  and 
laughing;  was  that  sufficient  to  make  him  vomit? — That  may 
•well  be  where  a  man  is  subject  to  bilious  fits. 

We  are  talking  of  excitement — of  epilepsy  with  tetanic  com- 
plications; I  want  to  know  on  what  you  can  put  your  hand  in 
the  way  of  excitement  or  depression  which  will  account  for 
the  remarkable  symptoms? — I  have  told  you  that  almost  any 
one  of  them  is  sufficient. 

'97 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

Where  is  there  one  which  you  say  might  have  occasioned 
death? — These  white  spots  in  the  stomach  might  have  caused 
death  by  an  inflammatory  condition  of  the  stomach. 

But  there  was  no  inflammation  of  the  stomach,  was  there  1 — 
I  have  given  you  my  opinion. 

If  there  had  been  any,  would  not  the  gentlemen  who  examined 
it  have  seen  it? — If  those  white  spots  were  present  you  would 
have  had  inflammation. 

They  say  there  was  none? — I  do  not  believe  them. 

Sensual  excitement  is  a  cause  of  epilepsy  with  tetanic  com- 
plications; is  that  what  you  say? — Yes,  it  might  be. 

Do  you  find  a  tittle  of  evidence  of  any  such  excitement? — I 
think  so — the  syphilitic  spots.  There  was  no  doubt  about  it. 

Do  you  mean  to  say  that  you  attribute  this  to  some  excite- 
ment at  some  anterior  period  long  before? — I  am  not  called 
upon  to  say  that.  I  take  my  opinion  from  what  was  seen. 

Supposing  the  man  had  any  such  excitement  a  week  before, 
do  you  mean  that  is  sufficient? — Yes;  we  have  instances  on 
record  of  convulsions  in  the  very  act  you  allude  to. 

Have  you  any  instance  a  fortnight  afterwards? — It  is  quite 
within  the  range  of  possibility. 

Would  epilepsy,  with  tetanic  complications,  set  in  from  that 
cause?  Do  you  mean  to  stand  there,  as  a  serious  man  of 
science,  and  tell  me  that? — Yes,  the  results  of  sensual  excite- 
ment— chancre  in  one  of  them,  and  syphilitic  sore  throat. 

Did  you  ever  hear  or  know  of  such  a  thing  as  chancre  or 
any  other  form  of  syphilis  producing  epilepsy? — Not  epilepsy, 
but  tetanus.  You  are  forgetting  the  tetanic  complications. 

If  I  understand  it  rightly,  it  stands  thus :  the  sensual  excite- 
ment produces  the  epilepsy,  and  the  chancre  produces  tetanic 
complications? — You  are  quite  mistaken.  I  say  the  results  of 
a  sensual  excitement. 

You  have  just  now  said  that  your  reason  for  thinking  and 
referring  it  to  epilepsy  was  that,  amongst  other  things,  an 
hour  or  an  hour  and  a  half  intervened  between  the  taking  of 
the  poison  and  the  appearance  of  the  first  symptoms.  Do 
you  mean  that  in  your  reading  you  have  not  met  with  cases 
quite  as  long  as  that  when  the  death  has  arisen  from  strychnia  ? 
— I  cannot  recollect  where  death  has  followed. 

Would  the  fact  of  morphia  having  been  given  for  an  hour  or 
two  previously  in  any  way  touch  your  opinion  with  regard  to 
poison? — No;  I  have  seen  opium  bring  on  convulsions  very 
nearly  the  same. 

Will  opium  bring  on  convulsions? — Yes,  but  a  different  form 
of  convulsions  from  epilepsy. 

Because  opium  brings  on  convulsions,  you  assume  in  this  case 
that  morphia  accelerated  the  disease? — Drawing  the  inference, 
I  should  say  it  might. 
198 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Suppose   not   a   case   of   epilepsy,    but   of   strychnia ;    what  W.  M'Donneil 
would  be  the  action  of  morphia?       How  would  it  attack  the 
disease? — In  some  cases  it  stimulates.     It  is  exceedingly  apt 
to  cause  congestion  of  the  brain. 

In  which  disease  does  it  cause  excitement? — It  depends  on 
the  idiosyncrasy,  on  the  habit  of  body,  if  I  might  use  a 
common  term. 

Having  taken  it  on  the  Saturday  and  Sunday  night,  and 
having  been  free  from  nervous  excitement  on  the  Sunday  and 
Monday,  what  would  you  assume  judging  from  the  result? — If 
it  were  opium,  yet  it  is  only  presumed  to  be  opium,  it  appears 
to  have  soothed  him. 

And  why,  when  the  man  was  tranquil  on  the  Sunday  and 
Monday,  did  you,  after  that,  venture  to  say  that  these  pills 
irritated  him? — I  do  not  mean  to  say  they  did. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — You  stated  that,  though 
you  had  seen  no  case  of  epileptic  convulsions  with  tetanic  com- 
plications, your  reading  informed  you  that  there  had  been, 
and  you  mentioned  Dr.  Mason  Goode? — Yes.  He  is  a  well- 
known  author  on  the  subject  of  convulsions.  There  is  a  class 
of  convulsions  called  epileptic — not,  strictly  speaking,  epilepsy 
— though  they  resemble  it  in  some  of  its  features.  Epilepsy, 
properly  so  called,  is  sudden  in  its  attacks.  The  patient  falls 
down  at  once  with  a  shriek.  Within  my  knowledge,  the  disease 
constantly  occurs  at  night  and  in  bed. 

Are  the  convulsions  which  the  authors  do  not  class  as  pro- 
perly epilepsy,  but  as  convulsions  of  an  epileptic  character, 
sometimes  attended  with  premonitory  symptoms? — Sometimes 
The  patient  is  thrown  into  tetanic  and  tetaniform  convulsions. 
Pending  the  struggle  or  the  convulsions,  actual  epilepsy  may 
come  on  in  this  way,  and  the  patient  die.  In  epilepsy  and 
in  convulsions  of  an  epileptic  character,  a  patient  may  have 
suffered  in  the  night  and  be  well  the  next  morning,  and  as  well 
the  next  day  as  if  he  had  had  no  fit  at  all,  more  especially  where 
adults  are  seized  for  the  first  time.  When  an  adult  is  seized 
for  the  first  time  it  is  in  my  experience  that  several  fits  follow 
each  other  during  a  short  period. 

If  it  were  true  that  Cook's  mind  appeared  distressed  and 
irritable  the  afternoon  before  he  died,  would  you  infer  from  that, 
considering  the  former  excitement  and  elation,  he  was  in  a 
state  of  depression  or  not? — Yes. 

What  would  JTOU  infer  from  what  happened  in  the  middle  of 
the  Sunday  night,  supposing  it  were  true  that  he  represented 
himself  to  be  mad  for  ten  minutes,  and  it  was  occasioned  by  a 
quarrel  in  the  streets? — That  he  had  been  seized  with  some 
sudden  cramp  or  spasm. 

Supposing  there  was   no   such   cramp,    and   that  he   meant 

199 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

r.  M'Donnell  to  tell  the  truth,  would  you  refer  what  he  said  to  any  nervous 
and  mental  excitement? — Yes,  decidedly. 

With  regard  to  the  spots  on  the  stomach,  which  you  men- 
tioned when  my  friend  was  examining  you,  you  stated  you 
differed  from  some  gentlemen  of  your  profession? — Yes. 

The  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — He  said  he  did  not  believe  them? 
— I  did  not.  I  did  not  believe  that  inflammation  could  be 
absent  and  these  spots  present. 

Re-examination  resumed — Have  you  known  any  serious  con- 
sequence of  a  convulsive  character  reasonably  imputed  to  spots 
of  that  description? — I  have.  There  was  a  case  about  twenty 
years  ago.  It  was  published.  I  saw  a  case  myself,  about 
eighteen  months  ago.  I  examined  the  body  after  death.  It 
was  a  case  of  fever,  I  thought.  I  did  not  know  what  the 
spots  were,  and  consulted  all  the  authors  who  had  treated  on 
the  mucous  structure  of  the  stomach,  and  could  find  no  account 
of  it  but  in  one  "which  I  have  here,  an  essay  by  Dr.  Sproshoid, 
a  medical  man  practising  in  Edinburgh,  but  now  deceased. 

B*  ?'b  id  ^r*  ^OHN  NATHAN  BAINBRIDGE,  examined  by  Mr.  GROVE — 
I  am  a  doctor  of  medicine  and  medical  officer  to  the  St. 
Martin's  Workhouse.  I  have  had  considerable  experience  of 
convulsive  disorders.  They  admit  of  a  very  great  variety  of 
symptoms.  There  are  causes  of  them  varying  from  what 
are  called  chronic  diseases  to  rigid  opisthotonos.  Hysterical 
convulsions  are  very  frequently  accompanied  with  opisthotonos; 
convulsions  of  the  muscles  of  the  back  and  of  the  limbs.  The 
different  cases  vary  very  much  as  to  the  frequency  of  the  recur- 
rences, and  as  to  the  muscles  attacked.  Periodicity  is  very 
common,  that  is,  occurring  at  the  same  hour,  the  same  day, 
and  at  an  interval  of  a  year.  I  have  known  this  very  common 
at  shorter  periods,  such  as  twelve  or  twenty-four  hours.  These 
disorders  run  so  imperceptibly  one  into  the  other  that  it  is 
almost  impossible  for  the  most  experienced  medical  man  to 
decide  where  one  kind  of  convulsion  terminates  and  the  other 
begins.  Epileptic  attacks  are  frequently  accompanied  with 
tetanic  complications,  or  tetanic  spasms. 

Cross-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — Do  hysterical 
convulsions  ever  end  in  death  without  being  attended  by  these 
tetanic  symptoms? — Very  rarely  indeed.  I  have  known  one 
case  within  the  last  three  months. 

Can  you  undertake  to  say  that  that  was  not  a  death  by 
apoplexy? — No.  The  symptoms  were  somewhat  of  the  same 
character,  but  more  of  the  character  of  epilepsy.  It  would 
be  very  difficult  for  any  man  to  define  the  difference  in  some 
instances  between  hysteria  and  epilepsy. 

In  fact,  had  not  the  man  been  subject  to  these  fits  for  a 

200 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

long  series  of  years,  and  at  last  he  died  in  one  of  them? — Yes,  J.  N. 

he   had.  Balnbridge 

In  attacks  of  this  nature  is  there  in  the  fits  a  loss  of  con- 
sciousness?— Sometimes.  I  have  seen  several  cases  in  which 
there  has  been,  and  in  others  they  can  almost  understand 
anything  you  say  to  them,  not  perfectly  perhaps,  but  you 
may  rouse  them. 

Have  you  ever  known  an  instance  in  which  a  man  was  able 
to  speak  when  the  paroxysm  has  set  in? — They  will  scream, 
and  recollect  what  we  have  said  to  them.  I  never  knew  any 
of  them,  in  the  actual  violence  of  the  paroxysm,  ask  to  have 
their  position  changed.  Epilepsy,  when  it  is  very  bad,  is 
sometimes  attended  with  opisthotonos. 

When  the  convulsions  are  so  violent  that  opisthotonos  is 
produced,  have  you  ever  known  patients  conscious? — Partly 
conscious.  If  they  were  asked  subsequently  they  would  recol- 
lect what  had  occurred.  I  have  seen  cases  of  traumatic  tetanus. 
As  far  as  I  have  observed  the  patient  always  retains  his  con- 
sciousness. I  have  frequently  known  epilepsy  end  in  death, 
and  also  hysteria  with  tetanic  complications  end  in  death. 

Because  you  tell  me  you  have  known  of  hysteria  ending  in 
death,  I  wish  you  to  inform  me  what  in  your  opinion  is  the 
distinction  between  them? — The  less  consciousness  more  especi- 
ally found  in  epilepsy,  and  the  sudden  falling  down. 

Did  you  ever  know  a  case  of  death  in  epilepsy  where  con- 
sciousness was  not  destroyed  before  death? — No,  I  do  not 
know  one. 

Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — I  think  it  is  an  assumption  that  Mr. 
Cook  was  conscious  between  the  last  shriek  and  his  death. 

Mr.  EDWARD  AUSTIN  STEADY,  examined  by  Mr.  GRAY — I  am  a  E.  A.  Steady 
member  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  and  am  in  practice 
as  a  surgeon  at  Chatham.  In  June,  1854,  I  attended  a  person 
for  trismus  and  pleurosthotonos,  the  head  depending  on  one 
side,  and  not  backwards  as  is  the  case  in  opisthotonos.  Con- 
vulsions came  on  in  paroxysms.  The  first  attack  continued 
for  a  fortnight.  She  had  trismus  all  the  time.  For  twelve 
months  there  were  remissions  of  the  pleurosthotonos.  She 
appeared  to  get  better  to  a  certain  extent,  and  walked  about, 
but  the  tendons  of  one  knee  were  contracted.  About  twelve 
months  after  she  was  again  seized.  The  seizure  continued 
about  a  week. 

Did  you  ascertain  the  cause  which  had  brought  about  this 
•disease? — It  was  detailed  to  me  as  excitement.  A  passion,  I 
believe,  brought  it  on.  I  believe  she  had  had  some  quarrel 
with  her  husband.  I  discovered  no  other  cause. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  JAMES — I  do  not  know  how  long 
t>efore  I  was  called  in  she  had  this  quarrel.  I  learned  that 

201 


Trial   of  William  Palmer. 

E.  A.  Steady  during  the  quarrel  she  had  had  a  blow  given  her  on  her  side 
by  her  husband.  I  observed  the  setting  in  of  the  lockjaw  at 
that  time.  I  saw  her  in  March,  1855,  when  she  was  under 
my  care  for  about  a  week.  The  locking  of  the  jaw  continued 
the  whole  week.  She  has  never  got  thoroughly  well.  She 
has  tetanic  extensions  of  the  limbs  in  any  case  of  excitement. 
In  my  opinion  the  disease  is  in  action  in  her  system  at  the 
present  time. 

6.  Robinson  Dr.  GEORGE  ROBINSON,  examined  by  Mr.  KENEALY — I  am  a 
Licentiate  of  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians  and  Fellow  of 
the  Royal  Medical  Chirurgical  Society  of  London,  and  physician 
to  the  Newcastle-on-Tyne  Dispensary  and  Fever  Hospital.  I 
have  devoted  considerable  attention  to  pathology,  and  have 
published  essays  on  it.  I  have  practised  as  a  physician  for 
ten  years.  From  the  symptoms  I  have  heard  described  my 
opinion  is  that  Mr.  Cook  died  from  tetanic  convulsions,  by 
which  I  mean,  not  the  disease  of  tetanus,  but  convulsions 
similar  to  those  witnessed  in  tetanus.  Convulsions  of  that 
kind  occasionally  assume  the  nature  of  epilepsy.  I  know  of 
no  department  of  pathology  which  is  more  obscure  than  that 
of  convulsive  diseases.  I  have  been  present  at  post-mortem 
examinations  of  persons  who  died  from  convulsive  diseases.  I 
have  sometimes  seen  no  morbid  appearance  whatever,  and  in 
other  cases  the  morbid  appearances  which  were  visible  were 
common  to  a  variety  of  diseases.  Convulsive  diseases 
undoubtedly  depend  very  much  on  the  state  of  the  nerves. 
They  are  all  connected  with  disorders  of  the  nervous  action. 
The  brain  has  great  influence  in  producing  convulsive  diseases, 
but  the  spinal  cord  has  a  greater  influence.  The  presence  of 
gritty  granules  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  spinal  cord  would 
be  likely  to  produce  convulsive  diseases.  There  is  such  a 
disease  as  spinal  epilepsy,  which  is  accompanied  by  strong 
convulsions,  which  might  resemble  in  a  great  degree  those 
described  in  the  present  case.  Periodicity  would  belong  to 
convulsions  arising  from  spinal  epilepsy.  I  should  think  from 
the  evidence  I  have  heard  that  Mr.  Cook's  mode  of  life  would 
predispose  him  to  epilepsy. 

Cross-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — In  all  cases  of 
epilepsy  there  are  violent  convulsions.  I  cannot  tell  you  how 
many  I  have  seen  assume  a  tetanic  character ;  perhaps  twenty. 

Has  it  gone  as  far  as  opisthotonos  ? — Not  the  extreme  opis- 
thotonos  of  tetanus.  The  whole  body  has  been  straightened 
out  and  the  head  thrown  back.  I  heard  Mr.  Jones  describe 
Mr.  Cook's  symptoms,  that  the  body  was  so  bowed  that  he 
could  not  raise  it,  so  bowed  that  it  would  lean  upon  its  heels 
and  the  back  of  its  head  if  it  had  been  turned  over. 

Have  you  ever  seen  anything  in  epilepsy  approaching  to  these 

203 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

symptoms  1 — I  have  never  seen  anything  approaching  to  it.       I  G.  Robiasoa 
have  never  seen  a  body  so  stiffened  that  it  would  rest  on  the 
head  and  heels. 

Is  that  symptom  peculiar  to  tetanus  ? — You  may  have  convul- 
sions of  the  same  character  occurring  from  other  causes — tetanic 
convulsions  from  the  operation  of  various  poisons. 

Keep  to  natural  diseases.  Did  you  ever  know  these  symp- 
toms of  opisthotonos,  in  that  shape  or  to  that  extent,  arise 
from  anything  but  tetanus  ? — Not  within  my  own  experience.  I 
have  read  of  epilepsy  being  accompanied  with  tetanic  convulsions. 
Epilepsy,  when  it  assumes  that  marked  character,  is  accom- 
panied with  unconsciousness.  I  have  read  in  a  case  of  Dr. 
Marshall  Hall's  that  sometimes  unconsciousness  is  not  present. 
He  does  not  mention  whether  death  took  place  in  this  case  or 
not.  That  would  make  all  the  difference. 

You  said  that  gritty  granules  would  be  likely  to  produce  con- 
vulsive diseases.  What  extent  of  development,  in  your  judg- 
ment, must  such  granules  reach  to  produce  an  action  in  the 
spinal  marrow? — I  should  say  there  is  no  relation  between  the 
size  of  the  granules  and  the  extent  of  the  effect  produced. 

Would  you  expect  when  they  began  to  get  to  the  size  that 
they  would  have  any  effect  on  the  nervous  system — that  they 
would  begin  to  show  their  effect  more  or  less  gradually? — No, 
in  epilepsy  I  have  myself  observed  several  granules  in  the  mem- 
brane of  the  brain ;  and  any  disturbing  cause  in  the  system,  I 
think,  would  be  likely  to  produce  convulsions.  I  believe  that  the 
granules  in  this  case  were  very  likely  to  irritate  the  spinal  cord, 
and  an  attack  might  very  likely  come  on  at  once  in  a  fit  of 
epilepsy.  There  would  be  pain  during  the  continuance  of  the 
violent  spasms  of  the  patient,  not  necessarily  pain  merely  from 
the  spasms.  These  granules  might  or  might  not  produce 
arachnitis. 

You  would  expect  to  find  inflammation  in  that  case? — Not 
necessarily.  Irritation,  not  inflammation.  Granules  of  that 
description  do  not  often  exist  in  healthy  spines.  In  the  dis- 
sections of  epilepsy  in  the  large  hospitals,  these  small  granules 
have  been  found  very  frequently.  The  granules,  in  my  opinion, 
would  be  likely  to  produce  epilepsy.  In  my  experience  I  have 
never  known  epilepsy  unaccompanied  by  unconsciousness,  nor 
have  I  known  epilepsy  producing  the  marked  symptoms  of 
tetanic  character  which  occur  in  Mr.  Cook's  case. 

Do  you  feel  yourself  warranted  in  giving  an  opinion  that  these 
granules  caused  epilepsy  in  this  case? — I  think  I  might  have 
done  so.  If  I  put  aside  the  hypothesis  of  poisoning  by  strychnia 
I  would.  Several  of  th*  symptoms  described  by  Mr.  Jones,  the 
severe  paroxysm,  the  stiffening  of  the  body,  the  convulsions  of 
all  the  muscles  of  the  trunk  and  limbs,  and  the  complete  opis- 

203 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

6.  Sobinson  thotonos,  are  also  common  to  other  convulsions.  The  symptoms 
are  certainly  consistent  with  death  by  strychnia. 

They  are  the  symptoms  that  you  would  expect  after  strychnia  1 
— I  think  there  would  have  been  some  slight  premonitory  symp- 
toms. If  I  had  no  other  cause  to  which  I  could  ascribe  the 
death  I  would  ascribe  it  to  epilepsy. 

But  in  this  case  you  admit  some  of  the  symptoms  are  in- 
consistent with  your  experience  of  epilepsy? — Yes. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — They  are  consistent  with 
the  possibility  of  epilepsy.  They  are  consistent  with  con- 
vulsions of  an  epileptic  form  ending  in  death,  though  perhaps 
not  actually  amounting  to  epilepsy. 

Supposing  it  to  have  been  actual  epilepsy,  at  what  period  of 
the  last  attack  should  you  say  the  epilepsy  commenced? — When 
Mr.  Cook  sat  up  in  bed  and  cried  out.  I  should  imagine  that 
would  be  the  sense  of  suffocation  which  would  be  the  premoni- 
tory symptoms. 

After  the  final  shriek,  and  throwing  himself  back  in  his 
bed,  is  there  any  symptom  from  which  you  would  infer 
consciousness  after  that  moment? — Except  that  he  swallowed 
some  pills. 

The  ATTORNEY -GENERAL — Allow  me  to  remind  you  he  asked 
them  to  turn  him  over. 

By  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — Would  you  consider  that  a  body 
which  immediately,  or  within  ten  minutes  after  death,  when  it 
is  quite  warm,  lay  perfectly  straight,  the  hands  extended, 
resting  on  its  heels  and  its  back  and  its  head,  was  in  a  state  of 
opisthotonos? — Not  if  it  rested  on  its  back.  In  my  judgment 
it  might  be  that  the  body  might  assume,  without  actual  rigidity, 
the  bow-like  shape  and  appearance  which  has  been  spoken  of, 
and  yet,  when  turned  over,  lie  flat  in  the  bed,  resting  on  the 
head,  back,  and  heels. 

B   W. 

Richardson  Dr.  BENJAMIN  WARD  RICHARDSON,  examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT 
SHEB — I  practise  in  London,  and  I  am  a  licentiate  of  the 
Faculty  of  Physicians  and  Surgeons  in  Glasgow  and  a  member 
of  the  College  of  Physicians  in  London.  I  have  never  seen  a 
case  of  idiopathic  or  traumatic  tetanus,  but  I  have  seen  a  con- 
siderable number  of  deaths  by  convulsions,  and  I  have  known 
these  cases,  when  they  have  ended  in  death,  sometimes  assume 
tetaniform  appearances  without  being,  strictly  speaking,  tetanus. 
The  patient,  if  conscious,  generally  desires  to  sit  up.  I  have 
known  persons  to  die  from  a  disease  called  angina  pectoris. 
The  symptoms  of  the  disease,  when  it  is  fatal,  resemble  closely 
the  symptoms  of  the  paroxysms  in  which  Mr.  Cook  died.  It 
is  classed  amongst  the  convulsive  or  spasmodic  diseases,  and 
has  no  distinctive  feature  in  post-mortem  examination. 

Will  you  state  what  symptoms  you  particularly  refer  to? — I 
204 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

could  not  do  better  than  describe  a  case  which  I  myself  saw.  B.  W 
A  child,  ten  years  of  age,  was  under  my  care  in  November, 
1850.       I  supposed  she  had  suffered  from  scarlet  fever.       She 
had  a  slight  feverish  attack.       She  recovered  so  far  that  my 
visits  ceased  on  20th  November.      I  left  her  merry  in  the  morn- 
ing, and  at  half-past  ten  I  was  called  to  see  her  dying.       She 
was  supported  upright  at  her  own  request.       The  face  was  pale ; 
the  whole  of  the  face  and  arms  rigid,  the  fingers  clenched,  the 
respiratory  muscles  completely  fixed  and  rigid,  and,   with  all, 
complained  of  an  intense  agony  and  restlessness  such  as  I  had 
never  witnessed.      There  was  perfect  consciousness.     The  child 
knew  me,  and  explained  her  intense  agony;  eagerly  took  from 
my  hands  some  brandy  and  water  from  a  spoon.     I  then  left 
to  get  some  chloroform  for  the  purpose  of  producing  relaxation 
by  chloroform  vapour.       On  returning,  I  found  the  head  was 
thrown  back.      I  could  detect  no  respiration.     The  eyes  remained 
fixed  open,  and  the  body  just  resembling  a  fit.       She  was  dead. 
I  did  not  observe  whether  the  rigor-mortis  came  on  at  its  usual 
time  or  later.     I  made  a  post-mortem  examination  the  following 
day.       Unfortunately  I  left  the  body  in  the  arms  of  the  sister, 
and,  of  course,  it  was  laid  out  afterwards.     At  the  post-mortem 
examination  I  observed  that  the  brain  was  slightly  congested; 
a  portion  of  the  upper  part  of  the  spinal  cord  seemed  normal 
and  healthy,  the  lungs  were  collapsed,  the  heart  was  in  such 
a  state  of  firm  spasms  and  so  empty  that  I  remarked  it  might 
have  been  rinsed  out,  it  was  so  perfectly  clean  and  free  from 
blood.       There  were  no  appearances  of  functional  disturbances 
except  a  slight  effusion  of  serum  in  one  pleural  cavity,  I  believe 
the  right  side.       The  other  part  of  the  spinal  cord  was  in  a 
normal  state.       They  told  me  the  child  was  unusually  well  and 
merry  at  supper;  that  she  then  went  to  bed  with  her  sister, 
and  in  lying  down  suddenly  jumped  up  and  said,  "  I  am  going 
to  die,"  and  begged  her  sister  to  rub  her. 

Cross-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — This  case  accords 
with  all  the  descriptions  of  angina  pectoris  by  the  best  authors — 
Latham,  Watson,  Boyeau,  Pratt,  and  Sir  Everett  Holme. 

What  is  the  true  nature  and  cause  of  angina  pectoris? — It 
has  been  laid  down  as  disease  of  the  valves  of  the  heart.  There 
have  been  many  cases  in  which  there  has  been  no  discovered 
cause. 

Are  the  symptoms  of  angina  pectoris  not  those  that  would  be 
produced  by  taking  strychnia? — Not  exactly.  In  angina  pectoris 
the  patient  requests  to  be  rubbed  to  give  relief. 

Did  you  hear  the  Leeds  case? — Assuming  that  that  was  a 
case  of  strychnia,  I  must  say  that  the  two  forms  are  so  strictly 
analogous  that  there  would  be  great  difficulty  in  detecting  angina 
from  strychnia,  with  this  difference,  that  angina  is  paroxysmal, 
it  comes  and  goes,  and  strychnia  would  not  be  so  likely  to  do 
that.  You  would  not  expect  it  for  many  months. 

205 


Trial   of  William  Palmer. 

But  in  this  case  you  are  speaking  as  if  it  ended  in  the  first 
1  paroxysm? — Yes. 

How  then  can  you  be  justified,  in  cases  where  you  discover 
no  abnormal  conditions  of  the  heart  or  its  arteries,  in  setting 
down  the  death  to  angina? — Precisely  as  if  I  saw  the  symptoms 
of  epilepsy  I  should  accept  them  as  such. 

Supposing  the  disease  was  referable  to  two  causes,  in  the 
absence  of  all  evidence,  what  is  your  reason  for  setting  it  down 
to  one  in  preference  to  the  other? — I  quite  admit  that  if  I  had 
known  as  much  of  the  nature  of  strychnia  as  I  do  now  I  should 
have  gone  on  to  make  analysis. 

Is  the  disease  of  angina  pectoris  attended  with  painful  symp- 
toms before  it  terminates  in  death? — Most  painful.  The 
paroxysms  terminating  in  death  may  run  on  for  more  than  eight 
minutes.  It  comes  on  suddenly.  It  does  not  always  kill  at 
the  first  attack.  It  generally  spreads  itself  over  a  certain  period 
of  time. 

You  said  that  the  head  was  somewhat  bent  back.  Was  that 
opisthotonos  ? — There  was  rigidity,  not  amounting  to  opis- 
thotonos,  but  still  very  marked.  The  neck  was  so  stiffly  bent 
back  that  if  the  body  had  been  laid  down,  and  the  lower  limbs, 
which  I  did  not  see,  had  been  the  same,  I  have  no  doubt  the 
body  would  be  resting  on  its  head  and  heels. 

You  say  in  epileptic  convulsions  you  have  seen  the  hands 
clenched  firmly  till  death.  Did  you  ever  see  them  so  long 
after  death? — I  have  seen  them  firmly  clenched,  not  in  epilepsy 
only. 

In  what  cases  have  you  seen  them  firmly  clenched  after 
death? — In  cases  where  there  has  been  violent  convulsion.  I 
saw  them  once  from  haemorrhage. 

In  other  cases  have  you? — I  can  only  say,  in  a  general  sense, 
I  have  seen  the  hands  clenched  over  and  over  again,  and  have 
paid  no  attention  to  it.  My  belief,  from  seeing  people  die,  is 
that  the  clenching  of  the  hands  is,  in  many  cases,  mere  matter 
of  accident. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — Have  you  known  cases 
personally  or  from  your  reading  where  patients  recover  from 
angina  pectoris,  and  whether  within  a  short  time  afterwards 
they  sometimes  have  another  attack? — They  do,  sometimes  in 
so  short  an  interval  as  twenty-four  hours. 

During  the  interval  between  the  two  attacks  what  is  the 
condition  of  the  patient? — Perfectly  healthy,  to  all  appear- 
ance. 

Are  the  symptoms  described  in  the  evidence  more  like  the 
symptoms  of  angina  pectoris  or  strychnia  poison? — I  should 
certainly  say  angina  pectoris. 

You  had  no  reason  to  suspect  poison  of  any  kind   in   that 
case,  either  before  or  now? — Not  the  slightest. 
206 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Dr.  WRIOHTSON,  recalled,  examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHKH —  Dr.. 
In  your  opinion,  when  the  strychnia  poison  is  absorbed  into  Wptehtson 
the  system,  does  it  become  diffused  by  the  circulation  of  the 
blood  through  the  system,  or  does  it  collect  in  the  tissues? — I 
should   think  it  is  diffused   throughout  the   entire   system   by 
circulation  if  it  be  wholly  absorbed,   and  it  would  depend  on 
the    rapidity    with    which   death    takes    place    after    complete 
absorption,  and  on  the  quickness  of  circulation. 

Cross-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — Would  the 
absorption  be  more  complete  if  a  longer  time  were 
given  for  the  process  between  the  administration  and  the  death  ? 
— Certainly,  it  would  be. 

Is  that  supposing  a  minimum  dose  given  sufficient  to  destroy 
life ;  if  a  long  interval  elapses  between  the  taking  of  the  poison 
and  the  death,  the  more  complete  the  absorption  the  less  the 
chance  of  finding  it  in  the  stomach? — Cccteris  paribus  that 
would  be  so. 

By  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — Would  you  have  a  very  good  chance 
of  finding  it  in  the  kidneys  and  spleen  and  in  the  blood? — Yes. 

CATHERINE  WATSON,  examined  by  Mr.  GROVE — I  live  at  Gam-  c-  Watson 
kirk,  in  Scotland.       Last  October  I  was  affected  with  a  fit.       I 
had  no  wound  nor  injury  on  my  body  before.     I  had  taken  no 
poison. 

Cross-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — I  was  not  ill 
during  the  day.  I  was  in  low  spirits,  but  not  in  pain.  A  few 
minutes  before  eleven  at  night  I  took  a  pain  in  the  stomach, 
then  two  cramps  in  my  arms,  then  I  was  very  ill.  I  have 
never  had  cramps  like  this  before  nor  since. 

The  Court  then  adjourned. 


207 


Tenth  Day,  Saturday,  24th  May,  1856. 
The  Court  met  at  ten  o'clock. 

o.  Pemberton  jfr  OLIVER  PEiiBERTON,  examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEH — I 
am  Lecturer  in  Anatomy  at  Queen's  College,  Birmingham,  and 
surgeon  to  the  General  Hospital  at  Birmingham.  I  was  present 
at  the  examination  of  the  body  of  the  late  Mr.  Cook  after  it 
had  been  exhumed  in  January  or  February.  I  observed  the 
condition  of  the  spinal  cord.  In  my  judgment  it  was  not  in 
a  condition  to  enable  one  to  state  with  confidence  in  what  state 
it  had  been  immediately  after  death.  The  upper  part,  where 
the  brain  had  been  separated,  was  green  in  colour  from  the 
effects  of  decomposition.  The  remaining  portion,  though  fairly 
preserved  for  a  body  buried  two  months,  was  so  soft  as  not  to 
enable  me  to  form  any  opinion  as  to  its  state  immediately  after 
death. 

Cross-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — I  did  not  see  the 
body  till  the  day  after  the  bony  canal  had  been  opened,  which, 
to  a  certain  extent,  would  expose  the  interior  substance  of  the 
cord  to  the  atmosphere.  So  far  as  I  recollect,  it  was  still 
covered  with  a  very  hard,  dense  membrane.  Mr.  Bolton,  the 
professor  at  Queen's  College,  was  also  present  on  Palmer's 
behalf. 

Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — My  lord,  this  closes  the  medical  testi- 
mony. 

H.  Matthews  HENRT  MATTHEWS,  examined  by  Mr.  GROVE — 1  am  an 
inspector  of  police  at  Euston  Station.  I  was  there  on  19th 
November  last.  The  two  o'clock  afternoon  train  is  the  last 
that  stops  at  Rugeley.  The  express  for  Stafford  leaves  at 
five,  and  is  due  at  Stafford  at  8.42.  On  19th  November  it 
arrived  at  8.45.  From  Stafford  to  Rugeley  it  is  nineteen  miles 
by  railway.  I  do  not  know  how  far  by  road.  After  the  two 
o'clock  train  to  Rugeley,  the  quickest  way  to  get  there  is  by 
the  five  o'clock  to  Stafford,  and  then  by  road. 

Joseph  Foster  JOSEPH  FOSTER,  examined  by  Mr.  GRAY — I  have  known  the 
late  John  Parsons  Cook  for  many  years,  and,  from  what  I  saw 
of  him,  he  was  of  weak  health  and  constitution.  I  have  been 
with  him  when  he  has  had  a  bilious  attack  and  sick  headache. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.   JAMES — He  hunted   regularly   about 
three  days  a  week.     He  was  a  member  of  the  Welford  Cricket 
Club,  but  I  have  not  seen  him  playing  for  three  or  four  years. 
208 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

GEORGE  MTATT,  examined  by  Mr.  GBOVB — I  am  a  saddler  at  George  Hyatt 
Rugeley.  I  was  at  Shrewsbury  races,  and  saw  Palmer  and 
Cook  at  the  Raven  Hotel  there  on  the  Wednesday  evening  of 
the  race  week.  It  was  about  twelve  at  night,  and  Cook 
seemed  the  worse  of  liquor.  We  had  some  brandy  and  water 
together.  Cook  drank  most  of  his,  and  remarked  that  it  was 
not  good,  and  thought  there  was  something  in  it.  Cook 
proposed  having  some  more,  but  Palmer  told  him  to  finish 
what  he  had  first.  Cook  then  drank  his  up.  We  all  then 
went  to  bed.  I  slept  in  the  same  room  as  Palmer.  The 
brandy  we  had  was  brought  in  a  decanter  and  poured  out. 
I  did  not  leave  the  room  from  the  time  Palmer  and  Cook  came 
in  till  we  went  to  bed.  Had  anything  been  put  in  the  brandy 
and  water  I  should  have  seen  it.  As  far  as  I  can  remember, 
when  Palmer  and  I  went  to  our  bedroom  we  left  Cook  in  the 
sitting  room.  I  locked  our  door,  and  Palmer  never  left  the 
bedroom  during  the  night.  In  the  morning  Palmer  asked  me 
to  call  Mr.  Cook,  which  I  did.  Cook  then  told  me  how  ill  he 
had  been  during  the  night.  He  said  he  had  been  obliged  to 
send  for  a  doctor,  and  asked  me  what  was  put  in  the  brandy 
and  water.  I  told  him  I  did  not  know  that  anything  was 
put  in.  He  then  asked  me  to  send  Palmer  to  him,  which  I 
did.  After  Palmer  and  I  had  finished  our  breakfast,  I  next  saw 
Cook,  who  came  into  the  sitting  room  and  had  his  breakfast. 
That  night  the  three  of  us  had  dinner  at  the  Raven,  and  left 
for  Rugeley  about  six  o'clock.  We  went  by  express  from 
Shrewsbury  to  Stafford.  Palmer  took  the  three  tickets  and 
paid.  We  took  a  fly  from  Stafford,  there  being  no  train.  In 
the  fly  from  Stafford  to  Rugeley  Palmer  was  sick,  and  vomited 
through  the  window.  They  could  not  account  for  it,  unless  it 
was  cooking  in  some  brass  utensil,  or  the  water.  I  heard  other 
people  speak  about  being  ill  at  Rugeley,  and  they  could  not 
account  for  it.  It  is  9  miles  by  the  road  from  Stafford  to 
Rugeley. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  JAMES — I  have  known  the  prisoner 
all  my  life,  and  he  deals  with  me  for  his  saddlery  at  his  racing 
stables.  I  am  not  in  the  habit  of  going  to  racing  meetings 
with  him,  although  I  attend  them  myself.  He  paid  my 
expenses  at  Shrewsbury  races,  but  never  at  any  other  race 
meeting.  About  four  or  five  weeks  ago  I  went  with  Mr. 
Smith  to  Stafford  gaol,  and  was  with  Palmer  for  about  two 
hours.  I  have  now  and  then  stood  in  half  a  sovereign  or  a 
sovereign  with  Palmer  when  betting  on  his  horses.  On  the 
Wednesday  night  in  which  I  saw  Palmer  and  Cook  I  dined 
at  home  at  Rugeley,  and  reached  Shrewsbury  between  eight 
and  nine.  I  went  straight  from  the  station  to  the  Raven 
Hotel,  and  up  to  Palmer's  room,  where  I  saw  Cook.  Palmer 
was  out,  and  I  went  to  the  town  for  about  an  hour,  and 

p  209 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

George  Hyatt  returned  to  Palmer's  room.  He  was  not  in ;  I  waited  about 
two  hours,  when  he  came  in  with  Cook,  about  twelve  o'clock. 
Cook  was  drunk,  but  not  very  drunk.  The  decanter  of  brandy 
and  the  tumblers  were  brought  in  directly.  The  water,  I 
think,  was  on  the  table.  I  do  not  remember  Mrs.  Brooks 
calling,  or  Palmer  being  called  out  of  the  room  to  speak  to  her. 
I  remember  Mr.  Fisher  coming  in.  I  will  swear  that  Palmer 
did  not  at  any  time  that  evening  take  out  a  glass  of  brandy 
and  water  and  leave  the  room.  He  never  left  the  room 
from  the  time  I  joined  him  till  we  went  to  bed.  When  Cook 
drank  his  brandy  and  water  he  made  a  remark  to  the  effect 
that  it  was  not  good,  and  that  there  was  something  in  it.  I 
will  swear  that  he  did  not  say,  "  It  burns  my  throat  dread- 
fully," or  anything  to  that  effect.  The  brandy  and  water 
was  then  given  to  some  one  to  taste.  I  think  there  were  but 
four  people  in  the  room  when  Cook  drank  the  brandy  and 
water.  Palmer  sipped  from  the  glass  Cook  had  drank  from, 
and  said  he  could  not  taste  anything  the  matter.  He  held 
the  glass  to  Mr.  Fisher.  I  do  not  remember  whether  Fisher 
said,  "It  is  no  good  giving  me  the  glass,  it  is  empty."  I 
will  not  swear  he  did  not.  Palmer  and  I  went  to  bed  about 
half  an  hour  after,  and  left  Cook  in  the  room.  That  I  will 
swear.  The  first  I  heard  of  Cook  being  ill  during  the  night 
was  when  he  told  me  of  it  next  morning. 

John  Sargent  JOHN  SARGENT,  examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — I  frequently 
attend  race  meetings,  and  knew  Mr.  Cook  intimately.  I  was 
with  him  at  Liverpool  on  the  week  previous  to  the  Shrewsbury 
meeting.  We  slept  in  adjoining  rooms,  and  in  the  morning 
he  called  my  attention  to  the  state  of  his  throat  and  mouth. 
The  back  part  of  his  tongue  was  in  a  complete  state  of  ulcer. 
I  said  I  was  surprised  that  he  could  eat  and  drink  in  the  state 
his  mouth  was  in.  He  said  he  had  been  in  that  state  for 
weeks  and  months,  and  took  no  notice  of  it  now.  He  had 
frequently  before  then  shown  me  his  throat  when  it  was  in 
that  state.  On  one  occasion,  when  he  took  a  ginger  nut  with 
cayenne  by  mistake,  he  told  me  that  it  nearly  killed  him. 
Before  Shrewsbury  races  Cook  was  very  poor.  He  owed  me 
£25,  and  paid  £10  on  account,  saying  he  had  not  sufficient  to 
pay  his  expenses  at  Liverpool.  Cook  and  Palmer  were  in  the 
habit  of  betting  for  each  other  on  particular  horses.  I 
have  heard  Cook  apply  to  Palmer  to  supply  him  with  a  lotion 
called  blackwash.  This  is  a  mercurial  lotion  of  calomel  and 
lime  water. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  JAMES — He  applied  for  it  at  the  latter 
end  of  last  year.  Having  seen  the  state  of  his  throat,  I  was 
surprised  at  his  eating  and  drinking  so  well. 

210 


Evidence   for   Defence. 

JEREMIAH  SMITH,  examined  by  Mr.  SERJEANT  SHBE — I  am  an  J.  Smith 
attorney  at  Rugeley,  and  knew  the  late  Mr.  Cook.  I  saw  him 
at  ten  o'clock  on  Friday  morning,  16th  November,  1855.  He 
was  having  breakfast  in  bed — a  cup  of  tea  with  a  wineglassful 
of  brandy  in  it.  I  dined  with  him  and  Mr.  Palmer  about  two 
o'clock.  "We  had  a  beefsteak  and  some  champagne.  After 
dinner  we  had  three  bottles  of  port  wine,  of  which  Cook  drank 
his  share.  We  rose  from  the  table  between  five  and  six,  and 
Cook  and  I  went  to  my  house,  and  then  to  the  Albion  Hotel, 
which  is  next  door,  and  had  a  brandy  and  water  each.  Cook 
left  me  there  between  seven  and  eight.  He  said  he  felt  cold. 
During  that  day  I  asked  Cook  for  £50  he  was  due  me.  He 
gave  me  £5,  and  when  he  took  the  note  out  of  his  case  I  said, 
"You  can  pay  me  the  whole  £50."  He  said,  "No;  there  is 
only  £41  10s.  due  to  you."  Then  he  said  he  had  given  Mr. 
Palmer  money,  and  he  would  pay  me  the  remainder  when  he 
returned  from  Tattersall's  on  Monday  after  the  settling.  On 
the  Saturday  night  following  I  slept  in  the  same  room  with 
him,  as  he  was  not  well.  We  went  to  bed  about  twelve  o'clock. 
In  the  early  part  of  the  night  he  got  some  toast  and  water, 
and  he  was  sick.  I  saw  him  using  a  night-chair  in  the  room. 
He  tried  to  vomit,  but  I  do  not  know  whether  he  did  so  or  not. 
After  that  I  slept  until  Mr.  Palmer  and  Mr.  Bamford  came 
in  the  morning  to  see  him.  He  said,  "  I  am  rather  better 
this  morning.  I  slept  from  about  two  or  three  o'clock,  after 
the  confounded  concert  was  gone."  Mr.  Bamford  said,  "  I  will 
send  you  some  more  medicine."  I  then  got  up  and  left  the 
house.  I  know  Mrs.  Palmer,  the  mother  of  the  prisoner.  She 
asked  me  to  see  her  on  Monday  evening,  and,  in  consequence 
of  that,  I  went  about  two  o'clock  to  see  if  I  could  find  Palmer, 
but  could  not.  About  ten  minutes  past  ten  I  saw  him  in  a 
car  coming  from  the  direction  of  Stafford.  I  asked  him,  "  Have 
you  seen  Mr.  Cook  to-day?"  He  said,  "No;  we  had  better 
just  run  up  and  see."  We  went  up,  and  Cook  told  Palmer 
he  was  late,  and  that  he  had  taken  the  medicine.  We  only 
stayed  two  or  three  minutes.  Cook  said  he  had  taken  some 
pills  Mr.  Bamford  had  sent  him.  He  also  said  he  had  been  up 
that  day,  and  Palmer  said  he  ought  not  to  have  been  up. 
Palmer  and  I  then  went  to  his  mother's  house,  about  400  or 
500  yarda.  We  stayed  about  half  an  hour,  and  then  left  for 
Palmer's  house.  I  left  him  at  his  house  and  went  home.  On 
the  Saturday  I  asked  Cook  to  dine  with  me,  but  he  did  not. 
He  said  he  was  not  well.  I  got  for  him  a  boiled  leg  of 
mutton  and  some  broth  from  the  Albion,  which  was  taken  to 
him  by  Ann  Rowley,  a  charwoman.  In  the  May  before  his 
death  I  borrowed  £100  from  Mrs.  Palmer  and  £100  from 
William  Palmer  for  Cook.  I  also  negotiated  a  £500  loan 
through  Mr.  Pratt.  I  know  that  Palmer  and  Cook  were  jointly 

211 


Trial   of  William   Palmer. 

J.  Smith  interested  in  one  horse,  "  Pyrrhine,"  and  that  they  were  in 
the  habit  of  betting  very  frequently  for  each  other.  Shortly 
before  Mr.  Cook's  death  I  had  seen  Mr.  Thirlby,  Palmer's 
assistant,  dress  Cook's  throat  with  caustic.  I  have  seen  this 
four  or  five  times,  chiefly  before  Shrewsbury  races.  I  know 
Mr.  Cook's  signature.  [Some  papers  were  handed  to  witness.] 
Here  are  two  notes,  instructions  for  the  £500.  One  is  signed 
"  J.  P.  Cook  "  and  the  other  "  J.  Parsons  Cook."  I  saw  that 
signed.  Some  weeks  before  Mr.  Cook's  death  he  was  served 
with  a  writ.  [The  following  letter  was  read: — ] 

My  dear  Sir, — I  have  been  in  a  devil  of  a  fix  about  the  bill,  but 
have  at  last  settled  it  at  the  cost  of  three  guineas,  for  the  damned 
discounter  had  issued  a  writ  against  me,  and  I  am  very  much  disgusted 
at  it.  JOHN  PARSONS. 

I  destroyed  the  envelope  in  which  that  was  contained.     [Another 
letter  was  read,  dated  25th  June,  1855 — ] 

Dear  Jimmy, — I  should  like  to  have  the  bill  renewed  for  two 
months  more.  Can  it  be  done?  Let  me  know  by  return;  4  Victoria 
Street,  Holborn  Bridge.  I  have  scratched  "  Polestar "  for  the 
Northamptonshire  and  Wolverhampton  Stakes.  I  shall  be  down  on 
Friday  and  Saturday.  In  haste.— J.  Parsons  Cook.  Fred  tells  me 
"  Bolton  "  or  "  Arabus  "  will  win  the  Northumberland  Plate. 

J.   P.   COOK. 

I  saw  that  "  J.  P.  Cook  "  written.     [The  following  paper  was 
read :  — ] 

"Polestar,"  three  years;  "  Sirius,"  two  years,  by  way  of  mortgage, 
to  secure  £500,  advanced  on  a  bill  of  exchange,  dated  29th  August, 
1855,  payable  three  months  after  date. 

These  were  the  instructions  to  prepare  the  mortgage. 

Cross-examined  by  the  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — I  am  the  Mr. 
Smith  that  took  Mr.  Myatt  to  Stafford  gaol.  I  have  been 
employed  a  good  deal  by  Mr.  Palmer  as  his  attorney.  I  do 
not  recollect  that  he  applied  to  me  in  December,  1854,  to  attest 
a  proposal  on  the  life  of  his  brother  Walter  for  £13,000  at  the 
Solicitors  and  General  office.  Nor  do  I  recollect  that  I  was 
applied  to  by  Palmer  to  attest  a  proposal  for  £13,000  to  the 
Prince  of  Wales  office  on  his  brother  Walter's  life.  I  knew 
that  Walter  Palmer  had  been  a  bankrupt  six  years  before,  but 
not  that  he  was  in  great  distress  for  money.  I  believe  he  had 
an  allowance  from  his  mother.  I  do  not  recollect  that  I  was 
called  upon  to  attest  another  proposal  in  the  Universal  office 
for  £13,000  upon  the  life  of  Walter  Palmer.  If  I  could  see 
any  document  or  any  letter  to  remind  me  of  the  circumstance 
I  would  not  deny  it.  [An  assignment  of  this  policy  by  Walter 
Palmer  to  William  Palmer  was  handed  to  witness.  He  was 
asked  if  he  received  £5  for  attesting  the  assignment,  and 
answered  he  might  have,  he  did  not  recollect.]  This  is  very 

212 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

like  my  signature.  It  is  a  good  imitation.  I  have  some  doubt  J.  Smith 
that  it  is  not  my  handwriting.  That  is  Walter  Palmer's  signa- 
ture, and  the  attestation,  "  signed,  sealed,  and  delivered,"  is  in 
Mr.  Pratt's  handwriting.  I  got  the  document  from  Mr.  Palmer. 
I  still  do  not  think  that  what  bears  to  be  my  signature  is  in  my 
handwriting.  In  October,  1855,  I  applied  to  the  Midland 
Counties  office  to  be  appointed  their  agent.  Bates  and  Palmer 
came  together  to  my  office  with  a  prospectus,  and  asked  me 
if  there  was  any  agent  in  Rugeley.  I  said  I  never  heard  of 
one.  They  asked  me  to  write  and  get  an  appointment,  as 
they  wanted  to  raise  money.  I  did  so.  The  reason  I  became 
an  agent  was  to  get  an  insurance  effected  upon  Bates'  life  for 
£10,000.  Bates  at  that  time  was  the  superintendent  of 
William  Palmer's  stud  and  stables.  After  this  I  went  to  the 
widow  of  Walter  Palmer  to  get  her  to  give  up  her  claim  upon 
the  policy  of  her  husband.  She  refused.  This  document,  the 
signature  to  which  I  doubt  whether  it  is  my  handwriting  or 
not,  is  signed  by  Walter  Palmer.  I  do  not  know  that  he  got 
nothing  for  the  assignment.  I  understood  he  got  a  house 
furnished  for  him.  I  do  not  recollect  being  applied  to  by 
William  Palmer  in  December,  1854,  to  attest  a  proposal  on  his 
brother's  life  for  £13,000  in  the  Solicitors  and  General  office. 
I  have  no  doubt  I  might.  The  body  of  the  document  [handed 
to  witness]  is  in  the  handwriting  of  William  Palmer.  The 
signature  is  mine.  I  may  have  signed  it  blank.  I  do  not 
remember  getting  £5  for  attesting  the  execution  of  that  deed 
of  assignment  by  Walter  Palmer  to  his  brother.  [The  witness 
gave  similar  answers  to  questions  put  as  to  his  attestation  of 
proposals  for  policies  of  £13,000  on  Walter  Palmer's  life  in  two 
other  offices.]  With  reference  to  that  £200  which  I  got  for 
Mr.  Cook,  £100  from  Mrs.  Palmer  and  the  other  £100  from 
William  Palmer,  Cook  gave  £10  for  the  accommodation  to 
William  Palmer.  William  Palmer  was  the  drawer  of  the  bill 
and  Cook  the  acceptor.  He  received  £100  less  £10  in  cash. 
When  the  bill  was  given  I  handed  it  over  to  Mr.  Palmer.  What 
he  did  with  it  I  do  not  know.  I  do  not  know  if  he  discounted 
with  Mr.  Pratt.  I  have  never  seen  the  bill  since.  Palmer  was 
not  short  of  money  at  this  time,  as  he  lent  £100  to  Cook.  I 
do  not  know  that  he  wanted  some  money  to  make  up  the  sum 
of  £500  payable  to  Mr.  Sargent. 

Proof  closed. 


213 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

Attorney-General's  Address  to  Jury. 

General  Mr.  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — May  it  please  your  lordships — 
Gentlemen  of  the  jury,  the  case  for  the  prosecution  and  the 
case  for  the  defence  are  now  before  you;  and  it  becomes  my 
duty  to  address  to  you  such  observations  upon  the  whole  of  the 
materials,  upon  which  your  judgment  is  to  be  founded,  as 
suggest  themselves  to  my  mind.  I  have  a  solemn  and  an 
important  duty  to  perform.  I  wish  that  I  could  have  answered 
the  appeal  made  to  me  the  other  day  by  my  learned  friend,  Mr. 
Serjeant  Shee,  and  have  felt  that  I  was  satisfied  with  the  case 
that  he  submitted  to  you  on  the  part  of  the  defence.  But,  stand- 
ing here  as  the  instrument  of  public  justice,  I  feel  that  I  should 
be  wanting  in  the  duty  that  I  have  to  perform  if  I  did  not  ask 
at  your  hands  for  a  verdict  of  guilty  against  the  accused.  I 
approach  the  consideration  of  the  case  in  what,  I  hope,  I  may 
term  a  spirit  of  fairness,  of  moderation,  and  of  truth.  My 
business  is  to  convince  you,  if  I  can,  by  facts  and  legitimate 
argument,  of  the  prisoner's  guilt.  If  I  cannot  establish  it  to 
your  satisfaction,  no  man  will  rejoice  more  than  I  shall  in  the 
verdict  that  you  will  pronounce  of  not  guilty. 

Gentlemen,  in  the  vast  mass  of  materials  which  the  evidence 
in  this  case  has  brought  before  you,  two  main  questions  present 
themselves  prominently  for  your  consideration — -did  the  deceased 
man,  into  whose  death  we  are  now  inquiring,  die  a  natural 
death,  or  was  he  taken  off  by  the  foul  means  of  poison?  And 
if  the  latter  proposition  be  sanctioned  by  your  approbation, 
then  comes  the  important — if  possible  the  still  more  important 
— question  of  whether  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  was  the  author 
of  his  death?  I  will  proceed  at  once  without  further  observa- 
tion to  the  discussion  of  those  questions,  taking  them  in  the 
order  in  which  I  have  proposed  them.  Did  John  Parsons  Cook 
die  by  poison?  I  assert  and  maintain  the  affirmative  of  that 
proposition.  The  case  which  is  submitted  to  you  on  behalf 
of  the  Crown  is  this,  that  having  been  first  practised  upon  by 
antimony,  he  was  at  last  killed  by  strychnia;  and  the  proposi- 
tion which  I  have  to  establish  is  that  the  death  of  the  deceased 
was  occasioned  by  that  poison.  The  first  question,  with  a  view 
of  seeing  what  is  the  conclusion  at  which  we  shall  arrive  upon 
that  point,  is,  what  was  the  immediate  and  proximate  cause 
of  his  death?  The  witnesses  for  the  prosecution  have  told 
you  one  and  all  that  he  died,  in  their  judgment,  of  tetanus, 
which  signifies  a  spasmodic  convulsive  action  of  the  muscles  of 
the  body.  Can  there  be  any  doubt  that  that  opinion  is  correct? 
Of  course,  it  does  not  follow  that  because  he  died  from  tetanus 
it  must  be  tetanus  from  strychnia ;  that  is  a  matter  for  after 
consideration;  but  inasmuch  as  strychnia  produces  death  by 
214 


Sir  Alexander  Cockburn. 


Attorney-General's  Address  to  Jury. 

tetanus,  we  must  see,  in  the  first  place,  whether  it  admits  of  Attorney- 
any  doubt  that  he  did  die  of  tetanus.  I  have  listened  with  General 
attention  to  every  form  in  which  that  disease  has  been  brought 
under  your  consideration,  whether  by  the  positive  evidence  of 
witnesses,  or  by  reference  to  the  works  of  scientific  authors; 
and  I  assert  deliberately  that  no  case  either  of  a  human  sub- 
ject, or  of  any  animal,  has  been  brought  under  your  notice  in 
which  the  symptoms  of  tetanus  have  been  so  marked  as  they 
are  in  this  case ;  from  the  moment  the  paroxysm  came  on,  of 
which  this  unhappy  man  died,  the  symptoms  were  of  the  most 
marked  and  of  the  most  striking  character.  Every  muscle, 
says  the  medical  man  who  was  present  at  the  time,  of  his 
body  was  convulsed ;  he  expressed  the  most  intense  dread  of 
suffocation ;  he  entreated  them  to  lift  him  up  lest  he  should  be 
suffocated,  and  when  they  stooped  to  raise  him  every  muscle  of 
his  body,  from  the  crown  of  his  head  to  the  sole  of  his  foot, 
was  so  stiffened  that  tHe  flexibility  of  the  trunk  and  limbs  was 
gone,  so  that  they  could  have  raised  him  as  you  would  raise 
a  dead  corpse  or  a  lifeless  log.  It  was  found  to  be  impossible, 
and  the  man  prayed  to  be  turned  over  in  order  to  escape  from 
the  sense  of  the  imminent  risk  of  suffocation ;  they  turned  him 
over,  and  in  the  midst  of  doing  so  a  fearful  paroxysm,  one 
mighty  spasm,  seems  to  have  seized  upon  his  heart,  to  have 
pressed  from  it  the  life  blood,  so  that  in  a  moment  vitality 
ebbed,  and  the  man  was  dead  before  them ;  when  dead,  the 
body  exhibited  the  most  marked  symptoms  of  this  most  fearful 
disease ;  it  was  bowed  from  head  to  foot,  and  it  would  have 
rested,  if  it  had  been  so  placed,  says  the  witness,  upon  the 
back  of  the  head  and  the  heels;  the  hands  were  clenched  with 
a  grasp  which  it  required  power  to  overcome,  and  the  feet 
were  curved  till  they  assumed  the  appearance  of  a  natural 
malformation.  It  is  impossible  to  conceive  symptoms  more 
striking  of  tetanus ;  nor  is  it  possible  to  conceive  evidence  more 
dishonest  than  that  which  has  attempted  to  represent  it  as  any 
other  than  as  a  case  of  tetanus. 

Well,  then,  if  it  was  a  case  of  tetanus,  as  to  which  I  will  not 
waste  your  time  with  any  further  observations,  was  it  a  case 
of  tetanus  from  strychnia?  I  will  confine  myself  for  the 
moment  to  the  exhibition  of  the  symptoms  as  they  have  been 
described  by  the  witnesses.  Tetanus  may  proceed  from  natural 
causes  as  well  as  from  the  administration  of  poison.  While 
the  symptoms  last  they  are  the  same,  but  in  the  course  of  the 
symptoms  before  the  disease  reaches  its  consummation  in  the 
death  of  the  patient  the  distinction  between  the  two  is  marked 
by  characteristics  which  will  enable  any  one  conversant  with 
the  subject  to  distinguish  between  the  two.  We  have  been 
told  upon  the  highest  authority  that  the  distinctions  are  these — 
Natural  tetanus  is  a  disease  not  of  minutes,  not  even  of  hours, 

215 


Trial   of  William   Palmer. 

Attorney-  but  of  days.  It  takes,  say  several  of  the  witnesses,  from  three 
General  ^  four  dayB)  and  will  extend  to  a  period  of  even  three  weeks, 
before  the  patient  is  destroyed.  Upon  that  point  we  have 
the  most  abundant  and  conclusive  evidence.  We  have  the 
evidence  of  gentlemen  who  have  made  it  their  especial  study,  like 
Mr.  Curling  and  Dr.  Todd.  We  have  the  evidence  of  one  of 
the  most  eminent  practitioners  who  ever  adorned  that  pro- 
fession or  any  other,  I  mean  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie.  We  have 
the  evidence  of  Mr.  Gordon,  who  for  twenty-eight  years  was 
surgeon  to  the  Bristol  Hospital;  we  have  the  evidence  of  Mr. 
Daniel,  who  saw  twenty-five  or  thirty  of  these  cases  of  natural 
tetanus ;  we  have  the  evidence  of  a  gentleman  who  practised 
for  twenty-five  years  in  India,  where,  owing  to  the  particular 
character  of  the  climate,  those  cases  are  infinitely  more  frequent 
than  they  present  themselves  here,  and  he  gives  exactly  the 
same  description  of  the  course  of  symptoms  through  which  this 
disease  runs.  Idiopathic  or  traumatic  tetanus  are  therefore, 
upon  the  evidence,  out  of  the  question ;  but  traumatic  tetanus  is 
out  of  the  question  for  a  very  different  reason.  Traumatic 
tetanus  is  tetanus  brought  on  by  lesion  of  some  part  of  the 
body.  What  is  there  in  this  particular  case  to  show  that  there 
was  lesion  in  any  part  of  the  body  at  all?  We  have  had  the 
most  singular  representations  upon  the  subject  of  Mr.  Cook's 
health  made  by  the  witnesses  who  have  come  here  on  behalf  of 
the  defence,  and  who  appear  to  have  come  into  that  bo  .  with 
the  determination  as  far  as  possible  to  misconceive  every  fact 
which  they  could  pervert  to  their  purpose.  We  call  before 
you  for  the  purpose  of  showing  what  Cook's  health  was  an 
eminent  physician  who  had  had  him  under  his  care.  It  seems 
that  in  the  spring  of  1855  Cook,  having  found  certain  small 
spots  manifest  themselves  in  one  or  two  parts  of  his  body,  and 
having  something  of  ulcers  under  his  tongue,  or  in  his  throat, 
conceived  that  he  was  labouring  under  symptoms  of  a  particular 
character,  and  he  addressed  himself  to  Dr.  Savage,  who  found 
the  course  of  medicine  he  had  been  pursuing,  founded  upon  this 
belief,  was,  in  his  judgment,  an  erroneous  one ;  he  altered  it 
altogether;  he  enjoined  the  discontinuance  of  mercury,  and 
was  obeyed  in  his  injunction ;  and  the  result  was  that  the 
deceased,  who  was  suffering,  not  from  disease,  but  from  the 
treatment,  rapidly  grew  well.  Nevertheless,  lest  there  should 
be  the  possibility  of  mistake,  Dr.  Savage  made  him  come  to 
him  from  time  to  time  that  he  might  see  that  things  were  going 
on  right,  and  he  sees,  long  before  the  summer  had  advanced, 
the  very  unsatisfactory  symptoms  had  entirely  gone,  and  that 
there  was  nothing  about  him  except  that  affection  of  the  throat 
to  which  sometimes  people  are  subject,  some  abnormal  condi- 
tion of  one  of  the  tonsils,  but  in  other  respects  the  man  was 
better  than  he  had  been,  and  might  be  said  to  be  perfectly 
216 


Attorney-General's  Address  to  Jury. 

convalescent.       On  the  very  day  he  left  London  to  go  into  the  Attorney- 
country  about  a  fortnight  before  the  races,  his  stepfather  accom-  Ur*nepal 
panied  him   to  the  station,   and  congratulated  him  upon  his 
healthy  and  vigorous  appearance,  and  the  young  man,  in  the 
consciousness   of  the  possession   of  health,    struck  his   breast, 
and  said  he  was  well,  and  he  felt  so. 

Well,  he  goes  to  Shrewsbury,  and  shortly  afterwards  came 
those  matters  to  which  I  shall  have  to  call  your  attention 
presently,  more  particularly  that  ended  in  his  death.  I  want 
to  know  upon  what  part  of  this  evidence  there  is  the  slightest 
pretence  for  saying  that  this  man  had  any  affection  about  him 
from  which  traumatic  tetanus  could  ensue.  It  is  said  at  some 
former  time  he  had  exhibited  his  throat  to  some  of  the  witnesses 
who  were  called,  and  that  he  had  applied  to  Palmer  for  some 
mercurial  wash  to  apply  to  his  throat,  or  some  of  those  ulcers. 
The  precise  period  of  it  is  not  fixed,  but  it  is  perfectly  clear 
that  though  he  had  at  one  time  adopted  that  course,  under  the 
recommendation  of  Dr.  Savage,  he  had  got  rid  of  it;  and 
there  is  not  the  slightest  pretence  for  saying  that  this  man  was 
suffering  under  a  syphilitic  affection  of  any  kind ;  nevertheless 
that  fact  was  distinctly  and  unequivocally  negatived  by  a  man 
of  the  highest  authority — a  medical  gentleman  of  eminence — 
under  whose  treatment  the  man  got  so  rapidly  well.  That 
fact  is  assumed  by  the  witnesses  for  the  defence  as  the  ground 
upon  which  to  suggest  that  there  was  traumatic  tetanus  in  this 
case.  It  is  a  pretence,  gentlemen,  which  has  not  the  shadow 
of  a  foundation,  and  which  I  should  be  shrinking  from  my 
duty  if  I  did  not  denounce  as  altogether  unworthy  of  your 
attention.  There  was  nothing  about  the  man,  according  to 
the  statement  of  all  those  who  were  competent  to  give  you  an 
opinion,  which  would  warrant  for  a  single  moment  the  sup- 
position that  there  was  anything  in  any  part  of  the  man's  body 
which  could  justify  the  notion  of  traumatic  tetanus ;  even  if 
there  were,  the  character  which  his  symptoms  assumed  when 
the  tetanus  set  in  is  utterly  incompatible,  according  to  the 
evidence  of  all  the  witnesses,  with  a  case  of  traumatic  tetanus. 
One  or  two  cases  of  traumatic  tetanus  have  been  adduced  in 
evidence  on  the  part  of  the  defence.  We  had  the  case  of  a 
man  who  was  brought  to  the  London  Hospital  in  the  evening, 
and  who  died  the  same  night.  Yes,  but  what  were  the  facts 
of  that  case?  The  facts  are  that  he  had  had  before  he  was 
brought  in  repeated  paroxysms;  that  he  felt  premonitory 
symptoms  early  in  the  morning ;  he  was  suffering  from  ulcers 
of  a  most  aggravated  description ;  and  that  the  symptoms  had 
run  their  course,  rapidly  it  is  true,  but  still  the  disease  was  not  a 
matter  of  minutes,  but  a  matter  of  hours.  There  is  no  other 
case  that  I  am  aware  of.  There  is  the  case  of  the  boy  who 
was  brought  in,  if  it  be  necessary  to  allude  to  it.  But  there 

217 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Attorney-  again  we  have  the  disease  existing  for  some  time  before  it  ends 
General  ^  jea^n>  j^  [s  a  matter  there  again  of  hours,  and  not  of 
minutes,  and  not  a  single  paroxysm  like  this  was  observed.  But 
it  is  then  suggested  that  this  may  have  been  a  case  of  idiopathic 
tetanus.  Idiopathic  tetanus  proceeding  from  what?  They 
say  that  Mr.  Cook  was  a  man  of  delicate  constitution — subject 
to  excitement — that  he  had  something  the  matter  with  his 
chest — that  in  addition  to  having  something  the  matter  with 
his  chest,  he  had  this  diseased  condition  of  the  throat — and, 
putting  all  these  things  together,  they  say  that  the  man,  if 
he  took  cold,  might  get  idiopathic  tetanus.  We  are  launched 
into  a  sea  of  speculation  and  of  possibilities.  Mr.  Nunneley, 
who  comes  forward  here  for  the  purpose  of  inducing  you  to 
believe  that  there  was  anything  like  idiopathic  tetanus,  goes 
through  a  bead-roll  of  the  supposed  infirmities  of  Mr.  Cook 
and  talks  about  his  excitability — talks  about  his  delicacy  of 
chest — talks  about  the  affection  of  his  throat — goes  through 
those  various  heads,  and  says  that  those  things  may  have 
predisposed  him  to  idiopathic  tetanus  if  he  took  cold.  What 
evidence  is  there  that  he  ever  did  take  cold  ?  Not  the  slightest 
in  the  world.  The  man,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the 
symptoms,  was  never  treated  for  cold  by  anybody,  or  ever  com- 
plained that  he  had  taken  cold.  I  cannot  help  saying,  to  me 
it  seems  that  it  is  a  scandal  upon  a  learned,  a  distinguished, 
and  a  liberal  profession,  that  men  should  come  forward  and 
put  forward  such  speculations  as  these,  perverting  the  facts, 
and  drawing  from  them  sophistical  and  unwarranted  conclusions 
with  the  view  of  deceiving  a  jury.  I  have  the  greatest  respect 
for  science — no  man  can  have  more ;  but  I  cannot  repress  my 
indignation  and  abhorrence  when  I  see  it  thus  perverted  and 
prostituted  to  the  purposes  of  a  particular  cause  in  a  Court  of 
justice.  Do  not  talk  to  me  about  excitement,  as  Mr.  Nunneley 
did  the  other  day,  being  the  occasion  of  idiopathic  tetanus. 
You  remember  the  sorts  of  excitement  he  spoke  of.  They 
are  unworthy  of  your  notice,  and  they  were  topics  discreditable 
to  be  put  forward  by  a  witness  as  worthy  of  the  attention  of 
sensible  men  constituting  such  a  tribunal  as  you  are. 

But  suppose  for  a  single  moment  that  excitement  of  this  kind 
could  produce  any  such  effect  or  influence,  where  is  the  excite- 
ment manifested  by  Cook  as  leading  to  this  supposed  disease? 
They  say  that  the  man,  when  his  mare  won  at  Shrewsbury,  was 
full  of  excitement ;  and  well  he  might  be — his  fortunes  depended 
upon  the  result  of  that  race;  and  I  do  not  deny  for  a  few 
minutes  he  was  overpowered  by  the  emotions  that  the  joy  of 
the  moment  excited  in  his  breast.  But  that  subsided,  and  we 
have  no  further  trace  of  it  from  that  time  to  the  moment  of 
his  death.  The  man  passed  the  rest  of  the  day  with  his 
friends  in  ordinary  conversation  and  in  ordinary  enjoyment. 
218 


Attorney-General's  Address  to  Jury. 

No  trace  of  emotion  was  left  about  him.  He  is  taken  ill ;  he  Attorney- 
goes  to  Rugeley ;  he  is  taken  ill  there  again ;  is  there  the Genepal 
slightest  symptom  of  excitement  about  the  man,  or,  on  the 
other  hand,  of  depression?  Not  the  slightest  in  the  world. 
When  he  is  ill,  like  most  other  people,  he  is  low ;  but  as  soon 
as  he  gets  a  little  better  he  is  cheerful  and  happy ;  he  admits 
his  friends,  and  he  converses  with  them ;  the  very  night  of  his 
death,  so  far  from  any  excitement,  his  conversation  is  full  of 
cheerfulness  and  mirth — he  is  laughing  and  happy,  little  think- 
ing, poor  wretch,  of  the  fate  that  was  impending  over  him. 
He  is  cheerful  and  happy,  talking  of  the  future,  not  in  the 
language  of  excitement  on  the  one  hand,  or  of  depression  on 
the  other.  What  pretence  is  there  for  this  idle  story  of  excite- 
ment and  depression?  Not  the  slightest  shadow  of  foundation 
in  the  world.  But  if  there  were — if  those  things  were  capable 
of  producing  that  form  of  tetanus  which  goes  by  the  term 
"  idiopathic,"  the  character  of  the  disease  is  so  essentially 
different  that  it  is  impossible  to  mistake  the  two.  What  are 
the  cases  which  they  attempt  to  set  up  against  it?  They  have 
brought  you  the  case  of  Mary  Watson,  which  a  gentleman  came 
all  the  way  from  Scotland  to  tell  us  about.  The  girl  had 
been  ill  all  day.  She  was  taken  with  cramps  in  the  night, 
probably  originating  in  the  stomach,  extending  to  all  other 
parts  of  her  body.  She  gets  well  in  a  very  short  time,  and 
goes  about  her  business.  Is  that  case  to  be  compared  for  a 
single  instant  to  the  death  agony  of  that  wretched  man,  and 
the  paroxysm  that  destroyed  him?  Those  are  the  sort  of 
cases  with  which  they  attempt  to  meet  such  symptoms  as  those 
which  are  spoken  to  by  the  witnesses  as  accompanying  the 
decease  of  Mr.  Cook. 

Gentlemen,  I  venture,  upon  the  evidence,  to  assert  boldly 
that  the  cases  of  idiopathic  tetanus  and  traumatic,  or  what  I 
may  call  natural  tetanus,  are  marked  by  clear  and  distinct 
characteristics,  distinguishing  them  from  the  tetanus  produced  by 
strychnia;  and  I  say  that  the  tetanus  which  accompanied  Mr. 
Cook's  death  ia  not  referable  to  either  of  those  forms  of 
tetanus.  You  have  upon  that  point  the  evidence  of  witnesses 
of  the  highest  competency  and  of  the  most  unquestionable 
integrity ;  and  upon  their  evidence  I  am  quite  satisfied  you 
can  come  to  no  other  conclusion  but  that  this  was  not  a  case 
either  of  idiopathic  or  of  traumatic  tetanus.  But,  then,  they 
say  it  may  have  been  something  else ;  and  various  attempts 
have  been  made  to  set  up  different  causes  as  capable  of  pro- 
ducing this  tetanic  disease.  And,  first,  we  have  the  theory 
of  general  convulsions  ;  and  Mr.  Nunneley,  having  gone  through 
the  bead-roll  of  the  supposed  infirmities  of  Mr.  Cook,  says, 
"  Oh,  this  may  have  been  a  case  of  general  convulsions.  I 
have  known  general  convulsions  to  assume  a  tetanic  char- 

219 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Attorney- acter."  "Well,  but  pause  a  moment,  Mr.  Nunneley,  have 
you  ever  seen  one  single  case  in  which  death  arising  from 
general  convulsions,  accompanied  with  tetanic  symptoms,  has 
not  ended  in  the  unconsciousness  of  the  patient  before  death? — 
No,  I  never  knew  such  a  case — not  one.  But  in  some  book 
or  other,  I  am  told  that  there  is  some  such  case  reported  "  ; 
and  he  cites,  not  for  that  purpose,  I  think,  but  he  cites,  with 
reference  to  general  convulsions  being  sometimes  accompanied 
with  tetanic  symptoms,  and  ending  in  death,  a  very  eminent 
author  of  the  present  day.  I  mean  Dr.  Copland.  Dr.  Cop- 
land is  living,  and  Dr.  Copland  might  have  been  called.  The 
author  of  the  book,  I  apprehend,  would  stand  before  you  as  a 
higher  authority  than  a  man  who  merely  quotes  the  book  as 
the  foundation  of  his  knowledge.  Dr.  Copland  might  have 
been  called.  Dr.  Copland  was  not  called,  notwithstanding  the 
challenge  which  I  threw  out.  Why?  Because  it  is  infinitely 
better  in  such  a  case  to  call  together  from  the  east  and  from 
the  west  practitioners  of  more  or  less  obscurity,  instead  of 
bringing  to  bear  upon  the  subject  the  light  of  science  which  is 
treasured  up  in  the  breasts  of  the  eminent  practitioners  with 
whom  this  great  city  abounds.  Dr.  Copland  is  not  called  ; 
but  I  say,  as  regards  general  convulsions,  the  distinction  is 
plain,  that  where  they  destroy  the  patient  they  destroy  con- 
sciousness; and  here  it  is  unquestionably  the  fact,  that  to  the 
last  moment  of  Mr.  Cook's  existence,  until  his  burst  heart 
ceased  to  beat,  his  consciousness  remained. 

But  then  comes  another  supposed  condition  from  which  death 
in  this  form  may  be  said  to  have  resulted,  and  that  is  the  case 
which  was  intended  to  be  set  up  by  a  very  eminent  practitioner, 
I  mean  Mr.  Partridge.  It  seems  that  in  the  post-mortem 
examination  of  Mr.  Cook,  when  the  spinal  marrow  was  investi- 
gated, certain  granules  were  found,  and  this  is  seized  upon. 
It  is  said,  "  Oh,  those  granules  may  have  occasioned  tetanic 
convulsions  similar  to  those  which  were  found  in  Mr.  Cook's 
case,"  and  a  very  eminent  gentleman  is  called  to  give  his 
opinion  upon  that  subject.  I  admit  him  to  be  not  only  a 
man  of  great  eminence,  but  a  man  of  the  highest  honour  and 
the  most  perfect  veracity.  I  allude  to  Mr.  Partridge.  I  must 
distinguish  between  him  and  other  of  my  learned  friend's  wit- 
nesses. Some  there  were  who  would  not  be  induced,  for  any 
consideration  in  the  world,  to  swerve  from  what  they  believed 
to  be  the  truth.  Mr.  Partridge  is  called  here  to  prove  that 
this  was  a  case  of  what  he  called  arachnitis — inflammation  of 
the  arachnoid  in  consequence  of  the  granules,  or  some  other 
abnormal  condition.  I  asked  him  the  symptoms  which  he 
would  find  in  such  a  case.  I  called  his  attention  to  what 
evidently  had  not  been  done  before,  namely,  the  symptoms  of 
Mr.  Cook's  case ;  and  I  asked  him,  in  simple,  straightforward 

220 


Attorney-General's  Address  to  Jury. 

terms,  whether,  looking  at  those  symptoms,  he  would  pledge  Attor»«y- 
his  opinion,  in  the  face  of  the  medical  world  and  the  Court,  General 
that  this  was  a  case  of  arachnitis,  and  he  candidly  admitted 
that  he  would  not  assert  that  this  was  in  his  opinion  a  case  of 
arachnitis. 

Then  we  have  the  gentleman  who  comes  all  the  way  from 
Scotland  to  inform  us,  as  the  next  proposition,  that  Mr.  Cook's 
was  a  case  of  epileptic  convulsions  with  tetanic  complications. 
Now,  I  asked  him  this  question,  "  Did  you  ever  know  a  case 
of  epilepsy,  with  or  without  tetanic  convulsions,  in  which  con- 
sciousness was  not  destroyed  before  the  patient  died?"  He 
said,  "No;  I  cannot  say  that  I  ever  did,  but  I  have  read  in 
some  book  that  such  a  case  has  occurred."  "  Is  there  anything 
to  make  you  think  that  this  was  epilepsy? — Well,  it  may  have 
been  epilepsy,  because  I  do  not  know  what  else  to  ascribe  it 
to ;  but  I  must  admit  that  epilepsy  is  characterised  generally 
by  a  loss  of  consciousness."  "  Well,  then,  what  difference  would 
tetanic  complications  make?  "  That  he  is  unable  to  explain.  I 
remind  you  of  that  species  of  evidence  in  which  the  witnesses 
resorted  to  the  most  speculative  reasoning,  and  put  forward 
the  barest  possibilities  without  the  shadow  of  a  foundation. 
But  this  I  undertake  to  assert,  and  I  refer  to  the  evidence  to 
prove  it,  that  there  is  not  a  single  case  either  to  which  they 
have  spoken  as  coming  within  their  own  experience,  or  of  which 
they  have  spoken  as  the  result  of  reading,  in  which  there  were 
the  formidable  and  decisive  symptoms  of  marked  tetanus  which 
existed  in  this  case  of  Mr.  Cook. 

Having  gone  through  this  evidence,  I  think  we  have  four  sets 
of  diseases — general  convulsions,  arachnitis,  epilepsy  proper, 
and  epilepsy  with  tetanic  complications.  I  expected  that  we 
had  pretty  well  exhausted  the  whole  of  those  scientific  theories, 
but  we  were  destined  to  have  another  that  assumed  the  formid- 
able name  of  angina  pectoris.  I  do  not  know  whether  it  struck 
you  as  remarkable  that  when  my  learned  friend  opened  this 
case  for  the  defence  he  never  ventured  to  assert  what  would 
be  the  nature  of  the  disease  to  which  he  would  endeavour  to 
refer  the  symptoms  of  Mr.  Cook ;  and  it  must,  I  think,  have 
struck  you  as  a  very  remarkable  thing  that  no  less  than  four 
or  five  distinct  and  separate  theories  are  set  up  by  the  witnesses 
who  appear  on  the  part  of  the  defence — general  convulsions, 
arachnitis,  epilepsy  with  tetanic  complications,  and,  lastly, 
angina  pectoris.  My  learned  friend  had,  however,  this  advan- 
tage in  not  stating  to  you  what  was  the  theory  that  his  medical 
witnesses  would  endeavour  to  set  up,  because,  one  after  another, 
I  must  admit  they  took  me  entirely  by  surprise.  The  gentle- 
man who  was  called  yesterday  at  the  last  moment,  and  who 
talked  of  angina  pectoris,  would  not  have  escaped  quite  so  easily 
if  I  had  had  tha  books  to  which  he  referred  under  my  hand* 

221 


Trial   of  William  Palmer. 


Attorney-  and  had  been  able  to  expose,  as  I  would  have  done,  the  ignor- 
ance or  the  presumption  of  the  assertion  which  he  dared  to 
make.  I  say  ignorance  or  presumption,  or,  what  is  worse,  an 
intention  to  deceive.  I  assert  it  in  the  face  of  the  whole  medi- 
cal profession,  and  I  am  satisfied  I  shall  have  their  verdict  in 
my  favour. 

But  it  is  a  fact  which  I  am  entitled  to  dwell  upon,  that  all 
those  medical  witnesses,  one  and  all,  differed  in  the  views  which 
they  take  in  this  case.  There  is  this  remarkable  coincidence 
between  the  views  of  some  of  them  and  the  views  of  the  witnesses 
whom  I  called — Mr.  Partridge  and  Dr.  Robinson,  two  of  the 
most  respectable  witnesses  they  called,  ay,  and  Dr.  Letheby 
himself,  strongly  as  he  was  biassed  in  favour  of  the  defence, 
being  three  of  the  most  eminent  of  the  witnesses  whom  my 
learned  friend  brought  forward,  agreed  with  the  statement  made 
by  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie,  and  supported  by  other  witnesses 
whom  I  brought  before  you,  that  in  the  whole  of  their 
experience,  in  the  whole  range  of  their  learning  and  infor- 
mation, they  knew  of  no  known  disease  to  which  the  symptoms 
of  Mr.  Cook  could  possibly  be  referred.  When  such  men 
as  those  tell  us  such  a  fact,  I  cannot  but  submit  to  you 
that  it  is  impossible  to  exaggerate  its  importance.  But,  then, 
if  it  be  the  fact  that  no  known  disease  can  account  for  such 
symptoms  as  those  of  Mr.  Cook,  and  that  they  are  referable 
to  poison  alone,  can  any  one  entertain  a  doubt  that  that  poison 
was  the  poison  of  strychnia?  The  symptoms,  at  all  events 
from  the  time  the  paroxysm  set  in,  are  precisely  the  same. 
Distinctions  are  sought  to  be  made  by  the  subtlety  of  the  wit- 
nesses for  the  defence  between  some  of  the  antecedent  symptoms 
and  some  of  the  appearances  after  death ;  but  I  think  I  shall 
show  you  beyond  all  possibility  of  contradiction,  that 
those  distinctions  are  imaginary,  and  have  no  founda- 
tion in  fact.  I  think  I  may  take  this,  however, 
along  with  me  as  I  go  on,  that  the  witnesses  called  for 
the  defence  admit  this  fact,  that  from  the  time  the  paroxysm 
set  in,  of  which  Mr.  Cook  died,  until  the  time  of  the  death,  the 
symptoms  are  precisely  similar  to  the  symptoms  of  tetanus  from 
strychnia.  But,  then,  they  say,  and  this  is  worthy  of  your 
most  attentive  consideration,  that  there  are  points  of  difference 
which  have  led  them  to  the  conclusion,  or  some  of  them  at  all 
events,  that  those  symptoms  could  not  have  resulted  from 
strychnia.  Let  us  see  what  they  are.  In  the  first  place, 
they  showed  that  the  period  which  elapsed  between  the  sup- 
posed administration  of  the  poison  and  the  first  appearance  of 
the  symptoms  was  longer  than  they  have  ever  observed  in 
animals  upon  which  they  have  experimented.  Now,  the  first 
observation  which  arises  there  is  this,  that  there  is  a  known 
difference  between  animal  and  human  life,  in  the  power  with 

222 


Attorney-General's  Address  to  Jury. 

which  specific  things  act  upon  its  organisation,  and  it  may  well  Attorney- 
be  that  the  poison  administered  to  a  rabbit  will  produce  its  General 
effect  in  a  given  time ;  it  by  no  means  follows  that  it  will  pro- 
duce effect  in  the  same  time  upon  an  animal  of  a  different 
description,  and  still  less  does  it  follow  that  it  will  exercise  its 
baneful  influence  in  the  same  time  upon  a  human  subject.  The 
whole  of  the  evidence  on  both  sides  tends  to  establish  this  fact, 
that  not  only  in  individuals  of  different  species,  but  between 
individuals  of  the  same  species,  the  same  poison  and  the  same 
dose  will  produce  effects  different  in  degree,  different  in  dura- 
tion, and  different  in  power.  But,  again,  it  is  perfectly 
notorious  that  the  rapidity  with  which  the  poison  begins  to 
work  depends  materially  upon  the  mode  of  its  administration. 
If  it  is  administered  as  a  fluid,  it  acts  with  great  rapidity ; 
if  it  is  administered  in  a  solid  state,  its  effects  come  on  more 
slowly ;  and  if  it  is  administered  in  some  indurated  substance, 
it  will  act  with  still  greater  tardiness ;  and  if  that  substance 
is  difficult  of  solution,  then  the  period  will  be  still  longer  before 
the  substance,  having  become  dissolved,  is  acted  upon  by  the 
absorbents  and  taken  up  into  the  system. 

Now,  what  was  the  period  at  which  this  poison  began  to  act 
after  its  administration,  assuming  it  to  have  been  poison  for 
the  purpose  of  argument?  It  seems,  from  Mr.  Jones'  state- 
ment, that  the  prisoner  came  and  administered  these  pills ; 
he  saw  him  administer  the  pills  somewhere  about  eleven  o'clock, 
so  that  they  were  not  administered  upon  his  first  arrival.  The 
patient,  as  though  with  an  instinctive  sense  of  the  peril  which 
impended,  strenuously  resisted  the  attempt  to  make  him  take 
them,  and  no  doubt  those  remonstrances  and  the  endeavour  to 
overcome  them  occupied  some  period  of  time.  The  pills  at  last 
were  taken,  and,  assuming  them  to  have  contained  strychnia 
(which  I  only  do  now  for  the  purpose  of  argument),  how  soon 
did  they  begin  to  operate?  Mr.  Jones  says  he  went  down  after 
this  and  had  his  supper,  and  came  back  about  twelve  o'clock. 
Upon  his  return  to  the  room,  after  a  word  or  two  of  conversa- 
tion with  Cook,  he  proceeded  to  undress  and  go  to  bed  ;  and 
he  had  not  been  in  bed  ten  minutes  before  the  warning  came 
that  another  of  these  paroxysms  was  about  to  take  place.  The 
maid-servants  put  it  still  earlier;  they  say  that  about  ten 
minutes  before  twelve  the  first  alarm  was  given,  which  would 
make  the  interval  little  more  than  three-quarters  of  an  hour 
from  the  taking  of  the  pills  and  the  first  manifestation  of  the 
symptoms.  When,  therefore,  my  learned  friend's  witnesses 
tell  us  that  it  took  an  hour  and  a  half  or  two  hours,  we  have 
here  another  of  those  exaggerated  determinations  to  see  the 
facts  only  in  the  way  that  will  make  most  for  the  view  which 
they  think  proper  to  put  forward.  I  say  it  certainly  was  not 
more  than  an  hour,  and  I  find  in  some  of  the  experiments  that 

223 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

Attorney-  have  been  made  that  the  duration  of  time  before  which  the 
General     pOison  began  to  work  has  been  little  less,  if  any  less,  thau  an 
hour.     Mr.  Morley,  who  is  as  much  entitled  to  your  attention 
as  Mr.  Nunneley — indeed,  when  I  contrast  the  way  in  which 
the  two  men  gave  their  evidence,  I  am  paying  him  but  a  poor 
compliment  when  I  say  that  he  is  as  worthy  of  attention  as 
Mr.  Nunneley — Mr.   Morley  says  in  his  evidence  that  five  or 
six  minutes,   or  something  less  than   an  hour,   is  the  period 
which  he  observed  the  poison  required  to  produce  its  effects 
upon  animals,  and  in  every  one  of  the  cases  which  we  have  got 
it  will  be  seen  that  more  than  an  hour  was  necessary.       In  the 
case  of  the  girl  at  Glasgow,  though  I  see  the  medical  gentleman 
speaks  of  twenty  minutes  when  he  was  called  in,  he  could  have 
only  had  that  information  from  the  statement  of  some  of  the 
people  about.       I  see  the  nurse  says  it  was  three-quarters  of 
an  hour  before  the  pills  began  to  work  upon  the  girl.     There 
may  have  been  some  cause  for  the  pills  not  beginning  to  take 
effect  within  a  certain  time  after  their  administration  ;  it  would 
be  very  easy  to  mix  them  with  some  substance  that  should 
render   them   difficult   of   solution ;    nay,    which   might   retard 
their  action.       I  cannot  for  a  single  moment  bring  myself  to 
believe,  if  in  all  other  respects  you  are  perfectly  satisfied  that 
the   symptoms,    the  consequences,   and  effects  were   analogous 
and  similar  to  those  produced  by  strychnia,  it  is  not  because 
those  pills  may  have  taken  a  quarter  of  an  hour  or  a  longer 
time  to  manifest  their  working,  it  is  not  on  that  account  you 
will  hesitate  to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  strychnia  was  ad- 
ministered in  this  case.     But  then  they  say,  yes,  but  the  pre- 
monitory symptoms  were  wanting  here.    They  tell  us  in  animals 
they  observed  that  the  animal  manifests  first  some  uneasiness, 
shrinks,  and  gathers  itself  into  itself,  as  it  were,  avoids  move- 
ment, and  then  certain  involuntary  twitchings  about  the  head 
come,  those  being  the  premonitory  symptoms  before  the  paroxysms 
set  in.       They  say  there  were  no  premonitory   symptoms   in 
Cook's  case ;  I  utterly  deny  that  proposition — I  say  there  were 
premonitory  symptoms  of  the  most  marked  character,  though 
he  did  not  describe  them  in  language.       He  is  lying  in  bed — 
he  suddenly  starts  up  in  an  agony  of  alarm.       What  made  him 
do   that?       Was    there    nothing    premonitory,    nothing   that 
warned  him  that  the  paroxysm  was  coming?       It  is  clear  there 
must  have  been.       He  jumps  up  in  his  bed,  and  says,  "  Fetch 
me  Palmer,  I  am  going  to  be  ill,  as  I  was  last  night."      What 
was  it  but  that  he  knew  the  symptoms  that  attended  him  on 
the  previous  evening  were  now  warning  him  of  what  he  might 
expect  in  a  short  period,  unless  succour  could  be  obtained?     He 
sits  up,  and  he  prays  to  have  his  neck  rubbed.       What  was 
the  feeling  about  the  neck  but  a  premonitory  symptom  which 
was  to  precede  the  paroxysm  which  presently  supervened?     He 
says,  "  Rub  my  neck,  it  gives  me  comfort  to  have  it  done." 
224 


Attorney-General's   Address   to  Jury. 

But  here  again  they  take  exception,  and  they  say  this  could  Attorney- 
not  have  been  tetanus  from  strychnia,  because  animals  cannot  Genepal 
bear  to  be  touched;  a  touch  brings  on  the  paroxysm;  not  only 
a  touch  but  a  breath  of  air,  a  sound,  a  word,  a  movement  of 
any  one  near,  will  bring  on  a  recurrence  of  the  paroxysm. 
True ;  but  that  is  after  the  paroxysm  has  once  been  set  up,  or 
when  it  is  just  about  to  begin.  It  is  quite  clear  that  those 
witnesses  who  come  and  say  that  the  fact  of  Mr.  Cook  having 
desired  to  have  his  neck  rubbed  is  a  fact  to  prove  that  this 
could  not  be  a  death  from  tetanus,  have  either  wilfully  sup- 
pressed the  knowledge  in  their  own  minds  of  the  evidence  they 
had  heard,  or  they  had  paid  no  attention  to  it ;  because  in  two 
cases  of  death  from  strychnia  we  have  shown  the  patient 
endured  the  touching  of  the  limbs,  and  found  satisfaction  from 
it.  In  Mrs.  Smyth's  case,  when  her  legs  were  distorted,  in  the 
agony  of  the  convulsion  she  prayed  and  entreated  to  have  them 
straightened ;  she  found  no  additional  pain  from  that  operation. 
The  lady  at  Leeds,  in  the  case  which  Mr.  Nunneley  himself 
attended,  implored  her  husband,  between  the  spasms,  to  rub 
her  legs  and  her  arms,  in  order  to  overcome  and  subdue  their 
rigidity.  That  case  was  under  his  own  knowledge,  and,  in 
spite  of  it,  although  he  detected  afterwards  strychnia  in  the 
body  of  that  unhappy  woman,  he  dares  to  come  forward  here 
and  say  that  the  fact  of  Mr.  Cook  having  before  the  paroxysm 
tolerated  rubbing,  and  found  comfort  in  it,  proves  that  this 
could  not  have  been  a  death  from  strychnia.  What  think  you 
of  the  honesty  of  such  a  witness?  But  there  is  a  third 
case,  which  is  the  case  of  Mr.  Clutterbuck,  spoken  to  by  Mr. 
Moore.  That  gentleman  had  taken  an  overdose  of  strychnia, 
and  he  suffered  from  all  the  pains  of  tetanus;  his  only  com- 
fort was  having  his  limbs  rubbed ;  and  therefore,  I  say,  to 
contend  and  to  endeavour  to  persuade  a  jury  that  the  fact  of 
Cook's  having  had  his  neck  rubbed  proved  that  this  was  not 
tetanus  from  strychnia,  proves,  I  say,  nothing  but  the  dis- 
honesty and  insincerity  of  the  witnesses  who  can  dare  to  put 
forward  such  a  pretence. 

But,  then,  they  go  further,  and  they  say  that  Mr.  Cook  was 
able  to  swallow.  So  he  was,  before  the  paroxysm  came  on. 
Nobody  ever  pretended  that  he  could  swallow  after  the 
paroxysm  came  on.  He  swallowed  the  pills,  and,  what  is 
very  curious,  and,  as  they  think,  bears  out  and  illustrates  a 
part  of  their  theory,  is  this.  It  was  the  act  of  attempting  to 
swallow  the  pills — the  sort  of  movement  that  must  have  taken 
place  in  raising  his  head  and  neck  for  the  purpose — that  im- 
mediately brings  on  the  violent  paroxysm  of  which  he  died. 
So  far  from  that  in  the  slightest  degree  militating  against  the 
supposition  that  this  was  a  case  of  poisoning  by  strychnia,  it  is 
strongly  and  decisively  conclusive  in  its  favour. 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Attorney-  But  then  they  take  us  to  the  appearances  after  death,  and 
18  they  say  that  there  are  circumstances  to  be  found  which  mili- 
tate against  this  being  a  case  of  strychnia  poisoning.  Let  us 
see  what  they  are.  In  the  first  place,  they  say  the  limbs 
became  rigid  either  at  the  time  of  death  or  immediately  after, 
and  that  ought  not  to  be  found  in  a  case  of  tetanus  from 
strychnia.  Mr.  Nunneley  says,  "  In  all  cases  upon  which  I 
have  experimented  I  have  found  the  animals  become  flaccid 
before  death,  and  they  do  not  become  again  rigid  after  it." 
I  can  hardly  believe  that  statement,  and  I  certainly  was  not 
a  little  surprised  when  the  very  next  witness  who  got  into  the 
box  (Mr.  Herapath,  of  Bristol)  told  us  he  had  made  two 
experiments  upon  cats,  and  killed  them  both.  He  described 
them  as  "  indurated  and  contorted."  Those  were  his  ex- 
pressions when  he  found  them  some  hours  after  death.  The 
presence  of  rigidity  in  the  body  at  or  immediately  after  death 
here  is  put  forward  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Nunneley  as  one  of  the 
grounds  upon  which  he  says  this  was  not  a  death  by  strychnia, 
although  Dr.  Taylor  had  told  us  that  in  the  case  of  one  of  the 
cats  he  killed  the  rigidity  after  death  was  such  that  upon  taking 
the  animal  by  the  hind  legs  and  holding  it  up  in  the  air,  the 
body  maintained  its  horizontal  natural  position,  as  though  the 
animal  had  been  upon  its  four  legs  upon  a  plain  surface.  Not- 
withstanding that  evidence,  Mr.  Nunneley  had  the  audacity 
to  say  that  he  did  not  believe  this  was  a  case  of  poisoning  by 
strychnia,  because  there  had  been  rigidity  of  the  limbs — be- 
cause the  feet  were  distorted,  the  hands  clenched,  and  the 
muscles  rigid  as  the  unhappy  man  exhibited  prior  to  his  death. 
The  very  next  witness  called  upon  the  other  side  produced  two 
instances  in  which  the  animals  were  indurated  from  one  end  of 
their  bodies  to  the  other.  As  he  says  they  were  contorted  in 
all  their  limbs,  and  so  they  remained,  it  shows  what  you  are 
to  think  of  the  honesty  of  this  sort  of  evidence,  in  which  facts 
are  selected  because  they  make  in  favour  of  the  particular 
hypothesis  of  the  party  who  brings  them  forward. 

Then  the  next  thing  that  is  said  is  that  the  heart  in  this 
case  was  empty.  In  the  animals  Mr.  Nunneley  and  Dr. 
Letheby  have  operated  upon  I  think  the  heart  has  been  found 
full.  I  do  not  think  that  applies  to  all  the  cases  ;  I  think  they 
make  some  exceptions;  and,  as  I  said  at  the  outset,  it  is  a 
remarkable  fact  connected  with  the  history  of  this  particular 
poison,  that  you  never  can  rely  upon  the  precise  form  or  order 
which  the  symptoms  before  death  and  the  appearances  after 
it  will  assume.  There  are  only  certain  great,  leading,  marked 
characteristic  features — the  collateral  incidents  are  capable  of 
infinite  variety.  We  have  here  the  main  marked  characteristic 
features,  and  we  have,  what  is  more,  collateral  incidents  similar 
to  the  cases  in  which  the  administration  of  strychnia  and  the 
226 


Attorney-General's  Address  to  Jury. 

fact  that  death  was  caused  by  it  are  beyond  the  possibility  of  Attorney- 
dispute.  In  the  very  evidence  which  has  been  adduced  of  Genepal 
two  cases  of  poisoning,  Mrs.  Smyth's  and  the  Glasgow  girl,  in 
both  the  heart  had  been  found  contracted  and  emptied;  and 
it  is  obvious  to  any  one  who  reflects  for  a  single  moment  that 
the  question  whether  the  heart  shall  be  found  congested  or  the 
lungs  congested  must  depend  upon  the  immediate  cause  of 
death,  and  we  know  that  in  cases  of  tetanus  death  may  result 
from  more  than  one  cause.  All  the  muscles  of  the  body  are 
subject  to  the  exciting  action  of  this  powerful  poison,  but  no 
one  can  tell  in  what  order  those  muscles  will  be  affected,  or 
where  the  poisonous  influence  will  put  forth  the  fulness  of  its 
power.  If  it  act  upon  the  respiratory  muscles,  and  arrest 
the  play  of  the  lungs,  and  with  it  the  breathing  of  atmospheric 
air,  the  result  will  be  that  the  heart  will  be  left  full ;  but  if 
some  spasm  seizes  on  the  heart,  contracting  it  and  expelling 
from  it  the  blood  that  it  contains,  and  so  produces  death,  why 
the  result  will  be  that  the  heart  will  be  found  empty,  and  the 
other  vessels  gorged  with  blood.  So  that  you  have  never 
perfect  certainty  as  to  how  those  symptoms  will  manifest  them- 
selves after  death ;  but  that  is  again  put  forward  as  if  the  fact 
of  the  heart  having  been  found  empty  is  a  conclusive  fact  against 
death  having  in  this  case  taken  place  from  strychnia.  Yet  those 
men  who  came  here  to  make  those  statements  as  witnesses  under 
the  sanction  of  scientific  authority  must  have  heard  both 
those  cases  spoken  to  by  the  medical  gentlemen  who  examined 
those  two  unfortunate  patients  after  death,  and  who  told  us  that 
in  both  cases  the  heart  was  found  empty.  That  gets  rid  of 
that  matter.  And  so  again  with  regard  to  the  congestion 
of  the  brain  and  other  vessels  the  same  observation  applies. 
If  instead  of  being  killed  by  the  action  of  the  poison  upon  the 
respiratory  muscles  or  by  its  action  upon  the  heart,  death  is 
the  result  of  a  long  series  of  paroxysms  exhausting  the  vital 
power  of  the  victim,  then  you  expect  to  find  the  brain  and  other 
vessels  congested  by  those  series  of  convulsions  and  spasms. 
As  death  takes  place  from  one  or  other  of  those  causes,  so  will 
be  the  appearance  of  the  heart,  the  brain,  and  the  body  after 
death.  There  is  nothing,  I  say,  in  this  for  a  single  moment 
to  negative  the  conclusion  which  you  would  otherwise  arrive  at 
from  the  symptoms  which  appeared  in  this  man's  body  at  the 
time  of  his  death  and  immediately  afterwards — that  those  are 
the  symptoms  of  tetanus  of  the  strongest  and  most  aggravated 
land ;  that  is  a  proposition  about  which,  I  think,  you  can 
entertain  no  doubt.  If  so,  are  they  referable  to  tetanus  of 
any  other  description?  Certainly  not;  because,  as  Sir 
Benjamin  Brodie  told  you,  the  course  of  the  symptoms  is  marked 
by  characteristics  of  unquestionable  difference. 

Is  it  not  then  preposterous  to  contend  that  this  was  not  a 

227 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Attorney-  case  of  tetanus?  And  if  every  one  of  the  distinctions  they 
General  nave  attempted  to  set  up  I  show  you  to  have  really  nothing  to 
do  with  the  case  (because  I  produce  you  at  once  an  undoubted 
case  in  which  the  administration  of  strychnia  is  beyond  the 
reach  of  question,  in  which  those  particular  symptoms  and 
appearances  were  manifested  and  observed)  I  get  rid  at  once 
of  all  those  vain,  futile  attempts  to  distinguish  this  case,  either 
in  its  premonitory  symptoms  or  in  the  appearances  either  before 
or  upon  post-mortem  examination.  I  get  rid  of  all  those 
difficulties,  and  I  come  back  to  the  symptoms  which  attended 
this  unhappy  man's  demise.  I  ask  whether  you  can  doubt 
that,  when  I  have  excluded  all  those  cases  of  tetanic  convulsions, 
epilepsy,  and  arachnitis,  or  angina  pectoris,  which  occurred, 
you  recollect,  in  a  young  girl  after  an  attack  of  scarlet  fever — 
in  all  human  probability  the  scarlet  fever  had  been  thrown 
back  upon  the  system,  and  had  produced  all  those  consequences 
— when  I  exclude  all  those  cases,  and  then,  lastly,  exclude  trau- 
matic or  idiopathic  tetanus,  what  remains?  The  tetanus  of 
strychnia,  and  the  tetanus  of  strychnia  only.  I  pray  your 
attention  to  the  cases  of  which  evidence  has  been  given,  in 
which  there  was  no  question  as  to  strychnia  having  been 
administered,  there  not  being  the  shadow  of  a  doubt  about  it, 
and  in  which  the  circumstances  were  so  similar,  and  the  symp- 
toms so  analogous,  that  I  think  you  cannot  hesitate  to  come 
to  the  conclusion  that  this  was  death  by  strychnia.  Medical 
witnesses  of  the  highest  authority,  both  on  the  part  of  the 
Crown  and  on  the  part  of  the  defence,  agree  that  in  the  whole 
range  of  their  experience  and  knowledge  they  know  of  no  natural 
disease  to  which  these  remarkable  symptoms  can  be  referred. 
If  that  be  so,  and  there  is  a  known  poison  that  will  produce 
them,  how  strong,  how  cogent,  how  irresistible  becomes  the 
inference  that  to  that  poison,  and  to  that  poison  alone,  are 
those  symptoms  and  this  death  to  be  ascribed ! 

Nevertheless,  gentlemen,  on  the  other  hand,  the  case  is  not 
without  its  difficulties ;  and  I  will  not  shrink  from  the  discussion 
of  them,  nor  from  the  candid  recognition  of  these  difficulties, 
so  far  as  they  in  reality  exist.  Strychnia  was  not  found  in 
this  body;  and  we  have  it,  no  doubt  upon  strong  evidence, 
that  in  a  variety  of  experiments  which  have  been  tried  upon 
the  bodies  of  animals  killed  by  strychnia,  strychnia  has  been 
detected  by  the  tests  which  science  places  at  the  disposition  of 
scientific  men.  If  strychnia  had  been  found,  of  course  there 
would  have  been  no  difficulty,  and  we  should  have  had  none  of 
the  ingenious  theories  which  gentlemen  from  a  variety  of  parts 
have  been  brought  forward  to  propound  in  this  Court.  The 
question  for  your  consideration  is,  whether  the  absence  of  its 
detection  leads  conclusively  to  the  view  that  this  death  could 
not  have  been  caused  by  the  administration  of  that  poison. 
228 


Attorney-General's  Address  to  Jury. 

Now,  in  the  first  place,  under  what  circumstances  was  the  ex-  Attorney- 
amination  made  of  which  Dr.  Taylor  and  Dr.  Rees  have  spoken  ?  Genepa* 
They  tell  you  that  when  the  stomach  of  this  man  was  brought 
to  them  for  the  purpose  of  analysis,  it  was  presented  to  them 
under  the  most  unfavourable  circumstances.  They  say  that 
its  contents  had  been  lost,  and  that  they  had  no  opportunity 
of  experimenting  upon  them.  It  is  very  true  that  those  who 
put  up  the  jar  make  a  statement  somewhat  different.  They 
say  that  the  contents  of  the  stomach  were  emptied  into  the  jar, 
but  there  appears  (at  all  events  I  will  not  put  it  higher  than 
accident),  by  accident,  to  have  been  some  spilling  of  the  con- 
tents ;  and  there  is,  I  think,  the  clearest  and  most  undeniable 
evidence  of  very  considerable  bungling  in  the  way  in  which 
the  stomach  was  cut,  and  the  way  in  which  it  was  emptied  into 
the  jar.  It  was  cut  from  end  to  end,  says  Dr.  Taylor.  It 
was  tied  up  at  both  ends ;  it  had  been  turned  inside  out  into 
the  contents  of  the  intestines,  and  lay  there  in  a  mass  of 
fo3culent  matter,  and  was  therefore  in  a  condition  the  most 
unsatisfactory  for  analysis  and  experiment.  It  is  very  true 
that  the  witnesses  upon  the  other  side — Mr.  Nunneley,  Mr. 
Herapath,  and  Dr.  Letheby — say  that,  no  matter  how  con- 
taminated or  how  mixed  with  impurities,  they  would  have 
been  able  to  ascertain  the  presence  of  strychnia  in  the  stomach, 
if  strychnia  ever  had  been  there.  I  own  I  should  have  more 
confidence  in  the  testimony  of  those  witnesses  if  their  par- 
tiality and  partisanship  had  not  been  so  much  marked  as  they 
are.  I  should  have  more  confidence  in  the  testimony  of  Mr. 
Herapath  if  he  had  not  been  constrained  to  admit  to  me  a 
fact  which  had  come  to  my  knowledge,  that  he  has  again  and 
again  asserted  that  this  case  was  a  case  of  poisoning  by  strych- 
nia, but  that  Dr.  Taylor  had  not  known  how  to  find  it  out — 
he  admits  that  that  is  a  statement  he  has  again  and  again 
made. 

Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEB — It  was  in  the  newspapers,  he  said. 

Mr.  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — He  did  not  venture  to  say  that  the 
newspaper  statement  in  any  way  differed  from  the  fact  which 
he  admitted  in  this  Court.  I  have  seen  that  gentleman  not 
merely  contenting  himself  with  coming  forward,  when  called 
upon  for  the  purposes  of  justice,  to  state  that  which  he  knew 
as  a  matter  of  science  or  of  experiment,  but  I  have  seen  him 
mixing  himself  up  as  a  thoroughgoing  partisan  in  this  case, 
advising  my  learned  friend,  suggesting  question  upon  question, 
and  that  in  behalf  of  a  man  whom  he  has  again  and  again 
asserted  he  believed  to  be  a  poisoner  by  strychnia.  I  do  not 
say  that  alters  the  fact ;  but  I  do  say  that  it  induces  one  to 
look  at  the  credit  of  those  witnesses  with  a  very  great  amount 
of  suspicion.  I  reverence  a  man  who,  from  a  sense  of  justice 
and  a  love  of  truth — from  those  high  considerations  which  form 

229 


Trial   of  William  Palmer. 

Attorney-  the  noblest  elements  in  the  character  of  man — comes  forward 
General  jn  favour  of  a  man  against  whom  the  world  may  run  in  a 
torrent  of  prejudice  and  aversion,  and  who  stands  and  states 
what  he  believes  to  be  the  truth;  but  I  abhor  the  traffic  in 
testimony  to  which  I  regret  to  say  men  of  science  sometimes 
permit  themselves  to  condescend.  I  ask  you  therefore  to 
look  at  the  statements  of  those  witnesses  with  dispassionate 
consideration  before  you  attach  implicit  credit  to  them.  But 
let  me  assume  that  all  they  say  is  true,  that  it  is  the  fact  that 
they  in  their  experiments  have  succeeded  in  discovering 
strychnia  when  mixed  with  other  impurities,  and  contaminated, 
no  matter  by  what  cause — they  say  that  no  extent  of  putre- 
faction, no  amount  of  decomposition,  will  alter  the  character  of 
that  vegetable  matter,  so  that  it  may  not  be  detected  if  it  is 
in  the  human  stomach.  Be  it  so.  But  then  must  it  always 
be  found  in  every  case  where  death  has  ensued?  Professor 
Taylor  says  no ;  and  he  says  it  would  be  a  most  dangerous  and 
mischievous  proposition  to  assert  that  that  must  necessarily  be 
so — that  it  would  enable  many  a  guilty  man  to  escape  who, 
by  administering  the  smallest  quantity  whereby  life  can  be 
affected  and  destroyed,  might  by  that  means  prevent  the  possi- 
bility of  the  detection  of  the  poison  in  the  stomach  of  the 
individual.  All  tEe  witnesses  seem  to  agree  in  this,  or,  at  all 
events,  the  great  bulk  of  them  agree  in  this,  that  the  poison 
acts  after  it  has  been  absorbed  into  the  system ;  taken  up  by 
the  absorbents  of  the  stomach,  it  is  carried  into  the  blood ; 
passing  by  means  of  the  circulation  through  the  tissues,  it  is 
deposited  there ;  at  some  stage  or  other  of  its  progress  it  affects 
the  nervous  system ;  and  as  soon  as  the  nerves  affecting  the 
muscles  of  motion  become  influenced  by  its  baneful  power, 
then  come  on  those  muscular  spasms  and  convulsions  of  which 
we  have  heard  so  much.  If  the  minimum  dose  be  given,  and 
that  operates  by  absorption,  it  is  perfectly  clear — and  must 
be  clear — that  the  whole  must  be  taken  up  by  absorbents  and 
pass  into  the  blood,  and  that  none  therefore  will  be  found  in 
the  stomach.  Nay,  a  further  proposition  is  also  clear.  If  it 
is  necessary  that  it  should  be  first  passed  by  means  of  the  circu- 
lation into  the  solid  tissues  of  the  body,  before  it  acts  upon  the- 
nervous  system,  it  will  cease  to  be  found  in  the  blood.  Again, 
a  portion  of  it,  if  in  excess,  will  be  eliminated  in  the  kidneys, 
and  pass  off  in  watery  excretion.  You  do  not  know,  therefore, 
in  what  part  of  the  human  body  to  put  your  hand  upon  it. 
But  this  is  undoubtedly  the  fact,  if  there  has  been  an  excess  over 
the  quantity  necessary  to  destroy  the  life  of  a  particular  indi- 
vidual, then,  as  soon  as  the  absorbents  have  taken  up  the- 
necessary  quantity,  the  nervous  system  will  at  once  be  affected 
and  life  destroyed  ;  you  will  find  the  excess  in  the  stomach,  if 
you  adopt  the  proper  means  of  seeking  for  it.  Now,  what 
230 


Attorney-General's  Address  to  Jury. 

did  these  gentlemen  do  1  They  gave  never  less  than  a  grain —  Attorney- 
often  as  much  as  two  grains ;  and  yet  we  now  know  that  a  G«neral 
quarter  of  a  grain  is  enough  to  destroy  a  small  animal  like 
a  rabbit,  and  that  no  man  could  venture  to  hope  for  life  who 
took  half  a  grain  or  three-quarters  of  a  grain  of  it.  There- 
fore in  the  cases  of  their  experiments,  and  experiments  made, 
allow  me  to  say,  for  the  purpose  of  this  case,  after  those 
parties  had  been  retained — I  use  the  word  "retained,"  for  it 
is  the  appropriate  word ;  no  parties  can  be  more  thorough- 
going partisans  than  scientific  men  who  have  once  taken  up 
a  case — after  they  have  been  retained  for  this  case,  and  desire 
that  their  experiments  should  have  a  certain  result,  they  take 
good  care  to  have  doses  large  enough  to  leave  a  small  portion 
in  the  stomach.  But  be  this  as  it  may,  I  have  only  now  to 
deal  with  the  experiments  of  Professor  Taylor  and  Dr.  Rees ; 
they  may,  for  aught  I  know,  be  a  pair  of  bunglers ;  it  is  no 
part  of  my  business  to  uphold  them  if  their  professional  repu- 
tation will  not  do  it ;  but  they  tell  us  that  they  tried  its  effects 
upon  four  animals  of  the  same  species  with  fully  adequate 
doses.  Where  they  administered  two  grains  they  reproduced 
the  poison  in  abundance ;  where  they  administered  one  grain 
they  found  a  small  indication  of  it;  and  when  they  adminis- 
tered half  a  grain  to  two  rabbits  they  found  no  traces  of  the 
poison  at  all.  It  may  well  be  that  that  may  result,  as  Mr. 
Herapath  says,  from  Professor  Taylor  not  knowing  the  right 
way  of  going  about  it.  It  may  be,  if  Mr.  Herapath  had  had 
the  stomach  under  his  more  scientific  manipulation,  he  would 
have  produced  the  strychnia.  It  is  enough  for  my  purpose 
when,  as  I  show,  the  man  who  did  in  this  case  experiment  upon 
the  stomach  of  Mr.  Cook,  in  two  cases  out  of  four  when  he 
had  given  a  smaller  dose  to  rabbits  failed  to  reproduce  the 
poison.  What  is  the  conclusion  I  draw  from  it?  Why,  that 
although  I  cannot  have  the  advantage  here  which  the  positive 
detection  of  the  strychnia  would  have  afforded  if  it  had  been 
found,  there  is  no  room  for  the  opposite  conclusion — the  con- 
verse of  the  proposition  for  which  my  learned  friend  and  his 
witnesses  contend — that  the  fact  of  the  strychnia  not  having  been 
reproduced  or  discovered  affords  negative  conclusive  proof  that 
the  death  was  not  produced  by  strychnia.  I  have  no  positive 
proof  on  the  one  hand,  but  on  the  other  hand  my  learned  friend 
is  in  the  same  predicament — he  cannot  say  that  he  has  negative 
proof  conclusive  of  the  fact  of  this  death  not  having  taken  place 
by  strychnia. 

But  now  is  there  no  other  evidence  in  the  case?  Do  I  ask 
you  to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  he  administered  strychnia 
to  his  friend,  simply  because  the  symptoms  of  that  friend's 
death  are  reconcilable  with  no  known  form  of  disease  which 
the  most  enlarged  experience  or  knowledge  can  supply?  No, 

231 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Attorney-  gentlemen,  it  does  not  rest  there.      Not  because  those  symptoms 
are  precisely  those  which  show  themselves  in  cases  of  poisoning 
by  strychnia.      No,  the  case  does  not  rest  there ;  I  wish  it  did. 
But,  alas  1  it  does  not.       I  must  now  draw  your  serious  atten- 
tion to  a  part  of  the  case  which  has  not  been  met,  and  has  not 
been  grappled  with.       My  learned  friend  said  that  he  would 
contest  the  ground  with  the  prosecution  foot  by  foot.       Alas  I 
we  are  upon  that  ground  upon  which,  as  it  were,   is  centred 
the  crisis  of  this  momentous  question ;   and,  alas !  my  learned 
friend  has  not  grappled  with  it  for  an  instant.       We  have  here 
a  death  of  which  the  dread  manifestations  bore  upon  their  face 
the  character  of  strychnia  poisoning.        Was   the  prisoner   at 
the  bar  possessed  of  that  poison?       Did  he  obtain  it  upon  the 
eve  of  the  death  into  which  we  are  inquiring?       These  are 
matters  of  fearful  moment.       They  are  matters  with  which  it 
behoved  my  learned  friend,  indeed,  to  have  grappled  with  all 
the  vigour  of  which  he  was  capable  and  with  all  the  means  that 
his  case  afforded.       But  I  grieve  to  say  that  this  part  of  the 
case  is  left  untouched  as  regards  the  defence.       Did  the  prisoner 
at  the  bar  obtain  possession  of  strychnia  on  the  Monday  late? 
Did  he  get  it  again  upon  the  Tuesday  morning?      The  fact  of 
his  having  got  it  on  the  Monday  night  rests,  it  is  true,  upon 
the  evidence  of  an  individual  whose  statement,  as  I  said  to  you 
at  the  outset,  and  as  I  repeat  now,  requires  at  your  hands  the 
most  careful  and  anxious  attention  before  you  adopt  it  easily. 
Newton   tells  us  that  on  that  night  when  Mr.    Palmer  came 
back  from  London,  he  came  to  him  and  obtained  from  him 
three  grains  of  the  poison  of  which,  supposing  it  had  been  ad- 
ministered,  the  symptoms   and   effect  both  in  life  and  death 
would  have  been  precisely  the  same  as  those  which  have  been 
described  in  Cook's  case.       Is  Newton  speaking  the  truth,  or 
is  he  nott       It  is  open  to  observation — I   said   so  from   the 
beginning,     and    my  learned   friend   has   done  no  more   than 
reiterate  the  warning  I  gave  you — it  is,  I  say,  open  to  serious 
observation,  that  Newton  never  made  that  statement  until  the 
day   previous   to   the   commencement   of   the   trial.        He   has 
explained  to  you  the  reasons  which  induced  his  silence.       His 
employer  had  been  for  a  long  time  upon  unpleasant  terms  with 
Palmer.       The  young  man,  who  knew  him,  however,  and  who 
appears  to  have  been  more  or  less  upon  familiar  terms  with 
him,  did  not  hesitate  to  give  him  the  three  grains  of  strychnia. 
Palmer  was  a  medical  man,   and  strychnia  is  often  used  by 
medical  men.       There  was  nothing  extraordinary  therefore  at 
that  time  of  night,  when  chemists'  shops  might  be  expected  to 
be  shut  up,  that,  upon  Mr.  Palmer's  coming  to  him  for  three 
grains  of  strychnia,  he  gave  them  to  him,  and  probably  thought 
little  more  about  it.       But  when  afterwards  the  question  of  the 
mode  by  which  this  man's  life  had  been  taken  away  became  rife 
232 


Attorney-General's   Address  to  Jury. 

in  Rugeley,  and  suspicions  arose  of  strychnia,  and  Roberts  came  Attorney- 
forward  and  said  that  upon  the  Tuesday  morning  Mr.  Palmer  General 
had  bought  strychnia  off  him,  and  this  young  man  was  called 
to  confirm  the  circumstance  of  Mr.  Palmer  having  been  at 
the  shop,  he  heard  that  this  question  of  strychnia  was  in- 
volved, and  it  began  to  occur  to  him  that  it  might  seriously 
implicate  him  with  his  employer,  might  cast  even  the  shadow 
of  doubt  and  suspicion  upon  himself,  if  he  came  forward  and 
voluntarily  stated  that  he  had  supplied  Palmer  with  the  poison 
the  night  before.  Then  he  locked  this  secret  in  his  breast. 
But  when  the  eve  of  the  trial  came,  and  he  knew  that  he  was 
to  be  subjected  to  examination  here,  he  felt  a  sort  of  oppression 
at  having  this  secret  locked  up  in  his  breast,  and  he  voluntarily 
came  forward  and  made  the  statement  which  he  has  repeated 
here.  It  is  for  you  to  say  whether  you  are  satisfied  with  that 
explanation.  It  is  unquestionably  true  that  it  detracts  from 
the  otherwise  perfect  credibility  which  would  attach  to  his  state- 
ment. But  then,  gentlemen,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  a 
consideration  which  I  cannot  fail  to  press  upon  you.  What 
possible  conceivable  motive  can  this  young  man  have,  except 
a  sense  of  truth,  for  coming  forward  to  make  this  statement? 
My  learned  friend,  with  justice  and  with  propriety,  has  asked 
for  your  most  attentive  consideration  to  the  question  of  motives 
involved  in  this  case.  Before  you  can  charge  a  man  with 
having  taken  away  the  life  of  another  by  aforethought  and  de- 
liberate malice,  it  does  become  important  to  see  whether  there 
were  motives  that  could  operate  upon  him  to  do  so  foul  a  deed. 
That  does  not  apply  to  this  witness,  for,  even  though  the 
hideous  crime  of  taking  life  by  poison  is  not  perhaps  so  horrible 
to  contemplate  as  the  notion  of  judicial  murder  effected  by  false 
witness  against  a  man's  neighbour,  can  you  suppose  that  this 
young  man  can  have  the  remotest  shadow  of  a  motive  for 
coming  forward  upon  this  occasion,  under  the  solemn  sanction 
of  an  oath,  in  a  Court  of  justice  like  this,  to  take  away  the 
life — for,  alas !  if  you  believe  his  evidence,  it  must  take  away 
the  life — of  the  prisoner  at  the  bar?  If  you  believe  that  on 
the  night  of  Monday,  for  no  other  conceivable  or  assignable 
purpose  except  the  deed  of  darkness  which  was  to  be  done  that 
night  upon  the  person  of  Mr.  Cook,  the  prisoner  at  the  bar 
went  to  Newton  and  obtained  from  him  the  fatal  and  deadly 
instrument  whereby  life  was  to  be  destroyed,  it  is  impossible 
that  you  can  come  to  any  other  conclusion  than  that  the 
prisoner  is  guilty,  and  that  your  verdict  must  pronounce  him  so. 
What  says  my  learned  friend?  He  says  that  Newton  does 
not  speak  the  truth — first,  because  he  did  not  come  forward 
till  the  last  minute ;  and,  secondly,  because  he  lays  the  time 
of  his  communication  with  the  prisoner,  and  affording  him  the 
strychnia,  at  nine  o'clock,  and  the  prisoner  was  not  in  Rugeley 
until  ten. 

233 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Attorney-  Now,  in  the  first  place,  I  must  remark  upon  this  that  the 
General  yOUng  man  does  not  say  nine  o'clock.  He  says,  "  about 
nine,"  and  every  one  knows  how  easy  it  is  to  make  a  mistake 
as  to  time  with  reference  to  half  an  hour  or  three-quarters  of 
an  hour,  or  even  an  hour,  when  your  attention  is  not  till 
perhaps  a  week  or  a  fortnight  or  three  weeks  afterwards  called 
to  a  particular  circumstance.  A  man  may  be  sitting  working 
in  his  study  or  his  surgery,  and  have  no.  clock  before  him,  and 
have  nothing  particular  to  impress  upon  his  mind  the  precise 
hour  of  time  at  which  a  certain  transaction  took  place ;  and  to 
say  afterwards,  when  he  comes  to  speak  to  it  under  the  sanction 
of  an  oath,  that  because  he  makes  some  slight  difference  as  to 
the  time  therefore  he  must  be  taken  to  be  speaking  untruly, 
appears  to  my  mind  a  most  untenable  and  unsatisfactory 
argument.  It  is  due  to  my  learned  friend  to  say  that  he  has 
sought  to  meet  this  part  of  the  case.  He  has  produced  to-day 
a  witness  of  whom  all  I  can  say  is  this,  that  I  implore  you,  for 
the  sake  of  justice,  not  to  allow  the  man  who  stands  at  the  bar 
to  be  prejudiced  by  the  evidence  of  that  most  discreditable  and 
unworthy  witness  who  has  been  called  to-day  on  his  behalf.  I 
say  that  not  to  one  word  which  that  man  has  uttered  will  you 
attach  the  slightest  value.  Before  I  come  to  him,  however,  I 
must  make  this  remark — that,  if  Newton  could  not  be  mis- 
taken as  to  the  time,  how  is  it  possible  that  the  prisoner  could 
be  mistaken  as  to  the  time?  Yet  he  clearly  was.  He  told 
Dr.  Bamford  (and  we  have  it  from  Dr.  Bamford  himself)  the 
next  morning  that  he  visited  Cook  between  nine  and  ten 
o'clock  the  night  before.  And  now  there  comes  a  witness  who 
tells  us  that  it  was  a  quarter  past  ten  that  he  had  with  him 
alighted  from  the  car  that  brought  them  from  Stafford,  and 
he  could  not  till  after  that  have  gone  to  visit  Cook.  My 
learned  friend  reminds  me  that  it  was  ten  minutes  past  ten. 
Then  he  had  to  go  to  Cook.  One  of  the  maid-servants,  Lavinia 
Barnes,  like  every  other  witness,  may  be  mistaken;  but  she 
asserts  that  on  that  night,  the  Monday  evening,  Mr.  Palmer 
came  to  the  hotel,  and  went  to  see  Mr.  Cook  before  nine  o'clock. 
It  is  clear  that  she  must  have  been  mistaken.  It  is  clear 
that  he  could  not  have  been  there  much  before  ten.  I  am 
told  that  they  get  over  in  about  an  hour.  There  was  a 
carriage  waiting  for  him,  and  he  would  come  over  to  Rugeley 
with  as  much  rapidity  as  he  could,  which  would  not  be  before 
ten  o'clock.  As  to  the  fact  of  the  witness  pretending  that  he 
saw  him  alight  from  the  car,  and  that  he  went  to  Cook  and 
stayed  a  certain  time  so  as  to  cover  the  whole  evening,  I  ask 
you  not  to  believe  a  single  word,  and  I  do  so  because  in  my 
heart  I  do  not  believe  a  single  word  of  it. 

It  is  a  remarkable  fact,  which  has  not  escaped  your  attention, 
I  dare  say,  that  my  learned  friend  did  not  open  a  single  word 

234 


Attorney-General's  Address   to  Jury. 

of  the  testimony  that  he  was  going  to  call.  He  said  he  hoped  Attorney- 
and  thought  he  should  be  able  to  cover  that  whole  period  at  6eneral  - 
Rugeley.  Did  he  tell  us  what  the  witness  was  going  to  prove, 
that  Jeremiah  Smith  had  been  upstairs  in  the  inn,  and  seen 
by  some  of  the  people  at  the  inn  going  upstairs  to  Cook's  room 7 
No,  he  did  not.  If  he  had  we  should  have  had  plenty  of  time 
between  that  and  this  to  ascertain  how  the  fact  stood,  and  I 
believe  have  been  ready  to  meet  Mr.  Jeremiah  Smith  with  con- 
tradictory evidence.  It  was  well  to  follow  that  course  when  you 
were  uncertain  what  your  witness  would  say,  or  what  your  case 
might  be,  because  you  might  be  met  and  confronted  by  con- 
tradictory evidence.  I  need  not  say  that  any  evidence  would 
have  been  better  than  the  evidence  of  that  miserable  man  whom 
we  saw  exhibited  to-day.  Such  a  spectacle  I  never  saw  in 
my  recollection  in  a  Court  of  justice.  He  calls  himself  a 
member  of  the  legal  profession.  I  blush  for  it  to  number  such 
a  man  upon  its  roll.  There  was  not  one  that  heard  him  to-day 
that  was  not  satisfied  that  that  man  came  here  to  tell  a  false 
tale.  There  cannot  be  a  man  who  is  not  convinced  that  he 
has  been  mixed  up  in  many  a  villainy  which,  if  not  perpetrated, 
had  been  attempted  to  be  perpetrated  in  that  quarter,  and  he 
comes  now  to  save,  if  he  can,  the  life  of  his  companion  and  his 
friend — the  son  of  the  woman  with  whom  he  has  had  that 
intimacy  which  he  sought  to-day  in  vain  to  disguise.  I  say, 
when  you  look  at  the  whole  of  those  circumstances,  balance 
the  evidence  on  both  sides,  and  look  at  the  question  of  whether 
Newton  can  by  any  possibility  have  any  motive  for  coming  here 
to  give  evidence  which  must  be  fatal  to  a  man  who,  if  that 
evidence  be  not  true,  he  must  believe  to  be  an  innocent  man — 
when  you  see  that  he  can  have  no  motive  for  such  a  purpose — 
to  suppose  that  he  would  do  so  without  a  motive  is  to  suppose 
human  nature  in  its  worst  and  most  repulsive  form  to  be  one 
hundred  times  more  wicked  and  perverse  than  experience  ever 
yet  has  found  it — I  cannot  but  submit  to  you  that  you  ought 
to  believe  that  evidence,  and  I  cannot  but  submit  to  you 
deferentially,  but  at  the  same  time  firmly  and  emphatically, 
that  if  you  do  believe  that  evidence  it  is  conclusive  of  the  case. 

But  it  does  not  stop  there.  On  the  morrow  of  that  day  we 
have  the  clearest  and  most  unquestioned  evidence  that  Mr. 
Palmer  bought  more  strychnia.  He  went  to  Mr.  Hawkins' 
shop,  and  there  purchased  six  grains  more,  and  the  circum- 
stances attending  that  purchase  are  peculiar  in  the  extreme. 
He  comes  to  the  shop,  and  he  gives  an  order  for  prussic  acid, 
and,  having  got  his  prussic  acid,  he  gives  an  order  for 
strychnia.  Before  the  strychnia  is  put  up,  Newton,  the  same 
man,  comes  into  the  shop.  What  does  the  prisoner  do?  He 
immediately  takes  Newton  by  the  arm,  and  says  he  has  some- 
thing particular  to  say  to  him,  and  takes  him  to  the  door. 

235 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

Attorney-  What  was  it  he  had  to  say  to  him  ?      Was  it  anything  particular  ? 

General  ^yas  ~t  anything  of  the  slightest  importance  1  Was  it  anything 
that  might  not  have  been  said  in  the  presence  of  Roberts,  who 
was  putting  up  the  strychnia?  Certainly  not.  It  was  to 
ask  a  most  unimportant  question,  namely,  when  young  Mr. 
Salt  was  going  to  the  farm  which  he  had  taken  at  Sudbury. 
In  that  question  there  could  be  nothing  which  might  not  be 
put  in  the  presence  of  anybody,  no  matter  who.  He  takes 
him  to  the  door,  and  then  puts  this  question.  At  the  same 
time  a  man  of  the  name  of  Brassington,  a  cooper,  comes  up, 
and  Brassington  had  something  to  say  to  Newton  upon  busi- 
ness, having  some  bills  against  Newton's  employer,  Mr.  Salt. 
Upon  that  Brassington  and  Newton  get  into  conversation  at 
some  little  distance  from  the  door.  The  prisoner  immediately 
takes  advantage  of  those  two  being  in  conversation,  and  he 
goes  back  and  completes  the  purchase  of  the  strychnia.  But 
while  the  strychnia  was  being  made  up  he  stands  in  the  door- 
way with  his  back  to  the  shop,  and  his  face  to  the  street, 
where  he  would  have  a  perfect  command  of  the  persons  of 
Newton  and  Brassington,  and  where,  if  Newton  had  quitted 
Brassington  to  return  into  the  shop,  the  prisoner  would  at 
once  have  been  in  a  position  to  take  every  possible  step  for 
not  letting  Newton  go  in,  by  renewing  the  conversation  with 
him  until  the  strychnia  had  been  taken  away.  I  ask  you, 
having  this  description  of  the  transaction  given  to  you  by 
Roberts,  in  the  first  place,  confirmed  by  Newton  afterwards, 
can  you  entertain  any  reasonable  doubt  that  the  prisoner  was 
desirous  of  not  letting  Newton  know  that  he  was  purchasing 
strychnia  there?  You  can  very  well  understand  that  he  would 
be  desirous  of  keeping  that  fact  from  Newton,  because,  if  it  be 
true  that  Newton  had  let  him  have  three  grains  the  night  before, 
Newton's  attention  would  be  naturally  immediately  aroused  by 
so  strange  a  circumstance,  because  nine  grains  of  strychnia  were 
enough — three  grains  were  enough — to  kill  three,  perhaps  six 
people.  What  could  a  man  want  with  nine  grains  of  strychnia 
in  so  short  a  space  of  time?  It  would  attract  Newton's  atten- 
tion, and  it  did ;  for  Newton  immediately  went  and  asked  what 
he  wanted  there,  his  attention  being,  in  the  first  place,  directed, 
not  so  much  to  what  he  had  come  to  purchase  as  to  the  singu- 
larity of  his  coming  there  at  all,  because  for  two  years  past 
the  prisoner  never  bought  an  article  of  any  sort  or  kind  at  the 
shop  of  Mr.  Hawkins.  His  former  assistant,  Mr.  Thirlby, 
had  two  years  before  set  up  in  business  as  a  chemist,  and  from 
that  time,  naturally  enough,  Mr.  Palmer  had  withdrawn  his 
custom  from  Mr.  Hawkins,  and  had  given  it  to  his  former 
assistant,  Mr.  Thirlby.  It  was  a  remarkable  thing  that  he 
should  go  to  Mr.  Hawkins'  shop  upon  this  occasion  to  get 
strychnia.  Why  did  he  not  go  to  Mr.  Thirlby?  I  will  tell 
236 


Attorney-General's  Address  to  Jury. 

you.  Mr.  Thirlby  would  have  known  perfectly  well  that  he  Attorney- 
could  have  no  legitimate  use  for  such  an  article.  Mr.  Thirlby  Genera> 
had  taken  his  practice.  Mr.  Palmer  was  no  longer  in  practice, 
except  in  the  circle  of  his  relatives  and  his  own  immediate 
friends ;  and  if  he  had  gone  to  Mr.  Thirlby  for  strychnia,  Mr. 
Thirlby  would  have  said,  naturally  enough,  ' '  What  are  you 
going  to  do  with  it?  "  and  therefore  he  did  not  go  to  Mr. 
Thirlby.  Why  he  should  have  gone  to  purchase  strychnia 
(I  agree  with  my  learned  friend  it  is  one  of  the  mysteries  of 
this  case)  on  two  successive  days  I  cannot  tell ;  but  that  he  did 
is  undeniably  true ;  and  if  on  the  one  hand  some  little  diffi- 
culty arises,  on  the  other  hand  is  not  the  difficulty  infinitely 
greater  in  accounting  for  the  motive  that  induced  him  to  go 
and  get  this  strychnia  either  on  the  Monday  night  or  upon 
the  Tuesday?  If  it  was  for  the  purpose  of  profes- 
sional use  for  the  benefit  of  some  patient  for  whom 
small  doses  of  strychnia  might  have  been  advantageous, 
where  is  the  patient,  and  why  is  he  not  produced  ?  My  learned 
friend  did  not  even  advert  to  the  question  of  the  second  purchase 
of  strychnia  in  the  whole  of  his  powerful  observations.  He 
passes  it  over  in  mysterious  but  significant  silence.  Account 
for  that  six  grains  of  strychnia,  the  purchase  of  which  is  an 
undoubted  and  indisputable  fact.  Throw  doubt  if  you  please — 
I  blame  you  not  for  it — upon  the  story  of  the  purchase  on  the 
previous  night ;  but  on  the  Tuesday  it  is  unquestionably  true 
that  six  grains  of  strychnia  were  purchased.  Purchased  for 
whom?  purchased  for  what?  If  for  any  patient,  who  is  that 
patient?  Produce  him.  If  for  any  other  purpose,  at  least 
let  us  have  it  explained.  Has  there  been  the  slightest  shadow 
of  an  attempt  at  explanation  ?  Alas  !  I  grieve  to  say,  none  at 
all.  Something  was  said,  in  the  outset  of  this  case,  about 
some  dogs  that  had  been  troublesome  in  the  paddocks  where 
the  mares  and  foals  were,  but  that  proved  to  have  been  in 
September.  If  there  had  been  any  recurrence  of  such  a  thing, 
where  are  the  grooms  who  had  the  care  and  charge  of  those 
mares  and  foals,  and  why  are  they  not  here  to  state  the  fact? 
If  this  poison  was  used  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  dogs, 
some  one  must  have  assisted  Mr.  Palmer  in  the  attempts  which 
he  resorted  to  for  that  purpose.  Where  are  those  persons? 
Why  are  they  not  called?  But,  not  only  are  they  not  called, 
they  are  not  even  named.  My  learned  friend  does  not  venture 
to  breathe  even  a  suggestion  of  anything  of  the  kind.  I  ask, 
gentlemen,  what  conclusion  can  we  draw  from  these  things, 
except  one,  and  one  alone?  Death,  with  all  the  symptoms 
of  strychnia — death  in  all  the  convulsive  agonies  and  throes 
which  that  fatal  poison  produces  in  the  frame  of  man — death 
with  all  the  appearances  which  follow  upon  death,  and  mark 
how  that  death  has  come  to  pass — all  these  things,  in  the  minds 

237 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Attorney-  of  those  who  can  discuss  and  consider  them  with  calm,  dis- 
passionate  attention,  who  do  not  mix  themselves  up  as  advo- 
cates, partisans,  or  witnesses,  leading  to  but  one  conclusion; 
and  then  the  fact  of  the  strychnia  being  purchased  by  the 
prisoner  on  the  morning  of  the  fatal  day,  if  not  obtained  by 
him,  as  was  sworn  to,  on  the  night  before,  is  left  wholly  un- 
covered and  wholly  unmet,  without  the  shadow  of  a  defence. 
Alas !  gentlemen,  is  it  possible  that  we  can  come  to  any  other 
than  one  painful  and  dread  conclusion?  I  protest  I  can  suggest 
to  you  none. 

It  is  said  by  my  learned  friend,  "Is  it  likely  that  Mr.  Palmer 
should  have  purchased  strychnia  at  Rugeley  when  he  might  have 
got  it  in  London?  "  I  admit  the  fact.  I  feel  the  force  of 
the  observation.  If  he  could  have  shown  that  he  had  done 
anything  with  this  strychnia — if  he  could  have  shown  any 
legitimate  purpose  to  which  it  was  intended  to  be  applied,  and 
to  which  it  was  afterwards  applied — then  I  should  say  that  it 
would  be  an  argument  worthy  of  your  gravest  and  most  atten- 
tive consideration.  But  just  see  on  the  one  hand  how  the 
fact  may  stand.  He  was  in  town  on  the  Monday,  and  he  had 
the  opportunity,  as  my  learned  friend  suggests,  of  purchasing 
strychnia  there.  But  on  the  other  hand  he  had  much  to  do ; 
he  had  his  train  to  catch  by  a  certain  time  ;  he  had  in  the 
meanwhile  his  pecuniary  embarrassments  to  solve  if  he  could. 
Time  may  have  flown  too  fast  for  him  to  be  able  to  go  and 
obtain  this  strychnia;  and  even  if  he  had  had  time,  I  do  not 
believe  it  is  sold  in  chemists'  shops  in  London  without  the  name 
of  the  party  purchasing  it  as  a  voucher.  If  he  had  given 
his  name,  of  course,  it  would  have  been  still  worse  if  he  had 
bought  strychnia  in  London  than  if  he  had  bought  it  in  Rugeley. 
I  do  not  say  that  it  is  not  worthy  of  your  consideration,  that 
it  is  not  a  difficulty  in  the  case ;  but  I  say  there  is  plain,  dis- 
tinct, positive  proof  of  the  purchase  of  strychnia,  and  under 
circumstances  which  cannot  fail  to  lead  to  the  conclusion  that 
he  shrank  from  the  observation  of  Newton  at  the  time  he  was 
buying  it ;  and  there  is  a  total  absence  of  all  proof,  nay,  of 
all  suggestion,  of  any  legitimate  purpose  to  which  that  fatal 
poison  was  to  be,  or  was  in  point  of  fact,  afterwards  actually 
applied. 

Then,  gentlemen,  it  is  said  that  there  are  two  other  circum- 
stances in  the  case  which  make  strongly  in  favour  of  the 
prisoner,  and  negative  the  presumption  of  a  guilty  intention, 
and  those  are,  the  fact  that  he  called  in  two  medical  men. 
Here,  again,  I  admit  that  this  is  a  matter  to  which  all  due  con- 
sideration ought  to  be  given.  He  called  in  Dr.  Bamford  on 
the  Saturday,  and  he  wrote  to  Mr.  Jones  on  the  Sunday,  and 
desired  his  presence  to  attend  his  sick  friend.  It  is  perfectly 
true  that  he  did.  It  is  perfectly  true,  as  medical  men,  they 
238 


Attorney-General's    Address  to  Jury. 

would  be  likely  to  know  the  symptoms  of  poisoning  by  Attorney- 
strychnia,  and  they  would  be  likely  to  suspect  that  death  had  General 
ensued  from  it ;  and  yet  even  here  it  strikes  me  that  there  is 
a  singular  inconsistency  in  the  defence.  See  the  strange  con- 
tradiction in  which  the  witnesses  called  for  the  defence  involve 
my  learned  friend  who  puts  them  forward,  if  all  those  symp- 
toms were  not  the  symptoms  of  strychnia.  If  they  are 
referable  to  all  the  multiform  variety  of  disease  to  which  those 
witnesses  have  spoken,  why,  then,  should  Mr.  Palmer  have  the 
credit  of  having  selected  medical  men  who  would  be  likely  to 
know  from  those  symptoms  that  they  were  symptoms  of 
strychnia  1  I  pass  that  by ;  it  is  not  a  matter  of  very  much 
importance.  It  is  true  that  he  did  have  those  two  medical 
men.  He  called  in  old  Dr.  Bamford.  I  speak  of  that  gentle- 
man in  terms  of  perfect  respect ;  but  I  think  I  do  him  no 
injustice  if  I  say  that  the  vigour  of  his  intellect  and  his  power 
of  observation  have  been  impaired,  as  all  human  powers  are 
liable  to  be  impaired,  by  the  advancing  hand  of  time.  I  do 
not  think  he  was  a  person  likely  to  make  very  shrewd  observa- 
tions upon  any  symptoms  exhibited  to  him,  either  immediately 
after  death  or  upon  the  subsequent  examination  of  the  body ; 
and  the  best  proof  of  that  is  to  be  found  in  that  which  he  has 
actually  done  and  written  with  reference  to  this  case.  As 
regards  Mr.  Jones  the  same  observation  does  not  apply.  He 
was  a  young  man  in  the  full  possession  of  his  intellect  and  the 
professional  knowledge  which  he  had  acquired.  Nevertheless, 
about  him  the  observations  I  am  about  to  address  to  you  I 
think  are  not  unworthy  of  notice.  The  prisoner  at  the  bar 
selected  his  men  well,  for  what  has  come  to  pass  shows  how 
wisely  he  judged  of  what  was  likely  to  take  place.  This  death 
occurred  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Jones,  with  all  those  fearful 
symptoms  which  you  have  heard  described ;  yet  Mr.  Jones  sus- 
pected nothing ;  and  if  Mr.  Stevens  had  not  exhibited  that 
sagacity  and  firmness  which  he  did  manifest  in  the  after  parts 
of  this  transaction,  and  if  Mr.  Palmer  had  succeeded  in  getting 
that  body  hastily  introduced  into  the  strong  oak  coffin  that 
he  had  had  made  for  it,  the  body  would  have  been  consigned 
to  the  grave,  and  nobody  would  have  been  aught  the  wiser. 
The  presence  of  Mr.  Jones,  and  the  presence  of  Dr.  Bamford, 
would  not  have  led  to  detection,  would  not  have  frustrated  the 
designs  with  which  I  shall  presently  contend  before  you  this 
death  was  brought  about. 

On  the  other  hand,  gentlemen,  the  matter  is  perhaps  capable 
of  this  aspect,  it  may  have  been  that  a  man  whose  cunning  was 
equal  to  his  boldness  may  have  thought  it  the  best  course  to 
adopt  to  avoid  suspicion — to  prevent  its  possibility — was  to 
take  care  that  medical  men  should  be  called  in  and  should  be 
present  at  the  time  of  death ;  nor  is  there  anything  to  show 

239 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Attorney-  that  the  prisoner  had  the  most  distant  notion  that  Mr.  Jones 
intended  to  sleep  in  this  room  that  night;  and  if  he  had  not 
the  man  would  have  been  found  dead  in  the  morning ;  he  would 
have  gone  through  his  mortal  struggle  and  intense  and  fearful 
agony ;  he  would  have  died  there  alone  and  unbefriended ;  he 
would  have  been  found  dead  the  next  morning ;  the  old  man 
would  have  said  it  was  apoplexy,  and  the  young  man  would 
have  put  it  down  to  epilepsy.  If  any  one  had  whispered  a 
suspicion,  the  same  argument  would  have  been  used  which  has 
been  used  now  with  so  much  power  and  force  by  my  learned 
friend.  Can  you  imagine  that  the  man  would  have  called  in 
medical  men  to  be  the  witnesses  of  a  death  which  he  himself 
was  bringing  about?  But,  gentlemen,  as  I  have  already  said, 
if  you  believe  the  evidence  of  Newton,  and  if  you  believe  that 
that  same  night  pills  were  administered  to  Cook  by  Palmer — 
and  that,  I  believe,  will  be  your  opinion  and  conclusion,  not- 
withstanding that  wretched  witness  to-day  said  he  heard  Cook 
say  to  Palmer  that  he  had  taken  the  pills  already,  because  he, 
Palmer,  was  late,  whereas  the  woman  witness,  Mills,  told  you 
that  the  next  morning  Cook  reminded  her  that  his  agony  was 
such  as  she  never  could  have  witnessed  in  any  human  being, 
and  he  told  her  he  ascribed  it  to  the  pills  which  Palmer  had 
given  him  at  half-past  ten — if  you  believe  that  statement,  and 
that  the  pills  were  given  him  by  Palmer  at  half -past  ten,  and 
you  find  that  Palmer  a  few  short  minutes,  perhaps,  before  went 
to  Newton,  and  got  the  poison  from  Newton,  and  you  find  upon 
that  night  the  first  paroxysms,  though  not  so  violent  and  not 
fatal,  yet  similar  and  analogous  in  character  to  those  which 
preceded  the  death,  can  you  doubt  on  the  first  night  the  poison 
was  administered  to  him?  though  with  what  purpose  I  know 
not;  I  can  only  speculate — whether  it  was  to  bring  about 
by  some  minute  dose  convulsions  which  should  not  have  the 
complete  character  of  tetanus,  but  would  bear  a  resemblance  to 
natural  convulsions  which  should  justify  his  saying  afterwards 
that  the  man  had  had  a  fit,  and  so  prepare  those  who  should 
hear  of  it  on  the  next  night,  when  the  death  was  to  ensue,  for 
the  belief  that  it  was  merely  a  succession  of  the  same  descrip- 
tion of  fit  that  he  had  had  before.  That  is  one  solution.  The 
other  may  be  that  he  attempted  on  that  Monday  night  to  carry 
out  his  fell  purpose  to  its  full  extent,  but  that  the  poison 
proved  inefficacious.  We  hear  that  an  adulterated  form,  or, 
at  all  events,  an  inferior  form,  called  bruchsia,  is  occasionally 
sold,  and  it  may  have  been  that  it  failed  in  its  effect.  It  is  only 
one-tenth  of  the  strength.  We  know  that  he  purchased  poison 
on  Tuesday,  and  that  on  that  night  Cook  died  with  all  the 
symptoms  of  poison ;  and  why  he  purchased  that  poison  is  not 
in  any  way  accounted  for.  The  symptoms  were  the  same  on 
the  Tuesday  night  in  character,  though  greater  in  degree,  than 

240 


Attorney-General's  Address  to  Jury. 

they  were  on  the  Monday ;  and  there  is  found  a  witness  who  Attorney- 
comes  forward  and  says,  with  no  earthly  motive  to  tell  so  foul  a  General 
falsehood,   "  I  found  the  character  of  the  convulsions  the  two 
succeeding  nights  the  same."       I  cannot  resist  the  conclusion 
to  which  my  reasoning  impels  me  that  poison  was  administered 
upon  both  nights,  though  it  failed  upon  the  first.       I  can  only 
speculate  as  to  what  was  the  cause  of  failure.      There  are  the 
facts,  and  you  must  deal  with  them. 

Alas !  gentlemen,  it  does  not  stop  there ;  there  is  another 
part  of  this  case  which,  though  it  may  not  have  been  the  means 
of  death,  is  of  the  highest  value  in  estimating  the  credit  that 
is  to  be  given  to  the  point  which  we  advance  of  this  death 
having  been  produced  by  strychnia — I  allude  to  the  antimony. 
We  have  had  medical  men  and  analytical  chemists  who  have 
told  us  a  great  deal  about  strychnia,  but  not  one  has  said  a 
word  about  antimony.  On  the  Wednesday  night,  at  Shrews- 
bury, when  Cook  drinks  his  glass  of  brandy  and  water  he 
fancies  there  is  something  in  it  that  burns  his  throat ;  he  ex- 
claims at  the  time,  and  he  is  seized  immediately  with  vomit- 
ing, which  lasts  for  several  hours.  On  that  same  night  Mrs. 
Brookes  sees  the  prisoner  shaking  something  in  a  glass,  evi- 
dently dissolving  something  in  fluid.  A  man  has  been  called 
here  to-day,  the  boon  companion,  the  chosen  associate,  the 
racing  confederate  of  the  prisoner,  to  come  and  tell  you  that 
all  that  story  is  untrue — that  the  woman  never  came  down 
stairs — that  Palmer  never  carried  out  the  brandy  and  water — 
that  there  is  not  a  word  of  truth  in  it — and  the  fact  is  that 
Palmer  and  Cook  only  came  in  at  twelve  o'clock,  when  Myatt, 
forsooth,  had  been  waiting  for  two  hours.  Mrs.  Brookes' 
story  is,  according  to  him,  an  entire  invention  from  beginning 
to  end ;  he  swears  that  he  must  have  seen  if  anything  had  been 
mixed  with  the  brandy  and  water,  and  nothing  was  mixed  with 
it.  I  think  you  will  be  more  disposed  to  believe  Mrs.  Brookes 
than  to  believe  any  of  those  persons  who  were  the  associates 
of  the  prisoner,  and  who  had  been  partners  in  his  transactions. 
It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  Cook  drinks  that  brandy  and  water 
and  a  few  minutes  after  is  taken  ill.  There  were  other  persons 
taken  ill  at  Shrewsbury ;  it  may  be  within  the  verge  of  possi- 
bility— although  ten  minutes  after  he  had  drunk  the  brandy 
and  water  he  was  taken  with  vomiting — that  it  was  the  same 
form  of  complaint  to  which  other  persons  were  subject  in  Shrews- 
bury ;  I  do  not  want  to  press  it  one  jot  further  than  it  ought 
to  go,  but  it  is  a  remarkable  circumstance  that  the  man  is 
seen  with  a  glass  and  with  a  fluid  which  he  is  mixing  up  and 
holding  to  the  light,  and  shortly  afterwards  his  friend  who  is 
drinking  with  him  or  drinking  at  the  same  table  at  which  he  is 
drinking,  who,  if  Myatt  be  telling  the  truth,  was  somewhat 
in  liquor,  and  ought  not  to  have  been  pressed  to  take  brandy 
B  241 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Attorney-  and  water — Palmer  says  that  lie  will  not  take  anything  until 
General     Cook  has  exhausted  his  portion — and  then  immediately  after- 
wards the  man  is  taken  ill.      These  are  circumstances  not  alto- 
gether  incapable  of  producing   certain   impressions   upon   one 
which  it  is  difficult  to  shake  off. 

Nevertheless,  I  pass  on  from  that,  and  go  to  Rugeley.  From 
the  Saturday  morning  until  the  Monday  morning  I  find  this 
poor  man  suffering  under  the  influence  of  constant  vomiting ; 
that  was  not  the  Shrewsbury  disease — he  had  got  rid  of  it ;  he 
was  well  on  Thursday  and  he  was  well  on  Friday.  On  Satur- 
day morning,  after  dining  at  Mr.  Palmer's,  he  is  taken  ill ;  and 
then  we  have  the  fact  of  Mr.  Palmer  administering  his  food, 
administering  his  remedies,  sending  over  toast  and  water,  send- 
ing over  broth ;  and,  no  sooner  has  this  poor  man  taken  those 
things  than  he  is  seized  with  incessant  vomitings  of  the  most 
painful  description.  What  about  the  broth?  The  broth  is 
said  to-day  by  Smith  to  have  been  sent  from  the  Albion.  Yes  ; 
and  where  does  it  find  its  way  to?  It  is  taken,  not  to  the 
Talbot  Arms,  but  to  the  prisoner's  kitchen.  After  that, 
instead  of  leaving  it,  as  one  would  suppose  he  would  leave  it, 
to  the  woman  to  take  to  the  Talbot  Arms,  he  takes  it  himself 
from  the  fire,  puts  it  into  the  cup,  gives  it  to  her,  it  is  taken 
over,  and  the  man  vomits  immediately  after  he  has  drunk  it. 
On  the  Sunday  the  same  thing  is  done  again ;  the  broth  is 
brought  from  the  same  quarter,  and  attended  with  the  same 
results.  Of  that  broth  the  woman  takes  a  couple  of  spoonfuls, 
and  she  is  sick  for  several  hours.  She  vomits  twenty  times, 
and  is  unable  to  leave  her  bed  for  some  hours.  My  learned 
friend  said  she  did  not  state  that  before  the  coroner.  Never- 
theless, it  is  sworn  to  by  the  other  servant  that  the  woman 
was  ill.  I  can  quite  understand  why  the  woman  did  not  state 
it  before  the  coroner.  It  shows  the  honesty  of  the  woman's 
character.  It  did  not  occur  to  her  to  connect  the  sickness 
from  which  she  suffered  with  the  taking  of  the  broth ;  but 
afterwards,  when  the  story  of  the  antimony  came  up,  and 
Cook's  sickness  was  connected  with  it,  then  she  remembered 
perfectly  well,  after  the  evidence  had  been  given,  how  she, 
having  taken  the  broth,  immediately  became  ill.  The  fact 
is  not  one  capable  of  dispute,  although  it  may  be  that  she 
did  not  mention  it  before  the  coroner.  And  I  think  you  will 
regard  it  as  a  very  important  and  significant  fact  in  the  case, 
that,  on  the  Monday  when  Palmer  is  absent,  Cook  is  better. 
On  the  Tuesday  he  vomits  again,  though  not  in  the  same 
degree.  But  after  death — now  comes  the  important  fact — 
antimony  is  found  in  the  tissues  of  that  man's  body,  and  his 
blood  shows  the  presence  of  it ;  the  blood  shows  distinctly  that 
it  must  have  been  taken  recently,  within  the  last  eight-and- 
forty  hours  previous  to  his  death.  How  came  it  there?  The 
242 


A  ttorney- General's  Address  to  Jury. 

small  quantity  that  is  found  does  not  form  the  slightest  criterion  Attorney 
of  the  quantity  that  had  been  administered  to  him.  Part  of  Genepal 
it,  you  know,  would  be  thrown  up  by  the  act  of  vomiting  which 
it  provokes;  part  of  it  would  pass  away  in  other  forms,  but 
none  would  be  there  unless  he  had  taken  some.  When  did 
he  take  it?  If  you  find  that  he  is  suffering  from  vomiting 
for  days  before  his  death — that  a  person  is  constantly  adminis- 
tering things  to  him,  and  after  taking  those  things  he  vomits — 
when  the  prisoner  sends  him  over  a  basin  of  broth  he  vomits, 
and  when  the  servant  takes  a  couple  of  spoonfuls  she  is  reduced 
to  the  same  condition — what  other  conclusion  can  you  come  to, 
knowing  that  antimony  is  an  irritant  that  will  produce  vomiting 
and  retching  in  the  human  system,  than  that  the  antimony 
must  have  been  administered  to  him  by  some  one?  By  whom? 
Who  but  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  could  have  done  it?  My 
learned  friend  says  Cook  might  have  taken  antimony  at  some 
former  time — that  he  might  have  taken  James'  powder  for  a 
cold.  There  is  not  the  slightest  trace  of  evidence  from  the 
beginning  to  the  end  of  the  case  that  he  ever  had  a  cold,  or 
ever  took  James'  powder  over  the  whole  period  we  are  now 
ranging.  Moreover,  as  I  have  even  now  said,  it  was  in  his 
blood,  it  must  have  been  administered  eight-and-forty  hours 
before  death ;  who  could  have  administered  it  but  the  prisoner 
at  the  bar?  I  ask  you  to  form  your  own  judgment  upon  that 
matter,  but  I  cannot  resist  the  conclusion,  it  is  irresistible. 
If  so,  for  what  purpose  was  it  administered;  it  is  difficult  to 
say  with  anything  like  precision ;  one  can  only  speculate  upon 
it.  It  may  have  been,  however,  to  produce  the  appearance  of 
natural  disease,  to  account  for  the  calling  in  of  medical  men, 
and  to  account  for  the  catastrophe  which  was  already  in  pre- 
paration ;  but  it  may  also  have  had  another  and  a  different 
object,  and  it  is  this — if  we  are  right  as  to  the  motives  which 
impelled  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  to  commit  this  great  crime, 
it  was,  at  all  events  in  part,  that  he  might  possess  himself 
of  the  money  which  Cook  would  have  to  realise  upon  the 
settling  day  at  TattersalTs  on  Monday.  If  Cook  went  there 
himself  the  scheme  was  frustrated ;  Mr.  Cook  intended  to  go 
there  himself,  and  if  he  had  done  so  the  prisoner's  designs 
would  have  failed  of  accomplishment.  To  make  him  ill  at 
Shrewsbury — to  get  him  in  consequence  to  go  to  Rugeley, 
instead  of  going  to  London  or  anywhere  else — to  make  him  ill 
again  and  keep  him  ill  at  Rugeley  might  be  part  of  a  cleverly 
contrived  and  organised  scheme.  It  might  have  been  with 
one  or  other  of  those  motives,  it  might  have  been  with  both, 
that  the  antimony  was  administered,  and  so  sickness  produced, 
but  that  the  sickness  was  produced  and  that  the  antimony  was 
afterwards  found  in  the  body  are  incapable  of  dispute.  Put 
them  together  and  you  have  cause  and  effect;  and  if  you  are 

243 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Attorney-  satisfied  that  antimony  was  introduced  into  that  poor  man's 
eneral  body  for  the  purpose  of  producing  vomiting  and  sickness,  then, 
I  say  there  is  no  one  who  could  have  given  it  to  him  within  that 
recent  period  but  the  prisoner  at  the  bar.  Neither  the  doctor 
at  Shrewsbury  nor  the  doctor  at  Rugeley  ever  gave  him  one 
fraction  of  antimony  which  had  those  natural  effects  which  as 
a  cause  it  was  certain  to  produce ;  then  it  will  be  for  you  to 
ask  yourselves  whether  it  can  have  been  with  any  other  than 
a  fell  purpose  and  design — with  a  view  of  paving  the  way  for 
the  more  important  act  which  was  afterwards  to  follow. 

My  learned  friend  has  dealt  with  this  case  of  antimony  in  no 
other  way  than  that  which  I  have  suggested,  namely,  casting 
out  some  loose,  floating,  imaginary  notion  that  at  some  period 
or  other,  for  which  no  precise  date  is  given,  he  may  have 
taken  James'  powder  for  the  purpose  of  getting  rid  of  a  cold. 
Alas !  gentlemen,  I  feel  that  so  idle  an  objection  cannot  stand 
between  you  and  the  conclusion  which,  I  submit  to  you,  arises 
from  the  fact  that  this  antimony  was  given  to  Mr.  Cook  with 
a  wicked  design.  If  it  was,  just  see  the  important  influence 
which  it  exercises  upon  the  other  question.  If  antimony  was 
found — if  antimony  can  have  been  given  with  no  legitimate 
object,  and  if  it  can  only  have  been  given  by  the  prisoner  at 
the  bar — how  great  does  it  render  the  probability  that  to  carry 
out  the  purpose,  whatever  it  may  be,  that  he  had  in  his  mind, 
he  gave  him  this  strychnia,  of  which  the  deadly  effects  and 
consequences  have  been  but  too  plainly  made  manifest. 

Then,  gentlemen,  let  us  take  the  conduct  of  the  prisoner 
into  consideration  in  the  after  stages  of  the  case,  and  also  in 
one  remarkable  particular — in  an  incident  that  took  place  on 
the  day  of  the  death,  on  the  evening  of  the  preparation  of  the 
pills — and  in  his  conduct  taken  in  all  its  circumstances  I  fear 
you  will  find  but  too  cogent  proofs  of  his  guilt.  I  begin  with 
the  Tuesday,  the  day  of  the  death.  Mr.  Cook  had  had  what 
every  one  will  admit  to  have  been  a  most  severe  fit  on  the  night 
before.  Dr.  Bamford  comes  upon  the  Tuesday,  but  not  a 
word  is  said  to  him  about  it.  He  comes,  and  the  prisoner 
is  solicitous  that  he  shall  not  see  Cook  ;  and  twice  in  the  course 
of  that  morning,  when  old  Mr.  Bamford  is  desirous  of  coming 
up  to  see  the  man,  the  prisoner  said,  "  He  is  tranquil  and 
dozing;  I  wish  him  not  to  be  disturbed."  That  may  have 
been  innocent,  but  on  the  other  hand,  if  Dr.  Bamford  had  come 
at  that  time  when  the  fit  was  fresh  in  Cook's  mind,  the  proba- 
bility is  great  that  Cook  would  have  told  him  what  had 
happened  the  night  before.  Cook  does  not  see  him  till  seven 
o'clock,  when  Mr.  Jones  had  arrived.  One  would  have  ex- 
pected that,  having  been  invited  to  come  by  the  prisoner,  the 
first  thing  Mr.  Palmer  would  have  done  would  have  been  to 
mention  how  he  found  him  the  night  before.  He  talks  of 
244 


Attorney-General's   Address  to   Jury. 

nothing  but  about  the  bilious  symptoms — bilious  at  Shrews-  Attorney- 
bury,  bilious  to  Dr.  Bamford,  and  bilious  to  Mr.  Jones ;  and 
thus  he  is  represented  throughout  by  the  prisoner  at  the  bar, 
yet  all  this  time  the  medical  men  agree  in  saying  that  there 
was  not  a  bilious  symptom  about  him  from  beginning  to 
end;  no  feverish  skin,  no  loaded  tongue,  and  none  of  the 
concomitants  of  a  bilious  condition.  The  moment  Mr.  Jones 
sees  him,  considering  he  had  heard  that  this  man  was  suffering 
under  a  bilious  affection,  he  says,  "  That  is  not  the  tongue  of 
a  bilious  patient."  The  only  answer  he  gets  is,  "  You  should 
have  seen  it  before."  When?  When  the  man  saw  him  at 
Shrewsbury,  or  when  Dr.  Bamford  saw  him,  they  both  found 
his  tongue  perfectly  clean ;  the  irritation  in  the  bowels  was  not 
the  result  of  natural  action,  but  of  the  antimony ;  and  not  one 
single  word  does  he  say  to  Mr.  Jones  of  the  fit  that  had  taken 
place  the  night  before.  It  is  a  remarkable  circumstance,  when 
the  three  medical  men  are  consulting  at  the  bedside,  the  patient 
says,  "  I  will  have  no  more  pills — no  more  medicine  to-night," 
intimating  that  his  sufferings  of  the  night  before  he  ascribed 
to  the  pills  which  he  had  taken.  There  is  no  observation  made 
by  Mr.  Palmer  as  to  what  had  been  the  nature  of  the  man's 
attack  the  night  before,  he  having  been  called  up  in  the  dead 
of  the  night.  They  go  into  an  adjoining  room  to  consult  as  to 
the  best  thing  to  be  done.  The  man  had  declared  his  aversion 
to  taking  any  pills  or  medicine;  and  Mr.  Palmer  immediately 
proposes  that  he  shall  take  the  same  pills  that  he  took  the 
night  before.  He  says  to  Mr.  Jones,  "  Do  not  tell  him  the 
contents,  because  he  has  a  strong  objection  to  them."  It  is 
arranged  to  have  the  pills  made  up ;  he  does  not  wait  to  have 
the  pills  sent  by  Dr.  Bamford,  though  it  was  early  in  the 
evening,  but  he  accompanies  Dr.  Bamford  down  to  his  surgery. 
I  cannot  for  the  life  of  me  understand  why  Dr.  Bamford  should 
have  made  up  those  pills  at  all.  The  prisoner  had  a  surgery 
of  his  own  close  by,  and  he  could  have  made  up  the  pills  in 
two  minutes,  he  knew  perfectly  well  their  contents,  instead 
of  which  he  goes  down  with  Dr.  Bamford  to  his  surgery.  One 
would  have  supposed  it  would  have  been  quite  enough,  as  he 
was  the  person  who  every  night  administered  the  pills  to  Cook, 
if  Dr.  Bamford  put  the  pills  in  a  box  and  handed  them  over  to 
Mr.  Palmer,  who  knew  what  was  to  be  done  with  them,  instead 
of  which  Mr.  Palmer  asks  Dr.  Bamford  to  write  the  direction. 
He  does  write  the  direction,  and  then  Mr.  Palmer  walks  away 
with  the  pills.  An  interval  occurs  of  an  hour  or  two,  during 
which  time  he  had  abundant  opportunity  of  going  home  to 
his  surgery  and  doing  what  he  pleased  in  the  way  of  substituting 
other  pills.  He  comes  back,  and  before  he  gives  the  pills  he 
takes  care  to  call  the  attention  of  Mr.  Jones,  who  was  present, 
to  the  remarkable  handwriting  of  the  old  gentleman,  Dr.  Bam- 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Attorney-  ford,  as  being  worthy  of  attention  in  a  man  of  his  advanced 
General  age  What  necessity  was  there  for  all  that?  Was  not  it, 
think  you,  part  of  a  scheme,  that  in  case  there  should  afterwards 
be  any  question  as  to  the  cause  of  this  man's  death,  or  the 
possibility  of  his  having  had  poison  administered  to  him,  he 
should  be  able  to  say  to  Mr.  Jones,  "  Why,  you  know  they 
were  Dr.  Bamford's  pills.  You  were  present  at  the  bedside  of 
the  deceased,  you  saw  that  I  administered  nothing  except  pills, 
and  you  must  be  clear  they  were  Dr.  Bamford's  pills.  Did 
not  I  show  you  the  address  written,  and  call  your  attention  to 
the  excellence  of  the  handwriting?  "  Who  knows  but  all  that 
prevented  the  possibility  of  suspicion  being  excited  and  pre- 
senting itself  to  the  mind  of  Mr.  Jones. 

Now,  any  one  of  those  circumstances  in  itself  would  not  be 
such  as  I  could  venture  to  submit  to  you  as  conclusive  of  the 
prisoner's  guilt,  but  I  ask  your  attention  to  a  series  of  things 
following  one  upon  the  other,  which,  at  the  same  time,  are  of 
a  most  remarkable  character,  and,  taken  as  a  whole,  lead  but 
to  one  conclusion.  The  death  having  taken  place  (I  am  passing 
over  for  a  moment  other  circumstances  which  have  no  reference 
to  the  immediate  cause  of  death,  I  shall  come  back  to  them  in 
another  part  of  the  case),  we  find  the  father-in-law  comes  down 
to  Rugeley  upon  the  Friday.  Let  us  see  what  the  conduct  of 
the  prisoner  is  then.  The  father-in-law  applies  to  him  for 
information  on  the  subject  of  his  stepson's  affairs.  I  pass  that 
over,  because  that,  too,  will  come  under  a  different  head ;  but 
having  done  so,  and  it  appearing  from  the  representation  which 
the  father-in-law  made  that  the  man  had  died  in  comparative 
poverty,  something  is  said  about  his  being  buried.  "  Well," 
says  Mr.  Stevens,  "  rich  or  poor,  poor  fellow,  he  must  be 
buried."  Mr.  Palmer  immediately  says,  "  If  that  is  all,  I 
will  bury  him  myself."  "  No,"  says  the  stepfather,  and  the 
brother  interposes.  Mr.  Stevens  says,  "  No,  I  am  his  step- 
father and  his  executor,  and  it  is  my  place  to  bury  him." 
Well,  there  is  nothing  in  all  that.  Palmer  may  have  said, 
with  regard  to  his  friend,  that  he  would  see  the  last  respect 
paid  to  his  memory.  But  there  is  this  remarkable  thing, 
when  the  stepfather  says  that  nobody  shall  bury  him  but 
himself,  and  makes  the  observation  that  perhaps  it  will  be 
inconvenient  to  the  people  at  the  inn  to  have  him  lying  there 
for  two  or  three  days,  because  he  intended  to  have  him  buried 
in  town,  so  that  the  poor  man  might  lie  in  the  same  grave  with 
his  mother — immediately  after  this  Palmer  says,  "  There  will 
be  no  harm  in  that,  he  can  stay  as  long  as  you  like ;  but  the 
body  ought  to  be  put  in  a  coffin  immediately."  After  that 
Mr.  Stevens  gets  into  conversation  with  Dr.  Bamford  about 
his  son-in-law,  and  while  they  are  in  conversation  Mr.  Palmer 
slips  away,  goes  out  into  the  town,  and  comes  back  in  about 
246 


Attorney-General's  Address  to  Jury. 

half  an  hour,  when  Mr.  Stevens  asks  him  for  the  name  of  Attorney- 
some  undertaker  in  order  that  he  may  go  and  give  the  under-  General 
taker  directions  about  the  funeral,  and  he  finds  to  his  surprise 
that  Mr.  Palmer  has  gone  out,  and  has  himself,  without  any 
authority,  ordered  a  shell  and  a  strong  oak  coffin  in  order  that 
the  body  may  be  immediately  put  away.  This,  again,  is  a 
circumstance  not  unworthy  of  consideration.  Why  should  he 
interfere  and  meddle  in  a  matter  which  did  not  concern  him, 
and  which  it  was  the  business  and  province  of  another  man  to 
attend  to,  except  this,  that  he  had  made  up  his  mind  that  that 
body  should  be  consigned  to  its  last  resting-place  and  removed 
from  the  sight  of  man  with  as  much  rapidity  as  circumstances 
would  permit  of?  You  have  heard  what  took  place  in  the 
course  of  conversation  upon  the  subject  of  the  betting  book. 
I  pass  that  by  for  the  present. 

I  now  come  to  Saturday,  when,  returning  from  London,  Mr. 
Stevens  and  Mr.  Palmer  met  in  the  railway  train,  and  at  the 
different  stations  when  the  train  stopped  had  conversations 
with  one  another ;  and  it  appeared  at  that  time  Mr.  Stevens 
had  fully  made  up  his  mind  to  have  the  body  examined — there 
were  circumstances  which  had  engendered  suspicion  in  his 
mind ;  he  had  seen  the  attitude  of  the  corpse ;  he  had  seen 
the  clenched  hands ;  and,  being  a  man  of  sagacity  and  shrewd- 
ness, upon  putting  things  together,  there  was  a  lurking 
suspicion  in  his  mind  that  he  could  not  overcome,  and  he  was 
determined  that  he  would  be  satisfied,  and  he  made  known  his 
intention  of  having  the  body  examined  before  it  was  consigned 
to  the  grave.  It  is  due  to  Mr.  Palmer  to  say  that  he  did  not 
flinch  from  the  trying  ordeal  of  Mr.  Stevens'  scrutinising  glance 
when  he  mentioned  the  subject  of  post-mortem  examination; 
he  makes  no  objection  to  the  post-mortem  examination ;  he  is 
anxious  to  know  who  shall  perform  it,  but  Mr.  Stevens  will  not 
inform  him  of  the  fact.  It  is  to  take  place,  and  it  is  appointed 
to  take  place  on  the  Monday.  On  the  Sunday  we  have  that 
remarkable  conversation  to  which  Newton  speaks,  and  which 
has  been  in  the  possession  of  the  Crown  (it  is  not,  like  the 
other  part  of  his  evidence,  brought  forward  at  the  last  moment) 
and  in  the  possession  of  my  learned  friend.  It  is  true  he  did 
not  state  it  before  the  coroner,  but  the  explanation  is  extremely 
easy.  Before  the  coroner,  Roberts  was  the  man  who  came 
forward  to  prove  the  purchase  of  strychnia,  and  vouched 
Newton  being  there.  Newton  was  immediately  fetched,  and 
his  deposition  will  be  found  immediately  following  that  of 
Roberts;  not  for  the  purpose  of  giving  a  general  statement, 
but  for  the  purpose  of  corroborating  Roberts,  which  he  does. 
Hence  it  came  to  pass,  in  answering  only  the  questions  which 
were  put  to  him  by  the  coroner,  nothing  was  said  upon  the 
subject  of  that  Sunday's  conversation,  but  it  was  given 
immediately  afterwards  to  the  Crown. 

247 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Attorney-  I  think  you  will  not  believe  that  Newton  comes  forward  for 
General  ^g  purpose  of  making  a  false  representation  as  to  this  con- 
versation. What  was  the  conversation?  He  is  sent  for  by 
Mr.  Palmer  to  his  house,  and  he  is  treated  with  a  glass  of 
brandy  and  water,  and  when  he  has  a  glass  of  brandy  and 
water  they  get  into  general  conversation,  and  then,  I  think, 
the  prisoner  says,  "  How  much  strychnia  would  you  give  if 
you  wanted  to  kill  a  dog?  "  "  Why,  I  should  give  from  half  a 
grain  to  a  grain."  "  Would  you  expect  to  find  any  appearances 
in  the  stomach  after  death?"  "No  inflammation  or  erosion, 
no  appearances."  Upon  which  a  sort  of  half-uttered  ejacula- 
tion comes  from  the  prisoner.  "  That  is  all  right,"  and 
a  sort  of  action  of  the  hands.  Was  that  entirely  an 
invention?  Was  nothing  said  about  a  dog?  Was  nothing 
said  about  strychnia?  Now,  it  may  have  proceeded  from  two 
causes,  if  you  believe  the  conversation.  It  may  have  been 
that  the  prisoner  was  in  a  state  of  great  anxiety  when  he 
found  the  post-mortem  examination  was  to  take  place,  and  he 
was  anxious  to  know  whether  the  views  of  another  medical 
man  confirmed  his  own  with  regard  to  the  appearances  in  the 
body  after  death,  where  death  had  been  occasioned  by  strychnia. 
It  may  have  been  that  he  meditated  some  trickery,  some 
jugglery,  that  involved  the  real  destruction  of  a  dog,  which 
may  have  given  rise  to  those  questions  which  were  suggested 
on  the  part  of  the  defence  to  one  of  the  witnesses  who  were 
called ;  it  may  have  been  that  something  was  in  contemplation 
to  destroy  or  attempt  to  destroy  a  dog,  to  account  for  the 
purchase  of  the  strychnia,  which  he  knew  was  likely  to  be 
brought  up  in  evidence  against  him,  and  which  it  would  be 
a  difficult  matter  to  explain.  Whether  any  such  attempt  was 
afterwards  made  I  know  not;  I  imagined  that  we  were  going' 
to  have  some  evidence  to  that  effect,  from  the  questions  that 
were  asked,  but  no  such  evidence  has  been  afforded — not  the 
slightest  as  to  what  purpose  this  quantity  of  strychnia  has 
been  applied.  It  has  not  been  found  upon  the  prisoner's 
premises.  What  has  become  of  it?  I  cannot  solve  precisely 
the  secret  of  that  conversation.  Like  many  other  matters  in 
this  case,  it  remains  a  mystery ;  but  this  I  know,  I  can  look 
at  it  in  no  aspect  in  which  it  does  not  reflect  light  upon  the 
guilt  in  which  this  transaction  is  involved ;  if  you  can  solve 
the  difficulty,  for  heaven's  sake  do,  but  I  can  suggest  to  you  no 
solution.  From  that  man  Newton,  then,  he  got  his  strychnia 
on  the  Monday  night,  and  for  that  man  he  sends  on  the 
Sunday.  With  that  man  he  holds  a  conversation — was  it 
with  the  view  of  leading  Newton  to  believe  that  it  was  for 
the  purpose  of  killing  a  dog  he  had  got  it?  These  are 
speculations  and  surmises,  into  which  I  do  not  deem  it  necessary 
further  to  go.  It  will  be  for  you  to  say  whether  you  can 
248 


Attorney-General's   Address  to  Jury. 

entertain  any  doubt  upon  all  these  facts,  when  they  are  before  Attorney- 
you,   that  this  death  was   occasioned  by   strychnia,    and  that General 
that  strychnia  was  administered  by  the  prisoner,  either  from 
what  he  obtained  upon  the  Monday  night,  or  from  that  which, 
beyond  the    possibility    of    question,    he   obtained   upon   the 
Tuesday,   for  which  he  has  failed  to  account,   and  for  which, 
indeed,  he  has  not  attempted  to  account. 

But,  then,  my  learned  friend  says  that  the  man  had  no 
motive  to  take  away  the  life  of  his  friend,  and  it  is  right  we 
should  see  how  that  matter  stands.  Gentlemen,  if,  indeed, 
I  have  satisfied  you,  beyond  the  reach  of  reasonable  doubt, 
by  the  evidence  I  have  adduced,  and  by  the  failure  on  the  part 
of  the  evidence  for  the  defence  to  neutralise  its  effect,  that 
the  death  here  was  occasioned  by  strychnia — that  the  strychnia 
could  have  been  administered  by  no  one,  and,  in  fact,  was 
administered  by  no  one,  save  Mr.  Palmer — the  question  of 
motive  becomes  a  matter  of  secondary  consideration.  It  is 
often  difficult  to  dive  into  the  breasts  of  men,  to  understand 
the  motives  that  have  been  working  there,  and  by  those 
motives  to  account  for  their  actions.  Omniscience  alone  can 
exercise  that  faculty  and  that  power ;  and  therefore,  where  acts 
are  proved  against  a  man  beyond  the  reach  of  reasonable  doubt, 
it  is  not  because  we  may  not  be  able  to  exercise  a  sufficiently 
scrutinising  power  to  ascertain  the  motives  that  we  are  to 
doubt  the  facts,  the  existence  of  which  is  brought  beyond  the 
reach  of  reasonable  doubt;  but  nevertheless  it  is  always  an 
important  element  in  a  case,  and  it  is,  above  all,  an  important 
element  in  a  case  upon  which  any  reasonable  doubt  can  by 
possibility  rest,  to  see  whether  there  was  an  adequate  motive 
to  lead  to  the  perpetration  of  the  act  which  is  charged.  On 
the  other  hand,  gentlemen,  we  must  not  be  too  precise  in 
weighing  the  question  of  adequacy  of  motive;  that  which,  to 
the  good,  would  appear  of  no  influence,  however  remote  or 
minute,  in  inducing  them  to  commit  crime,  oftentimes,  with 
the  wicked,  is  quite  sufficient  to  impel  them  into  crime,  and 
it  may  have  been  so  here. 

But  let  us  see,  before  I  make  any  further  observations  upon 
that  point,  how  the  matter  stands  upon  the  proof  which  is 
before  us.  I  told  you  that  Mr.  Palmer  was  a  man  in  circum- 
stances of  the  direst  embarrassment,  with  ruin  actually  staring 
him  in  the  face,  and  that  nothing  could  avert  that  ruin  save 
pecuniary  means  at  once  obtained  for  his  purpose.  The  proof 
which  I  have  offered  to  you  has  fully  come  up  to  the  proposition 
with  which  I  started.  The  fact  has  been  proved  beyond  the 
possibility  of  doubt.  It  appears  that  in  the  month  of  Novem- 
ber, 1855,  Mr.  Palmer  was  in  this  position.  He  owed  upon 
bills,  all  of  which  were  forged,  the  sum  of  £19,000;  he  had 
bills  to  the  amount  of  £12,500  standing  in  the  hands  of  Mr. 
Pratt;  he  had  bills  to  the  amount  of  £6500  standing  in  the 

249 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Attorney-  hands  of  Mr.  Wright ;  and  he  had  a  bill  for  £2000  in  the  hands 
General  of  Mr  padwick.  Although  it  is  true  that  £1000  upon  that 
account  had  been  paid  off  to  Mr.  Pratt,  yet  the  bills  still 
remained  for  the  full  amount  in  Mr.  Pratt's  hands.  Although 
£1000  had  been  paid  to  Mr.  Padwick,  he  held  a  warrant  of 
attorney  and  a  bill  of  sale  upon  the  stud  for  the  remaining 
£1000.  All  those  bills,  without  exception,  were  forgeries. 
A  correspondence  took  place  between  Mr.  Pratt  and  himself 
with  regard  to  the  £13,000  policy  upon  his  brother's  death, 
through  which  he  hoped  to  liquidate  Mr.  Pratt's  demand;  he 
had  been  disappointed  of  that  money,  and  upon  the  office 
declining  to  pay  the  money,  as  early  as  the  middle  of  October, 
Mr.  Pratt  gave  him  to  understand,  in  the  most  distinct  and 
positive  terms,  that  the  bills  must  be  met.  Bills  for  £4000 
were  due,  or  were  coming  due,  at  the  end  of  that  month — one 
upon  the  25th  for  £2000,  and  another  upon  the  27th  for 
£2000.  Bills  already  renewed  were  coming  due  from  month 
to  month,  and  there  was  £5500  which  it  was  necessary  im- 
mediately to  provide  for.  Mr.  Pratt  gave  him  notice  that  he 
could  give  him  no  longer  delay,  inasmuch  as  the  office  had 
resolved  to  dispute  this  policy.  It  was  no  longer  an  existing 
valid  security,  and  consequently  Mr.  Pratt  could  not  be  a 
party  to  representing  to  his  clients,  with  whose  money  those 
bills  had  been  discounted,  that  it  was  in  any  respect  a  valid 
security,  therefore  the  bills  must  be  met. 

The  matter  was  coming  to  a  crisis ;  the  bills  must  be  paid 
at  maturity;  he  sends  him  up  three  small  sums,  first  a  sum  of 
£300,  and  then  two  sums  of  £250  each,  making  the  sum  of 
£800.  Of  that  sum  £200  was  to  come  off  other  bills  to  fall 
due  in  January,  leaving  only  £600  applicable  to  the  principal. 
He  is  told  at  once  that  he  must  do  a  great  deal  more ;  he  is 
told,  late  in  October,  that  unless  he  does  a  great  deal  more 
writs  will  be  issued  against  his  mother  and  against  himself, 
which  would  at  once  bring  the  matter  to  a  termination  by 
showing  that  those  bills  were  forgeries.  He  entreats  that 
time  shall  be  given ;  he  obtains  this  concession  from  Mr.  Pratt, 
that  the  writs  shall  not  be  served  until  a  given  day,  and  he 
in  the  interval  must  make  further  payments  on  account  of 
the  principal  bill  due.  That  being  the  state  of  things  upon 
the  13th,  Mr.  Pratt  writes  and  presses  him  for  further  payment. 
On  that  day  "  Polestar  "  won.  Cook  was,  as  you  have  heard, 
in  an  ecstasy  of  delight,  feeling  that  his  difficulties  were,  at 
all  events  for  a  time,  removed;  that  he  should  now  get  through 
the  winter  and  live  happily  till  the  next  racing  season.  He 
little  thought  what  was  about  to  take  place.  If  this  accusa- 
tion is  well  founded,  the  mare  winning,  and  his  being  entitled 
to  a  large  sum  of  money,  was  the  most  fatal  thing  that  could 
have  befallen  him.  Alas !  how  great  is  the  shortsightedness 
250 


Attorney-General's    Address  to  Jury. 

of  mortal  man  1       When  we  have  the  highest  cause  of  joy  and  Attorney- 
exultation,   often  while  the  sunshine  of  our  prosperity  warms  Ganeral 
and  gladdens  our  heart  for  a  moment,  there  is  lurking  beneath 
our  feet  a  fatal  abyss,  into  which  we  are  about  to  fall.       This 
poor  man,  if  this  charge  be  true,  might  have  been  living  now, 
had  it  not  been  that  upon  that  fatal  day  his  mare  won,  and 
he  became  entitled  to  a  large  sum  of  money,  which  afforded 
temptation  to  his  murderer. 

Now,  it  becomes  perfectly  clear  that  at  this  moment  matters 
were  approaching  an  immediate  crisis.  What  was  Mr.  Palmer 
to  do?  He  had  no  source  to  which  to  turn  for  money.  It 
is  clear  that  he  could  not  go  to  his  mother.  I  presume 
that  source  had  long  since  been  exhausted,  or  he  would  not  have 
forged  her  name.  What  was  he  to  do  if  he  could  not  get 
money  to  satisfy  Pratt' s  demand?  You  know,  although  a 
moneylender  is  considerate  and  indulgent  enough  as  long  as  he 
is  certain  of  his  payment,  and  gets  his  heavy  usurious  interest 
paid  down  on  the  nail,  if  he  once  becomes  doubtful  of  the 
security  and  uncertain  of  payment,  you  may  as  well  ask  mercy 
of  a  rabid  tiger,  or  you  may  as  well  ask  pity  of  stones,  as  hope 
to  find  bowels  of  compassion  in  him.  Pratt  gave  him  fair 
warning  that  the  money  must  be  paid,  or  something  must  be 
paid  by  way  of  instalment  on  the  principal,  and  to  keep  the 
interest  down.  Where  was  Mr.  Palmer  to  get  money  from? 
My  learned  friend  says  Cook  was  his  best  friend,  and  that 
Cook  was  the  man  he  was  to  look  to ;  and  that  as  long  as  he 
kept  Cook  alive  he  had  a  friend  in  need  to  whom  he  could 
resort  for  assistance.  In  what  way?  Was  Cook  to  give 
acceptances  to  Pratt?  Is  anybody  weak  enough  to  suppose 
that  Pratt  would  have  taken  Cook's  acceptances  to  keep  those 
bills  alive,  unless  there  was  a  part  payment  of  the  principal 
and  interest?  It  is  quite  clear  that  he  would  not.  When 
even  for  the  sum  of  £500  he  was  asked  to  take  Cook's  security, 
he  refused  to  do  so,  unless  there  was  the  collateral  security  of 
an  assignment  of  his  horses.  Cook  had  assigned  to  him  all 
the  property  he  possessed.  All  that  Cook  had  in  the  world 
was  his  winnings  upon  that  day's  race  at  Shrewsbury,  and 
what  little  money  he  may  have  obtained  by  his  winnings  at  the 
races  at  Worcester.  If  you  believe  the  witness  Myatt,  those 
winnings  were  exhausted,  and  therefore  this  man  had  nothing 
except  his  winnings  at  the  Shrewsbury  races ;  and  you  are  asked 
by  my  learned  friend  to  believe  that  it  would  have  been  of 
use  to  Palmer  to  keep  this  man  alive.  The  reverse  is  proved 
by  the  evidence.  With  Pratt  his  personal  security  would 
have  been  unavailing.  Pratt  tells  you  that  he  would  not  take 
anything  from  him  unless  it  was  the  real  security  of  an  assign- 
ment of  his  horses  or  other  property.  Just  see  the  interest 
which  Palmer  had  in  securing  all  Cook's  effects.  My  learned 

251 


Trial   of  William   Palmer. 

Attorney-  friend  says  they  were  mixed  up  together  in  transactions  in 
General  which  they  had  a  joint  and  common  interest — they  were  con- 
federates upon  the  turf  and  had  joint  bets  together.  Yes; 
but  one  man  putting  another  on  does  not  mean  that  when  A 
puts  B  on  and  says  we  are  likely  to  make  a  good  thing,  and 
we  will  share  it,  that  B  is  to  pay  A's  losings  if  they  do  not 
win.  They  might  be  confederates  on  the  turf,  but  that  did 
not  make  Cook  responsible  for  Palmer's  liabilities.  Does  any 
one  suppose  that  Cook  intended  to  find  the  means  to  enable 
Palmer  to  meet  Pratt's  insatiable  demands,  to  stave  off  the 
difficulties  in  that  quarter?  Was  Cook  to  deprive  himself  of 
his  winnings,  and  leave  himself  without  money,  for  the  benefit 
of  his  friend?  That  is  the  proposition,  for  the  whole  of  which 
my  learned  friend  must  contend  before  you  before  he  can 
establish  anything  like  a  case  to  show  that  if  Cook  had  lived 
it  would  have  been  better  for  Palmer  than  that  he  should  die. 
My  learned  friend  says  there  is  proof  that  they  were  mixed 
up  closely  together  to  be  found  in  this,  that  Cook  writes  to 
his  agent,  Fisher,  and  says  to  Fisher,  writing  on  the  Friday 
after  he  had  dined  with  Palmer,  "  There  is  a  matter  which 
is  of  importance  to  Palmer  and  to  me,  that  £500  should  be 
paid  to  Mr.  Pratt  to-morrow;  £300  has  been  sent  down 
to-night,  and  I  request  you  will  be  so  good  as  to  pay  Mr.  Pratt 
£200  to-morrow  on  my  account,  and  charge  it  to  me."  My 
learned  friend  thought  that  that  transaction  would  be  favour- 
able to  his  client,  and  he  put  it  prominently  forward.  To  my 
mind  he  could  have  adduced  nothing  more  fatal.  The  ex- 
planation of  it  is  to  me  as  clear  as  the  sun  at  noonday.  Cook 
had  brought  with  him  some  £600  or  £700  ;  at  least  at  Shrews- 
bury he  was  seen  by  Fisher  with  a  roll  of  notes  amounting  to 
some  £700  or  £800.  On  the  same  evening  the  parties  came 
to  Rugeley,  when  he  had  not  had  time  to  spend  the  money. 
He  speaks  of  a  £500  transaction,  in  which  he  and  Palmer  have 
a  joint  interest.  There  is  only  that  one  transaction  with  Pratt 
in  which  they  had  a  common  interest,  that  was  the  £500  raised 
by  the  assignment  of  "  Polestar,"  and  a  bill,  of  which  we  say 
Cook  never  got  the  proceeds ;  and  he  says,  writing  on  that 
night  to  Fisher,  "  £300  have  been  sent  up  to-night,  and  I  will 
be  obliged  to  you  to  pay  the  other  £200  to  make  up  the  whole." 
No  £300  were  ever  sent  up  that  night.  Mr.  Pratt  has  given 
an  account  of  the  whole  transaction.  £300  were  to  be  sent 
that  night;  by  whom  were  they  to  be  sent?  Can  you  doubt? 
Where  is  all  Cook's  money  gone?  I  can  quite  understand 
that  he  handed  over  £300  to  Palmer  to  send  up  to  Pratt,  and 
directed  Fisher  to  pay  another  £200.  What  followed  in 
respect  to  the  joint  transaction?  What  was  the  joint  trans- 
action? they  never  had  but  one,  and  that  was  for  £500.  What 
was  it?  Why,  it  was  the  money  which  had  been  got  by  the 
252 


Attorney-General's  Address  to  Jury. 

assignment  of   "  Polestar  "   and  "  Sirius  "  ;    "  Polestar  "   had  Attorney- 

just  won  at  Shrewsbury — it  was  natural  that  the  man  should  General 

desire  to  redeem  his  mare ;  moreover,  the  bill  was  coming  due ; 

he  had  the  cash  in  his  pocket,  and  he  knew  that  he  was  going 

to  receive  money  at  Tattersall's,  which  he  never  did ;   and  he 

says,  "  -£300  will  be  sent  up  to-night."       It  is  the  only  matter 

in  which  they  have  a  common  interest,  not  only  as  to  the  £500, 

but  in  any  respect;  Pratt  had  no  other  dealing  whatever  with 

them  jointly  or  with  Cook,   if  we  except  the  bill  for  £500 — 

what  does  it  show?      It  shows  that  £300  had  been  sent  for  the 

purpose — he  sends  up  £300,  but  how  is  it  applied?       Pause 

for  a  moment ;  the  £300  is  not  sent  up,  Palmer  keeps  it  in  his 

pocket;  what  is  done  with  the  other  £200?       Is  it  carried  to 

the   account  of  the   matter  in   which  they  had   joint   interest 

with  Pratt  ?       No  such  thing ;   it  goes  as  part  of  the  payment 

made  by  Palmer  to  Pratt  on  account  of  the  bills  which  Pratt 

then  held — it  never  went  to  any  matter  of  joint  interest — it  is 

an  idle  and  false  pretence  to  say  that  Cook  was  in  any  way 

responsible  to  Pratt ;  it  may  have  been  the  intention  of  Palmer 

when  Cook  should  be  no  more  to  represent  him  as  so,  but  there 

is  no  foundation  in  reality  and  in  fact  for  the  statement.       I 

say   the   transaction   of   the    £500,    so    far   from   helping   the 

prisoner's   case,    shows   conclusively   that   the   £200   advanced 

by  Fisher,  and  the  £300  to  be  sent  up  that  night  to  satisfy 

this  bill  for  £500,  and  the  assignment  to  release  "  Polestar  " 

and  "  Sirius,"  was  £500  more  taken  from  this  young  man  and 

appropriated  by  the  prisoner  to  his  own  use. 

But  the  matter  does  not  rest  there — would  it  did.  I  come 
now  to  the  transaction  of  the  Monday,  and  I  find  £1020  of 
Cook's  money  applied  to  the  prisoner's  use.  He  goes  up  to 
London ;  he  had  ascertained  by  some  means  or  other  the  amount 
that  Cook  was  entitled  to  receive  on  the  Monday — possibly 
Cook  had  told  him ;  Fisher  was  Cook's  agent,  and  the  proba- 
bility is  that  Cook  desired  the  prisoner  to  hand  an  account  of 
his  bets  which  he  had  won  to  Fisher,  who  would  go  and  settle 
with  the  parties  at  Tattersall's ;  Fisher  would  have  to  pay 
himself  back  the  £200 ;  we  know  that  he  intended  his  accounts 
should  pass  through  Fisher,  because  he  asked  Fisher  to  ad- 
vance the  £200  upon  the  credit  of  it;  but  it  is  suggested  that 
under  the  guidance  of  Palmer  he  now  meditated  a  fraud,  and 
that  he  intended  to  pass  his  account  through  Mr.  Herring,  in 
order  to  avoid  paying  Fisher  the  £200  for  a  time.  Is  it 
charitable  to  Mr.  Cook  to  ascribe  to  him  a  fraud  of  this 
description,  which,  so  far  as  we  know,  he  was  not  in  the 
habit  of  doing?  I  ask  you  this  question  as  reasonable  men, 
supposing  he  had  disposed  of  his  ready  money,  and  we  find 
none  left — that  he  had  given  the  prisoner  £300  to  send  up,  you 
cannot  suppose  that  this  man  who  had  nothing  of  his  fortune 

253 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Attomey-  left,  who  sees  ruin  staring  him  in  the  face — he  was  not  a 
ruined  man  as  long  as  he  had  this  money,  but  having 
parted  with  this  money  he  was  a  ruined  man — 
you  cannot  suppose  that  he  intended  to  deprive  him- 
self of  the  whole  of  the  money  that  he  had  won,  to  leave 
himself  destitute  and  naked  for  the  coming  winter;  the  thing 
is  out  of  the  question — besides,  if  the  prisoner's  representation 
is  true  which  he  made  to  Mr.  Cheshire,  that  he  had  got  the 
genuine  cheque  of  this  man  for  very  nearly  the  amount, 
through  his  agents,  Messrs.  Wetherby,  of  the  stakes  at  Shrews- 
bury, you  are  asked  to  believe  on  the  one  hand  that  he  had 
given  him  his  ready  money,  and  on  the  other  hand  that  he 
had  given  him  a  cheque  to  receive  of  Messrs.  Wetherby,  and 
that  he  had  given  him  £1020,  which  constituted  absolutely  the 
whole  that  the  poor  man  possessed — you  are  asked  to  believe 
that  he  hands  it  over  to  the  prisoner  to  go  and  dispose  of  as 
he  pleases — that  is  my  learned  friend's  proposition,  but  I  do 
not  think  you  will  adopt  it. 

Then,  if  that  be  not  so,  what  does  the  prisoner  do?  He 
goes  to  London,  Jbut  does  not  go  to  Fisher,  who  was  the  agent 
of  Cook,  who  would,  in  the  first  place,  have  paid  himself  back 
the  £200,  and,  in  the  second  place,  would  not  have  paid  the 
sums  which  he  received  except  upon  Cook's  authority  and 
instruction,  but  would  have  sent  the  money  to  Cook,  or  have 
paid  it  upon  Cook's  written  direction  as  to  what  was  to  be 
done  with  it.  He  takes  the  account,  therefore,  to  a  compara- 
tive stranger,  who  never  had  acted  for  Mr.  Cook  before,  feeling 
that  that  stranger  would  have  no  hesitation  or  repugnance  in 
paying  the  money  according  to  the  direction  of  the  man  from 
whom  he  had  the  direction  to  receive  it,  supposing  that  both 
emanated  from  Mr.  Cook,  the  person  interested  in  the  money. 
Accordingly  he  says  to  Mr.  Herring,  "  Here  is  a  list  of  bets 
which  Cook  will  be  entitled  to  be  paid  at  Tattersall's ;  they 
are  so  much,  you  dispose  of  it  in  this  way ;  pay  yourself 
£200  "  ;  it  being  the  fact  that  Mr.  Cook  and  the  prisoner  had 
before  raised  the  sum,  I  think,  of  £600 ;  £200  had  been 
raised  by  Mr.  Cook  on  his  acceptance,  and  £400  had  been 
raised  on  the  acceptance  of  the  prisoner.  Mr.  Cook's  portion 
had  been  paid  off,  but  that  of  the  prisoner  remained  unpaid. 
Palmer  says  to  Mr.  Herring,  "  Pay  yourself  £200,  then  go  to 
Pratt's  and  pay  him  £450 ;  then  go  to  Padwick  and  pay  him 
£350."  Now,  it  is  perfectly  clear  that  the  £450  was  a  debt 
due  from  Palmer  to  Pratt,  and  it  is  untrue  that  Cook  had 
anything  to  do  with  it.  The  debt  of  £350  to  Padwick  was  for 
some  bet,  and  although  it  is  not  proved,  I  have  reason  to 
believe  that  the  minor  part  of  it  was  a  debt  of  Cook's,  but 
the  larger  part  was  a  debt  of  Palmer's  upon  a  matter  in 
which  they  stood  in  together.  There  is  evidence  that  Mr. 

254 


Attorney-General's  Address  to  Jury. 

Palmer  treated  the  debt  due  to  Pad  wick  as  his.  He  says,  Attorney- 
"I  will  pay  you  my  bet  of  £350  at  such  a  time."  I  am  Genepal 
giving  him  credit  for  what  I  believe  was  the  fact,  that  a 
part  of  it  was  Cook's.  Why  was  Cook's  debt  paid  then? 
There  was  a  warrant  of  attorney  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  Padwick, 
and  Mr.  Padwick  was  getting  impatient  for  his  £1000,  and  if 
this  bet  had  not  been  paid  to  Mr.  Padwick,  Mr.  Padwick  would 
have  resented  the  non-payment  of  the  debt  of  honour  which  he 
had  no  means  of  enforcing,  and  would  have  come  down  upon 
Mr.  Palmer,  no  doubt,  at  a  very  early  period  in  respect  of  the 
£1000  due  upon  the  bill  dishonoured  twelve  months  before. 
Exactly  that  came  to  pass — in  consequence  of  Mr.  Herring  not 
receiving  the  whole  of  the  money,  he  was  not  able  to  pay  Mr. 
Padwick,  and  the  result  was  that  Mr.  Padwick  put  the  process 
of  the  law  in  motion  against  the  prisoner  on  that  bill,  and 
brought  an  action  against  his  mother.  The  bill  for  £1000 
was  the  bill  of  Mr.  Palmer,  upon  which  Mr.  Cook  was  not 
primarily  liable.  I  say  here  was  a  distinct  interest  which 
the  prisoner  had  to  appropriate  this  money  to  himself,  because 
it  was  the  means  for  the  moment,  and  the  only  means  he 
could  resort  to,  of  staving  off  the  evil  hour  which  was  rapidly 
approaching.  The  degree  of  difficulty  in  which  he  was  placed 
must  not  be  measured  simply  by  the  amount  of  his  pecuniary 
liabilities.  It  was  not  merely  that  he  had  these  large  bills 
upon  which  at  any  moment  process  might  be  issued,  but  he 
had  made  his  mother  answerable  for  those  bills,  and  the  moment 
the  first  of  them  was  put  in  motion  in  the  Courts  the  fraud 
and  forgery  would  come  to  light,  and  he  would  be  exposed  not 
merely  to  the  consequences  of  his  inability  to  pay  his  debts, 
but  to  the  consequences  of  the  law  which  he  had  violated.  The 
former  might  have  been  got  rid  of  in  the  Insolvent  Court  or 
the  Bankruptcy  Court,  but  the  crime  of  forgery  could  not  have 
been  got  rid  of;  for  that  he  would  have  to  answer  at  the  bar 
of  a  Court  of  criminal  justice,  and  would  have  incurred  the 
penalty  of  transportation,  or  of  penal  servitude  in  an  aggra- 
vated form.  But  there  is  a  further  sum  besides  the  £1000 ; 
he  appropriated  a  further  sum  of  £350,  which  was  to  be  got 
from  Messrs.  Wetherby.  It  is  said  that  he  got  a  genuine 
cheque  from  Cook  to  entitle  him  to  receive  that  money,  but 
it  is  not  for  a  moment  suggested  what  induced  Cook  to  give  it 
to  him.  Was  it  a  genuine  cheque?  That  matter  might 
have  been  solved  by  its  production.  It  is  not  produced ;  yet 
it  is  quite  clear  that  it  was  returned  to  the  prisoner's  hands 
by  Messrs.  Wetherby  when  they  could  not  get  the  money. 
It  is  quite  clear  that  it  was  of  great  importance  to  him  to  get 
the  money,  because  there  was  £100  to  be  paid  to  Pratt,  which 
must  be  paid  in  order  to  stave  off  the  evil  day  upon  the  bill  of 
£1500,  which  was  due  on  the  9th  of  November.  Where  is 

255 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

Attorney-  that  cheque?  If  it  had  been  produced  we  could  have  seen 
General  whether  it  was  a  genuine  cheque  or  not.  It  is  not  forth- 
coming. What  are  the  circumstances  under  which  he  presents 
that  cheque  to  Mr.  Cheshire?  He  goes  to  Mr.  Cheshire  upon 
the  Tuesday,  and,  having  shown  the  cheque  to  Mr.  Cheshire, 
he  asks  Mr.  Cheshire  to  be  so  good  as  to  fill  up  the  body  of  it. 
I  suppose  he  saw  some  manifestation  of  surprise  in  Mr. 
Cheshire,  and  he  said,  "  Cook,  poor  fellow,  is  ill,  and  I  am 
apprehensive  if  I  fill  up  the  body  of  the  cheque  Wetherbys 
will  know  my  handwriting."  Why  should  not  they  know  his 
handwriting?  What  objection  was  there,  if  the  cheque  was 
genuine,  and  if  the  transaction  was  an  honest  one,  to  Messrs. 
Wetherby  knowing  that  the  handwriting  was  his?  Does  not 
it  pretty  plainly  indicate  that  there  was  some  fraud  going  on 
which  he  was  afraid  might  be  detected?  Why,  in  heaven's 
name,  should  he  send  for  Cheshire?  He  had  to  send  for 
Cheshire  from  the  post  office  when  Cheshire  was  busily  en- 
gaged in  the  business  of  the  evening,  at  seven  o'clock  in  the 
evening.  Just  about  that  same  period,  a  little  before  or  a 
little  after,  as  the  case  may  be,  he  had  to  meet  Dr.  Bamford 
and  Mr.  Jones  in  consultation  as  to  Cook's  case.  Mr.  Jones 
was  his  intimate  friend — the  trusty  friend  that  came  over  that 
afternoon.  If  poor  Cook  intended  to  give  him  the  cheque, 
and  was  at  the  same  time  so  ill  that  he  could  not  write,  why 
not  have  said  to  Mr.  Jones,  "  Jones,  I  do  not  want  to  bother 
Cook  to  fill  up  this  cheque,  fill  it  up  in  my  favour  for  £350, 
and  we  will  get  Cook  to  sign  it?  "  Why  should  he  send  to 
the  post  office  to  get  Cheshire  down  to  his  house,  alleging  at 
the  time  that  he  was  apprehensive  that  if  he  filled  it  up  his 
own  handwriting  might  be  known.  Does  not  that  transaction 
bear  fraud  upon  the  face  of  it?  On  the  other  hand,  it  may 
be  a  genuine  cheque;  but,  I  ask  again,  where  is  it?  Between 
the  time  when  these  matters  were  called  in  question  and  the 
time  when  Mr.  Palmer  was  finally  arrested,  not  upon  the 
criminal  but  upon  the  civil  process,  which  came  down  unluckily 
for  him  before  the  coroner's  inquest,  which  secured  his  bodily 
presence  to  answer  not  only  the  pecuniary  matters  but  these 
charges,  in  the  interval  he  had  undisturbed  possession  of  his 
own  papers.  From  the  moment  when  that  freedom  of  action 
and  possession  ceased,  we  have  traced  the  possession  of  the 
papers ;  and  it  is  clear  that  at  the  time  those  papers  were  taken 
possession  of  that  cheque  was  not  amongst  them ;  it  is  clear 
that  the  prisoner,  who  had  possession  of  it,  must  have  dealt 
with  it  in  some  manner.  What  has  become  of  it?  Why  is 
it  not  produced?  Can  you  help  drawing  the  inference  from 
its  non-production  that  there  is  something  in  the  transaction 
that  will  not  bear  the  light?  It  is  clear  that  he  intended 
to  get  possession  of  the  £350,  which  ought  to  have  been  given 
256 


Attorney -General's  Address  to  Jury. 

to  Cook,  upon  false  pretences.       He  had  not  a  farthing  himself,  Attorney - 

for  when  he  went  to  Shrewsbury  races  he  borrowed  .£25.       As  <»eneral 

I  have  shown,  a  person  made  a  bet  for  him  upon  the  races, 

and,  having  won  £200,  pressed  him  for  the  debt,   but  could 

not  get  another  shilling  from  him.       I  show  you  that  he  comes 

back  to  Rugeley,  and  is  from  that  moment  in  the  possession 

of  money.       Where  could  he  have  got  that  money?       It  is 

clear  that  he  must  have  got  it  from  Cook,  who  had  not  any 

left  himself ;    it  is  clear  that  he  had  all  that  money  to  the 

extent  of  £350,  probably  much  more,  and  besides  that  he  gets 

£1020  as  the  proceeds  of  the  betting  at  TattersalTs,   and  he 

attempts  to  get,  but  does  not  get,  £375,  which  ought  to  have 

been  paid  into  Messrs.  Wetherbys'  hands.     This  was  the  whole 

of  the  worldly  possessions,  the  whole  sum  of  the  wealth  of  this 

poor  young  man. 

But  he  is  not  satisfied  with  that — it  is  clear  that  he  meditated 
another  fraud  of  a  different  description.  On  the  Friday, 
almost  as  soon  as  the  breath  is  out  of  the  man's  body,  he 
intimates  that  he  has  a  claim  upon  him  for  £3000  or  £4000  in 
respect  of  bills  which  had  his  (Palmer's)  name  or  acceptance 
upon  them,  but  which,  in  fact,  had  been  negotiated  for  Cook's 
purposes.  He  tells  the  same  story  to  the  father-in-law,  but 
it  is  as  clear  as  the  sun  at  noonday  that  he  endeavoured  to 
fabricate  an  instrument  to  give  a  show  of  colour  to  those 
representations.  He  goes  on  the  Thursday  or  the  Friday  to 
Mr.  Cheshire,  and  brings  to  him  a  document  which  he  asks 
him  to  attest,  that  document  bearing  the  signature  "  J.  P. 
Cook."  The  man  having  left  the  body,  and  living  only  in  the 
spirit  eight-and-forty  hours  before  that  signature  had  been 
brought  to  be  attested,  who  can  fail  to  see  that  here  was  some 
great  fraud  and  design  meditated?  What  was  the  document? 
It  was  a  document  which  purported  to  be  an  acknowledgment 
from  Cook  that  certain  large  bills  which  had  been  negotiated 
were  for  Cook's  benefit,  and  for  Cook's  benefit  alone,  and  that 
he  (Palmer)  had  had  no  part  of  the  proceeds.  Now,  there  are 
no  such  bills  in  existence.  We  have  exhausted  the  bills  pretty 
well,  I  think,  and  none  such  are  proved  to  exist;  but  if  there 
be  any  such  bills  in  existence,  who  would  know  it  better  than 
the  prisoner  at  the  bar?  He  could  have  no  difficulty  in  satisfy- 
ing you  of  the  fact,  and  of  removing  this  great  stumbling- 
block  in  the  way  of  his  defence  ;  but  he  produces  this  document ; 
and  on  the  same  day,  the  day  that  followed  this  poor  man's 
death,  he  writes  to  Pratt,  and  says,  "  Mind,  I  must  have 
'  Polestar  '  if  it  can  be  arranged."  What  was  this  scheme? 
Having  got  every  shilling  of  the  man's  money,  his  purpose  was 
to  secure  the  little  property  that  remained  in  "  Polestar,"  the 
value  of  which  he  may  perhaps  to  himself  have  considerably 
exaggerated.  The  mare  had  just  won,  and  she  might  be 
s  257 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Attorney-  supposed  to  be  worth  more  than  she  had  been,  or  he  had  in 
General  yjew  Specuiatmg  at  other  races  to  bring  about  results  of  benefit 
to  himself.  Further,  he  may  have  intended  to  pay  out  of 
Cook's  estate  some  of  those  bills,  under  the  pretence  that  Cook 
had  had  the  money  for  them.  For  all  these  purposes,  from 
the  beginning  to  the  end,  it  was  necessary  that  Cook  should 
be  put  on  one  side.  Then  with  this  document  in  his  hand  he 
goes  to  Cheshire,  and  he  asks  Cheshire  to  attest  the  signature 
of  a  man  who  was  then  dead.  If  Cheshire  had  had  the  weak- 
ness and  wickedness  to  comply  he  would  have  had  him  in  his 
power;  and  the  next  thing  would  have  been  that  he  would 
have  brought  him  trembling  and  reluctant  into  the  witness-box 
of  some  Court  of  justice  to  swear  to  the  fact  that  he  had  seen 
the  dead  man  put  his  signature  to  that  piece  of  paper.  But 
it  may  be  suggested  that,  after  all,  the  document  was  a  genuine 
one,  and  that  the  signature  was  not  a  forgery.  Then  produce 
it  and  we  can  judge.  Here,  again,  I  point  out,  and  there  is 
no  escape  from  it,  that  the  papers  of  the  prisoner  were  in  his 
possession  till  the  time  of  his  arrest,  and  they  have  been  taken 
care  of  since  then,  and  are  here  one  and  all,  either  to  be 
answered  for  or  produced  in  his  presence,  or  they  have  been 
handed  over  to  his  brother.  Who  would  not  fail  to  notice 
that  this  paper  has  never  been  found  or  asked  for?  Who  can 
doubt  that  that  paper  brought  to  Cheshire  remained  in  the 
possession  of  the  prisoner?  Who  can  doubt  that  it  is  either 
destroyed  or  is  purposely  withheld?  Under  these  circum- 
stances who  can  doubt  that  in  it  is  to  be  found  proof  of  some 
meditated  act — of  some  vast  design  of  a  fraudulent  and 
flagitious  character,  for  the  full  completion  of  which  the  death 
of  Cook  was  a  necessary  thing? 

Now,  gentlemen,  I  have  gone  through  that  part  of  the  case 
which  relates  to  the  motives  of  the  prisoner,  and  it  will  be 
for  you  to  say  whether  you  are  satisfied  that  this  was  a  death 
by  strychnia — that  the  prisoner  was  in  possession  of  strychnia — 
that  he  had  access  to  the  dead  man's  bedside,  and  that  he 
administered  pills  to  him  at  a  period  short  enough  to  be 
capable  of  being  connected  with  the  catastrophe  that  after- 
wards happened ;  and  it  will  be  for  you  to  say  whether  you 
do  not  find  that  the  state  of  things  with  reference  to  pecuniary 
matters  to  which  I  have  been  just  alluding  is  sufficient  to 
account  for  the  act  which  is  ascribed  to  the  prisoner. 

But  there  is  another  part  of  his  conduct  as  throwing  light 
upon  this  matter  to  which  I  cannot  fail  to  refer.  What  has 
become  of  Cook's  betting  book?  What  has  been  the  conduct 
and  the  language  of  the  prisoner  with  reference  to  it?  On 
the  night  when  Cook  died,  ere  the  breath  had  hardly  passed 
from  that  poor  man's  body,  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  was 
rummaging  his  pockets  and  searching  under  his  pillow.  That 
258 


Attorney-General's  Address  to  Jury. 

may  have  been  for  a  perfectly  legitimate  purpose.  But  let  Attorney- 
us  see  what  takes  place.  He  calls  to  Mr.  Jones,  and  he  tells  General 
Mr.  Jones  that  it  is  his  duty,  as  the  nearest  friend  of  the  dead 
man,  to  take  possession  of  his  effects,  and  Mr.  Jones  does  take 
possession  of  his  watch,  and  afterwards,  at  the  suggestion  of 
the  prisoner,  of  his  rings.  At  the  same  time  Mr.  Jones  asks 
for  the  betting  book.  My  learned  friend  endeavoured  to  ex- 
plain away  this  most  awkward  part  of  the  case  by  saying, 
"  There  were  other  persons  who  had  access  to  the  place.  The 
undertaker  came  there  with  his  men,  the  women  came  to  lay 
out  the  dead  body,  and  the  servants  were  there;  any  one  of 
those  might  have  stolen  the"  book."  But  all  this  is  met  by 
the  fact  that,  on  that  same  night,  before  the  women  had  had 
anything  to  do  in  the  room — before  they  came  to  lay  out  the 
corpse — before  anybody  made  their  appearance- — that  very 
night,  when  Mr.  Jones  is  seeking  to  gather  up  the  effects  of 
the  dead  man,  he  asks  for  the  book.  What  is  the  answer? 
"Oh,"  says  Palmer,  adopting  the  language  which  he  after- 
wards repeated,  "  the  betting  book  will  be  of  no  use  to  any 
one."  Does  anybody  doubt  in  his  own  mind  where  that 
betting  book  had  gone  to?  The  father-in-law  came  down  on 
the  Friday,  and  he  begins  to  discourse  about  the  affair,  and 
he  is  not  satisfied  with  the  answers  he  gets.  The  day  passes 
away.  He  says  to  Mr.  Jones,  "Be  so  good  as  to  collect  my 
son-in-law's  betting  book  and  papers  and  bring  them  away." 
Mr.  Jones  goes  upstairs ;  he  is  immediately  followed  by  the 
prisoner — up  they  go,  but  there  is  no  betting  book  to  be  found. 
Down  comes  Mr.  Jones,  and  says  to  Mr.  Stevens,  "  We  cannot 
find  the  betting  book."  "  Not  find  the  betting  book!  surely 
you  must  be  mistaken  "  ;  and,  turning  round,  he  says,  "  Why, 
Mr.  Palmer,  how  is  this?"  Upon  which  Mr.  Palmer  says, 
"Oh,  the  betting  book  is  of  no  use."  "  No  use!  I  am  the 
best  judge  of  that.  I  think  it  will  be  of  a  good  deal  of  use." 
The  observation  is  again  repeated,  "It  is  of  no  use."  Mr. 
Stevens  said,  "Why?"  "Because  a  dead  man's  bets  are 
void,  and  because  he  received  the  money  himself  upon  the 
course  at  Shrewsbury."  A  dead  man's  bets  are  void!  Yes, 
that  is  true ;  they  are  void,  but  not  when  they  have  been 
received  in  his  lifetime.  Who  received  the  dead  man's  bets? 
The  prisoner  at  the  bar.  Who  appropriated  the  proceeds  of 
the  dead  man's  bets?  The  prisoner  at  the  bar.  Who  was 
answerable  for  them?  The  prisoner  at  the  bar.  Who  had  an 
interest  in  concealing  the  fact  that  he  had  received  them?  He 
had.  What  was  the  best  mode  of  doing  it?  The  destruction 
of  the  betting  book.  What  was  the  best  mode  of  calming 
the  determination  of  the  man  who  was  the  executor  of  the  dead 
man,  when  he  wanted  to  know  what  he  was  entitled  to  receive 
and  what  he  had  received,  and  to  see  the  record  of  his  pecuniary 

259 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Attorney-  transactions?  Why,  to  tell  him  that  the  record,  even  if  found, 
3  would  be  of  no  use,  for  a  dead  man  was  not  entitled  to  any 
bets,  he  having  died  before  they  were  received — yet  at  that 
very  moment  he  had  received  the  proceeds  of  the  bets  which 
he  was  representing  as  void,  and  was  applying  the  proceeds  to 
his  own  purpose.  Does  not  that  throw  light  upon  the  real 
nature  of  the  transaction?  What  possible  motive  could  he 
have  for  representing  that  the  bets  were  void,  having  himself 
received  them,  unless  he  knew  that  he  had  received  them 
fraudulently  and  wrongfully?  See  what  would  have  taken 
place  if  the  truth  had  come  out.  Mr.  Stevens,  if  he  had  seen 
that  book,  would  have  seen  that  his  stepson  was  entitled  to 
receive  £1020.  He  would  have  inquired  who  was  his  agent,  to 
see  whether  by  any  possibility  those  debts  could  be  realised ;  he 
would  have  learned  what  everybody  knew,  at  least  that  portion 
of  the  turfites  with  whom  Cook  was  in  the  habit  of  communi- 
cating, that  Fisher  was  his  agent.  Fisher  would  have  told 
him,  "  I  ought  to  have  received  the  money  to  repay  myself 
£200,  but  Mr.  Herring  received  the  money."  He  would  have 
gone  to  Mr.  Herring,  and  he  would  have  found  that  every 
shilling  of  the  money  found  its  way  into  the  prisoner's  pocket, 
and  was  appropriated  for  his  own  purposes.  How  was  all  this 
to  be  done?  By  the  removal  of  Cook,  and  then  by  the 
destruction  of  the  only  record  which  could  have  afforded  to  his 
representative,  who  was  entitled  to  stand  in  his  place  and 
realise  his  pecuniary  rights,  the  information  of  the  money  having 
been  received  by  a  wrongdoer,  by  a  man  who  had  no  right  to 
it.  Gentlemen,  I  submit  these  things  to  your  consideration, 
but  I  submit  them  to  you  as  leading,  unhappily,  but  to  one 
conclusion,  and  that  the  conclusion  of  the  prisoner's  guilt. 

But,  gentlemen,  the  matter  does  not  even  rest  here ;  there 
is  more  of  the  prisoner's  conduct  yet  to  be  commented  upon, 
on  which  I  must  say  a  few  words  before  I  conclude.  Mr. 
Stevens  determined  upon  having  a  post-mortem  examination. 
Let  us  watch  the  conduct  of  the  prisoner  in  respect  of  that 
most  important  part  of  the  history  of  this  case.  Dr.  Harland 
comes  over  to  perform  this  most  important  office ;  the  prisoner 
is  on  the  watch  to  see  who  comes ;  he  meets  him  as  he  alights 
at  the  inn;  he  accompanies  him  to  Dr.  Bamford's;  they  get 
into  conversation  about  this  death,  and  Dr.  Harland  says, 
naturally  enough,  speaking  to  a  brother  medical  man  who  he 
supposed  had  been  attendant  upon  the  patient,  ' '  What  is  this 
case?  I  hear  there  is  a  suspicion  of  poisoning."  "  Oh,  no," 
says  Palmer,  "not  at  all;  no  suspicion  of  poisoning;  the  man 
had  two  epileptic  fits  upon  the  Monday  and  Tuesday,  and  you 
will  find  old  disease,  both  of  the  head  and  of  the  heart." 
Well,  there  was  no  disease  found  of  the  head  or  of  the  heart, 
unless  that  very  wise  gentleman,  whom  I  should  have  liked  to 
260 


Attorney-General's  Address  to  Jury. 

have  asked  a  few  questions  of  to-day,  was  right  about  his  Attorney- 
story  of  angina  pectoris,  which  I  doubt  was  ever  accompanied  Genepal 
by  tetanic  symptoms  in  this  world,  or  that  any  other  man 
in  the  universe  would  declare  that  it  was.  "  You  will  find 
disease  of  the  head  and  the  heart."  They  opened  him,  and 
found  neither.  He  said,  "  He  had  two  epileptic  fits  on  the 
Monday  and  Tuesday."  That  very  same  man  the  day  before 
had  gone  to  Dr.  Bamford,  and  asked  Dr.  Bamford  to  fill  up 
the  certificate,  and  Dr.  Bamford  said  naturally  enough,  "  He 
is  your  patient,  not  mine ;  I  have  only  attended  him  at  your 
request."  "  No,  I  would  rather  you  did."  He  gets  Dr. 
Bamford  to  fill  in  "  apoplexy  "  ;  the  next  day  he  tells  Dr. 
Harland  that  it  is  a  case  of  epilepsy.  This  is  not  an  ordinary 
individual,  but  a  medical  man,  possessing  full  knowledge  and 
information  with  regard  to  medical  matters.  However,  the 
post-mortem  examination  took  place;  before  they  go  to  it  there 
is  some  conversation  with  Newton  which  I  will  not  again  more 
particularly  refer  to ;  it  is  not  satisfactory,  nor  does  it  show 
the  state  of  mind  in  which  you  would  expect  to  find  a  man 
whose  friend  had  just  died,  from  the  way  in  which  he  speaks 
of  the  examination  about  to  take  place.  Let  us  come  to  the 
examination  itself.  The  stomach  and  its  contents  are,  as  we 
understood,  removed ;  there  is  some  story  about  his  having 
pushed  against  the  parties  who  were  performing  the  examina- 
tion ;  I  think  that  is  carrying  the  matter  too  far ;  it  may 
have  been  an  accident,  and  we  will  look  at  it  in  that  light;  at 
last  the  stomach,  we  say  without  its  contents,  and  a  portion  of 
the  intestines  are  put  into  a  jar,  and  the  jar  is  fastened  with  a 
parchment  covering  doubled  over  it ;  it  is  tied  and  sealed,  and 
then  it  is  placed  upon  a  table  while  the  post-mortem  examina- 
tion, with  reference  to  other  parts  of  the  body,  is  made.  Dr. 
Harland  has  this  done ;  when  Dr.  Harland  turns  round  he  finds 
the  jar  removed ;  he  immediately  makes  an  outcry,  and  then 
at  the  other  end  of  a  long  room,  and  at  a  door  which  was  not 
the  proper  entrance,  but  a  door  which  led  into  a  different 
apartment,  which  apartment  led  into  the  passage,  the  prisoner 
was  found  with  the  jar  in  his  hand,  and  when  Dr.  Harland 
exclaims,  he  says,  "  I  thought  it  would  have  been  more  con- 
venient to  you  when  you  were  going  out."  That  might  have 
been  his  motive,  though  it  was  an  awkward  circumstance  that 
the  jar  containing  the  stomach  should  be  in  the  hands  of  the 
man  against  whom  there  rested  a  suspicion  of  having  deprived 
the  deceased  of  life  by  unfair  means.  That  is  not  all ;  two 
slits  were  found  in  the  parchment  cover  when  it  was  tied  and 
sealed  up  ;  who  could  have  made  them  except  the  prisoner  ? 
"What  did  he  do  it  for?  There,  again,  we  are  lost  in  conjecture, 
but  the  only  conclusion  at  which  we  can  arrive  is  against  the 
honesty  of  the  purpose  and  the  integrity  of  the  transaction ; 

261 


Trial   of  William  Palmer. 

Attorney-  whether  it  may  have  been  for  the  purpose  of  introducing  some- 
General     thing  which  might  be  capable  of  neutralising  the  poison,    I 
cannot  tell  you ;  all  I  know  is  the  fact,  and  it  is  a  fact  of  very 
significant  importance  in  the  consideration  of  the  case. 

It  does  not  end  there — we  find  that  he  is  restless  and  uneasy 
as  to  what  is  going  to  be  done  with  the  jar,  and  objects  to  its 
being  taken  away;  he  remonstrates  with  Dr.  Bamford  at  letting 
it  go  away,  as  if  Dr.  Bamford  had  any  interest  in  the  matter, 
and  as  if  any  one  would  suspect  Dr.  Bamford  of  having  had 
any  hand  in  the  taking  off  of  this  poor  man.  The  jar  is 
taken  away,  and  then  that  occurred  which  must  have  made  a 
painful  impression  upon  all  who  heard  it  in  this  Court — then 
comes  the  story  of  his  going  to  the  post  boy,  and  asking  him 
to  upset  the  carriage  which  was  conveying  those  who  had 
possession  of  the  jar  to  Stafford  or  London,  for  the  purpose  of 
its  contents  being  analysed.  My  learned  friend  sought  to  give 
a  comparatively  innocent  complexion  to  this  transaction ;  he 
says  that  this  bribe  of  £10  to  upset  the  carriage  arose  simply 
out  of  resentment  against  the  officious  stepfather  who  had 
dared  to  interfere  in  this  matter — to  insist  upon  a  searching 
investigation — he  had  been  guilty,  my  learned  friend  says,  in 
return  for  the  civility,  courtesy,  and  kindness  with  which  he 
had  been  treated  by  the  prisoner,  of  "  prying,  meddling, 
insolent  curiosity."  A  man  who  had  seen  his  poor  stepson, 
to  whom  he  was  tenderly  attached,  lying  dead  under  circum- 
stances which  raised  in  his  mind  a  suspicion — and  I  think  I 
am  fully  justified,  at  all  events,  whatever  may  be  the  result 
of  this  inquiry,  in  saying  that  the  very  inquiry  we  are  now 
upon — the  gravity  and  importance  of  it — at  least  fully  justify 
Mr.  Stevens  in  the  suspicions  which  he  entertained  for  having 
insisted  upon  the  inquiry,  and  that  ought  to  have  protected 
him  against  the  suggestion  of  "  insolent  curiosity."  It  was 
known  that  Mr.  Stevens  insisted  upon  inquiry — was  it  a 
reasonable  motive  operating  upon  this  man's  mind  that  it 
should  occasion  such  a  sense  of  resentment  and  anger  that  he 
should  desire  the  destruction  or  mutilation  of  this  man,  and 
offer  £10  to  the  post  boy  to  upset  him  upon  the  road?  I 
believe  the  other  to  have  been  the  true  version — if  you  upset 
him  you  may  break  the  jar,  and  then  the  contents  never  could 
be  found,  and  there  would  be  no  danger  of  strychnia  being 
discovered. 

But  it  does  not  stop  even  there  ;  the  inquiry  takes  place, 
and  the  post-mortem  examination  having  been  made,  a  coroner's 
inquest  is  insisted  upon  and  becomes  inevitable,  and  then  we 
have  the  prisoner  seeking  to  tamper  with  the  administration  of  a 
most  important  office ;  sending  presents  to  the  coroner  at  the 
time  the  inquest  was  sitting;  presents,  unquestionably,  of  game 
and  things  of  that  description,  and  if  the  evidence  does  not 
262 


Attorney-General's   Address   to  Jury. 

very  much  mislead  us  a  present  of  money  also.  For  what  pur-  Attorney- 
pose  was  all  that  done?  We  find  him,  with  uneasy  restlessness,  General 
obtaining  through  Cheshire  information  of  what  is  taking  place 
between  the  professional  man  who  was  employed  to  analyse  the 
contents  01  the  stomach  and  the  attorney  at  Rugeley  who  was 
instructed  on  behalf  of  Mr.  Stevens ;  is  that  the  conduct  of 
innocence  or  of  guilt?  Why  should  he  be  desirous  of  knowing 
whether  strychnia,  above  all  other  things,  should  be  found  in 
the  intestines  of  the  deceased?  Let  me  call  your  attention  to 
the  letter  which  he  writes  to  the  coroner — "  I  am  sorry  to  tell 
you  that  I  am  still  confined  to  my  bed;  I  do  not  think  it  was 
mentioned  at  the  inquest  yesterday  that  Cook  was  taken  ill  on 
Sunday  and  on  Monday  night  in  the  same  way  that  he  was 
on  Tuesday  night  when  he  died;  the  chambermaid  at  the 
Crown  Hotel  can  prove  this ;  I  believe  a  man  of  the  name  of 
Fisher  is  coming  down  to  prove  that  he  received  some  money 
at  Shrewsbury;  now,  here  he  can  only  pay  Smith  £10  out  of 
£41  he  owed  him."  Does  he  tell  what  had  become  of  the 
rest  of  the  money  that  the  man  had  at  Shrewsbury?  "  Had 
you  not  better  call  Smith,"  that  is,  Mr.  Jeremiah  Smith  whom 
we  saw  here  to-day,  "to  prove  this?"  What  a  witness 
Jeremiah  Smith  would  have  been  in  the  hands  of  the  coroner, 
Mr.  Ward,  the  friendly  coroner  of  Staffordshire !  And,  again, 
"  Whatever  Professor  Taylor  may  say  to-morrow,  he  wrote 
from  London  last  Tuesday  night  to  Gardner  to  say,  we  (that 
is,  Dr.  Taylor  and  Dr.  Rees)  have  this  day  finished  our  analysis, 
and  find  no  traces  of  either  strychnia,  prussic  acid,  or  opium ; 
what  can  beat  this  from  a  man  like  Taylor,  if  he  says  what 
he  has  already  said  of  Dr.  Harland's  evidence?  Mind  you, 
I  know  it,  I  saw  in  black  and  white  what  Taylor  said  to 
Gardner;  but  this  is  strictly  private  and  confidential,  but  it 
is  true.  As  regards  his  betting  book,  I  know  nothing  of  it, 
and  it  is  of  no  good  to  any  one  "  ;  the  repetition  of  the  same 
story.  "  I  hope  the  verdict  to-morrow  will  be  that  he  died 
of  natural  causes,  and  thus  end  it  "  ;  but  the  verdict  was  not 
so,  and  it  did  not  end  it;  and  it  is  for  you  to  say  whether 
upon  a  review  of  the  whole  of  this  evidence  you  can  come 
to  any  other  conclusion  than  that  of  the  prisoner's  guilt.  Look 
at  his  restless  anxiety ;  it  may  possibly,  it  is  true,  be  com- 
patible with  innocence,  but  I  think  on  the  other  hand  it  must 
be  admitted  that  it  bears  strongly  the  aspect  of  guilt;  if  it 
stood  alone,  I  would  not  ask  you  upon  that  to  come  to  a  con- 
clusion adverse  to  the  prisoner,  but  it  is  one  of  a  series  of 
things,  small  perhaps,  each  individually  in  themselves,  but, 
taken  as  a  whole,  as  I  submit  to  you,  leading  irresistibly  to  the 
conclusion  of  the  guilt  of  this  man. 

Now,  gentlemen,  the  whole  case  is  before  you.  It  will  be 
for  you  to  determine  it.  You  have,  on  the  one  hand,  a  man 
overwhelmed  by  a  pressure  almost  unparalleled  and  unexampled 

263 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

Attorney-  of  pecuniary  liabilities  which  he  is  utterly  unable  to  meet 
icneral  involving  the  penalties  of  the  law,  which  must  bring  disaster 
and  ruin  upon  him.  His  only  mode  of  averting  those  conse- 
quences is  by  obtaining  money ;  and,  under  those  circumstances, 
with  a  bad  man,  a  small  amount,  if  that  amount  will  meet 
the  exigencies  of  the  moment  and  avert  the  impending 
catastrophe  and  ruin,  will  operate  with  immense  power.  Then 
you  find  that  he  has  access  to  the  bedside  of  the  man  whose 
death  we  are  now  inquiring  into ;  that  he  has  the  means  of 
administering  poison  to  him,  and  you  find  that,  within  eight- 
and-forty  hours,  he  has  twice  acquired  possession  of  the  very 
poison,  the  traces  of  which  are  found  in  the  death,  and  after 
the  death ;  and  then  you  have  the  death  itself  in  its  terrible 
and  revolting  circumstances,  all  of  which  are  characteristic  only 
of  death  by  that  poison  and  of  no  other.  You  have  then  the 
fact  that,  to  the  uttermost  of  his  ability,  he  realises  the  pur- 
pose for  which  it  is  suggested  to  you  the  death  was  accom- 
plished. You  have  all  those  facts,  and  the  undoubted  and 
undisputed  fact,  that  a  subsidiary  poison  was  also  used,  of  which 
traces  have  been  found  in  the  man's  body,  although  no  traces 
may  have  been  found,  for  the  reasons  and  from  the  causes  I 
have  suggested,  of  the  principal  poison,  whose  possession  by 
the  prisoner  we  have  traced,  and  whose  presence  we  show  in 
the  symptoms  which  accompanied  the  death  of  the  deceased. 
It  is  for  you  to  take  all  those  circumstances  into  your  con- 
sideration. 

Gentlemen,  you  have,  indeed,  had  introduced  into  this  case 
one  other  element  which  I  own  I  think  would  have  been  better 
omitted.  You  have  had  from  my  learned  friend  the  unusual, 
and  I  think  I  may  say  unprecedented,  assurance  of  his  con- 
viction of  his  client's  innocence. 

Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — Not  unprecedented. 

The  ATTORNEY-GENERAL — I  can  only  say  I  think  it  would 
have  been  better  if  my  learned  friend  had  abstained  from  so 
strange  a  declaration.  What  would  he  think  of  me  if,  imitat- 
ing his  example,  I  at  this  moment  stated  to  you,  upon  my 
"  honour,"  as  he  did,  what  is  my  internal  conviction  from  a 
conscientious  consideration  of  this  case.  The  best  reproof 
which  I  can  administer  to  my  learned  friend  is  to  abstain  from 
imitating  so  dangerous  an  example.  My  learned  friend  in  that 
address,  of  which  we  all  admired  the  power  and  ability,  also 
adopted  a  course  sometimes  resorted  to  by  advocates,  but 
which  I  cannot  help  thinking  is  more  or  less  an  insult  to  a 
jury,  the  endeavouring  to  Intimidate  them  by  the  fear  of  their 
own  consciences  and  the  fear  of  the  country's  opinion  from  dis- 
charging firmly  and  honestly  the  great  and  solemn  duty  which 
you  have  to  perform  upon  this  occasion.  My  learned  friend 
told  you  if  your  verdict  should  be  "  Guilty,"  one  day  or 
other  the  innocence  of  the  prisoner  would  be  made  manifest, 

264 


Attorney-General's  Address  to  Jury. 

and  you  would  never  cease  to  repent  the  verdict  you  had  given.  Attorney- 
If  my  learned  friend  was  sincere  in  that — and  I  know  he  was —  Genepal 
there  is  no  man  in  whom  the  spirit  of  truth  and  honour  is  more 
keenly  alive — he  said  what  he  believed ;  but  all  I  can  say  in 
answer  is,  that  it  shows  how  when  a  man  enters  with  a  bias 
upon  his  mind  upon  the  consideration  of  a  subject  he  is  led 
into  error ;  and  when  my  learned  friend  said  that  he  had  en- 
tered upon  this  case  with  an  unbiassed  and  an  unprejudiced 
mind,  who  could  have  failed  to  feel  that  never  in  anything 
could  he  have  been  more  deceived  than  in  thinking  that?  For 
who  that  has  to  give  his  best  energies  to  a  defence  upon  such 
a  charge  as  this  would  not  shrink  in  his  own  mind  from  the 
conclusion  that  he  was  to  advocate  the  cause  of  one  whom  he 
believed  to  have  been  guilty  of  the  foulest  of  all  imaginable 
crimes?  I  say,  therefore,  I  think  my  learned  friend  had  better 

t 

have  abstained  from  making  any  observations  which  involved 
the  assurance  of  his  own  conviction.  I  say,  further,  I  think 
he  ought,  in  justice  and  in  consideration  for  you,  to  have 
abstained  from  reminding  you  or  telling  you  that  the  voice  of 
the  country  would  not  sanction  the  verdict  which  you  were 
about  to  give.  I  say  nothing  of  the  inconsistency  which  is 
involved  in  such  a  statement,  coming  from  one  who  but  a  short 
hour  before  had  complained  in  eloquent  terms  of  the  universal 
torrent  of  passion  and  prejudice  by  which  he  said  his  client 
was  oppressed  and  borne  down.  Why,  gentlemen,  in  answer 
to  my  learned  friend,  I  have  only  to  say,  pay  no  regard  to  the 
voice  of  the  country,  whether  it  be  for  condemnation  or 
acquittal ;  pay  no  regard  to  anything  but  the  internal  voice 
of  your  own  consciences,  and  the  sense  of  that  duty  to  God 
and  man  which  you  are  to  discharge  upon  this  occasion.  Seek 
no  reward,  except  the  comforting  assurance  when  you  shall 
look  back  to  the  events  of  this  day,  that  you  have  discharged 
to  the  best  of  your  ability  and  to  the  uttermost  of  your  power 
the  duty  that  it  was  yours  to  perform.  If,  upon  a  review 
of  this  whole  case,  comparing  the  evidence  upon  the  one  side 
and  upon  the  other,  and  weighing  it  in  the  even  scales  of 
justice,  you  can  come  to  a  conclusion  of  the  prisoner's  inno- 
cence, or  even  entertain  that  fair  and  reasonable  amount  of 
doubt  of  which  the  accused  is  entitled  to  the  benefit,  in  God's 
name  acquit  him.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  all  the  facts 
and  all  the  evidence  lead  your  minds,  with  satisfaction  to  your- 
selves, to  the  conclusion  of  the  prisoner's  guilt,  then,  but  then 
only,  I  ask  for  a  verdict  of  guilty  at  your  hands.  For  the 
protection  of  the  good,  and  for  the  repression  of  the  wicked, 
I  ask  for  that  verdict,  by  which  alone,  as  it  seems  to  me,  the 
safety  of  society  can  be  secured,  and  the  demands,  the  im- 
perious demands,  of  public  justice  can  alone  be  satisfied. 

The  Court  then  adjourned. 

265 


Eleventh  Day,  Monday,  26th  May,  1856. 

The  Court  met  at  ten  o'clock. 
Charge  to  the  Jury. 

Campbell  LORD  CAMPBELL — Gentlemen  of  the  jury,  we  have  at  length 
arrived  at  that  stage  of  these  solemn  proceedings  when  it 
becomes  my  duty,  as  the  chief  judge  presiding  in  this  Court, 
to  explain  to  you  the  nature  of  the  charge  brought  against  the 
prisoner,  and  those  questions  and  considerations  upon  which 
your  verdict  ought  to  be  found.  And,  gentlemen,  I  must 
begin  by  conjuring  you  to  banish  from  your  minds  all  that 
you  have  heard  with  reference  to  these  proceedings  before 
entering  into  that  box.  There  is  no  doubt  that  a  strong 
prejudice  elsewhere  did  prevail  against  the  prisoner  at  the 
bar,  in  the  county  of  Stafford,  where  the  offence  for  which 
he  has  now  to  answer  is  alleged  to  have  been  committed;  that 
prejudice  was  so  strong  that  the  Court  of  Queen's  Bench  made 
an  order  to  remove  the  trial  from  that  county.  The  prisoner, 
by  his  counsel,  expressed  a  wish  that  the  trial  should  take 
place  in  the  Central  Criminal  Court.  To  enable  that  wish  to 
be  accomplished  an  Act  has  been  passed  by  the  Legislature 
authorising  the  Court  of  Queen's  Bench  to  direct  the  trial  to 
take  place  in  the  Central  Criminal  Court,  where  it  was  believed 
and  known  that  the  trial  would  be  fair  and  impartial.  I 
must  not  only  \\arn  you,  gentlemen,  against  being  influenced 
by  what  you  may  have  before  heard,  but  I  must  likewise  warn 
you — although  I  am  sure  it  is  an  unnecessary  caution,  but 
one  which  it  is  my  duty  to  offer — against  being  improperly 
influenced  by  the  evidence  that  has  been  laid  before  you; 
because  there  has  been  evidence  which  certainly  implicates 
the  prisoner  in  transactions  of  a  very  discreditable  nature.  It 
appeai-s  that  he  had  forged  a  great  many  bills  of  exchange, 
and  that  he  had  entered  into  transactions  not  of  a  reputable 
nature.  These  transactions,  however,  would  have  been 
excluded  from  your  consideration  altogether  had  it  not  been 
necessary  to  bring  them  forward  to  assist  you  in  arriving  at 
your  verdict.  By  the  law  and  practice  of  some  countries  it  is 
allowed  to  raise  a  probability  that  the  party  accused  has 
committed  the  offence  which  he  has  to  answer,  to  show  that 
he  has  committed  other  offences,  with  a  view  of  showing  that 
he  is  an  immoral  man,  and  not  unlikely  to  commit  other 
offences,  whether  of  the  same  or  of  a  different  nature ;  but  the 
law  of  England  is  different,  and,  presuming  every  man  to  be 
innocent  until  his  guilt  is  established,  it  allows  his  guilt  to  be 
established  only  by  evidence  directly  connected  with  the  charge 
brought  against  him. 
266 


Lord  Chief  -  Justice  Campbell. 


Charge  to  Jury. 


Gentlemen,  't  gives  me  great  satisfaction  to  find  that  this  Lord 
case  has  been  so  fully  laid  before  you.  Everything  has  been  CamPbe11 
done  that  could  be  accomplished  for  the  purpose  of  assisting 
the  jury  in  coming  to  a  right  conclusion.  The  prosecution 
has  been  taken  up  by  the  Government  of  the  country,  so  that 
justice  may  be  effectively  administered.  The  Attorney- 
General,  who  is  the  first  law  officer  of  the  Crown,  has  con- 
ducted the  prosecution  as  the  Minister  of  Public  Justice. 
Again,  I  am  much  pleased  to  think  that  the  prisoner  appears 
to  have  had  ample  means  to  prepare  for  and  conduct  his 
defence.  Witnesses  very  properly  have  been  brought  from 
all  parts  of  the  kingdom  to  assist  in  his  defence;  and  he  has 
had  the  advantage  of  having  his  case  conducted  by  one  of  the 
most  distinguished  advocates  at  the  English  bar.  Gentlemen, 
I  most  strongly  recommend  to  you  to  attend  to  everything 
that  fell  so  eloquently,  so  ably,  and  so  impressively  from  that 
advocate,  with  the  exception  of  his  own  private  personal 
opinion.  It  is  my  duty  to  tell  you  that  that  ought  to  be  no 
ingredient  in  your  verdict.  You  are  to  try  the  prisoner  upon 
the  evidence  before  you,  according  as  that  evidence  may  be 
laid  before  you  upon  the  one  side  and  on  the  other,  and  by 
that  alone,  and  not  by  any  opinion  of  his  advocate.  I  feel  also 
bound  to  say  that  it  would  have  been  better  if  his  advocate 
had  abstained  from  some  of  the  observations  which  he  made 
in  his  address  to  you,  in  which  he  laid  great  stress  upon  his 
own  conviction  of  the  prisoner's  innocence  of  the  crime  imputed 
to  him  and  of  his  apprehension  that  if  you  returned  a  verdict 
of  guilty  you  one  day  would  have  to  regret  your  verdict.  The 
fact  of  the  prisoner  saying  "Not  guilty"  is  a  mere  form; 
it  goes  for  nothing,  and  it  may  lead  to  the  most  disastrous 
consequences  if  that  formal  answer  is  to  be  dwelt  upon  with 
too  much  importance,  as  it  may  lead  a  jury  to  believe  that 
a  prisoner  is  not  guilty  because  his  advocate  expresses  his 
perfect  conviction  of  his  innocence.  And,  upon  the  other 
hand,  if  the  advocate  withholds  an  opinion,  the  jury  may 
suppose  that  he  is  conscious  of  his  client's  guilt,  whereas  it 
is  the  duty  of  the  advocate  to  press  his  argument  upon  the 
jury,  and  not  his  opinion. 

Gentlemen,  I  will  now  in  a  few  words  give  you  the  allegations 
upon  the  one  side  and  on  the  other.  On  the  part  of  the  prose- 
cution it  is  alleged  that  the  deceased,  John  Parsons  Cook,  was 
first  tampered  with  by  antimony,  that  he  was  then  killed 
by  strychnia,  and  that  his  symptoms  were  the  symptoms  of 
poison  by  strychnia.  It  is  then  alleged  that  the  prisoner 
at  the  bar  had  a  motive  for  making  away  with  him;  that  he 
had  an  opportunity  of  administering  the  poison;  that  suspicion 
fell  upon  no  one  else;  and  that  on  two  days,  when  the  poison 
was  supposed  to  have  been  administered,  he  actually  pur- 

267 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Lord  chased  strychnia,  the  poison  employed;  and  that,  as  they 
Campbell  auege>  hjg  conduct  before  that  transaction,  before  the  deed, 
while  it  was  going  on,  and  afterwards,  was  that  of  a  guilty, 
and  not  of  an  innocent,  man.  On  the  other  side  it  is  con- 
tended (and  you  are  to  say  whether  or  not  truly  contended) 
that  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  was  really  the  victim  of  prejudice; 
that  he  had  no  interest  in  the  death  of  the  deceased;  and,  on 
the  contrary,  that  the  death  of  the  deceased  was  to  his  pre- 
judice; further,  that  Cook  did  not  die  from  poison  by  strych- 
nia, but  from  natural  disease;  that  his  symptoms  were  those 
of  natural  disease,  and  not  of  poison  by  strychnia;  and, 
further,  it  is  contended  that  no  part  of  tne  evidence  which 
has  been  given  shows  anything  which  is  at  all  consistent  with 
the  guilt  of  the  prisoner.  Gentlemen,  it  is  for  you  to  deter- 
mine between  the  allegations  on  the  one  side  and  the  other 
according  to  the  evidence.  A  most  anxious  task  is  imposed 
upon  you,  knowing  that  the  life  of  the  prisoner  is  at  stake ; 
and,  if  you  find  him  guilty,  he  must  expiate  his  crime  by  an 
ignominious  death.  It  is  of  the  last  importance  that  you 
should  be  convinced  of  his  innocence  or  his  guilt;  and,  if  you 
are  not  convinced  of  his  guilt,  you  will  rescue  him  from  the 
fate  with  which  he  is  threatened.  On  the  other  hand,  when 
you  have  heard  the  statements  which  were  given  in  evidence — 
if  you  are  satisfied  of  his  guilt — it  will  be  your  duty  to  return 
a  verdict  of  guilty;  for  if  the  poisoner  were  to  escape  with 
impunity,  there  would  be  no  safety  for  mankind,  and  society 
would  fall  to  pieces.  Gentlemen,  the  burthen  of  proving  the 
guilt  rests  on  the  prosecution;  and  unless  that  is  fully  sus- 
tained, and  you  are  not  convinced  upon  the  evidence  that  he  is 
guilty,  then  it  will  be  your  duty  to  acquit  the  prisoner;  but 
in  a  case  of  this  kind  you  cannot  expect  that  witnesses  should 
be  called  to  state  that  they  saw  the  deadly  poison  administered 
by  the  prisoner  or  mixed  up  by  the  prisoner  openly  before 
them.  Circumstantial  evidence  as  to  that  is  all  that  can  be 
reasonably  expected;  and  if  there  are  a  series  of  circumstances 
leading  to  the  conclusion  of  guilt,  then,  gentlemen,  a  verdict 
of  guilty  may  satisfactorily  be  pronounced.  With  respect  to 
the  alleged  motive,  it  is  of  great  importance  to  see  whether 
there  was  a  motive  for  committing  such  a  crime,  or  whether 
there  was  not,  or  whether  there  is  an  improbability  of  its 
having  been  committed  so  strong  as  not  to  be  overpowered 
by  positive  evidence.  But,  gentlemen,  if  there  be  any  motive 
which  can  be  assigned,  I  am  bound  to  tell  you  that  the 
adequacy  of  that  motive  is  of  little  importance.  We  know 
from  the  experience  of  criminal  Courts  that  atrocious  crimes 
of  this  sort  have  been  committed  from  very  slight  motives, 
not  merely  from  malice  and  revenge,  but  to  gain  a  small 
pecuniary  advantage  and  to  drive  off  for  a  time  pressing  diffi- 
268 


Charge    to   Jury. 


culties.  It  seems  to  me,  gentlemen,  you  will  have  to  consider  Lord 
well  whether  the  symptoms  of  Cook's  death  are  consistent  with 
a  poisoning  by  strychnia.  If  they  are  not,  if  you  believe  that 
death  arose  from  natural  causes,  the  prisoner  is  at  once 
entitled  to  a  verdict  of  not  guilty  at  your  hands;  but  if  those 
symptoms  are  consistent  with  a  poisoning  by  strychnia,  then 
you  will  have  another  and  an  important  question  to  consider, 
whether  the  evidence  which  has  been  adduced  is  sufficient  to 
convince  you  that  it  was  a  death  by  strychnia,  and  by  strychnia 
which  the  prisoner  administered.  In  cases  of  the  sort  the 
evidence  has  often  been  divided  into  medical  and  moral  evi- 
dence, the  medical  being  that  of  the  scientific  men,  and  the 
moral  the  circumstantial  facts  which  are  calculated  to  prove 
the  truth  of  the  charge  against  the  party  accused.  Gentlemen, 
they  cannot  be  finally  separated  in  the  minds  of  the  jury, 
because  it  is  by  combination  of  the  two  species  of  evidence 
that  their  verdict  ought  to  be  found.  In  this  case  you  will 
look  at  the  medical  evidence  to  see  whether  the  deceased,  in 
your  opinion,  did  die  by  strychnia  or  by  natural  disease;  and 
you  will  look  at  what  is  called  the  moral  evidence,  and  con- 
sider whether  that  shows  that  the  prisoner  not  only  had  the 
opportunity,  but  that  he  actually  availed  himself  of  that 
opportunity,  to  administer  to  the  deceased  the  deadly  poison 
of  which  he  died. 

Now,  gentlemen,  with  these  preliminary  observations  I  will 
proceed  to  read  over  to  you  the  evidence  which  has  been  given 
in  this  long  trial;  and  I  must  implore  you  earnestly  that,  in 
any  observations  I  may  make  upon  its  effect,  you  will  be 
guided  only  by  your  own  judgment.  To  assist  you  from  time 
to  time  I  may  make  observations,  but  you  will  not  be  in  the 
slightest  degree  influenced  by  them  unless  so  far  as  your  own 
judgment  concurs  in  them.  The  verdict  must  be  yours,  and 
in  your  hands  the  life  of  the  prisoner  must  rest. 

[His  lordship  then  began  with  and  took  the  jury  through  the 
story  of  Palmer's  financial  transactions;  next  the  evidence  of 
Cook's  illness  at  Shrewsbury;  and  then  that  of  Elizabeth  Mills 
and  Lavinia  Barnes,  and  of  Mr.  Jones  as  to  the  illness  at 
Rugeley;  and  passed  to  the  evidence  of  Newton.] 

Now,  gentlemen,  comes  a  witness  of  the  greatest  importance, 
Charles  Newton.  (His  lordship  read  a  portion  of  Mr.  Newton's 
evidence.)  I  may  notice  to  you  that  Roberts  swears,  and  is, 
I  think,  not  contradicted,  that  he  had  sold  strychnia,  among 
other  drugs,  to  Palmer;  and  you  are  called  upon  to  observe 
the  demeanour  of  Palmer  at  that  time,  and  the  way  in  which 
he  tried  to  prevent  Newton  from  observing  that  he  had  been 
obtaining  this  drug  at  the  shop  of  Mr.  Hawkins.  (His  lord- 
ship then  read  a  further  portion  of  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Newton.) 
Then  the  deposition  of  Newton  was  read,  and  it  had  better  be 

269 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Lord  read  again.  (The  deposition  of  Mr.  Newton,  taken  before 
Campbell  ^e  coroner>  was  then  read,  and  his  lordship  concluded  reading 
the  evidence  of  the  witness.)  Now,  gentlemen,  this  is  the 
evidence  of  Newton,  and  most  important  it  is  for  your  con- 
sideration. It  certainly  must  be  recollected  that  he  did  not 
mention  the  furnishing  of  the  strychnia  to  Palmer  on  Monday 
before  the  coroner,  and  that  he  did  not  mention  it  till  the 
Tuesday  morning,  when  he  was  coming  up  here.  That  cer- 
tainly requires  consideration  at  your  hands;  but  then,  gentle- 
men, you  will  observe  that  in  his  deposition,  which  has  been 
read  before  you,  although  there  is  an  omission,  which  is  always 
to  be  borne  in  mind,  there  is  no  contradiction  of  anything 
that  he  has  said.  Well,  then,  you  are  to  consider  what  is 
the  probability  of  his  inventing  this  wicked  and  most  abomin- 
able lie.  He  had  no  ill-will  towards  the  prisoner  at  the  bar; 
he  had  nothing  to  gain  by  injuring  him,  much  less  by  saying 
anything  to  affect  his  life.  I  see  no  motive  that  Mr.  Newton 
could  have  for  inventing  a  lie  to  take  away  the  life  of  another 
person.  No  inducement  could  be  held  out  to  him  from  the 
Crown;  he  says  himself  that  no  inducement  was  held  out  to 
him,  and  that  he  at  last  disclosed  it  from  a  sense  of  justice. 
If  you  believe  him,  certainly  the  evidence  is  very  strong  against 
the  prisoner  at  the  bar.  Now  I  will  take  you  to  the  evidence 
of  the  next  witness,  whose  evidence  is  closely  connected  with 
the  witness  Newton — who  did  furnish  strychnia  to  the  prisoner 
— I  mean  Joseph  Roberts.  (The  learned  judge  read  the 
examination-in-chief  of  Mr.  Roberts.) 

Now  comes  the  cross-examination,  which  consists  in  this, 
and  this  only,  "  I  did  not  make  an  entry  of  any  of  those  things 
in  our  books;  if  articles  are  sold  over  the  counter  and  paid 
for  at  the  time,  we  do  not  enter  them  in  our  books."  Now, 
gentlemen,  this  is  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Roberts,  which  is  most 
important,  for  he  is  not  cross-examined  as  to  the  veracity  of 
his  testimony,  nor  is  it  contradicted  at  all.  It  is  not  denied 
that  on  this  Tuesday  morning  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  got 
6  grains  of  strychnia  from  Mr.  Roberts.  If  you  couple  that 
with  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Newton,  believing  that,  then  you 
will  have  positive  evidence  of  strychnia  being  procured  by 
the  prisoner  at  the  bar;  that  the  symptoms  of  strychnia  were 
exhibited  in  Mr.  Cook,  the  deceased;  and  you  have  the  evi- 
dence of  Mr.  Roberts,  undenied  and  unquestioned,  that  on  the 
Tuesday  the  6  grains  of  strychnia  were  supplied.  Now,  gentle- 
men, if  you  believe  both,  a  very  serious  case  is  adduced,  sup- 
posing you  should  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  symptoms 
of  Mr.  Cook  were  consistent  with  that  poison.  If  you  think 
the  symptoms  are  accounted  for  by  merely  ordinary  tetanus, 
of  course  the  fact  of  strychnia  being  obtained  by  the  prisoner 
at  the  bar  is  entitled  to  very  little  weight;  but  if  you  should 
270 


Charge    to   Jury. 


come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  symptoms  which  Mr.  Cook  Lord 
exhibited  on  the  Monday  night  and  Tuesday  night  are  con-  Camp  £ 
sistent  with  strychnia,  then  a  fearful  case  is  made  out  against 
him.  Gentlemen,  I  have  listened  with  the  most  anxious  atten- 
tion to  know  what  explanation  would  be  given  respecting  the 
strychnia  that  was  purchased  on  the  Tuesday  morning.  The 
learned  counsel  for  the  prisoner  told  us  that  we  must  believe 
nothing,  that  he  would  combat  and  disprove  everything,  and 
no  doubt,  according  to  his  instructions,  he  very  properly  denied 
that  Mr.  Newton  was  to  be  believed;  and,  disbelieving  Mr. 
Newton,  you  have  no  evidence  of  any  strychnia  being  obtained 
on  the  Monday  evening;  but,  disbelieving  Mr.  Newton  and 
believing  Mr.  Roberts,  you  have  evidence  of  6  grains  of 
strychnia  having  been  obtained  on  the  Tuesday  morning,  and 
no  explanation  is  given  of  it.  The  learned  counsel  did  not 
favour  us  with  the  theory  which  he  had  formed  in  his  own 
mind  respecting  that  strychnia,  and  how  he  considered  it  to  be 
consistent  with  the  view  that  he  suggested.  There  is  no 
evidence  of  the  intention  with  which  it  was  purchased;  there 
ia  no  evidence  how  it  was  applied,  what  became  of  it,  or  what 
was  done  with  it. 

Then  I  say,  gentlemen,  that  it  will  not  at  all  influence  your 
verdict  unless  you  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  symptoms 
of  Mr.  Cook  were  consistent  with  a  death  by  strychnia;  but 
if  you  come  to  that  conclusion  I  should  shrink  from  my  duty, 
and  I  should  be  unworthy  to  sit  here,  if  I  did  not  draw  to  your 
consideration  the  importance  of  the  testimony  and  the  inference 
it  may  afford  of  the  death  having  been  occasioned  by  strychnia, 
and  that  that  was  administered  by  the  prisoner. 

[The  evidence  as  to  the  post-mortem  was  then  read,  and  that 
of  the  postboy,  of  Cheshire,  the  postmaster,  and  several  others, 
without  comment  of  material  importance.  Passing  to  the 
scientific  witnesses,  his  lordship  said — "  Now,  gentlemen,  you 
are  called  upon  to  form  your  opinion  as  to  the  opinion  of 
scientific  men  respecting  the  appearance  of  the  symptoms  that 
Cook  exhibited,  and  how  far  they  can  be  accounted  for  by 
natural  disease,  and  how  far  also,  upon  the  evidence,  they  are 
consistent  with  strychnia.  Whether  they  agree  with  traumatic 
or  idiopathic  tetanus,  whatever  it  may  be,  or  whether  the 
symptoms  correspond  with  a  natural  disease,  and  do  not  corre- 
spond with  strychnia,  is  a  matter  that  is  of  very  great 
importance  for  you  to  consider."  Until  his  lordship  reached 
Dr.  Taylor  the  scientific  evidence  was  read  to  the  jury  with  no 
material  comments.] 

The  next  witness  is  Dr.  Taylor.  Now,  gentlemen,  here  is 
something  most  important  for  your  consideration.  You  see  it 
is  very  properly  relied  on,  on  the  part  of  the  prisoner,  that, 
though  strychnia  may  be  found  in  the  body  by  analysis,  none 

271 


Trial  of  William    Palmer. 

Cam  bell  wa8  ^oun<*  uPon  *^e  analysis  which  was  made  by  Dr.  Taylor 
and  Dr.  Rees,  for  they,  and  they  alone,  experimented  upon  it, 
and  they  could  find  none.  We  know  that  experiments  were 
made  by  those  two  individuals,  and  they  say  that,  so  far  as 
their  skill  goes,  there  may  be  death  by  strychnia  and  yet 
that  strychnia  cannot  be  detected.  But  Dr.  Taylor  and  Dr. 
Rees  state  experiments  that  they  made  where  the  death  had 
been  by  strychnia  which  they  themselves  administered;  and 
in  at  least  two  of  those  cases  where  there  had  been  death  by 
strychnia  they  could  discover  none.  Now,  it  is  possible  that 
other  chemists  and  other  medical  men  might  have  discovered 
strychnia  in  those  animals,  and  might  have  discovered  strychnia 
in  the  body  or  in  the  jar  which  contained  the  stomach  of  Cook, 
but  they  found  none  in  their  analysis.  They  found  none  also 
in  at  least  two  cases  where  they  killed  animals  by  strychnia, 
and  afterwards  did  all  their  skill  enabled  them  to  do  for  the 
purpose  of  discovering  the  strychnia.  I  thought  at  one  time 
that  these  examinations  were  made  with  a  view  to  show  that, 
if  the  pills  prepared  by  Mr.  Bamford  had  been  taken  as  he 
prepared  them,  mercury  ought  to  have  been  found  in  the 
body  of  Mr.  Cook;  but  I  think  that  was  not  pressed,  and  I 
should  think  that  it  ought  not  to  have  any  influence  upon  your 
verdict — there  was  no  mercury  found.  There  was  mercury 
in  the  pills  which  Mr.  Bamford  prepared,  and  which  Cook 
ought  to  have  taken,  but  the  simple  fact  of  no  mercury  being 
found  in  those  parts  of  Cook's  body  that  were  examined  ought 
not  to  have  any  influence  upon  your  verdict;  but  that,  of 
course,  you  will  judge  of  for  yourselves.  Then  the  learned 
counsel,  in  cross-examination,  read  a  passage  from  Orfila  about 
a  dog  who  had  taken  antimony,  and  some  few  minutes  after- 
wards antimony  was  found  in  the  bones,  in  the  fat,  and  in  the 
liver.  (His  lordship  read  the  letter  written  by  Dr.  Taylor 
to  Mr.  Gardener.)  You  will  bear  in  mind,  gentlemen,  that 
was  written  before  the  symptoms  were  known  to  Dr.  Taylor 
and  Dr.  Rees,  but  they  had  been  informed  that  prussic  acid 
and  strychnia  and  opium  had  been  bought  by  Palmer  on  the 
Tuesday.  They  search  for  all  these  poisons  and  they  find 
none;  but  they  swear  distinctly  that  they  found  antimony 
in  the  body,  and  therefore,  in  the  absence  of  the  symptoms, 
they  do  not  impute  the  death  to  strychnia,  but  they  say  it 
may  possibly  have  been  produced  by  antimony,  because  the 
quantity  they  discovered  in  the  body  was  no  test  of  the  quantity 
that  had  been  administered  to  the  deceased.  Then  a  letter 
was  read  which  Dr.  Taylor  wrote  to  the  Lancet,  and  I  must 
say  that  he  would  have  done  better  to  have  abstained  from 
taking  any  notice  whatsoever  of  what  was  said  about  him,  but 
you  will  say  whether  what  he  did  write  materially  detracts 
from  the  credit  which  would  otherwise  be  due  to  him.  I  think 
272 


Charge   to    Jury. 


the  passage  in  this  letter  in  the  Lancet,  which  was  relied  on,  Lord 
is  the  last  passage  which  I  will  read  to  you.  He  explains  CampbeU 
what  his  evidence  had  been,  and  complains  of  the  reports  that 
had  been  spread  abroad  respecting  him,  and  then  he  concludes 
his  letter  thus — "  In  concluding  this  letter  I  would  observe 
that  during  a  quarter  of  a  century  which  I  have  now  specially 
devoted  to  toxicological  inquiries,  I  have  never  met  with  any 
cases  like  those  suspected  of  poisoning  at  Rugeley.  The  mode 
in  which  they  will  affect  the  person  accused  is  of  minor 
importance  compared  with  their  probable  influence  on  society. 
I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  the  future  security  of  life 
in  this  country  will  mainly  depend  on  the  judge,  the  jury, 
and  the  counsel  who  may  have  to  dispose  of  the  charges  of 
murder  which  have  arisen  out  of  these  investigations."  I 
again  say  that  I  think  it  would  have  been  better  if  he  had 
trusted  to  the  credit  which  he  had  already  acquired,  instead 
of  writing  a  letter  to  the  Lancet ;  but  it  is  for  you  to  say  that 
he,  having  been,  as  he  says,  misrepresented,  and  writing  this 
letter  to  set  himself  right,  whether  that  materially  detracts 
from  the  credit  which  is  due  to  him. 

Then  Dr.  Rees  follows,  and  he  corroborates  the  evidence 
given  by  Dr.  Taylor.  Here,  therefore,  is  Dr.  Rees,  whom  no 
one  can  suppose  to  have  an  interest  in  the  matter.  I  do  not 
know  what  interest  it  can  be  supposed  that  Dr.  Taylor  had 
in  the  matter,  for  he  was  regularly  employed  in  his  profession ; 
he  knew  nothing  about  Mr.  Palmer  until  he  was  called  on  by 
Mr.  Stevens  to  analyse  the  contents  of  the  jar;  he  had 
no  animosity  8 gainst  him,  and  no  interest  whatever  in 
misrepresenting  the  matter. 

Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEB — He  said  that  the  experiments  with  the 
two  rabbits  were  made  after  the  inquest. 

LORD  CAMPBELL — Certainly;  it  cannot  matter  whether  they 
were  made  before  or  after  if  they  are  witnesses  of  truth.  It 
is  the  case  that  there  was  the  death  of  the  animals  by  strych- 
nia, and  that  after  death  no  strychnia  could  be  found  in 
the  animals;  and,  if  the  experiments  had  been  made  this 
morning,  the  effect  would  have  been  the  same.  Dr.  Taylor 
has  been  questioned  about  the  indiscreet  letter  which  he  wrote 
to  the  Lancet  and  some  indiscreet  conversation  which  he  had 
with  the  editor  of  the  Illustrated  Times;  but  with  regard  to 
Dr.  Rees  that  imputation  does  not  exist,  and  he  concurs  with 
Dr.  Taylor  in  the  evidence  that  the  rabbits  were  killed  by 
strychnia,  and  that,  although  they  did  everything  in  their 
power,  according  to  their  skill  and  knowledge,  to  discover 
the  strychnia,  as  they  did  with  regard  to  the  contents  of  the 
jar,  yet  no  strychnia  could  be  found.  You  will  judge  from 
the  vomiting  that  took  place  at  Shrewsbury,  and  afterwards 
T  273 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

Lord         at  Stafford,  whether  antimony  may  have  been  administered  to 
Campbell  £ook  a^  Shrewsbury  or  Stafford.     Antimony  may  not  produce 

death;  but  it  is  part  of  the  transaction,    and  deserves  your 

deliberate  consideration. 

The  Court  then  adjourned. 


274 


Twelfth  Day,  Tuesday,  27th  May,  1856. 

The  Court  met  at  ten  o'clock. 

LORD  CAMPBELL — Gentlemen  of  the  jury,  at  the  adjournment  Lord 
of  the  Court  yesterday  evening  I  had  finished  the  task  of  laying  Campbe 
before  you  all  the  evidence  on  the  part  of  the  prosecution; 
and  certainly  that  case,  if  not  answered,  does  present  for  your 
consideration  a  serious  case  against  the  prisoner  at  the  bar. 
It  appears  that  in  the  middle  of  November  he  was  involved 
in  pecuniary  difficulties  of  the  most  formidable  nature;  he 
had  engagements  to  perform  that  he  was  unable  to  perform 
without  some  most  extraordinary  expedients;  he  had  to  make 
payments  for  which  he  was  unprepared;  there  were  actions 
brought  against  both  himself  and  his  mother  upon  the  forged 
acceptances ;  he  had  no  credit  in  any  quarter  upon  which 
money  could  be  raised.  It  so  happened  that  at  that  time 
Cook,  the  deceased,  by  the  winning  of  the  race  on  the  13th 
November,  became  the  master  of  at  least  £1000,  and  there 
is  evidence  from  which  an  inference  may  be  drawn  that  the 
prisoner  formed  the  design  of  appropriating  that  money  to 
his  own  use,  and  that  he  is  prepared  to  do  whatever  was 
necessary  to  accomplish  that  object.  There  is  some  evidence 
that  he  did  appropriate  that  money  to  the  payment  of  debts 
for  which  he  alone  was  liable.  There  is  evidence  from  which 
it  may  be  inferred  that  he  drew  a  cheque  in  the  name  of  Cook, 
which  was  a  forgery,  upon  which  to  obtain  payment  of  part 
of  the  money  which  was  due  to  Cook;  and  there  is  further 
evidence  that  he  employed  Herring  to  collect  money  on  the 
Monday  and  to  appropriate  it  to  his  own  use.  What  effect 
would  have  been  produced  by  the  survival  of  Cook,  under 
such  circumstances,  you  are  to  consider.  However,  it  appears 
that  from  Cook's  death  he  contemplated  the  advantage  of 
obtaining  possession  of  the  horse  "  Polestar,"  which  had 
belonged  to  Cook;  and  you  have  evidence  of  his  having  fabri- 
cated a  document  which  was  to  declare  that  certain  bills  of 
exchange  with  which  it  appears  that  Cook  had  no  concern 
were  negotiated  for  Cook's  advantage,  and  that  the  prisoner 
at  the  bar  had  derived  no  benefit  from  them.  Gentlemen, 
that  was  brought  forward  after  Cook's  death,  and  if  Cook  had 
survived  that  fraud  must  have  been  exposed,  and  might  have 
been  punished.  Then,  gentlemen,  with  respect  to  the  joint 
liability  of  Cook  and  Palmer,  which,  it  is  said,  would  now  be 
thrown  entirely  upon  Palmer,  that  was  rather  a  distant  object; 
and  if  Palmer  had  got  possession  of  all  Cook's  property  by 
the  means  that  he  resorted  to,  he  would  not  have  been  a 

275 


Trial   of   William  Palmer. 

Lord  sufferer  by  his  death.  Then,  gentlemen,  as  to  the  important 
question  whether  Cook  must  be  supposed  to  have  died  by 
natural  disease  or  by  poison.  You  have  the  evidence  of  Sir 
Benjamin  Brodie  and  other  most  skilful  and  honourable  men, 
who  say  that,  in  their  opinion,  he  did  not  die  from  natural 
disease;  they  know  no  natural  disease  in  the  whole  catalogue 
of  diseases  which  attack  the  human  frame  that  will  account 
for  those  symptoms.  Further,  gentlemen,  the  witnesses  go 
on  to  say  that  they  believe  that  the  symptoms  that  were 
exhibited  by  Cook  were  the  symptoms  of  strychnia,  that  they 
were  what  would  be  expected  from  strychnia,  and  that,  com- 
paring those  symptoms  with  natural  tetanus,  they  do  not 
correspond  with  it,  but  they  do  correspond  with  the  symptoms 
brought  on  by  a  man  being  poisoned  by  the  administration  of 
strychnia.  Then,  gentlemen,  with  respect  to  the  consideration 
that  no  strychnia  was  found  in  the  body,  that  is  for  you  to 
consider,  and  no  doubt  you  will  pay  great  attention  to  it;  but 
there  is  no  point  of  law  according  to  which  the  poison  must 
be  found  in  the  body  of  the  deceased;  and  all  that  we  know 
respecting  the  poison  not  being  in  the  body  of  Cook  is  that 
in  that  part  of  the  body  that  was  analysed  by  Drs.  Taylor 
and  Rees  they  found  no  strychnia.  But  witnesses  of  great 
reputation  have  said,  Dr.  Christison  among  the  number,  that, 
under  certain  circumstances,  where  there  has  been  poison  by 
strychnia,  they  would  not  expect  the  strychnia  should  be 
detected;  and  you  have  the  evidence  of  Dr.  Taylor  and  Dr. 
Rees,  who  made  the  examination,  that  they  having  experi- 
mented upon  animals  killed  by  strychnia  which  they  them- 
selves administered,  and  by  resorting  to  the  same  means  that 
they  had  employed  in  examining  the  body  of  Cook,  no 
strychnia  could  be  found. 

Then,  gentlemen,  with  regard  to  the  length  of  time  that 
occurred  between  the  alleged  administration  of  the  strychnia 
and  the  time  that  the  symptoms  appeared,  the  evidence  seems 
to  me  to  lead  to  this  conclusion,  that,  where  it  is  adminis- 
tered to  animals  with  a  view  of  making  experiments  and  with 
a  view  of  observing  its  operations  as  quickly  as  possible, 
it  generally  operates  more  rapidly  than  in  the  human 
frame  when  it  is  put  in  the  shape  of  pills,  and  that  will 
depend  upon  the  manner  in  which  those  pills  are  compounded, 
and  likewise  on  the  state  of  the  health  and  body  of  the 
person  to  whom  they  are  to  be  administered,  and  whether 
there  may  or  may  not  have  been  any  previous  tampering  with 
the  health  of  that  person.  Instances  are  referred  to  where, 
even  in  the  human  body,  a  greater  space  of  time  has  elapsed 
than  in  this  case  between  the  administration  of  the  poison 
and  the  symptoms  which  were  exhibited. 

Mr.  SERJEANT  SHBE — I  think  that  is  not  so  upon  the  evidence, 
my  lord. 
276 


Charge    to   Jury. 


LORD  CAMPBELL — There  are  instances  referred  to  in  which  it  Lord 
has  been  detected;  there  have  been  instances  referred  to  in  the 
course  of  this  trial  in  which  there  has  been  as  long  an  interval. 

Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — I  believe  that  is  a  mistake. 

LORD  CAMPBELL — With  regard  to  there  being  no  blood  in 
the  heart,  which  seems  to  have  been  relied  upon,  it  appears 
that  the  result  is  this,  that  if  the  death  is  produced  by  an 
obstruction  of  the  respiratory  organs,  producing  asphyxia,  the 
blood  is  found  in  the  heart;  but  if  it  be  produced  by  a  spasm 
upon  the  heart  itself,  the  heart  contracts,  the  blood  is  expelled, 
and  no  blood  is  found  after  death.  Now,  taking  the  evidence 
before  us,  there  are  two  instances  where  that  took  place. 

Then,  gentlemen,  we  have  to  look  to  the  evidence  as  it 
implicates  the  prisoner  at  the  bar.  You  must  consider  the 
evidence  to  show  that  he  must  have  tampered  with  the  health 
of  the  deceased,  by  administering  something  to  him  in  the 
brandy  and  water,  in  the  broth,  and  in  the  other  things  which 
were  administered  to  him  at  Rugeley.  One  part  of  the 
broth  was  taken  by  Elizabeth  Mills,  as  she  swears,  and  the 
consequence  which  followed,  according  to  her  evidence  and  the 
evidence  of  Lavinia  Barnes,  was  that  she  was  taken  ill  with  a 
vomiting  in  the  stomach  as  Cook  the  deceased  had  been. 

Then,  gentlemen,  you  have  antimony  found  in  the  body  of 
the  deceased ;  antimony,  which  would  show  that  tartar  emetic, 
producing  vomiting,  had  been  administered,  and  it  seems  to 
be  clearly  proved  that  that  substance  was  found  in  his  body, 
from  what  source  you  are  to  say  from  the  evidence  before  you. 

Then,  gentlemen,  comes  the  more  direct  evidence  that  the 
prisoner  at  the  bar,  if  you  believe  the  witnesses,  procured  this 
very  poison  on  the  Monday  and  on  the  Tuesday — 3  grains,  I 
think,  on  the  Monday,  and  6  on  the  Tuesday.  For  what 
purpose  was  that  obtained?  The  evidence  of  the  witness  who 
swears  to  the  pcison  being  obtained  on  the  Monday  is  impeached, 
but  no  impeachment  rests  upon  the  evidence  of  the  witness 
who  swears  to  the  poison  being  sold  by  him  on  the  Tuesday 
to  the  prisoner  at  the  bar.  You  have  no  account  of  that 
poison ;  what  was  the  intention  with  which  it  was  purchased, 
and  what  was  the  application  of  it,  you  are  to  infer.  Then, 
gentlemen,  it  is  impossible  that  you  should  not  pay  attention 
to  the  conduct  of  the  prisoner  at  the  bar,  and  there  are  some 
instances  of  his  conduct  which  you  will  say  whether  they  belong 
to  what  might  be  expected  from  an  innocent  or  a  guilty  man. 
He  was  eager  to  have  the  body  fastened  down  in  the  coffin. 
Then,  with  regard  to  the  betting  book,  there  is  certainly 
evidence  from  which  you  may  infer  that  he  did  get  possession 
of  the  betting  book,  that  he  abstracted  it  and  concealed  it. 
Then,  gentlemen,  you  must  not  omit  his  conduct  in  trying  to 
bribe  the  postboy  to  overturn  the  carriage  in  which  the  jar 

277 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Lord  was  being  conveyed,  to  be  analysed  in  London,  and  from  which 
imp  evidence  might  be  obtained  of  his  guilt.  Again,  you  find  him 
tampering  with  the  postmaster,  and  procuring  from  the  post- 
master the  opening  of  a  letter  from  Dr.  Taylor,  who  had  been 
examining  the  contents  of  the  jar,  to  Mr.  Gardner,  the  attorney 
employed  upon  the  part  of  Mr.  Stevens.  And  then,  gentlemen, 
you  have  tampering  with  the  coroner,  and  trying  to  induce 
him  to  procure  a  verdict  from  the  coroner's  jury  which  would 
amount  to  an  acquittal.  These  are  serious  matters  for  your 
consideration,  but  you,  and  you  alone,  will  say  what  inference 
is  to  be  drawn  from  them.  If  not  answered,  they  certainly 
present  a  serious  case  for  your  consideration.  It  is  for  you 
to  say  whether  the  answer  is  satisfactory.  Either  you  may  be 
of  opinion  that  the  case  on  the  part  of  the  prosecution  is 
insufficient,  or  you  may  be  of  opinion  that  the  answer  to  it  is 
satisfactory. 

Then,  gentlemen,  that  answer  consists  of  two  parts — first, 
of  the  medical  evidence,  and,  secondly,  of  the  evidence  of  facts. 
With  regard  to  the  medical  evidence,  I  must  say  that  there 
were  examined  on  the  part  of  the  prisoner  a  number  of  gentle- 
men of  high  honour  and  solid  integrity  and  proved  scientific 
knowledge,  who  came  here  only  to  speak  the  truth  and  assist 
in  the  administration  of  justice.  You  may  be  of  opinion  that 
others  came  whose  object  was  to  procure  an  acquittal  of  the 
prisoner.  Gentlemen,  it  is  material,  in  the  due  administration 
of  justice,  that  a  witness  should  not  be  turned  into  an  advocate, 
any  more  than  an  advocate  should  be  turned  into  a  witness. 
It  is  for  you  to  say  whether  some  of  those  who  were  called  on 
the  part  of  the  prisoner  did  not  belong  to  the  category  which 
I  described  as  witnesses  becoming  advocates. 

Gentlemen,  the  first  witness  on  the  part  of  the  prisoner  was 
Mr.  Thomas  Nunneley.  (The  learned  judge  read  the  evidence 
of  Mr.  Nunneley  and  the  documents  therein  referred  to.)  You 
will  recollect  what  he  says,  and  you  will  form  your  opinion  as 
to  the  weight  that  is  to  be  given  to  it.  He  certainly  seemed 
to  me  to  give  his  evidence  in  a  manner  not  quite  becoming  a 
witness  in  a  Court  of  justice,  but  you  will  give  all  attention 
to  the  facts  to  which  he  refers  in  the  evidence  he  gave.  He 
differs  very  materially  in  his  general  opinion  from  several  of 
the  witnesses  who  were  examined  on  the  part  of  the  prosecu- 
tion. He  speaks  of  there  being  an  extraordinary  rigidity  of 
the  body  after  death,  when  there  has  been  a  death  of  this 
description,  with  other  symptoms,  and  he  attaches  considerable 
importance  to  the  heart  being  empty,  but  you  will  say  what 
weight  ought  to  be  attached  to  his  opinion. 

Mr.  William  Herapath  is  then  called.  (The  examination- 
in -chief  of  Mr.  Herapath  was  read.)  He  seems  to  differ  from 
Mr.  Nunneley  with  respect  to  the  rigidity  produced  by  this 
278 


Charge   to    Jury. 


poison.  Now,  gentlemen,  Mr.  Herapath  is  a  very  skilful  Lord 
chemist,  and  I  have  no  doubt  he  spoke  sincerely  what  he  CamPbe11 
thought,  and  what  was  his  opinion?  That  when  there  has  been 
death  by  strychnia,  strychnia  ought  to  be  discovered;  but 
it  seems  he  intimated  an  opinion  on  this  very  case  of  Cook 
that  there  might  have  been  strychnia,  and  that  Dr.  Taylor 
did  not  use  the  proper  means  to  detect  it.  Now,  the  only 
evidence  that  we  have  in  this  case  that  there  was  not  strych- 
nia is  the  analysis  by  Dr.  Taylor  and  Dr.  Rees  that  they  did 
not  discover  it.  As  I  before  pointed  out  to  you,  in  two  other 
cases  in  which  there  certainly  had  been  poisoning  by  strych- 
nia the  result  was  the  same — they  could  not  discover  it. 

Then  the  next  witness  is  Mr.  Rogers.  Now,  this  is  a 
gentleman  whom  there  seems  no  reason  to  doubt;  there  seems 
no  reason  to  doubt  the  facts  that  he  stated,  and  that  he  does 
sincerely  entertain  the  opinion  that  he  expresses;  and,  accord- 
ing to  his  evidence,  where  there  has  been  strychnia  mixed 
with  impure  matter,  it  may  be  expected  that  it  would  be 
detected  by  skilful  experimentalists,  and  by  using  the  proper 
tests.  Then  Dr.  Letheby  is  called;  he  is  the  medical  officer 
of  health  to  the  city  of  London  and  of  the  London  Hospital. 
I  doubt  not  that  Dr.  Letheby  speaks  sincerely,  and  according 
to  his  experience  and  opinion,  but  he  does  say  truly  that  cases 
vary  very  much,  and  that  there  may  be  cases  which  he  calls 
"exceptional,"  alluding  to  the  case  of  the  lady  at  Romsey; 
and  it  may  probably  be  the  fair  result  that  enough  of  this 
disease  is  not  known  to  be  aware  of  all  its  varieties,  and  that 
any  peculiarity  that  may  arise  where  there  is  strong  proba- 
bility of  strychnia  having  been  administered  would  not  be 
anything  3 ike  conclusive  evidence  to  rebut  that  result. 

Then  Mr.  Robert  Gray  is  examined.  Now,  gentlemen,  here 
you  have  a  case  of  what  is  called  idiopathic  tetanus;  but  you 
are  to  say  whether  from  this  you  can  infer  that  the  illness  of  Mr. 
Cook  was  idiopathic  tetanus.  The  great  weight  of  evidence 
seems  to  me  to  show  that  it  was  not  idiopathic  any  more  than 
traumatic  tetanus ;  but  that  whatever  form  of  disease  it  might 
be,  it  would  not  be  idiopathic  tetanus;  and  you  will  find  that 
the  symptoms  vary  most  materially  in  their  appearance  from 
the  case  that  is  here  detailed  in  the  duration  as  well  as  the 
rest  of  the  course  of  events. 

The  next  witness  that  was  called  was  Mr.  Brown  Ross.  Now, 
gentlemen,  I  do  not  know  for  what  purpose  the  case  alluded 
to  by  Mr.  Ross  was  brought  before  you,  unless  to  lead  to  an 
inference  that  Mr.  Cook's  was  a  case  of  tetanus  of  the  same 
sort  with  this  which  is  here  described,  because  this  was  tetanus ; 
and  I  suppose  it  was  intended  that  you  are  to  infer  that  Mr. 
Cook's  was  of  the  same  description;  but  whether  you  call  it 
idiopathic  or  traumatic,  it  was  a  case  of  tetanus — was  directly 

279 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Lord  to  be  ascribed  to  wounda  which  were  upon  his  body,  and  which 
Campbei  ftre  j^re  described.  No  such  wounds  were  upon  the  body  of 
Mr.  Cook;  and  other  witnesses  who  were  examined  on  the 
part  of  the  defence  say  that  this  was  not  a  case  of  tetanus 
at  all;  but  then,  even  in  this  case  that  has  been  described, 
you  see  there  were  the  symptoms  so  nearly  approaching  those 
of  strychnia  that  strychnia  was  suspected,  but  there  was  no 
ground  for  it;  and  in  the  case  described  there  was  no  ground 
for  supposing  strychnia  could  by  possibility  be  the  cause  of 
death. 

The  next  witness  is  a  witness  worthy  of  all  praise  for  the 
sincerity  which  he  exhibited.  I  mean  Dr.  Wrightson.  Now, 
gentlemen,  this  witness,  who,  I  have  no  doubt,  is  a  most 
scientific  and  a  very  honourable  man,  speaks  as  a  man  of 
science,  and,  according  to  him,  the  poison  would  be  found  in 
the  body;  but  he  speaks  with  proper  caution,  and  upon  his 
evidence  you  ought  to  say  whether,  under  particular  circum- 
stances, it  might  not  be  discoverable,  or  whether  the  person 
seeking  for  it  might  fail  to  employ  the  proper  means  for 
detecting  it  in  the  body. 

Then  comes  Mr.  Partridge,  a  most  respectable  gentleman, 
who  says  he  has  been  many  years  in  practice  as  a  surgeon, 
and  is  professor  of  anatomy  at  King's  College.  Now,  gentle- 
men, you  have  here  the  opinion  of  a  very  respectable  witness 
as  to  the  different  topics  that  he  touches  upon;  and  the  most 
important  one  is  that  he  thinks  that  the  symptoms  that  were 
exhibited  did  not  correspond  with  what  he  should  expect  from 
strychnia;  but  he  speaks  from  his  own  experience,  and  you 
have  it  from  the  other  witnesses  that  the  symptoms  vary 
considerably  in  different  cases. 

The  next  witness  is  Mr.  John  Gay.  Now,  gentlemen,  this 
was  a  case,  you  see,  of  tetanus  arising  from  the  toe  being 
smashed ;  and  it  seems  to  me,  although,  of  course,  you  will 
form  your  own  opinion  upon  it,  bears  no  analogy  whatever  to 
the  case  of  Cook,  with  regard  to  whom  no  such  cause  could  be 
assigned.  Again,  gentlemen,  he  says,  what  is  very  material, 
that,  in  the  event  of  a  given  state  of  tetanus,  it  would  be 
extremely  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  without  collateral  evi- 
dence, to  ascribe  the  tetanic  disease  to  any  cause  in  the  absence 
of  any  evidence  as  to  the  cause.  But  you  will  form  your  own 
opinion  upon  it.  Therefore  you  are  to  look  to  collateral 
evidence;  and  if  the  collateral  evidence  would  impute  the 
symptoms  of  tetanic  convulsions  to  any  particular  cause, 
according  to  this  witness  that  cause  may  be  assigned.  That 
I  say  with  »  view  to  get  what  is  called  the  moral  evidence  with 
regard  to  the  conduct  of  a  particular  person,  and  with  regard 
to  what  He  may  have  done  or  what  he  may  have  had  in  his 
possession. 
280 


Charge    to   Jury. 


Now  comes  Dr.  M'Donald.     You  will  observe  that  he  gives  Lord 
an  account  of  experiments  he  made  for  the  prisoner,  and  you  Camp 
will  see  the  lengths  to  which  he  goes  in  adopting  a  new  form  of 
disease  of  epilepsy  with  these  complications.     You  are  to  say 
what   weight  you   give   to   that   evidence   compared   with   the 
witnesses  who  have  given  evidence  before  you. 

The  next  witness  is  Mr.  John  Bainbridge.  The  object  of  this 
witness's  evidence  seems  to  be  to  induce  you  to  believe  that 
this  was  a  case  of  epilepsy,  and  from  the  symptoms  you  will 
say  whether  you  can  come  to  that  conclusion. 

The  next  witness  is  Mr.  Edward  Steady.  The  case  referred  to 
by  this  witness  seems  to  be  a  case  of  traumatic  tetanus;  and 
you  will  say,  if  it  were  idiopathic,  whether  the  course  of  it  in 
the  slightest  degree  resembles  the  symptoms  of  Cook,  the 
deceased. 

The  next  witness  is  Dr.  Robinson.  Now,  gentlemen,  you 
have  this  respectable  physician,  who  gives  an  account  from 
which  you  are  called  to  infer  that  Cook's  case  was  a  case  of 
epilepsy.  He  says  he  should  only  take  it  to  be  epilepsy  in 
the  absence  of  evidence  of  strychnia  being  administered. 
He  says  that  all  the  symptoms  described  by  Jones  on  the  Tues- 
day night  are  consistent  with  strychnia ;  and,  with  regard 
to  epilepsy,  he  says  in  no  case  where  epilepsy  had  existed  would 
it  cause  death  without  a  loss  of  consciousness.  Cook,  you  will 
remember,  remained  conscious  to  the  last,  and  you  will  say 
whether,  upon  the  evidence  that  is  laid  before  you,  there  was 
or  was  not  a  bending  of  the  body,  which  is  characteristic  of 
tetanus,  and  what  the  witnesses  have  described  as  being 
inconsistent  with  epilepsy. 

The  next  witness  is  Dr.  Richardson,  who  now  brings  in  for 
the  first  time  angina  pectoris  as  a  disease  of  which  it  may  be 
presumed  Cook  died.  Now,  gentlemen,  you  have  to  attend  to 
this  case;  the  witness,  who  seems  most  highly  respectable, 
says  this  case  being  detailed  by  him,  the  symptoms  were  con- 
sistent with  strychnia,  and  that,  if  he  had  known  as  much  of 
strychnia  then  as  he  does  now,  he  would  have  made  an  analysis 
to  see  whether  strychnia  was  in  the  body.  The  great  ques- 
tion that  I  propounded  for  your  consideration  was  whether 
Cook's  symptoms  were  consistent  with  strychnia,  and,  if  they 
were  not,  then  the  conclusion  would  be  in  favour  of  the 
prisoner;  but  if  they  were  consistent  with  strychnia,  then 
you  are  not  upon  that  alone  to  find  a  verdict  of  guilty  against 
him;  but  you  are  to  consider  the  other  evidence  and  see 
whether  the  death  arose  from  strychnia  or  not.  Dr.  Wright- 
son  is  recalled,  and  he  says  that,  in  his  opinion,  when  strych- 
nia is  entirely  absorbed  in  the  system  it  is  diffused  equally 
throughout  the  entire  system.  Dr.  Wrightson  is  a  philosopher, 
and,  as  a  man  of  science,  he  speaks  with  caution,  and  you 

281 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Lord         have  heard  his  evidence.     He  says  that  if  the  minimum  dose 

Campbell  wgre  taken  to  destroy  life,   and  then  a  long  interval  elapsed 

between  the  taking  of  the  poison  and  death,  the  more  complete 

would  be  the  absorption,  and  the  less  chance  there  would  be 

of  finding  it  in  the  stomach. 

Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEB — I  think  he  said  he  would  expect  to  find 
it  in  the  spleen,  the  liver,  and  the  blood. 

LORD  CAMPBELL — Yes;  "I  should  look  for  it  elsewhere,  in 
the  spleen,  the  liver,  and  the  blood." 

Then  comes  Mr.  Oliver  Pemberton.  The  evidence  of  this 
witness  only  goes  to  show  that,  in  his  opinion,  an  examination 
of  the  body  at  that  time  was  not  of  much  value,  and  did  not 
afford  the  means  of  coming  to  a  satisfactory  opinion,  differing 
in  opinion,  therefore,  from  others  that  had  been  called. 

His  lordship  then  dealt  with  the  witnesses  as  to  facts,  and 
pointed  out  that,  according  to  the  trains,  Palmer  could  not 
have  arrived  in  Rugeley  on  the  Monday  night  before  ten  o'clock. 

Now,  gentlemen,  comes  a  very  material  witness,  who,  if  he 
were  to  be  believed,  would  be  very  important,  particularly 
upon  one  part  of  the  case.  I  mean  Jeremiah  Smith — and  you, 
having  heard  the  whole  of  his  evidence,  the  examination  and 
cross-examination,  are  to  say  what  faith  or  reliance  you  can 
place  upon  his  testimony.  Now,  gentlemen,  this  would  show, 
if  true,  that  the  genuine  and  very  identical  pills  that  Bamford 
had  made,  and  in  the  state  in  which  he  had  prepared  them, 
were  taken  by  Cook  before  Palmer  arrived  from  London  at 
Rugeley,  or,  at  any  rate,  before  he  came  to  the  Talbot  Arms. 
It  is  for  you  to  say  whether  you  can  place  reliance  upon  such 
testimony.  You  saw  how  he  conducted  himself  in  the  witness- 
box,  and  how  he  at  last  denied  that  the  signature  to  the  instru- 
ment which  he  purported  to  have  attested,  and  which  he 
received  from  the  prisoner  at  the  bar,  was  in  his  handwriting. 
He  said  it  was  like  it,  but  it  was  not  his  handwriting.  Then 
it  appears  that  he  did  receive  £5,  and  you  are  to  say  whether 
it  was  not  clearly  for  attesting  that  very  assignment.  The 
counterfoil  of  the  cheque  for  £5,  from  William  Palmer  the 
prisoner,  is  shown  him ;  and  with  that  piece  of  paper  he  goes 
to  the  bank  and  receives  the  £5.  Can  you  believe  a  man 
who  so  disgraces  himself  in  the  witness-box?  It  is  for  you  to 
say  what  faith  you  can  place  in  a  witness  who,  by  his  own 
admission,  engaged  in  such  fraudulent  proceedings.  We  are 
now  upon  veracity,  and  you  are  to  say  whether  you  can  believe 
a  witness  who  at  last  acknowledges  that  he  had  been  applied 
to  and  had  been  engaged  in  procuring  an  insurance  on  the 
life  of  Walter  Palmer,  who  had  been  a  bankrupt  six  years 
before,  and  who  had  no  means  of  living  except  by  the  allow- 
ance of  his  friends  and  an  allowance  made  to  him  by  the 
prisoner  at  the  bar. 
282 


Charge    to    Jury. 

Again,  he  acknowledges  that  he  was  engaged  in  the  proposal  Lord 
to  insure  the  life  of  Bates  for  £10,000.  Bates  being  at  that  H 
time  superintending  the  stables  of  the  prisoner  at  the  bar,  living 
in  lodgings  at  6s.  6d.  a  week,  apparently  having  no  property, 
and  nothing  depending  upon  his  life,  his  life  was  to  be  insured 
for  £10,000.  Smith  gets  himself  appointed  agent  to  an 
insurance  office,  and,  with  a  knowledge  of  these  facts,  he  pro- 
poses the  insurance  to  be  accepted  by  the  office  which  he 
represents ;  and  can  you  believe  such  a  witness  who  acknow- 
ledges himself  to  have  been  engaged  in  such  fraudulent  pro- 
ceedings, and  who,  now  being  examined  upon  his  oath,  denies 
the  handwriting  of  his  own  attestation  to  that  document? 
Gentlemen,  of  his  credit  you  are  to  judge.  His  evidence  would 
be  material  as  to  what  took  place  on  the  Monday  night,  ^  be- 
cause it  would  show  that  the  pills  that  Cook  took  that  night 
were  taken  as  they  had  been  prepared  by  Bamford,  and  before 
the  prisoner  at  the  bar  had  had  any  opportunity  to  substitute 
others  for  them  in  the  pill  box.  Such  is  the  case  with  regard 
to  what  took  place  on  the  Tuesday.  If  it  stood  there,  and  if 
it  were  believed,  it  would  be  evidence  in  favour  of  the  prisoner 
at  the  bar ;  and  you  are  to  say  whether  you  believe  it,  or,  if 
you  disbelieve  it,  what  effect  it  has  upon  the  other  testimony 
that  has  been  brought  forward. 

Gentlemen,  the  case  is  now  in  your  hands;  and,  unless  upon 
the  part  of  the  prosecution  a  clear  conviction  has  been  brought 
to  your  minds  of  the  guilt  of  the  prisoner,  it  is  your  duty  to 
acquit  him.  You  are  not  to  proceed  even  upon  a  strong 
suspicion ;  there  must  be  the  strongest  conviction  in  your 
minds  that  he  was  guilty  of  this  offence ;  and  if  there  be  any 
reasonable  doubt  remaining  in  your  mind,  you  will  give  him 
the  benefit  of  that  doubt;  but  if  you  come  to  a  clear  con- 
viction that  he  was  guilty,  you  will  not  be  deterred  from  doing 
your  duty  by  any  considerations  such  as  have  been  suggested 
to  you.  You  will  remember  the  oath  that  you  have  taken, 
and  you  will  act  accordingly.  Gentlemen,  I  have  performed 
my  task ;  you  have  now  to  discharge  yours,  and  may  God 
direct  you  to  a  right  finding. 

Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — Your  lordship  stated  to  the  jury  that 
the  question  for  them  to  consider  was  whether  the  evidence 
that  has  been  brought  forward  is  consistent  with  the  death  of 
Cook  by  strychnia.  I  submit  to  your  lordship  that  that  is 
not  the  question  which  ought  to  be  submitted  to  the  jury. 

LORD  CAMPBELL — Serjeant  Shee,  that  is  not  the  question  that 
I  have  submitted  to  the  jury;  it  is  a  question.  I  told  them 
that  unless  they  considered  that  the  symptoms  were  consistent 
with  death  by  strychnia  they  ought  to  acquit  the  prisoner. 

Mr.  SERJEANT  SHEE — It  is  my  duty,  my  lord,  not  to  be  de- 
terred by  any  expression  of  displeasure  at  my  stating  it ;  I  am 

283 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Lord  accountable  not  only  to  your  lordships,  but  I  am  accountable 
Campbell  ^  ft  Viuc]:i  higher  tribunal ;  and  I  am  bound  to  submit  to  you 
what  occurs  to  me  to  be  the  proper  question  to  be  put  to  the 
jury  in  this  case — it  is  your  lordship's  duty  to  overrule  it  if 
you  think  proper.  I  submit  to  your  lordships  that  the  ques- 
tion, whether  the  symptoms  of  Cook's  disease  were  consistent 
with  death  by  strychnia  is  a  wrong  question,  unless  it  is 
followed  by  this,  "  and  inconsistent  with  death  by  other  and 
natural  causes  " — and  that  the  question  should  be,  whether 
the  medical  evidence  establishes  beyond  all  reasonable  doubt 
the  death  of  Cook  by  strychnia — it  is  my  duty  to  submit 
that  to  your  lordship. 

LORD  CAMPBELL — Gentlemen  of  the  jury,  I  did  not  submit  to 
you  that  the  question  upon  which  your  verdict  alone  was  to 
turn  was  whether  the  symptoms  of  Cook  were  consistent  with 
death  by  strychnia,  but  I  said  that  that  was"  a  most  material 
question  for  you;  and  I  desired  you  to  consider  that  question 
with  a  view  to  guide  your  judgment  as  to  whether  he  died 
from  natural  disease,  or  whether  he  did  not  die  by  poison,  by 
strychnia  administered  by  the  prisoner.  Then  I  went  on 
to  say  that  if  you  were  of  opinion  that  the  symptoms  were 
consistent  with  death  from  strychnia,  you  should  go  on  to 
consider  the  other  evidence  given  in  the  case,  whether  strych- 
nia had  been  administered  to  him;  and  whether  strychnia 
had  been  administered  to  him  by  the  prisoner  at  the  bar ;  and 
those  are  the  questions  that  I  again  put  to  you.  If  you  come 
to  the  conclusion  that  those  symptoms  were  consistent  with  the 
strychnia,  do  you  believe  from  the  evidence  that  it  was 
strychnia,  and  do  you  believe  that  that  strychnia  was  ad- 
ministered by  the  prisoner  at  the  bar?  Do  not  find  a  verdict 
of  guilty  unless  you  believe  that  the  strychnia  was  administered 
to  the  deceased  by  the  prisoner  at  the  bar.  But  if  you  believe 
that,  it  is  your  duty  to  God  and  man  to  find  a  verdict  of  guilty. 

The  jury  retired,  and,  after  an  absence  of  an  hour  and 
eighteen  minutes,  returned  a  verdict  of  guilty. 

The  prisoner  was  asked  what  he  had  to  say  why  the  Court 
should  not  pass  sentence  of  death  upon  him  according  to  law, 
and  he  made  no  answer. 

LORD  CAMPBELL  then  said — William  Palmer,  after  a  long  and 
impartial  trial  you  have  been  convicted  by  a  jury  of  your  country 
of  the  crime  of  wilful  murder.  In  that  verdict  my  two  learned 
brothers,  who  have  so  anxiously  watched  this  trial,  and  myself 
entirely  concur,  and  consider  that  verdict  altogether  satis- 
factory. The  case  is  attended  with  such  circumstances  of 
aggravation  that  I  do  not  dare  to  touch  upon  them.  Whether 
it  is  the  first  and  only  offence  of  this  sort  which  you  have  com- 
284 


Charge    to   Jury. 


mitted  is  certainly  known  only  to  God  and  your  own  conscience.  Lord 
It  is  seldom  that  such  a  familiarity  with  the  means  of  death  CamPbe11 
should  be  shown  without  long  experience ;  but  for  this  offence 
of  which  you  have  been  found  guilty  your  life  is  forfeited. 
You  must  prepare  to  die ;  and  I  trust  that,  as  you  can  expect 
no  mercy  in  this  world,  you  will,  by  repentance  of  your 
crimes,  seek  to  obtain  mercy  from  Almighty  God.  The  Act 
of  Parliament  under  which  you  have  been  tried,  and  under 
which  you  have  been  brought  to  the  bar  of  this  Court  at  your 
own  request,  gives  leave  to  the  Court  to  direct  that  the  sentence 
under  such  circumstances  shall  be  executed  either  within  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  Central  Criminal  Court  or  in  the  county 
where  the  offence  was  committed.  We  think  that,  for  the 
sake  of  example,  the  sentence  ought  to  be  executed  in  the 
county  of  Stafford.  Now,  I  hope  that  this  terrible  example 
will  deter  others  from  committing  such  atrocious  crimes,  and 
that  it  will  be  seen  that  whatever  art,  or  caution,  or  experi- 
ence may  accomplish,  such  an  offence  will  be  detected  and 
punished.  However  destructive  poisons  may  be,  it  is  so 
ordained  by  Providence  that  there  are  means  for  the  safety  of 
His  creatures  for  detecting  and  punishing  those  who  administer 
them.  I  again  implore  you  to  repent  and  prepare  for  the 
awful  change  which  awaits  you.  I  will  not  seek  to  harrow 
up  your  feelings  by  any  enumeration  of  the  circumstances  of 
this  foul  murder.  I  will  content  myself  now  with  passing 
upon  you  the  sentence  of  the  law,  which  is,  that  you  be  taken 
hence  to  the  gaol  of  Newgate,  and  thence  removed  to  the  gaol 
of  the  county  of  Stafford,  the  county  in  which  the  offence  of 
which  you  are  justly  convicted  was  committed ;  and  that  you 
be  taken  thence  to  a  place  of  execution,  and  be  there  hanged 
by  the  neck  until  you  be  dead ;  and  that  your  body  be  after- 
wards buried  within  the  precincts  of  the  prison  in  which  you 
shall  be  last  confined  after  your  conviction ;  and  may  the  Lord 
have  mercy  upon  your  soul.  Amen ! 

The  prisoner  was  executed  at  eight  o'clock  on  Saturday 
morning,  14th  June,  1856,  in  front  of  Stafford  gaol.  He 
reiterated  that  he  was  "  innocent  of  poisoning  Cook  by 
strychnia." 


385 


APPENDICES. 


APPENDIX   I. 

LETTER   PROM   THOMAS   PALMER,  BROTHER  OF  WILLIAM   PALMER, 
TO  THE  LORD  CHIEF-JUSTICE  CAMPBELL. 


The  following  extract  from  the  Diary  of  Lord  Chief  Justice 
Campbell  will  serve  as  introduction  to  the  following  letter  : — 

June  28. 

Since  my  last  notice  in  this  journal  the  great  event  has  been  the 
trial  of  William  Palmer  at  the  Central  Criminal  Court  for  poisoning, 
which  began  on  Wednesday,  May  14th,  and  did  not  finish  till  Tuesday, 
May  27th — the  most  memorable  judicial  proceedings  for  the  last  fifty 
years,  engaging  the  attention  not  only  of  this  country  but  of  all  Europe. 

My  labour  and  anxiety  were  fearful ;  but  I  have  been  rewarded  by 
public  approbation.  The  Court  sat  eight  hours  a  day.  When  I  got 
home,  renouncing  all  other  engagements,  I  employed  myself  till  mid- 
night in  revising  my  notes  and  considering  the  evidence.  Luckily  I 
had  a  Sunday  to  prepare  for  my  summing  up,  and  to  this  I  devoted 
fourteen  continuous  hours.  The  following  day,  after  reading  in  Court 
ten  hours,  I  had  only  got  through  the  proofs  for  the  prosecution.  My 
anxiety  was  over  on  the  last  day,  when  the  verdict  of  guilty  was  pro- 
nounced and  I  had  sentenced  the  prisoner  to  die,  for  I  had  no  doubt 
of  his  guilt,  and  I  was  conscious  that  by  God's  assistance  I  had  done 
my  duty.  Such  was  the  expressed  opinion  of  the  public  and  of  all 
the  respectable  part  of  the  Press.  But  a  most  ruffian-like  attempt  was 
made  by  the  friends  of  the  prisoner  to  abuse  me,  and  to  obtain  a  pardon 
or  reprieve  on  the  ground  that  the  prisoner  had  not  had  a  fair  trial. 
Having  unbounded  funds  at  their  command,  they  corrupted  some  dis- 
reputable journals  to  admit  these  diatribes  against  me.  They  published 
a  most  libellous  pamphlet  under  the  title  of  "  A  Letter  from  the  Rev. 
T.  Palmer,"  the  prisoner's  brother,  to  Lord  Chief-Justice  Campbell, 
in  which  the  Chief-Justice  was  represented  to  be  worse  than  his  pre- 
decessor Jeffreys,  and  it  was  asserted  that  there  had  been  nothing  in 
England  like  the  last  trial  since  the  "  Bloody  Assize."  However,  the 
Home  Secretary  remained  firm  and  the  law  took  its  course. 

The  Rev.  T.  Palmer  has  since  disclaimed  the  pamphlet,  and  it  is  said 
to  have  been  written  by  a  blackguard  barrister.  I  bear  him  no  enmity. 
He  has  done  me  no  harm ;  but  for  the  sake  of  example  he  ought  to  be 
disbarred. 


A  LETTER  TO  THE  LORD  CHIEF-JUSTICE  CAMPBELL. 

After  a  struggle  with  internal  emotions  too  dreadful  to  be  described, 
amid  the  tears  and  lamentations  of  my  family,  the  bereavement  of  a 
household  knit  together  in  bonds  of  strongest  love  and  amity,  and 
the  smothered,  not  wholly-concealed  indignation  of  relatives  and 
friends,  I  address  your  lordship,  not  only  as  the  man  who  has 
sealed  my  brother's  fate  and  borne  him  to  the  foot  of  the  scaffold, 
but  as  the  judge  who  will  have  to  render  an  account  to  your 
fellow-men,  to  posterity,  and  to  God  of  your  dealing  towards  a 
human  being  whose  fate  was,  to  a  certain  extent,  placed  in  your 
hands,  and  on  whose  destiny  you  operated  in  a  manner  hitherto 

u  289 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

unknown,  at  least  in  our  days.  The  law,  with  bitter  irony,  pro- 
pounds it  is  an  axiom  dear  to  Englishmen  that  a  magistrate  invested 
with  powers  like  your  lordship  is  "  counsel  for  the  prisoner " ;  but 
every  man  who  witnesses  the  late  mockery  at  the  Old  Baliey,  in 
which  you  played  so  prominent  a  part,  confesses — to  his  own  heart, 
at  least,  whatever  he  may  own  in  public — that  a  more  infamous 
delusion  has  never  been  solemnly  enacted  before  a  British  audience 
since  those  days  of  shame  when  Jeffreys  went  forth  upon  the 
"bloody  assize,"  and,  in  the  name  of  Justice  and  the  Law,  con- 
signed the  young,  the  innocent,  the  helpless,  and  the  stricken 
with  years  to  the  dungeon  and  the  gallows,  professing  all  the  while 
to  be  actuated  by  a  sense  of  duty  to  the  Crown  and  to  the  people. 

These  may  appear  strong  words,  and  this  a  heavy  accusation,  but 
I  will  demonstrate  it  to  all  who  read  this  letter.  What  though  I 
may  not  hope  to  move  your  lordship  to  justice,  yet  I  may,  at  least, 
awaken  within  you  a  sense  of  that  awful  day  which  approaches 
you  as  certainly  as  it  looms  on  my  brother,  and  which,  at  your 
advanced  age,  cannot  be  far  removed.  I  may  awaken  within  you 
a  feeling  of  compunction,  or,  at  all  events,  of  solemn  reflection ;  for 
you,  also,  will  have  to  stand  before  a  Judge  enthroned  in  majesty 
and  power ;  before  whom  you  will  be,  indeed,  as  nought ;  and  when 
upon  your  brow  appears  the  awful  record  of  your  administration  of 
justice  to  the  man  whom  you  have  condemned,  in  that  hour  also 
shall  you  remember  this  word  from  the  brother  of  his  affections. 
May  it  avail  you  before  that  terrific  moment !  May  it  serve  to  save 
yourself  from  yourself,  and  to  warn  you  in  time  that  it  is  the  duty 
of  a  British  judge  to  hear,  not  to  condemn ;  to  adjudicate,  not  to 
execute ;  to  administer  the  law  as  the  representative  of  the  country, 
not  to  pervert  it  to  his  own  purposes  with  the  anxiety  of  a  hangman. 

My  lord,  in  one  week — in  some  short  days  from  this — William 
Palmer,  my  brother,  will  stand  before  his  God ;  he  will  have  to 
answer  for  his  life,  and  for  the  sins  of  his  life ;  he  will  have  to 
endure  that  fearful  scrutiny  into  his  past  from  which  even  the  best 
of  us  may  well  shrink  with  terror.  But  there  is  one  crime  for 
which  he  will  not  have  to  answer,  and  that  is  the  crime  for  which 
your  lordship  has  convicted  him.  My  brother,  William  Palmer,  is 
no  murderer.  His  whole  life,  his  whole  character,  his  whole  bearing 
at  and  since  the  trial  are  quite  convincing  of  the  fact.  From  child- 
hood upward  no  man  was  gentler  of  heart ;  his  charity  was  inex- 
haustible ;  his  kindliness  to  all  who  were  in  distress  was  well  known. 
To  him  the  wanderer  resorted  in  his  afflictions ;  by  him  the  poor  and 
houseless  were  fed  and  comforted.  I  write  in  the  face  of  the  public, 
with  my  character  as  a  gentleman  and  a  clergyman  at  stake,  and 
I  avow  only  facts  that  cannot  be  denied.  His  liberality  was  a 
proverb,  his  frank  sincerity,  his  courage,  his  faithful  loyalty  to  his 
friends,  his  temperance,  hia  performance  of  the  duties  of  religion, 
hie  social  relations  in  the  character  of  father,  husband,  and  son 
won  for  him  the  love  and  confidence  of  all  who  approached  him ; 
and  though  it  is  true  that  in  one  fatal  instance  he  violated  the 
laws  of  his  country,  and  subjected  himself  to  a  severe  penalty  for 
an  infringement  of  its  commercial  code,  yet  this  excepted,  his  was 
in  all  respects  the  very  opposite  of  that  cool,  calculating,  cowardly, 
crafty  temper  which  is  essential  to  the  poisoner,  and  which  we  know 
cannot  co-exist  with  these  qualities  which  my  brother  possessed  from 
his  earliest  years  down  even  to  the  day  when  your  lordship  sent 
him  to  his  death.  My  lord,  beware,  lest  while  you  convict  of 
murder  you  are  not  yourself  a  party  to  a  murder !  It  is  not  the 
first  time  that  the  annals  of  our  own  jurisprudence  have  exhibited 
traces  of  blood ;  it  is  not  the  first  time  that  judges  have  persuaded 
juries  to  convict  to  death  on  circumstantial  evidence.  The  records 
290 


Appendix  I. 


of  every  country  abound  in  remarkable  cases  of  persons  judicially 
destroyed  for  crimes  of  which  they  were  entirely  innocent.  A  mis- 
taken resemblance  to  the  actual  perpetrator,  the  fact  of  having  been 
6een  near  the  spot  where  the  crime  was  committed,  an  apparent 
motive  of  self-interest,  a  confusion  of  manner  when  he  was  accused, 
or  some  other  suspicious  circumstance  has  contributed  to  bring  the 
odium  of  guilt  and  consequent  punishment  on  the  wrong  party.  At 
one  time  cases  of  frightful  injustice  were  committed  by  condemning 
individuals  for  murder  when  it  was  not  proved  that  a  murder  had 
been  perpetrated.  The  now  well-recognised  principle  in  criminal 
law — violated,  indeed,  by  your  lordship  in  my  brother's  case — that 
no  murder  can  be  held  as  having  been  committed  till  the  body  of 
the  deceased  has  been  discovered,  had,  apparently,  terminated  this 
form  of  legal  oppression  until  your  lordship  persuaded  a  jury  to  find 
a  man  guilty  of  blood  where  there  was  no  actual  positive  proof  that 
a  homicide  had  at  all  been  perpetrated,  and  when  the  chemical 
analysis  had  even  demonstrated  that  it  had  not.  Another,  and 
perhaps  one  of  the  most  common  causes  of  prejudice  in  trials  of 
this  nature  was  the  prevarication  or  the  suspicious  conduct  of  the 
party  charged  with  the  offence,  and  this,  likewise,  your  lordship 
told  the  jury  was  proof  of  my  brother's  guiltiness.  Finding  him- 
self, though  innocent,  placed  in  an  awkward  predicament,  the 
accused  sometimes  invented  a  plausible  story  in  his  defence,  and 
the  deceit  being  discovered,  he  was  at  once  presumed  to  be  in 
every  respect  guilty.  Sir  Matthew  Hale  mentions  a  melancholy 
instance  of  this  kind.  An  uncle,  who  had  the  bringing  up  of  his 
niece,  to  whom  he  was  heir-at-law,  correcting  her  for  some  offence, 
she  was  heard  to  say,  "  Good  uncle,  do  not  kill  me  !  "  after  which 
she  could  not  be  found.  The  uncle  was  committed  on  suspicion  of 
having  murdered  her,  and  was  admonished  by  the  judge  of  the 
assize  to  find  out  the  child  by  the  next  assizes.  Being  unable  to  dis- 
cover his  niece,  he  brought  another  child,  dressed  like  her,  and 
resembling  her  in  person  and  years ;  but,  on  examination,  the  fraud 
was  detected,  and  upon  t"he  presumption  of  guilt  which  those  cir- 
cumstances afforded,  he  was  sentenced  to  be  hanged,  and  the  sen- 
tence was  executed.  The  child  afterwards  reappeared,  when  of 
age,  to  claim  her  land.  On  being  beaten  by  her  uncle  she  had 
run  away,  and  had  been  received  by  a  stranger ;  a  jury,  worked 
upon  by  suspicion,  and  probably  also  by  a  judge  who  pandered  then, 
as  judges  pander  now,  to  public  prejudice,  had  thus  murdered  an 
innocent  man ;  and  that  great  Chief -Justice  has  preserved  the  fact 
as  a  warning  for  all  time  to  beware  of  judgment  in  cases  of  life  and 
death.  Yet  your  lordship,  who  has  succeeded  that  noble  luminary 
of  the  law,  forgot  this  memorable  case  in  the  moment  when  you 
ought  most  to  have  remembered  it ;  though  I  take  upon  myself  to 
say  the  circumstantial  evidence  against  my  brother  was  not  half 
as  powerful  as  that  against  this  gentleman  whose  fate  has  thus 
been  commemorated  in  vain  by  your  lordship's  wise  and  Christian 
predecessor  in  the  judgment  seat.  Yet  do  I  believe  that,  as  surely 
as  the  sun  shines  or  that  God  lives  in  the  heavens,  there  will  come 
a  day  when  my  brother's  innocence  will  be  demonstrated  before  all 
men,  and  though  your  lordship  may  not  live  to  see  it,  yet  will 
his  blood  cry  out  from  his  prison  grave,  and  his  fate  will  blacken 
the  memory  of  all  who  were  parties  to  his  death  with  immortal 
infamy.  For  it  is  at  your  door  the  public  will  lay  his  conviction — 
not  at  that  of  the  jury  who  were  worked  upon  to  convict,  and  who 
would  have  been  more  than  men  if  they  had  resisted  your  looks, 
your  gestures,  your  actions,  and  your  arguments.  My  lord,  since 
this  conviction  of  death  has  been  recorded  I  have  seen  William 
Palmer.  I  have  visited  him  in  his  condemned  hold.  I  have  beheld 

291 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

that  darling  brother,  the  playmate  of  my  infancy,  the  companion 
of  my  youthful  sporte,  in  whom  my  heart's  blood  circulates,  and  with 
whom  my  love  is  entwined.  And  how  did  he  present  himself! 
And  how  did  he  bear  our  presence?  I  eay,  like  Socrates  in  his 
cell;  I  say,  like  Sidney  in  the  Tower;  I  say,  like  Galas  before  the 
wheel.  He  preserves  a  cheerful,  an  undaunted,  an  English  heart 
and  spirit,  and  I  am  proud  of  him  even  in  his  death  doom.  Your 
lordship  has  not  crushed  or  trampled  my  brother's  soul.  He  main- 
tains his  energy  and  his  hope  in  justice,  not  indeed  from  men,  for 
he  was  condemned  long  since,  but  in  the  course  of  events,  in  the 
discoveries  of  science,  in  the  confession  or  conviction  of  those  per- 
jured witnesses  against  him ;  or,  these  all  failing,  in  the  God  of 
truth.  Though  I  never  doubted  his  innocence,  yet  did  I  resolve  to 
make  all  certain  and  positive  before  I  hazarded  this  letter.  I  fell 
on  my  knees  before  him.  I  implored  him  by  our  past  love  and 
kindred,  by  our  early  recollections  and  hopes,  by  our  common  faith, 
by  all  the  duties  which  he  owed  to  man  and  God,  to  disburthen 
his  conscience  if  he  were  guilty,  and  not  to  enter  before  the  presence 
of  his  Creator  with  a  falsehood  upon  his  lips.  I  adjured  him  to 
say  if  he  were  guilty  or  not  guilty.  Oh,  my  lord  !  he  did  not  wince ; 
he  did  not  change  his  noble  composure ;  he  spoke  and  looked  all 
innocence.  Calmly,  earnestly,  and  solemnly  he  answered,  and  the 
seriousness  of  his  words  went  into  our  hearts  with  the  fullest  per- 
suasion of  his  perfect  guiltlessness  of  blood ;  the  most  complete  reliance 
on  that  dying  tongue  which  never  spoke  falsely  to  one  of  us,  but 
to  whose  language  we  listened  ever  with  full  assurance  in  its  in- 
tegrity and  its  faith.  Under  these  circumstances,  therefore,  I  make 
no  apology  for  addressing  your  lordship.  A  great,  a  majestic  duty 
is  now  imposed  on  you.  If  you  shrink  from  executing  it  you  are 
undone.  There  are  but  seven  days  between  this  and  the  irrevoc- 
able hour  of  death.  All  your  repentance,  all  your  shame  will 
be  unavailing  if  that  dread  sentence  be  rashly  carried  into  effect. 
I  ask  you  not  to  recommend  a  pardon  for  my  brother — for  that,  I 
know,  you  will  not  do ;  but  I  ask  you — for  in  you  it  lies — to  obtain 
a  respite  for  him  till  his  guilt  or  innocence  be  demonstrated  to  the 
satisfaction  of  the  world.  Bear  in  mind  that  my  brother's  counsel 
offered  fearlessly  at  the  trial  that  an  experiment  should  be  made. 
Bear  in  mind  that  some  of  the  most  able  chemical  analysts  in 
the  world  have  declared  upon  their  oaths  that  if  strychnia  were 
administered  it  can  be  found ;  that  the  Attorney-General  himself, 
to  a  certain  extent,  repudiated  Dr.  Taylor,  and  supported  himself 
by  Mr.  Herapath's  supposition  that  strychnia  was  there,  though 
Taylor  could  not  find  it ;  bear  in  mind  that  Taylor's  theory  of  the 
absorption  and  decomposition  of  strychnia  was  never  heard  of  until 
this  trial ;  that  it  was  hit  upon  by  him  to  bolster  up  his  credit, 
and  that  all  the  ablest  of  the  chemists  at  the  trial  unanimously 
repudiated  it  as  a  heresy,  unworthy  of  credit,  and  whose  fallacy 
they  had  themselves  proved  by  actual  experiment ;  bear  in  mind,  I 
say,  all  this,  and  remember  with  what  a  harsh  and  angry  denial 
you  refused  to  permit  such  an  experiment,  though  upon  it  depended 
the  blood  of  a  man.  I  say  deliberately  that  if  these  chemists  have 
sworn  the  truth,  and  that  there  is  no  strychnia  discernible  in  Cook's 
body,  then  will  William  Palmer  be  murdered  as  effectually  under 
the  semblance  of  English  law  as  ever  the  most  innocent  was  butchered 
under  the  worst  forms  of  the  Papal  Inquisition ;  and  that  the  most 
fearful  responsibility  of  blood  that  ever  rested  upon  human  head 
will  be  upon  those  who  refuse  to  concede  the  test  which  is  now 
challenged.  I  ask  that  that  experiment  shall  be  performed,  which 
will  set  at  rest  for  ever  the  imputation  of  judicial  murder  that  will 
sear  your  lordship's  character  with  the  present  and  with  the  future  ; 

292 


Appendix  I. 


an  experiment  which  may  probably  clear  your  soul  from  the  stain 
of  blood  that  it  must  risk  if  you  oppose  this  application.  What 
is  there  unusual,  what  is  there  criminal,  what  is  there  illegal  in 
only  asking  for  a  respite  until  it  be  proved — as  it  can  be  proved 
incontrovertibly — whether  Cook  died  of  strychnia  or  not?  And 
if  he  did  not  die  of  strychnia,  then  ia  my  brother's  innocence 
made  manifest,  even  to  your  satisfaction  !  While,  if  it  is  shown  that 
he  did  so  die,  then  is  the  voice  of  accusation  silent  for  ever,  and 
the  much-vaunted  majesty,  the  supposed  impartiality  and  purity  of 
English  law  vindicated  in  triumph  before  mankind.  The  precise 
mode  in  which  this  experiment  might  be  made  it  is  not  for  me  to  sug- 
gest. I  have  no  objection  that  it  shall  be  made  in  any  way  which 
may  appear  satisfactory  to  the  Home  Office,  provided  only  that 
neither  Dr.  Taylor  nor  Dr.  Rees  is  entrusted  with  its  management. 
In  this  pair  of  worthies  I  have  no  confidence.  The  first  pronounced 
my  brother  guilty  of  poisoning  on  grounds  the  most  ridiculous  that 
can  be  imagined,  upon  which  even  a  Stafford  Grand  Jury  did  not 
think  there  was  sufficient  to  warrant  them  in  finding  even  a  prima 
facie  case  for  investigation  at  the  assizes.  He  wrote  letters  to  the 
newspapers  branding  the  accused  as  a  most  desperate  criminal ;  he 
largely  assisted  in  getting  up  the  prosecution,  and  was  busily  engaged 
all  through  the  trial  in  writing  notes  and  making  suggestions  to  the 
Attorney-General  and  the  other  prosecuting  counsel ;  he  smiled  per- 
ceptibly when  the  case  was  etrong  against  my  brother,  and  could 
not  conceal  his  chagrin  as  it  grew  weak.  As  to  Rees,  he  seems  to 
endorse  all  that  Taylor  says,  and  I  have  no  confidence  whatever  in 
him.  A  writer  in  the  papers,  who  is  unknown  to  me,  makes  a  sug- 
gestion which  you  may  bring  if  you  choose  before  the  Home 
Secretary ;  but  it  matters  little  by  whom  the  experiment  is  made  so 
that  it  is  done  by  an  honest  man.  "If  it  is  proved,"  says  the 
writer,  "  that  Cook  died  from  strychnia,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  con- 
necting Palmer  with  the  administration  of  it.  But  if  that  fact  is  not 
proved,  then  the  other  circumstances  do  not  lead  to  the  irresistible 
inference  of  his  guilt. '*  For  the  sake  of  all  parties  concerned  in  the 
case,  for  the  sake  of  society  at  large,  and,  above  all,  for  the  sake 
of  justice,  let  that  point  be  set  at  rest ;  and  let  that  be  done  in  this 
manner — Mr.  Herapath  says  he  can  detect  strychnia  wherever  pre- 
eent.  Then  let  there  be  a  certain  number  of  animals  killed,  some  by 
strychnia  and  some  by  other  means ;  let  their  interiors  be  taken  out 
and  put  in  jars,  each  separately  and  numbered,  and  verified  with 
all  the  necessary  formalities,  Mr.  Herapath  being  kept  in  the  dark 
as  to  which  was  the  poisoned  jar  and  which  was  not;  and  if  he  then 
can  distinguish  between  those  which  contained  etrychnia  and  those 
that  did  not,  let  the  Home  Secretary  have  the  moral  courage  to 
etep  in  and  avert  the  disgraceful  and  horrible-to-contemplate  possi- 
bility of  having  one  day,  in  token  of  his  acknowledged  innocence, 
to  wave  a  flag  over  the  grave  of  William  Palmer,  to  which  he  has 
been  consigned  upon  insufficient  evidence,  despite  of  the  revelations 
of  science,  and  because  (to  use  the  words  of  Dr.  Taylor),  "society 
demands  a  victim." 

My  lord,  I  have  been  told  by  lawyers  that  all  presumptive  evidence 
of  crime  should  be  admitted  cautiously,  for  the  law  holds  that  it 
is  better  that  ten  guilty  persons  escape  than  that  one  innocent 
suffer.  And  there  is  a  famous  case  which  so  strongly  illustrates 
this  noble  principle  of  the  law  that  I  may  remind  your  lordship 
of  it  here.  The  mother  and  reputed  father  of  a  bastard  child  were 
observed  to  take  it  to  the  margin  of  the  dock  in  Liverpool,  and, 
after  stripping  it,  to  throw  it  into  the  dock.  The  body  of  the 
infant  was  not  afterwards  seen,  but,  as  the  tide  of  the  sea  flowed 
and  reflowed  into  and  out  of  the  dock,  the  learned  judge  who  tried 

293 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

the  father  and  mother  for  the  murder  of  their  child,  observed  that 
it  was  possible  the  tide  might  have  carried  out  the  living  infant, 
and  the  prisoners  were  acquitted.  The  case  is  mentioned  by  Garrow, 
one  of  the  ablest  and  purest  judges  that  ever  adorned  the  bench ;  and 
it  has  been  brought  before  me  as  illustrative  of  the  wise  and  merciful 
caution  which  the  judges  of  the  past  were  used  to  exercise  before 
they  persuaded  juries  to  condemn  men  who  might  possibly  be  inno- 
cent. How  your  lordship  would  have  decided  this  trial  had  it 
taken  place  before  you,  and  had  the  public  Press,  under  the  in- 
fluence of  insurance  societies,  hounded  on  the  many  to  a  cry  for 
blood,  I  can  easily  anticipate ;  but  that  the  great  judge  who  ruled 
for  mercy  adjudicated  according  to  the  well-known  principles  of 
the  Constitution  is  what  I  am  assured  by  every  man  who  has  made 
the  English  law  his  study,  and  who  is  too  pure  to  be  influenced  by 
a  shout  of  "  Crucify  him !  crucify  him ! "  will  admit  without  the 
slightest  shadow  of  a  doubt.  Take,  again,  the  ordinary  case  which 
I  find  mentioned  in  an  anonymous  letter  in  one  of  the  morning 
papers,  and  which,  I  am  informed,  is  so  strongly  illustrative  of  the 
caution  exercised  in  all  criminal  cases  where  the  judge  is  impartial, 
and  where  medical  science  must  occasionally  be  fallible,  that  it  needs 
no  words  of  mine  to  add  to  its  force.  Its  value  is  increased  by  this 
fact,  that  neither  I  nor  any  person  connected  with  my  family  has 
the  least  knowledge  of  who  the  writer  is,  and,  therefore,  no  con- 
siderations but  those  which  do  him  honour  can  be  supposed  to  operate 
on  his  mind. 

"  To  establish,"  he  says,  "  a  perfect  chain  of  circumstantial 
evidence,  every  circumstance  in  the  case  must  be  proved  beyond  all 
cavil.  And  the  first  and  most  important  and  absolutely  indispens- 
able circumstance  in  a  case  like  that  of  Palmer's  is  the  fact  of  a 
murder  having  been  committed.  That  is  the  groundwork  of  the 
circumstantial  fabric,  without  which  the  rest  of  the  edifice  topples 
over.  It  is  a  circumstance  of  which  merely  the  conduct,  however 
suspicious,  antecedent  or  subsequent  to  its  occurrence,  of  the  alleged 
murderer  furnishes  no  valid  proof.  To  convict  a  man  of  poisoning, 
you  should  distinctly  trace  the  death  of  the  deceased  to  poison. 

"  Take  a  case  in  point.  It  is  of  frequent  occurrence  in  this  country 
that  a  woman  is  charged  with  the  murder  of  her  newly-born  infant. 
She  is  unmarried ;  she  is  proved  to  have  been  suspected  of  pregnancy, 
and  to  have  denied  the  fact ;  she  is  proved  to  have  been  recently 
delivered  of  a  child ;  she  has  been  seen  going  to  a  water-closet,  and, 
after  she  has  left,  there  are  found,  rammed  down  the  pipe  of  that 
water-closet,  the  dissected  members  of  an  infant's  body ;  a  knife 
smeared  with  blood  is  discovered  hidden  away,  and  traced  to  the  prisoner's 
possession ;  she  has  made  no  provision  for  the  reception  of  the  child, 
which,  should  it  survive  the  moment  of  its  birth,  must  prove  an 
incubus  upon  ite  mother  and  a  living  witness  to  her  shame.  Here 
are  circumstances  of  a  damning  nature.  A  strong  motive,  a  cool 
premeditation,  a  mutilated  body,  and  physical  traces  which  cannot 
be  mistaken.  Mark  the  result.  A  surgeon  is  called  at  the  trial, 
and  states  that  he  cannot  positively  swear  that  the  child  was  born 
alive ;  that  it  may  by  possibility  have  been  born  dead ;  that  there 
being  no  proof  that  the  child  was  ever  alive,  he  cannot  be  sure  that 
it  was  killed  by  being  cut  in  pieces.  In  that  case  there  is  no  Pro- 
fessor Taylor,  who,  while  the  case  was  pendente  lite,  has  written 
letters  in  a  newspaper  stating  that  '  society  demands  a  victim,'  and 
whose  sworn  testimony  is  to  the  effect  that,  inasmuch  as  99  children 
in  100  are  born  alive,  his  solemn  belief  is  that  so  was  this  child, 
and  that  he  has  therefore  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  cutting 
off  of  its  head  was  the  cause  of  death.  There  is  no  Chief  Justice  to 
tell  the  jury  that  they  are  to  take  all  the  circumstances  surrounding 

294 


Appendix  I. 


the  case  into  consideration,  and  that,  although  it  was  not  proved 
beyond  a  doubt  that  death  was  the  result  of  mortal  agency,  yet 
if  they  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the  prisoner  had  a  strong  motive 
for  destroying  the  deceased,  and  had  possession  of  an  instrument  by 
which  to  effect  that  purpose,  there  was  a  prima  facie  case  made 
out  which  would  lead  them  to  the  next  question,  namely,  was  the 
state  of  the  body,  or  was  it  not,  consistent  with  the  fact  of  a  violent 
death?  There  is  no  infuriated  and  Press-prejudiced  populace 
regarding  the  prisoner  as  a  great  criminal,  and  thirsting  after  her  blood. 
No  !  The  judge  says  to  the  jury  you  cannot,  according  to  the  law 
of  the  land,  whatever  your  suspicions  in  this  case  may  be,  find  a 
verdict  of  guilty ;  there  is  no  proof  of  a  murder  having  been  com- 
mitted, and  the  prisoner  must  be  acquitted  on  that  charge.  That 
may  be  a  vicious  law,  but  it  is  the  law,  and  had  no  more  right  to  be 
violated  in  the  case  of  William  Palmer  than  in  that  of  any  other 
individual.  If  it  be,  the  whole  proceedings  of  the  trial  are  a 
mockery  and  a  delusion — a  disgraceful  pandering  to  out-of-door  pre- 
judices and  a  lasting  disgrace  to  this  country." 

This  is  the  language  of  a  man  who  writes  as  an  unprejudiced 
observer,  and,  I  am  told,  with  a  deep  knowledge  of  the  law.  If  it 
be,  as  he  says,  that  this  is  the  law  in  cases  of  this  nature,  with 
what  face  can  my  brother  be  executed  when  precisely  the  very  reverse 
was  done  by  your  lordship  in  his  case,  and,  when  forgetting  or 
despising  all  the  precedents  of  mercy  with  which  our  jurisprudence 
abounds,  you  took  only  the  sanguinary  view  of  the  evidence,  and 
enforced  everything  against  the  prisoner  by  argument,  by  gesture, 
and  by  look. 

That  the  law  Ls  wise  in  exercising  this  salutary  caution  I  think 
may  be  proved  even  by  the  testimony  of  the  actor  who  next,  after 
your  lordship,  had  most  influence  in  the  verdict  against  my  brother — 
I  mean  Dr.  Taylor.  In  that  writer's  work  on  "  Poisons,"  page  139, 
I  find  the  following  statement: — "It  often  happens,  in  the  hands  of 
the  ablest  analyst,  that  the  last  steps  of  a  process  lead  to  a  result 
very  different  from  that  which  was  anticipated  at  the  commence- 
ment; and,  therefore,  a  suspicion  derived  from  a  few  incipient  ex- 
periments is  very  likely  to  be  overthrown  by  continuing  the  investi- 
gation. In  the  Boughton  case  Dr.  Rattray  gives  an  opinion,  in 
the  first  instance,  that  the  poison  administered  to  the  deceased  was 
arsenic ;  but  he  subsequently  attributed  death  to  laurel-water !  A 
case  occurred  within  my  knowledge  where  arsenic  was  pronounced 
to  be  present  when  sulphuric  acid  was  really  the  poison.  In  another 
case,  tried  at  the  Kingston  Assizes  in  1832,  the  medical  witness 
admitted  that  at  the  coroner's  inquest  he  stated  the  poison  to  be 
arsenic,  but  by  subsequent  experiment  he  found  that  it  was  oxalic 
acid,  and  in  a  case  which  has  but  recently  occurred  the  poison  was 
at  first  stated  to  be  oxalic  acid,  but  on  a  more  careful  examination 
it  was  shown  to  be  arsenic  !  "  Whether  or  not  all  the  unhappy  persons 
in  whose  cases  these  chemical  mistakes  were  thus  made,  and  thu* 
coolly  avowed,  suffered  death  is  not  stated,  but,  as  I  am  told  that 
one  of  them,  Donellan,  was  certainly  executed,  and  as  it  is  even 
now  a  question  deeply  involved  in  doubt  whether  the  person  whom 
he  is  supposed  to  have  poisoned  was  poisoned  at  all,  and  the  most 
able  medical  authorities  incline  to  the  opinion  that  he  was  not,  it 
is  likely  that  the  others  also  were  as  ruthlessly  sacrificed  to  what 
is  called  "  public  opinion,"  and  that  they  have  been  sent  to  their 
graves  with  the  etigma  of  murder  when  they  were,  in  fact,  but 
victims  to  medical  delusions,  or  toxicological  mistakes,  which  are  as 
coolly  confessed  by  Taylor  as  if  they  were  merely  ordinary  trifles, 
not  affecting  in  any  way  the  life  and  death  of  the  wretches  whose 
interests  were  at  stake. 

295 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

My  lord,  how  comes  it  to  pass  that  not  one  of  these  most  important 
facts  was  mentioned  by  Taylor  at  the  trial?  that  his  henchman, 
Rees,  who  swore  exactly  as  Taylor  swore,  did  not  give  the  jury  the 
•lightest  information  upon  these  questions  of  vital  value  to  the 
prisoner?  Why  were  they  kept  back  from  the  knowledge  of  the 
jury?  Why  were  they  concealed  from  your  lordship?  It  was  proved 
at  the  trial  that  Dr.  Harland  sent  Stevens  his  medical  notes  of  the 
first  post-mortem  examination ;  that  Stevens  handed  them  over  to 
Taylor,  and  that,  up  to  the  third  day  of  the  trial,  Taylor  withheld, 
even  from  the  knowledge  of  the  Attorney-General  and  the  Crown 
solicitor,  that  he  possessed  these  notes,  which  contained  circumstances 
strongly  favourable  to  the  case  of  the  prisoner.  Was  not  his  silence 
as  to  the  medical  facts  just  mentioned  of  a  piece  with  his  suppression 
of  this  material  document?  Your  lordship  made  no  comment  to  the 
jury  upon  this  extraordinary  conduct.  You  severely  attacked  Mr. 
Nunneley,  you  bitterly  censured  others  of  the  witnesses  for  the 
defence,  you  weakened,  by  all  the  means  within  your  power,  the 
effect  of  their  evidence  when  it  told  for  the  prisoner;  but  not  one 
syllable  of  censure  had  you  for  Taylor,  who  kept  the  jury  in  ignor- 
ance of  these  facts,  and  the  cases  mentioned  by  him  in  his  own 
book,  though  he  was  sworn  in  the  language  of  the  law  to  tell  "  the 
truth  and  the  whole  truth."  The  whole  truth,  indeed,  he  did  not  tell; 
otherwise  these  matters  which  I  have  now  quoted  would  have  come 
before  the  jurors,  and,  as  I  believe,  with  all-powerful  influence. 

If  the  wilful  suppression  of  evidence  by  the  prosecution  had 
ended  with  Taylor  the  case  would  have  been  infamous  enough ;  the 
Crown  would  have  showed  that  it  prosecuted  for  victory,  not  for 
truth,  for  I  take  it  to  be  the  unquestioned  duty  of  a  prosecutor,  more 
especially  when  he  is  backed  by  the  Crown  authorities  and  the 
Home  Office,  not  merely  to  squabble  for  a  petty  triumph  on  a 
prisoner  charged  with  murder,  or  to  attempt  to  higgle  a  jury  out 
of  an  adverse  verdict,  but  to  present  not  a  part  but  the  whole  case 
fairly  before  the  public — the  features  favourable  to  a  prisoner  as 
well  as  those  that  are  unfavourable,  the  weak  portions  of  the  accusa- 
tions against  him  as  well  as  those  that  are  strong,  so  that  the 
jury,  who  are  (in  theory)  his  judges,  may  see  and  know  every  cir- 
cumstance, however  minute,  and,  from  an  aggregate  of  the  whole, 
come  to  a  right  conclusion  as  to  the  verdict  which  they  are  to 
pronounce.  But  this  salutary  rule  was  not  followed  by  the  Crown 
prosecutors  in  the  present  case ;  they  wilfully  deceived  and  misled  the 
counsel  for  my  brother,  and  by  this  trick,  which  I  shall  presently 
expose,  they  deprived  the  prisoner  of  two  of  the  most  material  wit- 
nesses, who  could  prove  his  innocence,  that  it  was  possible  for  man  to 
have.  The  first  of  these  witnesses  was  a  man  named  Henry  Cockayne. 
Your  lordship  remembers  the  questions  which  Serjeant  Shee  put  to 
that  wretched  Bates ;  and  you  recollect  also,  I  doubt  not,  the  artful 
way  in  which  he  answered  those  questions.  It  was  of  importance 
to  my  brother  to  show  for  what  purpose  he  had  purchased,  and  in 
•what  manner  he  had  used,  the  strychnia,  which  he  never  denied, 
and  does  not  now  mean  to  deny,  that  he  bought  from  Roberts  on  the 
Tuesday. 

He  had  a  number  of  valuable  brood  mares  in  a  paddock,  separated 
from  the  adjoining  land  only  by  a  thin  fence,  over  which  the  dogs 
were  in  the  habit  of  leaping  and  hunting  these  animals  (nine  in  all), 
so  much  so  that  even  Bates  was  obliged  to  admit  that  one  of  them, 
the  "Duchess  of  Kent,"  had  slipped  her  foal;  and  it  is  a  fact 
that  "  Goldfinder "  had  suffered  from  a  like  mishap,  though  Bates 
refused  to  acknowledge  it.  Indeed,  Bates  would  scarcely  admit 
anything,  or  give  a  direct  reply  to  any  of  the  questions  put  to  him. 
Here  is  an  example,  taken  from  the  verbatim  report  of  the  trial — 
296 


Appendix  I. 


"Can  you  give  me  any  notion  of  their  value?"  "I  do  not  pretend," 
answers  Bates,  "to  tell  the  value  of  the  stock  myself."  No  one  had 
asked  him  to  do  so,  yet  this  stable-boy,  brewer,  farmer,  or  whatever 
else  he  chooses  to  call  himself,  who  has  been  about  horses  all  his 
life,  could  not  give  Serjeant  Shee  a  notion  of  the  value  of  these  brood 
mares.  "Do  you  know,"  pursued  the  serjeant,  "that  one  of  them 
sold  for  800  guineas  ? ' '  Now,  Bates  knew  this  as  well  as  my 
brother  himself,  but  mark  his  answer — "I  have  heard  so."  Again, 
he  is  asked — "  Were  any  of  them  in  foal  shortly  before  or  at  the 
beginning  of  the  month  of  November?  "  Bates,  you  will  remember, 
was  in  the  stables  and  paddocks  every  day,  yet  he  answers  this 
question,  "I  cannot  say  whether  they  were  or  not.  I  should  sup- 
pose there  were  some  in  foal."  A  witness  who  answered  in  this 
way  would  probably  have  been  rebuked  by  any  fair  judge,  and 
ordered  to  answer  the  questions  put  to  him ;  but  your  lordship,  who 
was  so  dreadfully  sarcastic  on  Mr.  Nunneley  and  Dr.  Macdonald, 
had  no  word  of  reproof  for  Bates.  This  man  was  again  asked, 
' '  had  any  complaint  been  made  about  dogs  going  about  the  pad- 
dock?" Mark  the  artful  way  in  which  he  evaded  this  interro- 
gatory— "I  think  I  once  said  to  Harry,  'The  turf  seems  a  good 
deal  cut  up  here ;  how  is  it?  ' "  Your  lordship  sees  Bates  had 
not  been  asked  what  he  had  said  to  Harry  (this  was  Cockayne),  but 
he  had  been  asked  about  repeated  and  well-known  complaints  made 
by  my  brother  as  to  the  way  in  which  his  mares  were  constantly 
hunted  by  the  dogs  in  the  neighbourhood ;  and  you  now  see,  though 
you  would  not  at  the  trial,  the  evasive  and  equivocating  way  in 
which  he  replied.  Serjeant  Shee  then  proceeded — "  What  did  you 
see  on  the  turf  that  induced  you  to  make  that  observation? — I  saw 
it  cut  up,  which  I  supposed  to  be  with  horses'  feet,  for  they  could 
not  cut  it  up  without  they  galloped.  Did  you  attribute  that 
to  anything? — I  attributed  it  to  the  mares  galloping  about.  Had  you 
any  reason  to  think  they  had  been  run  by  dogs? — I  never  saw  any 
dogs  run  them."  This  was  no  answer  to  the  question,  but  your 
lordship  said  not  a  word,  and  this  Bates,  who  was  with  Day  in  the 
paddock,  who,  to  use  the  words  of  the  Attorney-General,  "  was  a 
hanger-on  of  Palmer's,  working  in  his  stables,"  could  not  tell,  as  he 
pretended,  how  it  was  that  the  mares  were  galloping  about  and 
cutting  up  the  turf.  The  serjeant  then  proceeded — "  Did  Harry 
keep  a  gun  there? — I  have  seen  a  gun  there.  (This  again  was  not  a 
direct  answer,  but  an  evasion.)  Did  he  keep  a  gun,  which  belonged 
to  his  master,  for  any  purpose? — I  have  seen  a  gun  at  the  paddock. 
Did  it  belong  to  his  master? — I  cannot  say.  Did  you  ever  see  it 
used? — No.  Was  it  in  a  condition  to  be  used? — I  never  had  it  in 
my  hands  to  examine  it."  In  ordinary  cases  I  am  told  that  where 
a  witness  misconducts  himself  in  this  manner,  the  Crown  immediately 
gives  him  up,  and  the  judge  informs  the  jury  that  no  reliance  is  to 
be  placed  on  his  testimony.  But,  so  far  from  abandoning  him,  the 
Attorney-General  relied  all  through  upon  this  man,  and  pressed 
against  my  brother  the  effect  of  the  evidence  which  he  gave.  Now, 
your  lordship  was  told  at  the  trial,  by  Serjeant  Shee,  that  the  object 
for  which  the  poison  was  purchased  was  to  destroy  these  dogs.  Bates 
was  found  to  admit  that  a  gun  was  kept  in  the  stables,  and  though 
he  cunningly  kept  back  for  what  purpose  the  gun  was  used,  yet  was 
there  another  witness  on  the  back  of  the  indictment  who  had  been 
examined  before  the  coroner,  and  who  was  present  in  the  Court,  of 
whose  evidence  your  lordship  was  well  aware,  for  it  was  in  the 
depositions,  and  this  witness  the  Crown  withheld  from  the  jury. 
Had  Cockayne  been  called,  as  he  ought  to  have  been  called,  he  would 
have  proved  that  he  kept  a  gun  loaded  in  the  stable,  by  order  of 
my  brother,  to  shoot  the  dogs  that  worried  his  brood  mares ;  that 

297 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

he  had  also  threatened  to  poison  them,  that  the  strychnia  was  pur- 
chased for  that  object,  and  that  he  had  missed  dogs  since  then 
which  had  been  in  the  habit  of  prowling  about  the  paddock  and 
hunting  the  mares.  That  my  brother  left  poisoned  food  about  the 
place  is  a  matter  which  can  be  proved  only  by  himself,  for  these 
things  are  not  always  trusted  to  servants ;  and,  as  it  is  a  positive 
medical  fact  that  animals  to  which  this  poison  has  been  given  go  away 
into  secret,  concealed,  and  quiet  places,  where  they  die  undiscovered, 
and  would  be  mortally  attacked  in  so  short  a  time  that  they  could 
not  get  to  their  own  homes.  Is  it  not  almost  demonstrated  that 
this  has  been  the  case  here,  and  that  my  brother  is  thus  made  the 
victim  of  circumstances,  harmless  in  themselves,  but  which,  having 
occurred  at  this  precise  period,  tell  now  with  fearful  weight  upon 
his  unfortunate  case?  The  Crown  may  cry  out,  "  Produce  the  dogs, 
and  show  us  the  strychnia  in  them."  With  how  much  more  freedom 
may  the  condemned  man  gay,  "  Produce  the  poison  from  Cook's 
body  before  you  hang  me  to  satisfy  a  medical  theory  invented  for 
this  trial  and  broached  against  me  by  a  deadly  foe  !  " 

In  the  same  way,  the  non-discovery  of  the  money  which  Cook  is 
said  to  have  possessed  at  Shrewsbury  was  urged  by  your  lordship  as 
startling  evidence  against  my  brother,  and  you  signified  to  the  jury, 
by  gestures,  by  looks,  and  shakes  of  the  head,  that  my  brother 
had  fraudulently  got  possession  of  that  money,  and  poisoned  Cook 
in  order  to  conceal  the  fact.  But  your  lordship  was  well  aware  at 
the  time,  for  it  was  in  the  depositions  of  Saunders,  who  was  also  in 
Court,  and  who  had  been  examined  before  the  coroner  and  the  Grand 
Jury,  that  Cook  had  sent  for  Saunders  on  the  Monday  before  his 
death,  that  he  had  paid  him  £510  (his  account),  and  excused  himself 
for  not  paying  any  more,  by  stating  that  he  had  given  my  brother 
all  his  money  to  take  with  him  to  London,  to  settle  his  affairs.  Thus 
the  disposal  of  the  money  was  accounted  for  by  Cook  himself;  and 
Saunders,  whose  testimony  was  thus  highly  favourable  to  my  brother, 
ought  to  have  been  called  to  prove  this  fact.  But,  strange  to  say, 
Saunders,  though  in  Court,  was  not  called ;  he  waited  until  the  end 
of  the  case  for  the  prosecution,  and  then  was  sent  away  by  the  Crown 
lawyers,  who  not  only  thus  deprived  the  prisoner  of  the  advantage 
of  his  testimony,  had  they  called  Saunders  for  the  prosecution,  but 
absolutely  put  it  out  of  the  power  of  the  prisoner  to  call  him  for 
the  defence  by  sending  him  away  into  the  country  at  the  last  moment, 
when  they  had  all  along  left  the  counsel  for  the  defence  under  the 
idea  that  it  was  intended  to  examine  Saunders  as  a  witness  on  behalf 
of  the  prosecution.  A  more  scandalous  trick  than  this,  I  believe, 
was  never  committed,  and  I  do  not  envy  the  feelings  of  the  parties 
who  perpetrated  it. 

It  may  be  asked,  why  did  not  Mr.  Smith,  an  able,  indefatigable, 
and  skilful  lawyer,  get  Cockayne  and  Saunders  put  into  the  box 
as  witnesses  for  the  prisoner?  My  lord,  the  answer  is  already  given. 
They  were  the  witnesses  for  the  Crown ;  they  were  kept  in  London, 
in  the  custody  of  the  Crown,  until  after  the  case  for  the  prosecution 
had  terminated ;  they  were  then  sent  out  of  London,  into  a  distant 
part  of  England  not  so  easily  accessible  as  was  needed  by  the  prisoner  ; 
and  if  we  are  to  take  your  lordship's  manifest  and  angry  impatience 
at  the  ten  minutes'  delay  in  calling  witnesses  for  the  defence,  which 
occurred  on  the  morning  of  Saturday,  the  tenth  day  of  the  trial,  as 
indicative  of  your  feelings,  we  may  be  very  certain  that  if  you  so 
chafed  at  that  brief  interval,  repeatedly  during  those  few  minutes 
asking  Serjeant  Shee  if  he  could  not  go  on — if,  I  say,  we  are  to 
consider  that  angry  haste  significant  of  anything,  we  may  very  well 
conclude  that  you  would  not  have  waited  until  Saunders  and  Cockayne 
were  brought  up  from  the  centre  of  England,  if,  indeed,  it  was 
298 


Appendix  I. 


possible  for  the  prisoner  at  all  to  discover  their  exact  lodgings  at  the 
time.  I  have  myself  heard,  on  many  occasions,  in  Courts  of  justice 
where  judges  themselves  called  witnesses  whose  names  were  in  the 
indictment  and  order  them  to  give  their  evidence  for  the  Crown.  But 
this  was  where  the  judges  were  not  biassed  against  the  accused — 
where  they  had  no  desire  to  become  the  objects  of  public  praise  or 
to  prostitute  their  high  places  to  the  low  desire  of  popularity  acquired 
by  pandering  to  a  cry  for  blood.  Why  your  lordship  did  not  follow 
the  well-known  precedents  of  law  in  my  brother's  case  is  best  known 
to  yourself.  Yet  there  are  many  of  the  public  also  who  can  form 
a  pretty  accurate  guess  as  to  your  real  motives.  Let  me  revert, 
however,  to  the  subject,  from  which  this  is  a  digression,  and  pursue 
the  confession  made  by  Dr.  Taylor  of  the  general  inaccuracy  of 
medical  men  when  they  are  retained  to  carry  out  a  theory  by  the 
prosecution.  These,  which  I  have  quoted,  are  not  the  only  instances 
in  which  mistakes  have  been  made  for  want  of  proper  caution.  Taylor 
(p.  63)  mentions  the  case  of  M.  Pralet,  where  "  several  medical 
witnesses  deposed  that  the  deceased  had  died  from  prussic  acid, 
administered  to  him  by  M.  L'Heritier,  the  accused.  Orfila  was 
requested  to  examine  the  medical  evidence,  and  found  it  extremely 
defective.  The  inferences  drawn  from  the  application  of  the  medical 
tests  were  highly  improper,  and  the  results  were  extremely  negative. 
Had  it  not  been  for  the  interference  of  Orfila,  it  is  most  probable 
that  the  accused  would  have  been  convicted,  more  from  the  strong 
medical  opinions  against  him  than  from  the  medical  facts  of  the  case. 
The  witnesses  appear  to  have  acted  on  the  principle  that  the  whole 
of  their  duty  consisted  in  rendering  the  charge  of  poisoning  probable, 
whereas  we  shall  hereafter  see  that  no  person  can  be  convicted  of  this 
crime  on  mere  probability.  The  fact  of  poisoning  must  be  made  reason- 
ably certain  either  by  medical  or  moral  evidence,  or  by  both  com- 
bined." He  cites  also  (p.  110)  a  case  reported  by  Anglada,  in 
which  there  were  circumstances  of  grave  suspicion,  though  the  party 
suspected  was  wholly  innocent.  "  A  lady,  in  perfect  health,  while 
supping  with  her  husband  and  family,  complained,  after  having  taken 
two  or  three  mouthfuls,  of  severe  pain  in  the  region  of  her  heart. 
She  fell  back  in  her  chair  and  died  instantly.  The  parties  not  having 
lived  on  the  best  of  terms,  the  husband  was  openly  accused  of  having 
been  accessory  to  the  poisoning  of  his  wife — a  circumstance  which 
was  rendered  still  more  probable  in  the  opinion  of  his  neighbours 
by  the  fact  that  the  wife  had  lately  made  a  holograph  will  in  his 
favour.  One  of  his  servants,  with  whom  he  was  said  to  live  in 
adultery,  was  arrested,  and  a  paper  containing  a  white  powder  was 
found  in  her  possession.  The  husband  endeavoured  to  compromise 
the  affair  by  offering  to  give  up  the  will.  Here,  then,  were  strong 
moral  presumptions  of  death  from  poisoning.  Three  surgeons 
(experts  !)  were  appointed  to  examine  the  body.  They  opened  the 
abdomen,  and,  observing  some  green  spots  in  the  stomach,  produced 
(as  it  afterwards  appeared,  by  imbibition  from  the  gall  bladder), 
pronounced  an  opinion  that  the  organ  was  in  a  gangrenous  state 
from  the  effects  of  some  corrosive  poison.  Some  doubt  arising  on 
the  correctness  of  this  view,  four  other  surgeons  were  directed  to 
re-examine  the  body.  They  found  that  the  stomach  had  not  even  been 
opened,  and  that  its  mucous  membrane,  as  well  as  that  of  the  intes- 
tines, was  perfectly  healthy.  It  contained  a  small  quantity  of  un- 
digested food,  which  was  free  from  any  trace  of  poison.  The 
deceased  had  died  from  natural  causes.  The  white  powder  found  in 
the  possession  of  the  servant  was  nothing  more  than  white  sugar  !" 
Nor  does  he  omit  the  case  of  Hunter  (p.  144),  whose  trial  at 
Liverpool  Assizes  somewhat  resembles  that  of  my  poor  brother,  but 
who  was  fortunate  enough  to  be  tried  by  an  honest  judge  and  an 

299 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

impartial  jury.  "  A  woman  was  charged  with  having  poisoned  her 
husband  by  arsenic.  The  medical  evidence  rested  chiefly  on  the 
symptoms  and  post-mortem  appearances,  for  no  arsenic  was  discovered 
in  the  body.  The  mucous  membrane  of  the  stomach  and  intestines 
was  found  throughout  its  whole  extent  exceedingly  inflamed  and 
softened.  The  medical  witnesses  for  the  prosecution  referred  (as 
they  always  do)  this  condition  to  the  action  of  arsenic ;  those  for  the 
defence  considered  that  it  might  be  owing  to  idiopathic  gastro- 
enteritis, independently  of  the  exhibition  of  any  irritant.  The  cir- 
cumstances of  the  case  were  very  suspicious,  but  the  prisoner  was 
acquitted,  not  merely  on  account  of  the  variance  in  the  medical 
evidence,  but  from  the  absence  of  positive  proof  of  poison,  i.e.,  its 
detection  by  chemical  analysis."  This  generally  weighs  much  with 
a  Court  of  law.  Yet  your  lordship  so  contrived  that  it  did  not  weigh 
one  hair  in  my  brother's  case.  The  principles  of  law  being  thus  clear, 
and  the  mistakes  of  medical  science  being  also  equally  admitted,  let 
me  follow  them  up  by  a  further  quotation  from  the  gentleman  out 
of  whose  powerful  letter  I  have  already  extracted  a  passage — "  Is  there 
clear,  and  distinct,  and  unimpeachable  proof  that  beyond  all  reason- 
able doubt  Mr.  Cook  died  a  violent  death?  Let  us  see  how  that  ques- 
tion is  answered.  For  the  prosecution  a  number  of  medical  men  of 
eminence  state  that  the  symptoms  in  his  case  were  such  as  they  would 
expect  to  have  resulted  from  the  administration  of  strychnia,  and  were 
irreconcilable  with  death  from  any  other  cause.  Upon  the  part  of 
the  prisoner  a  number  of  equally  eminent  medical  men  state  that  they 
can  account  for  the  death  of  the  deceased  without  being  compelled  to 
resort  to  the  hypothesis  of  strychnia,  and  that  in  many  important  par- 
ticulars the  symptoms  were  different  from  those  which  that  poison 
invariably  produces.  Each  set  of  witnesses,  upon  cross-examination, 
qualified  their  statements  in  some  degree,  but  in  the  result  such  is  the 
substance  of  their  respective  experience. 

"  Then  comes  Professor  Taylor,  who  analysed  the  contents  of  the 
stomach,  &c.,  and  who  states  that  he  found  no  strychnia  nor  any 
poison  which  could  account  for  the  death  of  Mr.  Cook.  As  Lord  Camp- 
bell said  with  a  sneer,  'Of  course,  upon  this  the  whole  defence  rests.' 
It  strikes  me  as  being  a  very  feasible  defence  indeed,  but  more  of  that 
presently.  However,  Dr.  Taylor  states  that  you  must  not  draw  the 
conclusion  that  because  no  strychnia  was  found,  therefore  none  was 
administered,  because  he  had  known  cases  (though  of  very  rare  occur- 
rence) where  he  had  himself  administered  that  drug  to  animals,  and 
afterwards  tested  for  and  failed  to  discover  it ;  and  from  the  symptoms 
he  is  convinced  that  Mr.  Cook  must  have  died  from  strychnia.  Dr. 
Rees  is  of  a  similar  opinion.  Now,  the  result  of  this  evidence  is  to 
destroy  the  practical  utility  of  analysis  for  strychnia  altogether ;  for 
although  if  strychnia  be  detected,  it  is  proof  that  it  has  been  ad- 
ministered, yet  if  it  be  not  detected,  that  is  no  proof  that  it  has  not 
been  administered. 

"Then  let  us  look  at  the  other  side.  Mr.  Herepath,  who  is  con- 
fessedly one  of  the  greatest  analytical  chemists  of  the  present  day, 
states  that  if  the  minutest  particle  of  strychnia  were  present  in  the 
body,  he  would  guarantee  to  find  it,  and  in  that  statement  he  is  cor- 
roborated by  a  series  of  eminent  toxicologists.  It  is  suggested,  in 
answer  to  this  evidence,  that  Professor  Taylor  did  not  apply  the  proper 
testa.  Surely,  if  he  did  not,  it  did  not  lie  in  the  mouth  of  the 
prosecution  to  urge  that  argument.  He  was  their  witness ;  he  was 
employed  by  them  to  make  the  analysis,  and  they  trusted  to  his 
capacity  to  do  so ;  and  when  he  states  that  he  found  no  strychnia,  the 
fair  and  logical  deduction  is,  not  that  he  did  not  use  the  proper  tests, 
but  that  there  was  no  strychnia  to  be  found.  Notwithstanding  this, 
Lord  Campbell  put  it  very  strongly — and,  as  I  conceive,  very  unjusti- 

300 


Appendix  I. 


fiably  and  illegally,  to  the  jury — that  Professor  Taylor  might  not  have 
used  the  proper  tests,  and  that  it  was  for  them  to  consider  whether, 
if  the  proper  tests  had  been  applied,  strychnia  might  not  have  been 
discovered.  But,  however,  Mr.  Herepath,  whose  testimony  is  borne 
out  by  other  chemical  witnesses  for  the  defence,  states  that  he  will 
guarantee  to  find  strychnia  in  all  cases  where  it  is  present,  however 
infinitesimal  the  quantity ;  that  he  never  found  his  tests  to  fail,  and 
that  the  only  conclusion  he  could  draw  from  the  fact  of  strychnia 
not  being  found  is  that  none  was  administered.  Upon  the  one  hand, 
therefore,  you  have  the  positive  opinions  of  fallible  medical  men, 
founded  upon  a  second-hand  knowledge  of  the  symptoms,  as  to  the 
impossibility  of  their  resulting  from  any  other  cause  than  strychnia. 
Upon  the  other  hand  you  have  the  equally  positive  opinions  of  medical 
men  similarly  situated  as  to  the  effect  of  those  symptoms  being  recon- 
cilable with  natural  causes.  Cast  into  the  scales  the  unerring  inspira- 
tions of  chemical  science,  add  that  the  life  of  a  fellow-creature  is  at 
stake,  and  which  way  lies  the  balance  of  evidence?" 

My  lord,  what  answer  can  you  make  to  this  argument?  You  will 
say,  perhaps,  that  you  have  convinced  yourself  that  my  brother  is 
guilty.  This,  indeed,  may  satisfy  a  man  of  weak  or  of  no  conscience ; 
but  how  will  it  fall  upon  the  great  body  of  the  enlightened  British 
public,  who  have  been  wound  up,  it  is  true,  to  the  most  awful  excite- 
ment against  this  unhappy  man,  but  who  will  assuredly  awaken  from 
that  excitement  and  demand  in  tones  of  thunder  how  it  came  to  pass 
that  you,  who  should  have  stood  between  the  prisoner  and  prejudice, 
ministered  to  that  prejudice,  and  were  found  to  be  his  accuser  rather 
than  his  judge  ! 

And  here,  my  lord,  before  I  proceed  further,  let  me  exonerate  you 
from  all  the  blame  of  this  sham  trial.  You  had  a  brother  judge  by 
your  side  who  shares  with  you  all  the  responsibility  of  prejudice  against 
my  brother,  who  made  no  secret,  but  rather  an  indecent  display  of  that 
prejudice  in  a  manner  which  astonished  the  whole  auditory,  and  who 
ought  also  to  be  recorded  with  you  to  all  time  coming  as  having  par- 
ticipated in  the  laurels  of  blood  with  which  you  should  be  crowned — I 
allude  to  Mr.  Baron  Alderson.  That  learned  functionary,  who  inaugurated 
the  first  day's  proceedings  by  falling  asleep  and  nearly  tumbling  over 
his  desk  during  the  Attorney-General's  opening  speech,  amused  himself 
during  the  progress  of  the  trial  by  suggesting  questions  to  Mr.  James, 
the  counsel  for  the  prosecution,  by  lifting  up  his  hands  in  apparent 
astonishment  when  anything  favourable  to  the  prisoner  was  elicited 
on  cross-examination,  by  looking  at  the  jury  with  every  mark  of  in 
credulity  and  contempt  when  Serjeant  Shee  suggested  any  matter  bene- 
ficial to  my  brother,  and  by  joining  with  your  lordship  in  overruling 
every  legal  objection  which  was  raised  by  the  counsel  for  the  defence. 
Once  also,  when  Serjeant  Shee  asked  one  of  the  witnesses,  "  Where  are 
the  pathionic  glands?  "  Baron  Alderson  started  up  with  every  mark  of 
anger  and  exclaimed,  "Humbug  !  "  And  on  another  occasion,  when 
your  lordship,  or  Mr.  Justice  Cresswell,  addressed  the  serjeant  as 
"  Brother  Shee,"  Baron  Alderson  impatiently  cried  out,  "  Oh,  bother 
Shee  !  "  I  can  feel  no  surprise,  therefore,  when  I  find  your  lordship, 
while  pronouncing  sentence  on  my  brother,  declaring  that  Baron  Alder- 
son  concurred  with  the  finding  of  the  jury,  though,  unless  he  con- 
curred with  you  before  the  verdict  was  pronounced,  he  certainly  did 
not  do  so  in  Court,  as  no  communication  passed  between  you  and 
either  of  the  judges  after  that  fatal  word.  But  of  Mr.  Justice  Cress- 
well  I  feel  bound  to  declare  the  feeling  of  my  brother,  of  all  my  family, 
and,  unanimously,  as  I  am  told,  that  of  my  brother's  counsel,  that  his 
conduct  was  in  accordance  with  all  that  we  hear  or  know  of  the  purity 
of  the  bench ;  that  his  demeanour  was  dignified,  noble,  impartial,  and 
most  honourable ;  and  that,  but  for  his  interference,  visible,  as  was 

301 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

remarked  on  many  important  occasions,  your  lordship  would  have 
admitted  evidence  illegally  against  my  brother,  or  excluded  testimony 
which  his  advisers  hoped  would  operate  favourably  for  him  on  the 
minds  of  his  jury.  Never  shall  the  memory  of  his  conduct  be  erased 
from  our  hearts ;  we  all  have  felt,  and  we  shall  always  continue  to  feel 
it;  nor  shall  any  sunset  close  on  me  for  the  remainder  of  my  days 
that  shall  not  witness  my  earnest  prayer  for  him  who  did  all  that  a 
judge  should  do  to  maintain  the  character  of  our  country  and  its 
criminal  jurisprudence ;  and  who  probably  would  have  exerted  himself 
still  more  strenuously  but  for  the  feeling  that  upon  your  lordship,  as 
chief  judge,  the  great  responsibility  of  this  case  rested,  and  that  he 
himself  was  but  an  appendage  rather  than  a  ministering  officer  at  the 
trial. 

My  lord,  the  remarks  which  I  have  up  to  this  time  made  may  be 
considered  preliminary  to  my  investigations  of  your  charge,  but  they 
seem  to  me  of  consequence  to  a  right  understanding  of  the  language 
in  which  you  thought  it  proper  to  address  them,  and  to  a  due  apprecia- 
tion of  the  kind  of  way  in  which  the  guilt  has  been  fastened  upon  my 
brother's  shoulders.  A  writer  in  a  daily  paper  says — "  However 
horrible  it  may  be  that  a  systematic  poisoner  should  escape  the  penalty 
of  his  crimes  by  an  effort  of  legal  chicanery,  there  is  something  even 
more  repugnant  to  the  principles  of  British  law,  and  that  is,  that  a  man 
should  be  found  guilty  upon  insufficient  evidence ;  and  there  is  something 
still  more  revolting,  both  to  the  constitution  of  the  country  and  to 
human  nature,  namely,  that  a  man  should  be  hanged  for  a  murder  which 
there  is  no  satisfactory  proof  had  ever  been  committed." 

Yet,  my  lord,  there  is  something  still  more  dreadful,  and  it  is 
this,  that  the  time-renowned  prestige  of  British  trial  by  jury  should 
be  abrogated,  as  abrogated  it  will  be,  if  your  lordship's  precedent  is 
to  be  followed  by  present  or  future  judges.  Did  your  lordship  really 
leave  any  question  to  the  jury  upon  which  to  exercise  an  impartial 
reason?  Did  you  throw  upon  them  the  whole  responsibility  of  the 
verdict,  as  by  the  theory  of  the  law  you  ought  to  have  done?  Did 
you  merely  lay  down  the  legal  principles  governing  the  case,  or  did  you 
not  step  out  of  the  way  to  comment  (like  an  advocate)  on  the  evidence? 
To  get  up  this  witness  and  to  knock  down  that  one,  to  praise  those  who 
supported  Dr.  Taylor's  theory  and  to  censure  those  who  were  indepen- 
dent of  such  nonsense?  Did  not  your  lordship  convey,  as  clearly  to 
the  jury,  by  meaning  looks,  by  thumping  the  desk  with  peculiar  energy, 
by  laying  emphasis  on  certain  parts  of  the  evidence,  and  then  pausing 
and  gazing  intently  upon  the  jurymen,  by  shaking  your  head,  as  if  your 
thoughts  of  my  brother's  guilt  were  too  dreadful  for  utterance ;  by 
repeating  over  and  over  again  those  parts  which  told  heaviest  against 
him;  by  running  on  the  evidence  for  the  prisoner  so  that  it  was 
impossible  for  the  jury  to  understand  it ;  by  charging  against  him,  for  a 
whole  day  and  on  the  morning  of  the  second,  recapitulating  with  fearful 
emphasis  and  solemnity  all  your  arguments  of  the  preceding  night,  con- 
densing them  and  summing  them  into  one  argumentative  whole,  from 
which  it  was  almost  impossible  for  the  jury  to  draw  any  other  con- 
clusion than  that  you  wished  them  to  find  a  verdict  of  guilty?  And 
when  you  had  done  all  this  you  devoted  the  rest  of  the  day — about 
two  hours  and  a  half — to  the  prisoner's  evidence,  having  given  upwards 
of  eleven  hours  to  the  evidence  for  the  prosecution.  If  you  think  this 
consistent  with  your  duty  and  with  trial  by  jury,  I  can  only  say  you 
stand  alone ;  for  if  any  faith  is  to  be  placed  in  the  public  Press,  in  the 
tone  of  general  conversation,  in  the  loudly-expressed  voice  of  all  inde- 
pendent persons,  you  have  struck  a  blow  at  trial  by  jury  from  which 
it  never  will  recover,  unless  the  great  mass  of  the  community  now 
protest  against  such  a  course  in  language  that  cannot  be  mistaken.  If 
persons  are  thus  persuaded  into  giving  verdicts  by  judges  in  high 
302 


Appendix  I. 


station  there  is  an  end  to  the  liberties  of  Englishmen.  Trial  by  jury 
becomes,  in  the  language  of  Lord  Denman,  "  a  mockery,  a  delusion, 
and  a  snare,"  and  the  most  glorious  privilege  which  we  have  inherited 
from  our  ancestors  degenerates  into  an  engine  of  tyranny,  cruelty,  and 
falsehood,  to  entrap  and  destroy  those  who  regard  it  as  their  dearest 
birthright.  My  lord,  if  there  be  no  sympathy  for  my  brother,  let 
there  be  at  least  a  feeling  for  our  own  rights  when  they  are  invaded, 
and  let  the  public  meditate  in  time  that  it  is  by  little  and  little  the 
grandest  rights  of  states  and  empires  are  insidiously  sapped  until  they 
perish. 

I  am  not  about  to  recapitulate  the  arguments  of  Serjeant  Shee,  which 
prove  that  this  charge  of  murder  is  one  of  the  most  improbable  in  the 
annals  of  criminal  jurisprudence.  These  arguments  failed  with  the 
jury  because  they  were  not  permitted  to  exercise  a  calm  judgment  upon 
them.  But  I  may  call  attention  to  the  gross  fallacy  on  which  the 
whole  prosecution  was  founded — that  of  starting  with  the  positive  theory 
of  a  murder  and  then  endeavouring  by  all  means  to  fix  that  murder 
upon  my  brother. 

It  is,  therefore,  clear  that  in  this  case  a  great,  and  what  would  have 
proved  in  any  other  an  insurmountable  difficulty  meets  one  at  the 
threshold — that  in  order  to  obtain  a  conviction  one  must  reverse  the 
legal  and  customary  order  of  proceeding.  Instead  of  proving  a  murder 
first  and  discovering  the  murderer  afterwards,  you  first  prove  the 
murderer  and  thence  deduce  a  murder.  That  is  the  course  which  the 
necessities  of  the  case  compelled  the  Attorney-General  to  pursue,  and  it 
was  your  duty  to  have  exploded  that  theory  in  your  summing  up.  But 
you  did  no  such  thing.  On  the  contrary,  you  went  into  all  the  ante- 
cedents of  the  prisoner,  and  put  them  to  the  jury  as  an  element  in  the 
consideration  of  whether  a  murder  had  or  had  not  been  committed. 
And  having  thus  prepared  the  minds  of  the  jury  by  the  antimony  of 
motives,  suspicious  circumstances,  &c.,  you  then  administer  to  them  the 
strychnia  of  a  murder.  You  descanted  more  especially  upon  the  pur- 
chase of  strychnia  by  the  prisoner  just  before  Cook's  death  as  strong 
evidence  that  Cook  was  poisoned.  That  circumstance,  coming  after 
proof  of  Cook's  death  by  strychnia,  would  reduce  the  case  to  one  of 
almost  geometrical  accuracy ;  but  by  itself,  in  the  absence  of  such  proof 
— nay,  in  presence  of  scientific  proof  to  the  contrary — of  what  value  is 
it?  Besides,  it  is  quite  incompatible  with  the  case  for  the  prosecu- 
tion. The  prosecution  suggests  that  my  brother  had  a  deliberate 
intention  to  murder  Cook,  and  had  for  ten  days  been  adopting  pre- 
liminary measures  to  carry  that  intention  into  effect ;  that  when  the 
time  for  the  completion  of  his  infernal  purpose  approached  (which  was 
on  the  Sunday),  he  wrote  for  Mr.  Jones,  of  Lutterworth,  a  surgeon, 
and  a  personal  friend  of  the  deceased,  to  come  over  and  be  present  at 
his  last  moments,  in  order  that  his  presence  there  might  stave  off 
suspicion.  Now,  if  that  were  so,  is  it  not  reasonable  to  suppose  that 
he  would  have  had  the  poison  ready  to  be  administered,  and  not  trust 
to  the  doctrine  of  chances  to  procure  it  at  a  village  like  Rugeley  when 
wanted  for  immediate  use?  Surely  the  professional  poisoner  might 
naturally  be  expected  to  keep  a  good  stock-in-trade?  Nothing  of  the 
sort.  On  the  Monday  night  (if  the  case  for  the  prosecution  is  to  be 
believed)  he  gets  from  Newton  three  grains  of  strychnia,  which  he  gives 
almost  immediately  afterwards  to  Cook.  Cook  is  attacked  with 
strychnia-tetanus,  but  recovers,  and  is  nearly  quite  well  the  next  day. 
The  prisoner,  finding  Cook  not  dead,  gets  six  grains  from  Roberts  on 
the  Tuesday,  which  he  also  gives  to  Cook,  and  this  time  he  succeeds 
in  his  purpose.  Now,  is  not  this — the  blackest  part  of  the  case  against 
my  brother — very  improbable?  Would  the  poisoner  of  fourteen  people 
do  his  work  in  such  a  clumsy  fashion?  But,  then,  the  possession  or 
destination  of  those  six  grains  is  not  attempted  to  be  accounted  for. 

303 


Trial  of  William   Palmer. 

That  certainly  is  a  most  inculpatory  circumstance.  But  we  must 
remember  this,  that  until  it  was  known  that  the  prisoner  had  had 
this  strychnia,  it  was  never  suspected  that  Cook  died  from  strychnia. 
It  was  that  circumstance  which  originated  the  train  of  ideas  as  to  my 
brother's  guilt;  and  when  charged  with  murder  he  may  naturally  have 
thought  that  the  strychnia,  if  found  in  his  possession,  would  be 
evidence  of  his  guilt,  and  BO  may  have  destroyed  it ;  whereas,  if  he 
had  preserved  it,  it  would  have  been  the  strongest  proof  of  hie  inno- 
cence. Then,  if  he  did  destroy  it,  he  could  give  no  proof  of  the  fact, 
for,  of  course,  it  would  be  done  without  the  privity  of  any  one  else. 
Now,  if  he  had  been  in  France  he  himself  would  have  been  subjected 
to  a  strict  examination  upon  all  the  points  of  the  case,  and  his  own 
statement  upon  that  point,  whether  for  or  against  him,  would  have 
been  in  evidence.  Moreover,  how  does  this  part  of  the  case  reconcile 
with  the  medical  evidence?  It  is  admitted  on  all  hands  that  half  a 
grain  is  sufficient  to  destroy  life ;  but  a  grain,  or  two,  or  three,  no  man 
could  survive  that.  •  Still,  the  inference  unquestionably  is  that  that 
quantity  was  administered  on  Monday  night  but  did  not  kill,  and  the 
next  day  the  dose  was  doubled  !  Nine  grains  in  all !  And  of  these  nine 
grains  of  strychnia,  which  unquestionably  were  administered  if  Cook 
died  from  that  poison,  no  trace  whatever  can  be  discovered  in  the  body  ! 
I  will  not  further  dwell  upon  this  subject,  but  come  to  your 
lordship's  conduct  and  charge,  which  are  the  more  immediate  objects 
of  this  letter. 

The  first  thing  which  appeared  to  me  unfair  was  the  order  which 
your  lordship  made  that  the  medical  witnesses  for  the  Crown  should 
be  accommodated  with  seats  in  the  most  convenient  part  of  the  Court, 
while  the  greater  number  of  witnesses  for  the  defence  were  obliged  to 
stand  during  the  greater  part  of  the  trial — no  slight  mode  of  exhausting 
them  mentally  as  well  as  physically.  And  so  rigidly  was  this  carried 
out  that  none  of  the  medical  witnesses  for  the  defence  were  admitted 
into  Court  until  all  the  witnesses  for  the  prosecution  had  taken  their 
seats,  and  fully  preoccupied  all  the  vacant  space.  This  may  appear 
a  slight  thing,  but  I  know  how  greatly  it  affected  some  of  the  older 
medical  witnesses  for  my  brother,  and  how  much  it  weakened  them 
for  the  violent  attacks  which  the  Attorney-General  made  upon  them. 
There  are  few  men,  however  vigorous,  who  will  not  be  worn  out  by 
standing  for  eight  or  nine  days  in  the  crowded  atmosphere  of  such  » 
Court  as  the  Old  Bailey. 

The  next  thing  which  appeared  to  me  unfair  was  your  permitting 
the  Attorney-General  to  open  to  the  jury  all  the  facts  connected  with 
Bates's  insurance,  and  this  you  did  after  Serjeant  Shee  objected.  It 
is  true  that  evidence  of  this  negotiation  was  afterwards  excluded  as 
being  irrelevant,  but  why  did  you  not  exclude  the  statement  which 
you  must  have  known  beforehand  would  prejudice  the  jury  against  my 
brother?  The  simple  fact  of  that  affair  was  that  my  brother  wanted 
to  raise  money  for  Bates,  whom  he  pitied ;  that  this  device  was  resorted 
to  for  that  purpose,  and  I  am  told  that  not  on  the  turf  alone,  but 
in  commercial  circles,  it  is  a  common  thing  to  raise  loans  upon  the 
deposit  of  insurance  policies.  Your  lordship,  however,  allowed  the 
jury  to  infer  that  my  brother  and  Cook  wanted  to  insure  Bates's  life  in 
order  that  they  might  afterwards  murder  him  ! 

It  is  a  principle  of  the  law  that  nothing  which  is  said  in  the  absence 
of  a  prisoner  can  be  given  in  evidence  against  him.  But  you  permitted 
a  conversation  between  Cook  and  Fisher  to  be  proved  when  my  brother 
was  not  present,  and  when  he  could,  consequently,  have  had  no  means 
of  contradicting  Cook's  drunken  folly  about  the  "  dosing."  In  this, 
I  am  told  by  a  most  accomplished  member  of  the  bar,  you  violated  one 
of  the  leading  rules  of  evidence — one  adapted  for  the  protection  of  all 
men,  as  it  is  obvious  that  if  private  slander  be  once  permitted  to  be 

3°4 


Appendix   I. 


detailed  before  a  jury,  the  most  innocent  man  living  may  be  hanged 
on  statements  made  behind  his  back.  In  your  charge  to  the  jury  you 
seemed  conscious  of  the  impropriety  you  had  committed,  and  you  did 
not  read  that  portion  of  the  evidence  to  them,  but  it  had  already  pro- 
duced a  fatal  influence  on  their  minds.  Yet  you  would  have  read  it, 
as  I  could  plainly  see,  only  that  Judge  Cresswell  interposed  just  as  you 
came  to  it.  What  renders  this  more  indefensible  is  that  Serjeant  Shee 
objected  to  it,  but  you  overruled  his  objection.  (See  verbatim  report 
of  trial,  p.  26.)  And  the  Attorney-General  himself  refrained  from 
stating  it  in  his  opening  address,  because  he  said  it  was  not  evidence 
(report,  p.  9).  Upon  its  manifest  falsehood  I  need  not  say  a  word- 
It  is  incredible  that  Cook  should  say  to  Fisher  my  brother  poisoned 
him,  and  yet  afterwards  go  to  Rugeley  with  him,  dine  with  him,  send 
for  him  every  hour  in  the  day,  entrust  him  with  all  his  moneys,  make 
no  mention  of  "  dosing  "  to  his  oldest  friend,  Dr.  Jones,  and  retain 
his  affectionate  faith  in  William  to  the  last.  Yet,  not  one  word  of 
these  obvious  reflections  did  you  put  before  the  jury  to  weaken  the 
force  of  the  illegal  evidence  you  allowed  to  go  before  them.  You  only 
said  that  it  was  "mysterious,"  whereas,  in  truth,  it  was  incredible; 
and  you  added  that  "  Cook  was  under  the  influence  of  Palmer  to  a 
very  great  degree,"  as  if  he  would  have  continued  so  after  an  attempt 
to  kill  him.  It  was  very  soon  apparent  that  your  lordship  was  resolved 
not  only  to  admit  illegal  evidence,  but  also  to  allow  the  prosecuting 
counsel  great  liberties  in  their  mode  of  examination.  Serjeant  Shee 
repeatedly  called  your  attention  to  Mr.  James  putting  "leading  ques- 
tions "  to  the  witnesses,  but  you  overruled  him,  until  he  told  Mr. 
Smith  that  it  was  quite  useless  to  object  any  further.  I  am  told  that 
every  member  of  the  bar  in  Court  was  of  opinion  that  the  questions 
were  irregular  in  the  leading  shape  in  which  they  were  put. 

In  his  opening  speech  the  Attorney-General  made  the  following  state- 
ment to  the  jury: — "The  next  morning,  at  an  early  hour,  Palmer  was 
with  him,  and  from  that  time,  during  the  whole  of  Saturday  and 
Sunday,  he  was  constantly  in  attendance  on  him.  He  ordered  him  some 
coffee.  Coffee  was  brought  up  by  the  chambermaid,  Elizabeth  Mills. 
It  was  taken  into  the  room,  given  to  the  prisoner,  and  she  left.  Palmer, 
having  received  the  coffee,  gave  it  to  the  man,  who  was  in  bed,  and 
had,  therefore,  an  opportunity  of  dealing  with  it "  (repoit,  p.  12). 
Elizabeth  Mills  was  called  to  prove  this  statement.  So  far  from  proving 
that  it  was  given  to  Palmer,  she  distinctly  swore  that  she  "  placed  it 
in  Cook's  hands,"  so  that  Palmer  had  no  opportunity  of  tampering  with 
it  (report,  p.  33).  Yet  your  lordship,  whose  duty  it  was  to  see  that  none 
of  these  misstatements  should  be  unobserved  upon  to  the  jury,  did  not 
point  out  this  remarkable  discrepancy,  nor  did  you  think  it  incumbent 
on  you  to  set  them  right  upon  a  point  of  such  material  import  to  my 
brother.  You  allowed  them  to  believe  that  he  had  poisoned  that  coffee 
when  the  evidence  negatived  his  dealing  with  it  at  all. 

In  commenting  upon  the  evidence  of  this  woman,  Elizabeth  Mills,  you 
said  that  Serjeant  Shee  had  made  "  a  most  foul  charge  against  her 
and  Stevens,"  representing  that  she  had  been  bribed,  but  that  you  did 
"not  see  the  smallest  pretence  for  such  a  suggestion."  I  wonder 
that,  after  your  three  score  and  ten  years  in  this  wicked  world,  you 
could  have  been  so  exceedingly  innocent  and  simple.  You  come  from 
a  country  where  the  inhabitants  are  keen-sighted  enough,  yet  you  thrust 
yourself  forward  as  the  defender  of  Eliza  Mills,  a  woman  upon  whose 
countenance  her  character  was  written,  and  whose  whole  demeanour 
flashed  conviction  to  every  mind  of  the  sort  of  person  she  was.  This 
woman  was  brought  away  from  Rugeley  by  Stevens,  she  was  lodged  by 
him  at  Dolly's,  where  she  saw  him  "  always  "  in  the  sitting-room,  that 
gentleman  having  called  "  merely  to  see  how  I  liked  London,  and 
whether  I  was  well  in  health,  and  all  that,  to  see  whether  I  liked  the 

x  305 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

place,"  though  she  afterwards  added  that  he  called  about  "sometimes 
one  thing,  sometimes  another,"  and  "  many  more  things  which  I  cannot 
remember.  I  do  not  keep  things  in  my  head  for  weeks  or  months 
together.  I  do  not  pretend  to  keep  in  my  head  what  the  conversation 
was,"  yet  "  there  were  many  more  things  talked  about  that  I  do  not 
wish  to  mention.  Perhaps  my  thoughts  were  occupied  about  something 
else."  And  when  the  same  woman  is  asked  to  give  some  account  of 
herself,  and  her  visit  to  the  man  Button  at  Hitchingley,  and  asked 
to  name  "who  are  your  friends?"  she  answers,  "I  have  some  friends 
there."  "Who  are  they?"  says  Serjeant  Shee,  to  which  Mills 
answered,  "  Friends  are  friends,  I  suppose,"  and  then  she  gave  an 
account  that  she  slept  .with  the  mother,  and  was  "  engaged  to  the 
eon,"  though  what  she  meant  by  this  she  did  not  venture  to  explain. 
Your  lordship,  however,  "  saw  not  the  smallest  pretence,"  &c. 

Again,  when  the  deposition  of  the  same  woman  was  read,  in  which 
there  was  no  mention  of  the  "  twitchings  and  jerkings,"  and  all  those 
other  horrors  which  she  imparted  into  her  narrative,  and  which  she 
enforced  by  so  much  pantomimic  action ;  and  when  in  the  deposition 
she  proved  that  the  "broth  was  very  good,"  while  in  the  evidence  at 
the  trial  she  swore  that  "  it  poisoned  her,"  you  coolly  told  the  jury 
that  it  was  "an  important  omission;  but  you  will  say  whether  that 
which  is  stated  is  not  substantially  the  same  as  the  evidence  which  she 
gave  on  oath  when  examined  before  you."  Whereas  you  ought  to  have 
said  that  they  were  substantially  opposite,  the  two  statements  being 
reconcilable  by  no  manner  of  even  Scotch  chicanery.  In  fact,  the 
manner  in  which  you  supported  this  woman  was  exactly  opposite  to 
that  which  judges  usually  do  when  persons  of  that  description  come 
before  them ;  and  I  have  heard  of  judges  telling  juries  to  place  no 
reliance  on  witnesses  whose  conduct  and  demeanour  were  every  way 
superior  to  that  of  Mills.  I  can  conceive  no  greater  blow  to  public 
trial  than  the  support  given  by  a  judge  to  a  witness  like  Mills,  but 
"  a  fellow  feeling  makes  us  wondrous  kind,"  and  you  adopted  her 
with  all  the  fervour  of  a  champion  of  romance.  When  it  was  pro- 
posed to  contradict  this  woman  by  Dr.  Collier,  who  was  in  Court, 
Judge  Alderson  said,  with  unrestrained  anger,  "  It  is  better  Dr.  Collier 
should  be  absent  from  the  Court.  If  he  is  to  be  examined  as  to  facts, 
he  ought  not  to  be  here  at  all ;  he  is  here  under  the  false  pretence 
of  being  a  doctor,"  forgetting  that  Taylor,  Rees.  and  Monkton,  who 
were  also  to  be  examined  as  to  facts  on  behalf  of  the  Crown,  were  then 
present,  though  not,  of  course,  ' '  under  the  false  pretence  of  being 
doctors  !  "  The  jury  very  soon  saw  what  the  judges  thought  of  the 
case.  Mr.  Gardner,  the  lawyer  of  Rugeley,  was  then  called  to  prove 
that  the  coroner  had  not  asked  several  questions  of  Mills,  and  that  the 
jurymen  had  expostulated  with  him  for  not  doing  so.  This  illegal 
course  you  permitted,  assigning  the  following  strange  reason  for  it: — 
"  What  was  said  there  is  part  of  the  transaction  of  taking  the  evidence. 
It  cannot  be  evidence  against  the  prisoner,  but  it  may  explain  the 
manner  in  which  the  depositions  are  taken."  It  requires  no  lawyer 
to  tell  me  that  "if  it  cannot  be  evidence  against  the  prisoner,  then  it 
has  no  right  to  go  upon  your  notes,  or  to  be  stated  in  the  presence 
of  the  jury  at  all,  whom  it  cannot  fail  to  affect,  although  they  are 
sworn  to  decide  according  to  the  evidence."  Yet  all  this  you  per- 
mitted, allowing  the  Attorney-General  to  damage  the  character  of  the 
coroner  in  every  way  he  could ;  and  there  is  no  knowing  what  you  could 
not  have  got  Gardner  to  say  had  not  Judge  Cresswell  interposed  and 
terminated  the  scene.  He  said  "  the  depositions  which  had  been  put 
in  did  not  show  that  any  questions  had  been  put  by  the  jurymen.  If 
they  had  contained  such  questions  they  would  have  shown  the  motive 
of  the  jury  in  putting  them.  But  the  Court  was  left  totally  in  the 
dark  as  to  whether  questions  had  been  put  by  the  coroner  or  any  other 

306 


Appendix  I. 


person.  For  anything  that  appeared  to  the  contrary,  the  witnesses 
might  have  made  a  voluntary  statement  without  any  questions  at  all 
being  put  to  then.  No  foundation  was,  therefore,  laid  for  the  Attorney- 
General's  inquiries."  Every  one  in  Court  saw  how  chagrined  you 
were  at  this  interposition  of  Judge  Cresswell,  but  you  were  obliged  to 
submit,  as  Alderson  concurred  with  him.  One  word  with  reference 
to  Ward,  the  coroner.  He  is  a  very  able  lawyer.  The  jury  wanted  to 
put  questions  as  to  various  rumours  about  my  brother  William  poisoning 
Lord  George  Bentinck,  Bladen  the  brewer,  and  twenty  other  people; 
and  as  the  coroner  overruled  all  such  folly,  the  sapient  jurymen  did 
expostulate  with  him,  and  this  was  Gardner's  mare's  nest ! 

The  next  witness  examined  was  Mrs.  Brooks,  and  though  she  gave 
evidence  of  the  most  valuable  kind  to  the  prisoner,  yet  not  one  syllable 
of  it  did  you  comment  upon  to  the  jury.  The  main  evidence  against 
my  brother,  connected  with  Shrewsbury,  related  to  the  sickness  with 
which  Cook  was  seized.  If,  therefore,  other  persons  in  various  parts 
of  the  town  were  similarly  affected,  it  could  not  fail  to  benefit  William, 
for  he  could  not  be  said  to  have  poisoned  or  "dosed"  all  the  others, 
especially  as  he  was  not  at  Shrewsbury  at  all  when  they  were  sick,  but 
was  at  home  at  Rugeley.  Serjeant  Shee  asked  Mrs.  Brooks  (report, 
p.  54),  "  Do  you  know  whether  other  racing  men  were  taken  ill  on  the 
Wednesday  at  Shrewsbury  ? — There  were  a  great  number ;  one  of 
my  company  was  dreadfully  ill,  and  there  was  a  wonder  what  could 
cause  it.  We  made  an  observation.  We  thought  the  water  might  have 
been  poisoned  at  Shrewsbury.  We  were  all  afflicted  in  some  way  by 
sickness — sick  and  purged."  After  twelve  days  the  jury  can  be 
scarcely  expected  to  have  remembered  this  most  important  admission. 
It  was  your  incumbent  duty  to  have  recalled  their  attention  to  it,  for 
it  was  strongly  in  my  brother's  favour ;  but,  if  they  recollected  it 
at  all,  you  took  care  that  they  should  pay  no  attention  to  it,  for,  after 
reading  to  them  all  that  she  said  in  her  direct  examination,  you 
remarked,  "This  ends  the  affair  about  Mr.  Cook's  illness  at  Shrews- 
bury, and,  taken  by  itself,  it  really  amounts  to  very  little,  but,  you 
observe,  it  is  connected  with  what  follows  when  he  returned  to 
Rugeley"  (report,  p.  311).  You  then  passed  on,  not  saying  a  word 
about  the  incident  just  mentioned,  and,  associating  in  the  minds  of  the 
jury  with  subsequent  transactions  at  Rugeley  that  part  of  Mrs.  Brooks' 
evidence  which  was  brought  forward  for  the  prosecution,  you  kept 
back  the  most  valuable  portion  of  her  testimony  to  my  brother,  and 
entirely  ignored  its  existence  in  the  case. 

Dr.  Jones,  of  Lutterworth,  the  friend  of  Cook,  to  whom  my  brother 
writes,  gave  evidence  of  the  most  valuable  kind,  showing  Cook's 
broken  constitution,  hie  sores,  his  syphilis,  his  secondary  symptoms,  his 
unbounded  confidence  in  William,  and  William's  brotherly  kindness  to 
him,  yet  not  one  word  of  comment  did  you  offer  to  the  jury  upon  these 
matters.  The  only  remark  you  made  was  one  highly  damaging  to  my 
brother,  and  was  as  follows: — "At  first  sight  it  would  appear  very 
much  to  be  in  his  favour  that  he  sends  for  a  medical  man,  who  is  a 
friend  of  Cook's,  and  who  took  a  lively  interest  in  him,  and  wished 
him  well.  But,  at  the  same  time,  there  are  circumstances  in  this  case 
that  may  enable  you  to  draw  a  different  conclusion,  but  I  will  not 
suggest "  (report,  p.  312).  No,  you  did  not  suggest  in  words,  but, 
pausing  here,  you  looked  at  the  jury  and  shook  your  head  at  them  for 
half  a  minute  in  the  most  mysterious  manner,  eo  that  they  must  have 
been  the  dullest  of  all  mankind  if  they  had  not  perfectly  well  known 
what  you  meant.  I  have  heard  more  than  one  person  remark  upon  the 
Scotch  subtlety  of  this  mode  of  proceeding.  Your  lordship  is  a  sort 
of  biographer  of  the  Chief  Justices  of  England,  though  I  am  toH  that 
the  unfortunate  Dr.  Giles,  whom  you  had  the  pleasure  of  sentencing 
at  Oxford  to  twelve  months'  imprisonment,  is  the  real  author  of  that 

307 


Trial   of  William   Palmer. 

production;  and  I  suppose  you  hope  to  figure  one  day  in  the  literary 
gallery  with  those  whom  you  have  commemorated.  It  would  be 
impossible,  perhaps,  for  a  future  historian  who  merely  read  your  pro- 
ceedings in  my  brother's  trial,  to  form  an  accurate  notion  of  your 
demeanour;  but,  with  the  light  which  this  letter  will  throw  upon  the 
transaction,  such  an  annalist — if  ever  you  should  be  thought  worthy  of 
notice — will  be  able  to  inform  future  times  how  you  managed  to  convince 
a  jury  without  leaving  any  trace  behind  of  the  means  by  which  you 
did  it. 

The  next  witness  of  any  consequence  was  Newton ;  and  here  I  should 
have  thought  your  lordship's  feelings  as  a  man,  if  they  had  not  entirely 
perished,  would  have  exhibited  some  trace  of  natural  passion.  Newton, 
according  to  his  own  account,  was  an  accessory  to  the  murder,  and  the 
murderer  after  the  fact;  he  knew  the  current  gossip  of  Rugeley  and 
Stafford,  that  Cook  had  been  poisoned  by  my  brother ;  he  assisted  at 
the  post-mortem  examinations  for  the  purpose  of  detecting  the  poison 
which  the  murderer  had  used ;  he  had  an  interview  on  the  Sunday  after 
Cook's  death  with  William,  in  which  this  skilful  poisoner  (whose 
chemical  knowledge  of  the  minimum  dose  of  strychnia  which  destroys 
life,  and  of  the  hitherto  unknown  fact  that  antimony  neutralises  the 
discovery  of  strychnia,  places  him  a  hundred  years  in  advance  of  all 
the  chemists  of  the  age),  asks  the  ignorant  shopboy  of  the  nature  and 
the  effects  of  strychnia  !  And  when  the  learned  Newton  gives  him 
information  on  the  matter,  the  poisoner  snaps  his  fingers  in  joy  and 
exclaims,  "  That  will  do  "  ;  and  after  that  he  goes  with  him  to  the  post- 
mortem examination ;  and  after  that  Newton  swears  against  him  at  the 
inquest ;  and  after  that  he  keeps  the  deadly  secret  buried  in  his  bosom 
from  November  until  the  middle  of  the  month  of  May,  just  one  day 
before  the  trial !  And  after  the  trial  he  communicates  the  further 
fact  to  the  Attorney-General  that  it  was  he  who  made  up  the  deadly 
pills  for  my  brother  on  the  Monday  night.  With  reference  to  the 
credibility  of  this  monstrous  witness  you  have  not  one  word  to  say, 
though  you  did  not  hesitate  to  stigmatise  Mr.  Nunneley  and  Dr. 
M 'Donald  as  persons  on  whom  the  jury  could  place  no  reliance ;  and 
in  the  course  of  their  cross-examination  you  looked  at  them  in  a  manner 
significant  of  total  incredulity  of  their  testimony.  Observe  the  mode 
in  which  you  support  Newton.  You  say,  "  There  is  no  contradic- 
tion of  anything  that  he  has  said."  Why  did  you  not  tell  the  jury 
that,  as  he  fixed  no  time  or  place  when  any  one  but  the  prisoner  him- 
self, whose  mouth  was  sealed,  was  by,  it  was  impossible  he  could  be 
contradicted?  You  go  on  (report,  p.  313) — "Well,  then,  you  are  to 
consider  what  is  the  probability  of  his  inventing  this  wicked  and 
most  abominable  lie?  He  had  no  ill-will  towards  the  prisoner  at  the 
bar."'  (Who  told  you  that?  Who  proved  it?  What  right  had  you 
to  assume  it?  What  right  had  you  to  tell  it  to  the  jury?)  "  He  had 
nothing  to  gain  by  injuring  him  much  less  by  saying  anything  to 
affect  his  life."  (I  ask  again  who  told  you  all  this,  and  on  what  pre- 
tence did  you  venture  to  say  so  to  the  jury?)  "  I  see  no  motive  that 
Mr.  Newton  could  have  for  inventing  a  lie  to  take  away  the  life  of 
another  person."  (Are  you  omniscient,  then,  and  do  you  profess  to 
read  that  inscrutable  mystery,  the  human  heart,  and  have  you  not 
read  in  the  annals  of  crime  of  innumerable  murders  and  perjuries  com- 
mitted without  apparent  motive?)  "  No  inducement  could  be  held  out 
to  him  by  the  Crown  ;  he  says  himself  that  no  inducement  was  held 
out  to  him,  and  that  he  at  last  disclosed  it  from  a  sense  of  justice." 
(As  if  a  man  who  screened  a  murderer  for  six  months  could  have  any 
sense  of  justice.)  "  If  you  believe  him,  certainly  the  evidence  is  very 
strong  against  the  prisoner  at  the  bar."  Not  a  word  of  caution  is 
here  given ;  not  one  Scotch  hint  of  doubt  in  this  witness.  Your 
"canny"  countrymen  are  not  always  so  credulous;  they  are  not  at  all 
308 


Appendix  I. 


times  so  easy  of  belief  in  persons  of  this  description.  Yet  your  milk 
of  human  kindness  is  so  pure  that  you  cannot  for  your  life  imagine 
the  least  reason  why  Newton  should  not  be  believed. 

But  it  was  on  the  evidence  of  Roberts  that  your  lordship  used 
observations  which  had  the  most  powerful  effect  on  the  jury,  and  since 
then  upon  the  public  mind.  I  have  already  explained  how  it  was  that 
the  prisoner,  even  if  he  were  a  guilty  man,  might  have  denied  the  pur- 
chase of  the  strychnia  from  Roberts,  as  h©  always  denied  its  purchase 
from  Newton,  was  deprived  by  artifice  of  the  witness  Cockayne,  who 
could  have  thrown  a  new  light  upon  this  affair,  and  I  have  shown 
how  Bates  prevaricated  with  reference  to  the  dogs  and  the  brood 
mares.  My  brother  being  in  this  way  at  the  mercy  of  Bates,  and 
juggled  out  of  Cockayne,  in  what  possible  way  could  he  account  for 
the  disposal  of  the  strychnia?  Yet  you,  who  knew  all  this  a  thousand 
times  better  than  the  jury,  told  them  that  "  a  very  serious  case  is 
adduced,  supposing  you  should  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
symptoms  of  Mr.  Cook  were  consistent  with  that  of  poison.  If  you  think 
the  symptoms  are  accounted  for  by  merely  ordinary  tetanus,  of  course 
the  fact  of  strychnia  being  obtained  by  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  is  of 
very  little  weight ;  but,  if  you  should  come  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  symptoms  which  Mr.  Cook  exhibited  on  the  Monday  night  and 
Tuesday  night  are  consistent  with  strychnia,  then  a  fearful  case  is 
made  out  against  him."  The  learned  counsel  did  not  favour  us  with 
the  theory  which  he  had  formed  in  his  own  mind  respecting  that 
atrychnia,  and  how  he  considered  it  to  be  consistent  with  the  view  that 
he  suggested.  There  is  no  evidence  of  the  intention  with  which  it 
was  purchased.  There  is  no  evidence  how  it  was  applied,  and  what 
became  of  it,  or  what  was  done  with  it  (report,  p.  313).  What 
modern  judge  before  yourself  in  a  case  of  death  ever  ventured  to  tell  a 
jury  that  "  a  fearful  crime  was  made  out  against  the  prisoner  "  ? 
Scraggs  or  Belknap  might  have  done  it ;  Jeffreys  might  not  have  blushed 
to  use  the  words,  but  that  they  should  now  be  used  in  the  face  of  an 
open  Court,  and  with  a  pantomimic  gesture  and  grim  stare  at  the  jury 
euch  as  you  gave,  are  facts  discreditable  to  any  law.  By  what  right, 
with  what  face,  on  what  authority  did  you  venture  to  tell  the  jury 
that  his  "learned  counsel"  was  bound  to  prove  his  innocence  or  to 
account  for  his  possession  or  disposal  of  the  strychnia?  I  have  always 
understood  it  to  be  the  law  that  every  man  was  presumed  to  be  inno- 
cent until  he  was  proved  to  be  guilty ;  but  you  have  reversed  this 
majestic,  merciful  principle,  and  intimate  that  every  man  is  guilty 
until  his  counsel  proves  him  to  be  innocent.  A  more  shameful  per- 
version of  the  law  than  this,  I  am  told  by  persons  in  authority,  has 
never  been  witnessed.  Well  also  did  you  know  that  Serjeant  Shee  was 
not  entitled  to  put  forward  to  the  jury  ' '  the  theory  which  he  had 
formed  in  his  .own  mind  respecting  the  strychnia."  Had  he  ventured 
to  do  so  I  have  no  doubt  you  would  have  interrupted  him  with  un- 
feeling harshness,  and  repeated  to  him  in  even  stronger  language  than 
you  did  that  species  of  insult  "  that  a  witness  had  no  more  right  to 
make  himself  an  advocate  than  an  advocate  to  make  himself  a  witness." 
And  then  you  glaringly  tell  the  jury  that  there  has  been  no  "  evidence 
of  the  intention,"  as  if  you  did  not  well  know  that  if  such  evidence 
were  possible  to  be  given  it  could  only  be  given  by  my  brother 
William  himself  (who,  by  law,  could  not  speak) ;  and  that,  even  if 
he  could  speak  and  was  about  to  mention  his  intention,  you  would 
have  stopped  him,  and  said  that  such  evidence  was  illegal,  facts, 
not  intentions,  being  the  only  admissible  evidence  in  a  Court  of 
law.  Yet  you  gravely  complain  as  if  the  thing  might  have  been 
done,  and  the  jury,  who  probably  believed  you,  convicted  my 
brother  because  he  could  not  prove  an  impossibility. 

My    lord,    if   our    present    system    of   representation   were    anything 

309 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

but  a  mockery,  and  if  the  House  of  Commons  were  constituted  as  it 
was  in  the  days  of  Pym,  Vane,  and  Hampden,  I  verily  believe  you 
would  be  impeached  for  such  a  charge  as  this,  fur  you  stated  to  the 
jury  that  the  prisoner  was  guilty  because  he  did  not  do  that  which 
you  absolutely  knew  he  could  not  do,  namely,  prove  his  intention. 
But,  under  the  present  system  of  things,  judges  may  do  anything 
they  please  with  impunity,  and  no  one  calls  attention  to  it,  because 
the  wretches  whom  they  hang  or  exile  are  friendless  outcasts,  deprived 
of  all  sympathy  from  the  world,  enemies  often  of  society,  which 
thus  becomes  their  enemy ;  and  the  great  body  of  the  community 
not  being  acquainted  with  the  law,  and  the  only  persons  who  are, 
namely,  the  bar,  being  a  body  of  degraded,  crawling,  sneaking 
slaves  and  sycophants  who  do  not  venture  to  arraign  a  judge,  because 
if  they  do  they  fear  that  attorneys  will  desert  tl  em ;  in  this  way  the 
most  frightful  licentiousness  of  power  is  given  to  men  like  you,  and 
they  are  as  despotic  as  the  Cadis  in  the  remotest  part  of  Turkey. 
In  civil  cases,  indeed,  there  is  a  check  upon  them,  because  there  the 
parties  are  rich,  and  there  is  an  opportunity  for  a  new  trial,  but 
in  criminal  cases  there  is  no  new  trial,  even  in  the  most  scandalous 
and  infamous  conduct  of  the  judge ;  and  the  consequence  is  that  A 
wicked  man  may  commit  almost  any  conceivable  crime  upon  the 
bench,  and  gratify  his  love  of  blood  to  the  utmost  without  restraint 
or  fear,  than  which  I  can  conceive  no  more  shocking  infamy  to  exist. 

Next,  as  to  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Stevens,  you  made  it  a  rule  all 
through  violently  to  censure  Serjeant  Shee  whenever  he  said  any- 
thing against  the  witnesses  for  the  Crown,  but  not  one  syllable  did 
you  say  against  the  Attorney-General  for  his  attack  on  the  medical 
witnesses  for  my  brother.  Thus  you  say  here  (report,  p.  313) — "  The 
learned  counsel  in  the  discharge  of  his  duty  did,  as  he  was  perfectly 
justified  in  doing,  make  very  violent  attacks  upon  the  character  and 
conduct  of  Mr.  Stevens.  It  rests  with  you  to  say  whether  that 
attack  was  well  founded."  But  had  you  not  said  that  he  waa 
justified  in  doing  so,  and  did  not  this  imply  that  Stevens  deserved  it? 
And  if  it  "rested  with  the  jury,"  what  right  had  you  to  add,  "I 
own  I  can  see  nothing  in  Mr.  Stevens  in  the  slightest  degree  calling 
for  it "  ?  Thus  you  first  say  Serjeant  Shee  was  "  justified,"  then 
you  say  it  "  rests  with  the  jury,"  and  then,  lest  they  may  jointly 
agree  with  the  serjeant,  you  volunteer  your  own  opinion,  that  Serjeant 
Shee  was  not  justified.  Conduct  like  this  requires  no  comment,  but 
if  my  brother  is  hanged  upon  such  a  charge,  who  is  guilty  of  his 
blood? 

The  next  witness  was  Mary  Keeling.  She  gave  imporatnt  evidence 
as  to  the  condition  of  the  body.  Mills  and  one  or  two  other  of 
the  witnesses  had  endeavoured  to  show  that  the  body  was  "  bent 
like  a  bow,"  to  use  the  imaginative  language  of  that  man  Taylor, 
and  this  was  pressed  in  to  support  your  view  of  the  case  that  "  the 
death  was  consistent  with  strychnia."  Now.  Mary  Keeling  proved 
the  exact  reverse  of  this,  but  you  did  not  either  take  it  in  your  notes 
or  read  it  to  the  jury.  Serjeant  Shee  was  obliged  to  interrupt  you. 
I  copy  from  the  report,  p.  313 — 

"  Mr.  Serjeant  Shee — I  am  not  quite  sure  whether  your  lordship 
read  that  the  witness  said  that  the  body  was  lying  straight  on  the 
back  on  the  bed? 

"  Lord  Campbell — I  have  read  all  that  I  have  taken  down.  Is 
it  in  the  cross-examination? 

"  Mr.  Serjeant  Shee — No,  in  the  examination  in  chief.  '  How  was 
the  body  lying? — On  the  back,  straight  down  on  the  bed.' 

"  Mr.  James — Where  do  you  read  that  from? 

310 


Appendix  I. 

"Mr.  Serjeant  Shee — It  is  in  two  reports;  one  in  the  Times  and 
one  from  the  shorthand  writer's  notes. 

"Lord   Campbell — Bamford  says   it  was  lying  straight  on   tlie   bed. 

"Mr.  Serjeant  Shee — I  did  not  allude  to  Bamford's  examination. 
This  witness  says  so  too." 

And  there  the  matter  ended,  and  though  it  was  admitted  that  it 
had  been  said,  and  though  it  corroborated  Dr.  Bamford  and  Dr. 
Jones,  and  entirely  refuted  the  "  opisthotonos "  theory  of  Taylor 
and  Mills,  and  thus  got  rid  of  one  of  the  most  remarkable  symptoms 
"  consistent  with  poisoning  by  strychnia,"  yet  not  one  word  of  com- 
ment did  you  offer  upon  it ;  but,  as  you  said,  it  was  not  upon  your 
notes— where  it  ought  to  have  been — you  left  the  jury  unadvised  upon 
this  essential  contradiction,  which,  taken  with  the  evidence  of  the  two 
medical  men,  entirely  demolished  Mills  and  her  congenial  companion 
Taylor,  and  took  out  of  the  mouth  of  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  and  the 
other  medical  witnesses  one  of  those  vital  symptoms  on  which  they 
founded  their  diagnosis  of  the  causes  of  death.  For,  if  there  was  no 
opisthotonos,  or  bent  bow-like  shape,  then  Cook  did  not  die  of 
strychnia;  and  this  being  proved  not  to  have  been  so  by  these  three 
witnesses,  or,  at  all  events,  left  in  deep  doubt,  my  brother  was  entitled 
to  the  benefit  of  that  doubt,  and  should  have  been  acquitted. 

The  same  wish  of  omission  was  manifest  in  your  notes  when  you  read 
out  the  evidence  of  Devonshire  to  the  jury ;  you  forgot  to  tell  the  jury 
that  Cook's  left  lung  was  diseased,  which  was  important,  as  his  death 
arose  from  natural  causes.  Serjeant  Shee  was  again  obliged  to  interfere 
(report,  p.  314) — 

"Mr.  Serjeant  Shee — I  think  the  witness  said  there  were  traces  of 
emphysema  in  the  left  lung? 
"Mr.   Baron  Alderson — Yes." 

But  not  one  word  of  comment  did  you  make. 

Myatt,  the  postboy,  whose  testimony  was  wholly  incredible,  you 
bolstered  up  with  this  remark,  "Now,  there  seems  no  reason  t>  doubt 
the  evidence  of  this  poor  boy."  As  if  you  could  fathom  the  secret 
motives  of  man. 

Upon  the  letter  which  my  brother  addressed  to  the  coroner  you  say — 
"  This  letter  is  a  most  improper  letter,  addressed  by  the  prisoner  to 
Mr.  Ward,  the  coroner,  who  is,  of  course,  a  judge.  It  so  happens 
that  I  myself  am  the  chief  coroner  of  England,  but  all  the  coroners 
are  judges  as  much  as  I  am,  and  ought,  with  equal  integrity  and  in- 
difference, to  administer  the  law  of  the  country."  This  self  praise,  my 
lord,  is  of  that  species  which  is  said  to  stink.  It  would  have  been 
better  if  you  had  not  eulogised  your  conduct  upon  this  trial,  but  allowed 
others  to  do  so.  You  did  the  same  thing  when  you  were  sentencing 
my  brother,  for  you  prefaced  your  "  hanging  speech  "  by  these  words — 
"  William  Palmer,  after  a  fair  and  impartial  trial,"  &c.,  &c.  You  then 
go  on,  and  suggest  to  the  jury  that  my  brother  was  guilty  because  he 
wrote  that  letter.  "You  will  say  whether  this  is  consistent  with 
innocence;  it  is  clear  tampering  with  the  judge."  Yet  the  conduct  of 
the  gentleman  mentioned  by  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  or  the  French  gentle- 
man who  offered  to  surrender  his  wife's  will,  was  just  as  suspicious, 
though  the  first  was  hanged  innocently,  and  the  last,  fortunately  for 
himself,  not  tried  by  you. 

When  Cheshire  was  cross-examined  by  Serjeant  Shee  he  asked  mm, 
"  Did  he  not  say  I  knew  they  would  not,  for  I  am  as  innocent  as  a 
baby?  "  You  immediately  interrupted,  in  a  most  angry  tone,  saying, 
"  He  has  already  said  that,"  whereas  in  truth  he  had  not  done  so,  but 
the  phrase  was  likely  to  have  an  influence  on  the  jury. 

3" 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

Again,  when  Herring  was  examined,  and  Mr.  Welsby  proposed  to 
give  some  evidence  from  the  pages  of  the  lost  betting  book,  about  whose 
disappearance  one  of  the  greatest  points  was  made  against  William, 
Serjeant  Shee  said,  "  We  cannot  have  the  contents." 

"Lord  Campbell — The  last  account  we  have  got  is  that  it  was  in 
Mr.  Palmer's  possession. 

"  Mr.  Serjeant  Shee — I  do  not  think  there  is  any  proof  of  its  ever 
having  been  in  Mr.  Palmer's  possession. 

"  Mr.  Attorney-General — We  show  that  it  was  in  the  dead  man's 
room  on  the  Tuesday  night  before  his  death,  and  Mr.  Palmer  is  after- 
wards seen  looking  about;  we  have  no  one  else,  my  lord,  that  we  can 
resort  to."  .  .  .  (This  was  utterly  false,  for  the  last  person  who  saw 
it,  or  swore  she  saw  it,  was  Mills,  and  that  was  on  Monday  night.) 

"Lord  Campbell — I  do  not  think  we  can  receive  this  evidence'' 
(report,  p.  41). 

Thus  you  were  about  to  admit  the  contents  of  that  book  on  the  plea 
that  my  brother  possessed  it,  a  plea  entirely  untrue,  and  not  only 
not  supported,  but  even  negatived  by  the  evidence.  My  lord,  if  you  do 
these  things  in  matters  of  life  and  death,  who  among  us  is  safe? 

When  Bates  was  called,  it  was  proposed  to  give  in  evidence  the 
facts  of  the  insurance,  and  you  permitted  a  discussion  to  arise  which 
put  the  jury  in  possession  of  all  the  facts.  You  then  said,  "  On  the 
Attorney-General's  opening  I  doubted  whether  this  would  be  rele- 
vant and  proper  evidence  to  be  received  at  this  trial ' '  (yet  you  per- 
mitted him  to  open  it !),  "  and  upon  consideration  my  brothers  agree 
with  me  it  is  too  remote  to  be  admissible."  But  all  the  evil  had  then  been 
done,  the  jury  having  been  prejudiced  by  the  statement  and  discussion. 
And  not  one  word  did  you  say  to  them  in  your  charge  about  disabusing 
their  minds  of  the  false  impression  which  it  might  have  made. 

When  you  commented  on  the  medical  evidence  you  told  the  jury  that 
my  brother  had  an  opportunity  of  substituting  for  Bamford'e  pills 
others  made  by  himself.  What  right  had  you  to  do  that?  Was  it  not 
leading  their  minds  to  an  inference  that  he  did  so,  and  that  the  sub- 
stituted pills  contained  poison?  (report,  p.  315). 

You  introduced  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  with  great  praises ;  in  fact,  you 
praised  all  the  medical  witnesses  for  the  Crown,  and  confined  your 
applause  to  only  one  of  those  for  the  prisoner,  who  slightly  coincided 
with  Taylor's  notions.  You  said  of  Sir  Benjamin — "  You  will  take 
into  consideration  the  solemn  opinion  of  this  distinguished  medical  man, 
that  he  never  knew  a  case  in  which  the  symptoms  that  he  heard  de- 
scribed arose  from  any  disease.  He  has  seen  and  known  the  various 
diseases  that  afflict  the  human  frame  in  all  their  multiplicity,  and  he 
knows  of  no  natural  disease  such  as  will  answer  the  symptoms  which  he 
heard  described  in  the  case  of  Cook ;  and  if  it  did  not  arise  from  natural 
disease,  then  the  inference  is  that  it  arose  from  other  causes  "  (report,  p. 
316).  Now,  Sir  Benjamin  formed  his  opinion  upon  two  inconsistent 
statements  made  by  Mills  and  Dr.  Jones.  If  what  Mills  swore  was  all 
true,  then,  perhaps,  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  would  have  been  justified  in 
saying  that  no  disease  that  he  had  seen  accorded  with  that  description ; 
but  if  what  Mills  swore  was  all  false,  and  it  was  entirely  inconsistent 
with  what  Dr.  Jones  proved,  then  also  it  would  not  be  consistent  with 
natural  disease,  or  with  anything  in  Nature,  and  yet  my  brother  be 
innocent  of  this  crime.  If  Mills  invented  a  number  of  symptoms  which 
no  medical  man  had  ever  seen,  and  it  is  what  an  ignorant  chambermaid 
who  was  disposed  to  perjure  herself  might  be  supposed  to  do,  then  what 
Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  proved  would  have  been  correct,  and  he  could 
not  assign  to  any  natural  disease  that  which  was,  in  truth,  but  a  fictitious 

312 


Appendix  I. 


narrative ;  but  it  would  not  necessarily  follow  from  that  that  Cook  died 
of  poison,  as  you  told  the  jury  it  would,  but  it  would  as  logically  follow 
that  the  whole  of  the  symptoms  not  being  in  accordance  with  any 
known  disease  were  invented  by  an  unskilful  person,  and  unskilfully 
put  together  for  the  occasion.  I  think  you  saw  in  ite  full  force  the 
effect  of  this,  for  it  will  be  seen  by  the  report  that  you  prevented 
Serjeant  Shee  from  discovering  on  which  of  these  two  witnesses  Sir 
Benjamin  relied  in  premising  his  opinion. 

"  Considering  how  rarely  tetanus  is  witnessed  at  all,  would  you  think 
that  the  description  of  a  chambermaid,  and  of  a  provincial  medical 
man  who  had  only  seen  one  case  of  tetanus,  could  be  relied  upon  by 
you  to  state  what  description  of  disease  the  disease  observed  was? — I 
must  say  I  thought  the  description  very  clearly  given."  (How  could  it 
be  given  clearly  if  it  accorded  with  no  known  disease?  Besides,  the 
answer  is  an  evasion  of  the  question.) 

"  Mr.  Serjeant  Shee — On  which  of  the  two  would  you  rely,  supposing 
they  differed — the  chambermaid  or  the  medical  man? 

"Lord  Campbell — That  is  hardly  a  proper  question"  (report,  p.  120). 

In  my  judgment  no  question  could  be  more  proper,  for  if  Sir  Benjamin 
relied  on  Mills,  then  the  jury  would  have  known  why  he  pronounced  so 
strong  an  opinion,  and  if  they  disliked  her,  the  opinion  would  go  for 
nothing ;  but  if  Sir  Benjamin  relied  on  Dr.  Jones,  then  the  symptoms 
described  by  him  were  accordant  with  many  known  diseases,  and  Sir 
Benjamin  Brodie  must  have  said  so.  This  ruling  therefore  hanged  my 
brother ! 

But  let  me  hasten  to  a  close.  I  am  so  heartbroken,  so  wearied  out 
with  fatigue,  and  pain,  and  grief ;  I  am  so  utterly  disgusted  by  these 
enumerations  that  I  feel  I  cannot  go  on.  From  the  first  to  the  last 
my  brother  had  no  chance.  You  introduced  him  to  the  jury  as  a 
forger  in  the  following  words : — ' '  There  has  been  evidence  which  cer- 
tainly implicates  the  prisoner  in  transactions  of  a  very  discreditable 
nature.  It  appears  that  he  had  forged  a  great  many  bills  of  exchange, 
and  that  he  had  entered  into  transactions  not  of  a  reputable  nature." 
If  all  this  was  irrelevant  why  did  you  introduce  it?  In  the  same  tone 
was  your  allusion  to  the  "student's  book,"  which  even  the  Crown 
abandoned.  "  This  book  has  been  laid  before  you  in  evidence,  and 
certainly  I  think  I  need  hardly  beg  of  you  to  pay  no  regard  to  it, 
because  it  was  a  book  that  Palmer  had  when  he  was  a  surgeon,  and  at 
a  time  when  I  have  no  doubt  he  would  have  shrunk  with  horror  at 
any  such  crime  as  that  with  which  he  is  charged  here  to-day.  There 
is,  in  the  title  page  of  the  book,  '  Strychnia  kills  by  causing  tetanic 
fixing  of  the  respiratory  muscles,'  and  in  another  part  there  is  a  descrip- 
tion of  what  nux  vomica  is,  and  how  strychnia  is  produced  from  it, 
with  these  words — '  Strychnia  kills  by  causing  tetanic  fixing  of  the 
respiratory  muscles.'  Again  I  say  that  I  think  this  being  found  in 
his  possession  ought  not  to  weigh  at  all  against  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  " 
(report,  p.  315).  If  it  ought  not  to  weigh  against  him,  why,  in  Heaven's 
name,  did  you  so  solemnly  drag  it  in?  Why  did  you  read  and  re-read 
it?  Would  it  not  have  been  fairer  to  put  it  aside  altogether  than  to 
impress  it  on  the  minds  of  the  jury,  and  then  tell  them  it  ought  not  to 
weigh  at  all?  IB  it  possible  to  believe  you  were  sincere?  Is  it 
possible  the  jury  could  have  drawn  any  other  conclusion  from  your 
dwelling  on  it  than  that  you  wished  them  to  regard  it  as  proof  of  guilt? 

With  what  regret  I  have  written  this  letter  I  need  not  say.  My 
own  avocations  are  mercy,  peace,  and  charity,  but  there  is  a  time 
when  duty  compels  a  man  to  lay  aside  his  garb  of  peacefulness,  and  to 
assume  the  weapon  of  the  world.  I  feel  I  should  have  been  a  traitor 

313 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

to  the  truth,  to  my  family,  yea,  even  to  the  country,  if  I  had  feared, 
from  any  selfish  motives,  to  abate  one  word  that  I  have  here  written. 
Against  yourself  personally  I  feel  no  anger ;  but,  indeed,  I  am  sorry 
for  you,  and  I  tremble.  My  lord,  you  are  in  a  fearful  condition.  If 
your  mind  is  so  tainted  that  you  decide  all  other  cases  as  you  decided 
this,  you  will  have  a  most  dreadful  account  to  render  to  a  most  just 
God.  Before  Him  how  contemptible  is  human  nature  in  its  pride,  and 
robes,  and  silken  vanity,  and  self-worship ;  before  Him  what  a  wretched 
insect  is  the  judge  who  makes  others  tremble,  and  flings  about  his 
sentences  of  death,  and  dabbles  in  blood  as  if  it  were  water.  You  are 
now  exulting  in  your  station,  but  in  a  few  short  weeks,  or  months 
(for  you  can  scarcely  hope  for  years)  you  will  be  no  more ;  nothing 
but  a  noisome  corpse  from  which  all  will  flee — loathsome  and  abomin- 
able, dust  and  ashes,  a  shadow  and  a  name.  You  will  be  shut  up 
in  a  box,  and  put  away  into  the  earth,  to  form  food  for  worms  and 
to  deal  with  abomination ;  and  all  your  state,  and  all  your  bowing, 
sycophantic  train  will  fear  to  look  upon  you,  and  will  fly  to  others, 
and  you  will  have  left  nothing  but  perishable  mercy  and  a  vain 
name,  and  your  life  will  have  been  like  smoke.  But  there  is  within 
you  a  part  that  liveth,  and  will  have  to  answer  for  the  past,  and 
to  render  up  an  account  of  the  things  done  in  the  body,  before  a 
Lord  and  Judge  who  makes  the  heavens  tremble  and  before  whom 
the  mountains  are  but  as  grains  of  dust.  Answer  me,  and  say  how 
will  you  face  that  fearful  tribunal  if  you  leave  one  etone  unturned 
in  the  present  case  to  discover  the  whole  truth,  or  if  you  oppose 
the  application  that  will  be  made  for  a  respite  until  science  has  made 
clear  either  guilt  or  innocence  !  All  human  testimony  is  fallible ; 
most  dangerous  it  is  to  destroy  life  upon  a  train  of  circumstances 
depending  on  the  veracity  of  such  persons  as  Mills,  and  Taylor,  and 
Wyatt,  and  Newton.  But  the  conclusions  of  science  are  certain, 
and  this  fact,  the  first  chemists  of  the  day  aver,  can  be  made  as 
clear  as  light,  that  if  strychnia  were  administered  to  Cook  in  his 
lifetime,  it  is  now  in  his  body,  and  can  be  detected  by  means  that 
are  infallible.  If,  then,  it  is  undoubted  that  my  brother  poisoned 
Cook,  what  objection  can  there  be  to  exhume  the  body,  and  convince 
the  whole  world  of  the  fact?  but  if  it  be  not  certain,  what  a  frightful 
crime  are  we  then  plunging  into,  to  hang  a  man  about  whose  guilt 
there  still  remains  a  tremendous  body  of  doubt?  or  what  reparation 
shall  you  make  to  his  orphan  boy,  to  his  mother  and  sister,  who 
love  and  have  faith  in  him,  if  a  few  short  weeks  shall  demonstrate, 
as  in  the  rapid  advance  of  science  they  may  do,  that  William  Palmer 
has  been  murdered  on  a  scientific  theory  invented  for  the  purpose 
of  blood,  and  scouted  by  men  of  the  greatest  eminence  in  chemical 
analysis?  Even  while  these  pages  pass  through  the  press  I  read 
in  the  papers  a  letter  which  utterly  destroys  Taylor's  new  hypothesis, 
and  annihilates  for  ever  the  foundations  on  which  he  rested.  It  is 
published  also  in  a  morning  journal,  the  Times,  which  cries  aloud 
for  my  brother's  blood  and  fixes  his  guilt,  not  upon  the  fact  proved 
at  the  trial,  for  the  editors  of  that  able  paper  knew  that  these  facts 
are  but  as  cobwebs,  but  upon  what  he  is  supposed  to  have  done  when 
he  was  taken  to  Stafford  prison,  upon  his  threat,  if  he  used  the 
threat,  to  destroy  his  life.  Weak  and  miserable  must  be  the  case 
for  the  prosecution  when  their  advocates  are  compelled  to  resort  to 
this  flimsy  ad  captandum  argument  for  the  vulgar.  Who  is  there 
so  hardy  as  to  be  able  to  answer  for  himself  that,  under  similar 
accusations,  he  would  not  resort  to  suicide,  or  who  but  the  most 
uncharitable  would  regard  that  suicide  as  proof  conclusive  of  the  guilt 
of  poisoning?  He  was  overwhelmed  with  debts  which  he  had  no 
means  of  paying,  he  had  violated  the  civil  law,  and  had  forged  his 


Appendix  I. 

mother's  name  to  the  extent  of  thousands;  he  was  accused  of  fourteen 
or   fifteen   hideous   and    dreadful    murders         He    was    Prost^d    m 
mind  and  body  by  sickness,  by  weakness,  by  anxiety,  by  a  thousand 
Xcting  passions  of   grief,   despair,   remorse    and  indignation  at  the 
fearful  torrents  of  calumny  against  him ;  and  because  the  human  mind 
gave  way  under  this  awful  load  of  calamities,  and  he  declared  that  he 
would  willingly  die-who  is  the  man  that  can  fairly  say  he  is  there- 
fS  gunty  0*1  murder?       The   editor  of  the   Times  has  indeed  said 
BO:    and   many   influential   persons   will,  perhaps,    blame   him,    but   I, 
for   one,   consider   that  his  conduct,  though    censurable,    was   natural 
and  what  might  have  been  expected,  and  I  draw  no  such  conclu  ion 
from  the   circumstances  as  the   Times  has  done        But   however   this 
may  be,  it  is  not  to  the  Times,  but  to  you  and  the  Home  Secretary 
flook,  'and  in   your   hands  is  the   life   of   William   Pa  mer.       I   have 
not  flattered  vou  in  aught,  but  I  have  spoken  as  I  felt.       I  ask  you 
no    to  respite  him  for  m§y  s'ake,  for  the  sake  of  his  family    nor  even  for 
ubHc  justice  and  humanity.       These  appeals  would  probably  be  lost 
on  you        But  I,  as  a  minister  ot  the  Gospel,  ask  you  to  respite  him 
fo/your  own  sake-for  you  will  have  the  guilt  of  his  blood  and  the 
infamy  of  his  death  if  he  is  wrongly  executed;   and   i f  his  ^ocence 
should   be   hereafter  demonstrated     his   memory  ^ J^S.TC  S* 
soul;  it  will  be  like  a  mountain  of  lead  upon  your  heart ;  it  will  stifle 
your  cries   to   God,    and    drag   you   down   with   that  darkness  of  hell 
Ihich   is   prepared   for  those  who   violate   the  commandmen^,  ^Thou 
shalt  not  kill. 


APPENDIX  II. 

SHORT  ACCOUNT  OP  THE  JUDGES  AND  COUNSEL  ENGAGED  IN  THE 

CASE. 

JOHN  CAMPBELL,  Baron  Campbell,  Lord  Chief  Justice  of  the  Queen's 

Bench.     Lord  Campbell  had  been  Lord  Chief  Justice  six  years  when 

he  presided  at  the  trial.       He  was  seventy-seven  years  of  age      Three 

years  after  he  resigned  the  Chief  Justiceship    and  became  Lord  Chan- 

Slor  at   eighty,  a*  greater  age  than   any   of  his   Predecessors  j on  the 

Woolsack   had   reached  on   being   appointed.        He   held  his  oftce   lor 

two  years  longer,  and  died  at  eighty-two,  an  age  ™hich  none  °*  >g 

successors  reached  while   holding   it.       On   the   day   of. his   death     in 

1861,  he   had   sat  in   Court   and  attended   a   Cabinet  Council       Lord 

Campbell's    life    as    Chancellor    and    politician,    an d   as   the    writer  of 

the  celebrated  lives   of   the  Lord  Chancellors   and  the   Chief  Justices, 

forms  too  considerable  a  part  of   general  history  and  literature  to  be 

detailed  here.       As  a  lawyer  and  judge  his  name  stands  high.       Uis 

temporaries  never    denied    his    abilities ;   but   they    considered   his 

personal  character  and  ambitions  were  selfish  and  by  n°  mea™  "^ 

nanimous.       He  is  said  by  Sir  John  Macdonnell  m  the  Dictionary  of 

National  Biography  to  have  shown  on  the  bench  somewhat  too  openly 

an   unworthy   love7 of  applause;  and   a  tradition  still   lingers  amongst 

lawyers   of  an   ostentatious  kind   of  politeness   assumed  by  him pwhen 

he  Intended  anything  deadly.      The  tfsher  of  the  Court ,a -the  Palmer 

trial  is  credited  with  saying  that  he  knew  the  Chief  meant  to  hang 

Palmer;  he  was  so  polite  in  requesting  him  to  be  seated.       Ihe  tone 

of  the   letter  we   pnnt   from  Palmer's   brother   expresses   much  of    a 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

prevalent  feeling  against  Campbell.  But,  in  Sir  John  Macdonnell's 
words,  whatever  difference  of  opinion  there  may  be  as  to  the  spirit 
in  which  he  served  his  country,  there  is  none  as  to  the  value  of  the 
services  themselves. 

MR.  BARON  ALDERSON.  Sir  Edward  Hall  Alderson  was  in  1856  a 
Baron  of  the  Court  of  Exchequer,  where  he  was  transferred  in  1834, 
his  original  appointment  as  judge  having  been  in  1830  to  the  Court 
of  Common  Pleas.  He  was  born  in  1787,  so  that  he  was  now  sixty- 
nine  years  of  age.  He  was  of  Norfolk,  and  his  father  was  Recorder 
of  Yarmouth,  Norwich,  and  Ipswich.  His  career  at  Cambridge 
was  remarkable.  In  the  year  1809,  when  he  took  his  degree, 
he  was  Senior  Wrangler  and  first  Smith's  prizeman,  besides  being 
first  Chancellor's  medallist,  which  was  the  highest  honour  then 
for  classics.  From  1817  to  1822  he  was  joint  editor  of  the  well-known 
Barnewall  and  Alderson's  Reports  of  those  years  in  the  Court  of  King's 
Bench ;  and  whilst  so  reporting  he  was,  unlike  reporters  of  these 
days,  rapidly  acquiring  a  practice,  though  he  never  took  silk.  He 
made  no  particular  mark  on  the  bench  during  his  twenty-seven  years 
of  occupancy ?  and  he  died  in  1857,  the  year  after  the  trial.  It  is  rather 
curious,  in  view  of  the  attack  made  on  him  for  prejudice  in  the  letter 
to  Lord  Campbell,  that  he  should  have  been  known  as  a  humane 
judge,  with  a  desire  to  restrict  capital  punishment. 

MR.  JUSTICE  CRESSWELL.  Sir  Cresswell  Cresswell  was  the  junior 
judge  on  the  bench.  His  age  was  sixty-two,  and  he  had  been  on  the 
bench  in  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas  since  1842,  where  he 
had  established  a  reputation  as  a  learned  and  strong  judge.  At  the 
bar  he  had  a  large  practice,  and  his  legal  name,  apart  from  his  judicial 
career,  would  have  lived  as  one  of  the  editors  of  the  Barnewall  and 
Cresswell's  Reports  in  the  King's  Bench  from  1822  to  1830.  But 
his  most  abiding  fame  rests  on  his  having  been  the  first  appointed 
judge  of  the  new  Probate  and  Divorce  Court  which  was  established 
in  1858.  He  became  for  the  new  principles  and  practice  of  divorce 
what  Mansfield  had  been  for  commercial  law — their  creator  and  ex- 
pounder. He  sat  in  this  Court,  achieving  a  distinction  which  falls 
to  the  lot  of  few  judges,  until  1863.  In  July  of  this  year  he  was 
knocked  down  in  Constitution  Hill  by  runaway  horses  belonging  to 
Lord  Aveland,  which  had  been  frightened  by  the  breakdown  of  the 
carriage,  and  he  died  from  the  shock.  On  being  made  judge  of  the 
Probate  and  Divorce  Court  he  was  offered  a  peerage,  but  declined 
it,  probably  as  he  was  a  bachelor,  being  sufficiently  content  with 
the  ancestral  name  of  Cresswell  of  Cresswell,  near  Morpeth.  Though 
as  a  judge  he  was  considered  overbearing,  it  is  noticeable  that  he 
did  not  intervene  very  much  in  the  trial ;  the  letter  to  Lord  Camp- 
bell makes  a  point  of  contrasting  his  opinions  on  admission  of  evidence, 
and  in  other  respects,  as  being  in  favour  of  the  prisoner,  while 
those  of  Lord  Campbell  and  Mr.  Baron  Alderson  were  asserted  to  show 
bias  and  even  strong  and  unfair  prejudice. 

SIR  ALEXANDER  JAMES  EDMUND  COCKBURN  was  appointed  Solicitor- 
General  in  July,  1850,  and  early  next  year,  in  succession  to  Sir 
John  Romilly,  was  made  Attorney-General.  He  had  up  to  the  former 
year  been  obtaining  considerable  reputation  as  an  advocate,  had  been 
appointed  Q.C.  in  1841,  and  especially  had  attracted  attention  by  hia 
defence  of  M'Naughten,  who  shot  Mr.  Drummond,  Sir  Robert  Peel's 
secretary.  He  obtained  his  acquittal  on  the  ground  of  insanity ;  a 
defence  less  credible  and  easy  in  1843  than  it  subsequently  became. 
But  he  first  obtained  real  public  distinction,  and  proved  his  qualifi- 
cations to  be  of  the  highest  class,  in  1850  by  speeches  in  Parliament, 

3t6 


Mr.  Baron  Alderson. 


Appendix   II. 


which  led  immediately  to  his  appointment  as  Solicitor  and 
Attorney-General  as  above  mentioned.  In  the  Don  Pacifico  debate 
Lord  Palmerston  had  made  the  great  speech  of  his  life ;  and  the  law 
had  been  prepared  for  him  by  Cockburn.  On  the  fourth  night  of  the 
debate  Mr.  Cockburn  replied  to  a  long  speech  made  by  Mr.  Glad- 
stone against  Palmerston's  policy.  At  the  end  of  his  reply,  accord- 
ing to  a  description  by  Sir  Robert  Peel,  ' '  one  half  of  the  Treasury 
benches  were  left  empty,  while  honourable  members  ran  one  after 
another,  tumbling  over  each  other  in  their  haste  to  shake  hands  with 
the  honourable  and  learned  member."  He  remained  Attorney- 
General  in  Palmerston's  Government  until  November,  1856;  and  thus 
it  fell  to  him  to  conduct  the  Palmer  prosecution.  It  is  worth  men- 
tioning that  Cockburn's  reply  at  the  end  of  the  case  was  made  with- 
out a  single  note.  Palmer  had  therefore  against  him  the  greatest 
figure  at  the  bar,  and  one  of  the  most  accomplished  orators  of  his 
generation.  It  was  in  November,  1856,  that  Cockburn  gave  up  his 
enormous  income,  and  his  Parliamentary  position,  to  become  Chief 
Justice  of  the  Common  Pleas ;  and  the  rest  of  his  distinguished  career, 
until  his  death  in  1880,  was  spent  in  that  office,  or  in  that  of  Lord 
Chief  Justice  of  England,  which  under  the  Judicature  Acts  super- 
seded the  two  ancient  Chief  Justiceships.  Sir  Alexander  Cockburn 
was  of  an  ancient  Scottish  family ;  he  was  several  times  offered  a 
peerage,  but  declined ;  he  was  never  married,  and  his  baronetcy 
expired  with  him. 

JOHN  EDWIN  JAMES  was  forty-four  years  of  age  in  1856.  "  With 
the  appearance  of  a  prize  fighter,"  he  failed  when  he  went  on  the 
stage  as  a  young  man  and  played  "George  Barnwell."  His  father, 
being  a  solicitor  and  an  officer  of  the  city  of  London  it  was  natural 
for  him  to  turn  to  the  bar,  and  he  was  called  at  the  Inner  Temple  in 
1836,  when  he  was  twenty-four.  By  1856  he  was  a  noted  advocate, 
had  been  made  a  Queen's  Counsel,  was  Recorder  of  Brighton,  and 
had  a  professional  income  of  £7000  a  year.  He  was  member  of  Par- 
liament for  Marylebone  in  1859;  but  in  1861  his  retirement  was 
announced.  He  was  overwhelmed  with  pecuniary  difficulties,  and 
owed  £100,000.  An  inquiry  by  his  Inn  in  1861  showed  that  he  had 
in  1857  and  1860  inveigled  a  young  man,  a  son  of  Lord  Yarborough, 
into  debts  of  £35,000 ;  had  obtained,  three  years  before  the  trial, 
£20,000  from  a  solicitor  by  false  misrepresentations ;  and  in  a  case  in 
which  he  was  acting  for  the  plaintiff  had  borrowed  £1250  from  de- 
fendant, promising  to  let  him  off  easily  in  cross-examination.  He 
was  disbarred ;  went  to  America  in  1861 ;  was  admitted  to  the  bar 
there  and  practised ;  but  in  1865  was  playing  at  the  Winter  Garden 
Theatre,  New  York.  He  returned  to  England  in  1873,  and  failed 
in  persuading  the  judges  to  reconsider  his  case.  He  had  married 
in  1861,  but  his  wife  divorced  him  in  1863.  After  his  failure  to 
return  to  the  bar  he  was  articled  as  a  solicitor,  but  was  not  admitted  ; 
and  he  even  offered  himself  again  as  candidate  for  Marylebone.  He 
practised  as  an  expert  in  American  and  English  law,  but  sank  into 
very  poor  circumstances,  and  a  subscription  was  being  made  for  him 
when  he  died  in  1882. 

SIE  WILLIAM  HENRY  BODKIN.  Three  years  after  the  trial  Mr.  Bodkin 
was  appointed  assistant  judge  of  the  Middlesex  Sessions,  and  in  1867 
was  knighted.  He  held  his  office  until  a  few  weeks  of  his  death,  in 
1874,  at  the  age  of  eighty-three.  At  the  time  of  the  trial  he  was 
sixty-five,  and  was  the  most  distinguished  of  the  practitioners  in 
specialised  criminal  business.  In  1832  he  had  been  appointed 
Recorder  of  Dover,  after  being  only  six  years  at  the  bar.  He  acquired 
a  large  practice  on  the  Home  Circuit  and  at  the  Middlesex,  West- 

317 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

minster,  and  Kentish  Sessions ;  he  was  counsel  to  the  Treasury  at  the 
Central  Criminal  Court  in  1856,  and  was  ex  officio  of  the  counsel  for 
the  Crown  in  prosecutions  in  that  Court.  He  retained  this  appoint- 
ment until  he  was  made  a  judge.  As  an  expert  on  the  practice  of 
the  poor  law  and  secretary  of  the  Mendicity  Society  he  took  great 
interest  in  poor  law  questions.  In  1841  he  had  been  returned  to 
Parliament  as  a  Conservative  member  for  Rochester,  but  lost  his 
seat  at  the  election  in  1847  for  having  supported  Sir  Robert  Peel's 
Corn  Law  Bill.  While  he  sat  in  Parliament  he  brought  forward  and 
passed  an  important  measure  of  reform  as  to  the  changeability  of 
irremovable  poor,  which  has  become  a  permanent  feature  of  our 
poor  law  system.  Sir  William  held  several  distinguished  and 
important  offices.  He  was  President  of  the  Society  of  Arts,  a 
Deputy-Lieutenant  of  Middlesex,  and  chairman  of  the  Metropolitan 
Assessment  Sessions.  By  his  marriage  in  1812  to  Sarah  Sophia, 
daughter  of  Peter  Raymond  Poland  of  Winchester  Hall,  Highgate, 
he  became  connected  with  the  family  of  the  distinguished  lawyer,  Sir 
Harry  Bodkin  Poland,  whose  own  professional  career  has  followed 
so  closely  that  of  his  uncle.  Sir  Harry  Bodkin  Poland  succeeded 
him  in  his  Recordership  of  Dover  and  his  office  at  the  Central  Criminal 
Court.  This  family  and  legal  connection  alike  suggested  the  dedica- 
tion of  this  book  to  Sir  Harry  Bodkin  Poland.  None  of  those  who 
actually  took  part  in  the  trial  are  now  living. 

WILLIAM  NEWLAND  WELSBY  had  been  called  to  the  bar  in  1826, 
was  made  Recorder  of  Chester  in  1841,  and  eventually  became  the 
leader  on  the  North  Wales  Circuit.  When  Sir  John  Jervis,  who 
became  Lord  Chief  Justice  of  the  Common  Pleas,  was  made  Attorney- 
General  in  1846,  Welsby  was  appointed  by  him  junior  counsel  to  the 
Treasury ;  in  other  words,  junior  counsel  with  the  Attorney-General 
in  all  his  legal  duties,  thence  known  in  English  legal  professional 
slang  as  the  Attorney-General's  "  devil,"  a  very  important  and 
lucrative  post,  which  generally  leads  to  a  judgeship.  It  was  prob- 
ably his  experience  of  criminal  law  in  this  office,  and  his  general 
reputation  for  knowledge  of  criminal  law,  founded  on  his  editing 
numerous  law  books  as  well  as  on  his  practice  at  the  bar,  that  led 
to  his  being  associated  with  the  Attorney-General  at  the  trial.  He 
had  enormous  industry,  and  besides  editing  a  large  number  of  legal 
books  was  an  editor  of  one  of  the  most  celebrated  series  of  Reports, 
the  seventeen  volumes  of  "  Meeson  and  WTelsby,"  the  product  of  their 
reports  for  years  in  the  Court  of  Exchequer  in  the  earlier  part  of 
Welsby's  career.  He  died  eight  years  after  the  trial,  at  sixty-one, 
without  having  reached  the  bench,  broken  down,  it  was  believed,  by 
his  excessive  labours. 

SIB  JOHN  WALTER  HTIDDLESTON  (Mr.  Baron  Huddleston).  A  year 
after  the  trial  Mr.  Huddleston  was  made  a  Q.C.  From  1865  to  1875 
he  was  Judge-Advocate  of  the  Fleet.  In  the  latter  year  he  became 
a  judge  of  the  Common  Pleas,  and  was  afterwards  transferred  to  the 
Court  of  Exchequer ;  hence  the  name  of  Mr.  Baron  Huddleston,  by 
which  in  later  years  he  continued  to  be  known,  even  after  the  recon- 
stitution  of  the  Courts  by  the  Judicature  Acts,  when  all  the  judges 
took  the  title  of  Justices  of  the  High  Court.  Huddleston  was  a 
remarkable  man.  His  father  was  a  captain  in  the  merchant  service. 
He  was  educated  at  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  but  did  not  take  a 
degree,  and  he  became  usher  in  an  English  school.  He  was  called 
by  Gray's  Inn  in  1839,  when  he  was  twenty-four  years  of  age,  so  that 
he  was  forty-one  at  the  time  of  the  trial.  He  was  member  of  Parlia- 
ment for  Canterbury  from  1865  to  1868,  and  for  Norwich  in  1874 
and  until  he  was  made  a  judge.  He  was  a  great  advocate,  but  not 

318 


Appendix  II. 


so  great  a  judge.  His  reputation  increased  rather  on  the  social  than 
the  legal  side.  He  had  married  in  1872  Lady  Diana  De  Vere  Beau- 
clerk,  daughter  of  the  ninth  Duke  of  St.  Albans,  and  he  was  accounted 
to  be  ambitious  most  of  all  of  social  distinction.  He  was  fitted 
for  this,  if  not  by  family  connections,  by  his  brilliance  as  a  conver- 
sationalist, and  his  gifts  as  a  man  of  the  world  and  his  associations 
with  the  theatre  and  the  turf.  His  accomplishments  included  an 
extensive  knowledge  of  French  literature  and  a  facility  of  speaking 
in  French  which  few  Englishmen  have.  He  thus  represented  grace- 
fully the  English  bar  at  the  funeral  in  1868  of  Berryer,  the  great 
French  advocate,  over  whose  grave  he  made  a  speech  in  French.  He 
died  in  1890,  aged  seventy-five. 

SIB  WILLIAM  SHEE.  The  leading  counsel  for  Palmer,  Mr.  Serjeant 
Shee,  was  in  his  fifty-second  year ;  seven  years  afterwards  he  was 
appointed  a  judge  of  the  Queen's  Bench,  the  first  Roman  Catholic  judge 
since  the  Reformation.  He  was  Irish,  but  educated  at  a  French 
school  in  Somers  Town,  London,  subsequently  at  St.  Cuthbert's 
College,  near  Durham,  where  his  cousin,  afterwards  famous  as  Cardinal 
\Viseman,  was,  and  then  at  Edinburgh  University.  A  student  of 
Lincoln's  Inn  when  nineteen,  he  had  become  a  serjeant  at  law  by  1840, 
and  was  one  of  the  leading  counsel  in  London  and  on  the  Home  Circuit. 
In  1852  he  became  member  of  Parliament  for  Kilkenny,  and  repre- 
sented it  for  five  years.  He  had  been  prominent  as  an  advocate  for 
Catholic  Emancipation  very  early  in  his  career,  and  in  Parliament  he 
was  a  zealous  promoter  of  measures  connected  with  Irish  land 
tenancy,  and  dealing  with  the  Church  endowments,  measures  pre- 
cursory of  later  land  legislation  and  the  Disestablishment  of  the  Irish 
Church.  He  lost  his  seat  for  Kilkenny  in  1857,  and  he  never  sat  in 
Parliament  afterwards.  In  1860,  three  years  before  he  vras  made 
a  judge,  he  refused  the  Chief  Justiceship  of  Madras.  Four  years 
after  his  appointment,  in  1868,  he  died  of  apoplexy  at  the  age  of 
sixty-three.  It  is  noticeable  that  though  Serjeant  Shee  had  been 
in  most  of  the  great  trials  he  had  never  defended  in  a  murder  trial 
until  he  defended  Palmer.  We  have  referred  to  his  declaration  of 
belief  in  Palmer's  innocence ;  and  this  was  not  the  only  point  dn 
which  his  speech  was  criticised  at  the  time.  The  leading  legal  journal 
characterised  it  in  terms  which  will  most  likely  be  agreed  with  by 
the  present-day  reader,  even  more  decisively  than  by  the  reader  of 
half  a  century  ago,  when  the  taste  was  more  for  florid  speaking  than 
it  is  now.  "  The  defence  of  Mr.  Serjeant  Shee  was  clever,  ingenious, 
and  eloquent,  but  wanting  in  judgment  and  taste.  The  peroration 
was  a  striking  instance  of  this  defect,  for  the  allusion  to  the  family 
of  the  prisoner,  and  to  his  supposed  affection  for  his  wife,  grated 
sorely,  and  almost  ludicrously,  on  the  sense  of  propriety  in  the  face 
of  the  undisguised  fact,  known  to  all  his  audience,  that  ho  waa 
accused  of  murdering  his  wife,  that  he  slept  with  his  maid  servant 
on  the  very  night  she  died,  and  that  he  had  confessed  himself  guilty 
of  forgery  upon  his  mother.  Equally  injudicious  was  the  philippic 
against  the  insurance  offices.  In  worse  taste  still  was  his  solemn 
assertion  to  the  jury  that  he  was  convinced  by  the  evidence  of  the 
prisoner's  innocence." 

SIB,  WILLIAM  ROBERT  GROVE.  Palmer's  second  counsel,  Mr.  Grove, 
Q.C.,  was  in  one  respect  the  most  distinguished  of  all  the  persons 
who  took  part  in  the  trial.  At  the  time  he  had  a  European  reputa- 
tion, but  this  was  due  to  his  career  as  a  scientific  investigator,  and 
not  as  a  lawyer.  Without  mentioning  more,  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that 
he  had  published  in  1846  the  great  book,  "  The  Correlation  of  Physical 
Forces,"  which  placed  him  in  the  front  rank  of  European  science. 

319 


Trial  of  William  Palmer. 

The  book  was  translated  into  French  in  the  year  of  the  trial.  He 
had  been  called  to  the  bar  in  1835,  and  was  in  1856  forty-five ;  but 
he  had  ill -health,  and  he  turned  to  science  rather  than  to  practice. 
He  was  at  his  call  a  member  of  the  Royal  Institution,  and  in  1844 
he  had  become  its  vice-president.  By  1853  his  health  had  improved, 
and  he  was  then  a  Q.C.,  having  a  practice  chiefly  in  patent  and 
scientific  cases ;  but  he  had  also  become  a  leader  on  his  Circuit.  It 
was  probably  his  scientific  eminence  that  led  to  his  brief  in  the 
Palmer  case.  Grove  was  appointed  a  judge  in  1871,  retired  in  1887, 
and  died  in  1896  at  eighty-five.  He  did  not  gain  any  special  dis- 
tinction as  a  judge  nor  add  to  his  scientific  reputation  after  he  left 
the  bench,  though  he  published  several  scientific  studies. 

EDWABD  VAUGHAN  HYDE  KENEALY  was  the  junior  counsel  for 
Palmer,  and  was  thirty-seven  years  old.  He  was  a  graduate  of  Trinity 
College,  Dublin,  in  1840,  the  year  of  his  call  to  the  Irish  bar.  In 
1847  he  was  called  to  the  English  bar  by  Gray's  Inn,  and  by  1850  he 
was  a  Doctor  of  Laws  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin.  He  had  published 
poems  as  translations  from  many  Eastern  and  European  languages, 
and  especially  in  1850  a  poem  which  has  been  described  as  marked  by 
genius,  "  Goethe,  a  new  Pantomime."  Between  the  year  of  the 
trial  and  1868  he  had  risen  rapidly,  and  in  the  latter  year  he  was 
made  a  Queen's  Counsel  and  a  Bencher  of  his  Inn.  He  was  the 
leading  counsel  for  the  prosecution  in  the  great  Overend  and  Gurney 
case  of  1869 ;  and  in  1873  came  the  most  extraordinary  period  of  his 
career,  when  he  became  chief  counsel  for  the  Tichborne  claimant. 
His  conduct  of  that  person's  defence  on  the  prosecution  for  perjury, 
and  his  editing  of  the  wild  paper  called  The  Englishman,  and  his 
scurrilous  attacks  on  the  Chief  Justice  and  others,  led  to  his  expulsion 
from  the  Circuit,  the  deprival  of  his  legal  distinctions,  and  finally 
to  his  disbarring.  He  was  elected  in  1875  as  member  for  Stoke, 
solely  as  the  champion  of  the  Tichborne  claimant.  He  sat  until  1880, 
but  was  defeated  then  at  the  General  Election,  and  in  that  year  he 
died.  He  was  an  accomplished  and  successful  advocate,  and  a 
scholar  of  unusual  learning,  but  his  gifts  seemed  of  that  order  of 
genius  which  is  allied  to  madness.  In  1860  he  published  a  transla- 
tion of  a  Celtic  poem,  and  in  1864  a  volume  of  "  Poems  " ;  in  1878, 
"Prayers  and  Meditations,"  "An  Introduction  to  the  Apocalypse,'' 
and  "  Fo,  the  Third  Messenger  of  God." 

JOHN  GRAY.  Mr.  Gray  was  born  at  Aberdeen  in  1807,  and  educated 
at  Gordon's  Hospital.  First  a  solicitor  in  London,  he  was  called 
to  the  bar  in  1838.  After  attaining  the  rank  of  Queen's  Counsel 
in  1863,  seven  years  after  the  Palmer  trial,  he  was  appointed  solicitor 
to  the  Treasury  in  1870.  It  was  while  holding  this  office,  in  1873, 
that  he  conducted  the  prosecution  of  Arthur  Orton ;  so  that  his  career 
and  Dr.  Kenealy's  touched  in  two  points.  He  was  the  author  of  a 
number  of  valuable  contemporary  legal  text  books.  He  died  in 
1875,  owing,  it  was  said,  to  his  labours  in  preparing  and  directing 
the  Orton  prosecution. 


Letter  from  William  Palmer  to  his  wife. 

(Reproduced  from  the  original  in  the  postemon  of  Dr.  Kurt  Loewenfeld, 

Bramhall,  Cheshire.) 


U  ~ 


^w 


^  <S(/& 

/t^~~^      pUL^-t"     J^*"*^-~~~— '  ^ 

^  *  -  ^  y  t^L^Tte 


iJ^J^[^(L<s*^u^ 


J^^^V.^^ 


as  to  wi  November  ~~  19  MONDAY   uo-ta 


M/fet^sf   ^Co a70-*^-~c>c<9--i-^    <-& 

/- 


2O  TUESDAY  [32*-  44  3 


<*^£tt^& 


-  21  TVEDNBSDAY 


Q 


Facsimile  of  page  from  the  Diary  of  William  Palmer. 


1855  nth.  Month      —  22  rHUftSDAY 


November  lit  to  253 


p 

JOL 


A 


St  Cecilia 


FRIDAY  [3U7-38J  o 


o-fr^K*    tftt4^^>       t/    ^/V 
/  fl       /    ~  x 

idK-*-«--^--       ^        v^^      £a££-*^e_^^3| 


24  SATURDAY  [328-371 


Lxt^L-e«-t^C-«  —  <^ 


20  Sunday  -25  aft  Triixj;»zs'- 


E£^£wi_ 


Ji 


/ 


9 


z 


Ito- 
/ 


Facsimile  of  page  from  the  Diary  of  William  Palmer. 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY,  LOS  ANGELES 

COLLEGE  LIBRARY 

This  book  is  due  on  the  last  date  stamped  below. 


06«OI/'84REC(L 


FES  1 1  '65 

6F£B'85R£C 


14  DAY 


Book  Slip-35m-9,'62(D2218s4)4280 


K 

39 

Pl82t 


A    001205613    1 


