JScng al Club Xtbrarp. 


THIS BOOK MUST BE 
RETURNED WITHIN 


14 DAYS. 





IRotablc »rttteb trials 


ADOLF BECK 

(1877 - 1904) 



NOTABLE BRITISH TRIALS SERIES 


Madeleine Smith. Edited by A. IX Smith. 
Dir. Pritchard. Edited by William Ronghcad. 
The Stauntons. Edited by J. IX Atlay. 
Franz Muller. Edited by H. IX Irving. 

The Annesley Case. Edited by Andrew Lang. 
Lord Lovat. Edited by David N. Mackay. 
Captain Porteous. Edited by \V. Ronghead. 
William Palmer. Indited by Geo- II. Knott. 
Mrs. May Brick. Edited by II. IX Irving. 
Dr. Lamson. Edited by H. L. Adam. 

Mary Blandy. Edited by William Rougliuad. 
City ol Glasgow Bank. Edited by W. Wa.IIa.ee. 
Deacon Brodie. Edited by William Rouglirad. 
James Stewart. Edited by 'David N. Mackay. 
A. J- Monton. Edited by J. W. More. 
Oscar Slater. Edited by William Roughead. 
E. M. Chantrelle. Edited by A. D. Smith. 
Douglas Cause. Edited by A- Francis Steuart. 
Mrs. M'Lachlan. Edited by William Roughead. 
Eugene Arana. Edited by Erie Watson. 

J. A. Dick mart. Ed. by S. O. Rowan-Hamiltoii. 
The Seddons. Edited by Eihion Young. 

Sir Roger Casement. Edited by G. II. Knott. 
H. H. Crippen. Edited by Filson Young. 

The Wainwrights. Edited b3^ II. J >. Irving. 
Thurtell and Hunt. Ed. by Eric R. Watson. 
Burke and Hare. Edited by W. Roughead. 
Steinie Morrison Ed. by II. Fletcher Moulton. 
G. J. Smith. Edited by Erie R. Wataon. 
Mary Queen of Scots. Edited by A. E. Steuart. 
Neill Cream. Edited by W. '.Feign mouth Shore. 
By waters and Thompson. Ed. by Filson Y oung. 
Adolf Beck. Edited by Eric It. Watson. 


IIS/ PftEPA /?A TICJIV. 

Henry Fauntleroy. Ed. by Horace JBleaekley. 
Ronald True. Edited by Donald Carswell. 

H. R. Armstrong. Edited, by Hi 1st on Young. 
S. H. Dougal. Edited by Gilbert Hair. 
Catherine Webster. Ed. by Elliot O’Donnell. 
Katharine Nairne. Edited by W. Roughead. 


J^ariicuZars may be HclH from the Publishers- 


'Wan. Hodge & Co.. Lid.. Edinburgh and London. 



ADOLF BECK 

( 1877 - 1904 ) 


13 Y 

Eric R. Watson, LL.B. 

Author of “Eugene Aram: His Life and Trial,” &c., Sec. ; Member of the 
Medico Legal Society 



• EDINBURGH AND LONDON 

WILLIAM HODGE & COMPANY, LTD. 



MADE AND PRINTED AM GREAT BRITAIN 
UV 

WILLIAM HODOE AND COMPANY. LTD. 
GLASGOW ANI) KDIN1SU UGH 



CO MB DIE OF ERRORS. 


Dro. S- — To conclude, the drudge . . . told me what privic 
markes I had about race, as the marke of my shoulder, 
the Mole in my necke, the great Wart on my left Arme, 
that I amaz'd raime from her as a witch. 

Actus Tertius. Sccna Secunde. 


Cur. — A Ring he hath of mine worth fortie ducketts 
And for the same he promis’d, me a Chaine. 
Both one and the other he denies me now : 

Actus Quart us. Sccna Tcrtia. 


K. Dro. — Sir, he din’de with her there at the Porpentine. 
Cur. — He did, and from my finger snacht that Ring. 

An bicss f. — Most mightie Duke, behold a man much wrong’d. 

S. An t. — This purse of Ducketts I received from you. 
And Droinio my man did bring them me : 

* I see we still did nieete each other’s man 
And I was ta’en for him, and he for me, 
And thereupon these errors are arose. 

Actus Quintus , Sccna Prtma. 




PREFACE. 


This Beck case will, I venturo to think, remain one of the 
most remarkable instances of a genuine miscarriage of justice, 
resulting neither from want of good faith on the part of those 
concerned in the prosecution nor from want of skill and 
experience on the part of those responsible for the defence, 
but from a singularly sinister combination of unhappy coin- 
cidences, such as can seldom happen in the legal history of any 
country. It is the fashion of judges to exhibit some im- 
patience, when counsel cite the Beck case as a historic ease 
of mistaken identity; yet separating the features peculiar to 
that case, which can happily never recur — though the reasons 
why they cannot, such as the Indictments Act, are as technical 
as those which produced the lamentable result in 1896 — from 
those that it shares with other such cases, it still remains a 
most remarkable example of tlio fallibility of human testimony 
and of human judgment. 

A generation having passed since Beck’s nan^e was before 
the public, many readers and reviewers may stand in need of 
a succinct account of the essential facts of the story, which 
began in 1877 and ended in 1909. 

The late Master of the Bolls, Lord Collins, has happily 

relieved mo by his lucid narrative of the facts (which will bo 

found at p. 247 in Appendix XI., containing the report of the 

Committee), ahd his clear marshalling of them under their dates 

(from which 1 have compiled the table of leading dates) from 

attempting to do what he had already accomplished with more 

skill, knowledge, and opportunity of ascertaining the facts from 

inspection of the documents than I could lay claim to. 

* 

My cordial thanks are due to Superintendent Lawrerico (now 
retired) and his staff at Scotland Yard for the assistance so 
readily given and for the loan of many documents and photo- 



PREFACE. 


viii 

graphs bearing on the case. Most unfortunately, Meissonieris 
original description and some others hardly less material are 
no longer extant. I also have cause to regret that the Home 
Office did not see its way to allow me to inspect the exhibits 
in her case and in other cases covering ,the period, when 
Beck certainly was, and Meyer was not proved to be, in 
England. As, however, Meyer certainly perpetrated the frauds on 
Nutt in 1894, we may safely assume his guilt throughout 
1895. 

My thanks are due to Mr. Teignmouth Shore for drawing 
my attention to Inspector Littlechild’s experiences of mistaken 
identity, and to Mr. Frank Froest, who has been good enough, 
in his well-earned retirement, to furnish me with his recol- 
lection, after so many* years, of the marks pointed out in 
open Court by Meissonier and Brakelield. 

ERIC R. WATSON. 


London, August , 1022. 



CONTENTS. 


Introduction, 



PAGE 

1 

The Crimes of 1877, 



9 

The Crimes of 1894-1 «95, 



- 11 

The Convict, - 



- 25 

The Ticket-of-Leave Man, 



- - 27 

The Crimes of 1903-1904, 



- 28 

The Agitation, 



- 31 

The Committee of Inquiry, 



- 33 

The Police Evidence, 



- 34 

Evidence from the Public Prosecutor’s Department, 



- 40 

Evidence of the Prison Authorities, 



- 44 

Evidence of Judges and Counsel, - 



- 45 

Evidence of Solicitors, - 



- 55 

The Home Office Evidence, - 



- - 57 

The Handwriting Exports, ------ 



- - 63 

Mistaken Identity Defences, 



- - 71 

(1) The Lyons Mail, 



- - 72 

(2) Wreathock and Others, - 



- - 76 

(3) Clinch and Mackly, - - 



- 77 

(4) R. Robinson, ------ 



- 78 

(5) Edmond Pook, 



- 80 

(6) Lewis and Brady, 



- 85 

(7) The Corse Hall Mystery, - 



- - 87 

(8) Oscar Slater, ------ 



- - 90 

(9) Robert Wood. ..... 



- 99 

Conclusion, 


- 

- 102 

Leading Dates in the Beck Case, 

- 

- 

- 108 


The Trial of Adolf Beck (March, 1896)— 

First Day— Tuesday, 3rd March, 1896. 


Opening Speech for the Crown, 

Evidence for the Prosecution. 

- 117 

Fanny Nutt, 

- 118 

Daisy Grant, 

- 135 

Frank Cooper’, - 

121 

Ottilie Meissonier, 

- - 137 

Marion Taylor, - 

- 121 

Mary Harvey, 

- 140 

Evelyn Emily Miller, - 

- 123 

Frederick Edwards, - 

- 140 

Alice Sinclair, - 

- 125, 129 

Godfrey Chetwynd, - 

- 141 

Ethel Annie Townsend, 

- 127 

John Watts, 

- 142, 149 

Minnie Lewis, - J 

- 130 

James Norris Sutton, - 

- 144 

Juliette Kluth, - 
Kate Brakefield, - 

- 131 

- 133 

William John Wey, - 

- 145 



CONTENTS. 


x 


Second Day— Wednesday, 4th March, 1896. 


Evidence for the Prosecution — continued. 


Marous Browne, - 
Frank Froest, 

Thomas Henry Gurrin, 

- 146 

- 147 

- 147 

AVilliam Parsons, 

Albert Ernest Lamb, - 

- 149 

- 149 

Statement for the Defence, 

. 

- - - 

- 150 


Evidence for the Defence. 


Henry Herman Ellis, - 

- 150 

j Major Lindholrn, 

153 

Annie Smith, 

- 151 

Colonel Harris, - 

- 153 

Charles George Kistner, 

- 152 ; 

j Frederico Pcaet, 

154 

Samuel Archer Jones, 

- 153 i 

1 John Brailsford, - 

- 154 


Third Day— Thursday, 5th March, 1890. 

Verdict and Sentence, - -155 


APPENDICES. 


I. Trial of John Smith (May, 1877)- 

Evidtnct for the Prosecution. 


Louisa Leonard, - - - * 159 j Josiah Willey, - 161 

Emily Ashton, - - - 101 | George Clarke, - 101 

John Cook, 161 j William Redstone, - - 161,102 

Elias Spnrrell, - - - 161 | Louis 4 * Victoria Howard, * - 162 

Verdict and Sentence, - - 162 

II. Deposition of Ada Wooding (April, 1807), ----- 163 

III. Trial of Augustus William Meyers (April, 1S94), 164 


IV. Depositions of Witnesses in the case of Adolf Beck (December, 1895, 
and January, 1896)— 


Ottilie Meissonier, 
Daisy Grant, 

John Watts, 

Mary Harvey, - 
Frederick Edwards, 
Kate Brakelield, - 
James Norris Sutton, 
William John Wey, 
Marion Taylor, - 
Alice Sinclair, 


- 166 

- 168 

170, 174, 187 

- - 171 

- 172 

172 

- 175 

- - 175 

- 175, 1S4 

- 178 


< 

Ethel Annie Townsend, 
Lily Vincent, 

Fanny Nutt, 

Frank Cooper, * 
Minnie Lewis, 

Evelyn Emily Miller, - 
Marcus Browne, - 
Godfrey Chetwynd* - 
Thomas Henry Guerin, 
Eliss Spurred, 


- 179 

- 182 

- 185 

- 188 
- 188 

- 190 

- 192 

- 193 
193, 196 

- 194 


Statement of the accused, Adolf Beck, 


- 195 



CONTENTS. 


xi 


V. Correspondence &c., relating to Beck’s First Conviction, - ■ - 197 

/ 

VI. Note of the Distinctive Marks of John Smith and Adolf Beck, - - 204 

VII. Report regarding Adolf Beck from the Christiania Police (February, 

1896), - 205 


VIII. Trial of Adolf Beck — 

Monday, 27tjt June, 1904. 
Evidence, for the Prosecution. 


Rose Reece, .... 208 Walter Elliott Murphy, - - 215 

Pauline Scott, - - - 210 Wilfred Stagg, - - - - *216 

Lily King, 212 Stephen de Maria, - - * 216 

Dr." Boyd, - - - - - 213 William Green, - - - - 217 

Inspector Ward, - - 213, 218 James Walter Palmer, - - 217 

Caroline Singer,- - - - 215 Thomas Henry Gurrin, - - 219 

Evidence for the Defence. 

Matthew Edward Williams, 220 


IX. Trial of William Thomas, alias John Smith (15th September, 1904), - 222 


Depositions of Witnesses (July and August, 19(H) — 

Violet Turner, - - - 230 j Fritz Glenville, - - - 237 

Beulah Turner, - 231 j Alfred Burr, - - - 237 

Frank Wood laud, - - 232 j John Kane, - 238 

Nellie O'Neill, .... 233 j Andrew John Day, - - - 240 

Evelyn Miriam Edwards, - - 235 j John Ruff, 240 


X. Letter from Sir Forrest Fulton (*27th August, 1904), - - - 242 


XI. Extracts from the Report by the Committee of Inquiry (November, 


1904), 247 

XII. Extracts from Evidence before the Committee of Inquiry — 

Horace A very, K.C., 267 

Sir Forrest Fulton, i - - 285, 291 

Thomas Henry Gurrin, ------ .... J>91 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Adolf Beck, - Frontispiece 

William Augustus Wyatt, alias John Smith, .... facing page 10 
Ear of Adolf Beck and Ear of William Augustus Wyatt, - - ,, 31 

Exhibits in trials 1877, 1896 and 1904; and admitted hand 

writings of “John Smith” and Adolf Beck, ,, 68 

William Augustus Wyatt, alias John Smith, - - * - ,, 160 

Adolf Beck, 13/7/04 (Second Conviction), ,, 208 

William Augustus Wyatt, alias William Thomas, ,, 222 



ADOLF BECK. 


"introduction. 

Adolf Beck was born at Christiansund, Norway, on 14th 
January, 1841, his father being a merchant captain and a 
merchant. He was educated at his native place until six- 
teen years of age, when he was put into a merchant's office, 
but the lifo did not suit him. For a time he studied chemistry, 
and then, at his own wish, went to sea for a year. He next 
arrived in this country, reaching Cardiff in 1865. 1 

His first employment in England seems to have been in 
the office of Mr. Henry Jepson, ship's chandler, where he 
remained for about eight months, 2 nothing being known 
against him while there. In 1896 Mr. Jepson recognised 
him from a photograph shown him by Inspector Harris of 
Falmouth. He continued to improve his English by entering 
the service of a ship's broker at Bristol, whence he returned 
to Cardiff, thence proceeding north to Liverpool, Aberdeen, 
and Glasgow. 3 In Aberdeen he obtained his living by singing 
on the stage. 4 He left this country towards the end of 1868, 
sailing for Monte Video, where he remained nearly a year. 
Whilst there he met the popular pianist, Louis Moreau 
Oottschalk, then at the height of his fame, and he “ used to 
sing with him to the best people in Monte Video.*' A revolu- 
tion broke out in which Beck took part, sustaining a sword 
wound on the right arm, the scar of which was long afterwards 
visible. lie earned his living at this time as a broker until 
Gottschalk telegraphed to him to join him at Buenos Ayres. 
Here he remained a year, working in a ship broker's office and 
presumably assisting the pianoforte virtuoso at his recitals. 
After visiting Paraquay, Bolivia, and Chili, he went to Iquita, 
where he met Colonel North, with whom he shared a tent, 
and he was dn visiting terms with that financier in England 
about 1892. 5 At some period whilst in South America he 


1 Beck's evidence before Committee. 

2 Inspector Harris's report. 

* Beck's evidence before Committee. 

4 Van vert ^statement to Scotland Yard. 

• lb. and Beck’s evidence before Committee and Sir A. Kirby's state 
ment to Scotland Yard. 

i; 1 



Adolf Beck. 


sang on the concert platform with Carlotta Patti. 1 Accord- 
ing to his one-time secretary, Mr. Vanvert, he sang with her 
in Italian Grand Opera, albeit she was lame and appeared little 
on the stage. lie himself says that he <e returned to the 
port (?) and formed a company to build a theatre . 99 He 
went to Lima in Pern in 1874, remaining there ten years. 
In 1879 war broke out between Chili and *?eru, and continued 
until the battle of Mirailores and the surrender of Lima in 
January, 1881. 

Beck passed scathless through this affair, though it led to 
his malting the acquaintance of a Major Lindholm, who was 
taken prisoner by the Peruvians, and who was a witness for 
the defence at the trial of 1896. 

Owing to a concession falling through, Beck left South 
America in 1884, reaching London in May, 1885. He went in 
1888 to stay at the Covent Garden Hotei, then kept by a Mr. 
A. S. Brown, and remained about six years, incurring a bill 
for £600 for board and lodging. Mr. Brown further lent 
Beck about £1600 on bills to assist him to work his mines in 
Norway. 

In September, 1894, Brown requested Beck to leave, being 
unable to get any money out of him. Whilst a resident 
in the hotel, Beck was continually quarrelling with other 
lodgers, and trying to get them to lend him money. 2 In 
the summer of 1891, Beck engaged Jorgen Traag Vanvert as 
his secretary at a salary of 30s. a week, but the 
money was never regularly paid, and finally was not paid at 
all. When Beck was “ turned out ” of the Covent Garden 
Hotel Vanvert ceased to have anything to do with him, but 
when they accidentally met Beck was always .well dressed. 
About 20th December, 1895, Beck was so embarrassed that 
he borrowed £5 from Vanvert on a promissory note, which 
Vanvert destroyed, never expecting to get the money back. 3 
During the whole time of his residence with Mr. Brown, Beck 
was in the habit of pawning things, including a gold-mounted 
umbrella and a gold watch. 4 

Whilst living at the Covent Garden Hotel, Beck became 
acquainted with Mr. F. Tallock, of Albion Tower, South Nor- 
wood Hill; with Mr. Godfrey Chetwynd, of 13a Oockspur 


1 G. R. Sims’ “ Martyrdom of Adolf Beck ” and Vanvert ’s statement. 
He had been a pupil of Mario and could sing in Italian opera and play the 
mandoline. E. P. Wells* statement to Scotland Yard. 

2 Brown’s statement to Scotland Yard. From S. A. J ones’s evidence, Beck 
came to his hotel in September, 1893. Jones kept the Buckingham hotel. 

* Van vert’s statement. 

4 Van vert’s statement. Brown’s statement to Sergeant Allen. White, 
hotel porter’s statement. 

2 



Introduction 


Street; with Miss Emma Craddock, then employed in the 
hotel ; Mrs. Millett , keeper of the Sessions House, Broad 
Sanctuary; and Mrs. Simpson, housekeeper at a very good 
address in the West-end. About this time he also became 
acquainted with the late Sir Alfred Kirby, a financier in- 
terested in mining properties; and with Mr. Edwin Wells, 
J.P., in the employ of the L.C.C. Beck was in the habit of 
writing to the ladies mentioned and to others. 

As he possessed little skill with his pen he frequently got 
Vanvert to write for him. But he also employed outside aid, 
and was sued in the County Court for work done in writing 
letters to ladies. 1 

Far the most valuable of the acquaintanceships Beck made 
while staying at Marcus Brown's Hotel was that with George 
R. Sims, who was later destined to bring to light, not indeed 
with scrupulous accuracy or studied impartiality, the extra- 
ordinary miscarriages of justice, which have secured this un- 
attractive Norwegian a permanent niche in the Temple of 
Fame. 

Leaving the Covent Garden Hotel under the circumstances 
described. Beck next took up his abode at the Buckingham 
Hotel in the Strand, where he stayed for about two and a half 
years, or, according to the proprietor, S. A. Jones, from Sep- 
tember 1893, to September, 1895. He appeared to be in 
poor circumstances and his clothes were shabby in the winter 
and spring of 1894-95. 2 He left the hotel to go to a flat at 
139 Victoria Street. Here he continued to reside until his 
arrest on the charge of Ottilie Meissonier on 16th December, 
1895. 

Beck had returned from South America with considerable 
funds. In his own statement he says that from a commission 
for procuring a concession to build a railway in Spain he 
obtained £8000 from Attolla Brothers, and Vanvert added 
that Beck had obtained large sums from tc supplying the 
troops with food." This was presumably during the war between 
* Chili and Peru. He went to Norway and invested £4000 in 
copper mines at Dalen, and on his return to England appointed 
a certain A. Dettmer as manager, but he could not get any 
money out of Beck, and had to sell up his home in order to 
return to his native Sweden. 3 

About 1889 or 1890, Beck had bought a mining property 
at Telemarken from one Charles Delgobe, whom he engaged 
as manager, promising him a fixed salary, of which, however, 

1 W. E. Savory’s information to Scotland Yard, post , p. 6. 

2 Jones’s evidence. Annie Smith’s evidence. C. C. C., 4 March, 1896* 

9 Vanvert’s statement to Scotland Yard. 



Adolf Beck. 


Delgobe never received anything; and in February, 1896, 
when he made his statement to the Christiania police, Delgobe 
claimed that 5000 kroner were due to him. 

Delgobe also furnished information of little moment as to 
Beck's association with women. 1 Beck was likewise negotiat- 
ing in 1890 for the purchase of the Nysaeter mine in Iladeland, 
the property of 0. & A. Ilorth, engineers, t and he introduced 
the Spanish Company, Ltd. On this transaction Beck received, 
a commission of 54.00 kroner, which was paid to him in cash. 
“ But notwithstanding this, he had received from the pur- 
chasers of the mine in London a portion in advance of the 
commission. This, together with a loan in cash of about 
1000 kroner, amounted altogether to 7750 kroner, which Beck 
still owes to the deponents." 2 Rudolf Andvord, steamship- 
agent, had a very similar experience with another Telemarken 
mine, which Beck purchased from him on behalf of a Spanish 
company. Beck borrowed money from him, and Andvord 
also expended his own money on the upkeep and renovation 
of Beck's mining property, which had been neglected. So 
that the deponent now has not a little owing to him. He 
has sized Beck up as an adventurous and irresponsible indi- 
vidual, and has always kept a safe distance away from him. 3 

On returning to London, Beck endeavoured to dispose of these 
mining properties by offering them to interested parties and 
by the flotation of companies. Through Colonel North he 
made the acquaintance of Sir Alfred Kirbv, of t( The British 
Goldfields of West Africa, Limited," somewhere about the year 
1893. Sir Alfred lent him £200 or £300 in return for 
an option to purchase the mines when the debt was cleared. 
He further sent a mining engineer named Kitts and his own 
son to Norway to examine the mines, and they found the 
mines t€ were nothing near what Beck had represented and 
would not pay for the working." Sir Alfred had previously 
sent a further £200 to a bank in Christiania for the use of 
Beck, but on learning that Beck's statements about the mines 
were “ untrue," Sir Alfred prevented his getting the money, 
though Beck “ tried very hard " to get it. The cost of the 
trip of Kitts and Sir Alfred's son was between £500 and £600. 
A. 8 to Beck's financial position atiout this time,* it seems he 
had often been glad to borrow sums of half a crown to half a 
sovereign from Sir Alfred. The latter had no doubt that 
Beck and Colonel North were together in South America* 
he had heard each speak about it. 4 


1 Report of Christiania police, p. 205. 

*/&. 

* lb. Andvord’s deposition. 

4 Sir A. Kirkby’s statement to Scotland Yard. 
4 




Introduction 


Beck also approached Mr. F. Tallock, of Albion Tower, 
South Norwood Hill. This was in 1890, when he w r as staying 
at the Covent Garden Hotel, where also was staying a Mr. 
Mellar, a friend of Mr. Tallock, and to him also Beck repre- 
sented that he was in need of ,£200 to work his. mines. He 
promised to repay him £5000 for an advance of £200. The 
money was lent, aftd when Mr. Mellar possessed but £25 to 
his credit he lent Beck a further £10 on the strength of his 
statements. Not a penny was ever repaid. 1 * Mr. Mellar went 
to America. 

Mr. Godfrey Chetwynd was another person approached by 
Beck, but as he gave evidence in 1896, it is unnecessary to 
give details of his statement here. In December, 1895, Mr. 
Chetwynd ordered Beck out of his office. He had given him 
a commission note, payable when some business in connec- 
tion with a patent lock nut was completed, and after Beck’s 
arrest, ho offered his solicitor, Mr. Ditton, £100 to get it 
back. He stated that Baron Victor de Fock, of Bradbury, 
Wilkinson & Co., could give information of Beck -when in 
South America.* 

Mr. Edwin Wells, J.P., also gave information touching 
Beck’s mines, but his principal complaint against him was that 
whereas he himself had introduced a purchaser for an Aus- 
tralian gold reef, Beck had written to the owner not to pay 
Mr. Wells his commission, and in consequence it was paid, 
the amount being £450, to Beck, between June and August, 
1895, by Jenkins, Baker & Co., of St. Mildred’s Court, 
Poultry. 3 

Assuming the above statements to be true, it will be seen 
that Beck was not scrupulous in his dealings with men in 
money matters ; it will be seen that he was often necessitous — 
to the extent of needing to borrow a few shillings, but it will 
also appear that he had the handling of large sums of money 
at a time. In particular, about mid-summer, 1895, Beck was 
paid £450; yet at this very time it was alleged that he robbed 
Daisy Grant and Kate Brakefield of property valued at £32 
10s. 4 

As to his relations with men, it deserves to be recorded that 
two hotelkeepers, Browne of London and Fritzner of the Grand 
Hotel, Christiania (?), were ready to let Beck have very large 
credit for his hotel accounts, as he was u very open-handed 
with money when he had it.” 5 


1 Mr. Tallocjl’s statement to Scotland Yard. 

8 Mr. Cheti/pnd’s statement to Scotland Yard. 

3 Wells* information to Scotland Yard. 

4 See their evidence, post , p. 133, 135. 

* Browne's evidence, report of Christiania police, p. 205. 



Adolf Beck. 


It now remains to examine his relations with the sex in 
his known character of Adolf Beck, Norwegian, in order justly 
to appreciate the likelihood that he might be inclined to commit 
the crimes of which he was accused and convicted in 1896 and 
1904. The first information the police received about him, 
apart from the charges he was apprehended and remanded 
upon, was contained in a pink envelope, posh marked “ London, 
S.W., 30th December, 1895,” and addressed to “ Detective 
Department, Great Scotland Yard.” It was anonymous, but 
there seems some reason to think it was written by E. S. M., 
a married woman, who wrote again in 1904. The letter, 
headed “ Re Adolf Beck,” stated that the subject “ is a 
thorough rogue and has been practising this business 
with better-class ladies (mostly widows) for years.’ ’ The 
writer, evidently a woman, gave information concerning a 
Mrs. M., whoso acquaintance Beck had made some five years 
before at the Covent Garden Hotel, but added that Mrs. M. 
would be reluctant to help, fearing exposure. 1 

On 27th January, 1896, Mr. Van vert, Beck's former secre- 
tary, volunteered a statement. To an extent I need not now 
go into, he confirmed the opinion of Messrs. Gurrin and Inglis 
that certain of the incriminating documents were “ positively ” 
in the handwriting of Beck. Ho also added that he “ frequently 
drafted letters to ladies for Beck,” and he mentioned several 
names, but could not remember them all. He was confirmed 
in this by Mr. W. E. Savory, for six years clerk to Messrs. 
Williams & Nevill, solicitors, who, writing under date 1 3th 
July, 1904, after Beck's second apprehension, stated: “ I knew 
this man in London in 1889, and in 1890 defended a County 
Court action brought by a, Norwegian for money due for trans- 
lating letters to women. This case was tried at/ the Lambeth 
County Court, and Beck was represented by Mr. Sylvain Mever, 
barrister (he has since taken silk) . At this trial Beck admitted 
that he had recently returned from Panama, and his English 
was not quite good enough to write the letters he wished. 
He has small fingers and was wearing women's rings. 

I believe, but cannot prove, that Beck has been convicted in 
Tolemarken, Santa Rosario, Panama, and Buenos Ayres. He 
is acquainted with an ex-convict from Christian i at named Mellin 
(possibly an alias). I am firmly convinced he is an adventurer 
of the worst type.” 2 

Mrs. E. S. M., under date 14th May, 1904, states — “ I was 


1 C.I.D. 108850/2 ; Div. Ref. a / 11067. 

2 Savory’s statement to Scotland Yard. The Christianid^polioe reported 
that Beck was never charged with any offence in Norway. \ Sir A. Kirby 
concluded his statement by saying he was “of opinion thatBt,.>k is a great 
liar and a scoundrel.” 

6 



Introduction. 


a friend of Mrs. M., of the Guildhall, Westminster, about three 
or four years ago. I was with my husband at a dinner party 
with Mrs M. when I was introduced to Adolf Beck. I was 
at this time a constant companion of Airs. M., and I on 
numerous occasions met Beck there. The friendship between 
myself and Mrs. M. and Beck extended over a long period, 
lie offered to accompany me to a religious meeting. On the 
w ay he asked if I could lend him £20 and not to acquaint my 
husband. He also made several proposals to me that I did 
not consider proper, he put his arm around me, which I 
resented. lie suggested calling on me during my husband’s 
absence from home. He used to say I was good-looking, and 
promised to buy mo presents, and he w r as a rich man. I have 
been shown very handsome presents by Mrs. M. which she 
stated had been given her by Beck.” . . . She then gave 

particulars of the relations between Beck and Mrs. M., and 
concluded — u During the time I knew Beck I never knew 
him to have a.ny money ; he always asked me for the bus fares. 
I have often seen Beck wearing a single eyeglass. It was his 
favourite eyeglass with a cord attached.” 1 

On 15th July in the same year, Inspector Kane, a firm 
believer in Beck’s innocence as to both the second and the 
third series of crimes, forwarded a letter to the C.I.D. from a 
Mrs. C. From the tone and writing of her letter and from 
her card, she was evidently a lady, and was a cousin of one of 
the most popular and powerful figures in the political life 
of the last decade of Queen Victoria’s reign. 

Mrs. 0. was visited, and made a statement that her sister, 
Airs. H., was introduced to Beck, who visited her daily at her 
flat, whilst living at the Covent Garden Hotel, and that on 
several occasions he sent Airs. II. presents from Norway. Mrs. 
C. suspected. Beck of stealing three bangles from Airs. H., and 
also of having some of her sister’s allowance. In 1896 the 
officers engaged on the ca.se w T ere very desirous of interviewing 
Mrs. H., but she went on the continent with Airs. C.’s husband, 
travelling as brother and sister. 2 

Beck was more or less accepted as All’s. H.’s fiance. Colonel 

G. , who in 1896 was the husband of Airs. C. and the brother- 
in-law’ of Mrs. H., made a statement to the police on 15th 
January, 18$6. He was naturally anxious to spare his sister- 
in-law' the pain of any publicity, but promised to assist Mr. 
Froest by sending him any specimens of Beck’s writing Mrs. 

H. might possess. With regard to the proposed marriage, 

1 Stateme/t of E.R.M. forwarded by F. division; no C.I.D. or Div. 
Ref. No. 

2 Re^ft of Sup. P. 385; C.I.D. Ref. 176167/13. 



Adolf Beck 


Colonel G. told Beck, who had met Mrs. II. at the house of an 
“ influential lady,” that he was a blackguard. Consequently 
the marriage did not take place. 1 

Mrs. S. M., a widow, giving a good address, furnished a 
little information which, slight as it was, is worth summarising. 
About August or September, 1895, a stranger accosted her in 
a confectioner’s shop, talking casually aboitf, the weather. He 
drove her home in a hansom, and asked her to come and have 
tea with him. He gave her his card, which, she thought, ran : 
t( A. Beck, 296 Victoria Street.” Some short time after she 
came and had tea with him; the rooms were well furnished, 
and he seemed to be comfortably off. A housekeeper brought 
the tea, and he treated her “as a gentleman should treat a 
lady. He did say he was going abroad, Norway, I think : 
he said something about having a mine there.” She never 
met him or heard from him again, and did not recognise his 
photograph when produced by Froest.” 2 * 

After liis free pardons and the grant to him of .£5000 as 
compensation, there is no doubt he frequented the society of 
loose women. Thus on 17th Octol>er, 1905, Adolf Beck, of 
Dryden Chambers, Oxford Street, was charged, before Mr. 
Denman, at Marlborough Street, with obstructing P.C. Willard 
in the execution of his duty, which was the arresting of Marie 
Rouquin, a prostitute, and, according to Superintendent Mann, 
also a “ well-known brothel keeper.” lie was bound over. 
The superintendent adds — “ He can be seen almost nightly in 
company of prostitutes in Oxford Street.”* Several anony- 
mous letters from prostitutes reached Scotland Yard saying that 
Beck was up to his old tricks and the like, and Mr. S., an 
American subject, spoke to a conversation on board the 
“ Premia” in January, 1906, with Mr. Tallock, who had 
got to know Beck before his first conviction, through friends 
investing several thousand pounds m a company promoted by 
him, which “ was found to be a swindle.” 

He went on to say that Mr. Tallock had shadowed Beck and 
had seen him speak to women, to whom he had afterwards 
spoken himself. The police attached no importance to this, 
and did not see Mr. Tallock upon it. 4 

As to Beck’s relations with the sex in Norway, Delgobe 
states — “ Beck is free handed with money when he has it ; he 
is also somewhat given to drink, and when he is in an intoxi- 
cated condition he likes to associate with women, especially 


1 Statement of Col. G. from C.I.D. 108850/9. 

2 108850/9. 

•C. Div. 176167/24. 

4 C.I.D. 176167/25. 

8 



Introduction 


those of the lowest class.’ ’ To Fritzner Beck appeared so 
unattractive that he could not imagine any one being led astray 
by him ; he did not know him to associate with women. 1 

Beck speedily got rid of the .£5000 grant to him. Sued 
before Mr. Justice Bingham on 23rd February, 190G, for £220 
due to his late solicitor's trustee in bankruptcy, he told the 
judge — “ I have no money, my lord.” In December, 1909, 
being then in very indigent circumstances, he was admitted to 
the Middlesex hospital suffering from pleurisy and bronchitis, 
and there he died on the seventh day of tha month. 

The Crimes of 1877. 

About Christmas-time, 1876, Ada Wooding was walking 
between Charing Cross and Ludgate Hill, when a stoutish 
young man, already exhibiting signs of a double chin, accosted 
her, and said he should like to see her again. She gave 
her address, and he said he would write to her, which he did 
on Wednesday, 7th March, 1877. He wrote on crested note- 
paper, approximating to the arms of several branches of the 
Milles family, having the curiously infelicitous motto, in the 
circumstances, “ Esto quod esse videris.” He purported to 
write from the Army and Navy Club, Pall Mall, and he signed 
his letter “ Captain Wm.,” as far as what followed the word 
ts Captain ” was decipherable at all. He came as appointed, 
and lie gave the so-called cheque for £13 10s., and the order 
to Messrs. Howell A James, which are described in Ada 
Wording's deposition. There was the promise to instal her 
as his mistress at a house in St. John’s Wood, the borrowing 
of her rings rf her small cash, and an umbrella, which were 
to form common features of these frauds from the spring of 
1877 to the summer of 1904, when they finally ceased. 

Less than a month later Louisa Leonard, married but 
living apart from her husband, was perambulating in the 
neighbourhood of Charing Cross, when the same young man 
accosted her. lie promised to write next day, and he did so, 
and called on her on Thursday, 12th April. She was to 
become his mistress at a house in St. John’s Wood, and in 
lieu of her cl^eap rings, he would send her good ones by a 
commissionaire of the Army and Navy Stores. He gave her 
an order on » Howell & James, and a so-called cheque for 
£13 10s., borrowed her small cash, and departed. 

On 18th April, he met Louisa Howard, to whom identical 
proposals wei.o made, a so-called cheque for the same amount 
given with order to Messrs. Howell & James, and from 
. 

1 Rep' t of Christiania police, p. 205. 



Adolf Beck. 


wh6m, .too, petty cash was borrowed. The notepaper on which 
he wrote appointing to call bore the same coat of arms, arid 
purported to be written from the Army and Navy Club, of 
w T hich, in conversation, he professed to be a member. 

Of course, all three “ cheques ” were valueless, and there 
were seventeen other women defrauded in a precisely similar 
way. 1 On Friday, 20th April, Louisa Leonard recognised the 
man who had defrauded her, pursued him into Gower Street, 
and gave him into custody. To the three women whose 
depositions were taken and the exhibits in whose cases sur- 
vive, he represented himself as “ Lord Willoughby,” and lie 
signed the bills of exchange forms, as far as can bo seen, “ W. 
Willoughby.” 

Nothing of a foreign appearance or accent was noted about 
the man by these women, and inasmuch as ho professed to be 
an English nobleman, no foreign accent can have been very 
apparent. 

Committed for trial, in the name of (t John Smith,” he 
was prosecuted by Mr. Forrest Fulton, defended by the famous 
Montague Williams, tried by the Common Serjeant, Sir 
Thomas Chambers, convicted and sentenced to what would 
nowadays seem the vindictive term of five years* penal 
servitude. 

He never disputed the justice of his conviction, but only 
complained of the severity of his sentence in a petition to the 
Home Secretary, dated 25th June, 1879. 

The petition and the exhibits alike exhibited in nearly 
every word strong evidences of a German education in cali- 
graphy. In a statement made long afterwards, which the 
police were not able to verify, Wyatt, alias Smith, alias 
Thomas, said he had been educated at the University of 
Vienna, whore he bad obtained two degrees. 

He seems to have been described on his indictment by the 
addition of “ labourer,” which probably accounts for his 
description as such on his ticket of leave, dated 14th April, 
1881. His term of penal servitude had so macerated and 
reduced him th^t the plump and youthful viveur of 1877 was 
transformed into a grave ascetic of middle age in February, 
1881, when he was photographed prior to release on licence. 

In the name of Dr. Weiss, Wyatt had becorpe acquainted 
with Mrs. Catherine Brown at Highgate in 187^. After his 
release in 1881, he visited her, and eventually resided with 
her, but he never paid her for the five monllis he stayed 
with her, nor did he do any work. When, he ldt her he said 


1 Brief for prosecution n B. v. Beck, 1896. 
10 






Introduction* 

h© was going to Germany. lie. had toli Ker hi^ parents 
resided in Vienna. He was alw^d Veil dressed.* 

The Crimes of 1894-1895. 

On 2nd December, 1894, Fanny Nutt, widow of a deceased 
corporal-major in thfc Life Guards, was walking in Bond Street 
about six o 7 clock in the evening, when a well-dressed stranger 
accosted her, and said he would like to call and see her at 
her home off the Hampstead Road. They talked for about 
ten minutes, and the affable stranger promised to write and 
make an appointment to call on the widow. Next day 
arrived a note on the Grand Hotel stationery, headed “ Mon- 
day evening/ * and signed with an illegible scrawl. Its word- 
ing and handwriting will call for comment later. The stranger 
called as appointed and was shown upstairs. After the 
familiar talk about establishing Mrs. Nutt as his mistress in 
John’s Wood, the stranger, incidentally remarking that he had 
estates in Lincolnshire (the county where Wyatt happened 
to be born), produced two cheques, one for ten, the other for 
fifteen guineas, drawn on the Union Bank, Belgrave Man- 
sions — a non-existent bank. As in 1877 the so-called cheques 
were on bill forms, having the printed words “ after date ” 
and “ value . received.” A list of clothing to bo got at 
Red fern’s w 7 as made out. Rings to the value of <£6 or £7 
were borrowed to match the size, arid a one-armed commis- 
sionaire from the Grand Hotel w r as to bring the rings back 
with other jewellery at five the same day. A brooch also 
was missed after the visitor left. The stranger himself 
would return next day. lie was very well dressed. He 
gave no name, and did not say he was Lord Willoughby. 
The signature to the bills was a mere scrawl. Mrs. Nutt never 
presented the “ cheques/’ nor did she inform the police. 
On 9th January, 1896, Mrs. Nutt claimed to recognise Beck 
then in the dock at the Police Court as tho man who had 
defrauded her. “ I swear to the back of him ” runs the 
deposition. “ I identify him back and front/’ says the 
report in the Morning Advertiser of 24th January. She 
thought he ™as English, but “ he might have had a slight 
foreign accent.” 

His clothVig a a described by her exactly agreed with the 
descriptions |'iven by several other women. Wyatt, who 
had been discharged for want of evidence in connection with 
a worthless letter of credit in April, 1894, was not known to 
tho police be in London or even in England in the following 

J Statement of Mrs. Brown, February 5, 1896, from 108850/9. 


11 



Adolf Beck 


December, nor indeed were they able ever to trace him as being 
in England before the early part of 1896. Beck, on the 
other hand, was in London. 1 On 1st January, 1895, Marion 
Taylor, who passed as Miss Duncan, and was leading an 
immoral life, was walking in Piccadilly. It was a Saturday. 
Outside a shop a stranger came up, who arranged to call next 
day. A telegram arrived on the Sunday, and at four the 
stranger arrived at Miss Duncan’s rooms in Pimlico. The 
inevitable establishment at St. John’s Wood, tho worthless 
“ cheque ” — this time for £25 — the list of clothing to be 
got at Redfern’s, the borrowing of the rings figured again, 
and petty cash was borrowed for a cab fare. The tc cheque ” 
was drawn on the Union Bank, St. James’s Street, a non- 
existent branch. 

This woman noticed that tho stranger had a strong foreign 
accent. He said to her he was a German. He was beauti- 
fully dressed. Miss Duncan came forward a year later, and 
identified Beck when in custody as the man who had robbed 
her. The telegram was signed “ Wilton, Carlton Club.” 

On 3rd January, 2 1895, Evelyn Mliler was walking in 
Bond Street about five in the afternoon, when a stranger 
stopped her and asked her if they had not met at a Covent 
Garden ball. The usual arrangement to call followed, but, in 
this instance, the cheque which tho wealthy patron gave was 
for £30, and was drawn on the L. and S.W. Bank, Balham 
branch. It was one of several cheques out of a particular 
cheque book, as will be seen later. A list of clothing to be 
got at Redfern’s and Russell & Allen was made out : £2 were 
borrowed. The one-armed commissionaire, who was to bring 
the jewellery, reappeared. The telegram making the appoint- 
ment. was signed “ Wilton, Carlton Club.” This witness, on 
finding her cheque to be worthless, went at once to Albany 
Street police station and described the man who had robbed 
her. I have not that description, but the witness herself 
repeats it thus — “ Slight foreign accent, about, sixty, 5 ft. 

4 in. high, hair and moustache cut short, almost white, dressed 
well, speaks with rather a broad accent, evidently a gentle- 
man.” 

This witness, who did not give her real name, which also 
began with “ M,” was an actress “ resting.” Accent and 
pronunciation would, therefore, be more carefi lly noted by 
her than by the average woman. She identified Beck at the 
Police Court, as the man on 23rd January, 18961 

1 Opening speech of Mr. Mathews in R. v. Thomas , 15th Sept., 1904. 

* la her evidence and deposition she gives the date as 28th January. 
The date above is from the official chronological statement in*Cd. 2315. ’ 
I believe the date — 28, a Saturday — to be correct. — E.R.W. 

12 



Introduction. 


On 18th April, a Saturday, Alice Sinclair was walking in 
Ludgate Hill when a stranger spoke to her. She was with 
her sister. The stranger arranged to call next day. He did 
so. In the course of conversation he mentioned that his 
house in St. John’s Wood was in the Abbey Road. What 
form of cheque was given on this occasion is not clear. In 
her deposition Miss Sinclair said the “ cheque,’ * for £40, was 
on the “ bank in Bolgrave Mansions, Victoria,” but from 
her evidence it would seem to have been drawn on the Balham 
branch of the L. and S. W. Bank, and therefore to have come 
out of the cheque book referred to. The clothing, of which a 
list was made, was to be got at Redfern’s and a riding habit at 
Cobb’s. A commissionaire was to return the borrowed rings. 
Miss Sinclair identified Beck as the man, when he was in 
custody on 2nd January, 1896. At the time she thought the 
man was “ not an Englishman,” though he said he was the 
Earl of Wilton. He was very well dressed in new clothes. 
Details of his dress will be referred to later. 

On 6th March, Mrs. Townsend, a widow, was walking with 
her little daughter in Piccadilly when a stranger came up and 
asked her if she was “ Lady Somebody.” She said she was 
not. The stranger said he was “ Lord Winton de 
Willoughby,” and had just returned from Canada. Calling by 
appointment next day, the stranger went through his in- 
variable procedure, but in view of Mrs. Townsend’s position as 
the widow of an Indian official,' the cheque — again on the 
bank at Balham — was for £120. But the property abstracted 
was also worth more, about £100. There was downright 
larceny on this occasion, as distinct from false pretences, 

larceny by a. trick or as a bailee. The one-armed com- 

missionaire reappeared as the party to return the borrowed 
rings. The stranger was to return next day. Both in the 
street and at the house, the stranger held a pocket hand- 
kerchief to his cheek — the left cheek — the whole time. When 

Jhe stranger spoke to her in March she noticed no foreign 
accent, but rather a Yankee twang. At the Police Court she 
identified, not without doubt, Beck as the man on 23rd Decem- 
ber. She did not doubt his appearance, but doubted when 
he spoke with) a foreign accent, which seemed to her Swiss. 
He spoke in l foreign language at the station. It was not 
in French. j 

Tn March Jor April, 1895, 1 Juliette Kluth, a music-hall 
artiste, who passed under the name of Lily Vincent, was at 
Olympia with her little sister between 3 and 4 p.m. 


1 Letter /from 108859/5 received 31st December, 1895. By this time 
Beck had already been described in the press as a mineowner. 


13 



Adolf Beck. 


After the performance a mail came up and spoke. Next day 
he called by appointment. The one-armed commissionaire 
was mentioned again by the generous stranger, who wrote 
out on what the Sessions paper describes as a “ promissory 
note form 99 a “ cheque ” for £20. It was domiciled at the 
Union Bank, Belgrave Mansions. This witness wrote to 
Scotland Yard, describing the man, and this is her descrip- 
tion — “ The man is about fifty years of age and had a gentle- 
manly manner. He told me he is the owner of a mine. If 
I can see that man Adolf Beck, I can at once say if he is 
the man who defrauded me. , ’ On 2nd January, 1896, 
Juliette Kluth, without a moment’s hesitation, picked out 
Beck as her swindler. She was a Belgian under contract to 
perform in Germany, at Riga and elsewhere, and she noticed 
the stranger’s foreign accent, as she said, but it is not referred 
to in her letter. The general features of the fraud were the 
same, and there was once more the mythical ono-armed com- 
missionaire. The man wrote the exhibits 99 quickly. Red- 
fern was to supply the costumes. The man spoke in fluent 
French to Miss Kluth, and with more a French than a German 
accent when he spoke in English. 

His moustaches were waxed. In her evidence Miss Kluth 
said the man was described by her as “ short, broad shoulders, 
and a long moustache. ” She also said she described his 
foreign accent at the time. That is not 60 . Also she said 
in her letter to the police that the man met her “ at the 
end of April at Earl’s Court railway station, and that he called 
on her on the 1st March. There is room for doubt if her 
evidence was not as inaccurate as her letter and her memory. 

On 3rd April, 1895, a man called at a house in Pimlico 
and inquired for a Mrs. Allen. Mrs. Allen was not in, but 
Miss Minnie Lewis answered for her. Miss Lewis had three 
times seen the man before when he had called for Mrs. Allen. 
He sat down in Miss Lewis’s room, and went through the 
familiar business of the house at St. John’s Wood, the. 
“ cheque,” the clothing to be got at Redf era’s, and the habit 
at Cobb’s. The man said he was Lord Wilton. He wore a 
pointed, military moustache, was very well dressed, and wrote 
the “ cheque ” backhanded, but freely. Tlis case differs 
only from the others in that the man who called was not a» 
stranger to Miss Lewis. She picked Beck ocit as the man 
on 23rd January, 1896. ' 

“ I have not a shadow of doubt he is the man,” she said. 
Under cross-examination she was unable to recall any peculiari- 
ties in her description of the man to the police. And she 
was very vague as to his stature, “ about five feet^high or a 
little more.” She described him as 55 or 56. 


14 



Introduction. 


On 22nd July, a Saturday, Kate Brakefield, a music-hall 
artiste, whose stage name was Alice Brookman, w^as walking 
along Sloane Street when a man came up and professed admira- 
tion of her small foot. He arranged to call next day. He 
called, gave the name of Lord Wilton, and the usual talk fol- 
lowed, including th<t promise to send the things by a one- 
armed commissionaire. The lady, on discovering the fraud, 
went the same day — a Sunday — and described the man. She 
gave no description of any mole, scar, or mark on his face, 
but when she read of such a mark in Mme. Meissonier’ s case 
in December, she went to the Police Court and picked out 
Beck as the man. “ His face is a little thinner arid his 
moustache not so military. It was then long and waxed/ * she 
said at the trial. 

She noticed that the man spoke with a little foreign accent, 
which he explained by saying he had been abroad a good deal. 

Daisy Grant, the next victim, met a man on 4th July, 1895, 
in St. James’s Street. She was with a. lady and a little boy. 
Her story in no way differed from the others, except that the 
house in St. John’s Wood was now situate in Adair Road. 
Daisy Grant purported to recognise Beck as the swindler on 
lGth December, 1895. She admitted that her companion, 
who had only seen him once, could not recognise him. In 
cross-examination at the Police Court she admitted that the 
man “ did visit me for a purpose, and not having money, gave 
me that cheque.” 

It was not until 26th November 1 following that the next 
of the cases charged against the unhappy Norwegian occurred. 
On that day, Ottilie Meissonier, a German subject, but speak- 
ing with a strong French accent, 2 met an affable stranger in 
Victoria Street. She was returning from a flower show, and 
the method of accosting w>as exactly the same a 9 in Mrs. 
Townsend’s case — the pretence of recognising her as a lady 
of title. As a matter of fact, she was a teacher of music, 
had some means of her own, and spoke several languages 
fluently. 

The stranger desired to call on Mme. Meissonier next day, 
ostensibly to see some chrysanthemums she had received. He 
was let in by her maid, Harvey. Mme. Meissonier seems to 
havo been an intelligent and observant woman. She noticed 
the way the njan held his pen as he wrote the list of dresses 
to be got, at Rfcdf era’s and Cobb’s and the so-called cheque. He 
held it between his two fingers, and not as men mostly do, 
between forefinger and thumb. His hands were marked by 

1 According to the Chronological table it was November 29. 

2 Morning Advertiser , December 18, 1895. 

15 



Adolf Beck. 


the seams of his tight brown gloves, as he took them off to 
write. When she returned to the sitting room, she noticed 
that he was reading a German paper. A porter with one arm 
was to return the borrowed rings. There was also downright 
larceny on this occasion, an antique watch being stolen. The 
so-called cheque was drawn on the Unioji Bank, St. James’s 
Street. 

Immediately she missed the watch Mme. Meissonier sent out 
Harvey to look for the man. She herself at once took a cab 
and tried to find the bank. At the Trafalgar Square branch 
they told her the instrument was worthless, and she then 
went to Vine Street police station, where they took her 
description of the man and referred her to the Hammersmith 
station, in the jurisdiction of which she resided, to enter her 
complaint in the crime book there. She did so. 1 Throe 
weeks later she was passing along the south side of Victoria 
Street when she saw a man standing in the door of a house, 
135 or 139 — she was not sure which — to whom she spoke, he 
“ smiling very sweetly,” in English, in which tongue he 
replied. What happened in the next few minutes was to 
decide the whole of Beck’s future life, for Beck it unquestion- 
ably was to whom Mme. Meissonier had spoken. Instead of 
withdrawing to the security and privacy of his flat at 139, he 
rapidly crossed the street to the north side, running rather 
than walking, through the omnibuses and cabs, pursued by the 
lady, who “ could hardly follow him.” By the old Royal 
Standard theatre, they both espied a policeman on duty by 
the clock that still stands at the junction of Vauxhall Bridge 
Road and Victoria Street. It was evident to Beck that the 
woman was about to charge him, and, outstripping her, he 
first approached and spoke to the officer, complaining that 
the lady had accosted him and using foul language about her. 
She took upon herself the responsibility of charging him with 
the property she missed or parted with on 27th November, and 
P.C. Edwards took both parties to Rochester Row police station 
where the officer in charge accepted the lady’s charge and 
refused to take Beck’s. 

The same evening Harvey and Daisy Grant attended the 
station and identified Beck as the culprit, Daisy Grant saying, 
“ I believe this is the man, but I should know him if he took 
his hat off.” Beck, with about seven othe(* men put up 
with him, removed his hat, and then Daisy Grant felt sure. 
Next day he was charged before Mr. Sheil at Westminster 
Police Court. According to the deposition a, Meissonier’® 
charge was heard first, but, according to the Morning Adver- 

1 The entry ia no longer extant. 

16 



Introduction 


User, Daisy Grant, a “ stylishly-dressed girl,” deposed first. 
After they and Detective Watts had given evidence, the accused 
was remanded without bail. 

Many other women, as a result of the publicity given to 
the case, now came forward. 

Of those who testified against Beck, nothing need here be 
said, blit those who saw' him and definitely refused or else 
merely failed to identify him call for consideration. The 
most important of these women was a Mrs. Cawston, who lived 
in Warwick Street, close to Victoria, and w T ho was accosted 
by a stranger in September, 1894, whilst crossing Buckingham 
Palace Road. The stranger promised to write to her, which 
he did on the notepaper of the Hotel Belgravia, 72-74 Victoria 
Street, almost opposite Beck’s flat,. The envelope and letter, 
Mr. Vanvert was almost but not quite certain, was in Beck’s 
writing. The bogus draft given to Mrs. Caw T ston was for .£12 
15s. on the Union Bank, Pall Mall. There was also a list of 
dresses. “ Mrs Cawston has seen Beck, and she states posi- 
tively that he is not the man who robbed her.” 1 Years later 
she positively identified Smith, then in custody, under his alias 
of Thomas, as the man, under the rather pathetic circumstances 
described by Sir Melville Macnaghten. 

With Mrs. Cawston there was living in 1895 a Miss Sinclair, 
other than the one who gave evidence. 2 This young lady 
also received an envelope and a promissory note, which Mr. 
Vanvert positively identified as in Beck’s writing. Mr. Van- 
vert was equally confident about a bill on the Union Bank, 
Victoria Street, which was anonymously sent to Mr. Sheil. 
It was for £25, and was dated 16th August, 1894. Another 
bill on the Usuon Bank, Pall Mall, Belgrave branch, for the 
same sum was forwarded, with a list of dresses and a telegram 
by “ a victim ” who refused to come forward. Another 
victim forwarded a cheque on the L. and S.W. Bank at 
Balham, dated 18th January, 1895. Two bills on the Union 
Bank, St. James’s, for £30 and £25 respectively were dated 
26 th March and 12th April, 1895. The first was 
presented by a Mrs. Simpson, the second by a Miss Lock- 
wood. Mrs. Simpson seems not to have come forward, but 
Miss Lockwood stated that the stranger introduced himself 
as Lord Wilton, wrote out a cheque identical with that to 
Minnie Lewis, 'and decamped with a pair of opera glasses. 
She identified Beck in custody, and was willing to prosecute. 

A Mrs. Lester also received a bill for £40, dated 10th May, 
1895, on the Union Bank, Belgrave Mansions. She described 

V 

1 Statement taken by Froest, 22nd January, 1896. 

3 This Miss Sinclair was in South Africa in January, 1896. 

S711S 


17 



Adolf Beck 


the man who gave it to her as “ age about fifty, height about 
5 ft. 7 or 8 in., complexion fresh, face full, hair and 
moustache turning grey, dress black frock coat, bluish-grey 
striped trousers, silk hat.” The stranger took from her a 
gold bracelet, an ivory brush, and a pair of opera glasses. 
She identified Beck in custody as the iyan. 

A party unknown received a bill for £25 on the same bank 
and a list of dresses. 

A Miss Elliott received a cheque for ,£25, dated in April, 
1895, and lost a guitar. Julia Alexander received one dated 
28th January on the bank at Balham, and Alice Wright an- 
other apparently on the same bank. Seven cheques in all 
were presented on the Balham Bank, and they ail came from 
a cheque book issued to one, Mrs. Gardiner, on 10th Novem- 
ber, 1894. The witnesses Miller, Townsend, and Sinclair pre- 
sented three, and the other four were presented by these 
women whose cases were not proceeded with. 

In 1904 Beck contended that Mrs. Gardiner was, so to 
speak, “ spirited away ” by the police. He says—' “ She 
has gone under the name of the Countess de Mundi, and 
she gave the name of Mrs. Gardiner,” and tc had made a 
statement against me that I had stolen her cheque book. 
I insisted upon the woman being brought into Court, but it 
was not done.” Mr. Froest’s evidence on this point will 
appear in the report of the 1896 trial, but I have also the 
advantage of having a statement taken by Sergeant Allen from 
Lieutenant-Colonel D. about her and others taken from Mr. 
Way, a witness from the bank, and Mr. Rogers, a solicitor. 

Lieutenant-Colonel D. said that a Mr. S.’ a solicitor, had 
been annoyed by the woman, and it was arranged to call 
upon that gentleman, who undertook to find Mrs. Gardiner 
if a warrant against her were withdrawn and no action were 
taken against her for uttering worthless cheques, and he added 
that she would need £1 Is. subsistence money pending the 
trial, and that she was, according to his clerk, very nervous 
of giving evidence. Mr. S. undertook to have her at his office 
one evening if the Sergeant would call. Mr. Way referred 
to a Mr. Livett as her reference, when she opened the account, 
and he was interviewed by Mr. Freest, with a view to tracing 
her. Mr. Rogers, who had acted for her, described that she 
was robbed of her cheque book by a man, who met her in the 
Daily Telegraph Office, and took her to some mansions, where 
she produced her cheque book. , The man wrote out a cheque 
for £100 to purchase clothing, and told her to go out and 
cash it. Whilst she was away, the man decamped with her 
cheque book. She described the man to Mr. Rogers as if he 
were Beck, and said that Mr. Dutton, Beck’s solicitor, had 

18 



Introduction 


implored her to keep out of the way. He also added that if 
the warrant were withdrawn there would be no difficulty in 
finding her. She never, in fact, was found. The cheque 
.given her was not genuine. 1 

At the second hearing at the Police Court on 23rd Decem- 
ber, Mary Harvey, ^ the maid, P.C. Edwards, the constable 
who took the parties to the station, and Kate Brakefield gave 
evidence, and Watts was recalled, who owned that two other 
women, who had been defrauded, had refused to swear to 
Beck. He appeared again on remand on the 9th, 23rd, and 
30th of January, 1896. 

Some very material information had meantime reached 
Scotland Yard from an utter stranger, who wrote reminding 
the C.I.D., which was not in existence in 1877, of the 
remarkable similarity of the Smith case of that year to the 
present charges, but whereas the strangers, who wrote of the 
similarity of the facts in the George Joseph Smith series of 
crimes, put the police on the track of the criminal, the well- 
meaning gentleman who suggested that John Smith and Adolf 
Beck might be the same man was the unwitting cause of the 
whole tragedy of errors. Scotland Yard summoned retired 
Constable Eliss Spurred and Inspector Redstone, who had re- 
spectively arrested and taken the charge against Smith in 
1877, and both on seeing Beck were confident that the man 
in custody was none other than Smith. “ There is no doubt 
whatever he is the man. I know what is at stake on my 
answer, and I may say without doubt he is the man," said 
Spurred. The next step was to submit Beck’s admitted writ- 
ing, the exhibits in the present series of charges and those of 
1877 to Mr. J. H. Gurrin, the expert, and he reported that 
the various exhibits and the admitted writing “ must have 
been written by the same person.” 

After the hearing on 30th January, Bock, who called no 
evidence and made no statement, was committed for trial — 
apparently on 6th February — on ten charges, having been 
identified by eleven women. Two other women, Mrs. Lester 
and Miss Lockwood, had also picked him out. Mrs. Cawston 
alone was certain he was not the man. 

In 1904 there was considerable discrepancy between Beck 
and the police as to the number of women who had failed to pick 
him out. Beck pnt it as high as twelve. 2 P.C. Watts admitted 
that five or six had failed on 23rd January. According 
to Sir Melville Nacnaghten no less than sixty worthless cheques 
had been presented at the Union Bank alone, exclusive of the 

1 From 108850/9. There can be no doubt she mistook the man if the 
evidence of Miller, Townsend, and Sinclair be studied. 

2 Cd. 2315, pp. 115-116. 


19 



Adolf Beck. 


seven drawn on the Balham branch of the L. and S.W. Bank. 1 
Sir Melville, who in 1896 was Chief Constable of the C.I.D., 
also said that whereas the description of the swindler by 
the numerous women robbed varied considerably, the writing 
on the documents they forwarded never varied. 2 

A list of cases not proceeded with against Adolf Beck con- 
tains eleven cases of victimisation by worthless bills or cheques 
and one case of simple larceny. The women Lester and Lock- 
wood, who were willing to come forward, as has been said, 
identified Beck. Others who sent their “ cheques ” to the 
police could not be traced or would not come forward. 

Except the undisguised prostitutes, the victims were most 
loth to give evidence, so that Mr. Sims, for the Treasury 
solicitor, addressing the magistrate, said — “ Most important 
witnesses are keeping out of the way,” and Mr. Sheil threatened, 
to issue warrants against them. 3 

Mr. Sims also intimated that he had other women he need 
not call. 

Beck was committed to take his trial at the Old Bailey, 
and, a true bill being found, he came up before the then Com- 
mon Serjeant, who, as Mr. Forrest Fulton, had prosecuted 
“ Smith” in 1877, on 3rd March, 1896. 

Mr. Horace Avory, 4 with Mr. Guy Stephenson, was for the 
Crown, and Mr. C. F. Gill, 5 with Mr. Percival Clarke, led for 
the defence. A happier selection of counsel than Mr. Gill, 
in whom shone with equal brightness those lamps of advocacy, 
the lamp of courage and the lamp of caution, could not have 
been mad© by Mr. Dutton. Fully adequate as a defender of 
prisoners in all classes of case, Gill was incomparable in w T hat 
are known as t( West End adventure ” cases. * 

Without anticipating the evidence or the comments it calls 
for, given at the trial, it may merely be said here that the 
Treasury briefs concluded — <l The exhibits in the case of 1877 
have been examined by Mr. Gurrin, who says, as is obviously 
the fact, that they are in the same handwriting as the doo.it- 
ments in the present case, and they will be in Court for refer- 
ence if necessary.” 6 


1 lb. 70. 3 lb. 3 Morning Advertiser , 24th January. 

4 Now Mr. Justice Avory. * Later Sir Charles Gill, K.C. 

• That the Press were perfectly aware of the real issue appears from the 

Evening News of 30th January, 1896, col. 3 b. “It is agreed on both 

sides that the offences which the prosecution are seeking to fix on Adolf 

Beck were committed by a man who ivas almost twenty years ago tried for 
offences of a similar character and sentenced to five years* penal servitude. 
The peculiar characteristics of the present frauds are identical with those 
by wl lich this man; under the name of Lord Willoughby, obtained money 
and jewellery from young women. For the defence it is contended that 
Smith is still at large and that Beck is not the same individual, but the* 
police are confident that they can connect him with both cases.’* 

20 



Introduction 


Mr. Avory could elect to proceed either upon a misde- 
meanour indictment, in ten counts, charging no previous con- 
viction of Beck in the name of Smith in 1877, or upon any one 
of several indictments for felony and larceny, in which the 
previous conviction was charged. A copy of the depositions 
and exhibits in It. Smith accompanied his brief, which in 
every line of it assumed the identity of Beck and Smith as 
beyond dispute and as being the very corner-stone of the whole 
edifice of the Crown case. Nevertheless Mr. Avory decided 
to rely only on the misdemeanour indictment. His reasons 
were, first, that many of the offences charged appeared to him 
to amount only to misdemeanour; secondly, that “ if a man 
were tried upon one indictment only for a felony, 1 in such a 
case as this it might be difficult or impossible for him to 
establish a defence either by way of alibi or otherwise to that 
particular charge, but if he were tried upon ten different charges 
giving at least ten different dates, it not only enabled the 
jury to have the whole case before them, but it enabled him 
(the prisoner) to prove an alibi or other defence as to any 
one of those charges.” 

He admitted having overlooked the fact that he could 
under 34 & 35 Viet. c. 112, sec. 8, have charged the previous 
conviction in the misdemeanour indictment. Had he done so, 
Mr. Gill could not have been deprived of raising his substantial 
defence — that the crimes of 1894-95 were the work of the 
criminal of 1877, and that Beck could not be that man. 

Accordingly Mr. Avory opened his case without a reference 
to the earlier and identical crimes of the seventies. It is 
interesting to note that he applied for suppression of the names 
of the female witnesses — now so often sanctioned, but the 
Common Serjeant thought it a novel application and refused it. 
The judge ordered the witnesses out of Court, but as the women 
had heard and read one another’s evidence in the Police Court 
and had many opportunities of comparing notes, this made 
fcttle difference. Only two of the ten women defrauded seem 
to have had any doubts about their identification — Alice Sin- 
clair and Ethel Townsend. Fanny Nutt, the first victim, of 
those who earner forward, in point of time, and Ottilie Meis- 
sonier, an educated and minutely observant woman, whose 
recognition had occurred under dramatic circumstances in the 
street, were especially confident. Mrs. Nutt would have 
“ known him among a thousand.” The letter to her was on 
Grand Hotel paper, and the next witness, a smoking-room 
waiter there, proved that Beck was in the habit of using 
the hotel stationery. Mme. Meissonier was extremely precise. 


1 Cd. 2315, p. 132, where the word penalty is misprinted for felony. 

21 



Adolf Beck. 


She had noticed the man’s red morocco silver-mounted pocket 
book, his silver-mounted umbrella, his silver matchbox, his 
hands marked by the seams of his tight gloves, the odd way in 
which he held his pen, the lining of his overcoat and the coat 
he wore beneath it — a frock coat in the street, a short coat 
when he paid his call. In particular she described the mark 
on the man’s right cheek. 1 

Several of the jury said that they could see it. A mark 
not visible till the collar was removed was pointed out by Kate 
Brakefield. A warder took Beck below and brought him up 
with his shirt and collar loose, and then the jury, or some 
of them, saw the mark described by the witness. 2 

Many other women repeated their evidence, and if any 
appeared, as two did, to doubt the identity of Beck with the 
swindler, there were the deadly exhibits, all in the one writing, 
to show their doubts were ill-founded. Parsons, a prison 
warder, proved that he found both a mark — 11 I could not call 
it a scar ” — and a mole on Beck’s right side of the throat, 
and Mr. Chetwynd and Marcus Browne proved that Beck was 
often in needy circumstances. In some respects the former 
refuted the women's evidence as to the smart clothing alleged 
to have been worn by the prisoner, particularly as to the spats 
and the blue overcoat. 

But Detective-Inspector Froest (as Mr. Browne admitted 
at the Police Court) found white spats and white waistcoats 
when he searched the prisoner’s boxes at the hotel. 

Mr. Gurrin gave evidence (in which Mr. Inglis for the 
defence apparently concurred) that the exhibits were in the 
disguised handwriting of Beck, an opinion shared by Beck’s 
former secretary, and it was when Mr. Gill sought to raise his 
defence by cross-examining the expert as to the handwriting 
of the 1877 exhibits, to show that they were in the same hand 
as those said to have been written by his client, that the first 
in a long series of misjudgments occurred. “ Mr. Avory 
objected . . . ; that was a collateral issue, and should not 

be inquired into until after the jury had returned their verdict, 
lest it should afterwards be said that the prisoner had been 
improperly convicted. ’ ’ 

Two observations seem to arise on this. Who was to com- 
plain that the line sought to be taken by the defence had 


1 Mr. Froest thought this only occurred in Brakefield’s case, but it 
seems clear that both women described some mark, though perhaps not 
the same. Cf. Cd. 2315, pp. 89, 90, 116, 290, 321-2. 

2 Both Sir Forrest Fulton and Mr. Froest agree that the warder found 
a mark and Brakefield then recognised it. Beck denied that he had a scar, 
but admitted that in his counsel’s presenoe the warder said he had. See 
Cd. 2315, p. 117. 

22 



Introduction. 

led to an improper conviction? Not the counsel for the 
defence surely. Again, if the identity of Beck with Smith 
was a proper subject for inquiry after verdict, why did Mr. 
Avory object to Mr. Gill going into it then? Mr. Gill asked 
that the felony indictments be tried. Mr. Avory replied — 
“ Ilis learned friend, practically admitted that his object was 
to show that the verdict of the jury was wrong. He could 
be no party to that.” 

Consequently, a nolle prosequi was entered by the 
Attorney-General, and Beck’s defence concealed from all but a 
handful of reporters to whom Mr. Gill said — “ This was a 
case of a grave miscarriage of justice.” 1 

An observation made by Sir John Edge during a session 
of the committee sums up the matter concisely. “ If they 
(the eihibits of 1877) had been before the Recorder and the 
jury, and the jury had believed the evidence about Peru, it 
is impossible there could have been a conviction, notwith- 
standing all these identifications.” 2 

It was admitted on all hands that the exhibits of 1877 
were in Court, but no one compared them with the exhibits 
in U. v. Beck. “ One can quite understand why they were not 
looked at, because it never occurred to any one to question 
that they were all in the same handwriting,” said the chair- 
man at the Committee. “ It was the last thing I would have 
questioned,” replied Mr. Gill. 3 

The learned Common Serjeant having sustained Mr. 
Avory’s objection, the cross-examination of Mr. Gurrin came 
to an abrupt end before he had been allowed to complete his 
statement. In his own words — “ The second part of my 
evidence as .to the identity of the 1877 and 1896 writings 
being identical, and which was manifest to any one, was, I 
regret to say, not taken.” Mr. Gurrin ’s actual view came to 
this. The exhibits of 1896 appeared to be in the disguised 
writing of Beck; but the exhibits of 1896 were indubitably 
•in the same hand as those of 1877. Yet it w r as considered 
fair to present only half — the less confident half — of that 
opinion to the jury, though, as has been seen, the Treasury 
briefs stated Mr. Gurrin ’s opinion on the matter, and that 
the exhibits of 1877 would be in Court for reference. The 
point Mr. Gill strove to take was brushed aside as irrelevant, 
without a single reference by anybody to these older exhibits, 
on which, as was later to appear, the entire case turned. His 
alibi thus excluded, Mr. Gill was constrained to call his alibi 


1 Cd. 2315, p. 108. 

2 Cd. 2375, p. 113. 

8 lb. 

23 



Adolf Beck. 

'witnesses as witnesses to character, though as such, they 
possibly, owing to the lapse of time, did ill service. Mr. 
Gill, for reasons to be examined later, pressed his real 
defence no further, and relied on the failure to trace any of 
the missing articles to Beck, the contradictory evidence of his 
witnesses as to the prisoner’s dress, and oq the familiar device 
of trying to laugh a case out of Court. “ A woman in such a 
situation might be excused if she was a little off her head, 
for she might well have imagined that the time had come when 
her charms were to be adequately appreciated. (A laugh.) 
Such excitement might well interfere with their judgment, 
and their indignation might well be imagined on finding the 
romance of their lives explod ed.” 1 (Laughter.) 

Mr. Avory, in reply, addressed himself to the clothing 
found on search being exactly as that described, the confident 
identifications, the foreign accent noticed by most, and he 
added that “ one of them, experienced in foreign languages, 
stated the accent was that of a Norwegian.” 2 Ho also said 
— “ The expert’s evidence as to the identity of the hand- 
writing was absolutely undisputed.” 3 

The Common Serjeant began his summing up by saying 
that “ One would have thought a man, whoever he was, who 
committed these frauds, if he had had a single grain of man- 
hood left, having gratified his own selfish and immoral lusts, 
would have refrained from resorting to such low and mean 
artifices.” On tho whole, his summing up was adverse, and 
in a few minutes the jury returned a verdict of guilty. It 
being misdemeanour only, there was no allociitus , or calling on 
the prisoner if he had anything to say, and the Court passed 
the severe sentence of seven years’ penal servitude. Thus 
ended the first act of this tragedy of errors. 

Whatever may have been the impression on his mind 
in after years, Mr. Sims at the time, in an article in the 
Referee of 8th March, 1896, accepted the verdict and sentence 
like the rest of the world; in his well-known “ Mustard and # 
Cress ” columns, he devoted four paragraphs to Beck and his 
trial. He commenced — (t I have known Adolf Beck, the sham 
Earl, for over ten years. During the whole of that time there 
was never the slightest suspicion in my mind that he was 
anything but a cultured and agreeable Scandinavian gentle- 
man. . . . Excellent as was the English he spoke, it was 

unmistakably the English of a foreigner and his appearance 
was not that of an Englishman. He might have been a 
German, a Swede, a Dane, or a Norwegian, but no one would 


1 Morning Advertiser, 5th March, 1896. 

*Ib. *Ib. 




Introduction. 

talk to him and look at him and say this is an Englishman. 
Yet most of the women duped seem to have accepted him as 
an English nobleman.” 

The real culprit was, as has been said, a German, talked 
like one, and wrote like one, much more like one than Beck, 
so that all the pother raised in after years about there being 
no possibility of a bond fide confusion between the two men 
rests on a false assumption. A woman who accepted the 
swindler’s capital lt T ” and “ P ” and his Teutonic tl 7 ” 
as the writing of an English peer could swallow anything. 

The Convict. 

The Common Serjeant having declined to reserve a case 
upon the point whether he was right in refusing to admit the 
evidence relating to the conviction in 1877, Mr. Gill, having 
made the observation recorded above, could do no more, and 
Beck was removed to Wormwood Scrubbs, and thence to Port- 
land. Meanwhile Smith, or Wyatt, or Myer, who had 
luckily escaped identification with the convict of 1877, when 
charged at Bow Street on 13th April, 1 1894, with a fraud 
by means of a worthless letter of credit, remained in London 
during the whole time the Beck case was being investigated, 
but after the arrest of Beck he attempted no more frauds on 
women. In 1896 he assumed the name of Dr. Marsh, and 
carried on a jewellery business in Rosebery Avenue. In 
August, 1897, he suddenly disappeared, and could only be 
traced as being back in London at the date of August, 1904, 
when the same frauds on women recommenced. He had 
meantime been practising as a doctor in America, as he for- 
merly had in Adelaide. 

Notwithstanding that the Common Serjeant, in passing 
sentence, had stated that he “ should treat the prisoner as 
if he had not been previously convicted,” on all the petitions 
•sent up to the Home Office by Beck from June, 1896, to July, 
1898, there was endorsed by the Governor a statement of 
Beck’s previous conviction in the name of Smith, although in 
the very first petition of all sent in by Mr. Dutton on Beck’s 
behalf, the impossibility of Beck having committed the crimes 
of 1877, when he was proved to be in Peru, was clearly mani- 
fested. To that petition no more attention was paid than by 
marking the minutes thereon “ nil.” The non -identity of 
the two men was thus disposed of — “ If the prisoner is not 
Smith, the evidence of his guilt in this case is quite over- 
whelming.” Mr. Gill’s absolute alibi as to 1877 was curtly 

1 See the proceedings against him in Appendix III., p. 164. 

25 



Adolf Beck. 

dismissed as a clever ruse. Further, Beck was given the con- 
vict number DW 523, indicating a previous conviction. 

In 1898 Mr. Dutton more than once unsuccessfully applied 
to see the record of marks, &c., of convict D 523 — Smith — 
to compare them with those of convict DW 523, but this 
was refused in March of that year, andc again in July the 
Home Secretary, “ after very careful consideration of all the 
circumstances," rejected Mr. Dutton's application for permis- 
sion to call and explain the circumstances. About 25th May, 
1898, Mr. Dutton heard that the convict “ Smith " was a Jew 
and as his own client was a Christian, indisputable evidence 
of their non-identity might be obtainable. As a result of 
physical examination and comparison of the record of D 523, 
it appeared that Beck had not undergone circumcision, whereas 
D 523 had. Their distinctive marks were further compared, 
but in no very careful manner; this will fall to be dealt with 
later in considering their physical resemblances. 

It being patent to the meanest intelligence that the Gentile 
DW 523 could not be the Jew D 523, the authorities at last 
took action. They rose to the occasion; they wrote to the 
Common Serjeant. They went so far as to say they “ believed 
Mr. Dutton was so far right that Beck and Smith are different 
persons .' * The Common Serjeant's reply, however, lulled 
the Home Office again into repose. If Smith were circumcised 
and Beck were not, they could not be the same person, wrote 
the learned judge, but with respect to the South American 
alibi, “ I should be inclined to regard it with great suspicion." 
It is difficult to assign a meaning to this. There was no 
question at all that Smith was rightly convicted in 1877. In 
his petition to the Home Office in 1879, he admits.it, but asks 
for leniency for a first offence. There was thus no question 
of Beck, wherever he was geographically, being the culprit of 
1877. Even if he were in London, he was indisputably not 
the burly youth chased from Tottenham Court Road to Gower 
Street on that April day in 1877. 

The tone of the judge's letter implying that the new dis- 
covery did not affect the propriety of the conviction, the 
customary “ nil " marked the extent of the Home Office's 
perspicacity. Beck petitioned again in December, 1898, re- 
ferring to the scar described by the witnesses Meissonier and 
Brakefield. Mr. Froest was asked for his views on this, and 
he replied in agreement with the judge that there was a scar, 
not visible when the man was wearing a collar. He added 
with truth that since Beck was locked up this class of crime 
had entirely ceased. Beck continued to petition until his 
discharge on licence on 8th July, 1901. His descriptive marks 
on release will be considered in due place. 

26 



Introduction. 

The Ticket of Leave Man. 

For fifteen months after his release Beck stayed with the 
Rev. Mr. Jackson, of Whitechapel. In October, 1902, he 
went to Norway, and on his return took up his abode at the 
Central Hotel, Per<5y Street, Tottenham Court Road, until 
turned out by the manager on hearing from the police that 
“ he was up to his old tricks again / ’ He sought in turn 
the aid of Mr. Dutton, of Inspector Waldock, who at one time 
had shown a friendly interest in his case, and Major Beasley, 
of the detective branch of the Salvation Army. He has left 
it on record that Mrs. Townsend, who was dead in 1904, did 
not recognise him after he came out of prison, and said that 
“ we were almost forced ” to identify him, as “ there were 
lots of women who said he was not the man/ Eliss Spurrell, 
who had been so confident as to his identity with Smith, whom 
he had never seen between 1877 and 1896, failed to recognise 
in 1901 the man he had sworn to five years before. Mme. 
Meissonier alone persisted that he “ was the man right 
enough/ According to Beck, Mrs. Townsend thrice told Beck 
that she had been threatened by detectives if she made a state- 
ment favourable to him, such as had been drawn up by Major 
Beasley. Mr. G. R. Sims now actively interested himself in 
securing the rehabilitation of his Norwegian friend. An un- 
signed article appeared in the Weekly Despatch on 23rd May, 
1903, headed “ Mistaken Identity — The Strange Case of Adolf 
Beck — Where is John Smith? ” It contains in italics this 
statement — “ One of the chief witnesses, who professed to be 
most confident of his identity, has now made a declaration 
that she is satisfied she w r as mistaken, and that Beck is not the 
man who robbed her/ Readers who could throw any light 
on the case were referred to Messrs. Churchman & Winser, 
solicitors. 

After spending several hundred pounds, Beck seemed as 
•far as ever from demonstrating the wrongfulness of his convic- 
tion, and would never have done so but for the fact that, in 
August, 1903, if not before, the same strange frauds began 
to be re-enacted. 

Rose Reece, a housekeeper, out of an engagement, was the 
first victim of those willing to prosecute in the final series 
of crimes. They had been continuing for some months, when, 
towards the end of January, 1894, Beck received an anonymous 
letter, saying that “the same thing will be coming up against 
you again. They are working it/ He was disgusted and put 
the letter in the fire. 1 Less than two months later he was again 
in custody. 

1 Cd. 2315, p. 125. 

27 



Adolf Beck. 


The Crimes of 1903-1904. 

In August, 1903, Rose Reece was near Oxford Circus, 
when an affable stranger, whose nose was so peculiar that one 
could not be mistaken about it, she could “ pick it out of 
a thousand,” came up and asked for her* address. “ Silly 
like ” she gave it to him, and a letter in the common form on 
Hotel Victoria notepaper arrived about a week later. The 
actual call was not paid until October. There was no varia- 
tion in style at all from the earlier frauds, only that Mme. 
Hayward was now the dressmaker patronised by his lordship 
and Streeter was his jeweller. 

A cheque on notepaper, drawn for £74 on the Union 
Bank, Pall Mall, was given, and Miss Reece did not see the 
generous stranger again until he was in custody. 

On 22nd March in the following year Pauline Scott, who 
seems to have been a domestic servant, was accosted by a 
stranger in Oxford Street, who asked for her address, and, 
obtaining it, wrote appointing to call on Ilyde Park Hotel 
notepaper. In all essentials the fraud was carried out in the 
familiar way and money was borrowed, as much as a sovereign. 
The cheque was again written on notepaper. After giving 
information to the police at Scotland Yard, Miss Scott went 
by police advice to a restaurant — De Maria’s — in Oxford Street 
that Beck was in the habit of using, and remained there 
for an hour and a half, whilst Beck was there, without recog- 
nising him. According to a statement communicated by De 
Maria to the Evening News of 11th July, 1904, Miss Scott’s 
bill of 4d. she was unable to pay. De Maria added that the 
women, who charged Beck, tramped up and down in front 
of his restaurant, where Beck was a daily caller. 

On 15th April Miss Scott was instructed by Inspector 
Ward to stand at the cor ner of Store Street, Tottenham Court 
Road, near to Beck’s new lodgings in South Crescent. As 
soon as he came out he could see three people standing on the 
•corner. The woman came up and taxed him with the larceny 
of her jewellery and money, and Ward took him into custody. 

Four other women, including Rose Reece, came and identi- 
fied Beck in custody. One of these, Grace Campbell, was 
of a different social class from the others. She swore a 
•deposition, but was too ill to attend the subsequent trial. 
To her the swindler wrote on the paper of the Albemarle Hotel. 
In the other two cases, of Caroline Singer and Lily Ring, 
the notepaper of the Hyde Park Hotel was used, as in Miss 
Scott’s case. • 

Beck, on being taken into custody, wired to his solicitor, 
Mr. Williams, but his defence was afterwards undertaken for 



Introduction. 

a while by Mr. Freke Palmer, a solicitor-advocate of great 
experience. On his advice. Beck reserved his defence and 
did not give evidence. He was duly committed for trial by 
Mr. Curtis Bennett, after a dramatic appeal to the press to 
assist him in establishing his innocence. 

Mr. Freke Painter was obliged to discontinue acting for 
the defence, funds having run short, and Mr. Williams took 
over the case for him, instructing Mr. W. H. Leycester, who 
has for many years been a Metropolitan magistrate. 

Although only five women had hitherto come forward, it 
appeared from the evidence of Mr. Murphy, cashier at the 
Union of London and Smith’s Bank, that no less than twenty 
or twenty-five bogus cheques on the Union Bank had been 
recently presented, mostly by women. 

In March and April, before the arrest of Beck, Nellie 
O’Neill and Evelyn Edwards were also tricked, the letter to the 
former being on the Berkeley Hotel paper, that to Miss Edwards 
being on Hyde Park Hotel paper. These women promptly 
identified Thomas when in custody as the culprit ; it seems they 
never attended the Police Court during the remands of Beck, 
their attention not being drawn to the case till July. 

From Beck’s arrest on loth April until 7th July, about ten 
days after his conviction, crimes of this sort ceased. They 
recommenced then, but the same evening the real culprit was 
taken in the act of pawning the rings of the sisters Turner. 
Truth was at length to prevail. 

Violet and Beulah Turner were actresses out of engage- 
ments. On Thursday, 7th July, an elderly, well-dressed man 
called on them as a result of a chance meeting and a letter 
making an appointment in the common form, “ Please expect 
me to-morrow.” He borrowed their rings, stayed about an 
hour, gave them a list of clothing, and departed. Within a 
quarter of an hour he was caught in the act of pawning the 
rings. The girls charged him next day at Bow Street, and 
•he was remanded until 29th July, when Nellie O’Neill and 
Evelyn Edwards gave evidence. Fritz Glenville, the landlord 
of the Misses Turner, gave evidence too; the man said he 
was a German. The most important police witness was In- 
spector John Kane. 

He had been present at both Beck’s trials, and as a conse- 
quence of something imparted to him by counsel, he had 
been on the look-out for “ Smith ” for some time. On hearing 
that a man was in custody on a charge identical with those of 
which Beck had just, for a second time, been convicted, he 
went the same night to the Tottenham Court Road station and 
saw the culprit of 1877 in custody. Working energetically 
on the case, he procured Beck’s release on 19th July, and by 

29 



Adolf Beck. 

27th July Beck had received free pardons in respect of each 
conviction. 

The trials of Beck and Thomas in 1904 can be dismissed 
in a few* words. With scant means at their disposal, the 
defence never ventured to put forward tlieir real answer to 
the charge against Beck. Mr. Leycester’s explanation was this: 
he could draw attention to the identity of method of all three 
series of frauds, but he was unable to prove that Beck and 
Smith were not the same person. The Treasury assumed them 
to be. In the Crown counsel’s brief it is stated — “.This is the 
third time upon which the prisoner has stood in the dock at 
the Central Criminal Court charged with offences of a like 
description. Counsel will find in the session’s papers of 
1876-1877, p. 58, and 1895-1896, p. 462, a complete account 
of his past misdeeds and his modus operand* 

The defence was merely a matter of cross-examination as to 
identification and handwriting, supported by the prisoner’s 
unconvincing alibi that ho was engaged with a Mr. Gajardo, 
who was not called, on the dates assigned. A verdict of 
guilty was easily arrived at. Beck then formally pleaded 
guilty to a previous conviction — a mere form, although the 
journalists seized upon it as a crowning infamy in the case. 
All it meant was that he did not call on the Crown to prove 
that he was identical with the person sentenced to seven years 
by Sir Forrest Fulton. Judgment was respited, for reasons 
that will appear in Sir William Grantham’s account of hie 
connection with the case. 

There being no August session at the Old Bailey, 
“ Thomas ” did not come up for trial until 15th September, 
when, after pleading guilty, he received a sentence of five years, 
Mr. Justice Phillimore expressly saying that he put wholly 
out of account the crimes of which Beck had been sentenced, 
and assumed merely that Thomas was in old age returning 
to the wicked practices of his youth. The account given of 
“ Thomas ” by Mr. Mathews in his opening speech 
reveals a career more varied and chequered 
even than that of Beck. The Jew of Austrian 
education, if not extraction, helps the heroic Catholic, Father 
Damien, in his fight against leprosy, and the heroic Moslem, 
Osman Digna, before the walls of Plevna. He had been 
a surgeon in the brief and inglorious campaign which ended 
in Austria’s crushing defeat at Sadowa. Successfully practis- 
ing the healing art in places as remote as Adelaide and Denver, 
he stands in the dock once more, at the age of 65, pleading 
guilty to the theft of rings worth 1 3s. ! , 

He served his sentence until 1908, when he was released. 
The last photograph of him taken in prison still shows traces 

30 



Introduction. 

of the plump sensualist of 1877, the lean and bearded convict 
of 1881, and the obese voluptuary of 1904. There is still 
the puffy lower eyelid, the narrow slits of eyes, and the 
adherent ears. Ai^d in each one can notice the slightly- 
everted lower lip. * With his disappearance to the cells on 
that September aftei'noon came the breaking of the storm. 
Ominous preliminary thunder claps had been audible ever 
since the real “ bogus peer ” had been caught in flagrante 
delicto . 

The Agitation. 

No person, however unwittingly, had more to do with 
Beck’s misfortunes than Mr. F. J. Sims, clerk to the Director 
of Public Prosecutions, and he tells us in his evidence — ” Some 
time this year after the second conviction — what I may call 
(I do not want to use the term in any offensive way) — the 
agitation commenced.” 

The most popular of the amateur criminologists of the day 
was Mr. G. R. Sims, and he led the way with a series of 
articles in the Daily Mail , which, though written in good 
faith, were marred by some notable inaccuracies and innocent 
misrepresentations . 

One will suffice — “ The fact that Beck never crosses a 
“ t ” while John Smith always crosses his should have sufficed 
to prove his innocence even to expert Gurrin.” 

As a matter of fact, Beck crossed the “ t ” as often as 
not. In a letter to Mr. Chetwynd, written from the Bucking- 
ham Hotel, forty-one out of forty- three “ t’s ” are crossed. 
Smith seldom omitted to cross a “ t,” but there is no cross 
to the “ t ” in “ to-morrow ” in the note to Fanny Nutt, 
nor in the ” fifteen ” pounds “ fifteen ” shillings in the bitH 
in her case. And Beck was alleged to be the writer of each. 

Mr. Sims’ articles were later reproduced in pamphlet form 
v.nder the title ” The Martyrdom of Adolf Beck.” They 
appeared in the popular paper on 15th August and following 
dates. On 16th August the Daily Telegraph entered the lists 
with an article headed ” The Case of Adolf Beck: Its Legal 
Aspects.” It consisted of a republication of Mr. Sims’s article 
in the previous number of the Referee , followed by comments 
by a “ distinguished lawyer with an extensive criminal 
practice.” He dismissed the journalistic idea of a ts con- 
spiracy ” against Beck as ff wholly untenable.” The worst 
that ” can reasonably be urged against the prosecuting counsel 
is that they may have been a little over-zealous.” ” It is 
possible that in the case of Mr. Beck appeal to such a Court 

31 



Adolf Beck. 

(of criminal appeal) might have resulted in the conviction 
being quashed.” The distinguished lawyer was in favour of 
a departmental inquiry into the case by, the Home Office — a. 
veritable appeal from Caesar to Caesar! * 

Next day the Telegraph showed sig'is of bending to the 
storm. “ People,” it said, “ are no ^longer talking about 
mistaken identity simply ; the ugly word ‘ conspiracy 9 has 
been introduced — whether wisely or not is another matter — 
and definite charges are being levelled against the authorities. 

. . . If Beck was not Smith, the probability of his guilt 

dwindled to zero. Nevertheless, the Home Office never moved 
a finger. . . . The public will not rest cOhpfifeht until there 

has been a complete explanation.” The papers, both the 
dailies and the Sunday papers, severely censured the 
“ authorities,” who, within a week of the opening of the 
attack, made the great mistake of an offer to Beck of £2000 
as an “ act of grace.” He was strongly counselled to Muse 
it, and the Daily Mail guaranteed to find him that sum. 
He accordingly refused the Treasury’s offer. On 22nd August 
the Telegraph published some very outspoken views from Sir 
George Lewis, who acted for Beck at the subsequent inquiry. 
He rightly ridiculed a Home Office inquiry to whitewash itself. 
He also concurred with Mr. Sims that to ask an officer, who 
had been instrumental in obtaining a conviction, to make 
further inquiries would be asking him to “ destroy his own 
reputation.” 

On 25th August, Truth wrote — “ The additional light 
thrown on the case during the past week only deepens the 
scandal.” It spoke of “ what was virtually a conspiracy 
to hoodwink Mr. Justice Grantham, who postponed 
sentence to make special inquiries.” It spoke of the (t Uni- 
versal demand for an inquiry,” and insisted that this should 
not be a departmental Home Office affair, but be before a 
judge or an ex- judge. 

On 9th September the press informed the public that Mr.* 
Akers Douglas had appointed a committee consisting of the 
Master of the Rolls, Sir Richard Henn Collins, Sir John Edge, 
an ex-Chief Justice from India, and Sir Spencer Walpole, 
K.C.B., to inquire and report upon the two convictions. The 
Committee began its sittings on 18th October following. 

It was over eight years sinc§ Mr. G. R. Sims had, on 22nd 
July, 1896, in an article, which* was sent to Scotland Yard, 
the Treasury, and the Home Office, and was “ circulated 
broadcast,” denounced the conviction, concluding with these 
words, “ The only thing is to find John Smith am} then the 
Home Secretary will grant Adolf Beck Her Majesty’s gracious 

32 



Introduction. 

pardon for a crime he never committed.** 1 Counsel had been 
instructed by Messrs. Lewis & Lewis on Beck's behalf, but 
the Committee refused to hear them. 3 

v 

The Committee of Inquiry. 

As the chairman clearly explained* the Committee were 
not a Court of Criminal Appeal to rehear the case against Beck, 
nor, indeed, could they well have discharged that function, 
since all the female witnesses of the 1894-96 period had dis- 
appeared, leaving no trace behind, with the sole exception of 
Mrs. Cawston, who had definitely said that Beck was not .the 
man. This woman's testimony was dispensed with, but it 
would have been of value as showing the physical differences, 
which enabled her, having seen both the men, to say unhesi- 
tatingly which was the true culprit. 

The Committee construed its mandate as giving it the 
largest possible discretion in fixing the limits of the inquiry. 
Broadly, the fact of two wrongful convictions was conceded; 
it was for the Committee to apportion the blame — if blame 
there was — between the Home Office, the Public Prosecutor, 
the Treasury, including the solicitor and counsel for the 
Treasury, Scotland Yard, and the subordinate police and the 
judicial bench. Incidentally, the Committee “ desire to 
record our opinion that there is no shadow of foundation for 
any of the charges made against Mr. Beck or any reason for 
supposing that he had any connection whatever with them." 

The witnesses were called to suit the convenience of the 
more busy aqd important of them, without any special regard 
to the advantage of calling consecutively those who could 
speak to a particular matter or who were concerned to defend 
or attack anything that had been done. I think, however, 
that a clearer idea will be obtained by grouping them accord- 
ing to their callings or professions, and as the tragedy of 
errors began with the perfectly proper taking to Rochester 
Row station of the prosecutrix Meissonier and the accused Beck 
by a constable dn uniform, it seems, better to proceed with the 
police testimony first. 


1 I have been entirely unable to trace this article, which Scotland 
Yard never received, and I believe Mr. Sima to be mistaken in hia recol- 
lection. 

3 Morning Advertiser. 


n 


33 



Adolf Beck. 

The Police Evidence. 

P.C. Frederick Edwards, who was the officer on duty out- 
side the Royal Standard public-house where the Victoria 
Palace now stands) admitted that Beck /was the first to com- 
plain, but said that when Meissonier said she was willing to 
charge him, Beck made no reply. At the station only the 
woman’s charge was taken, and Beck’s refused. He said he 
had never seen the woman before. 

Sergeant John Watts, who had been a detective-constable 
in 1895, was in charge of the Rochester Row station when 
Beck and Meissonier were brought in. Inspector Pigott was 
his superior, but he had retired before 1904 and gave no 
evidence. In July Watts had received Daisy Grant’s com- 
plaint of having been robbed in a very similar manner, and 
he went to her address, as taken down in the felony book, 
only to find she had moved to St. John’s Wood. The detec- 
tive-constable found her and brought her to the station, where 
in the meantime the servant Harvey had arrived. Watts 
went into the street and into adjoining shops and collected about 
seven men who were willing to be put up for identification. 
Beck made no objection, as he was entitled to do, to the men 
on the score of want of similarity, saying that he was innocent 
and he did not mind where he stood. Daisy Grant came in, 
went up to Beck, and said — “ I believe that is the man, but 
I should know him if he took his hat off.” All the men 
took off their hats, end the woman identified him as the thief. 
Harvey next came in, and with no means of communicating 
with the last witness, picked out Beck. Watts searched 
Beck’s flat and found nothing relating to the charge. 

Local-Inspector Waldock, who was personally known to 
Beck, conducted the next identifications; these included Kate 
Brakefield, who identified Beck on or about 23rd December; 
Alice Sinclair, Ethel Townsend, Lily Vincent, alias Juliette 
Kluth, and a Miss Johnson, who apparently failed to identify; 1 
these women all saw Beck in custody, and the identifications 
took place on two different occasions in January, 1896, before 
Waldock retired from the case and Inspector Frank Froest 
took it over. 

On 2nd January Waldock was conducting the identifica- 
tions, and he put Beck up amongst fourteen or sixteen other 
men, and told him to place himself where he liked. Beck 
replied — “ I am perfectly satisfied.” Alice Sinclair said — 
“ That is as much like the man as any of them. I believe he 
is the man.” Miss Vincent said — “ I feel almost sure he 


*Cd. 2315, p. 77. 



Introduction. 


is the man.” Miss Johnson, who was not called, said — 
“ That is as much like the man as any, but I should not 
like to swear he is |he man.” Miss Taylor at once pointed 
to Beck and said — “ ^That is the man, I can swear to him. 1 
have no doubt abotjjb his being the man.” Beck, when 
charged, replied — “ I have never seen one of the women before 
to my knowledge, so help me God.” 1 

The identification by Kate Brakefield Waldock does not 
describe, but the mark on the right cheek described at the 
previous hearing by Meissonier was the peculiarity that induced 
her to come to the Police Court. She never mentioned any- 
thing except to P.C. Jeffreys, who was not called, about the 
mark, until the trial. 2 On 13th January Inspector Waldock, 
who had conducted the case admirably, was superseded by 
Inspector Freest, of Scotland Yard, on the ground that the 
magnitude of the case made it impossible for a local inspector 
to attend to it. 

He conducted the remaining identifications, which included 
those of Marion Taylor, Fanny Nutt, Minnie Lewis, and Evelyn 
Miller. He stated that he chose men as far as possible re- 
sembling the accused, that no hint was given to any of the 
women, and it struck him that the women seemed to have 
a great deal of sympathy with the accused on account of his 
age. 

All four women identified Beck, under the superintendence 
of Mr. Froest, but he adds that several others also identified 
him, but would give the police no particulars of their names or 
addresses. Two women, according to Watts, had failed to 
identify at the last hearing in the previous December, and 
five in all had failed. 

The inspector added that an identification in the dock was 
not regarded as a good one, and would not be accepted unless 
there were many others. The rest of the evidence relates to 
the physical marks of the two men. -■ 

• Inspector Alfred Ward conducted the identifications in 1904. 
There had been complaints, and the inspector frankly says— 
“ I came to the conclusion that the person whose arrest was 
sought was Beck.” Accordingly, he told the complainant, 
Pauline Scott, to go to De Maria’s restaurant in Oxford Street, 
whilst he and another officer waited over an hour outside. 
Beck was in the restaurant the whole time, but when Miss 
Scott came out she said she had not seen any one there who 
had robbed her. Ward next took her — about a fortnight 
later — to the corner of Store Street, where he had ascertained 


1 /&., pp. 85-6. 

2 Cd. 2315, p. 262. 


35 



Adolf Beck. 

that Beck lived, aind told her “ if she saw any one come along 
the road that had robbed her, to speak to him.” Beck 
preesntly came out, and he and the woman spoke for €t about 
five minutes,” when Ward came up and arrested him. Beck's 
account varies. He says that the two detectives and the 
woman were all standing together when he came out, and 
that the woman came over to him. 1 

The other identifying witnesses were Bose Reece, Caroline 
Singer, Grace Campbell, and Lily King. Beck was put up 
with about sixteen or seventeen other men, some older, some 
younger, and some “ as like him as we were able to get ” 
on the first occasion, and each of the three first-named women 
picked him out, Grace Campbell, the most cultivated of them, 
being especially precise. She could identify him “ back and 
front, from top to bottom.” 

King identified Beck amongst seven other men, all prisoners. 
One woman at a later date failed to identify him ; the swindler 
in her case was <e at least six inches taller,” which shows that 
a third man, not being Beck or Thomas, was at work on this 
class of fraud. 2 

Much having been alleged by Beck and his partisans against 
the fairness of these identifications, it is well here to interpolate 
the statement of Mr. Dutton on this point. He had ceased 
to act for Beck in 1904, but he or his clerk had been present 
at all the identifications, except, of course, Meissonier’s, in 
the 1895-1896 period, and he says — “ It was always fair, 
perfectly fair.” 3 As stated by Mr. Froest, the police cannot 
compel suitable members of the public to be put up; they 
have to get whom they can. 

The next matter, in which the police evidence, i$ of supreme 
importance in this case, is as to the physical and distinctive 
marks of these two men. . There, again, the allegation was 
that they were so different that their non-identity must have 
been apparent and was deliberately concealed. 4 

The first officer to have anything to do with either man wee 
Eliss Spurrell, who served in the force from 1866 to 1892, when 
he tras pensioned. In April, 1877, he arrested ft Smith,” then 
wearing a full beard, in the Euston Road. He was present 
at Smith's trial, and gave evidence then and at the Police 
Court. Smith at the time gave his age as twenty-seven r 


^..pp. 91, 118. 

8 Cd. 2315, p. 92. 

8 /5., p. 179. 

4 Mr. Frank Froest’s evidence that at this date these marks were quite* 
undependable is confirmed by Sir Alfred Wills’ account of 2?. v. Evans, 
tried by him in 1885. See p. 101, post 
36 



Introduction. 

but if his statement to Mr. Kane in 1904 was true, he was 
thirty-eight at the time he first got into trouble. 

Smith committed tan offence in connection with a letter of 
credit in 1891, for wl'ich he was charged in 1894, but Spurrell 
never saw him at th.pt time. The next he heard was that, 
after he had retired, he was asked to go down and see if he 
could pick out Beck as the man he had apprehended nineteen 
years before. When he saw Beck, he says, he “ was firmly con- 
vinced he was Smith / 9 'Beck was then beardless. Beck 
twice called on Spurrell after serving his sentence. On the 
second occasion, he was wearing a beard, and Spurrell “ felt 
more than ever convinced that he was Smith / 9 But on the 
first occasion, Beck wore no beard, and Spurrell failed to 
recognise him as a man he had seen before. 1 The distinctive 
marks of Smith when released on licence will be dealt with 
later. Spurrell, on no occasion, emphasised any peculiarity 
as enabling him to speak so confidently as to the man after 
so long. Would he have recognised the lean ticket-of-leave 
man of 1881 as the man he had arrested only four years 
before ? 

It was on 13th January, 1896, that the police first con- 
cerned themselves with the physical descriptive marks of the 
two men. That was the day on which Freest succeeded 
Waldock as the officer in charge of the case, and it was a fort- 
night before Spurrell gave his evidence of the identity. Mr. 
Froest wrote for authority to have the marks of expiree 
Smith and ■* the man Beck ” examined for comparison. The 
complexion of the expiree, noted as “ dark *’ in 1881, was 
altered to “ fresh/’ which was also the complexion assigned 
to Beck, but. the eyes of the expiree were stated to be brown 
and those of Beck to be blue. These and other discrepancies 
were withheld from the defence, oq the ground that the papers 
were privileged, and they and the photograph of Smith were 
not shown to Mr. Dutton, who repeatedly applied to inspect 
them, alleging his reason, viz., that his client was said to be 
Smith, w T hich he totally denied. 2 * 

Questioned as to the alteration in the descriptive marks 


1 Cd. 2315, p. 149. 

2 The correspondence is set out, postj p. 198. Mr. Freest thus explained 
the alteration in the descriptive marks. The Chairman — “ Do you think 
those emendations were put in by the police at the time or afterwards?” — 
“ It would be handed to the police at the prison/’ The Chairman — “ The 
presumption is that those emendations were made afterwards on the 
personal observation of the prisoner?” — “That is so, no doubt, my lord.” 
Earlier in his evidence he had said — “The officer would see the convict 
about to be discharged ; he would see the scar described on the form as 
the right Bide, and he would put his pen through that and put it in its 
proper position.” 

37 




Adolf Beck. 


of “ Smith/ * Mr. F. J. Sims, chief clerk to the Director of 
Public Prosecutions, said — “ I cannot explain that. That 
(the amended form) is the document exactly as it came to 
us.” He adds — “ With regard to the* application for exa- 
mination of the marks of Mr. Beck, wej were never furnished 
with the result of any examination that might have been 
made.” 

Sir Robert Anderson, at the time of the first trial chief of 
the C.I.D., stated that the refusal to show Mr. Dutton either 
the photo or the record of ” Smith ” was in consequence of the 
Treasury regarding them as “ privileged.” He said the 
papers would not be shown to a defending solicitor, except by 
permission of the Home Office. 1 

Mr. F. J. Sims, recalled, said that his refusal was on the 
ground that “ the matter was not within the province of the 
Public Prosecutor. It only concerned the Commissioner of 
Police.” 2 

Pressed as to what was “ confidential ” in the documents 
asked for by Mr. Dutton, Mr. Sims replied — “ I do not 
know.” 3 He said that Mr. Dutton could (as he indeed did) 
subpoena a witness to produce them at the trial, but as the 
chairman pointed out, that was a very different matter from 
inspection before trial. 

However, the letter dated New Scotland Yard, 29th March, 
1898, signed by Mr. Freest, inspector, and Mr. Swanson, 
superintendent, shows that at that date the opposition to the 
production of the papers of the two men came from the police 
and the major responsibility thenceforth rested with them. 

Some two months later, as has been said, the fact of 
“ Smith’s ” circumcision became known to Beck and his 
advisers. This, far more certainly than any discrepancy in 
the rough notes of their descriptive marks, proved the non- 
identity of the two men. The fact that Beck was not cir- 
cumcised was established on 18th May, 1898. As we have 
seen, beyond the removal of the letter “ D ” from Beck’s 
convict number and a reference back to Sir Forrest Fulton, 
to whom the discovery seemed in no way material, nothing 
was done. The police were never informed. Mr. Froest first 
became aware of the circumcision of “ Smith ” after his second 
arrest. 4 

Inspector Waldock, for his own satisfaction, made a 
physical examination of the marks of Beck after his second 


1 Cd. 2315, p. 52. The refusal, as the original papers show, were partly 

based on grounds personal to Mr. Dutton. 

9 76., p. 79. •Ib.,i>. 80. 

4 Ib. t p. 90. Of. Mr. Macnaghten at p. 71. 

38 




Introduction. 


remand. Nothing was then known to the police as to the 
absolute proof that he could not be identical with f< Smith,” 
but comparing the ^official descriptive marks of the expiree 
with those of his prisoner, Waldock came to the opinion that 
the two were not the same. “ I stripped him and took the 
marks, and I failed to find the marks. ... I said at the 
time I could not see any likeness with Smith. I should report 
it verbally to Mr. Sims prior to 14th January. Information 
was given to Scotland Yard that Mr. Beck had pre- 
viously had five years.” 1 Mr. Sims was confident 
that Mr. Waldock made no such report to him. 2 The 
Committee preferred the police officer’s recollection. “ If his 
(Mr. Sims’) recollection is wrong, and we must say that we 
incline to the latter view, his conduct was, nevertheless, quite 
consistent with a perfectly honest intention to bring together 
the necessary materials on which the prosecution was to be 
based.” 3 

Apart from the unsatisfactory circumstances attending 
Pauline Scott’s identification, no allegation was seriously made 
on behalf of Beck in relation to the police conduct on his 
second trial. The identifications, though much fewer, were 
confident. The speedy arrest of the true culprit led to Beck’s 
liberation in a few days. “ It is due to the police to point 
out that Mr. Beck owed his almost immediate release to the 
intervention of an intelligent police officer,” observed the Com- 
mittee, referring to Inspector Kane. 

There remains another allegation to notice — that they with' 
held from the defence the names and addresses of the women 
who failed to identify Beck or definitely said he was not the 
man. 

Beck’s allegation was in these terms — “ There were more 
women who said I was not the man than who said I was. 

. I believe it was the first time Inspector Freest 
appeared on the scene. I asked Mr. Dutton for the addresses, 
•and it was refused. I was told by Mr. Dutton that it was 
refused.” Mr. Dutton’s evidence was — “ On 21st February 
I wrote to the solicitor to the Treasury — 4 For the purpose of 
the defence I shall be glad if you will furnish me with the 
dates of any similar offences to those alleged to have been 
committed by the prisoner, other than those which appear 
on the depositions.’ I knew that there were twenty or 
twenty-five women, whose statements had been taken by the 
police, and that more than half that number had not been 


1 Cd. 2315, p. 138. 

2 76., p. 193. 

*/&., p. x. 



Adolf Beck. 

called, and I naturally concluded that they had failed to 
identify my client. . . . Strange to say, I had no reply.” 

He corrected himself, and added — “ On 2^nd February I had 
a reply from Mr. Anderson — ‘ I regret I cannot comply with 
your request/ ” 

Mr. F. J. Sims, in answer, said he was unaware that Watts 
had admitted that four women had failed on one day to 
identify Beck. He stated the police report requesting legal aid 
did not disclose it, and that the concealment of names was 
done at the insistence of the women. He handed Mr. Dutton 
.the name and address of eveiy witness he called. Beck asked 
— “ What about those ladies who were there and distinctly 
said in my presence that I was not the man? ” Mr. Sims 
replied — “ Only fifteen statements were placed before us. I 
called eleven. I was not there at the identification process. 
I do not know what occurred/ * Mr. Dutton returned to the 
charge. “ There were many other women known to the police 
and whom the police had seen . . . who subsequently said 

he was not the man. I am talking of the women whose 
names came to the police after Beck's committal/ ’ Mr. 
Macnaghten had spoken, it will be recalled, of no fewer than 
sixty worthless cheques on the Union Bank alone. The 
matter was never cleared up. From the list of cases, not pro- 
ceeded^ with it seems some women wrote anonymously, just 
enclosing the “ cheque ” and could never be traced. In its 
report the Committee omit to notice this allegation. 

Beck also charged the police with keeping back Mrs. 
Gardiner, from whose book the Balham cheques were stolen; 
as has been seen, they persevered up to a point in their efforts 
to find her, but neither side could get her to come forward. 


Evidence from the Public Prosecutor’s 
Department. 

The Committee, having dealt with the allegations against 
this department, immediately after acquitting the police of all 
blame, it becomes convenient to handle this evidence next. 

The Earl of Desart at the time of the first trial occupied 
the position of Public Prosecutor, which in modern times is 
always held by a barrister who has had a long and large 
experience in criminal Courts. The noble Earl was not 
present at Beck’s trial, and he left it very largely to Mr. 
F. J. Sims, who was not a solicitor, to prepare the case and 
instruct counsel. The Earl was unable to recollect the Peru 
alibi, when he tendered himself in 1904, but he was convinced 
that Beck 11 was the same person as the John Smith who 

40 



Introduction. 

was convicted in 1877.” The result of the physical examina- 
tion of the two men, requested to be made by Mr. Sims on 
the application of Jdr. Freest, was never communicated by 
the directors of convict prisons to the department, so that 
until the arrest of “ Thomas ” in 1904 it shared the ignorance 
of Scotland Yard that the two men had been conclusively proved 
to be different persons 1 The director, as soon as the discovery 
was communicated to him, applied to the High Court for 
Beck's release on bail, and communicated with the Home Office. 
It was only a matter of days before Beck was pardoned. As 
to the handwriting, the Earl said — ‘ ‘ I have not seen the letters 
lately, but I think as regards these Smith documents, the 1877 
documents and the actuaf documents used by the guilty persons 
in the two later cases were identical. With the assistance of 
an expert, the documents in Mr. Beck's writing appeared to be 
the same.” Had Beck been indisputably proved not to be 
Smith in 1896, tht Earl did not think he could have withdrawn 
the case, in view of the number of identifications. lie added — 
“ If I had had an opportunity of considering any direct evi- 
dence that this man could not have been in the country, the 
case would have required very serious consideration. I have 
no right to try a case. I have to see whether a case ought 
to be tried.” The Earl himself never saw the u cheques ” 
nor any of Beck's petitions, and he took no steps as to entering 
the voile prosequi except to ask that it be stopped if not 
already lodged., 

Mr. Francis John Sims, a civil servant, was the most 
material witness in this branch of the inquiry . It was, per- 
haps, to be regretted that one who was not a solicitor, and 
therefore aq “ officer of the Court," was doing what was 
practically a solicitor's duty in prosecuting at the Police Court, 
in instructing counsel, and in dealing with applications from 
the “ other side ” w r ith regard to inspection. No doubt the 
intentions of Mr. Sims were excellent ; his conduct of the case 
proved to be in the last degree lamentable. 

Mr. Sims first came into the case about 26th December, 
1895, when Mr. Sheil, having heard the evidence ef Meissonier, 
Grant, Brakefield, and Harvey, wrote recommending the Public 
Prosecutor to take up the case. On .10th December Waldbck, 
then in charge of the case, came to- the Treasury. On 8th 
January Mr. Inglis, a handwriting expert, who had been in 
partnership with Mr. T. II. Gurrin, called and inspected the 
incriminating documents and Beck's admitted writing. He 
saw no “ Smith " exhibits. 

On 13th January Mr. Sims wrote to the Directors of Convict 


1 Cd. 2315, p. 60. 


41 



Adolf Beck 


Prisons, who replied on 17th. The physical descriptive marks 
of Beck never were sent to the department. When Spurrell 
so rashly swore to the identity of Beck with Smith, the matter 
was lost sight of as unimportant. “ We were satisfied Beck 
was Smith." 1 

At the Police Court hearing on 30th January, Gurrin's 
report was put in. It dealt with the exhibits of 1877 and 1895, 
and asserted that they were identically the same writing, and 
that they <( were undoubtedly in the handwriting " of the 
person who had written Beck's admitted letters to Chetwynd 
and his MS. book. 2 Mr. Gurrin's complete report was handed 
by Mr. Sims to Mr. Dutton at the Police Court for him to cross- 
examine upon. 3 

Mr. Sims himself called Spurrell at the Police Court, and, 
being satisfied with his identification, concerned himself no 
more with the men's physical descriptive marks. Ho prepared 
the briefs of Messrs. Charles Mathews and Horace Avory, 
which, it will be recalled, concluded with the statement of 
the previous conviction in 1877, and copies of the exhibits in 
that case were sent with each. 4 Mr. Frayling attended the 
trial in 1896, Mr. Sims not appearing to have more to do with 
the misfortunes of Beck until his second apprehension. He 
admitted it was “ common ground ' ' that the incriminating 
documents of 1877, 1896, and 1904 were all in the same writing. 
The only doubt was whether that was Beck's. Had he known 
in 1896 that Beck was not Smith and could not have committed 
the 1877 frauds, he would still have gone on with the prosecu- 
tion in “ face of the fact of the positive identification by eleven 
women." 

He did not admit that “ we could have done anything 
differently." Recalled and examined as to the incriminating 
documents, he said that they were all at the Old Bailey attached 
to their respective depositions, and would have been exhibited 
to Mr. Dutton by the clerk of the Court as readily as to Mr. 
Gurrin, who inspected them on behalf of the Crown ; it does not 
appear that Mr. Inglis or any one acting for the defence did 
see the 1877 exhibits on which was founded Gurrin's opinion 
of the identity ^ of the writer of the 1896 with that of the 
1877 exhibits. Recalled a second time, he denied that he 
had ever received Waldock's report to the effect that Beck's 
marks did not correspond with Smith’s. He made a very 


iCd. 2315, p. 53. 

2 See his report, post , pp. 193 and 196. 
8 Cd. 2315, p. 54. 

4 Cd. 2315, p. 55. 

42 



Introduction. 


significant admission as to th© 1904 charge. “ I had seen 
certain articles in the paper challenging the correctness of the 
verdict against Mr. 1 Beck in 1896, and I was specially careful 
at the Police Court to introduce nothing referring to that con- 
viction or any past incident of that description ” ; yet the 
briefs in 1904, as in 1896, referred to Beck as a previously 
convicted man, and the briefs were prepared by Mr. F. J. Sims. 1 

With regard to Mr. Sims’s refusal to show Mr. Dutton 
the papers of Smith, to meet the charge in 1896, Mr. Sims 
sheltered himself under the letter of Sir Robert Anderson of 
22nd February, 1896, refusing Mr. Dutton’s application, but 
on that same day Scotland Yard had written that “ Mr. 
Sims, who has conducted the prosecution, suggests that the 
papers bo not produced unless absolutely compelled to do so.’’ 
A letter in similar terms had been sent on 10th. Sir Robert 
Anderson, Assistant Commissioner of Police and Chief of the 
C.I.D., on the other hand, attributed his refusal to allow in- 
spection in 1896 to the fact that the Treasury objected, and 
“ if I were back in my chair with the experience of this inquiry 
to-day^ I should have given the same decision, having regard 
to the Treasury opinion.” llis refusal to allow inspection in 
1898, he explained, on the ground that that was a matter 
that could only be considered by the Home Office. 2 

Wherever, in fact, some particular error was inquired into 
by the Committee, each department contended that the scape- 
goat must be looked for in some other. It suffices to point 
out hero that Mr. F. J. Sims could have been in no possible 
doubt as to why Mr. Duttop was so anxious to see the records 
and papers relating to the expiree; he had plainly disclosed 
his defence-on 30th January at the. Police Court. And, what- 
ever may have been the acquaintance with the case at this 
stage of his chiefs, it is difficult- to understand how Mr. Froest. 
can have failed to grasp the reason of Mr. Dutton’s repeated 
applications to inspect. 

* AUquando bonus dorm if at Hnmcrus , but at this fatal 
period in the fortunes of Beck, February, 1896, not Homer 
only but all the great minds that had to consider tjhe matter 
were asleep. If Beck were Smith, what more likely than that 
the Home Office would have some of Smith’s admitted writing 
in the form of petitions ? As a matter of fact, it had at least 
two, and had these been compared then and there with both 
the then existing sets of exhibits, a conviction of Beck would 
have been impossible. Yet the Home Office was never 


^..p. 57. 

2 Cd. 2315, pp. 66, 67. 

43 



Adolf Beck. 

approached by the Treasury or the C.I.D. for any of Smith's 
writing, though Gurrin was much handicapped by having 
none. 1 * 


Evidence of the Prison Authorities. 

Only one witness was actually before the Committee on 
behalf of the prison authorities — Major Clayton. He referred 
to the Standing Orders as to the insertion of previous con- 
victions in the “ grey calendar," which informs the judge of 
what the prisoner's previous history has been. He went on 
to say that the Governor at Holloway (now a female prison) 
would have acted on the evidence of Spurrell at the Police 
Court as identifying Beck with Smith, “ entirely without 
respect to anything that happened before the judge at the 
trial." It seems that Beck's name in the grey calendar had 
an entry of a previous conviction for felony in the name of 
Smith. 2 

The chairman next took the witness* to the examination 
of “ Smith," which established that ho was circumcised. The 
explanation of why this absolutely distinctive mark was not 
entered in revising the identification marks of Smith on his 
discharge was that <( it has not been the custom to enter it. 
We never search for that particular mark.*'* It having in this 
case been searched for at the convict's express request, the 
reason for not entering it when found would scarcely appear 
convincing. It also appeared in the course of his evidence 
that Beck's application to see a solicitor was refused by two 
directors of Portland Prison and also by the visiting justices. 
Every petition sent up hy Beck to the Home Office up to and 
including that of 5th July, 1898, contained a statement by 
the Governor of Portland that Beck had been previously con- 
victed in the name of Smith in 1877, although on 19 th May 
in that year the Governor had written to the Prison Com- 
missioners — “ It appears from a statement . . . dated ' 

13/1/79, that John Smith had been circumcised. I requested 
the medical officer to examine DW 523, A. Beck, and enclose 
his report, from which it will be seen that Beck has not been 
circumcised.' 1 In other words, with a recent and conclusive 

test before him proving Beck could not be Smith, the Governor 
endorsed the petition exactly as if the identity of the men 
could be assumed as before. 


1 See his evidence at p. 199 of Cd. 2315. Cf. also what Sir William 
Harcourt did in the case of R. v. Evans (1885), post, p. 101. 

a Cf . Cd. 2315, p. 151, and “The Martyrdom of Adolf Beck,” p. 7. 


44 



Introduction. 

Evidence of Judges and Counsel. 

The next stage Veached by the Committee was described in 
their report as “ a very anxious and difficult part of our in- 
quiry.” The honour both of the bar and of the bench had been 
assailed, and it must be admitted that “ the man in the 
street,” after reading the strictures of Mr. Sims, stood in need 
of enlightenment as to how the vaunted integrity of the pro- 
fession had so contrived matters that an innocent man was 
twice convicted without his real defence ever being put before 
a jury, although the nature of that defence had been disclosed 
at the Police Court at the time of the first charge. “ We 
are not,” said the Committee, “ a judicial tribunal, much 
less a Court of Criminal Appeal.” “ Wo are trot here in a 
judicial capacity, and therefore my brother (referring to Sir 
John Edge) and myself must disengage ourselves from the 
fact that we do happen to be or have been judges,” said the 
Chairman. One thing is patent — all three, but especially 
Sir Richard Henn Collins and Sir John Edge, were almost 
morbidly anxious that no aspersion should be suffered to rest 
on any member of the legal profession. “ No such inquiry 
could be conducted without compromising the dignity, and 
therefore impairing the efficiency of any one holding the 
exalted station such as that of a. judge in this country. There- 
fore, it would be nothing less than a public scandal if any ques- 
tions in the nature of cross-examination wore addressed to a 
judge,” said the Chairman in introducing the Recorder, who 
had, as Common Serjeant, sentenced Beck in 1896. 

One is inclined to comment that, just as no author can 
be written down blit by himself, so no judge can be impaired 
in efficiency or compromised in dignity, save by himself, and 
that if a decision of his, repugnant alike to law and to good 
sense, has consigned a wholly inndcent man to penal servi- 
tude, any member of the public on whom a like fate may fall 
•has an interest to see that judge called on to justify his con- 
duct, or, failing that, to see that an address is moved in 
Parliament for his removal. There should be nothing 
sacrosanct about the judicial office which places it above a 
healthy public criticism. 

Similarly, in introducing counsel, the Chairman, by a few 
carefully-chosen words, made it appear that counsel appeared 
by no means in a penitential robe, but rather as an act of 
grace to explain his share in the case. 

The legal witnesses were called to suit their convenience, 
and Mr. C. F. Gill was actually the first witness of this class. 
The logical order would appear to be to present the prosecu- 
tion point of view first, then the defence, and finally the judicial, 

45 



Adolf Beck. 


and accordingly I summarise Mr. Horace Avory’s evidence 
first. He explained his omission to charge the previous con- 
victions in the misdemeanour indictment /by saying that he 
never availed himself of the section in the Prevention of Crimes 
Act (34 & 35 Viet. c. 112, sec. 8) enabling him to do so, 
and he was “ not sure he was aware of it.” He had two 
reasons for electing to proceed upon that indictment and not 
upon the felony indictments charging the previous convictions, 
firstly, that many of the offences seemed to him to be false 
pretences and not larceny; secondly, that by including all the 
charges, “ giving twenty different dates when the prisoner 
was said* to be identified as being at a particular place at a 
particular time,” it enabled him to prove an alibi “ or any 
other defence ” which it “ might be difficult or impossible ” 
for him to do if tried on one indictment charging one felony on 
one date. His objection to Mr. Gill’s cross-examination of 
Gurrin he dealt with thus; he had in his instructions the evi- 
dence of Spurrell and Redstone that Beck was undoubtedly 
Smith, and he himself felt no reasonable doubt ho was the 
same man who had been previously convicted. “ As soon as 
the questions were put with a view of showing 'that the hand- 
writing was that of Smith, who had been convicted in 1877, 

I was in this position, that if I did not object to it, that it would 
go before the jury that the handwriting was that of another 
man named Smith and not of the accused. I should then 
have been bound, in order to prevent the jury, as 1 thought, 
being misled, to prove that he was the same man who had been 
previously convicted, and having regard to the fact that not 
only common law and common fairness, but the statute itself 
in express terms says that a jury shall not be told of a previous 
conviction until they have delivered their verdict, it was my 
duty to prevent the breach of the statute by allowing the 
jury to be told that he was the same man who had been 
previously convicted, and it was solely to prevent that that 
I took the objection to the evidence at that stage. If the 
judge had ruled that the evidence was admissible, and that 
the defence must take the risk of what would follow, I should 
have called the witnesses, who would have proved to the jury 
that he was the same man who had been convicted. My 
belief is that if the jury had before them the eyidence of those 
two police constables, positively identifying him, they would 
have come to the conclusion wrongly, as it now appears, that he 
was the man previously convicted.” The next point was 
his refusal to accede to Mr. Gill’s request to try the felony 
indictments after the conviction for misdemeanour. Here, 
again, a technical difficulty arising out of statute law was to 
prove an insuperable obstacle to the ascertainment of the 
46 



Introduction. 

truth. “ The very statute which enacted the offence of 
obtaining money by false pretences contains an express provi- 
sion that a man sh&ll not be acquitted if it turns out to be 
larceny, provided, nevertheless, that he Bliall not be liable 
to be tried for larceny afterwards upon the same offence. So 
that I had an express provision of a statute which absolutely 
prevented me trying a second indictment for larceny upon 
those same facts. Mr. Gill said, ‘ I insist upon the other 
indictment being tried.’ 1 I, having this provision in my mind, 
eaid, ‘ I insist that I cannot try them.’ ” 

A nolle prosequi was the only way of disposing of the 
four? felony indictments on the file. He w r ent on to explain 
that if the defence had produced affirmative evidence that the 
incriminating documents were not in Beck’s writing but in 
that of the author of the 1877 frauds, no objection would 
have been taken, and he referred to the witness Lamb, who 
proved that Inglis had Y inspected the writing on behalf of Beck 
and was not forthcoming at the trial. 2 lie went on to point 
out that neither Chetwynd nor Kistner were asked by the 
defence whether they thought the incriminating documents were 
in a writing other than Beck's. Accordingly he thought the 
question of the identity of Beck with Smith was “ one of 
those false issues wffiich some people delight in.” He warmly 
repudiated the suggestion of Sir George Lewis that he took 
the course he did on the Public Prosecutor’s instructions. He 
should have taken the same .objection if there had been no 
indictment charging a previous conviction “ to exclude from 
the jury the f&ct that he had been previously convicted.” He 
admitted that counsel for the defence could waive the right 
to have it excluded, and, if he tendered it, the prosecution 
could not invite the judge* to exclude it. “ In this case it was 
in the nature of a warning, my objection was in the nature of 
a warning.”* 

The evidence of the witness as to why he objected to Mr. 
Gill showing that the author of the crimes charged in 1896 must 
be identical with the author of the crimes of 1877, which 
were the same “ in every special detail and the documents 
obviously the work of the same hand ” is so important, having 
regard to the position then and now occupied by this eminent 
lawyer, that I .give it in full in an appendix, together with 
the learned recorder’s statement’. Summarised it amounted 
to this — that he still saw ” nothing improbable in two different 
people committing offences so similar to each other. This 
kind of fraud is as common as petty larceny. Remembering 


1 There were four felony indictments. 

2 Inglis never saw the 1877 exhibits. See p. 42 ante. 


47 * 



Adolf Beck. 

the way in which these persons gave their evidence and the 
way in which their identification was not only unshaken but 
in some instances confirmed in cross-examination by* their point- 
ing dut things which had not been previously mentioned, my 
opftiion is that, even if that issue of the previous conviction 
had gone to the jury, the jury would have convicted of the 
offences in 1896 — even if they did not convict on the previous 
conviction.” 

“ Do you think,” asked the Chairman, “ that justice could 
possibly be done under those circumstances — that any tribunal 
could allow a judgment or verdict to stand if the point was 
laid before a Court of Appeal?” “Well,” replied the wit- 
ness, “ I cannot prognosticate what a Court in the nature of 
a Court of Appeal would do.” lie admitted that the evidence 
nominally as to Beck’s character went before the jury without 
their attention being directed to its bearing on the main 
issue. As evidence of character, this testimony relating to 
a period fifteen years before was of no value. He could 
not have objected to Mr. Gill opening that he proposed to call 
evidence to show that similar frauds were committed in 1877 
by a man who wrote in exactly the same handwriting and that 
Beck was then in Peru, nor did he suggest ft was improper 
for Mr. Gill to broach that defence by his cross-examination of 
Mr. Gurrin, but merely 4 that he was himself doing his duty 
in objecting. The Chairman concluded — “ But your interven- 
tion did not in any way narrow the issues in the case?” The 
witness — “ Not in the least.” The Chairman — “ And any 
ruling which had for its effect to narrow those issues would 
be a wrong ruling?” 

Beck himself next interrogated Mr. Avory as to his having 
influenced a Mr. Wilkinson, since dead, against him, which the 
witness warmly denied. The last question was framed by 
Sir George Lewis — “ Whether after the evidence that Beck 
was in Peru during the whole of the years that Smith was in 
prison he was satisfied that Beck was not Smith?” The 
witness — “ To ask me what I thought at a particular moment 
in 1896 about one case of several that I did in 1896 is an 
impossible question to answer, quite. ’ ’ 

The counsel who actually conducted the 1904 prosecution 
were Mr. Biron 1 and Mr. Guy Stephenson, Mr. Mathews and 
Mr. Bodkin 2 taking no part in the case beyond an opening 
by the latter learned counsel. Mr. Bodkin, however, gave 
evidence that he had drawn the indictment which was for 
misdemeanour only, and he charged the previous conviction 


1 Now Sir Chartres Biron. 

2 Now Sir Archibald Bodkin, the public prosecutor. 
48 



Introduction. 

of 1896, and his brief, as has been said, stated that this was the 
third time Beck stood charged with such offences. A news- 
paper account in which Beck denied that he was the person 
who committed the 1877 or 1896 offences accompanied the 
instructions, but it did not favourably impress counsel. “ It 
was an illustrated paper, which dealt with crimes of a more 
or less sensational kind.” 1 

The witness’s view was, according to his instructions, that 
Smith and Beck were one person, and that was the point of 
view from which the prosecution was conducted. 

Mr. Gill, who had led for the defence in 1896, was the 
lengthiest witness amongst the counsel. He made it clear 
that his defence was put forward at the Police Court and was 
on the depositions; it was that “ the prosecution were right in 
supposing that the offences alleged against Beck had in fact 
been committed by the same man who committed the Smith 
offences, and the mistake was in supposing that Beck was 
Smith, and that it was indicated in the clearest possible way 
by the cross-examination of Gurrin and Spurrell at the Police 
Court.” 

Adverting to the evidence of Sir Kenelm Digby, he said — 
“ I think he has not quite made himself master of all the facts 
in this case. . . . The prosecution said — ‘ This man who 
is now charged is the s$me man who committed identically 
the same offences on the occasion that Smith was convicted, 
and the handwriting is identical.’ So that the%case resolved 
itself into the question whether the prosecution were right in 
supposing that they had in custody the man who had been 
convicted in 1877.” He dwelt on the difficulty of establishing 
his defence .with Mr. Beck in custody, and pointed out the 
impossibility of fully developing the defence before the magis- 
trate. It was the case for the defence that Mr. Gurrin’ a opinion 
was so far right; that the handwriting of the incriminating docu- 
ments of 1877 and 1896 was identical. It was “ common 
ground,” but the defence said it was “ Smith ” in both cases, 
or at least not Beck. It was never disputed or discussed 
t: that the incriminating documents in all the cases were in 
the same handwriting.” The material part of the expert’s 
evidence for the Crown was to show that “ notwithstanding 
apparent dissimilarity, the handwriting, which was the same 
in all the cases, was the handwriting of Mr. Beck.” 

Dealing with the question of alibi, he pointed out that 
there was no difficulty as to the Peru alibi, covering all the years 
that t€ Smith ” was in prison, but that “ it was a very difficult 


1 Probably Sir Harry Fumiss’s “ Famous Crimes,” vol. II., parts 
34 and 35. 

k 49 



Adolf Beck. 


thing to prove an alibi with regard to some occasion, or some 
occasions, over a period of eighteen month § or two years, upon 
somewhat uncertain days, and at uncertain times. 1 ” There- 
fore steps were taken to secure that (the Peru) alibi, and steps 
were also taken to have before the Court the record of Smith 
and the documents in the Smith case. . . . The ca.se which 

the defence waa prepared to present was, and which was, I 
think, presented in the course of the trial, that there was a 
grave mistake being here committed, and that it was very 
important that tho issue should be tried as to whether this was 
the man w r lio had been previously convicted.” 

\The identification by the women, said Mr. Gill, was “ re- 
markably positive.” So that though “ no single article that 
had been obtained from either the ten women who were called 
or the twenty-five or thirty women who complained was traced to 
his possession,” the immense amount of feeling with which 
the women gave their evidence, “ becoming more positive as the 
cross-examination went on,” satisfied the jury of Beck’s guilt. 

Far the most material thing in his evidence was as to 
why Mr. Gill, having been stopped in his cross-examination of 
Mr. Gurrin, never strove to force his true defence thereafter. 

lie first paid a tribute to the fairness of his opponent, Mr. 
Avory, and to that of the Common Serjeant, and he continued — 
U I do not know wdiether Sir Kenelm quite appreciates that, 
having been stopped in cross-examination upon a defence that 
you are desirous of putting forward, it would bo rather a strong 
thing to open a defence in opposition to the ruling of tho judge, 
but if I thought I had the material for doing it, I do not 
know that I would not be prepared to take the extreme course. 
My difficulty was 1 had no witnesses, because my only witnesses 
were Mr. Gurrin or Mr. Spurred.” He could not, he ex- 
plained, call, the former only to discredit him by some such 
question as that — f ‘ Would you be so confident that the 1877 
documents were written by the prisoner .if you knew he was 
then in Peru?” 

It is plain Mr. Gill thought that Gurrin and Spurred together 
would have caused the jury to discredit his Peru alibi. 
“ Gurrin’s evidence would have been — * Yes, the documents in 
the two cases are identical, but. they are both in the hand- 
writing of Beck.’ Spurred would have said — ‘ Yes, the man 
is now in the dock that was convicted at that time. 1 So that 
I was driven of necessity to deal with the case upon the facts.” 


*In tho cases of Taylor, Miller, Brakefield, and Sinclair the first 
meeting was on a Saturday and the visit was paid on a Sunday, thus 
lessening an innocent man’s chance of proving a business alibi. The 
selection of a Saturday for the rencontre was common to all three series 
of frauds. 

60 



Introduction. 

fie continued that it was thought well, notwithstanding, to 
call the Peruvian alibi witnesses as witnesses to character to 
enable the Crown to prove that they must be entirely mistaken, 
as Beck in the name of “ Smith " was then serving a sentence 
of penal servitude, and also to get their evidence placed on 
record. He referred to the Daily Telegraph report of the case 
as showing that he had asked the Common Serjeant to state a 
case, and had referred to the result as “ a grave miscarriage of 
justice.” 1 

He pointed out that the then state of the law allowed him no 
way of calling into question the Common Serjeant's ruling. A 
chairman of Quarter Sessions or a Recorder of a small town 
could give an unimpeachable ruling and it was idle to go to 
the Home Office on a ruling or a sentence. He pointed out 
that the Home Office “ had all the material that would enable 
them to form an opinion ” with regard to the defence that he 
strove to put forward (including the admitted handwriting of 
“ Smith " on his petitions), and the Times report disclosed 
that he had asked for a case to be stated. “ As a bald pro- 
position " he agreed that the Common Serjeant and Mr. Avory 
were right in treating the issue of a previous conviction as 
collateral, but as it was “ directly relevant on the real issue," 
viz., that no two men could have committed the two series 
of crimes, and that Beck could not have committed the first, it 
ought not to have been refused. He explained that he could 
not call Gurrin as his witness only to discredit him, and hi® 
own expert, Inglis, had unfortunately declined to go into the 
box to oppose Gurrin. He had facsimiles of the 189t-95 docu- 
ments, but not, he thought, of the 1877 documents. 

Sir John Edge — It is a pity you had not seen the originals 
in the two cases. Mr. Gill — I think we acted on the assump- 
tion at the time that thediandwriting was identical in both cases. 

It appeared that Gurrin’s report compared part of one of 
the Smith documents only with one of the documents in the 
beck case. 2 * Mr. Gill added — “We did not get an inspection 
of them (the documents of 1877, I suppose. — Ed.) . It seems 
they were in Court, but “they were never produced.” 8 The 
documents were not before the Common Serjeant “ further 
than appears on Mr. Gurrin' s report, that would be the only 
document in the Smith case that would come directly before 
the Common Serjeant.” 4 All the Smith documents were on 
the spot as the “ defence had subpoenaed every one in whose 

1 See ante , p. 25. 

a Cd. 2315, question 871. 

8 /&., question 879. 

4 Ib. t question 880. 


51 



Adolf Beck. 


possession they could be,” and at the very moment that Mr. 
Gill was “ proceeding to deal with the Smith documents ” the 
objection was taken, and thus the identity of the writing of 
1877 and 1894-96 was never properly before the jury. 

Mr. Leycester, who has for some years been a Metropolitan 
magistrate, was the last counsel to give evidence. He had 
appeared for Beck in 1904. He explained that lack of funds 
prevented Mr. Freke Palmer going on with the case or pre- 
paring the true defence, which would once more have entailed 
expensive alibi witnesses from Peru and Sweden. He was 
not in a position to prove “ that Beck was not Smith.” He 
was absolutely ignorant that Smith was circumcised and Beck 
was not. 1 Mr. Freke Palmer threw up the case on the Recor- 
der’s refusal to postpone it. Beck, however, personally ap- 
plied for a postponement, which the Recorder granted, but 
cancelled on the application of the Treasury, supported by 
Sergeant Yeo’s affidavit that Beck would never be in a position 
to provide properly for his defence, and that the witnesses 
were anxious to leave London. Mr. Leycester never saw the 
earlier documents — had never up to the time of giving evidence 
seen them — and Beck’s defence was again never heard by the 
jury. Inspector Ward first told the learned counsel that Smith 
was circumcised and that Beck was not two days after Smith’s 
second arrest. During an adjournment Gurrin had told him 
that the documents of the three periods were quite obviously 
and not as a mere matter of opinion in one and the same 
writing. It was half-way through the trial, and Mr. Leycester 
dared not take the risk of bringing out the previous convic- 
tion, so that Mr. Gurrin’s candour availed the defence nothing. 
Mr. Leycester paid a tribute to the honesty of Inspector Ward, 
who offered to take any steps counsel could suggest to clear the 
matter up. 

Sir Forrest Fulton, who had prosecuted “ Smith ” in 1877, 
had sentenced Beck in 1896, and who would in the ordinary 
course have tried him again in 1904, was so vital a witness 
that his evidence, with his letter to the Times in defence of his 
conduct, must find a place at length in the appendix. Sum- 
marised, his evidence comes to this, In 1896 he thought that 
Beckj was “ probably not Smith at all,” that the two sets of 
documents were probably not in the same hand, and that Gurrin 
was mistaken in saying they were. He had never seen the 1877 
documents, and though they were then in Court, he did not 


1 Beck was of cotyse quite aware qf Smith’s circumcision, and it onljr . 
shows how helpless a man is without funds that counsel was never 
instructed as to this or any other really material fact. Mr. Leycester 
was allowed to remain under the impression that he could not show Beok 
was hot Smith. 

62 




Introduction. 


examine them before refusing Mr. Gill’s request for their pro- 
duction. He refused to reserve the point, a s it did not seem 
to him a point of 'law. He put in his letter to the Times, 
and it was read. It amounted to this. From the Treasury 
not proving the previous conviction or calling Beck’s character 
into question, ho assumed they were satisfied Beck was not 
Smith or that they could not prove that he was. He could 
not accede to Mr. Gill’s request to try the four felony indict- 
ments, as the facts were the same, and to postpone them to 
the next sessions was his only course. Whether an acquittal 
should be taken or a nolle prosequi entered was for the Public 
Prosecutor to decide. He then dwelt on the facts, and said 
that Meissonier before him pointed out the mark to the jury. 
It was a mole. He did not refer to Brakefield. He dwelt on 
the corroboration of the women to the accused’s clothing and his 
necessitous condition, and on the fact of * the smoking room 
waiter at the Grand Hotel speaking to Beck frequenting it and 
so confirming Fanny Nutt. He explained his refusal to allow 
Mr. Gill to cross-examine Gurrin in the following words: — 
“ From Mr. Gill’s point of view, Mr. Gurrin’s evidence was per- 
fectly worthless as establishing the fact that the same man must 
have committed the crimes of 1876 and the crimes of 1894. If 
Mr. Gill was right, and Beck was not that man, Beck was ex 
htppothesi innocent; yet Gurrin had sworn to the best of his 
belief, having Beck’s admitted writing before him, that all the 
documents in the case before me were in Beck’s handwriting. 
If he was wrong in this, of what value was his evidence as 
establishing in whose handwriting the Smith documents were? 
I considered the issue whether Beck had been convicted as Smith 
in 1877 as ^wholly immaterial.” The identity of method, again, 
did not impress him. “ The probabilities (of the crimes 
being the work of one man) seemed to then and seem to 
me now all the other way.” The trial was perfectly fair, the 
evidence overwhelming, and the verdict the only one possible. 
.The verdict w r as the same, he added, when in 1904 Beck gave 
evidence in his own behalf. 

One point in his evidence must be noted; he said that he 
thought at the time Beck and. Smith were not the same ; yet 
in his letter to the Home Office of 13th July, 1898, he had 
written — “ I did not investigate the question as to whether 
he was John Smith, although I have very little doubt that 
he and Beck were one and the same person.” 

Mr. Justice Grantham’s evidence was given very charac- 
teristically. He began by reading his letter to the Home 
Secretary of 28th August, 1904, " and continued that it was 
news to him that there had been applications for postpone- 
ment of the trial and that he had already written to the 

58 



Adolf Beck. 


Home Secretary to ask why he had not had some communica- 
tion as to the previous history of Smith and Beck, “ but Mr. 
Douglas said he did not personally know Anything about it, 
and he thought the Home Office did not either.* * He went 
on to explain the personal circumstances that led him to- 
exchange the trial of the woman Watson for Beck’s, which 
was in the Recorder’s list. He first heard of tho duality of 
Smith and Beck from Mr. Guy Stephenson, but after “ the 
Home Office inquiry ” there could be no doubt of Beck’s guilt, 
and the conviction stood. The handwriting evidence did not 
impress him at all, and he told the jury to disregard it. He 
felt a doubt if he should leave the case to the jury, but the 
evidence of do Maria and of Mr. Williams, showing that Beck 
would not pay debts while in receipt of money, and that a 
new solicitor, Mr. Williams, took up the defence only in the 
last week unfavourably affected him, and he ‘ ‘ allowed Mr. 
Beck to be convicted.” He saw counsel and Dr. Scott as 
to the state of the prisoner’s mind, and the detectives as to 
what was known about Beck — these being, of course, officers 
who bond fide believed that they had again caught the right 
man — and he decided, still with misgivings, that ho must 
pass a sentence of a year’s imprisonment. If the issue that 
Beck was not Smith had been before him, it would havo 
entirely altered his view. It was “ the most material issue 
in the case to my mind,” and that issue should have been 
fought before him. “ I cannot understand how those who 
were advising him did not face the difficulty and admit the 
previous conviction but challenge its justice.” 

One other observation, wholly remote from the immediate 
issue, deserves to be rescued from the decent obscurity of a 
blue book. “ Mr. Bradlaugh was one of the most level- 
headed men ever in that House.” Considering tho bitter 
forensic and Parliamentary strife of the speaker and 
“ Iconoclast,” that sentence is worth transcribing for those 
who road not Blue-books or White Papers or even Hansard. 

The Committee, anxious as it was to spare the judicial 
dignity the least semblance of censure, yet felt constrained 
to record that “ the ruling (of Sir Forrest Fulton) cannot 
be supported,” and that “ we cannot doubt ” that it carried 
with it tho mistrial of 1896. Coming to the second trial, 
after exonerating both the police and the Public Prosecutor, 
the Committee opined that “ no exception can be taken to 
anything that took place,” and that the second miscarriage 
of justice was due to the change of solicitor and tho inability 
of Beck again to set up his true defence. This resulted, they 
thought, from the Recorder’s rescinding the order postponing 
the trial. They added — “ But it is a formidable fact that an 

54 



Introduction. 

9 

innocent man was convicted through the ignorance of the 
police and the Public Prosecutor of a material fact which was 
in the possession of 'the prison authorities and the Home Office. 
Possibly the solicitor . . . might have got on the track 

of the information had Mr. Beck informed him of his appli- 
cation to the Home Office which resulted in his number and 
mark indicative of previous conviction being changed; but he 
does not appear to have done so.” 

Evidence of Solicitors. 

Sir George Lewis, though not formally a witness, in a 
few words defined his relation to the case. He appeared on 
behalf of Mr. Beck and had entered into correspondence with 
the Committee, part of which he had sent to the press. 
Beck’s statement was hia own, not prepared with professional 
assistance. The famous solicitor took little further part in 
the inquiry, except for a passage of arms with Mr. Horace 
Avory, which will be found in Appendix XII., p. 274. Sir 
George regarded the course taken by the prosecution in 1896 
as “ open to the gravest suspicion,” and added that “ it cut 
away Mr. Beck’s entire defence.” 

Mr. Duerdin Dutton, Beck's solicitor from 1895 until 1898, 
gave evidence at some length. Four women, he said, failed 
to identify Beck at the very first hearing in 1895. But it 
appeared that they believed he was the man. On 31st 
December, 1895, Mr. Dutton wrote to Mr. F. J. Sims, asking 
to inspect the incriminating documents, and adding that he 
had asked Mr. Gurrin for a copy of his report, and had had 
the documents photographed. 

Mr. Sims replied, refusing an opportunity for inspection 
before the documents were exhibited in evidence, and adding 
that he fiad wired to Mr. Gurrin to refuse the request for a 
copy of his report. More correspondence followed, but Mr. 
Sims adhered to his refusal to allow the defence a copy of 
Mr. Gurrin ’s report. 

It was after the remand on 23rd January, 1896, that Mr. 
Dutton first learned that it was intended to charge a previous 
conviction. Mr. Dutton's letter to the Treasury asking for 
particulars of tho alleged earlier crime was simply ignored, 
although he made it clear what issue he would raise in regard 
to it. “ If I am instructed correctly,” he wrote, “ my 
client was not in this country during the years 1876 and 
1877.” 

The Treasury duly proved through Spurrell the convic- 
tion as Smith in 1877, and then Mr. Dutton “ felt he had a 
winning case.” He told Mr. Sims so, and from that moment 

55 



Adolf Beck. 


the fact that both sets of incriminating documents were by 
one man, as Inglis and Gurrin were both agreed, and that that 
man could not be Beck became “ the centre pin of my 
defence.” The witness took all possible steps to trace 
“ John Smith,” who he “ had no doubt ” had committed 
the crimes, and he also, as has been seen, wrote to the Com- 
missioner of Police for leave to inspect the record and photo- 
graphs of “ Smith,” a request that was repeatedly refused. 
There was no method known to him like discovery in civil 
actions by which the production of what he wanted could have 
been forced. He only had copies of the depositions arid ex- 
hibits in the Smith case, which were no good. Inglis, his 
expert, only had access to the admitted handwriting of Beck 
and the exhibits in his case to form his opinion; these he 
inspected at the Treasury. 1 

Knowing that many women — about twenty-five — had failed 
to identify Beck in connection with the 1894-95 frauds, he 
wrote to the Treasury solicitor for the dates of any offences 
similar to those alleged against Beck, saying “ As the object 
of the Crown can only be to further the interests of justice, 
I am sure you will not refuse me this information, when I 
tell you it may enable the prisoner to prove his innocence.” 
He received no reply, and the information was never supplied. 

The Chairman pointed out that there would have been 
some risk in calling these women only to say they were not 
positive he was the man. 2 As to the identifications, Mr. 
Dutton differed from his client in stating that these were 
always “ perfectly fair.” 

Recalled, Mr. Dutton mentioned a very remarkable coinci- 
dence. A “ cheque ” dated 26th October, 1895# had been 
given to a Mrs. Bird, an actress, living at 5 Stafford Street, 
where also lived a Mrs. Lawrence, with whom Beck in his own 
name had some acquaintance. Mr. Dutton could prove that 
on that date Beck was in Norway, yet, the cheque, when 
examined, turned out to be in exactly the same form and 1 
writing as the others. Mrs. Lawrence brought Mr. Dutton 
the cheque in question. 

1 Later in his evidence he implies that Mr. Inglis did have access to the 
Smith documents, but, even if that were so, it would not include any of 
Smith’s admitted writing. Gurrin himself did not see that. 

2 Mrs. Cawston was the only woman to be quite confident that Beck 
was not the man. The police produced her in 1904, but the Chairman did 
not see fit to call her. Beck, in the course of Mr. Sims* further evidence, 
expressly said that he had “several women,” whom he was ready then 
and there to call, who would say he was not the man, and that they had 
said so in his presence. Neither the Chairman nor Sir John Edge, though 
the bonafides of the Treasury was one of the issues before them, desired to 
hear these witnesses. See pp. 125 and 185 of Cd. 2315. 

56 



Introduction. 


The Chairman pointed out that this evidence would not 
have helped the defence unless it could have been shown that 
the cheque came into existence on 26th October; otherwise the 
evidence would have been against them. 1 

Mr. Dutton reiterated that “ from the moment the previous 
conviction was proved, my case seemed to be perfectly clear, 
and I had only to show where Mr. Beck was in 1877.” 

Mr. Sims, recalled, and Mr. H. K. Avory, having given 
evidence to show that the Smith exhibits would have been in 
the latter gentleman’s custody as clerk of the Central Criminal, 
Court, and Waldock having been recalled to contradict Beck's 
statement that he assisted a woman to identify Beck and to 
describe his examination of Beck to see if he had marks corre- 
sponding to those of Smith, which he failed to find, as he 
reported at the time to Mr. Sims, the departmental and profes- 
sional inquiry was concluded, and it remained only to examine 
Mr. Gurrin, his former partner, Mr. Inglis, who had been re- 
tained by the defence, being dead. 

Mr. Gurrin’s evidence at the trials and at the inquiry 
requires a detailed scrutiny. 


The Home Office Evidence. 

The last department of State whose conduct called for review 
by the Committee was the Home Office; here, if anywhere, 
must be found the scapegoat, since the conduct of all the other 
departments and individuals concerned had been pronounced 
unexceptionable . 

The firsts witness was Mr. C. E. Troup, in 1904 Assistant 
Under-Secretary, who had no connection with the case before 
the year of the inquiry. He briefly recounted the history of 
the numerous petitions, and then dealt with the all-important 
fact of the circumcision of Smith, which had been noted in 
1£79 on his application to change his religion. It was not on 
Smith’s record, but the certificate of the medical officer was 
attached to the record, and, on report being made to the Home 
Office, a medical examination of Beck was ordered, which took 
place in May, 1898, and on the 19th May it was reported to 
the Home Office that Beck was not circumcised. He went 
into some detail in comparing the “ physical descriptive marks ” 
of the two men, observing that it was noted that iC so far as the 


1 One communication received later by Scotland Yard stated that 
Mr. Dutton, on pursuing this matter, found he could not establish an alibi 
as to this date. It does not appear if he got in touch with Mrs. Bird. 
It is proper to add that Scotland Yard was not inclined to attach weight 
to this informant’s statement. 


57 



Adolf Beck. 

description of the marks was concerned, it might be possible 
to reconcile them . . . but the fact of one man being 

circumcised and the other not circumcised was conclusive as 
to their being different persons.” Another fact, which had 
always been on the records, was conclusive. Scars may come 
and go, but the brown-eyed Smith could never turn into the 
blue-eyed Beck, and Smith, both in the Portsmouth prison and 
the Millbank prison forms, was described as having brown eyes. 1 
At Holloway, in January, 1896, Beck’s eyes were entered up as 
blue. 

Mr. Troup next proceeded to read Mr. Murdoch’s unhappy 
minute of 23rd May, 1898, in which, the facts as to the circum- 
cision being now definitely known, he states he <c believes Mr. 
Dutton is so far right that Beck and Smith are different persons 
. but this does not prove that Beck was not guilty of 
many offences of the same kind of which he was convicted* 
though it does prove that the police witness was mistaken.” 

Mr.' Troup next read the highly important, letter of Mr. 
Dutton of 16th May, 1898, in which he wrote — “ Reference to 
the documents in Smith’s case shows conclusively that his hand- 
writing and that on the documents produced against Beck is 
identical. This statement is supported by Mr. Gurrin, who 
at Beck’s trial was called for the prosecution and stated that 
in his opinion the two sets of documents were in the same hand- 
writing. It is clear, therefore, that the offences committed in 
1877 by Smith and those in 1894-95 were all by the same 
person.” 

The letter went on to deal with the conclusive nature of 
Beck’s Peru alibi. The only result of these, to any ordinary 
mind, disturbing applications was, as has been seen, that the 
<e whole of the papers ” were sent to Sir Forrest Fulton, with 
the very notable omission that “ the incriminating documents 
in the Smith case ” were not sent. 2 Nor, apparently, were 
those in the Beck ease of 1896. Thus Sir Forrest was, by the 
Home Office action, entirely prevented from exercising afresh 
his judgment on the only material issue — Were not the frauds 
plainly the work of one man, and Beck could not be that man, 
because, when they began, he was in Peru? 

Sir Forrest’s reply to the Home Office of 13th July shows 
how far ho yet was from appreciating the force and cogency 
of the defence he had precluded Mr. Gill from raising, but it is 
only just to add that if the Home Office had supplied him with 
the facsimiles, which were in Court in 1896, he could not have 
penned the letter he did, which effectually closed the door to 


1 In July, 1904, Smith’s eyes are described as “hazel.” 
a Cd. 2315, p. 17. 

58 



Introduction. 

further investigation. Beyond assigning Beck a new number, 
not denoting a previojis conviction, the Home Office did nothing. 
It did not even communicate its discovery of the non-identity of 
the two men to the police. 1 

After speaking as to Mr. Freest ’s recollection as to the scar 
on the cheek visible on Beck in 1895-96, Mr Troup went on 
to add that the Home Office knew absolutely nothing of Mr. 
Beck’s second arrest until after his conviction. This is indeed 
amazing, in view of Beck’s appeal to the press at the Police 
Court to come forward and help him and of the already con- 
siderable number of newspaper articles that had appeared since 
the second arrest. 

He briefly related the steps taken to release Beck on nominal 
bail, and it appeared that Mr. Gurrin was largely instrumental 
in securing Beck’s prompt release. He had been shown the 
letter to Beulah Turner, posted on 6th July, 1904, and he wrote 
“ beyond any doubt this letter was in the same handwriting 
as the incriminating documents of 1877, 1896, and the Beck 
documents of 1904.” At the same time he withdrew his 
opinion that the documents were in Beck’s disguised writing. 
Mr. Troup concluded by reading the Home Office minute of 23rd 
July, 1904, which regarded the innocence of Beck as to the 1904 
frauds as “ clearly established ” and his innocence as regards 
the 1896 frauds as “ established beyond all possibility of 
doubt.” 

He was followed in the witness chair by Sir Kenelm Digby, 
Permanent Under-Secretary in 1896. He began by reading the 
Home Office memorandum dealing with the practice as regards 
criminal petitions. Four thousand were received a year, and 
the long and short of the Home Office statement was that it 
would not, save in very exceptional circumstances, presume to 
differ from the opinion of the judge, nor even from that of a 
recorder, chairman of Quarter Sessions, magistrate or justice of 
the peace, even if “ a doubt is still entertained.” Free pardons 
on the ground that the prisoner’s innocence had been estab- 
lished amounted to five in six years, while in the same period 
there were ninety cases of sentence being remitted, because of 
some doubt arising as to the propriety of the conviction. A 
strong opinion of the judge was regarded as Anal. 

He next addressed himself to Beck’s case in particular, read- 
ing from a memorandum prepared by himself. He covered 
much the same ground as Mr. Troup, and the official view 
was, on considering the early petitions, that the evidence of the 
women was “ overwhelming.” The fact that the Scandinavian 
minister did not take up the case, notwithstanding that he had 


*Cd. 2315, p. 17. 


59 



Adolf Beck. 

called at the Home Office and arranged for a solicitor to visit 
Beck, also told heavily against the convict. 

“ Whether or not,” proceeded Sir Kenelm's memorandum, 
tf Beck had been previously convicted in the name of Smith 
in 1877 was not relevant in any way to the case of the prosecu- 
tion on the indictment on which he was tried. The question 
was simply whether he was guilty on all or some of the ten 
counts on which he was tried. I doubt if the records of 
criminal courts could show nny stronger case of proof of iden- 
tity by direct evidence. None at all events has occurred within 
the experience of the Home Office. It is unnecessary to dwell 
on the point that the proof that Beck and Smith were different 
persons was no answer to the charges against Beck. As 
regards the point that Beck and Smith were different 
persons, there was the evidence of the persons who had known 
Beck in Peru during the period in question, some of whom 
were actually called as witnesses to character. The conclu- 
sion appears inevitable that the defence deliberately abstained 
from calling evidence on the points referred to. When this 
course is adopted by counsel of Mr. Gill’s experience and ability, 
the inference is strong that he felt it hopeless to oppose the 
affirmative evidence at his command to the strong evidence 
given by the prosecution.”* 

Let us pause to examine this official defence. The women 
in the case, of course, could not prove the identity of Beck 
with Smith. None of the 1877 victims were called. Spurrell, 
who swore to the identity at the Police Court, was deliberately 
dropped by the Crown at the Old Bailey. Gurrin swore that 
the writer of the incriminating documents of 1894-95 was Beck, 
but also was prepared to swear that he must algo have been 
the writer of the 1877 documents, when he was stopped by 
Mr. Avory. Inglis agreed with Gurrin. Mr. Gill's Peru 
witnesses, if believed, established beyond all doubt that Beck 
was not Smith, and it was no fault of the defence that this was 
brushed aside by the Common Serjeant as wholly immaterial. 

Sir Kenelm took the view that the “ evidence which was 
not in fact given was so material that it could not have been 
reasonably objected to if it had been pressed at the proper 
time.” Ho differed from Mr. Gill in thinking that he could 
have tc tendered the evidence when he came to open the de- 
fence.” Mr. Gill thought himself concluded by the judge's 
ruling. 

Pursuing this matter, the Master of the Rolls asked — “ I 
want to see whether the pith of the matter was really cut out 
of the case or whether what was dealt with was merely a 
technical objection. It does seem upon this that Mr. Gill was 
in limine putting forward the first and most cardinal point 

60 



Introduction. 

of the defence and was not on the by-issue at all. I do not see 
that the learned counsel, without violating the ordinary etiquette 
of the bar, could have sought to tender evidence which would 
have been in contravention of the judge's ruling." 

The witness replied — “ I caniiot conceive that any objection 
would have been raised or any difficulty thrown in the way." 

The Master of the Rolls proceeded — “ You have got this: 
that two different persons without any evidence from the Crown 
suggesting any possible collusion at an interval of nineteen' 
years have committed the same crime, not only in principle but 
in every detail, and, further, have done it in the same hand- 
writing. Which is the more probable hypothesis — that the 
crimes have been committed by two different persons, or that 
they are the work of one man?" The witness admitted the 
probability of the latter, adding — “ But you have to compare 
that with the affirmative evidence the other way." 

“ As a matter of fact," inquired the Chairman, “ did the 
Home Office at all examine for themselves the incriminating 
documents?" “ No, my lord, they were not examined," was 
the frank admission in reply. 

t€ At any rate," resumed Sir Ilenn Collins, “ you regarded 
the conduct of the case as indicating that the defence did not 
rely upon that " (evidently meaning the non-identity of Beck 
and Smith and the identity of all the handwriting covered by 
the charges). 

<f I believe I so regarded it," answered the witness. 

Sir Kenelm went on to deal with the delicate matter of 
reviewing a judge’s decision. If a judge refused to state a 
case, he thought there ought to bo some means to get over his 
refusal, and he further said that the Home Office would occa- 
sionally act in opposition to a judge’s views. Recalled, he 
amplified his answer by adding that if a judge refused to state 
a case, there ought to be “ some power of granting a new 
trial." And he preferred a review by c( some tribunal ’’ to one 
by an “ administrative office." 

The witness was not in favour of a Court of Criminal 
Appeal as we -know it; he would not concede a direct right 
of appeal, but only an appeal by leave of the Home Office. 
Technical rulings by the trial judge could, he thought, bo 
reviewed adequately by the existing Court of Crown Cases 
Reserved, and he thought questions of fact, too, should be 
subject to its consideration. 

On the question of costs, he pointed out that either the 
country or the appellant must pay, and that to the latter 
might be a very serious bar to a really effective appeal. 
He was not against a convict having the right to apply to a 
Court for leave to appeal. At the end of his first examination 

61 



Adolf Beck. 

i 

he reiterated his impression that Mr. GilDdid not further press 
for the admission of the evidence the Oommon Serjeant had 
shut out, because “ it was not really relied on.” This view 
appears from Mr. Gill's evidence to have been without actual 
foundation, but it was a very natural supposition, when 
what afterwards turned out to be “a perfect answer to the 
charge,” to use the familiar cliche , was dropped by the 
defence, and the case treated as an ordinary one of mistaken 
identity, accompanied by a somewhat ponderous effort to 
laugh it out of Court. 

The next Home Office witness was Mr. Charles Murdoch, 
Assistant Under-Secretary from 1896 to 1903. As will be 
seen, so far as any one was made a scapegoat in the course 
of this whitewashing inquiry, it was he. It was his duty to 
draw up the various minutes on the petitions presented by and 
on behalf of Beck. 

It will be recalled that Mr. Dutton presented a petition, 
dated 20th May, 1896, and Beck one on 9th June. Both of 
these were considered by Mr. Murdoch together, after reading 
a minute on the first made by a subordinate on 1st June, 
and embodied by him in a minute dated 16th June. 1 It is 
not a little difficult to decide which minute, as well as the 
steps taken to form a correct opinion before drawing up the 
minute, displays less acumen. 

The subordinate's minute states that Beck <e was identified 
with one John Smith, who was convicted of similar frauds 
in 1877, and this former conviction was charged in the indict- 
ments.” It summarises the argument of the petition that 
both sets of frauds must be the work of one man, and that 
man Smith, as Beck was in Peru during the first period, and 
concludes — ” Even if the prisoner is not Smith, the evidence 
of his guilt is overwhelming. . . . There was also the 
evidence of Mr. Gurrin as to the handwriting of the forged 
cheques and its identity with the prisoner's writing.” 

Mr. Murdoch's comment was “ Mr. Gill tried very hard 
to press the point now put forward that the writing of the 
cheque was the writing of the man convicted in 1877, and if 
he had succeeded he had witnesses to prove that Beck could 
not be the man, as he was out of the country. It was a clever 
ruse, for how could his witnesses' evidence be disproved.” 

Before penning this minute it never occurred to Mr. Mur- 
doch to compare the petition of Beck with the two the Home 
Office had of Smith, and with the incriminating documents 
in the two cases, which were in the custody of the clerk of 
the Central Criminal Court, from whom the Home Office after- 


1 Cd. 2315, p. 276. 




Introduction. 

wards obtained thenV “ I read,” he said, “ the Sessions 
Paper and the report of the trial in the Times and no other 
documents." 

The witness was much impressed by the failure of the 
Swedish minister (Norway and Sweden not then being separate 
kingdoms) to take up the case after calling at the Home 
Office and obtaining leave for a solicitor to see Beck. The 
next time the witness's attention was drawn to the case was 
in 1B98, when Mr. Dutton applied for leave to inspect the 
papers of Beck and Smith. Scotland Yard opposing this 
request, it was formally refused. 1 

The witness admitted that very early in the case the non- 
identity of the two men was raised, and that the police were 
aware of it; yet when the witness saw Frank Froest on 
28th December, 1898, some six months after the circum- 
cision of Smith and the non -circumcision of Beck had been 
brought to the knowledge of the Home Office, 2 he never com- 
municated to that officer the fact which definitely established 
that Beck and Smith were different men. 

The scar, which might well have disappeared between 
Beck's conviction and his physical examination two years 
later, was recalled by Freest* who was allowed to continue 
under his false impression that the two culprits were pro- 
bably one and the same. 

Mr. M. D. Chalmers 3 was the next witness. He related 
the steps taken to procure Beck's speedy release on dis- 
covery of the error and the practice of the Treasury in grant- 
ing compensation in such cases. He concluded — “ The events 
of 1904 shed a flood of new light on the case; but I believe 
if I had been’ at the Home Office in 1896 I should have taken 
the same view of the case that my predecessor, Sir Kenelm 
Digby, took." 

The Handwriting Experts. 

“ Handwriting," observed that most adroit of advocates, 
Mr. Serjeant , Ballantine, “ is a dangerous element upon 
which to rest a case; the evidence of what are called experts 
is viewed with no great confidence." He proceeds to give 
particulars of a remarkable case in which he was engaged, 


'The correspondence as printed in Cd. 2315 is set out at p. 198, post, 
but the original letter from Scotland Yard, which I have inspected, there 
contains a passage showing that the refusal to show the papers to Mr. 
Dutton was to some extent based on personal grounds. 

2 The Governor of Portland prison wrote on May 19 that Smith had 
been circumcised and that Beck had not, and Mr. Murdoch himself 
commented on this in his minute of June 29. f 

* Since created K.C.S.I. 


63 



Adolf Beck. 


where there was a disagreement of the /ury, notwithstanding 
the “ expert ” was wholly in his favour, and upon a new trial, 
calling the same evidence, without the expert, the jury found 
in his client's favour. Indeed, at common law such evi- 
dence was not receivable. In Doe v. Suckmermore, 1836, Mr. 
Justice Vaughan having rejected such evidence when tendered, 
the Court of King's Bench refused to say that he was wrong. 1 
In 1854 by the Common Law Procedure Act, and in 1865 by 
the Criminal Evidence Act, the law first enabled the handwrit- 
ing expert, who had never seen the writing of the parties 
before, but who professed from a study of writing in general 
to give an authoritative opinion upon disputed writing, to be 
called in civil and in criminal proceedings respectively. 

The witnesses with whom we are concerned consisted of 
two paid professional experts, Mr. Gurrin and Mr. Inglis, 
and of one or two other persons, who were not called into the 
box, but were prepared to swear to the identity of the 1895-96 
exhibits with Beck's admitted writing. 

Of the experts, only Mr. Gurrin faced the ordeal of the 
witness-box. He had first come prominently before the public 
in the Southend murder case, in which he gave evidence for 
the Crown against James Canham Read. Of the impression 
he then made, some idea may be gleaned from the con- 
temporary newspapers. 

The Echo of 14th August., 1894, thus reports the proceedings 
at the local Police Court : — 

“ Mr. Lamb handed him eight letters, and these he declared 
were in the handwriting of the prisoner. His most important 
declaration was that tho telegrams he identified were in the 
same handwriting as the letters of Read. Mr. Warburton 
(defending) wanted to know if witness had experience and the 
qualifications of an expert in handwriting. ‘ Yes,' said wit- 
ness, ‘ I have been on Treasury work for quit© two and a half 
years.' ‘ How many cases have you had?' ‘ About two or 
three a week.' ‘ Where?' * At the Old Bailey.' ‘ But there 
cannot be two or three a week there, you fcnow.' (Laughter.) 
Mr. Warburton — ' Now just look at the m of my darling 
in the letter and then look at meet in the telegram. Where is 
the resemblance?' c I don't see.' Mr. Warburton — 1 Nor do 
I.' (Laughter.) ' Let us try another look at a in darling and 
a in table . Is there the slightest resemblance?' c No, I don't 
think there is.' ‘ What do you call the second loop of aV 
* Well, we call it the second limb.' ‘ Is not the general style 
of writing in the letters and telegrams generally unlike?' * Ap- 
parently unlike.' f Are there not enormous differences?' ‘ Yes, 


1 5 A. and E. 703. 
64 



Introduction. 


between some of tffe letters.* f Are not the dissimilarities 
many and the similarities fowl* ‘ Yes, that is* so.’ Mr. Lamb 
(re-examining) — * Are you of opinion they were in a disguised 
hand?* ‘ Yes, certainly they were.* ” 

The Evening News and Post of 25th August announced — 
<f A significant circumstance in yesterday’s proceedings was the 
appearance of Mr. C. F. Gill on behalf of the Treasury. It 
had, however, been expected that the prosecution would be 
strengthened, as it had become apparent that those hitherto 
appearing for the Crown were overmatched.” 

Read was committed for trial, and eventually found guilty 
upon very strong circumstantial evidence and executed. 

The Beck case, originating in December, 1895, was the next 
one of first-class importance in which Mr. T. II. Gurrin was 
engaged. He first received from the Treasury in that month 
the incriminating documents in the charges then pending and 
such specimens as the police could obtain of Beck’s admitted 
writing. In January of the next year he received the exhibits 
in R. v. Smith (1877), but he never at any material time 
saw any admitted writing of the man calling himself “ John 
Smith.” 1 

Upon comparing the 1877 with the 1895-96 exhibits he 
found that “ the documents in nature, form, and handwriting 
were so absolutely identical that there could be no possible 
doubt that they were by the same man.” “ When I gave my 
evidence,” he stated at the inquiry before the magistrate at 
Westminster, “ I gave my evidence on both points; first, that 
to the best of my belief the handwriting in the incriminating 
documents of 1896 was Mr. Beck’s; secondly, that the incrimi- 
nating documents in the 1877 case were beyond any doubt 
by the same man who wrote the incriminating documents in the 
1896 case. . . . During the proceedings I carefully fol- 

lowed the evidence of every witness, and it seemed to me that 
every particle of the evidence strongly confirmed the opinion I 
had formed.” 

Dealing with his evidence at the first trial of Beck, Mr. 
Gurrin said — u The second part of my evidence, however, as to 
the identity of the 1877 and 1896 writings being identical, and 
which was manifest to any one, was, I regret to say, not taken. 
At the trial in the present year (1904) I repeated the same 
evidence as in 1896, having, moreover, repeated to the Treasury 
that there could be no doubt that all the incriminating docu- 
ments in 1877, 1896, and 1904 were written by one man.” A 
letter written in 1904, after Beck was in custody, having been 

1 Cd. 2315, pp. 198-199. 

I|5 


F 



Adolf Beck. 

shown to Mr. Gurrin, he was astounded to 4nd it in the identical 
hand that had been used throughout. 

He concluded by expressing his deep sympathy in the mis- 
fortunes which had overtaken Beck, as, indeed, with one notable 
exception, did everyone else who had been instrumental in 
obtaining the convictions. 

His 1896 report to the Treasury is not available to me. 
In his printed deposition appended to Cd. 2315 he says — “ I 
have carefully examined these exhibits. In my opinion they 
are all in the handwriting of one person. I have also examined 
Nos. 1, 7, and 8 (Beck’s admitted writing). In my opinion 
these are also in the handwriting of one person. I have com- 
pared the two sets, and I have formed the opinion they were all 
written by one person, one set of course being disguised. I 
should describe the general character as Scandinavian. There 
are two styles of writing. One is either vertical or sloping 
to the left, back-handed ; the other has the natural slope to the 
right. . . . The whole of the documents put to mo in this 

case I have found to bo undoubtedly in the same handwriting.' * 

The following extract from the witness's report is also 
appended: — <c I should also add that I have examined at the 
Old Bailey the exhibits in the case of Smith, alias Willoughby, 
and, having compared the exhibits therein with the bills and 
cheques in this case, I am perfectly satisfied that they are all 
in the self-same handwriting — the disguise then adopted is the 
same as now adopted, and the exhibits in that case must, in 
my opinion, have been written by the person who has ^written 
the bills and cheques in this case.” 

As has been seen, the defence were refused permission to see 
this report, 1 and at the trial itself it seems that it vras a very 
perfunctory performance. The learned Chairman thus sum- 
marises its contents — “ He does append to his report one 
exhibit only, in which he compares part of one of the Smith 
documents with one of the documents in the Beck case. 1 
think that is the only one. He gives that specimen that you 
see (to Mr. Gill). Was that, as a matter of fact, all you had 
seen yourself? Had you seen anything more than that?” — 
te No, I saw nothing else.” 

In comparing the exhibits with the admitted writing of Beck, 
it is easy to see that a superficial resemblance exists as to 
certain letters, but as soon as these are compared again with 
the same letters in “ Smith's ” petition of 25th June, 1879, the 
true authorship of all three sets of exhibits becomes patent. 

Before proceeding to a detailed examination, one must 
observe that each sentence, without exception, in the petition, 


1 See Mr. Dutton’s evidence, ante t p. 55. 

6B 



Introduction. 


and each sentence inUhe letters of assignation, ends with a full 
stop followed by a dash, and this peculiarity is never once found 
in the writing of Beck. 

The exhibits over the whole period from 1877 to 1904 fall 
into three groups — first, there is the letter of assignation, then 
the list of clothing to be purchased, and finally the so-called 
cheque. 

It is not possible either to reproduce or to comment upon 
any of these, other than those published in Cd. 2315, for the 
reason stated in the preface — that the Home Office, having 
borrowed these exhibits from the clerk of the Central Criminal 
Court, who has the right to their custody, has never returned 
them and has refused to allow me inspection of them. 

Under these circumstances, every presumption in favour of 
the Committee's view — that no one but a fool, having all the 
exhibits and Smith’s petitions before him, could doubt th&t 
there had been a grave miscarriage of justice against Beck — 
must be made. All the specimens of the two men's writing 
published in the Blue-book illustrate the observations repeatedly 
made by the Committee that (in, the words of Sir John Edge) 
“ no doubt could be entertained by any one that they Were 
written by the same man." 1 

In form as well as in handwriting the letters of assignation 
bear a striking resemblance to one another. In 1877, in I894, 2 
and in 1904 one finds the same phrase — “ Please expect me." 
In each case the upward stroke of the “ x " of “ expect " rises 
well above the level of the neighbouring short letters, as high or 
higher than the top of the “ t " following. In every “ x " 
we can find of Beck’s, as in “ exoneration " and “ expendi- 
ture," the <c * x " is flush with the surrounding low lettqrs. In 
the petition of “ Smith " the “ x " of “ extenuating '* soars 
high above the “ e " and “ n " following, and far above the 
cross of the (< t ". 

The “ T ” of “ Thursday " in the letter to Turner on 
Hyde Park Hotel paper has the same tremulous wave as tne 
same letter has in the word “ Tuesday " in the note to Mis. 
Nutt on Grand Hotel paper in 1894. 2 

The “ S " of “ Smith " is a wholly different letter from 
that of Beck. In “ Smith's " real and disguised writing this 
letter has a very pronounced upper loop, but no lower loop; 
in Beck's writing there is always a lower loop; “ Smith," 
too, begins this letter with a heavy downward stroke of the pen ; 
not so Beck. 

Turning to numerals, the “ 7 " in the bills of exchange of 
3 Cd. 2315, p. 200. 

3 This is the only letter of this series of crimes I can reproduce. 

&7 



Adolf Beck. 

* 

1877, like the “ 7 " in the petition, line/three, is crossed by 
a slfghtly ascending stroke. This Teutonic characteristic is not 
found in the “ 7 " in Beck's letter to Frank Froest. The 
same “ 7 99 occurs in the note to Messrs. Howell & James of 
8th March, 1877. Time, in all the exhibits, is invariably 
written as such and such an hour “ o'clock," the writing of 
this word being most characteristic. 

Beck describes time as such and such an hour a.m. or p.m. 

“ L " is another characteristic capital letter. In Smith's 
petition and on the bill forms and in the word “ Lord 99 in 
the note to Howell & James this letter begins with a loop to 
the right, or inside of the down stroke; this loop, like that of 
“ s," is commenced with a heavy down stroke. Beck's u L " 
begins with a light loop on the left, or outside, of the down 
stroke. 

An “ s " at the commencement of a word in Beck's writing 
invariably, or almost, connects on to the following letter; in 
u Smith’s " writing an initial " s " is invariably separated 
by a space frorii the following letter; note, for example, the 
words “ smallness 99 and " sentence " in the petition, and the 
words “ sight" and "shillings" in the bill of 19th April, 
1877, and the proper name “ Singer " in the note of March, 
1904, and the days of the week, “ Saturday " and “ Sunday," 
therein. 

Turning to the lists of clothing, that given, as was alleged, 
by Beck to Grant in 1895 begins with exactly the same first 
five items as that admittedly given by " Smith " to Turner 
in 1904. " Two tailor-made dresses, two afternoon ditto, two 

evening ditto, one tea gown, one dressing gown." The earlier 
list, indeed, betokens a minuter acquaintance with articles of 
feminine wear. The tailor-made garments are there correctly 
described as “ costumes." 

Finally, one notes the always characteristic “ x " of 
“ extras " in the list given to Turner. 

Capital " P " in “ Smith's " writing is another test letter. 
We find it as an initial letter in “ Pounds," “ Please," “ Peti- 
tion," and in the contraction ff P.S." There is invariably 
in the natural and the disguised writing a looped, Teutonic, 
vertical stroke, such as is also found in the writer's capital 
tt T” ,, A * S<> > what Mr - Gurrin would have called the upper 
limb ' of the letter begins with a heavy loop, often so heavy 
as to cause a blot. A symmetrical loop closes the limb. 
Nothing of the kind can be detected in the capital “ P ” of 
® eck ;, Capital “ W " is another test letter, as indeed is 

w. In all Beck's writing the letter is sharp and angular, 

beginning with a horizontal stroke, before the pen runs finely 
down to make an acute angle on rising again. In " Smith's " 



Introduction. 

the letter has curves rather than angles, begins with a light 
ascending stroke, runs down with a heavy stroke, and connects, 
unlike Beck’s, with the following letter. > 

Capital “ B ” is written by Beck with a loop at the turn 
of the down stroke; not so the “ B ” of “ Smith,” which 
generally has the Teutonic looped vertical linQLb; whep it lacks 
this, it is superficially not unlike the “ B ” of Beck. 

The word “ charge ” as written by the two men well illus- 
trates the rotundity and love of curves and flourishes we find 
in “ Smith’s ” penmanship, as sharply in contrast with the 
angularity of Beck’s. 

The singular “ d,” which we find in the early letter to 
Ada Wooding, occurs over and over again in the natural and 
feigned writing of “ Smith ” ; it is never seen in that of Beck. 
” To morrow ” is two words always in the writing of “ Smith ” ; 
one word in that of Beck. 

“ Smith ” writes capital “ M ” in the reverse way from 
Beck who makes it simply a small ” m ” raised in height, as 
distinct from a sort of inverted capital ff W.” “ Yours ” and 

€t Yard ” are other typical differentiating words. 

To conclude, in the words of the late Master of the Rolls — 
“ It would take an expert* to find any similarity between Beck’s 
writing and that of any of the exhibits; the identity of 
' Smith’s 5 with them would be manifest to the man in the 
street.” 

Mr. Van verts, the erstwhile secretary of Beck, volun- 
teered to give evidence that the exhibits were undoubtedly iq 
Beck’s handwriting, and it is probable that some women 
would have been able, if willing, to give similar evidence . r 

As against, this available testimony, reinforcing that of 
Gurrin as given at the Police 00111*1 and the trial, the defence 
were able to produce nobody; their own expert, Mr. Inglis, 
at one time, it seems, a partner of Gurrin, would not come 
forward to oppose him; this was partially explained by Mr. 
Gill, who told the Committee that “ Mr. Inglis was in the por- 
tion of having been seriously discredited, and he was, perhaps, 
a somewhat nervous jnan.” 

At the trial in 1904 Mr. Justice Grantham thought the 
handwriting expert evidence of very little weight, and told 
the Committee that he thought the Crown case was weakened 
by it. Indeed, it made him doubt whether the prosecution 
were right in their case. 1 2 


1 Cd. 2315, p. 59. From Mr. Van vert’ a statement to Scotland Yard it 
appears that Beck had employed him to write letters of a like kind to ladies, 
and, as has been said, he was sued in the county court for work of this kind. 

-Cd. 2315, pp, 209-210, 



Adolf Beck. 


At this point we may conclude our summary of the evi- 
dence taken by the Committee. The essential parts of its 
report will be found in Appendix XII., p. 267. To sum up in a 
few words, the Committee acquitted in turn the police, the 
judiciary, and the bar of anything approaching remissness. 
It saw no reason to recommend a Court of Criminal Appeal, 
believing that a right to compel the Court to state a case 
would suffice, the miscarriage being, in its opinion, entirely 
due to the Common Serjeant’s refusal in this instance. The 
only definite implication of censure was upon the minor 
Home Office official, who had penned the unfortunate minute 
of 16th June, 1896. The Committee add — ** In our opinion 
Sir Kenelm Digby, owing to the want of legal training on 
the part of his subordinates, did not receive this assistance 
in this case, which turned as shown above upon a point of 
law. This minute is hardly one a trained lawyer could have 
written.” 

The Committee having recommended the modest change in 
the law above stated, made the observation which the conclud- 
ing portion of this introduction is designed to illustrate. 

“ Judges, however able, are fallible, and evidence as to 
identity based on personal impressions, however bond fide, 
is perhaps of all classes of evidence the least to be relied upon, 
and, therefore, unless supported by other facts, an unsafe 
basis for the verdict of a jury.” 

When we proceed to review the historic errors of the past 
of this description, we shall invariably find a large amount of 
actually admissible testimony, under the law of evidence then 
hnd there obtaining, appearing to confirm the evidence of the 
identifying witnesses, but also in considering, at* the bar of 
history, those other matters, not strictly admissible — it may 
be for a purely technical reason, such as that the prisoner’s 
wife knew some incriminating facts and could not be called — 
we shall find that the police and the judiciary, if consulted 
about the propriety of giving full effect to the verdict, had 
very good reasons, such as we act on in ordinary life, for 
thinking that justice had concerned itself with the right man. 
We shall also find some fatal flaw in the conduct of the pro- 
ceedings — here the wrongful exclusion of material evidence, 
with the resulting abandonment of the true line of defence. 

In the Lyons Mail mystery a false alibi put forward and 
abandoned — to the hopeless prejudice of the entire case for the 
defence. In other cases a true alibi not disclosed until the 
last stage and consequently disbelieved. 

In every case, perhaps, where an innocent man has been 
convicted by reason of mistaken identity, a blunder of the 
judge or of his advocate has had as much to do with the 

70 



Introduction. 

miscarriage of justice as the honest errors of the identifying 
witnesses. In this spirit, let us approach the last part of 
our study of this remarkable case. 

Mistaken Identity Defences. 

The exclusion by the learned Common Serjeant of the 
evidence, to be extracted by cross-examination, that the same 
man was the author of the 1877 and 1894-95 series of frauds, 
and that that man could not be Beck, forced the defence to 
rely upon the much weaker defence, in the particular cir- 
cumstances, that it was an old-fashioned case of mistaken 
identity, some man unknown, not in custody, being the 
culprit. 

It is often superficially observed that the finger print and 
other modern methods of establishing identity in the living 
have made a recurrence of what happened to Beck impossible. 
The English practice is to take a man’s finger prints upon 
arrest and to destroy them if he is acquitted or discharged. 
Thus, in this country, finger prints are only of service as 
establishing the identity of a suspect with a previously-con- 
victed, as distinct from charged, person. True it is that the 
method would in this case, had it been in use, have demon- 
strated, but no more certainly than the circumcision test 
accidentally available, the non-identity of the two men, but 
only the chance fact that the Crown put in issue the identity 
of the two men brought the miscarriage of justice eventually 
to light. 

If a stranger had not written to Scotland Yard, with the 
result that* Spurrell made his jionest error, there would have 
been no Beck case as we know it. 

So long ago as the eighteenth century, Sir Thomas Daven- 
port, later Recorder of London, was rendered conscious by an 
unhappy personal experience, in which he as prosecutor swore 
erroneously to the identity of the accused on a capital charge, 1 
of the danger of relying on this sort of evidence, and early 
in the last century Bolland, afterwards an Exchequer baron, 
prosecuted in a case where eleven witnesses swore confidently 
to the accused woman, who was acquitted owing to evidence 
for the defence, and subsequently thirteen witnesses swore as 
confidently to another woman in respect of the same crime — 
the unusual one of child-stealing. 2 

In this case, it seems, the purchase by the woman first 
accused of things likely to be needed by a young child was 
one of the facts apparently corroborating the identification. 

1 See 28 St. Tr. 819, and A.R. 1784. 

2 “ Wills on Circumstantial Evidence, ” 1912 ed., p. 82. 

71 



Adolf Beck. 

I. The Lyons Mail. 

Leaving, for the nonce, English cases, it will repay us to 
consider the historic mystery of the Lyons Mail. Whether 
Lesurques was entirely innocent of all guilt in the murder of 
the courier and the sharing of the plunder taken from the 
boot of the coach, he probably was honestly mistaken for 
Dubose, and to that error he owed his shameful death. 

About 9 p.m. on the night of 26th April, 1796, the mail 
from Paris to Lyons was attacked about two miles beyond 
Lieursaint, some twenty-five miles from Paris. In the coach 
was travelling a courier named Excoffon, who had in his 
charge 7,000,000 livres in assignats and 10,000 in specie. 
These were destined for the payment of Bonaparte’s army in 
Italy. In the boot of the coach were also 5000 in livres and 
a large sum in assignats for private persons. Another 
traveller journeyed with Excoffon, his only luggage a sabre; 
he was a taciturn individual, giving the name of Laborde. 
Horses were changed at Villeneuve St. Georges, and at S^nart 
the postillion was replaced. As the coach pulled up at Lieur- 
saint to change horses again a young, well-dressed man in the 
stable yard mounted his horse and galloped in the direction 
of Melun, through which the mail would have to pass. 

A mile and a half from Lieursaint four cross roads meet, 
the intersecting roads connecting Pouilly and Savigny, a small 
bridge spanning the main road at this point. Four mounted 
men stopped the coach at this bridge. It soon became 
apparent that Laborde was an accomplice of the horsemen. 
All five criminals murdered first the courier, then the 
postillion, and ransacked the richly-laden boot of the coach. 

The only abiding interest of this crime is — Was Lesurques 
one of the four horsemen? 1 If not, how came he to be con- 
victed, there being abundant daylight when the horsemen 
were observed by the various witnesses? 

Assuming there were only four horsemen, Lesurques was 
mistaken for Dubose; assuming there may have been five or 
more, some may have correctly spoken as to Lesurques as 
being at a certain spot at a certain time, and others as to 
Dubose. 

Joseph Lesurques was thirty-three years of age, fair-haired, 
blue-eyed, with a long, pointed nose, a high forehead, percept- 
ibly marked by a scar, and with one finger of the right hand 
crippled by an accident. 

Dubose is described as a blond, fresh-complexioned, gTey- 

1 There was some evidence of the four having been joined by a fifth and 
even a sixth, as will bo seen. 

72 



Introduction. 


•eyed man of thirty, who, however, habitually wore a wig, 
generally a chestnut, sometimes a black one, for purposes of 
disguise. 

In social station, and, we may suppose, in dress he was not 
the equal of Lesurques. He had been a cook in the employ 
of the Archbishop of Besan 9 on, and was a habitual criminal. 

Lesurques was a married man, maintaining a mistress and 
living somewhat beyond his means, which were about 12,000 to 
15,000 francs a year, derived from house property. 

The first undoubtedly guilty criminal to be arrested for the 
crime was Courriol, upon whom were found some of the very 
notes entrusted to Excoffon. This man never denied his guilt, 
but he was identified as one of the horsemen by only the ostler 
at Montgeron ; citizen Perraud, who had dined at the inn there 
when the horsemen called; a woman, Santon, who was a servant 
there ; a farmer, Gillet of Lieursaint, who was not positive ; 
Champeau, the innkeeper there, and his wife — six witnesses 
in all. Nine swore to Lesurques as one of the horsemen, and 
purported to take particular notice of him by reason of his 
having a broken spur, the chain of which was mended with 
string; just such a spur was picked up on the road near the 
scene of the murder. Another witness, a woman named Gras- 
sotete, deposed to serving Lesurques at another inn at Mont- 
geron with a pip© and tobacco. This woman and the woman 
Santon recognised Lesurques before he was in custody on any 
charge, accidentally seeing him while waiting in the office of 
juf/t' de la paix , Daubanton, to whom they volunteered their 
evidence. 

One of the deadliest witnesses, w 7 ho also swore to Courriol, 
was Mme. Alfroy, who deposed to seeing Lesurques pass three 
times before her door with Courriol, both being armed. 
Lesurques was wearing plated spurs. It was at the inn of her 
village, Lieursaint, that a man, sworn to as Lesurques by the 
Oiampeaus, borrowed string to mend his plated spur. 

The prosecution proved Lesurques to have been associating 
after the crime with Courriol, of whose guilt there could be 
no doubt, and with Guenot, who was put on his trial but 
established an alibi; they proved that Lesurques had no pass- 
port or identification paper, but that there were found on him 
two of the latter, one in the name of his cousin, Andre, the 
other blank, but bearing the name's of the president and secre- 
tary of the section, so that it could be filled up at any moment. 
He was also proved to have associated after the crime with 
Richard, convicted of receiving the stolen proceeds of the 
robbery, and with Bruer, who, like Gu6not, was acquitted. 

xlgainst this formidable mass of testimony his defence was 
(1) an alibi, (2) his position was such as to render the charge 
incredible. 


73 



Adolf Beck. 


The alibi was that on 26th April, 1796, Lesurques was 
from 9.30 a.m. to 2 p.m. in the company of one Legrand, a 
jeweller, of the Palais Royal, that in the afternoon one Ledru, 
a painter, had dined with him and afterwards walked upon the 
boulevards, one Aldenhoff being also of the party, and that 
one Baudart had supped with the accused the same night at 
his house. Five workmen, whose evidence was scouted by 
the judge, were prepared to swear that on the same day the 
accused gave them a gratuity for papering his walls. Finally 
the mistress of this domesticated man swore that she saw him 
in Paris on this day, and could not be mistaken, as sbe saw 
him every day, but she admitted she did not know the names 
of the months in the revolutionary calendar, or how many days 
there were in each. 1 

Aldenhoff had also transacted business with Legrand on the 
same day, and all the witnesses of repute fixed the date with 
reference to the business done with Legrand. But when he 
passed his day-book up to the judge, it became evident that 
the date originally entered was 27th April, and that some one 
had deliberately altered it. Legrand withdrew his evidence, 
and the defence abandoned their alibi. 

Nor were the defence much happier in their efforts to prove 
that Lesurques was a man of such unblemished character as 
to make the charge incredible. His mistress, who was called 
to prove that this paragon of virtue was never out of her sight, 
lax though sexual morality was in revolutionary France, can 
hardly have assisted in this part of the case. Lesurques, too, 
could give no satisfactory explanation of how he came to associate 
with such admittedly bad characters as Courriol and Richard, 
who were, moreover, in very humble circumstances. 

Further, the unexplained circumstance of his having a carte 
de surete belonging to his cousin and another in blank must 
have told against him. Moreover, M. Delayen, avocat, who 
has explored the case thoroughly and impartially, satisfied him- 
self from the juridical records that he was living extravagantly. 
Mile. Excoffon, indeed, in a frankly unjudicial account of the 
case, says that he was deeply in debt, always changing his 
abode, and that his circumstances suddenly and miraculously 
improved after the crime. 

Thus his conviction is easily understood ; was it entirely 
wrongful? When years later the witnesses, who had so confi- 
dently identified Lesurques as one of the four horsemen, were 
confronted with Dubose, the women Santon and Grossetete, who 
had picked out Lesurques when not in custody, refused to recog- 
nise Dubose or to withdraw their testimony. Gillet, the 

1 26 April was 8 Flor6al and 27 was 9 Flor6al. 

74 



Introduction. 


farmer, and citoyen Perraud, who had dined at the inn at 
Montgeron, and the two Champeaus also would not recognise 
him , 1 nor, at first, would the woman Alfroy, until a fair wig, 
resembling the natural hair of Lesurques, was placed on his 
head in Court, when she collapsed. This woman afterwards 
became mad. 

Well might one doubt that there had been any miscarriage 
of justice were it not for the fact that Courriol, Durochat (the 
mysterious traveller under the name of Laborde in the coach), 
and Roussy, the last to suffer for the crime, all exonerated 
Lesurques. Dubose and Vidal died without making any con- 
fession. Among the nine (or ten, counting one not called at 
the trial) who with greater or less confidence identified Lesur- 
ques, and six were absolutely certain, there were just those 
minor discrepancies about the colour of his riding coat which 
one expects from honest witnesses. Several took minute 
notice of the horseman's spur and its defective chain. The 
jury may well have thought that witnesses, who bestowed so 
much attention upon such a detail, must have observed the man 
himself with corresponding care, but we shall see that in the 
English cases about to be glanced at the witnesses, particularly 
the females, who were most copious and minute as to what 
the accused was wearing and most confident as to his person, 
were most unquestionably wrong. 

Some writers have maintained the guilt of both Dubose, 
who was only convicted as an accessory, and not as a prin- 
cipal, and of Lesurques. Yet another view is based on the 
testimony of the Champeaus, that there were five or even 
six mounted men present at the murder, making seven prin- 
cipals in all, including Durochat, and that some of these wit- 
nesses, such as Alfroy, saw Dubose and others Lesurques. 
The difficulty of this is that three out of the five men, other 
than Lesurques, who suffered death, exonerated him, though, 
as Roussy also exonerated himself, his statement goes for 
little, and it is not impossible that Courriol and Durochat may 
have been influenced by a motive common among criminals, 
who know that their own doom is sealed, to bring discredit 
on the law by proclaiming a judicial murder, and there is 
some reason to think that Courriol, who had no hopes for 
himself, may have looked for some assistance for his family 
from that of Lesurques, if he cleared his memory . 2 


1 These witnesses all agreed that Dubose was smaller, fairer-haired, and 
less pale than Lesurques, and several added that his features and nose 
differed. Dubose's hair, however, was a wig. 

a These alternative views will be found disoussed by two English 
writers, H. B. Irving at pp. 63, 72, and 81 of “ Last Studies in Crimin- 
ology,” and Hugh Childers at p. 226 et seq, of “ Romantic Trials of Three 
Centuries.” 


75 



Adolf Beck. 

2. Wreathock and Others. 

When we examine the English cases, where the defence has 
been one of mistaken identity, we shall find a judicial recogni- 
tion at a very early stage of the necessity of some corrobora- 
tion of the witnesses speaking to the identity; the best sort, 
where the crime has embraced robbery, theft, or obtaining 
goods by false pretences, is the finding of some of the property 
on the accused’s person or in his dwelling. Next to that 
ranks the finding of some particular article of dress in the 
accused’s wardrobe corresponding with what the complainants 
described the wanted man as wearing at the time he was in 
their company or under their observation. 

Last of all, there is evidence, which seems a sort of corro- 
boration, until reflection shows that it only goes to support 
the bona fides of the prosecutors, and is in no way incon- 
sistent with their being honestly mistaken. 

An early example of this sort is to be found in the Old 
Bailey Sessions Paper for December, 1735. Dr. Lancaster, 
a divine, prosecuted five men, of whom two followed the 
reputable calling of attorney, for highway robbery, one Julian 
Brown filling the then common r61e of the ‘ c evidence ” ; 
Brown’s evidence was thought to need corroboration, and he 
having stated that at a certain moment during the attack on 
the doctor that worthy held up his hands, the prosecutor was 
recalled and in all sincerity confirmed the evidence of Brown. 

This was strangely considered as supporting Brown’s evi- 
dence; it did so only to this extent, it showed he was 
there, but not that he was swearing truly as to who were 
there with him as his partners in the guilty enterprise. All 
five men were convicted, and Wreathock went so far as to 
prepare his last dying speech protesting his innocence, but 
after several respites, a tardy reprieve arrived in May, 1736. 1 

In this case there was, without doubt, a genuine highway 
robbery committed upon the person of Dr. Lancaster, as dis- 


1 JR. v. Wreathock, Chamberlain, Bus set., Bird, and Campbell, Decem- 
ber, 1735, Williams’ ‘‘Mayoralty,” O.B.S. Thomas Maccray had been 
prosecuted and acquitted of the same robbery at the July Sessions. The 
prosecutor was the Rev. Nathaniel Lancaster, chaplain to the Prince of 
Wales, a cleric much of the same type as Dodd, who behaved with much 
more humanity in the very similar attack upon him by Griffiths in 1772. 
By getting five men convicted of H.R., Lancaster became entitled to a 
reward of £40 a head. Brown was a worthless Italian, well known to 
De Veil, by whom he had been committed to Newgate. He had the 
impudence to swear he had only known Wreathock seven months, or a 
month before the crime, and that Wreathock, an attorney in good practice 
with a country seat at Fulham, went out on the road with him. Wreathock 
had plenty of evidence to character, as had the others. To that they 
owed their lives. 

70 



Introduction. 


tinct from on© of those manufactured crimes contrived by the 
(t thief-takers ” for the rewards and the “ Tyburn Tickets.” 
The only question was as to the identity of the assailants. 

3. Clinch and Mackly. 

Half a century later, in the Mayoralty of Watson, two- 
men named Clinch and Mackly were tried before Sir Nash 
Grose for the murder of Sidney Fryer, Ann Fryer, the 
deceased’s cousin, swore that a few minutes before 8 p.m. 
on the evening of 7th May, 1797, she was with the deceased 
walking towards Islington. A man appeared, wearing a silk 
handkerchief over the lower part of his face, and when withfti 
four yards of the witness, shot Mr. Fryer with a pistol. He 
disappeared over a stile, after robbing her of her money, and 
another man then appeared, who forced her to part with her 
cloak. The first man was middle-sized, “ rather inclined to be 
lusty ”; the second was a tall man. The witness was taken 
to see three men detained at the Police Office in Bow Street, 
and said they were not the men ; the first man had a very 
broad upper part to his face. She could give no description 
of either man at the time, when taken with her wounded 
cousin tx> a public-house. That was from agitation of mind. 
Before the Coroner it plainly appeared she had said she could 
not describe the men, but thought they were “ both lusty,” 
and that one had a dark-coloured coat on. Both men were 
in custody when she identified them; they were not taken up 
in consequence of any description by her, but on some other 
charge, from which they were discharged. 

Four wftnesses, husband and wife and two young sons, 
named Goddard, described two men as being about the spot 
at the time; all four spoke to one man’s hair being red or 
“ carroty.” This man was much the taller; not one of them 
would say either of the accused was one of the men, but one 
of the young boys said, “ I believe! Clinch to be the man I saw 
in the lane-r-a short, thick-set man.” Mrs. Goddard and one 
of her sons were confident that the short man wore a light 
waistcoat. 

Harper, a police officer, described the identification by 
Miss Fryer as direct and positive; they were sitting among a 
number of other persons detained at a police office. 

None of the stolen property was found on them, and only a 
little money. 

Blackiter, another officer, swore to a conversation, when 
no one else was present, with Clinch when in custody, and the 
latter said it was going to be a bad business for him and 
made other observations, which an experienced officer, with 

77 



Adolf Beck. 


a full knowledge of £40 rewards and so on, could make 
resemble an admission of guilt. 1 

For the defence, Rice, who kept the public-house, said 
Miss Fryer could not tell at all what kind of people they were 
who had murdered and robbed her cousin. She believed they 
were three young men ; as the patrol was then arriving they 
tried to get her to describe the men, that they might be at 
once taken in the neighbourhood. She believed they had 
something over their faces and darkish-coloured coats. She 
at no time described either man as wearing a light waistcoat. 

Sir Nash Grose, after explaining the law to the jury, where 
two men go out to commit felony and one commits murder in 
the course of it, proceeded to ask the jury if they thought 
there was corroboration here. He referred to the evidence of 
the Goddards, but seems not to have cautioned them about 
the statement alleged to have boon made to Blackiter. He 
asked them whether, in the circumstances, they could have 
expected clearer testimony from Miss Fryer. After half an 
hour’s deliberation, the jury brought them both in guilty, 
and they were executed. Years later Burton Wood, executed 
on Kennington Common, and Timms, executed elsewhere, con- 
fessed at the t€ fatal tree ” that they were the murderers. 

Here, it will be seen, there was no corroboration from 
the finding of stolen property, and not nearly enough as to 
person or attire to satisfy all reasonable doubt, unless the 
jury gave weight to the alleged admission to Blackiter. 2 3 

4. R. v. Robinson. 

In 1824 occurred a much more remarkable case., A youth 
of seventeen named Robinson was charged, before Mr. Justice 
Burrough, with larceny from a dwelling-house to the value of 
£4 12s., a capital felony. Lucy Denham swore — “ He is the 
person; I have no doubt or I would not swear it. It was on 
26th May, at 9 to 10 p.m. I ran up to him and accused 
him of it at 8 p.m. on 8th June last in Cleveland Street.”* 
She was, like all the female witnesses against Beck, very minute 
as to the accused's dress. Ann Denham swore — “ I know the 
prisoner; I have seen him pass our door seven or eight times. 

1 Such evidence was admitted on the trial of Wood for the murder of 
Dimmock and of Field and Grey for the murder of Irene Munroe at 
Eastbourne, but the temptation to a police officer, who believes in his 
■case, to warp the statement made to him ever so little is great. For a 
prisoner to say “this is going to be bad for me” is in itself nothing. In 
the Eastbourne case the conversation took place with another prisoner. 

2 See O.B.S.P., Watson’s “Mayoralty,” case 360, and Paris and 
ITonblanque’s “ Medical Jurisprudence,” iii., 144 n. 

3 Cf. Meissonier’s identification. 

78 



Introduction. 


I am positive on my oath as to his person.” H. Fenner said — 
“ I believe he is the person.” 

On evidence of character and an alibi, the prisoner was 
acquitted. He was then charged on another indictment with 
larceny in a shop to the value of ten shillings, another capital 
felony. S. Dolby swore — “ On 1st May, at 11 a.m., prisoner 
came into my shop. I have not the least doubt of his being 
the man.” The missing property, books and the like, were 
not found on the prisoner or at his abode. , Charlotte Dolby 
swore — “ I saw him twice, at 11 a.m. and again at 8 p.m. 
I have no doubt whatever of his being the man. I watched 
him all the time he was in our shop.” The prisoner could not 
in this instance prove an alibi, but relied on his character, and 
on the defence of mistaken identity, urged, of course by him- 
self, since his counsel could not speak for him. He was found 
guilty, but respited. He was next tried before Mr. Justice 
Gaselee 1 for larceny. Elizabeth Clifton swore — “I cannot be 
mistaken. I am certain he is the man.” The hour of the 
offence was 8.30 p.m. on 3rd May. W. Biles swore — u He 
is very much like the man I saw. I might mistake him for 
another person who came into my shop.” In this case Robin- 
son could establish an alibi and was acquitted. 

He was next tried for larceny in a dwelling-house on 8th 
June at 3 p.m. Ann Marchant swore — “ I am positive he is 
the man.” She was, as female witnesses in these cases always 
are, very minute in her description of his clothes. There was 
no alibi available this time, but the prisoner proved, through 
witnesses, that he was never known to wear such clothes. He 
was acquitted. 

He was once more tried for larceny of ten shillings on 29th 
April. Yeck swore — “ I am positive he is the man. He 
had a peculiar twitch with his mouth. He wore a dark olive 
or puce coat, a light waistcoat, a small key to his watch ribbon, 
and light-coloured trousers which I think were cloth.” 

Here again the minute particularity of the witness as to 
dress came to the prisoner’s aid. He proved he never had 
such clothes. Gaselee and Burrough, J.J., recommended 
him for a free pardon in respect of his one conviction. The 
real culprit was soon afterwards caught. 2 

1 Stareleigh of Barddl v. Pickwick . 

a O.B.S.P., Waltham’s “Mayoralty,” cases 1167, 1170, 1209-11. 
Cf. Wharton on “Criminal Evidence, ” s. 808. These cases will be found 
in Wills on “Circumstantial Evidence,” but the late Sir Alfred Wills, 
though dealing with the Gorse Hall murder about to be noticed, nowhere 
mentions Beck’s case. Another resemblance may be noted : just as the 
witness Reece swore to Beck’s peculiar nose — one in a thousand— in 1904, 
so Veok swore to the peculiar twitch of the mouth. Now all .this took 
place in the face of the jury who eould see and judge for themselves. 

s 79 



Adolf Beck. 


Here we at once see resemblances to Beck’s case. An 
innocent man is stopped in the street by a bond fide and con- 
fident prosecutrix. The police, having the man in custody, 
naturally bring other folk, who complain of having been robbed, 
to see him. They pick him out with varying degrees of 
confidence, the women, however, having no doubts and only 
becoming more cocksure under cross-examination; his clothes 
are minutely described by several witnesses. Here fate is as 
kind to Robinson as it was harsh to Beck. 

Robinson had not such clothes; Beck wore the same white 
vest slip and spats, the same patent boots and frock coat, as 
“ Smith.” Moreover, unhappily, he had no alibi, and his 
witnesses to character could only damn him by saying he had 
known reputable people many years before, but they could say 
nothing of him now. 

If Robinson had had the same sort of wardrobe as his double, 
if he had been unable on any occasion to prove an alibi, if his 
character had not been sworn to by persons with recent know- 
ledge of him, who can doubt but that he would have been 
hanged 1 


5. Edmund Pook. 

The mysterious case may here be mentioned of Edmund 
Pook, tried in July, 1871, for the murder of Jane Maria Clousen 
on the preceding 25th April. It will be found at large in the 
O.B. Sess. Papers, vol. 74, pp. 245-309. Sir John Coleridge, 
S.G., Poland, Archibald, and Beasley were for .the Crown; 
Huddleston, Q.C., Harrington, and Besley for the defence. The 
judge was Sir William Bovill, L.C.J., of the C.P. A very con- 
densed report of the case, favourable to Pook, will be found in 
“ Wills on Circumstantial Evidence ” (1912), pp. 299-301. 

The deceased girl was seventeen years old, and had been 
in the employ of the prisoner’s father at Greenwich, where the 
prisoner also lived. She left "that service on 11th April, being 
then about two months pregnant. She was seen alive at 6.37 
in the High Street, Deptford, by Mrs. Fanny Hamilton, to 
whom she said that she was on her way to meet the prisoner. 
A Miss Prosser was also informed on Sunday, 23rd April, of 
this appointment with Pook, by whom the deceased girl told 
the witness she was in trouble. 1 This material evidence, re- 
futing the prisoner’s alibi and establishing motive, was ruled 

*The Timet , 5th May, 1871, 11a. As Bovill, C.J.* pointed out, if this 
Mrs. Hamilton were correct, Laysell, who Bpoke of seeing prisoner at a 
spot 3 to 4 miles off at 6.50, must obviously be wrong. 

80 



Introduction 


inadmissible, as not part of the res gestae, by Bovill, C.J., on 
Huddleston's objection. i 

At 4.15 a.m. on 2Gth April Jane Clousen was found dying in 
Kidbrook Lane with her head beaten in. Mr. Harris, of Guy’s 
Hospital, described the wounds, and stated that she was two 
months advanced in pregnancy. 2 

On 27th April a hammer, with bloodstains and adherent 
hair, was found near the scene of the murder, by a witness, T. 
Brown, in the direction of the house of Pook. A metal 
whistle, similar to one the prisoner was proved to use, was also 
found quite near. 

Sparshott, an ironmonger, proved that the prisoner called 
at his shop in Deptford about 8.30 p.m. on 24th April, to 
purchase a small axe for some theatricals ; the prisoner rejected 
the one shown as too dear, and was referred to a Mr. Thomas. 
There was plenty of gas burning, and Sparshott picked out 
the prisoner at the station among a dozen men. Prisoner wore 
a dark coat and a black, soft-crowned hat. 

Witness was doubtful if he described prisoner’s trousers 
as light or not. He did not know prisoner previously. 

Mrs. Sparshott, his wife, never saw the man’s face, but 
noticed his “ round, little hat.” 

Renneson, fourteen years old, employed by Sparshott, 
swore the man wore lightish trousers, a coat with hip pockets, 
and a little round black hat, with a rather wide brim. 

Alfred Sparshott, son, described the hat as round, black, 
tumbled in at the crown, but could not describe the man, 
and described the trousers as light. 

Perrin, 3 comedian, had known Pook three or four years, 
and saw him come on the night in question from Sparshott’s 
shop, wearing a billycock hat, a soft one, about 7.45 p.m. 
Prisoner asked witness to have a drink, but witness had to 
catch a train at 8.3 p.m. 

Cross-examined, he said he had been twice fined, but the 
second time he served the alternative fourteen days; might 
have been convicted at other times. Did not say, “ I don't 
know. I think that is the man.” Said “ That is the man, 
to the best of my belief.” His credit was much shattered in 
cross-examination . 


J O.B. Sess. Papers 74, p. 250. Of course Bovill, C.J., wivb quite 
right in law. 

*The Times, 5th May, 1871, 11 a. P.C. Gunn, who found her, testi- 
fied that she was only able to say — “ Oh, my poor head. . . . Let me 

die,” before lapsing into unconsciousness, from which she never recovered. 
This indicates a much later hour for (he assault than the prosecution 
relied on. 

9 The jury stopped Huddleston for the defence, saying they disbelieved 
Perrin. 


o 


81 



Adolf Beck. 

Kirkby, paperhanger and decorator, confirmed Perrin’s 
account of his movements. 

Sellis confirmed last witness. 

Lydia Cavell noticed a young man, attired in light trousers, 
a dark coat, and a low, round, dark hat come into Thomas’s 
shop some time after 8 p.m. on 24th April. 

Mrs. Thomas proved the sale of a hammer like that pro- 
duced on 24th April. 

Mr. Thomas gave similar evidence ; neither could identify 
Pook.i 

Norton, coachman, saw a young man and woman in Kid- 
brook Lane on 25th April. Then heard two or three screams, 
and saw the man running fast towards Kidbrook. He wore 
a dark coat. Witness would not know him. Thought the 
screams were uttered in fun, not in anguish. 

Louisa Putnam was with last witness. She said the man 
was dressed in dark clothes and a low hat. 

Cronk, gasfitter, saw a young man and woman in Kid- 
brook Lane. Heard the woman say, “ Lot me go.” Thought 
she added “ Charley.” The man had a dark frock-coat 
and billycock hat. Witness picked the prisoner out among 
fifteen or twenty men. 

P.C. Ovens found a common metal whistle fifteen yards 
from the body at 9 a.m. on 26th April. He reported it to the 
station sergeant. It was not entered in the station book 
of things found. 

P.S. Wills received the whistle from last witness at 11 
a.m. on 26th April. Did not know why it was not entered 
in the occurrence book. 

P.C. Tilbrook did not enter the whistle as he considered 
it of no importance. He knew it was found near the scene 
of the murder, but did not connect it with it, 

P.S. Haynes corroborated him. 

D.I. Mulvany gave further evidence of little importance 
as to this. It was a common whistle. 1 2 


1 Wills says the defence called the only purchaser of a hammer at the 
shop that day, and in the Times of 17th July, 1871, 12 a, Bovill, C.J., is 
reported as saying — “It now appeared abundantly that it was a boy 
named Elliott who bought the hammer to which Conway referred. ” 
(Conway was called before the magistrate, but abandoned by the Crown 
at the trial.) Elliott proved buying a hammer, which he had still got, on 
which were his initials on 22nd April. 

2 Mulvany had given at an early stage the formal evidence of arrest, 
Ac. The prisoner at once disclosed his alibi as to 24th April — that he was 
in Lewisham with his brother, and that he had an appointment to meet a 
lady there on the 25th It is to be noted that Huddleston did not put it 
to Miss Durnford that she was the young lady. Prisoner also said at once 
that he had seen Fange, his father’s boy, delivering a parcel at Lewisham 
about 8 p.m. on 24th April. 



Introduction. 

Alice Durnford knew the prisoner. She had seen him 
use a whistle “ something like " the one produced. He also 
had a bone whistle. She was not expecting to meet the 
prisoner before Thursday, 27th April. 

John Barnes, pawnbroker, knew prisoner to speak to and 
saw him on 25th April at the corner of Circus Street, .Green- 
wich, about 9 p.m. He did not speak to him. 

Priscilla Billington was with last witness and confirmed 
him. She knew Pook by sight. He was running, and red in 
the face. 

Ellen Playne 1 had known prisoner eighteen months. She 
saw him about 8.30 or 8.45 on 25th April in Royal Hill, 2 
running. He told her he had run from Lewisham Road. 
She knew prisoner had fits. 

Ann Billington confirmed the last witness, biffc put the 
time at 8 to 8.30. Prisoner asked for a brush to 
brush the mud off his clothes. The streets were very dry 
indeed. 

Dixon, who knew the prisoner, saw the prisoner leave 
Mrs. Playne's shop about 9.15 to 9.20. 

Layzell only knew prisoner by sight, and saw him with a 
young woman in Kidbrook Lane about 6.50 on 25th April. 
He passed him quite close. Witness picked him out at the 
station. Witness also gave evidence as to the finding of a 
blood-stained duster. Whether it was really blood was never 
proved, nor was it connected with the prisoner. 

Mary Love and Alice Langley proved that prisoner told 
them on 23rd April that he was going up to London to sing on 
25th April, which was untrue. The prisoner had been walk- 
ing out witK the latter. 

Alice Wicks knew the prisoner and that he had been court- 
ing Miss Dumford. He asked her to give Miss Durnford a 
message to meet him on Thursday, 27th April. He was 
wearing a dark moustache, very perceptible. 

Caija, surveyor, proved that it was 3 miles 5 furlongs 
from Douglas Street, Deptford, to the scene of the murder 
in Kidbrook Lane, and 2 miles 5£ furlongs thence to prisoner's 
home. 

Dr. Letheby examined the prisoner's clothing consisting 
of very dark trousers, a shirt, and a wide-awake hat. He 
found a little blood on the trousers and a human hair, 7J in. 
long. It was exactly the same colour as deceased's hair. 


2 The identification of the next three witnesses was not disputed. 
Prisoner, in Pook v. Croaland , explained that he ran as he felt a fit 
coining on. 

2 Royal Hill adjoins Circus Street. 


83 



Adolf Beck 


Blood was also observed on the shirt and hat, but none on the 
boots, coat, or the brush used at Mrs. Playne’s. It was 
mammalian blood. 1 

That was the case for the Crown. 

Ebenezer Pook, the prisoner’s father, said he dismissed 
deceased for her dirty habits. His son was constantly sub- 
ject to fits and seldom allowed out of sight. He did not 
have affairs with women. 

Prisoner denied to D.I. Mulvany 2 writing to the deceased. 
He told him he had spent the evening of 24th April with his 
brother, and of 25th April at Lewisham, returning at 9 p.m., 
a fact confirmed by witness’s elder son. Prisoner explained 
the blood on his wristbands by saying it was due to washing 
without turning up his sleeves. His fits caused him to bite 
his tongue and to bleed. He never noticed his son with a 
moustache. 

Mrs. Pook never saw any intimacy between her son and 
deceased; he had no light trousers. 

T. B. Pook, prisoner’s brother, gave evidence of being with 
prisoner all the evening of 24th April. He denied the evi- 
dence of Sparshott. They never went near Deptford. Prisoner 
had no light trousers. Prisoner cut his finger and it bled 
very much on 14th April. He had a fit on 6th April, and bit 
his tongue and bled very much. Prisoner shaved his upper 
lip, it could not be called a moustache, on 22nd April. He 
was not hot and excited on his return at 9 p.m. on 25th 
April. Witness saw the whistle on 23rd April, and found it 
again, when the police produced a whistle before the magistrate. 

Harriet Chaplin, cousin, corroborated last witness as to 
prisoner’s movements on 24th April, and the cutting of his 
finger on 14th April. Never saw any intimacy between 
prisoner and deceased. 

Collins, in Mr. Pook’s employ, never saw any intimacy 
between prisoner and deceased. 

John Fange, a boy in Mr. Pook’s employ, proved that he 
took a parcel to Lewisham for his master about 8 p.m. on 24th 
April, confirming the prisoner’s statement on arrest to D.I 
Mulvany. 

John Eagle saw the prisoner about 8 p.m. on 25th April, in 
Bridge Place, Lewisham. He identified him by a photograph. 
He did not know him before. Witness had partially lost the 
sight of his right eye. 


*At that date human could not be distinguished from mammalian 
blood. 

9 Mulvany was warmly censured by Bovill, C.J., for not taking down 
accused ’8 denial of relations with deceased. 

84 




Introduction 


Mary Ann Eagle, wife of the last witness, corroborated him. 
The young man waited on the bridge a long time, perhaps 
three-quarters of an hour. 1 

William Douglas, decorator, confirmed the witness. He 
picked out the prisoner from a number of photographs. He 
had seen him before. 

Eliza Merritt knew prisoner well, and confirmed the above 
witnesses. She told her mother directly she heard Pook waa 
charged. 

Edward Mackenzie confirmed Mr. Pook’e evidence as to 
the blood on prisoner’s wristbands. 

Charles Ikey swore that Layzell told him he had never 
seen Pook. 

llenry Catt was called to rebut Eagle. 

Matthew Crawford swore that Sparshott said to him that to 
the best of his belief the man who came about the axe had 
light clothes on. lie could not swear to him. 

There was evidence of prisoner’s good character. 

The prisoner was found not guilty, and in the following 
February ho brought several libel actions, Pook v. Cropland 
and Pook v. HartnolU which will be found reported in the 
Times of 2nd, 3rd, and 5th February, 1872. He recovered 
£50 damages and costs in the first case, and took a verdict for 
40s. and costs by consent in the second. Serjeant Parry cross- 
examined him very strongly, and referred to the excluded evi- 
dence of Mrs. Holloway and Miss Prosser, and he claimed the 
right, on the authority of Lord Campbell’s dictum in E. v. 
Palmer (5 E. & B. 1029) to go behind a verdict of not guilty 
in a criminal trial and examine the question anew. Lord 
Chief Baron •Kelly said that if any one did this he must do so 
fairly, and in the libel complained of all that was in the 
prisoner’s favour was suppressed. This case involves the sup- 
position that several people, who knew Pook, were mistaken 
as to hisi identity at the hour of twilight on the night of the 
murder. But this observation applies alike to witnesses for 
the Crown and the defence. 

6. Lewis and Brady. 

A much more modern case hero calls for examination. The 
Daily Mail , which in January, 1907, had devoted some space 
to the case of George Edalji, the young Birmingham solicitor, 
who had just received a free pardon in respect of his conviction 


XU 1 Wills suggests he was waiting for Miss Durnford, and that she did 
not turn up. This does not appear in her evidence, and it was not put to 
her in cross-examination. 


85 



Adolf Beck 


for the Great Wyrley cattle mannings, published on the 30th 
of that month a strong article on the case of George II. W. 
Lewis, who had recently been sentenced by Sir Ralph Littler 
at the Middlesex Guildhall sessions to three years’ penal servi- 
tude for uttering a forged cheque for two pounds. He had 
been identified by Mr. Roland Turner, manager to Messrs. 
Mainprice and Lord of Kilburn, by Millie Marsh, domestic 
servant, and by Edith Read, her fellow-servant, as a person 
who had uttered a cheque purporting to be drawn by Soloman 
Barrett. Turner’s identification was not of the most satis- 
factory kind. The cheque came from a book, which had been 
issued to Lewis, and the late Divisional Detective-Inspector Cole 
took Mr. Turner to the house where Lewis lived. Turner at 
once recognised him. Marsh, Pead, and Turner afterwards 
picked him out when in custody. After receiving sentence 
in November, 1906, Lewis, whose sentence had been reduced 
by Mr. Gladstone, the Homo Secretary, 1 was liberated in con- 
sequence of the arrest and confession of Duncan Brady, who 
was twenty-three years of age, or four years younger than Lewis. 
Brady’s story was that Lewis, whom he knew' well, gave him 
the cheque, which he uttered, and that they shared the pro- 
ceeds. Marsh withdrew her evidence against Lewis, and said 
that Brady, with whom she had been intimate, was the man. 

Marsh was convicted of perjury before Sir Albert Bosanquet 
at the Old Bailey. Brady and Lewis, who warmly denied 
Brady’s story of their joint guilt and said that, there being 
only two shillings to his credit at the bank, he gave the cheque 
book to one Stacey to return to the manager and never knew 
it was not returned, were both called, and the jury saw them 
on Marsh’s trial, and, being invited by the Comrfion Serjeant 
to say whether they thought she might have made a bond, fide 
mistake, the men being somewhat alike, found her guilty. 

Her identification, being found to be maid fide , goes for 
nothing; that of Mr. Turner is partially vitiated by the fact 
that Cole took him up to the house where he knew Lewis 


*Now Lord Gladstone. In Jones v. Donallan {Times, 4th December, 
1923), Brady gave the following evidence as to the matter: — “Duncan 
Brady denied that he had been convicted of perjury. He described 
alleged attempts by the plaintiff to get a settlement and to give him a 
share of the proceeds. Cross-examined — He was mixed up in the Millie 
Marsh case, when a man named Lewis was sent to penal servitude for 
passing worthless cheques, on the evidence of a girl named Marsh, He 
(the witness) subsequently went to gaol for that offence and Lewis was 
pardoned. He had not. suborned Marsh ; he and Lewis were jointly 
concerned, but he accepted responsibility in the particular instance for 
which Lewis was convicted. Marsh might easily mistake Lewis for him 
(the witness) ; they were as alike as twins. He had been convicted on 
another occasion.” 

86 



Introduction. 

would be found, thus inclining to witness to be biassed in his 
expression of opinion. It is very like Pauline Scott’s identi- 
fication when in the company of Detective Inspector Ward. 
Pead, a young servant girl, who doubtless talked- the case over 
with Marsh, may have been influenced by her. Lewis made 
the same allegations against Cole’s behaviour during the 
identification process at the station that Beck had made against 
Waldoclc and Ward, saying that he indicated him among the 
other men to the witnesses. It is only fair to add, Mr. Cole 
being dead, that, as has been seen, in Beck’s case Mr. Dutton 
did not endorse in the slightest degree what Beck alleged. 1 

Without attempting to decide whether Brady or Lewis 
was speaking the truth, we see that here tho police had in- 
formation that a clean-shaven, nice-looking, middle-class 
young man had been forging and uttering cheques. The 
book was easily traced to Lewis. 

The defrauded party is taken to where Lewis lives, identi- 
fication and conviction follow. Yet the wrong man, whether 
wholly irreproachable in the matter or not, is convicted of 
uttering on the date assigned, 29th September, at the place 
alleged — Ki lburn . 2 

7. The Gorse Hall Mystery. 

Yet more remarkable was the Gorse Hall mystery of 
1909-10. 3 The Times for the 8th December, 1909, while 
recording on page 11 the death of Adolf Beck, reported on 
another page the opening stage in the unsolved mystery of 
the murder of Mr. G. H. Storrs of Gorse Hall. On 3rd 
November that paper had published the following description 
of the man wanted for that murder committed on the night 
of the first of the month : — * ‘ About twenty-five to twenty- 
seven years of ago, 5 ft. 6 in. to 5 ft. 8 in. in height, thin 
features, very fair to pale complexion, slight moustache, very 
light, has the appearance of a working man.” A reward of 
£100 was offered for such evidence as should lead to the con- 
viction of the murderer. 

On 7th December, one Cornelius Howard, aged thirty-one, 


1 A full report of the trial of Marsh will be found in the Times, 
March 7-1 1, 1907. 

2 Lewis had an alibi as to this place and date, but he did not disclose it 
at the Police Court, with the result that Sir Ralph Littler cautioned the 
jury as to accepting it. When asked in cross-examination upon Marsh’s 
trial how he spelt Solomon, Lewis replied, “Solo man,” and that he 
always spelt it that way. 

3 Some account of this case, unlike the preceding, will be found in 
“ Wills on Circumstantial Evidence.” 


87 



Adolf Beck 


was charged with the murder. It may here be said that a 
shot had been fired near the hall on 10th September, seven 
weeks before the murder, and this and perhaps some threats 
had so alarmed Mr. Storrs that he asked the Chester County 
Constabulary to afford him protection, which they did, sur- 
rounding the hall with a picket. 

The murder was committed in the presence of the 
deceased's wife and niece, and the murderer was also seen by 
two female domestic servants ; anything like burglary was thus 
excluded by the circumstances of the crime. Everything 
indicated a desire to gratify a desire for vengeance at almost 
any risk, the victim being murdered under the eyes of his 
family, in his own house, full of servants and surrounded by 
police. 

The murderer can have been no stranger to Mr. Storrs or 
to his house and domestic arrangements. The deceased's 
coachman had committed suicide soon after the inquest opened, 
but his death was attributed to worry over his master’s fate, 
and, of course, he was not the assailant as lie must have 
been perfectly known to the household. 

On 18th November, Howard, who was a distent cousin of 
Mr. Storrs and who was in custody on another charge, was 
put up for identification with a number of other men. The 
two ladies and the two maids attended the station. The 
niece swore at the Police Court, “ This is the man I saw 
at Gorse Hall on 1st November, and identified on 18th Novem- 
ber." 

The widow was less positive; she testified “ This man is 
the man most like the man of those that were put up." The 
cook swore “ To the best of my belief, he is the man." 1 

At the Police Court counsel said that the identification 
/would point most strongly to the prisoner being the man," 
and the Times stated that Miss Lindley, the niece, gave her 
evidence “ emphatically." 

Howard was committed for trial before Sir William Pick- 
ford, B. F. Williams, lv.C., leading for the Crown; he was 
the only counsel to appear in this and the ensuing trial for 
this murder, and he stated at the second trial that Howard 
and Wilde remarkably resembled each other. 

It appeared in evidence that the accused was a somewhat 
unfortunate cousin of the deceased, that he had fallen on evil 
times, whereas the deceased had prospered, but it did not 
appear that the two men had had any communication for a 
long time or that the accused owed Mr. Storrs a grudge. As 

1 From the Times of 20th November, 4 f, it seems that both servants 
identified Howard, but that Mrs. Storrs failed to pick him out. 

88 



Introduction 


haa been said, Howard was in custody when identified, and 
explained certain cuts, &c., as having been sustained in the 
course of committing the felony, for which he was in custody. 

He produced an alibi for the night of 1st November, viz., 
that he was playing dominoes at a public-house at Hudders- 
field, and this was corroborated by the licensee, who remem- 
bered the day of the week, because it was election day. 

At the trial, Mary Evans, servant, swore that “ she was 
not able to identify any of them till the last time she went 
to the station. She then picked out the man.” (Howard, of 
course, had been one of the men each time.) Eliza Cooper, 
servant, swore “ She failed to identify any one till she 
saw the last batch of men. She then picked the prisoner 
out.” 

Mrs. Storrs testified that “ she picked out two men, the 
prisoner and another.” 

Miss Lindley admitted that she did not identify Howard 
when placed among the first twenty men, of whom he was 
one. The Chief Constable gave his evidence in a very fair 
manner; he said that the man Mrs. Storrs picked out as 
most like the murderer was not Howard. Mr. Justice Pick- 
ford, in summing up, said the real question was whether the 
eye-witnesses were right in identifying Howard as Mr. Storrs’ 
assailant. After twenty minutes’ deliberation, the jury 
returned a verdict of not guilty. 1 

Later in the year Mark Wilde was identified by the same 
women who gave evidence against Howard as the murderer. 

At his trial before Sir Thomas Horridge Mary Evans swore 
that she picked him out from among thirteen men, but admitted 
she had picked out Howard before. Eliza Cooper said that 
Howard and Wilde were so alike that one might pass for the 
other. Howard then, at counsel’s request, stepped beside the 
man in the dock, when the witness repealed that she t hought 
the men very much alike. 

A Liverpool police constable identified the revolver taken 
from the murderer by Mrs. Storrs at Corse Hall as an American 
one of unusual type the prisoner had had when a fellow soldier 
of his in the Army. A corporal in the Worcester regiment 
minutely identified the revolver as the prisoner’s. 

Mary Evans “ could not be positive.” Mrs. Storrs said — 
“ The prisoner was like the man.” Eliza Cooper swore that 
“ the prisoner and Howard were like the man.” The prisoner 
had an alibi as to the night when the pistol shot was heard 
near the hall, but none as to the night of the murder; it did 
not appear that he knew the deceased. 

1 The Timttj 4th March, 1910, 4 f. 

89 



Adolf Beck 


The jury were fifty minutes out of Court before returning 
with a verdict of not guilty. 1 

The next case to claim attention is one which cannot strictly 
be taken as a genuine case of mistaken identity, inasmuch as 
no Secretary of State for Scotland has seen his way to liberate 
the convict. 

8. Oscar Slater. 

Oscar Slater was a German Jew, and he was said to have 
followed that most degrading of all callings — living on women 
practising “the oldest profession in the world.” 2 He was 
convicted in 1909 by a majority verdict of nine against six 
of the murder of Miss Marion Gilchrist, an old lady of means, 
who had . valuable jewellery in her house in Queen's Terrace, 
Glasgow r . 

It is proposed here to examine briefly the evidence of the 
witnesses who identified Slater as the man seen on several occa- 
sions watching the house where the deceased lived and wherein 
she was murdered, and of those witnesses who identified him as 
a man seen running away from the direction of that house after 
the murder and the circumstances relied on as corroborating 
those respective identifications. 

First as to the twelve witnesses who identified the accused 
as the man seen watching the house. Two notices had been 
issued respecting the murder; one was only to the police; the 
other, dated 31st December, 1908, ten days after the murder, 
was addressed to the public, and it offered a £200 reward to 
any one giving such information as should lead to the convic- 
tion of tlie person or persons who committed the crime. 

The police notice published a description of £wo wanted 
men — (1) A man from twenty-five to thirty years of age, 5 feet 
7 or 8 inches in height, thought to be clean shaven, wore a 
long grey overcoat and dark cap ; (2) a man from twenty-eight 

*The Times [25th and 26th October, 41 and 7th September, 3 f. I 
entertain very little doubt that each verdict was not only proper in the 
circumstances, but a true verdict insooth. The murderer took his life in 
his hand — not for robbery or burglary, which were impossible in the 
circumstances he had himself created — but to gratify an imperative desire 
for revenge for some real or supposed wrong done him by the dead man, 
and there was no suggestion that Howard or Wilde cherished such a 
feeling. Miss Lindley also identified a knife produced, belonging to the 
prisoner, as very like one in the hands of the murderer. There was loud 
applause in Court on tho verdict being returned. The revolver, which tho 
murderer had allowed Mrs. Storrs to take from him, was identified as 
Wilde’s in August. Howard, as well as Wilde, had an alibi as to the day 
of the pistol shot, 10th September, 1909. 

2 See cross-examination of Hugh Cameron, p. 156, Notable Trials 
Series , also evidence of Catherine Schmalz passim ; and the Lord 
Advocate’s address to the jury. 

90 



Introduction. 

to thirty years of age, tall and thin, clean shaven, nose slightly 
turned to one side, thought to be the right side, wore a fawn- 
coloured overcoat, believed to be waterproof, dark trousers, 
tweed cloth hat of the latest make, and believed to be dark in 
colour, and brown boots. 1 

A practically identical description of the second of these 
men appeared in the Glasgow evening newspapers of 25th 
December, the day the police notice was circulated, except that 
the hat was described more minutely as a Donegal hat. 2 

The man first described was a man seen by the witnesses 
Adams and Lambie; the second was the man seen running 
away by the girl Barrowman. These witnesses’ statements will 
be noted in due course. 

The witnesses identifying the watcher were (1) Mrs. 
M'Haffie, who lived almost opposite Miss Gilchrist, in the same 
street, but a little to the south-east, on the other side of 
the street. 3 She saw a man loitering about on five or six 
occasions ; he was dark, had a moustache, and wore an overcoat, 
not a waterproof, check trousers, spats, and a black bowler 
hat. She noticed nothing peculiar about his nose. He 
did not carry himself well, but slouched along. Her daughter 
Margaret gave similar evidence, but said that twice the man 
was wearing a black morning coat instead of an overcoat. In 
the March following the murder she had told the prisoner’s 
agent that she was not quite sure the prisoner was the man ; 
only that, there was some resemblance. At the trial, after 
thinking it over, she came to the conclusion he was the man. 
The age of this witness is not stated; her father shoed horses. 

Her sister Anne spoke to seeing a man once like the prisoner ; 
he spoke t5 her, but without a foreign accent. (Slater spoke 
and wrote very broken English.) Madge M'Haffie, a niece of 
Mrs. M'Haffie, described two occasions before the murder when 
she was at her aunt’s and saw a man “who wore black- 
checked trousers, a fawn overcoat, a black bowler hat, and fawn 
gaiters. 4 . . . The prisoner was like the man.” Examined 

by the Lord Advocate — “ Were you quite sure about him or 
not?” — “No, he was just like him.” 5 

1 Slater was thirty-eight, and looked every day of it. 

a It will he apparent that Lambie and Barrowman, if they really 
observed anything at all with precision, saw two different men. Christmas 
day is not a festival in Scotland. 

3 1 understand Queen’s Terrace to be a part or continuation of West 
Princes Street. 

4 As he wore trousers, she must mean spats. 

8 By “just,** as appears from the context, she means “merely,” not 
“exactly.” Anne M‘Haffie stated that the stranger asked for a Mr. 
Anderson. Slater passed at times by that name. 


91 



Adolf Beck. 

C. Walker, a Glasgow policeman, was on duty at the end 
of December, 1908, on the north-west side (the opposite side 
to Miss Gilchrist's house) of West Princes Street, and on 
the first of the month, at about a quarter before 6 p.m., 
he saw a man standing opposite the deceased's house; he 
took a good look at him. “ I thought I knew the man, and 
I waved to him. I saw he was not the man." Three nights 
later he met the same man forty or fifty yards further 
towards the south-east, again on the opposite side of the street. 
“ I did not look at him. I simply recognised him as the man 
I had mistaken." A fortnight later, witness again saw the 
man at a quarter before seven, this time on the same side 
as the house, but at the corner of West Princes Street and St. 
George's Road, about seventy-five yards from the house. 
^He had no difficulty at all in picking Slater out as the man, 
when he saw him in custody. 

The man for whom witness mistook Slater was a Mr. 
Paradise, foreign looking, with a dark complexion and 
moustache. The witness could see the man distinctly, owing 
to bright electric lights. Cross-examined — t€ What did you 
identify him by? " — “ I just thought lie resembled the 
man." 

Euphemia Cunningham swore that on 14th December, when 
going home past West Princes Street for her dinner, ap- 
parently about one o’clock, she saw a man at the corner of 
Queen's Crescent and West Princes Street, about 111 yards 
from the house. On the three following days, at the same 
time and place, she saw the same man. Ilis appearance was 
foreign, very dark, w r ith a sallow complexion and heavy fea- 
tures. She thought he was clean shaven. He hAd a dark 
tweed coat and a green peaked cap. She was always on the 
same side of the pavement when she saw the man. She 
always saw the left side of his face, and noticed no peculiarity 
about the nose. She picked out Slater in custody as the 
man. The caps produced as Slater's were not the same as the 
cap she saw; he must have been wearing a green cap not 
shown to witness. His ears stuck out, and he had heavy 
jaw bones. What she saw w r as more the side and back of the 
head. 

W. Campbell was with the last witness on these occasions, 
and he corroborated her to this extent : prisoner w r as like the 
man he saw; there was a general resemblance. 

On 20th December, the day before the murder, at ’7.40 
p.m., II. Bryson was passing Miss Gilchrist's house, which 
he knew well; he saw a man standing in the entry of the 
house. The witness “ took a very good look at him." The 


02 



Introduction. 


tnnn moved off some paces. He was dressed in a black coat 
and vest, and had a black “ boat " (?) hat on. Nothing 
peculiar about his gait or walk. Shown a A photograph of two 
men, witness picked out that of Slater gfi the man he saw, 
and identified him at the station. Slightly foreign appearance 
and sallow complexion. 

The man wore no overcoat. There were several foreign- 
looking men put up for identification with Slater with sallow 
faces and dark moustaches, at least four. Witness's wife, 
who was with him that night, could not recollect seeing any 
man at the entry of the house. 

On the same day, A. Nairn waited fully five minutes for 
his family in West Princes Street, 120 yards from the house, 
at about 9.15 p.m. He saw a man on the opposite, or north, 
side of the street, apparently waiting for some one, about v 
thirteen jrards from witness, wearing a light overcoat; he 
was broad shouldered, a little long in the neck, and had black 
hair. He wore a motor cap, with the flaps up. Witness 
identified Slater as the man. “ I am positive he is the man," 
he added. He never saw the man's face; he had never gone 
up behind a man and clapped him on the shoulder as a friend 
and found he was mistaken. He would not go the length of 
being positive. 

A. Gillies, on 15th, 16th, and 17th December, saw a man 
standing in the close or entry to his house, opposite Miss Gil- 
christ's, at about a quarter to six. He wore a long fawn coat 
and a cap, was sallow, with dark hair and clean-shaven, 
about 5 ft. 8 in. in height. Prisoner resembled the man, 
but he would not say he was the man. 

F. Brifin, a Glasgow constable, also gave evidence that he 
once saw Slater on a night he could not fix, leaning against 
a railing in St. George's Road a few yards from the corner of 
West Princes Street; he knew him by sight, and took a good 
look at him, thinking he was drunk. This constable, like 
Walker, “ identified " Slater, when standing among their 
brother officers in plain clothes. Yet Scots are supposed to 
be without humour! 

The next witness to the identity of Slater as the watcher 
was a most important one. Mrs. Rowena Adams or Liddell 
gave evidence that she reached her house at 14 Queen's Ter- 
race at five minutes to seven on the night of the murder. 
She saw a dark form leaning against the railing. “ I gave 
him a good stare — almost a rude stare — and I took in the 
face entirely, except that I did not see his eyes. He had 
a long nose, with a most peculiar dip from here (pointing to 
the bridge of the nose). You would not see that dip among 


93 



Adolf Beck. 


thousands. 1 He had a very clear complexion, not sallow 
. . . but something of an ivory colour. He was very 

dark, clean-shaven, and very broad in this part of the head 
(pointing to the cheekbone or temple).” 

Although it was quite dark, save for the street lamps, 
the witness went on to describe with the utmost minuteness 
the hem of the man's tweed overcoat, though as to the colour 
of it she gave unsatisfactory replies. As to her recognition, 
she said, after looking at the man in the dock, “ I do believe 
— I am afraid he was there — he was there at any rate.” Her 
evidence, as it reads in print, conveys an impression that the 
witness, from affectation and a sense of her importance in 
her then surroundings, was thoroughly undependable. 2 

This was the last witness to identify the watcher. As to the 
evidence of Bryson and Nairn, the defence sought to prove 
an alibi by the women Antoine, on whose’ immoral earnings, 
it was said, Slater lived, and Schmalz, their maid. Reid, a 
friend, corroborated them, and added that on 20th December 
Slater had a very noticeable black moustache. 

As to the other witnesses, no alibi was eet up in contra- 
diction of them. But from Slater's alleged profession of 
souteneur , he would hardly be likely to get witnesses of credit; 
and he may, as such people do, have lounged much at street 
corners, watching to see what fortune attended the peregrina- 
tions of his mademoiselle. 

The next class of witnesses to identity bore much more 
strongly against the prisoner; they were those who swore to 
him as a man seen running away from 15 West Princes Street 
just after the murder. Of these, the most important was 
Anne Lambie, the deceased's servant. 

The description she first gave of the man she saw leav- 
ing the house was “ between twenty-five and thirty, 5 ft. 8 
or 9 in. in height, slim build, dark hair, clean-shaven, dressed 
in light grey overcoat and dark cloth cap; cannot be further 
described.” 3 

When this witness, who was taken with Barrowman and 
Adams to America for the extradition proceedings, saw Slater 


1 Cf. Rose Reece on the second trial of Beck — “His nose is most 
peculiar, and is one I could pick out of a thousand.” This takes place 
while the man is before the jury in the dock. Not a word is said to the 
police at the station about a nose in a thousand. 

2 See her evidence in the Notable Trials Series, 2nd ed., pp. 85-88. In 
the dark she is able to see that the man’s coat was not “ whafc you would 
call a gentleman’s waterproof,” although it might have been waterproof. 
When she saw this German adventurer in “his beautiful blue coat” he 
seemed a “fine figure of a man.” 

8 The witness Liddell described the man at first as frail; Slater was 
thick set and stocky. 

94 



Introduction. 


passing along a corridor, apparently not in custody, in the 
U.S.A. District Court, she and the girl Barrowinan simul- 
taneously said — “ That is the man.” The men with him in 
no way resembled the wanted man ; Inspector Pyper was with 
the girls at the time, but they stated that they were not 
prepared to see Slater pass. 

Examined by the Lord Advocate, she said — “ The man when 
he passed me coming down the stairs at 15 West Princes Street 
was very close to me. I noticed he held his head down. 

.. I got a good look at him. He had nothing in his 
hand. He was wearing a dark cap, a fawn overcoat, and 
dark trousers. His coat was open. No. 43 of the productions 
is the coat he wore.” Asked in cross-examination how she 
identified the coat, she replied — ‘ 4 That is the coat " ; in 
America she professed to identify the man by his slouching 
walk and not by his face, which she never saw. She told 
the American Commissioner — “ I could not tell his face; I never 
saw his face." In cross-examination she complained that 
there was “ a bit left out " in her American deposition, but 
could assign no better reason than that — “ If I did not say 
it (that she had seen the face) there, I could not say it here." 
She now professed to have seen the man's face as he was going 
down the stair, and that he was clean-shaven. 

The peculiarity about the walk was that the man bent 
forwards and shook his shoulders as he walked. She recog- 
nised the walk in the corridor in America. 

A. Adams, living at 51 West Princes Street, was the next 
of these witnesses. He lived next door to Miss Gilchrist. 
Hearing a thud, apparently from Miss Gilchrist's bedroom, he 
went to her front door and rang the bell. Failing to get 
admittance, he returned to his own house and left the door 
ajar. He returned again to Miss Gilchrist's, and Lambie, 
coming home at the same time, let him in. As he stood 
at the threshold, “ a well-dressed man appeared. I saw the 
man walk quite coolly till he got up to me, and then he went 
down quickly like greased lightning. He was a little taller 
than me, a little broader in the shoulders; not a well-built 
man, but well-featured and clean-shaven. If he had any 
moustache, it was very little. He had on dark trousers and a 
light overcoat. I did not notice anything about his way of 
walking at all. He was between twenty-five and thirty, I 
thought. I pointed out Slater as closely resembling the man 
in New York. He was sitting ; I thought he was a visitor, and 
was thoroughly off my guard when he passed me.” 

The next witness was a young girl named Barrowman, aged 
fifteen. She had first mentioned seeing a man running away 
from Miss Gilchrist's close on the night of the murder to her 

95 



Adolf Beck. 


foster mother, who made light of it, but as she said she was 
sure she would know the man again, the detectives were sent 
for. She had already told her foster mother that the man 
she saw had a turned nose. In her evidence she described the 
man as “ running out of the close and knocking up against 
her.” He “ wore a fawn overcoat, a dark suit of clothes, 
and a Donegal hat ; he had dark brown boots. He was coming 
very fast. He was tall and broad-shouldered, and he had a 
slight twist in his nose. He was clean -shaved and had dark 
hair. She described how she recognised him in the corridor 
and picked him out, when seated, in the American Courthouse. 1 
His hat, as he ran away, was pulled down over his eyes. She 
had no doubt whatever the man had no hair on his face. His 
coat was a waterproof and unbuttoned. 

This young witness, who professed to have noted an amazing 
number of details in the appearance of the fugitive — she can 
distinguish dark brown boots from black on a December night — 
was cjuite emphatic that the man ran in the direction of West 
Cumberland Street, that is up West Princes Street in a north- 
westerly direction. 

A much older, more educated, and responsible witness, Agnes 
Brown, school teacher, swore in her deposition (although she 
was not actually called as a witness) that at about 7-8 p.m. on 
the night of the murder, as she was stepping off the pavement 
to cross West Princes Street in the direction of Carrington 
Street, which is further along the street to the north-west than 
where West Cumberland Street runs into it from the south- 
west, two men came rushing past her in the direction of St. 
George's Road, i.e., going south-east. The men were each 
about thirty, and about 5 feet 9 inches in height. ‘ One of the 
men was of medium build, but squarer than the other ; he had 
very dark hair, probably jet black, well groomed and glossy, 
and was bareheaded. He had a navy blue overcoat with velvet 
collar and black boots, a stand-up white collar, and carried 
something in his left hand She recognised Slater in custody 
as this man. She thought she had several times seen him 
in Grant Street between seven and eight. That is a street 
parallel with West Princes Street, and between it and the house 
where Slater lived. 

There being no opening statement in a Scottish trial, the 
evidence that Miss Brown might have given, which, if believed, 
utterly destroyed that of Barrowman and very much weakened 
that of Larnbie and Adams, in the matter of dress and whether 
the man carried anything in hia hand, was never hinted at 

'His American lawyer tried to screen him by standing in the way. 
Whethep this helped or hindered Barrowman may be open to doubt. 

96 



Introduction. 

before the jury. The Lord Advocate did not tender her as a 
witness, nor did Mr. M'Clure insist on his right to have her 
contradictory testimony laid before the jury. 

Annie Armour was the last witness called as to the fugitive. 
She was booking clerk at Kelvinbridge Station, which would 
be reached by a person running from Miss Gilchrist's house, by 
his continuing to run north-west up West Princes Street till 
he came to Park Road, where he would be very near the station, 
and could reach it by taking either of two directions and .a 
turning. If he ran towards St. George's Road or down West 
Cumberland Street he would be running away from it. 

On the night of the murder a man rushed up to the witness 
at her pane and, flinging down a penny, ran off without a ticket. 
“ He was of medium height, dark, clean-shaven, and wore a 
light overcoat, but I could not say if it was a hat or cep he 
wore, but it was something dark. The time might have been 
7.30 to 8 p.m. ... I have no difficulty in knowing 
prisoner is the man I saw. I had no difficulty in picking him 
out." 

The Lord Advocate's explanation of the time taken to reach 
Kelvinbridge was that there was a network of streets up and 
down which Slater must have doubled in order to “ get to the 
best place to elude observation." That may be so; but police- 
men have a way of stopping people who double up and down 
back streets on winter nights, and to arrive out of breath at 
his place of refuge so as to- attract attention, when by walking 
quickly the nearest way one would arrive sooner in good trim, 
scarcely seems like the conduct of a scheming murderer. 

Slater, if the murderer, would know that there would be a 
regular hue knd cry after the murderer by 7.15 at latest, and 
that he should have spent another half an hour doubling about 
the neighbouring streets seems incredible. 

The evidence of those witnesses as to the man’s dress and 
appearance was met by the defence by that of Cameron, who 
never saw Slater wearing a drab or fawn-coloured waterproof, 
or in check trousers, or light spats, or in a cloth cap with 
a rim round it. Rattman confirmed this ; he had never seen 
Slater in a Donegal hat. On the day of the murder he would 
never have taken Slater for a clean-shaven man; he had a 
dark moustache a quarter of an inch long. Henderson saw 
him that night; he had a short moustache “like stubble" 
and a Donegal hat, but not like production 44. Reid also 
swore that Slater had at this time “ a very noticeable 
moustache." 

The corroborating circumstances relied on to clinch the 
identifications were weak indeed. Slater would never have 
been arrested at all had he not pawned a brooch which the 

h 97 



Adolf Beck. 


police believed to have been one taken from Miss Gilchrist. 
It turned out to have nothing to do with her, so that if he 
were guilty it was an amazing coincidence that the police 
were put on the right scent by a false clue. 

A cheap hammer — hardly more than a toy 1 — was found 
among his effects. No blood was discovered on it nor did 
the prosecution remove the head to look for blood-stains that 
could not have been washed off. It might have caused all 
the deceased’s injuries, though Dr. Galt would have expected 
a heavier weapon. No blood stains were found on the 
accused’s hat, and only the merest trace on his waterproof. 
The murderer must have been drenched in blood. His hands 
must have been covered with blood. 

So far the Crown witnesses; the defence witnesses con- 
sidered the hammer -a most unlikely weapon to have caused 
the injuries, particularly one to the left eye, and certain 
spindle-shaped wounds. There were no depressed fractures 
on the skull, such as the hammer would cause. 

In the Notable Trials Series report and in Sir A. Conan 
Doyle’s brochure will be found instructive criticism of the other 
incriminating circumstances — the hasty flight in a false name 
just after the crime and after realising all money possible. 
But nothing in this was other than was to bo expected from 
a foreign souteneur , who habitually passed under a false name, 
going with a prostitute to the U.S.A. in order to escape from a 
position of increasing financial embarrassment owing to the 
slackness in the land of the unco’ guid and of Holy Willie, 
of the sort of business by which ho lived. That he was a 
souteneur is a strong reason in Slater’s favour; it explain** 
much that would be suspicious in an ordinary man, and it is 
prim, a facie unlikely that a criminal of his class should take 
to a perfectly different and far more perilous mode of criminal 
livelihood. 

At the further inquiry held in 1914, which was extra- 
judicial, the witnesses not being on oath, the following facts 
came to light. At 7.15 on the night of the murder, Lambie 
came up to the house of a Miss Birrell, a relative of the de- 
ceased, and said — “ Oh, Miss Birrell, Miss Gilchrist has been 
iiiurdered. I saw the man who did it; I think it was f A. 
B.’ I am sure it was e A. B.’ ” Lambie told the same to 
Detectives Pyper and DormaH. Shown a sketch of Slater 
on 3rd January, 1909, Lambie failed to recognise it. Asked 
by Defective-Lieutenant Trench if “A. B.” was not the man, 
she replied — “ It’s gey funny if it wasn’t him I saw.” 


1 It was bought on a card with a number of other cheap tools. 
Antoine’s evidence, p. 188. 

98 



Introduction. 

This rested on the statement of Trench. Neither Miss 
Birrell nor Lambie nor the other officers confirmed it. Detec- 
tive Gordon, however, said that Lambie told him on the night 
of the murder that she was quite unable to identify the man. 
Chief Inspector Pyper confirmed him. To some extent Chief 
Inspector Cameron confirmed Trench. It is a fact, however, 
that the police did closely inquire into A. B.’s movements. 

Other evidence was called, tending to negative the Lord 
Advocate’s asseveration that Slater covered up his tracks 
and fled from justice; as this does not bear on the identity, I 
refer the reader to Mr. Roughead (pp. lxvi. et seq. in the 
Notable Trials Series report of the trial). But as to Barrow- 
man’s evidence Trench said that Maccallum, her employer, 
stated that it was on the 18th, not oil the 21st, that she went 
on the errand that took her to the point where she professed 
to see Slater. 

Barrowman, Pyper, and Maccallum contradicted Trench 
as to this. 

Finally a new witness, one Macbrayne, stated that he recog- 
nised Slater standing a few yards from his residence, 69 St. 
George’s Road, at 8.15 on the night of the murder; the Crown 
never called this man, whose evidence contradicted that of 
Armour; the defence did not know of him. The recognition 
was mutual, for, when he saw Slater in custody, the latter 
exclaimed — “ Oh, you are the man in the big shop in Sauchie- 
hall Street.” 

The Secretary for Scotland saw no reason, on these new 
facts, that would justify him in interfering with the sentence. 
Accordingly the swarthy, stocky, middle-aged German Jew 
remained in Peterhead Convict Prison, for the crime committed 
by the man or men first-described, who, in age and build, were 
so distinct from him. 

9. Robert Wood. 

The confidence with which Lambie professed to recognise 
Slater from his gait recalls the evidence of R. W. M' Go wan 
at the trial of Wood for the murder of Dinimock. M'Gowan 
described a man as seen by him leaving the house where the 
murder was done at 4.55 a.ni. on the morning of 12th Sep- 
tember. The man walked with his right shoulder inclined 
forward. 

At the station, he failed to pick out Wood at once, but 
■when the men at his request started to walk he picked out 
Wood. This induced Ruby Young, who knew Wood inti- 
mately, to say that she had noticed this peculiarity, but had 
not mentioned it before. 



Adolf Beck, 

Divisional Detective-Inspector Grosse, in further cross-exa- 
mination, admitted that from inquiries made by him the 
electric lamp by which M f Gowan professed to distinguish this 
walk was extinguished at 4.40 a.m. on that morning. 1 


How difficult trained detectives may find it to be confident 
as to identity appears from two cases related by the late Chief 
Inspector Littlechild. A well-known crook, one Jerry, 
escaped from a young officer by offering to go quietly to the 
station. A little later the same constable arrested a man 
as Jerry, who made the same offer to go quietly, which was 
ironically refused. At the station Littlechild and two detec- 
tives, who knew something of Jerry, and had, in fact, 
arrested him before handing him over to the constable, were all 
at a loss to say if he were the man in custody. Finally 
something in the man’s walk and speech satisfied Littlechild 
that this was not Jerry — and so it proved. The divisional 
detective, who knew r Jerry quite well as a burglar, said at the 
station — “ That’s Jerry right enough.” 

The second instance Littlechild gives was a blunder of his 
own. He held a warrant for the arrest of a man he knew 
quite well. Happening to be on a bus travelling in the same 
direction as a tram, he espied, as he thought, his man on the 
tram. Following him till he alighted, he lost sight of him 
near Blackfnar’s Bridge. Three weeks later he saw, as he 
believed, the same man, and took him into custody in Queen 
Victoria Street, almost exactly where he had lost him Iwfore, 
and the man offered no explanation, but behaved as a guilty 
man. . At the station, however, his father made it quite clear 
that Littlechild was mistaken, and official apologies and. reproofs 
followed. Not long after Littlechild, in Islington, saw, as he 
believed, the man he knew and wanted, but to avoid a second 
mistake, he introduced himself with a “ How do you do?” The 
stranger turned and said, “ I want nothing more to do with 
you.” It -was the same man as ho had erroneously arrested 
only a short while before. 2 

Mention may here be made of three cases where evidence of 
a most, dramatic kind confounded the identifying witness. 
Ballantino was counsel for the defence in a trial for murder on 
the Home Circuit. The prosecution had already jeopardised 
their case by blunders, when, having put it beyond reasonable 
doubt that the prisoner was in the locality at the time of the 
crime, they called the postman of Robert abridge to prove that 

1 Mr. Arthur Neil has informed me that he thinks the time supplied 
was wrong and the lamp was still alight. 

2 “ Reminiscences of Chief Inspector Littlechild,” ch. 12. 

100 



Introduction. 


he saw the prisoner in a public-house there (near the scene of 
the murder) at such a time. The defence knew it to be 
otherwise, and the serjeant asked a person, much resembling 
the accused, to stand near the dock, whereupon the postman, 
in utter confusion, withdrew his identification and the prisoner, 
a fortunate man in the serjeant’s estimation, was acquitted. 1 

Wharton in his work on Criminal Evidence, sec. 808, relates 
an identical case, the witness being a female, and the incident 
of Mme. Alfroy withdrawing her identification of Lesurques, 
on seeing Dubose in a fair wig, is a third. 

Much, at the Beck inquiry, turned upon the distinguishing 
physical marks of Beck and “ Smith.” From the point of 
view of present-day practice, this aspect of the case is without 
value as a lesson for the future, but I cannot but recall, in view 
of what happened to Beck’s application in his petitions, the 
very different course pursued in the matter of Henry Evans in 
1885. Evans was convicted of burglary; there was another 
charge of a previous conviction for burglary in the name of 
Williams. A warder swore that Evans was Williams; the 
defence called for the identification marks of Williams, and 
tho prison surgeon found marks on Williams that were not on 
Evans, and vice verm. The jury found Evans was not Williams, 
and ho received a sentence as for his first offence. Subse- 
quently Evans memorialised the Home Secretary, Sir William 
Harcourt, who had been Solicitor-General, and had given up a 
lucrative practice to take to politics, and Sir William, in com- 
paring his petition with the writing of Williams, found <( not 
only were the handwritings identical, but there was a peculiar 
vein of thought running through both petitions, which could 
hardly by any possibility have been the v r ork of two different 
^persons.” 2 

Mr. Justice Wills, frdrn whom I take tfye above case, knew 
of only one case where a warder was wrong upon such an 
identification; the warder in mitigation said — (t I have to. 
identify about 3000 a year.” 3 

1 “Some Experiences of a Barrister’s Life.” Did Dickens, who knew 
Ballantine at the Garrick, borrow this incident for the trial of Charles 

Darnay ? 

3 “ Wills on Circumstantial Evidence,” 1912 ed., by Sir Alfred Wills, 
pp. 185-6, R. v. Evans . 

3 76. JR. v. Hdsham. If Mr. Akers Douglas had only followed the 
wise precedent of the trained lawyer who preceded him the non-identity of 
the two men and the guilt of “Smith” of the 1894-5 frauds would have 
been patent at once. Sir Alfred makes it quite clear that, in *his view, 
as the trial judge, the warder was right and the jury were wrong, all of 
which goes to confirm the evidence of Froest and other police witnesses 
as to the little value of these old identification marks and to refute those 
who professed to see in the police identification of the men evidence of 
mala fides. Some scars persist through life ; others disappear in a few 
weeks. An entry, “scar, left cheek,” without more, is worse than useless. 

101 



Adolf Beck. 

Conclusion* 

We are now in a position briefly to sum up the causes leading 
to this singular miscarriage of justice. The features peculiar 
to this case have already been noted — the rare circumstance of 
a man challenging a previous conviction, the unhappy reliance 
upon a pure technicality of English criminal procedure, which 
at that time prevented the challenge thrown out by the defence 
being inquired into, the singular perversity of the Home Office, 
which, with Sir William Harcourt’s excellent precedent before 
it, refrained from comparing the writings and style of the two 
men, the extraordinary fatality, which led a stranger to put 
Scotland Yard on to a false scent, only in the years that were 
to come to lead it back to the right one, the inconceivable folly 
of Meyer in hazarding fortune once more after Beck’s second 
conviction — all these things go to make the Beck case one 
without precedent and any possibility of its creating a precedent. 

But, eliminating these peculiarities, let us ask — What would 
be the position of a Beck to-day, tried on the evidence of 1890, 
and there being no suggestion (as but for the officious stranger 
there would have been none at the time) as to any identical 
earlier crimes committed by some other man, can any one doubt 
that he would be convicted, and that the Court of Criminal 
Appeal would sustain the verdict as one that a jury might 
reasonably find? 

The evidence as to identity was stronger than in any of the 
cases just glanced at. Those women, who, like Mrs. Townsend, 
hesitated, were corroborated by the exhibits put to them, which 
were transparently in the same writing as those given or posted 
to the women, who were absolutely confident, and' as to each 
and all of these there was the uncontradicted evidence of Mr. 
Gurrin that these wore all in the prisoner’s handwriting. 

About twenty-two occasions were spoken to by the eleven 
women, and on not one of those occasions could Beck render 
it probable by alibi or other evidence that he was elsewhere than 
where the women said. He was poor, pawn tickets relating to 
female jewellery, brooches, and rings were found in his posses- 
sion, just the clothing, the white vest slips, spats, and patent 
boots they described were found at his apartments, and all he 
could prove as to character was that twenty years before, in a 
foreign land, he had mixed with decent people. The women, 
too, grew more confident, as Mr. Gill admitted, 1 under cross- 
examination, and gave their evidence with a vivacity and air 

1 Sir A. Conan Doyle noted the same thing about the female witnesses 
in Slater’s case, and I have observed it to be a usual feature of their 
evidence in this class of case. 

J02 



Introduction. 

of cqipviction which the Sessions report does not preserve, but 
which is reflected in the newspapers of the period. 

The identification by Meissonier and Brakefield of the marks 
in open Court must have had a most damning effect, and Beck’s 
short remarks to the jury in broken English probably only 
strengthened the conviction that he was a humbug, as his own 
witnesses said he could speak English very well, and the papers 
in reporting the Police Court proceedings described his foreign 
accent as slight. 

Yet, when one looks below the surface, the corroboration 
was nothing. The female witnesses, with their exhibits, and 
Gurrin’s evidence, only proved that one and the same man was 
the culprit in 1894-95. None of the property was traced to 
Beck, though, owing to the lapse of time, it would hardly have 
been still in his possession ; none of it was pawned by him. 
If we disregard for the moment Meissonier, none of the women 
furnished any real description of the man as pointing at all 
strongly to Beck. 

Fanny Nutt made no complaint to the police at the time 
and only came forward more than a year after she had been 
defrauded ; yet she was the most confident of the lot. 

Marion Taylor, or Duncan, only came forward a year later. 
She described the mail as “ beautifully dressed,” though in the 
winter of 1894-95 Beck was shabby,*- and as speaking with a 
“strong foreign accent ” and describing himself as a German. 

Evelyn Miller’s description, given at Albany Street 
station at the time, is not extant, but from her evidence, 
the man was dressed well and evidently a gentleman ; the 
accent was “ slightly foreign ” and “ rather broad.” Alice 
Sinclair, who came forward nearly nine months after being 
defrauded, described the man as “ very well dressed ” in 
April, 1895. She thought he was not an Englishman; which, 
of course, was the case. 

Brakefield gave a description the day she was robbed at 
Chelsea, but this, unhappily, is no longer extant. It was 
Meissonier’s description of a mark that brought her up to 
the Court six months later, and what she recognised was a 
perfectly distinct mark from those noted by Meissonier. 1 2 

Juliette Kluth in her evidence said she described the man 
in her letter to Scotland Yard; that is not so; she wrote not 
a word about accent or appearance, beyond that “ he was 
about fifty and had a gentlemanly manner.” . ^ 


1 See the evidence of Ellis, Annie Smith, Kistner, and Jones for the 
defence. 

2 According to Mr. Frank Froest’s memorandum forwarded to me from 
Scotland Yard. It differs slightly from his account from the printed 
report and from his evidence before the committee. 


103 



Adolf Beck 


In April Minnie Lewis was defrauded by a man she 
described as very well dressed, but under cross-examination 
she was unable to recall any particulars in her description 
to the police at the time. Daisy Grant, when accosted, was 
with a companion, who failed to identify Beck. 

Ottilie (or Ottalie, according to Mr. Sims) Meissonier 
stands in a class alone, as regards this one case ; but we find 
a parallel to her evidence in that of Lucy Denham in 
Robinson’s case, and of the women Santon and Grossetete 
in the case of Lesurques. If we could accept it that Lambie 
and Barrowman were totally unprepared to see Slater in 
the corridor of the New York Court, and further that 
their identification was wrong, we might add that as an 
instance of a person, not apparently in custody, being picked 
out in error. 

She was a German subject, but spoke with a strong French 
accent; she taught German, among other languages, and 
she noted that the affable and generous stranger read a 
German newspaper during his visit. Yet she describes him, 
not as a fellow-countryman and a German, but as a 
“ foreigner,” which he would not be in relation to her ! 1 

She notices his apparel most minutely, the lining of 
his coat, the creases made by the seams of his tight leather 
gloves on his hand, his odd way of holding the pen, the 
two marks on his face, which she was able to point out to 
the jury on Beck at the trial, and to the warder at the 
Police Court. 

His behaviour, too, weighs heavily against him. If 
innocent, all he has to do is to shut his front door in her 
face and go upstairs. Instead he runs away .across the 
street and is chased as far as the first policeman, when 
he uses familiar English bad language ! 

Every effort has been made to get Meissonier’s original 
description as furnished by her at Vine Street arid at the 
Jubilee police station, Fulham, but neither are now extant. 

My request to the Home Office to see the exhibits in her 
case, to see if by any chance they differed from the others, 
was refused. Yet, having regard to the undoubted fact that 
the first, of this series of frauds — that on Nutt — was the 
work of Meyer, as well as all the later ones, in which we 
have facsimiles of the exhibits, there seems to be no doubt 


1 According to several newspaper reports Mr. Horace Avory, in his 
reply, said that one witness, who was a teacher of languages, described 
the man as a Norwegian. This does not appear in the Sessions Paper 
report of Meissonier’s evidence, but doubtless the witness must have 
said so. 


104 



Introduction. 

that the committee was right in saying that Beck had no 
more connection with this than any of the others. 

The 1904 frauds call for only two observations. The 
most educated and ladylike of the women, Grace Campbell, 
was the most minute in her description of the man and 
his apparel, and, if anything, the most confident in her 
identification of Beck. 11 I have not a doubt he is the man,” 
she said. Yet she was wrong. Rose Reece purported to 
recognise Beck by his nose — one in a thousand — as Mrs. 
Adams (or Liddell^ did on Slater's trial. She pointed the 
feature out to the jury ; yet Rose Reece was certainly wrong. 
These feminine afterthoughts may be peculiarly deadly ! 

A point that was made much of by Mr. Sims and those 
who shared his views was that Beck was transparently a 
foreigner; so was Meyer. Each man fiad a slight, but 
noticeable accent. Meissonier, as we have seen, could not 
detect it as German, while to Kluth, also speaking several 
languages, it seemed French rather than German. Mrs. 
Townsend recognised an American twang. Now both men 
had been for years in different parts of America. 

Beck affected to know little English. Yet he had earned 
a living by singing in that language as a youth. 1 The news- 
papers agree with Mr. Froest that he could speak it with 
hardly any accent, and the whole probability is that each 
man had about the same command of our language in spoken 
speech and that neither was able to write it idiomatically, 
though Beck's penmanship was less Teutonic. 

Allowing for Beck's careworn appearance in his photo- 
graph taken after his second arrest, and supposing each 
man to lie similarly attired — down to the monocle, each 
affected when on a lady-killing expedition — it is not difficult 
to imagine the two being confounded. 

Another circumstance which must have seemed to the 
police a strong confirmation of their view that they had 
got the right man, was that by what was probably a mere 
coincidence, Meyer invariably operated near to where Beck 
lived. The most striking example of this is the case of 
Nellie Cawston, who, luckily for Beck, refused to pick him 
out, and later identified Meyer. She met the stranger within 
a hundred yards of Beck's flat and was written to from the 
Belgravia Hotel (the site of the present offices of Home- 
finders, Limited), exactly opposite Beck's flat. Daisy Grant 
was accosted within a few yards of where he. lived. 
Meissonier's encounter was in Victoria Street, where Beck 
lived. 


1 See Vanvert, ante, p. 2. 


105 



Adolf Beck. 


When, after serving his sentence, Beck removed to quite 
a different part of London, his evil genius still pursued him. 
He takes rooms off Oxford Street and uses de Maria’s 1 
restaurant at No. 35. Where does Rose Reece encounter the 
stranger? In Oxford Street, to be sure! Pauline Scott is 
accosted in Oxford Street. Lily King is encountered in 
Regent Street. Caroline Singer meets with her adventure in 
Oxford Street. Why, at the very beginning of Beck’s amaz- 
ing story, it is the common use by the two men of the same 
hotel — the Grand Hotel, Charing Cross, that first loads to 
Beck’s undoing! Beck pawns women’s jewellery; there may 
be some innocent explanation of that, but what is it? 1 

On the second, as on the first trial, Beck cannot account 
for his movements; he himself, the second time, goes into the 
box and says he was with Mr. Gajardo. Where is G&jardo? 
He is not called. 

What, then, is the lesson of this ease? 

Several seem to stand out. The first is embodied in the 
Committee’s report that “ evidence as to identity based upon 
personal impressions is, unless supported by other facts, an 
unsafe basis for the verdict of a. jury.” The second is that 
women, as appears from all the cases; noted, are especially to 
be mistrusted in cases where the evidence is of this character. 
Thirdly, it must be made manifest that the so-called corro- 
boration really is corroboration, and not merely evidence going 
to show that the crime or crimes had been Committed, and not 
indicating the prisoner as the one man who could have com- 
mitted them. The last would seem to be that it is at least 
highly dangerous for a judge, on the objection of prosecuting 
counsel, to sustain a technical objection, which really goes to 
the whole root of the defence. 

It will be a lasting puzzle to me why Mr. Gill, mast 
intrepid of advocates, did not, by all means in his power, 
forco the real issue upon the public at the time. I cannot 
believe that mere questions of the etiquette of the bar re- 
strained him; I can only suppose that, as counsel, he possessed 
some knowledge, which induced him to take the apparently 
timorous course, for him, that, he did take. It is also 
quite possible that he never realised, as we at Our leisure 
can, how unanswerable a defence he had when all the docu- 
ments are laid on the table. 

The task of trying and judging a fellow-creature is the 
most solemn and awful upon which fallible man can be called 


1 From information supplied to S.Y. it seems Beck was not above 
borrowing off women when in need. 


106 



Introduction. 

on to engage. From what I have seen of judges and jurors 
I believe they so appreciate that solemn duty. If anything in 
the perusal of this book can serve to admonish those who may 
have such duties to perform, that they must all the time be 
all attentive and alert, and that they must let no cynical 
prepossession against the friendless and helpless man in the 
dock weigh for an instant against Iho presumption of his 
innocence, I shall feel repaid for such exertions as its 
compilation have entailed. 


107 



Leading Dates in the Beck Case. 


12th April, 

1877, - 

.John Smith defrauded Louisa Leonard of a 
ring, a pair of earrings, and 15s. 

20th „ 

»> 

Louisa Leonard saw John Smith in the Totten- 
ham Court Road ; she charged him with 
having robbed her, and gave him into 
custody. 

21st „ 

»» 

J ohn Smith was brought up at the Clerkenwell 
Police Court, and charged with defrauding 
Louisa Leonard of a ring, a pair of earrings, 
and 15s. on April 12th, 1877. Evidence 
was given, and the prisoner was remanded 
in custody. 

28th „ 

»> 

John Smith was committed for trial at the 
Central Criminal Court. 

10th May, 

»> 

John Smith was convicted at the Central 
Criminal Court on indictments charging 
him with larceny from Louisa Leonard and 
Louisa Howard. The third indictment 

charging larceny from Ada Wooding was 
not tried. 

Jf 


The prisoner was sentenced to five years’ penal 
servitude. 

>> 

>t * 

John Smith was assigned the letter and number 
1) 523 by the prison authorities. 

13th January, 1879, 

John Smith, who had on being received into 
prison described himself as a Protestant, 
applied for leave to change his religion and 
to be entered as a Jew. He was examined 
by the Medical Officer who certified in 
writing that he was circumcised ; and the 
application was accordingly granted. 

25th June, 

tt 

Petition of John Smith for remission of part 
of liis sentence. The petition was refused. 

4th April, 1881, 

Photograph and * k description ” of John Smith, 
who was then about to be released on 
licence, sent by the Governor of Ports- 
mouth Prison, where he was then confined, 
to the police authorities at Scotland Yard. 
The “ description ” did not state that John 
Smith was circumcised. 

14th „ 

v tt 

John Smith was released on licence. For two 
years after his release, John Smith remained 
in England. In 1884 he went to South 
Australia and set up at Adelaide as a doctor 
under the name of Augustus Wilhelm 
Meyer ; he appears to have had a con- 
siderable and lucrative practice as a doctor 
there. 

13th May, 

»* 

Letter from John Smith to the Home Office 
asking for the return of some property in 
the hands of the police. 


108 



Leading 

May, 1885, 

8th April, 1894, 


30th November, 1895, 


16th December, , 


17th 


18th 


Dates in Beck Case. 

Mr. Adolf Beck came from America to London. 

A man who called himself Augustus Wilhelm 
Meyer, was arrested in London for obtain- 
ing 300J. on a worthless letter of credit ; lie 
was discharged after a fortnight for want 
of evidence. 

Ottilie Meissoiner lodged a complaint at Vine 
Street Police Station that she had been de- 
frauded of two rings and two watches by a 
man who had represented himself as a 
wealthy nobleman with an establishment 
in St. John’s Wood. The police had, during 
the preceding twelve months, received 
complaints from various women of similar 
frauds. In every case the handwriting of 
the swindler was the same, and there was 
no doubt that all the frauds wore perpe- 
trated by ono person ; but the police had 
been unable to find him. 

In the afternoon Ottilie Meissonier saw Mr. 
Beck in Victoria Street, and accused him 
of having stolen her rings and watches. 
He denied that he had ever seen her and 
both went to a constable, who took them 
both to Rochester Row Police Court. 

The detective at the police station, sent for 
Mary Harvey, Madame Meissonier’s ser- 
vant, and Daisy Grant, who had also 
complained to the police that she had been 
defrauded in a similar manner and they 
identified Mr. Beck as the swindler. 
Thereupon the Inspector took the charge 
against Mr. Beck. 

Mr. A. Beck was brought up at the West- 
minster Police Court and charged with 
defrauding Ottilie Meissonier and Daisy 
Grant. 

Evidence was given by Meissonier and Daisy 
Grant, and Mr. Beck was remanded in 
custody. 

A gentleman who happened to remember the 
case of John Smith, on reading an account 
of the proceedings at the Westminster 
Police Court, observed the resemblance 
between the crimes committed by John 
Smith and those charged against Mr. Beck ; 
he accordingly informed the police that Mr. 
Beck was no doubt the John Smith of 1877. 
During the course of the proceedings before 
the magistrate it was ascertained that the 
incriminating documents attributed to Mr 
Beck were in fact in the same handwriting 
as those written by John Smith in 1877 ; 
and moreover P.C. Spurrell and Inspector 
Redstone identified Mr. Beck as John 
Smith. 


109 



Adolf Beck 


23rd December, 1895, - Mr. Beck was further charged at the West- 

minster Police Court with defrauding Kate 
Brakefield. The evidence of Mary Harvey, 
P.C. Edwards, Kate Braketield, and John 
Watts was taken, and Mr. Beck was again 
remanded in custody. 

26th ,, ,, Mr. Shtil having certified for legal aid, the 

Director of Public Prosecutions took charge 
of the case. 

2nd January, 1896, - Westminster Police Court. — Mr. Beck was 

remanded for a week, no evidence being 
taken on this day. 

9th ,, ,, - Mr. Beck was further charged at the West- 

minster Police Court with defrauding 
Marion Taylor, Alice Sinclair, Mrs. Towns- 
end, Juliette Kluth. Mr. Beck was again 
remanded in custody. 

13th „ ,, - Inspector Froest put in charge of the case in 

place of Inspector Waldook. 

15th ,, „ - Mr. Beck examined for personal marks at 

Holloway Prison. 

23rd ,, ,, - Mr. Beck was further charged at the West- 

minster Police Court with defrauding 
Fanny Nutt. Mr. Beck was again re- 
manded in custody. 

29th ,, ,, - Mr. T. H. (Jurr in reported on the handwriting 

of the incriminating documents. 

80th „ ,, - Mr. Beck was further charged at the West- 

minster Police Court with defrauding 
Minnie Lewis and E. E. Miller. Mr. Beck 
was remanded in custody. 

„ „ - On this occasion the witness Spurrell swore 

that Mr. Bock was John Smjth. 

6th February, „ - Mr. Beck committed for trial at the Central 

Criminal Court oil charges of (a) obtaining 
by false pretences, (b) larceny, and (c) 
conversion as a bailee in respect of the 
following cases, viz. : — 

(1) 3rd December, 1894: Fanny Nutt: 
two rings and a brooch. 

(2) 1st January, 1895: Marion Taylor: 
one ring and 9s. 

(3) 3rd January, 1895: Evelyn E. 
Miller : one ring and £2 

(4) ISth February, 1895: Alice Sinclair : 
two rings. 

(5) 7th March, 1895: Ethel Annie 
Townsend : one ring, two braoelets 
and other property. 

(6) 1st March, 1895: Juliette Kluth: 
one ring. 

(7) 3rd April, 1895: Minnie Lewis: 
one ring. 

(8) 23rd June, 1895 : Kate Brakefield s 
two rings and other property. 


110 



Leading Dates in Beck Case. 


6th February, 1896, 


>> »» 

20th „ ,, 


3rd, 4th, and 
5th March, ,, 

♦ 1 ft 


)> 


») 


>» 


5th 

20th May, 

9th J une, 
2nd July, 


26th March, 1898, 
10th May, ,, 


Mr. Jteck committed for trial at the Central 
Criminal Court, &c. — 

(9) 6th July, 1895: Daisy Grant: two 
rings and other property. 

(10) 29th November, 1895: Ottilie 
Meissonier : two rings and two 
watches. 

Mr. Dutton applied to the Commissioner of 
Police for liberty to inspect the record of 
John Smith. His application was refused. 

Mr. Dutton applied to the Commissioner of 
Police for production of John Smith’s record 
at the ensuing trial of Mr. Beck. His appli- 
cation was refused. 

\ Trial of Mr. A. Beck at the Central Criminal 

- / Court. 

Mr. Beck was tried on an indictment for 
misdemeanour containing ten counts, and 
charging him with obtaining by false 
pretences from each of the ten women 
mentioned above ; this indictment did not 
contain any count charging' a previous 
conviction. 

There were four other indictments on the file 
charging Mr. Beck with larceny, and each 
of those indictments did contain a count 
charging the previous conviction. 

Mr. Beck was convicted on the misdemeanour 
indictment, and was sentenced to 7 years* 
penal servitude. 

At the next Sessions the Attorney-General 
entered a nolle prosequi on the other 
indictments. 

Mr. Beck was assigned a letter and number, 
viz., D.W. 523, which indicated that he 
was John Smith and had been previously 
convicted. 

Petition from Mr. T. D. Dutton on behalf of 
Mr. Beck. 

First Petition by Mr. Beck. 

Count Lewenhaupt, the Minister for Norway 
and Sweden, called at the Home Office, 
bringing a letter from Mr. Dutton and 
asking to be allowed to send a solicitor on 
behalf of the Legation to Mr. Beck. Per- 
mission was granted ; but in fact no solicitor 
on behalf of the Legation was sent to s&e 
Mr. Beck. 

Mr. Dutton applied to the Commissioner of 
Police for leave to inspect the record of 
John Smith. His application was refused. 

- Mr. Dutton applied to the Home Office for an 

interview to explain Mr. Beck’s case. His 

r application was refused. 


Ill 



Adolf Beck 


' 12th May, 1898, 

16th „ 

19th „ 

25th ,, 

8th July, ,, 

13th „ 

27th ,, 

August 

9th December, 1898, 

8th July, 1901, - 

August, 1903, 

23rd March, 1904, - 


15th April, 

lStii „ 
23rd „ 


Mr. Murdoch, who dealt with Mr. Beck’s 
Petitions, instituted inquiries with regard 
to the records of Smith and Beck. 

Further letter from Mr. Dutton to the Home 
Otlice urging Beck’s innocence. 

The Governor of Portland informed the Home 
Office that Smith was circumcised and that 
Mr. Beck was uncircumcised. 

Further letter from Mr. Dutton to the Home 
Office. 

Having ascertained that Mr. Beck was not 
Smith, the Home Office decided to refer 
the matter to the Common Serjeant, who 
had tried the Ase. Accordingly the papers 
in the case were sent to him, under cover 
of a letter from Mr. Murdoch. 

Letter from the Common Serjeant in reply. 

Letter from the Home Office to Mr. Dutton 
stating that the Home Secretary could not 
interfere with Mr. Beck’s sentence. 

A new number was assigned to Mr. Beck, 
which did not indicate that he had been 
previously convicted. 

10th Petition by Mr. Beck. After receipt of 
this Petition, Inspector Froest saw Mr. C. 
S. Murdoch at the Home Office about the 
alleged scar on Mr. Beck’s jaw or neck. 

Mr. Adolf Beck was released on licence from 
Pentonville Prison. After his release Mr. 
Beck remained in London and endeavoured 
to procure evidence to prove his innocence. 

It is now known that in this month John 
Smith was again in London, and remained 
there till his arrest in July, 1904. The 
first of the series of frauds deposed to at 
Mr. Beck’s trial in June, 1904, occurred in 
August, 1903. 

Pauline Scott complained at Scotland Yard 
that she had been defrauded of a ring, a 
watch, and £1. The circumstances of this 
fraud were so similar to those of the frauds 
for which Mr. Beck had been convicted in 
1896 that Inspector Ward, who had charge 
of the case, suspected he was the guilty 
person. 

Pauline Scott identified Mr. Beck as the person 
who had defrauded her, and he was 
arrested. Mr. Beck was charged at the 
Marylebone Police Court, and remanded in 
custody. 

The Director of Public Prosecutions took 
charge of the case. 

Marylebone Police Court : Mr. Beck was 
remanded in custody, no evidence being 
taken. 


112 



Leading Dates in Beck Case. 

30th April, 1904, - - Mr. Beck was again brought up at the Mary- 

lebone Police Court, and charged with 
defrauding Rose Reece, Caroline Singer, 
and Grace Campbell. Mr. Beck was re- 
manded in custody. 

7th May, ,, - Marylebone Police Court. Mr. Beck was 

remanded in custody, no evidence being 
taken. 

12th ,, ,, - - Mr. Beck was brought up at the Marylebone 

Police Court, and was charged with de- 
frauding Lily King, and was remanded in 
custody. 

19th ,, ,, - - Mr. Beck was brought up at the Marylebone 

Police Court, and was committed for trial 
at the Central Criminal Court. 

22nd June, ,, - . Application was made by Counsel on behalf of 

Mi 1 . Beck to the Recorder at the Central 
Criminal Court that his trial should be 
postponed to the next Sessions to enable 
him to prepare his defence. The Recorder 
granted this application, and directed that 
the case should be tried before the Common 
Serjeant on Wednesday, 27th July. 

23rd ,, ,, - Counsel for the prosecution applied to the 

Recorder to rescind the order which he had 
made for the postponement of Mr. Beck’s 
trial on the grounds set put in the affidavit 
of Police Constable Yeo. The Recorder re- 
scinded his order, and directed that Mr. 
Beck should be tried on the following 
Monday, 27th June. 

27th ,, ,, - Mr. Beck was tried before Mr. Justice Graut- 

hani at the Central Criminal Court and was 
* convicted ; but the learned judge, having 

some doubts about the case, did not pass 
sentence. 

7th July, *, - - William Thomas, alias John Smith, was 

arrested in the act of pawning certain 
rings which he had just obtained from two 
women by false pretences, similar in every 
respect to those of which Mr. Beck had 
been accused and convicted in 1896 and 
1904. It was then found that Thomas, 
alias Smith, had written a letter to Miss 
Turner, which was obviously in the same 
handwriting as the incriminating docu- 
ments of 1877, of 1894-5, and of 1904. 

18th „ „ - - Mr. T. H. Gurrin withdrew his evidence as to 

the incriminating documents being in Mr. 
Beck’s handwriting. 

19tn ,, ,, - . - Mr. Beck was released from prison. 

27 4 H ,, - - Free Pardons were granted to Mr. Beck in 

respect of his convictions of 1896 and 1904. 

113 


i 



July-August, 1904, 

16th September, 1904, - 


Depositions of witnesses in the case against 
William Thomas taken before Sir A. de 
Rutzen at Bow Street Police Station. 

William Thomas, alias John Smith, pleaded 
guilty at the Central Criminal Court to 
various charges, and was sentenced to five 
years’ penal servitude. 



]. a 








4 '^V^4jo lA^%*)^ 
5 

6 fvX^d^X^ 


From exhibit to Ada 
Wiitnl in^’s deposition, 
R v Smith, 1877. 


From exhibit to Fanny 
Nutt’s deposition, R v 
Beck, 1896. 


From exhibit to 
Caroline Singer’s de- 
position, R v Beck, 
15)04. 


From exhibit to 
Beulah Turner's 
deposition, R v 
Thomas, alias 
Smith, 1904. 


From exhibit to Fanny 
Nutt's deposition, R v 
Beck, 1896. 


From exhibit to 
Caroline Singer's de- 
position, R v Beck, 
1904. 


From exhibit to 
Beulah Turner’s de- 
position, R v Thomas, 
alias Smith, 1904. 


From a letter in Beck’s 
admitted handwriting. 


9 - % 




From exhibit to Ada 
Wooding’s deposition, 
R v Smith, ! 977. 


Exhibits in trials 1877, 1896 and 1904; anil admitted handwritings 
of “John Smith” and Adolf Beck. 



-ir — j 

ii. i 


12. ~~Vt) .w^r tv 


-^vT 


13 - 


H. 






16 . 


17 . 


-K 

it 


r 


From exhibit to Louisa 
Howard’s deposition, 
R v Smith., I S77. 


Prom exhibit to Panny 
Nutt’s deposition, R v 
Ihek, 18 %. 


hrom exhibit to 
Caroline Sinners de- 
position, K v Beck, 
1904. 


h’rom exhibit to 
Beulah Turner’s de- 
position, R v Thomas, 
alias Smith, 1904. 

B cell’s a d m i 1 1 e d 
writing. 


“ Smith’s ” admitted 
writing. 


Prom letter to Nutt, 
R v Beck, 1890. 


Prom letter to Turner, 
R v Thomas, alias 
Smith, 1904. 


IS. 


Prom Beck’s admitted 
writing. 




From Smith’s admit 
ted writing- 


From exhibit in R v 
Smith. 1877. 


Prom exhibit in R v 
Reek, 1904. 

/ryy- - 

From Reek's admitted 
writing. 

sfr 

From Smith's admit- 
ted writing. 


From an exhibit in 
\< v Smith. 1877. 

m 

From an exliibit in 
R v Smith, 1877. 


Fmm Smith’s admit 
ted writing. 

l 

From an exhibit in 
R v Smith, 1877. 


From Smith's admit- 
ted writing. 


28 . 





From an exhibit in 
R v Smith, 1877. 

30. 


From Beck’s admitted 
handwriting- 

31. 

JPJ*. 

From Smith’s admit- 
ted hand writ inn- 



Front an exhibit in 
R v Beck, 189«. 

.w. •* y. 

11 

From Beck's admitted 

handwriting. 



From Hock's admitted 
handwriting. 


35 . 



From ex hi hit to 
Singer's deposition, 
R v Beck, 1904. 


36 . VX>^ 


From exhibit to 
Turner's deposition, 
R v Thomas, alias 
Smith, 1VM)4. 


37 . 


From exhibit in 
R v Smith. 1877. 



38. 

l : rom Beck’s admitted 
ha ndwriting. 



From an exhibit in 
H v Smith, 1877. 

411 

^■et 

s-al 

From an exhibit in 
K v Beck, 189b. 

41 


Hrom Beck's admitted 
handwriting. 

«. 


From Smith's admit- 
ted handwriting. 

•<.?. ■ 


From an exhibit in 
K v Smith, 1877. 

• 

4'. #-J$ Q 


From Smiths admit- 
ted handwriting. 

,S. ^^ 


From Beck’s admitted 
handwriting.. 



From Beck’s admitted 
ha ruiwritmg. 




Prom an exhibit in 
R v Smith, 1877. 


From an exhibit in 
R v Beck. 1904. 

^ »w 

Prom an exhibit in 
R v Beck. 1898. 


Prom Beck’s admitted 
handwriting. 


From Smith’s admit- 
ted handwriting. 


Prom an exhibit in 
R v Smith. 1877. 

"v4€- ■ — 

S 

• — 

Full stop and dash 
from admitted writing 
of Smith. 

4>tf. _ 

Pull stop and dash 
from exhibit in R v 
Smith, 1877. 


55 . 0 ' 


Hull stop and dash 
from exhibit in R v 
Beck, 1904. 



THE TRIAL 

WITHIN THE 

CENTRAL CRIMINAL COURT, 
OLD BAILEY, LONDON, 
TUESDAY, 3rd MARCH, 1896. 


Judge — 

SIR FORREST FULTON 
(Common Serjeant.) 


Counsel for the Crown — 
Mr. Horace Avory. 
Mr. Gdy Stephenson. 


Counsel for the Prisoner — 
Mr. C. F. Gill. 

Mr. E. Percival Clarke. 






First Day— Tuesday, 3rd March, 1896. 

Adolf Beck was indicted for unlawfully obtaining from 
Fanny Nutt two gold rings ; and from other persons other 
articles by false pretences with intent to defraud. 

The prisoner pleaded “ Not guilty/ ’ 


Opening Speech for the Crown. 

Mr. Horace Avory — My lord and gentlemen of the jury, 
the allegations in this case are that the prisoner has systemati- 
cally got himself up in swell clothing, and with a great amount 
of discrimination, has accosted ladies in the street, generally 

at the West-End, calling them “ Lady mentioning some 

name. He would then state that he had made a mistake, but, 
continuing in conversation, succeeded before he left in obtaining 
the address of the lady he was speaking to, and a permission 
that he might visit her the next day. He introduced himself 
in most cases as the Earl of Wilton. In some cases the lady 
would receive a telegram from the man, and this was followed 
by a letter from him purporting to be written from the Carlton 
Club or the Grand Hotel. It is suggested that the accysed was 
in the habit of using the smoking-room of that hotel. In 
several cases he represented that he had a large establishment 
at St. John’s Wood, and that, having quarrelled with his house- 
keeper, he was desirous of finding another lady to take her 
place. He would then tell the lady that she was suitable to 
take the vacant position, and he would give her a list of dresses 
that she must purchase to make herself properly presentable, 
and he would then present her with a cheque for a considerable 
sum of money, ostensibly to get the necessary things. He 
would next inquire as to the woman’s jewellery, and then, under 
various pretexts, take what jewellery they had away with him. 
In one instance jewellery to the value of £150 was taken 
away. The cheques which he gave were all fictitious. One 
of the ladies recognised the prisoner as he was leaving his rooms 
in Victoria Street, Westminster, and gave him into custody. 

It is not to be expected that any of the stolen property 
would be found in the prisoner’s possession. Of course he 
would get rid of it at once. You would not expect the 
prisoner to go about with a pair of elephant’s tusks under his 

117 



Adolf Beck. 

llr Horace Avory 

arm and a row of medallions and rings round his neck. As 
to the prisoner’s absence abroad in October, 1895, no offence 
is alleged in that month. 

I understand there will be no dispute as to the facts, the 
defence being that it was a case of mistaken identity. It 
may not bo necessary to mention the names of the witnesses. 

Mr. Gill — I do not desire to have the names, as they do 
not affect my case in any way. 

The Common Serjeant — It is quite a new suggestion that 
a person coming forward as a witness should refrain from 
giving his or her name, and I must confess that I should require 
the authority of the High Court to induce me to alter the 
practice of the Court in this matter. 

Mr. Avory — I do not press the point, as the difficulties, 
perhaps, are not quite the same as they were when the wit- 
‘ Besses v r ere before the Magistrate. 

The Common Serjeant — I can quite understand that at the 
preliminary inquiry it might not be desirable to disclose the 
names, but this is the final inquiry. 


Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Fanny Nutt, examined — I am a widow. In December, 
1894, I was living in Delancey Street, Regent’s Park; my 
husband had been dead then not quite twelve months. About 
six o’clock on Monday evening, 2nd December, I was in Bond 
Street, dressed in widow’s weeds, when the prisoner came up 
and said, t( You must be a very young widow? ” 1 I said, “ I 
am; I am only twenty-one.” He said, “ Tell me all about 
your husband and how he died.” I told him all about him. 
He eventually asked if he might call. I wrote down my 
address and gave it to him; I said I was not in the habit 
of receiving gentlemen, but he might call, as he said he would 
be such a friend to me. He said he could not stop and talk 
to me that evening, as he was going to a grand dinner, but 
that he would write and let ine know when he would call. I 
was talking to him for about a quarter of an hour. He did 
not give his name. 

Next morning I received this letter. [This was on paper 
with the printed heading, “ Grand Hotel, London,” and 
stated, t€ Please expect me to-morrow, Tuesday, between one 
and two o’clock.] Next day, between one and two, the 
prisoner drove up in a cab. I let him in ; he took off his coat, 
and sat down in a chair by the fire. He said he had got a 
nice house in St. John’s Wood ; would I like to be his house- 

118 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Fanny Ni|tt 

keeper that he was just sendiog the lady who had been living 
with him away to Coventry ; she had no money whatever, and 
he was not going to give her any ; she had got about £8000 
worth of jewellery which he had given her ; that he would give 
rue £5 a week to begin with, to be increased to £10 if every- 
thing went on satisfactorily ; that he had estates in Lincoln- 
shire, and he would be having some grapes sent him next day, 
and w r ould forward me some. I was to give up my apart- 
ments. He wanted to go away in his yacht to the south of 
France before Parliament sat, and was anxious to get me 
settled before he went. His umbrella had a rather massive 
silver top, with some monogram or initials on it. I thought 
he was quite a gentleman; he was pressed as such. He said 
he would make out a list of dresses 1 should get, because I 
must leave off my mourning. He said ho would give me some 
jewellery ; I gave him my writing case, and he wrote out list 
(Q) of dresses and other things. I did not suggest the items 
to him. He made out a list of jewellery ; I was to have rings, 
brooches, bracelets, and a watch; he took that list away with 
him. 

He specified the various shops at which I was to get the 
things. He gave me a cheque for 15 guineas, with which I 
was to pay a deposit of £10 at Redfern’s. He had two 
cheques, one for £10 10s. and the other for £15 15s., in his 
pocket, already written. [The one produced was on a pro- 
missory note form.] He put it into an envelope, and 
addressed it in my presence to the Union Bank, Belgravo 
Mansions. I did not see him write anything on the cheque. 
I said, “ Could I not get it changed without going to Belgravo 
Mansions as it was such a long way off? ” He said, “ No, 
it would not do for a gentleman in my position to have a 
cheque changed anywhere.” I said, “ I cannot get there 
to-day.” He said, “ The bank keeps open to six o’clock at 
Christmas time.” He asked me what jewellery I had. I 
told him not much; I was wearing iny rings. He said he 
must have a ring for the size of my finger ; he wanted one to 
take away for my size, and he would buy me a more massive 
wedding ring. He took my wedding ring for the size, and 
another one; I was wearing two of my husband’s rings at the 
time on my little finger. He put the two rings into an 
envelope and put them in his pocket. He said he would 
return* them about five o’clock by a commissionaire with one 
arm, from the Grand Hotel. The value of the two rings would 
be about £5 or £6. He said he would call again the following 
Thursday to make final arrangements. He took a brooch, 
worth about £1 , from my dressing table without my knowing 
it; I missed it after he had gone. Later in the day I saw 

119 



Adolf Beck. 

Fanny Nutt 

my brother, and showed him the cheque; and, in consequence 
of what he said, I never presented it. I did not communicate 
with the police; my brother said it would be no good. 

In January my brother showed me a newspaper report, in 
consequence of which I went to Westminster Police Court on 
19th January, without previously communicating with the 
police. I went straight into the Court, and found the 
prisoner standing in the dock; I saw his back; I should know 
hix$ among a thousand. I recognised him at once; I am 
quite sure he is the man. 

Cross-examined — The newspaper I saw was the Evening 
Standard , when tho man was first charged, two or three 
weeks before I went to the Police Court. There was a full 
account of what he was charged with. I read two or three 
accounts before I went to. the Police Court, and knew a man 
was in custody charged with doing what I complain of to 
some one. I only read accounts in the People, which is not 
illustrated, and the Standard. I am very angry w r it.h the 
man who took my wedding ring ; it was a most heartless thing 
to do. I was dressed in widow T ’s weeds when I met the man 
in Bond Street. I talked to him for ten or fifteen minutes, 
standing in the street. I was looking at some pictures in a 
window, I think. He had never seen me before, to my know- 
ledge. I never knew his name ; he was to come on the follow- 
ing Thursday. At the interview on the following day no one 
else was present. I was not excited at all ; I listened to what 
he had to say. I was perfectly calm and collected then and 
the day before. He was very well dressed ; his clothes were 
very good. He was a middle-aged man, with slightly grey 
hair. Ho looks ten years older now. I could not say if he 
faced me when he spoke to me in the street. He had light 
hair, tinged with grey. He had no rings. He had a watch 
and chain, apparently gold. He took out the watch and 
looked at it; it was rather a massive chain. I let him out, 
and shut the door. T identified him by his back at once at 
the Police Court. 1 was quite sure of him, and always 
have been. I never identified any one before. I have 

not seen my property since. One of the rings had 
“ Love and Friendship 99 engraved on it. The brooch 
was made out of a five-shilling piece, enamelled, with the 
date, 1922- With the exception of the wedding ring, 
the property could be easily identified. I heard one lady 
give evidence at the Police Court. I was there, four times 
altogether. There was nothing peculiar about his dress, 
except the watch and chain. I saw him write the whole of 
this list ; he wrote quite freely. He said the lady who was 
retiring from the position had £8000 worth of jewellery. 

120 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Fanny Nutt 

Re-examined — On this list bonnets is spelt “ bonetBr.” I 
was sitting at the table when he wrote it ; I was not looking 
at him all the time. When he spoke to me in Bond Street he 
had on a blue overcoat with a velvet collar. When he called 
the next day and took off his overcoat, I saw he had a black 
frock-coat underneath. I did not notice if he had patent 
boots. He wore fawn-coloured spats. The picture shop I 
was outside in Bond Street was well lighted. I saw his face 
well. When he called ho was with me from one to one and a 
half hours. He does not look older now than when I first 
saw him at the Police Court; I do not think he looks quite 
so old. I think he looks better this morning. He does not 
look quite so worried. Since he has been in custody I have 
only heard him say, “ No,” or “ Leave it to Mr. Dutton.* ' 
When I met him in Bond Street, and when he called, I thought 
he was English; he might have had a slight foreign accent. 
I have not heard him speak' since he has been in custody, so 
as to say one way or the other. 

Frank Cooper, examined — I am smoking-room waiter at 
the Grand Hotel, Charing Cross. 1 have been there nine 
years. I have known the prisoner by the name of Mr. Beck 
for the last six years as a visitor to the Grand Hotel, using 
the smoking room ; in that room there are writing tables and 
materials. Printed notepaper and envelopes are supplied to 
visitors without charge. Any one in the room can sit down 
and write. I have not seen the prisoner write, but he may 
have done so. He came, perhaps, twice in a week, and then 
he would not come for perhaps two months, during six years. 
I last saw Tiim there in September or October, 1895. I went 
for a holiday at the latter part of August and beginning of 
September. I saw him on my return. This was the note- 
paper and envelope in use at the Grand Hotel close on the 
beginning of 1895. The Victoria Hotel, which is given 
among the list, of hotels at the head of the notepaper, was 
taken over by our company on 1st January, 1895. I did not 
notice that the postmark on the envelope is 3rd December, 

1894, for some time before the company proposed to take over 
the Victoria, and I believe they were carrying it on before 

1895. 

Cross-examined — I never saw the prisoner writing. 

Marion Taylor, examined — In the early part of January, 
7895, I was living at Morton Place, Pimlico. On the first or 
second Saturday in January, about 4 p.m., the prisoner 
addressed me in the usual way, and asked me if he might call, 
and I gave him my address on a dirty envelope. He said he 

121 



Adqjf Beck. 

Marion Taylor 

would call the next afternoon. He did not tell me his name. 
The same evening I received a telegram, signed “ Wilto-n, 
Carlton Club.” “ Shall call upon you at four o’clock/ ’ 
Next day, Sunday, he came punctually at four, and stayed 
about two hours, I should think. I gave him tea. He told 
me he had a very nice house at St. John’s Wood, that ho 
had quarrelled with his mistress, and should like me to be 

at the head of his establishment. He said, “ You are nicely 

dressed, but certainly not well enough for my establishment.” 
Ho said he had an estate near Homcastle, in Lincolnshire. 
He asked me what jewels I possessed; I had not many. Ho 
made, in my presence, a most elaborate list of dresses, and 
everything. I was to get them at Redfern’s. He said, 

“ Now, I will write you a cheque for £25; you pay so much 

at Redfern’s, and keep the balance for yourself, and I will 
pay Streeter’s, and send the diamonds down.” Ho said, 
“ Of course, you must have some rings.” lie took from mo 
an ordinary old buckle ring for the size; it was not mine. 
He said the jewellery would be brought by a commissionaire, 
and my ring would be sent back. 

He wrote out in my presence a cheque for £25 on a form 
like this promissory note form. The cheque and list are lost. 
He signed the cheque, but I could not read the name; it was 
all scribble. He never told me his name was Wilton. I 
said to him, “ You are not English.” He said, “ No, I 
am a German.” There was on my mantelpiece a little 
statuette of Goethe. lie said, “ Wliat do you know about 
Goethe? ” I said to him, “ Well, I am educated,” and wo 
got into conversation. The cheque was on the Union Bank. 
He told me I should find the branch of the bank opposite 
Marlborough House. I did not find it. I w r ent to the nearest 
branch of the Union Bank I could find, and got nothing by 
it. This list (Q) is like the one he gave me, and the writ- 
ing is the same. As he was leaving, he said “ Have you any 
silver? ” He wanted it for his cab, it was Sunday night. 
I gave him 9s. He said h© should come at one o’clock next 
day with the commissionaire, with the diamonds. I afterwards 
went to the Carlton Club, and inquired for Wilton, but got no 
satisfactory answer. I did not see him again till, on 2nd 
January, 1896, I went to Rochester Rcftv Police Court, in 
consequence of seeing his case in the paper, arid picked the 
prisoner out of eleven or twelve men without the slightest 
difficulty. I am quite sure about him. 

Cross-examined — There was no one there a bit like him. 
They were all respectably dressed. I saw one man, whom I 
have seen driving a coach. I cannot say if the prisoner was 
the only man of the eleven or twelve respectably dressed. 

122 



Evidence for prosecution. 

Marion Taylor 

I was looking into a jeweller’s window when the prisoner spoke 
to me. I did not keep this matter to myself. I was only 
about five minutes with him in the street. When he came the 
next day, I thought he was very nicely dressed. lie had on 
a black coat and a covert coat. He had on a waistcoat with 
a white lining that showed beyond the waistcoat. He had 
patent bbots, white spats and grey trousers. I cannot say if 
he had a watch and chain. I did not give information to the 
police. I afterwards read the prisoner’s case in the Daily 
Chronicle. 1 went to the Police Court for revenge. I had 
read, no description of the man in custody. The prisoner is 
the living picture of the man I saw. He was a middle-aged 
mail, with grey hair, as the prisoner’s is, I am suro. There 
was no mixture of any other colour in his hair. He looks 
very much older now. The man *1 saw was not perceptibly 
younger than the prisoner. The ring I gave him I borrowed 
from my landlady; it was not a very valuable one. I gave 
her the documents to hold for safety ; I cannot keep anything. 
The prisoner wrote with rather a cramped hand. I watched 
him write the list. I took an interest in it. I w T as greatly 
excited. 

Re-examined — In writing the cheque, when ho came to the 
signature, he wrote backhanded. I did not notice liow he 
held the pen. I have not had an opportunity of hearing him 
speak since he has been in custody, except a w r ord or two on 
the last hearing. 

Evelyn Emily Miller, examined — -I live at 17 Park 
Village East, Regent’s Park. About 5 p.m. on 28th January, 
1895, I was in Bond Street, when the prisoner said, “ Did 
not I meet you at a ball last night? ” I said he might have 
done so, but that I did not remember him. He said he was 
sure he had met 'mo, and that he would be delighted if I 
would allow him to lunch with mo at my . house next day. 
I said he might. Ho said he was not quite sure whether it 
would be the next day or the day after, but that he would 
send me a telegram in the evening, signed Cf Wilton, Carlton 
Club.” I gave, him my address, and we separated. The 
same evening I bad a telegram, signed “ Wilton, Carlton 
Club,” stating that he would be with me at two to-morrow. 
He came at two next day, and had lunch with me. He said 
he had a house in St. John’s Wood, and the lady who had 
been acting as his housekeeper had just left. I asked who 
he was, and he said he was the Earl of Wilton. I said I 
would consider whether I would go to his house in St. John’s 
Wood. He offered me the position; he said he would come 
a day or two after and arrange details; that after the sitting 

123 



AdoJf Beck. 

Evelyn Emily Miller 

of Parliament he was going on a trip to Italy, and would 
like me to go with him, and that I should want a new out- 
fit. He asked for a piece of paper, in order to give mo 
a list of dresses. I gave him the paper and he wrote out 
a list, which has been destroyed. He composed it himself, 
it was like this , and in writing like this (Q). The tailor- 
made dresses I was to get from Redfern, and the other gowns 
from Russell & Allen. He said I should have to pay some- 
thing on account, and he would give me a cheque. He 
took a cheque book, in which there were not many cheques, 
from his pocket, and filled up this cheque for .£30. [This 
.was on the Balham branch of the London and South-Western 
Bank.] He said I could cash it at the South Belgravia 
branch. I gave him an envelope to put it in, and he sealed 
it up and addressed it. 

lie said also that he would give mo some jewellery, and 
asked me to let him have one of my rings to get the size 
of my finger. I asked him to take the size in cardboard. 
He said he preferred having the ring. I was wearing some 
rings, but I did not care to part with them, so I borrowed 
a diamond horseshoe ring, worth £7 or £8, which I gave 
him. He was with me about one and a quarter hours. Before 
he left ho said he had a pensioned -off coachman who lived 
near me, and he wanted to take him some money, and he 
jhad not any change. Could I lend him £2? I believed 
about the pensioned coachman, and lent him £2. He said I 
could deduct it out of the £30 cheque. He said a commis- 
sionaire would bring the ring back that evening. The ring 
did not come. I did not see the prisoner again uptil lately. 
I took the cheque to Sloano Square, and was referred there to 
the Balham branch of the London and South-Western Bank. 
I presented the cheque there, and it was dishonoured and 
returned. I then went to Albany Street police station, and 
reported what had happened, and described the man who had 
robbed me. At the beginning of February this year the 
police came to me. I went to Westminster Police Court 
and saw the prisoner with a number of other men in the 
Court yard, and identified him at once without difficulty. 
He wrote both the body and the signature of this cheque in 
my presence. He spoke with a slight foreign accent. 

Cross-examined — The description I gave at the police 
station was of a man aged about sixty, 5 feet 4 inches, hair 
and moustache cut short, almost white, dressed well, speaks 
with rather a broad accent, and evidently a gentleman by 
education. When I went to identify the prisoner I knew 
a man was in custody of whom it was said he had committed 
similar offences. I had read the case in the newspapers; I 

124 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Evelyn Emily Miller 

have a good memory ; I did not take a very great interest 
in the ease; I took an interest in it because I wanted to 
get the ring back. I had attended the Police Court to 
identify the prisoner before I gave evidence. There was 
one man in the yard like the prisoner, but a stouter, bigger 
man. I could not give a description of him, or of how he 
was dressed. The case was being heard that day. I did 
not go into Court. I saw the case in the Daily Telegraph , 
not. in the Sunday papers, or the Daily Graphic . I read the 
whole case. The man wrote freely, without difficulty. The 
ring I gave him could be easily identified. The man who 
spoke to me in Bond Street was an utter stranger to me; he. 
would answer to the description of an oldish man with grey 
hair, and well dressed. He was about five minutes with me 
in the street. He might have met me at the ball. I 
thought he might have danced with me* 

lie-examined — It was a Covent Carden fancy dress ball, 
with masks and dominoes. Some of the men wear masks 
and dominoes. The prisoner had on a black waistcoat with 
a white lining showing, it might have been a double waist- 
coat, and a frock-coat. I saw him at the Police Court when 
I gave evidence, and here to-day. I have no doubt about his 
being the man. 

Alice Sinclair, examined — In February last I lived in. 
Upper Baker Street. On Saturday, 16th February, about 1 
p.m., I was passing with my sister through Ludgate Hill, when 
a man, who, to the best of my belief, is the prisoner, came 
up and asked me if I was waiting for an omnibus. After a 
little conversation he asked me for my address, and I gave it to 
him. He asked permission to call on the next day. lie called 
the next day about two. He was announced as Mr. Wilton. He 
came into the room', and said he was the Earl of Wilton. He 
sat talking to me for three-quarters of an hour. He wrote 
me out a list of dresses, and asked if I should like to dine 
with him. lie said he had a house in Abbey Road, St. 
John's Wood, and asked me if I should like to : go and stay 
there with him, and if I should like to go and dine 
with him on the Tuesday. He said it was a very nice 
house, with good conservatories, and plenty of servants, and 
the best of wine. He proposed that I should dine with him 
there, to see how I liked it, on the Tuesday. The list of 
dresses he wrote out is at home. (The witness was directed 
to fetch it at the conclusion of her examination.) The hand- 
writing was the same as this (Q). I was to get the dresses 
at Redfern’s, the riding habit at Cobb’s, in Baker Street, a 
well-known shop ; I believed I was to go to Norman’s in 

12.3 



Adolf Beck. 


Alice Sinclair 

Victoria Street for boots. He gave me a cheque for £40. I 
was to pay a deposit for some of the things and keep £5 
for myself. I was to give his name, the Earl of Wilton, 
at the shops. He tore the cheque from a cheque-book, and 
wrote out the whole of it and signed it; he kept his hand in 
front that I should not see. [This was a cheque on the 
Balham branch of the London and South-Western Bank.] 

He said I wanted some rings, and that he would buy me 
a half -hoop diamond ring and a marquise ring, and asked me 
to give him rings for the sizes. I asked if he could not do it 
with a piece of cardboard. He said no, surely I could trust 
him with my rings, and I gave him a wedding ring and a plain 
foreign gold ring. He said they would be sent back to me 
by a commissionaire from Streeter’s. He talked about tak- 
ing me away in his yacht to the Riviera. Next morning I 
took the cheque, which he had put in an envelope and directed 
to the bank at Belgravia Mansions. I saw no London and 
South-Western Bank there, and I opened the envelope and 
went back home. I afterwards sent the cheque to the London 
and South-Western Bank; they refused payment, and kept it. 
On 2nd January the police fetched me to Westminster Police 
Court, where I picked out the prisoner from about a dozen 
men. I thought at the time of our conversation that he was 
not an Englishman. 

Cross-txamintd by Mr. Gill — I made no complaint to the 
police ; I believe they came to me from seeing my , name 
and address on the cheque. The only woman who has given 
evidence that I knew before this case was Miss Taylor; I 
saw her about five or six years ago. The first day I met 
the prisoner I was with him about two minutes ;' my sister 
saw him, she does not live with me. I saw this case in 
the papers about the day after I was subpoenaed; I knew 
there was a man in custody, and if he was at all like the man 
I had seen he must have been an elderly man with grey hair; 
the prisoner looks slightly thinner now; he looks altered since 
I saw him at the Police Court. I am pretty well sure he is 
the man; to the best of my belief he is the man; I recognised 
him among the other men ; they were not the least like .him 
I am quite sure. There was one other man, oldish, with grey 
hair, and well dressed. I think I gave the detective a. de- 
scription of the prisoner when he brought a subprcna to me. 

I did not think the Earl of Wilton was a foreign title; he told 
mo he had travelled a good bit ; T thought he was a- gentleman, 
and I took his word who he was. I was not excited during 
the interview. I believed his statements. I should haVe 
no difficulty in identifying the rings I parted with. He was 
remarkably w^ell dressed, with spats, a black frock-coat: 3 

met *• 9 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Alice Sinclair 

think he had no overcoat. It was a very fine day when I was 
waiting for the omnibus. I could not say if the next day was 
fine ; he had no overcoat. He had a black satin tie, with a 
large pearl pin, and something white inside his waistcoat. My 
sister had not seen him since the Saturday. He wore white 
spats; I cannot say if he had patent boots. I don’t know if he 
had a w r atch and chain. 

Be-examincd — He looks slightly thinner now, and his mous- 
tache is not waxed, as it was before. He looks about the same 
age. He looks thinner than when he was at the Police Court, 
his moustache is the same, as it was there; apart from that 
he looks the same now as he did in February. T had no 
communication with Miss Taylor before I went to the police 
station and identified the prisoner; I was thp first to identify 
him, and she was the last, and I was very surprised to see 
her. I did not help her, and she did not help me, to point 
him out. 

By Mr. Gill — The man held fiis pen backwards; when he 
wrote the lists of dresses he wrote vejy freely and without 
difficulty, but very indistinctly. There were five or six women 
at the Police Court to identify the prisoner when I did so. 
We went in one by one; I first, and then I saw the others 
come out. The detective asked me if I would go and identify 
the man. I touched him with my umbrella. I only hesi- 
tated because I did not care about doing so. I did not touch 
any one else, only the one man, who was the prisoner. 

Etiibl Aitnie Townsend, examined — I am a widow. In 
March, 1895, I was living in a flat in Shaftesbury Avenue. 
On 6th March I was walking with my little daughter in Picca- 
dilly about 1.15 p.m., when the prisoner asked me if I was 
Lady somebody (I do not remember the name he used) ; l 
said I was not, unfortunately. He asked me then where I 
was living, and if I knew Lord Aberdeen. I said I did, but 
I knew his brother better. I thought by that I knew the 
prisoner, and had met him at dinner somewhere. He said 
he had just come back from Canada, that he had been staying 
with the Earl of Aberdeen, and should like to talk to me about 
him, and he asked if he might call. I said “ Yes,” and 
gave him my card; he did not say who he was. He kept 
his handkerchief to the left-hand side of his face the whole time 
he w^s speaking to me, about three minutes, as if he was 
trying to conceal his face; and when he came to my .flat he 
did the same thing. He said he would call at four the next 
afternoon. He came about 3.40; my sister let him in, and 
he came into the drawing-room. He did not keep his hand- 
kerchief to his face the whole time, only while my sister was 
’ “ ' 127 



Adolf Beck. 

Ethel Annie Townsend 

letting him in, and part of time he was with me; he stayed 
about twenty minutes. He said he was Lord Wintbn de 
Willoughby. He asked why I lived alone in a flat. I said 
1 had an income, and wished to do so. He asked me if I 
would prefer to live in St. John’s Wood. I said I should 
very much like it, but 1 should want to know' something 
about him first. He said he had a little house there, with, 
I think, twelve servants. It was standing empty at the time, 
with the exception of the servants; that he had a carriage 
and pair, and a wine cellar, and everything requisite, but no 
lady in possession, and that he wx>uld call and take me to see 
it. He said he did not think I was dressed sufficiently well, 
and he washed to buy me some new clothes and diamonds, and 
he wished me to write a list of what I wanted. I wrote the 
list, which he dictated to me; he said I was to get some of 
the things at Redfern’s. I destroyed the list about two days 
after, finding he did not return. He said he would give mo 
.£150 to go on with. I saw him writ© out this cheque for 
£120; ho put it in an envelope and sealed it. 

He said he would send me some jewellery from Streeter’s, 
and asked nie for a ring for the size of my finger; he promised 
me a few diamond rings. I gave him the only ring I had on 
at the time, my wedding ring, for the size. He said the ring 
would come back by a commissionaire with one arm. He 
said he would make an appointment with me as to the house 
in St. John’s Wood in two or three days’ time. He looked 
at a thick gold curb bracelet I. had on, and said he thought 
it ought to be set with a diamond in the padlock. I gave 
it to him. lie also took iny sister’s bracelet from the table 
to have some dents knocked out. He took an ostrich feather 
fan, that had cost fourteen guineas, to have it mounted with 
turquoise, and a pair of elephant’s tusks (I have- seen a similar 
pair worth fifty guineas) to have mounted as an inkstand, 
and a hand-painted porcelain photograph of myself. I left 
the room to get him some tea. 

Two or three hours after ho had gone I missed some tigers* 
claws, and the teeth of an animal mounted in silver with my 
monogram, they had all been in the room in which he had 
been sitting. I valued the property he got from me at £180, 
but it was worth more. Next day I took his cheque to the 
bank at Balharn. I was asked to put my name and address 
on it; the bank kept it, and it w r as dishonoured. Two days 
afterwards I communicated with the police at Vine Street, and 
gave a description of the prisoner and the name he had given 
me. 

I did not see the prisoner again till I saw him at the Police 
Court on 23rd December. The police came for me, and I 

128 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Ethel Annie Townsend 

went and saw thirteen men in the yard of Westminster Police 
Court, and I at once recognised the prisoner. Immediately 
I heard him speak I was doubtful, as he spoke in my flat in 
a Yankee twang, and in the Police Court with a foreign accent ; 
I thought it was Swiss. His hands, hair, and feet are the 
same as I noticed before; he is the same man. 

Cross-examined — I thought I might have met him in India, 
where I had been for eleven years ,* I did not recognise him. I 
heard him say at the police station that he had never seen 
me or any of the women, except one who gave evidence against 
him. When I heard his voice I said I did not think he was 
the man. The man I saw was oldish, with grey hair. I have 
seen some oldish men with grey hair, and well dressed, in 
Piccadilly. I believe the man who spoke to me to be an 
Englishman. He made up the things he took away into a 
parcel ; they were not very large. Not one of the articles was 
found in his possession; I could identify them. Of the men 
I saw him among afterwards no one was like him. He seemed 
to write freely; I did not watch him; his back was towards 
me. My sister let him in when he called; but it was very 
dark, and ho had his handkerchief to his face. The man 
who spoke to me in Piccadilly had a black overcoat with a 
velvet collar, and spats. I am not quite sure whether he had 
a little white lining to his waistcoat. I read this case in 
the paper. I had not heard that four or five people had 
given evidence before me, describing the same sort of frauds; 
1 thought I was the first one that went to Vine Street. I 
had spoken to the police before I read the case in the papers. 
I don't remember reading the case; I may have done so. He 
gave the name of Winton de Willoughby. I described him as 
about fifty-three. I did not say he wore a yellow and black 
stripped muffler. He had no whiskers; his moustache is the 
same now as then. He looks just the same now as then. He 
had what appeared to be a gold watch and chain. I did not 
notice any ring on his finger. I gave the police a full list of 
my property, and described it. 

lie-examined — When I first saw him at the Police Court 
he was wearing an overcoat the same, I believe, as the man 
had worn. When he came to me he had fawn-coloured spats on. 
At the station I heard him speak in a foreign language to the in- 
terpreter ; it was not French ; it might have been Norwegian ; I 
did not understand it. When he called on me he only talked on 
the one subject. I felt he wanted to get away as quickly as 
possible ; he fidgeted, and he did not drink the tea that was pre- 
pared for him. I made the things up into a parcel for him. 

Alice Sinclair, recalled and re-examined — This is the list 
the prisoner gave me ; I have just fetched it. 

K 


129 



Adolf Beck. 

Minnie Lewis 

Minnie Lewis, examined — In April, 1895, I was living at 
3 Charlwood Street, Pimlico. Miss Allen lived in the same 
house. Before 3rd April I had seen the prisoner coming to 
the house to see Miss Allen ; I knew him by sight. On 3rd 
April he called to see her; I answered the door, and told him 
she was not at home. I recognised him as the man who had 
called before. He asked to be allowed to write a note to her. 
I took him into my room for that purpose#, and fetched him 
notepaper and envelopes. He asked me to sit down and 
talk to him. lie told me he wanted to do some good for Miss 
Allen ; he considered for a few minutes, and then said he would 
not write to her. He told me he would like me to be his 
housekeeper at St. John’s Wood ; the one he had had before 
was always intoxicated and he had had to send her away; 
and that he was Lord Wilton. I had not known him by 
any such name before. He told me I should have to have a 
lot of dresses, and that he would have me taught riding. He 
wrote out and gave me a list of things I wanted; I have 
destroyed that list. It was the same as thus (Q), and the 
writing was the same. Some of the things I wa s to get at 
Redfem’s. A riding habit, which I was to get at Cobb's, 
I think, was on the list. I heard of Cobb's, in Baker Street, 
as a great riding-h#bit maker. Miss Allen is not still living 
with me. 

He spoke about jewellery, and asked for a ring, for the size 
of my finger, and said he would send me several rings by a 
one-armed man. I gave him a gentleman's signet ring, which 
I was wearing. He wrote out this cheque for £30 on a sheet 
of notepaper in my presence, enclosing it in an envelope, sealing 
it, and addressing it to the Union Bank, St. James Street, and 
gave it to me to pay for the things. He left, saying he would 
write and make an appointment for going iqto the house at 
St. John's Wood. The same day I went to St. James Street, 
but could not find the Union Bank ; I found a branch at Charing 
Cross, and presented the cheque there, and one of the clerks 
took me to Scotland Yard, that I might give information about 
the cheque, and I gave information of what, had happened, and 
a description of the man who had visited me. 

In January or February the police came to me, and I went 
to Westminster Police Court, where from about fourteen men 
I picked out the prisoner. I have not a shadow of a doubt 
he is the man. In writing the cheque, when he came to the 
signature he altered his hand, and wrote backwards. 

Cross-examined — The man who called had no marked 
peculiarity th^t I can mention. He had a gold watch and 
chain, and patent leather boots. I had not the least difficulty 
in picking out the prisoner. I described him to the police 

130 



Evidence for Prosecution. > 

Minnie Lewie 

as fifty-five or fifty-six, five feet high, or a little more, with a 
tail hat, a black coat and vest, bluish striped trousers, patent 
boots and spats. I cannot remember if I said he was five 
feet eight inches; the constable asked me if he was about a& 
tall as the man from the bank, and I said lt Yes.” I could 
easily, identify my ring again ; the man’s chain had a seal with 
a crest attached. He wrote freely. 1 read the case in the 
newspaper beforo'I went to the Police Court, and I knew a 
man was in custody charged with having done this sort of thing. 
Among the fourteen men, no one else answered by description 
except the prisoner. Miss Allen left the following week, and 
I don’t know where she is; I do not know where she came 
from, or anything about her; she had lived in the house about 
five weeks. 

Re-examined — The prisoner had visited her for about three 
weeks before 3rd April. I had seen him about three times 
during the three weeks; I saw him coming in and going out; 
I had not opened the door to him, or spoken to him, before 
3rd April. The cheque and the list are the only things I 
saw him write; he seemed to write freely. He wore brown 
spats. When 1 saw thirteen or fourteen men in the yard, I 
went up to the prisoner without hesitation, and said — “ This 
is the man.” 

Juliette Kluth, examined — I live at 5 Harwood Road. 
Walham Green. In March, 1895, I was at Olympia with my 
little sister, between 3 and 4 p.m. After the performance 
the prisoner came up and spoke to me. I gave him my address 
at his request. Next day, 1st March, he called; lie said he 
kept a large place in St. John’s Wood, and asked me if I would 
come and see him one day; he said that he had some more 
friends there, and wojuld I give them some music. I said 1 
did not mind, as I had nothing to do during the afternoon. I 
am a professional artist. I think he told me he was the 
proprietor of a mine somewhere, and had plenty of money. I 
noticed by his speech that he was not an Englishman. I am 
a Belgian by birth*. When I said I would come and see him 
he told me I was not dressed well enough, and he wrote me 
out a list of clothes. I burnt the list, which was like this 
(Q), a.nd in the same handwriting. I was to go to Redf era’s 
for some of the things, and to Regent Street for the boots and 
shoes. I said I had not enough money to get the things. 
He said — “ Very well, little wqman, I will give you a cheque,” 
and he wrote out this chequ$lfj&<r £20. [This was on a pro- 
missory not© form and addressed to the Union Bank.] 

He signed it and put it 4n an envelope, which he sealed 
with wax. He told me I was hot to open it, but to take it to 



Adolf Beck. 

Juliette Kluth 

the Union Bank, Belgrave Mansions, just as it was. He said 
he would give me some Jewellery, and asked for one of my rings, 
to take the size of my linger. I gave him a ring with three 
little diamonds. He said he would return it with three other 
rings by & one-armed messenger in about an hour’s time. He 
was with me for about an hour. lie said he would write to me 
■when I was to come to his place. I never heard of or saw 
him again. I went to Belgrave Mansions next day, but could 
find no bank there. 

I saw this case reported in a newspaper, and I wrote to 
Scotland Yard, Enclosing the cheque. I gave a description of 
the man. On 2nd January I was asked to go to the West- 
minster Police Court. I there saw about eighteen men, and 
among them I recognised the prisoner at once, as soon as I 
put my foot in the yard. 

Cross-examined — I saw the case in the Weekly Times and 
Echo 'before I went to the police station, that a man giving the 
name of Lord Wilton was charged with committing this sort 
of fraud in connection with women. I think the signature on 
the cheque looks very much like Wilton. I read in the paper 
that the man oharged was the proprietor of a mine. I described 
the man to the police as about fifty, short, broad shoulders, 
no beard, and a long moustache. The only peculiarity I noticed 
about him was his foreign accent. I mentioned that to the 
police at the time. About ten other women were at the Police 
Court to identify him when I went there. I went in about 
third, I think. When I came out I said I had identified him 
at once. I looked at the other men before identifying the 
prisoner. There was no other oldish, short man with grey hair 
there ; no one like it. 1 knew there was a man in 'custody who 
answered the description of an oldish man, with grey hair, 
and well dressed. The man I met at Olympia had patent- 
leather button boots, and a large gold watch and chain. I 
did not notice if it was a hunting watch . I did not say it was 
at the Police Court. I have no idea what a hunting watch is. 
Some one from Scotland Yard came to see me after I wrote, 
and took a statement from me. I do not know whether I could 
identify my ring. The man wrote . quickly. Three of the 
other witnesses were at the Police Court the day I identified the 
prisoner. Wo talked about the case a little. I was a bit 
angry. 

Ile-examined — When he called upon me his moustache was 
longei; and waxed at the ends. When I first saw him at the 
Police Court it was not waxed. When he first spoke to me at 
Olympia he spoke in French. I speak French very well. 
Afterwards he said I spoke English very well ; I said I wla&mot 
an * Englishwoman ; he said I spoke English as well as anv 

132 



Evidence for Pfosecution. 

Juliette Kluth 

English people do, pretty near. He did not tell me his nation- 
ality. I know the difference between German and French 
accents ; his was more French than German when he spoke 
English. I could not say whether he spoke French as if he 
were a Frenchman, or had acquired it. I have never, to my 
knowledge, been in conversation with a Norwegian. He only 
spoke a few words to me in French. 

Kate Brakefield, examined — I am married. I am a music- 
hall artist. In June, 1895, I lived in a flat at tJpceme Road, 
Chelsea. On Saturday, 22nd June, I was walking down Sloane 
Street in the afternoon. The prisoner followed me, and, after 
a while, came up and said he followed me because I had small 
feet. It led to conversation, and ultimately he asked me where 
I lived. I told him my profession. He asked me what instru- 
ment I played. I said, “ The mandolin.” He said he would 
like to come and hear me play. 1 arranged for him to call the 
next day and hear mo play. 

Next day, Sunday, he called. He asked me where I had 
been. I said to Wilton Crescent. He said he was Lord Wilton, 
and that all that property round there belonged to him. After 
a little conversation he asked me for a sheet of paper to write 
out a list of costumes which he was going to buy me; he said 
he had so much money he did not know what to do with it. 
I got some notepaper and an envelope for him. He wrote 
out this list (F) of dresses and other things I was to get. 
He put the name Redfem at the top, and told me to get the 
dresses there. lie gave me a cheque for £30 to pay fojr the 
costumes, and one for £20 for myself to spend till he came to 
see me again. He arranged to come the following day. He 
put both cheques into one envelope and addressed it “ Union 
Bank, St. James’s Street.” I asked him why he did not 
endorse the cheques across the back? and he said, “ Oh, I am 
known so w r ell, you have only to hand them in and you will 
get the money.” I did not notice that the cheques were drawn 
on bill of exchange forms. He said I was not to look at the 
cheques, and he sealed them down and put them under a large 
book. -I 

He asked me to take some of my rings off for the size, as 
he would get me eome fresh ones, and I gave him for that 
purpose a diamond and turquoise ring, and a ruby ring worth 
about £10. They, were presents. He said he would return 
them by a commissionaire with one arm, and I was to b$ in to 
take them. He said he would send them back the next day. 
He just tried the mandolin, but it was out of tune. He stayed 
nearly two 5 hours. I was talking to him all that time. He 
asked me to take down large Indian medallions, with paintings 

133 



Adolf Beck. 

Kmte Brakefitld 

of India on ivory, counted in silver, and with plush frames, 
that hung on the wall, that he might look at them. They 
were laid on a chair. He looked at a silver belt and bangles, 
and said they were no good; I was to give them to my poor 
relations. About 3.45 I went up to see about some tea, which 
I was going to give him. When I came down to ask him a 
question, he was gone, and I missed my mandolin and case, 
seven silver bangles, a silver brooch, a silver belt, two of the 
medallions ; the brooch he asked me to lend him, as it was a 
good design. I have seen none of those things since; I have 
inquired at every pawnshop, and cannot find them. Within 
an hour I gave information at the police station, and gave a 
description of the man. I did not take these cheques to the 
bank ; I made up my mind that I had been robbed. 

On 23rd December I went to the police station, having seen 
this case in the paper, and picked out the prisoner from seven 
other men. I am satisfied he is the same man. He is a little 
thinner in the face, and his moustache is not so military, it was 
then long and watxed. 

Cross-examined — There is no doubt that this is the same 
man I saw at the Police Court and in the yard. I saw in 
the paper a man was in custody for defrauding women. I 
saw a very good picture of him in the paper, but not before 
I picked him out. The man I had seen was oldish, with grey 
hair and moustache, and well dressed. None of the other 
men in the yard answered to that description; as soon as I 
saw him I knew hinw I took no notice of the other men. 
I was not the least excited on the Sunday wdien he called. 
I don’t know why he was going to give me all these things. 
My husband was in a situation. You could put th& medallion* 
undeir your arm, not in your pocket. I could easily identify 
them. I did not show him out, and there was no one else 
to do so. My parlour is alongside the front door. He seemed 
to turn his hand a little round in writing. He had on a 
kind of grey check trousers and white spats, a white lining 
to a black waistcoat, a gold chain, a tall silk hat, and a blue 
thin overcoat. When I met hiiri on the Saturday he had a 
grey dust coat. He had patent-leather button boots. lie had 
a little scar by the right side of his neck, under the ear. I 
spoke to him about it, and he said — “ Oh, don’t speak to me 
about that, talk about the costumes, because I want to get 
away ”; it is a little scar something like a mole. I said — 
“ It is a singular thing; it is rather like this on my face.” I 
have a - mole there. I did not mention that to the police, nor 
in my evidence before the magistrate. ■* I have spoken of it 
a good many times to the detective. My attention was at- 
tracted to something said in the Evening News about a man 

134 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Kate Brtk«fieU 

having such a scar, and that was why I went to the station. 
I and three or four women were there on the same day, we 
went in one by one to pick him out. That was 23rd December, 
the day I gave evidence. 

Re-examined — I told Constable Jeffreys about the mark on 
the prisoner’s face. I noticed he spoke with a little foreign 
accent, and I asked him if he was foreign. He said he had 
been abroad a good deal. [At Mr. Gill’s request the witness 
went to the dock and pointed to the angle of the prisoner’s 
jaw as the place where she said the mark was; she said — “ I do 
not see it now.”] 

Daisy Grant, examined — I live at 44 Circus Road, Stk John’s 
Wood. On 4th July I was in St. James’s Street," about 5 p.m., 
with a lady and a little?' boy, when the prisoner came up and 
spoke to me, and said he would call on me. He asked me if I 
did not remember him. I said no. He said, “ My name 
is Wilton,” and he told me to ask my young man whether he 
knew him. I had no young man witA. me, the prisoner must 
have followed me about and seeh some one with me, as the 
prisoner lived in Victoria Street, and I lived then just round 
the corner, in York Street. I did not know the prisoner by 
sight. I gave him my address, he took out a pocket book and 
wrote it down, and said he would call the next afternoon. The 
next afternoon, 5th July, he called about four o’clock, arid 
remained with me about three-quarters of an hour. I told 
him I did not know" his name, nor did any one I knew know" 
him. He said it was only an excuse to speak to me. He 
said he was Lord Wilton. He said he had a house at St. John’s 
Wood, which was empty, and suggested that I should go to it. 
I said I was very happy where I w^as. lie said he should like 
to buy me some better dresses and jewellery, and asked for a 
piece of paper on which he could write out a list. He wrote 
out this list. He arranged to call the following Monday to 
arrange matters. He said I had better pay a deposit,' and he 
wrote out this cheque for £35, which he put in an envelope, 
and addressed it to a hank in St. James’s Street. 

He said I should want a ring, and asked me for a ring t$ 
measure the size of my finger. I gave him a small diamond 
ring and also a gold bracelet which w r as dented, and w r hich 
he offered to get repaired at Streeter’s; He said a commis- 
sionaire with one arm in a sling would bring them back in 
an hour. I fetched from another room, and showed him a 
marquise ring in a case; I left that in the room in wKich he 
was. I went out of the room twice, once for matches to light a 
cigarette, and once for a photograph. After he had g$P© I 
missed my ring out of its case; the ring is worth about £15. 

135 



Adolf Beck. 


Uaiiy lirant 

It was given to me. I valued all he took at £15, but the 
marquise ring 1 find is worth a good deal more than I said. 
I went to St. James's Street, but could not find any Union Bank 
there. 

On 9th July I went to the police station and gave a descrip- 
tion of the man. On 16th December 1 was sent for, and 
went to the police station, and there, among seven or eight 
men, I recognised the prisoner after he took off his hat. He 
had his hat on. I asked that lie might take it off, and when he 
took it off I knew it was him. I say now he is the man. He 
was in my apartments three-quarters of an hour. 

Cross-examined — I was influenced by his taking off his hat 
in identifying him. 1 could tell him better with his hat off. 
There is nothing remarkable about his hair; he is slightly 
inclined to be bald on the top of his head, but I was influenced 
by his whole appearance. There is a peculiarity in the shape 
of his face. I did not mention that in the description I gave. 
When I met him in St. James's Street he spoke to me first, 
and then to the little boy with me, “ What a nice little boy.” 
I had never seen him before. I think he must have known 
me, because he lived in Victoria Street. I found out at the 
police station where he lived. I don't know how long he had 
lived then at Victoria Street. I saw him write in his pocket 
book my address at York Street, Westminster. I know now 
that my name and address were not found in anything belong- 
ing to the prisoner. The lady with me in St. James's Street 
did not glance at the man when he spoke to me, she walked 
straight on; she was not with me when he called. She did 
not go to the Police Court. When he called he had on a frock- 
coat, with white lining to his waistcoat, and whfte spats, a 
heavy gold chain, and apparently a gold watch. I think he 
had a pearl pin ; I do not remember. I described the man 
as between fifty and sixty, rather short, about five feet two, 
rather fat, with a dark complexion (I have not a good memory), 
moustache cut short, brown, turning grey; it was a tawny 
sort of moustache, with a lot of grey in it. I remembered 
more then than I do now. I saw his watch. He wrote 
everything but his name in the ordinary way; he wrote his 
signature to the cheque with the pen between two fingers. I 
did not notice him write the list so much. I was sent for 
an hour or two after the prisoner was arrested, and had not 
time to read any description of him. Miss Meissonier was 
at the t Police Court when I got there. I had not seen her 
before. She spoke to me of him, asked me what I had lost and 
that sort of thing. None of the men among whom the prisoner 
was placed was like the prisoner so far as I saw. My atten- 
tion was attracted to him at once. I looked round and saw* 

136 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Daisy Grant 

him, and said I should not like to swear till he took his hat 
off. I did not notice any other man. I should not like to 
swear that there wasi another well-dressed man there. There 
was another man with a grey moustache, but he was too tall and 
had a ruddy face. Afterwards at the Police Court I heard 
his address and came to tho conclusion that he must have 
followed me as he lived round the corner. When he spoke 
to me in the street he had on a low round hat. I cannot 
remember if he had on a light or a dark suit of clothes; I 
think it was a brown sort of coat. He was dressed quite 
differently when he called upon me. The things 1 lost I 
could easily identify. 

Re-examined — I noticed when he talked to me that he 
was not English, and I said — “ You * are not English . 99 He 
said he was, but he had travelled a lot. When he laughed 
his eyes nearly shut, and there was a certain expression which 
I cannot explain, but which I should know again. I noticed 
that when he called, and saw it afterwards at Westminster 
Police Court, after he had been identified. The pocket-book 
in which he wrote my name and address in St. James’s Street 
was of dark-coloured leather, mounted. I did not see what 
he wrote in it. 

Ottilib Meissonier, examined — T live at Fulham, and teach 
music. I am German. On 2Gth November I was passing 
through Victoria Street, going to a flower show, and I met the 
prisoner, who passed, turned back, and lifted his hat, and 
said — “ Oh, pardon; are you Lady Everton?” or “ Illington?” 
Then he asked my pardon, as he said he had made a mistake, 
and asked me where I went. I said I went to a flower show. 
He said it was not worth while going there, because the flowers 
were very poor ; and as he kept ten gardeners in Lincolnshire, 
his flowers were much better. I said I had that very morning 
received a box with some chrysanthemums, and as they were 
very beautiful, he asked permission to come and see them. 

I gave him my address. He spoke in English. I remarked 
that he was a foreigner, and he said no, he was an Englishman. 

The following day he called ; my servant, Harvey, opened the 
door. He said his cousin was Lord Salisbury; that he had 
a very great estate in London, nearly all the property round 
West Brompton t>elonging to him; and that he had £180,000 
a year. He proposed that I should join him and six other 
people in a trip to the Riviera, because I was musical and 
spoke several languages, I should be very useful. 1 speak 
three languages very well, English, German, and French , and 
Italian and Portuguese a little. At first I declined, and then 
I thought I ought not to throw away such a good occasioti, * 

137 



Adolf Beck. 


Ottilia MaiMonier 

and I told him I might manage to go for a fortnight, but not 
longer He thought my toilette was not good enough, and he, 
wrote out this long list. I had to stop him, ho wanted to 
make it so long. He told me to go to Redfern’s. He wanted 
me t6 order a riding habit at Cobb’s, of Baker Street. c As 
it was a yachting trip, I asked hirn what I wanted it for, and 
fie said when we landed he had always his own horses there. 
To pay for the things he ga,ve me this cheque for £40, to open 
an account ; he wrote out the body in my presence ; I think 
the signature was already written. He held the pen between 
the second and middle lingers, and under his hand. 

He thought my jewels were not good enough, and asked 
me to give him my bracelet to put two black pearls in; he 
did not like a diamond ring I had. I gave him a snfiill ring 
of not much value, for the size of my finger. I let him 
have my watch to get the glass mended. He told me the 
South Kensington Exhibition of antique watches partly belonged 
td him. I showed him an antique watch I had, about the size 
of a shilling. He had it in his hand, and said he would 
like to exchange it for a diamond bracelet, and that he would 
vdo so later in the Riviera. I left it on the table, and as 
soon as lie had gone I missed it, and I sent my servant after 
him, but she followed him p to the next corner, and then lost 
sight of him. He left, promising to come again on the following 
Wednesday. As he went out he took out a pocket-book and 
put in it a list of articles he wanted to buy himself; opera- 
glass, umbrella, dressing-case, hats, and other things. It 
was a very good pocket-book, of morocco, I think, with initials, 
but he opened it so quickly I could not see the initials. lie 
had a very good watch and a chain. He had a sil'ver match- 
box, and a cigarette case, leather. I think. Altogether, the 
property he took of mine was worth over £30. 

Immediateley after he had gone I took a cab, and tried to 
find the Union Bank, St. James’s Street, but could not. The 
cabman took me to a bank in Trafalgar Square, and I found 
the cheque was no good. I then went to Vine Street and 
gave a description of the man who had defrauded me. I 
noticed when he sat in my room he had some mark just below 
the right jaw, whether it was from a drawn tooth or not 
I cannot say. I described it at the station. 

I next, saw him on 10th December ; I was coming along 
Victoria Street from the Army and Navy Stores, and I saw 
the prisoner standing in the doorway of 135, or 139, Victoria 
Street. As soon as I passed I recognised him, and I stepped 
up to him and he smiled. I touched his coat and said — 
Sir, I know you.” As soon as he heard my voice he tried 
to push past me into the street, and said — “ What do you 

138 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Ottilia MeiMonier 

want from me?” I said — “ I want my two watches and 
my rings.” He used bad language to me and ran across 
Victoria Street, through omnibuses and cabs, to the other side. 
It We# about 4.40, and dark, the gas had just been lighted. 
I followed him, and said I would not leave him till I found 
a constable. He went down Victoria Street, and I followed. 
I saw a policeman nearly opposite the new clock, close to Vic- 
toria Station; I stepped up to the policeman, but, before I 
could speak, he again called me very bad names, and said 
I was in the habit of accosting men, and had accosted him. 
I said — “ Never mind, I give this gentleman in charge for 
stealing two watches and a ring, and forging a cheque for 
.£40.” He said — “ Well, I never saw her in my life,” or “ I 
have never seen her before.” The policeman said, as I charge 
him, he must take him to the station. When I saw him on 
that day he had on the same overcoat as when he called on 
me, but he had a different coat underneath. He had a frock- 
coat tho first time, and the next time he had a short jacket. 
He had light spats when he called on me. When I saw him 
in Victoria Street he had no spats, or dark ones, and an 
umbrella with a silver top like this. 'Phis is the overcoat he 
wore (produced), it is blue cloth with a black velvet collar^ 
as he sat in my place he put it on my couch, and I saw the 
lining; he wore tight brown gloves; the seams left marks 
on his htytids. 

Gross-examined — The first time I met him we spoke for 
four or five minutes ; the second time for about three-quarters 
of an hour, or it might be a little more. He was a perfect- 
stranger to me. His moustache was waxed then ; it is altered 
now. I tfm sure about the scar or something I spoke of on 
the right side ; it might be from a drawn tooth ; it was some- 
thing I could notice; I could not see it quite plainly. I see 
the mark on the prisoner now. [Some of the jury stated 
that they saw the mark described.] I gave a description of 
the mark as I lodged the charge. When I charged him I 
think he was dressed as he is now. At my place he wore a 
necktie with a pearl pin. 1 cannot say whether ho had 
patent-leather boots when he came to my place. I could 
not see if they were button boots, because he had light spats, 
nearly white. Ilis frock-coat had new silk facings, not worn 
in the least. He had a watch and chain, apparently gold. 
When I said to him in the street, t€ I know you,” he said, 
“ Pardon, what do you want from me?” And then he said, 
*' Oh, you mean the dentist.” I did not speak rudely to him, 
but quite calmly. I said I would follow him wherever he 
went. He told the policeman I was a common prostitute yrha 
accosted men. Just as I was stepping up to the constable, the 

139 



Adolf Beck. 

Ottille Meissonier 

prisoner walked more quickly and said it, and then he said — 
“ 1 never did see this woman before; I don’t know why she 
follows me.” He did not say — “ What am I to do with this 
'Woman, who keeps following and annoying me ” I went 
straight to the station. I could not tell what bootsi he had 
on then, or whether he had a watch and chain. I was so 
much upset and excited at the police station that I did not 
notice small details. It was 4.40 when I charged him in 
Victoria Street. I left the Army and Navy Stores at 4.30; 
it was not dark, but getting dark. 

Re-examined — When he followed me the first day in Victoria 
Street he was a little shorter than me, and I saw the waxed 
point of his moustache sticking out below my eyes when he 
raised his head. His moustache was waxed when I gave him 
into custody. I was differently dressed, and he did not 
recognise me at first, but when he heard my voice he recognised 
me and changed entirely, and tried to pass me. When I 
first spoke to him in the doorway he did not appear angry 
or annoyed with me for speaking to him ; quite the reverse, 
he smiled very sw r eetly. lie did not think I was accosting him 
improperly. 

Many Harvey, examined — I am the last witness’s servant, 
and was so in November. On Wednesday, 27th November, 

I let the prisoner in at 1 or 1.30. He asked me for Madame 
Meissonier, and I showed him upstairs. About an hour after- 
wards Madame Meissonier came and told me to follow him, and 
I went to the door, but could not see him anywhere. lie had 
an umbrella and a high hat and overcoat. I next saw him 
oir the evening he was locked up, with a lot more gentlemen, 
at the police station, and I picked him out. 

Cross-examined — No other gentleman called during the time 
I was with Madame Meissonier. I knew the prisoner’s face 
when I 6aw him at the police station. I only saw him for 
about a minute in the house. I offered to take his hat and 
umbrella, but he took them into the dining-room. 

Re-examined — I had lived with Madame Meissonier for a 
fortnight at that time. 

Frederick Edwards (419 A), examined — About 5 p.m. on 
16th December I was on duty in Victoria Street, outside the 
Royal Standard Music Hall, near Victoria Station, when the 
prisoner and Madame Meissonier came up to me. The prisoner 
wanted ‘to know what he could do with the -woman, as she kept 
following him about and annoying him, he said. I told 
him I must hear what she had to say. She said she wished 
to give him into custody for stealing two ^watches and a gold 

140 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Frederick Edward* 

ring from her house a fortnight before. I asked her if she 
would take the responsibility of charging him herself. She 
said she would. The prisoner said he did not know her, and 
had never seen her before in his life. I told him he woulcte* 
have to go to the station. He said he was quite willing to 
do so, and he at once went with me. The charge was read 
over to him there ; he said he did not know the woman. Harvey 
came to the station and picked him out from others. 

Cross-examined — I did not ask him for his name and address 
in the street. At the station he was asked for it, and he gave 
it as Adolf Beck, 139 Victoria Street. Ho was living there 
at the time. He had on an overcoat and high hat. I did 
not search him. I did not notice his boots. The inspector 
on duty arranged the identifications. I was there at the 
time. About eight or nine men were got from the street, 
and some from the adjoining shops ; most of them were well 
dressed, I think. Their ages ranged from thirty upwards, I 
should say. Two, in addition to the prisoner, had grey hair. 

I think they were about the prisoner’s height. One came 
from the shop opposite. He was not much like the prisoner 
in appearance; except that his hair was grey, I do not think 
there was any similarity in* appearance. The other, who was 
about the prisoner’s height, and with grey hair, happened to 
be walking past. 

# 

Godfrey Chetwynd, examined — I am a financial broker at 
13a Cockspur Street. In June, 1894, the prisoner called 
with reference to some company in connection with a copper 
mine he owns in Norway. After that I wrote to and received 
letters froih him upon that and other business matters. These 
are three I received from him. He was then living at the 
Buckingham Hotel, Buckingham Street, Strand. I had 

business relations and communications with him up to about 
22nd or 23rd December, 1894 ; they were renewed afterwards. 
The final date I saw him was April or May, 1895. I cannot 
say where he was living then without referring to my books. 
While he was visiting my office I believe my clerk wrote some 
letters for him. I only know that by hearsay. The clerk is 
not in my employment now, and is not here. 

Cross-examined — I believe my clerk did some correspondence 
for him, but I cannot say what. I saw the prisoner on and 
off from June, 1894, to the end of the year, and again once 
or twice in 1895. I never saw him with a gold watch and 
chain ; I have heard him speak of having owned one. * If he 
carried a watch it never attracted my attention. I don’t 
remember seeing any jewellery about him. In December, 
1894, and the beginning of January, 1895, he generally wore 

141 



Adolf Beck. 

Godfrey Chetwynd 

an overcoat that I gave him; one I had worn myself. He 
returned it soon after the new year, 1895, or about Christmas, 
1894. The beginning of 1895 was exceeding cold, and he 
wore* a fur coat then. I knew he had a fur coat before I gave 
him mine. 1 gave him mine because he said he had no coat 
suitable for the season; the fur coat was too warm. I did 
not see him westing a fur coat. I did not see him for some 
time after that. He sometimes wore a double-breasted black 
jacket when he came to see me I never saw him wear a 
white waistcoat or a waistcoat with a white lining. I never 
noticed him wearing patent button boots, or white or black 
spats. I remember his saying his frock-coat had been turned 
at a tailor’s. The" overcoat I lent him was dark grey; it 
might have been taken for black. It had no velvet collar; it 
was perfectly plain. I should not think it could be mistaken 
for blue. I have no recollection of seeing him wear any other 
‘overcoat than the one I lent him and the fur coat. lie never 
wore a covert coat .to my knowledge. 

* Re-examined — Some time this year I was asked whether 
I could say if the prisoner was shabbily dressed at the time he 
came to my office. I have no distinct recollection of the way 
he used to dress from day to day. I don’t- remember having 
ever seen him vrear spats; I think the frock-coat he wore had 
silk facings, I don’t remember; but ofte would be apt to notice 
a frock-coat that had not; I should gather he meant the coat 
had been turned inside out. In 1$94 I had a good many 
interviews with him ; he borrowed a good deal of money in small 
amounts for daily expenses, 10s. and 5s. I also paid his 
, weekly hotel bill occasionally. # i 

John Watts (Constable A), examined — On 16th December 
I was at Rochester Row police station shortly after the prisoner 
was brought in. I told him he answered the description of 
a man giving the name of Earl Wilton, who was wanted for 
stealing jewellery. He said, “ It is a mistake.” I sent for 
Miss Grant, who had given a description ; she came, the prisoner 
was placed, with six other men, in the charge-room. She 
looked at the men and pointed to the prisoner and said — 
“ I believe that is the man ; if ho will take his hat off I shall 
know.” All the men took their hats off, and then she said — 
“ That is the man.” I charged him with stealing the pro- 
perty of Daisy Grant. He said — i( It is a great mistake; I 
have never seen the ladies before in my life,” referring to 
Madame Mcissonier and Daisy Grant. lie was charged with 
stealing from both of them. I searched him, and found on 
him this brown leather pocket-book, with silver mounting, and 
the initials “ A. B.,” a £10 note, a £5 note, an Army and 

142 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

John Watt# 

Navy Stores ticket, 30s. in gold, 2s. 6d. silver, a knife, a 
tobacco box, and some visiting cards with the name of “A. 
Beck, 139 Victoria Street.” He gave his name and address 
before I found the cards. I went to 139 Victoria Street about 
twenty minutes after he was charged. I found he had beeri 
in occupation of three rooms which were sub-let to him. There 
was a porter in charge of the whole building but no one in 
charge of this suite of rooms. I had the keys. I found in 
the rooms about six or seven suits of clothes, a black frock-* 
coat, two ordinary overcoats, besides the one produced, which 
he was wearing when arrested. 1 did not take very particular 
notice of them. I did not bring any of the clothing away. 

I noticed 1 a new pair of patent boots in paper; they had never 
been worn. On 18th December I made a further search with 
another constable. I found this indexed address-book. He 
had a bedroom, sitting-room, and a small ante-room — a friend 
of the prisoner had previously occupied them, and had sub-let 
them to prisoner, who was the only occupant at that time. 

I found these documents, one of which is aietter addressed tp 
a lady, but apparently not sent, the others are memoranda of 
addresses of ladies apparently. The lettered address-book con- 
tains the names of business people apparently, mostly 
foreigners ; I cannot find the names and addresses of any women 
in it. I also found eight or nine pawn tickets relating to 
jewellery; I left them behind; they were dated 1890 and 1891. 

I also saw printed papers apparently relating to a mine or 
mines, in Norwegian or some foreign language; I could read 
the title at the top. I don’t know what has since become of 
the things 1 left behind in the rooms ; the clothes were removed 
two or three days afterwards, I believe, after the prisoner wa# 
in custody. I called again, and found they were gone. 

Cross-exa min ed — When I got to the station I found the 
prisoner detained on Madame Meissonier’s charge; ho was not 
charged, he had given his address ; I searched him after he was 
charged, some time after he was at the station. Miss Grant 
had to be fetched from St. John’s Wood. He was wearing a 
small link-pattern gold watch chain arid a dark gun-metal watch ; 
he also had a small silver match-box; no other articles of 
jewellery; he wore an overcoat and a high silk hat; his 
other clothes were as they are now ; he had this 
umbrella with a silver top ; I am not sure about his boots. I 
found no promissory note or bill of exchange form. ,1 found 
no entry in the pocket-hpok of the name and address of any 
of these women, or of any particulars of clothing. I 'should 
say about fifteen or sixteen women have seen him between 
the time of his arrest and his committal. I should say there 
had been about twenty complaints from different parts of the 

143 



Adolf Beck. 


John Wttti 

metropolis of the same kind of thing complained of in the 
present case ; the dates would be kept ; I ao not know them. 
Sergeant Briggs and Cracknell would have the dates when 
the complaints were made; they were here this morning. I 
arranged the identification in the first case, when the prisoner 
was detained at Rochester Row police station; on the next 
occasion Inspector Waldook arranged it. I looked through 
all the papers at the prisoner’s address; I made very careful 
search to try and find some cheques. I found no paper with 
the name and address of any woman, no cheque, and no bill 
form. I have been in this case throughout; no single article 
of property belonging to any of the ten different women has 
been traced to the prisoner’s possession. Whenever a com- 
plaint of such a thing as this is made, we take the date of 
when it is alleged to have occurred, and a description; we 
are always very careful about the date. It was a pair of new 
patent shoes I found at his address ; they had never tfeen 
worn ; there was a dress suit there. 

Re-examined — The fifteen or sixteen women who saw him 
at the police station include the ten who have sworn to him 
here, the other five or six did not identify him; one woman 
was not sure, she would not swear to him. The five or six 
women who are not here saw him under the same circumstances 
as the others, three failed to identify him; they said they 
could not see the man there. Another of them came into the 
charge-room while ho was in the dock being charged, and 
she said she did not think he was the man. Another of them 
afterwards said she thought he was the man. All of them 
but one had lodged complaints, I believe. I believe I can get 
the dates on which the five or six women complained. I 
ascertained that the prisoner had been living at Victoria 
Street for about three months ; he went there about 6th 
September. 

Jambs Norris Sutton — I am cashier at the Union Bank 
of London, 66 Charing Cross. We have no branch in St. 
James’s Street or Belgrave Mansions. We have no customer 
named A. Winton, Lord Wilton, or Lord Willoughby de 
Winton, or any name of that kind. During the year 1895 a 
number of cheques, most of them drawn on bills of exchange 
forms, were presented by different ladies, and with this 
signature, which I cannot decipher. I knew nothing of the 
drawer, and had no money to meet the cheques, and I dis- 
honoured and returned them. These exhibits were so pre- 
sented for payment at our bank and dishonoured. 

Cross-examined — All of them were on promissory note 
forms. There were fifteen or twenty altogether, and I should 

144 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

James Norris Sutton 

think during between eighteen months and two years. We 
kept no record, because they were not drawn on our bank. 
They were all the same kind of document; as soon as I saw 
one I recognised it. I don’t remember keeping any. 

William John Wey, examined — I am cashier in the 
Balham branch of the London and South-Western Bank. On 
10th November, 1894, Mrs. Gardiner opened an account with 
our branch. I issued to her a book of twenty -five cheques, 
Nos. A 482776 to 800. On 4th January, 1895, I received 
notice from her to stop cheques in that book, Nos. from 
482791 to 800. She gave a reason for that. Subsequently 
seven of those cheques were presented. Exhibits J, L, and 
V were three of them. They were all signed like those pro- 
duced, with the signature “ Wilton/' that is the name they 
were put down to. In some cases I got the ladies who pre- 
sented them to endorse them. That was on the instruction 
of the police. I gave them up to the police. I have not seen 
Mrs. Gardiner since. 

Cross-examined — I could not give you the dates the cheques 
were presented. We do not keep dates unless the cheque 
comes into the accounts. We detained the cheques in every 
case. I produced seven to the police. I had received notice 
from our customer they had been stolen [the cheques produced.] 

Re-examined — The dates run from 28th January to 7th 
March, 1895. 


145 



Second Day— Wednesday, 4th March, 1896. 
Evidence for Prosecution— continued. 

Marcus Browne, examined — I am the proprietor of the 
Covent Garden Hotel. The prisoner lived there for some 
years, down to within the last two years. I could not tell 
you the date without referring to my books, and I do not 
carry them in my pocket. You should have given $ne notice 
to look. It might be September, 1894. I have so many 
people to see, I cannot recollect every individual who comes 
to the hb&el, the time he leaves, and so on. I cannot tell 
whether it was September or January. I am in a criminal 
Court, and I have nothing to do with a criminal case; you 
can apply to my solicitors in the city, and they will tell you, 
may be. The prisoner lived at my house about six years; he 
left because he had not paid his bill, and I said I could not 
keep him any longer. Apply to my solicitor ; the bill is my 
business, not yours. That has nothing to do with a criminal 
Court, whether he owes me money or whether he does not ; go 
to my solicitor ; you have my solicitor to go to. Am I obliged 
to answer what was owing to me? He owed me £300, as far 
as the hotel bill went, and he owed me hundreds in money 
lent to him. I could not tell you the amount ; you must apply 
to my solicitors ; they have got all the information ; they have 
got all my papers [the witness was here cautioned,not to with- 
hold information]. I am quite aware you have power to 
commit me. The amount is between,, £1300 and £1400. A 
lot of the prisoner’s boxes are at the hotel. He left them. 
Inspector Froest has searched them. I believe he had a watch; 
I do not recollect the kind of watch. He gave me a pawn 
ticket for a gold watch, which I gave to Inspector Froest. He 
always dressed very nicely and behaved very gentlemanly, 
and never brought any persons into the house. I should not 
notice, with twenty or thirty in the house, whether any indi- 
vidual wore spats. I have not said at the Police Court I 
did notice the prisoner wore white spats. I cannot recollect 
whether he did. 

Cr6ss-examined — Who is the prisoner’s solicitor? — I do not 
recollect seeing him. I saw Mr. Froest. I did not recollect 
a gentleman calling at the hotel to see the prisoner’s things. 

I did refuse to allow the prisoner’s solicitor to see anything 
in the place — you have got the letter, no doubt — because I did 
not know whether I was doing right or wrong. I have heard 

146 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

M&rcua Browne 

nothing from him since. As to an action against the prisoner, 
that has to do with a civil Court and with my solicitor. I 
was not winking at the prisoner ; he is no friend of mine. I 
brought an action against him. I believe my solicitors have 
the judgment. I am satisfied if my solicitors are. 

Frank Froest (Detective Inspector), examined — I searched 
the prisoner’s box at the Covent Garden Hotel — I found a 
pair of white spats, a pair of brown spats, half a dozen white 
waistcoats, a quantity of underclothing, an opera hat, a 
wedding ring, a few photographs of ladies and views of Nor- 
way and Sweden, and a large quantity of correspondence 
relating to business. 

Cross-examined — I understood Beck had been staying at 
the hotel up to September, two years ago; that his things were 
detained. j have seen Mr, Browne calmer than he was here. 
Afterwards he was living at the Buckingham Hotel, Strand. 

I went there. I did not go to Victoria Street. I did not take 
charge of the case till after 3rd January. [A white waistcoat 
was here produced.] That is a specimen of the waistcoats; 
they were all of this class. There was some silk underclothing 
— old things. I have made inquiries about Mrs. Gardiner. 
She has been convicted of uttering bad cheques and passing 
herself off as a person of distinction. A warrant was out 
against her for assault. I have not seen her. She led a loos& 
and fraudulent life. She lived once at Balham. She was 
charged, with others, at Westminster, and, after several 
remands, discharged. 

Re-examined — The charge of assault was withdrawn by her 
landlady. I have made every effort to find her whereabouts, 
to subpoena her as a witness here. I was not in charge of 
this case until the third remand. I did not sanction the 
prisoner’s clothes being left at his lodgings. I would not 
have left them. 

Thomas Henry Gurrin, examined — I am an expert in 
handwriting, at 59 Holborn Viaduct. I have had many years’ 
experience. I have examined the cheques and promissory 
note forms produced ; also this manuscript book. [Mr/Ffbest 
identified the book as the one he found at the Covent Garden 
Hotel, and which purported to be a report of the Galapagos 
Mine.] I have also examined the three letters which Chet- 
wynd has sworn to be the prisoner’s writing. They are 
written to Chetwynd. They are all in the same writing. 
There are two handwritings in the book. I do not include 
all the handwritings there. I include the writing in the 
address book produced. The prisoner’s writing is in different 

147 



Adolf Beck. 

Thomas Henry Gurrin 

hands. I prepared the report produced, giving my reasons, 
and with facsimiles showing similarities. The cheques and 
lists are not? written in the prisoner’s ordinary hand. Two 
forms of disguise have been adopted. One is a back-handed 
or vertical scribble. That occurs in the signatures, the list 
of addresses, and on the envelopes. The other disguise is an 
ordinary hand, more resembling his writing in the books, 
but written large and more distorted. 

Cross-examined — The lists of dresses are written with free- 
dom. The control of the lingers is not exercised ; it is written 
with the arm. A man who habituated his hand to it would 
acquire facility. List “A” is a medium writing between the 
two disguises. The photographs are very much reduced. 
Part of “A” was dashed off. I mean “ Redferns,” at the 
top, and “ Cobb, Baker Street,” and one or two other in- 
stances, as to which little control was exercised. I do not 
suggest he held his pen differently. [The witness pointed out 
the similarities in the documents.] 

[Mr. Gill was proceeding to cross-examine as to the hand- 
writing of certain other documents, exhibits in the case of a 
man Smith, tried in 1877. 

Mr. Avoky objected to the witness being cross-examined 
with a view of raising the question whether the prisoner was 
the person oonvicted in 1877 of an offence similar to that 
charged in the indictment ; that was a collateral issue, and 
should not be inquired into until after the jury had returned 
their verdict, lest it should afterwards be said that the prisoner 
had been improperly oonvicted. 

Mr. Gill urged that the question was directly in issue, 
and that he was entitled to raise it, as his case on behalf of 
the prisoner was that the man who was convicted in 1877 
was the man who had been committing these frauds, and that 
the prisoner had been mistaken for that man. He desired 
to show, by cross-examination, that the writing of the man 
oonvicted in 1877 was the same as that of the exhibits in the 
present case. 

Mr. Gurrin stated that the exhibits in the case of Smith 
were examined by him some time after he had made his 
report; there was a reference in his report, produced at the 
Police Court, to the exhibits in that case. 

Mr. Gill further contended that upon the question of the 
value of the witness’s opinion he was entitled to have all the 
documents produced which had been submitted to him. 

Mr. Avoky objected to the witness being asked whether 
those exhibits were in the same writing as the lists in the 
present case. 

The Common Serjeant ruled that the question whether the 

148 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Thomas Henry Gurrin 

prisoner was or was not the man convicted in 1877 was not 
admissible, upon the ground that it related to another and 
distinct issue, and one calculated to mislead tl|e jury. If 
witnesses were called to character, Mr. Avory might cross- 
examine them as to the prisoner’s previous character; or he 
might choose not to have the issue confused by the intro- 
duction of that matter.] 

Re-exanuined — The writing is that of a foreigner; it is 
the Scandinavian type, which would include Norway, as dis- 
tinguished from the German or the French type but not far 
from the German type; it is distinct from the English type, 
which, as a rule, is after the Italian. [The witness further 
pointed out the similarities in the documents.] 

William Parsons, examined — I am a warder of Her 
Majesty’s Prison, Holloway. I made a special examination 
of the prisoner about three weeks after he was received in 
custody. I found a mark on the right side of his throat, 
I could not describe it as a scar. I also found a mole on the 
right side of it. 

Cross-examined — It is not the mark from a double chin. 
The examination of prisoners is usual, as a record for future 
use, so that a man can be afterwards identified. Photographs 
are also taken. I have not photographed him as my prisoner. 
I was told to make the special examination seven or eight 
weeks ago. I did not know I was to become a witness till 
a warder spoke to me this morning. I have not been shown 
a record of a man sentenced to five years’ penal servitude, 
named Smith. 

Albert Ernest Lamb, examined — I am a clerk in the 
Solicitor’s Department of the Treasury. I was present when 
the exhibits in this case were produced at the Treasury for 
inspection by Mr. Inglis, an expert in handwriting. He 
attended on behalf of the defendant on 8th January. 

Cross-examined — I was partly cognisant of the conduct of 
this case. I cannot speak personally of Mr. Dutton’s appli- 
cation for the dates of offences, or of all that went on in 
the office. 

John Watts (Detective A), re-examined — I produce dates 
of complaints in two cases; one of 9th May, reported on 10th 
May, 1895, at New Scotland Yard; the other is of 16th -April. 
Tho offence complained of was on 13th April, 1895. The 
officer took the report, and referred to another complaint 
by Miss Minnie Lewis, but it does not give a description of 
the prisoner. Two others complained, but gave no informa- 

149 



Adolf Beck. 

John Watts 

tion; they came to the Police Court amongst other witnesses, 
but failed to identify. 

G ross-exqmined — In two cases the witnesses were sent for, 
in consequence of information the police had possession of, 
to identify the prisoner. They both gave descriptions. 

Evidence for the Prosecution closed. 


Statement for the Defence. 

Mr. Gill — May it please your lordship, gentlemen of the 
jury — I submit it will not be Safe to act on the evidence of 
identification. The women who have sworn to the prisoner 
must have been excited by the offer of the “ Earl of Wilton ” 
to come and manage his establishment and his £180,000 a 
year. They were evidently a little off their heads, and 
imagined that the hour had at length arrived when their 
charms would be appreciated. Can it be conceived that they 
were not under such excitement as would interfere with their 
judgment? Their indignation, however, can well be imagined on 
their finding the romance of their lives exploded. The tigress 
in the jungle in pursuit of her prey would only fitly represent 
their condition on finding that they had been robbed and 
deceived, although some of them may be consoled by the 
reflection that there are just as good fish in the sea. I 
strongly urge the point that none of the stolen property has 
been found in the prisoner's possession. 


Evidence for the Defence. 

Henry Herman Ellis, examined — I am one of the firm of 
J. & II. Ellis, tailors, of Farringdon Street. I have known 
the prisoner since the end of February or the beginning of 
March, 1895. He came on a matter of business with a lady. 
He had a fur coat and under it a serge suit. His first order 
for clothes was in March. IIo told me he would take the suit 
away as soon as he could pay for it. I had said, “ Our 
terms are cash.” When he took them away he was wearing 
the same serge suit, a double-breasted reefer. The price of 
the suit was £3 10s. He then gave orders for a lot of goods. 
His serge suit was rather shabby. He bought some white 
waistcoats on the 14th or 15th of last September. Then he 
sent all his wardrobe for me to clean, as he said he was going 
to survey some mining property in Norway. There were four 
suits and an extra pair of trousers. There were no white 

130 



Evidence for Defence. 

Henry Herman Ellia 

waistcoats. The clothes were very shabby. I have never 
seen the prisoner wear a white waistcoat, only those I made 
in September. 

Cross-examined — I saw him in November, and we made 
him several other things. I saw him at the end of September. 
He told me when he returned that he went to Norway in 
October. I returned him his clothes in September to take 
with him. I pressed them up. He paid me. The cleaners 
sent two or three back as not worth cleaning. I saw him 
again about the end of November, when he gave me a further 
order. They were four dress vests that he ordered on 11th 
September. There was no frock-coat sent to be done up. 
We made him a frock-coat about June or July; it had silk 
facings. I cannot recollect where I sent it without referring 
to my books. In February or March he lived at Buckingham 
Hotel, Strand. 

Re-examined — I had made him a dress suit, and for that I 
made the waistcoats. I never made him a white lining to 
wear inside a black waistcoat. 

Annie Smith, examined — I am chambermaid at the 
Buckingham Hotel, Strand. Beck was there when I went in, 
I think, February, 1891. Beck stayed there till last Septem- 
ber. I saw his clothes. Ho had his things washed there. 
I never saw him with a gold watch. I saw him with a black 
one, like that produced and a gold chain. I never saw 
jewellery in his rooms. Up to May or June, 1895, he was 
rather shabby, when he began to brighten up. After that 
he had good clothes. I never saw him wear a white waist- 
coat. I rfever sent any to the wash. I never saw him wear 
white spats. He had a black overcoat lined with fur; he 
wore it a good deal. I looked after his room. I was in it 
every day. I have never seen elephant’s tusks or a man- 
dolin there. I have seen him writing; letters, I believe. 
He wrote very badly and slowly. 

Cross-examined — I have been at the hotel two years. [Mr. 
Froest explained he had not been allowed to see the hotel 
books to get the dates. ] Beck had a bedroom, and the use 
of the coffee-room and drawing-room. lie had no sitting- 
room of his own* He wrote in his bedroom in the evening 
as a rule. He was generally out during the day. He never 
wrote to me. He sent me a note. It was a letter of half 
a dozen words. I had forgotten that. I have not got the 
letter. It was last August. In the letter he hoped I was 
enjoying my holiday, and he would be pleased to see me back. 
He did not go till September. I think he went to Victoria 
Street. He did not tell me the number. lie took a large 

151 



Adolf Beck. 

Annie Smith 

portmanteau and a black box. I did not help him pack. I 
could not help noticing his clothes; they were hanging in the 
room. There were a good many of them. He had the port- 
manteau when I went there; the box came later, about June, 
I think. He had a dark blue overcoat with a velvet collar, 
and an old frock-coat with silk facings, but he veiy seldom 
wore it. He had it all the time he was there. His watch 
used to lie on his dressing-table in the morning. I believe 
he had a pearl pin, but I did not much notice. He had a little 
pin of some kind. It looked like pearl. lie wore spats, but 
they were dark blue or black always. Only one pair that I 
saw. He wore them last winter; I don’t know about 
“ always ”; he was wearing them when I went there. 

Re-examined — I brushed his clothes. I do not know 
whether his coat had been turned. I heard of his being in 
custody. Several officers have been to see me; about four, 
I think; two wrote down what I said, one I know did. I 
think Mr. Froest. 

Charles George Kistner, examined — I am a clerk to 
Messrs. Jenkins, Baker & Co., solicitors, St. Michael’s House, 
Cornhill. About the middle of January, 1895, Beck came to 
the office practically every day, sometimes before I got there 
at ten. He was there sometimes all day. He was introduc- 
ing a mine, the Hannen’s Reef. Then he went to Ward & 
Chandler’s. He was paid considerable sums of money in 
respect of the mine. One cheque in September, 1895, was for 
£282 ; one in October for £100, and he had 3500 shares 
allotted him. Ilis dress was “ medium ” the early part of the 
year, but afterwards he was better dressed. I nevdr saw him 
with a massive gold chain, gold watch, nor pearl pin. He 
had an oxidised watch. I should say this is the one he was 
wearing. I did not see a chain ; he used to take it out of 
his ticket pocket. I have seen him writing. His writing was 
laboured. The longest time he has been at the office has been 
from 9.45 a.m. till 7 or 8 p.m. This was about March. I 
drafted him a letter which he took away. 

Cross-examined — I was told ho was a Norwegian. He 
spoke Spanish. He spoke with a foreign accent. His dress 
improved towards June or July. He wore a high hat. He 
had a fur-lined overcoat; I never saw him in any other over- 
coat. I could not see what he wrote. I never looked at 
what he wrote. Wo allowed him to use the office to write 
his private correspondence. He held the pen in a peculiar 
way. He wrote slowly. 1 do not recognise his writing in 
those letters to Chetwynd. He has not written to me. He 
has never signed documents in my presence. The writing in 

152 



Evidence for Defence. 

Charles George Kialner 

these documents does not remind me of his, nor does the 
writing in the book of the Galapagos Report. I could not 
swear to his writing. I never saw him write back-handed. 
I saw him about 3rd October. I believe he went to Norway 
after that. I believed he returned in November. I do not 
recollect his conversation in November, but I believe he said 
he had gone from Liverpool. I have not the cheques the 
prisoner last paid to him. 

Re-examined — His business at our office was connected 
with mines and other business. I remember the September 
cheque for £282 being cashed across the counter. I went 
to the bank with him. 

Samuel Archer Jones, examined — I keep the Buckingham 
Hotel. The prisoner came there in September, 1893 ; he 
stayed till September, 1895. The end of 1894 and the be- 
ginning of 1895 he was shabbily dressed. He left to go to 
Victoria Street. His clothes were better the last month or 
two; I never saw him with any jewellery nor wearing white 
spate. No jewellery, elephant’s tasks, mandolines, ostrich 
feathers, or anything of the kind were ever brought there. 

Cross-examined — I do not know if he had a watch. We 
had about forty guests at the hotel. I noticed the prisoner’s 
dress, because I lent him a sovereign or two. I got it back. 
He was rather shabby up to April or May, 1895. After that 
he seemed to be in better circumstances. He dressed better, 
but nothing out of the way. He had a good coat with fur on 
it. I saw him wear that. I do not recollect seeing a pearl 
pin. 

Major IIans Radolph Sofas Lindholm, examined — I have 
arrived to-day from Copenhagen, which I left two days ago. 
I live at Bred Garland. I am Gentleman of the Chamber of 
the King of Denmark. I knew Beck several years at Lima 
in 1880. I left Denmark for Valparaiso about May, 1880. 
[This evidence was objected to as not being relevant.] I 
first knew Beck in June or July, 1880, and from then to 
1883 or 1884. He was a good friend and an honourable man. 

Colonel Harris, examined — Beck is no friend or acquaint- 
ance of mine. I have been brought here on subpoena. I 
knew him in Peru from 1875 up to 1882. I have seen him 
with the very best class of people. 

Cross-examined — I do not think he could write two lines 
in English. Ho may have learned since. I knew he was 
a Norwegian. I do not think he could understand what 
English he did write. He spoke English very well, and Spanish 

153 



kdolf Beck. 


Colonel Harris 

remarkably well. I last saw him about five months ago in 
Bread Street. I had seen him twice previously; I had no 
business with him. I met him casually in the streets. . 

Re-examined — From 1875 to 1882 I used to see him in the 
carriers and in the streets of Lima sometimes, and used to say , 
“ Good-day ” — as one has to be careful with whom they con- 
verse in a country like that. I do not think he can write a 
line in English now. 

Frederico Pezet, examined — I am Consul-General of Peru 
in Liverpool. I knew Beck in Peru in 1880 or 1881, or before 
that. I have known him ever since. I have always heard 
every one speak very highly of him. 

Cross-examined — I knew him in London in 1894. I did 
not know his residence. I have seen him in the street on 
several occasions. 


John Brailsford, examined — I live at 97 Golden Lane, 
Chester. I met Beck in Lima in March, 1881, afterwards in 
Callao up to July, 1882, and since in London; the English 
thought a good deal of him. 


154 



Third Day— Thursday, 5th March, 1896. 

Mr. Gill — My lord, several witnesses* have spoken of the 
prisoner speaking with a foreign accent. May I ask permis- 
sion for him to speak to the jury? 

The Common Serjeant — Yes. 

The Prisoner — From the beginning to the end of these 
horrible charges I have had nothing to do with them. I am 
absolutely innocent. 

Verdict and Sentence. 

After being charged by the Common Serjeant, the jury 
found the prisoner guilty. 

Mr. Avory — My lord, the police are in possession of certain 
information with regard to the prisoner. 

The Common Serjeant — I do not think I shall be influenced 
by anything which I hear. 

Mr. Gill — There are four indictments charging the prisoner 
with having been previously convicted of felony, and I submit 
I am entitled to have them tried or discharged. It is part of 
the prisoner’s defence that the man convicted in 1877 and 
sentenced to five years was the same man as has carried out 
these frauds. This man was in prison from 28th April, 1877, 
until April, 1881, during which time the witnesses from South 
America spoke to seeing the prisoner repeatedly. This is a 
case of a grave miscarriage of justice. 

Mr. Avory — I ask that the prisoner shall be sentenced on 
the indictment on which he has been convicted, and that the 
other indictments shall be postponed until the next session, 
when I shall consider the necessity of applying to the Attorney- 
General for a nolle 'prosequi . My learned friend practically 
admits that his object is to show that the verdict of the jury 
is wrong. I can be no party to that. 

Mr. Gill — There is no precedent for an indictment re- 
maining on the files of the Court against the will of the accused. 

The Common Serjeant — I am clearly of opinion that I 
cannot accede to Mr. Gill’s application, which would be a de- 
parture from the practice of this and all other Criminal Courts. 

I shall postpone the other indictments until next session, and 
shall sentence the prisoner only on the charges of which he has 
been convicted. I shall treat the prisoner as if he had not 
been previously convicted. The evidence of identity has been 
absolutely overwhelming. The prisoner has been found guilty 

105 



Adolf Beck 


of a moot base and wicked crime. He has heartlessly robbed 
these persons, relying on the fact that, having regard to their 
previous history, they were not likely to bring the matter 
before a public Court. I sentence the prisoner on the fifth 
count of the indictment to four years’ penal servitude, and on 
the tenth count to three years’ penal servitude, and I direct 
that these sentences shall be consecutive. On the other counts 
of the indictment, I sentence the prisoner to three years* penal 
servitude, but I direct that these sentences should be con- 
current with the other sentences, so that the total sentence 
that the prisoner will undergo is one of seven years* penal 
servitude. 

[Mr. Gill applied that the point of law — viz., whether the 
learned judge was right in stopping his cross-examination of 
Gurrin — might be reserved, but the Common Serjeant said he 
entertained no shadow of doubt on the subject, and that it 
would Be improper under the circumstances to reserve a case. ] 

The Prisoner — I am absolutely innocent. 


15ft 



APPENDICES. 




APPENDIX I. 


REPORT OF THE TRIAL OF JOHN SMITH, at the CENTRAL 
CRIMINAL COURT in May, 1877, contained in the 
Central Criminal Court Sessions Paper, Vol. 86, p. 60. 


Third Court. — Thursday, May 10th, 1877. 

Before Mr. Common Serjeant. 

John Smith (27). Stealing a pair of earrings, a ring, and 
11s. off Louisa Leonard. 

Mr. Fulton conducted the prosecution, and Mr. M. Williams 

the defence. 

Louisa Leonard — I am married, but living apart from my 
husband at 8 Great College Street. On Hh April I met the 
prisoner near Charing Cross. He said he would write me a 
letter. I received a letter next day. lie came on the Thurs- 
day, when I was moving from my last residence. My friend 
Emily Ashton was with me. He came with me to College 
Street. Me said he was Lord Willoughby. He came and 
sat opposite me in my room, my friend being present, and 
said he wished to talk to me very seriously. He had a nice 
house at St. John’s Wood, and I must give up my apartments 
and go there by 8.30 on the following Saturday, to meet him 
there to dinner. The address was Alpha Villa, Abbey Road. 
He said I was to have a carriage and pony, and a nice little 
page and several servants, and whatever I did I was not to 
associate with the servants. He then asked what jewellery 
I had, and said iC I suppose it is all rubbish? ” I said “ Un- 
fortunately it is,” and showed him the rings on my finger. 
ITe asked for a plain ring, which appeared to fit me the best, 
for a pattern, saying he would send me some better ones by a 
commissionaire from the Army and Navy Club. He belonged 
to that club, and if I wanted any more money I was to # apply 
there for it. I said, te You could take the size of the ring 
without taking the ring.” He said he had given a ring to 
another young lady and had lost it through not taking the size, 
and he took it. I also had some filigree earrings. He said 

159 



Adolf Beck. 

he admired the patterns, but that they were rubbish, and if I 
would allow him to take them ho would have them made in 
real gold. lie showed me a ring on his finger which had been 
left him through his ancestors 500 years before Christ. He 
put the earrings in his pocket. He then asked for pen, ink, 
and paper, and when it was brought he wrote on it, and I was 
to give it to Messrs. Howell & James, as he wished me to have 
good clothing. He also enclosed a cheque in an envelope 
which he took from his pocket-book. lie said, “ Don’t unseal 
it, because they will think it is not from the lord.” I was 
to take it to the London Bank, No. 12 Lombai'd Street. He 
looked at his watch now and then, and at last said, “ It is 
time you went to the bank, otherwise you won’t get this 
money.” After sitting a little while longer, my friend and 
I went out with him, and in the street he said, “ Oh, what a 
nuisance, I have sent my brougham away. Have you any 
loose change in your pocket? ” I said, “ Yes, I have 15s.” 
He said, “ Will you let me have it, because you will have 
plenty when you get to the bank.” I said, “ You can take 
4s. if you want it only for a cab.” I handed him my purse, 
showing him the amount I had. He said, tl You may as well 
let me have it all, because you will have more than enough 
when you get to the bank; £13 10s. will be more than 
enough.” I objected to his taking the 10s. He took it and 
laughed, and added, ” Don’t be afraid.” He threw the purse 
into the road. He then called a cab, and said, “ You had 
better get in this cab and make haste and get to the bank, 
it is open till five o’clock, close the windows ” — we got in 
and drove away, but subsequently changed our four-wheel for 
a hansom because we were not going quick enough — we pre- 
sented the sealed letter in Lombard Street, the clerks con- 
sulted and then said it was a swindle — I did not get any 
money — I have not since seen my earrings, my ring, or my 
money — on 19th April I saw the prisoner in Tottenham Court 
Road. I was going with my friend to have lunch at the 
Horseshoe. I said, “ There’s the Captain.” I said to him, 
** How are you, you never gave me what you promised.” He 
said, “ You be off, I do not know you, I will give you in 
custody; who are you?” I said, “I think it is my duty 
to give you into custody, you have taken my things, and it 
appears to me I shall never see them again.” — he walked along 
quickly and then ran across the road ; we followed — I next 
saw him in custody and charged him — I have no doubt he is 
the sajne man. 

Cross-examined — When I first met the prisoner he asked me 
where I lived. I said, “ 50 Cherrington Street.” I expected 
better jewellery and earrings — I believed every word he told 
me. 

ICO 



William Augustus Wyatt, a/ /us John Smith. 

(Krt/m ft folia* fhotfujru fit , / s 7/.) 




Trial of John Smith. 


Emily Ashton — I live with the last witness; I recollect 
the prisoner coming to 8 Great College Street, on a Thursday, 
in April — he said he was Lord Willoughby — I was present the 
whole time — he said he had a house at St. John’s Wood, and 
would take my friend to live with him where she was to have 
servants and a page, and she was to be careful not to associate 
with the servants — then he said to her, “ Let me look at the 
size of your finger ” — I was with her when we saw him in 
Tottenham Court Road — 1 am sure the prisoner is the man; 
I saw him run away — he was given in custody. 

John Cook — I live at 24 Fitzroy Place — I saw the prisoner 
and a crowd on a Friday, in April, running into Gower Street, 
from Euston Road — 1 asked the ladies what was the matter and 
then ran after him — he got into a cab ; I got hold of the horse’s 
head — he said, “ Drive away, cabby, take no notice of him, 
hit him with your whip ” — the cabman hit me with his whip, 
but the prisoner finding it was no use jumped out on the other 
side of the cat) — he was taken into custody. 

Elibs SrURRSLL (Policeman ER 25) — I took the prisoner 
at five o’clock, on April 20th, in the Euston Road — he said, 
c< Come round a corner in one of the houses; I am perfectly 
ashamed of this crowd running after me ” — Cook then came 
up and said that he had robbed two ladies — I took the prisoner 
back to meet the ladies, who told me the charge in his presence 
— he said nothing. 

Cross-examined — He had £4 in gold, and five rings, and an 
umbrella on him. 

Jo, siAir Willey — I am a partner in the firm of Howell & 
James, of Regent Street ; I do not know the prisoner — I do not 
know Lord Willoughby. 

George Clarke — I am a counterman, and live at 16 
Abchurch Lane — there is no Bank of London now — there was 
once, but it did not carry on business at 12 Lombard Street. 

William Redstone (Police Inspector Y) — I have searched 
the Peerage, and can find no Lord Willoughby. 

Mr. Williams submitted that there was no larceny, the pro- 
perty was entrusted to the prisoner by the prosecutrix, and 
although it might amount to an obtaining by false pretences, 
it was no felony. Mr. Fulton contended that it was obtained 
by a trick with the intention to deprive the owner of it; that 
would amount to a larceny, and The Court so held. 


M 


Guilty. 

161 



Adolf Beck. 


John Smith (27), was again indicted for stealing one ring and 
11s. off Louisa Victoria Howard. 

Mr. Fulton conducted the prosecution, and Mr. M. Williams 

the defence. 

Louisa Victoria Howard — I am single, and live at 4 
Limerston Street, Chelsea — on April 18th I was getting out 
of an omnibus in Limerston Street, when I met the prisoner, 
who asked me the way to Gertrude Street — I told him the 
way, and as he passed my house I asked him if he would come 
in — he came in and said he would make an appointment for 
the next day — I had a letter next morning, and after that the 
prisoner came — he said he would not tell me who he was, but 
afterwards said he was Lord Willoughby — I had some flowers 
in my grate which were rather faded — I said I was going to 
have them done up by contract — he said, “ Don't do that, I 
have a proposal to make to you. I have been keeping a little 
woman, but have left her three months ” — then he said he 
thought I took his fancy and that he would like me ; that he 
belonged to the Army and Navy Club — I said I knew someone 
there — he said he knew that — I said, “Why? ” — he said he 
would not tell me — he then said he would allow me £10 a 
week pin money, and that I should have a pony and carriage, 
a page and a hack for the park, and that he would pay my 
debts and buy me dresses — lie said he would send me some 
jewellery next day as I had not sufficient to please him, and a 
watch and chain, four rings, and .£50 — he took one of my 
rings for a pattern — he wanted to take other things, but I 
would not let him — he gave me a cheque for £13 10s. upon 
the Bank of London, and wanted change — I gave him 1 Is. — 
he also gave me an order to Messrs. Howell & James, for £400 
for dresses — I presented the letter. I did not get the dresses. 
I saw him next at the police station. I have no doubt the 
prisoner is the man. This ring (produced) is mine. 

Cross-examined — I believed all he said. I was very pleased. 

I gave him the ring for him to take the size of my finger; I 
expected a better wedding ring and a diamond keeper. 

William Redstone (Inspector Officer T) — I took this charge 
against the prisoner and found the ring produced upon him, 
with four others — the last witness identified him in the police 
court cell — he was placed with other prisoners. 

GUILTY — Five Years’ Penal Servitude. 

There was another indictment against the prisoner. 


162 



APPENDIX II. 


DEPOSITION of ADA WOODING taken before Mr. W. M. 
Cooke at the Clerkenwell Police Court, 28th April, 1877. 


This Deponent, Ada Wooding, on her oath saith as follows: — 

I live at 8 Northway Road, Cambrian Road, Brixton. I 
am single. About four months ago I met prisoner between 
Charing Cross and Ludgate Hill. We had a conversation and 
he said he should like to see me again. He came to my 
address on the 8th March after 1 had received the letter pro- 
duced. lie said ho had an offer to make me, and my house 
was not good enough for me, and he would keep me. He had 
a villa at St. John’s Wood, and 1 was to go there and have a 
servant, a page, and a little trap to go out in. He brought out 
the cheque produced for .£13 10s. arid said I was too quiet, 
and I was to have different dresses and go for them to Howell 
& James. He would send his brougham for me between 
six and seven o’clock, and I was to have some boxes and some 
jewellery. He also said my rings were not good enough. 
They were too thick and clumsy. He asked me to put them in 
an envelope and he would have a sapphire stone put in my 
wedding ring. The diamond ring was not good enough, 
and I put them in an envelope and let him take them because 
I believed the cheque to be good. He gave me the cheque 
before he took the jewellery. He said he’d broken one of his 
sleeve-links and would I let him have mine. I lent them to 
him. It was snowing. I said “ Will you have an umbrella? ” 
and I lent him mine. He said he should like a cab but he 
had no money. I lent him 5s. He then went away. I never 
saw my jewellery again till to-day. They are now produced. 

I sent to Howell & James and to the Bank of London. I never 
saw him again until to-day. 

(Signed) Ada Wooding. 


163 



APPENDIX III. 


R. v. AUGUSTUS WILLIAM MEYERS. 


(From the Times of 14th April, 1894.) 


Augustus William Meyers, fifty-three, was charged with 
forgery. The prosecutor was Mr. Hoseof Margossian, a mer- 
chant resident in Vienna. He stated that in May, 1891, he 
was staying at the Westminster Hotel, and there made the 
acquaintance of the prisoner, who was also staying there. 

Prisoner said he was a physician in Adelaide, Australia, 
with a practice of £5000 or £6000 a year. He represented 
that he had bought for a very small sum a property in Ade- 
laide, which he afterwards sold for £80,000, and that alto- 
gether he was worth not much less than £200,000. He also 
stated that he was about to stay with a well-known gentleman 
at Stourton Hall, 1 and witness afterwards received several 
letters apparently coming from there. Witness subsequently 
went to stay in Montague Street, Russell Square, and prisoner, 
on his return to London, took rooms in the same house. He 
showed witness a letter from Berlin, thanking him for advanc- 
ing £10,000 to save the writer from ruin. Prisoner, in the 
course of various conversations, said he was acquainted with 
people in the highest positions, and showed letters purporting 
to be from members of Parliament asking him to dine with 
them. He afterwards told witness that, in consequence of 
having advanced this £10,000, ho was temporarily short of 
money, and witness agreed to advance him small sums and 
pay for his lunches until he could get a remittance which he 
said he expected from Australia. The remittance, however, 
never arrived. Prisoner was continually advising wit- 
ness to go to Australia and establish himself as a 
stockbroker in Adelaide, where, he said, his influence 
would be of great assistance to him. Witness ulti- 
mately decided to take his advice, and prisoner gave 
him a letter to the manager of the Bank of Australia, 
instructing him to place £2000 to witness's credit, and, if 
necessary, another £1000, for which prisoner would be respon- 


in lfWfi'Tnlfnf ’ , M i ”° oln S, h,r , e ‘ C (l the evidence of Meissonier and Nutt 

wtate uear Horn^X. 7 me “ ti<>n8 that the man s P oke of his 


164 



Trial of Augustus Meyers. 

sible. On the strength of this witness sent the prisoner from 
Vienna a cheque for £300. It was arranged that prisoner 
should repay that and other sums borrowed at Naples, where 
he and witness were to meet. Prisoner said he was going 
there in a yacht belonging to the owner of Stourton Hall. 
Witness went to Naples to keep the appointment, but prisoner 
failed to make his appearance. Witness did not see him 
again till Sunday night, when he met him in a West End 
restaurant. He asked him for his £300, and prisoner said 
he would let him have it in a fortnight. He was then given 
into custody. Prisoner was remanded. Mr. Vaughan 
directed Detective- Sergeant Walters to communicate with the 
Public Prosecutor. 

(At the next hearing, on 23rd April, Meyers was discharged 
for want of evidence.) 


165 



APPENDIX IV. 


DEPOSITIONS OF WITNESSES taken before Mr. J. Sheil at 
the Westminster Police Court on the 17th and 23rd 
December, 1895, and the 9th, 23rd, and 30th January, 
1896. 

Metropolitan Police District to wit. The Examination of 
OTTILIE MEISSONIER, DAISY GRANT, and JOHN 
WATTS, 

taken on oath this seventeenth day of December in the year 
of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and ninety-five at the 
Westminster Police Court, in the county of London, and within 
the Metropolitan Police District before me, the undersigned, on© 
of the Magistrates of the Police Courts of the Metropolis, sitting 
at the Police Court aforesaid, in the presence and hearing of 
Adolf Beck, who is charged this day before me. 

OTTILIE MEISSONIER, sworn. 

I am single. I live at 36 St. Oswald's Road, Fulham. I 
met the prisoner on the 26th November. I went to the West- 
minster Drill Hall to a flower show. In passing through 
Victoria Street I met the prisoner. I did not know him before. 
He passed and turned back and said, 1 ‘ Pardon me, are you not 
Lady Everton or Egerton V’ When he saw my face he said, 
“ Oh, pardon, I've made a mistake." He asked me where I 
was going. I said I was going to the Drill Hall to see the 
Chrysanthemum Show. He told me that he had an estate in 
Lincolnshire and kept ten gardeners. I told him I had just 
received a box of chrysanthemums. He asked if he could 
see my flowers. I gave permission for him to come next day 
l>etween one and two, and he came. My servant let him in ; 
her name is Kate Harvey. He stayed about three-quarters of 
an hour to an hour. I went to my bedroom to change my dress. 
He was alone in my sitting-room for three to five minutes. 
When I came back^he w T as reading a German newspaper I 
brought a watch to show him, the glass was broken. He said 
if I gave it him he would have it mended, and put a diamond 
star in its back. He promised to buy me a lot of dresses, and 
asked for the loan of a ring as he would buy me another. 

166 



Examination of Meissonier, &c. 

He asked me to join him in going to the Riviera. He wrote 
out the paper marked C. He held the pen between his two 
fingers. He also gave me the cheque D for <£40, to pay for 
the dresses, boots and shoes, bonnets and hats he was going 
to buy me. I was to make out an invoice. He was going 
to call on the following Wednesday. The envelope marked E 
is the one he put the cheque in. He wrote the cheque out in 
my presence, but I think the name was already written. He said 
he was a cousin of Lord Salisbury’s and most of the property 
round Brompton belonged to him. He said he had £180,000 
revenue every year. He asked if T had a watch — I said I had 
three, and he asked me to show them to him. 

The watch with the broken face was a gold watch with a 
gold chain and a little key attached. I believed what he said 
and gave it to him. It was worth £10. 

I gave him an old-fashioned ring to have one made for me 
from it. He asked rne to give him my diamond ring; it was 
too small, he would have it made larger. The ring I gave him 
was worth 30s. He said he would send them back the next 
day by a porter with one arm, and would send some jewels for 
me to choose. 

Three minutes after lie left I missed an antique enamelled 
watch about the size of a shilling from the table. I showed it 
to the prisoner, and he said he had given his collection of antique 
watches to South Kensington Museum. The value of my 
enamelled watch was £10 to £15. I sent my servant after 
him. The same hour I went in a cab to look for the Union 
Bank in St. James’s Street. I went to the Union Bank, in 
Trafalgar Square, and found he had no account there. I 
went to Vine Street station, and gave a description of the person 
to the police. 

I was sent to Jubilee police station, Fulham, and gave the 
description there. Yesterday, at ten minutes to five, I saw him 
standing at the door of a house in Victoria Street. I went 
to him, looked in his face, and he smiled very sweetly, and 
I told him, “ Sir, I know you.” He said, “ What do you want 
from me?” I spoke to him in English. He tried to push away 
through the gate of the iron railing and go into the street. I 
followed and said, “ Sir, I shall follow you wherever you go.” 
Then he ran over- to the other side of Victoria Street, but I 
followed him. Then he stopped and turned round and said, 

“ You’re only a b dirty bitch,” and worse words still. 

He tried to run away, he more than walked, I could hardly 
follow him. I gave him into custody just opposite the clock at 
Victoria Station. I am sure it is the man. I noticed his 
right cheek was drawn and his left cheek fuller. He took a 
pocket-book out at my house, and wrote in it about dresses, 

167 



Adolf Beck. 

silk stockings, and gloves. The pocket-book produced is the 
one. I recognised yesterday that silver match-box. I think 
he had a silver cigarette case. I am sure about the pooket- 
book. 

Cross-examined — I must confess I had never been to Vine 
Street before. In June, a year ago, I was at a Police Court 
to prosecute a servant who had taken about £20 worth of 
wearing apparel. I was living then where I live now. I 
have never been charged myself. I decline to say whether 
I have been married. I have lived twenty-one months where 
I am living now. I do not get my living by seeing men. I 
am a music teacher and I have my own income. I have gone 
to one family as a teacher four years. Prisoner did not yester- 
day charge me with annoying and accosting him. It was 
between two and three on 26th November when I saw him. 
It might be from a quarter to two to half-past two. I am 
quite sure about the date and time. I was with him on the 
26th about five minutes, and on the 27th about an hour. I 
saw the prosecutrix in the first case yesterday for the first time. 
I did not see her again till to-day. I really mean to say that 
is the book I saw the man with — I have no doubt. I did not 
have it in my hand on the 27th, I saw some initials on it, but 
he opened it so quick I didn’t see what they were. Both these 
documents were written in my presence. 

On the 26th November, when I met the defendant, it must 
have been a fairly fine day else I would not have gone out. I 
have been in this Police Court as a witness before. A gentle- 
man named Allen, a detective, subpoenaed me. 

( Signed ) Otttlie Meissonier. 

DAISY GRANT, sworn. 

I live at 44 Circus Road, St. John’s Wood. On the 5th 
July I was living at 3 Wellington Chambers, York Street, 
Westminster. On Thursday, the 4th of July, I met the prisoner 
in St. James’s Street. I was just returning home. I was 
with a lady and a little boy. He spoke to me, making a remark 
about the little boy. I stopped to speak to him, and the lady 
and the little boy went on. He took out his pocket-book and 
wrote down my name and address. He made an appointment 
to call the next afternoon. He did call about four o’clock. I 
was at home. He remained about three-quarters of an hour. 
That was the only visit. He said he would buy me other rings, 
he was. going to Streeter’s in Bond Street. He took a small 
diamond ring to know the size of my finger. He said he would 
send them by a commissionaire. He was going to give me 
the things, a list of which I produce. The ring I gave him 

168 



Examination of Daisy Grant. 

in order to know the size of my finger was worth about 30s. 
He said he would send it back with others by a commissionaire 
in half an hour. lie said 1 would know the commissionaire 
as he had his arm in a sling. I knew there was one who had 
lost his arm; he is connected with one of the clubs in St. 
James’s. That was why 1 believed him. I saw him write 
out a list marked A. He said he was going to give me the 
things ; he was going to take a house for me in Adair Road, 
St. John’s Wood. He told me to buy the things and said 
where I was to order them. lie wrote out the cheque marked 
B at the same time (cheque dated 5th June). I couldn’t 
say whether it was June or July. He signed the cheque 
“ Wilton.” He said he was the Earl Wilton. He did not give 
me any money besides. He went away and said he would call 
again on Monday. He sent me out of the room for matches to 
light a cigarette with, he sent me out twice, once for my photo- 
graph and once for a match. I had shown him my marquise 
ring before he left. It was in a case on the table. About half 
an hour after he left I missed my ring from the case, which 
was left behind. I gave him my bracelet — a broad gold bracelet 
chased on the top, which had been dented. He said he would 
get the dents taken out. 

He did not return or send me anything, and I came to the 
Police Court on the Monday. I did not see him again till I 
saw him in custody last evening. I have not got my rings 
or my bracelet. 

The figures in the margin of the list A were different 
deposits I was to leave at the shops on the goods I bought. 
The cheque w r as given to me partly to meet that. I inquired 
for the Uilion Bank in St. James’s Street, and couldn’t find 
any such bank. 

The value of my bracelet was about £3, the diamond ring 
I gave him as a pattern 30s., and the marquise ring about 
£10. I bought the marquise ring off somebody else for £8. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Dutton. 

The lady that was with me on the 4th July cannot identify 
the prisoner. She has told me since that she couldn’t identify 
him. I can’t say for certain whether it was in June or July. 
I believe it was July. It was about five in the afternoon of 
the 4th July when I first saw the prisoner. It was a fine 
afternoon. He had on a low hat, a round felt hat — I think 
it was dark brown. I can’t say whether his clothes were light 
or dark. In my presence he wrote the whole of the cheque 
B — everything. He put it in an envelope first, and directed the 
envelope — I think I have the envelope at home among my 



Adolf Beck. 


papers. I did not look at the cheque till after he'd gone. I 
read it then. I noticed it was on a promissory note. I $id not 
notice it was dated a month earlier. That it was a promissory 
note and not a cheque from a bank book attracted nay atten- 
tion more than the date. It was given me to order these 
things on the paper. I was not carrying on a gay life on 
that day. I certainly spoke to the man when he spoke to 
me. I was leading a respectable life then. I am living now 
as a married woman. I decline to say whether I am married. 
I have been for five years under the keeping of somebody. I 
was living in my own name as Mrs. Grant. That is my correct 
name, Daisy Grant; prisoner did visit me for a purpose, and, 
having no money, gave me that cheque, if you put it that way. 
The man wrote on the paper B what is written there, ©very 
bit of it in my presence. That is my paper — I took it out of 
my drawer. I identified the prisoner at the station here yester- 
day; I was sitting with another girl on a form in the station. 
When I identified the prisoner he was amongst several men. 
I did not see him before I identified him attempt to enter the 
room where I was sitting, and then be immediately pushed out 
by the officer in charge. 

Further examined — I would not have let him have the gold 
bracelet or the ring if I had not expected he would bring it 
back to me. I am quite sure he wrote both these things in 
my presence, I can swear it. 

(Signed) Daisy Grant. 

JOHN WAITS, Detective, A Division, sworn. 

About 5.45 last night I saw the prisoner detained at 
Rochester Row police station on another charge. I told him 
that he answered the description of a man giving the name 
of Earl Wilton, who was wanted for stealing jewellery. ITe 

said, “ It’s a great mistake. The lady has made a great 

mistake. I never saw her in my life.” I then sent for the 
prosecutrix, Mrs. Grant. The prisoner was placed with six 
other men. She said, <f I believe that’s the man,” touching 
the prisoner, ‘ ‘ if he took his hat off I should know.” The 

prisoner took his hat off, and she said that was the man. ITe 

was then charged, and he said he'd never seen the ladies before 
in his life. I then searched him and found a pocket-book, 
one .£10 Bank of England note, one .£5 note, 30s. gold, 2s. 
6d. silver, one Army and Navy Stores ticket in the name of 
A. Beck , several cards and memoranda. I then went To 139 
Victoria Street, a house let out in chambers, and found that 
fie occupied three rooms there in partnership with a gentleman 

170 



Examination of John Watts. 


who is away, I searched all the rooms, but failed to find any 
cheques or cheque book, or anything relating to the charge. 

Cross-examined — I saw a great number of papers — some- 
thing to do with mines. He has told me that he is connected 
with some copper mines. 

(Signed) John Watts, P.C., C.I.D.a. 


The above depositions of OTTILIE MEISSONIER, DAISY 
GRANT, and JOHN WATTS, 

were taken and sworn before me, the undersigned, one of the 
Magistrates of the Police Courts of the Metropolis at the Police 
Court aforesaid, on the day and year first above-mentioned. 

(Signed) J. Shetl. * 


Metropolitan Police District to wit. The Examination of 
MARY HARVEY, FREDERICK EDWARDS, KATE 
BRAKEFIELD, and JOHN WATTS, 

taken on oath this 23rd day of December in the year of our 
Lord one thousand eight hundred and ninety-five at the West- 
minster Police Court, in the county of London, and within the 
Metropolitan Police District, before me, the undersigned, one 
of the Magistrates of the Police Courts of the Metropolis, 
sitting at, the Police Court aforesaid, in the presence and 
hearing of Adolf Beck, who is charged this day before me, as 
aforesaid. 

MARY HARVEY, sworn. * 

I am servant to Madame Meissonier. I live at 2 Aviland 
Road, King’s Road, Chelsea. I remember Wednesday, the 
27th November, last. I recognise the prisoner. lie called 
between one and half-past two that day. I opened the door 
for him. He asked if Madame Meissonier was in. I showed 
him upstairs. I did not see him again till I saw him up 
here. I am quite sure he is the man. 

Cross-examined — It was three weeks last Wednesday. I 
know, because I let him in. It was our washing day. It 
was no other Wednesday. Ho had a high hat on and carried 
an umbrella. My mistress sent for me to the police station 
last week. The time when ho came was about my dinner 

171 



Adolf Beck. 


time. I recollect the previous day. I know she went out. 
I don’t remember the time when she went out or came in. 
On the Wednesday she told me to put on my hat and jacket, 
and go to the top of the street and see if I could see this 
gentleman, and I went. 

(Signed) Mary Harvey. 
FREDERICK EDWARDS, P.C. 419 A, sworn. 

About 5 p.m. on the 16th December I was on duty in 
Victoria Street, outside “ The Royal Standard ” public-house, 
when I saw the prisoner and the second prosecutrix coming up 
the street towards me. The prisoner was the first to speak, 
and wanted to know what he could do with the woman, she 
kept following him and annoying him. I told him I must 
hear the woman’s story as well. She then said that she should 
charge this man with stealing two watches and a ring. I 
asked her if she would charge him; she said “ Yes.” I then 
took him into custody. He said nothing, but was quite 
willing to go to the station. When the charge was read 
over he said he never knew this woman and he never saw her 
before. He was identified by the first prosecutrix and also the 
servant. 

(Signed) Frederick Edwards. 
KATE BRAKEFIELD, sworn. 

I am the wife of Henry Brakefield, a butler, living at 
34 Smith Street, Chelsea. My professional name is Alice 
Brookman. I am a music hall artiste. 

I first met with the prisoner on the 22nd June, a Satur- 
day, coming down Sloane Street, about two o’clock in the 
afternoon. I was alone. He followed me and spoke to me. 
He said he'd been following mo because I had a very small 
foot. He asked me where I lived. I was living at 39 Upcerae 
Road, Chelsea. I gave him that address. I told him I was 
a professional. He asked me if I had a piano. I said I had a 
piano and a mandolin too. He said he would come down on 
the Sunday afternoon and play. He came down on Sunday 
afternoon, the 23rd June, at two o’clock. I let him in. He 
asked me how I was and walked into the parlour. He said 
he hadn't long to stay, but would I give him a sheet of paper 
and an envelope, and he would write out a list of dresses for 
me to .get at Regent Street. I told him I had been to Wilton 
Crescent. He told me that as I had been up to Wilton 
Crescent, he was Lord Wilton. I got the envelope and paper 
produced from a box in my room. The list marked F, the 

172 



Examination of Kate Brakefield. 

envelope marked G, and the two cheques H and I he wrote out 
in my presence, and gave me. The £30 cheque was to pay 
for the dresses. The £20 was to last me until he came to 
see me on the Wednesday. I asked him to show me the notes, 
but he said I must not open the envelope until I had taken 
them to the bank. He told me to go to the Union Bank, 
St. James’s Street, Piccadilly. He asked me to take the 
ring off my finger to get the size, and he would get mo some. 
I gave him two rings as patterns, a diamond ring and a ruby 
ring. I value them at £10. They were given to me as 
presents. I did not give him anything else. He said he 
would send me down the things he was going to buy, by a 
commissionaire with one arm. He stayed nearly two hours. 
He came at two and went away at a quarter to four. Directly 
he was gone I missed a silver belt, six silver bangles, one 
silver snake-headed bangle, a mandolin in a case, a snake 
brooch which I think was silver washed with gold, and two 
ivory medallions. They were lying on a table in the parlour. 
They were safe when he came. He had been, looking at them 
and said they were no good. I wasn’t to have those when he 
bought me better things. I went upstairs more than once 
while he was there. I went out of the room twice — about ten 
minutes. Ho had a dust coat on. I went upstairs to make 
some tea. When I came down he was gone. I went an hour 
afterwards to Chelsea police station and gave a description of 
him. I never saw him again till I saw him here. I saw it 
in the paper and I came here. I am sure he is the man. 

Cross-examined — I don’t know Pm sure that a great many 
men have admired my pretty little feet. I had new shoes on. 
He is the only man 1 have invited to my rooms. He did not 
play the piano. I am a married woman, respectable, married 
to a butler. He is not doing anything now. His lady is away 
— he is waiting till she comes back from abroad. He is 
having his wages just the same. I have been married twice. 
I have been married seven years to my present husband. 

We were married at St. John’s Church, Westminster. My 
first husband’s name was Beale. 

On 22nd June, about two o’clock, I met prisoner in Sloane 
Street. I did not stay ten minutes with him. My husband 
was not at home the next day — he was in his own place. 
Prisoner was there about two o’clock next day. I had had my 
lunch. He sat in the parlour writing nearly two hours. He 
had spats on. The address he came to was 39 Upcerne Road, 
Chelsea. There I had a flat. He had a stick with a kmd of 
brown knob, and light spats and black patent boots, a white 
waistcoat, a dark pair of trousers with a stripe, and a dust 
coat. He had a little safety pin with a pearl in it. I saw 



Adolf Beck. 

him write the whole of the document F, the envelope G, and 
I saw him write those cheques. He wrote the signature and 
the date to the cheques, and also the body of the cheques. 
I do not recollect a very similar case to this being tried at 
this Court about three months ago. 

Further examined — I valued the whole of my property at 
£22, the rings at £10, arid the other things at £12. 

(Signed) Kate Brakefield. 

JOHN WATTS, Detective, A Division, sworn. 

This morning, when the charge was read over to the pri- 
soner, he said “ I never saw that woman in my life or any 
9f them. ,, 

Cross-examined — There are two other women that say they 
now believe he is the man but won’t swear to him. They 
were put up to identify him — there were five men altogether, 
including the prisoner. About five men altogether saw him. 
* (Signed) Johx Watts, P.C., C.I.D.a. 

The above depositions of MARY HARVEY, FREDERICK 
EDWARDS, KATE BRAKEFIELD, and JOHN WATTS, 

were taken and sworn before me, the undersigned, one of the 
Magistrates of the Police Courts of the Metropolis, at the 
Police Court aforesaid, on the day and year first above- 
mentioned. 

(Signed) J. Sheil. 


Metropolitan Police District to wit. The Examination of 
JAMES MORRIS SUTTON, WILLIAM JOHN WEY, 
MARION TAYLOR, alias KATE DUNCAN, ALICE 
SINCLAIR, ETHEL ANNIE TOWNSEND, and LILY 
VINCENT, alias JULIETTE KLUTH, 

taken on oath this 9th day of January in the year of our 
Lord one thousand eight hundred and ninety-six at the West- 
minster Police Court, in the county of London, and within the 
Metropolitan Police District, before me, the undersigned, one 
of the Magistrates of the Police Courts of the Metropolis, 
sitting at the Police Court aforesaid, in the presence and hearing 
of Adolf Beck, who is charged this day before me, as afore- 
said. 

174 



Examination of Sutton, Wey and Taylor. 

JAMES NORRIS SUTTON, sworn. 

I am cashier of the Union Bank, London, 66 Charing Cross. 
The bank has not a branch in St. James’s Street or at Belgrave 
Mansions. We have no customer named A. Wilton or A. de 
Wilton or Lord Wilton. During the past year, 1895, we 
had presented a number of promissory notes or bills draiwn by 
A. Wilton or A. de Wilton. There were from 15 to 20. 
They were chiefly presented by ladies. I dishonoured them, 
having no instructions to meet them. The four exhibits 
marked B, D, II, and I were all presented, together with 
three others marked M, P, and 0. 

(Signed) J. N. Sutton. 


WILLIAM JOHN WEY, sworn. 

I am a cashier of the London and South-Western Bank, 
Balham branch. In 1894 and 1895 we had a customer named 
Mrs. Gardiner. On the 10th November, 1894, there was 
issued to her a cheque book of 25 cheques, numbered 482,776 
to 482,000 inclusive. In the month of January, 1895, I had 
instructions from Mrs. Gardiner, and in consequence I refused 
to honour cheques from her book. She signed also a stop- 
order form which is dated 4tli January, 1895. After that 
date there were presented the cheques produced marked 
J, K, L, S, T, U, Y. They were all from the book which was 
issued to Mrs. Gardiner. They were chiefly presented by 
young women who, in most cases, endorsed them. I retained 
them till they were handed to the police. The drawer’s name 
appears to’ bo written. We had no customer of that name and 
no instructions to meet the cheques. 

(Signed) W. J. Wat. 


MARION TAYLOR, sworn. 

I live at 124 Vauxhall Bridge Road. In the early part of 
last year I was living at 23 Moreton Place, Pimlico. On a 
Saturday afternoon in January, 1895, I was walking in 
Piccadilly. That man (the prisoner) spoke to me just out- 
side a silversmith’s, Dobson’s. I was alone. lie said I was 
a very charming woman, he should like to call on me, and 
would I give him my card. I said I didn’t have cards, but 
I gave him a very dirty envelope. He arranged to call next 
day, which was Sunday. I went home for tea. While -I was 
home a telegram came to me. I have since destroyed it. 
The following day at four o’clock the prisoner called at my 
rooms at 23 Moreton Place. My servant made him some tea. 

175 



Adolf Beck. 

Bfe told me he had a most lovely establishment in St, John’s 
W<fcd, that he’d quarrelled with his mistress, and he should 
like me to head his establishment as he had so many stylish 
friends on the Stock Exchange. He said: “ You are very 
nicely gowned, but, of course, you are not dressed sufficient 
for my position.” He then told me to get a sheet of note- 
paper, which I did. Then he made a list of my dresses I 
was to have. I was to get them at Redfern’s. The prisoner 
made the list out. I did not suggest the things to him. I 
was too appalled by the wealth of it all. He made the list 
out himself. Then he said to me, “ Now, how about money? ” 
I said, “ I haven’t any money to speak of.” He said, “ These 
people, of course, don’t know you, so I’ll write you a cheque.” 
Accordingly, he wrote me one. I thought it a very funny 
thing, he did not bring it out of a cheque book. It was on 
blue paper with a stamp. It was for .£25. I don’t know what 
he signed, it was all scribbly up in the corner. He had not 
told me his name. The cheque was given into my hands. He 
said, “ Now about diamonds, you must have some diamonds; 
now have you a ring the size of your finger? ” I suggested 
a piece of pasteboard. Ho said, “ No, that would look so 
bad.” I went downstairs, I wasn’t going to give my wedding 
ring away. So I went downstairs to my 'landlady, who lent 
me an old-fashioned buckle gold "ring. I gave it to the 
prisoner. He was to take it to get me some diamonds and 
send them on by a commissionaire before one o’clock on the 
Monday morning. He told me to take the cheque to the bank 
opposite Marlborough House, where the Prince of Wales live®. 
He said, “ Oh, by the by, have you any loose silver, I’ve 
nothing but gold for my cab fare, it’s so awkward on Sunday 
nights.” I opened my purse and said, “ Yes, I have,” and 
I gave him 9s. He arranged to call again on the following 
Monday afternoon after the commissionaire. On the Mon- 
day I went up to St. Jamas’s Street. I could not find any 
Union Bank. I went afterwards to the Union Bank in 
Trafalgar Square with my cheque. I could not get it cashed. 
The prisoner never called on me again. I did not see him 
again till last Thursday, when I identified him in the Court. 

I saw him with a number of men and picked him out in one 
minute. I should have made it hot for him if I had seen 
him before. I gave the cheque and the list to Mrs. Baker, 
my landlady. The value of the ring I got from the landlady 
was 15s. or 16s. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Dutton — I have an objection to 
answer my age. I decline to answer such a question as to 
how long I have been leading a life of immorality. I won’t 
say what name the prisoner knew me under. It was Duncan. 

176 



Examination of Marion Taylor. 

He didn't take the trouble to know my Christian name. 
is my business whether I have been married. Yes, I have. 

I shan't say whether my husband is alive, I won’t there. I 
have not a daughter alive and I never had one, there. I don't 
know what date it was in January. It was in the early part, 
the snow was not on the ground. It was about a fortnight 
after Christmas. It was between three and four on the Satur- 
day when I first met him, outside Dobson's, the silversmith's, 
going up Vine Street. He was dressed most beautifully. He had 
a high silk hat on. He didn't look half so wearied as he looks 
now. He had a covert coat on, a light coat. He had a white 
thing inside his black waistcoat, and I thought, dear me, how 
nice he looks. He had white spats over his patent boots, very 
nice boots they were. On the Sunday he called at four o'dpeK- 
punctually at 23 Moreton Place, Pimlico. He was dressed in 
the same manner. He took off his greatcoat. He had a most 
beautiful coat -on underneath. He had patent boots, white 
spats, grey trousers, black coat, black vest, and a white inside 
thing. I did not notice whether he had a watch and chain 
on. Ho stayed wif^h mo till seven o'clock. We had tea. I 
gave the list and cheque to Mrs. Baker that night, after he 
left. He was "to give me thq cheque and these articles simply 
for admiring me. I did not communicate with the police, for 
the simple reason my name was too good to be bandied about. 

I have never been in custody or had a complaint made against 
me. I have appealed to the police for protection. That was 
not in Moreton Street. My only reason I did not communi- 
cate with the police was because I belong to a good family. 

I communicated with the police — revenge is sweet. It was 
after I first saw the case in the paper. I first communicated 
with Detective Watts. I last saw Mrs. Baker about twp 1 
months ago. I told Sergeant Watts that Mrs. Baker had 
these two documents. Prisoner did not tell me any name^ I 
said to Watts that I received a telegram from him signed 
“ Wilton, Carlton Club." When I identified prisoner last 
week he was with a number of men. No one told me he 
would be found between two tall men at the right of the 
line. I said, “ That's the man." They said, “You must 
touch _him," and I touched him. I came out of the door and 
walked up to him. I identified him, I can swear to him. I 
did not go straight up to him. They said, “ Will you look 
along that line? " I said, “ That's the man." He was near 
the door. I noticed his voice when he was with me. . He 
spoke with a foreign accent. Pie told mo he was a German. 
Ho said, “ What have you to do with Goethe? " 

(Signed) Kate Duncan. 



Adolf Beck 


ALICE SINCLAIR, sworn. 

I live at 40 Albany Street, Regent’s Park. In February, 
1895, I was living in Upper Baker Street. I was walking in 

Ludgate Ilill on a Saturday morning in that month. Some 

one spoke to me. To the best of my belief it was the pri- 
soner. He asked me if I was waiting for an omnibus; I 

said “ Yes.” I was just about to get into an omnibus with 
my sister. He asked me where I lived. I gave him my 
address, 25 Upper Baiter Street. He said he would call on me 
the next day, the Sunday afternoon. He called on the Sunday 
at two o’clock. He told me he had a very nice house in 
St. John’s Wood, and asked if I should like to go and stay 
there, and asked if I would like to dine with him on the 
Tuesday night, and I said I would. He asked me to go and 
live there under his protection ; I had not quite made up my 
mind. He proposed to buy me some new dresses. I was 
to dine with him in the Abbey Road, St. John’s Wood. He 
said ho wished to buy me some new dresses. I was to go to 
Redfern’s, he wished to take me away to live with him. I 
was to go on his yacht, so I wanted some new dresses. I was 
to get an opera-cloak, boots, and a riding-habit, which I was 
to order at Cobb’s in Baker Street. I told him I could not 
ride. He said I was to learn. He made a list of what I was 
to order. He put down what he thought proper. I have 
destroyed the list. There were two tailor-made dresses, two 
evening dresses, an opera-cloak, a habit, and boots I was to 
order at Norman’s in Queen Victoria Street. The boots were 
not on the list. My list was similar to that marked C. He 
gave me a cheque for £40. He proposed I should pay £5 to 
Cobb’s for my habit, £5 deposit for boots, and the other £30 
for dresses at Redfern’s. The cheque he gave me is marked J. 
I saw him write the cheque. He took it from a cheque-book. 
He put it in an envelope and addressed it to the manager of 
the bank. I was to take it to the bank in Belgrave Man- 
sions, Victoria Street. He said he would buy me some rings 
and a bracelet, and said I should* have a marquise ring and 
5-stone diamond ring, and he wanted both mine to take the 
measurement. I told him I did not wish to part with my 
rings. I wanted him to take the measurement in cardboard. 
He said, “ Can’t you trust me? ” and I gave him my rings. 
One was a gold wedding ring, the other a foreign gold ring. 
The.wedding ring was worth about £2, the two together about 
£6. A commissionaire from Streeter’s was to bring me the 
rings on the Monday morning about twelve, and return me 
my own rings at the same time. He was to take me to the 
Kiviera in his yacht. He told me he was the Earl of Wilton. 

178 



Examination of Alice Sinclair. 

On tli© Monday I sent my landlady's daughter to the bank 
■with the cheque. I had previously signed it. The cheque was 
detained by the*bank. The prisoner never called on me again, 
nor did the commissionaire arrive with the rings. Last week 
in the Court yard I saw a number of men together — I pointed 
to the prisoner. 

On the Sunday he was with me from half to three-quarters 
of an hour. 

Cross-examined — I believe it was the 27th February — I 
only go by the cheque. It was the day before the 17th 
February. I had my sister with me. It was fine, very fine. 
He had light trousers on, a black waiscoat, a white vest 
front, a black frock-coat, a black satin tie with a big pearl 
pin, a tall hat and an umbrella. He spoke to my -sister 
and I got into the bus. I don't know whether he drove up 
on the Sunday. To the best of my belief he was dressed 
in the same manner. I was going in the same name then 
as now. That is my correct name. I am single. I. get 
my living partly by seeing gentlemen. I was alone on the 
Sunday. Directly he came into the room he asked me if 
I recognised him and I said “ Yes, from seeing you yester- 
day afternoon.” He said, “ Do you know who I ami ” 
I said, “ N6.” He said, “ I'm the Earl of Wilton/' I 
asked him to sit down. He had no overcoat on, simply a 
frock-coat. I did not notice whether he had a watch chain. 
He proposed that I should come to his house in St. John's 
Wood. He did not strike me as being an Englishman. He 
asked me for a piece of paper. I rang the bell and the 
servant brought it up. I think it was my landlady's little 
son who brought it and the pen and ink. He wrote the 
list and the cheque. He had no difficulty whatever in 
writing them. The clothes appeared to me to be new — 
perfection. He looked a gentleman, and the noble lord that 
he represented himself to be. I never got my rings back. 
He got no money from me. I have seen the last witness 
before. I have not spoken to her about it. I did not com- 
municate with the police. The police called on me. The 
rings were not very valuable, £5 or £6, and I did not wish 
to communicate with the police. 

Re-examined — The two rings I was wearing were the only 
rings I had then, my others were in pawn. That was why 
I was reluctant to part with them. 

(Signed) Alice Sinclair. 

ETHEL ANNIE TOWNSEND, sworn. 

I am a widow and live at Oxford House, Tottenham 

179 



Adolf Beck. 

Couit Road. In March, 1895, I was living in Shaftesbury 
Avenue. On the 6th March I was walking with my little 
daughter in Piccadilly between one and half-past one. I 
was accosted by a man — the prisoner. He asked me first if 
I was lady somebody. I said I was not. Then he asked 
me if I Jpew Lord Aberdeen. I said I did, but not so 
well as his brother. He said he'd just returned from 
Canada and had been staying with them some time, could 
he converse with me. I gave him my card. He arranged 
to call at four next day. He came at twenty to four. He 
said he was Lord Wilton de Willoughby. Two years ago 
I met a gentleman of the same name but not for long. 
I expected him to be the same gentleman. He asked me 
why I was living alone in a flat. I told him I had buried 
my husband in India, and that was the reason I was living 
- alone in a flat. He asked me why I was living in a flat, 
*vhy I didn't live up in St. John's*Wood somewhere. I 
Skid T preferred to live in the West End as it was nearer 
my friends. He said he had a little house in St. John's 
Wood he wished to get an occupant for, servants, and wine 
cellar. I said I didn't mind living in St. John's Wood, 
but I should have to know a little more about him, and 
go and see the house. He said I could see it in a day or 
two. He said I wasn't dressed decently enough, and I 
hadn't diamonds. He asked me to take off my wedding 
ri&g. He said he simply wanted it for a measure to buy 
me some more at" Streeter's. The ring was a plain gold 
ring, value, as far as I know, £3 10s. He promised to 
send me three or four half-hoop diamond rings. • He said 
I wasn't dressed well enough and made me write a list 
of dresses I was to get at different shops in Bond Street. 

I was to get a dressing-case in Piccadilly. I have destroyed 
the list. He told me what to put down — dresses of every 
description, evening dresses, walking dresses, three or four 
of each, and a riding habit. I was to get them at Redfern's. 
He gave me a cheque which he said was to pay for them. 
He wrote out the cheque L for £120. I did not see where 
he took it from, I was fetching the tea at the time. He put 
the cheque in an envelope and sealed it. I was to present 
it. at the Balham Bank. He took a gold chain bracelet 
with a padlock off my arm. He said he was going to have 
a diamond put in the padlock. I had a gold bracelet 
set with a pearl horse shoe. He took that to have it 
straightened. It was a little dented. I had also at this- 
time a black ostrich feather fan. He took it to 
Rave it mounted in turquoise. It was a magnificent 
fan. He said it was spoiled by not being mounted. 

180 



Examination of Ethel Townsend. 

I had also a pair of elephants’ tusks value £ 50 . 

He took them to have them mounted on an ink- 
stand. I had a bracelet belonging to my sister on the 

table. He asked whose it was. He said it wanted to be 

repaired. I said, “ Not necessarily.” He put it down 
again. I let him have a portrait of myself on ^porcelain. 
He said he wanted it for the house in St. John’s Wood, he 
also took three others. I went to get him some tea. After 
1 returned he stayed five or ten minutes. I was to receive 
the rings the same evening by a commissionaire with one 
arm, and he himself would call on me the next day. After 
he’d gone I missed my sister’s bracelet, and a pair of 
tiger’s claws that had just arrived from India that day, 
a tooth of an animal that I’d had mounted for my parasbl 
with my monogram in silver. 

The following day I took the cheque to the Bank at* 
Belham. The bracelet, tooth, and tiger’s claws, were worth * 
,£20. The things I handed to him were worth, I shotfld 
think, £ 1 00. I let him have these things believing the 
cheque was a good one, and that he was who he represented 
himself to be — a friend of friends of mine. The cheque 
was dishonoured at the bank and kept. I was asked to 
put my name and address on the back of it, and did so. 

I never saw him again, neither did the jewellery arrive. I 
went two days after and gave information „to the police — 
to Sergeant Bridges on the 23rd December, in tjie cou#t 
yard of this building. I picked out the prisoner from 
other men. 

Cross-examined — To the best of my belief the prisoner 
it* the man. I am not sure when I hear him speak. He 
speaks with a foreign accent that he did not speak with 
then. There is a slight doubt in my mind about him. I 
have heard him speak once for a minute in the court yard. 

I have looked at the prisoner. To my knowledge the man 
who called on me had no more hair on, his face than the 
prisoner. I have not the slightest doubt about the date, 
6th March. He had a little hair down the side, that is 
my sister’s idea. I did not notice the gentleman sufficiency. 
He held a pocket handkerchief on the left side of the face 
the whole time he was with me, and in Piccadilly the 
same. He was only in my drawing-room twenty minutes at 
the outside. I was not well enough to entertain the gentle- 
man, and he went as soon as convenient. He was wearing 
a similar overcoat to the one he has on now. I believe 
it is the same coat. It has worn very well for twelve months, 
he did not take his coat off. His trousers were a grey 
mixture with black. he had spats on, dark brown, 

181 



Adolf Beck 


not exactly dark brown. I destroyed the list as 
soon as I found my property gone — a week after. 
I found it gone after he’d left. I really couldn’t 
tell you what he was to give me this valuable pro- 
perty for — to live in his house in St. John’s Wood, not 
alone, I have a daughter. I am not in the habit of re- 
ceiving gentlemen at all. He was going to tell me after 
what he was giving me these things for. I took it for 
granted he was giving me £120, because he had so much 
money he didn’t know what to do with it. I have my 
income and live on it. It was strange for him to give me 
this money. The address on the back of the cheque was 
the address where I was living. My sister is about to be 
married and go to India. I have given my correct address 
now. I gave the prisoner my name, I gave him my card. 
I did not notice whether he was deaf at all, he was very 
fidgety. I did not notice whether he could hear better 
in one ear than the other. 

(Signed) Ethel Annie Townsend. 

LILY VINCENT, sworn. 

I live at 5 Harwood Road, Walham Green. I am a 
single woman and a music-hall artiste. In March or April 
of last year I was accosted by a man at Olympia. I think 
it was the first few days in March. I don’t recollect the 
day of the Week. It was between three and four outside 
the theatre. I was with a little sister of mine I had taken 
to see the performance. He asked for my name and 
address. I gave it to him. He asked if he might come 
and see me. He came a few days afterwards between three 
and four. He told me he kept a large house in St. John’s 
Wood, and had a lot of friends there, and as I told him 
I was a professional he would like me to come and see him 
and give him some music. I said I shouldn’t mind coming 
up as he had some other friends there. Then he told me 

k wasn’t dressed well enough, I should have to wear 
fferent clothes. Then he asked me whether I could 
bring him a piece of paper to write out a list of 
clothes. I sent and got it, and he wrote a list of things 
I was to get at Bond Street. I think in Redfern’s. I 
Have since burnt that list. I think there were a riding 
habit, tea-gown, evening dress, and two plain dresses. I 
told liim I had gone riding a few years before. I was 
also to get boots and shoes in Regent Street. He drew me 
a cheque and told rne to get the money and pay on account. 
The cheque is marked 0. He wrote it himseif and put it 
182 



Examination of Lily Vincent. 

in an envelope. I was going to open it. He told me not, 
it would be better to take it as it was. I was to take it 
to the Union Bank, Belgrave Mansions, next morning. I 
had several rings on my finger. He said they were not of 
much value, and asked me for one and he would send me 
some better, and return the other in about an hour’s time 
with a one-armed messenger. It was a small gold ring 
with three stones, one white and two red in it, value about 
,£3. He was with me about an hour or an hour and a 
half. He said he would write and let me know when he 
would see me again. He told me he was either proprietor 
or manager of a mine. The name written on the cheque 
was Wilton. I never heard from him or saw him after 
that. I did not get my ring back. The following morning 
I went to Belgrave Mansions and could not find the bank. 
I kept the cheque until I saw this case in the paper, then 
I sent a letter to Scotland Yard. In letting him take my 
ring I believed the cheque was a genuine cheque. Last 
week at this Court I recognised the gentleman as soon as 
I got out in the yard. That is the prisoner. 

Cross-examined — I was in Court about five minutes when 
the last witness gave evidence. I was standing at the door. 
I read this case in the weekly paper. I recognised the 
name Wilton from the document he gave me. I can 
recognise the name of Wilton on it. The document con- 
taining a list of clothes and the cheque were written in 
my presence in a free, off-hand manner — no hesitation in 
writing, nothing out of the ordinary way. I can’t say 
whether Ire dated it the samo day he wrote it. I looked 
at the name, not the date, I can’t say what date in March 
it was, it was the first two or three days, not later than the 
third day, not a week from my first seeing him. I can be 
certain it was not more than four days. When I first saw 
him it was between three and four in the afternoon — day- 
light. He had a dark blue overcoat with velvet collar, a 
high hat, and spats, you’ll have to excuse my bad English, 
I’m a foreigner. I think he had patent boots on. He 
was dressed the same the second as the first time. Hfo 
was with me about an hour and a half. He did not have 
tea with me. I notice the gentleman was not quite English, 
he spoke with a foreign accent, he spoke a little French. 
I did not know what he was, whether he was a German or 
what he was. I think he had just the same quantity of 
hair on his face then as now. "When I saw him h6 had 
whiskers and he’s got them now, a moustache. He had no 
side whiskers. I don’t think he had any hair under the 
chin. I did not notice anything the matter with his hear- 

183 



Adolf Beck 


ing. He asked me questions now and again; and said, 
/‘What did you say?” I wrote to Scotland Yard giving 
my stage name. My right name £s Miss Juliette Kluth. 
I was living at the same address as I have given to-day. 
The prisoner had on a watch chain and a large gold watch, 
a hunting watch. I thought he was a gentleman by the 
way he spoke and a man of means. I think the chain he 
had on was gold; I didn't examine it. I did not notice 
whether he had any rings on his finger. 

(Signed) Miss Juliette Kluth. 

The above depositions of JAMES NORRIS SUTTON, 
WILLIAM JOHN WEY, MARION TAYLOR, alias 
KATE DUNCAN, ALICE SINCLAIR, ETHEL ANNIE 
TOWNSEND, and LILY VINCENT, alias JULIETTE 
KLUTH, 

were taken and sworn before me, the undersigned, one of 
the Magistrates of the Police Courts of the Metropolis at 
the Police Court aforesaid on the day and year first above- 
mentioned. 

(Signed) J. Siieil. 


Metropolitan Police District to wit. The Examination of 
MARION TAYLOR, alias KATE DUNCAN, FANNY 
NUTT, and JOHN WATTS, 

taken on oath this twenty-third day of January, in the year of 
our Lord one thousand eight hundred and ninety-six, at the 
Westminster Police Court, in the county of London, and within 
the Metropolitan Police District, before me, the undersigned, 
one of the Magistrates of the Police Courts of the Metropolis, 
sitting at the Police Court aforesaid, in the presence and 
hearing of Adolf Beck, who is charged this day before me, 
as aforesaid. 

MARION TAYLOR, sworn. 

Recalled and cross-examined — I did not meet the prisoner 
six years ago at Charing Cross. I don't know Brown's Hotel, 
Covent Garden. I did not stay there three years ago and 
breakfast twice with a man. I dare say I went to the 
Foreign Dog Show at the Aquarium at the latter part of last 
year. I did go. I did not meet the prisoner there and 
,speak to him. I was not exhibiting a dog there, neither was 
‘ a friend of mine. 

(Signed) Kate Duncan. 


134 



Examination of Fanny Nutt. 

FANNY NUTT, sworn. 

I live at 1 Rutland Street, Hampstead Road. I am a 
widow. In December, 1894, I was living at Lancy Street,, 
Regent's Park. On the 2nd December, 1894, Monday, I was 
walking in Bond Street about six o'clock in the evening. I 
was dressed in deep widow's mourning at the time. A gentle- 
man spoke to me in Bond Street. It was the prisoner. He 
said, “ You must be a very young widow," and asked me 
how long my husband had been dead. I told him nearly 
twelve months. He asked me if he might be allowed to come 
and see me. I said I didn't know; I was rather reluctant in 
giving my address. He asked me for a card, but I hadn't 
got one to give him. He held my umbrella while 1 wrote 
my address down. He told me that he was going to a grand 
dinner that night, and couldn't stay to talk to me, but he 
would write and come and see me. I was talking to him for 
about ten minutes, perhaps. I understood he was to write 
and make an appointment to call on me. On the following 
morning I received the letter produced, marked P. in the 
envelope P. On that Tuesday, between one and two, the 
prisoner came to my house. I let him in and took him 
upstairs — I was in apartments. He took off his coat and hat 
and sat down in a chair by the fire. He began to tell me 
that he would like to keep me, that he would like to take 
me to his house to be his lady housekeeper. He said that he 
had a nice house in St. John's Wood, and that he'd just 
sent the lady away that was at his house, sent her away to 
Coventry, because she had misbehaved herself with some 
of his friends while he was away, some of his club friends 
had told him. He said that ho was sending her away without 
any money whatever, all that she had was about £8000 worth 
of jewellery which he had given her. He was to allow me 
about £5 a week to begin with, and, if I suited him, would 
make it £10. He told me he had estates in Lincolnshire; 
he would be having some grapes sent the next day, and he 
would send me up a box. He said I should have to leave 
off mv widow's mourning, and if I would give him some 
paper he would write a list of dresses that I was to get. He 
asked me what jewellery I had, as I should want some nice 
jewellery to wear in his house. I showed him what I had, 
and he wrote out another list which he took with him. I was 
to have a diamond and pearl brooch, a watch and dressing- 
case. I supplied him with some paper, on which he wrote the 
list marked Q. I did not suggest the things to him. He 
gave me that list, and took the jewellery list away. I was 
order the dresses. He took two cheques out of his pocket, one 
for 10 guineas, the other for 15 guineas, and gave me the 

185 



Adolf Beck. 


one for 15 guineas, marked R., and said I was to pay <£10 
deposit, and keep the other till he came on the following 
Thursday. He addressed it himself — “ The Union Bank, 
Belgrave Mansions,” on a mourning envelope. The envelope 
was sealed down. I said it was rather a long way to go, the 
bank would be closed before I got there. He said, “ Oh, it 
keeps open till six o’clock Christmas time.” I said, “ Can’t 
I change it anywhere else? ” He said, “ Oh, no, it wouldn’t 
do for a gentleman in his position to have his cheques changed 
anywhere.” I showed him the rings I was wearing when he 
asked to see my jewellery. He said he should want some 
rings the size of my finger, he wanted them to fit nicely. He 
picked up some that were not of much value. Then he said, 
<c Let me have that, that fits the best.” That was my wed- 
ding ring which I was wearing. He had that ring. I was 
wearing another ring with a motto, “ Love and Friendship,” 
written inside — iny husband’s ring. He took that as well 
for the size of my middle finger. These rings were to be 
returned to me at five o’clock with the other jewellery he 
was going to buy me. A commissionaire, with one arm, from 
the Grand Hotel, would bring it. I was to see him again 
the following Thursday. The value of my two rings was £6 
or £7. He did not give me any name, and I did not ask 
him for any. He was with me from an hour to an hour and 
a half. While he was with me I had a brooch on my dressing- 
table, a five-shilling piece mounted, marked 1822. After he 
had gone I missed the brooch. I valued it at eighteen shil- 
lings or a [K>und. I did not present the cheque at tho bank. 
I showed it to a relative. In consequence of what he said 
and of inquiries made, it was not presented. In parting 
with my rings, I believed the cheque was a genuine cheque. 

Cross-examined — My husband’s name was Venmore Nutt; 
he was a corporal -major in the First Life Guards. He died 
at Albany Street Barracks, 11th January*, 1893. On 2nd 
December the prisoner was with me about ten minutes. He 
was dressed in a tall hat, a dark blue overcoat with velvet 
collar, very small-checked trousers, rather light, fawn- 
coloured spats. I couldn’t tell whether he had on patent 
boots. The next day he was dressed just the same. He took 
off his greatcoat. He was wearing a black frock-coat under- 
neath. 4 He was very nicely dressed. The coat was not shabby 
at all. He had a gold watch and chain on. It looked like 
gold. The chain was rather a massive one. He wrote the 
list fr.eely, without any apparent difficulty, with a free hand. 
He gave no name whatever. He did not mention the name of 
do Willoughby. Ho did not give me his card. I was not 
at that time in the habit of receiving gentlemen without a 
name. I don’t remember asking for his name. I was to see 

186 



Examination of Fanny Nutt. 

him' on the following Thursday to make arrangements. I 
did not identify the prisoner in the yard out of a number of 
men. I read this case in the paper some time ago, and 
curiosity brought me to the Court to look at the man that 
was charged. This is the third time I have been to the Court; 
I identified him ; I swear to the back of him. 

Re-examined — 1 came to this Court the first time on the 
9th. Up to that time I had not communicated with the 
police. I came and sat in Court. The prisoner was in the 
dock; I at once identified him. I gave the police my docu- 
ments when I went outside. The prisoner did not come back 
the following Thursday, neither did the commissionaire come 
with the rings. 

(Signed) Fanny C. Nutt. 

JOHN WATTS, Detective, A Division, sworn. 

Recalled — When the prisoner was arrested he gave an 
address at 139 Victoria Street, Westminster. I made a search 
there on the night of the 16th December, about eleven o’clock. 
I saw a quantity of clothing there, which I left behind, six 
or seven suits altogether. There were about two overcoats, 
a black frock-coat, a dress suit, and several other articles of 
clothing. T saw a new pair of patent shoes. I believe there 
was some boots. I went again on the 18th with Sergeant 
Heard. I saw there some letters and papers and a memo- 
randum book. I took possession of those. The book is pro- 
duced, marked No. 1. I found it in the writing-desk, which 
was locked. I also found the letters and papers numbered 
2, 3, 4, 5* 6, and 7. I also saw a number of pawn tickets. 
I noticed the dates were 1890 or 1891, and I left them behind. 
Whistler was the name of one of the pawnbrokers, and Atten- 
borough another. They referred to different articles of 
jewellery, brooches and rings, arid a pin, I believe. There 
were about nine or ten pawn tickets altogether. 

Grass-examined — I made a very careful search. I have 
seen the two kinds of cheques which have been given in evi- 
dence by the various witnesses. I did not find anything of 
the kind amongst the prisoner’s things. I have seen these 
lists of goods. I did not see anything of the kind there. 

(Signed) John Watts, P.C., C.F.D.a. 

The above depositions of MARION TAYLOR, alias KATFj 

DUNCAN, FANNY NUTT, and JOHN WATTS, 

were taken and sworn before me, the undersigned, one of the 
Magistrates of the Police Courts of the Metropolis, at the 
Police Court aforesaid, on the day and year first above-- 
mentioned. (Signed) J. Sheil. 

187 



Adolf Beck. 

Metropolitan Police District to wit. The Examination of 
FRANK COOPER, MINNIE LEWIS, EVELYN EMILY 
MILLER, MARCUS BROWNE, GODFREY CHET- 
WYND, THOMAS HENRY GURRIN, and ELISS 
SPURRELL, 

taken on oath this 30th day of January, in the year of our 
Lord one thousand eight hundred and ninety-six, at the 
Westminster Police Court, in the county of London, and 
within the Metropolitan Police District, before me, the under- 
signed, one of the Magistrates of the Police Courts of the 
Metropolis, sitting at the Police Court aforesaid, in the 
presence and hearing of Adolf Beck, who is charged this day 
before me, as aforesaid. 

FRANK COOPER, sworn. 

I live at 69 Brook Street, Kennington Road. I am the 
smoke-room waiter at "the Grand Hotel, at Charing Cross. I 
have been there between nine and ten years. I know the 
prisoner as a person who used the smoke-room. I knew him 
as Mr. Beck. I knew him as coming to the smoke-room on 
and off for the last six years. There are writing tables 
supplied with writing materials in the smoke-room. They 
are restricted to visitors if we know them. The letter and 
envelope marked P are our notepaper and envelope. It has 
not been in use more than eighteen months, as Hotel Victoria 
is on it. The Hotel Victoria only came into thecompany’s 
possession on the 1st January, 1895. I never saw the 
prisoner’s writing. 

Cross-examined — Occasionally any one in the smoke-room 
could sit down and write a letter, unless they were checked 
by me or my assistant. Persons in the smoking-room are 
looked upon by us as respectable persons; I don’t watch a 
person writing if I know him, and I know about 90 per cent, 
of our visitors. There is nothing to prevent a person taking 
a piece of paper or a dozen sheets. I knew Mr. Beck by 
sight. I last saw him about September or October last year. 
1 recollect seeing him after I came back from my holidays, 
early in September. I did not see him again till he entered 
the Court to-day and I saw him in the dock. 

(Signed) Frank Cooper. 


MINNIE LEWIS, sworn. 

I live at 21 Langham Street. I am single. In April of 
last year I was living in Pimlico. A lady named Allen lived 
in the same house with me. On the 3rd April, 1895, the 
188 



Examination of Minnie Lewis. 

prisoner in the dock called at the house to inquire for Mrs. 
Allen. I had seen him at the house before when he called 
on several occasions. Mrs. Alien was not at home on this 
day. I told him that. He asked to be allowed to write a 
letter. I asked him into my room to write the letter. I was 
living on the ground floor. He went into my room. I went 
downstairs to get some notepaper and envelopes, returned 
with them. He was considering for a few moments, when 
he said he thought he would not write to Mrs. Alien. I told 
him I would leave the room while he wrote the letter. He 
said, “ Oh, no, sit down for a moment; talk to me.” He then 
told me he was trying to do some good for Mrs. Allen. He 
then said, “ I have a house in St. John's Wood; I should 
like you to be my housekeeper .' 9 He told me that I should 
have to dress well. He wrote out a list of dresses, some from 
Redfern’s. The list was destroyed; I think it was two or 
three days afterwards, when I was leaving for the Isle of 
Wight. He told me he would have me taught riding, and I 
was to go to Cobb's, in Baker Street, for my habit. He told 
me he was Lord Wilton. When making the list of dresses 
he asked me if I liked brown or grey. I said I liked grey 
for the tailor-made dresses. lie said he preferred evening 
dresses for dinner. I was to have a riding habit and boots; 
I was to have my hats from Heath's, and rings from Bond 
Street. 

The exhibit marked F is similar to my list of dresses. He 
gave me a cheque for i>30 to pay for the dresses. I saw him 
write it. It is marked W. lie put it in the envelope marked 
X. & 

I was wearing a gentleman’s signet ring on my finger, 
with a crest. I was wearing another ring, which was of no 
value. He asked nie for the signet ring, as he thought it 
was the best measurement ; he was going to send me three or 
four rings, among them a marquise ring. They were to be 
sent the same evening by a man with one arm, and the signet 
ring was to be returned at the same time. When I parted 
with my ring I believed the cheque to be a good one and the 
statement as to himself to be true. He was with me a quarter 
of an hour or twenty minutes. He said he would write to me. 
After he'd gone I went down to St. James's Street and tried 
to find the Union Bank. I did not find any branch of the 
Union Bank there. I went to Charing Cross and presented 
the cheque. I couldn’t get the money. I was taken to 
Scotland Yard by one of the bank clerks, and gave informa- 
tion to the officer on duty. My name and address was written 
down. At this Court last week I picked out the prisoner 
from a number of other men. The ring was worth about 10s.* 

189 



Adolf Beck. 

Cross-examined — I do not know any of the womea* in con- 
nection with this case. When I went to Scotland Yard I gave 
a description of the man. It was taken down in writing. 
The man did not give the name of Lord Winton de Willough- 
by; he told me he was Lord Wilton. It was about three 
o'clock when he called. I think it was on a Thursday he 
called, about a fortnight before Easter. He had on patent 
boots, spats of the finest cloth, fawn-coloured; he had bluish- 
grey striped trousers, French grey, stripes downwards, black 
coat and vest, morning coat. He was wearing a gold watch 
and chain. To the best of my remembrance, it was a small 
chain. I saw the watch. He took it out to see the time. I 
couldn't see the face of it. He vras wearing a seal attached 
to the chain with a crest on it, a white collar, I couldn't say 
to the tie. He had a silk hat and umbrella. lie wrote freely, 
but when he signed the cheque he wrote back -handed. He 
wrote on the cheque A. W. Wilton, Esquire, or A. W. Wilton. 
I noticed it from the cheque after he'd written it. I was then 
living at 3 Charlwood Street. I occupied my own apartments 
there on the ground floor. I had been there two months. The 
prisoner had no more hair on his face than now. His 
moustache was dressed more military, it was more pointed. 
I identified him last week. I had only read of this case in 
the paper on one occasion. I have not seen the Daily Graphic 
of 22nd December before. I should say the photo is a very 
good one. The gentleman's signet ring he took away was not 
given to me. It was left by a gentleman at my rooms on 
the Sunday. Ilis name was Richard Diesch. Prisoner did 
not take anything else. He did not tell me where the house 
in St. John's Wood was. 

(Signed) Minnie Lewis. 
EVELYN EMILY MILLER, sworn. 

I live at 17 Park Villas East, Regent's Park. 

On the 28th January, 1895, about five o'clock in the after- 
noon, I was walking in Rond Street. The prisoner stopped 
me and spoke to me. He raised his hat and asked me if he 
hadn't met me at a ball at Covent Garden I had been to two 
or three nights before? I said he might have met me there, 
but I wasn't certain. He said he was quite sure he had met 
me there, and might he call on me to lunch with me the follow- 
ing day. He said he was not quite sure he could come, but he 
would send a telegram the same evening to let me know. I 
said he might come and gave him my address. He did not give 
me his name or address. lie told me the telegram would be 
signed (t Wilton, Carlton Club." I had a telegram the same 

190 



Examination of Evelyn Miller. 

evening. I have destroyed it. It was an appointment for 
two the next day. On the following day at two o’clock, or 
thereabouts, he came to the house. He had lunch with me. 
Before lunch he said he had a house in St. John’s Wood, that 
he’d quarrelled with his mistress, and that he would like me 
to go and keep house for him there. I asked who he was. 
He said, “ There is only one Earl of Wilton, and I’m the man.” 

I agreed to his suggestion to act as his housekeeper. He was 
coining a day or two afterwards to see me, and to arrange 
everything. During the conversation he said after the sitting, 
of Parliament he was going for a trip to Italy, and would like 
me to accompany him. He said I was to have dresses and 
an outfit to go out there with, and he wrote the list of dresses 
down on a piece of paper which I provided. I kept it. He 
also wrote one for himself. My list has been destroyed with 
other papers. I looked for it afterwards and couldn’t find it. 
He suggested the dresses, tailor-made gowns, afternoon gowns, 
and evening gowns, opera cloaks, riding habit, dressing-ca.se, 
and boots. I was to get the tailor-made dresses from Red- 
fern’s, and the other gowns from Russell & Allen. My 
list was very similar to that marked F. He wrote me out 
a cheque for £30 to pay for the dresses. He tore it from a 
cheque book. It is marked V. He put it into an envelope. 
He told mo to cash it, I think, at the South Belgravia branch. 
He said it was in Sloane Street. He wanted in addition to 

the dresses to give me some rings. He wanted the size of my 

finger. I asked him to take it in cardboard. He said that 
was no guarantee to size, and he much preferred having a ring. 

I was wearing some rings at the time. I wouldn’t let him 
have those, I wouldn’t take them off my finger. I borrowed 
a ring from my lady friend, value £6 or £7. I gave it to 
him. It was to be returned the same evening w r ith the other 
rings. Ho was with me from an hour to an hour and a quarter. 
He told he he was going to see a pensioned-off coachman, 
who was living in the neighbourhood, and he borrowed £2 from 
me to give to this man as he had no change. He said he’d 
given me the cheque for £30, and I was to deduct it out of 
that. The rings did not come, and I never saw or heard from 
the prisoner again. 

On the following day I took the cheque to Sloane Square, 
and was referred to the Balham branch. I went on there 
and presented the cheque. It was retained. I did not give 
my name and addres. Last Thursday I came to this Court, 
and picked out the prisoner from amongst other men ih the 
yard. 

Cross-examined — I was living then at the address I have 
given. I have read of this case in the paper. I have taken 

191 



Adolf Beck. 

great interest in the case, because I wanted to get the ring 
back, and because I have been duped and robbed. I have 
not seen the prisoner again till last week. I communicated 
with the police at Albany Street police station. I gave a 
description of the man which was taken down in writing in my 
presence. I believed him when he told me he was Lord Wilton. 
He was dressed as a gentleman. He spoke with just a slight 
foreign accent, very slight. Ho had a silk hat, black frock- 
coat, black waistcoat, and a white waistcoat showing under- 
neath. I did not notice whether he had a chain or not. He 
had dark grey trousers, patent-leather boots, and white spats. 
On the first day I met him he had a greatcoat on. I don’t 
remember if it was a heavy fur coat. When he wrote he 
wrote freely — no difficulty apparently in writing or spelling. 
I read what he wrote. I don’t remember any word being sp«St 
wrong. There were several other cheques in the book. 

(Signed) Evelyn E. Miller. 

MARCUS BROWNE, sworn. 

I am the proprietor of the Co vent Garden Hotel. The 
prisoner was lodging with me down to about September, 1894. 

I could not get my payment of my bill, and got rid of him and 
detained his trunk. At that time he owed me about £300. 
After his arrest in this case I allowed Inspector Froest to make 
a search of the things I had detained. I was present when 
they searched. I saw them find some white waistcoats and 
white spats, and also the book produced (marked No. 8) in 
manuscript. He had an umbrella with a gold or gilt handle, 
which he said he thought had been stolen from the hall. My 
son lost an overcoat about the same time. While he was with 
me he gave me a pawnticket to mind. It related to a gold 
watch. I kept it in my c ash box. It is produced, marked No. 9. 

Cross-examined — I brought an action against the prisoner and 
obtained judgment against him. Since then I have had trans- 
ferred to me certain shares in the Hannan Main Reef. I think 
my judgment is satisfied. Prisoner always was hard up. I 
was unable to get my satisfaction of my claim until I attached 
these shares, which was during the present month. I put 
my claim in the hands of my solicitors, and they’ve done what 
they could to get the money. Ilis clothes were not looking 
very seeedy when he left me, he always dressed well. He 
lodged at my place nearly six years. I have not had large 
sums of money from him — I have had some money. 

Re-examined — My claim against prisoner was not for board 
and lodging only. I had advanced him money — about £1400; 
on one occasion I lent him money to go to Norway to assist 

192 



Examination of Marcus Browne. 

him in fris mines and also to assist him in bringing out the 
companies in connection with the copper mines he was supposed 
to have in Norway. 

(Signed) M. A. S. Browne. 
GODFREY CHETWYND, sworn. 

I live at 13a Cockspur Street. Financial broker. In 
June, 1894, the prisoner called on me and discussed some busi- 
ness with me with respect to a copper mine. I afterwards 
had some business transactions with him. In the course of 
these transactions I had to write to him from time to time. I 
had replies to my letters. The three produced, 10, 11, 12, are 
three of them. They are addressed from the Buckingham 
Hotel, Buckingham Street, Strand. I paid his weekly bill 
while he was there ; occasionally I handed him the money. My 
office is at 13a Cockspur Street. I do not reside there. 

(Signed) Godfrey J. B. Chetwynd. 

THOMAS HENRY GURRIN, sworn. 

My address is 59 Holborn Viaduct. I am an expert in 
handwriting. I have followed that occupation for about eleven 
years, and given evidence in a large number of cases. I have 
had submitted to me for examination the exhibits in this case, 
particularly the cheques produced by the various femaie wit- 
nesses, the lists of dresses and the envelopes in which the 
cheques were contained, and also the letter and envelope upon 
the Grand .Hotel notepaper. I have carefully examined these 
exhibits. In my opinion they are all in the handwriting of 
one person. I can if necessary give my reasons for that opinion. 
I have also examined the book containing address marked 
No. 1, and the five documents w T ritten in pencil marked 2, 3, 
4, 5, and 6, and the letter and envelopo marked No. 7. I 
have also examined the writing in the manuscript book marked 
No. 8, and the letters produced by Mr. Chetwynd marked 
10, 11, and 12. In my opinion these documents are undoubt- 
edly in the handwriting of one person. I have compared 
the two sets, the set marked with the letters and the set marked 
with numbers, and I have formed the opinion they were all 
written by one person, one set of course being disguised. I 
should describe the general character of the hand as Scandi- 
navian. In the exhibits marked with letters, I find more than 
one style of writing. There are two styles of writing on the 
bills, cheques, and lists. One is either vertical or sloping to 
the left back-handed, and the other has the natural slope to 
the right. The writing sloping to the left* or written vertically 

o 193 



Adolf Beck. 


was written under the control of the arm rather than the 
muscles of the fingers and thumb. It appears to have been 
written without any effort — with ease. 

The other writing appears to me to be a laboured writing in 
which the pen was immediately under the control of the muscles 
of the thumb and fingers. I have carefully examined these 
documents and made tracings of them, and can give my reasons 
for my opinions if they are wanted. 

Cross-examined — I moan by Scandinavian a handwriting 
written by persons in those Northern countries, Norway, Den- 
mark, Sweden, Finland. The writing which I inspected is 
mostly of that type. Some of the writing written with the 
forearm on account of being rapidly written does not show 
these characteristics. I am referring to the class of writing 
that you find in the signatures of the cheques and also* on the 
envelopes enclosing the cheques. I don't say that that is not 
of the Scandinavian type. I say that owing to its having been 
written rapidly I cannot detect the Scandinavian characteristics, 
in fact some of it is illegible. The exhibits that are of the 
Scandinavian type of writing are, first the pocket-book (No. 1), 
next the other book (No. 8), the documents 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 
7, 10, 11, and 12, the handwriting in the body of most of the 
cheques, speaking roughly. That fairly conveys my view. 
The remaining documents and the remaining portions of the 
cheques are in the Scandinavian type of writing, but they are 
disguised. When I say there are two styles of writing I 
mean one is natural and the other is feigned or disguised. 
On some of the documents we have both styles. Those marked 
1,2, and 3, and so on are of the first kind. With regard to 
the cheques there are two writings, both of which are in my 
opinion disguised, but, with reference to a portion the style 
is much more like the natural handwriting because written at 
the same slope. I have no objection to put in my report. 
It is numbered 13. The whole of the documents put to me in 
this case I have found to be undoubtedly in the same hand- 
writing. You don't include that book No. 1. In that I 
found two distinct handwritings. 

(Signed) T. II. Gurrin. 


ELISS SPURRELL, sworn. 

I live now at 19 Broadley Terrace, Marylebone. I am pen- 
sioned from the Metropolitan Police. 

In 1877 I was in the Metropolitan Police E Reserve stationed 
at Hunter Street. On the 7th of May, 1877, I was present 
at the Central Criminal Court when the prisoner in the name 
of John Smith was convicted of felony , stealing earrings and 

194 e 



Examination of Eliss Spurrell. 

a ring and 11s. in money, the property of Louie Leonard, and 
sentenced to five years’ penal servitude. I produce the certi- 
ficate of that conviction marked Y. The prisoner is the man. 

Cross-examined — There is no doubt whatever he is the man. 
I know what’s at stake on my answer, and I may say without 
doubt he’s the man. I took him in custody. I don’t know 
where he was living. lie was taken in custody at Euston 
Hoad. I could not find his address. The prisoner then re- 
presented himself as Lord Willoughby. I was unable to find 
out where he’d being living. There was nothing found out 
about him. I did not find out how long he had been in London 
before he was arrested. I only found out that he’d been to 
these different addresses in the 17 similar cases on that Occasion. 
Smith did not give any account of himself. When he was 
charged he gave the name of Lord Willoughby. When he 
came before the magistrate he gave the name of Smith and 
refused his address. Inspector Redstone who took the charge 
also took part in the inquiry. 

(Signed) Eliss Spurrell. 

The above depositions of FRANK COOPER, MINNIE LEWIS, 
EVELYN EMILY MILLER, MARCUS BROWNE, GOD- 
FREY CHETWYND, THOMAS HENRY GURRIN, and 
ELISS SPURRELL were taken and sworn before me, the 
undersigned, one of the Magistrates of the Police Courts 
of the Metropolis, at the Police Court aforesaid, on the 
day and year first above-mentioned. 

(Signed) J. Shbol. 

STATEMENT OF THE ACCUSED.— ADOLF BECK (here- 
inafter called the accused) stands charged before the under- 
signed, one of the Magistrates of the Police Courts of Metropolis 
sitting at the Westminster Police Court, in the Metropolitan 
Police District, this 30th day of January, in the year of our 
Lord one thousand eight hundred and ninety-six as hereinbefore 
set forth, and the said charge being read to the said accused, 
and the said witnesses for the prosecution being severally 
examined in the presence of the said accused, the said accused 
is now addressed by me as follows: — 

“ Having heard the evidence do you wish to say anything 
in answer to the charge? You are not obliged to say anything 
unless you desire to do so, but whatever you say will be taken 
down in writing and may be given in evidence against you 
upon your trial, and if you desire to call any witness/ you 
can now do so.” 

Whereupon the said accused saith as follows: — 

" No.” 


195 



Adolf Beck. 


Taken before me at the Police Court aforesaid, on the day 
and year above-mentioned. 

(Signed) J. Sheil. 


EXTRACT from the REPORT of Mr. T. H. GURRIN, 
29th January, 1896. 

I should also add that in accordance with instructions 
received from the Treasury I have examined at the Old Bailey 
the exhibits in the case of Smith, alias Willoughby, of 1877, 
and, haying compared the exhibits therein with the bills and 
cheques in this case, I am perfectly satisfied that they are all 
in the self-same handwriting — the disguise then adopted is 
the same as that now adopted, and the exhibits in that case 
must, in my opinion, have been written by the person who has 
written the bills and cheques in this case. 


196 



APPENDIX V. 


Correspondence, Ac., relating to Beck’s First Conviction. 

Letter from Mr. T. Duerdin Dutton to the Commissioner of 
Police, 26th March, 1898 ; Police Report thereon, and the 
Commissioner’s reply. 


(i) 

Re ADOLF BECK. 


Gentlemen, 


Churton Street, London, S.W., 
26th March, 1898. 


I am about to seek an interview with the Home Secretary 
respecting the above-named convict, who is undergoing 
sentence in H.M. Convict Prison at Portland. 

He was tried in March, 1896, at the Central Criminal 
Court, and it was then alleged against him that he, on the 
7th day of May, 1877, was convicted in the name of John 
Smith, and sentenced to five years’ penal servitude. 

There was overwhelming evidence, which the learned 
judge ruled to be inadmissible on the trial, to prove that 
Adolf Beck was resident in Peru during the whole of the 
period John Smith was in prison in this country, and long 
oefore and afterwards. 

Will you, under the circumstances, allow me to inspect 
the papers of John Smith and Adolf Beck, so that I may 
have an opportunity of comparing them. 

I am, <fec., 

(Signed) T. Duerdin Dutton. 

To H.M. Commissioners of Police, 

New Scotland Yard, S.W. 


<ii.) 

Criminal Investigation Department, 

New Scotland Yard, 29th March, 1898. 

Referring to the attached application from Mr. Dutton, 

197 



Adolf Beck 


solicitor, for permission to inspect the papers of Beck and 
Smith, I beg to report that these documents are confidential 
and privileged, and should not be shown to Mr. Dutton. 

The previous conviction was proved against the convict 
at the Police Court, and he was also indicted for the same 
at his trial, and witnesses were in attendance to prove it, 
but the Attorney-General entered a nolle prosequi, and Beck 
was sentenced only for the offences upon which he was con- 
victed, and that upon overwhelming evidence. 

(Signed) Frank C. Froest, Inspector. 

D. S. Swanson, Superintendent. 


(iii.) 

Convict Supervision Office, 

New Scotland Yard, 31st March, 1898. 

Sir, 

Referring to your communication of the 26th instant, 
relative to the case of Adolf Beck, I have to acquaint you 
that your application to examine and compare official police 
papers is one which cannot be entertained. 

I am, Ac., 

(Signed) R. Anderson. 

To T. Duerdin Dutton, Esq., 

Churton Street, S.W. 


Letters written by Mr. T. Duerdin Dutton to the Home Office 
in May, 1898. 

(i) 

To the Right Honourable Sir Matthew White Ridley, H.M. 
Principal Secretary of State for the Home Department. 


Churton Street, London, S.W., 
10th May, 1898. 

Re ADOLF BECK. 

Sir, 

I.am acting as solicitor for the above-named convict who, 
on the 5th day of March, 1896, was sentenced at the Central 
Criminal Court by the Common Serjeant, Sir Forrest Fulton, 
Q.C., to seven years’ penal servitude. 

198 



Correspondence with Home Office. 

Subsequently I presented a petition for your consideration 
on bis behalf, and I understand that Beck has also presented 
more than one, the contents of which latter I am not 
acquainted with. 

There are certain circumstances connected with the case 
which were not admitted as evidence on the trial that point 
strongly to the fact that, notwithstanding the evidence of 
identity produced on behalf of the Crown, the prisoner was 
and is innocent of the offences alleged. 

On 26th March last I applied to H.M. Commissioners 
of Police for permission to examine the records of Beck and 
a former convict, John Smith alias Vilvoir Weisenfells, who, 
in May, 1877, was also convicted at the same Court for 
similar offences, but my application was refused. 

I therefore respectfully ask you to grant me an inter- 
view, so that I may have an opportunity of explaining 
personally the nature of the circumstances I refer to. 

I am. Sir, 

Your obedient servant, 

(Signed) T. Duerdin Dutton. 


<H-> 

To the Under Secretary of State, 

Home OlRee, Whitehall, S.W. 

lie ADOLF BECK. 

Churton Street, London, S.W., 
16th May, 1898. 

Sir, 

T am obliged for your letter of the 12th instant. My 
reason for seeking an interview with the Secretary of State 
respecting the case of the above-named convict is that from 
information in my possession it would seem that Beck is 
innocent of the offences for which he is now undergoing 
imprisonment, and that that there has been a grave mis- 
carriage of justice in his case. These facts were embodied 
in a petition presented by me to the Secretary of State as 
long ago as May, 1896, and T crave leave to refer to that 
petition and the documents accompanying it. 

In the year 1877, a man who gave the name o£ John 
Smith (otherwise known as Ivan Weisenfells) was convicted 
of a series of offences carried oil precisely the same lines as 

199 



Adolf Beck. 


those alleged against Beck in the years 1894 and 1895, and 
for which he was tried and found guilty at the Central 
Criminal Court on the 7th day of May, 1877. Reference 
to the documents in Smith’s case shows conclusively that his 
handwriting and that on the * documents produced against 
Beck is identical. This statement is supported by the evidence 
of the expert in handwriting, Mr. Giirrin, who at Beck's 
trial was called for the prosecution, and stated that in hie 
opinion the two sets of documents were in the same hand- 
writing. It is clear, therefore, that the offences committed 
in 1877 by Smith and those in 1894-5 were all committed by 
one and the same person. 

When the offences in 1877 were committed by John Smith, 
afterwards when ho was in prison as well as for several years 
before and after, Beck was in Peru and never once visited 
this country, and witnesses of the highest character and 
reputation were brought to the Court on his trial to testify 
to that fact, but the learned judge, Sir Forrest Fulton, ruled 
that the evidence was inadmissible on the indictment on which 
he was tried. There were indictments on the file alleging 
Beck’s previous conviction in 1877, upon which if he had been 
tried ho would have had an opportunity of proving his inno- 
cence, but they were not proceeded with, and the Treasury 
entered a nolle prosequi thereto ; yet, notwithstanding, Beck 
was branded as having been already convicted for the same 
offence ahd more severely punished in consequence, as is 
proved by the learned judge’s remarks. 

I do not know whether anything is known of the ante- 
cedents or parentage of the man John Smith, but it can 
be proved conclusively that Beck was born at Christiansund 
in Norway in the year 1842, and that he has always been 
known as Adolph Beck and by no other name. „ 

I have already given the names of the witnesses who knew 
Beck in Peru during the years mentioned, and who are 
still available to give evidence, and I am instructed that 
others can now be called to speak to the same fact. 

1 beg to ask the careful further consideration of these 
facts, which points so strongly to Beck’s innocence, and I 
shall be pleased to add any further information in my power 
to assist the investigation. 

I am, Sir, 

* Your obedient servant, 

(Signed) T. Duehdin Dutton. 


200 



Correspondence with Home Office. 

(iii.) 

To ihe Under Secretary of State, 

Home Office, Whitehall, S.W. 

Re ADOLF BECK. 

Churton Street, London, S.W., 
25th May, 1898. 


Sib, 

Referring to my letter of the 16th instant respecting the 
above, I have been informed that it is believed the man 
John Smith, alias Ivan Weisenfells, was of the Jewish 
persuasion, and would therefore have been circumcised in 
accordance with the custom of his race. I do not know 
whether this appears on the records of John Smith, but it 
can, of course, be easily proved that Beck has not been 
circumcised. 

It can also be easily proved that Beck is a Norwegian 
subject and a copy of his certificate of baptism obtained 
and evidence produced to show that he is the man referred 
to therein, whereas I am informed that Smith or Weisenfells 
was not a Norwegian subject. 

I have the honour to be, Sir, 

Your obedient servant, 

(Signed) T. Duerdin Dutton. 


Letter dated -12th May, 1898, from the Prison Commissioners 
to the Governor of Portland Prison, and the Minutes made 
thereon. 


Prison Commission, 

Home Office, Whitehall, 

12th May, 1898. 


To the Governor, Portland Prison. 

D.W. 523 ADOLF BECK. 


Please forward the Penal 
convict. 


Records for the above-named 


(Signed) E. G. Clayton, 
Secretary. 

201 



Adolf Beck. 


Minutes made on the above letter . 


Noted. 


0 ) 


Penal Record herewith. 

(Signed) B. Partridge, 

Governor of Portland Prison, 
13/5/98. 


(ii.) 

Penal Record returned. Be so good as to have this 
prisoner’s description revised carefully. The marks, Ac., 
shown do not agree with those on the old Penal Record. 
Send up a full description after marks, &c., have been 
retaken. 

(Signed) E. G. Clayton, 

Secretary to the Prison Commissioners, 
14/5/98. 


(iii.) 

Marks retaken and inserted in description. It appears 
from a statement by the medical officer on an application 
to change religion, dated 13/1/79, in the case of D. 523 
John Smith, that this prisoner had been circumcised. I 
requested the medical officer to examine D.W. 523 A. Beck, 
and enclose his report, from which it will be seen that Beck 
has not been circumcised. 

Penal Record returned. 

(Signed) B. Partridge, 

Governor of Portland Prison, 
19/5/98. 


Copy of the Report of the Medical Officer mentioned in 
the above Minute : — 

The Governor, Portland Prison, to the Medical Officer, 
Portland Prison. 

D.W. 523 ADOLF BECK. 

Will you be good enough to inform me if the above- 
named prisoner is circumcised. 

• (Signed) B. Partridge, 

Governor. 

The Medical Officer, Portland Prison, to the Governor, 
Portland Prison. 

202 



Home Office Minutes. 

No. He has certainly not been circumcised. 

(Signed) O. M. Madwell, M.O., 
18/5/98. 


HOME OFFICE MINUTES : May and June, 1898. 


(i-> 

1 believe Mr. Dutton is so far right that Beck and Smith 
are different persons, which is shown by the marks on them, 
which I have compared, and which differ widely, and which 
curiously have never been referred to before ; but this does 
not prove that Beck was not guilty of the many offences of 
the same kind of which he was convicted, he having been 
satisfactorily identified by numerous women whom he had 
defrauded; though it does prove that the police witness was 
mistaken, and shows how invaluable in such a case would 
have been the measurement system. 

C. M. 23rd May, 1898. 


(»•) 

It is a very curious case, but the evidence of Beck’s iden- 
tity by the numerous women he had defrauded was positive. 
I have seen Inspector Froest, who was examined at the trial, 
and he says that the evidence of the women was overwhelming. 

The fact of Smith’s circumcision was ascertained when he 
applied for leave to change his religion to the Jewish. 

Though the present conviction is not affected by the repre- 
sentations made by Mr. Dutton, I think the papers should 
go to the Common Serjeant for his opinion and observation. 

C. M. 27th June, 1898. 

I agree. K.E.D. 29th June, 1898. 


203 



APPENDIX VI. 


Note of the Distinctive Marks of John Smith and 
Adolf Beck. 



JOHN SMITH. 

ADOLF BECK. 

Complexion 

Dark 

Fresh. 

Hair 

Brown 

Grey. 

Eyes 

Brown 

Blue. 

Height 

5 ft. 6 ins. 

5 ft. 6§ ins. 

Build 

Proportionate 

Proportionate. 

Shape of Face 

Marks — 

Oval 

Oval. 

Right Side ... 

Scar bottom lip. 

„ upper part of 
nose. 

„ jaw. 

Two vaccination 

marks. 

Scar outside arm .. 
Mole arm pit. 

Long scar front of upper 
arm. 

Scar head. 

Small mole neck and nape 
of neck. 

Boil scar above shoulder 
blade. 

Slight scar front shin. 


Left Side 

Mole neck 

„ shoulder 

Three vaccination 

■ 



marks 

Scar cheek. 



Slight scar front shin. 

First joint fourth finger 



slightly contracted. 


Circumcised 

Not circumcised. 


[Note , — This is a copy of one of the documents enclosed in the letter 
sent by the Home Office to Sir Forrest Fulton, dated 8th July, 1898.] 
204 





APPENDIX VII. 


Christiania Police Headquarters, Detective Department, 
No. 864, 1896. 

Christiania, 14th February, 1896. 

With reference to the letter of the 5th inst. from London 
Police Headquarters, Detective Department, with respect to the 
Norwegian, Adolf Beck, previously arrested in London, investi- 
gations have been made, and the results thereof are as 
follows : — 

1. Charles Delgobe, engineer, of 32 Oskarsgade, declares 
that he has known Adolf Beck since 1889 or 1890, when he 
was in this country and purchased a mining property in Tele- 
marken ; he was to pay 100,000 kroner for the property, and 
paid 63,000 kroner in cash. Silver and copper were to be 
extracted from this mine, and a certain number of workmen 
were employed there, but up to date no ore was sold out of it. 
When the purchase was concluded the deponent was engaged 
by Beck as manager of the mine at a fixed annual salary, of 
which up to the present he has received nothing, so that the 
deponent has now 5000 kroner to his credit. Beck has since 
then been several times in this country, the last time being 
in October last. The deponent knows that Beck is free-handed 
when he has money in his possession ; he also is somewhat given 
to drink, and when he is in an intoxicated condition ho likes 
to associate with women, especially those of the lowest class. 
The deponent has never heard of Beck doing any dishonest 
business. He has heard that Beck came from Christiansund, 
which he left at the age of fourteen or fifteen to go to sea, and 
since then there is no doubt he has wandered all over the world. 
It is quite certain that the money he had to put into the pur- 
chase of the mine was acquired through speculation in railroad 
construction in Spain. The deponent thinks that Beck is in 
debt on his mine to a considerable amount, but in the event 
of the mine being sold, deponent thinks he will get his money 
back. The deponent recognises with certainty the Beck he 
has been talking to as being the same person as is shown in 
the photograph sent here by the London police. 

2. Fritzner, hotel-keeper, of the Hotel “ Grand ,’ 9 declares 
that ho has known Adolf Beck since he was in this country 
some years ago and purchased some mining property up in 

205 



Adolf Beck. 


Telemarken, as at that time and on several occasions since then 
he stayed at hie hotel, the last time being last October. Beck 
was very open-handed when he had money on him, but in the 
autumn it seemed as if he was short of cash. A couple of years 
ago Beck was in debt to the deponent for about 700 kroner, 
partly for loansi and partly for his board in the hotel, but 
deponent got this money back in the autumn. Deponent has 
observed that Beck is of an unattractive appearance, so that he 
cannot imagine how any human being could bo led astray by 
him. Deponent has never noticed that Beck has shown any 
special love for the society of women, but deponent has never 
been round the town with him, and therefore has no definite 
information on this point. He has never heard that Beck 
has done anything in this country that is punishable. The 
last time deponent spoke to Beck he said that he had lately 
been in South America. Deponent recognised Beck from the 
photograph. 

3. Schweigaard, advocate, No. 2b Prinsengade, has stated 
that he has no knowledge of Adolf Beck, but, on the other 
hand, his colleague, Mr. Klingenberg, advocate, had some deal- 
ings with him. 

4. Mr. Klingenberg, advocate, declares that Adolf Beck, 
whom he recognised from the photograph, came to him in 
1889 with a request for assistance in drawing up documents 
in connection with the purchase of some mining properties up 
in Telemarken, which deponent likewise executed for him. 
For these mining properties Beck paid in cash about 60,000 
kroner. Since then Beck has been several times in deponent’s 
office, and in a letter dated London, the 2nd of August, 1895, 
deponent received from Beck 360 kroner for renovation of the 
mine property in Telemarken, and there is still something 
owing to deponent for his services. In October last Beck was 
in deponent’s office, in the company of some Englishmen who 
had been up to Telemarken and had inspected his mining pro- 
perty with a possible view of purchasing the same, but it is 
certain that no business was done. Deponent has no other 
knowledge of Beck. 

5. 0. & A. Hjorth, engineers, of 34 Kirkegaden, have both 
declared that they got to know Beck in 1890, when he under- 
took to procure purchasers for the Nysaeter mine, in Hadeland, 
which belonged to them, which he did, the mine being purchased 
by the Spanish Company, Limited, London. On this transac- 
tion Beck received a commission of 5400 kroner, which was paid 
to him in ca>sh ; but notwithstanding this, he had received from 
the purchasers of the mine in London a portion in advance of 
the commission coming to him, which was then deducted when 
settlement of the sale took place. This, together with a loan 

206 



Report from Christiania Police. 

in cash of about 1000 kroner, amounted altogether to 7750 
kroner, which Beck still owes the deponents. They cannot 
say that they have experienced anything absolutely dishonest 
with Beck. The last time deponents saw Beck is now two 
years ago, as they were not at home in the autumn when Beck 
was here. 

G. Rolf And void , steamship agent, of 2b Prinsengade, has 
declared that some years ago ho got to know a person in this 
town of the name of Adolf Beck, and a year later deponent made 
a journey to London with the object of trying to sell his mining 
property in Telemarken, which property he almost succeeded 
in selling, when one day he met Adolf Beck, who finally wished 
to purchase the mine, and a purchase contract was drawn up 
between them, as Beck promised to come over here soon after- 
wards in order to settle further about the purchase, but he 
was, however, a long time before anything was heard from 
him, so that deponent had to telegraph to him. Later on 
Beck finally arrived, and had with him a cheque or transfer from 
a Spanish company in London amounting to 63,000 kroner for 
the purchase of the mining property. The transfer in question 
was so made out that the relative drawer did not have to pay 
the amount if he did not find a sufficient guarantee for the 
amount, but the firm concerned certainly found this, as the 
deponent had the amount previously agreed on paid to him 
for the mine. Deponent should havo had almost twice this 
amount for his mine, but as at. the moment he had no other 
purchaser, he allowed Beck to have the property for the amount 
mentioned. Deponent does not remember the name of the firm 
which bought the mine, but, according to what ho heard later 
on, it appears that some time afterwards this firm failed. Beck 
twice borrowed money from deponont ; he ( ? deponent) likewise 
also paid something for renovation of Beck's mine property, as 
the latter had neglected to look after this, so that deponent now 
has not a- little owing from him. Deponent has sized up 
Beck as being an adventurous and irresponsible individual, and 
for this reason deponent has always kept a safe distance away 
from him. Deponent has not had any other transactions with 
Beck than the above-mentioned. Deponent recognised Beclf 
in the photograph as the person in question. 

It will bo observed that there appears nothing here to show 
that Beck has at any time been prosecuted or punished in this 
country. 

Yours faithfully, 

* (Signature) 

To the Chief of Police. 


207 



APPENDIX VIII. 


REPORT OF THE TRIAL OF ADOLF BECK at the CENTRAL 
CRIMINAL COURT on the 27th June, 1904:, contained in 
the Central Criminal Court Sessions Papers. 


Old Court — Monday, 27th June, 1904. 

Before Mr. Justice Grantham. 

Adolf Beck (^3) — Unlawfully and fraudulently obtaining 
by false pretences from Rose Reece a gold ring, from Pauline 
Scott a watch, a ring and £1, from Grace Campbell a ring, 
from Lily King a ring and 4s., and from Caroline Singer £2, 
with intent to defraud. 

Mr. Mathews, Mr. Bodkin, Mr. Biron, and Mr. Stephenson 
prosecuted; and Mr. Leycester defended. 

Rose Reece — In August, 1903, I was living in Marylebone 
Road — I was then out of an engagement — one afternoon in 
that month I was near Oxford Circus — the prisoner spoke to 
me — I swear he is the man — he said he had seen me on one 
or two occasions before, and was desirous of making my 
acquaintance — that he had only five minutes to spare, would 
I kindly give him my address ! — silly like, I gave it to him — 
in the hurry 1 did not think there was any harm in it — about 
a week afterwards I received a letter in writing like this one 
(produced) — it had “ Hotel Victoria ” stamped on it — I have 
destroyed it — it said, “ Will call upon you at 4.30 in the 
afternoon to-morrow ,5 — nobody came, but about six weeks 
afterwards the prisoner called and said, “ You remember re- 
ceiving a letter from the Hotel Victoria ” — I said I did, and 
asked him in, because he said he was interested in me, and 
would like to know something about me — I told him I was a 
housekeeper out of an engagement, but was looking for one — 
he said he had a large house in St. John's Wood, and wanted a 
housekeeper — I thought it was a good opportunity — ho did 
not describe the house, except to say that he had a copk and a 
housemaid there — he said I should require some dresses, as I 
was then rather badly off for them — I was to get a tailor-made 
dress — I cannot remember each one, but he made a list in 

208 




Adolf Beck, 13/7/04 (Second Conviction). 



Report of Beck Trial in 1904. 

pencil — the writing was similar to this list, but the amount was 
different — I was to get the dresses at Madame Hayward's in 
Bond Street — he said he thought that would be a nice place to 
go to, as he had got many dresses there and was known there 
— he saw I had a little ring on my finger, and he asked whether 
I would like another — I said 1 should — he asked if the one I 
had uri fitted me well — I said it did — ho said he would take 
it for the measurement — he did so — it had a design of a sham- 
rock in the centre and three diamonds and a ruby on either 
side — it was worth about £ 4 — I had had it for some time — he 
asked me what sort I would like, and I said a diamond and 
turquoise — he said it should be so, and that it would come 
from Streeter’s in Bond Street — he wrote me out a cheque 
for the dresses for £ 74 = — it was similar to this document — he 
would not let me see it, but sealed it up in an envelope, and 
addressed it to the Union of London Bank, Pall Mall — he would 
not let inti see the signature — I tried to see it, and asked him 
if he would tell me what it was — I tried to look over -his 
shoulder, but he put his arm up, and said I was to take it just 
as it was to the bank — I saw that it was written on a half-sheet 
of notepaper which I gave him — I said, “ Had not you better 
write it. on a cheque form? ” — he said, “ Immediately they see 
my signature they will give you the money ” — he took the 
ring off my finger; I did not give it to him — 1 cannot say if 
he did so before or after he wrote the cheque — I should not 
have let him take my ring away if I had not believed his story 
— I begged him to be careful not to lose it, because it was a 
present from my mother — he made a pretence to give it back 
to mo, but did not do so — I let him take it away as he 
promised to return it the following morning — next day I went 
to find the Union Bank in Pall Mall — I asked several police- 
men, but they said there was not one there; the nearest one 
was in Oockspur Street — I went there and presented the 
cheque — before that 1 had steamed the envelope open and 
looked inside and then closed it — that is how I know it was 
like this cheque — I could not make the signature out — the 
cheque was not honoured at the bank — I never saw my ring 
again, and I did not see the prisoner until I picked him out of 
a number of other men, I believe, at Paddington Green police 
station, about 23rd April — I gave the police a description of 
the man who has swindled me. 

(Voss-examined — When I picked him out I believed he was 
already in custody on Miss Scott’s charge — I did not particu- 
larly notice the other men when I picked him out — I believe 
all of them were younger than he is — I cannot remember if 
any of them had grey moustachios — I caught sight of the 
prisoner immediately — I had never seen the man who robbed 
me before August, and upon that occasion I was" only with 


1' 



Adolf Beck. 


him about five minutes, talking in the street; it was about 5 
p.m. — I did not see him again until October — I saw him then 
for just an hour — I did not see him after that until 23rd 
April — I do not remember if anything was said when I picked 
him out — his nose is most peculiar, and is one I could pick 
out of a thousand — his whole face is different from any other 
man I ever remember seeing — when he came to me he had on 
a jacket suit of black and fawn small check — it was not a dark 
suit, but rather light, and had white spots — ho had no over- 
coat — I think when I picked him out he had on a brown suit, 
not a blue one, as he has now, but I am not certain — I looked 
at his face, not his dress — I think ho had eyeglasses on then 
— the man who robbed me was not wearing eyeglasses when he 
came to see me — I cannot quite remember if he put them on 
to write — I kept all the documents until the Friday before he 
was arrested, when I tore them up — I am positive about the 
writing — it slopes backwards, which is rather peculiar — I have 
seen German writing sloping like that — I do not think it is 
often seen in English writing — I remember the signature per- 
fectly — nobody can read it, and that is what makes me re- 
member it. 

Re-examined — I have never seen a signature like it before 
— I have not the slightest doubt that the prisoner is the man 
who robbed me. 

Paulixe Scott — On 22nd March I was living at 27 Cam- 
bridge Terrace — on that day I was in Oxford Street — the 
prisoner came up and spoke to me — ho asked for my address, 
and if I would like to meet him again — I gave him my address 
— he said he was staying at the Hyde Park Hotel— -next day I 
had this letter from him (produced) ; it is written on Hyde 
Park Hotel notepaper: (read) “ My dear Miss Scott, — I shall 
have pleasure in calling to-morrow between 1 and 2. — Yours 

” — the signature I cannot make out — he called next day 

— he said ho would like to make me a little present, as he 
was interested in me — he wrote out this list of addresses, 
which I was to get (produced) — he said he was a lord, T do 
not remember the name, I think he said Willoughby — he said 
he could not stay long as he had to go to the House of Lords 
— lie wrote out this cheque (produced) to pay for the dresses; 
it was written on an ordinary sheet of note paper — he asked 
mo to get the paper, as his valet had forgotten to put his 
cheque-book into his pocket — he put it into this envelope, but 
did not seal it up — he asked me if I would like some jewellery 
— 1’said I should — he told me he would send me some, and 
asked me if I would like a ring, and if I had one to take as a 
measurement — I gave him one and he said it would do very 
nicely — it was not a very expensive one — the prisoner asked 

210 



Report of Beck Trial in 1904. 

had I not got a better one, which would fit me better — I said 
I had not — he asked me if I would like a watch — I said I had 
one, but it was out of repair — he asked me to let him see it — 
I showed it to him — he said, “ It is a nice little watch; I will 
take it and have it repaired for you ” — the watch and the 
ring were not very valuable — I have had the watch ever since 
I was a child — 1 then said I was going out to have some lunch 
— he said he would come with me, but he had got no money 
on him — 1 had my purse which he took, and took a sovereign 
out, and said, “ This will pay for the lunch ” — we went, 
and got to Edgware Road — he said, “ I think you had better 
get into a cab and drive to the bank or it will be closed — 
he did not have any lunch — I got into a cab and 
drove to the bank — I got there and found the 
cheque was no good — that wa* between 1 and 2 p.m. — 
I did not remember the banks did not close till 4 p.m. — the 
prisoner said it was quite a mistake that he had got no money, 
that he had got up late, and his valet had forgotten to put 
any in his pocket — I did not get my lunch, but the prisoner 
got my watch and ring — I then went to Scotland Yard and 
gave a description of the man who had swindled me — I after- 
wards received information from the police, and went to a 
restaurant at 35 Oxford Street — I did not recognise the prisoner 
there — as a matter of fact that night I felt so nervous I could 
not have spoken to him even if he had been there — I saw some- 
body who I thought was like him ; he was wearing glasses 
then, but not when I mot him — I was in rather an awkward 
position behind a partition, and could not see him — the morn- 
ing he wn£ arrested he had glasses on, and I recognised him 
quito well — on 15th April I was with Detective Ward, waiting 
at the corner of a street in Tottenham Court Road, I do not 
know the name — I saw the prisoner; I went over to him and 
asked him what he had done with my jewellery — I said, “ You 
are the man w’ho took my jewellery and my sovereign ” — he 
said, “ No, I am not; I do not know you; I have never seen 
you in my life before ” — I said, “ You are the man who took 
my jewellery 99 — he said, “ Who put you up to this? You come 
with me to my solicitors ” — I said, “ I have got somebody 
waiting for you here ” — he tried to make off round the corner, 
but of course Mr. Ward came up and took him to the station. 

Cross-examined — The prisoner kept on denying that he 
had ever seen me before — that was the first tiling he said when 
I stopped him — I expected to see the prisoner there — I think 
it was at the corner of South Street — I did not see the % pri- 
soner coin© out of a house — he was going to pass me without 
taking any notice of me — I never saw him before 22nd March 
— on that day he was only with me a few minutes in the 
street — it was between 5 and 6 p.m. — the next time I saw 

211 



Adolf Beck. 


him was at my lodgings about 1.10 p.m. — I only saw him for 
five or ten minutes on that day — he was not wearing spectacles 
or glasses at that time — I think he wrote the cheque and list 
without using glasses, but I am not quite sure about that; I 
did not look at him while he was writing — ho was dressed in 
a dark overcoat, a bowler hat and spats, and I think he had 
a light overcoat — I did not see him without an overcoat, so 
I do not know what he had on underneath — I do not know if 
he had a velvet collar — on 15th April he was dressed as ho is 
now; he had no overcoat then — I think he was wearing eye- 
glasses then, but I am not sure — I have seen him since, in 
custody, without glasses — at the police station he was told 
tx> take them off — he wore them until he was told to take 
them off — I went to the restaurant in Oxford Street on 31st 
March with Ward — I went in and sat down — I did not notice 
if the prisoner was standing talking to the proprietor when I 
went in — I went there to see if I could see the man who had 
robbed me — I do not think he was there when I went in — I 
looked round to see if he was there — I saw a man talking to 
the proprietor — I believe now it was the proprietor — I did not 
quite recognise him then, but inwardly I thought he was the 
man — I do not say so — I do not remember if I said at the 
Police Court that the man was not the prisoner — I stayed at 
the restaurant one and a half or two hours — I do not think 
the prisoner was there all the time — the man I was doubtful 
about went out — I do not know how long ho stayed there after 
I went in — I have not the least idea if it was five minutes 
or an hour — Ward was not with me — I suppose ho waited out- 
side — I did not notice how the man was dressed ; he had glasses 
on then. 

Lilt King — I live at 4 Gerard Mansions, Piccadilly — in 
March I lived at 18 Gloucester Mansions, Cambridge Circus. 
On 28th March, about 8 p.m., I was in Regent Street — the 
prisoner asked me for my address — 1 gave him a card — next 
day I got this letter — (read) “ Hyde Park Hotel, Monday 
evening. My dear Mrs. King — Please expect me to-morrow, 
Tuesday, between one and two o'clock,” with this signature 
which is illegible — this is the envelope — next day the prisoner 
called between one and two — I saw him in my sitting-room. 
He offered to take me to his house — he said he had two 
servants, but I should feel lonely because he had no time — he 
said I could not go to his house as I was, and that I should 
have # t,o have some dresses — he said he was a lord, and had 
a house in tho country, with a fruit garden and a wine cellar 
— he wrote out a list of dresses amounting to £230 — he wrote 
me out a cheque for £250 — at first it was £225, then he said 

•212 



Report of Beck Trial in 1904. 

“ Do you owe something? I said, “ A couple of quid,” and 
he said, “ I will make it .£250 33 — he put it into an envelope 
— I saw him writing it, but I did not see the cheque — I was 
wearing some rings — he asked for one — he took a plain gold 
one as a measurement — he said ho would buy me some, and 
they would arrive at four o’clock that day— he left the house— 
I was to go quick to the bank — ho told me to give my servant 
half a sovereign, which I did— he said he had not got half a 
sovereign himself, as his servant had not put any money into 
his pocket — he borrowed the half-sovereign from me to give 
to rny servant — he said, <c I have not got any change about 
me; have you got any ? ” — I said, “ Yes, but I have only got 
4 s -” — he said, tc Give it to me M — he took it and the ring — 
I went right away to the Union Bank, Knightsbridge— I did 
not get the cheque cashed — I think the prisoner was wearing 
glasses, but I am not sure — I afterwards saw him at the Court 
with a number of other men and picked him out. 

Cross-examined — Ho was then in custody — I noticed the 
other people he was standing with; I think about nine or ten 
were there — I think they were all younger than the prisoner 
— I do not think there was anybody else there with a grey 
moustache — I told the police the man who robbed me had a 
grey moustache — I do not know if I mentioned that he wore 
glasses — I did not remember anything about his wearing 
glasses until I was asked about it at the Police Court — I never 
saw him before 28th March — I only saw him for a few minutes 
on that day — and for about half an hour on the next day — 
those are the only times I saw him — he was dressed in dark 
clothes — had a dark black overcoat on — I did not notice 
the collar — he said he was a lord, but he did not say what 
his name was — he spoke in English — I cannot speak English 
very well — I did not talk any German to the man who robbed 
me. 


Dr. Boyd — I practise at 118 Seymour Place. I saw Grace 
Campbell at 23 Quebeck Street, Wardour Street, this morn- 
ing. She is unable to leave her bed, and has been unable 
to do so for the last ten days, in consequence of the state of 
her health. 

Inspector Ward — I was present at the Police Court when 
Grace Campbell gave her evidence in the presence of the pri- 
soner. He had an opportunity of cross-examining her. She 
signed her deposition as well as the Magistrate (deposition 
read): “I live at 123 Quebeck Street, Wardour Street*. I 
am single and of independent means. In February I was in 
Albemarle Street. It was between 24th and 28th February, 

213 



Adolf Beck. 


between 4 and 5 p.m. I had been at an office. As I was 
going away the prisoner spoke to me. I was quite alone. I 
had seen him before I went into the office in the Arcade 
between Bond Street and Albemarle Street. As I came out 
he spoke to me in a most gentlemanly manner. He said, ‘ I 
have seen you somewhere before. ' I said, * Probably you 
have.’ He said he had seen me in Scotland. I am Scotch. 
I asked him who he was. He said he was a friend of the 
Sessoons in Park Lane. He said he would like to take me 
out to lunch, and asked my name and address. I gave it to 
him. I told him I did not want my people to know I had 
done so. He said he did not want his to know either, as 
he was a great lord. Ho did not tell me what his nationality 
was. I had a letter next morning which I at once tore up; 
it bore the address of the Albemarle Hotel, where the prisoner 
said he had stayed some months. It was in exactly the same 
printing as exhibit 7. He called at the address I gave him 
next day as I was finishing luncheon. The friend I was stay- 
ing with came in for a moment while he was there. Prisoner 
only stayed a few minutes. He said he had a house at Abbey 
Road, St. John's Wood, with servants. He said he had a 
lady friend staying there, and asked me to take her place. I 
declined. I was wearing two diamond rings. He looked at 
them, and said they were not good enough for me, and he 
would get ever so many grand rings from Streeter's in Bond 
Street for me. He asked me to let him see my half-hoop 
diamond ring for a pattern and to show the size. I let him 
see it and went and spoke to my friend in the next room. 
When I returned, I did not want to part with it, and he gave 
it back to me. Eventually I let him take a plain gold ring, 
which I told him had belonged to my mother. He said, 4 You 
don't trust me? ' I said, ‘ Well, I don't, for a gentleman 
does not usually ask a lady for a diamond ring to act as a 
pattern.' He took away the plain gold ring. It was worth 
about £1. He said I should have a great many dresses as a 
present, and I was to get them from Hayward's in Bond Street. 
He wrote out a list of them on a piece of paper, and read 
it to me. He too-k one list away and left one with mo, which 
I destroyed. The handwriting it was written in was exactly 
similar to that on document marked 3, but my list was much 
more sumptuous, and the dresses were to cost £250. He 
wrote out a cheque for that amount, and said I was to take 
it as a present. It was on plain paper on the Union Bank, 
St. James’s. He left it in an envelope sealed up. He told me 
not to touch it, but to go to the Union Bank, St. - James's 
Street, next morning. I destroyed that cheque directly he had 
gone. It was in exactly the same writing as that marked 2. 

214 



Report of Beck Trial in 1904. 

He told me to stay in till 6.30 p.m., because he would go to 
Streeter’s and get my rings, and would send them to me by 
commissionaire. I never received any ring nor my own back. 
I never took the cheque to the bank. I never heard from him 
again. Last Saturday I picked the prisoner out from a great 
many other men. I have not a doubt ho is the man.** 

Cross-examined — At first I believed in him, but when he 
asked for my nng I suspected him — I never thought the cheque 
was genuine — I never expected to see my ring back. When 
I saw him first I only talked to him for a few minutes. The 
interview at my friend’s only lasted half an hour — he had a 
dark grey overcoat and patent leather boots on, a foulard tie 
with a cheap pearl pin — I can identify tho prisoner by his 
general appearance, back and front from top to bottom — the 
men he was placed among were all younger than the pri- 
soner — the man who called on me wore eyeglasses and a pair 
of gold pince-nez. 

Caroline Singer (interpreted) — In March I was living at 
4 Keppel Street — I recollect meeting a man in Oxford Street 
who asked if he might go home with mo — he asked for a 
card ; as I had not got one I gave him my address — some days 
afterwards I received this letter (produced) — the man called 
next day which was Sunday — he said, €t I am very rich, and 
have got plenty of money 9 9 — he wanted me to go to his house 
— I said , “ I am married 99 — he said, “It makes no difference; 
I want you as a friend 9 * — we spoke in English — he made out 
this list — he wrote this cheque of <£140 to pay my debts — 
he said, “ I am going to buy you a chain and watch and a 
pair of diamond earrings, and a marquise ring 99 — he said, 
“ Give me those earrings as a pattern ” — he pointed to the 
ones I have on now — I said, “ No, I cannot give you these, 
they belonged to my mother who is dead ” — he borrowed £2 
from me — I told him it was given me by my husband — he did 
not say what he wanted the £2 for — I picked him out at the 
Police Court — the prisoner is tho man. 

Cross-examined — I only saw tho man twice — I spoke two or 
three words with him in the street — I do not speak English 
very well — I did not speak any German to him — the second 
time I was with him for about thirty minute® — he said, “ I 
»do not speak anything else but English ” — he had a single 
eyeglass hanging down, but he did not put it on — he had 
a brown suit on, a black overcoat with a velvet collar — I picked 
him out on the same day that the others did. 

Walter Elliott Murphy — I am a cashier at the Union 
of London and Smith’s Bank, Charing Cross branch 

215 



Adolf Beck. 


— we have no branch in Pall Mall — cheques like these have 
been presented at our bank for payment for nearly a year — 
they were always presented by women — about twenty or 
twenty-five have been presented — in none of them can we 
decipher the name of the drawer — if the signature is a name, 
no such person has an account with us — all the cheques were 
dishonoured — none of them were on proper cheque forms — some 
of them were drawn on Union Bank, St. James's Street — we 
have no branch there or at Knightsbridge — we have one in 
Sloane Place — I do not know the prisoner — none of the cheques 
have a stamp on. 

Wilfred Stagg — I am a clerk in the inquiry office at 
the Hyde Park Hotel, Albert Gate — these letters are written 
on Hyde Park Hotel notepaper, which is left in the public 
room for the use of visitors — any one coming into the room 
can write a letter on that paper — I have not seen the 
prisoner at the hotel. 

Cross-examined — There is an attendant whose duty it 
is to notice people coming in — I look after the visitors’ 
mail and so on — if the prisoner came in I think T should 
notice him. 

Stephen de Maria — I keep a restaurant at 35 Oxford 
Street, and have known the prisoner for two and half years 
as Adolf Michael Beck — he constantly came in as a customer 
and had his meals there — after I had known him about 
six months he asked me if I would allow his lei tors to my 
place — I said “ Yes ” — they came addressed to Adolf Beck, 
except on one occasion, when it was Michael Adolph Beck — 
he said he w r as engaged in the city as a commission agent — 
he had breakfast at my restaurant, and sometimes lunch, 
but not lately, and every evening he had dinner — for the 
first few months he paid every day, then he told me he 
was rather short, and I said, (( I have no objection, you 
can go on and pay me whenever you can ” — at present he 
owes me between £40 and £50 — I remember some time 
before April the police coming and speaking to me at my 
Holborn shop — I saw the prisoner the same day — I did 
not then mention that the police had been to me — on 4th 
April when he came to my place about 8 a.m. he said that, 
when he went to his hotel the night previous somebody told 
him that the police were after him, and that the proprietor 
would not allow him to sleep there any longer — he was then 
sleeping at the Percy Hotel, Percy Street — I said. . “ I do 
not think there is anything against you, because the police 
came to my place, and Inspector Ward said there was nothing 

216 



Report of Beck Trial in 1904. 

against, you ” — I think the prisoner said, “ I am not going 
to be looked upon as a dishonest man; I had better leave; 

I shall look out for a room and I shall leave ” — he said 
he wanted to be free and easy, and did not want to be 
locked up — he said he moved to 7 or 9 South Crescent. 

Cross-examined — He asked me who the police officer was, 
and I showed him Ward’s card — he asked mo to go to the 
station with him, which I did on Easter Monday — there 
were several constables there, but Ward was out, so I made 
an appointment to meet him at 2.30 that afternoon — I saw 
him about, the prisoner’s case — the prisoner was not there 
then, but he afterwards asked me, “ Have you been up 
there? ” — I said, " Yes ” — he said, “ What did he say? ” 
— T said, “ He had nothing against you, but oiily wanted 
to know where you lived ” — when the prisoner moved to 
South Crescent I believe he left his address with me — I 
knew his address all the time he used my house — I was 
quite willing to give him credit — I am not complaining 
that he swindled me; he always paid me before — I remember 
Miss Scott corning to my restaurant one evening — the 
prisoner was there having some tea, I believe — he was there 
for about one and a half hours while she was there — I 
noticed that she was looking at the table where the prisoner 
and I were sitting — she was looking at him; there was 
nothing to prevent her seeing him — I believe that was on 
*21 st March, but I am not sure. 

Re-examined — On the first occasion I went with the 
prisoner to the police station at his suggestion — he waite 1 
outside because I asked him to — I went to see if there was 
any th i n g • aga i nst hi m . 

William Green — I am manager of the Central Hotel, 
Percy Street — I know the prisoner as Adolf Beck — bo stayed 
at the hotel from 16th October to 30th October, 1902, from 
14th to 17th November, 1902, from 28th December, 1902, 
to 20th January, 1903, and from 14th February, 1903, to 
4th April, 1904, when he finally left — I understood him 
to be an agent — when he left he owed 30s. — he was requested 
to leave, although 1 did not give him notice myself — people 
had been inquiring for him. 

m Cross-examined — It was the police who had been there, 
and I did not like it. It was after he had stayed at the 
hotel from February, 1903, to April, 1904, that he owed 
30s. — I am not making any complaint that he had swindled 
me. 


James Walter Palmer — On 24th April I lived at 9 

217 



Adolf Beck 


South Crescent — I remember the prisoner taking a room at 
10s. a week — he said he had come from the north, that 
he had been living at a hotel, and wanted a cheaper place 
— he said ho was a financial agent, and that his name was 
Adolf Beck — he stayed until he was arrested — his effects 
were taken charge of by the police. 

Inspector Ward (re-examined) — On 24th March I 
received information of Miss Scott’s complaint — I 
called upon her and took her statement — she gave 
me a description of the man she said had robbed 
her — I made inquiries and communicated with de 
Maria — I ascertained that the prisoner was living at 
9 South Crescent — on 15th April I told Miss Scott to stand 
at the corner of Store Street, and if she saw anybody she 
knew, or the man who had stolen her jewellery, to speak 
to him — about 9.30 the prisoner came out and looked round 
at Miss Scott — they spoke for a few minutes — I went across 
the road, and she gave him into custody as the man who 
had stolen her jewellery — he said, “ It is mistake ” — I 
said I was a police officer, and he would have to go with 
me to the police station — I conveyed him to the station, and 
when he was charged he said it was a trumped-up affair — • 
he gave de Maria’s address as his own — I told him it 
was false and that he was not living there — he said he 
was — I said he was not, and I directed the inspector who 
was taking the charge not to put it on the charge sheet — the 
l risoner said he was an agent and a Norwegian — after 
he was charged he asked to send a telegram, and in my 
presence he wrote these four telegrams and this envelope — I 
found 2s. 4d. in money on him and a number of articles, 
among them two pairs of eyeglasses — I made a list of the 
articles — I afterwards went to 9 South Crescent., and took 
possession of his effects — I made a list of the things; it 
contains pince-nez, keys, a box containing visiting cards, 
pawn tickets, hair dye, two pocket books, an overcoat, a 
wishing book, and some memoranda in this envelope — on 
the 23rd April I placed the prisoner with twelve other men 
at the Police Court ; some were about his own ago, some 
older, and some younger — T told him he was about to be 
put up for identification, and that he could stand where* 
he liked, he chose his position, standing w T ith his back to 
the window — he was going to take off his coat — I told him 
not to do so, as other people were wearing coats — he had 
on a greatcoat with a velvet collar — he was wearing- glasses, 
and I told him to take them off, as other people were not 
wearing glasses — the witnesses came in separately, and each 

218 



Report of Beck Trial in 1904. 

picked him out — in each case he said he did not know them 
— he was wearing a hard felt hat. 

Cross-examined — The witnesses are wrong if they say 
the prisoner was wearing glasses when they identified him 
— I do not know that the man who committed the robbery 
did not wear glasses — I seized everything that I could find 
at the prisoner's lodgings — I found a light grey suit; there 
were eight or nine suits there — this is the overcoat he was 
wearing (produced) — there is no velvet collar on it; I am 
wrong about that — i am not wrong about liis wearing glasses, 
because I told him to take them off — a woman was brought 
in to identify him for a different offence altogether; she 
did not do so — I did not find any pawn tickets relating to 
any of these articles, and I have not succeeded in tracing 
any of them — de Maria told me ho took him food at his 
place — I did not know that de Maria knew where he lived. 

Thomas Henry Gurrin — I am an expert in handwriting 
at Bath House, Holborn Viaduct — I have practised for about 
twenty years and have given evidence for the Treasury and 
others hundreds of times — I have seen the exhibits in this 
case — I have compared the list of dresses, cheques, and 
letters addressed to the witnesses, with the telegrams and 
envelopes proved to be in the prisoner's handwriting — to the 
best of my belief the writing on those exhibits is 
the studiously disguised writing of the same person who 
wrote the five proved exhibits — some of the disguised 
writing is written backwards, some of it straight, 
and most of it is distorted in such a way as to 

suggest that it is intentionally disguised — I see in it 
a number of peculiarities which I see in the proved 

writing — I should say the handwriting belongs to the 

Scandinavian group, Norwegian or Danish — I have occa- 
sion to study manuscripts of foreigners, and I have 
noticed the t's and f's of that writing — I have also com- 
pared the disguised writing with a pocket book found at 
the prisoners lodgings — almost all the writing in that book 
is the same as that which appears on the telegrams, and 
it is the same writing as the other exhibits, only they are 
disguised. 

• Cross-examined — The pocket book supplied me with a 

great deal more material — the style of writing is foreign — 
I do not. think there is any instance in the disguised writing 
where it is absolutely natural, except by inadvertence — I 
think it was all intended to be disguised — all the capital 
P’s in the telegrams have the same peculiarity — the umbrella 
part goes through the main stroke — in the disguised writing 

219 



Adolf Beck. 


there are eight P’s, and in most of them one sees the same 
pecuiarity — there are many differences in the writing, but, 
to the best of my belief, they are not material. 

Re-examined — The dissimilarities are not what I should 
expect to find in the writing of two different people. 

The prisoner’s statement before the magistrate, “ Before 
God, my Maker, I am absolutely innocent of every charge 
brought against me. I have not spoken to or seen any of 
these women before they were set against me by the 
detectives. I can bring many witnesses to prove I have 
acted honestly in my business in the city from 10 a.m. to 
6 p.m. I ask the press to help me to get all evidence in 
my support from my solicitor.” 

The prisoner in his defence on oath said he did not know 
any of the women ; that he had never seen them ; that on 
22nd March he was in the city doing business with a Mr. 
Gajardo from 11 to 3, and stayed in the city till (5 p.m.; 
that he was in Mr. Williams’, his solicitor, office in the 
afternoon; that he had dinner at de Maria’s between six 
and seven ; that on 23rd March he was in the city at lunch 
time; that on 28th March he was with Gajardo all day on 
business ; that he remembered Miss Scott being in de Maria’s 
restaurant on 30th March; that on 29th March he had lunch 
at a baker’s shop in Old Broad Street; that the letters to 
the witnesses were not written by him; that he could not 
write without glasses, and then not more than two sentences 
in English without using a dictionary; that he carried two 
pairs of pince-nez, one for distance and one for reading; 
that he had been mistaken for a rnan named Smith, his 
double; that in March and April he had no brown suit, 
or a coat with a velvet collar ; that he was receiving £3 
or £4 a week from Mr. Williams; and that he received an 
option on some copper property of his own in Norway. 


Evidence fob the Defence. 

Matthew Edward Williams — I am a solicitor of Broad 
Street Place, Finsbury Circus — I have known the prisoner 
for fifteen years — I have taken up his defence during the 
last week only — I know his writing — I have received a 
number of letters from him — in the course of my profession 
I deal with handwriting — I have seen the letters written by 
the thief — I say most decidedly they are not written by 
tlie prisoner — I do not trace the slightest resemblance — 
the characteristics of the two writings are entirely 'distinct 
in my opinion — during March and April I made the prisoner 
an allowance — I was engaged in the sale of property for 
220 



Report of Beck Trial in 1904. 

him — 1 have the contract here — I made him an allowance 
because of that property, and because I had known him 
a long time and had a respect for him — I should think I 
have given him .£200, on an average of £2 a week — there 
were no regular payments — I was prepared to lend him 
anything within reason — I have never seen him without 
eyeglasses, except to wipe his eyes — I imagine that he cannot 
write without them — I have never seen him write, except 
to copy letters written by my clerk. 

Cross-examined — I made him an allowance because I 
believed he wanted money, and because I believed that it 
would be repaid — I do not do that for anybody w T ho asks 
it — the prisoner was introduced to me by some clients — his 
property is a series of mines, described in this agreement 
of sale — I have not seen him, but I have corresponded with 
our agent in Christiania concerning them, and he has seen 
the title — 1 have a list of my payments — I have no receipts 
except the cheques — towards the end of last year I received 
about .£200 from the prisoner, which was part of £500 
paid on his property — 1 did not know that I should be 
called as a witness until ten minutes ago — I was rather 
anxious to be called in the prisoner's interests — I had a 
good deal of experience in handwriting in my early days — 
I was never employed in comparing handwriting — Mr. 
Gurrin’s business is to compare handwriting hypercritically ; 
mine is to get a general contour of the whole thing. 

By the Court — T knew of this case some weeks ago, but 
not professionally — it was after Mr. Freke Palmer was not 
able to continue it that I took it up. 

Guilty — The accused then pleaded guilty to a conviction 
of obtaining goods by false pretences at this Court on 24th 
February, 1896. Judgment respited. 


221 



APPENDIX IX. 


REPORT of the case of WILLIAM THOMAS, alias JOHN 
SMITH, contained in the Times newspaper, of 16th Sept., 
1904. 


Central Criminal Court, 15th September, 1904. 

Before Mr. Justice Phillimore. 

William Thomas, 65, journalist, who pleaded “ Guilty *’ 
yesterday to indictments charging him with stealing rings, 
the property of Nellie O'Neill, Violet Turner, and Beulah 
Turner, and an umbrella, the property of Nellie O’Neill, and 
to converting the rings to his own use and benefit, was brought 
up for judgment. 

The prisoner also pleaded “ Guilty 99 yesterday to a 
previous conviction in May, 1877, in the name of John Smith. 

Mr. Charles Mathews and Mr. Arthur Gill appeared for 
the prosecution on behalf of the Director of Public Prosecu- 
tions. 

Mr. Mathews said that in this case he appeared with Mr. 
Arthur Gill for the prosecution, instructed by the Director of 
Public Prosecutions. He did not suppose that it would be neces- 
sary for him to recapitulate to his lordship the facts of the case, 
which appeared sufficiently clear from the depositions to which 
his lordship’s attention had, he doubted not, been directed. 
Stated quite shortly, the charges against the prisoner were 
that lie, at different dates between 25th March and 7th July in 
this year, succeeded in stealing four rings and one umbrella 
from three women named Nellie O’Neill, Violet Turner, and 
Beulah Turner, and attempted to obtain two rings from two 
women named Evelyn Edwards and Emily Forwerk. In the 
indictment for misdemeanour the same acts were differently 
charged, except that the two attempts to steal w r ere added to 
it. The prisoner’s plan of operations was uniform and some- 
what peculiar, in that in all the cases he would seem to have 
posed as a man of considerable wealth and to have expressed 
himself as desirous of taking either into his employment or 
takipg to live w T ith him the woman to whom he w r a.s at the 
moment speaking. That statement was followed by a sug- 
gestion from him that the woman, for the purpose of her 
new position, would require an expensive wardrobe. He would 

222 




The same shown wearing hat. 





Report of Thomas Trial in 1904, 

thereupon proceed to make out a list of clothing which she 
would require, and would either dictate or himself write out 
a list of high-class tradesmen with whom he represented that 
he had credit, and where the articles could be purchased. That 
was followed by a statement from him that the woman might 
bo in need of some ready money, whereupon he would sit down 
and upon a blank sheet of paper proceed to draw what he said 
was a cheque. The cheques which he drew were for the most 
part on the Union Bank, and nearly always on the Pall Mall 
branch, that branch being selected probably because no 
such branch was in existence. The cheque he would leave with 
the woman, with instructions that she should cash it; and then 
there would arise a question of suitable jewellery. He said 
the woman would require for the purposes of her new position 
more expensive jewellery; and, the subject being brought out 
in that way, it was almost invariably concluded by her giving 
him a ring as a measurement of her finger for a ring or rings 
which he undertook to purchase for her. The prisoner would 
then almost invariably say that his valet had been careless in 
allowing him to come out without any ready money, and he 
would request the woman to make him a small loan. Having 
obtained the loan, he wont on his way. Apparently, in Miss 
O’NeilPs case ho was not too proud to take a silver-handled 
umbrella which lay to his hand in the passage, and which was 
found in his possession at the time of his arrest. That was a 
short statement of the kind of confidence trick which the 
prisonor confessed that he had jjractised upon the different 
occasions upon the different women between 25th March and 
7th July in this year. There was attached to the different in- 
dictments to which the prisoner had pleaded guilty a count 
which set out a previous conviction, and to that previous con- 
viction also the prisoner had pleaded guilty. The previous 
conviction was one which took place in that Court on 10th 
May, 1877, at the Sessions which began on 7th May, 1877. 
It would seem that on that occasion certainly two indictments 
were tried before the Common Serjeant, the late Sir Thomas 
Chambers. The fraud charged was identical in almost all 
its particulars with that to which the prisoner had pleaded 
guilty to having committed in this year, 1904. On that occa- 
sion the prisoner was sentenced to five years’ penal servitude. 
Ife (Mr. Mathews) thought it necessary, having regard to the 
peculiar circumstances of the case, to make to his lordship 
some statement as to the prisoner’s history, as far as the 
prosecution had been able to obtain it. Many of the facts 
about to be stated were taken from two confessions made by 
the prisoner and dated respectively 23rd July and 29th July 
in this year. He thought, however, that it would be quite 

2*23 



Adolf Beck. 


obvious to his lordship that those so-called confessions were by 
no means complete, and that in many important particulars 
they were by no means accurate. Before 1876 they had only 
himself to rely upon. They knew nothing of him up to that 
date but what he told them himself. According to the state- 
ment he first made his correct name was William Augustus 
Wyatt: he was born in Lincolnshire in 1839, and was taken 
to Russia by his parents, studied at the University of Vienna, 
where he obtained the degrees of M.D. and M.C., and he 
volunteered as a surgeon in the Austro-Prussian War. In- 
quiries had been made of the Austrian police, which, however, 
failed to verify or to refute that statement. The prisoner 
went on to say that he studied leprosy in the Sandwich Islands 
under Father Damien; that he was surgeon-general to the 
King of Hawaii, and owned a coffee plantation at Honolulu; 
that he was afterwards surgeon to the Turkish troops before 
Plevna; and that he subsequently went to America and prac- 
tised there as an oculist. The evidence on the depositions 
would show that in tho year 1876 the prisoner went to lodge at 
the house of a Mr. Ruff, a watchmaker in Barnsbury Street, 
Islington. The prisoner was a lodger there in the name of 
William Weiss, and lie described himself as a pensioner from 
the Austrian army. Ho had no occupation at that time, but 
always dressed well and seemed to be well supplied with money. 
In April, 1877, tho prisoner was arrested and charged with the 
different frauds for which he was convicted at that Court on 
10th May, 1877. At the time of his arrest he gave his name 
as John Smith; and in that name he was tried, convicted, and 
served his sentence. He was released from prison on 14th 
April, 1881. If his lordsnip would turn to the first confession 
made by the prisoner on 23rd July, 1904, he would see how 
the prisoner, giving an account of his movements after his 
release, stated that he was not in England from tho dale of 
his release in 1881 until he returned to this country in August, 
1903 — a period which he himself computed at twenty-three 
years, which was not quite accurate. That was not a correct 
statement, as appeared from a statement made by the prison ex- 
on 29th July last to Inspector Kane, who had taken a great 
interest in the case and had done invaluable service to the 
cause of justice by means of the inquiries which he had made 
so diligently and with so much intelligence and insistence. 
Inspector Kane had discovered more than one witness who had 
been able to give him information as to the actual where- 
abouts of the prisoner during a portion of the time, which had 
satisfied him (Inspector Kane) that the statement the prisoner 
made that he was absent from England twenty- two or twenty- 
three years was not accurate. The prisoner was released front 
224 



Report of Thomas Trial in 1904. 

prison on 14th April, 1881, and in 1882 and 1883 he was seen 
by Mr. lluff in London. In 1884 the prisoner went to Ade- 
laide, South Australia, and became known to a Mr. Day, a 
witness. Mr. Day spoke of the prisoner as passing under 
the name of Augustus Wilhelm Meyer and practising as a 
doctor in Adelaide, having a lucrative practice and 
living in a luxurious style. The prisoner lived in 
Adelaide until 1890, when he left for Europe to 
study, as he said, the Koch treatment in Berlin. They got 
it from the prisoner’s own statement which he made on 29th 
July last that he was in London in 1891, and again in 1894. 
It was quite certain that in 1894 the prisoner was in London, 
because in April of that year he was arrested and charged at 
Bow Street with a fraud perfectly distinct in its character from 
any of these — a fraud upon a Mr. Margossian. On 23rd 
April he was discharged at Bow Street on the ground that 
there was no available evidence in this country which would 
support the charge. The prisoner said that when he was dis- 
charged in April, 1894, he went to America. That statement 
had been made the subject of inquiry, and the result of the 
inquiry and of affirmative testimony was to show that the 
prisoner — whatever became of him after his discharge from 
custody in April, 1894 — was in London in the early months of 
1896. That was shown by the evidence of two witnesses — 
Mr. Nolkin and Mr. Hatteriek — which his lordship would find 
among the additional evidence served on the prisoner. Mr. 
Nelkin said he knew the prisoner and saw him in London in 
February, 1896, and became on friendly terms with him, which 
friendly terms continued between February and the month of 
June or July, 1896. Mr. Hatteriek vouched that he knew 
the prisoner in 1896 and helped him to establish a jewellery 
business in Rosebery Avenue. The prisoner conducted that 
business until August, 1897, when he somewhat suddenly dis- 
appeared. At that time the prisoner went by the name of 
Dr. Marsh. 

Mr. Justice Ruillimore observed that the prisoner said 
that his real name was Meyer and that ho was an English 
Jew. 


* Mr. Matiiews said that the name which the prisoner em- 
ployed in the jewellery business was stated to have been 
Markham. The prisoner was in London in February, 1896, 
and remained in London until August, 1897. Those dates 
were material, because of something which happened *in 
London between December, 1894, and March, 1896. From 
December, 1894, down to November, 1895, a series of frauds 
o 225 



Adolf Beck. 


similar in all their details to those of which the prisoner had 
confessed himself the author was practised upon a large number 
of women. In December, 1895, one, Adolf Beck, was arrested 
and charged with the commission of one of those frauds; and 
the detention of Adolf Beck in custody brought forward a 
number of women, eleven in all, who identified Mr. Beck as 
the person who had defrauded them by those identical pre- 
tences of which the prisoner Thomas stood before the Court as 
the confessed author in 1877 and now. Mr. Beck was tried 
in that Court on 3rd, 4th, and 5th March, 1896, a time during 
which it would seem that the prisoner was still in London. As 
he (Mr. Mathews) had said, no fewer than eleven women 
identified Mr. Beck a» having been the person who defrauded 
them, and he was convicted and sentenced to seven years* 
penal servitude. A considerable interval between August, 
1897, and August, 1903, occurred, when they had no informa- 
tion with regard to the prisoner Thomas. They had no in- 
formation which could establish with any certainty that he 
was either in England or in London between August, 1897, 
and August, 1903. But in August, 1903, he went to lodge 
at the house of a Mr. Burr, at Highbury. Inspector Kane 
found at those lodgings of the prisoner documents showing 
that some time between 1897 and 1903 the prisoner was in 
America in the name of Dr. W. A. Wyatt. Inspector Kane 
found visiting cards at the prisoner’s lodgings with the name 
“ Dr. W. A. Wyatt, M.D., M.C.,” and a bank-book showing 
that ho had been resident in Denver, in the United States, and 
had a banking account with the Colorado Bank there. The 
fact that in August, 1903, the prisoner went to lodge at Mr. 
Burr’s house was clearly established by Mr. Burr himself. It 
was a fact, therefore, that in August, 1903, and in the be- 
ginning of 1904 the prisoner was resident in London. In 
August, 1903, one Rose Reece spoko to having been victimised 
by the methods with which they were now so familiar; and 
that course of victimising women would seem, in all important 
particulars, to have been continued by some one in February 
and March, 1904. In the month of April, 1904, Mr. Adolf 
Beck, who, having served his sentence, was at liberty and in 
London, was again arrested, and he was identified by no fewer 
than five women. Upon the testimony of those women he 
was committed to take his trial at that Court, and was tried 
at that Court on 27th June, 1904, and again convicted. But 
he was not sentenced. The learned judge who tried him re- 
spited sentence until the next sessions, which began some- 
where about 20th July. Sentence was, in fact, ncVer passed 
upon Mr. Beck, owing to the facts which he (Mr. Mathews) 
was about to relate. Mr. Beck being in prison on 7th July 



Report of Thomas Trial in 1904. 

awaiting sentence, the prisoner, Thomas, on that da y paid 
a visit to the two women, Violet and Beulah Turner, and ob- 
tained two rings from them upon the old pretences, and left 
with them a letter and a list of clothes which they would 
require for their new position. Those documents, of course, 
were of vital consequence to the investigation which followed, 
and which began on the night of 7th July. On that day the 
prisoner Thomas was arrested on the charge of stealing the 
rings from Violet and Beulah Turner; Inspector Kane was at 
the police station when the prisoner was brought there, and 
he divined that he was the man who was convicted in May, 
1877. Inspector Kane was correct in his conjecture; and he 
made diligent inquiries, and quickly brought the result of them 
to the notice of the Director of Public Prosecutions and the 
Home Office. So searching and successful was the investiga- 
tion that on 19th July — twelve days after the prisoner had 
been seen in custody at the police station — an order for the 
release of Mr. Adolf Beck was obtained from Mr. Justice Philli- 
more. With ail due speed, therefore, the authorities acted 
when once the idea of a possible mistake was made plain to 
them. Mr. Beck having been released on 19th July, on 29th 
July he received the King's pardon in regard to the two con- 
victions — that which took place on 5th March, 1896, and that 
which took place on 27th June, 1904. In the evidence given 
against Mr. Beck in March, 1904, one of the women spoke to 
the month of August, 1903, as that in which she was de- 
frauded, and the other woman spoke to the months of February 
and March in this year as the months in which they were vic- 
timised. Pauline Scott said that it was on 22nd March, 1904, 
that she was victimised by means of the fraud, all the features 
of which they were now so completely familiar with. Turning 
to the evidence in this case of the prisoner Thomas, it would 
be seen that it was on 25th March in this year that the first 
witness in the case, Nellie O'Neill, was visited and defrauded 
by the prisoner. Of the five women who spoke with positive- 
ness to the identity of Mr. Beck, three of them had since seen 
the prisoner Thomas, and had found that they were mistaken in 
their identification of Mr. Beck. When they placed all the 
facts, dates, and circumstances, and the admitted wrongful 
identification, together he (Mr. Mathews) ventured to think 
that there could be no doubt at all that the conviction of 1904 
was a mistaken conviction of Mr. Adolf Beck. As to the cir- 
cumstances attending the conviction of Mr. Beck in 1896, the 
materials hitherto collected did not allow of so confident an 
expression of opinion, as they were not of the same strength 
when placed together as the proved facts in relation to the con- 
viction of 1904; but, with the light now thrown upon the whole 

227 



Adolf Beck. 


case, the prosecution desired to express their opinion upon the 
materials which existed that the conviction of Mr. Beck in 
1896 was wrongful. From 16th December, 1895, when he 
was first arrested, down to 27th June, 1904, when he was last 
convicted, Mr. Beck had most strenuously denied the accusa- 
tions, and even, when on 27th June, 1904, his previous con- 
viction of March, 1896, was put to him, compelled as he was 
to admit the fact of that previous conviction, he most strongly 
asserted that it was a wrongful conviction. lie (Mr. Mathews) 
made that statement with the greatest possible pleasure, 
because Mr. Beck felt somewhat sore that in the Sessions Paper 
containing the official record of the second trial there was not, 
as in the ordinary course there would not be, any reference to 
his denial. He (Mr. Mathews) had purposely taken advan- 
tage of the opportunity now offered to make such a statement 
as he considered due to Mr. Beck; but, of course, he had no 
desire that any punishment should be passed upon the prisoner 
Thomas upon the assumption that he was the author of the 
crimes of 1896 or 1904 for which Mr. Beck had been con- 
victed. As he had stated, no proof was forthcoming to show 
that Thomas was the author of those crimes, although the 
investigation, as far as it had gone, showed that it was possible 
that he could have been the author of the crimes of 1896, and 
that it w r as likely that he was the author of the crimes of 1904. 
Into the circumstances attending the two convictions of Mr. 
Beck the Government had ordered an inquiry, and until that 
was concluded no final pronouncement could be made on a 
matter which had attracted universal public interest. 

In reply to the Clerk of Arraigns, who asked him if he 
had anything to say, the prisoner replied, “ I am exceedingly 
sorry.” 

Mr. Justice Phtllimore, addressing the prisoner, said — 
William Thomas, you have pleaded “ Guilty ” to three charges 
of larceny of a very mean and despicable character from three 
women, and to attempts of the same description which did not 
fail by reason of any repentance on your part. You have also 
pleaded “ Guilty ” to having been convicted of similar crime 
on or about 10 th May, 1877, on which count the judge who 
presided at your trial awarded you a sentence of five years' 
penal servitude. It is suggested on behalf of the Crown tffat 
we have by no means got to the bottom of your offences when 
I state what I have stated. It is suggested that it is at least- 
probable that you were the author of eleven offences which 
were committed from December, 1894, to November, 1895, 
for which one Adolf Beck w r as tried, convicted, and sentenced, 
it is now thought unjustly; and certainly if you were the 

228 



Report of Thomas Trial in 1904. 

author of those offences it is certain that he was unjustly con- 
victed. It is suggested, further, that you were the author of 
five offences in August, 1903, and February and March of this 
year, for which Adolf Beck was again tried, before Mr. Justice 
Grantham, in June of this year, and was again convicted; but 
fortunately, owing to the care wdiich my brother took before 
passing sentence, no sentence was passed. If you were the 
author of either or both these sets of crimes you are very bad 
indeed, and you have added to your offences by allowing an 
innocent man to suffer in your stead. I cannot help thinking 
that, at any rate as regards the later series of offences, they 
very closely correspond with the time when you were in 
London. I cannot help thinking that you are the real person 
who was guilty of those offences. There is no reason particu- 
larly that I see for supposing that you were the author of the 
earlier series of offences except that you were in London and 
that you in your first confession concealed the fact that you 
were in London at that time — and one would hope that there 
were not two people living at the same time who were guilty 
of this particular mean and, I am glad to say, novel form of 
fraud. I say there is no reason otherwise to say that you 
are the man ; but with regard to both of the sets of offences for 
which Adolf Beck was tried, I do not propose for one moment 
to consider that it is sufficiently proved before me that you 
were guilty of them to make me add one day to the sentence 
which I should otherwise have passed upon you. It would 
not be proper that I should, without full inquiry and full 
proof. I have only allowed counsel for the Crown to make 
the statement which he has made because it was in the nature 
of a justification of the character of Adolf Beck, not because it 
w r as to injure you, but because it was a convenient moment 
for making a clear statement w r ith regard to a man whom the 
Crown believe to have been unjustly convicted. That being 
the case, I treat you merely as I should any one else who, 
many, many years ago, was convicted of this mean form of 
crime and who had a very severe sentence, which ought to 
have been a lesson to him, but who was found in his old age 
returning to his old wicked practices. The sentence upon 
you is the same as the previous one — that you be kept in 
penal servitude for five years. 


229 



Adolf Beck. 


DEPOSITIONS taken before Sir ALBERT DE RUTZEN at 
Bow Street Police Court on 8th, 23rd, and 29th July, and 
2nd August, 1904. 


VIOLET TURNER, on oath, saith : — 

I am single. I am an actress, last engaged six weeks 
ago. I live at 2 Torrington Street, Russell Square. Yester- 
day, 7th July, at 12.30 p.m., I was at home and prisoner called 
at my house, and was shown up to me. He was a stranger to 
me. He said he thought he had. met me before. I said, 
te Very likely you have.” He said he thought it was in Oxford 
Street. My sister was present. Prisoner said he would like to 
take us both away yachting. I said I should like to go, but 
not so soon. He asked me, “ Why have you not so many 
rings on your finger as your sister?” I said I did not like 
jewellery so much. He said, “ I will get you a nice ring 
if you will give me the measurements.” He took the measure- 
ments of my finger and of my sister's. 

Then we took him down to the drawling- room, and he took 
a pen and paper, and began to write down what he was going 
to get me, a list of things and what money they would cost fo-r 
both of us. It came to £100. lie took the paper to put in 
the same envelope as the cardboard measurement for the rings. 
Then he said, “ I don't like to go into a jeweller's shop with a 
piece of cardboard. Have not you a common ring you could 
let me have?” I said I 'would look for one. I could not find 
it. So I gave him this ring from my finger. 

Afterwards he asked my sister to give him a ring as a 
measurement for her finger, and he asked her to lend him her 
bangles that he might get some gold coins put on. She 
did not lend him the bangle; she said it was too common, but 
she lent him this other ring (produced). Then he left us, at 
about half-past one, and I became suspicious and spoke to 
my landlord. He was away about an hour, and then came back 
with prisoner and a policeman. 

I charged prisoner, and he was taken to the station. The 
value of my ring is 15s. 

Recalled — My evidence of the 8th inst. now read over is 
correct. 

When I saw the prisoner at my house I did not recognise 
him as a man I had ever met before. He said he was staying 
in Hyde Park Hotel, and had plenty of dogs and houses and 
large gardens. He said he could get thousands of pounds from 
his bankers. 

I have heard my sister’s evidence that prisoner said he 

230 



Deposition of Violet Turner. 

would send some money round. He said he would send it by 
his valet. Prisoner did not give his name. I asked him 
whether I could write to him. He said, t( You have my address, 
but you don’t know my name. n 

Besides the yachting trip and the dresses, prisoner said that 
after we came back from yachting he would give me a house 
and a saddle-horse. Before leaving the house he said, “ I 
haven’t any change, will you give the servant a half-crown?” 
That request made me suspicious. When he left the house I 
spoke to the landlord, Mr. Glenville. About an hour or an 
hour and a, half later the prisoner came back with Mr. Glenville 
and a constable. Then he was charged. 

(Signed) Violet Turner. 

BEULAH TURNER, on oath, saith:— 

I am single. I am a professional, theatrical line, and 
live with my sister, the last witness. 

I received this letter in the morning, and during the morning 
the prisoner called. I said I did not think I knew him. He 
said, “ I don’t think it’s you I met; it’s your sister. Is she 
a little bit taller?” I said, “ Yes,” and I called her up. Then 
he wanted to take my sister away on a yachting expedition. 
I said if he wanted to take one he would have to take both. 
He said he didn’t mind that if we would not be jealous. 

Then he drew up a list of things he said he would buy us. 
I gave him a piece of paper with a measure for a ring he 
said ho would buy, and he said — “ That looks funny to take 
to a jeweller’s; can’t you give me the ring?” So I gave him 
this ring now before me, worth £1. My sister gave him this 
other ring. Then he went out, and we sent the landlord out, 
and he came back with prisoner and a policeman. Prisoner said 
nothing. lie was given into custody. He was quite sober. 

Recalled — My evidence of the 8th inst., now read over, is 
correct. Produced, exhibit 1 is the letter referred to in that 
evidence. 

The two rings are now shown to me. 

Recalled — I look at the letter, exhibit 1. It is addressed 
to me, and I opened it. I was not able to make out the 
signature, only the first, two letters, which look like “ Li.” 
When the prisoner called and was shown up to my room I 
did not recognise him as a person I had met before, and 
apparently he did not recognise me. 

He spoke about the letter a little time after he came. 
He said, “ Have you got my letter?” I said, <c Yes,” and 
diowedhim the letter, exhibit 1. He agreed to take us 
both on the yachting tour. He mentioned a date when we 
were to start ; I think he said about a fortnight from that date, 

231 



Adolf Beck. 


but I forget. lie said he should want “ evening dresses and 
yachting dresses and everything-.” He told us that we were 
to get those things, and he said he would send us the money 
at three o’clock by his valet. He said he was going to send 
about £200 altogether, I think He asked whether we preferred 
a cheque or bank notes. I said it did not matter which, as 
they could both be easily changed. 

He told us he was going to get us marquise rings. We 
did not ask when we were going to get the rings. I gave 
him a ring in order that he might know the size of my finger. 
I was wearing a gold-cased bangle at the time. Prisoner asked 
if I would like any things put on it. I said, “ No, it isn’t 
worth it.” I did not take it off, and prisoner did not examine 
it. Prisoner did not give his name. I said something about 
writing to him; he said, “ Oh, but you haven’t got my name.” 

When he was brought back to the house by the policeman, 
the policeman asked if I knew “ this gentleman.” I said, 
“ Yes, by coming here this morning.” The policeman showed 
me the two rings and asked me if they belonged to me. I 
said, “ One belongs to my sister and one to mo.” The police- 
man said, “ Did you give these rings to the gentleman with 
the intention of pawning them?” I said, “ No.” 

The prisoner made no statement when he was brought back 
that I know of, only when the policeman asked if I knew him, 
prisoner nodded his head to me. (Signed) Beulah Tuiwer. 

FRANK WOODLAND, P.C. 578 Y. on oath, saith: — 

At 1.45 p.m., 7th July, T was called to 128 Grosvenor Street, 
Euston Road, a pawnbroker’s shop, by Mr. Lawley, pawnbroker. 
I found prisoner there and a Mr. Glenville, the landlord of the 
two witnesses, Misses Turner, and there were these two rings 
there. Glenville said that the two rings belonged to the 
Misses Turner, Torrington Street. 

The pawnbroker said prisoner had brought them in and 
wanted to pawn them and handed me a ticket and the two 
rings. Prisoner said nothing. 

I took them to 2 Torrington Street and saw both ladies 
separately, in prisoner’s presence; each said the rings had 
been obtained for the purpose of taking the girls in the country, 
and that he had promised to get new rings for the girls at a 
jeweller’s. 

Prisoner gave the name William Thomas, and refused to 
give any address. Beyond that he said nothing. 

Recalled — My evidence of the 8th inst., now read over, is 
correct. When prisoner was arrested he gave the age of 
65, and said he was a journalist. I searched him at the 

232 



Deposition of Frank Woodland. 

station and found on him a watch and a small sum in money. 
I found no papers at all on him. There was nothing that would 
give any clue to his address. He was carrying the silver- 
handled umbrella produced in his hand. He was wearing 
white spats on his feet. He had a single eyeglass hanging 
down in front of him. 

He was remanded for a week at this Court. On the remand 
day he was not wearing the spats. They were in his pocket. 

Frank Woodland. 

NELLIE O’NEILL, on oath, saith : — 

I live at 104 Whitfield Street, Tottenham Court Road. I 
am single. I remember the evening of Thursday, 24th March 
last. I was walking in Haymarket on that evening, and the 
prisoner spoke to me. He asked me to give him my card, 
and said he w’ould call and see me next day. I gave him 
my address, and he wrote it down. He said he was stopping 
at the Berkeley Hotel, Piccadilly. He said that I should 
have a letter from him by the next morning’s post. 

I received a letter next morning. I have destroyed it. It 
was on a correspondence card with “ Berkeley Hotel, Picca- 
dilly ” printed on it. The signature was something like that 
on exhibit 1. The writing was like the writing on exhibit 1. 
I was unable to make out the signature. The letter said : — 

“ Miss O’Neill, I shall be round to see you at one o’clock to-day. 

iC Yours truly.” 

followed by a scrawl, which I could not make out, as signature. 

The prisoner called upon me about one o’clock on Friday, 
25th March. He was shown up into my room. He said he 
wanted to know if I would go and live with him at a house 
in St. John’s Wood — his house. He told me he had had that 
house for eighteen years. He said he had another house in 
Belgrave Square. He said he had four servants in St. John’s 
Wood, and that the house in Belgrave Square was shut up. 

I said “ Yes ” to his proposal. 

Prisoner said he was a member of the House of Lords. 
He said I should want everything a lady would want, and asked 
for some foolscap paper to write down what I should want. 
I provided him with writing materials, and he wrote down a 
list of dresses, tailor-made dresses, boots, shoes, and hats that 
I should want. He put prices to these things, amounting to 
£93. He gave me that list. I was to go to shops in Bond 
Street. • He mentioned the name of Madame Hayward’s for 
underwear. Prisoner said he would want me to be ready to 
join him in a week. He left the list with me. I have destroyed 

233 



Adolf Beck 


it. It was very much like the list now shown to me, exhibit 2. 
The prices were almost the same. 

Prisoner said he would write me out a cheque for .£100 to 
pay for the things. He wrote out such a document on the 
“ Union Bank, St. James’s Street.” I kept the cheque a 
little while and then destroyed it. He sealed the cheque up in 
an envelope and told me to give it to the cashier. 

Prisoner then said he would send me up some rings from 
Asprey’s in Bond Street. lie said he would send me three 
or four diamond rings — including a half -hoop ring and a mar- 
quise ring — and a gold ring. He said the commissionaire 
from Asprey’s would bring the rings to me about six o’clock 
that evening. He said he would want one of my rings to 
know the size, and asked if I had any rings. I said I would 
let him have two. I handed him two rings — one a thin gold 
band with a dark blue stone in it, and the other a little gold 
band with a tiny American coin attached to it. They were 
worth about l Os. each. Prisoner said he w r ould let me have 
those rings back at the same time as the others came up. 
Up to this time prisoner had not given me any name. I asked 
him if I could write to him. lie said, “ No, but he would 
come and see me on the following Sunday.” I was to get 
my dresses, &c., the next day. Prisoner said he would be 
going yachting in about a fortnight and w T ould take me with 
him. 

He was with me altogether from about one o’clock till half- 
past three. As he was leaving he said his valet had forgotten 
to put his money in his pocket, and asked me if I would let 
him have some silver. I gavo him 5s. Then he went away. 

While this conversation was going on, I had a silver-mounted 
umbrella standing in a comer. It is produced. Prisoner had 
a very old umbrella w r hen he came. Before he left he asked 
me to get something. I left the room for about five minutes. 
Prisoner was wearing an overcoat. 

I waited in that evening till about eight o’clock. No rings 
came. No one came. I went to the Berkeley Hotel and 
made some inquiries. I took my letter card with me. I could 
find out nothing there about the writer of the letter card. 
That night I tried to find the Union Bank in St. James’s. Street. 

I could not find any Union Bank there. There is a bank in 
St. James’s Street — Lloyd’s Bank. • 

Upon returning home I missed the umbrella (produced). It 
is worth about 38s. In the hall stand I found the umbrella 
which prisoner had with him when he came to the house. 
That, was all broken. I kept it for some time, and then threw 
it away. 

Some little time ago I saw an account in a newspaper of a 

234 



Deposition of Nellie O’Neill. 

man who was in custody at this Court, and I came here to» make 
inquiries. The police took me to Tottenham Court Road police 
station. My statement was taken down, and I was then shown 
my umbrella, and I identified it. 

On Saturday last at this Court I was shown about ten men, 
and I picked out the prisoner as being the man that robbed me. 

Nellie O'Neill. 


EVELYN MIRIAM EDWARDS says: — 

I sun a waitress and live at 24 St. Margaret's Mansions, 
Lillie Road, Fulham. 

In the first week in April last I was walking in Holbom 
one afternoon with a female friend. The prisoner spoke to me 
there. He asked me for my address. I wrote my address 
on a piece of paper and gave it to him. Prisoner said nothing 
about his card or his name. lie said he was in a hurry as he 
was dining at the Hyde Park Hotel with some friends. He 
said he would write me and call the following afternoon between 
one and two o'clock. 

On the following morning I received a letter through the 
post. I produce a portion of the letter — exhibit 3 — I have 
destroyed the letter all but that piece, which is on the printed 
notepaper of the Hyde Park Hotel. The letter made an 
appointment to call upon me between one and two. It was 
signed, but I could not read the signature. 

Between I and 2 p.m. the prisoner called at my lodgings 
(T was then living in Clerkenwell) . I saw him in my flat. 
My female friend was with me at the time. When prisoner 
came into the room he said, “ Oh, what a place.” I said, 
“ We have to live according to our income.” Prisoner then 
asked for some writing paper and an envelope. My friend 
left the room to get those things. When she was gone prisoner 
said, would I like to go and live with him at a. house in St. 
John's Wood. He said he had had a lady there and she had 
gone off with £2000 worth of jewellery and some large sum of 
money. I forget the exact amount. 

He said he had got a housekeeper who had been there 
seventeen years. I was to go there and live with him. As I 
was hard up at the time I said “ Yes.” By this time my 
©friend had returned with the writing materials, and prisoner 
said, ” Sit down, you must have clothes to come there with, 
and I will write you out a list of things you are to get." He 
then wrote out the list produced — exhibit 2 — the total of the 
values -put on that list comes to £100. 

Prisoner said I was to get the costumes at Redfern's in 
Bond Street, and he said "I will give you a £100 cheque; 

235 



Adolf Beck. 

take it to the Union Bank in Pall Mall to-morrow morning." 
He wrote out a cheque on that bank on a plain piece of paper. 
He put it in an envelope addressed to the head cashier. I said 
to prisoner, " Is this all right? ” Prisoner said, "Yes, you 
ask for the head cashier and give it to him, and ask no ques- 
tions; you’ll have no question asked you.” lie then asked 
me if I had any jewellery. I said, “ I haven’t anything, 
money or jewellery.” He said, " Haven’t you a watch and 
chain, bracelet, or anything, or a ring? ” My friend said, 

" She has not anything at all.” Prisoner said he must get 
mo some, and said, “ Hasn’t your friend a ring to lend you?” 
He wanted a ring for the size of my finger. My friend took off 
her wedding ring (a 9-carat one) ; I tried it on, but it would 
not fit. 

Prisoner looked at her ring and gave it back to her without 
saying anything. I then said, " I’ve got a brass wedding 
ring,” and I showed it to him. He said, " Oh, rubbish. I 
couldn’t take that into a jeweller’s shop.” Prisoner said he 
would find out and send me a ring on. He asked me what 
stones I should like. I said, " Diamonds.” Prisoner said 
I was to wait until five o’clock and he would send me some 
rings by special messenger. He did not say how many he 
would send. He was also to present me with some fruit. 

Beforo he left my room he took a cigar case from his pocket. 

It looked like gold. There was nothing in it. After that lie 
took out a cigarette case, which also appeared to be gold. It 
was like the one shown to me. It was also empty. Prisoner 
said, “ I shall have to go home and sack my valet; he never 
thinks of putting anything in my pockets. He said nothing 
about money, and I said nothing to him about money. 

Prisoner said he would write and let me know what day 
I was to go to St. John’s Wood. I was to get the things in 
the meantime. Prisoner left then. I stayed in that evening. 
Nothing came. 

On the following morning I went with my friend and tried 
to find the Union Bank in Pall Mall. We inquired for it. We 
could not find it. At the corner of Cockspur Street I found 
a Union and Smith’s Bank. I presented the letter containing 
the cheque to the cashier. I got no money for it. The 
cashier told, me something, and I came away with the cheque. 
Afterwards I threw the cheque out and the envelope into the * 
fire. 

In July last I saw something in the newspaper, and in 
consequence I wrote to Inspector Kane. Afterwards I came to 
this Court and was shown a number of men standing together. 

I picked out the prisoner. I am sure he is the same man. 

(Signed) Evelyn Miriam Edwards. 


236 



Depositions of Glenville and Burr. 

FRITZ GLENVILLE says— 

My address is 2 Torrington Street, Russell Square. I am a 
dentist. The Misses Turner occupy rooms in my house. 

On Thursday, 7th July, I saw the prisoner at the corner 
leaving the house. The Misses Turner both spoke to me, and 
in consequence I followed the prisoner. He passed through 
Russell Square and into Bedford Place. In Bedford Place he 
tore up some paper and threw it away. I picked it up after- 
wards. I followed him to Seymour Street — a jeweller's shop, 
lie went into the shop. I went in too. When I got into the 
shop the man in the shop was looking at two rings. Prisoner 
asked " How much is it worth? " The jeweller said, “ 13s." 

Prisoner picked up the rings and went out. I followed 
him to a pawnbroker’s shop — Mr. Seymour's. Prisoner went 
in at one door and I went in at the other. I spoke to the 
assistant and then a policeman was fetched. When the police- 
man came I said to him, “ This is the man that pawned those 
two rings, and they belong to a lady." Prisoner said nothing 
in the shop. 

Afterwards I went back to my house with prisoner and the 
policeman. On the way the prisoner said in German, “ Will 
you ask the girls to forgive me. I am German, and you can 
do it, for you are German too." I said, “ I am not German." 

(Signed) Fritz Glenville. 

ALFRED BURR says— 

I live at 3 iiorsell Road, Highbury, and am employed in 
the Post Office. I know the prisoner by the name of et Dr. 
W. A. Wyatt." He has been residing with me since 20th 
August, 1903. lie had a first floor back room, furnished, 
at a rental of 5s. Gd. a week. He said he had practised in 
London at first, but had gone to Adelaide, Australia, after- 
wards. He said he had come back to London for the purpose 
of fighting an important case in the Privy Council. He had 
no visitors whatever, and no letters. 

At first the rent was paid regularly every week. After 
about 24th December he did not pay until the end of March. 
At the March quarter ho was £5 in arrear. I pressed for pay- 
ment, and he promised to pay. On the 7th April he paid £3, 
^leaving a balance of £2, which he promised to pay in a day 
or two. He paid the balance on 9th April, but afterwards got 
in arrear again. At the end of June quarter he was owing 
about £4. I was leaving town for my holiday on the 6th 
June, and while I was away I received the letter produced — 
exhibit 4 — in his handwriting. In it he promises to pay th<3 rent. 

On the 5th July prisoner paid me £2, leaving £2 odd due. 
I last saw him at the house on that day. I have seen the 

237 



Adolf Beck 


silver-handled umbrella produced in his possession. I first 
saw that at the end of March. Prisoner was missing from my 
house from the 7th July. 

Afterwards I saw something in the newspapers and com- 
municated with Inspector Kane. Afterwards Mr. Kane came 
to my house and searched the prisoner’s room, and took pos- 
session of certain things. 

(Signed) Alfred Burr. 

JOHN KANE says— 

I am an inspector of the Criminal Investigation Depart- 
ment attached to the “ D ” Division. 

In 1896 and 1904.- I was present at the Central Criminal 
Court at the trial of a man named Adolf Beck. 

On the night of 7th July last I visited the Tottenham 
Court Road police station about a quarter past eleven. I 
heard the charge which had been made against the prisoner, 
and I then went into the cell and saw him. I learnt that he 
had refused to give any account of himself. 

On the following day he was brought up at this Court and 
remanded for a week. I procured the publication of the 
paragraphs about his case in the newspapers, and as a result 
the last witness — Mr. Burr — came forward. I made a search 
at the prisoner’s room at Horsell Road on the 18th July. I 
saw some travelling trunks and a quantity of clothing there. I 
found some blank notepaper — six sheets and seven envelopes 
to match. 1 produce them — exhibit 5. They are printed 
notepaper of the Hyde Park Hotel. I produce a list of eight 
pawn tickets which I found there — exhibit 6. I found a sheet 
of notepaper with something written on it — exhibit 7. It 
was in the envelope produced — exhibit 7a. I found the 
counterpart of a first-class ticket issued in Durban in the 
name of W. Wyatt for a passage in the steamship “ Briton,” 
of the Union Castle Mail Steamship Company (produced) — 
exhibit 8. 

I also found a passengers’ list including the name of Dr. 
W. A. Wyatt — exhibit 9 (produced) ; also 38 paid cheques 
in prisoner’s handwriting on the account of W. A. Wyatt with 
the Colorado National Bank, Denver (produced) — exhibit 10; 
also a passbook and two other books relating to the same 
account (produced) — exhibit 11; also a number of letters anti 
papers and bills. They run in date from October, 1900, to 
May, 1903, and are dated from Denver, New York, and South 
and East Africa (produced) — exhibit 12. 

I .also found a catalogue of surgical instruments (pro- 
duced) — exhibit 13 — a religious book called “ Gems from 
the Talmud” (produced) — exhibit 14; also some visiting 

238 . 



Deposition of John Kane. 

cards in the name of “ Dr. W. A. Wyatt, M.D., M.C.," with 
no address. I produce one of them — exhibit 15. I also found 
the yellow metal cigarette case (produced) and two imitation 
pearl pins (produced). 

On the morning of 15th July I took from the prisoner the 
watch and chain (produced). I asked him how long he had it 
and where he bought it. He said he had had it five years, 
and purchased it in Denver, Colorado; I think he said for 25 
dollars, but I am not sure about that. He told me the case 
was 14-carat rolled gold and that the watch was manufactured 
in England. 

On the 23rd July I put the prisoner amongst other men in 
order that he might be seen by certain persons. That was 
at this Court, and I requested him to choose his own position. 
Amongst other persons he was seen by a Mr. John Ruff and a 
Mr. Albert Embler. Wtien they saw him they said in prisoner's 
presence, “ That's the man." I said, “ What man do you 
mean?" Mr. Ruff said, “ The man who lodged with me 
for about twelve months in 1870 and 1877, and whom I knew 
as Captain Weis, but I also knew him as John Smith, as he 
wrote from prison in that name to my brother-in-law for me 
to employ Mr. Ricketts to defend him." I said to prisoner, 
“Do you understand what Mr. Ruff says? He says that 
you are Captain Weis, otherwise John Smith, who lodged with 
him in 1876 and 1877." Prisoner said, “ Yes, I understand." 

After the p>ersons who had identified him left the room 
prisoner was about to make a statement when I said to him, 
“ Any voluntary statement you may desire to make shall be 
taken down in shorthand by Sergeant Draper, and I, shall read 
it to you afterwards." He then made a statement which 
was taken down in shorthand by Sergeant Draper and trans- 
cribed. I read the statement over to prisoner afterwards, 
lie said it was quite correct, and signed it. I produce it — 
exhibit 16. 

After I had read over that statement I said to prisoner, 
“ I have a gentleman here from Adelaide, South Australia, 
who has made a statement to me regarding you, extending to 
twenty-one sheets. He tells me he has been a great friend 
of yours for many years in Adelaide, and he will be called as a 
witness." Prisoner said, “Who's that?" I said, “A Mr. 
Day, a watchmaker." Prisoner said, “ He's a highly re- 
spectable man, and I'm quite sure he would not say anything 
that was not true." He then asked me if he could correct 
certain parts of the statement which he had signed. I said, 
“ Certainly. If you desire to do so, it shall be taken down 
at once." He then made the further statement which f now 
read out. It was taken down at once in longhand and read 



Adolf Beck. 

over to prisoner, and he signed it. It is attached to exhibit 

16 . 

I know as a fact that prisoner was charged at this Court in 
1894. He was remanded twice and then discharged. 

(Signed) John Kanb. 

ANDREW JOHN DAY says— 

My address is 44 Baker Street, Lloyd Square. I used to 
live in Adelaide, South Australia. I am a watchmaker. I 
lived in Australia at a place called Semaphore. I knew the 
prisoner there by the name of Augustus Wilhelm Meyer. He 
practised as a doctor and was called Dr. Meyer. He resided 
in Vienna Villa, Hutt Street, Adelaide. I made his acquaint- 
ance about 1884 or 1885. I became a very close friend of 
his. He lived in excellent style in Vienna Villa. He kept a 
carriage and a coachman, &c. I do not know whether he is a 
qualified medical man or not. He showed me a diploma, but 
I believe it is an American one of no value. 

I last saw prisoner in Australia in the winter (Australian 
summer) of 1890. lie was then leaving Australia for six 
months for Berlin. He said he was going to Berlin to study 
under Koch (the consumption profeasor) . I took over 
prisoner’s house. We corresponded by every mail while he 
was away. I wrote to him in Berlin and other places. I 
wrote to him at Westminster Palace Hotel, London. I had a 
letter from him from that address. I sent him a draft for 
£30 to that address. That was a gift to him. I have some 
of his letters now — in Australia. 

Prisoner did not come back to Australia. I left Australia 
in 1899. 

In April of this year (28th April) I happened to meet 
prisoner — at Moorgate Street, I think. He saw me first. He 
spoke to me and called me ” Brother Day.” He told me he 
had just arrived from South Africa, and had a case on before 
the Privy Council. We exchanged addresses for the purpose of 
meeting that evening. Prisoner was to call at my house. 
He did not come and he did not write. I wrote to the address 
he gave me. The letter was returned “ unknown.” 

I next saw him last Friday at this Court. I am well 
acquainted with his handwriting. Exhibits 1, 2, 3, 4, and 7 
now shown to me are in his handwriting. • 

The last letter I received from the prisoner (the one from 
the Westminster Palace Hotel) was about August, 1891. 

(Signed) A. J. Day. 

JOHN RUFF says— 

I live at 421 Caledonian Road. I am a watchmaker. 

240 



Deposition of John Ruff. 

In 1876 I was living at 33 Barnsbury Street, Islington. 
The prisoner was a lodger of mine. He occupied two furnished 
rooms — a sitting room and a bedroom, at 15s. a week rent. I 
knew him as Captain William Weis. He said he wrote for 
the newspapers, and had been in the Austrian Army. He 
lived with me until about May, 1877. Then he disappeared. 
I didn’t see him after that until 1883 or 1884. 

After he disappeared in May, 1877, I got a message in 
consequence of which I paid some money for prisoner to Mr. 
Ricketts, the solicitor. When I saw him again in 1883 or 
1884 he said he would pay me the money — £12 or £15. He 
never paid me anything after that. I did not see him again. 
He said he had “ done five years,” or something like that. 1 
next saw him last Saturday week, 23rd July, at this Court 
amongst other men. I picked him out. I am quite sure he 
is the same man. 

(Signed) John Rupp. 


r 


241 



APPENDIX X. 


LETTER from Sir FORREST FULTON, published in 
the Times , 29th August, 1904. 

The Case of Mr. Adolf Beck. 

To the Editor of the Times. 


Sir, 

It was refreshing to read the letter of Sir Douglas Straight 
in your issue of the 24th inst.., and to find some one who, 
before criticising the ruling of a judge, at least took the 
trouble to ascertain what the charge really was. 

I notice he reserves his opinion as to the accuracy of my 
ruling on the point of law. I am, however, quite sure that 
if he had tried the case he would have decided as I did, and 
that any other competent judge, who had the courage of his 
opinions, must have done the same. The question whether 
Adolf Beck was John Smith was never at any time in issue 
in the trial before me; the Treasury, represented by Mr. 
Horace Avory, threw him over from the first. 

(a) They deliberately tried the indictment for mis- 
demeanour in which the previous conviction was not charged. 

(b) Mr. Gill, for the defence, called several witnesses to 
Beck’s character, which entitled Mr. Avory at once to prove 
the previous conviction ; he did not attempt to do so or to call 
his character in question in any way. The. only conclusion 
I could draw was that the Treasury had satisfied themselves 
either that Beck was not Smith at all, or that they were not 
in a position to prove that he was. There were four further 
indictments on the file of" the Court charging four of the 
cases as felony, and in each indictment alleging the previous 
conviction. 

After Beck’s conviction on the misdemeanour indictment, 
Mr. Avory applied for a postponement of these cases to the 
next session, stating that he should advise the Public Prose- 
cutor to apply to the Attorney-General to enter a nolle prose- 
qui. Mr. Gill asked me to try one of the indictments, and I 
told him (which, of course, he well knew) that I could not 
compel Mr. Avory to try the accused a second time on the 
same facts for felony, he having already been convicted of 
misdemeanour, but that I must follow the usual practice and 

242 



Sir Forrest Fulton’s Letter. 

postpone the fo<ur felony indictments to the next session to 
give the Public Prosecutor time to make up his mind whether 
he would offer no evidence and take an acquittal, or advise 
the Attorney-General to enter a nolle prosequi . I may here 
explain that, if an acquittal were taken, the previous con- 
viction, as well as the substantive charge, would both have 
been finally wiped out, but if the course were pursued of 
entering a nolle prosequi , the previous conviction might be 
revived should the Crown at any time find themselves in 
possession of conclusive evidence in support of it. The 
proper person to decide what should be done in such a case 
was the Director of Public Prosecutions — a statutory officer 
specially appointed by Parliament for ( inter alia) such a 
purpose. In due course a nolle prosequi was entered, and 
the' indictments thus disposed of so far as the file of the Court 
was concerned. 

In acting as I did I followed the ordinary and well- 
established practice, and any other judge must have acted in 
a precisely similar manner. 

I now turn to the facts in the actual case tried before me. 

The indictment (as Sir Douglas Straight has pointed out) 
was for the misdemeanour of obtaining various articles of 
jewellery by false pretences from ten different women on ten 
different occasions between December, 1894, and November, 
1895, and contained ten separate counts. All the women 
swore most positively to the identity of Beck, and picked 
him out in every case from ten or twelve others, and, with 
two or three exceptions, they were entirely unshaken in cross- 
examination. It was not a case of witnesses seeing a person 
previously unknown to them for only a brief period of time, 
and then never seeing him again until they identified him ; 
most if not all of them saw him more than once, and for a 
long period of time, extending, in some cases, over two or 
three hours. 

The most dramatic evidence was that of Ottilie Messonier. 
She saw him twice, once for five minutes in Victoria Street, 
and a second time for three-quarters of an hour at her house. 
She swore that, as soon as she found she had been robbed 
and swindled, she at once lodged a complaint at Vine Street 
police station, gave a description of the man, and informed 
the police that he had a mark on his neck on the right side. 
In the course of her evidence before me she there and then 
pointed out the mark she had referred to, to the jury, who 
examined it for themselves. It was a mole. This witness 
saw the Accused in Victoria Street on 16th December, 18,95, 
at once identified him, and gave him into custody, alleging 

that he tried hard to get away, calling her “ a dirty 

243 



Adolf Beck 


,” but that she followed him and handed him over to 

Pol ice- Constable Edwards, 419 A Division. 

Mary Harvey, servant to Ottilie Messonier, also picked 
out Beck as the man who visited her mistress on 27th Novem- 
ber, 1895, and remained about one hour. 

To show motive, the Crown presented a considerable body 
of evidence to prove that Beck was in needy circumstances 
at the time, and glad to borrow 5s. It was further proved that 
Beck was in the habit of occasionally frequenting the smoking- 
room of the Grand Hotel, and would thus have access to the 
hotel notepaper, and that the Grand Hotels Company, 
Limited, took over the Hotel Victoria on 1st January, 1895. 
Several of the documents in the case bore the impress of the 
Victoria Hotel. Lastly, Mr. Gurrin was called and gave 
elaborate evidence, swearing that, to the best of his belief, 
all the documents in the case were in the handwriting (dis- 
guised) of the prisoner, he having, of course, compared them 
with documents in his (Beck's) admitted handwriting. It 
was at this point that Mr. Gill desired to cross-examine Mr. 
Gurrin so as to raise the issue that, the writing in the Smith 
case being the same as the writing in Beck's case, according 
to Mr. Gurrin's evidence before the magistrate, the man who 
committed the one crime must have committed the other. 

From Mr. Gill's point of view, Mr. Gurrin's evidence was 
perfectly worthless as establishing the fact that the same man 
must have committed the crime of 1876 and the crime of 
1894. If Mr. Gill was right that the same man must have 
committed both crimes, and Beck was not that man. Beck 
was ex hypothesi innocent; yet Gurrin had sworn to the best 
of his belief, having Beck's admitted writing before him, 
that all the documents in the case before me were in Beck's 
handwriting. If he was wrong in this, of what value was 
his evidence as establishing in whose handwriting the Smith 
documents were? I may here add that in my summing up I 
"specially cautioned the jury against relying too much on the 
expert evidence as to handwriting. I carefully explained to 
them that it only amounted to an opinion, and that they 
ought to exercise their own independent judgment on the 
matter ; and to enable them to do so I took care that the 
documents should be handed to them one by one as they were 
referred to by Mr. Gurrin. It was never suggested that Beck 
had any alibi as to any of the ten charges laid against him 
in the indictment which I tried, and I thought that the defence 
was seeking to draw the jury away from the real issue — 
viz ; , whether all or any of the ten charges laid in the indict- 
ment were proved — by calling an alibi as to something not 
in issue before them — viz., whether Beck had been convicted 
of felony as John Smith in 1876. 

244 * 



Sir Forrest Fulton’s Letter. 

I considered this issue was wholly immaterial, and, in 
accordance with the well-known rule of law, I excluded the 
evidence. It only could be material on the assumption that 
the man who committed the one crime must have committed 
the other, and upon this point I was of opinion there was no 
sort of proof before me. 

Again, it is said the methods of Smith in 1876 were the 
same as the methods in the case before the jury; therefore, 
the man must have been the same. 

I am quite unable to follow this argument ; in my experi- 
ence of thirty-two years, the methods of criminals constantly 
are the same; and, having regard to the fact that eighteen 
years elapsed between the commission of the one crime and 
the commission of the other, the probabilities seemed to me 
then, and seem to me now, all the other way. 

In conclusion, I only desire to add that I do not think 
any one who was present would venture to say that the 
accused did not have a perfectly fair trial ; it extended over 
nearly two days, and I summed up the case with the greatest 
care for nearly two hours. I explained to the jury that the 
responsibility rested with them, and with them alone; that 
they were to exercise their own unbiased judgments on the 
evidence as to the prisoner's identity, and I have no doubt 
at all that I told the jury in this case, as I certainly have 
done in scores of similar cases since, that if they thought 
the case was not proved, the prisoner was entitled to be 
acquitted, and that it was better that a thousand guilty men 
should escape than that one innocent man should be con- 
victed ; and, further, that every count was a separate indict- 
ment, and that they could convict on all, or acquit on all, 
or convict on some and acquit on others. Th& jury considered 
their verdict for some time, and then convicted on ail the 
counts. I entirely concurred in their verdict; and I am 
quite sure that any one who will take the trouble to read the 
very full shorthand report of the trial contained in our Session 
Papers will come to the same conclusion, and say that on 
the evidence before them no other course was possibly open 
to them. 

Eight years pass away, and Beck is again arrested for 
similar frauds, again committed for trial, again tried (this 
time before Mr. Justice Grantham), and again convicted. 

On this trial Beck gave evidence on his own behalf, which 
in 1894, in the trial before me, the then state of the law did 
not permit him to do; it made no difference, the result was 
the same. 

I am informed Mr. Justice Grantham has stated to a 
correspondent that he concurred with the jury in their ver- 

245 



Adolf Beck. 

diet; I have carefully read the report of this case in the 
Session Papers ; it was a strong case, but the strength of it 
was not nearly so great as in the trial before me in 1894. 

No one more deeply deplores the wrongful conviction of 
A. Beck than I do; no one more deeply sympathises with him 
in his terrible misfortune and in his awful sufferings; but 
it is an odd thing to try and remedy one injustice by com- 
mitting another. 

Accused persons in this country are convicted on indict- 
ment, not by judges, but by juries; and under no system of 
jurisprudence can it ever be possible to prevent judges and 
juries alike being deceived by reckless or perjured testimony. 

No one would welcome more heartily than I should the 
establishment of a strong Court of Criminal Appeal, but I 
fear even then cases of miscarriage of justice would from 
time to time arise; but I agree with Sir Harry Poland that 
they are very rare. 

I am, Sir, yours faithfully, 

Forrest Fulton. 

Sheringham, 27th August, 1904. 


246 



APPENDIX XI. 


EXTRACTS FROM THE REPORT BY COMMITTEE OF 

INQUIRY. 

To the Right Honourable A. Akers Douglas, M.P., 

One of His Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State, 
&c., &c. , &c. 


Sir, 

We have the honour to state that we have completed 
the inquiry directed by our warrant and beg to submit our 
report. 

We construed our mandate as giving us the largest possible 
discretion in fixing tile limits of our inquiry. 

The following is a shoit outline of the facts, to some of 
which it will be necessary to refer in more detail hereafter. 

In 1877 a man who called himself John Smith was con- 
victed at the Old Bailey for frauds on women of loose character, 
whereby he had obtained from them articles of jewellery or 
money. His methods were to introduce himself as a nobleman 
of wealth, with an establishment in St. John’s Wood, and 
offer the position of mistress to his victim. He would then 
suggest that she would require a new outfit, write out an 
order to some well-known tradesmen at whose shops she waa 
to purchase what was required, and give her a cheque on a 
non-existent bank. He would then on some pretext borrow 
some article of jewellery or money, with which he decamped. 
The name under which he perpetrated these frauds was Loud 
Willoughby. John Smith was sentenced to five years’ penal 
servitude; he continued in prison till April, 1881, when he 
was released on licence. 

Towards the end of 1894 the police began to receive com- 
plaints from women, mostly of loose character, that they had 
been defrauded by a man who gave himself out as Lord 
Wilton or Lord Winton de Willoughby, with an establishment 
in St. John’s Wood. His methods were precisely similar to 
those which had been deposed to in the Smith case. # The 
description given by these women of the man who had defrauded 
them varied considerably, but the cheques appeared to be all 

247 



Adolf Beck. 

in the same handwriting.* The efforts of the police to find 
the culprit had been unsuccessful, and their attention was first 
drawn to Mr. Beck, whose case is the subject of this inquiry, 
on the 16th December, 1895. On the afternoon of that day 
Ottilie Meissonier, a woman who had been defrauded in the 
previous month, happened to meet Mr. Beck in Victoria Street 
and charged him with having robbed her. He indignantly 
protested that he had never seen her before. She followed 
him along the street till they met a policeman, to whom both 
appealed; and, as the woman persisted in her charge, they 
were taken by the policeman to the station, where a charge was 
entered against Mr. Beck. This was the first intervention 
of the police in the Beck case. A large number of Hie women 
who had complained to the police were then in the ordinary 
way given opportunities of seeing Mr. Beck, with a view to 
ascertain whether they could identify him as the man who had 
defrauded them. Of these, several with varying degrees of 
confidence affirmed that he was the man, and gave evidence to 
that effect before Mr. Sheil at the Westminster Police Court. 
After publicity had been given to the case by the reports of 
the proceedings, a gentleman who had been interested in the 
Smith case, and was entirely unconnected with the police, 
informed them that Mr. Beck was, no doubt, the ex-convict 
Smith. Upon that information Spurrell, an ex-police -con- 
stable, who had arrested Smith in 1877, was found. He 
swore positively that Mr. Beck Avas Smith, and was confirmed 
in his opinion by another officer wffio had been concerned in 
the Smith case. Mr. Beck Avas finally committed for trial 
on all the charges brought against him. 

His case came on for trial before Sir Forrest Fulton, then 
Common Serjeant, at the Old Bailey, in March, 1896, when 
he w r as convicted and sentenced to seven years' penal servitude. 
He was tried on an indictment for misdemeanour only ; there 
were also four felony indictments on the file in which it was 
charged that he had been convicted in 1877 in the name of 
Smith, but these were postponed till the next session, when a 
nolle prosequi was entered. The circumstances of his trial 
must be considered in detail later on. Suffice it to say here 
that his defence was that the real culprit was the man who had 
been convicted in 1877, and that he was not that man. 

He was sent to Chelmsford Prison and ultimately to Port* 
land, and in both prisons was classed and treated as a prisoner 

* Facsimiles of the incriminating documents of 1877 and 1896 are 
printed at the end of the Appendix to the Report. It is obvious that 
they tfre all in the same handwriting ; but whereas the cheques of ^877 
are clearly signed “Willoughby,” the signature on the 1896 documents 
is scarcely decipherable. 

248 



Report by Committee of Inquiry. 

who had been previously convicted and wore a dress bearing 
marks indicative of that fact. 

Immediately after his conviction he petitioned the Home 
Office on the ground that the case was one of mistaken identity, 
and that there had been a mistrial. 

He presented several subsequent petitions on the same 
grounds, to all of which he received a reply refusing relief, until 
in May, 1898, his solicitor addressed another demand to the 
Home Office for a reopening of the case. Inquiries instituted 
for the first time by the Home Office, in consequence of this 
letter, elicited the fact that in 1879 Smith had, under special 
circumstances, been examined at Portland by the prison doctor, 
who had reported in writing to the governor that he had under- 
gone the rite of circumcision. Orders were accordingly 
given to have Beck examined, to ascertain whether he was 
circumcised. It was found that he was not. On this new 
fact the Home Office, for the first time, consulted the Common 
Serjeant on the case. We shall deal in detail hereafter with 
the circumstances of this consultation, and the materials sub- 
mitted to the learned judge. As the result, the Home Office 
came to the conclusion that they ought not to interfere in the 
case, except by ordering that Mr. Beck should be allotted a 
new number and letter not indicating a previous conviction. 

The fact that Smith had been circumcised, though known to 
the prison authorities in 1879, and thus communicated by them 
to the Home Office in 1898, never became known to the Public 
Prosecutor or to the police until July of the year 1904, 
when, as will appear hereafter, Smith again fell into the custody 
of the law. Meanwhile, in July, 1901, Mr. Beck, having 
served his time, was released on licence. In April, 1904 — 
nearly three years after he had been released — Mr. Beck was 
again arrested on a charge similar to those on which he had 
been previously convicted. He was tried before Mr. Justice 
Grantham, and again convicted; and, as he could not deny 
that he had been convicted in 1896, was treated as having 
pleaded guilty to a charge averring a previous conviction. 
The learned judge, however, felt misgivings as to his case, and 
postponed sentence till the next session; and though, after 
making inquiries of the police and the medical officer of the 
jail where Mr. Beck was incarcerated, he could find no solid 
ground for further withholding sentence, none was in fact 
pronounced, as in the meantime the arrest of the ex-convict 
Smith on similar charges, based on acts committed while Mr. 
Beck was in custody, led to further inquiries, and the conse- 
quent release and pardon of Mr. Beck in respect of both the 
1896 and 1004 convictions. It should here be mentioned that 
the Home Office were not aware that Mr. Beck had been arrested 

249 



Adolf Beck. 

and tried a second time until after Smith had been taken into 
custody. 

The fact that an innocent man could be not once only, but 
twice convicted, and that an application to the Home Office 
upon the first of such convictions could lead to i fo redress, 
naturally created grave misgivings in the public mind as to 
the nature and working of our system of criminal justice. Hence 
the appointment of this Committee. 

In view of this deplorable failure of justice, we have 
addressed ourselves to an examination of all the material stages 
in the history of the case in order to discover, if possible, the 
cause, not only of the original miscarriage at the first trial, 
but also of the subsequent failure of the reviewing authority 
to detect the flaw and redress the wrong. This latter inquiry 
seemed to us to be perhaps the more important of the two, 
since judges, however able and experienced, are fallible, and 
evidence as to identity based on personal impressions, however 
bona fide , is perhaps of all classes of evidence the least to be 
relied upon, and therefore, unless supported by other facts, an 
unsafe basis for the verdict of a jury. These elements of 
uncertainty cannot be eliminated from any system of juris- 
prudence. But it ought to be possible, not to say reasonably 
certain, that a miscarriage arising in the first instance from 
one or both of these causes should be capable of redress by the 
reviewing authority. Does our system provide with reason- 
able certainty for the detection and redress of miscarriage aris- 
ing from either or loth of such grounds? 

The next stage in the investigation would be the circum- 
stances antecedent to the second trial of Mr. Beck, and lastly 
the second trial itself. 

Before statjng the result of our inquiries as to each of the 
above stages it is desirable to make one or two general 
observations. 

Broadly speaking, the terrible calamity which overtook the 
victim in this qase was due to mistaken identity. He was 
believed by the prosecution to be Smith, the ex-convict. When 
convicted he was assigned by the prison authorities the letter 
and number by which Smith had been designated; and it was 
not until the re-arrest of Smith after Mr. Beck's second convic- 
tion that it became known to the police, the Public Prosecutor, 
the judges, or any one concerned in the case, that there was 
in existence evidence conclusively negativing the identity of 
Smith and Mr. Beck. And yet this evidence had been in 
existence since 1879. Although, therefore, the system of taking 
physical identification marks which prevailed at the time of 
Smith's incarceration was very loose and inadequate, and pre- 
sented an avoidable difficulty, which has been since corrected, 

250 .* 



Report by Committee of Inquiry. 

in establishing the identity or non-identity of prisoners, the 
failure to dissever the identity of Smith from that of Mr. Beck 
was not due to the defect of the then system. Though that 
system did not provide for noting the particular mark in ques- 
tion, it so happened that, as it were by an accident, the parti- 
cular mark was discovered anti noted ; and but for the neglect 
or omission of the then governor, it would have been placed 
with the other identification marks on the prisoner’s “ descrip- 
tion,” of which it would then have formed part, and as such 
would have been brought to the attention of persons who applied 
for and received, or ought to have received, copies of his 
“ description.” This point will be more fully dealt with 
later on. 

But a still stranger fact in this strange case, at first sight 
at all events, is this. Though mistaken identity was the root 
of all Mr. Beck’s misfortunes, though it had never occurred 
to any one concerned in the prosecution that he was any other 
person than Smith, yet when it had been conclusively proved 
to the Home Office in 1898 as the result of their inquiries 
addressed to the prison authorities that Mr. Beck was not 
Smith, he was nevertheless allowed to serve out his term and 
no answer was given to his petition, except that he was accorded 
a new number and the mark indicating a previous conviction 
was withdrawn. And to add one new element to this extra- 
ordinary history, the fact thus discovered by the Home Office 
was never communicated by them to the Public Prosecutor or 
the police, an omission which seriously affected their action on 
the second arrest and trial. 

In tracing the history of the case through its several stages, 
we have thought it necessary to scrutinise carefully the action 
of the police, the prison authorities, and the Public Prosecutor, 
to examine critically the circumstances of the trial itself, both 
on the first and second occasion, and, lastly, to consider the 
action of the Home Office. 

To begin, then, with the conduct of th^ police. Some 
vague charges were suggested rather than asserted against them 
by Mr. Beck. We have done our best by all means at our 
disposal to search for any evidence in support of such sugges- 
tions, and have wholly failed to find it. The first suggestion 
was that the police, the prosecutor, and, among others, his 
Own solicitor were in league against him. It was indeed natural, 
and perhaps inevitable, that, having gone through such experi- 
ences as he had, Mr. Beck should seek an explanation in the 
theory of a conspiracy. The mistake from his point of view 
seemed too gigantic to be explicable on any other hypothesis. 
We had all the officers before us who had to do with his arrest 
and his identification, as well as Mr. Dutton^, This solicitor, 

251 



Adolf Beck. 

<&■ 

who confirmed their statements that the process of identifica- 
tion was quite fairly conducted. The suggestion that the 
police had anything to do with bringing about his first arrest 
is negatived by the evidence, which shows that though the 
police were looking for the criminal they had failed to find 
him, and that his first arrest was brought about on the personal 
initiative of the woman Meissonier under the circumstances 
above stated. 

coupled with the entire absence of any probable motive for 
such suggested action on the part of the police, the evidence 
of the men themselves and their superior officers satisfied us 
that their conduct throughout was dictated by nothing but a 
sense of duty, and was perfectly correct. It requires no 
sinister hypothesis to explain the unreliability of evidence of 
identity based on personal impressions, and it would seem that 
there was some slight resemblance in fact between Mr. Beck 
and Smith. 

It is due also to the police to point out that, after Smith’s 
arrest in the present year, Mr. Beck owed his almost immedi- 
ate release to the intervention of an intelligent police officer. 

Next, as to the part played by the Public Prosecutor and 
his subordinate officer, Mr. Sims, in getting up the case for 
the Crown. 

The Public Prosecutor, now Lord Desart, was not intro- 
duced into the matter until the 26th December, 1895, after 
the prisoner had appeared before the magistrate and been 
twice remanded. From that point onwards the case was 
managed by Mr. Sims, under the supervision of the Public 
Prosecutor. A few days after Mr. Beck’s arrest, information 
had been received by the police, as already stated, that the 
prisoner was the ex-convict Smith. This information was 
communicated by the police to Mr. Sims, who thereupon, 
under the direction of Lord Desart, took steps to test the 
identity of Smith with Mr. Beck by applying in the proper 
quarter for the identification marks of Smith, and also for 
those of Mr. Beck. The marks of Smith were received in due 
course, but Mr. Sims stated that his recollection was that he 
did not receive those of Mr. Beck. They had, however, in 
consequence of Mr. Sims’ application, been obtained by the 
police on the 15th January, 1896, from the deputy governor of 
Holloway Prison, where Mr. Beck was then confined. In- 
spector Froest, who received them, was under the impression 
that, they had been sent on. However this may be, Mr. Sims 
certainly made no further application for them, and his 
explanation of his inaction is that about the time when he . 
ought to have received therrv a witness was found who could 
identify Mr. Beck as Smith,' in the person of Spurrell, an 

262 v 



Report by Committee of Inquiry. 

ex-constable, who had had charge of the case against Smith, 
and whose evidence, together with that of another officer who 
had taken part in the case, was sufficient prima facie evidence 
of Mr. Beck's identity with Smith. Having regard to the 
fact that neither Spurred nor the other witness had seen Smith 
for nineteen years, we think their evidence ought to have been 
tested by comparing it with any available records of the two 
men. The neglect to take this course tends to create an im- 
pression — perhaps an unwarranted one — that identification 
marks are used only to secure the conviction, and not to 
establish the innocence of a prisoner. We mention these 
facts in detail because of another incident in the case. In 
the early stage of the proceedings Inspector Waldock was in 
charge of the case. It so happened that he alone of the police 
force, so far as we know, happened to have had a previous 
acquaintance with Mr. Beck, and, as he told us himself, could 
not, and did not, believe in his guilt till after his conviction. 
Before he had ceased to have charge of the case, and while 
Mr. Beck was in custody, but after the information above 
referred to connecting Mr. Beck with Smith had been given 
to the police, he caused Mr. Beck to be stripped for the pur- 
pose. as be says, of discovering whether he could find on 
Mr. Beck the marks specified in Smith's <c description," which 
had been furnished to him. This document, which had 
attached to it a photograph of Smith, did not, as above stated, 
record the fact of circumcision. Waldock could see no like- 
ness between Mr. Beck and the photograph, and for his own 
satisfaction, without any order from his superiors, made 
the examination, with the result that he could not find on Mr. 
Beck the corresponding marks. The examination was, as 
above stated, unauthorised, and no written report upon it 
was made by Waldock to his superior officer, to whom in 
ordinary course he would have been bound to report it. He 
told us, however, that be did report the result verbally to Mr. 
Sims. Mr. Sims, though he threw no doubt upon Waldock's 
veracity, was quite positive that no such communication had 
been made to him. Shortly afterwards another officer, at 
the instance of the Public Prosecutor, acting through Mr. 
Sims, was substituted for Waldock in the conduct of the case. 
Waldock appeared to us to be a perfectly honest and respect- 
able witness, and we cannot think that he stated anything 
which he did not believe to be true. We state these facts in 
detail because they are, in our opinion, the foundation for 
the only plausible allegation of unfair conduct on the part 
of the -prosecution in this case. If Mr. Sims' recollection is 
right, the charge, of course, falls to the ground. If his recol- 
lection is wrong, and we must confess that/ we incline to the 

253 



Adolf Beck 


latter view, his conduct was nevertheless, in our view (to put 
it at the worst) quite consistent with a perfectly honest inten- 
tion to bring together the necessary materials on which the 
prosecution was to be based. The gist of the suggestion made 
against him is that, having at an early stage of the proceed- 
ings received information showing that there were strong 
grounds for believing that Mr. Beck was not Smith, he kept 
it back and conducted the case throughout on the footing that 
they were one and the same person. The facts, however, are 
susceptible of another explanation. With his great experience 
of the untrustworthy character of these “ descriptions/ ' he 
might well suppose that no weight could be attached to the 
fact that Waldock had failed to find on Mr. Beck all the 
marks specified in Smith's “ description." He may also have 
thought that Waldock’s was a biased opinion, and it was 
clearly desirable that the conduct of the case should be con- 
fided to a perfectly neutral officer. 

The only other suggestion adverse to the conduct of the 
prosecution in the preliminary stages of the case is that put for- 
ward by Mr. Beck's solicitor, Mr. Dutton, who complained that 
he had not been met either by the Public Prosecutor or the 
police in a sufficiently generous manner, and that unnecessary 
difficulties were thrown in his way. As no point bearing on the 
conduct of the prosecution in this unhappy case seemed in 
the peculiar circumstances too small to investigate, we care- 
fully considered it, and, without discussing whether Mr. Sims' 
attitude might not have been more conciliatory, or whether 
Dr. (now Sir Robert) Anderson might not have reasonably 
given to Mr. Dutton the inspection of Smith's record for which 
he asked in his letter of the 6th February, 1896; we are of 
opinion that Mr. Beck's defence was not in this way pre- 
judiced during the proceedings antecedent to the trial. 

We now come to the action of the prison authorities during 
the same period. After his conviction in 1877, John Smith 
was examined for the purpose of ascertaining, for future 
identification, what personal marks he bore, and a record 
of the marks then observed was made. He was not then 
examined for marks of circumcision; examinations with that 
particular object were most unusual, and, as a fact, John 
Smith at that time declared himself a Protestant. In 1879 
John Smith applied to the governor of the prison in which hd 
was confined to be entered on the prison records as a Jew. 
He was thereupon examined by the prison doctor, who reported 
in writing that Smith had been circumcised. Owing, appar- 
ently, to the negligence or omission of the governor *of the. 
prison, who has since died, the fact that Smith was circum- 
cised was not entered in his record of marks. The doctor's 

254 



Report by Committee of Inquiry. 

report was, however, placed on the file with the other papers 
relating to the prisoner. John Smith continued in prison 
till 1881, when he was released on licence. Before his release 
he was again examined in the ordinary course for personal 
marks, but not for marks of circumcision, and his record of 
marks on release was drawn up and issued to the police. In 
that record of 1881 it was not mentioned that he had been 
circumcised. The result was that neither his record of marks 
of 1877 nor his record of marks of 1881 showed that Smith 
had been circumcised. Consequently, when, on the demand 
of the Public Prosecutor in January, 1896, the “ identifica- 
tion marks ” of Smith were obtained from the police, these 
contained no allusion to the fact of circumcision. This 
omission, whether due to defect of system or to negligence on 
the part of an individual, was, in our opinion, the primary 
cause of the miscarriage of justice in this case. Had the 
fact of Smith’s circumcision been ascertained at that stage 
of the case, in the competent hands of the Public Prosecutor, 
it must have radically altered its whole subsequent history, if, 
indeed, it had not brought it to a summary conclusion. There 
was, to be sure, the direct evidence of the women who had 
identified Mr. Beck, but there was simultaneous and no less 
cogent evidence that persons who had known Smith well, viz., 
the two policemen, Spurred and another, could, and did, 
confound Mr. Beck with him. It seems to us that this fact 
alone, when the entire onus is on the Crown, might have of 
itself sufficed to show that the prisoner could not be safely 
convicted on evidence of identity resting on personal impres- 
sions only. But when the extraordinary similarity in detail 
of the methods employed, coupled with the fact that the hand- 
writing was obviously identical, was thrown into the scale, 
the evidence, in our judgment, would have so preponderated 
in favour of innocence that the Crown would in all proba- 
bility have declined to pursue the case. Even if the case had 
gone to trial, the disturbing factor of the previous conviction 
which led to so much unhappy confusion would have been 
wholly eliminated. There can bo no doubt, therefore, of the 
importance of this circumstance. We were told by Major 
Clayton, who represented the prison authorities, that there 
was no rule obliging the governors of prisons to add such a 
detail to the prisoner’s identification marks, but that he 
thought it only reasonable that it should be added when dis- 
covered. It seems that the ordinary process of examination 
for physical marks (for reasons which will be easily under- 
stood) did not extend to such a detail. The introduction of 
the finger-print system has now placed at the disposal of the 
authorities a means of identification which fs certainly more 
satisfactory, and is alleged to be conclusive. 


255 



Adolf Beck. 


We now came to a very anxious and difficult part of our 
inquiry, viz., an examination and criticism of what took place 
at the trial itself. We are not a judicial tribunal, much 
less a Court of Criminal Appeal, and have no authority to 
pronounce judgment upon the ruling of the learned and ex- 
perienced judge who presided at the trial. We caimot, how- 
ever, execute our commission in this case without expressing, 
for what it is worth, an opinion upon it. To make this 
opinion of any value whatever, we must place ourselves in 
the position of the learned judge at the trial, wholly dis- 
engaged from all impressions based on after-acquired know- 
ledge. This is difficult, perhaps impossible, but we are bound 
to attempt it. 

Mr. Beck was tried for the misdemeanour of obtaining 
money or jewellery by false pretences ; but not on any of the 
indictments in which the previous conviction of 1877 was 
charged. There was 11 b doubt whatever that the complainants 
had been robbed. The single issue of the case was one of 
identity, viz., was Mr. Beck the man? 

A witness was called by the Crown, who gave expert evi- 
dence to the effect that the incriminating documents in the 
case were in Mr. Beck’s handwriting, disguised, no doubt, but 
his. Mr. Gill, for the defence, having before him the deposi- 
tion of this witness at the Police Court, which would be also 
before the judge — we will quote here from the report itself — 
“ was proceeding to cross-examine as to the handwriting of 
pertain other documents, exhibits in the case of a man named 
Smith, tried in 1877. Mr. Avory objected to the witness 
being cross-examined with a view of raising the question 
whether the prisoner was the person convicted in 1877 of an 
offence similar to that charged in the indictment; that was 
a collateral issue, and should not be inquired into until after 
the jury had returned their verdict, lest it should afterwards 
be said that the prisoner had been improperly convicted. Mr. 
Gill urged that the question was directly in issue, and that he 
was entitled to raise it, as his case on behalf of the prisoner 
was, that the man who was convicted in 1877 was the man 
who had been committing these frauds, and that the prisoner 
had been mistaken for that man. lie desired to show, by 
cross-examination, that the writing of the man convicted in 
1877 was the same as that of the exhibits in the present 
case. Mr. Gurrin stated that the exhibits in the case of 
Smith were examined by him some time after he had made 
his report; there was a reference in his report, produced at the 
Police Court, to the exhibits in that case. Mr. Avory ob- 
jected to the witness being asked whether those exhibits were 
in the same writing as . the lists in the present case. Mr. 

256 



Report by Committee of Inquiry. 

Gill further contended that upon the question of the value of 
the witness's opinion he was entitled to have all the docu- 
ments produced which had been submitted to him. The 
Common Serjeant ruled that the question whether the pri- 
soner was or was not the man convicted in 1877 was not ad- 
missible, upon the ground that it related to another and 
distinct issue, and one calculated to mislead the jury. If 
witnesses were called to character, Mr. Avory might cross- 
examine them as to the prisoner's previous character ; or he 
might choose not to have the issue confused by the introduc- 
tion of that matter." 

The result was that Mr. Avory’ s objection was upheld, 
and the evidence to show that the documents in the Smith 
case were in the same handwriting as those in the Beck case 
then under trial, and that Mr. Beck was not the man convicted 
in 1877 was excluded. By this ruling the defence on which 
Mr. Gill relied was undoubtedly taken away from him. Ilis 
case was that a comparison of the incriminating documents of 
1877 and 1806 would show conclusively that they were the 
work of the same man, and that the criminal of 1877 must, 
therefore, necessarily be the criminal of 1896; and he had 
abundant evidence to prove that Mr. Beck could not have 
been the criminal of 1877 because in that year and for some 
years afterwards he was in South America. Mr. Gill, indeed, 
as a matter of fact, did call witnesses to character from whom 
he elicited the fact that they had known Mr. Beck in Peru 
during the period in question, but in face of the judge’s ruling 
this evidence did not enable him to lay the real issue before* 
the jury. The jury, therefore, never had any opportunity of 
considering the case for the prisoner based on the inference, 
to be drawn from the identity of handwriting and similarity 
of methods, that all the crimes were committed by one person, 
followed by proof that Mr. Beck was not that person, since 
being out of England ho could not have committed the crimes 
for which Smith had been convicted in 1877. If Mr. Beck 
was entitled to the verdict of the jury on these points he has 
never had it. He was convicted on evidence from which 
everything that told, or might bo thought to tell, in his favour 
was excluded. His case was never tried. 

Two questions therefore arise. Was the learned judge’s 
filing right? Did it cany with it these consequences? In 
our opinion, the ruling cannot be supported, and the con- 
sequences named ensued. 

No doubt the question, “ Has the prisoner been previously 
convicted? ’’ was not in issue on the indictment on \yhich 
he was being tried, and the learned judge was perfectly right 
in asserting the principle that on a criminal trial the true 

s ■ - 257 



Adolf Beck. 


issue must not bo encumbered by the introduction of matter 
relevant only to a collateral issue. And had the evidence, 
involving a reference to a previous conviction, been tendered 
by the prosecution, and had the objection come from the 
prisoner it must have been properly upheld. The statutory 
inhibition debarring the prosecution in certain cases from 
referring to a previous conviction does not debar the pri- 
soner from introducing it, if it is in any way material to his 
defence. These remarks have special application to the parti- 
cular collateral issue of previous conviction which we are deal- 
ing with in this case, but there is a broader principle under- 
lying the whole question, namely, that evidence adduced by 
the prisoner relevant to his defence cannot be excluded, al- 
though it be relevant also to a collateral issue which is not 
under trial. The existence of another charge, in respect of 
which he was not being tried, could not in any way narrow 
his right to give all evidence relevant to his defence. In 
our opinion the only ground on which the evidence tendered 
by Mr. Gill could have been excluded would have been that 
it was not relevant to the main issue. There can be no doubt 
whatever that in this case it was relevant to the main issue. 
It was the first step in a train of reasoning leading to the 
conclusion that Mr. Beck was not the man. Two crimes were 
committed by one and the same man. Mr. Beck could not 
have committed the first. Therefore he did not commit the 
second. 

Upon the second question suggested, “ Did the ruling carry 
with it as a consequence the mistrial as above described? ” 
we cannot doubt that it did. 

Mr. Gill raised his point in cross-examination, which was 
the first occasion upon which technically he was entitled and 
bound to raise it, and having got a ruling excluding the evi- 
dence which he sought to elicit he could not in the teeth 
of the judge’s decision have tendered directly evidence to the 
same effect, even if he had been prepared to accept the 
consequences of calling a witness for the Crown as his own 
witness. 

It seems to us that the learned judge did not fully 
appreciate the ground on which Mr. Gill claimed the right to 
put the question, and treated the sound rule as to evidence on 
collateral issues as applicable to the special circumstances of 
this case, which, with the greatest deference to the learned 
judge, for the reasons above given, we venture to think it was 
not. 7 

V?e are quite satisfied that there was nothing whatever to 
complain of in the conduct of the trial by the prosecution. Mr. 
Avory, as counsel for the Crown, in the view of the case which 

258 * 



Report by Committee of Inquiry. 

he held, was perfectly justified in taking the objection, as 
well as in every step he took in the conduct of the prosecution, 
lie has given his reasons in his evidence, and it would be 
quite superfluous to refer to them here. 

It is only necessary to analyse the true bearing of the issue 
of previous conviction on the case to see that the course taken 
by the Crown in proceeding on the misdemeanour indictment , 
instead of on that which charged a previous conviction, was 
the most considerate to the prisoner and that it could have 
no possible effect in narrowing the area of his defence. The 
complaints urged as to this point have, in our opinion, no 
shadow of foundation. 

The suggestion made that the prosecution, the judge, or the 
officials of the Central Criminal Court were responsible for the 
fact that Mr. Beck was treated in prison as a person previously 
convicted is also unfounded. The responsibility for this rests 
exclusively with the prison authorities. 

Reserving the action of the Home Office for consideration 
hereafter, the next stage in the investigation is the period 
antecedent to the second trial. Here, again, we are of opinion 
that there is no foundation for any complaint against the police 
or the Public Prosecutor, who are the only persons concerned 
in this part of the case. It is true that on this occasion the 
police had themselves sought out Mr. Beck as the possible 
culprit and devised the means by which the woman who had 
complained should meet and identify him. Inspector Ward 
was the officer engaged in this stage of the case, and there is not 
the slightest ground for supposing that there is anything to 
complain of in his conduct. It was natural and reasonable after 
the result of the previous trial that Mr. Beck should be suspected 
and an opportunity provided for the witness to see him, but 
nothing unfair was done then or upon the identifications which 
followed. 

The next stage is the trial before Mr. Justice Grantham, 
in which we include the antecedent applications for postpone- 
ment. Here again misfortune pursued Mr. Beck. He had 
intended to raise the same defence which he had attempted 
unsuccessfully to put forward at the first trial. The solicitor 
who was preparing his defence was unwilling to proceed further 
without funds which Mr. Beck could not provide, and threw 
u|> the case. Shortly before this, however, as the trial was 
approaching, he instructed counsel on Mr. Beck’s behalf to 
npply to the Recorder for a postponement in order to enable 
him to bring over witnesses from Sweden to support his alibi, 
and the application was granted. On the following day, how- 
ever, the Crown, on an affidavit, stating that some of their 
materia^ witnesses were about to leave England, applied to 



Adolf Beck. 


have the case taken at the then session, and thereupon the 
Recorder acceded to this application and rescinded his order 
postponing the trial. The result was that Mr. Beck was not 
in a. position to raise or prove his defence, a result which 
probably was not present to the mind of the Recorder when he 
directed that the trial should proceed in the ordinary course. 

When the case came on the learned counsel who defended 
Mr. Beck, being ignorant of the fact that the non -identity of 
Smith and* Mr. Beck had been conclusively established, and 
never having seen the original documents in Smith’s case, and 
having no evidence to show their identity in all respects with 
those on which the ease against Beck was founded, and being 
further hampered by a previous conviction, was naturally unable 
to meet the case for the prosecution, and the prisoner was con- 
victed. He was not oven in a position apparently to inform 
the judge of the circumstances under which the trial had been 
forced on, otherwise that learned judge would infallibly have 
taken steps to remedy the evil, and Mr. Beck would in all 
probability have been spared the ignominy of a second convic- 
tion. Mr. Justice Grantham has himself explained at length 
his misgivings in the matter, and the efforts he made to sift 
the case to the bottom. 

No exception can be taken to anything that took place at 
this trial. The miscarriage was due to the causes we have 
stated. But it is a formidable fact that an innocent man was 
convicted through the ignorance of the police and the Public 
Prosecutor of a material fact which was in the possession of the 
prison authorities and the Home Office. Possibly the solicitor 
who befriended Mr. Beck at the last moment and instructed 
counsel might, have got on the track of this information had Mr. 
Beck informed him of his application to the Home Office which, 
resulted in his number and mark indicative of a previous con- 
viction being changed ; but he does not appear to have done so. 

We have now to deal with that part of the inquiry which 
relates to the conduct of the Home Office. 

Here, again, as pointed out by Sir Kenelm Digby, we 
must disengage our minds absolutely from all impressions 
derived from after acquired knowledge. We must bear in 
mind also that matters were in a totally different position 
when the case came before the Home Office from that in which 
they stood at the time of the trial. The case had bee«i 
tried and the judge had expressed a strong opinion in pronounc- 
ing sentence that the evidence was overwhelming. In view of 
the opinion expressed by the judge, coupled with the fact that 
the petitions relied only on the same evidence as had been 
tendered and rejected at the trial, a negative answer was re- 
turned to the earlier petitions. The judge was not consulted 

260 * 



Report by Committee of Inquiry. 

because it was apparent on the face of the report that he had 
himself dealt judicially with the point raised and was satisfied 
with the verdict. In these circumstances the view of the Home 
Office was that the subject matter of the complaint had been 
exclusively within the jurisdiction of the judge at the trial and 
fell outside the bounds ordinarily prescribed by practice to 
the jurisdiction of the Home Office. They do not seem at 
this stage to have felt themselves called upon to look at the 
matter as res integra and form an independent judgment upon 
it. In a valuable memorandum handed in by Sir Kenelm 
Digby, the limits which the Home Office regard as in practice 
defining their jurisdiction are stated, and, speaking broadly, 
we think that the reasons urged for observing those limitations 
are sound. The two jurisdictions must be kept apart and 
yrima facie the proper tribunal for dealing with the legal aspect 
of the case is undoubtedly the judge at the trial. Sir Kenelm 
Digby admitted, however, that in a very strong case of mis- 
carriage the Home Office might interfere even against the 
opinion of the judge on a matter within his jurisdiction. It 
seems to us that even on the facts stated in the first petitions 
the Home Office might have realised that there had been a 
miscarriage so grave as to call for interference had they deemed 
themselves bound to look at the case with a fresh eye. That 
accomplished lawyer who then held the post of permanent 
Under-Secretary could not have failed to realise the extent of 
the miscarriage had he felt himself at liberty to canvass the 
ruling of the judge. 

A further circumstance should bo mentioned, as it is said 
to have had some effect in confirming the original view taken 
by the Horne Office, that there was no substance in Mr. Beck’s 
petitions. It appears that in July, 1896, four months after 
the trial, at the instance of the Swedish Minister, pennission 
was given for a solicitor on behalf of the Legation to see Mr. 
Beck and go into his case, and as no further steps were taken 
in consequence, the Home Office inferred that no ground had 
been found for intervention. 

Whatever opinion, however, may be formed of the conduct 
of the Home Office in dealing with the earlier petitions, we 
regret to have to say that we think that its action was defective 
in dealing with the case in 1898. The Home Office then took 
'a step, which might with advantage have been taken before, 
and obtained from the prison authorities, for the first time, 
the information that Smith bore the distinctive mark of a 
Jew, and that Mr. Beck was uncircumcised. With this fresh 
and important information before them, the Home Office very 
properly referred the matter to the learned judge who had 
tried the case for his opinion ; but unfortunately they did not 



Adolf Beck. 

explain to the learned judge with sufficient clearness that this 
information was derived from official sources, nor did they 
ascertain the indisputable fact that the incriminating documents 
of 1896 were in the same handwriting as those of 1877. If 
tfie whole of the information as to Smith’s circumcision and 
as to the identity of the incriminating documents of 1877 
and 1896 had been placed before the learned judge, we 
can hardly doubt that he would at once have seen 
the mistake which had been made, and advised 
Mr. Beck’s immediate release and pardon. Unfortunately the 
Home Office omitted to refer to the incriminating documents, 
and communicated the fact of Smith’s circumcision in such a 
way that Sir Forrest Fulton regarded it merely as a sugges- 
tion put forward by* Mr. Beck’s solicitor; he certainly failed 
to realise that it was an ascertained fact, for in his report to 
the Home Secretary he stated that he had ” very little 
doubt' that Smith and Beck were one and the same person,” 
though he added that, if Smith were circumcised and Beck 
uncircumcised, this, of course, could not be the case; and he 
repeated what he had said in passing tho sentence, that in his 
opinion the evidence against Mr. Beck was overwhelming. 
The gentleman in the Home Office who dealt with the matter 
ought, we think, to have observed that Sir Forrest Fulton 
was under a misapprehension and to have suggested a further 
reference to him. If he had taken that course, if even he 
had consulted the Public Prosecutor or the intelligent inspector 
of police, whom he did subsequently consult about tho sup- 
posed scar, on the prisoner’s neck or jaw, wo cannot doubt that 
the mistake would have been discovered, and that Mr. Beck 
would have been forthwith released. Misled by Sir Forrest 
Fulton ’8 statement that the evidence on which Mr. Beck was 
convicted was overwhelming, he failed to apprehend the point 
which had been specifically brought before him. He did not 
even communicate either to the police or the Public Prosecutor 
the new facts which had been brought to light and proved con- 
clusively that Mr. Beck and Smith were different persons. 
No doubt he imagined, having regard to the view of the 
learned judge at the trial, that the facts, which proved that 
Smith and Mr. Beck were different men, were immaterial. 
How material they were was proved in 1904. If in 1904 
either the police or the Public Prosecutor had known that* 
Mr. Beck and Smith were different persons, it is impossible 
to suppose that the second trial of Mr. Beck could have 
ever taken place or that the scandal arising from his second! 
conviction could have occurred. Thus the mistake which was 
then made by the Home Office involved two consequences; it 



Report by Committee of Inquiry. 

led to Mr. Beck's continued detention in prison ; it indirectly 
led to his re-arrest and conviction in 1904. 

The first Home Office minute is in these terms — “ The 
argument of the petition is that the handwriting of the 
swindler in this case is the same as that of John Smith, and 
all the details of the frauds are precisely similar. There- 
fore, all the present sets of frauds were committed by John 
Smith. But the prisoner cannot be John Smith, because he 
was in Peru from 1873 to 1884, while Smith was convicted 
in 1877. Therefore the prisoner is innocent. Prisoner's 
counsel tried to raise the question of the prisoner's identity 
with Smith in the course of his trial on the specific charges 
of fraud, but the Common Serjeant ruled that it was irre- 
levant (Sessions Paper, page 485), and even if the prisoner 
is not Smith the evidence of his guilt is overwhelming. He 
was identified by ten women whom he had defrauded quite 
positively. There was also the evidence of Mr. Uurrin as 
to the handwriting on the forged cheques and its identity with 
the prisoner's writing." Though this minute does correqtly 
state the points of the defence, it is not, in our opinion, such 
a minute as a trained lawyer, who had read and understood the 
petition and realised the full effect of the learned judge's rul- 
ing in excluding all the evidence in favour of the prisoner, 
could possibly have written for the guidance of his superior. 
It suggests no inkling on the part of the writer of any mis- 
carriage. It assumes as concluded beyond discussion the 
ruling itself which is the real ground of appeal, and assumes 
as conclusive evidence which was only conclusive because all 
evidence to the contrary was excluded by the ruling impugned. 
The following minute also calls for comment: — 

(t Mr. Gill tried very hard to raise and press the point now 
put forward in the memorial, that the writing of the cheques 
was the writing of the man convicted in 1877, and, if he had 
succeeded, he had witnesses to prove that Beck could not be 
the man, as he was out of the country. Mr. Avory objected 
and the Common Serjeant supported him. It was a clever 
ruse, for how could his witnesses' evidence have been dis- 
proved. It would have been very difficult indeed, I should 
think. See pp. 485 and 489, Sessions Paper. The Common 
Serjeant, in passing sentence (Times report, 6th March, 
*1896) said ' the jury had convicted the prisoner on what he 
himself considered overwhelming evidence of identity: evidence 
found not in one direction, but in every direction, of a most 
base and wicked crime, one which was entirely heartless.' " 
This minute is hardly one a trained lawyer could have 
written. It would almost seem to suggest that a defence 


263 



Adolf Beck. 

of an alibi was defective and a ruse, because it would have 
been so difficult for the Crown to answer it! Could any one 
who fully appreciated the vital importance of the alibi in the 
chain of the prisoner's defence, and realised that the judge's 
ruling had excluded it, have framed this minute? 

We think it only right to observe here with respect to the 
alibi which called out these observations as well as those of the 
learned judge's letter which has been made public, that apart 
from the general suspicion which this defence commonly 
suggests there was here no primd facie ground to discredit it. 
It is not on its face open to the possible vice of most alibis, 
viz., that the events described as incompatible with the pri- 
soner's presence at a particular spot on a particular day may 
be quite truly averred to have happened, though they hap- 
pened on some day other than the one in question. Here 
the presence of Mr. Beck in Pern on any single day in the 
whole period embracing Smith's frauds and his imprisonment 
would have sufficed to prove his plea. 

Furthermore, could any one who had fully realised that 
the foundation of the defence, or at all events one of the two 
factors which constituted the defence, was, that Mr. Beck 
and Smith were two different persons, and who realised that 
the evidence in support of it had been excluded, could such a 
person have refrained from doing what was done two years 
later, namely, procuring the identification marks of Smith and 
Mr. Beck respectively? The desirability of such an applica- 
tion w T as fully realised by Mr. Murdoch later on, for he says 
in his minute of 1898, referring to the identification marks, 
“ which curiously have never been referred to before." One 
of the first steps the Public Prosecutor had taken when the 
matter came into his hands was to attempt to procure these 
marks. 

The following minute, which was written in July, 1898, 
after the Common Serjeant had been consulted on the case 
and was certainly placed before Sir Kenelm Digby, since it 
bears its initials, is also open to the comment which we have 
made on those above-mentioned ; it discloses a want of appre- 
ciation of the facts and legal aspect of the case: — 

“ The Common Serjeant has not the slightest doubt that 
Beck is the man w'ho robbed the women in 1895 ; whether 
he is also the man who was convicted of a similar offence irf 
1877 is open to doubt, but this is really immaterial, as Beck 
is being punished only for the offence proved in 1896. 

“ Nil : but let convict be given a fresh prison number, 
so th&t his identity with D 523 should not be affirmed." 

The short fact is that if there had been any one in the 


264 



Report by Committee of Inquiry. 

Home Office in the chain of subordination up to the permanent 
Under-Secretary, whose legal training had enabled him to 
convey in a minute the real nature of the miscarriage, the 
Attention of that official must have been attracted to the case 
in such a manner as to compel intervention. 

Probably to the same want of appreciation of the legal 
bearing of the case is to be attributed another defect in the 
process of review by the Home Office. When the informa- 
tion was received dissevering conclusively the identity of Smith 
and Mr. Beck the effect was that the second step in his defence 
was made good. Instead of the alibi, which had not been 
before the jury, there was now the indisputable fact of Smith's 
circumcision. What was the other step in Mr. Beck's defence? 
It was clearly stated in his very first petition: “ From what 
I have heard ,' 9 he wrote, “ there can be no doubt that this 
person " (namely, John Smith) “ whoever he is, is the same 
who has committed the crime for which I am accused by this 
woman. Your lordship will find that in examining that man's 
trial of '77 there will be found the same story as told by this 
woman against me, the same cheques, the same handwriting and 
signature. What steps were taken then to see whether there 
was any solid foundation for this contention by looking at and 
comparing the original documents in Smith's case with those 
on which Mr. Beck was convicted? It is true that the docu- 
ments were not at the Home Office, but they were with the 
records at the Central Criminal Court and were available for 
comparison. To compare them would have been the simplest 
way to ascertain whether a real or only technical wrong had 
been done by excluding from proof the first step in Mr. Beck's 
defence. Had these documents been examined the inference 
must have been irresistible that all were the work of the same 
man, and have forced the conclusion that relief could not be 
withheld. But nothing of the kind was done. Indeed it is 
another extraordinary fact in this strange story that neither 
at the first trial, the review by the Home Office, or the second 
trial were these documents examined, and yet they would have 
been practically conclusive if they had been compared. 

There was no evidence that any of the petitions presented by 
Mr. Beck went before Sir Matthew White Ridley, who was the 
Secretary of State during the period of Mr. Beck’s first imprison- 
ment; none of the documents in the case bear his initials. We 
consequently did not consider it necessary to call him before us. 

Before parting from the facts of the case, we desire to record 
our opinion that there is no shadow of foundation for any of 
the charges made against Mr. Beck or any reason for supposing 
that he had any connection whatever with them. 

265 



Adolf Beck. 

It only remains for us to express our obligation to our 
Secretary, the Hon. Malcolm Maenaghten, for the great assist- 
ance he has given us throughout this inquiry. 

We have the honour to be, 

, «* 

Sir, your obedient servants, 

R. Henn Collins, M.R. 
Spencer Walpole. 

John Edge. 


Malcolm M. Macnaghten, 
Secretary. 


The 1 Mi day of November , 1904. 



APPENDIX XII. 


Extracts from Evidence before Committee of Inquiry. 


Mr. HORACE AVORY, K.C., called and Examined. 

1041. The Chairman — You are Mr. Horace Avory, K.C. ? — 
Yes. Shall I make a statement, or do you desire to put any 
questions to me ? 

1042. I would rather you make a statement, and if there is 
anything I want to call attention to I will ask you? — If I may 
be permitted I should like first to answer the allegations which 
have been made against me personally of what I consider would 
have been gross professional misconduct in this case of Adolf 
Beck. 

1043. I am not aware that any aspersions have been cast 

upon you. On the contrary, we have had an eulogium pro- 
nounced upon you this morning when you were not here? — 
I know nothing of what has passed this morning. I only 
know my attention has been called to certain passages in the 
Daily Mail , in which I am accused of having been a party to a 
conspiracy to procure the conviction of a prisoner by suppressing 
facte which would have ensured his triumphant acquittal, and 
also in another passage it is alleged 

1044. I really do not think it is necessary for you even to 
seem to confute such a charge as that. I mean it is so out- 
rageous and ridiculous on the face of ft, that no reasonable 
person could for a moment entertain it? — My lord, I should 
not have noticed any such allegations if they had appeared 
merely in a newspaper, but I do desire to call your attention 
to the fact that at a later date Sir George Lewis, the solicitor 
to the Daily Mail , is reported in an interview to have stated 
that the conduct of the prosecution was open to the gravest 
suspicion, and that my conduct was apparently designed in 
order to deprive Adolf Beck of his defence to this charge. 
Seeing that Sir George Lewis is a man who ought to know 
something of the criminal law, and who ought to know some- 
thing qf me, I do desire merely to meet the allegation that the 
indictment in this case was prepared, and the prosecution* con- 
ducted, # with the object of excluding from the consideration of 

267 



Adolf Beck. 


the jury a defence which Adolf Beck desired to lay before them, 
and it is only for that reason that 1 have even mentioned 
allegations, which as your lordship is good enough to say— — 

1045. They carry with them tileir own refutation in my 
judgment? — My lord, I am quite satisfied now to proceed to 
state the history, so far as I was acquainted with it, of this 
case. 

1046. Here is Sir George Lewis himself, and I am quite 
certain that he would be the first to disclaim ever having made 
such a suggestion to any person in the world? — My lord, in 
the first place the indictment for misdemeanour was prepared 
here in the ordinary form in such cases. It has been alleged 
that that indictment did not include a charge of the previous 
conviction, and that by trying that indictment which did not 
contain any count or charge of a previous conviction that issue 
was kept from the jury. I may remind the Committee, who 
no doubt are well aware of it, that such an indictment could 
not contain any charge of a previous conviction.* 

1047. Sir John Edok — That was the practice at my sessions, 
I believe? — I elected to try the indictment for misdemeanour, 
also in accordance with the usual practice in euch cases, for 
two reasons : first, because in my judgment many of the offences 
which were alleged in this case did not amount to larceny, 
but were clearly cases of obtaining money and goods by false 
pretences; and, secondly, because this w'as a case, in either 
view, where it was desirable that the jury should have all the 
case before them at the same time. If a man were tried upon 
one indictment only for a felony in such a case as this, it might 
be difficult or impossible for him to establish a defence either 
by way of alibi or otherwise to that particular charge, but 
if he were tried upon ten different charges giving at least ten 
different dates (and in this case giving in fact twenty different 
dates when he was said to be identified as being at a particular 
place at a particular time) it not only enabled the jury to have 
the whole case before them, but it enabled him also to prove 
as to any one of these occasions that he was elsewhere, or to 
establish any other defence to any one of those charges, and 
if any such defence had been put forward as to any one of the 
cases, I cannot myself doubt that the jury in this case would 
have hesitated to accept the evidence of identification. As a 
fact, of which of course you are aware, there was no attempt 
made as to any one of the nineteen or twenty different ooca- 

* Note by the Witness.— My attention has since been called to the Pre- 
yentipn. of Crimes Act (34 & 35 Viet. c. 112, s. 8) which might have 
justified it, but it was never my practice to do so, and I am not sure that 
I was aware of it.— H.A. 

268 1 



Examination of Mr. Avory. 

eions of which ho was identified as having been present at a 
particular place and at a particular time 

1048. The Chairman — -As to which he was identified? — As to 
which — there was no attempt to put before the jury any sugges- 
tion of any alibi, which would be the ordinary defence, of 
course, which a jury would expect in such a case. Those 
were my reasons for trying the indictment for misdemeanour, 
instead of the indictment for felony. Now it is said that 
upon the trial when evidence was given by the expert in hand- 
writing, that the documents in that case in 1896 were in the 
handwriting of the accused person, that I objected to cross- 
examination with a view of showing that those documents were 
in the handwriting of a man who had been convicted in 1877, 
and it is true that I took that objection. Whether I was right 
or wrong in law in the objection, I think I can satisfy the 
Committee that I was right in taking it. 

1049. I do not think there can be any doubt about it 
from your point of view ? — I should like to state, if I may, why. 

1050. Certainly? — Because those people, of course, who 
do not know anything about, the law, and who have written 
on this subject, have blundered about it, and probably did not 
appreciate the reason for the objection. I started upon this 
inquiry with positive instructions, which I had no reason to 
doubt, that Adolf Beck was the man who had been convicted 
in 1877. I had before me not only the evidence of the police 
constable who had been called at the Police Court, and who 
had positively identified him as the same man, but I had 
also in my instructions the evidence of another police constable, 
an inspector, then retired from the force, w r ho had had charge 
of the case in 1877 together with the police constable Spur- 
rell, and who, it was said, was actually prepared to identify 
him as the same man w T ho had been convicted. Therefore, I 
wish to make it plain that, not only before the prosecution 
commenced, but at the trial, I myself felt no reasonable 
doubt that he was the same man who had been previously 
convicted. As soon as the questions were put in cross- 
examination with a view of showing that the handwriting was 
that of a man of the name of Smith wdio had been convicted 
in 1877, I was in this position if I did not object to it — that 
it would go before the jury that the handwriting was that of 
another man named Smith and not of the accused. I should 
then have been bound, in order to prevent the jury, as I 
thought, being misled, to prove that he w as the same man w-ho 
had been previously convicted, and having regard to the fact 
that not only common law and common fairness, but the statute 
itself in express terms says that a jury shall not be told* of a 
previous conviction against a man until they have delivered their 



Adolf Beck 


verdict on the issue which they are trying, it was my duty if 
I could to prevent the breach, as I thought it would be, of the 
statute by allowing the jury to be told, or allowing myself 
to be forced into the position of proving before the jury, that 
he was the same man who had been previously convicted, and 
it was solely in order to prevent, as far as I could, the jury 
being prejudiced by evidence that this man who was on his trial 
had been previously convicted that 1 took that objection to the 
evidence at that stage. If the learned judge ^ho was trying the 
case had ruled otherwise than he had done — had ruled that 
the evidence was admissible, and that the defence must take the 
risk of what would follow, I should of course have accepted the 
position, and I should, at the conclusion of the evidence that 
I then had to give to the jury, have called the witnesses, who 
would have proved before the jury that he was the same man 
who had been convicted. And my recollection of the case is, 
having no reason to doubt at that time the testimony of those 
police constables — my belief is, that if the jury had had before 
them at that time the evidence of those two police constables, 
positively identifying him, they would have come to the con- 
clusion then, wrongly as it now appears, that he was the man 
previously convicted. As I say, it was entirely to prevent 
the prejudice which would have arisen that I took that objec- 
tion, and the learned judge upheld it on the very grounds which 
I think are reported in this report of the trial. I appear 
to have said, according to this report, that I was anxious to 
avoid any question of the previous conviction coming before 
the jury at all. 

1051. I noticed the passage. You say at the end of your 
speech — “ And should not be inquired into until after the jury 
had returned their verdict, lest it should be afterwards said 
the person had been improperly convicted ” 1 — Certainly. My 

feeling at that time was that it might bo said that the evidence 
had been improperly admitted, contrary to the statute, of a 
previous conviction against this man. Now it has been further 
said that at the conclusion of the trial, after the jury had 
convicted, I improperly refused to allow cne of the indictments 
upon the file of the Court for felony which contained the charge 
of a previous conviction to be tried. The answer to that, of 
course, is patent to any lawyer who knows anything of the 
criminal law. The man had been tried for obtaining the^e 
goods by false pretences and convicted. The statute provides 
that a man who is tried for obtaining goods by false pretences 
if the offence turns out to* be larceny may nevertheless be con' 
/vie ted. He is not to be acquitted if it turns out to* be larceny, 

and lo suggest that he should afterwards be tried for larceny 
on the same facts is, of course, ridiculous to any lawyqr. He 
270 



Examination of Mr. Avory. 

could not be tried on the same facts for larceny by the common 
law, but the very statute which enacted the offence of obtain- 
ing money by false pretences contains an express provision that 
a man shall not be acquitted if it turns out to be larceny, pro- 
vided, nevertheless, that he shall not be liable to be tried for 
larceny afterwards upon the same offence. So that there I 
had an express provision of a statute which absolutely pre- 
vented me from trying a second indictment for larceny upon 
those same facts. Yet it has been said that that course was 
taken for the purpose only of excluding from the jury the con- 
sideration of this question of the previous conviction, and 
further, to complete the history of that trial, it appears that 
an application was made to the Attorney-General to enter a nolle 
'prosequi as to these other indictments. As far as my recollec- 
tion serves me, that was done simply because my learned friend, 
Mr. Gill, said — “ I insist upon the other indictment being 
tried / 9 I, having this provision of the statute in my mind, 
said — “ I insist that I cannot try them.” But he said — 
“ They are there on the file; something must be done with 
them,” and this is a question which has often presented itself 
to my mind, and I am not sure whether it has ever been settled 
as to what ought to be done in such a case. 

1052. I know; I have been embarrassed by it myself? — My 

owm view has always been that any man who is. charged is 
entitled to have the indictments which are on the file got rid of 
in some way for or against him. There is no power for anybody 
to tear them up, and there is no power for anybody to bum 
them, and if a man insists when there are other indictments on 
the file that they should be got rid of, I know of no way except 
by entering a nolle prosequi to them. At all events that was 
done simply as a formality because he insisted on their being 
got rid of. As I have pointed out, by law they could not be 
tried, and therefore the nolle prosequi was the only formal way 
of dealing with them. ? 

1053. Sir John Edge — You say you could not try them even 
to the extent of putting the man under charge for the indictment 
of felony? — If you refer to the statute you will find it is, I 
think, section 88 of the Larceny Act. 

1054. It is many years since I have, seen it? — I think it 
is section 88 which makes the offence one of false pretences, 
and there is an express provision that the man shall not be 
tried for larceny on the same offence. It clearly would be a 
trial to put him upon his trial. 

1055. Yes. Then, according to your view, a nolle 
prosequi was the only way of disposing of it? — It is the only 
way I can think of now even, and I am getting rusty a little 
now. 


271 



Adolf Beck. 

1056. Hardly yet? — There is only one other thing I .should 
like to say about this question of the handwriting. As I 
have said, my only reason for taking the objection to the 
questions put in cross-examination was, that it would involve 
me in the predicament of having to prove the previous convic- 
tion. I waited to see whether any affirmative evidence would 
be forthcoming from the defence as to the handwriting, as to 
which quite a different consideration would have arisen. If, 
for instance, any witness had been called for the defence to 
express his opinion that the handwriting in the documents in 
1896 was not the handwriting of the accused person, no objec- 
tion, of course, could have been taken to that, and none 
would have been taken, and if such a witness had come and 
expressed an opinion that the handwriting in those docu- 
ments in 1896 was not the handwriting of the accused person, 
I doubt whether any objection could have been taken to his 
going on to say — “ I not only think they are not in the 
handwriting of the accused, but 1 do think they are in the 
handwriting of another man whose writing I have seen in 
1877.” And therefore I am making these observations only 
for the purpose of pointing out that my objection taken to a 
question in cross-examination did not exclude the defence from 
producing affirmative evidence as to the handwriting. If they 
had only put any witness into the box who either knew it, or 
an expert who it appears they had in fact consulted and I had 
that fact before me — when I made the objection I had the fact 
present to my mind. I was informed in my instructions 
that an expert in handwriting had been consulted on behalf of 
the defence, and I had reason to believe he would not be forth- 
coming and could not come into the witness-box and express 
an opinion in favour of the accused. 

1057. It could not have prevented that evidence? — It 
clearly could not, and the Committee will see, I think, in 
this report that a witness was called, whose name was Albert 
Ernest Lamb, for the very purpose of proving that the exhibits 
had been produced at the Treasury to Mr. Inglis, the expert 
in handwriting, and that he had had the opportunity of examin- 
ing them on behalf of the defendant, and therefore I had before 
my mind the fact that no expert on the other side would-be 
forthcoming. 

1058. You thought it was not at all likely that that expert 
would be called? — I knew. 

1059. He had an opportunity of coming to give evidence? 
— Hfe had an opportunity, and I knew he was not coming. I 
was told he had seen the documents long before the case had 
concluded at the police court, and he was not forthcoming. I 
was right in that because he did not come. Further, in 

272 t 



Examination of Mr. Avory. 

reference to this question on the handwriting I had this before 
mo. There was a witness called for the prosecution named 
Godfrey Chetwynd, who was called to prove the genuine hand- 
writing of the accused person, and who produced letters which 
he had received from him. They were produced by the 
prosecution for the purpose of founding the comparison which 
the expert was going to make and did make. This witness 
knew, therefore, the handwriting of the accused person per- 
fectly well, but no question was put to him in cross-examina- 
tion as to whether he believed the documents in question to 
be in the handwriting of the accused, and when witnesses for 
the defence were called, a man named Kistner, a clerk, was 
called for the purpose of proving transactions with the accused, 
and who knew his handwriting arid spoke about his writing in 
his office in his presence. Although he was called as a witness 
for the defence and knew the handwriting, no question was 
ever put to him as to these documents being in the handwriting 
of the accused. So that I had, therefore, before me, not only 
the fact that the expert who had seen them refused to give an 
opinion in favour of the accused, but also the fact that at 
least two witnesses who knew the handwriting and had seen 
him write were not prepared to express any opinion in his 
favour. Under those circumstances, I have a distinct, recol- 
lection that at the time I thought this question about the 
previous conviction was what a learned judge has described 
as one of those false issues which some people delight in.” 
I thought it was a false issue being raised before the jury, 
and that it was my duty, if I could, to exclude a false issue 
from the jury. I think there is nothing else that I desire 
to say. 

Mr. Beck — My lord, may I be allowed to ask a question 
on this matter ? 

1060. The Chairman — Will you ju^t let me know what 
question it is you want to put. I mean it will probably 
come better later on after I have put some questions to Mr. 
Avory. In the meantime you might, either write the question 
down, or tell me what it is. Have you finished your state- 
ment, Mr. Avory? — May I add something. I do not want to 
prolong any personal aspect of this matter at all, but this is 
the only opportunity. I observed the usual rule of not answer- 
ing in the newspapers anything which has been said about 
me. 

' 1061. If you think it worth while, you are fully within 
your rights? — I have said I only think it worth while because 
the author of this statement is supposed to know something 
about the law, and I find in this interview with Sir George 
Lewis tlyit he states that the suspicion in his mind arises from 

t 273 



Adolf Beck. 


the fact of our choosing the indictment for misdemeanour, 
and that he supposes by this time the prosecution had arrived 
at the opinion that John Smith and Adolf Beck were two 
separate persons. That is a distinct statement that this in- 
dictment was chosen because we had arrived at the conclusion 
that John Smith and Adolf Beck were two different persons, 
and that, therefore, we wanted to exclude from the considera- 
tion of the jury this issue of whether they were in fact two 
persons or not. I have already answered that by saying that 
at the time when I started upon this trial, and throughout the 
conduct of it, I was iriyself firmly of opinion from the evidence 
which was before me that they were the same person, and 
that my only object was to prevent the jury being prejudiced 
by the knowledge of it. 

Sir George Lewis — Will Mr. Avory produce my letter to 
him? 

The Witness — Certainly. 

Sir George Lewis — If you have it will you read it, Mr. 
Avory ? 

The Witness — I have not got it, but Sir George Lewis 
wrote to me to say that what I did was no doubt done on the 
instructions of the public prosecutor; to which I replied that 
I never did anything which I thought was professionally wrong 
on the instructions of any client. 

Sir George Lewis — That was not all I wrote to you. 

The Witness — The substance of it. 

Sir George Lewis — Produce the letter, and that will speak 
for itself. 

The Witness — By all means, if I have it. This is the 
letter — “ Upon my return to business to day I have seen your 
letter of the 1 4th inst., in which you refer to the interview 
with me published in the Daily Telegraph That is my letter 
to Sir George Lewis. “You complain that I said * that the 
course adopted in that case is open to the gravest suspicion, 
and that the course was adopted with the object of cutting 
away from Mr. Beck his entire defence. ’ I did say that the 
course adopted by the prosecution was open to the gravest 
suspicion, but I did not say that the course was adopted 
with the c object ’ of cutting away Mr. Beck's entire defence. 
I still maintain that the course adopted did cut away from 
Mr. Beck his entire defence. You will observe that before 
making that statement I said you must have been instructed 
"by the public prosecutor to take the course you did. I cannot 
therefore , understand why you should suggest that I have 
mad$ a grave accusation against you ; certainly I had* no in- 
tention of doing anything of the sort, and it would have been 
most repugnant to my mind to have suggested that you were 

274 



Examination of Mr, Avory. 

capable of intentionally acting unfairly with a view of obtain- 
ing an unjust verdict against an accused person. I think it 
due to you and to myself to make this explanation that there 
may be no misunderstanding as to what my view was.” All 
I want to say upon that letter is, that I do not excuse myself 
or ever should excuse myself from any such accusation on 
the ground that I have been instructed by any client to take 
any such course. 

1062. The Chairman — Is that all? — That concludes my 
statement. 

1063. Suppose in this case there had been no indictment 
of which a previous conviction was a part at all, and the 
prisoner had been tried only for the misdemeanours named in 
the indictment and this evidence had been tendered, could you 
have objected ? — Am I to assume that I have before me evidence 
that he is the man who has been previously convicted? 

1064. Yes? — Then, assuming that I have before me evi- 
dence that he is the man who has been previously convicted, 
and the question is put tending to show that the handwriting 
is that of a man previously convicted, I should have taken 
the same objection, for the same reason, simply for the purpose 
of excluding, if I could, from the jury the fact that he had 
been previously convicted. 

1005. Is that a right that, you think the prisoner or his 
counsel could not waive? — I think he could waive it. 

1066. And if ho tendered the evidence it would be your 
duty, or at least you might think it right, to warn him of 
the consequence, namely, that he was introducing an element 
which might prejudice the jury against him; still, if he per- 
sisted, you could not invite the judge to exclude it? — I think 
not; in fact, the case frequently happens where one is obliged 
to warn either the counsel or the man where he insists on 
taking a line of evidence as to character where it may entail 
consequences. 

1067. Quite? — In this case it w T as in the nature of a warn- 
ing, my objection was in the nature of a warning. 

1068. I inferred that. But it did not alter the real issues 
in the case in any way? — No. 

1069. It left them where they were? — It left them exactly 
w T here they were. 

* 1070. A warning given to the person tendering the evi- 

dence that he might be making a mistake? — Certainly^ , * 

1071. But it did not in any way alter the legal ipsue?— I 
agree. 

1072. Which was: “ Is the man in the dock the person 
who committed these offences?” — These offences in 1895; 
that was the issue. 


275 



Adolf Beck. 


1073. Certainly, that was the issue. Would it not be a 
perfectly direct answer to that to show that the person who 
committed the offences charged was another person and not 
the prisoner? — Certainly. 

1074. Was another person, and therefore not the prisoner? 
— Certainly. 

1075. One way — perhaps not the most direct — but still 
a direct way of showing that the person who had committed 
the offences charged was another person and not the prisoner 
would be to say, “ I hope to show that in the opinion of the 
expert the incriminating documents in this case are in the 
same handwriting as those of the 1877 case, and that there 
are other points of similarity between the two cases. This I 
tender as evidence to show that the crime, whoever it was 
that committed it, now charged, and the crime of 1877 are 
the work of the same hand ; and having established that, I 
propose to show that the crime committed in 1877 could not 
have been committed by Beck, because he was then out of 
the country.’ * As I have said, it is a somewhat roundabout 
way of arriving at the main issue, namely, that the man in 
the dock is not the man who committed the crime; but each 
of those steps would be relevant, would they not? — I think 
it is undoubtedly a roundabout way of arriving at the con- 
clusion that he is not the man. 

1076. Whether it is roundabout or not, it may be the only 
means which he is enabled by evidence to adopt, and it lands 
ultimately in evidence directly material on the main issue in 
the case? — Yes, that is all subject to the difficulty — the pre- 
dicament — that you are in. In admitting it you are admitting 
the evidence of the previous conviction. 

1077. That we have dealt with and we understand. If you 
throw into that discussion the mere probabilities of the case 
that two people, at an interval of fifteen years, should commit 
the same crime, not only in general outline and principle but 
in every special detail, and that the documents which were 
used on those two. occasions are to ordinary persons — not 
experts at all, if they compare them, obviously the work of 
the same hand, would it not seem to result in a most extra- 
ordinary coincidence that two separate persons should commit 
these crimes with these details of similarity at that interval 
without any proof of any possible opportunity of collusioh 
between, them? — I hesitate to express any opinion contrary to 

"that which I see is in your lordship’s mind, but I must say 
my own view is now, and certainly was then, that there was 
nothing improbable in two different people committing offences 
so similar to each other. 

1078. I can understand, in principle, that that is so. As 
J276 



Examination of Mr. Avory. 

long as human nature is human nature you will probably have 
people who will, in some way or other, do similar things? — In 
my experience this kind of fraud upon this kind of women is 
as common as petty larceny. 

1079. Yes, that I can quite understand? — And the features 
of it are all similar in all cases which have come under my 
notice. Certainly, hundreds of cases have come under my 
notice of men representing themselves to be men in a**good 
position with titles — members of the aristocracy and so on — 
deceiving women of this class and getting anything from them 
which they could, and giving them bogus cheques to deceive 
them, and the mere fact that the men even used the same 
name of a member of the aristocracy would not, to my mind, 
give rise to the suspicion that he was necessarily the same man. 

1080. That would be all for the jury? — It is an observation. 
It is a legitimate argument to the jury. If I had not had 
evidence of this man being the same man I should certainly not 
have drawn the conclusion that he must be the same man because 
of the similarity of the circumstances. 

1081. Quite; that would be a question of degree. They 
might be more or less similar and they might be identical? — 
And you cannot sa,y that the same man will do the same thing. 
My experience is that he does not do the same thing. When 
he comes out of prison he varies his methods generally ; there- 
fore it was rather unlikely the same man should be pursuing 
exactly the same course. 

1082. At all events that would be a matter for the jury to 
decide ? — Entirely. 

1083. And the nearer you get an identity in the handwriting 
and in the special facts — the particular name of the house in 
St. John’s Wood, and all that kind of thing — the more difficult 
it is, or might be, for a jury to come to the conclusion that 
they are the work of two different persons and not of one? — * 
Yes. In this case I think it was merely a case of a man 
saying he was Earl So-and-so and had a house in St. John’s 
Wood. 

1084. Did he not give the name of the house? — Not in 
'each of the cases. 

1085. Now throw into that evidence the fact that Beck 
was out of England during the whole period covered by the 
•Smith frauds, and then it seems to mo you have a very formid- 
able case to go to a jury. First of all, you have the eighteen 
years’ interval and the extraordinary similarity of the acts 
themselves, which, as you say, is not so material, because it is 
not uncommon ; then the writing apparently identical — still only 
matter for the jury — and throw into that in addition the evi- 
dence ^hat Beck could not have committed the first set of frauds 

277 



Adolf Beck. 


because he was out of England at the time, that would have 
been a formidable case for a jury? — I do not know that there 
ia any object in expressing an opinion on what would have 
happened. 

1086. No, but it would have been a case to address the 

jury upon? — Yes. I have an opinion. 

1087. You are quite entitled to express it? — Since I have 
read this case it has come back to my memory, and remember- 
ing, as I do now, the way in which these persons gave their 
evidence in Court, and the way in which their identification 
was not only unshaken, but in some instances confirmed and 
corroborated in cross-examination by their pointing out things 
which had not previously been mentioned, my own opinion is 
that, even if that issue of the previous conviction had gone to 
the jury, the jury would have convicted of the offences in 
1896 — even if they did not convict on the previous conviction. 

1088. Would not that depend on what view they took of the 

veracity of the witnesses proving the absence of Mr. Beck 
from England? — Yes, I say that lor this reason: that the jury 
had before them practically the evidence 

1089. There is a great deal in the word “ practically 
there? — I say it becauso they had before them under the name 
of “ character ” evidence of the alibi in 1880 or 1881. 

1090. r l 1 hey had, but that issue could not be pressed upon 
the jury, nor that evidence used for that purpose before the 
jury ? — No. 

1091. It would come out, a.s you say, incidentally under 
the garb of character? — It was put before the jury for that 
purpose. 

1092. It could not be, and was not, pressed home as an 
argument on the main issue in the case? — I could not pretend 
to recollect what was said in the speech for the defence. 

1093. The learned judge had ruled that any evidence going 
to show the identity of Smith and Beck was inadmissible. The 
Common Serjeant ruled that that question, whether the prisoner 
was or was not convicted in 1877 was not admissible on the 
ground that it related to another and distinct issue, and he 
suggested that witnesses might be called as to character; so 
that the learned counsel could not according to the rules upon 
which these things are conducted have pressed home the evi- 
dence of these witnesses on th% question based upon the hypo-* 
thesis that Smith and Beck were two different persons? — No ; 

I am not pretending to say fhat that issue was before the 
jury. I mean my whole statement is that it was not. 

1094. Then the result of tftp ruling was that a very material 
part of the evidence of the case — possible and present in the 
case — was excluded on the question whether this man w^as the 

278 



Examination of Mr. Avory. 

man who committed the crime or not? — Yes; but, as I have 
said, I do not think it would have been excluded if the defence 
had tendered any affirmative evidence in support of that pro- 
position. ' 

1095. I just want to see. I quite agree with you that they 
might have tendered it. They might have tendered the direct 
evidence you suggest of an expert to the effect that the hand- 
writing of the incriminating documents was not the handwriting 
of Beck. That would have been going direct to the main issue, 
not going by what you call a roundabout way. But the one 
would not have been any more admissible than the other. The 
direct way is the direct way, and therefore admissible, and 
the roundabout way, if you go by the roundabout process, is just 
as admissible as the other? — Yes. 

1096. The first, I agree, was not excluded by the ruling ; 
but the second was, with the result that all the evidence going 
to negative Beck’s having possibly committed the crime in the 
first instance, and therefore in the second, the hypothesis being 
that they were in the same hand was excluded? — Yes. 

1097. Do you think that justice could be done under those 
circumstances — that any tribunal could allow a judgment or 
verdict obtained under such circumstances to stand, if the point 
was laid before a Court of Appeal ? — Well, I cannot prognosti- 
cate what a Court in the nature of a Court of Appeal would do. 
I cannot help thinking the Court would have, asked immediately 
the argument was opened: “ Was any evidence tendered for 
the defence that this was not his handwriting V 9 

1098. It was tendered, but excluded? — No, not for the 
defence. 

1099. That answer in cross-examination was an answer, of 
course, in point of defence? — Yes, but I think the question 
would have been asked. 

1100. And it carried with it the alibi, too, because that 
would have been for the defence, and no evidence was admitted 
for the defence going to the alibi. But as you say the fact 
was elicited which, if it had been considered relevant to the 
issue which was in existence, might have been asked, but it 
could not be asked under that ruling, and the jury could not be 
addressed upon it? — As I said, I do not pretend to have any 
recollection of what the address to the jury w r as, and what 
•was said, though I have no doubt whatever that the jury appre- 
ciated that that was the issue the defence desired to raise, and 
they must have appreciated the evidence of these gentlemen who 
were called to say he was in t*eru in 1880, 1881,. and 1882. 
I might, if I had insisted on strictness, have objected to their 
saying a word al>out those years. 

11D1. I am not sure that you did not, to some extent, 

279 



Adolf Beck 


indicate that you did not approve altogether? — Possibly I did 
my best to keep to what I thought was regular. 

1102. Certainly, it would have been perfectly regular on 
that ruling to have excluded all questions except those as 
to the point of character undoubtedly? — Yes. 

1103. It came out in a very indirect way, as it were, 
emphasising their opportunities of affirming an opinion as to 
Beck’s character? — Fifteen years before, in Peru. 

1104. Quite? — I mean it is hardly evidence of character. If 
I had chosen to object to it I might have objected that it waa 
not evidence of character at all, and it evidently went in before 
the jury. To say that you have known a man in Peru fifteen 
years before would hardly be accepted by a jury as evidence 
of good character. 

1105. I suppose they were directed that the evidence did 
only go to character. Their attention was never addressed to 
its bearing on the main issue in the case ? — No. 

1106. Sir John Edge — I suppose you could not have 
objected to an opening by Mr, Gill that he proposed to call 
evidence to show that similar frauds were committed in 1877 
by a man who wrote cheques which were exactly in the same 
handwriting as these cheques in 1896, and at the time those 
frauds were committed in 1877 Mr. Beck was in Peru? — 
Certainly I could not have objected to his opening that. 

1107. You could not have objected to his proving it, could 
you? — Subject to my warning which I had already given. As 
I said, if he had persisted in doing it of course I could not have 
objected. 

1108. You could not have objected to it? — No. 

1109. Just one question further. Would not Mr. Gill have 
been open to some reflection if he had not broached that defence 
by his cross-examination of Mr. Gurrin? He had Mr. Gurrin 
in the witness-box who had examined all these documents. Was 
it not his duty, as defending counsel, if he intended to open 
a defence of that kind, to cross-examine Mr. Gurrin on the 
point? — Quite. I have never suggested that Mr. Gill was not 
doing his duty in putting the question in cross-examination. 

I am only concerned to say that I was doing my duty in object- 
ing to it. 

Sir John Edge — I quite understand your point. 

The Chairman — I think you were only right and Bound tOk 
take the point. 

Sir John Edge — It is the duty of the prosecution — at least 
I always thought it was, and I have conducted prosecutions 
myself — to prevent the jury being misled. 

The Chairman — I hope it is so. 



Examination of Mr. Avory. 

The Witness — I have made a great many efforts in my life, 
I know, with that object. 

Sir John Edge — I did for twenty years. 

1110. The Chairman — But your intervention, just to put it 
shortly, did not in any way narrow the issues in the case? — Not 
in the least. 

The Chairman — And any ruling which had for its effect 
to narrow those issues would be a wrong ruling. I do not 
think there is anything else. Mr. Beck, do you wish to ask 
a question ? 

Mr. Beck — I have not had the pleasure of seeing this learned 
gentleman since 1896 in the Old Bailey, when I had such an 
ironic and pleasant smile from him as much as to say : ‘ i You 
are the culprit.' ' I want to ask this learned gentleman if he 
does not think that the jury, who were then called, knew 
when they were sitting in that box that it had been declared in 
the Police Court that I had been formerly convicted as John 
Smith, giving the name of John Smith, or Lord Willoughby, 
or the Earl of Wilton. I have not the slightest doubt in my 
own opinion that the jury know all that, and when Mr. Gill 
asked this learned gentleman to defend myself against this 
terrible accusation I wondered that it was so, because in every 
countiy a man w T ho feels himself innocent always gets the chance 
to defend himself, but I had not the slightest. Moreover, at 
that time, as you will have seen, I was quite imbecile from 
shame and horror at what had passed. I think myself every 
one of them knew r that I was accused of being formerly con- 
victed, because it w r a.s a long time after that. That is one 
thing. Another thing, I believe that you, sir, knew r that they 
took away from me the letter D. I was John Smith no 
more, but Adolf Beck. There w r ere two persons, John Smith 
and Adolf Beck ; but that you must have known when I got 
out. I have often wondered, when I approached a friend of 
yours, Mr. Wilkinson, the solicitor whom in the beginning, 
when I told him my story, believed absolutely in my story, 
when I took him to your chambers, and he told me he was a 
friend of yours, why, after a while, I found that Mr. Wilkinson 
was quite a different man. I ask him why. I will tell you 
why he said it was. “ My friend, Mr. Avory, has told me 
that he absolutely believed that you are a guilty man." After I 
had come out and tried to prove my innocence, what neces- 
sity was there for Mr. Avory to tell this gentleman against me 
here in 1901? 

The Witness — What is the question you want me to answer! 

Mr. Beck — I have called upon you, and I have written to 
you, but I have not had the pleasure of seeing you before now, 
and perhaps I shall not have the opportunity again. I want 

281 



Adolf Beck 


to take this opportunity of asking you why you should put 
Mr. Wilkinson against me? 

The Witness — It is absolutely untrue that I ever put Mr, 
Wilkinson against you. 

Mr. Beck — I am sorry to say that above the tomb of a 
dead man. I do not think Mr. Wilkinson ever would say such 
a falsehood to me. He told me distinctly that you had set him 
against me, and that you told him I was a guilty man right 
enough. I take this opportunity to ask you this question, 
and now you have said you have not said so. I am sorry 
on the tomb of a dead man that such a question should be 
asked. 

The Witness — It makes no difference to me whether a man 
is* dead or alive. 

Mr. Beck — No, he is not dead; lie always lives; every one 
of us lives. This is what was told to me, and I am not sitting 
here telling a false stoiy. Whether he has told me a false 
story, or whether I was telling a false story, there are people 
who will tell you the same as I am doing. 

The Witness — I understand your question to me, and the 
only question I have been able to gather is whether I told Mr. 
Wilkinson not to have anything to do with you because I thought 
you were a guilty man. Is that the question? 

Mr. Beck — You have set him against me. Since he saw you 
he became quite a different man to me. 

The Witness — All I can say is, it is absolutely untrue to 
say that I ever said to Mr. Wilkinson, or to anybody else, 
as far as I know, after you came out of prison, that they were 
to have nothing to do with you as you were undoubtedly a 
guilty man. That is my answer. 

Sir George Lewis — May Mr. Avory bo asked whether, after 
the evidence that was given of Mr. Beck being in Peru during 
the whole of the years that Smith was in prison — whether after 
hearing that evidence he was satisfied that Mr. Beck was not 
John Smith ? 

1111. The Chairman — What do you say, Mr. Avory? — There 
is no objection to asking the question, I suppose? 

1112. No? — To ask me what I thought at a particular 

moment in 1896 about one case out of several that I did during 
1896 is an impossible question to answer, quite. * 

The Chairman — I think we may relieve you. I am very 
much obliged to you for your assistance. 

The Witness withdrew. 
******* 


282 



Statement by Chairman. 

The Chairman — I desire to make a short statement in view 
of the fact that the learned Recorder is present, and, as I 
understand, is about to make a statement. I think I am 
expressing the sentiments of my colleagues, as well as myself, 
when I say that we have from the first considered ourselves 
bound to regard the well-settled principle that all communica- 
tions between a judge and the Home Office in the course of 
reviewing a sentence are upon the highest public grounds' 
deemed to be absolutely confidential. It Was a difficulty which 
we had to consider in coming to the conclusion, at which we 
arrived, that in the public interest it was desirable that the 
inquiry should be held in public. We came to the con- 
clusion that in the circumstances of this case the inquiry could 
be held in public without in any degree infringing upon the 
principle to which I have referred, and which we regarded as 
inviolable. We felt, therefore, that we ought not to put 
any pressure upon or formulate any invitation to the learned 
judge who had tried the case to make any communication 
whatever to us. Such communication as he is about to make 
he is making entirely at his own instance, because he thought, 
from his point of view', that it was desirable that he should 
say in public what he had to say upon the matter. Speak- 
ing for myself, and I think I am expressing the view of my 
colleagues also, had we thought that, the inquiry which we 
are now T carrying out, if held in public, would cause us to 
violate in the slightest degree the absolute sanctity, if I 
may so call it, of the communications between the judge and 
the reviewing authority, w r o should have faced the responsi- 
bility of holding this inquiry in private ; and it is only because 
we came to the conclusion that we could without risk in the 
special circumstances of this case carry out this investigation 
in public that we decided to do so. I make these remarks 
because we are dealing, so far as I know, with a case of first 
instance. I am not aware that a judge has ever been called 
upon to state, or has ever been given the opportunity of stating 
in public, what reasons influenced him in dealing with the 
case before him in his capacity as judge. Therefore, I desire 
that the method which we are now adopting should not in any 
way be deemed to be a precedent involving the suggestion that 
under any possible circumstances the communications between 
the judge and the Home Office are other than inviolable, unless 
tlie judge himself chooses to break, so to speak, the seal and 
publicly state that which he thinks fit to state upon the matter. 
It must not be supposed that in saying this I am dealing with 
anything more than the principle itself. We have had, we 
were obliged to have, and w r e were entitled to have under the 
special circumstances of this case, access to the confidential 


283 



Adolf Beck. 


communications between the learned judge and the Home 
Office. I am dealing with the principle and not with the 
instance. In my view everything that has passed between 
them might be placarded in the public streets without any 
mischief whatever to the public; but it is the principle, and 
not the instance, that is at stake ; and I desire most anxiously 
that what we are doing in this case should never in any degree 
be taken as a precedent for inviting, or putting any pressure 
of any kind whatever upon a learned judge to state anything 
that has passed, under the seal of confidence, between him 
and the Home Office. 

Sir' John Edge — I entirely agree with every word that the 
Master of the Rolls has said. I think it is highly necessary 
that communications between the judge who has tried the case 
and the Home Office should be kept absolutely confidential. 

The Chairman — There is just one other observation that 
I desire to make before we heard the Recorder, and that is 
this, and it is addressed to the manner in which such a coni' 
munication ought to be received. All judges — all tribunals — 
in this country are liable to make mistakes except the House 
of Lords, which, like the King, and to a very great extent on 
the same grounds, is deemed to be incapable of making a 
mistake ; but if such mistakes are made they are reviewed, 
where the right to review exists, by the proper authority, and 
no one has at any time suggested that any judge, whose de- 
cision is the subject-matter of the review, could be invited to 
state anything or answer any question touching the grounds 
upon which he arrived at his decision. No such inquiry could 
be conducted without compromising the dignity, and there- 
fore impairing the efficiency of any one holding the exalted 
station such as that of a judge in this country. Therefore to 
my mind it would be nothing short of a public scandal if any 
questions in the nature of cross-examination were addressed 
to a judge who, for public reasons, has thought it fitting on a 
public occasion to state such facts as he thinks material that 
have come before him in his judicial capacity on the trial. 
Therefore, in this inquiry no questions will be addressed to Sir 
Forrest Fulton upon his statement, except such as may occur 
to us as necessary to enable us to understand fully that which 
he desires to say. 

Sir Spencer Walpole — As Sir John Edge has spoken, and 
in case my silence might lead to any misapprehension, I should 
like to be allowed to add that I entirely concur with every 
word that has fallen from his lordship. His lordship was 
good enough to speak to me before he made the statement, 
so that I was aware of what he was going to say. I concur 
with every word as to the principle which he has laid down, 

284 



Statement by Chairman. 

and as to the exception which he has drawn in this instance 
in view of the action of the learned judge, the Recorder, who 
is before us this morning. 

Sir FORREST FULTON, called and Examined. 

Sir Forrest Fulton — Mr. President, there is very little 
which I desire to add to the very full public statement I 
thought it my duty to make in the face of the wholly excep- 
tional circumstances connected with this unhappy case, in 
which so grievous a wrong has been done to Mr. Beck. My 
recollection is that throughout the course of this long and 
anxious trial, my own private opinion was that probably Beck 
was not Smith at all. When, however, I was called upon to 
reconsider the whole case on the petitions forwarded to me 
by the Home Office in July, 1898, I seem to have arrived at 
the conclusion that Beck and Smith were probably one and 
the same person. I noticed, however, that Mr. Dutton in his 
petition alleged that the official record showed that Smith 
was a Jew, and I suggested to the Home Secretary that the 
vexed question as to whether Beck was Smith or not would be 
at once solved if it was proved on examination that Beck was 
not a Jewr. The Home Office acted on my suggestion and 
the “ D ” mark was removed. Why Beck was marked after 
his conviction as a person wffio had been previously convicted 
in the face of the fact that the Treasury carefully abstained 
from trying the issue I do not know, and I am, of course, in 
no way responsible for it. The course taken by the Treasury 
in the conduct of the prosecution left on my mind a strong 
belief that they either thought Beck was not Smith, or at 
any rate that they were not in a position to prove it. I 
naturally assumed, as the case was conducted by the Director 
of Pubilc Prosecutions, that every point had been carefully 
considered and all the documents compared and examined, and 
so far from regarding it as an axiom, as you, sir, seemed 
to think from your statement on Thursday last, that the 
documents in the Smith case and the Beck case were clearly 
in the same handwriting, and generally admitted to be so by 
every one, I thought that Mr. Avorv had arrived at the con- 
clusion that it was a very doubtful point, and that Mr. Gurrin 
^as probably mistaken in the view which he took at the 
Police Court as to the identity of the handwriting in the two 
cases. Mr. Avory objected to the production of the docu- 
ments in the Smith case, on the ground that the question 
whether they were in Beck’s writing or not was a collateral 
issue, in other words that Beck might he the man who com- 
mitted* the offences charged, and yet not the man who com- 

285 



Adolf Beck 


mitted the offence not charged in the indictment before me, 
namely, the previous conviction of John Smith in 1877. I 
had not, and never have, seen the documents in the Smith 
case since 1877, when I see by the Session Papers I prose- 
cuted this man. I had not the faintest recollection either of 
the case or the man. I cannot lay my hand on my fee book 
for that year, but I expect 1 only held the brief, which was 
probably a Court prosecution, for a friend. I had very little 
business at the Old Bailey at that time. I thought that Mr. 
Avory was right, and that the question whether Beck was 
Smith not being charged in the indictment was a collateral 
issue, and that the course taken by the Treasury could only 
be explained on the assumption that they thought that, at the 
very least, it was very doubtful whether the documents in the 
Smith case and the Beck case were in the same handwriting. 
It seemed to me otherwise quite impossible to explain why 
Beck’s witnesses to character were not cross-examined, or any 
^attempt made to prove the previous conviction. I regard 
expert evidence as to disguised handwriting at all times with 
the greatest suspicion. It is to my mind almost in- 
variably inconclusive, and as I have already explained, 
I specially cautioned the jury against relying too much 
on Mr. Gurrin's opinion, all the more because I thought 
the Treasury had arrived at the conclusion that he was prob- 
ably mistaken in saying the Smith documents and the Beck 
documents were in the same handwriting. I thought Mr. Gill, 
quite legitimately, was trying to run the defence on the 
identity of doubtful documents, to the exclusion of the positive 
evidence as to Beck’s identity which had been sworn before 
me by no less than eleven witnesses. Mr. Avory, represent- 
ing the Treasury, objected to the production of the Smith 
documents on the ground that the issue involved was a col- 
lateral one, and I upheld his objection and declined to order 
the documents to be produced. Mr. Gill then said, “ Will 
you reserve the point? ” I said t( What point? You are 
asking me to exercise a discretion which for the reasons given I 
do not think I ought to do, that is not a point of law.” The 
matter then dropped. As Mr. Avory’s conduct of the prose- 
cution has been publicly attacked, T think it right to say 
I have known him intimately all through his professional 
career, and that he is both a most able lawyer and advocate* 
and also a man of the very highest honour and integrity. I 
think, however, he was in error in supposing that the previous 
conviction could not have been charged in the misdemeanour 
indictment ; it is specially provided for by the Prevention of 
Crimes Act (sec. 34 & 35 Victoria, cap. 112). I asked Mr. 
Justice Grantham to take Beck's case in the preserfo year 

286 



Examination of Sir Forrest Fulton. 


because I thought it fairer for him; 1 never like to try a man 
twice. 1 have already given public expression to my deep 
sympathy with Mr. Beck in the awful calamity which has be- 
fallen him, and I desire to-day to repeat what I have already 
written. 

The Chairman — Yes, certainly. 

(The statement was handed in.) 

1315. The Chairman — Does that comprise your statement? 
— That is all I desire to say. I desire to hand in this state- 
ment formally. 

1316. There is this point of fact that we should like to be 
clear upon. We have heard that documents were sent to you 
from the Home Office for your opinion and advice? — Yes. 

1317. What I should like to know is, were the documents 
which disclosed the non-identity of Smith with Beck by reason 
of the fact of circumcision included in the documents that 
were sent to you?— I think not. I saw T the statement referred 
to by Mr. Dutton, and that is the reason why I suggested that 
if an examination was made the matter would be at once set 
at rest. 

1318. I gather that we are at liberty to refer to the 
contents of your letter to the Home Office? Certainly. 

1319. It is upon that I should just like to put a question 

*Sir John Edge — This was the letter which Mr. Murdoch 
wrote to you: I will hand it up in order that you may lefiosh 
your memory. 

(Sir J. Edge handed the letter, which is printed at page fl 
290,* to the Witness.) 

1320. This is a copy of the document which, it has been 
stated, was sent to you ? 

(The document which is printed at page 287* was handed 
to the Witness.) 

Yes, it was for that reason that I, in my' report, advised 
that the examination should be made of the man as to whether 

he was a Jew or not. „ 

* 1321. The Chairman — Then I understand your recollection 

is that it was not brought home to you by official evidence 
that it was the fact that these distinguishing physical circum- 
stances existed?— No, certainly not. That was not the im- 
pression left on my mind at all by the documents submitted to 


‘Cf.\3d. 2315. 


287 



Adolf Beck 


me. But I did, of course, see how vital the point was as deter- 
mining this vexed question of the identity of Smith and Beck, 
and 1 suggested to the Home Secretary that he should have 
the examination made for the purpose of establishing the 
point, which he did do, and the result was that the mark was 
removed, as I am informed, from this man. 

1322. I would like you, if you do not mind, to look at the 
terms of your letter. I think perhaps it ought to be read? 
— I have a copy in my pocket. 

1323. Would you object to it being read out? — Not in the 
least. 

The Chairman — I think it really ought to be read. The 
Secretary will kindly read it. 

1324. The Chairman — There is just one passage in that 
letter I wanted to ask you about. This is the passage : The 
letter, I think, was dictated fey you, was it not. It was not 
written by you? — I do not remember, but I can tell in a 
moment if you will let me look at it. (Letter handed to 
Witness.) It is in my clerk’s writing, signed by me. 

1325. Now you have the original before you. There is this 
passage which caused me some little perplexity: “I did not 
investigate the question as to whether he was John Smith, 
although I have very little doubt he and Beck were one and 
the same person. ” Do you think “ have ” is the word that 
you used there? — I could not say. Do you mean whether the 
word was et have ” or “had”? 

1326. Quite? — 1 could not positively say. 

1327. If it really was “ have 99 it would be quite con- 
sistent with what you say to-day: that your impression is that 
you had not received at that time the conclusive evidence dis- 
severing the identity of Smith and Beck? — Exactly. 

1328. That was really what puzzled us in the matter, 
because we were told by the Home Office that you had had 
that document. I mean the identification record which dis- 
closes the fact that one was circumcised and the other was 
not? — I did not apparently understand whether that was an 
official document or not. 

1329. Quite: whether it was the record of an ascertained 
fact? — Of an ascertained fact or not, and therefore it was for 
that reason I suggested to the Secretary of State that the 
examination had better be at once made, because if it were 
made it would establish the question beyond all doubt. 

1330. Were there any verbal communications between you 
and the Home Office? — No, I think none whatever. It was 
entirely conducted by the correspondence. I only had one 
comniunication with the Secretary of State and this is the com- 
munication. So far as I remember, I do not think th$re was 
any other. 

. 288 ' 



Examination of Sir Forrest Fulton. 


1331. The Home Office claim to have instituted that in- 


vestigation at their own instance before they communicated 
with you — I mean the investigation as to whether Smith was 
a Jew? — I do not know anything about that, but I thought 
that the investigation was the result of my letter, but I do 
not know. 

1332. It is quite clear now, if you are right in 
thinking you used the word “ have ” instead of “had,” that 
you could not have had before you the official state- 
ment disconnecting the two people ?— Certainly. My opinion 
is, that I never had that before me at that time; at any rate, 
that I did not appreciate it. 

1333. That is what occurred to us? — I certainly intended 
in my letter to suggest that the Secretary of .State should 
make this examination with a view to ascertaining the fact. 

I then subsequently found, according to the statements which 
have arisen in this inquiry, that the examination was made, .but 
I was not at all aware that it had been made at the time 
the Secretary of State communicated with me; certainly not. 

1334. I thought it worth while to clear that up? — It is im- 
possible if I had known that the examination had been made 
that I could have said that I thought he was the same man. 

1335. I thought it possibly might be explained by the 
mistake of the word “ have ” for the word “ had M ? — It may 
be so. But it would be contrary to the terms of my letter 
and common sense. If I had in the least understood that the 
Home Office at that time had made the examination, how could 
T possibly say that I thought they were the same person? I 
could not, because I distinctly said if that point is established 
it is clear they cannot be the same person, which, of course, 


is perfectly obvious. , 

1336. Sir Spencer Walpole — Have you seen by any chance 
this paper which the Home Office circulated amongst us, which 

contains the distinctive marks? — No. , 

1337 Would you mind looking at that? It contains the 
distinctive marks of Smith and Beck. {Handing statement 
to Witness) ?— No. I have not seen it. . _ 

1338. You will see that paper was prepared for the Home 
Office in May of 1898. You will observe that at the bottom 
fit these facts there is the fact that one man is circumcised and 
the other man is uncircumcised? — Yes. 

1339. If you will kindly look at Mr. Murdoch s letter to you 

of July, 1898, two months afterwards, it purports at the end 
of it to forward to you a note of the distinctive marks found 
upon* Smith and Beck. You observe that?— Yes. • 

1340. What I want to ask you is, if you can recollect whether 
that note of the distinctive marks in the previous page was 

289 



Adolf Beck. 

the document ehclosed to you in that letter, and if so, whether 
there was anything on it to show that it was an official docu- 
ment, and not a document furnished to the Home Office by 
Mr. Dutton ? — Certainly, the impression left upon my mind was 
that it was not an official document; that it was a document 
which required investigation and that it was part of the inquiry 
that Mr. Dutton was making on behalf of the accused, and which 
formed the subject matter of the petition. That is how the 
matter was presented to my mind when I went through these 
papers. 

1341. You think that document, as far as you recollect, 
was actually enclosed in the Home Office letter, but there was 
nothing to show that it was official? — I have no doubt it was, 
but it did not present itself to my mind as an official document. 
|f it had" presented itself to my mind as an official document, 
and T had supposed that the examination had then been made, 
it is impossible that I could then have said I thought they were 
the same person, because, if ,one man is circumcised and the 
other is not, they could not be the same person. 

1342. You say you suggested that such an examination 
should be made? — I did by inference; at least I thought so. 
It was not necessary to put it in exact terms. “ It is, of 
course, obvious that if at the time of his conviction Smith was 
circumcised and Beck is not. so* they cannot be one and the 
same person.” I presumed from that that the Secretary 
of State would institute the necessary inquiries, and would do 
if one way or the other. 

1343. The Chairman- — We are very much obliged to vou for 
the assistance you have given to us? — Mr. President, I thought 
it right to present myself, having regard to the exceptional 
circumstances of this case, and I thought it was right; that I 
should make such statement as I desired to make, and that 
I should answer questions ns you might think it right to put 
to me in public, otherwise if I had sheltered myself by mv 
official position and given evidence in private it might have 
been open to the gravest question that there was something I 
desired to conceal. On the contrary, T desire to be perfectly 
open and frank with regard to the whole of my transaction's, 
both as to the Secretary of State and otherwise. 


The Witness withdrew 7 . 
******* 


290 



Examination of Sir Forrest Fulton. 

Sir FORREST FULTON, recalled. 

1 381. I he Witness — Ih© document that has now been 
handed to me is the document that was sent to me by the Home 
Office in 181)8. There is nothing on it which would indicate 
that it is an official document so far as I can see. You can 
judge for yourself. 

1382. Sir Spence® Walpole — Except the stamp on the 
paper? — Yes, copied by the Home Office, but I cannot say that 
1 thought it was an official document from that. It is on their 
paper, of course. 

The Chairman — We ate very much indebted to you for your 
assistance. 

The Witness withdrew. ■ 

******* 


Mr. THOMAS HENRY GUR1UN, called and Examined. 


1015. The Chairman — I understand you desire to make a 
statement? — That is so, my lord. 

1010. You were the expert in handwriting who gave evidence 
at the first trial of Mr. Heck? — I was, my lord. 

1017. Would you like the secretary to read your state- 
ment, or would you prefer to read it yourself? — I think I 
would prefer to read it myself. The documents in the charge 
against Mr. Beck were sent to me from the Treasuiy in 
December, 1805, and January, 1800. They consisted of the 
incriminating documents and of specimens of Mr. Beck’s hand- 
writing. I submitted (hem all to a careful analysis, and made 
various tracings for the purpose of comparison. I do not 
think it would serve any useful purpose were I to endeavour 
to show all the grounds on which I based the opinion I then 
gave, but I may briefly sav that the two groups of writing 
differed in general appearance, Mr. Beck’s being more uniform 
and usually sloping forward, while the other was apparently 
distorted and written backward, vertically, t and forward. I 
need not say that a difference in general appearance cannot be 

{ ©lied on as showing different authorship, because if a writing 
>e disguised, the aim of the writer has been to produce an 
effect as distinct as possible from that, produced by his ordinary 
writing, and in such cases if the penmanship does not absolutely 
baffle jdetection, the authorship may be identified by the tracing 
of peculiarities and lin-bits existing in proved handwriting and 
inadvertently left in the disguised writing. The distorted 
forms of many of the letters and the variety of angle and style 

201 



Adolf Beck. 

in the incriminating documents, as well as their fraudulent 
nature, led me to assume that they were disguised. The hand- 
writing in these incriminating documents contained a number of 
peculiar features. It appeared to be a foreign hand, the 
capitals particularly being suggestive of types commonly met 
with in German, Norwegian, and Swedish writings. In Mr. 
Beck’s writing I found features which seemed to me to be of a 
kindred type. In both groups of writing I found a similar 
variety in the size of the capitals, varying from large to very 
small. In both I found resemblances in various letters, capital 
and small, as well as in some of the figures — 3, 4, and 5 — 
which seemed to indicate the habit of the same writer. The 
consideration of these resemblances led me to the belief that 
the two groups of writing were by the same hand, only that 
in the one case they were disguised. This was the result of 
the first part of my investigation. As to the result of the 
second part, I examined the papers in the case of John Smith, 
1877, and found the documents in nature, form, and hand- 
writing were so absolutely identical that there could be no 
possible doubt that they were by the same man who had 
written the incriminating documents in the 1896 case. This 
was too obvious to need any demonstration. When before tho 
magistrate at Westminster I gave my evidence on both points ; 
first, that to the best of my belief the handwriting in the in- 
criminating documents of 1896 was Mr. Beck’s handwriting, 
and in regard to those I have already admitted frankly that 
I was wrong, and I did so the moment it came to my know- 
ledge. I very deeply regret the error in judgment. Secondly, 

I gave evidence to the effect that the incriminating documents 
in the 1877 case were beyond any doubt by the same man 
that wrote the incriminating documents in the 1896 case. I 
may add that in the 1877 case there was no proved specimen 
of John Smith’s ordinary handwriting. Such a specimen 
would have been of the greatest value. During the proceed- 
ings I carefully followed the case and the evidence of every 
witness, and it semed to me that every particle of the evidence 
strongly confirmed the opinions I had formed. There w r ero 
ten or eleven women who identified Mr. Beck as the man who 
had robbed them (I witnessed one of the identifications myself), 
some of whom swore that they saw Mr. Beck write these, 
documents. There were tho identifications by the two police 
officers of Mr. Beck as the man John Smith in their custody 
in 1877. There was the absolute identity of the writing in 
the 1877 and 1896 cases, and there was the fact that the late 
Mr. Inglis, my colleague, who was never loth to oppose me,* had 
examined the documents on behalf of th$ defence, and he was 
not called to rebut my evidence, thus leaving me to assume that 
292 



Examination of Mr. Gurrin 


he shared my opinion. At the trial in 1896 my evidence as to 
the incriminating documents and Mr. Beck’s handwriting was 
given. 1 expressed my conscientious opinion to the best of my 
belief. I never swear to handwriting, and in answer to Mr. 
Gill in cross-examination I admitted, as 1 am always willing 
to do, the possibility of my being mistaken. I said I laid 
no claim to infallibility. The second part of my evidence, 
however, as to the identity of the 1877 and 1896 writings 
being identical, and which was manifest to any one, was, 1 
regret to say, not taken. At the trial in the present year I 
repeated the same evidence as in 1896, having, moreover, 
repeated to the Treasury that there could be no doubt that all 
the incriminating documents in 1877, 1896, and 1904 were 
written by one man. Had I then known that it had already 
been ascertained that John Smith and Mr. Beck were two 
different persons, my report would have been in Mr. Beck’s 
favour, as to assume him guilty under these circumstances 
would, on the handwriting, have been a contradiction. I was 
still convinced that the John Smith of 1877 and Mr. Beck were 
one. In July last, when Mr. Beck was still in detention, I 
heard of the arrest of another man for the same class of fraud, 
and of a letter said to be identical with the writing in the 
incriminating documents in the previous cases. I saw it on 
Sunday, the 17th July, arid was astounded to find the identical 
hand that had been used in all the incriminating documents 
throughout. Then for the first time I recognised that Mr. 
Beck could not be John Smith. On Monday, the 18th, I 
went to Lord Desart and to the chief commissioner of police, 
and stated that in view of that letter I was convinced of Mr. 
Beck’s innocence. In conclusion, I can only express my 
deepest sympathy with Mr. Beck in his terrible trials, and 
my heartfelt regret that his innocence of the charges brought 
against him was not discovered in time to spare him his many 
years of suffering. 

1618. Sir John Edge — I understand you to say that the 
incriminating documents of 1877, the incriminating documents 
of 1895, and the incriminating documents of 1904 are exactly 
in the same handwriting? — Absolutely identical in every respect. 

1619. No doubt could be enter tained by any one that they 
*vere written by the same man? — Absolutely impossible for there 
, to be any question at all of that. 

1620. Do you still think that that was a disguised hand? 
You see there was an interval of twenty-seven years between 
1877Jand .1904. Do you think a man would carry on exactly 
the same dharacter of disguised hand for twenty-seven years ? — 
I ha, vo to answer that in two ways ; the last part of the question 

293 



Adolf ■Beck. 

first. It is quite , possible that a< man may adhere to the 
same form of disguise for a large number of years. 

1621. What you mean by a disguised hand is that it is not 
his natural hand I — Not his natural hand. 

1622. Cut only used on particular occasions? — Yes, that 
is so. 

1623. You have it in 1877, and then you have it eighteen 
years afterwards, in 1895, and again twenty -seven years after 
the first, in 1904. Do you think that a man would carry for- 
ward the same peculiarities in disgorging his hand dining all 
those years and leave no trace of any difference? — It is, I 
think, quite manifest, on examining the incriminating docu- 
ments, that some portions of them are intentionally disguised. 

1624. Put the signatures on one side. Take the bodies of 
the documents. Is there the slightest difference in the waiting 
in all these years? — I may say that, take them all in all, tho 
writings of 1877, 1896, and 1904 are manifestly by one hand, 
even including the differences which appear on the documents 
themselves. Sometimes the John Smith writing is a small 
writing, with a forward slope, and nothing like vso distorted 
as at others. At other times it is a very large writing, 
written backwards, and apparently written right from the elbow, 
without apparently controlling the wrist. I can show 7 in a 
moment, I believe, what 1 mean by referring to a tracing. 

1625. Really, what I was trying to come at was, whether 
you concluded that the incriminating documents in 1895 and 
1896 were in a disguised hand, because the hand differed from 
Mr. Beck’s ordinary hand?- — No, those were not the grounds 
on which I concluded that it was disguised. It was the dis- 
tortion, the irregularity of angle, and the difference of style 
in tho incriminating documents themselves. 

1626. Then if you had seen none of the genuine writing of 
Mr. Beck at all, you would still have been of opinion that the 
documents of 1895 and 1896 woe in a, disguised hand? — Yes. 

1627. Sir Spencer Walpole — The documents as well as 
signatures? Signatures are obviously, as you have described 
it, inverted? — -There was other writing besides the signatures; 
for instance, the bills of exchange and the addresses on the 
envelopes. For instance, here is a facsimile of writing taken 
from those incriminating documents (documents produced). • 
Some of it is very large. These are upright, and backward, 
and small with the forward slope. All those handwritings were 
taken from the same set of documents. 

1628. Sir John - Emu; — Of course, 1 am not an expert? — - 

It is the enormous difference in the style. / 

i 1629. As a matter of fact, do you find there is any differ- 
ence in the style of a man’s writing over a period of twenty- 

294 



Examination of Mr. Gtlrrin. 

seven years? — It depends upon what period you compare them 
with. 

1630. I say over a period. Is it your opinion that a man's 
writing remains the same for a period of twenty-seven years? — It 
often does ; sometimes it does hot. I have seen writing written 
at an interval of thirty-live years. A woman's writing, com- 
pared when she was twenty-live with when she was sixty, and 
the two signatures looked as if they might have been written 
almost at one sitting. 

1631. And the body of the letter? — I am only speaking of 
the signature. 

1632. Sir Spencer Wai^O&e — If y ou had known in Decem- 
ber, 1895, that the mai^cs^On- Beck's body did not correspond 
with the marks on Smith; would you have modified your opinion? 
— If I had known that there were marks that refuted his iden- 
tity, certainly. I should have said it was impossible. 

1633. You were not informed of any such difference in 
marks by the police, were you? — I heard on one occasion, I 
think, that there was some discrepancy, something in the way 
of a mole or a wart, but it struck me that it was of such a 
nature that it might have been transient at the time, and that 
the lapse of years would have accounted for it disappearing. 

1631. If you had known in 100-1 that there was a distinct 
difference between the marks in the two bodies, the one being 
a circumcised and the other an un circumcised man, would that 
have modified your opinion? — I should say so, most decidedly, 
because I was absolutely conscious of the fact all the wav through 
that it must have been the 1877 man that committed these 
frauds. 

1635. And, a.s a matter of fact, you did not receive that 
information ? — No. 

1636. Sir John Edge — From the point of view of an expert, 
I suppose it would be immaterial that you should receive that 
information, would it not? — I take the greatest notice of facts. 

1637. Yes, but are not those outside facts likely to influence 
your judgment, as an expert? I mean, if you find there are ten 
or eleven witnesses who identify a man, would that, strengthen 
your view that you were correct in your viJw of the writing, 
a,s an expert? — I think so, undoubtedly, if I heard ten or eleven 
witnesses declare a fact, and 1 believed their statement, it 
would certainly strengthen mv opinion. 

1638. It would strengthen your opinion that you were cor- 
rect in your criticism of the writing? — Yes, all the evidence that 
I heartl from time to time did confirm me in the belief that 
my opiniori was an accurate one. 

1639. Ogn you say that it did not influence your opinion 
when you were coming to a conclusion in this matter? — No, it 

295 



Adolf Beck. 

did not influence me in the first place. Step by step it con- 
firmed me. 

The Chairman — Thank you, Mr. Gurrin. 

The Witness withdrew ~ 

Mr. Adolf Beck — May I put a question to Mr. Gurrin 
with regal’d to Mr. Gurrin' s statement? 

The Chairman — Let me know what the question is. 

Sir George Lewis — The question is : Does Mr. Gurrin think 
that, if he had been allowed to give evidence at the trial and* 
was not stopped from doing so, his evidenc e would have made 
Mr. Beck’s innocence apparent at the trial. 

The Chairman — He said so. 


296 








