\\ 


Iff) 


Iflotable  £ngltsb  flrtate 


Franz    Muller 


NOTABLE 
ENGLISH   TRIALS. 


The  Stauntons.      Edited  by  J.  B. 
Allay,  M.A.,  Barrister-at-Law. 

Franz  Muller.      Edited  by  H.  B. 
Irving,  M.A.(Oxon). 

Lord  Lovat.     Edited  by  David  N. 
Mackay,  Solicitor. 

William  Palmer.      Edited  by 
Geo.  H.  Knott,  Barrister-at-Law. 

The  Annesley  Case.      Edited  by 
Andrew  Lang. 

Dr.  Lams  on.      Edited  by   H.   L. 
Adam. 

Mrs.  Maybricfc.    Edited  by  H.  B. 
Irving,  M.A.(Oxon). 


Lord  Chief  Baron  Pollock 
(From  a  Photograph  by  Maull  &  Fox,  London). 


Trial  of 

Franz   Muller 


Edited  by 

H.   B.  Irving,  M.A.(Oxon) 

Author  of  "The  Life  of  Judge  Jeffreys,"   "French  Criminals  of  the 
Nineteenth  Century,"  "Occasional  Papers" 


EDINBURGH   AND   LONDON 

WILLIAM    HODGE   &   COMPANY 


PRINTED  BY 

WILLIAM  HODGE  AND  COMPANY 

GLASGOW    AND  EDINBURGH 

1911 


TO  THE  BIGHT   HONOURABLE 

THE  EARL  OF  HALSBURY, 

SOME  TIME  LORD  CHANCELLOR  OF  ENGLAND, 

THE  ONLY  SITRVIVOR,   AND  THE  MOST  ILLUSTRIOUS 

OF  THE  MANY  DISTINGUISHED  LAWYERS 

WHO  TOOK  PART  IN  THIS  TRIAL, 

THIS  VOLUME  IS 

BY   KIND  PERMISSION 

RESPECTFULLY  DEDICATED 

BY 
THE  EDITOR. 


PREFACE. 

THE  present  report  of  the  trial  of  Franz  Muller  is  taken  from 
that  published  in  the  Daily  Telegraph,  which  has  been  care- 
fully collated  with  the  report  of  the  evidence  as  given  in  the 
"  Central  Criminal  Court  Sessions  Paper,"  vol.  lix.,  part  360. 

There  is  a  fairly  full  report  of  the  trial,  and  the  summing 
up  of  the  Lord  Chief  Baron  in  the  "  Annual  Register  "  for  1864, 
vol.  cvi.  References  to  Miiller's  case  will  be  found  in  Major 
Arthur  Griffiths'  "  Chronicles  in  Newgate,"  vol.  ii.,  pp.  417 
and  448,  and  "  Mysteries  of  Police  and  Crime,"  vol.  i.,  p.  402. 
The  murder  of  Mr.  Briggs  and  other  railway  outrages  are 
dealt  with  in  volume  ii.,  chapter  25,  of  Pendleton's  "Our 
Railways "  (1896).  There  is  an  account  of  Muller  in  a 
little  volume,  "  Celebrated  Crimes  and  Criminals,"  published 
in  1890,  under  the  signature  "W.  M."  I  am  at  liberty  to 
divulge  the  fact  that  "  W.  M."  is  my  friend  Mr.  Willoughby 
Maycock,  C.M.G.,  and  to  his  kindness  I  owe  the  copy  of  the 
correspondence  given  in  Appendix  IV.  relating  to  Miiller's 
confession  on  the  scaffold. 

I  am  indebted  to  the  courtesy  of  friends  in  preparing  the 
illustrations  for  this  volume;  to  Mr.  Ernest  Pollock,  K.C., 
M.P.,  for  helping  me  to  obtain  a  photograph  of  Chief  Baron 
Pollock;  to  the  Hon.  Malcolm  Nacnaghten,  who  kindly  got 
me  Lord  Macnaghten's  permission  to  have  the  portrait  of 
Baron  Martin  photographed  for  this  volume ;  to  Judge  Parry 
for  lending  me  a  photograph  of  his  father;  and  to  Mr.  Hairy 
Furniss  for  his  sketch  of  the  "  Muller  hat."  I  would  thank, 
too,  the  Hon.  John  Collier  for  his  courtesy  in  allowing  me  the 
use  of  a  photograph  of  his  father,  Lord  Monkswell,  for  repro- 
duction, and  Professor  Harvey  Littlejohn,  of  Edinburgh,  who 
has  permitted  the  reproduction  of  the  police  bill  for  the 
apprehension  of  Lefroy. 

The  account  of  Dickman's  trial  has  been  taken  from  the 
Newcastle  Daily  Chronicle  reports  of  the  various  proceedings 
in  the  case. 


PREFACE. 

If  justification  were  needed  for  the  publication  of  the  reports 
of  these  famous  trials  it  would  be  found  in  the  words  of 
Edmund  Burke,  quoted  by  George  Borrow,  in  the  edition  of 
"  Celebrated  Trials,"  of  which  he  was  the  author.  But, 
apart  from  their  historical  or  psychological  interest,  to  which 
Burke  does  ample  justice,  the  full  and  accurate  reports  of  great 
criminal  trials  must  be  of  some  practical  value  to  any  student 
who  would  acquaint  himself  with  actual  examples  of  forensic 
eloquence,  the  examination  and  cross-examination  of  witnesses, 
the  conduct  of  a  case,  the  function  of  judge  and  counsel,  and 
the  administration  of  our  criminal  law.  H.  B.  I. 

LONDON,  May,  1911. 


CONTENTS. 


Introduction,     - 
Table  of  Dates, 


The  Trial— 


FIRST  DAY— THURSDAY,  2?TH  OCTOBER,  1864. 


PAGE 

xiii 
xlvii 


u 

The  Solicitor-General's  Opening 

Speech,         .... 

4 

Evidence 

for  the  Prosecution. 

David  Buchan,  - 

16 

George  Greenwood,  - 

-      26 

Mrs.  Buchan,    - 

17 

Lewis  Lambert, 

-      26 

T.  Fishbourne,  - 

17 

Walter  Kerressey,    - 

-      26 

Henry  Vernez,  - 

18 

Dr.  Henry  Letheby, 

-      28 

Sydney  Jones,  - 

18 

John  Death, 

29 

Benjamin  Ames, 

19 

Mrs.  Blyth, 

31 

William  Timms, 

20 

George  Blyth,  - 

34 

Alfred  Ekin,      -        -        : 

21 

Mrs.  Repsch,     - 

35 

Edward  Dougan,       ... 

21 

Godfrey  F.  Repsch,  - 

-      39 

Dr.  Francis  Toulmin, 

22 

John  Haifa, 

-      40 

Dr.  Alfred  H.  Brereton,  - 

24 

George  Death,  - 

-      42 

Dr.  Vincent  M.  Cooper,  - 

25 

SECOND  DAY — FRIDAY,  28iH  OCTOBER,  1864. 
Evidence  for  the  Prosecution  (continued}. 


John  Henry  Glass,  44 

Henry  Smith,   ...  45 

Alfred  Wey,      ...  45 

Charles  Young,  -      45 

Jonathan  Matthews,          -  -      45 

Mrs.  Matthews,  60 
Godfrey  F.  Repsch  (recalled),  -      62 

Mrs.  Repsch  (recalled),     -  -      62 

Joseph  Hennaquart,  62 

Edward  Watson,       -  -      63 

Thomas  H.  Walker,-        -  -      63 


W.  H.  Tiddy,  -  64 

James  Gifford,  -  -      64 

Jacob  Weist,     -  -      65 

George  Clarke,  -  66,  69 

Inspector  Tanner,      -  67,  72 

Thomas  J.  Briggs,  70 

Samuel  Tidmarsh,  70 

Daniel  Digance,  70 

Frederick  W.  Thorn,  -        -      72 

Mrs.  Blyth  (recalled),  -               72 


Mr.  Serjeant  Parry's  Speech  for  the  Defence, 


73 


CONTENTS. 

THIKD  DAY— SATURDAY,  29-ra  OCTOBBB,  1864. 
Evidence  for  the  Defence. 


PAGE 


Thomas  Lee,     ....  95 

George  Byers,  99 

William  Lee,     ...        -  99 

Alfred  C.  Woodward,       -        -  100 


Mrs.  Jones,       ....  101 

Mary  Ann  Eldred,    -        -        -  106 

Thomas  Beard,  -        -        -        -  108 

Charles  Foreman,      -        -        -  109 


The  Solicitor-General's  Reply,         ...  110 

The  Judge's  Summing-up,        - -        *  131 

The  Verdict,     -  145 

The  Sentence, 145 

APPENDICES. 

I.  Extradition  Proceedings  at  New  York, 151 

II.  Memorial  presented  by  the  German  Legal  Protection  Society,      -  161 

III.  An  Account  of  the  Execution  of  Miiller, 169 

IV.  Correspondence  relating  to  Miiller's  Confession  on  the  Scaffold,  -  179 
V.  Short  Account  of  the  Judges  and  Counsel  engaged  in  the  case,  -  188 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Lord  Chief  Baron  Pollock, Frontispiece 

X"      A  "  Muller "  Hat,                                                    -        -  facing  page         xvi 

Handbill  in  Lefroy  Case,       ...        -  ,,                xxxii 

Mr.  Serjeant  Ballantine, »                    16 

Mr.  James  Hannen, ,, 

Sir  R.  P.  Collier,  -        -  „                  109 

Mr.  Hardinge  Giffard,  -  „                    64 

Mr.  Serjeant  Parry,      -        -  ,,72 

Franz  Muller,        •  ,> 

Mr.  Baron  Martin,        -  ,,                  144 

Franz  Muller,       •  »                  169 


FRANZ    MULLER. 


INTRODUCTION. 

ON  the  night  of  Saturday,  the  9th  of  July,  1864,  a  suburban 
train  on  the  North  London  Railway  left  Fenchurch  Street  station 
for  Chalk  Farm  at  9.50.  It  left  the  next  station,  Bow,  at 
10.1;  Hackney  Wick  or  Victoria  Park,  at  10.5;  and  arrived 
at  Hackney  about  six  minutes  later.  At  the  last  station  two 
bank  clerks,  who  had  taken  tickets  for  Highbury,  opened  the 
door  of  a  compartment  of  a  first-class  carriage.  The  carriage 
was  empty.  The  two  men  got  in  and  sat  down.  They  had 
hardly  done  so  when  one  called  the  other's  attention  to  some 
blood  on  his  hand.  They  alighted  immediately  from  the 
carriage,  and  called  the  guard  of  the  train.  He  examined  the 
compartment,  and  discovered  stains  of  blood  on  the  cushions  of 
the  seat  which  backed  to  the  engine  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the 
train  going  from  London.  There  was  blood  on  the  glass  by  the 
cushion,  some  marks  of  blood  on  the  cushion  opposite,  and  on 
the  offside  handle  of  the  carriage  door.  In  the  carriage  the 
guard  found  a  hat,  stick,  and  bag.  These  he  took  out,  the 
carriage  was  locked  up,  taken  to  Chalk  Farm  station,  and  later 
brought  back  to  Bow. 

About  twenty  minutes  past  ten  on  the  same  night  the  driver 
of  a  train  of  empty  carriages  from  Hackney  Wick  to  Fenchurch 
Street  noticed  a  dark  object  lying  on  the  6-foot  way  between 
the  Hackney  Wick  and  Bow  stations.  He  stopped  the  train, 
alighted  from  the  engine,  and  found  that  the  dark  object  was 
the  body  of  a  man.  He  was  lying  on  his  back  between  the  up 
and  down  lines,  his  feet  towards  London  and  his  head  towards 
Hackney,  at  a  spot  about  two-thirds  of  the  distance — 1  mile 
414  yards — between  Bow  and  Hackney  stations.  The  body  was 
taken  to  a  neighbouring  public-house,  and  a  doctor  summoned. 
He  found  that  the  unfortunate  man  was  alive,  but  completely 
unconscious,  that  his  skull  had  been  fractured,  and  several 


Franz    Muller. 

wounds  inflicted  on  his  head,  presumably  by  some  blunt  instru- 
ment, while  there  were  a  number  of  jagged  wounds  near  the 
left  ear. 

The  victim  of  this  apparently  atrocious  assault  was  soon 
identified  as  Mr.  Thomas  Briggs,  chief  clerk  in  the  bank  of 
Messrs.  Kobarts  &  Co.,  of  Lombard  Street.  Mr.  Briggs 
remained  unconscious  until  late  the  following  night,  when  he 
expired.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  close  on  seventy 
years  of  age,  a  gentleman  greatly  trusted  and  respected  by 
his  employers,  and  held  in  high  esteem  by  a  large  circle  of 
friends.  He  resided  at  Victoria  Park,  and  was  a  frequent 
traveller  between  Fen  church  Street  and  Hackney  Wick,  or 
Viotoria  Park,  station.  On  the  evening  of  9th  July  Mr.  Briggs 
had  dined  with  some  relations,  and  left  their  house  at  Peckham, 
carrying  a  black  bag  and  walking  stick,  about  half-past  eight. 
He  had  walked  from  there  to  the  Old  Kent  Road,  where  he  had 
taken  an  omnibus  to  King  William  Street  for  the  purpose  of 
getting  to  Fenchurch  Street  station.  At  Fenchurch  Street  Mr. 
Briggs  was  seen  and  spoken  to  by  the  ticket  collector,  who  knew 
him  well,  as  he  passed  through  with  his  ticket  to  enter  the 
9.60  train  for  Hackney  Wick.  From  that  moment  Mr.  Briggs 
had  been  seen  by  no  one  until  he  was  found  insensible  on  the 
railway. 

In  the  blood-stained  carriage  a  bag,  a  stick,  and  a  hat  had 
been  found.  The  bag  and  stick  were  both  recognised  as  having 
belonged  to  Mr.  Briggs,  and  been  in  his  possession  when  he 
quitted  his  friend's  house,  but  the  hat  was  not  his.  The  tall 
hat  worn  by  Mr.  Briggs  had  disappeared ;  the  hat  found  in  the 
carriage  was  a  black  beaver  hat,  but  lower  in  the  crown  than 
the  ordinary  high  hat  such  as  Mr.  Briggs  was  in  the  habit  of 
wearing.  Inside  the  hat  was  the  name  of  the  maker,  "  Mr. 
J.  H.  Walker,  49  Crawford  Street,  Marylebone." 

This  hat  seemed  to  be  the  only  possible  clue  to  the  identity 
of  the  assailant,  for  that  Mr.  Briggs  had  been  the  victim  of  a 
foul  murder  there  could  be  no  reasonable  doubt.  No  weapon 
capable  of  inflicting  the  injuries  on  the  head  of  the  murdered 
man  had  been  found;  but  it  was  thought  possible,  though  by 
no  means  certain,  that,  wielded  by  a  powerful  arm,  these 
might  have  been  inflicted  by  Mr.  Briggs's  walking  stick,  which 
was  large,  heavy,  and  stained  with  blood.  From  the  appear- 


Introduction. 

ance  of  the  compartment  it  seemed  likely  that  Mr.  Briggs  had 
been  attacked  while  dozing,  with  his  head  against  the  corner 
of  the  carriage.  Though  nearly  seventy  years  of  age,  he  was 
described  as  a  stout,  stalwart  man,  who,  had  he  been  fully 
alert,  would  no  doubt  have  made  a  desperate  resistance. 
Whether  he  had  been  thrown  on  the  line  by  his  assailant  or 
had  struggled  and  fallen  from  the  carriage  in  his  endeavour  to 
escape  was  a  matter  of  conjecture,  though  here,  again,  the 
probability  was  that  he  had  been  flung  on  the  line.  Robbery 
had  been  the  motive  of  the  crime;  though  some  £5  in  money 
had  been  left  in  the  pockets  of  the  murdered  man,  his  gold 
watch  and  chain,  and  gold  eye-glasses  were  missing,  only  the 
gold  fastening  of  the  watch  chain  being  left  attached  to  the 
waistcoat. 

Great  public  interest  and  indignation  were  aroused  by  the 
crime.  It  was  the  first  murder  on  an  English  railway,  of  a  char- 
acter very  alarming  to  a  public  less  inured  to  such  crimes  than 
we  are  to-day.  The  Government  and  Messrs.  Robarts'  Bank 
offered  each  a  reward  of  £100  for  the  discovery  of  the  murderer, 
and  these  offers  were  followed  shortly  after  by  another  £100  from 
the  North  London  Railway.  The  first  clue  to  the  identity  of 
the  murderer  was  furnished  by  a  jeweller  of  the  not  inappro- 
priate name  of  Death.  He  stated  that  on  the  morning  of 
Monday,  the  llth  of  July,  a  man  of  about  thirty  years  of  age, 
of  sallow  complexion  and  thin  in  feature,  apparently  a  German, 
but  speaking  good  English,  had  called  at  his  shop  in  Cheapside, 
and  had  exchanged  for  a  gold  chain  and  a  ring  to  the  total 
value  of  £3  10s.,  a  gold  albert  chain,  which  Death  recognised 
from  the  published  description  as  the  chain  worn  by  Mr.  Brigga 
on  the  night  of  his  murder.  He  described  the  man  as  having 
been  perfectly  self-possessed  during  the  quarter  of  an  hour  he 
was  in  his  shop,  but  noticed  that  he  placed  himself  all  the  time 
in  such  a  position  as  not  to  be  exposed  to  a  full  view. 

For  another  six  days  rumour  was  busy  and  speculation  rife 
as  to  the  nature  of  the  crime  and  the  identity  of  the  murderer. 
Some  suggested  that  the  crime  had  been  an  act  of  revenge  on 
the  part  of  an  employee  of  Messrs.  Robarts'  Bank  whom  Mr. 
Briggs  had,  in  the  course  of  his  duty,  seen  fit  to  discharge. 
But  on  the  18th  of  July  a  cabman  named  Jonathan  Matthews 
made  a  statement  to  the  police,  which  seemed  to  indicate  clearly 


Franz    Muller. 

the  identity  of  the  perpetrator  of  the  crime.  Matthews,  who 
appears  to  have  been  a  man  of  very  moderate  intelligence, 
and  certainly  no  great  reader,  had,  according  to  his  own 
account,  heard  nothing  of  the  murder  that  was  agitating  all 
London,  until  talking  of  the  crime  with  a  man  on  the  cab 
rank,  his  attention  was  arrested  by  the  name  of  the  jeweller 
Death.  He  then  recollected  that  he  had  seen  in  his  own  house 
a  few  days  previously  a  jeweller's  cardboard  box  bearing  the 
rather  singular  name  of  Death.  This  box  had  been  given  to 
his  little  girl  by  a  young  German  of  the  name  of  Franz  Muller. 
Muller  had  been  at  one  time  engaged  to  one  of  Matthews' 
daughters,  but,  owing  to  his  unreasonable  jealousy,  the  engage- 
ment had  been  broken  off. 

Muller  was  a  native  of  Saxe-Weimar,  twenty-five  years 
of  age.  Apprenticed  as  a  gunsmith  in  his  native  country, 
he  had  come  over  to  England  about  two  years'  before 
the  murder  of  Mr.  Briggs.  Failing  to  get  work  as  a 
gunsmith,  he  had  turned  tailor,  and  had  been  working  up  to 
the  2nd  of  July  in  the  employment  of  a  Mr.  Hodgkinson.  Muller 
was  not  satisfied,  however,  with  the  conditions  of  work  in 
England,  and  had  declared  his  intention  of  going  away  to  seek 
his  fortune  in  America.  In  accordance  with  this  intention  he 
had  left  England  on  Friday,  the  15th  of  July,  by  the  sailing  ship 
"Victoria,"  bound  from  the  London  Docks  for  New  York. 

The  cabman  Matthews  supplied  the  police  with  another  link 
in  the  chain  of  evidence  against  Muller.  He  identified  the  hat 
found  in  the  railway  carriage  as  a  hat  which  he  had  himself 
purchased  for  Muller  at  the  shop  of  a  Mr.  Walker  in  Crawford 
Street,  Marylebone.  He  was  able  to  supply  the  police  with  a 
photograph  of  Muller,  and  the  address  of  the  house  in  which 
Muller  had  been  lodging  immediately  before  his  departure  for 
America.  The  photograph  was  shown  to  Death,  who  at  once 
identified  it  as  that  of  the  man  who  on  Monday,  the  llth  of 
July,  had  visited  his  shop  and  exchanged  Mr.  Briggs 's  gold 
chain  for  another. 

Muller  had  been  lodging  last  with  a  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Blyth  at 
16  Park  Terrace,  Bow,  so  that  he  had  been  in  the  habit  of 
travelling  on  the  same  railway  line,  to  and  from  Fenchurch 
Street,  as  the  late  Mr.  Briggs.  Mrs.  Blyth  gave  her  lodger 
an  excellent  character.  "  He  was,"  she  said,  "  a  quiet,  well- 


Introduction* 

behaved,  inoffensive  young  man,  of  a  humane  and  affectionate 
disposition."  She  stated  that  on  Saturday,  the  9th  of  July,  the 
day  of  the  murder,  Miiller  had  gone  out  as  usual  in  the  morning, 
but  had  not  returned  home  when  she  and  her  husband  went  to 
bed  at  eleven  o'clock.  On  the  following  day,  Sunday,  she 
said  that  he  had  been  in  the  best  of  spirits,  laughing,  chatting, 
and  enjoying  his  meals.  On  the  Monday  evening  Miiller  had 
shown  Mrs.  Blyth  the  gold  chain  which  he  had  got  from  Death 
in  exchange  for  that  taken  from  Mr.  Brigge.  Since  his 
departure  for  America  Mrs.  Blyth  had  received  a  letter  from 
Miiller,  posted  from  Worthing.  It  ran  as  follows :  — 

On  the  sea,  July  16th,  in  the  morning.  Dear  friends,  I  am  glad  to 
confess  that  I  cannot  have  a  better  time  as  I  have,  for  the  sun  shines  nice 
and  the  wind  blows  fair  as  it  is  at  present  moment,  everything  will  go 
well.  I  cannot  write  any  more  only  I  have  no  postage,  you  will  be  so  kind 
as  to  take  that  letter  in. 

Besides  this  letter  Mrs.  Blyth  showed  the  police  a  hatbox 
which  Miiller  had  brought  with  him  when  he  first  came  to  lodge 
at  her  house.  It  bore  on  it  the  name  of  Walker,  Crawford 
Street,  Marylebone,  the  name  of  the  shop  from  which  Matthews 
had  stated  that  he  had  bought  the  hat  for  Miiller. 

The  police  lost  no  time  in  getting  on  the  track  of  the  young 
German  tailor.  Matthews  made  his  statement  at  ten  o'clock 
on  the  night  of  the  18th  of  July.  At  half -past  six  the  following 
morning  the  officers  called  on  Mrs.  Blyth,  and  the  same  night 
Inspector  Tanner  and  Detective-Sergeant  Clarke,  taking  with 
them  the  jeweller  Death,  the  cabman  Matthews,  and  a  warrant 
granted  by  Mr.  Henry,  chief  magistrate  at  Bow  Street, 
for  Muller's  arrest,  left  Euston  station  for  Liverpool.  They 
sailed  from  there  for  New  York  on  Tuesday,  20th  July,  by  the 
New  York  and  Philadelphia  Company's  steamship  "  City  of 
Manchester."  The  steamer  was  timed  to  arrive  at  New  York 
some  two  or  three  weeks  before  the  sailing  ship  that  was 
carrying  Miiller.  The  proceedings  of  the  police  in  this  case 
bear  some  resemblance  to  those  employed  recently  in  the  capture 
of  Crippen,  save  that  in  1864  there  was  no  wireless  telegraphy 
to  assure  the  police  officers  that  the  "  Victoria  "  had  their  man 
on  board.  Inspector  Tanner  and  his  companions  reached  New 
York  on  the  5th  of  August.  They  had  to  wait  twenty  days 
before  the  "  Victoria  "  came  into  port.  By  that  time  New  York 
had  become  as  excited  as  London  over  the  expected  arrival  of 

a  xvii 


Franz    Muller. 

Miiller,  and  in  their  excitement  some  foolish  persons  all  but  pre- 
vented the  police  from  taking  Muller  alive.  As  the  "  Victoria  " 
was  waiting  in  harbour  for  the  pilot  boat  containing  the  officers 
to  come  out  to  her,  a  party  of  excursionists  passing  near  the 
vessel  shouted  out,  "How  are  you,  Muller  the  murderer  ?"  For- 
tunately Muller,  who  was  on  deck,  did  not  hear  them.  Had  he 
done  so,  he  might  have  evaded  capture  by  timely  suicide.  As 
soon  as  the  officers  came  on  board  the  captain  ordered  all  the 
steerage  passengers  aft  for  medical  examination.  Muller  was 
called  into  the  cabin.  He  was  charged  with  the  murder  of 
Mr.  Briggs  on  the  North  London  Railway  on  the  night  of  the  9th 
of  July.  He  turned  very  pale,  but  said  that  he  had  never  been 
on  that  line.  His  keys  were  taken  from  him,  his  box  searched, 
and  in  it  were  found  the  watch  and  what  was  believed  to  be 
the  hat  of  the  late  Mr.  Briggs.  Muller  said  that  they  were  both 
his  property,  that  he  had  had  the  watch  for  two  years  and  the 
hat  for  about  twelve  months. 

Muller  on  landing  in  New  York  was  an  object  of  great  interest 
to  the  public.  He  is  described  as  short,  with  light  hair  and 
"  small  grey,  inexpressible  eyes."  He  had  behaved  fairly  well 
on  the  voyage  out,  but  had  got  into  trouble  once  or  twice  on 
account  of  his  overbearing  manner.  On  one  occasion  he  received 
a  black  eye  for  calling  a  fellow-passenger  a  liar  and  a  robber. 
He  had  no  money  with  him,  but  tried  to  raise  some  by  offering 
to  eat  5  Ibs.  of  German  sausage.  He  failed  in  this  laudable 
endeavour,  and  was  compelled  to  stand  porter  all  round,  a 
penalty  he  could  only  fulfil  by  parting  with  two  of  his  shirts. 

On  the  26th  of  August  extradition  proceedings  were  com- 
menced before  Commissioner  Newton,  and  concluded  the  follow- 
ing day.  Death,  Matthews,  and  the  police  officers  gave  evidence. 
Muller  was  represented  by  a  Mr.  Chauncey  Schafier.  In  addressing 
the  Commissioner  on  behalf  of  his  client,  Mr.  Schaffer  made  no 
reference  to  the  charge  against  him.  He  indulged  in  a  harangue 
in  the  true  "Jefferson  Brick  "  vein,  punctuated  by  loud  applause, 
in  which  he  denounced  the  British  for  their  flagrant  iniquity  in 
regard  to  the  ship  "  Alabama,"  which  had  been  destroyed  in 
the  previous  June,  and  said  that  by  our  own  treachery  and  gross 
misconduct  we  had  made  any  Extradition  Treaty  a  dead  letter. 
The  Commissioner,  while  tactfully  complimenting  Mr.  Schaffer 
on  his  address,  did  not  yield  to  his  singular  arguments.  He 
xviii 


Introduction. 

granted  Miiller's  extradition,  and  on  the  3rd  of  September  Miiller 
and  his  captors  left  for  England  on  the  steamship  "  Etna  "  of 
the  Inman  Line. 

In  England  Miiller's  arrival  was  no  less  eagerly  awaited  than 
that  of  Dr.  Crippen  some  months  ago.  The  dramatic  flight 
and  capture  of  the  young  German  had  given  the  case  a  degree 
of  interest  which  it  had  failed  to  awaken  at  the  outset.  Even 
the  Times  accorded  large  headings  to  the  news  of  Miiller  which 
was  coming  from  America,  and  gave  to  his  arrival  a  journalistic 
importance  which  in  recent  years  it  has  denied  to  occurrences 
of  this  nature.  For  the  moment  the  news  of  Miiller  seemed 
almost  to  eclipse  in  importance  that  of  the  Civil  War  then 
raging  in  the  United  States  between  North  and  South.  It 
was  pointed  out  by  some  English  newspapers  that  had  Miiller 
possessed  $3000  or  $4000  at  the  time  of  his  arrest  in  New  York, 
he  might  have  procured  bail  from  the  Commissioner,  and  been 
quietly  spirited  away  into  the  ranks  of  the  Federal  Army. 
According  to  these  newspapers,  American  law  at  this  time 
allowed  bail  to  all  accused  persons,  whatever  the  nature  of 
their  offence.  But  Miiller  was  penniless  and  without  friends. 
There  was  to  be  no  military  career  for  him — he  was  not  to  lose 
his  life  upon  the  field  of  battle. 

During  his  absence  from  England  the  question  of  Miiller's 
guilt  had  been  widely  discussed.  The  weight  of  the  evidence 
against  him,  especially  that  of  the  cabman  Matthews,  had 
been  made  a  subject  of  newspaper  correspondence.  To  such 
lengths  had  this  improper  discussion  been  carried  that  the 
Daily  Telegraph  published  a  leading  article  warning  the  public 
against  forming  a  premature  judgment  of  the  case  against 
Miiller.  To  help  him  to  secure  the  best  assistance  at  his  trial 
the  German  Legal  Protection  Society  announced  that  they  had 
undertaken  his  defence. 

The  "  Etna  "  arrived  at  Queenstown  on  the  evening  of  the 
15th,  of  September.  A  representative  of  the  Daily  Telegraph 
visited  Miiller  in  his  cabin,  and  found  him  quiet  and  cheerful.  On 
his  undertaking,  willingly  given,  that  he  would  cause  no  trouble, 
the  officers  had  dispensed  with  the  use  of  handcuffs.  The 
young  man  seemed  greatly  interested  in  a  shoal  of  porpoises, 
and  pointed  out  some  cows  on  the  Irish  coast  which  could  only 
have  been  descried  by  a  man  with  extremely  good  sight.  Miiller 

zix 


Franz    Muller. 

was  reading  "  David  Copperfield."  He  had  been  given  "  Pick- 
wick "  at  the  commencement  of  the  voyage,  and  had  enjoyed 
the  book  so  well,  especially  the  account  of  the  trial  of  Bardell 
v.  Pickwick,  that  he  had  asked  for  another  work  by  the  same 
author.  His  conduct  during  the  voyage  had  been  exemplary; 
he  alluded  with  evident  pleasure  to  the  fact  that  as  a  prisoner 
on  the  "  Etna  "  he  was  enjoying  much  better  food  than  had  been 
supplied  to  the  steerage  passengers  on  the  "  Victoria." 

Liverpool  was  reached  on  the  night  of  Friday,  the  16th, 
There  a  strange  incident  occurred.  A  well-dressed  and 
apparently  gentlemanly  person  walked  into  the  room  where 
Muller  was  waiting,  and,  going  up  to  him,  said,  "  And  you 
are  Franz  Muller.  Well,  I  am  glad  to  see  you  and  shake 
hands  with  you.  Do  you  think  you  will  be  able  to  prove  your 
innocence?  "  To  which  Muller  replied  "  I  do."  "  You  know, 
Muller,"  said  the  gentleman  in  a  loud  voice,  "this  is  a  very 
serious  charge."  Here  one  of  the  detectives  interposed  and 
told  the  man  to  leave  the  room,  which  he  did,  but  with  some 
reluctance.  His  fatuous  conduct  was  made  the  theme  of  a 
stinging  rebuke  in  Punch,  under  the  heading  of  "  An  Awful 
Snob  at  Liverpool."  At  nine  o'clock  on  the  Saturday  morn- 
ing Muller  left  for  London,  reaching  Euston  at  a  quarter  to 
three.  A  large  crowd  greeted  him  with  hoots  and  groans. 
He  was  taken  at  once  to  Bow  Street,  and  charged,  after  which 
he  was  removed  to  Hollo  way  Prison. 

On  the  following  Monday  the  magisterial  hearing  commenced 
at  the  Bow  Street  Police  Court  before  Mr.  Flowers.  Mr. 
Hardinge  Giffard — now  Lord  Halsbury — appeared  to  prosecute 
for  the  Crown,  and  Muller  was  defended  by  a  well-known 
solicitor,  Mr.  Thomas  Beard,  who  had  been  instructed  by  the 
German  Legal  Protection  Society.  The  evidence,  which  was 
substantially  that  given  afterwards  at  the  trial,  need  not  be 
recapitulated  here.  One  important  new  piece  of  evidence  was 
that  of  the  hatter  Digance  and  his  assistant,  who  had  been 
in  the  habit  of  making  Mr.  Briggs's  hats.  They  declared  that 
the  hat  found  in  Muller's  box  was  a  hat  made  by  them;  that 
it  had  been  cut  down  an  inch  and  a  half  and  sewn  together 
again,  but  not  in  such  a  way  as  a  hatter  would  have  done  it; 
a  hatter,  they  said,  would  have  used  gum.  They  stated  that 
it  was  their  custom  to  write  the  name  of  the  customer  for 


Introduction. 

whom  the  hat  had  been  made  on  the  band  of  the  hat  inside 
the  lining.  This  part  of  the  hat  had  been  cut  away  from  the 
hat  found  in  Miiller's  box.  Muller  was  remanded  from  Monday, 
the  19th,  to  Monday,  the  26th  of  September.  That  day,  at 
eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  he  attended  the  last  sitting  of 
the  coroner's  inquest  at  the  Hackney  Town  Hall,  when  the  jury 
returned  a  verdict  of  wilful  murder  against  him.  From 
Hackney  he  was  taken  to  Bow  Street  at  eleven  o'clock,  and 
at  the  end  of  the  day's  hearing  Mr.  Flowers  committed  him  for 
trial  at  the  Central  Criminal  Court.  No  evidence  was  called 
on  behalf  of  the  prisoner.  The  magistrate  asked  Muller  if  he 
had  anything  to  say.  He  answered,  "  No,  sir,  I  have  nothing 
to  say  now."  Throughout  the  proceedings  Muller  had  appeared 
cool  and  collected,  only  betraying  anger  on  one  occasion  during 
the  evidence  of  Matthews,  the  cabman. 

The  Sessions  at  the  Central  Criminal  Court  opened  on 
Monday,  24th  October,  when  the  Recorder,  Mr.  Russell  Gurney, 
advised  the  jury  to  bring  in  a  true  bill  against  Franz  Muller. 
This  they  returned  on  the  following  Wednesday,  and  on  the 
next  day,  Thursday,  the  27th,  Muller  was  put  upon  his  trial. 
The  presiding  judges  were  the  Lord  Chief  Baron,  Sir  Frederick 
Pollock,  and  his  son-in-law,  Mr.  Baron  Martin — two  of  the  most 
distinguished  judges  on  the  bench.  In  these  more  leisurely 
days  a  law  officer  of  the  Crown  did  not  disdain  to  conduct  the 
prosecution  in  a  sensational  trial  for  murder.  On  this  occasion 
Sir  Robert  Collier,  Solicitor-General,  led  for  the  Crown  with 
a  very  strong  team  of  assistants  at  his  back.  First  and  fore- 
most among  them  was  Serjeant  Ballantine,  one  of  the  most 
popular  advocates  of  the  day,  noted  more  particularly  for  his 
great  skill  as  a  cross-examiner.  His  juniors  were  Mr.  Hardinge 
Giffard,  Mr.  Hannen,  and  Mr.  Beasley.  The  first  of  these  is 
now  Ihe  Earl  of  Halsbury,  ex-Lord  Chancellor  of  England, 
and  the  only  survivor  amongst  the  distinguished  lawyers  who 
took  part  in  Miiller's  trial.  Mr.  Hannen  had  been  appointed 
recently  junior  counsel  to  the  Treasury,  or,  in  legal  slang, 
"  Attorney -General's  devil."  He  was  soon  to  be  raised  to  high 
judicial  office,  and  is  best  known  to  history  as  President  of  the 
Divorce  Court  for  more  than  twenty-five  years,  and  of  the 
Parnell  Commission  in  1888. 

Serjeant  Parry  led  for  the  defence.     His  tact  and  skill  as 


Franz    Muller. 

a  verdict  getter,  his  great  powers  of  persuasion  with  a  jury, 
made  Parry  one  of  the  most  popular  and  successful  advocates 
of  his  time,  whilst  his  kind  and  genial  nature  had  rendered 
him  no  less  popular  as  a  man.  Mr.  Metcalfe  and  Mr.  Besley 
were  his  juniors,  the  latter,  until  a  few  years  ago,  a  well- 
known  member  of  the  Old  Bailey  bar. 

Needless  to  say,  the  Court  was  crowded  throughout  the 
trial.  The  Lord  Mayor  Lawrence  accompanied  the  judges  on 
the  bench.  Muller  is  described  as  pale  and  anxious,  following 
the  proceedings  closely  and  communicating  frequently  with 
his  solicitor,  Mr.  Beard.  Sir  Robert  Collier  opened  the  case 
for  the  Crown  in  a  short  and  business-like  speech.  He  sug- 
gested that  Mr.  Briggs  had  been  attacked  while  dozing  in  the 
corner  of  the  carriage,  and  that  the  weapon  with  which  the 
deed  had  been  done  had  been  undoubtedly  Mr.  Briggs 's  walking 
stick — "  a  formidable  weapon,  large,  heavy,  with  a  handle  at 
one  end."  As  motive  for  the  crime  the  Solicitor-General 
suggested  a  sudden  desire  that  had  come  over  the  murderer 
to  possess  the  gold  watch  and  chain  which  stood  out  conspicu- 
ously on  the  waistcoat  of  his  victim.  He  attached  great 
importance  to  the  hat  found  in  the  railway  carriage — "  If  you 
discover  with  certainty,"  he  said,  "  the  person  who  wore  that 
hat  on  that  night,  you  will  have  the  murderer,  and  the  case 
is  proved  almost  as  clearly  against  him  as  if  he  was  seen  to 
do  it."  He  showed  how  by  his  dealings  with  pawnbrokers 
and  others,  commencing  from  the  exchange  of  Mr.  Briggs 's 
watch  chain  with  Death,  the  prisoner  had  become  possessed  of 
about  £4  5s.  in  cash  with  which,  on  the  Wednesday  following 
the  murder,  he  had  bought  his  passage  to  America.  He 
dealt  with  the  evidence  as  regards  the  two  hats,  the  one  found 
in  the  carriage,  which  he  would  prove  to  have  belonged  to  Muller, 
and  the  other  found  in  Muller 's  box  in  New  York,  which  he 
would  prove  to  have  belonged  to  Mr.  Briggs.  "  Mr.  Briggs," 
concluded  the  Solicitor-General,  "  is  robbed  and  murdered  in 
a  railway  carriage ;  the  murderer  takes  from  him  his  watch 
and  chain,  and  takes  from  him  his  hat.  All  the  articles  taken 
are  found  on  Muller ;  he  gives  a  false  statement  of  how  he  got 
them,  and  the  hat  left  behind  is  the  hat  of  Muller."  If  these 
circumstances  were  proved  by  witnesses,  then,  in  the  opinion  of 
the  Solicitor-General,  a  stronger  case  of  circumstantial  evidence 
had  rarely,  if  ever,  been  submitted  to  a  jury, 
xzii 


Introduction. 

The  first  witnesses  called  were  those  concerned  in  the  finding 
of  Mr.  Briggs  and  the  medical  gentlemen  who  had  examined 
his  body.  It  was  with  the  appearance  of  Death,  the  jeweller, 
that  the  real  interest  of  the  case  began.  Death  was  clear 
that  it  was  Miiller  who  had  brought  him  Mr.  Briggs's 
chain  on  the  llth  of  July,  which  he  had  valued  at  £3  10s. 
Miiller  said  that  he  would  prefer  to  take  another  chain  in 
exchange  instead  of  money,  upon  which  Death  gave  him  a  gold 
chain  worth  £3  5s.  and  a  5s.  ring  to  make  up  the  balance.  The 
chain  he  had  put  into  a  box  identical  with  that  which  the 
prisoner  had  given  to  Matthews'  little  girl.  In  cross-examina- 
tion it  was  suggested  to  Death  that  Miiller  had  been  to  his 
shop  in  the  previous  year,  but  Death  and  his  brother  were 
positive  that  they  had  neither  of  them  seen  the  prisoner 
before  the  llth  of  July. 

Mrs.  Blyth,  Miiller's  landlady,  gave  evidence  as  to  the 
prisoner's  movements  at  the  time  of  the  murder.  In  cross- 
examination  she  bore  testimony  to  the  quiet  and  inoffensive 
disposition  of  the  prisoner.  She  said  that  owing  to  an  injury 
to  his  foot,  Miiller  was  wearing  a  slipper  on  one  foot  the  day 
of  the  murder,  and  she  admitted  that  he  had  spoken  of  going 
to  America  some  fortnight  before  the  murder  of  Mr.  Briggs. 
Her  evidence  was  supported  by  that  of  her  husband.  • 

Mrs.  Repsch,  the  wife  of  a  German  tailor,  a  fellow-workman 
with  Miiller,  gave  important  evidence.  Miiller  had  been  at 
their  house  the  evening  of  the  murder,  and  had  left  them  about 
half -past  seven  or  eight  o'clock.  On  Monday,  the  llth, 
Miiller  had  shown  Mrs.  Repsch  the  chain  which  Death  had 
given  him  in  exchange  for  that  of  Mr.  Briggs.  He  had  told 
her  what  was  not  true :  that  he  had  bought  it  in  the  docks. 
She  noticed  that  he  was  wearing  a  different  hat.  Miiller  said 
he  had  bought  it  for  14s.  6d.,  upon  which  her  husband  had 
remarked  that  it  looked  more  like  a  guinea  hat.  She  recol- 
lected the  hat  which  Miiller  had  been  wearing  previous  to 
thia.  To  the  best  of  her  belief  it  was  the  hat  found  in  the 
railway  carriage.  Cross-examined,  Mrs.  Repsch  said  that  she 
particular!/  remembered  this  hat  because  of  its  peculiar 
lining. 

John  Haffa,  a  journeyman  tailor,  and  friend  of  the  prisoner, 
deposed  to  having  pawned  his  own  coat  on  the  Wednesday  before 


Franz    Muller. 

Miiller  sailed  for  America  in  order  to  help  his  friend  to  buy 
his  passage ;  but  in  cross-examination  he  admitted  that  before 
the  9th  of  July  he  had  seen  Muller  in  possession  of  a  sum  of 
money  sufficient  to  have  paid  for  his  passage. 

On  the  second  day  of  the  trial  the  Crown  commenced  by 
calling  evidence  as  to  the  exact  financial  position  of  Muller 
immediately  before  and  after  the  murder.  It  then  appeared 
that  in  June  Muller  had  raised  £3  by  pawning  a  gold  watch 
and  chain  at  the  shop  of  a  Mrs.  Barker,  in  Houndsditch.  On 
Monday,  the  1 1th  of  July,  he  got  from  Death  in  exchange  for 
Mr.  Briggs's  chain  a  gold  chain  valued  at  £3  5s.  This  he 
pawned  on  the  Tuesday  for  £1  10s.,  and  with  the  money  so 
obtained  he  took  his  own  watch  out  of  pawn  from  Mrs. 
Barker's.  By  borrowing  £1  from  a  man  of  the  name  of 
Glass  he  redeemed  his  own  chain  also,  which  he  had  left  with 
Mrs.  Barker.  Glass  and  he  then  pawned  this  watch  and  chain 
a  second  time  with  Messrs.  Cox,  of  Princes  Street,  Leicester 
Square,  for  a  sum  of  £4.  This  pawn  ticket  Muller  sold  to 
Glass  for  5s. ;  thus  Muller  had  altogether  £4  5s.,  and  it  was 
with  this  sum  that  he  had  purchased  his  passage  to  America. 
If  Muller  were  the  murderer  of  Mr.  Briggs,  he  had  perjured 
his  soul  for  the  paltry  sum  of  30s. 

The  evidence  of  Jonathan  Matthews,  cabman,  was  awaited 
with  some  excitement.  His  severe  cross-examination  at  the 
Police  Court  by  Mr.  Beard  had  led  to  the  expectation  that  the 
defence  might  seek  to  prove  Muller's  innocence  of  the  murder 
by  suggesting  Matthews  as  having  been  the  guilty  man.  But 
Serjeant  Parry  was  wise  enough  not  to  adopt  so  dangerous  a 
course.  His  cross-examination  was  directed  entirely  to  damage 
the  credit  of  Matthews  as  a  trustworthy  witness.  Matthews 
identified  the  hat  found  in  the  carriage  as  one  with  a  peculiar 
striped  lining,  which  he  had  bought  for  Muller  at  his  own 
request  at  Mr.  Walker's,  in  Crawford  Street.  Serjeant  Parry 
showed  that  on  the  question  of  his  purchases  of  hats  Matthews' 
statements  at  the  trial  differed  materially  from  those  he  had 
made  before  the  coroner  and  the  magistrate,  and  he  questioned 
him  pointedly  as  to  what  had  become  of  his  own  old  hats, 
particularly  the  one  which  he  had  bought  at  Mr.  Walker's, 
the  one  to  which  Muller  had  taken  such  a  fancy  that  he  had 
asked  him  to  get  him  another  like  it.  At  the  Police  Court 


Introduction. 

Matthews  could  give  no  account  of  his  movements  on  the  night 
of  Mr.  Briggs's  murder.  Now  he  said  he  had  made  inquiries, 
and  had  found  that  he  had  been  on  the  cab-stand  at  Paddington 
station  from  seven  to  eleven  o'clock.  Matthews  adhered  to  the 
statement  that  he  knew  nothing  of  the  murder  until  the  18th 
of  July  when  he  saw  near  his  cab-stand  the  bill  offering  a 
reward  for  the  apprehension  of  the  murderer.  He  denied  that 
it  was  a  desire  to  receive  the  .£300  reward  that  had  prompted 
him  to  give  his  evidence  against  Miiller. 

A  new  fact  Serjeant  Parry  elicited  as  damaging  to  Matthews' 
good  character,  though  it  cannot  be  said  that  it  told  very 
heavily  against  his  credibility  as  a  witness  in  this  particular 
instance.  In  1850,  at  the  age  of  nineteen,  Matthews  had 
undergone  twenty-one  days'  imprisonment  for  theft.  He  had 
been  at  that  time  conductor  of  a  coach  at  Norwich,  and  had 
absconded  from  his  situation,  taking  with  him  in  his  box  a 
bit,  a  spur,  and  a  padlock  belonging  to  his  employer. 
Matthews  preferred  to  describe  this  incident  as  a  "  spree," 
which,  he  said,  had  been  construed  harshly  into  an  act  of 
theft,  and  he  protested  that  the  things  had  been  put  into  his 
box  "  unbeknown  "  to  him.  He  had  never  been  in  trouble 
since.  Severe  as  was  the  cross-examination  of  Matthews,  in 
the  judgment  of  those  who  heard  it,  it  had  not  shaken  the 
weight  of  his  evidence  in  any  material  degree. 

Mrs.  Matthews  gave  evidence  as  to  the  jewellers'  box  given 
by  Miiller  to  her  little  daughter.  In  cross-examination  she 
admitted  that  she  had  known  of  Mr.  Briggs's  murder  on  the 
Monday  following,  though  her  husband  would  appear  to  have 
known  nothing  of  it  until  the  18th  of  July. 

One  fact  came  out  unexpectedly  in  the  evidence  of  Walker, 
the  hatter,  and  his  foreman.  They  stated  that  the  lining  in 
Muller's  hat,  which  Matthews  had  bought  for  him  at  their  shop, 
was  very  peculiar  in  character,  and  had  not  been  used  by  them 
in  the  lining  of  more  than  two,  or,  at  most,  three  or  four 
hats. 

The  evidence  of  the  police  officers  who  had  arrested  Miiller 
in  New  York  was  followed  by  that  of  Mr.  Briggs's  son  and 
his  hatter,  Digance.  Mr.  Thomas  Briggs  identified  both  the 
watch  and  hat  found  in  Muller's  box  as  having  belonged  to  his 
father.  Digance  said  that  as  Mr.  Briggs  had  found  his  last 


Franz    Muller. 

hat  a  little  too  easy  on  the  head,  he  had  placed  a  piece  of 
tissue  paper  inside  the  lining ;  some  small  fragments  of  this 
tissue  paper  were  remaining  in  the  band  of  the  hat  when  found 
in  Muller's  box. 

It  was  half-past  two  when  Serjeant  Parry  rose  to  make  his 
speech  for  the  defence.  He  spoke  for  two  hours  and  a  half. 
It  was  the  only  speech  then  allowed  by  law,  and  the  Serjeant 
complained  with  some  reason  that,  though  he  was  about  to 
call  evidence  for  the  defence,  he  was  forbidden  to  sum  up  his 
case  to  the  jury,  a  privilege  that  would  have  been  accorded 
him  if  he  had  been  engaged  at  nisi  prius  "  in  some  miserable 
squabble  between  a  hackney  cab  and  a  dust  cart."  By  the 
Act  28  Viet.  cap.  18,  section  2,  "  Denman's  Act,"  passed  in  the 
following  year,  the  grievance  alluded  to  by  the  learned  Serjeant 
was  removed. 

The  Serjeant  commenced  by  dealing  with  the  evidence  that 
had  been  called  for  the  Crown.  He  warned  the  jury  that, 
though  they  might  be  satisfied  that  Muller  had  had  a  hat 
similar  to  that  found  in  the  carriage,  they  must  not  therefore 
assume  that  the  hat  found  in  the  carriage  had  necessarily 
belonged  to  Muller.  He  deprecated  warmly  any  intention  of 
accusing  Matthews  of  the  murder.  At  the  same  time,  he 
suggested  that  the  hat  found  in  the  carriage  might  just  as 
well  have  been  Matthews'  as  Muller's.  Matthews  he  described 
as  an  entirely  unreliable  witness,  actuated  solely  by  the  desire 
to  obtain  the  £300  reward,  and  proved  in  one  instance  to  have 
lied  deliberately  before  both  magistrate  and  coroner. 

As  regards  Mr.  Briggs's  hat,  he  commented  on  the  fact  that 
the  prosecution  had  called  no  witness  to  prove  that,  on  the 
day  of  his  death,  Mr.  Briggs  was  wearing  such  a  hat  as  that 
found  on  Muller.  Muller's  false  statement  as  to  the  way  he 
had  become  possessed  of  the  watch  and  chain  he  attributed  to 
the  fact  that  the  prisoner  had  bought  them  at  the  docks  under 
circumstances  which  must  have  convinced  him  that  he  was 
buying  them  from  some  person  who  had  obtained  possession 
of  them  in  a  suspicious  way.  He  pointed  out,  and  very  justly, 
that  no  blood-stained  clothes  had  been  found  on  Muller,  and 
that  the  evidence  given  to  prove  that  he  had  changed  or  got 
rid  of  some  of  his  clothes  after  the  murder  was  highly  incon- 
clusive. He  scouted  the  idea  that  a  slight  and  by  no  means 


Introduction. 

muscular  young  man  such  as  the  prisoner  could  in  three  minutes, 
the  time  taken  by  the  train  to  go  from  Bow  to  Hackney  Wick 
station,  have  murdered,  robbed,  and  thrown  out  of  the  carriage 
a  man  5  feet  9  inches  in  height  and  weighing  12  stone.  The 
crime,  he  contended,  and  he  was  going  to  call  evidence  to  prove 
it,  must  have  been  the  work  of  two  men.  Nor  would  he  accept 
the  Solicitor-General's  suggestion  that  Mr.  Briggs'a  stick  had 
been  the  weapon  with  which  the  crime  had  been  committed. 
"A  pair  of  shears,"  he  said,  "had  been  taken  out  of  the 
pocket  of  the  prisoner;  he  did  not  suppose  that  even  now  the 
Solicitor-General  would  suggest  that  the  murder  was  com- 
mitted with  them."  A  curious  comment  on  this  statement  is 
contained  in  a  letter  written  to  the  Times  two  days  after 
Muller's  execution  by  Mr.  Toulmin,  the  surgeon  who  had  made 
the  post-mortem  on  Mr.  Briggs.  In  this  letter  Mr.  Toulmin 
expressed  the  opinion  that  the  "  tailor's  shears  found  on  Muller, 
some  13  inches  or  14  inches  long,  and  weighing  about  2  Ibs., 
was  the  only  instrument  he  knew  of  that  might  have  inflicted 
the  wounds  found  on  Mr.  Briggs,"  and  he  quoted  the  statement 
of  a  journeyman  tailor  to  the  effect  that  a  tailor  who  did  not 
take  away  his  shears  every  day  from  his  workshop  would  very 
quickly  lose  them. 

Serjeant  Parry  said  that  he  should  call  as  the  first  witness 
for  the  defence  a  Mr.  Lee,  a  respectable  gentleman  who  had 
given  evidence  at  the  inquest,  but  for  some  reason  had  not 
been  called  by  the  Crown.  Mr.  Lee  would  say  that  he  had 
seen  Mr.  Briggs  in  a  compartment  of  a  first-class  carriage  at 
Fenchurch  Street  station  on  the  night  of  the  9th  July;  that, 
knowing  him,  he  had  said  "Good-night"  to  him,  and  that 
he  had  then  seen  two  men  sitting  in  the  carriage  with  him. 
The  Serjeant  said  that  he  should  further  prove  an  alibi;  he 
would  prove  that  between  nine  and  ten  o'clock  on  the  night 
of  Mr.  Briggs's  murder  Muller  had  been  at  a  house  in  James 
Street,  Camberwell.  He  would  also  call  an  omnibus  conductor, 
who  would  swear  that  about  ten  minutes  to  ten  on  the  Saturday 
night  a  passenger  had  got  on  to  his  omnibus  at  Camberwell 
Gate,  wearing  a  carpet  slipper  on  one  foot.  He  was  not 
prepared  to  swear  that  the  passenger  was  Muller,  but  it  had 
been  proved  by  the  prosecution  that,  owing  to  the  injury  to 
his  foot,  Muller  was  wearing  a  slipper  on  that  night,  and,  if 


Franz    Muller. 

X 

he  were  at  Camberwell  Gate  at  ten  minutes  to  ten,  it  was 
clear  that  he  could  not  have  left  Fenchurch  Street  by  the  9.60 
train. 

At  the  conclusion  of  the  learned  Serjeant's  speech  the  Court 
adjourned  until  nine  o'clock  on  Saturday,  the  29th  November, 
when  Mr.  Thomas  Lee,  the  first  witness  for  the  defence,  was 
called.  Mr.  Lee  swore  that  he  had  seen  Mr.  Briggs  sitting 
with  two  other  men  in  a  first-class  compartment  of  the  9.50 
train  from  Fenchurch  Street  on  the  night  of  the  murder.  He 
swore  that  he  had  said  "  Good-night,  Mr.  Briggs,"  to  which 
Mr.  Briggs  had  replied,  "Good-night,  Tom."  He  could  not 
swear  to  the  prisoner  being  either  of  the  men.  Mr.  Lee  was 
positive  and  unshaken  on  the  main  point  of  his  evidence,  in 
spite  of  severe  cross-examination.  When  asked  why  he  had 
not  made  his  statement  to  the  police  until  more  than  a  week 
after  the  murder,  he  answered  that  it  was  because  he  thought 
it  unimportant,  and  knew  what  a  bother  it  would  be.  "  I 
have  something  to  do,"  he  said;  "  I  collect  my  own  rents  " — 
a  frame  of  mind  which  the  Chief  Baron,  with  some  reason, 
declared  threw  general  discredit  upon  Mr.  Lee's  views  and 
motives. 

After  some  evidence  that  the  cutting  down  and  stitching  of 
hats  was  a  usual  method  of  procedure  in  the  second-hand  hat 
trade,  the  defence  proceeded  with  the  proof  of  the  prisoner's 
alibi.  This  rested  on  the  evidence  of  a  girl  of  the  unfortunate 
class,  and  that  of  the  man  and  woman  in  whose  house  she 
lived.  Muller  had  formed  an  intimacy  with  the  girl  Eldred, 
and,  according  to  the  evidence  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Jones,  with 
whom  the  poor  girl  lodged,  Muller  had  called  at  their  house 
in  Camberwell  at  half-past  nine  o'clock  on  the  night  of  the 
9th  July.  The  girl  Eldred  was  out,  and  Muller  had  remained 
talking  to  Mrs  Jones  for  five  or  ten  minutes,  after  which  he 
had  left.  If  the  evidence  of  Mrs.  Jones  was  absolutely  correct, 
then  Muller  could  not  have  reached  Fenchurch  Street  from 
Camberwell  in  time  to  have  caught  the  9.50  train.  But  the 
prosecution  suggested  that  her  evidence  was  not  strictly  correct. 
It  had  been  proved  that  Muller  had  left  his  friend  Haffa  at 
Jewry  Street  at  eight  o'clock  that  night.  If  he  had  gone 
straight  from  there  to  Camberwell  he  would  have  reached  there 
about  nine,  the  hour  at  which  he  must  have  known  the  girl 


Introduction. 

Eldred  was  in  the  habit  of  going  out.  If  that  were  so,  he 
would  then  have  had  plenty  of  time  to  get  on  an  omnibus  to 
Fenchurch  Street,  possibly  arriving  at  that  station  at  the  same 
time  as  Mr.  Briggs.  The  character  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Jones  did 
not  help  their  credibility,  and  the  Solicitor-General  dwelt  with 
almost  undue  vehemence  on  the  little  reliance  that  was  to  be 
placed  on  the  clock  of  a  brothel;  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  the 
veracity  of  a  clock  should  vary  according  to  the  character  of 
the  house  in  which  it  stands.  The  girl  Eldred,  whom  the  Chief 
Baron  described  as  a  pathetic  figure,  heard  and  seen  with  great 
compassion,  had  evidently  done  her  best  to  save  the  life  of  the 
young  man,  and,  as*  she  left  the  Court,  Miiller  looked  at  her 
with  an  expression  of  sincere  gratitude. 

The  evidence  of  the  omnibus  conductor  as  to  his  passenger 
wearing  slippers  was  quite  valueless. 

The  Solicitor-General  exercised  his  right  to  reply.  He 
dealt  very  severely  with  the  evidence  that  had  been  called 
for  the  defence,  and  reiterated  the  great  strength  of  the  case 
that  had  been  made  out  by  the  Crown.  At  half-past  one  the 
Chief  Baron  commenced  his  charge  to  the  jury.  It  occupied 
a  little  more  than  an  hour  and  a  quarter.  Though  scrupulously 
fair  and  dignified  in  tone,  it  was  decidedly  unfavourable  to 
the  prisoner.  It  was  clear  that  the  learned  judge  was  power- 
fully impressed  by  the  strength  of  the  circumstantial  evidence 
against  the  prisoner.  Miiller  listened  to  the  charge  with 
painful  anxiety.  The  jury,  who  declined  the  offer  of  the  Chief 
Baron  to  read  through  to  them  the  whole  of  the  evidence, 
were  only  absent  from  the  Court  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  when 
they  returned  with  a  verdict  of  guilty.  Baron  Martin,  as  the 
junior  judge,  passed  sentence  of  death.  "  I  have  no  more 
doubt,"  he  said  to  Muller,  "  that  you  committed  this  murder 
than  I  have  with  reference  to  the  occurrence  of  any  other  event 
of  which  I  am  certain,  but  which  I  did  not  see  with  my  own 
eyes."  At  the  conclusion  of  the  sentence  the  prisoner  was 
understood  to  say,  "I  should  like  to  say  something;  I  am 
satisfied  with  the  sentence  which  your  lordship  has  passed.  I 
know  very  well  that  it  is  what  the  law  of  the  country  pre- 
scribes. What  I  have  to  say  is,  that  I  have  not  been  con- 
victed on  a  true  statement  of  the  facts,  but  on  a  false  state- 
ment." As  he  left  the  dock  his  firmness  gave  way,  and  he 
burst  into  tears. 


Franz    Muller. 

No  sooner  had  Muller  been  condemned  to  die  than  the 
German  Society,  which  had  defended  him,  made  strenuous 
efforts  to  obtain  a  remission  of  the  sentence.  A  memorial  was 
prepared  for  presentation  to  the  Home  Secretary,  Sir  George 
Grey.  Even  the  King  of  Prussia  and  some  of  the  minor  German 
potentates  had  telegraphed  to  the  Queen  asking  her  to  inter- 
vene and  save  Miiller's  life. 

Certain  German  newspapers  had  gone  the  length  of  suggesting 
that  it  was  the  war  in  Schleswig-Holstein,  and  the  impotent 
rage  of  the  English  aristocracy  arising  from  that  nefarious 
transaction,  that  were  tying  the  noose  round  Muller's  neck. 
Punch  waxed  very  sarcastic  over  these  insinuations,  and  made 
them  the  subject  of  the  following  verses :  — 

MULLER  AND  ms  MBN. 

The  German  who  clapped  when  the  Diet  dared  draw 

Execution  to  deal  on  the  Duchies, 
Howl  against  execution  awarded  by  law 

To  Muller  in  Calcraft's  stern  clutches. 
Can  the  reason  that  Vaterland  thus  makes  black  white, 

Prom  applause  to  abuse  shifts  its  song, 
Be  that  our  execution  was  provably  right 

And  their  own  as  demonstrably  wrong? 

The  execution  had  been  fixed  for  Tuesday,  the  14th  of 
November.  On  the  10th  of  November  the  German  Society 
presented  their  memorial  to  Sir  George  Grey.  They  relied, 
among  other  things,  on  a  story  of  a  parcel  which  had  been 
thrown  from  a  cab  into  the  bedroom  of  a  Mr.  Poole  at 
Edmonton,  breaking  his  window  at  two  o'clock  in  the  morning 
of  Sunday,  the  10th  of  July.  Mr.  Poole  had  followed  the  cab 
with  a  view  to  obtaining  compensation  for  the  damage  done  to 
his  window.  There  were  four  men  inside  the  cab,  one  without 
a  hat,  and  wearing  a  handkerchief  round  his  head.  The 
parcel  that  had  been  thrown  contained  blood-stained  trousers. 
But  the  matter  resolved  itself  into  nothing  more  than  a 
foolish  spree.  The  memorial  also  included  a  statement  of  a 
Baron  de  Camin,  ^ho  said  that  he  had  seen  a  blood-stained 
man  on  the  Embankment  between  Bow  and  Hackney  Wick 
station  on  the  night  of  the  9th  of  July.  Muller  had, 


Introduction. 

since  hie  confinement,  made  a  statement  to  the  effect  that 
he  had  bought  the  hat  found  on  him  at  Mr.  Digance's  shop,  but 
Digance  and  his  shopman,  when  confronted  with  Miiller  in 
Newgate,  failed  to  recognise  him.  On  the  8th  of  November 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Blyth,  with  whom  Miiller  had  lodged,  and  who  had 
evidently  become  rather  attached  to  the  young  man,  made  a 
declaration  at  Worship  Street  Police  Court  that  Miiller  had  been 
wearing  the  same  hat  on  the  Sunday  as  he  had  been  wearing  on 
the  Saturday,  the  day  of  the  crime.  They  said  that  they  had 
not  seen  the  hat  produced  at  the  trial,  but  were  sure  that  it  was 
not  his  hat.  These  efforts  to  save  Miiller  were  not  allowed  to  go 
without  reply.  An  attempt  was  made,  but  fruitlessly,  to 
connect  Miiller  with  the  murder,  in  1863,  of  Emma  Jackson, 
a  woman  of  light  character,  killed  in  a  house  of  ill-fame  in 
George  Street,  Bloomsbury.  The  unfortunate  girl  had  been 
found  dead  about  four  o'clock  on  the  afternoon  of  the  10th  of 
April.  No  clue  was  ever  obtained  to  the  murderer,  though 
there  were  people  living  in  an  adjoining  room,  and  almost 
immediately  below,  at  the  time  the  crime  must  have  been 
committed.  One  or  two  Germans  wrote  to  the  newspapers 
protesting  against  any  reflections  that  had  been  made  on 
English  justice  in  connection  with  Miiller's  trial,  and  saying 
that  they  were  perfectly  satisfied  that  he  had  been  fairly  tried, 
and  had  no  wish  to  interfere  with  his  punishment. 

Mr.  Beard  received  Sir  George  Grey's  reply  to  the  memorial 
on  Saturday,  the  llth  of  November.  In  it  Sir  George  Grey 
stated  that,  after  carefully  comparing  the  statements  contained 
in  the  memorial  with  the  evidence  given  at  the  trial,  and,  after 
communicating  fully  with  the  two  judges  who  had  tried  the  case, 
he  could  see  no  ground  for  advising  Her  Majesty  to  remit  the 
death  penalty.  At  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  Mr.  Beard 
called  at  Newgate  and  acquainted  Miiller  with  the  Home 
Secretary's  decision.  Miiller  received  the  news  with  calmness 
and  composure,  and  expressed  his  gratitude  for  the  efforts  that 
had  been  made  to  save  his  life.  In  spite  of  the  efforts  of  Dr. 
Cappel,  the  German  Lutheran  minister  attending  upon  him, 
Miiller  refused  to  make  any  statement  by  way  of  confession, 
and  appeared  to  be  perfectly  prepared  to  meet  his  fate.  His 
public  execution  on  the  14th  of  November  furnished  a  scene 
more  disgraceful  than  usual.  The  crowd,  consisting  of  a  mob  of 

xxxi 


Franz    Muller. 

the  lowest  kind,  kept  up  their  spirits  during  the  night  by  shout- 
ing and  singing  doggerel  verses  alluding  to  the  murderer.  On 
the  evening  of  the  13th  Muller  was  visited  by  one  of  the  Sheriffs, 
who  again  exhorted  him  to  confess,  but  Muller  obstinately 
declared  his  innocence.  As  the  Sheriff  left  he  turned  to  one 
of  the  warders  and  said,  "  Man  has  no  power  to  forgive  sins, 
and  there  is  no  use  in  confessing  them  to  him."  He  was 
equally  obdurate  on  the  morning  of  his  execution  while  Dr. 
Cappel  was  praying  with  him.  He  mounted  the  scaffold 
calmly,  looked  with  curiosity  at  the  beam  above  his  head,  and, 
though  trembling  a  little,  showed  no  sign  of  fear.  Immediately 
before  the  drop  fell  Dr.  Cappel  once  again  besought  Muller  to 
admit  his  guilt,  when  the  following  conversation  took  place 
between  them :  — 

Dr.  Cappel — Muller,  in  a  few  moments  you  will  stand  before 
God.  I  ask  you  again,  and  for  the  last  time,  are  you  guilty 
or  not  guilty? 

Muller — Not  guilty. 
Dr.  Cappel — You  are  not  guilty? 
Muller — God  knows  what  I  have  done. 

Dr.  Cappel — God  knows  what  you  have  done.  Does  he  also 
know  that  you  have  committed  this  crime? 

Muller — Yes,  I  have  done  it.  (Jah,  ich  habe  es  gethan.) 
Though  some  doubt  was  afterwards  cast  as  to  the  actual 
words  used  on  this  occasion,  the  correspondence  printed  in  an 
Appendix  to  this  volume  shows  conclusively  that  Muller  did 
confess  his  crime  immediately  before  he  was  launched  into 
eternity. 

It  is  difficult  at  this  distance  of  time  to  quite  appreciate 
the  extraordinary  interest  that  the  case  of  Muller  aroused. 
There  is  nothing  very  remarkable  either  in  the  crime  or  in  the 
criminal.  The  trial  itself  is  interesting  as  showing  the  con- 
clusive weight  of  circumstantial  evidence.  That  it  did  create 
extraordinary  interest  at  the  time  there  can  be  no  doubt. 
It  was  the  first  railway  murder,  and  the  circumstances  of  the 
flight  and  capture  of  the  murderer  were  calculated  to  excite  the 
public  mind.  The  character  of  Muller  is  a  little  difficult  to 
understand.  He  would  seem  to  have  been  a  young  man  who 
could  make  friends  among  both  men  and  women ;  all  the 
witnesses  at  his  trial  spoke  of  his  humane  and  gentle  disposi- 
xxxii 


MURDER. 


WHEREAS,  on  Monday,  June  27th,  ISAAC  FREDERICK  GOULD  waa  murdered  on  the  London  Brighton  and  Sooth  Ooast 
Railway,  between  Three  Bridges  and  Balcombe.  in  East  Sussex 

AND  WHEREAS  a  Verdict  of  WILFUL  MURDER  has  been  returned  by  a  Coroner's  Jury  against 

PERCY    LEFROY    MAPLETON, 

whoso  Poruait  and  Handwriting  are  given  hereoo, — 


S*~*~*~*jt. 


and  who  is  described  as  being  22  years  of  age,  height  5  ft  8  or  9  in.,  very  thin,  hair  (cut  short)  dark,  email  dark  whiskers  ;  dress. 
dark  frock  coat.ju  1  shoes,  and  auupoaud  low  black  hai  (worn  at  back  of  head),  had  scratches  from  fingers  on  throat,  several 
wounds  on  he»  i.  the  dressing  of  which  involved  the  cutting  of  hair,  recently  lodged  at  4,  Cathcart  Road,  Wallington,  was  seen 
at  9.311  a.m.  2Slb  ult.,  with  uis  head  bandaged,  at  the  Fever  Hospital,  Liverpool  Road,  Islington.  Had  a  gold  open-faced  watch 
(which  he  Is  likely  to  pledge).  "  Maker.  Griffiths,  Mile  End  Road,  No  1G261." 

One  Half  of  the  above  Reward  will  be  paid  by  Her  Majesty's  Government,  and  One  Half  by  the  Directors  of  the 
London  Brighton  and  South  Const  Railway  to  any  person  (other  than  a  person  belonging  to  a  Police  Force  in  the  United  Kingdom) 
who  shall  give  such  information  as  shall  lead  to  the  discovery  and  apprehension  of  the  said  PERCY  LEFRQY  MAPLETON,  or 
others,  the  Murderer,  or  Murd-jrers,  upon  his  01  their  conviction  ;  and  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  will  advis* 
the  Kraut  of  Her  Majesty's  gracious  PARDON  to  any  accomplice,  not  being  the  person  who  actually  committed  the  Murder,  who 
•hall  give  such  evidence  as  shall  lead  to  a  like  result. 

Information  to  be  given  to  the  Chief  Constable  of  Bast  Sussex,  Lewes,  w  any  Police  Station,  or  to 


JULY  4».  1881. 


The  Director  of  Criminal  Inuestigations,  Gt  Scotland  Yard. 


(i81t)  Jlamsou  and  Sou,  Printers  in  Ordinary  to  Her  Mqesty,  St.  Martin's  Lane. 

Reproduction  of  Handbill  in  the  Lefroy  case. 


Introduction. 

tion.  He  was,  however,  at  times  overbearing  and  inclined  to 
violence.  He  was  vain,  and  in  the  habit  of  making  boastful 
and  untrue  statements  about  himself  and  his  doings.  He  seems 
to  have  been  fond  of  jewellery,  and  it  is  probably  correct  to 
surmise,  as  Baron  Martin  said  in  sentencing  him  to  death, 
that,  "moved  by  the  devil  in  the  shape  of  Mr.  Briggs's  gold 
watch  and  albert  chain,  the  young  man  was  overcome  with  a 
sudden  impulse  of  greed,"  to  which  he  yielded  the  more  readily 
owing  to  his  desire  to  obtain  sufficient  money  to  take  him  to 
America,  where  he  seems  to  have  thought  that  he  would  be 
more  successful  than  in  England. 

Though  Miiller's  was  the  first  railway  murder  in  England, 
his  crime  is  not  to  be  compared  with  the  exploits  of  a  train 
murderer  in  France,  named  Jud,  four  years  earlier.  This  man 
Jud  murdered  a  Russian  Army  doctor  on  a  railway  in  Alsace; 
and  three  months  later  he  was  more  than  suspected  of  the 
murder  of  Monsieur  Poinsot,  a  distinguished  judge,  on  the 
railway  between  Troyes  and  Paris.  Though  the  guilt  of  Jud 
was  clearly  established,  he  was  never  captured. 

England  had  to  wait  for  nearly  twenty  years  before  Miiller's 
melancholy  success  was  repeated.  On  the  27th  of  June,  1881, 
Mr.  Gold,  a  respectable  gentleman  living  in  a  suburb  of 
Brighton,  sixty-four  years  of  age,  was  murdered  on  the  London, 
Brighton  &  South  Coast  Railway  by  a  man  of  the  name  of 
Lefroy.  The  murder  occurred  in  a  first-class  carriage  between 
Croydon  and  Horley.  Mr.  Gold  was  returning  by  the  two  o'clock 
train  from  London  Bridge  to  his  house  at  Preston.  When  the 
train  drew  up  at  Preston  Park  station,  Lefroy  was  found  in  the 
carriage  dishevelled  and  covered  with  blood.  He  said  that  he 
had  been  attacked  and  robbed.  A  watch  chain  was  hanging 
from  his  shoe,  which  he  said  he  had  placed  there  for  safety. 
His  statements  were  accepted,  and  he  was  allowed  to  go  on  his 
way.  The  credulity  of  the  officials  on  this  occasion  exposed 
them  to  a  great  deal  of  ridicule,  which  found  highly  humorous 
expression  in  some  satirical  verses  by  the  late  H.  D.  Traill. 
During  the  same  afternoon  the  body  of  Mr.  Gold  was  found  near 
the  entrance  to  Balcombe  Tunnel.  There  was  a  bullet  wound 
in  his  neck,  and  further  wounds  on  his  body,  apparently 
inflicted  with  a  knife.  Lefroy,  after  his  release  by  the  police, 
disappeared.  It  was  not  until  a  week  after  the  murder  that 


Franz    Muller. 

he  was  discovered  in  some  lodgings  in  Smith  Street,  Stepney. 
Lefroy  was  tried  at  the  Maidstone  Assizes  before  Lord  Chief 
Justice  Coleridge  on  the  5th  November,  1881.  Sir  Henry 
James,  then  Attorney-General,  now  Lord  James  of  Hereford, 
led  for  the  prosecution,  and  the  prisoner  was  defended  by  Mr. 
Montagu  Williams.  He  was  convicted  on  the  fourth  day  of  his 
trial,  sentenced  to  death,  and  executed  at  Lewes.  Lefroy, 
whose  real  name  was  Percy  Lefroy  Mapleton,  was  a  journalist. 
He  was  a  vain,  weak  creature,  with  literary  ambitions  which  he 
had  not  the  necessary  talent  to  fulfil.  He  was  desperate  for 
want  of  money,  and  had  apparently  gone  to  the  London  Bridge 
station  with  the  intention  of  robbing  some  passenger,  and,  if 
necessary,  taking  life.  He  hoped  to  have  travelled  with  a  lady, 
whom  he  could  have  robbed  by  merely  threatening  her,  with- 
out being  driven  to  the  necessity  of  murder.  He  was  not  suc- 
cessful in  finding  a  lady  who  answered  his  dismal  requirements, 
and,  finally,  entered  a  carriage  that  was  occupied  by  a  solitary 
gentleman.  That  gentleman  was  the  unfortunate  Mr.  Gold.  It 
was  Lefroy's  portrait,  published  in  the  Daily  Telegraph  and  seen 
by  his  landlady,  that  led  to  his  arrest.  This  was,  I  believe, 
the  first  occasion  on  which  the  portrait  of  a  "  wanted  man  " 
appeared  in  a  newspaper. 

The  next  crime  of  this  character  was  the  murder  in  the  year 
1897  of  Elizabeth  Camp.  She  was  a  woman  of  thirty -three 
years  of  age,  at  the  time  of  her  death  a  barmaid  at  the  "  Good 
Intent,"  a  small  tavern  in  Walworth.  On  the  afternoon  of 
the  llth  of  February  she  left  Walworth  for  Hammersmith,  and 
stayed  there  at  the  house  of  a  friend  for  about  two  hours.  She 
then  went  on  to  Hounslow  to  visit  a  married  sister.  She  left 
Hounslow  by  the  7.43  train  for  Waterloo,  entering  an  empty 
second-class  carriage.  As  soon  as  the  train  reached  Waterloo 
at  8.25  her  body  was  found  on  the  floor  of  the  carriage.  Her 
head  had  been  battered  in  by  some  heavy  instrument,  and 
her  pockets  had  been  rifled.  There  had  evidently  been  a 
desperate  struggle  in  the  carriage.  The  only  possible  clue 
in  the  case  was  a  "  Wedgwood  "  pestle,  similar  to  that  used  by 
chemists,  which  was  found  covered  with  blood  and  hair  a  short 
distance  from  Wandsworth  station.  It  was  probable,  therefore, 
that  the  murder  had  been  committed  before  the  train  reached 
Vauxhall.  Certain  persons  were  suspected  of  the  crime,  but 


Introduction. 

no  arrest  was  ever  made,  and  after  a  prolonged  inquest  the 
jury  returned  a  verdict  of  wilful  murder  against  some  person 
or  persons  unknown. 

The  fourth  railway  murder  occurred  on  Thursday,  the  17th  of 
January,  1901,  on  the  London  &  South- Western  Railway.  As 
the  1.29  train  from  Southampton  was  entering  Vauxhall 
station  a  man  sprang  from  a  third-class  carriage  and  fled  down 
the  platform  at  a  desperate  speed.  A  woman,  wounded  and 
bleeding,  appeared  at  the  door  of  the  carriage,  and  called  out 
to  the  officials  to  stop  the  man.  He  was  pursued  and  captured. 
It  then  appeared  that  the  murderer  had  got  into  the  train  at 
Eastleigh.  At  that  time  there  were  in  the  carriage  a  farmer 
of  the  name  of  Pearson,  living  near  Winchester,  and  a  lady, 
Mrs.  King.  As  the  train  passed  Winchester  station  the  man 
rose,  shot  Mr.  Pearson  dead,  and  began  to  rifle  his  pockets. 
He  threatened  to  serve  the  woman  in  the  same  way,  fired  at 
her,  and  wounded  her  in  the  jaw.  He  said  that  he  would  not 
do  her  any  further  injury,  if  she  said  nothing  about  it.  On  the 
evening  of  his  arrest  George  Henry  Parker — for  that  was  the 
name  of  the  man — made  a  full  confession  of  the  crime.  He 
had  been  drinking  heavily,  and  had  formed  the  acquaintance 
of  a  woman  who,  he  said,  had  told  him  that  she  was  unhappy 
at  home,  and  had  asked  him  to  take  her  away  with  him.  It  was 
to  effect  this  purpose  that  he  had  committed  the  crime.  Parker 
was  twenty-three  years  of  age,  a  tall,  good-looking  man,  who 
had  been  in  the  Army.  He  said  that  he  must  have  been  mad 
when  he  committed  the  crime,  and  from  the  first  was  resigned 
to  his  fate.  He  was  convicted  at  the  Central  Criminal  Court 
on  the  7th  of  March,  and  executed  three  weeks  later. 

On  the  night  of  Sunday,  the  24th  September,  1905,  the  body 
of  Mary  Sophia  Money,  aged  twenty-one,  a  book-keeper  at  a 
dairy  at  Lavender  Hill,  Clapham  Junction,  was  discovered  in 
Merstham  Tunnel  on  the  London,  Brighton  &  South  Coast 
Railway.  In  her  mouth  was  a  long  piece  of  silk  veil,  her  skull 
was  smashed,  one  of  her  legs  severed;  she  had  apparently  been 
thrown  from  a  train.  There  were  marks  of  her  hands  on  the 
side  of  the  tunnel,  and  her  gloves  were  covered  with  soot.  On 
the  16th  of  October  the  coroner's  jury  found  that  Miss  Money 
had  met  her  death  by  severe  injuries1  brought  about  by  a  train, 
but  that  the  evidence  was  insufficient  to  show  whether  she  fell 


Franz    Muller. 

or  was  thrown  from  the  train.  It  is  impossible  to  say  whether 
Miss  Money  met  her  death  by  murder,  suicide,  or  mischance. 

The  last  railway  murder  that  aroused  a  very  considerable 
degree  of  interest  was  that  committed  on  the  North-Eastern 
Railway  by  John  Dickman,  of  Newcastle.  It  is  a  remarkable 
case,  from  many  points  of  view,  and  calls  for  more  than  passing 
comment.  In  this  case  the  murderer  had  not  acted  as  Muller, 
on  a  sudden  impulse;  he  had  not  left  the  choice  of  his  victim 
to  chance,  as  Lefroy ;  he  had  carefully  planned,  deliberately 
executed  his  crime,  and  met  the  consequences'  with  fearless 
determination. 

It  was  a  little  after  twelve  o'clock  on  Friday,  18th  March, 
1910,  that  the  10.27  a.m.  slow  train  from  Newcastle  to  Berwick 
steamed  into  Alnmouth  station.  Sleet  was  falling  heavily  at 
the  time.  A  porter  opened  the  door  of  a  third-class  compart- 
ment in  the  carriage  next  to  the  engine,  in  order  to  close  the 
window.  He  saw  to  his  horror  that  the  carriage  was  smothered 
in  blood  and,  lying  face  downwards,  pushed  under  the  seat, 
was  the  body  of  a  man.  It  was  removed  at  once  to  a  waiting- 
room,  and  the  carriage  placed  in  a  siding.  The  body  was  found 
to  be  that  of  John  Innes  Nisbet,  cashier  and  book-keeper  to  a 
Newcastle  firm,  owning  the  Stobswood  Colliery,  near  Wid- 
drington,  some  24  miles  from  Newcastle.  Nisbet  was  in  the 
habit  of  travelling  every  alternate  Friday  by  this  10.27  train 
from  Newcastle,  due  at  Widdrington  at  11.31,  carrying  with 
him  the  money  for  the  miners'  wages.  In  good  times  he 
might  carry  as  much  as  £1000  in  cash,  but,  owing  to  the  coal 
strike,  on  the  morning  he  met  his  death,  he  was  carrying  in 
a  black  bag  £370  9s.  6d.,  in  sovereigns,  half-sovereigns,  silver, 
and  coppers.  It  was  clear  that  the  unfortunate  man  had  met 
with  foul  play ;  there  were  five  bullet  wounds  in  his  head. 
Four  of  the  bullets  were  found,  but  they  were  of  different 
calibre.  The  assassin,  or  assassins,  must  have  used  two 
pistols,  but  no  weapon  was  found  in  the  carriage. 

Nisbet  was  forty-four  years  of  age,  short  and  slight  in  build, 
married,  and  had  two  children.  He  had  been  twenty-two 
years  in  the  service  of  the  colliery  firm,  and  bore  an  excellent 
character.  Mrs.  Nisbet  had  been  in  the  habit  of  meeting  the 
10.27  train  on  the  Fridays  on  which  her  husband  was  travelling 
by  it,  at  Heaton  station,  some  seven  minutes  by  rail  from 


Introduction. 

Newcastle.  On  the  day  of  her  husband's  murder  she  had  met 
the  train  as  usual,  and  had  seen  that  there  was  another  man 
in  the  carriage,  sitting  opposite  to  Nisbet,  but  she  could  not 
give  any  description  of  him.  Nisbet  had  been  last  seen  alive 
at  Stannington,  the  station  immediately  before  Morpeth,  by 
two  colliery  clerks,  who  knew  him  well.  As  they  left  the 
train  at  the  station  they  had  greeted  Nisbet,  and  one  of  them 
had  noticed  that  there  was  another  man  in  the  carriage,  sitting 
on  the  opposite  side  to  the  deceased,  reading  a  newspaper. 
Nisbet  was  not  seen  by  any  of  the  railway  officials  at  Morpeth, 
to  whom  he  was  well  known  as  a  regular  traveller  on  the  line  ; 
and  at  Widdrington  station,  where  he  should  have  alighted, 
some  surprise  was  expressed  at  his  absence.  It  was  not 
until  the  train  reached  Alnmouth,  half  an  hour  later,  that  his 
body  was  discovered.  It  seemed  almost  certain  that  the 
unfortunate  man  had  been  murdered  between  Stannington  and 
Morpeth,  a  non-stop  run  of  ten  minutes,  the  longest  on  the 
journey.  By  alighting  at  Morpeth,  which  is  a  busy  station, 
the  murderer  would  have  had  a  much  better  chance  of  escaping 
unobserved  than  at  any  of  the  smaller  stations  at  which  the 
train  stopped. 

The  day  after  the  murder  the  owners  of  the  Stobswood 
Colliery  offered  a  reward  of  £100  for  the  detection  of  the 
murderer,  of  whom  a  description  was  issued,  based  on  the 
statement  of  the  two  clerks  who  had  left  the  train  at  Stanning- 
ton. One  of  them  had  seen  a  man  get  with  the  deceased  into 
a  compartment  in  the  front  of  the  train  immediately  behind 
that  in  which  he  and  his  friend  were  sitting,  before  the  train 
left  Newcastle;  the  other  had  seen  a  man  sitting  opposite 
Nisbet,  as  he  was  leaving  the  train  at  Stannington. 

A  rumour  spread  that,  on  the  Saturday  following  the 
murder,  a  man  answering  the  description  of  the  wanted  man 
had  been  seen  by  the  conductor  of  an  omnibus  between  London 
Bridge  and  Hackney.  But  a  statement  made  to  the  police  in 
Newcastle  led  to  the  arrest  on  Monday  evening,  the  21st  of 
March,  of  John  Alexander  Dickman,  a  bookmaker  in  that  city. 
He  had  known  the  murdered  man.  He  had  been  at  one  time  a 
clerk  on  the  quayside,  Newcastle;  later,  secretary  to  a  colliery 
company  near  Morpeth ;  and  since  then  had  been  earning 
a  precarious  and  insufficient  living  by  betting  operations, 


Franz    Muller. 

Dickman  was  forty-three  years  of  age,  and  married.  He  is 
described  as  a  short,  rather  thick-set  man,  having  a  heavy 
moustache  and  short,  curly  hair,  spruce  and  well-dressed  in 
appearance.  On  Monday  evening  a  police  officer  called  at  his 
house,  and  invited  Dickman  to  accompany  him  to  the  Central 
Police  Station.  Dickman  consented  without  reluctance  or 
betraying  any  sign  of  nervousness,  and,  on  arriving  at  the 
station,  made  a  voluntary  statement  in  which  he  admitted  travel- 
ling by  the  10.27  train  from  Newcastle  on  the  18th  of  March. 
He  said  that  he  had  seen  Nisbet  at  the  booking  office,  but  not 
again  after  that,  and  that  he  had  entered  a  compartment  alone 
near  the  hinder  end  of  the  train.  He  had,  he  said,  taken  a 
ticket  to  Stannington  in  order  to  keep  an  appointment  with  a 
Mr.  Hogg,  a  colliery  owner,  but  that  he  was  so  absorbed  in  a 
newspaper  he  was  reading  that  he  had  missed  his  station,  and 
had  got  out  at  Morpeth  with  the  intention  of  walking  back  to 
Stannington.  On  the  way  he  had  been  seized  with  an  attack 
of  diarrhoea,  and  after  some  delay  had  returned  to  Morpeth, 
from  which  station  he  had  caught  the  1.40  train  back  to 
Newcastle.  On  being  placed  under  arrest  and  charged  with 
the  murder  of  Nisbet,  Dickman  said — "  I  don't  understand  the 
proceedings ;  it  is  absurd  for  me  to  deny  the  charge,  because 
it  is  absurd  to  make  it.  I  only  say  I  absolutely  deny  it." 

Dickman 's  account  of  his  movements  on  the  day  of  the 
murder  was  in  one  respect  inconsistent  with  a  statement  which 
had  been  made  to  the  police  by  Wilson  Hepple,  an  artist  living 
near  Newcastle.  He  had  known  Dickman  for  some  twenty  years, 
and  was  travelling  by  the  10.27  train  from  Newcastle  on  the 
morning  of  the  18th  of  March.  He  stated  that  he  had  seen 
Dickman  at  the  booking  office  as  he  was  taking  his  ticket,  and 
had  then  gone  to  a  carriage  in  the  middle  of  the  train.  As  he  was 
standing  by  the  carriage  Dickman  passed  him  in  company  with 
another  man,  whom,  he  did  not  know,  and  went  to  the  engine 
end  of  the  train.  He  then,  as  he  was  walking  up  and  down 
the  platform,  saw  one  of  the  two  men  place  his  hand  on  the 
door  of  a  carriage  at  the  higher  end  of  the  train,  and,  when 
he  turned  round  again  in  his  walk,  the  two  men  had  dis- 
appeared. About  a  minute  later,  Hepple  got  into  his  carriage 
and  the  train  started.  If  Hepple  was  not  mistaken  and  was 
telling  the  truth — and  his  character  made  any  other  supposition 
xxxviii 


Introduction. 

impossible — then  Dickman  had  given  a  false  account  of  his 
movements  when  he  stated  that,  after  seeing  Nisbet  at  the 
booking  office,  he  had  walked  alone  to  a  carriage  at  the  hinder 
end  of  the  train. 

On  Tuesday,  22nd  March,  Dickman  was  charged  before  a 
magistrate  at  Gosforth  Police  Court,  but  it  was  not  until  the  14th 
of  April  that  the  case  was  gone  into  fully  before  the  Newcastle 
magistrates.  In  addition  to  the  evidence  of  Mrs.  Nisbet  and 
Hepple,  Hall,  one  of  the  colliery  clerks  travelling  by  the  10.27 
train,  said  that  he  had  seen  Nisbet  and  a  man  he  believed  to 
be  the  prisoner,  get  into  a  compartment  immediately  behind 
his,  which  was  the  second  compartment  from  the  engine  in  the 
carriage  next  to  the  engine.  When  asked  to  point  out 
Nisbet's  companion  from  among  nine  men  at  the  police  station, 
Hall  pointed  out  Dickman  and  said,  "  I  won't  swear  that  the 
man  I  pointed  out  was  the  man  I  saw  get  in  with  Mr.  Nisbet, 
but,  if  I  could  be  assured  that  the  murderer  was  there,  I 
would  have  no  hesitation  in  pointing  the  prisoner  out."  His 
companion,  Spink,  swore  that,  as  he  passed  Nisbet  at  Stan- 
nington  station,  he  had  seen  another  man  in  the  carriage  with 
him,  but  was  unable  to  identify  Dickman  as  the  man. 

Evidence  was  given  as  to  Dickman's  financial  position  at 
the  time  of  the  murder.  It  was  clear  from  a  letter  of  his 
wife's  that  the  Dickmans  were  sorely  in  need  of  money,  and 
that  the  husband  had  practically  no  money  at  all,  the  wife  some 
£20  in  a  co-operative  society  and  the  Post  Office  Savings  Bank. 
On  the  day  before  the  murder  Dickman  had  pawned  a  pair  of 
field-glasses  for  15s.,  and  a  fortnight  earlier  had  pawned 
another  pair  for  12s.  At  the  time  of  his  arrest  he  had  on  him 
£17  9s.  lid.  in  cash,  fifteen  sovereigns  of  which  were  in  a 
"  Lambton's  Bank  "  canvas  bag,  the  remainder  loose  in  his 
pockets.  The  clerk  at  Lloyd's  Bank  in  Newcastle,  with  which 
Lambton's  Bank  had  been  amalgamated,  stated  that  the 
sovereigns  and  half-sovereigns  of  the  £370  paid  out  to  Nisbet 
on  the  morning  of  the  18th  March  had  been  contained  in 
canvas  bags  similar  to  that  found  on  Dickman.  At  the  same 
time  it  was  proved  that  Dickman  had  had  an  account  at 
Lloyd's  Bank,  which  had  been  closed  at  the  end  of  the  year 
1909. 

Some  evidence  was  given  of  Dickman  having  received  a  parcel 


Franz    Muller. 

containing  a  gun  at  a  shop  in  Newcastle  in  the  name  of  "  Fred. 
Black  " ;  and  a  gunsmith's  assistant  stated  that  according  to 
his  register  he  had,  in  the  year  1907,  sold  an  automatic  pistol 
to  a  "  J.  A.  Dickson,"  giving  an  address  at  Lily  Avenue, 
Jesmond,  the  street  in  which  Dickman  was  living  at  the  time 
of  his  arrest.  Another  gunsmith  stated  that  two  of  the  bullet 
wounds  in  the  head  of  the  deceased  might  have  been  inflicted 
with  a  pistol  of  such  a  character. 

At  the  second  hearing  in  the  Police  Court,  Mr.  Hogg  was 
called.  He  was  the  contractor  whom  Dickman  said  he  had  gone 
to  see  on  the  morning  of  18th  March  about  some  sinking  opera- 
tions at  Stannington.  Hogg  said  that  he  had  made  no 
appointment  with  Dickman  on  that  morning,  and  had,  in  fact, 
been  in  Newcastle  all  day ;  that  the  prisoner  had  been  to  see 
him  at  Stannington  a  fortnight  before  the  murder,  arriving 
by  the  same  10.27  train  from  Newcastle  as  that  by  which  he 
had  travelled  on  the  day  of  Nisbet's  murder.  Hogg  further 
stated  that  the  visit  had  been  in  a  purely  friendly  way,  and 
not  on  any  matter  of  business ;  that  he  had  on  one  occasion 
lent  Dickman  <£2,  and  that,  as  far  as  he  knew,  the  prisoner 
had  never  had  anything  to  do  with  any  sinking  operations. 

Medical  evidence  was  called  as  to  the  nature  of  the  five  bullet 
wounds  found  in  the  head  of  the  murdered  man,  one  of  which, 
entering  the  brain,  had  caused  death.  At  the  conclusion  of 
the  evidence  the  magistrates  decided  that  a  prima  facie  case 
had  been  made  out  against  Dickman,  but  remanded  him  until 
21st  April,  when  the  depositions  would  be  read  over  and  the 
prisoner  committed  for  trial. 

That  day  an  unlooked-for  incident  occurred.  Dickman  had 
no  sooner  entered  the  Court  than  Mrs.  Nisbet  went  into  the 
witness-box,  and  asked  to  be  allowed  to  make  a  statement. 
At  the  conclusion  of  her  evidence  at  the  previous  hearing  she 
had  fainted  away,  and  had  to  be  assisted  from  the  Court.  At 
the  time  her  collapse  was  attributed  to  emotion  natural  in  so 
painful  a  situation  as  hers.  Now,  however,  with  the  permis- 
sion of  the  Court,  she  wished  to  explain  the  cause  of  her 
distress.  She  had,  she  said,  seen  but  little  of  the  man  seated 
opposite  to  her  husband  in  the  railway  carriage  when  she  met 
the  train  at  Heaton  station  on  the  fatal  morning ;  "  he  had  got 
his  collar  up,  and  had  partly  covered  his  face.  I  recognised 

xl 


Introduction. 

the  same  part  of  the  face  in  the  dock  the  other  day,  and  that 
is  how  I  lost  my  senses."  At  this  point  Mrs.  Nisbet  almost 
broke  down  again.  As  soon  as  she  had  recovered  herself 
sufficiently  she  was  cross-examined  by  the  prisoner's  solicitor, 
but  she  persisted  that  she  recognised  the  side  of  the  face  that 
she  had  seen  in  the  dock  as  the  side  of  the  face  that  she  had 
seen  in  the  railway  carriage  at  Heaton  station.  The  man  in 
the  train,  she  said,  resembled  the  prisoner;  "he  turned  in 
the  dock  as  I  saw  him  in  the  train."  The  evidence  was  read 
over,  and  Dickman  committed  for  trial  to  the  Newcastle 
Assizes. 

On  the  9th  of  June,  between  the  magisterial  investigation 
and  the  trial,  the  leather  bag  in  which  Nisbet  had  carried  the 
money  on  the  18th  of  March  was  found,  slit  open  and  emptied 
of  the  greater  part  of  its  contents,  at  the  bottom  of  the  shaft  of 
the  Isabella  pit  at  Hepscott.  This  pit  lies  If  miles  to  the  south- 
east of  Morpeth  station.  The  bag  contained  some  coppers, 
and  other  coppers  were  found  near  it,  amounting  altogether  to 
19s.  8d.  Dickman,  it  was  proved,  knew  of  the  existence  of 
this  particular  shaft.  Arriving  at  Morpeth  at  11.16  the 
murderer,  whoever  he  was,  would  have  had  ample  time  and 
to  spare  to  visit  the  shaft  and  to  return  by  the  1.40  train  to 
Newcastle. 

The  trial  of  Dickman  commenced  on  the  4th  of  July  before 
Mr.  Justice  Coleridge.  Mr.  Tindal  Atkinson,  K.C.,  led  for  the 
Crown,  and  the  prisoner  was  defended  by  Mr.  Mitchell  Innes, 
K.C.  In  opening  the  case,  Mr.  Tindal  Atkinson  emphasised 
the  fact  that  four  persons  had  seen  Dickman  in  the  company 
of  the  deceased  on  the  morning  of  18th  March.  A  man  named 
Raven  had  seen  both  men  walking  together  at  Newcastle 
station  on  their  way  to  No.  5  platform,  from  which  the  10.27 
train  started.  Hepple  had  sworn  to  seeing  the  prisoner  get 
into  the  front  part  of  the  train  with  a  man  of  a  build  corres- 
ponding with  the  deceased.  Hall  had  identified  Dickman  as 
the  man  he  had  seen  with  Nisbet  on  the  platform  at  Newcastle. 
And  Mrs.  Nisbet  had  identified  him  under  the  circumstances 
already  described.  Of  these  witnesses,  Hepple's  was  the  most 
serious  evidence  against  the  prisoner,  and  remained  unshaken 
in  spite  of  earnest  cross-examination. 

As  further  evidence  of  the  prisoner's  guilt  there  were  pro- 

xli 


Franz    Muller. 

duced  a  pair  of  suede  gloves  belonging  to  Dickman,  one  of 
which,  the  left-hand  glove,  was  smeared  with  blood ;  and  a 
pair  of  his  trousers,  in  the  left-hand  pocket  of  which  were  spots 
of  blood.  It  was  suggested  that  the  stains  had  been  produced 
by  the  glove,  still  wet  with  blood,  having  been  put  into  the 
trousers  pocket,  whilst  it  was  still  on  the  murderer's  hand.  In 
regard  to  the  impecuniosity  of  Dickman  at  the  time  of  the 
murder  it  was  proved  that  both  Dickman' s  banking  accounts 
had  been  closed  in  1909,  and  that  apparently  some  £20  of 
savings  of  Mrs.  Dickman 's  was  the  sum  of  their  fortune  on  the 
18th  of  March,  1910. 

Dickman  went  into  the  witness-box.  He  repeated  in  sub- 
stance the  statement  he  had  already  made  to  the  police.  He 
had  passed  Stannington  station  because,  as  a  betting  man,  he 
was  engrossed  in  reading  in  the  newspaper  about  the  Grand 
National  Steeplechase  that  was  to  be  run  that  day.  He  said 
that  the  £17  found  on  him  on  his  arrest  was  part  of  a  reserve 
fund,  belonging  to  his  betting  account  and  known  only  to 
himself.  In  cros'e-examination,  Dickman  maintained  that 
he  had  entered  the  last  carriage  but  one  at  the  back  of  the 
train.  There  were,  he  said,  other  people  in  the  carriage,  but 
he  could  not  describe  any  of  them,  nor  recollect  whether  any 
of  them  had  got  out  before  the  train  reached  Morpeth.  About 
ten  minutes  after  he  left  Morpeth,  Dickman  said  that  he  was 
seized  with  illness,  and  had  spent  half  an  hour  in  a  field.  He 
returned  home  about  a  quarter-past  four  that  afternoon,  and 
went  to  the  Pavilion  Music  Hall  in  Newcastle  that  evening. 
The  blood  steins  on  his  glove  he  attributed  to  his  nose  bleeding 
or  cutting  his  corns. 

No  fairer  account  of  the  case  can  be  given  than  the  masterly 
summing  up  of  Mr.  Justice  Coleridge.  It  is  a  model  of  what 
such  a  thing  should  be.  It  cannot  be  said  to  have  been 
favourable  to  the  prisoner.  At  the  same  time,  it  never 
emphasised  unduly  the  strength  of  the  circumstantial  evidence 
against  him.  The  learned  judge  commenced  by  dealing  with 
the  evidence  that  showed  Nisbet  and  Dickman  to  have  been 
together  in  the  train  on  the  day  of  the  murder.  It  resulted 

I  in  this,   the  deceased  was  proved  to  have  been  in  the  third 
compartment  of  the  front  coach,   "  and  there  was   one  man, 
and    one    man    alone    with    him    in    that  carriage."       The 
xlii 


Introduction. 

prisoner  was  seen  with  the  deceased  at  the  railway  station, 
and  was  seen  getting,  with  a  companion,  into  a  compartment 
approximate  to  the  one  in  which  the  deceased  had  travelled. 
Then  there  was  the  evidence  of  Mrs.  Nisbet.  It  was  clearly 
proved  that  on  that  morning  the  prisoner  had  a  companion. 
He  said  that  he  had  not.  "If  he  said  that  he  had  no  com- 
panion, when  they  knew  that  he  had,  then  who  was  that 
companion?  " 

The  judge  commented  on  the  prisoner's  account  of  his  move- 
ments after  reaching  Morpeth.  Why  did  he  not  go  back  at 
once  to  Stannington  station,  where  he  should  have  got  out? 
The  story  of  his  seizure  of  illness  was  uncorroborated ;  and 
two  men  who  had  met  him  near  Morpeth  station,  about 
twenty  minutes  past  one,  had  found  him  cool,  collected,  and 
with  no  sign  of  suffering.  The  prisoner's  explanation  of  the 
blood  on  his  gloves  and  in  his  trousers  pocket  was  vague  and 
unsatisfactory. 

In  dealing  with  the  circumstantial  character  of  the  evidence 
against  the  prisoner,  such  evidence,  Lord  Coleridge  said,  "  One 
may  describe  as  a  network  of  facts  cast  around  the  accused 
man.  That  network  may  be  a  mere  gossamer  thread  as  light 
and  insubstantial  as  the  air  itself,  which  would  vanish  at  a 
touch.  It  may  be  strong  in  parts,  but  leave  great  gaps  and 
rents  through  which  the  accused  is  entitled  to  pass  with  safety. 
It  may  be  so  close,  so  stringent,  so  coherent  in  its  texture, 
that  no  efforts  on  the  part  of  the  accused  could  break  it." 

The  jury,  after  an  absence  of  half  an  hour,  returned  a 
verdict  of  "  guilty "  against  Dickman,  who  was  sentenced 
to  death.  The  prisoner,  whose  firmness  had  never  deserted 
him  from  the  first  moment  of  his  arrest,  protested  his  inno- 
cence. Notice  of  appeal  was  given  on  Dickman's  behalf. 
At  the  same  time  a  brother  of  the  prisoner  wrote  a  letter  to 
the  Newcastle  Daily  Chronicle,  in  which  he  asked  if  anybody, 
after  reviewing  Dickman's  own  evidence,  could,  unless  he 
looked  through  smoked  glasses,  say  that  Dickman  was  an 
innocent  man.  He  wrote,  he  said,  in  the  hope  of  stopping 
people  writing  foolish  letters  to  the  papers  protesting  against 
the  verdict.  He  said  that,  if  his  brother  had  taken  his 
advice,  he  would  not  have  been  where  he  was.  In  spite  of 
this  singular  fraternal  intervention,  a  petition  for  a  reprieve 

was  prepared  and  sent  to  the  Home  Secretary. 

xliii 


Franz    Muller. 

Dickman's  appeal  was  held  before  the  Court  of  Criminal 
Appeal,  consisting  of  the  Lord  Chief  Justice,  Lord  Alverstone, 
and  Justices  Lawrance  and  Phillimore,  on  Friday,  22nd  July. 
Mr.  Mitchell  Innes,  who  appeared  for  Dickman,  dealt  chiefly 
with  the  unsatisfactory  character  of  Hall's  identification  of  the 
prisoner,  and  the  fact  that  Mr.  Tindal  Atkinson,  in  his  con- 
cluding speech  for  the  Crown,  had  commented  on  the  fact  that 
Mrs.  Dickman  had  not  been  called  as  a  witness  for  the  defence. 
Hall  was  called  before  the  Court,  and  examined  by  Mr.  Mitchell 
Innes,  when  it  appeared  that  he  had  been  assisted  rather 
improperly  by  the  police  in  his  identification  of  the  prisoner. 
But  the  Court  held  that  this  identification  had  so  little  bearing 
on  the  real  merits  of  the  case  that  it  was  impossible  to  inter- 
fere with  the  verdict  of  the  jury  on  the  ground  of  anything 
that  had  happened  at  the  police  station.  As  to  Mrs.  Dick- 
man's evidence,  Mr.  Justice  Coleridge  had  told  the  jury,  before 
the  foreman  had  delivered  their  verdict,  that,  if  Mr.  Tindal 
Atkinson's  comment  had  in  any  way  affected  their  minds, 
they  must  re-consider  their  verdict ;  but  the  foreman  had  replied 
that  the  subject  had  never  been  mentioned  amongst  them. 
Without  calling  on  Mr.  Tindal  Atkinson,  the  Court  dismissed 
the  appeal. 

On  August  the  5th  the  Home  Secretary  wrote  that  he  was 
unable  to  advise  any  interference  with  the  due  course  of  the 
law  in  Dickman's  case,  and  on  the  9th  of  August  Dickman  was 
executed  in  Newcastle  Gaol.  He  met  his  death  unflinchingly, 
and  made  no  confession.  From  the  moment  that  Dickman 
contemplated  the  murder  of  Nisbet  he  seems  to  have  set  about 
it  with  a  method  and  determination  that  were  unfaltering. 

!His  journey  to  Stannington  on  4th  March  was,  no  doubt,  as 
the  judge  suggested,  in  the  nature  of  a  rehearsal  for  the  actual 
deed  itself.  Dickman,  at  the  end  of  his  resources,  had  come 
to  the  deliberate  resolution  of  refilling  his  pockets  by  the 
murder  of  a  man  who  would,  he  knew,  be  carrying  with  him 
on  the  18th  of  March  a  very  considerable  sum  of  money. 

The  People  newspaper,  after  his  execution,  stated  that  Dick- 
man was  strongly  suspected  by  the  police  of  having  been 
connected  with  the  murder  of  a  Jewish  moneylender,  which 
had  occurred  in  Sunderland  on  the  evening  of  the  8th  March, 
1909.  It  would  seem  that  Dickman  had  undoubtedly  had  some 
xliv 


Introduction. 

dealings  with  the  murdered  man.  Prior  to  Dickman's  arrest, 
a  number  of  assaults  and  robberies  had  taken  place  in  Jesmond, 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Dickman's  house.  The  perpetrator 
had  never  been  discovered.  It  was  said  that  one  of  the 
victims  of  this  mysterious  assailant,  who  had  been  present  at 
Dickman's  trial,  had  recognised  the  prisoner  in  the  dock  as 
the  man  who  had  attacked  and  robbed  him.  Among  the 
articles  found  in  Dickman's  house  at  the  time  of  his  arrest 
was  a  life  preserver.  Mrs.  Dickman  wrote  to  the  People 
protesting  strongly  against  these  insinuations,  and  challenging 
proof  of  them. 

Two  mysteries  in  connection  with  the  Dickman  case  are  to 
this  day  unsolved.  What  became  of  the  weapons  used  by 
the  murderer?  What  has  become  of  the  greater  part  of  the 
£370  taken  from  the  murdered  man?  Does  the  money  still 
lie  concealed  in  some  hiding  place  where  the  murderer  had 
secreted  it,  in  the  hope  of  recovering  it  when  the  excitement 
caused  by  his  crime  had  died  down?  or  has  some  unscrupulous 
person  found  it  and  preferred  to  say  nothing  of  the  discovery? 

I  have  given  the  outline  of  this  case  at  some  length,  as 
it  is  perhaps  the  most  remarkable  of  the  crimes  perpetrated 
on  our  English  railways.  Happily  these  crimes  have  been 
few,  in  spite  of  the  facilities  offered  to  the  criminal  by  the 
construction  of  our  English  railway  carriages.  In  Pendleton's 
"  Our  Railways,"  published  in  1896,  statistics  are  given  which 
show  that  we  then  compared  very  favourably  with  other 
European  countries  in  the  number  of  such  crimes.  France 
heads  the  list  by  a  long  way.  In  the  thirty  years  previous, 
there  were  in  France  twenty-eight  murders  or  attempted  murders 
on  the  railway.  In  Russia  and  Turkey  there  were  seven  each, 
in  Italy  five,  in  England  four,  in  Spain  two,  and  in  Austria 
one.  Germany,  Switzerland,  Holland,  and  Belgium  had  none. 
With  the  coming  of  the  corridor  carriages  we  may  hope  that 
these  crimes  will  come  to  be  matters  of  ancient  history. 


xlv 


Leading  Dates  in  the  Muller  Case. 

1864. 
Saturday, 

July     9. — The  body  of  Mr.  Briggs  found  on  the  North  London 
railway  between  Bow  and  Hackney  Wick  stations. 

11. — Inquest  opened  by  Mr.  Humphreys,  coroner,  at  the 
Prince  of  Wales'  Tavern,  Bow,  afterwards  ad- 
journed to  the  Hackney  Town  Hall. 

Muller  visits  Death's  shop  in  Cheapside,  exchanges 
Mr.  Briggs's  watch  chain  for  another,  and  gives 
to  Matthews'  little  girl  the  jeweller's  box  bearing 
Death's  name. 

13. — Muller  books  passage  at  the  London  Docks  by  the 
sailing  ship  "  Victoria  "  for  New  York. 

15. — "Victoria"  sails  for  New  York. 

18. — The  cabman  Matthews  makes  a  statement  to  the 
police  as  to  the  identity  of  the  hat  left  in  the 
railway  carriage. 

20. — Inspector  Tanner,  Sergeant  Clarke,  Death,  and 
Matthews  leave  Liverpool  for  New  York  by  the 
New  York  and  Philadelphia  Company's  steamship 
"  City  of  Manchester." 

Aug.     5. — "  City  of  Manchester  "  arrives  at  New  York. 

25. — "  Victoria  "  reaches  New  York.     Muller  is  arrested. 
27. — Commissioner  Newton  grants  Muller's  extradition. 

Sept.    3. — Muller    sails   for  England  by    steamship    "  Etna," 
Inman  Line. 

16. — "  Etna  "  reaches  Liverpool. 

xlvii 


Franz    Muller. 

1864. 

Sept.  17. — Muller  is  brought  to  London  and  charged  at  Bow 
Street. 

19. — Magisterial  hearing  commences  before  Mr.  Flowers 
at  Bow  Street  Police  Court. 

26. — Coroner's  jury  return  verdict  of  "  wilful  murder  " 
against  Muller.  Magisterial  hearing  concluded, 
and  Muller  committed  for  trial  at  Central  Criminal 
Court. 

Oct.  26. — Grand  jury  at  Central  Criminal  Court  return  a  true 
bill  against  Muller. 

27. — His  trial  commences  at  the  Old  Bailey  before  Chief 
Baron  Pollock  and  Mr.  Baron  Martin. 

29. — The  jury  return  a  verdict  of  "Guilty,"  and  Muller 
is  sentenced  to  death. 

Nov.  10. — The  German  Legal  Protection  Society  present 
memorial  to  the  Home  Secretary  praying  for  a 
commutation  of  the  sentence. 

12. — Letter  from  the  Home  Secretary  declining  to  inter- 
fere with  the  sentence. 

14. — Muller  executed  before  Newgate,  after  confessing  his 
guilt. 


xlviii 


THE  TRIAL. 


On  the  Queen's  Commission  of  Oyer  and  Terminer  and  Gaol 
Delivery  for  the  City  of  London  and  Gaol  Delivery  for  the 
County  of  Middlesex  and  the  parts  of  the  Counties  of  Essex, 
Kent,  and  Surrey  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Central 
Criminal  Court. 

THURSDAY,   27-ra   OCTOBER,   1864. 
The  Court  met  at  Ten  o'clock. 


Judges — 

THE  LORD  CHIEF  BARON  (Sir  Frederick  Pollock). 
MR.  BARON  MARTIN. 


Counsel  for  the  Crown — 

THE  SOLICITOR-GENERAL  (Sir  R.  P.  Collier,  Q.C.,  M.P.). 
Mr.  SERJEANT  BALLANTINE. 
Mr.  JAMES  HANNEN. 
Mr.  HARDINGE  GIFFARD. 
Mr.  BEASLEY. 

Instructed  by  Mr.  A.  W.  POLLARD,  on  behalf  of  the  Treasury. 


Counsel  for  the  Prisoner — 
Mr.  SERJEANT  PARRY. 
Mr.  METCALFE. 
Mr.  EDWARD  BESLEY. 

Instructed  by  Mr.  THOMAS  BEARD,  Solicitor  to  the  German 
Legal  Protection  Society. 


FRANZ  MULLER  (23)  was  indicted  for  the  wilful 
murder  of  Thomas  Briggs. 

CLERK  OP  THE  COURT — Franz  Muller,  you  are  indicted  that 
.you  did,  on  the  9th  of  July,  in  the  present  year,  maliciously, 
wilfully,  and  of  malice  aforethought,  kill  and  murder  Thomas 
JBriggs.  Are  you  guilty  or  not  guilty? 

The  PRISONER — Not  guilty. 

CLERK  OF  THE  COURT — You  are  entitled  to  be  tried  by  a 
.jury  partly  composed  of  foreigners. 

SERJEANT  PARRY  (for  the  prisoner) — He  wishes  to  be  tried 
by  twelve  Englishmen. 

CLERK  OP  THE  COURT — Prisoner  at  the  bar,  if  you  wish  to 
•object  to  any  of  the  gentlemen  of  the  jury  you  must  do  so  as 
they  come  into  the  box  to  be  sworn. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — I  understand  that  a  ballot  of  all  the  jury- 
men takes  place  at  the  beginning  of  the  sessions,  and  that  they 
are  divided  into  classes  or  pannels,  and  that  these  classes 
consist  of  fourteen  jurymen  each. 

CLBRK  OF  THE  COURT — Yes. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — I  ask  your  lordship  that  the  whole  of  the 
names  of  the  gentlemen  of  the  jury  be  placed  in  a  box,  and 
that  they  should  be  taken  out  indifferently. 

BARON  MARTIN — You  are  entitled  to  have  the  jury  sworn 
according  to  Act  of  Parliament. 

CLERK  OP  THE  COURT — Send  into  the  other  Courts,  and  tell 
them  to  send  in  all  the  jurymen  in  waiting. 

(Messengers  were  sent,  and  while  they  were  away  the  prisoner 
held  a  long  conversation  with  his  solicitor,  Mr.  Beard,  over 
the  front  of  the  dock.  Upon  the  entry  of  the  jurymen  from 
the  other  Courts  those  gentlemen  who  had  already  taken  their 
•seats  in  the  jury-box  were  requested  to  retire,  which  they  did.) 

CLERK  OF  THE  COURT — The  gentlemen  who  are  summoned  as 
-a  foreign  jury  need  not  stay  any  longer. 

(Several  jurymen  were  then  called,  but  Mr.  Serjeant  Parry 
•exercised  his  privilege  of  objecting  to  several.) 

SERJEANT  PARRY — I  ask  that  the  names  of  the  jury  be  put 
>into  a  box  and  drawn. 

3 


Franz    Muller. 

BARON  MARTIN — There  is  no  such  Act  of  Parliament. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — I  ask  that  the  names  be  put  in  the  box 
and  drawn. 

BARON  MARTIN — I  shall  proceed  according  to  law. 

(The  learned  baron  then  directed  that  the  Act  of  Parliament 
be  handed  to  Serjeant  Parry.) 

The  LORD  CHIEF  BARON — Mr.  Avory  was  calling  the  names 
of  the  gentlemen  of  the  jury  who  had  been  summoned  from 
Middlesex.  I  propose  that,  as  counties  send  prisoners  for 
trial  to  the  Old  Bailey,  and  there  are  pannels  from  each  of 
those  counties,  some  jurymen  should  be  cited  from  each  pannel. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — I  am  quite  satisfied  with  the  proposal,  and 
thank  your  lordship  for  the  suggestion. 

The  jury  having  been  duly  empannelled  and  sworn, 

The  CLERK  OP  THE  COURT  said — Gentlemen,  the  prisoner,. 
Franz  Muller,  is  indicted  for  that  he  did  feloniously,  wilfully, 
and  with  malice  aforethought,  kill  and  murder  Thomas  Briggs, 
and  it  is  your  duty  to  say  whether  he  is  guilty  or  not  guilty. 

Solicitor-      The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — Gentlemen   of  the   jury,    it   is   my 
General 

duty  to  state  to  you  the  circumstances  of  a  most  extraordinary 

murder,  and  to  inform  you  of  the  evidence  which  will  be  laid 
before  you,  warranting  the  conclusion  that  that  murder  wa& 
committed  by  the  prisoner  at  the  bar.  Gentlemen,  this  is  a 
case  which  has  excited  unusual  and  painful  interest.  It  is, 
one  which,  as  we  all  know,  has  been  canvassed  and  discussed  in 
almost  every  newspaper,  I  might  say  almost  every  house,  in 
the  kingdom;  and  it  is  one  on  which  some  persons  might 
be  inclined  already  to  form  an  opinion.  I  must  entreat  you, 
gentlemen,  in  approaching  this  most  solemn  inquiry,  to  discard 
from  your  minds  anything  that  you  may  have  heard,  everything 
that  you  may  have  read  upon  the  subject.  I  appear  on  the  part 
of  the  prosecution  with  a  true  desire  to  do  justice  to  the 
prisoner.  You  will  try  him  upon  the  evidence,  and  upon  the 
evidence  alone.  It  gives  me  great  satisfaction  to  know  that 
the  prisoner  has  been  enabled  to  avail  himself  of  the  services. 
of  the  distinguished  counsel  who  are  on  his  side,  for  I  am 
convinced  they  will  present  to  your  consideration  in  the  most, 
4 


The  Solicitor-General's  Opening. 

favourable  manner  every  argument  that  can  be  made  in  his 
favour.  I  shall  now  give  you  a  plain  statement  of  the  facts 
which  will  be  presented  before  you. 

Gentlemen,  we  have  to  inquire  into  the  circumstances  attend- 
ing the  death  of  a  Mr.  Thomas  Briggs.  Mr.  Briggs  was  one  of 
the  chief  clerks  of  the  well-known  banking  house  of  Messrs. 
Roberts  &  Co.  He  was  a  gentleman,  I  understand,  very  highly 
respected  and  esteemed  by  all  who  were  acquainted  with  him. 
Mr.  Briggs  had  a  house  in  Clapton  Square,  which  is  near  to  the 
Hackney  or  Hackney  Wick  station  of  the  North  London  rail- 
way, and  he  frequently — almost  habitually,  I  believe — went  to 
and  fro  between  his  place  of  business  and  his  house  by  that 
railway.  I  have  now  to  call  your  particular  attention  to 
Saturday,  the  9th  of  July  last.  On  Saturday,  the  9th  of 
July,  Mr.  Briggs  dined  with  a  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Buchan,  who 
lived  in  Nelson  Square,  Peckham,  Mrs.  Buchan  being  a  niece 
of  Mr.  Briggs.  Mr.  Briggs  left  Mr.  Buchan's  about  half-past 
nine  o'clock  at  night  with  the  intention  of  returning  to  his 
home  at  Clapton  Square.  Mr.  Buchan  walked  with  him  as 
far  as  the  omnibus  which  went  to  King  William  Street,  where 
he  would  get  out  and  walk  to  the  Fenchurch  Street  station.  Mr. 
Briggs  had  on  that  occasion  with  him  a  black  bag.  He  had 
a  stick,  which  will  be  shown  to  you,  and  he  had  a  watch  and 
chain.  The  watch  was  an  old-fashioned,  large,  gold  lever 
watch,  and,  I  believe,  a  valuable  one.  The  chain  was  also 
of  some  value,  and  was  one  he  had  had  for  some  time.  Attached* 
to  the  chain  was  a  ring,  partly  broken,  which  will  be  presently 
shown  to  you  and  identified.  It  is  clear  that  Mr.  Briggs  had 
the  watch  and  chain  upon  him  at  the  time,  for  Mr.  Buchan  will 
tell  you  that  on  his  way  to  the  omnibus  he  once  or  twice  took 
out  his  watch  to  see  the  time.  Gentlemen,  Mr.  Briggs  arrived 
at  the  Fenchurch  Street  station  in  time  to  go  by  the  train 
which  starts  at  a  quarter  before  ten.  He  had  taken  a  first- 
-lass return  ticket  in  the  morning,  and  he  went  into  a  first- 
class  carriage  with  the  intention  of  returning  home.  Now, 
gentlemen,  it  will  be  proved  to  you  beyond  all  doubt  or  con- 
troversy that  Mr.  Briggs  was  robbed  and  murdered  on  that 
night  in  that  railway  carriage.  The  murder  was  consum- 
mated. His  body  was  thrown  out  of  the  door  of  the  carriage 
between  two  stations,  the  one  the  Bow  station  and  the  other 

5 


Franz    Muller. 

Solicitor-  the  Hackney  Wick  station — rather  nearer  the  Hackney  Wick 
than  the  Bow,  at  a  spot  which  will  be  pointed  out.  The 
murder  was  first  discovered  in  this  way.  Two  gentlemen, 
clerks  in  the  same  banking  establishment  as  Mr.  Briggs, 
happened  to  be  getting  into  the  same  train  at  the  Hackney 
station.  On  getting  in  they  felt  something  wet  on  the  cushion, 
and  upon  examination  they  found  it  to  be  blood.  One  or 
two  other  persons  got  into  the  carriage,  and  they  called  the 
attention  of  the  guard.  The  guard  examined  the  carriage ,. 
and  '.found  a  quantity  of  blood  in  it.  He  found  also  the  black 
bag,  the  stick,  and  a  hat,  in  respect  of  which  I  may  have- 
some  remarks  to  make  by  and  by.  The  guard,  of  course, 
caused  all  the  passengers  to  leave  the  carriage,  locked  it  up., 
and  sent  it  on  to  the  Chalk  Farm  station,  where  it  was  received 
by  Mr.  Greenwood,  and  sent  to  Bow  station,  where  it  remained 
from  that  time  to  this,  and  where  it  is  now  in  the  same  state 
as  that  in  which  it  was  on  that  night.  In  the  meantime  the 
guard  of  an  up  train — an  empty  train — passing  between  the 
Hackney  Wick  station  and  the  Bow  station,  observed  a  dark 
object  on  the  ground  between  the  two  lines  of  railway.  He 
called  the  attention  of  the  driver  to  it ;  it  proved  to  be  the 
body  of  a  man,  who  was  still  breathing,  but  insensible.  He 
was  taken  to  the  Mitford  Castle  Inn,  and  it  was  then  discovered 
that  this  person  was  Mr.  Briggs.  Gentlemen,  Mr.  Briggs 
never  recovered  his  consciousness,  but  lingered  in  that  state 
until  the  next  evening,  when  he  died,  having  been  conveyed 
in  the  meantime  to  his  own  house. 

It  is  proper  that  I  should  describe  to  you  the  state 
in  which  Mr.  Briggs  was  at  the  time  he  was  found. 
I  am  informed  he  had  several  severe  wounds,  appar- 
ently inflicted  by  a  blunt  instrument,  used  with  great  force. 
The  skull  had  been  fractured  in  several  places.  There  were 
also  other  bruises  and  contusions,  which  the  medical  men 
who  attended  him  are  inclined  to  admit  might  be  caused  by 
the  fall  from  the  carriage ;  but  I  believe  the  medical  men  will 
think  that  those  injuries  which  were  not  done  by  the  fall  were 
inflicted  by  a  blunt  instrument.  The  blood  in  the  carriage 
would  indicate  that  violence  was  there  used.  The  dress  of 
Mr.  Briggs  was  disordered  to  such  an  extent  as  to  indicate  that 
a  serious  struggle  had  taken  place.  He  had  been  robbed  of 
6 


The  Solicitor-General's  Opening. 

his  watch  and  chain.      They  had  been  taken  forcibly  from  his  Soiieitor- 

.      ,        ,    .       ,  .,          General 

person,   because  there  was  subsequently  found  in  the  railway 

carriage  the  broken  link  of  the  chain.  But  he  had  not  been 
robbed  beyond  this.  He  had  four  sovereigns  in  one  of  his 
trousers  pockets  when  he  was  found.  He  had  also  in  the  other 
pocket  a  silver  snuffbox,  and  he  had  a  diamond  ring  on  one 
of  his  fingers.  These  articles  had  not  been  taken.  That 
is  the  description  of  the  state  of  Mr.  Briggs  at  the  time  he  was 
found. 

Now,  it  would  be  well  for  me  to  describe  a  little  more 
particularly  the  state  of  the  carriage.  If  you  take  this 
to  be  the  carriage — (referring  to  a  model) — Mr.  Briggs  would 
appear  to  be  sitting  on  the  "near"  side,  as  it  is  called.  A 
large  quantity  of  blood  was  found  on  this  side,  which  appears 
to  have  flowed  profusely  from  the  corner  seat.  There  is  also 
a  good  deal  of  blood  on  the  other  part  of  the  seat.  I  should 
state  to  you  the  carriage  is  not  divided,  as  some  carriages 
are,  into  compartments.  It  is  a  large  and  spacious  carriage, 
and  has  a  small  partition  between  some  of  the  seats.  There 
was  a  small  quantity  of  blood  on  the  window  where  Mr.  Briggs 
sat.  There  was  also  blood  on  other  parts  of  the  carriage, 
on  the  handle,  and,  I  believe,  on  some  of  the  door  steps,  which 
would  be  produced  by  his  falling  out  of  the  carriage,  and  not 
by  his  being  struck  in  the  train.  This  blood  in  the  carriage 
has  been  examined  by  Dr.  Letheby,  a  very  careful  and  efficient 
chemist,  and  he  will  show  that  it  was  no  doubt  human  blood. 
This  would  lead  to  the  inference  that  Mr.  Briggs  was  sitting 
in  this  corner  and  had  fallen  asleep,  dozing  and  resting  his 
head  against  the  brass  rail,  and  that  he  had  been  struck  by 
somebody  on  the  opposite  side  on  the  left  temple.  Possibly 
then  he  fell  on  this  seat,  where  the  blood  would  flow.  Then 
appearances  would  indicate  that  the  murderer,  whoever  he 
was,  had  taken  Mr.  Briggs  to  the  window  opposite  the  door 
and  thrown  him  out.  It  would  be  more  convenient  to  throw 
him  out  at  that  side,  because  he  would  fall  between  the  rails, 
where  he  would  not  so  soon  be  discovered.  This,  however, 
is  not  a  matter  of  proof.  It  may  possibly  be  that  Mr.  Briggs, 
although  bruised  and  stunned,  may  have  had  sense  enough  to 
move  himself,  with  a  view  to  getting  up  or  out.  The  doors, 
I  am  told,  are  not  locked  on  either  side. 

7 


Franz    Muller. 

f 

solicitor-      Now,  gentlemen,  you  may  be  disposed  to  ask  me  if  I  can 
.    .  . 

inform    you    whether    this    murder    was    committed    by    one 

person  only  or  by  more  than  one  person.  It  would 
appear,  I  think,  more  probable  that  the  violence  was 
committed  by  one  person.  If  it  was  committed  by  a 
number  of  thieves  Mr.  Briggs's  pockets  would  have 
been  rifled,  and  his  snuffbox  would  have  been  taken  out; 
whereas  if  the  murder  was  committed  by  one  man  alone  he 
would  take  the  watch  and  chain  and  leave  the  body,  and  the 
marvel  is  that  he  did  it  in  so  short  a  time.  You  may  ask 
with  what  weapon  the  blows  were  inflicted,  for,  beyond  all 
doubt,  the  blows  were  inflicted  by  some  blunt  instrument. 
I  have  been  shown  the  stick  of  Mr.  Briggs.  It  is  a  formidable 
weapon — a  large,  heavy  stick,  with  a  handle  at  one  end.  The 
stick  was  covered  with  blood,  and  it  is  now  covered  with  blood. 
It  is  possible  that  the  stick  might  have  become  blooded  in  the 
carriage  without  having  been  used  as  a  weapon ;  but  you  will 
see  it,  and  you  will  judge,  assuming  the  murderer  to  have 
been  on  the  opposite  side,  whether  the  wounds  might 
have  been  produced  by  that  weapon.  But  whether  produced 
by  that  weapon,  or  a  life-preserver,  or  other  weapon,  it  is  a 
matter  on  which  I  am  not  able  to  give  you  any  distinct  infor- 
mation. Gentlemen,  you  may  be  disposed  to  ask  w~hether, 
on  the  part  of  the  Crown,  we  are  disposed  to  represent  this 
as  a  premeditated  murder  or  a  fortuitous  one.  On  that  point, 
again,  I  cannot  offer  any  distinct  information,  but  it  would 
appear  to  me  that  the  murder  was  the  result  of  some  sudden 
determination.  It  may  be  that  the  murderer,  seeing  Mr.  Briggs 
in  the  carriage,  and  being  able  to  get  in,  or  being  in  that 
carriage  alone  with  him,  he  might  have  been  seized  with  the 
sudden  impulse  to  possess  his  watch.  I  am  told  a  person 
with  a  second-class  ticket  might  have  got  into  that  carriage, 
because,  the  train  being  late,  the  tickets  were  not  examined. 
Any  one  with  a  second-class  ticket  might  have  got  in  and  might 
have  got  out  without  his  ticket  being  examined  at  Bow.  How- 
ever, these  are  matters  into  which  it  is  not  requisite  for  me 
to  enter.  I  have  described  to  you  the  state  of  Mr.  Briggs's 
person.  I  have  described  to  you  the  state  of  the  carriage, 
and  I  have  told  you  what  was  found  in  the  carriage.  There 
was  found  Mr.  Briggs's  bag,  and  there  was  found  Mr.  Briggs's 
8 


The  Solicitor-General's   Opening. 

-stick.       There  was  also  found  in  that  carriage  a  hat,  and  that  Solieitor- 

General 

is  a  circumstance  of  the  utmost  possible  significance.  Gentle- 
men, that  that  hat  was  not  Mr.  Briggs's  is  beyond  all  doubt. 
The  hat  was  crushed,  apparently  as  if  it  had  been  trod  upon 
in  a  struggle,  and  Mr.  Briggs's  hat  was  not  found.  The  con- 
clusion appears  to  me  inevitable  that  the  murderer,  in  the 
hurry  and  excitement  of  the  moment,  took  the  wrong  hat. 
He  took  Mr.  Briggs's  hat  with  him  and  left  his  own.  I 
venture  to  think  that  one  point  in  this  case  which  may  not  be 
disputed  is  this,  that  the  man,  whoever  he  was,  who  robbed 
and  murdered  Mr.  Briggs  left  his  hat  in  that  carriage.  If 
you  discover  with  certainty  the  person  who  wore  that  hat  on 
that  night  you  will  have  the  murderer,  and  the  case  is  proved 
almost  as  clearly  against  him  as  if  he  was  seen  to  do  it. 

It  is  now  proper  for  me  to  give  some  description  of  the  prisoner 
at  the  bar,  and  to  state  the  circumstances  which  point  to  his 
guilt.  The  prisoner,  Franz  Miiller,  is  a  German.  He  came 
to  England  about  two  years  ago,  and  worked  as  a  tailor  for 
aeveral  employers,  the  last  being  Mr.  Hodgkinson,  Great  Queen 
Street.  Miiller  had  been  out  of  employment  for  about  a  week 
before  the  murder,  and  he  appeared  to  have  been  very  poor. 
He  wished  to  make  his  fortune  in  America,  and  had  no  means 
to  pay  his  passage,  which  amounted,  I  am  told,  to  about  £4. 
It  is  fair  to  state,  however,  that  before  the  murder  Miiller 
•contemplated  going  to  America,  and  therefore  the  fact  of  his 
going  there  is  not  the  slightest  evidence  against  him.  Miiller 
had  a  watch  and  chain  of  his  own,  which  he  was  very  fond  of 
displaying,  but  his  necessities  were  such  that  he  was  obliged 
to  pawn  this  watch  and  chain.  He  pawned  the  watch  for 
£3  and  the  chain  for  £1.  Miiller  lodged  at  the  house  of  a 
Mrs.  Blyth  in  the  Victoria  Park,  and  it  is  a  fact  not  altogether 
undeserving  of  consideration  that  the  railway  station  would 
be  on  his  way  home — or,  at  all  events,  would  not  be  out  of 
his  way  home.  Now,  what  were  his  whereabouts  on  the 
Saturday  night  of  the  murder?  After  he  left  his  employer, 
Mr.  Hodgkinson,  he  was  in  the  habit  of  passing  a  good  deal 
of  time  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Repsch,  a  tailor  living  in  Old 
Jewry  Street ;  and  on  this  night  he  was  at  Mr.  Repsch's.  He 
left  there  about  half-past  seven  o'clock,  saying  he  was  going 

9 


Franz    Muller. 

Solicitor-  to  see  some  girl  of  the  town  with  whom  he  was  acquainted. 
He  did  not  return  to  his  lodgings  until  late  at  night.  The 
landlady  sat  up  until  one  o'clock,  and  he  had  not  returned  then. 
But  he  afterwards  went  home,  and  let  himself  in.  He  re- 
mained all  the  Sunday  at  his  lodgings.  On  Monday  morning 
at  ten  o'clock  Muller  was  in  possession  of  Briggs's  chain.  Of 
that  there  is  no  question  whatever.  At  ten  o'clock  on  the 
Monday  morning  he  took  this  chain  to  the~shop  of  a  jeweller 
in  Cneapside,  of  the  name  of  Death.  He  asked  Mr.  Death 
what  he  would  give  in  exchange.  Mr.  Death  valued  the 
chain  at  =£3  10s.,  and  he  gave  Muller  another  chain,  which  he 
valued  at  £3  5s.  Muller  said  he  would  take  a  ring  for  the 
difference,  and  he  took  a  gold  ring  with  a  white  stone  in  it 
of  the  value  of  5s.  Muller  then  left  Mr.  Death  with  the 
chain  and  ring,  the  chain  he  took  being  in  a  small  box,  with 
the  name  of  Mr.  Death  inside,  which  was  a  circumstance  of 
some  importance 'uf'EnTs  case.  Muller  went  to  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Repsch's  with  the  chain.  He  was  asked  where  he  had  got 
it,  and  he  said  he  had  bought  the  chain  off  a  man  at  the 
London  Docks  that  morning,  and  had  given  £3  15s.  for  it. 
Now,  that  was  clearly  an  untruth,  for  he  had  got  it  in  ex- 
change. He  also  said  he  had  bought  a  ring,  which  was  like- 
wise untrue.  On  the  same  day  he  goes  to  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Matthews,  friends  of  his,  and  shows  them  the  chain,  and  give? 
them  an  account  of  it.  He  shows  the  ring,  and  says  it  had 
been  sent  to  him  by  his  father  from  abroad.  This  is  the 
account  he  gives  of  it,  and,  at  the  same  time,  having  no  further 
use  for  the  box  in  which  Mr.  Death  had  put  the  chain,  he  left 
the  boi,  and  gave  it  to  Mrs.  Matthews 's  little  girl. 

Now,  gentlemen,  Muller  therefore  clearly  had  Mr.  Briggs's 
chain  on  Monday  morning  at  ten  o'clock,  and  exchanged  it  for 
another.  It  may  be  proper  for  me  to  state  to  you  what  he  did 
with  the  chain  which  he  got,  and  what  further  transactions  took 
place  with  reference  to  this  murder.  The  next  thing  he 
appears  to  have  done  was  to  pawn  this  chain  that  he  had  got 
at  Death's.  He  pawned  it  for  30s.,  and  he  contrived  to  raise 
10s.  more;  he  borrowed  6s.  off  Mrs.  Repsch,  he  received  4s.  6d. 
from  Mrs.  Matthews  in  payment  of  a  debt  she  owed  him; 
and  with  that,  making  £2  10s.  6d.,  he  goes  to  the  pawn- 
broker and  redeems  his  own  watch.  The  next  thing  to  do 
10 


The  Solicitor-General's  Opening. 

is  to  get  his  chain  out  of  pawn,  which,  as  I  have  told  you,  he  Soliettor- 

General 
pawned  for  <£!.      He  does  that  by  borrowing  the  money.    What 

he  does  subsequently  is  this.  Having  got  his  own  watch 
and  chain  out  of  pawn  for  £3,  he  takes  them  to  another  pawn- 
broker's, of  the  name  of  Cox,  who  will  advance  more  than 
that — who  will  advance  £4.  At  the  same  time  he  sells  the 
ticket  to  a  man  of  the  name  of  Glass,  in  whose  name  he  had 
pawned  the  watch  and  chain.  By  this  means  he  makes  about 
£4:  5s.  What  does  he  do  with  this?  Why,  having  got  this 
money,  he  goes  to  the  London  Docks — that  was  on  Wednesday 
— he  secures  a  passage  by  a  vessel  which  was  to  start  next 
day,  but  did  not  start  till  Friday.  Now,  that  is  the  account 
I  have  to  give  you  of  Muller  before  he  left  this  country,  with 
respect  to  Mr.  Briggs's  chain.  And,  gentlemen,  I  think  you 
will  be  satisfied  that  at  this  time,  before  he  left  the  country, 
Muller  had  not  only  Mr.  Briggs's  chain,  but  Mr.  Briggs's  watch. 
The  watch  is  never  seen  in  England.  He  says  nothing  about 
the  wateh  to  anybody.  When  he  got  it  what  he  did  with  it 
does  not  appear,  but  when  he  was  arrested  in  America  the 
watch  of  Mr.  Briggs  was  found  in  his  trunk,  sewed  up  in  a 
piece  of  canvas.  The  account  Muller  gives  'of  the  watch  is 
this,  that  he  had  the  watch  for  two  years.  Therefore  it  can 
hardly,  I  suppose,  be  suggested  that  he  had  taken  this  watch 
on  the  passage.  That  is  not  his  own  suggestion.  He  said  he 
had  had  it  two  years.  I  think,  therefore,  you  will  come  to 
the  conclusion  that  Muller  had  the  watch  and  chain  before  he 
left  England.  Now,  gentlemen,  how  did  he  get  them?  Of 
course,  on  the  part  of  the  prosecution,  I  am  willing  to  try  any 
supposition  that  is  consistent  with  innocence.  He  may  say 
he  bought  the  chain  which  he  exchanged  with  Mr.  Death  at  the 
docks  on  the  Monday  morning.  He  may  say  that  he  bought 
the  original  chain,  which  belonged  to  Mr.  Briggs.  Then  it 
will  be  a  matter  for  consideration  whether  Muller  was  in 
possession  of  Mr.  Briggs's  chain,  and  gave  £3  for  it.  The 
evidence  will  satisfy  you  that  Muller  was  in  great  distress, 
and,  if  he  was  unable  to  raise  the  money  for  his  passage, 
where  was  he  to  get  the  money  to  buy  a  chain  ?  Would  he  not 
have  got  his  own  watch  out  of  pawn?  And  if  he  could  buy 
a  chain,  where  could  he  have  got  money  to  buy  a  valuable 
watch?  This,  I  think,  will  be  one  of  the  greatest  difficulties 


Franz    Muller. 

Solicitor-  my  learned  friends  will  have  to  contend  with  in  this  part  of 
General 

the  case. 

Before  I  pass  to  another  part  of  the  case  let  me 
remind  you  that  the  stolen  property  is  found  on  Muller  shortly 
after  the  robbery,  and  that  Muller  gives  a  false  account  of  the 
manner  in  which  he  came  into  possession  of  it.  Now,  in 
ordinary  cases  of  felony  such  evidence,  I  think,  you  will  hear 
from  the  learned  judges,  is  submitted  to  juries,  and  forms 
evidence  which  makes  a  strong  case  against  the  prisoner.  If 
Mr.  Briggs  had  been  robbed  and  not  murdered  it  would  have 
been  a  strong  case.  I  am  not  aware  that  the  law  requires 
stronger  evidence  in  a  case  that  is  attended  with  violence  than 
in  a  case  that  is  not  attended  with  violence ;  but  I  can  quite 
understand  that  juries  may  require  stronger  evidence  to  satisfy 
them.  Gentlemen,  that  strong  evidence  I  mean  to  give  you. 
I  now  refer  to  the  hat  which  was  left  in  the  railway  carriage 
(hat  produced).  Gentlemen,  this  is  the  hat  which  was  left 
in  the  railway  carriage,  and  beyond  all  doubt  it  is  not  Mr. 
Briggs's  hat.  The  hat  bears  the  name  of  "  H.  Walker,  49 
Crawford  Street,  corner  of  Seymour  Street,  Marylebone." 
The  lining  is  a  peculiar  one,  which  you  will  have  the  oppor- 
tunity of  examining.  We  have  got,  then,  as  far  as  this,  that 
the  murderer,  whoever  he  was,  wore  a  hat  of  this  kind  on  the 
night  in  question,  which  was  left  in  the  carriage.  Now,  gentle- 

Smen,  I  believe  I  shall  be  in  a  position  to  satisfy  you  that  this 
was  the  hat  of  Muller,  and  that  he  wore  this  hat  on  that  very 
night.  I  will  very  shortly  state  to  you  the  evidence  which 
will  be  laid  before  you  on  that  subject.  I  believe  I  shall  be 
able  to  show  you  under  what  circumstances  this  hat  was  bought. 
The  circumstances  are  these.  Muller  was  acquainted  with  a 
cabman  of  the  name  of  Matthews.  He  became  acquainted 
with  him,  having  worked  some  time  with  Mr.  Waugh,  who  was 
a  relation  of  the  cabman's  wife.  He  observed  the  hat  which 
the  cabman  wore,  and  said,  "That  is  a  nice  hat;  where  did 
you  get  it?  "  And  he  said,  "  I  got  it  at  Walker's,  in  Craw- 
ford Street."  He  tried  it  on,  and  found  it  would  not  fit 
him.  So  he  said  to  Matthews,  "  I  will  be  much  obliged  if  you 
will  get  me  a  hat  a  size  larger,  and  then  it  will  fit  me."  It 
was  more  convenient  for  the  cabman  to  buy  this  hat,  the  street 
being  in  his  beat,  than  for  Muller  to  buy  it  himself.  The 
12 


The   Solicitor-General's  Opening. 

cabman  bought  this  hat  for  him  for  8s.  6d.,  and  Miiller  paid  Solicitor- 
him  in  kind  by  giving  him  a  waistcoat  and  some  other  clothes. 
That  is  the  account  Matthews  gives  of  this  hat.  It  came  out 
in  this  way.  It  appeared,  as  I  before  said,  that  Miiller  on  the 
Monday,  not  wanting  the  box,  gave  it  to  Matthews's  little 
child.  Matthews  observed  on  it  the  name  of  Death.  He 
saw  a  placard' announcing  that  the  murderer  of  Mr.  Briggs  had 
exchanged  Mr.  Briggs's  chain  with  one  Death.  He  then 
gave  information  to  the  police  about  the  hat,  and  said,  "You 
will  probably  find  the  hat  to  be  Mliller's,"  and  he  gave  a 
description  of  it.  One  side  of  the  brim  was  worn  slightly 
down;  he  had  seen  it  often;  and  he  will  identify  this  hat  as 
clearly  as  it  is  possible  to  identify  a  hat.  But  the  evidence 
of  the  identity  of  this  hat  does  not  rest  upon  the  cabman 
alone.  I  shall  call  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Repsch,  and  Mrs.  Repsch 
will  tell  you  she  observed  the  prisoner  wearing  this  hat.  She 
observed  him  several  times  put  off  this  hat,  and  put  letters 
in  the  lining.  This  was  the  hat  he  wore  on  the  Saturday 
night.  In  Muller's  room  after  he  left  was  found  a  hatbox 
with  the  name  "  Walker  &  Co."  on  it,  so  it  is  quite  manifest 
he  had  a  hatbox  of  Walker's.  Now,  the  counsel  for  the 
defence  may  say  that  Walker  may  make  hats  for  some  other 
men  than  Miiller,  and  the  murderer  may  not  have  had  a  hat  of 
Walker's.  Gentlemen,  Miiller  had  a  hat  of  Walker's,  and  if 
not  in  the  box,  where  is  this  hat  of  Walker's?  This  will  be 
a  question  the  defence  will  have  to  answer. 

Gentlemen,  the  case  does  not  rest  here.  The  murderer, 
whoever  he  was,  not  only  left  his  own  hat  behind,  blrtrhe  took 
away  Mr.  Briggs's  hat.  Tou  would  therefore  expect  to  find  Mr. 
Briggs's  hat  in  his  possession.  Gentlemen,  I  believe  I  shall  be 
able  to  show  you  by  evidence  peculiarly  striking  that  Mr. 
Briggs's  hat  was  found  in  Muller's  possession.  It  was  found  in 
his  possession  when  he  was  apprehended  in  America.  Miiller 
himself  told  Mrs.  Repsch  that  Matthews  had  made  him  a 
present  of  the  hat.  The  hat  was  found  in  Muller's  box  in  the 
ship  in  which  he  was  apprehended  in  America.  Gentlemen, 
Mr.  Briggs  dealt,  and  dealt  only,  with  hatters  of  the  name  of 
Digance  &  Co.,  and  there  was  the  name  of  "  Digance  &  Co., 
Royal  Exchange,"  in  the  hat.  When  young  Mr.  Briggs  saw 
this  hat  first  he  expressed  doubts  of  its  identity,  because  he 

13 


Franz    Muller. 

Solicitor-!  said,  "  My  father's  hat  was  higher  in  the  crown  than  this." 
j  He  was  perfectly  right.  This  hat  has  been  cut  down  an  inch 
I  or  an  inch  and  a  half.  I  will  call  before  you  the  man  who 
I  made  this  hat,  and,  as  Mr.  Briggs  was  in  the  habit  of  ordering 
his  hats,  it  would  be  made  to  order.  This  hat  was  ordered  in 
September,  1863,  and  it  has  been  well  worn  since  then.  Mr. 
Briggs  wore  what  is  called  a  bell-crowned  hat.  I  will  call  the 
man  who  made  it,  and  he  will  say  this  is  the  hat  he  made.  I 
will  further  say  that  Mr.  Briggs  complained  that  this  hat  was 
too  large  for  him,  and  some  silver  paper  was  put  in  under  the 
lining.  Now,  some  of  that  paper  has  been  taken  away,  but 
not  completely  taken  away,  and  you  will  see  pieces  of  silver 
paper  still  remaining  there.  The  man  who  made  this  hat  will 
tell  you  it  has  been  cut  down  an  inch  or  an  inch  and  a  half, 
and  he  will  further  tell  you  it  has  not  been  cut  down  by  a 
hatter.  He  will  say  that  a  hatter  would  have  used  varnish 
and  a  hot  iron,  and  he  will  tell  you  that  this  has  merely  been 
pasted  on  and  sewed — and  sewed  very  neatly  and  regularly. 
It  has  therefore  been  cut  down,  not  by  a  hatter,  but  by  one 
who  understood  sewing.  In  fact,  it  has  been  cut  down 
by  a  tailor,  and  not  a  hatter.  Now,  you  may  ask,  why  did 
Muller  cut  down  the  hat?  Had  he  a  fancy  for  a  low-crowned 
hat?  Why,  no;  for  his  own  hat  was  not  low  crowned,  and 
he  wore  that.  The  maker  of  the  hat,  a  man  of  the  name  of 
Thorn,  will  tell  you  when  he  made  this  hat  he  wrote  the  name 
of  Mr.  Briggs  inside  the  lining,  as  it  was  the  rule  to  do  with 
all  customers.  That  part  of  the  hat  on  which  Mr.  Briggs's 
name  was  written  is  that  part  which  has  been  taken  away. 
That  Muller  had  this  hat  in  his  possession  is  beyond  all  doubt. 
Then,  gentlemen,  you  will  say  whether  the  evidence  leads  you 
to  the  conclusion  that  on  finding  the  name  of  Mr.  Briggs  in 
the  hat  Muller  made  this  alteration.  Muller,  on  being  ques- 
tioned, said  he  had  this  hat  a  year.  This  hat  is  clearly  found 
in  Miiller's  possession  when  he  is  apprehended  in  America,  and 
I  think  the  evidence  will  lead  you  to  the  conclusion  that  he 
wore  it  on  the  Monday  morning  after  the  murder,  and  not 
before  that,  because  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Repsch  will  tell  you  that 
upon  his  coming  to  them  on  the  Monday  morning  after  he  had 
exchanged  Mr.  Briggs's  chain  for  another,  which  he  got  from 
Mr.  Death,  they  observed  that  Muller  had  a  new  hat,  clearly 


The  Solicitor-General's  Opening. 

different  from  the  one  he  had  on  Saturday.  They  called  Solicitor- 
attention  to  it,  and  said,  "You  have  got  a  new  hat."  He 
said  he  had  had  it  two  months.  "  Why,"  Mr.  Repsch  said, 
"  this  is  a  guinea  hat."  "No,"  Miiller  said,  "  I  gave 
14s.  6d.  for  it."  You,  gentlemen,  will  judge  of  the  value  of 
this  evidence.  I  will  further  observe  that,  on  Miiller 's  effects 
being  examined,  a  portion  of  his  dress  was  missing.  A  portion 
of  the  trousers  he  wore  on  that  Saturday  night,  and  some 
other  clothes,  were  missing.  I  have  before  told  you  the 
watch  was  found  in  the  box.  These,  then,  are  the  principal 
facts. 

Undoubtedly  the  evidence  in  this  case  is  what  is  called 
circumstantial  evidence  chiefly,  but  I  may  remind  you  that 
it  is"  "by  circumstantial  evidence  that  great  crimes  are  most 
frequently  detected.  Murders  are  not  committed  in  the 
presence  of  witnesses,  and  to  reject  circumstantial  evidence 
would  be  to  proclaim  immunity  to  crime.  There  is  a  descrip- 
tion of  evidence  which  I  may  be  allowed  to  call  evidence  of 
facts.  Such  is  the  evidence  of  the  watch  and  chain,  such  is 
the  evidence  of  the  hat  cut  down,  and  such  is  the  evidence 
of  the  box  with  Mr.  Death's  name  on  it.  There  are  circum- 
stances which  give  evidence  which  cannot  be  false  and  which 
cannot  be  mistaken.  Gentlemen,  without  again  repeating  the 
many  details  of  this  case,  the  main  facts  may  be  summed  up 
thus — Mr.  Briggs  is  robbed  and  murdered  in  a  railway  carriage ; 
the  murderer  takes  from  him  his  watch  and  chain,  and  takes 
from  him  his  hat ;  all  the  articles  taken  are  found  on  Miiller ; 
he  gives  a  false  statement  of  how  he  got  them,  and  the  hat 
left  behind  is  the  hat  of  Miiller.  Gentlemen,  I  venture  to 
think  that  if  these  circumstances  are  proved  to  you  by  wit- 
nesses, a  stronger  case  of  circumstantial  evidence  has  rarely,  if 
ever,  been  submitted  to  a  jury.  If,  indeed,  after  hearing  the 
whole  case,  you  can  entertain  a  reasonable  doubt  of  his  guilt 
you  will  acquit  him,  but  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  evidence 
amounts — I  will  not  say  to  demonstration,  for  demonstration 
is  a  species  of  proof  not  to  be  found  in  cases  of  murder — but 
if  the  evidence  leaves  no  reasonable  doubt  of  the  prisoner's 
guilt,  I  am  sure  you  will  not  hesitate  to  perform  the  duty  which 
is  cast  upon  you. 

15 


Franz    Muller. 


EVIDENCE  FOR  THE  PROSECUTION. 

David  Buchan  DAVID  BucHAN,  examined  by  the  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — 
I  reside  at  23  Nelson  Square,  Peckham.  Mr.  Briggs,  the 
deceased,  was  a  relative  of  my  wife.  His  age  was  about  sixty- 
nine,  his  height  5  feet  9  inches.  I  remember  his  coming  to 
visit  us  on  the  9th  of  July.  He  came  about  five  o'clock.  He 
had  a  black  bag  with  him.  He  dined  at  my  house  that  day, 
and  left  about  half-past  eight.  I  accompanied  him  as  far  as 
the  Lord  Nelson  in  the  Old  Kent  Road,  and  saw  him  to  an 
omnibus,  which  would  take  him  to  King  William  Street,  for 
the  purpose  of  going  to  Fenchurch  Street  railway  station. 
When  I  parted  with  him  he  was  in  his  usual  health  and  spirits. 
I  knew  that  he  wore  a  watch  and  chain,  the  watch  in  his 
waistcoat  pocket,  the  chain  being  attached  to  his  buttonhole. 
He  had  a  small  seal  and  two  keys  attached  to  his  watch.  He 
had  the  watch  that  night;  he  referred  to  it  to  see  whether  he 
was  in  time  for  his  train.  The  next  morning  I  went  to  the 
railway,  and  then  to  Mr.  Briggs's  house  between  ten  and 
eleven.  I  saw  him,  but  he  was  at  that  time  insensible,  and 
did  not  recover  up  to  the  time  of  his  death.  I  left  before  he 
died. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — Was  he  perfectly 
sober? — Yes. 

Was  he  in  good  spirits? — Yes. 

He  was  in  perfect  self-control? — Yes. 

You  are  quite  sure  of  that? — Yes;  I  am  quite  certain  of  that. 

Is  your  wife  here? — Yes. 

Was  she  examined  before  the  coroner? — Yes. 

Do  you  know  whether  he  had  more  than  one  hat? — I  should 
think  he  had. 

Was  he  a  gentleman  well  off  in  the  world? — I  believe  so. 

And  lived  in  a  fair  and  reasonable  style? — Yes. 

You  say  that  this  omnibus  that  he  got  into  goes  up  the  Old 
Kent  Road? — Yes;  through  the  Borough  and  over  London 
Bridge. 

And  from  London  Bridge  to  King  William  Street? — Yes. 

Where  did  you  part  with  him? — At  the  Lord  Nelson,   Old 
Kent  Road.      The  'bus  started  from  there. 
16 


Mr.  Serjeant  Ballantine. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Are  you  aware  that  any  threats  had  been  held  out  against  David  Buchan 
Mr.  Briggs? — Not  to  my  personal  knowledge. 

Not  to  your  personal  knowledge?  Have  you  heard  some  say 
BO? — I  heard  my  wife  say  so. 

I  believe  your  wife  was  examined  before  the  coroner? — Yes. 

But  not  before  the  magistrates? — No. 

Mrs.  BUCHAN,  examined  by  SERJEANT  BALLANTINB — I  am  the  Mrs.  Buchan 
wife  of  the  last  witness.       I  am  a  relative  of  Mr.  Briggs.     He 
was  at  our  house  at  dinner  on  the  9th  of  July.       He  was  in 
his  usual  health  and   spirits.       He  was  perfectly  sober.        I 
never  saw  him  again  alive. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — I  was  examined  before 
the  coroner,  but  not  before  the  magistrate.  I  believe  that 
my  evidence  was  not  considered  of  any  importance ;  it  was 
simply  corroborating  my  husband's  statement. 

Have  you  ever  heard  any  one  use  any  threats  towards  Mr. 
Briggs  ? — Not  personally. 

What  do  you  mean  by  not  personally? — Not  from  any  one's 
lips,  but  I  have  from  a  third  person's  lips.  The  coroner 
asked  me  that  question. 

Was  it  a  person  to  whom  he  objected  to  send  money? 

The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL  objected  to  the  question. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — I  am  only  in  the  exercise  of  my  rights  in 
asking  it. 

The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL  would  not  press  his  objection  if  his 
friend  wished  to  put  the  question. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — I  don't  want  the  slightest  favour,  but  only 
my  right,  and  especially  in  a  case  of  this  kind. 

The  question  was  not  repeated,  and  the  witness  retired. 

THOMAS  FISHBODRNB,  examined  by  Mr.  HANNBN — I  am  a  ticket  T.  Fishbourae 
collector  at  Fenchurch  Street  station  on  the  North  London 
railway.  It  is  my  duty  to  mark  the  tickets.  I  stand  at  the 
bottom  of  the  stairs  leading  to  the  platform.  There  is  a 
considerable  flight  of  stairs  up  to  the  platform  which  passengers 
have  to  pass  after  they  leave  me.  I  knew  the  late  Mr.  Briggs 
o  17 


Franz    Muller. 

T.Fishbourne  by  Bight.  He  was  in  the  habit  of  travelling  by  the  North 
London  railway.  On  the  night  of  the  9th  of  July  last  I  saw 
him.  He  presented  his  ticket  in  the  ordinary  way.  It  was 
a  quarter  to  ten  o'clock.  There  was  a  train  to  start  about 
that  time.  He  presented  his  ticket  in  time  to  start  by  that 
train.  It  was  to  start  at  9.45,  or  about  that  time.  I 
don't  know  whether  it  was  a  minute  or  so  late.  He  spoke 
to  me,  and  I  answered  him;  I  marked  his  ticket.  I  heard 
of  his  death  about  twelve  o'clock  the  next  day.  I  went  to 
his  house  and  recognised  him. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — I  only  look  at  the 
tickets  to  "  nip  "  them.  I  "  nip  "  all  for  the  North  London 
railway. 

Henry  Vernez  HENRY  VERNEZ,  examined  by  Mr.  BEASLEY — I  am  a  clerk  in 
the  employment  of  Messrs.  Robarts  <fe  Co.  On  Saturday,  the 
9th  of  July  last,  I  went  to  the  Hackney  station  of  the  North 
London  railway.  It  was  about  ten  o'clock.  I  was  in  com- 
pany with  Mr.  Jones,  a  clerk  in  the  same  employment  as 
myself.  I  took  a  first-class  ticket  for  Highbury.  Upon  the 
arrival  of  the  train  from  Fenchurch  Street  I  went  to  the  door 
of  a  first-class  carriage.  I  opened  the  door  of  the  carriage, 
which  was  empty.  I  and  Mr.  Jones  got  into  it.  I  sat  on 
the  right-hand  side  going  in,  and  about  the  centre  of  the 
carriage ;  that  is,  with  my  face  to  the  engine.  Before  the 
train  started  Mr.  Jones  called  my  attention  to  something — 
to  some  blood  on  his  hand.  I  immediately  called  the  guard, 
and  the  guard  got  a  light.  Then  we  got  out.  Two  other 
persons  besides  us,  who  had  got  into  the  carriage,  also  got  out. 
I  saw  a  stick,  hat,  and  a  black  bag  in  the  carriage  when  the 
guard  brought  a  light.  The  guard  then  locked  up  the 
carriage,  leaving  the  articles  in  it.  I  got  into  another  carriage. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — I  have  no  questions  to  ask  the  witness. 

Sydney  Jones  SYDNEY  JONES,  examined  by  Mr.  BEASLEY — I  live  at  10  Barns- 
bury  Park,  Islington.  I  am  also  a  clerk  in  the  employment 
of  Messrs.  Robarts  <fe  Co.  I  went  to  the  Hackney  station  on 
the  evening  of  the  9th  July  with  the  last  witness.  It  was 
about  ten  o'clock.  I  had  a  first-class  ticket  for  the  train 
18 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

going  to  Highbury.       I  won't  say  that  I  took  it,  or  my  friend.  Sydney  Jones 
I  got  into  a  first-class  carriage  with  the  last  witness.       He 
opened  the  door.       On  entering  it  I  saw  a  black  bag  on  the 
left-hand  side  on  the  seat  nearest  the  door.       I  put  it  on  the 
•opposite  side. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — I  knew  Mr.  Briggs 
very  well.  I  was  in  the  same  bank  with  him  as  a  clerk.  I 
had  seen  him  daily  for  the  last  twelve  months.  I  had  known 
him  about  four  years. 

BBNJAJGN  AMES,  examined  by  the  SOLICTTOR-GENBRAL — I  am  B.  Ames 
a,  guard  on  the  North  London  railway,  and  was  guard  of  the 
train  which  left  Fenchurch  Street  at  9.50  p.m.  on  the  9th  of 
July.  It  was  five  minutes  after  its  time.  As  we  were  late 
in  arriving  at  Fenchurch  Street  I  had  not  time  to  examine  the 
tickets  or  shut  the  doors.  I  knew  Mr.  Briggs  as  a  passenger. 
I  did  not  observe  him  that  night.  When  the  train  arrived  at 
the  Hackney  station  my  attention  was  called  by  Mr.  Vernez  to 
No.  69,  first-class  carriage.  I  noticed  something  was  the 
matter.  I  went  back  to  the  brake  van  and  procured  my  hand- 
lamp,  and  then  examined  the  carriage.  On  the  near  side 
cushion  there  were  marks  of  blood — that  is,  the  cushion 
nearest  the  engine — and  on  the  quarter-lights  on  the  near  side 
there  were  marks  of  blood.  The  quarter-light  is  a  square 
of  glass  that  shows  light  into  the  carriage  even  with  the  seat. 
After  examining  that  part  of  the  carriage  I  found  the  hat, 
stick,  and  bag.  (The  hat  and  stick  were  shown  to  the  witness, 
and  he  said  that  they  were  like  those  he  saw.)  There  were 
marks  of  blood  upon  the  hat,  which  was  crumpled  up,  and  also 
on  the  stick  and  bag.  I  pulled  up  the  windows  of  the  carriage 
and  locked  the  doors.  There  were  no  passengers  in  the 
carriage  when  I  went  to  inspect  it.  I  locked  up  the  carriage 
as  it  was,  with  the  hat,  stick,  and  bag  in  it.  I  telegraphed 
on  to  Chalk  Farm.  Mr.  Greenwood  is  stationmaster  there. 
When  we  arrived  at  Chalk  Farm  he  examined  the  carriage, 
and  locked  it  up,  and  it  was  brought  to  Bow  station.  It 
has  not  been  used  since.  It  stands  in  the  shed  there  now.  Mr. 
Greenwood  took  charge  of  the  hat,  stick,  and  bag  as  lost 
property. 

19 


Franz    Muller. 

B.  Ames  Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — There  was  a  good  deat 

of  blood,  as  there  were  a  great  many  spots  on  the  cushions.  I 
did  not  notice  any  blood  on  the  floor.  On  the  opposite  cushion 
there  was  a  finger  mark,  as  though  a  person's  hand  had  been 
wiped  there.  The  blood  was  in  a  liquid  state  when  I  saw  it. 
There  was  blood  on  the  glass  of  the  window — blood  about  the 
size  of  a  crown  piece,  and  it  was  trickling  down  the  glass. 

Was  it  a  large  pool  of  blood  that  you  saw? — I  should  think 
about  the  size  of  a  sixpenny  piece  or  a  little  more.  That  was 
on  the  cushion.  There  was  more  than  one  spot — there  were 
two  or  three.  I  cannot  give  the  time  I  arrived  at  Hackney. 
I  can  give  the  time  we  left.  We  left  Fenchurch  Street  station 
at  9.50.  We  left  Hackney  at  10.15,  and  Bow  at  one  minute- 
past  ten  o'clock.  There  is  a  station  between  Bow  and 
Hackney — Victoria  Park  station,  sometimes  called  Hackney 
Wick.  I  left  Victoria  at  10.15.  I  have  not  measured  the- 
distance  between  Bow  station  and  Hackney.  I  did  not  see- 
Mr.  Briggs  that  night.  I  did  not  see  him  at  Bow  station. 
We  left  Hackney  Wick  at  10.5,  and  Hackney  at  10.15.  We 
stayed  there  about  four  minutes.  We  differ  in  the  length  of 
time  going  the  journey.  It  differs  sometimes  owing  to  the- 
state  of  the  weather  acting  on  the  rails — as  slippery  weather. 

On  that  night  how  long  were  you  going  from  Bow  to  Hackney 
Wick? — From  three  minutes  to  three  and  a  half  minutes.  T 
had  nothing  to  do  with  the  discovery  of  the  body. 

Re-examined  by  the  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — I  discovered  blood 
on  the  quarter-light  and  offside  cushion  on  the  same  side  of 
the  carriage.  It  was  about  the  size  of  a  fourpenny  piece. 
I  examined  the  door  on  the  other  side — there  was  blood  there- 
on the  handle  on  the  offside. 


Wm.  Timms  WILLIAM  Tnocs,  examined  by  SERJEANT.  BALLANTINE — I  am- 
a  guard  on  North  London  railway.  I  brought  a  train  of 
empty  carriages  from  Hackney  Wick  station  on  9th  July.  It 
left  about  twenty  minutes  past  ten.  We  have  to  go  over  the 
canal  bridge  at  that  point.  The  driver  called  my  attention 
to  something  in  the  six-foot  way.  I  put  on  the  brake,  and 
stopped  the  train  as  soon  as  possible.  Upon  examination  we 
found  the  body  of  a  man  lying  in  the  six-foot  way.  He  was 
20 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

lying  on  his  back,  with  his  head  towards  Hackney.       He  was  Wm.  Ttanms 
lying  straight  about  midway  on  the  six-foot  way  between  the 
up  and  down  lines.       I  picked  the  body  up,  and  took  it  to  a 
neighbouring    public-house.        He   was     alive     at    the    time. 
Medical  men  were  sent  for  directly. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — It  took  four  or  five 
-of  us  to  carry  the  body.  No  persons  came  to  the  place  where 
the  body  was  till  they  were  called  upon.  I  went  to  the  public- 
house  to  get  assistance.  Several  other  persons  came  to  help 
besides  those  who  carried  the  body.  I  should  think  there 
might  have  been  a  dozen  altogether. 

By  the  CHIEF  BARON — He  was  lying  in  the  six-foot  way 
between  the  up  and  down  lines,  and  with  his  head  towards 
Hackney. 

ALFRED  EKIN,  examined  by  Mr.  HANNBN — I  was  the  engine-  Alfred  Ekln 
driver  of  the  train  of  which  the  last  witness  was  guard.  We 
started  from  Victoria  Park  station  about  10.20  p.m.,  and  pro- 
ceeded on  the  line  towards  Fenchurch  Street.  On  my  way 
my  attention  was  directed  towards  something  on  the  line.  It 
was  a  black  object,  and  was  lying  on  the  six-foot  way  about 
half-way  between  the  two  stations.  We  were  just  entering 
on  the  canal  bridge  when  I  saw  it.  I  called  the  attention  of 
the  last  witness  to  what  I  saw.  I  stopped  the  engine  as  soon 
as  possible,  and  backed  to  the  spot  where  the  body  was  lying. 
I  did  not  take  part  in  carrying  it  to  the  public-house.  I 
stopped  with  the  engine.  I  did  not  see  any  more  of  the  body 
afterwards.  When  I  first  called  the  attention  of  the  last 
witness  to  it  there  was  nobody  else  there  but  our  fireman.  No 
one  came  to  the  spot  before  the  last  witness  had  gone  to  the 
public-house. 

Cross-examined  by  SBRJEANT  PARRY — Where  the   body  was 
found  do  the  rails  run  on  an  embankment? — Yes. 
How  high  is  that  embankment? — About  8  or  9  yards. 

EDWARD    DOUOAN    (Police    Constable    K71),     examined    by  E.  Dougan 
Mr.    BBASLEY — I    was    on   duty    in   Wick    Lane,    Bow,    about 
twenty  minutes   past  ten   on   the  night   of  the   9th   of  July. 

21 


Franz    Muller. 

E.  Dougran  In  consequence  of  a  cry  I  heard  on  the  line  I  went  up  the 
embankment,  about  eight  or  nine  steps  up.  There  is  a 
kind  of  path  made  there  by  persons  going  up  and  down  at 
the  corner  of  the  bridge.  I  saw  several  persons  carrying  a 
gentleman  down  off  the  line.  I  accompanied  those  persons  to 
the  Mitford  Castle  public-house.  I  sent  for  a  surgeon,  seeing 
the  condition  of  the  deceased.  I  searched  his  pockets,  and 
found  four  sovereigns  and  some  keys  in  the  left-hand  side 
trousers  pocket,  and  in  the  vest  pocket  a  florin  and  half  of  a 
first-class  railway  ticket  of  the  North  London  railway.  In 
the  right-hand  side  trousers  pocket  there  were  10s.  6d.  in 
silver  and  copper,  some  more  keys,  a  silver  snuffbox,  and 
a  number  of  letters  and  papers,  and  a  silk  handkerchief,  and 
a  diamond  ring  on  the  little  finger,  which  I  took  away.  There 
was  a  gold  fastening  attached  to  his  waistcoat,  but  I  could 
not  undo  it.  I  observed  his  dress,  saw  that  his  shirt  was 
rumpled,  and  that  there  was  one  black  stud  in  the  front,  which 
I  took  away,  only  one.  I  have  measured  the  distance  from 
the  Bow  station  to  the  spot  where  the  body  was  found. 
It  was  1434  yards,  and  from  the  spot  to  Hackney  Wick  station 
740  yards.  The  whole  distance  from  Bow  to  Hackney  Wick 
is  1  mile  and  414  yards.  I  have  not  measured  from  Hackney 
Wick  to  Hackney. 

P.  Toulmin  Mr.  FRANCIS  TOULMIN,  examined  by  SERJEANT  BALLAN- 
TINS — I  am  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  carry- 
ing on  my  business  in  Lower  Clapton.  I  was  the  usual  medical 
attendant  of  Mr.  Briggs.  I  believe  that  he  was  in  his  seven- 
tieth year.  He  enjoyed  very  good  health  until  this  spring, 
when  he  was  attacked  with  erysipelas,  but  from  this  he  had 
perfectly  recovered,  though  in  danger  for  some  time.  On 
the  morning  of  the  10th  July  I  was  sent  for  between  two  and 
three  o'clock.  I  arrived  before  three.  I  found  that  he  was 
still  living,  but  groaning,  and  was  perfectly  unconscious.  I 
attended  him  from  time  to  time  till  he  died,  which  was  at  a 
quarter  before  twelve  o'clock  on  the  Sunday  night.  It  was 
a  hopeless  case.  After  his  death  I  made  a  careful  post- 
mortem examination.  This  was  on  the  Tuesday  following,  and 
in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Brereton,  Mr.  Cooper,  and  others.  I 

22 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

made  notes  of  it  immediately  after.      The  cartilage  of  the  left  F.  Touimin 

ear  was  severed  by  a  jagged  wound ;   about  an  inch  anterior 

to  the  left  ear  was  a  deep  wound,  extending  to  the  bone,  if  not 

into  it.       Over  the  temporal  muscle  was  a  contused  wound — 

a  superficial  and  grazed  wound,   not  a  deep  wound.       There 

were  several  incised  wounds  on  the  scalp,  as  many  as  four,  and 

one   other,   near  the   crown   of  the  head,    behind   the   others, 

3  inches  long,  behind  the  vertex.       It  was  an  incised  wound. 

The    other    wounds   were   about   f    inch   in   length,    having   a 

direction   all   from   before   to    behind.        That   applies    to    all 

wounds  on  the  top  of  the  head.       Those  wounds  all  extended 

to  the  pericranium,   but  had  not  divided  it.        On   removing 

the  scalp  the  shell  was  found  to  be  extremely  fractured ;   the 

fissures    extended    in    various    directions,    radiating    from    the 

centre.       I  have  some  sketches  here. 

SERJEANT  BALLANTINE — Thank  you.  We  won't  trouble 
you  for  them  now. 

WITNESS — The  fissures  radiated,  as  it  were,  from  a  centre. 

Does  that  imply  one  blow  or  more? — I  cannot  say.  A 
portion  of  the  outer  commencement  of  the  parietal  bone, 
f  inch  long  and  \  inch  wide,  was  perfectly  separated,  and  fell 
out.  There  was  an  effusion  of  blood  between  the  neck  and 
the  skull  cap  or  calvarium.  There  was  also  a  further  effusion 
of  blood  between  the  skull  cap  and  the  dura  mater.  The 
temporal  bone  was  driven  in  upon  the  brain. 

In  your  opinion,  were  all  or  any  of  these  wounds  inflicted 
by  a  sharp  or  a  blunt  instrument? — I  cannot  account  for  the 
wounds  on  the  top  of  the  head  except  on  the  presumption  that 
they  were  inflicted  by  a  blunt  instrument,  used  with  consider- 
able force.  I  think  that  the  wound  on  the  left  ear  was  also 
inflicted  by  a  blunt  instrument;  but  of  that  I  cannot  speak  so 
certainly;  that  was  my  impression. 

Are  you  able  to  say  whether  many  blows  were  struck? — 
There  were  four  or  five  distinct  wounds  on  the  scalp  which 
would  account  for  so  many  distinct  blows. 

Does  the  blunt  instrument  apply  to  all  of  these? — Yes.  I 
was  especially  guided  to  think  that,  because  the  pericranium 
was  not  divided,  which  it  would  have  been  by  a  sharp  instru- 
ment. 

23 


Franz    Muller. 

F.  Touimin      Were  there  any  wounds  about  the  head  which  could  be  traced 
to  a  sharp  instrument? — No. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — There  were  five  or 
six  wounds  altogether. 

Speaking  with  reference  to  all  these  wounds,  must  consider- 
able force  have  been  employed? — The  contused  wound  on  the 
temple  might  have  arisen  from  a  fall. 

You  have  said  that  the  incised  wounds  on  the  crown  of  the 
head  were  3  inches  long;  how  deep  were  they? — Not  more 
than  £  inch — perhaps  not  quite  so  much. 

How  tall  was  Mr.  Briggs? — About  5  feet  8  inches. 

What  weight  was  he  ? — He  had  decreased  in  flesh. 

I  did  not  ask  you  that;  be  good  enough  to  answer  my  ques- 
tion?— Between  11  and  12  stones. 

I  do  not  suppose  you  weighed  him.  Was  he  more  than 
12  stones? — I  should  say  not. 


Alfred  H.        Mr.  ALFRED  HENRY  BRERBTON,    examined  by  the  SOLICITOR- 

Br ere ton  * 

GENERAL — I  am  a  surgeon,  residing  at  the  Old  Ford  Road.  I 
was  called  to  see  Mr.  Briggs  about  eleven  o'clock  on  Saturday, 
9th  July,  at  the  Mitford  Castle  public-house.  I  was  the  first 
medical  man  that  saw  him.  I  found  him  in  a  lower  room 
near  the  bar.  He  was  lying  on  a  table,  evidently  suffering 
from  concussion  of  the  brain.  In  consequence  of  the  room 
being  close,  I  had  him  removed  from  the  lower  room  to  an 
upper  room,  and  laid  on  a  mattress  on  a  table.  I  attempted 
to  restore  reaction  by  different  methods,  but  could  not  succeed. 

By  BARON  MARTIN — You  failed? — Yes. 

Examination  resumed — Describe  distinctly  the  injuries  which 
he  had  received? — There  was  a  jagged  cut  wound  across  the 
cartilage  of  the  left  ear.  In  front  of  that  ear  there  was  also 
another  jagged  wound,  and  above  the  same  ear  there  was  also 
a  swelling,  a  scalp  tumour.  There  were  also  two  deep  wounds 
on  the  vertex  of  the  head. 

Could  you  judge  how  these  wounds  were  inflicted? — I  made 
two  distinctions  at  the  time  between  those  wounds  on  the 
vertex  of  the  head  and  those  on  the  left  side  of  the  head.  I 
24 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

think  that  those  on  the  left  side  of  the  head  were  owing  to  Alfred  H. 

Brereton 
the  fall  from  the  carriage.      Those  above  I  attributed  to  some 

blunt  instrument. 

Some  of  the  injuries  you  refer  to  a  fall  and  some  to  a  blunt 
instrument  used  with  violence? — Yes. 

He  never  recovered  his  consciousness? — No.  I  was  with 
him  during  the  whole  night  until  six  o'clock  the  next  morning, 
when  he  was  attended  by  Mr.  Toulmin. 

I  believe  you  made  some  examination  of  the  railway  car- 
riage?— That  was  at  six  o'clock  on  the  Sunday  morning.  I 
found  there  was  blood  on  the  carriage.  On  the  offside  there 
was  evidently  blood  spurted,  on  the  outside  lower  panels  of  the 
•carriage  and  the  inside  of  the  door.  There  was  blood  also  on 
the  iron  step,  and  on  the  footboard  of  the  carriage  and  the 
platform. 

The  wooden  step? — Yes.  There  was  some  blood  on  the 
hinder  wheel  of  that  division  of  the  carriage.  I  did  not 
observe  any  on  the  door  handle.  I  found  a  link  of  a  chain  in 
the  carriage,  and  gave  it  to  the  police.  I  found  it  on  the  near 
side  mat  in  front  of  the  near  side  cushion. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — I  have  no  questions  to  ask. 


Mr.  VINCENT  MERTON  COOPER,  examined  by  Mr.  HANNEN — I  v-  M-  Coopep 
am  a  member  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons.  I  was  called 
in  to  see  Mr.  Briggs  shortly  after  the  accident.  It  was  about 
an  hour  afterwards.  I  made  an  examination  with  the  other 
witnesses.  I  have  not  been  in  Court  while  they  were 
examined,  and  have  not  heard  their  evidence.  There  were 
some  scalp  wounds  over  the  two  parietal  bones,  a  jagged 
wound  of  the  left  ear,  a  few  bruises'  about  the  forehead,  and  a 
large  and  deep  wound  in  front  of  the  ear.  There  was  a  tumour 
over  the  left  side  of  the  left  ear.  The  skull  was  fractured. 

Were  any  of  these  wounds  caused  by  a  blunt  instrument? — I 
think  that  the  wounds  on  the  top  of  the  head  were  caused  by 
a  blunt  instrument,  but  not  the  wounds  over  the  left  ear.  I 
think  they  were  caused  by  coming  into  contact  with  a  stone 
on  the  railway. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — I  have  no  questions  to  ask  this  witness. 

25 


Franz    Muller. 

G.  Greenwood  GEORGE  GREENWOOD,  examined  by  the  SOLICITOR-GHNARAL, 
— I  am  the  stationmaster  at  the  Chalk  Farm  station  of  the 
North  London  railway.  On  Saturday,  9th  July,  Ames,  at 
10.30  p.m.,  drew  my  attention  to  the  first-class  compartment 
of  a  carriage  there.  I  took  from  it  a  hat,  bag,  and  walking 
stick  (produced).  I  locked  them  up  till  next  morning,  and 
then  gave  them  to  Lambert,  the  policeman. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — I  took  the  hat  out 
of  the  carriage  about  10.30.  I  took  it  to  my  own  room  and 
locked  it  up  for  the  night.  I  am  sure  of  that,  and  on  Sunday 
morning  I  gave  it  to  Lambert.  It  is  now  in  exactly  the  same 
condition  as  when  I  had  it.  The  lining  of  the  hat  has  been 
torn  a  little  since.  The  lining  was  pointing  upwards  when 
I  took  it  out,  as  if  the  hat  had  been  pressed  down  hard  on 
the  head  and  then  pulled  off  and  the  lining  taken  out  with 
it. 

L.  Lambert  LEWIS  LAMBERT  (Police  Constable  K311),  examined  by  the 
SOLICITOR-GENERAL — I  am  a  police  constable.  I  went,  on  the 
afternoon  of  Sunday,  10th  July,  to  the  Chalk  Farm  station, 
and  the  stationmaster  there  handed  me  a  hat,  stick,  and  bag. 
(Articles  produced  and  identified.)  I  took  them  to  Mr. 
Briggs's  house  in  Clapton  Square.  The  stick  and  bag  were 
owned  by  young  Mr.  Briggs,  but  the  hat  he  knew  nothing  of. 
I  then  took  them  to  Bow  station  and  gave  them  to  Inspector 
Kerressey.  They  were  in  my  care  till  I  gave  them  to  him. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — Young  Mr.  Brigg& 
would  not  own  the  hat.  He  said  he  did  not  know  anything 
of  it — that  it  was  not  his  father's.  That  was  the  hat  found 
in  the  carriage.  I  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  other  hat  (that 
belonging  to  Mr.  Briggs). 

W.  Kerressey  WALTER  KERRE8SEY  (Police  Inspector  K),  examined  by  Mr. 
BEASLEY — I  produce  a  hat,  stick,  and  bag.  (Articles  identified.) 
I  received  them  from  Lambert.  I  handed  the  hat  over  to 
Inspector  Tanner  on  the  llth,  and  the  stick  and  bag  after 
the  last  examination  at  Bow  Street.  Up  to  that  time  they 
were  in  my  care.  On  Sunday  morning,  10th  July,  I  went 
26 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

to  Bow  station,  about  ten  in  the  morning.  I  there  saw  in  a  w.  Kerrassey 
shed  a  railway  carriage.  The  door  handle  on  the  offside 
was  bloody;  that  is  the  offside  going  towards  Hackney. 
There  was  blood  also  on  the  cushions,  on  the  front  part  of 
the  carriage,  and  also  on  the  near  window.  There  was  a  little 
blood  on  the  off  window,  on  the  footboard  outside,  and  step, 
on  the  same  side  as  the  handle,  and  on  the  panel  of  the  car- 
riage outside,  on  the  same  side.  I  then  went  to  Mr.  Briggs's 
house  about  eleven  o'clock.  I  saw  him;  he  was  then  alive, 
but  insensible.  On  Tuesday  morning  I  observed  on  his  waist- 
coat a  hook,  which  I  produce.  It  was  fastened  to  the  waist- 
coat at  the  third  buttonhole.  Mr.  Thomas  Briggs  gave  it  to 
me  on  the  Tuesday.  I  saw  him  take  it  off  the  waistcoat.  It  is  a 
patent  hook  difficult  to  undo — he  knew  how  to  undo  it.  If 
closed,  there  are  not  many  persons  who  would  know  how  to 
open  it.  I  produce  also  a  ring  which  I  received  from  Police 
Sergeant  Prescott.  It  is  a  small  "  jump  "  ring.  Mr.  Brere- 
ton  was  present  at  the  time  I  received  it.  I  also  produce  a 
gold  chain,  to  which  there  were  attached  a  swivel,  seal,  and  two 
keys.  I  received  them  from  Mr.  Death. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — I  had  directions 
from  Sir  Richard  Mayne  to  go  to  New  York  on  the  22nd  of 
July.  Up  to  that  time  I  had  been  making  inquiries  with 
respect  to  this  case.  I  know  Thomas  Lee.  He  was  not 
examined  before  the  coroner  in  my  presence.  I  heard  he  was 
examined. 

Have  you  not,  in  the  course  of  your  inquiries  in  this  case, 
heard  that  Mr.  Briggs  was  seen  alive  on  the  night  of  the 
murder  at  the  Bow  station? 

The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — I  object  to  that  question.  The 
matter  is  not  in  evidence  either  on  the  part  of  the  Crown  or 
of  the  prisoner. 

SERJJEANT  PARRY — I  apprehend  that  if  the  witness  heard  a 
fact  of  so  important  a  character  as  this,  and  that  fact  is  kept 
from  the  jury,  I  have  a  right  to  ask  a  witness,  whose  special 
duty  it  was  to  make  inquiries,  whether  such  a  fact  was  not 
heard  of,  on  the  ground  that  it  goes  to  the  credit  of  the  witness. 

BARON    POLLOCK   decided  against   the  question  being 

27 


Franz    Muller. 

W.  Kerressey  put,  on  the  ground  that  if  such  questions  were  admitted  they 
would  let  in  a  flood  of  hearsay  evidence  that  would  take  up 
time  without  advancing  the  case. 

Cross-examination  resumed — On  the  llth  July  I  first  heard 
of  the  reward  of  £200,  viz.,  £100  by  the  Government  and 
£100  by  the  bank.  The  North  London  railway  afterwards 
offered  another  £100.  It  was  offered  within  a  week.  I  saw 
it  placarded  at  several  stations  and  at  Bow,  my  station,  and 
I  have  seen  it  advertised  in  the  newspapers.  I  have  no  doubt 
the  placards  were  on  the  walls  of  London,  but  I  did  not  notice 
them.  I  am  sure  the  handle  of  the  door  was  bloody.  There 
was  no  blood  on  Mr.  Briggs's  hands. 

Dr.  H.  Letheby  Dr.  HENRY  LETHEBT,  examined  by  the  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — I 
am  a  professor  of  chemistry  at  the  London  Hospital.  I  made 
a  particular  inspection  of  the  railway  carriage  with  a  view  to 
ascertain  if  there  was  blood  and  the  nature  of  the  blood.  I 
examined  the  carriage  on  Tuesday,  26th  July,  at  Bow.  It 
was  No.  69.  I  examined  the  first  compartment  next  to  the 
buffers;  there  were  three  or  four  compartments.  This  was 
the  end  compartment.  I  observed,  on  the  seat  of  the  carriage, 
blood  was  upon  two  of  the  cushions.  I  have  measured  the 
globules  of  the  blood,  and  I  believe  it  to  be  human  blood. 
It  had  all  the  characteristics  of  human  blood.  It  was  the 
first  cushion  on  the  left-hand  side  as  we  were  facing  the  front 
of  the  carriage,  the  cushion  nearest  the  engine.  The  cushion 
had  been  turned,  the  leather  side  uppermost,  so  that  the  blood 
had  been  retained  in  the  cushion.  There  was  blood  on  the 
glass  immediately  above  the  cushion.  It  had  the  charac- 
teristics of  human  blood,  and,  from  the  coagulum  in  it,  had 
been  living  when  it  came  on  the  glass.  It  contained  particles 
of  brain  matter.  There  were  two  spots  like  splashes.  They 
were  about  the  size  of  sixpences.  Such  an  effect  would  have 
been  produced  by  a  blow  if  a  person  had  been  sitting  on  that 
part  of  the  carriage,  and  had  been  struck  on  the  left  side  of 
his  head;  as  he  was  leaning  against  the  glass  that  effect 
might  have  been  produced.  There  were  about  thirty  spots  of 
blood  on  the  opposite  cushion,  the  one  furthest  from  the 
engine.  There  were  two  on  the  other  cushion  on  the  same 
28 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

side.  In  fact  there  was  blood  on  all  four  of  the  cushions.  Dr.  H.Letheby 
There  were  spots  of  blood  outside  the  door,  and  on  the 
carriage,  which  trailed  in  the  direction  of  the  hinder  part.  I 
examined  the  stick  ;  there  was  blood  on  it.  (Stick  pro- 
duced.) I  see  it  there  now.  There  is  very  little  there, 
though  it  covers  nearly  the  whole  of  the  stick,  from  the 
bottom  to  the  top.  I  did  not  see  any  blood  on  the  top,  or 
for  6  inches  downwards. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY  —  I  examined  the  carriage 
on  the  26th  July,  and  the  stick  on  the  6th  October.  There  was 
very  little  blood  on  it,  but  it  is  there  now.  It  does  not 
require  magnifying  power  to  see  it,  but  it  requires  magnifying 
power  to  discover  it  to  be  blood.  I  used  a  microscope  and 
also  chemical  tests  to  determine  the  character  of  the  stains. 
I  have  not  examined  anything  else  at  the  request  of  the 
prosecution,  but  the  carriage  and  the  stick. 


JOHN  DEATH,  examined  by  SERJEANT  BALLANTINE  —  I  live  at  55  John 
Cheapside,  and  am  a  jeweller.  I  know  the  prisoner  at  the 
bar  very  well.  On  Monday,  llth  July,  he  came  into  my 
shop,  just  before  ten  in  the  morning.  I  was  called  into  the 
shop,  and  a  chain  was  handed  to  me  by  my  brother,  saying 
that  the  customer  wished  to  part  with  it  in  exchange.  (Mr. 
Briggs's  chain  produced.)  That  is  the  chain.  I  examined 
the  chain  closely  with  a  magnifying  glass,  in  presence  of  the 
prisoner.  Then  I  went  to  some  scales  behind  him,  and 
weighed  the  chain.  As  I  did  so  he  turned  round  to  see  me 
do  it.  I  then  told  the  prisoner  that  I  would  give  him  £3  10s. 
for  it.  He  silently  accepted  that  price,  and  said  he  would 
take  a  chain  in  exchange  of  the  same  cost.  I  produced  a 
chain  at  £3  15s.  He  made  some  objection  to  it,  because  it 
had  drop  appendages.  I  persevered  to  sell  that  chain.  He  said 
that  he  would  take  it  if  I  would  sell  it  at  the  same  price,  £3  10s. 
I  objected.  I  then  found  a  chain  worth  £3  5s.  I  showed  him 
that,  and  he  very  shortly  accepted  that  chain.  I  asked  my 
brother  for  a  box,  which  was  given  to  me.  I  put  the  chain 
in  the  box,  and  made  a  parcel  of  it.  (Box  produced.)  I 
gave  him  the  box,  and,  after  a  moment's  pause,  said,  "What 
will  you  take  for  the  5s.?"  He  immediately  said,  "A 

29 


Franz    Muller. 

John  Death  finger  ring."  I  showed  him  about  half  a  dozen  on  a  card, 
one  of  which  was  5s.,  and  he  accepted  the  one  worth  5s.,  after 
putting  it  on  his  finger,  instead  of  the  5s.  in  money.  (Box 
produced.)  This  is  the  same  size,  shape,  and  colour  as  the 
box  in  which  I  packed  the  chain.  I  believe  it  to  be  the  same 
box. 

Take  the  chain  of  Mr.  Briggs,  and  tell  me  whether  a  jump 
ring  formed  part  of  the  chain? — There  must  have  been  a  jump 
ring  to  this  chain  at  this  junction  to  connect  the  two  parts  of 
the  chain  and  the  hook  together.  There  is  now  a  piece  of 
wire  to  it.  It  is  the  same  as  when  I  examined  it  first.  It 
is  a  common  pin  without  a  head,  bent  round,  which  served 
the  same  purpose  as  a  jump  ring.  There  was  also  a  piece 
of  string  holding  together  the  two  parts  of  chain,  tied  in  such 
a  way  that  if  the  jump  ring  had  given  way  the  two  parts  of 
the  chain  would  still  remain  together.  The  piece  of  string 
has  been  used  for  the  purpose  of  attaching  a  gold  key  to  the 
chain,  so  that  the  chain  would  not  part  if  the  jump  ring  were 
broken.  It  is  in  the  same  condition  as  when  I  first  saw  it. 
I  gave  information  to  the  police  in  this  matter  the  same  after- 
noon as  the  prisoner  had  been  there,  and  accompanied  the 
officers  to  New  York.  There  was  a  white  cornelian  stone, 
with  an  engraved  head,  in  the  ring  which  I  sold  to  Muller. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — It  is  very  common  to 
exchange  goods  in  my  business.  My  brother  saw  the  prisoner, 
and  the  prisoner  saw  me  weigh  the  chain ;  he  was  close  to  it, 
only  a  show-case  parting  him.  I  don't  know  what  passed 
between  the  prisoner  and  my  brother  before  I  came  into  the 
shop.  The  prisoner  did  not  speak  to  me  about  the  chain.  It 
was  handed  me  by  my  brother.  My  brother  is  now  minding 
the  shop,  and  can  soon  be  here  if  required.  I  had  never,  to 
my  knowledge,  seen  the  prisoner  in  my  shop  before.  I  am 
mostly  in  the  shop,  but  my  brother  is  constantly  there, 
and  might  have  dealings  with  which  I  was  not  personally 
acquainted. 

Take  that  chain  (chain   belonging  to  Muller,    and  referred 

to  as  having  been   seen   in   his   possession  some  time   before 

the  murder.)      Now,  Mr.  Death,  tell  me  did  not  the  prisoner, 

in  November,  1863,  get  a  link  put  to  that  very  chain  at  your 

30 


Mr.  James  Hannen 
(From  a  Photograph  by  the  London  Stereoscopic  and  Photographic  Co.,  Ltd.). 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

shop,    and    pay  you    Is.    6d.    for  it? — Certainly  not,   to  my  John  Death 
knowledge. 

Did  he  not  call  two  or  three  times  after  he  had  left  the 
chain  to  have  the  link  put  to  it? — I  never  saw  the  prisoner 
before  the  llth  of  July  to  my  knowledge. 

BAEON  MARTIN  suggested  that  as  there  were  three  chains  in 
question  it  would  be  best  to  distinguish  Mr.  Briggs's  chain 
as  No.  1,  the  chain  given  by  Mr.  Death  in  exchange  as  No.  2, 
and  Muller's  own  chain  as  No.  3. 

Cross-examination  resumed — Now,  look  at  that  chain  (No.  3) 
carefully? — I  don't  think  I  ever  saw  it  before.  I  could  not  swear 
to  my  own  workmanship  in  such  a  matter  as  putting  in  a  link. 

Do  you  recollect  in  June  last  the  prisoner  offering  to 
exchange  another  chain  at  your  shop? — I  do  not.  My 
memory  is  very  good  for  persons ;  and  if  he  had  done  so  I 
think  I  should  have  remembered  him. 

Look  again  at  that  chain  (No.  3)  and  tell  me  whether  a 
link  has  been  broken? — This  chain  has  been  mended.  I 
cannot  say  whether  it  is  my  work  or  not.  I  cannot  remember 
it ;  in  fact,  I  am  sure  I  have  never  seen  this  chain  before. 

Re-examined  by  the  SOLICITOR- GENERAL — As  far  as  my 
memory  serves  me,  up  to  the  morning  of  the  llth  of  July  I 
had  never  seen  the  prisoner  before. 

The  CHIEF  BARON — Had  you  not  better  send  for  the  brother 
of  Mr.  Death? 

SERJEANT  BALLANTINB — We  have  sent  for  him,  and  he  will 
be  here  very  shortly. 

Mrs.  ELLEN  BLTTH,  examined  by  Mr.  HANNEN — I  am  the  wife  Mrs.  Blyth 
of  George  Blyth,  a  messenger,  living  at  16  Park  Terrace,  Old 
Ford  Road.  I  know  the  prisoner  at  the  bar.  He  lodged 
at  our  house  for  about  seven  weeks  ending  the  14th  of  July. 
He  occupied  the  first-floor  back.  He  took  his  meals  with  us. 
I  knew  he  was  a  tailor.  He  usually  left  our  house  at  half -past 
seven  in  the  morning,  or  from  that  till  eight.  I  remember 
the  morning  of  Saturday,  9th  July.  I  saw  the  prisoner  at 
eleven  o'clock  that  morning.  When  he  went  out  I  did  not 
expect  him  home  at  any  particular  time  at  night.  I  sat  up 


Franz    Muller. 

Mrs.  Blyth  till  eleven  o'clock  that  night.  He  had  not  then  come  home. 
He  had  a  latchkey.  I  did  not  hear  him  come  home.  My 
husband  and  myself  went  to  bed  at  eleven  o'clock.  I  saw 
the  prisoner  next  morning  between  eight  and  nine  o'  clock . 
He  breakfasted  with  us,  and  stopped  at  home  all  day.  In  the 
evening  we — my  husband,  myself,  and  the  prisoner — went  out 
together  and  returned  together.  He  spent  the  day  with  us 
on  Sunday.  On  Monday  morning  I  saw  him  between  seven 
and  eight  o'clock.  He  breakfasted  with  us,  and  left  the 
house  about  eight  o'clock.  I  saw  him  next  between  eight  and 
nine  on  the  same  evening.  He  spent  some  time  with  us,  and 
showed  us  a  gold  albert  chain  (chain  No.  2,  Mr.  Death's,  pro- 
duced). I  don't  know  whether  that  is  the  chain.  I  did  not 
examine  it  enough  to  know  it  again.  It  is  something  similar 
to  it.  He  said  nothing  about  it.  He  remained  Tuesday  and 
Wednesday,  and  left  on  the  Thursday  morning.  When  he 
came  to  us  he  brought  a  hatbox  and  a  long  black  box.  This 
hatbox  (the  one  produced)  has  the  same  name,  "  Walker,  49 
Crawford  Street,  Marylebone,"  upon  it.  I  found  that  box 
in  the  prisoner's  room  after  he  left,  and  gave  it  to  the  police- 
constables  when  they  came  to  make  inquiries. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — He  passed  the  day  on 
Sunday  much  the  same  as  usual,  and  there  was  nothing 
different  in  his  manner.  I  have  known  the  prisoner  more 
than  twelve  months,  and  have  found  him  a  quiet,  inoffensive, 
well-behaved  young  man.  I  have  had  plenty  of  opportunities 
of  judging  of  his  temper,  as  he  used  to  take  his  meals  with 
us.  He  took  every  meal  with  us  on  that  Sunday.  I  consider 
he  was  of  a  kind  and  humane  disposition.  We  usually  took 
a  Sunday  walk  together.  He  walked  out  with  us  on  the 
Sunday,  and  exhibited  the  same  manner  he  usually  exhibited. 
My  husband  has  not  been  examined  either  before  the  coroner 
or  before  the  magistrate.  He  has  not  been  examined  at  all. 

Did  the  prisoner  wear  the  same  dress  on  the  Sunday  that 
he  wore  on  the  Saturday? — Yes. 

Did  he  wear  the  same  dress  on  the  Monday  as  on  the 
Saturday  and  the  Sunday? — I  cannot  recollect  whether  the 
trousers  he  wore  were  light  or  dark ;  but  he  wore  the  same 
coat.  I  have  seen  the  coat  since,  and  have  recognised  it  as  the 
one  he  wore.  (Coat  produced  and  handed  to  the  witness.) 
32 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

That   is  the  coat  he  had   on   on  the   Saturday,    Sunday,    and  Mrs.  Blyth 

Monday,  but  I  am  not  sure  as  to  the  trousers.       I  am  sure 

that  he  wore  the  same  trousers  on  Saturday  and  Sunday,  but 

I  am  not  sure  about  Monday.       He  was  lame,  I  think,  of  the 

left  foot.       He  wore  a  slipper  on  the  Saturday,  which  I  have 

given    up   to   the   police.     (Slipper   produced.)        That   is    the 

slipper.       I  see  it  is  for  the  right  foot,  but  I  am  not  quite 

sure  which  foot  was  lame.       I   am  quite  sure  he  was  lame, 

and  went  out  with  a  slipper  on  on  the  Saturday.       This  is  the 

slipper  left  at  my  house  by  the  prisoner.       I  gave  that  slipper 

to  Inspector  Tiddy  with  the  hatbox.       The  prisoner  got  lame 

on  the  Thursday.       He  was  confidential  with  us,  but  I  don't 

know  where  he  was  going  on  the  Monday.       I  did  not  know 

then  whether  he  had  been  to  look  after  a  ship  at  the  docks. 

I  knew  of  his  intention  to  go  to  America  a  fortnight  previous 

to  the  14th  of  July.       He  told  us  when  he  left  the  name  of 

the  ship  he  was  going  to  New  York  in — the  "  Victoria."     He 

did  not  give  us  any  address  in  New  York.       I  recollect  a  letter 

from  him  shortly  after  he  left.     (Letter  produced.)     That  is 

the  letter.     (Letter  read.)       It  is  from  the  prisoner,  and  the 

envelope   is   directed   to    Mrs.    Blyth,    16    Park   Terrace,    Old 

Ford  Road,  Victoria  Park,  N.E.,   London  (in  pencil).       It  is 

as  follows  :  — 

On  the  sea,  July  16,  in  the  morning. 

Dear  Friends, — I  am  glad  to  confess  that  I  cannot  have  a  better  time, 
as  I  have ;  if  the  sun  shines  nice  and  the  wind  blows  fair,  as  it  is  at 
the  present  moment,  everything  will  go  well.  I  cannot  write  any 
more,  only  I  have  no  postage;  you  will  be  so  kind  to  take  that  letter 
in. 

The  postmark  is  Worthing,  16th  July,   1864. 

Do  you  know  the  prisoner's  age? — I  believe  about  twenty- 
three  or  twenty-four.  I  never  washed  for  the  prisoner  until 
the  last  week,  and  then  I  washed  six  new  shirts  for  him. 

Re-examined  by  the  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — We  were  walking 
from  six  to  nine  o'clock  on  the  Sunday  night. 

By  BARON  MARTIN — The  prisoner  had  a  pair  of  slippers.  He 
took  one  slipper  out  with  him  on  Saturday.  This  is  the  one 
he  wore  on  his  bad  foot,  the  one  he  took  out  with  him.  The 
other  slipper  he  left  at  Mrs.  Repsch's. 

D  33 


Franz    Muller. 

George  Blyth  GEORGE  BLTTH,  examined  by  Mr.  GIFFARD — I  am  husband 
of  the  last  witness.  I  walked  out  with  the  prisoner  and  my 
wife  on  the  Sunday.  We  usually  left  home  together  to  go 
to  work  between  half-past  seven  and  a  quarter  to  eight.  From 
the  7th  to  14th  July  we  did  not  go  from  home  together  in 
the  morning.  I  left  him  at  home  every  morning  during  that 
time.  I  went  to  town  at  my  ordinary  time.  On  Sunday,  the 
10th,  we  walked  in  the  Victoria  Park,  which  is  two  minutes' 
walk  from  my  house.  He  returned  with  us,  and  I  heard 
him  go  upstairs  to  bed.  On  the  Monday  evening  he  got  home 
after  I  got  home.  It  was  between  eight  and  nine.  He  and 
a  man  named  Haffa  came  in  together.  I  noticed  that  he  had 
a  new  chain.  I  had  not  noticed  whether  he  had  been  wearing 
a  chain  for  some  time  previously.  He  had  not  one  for  two 
or  three  weeks.  Before  that  two  or  three  weeks  I  had  seen 
him  wearing  a  chain,  but  the  chain  I  saw  on  the  Monday  was 
a  different  one. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  METCALPE — He  ceased  to  go  to  work 
with  me  on  the  7th,  which  was  about  the  time  he  hurt  his 
foot.  A  cart,  he  said,  had  run  against  it  and  hurt  it.  He 
used  to  wear  a  slipper  up  to  the  Sunday.  He  wore  a  slipper 
on  Sunday  morning.  We  walked  all  the  time,  I  believe,  in  the 
Victoria  Park  on  the  Sunday  evening.  I  do  not  remember 
sitting  down,  or  whether  he  sat  or  not.  His  dress  on  Satur- 
day and  Sunday  was  the  same.  I  don't  know  what  he  wore 
on  the  Monday.  I  did  not  see  him  much  on  Monday.  I 
went  out  to  my  work.  (Coat  produced.)  This  is  like  the  coat 
he  wore  on  Saturday  and  Sunday.  To  the  best  of  my  belief  it 
is  the  coat.  I  could  not  swear  to  it.  He  bore  the  character 
of  being  a  very  well-conducted  young  man  in.  every  respect. 
He  was,  I  should  say,  of  a  kind  and  humane  disposition.  I 
never  heard  of  his  getting  into  rows  or  committing  any 
assaults.  He  bade  me  good-bye  on  Thursday  morning.  He 
told  me  he  was  going  by  the  "  Victoria  "  from  the  London 
Docks  to  New  York.  I  had  known  for  a  fortnight  that  he 
was  going  to  New  York.  He  had  made  it  public  to  all  his 
friends. 

By  a  JUROR — I  left  him  about  half-past  seven  on  Saturday 
morning  and  returned  at  seven  in  the  evening.       I  did  not 
34 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

see  Miiller  change  his  coat  at  any  time  on  Saturday  or  Sunday.  George  Blyth 
I  did  not  see  him  at  all  between  Saturday  morning  and  Sunday 
morning. 


Mrs.  ELIZABETH  SAKAH  REPSCH,  examined  by  the  SOLICITOR-  Mrs.lRepsch 
GENERAL — I  am  wife  of  Mr.  William  Repsch,  a  tailor,  12  J 
Jewry  Street,  Aldgate.  I  am  an  English  woman  born  of 
German  parents.  My  husband  is  a  German.  I  have  known 
the  prisoner  Miiller  for  some  time.  He  worked  as  a  tailor  with 
Mr.  Hodgkinson  up  to  the  2nd  July.  After  that  he  was  not 
in  any  employment.  He  used  to  come  to  our  house  from  time 
to  time  after  2nd  July.  We  were  on  friendly  terms.  He  had 
a  watch  and  chain  of  his  own.  I  have  seen  them.  I  saw  him 
wearing  them  last  while  working  for  Mr.  Hodgkinson.  He 
said  he  had  pledged  watch  and  chain  separately.  On  Saturday, 
9th  July,  Muller  had  not  got  them  out  of  pledge.  He  came 
to  our  house  on  that  day  between  twelve  and  one,  or  between 
eleven  and  one,  and  remained  till  half -past  seven  in  the 
evening.  He  was  at  work  there — I  don't  know  whether  for 
himself  or  a  friend.  He  met  with  an  accident  on  the  Thursday 
previous,  and  wore  a  slipper  on  that  day.  I  don't  know  whether 
he  came  in  the  slipper  on  the  Saturday,  but  he  wore  a  slipper 
during  the  day  on  the  right  foot — in  fact,  two  slippers.  He 
used  to  wear  slippers  when  at  work.  I  don't  know  whether  he 
went  away  with  a  slipper  on.  I  have  here  the  slipper  of  the 
left  foot,  which  I  found  after  he  was  gone.  The  right  slipper 
was  gone.  He  had  his  boots — two  boots — with  him  during  the 
day.  I  can't  say  whether  he  had  two  boots  at  our  house  on 
Saturday.  I  don't  know  whether  he  came  in  them  in  the  morning, 
or  whether  he  had  them  on  when  he  went  away.  I  was  out  when 
he  went  away  in  the  evening.  But  neither  of  the  boots  were 
left  behind,  so  that  he  had  taken  away  both  boots  and  one 
slipper.  When  he  came  in  on  the  Saturday  morning  he  wore 
green  and  black  trousers,  but  he  changed  them  for  an  older 
pair  of  striped  trousers  to  work  in.  He  must  have  put  on 
the  newer  trousers  when  he  went  away,  because  the  working 
pair  were  left  behind.  I  saw  him  next  on  the  Monday  morning 
between  ten  and  eleven  o'clock.  He  then  had  on  a  pair  of 
light  trousers,  having  left  on  Saturday  in  a  pair  of  dark  ones. 

35 


Franz    Muller. 

Mrs.  Repseh  On  the  Monday  morning  he  came  in  both  boots.  He  showed 
me  a  chain  on  Monday  morning.  (Chain  No.  2  handed  to 
witness.)  I  believe  this  to  be  the  same  chain.  He  said  he 
had  bought  it  in  the  docks  that  morning,  and  had  given 
£3  15s.  for  it.  He  had  also  a  plain  gold  ring,  with  a  white 
stone  and  a  head  engraved  upon  it,  on  his  finger.  He  said 
he  had  paid  7s.  6d.  for  that  at  the  same  place  that  he  had 
bought  the  chain.  My  husband  saw  him  on  Monday  morning 
as  well  as  myself.  On  that  morning  I  observed  that  he  had  a 
new  hat  on  which  I  had  never  seen  before.  I  told  him  he 
was  very  extravagant  in  having  another  new  hat.  He  said 
that  his  old  one  was  smashed,  and  he  had  thrown  it  in  the 
dusthole.  My  husband  asked  him  how  much  he  had  given  for 
it,  and  he  said  14s.  6d.  My  husband  said  it  looked  more  like 
a  guinea  hat.  Nothing  more  passed  about  it.  I  had  not  seen 
that  hat  before.  I  had  observed  before  what  hat  Muller  wore. 
The  hat  he  wore  before  was  a  plain  black  beaver  hat,  with 
merino  rim  inside  and  striped  lining,  broad  brown  stripes,  and 
broad  blue  stripe  edged  with  black  and  white.  My  attention 
was  drawn  to  it  by  its  lining  being  a  peculiar  lining.  I  had 
never  seen  a  hat  lined  with  such  lining  before.  I  have  had 
the  hat  often  in  my  hands.  He  was  in  the  habit  of  putting 
letters  inside  the  lining.  I  have  seen  him  do  so.  I  gave 
a  description  of  the  hat  to  the  police  before  seeing  it. 
(Hat  produced.)  To  the  best  of  my  belief  that  is  the  hat. 
The  merino  and  the  lining  are  the  same.  As  far  as  I  can 
judge,  it  corresponds.  He  said  that  Mr.  Matthews,  the  cabman, 
had  made  him  a  present  of  it.  He  must  have  told  me  that 
either  in  November  or  December  of  the  previous  year.  I 
had  never  seen  him  wear  any  other  hat  than  that.  It  was  in 
a  hatbox  when  he  brought  it  to  our  house  in  November  or 
December  last.  (Box  produced.)  That  is  the  same  description 
of  hatbox.  He  brought  them  to  show  me,  and  then  took  them 
away.  On  Saturday,  9th  July,  to  the  best  of  my  belief,  he 
wore  that  hat.  On  Monday  he  had  a  new  one.  Muller  had  a 
single-breasted  overcoat  with  a  velvet  collar.  On  Saturday  he 
had  a  morning  coat  on.  (Two  pairs  of  trousers  found  in  Muller's 
possession  when  arrested  were  here  handed  to  the  witness  and 
identified.)  One  pair  of  these  trousers  he  wore  on  Saturday, 
while  at  work;  the  other — the  light  pair — he  came  in  on  the 
36 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Monday    morning   to    our   house.      Neither    of  them    are    the  Mrs.  Repseh 
trousers  that  he  left  our  house  in  on  Saturday  night.     I  have 
never  seen  that  pair  of  trousers  since. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — I  did  not  see  him  leave 
our  house  on  Saturday.  I  saw  him  last  at  half-past  seven.  I 
left  him  and  Haffa  at  my  house  together  when  I  went  out. 
He  had  the  slipper  on  the  whole  day  on  Saturday  when  I  was 
there,  but  I  am  not  able  to  say  whether  he  left  in  the  slipper 
or  not.  I  produce  a  slipper  which  was  left  at  my  house  on  the 
Saturday.  He  must  have  taken  the  right  slipper  with  him.  I 
do  not  know  of  my  own  knowledge  that  he  left  in  a  slipper; 
only  from  what  I  have  heard  Haffa  say.  I  understood  that 
Miiller  had  been  lame  in  his  right  foot  since  the  Thursday. 
The  prisoner  was  rather  fond  of  finery,  and  of  showing  the 
things  that  he  had.  I  can't  say  whether  he  used  to  romance 
a  little  or  not.  He  told  us  that  he  had  told  Mrs.  Blyth  that 
Mr.  Hodgkinson  was  sending  him  to  New  York.  Of  course 
we  knew  better.  He  did  not  tell  me  that  he  had  said  he  was 
to  have  £150  a  year.  My  husband  wears  a  hat,  but  I  don't 
know  the  colour  of  the  lining.  I  had  Miiller's  hat  constantly 
in  my  hand.  If  it  was  in  my  way,  in  my  own  place,  I  had 
a  right  to  move  it.  That  is  how  I  account  for  knowing  it  so 
well.  I  saw  it  at  the  Police  Court  and  at  the  inquest,  and  had 
it  in  my  hand  on  both  occasions.  I  knew  Haffa  for  about  a 
twelvemonth ;  he  was  in  the  habit  of  coming  to  our  house,  but 
not  to  work.  He  works  for  Mr.  Hodgkinson.  I  had  known 
Miiller  for  nearly  two  years.  Haffa  used  to  come  constantly 
to  my  place.  He  wore  a  hat,  but  I  don't  know  what  sort  of 
lining  it  has,  nor  yet  what  sort  of  lining  there  is  in  any  other 
man's  hat  who  comes  to  see  my  husband.  It  was  the  peculiarity 
of  the  lining  in  Miiller's  hat  that  took  my  attention.  I  may 
have  looked  into  it  thirty  or  forty  or  fifty  times.  I  can't  say 
how  often.  I  cannot  say  whether  I  looked  into  it  each  time  I 
had  it  in  my  hands.  I  know  Jonathan  Matthews,  the  cabman. 
My  husband  knows  him.  I  have  known  him  about  six  years. 
I  did  not  see  him  after  the  murder  before  he  returned  from 
New  York.  I  had  not  seen  him  for  three  years.  I  think  I 
have  visited  him  twice.  The  prisoner  bought  a  new  pair  of 
trousers  about  a  month  before  the  murder. 

37 


Franz    Muller. 

Mrs.  Repseb  Did  you  ever  ask  the  prisoner  to  lend  you  5s.  ? — No,  sir. 
(After  some  hesitation) — Yes,  I  did. 

Did  he  not  tell  you  that  he  could  not  do  so  because  he  was 
going  to  buy  a  new  hat? — That  I  can't  say.  I  can't  remember. 

And  did  you  not  say,  "  Pooh,  pooh !  you  may  as  well  lend  me 
the  money ;  you  can  buy  a  hat  next  week  "  ? — I  don't  think  I 
did.  I  can't  swear  to  that.  I  don't  remember  his  making 
such  an  excuse,  because  he  lent  me  the  money.  I  did  not  say 
that  just  now  because  I  was  not  asked.  I  repaid  the  money 
to  him,  and  I  believe  that  was  the  only  time  I  ever  borrowed 
money  from  him,  but  I  cannot  swear  to  it.  My  husband  was 
not  by  when  he  gave  me  the  5s.  He  knew  nothing  about  it.  I 
have  only  seen  Mrs.  Matthews  at  the  Court;  I  am  quite  sure 
of  that.  I  don't  expect  to  get  any  of  the  reward  which  is 
offered.  I  cannot  say,  with  the  exception  of  the  trousers, 
whether  Muller  wore  the  same  dress  on  the  Monday  as  on  the 
Saturday,  or  whether  he  had  the  velvet-collared  or  morning 
coat  on. 

Re-examined  by  the  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — Muller  had  not  the 
same  hat  on  on  the  Monday  that  he  wore  on  the  Saturday.  I 
don't  remember  the  date  when  I  asked  him  to  lend  me  the  5s. 
It  was  repaid  to  him  in  the  settling.  To  the  best  of  my  recol- 
lection, he  said  nothing  about  a  hat  when  I  borrowed  the  5s. 
It  was  after  he  brought  the  hat  and  bandbox  to  our  house 
that  I  borrowed  the  5s.  I  have  frequently  lent  him  a  trifle 
of  money,  and  he  has  always  paid  me  again.  I  don't  remember 
the  last  time  that  I  lent  him  money.  I  never  saw  a  lining 
like  that  in  Muller's  hat  until  I  saw  his  hat.  I  said,  when 
he  took  it  brand-new  out  of  the  bandbox,  "  What  peculiar 
lining."  I  have  seen  him  put  letters  behind  the  lining  more 
than  once. 

Re-cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — Did  you  pledge  a 
coat  for  Muller  on  the  Wednesday  before  he  left? — Yes. 

Is  that  the  coat  which  was  identified  by  Mrs.  Blyth? — That 
is  the  coat. 

By    the    SOLICITOR-GENERAL — How    came    you    to    pawn    a 
coat    for    Muller? — Because    he    said    he    had    not    sufficient 
money  to  pay  his  passage.     He  asked  me  to  pawn  it  for  him; 
38 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

that  was  on  Wednesday,  the  13th,  and  I  pawned  it  for  6s.  Mrs.  Repscb 
at  Mr.  Annis's,  121  Minories.  I  gave  the  money  to  Miiller 
the  same  day.  He  came  in  green  and  dark  trousers  on  Satur- 
day, and  took  them  off  while  working,  and  put  on  another 
pair.  I  did  not  see  him  put  them  on  before  going  away;  but 
the  old  ones  that  he  wore  during  the  day  were  left  behind, 
and  those  he  came  in  in  the  morning  were  gone. 

GODFREY  FERDINAND  REPSCH,  examined  by  SERJEANT  BALLAN-  G<  F<  R°Psch 
TINE  —  I  am  husband  of  the  last  witness.  I  have 
been  acquainted  with  the  prisoner  some  time.  He 
used  to  work  at  my  shop.  Miiller  came  to  my  house  on 
Saturday,  9th  July.  He  had  an  old  pair  of  trousers  on  when 
he  was  working.  They  were  his  working  trousers.  When 
he  went  away  on  Saturday  evening  those  trousers  were  left 
behind.  I  knew  of  a  pair  of  trousers  he  had  with  green  spots — 
a  new  pair  that  he  had  a  month  or  six  weeks  before.  They 
were  a  green  mixture.  I  may  have  seen  them  the  week  before 
he  left  England.  I  have  never,  to  the  best  of  my  belief,  seen 
them  since  the  murder  of  Mr.  Briggs  ;  but  I  cannot  say  definitely 
whether  I  have  or  not.  He  came  to  my  shop  on  the  Monday, 
about  ten  o'clock,  and  said  he  had  got  a  new  hat,  and  he  had  a 
chain  and  ring  which  he  said  he  had  bought  in  the  docks.  He 
said  he  had  bought  the  hat  two  months  before,  and  had  only 
worn  it  three  times,  on  Sundays.  He  took  the  chain  daily 
from  his  waistcoat  pocket.  The  ring  was  not  attached  to  the 
chain ;  it  was  on  his  finger.  I  said  the  hat  was  worth  a  guinea, 
because  he  said  he  had  only  given  14s.  6d.  for  it. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — I  had  seen  Miiller  wear- 
ing the  dress  before  which  he  had  on  on  Monday.  My  wife 
made  the  observation  about  the  new  hat.  When  asked  before 
for  the  description  of  the  trousers  he  wore  on  Saturday  I 
said  they  were  brown,  grey,  and  all  sorts  of  colours,  that  they 
were  very  old,  and  that  they  had  brown  stripes.  1  did  not 
see  Miiller  go  out  on  Saturday  night.  He  came  between  ten 
and  eleven  on  Monday,  I  believe.  He  had  not  been  there 
before  that  I  know  of.  I  was  at  home  at  eight  o'clock.  Haffa 
wa»  not  there  then.  I  do  not  remember  asking  him  to  come 
early  on  Monday  morning  to  fetch  neckties  for  Haffa.  That 

39 


Franz    Muller. 

G.  F.  Repsch  was  on  Tuesday  morning,  I  am  sure.  I  knew  for  some  time 
that  he  was  going  to  America,  and  gave  him  leave  to  work 
up  his  clothes  at  my  place  for  that  purpose.  I  went  with  him 
on  board  the  "  Victoria."  Every  one  who  knew  him  knew 
where  he  was  going.  I  have  known  Jonathan  Matthews,  the 
cabman,  about  eight  years.  After  the  murder  I  saw  him  for 
the  first  time  at  the  inquest  at  Hackney,  after  he  had  given 
information  to  the  police.  About  two  months  before  the 
murder  Muller  bought  some  new  clothes.  I  never  used  to  see 
Muller  on  Sundays.  I  never  was  at  Mrs.  Blyth's. 

Re-examined  by  the  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — I  had  seen  him  on 
weekdays.  I  had  not  noticed  the  hat  before  which  he  wore 
on  the  Monday  morning.  I  should  not  have  noticed  it  then 
if  my  wife  had  not  made  a  remark  with  respect  to  it.  (A 
pair  of  old  trousers  handed  to  the  witness.)  These  are  the 
working  trousers  which  he  wore  on  the  Saturday,  and  which 
I  described  to  the  magistrate  as  being  of  all  colours.  I  do 
not  know  whether  he  came  in  those  trousers.  I  did  not  see 
him  come  in  or  go  away.  It  is  usual  for  tailors  to  change 
their  trousers  when  they  come  into  the  room  and  put  on 
slippers. 

John  Haffa  JOHN  HAFFA,  examined  by  Mr.  HANNEN — I  am  a  journeyman 
tailor  and  work  at  Messrs.  Hodgkinson's.  I  have  known  the 
prisoner  about  six  months.  I  remember  the  9th  of  July.  I 
was  at  Mr.  Repsch's,  and  saw  the  prisoner  between  six  and 
seven  in  the  evening.  I  came  and  found  him  there.  I  do 
not  remember  if  he  was  at  work  or  not.  He  left  before  me; 
he  left  between  seven  and  eight — nearly  at  eight  o'clock.  He 
said  he  was  going  to  see  his  sweetheart.  I  had  seen  him  work- 
ing there  before.  I  did  not  notice  his  clothes;  it  was  too 
dark.  I  saw  him  again  on  Monday  at  Mr.  Repsch's  about  two 
o'clock.  I  noticed  a  chain  on  him  which  I  had  not  seen  before. 
He  said  he  had  bought  it.  I  do  not  know  if  he  said  where. 
He  said  he  had  given  £3  15s.  for  it.  I  left  him  at  Repsch's 
and  went  to  my  work.  When  I  returned  in  the  evening  he 
was  still  there.  We  then  left  Repsch's  together,  and  I  went 
with  him  to  his  lodgings.  I  remained  there  that  night.  I 
40 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

afterwards   lent  him  12s.        Mr.    Repsch  told  me   Mr.    Franz  John  Haifa 

Miiller  had   not  sufficient  money   for  his   passage   ticket;    he 

wanted  12s>.     I  gave  Mr.  Repsch  a  suit  of  my  clothes  to  pawn 

to  raise  the  money.      That  was  on  Wednesday.     The  prisoner 

gave  me  the  duplicate  of  a  chain  pledged  at  a  pawnbroker's 

named  Annis.       He  told  me  Mr.  Repsch  had  the  ticket  for  a 

coat,  which  I  could  have  for  the  money  to  pay  the  rent.       I 

got  the  ticket  from  Mr.  Repsch.     I  got  the  coat  out  of  pawn 

the  day  before  he  came  back  to  London  from  America,   and 

sent  it  to  Scotland  Yard. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — He  was  working  for 
me  on  one  day  only.  I  was  well  aware  of  his  going  to 
America.  He  made  up  his  mind  to  do  so  a  fortnight  before 
he  left.  I  knew  that  he  was  lame.  I  saw  him  in  possession 
of  money  before  the  9th  of  July,  both  gold  and  silver.  I 
cannot  say  how  much,  but  I  believe  it  was  enough  to  pay  his 
passage.  I  have  known  him  for  six  months.  He  bore  the 
character  and  disposition  of  a  humane,  kind  young  man.  I 
lodged  with  him  for  the  last  three  nights  before  he  left.  I  had 
not  lodged  with  him  longer,  not  for  some  weeks.  He  slept 
with  me  once  or  twice. 

When  he  said  he  was  going  to  see  his  sweetheart,  did  he 
say  he  was  going  to  Camberwell? — No;  I  did  not  understand 
that.  He  said  his  sweetheart's  name  was  Eldred.  This  is 
not  the  first  time  I  have  been  asked  these  questions.  When  he 
went  out  from  Repsch's  on  Saturday  night  it  was  about  a 
quarter  to  eight  or  eight;  he  had  a  slipper  on  one  foot.  He 
was  lame  of  one  foot,  and  had  been  so  for  two  or  three  days. 
He  told  me  a  letter-carrier's  cart  had  run  against  his  foot. 
(Slipper  shown  to  witness.)  That  is  the  slipper.  I  recognise 
it  again.  It  was  a  carpet  slipper.  I  believe  he  had  money 
enough  to  pay  his  passage  a  week  before  this  murder.  After 
that  Monday  I  assisted  him  to  make  up  the  money  for  his 
passage.  He  did  not  tell  me  what  had  become  of  his  money 
and  I  did  not  ask  him.  I  only  knew  of  his  going  to  the  docks 
several  times  from  what  he  told  me.  He  did  not  tell  me  that 
he  had  spent  his  money  in  purchasing  a  watch  and  chain  in 
the  docks.  He  said  he  had  bought  a  chain  for  £3  15s.  He 
might  have  said  that  he  had  been  down  to  the  docks  on  the 

41 


Franz    Muller. 

John  Haffa  Monday  morning,  but  I  do  not  remember.  I  only  knew  Death, 
the  jeweller,  after  this  case  came  on.  I  do  not  know  anything 
about  Muller  having  a  gold  chain  repaired  in  November  last. 
I  did  not  know  him  at  that  time.  In  June  I  gave  him  a  chain 
to  get  exchanged  for  another  chain  for  myself,  but  he  could 
not  do  it.  He  returned  it  to  me.  He  did  not  tell  me  whether 
he  had  been  anywhere  to  change  it. 

Re-examined  by  the  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — This  transaction 
about  the  chain  might  have  been  at  the  end  of  May  or  the 
beginning  of  June.  But  nothing  came  of  it.  I  gave  him  the 
chain,  but  he  brought  it  back  to  me.  I  saw  him  with  some 
money  a  week  before  he  left,  but  I  did  not  count  it. 

By  a  JUROR — You  say  that  you  could  not  see  Muller 'a  clothes 
when  he  left  Repsch's  house  on  the  Saturday  between  seven 
and  eight  o'clock,  because  it  was  too  dark.  It  is  not  dark  at 
that  time  in  July,  but  quite  light? — He  left  just  before  eight 
o'clock.  In  the  lodging  where  I  lived  it  was  rather  dark, 
because  it  is  in  a  court.  The  prisoner  did  not  sleep  with 
me  on  the  Saturday  night. 

Georg*  Death  GEORGE  DEATH,  examined  by  SERJEANT  BALLANTINH — I  am 
a  brother  of  the  jeweller  in  Cheapside.  I  remember  some 
one  coming  in  on  the  morning  of  the  llth  of  July  with  a  chain 
perfectly  well.  I  believe  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  is  the  person. 
I  had  never,  to  my  recollection,  seen  him  before. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — I  have  not  the  slightest 
recollection  of  having  seen  him  before.  I  have  not  the  slightest 
recollection  of  a  person  leaving  a  chain  with  me  to  be  exchanged 
in  June  last.  (Chain  No.  3  handed  to  witness.)  I  am  positive 
I  have  never  seen  this  chain  before.  It  is  such  a  peculiar  one 
that  I  should  remember  it  if  I  had.  This  chain  appears  to 
have  been  mended;  such  a  job  we  should  send  to  a  jobbing 
jeweller,  and  it  would  be  put  down  to  the  credit  of  that  jeweller. 

Do  you  remember  the  dress  of  the  prisoner? — His  coat  was 
dark,  but  I  do  not  remember  the  particulars  of  his  dress.  My 
first  impression  was  that  his  trousers  were  light,  but  I  was  not 
positive  about  it;  it  was  a  mere  impression.  We  employ 
eteveral  jewellers.  Our  jobbing  jeweller  is  Mr.  Evans,,  of 
42 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Bartholomew  Square,   No.    14.       We  often  send  chains  to  be  George  Death 
repaired  to  the  chainmakers. 

Ke-examined  by  SERJEANT  BALLANTINE — Any  work  of  the  kind 
would  pass  through  my  hands  or  my  brother's  first.  I  am 
certain  I  never  saw  this  chain  before. 

The  Court  adjourned  at  a  quarter  to  five  o'clock. 


43 


Second  Day— Friday,  28th   October,  1864. 

The  Court  met  at  ten  o'clock. 

John  H.  Glass  JOHN  HENRY  GLASS — I  am  in  the  employ  of  Mr.  Hodgkinson, 
and  have  been  for  some  time.  I  have  known  the  prisoner 
about  four  years.  I  do  not  know  exactly  how  long  the 
prisoner  was  in  Mr.  Hodgkinson's  employment.  On  Tuesday, 
12th  of  July  last,  he  came  to  me  at  Mr.  Hodgkinson's  shop 
about  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  He  offered  me  a  gold 
watch.  He  said  if  I  would  not  buy  it  he  would  not  have 
money  enough  to  go  to  America.  He  said  he  had  a  gold  chain 
at  a  pawnbroker's,  which  he  had  pledged  for  £1.  He  did 
not  say  how  much  he  wanted  to  sell  the  watch  for.  He  said 
if  he  could  pawn  the  watch  and  chain  together  he  could  get 
£4:  10s.  for  them.  The  watch  produced  is  the  same.  That 
was  his  own  watch,  which  he  had  been  in  the  habit  of  wearing. 
I  told  him  to  come  again  the  next  morning.  He  came  the 
next  morning  about  nine  o'clock.  We  both  went  together  to 
a  pawnbroker's  shop — Mr.  Barker's.  We  both  went  into  the 
shop  and  took  a  chain  out  of  pawn  (No.  3).  We  paid  £1. 
We  then  went  together  to  Mr.  Cox's,  Princes  Street,  Leicester 
Square,  and  there  pawned  the  watch  he  had  offered  me  the 
day  before  and  the  chain  he  had  just  redeemed.  We  got  £4 
on  them.  Muller  took  the  money  and  I  took  the  ticket. 
(The  ticket  produced.)  This  is  it.  It  was  in  my  name. 
I  gave  him  5s.  for  it.  I  gave  the  £1  for  the  chain.  I  paid 
£1  5s.  altogether.  We  then  went  back  together  in  an  omnibus 
as  far  as  the  Bank,  and  when  we  got  there  we  parted.  He 
told  me  he  was  going  to  the  London  Docks  to  get  a  ticket  to 
go  to  America. 

Cross-examined — I  have  known  the  prisoner  about  four 
years.  He  has  been  in  this  country  during  that  time.  He 
is  a  native  of  Saxe-Weimar.  I  am  a  journeyman  tailor. 
During  the  four  years  I  have  known  him  he  has  borne  a  kind 
and  humane  character.  I  have  been  in  the  habit  of  asso- 
44 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

elating  with  him,  and  have  had  full  opportunities  of  judging  John  H.  Glass 
his  character  for  humanity  and  kindness.  I  don't  know  that 
he  was  in  the  habit  of  pawning  and  exchanging  his  watch.  I 
did  not  see  any  money  in  his  possession  the  week  before  the 
9th  of  July.  I  don't  know  what  wages  he  earned.  I  am  a 
pieceworker.  I  can  earn  30s.  or  36s.  a  week. 


HENRT  SMITH; — I  am  assistant  to  Mrs.  Barker,  a  pawnbroker,  Henry  Smith 
91  Houndsditch.  On  the  22nd  of  June  I  took  in  a  gold  albert 
chain  of  the  prisoner,  and  advanced  £1  on  it.  The  chain 
produced  is  the  same  (Muller's  chain  No.  3).  He  had  a  new 
ticket  on  the  12th  July,  his  ticket  having  got  damaged,  and 
it  was  redeemed  on  the  13th  July.  I  think  it  was  Muller 
who  redeemed  it,  but  I  did  not  deliver  it  myself. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — It  was  £1,  not  30s., 
that  was  advanced. 

ALFRED  WET — I  was  formerly  assistant  to  Mrs.  Barker.     On  Alfred  Wey 
the  13th  June  last  I  took  in  a  watch  from  the  prisoner.     This 
is  it.       I  advanced  £2  upon  it.       It  was  redeemed  on  12th 
July  by  Muller,  I  believe. 

CHARLES  YOUNG — I  am  assistant  to  Mr.  John  Annis,  pawn-  c.  Young 
broker,  of  121  Minories.  On  the  12th  July  I  took  in  a 
chain  (the  one  produced)  of  a  person  who  gave  the  name  of 
Miller,  Christian  name  "  John,"  and  the  address  22  Jewry 
Street,  Aldgate.  I  advanced  £1  10s.  on  the  chain.  I  after- 
wards handed  it  to  the  police.  This  is  the  chain  (No.  2). 

Cross-examined — It  is  very  common  to  supply  the  Christian 
name  for  parties  who  come  to  pawn.  "John"  is  the  name 
we  mainly  patronise. 

JONATHAN  MATTHEWS,  examined  by  the  SOLICITOR-GENERAL —  J<  Matthews 
I  think  you  are  a  cab-driver? — Yes. 

Do  you  know  Muller? — Yes. 

How  long  had  you  known  him  before  the  day  of  the  murder? 
— Two  years  and  some  few  weeks.  I  would  not  say  exactly. 

45 


Franz    Muller. 

J.  Matthews  How  did  you  come  to  be  acquainted  with  him  ? — He  was 
working  for  a  brother-in-law,  and  so,  being  a  stranger  in  the 
country,  came  to  dinner  with  him  frequently. 

And  by  that  means  you  knew  him? — Yes. 

And  from  that  period  you  have  seen  him  from  time  to  timet 
— Yes ;  twice  or  three  times  in  a  month. 

He  came  to  your  house  sometimes? — Yes. 

Have  you  been  to  see  him? — Yes,   several  times. 

Do  you  remember  anything  passing  between  you  and  the 
prisoner  on  the  subject  of  a  hat  towards  the  end  of  last  year? 
—I  do. 

Can  you  tell  me  about  what  time? — About  the  latter  end  of 
November  or  the  beginning  of  December.  I  could  not  say 
to  a  week. 

Tell  us  about  the  hat? — I  had  a  new  hat,  and  he  came  to 
dine  with  me  on  the  Sunday  after  I  bought  it.  He  saw  my 
hat,  and  said  that  he  would  like  to  have  one  like  it. 

Did  he  look  at  it? — Yes ;  he  put  it  on  his  head,  and  said  that 
it  was  too  small  for  him. 

He  looked  at  the  hat,  then  ? — Yes ;  he  asked  me  what  I 
gave  for  it,  and  I  said  10s.  6d. 

Ten  and  sixpence  ? — Yes ;  he  said  that  he  should  like  one 
like  it,  and  I  said  that  I  would  get  him  one  if  he  wished  it. 

Yes,  you  said  that  you  would  get  him  one? — Yes. 

He  said  that  it  was  rather  too  small? — Yes. 

Well,  was  anything  said? — I  put  it  on  his  head  and  said, 
"  What  is  too  easy  for  me  will  suit  you." 

And  in  consequence  of  that  you  got  one? — Yes. 

At  what  shop? — At  the  same. 

What  same,  what  shop? — At  the  hatter's. 

Of  course,  but  where? — Mr.  Walker's,  Crawford  Street, 
Marylebone. 

Can  you  remember  the  lining  of  that  hat? — It  appeared  to 
resemble  "  striped  "  lining. 

Now,  did  you  get  it  soon  after  this  occasion  when  he  asked 
you? — I  ordered  it  on  the  Friday,  and  said  that  I  should  want 
one,  and  on  the  Saturday  evening  I  bought  one.  My  wife 
was  with  me. 

Did  you  take  it  away? — Yes. 

In  the  hatbox? — Yes. 
46 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

What  did  you  do  with  it? — It  remained  at  my  house  until  j.  Matthews 
the   Sunday   week   following. 

When  Muller  came  for  it? — Yes. 

Was  it  the  Sunday  week  following? — Yes. 

Muller  came  for  it  and  took  it  away? — Yes. 

Did  he  take  away  the  box  as  well  ? — Yes ;  the  hat  and  box. 

Did  you  pay  for  the  hat? — Yes. 

What?— 10s.   6d. 

Did  Muller  pay  you  again? — No. 

Not  at  all?— No. 

Did  he  settle  with  you  in  any  way  ? — Yes ;  he  made  me  a 
waistcoat — the  one  that  I  now  wear. 

That  was  in  return  for  it? — Yes. 

After  that,  did  you  see  him  wear  the  hat? — Yes,  frequently. 

Frequently  ? — Yes ,    frequently . 

Very  well;  can  you  tell  me  about  the  latest  time  when  you 
saw  him  wearing  it? — About  a  fortnight  before  the  murder. 

About  a  fortnight  before? — Yes;  a  fortnight  beforehand. 

Now,  Matthews,  can  you  give  me  a  description  of  the  hat — 
did  you  give  a  description  of  it  to  the  police? — I  did,  sir. 

Before  you  saw  it? — Yes,  I  did. 

Be  good  enough  to  look  at  it. 

(Inspector  Tanner  here  handed  the  hat  which  had  been  found 
in  the  railway  carriage  to  the  witness,  who  looked  at  it.) 

Examination  resumed — What  is  your  belief  as  to  the  hat? 
Do  you  believe  it  to  be  the  same? — Yes,  I  believe  it  to  be  the 
hat  I  purchased.  It  corresponds  exactly. 

By  the  crease? — Yes. 

In  what  way  was  it  creased  ? — I  had  it  "  turned  up "  a 
little  extra  on  one  side.  I  said  that  I  should  like  it  to  be 
turned  up  a  little  more,  and  that  was  done  while  I  waited 
there. 

Like  the  one  you  had? — Yes. 

Was  the  brim  the  way  that  it  is  now? — I  noticed  there  was 
a  little  curl.  I  said  to  Muller,  "Have  you  had  it  done  up?" 
and  he  said  that  it  wore  uncommonly  well. 

He  said  that  to  you? — Yes. 

There  seems  something  on  the  brim  wanting.  There  is  no 
nap  on  the  lower  part? — Yes;  there  was  merino  on  the  lower 

47 


Franz    Muller. 


J.  Matthews  part.  The  under  part  of  the  brim  is  merino,  same  as  mine. 
(So  the  witness  was  understood,  but  he  spoke  in  a  very  low- 
tone.) 

SERJEAKT  PARRY — Speak  up,  sir,  do. 

Examination  resumed — You  remember  seeing  a  box  in  your 
house? — Yes,  a  small  box. 

And  the  name  of  Death  on  it? — Yes,  I  saw  that. 

(The  box  was  handed  to  the  witness) — Is  that  the  same? — 
That  is  like  the  box  that  he  gave  to  my  little  girl. 

When  did  you  first  see  it? — On  the  Tuesday  morning — the 
Tuesday  week  following  the  murder.  I  noticed  it,  because  I 
put  my  foot  on  it  that  morning. 

I  think  that,  from  what  you  subsequently  saw,  you  gave 
information  to  the  police? — Yes,  I  did,  sir.  I  saw  a  handbill. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — Allow  me  that  hat,  please.  (The  hat 
was  handed  to  the  learned  Serjeant.) 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — Now,  if  I  understand 
you,  you  identify  this  hat  because  the  side  portion  of  the  rim 
is  turned  up? — Yes,  and  not  only  by  that,  but 

You  are  quite  sure  of  that? — Yes. 

That  is  one  thing? — Yes. 

You  had  this  done  in  a  shop? — Yes. 

I  believe  that  your  own  hat  is  like  it? — As  nearly  as  possible. 
I  got  this  like  it. 

As  nearly  as  possible  like  it? — Yes. 

SERJEANT  PARRY  here  asked  for  the  depositions  of  Matthews 
before  the  coroner  and  magistrate. 

The  CLERK  OP  THE  COURT  produced  the  depositions. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — Now,  sir,  when  you  were  before  the  magis- 
trate did  you  not  say  that  this  was  one  of  the  means  by  which 
you  identified  the  hat?  Did  you  not  say  this? 

The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — I  think  that  the  proper  course  would 
be  to  read  the  evidence  to  the  witness,  and  then  to  ask  any 
questions  upon  it.  Read  the  depositions  and  ask 

SERJEANT  PARRY — No;   because  that  might  baffle  my  very 
question.        I   apprehend   that   I   have    a   right   to   take   the 
depositions — at  least,  so  I  submit — and  ask  him,  is  that  your 
48 

I 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

signature,  and  then  ask  him  a  question.     I  wish  to  have  it  J.  Matthews 
from  him,  because  my  object  is  to  discredit  this  witness.     I  do 
not  want  him  to  know  beforehand  what  I  am  going  to  ask. 

The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — I  submit  that  the  proper  course  is 
to  read  that  portion  of  the  depositions  which  is  referred  to,  and 
then  ask  him  any  questions  upon  it. 

BARON  MARTIN — It  is  nothing  more  than  asking  the  witness 
whether  he  did  not  give  a  different  account  then  to  now.  That 
my  brother  Parry  has  a  right  to  ask  him. 

The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — I  think  the  deposition  should  be  read 
first. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — He  has  sworn  that,  as  one  means  of 
identifying  it 

BARON  MARTIN — Wait  one  moment.  You  must  put  in  the 
depositions. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — Certainly.  (To  Witness) — I  ask  you,  sir, 
did  you  not  say  before  the  magistrates,  one  of  your  means  of 
identifying  the  hat  was  this,  that  three  weeks  prior  to  the  9th 
of  July  you  saw  the  prisoner,  and  that  the  brim  of  his  hat 
was  turned  up  in  one  part  of  it  more  than  in  another,  and  you 
told  the  prisoner  so? — I  did  so. 

Did  you  ever  mention  before  to-day  that  you  had  the  two 
edges  turned  round  yourself  while  you  waited  at  the  shop  while 
it  was  being  done? — No. 

Did  you  not  also,  when  before  the  coroner,  say  this — "  I  saw 
him  (the  prisoner)  frequently  wearing  the  hat,  and  I  had  noticed 
and  remarked  on  its  wearing  so  well.  I  fancied  that  one  side 
was  turned  up  more  than  usual,  and  pointed  that  out  to  him. 
I  said  it  was  altered  in  shape,  and  suggested  that  he  might 
have  done  that  from  lifting  it  off  his  head  on  that  side  ' '  ?  Did 
you  say  that  before  the  coroner? — I  did. 

Now  let  me  understand  about  this  hat.  Is  it  like  your 
own  hat?  Can  you  tell  me  how  many  hata  you  bought? — I 
cannot. 

Not  throughout  the  whole  of  your  life.  I  did  not  mean 
that;  you  should  have  waited  and  let  me  finish  my  question. 
Can  you  tell  me  how  many  hats  you  bought  within  six  or  twelve 
months  of  the  9th  of  July? — I  cannot  tell  you. 

E  49 


Franz    Muller. 

J.  Matthews  What  has  become  of  your  last  hat  at  the  time  of  this  one? — 
I  cannot  say.  I  think  I  left  it  at  a  hatter's  shop  where  I  bought 
another. 

Where  did  you  buy  the  hat  that  you  now  wear? — In  Oxford 
Street,  at  Mr.  Mummery's. 

Did  you  leave  it  there? — No,  I  did  not. 

Have  you  not  stated  that  you  left  it  at  Mr.  Downs'  in  Long 
Acre  three  weeks  before  the  9th  of  July? — I  said  that  I  left 
one  there.  I  did  not  say  the  time  I  did  so.  I  believe,  at  the 
same  time,  that  I  did  not  state  the  time. 

Did  you  not  say  this — "  I  purchased  the  hat  at  Downs',  Long 
Acre.  I  left  my  old  one  there,  and  that  was  about  three  weeks 
before  I  bought  one  in  Oxford  Street"? — that  you  purchased 
a  hat  in  Long  Acre,  and  left  the  old  one  there? — I  did  say  so. 

When  did  you  buy  the  one  in  Oxford  Street? — I  bought  it  a 
few  days  before  I  went  to  America. 

In  Oxford  Street?— Yes. 

When  did  you  buy  the  one  at  Downs'? — I  cannot  say  which 
of  the  Downs'  I  bought  it  at,  the  one  in  the  Strand  or  the  one 
in  Long  Acre.  I  find  I  am  in  error  about  my  hats  altogether. 
I  have  had  so  many  that  I  cannot  remember. 

Did  you  not  say — "  When  I  purchased  the  next  it  was  about 
June,  at  Downs',  in  Long  Acre.  It  was  a  cheap  one.  I  gave 
5s.  6d.  for  it,  and  I  left  the  other  one  at  Downs'  "  ? — I  did  say 
so. 

That  is  not  true? — No,  it  was  not  it  exactly.  It  was  longer 
ago.  I  cannot  remember  exactly. 

The  CHEHF  BARON — You  said  that  you  bought  a  hat  a  few 
days  before  you  went  to  America.  When  was  that? 

WITNBSS — I  went  from  Liverpool  with  Mr.  Inspector  Tanner 
on  the  20th  of  July. 

/  SERJEANT  PARRY — Here  is  a  passage  of  your  evidence  before 
the  coroner — "  The  next  hat  I  purchased  was  about  June, 
at  Downs',  in  Long  Acre.  It  was  a  cheap  one.  I  gave  5s.  6d. 
for  it.  I  left  the  other  one  at  Downs'  "? — I  said  so  before  the 
coroner,  but  that  was  a  mistake  of  mine. 

A  mistake? — I  did  not  know  how  many  hats  I  had  had  until 
I  got  home. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Have  you  not  found  out  that  three  weeks  before  you  were  J.  Matthews 
^examined  before  the  coroner  there  was  no  such  shop  as  Downs' 
In  Long  Acre?— 7!  made  that  inquiry. 

And  you  found  that  there  was  not  such  a  shop — that  it  had 
been  shut  up  for  some  time? — Yes. 

Have  you  not  altered  your  statement  in  consequence  of  that? 
— When  I  came  to  examine  my  hats  I  was  surprised  to  find 
that  I  had  so  many. 

When  before  the  magistrates  did  you  not  also  say — "  Three 
weeks  before  this  job  I  bought  a  hat  at  Downs'  "1 — I  did 
!say  so. 

And  you  found  out  that  it  was  a  mistake  of  yours? — Yes, 
I  have. 

Did  any  one  assist  you  in  finding  out  that  there  was  not 
'such  a  shop  as  Downs'  ? — Yes ;  Mr.  Clarke  went  with  me. 

Who  is  Mr.  Clarke? — A  detective  officer. 

You  found  out  that? — I  told  Mr.  Clarke  at  the  time  that 
there  was  a  mistake. 

Sir,  where  do  you  believe  the  hat  is  now  which  you  had 
•like  this  one? — I  have  no  idea  whatever. 

Did  you  ever  throw  your  old  hats  into  the  dusthole? — Yes; 
occasionally  I  do. 

You  said  that  before  the  coroner,  did  you  not? — Yes. 

I  believe  you  were  asked  also  whether  you  could  swear  to 
"the  colour  of  the  lining  of  your  hats,  and  you  said  no? — I 
^cannot. 

You  cannot  swear  to  your  own  hats? — No,  not  to  all. 

When  did  you  first  hear  of  this  murder? — About  Thursday 
•or  Friday  in  the  week  following. 

That  must  be  nearly  eleven  days  ? — No ;  it  was  in  the  week 
after,  on  the  Friday  night  after  Saturday,  the  9th. 

Do  you  mean  to  say  that  you  had  not  heard  of  it  before! — 
No,  sir. 

Had  you  been  out  with  your  cab? — Yes. 

And  did  you  not  hear  of  the  murder? — No. 

Did  you  go  to  the  cab-stand  amongst  your  fellow-cabmen? 
— Yes,  occasionally,  when  I  wanted  something  to  eat. 

And  you  never  heard  of  it? — No. 

Did  you  go  into  a  public-house? — I  am  not  a  public-house 
"visitor.  Perhaps  I  may  go  there  sometimes. 

Si 


Franz    Muller. 

J.  Matthews  There  is  no  harm  in  going  into  a  public-house  to  have  a 
glass  of  ale.  Did  you  go  into  a  public-house  for  refreshment? 
—Yes. 

Every  day? — Yes,  sir. 

Do  you  take  in  a  newspaper? — Sometimes  I  do. 

Any  particular  newspaper? — No. 

A  Sunday  paper? — Yes,  Lloyd's. 

Do  you  buy  a  daily  paper? — Sometimes. 

Did  you  not  see  a  paper  from  the  9th  until  the  14th  of 
July? — Not  to  bring  the  murder  into  my  mind. 

Did  you  not  see  it  in  large,  conspicuous  letters  on  the 
placards  before  the  Thursday? — No. 

Where  do  you  live? — No.  68  Earl  Street,  East  Paddington. 

Do  you  attend  the  station? — Yes. 

Do  you  pass  the  police  station  every  day — did  you  from  the 
9th  until  the  14th? — I  cannot  answer. 

And  you  never  saw  a  placard  or  a  notice  in  any  way  ? — No ; 
I  saw  placards,  but  did  not  read  them. 

You  knew  that  Muller  was  going  to  America? — Yes. 

(The  examination  was  stopped  for  a  moment  for  Mr.  Baron 
Martin  to  look  at  the  deposition.) 

You  knew  that  Muller  was  going  to  America,  you  say? — Yes. 

When  did  you  give  information  to  the  police? — On  Monday, 
the  18th  of  July. 

At  that  time  did  you  know  that  Muller  had  gone  out  in  the 
"Victoria"  sailing  ship  to  New  York? — I  did. 

Did  you  know  that  he  sailed  on  the  14th? — I  knew  that  he- 
was  going  to  sail. 

He  called  to  wish  you  and  your  family  good-bye? — Yes. 

Now,  can  you  tell  me  what  you  were  doing  on  Saturday,  the 
9th  of  July? — I  was  out  in  my  cab,  I  find. 

Did  you  not  say  this  before  the  coroner,  "  It  is  impossible 
for  me  to  say  where  I  was  on  the  night  of  the  9th ;  I  was  about 
with  my  cab,  and  I  cannot  say  where"? — I  did  say  so.  I 
have  made  inquiries  since. 

So,  since  you  were  before  the  coroner,  you  have  been 
making  inquiries  with  a  view  of  giving  evidence  here? — I  made 
inquiries  to  see  whether  I  was  out,  as  I  had  lost  my  pocket- 
book,  but  have  found  it  since. 

Did  I  not  notice  that  you  took  a  piece  of  paper  out  of  your 
52 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

pocket  just  now? — Yes,  here  it  is.     (The  witness  handed  it  in  J.  Matthews 
to  the  Serjeant.) 

It  is  dated  29th  September.  It  is  written  to  you  by  your 
employer? — Yes,  by  my  employer. 

These  inquiries  were  made  by  you  since  you  were  before 
the  coroner? — Yes.  (The  paper  was  not  read.) 

I  believe  your  master  failed,  or  was  "sold  up,"  to  use  your 
own  expression? — He  sold  off. 

This  is  another  mistake,  then? — Yes. 

Is  it  a  mistake  in  the  depositions? — Yes. 

Were  they  not  read  over  to  you? — Yes. 

Then  why  did  you  not  correct  it  if  it  was  "  sold  off  "  instead 
of  "sold  up"?— I  did  not  hear  it. 

What  day  was  it  that  your  master,  Mr.  Perfitt,  sold  off? — 
I  cannot  say  exactly. 

When  did  you  first  see  Repsch  after  you  gave  information 
to  the  police? — At  Bow  Street. 

And  you  did  not  see  him  before  you  gave  information  to 
the  police  ? — No ;  I  am  quite  sure  of  that ;  not  for  years 
previous. 

How  long  have  you  been  a  cabman? — I  have  been  licensed  for 
«ight  or  nine  years.  I  cannot  say  exactly. 

Have  you  been  anything  else? — Yes. 

What? — In  a  training  stable. 

When  was  that? — Twenty-two  or  twenty -three  years  ago. 

Since  then  you  have  been  a  cabman? — Yes. 

What,  have  you  been  a  cabman  ever  since? — Sometimes  I 
have  been  in  business. 

What  business? — In  a  small  fly  business. 

Any  other  business? — I  was  foreman  to  Mr.  Hubble,  of 
<?amberwell,  and  foreman  to  Mr.  Langley,  of  Westminster. 

Anything  else  but  the  cab  and  fly  business  ? — Yes ;  I  have 
driven  for  the  London  and  General  Omnibus  Company. 

Anything  else  besides  being  a  driver  for  the  company? — 
Yes;  I  have  taken  in  horses. 

Have  you  never  been  a  coachman  to  a  private  gentleman? — 
No. 

Never  ? — Never. 

Did  you  know  a  gentleman  of  the  name  of  Linklater? — Yes. 

Were  you   his  coachman? — No. 

J 

Did  you  live  with  him? — No. 

53 


Franz    Muller. 


J.  Matthews      How  did  you  know  him? — I  lived  in  the  neighbourhood. 

Have  you  been  insolvent? — No. 

Were  you  in  business  at  Brixton? — Yes. 

Did  you  fail  there? — No. 

That  you  swear? — Yes. 

When  were  you  at  Brixton? — Two  years  ago. 

Did  you  compound  with  your  creditors? — No. 

Why  did  you  give  it  up? — I  was  not  making  a  living  out 
of  it.  I  owed  money,  and  I  was  not  able  to  pay  it. 

Are  you  still  in  that  position? — Yes. 

Have  you  stated  to  your  creditors  that  as  soon  as  ever  you 
got  a  portion  of  the  reward  you  will  settle  with  them  ? — No,  sir. 

You   swear   that? — Yes. 

Never  to  any  one  of  your  creditors  have  you  mentioned  that? 
—No. 

Of  course  you  expect  a  portion  of  the  reward? — I  don't 
understand  it. 

You  are  the  only  person  in  the  Court  who  does  not,  then. 
Do  you  expect  a  portion  of  the  £300? — I  leave  that  entirely^ 
to  my  country,  if  it  thinks  that  I  have  done  my  duty. 

Then  you  do  expect  a  portion  of  the  reward? — If  they  are 
only  satisfied  with  my  conduct. 

If  they  are  satisfied  that  you  have  done  your  duty,  you  da 
expect  a  portion  of  the  reward  ? — If  they  think  proper  to  give  it. 

What  is  passing  in  your  mind  about  it,  sir?  If  they  are 
satisfied  that  you  have  done  your  duty,  you  do  expect  a  portion 
of  the  reward? — I  have  no  expectations  of  anything. 

Do  you  mean  to  say  that  you  did  not  see  the  bills  offering- 
the  £300  reward? — Yes;  but  if  it  had  been  a  "plain"  bill 
I  should  hare  done  my  duty  the  same. 

Do  you  expect  a  portion  of  the  reward? — If  I  am  entitled  ta 
it  I  should  expect  it. 

Then  you  do  expect  it.  Why  did  you  not  answer  me  beforef 
Have  you  ever  said  this,  that  if  you  had  kept  your  mouth 
closed  a  little  while  longer  there  would  have  been  £500  instead 
of  £300  reward? — I  never  said  so. 

Never  anything  like  it? — No ;    I  said  that  I  was  given  to- 
understand  when   I  was   before   the  coroner  that  there  were 
bills  offering  £500.       But  if  it  had  been  a  shilling  I  should 
have  done  my  duty  the  same. 
54 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


I  do  not  ask  you  to  compliment  yourself.  J.  Matthews 

By  BARON  MARTIN — I  said,  my  lord,  if  it  had  been  a  shilling 
I  should  have  done  my  duty  the  same  as  if  it  had  been  £300. 

Cross-examination  resumed — Were  you  ever  in  prison? — Yes, 
for  absconding. 

Absconding? — Yes,  leaving  my  situation  without  giving  due 
notice. 

Absconding  from  a  situation  without  giving  notice!  What 
absconding  was  that,  then? — I  was  conductor  of  a  coach. 

Why  should  you  abscond  from  a  coach? — Well,  sir,  I  was 
but  a  young  man  then.  I  made  a  little  free — a  spree.  I  got 
out  on  the  spree. 

A  spree  was  it? — Yes;  I  went  away  and  left  the  coach  with- 
out any  one. 

And  for  that  you  were  convicted? — I  had  twenty-one  days 
because  I  could  not  pay. 

Were  you  ever  at  Norwich? — Yes. 

Were  you  there  in  November,  1851? — No,  sir. 

Now,  be  very  careful.  Your  name  is  Jonathan  Matthews, 
is  it  not? — Yes,  sir. 

When  were  you  in  Norwich? — I  was  there  in  1860. 

Not  in  1851?— No. 

You  were  there  in  1850.  Were  you  ever  imprisoned  there? 
— Yes,  for  twenty-one  days. 

Anything  else? — No,  sir. 

You  say  that  was  for  the  freak? — Yes,  for  the  spree. 

And  they  convicted  you  for  absconding.  Who  convicted 
you? — I  cannot  tell  the  gentleman's  name. 

Were  you  not  tried  before  a  jury? — Yes. 

For  a  spree? — It  was  only  a  spree,  but  they  brought  it  in 
that  I  stole  the  things — that  it  was  a  theft.  It  was  only 
absconding,  and  not  theft. 

Did  they  not  find  things  in  your  box? — They  made  it  a  theft, 
but  it  was  not. 

Were  you  not  convicted  for  having  feloniously  stolen  a  post- 
ing boot,  value  8s. ;  a  spur,  value  2s. ;  and  a  padlock,  value 
6d.?  Was  not  that  the  conviction? — That  was  what  they 
brought  in,  because  they  found  them  in  the  box,  unbeknown 
to  me.  It  was  found  on  me  after  the  box  was  taken  away.  I 
did  not  know  they  were  there. 

55 


Franz    Muller. 


J.  Matthews  One  other  question.  You  said  that  the  lining  of  your  hat 
was  the  same  as  this? — Similar,  I  think. 

The  same,  you  said? — Similar,  I  believe. 

Did  you  not  say  that  the  lining  of  both  hats  was  the  same,  as 
nearly  as  possible? — I  cannot  say  exactly. 

Re-examined  by  the  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — You  were  imprisoned 
for  twenty-one  days? — Yes. 

How  old  were  you? — About  nineteen \  or  twenty.  I  am 
thirty-seven  or  thirty-eight  years  of  age  now.  I  was  born  in 
1829. 

Have  you  ever  been  in  any  trouble  of  the  kind  since? — No. 

Now,  attend  to  me.  You  said  that  you  gave  information 
to  the  police  on  Monday,  the  18th  of  July? — Yes. 

Just  explain  how  you  came  to  give  the  information? — I  was 
coming  by  the  Great  Western  Hotel,  and  I  took  my  horse 
to  drink  at  the  stand,  and  I  saw  the  bill  respecting  the  murder. 
I  said  to  the  waterman 

SERJEANT  PARRY — Not  what  you  said  to  the  waterman. 
WITNESS — I  made  some  inquiries. 
SERJEANT  PARRY  again  objected. 

By  the  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — You  made  some  inquiries  with 
reference  to  this  matter.  Was  your  attention  drawn  to  a 
handbill? — It  was  on  the  wall. 

You  read  it?— I  did. 

(The  witness  was  proceeding  to  state  some  conversation  he 
held  with  the  waterman.) 

SERJEANT  PARRY — You  said  to  the  waterman 

The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — I  object. 
SERJEANT  PARRY — I  am  quite  proper 

The  CHIEF  BARON — If  you  have  a  part  you  must  have  the 
whole  of  the  conversation. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — The  witness  was  making  some  statement 
of  his  own,  and  I  believe  that  the  jury  heard  the  observation. 
I  understood  him  to  say  this — "  I  looked  at  the  height  on  the 
bill,  and  I  asked  the  waterman  what  height  he  thought  I 
was."  I  understood  him  to  say  BO. 
56 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — That  being  so,  I  think  he  must  give  j.  Matthews 
•us  the  whole  account  of  what  took  place. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — That  I  object  to. 

The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — You  cannot  get  a  scrap.  We  must 
have  the  whole  if  we  have  the  part. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — I  have  not  got  it  out;  it  is  your  own  witness. 
He  dropped  it.  I  did  not  get  it.  It  is  an  incident. 

The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — I  understand  you  to  object  to  any- 
thing he  said  to  the  waterman  or  the  waterman  to  him. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — The  witness  gave  it. 

The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — You  must  have  the  whole.  It  is  not 
fair  that  you  should  only  have  part. 

BARON  MARTIN — The  Solicitor-General  is  quite  right,  if 
Brother  Parry  will  insist  upon  having  a  portion. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — I  did  not  insist  upon  anything.  The 
witness  said  this. 

The  CHIEF  BARON — You  cannot  ask  the  judge  to  take  it  down. 
SERJEANT  PARRY — I  do  not  ask  the  judge  to  take  it  down. 

The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — It  is  all  very  well  to  say  that  after 
the  jury  heard  it. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — Ask  the  jury  if  they  heard  it. 

The  CHIEF  BARON — We  cannot  ask  the  jury  any  such  question 
at  present. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — I  did  not  put  it  before  the  jury,  but  the 
witness  inadvertently  stated  it. 

The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — It  is  only  fair  that  the  witness 
should  state  the  whole. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — I  can  assure  my  learned  friend  that  he  is 
perfectly  mistaken  as  regards  the  tenor  of  my  cross-examination. 

The  CHIEF  BARON — The  witness  has  been  under  examination, 
cross-examination,  and  now  re-examination.  You  certainly 
called  attention,  both  to  my  Brother  Martin  and  myself,  to  some 
thing  that  fell  from  the  witness,  and  begged  that  we  would 
take  it  down.  If  it  is  to  be  taken  down,  we  must  have  the 

57 


Franz    Muller. 

J.  Matthews  whole  of  the  conversation.       I  think  that  the  Solicitor-General 
is  entitled  to  it. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — If  your  lordship  so  rules.     - 

The  CHIEF  BARON — We  cannot  take  part  of  the  conversation. 

The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — Tell  us  all  that  took  place. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — Subject  to  my  objection. 

BARON  MARTIN — I  did  not  hear  it. 

The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — I  did,  my  lord,  and  so  did  my/ 
learned  friend.  (To  the  Witness) — Tell  us  all  you  said  to  the 
waterman? — I  asked  the  witness  what  height  he  was. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — Will  your  lordship  take  my  objection  to. 
this? 

The  CHIEF  BARON — I  will  take  it  down  as  part  of  the  evi- 
dence if  it  is  given  in  full;  but  I  cannot  take  down  anything 
that  fell  from  the  witness  irregularly. 

BARON  MARTIN — The  last  I  have  got  is — "  I  gave  infor- 
mation to  the  police  on  Monday,  the  18th." 

The  CHIEF  BARON — I  have  got  to  this — "  While  the  horse  was 
standing  and  drinking  I  saw  the  bill  and  read  it." 

The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — The  witness  went  on  to  speak  of 
the  waterman. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — I  object  to  receive  this  evidence. 
The  CHIEF  BARON — If  you  do  there  is  an  end  of  it. 

Re-examination  resumed — Tell  us,  generally,  did  you  read 
the  bill?— I  did. 

What  did  you  do  on  reading  it? — I  took  the  waterman  in  my 
cab,  and  went  directly  and  fetched  a  small  box. 

Look  at  the  box.  (It  was  handed  to  the  witness,  who  looked 
at  it.)  Is  it  like  the  one  you  fetched? — Yes. 

How  came  you  to  look  at  it? — By  reading  the  bill  I  saw. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — There  is  nothing  in  the  examination  about 
the  box.  I  shall  claim  to  re-cross  upon  it  as  fresh  evidence. 

Re-examination  resumed — Your  attention  was  directed  to  the 
box? — Yes,  my  wife  said  that  Muller  came  to  the  house  and 

58 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

gave  the  little  girl  the  box.     In  consequence  of  some  conversa-  J.  Matthews 
tion  with  the  waterman,  I  knew  that  Death  was  the  jeweller. 
I  took  it  to  the  waterman,  and  he  said  that  it  was  very  much 
like  it. 

What  did  you  do  then? — I  took  the  waterman  and  went 
to  Hermitage  Police  iStation  at  Paddington. 

And  whom  did  you  see  there? — Sergeant  Steers. 

Did  you  give  the  box  to  him? — Yes;  I  took  him  to  get  a 
small  piece  of  paper  left  at  my  house  by  Muller,  with  an 
address  he  had  written  on  it. 

Did  you  on  that  occasion  give  any  description? 

SERJEANT  PABBY  objected. 

Re-examination  resumed — Where  is  the  piece  of  paper? 
(It  was  handed  in.) 

It  has  the  name  and  address  of  Mrs.  Blyth,  with  whom  the 
prisoner  lodged.  You  told  me  just  now  that  you  went  to 
America  ? — Yes. 

You  were  examined  before  the  coroner  soon  after  you  came 
back? — I  think  it  was  on  the  following  Tuesday,  as  I  came  back 
from  New  York  on  the  previous  Saturday. 

On  the  Monday  you  went  before  the  magistrate,  and  on  the 
Tuesday  before  the  coroner? — Yes. 

You  say  that  at  that  time  you  were  cross-examined  as  to 
where  you  were  on  the  day  of  the  murder? — Yes. 

Had  you  prepared  yourself  to  answer  the  question? — No. 

Did  you  recollect  precisely  where  you  were? — No;  not  till 
I  got  home  and  made  inquiries  of  the  waterman.  I  had  some 
little  idea  myself. 

You  wrote  to  your  employer,  and  got  an  answer? — Yes. 

From  subsequent  inquiries  that  you  made,  and  from  com- 
munications which  you  have  received,  are  you  enabled  to  tell 
us  where  you  were? — Yes;  I  was  on  the  cab-stand  from  seven 
o'clock  until  eleven  o'clock. 

Where? — At  the  Great  Western  railway. 

Where  did  you  go  then? — I  did  not  get  a  fare,  and  then  I 
went  homewards.  I  bought  a  joint  of  meat  and  took  it  home. 
I  went  to  the  stable  yard,  and  left  the  cab  in  Lisson  Grove. 
I  then  went  home. 

With  a  leg  of  mutton? — Not  a  leg  of  mutton;  it  was  an 
edgebone  of  beef.  I  took  it  home  for  my  Sunday  dinner. 

59 


Franz    Muller. 

J.  Matthews  You  were  cross-examined  respecting  your  hat? — Yes;  a  good 
deal,  and  I  was  not  prepared  to  answer  questions  about  my 
hats  then. 

You  cabmen  are  exposed  a  good  deal,  and  therefore  wear 
out  a  good  many  hats? — I  should  think  that  I  bought  nine  or 
ten  hats  in  the  year. 

Subsequently  did  you  make  inquiries  upon  that  subject? — 
Yes. 

And  what  you  have  told  us  to-day  is  correct? — Yes. 

With  respect  to  Muller's  hat,  was  one  brim  turned  up  more 
than  another? — Yes. 

Was  that  the  fact  ? — Yes ;  more  on  one  side  than  the  other. 

That  is  distinguishing  from  the  statement  that  both  brims 
were  turned  up  by  the  hatter? — Yes. 

And  you  say,  in  addition  to  that,  that  one  brim  was  a  little 
more  turned  up  than  another? — Yes;  the  right-hand  brim  as 
he  stood  from  me  a  trifle  more  than  the  other. 

Do  you  recollect  whether  you  ever  called  Muller's  attention 
to  it? — I  said,  "  I  think  you  have  had  it  turned  up  a  little 
more;  it  looks  so  well." 

The  depositions  of  this  witness  which  were  taken  before  the 
coroner  and  the  magistrate  were  then  read. 

Mrs.  Matthews  ELIZA  MATTHEWS,  examined  by  SERJEANT  BALLANTINE — I  am 
the  wife  of  Jonathan  Matthews.  I  know  the  prisoner  Muller. 
I  have  known  him  rather  more  than  two  years.  He  has 
occasionally  come  to  my  house.  I  was  present  when  my 
husband  bought  a  hat — I  think  in  November  or  December  last 
year.  He  bought  it  at  Walker's,  in  Crawford  Street.  It 
was  turned  up  rather  more  than  my  husband's  was.  The  hat 
produced  (found  in  the  carriage)  looks  like  the  same  hat.  The 
hat  my  husband  bought  he  gave  to  Muller  a  fortnight  after. 
I  have  a  family  of  four  children.  On  the  llth  July  the 
prisoner  came  to  see  me  between  two  and  three  in  the  after- 
noon to  wish  me  good-bye  previous  to  going  to  New  York. 
He  remained  with  me  three  or  four  hours.  He  said  he  was 
going  out  for  Mr.  Hodgkinson.  He  said  he  was  to  get  £150 
a  year,  and  that  he  had  met  with  an  accident  on  the  Thursday. 
A  letter -cart  ran  over  his  foot  on  London  Bridge.  During 
the  time  he  was  with  me  he  showed  me  a  chain.  He  took  it 
60 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

off  the  button-hole  of  his  waistcoat.  He  put  it  in  my  hand.  Mrs.  Matthews 
I  told  him  I  thought  it  was  not  a  very  good  one.  It  looked 
so  pale,  much  lighter  gold  than  his  own  watch  and  chain.  I 
did  not  say  that  to  him,  but  I  thought  it.  The  chain  pro- 
duced is  similar  (Mr.  Death's  chain).  The  green  box  pro- 
duced he  took  out  of  his  pocket  and  gave  to  my  little  girl, 
aged  ten  years.  On  the  Monday  week  after,  I  recollect,  my 
husband  came  home  to  fetch  it.  My  little  girl  had  been 
playing  with  it  the  same  evening,  and  it  was  then  put  away 
in  a  drawer  from  the  Tuesday  evening.  It  was  taken  out  of 
the  drawer  a  week  after.  Miiller  showed  me  a  ring — a  plain 
gold  one  with  a  white  cornelian  head — which  he  said  his 
father  had  sent  him  from  Germany.  When  he  left  he  said 
that  he  would  call  on  the  Tuesday  or  Wednesday  to  wish  my 
husband  good-bye,  but  he  did  not. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — When  he  said  that 
Messrs.  Hodgkinson  were  going  to  give  him  £150  a  year,  did 
he  not  say  that  he  should  like  to  receive  it  half-yearly? — Yes. 

As  to  this  box,  when  did  your  husband  first  see  it? — On  the 
Tuesday  morning ;  it  was  lying  on  the  table. 

Did  you  notice  the  name  of  Mr.  Death  ? — No ;  I  did  not. 

Did  the  prisoner  say  anything  about  Mr.  Death? — Not  a 
word. 

You  are  quite  certain  ? — Yes ;   quite  certain  of  that. 

Did  you  not  remark  that  Mr.  Death  was  a  very  good 
jeweller? — I  remarked  that  Mr.  Death  was  a  good  jeweller. 

Did  you  know  him? — No;  I  never  saw  him. 

I  suppose  it  was  from  the  place  where  he  lived — Cheapside? 
— Yes. 

Very  naturally.  Did  you  notice  that  afternoon  that  Miiller 
had  dark  trousers  on? — Yes. 

He  was  there  three  or  four  hours? — Yes. 

As  he  was  going  away  did  you  remark  that  his  hat  had 
worn  very  well? — Yes;  as  he  took  it  off  the  drawers. 

How  well  that  hat  had  worn? — Yes ;  and  he  said,  "It  is  a 
different  hat." 

I  think  that  you  heard  of  the  murder  on  the  Monday  after- 
noon, the  llth  of  July? — Yes ;  from  a  lodger. 

Did  you  hear  that  it  was  a  shocking  murder  in  a  railway 
carriage  ? — Yes. 

61 


Franz    Muller. 

Mrs.  Matthews  You  have  a  penny  paper  that  you  read  almost  every  day? — 
He  (my  husband)  did,  but  I  did  not. 

He  was  in  the  habit  of  having  it? — Sometimes. 

Sometimes  he  brought  it  home? — Yes;  sometimes  I  took 
it  out  of  his  pocket. 

Have  you  a  weekly  paper? — I  always  take  one. 

Had  you  one  on  the  Sunday? — I  might  have  had  one,  but 
I  do  not  remember. 

Re-examined — I  made  the  observation  about  Mr.  Death  when 
Muller  was  showing  me  the  chain.  I  had  no  conversation  with 
my  husband  about  the  murder.  He  leaves  home  about  nine 
in  the  morning,  and  sometimes  I  don't  see  him  till  one  the 
next  morning. 

Mr.  Repscb  Mr.  REPSCH  (recalled)  said,  in  answer  to  a  juror — I  do  not 

know  what  day  in  the  week  Muller  brought  the  new  hat  in  the 
hatbox.  It  might  have  been  Sunday  or  Monday ;  I  could  not 
say  which. 

Mrs.  Repsch  Mrs.  RBPSCH  (recalled)  said — I  did  not  see  Muller  for  three 
or  four  weeks  on  a  Sunday.  I  did  not  generally  see  him  on 
Sundays. 

Mr.  Repsch  (A  question  being  raised  by  Serjeant  Parry  whether  Mr. 

Repsch,  in  his  evidence,  had  not  stated  that  he  was  not  in 
the  habit  of  seeing  Muller  on  Sundays,  that  witness  was 
recalled,  and,  the  question  being  put  to  him  through  the  Chief 
Baron,  he  replied,  "  I  did  not  see  him  on  Sundays  for  three 
or  four  weeks,"  meaning  prior  to  his  leaving  England.) 


Joseph  JOSEPH    HENNAQTJART,    examined    by    Mr.    GIFPAKD — I    am 

Hennaquart  .  . 

foreman  to  Mr.   Hodgkinson,   tailor,   in  Threadneedle   Street. 

The  prisoner  was  in  Mr.  Hodgkinson's  service  for  six  weeks 
before  the  9th  of  July.  He  was  engaged  at  25s.  a  week 
wages,  and  worked  at  those  wages  for  nearly  a  month.  I 
then  made  an  alteration,  setting  him  to  work  at  piecework, 
because  for  very  nearly  two  weeks  he  did  not  finish  his  work. 
He  worked  at  piecework  for  two  weeks.  I  then  intended  to 
put  him  back  to  25s.  a  week ;  but  he  said  he  could  make  more 
62 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

at  piecework,  and  discharged  himself  a  week  before  the  murder,  Joseph 

,  i      n    j     ,.  T  i  TT  i.  ••     Hennaquart 

on  the  2nd  of  July.      He  was  not  engaged  to  go  to  America  in 

Mr.  Hodgkinson's  service. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  MBTCALFE — He  was  in  our  employ- 
ment six  weeks  altogether. 

Did  he  bear  the  character  while  he  was  with  you  of  a  quiet, 
inoffensive  young  man  ? — He  had  always  been  very  polite  to  me. 

He  was  not  quarrelsome? — No;  we  had  a  few  words  before 
he  left. 

He  thought  he  could  do  better  at  piecework  than  at  25s.  a 
week? — He  said  so. 


EDWARD  WATSON,  examined  by  Mr.  HANNEN — I  was  foreman  E.  Watson 
in  the  employ  of  Mr.  Walker*  a  hatter,  of  49  Crawford  Street, 
Marylebone,  for  a  period  of  four  years.  I  have  seen  the  hat  in  the 
hands  of  the  police  before  (the  one  left  in  the  carriage).  It  is 
one  of  Mr.  Walker's  manufacture.  The  lining  in  that  hat  was 
not  what  Mr.  Walker  usually  used.  It  did  not  belong  to  any 
particular  class  of  hats.  I  have  not  seen  it  used  by  any  other 
hatter.  Judging  from  the  appearance  of  the  hat,  I  should 
say  that  it  was  sold  for  8s.  6d.  We  kept  no  record  of  hats 
sold  over  the  counter  unless  they  were  sent  home. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — Did  you  say  the  lining 
of  that  hat  was  peculiar  to  Mr.  Walker's  establishment? — It  is 
a  peculiar  lining.  I  do  not  think  Mr.  Walker  ever  had  more 
than  three  or  four  of  that  particular  lining  in  the  establish- 
ment. I  believe  Mr.  Walker  is  here  himself. 

By  the  CHIEF  BARON — Do  you  mean  three  or  four  hats,  or 
three  or  four  pieces  of  lining  — We  buy  the  lining  already  cut. 
This  lining  was  one  of  a  lot  of  sample  linings  which  Mr.  Walker 
bought,  and  I  do  not  think  there  were  more  than  three  or  four 
of  this  particular  pattern.  I  do  not  know  from  whom  he  bought 
them. 

THOMAS  HENRY  WALKBR,  examined  by  the  SOLIOITOR-GHNTOAL  j.  H.  Walker 
-I  am  a  hatter  in  Marylebone.     (Hat  found  in  the  railway 
carriage  handed   to   witness.)     This  hat  is   one   of  mine;   it 
was  sold  in  my  shop.       The  lining  is  peculiar,  and  I  do  not 

63 


Franz    Muller. 

T.  H.  Walker  think  we  had  more  than  two  of  this  kind  of  lining.  This 
lining  is  one  of  about  500  sample  linings,  in  which  there  were 
scarcely  more  than  two  alike.  It  is  a  French  lining.  The 
price  of  this  hat  was  8s.  6d.  or  10s.  6d.  I  cannot  tell  which  now. 

W.  H.  Tiddy  WILLIAM  HENRY  TiDDT,  Inspector  of  Metropolitan  Police, 
examined  by  SERJEANT  BALLANTINE — I  produce  a  box  with  Mr. 
Death's  name  upon  it,  a  hatbox  with  Mr.  Walker's  name  upon 
it,  and  also  a  slipper,  the  right  slipper,  all  of  which  were 
handed  over  to  me. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — The  slipper  you  received 
from  Mrs*.  Blyth  ? — Yes ;  I  received  it  from  Mrs.  Blyth.  It  is 
the  slipper  for  the  right  foot. 

James  Gifford  JAMES  GIFFORD,  examined  by  Mr.  GIFFARD — I  am  an  agent  for 
Messrs.  Grinnell,  the  shipowners.  We  have  an  office  on  the 
North  Quay,  London  Docks,  which  we  open  at  nine  in  the 
morning.  I  recognise  the  prisoner.  I  saw  him  first  on  Wed- 
nesday, the  13th  July,  about  eleven  o'clock  in  the  morning. 
He  spoke  to  me  and  asked  the  price  of  a  passage  to  New  York. 
I  told  him  £4.  He  asked  then  when  the  ship  sailed.  I  told 
him  to-morrow,  which  would  be  Thursday,  the  14th.  He  then 
went  away,  and  came  back  about  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon. 
He  said,  "  I  am  come  to  pay  my  fare."  He  paid  £4,  and  I 
gave  him  a  contract  ticket.  He  then  went  away  again.  He 
oame  back,  to  the  best  of  my  belief,  about  half -past  three 
o'clock,  and  came  into  the  office  with  three  parcels,  and  one, 
a  larger  one,  done  up  in  canvas.  The  larger  one  was  about 
18  inches  long  and  9  inches  wide.  I  could  not  see  the  angles 
of  any  hard  substance  outside  the  canvasi.  I  could  not  tell 
what  was  inside.  He  asked  me  to  take  charge  of  them.  I 
said  I  could  not,  that  he  would  have  to  leave  them  with  the 
foreman  of  the  docks,  under  the  shed.  He  then  took  them 
with  him  out  of  the  office.  I  did  not  see  his  trunk  nor  did  I 
notice  the  size  of  his  small  parcels.  The  canvas  on  the  out- 
side of  the  larger  one  was  such  as*  I  have  seen  inside  the  lining 
of  packs.  I  saw  him  on  board  the  "  Victoria."  The  ship 
sailed  on  Friday  morning  at  about  6.30,  with  the  prisoner  on 
board. 
64 


Mr.  Hardinge  Giffard. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — The  prisoner  would  have  James  Gitford 
left  his  parcel  with  me  if  I  would  have  taken  charge  of  it.  If 
I  had  taken  charge  of  it,  it  would  have  remained  in  the  office 
all  night.  So  that  if  there  had  been  anything  suspicious  in 
it  I  should  have  had  plenty  of  opportunity  of  looking  at  it. 
I  had  no  suspicion  at  all  about  it  at  the  time.  It  is  the  custom 
for  poor  German  emigrants  to  carry  little  packages  with  them — 
bacon,  soap,  and  so  on.  The  little  packages  might  have  been 
such  packages.  Besides  myself,  there  is  a  German  porter 
named  Jacob  Weist.  He  does  not  generally  get  to  the  docks 
before  me,  and  if  he  did  he  could  not  get  into  the  office  till  I 
open  it.  I  open  it  when  I  reach  the  docks.  My  general  time 
for  getting  there  is  nine  o'clock,  but  the  docks  open  in  the 
summer  at  six  a.m.  Miiller  gave  me  his  right  name.  The 
"  Victoria  "  only  took  out  four  or  five  German  passengers.  I 
have  not  got  a  contract  ticket  with  me.  The  ordinary  form  of 
such  ticket  gives  the  name  of  the  vessel,  tonnage,  the  date  of 
sailing,  and  the  passenger's  name  and  age.  The  prisoner  gave 
me  his  name,  Franz  Miiller,  and  his  age,  twenty-four  years. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  GIFFARD — Weist  would  attend.  I 
generally  arrived  at  the  office  about  nine  o'clock.  Sometimes 
I  might  be  later.  If  in  such  case  an  application  were  made  to 
Weist  about  a  passage  in  the  "  Victoria  "  he  would  answer  it 
himself,  but  he  would  keep  the  passenger  till  I  came. 

JACOB  WEIST,  examined  by  Mr.  GIFFARD — I  am  in  the  employ  Jacob  Weist 
of  Messrs.  White,  provision  merchants.     I  attend  at  the  London 
Docks.       I  remember  seeing  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  on  several 
occasions.       I  cannot  say  exactly  the  first  time,  but  it  must 
have  been  some  days  previous  to  his  paying  his  passage. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — The  prisoner  paid  his 
passage  on  Wednesday.  I  am  not  quite  positive,  but  I  have 
some  idea  of  seeing  him  at  the  docks  on  the  Monday.  Germans 
come  to  me  sometimes  to  ask  questions.  I  am  a  German 
myself. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  GIFFARD — I  got  to  the  office  on  the 
Monday  about  nine  o'clock. 

*  65 


G.  Clarke  GEORGE  CLARKB,  examined  by  Mr.  BEASLBY — I  am  a  sergeant 
of  the  detective  police.  On  the  24th  of  August  I  went  on 
board  the  "  Victoria  "  in  New  York.  Mr.  Tiernan,  an  officer 
of  the  New  York  police,  was  in  company  with  me.  The  prisoner 
was  on  board.  He  was  called  to  the  after  part  of  the  ship 
by  the  captain.  I  then  seized  him  by  the  arm.  He  said, 
"What  is  the  matter?  "  John  Tiernan,  the  American  police 
officer,  replied,  "  You  are  charged  with  the  murder  of  Mr. 
Briggs."  I,  finding  that  Tiernan  did  not  recollect  the  par- 
ticulars, followed  up  with,  "  Yes,  on  the  North  London  rail- 
way, between  Hackney  Wick  and  Bow,  on  the  9th  of  July." 
The  prisoner  said,  "I  never  was  on  that  line."  I  do  not 
know  whether  he  said  "  that  night,"  or  whether  he  only  said, 
"  I  never  was  on  that  line."  I  replied  that  I  was  a  policeman 
from  London,  and  that  Mr.  Tiernan  was  a  policeman  from  New 
York.  I  then  took  him  down  to  the  saloon,  and  Mr.  Tier- 
nan  searched  him  in  my  presence.  He  took  a  key  from  the 
prisoner's  waistcoat  pocket,  which  I  produce.  I  took  pos- 
session of  the  key  and  said,  "  What  is  this  the  key  of  ?  "  He 
said,  "  The  key  of  my  box."  I  said,  "  Where  is  your  boxt  " 
He  replied,  "  In  my  berth."  In  consequence  of  what  the 
captain  told  me,  I  went  to  No.  9  berth  and  found  a  large  black 
box,  which  I  brought  into  the  saloon  where  the  prisoner  was 
standing.  He  said,  "  That  is  my  box."  I  unlocked  it  with 
the  key  I  had  taken  from  his  waistcoat  pocket,  and  in  the 
corner  of  the  box  I  found  this  watch  (producing  it).  It  was 
then  sewn  up  in  a  piece  of  leather,  which  I  have.  I  said, 
"  What  is  this]  "  knowing  it  by  the  feel  to  be  a  watch.  He 
replied,  "It  is  my  watch."  I  then  took  out  a  hat  which  was 
standing  in  the  box,  and  said,  "  Is  this  your  hat?  "  He  said, 
"  Yes."  This  is  the  hat  (taking  up  the  one  supposed  to  have 
belonged  to  Mr.  Briggs).  I  said,  "  How  long  have  you  pos- 
sessed them?"  He  said,  "  I  have  had  the  watch  about  two 
years  and  the  hat  about  twelve  months."  I  then  told  him  he 
would  have  to  remain  in  custody  and  be  taken  to  New  York. 
I  kept  him  on  board  all  night  until  Inspector  Tanner  came  on 
board  in  the  morning,  when  I  gave  him  over  to  him. 

Cross-examined  by  S,ERJBANT  PARRY — The  prisoner  answered 
my  questions  about  the  watch  and  the  hat  readily,  and  with- 
out the  slightest  hesitation. 
66 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

I  think  you  have  omitted  an  expression  which  Mr.  Miiller  G.  Clarke 
used,  when  you  described  to  him  the  name  of  the  gentleman 
who  was  murdered,  the  railway,  and  the  night.  Did  he  not 
say,  "  I  know  nothing  about  it;  I  never  was  on  the  line  "1 — 
My  impression  is  he  said,  "  I  never  was  on  that  line  ";  but 
whether  he  said  "  on  that  night "  I  do  not  remember.  I  believe 
he  did  not. 

I  am  sure  this  is  only  an  omission  from  your  memory  failing ; 
but  if  you  refer  to  your  deposition,  made  when  you  were  some 
weeks  nearer  in  point  of  time  to  the  actual  conversation,  you 
will  see  that  you  made  that  statement. 

Witness  referred  to  his  deposition  before  Mr.  Flowers  at  Bow 
Street,  and  said — I  find  here,  my  lord,  that  I  said  that  "  the 
prisoner  remarked  in  reply,  '  I  know  nothing  about  it.  I  never 
was  on  the  line.'  '  I  do  not  now  remember  whether  he  said 
"  that  night." 

You  don't  now  remember  it,  but  it  is  very  important.  I 
need  not  remind  you  that  this  deposition  was  read  over  to  you 
before  you  signed  it? — Of  course. 

Of  course  a  man  in  your  position  would  be  very  careful  in 
making  such  a  deposition,  and  being  made  at  that  time  it 
would  be  more  likely  to  be  correct  than  what  you  remember 
now? — If  I  used  those  words  I  am  quite  certain  the  prisoner 
said  so. 

You  said  also  that  you  searched  his  box,  and  that  there 
were  no  new  shirts? — I  find  that  is  a  mistake.  I  said  they 
were  not  new  because  they  were  dirty ;  but  I  found  after  that 
deposition  that  they  were  shirts  which  had  not  been  worn 
probably  more  than  once  or  twice. 

INSPECTOR  TANNER,   examined  by  the  SOLICITOR- GENERAL — I  inspector 
am  an  inspector  of  the  detective  police  of  London.       I  wasTanner 
employed  in  this  matter  by  Sir  Richard  Mayne.       I  went  to 
America,  accompanied  by  Sergeant  Clarke,  by  Mr.  Death,  and 
by  Matthews.       I  found  Miiller  on  board  the  "  Victoria."     I 
left  Mr.   Death  on  deck,   and  went  below  and   found   Miiller 
there.       I  placed  Miiller  among  eight  other  persons,  and  Mr. 
Death  then  came  down  and  pointed  him  out.     I  then  spoke  to 
Miiller  with  reference  to  a  ring,   saying,    "  Have  you   stated 
that  you  have  lost  a  ring  on  board  this  ship?"       He  said, 

67 


Franz    Muller. 

Inspector  "Yes,  I  have."       He  then  said  he  had  not  lost  it;   it  must 
Tanner 

have  been  stolen  from  him.       I  said,  "  Tell  me  what  sort  of 

ring  it  is  and  I  will  endeavour  to  have  it  found."  He  said, 
"It  is  a  gold  ring  with  a  stone  in  it."  I  asked  whether  it 
was  a  red  stone.  He  replied,  "  No,  a  white  stone."  I  said, 
"  A  gold  ring  with  a  plain  white  stone?  "  He  said,  "No, 
a  gold  ring  with  a  white  stone,  which  has  got  a  head  upon 
it.  I  got  it  in  Cheapside,  and  gave  7s.  6d.  for  it."  The 
ring  was  not  found.  I  took  possession  of  the  effects  of  the- 
prisoner.  I  showed  them  to  him.  He  saw  all  that  I  had. 
He  said  that  they  were  the  whole  of  his  property,  with  the 
exception  of  the  ring.  All  his  things  were  in  the  box.  I 
found  no  other  parcel  except  the  things  in  the  box.  I  told 
him  that  I  should  have  to  hold  him  as  a  prisoner,  and  he  had 
better  tell  me  what  was  his  property  before  he  left  the  ship. 
I  have  the  box  here.  (Box  produced.  A  trunk  covered  with 
black  and  ornamented  with  brass  nails,  similar  to  those 
generally  in  use  by  female  servants.)  I  now  put  into  the  trunk 
all  the  articles  found  in  it  when  Muller  was  arrested  in  New 
York.  (The  trousers  worn  by  Muller,  and  found  in  the  box, 
were  the  dark  pair  of  working  trousers  and  the  light  pair 
spoken  of  by  Mr.  Repsch.)  No  other  trousers  but  these  two- 
pairs  were  found.  There  was  very  little  other  clothing.  The 
other  things  were  one  or  two  shirts,  some  collars,  a  few  of  the 
implements  of  his  trade,  such  as  shears  and  measure,  a  few 
scarfs,  a  few  brushes,  and  an  umbrella.  There  were  also  a 
towel  or  two,  a  comb  and  brush,  a  pair  of  gloves,  and  a  hand- 
kerchief. There  was  no  coat  in  the  box  or  waistcoat.  The* 
prisoner  only  had  one  coat,  and  that  was  the  one  he  had  on. 
No  other  parcel  was  discovered  sewn  up,  such  as  has  been 
described. 

(The  prisoner's  shears  were,  at  the  request  of  one  of  the 
jurymen,  handed  into  the  jury-box,  and  examined.) 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — The  prisoner  answered 
the  questions  I  put  to  him  most  readily.  I  heard  before 
I  saw  him  that  his  ring  was  lost.  Sergeant  Clarke 
reported  it  to  me.  I  knew  from  Mr.  Death  what 
the  ring  was  like.  The  prisoner  said  he  did  not 
take  it  out  of  his  pocket,  but  believed  it  was  stolen  from 
68 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

him,  and  he  had  a  suspicion  of  the  man  who  had  stolen  it.  Inspector 
When  I  asked  him  whether  it  was  a  gold  ring,  with  a  plain 
•white  stone  upon  it,  he  at  once  said,  "  No;  it  has  got  a  head 
•upon  it,"  and  that  he  had  bought  it  in  Cheapside  for  7s.  6d. 
I  did  not  hear  him  say  in  New  York  that  he  had  purchased 
the  watch  and  chain  on  Monday  morning  at  the  docks.  That 
was  suggested  by  his  counsel  in  Commissioner  Newton's  Court 
in  New  York.  That  was  after  he  had  seen  his  legal  adviser. 
Some  German  gentleman  assisted  the  prisoner  in  New  York. 
I  found  11s.  upon  him.  He  was  so  thoroughly  searched  that 
there  could  be  no  mistake  as  to  the  amount  of  the  money 
he  had.  I  did  not  ask  him  how  he  became  possessed  of  that 
money,  nor  did  he  offer  any  explanation  to  me.  I  am  quite 
sure  of  that.  He  did  not  say  anything  to  me  about  having 
sold  or  exchanged  any  of  his  clothes  during  the  voyage.  I 
think  he  said  something  to  Clarke  about  having  exchanged 
a  waistcoat,  but  not  within  my  knowledge. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — Perhaps  your  lordships  will  allow  Clarke 
to  be  recalled  that  I  may  ask  him  that  question. 

The  bench  assented. 

GEORGE  CLARKE,  recalled,  and  examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY  G.  Clarke 
— The  prisoner  told  me  that  he  had  exchanged  a  waistcoat  for 
a  little  leather  reticule.     He  exchanged  again,   and  got  the 
^waistcoat  back  again.    That  is  the  waistcoat  which  the  prisoner 
is  now  wearing. 

Re-examined  by  the  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — The  prisoner  had 
&  waistcoat  on  when  he  was  first  taken,  but  that  is  not  the 
one  I  am  speaking  of.  The  one  he  wore  when  he  was  taken 
was  a  very  old  one.  I  learned  from  something  I  said  to  him 
about  his  clothes  that  he  had  exchanged  a  waistcoat  for  a 
reticule,  so  I  got  the  waistcoat  back,  and  he  wore  it  home.  I 
don't  recollect  that  anything  else  passed  between  us  with 
respect  to  his  clothes. 

SBRJBANT  PARRY  asked  Inspector  Tanner  whether  the  clothes 
that  the  prisoner  had  on  had  been  taken  off  his  back  for  the  pur- 
pose of  being  analysed  to  see  whether  there  was  any  blood  upon 
them? — I  believe  they  were  closely  examined,  but,  not  to  my 

knowledge,  analysed. 

69 


Franz    Muller. 

T.  J.  Briggs  THOMAS  JAMES  BRIQQS — I  am  the  second  son  of  the  late 
Mr.  Briggs.  I  saw  him  last  on  the  Thursday  before  the  9th 
July.  I  next  saw  him  at  two  o'clock  on  Sunday  morning,  the- 
10th  July.  I  was  sent  for.  He  was  then  in  a  state  of  insensi- 
bility. I  saw  him  at  the  Mitford  Castle.  His  clothes  had 
not  been  removed.  He  was  covered  with  a  blanket,  and  his 
clothes  open  at  the  neck.  I  have  seen  the  watch.  It  is 
my  father's.  The  chain  is  also  his.  He  had  not  worn  it 
many  years.  I  have  seen  the  watch  and  chain  many  timea 
before  my  father  had  it.  It  was  his  brother-in-law's.  "I 
have  seen  him  wear  the  chain  and  seal  produced.  My  father 
bought  his  hats  from  Mr.  Digance,  of  18  Royal  Exchange,, 
for  many  years.  The  hat  produced  by  Tanner  I  first  saw 
at  Bow  Street.  I  did  not  at  first  recognise  it  as  my  father's 
hat,  as  it  is  much  shorter.  I  have  seen  the  black  bag  and 
stick  found  in  the  railway  carriage.  The  stick  is  my  father's, 
the  bag  is  my  youngest  brother's. 

Cross-examined — I  did  not  know  a  person  named  Thomas 
Lee  living  in  King  Edward's  Road  before  this  transaction.  I 
have  known  him  since.  He  lived  about  two  miles  from  where 
my  father  lived.  I  passed  his  house  every  day  nearly.  I 
know  that  Mr.  Thomas  Lee  was  examined  before  the  coroner. 
I  saw  my  father  only  a  few  days  before  his  death. 

S.  Tid marsh  SAMUEL  TiDMARSH — I  am  a  watchmaker.  I  knew  the  late 
Mr.  Briggs  for  seven  or  eight  years.  I  had  repaired  a  watch 
for  him  once  or  twice.  It  is  the  practice  in  the  trade  to 
enter  the  number  of  a  watch  we  have  to  repair  in  our  books. 
I  have  looked  at  the  number  of  the  watch  produced.  I  know  it 
is  Mr.  Briggs's  watch.  I  have  repaired  it  twice  for  him.  I 
last  repaired  it  for  him  on  6th  February,  1863.  Its  value 
at  the  present  time  is  about  £10  or  £12.  I  would  give 
hardly  so  much  for  it  in  the  trade — perhaps  not  more  than 
£7.  The  original  price  was  very  likely  about  £25,  or  perhaps 
£30 — it  is  an  old-fashioned  gold  watch. 

D.  Digance  DANIEL  DiGANCB — I  am  a  hatter  at  18  Royal  Exchange.  Mr. 
Briggs  has  been  a  customer  of  mine  for  the  last  five-and-twenty 
or  thirty  years.  I  made  him  his  hats  to  order.  I  made  a 

70 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

hat  to  order  for  Mr.  Briggs  in  September,  1863.  According  D.  Digance 
to  the  description  in  the  book  the  hat  produced  does  not 
correspond.  It  is  lower  in  the  crown,  but  corresponds 
in  the  shape  of  the  crown.  It  is  what  is  called  a  bell- 
crowned  hat.  This  hat  is  lower  in  the  crown  than  the  hat 
Mr.  Briggs  ordered.  It  has  been  cut  down.  Mr.  Briggs 
always  wore  a  bell-crowned  hat.  Mr.  Briggs's  hat  was  a 
little  too  easy  on  the  head,  and  I  placed  a  small  piece  of  tissue 
paper  round.  That  tissue  paper  is  not  here.  There  are 
some  small  fragments  of  it  remaining  in  the  band  of 
the  hat.  The  tissue  paper  would  be  inside  the  lining.  I 
should  say  the  hat  had  been  cut  down  from  1  inch  to  1^  inches. 
The  bottom  part  of  the  leather  has  been  cut  off.  The  piece 
has  been  cut  off,  and  it  has  been  sewn  together  again,  and  the 
silk  has  been  pasted  on  again.  It  has  not  been  cut  down  as 
a  hatter  would  do  it.  It  is  an  operation  I  have  never  seen.  A 
hatter  would  have  used  gum,  and  put  it  on  a  block,  and  pressed 
it  down  with  a  hot  iron.  This  hat  has  certainly  not  been  done 
in  that  way.  It  has  been  sewn,  and  the  silk  pasted  down. 
The  hat  has  been  neatly  sewn,  and  I  should  say  it  was  done 
by  a  person  who  understood  sewing.  With  the  exception  of 
the  cutting  down,  the  hat  corresponds  with  the  hat  of  Mr. 
Briggs.  When  a  hat  is  made  to  order,  the  name  of  the 
customer  is  generally  written  on  the  band  of  the  hat  inside 
the  lining.  That  is  the  part  of  the  hat  which  has  been  taken 
away. 

Cross-examined — I  saw  on  the  lining  Francis  Miller,  22  Jewry 
Street.  It  is  a  common  thing  to  put  tissue  paper  in  a  hat 
that  is  too  large,  sometimes  leather.  My  trade  in  Cornhill 
is  of  a  first-class,  not  second-hand.  I  know  nothing  of  the 
second-hand  trade  in  hats.  My  hats  may  get  into  the  second- 
hand trade.  Servants  sell  their  masters'  hats  very  frequently. 

(Several  old  hats  were  here  handed  to  the  witness  by  Serjeant 
Parry.) 

He  said — They  are  my  hats,  but  they  are  very  old  affairs. 
Mr.  Briggs  generally  had  one  hat  a  year,  and  he  used  to  have 
his  hat  lined  very  frequently.  He  was  a  very  careful  wearer. 

Re-examined — The  price  of  the  hat  that  is  cut  down  is  one 
guinea.  It  has  not  the  appearance  of  being  very  old.  None 
of  the  hats  shown  me  has  been  cut  down. 

7* 


Franz    Muller. 

D.  Digance  By  SERJEANT  PARRY — I  will  not  swear  that  the  hat  produced 
is  the  hat  I  made  for  Mr.  Briggs.  If  the  piece  had  not  been 
cut  off  I  could  have  told. 


F.  W.  Thorn  FREDERICK  WILLIAM  THORN — I  am  a  hat  manufacturer,  and 
make  hats  for  Mr.  Digance.  The  hat  produced  I  recognise  as 
my  manufacture,  and  has  my  handwriting  in  it — two  letters, 
"  D.  D."  There  is  nothing  in  it  to  show  when  it  was  made. 
It  is  not  as  I  made  it ;  it  has  been  cut  down ;  a  piece  has  been 
cut  from  the  band  of  the  hat,  removed  entirely.  When  I  have 
a  hat  to  order  I  put  the  name  of  the  gentleman  on  the  inside. 
From  1  inch  to  1^  has  been  cut  away,  and  the  name  would  be 
on  that  part  of  the  band  of  the  hat.  Sometimes  I  have  marked 
them  higher  up,  two,  three,  or  four  years  back.  For  the 
last  two  or  three  years  I  have  marked  them  in  the  band — for 
my  own  convenience  in  the  course  of  manufacture.  I  don't 
know  whether  I  made  this  hat  for  Mr.  Briggs,  but  I  know  I 
made  it  for  Mr.  Digance.  If  I  had  cut  it  down  I  should  have 
used  gum  and  an  iron,  and  not  have  done  it  as  this  is  done. 
The  silk  of  this  hat  has  been  turned  back  for  the  purpose  of 
sewing  it  together,  and  it  has  been  fastened  down  again  with 
paste,  which  we  should  never  use;  it  has  been  sewn  together 
neatly. 

Cross-examined — I  am  not  aware  that  my  hats  are  sold  in 
the  second-hand  trade.  I  put  a  different  mark  for  other  cus- 
tomers. I  mark  all  the  hats  I  make  for  Mr.  Digance  as  this 
is  marked. 


inspector  At  the  request  of  Serjeant  Parry,  Inspector  TANNER  was 
recalled,  and  was  asked  if  the  hat  which  Muller  had  with  him, 
when  he  was  apprehended  in  America,  fitted  him.  Inspector 
Tanner  replied  that  it  did. 


Mrs.  Blyth  Mrs.  BLTTH  was  also  recalled  at  the  request  of  the  counsel 
for  the  defence,  and  was  asked,  through  the  Court,  whether 
she  knew  the  velvet  coat  or  overcoat  which  had  been  spoken  of 
by  Repsch.  She  said  she  knew  the  coat  well. 

When  did  you  last  see  itf — On  Thursday,  the  14th  of  July. 
72 


Mr.  Serjeant  Parry. 


J 

4 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

That  was  the  day  of  his  leaving  on  board  the  "  Victoria."  Mrs.  Blyth 
Was  he  wearing  it  then? — I  cannot  say  whether  he  was  wearing 
it  or  had  it  on  his  arm. 

This  closed  the  case  for  the  prosecution. 


EVIDENCE    FOR   THE    DEFENCE. 


lordships    and  Mr.  Serjeant 


Mr.  SERJEANT  PARRY — May  it  please  your 
gentlemen  of  the  jury,  I  am  assisted  in  the  performance  of  the 
very  serious  and  responsible  duty  which  has  been  placed  upon 
me  by  the  firm,  thorough,  and  unshaken  conviction  that  the 
young  man  at  the  bar  will  have  from  you  a  fair  and  impartial 
trial.  I  know,  however,  gentlemen,  how  difficult  it  will  be 
for  you  to  act  with  that  self-control  upon  your  judgment  to 
prevent  yourselves  from  being  carried  away  by  any  feeling  of 
prejudice.  The  Solicitor-General  has  already  invited  you, 
and  probably  his  lordship  in  summing  up  the  case  will  repeat 
that  invitation,  to  discard  from  your  minds  all  that  you  have 
heard,  all  that  you  have  read,  all  that  you  have  discussed  about 
this  case.  Gentlemen,  that  will  be  a  difficult  task.  I  think 
in  every  newspaper  in  the  kingdom  this  case  has  been  discussed 
pro  and  con.  Articles  have  been  written  in  the  public  Press 
proving  that  this  young  man  was  guilty  of  this  murder. 
Articles  have  been  written  in  the  public  Press  proving  that  he 
oould  not  have  been  guilty  of  this  murder.  Gentlemen,  it  is 
not  for  me  to  criticise  the  action  of  the  public  Press.  The 
writers  in  the  Press  have  their  law  of  action  as  we  have  at  the 
bar;  but  it  is,  for  the  most  part,  unusual  that  when  a  man  has 
been  arrested  upon  a  charge  for  which,  if  he  is  found  guilty, 
his  life  must  be  sacrificed — I  say  it  is,  for  the  most  part, 
unusual  to  take  the  course  that  has  been  taken,  not  by  insig- 
nificant journals,  but  by  the  most  respectable  and  most  eminent 
papers  of  the  country — the  course  of  commenting  upon  the 
likelihood  of  the  guilt  or  innocence  of  such  a  person.  That 
has  been  done.  What  has  been  written  has  been  read  probably 
by  every  one  of  you  gentlemen — certainly  by  almost  every 
person  capable  of  reading  a  newspaper  in  the  country.  What 
has  been  done  cannot  be  undone ;  but  an  impression,  more  or 

73 


Franz    Muller. 


Mr.  Serjeant  less  strong,  must  have  been  made  on  your  minds,  and  not  only 
the  action  of  the  Press,  but  also  social  discussions  taking  place 
between  man  and  man  on  the  subject  of  this  young  man's  guilt 
— sometimes  diverging  into  the  hottest  of  arguments — cannot 
have  failed  to  make  an  impression  upon  your  minds.  But,, 
gentlemen,  I  am  confident  you  will  give  this  young  man  a  fair 
and  impartial  trial,  that  when  you  retire  to  consider  your 
verdict  you  will  find  it  apart  from  everything  but  what  has 
been  brought  before  you  here.  I  cannot  disguise  from  myself 
that  there  is  another  terror  and  dread  that  I  ought  to  feel  in 
defending  the  prisoner.  Gentlemen,  the  crime  of  which  this 

(young  man  is  charged  is  almost  unparalleled  in  this  country. 
It  is  a  crime  which  strikes  at  the  lives  of  millions.  It  is  a 
crime  which  affects  the  life  of  every  man  who  travels  upon  the 
great  iron  ways  of  this  country.  A  thrill  of  horror  ran  through 
the  whole  land  when  the  fact  of  this  crime  was  first  published. 
Gentlemen,  this  is  a  crime  of  a  character  to  arouse  in  the 
human  breast  an  almost  instinctive  spirit  of  vengeance.  It  is 
a  crime  which  demands  a  victim.  Yet,  still  I  have  faith  in 
your  honour  in  this  matter.  I  have  faith  that  you  will  allow 
no  spirit  of  vengeance,  no  vindictive  feeling,  to  enter  your 
minds,  and  if  for  a  moment  such  a  feeling  should  enter,  that 
you  will  banish  it  away.  Gentlemen,  the  law  is,  or  ought  to 
be,  passionless ;  and  I  am  sure  that  when  you  come  to  consider 
the  course  of  this  case  you  will  be  passionless  also. 

Gentlemen,  the  course  I  intend  to  take  on  behalf  of  this  young 
man  shall  not  be  misunderstood  by  any  human  being.  I 
know  that  there  have  been  in  my  profession  men  far  more 
eminent  than  I  am  ever  likely  to  be,  who  have  damaged  them- 
selves, who  have  damaged  their  client,  and  who  have  damaged 
the  profession  to  which  they  belonged  by  solemn  asseverations 
of  the  innocence  of  the  man  they  were  defending.  Gentle- 
men, I  will  indulge  in  no  such  asseverations.  Supposing  I 
were  solemnly  to  assure  you  that  I  believed  this  young  man 
to  be  innocent,  you  would  treat  that  observation,  as  it  deserved 
to  be  treated,  with  perfect  indifference.  Supposing  my 
learned  friend  the  Solicitor-General  had  solemnly  declared 
to  you  that  he  believed  that  young  man  at  the  bar  to  be 
guilty,  you  would  have  treated  that  assertion  just  as  you 
would  have  treated  my  assertion  of  his  innocence.  No,  gentle- 
74 


Mr.    Serjeant   Parry's    Opening. 


men,  the  true  test  of  a  man's  guilt  or  innocence  is  the  evidence  Mr.  Serjeant 

Parry 
brought  before  the  jury  at  the  time  of  his  trial.       I  take  it  to 

be  impertinence  on  the  part  of  a  counsel,  I  take  it  to  be  a  per- 
version of  professional  duty,  if  he  pledges  his  own  word  to  that 
of  which  he  can  know  nothing,  except  from  the  evidence  before 
him.  This  I  pledge  myself  to  demonstrate  to  you  from  the 
points  of  evidence  before,  supplemented  by  the  evidence  which 
I  shall  lay  before  you,  that  you  cannot,  that  you  ought  not, 
and  I  believe  you  will  not,  find  this  young  man  guilty.  What 
should  be  the  rule  and  canon  of  your  conduct  in  trying  to 
arrive  at  a  right  conclusion?  It  should  be  this — that  the 
charge  of  murder  brought  against  this*  young  man  should  be 
brought  home  to  him  on  the  clearest  and  most  unmistakable 
evidence;  that  you  should  be  as  surely  satisfied  of  his  guilt 
as  though  you  with  your  physical  eyes  had  seen  him  do  the 
deed.  The  evidence  ought  to  be  complete.  There  ought  to  f 
be  no  omission,  no  discrepancy,  no  uncertainty  in  the  evidence 
which  is  to  bring  home  such  a  charge  against  him.  My 
learned  friend  the  Solicitor-General  has  said,  as  regards  cir- 
cumstantial evidence,  that  if  it  were  not  the  rule  of  the  Courts 
and  the  practice  of  juries  to  act  upon  such  evidence,  crime 
would  be  committed  with  impunity.  Gentlemen,  I  entirely 
concur  in  that  observation.  I  believe  myself  that  circum- 
stantial evidence,  if  not  of  the  highest  character,  is  of  nearly 
the  highest  character  of  evidence;  but  only  this  when  there  is 
no  link  wanting  in  the  chain.  But  if  there  be  a  doubt  on  the 
evidence  laid  before  the  jury,  or  anything  that  might  cast  a 
doubt  on  the  evidence  given,  then  the  chain  of  evidence  is  in- 
complete, and  the  jury  ought  not,  and  cannot,  act  upon  it. 

The  prosecution  relied  mainly  upon  three  pieces  of  evidence. 
They  relied,  first,  upon  the  hat  found  in  the  railway  carriage; 
next,  upon  the  hat  found  in  the  prisoner's  box;  and  lastly,  on  ! 
the  watch  and  chain  also  found  with  the  prisoner.  The 
Solicitor-General  said  distinctly  that  that  was  the  evidence 
upon  which  he  relied  for  a  conviction.  Now,  gentlemen,  I 
will  show  that  that  evidence  is  not  to  be  relied  upon.  First, 
as  regards  the  hat  found  in  the  railway  carriage.  The  wit- 
nesses all  proved,  or,  rather,  sought  to  prove,  that  the  hat 
belonged  to  this  young  man,  Miiller;  but  only  two — Mrs. 
Repsch  and  Jonathan  Matthews,  the  cabman — have  spoken  at 

75 


Franz    Muller. 

?Irr|erJeant  a11  decidedl7  uP°n  that  point.  Now,  gentlemen,  you  will  be 
good  enough  to  bear  in  mind  that  there  is  a  vast  difference 
between  whether  Muller  ever  had  a  hat  like  that  found  in  the 
carriage  and  whether  that  hat  really  belonged  to  him.  This 
difference  is  as  great  as  the  difference  between  something  and 
nothing,  which  is  said  to  be  infinite.  If  the  hat  belonged  to 
him,  the  Solicitor-General  says  that  is  conclusive  evidence  of 
his  guilt.  The  hat,  he  says,  was  found  on  the  scene  of  the 
murder,  and  must  have  been  left  in  the  railway  carriage  by 
the  murderer.  That  is  the  theory  of  my  learned  friend  the 
Solicitor-General.  But,  gentlemen,  he  went  on  commenting  on 
the  evidence,  and  I  must  caution  you  most  strongly  as  to  ming- 
ling and  mixing  up  the  two  questions  as  to  whether  Muller 
ever  had  a  hat  like  that,  and  this  being  Muller's  hat  in  the 
railway  carriage.  Now,  Mrs.  Repsch's  evidence  was  very 
remarkable.  She  could  not  tell  the  lining  of  her  husband's 
hat,  of  Haffa's  hat,  or  of  any  one  else's  hat  which  she  was  in  the 
habit  of  seeing.  She  did  not  seem  to  have  been  meddling  or 
muddling  herself  with  their  hats,  but  some  thirty  or  forty 
times  she  had  looked  into  the  hat  of  this  young  man, 
Muller,  and  she  was  positive  that  this  hat  was  his.  But  if 
there  were  another  hat  similar  to  the  hat  Muller  may  have 
had,  why,  then,  gentlemen,  what  she  has  stated  ceases  to  be 
important.  Gentlemen,  I  watched  that  woman  while  giving  her 
evidence.  I  think  she  gave  it  with  vehemence.  All  that  she 
says,  however,  is  that  the  hat  Muller  brought  to  her  in  Novem- 
ber last  was  like  the  hat  found  in  the  railway  carriage. 

I  now  come  to  a  much  more  important  part  of  the  evidence, 
and  that  which  bears  the  strongest  against  the  prisoner  at  the 
bar;  I  mean  that  of  the  person  who  first  gave  information  to 
the  police,  and  who  has  played  a  most  conspicuous  part  in  the 
inquiry — Jonathan  Matthews,  the  cabman.  Now,  gentlemen, 
an  observation  dropped  from  my  learned  friend  the  Solicitor- 
General  which  did  me  a  great  injustice.  My  learned  friend 
said  he  saw,  by  the  tenor  of  the  questions  I  was  putting,  that 
virtually,  if  not  actually,  I  was  going  to  accuse  Jonathan 
Matthews  of  this  murder.  Gentlemen,  through  the  whole  time 
I  have  been  most  anxiously  engaged  in  this  case,  examining  it 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  sifting  the  most  trifling  circum- 
stances connected  with  it,  such  a  thing  has  never  for  a  moment 
76 


Mr.    Serjeant    Parry's    Opening. 

entered  into  my  mind.       Gentlemen,  I  should  be  indescribably  MP.  Serjeant 
foolish  and  wicked  if  I  were  to  make  such  a  statement.     Except    ' 
the  actual  perpetrator  of  the  crime,  none  but  the  Omniscient — 
"He  to  whom  all  hearts  are  open,  and  from  whom  no  secrets 
are   hid  " — knows   who   did  it.        How   dare  I,    then,    as  the 
advocate  of  the  young  man  at  the  bar — how  dare  I,  with  my 
finite  and  limited  intelligence,  affirm  that  which  the  Almighty 
alone   knows?       If   I  were  to   affirm  that  Jonathan  Matthews 
has  been  guilty  of  this  murder,  or  a  participator  in  this  murder, 
I   should  be   a   disgrace   to   the  profession.        There   was   no 
such  suggestion  in  my  thoughts.       But  this  I  say,  he  is  a  man 
whose  evidence  is  entirely  unreliable.      He  is  a  man  "who  gives 
his  evidence  in  such  an  unsatisfactory  manner  that  no  body 
of  sensible  men  would  for  a  moment  pay  any  attention  to  it. 
And,  gentlemen,  I  say  this  of  him,  that  he  is  evidently  actuated 
by  a  desire  to  obtain  the  reward  that  has  been  offered  for  the 
conviction  of  the  murderer  of  Mr.  Briggs.      That  has  animated 
his   whole  conduct.     I   should   be   very   sorry   to  charge   him 
with  being  a  party  to  the  murder,  but  I  should  be  very  wicked 
if  I  were  not  to  say  that  suspicion  is  pointing  to  him.     Matthews 
could  not  say  where  he  was  on  the  night  of  the  murder,   but 
now   he  recollects  that  he  was  at  the  Great  Western  station 
from  seven  to  eleven  o'clock  that  night.       In  that  he  is  per- 
fectly uncorroborated.       There  is,   however,  very  little  doubt 
that  he  gave  Muller  the  hat  in  exchange  for  the  waistcoat,  in 
November,  1863.      Now,  Matthews  was  examined  very  shortly 
indeed  by  the  Solicitor-General,  and  he  said  this  was  the  hat, 
he  believed,  of  Muller,  and  he  remembered  it  by  the  edges  of  the 
rims  being  turned  up  to  resemble  the  one  he  had.      That  is  his 
evidence-in-chief.     Now,  in  cross-examination,  I  found  that  he 
never  said  that  before.       He  said  he  took  it  to  the  shop  to  be 
done,   and  that  that,    as  nearly  as  he   remembered,    was   the 
hat  he  gave  to  Muller.       You  will  remember  he  made  a  state- 
ment on  his  examination  at  the  inquest  about  a  hat  he  had 
purchased  about  three  weeks  before  of  Mr.   Downs,  in  Long 
Acre.       Since  then  he  has  discovered  that  there  was  no  hatter 
of  the  name  of  Mr.  Downs  there  at  that  time.       It  is,  then, 
very  important  to  know  where  is  the  hat  which  exactly  resembled 
Muller's.     We  had  Mr.  Walker  and  his  foreman  here.       Mr. 
Walker  and  his  foreman  both  say  that  there  might  have  been 

77 


Franz    Muller. 

MP.  Serjeant  three  or  four  hats  with  this  kind  of  lining  in  them,  or  there 
might  be  only  one;  but  I  think  two,  or  three,  or  four  is  all 
that  Mr.  Walker  had  of  these  hats.  It  is  very  remarkable, 
therefore,  that  although  there  were  only  two  or  three  hats  of 
this  kind,  Matthews  should  have  purchased  one  for  Muller  so 
exactly  like  his  own,  as  he  said  before  the  coroner  that  he  did. 
Why  could  not  this  be  Matthews'  hat?  Gentlemen,  I  say  you 
must  not  assume  this  is  Miiller's  hat.  You  must  not 
take  it,  from  the  mode  in  which  Matthews  was  examined  by 
the  Solicitor-General,  that  this  is  the  hat  of  Muller.  I  appre- 
hend you  cannot  be  sure  of  anything  of  the  kind.  There  was 
another  hat  resembling  Miiller's,  and  resembling  it  in  every 
possible  respect.  Where  is  that  hat1?  We  have  made  in- 
quiries, gentlemen.  Inquiries  have  been  made  by  Mr.  Beard, 
the  highly  respectable  and  very  able  gentleman  who  is  instruct- 
ing me  in  this  case,  but  his  inquiries  have  been  baffled  by 
the  falsehood  of  Matthews,  who  tells  an  untruth  both  before  the 
magistrates  and  before  the  coroner.  He  never  corrects  that 
untruth  until  now,  when  he  knows  we  have  witnesses  to  show 
that  Mr.  Downs  had  ceased  to  carry  on  business  in  Long  Acre 
before  the  time  he  said  he  disposed  of  the  hat  to  him.  Then 
he  changes  his  tune,  and  says  he  does  not  know  where  it  is. 
I  do  not  know  whether  you  remember  a  remarkable  expression 
of  Mrs.  Repsch's  to  me  when  she  said  that  Muller  said  his 
hat  been  thrown  into  the  dusthole.  Is  it  not  a  remark- 
able coincidence  that  Matthews,  too,  has  said  that  some  of  his 
hats  were  thrown  into  the  dusthole?  I  should  think  that  is 
the  last  place  where  a  man  would  throw  his  hat.  Is  Mr. 
Matthews' trustworthy  in  other  respects?  Do  you  believe  that 
he  never  heard  of  the  murder  before  Thursday?  Do  you 
believe  that  he  had  been  on  his  cab  all  through  the  streets  and 
had  not  heard  of  this  murder  before?  I  do  not  believe  it. 
Why,  murders,  robberies,  and  police  cases  of  all  kinds  are  the 
literature  of  cabmen.  They  read  scarcely  anything  else. 
Matthews  says  he  had  never  heard  of  this  before,  but  I  put  it 
to  you,  is  that  story  a  likely  or  probable  one?  His  wife  knew 
on  Monday,  the  Repsches  knew  on  Monday,  and  it  seems  almost 
impossible  for  me  to  believe  that  Matthews  is  telling  you  the 
truth  when  he  says  that  he  knew  nothing  whatever  about  this 
before  Thursday.  Gentlemen,  there  was  another  circumstance 
78 


Mr.    Serjeant    Parry's    Opening. 

in  the  evidence  which  he  gave  which  I  think  ought  to  induce  Mr.  Serjeant 

you  to  disbelieve  him.       He  had  been  convicted  of  a  trumpery    ' 

theft  about  thirteen  years   ago.       Now,  gentlemen,   I  assure 

you  I  was  most  reluctant  to  touch  upon  that,  because  a  theft  of 

this  kind  committed  by  a  young  man  so  long  ago  would  not  go 

far  to  impugn  his  character  for  honesty.       But,  gentlemen,  he 

told  a  deliberate  falsehood,    and   then   I   was  determined  you 

should  see  he  was  a  man  who  did  not  habitually  adhere  to  the 

truth.        The    Solicitor-General    says,    where  is  Miiller's    hatl 

Well,  where  is  Matthews'  hat?      He  cannot  produce  it.       He  is 

in  the  same  circumstances  as  Muller  in  not  being  able  to  produce 

his  hat.       I  know  that  Mr.  Repsch  says  that  Muller  told  him 

that  his  other  hat  was  smashed,   and  that  he  had  thrown  it 

into  the  dusthole.       Now,  gentlemen,  I  think  I   shall  satisfy 

your  minds  that  there  is  no  unmistakable  proof  that  this  hat 

ever  belonged  to  the  young  man  at  the  bar.     Mr.  Tanner — of 

whom  it  is  right  to   say  he  has  performed  his   painful  duty 

towards  this  young  man  with  the  greatest  delicacy  he  could — 

Mr.  Tanner  has  simply  performed  his  duty  as  we  perform  ours 

here.       These  duties  are  cast  upon  him  just  as  duties  are  cast 

upon  us  here.       And  I  am  sure  Mr.  Tanner  now  is  no  more 

desirous  for  the  conviction  of  this  young  man  than  I  am.       I 

think   it  is   only   right   to  pay  this  tribute  to   his   character. 

There   is,    I    say,   a  suspicion  that   this   hat  belonged  to  the 

prisoner  at  the  bar ;  but,  gentlemen,  the  charge  must  be  brought 

home,  the  charge  must  be  proved,  even  strong  suspicion  must 

be  cast  aside,  and  if  you  consider  that  in  this  case  there  is  only 

strong  suspicion  against  the  prisoner,  he  will  be  entitled  to  have 

the  benefit  of  the  doubt. 

Now,  let  me  come  to  the  hat  of  Mr.  Briggs.  This 
hat  has  been  cut  down  and  sewed,  as  you  have  all 
seen.  This  young  man  has  given  different  accounts  of 
the  time  he  has  had  this  hat.  In  answer  to  Repsch,  he  said 
he  had  had  it  two  months,  and  it  appears  that,  in  answer  to 
Sergeant  Clarke,  he  said  he  had  had  it  twelve  months.  Now, 
gentlemen,  I  regret  that  the  prisoner  has  in  the  coarse  of  this 
case  made  many  statements  that  are  not  consistent  with  the 
truth.  It  is  quite  evident  that  he  is  a  vain  and  boastful  man, 
and  there  is  no  doubt  whatever  that  he  was  in  the  habit  of 
making  statements  with  reference  to  his  own  property  which 

79 


Franz    Muller. 

were  not  actuall7  true.  He  had  said  that  Mr.  Hod^ktnson 
was  going  to  send  him  out  to  America  as  an  agent  at  £150 
a  year;  and  in  the  same  way  he  may  not  have  chosan  to  tell 
the  truth  to  Mrs.  Repsch  about  that  watch  and  chain.  At 
New  York  he  might  have  felt  there  was  something  wrong  about 
the  watch,  chain,  and  hat,  and  he  may  have  made  the  state- 
ment he  made  there  in  order  to  redeem  himself  from  the  diffi- 
culty into  which  he  had  got.  Will  you  then  go  so  far  as  to 
say  that  if  these  statements  were  not  reliable,  he  is  guilty  of 
this  murder?  There  is  no  dout  that  fear  came  upon  him 
when  he  was  arrested  in  New  York,  but  you  will  find,  when  you 
come  to  examine  the  evidence,  that  the  statement  he  made  with 
regard  to  the  hat  has  not  been  disproved.  But  if  it  were  not 
so,  I  do  not  believe  for  one  moment  that  you  would  on  that 
account  find  him  guilty  of  murder.  The  hat  is  cut  down;  but 
I  shall  bring  you  witnesses  to  show  that  in  the  second-hand 
trade  it  is  not  unusual  to  cut  down  hats  like  this. 
Mr.  Digance  will  not  swear  that  he  sold  this  hat  to  Mr. 
Briggs,  and,  if  Mr.  Digance  will  not  swear  to  it,  will  you  by 
your  verdict  undertake  to  swear  to  it?  I  will  go  further  and 
say,  did  this  hat  ever  belong  to  Mr.  Briggs?  This  hat  got  into 
the  second-hand  market.  There  is  a  bit  of  tissue  paper  left, 
and  it  is  actually  suggested  that  this  little  bit  of  tissue  paper  is 
sufficient  to  prove  the  identity.  Such  a  proposition  passes  my 
comprehension,  and  I  ask  you  not  to  act  upon  it.  It  is  a 
strange  thing  that  some  one  was  not  called  from  Mr.  Briggs's 
house  to  show  what  hat  he  had  on  that  morning.  Is  not  that 
a  great  omission  on  the  part  of  the  prosecution?  He  must 
have  a  household.  Why  are  not  some  of  the  servants  brought 
here  to  tell  you  what  hat  he  had  on  that  night?  These  are 
serious  omissions,  tending  to  show  that  there  is  no  proof  and 
that  there  is  no  evidence  on  which  you  can  rely  that  Mr.  Briggs 
wore  this  hat  at  the  time  of  the  murder.  It  is  easy  to  say 
that  the  name  of  Mr.  Briggs  was  in  the  hat,  and  that  it  had 
been  cut  down  to  obliterate  that  name.  Well,  Muller  writes 
his  name  there,  and  writes  his  address  also,  22  Old  Jewry 
Street.  That  he  must  have  done  before  he  left  England;  and 
from  that  we  may  infer  that  he  had  the  hat  some  time  before 
he  went  to  America.  As  regards  the  lining,  many  gentlemen 
change  that  once  a  month  or  so;  and  it  was  shown  that  Mr. 
So 


Mr.    Serjeant   Parry's    Opening. 

Briggs,  too,  was  frequently  getting  his  hat  lined  afresh.     Gen-  Mr.  Serjeant 
tlemen,   I  would  warn  you  against  assuming  as  a  matter  of 
course   that,   when   a   witness   proves  what   he   was   called   to 
prove,  the  object  the  prosecution  had  in  view  is  gained,  and  that 
the  purpose  for  which  he  is  called  is  accomplished. 

Now,  there  is  no  proof  whatever  that  this  hat  which  is  brought 
forward  to  prove  the  identity  of  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  was 
ever  worn  by  Mr.  Briggs.  When  was  the  hat  cut  down? 
Surely,  if  it  had  been  done  on  the  voyage,  there  would  be 
somebody  here  to  tell  us.  Surely,  if  it  had  been  done  on  the 
Sunday,  Mrs.  Blyth  would  have  known  of  it.  When  was  it 
done?  When  is  it  suggested  that  it  was  done?  Here  is  the 
name  of  the  prisoner.  Was  it  put  there  by  Muller?  Was  it 
put  there  when  he  was  at  sea  in  order  to  deceive?  Or  was  it 
put  there  by  Miiller  when  he  said  he  bought  the  hat,  two 
months  before,  and  said  he  gave  4s.  6d.  for  it?  You 
will  remember  that  Mrs.  Repsch  said  that  two  months 
before  the  murder  she  asked  Muller  to  lend  her  5s.,  and  he 
said  he  could  not  do  so  because  he  was  going  to  buy  a  hat. 
The  foreman  of  you  asked  whether  Mrs.  Repsch  saw  him  on 
the  Sunday,  or  was  in  the  habit  of  seeing  him  on  Sunday.  Mrs. 
Repsch  did  not  see  him  on  the  Sunday,  and  therefore  it  is 
clear  that,  whatever  hat  Muller  wore  on  the  Sunday,  Mrs. 
Repsch  would  not  see  it.  There  is  no  evidence  that  Muller 
did  not  take  this  hat  with  him  on  board  the  "  Victoria  "  and 
sell  it  to  some  person  there,  because  you  will  remember  that 
this  man  was  always  chopping  and  changing  his  mind,  and  was 
continually  exchanging  or  selling  his  property. 

Now,  as  regards  the  watch  and  chain,  Muller  has  to  encounter 
the  difficulty  of  having  made  different  representations  about 
them.  There  is  no  doubt  whatever  that,  if  Muller  purchased  the 
watch  and  chain,  which  are  not  of  the  enormous  value  my 
learned  friend  said  they  were,  but  were  valued  by  the  jeweller  at 
£7,  he  must  have  purchased  them  under  most  suspicious  circum- 
stances. That,  gentlemen,  is  a  matter  which  should  be 
strongly  borne  in  mind  before  you.  I  believe  this  case  to  be  a 
great  mystery,  but  I  know  there  have  been  many  mysteries  in 
this  world  that  the  human  intellect  has  not  been  able  to  pene- 
trate. If  he  purchased  this  watch  at  the  docks,  as  it  is 
alleged  by  his  counsel  that  he  did,  there  can  be  no  doubt  what- 
G  81 


Franz    Muller. 

Mr.  Serjeant  ever  that  he  would  get  them  at  an  inferior  price,  and  he  must 
have  known  that  he  was  doing  a  suspicious  act.  But  it  does 
not  follow  that  he  knew  anything  of  the  murder.  If  he  pur- 
chased those  articles  at  the  docks,  either  the  murderer  or  the 
agent  of  the  murderer  must  have  sold  them;  and  where  was 
he  so  likely  to  have  taken  them  as  down  to  the  docks,  where 
he  might  expect  to  find  purchasers  who  would  soon  leave  the 
country  with  them?  Muller  said  he  had  had  the  watch  for 
two  years.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  is  untrue;  but,  gentle- 
men, if  you  consider  for  a  moment,  you  will  see  that  the 
prisoner  at  the  bar,  perfectly  irrespective  of  the  murder,  had 
some  reason  to  believe  that,  in  buying  the  watch  and  chain, 
he  was  doing  something  that  would  bring  him  into  trouble, 
and  then  the  observations  that  had  been  made  about  his  having 
told  untruths  about  them  are  easily  to  be  accounted  for.  He 
told  Mrs.  Repsch  that  he  had  bought  Mr.  Death's  chain  at  the 
docks.  That  was  not  true;  but  still,  if  he  made  the  purchase 
in  the  docks  that  morning,  the  falsehood  was  not  so  great  as 
it  would  have  been  if  he  had  made  no  purchase  at  all.  There 
is  one  very  curious  quality  which  this  young  man  possessed. 
He  was  always  either  buying  waistcoats  or  hats,  making 
trousers,  or  pledging  trousers,  or  pawning  watches.  He  was 
always  getting  these  things,  and  he  was  a  young  man  who 
might  easily  be  tempted  into  making  purchases  of  this  descrip- 
tion. Had  he  any  money?  I  do  not  intend  to  go  through  the 
various  means  he  adopted  after  Monday  of  raising  money  by 
pledging  the  watch  and  chain.  It  is  a  curious  circumstance 
that  he  had  pledged  his  own  watch  and  chain,  and  he  appears 
to  have  pledged  a  coat.  There  is  no  doubt  that  he  was  then 
raising  money  to  pay  his  passage  on  Wednesday. 

But,  gentlemen,  it  has  l)een  proved  before  you  that  Haffa 
saw  him  in  possession  of  sufficient  money  to  pay  his  passage 
a  week  before  the  19th  of  July.  Then  what  has  become  of 
that  money?  Gentlemen,  it  has  gone  somewhere,  because 
only  11s.  is  found  upon  him.  The  prisoner  had  the  means, 
therefore,  of  purchasing  this  watch  and  chain,  for  it  would  be 
idle  to  suppose  that,  in  disposing  of  these  articles  at  the  docks, 
the  seller  would  get  more  than  one-half  of  their  value.  Now, 
Muller  was  at  the  docks  on  Monday  morning.  My  learned 
friend  has  called  Gifford,  the  clerk,  to  show  that  the  prisoner 
82 


Mr.    Serjeant   Parry's    Opening. 

•came  there  on  the  Wednesday  morning,  and  he  was  there.  He  Mr.  Serjeant 
calls  another  young  man,  a  German  of  the  name  of  Jacob 
Weist,  who  says  he  saw  Miiller  there  two  or  three  days  before 
he  took  his  passage,  and  he  believes  he  saw  him  on  the  Monday 
morning  at  the  docks.  Now,  that  is  remarkable  evidence,  for, 
of  course,  it  was  supposed  that  Miiller  had  never  been  at  the 
•docks  before  Wednesday.  What  is  more  likely  than  that  he 
should  go  down  to  the  docks  before  making  the  necessary  inquiry 
as  to  the  amount  of  the  passage?  You  will  remember  that  on 
the  Monday  morning  he  left  Mr.  Death's  at  eight  o'clock. 
That  would  give  him  two  whole  hours,  and  I  cannot  but  think 
that  the  evidence  presented  as  to  the  exchanging  of  the  chain 
at  Death's  will  bear  a  different  interpretation  to  what  the 
prosecution  has  put  upon  it.  Suppose  he  had  bought  this 
watch  and  chain  at  the  docks  that  morning,  suppose  he  knew 
that,  for  that  small  sum  of  money  he  knew  he  had,  he 
could  get  a  gold  watch  and  chain,  he  would  have  some  sus- 
picion that  the  chain  was  not  a  good  one  or  the  watch  not  a 
good  one,  and  therefore,  in  order  to  remove  that  suspicion  or 
confirm  it,  he  takes  the  chain  to  Mr.  Death,  the  jeweller,  to 
ascertain  whether  it  is  gold  that  he  has  got.  By  exchanging 
the  chain  at  Mr.  Death's  he  laid  himself  open  to  suspicion  the 
same  as  if  he  had  pawned  it.  I  believe  he  said  to  Mr.  Tanner, 
"  I  bought  it  in  Cheapside,  and  gave  7s.  6d.  for  it,"  which 
is  almost  the  truth.  He  mentioned  that  he  had  been  in 
Cheapside,  where  Mr.  Death  lived.  He  never  denied  having 
been  at  Mr.  Death's,  and  I  think  I  am  free  to  say  that  his 
visit  there  is  open  to  the  interpretation  I  have  put  upon  it. 
I  leave  it,  however,  entirely  to  your  judgment. 

Now,  gentlemen,  what  I  have  submitted  to  you  must  leave 
an  impression  short  of  anything  like  conclusiveness  as  to  the 
guilt  of  the  young  man  at  the  bar.  If  the  two  hats  have  not 
been  satisfactorily  shown  to  you  to  be  one  belonging  to  Miiller 
and  the  other  to  Mr.  Briggs,  and  if,  as  regards  the  watch  and 
chain,  his  conduct  has  been  what  I  suggest,  then  I  say  that, 
as  respects  the  possession  of  this  property,  the  facts  are  fairly 
open  to  the  interpretation  which  I  have  put  upon  them. 

Now,  gentlemen,  there  is  a  portion  of  the  evidence  which  is 
produced  by  the  Crown  in  which  the  prosecution  has  attempted, 
and  I  think  I  shall  prove  they  have  completely  failed,  to  show 

83 


Franz    Muller. 

Mr.  Serjeant  the  guilt  of  the  prisoner.  In  the  first  place,  they  have  said  h& 
had  a  pair  of  dark  trousers  on  the  Saturday  and  a  pair  of 
light  trousers  on  the  Monday.  Where,  they  ask,  are  the  dark 
trousers?  The  insinuation  is  that  the  dark  trousers  may  have 
been  covered  with  blood,  and  that  therefore  the  light  trousers 
were  worn  on  Monday.  This  is  an  inference  that  would  not  be 
drawn,  I  think,  except  in  the  mind  of  one  who  was  determined 
to  find  something  wrong  in  everything.  There  would  not 
otherwise  appear  to  be  anything  wrong  in  wearing  a  dark  pair 
on  Saturday  and  a  light  pair  on  Monday.  The  prosecution 
felt  their  case  was  weak,  and  they  found  it  necessary  to  take 
hold  of  anything  they  could  grasp.  But  what  had  become  of 
the  dark  trousers?  Why,  he  had  them  on  on  the  Monday.  Mrs. 
Blyth,  a  thoroughly  honest  woman,  who  did  not  come  here  to 
mislead  you  or  to  press  unduly  against  the  prisoner,  said  she 
would  not  pledge  herself  to  say  whether  he  had  on  light  or 
dark  trousers  on  the  Monday.  That  is  the  index  of  a 
thoroughly  conscientious  mind.  She  evidently  had  been  friendly- 
with  the  prisoner.  She  evidently,  if  her  own  wishes  were  to 
be  consulted,  did  not  wish  him  to  be  convicted.  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Repsch  said  he  had  light  trousers  on.  What  does  Matthews, 
say?  "  He  had  dark  trousers  on  on  Monday  when  I  saw  him." 
Mrs.  Repsch  is  asked  if  the  prisoner  had  an  overcoat  with  a 
velvet  collar,  and  she  said  he  had.  She  was  not  asked  whether 
it  was  a  very  hot  season  of  the  year,  but  simply  had  he  a 
coat  with  a  velvet  collar.  Well,  yes,  he  had;  but  that  proves 
nothing  at  all.  Mrs.  Repsch  would  not  swear  that  he  had  not 
dark  trousers  on;  but  Mrs.  Blyth,  the  conscientious  woman, 
was  recalled  at  the  last  moment,  and  states  that  she  saw  him 
with  a  coat  on  with  a  velvet  collar  on  the  Thursday,  on  the 
14th  of  July,  after  the  murder.  If  he  took  the  coat  to  the 
"  Victoria  "  when  he  started  for  America,  and  if  he  had  the 
dark  trousers  on  on  the  Monday,  what  right  has  the  Solicitor- 
General  to  ask  where  they  are  now?  He  has  now  no  more  right 
to  ask  it  than  the  greatest  stranger.  It  is  a  superfluous  ques- 
tion coming  from  the  prosecution  altogether.  The  prosecution 
has  nothing  at  all  to  do  with  it.  I  must  confess  I  never  saw 
any  evidence  that  has  so  completely  crumbled  away  as  the 
evidence  that  has  been  given  with  respect  to  the  trousers  and 
the  coat.  He  might  have  sold  them  on  board  the  vessel,  for 
84 


Mr.    Serjeant   Parry's    Opening. 

it  appears  that  he  was  in  want  of  money ;  but,  whether  he  Mr.  Serjeant 
sold  them  or  not,  the  prosecution  has  nothing  to  do  with  it. 
My  learned  friend  Mr.  Giffard  made  a  most  ingenious  sugges- 
tion. He  asked  the  clerk  whether  he  had  any  parcels  with 
him,  and  he  replied  that  he  had  three — two  small  ones  and 
one  canvas  one,  18  inches  long,  and  my  friend  said,  "  Did  there 
appear  to  be  anything  sharp  or  pointed  1  "  He  asked  him  if 
there  appeared  to  be  anything  heavy,  with  rough  edges.  He 
said  he  did  not  take  any  notice  of  that.  Is  this  evidence 
against  the  prisoner?  Does  it  not  rather  appear  as  if  their 
case  was  not  strong  enough  when  they  want  to  force  on  the 
jury  a  question  like  this?  We  understand  well  what  it  was. 
It  was  intended  to  imply  that  the  parcel  18  inches  long  con- 
tained garments  stained  with  blood,  and  that  the  prisoner 
intended  to  sink  it  when  he  got  to  sea.  That  is  the  suggestion 
made,  and  I  say  it  cannot  be  relied  on  in  a  case  of  murder.  I 
am  sure  you  will  reject  that  evidence,  as  it  does  not  tell  in 
the  slightest  degree  against  Muller,  but  is  rather  in  his  favour. 
I  have  already  commented  on  the  false  statements 
this  young  man  is  alleged  to  have  made.  I  have  offered  to 
you  what  I  believe  to  be  not  an  unreasonable  explanation 
of  all  those  false  statements,  and  I  ask  you  to  bear  in  mind 
the  plain,  straightforward  conduct  of  the  prisoner  throughout. 
Excepting  those  false  statements,  there  does  not  appear  as 
regards  his  conduct  anything  whatever  that  is  wrong.  I  notice 
that  he  has  been  spoken  of  as  a  fugitive  from  justice.  Now, 
that  is  utterly  untrue;  he  did  not  fly  from  justice.  For  two 
months  previously  he  had  expressed  his  intention  of  going  to 
America.  That  was  not  concealed  from  any  one;  he  had  told 
it  to  his  friends,  and  they  all  knew  it.  So  far  as  the  pledges  are 
concerned,  he  appears  to  have  pledged  in  his  own  name,  except 
•when  Mr.  Glass's  shopmate  was  with  him,  and  then  he  pledged 
in  his  name,  as  he  was  justified  in  doing.  There  is  no  disguise 
there.  Then  he  goes  to  the  docks  and  takes  a  passage  in  his 
own  name.  He  is  supposed  to  have  committed  a  heinous  murder 
•on  the  previous  Saturday.  Now,  do  you  not  believe  that  a 
man  who  had  committed  such  a  crime  would,  at  all  events,  go 
to  America  in  a  false  name?  Because  a  man  who  commits  a 
crime  like  this  must  be  a  great  criminal.  If  he  had  done 
this  deed,  how  he  could  have  taken  a  passage  in  his  own 

85 


Franz    Muller. 

Mr.  Serjeant  name  passes  my  comprehension.  I  cannot  understand  it, 
Then,  when  he  sails,  his  first  act  is  to  write  a  letter  to  his 
friends,  which  you  have  heard  read,  which,  I  think,  is  not  the 
letter  of  a  guilty  man.  His  conduct  on  his  arrival  in  America 
is  not  opposed  to  the  statements  he  has  made.  He  is  there 
suddenly  arrested.  He  is  seized  suddenly,  and,  I  suppose, 
almost  dragged  out  of  the  room  by  Sergeant  Clarke.  He  is 
told  all  the  circumstances  of  the  murder  of  Mr.  Briggs,  and 
he  says,  "I  know  nothing  about  it;  I  was  never  on  the  line." 
I  think  I  will  show  you  that  he  was  in  the  habit  of  travelling- 
by  omnibus  generally,  and  that  he  never  was  on  that  line. 
As  far  as  the  evidence  goes,  that  is  uncontradicted  by  any  one. 
He  answers  the  questions  that  were  put  to  him  in  the  politest 
manner,  and  it  is  remarkable  that,  in  reply  to  Mr.  Tanner,  he 
said  he  had  a  ring,  but  it  had  been  stolen  from  him.  When 
asked,  "Was  it  a  red  stone?  "  he  said,  "No,  it  was  a  white 
stone,  and  I  bought  it  in  Cheapside  for  7s.  6d."  Now,  he 
had  bought  it  for  5s.,  which  was  not  far  removed  from  the 
value  he  stated. 

Now,  gentlemen,  there  is  one  part  of  this  most  anxious 
inquiry  of  which  I  must  speak  as  one  earnest  man  may  speak 
to  other  earnest  men  when  they  are  discussing  a  matter  of  the 
gravest  kind.  I  say  there  is  one  part  of  Jthis  case  which  I 
almost  defy  any  one  to  reconcile  with  the  prisoner's  guilt.  Mr. 
Briggs  appears  to  have  been  a  man  of  about  12-stone  weight, 
and  about  5  feet  8  or  9  inches  high.  He  was  in  robust  and 
vigorous  health,  according  to  his  medical  man.  The  young 
man  at  the  bar,  compared  with  Mr.  Briggs,  is  a  mere  stripling. 
The  distance  between  the  Bow  station  and  the  Hackney  Wick 
station  is  1  mile  414  yards.  The  body  of  Mr.  Briggs  is  found 
upon  the  6-foot  way  between  the  lines,  700  yards  from  Hackney 
Wick  station.  Now,  it  takes  three  minutes  for  an  engine 
to  go  from  Bow  to  Hackney  Wick  station.  Therefore,  when  the 
murder  had  been  consummated,  and  the  body  thrown  out,  there 
was  only  about  two  minutes,  or  a  minute  and  a  half.  Do  you 
believe  that  a  slight  and  by  no  means  muscular  young  man 
could  have  committed  that  murder  in  that  time?  I  think  no 
less  than  eight  blows  were  inflicted,  and  some  of  them  must 
have  caused  death.  After  eight  heavy  blows  had  been  inflicted 
on  Mr.  Briggs,  his  body  must  have  been  dragged  along  across, 
86 


Mr.    Serjeant   Parry's    Opening. 

the  carriage,  the  door  must  have  been  opened,  and  the  body  Mr.  Serjeant 

thrown  out,  and  all  this  while  the  train  was  in  rapid  motion. 

Now,  you  can  see  for  yourselves  that  I  am  not  describing  this 

wrongly  when  I  say  that  the  prisoner  is  a  young  man  possessed 

of  no  great  amount  of  physical  force.     His  physique  is  slight 

in  the  extreme.       It  is  proved  that  Mr.  Briggs  was  perfectly 

sober,  and  it  is  said  that  he  was  sleeping. 

Now,  gentlemen,  you  have  to  say  whether  you  can  form  an 
opinion  as  to  whether  that  struggle,  which  ended  in  the  death 
of  a  powerful,  sober  man,  could  have  been  sustained  by  the 
young  man  at  the  bar.  If  you  believe  in  your  own  minds 
and  consciences  that  this  young  man,  with  the  physique  that  he 
has,  and  which  you  yourselves  can  see,  could  not  have  mur- 
dered Mr.  Briggs,  then  you  will  acquit  him.  Gentlemen,  such 
an  impression,  if  on  your  minds,  will  outweigh  all  the  circum- 
stantial evidence  in  the  world.  Is  it  not  likely  that  this  was 
a  premeditated  murder,  committed  by  men  well  accustomed  to 
traffic  in  robbery,  and,  if  necessary,  to  secure  themselves  by 
murder?  I  can  imagine  that  two  such  men  might  have  com- 
mitted this  deed,  and  I  will  prove  to  you  that  there  were  two 
men  in  the  carriage  with  Mr.  Briggs.  I  would  imagine  that 
two  such  men  had  followed  Mr.  Briggs,  seeing  him  in  the 
omnibus  or  in  King  William  Street,  when  he  alighted  from  the 
omnibus  and  went  to  the  North  London  railway.  They  had 
followed  him,  seeing  his  watch  and  chain  and  the  black  bag, 
which  they  thought  might  contain  money,  and  seeing  also  that 
he  was  a  man  likely  to  have  other  property  about  him.  I 
should  have  thought  that  men  of  that  character  would  have 
committed  this  crime.  And,  gentlemen,  what  is  the  young  man 
at  the  bar?  He  is  a  journeyman  tailor,  following  the  most 
peaceful  of  peaceable  occupations.  He  is  a  young  man  of  a 
kind  and  trusting  nature,  putting  confidence  in  those  who  are 
around  him.  among  whom  he  has  secured  the  friendship  and 
goodwill  of  a  woman  like  Mrs.  Blyth.  I  say  that  a  young  man 
who  shows  himself,  as  he  must  have  done,  to  a  woman  like  Mrs. 
Blyth,  and  secures  her  good  feeling,  does  that  which  tells  a 
great  deal.  Mrs.  Blyth' s  friendship  has  been  of  great  service 
to  this  young  man.  Mr.  Blyth  also,  who  is  a  respectable  man, 
speaks  of  him  as  kind  and  humane.  Mr.  Glass,  who  has  known 
him  for  four  years,  also  says  he  was  a  kind  and  humane  young 

87 


Franz    Muller. 

Mr.  Serjeant  man.       Mr.  HaflEa  says  the  same.     And  this  is  the  man  who 
P&rry 

has  perpetrated  this  most  hideous  murder.       That  is  what  the 

prosecution  says.  My  learned  friend  the  Solicitor-General 
said  he  had  seen  the  stick  which  was  in  the  railway  carriage, 
and  that  it  was  covered  with  blood,  and  that,  therefore,  it 
probably  was  the  weapon  with  which  the  murder  was  committed. 
He  has  undertaken  to  show  you,  or  has  suggested  to  you  the 
theory,  that  this  young  man,  seized  by  the  sudden  temptation 
to  possess  the  property  of  Mr.  Briggs,  took  his  stick,  beat  him 
about  the  head,  carried  the  body  across  the  carriage,  and  threw 
it  out  of  the  window.  Gentlemen,  I  say  that  is  impossible. 
I  say  that  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  could  not  in  any  way  have 
done  that. 

Allow  me  to  go  a  little  further  into  this.  The 
prosecution  were  at  a  loss  to  say  with  what  weapon  this  could 
have  been  done.  Not  a  word  was  said  about  this  either  at 
the  Police  Court  or  before  the  coroner.  Not  a  single  word 
was  suggested  that  this  was  the  way  in  which  the  murder  was 
done  by  the  young  man  at  the  bar,  and,  until  that  statement 
fell  from  the  lips  of  the  Solicitor-General,  it  never  entered  my 
mind  that  that  was  the  way  in  which  the  prosecution  were 
going  to  account  for  the  murder  having  been  committed.  A 
pair  of  shears  had  been  taken  out  of  the  pocket  of  the  prisoner, 
but  I  do  not  suppose  that  even  now  the  Solicitor-General  would 
suggest  that  the  murder  was  committed  with  the  shears.  The 
blows  were  inflicted  with  a  blunt  instrument,  and  not  with  a 
sharp  one.  The  stick  was  said  to  be  covered  with  blood.  Now, 
if  that  were  the  weapon,  where  would  the  blood  have  been 
found?  There  was  a  little  blood  upon  it  for  about  6  inches, 
which  had  been  examined  by  Dr.  Letheby  with  a  microscope, 
and  there  was  no  doubt  it  was  human  blood.  But  there  was 
blood  all  over  the  carriage,  and  this  stick  being  there  must 
have  got  splashed  with  blood,  though  if  it  had  been  used  as  a 
weapon  the  blood  would  have  been  upon  the  handle.  Now, 
gentlemen,  you  have  heard  me  ask  Mr.  Briggs,  the  younger, 
whether  he  knew  a  gentleman  of  the  name  of  Lee.  That 
gentleman  was  examined  before  the  coroner.  I  cannot  under- 
stand why  he  has  not  been  presented  before  you  on  the  part 
of  the  prosecution,  but  my  learned  friend,  who  has  not  thought 
fit  to  call  him,  has,  I  have  no  doubt,  some  good  reason  satis- 


Mr.    Serjeant   Parry's    Opening. 

factory  to  his  own  mind  for  not  doing  so.  Mr.  Lee,  I  under-  Mr.  Serjeant 
stand,  is  a  gentleman  of  independent  means.  He  is  the  son 
of  Mr.  Lee,  one  of  the  first  coal  merchants,  and  is  altogether 
unimpeachable  as  regards  character.  He  was  called,  I  think, 
before  the  coroner,  and  he  told  the  coroner  what  he  will  tell 
you,  that  on  the  night  of  the  9th  of  July  he  saw  Mr.  Briggs, 
and,  knowing  him  well,  spoke  to  him  at  the  station.  I  shall 
bring  this  gentleman  before  you,  who  will  prove  this.  He 
was  going  as  a  passenger  to  Bow  by  the  train  which  arrived 
at  ten  o'clock.  He  says  Mr.  Briggs  got  into  the  first  com- 
partment of  the  first-class  carriage  nearest  the  engine,  and  he 
said  "Good-night,  Mr.  Briggs,"  and  Mr.  Briggs  replied 
"  Good-night,  Tom."  Nothing  else  passed  between  them.  He 
«aw  there  were  two  persons  in  the  same  part  of  the  carriage, 
and  the  deceased  was  sitting  on  the  side  next  the  down  plat- 
form. One  man  sat  on  the  same  side  as  Mr.  Briggs,  and  the 
other  opposite  to  him.  There  was  a  light  inside,  but  it  was 
from  the  lamp  outside  that  Mr.  Lee  saw  the  two  persons.  It 
was  quite  possible  for  these  passengers  to  have  got  out  after 
he  got  into  another  compartment  without  his  seeing  it,  but  they 
<lid  not  appear  to  have  any  intention  of  leaving  the  carriage 
when  he  saw  them.  One  man,  he  said — the  man  next  the 
-deceased — was  a  tall  man,  and  he  believed  he  had  dark  whiskers. 
He  would  not  swear  he  had  whiskers.  The  other  man  had 
light  hair.  He  could  not  tell  the  ages.  That  is  a  statement 
of  what  he  saw,  and  that  is  an  important  statement,  because, 
as  far  as  you  know  of  this  matter  as  placed  before  you  on  the 
part  of  the  prosecution,  the  murder  must  have  been  committed 
between  Fenchurch  Street  and  Bow,  or  between  Fenchurch 
Street  and  Hackney  Wick.  There  is  no  reason  whatever  to 
•doubt  that  Mr.  Lee  saw  two  men,  and  that  it  was  the  gaslight 
that  enabled  him  to  see  the  men  so  well  as  he  did.  As  far  as 
he  knew,  neither  of  these  men  got  out  of  the  carriage.  He 
could  not  say  that  Muller  was  one  of  them.  My  learned  friend 
the  Solicitor-General  has  put  before  you  another  theory.  He 
did  not  think  there  were  two  men.  He  thought  there  was 
only  one,  and  he  gave  as  a  reason  that  if  there  had  been  two 
men  the  pockets  of  Mr.  Briggs  would  have  been  rifled,  and 
the  money  taken  from  him,  but  if  there  was  only  one  man  the 
time  would  not  have  been  long  enough  to  get  at  the  pockets  of 
the  deceased  gentleman. 

89 


Franz    Muller. 

Mr.  Serjeant  Now,  gentlemen,  you  will  observe  that  the  description  given 
by  Mr.  Lee  does  not  answer  to  the  description  of  Muller  in  any 
way.  He  says  he  cannot  swear  it  was  Muller,  but  he  says  also- 
he  cannot  swear  it  was  not.  He  is  clear,  however,  that  he  saw 
two  men.  Now,  gentlemen,  for  some  reason  or  other  this 
gentleman  has  been  kept  back.  It  would  not  serve  the  purposes 
of  the  prosecution  to  let  you  know  that  fact.  Therefore  Mr. 
Lee  is  not  called,  because,  I  suppose,  he  would  embarrass  the 
theory  as  to  who  did  this  murder  and  how  it  was  done.  I  shall 
feel  it  my  duty  to  place  that  gentleman  before  you.  Mr.  Lee 
said  that  at  the  time  he  saw  Mr.  Briggs  that  gentleman  had 
his  hat  on.  Here  you  put  an  end  to  the  suggestion  that  this 
is  the  hat  of  Mr.  Briggs,  for,  if  he  had  it  on  at  the  time  of  the 
first  blow,  it  must  have  been  crushed. 

Gentlemen,  if  this  were  a  case  of  a  £10  note,  if  it  were 
a  case  of  a  bill  of  exchange,  if  it  were  a  case  of  goods  exchanged 
or  sold,  of  work  done,  or  if  it  were  a  miserable  squabble 
between  a  hackney  cab  and  a  dust  cart,  I  should  be  per- 
mitted to  sum  up  the  evidence  for  the  defence.  But  this 
is  simply  a  case  of  life  or  death,  and  the  law  of  England 
forbids  that  to  be  done.  I  feel  very  strongly  on  this  subject; 
but  we  are  in  a  Court  of  justice,  and  not  in  a  Court  of 
legislature,  so  I  forbear  to  express  my  opinion  further.  You 
may  remember  that  the  prisoner  said  he  was  going  to  see 
his  sweetheart  at  Camberwell,  and  he  gave  the  name  of  the 
girl  he  was  going  to  see,  who  Haifa  said  was  a  girl  of  the 
town.  He  had  known  her  before,  and  had  been  in  the  habit 
of  visiting  her.  Haifa  did  not  know  whether  she  knew  Muller 
by  his  right  name,  but  she  will  tell  you  that  when  you  see  her. 
Her  landlady,  Mrs.  Jones,  lives  at  Stanley  Cottage,  James 
Street,  Vassal  Road. 

Now,  gentlemen,  this  evidence  is  in  the  nature  of  an  alibi, 
and,  if  true,  it  is  the  most  conclusive  evidence  which  can  be 
given.  This  young  girl  knew  a  person  of  the  name  of  Alexander 
Gill.  I  shall  call  Mrs.  Jones  before  you,  and  she  will  tell  you 
that  on  that  night,  after  nine  o'clock,  between  nine  and  ten, 
Muller  called,  but  the  girl  Eldred  was  out.  He  spoke  to  Mrs. 
Jones  or  Mrs.  Johnson,  as  he  called  her,  about  ten  minutes, 
and  then  left.  He  had  his  slipper  on,  and  you  will  remember 
that  it  is  clearly  proved  that  upon  the  night  of  the  murder 
90 


Mr.    Serjeant   Parry's    Opening. 

he  had  his  slipper  on  when  he  left  the  Repsches.    He  had  it  on  Mr.  Serjeant 

Pappy 
also  at  Camberwell.     That  is  another  circumstance  in  the  case 

which  makes  it  very  unlikely,  as  it  seems  to  me,  that,  with 
a  slipper  on,  he  could  have  committed  such  a  crime  as  this. 
He  had  his  slipper  on  when  he  left  Camberwell.  The  girl  Eldred 
had  gone  out  about  nine  o'clock.  Shortly  after  that,  as  you 
will  find  by  witnesses,  Eldred  returned,  and  then  Mrs.  Jones 
told  her  that  Muller  had  been  to  see  her.  (The  learned  Serjeant 
was  here  interrupted  by  one  of  the  other  learned  counsel  for 
the  defence,  and,  correcting  himself,  said) — I  am  told  it  was 
Sunday  morning  when  Eldred  returned.  This  only  shows  you 
how  very  desirable  it  is  that  counsel  for  the  defence  should 
have  the  right  of  summing  up  afterwards.  Mrs.  Jones  told 
her  that  her  young  Frenchman  had  come  to  see  her;  for  Mrs. 
Jones,  or  Johnson,  knew  him  as  the  young  Frenchman.  Now, 
Mrs.  Jones  and  the  young  girl  Eldred  about  this  time  received 
a  paper  which  I  hold  in  my  hand,  and  which  is  a  telegraphic 
message.  That  message  was  received  on  the  9th  of  July  from 
Alexander  Gill  Strachan,  giving  an  address  somewhere  in 
Whitechapel,  and  addressed  to  Miss  Eldred,  Stanley  Cottage, 
James  Street,  Vassal  Road,  Camberwell.  It  said — 

I  shall  be  with  you  on  Sunday  at  three  o'clock,  be  at  home. — Yours, 
in  haste,  Alexander  Gill  Strachan. 

Mrs.  Jones  has  two  lodgers  in  her  house,  one  Miss  Eldred  and 
another  girl.  Both  of  these  girls  are  what  are  called  unfortunate 
girls.  Now,  that  appears  to  me  to  be  the  only  blot  in  the 
character  of  Muller  that  we  have  seen  in  the  course  of  this 
very  long  trial.  Gentlemen,  when  we  know  well  what  is  going 
on  in  all  classes,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  our  moral 
indignation  ought  not  to  press  too  heavily  on  the  heads  of  thesa 
unfortunates.  Still,  they  will  have  to  be  watched  narrowly  to 
see  whether  evidence  is  or  is  not  true.  If  you  are  satisfied  that 
this  telegram  is  genuine,  it  is  a  wonderful  coincidence  that 
this  girl  should  have  received  it,  and  that  she  should  be  told 
on  the  same  day  by  Mrs.  Jones  that  her  young  Frenchman 
had  been  to  see  her.  This  is  a  wonderful  coincidence.  That 
this  message  is  a  genuine  one  can  be  proved  beyond  all  doubt 
or  question,  and  Mrs.  Jones  will  tell  you  that  on  that  night 
Muller  came  to  her  house;  and  that,  gentlemen,  is  where 


Franz    Muller. 

Mr.  Serjeant  Muller  himself  said  he  was  going  when  he  said  he  was  going  to 
Camberwell,  and,  I  believe,  to  see  the  girl  Eldred. 

Now,  gentlemen,  a  person  suddenly  appears  before  you  as 
a  witness  of  whom  you  have  heard  nothing  before;  but,  if  you 
believe  what  this  witness  will  tell  you,  it  will  allow  you  to  relieve 
the  young  man  at  the  bar  from  the  fearful  consequences  of  this 
charge.  I  shall  call  before  you  a  witness  whose  testimony, 
however,  will  not  be  very  great.  An  omnibus  conductor  who 
conducts  an  omnibus  from  Camberwell  Gate  remembers  this, 
and  it  is  one  of  the  results  of  the  inquiries  that  have  been  made 
by  the  German  Legal  Protection  Society,  who,  much  to  their 
honour,  although  feeling  as  great  a  horror  at  this  crime  as  any 
men  living,  have  not  allowed  the  life  of  their  countryman  to  be 
sacrificed,  however  humble  he  may  be,  without  giving  him  the 
means  of  a  complete  and  thorough  defence.  I  shall  call  this 
omnibus  conductor  before  you.  He  has  been  to  see  Muller  since 
he  was  in  prison,  and  has  been  unable  to  identify  him.  Mrs. 
Jones  and  Miss  Eldred  saw  him  in  prison,  and,  of  course, 
recognised  him  at  once.  It  is,  however,  a  very  small  circum- 
stance that  I  am  about  to  mention.  The  omnibus  conductor 
remembers  that  at  seven  minutes  to  ten  o'clock  on  one  Saturday 
night  a  passenger  got  into  his  omnibus;  and,  if  it  should  be 
that  this  man  was  the  prisoner  before  you  here  to-day,  it  would 
not  be  the  first  time  that  you  had  heard  that  he  had  come 
home  in  a  Camberwell  omnibus  that  night.  About  ten  minutes 
to  ten  o'clock — on  a  Saturday  night,  I  say — the  omnibus  con- 
ductor recollects  a  passenger  got  into  his  omnibus  who  had  a 
carpet  slipper  on  one  foot.  That  is  the  whole  of  the  evidence 
he  can  give  you.  It  may  weigh  as  naught.  A  passenger  in  an 
omnibus  with  a  carpet  slipper  is,  however,  a  very  rare  kind 
of  passenger.  The  time,  too,  fits  with  Miiller's  visit  to  Mrs. 
Jones. 

Now,  gentlemen,  it  may  be  that  on  examining  him  more 
may  come  to  his  recollection.  It  is  a  very  trifling  circumstance 
which  he  has  to  speak  to,  but  the  very  insignificance  of  it 
shows  that  the  man  who  tells  it  must  be  the  witness  of  truth. 
If  what  he  had  to  say  had  been  false,  he  would  have  said  he 
had  known  Muller,  and  he  would  have  told  you  all  that  was 
necessary  to  prove  an  alibi.  I  dared  not  keep  this  fact  from 
you,  although  I  admit  it  is  not  of  so  great  importance  as 
92 


Mr.    Serjeant   Parry's    Opening. 


others  that  will  be  submitted  to  you.     There  is,  however,  one  Mr.  Serjeant 

P&PPV 

observation  which  I  ought  to  have  made  before,  and  it  is  of 
such  great  importance  that  I  am  sure  you  will  not  regret  that 
I  make  it  now.  It  is  this,  that  no  marks  of  blood  whatever  • 
have  been  found  on  the  clothes  of  the  prisoner.  It  is  idle  to  j 
say  that  he  has  made  away  with  his  clothes,  because  he  clearly 
had  not  done  so  before  his  departure  from  the  London  docks. 
No  marks  of  blood  have  been  found.  Gentlemen,  it  cannot  be 
doubted  that  if  he  were  himself  the  murderer,  or  if  he  were 
one  of  two  murderers,  he  would  have  had  marks  of  blood  upon 
him.  Blood  spurted  out  of  Mr.  Briggs,  and  there  is  no  doubt 
whatever  that  his  assailant  must  have  been  covered  with  blood, 
or,  at  all  events,  have  had  a  considerable  amount  upon  his 
clothes.  Now,  the  only  way  in  which  the  prosecution  can 
answer  that  statement  is  this,  that  the  clothes  he  wore  in  that 
carriage  might  have  been  made  away  with.  It  appears  to  me 
to  be  conclusive  that  they  were  not  made  away  with  after  the 
murder. 

Now,  gentlemen,  I  believe  that  I  have  urged  upon  your 
attention  every  topic  that  I  thought  might  be  honourably 
advanced  by  me  on  behalf  of  the  prisoner  at  the  bar.  I  hope, 
I  sincerely  hope,  that  I  have  done  my  duty.  Gentlemen,  this 
case,  as  I  have  said  all  along,  is  one  of  suspicion,  great 
suspicion ;  but  I  hope  you  will  forgive  me  if,  at  the  last  moment 
that  I  shall  have  the  opportunity  of  saying  a  word  to  you — I 
hope  you  will  forgive  me  if  I  entreat  you  to  bear  in  mind  that 
the  case,  if  not  proved  against  the  prisoner,  is  equivalent  to  the 
fact  of  his  innocence — at  all  events,  so  far  as  your  duty  is 
concerned.  "  Not  guilty "  in  the  English  law  means  this, 
either  that  the  person  charged  is  perfectly  innocent,  or  that 
the  evidence  against  him — the  proof  brought  forward — was 
not  satisfactory  to  the  careful  and  cautious  men  who  tried 
him.  Gentlemen,  if  ever  there  was  a  case  in  which  care  and 
caution  ought  to  be  exercised  by  Christian  men  before  they 
arrive  at  a  conclusion  it  is  a  case  like  this,  where  the  life  or 
death  of  a  fellow-creature  hangs  upon  the  balance.  Once  given, 
and  the  sentence  executed,  your  judgment  is  irrevocable.  You 
possess  a  transcendent  power — a  power  which  no  other  institu- 
tion in  this  country  possesses.  You,  the  jury,  have  the 
transcendent  power  to  bid  that  young  man  to  live  or  to  die. 

93 


Franz    Muller. 

MP.  Serjeant      Gentlemen,   when  you  retire   after  the  final  charge  of  the 
Pappy 

learned  judge,  there  will  be  a  terrible  duty  cast  upon  you.     Is 

there  one  of  you  who  would  not  have  preferred  to  be  relieved 
of  that  duty?  Gentlemen,  as  I  began,  so  I  will  end.  Whatever 
difficulties  this  young  man  has  had  to  encounter  in  this  case — 
whatever  difficulties  I,  as  his  advocate,  have  had  to  encounter 
in  the  performance  of  my  duty — I  will  only  say  at  the  end,  as 
I  did  at  the  beginning,  that  I  have  the  fullest  reliance  upon 
your  honour  and  your  caution.  I  have  the  fullest  reliance  that 
you  will  receive  every  proposition  I  have  made  for  the  prisoner 
with  the  favour  it  deserves  at  your  hands.  Gentlemen,  you 
will  have  to  pronounce  judgment,  and  I  hope  and  pray  the 
judgment  may  be  one  of  mercy. 

The  Court  adjourned  at  seven  minutes  past  five  o'clock. 


94 


Third  Day— Saturday,  2pth  October,  1864. 

The  Court  met  at  nine  o'clock. 

THOMAS  LEE,  examined  by  Mr.  "METCALFE — I  reside  at  King  Thomas  Lee 
Edward  Road,  Hackney.  I  am  a  private  gentleman.  My 
father  was  in  business  as  a  coal  merchant.  I  knew  the  late 
Mr.  Briggs,  and  had  known  him  for  the  last  three  or  four 
years.  I  saw  him  last  alive  on  Saturday  night,  9th  July, 
at  the  Bow  station.  It  was  about  ten  o'clock.  He  was  in  a 
first-class  carriage  of  a  train  coming  from  Fenchurch  Street, 
which  stopped  at  Bow  station.  The  carriage  was  the  third 
or  fourth  from  the  engine.  I  did  not  notice  exactly  which. 
I  said  to  him,  "Good-night,  Mr.  Briggs."  He  answered  me 
and  said,  "  Good-night,  Tom."  I  was  sufficiently  familiar  with 
him  for  him  to  address  me  in  that  way.  The  train  stopped 
there  longer  than  usual.  I  got  into  a  second-class  carriage, 
nearer  the  engine,  to  go  to  Hackney,  where  I  live.  There  were 
two  other  persons  in  the  same  compartment  with  Mr.  Briggs. 
There  was  a  light  in  the  carriage.  I  believe  Mr.  Briggs  had 
his  hat  on,  or  I  should  have  noticed  it  certainly.  One  of  the 
persons  was  sitting  on  the  side  of  the  carriage  next  the  platform, 
opposite  to  Mr.  Briggs;  the  other  was  sitting  on  Mr.  Briggs's 
left-hand  side  next  to  him,  on  the  same  side  of  the  compartment. 
I  saw  sufficient  of  those  persons  to  give  a  description  of  them — 
one  in  particular.  The  man  who  sat  opposite  to  Mr.  Briggs 
was  a  stoutish,  thick-set  man,  with  light  whiskers.  He  had 
his  hand  in  the  squab  or  loop  of  the  carriage,  and  I  noticed 
that  he  had  rather  a  large  hand.  The  other  man  I  only  saw 
casually,  but  he  appeared  a  tall,  thin  man,  and  dark. 

To  the  best  of  your  belief,  does  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  appear 
like  either  of  those  men? — I  can't  swear  to  him. 

Have  you  any  belief  on  the  subject? — I  should  rather  think 
he  was  not.  I  gave  no  information  to  the  police  of  what  I  had 
seen.  Neither  of  the  persons  seemed,  when  the  train  came  up, 

95 


Franz    Muller. 

Thomas  Lee  as  if  they  were  getting  out,  or  moving  with  the  intention  of 
getting  out,  at  the  station.  I  was  in  the  second-class  some- 
time before  the  train  moved  on.  When  the  carriage  came  up 
I  spoke  to  Mr.  Briggs.  I  saw  no  apparent  intention  of  those 
persons  leaving  the  carriage.  I  first  mentioned  this  to  any  one, 
I  think,  on  the  Monday  or  Tuesday  following,  almost  as  soon 
as  I  heard  of  the  murder  being  committed.  I  spoke  to  a  friend 
about  it  first.  Subsequently,  I  believe,  it  was  communicated  to 
the  police,  and  I  was  examined  before  the  coroner.  I  was 
called,  I  don't  know  on  whose  part.  The  coroner  directed  me 
to  be  there.  Before  going  before  the  coroner  I  gave  my  evidence 
to  Superintendent  Howie,  who,  I  believe,  was  making  inquiries 
for  the  prosecution. 

Cross-examined  by  the  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — I  was  not 
examined  before  the  magistrate.  I  live  about  twenty  minutes' 
walk  from  Hackney  station.  I  left  my  house  about  eight 
o'clock.  I  cannot  be  sure  what  time.  My  only  object  in  going 
to  Bow  was  for  a  change.  I  walked  up  Hackney  a  little  way 
for  amusement,  for  a  stroll.  I  think  I  started  from  Hackney 
by  the  quarter  to  nine  or  nine  train.  I  took  a  stroll  down  to 
Bow  Church.  I  only  went  to  Bow  for  a  stroll,  that's  all.  I 
called  in  and  had  a  glass  of  ale  in  a  public-house  at  Bow  just 
beyond  the  church  on  the  left-hand  side.  I  don't  know  the 
name  of  it.  I  only  had  one  glass  of  ale.  I  can't  swear  that 
I  did  not  go  to  any  other  house,  but  I  did  not  speak  to 
anybody.  I  simply  went  to  Bow  for  a  stroll.  That  is  all  the 
account  I  can  give.  I  got  back  to  my  house  about  a  quarter 
to  eleven.  I  did  not  speak  to  anybody  during  that  time.  I 
don't  think  I  saw  any  one  I  can  remember  except  Mr.  Briggs.  I 
believe  I  did  not.  To  the  best  of  my  belief,  I  swear  it.  I 
cannot  go  beyond  that,  because  it  is  some  time  ago.  I  know 
it  was  Saturday  night,  the  9th  of  July,  because  I  heard  of 
the  murder  the  following  week.  It  was  the  only  night  I  ever 
saw  Mr.  Briggs  at  Bow  station  so  late.  I  heard  of  the  murder, 
I  think,  some  time  on  Monday,  about  the  middle  of  the  day, 
at  Mr.  Ireland's,  the  Falcon,  Fetter  Lane,  where  I  have  my 
dinner  generally,  or  Mr.  Lake's,  the  Anchor  eating-house,  in 
Cheapside.  I  am  not  quite  certain  whether  I  dined  at  Mr. 
Ireland's  or  Mr.  Lake's  that  day.  I  am  not  quite  certain  that 
96 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

it  was  Monday ;  it  might  have  been  Tuesday,  but  I  think  it  was  Thomas  Lee 
Monday.     I  am  quite  positive  I  did  not  hear  of  it  on  Sunday. 

Having  seen,  as  you  say,  Mr.  Briggs  within  a  few  minutes 
of  his  murder,  in  company  with  two  men  in  the  same  carriage, 
why  did  you  not  inform  the  police  of  that  fact? — Because  I 
did  not  wish  to  be  brought  up.  I  did  not  see  what  my  evidence 
had  to  do  with  it. 

Pray,  consider  your  answer.  Do  you  mean  to  adhere  to  that 
answer,  that  you  did  not  consider  your  evidence  was  of 
importance? — I  do. 

What!  you  saw  Mr.  Briggs  three  or  four  minutes  before  his 
murder  with  two  men,  whom  you  say  you  could  describe,  and 
yet  you  did  not  think  it  of  importance  to  inform  the  police? — 
I  did  not  think  there  was  any  need  of  it.  That  answer  I  persist 
in.  I  first  mentioned  that  I  had  seen  two  men  in  the  carriage 
with  Mr.  Briggs  whom  I  could  describe  to  a  friend  of  mine, 
Mr.  Tompkins,  I  think,  on  the  Monday  night.  I  can't  swear 
to  what  I  only  think.  Mr.  Tompkins  is  a  doctor,  but  not  my 
doctor.  I  have  a  wife.  I  am  positive  I  told  Mrs.  Lee  on 
Monday  night.  I  told  Mr.  Tompkins  first,  because  I  saw  him 
before  I  got  home.  I  think  I  saw  him  on  Monday.  I  think 
I  then  told  it  to  Mr.  Ireland  on  the  Tuesday.  I  did  not  know 
at  the  time  I  should  be  called  up  for  anything,  therefore  these 
facts  did  not  impress  themselves  on  me.  The  next  person,  I 
believe,  was  Superintendent  Howie.  I  did  not  go  to  Superin- 
tendent Howie  to  give  information;  he  came  to  me  on  the 
following  Sunday  afternoon,  I  suppose  in  consequence  of  what 
he  heard  I  had  been  talking  about.  He  sent  a  man  round  on 
Sunday  morning  and  came  in  the  afternoon.  I  then  gave  him 
some  information. 

Then  I  am  to  take  it  that  during  the  whole  of  that  week 
you,  knowing,  as  you  say,  that  there  were  two  men  whom  you 
could  describe,  gave  no  information  to  the  police? — Yes. 

You  did  not  give  it  until  one  of  them  came  to  you  ? — I  should 
not  have  given  any  information  at  all  if  they  had  not  come, 
because  I  thought  it  unimportant,  and  because  I  knew  how 
much  bother  it  was.  I  have  something  to  do.  I  collect  my 
own  rents.  I  was  examined  before  the  coroner,  and  I  believe 
gave  the  same  account  of  the  men  before  the  coroner  that  I 
have  given  here  now. 

H  97 


Franz    Muller. 

Thomas  Lee  (The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL  was  about  to  read  from  the  witness's 
deposition  before  the  coroner,  when  Serjeant  Parry  objected, 
on  the  ground  that  the  depositions  had  not  been  put  in  as 
evidence — that  certain  words  with  reference  to  the  witness's 
statement  before  the  coroner  he  (Serjeant  Parry)  had  read  from 
the  instructions  contained  in  his  own  brief. 

After  some  little  discussion,  Serjeant  Parry's  objection  was 
sustained,  and  the  witness's  cross-examination  resumed.) 

Cross-examination  resumed — I  don't  remember  who  was 
the  ticket  collector  on  that  night.  When  I  saw  Mr. 
Briggs  the  train  had  just  stopped,  and  I  immediately 
got  into  my  carriage  after  bidding  him  good-night.  I  have 
been  in  Mr.  Briggs's  company  a  good  many  times — more  than 
half  a  dozen  times — a  good  deal.  I  never  visited  or  dined 
with  him  or  he  with  me.  I  have  seen  him  in  the  city,  and 
often  riding  home  with  him  in  the  same  carriage.  That  was 
my  only  acquaintance  with  him.  He  had  been  in  the  habit 
of  calling  me  "  Tom "  lately,  and  I  will  swear  he  did  so  on 
that  night.  My  carriage  was  next  to  his,  nearer  to  the  engine. 
I  got  out  at  the  Hackney  station.  I  did  not  observe  the  guard 
come  with  a  lamp  to  his  carriage,  nor  any  commotion  on  the 
platform,  for  I  got  out  quickly.  I  heard  of  nothing  extra- 
ordinary having  occurred  in  the  carriage  next  to  me. 

Re-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — Hackney  is  not  far  from 
Hackney  Wick.  I  am  able  to  swear  I  heard  of  the  murder 
on  Monday  or  Tuesday.  I  believe  I  gave  Superintendent  Howie 
the  same  account  that  I  have  given  to-day.  He  wrote  it  down. 
I  have  not  seen  him  here.  I  was  examined  twice  before  the 
coroner,  but  not  in  the  sharp  way  that  I  have  been  by  the 
Solicitor-General  to-day.  Mr.  Beard  asked  me  one  or  two 
questions.  I  had  to  go  to  Bow  Street  to  see  if  I  could  identify 
Muller.  When  it  was  found  that  I  could  not  identify  him  I 
was  not  called.  I  never  knew  or  heard  of  Muller  before  in  my 
life.  I  have  known  Mr.  Briggs  in  the  way  I  have  described  for 
two  or  three  years.  He  was  rather  of  a  cheerful,  affable  dis- 
position. He  generally  used  to  sleep  going  home  in  the  railway 
carriage;  but  he  was  not  asleep  on  the  night  I  bade  him  good- 
night at  Bow  station.  I  think  the  train  was  late  that  night. 
When  I  arrived  at  Hackney  I  immediately  got  out  of  the 
98 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

carriage  and  left  the  station,  just  as  an  ordinary  passenger,  Thomas  Lee 
but  rather  quicker,  because  I  was  rather  late. 

By  a  JUROR — When  Mr.  Briggs  was  asleep  he  would  keep  his 
hat  on. 


GBORGB  BTERS,  examined  by  Mr.  BESLEY — I  live  at  4  Bridge  George  Byers 
Road,  Eburybridge,  Pimlico.  I  am  a  hatter  by  trade,  and 
have  been  brought  up  to  it  from  boyhood.  I  am  acquainted 
with  all  the  branches  of  the  hat  trade,  the  second-hand  trade 
most  particularly.  Cutting  down  hats  and  sewing  them  is  usual 
in  the  second-hand  hat  trade  with  me  and  others.  It  is  usual 
to  stitch  them  when  they  have  been  cut  down.  (Hat  found  in 
Miiller's  possession  handed  to  witness.)  This  is  not  done  as  I 
«hould  do  it,  because  I  should  stick  it  with  dissolved  shellac, 
as  well  as  stitch  it.  That  would  involve  more  time  and  trouble 
in  the  work. 

By  the  CHIEF  BARON — I  should  stitch  it  first,  and  then 
fasten  it  with  dissolved  shellac,  so  that  it  would  be  independent 
of  the  stitching.  That  is  the  usual  way  in  which  it  is  done  in 
the  trade.  I  should  cut  it  down,  of  course,  but  likewise  gum 
or  fasten  it  with  the  dissolved  shellac.  Some  men,  I  may  say, 
are  bunglers.  They  might  probably  in  a  hurry  put  a  hat 
together  without  stitching. 

By  a  JUROR — It  would  probably  take,  independent  of  the 
sewing,  half  an  hour  to  make  a  good  job  of  a  hat,  to  gum 
it,  finish  it,  stick  it  on,  and  put  the  silk  in  its  place  after  it  is 
stitched.  Then  it  is  finished.  If  I  had  a  job  of  that  sort, 
I  should  take  the  leather  out ;  I  should  not  cut  it  off.  I  should 
put  a  new  leather  in. 

WILLIAM  LEE,  examined  by  Mr.  BBSLBT — I  am  a  hatter,  resid-  William  Lee 
ing  at  Queen's  Road,  Chelsea.  I  have  been  for  six  or  seven 
years  in  the  trade.  In  the  second-hand  trade  I  always  stitch 
hats  after  cutting  them  down.  The  reason  for  cutting  them 
down  is  that  hats  are  now  worn  lower  than  the  old  hats. 
Besides  stitching,  hatters  use  varnish.  (Same  hat  handed  to 
witness.)  I  have  done  a  great  many  hats  in  the  same  way  as 
this.  If  I  cut  down  a  hat  for  any  one  which  did  not  require 

99 


Franz    Muller. 

WiUiam  Lee  a  new  lining,  I  should  put  in  the  old  one  again.  It  is  cheaper 
to  stitch  hats  in  the  second-hand  trade,  because  you  save  the 
expense  of  shellac.  I  know  nothing  of  Muller.  When  I  heard 
of  this  case  I  did  not  volunteer  my  evidence;  I  was  subpoenaed. 
I  have  never  seen  this  hat  before. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  BALLANTINB — Is  that  lining  cut 
in  the  way  you  would  do  it?  You  observe  the  edge  of  the 
leather  is  cut? — It  is  lower.  The  leather  has  been  cut.  I 
do  not  know  why  the  leather  should  be  cut.  We  do  not  cut 
leather  in  our  trade. 

Has  it  been  cut  for  any  purpose  you  can  understand? — I  do 
not  know  that. 

People  would  not  think  of  cutting  a  piece  out  of  a  new  hat? — 
Hats  are  worn  lower  than  they  used  to  be,  and  a  hat  would 
become  more  saleable  after  being  so  treated. 

Re-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — Have  you,  as  regarda 
stitching,  done  many  hats  in  the  same  way  as  that  in  your 
own  trade? — Yes. 

Are  hats  sometimes  cut  down  on  account  of  grease  from  th& 
head  having  injured  them? — I  have  never  done  so. 

By  a  JUROR — I  should  not  put  so  many  stitches  in  a  hat  aa 
are  in  this;  not  so  close  together,  nor  yet  in  the  same  zig-zag 
way.  I  should  not  either  cut  a  hat  down  so  low.  It  is  lower 
than  they  are  worn. 

Alfred  C.  ALFRED  COOPER  WOODWARD,   examined  by  Mr.   METCALFB — I 

am  a  clerk  in  the  service  of  the  Electric  and  International  Tele- 
graph Company,  which  connects  with  the  London  District  Com- 
pany. (Telegram  handed  to  witness.)  I  have  the  original 
of  which  this  is  a  copy;  here  it  is.  (Original  produced.)  That 
telegram  was  sent  from  the  office  on  the  9th  of  July  last. 
(Telegram  read  by  the  Clerk  of  the  Court.)  The  sender  of 
the  message  was  Alexander  Gill  Strachan,  Mr.  Drake's,  Somer- 
set Street,  Whitechapel.  It  was  sent  to  Miss  Eldred,  Stanley 
Cottage,  James  Street,  Vassall  Road,  Camberwell,  New  Road, 
and  was  as  follows: — "Gone  to  Stratford,  but  I  shall  be  with 
you  to-morrow,  Sunday,  three  o'clock.  Be  at  home.  I  shall 
come  without  fail. — Yours  in  haste,  Alexander  Gill  Strachan." 
It  was  received  on  the  9th  of  July,  at  the  Mincing  Lane  office* 
100 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

at  4.30  p.m.,  and  sent  about  twenty-five  minutes  to  five.     It  Aifl-ed  C. 
might  be  half  an  hour  or  less  reaching  its  destination. 

By  the  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — The  date  is  on  the  top  of  the 
telegram. 

Mrs.  ELIZABETH  JONES,  examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — I  Mrs.  E.  Jones 
reside  at  1  St.  George's  Road,  Peckham.  In  July  last  I  lived 
at  Stanley  Cottage,  James  Street,  Vassall  Road.  I  have  two 
female  lodgers,  young  women,  who  receive  the  visits  of  men. 
A  young  woman  of  the  name  of  Mary  Ann  Eldred  lived  with  me 
then,  and  she  lives  with  me  still.  She  has  lived  with  me  ten 
months.  I  know  the  young  man  at  the  bar.  He  had  been 
in  the  habit  of  occasionally  coming  to  see  Mary  Ann  Eldred.  I 
have  known  him  as  visiting  her  about  nine  or  ten  months  before 
the  9th  of  July.  Miss  Eldred  knew  Miiller  before  she  came 
to  me — about  a  twelvemonth,  I  think.  I  have  seen  him  visit 
my  house  frequently.  I  remember  my  lodger  receiving  this 
telegram  quite  well.  I  do  not  recollect  when  I  received  it, 
but  it  was  some  time  in  the  afternoon.  I  remember  seeing 
Muller  on  the  9th  of  July,  the  date  of  that  telegram.  It  was 
about  half-past  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening.  At  that  time 
Mary  Ann  Eldred  was  not  at  home.  She  had  gone  out  at 
nine  o'clock,  and  had  been  out  about  half  an  hour.  Muller 
called  to  see  her,  and  found  she  was  not  at  home.  He  stayed 
talking  with  me  about  five  or  ten  minutes  at  the  door.  I  am 
quite  sure  it  was  as  much  as  half-past  nine  o'clock.  He  then 
left.  Bearing  in  mind  that  telegram,  I  am  quite  sure  that  it 
was  Saturday  evening,  the  9th  of  July,  about  half -past  nine, 
that  I  saw  this  young  man.  I  thought  his  name  was  Muller, 
but  I  used  to  call  him  the  little  Frenchman.  I  did  not  know 
he  was  a  German.  Miss  Eldred  used  to  say  that  he  was  a 
German,  but  I  used  to  call  him  the  little  Frenchman.  I  noticed 
that  he  had  one  slipper  on.  He  told  me  that  he  had  hurt  his 
foot.  (Slipper  handed  to  witness.)  I  did  not  notice  what 
kind  of  slipper  it  was.  He  told  me  he  was  obliged  to  come  out 
with  a  slipper,  for  he  had  met  with  an  accident  and  hurt  his 
foot.  I  did  not  see  Mary  Ann  Eldred  after  this  young  man 
had  left  until  Sunday  morning.  I  told  her  her  friend  had  been, 
•and  she  said,  "  Who — the  one  I  received  the  telegram  from?  " 

•  -  101 


Franz    Muller. 

Mrs.  B.  Jones      The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL  objected  to  a  conversation  being  giver* 
as  evidence,  and  his  objection  was  sustained  by  the  bench. 

Examination  resumed — I  am  afraid  I  can  only  ask  you  did 
you  communicate  something  to  Mary  Ann  Eldred  the  next 
morning  1 — Yes . 

And  also  to  your  husband? — Yes,  on  the  same  evening  to 
my  husband.  My  house  was  from  a  half  to  three-quarters  of 
a  mile  from  where  the  omnibuses  start  at  Camberwell  Green. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  BALLANTINB — I  suppose  Miss 
Eldred  is  here? — Yes. 

You  are  living  in  some  other  house;  are  you  living  in  the 
same  name? — Yes. 

Are  you  sure?  Have  you  taken  the  house  in  the  same  name? 
— I  do  not  know  whether  my  husband  has  taken  the  house  in 
the  name  of  Kent  or  Jones. 

Is  his  name  Kent? — Yes. 

How  is  it  your  name  is  Jones  ? — My  name  has  been  Jones  for 
thirty-six  years,  and  I  have  always  gone  in  the  name  of  Jonea. 
This  is  my  second  husband.  I  do  not  know  Nelson  Square, 
Peckham,  or  any  part  of  Peckham.  I  am  living  now  at  Peck- 
ham,  about  half  a  mile  from  where  I  used  to  live.  It  was 
Camberwell  before;  now  I  have  got  down  the  road  to  Peck- 
ham,  but  I  do  not  know  where  Nelson  Square  is.  Supposing 
a  person  wanted  to  get  to  Fenchurch  or  King  William  Street, 
he  would  go  up  towards  Camberwell  Gate  for  an  omnibus.  It 
would  take  a  quarter  of  an  hour  or  ten  minutes  to  walk  there 
from  Vassall  Road.  It  is  half  a  mile  or  more.  The  Peckham 
omnibuses  do  not  go  to  Camberwell  Gate,  they  go  by  the  Lord 
Nelson.  I  do  not  know  whether  the  Peckham  and  Camberwell 
omnibuses  meet  in  King  William  Street.  I  believe  they  both 
go  over  London  Bridge. 

Can  you  give  an  idea  of  the  time  you  received  that  telegram? 
— No,  I  cannot  give  a  better  idea  than  I  have  given,  it  is  sa 
long  ago. 

To  whom  was  the  telegram  handed? — I  took  it  in  off  the 
messenger.  I  do  not  know  whether  I  signed  for  it.  I  only 
recollect  its  coming  on  that  day.  Directly  I  received  it  I 
took  it  up  to  Miss  Eldred 's  room.  The  gentleman  that  sent 
it  lives  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Peckham.  Miss  Eldred  occupies 
the  first  floor. 
102 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

What  time  do  you  generally  dinel — Sometimes  at  one  and  Mrs.  E.  Jones 
sometimes  at  two  o'clock;  never  later  than  two. 

Don't  you  recollect  how  long  it  was  after  dinner  that  the 
telegram  came? — I  do  not. 

Had  you  any  reason  to  recollect  Miiller's  calling  except  from 
Miss  Eldred's  being  out? — I  should  not  have  known  the  date 
if  it  had  not  been  for  this  letter  (the  telegram). 

Should  you  have  known  the  time  when  Muller  came  but  for 
what  Mary  Anne  Eldred  told  you? — Muller  came  about  half- 
past  nine,  half  an  hour  after  Miss  Eldred  went  out. 

How  did  you  know  what  time  Miss  Eldred  went  out? — She 
called  to  me  before  she  went  out  to  know  the  time. 

You  remember  the  time  she  called  to  ask? — Yes. 

Can  you  not  tell  me  how  long  after  the  telegram  arrived 
Hiiller  called? — I  cannot  give  you  the  time  when  the  telegram 
came.  It  was  some  time  in  the  afternoon ;  but  I  cannot  say 
when.  I  had  a  clock  in  the  kitchen.  I  looked  at  the  clock, 
and  called  out  when  it  was  nine  o'clock,  and  then  Miss  Eldred 
went  out. 

When  were  inquiries  made  of  you  in  this  matter? — When 
inquiries  were  made  she  remembered  having  this  telegram  on 
the  afternoon  that  Muller  called. 

When  were  inquiries  made  of  you  about  this  matter?  Was  it 
before  Muller  arrived  in  England? — I  do  not  understand  your 
question. 

(Question  repeated) — It  is  about  seven  or  eight  weeks  ago,  I 
think. 

Who  called  first? — A  German  gentleman  and  another  gentle- 
man. 

Did  you  know  that  Muller  was  suspected? — We  had  heard  it, 
but  we  did  not  know  whether  this  was  the  same  or  no.  He 
went  by  the  name  of  Miller.  We  did  not  know  it  till  the 
German  gentleman  came.  He  called  two  or  three  times.  It 
•was  some  weeks  after  we  had  seen  Muller. 

Was  Miss  Eldred  with  you  when  the  German  gentleman 
came? — She  was  called  into  the  room. 

When  the  German  gentleman  came,  you  had  not  the  tele- 
gram upon  the  table? — No,  sir;  it  was  fetched  afterwards. 
Miss  Eldred  remembered  that  she  had  received  it  on  the  same 
day,  and  she  had  it  in  her  box  with  her  other  letters. 

103 


Franz    Muller. 

Mrs.  B.  Jones  Did  the  German  gentleman  mention  the  day,  or  how  came 
she  to  know  anything  about  the  day? — She  had  heard  of  the 
murder  being  committed  on  the  9th  of  July. 

If  you  and  she  had  had  any  talk  about  the  murder,  do  you 
mean  to  represent  that  Eldred  was  not  at  all  aware  that  the 
man  accused  of  that  murder  was  Muller  ? — Not  for  some  time ; 
but  when  we  used  to  read  the  papers,  being  a  tailor,  and  being 
lame  when  we  saw  him  last,  although  he  was  called  Muller 
instead  of  Miller,  we  thought  it  seemed  to  correspond  with  the 
young  man  she  knew.  We  fancied  so  before  the  German 
gentleman  came. 

Did  she  not  remember  that  she  had  had  this  telegram  before 
the  German  gentleman  came? — No;  she  remembered  it  one  time, 
and  she  said  she  had  it  on  the  very  day  Muller  last  called, 
and  "  if  I  find  the  letter  we  shall  know  the  right  date  when 
he  came  on."  That  was  only  two  or  three  weeks  ago.  Sha 
said,  "  I  hope  I  have  not  destroyed  it."  When  she  looked 
for  it  she  found  it.  It  was  only  two  or  three  weeks  ago  she 
found  it.  She  has  always  had  it  by  her,  but  it  was  never 
sought  for.  She  gave  it  to  my  husband  in  my  presence.  She 
said  she  did  not  know  whether  it  would  be  of  any  service.  My 
husband  gave  it  to  the  German  gentleman. 

It  is  six  or  seven  weeks  since  the  German  gentlemen  came 
who  were  assisting  in  the  defence  of  Muller ;  if  she  had  the 
telegram  when  they  called  why  did  she  not  go  and  look  for  it 
at  once? — She  might  not  have  thought  of  it.  I  do  not  know 
whether  she  told  the  German  gentleman  that  day  that  she  had 
the  telegram;  I  was  not  in  the  room  all  the  time.  Nothing 
was  said  about  the  telegram  while  I  was  in  the  room.  I 
remembered  distinctly  that  the  telegram  was  received  on  the 
day  that  Muller  called  last.  I  did  not  tell  the  German  gentle- 
man so,  but  she  gave  him  the  letter  to  convince  him  as  soon  as 
she  found  it. 

Why  did  you  not  tell  the  German  gentleman  that  Muller  had 
called  at  half-past  nine  on  that  evening,  and  that  you  remem- 
bered the  day  by  the  telegram? — Well,  I  do  not  know.  I  did 
not  interfere  with  her  affairs.  I  did  not  think  of  it  at  the 
time;  they  did  not  refer  to  any  letter,  neither  did  I.  I  do 
not  know  whether  Eldred  told  him.  I  left  him  and  her  alone 
in  the  room  both  before  and  after.  The  first  time  that  Eldred 
104 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

and  I  had  any  conversation  about  the  telegram  may  be  three  Mrs.  E.  Jones 

weeks  ago,  that  would  be  some  three  or  four  weeks  after  the 

German  gentleman  called  on  us.       I  never  knew  of  it  until 

about  three  weeks  ago,  because  we  did  not  know  the  day  of 

the  month,  but  she  said,   "  I  had  a  letter  from  my  friend," 

calling  him  by  his  name,  "  and  if  I  can  find  that  letter  I  shall 

know  the  day  of  the  month;  I  hope  I  have  not  destroyed  it." 

That  was  two  or  three  weeks  ago,  and  she  looked  in  her  box 

and  found  it. 

Can  you  say  how  she  came  to  say  this  two  or  three  weeks 
ago,  never  having  referred  to  it  before;  can  you  explain  that? 
— She  remembered  having  the  letter  the  same  day,  and  she 
knew  if  she  had  come  up  she  would  not  like  to  false  swear, 
and  she  would  know  by  that  letter  the  date.  I  took  the  tele- 
gram to  Miss  Eldred.  I  have  parted  with  it  to  the  gentlemen 
who  are  defending  the  prisoner.  My  husband  gave  it  to  them 
in  my  presence,  but  not  in  Miss  Eldred's  presence.  Miss 
Eldred  sent  it  to  him,  but  she  said  she  did  not  know  if  it  would 
be  of  any  service.  I  thought  that  was  a  fortnight  ago  come 
Tuesday.  A  week  last  Tuesday  the  German  gentleman  has 
had  the  letter  in  his  possession.  Miss  Eldred  brought  it  down 
and  gave  it  to  my  husband ;  I  saw  her  do  it ;  it  was  last 
Monday  week  she  brought  it  down,  and  on  the  Tuesday  she 
gave  it  to  the  German  gentleman.  I  mean  that  at  the  time 
she  gave  it  she  said  that  she  did  not  know  it  was  of  any  service. 
Miss  Eldred  was  sometimes  in  the  habit  of  asking  the  time  before 
she  went  out,  but  not  always.  I  cannot  say  whether  she  did 
so  the  night  before;  I  think  she  did — she  generally  wants  to 
know  the  time.  I  cannot  say  whether  she  did  on  the  night 
after.  She  does  not  go  out  on  Sunday  evenings.  I  cannot 
recollect  whether  she  did  on  the  Monday.  Sometimes  she  will 
ask  the  time  three  or  four  times  a  day.  There  is  no  clock  in 
her  room. 

Re-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — Would  you  not  have  been 
able  positively  to  fix  the  date  of  Mtiller's  calling  unless  the 
telegram  had  been  found  1 — I  knew  that  it  was  on  a  Saturday.  I 
believe  it  is  about  seven  or  eight  weeks  ago  since  a  German 
gentleman  and  one  of  Mr.  Beard's  clerks  first  called.  We  then 
told  them  that  Muller  had  called,  he  had  been  in  the  habit  of 
visiting  our  house,  and  had  called  on  the  Saturday.  We 

105 


Franz    Muller. 

Mrs.  K.  Jones  heard  of  the  murder  on  the  Tuesday  following.  I  think  we 
should  have  known  the  date  by  hearing  of  the  murder.  Find- 
ing the  telegram  made  us  quite  positive  as  to  the  day  of  the 
month.  I  never  eat  supper,  nor  does  Miss  Eldred  before  she 
goes  out. 

By  a  JUBOE — Muller  had  a  hat  on  when  he  called. 

M.  A.  Eldred  MART  ANN  ELDRBD,  examined  by  Mr.  MBTCALFE — Where  did 
you  live  in  July  last? — Lant  Street,  in  the  Borough. 

Where  did  you  live  before  you  came  to  Peckham? — Lant 
Street. 

Where  did  you  live  before  that? — In  Islington. 

Did  you  ever  live  at  Camberwell  ? — Yes ;  with  the  same  land- 
lady that  I  am  now  with. 

What  was  the  address? — That  was  Stanley  Cottage,  James 
Street,  Vassall  Road. 

Were  you  living  there  in  July  last? — Yes,  sir. 

Do  you  know  Muller? — Yes,  sir;  I  have  known  him  for  a 
twelvemonth. 

Were  you  often  in  the  habit  of  seeing  him? — Yes. 

How  long  was  it  before  the  9th  of  July,  when  you  received 
that  telegram,  that  you  had  seen  him? — I  met  him  on  the 
Saturday  preceding  the  9th  of  July  in  the  Old  Jewry,  Cheapside. 

Do  you  remember  to  what  hour  you  remained  at  home  on  the 
day  you  received  the  telegram? — I  went  out  at  nine  o'clock  in 
the  evening,  and  I  remained  out  till  after  twelve  o'clock.  I 
came  home  that  night. 

Did  you  see  your  landlady  that  night? — No,  not  till  the 
morning.  She  told  me  then  that  my  friend  had  called. 

How  long  was  it  after  that  before  you  heard  of  the  murder  ? — 
I  can't  recollect.  I  can't  tell  at  all. 

Are  you  quite  sure  you  went  out  at  nine  o'clock  that  night? 
— Yes ;  I  generally  went  out  about  that  time — at  nine — and 
the  prisoner  called  at  half-past  nine. 

Did  Muller  call  before  you  went  out? — No. 

Did  you  know  of  his  going   abroad  ? — Yes ;    several   weeks 

before  he  went.       He  told  me,  and  asked  me  to  go  with  him. 

He  said  he  was  going  to  America  to  see  his  sister,  and  that 

if  I  did  not  go  with  him  he  should  only  remain  there  six  months- 

106 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

When  did  you  first  make  a  communication  to  any  one  about  M.  A.  Eidr*d 
his  having  been  there? — I  don't  remember  telling  any  one. 

Do  you  remember  some  gentlemen  calling — some  German 
gentlemen? — Yes,  sir;  I  did  not  see  them  the  first  time  they 
called. 

Did  some  one  come  afterwards  to  speak  to  you  about  it? — 
I  don't  recollect. 

Did  you  make  a  statement  at  any  time? — No,  sir. 

Did  you  say  something  which  was  taken  down  in  writing  by 
a  gentleman? — No,  sir. 

Did  you  see  the  solicitor,  Mr.  Beard? — Yes. 

When  was  that  telegram  produced  first? — I  have  had  it  a 
long  time. 

When  did  you  give  it  up  to  any  gentleman? — Two  or  three 
days  ago,  I  think. 

Cross-examined  by  the  SOLICITOR- GENERAL — When  did  you 
see  that  gentleman,  Mr.  Beard? — A  few  days  ago. 

When  did  you  see  him  first?  Do  you  recollect?  Within  a 
month? — It  is  not  so  long  as  a  month  ago. 

How  soon  after  seeing  Muller  for  the  last  time  did  you  speak 
to  anybody  of  this  matter? — I  don't  remember  that  I  ever  did. 

Did  you  see  a  German  gentleman? — -No,  sir. 

Did  you  see  two  gentlemen  together  at  your  house? — Yes. 

When? — Some  weeks  ago.       Three  or  four  weeks  ago. 

Was  anything  said  about  the  telegram? — I  did  not  say  any- 
thing about  a  telegram. 

When  did  you  first  say  anything  about  the  telegram? — A  few 

• 

days  ago. 

Until  these  gentlemen  called  at  your  house  about  a  month 
ago,  had  your  attention  been  called  to  the  date  or  time  of 
Muller  coming  to  see  you? — No,  sir. 

Did  you  remember  at  once  the  exact  time  of  your  going  out? 
— Yes ;  I  remembered  going  out  at  nine  o'clock,  because  I  had 
the  telegram  from  that  gentleman. 

What  time  did  you  receive  it? — I  can't  say  the  time,  but  it 
was  towards  the  afternoon.  It  might  have  been  one  or  two 
o'clock. 

What  time  did  you  dine  on  that  day — after  four  o'clock? — 
I  can't  exactly  tell.  I  daresay  it  was  about  that  time,  but 
I  can't  tell  to  half  an  hour. 

107 


M.  A.  Eidred  When  did  you  breakfast? — I  don't  remember  when  I  break- 
fasted. It  might  have  been  ten  or  eleven  o'clock. 

When  did  you  get  up? — I  got  up  after  eleven. 

When  did  you  go  to  bed? — I  went  to  bed  past  twelve  o'clock. 
I  think  half-past.  I  only  guess.  I  am  positive  I  went  out 
that  night  at  nine  o'clock,  because  it  is  the  time  I  generally 
go  out,  and  because  I  went  out  every  night  at  that  time.  I 
can  remember  so  well  because  of  the  telegram. 

What  had  the  telegram  to  do  with  the  time  you  went  out? — 
I  don't  know  that  it  had  anything  to  do  with  it.  I  remember 
the  time,  because  the  landlady  told  me  Muller  had  called  in 
the  evening.  It  was  the  next  morning  she  told  me  that.  The 
receiving  the  telegram  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  time  of  my 
going  out.  I  don't  know  why  that  should  assist  me  in 
recollecting  the  time  I  went  out. 

Re-examined  by  SERJEANT  PARRY — You  say  you  heard  from 
Mrs.  Jones  next  morning  that  Muller  had  called? — She  said  to 
me  that  a  friend  of  mine  had  called. 

By  a  JUROR — Were  you  in  the  habit  of  seeing  Muller's  hat? — 
.f"      No,  sir;  I  have  not  noticed  it. 

T.  Beard  THOMAS   BEARD,    examined    by   SERJEANT   PARRY — You   have 

conducted  the  defence  of  this  young  man,   instructed  by  the 
German  Legal  Protection  Society? — I  have. 

You  have  heard  Haffa  examined  here? — I  have. 

Did  you  hear  him  say  that  Muller  told  him  when  he  left  Old 
Jewry  Street  at  a  quarter  to  eight  o'clock  that  he  was  going  to 
Camberwell  to  see  this  young  woman  ? — I  did  hear  him  say  so. 

Did  he  communicate  that  fact  to  you  before  the  arrival  of 
Muller  in  this  country? — He  did. 

I  believe  he  also  said  so  at  the  Police  Court  ? — I  am  not  quite 
sure,  but  I  am  sure  he  communicated  it  to  me  out  of  Court. 
I  received  that  communication  four  or  five  days  before  Muller 
arrived  from  America,  and  he  arrived  on  the  17th  of  September. 

In  consequence  of  that  did  you  instruct  your  clerk  to  accom- 
pany one  of  the  German  gentlemen  to  make  inquiries  about 
this  matter? — I  did. 

Did  he  do  so? — He  did,   and  he  brought  the  result  back 
to  me. 
108 


Sir  R.  P.  Collier  (First  Lord  Monkswell). 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

This  telegram  was  first  handed  to  you  twelve  or  fourteen  days  T.  Beard 
ago? — About  that  time.       I  had  proofs  produced  to  me  by  my 
clerk  and  a  German  gentleman  before  Muller's   arrival,   also 
proofs  of  Eldred  and  Jones. 

The  telegram  was  shown  to  you  on  consultation,  I  daresay 
on  Thursday  week? — I  had  not  then  had  it  in  my  possession 
above  a  couple  of  days. 

Cross-examined  by  SERJEANT  BALLANTINE — It  was  under  my 
judgment  that  neither  of  these  witnesses  was  called  at  the 
Police  Court  nor  before  the  coroner. 

CHARLES  FOREMAN,  examined  by  Mr.  METCALFE — I  am  an  c.  Foreman 
omnibus  conductor,  living  at  7  Norfolk  Street,  Montpelier 
Square,  Peckham.  I  conduct  an  omnibus  belonging  to  Mr. 
Barwick,  fly  master,  of  Camberwell,  running  from  Peckham, 
through  Camberwell,  Walworth,  and  Newington,  to  the 
Borough.  On  our  last  journey  I  leave  Camberwell  Gate  at 
five  minutes  to  ten,  and  arrive  in  King  William  Street  about 
twenty  past  ten  o'clock,  and  leave  again  at  the  half-hour,  or 
a  minute  or  two  over.  The  previous  journey  we  leave  Camber- 
well  Gate  at  seven  o'clock.  It  is  a  little  more  than  a  quarter 
of  a  mile  from  Camberwell  Gate  to  Camberwell  Green,  and 
about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  Camberwell  Green  to  Vassall 
Road.  I  cannot  say  exactly.  I  remember  I  had  a  gentleman 
ride  in  my  omnibus  on  my  last  journey,  at  five  minutes  to  ten, 
from  Camberwell  Gate  to  the  City,  who  appeared  to  be  lame, 
and  wore  a  slipper,  but  when  I  could  not  say.  It  was  in  the 
summer,  but  I  can't  say  whether  it  was  in  July  or  August.  I 
cannot  tell  the  day  of  the  week.  My  attention  was  called  to 
it  a  month  or  five  weeks  ago.  How  I  noticed  it  was  this.  He 
leant  rather  heavy  on  my  arm  as  he  got  out.  He  appeared  to 
me  to  be  lame,  and  seemed  rather  stout.  I  made  the  remark 
to  myself,  "Ah,  he  has  got  a  touch  of  my  old  complaint"; 
that  is,  the  gout.  He  seemed  to  me  to  be  rather  fair  and,  to 
the  best  of  my  belief,  rather  stout.  (The  slipper  was  handed 
to  witness.)  I  can't  swear  that  was  the  slipper.  It  seemed 
to  me,  to  the  best  of  my  belief,  to  be  a  Brussels  carpet  slipper. 
I  cannot  say  whether  it  resembles  it.  It  was  a  carpet  slipper 
to  the  best  of  my  belief. 

This  concluded  the  case  for  the  defence. 

109 


The  Solicitor-General's  Address  to  the  Jury. 


Solicitor- 
General 


The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL  then  rose  for  the  purpose  of  replying 
upon  the  whole  case.  He  said — Gentlemen  of  the  jury,  I  said 
in  my  opening  speech  that  it  gave  me  great  satisfaction  that 
the  prisoner  at  the  bar  was  not  an  altogether  friendless  man, 
but  one  who  had  been  so  far  befriended  and  assisted  that  he 
had  been  able  to  obtain  the  assistance  of  most  eminent  counsel. 
We  have  all  witnessed  the  zeal  and  ability  with  which  those 
counsel  have  discharged  those  duties.  Gentlemen,  that  my 
learned  friends  should  have  appeared  on  the  part  of  the 
prisoner,  and  have  exerted,  as  I  knew  they  would,  both  ability 
and  eloquence,  is  highly  satisfactory  to  the  Crown.  Had 
Muller  been  undefended  it  is  probable  and  possible  that  some 
circumstances  which  might  fairly  and  legitimately  be  urged  in 
his  favour  would  have  escaped  our  attention.  But  now  you 
have  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  that  everything  which  can  be 
fairly  and  properly  said  on  his  behalf  has  been  said  with  the 
utmost  force  and  eloquence.  It  remains  only,  therefore,  to 
hear  the  comparatively  few  observations  which  it  will  be  neces- 
sary for  me  to  address  to  you  on  the  part  of  the  Crown,  and  to 
hear  the  summing  up  of  the  learned  judge,  to  be  in  a  condition 
to  do  your  duty  with  perfect  impartiality  towards  the  prisoner 
at  the  bar.  Gentlemen,  I  am  sure  I  need  not  say  "  at  length," 
for  you  will  readily  believe  me  that  the  Crown  could  have  no 
interest  in  unduly  pressing  any  prosecution.  God  forbid  that 
any  man  who  appears  on  the  part  of  the  Crown  should  be 
desired  to  do  so.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  my  duty,  repre- 
senting the  Crown — which,  in  other  words,  is  the  public,  the 
public  to  whom  it  is  my  duty  to  inform  you  that  you  have  a 
duty  to  perform  as  well  as  to  the  prisoner — to  see  that  you 
thoroughly  appreciate  the  facts  of  the  evidence  which  hare  been 
submitted  to  you.  When  I  have  done,  my  duty  is  done  and 
yours  begins. 

Gentlemen,  my  learned  friend  Serjeant  Parry  some- 
what complained  of  me,  I  think,  for  having  alluded  to  the 
probabilities  of  this  case.  Though  he  complained  of  me  for 


Addresses  to   Jury. 


alluding  to  those  probabilities,  he  proceeded  to  dwell  on  them  Soiieitor- 
himself.  In  fact,  the  staple  of  his  speech  has  been  proba-  M 
bilities,  but,  with  respect  to  the  facts  of  the  case,  my  learned 
friend  has  been  silent.  It  is  highly  proper  that  the  jury,  in 
considering  a  case  of  this  sort,  should  bear  in  mind  not  merely 
facts  which  are  in  the  nature  of  conclusive  and  proper  evidence, 
but  that  you  should  bring  to  the  discharge  of  your  duty  your 
knowledge  of  the  ordinary  affairs  of  the  world.  My  learned 
friend  was,  therefore,  perfectly  right  in  dwelling  on  the  proba- 
bilities of  this  case;  he  was  only  wrong  in  blaming  me  for 
having  done  so  also.  But,  gentlemen,  in  adjusting  the  final 
balance,  when  you  hold  the  scales,  probabilities  are  as  feathers, 
facts  as  lead.  I  desire  to  call  attention  to  some  of  the  leading 
facts,  and  I  will  omit  the  probabilities.  The  first  and  most 
important  fact  of  the  case  appears  to  be  this.  Aye  or  no — 
was  that  hat  found  in  the  railway  carriage  the  hat  of  Muller? 
Now,  it  is  proper  you  should  appreciate  the  full  force  of  that 
inquiry.  For,  gentlemen,  if  that  hat  was  the  hat  of  Muller, 
worn  at  the  time  on  that  night,  what  follows  1  That  Muller 
was  in  that  carriage  with  Mr.  Briggs,  and  that  the  case,  as  far 
as  his  being  in  the  same  carriage  with  Mr.  Briggs  is  concerned, 
is  proved  as  conclusively  as  if  he  were  seen  in  that  carriage 
by  a  dozen  witnesses.  If  Muller  left  that  hat  that  night  in 
that  railway  carriage,  the  case  is  the  same  against  him  as  if  he 
had  been  seen  to  get  out  of  the  carriage  after  the  murder  was 
committed,  and  thereupon  was  apprehended.  It  is  impossible 
to  over-rate  the  significance  of  that  fact.  Aye  or  no — was 
that  hat  the  hat  of  Muller?  That  is  the  question.  I  listened 
to  my  learned  friend's  speech  with  a  good  deal  of  interest.  I 
wished  to  see  whether  he  would  suggest  this  theory,  for  I  knew 
the  fertility  of  my  learned  friend's  invention  would  suggest  the 
best  possible  theory  for  your  consideration  in  this  matter.  I 
waited  to  see  whether  my  learned  friend  would  suggest  a  theory 
of  this  kind — "  that  hat  was  the  hat  of  Muller :  it  was  left 
by  Muller  in  that  carriage  on  that  night,  but  still  Muller  did 
not  commit  the  murder."  But  my  learned  friend,  feeling  the 
gigantic  difficulties — which  I  candidly  admit — of  the  case  that  ' 
he  had  to  grapple  with,  did  not  feel  himself  able  to  propound 
to  you  any  theory  of  Muller 's  innocence  consistent  with  the 
fact  of  his  hat  having  been  found  in  the  railway  carriage.  I 

in 


Franz    Muller. 

Solicitor-  should  have  been  glad  to  hear  the  suggestion  of  Muller  having 
been  in  that  railway  carriage,  and  having  left  that  hat  inno- 
cently, and  not  having  been  connected  with  the  murder.  But 
my  learned  friend  knew,  his  experience  told  him,  that  it  was 
idle  to  make  any  such  suggestion — lhat  it  was  impossible  that 
it  should  be  believed  by  a  jury.  My  learned  friend  knew  that 
the  only  course  he  could  pursue  to  save  his  client  was  this,  to 
deny  or  to  raise  a  doubt  in  your  minds  as  to  that  hat  found  in 
the  railway  carriage  being  the  hat  of  Muller. 

Now,  gentlemen,  on  that  it  is  my  duty  to  invite  your  attention 
to  the  evidence.  The  evidence  upon  that  subject  has  turned 
out,  in  the  course  of  the  inquiry,  stronger  than  I  was  aware  of, 
and  stronger  than  I  stated  to  you  in  my  opening  speech.  I 
was  anxious  in  stating  this  case  not  to  overstate  it.  It  would 
have  been  highly  improper  if  I  had  done  so.  I,  therefore, 
with  the  information  which  I  had  then  received,  stated  it  to 
you  in  this  way,  that  the  hat  which  was  bought  from  Mr.  Walker 
in  Crawford  Street  had  a  peculiar  lining,  but  that  it  was  a 
lining  used  by  Mr.  Walker  in  his  trade.  I  certainly  was  under 
the  impression  that  possibly  he  had  put  the  same  kind  of  lining 
into  five  hundred  different  hats.  But,  gentlemen,  it  has  turned 
out,  and  upon  the  cross-examination  of  my  learned  friend  him- 
self, that,  according  to  the  witness  Watson,  there  were  only 
three  or  four  hats  made  with  that  lining,  and,  according  to  Mr. 
Walker's  evidence,  only  one,  or  possibly  two.  That  certainly 
was1  very  striking.  There  is  no  more  powerful  cross-examiner 
than  my  learned  friend.  Under  his  cross-examination  a  bad 
case  or  a  rotten  case  crumbles  into  dust.  But  it  is  the  char- 
acteristic of  a  strong  case  and  a  true  case,  that  the  more  it 
is  cross-examined  the  stronger  it  becomes,  and  the  effect  of  the 
whole  of  the  cross-examination  of  my  learned  friend  has  been 
to  corroborate  the  case  against  the  prisoner.  Gentlemen,  the 
evidence  upon  the  subject  of  the  identity  of  the  hat  is  a  most 
striking  fact.  I  believe,  if  a  hundred  cases  were  tried  turning 
upon  the  identity  of  a  hat,  it  would  be  impossible  to  give 
evidence  so  cogent  as  this. 

It  is  proper,  now,  to  point  out  the  effect  of  the 
evidence.  I  will  take  the  evidence  of  the  hatter  and 
that  of  Mrs.  Repsch  only  for  the  purpose.  I  will  put  aside 
Matthews,  of  whose  evidence  I  shall  have  a  word  to  say 

112 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


presently.  I  will  put  Matthews'  evidence  altogether  out  of  soiieitor- 
the  case,  and  see  how  the  matter  stands  with  respect  to  that 
hat.  Mr.  Walker,  the  hatter,  was  called,  and  shown  the  lining 
of  that  hat.  He  says,  "  That  is  a  peculiar  lining,  which  I  got 
from  France.  It  was  only  a  sample,  and  it  was  used  at  most 
in  two  hats."  Watson,  the  foreman,  says  it  was  used  prob- 
ably in  three  or  four,  but  Mr.  Walker  says  in  one  or  two  hats 
only,  and  he  believes  only  in  one.  What  does  Mrs.  Repsch 
say?  She  noticed  Muller  with  a  hat  with  that  particular  lining. 
When  Muller  got  the  hat  he  brought  it  to  her,  and  she  observed 
the  peculiarity  of  the  lining-  She  had  seen  him  from  time 
to  time  take  off  this  hat,  and  put  letters  behind  the  lining,  and 
she  gave  a  description  to  the  police  of  that  lining  before  the 
hat  was  shown  to  her.  Gentlemen,  my  learned  friend  has 
made  some  attempt,  I  confess  I  thought  a  somewhat  feeble  one, 
to  impugn  the  evidence  of  Mrs.  Repsch.  My  learned  friend 
said  that  she  gave  her  evidence  vehemently,  but  he  was  con- 
strained in  candour  to  admit  that  he  was  not  justified  in  im- 
puting that  she  came  before  you  to  commit  perjury.  You 
will  judge  whether  Mrs.  Repsch  is  open  to  any  imputation  at 
all.  It  is  entirely  a  question  for  the  jury  to  judge  as  to  the 
credibility  of  witnesses  from  their  demeanour  in  the  box.  As 
far  as  I  am  able  to  judge,  and  I  make  the  observation  subject 
to  your  correction,  a  fairer  and  more  straightforward  witness 
than  Mrs.  Repsch  never  appeared  before  a  jury.  She  had  no 
quarrel  with  Muller.  On  the  contrary,  she  was  on  inti- 
mate terms  with  him.  What  desire  Mrs.  Repsch  could  have  to 
injure  this  young  man  is  not  even  suggested.  She  gave  her 
evidence  in  every  respect  in  a  perfectly  straightforward  manner, 
and  there  is  no  reason  whatever  which  my  learned  friend  could 
suggest  for  discrediting  anything  which  she  told  you.  She 
is  a  highly  respectable  woman,  who  came  forward  to  give 
her  evidence,  and  from  a  sense  of  duty  was  compelled  to  tell 
the  truth,  although  that  truth  might  weigh  against  a  man 
with  whom  she  was  well  acquainted.  Now,  unless  this  witness 
is  not  to  be  believed,  Muller  had  a  hat  with  that  peculiar  lining. 
What  follows?  If  Mr.  Walker  is  correct,  there  were  only  two 
hats  ever  made  with  that  peculiar  lining — he  believes  only  one 
— but  there  may  have  been  two.  Now,  mark  the  significance 
of  this  evidence.  If  Mr.  Walker  is  correct,  murder  must  have 
i  113 


Franz    Muller. 

Solicitor-  been  committed  by  one  of  two  men.  If  it  were  not  by  Muller, 
it  must  have  been  by  the  man  who  bought  the  other  hat — if 
the  other  hat  was  ever  made  and  was  still  in  existence.  But, 
gentlemen,  what  follows  further,  assuming  that  there  was 
another  hat?  Why,  the  man  who  committed  the  murder  was 
the  owner  of  the  other  hat.  But  where  is  Muller 's  hat?  And 
what  about  the  chain  and  the  watch?  Muller  must  have  got 
the  chain  and  the  watch  from  the  man  who  wore  the  other  hat 
lined  in  the  same  way.  Where  did  he  get  them?  He  must 
have  got  them  on  the  Monday  morning.  Then,  again,  how 
about  Mr.  Briggs's  hat?  Do  you  believe  the  hat  in  Muller' s 
possession  to  have  been  Mr.  Briggs's  hat,  subsequently  cut 
down?  If  so,  Muller  must  have  got  it  from  the  man  who  wore 
a  hat  lined  in  the  same  way  as  his  own.  When  one  comes 
to  state  such  a  proposition  to  a  jury  the  matter  becomes  so 
incredible  and  almost  impossible  that  my  learned  friend  knew  he 
could  not  venture — that  it  would  be  trifling  with  your  under- 
standing— to  mention  such  a  thing. 

But  the  evidence  does  not  rest  here.  I  must  dwell 
a  little  longer  on  these  most  important  facts.  Let 
me  remind  you  here  that  if  this  fact — that  the  hat 
belonged  to  Muller — is  proved,  Muller  was  in  that 
carriage  with  Mr.  Briggs,  and  he  left  that  hat  there  after  the 
murder,  and  after  Mr.  Briggs  had  been  thrown  out.  It  is 
not  necessary  for  me  to  prove  more.  But  let  me  dwell  further 
on  the  evidence  with  respect  to  that  hat.  It  is  such  as  a 
jury  could  accept,  for  the  evidence  was  conclusive  on  that  sub- 
ject. I  called  before  you  Matthews,  the  cabman.  And  here, 
again,  I  wish  to  know  what  there  is  to  impeach  the  evidence  of 
Matthews?  I  am  extremely  glad  that  my  learned  friend  con- 
tradicted a  statement  which  I  made  as  to  the  impression  which 
his  cross-examination  made  on  my  mind.  My  learned  friend 
most  honestly  and  candidly  disavowed  any  intention,  or  the 
most  remote  idea,  of  imputing  to  Matthews  that  he  was  con- 
cerned in  the  murder.  My  learned  friend  must  forgive  me  for 
my  misapprehension ;  but  why  was  Matthews  cross-examined 
so  sharply  as  to  where  he  was  on  that  night?  It  was  utterly 
immaterial,  unless  he  had  committed  the  murder,  where  he 
was  on  that  night  more  than  any  other  man.  It  does  not 
signify  where  he  was  that  night,  unless  the  object  was  to  impute 
"4 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


complicity ;  therefore  my  learned  friend  must  forgive  me  if  I  Sotieitor- 
supposed,  when  Matthews  was  so  cross-examined  as  to  his  where- 
abouts, that  that  cross-examination  had  an  object  which  it  now 
appears  it  had  not.  But  I  accept  the  disclaimer  of  my  learned 
friend.  It  would  be  preposterous,  and  my  learned  friend,  as 
a  distinguished  advocate,  knows  his  duty  too  well  to  defend  any 
person  whose  defence  must  be  conducted  by  casting  imputa- 
tions upon  others.  I  believe  that  there  is  not  one  of  my 
learned  friends  who  would  adopt  such  a  course.  But  what 
is  the  imputation  against  Matthews,  if  there  be  any?  Why, 
gentlemen,  it  is  supposed  that  he  is  actuated  by  a  hope  of 
reward.  What  is  the  object  of  advertising  rewards  if  you  do 
not  intend  that  any  one  should  be  influenced  by  them?  The 
object  is  to  induce  people  to  come  forward  to  give  evidence ;  and 
if  you  are  to  disbelieve  every  man  who  gives  evidence  because 
of  a  reward,  at  once  and  for  ever  cease  to  give  rewards  for  the 
purpose  of  detecting  great  offences.  You  have  heard  the  evi- 
dence of  Matthews,  and  the  account  which  he  gave.  Now, 
let  us  see  whether  that  account  is  a  probable  or  an  improbable 
one.  It  is  quite  right  for  you,  gentlemen  of  the  jury,  to  judge 
of  what  you  think  probable  or  improbable  in  the  evidence  of  a 
witness  by  the  aid  of  your  knowledge  and  experience  of  the 
world.  Now,  what  does  Matthews  say?  He  says  he  got  a 
hat  for  Miiller,  whom  he  had  known  for  some  time,  from  Mr. 
Walker.  Muller,  he  says,  saw  his  hat  towards  the  end  of 
November  or  December  last.  He  said,  "  I  like  your  hat, 
Matthews,"  and  put  it  on  his  head;  "but  it  is  a  trifle  too 
small  for  me.  I  should  like  to  have  it  larger.  Buy  me  a 
hat  at  Walker's,  and  I  shall  be  much  obliged."  This  was 
very  natural,  because  Walker's  shop  was  out  of  Muller's  beat, 
which  was  between  Victoria  Park  and  Fenchurch  Street,  and 
in  the  beat  of  Matthews.  Matthews  says,  "  I  got  the  hat  for 
him,  put  it  into  a  hatbox,  and  he  called  one  day  at  my  place 
and  took  it."  To  the  question,  "  What  did  you  pay  for  it, 
and  did  Muller  pay  you  again?  "  Matthews  replies,  "  Well,  he 
did  not  exactly  pay  me ;  but  he  made  me  a  waistcoat  of  the 
value  of  8s.  6d.,  and  took  the  hat."  A  more  probable  account 
was  never  given.  In  the  whole  course  of  the  cross-examina- 
tion my  learned  friend  introduced  a  great  deal  of,  as  I  think, 
irrelevant  matter  as  to  where  Matthews  was  on  the  night  of 

"5 


Franz    Muller. 

Solicitor-  the  murder :  but  not  one  question  did  he  ask  Matthews  about 
Jeneral 

the  purchase  of  the  hat  for  Muller  for  8s.  6d.,  or  about  Muller 

taking  it  away.  That  part  of  Matthews'  evidence  my  learned 
friend  did  not  attempt  to  attack.  Then  you  have  this  evidence 
that  Matthews  never  had  any  quarrel  with  Muller.  Is  it 
credible,  then,  that  Matthews,  by  false  evidence,  should  desire 
to  take  Muller 's  life?  No  one  could  impute  anything  of  the 
kind. 

I  confess  it  gave  me  great  pain  when  my  learned  friend 
desired  to  cross-examine  Matthews  as  to  whether  he  had  not 
been  convicted,  fourteen  years  ago,  of  a  trivial  offence  for 
which  he  got  twenty-one  days'  imprisonment.  He  was  tried 
at  Quarter  Sessions,  and  the  evidence  went  to  show  that  the 
offence  was  not  a  very  great  one.  But  he  did  not  disclaim 
it,  and  from  that  time  to  this  there  is  no  imputation  of  any 
kind  upon  Matthews.  He  appears  to  have  been  struggling 
honestly  and  perseveringly  to  support  his  wife  and  family. 

I  From  that  time  to  this  he  has  been  an  industrious  man,  and 
if  he  did  commit  an  error  in  his  youth,  he  has  endeavoured 
to  redeem  it.  It  is  a  very  hard  case,  because  he  is  a  witness 
for  the  prosecution,  that  an  error  committed  in  his  youth 
should  be  raked  up  against  him ;  but  to  suppose  this  is  a  ground 
for  discrediting  his  testimony  seems  to  me  entirely  out  of  the 
question.  Matthews  had  been  to  America  for  the  purpose 
of  giving  evidence  in  the  American  Court  with  a  view  to  the 
extradition  of  Muller.  When  Muller  returns  Matthews  goes 
up  to  speak  to  facts  which  he  knew,  and  is  cross-examined  in 
the  most  forcible  way.  He  is  asked,  "  Where  were  you  that 
night?  "  "  Account  for  your  time,"  and  a  number  of  questions 
of  that  kind  are  put  to  him.  Matthews,  naturally  enough, 
replies,  "I  can't  exactly  say;  I  was  out  with  my  cab;  but 
I  can't  say  where."  Supposing  you  were  now  to  send  out 
a  policeman  and  bring  in  the  first  cabman,  and  say  to  him, 
"  Where  were  you  on  the  night  of  the  9th  of  July?  "  he  would 
say,  no  doubt,  "  I  was  out  with  my  cab  " ;  and,  if  required  to 
be  more  definite,  would  refer  to  a  book,  or  to  his  wife,  and 
his  customers,  or  write  to  his  master.  Then  probably  he 
would  be  able  to  find  out  exactly  what  he  was  doing.  Now, 
Matthews  appears  to  have  written  to  his  employer,  and,  having 
got  the  information,  he  was  able  to  tell  you  precisely  where  he 
116 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


was.  He  tells  you  that  he  was  in  the  street,  and  at  the  Great  solicitor- 
Western  station  for  some  hours ;  that  he  was  not  lucky  in 
getting  a  fare,  went  and  ordered  a  joint  of  meat  for  his  Sunday 
dinner,  and  went  home  about  eleven  or  twelve  o'clock.  Then, 
again,  Matthews  is  asked  a  good  many  questions  about  his  own 
hats.  He  says  he  has  got  a  good  many,  and  I  suppose  he  has, 
for  cabmen  are  out  more  hours,  in  all  sorts  of  weather,  than 
most  other  men,  and  I  never  saw  a  cabman  using  an  umbrella. 
It  appears  that  he  had  made  a  mistake  as  to  getting  one  of 
his  own  hats ;  but  now  he  says  he  can  tell  all  about  his  own 
hats  if  you  wish  it.  These  are  the  grounds  on  which  you  are 
asked  to  discredit  the  evidence  of  Matthews ;  but  it  is  easy  to 
see,  gentlemen,  what  effect  his  evidence  made  upon  your  minds. 
Does  any  one  who  heard  Matthews  doubt  that  he  got  such  a 
hat,  gave  it  to  Muller,  and  that  Muller  took  it  away?  Then, 
again,  Mrs.  Matthews  corroborates  the  transaction.  My 
learned  friend  did  not  accuse  her  of  being  actuated  by  any  hopes 
of  reward,  or  desire  of  vengeance,  or  any  other  improper 
evidence.  Now,  what  is  the  evidence  of  Matthews?  Can 
there  be  any  mistake  about  Matthews'  evidence?  Matthews 
says,  that  in  pursuance  of  an  agreement  made  with  Muller,  he 
went  to  Walker's,  bought  a  hat,  and  gave  that  hat  to  Muller. 
Matthews  recollects  that  Muller  said,  "  Make  it  as  like  your  hat 
as  you  can."  So  he  had  it  turned  up  at  the  brim  somewhat 
more  than  it  was,  with  a  view  to  making  it  more  like  his  own, 
and  Muller  was  very  much  pleased  with  it.  My  learned  friend 
assumed  that  Matthews'  hat  was  lined  like  Muller's.  Gentle- 
men, it  comes  to  this,  that  if  this  was  not  Muller's  hat,  the 
man  who  was  in  the  railway  carriage  that  night  must  have 
had  Matthews'  hat.  Matthews  said,  however,  that  he  pur- 
chased a  hat  for  Muller,  and  he  could  not  tell  if  the  linings 
of  both  were  alike. 

SHRJBANT  PARRY — The  cabman  stated  that  the  lining  of  both 
hats  was  alike. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  BARON — I  have  nothing  of  that  kind  on 
my  notes,  and  we  must  go  by  what  is  here. 

BARON  MARTIN — I  do  not  know  what  was  on  the  depositions 
before  the  coroner;  but  the  last  answer  he  gave  in  cross- 
examination  here  was  that  the  lining  of  his  hat  was  similar  to 
that  of  Muller's  hat. 

117 


Franz    Muller. 

Solicitor-      The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — That  has  escaped  me.     If  that  be 
General 

so,  it  makes  the  case  somewhat  stronger  than  it  was  before. 

Just  see  the  significance  of  it.  If  Mr.  Walker  is  right  in  saying 
that  this  particular  lining  was  only  used  in  two  hats,  and  the 
cabman's  hat  was  the  other  hat,  and  the  cabman  had  not  parted 
with  it,  the  murder  must  have  been  committed  either  by  Muller 
or  the  cabman ;  but,  if  the  cabman  had  parted  with  his  hat, 
or  it  had  become  too  bad  for  him  and  been  discarded,  and  had 
been  picked  up  by  somebody  else  from  a  dusthole,  probably 
then  the  supposition  must  be  that  the  man  who  picked  up  or 
obtained  the  discarded  hat  was  the  murderer.  And,  further — 
and  this  is  extremely  important — if  the  other  hat,  the  hat 
worn  by  Muller,  was  the  cabman's  cast-off  hat,  it  would  not  fit 
Muller.  It  was  too  small  for  him,  because,  you  recollect,  he 
tried  it  on  in  Matthews'  room,  and  found  it  would  not  fit. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — That  is  not  proved. 

The  SOLICITOR-GBNERAL — Yes ;  he  said  to  the  cabman — "  You 
must  get  me  a  size  larger."  But  the  evidence  of  the  cabman 
is  corroborated  by  his  wife,  upon  whom  my  learned  friend  casts 
no  imputation.  Then  there  is  the  evidence  of  Mrs.  Repsch,  who 
saw  not  only  the  hat,  but  the  hatbox.  She  was  asked  whether 
Muller  brought  them  there  on  a  Sunday  or  not,  and  she  said 
she  thought  he  probably  did  on  a  Sunday.  The  evidence  of  the 
cabman  is  so  far  confirmed  that,  having  said  he  gave  the  hat 
and  the  box  to  Muller,  Muller  brought  them  to  Mrs.  Repsch's. 
But  the  matter  does  not  rest  there.  Muller  actually  speaks  to 
Mrs.  Repsch  as  to  the  circumstances  under  which  he  obtained 
the  hat.  He  says  Matthews  gave  it  to  him.  The  fact,  however, 
appears  that,  instead  of  Matthews  actually  giving  the  hat  to 
Muller,  he  received  a  waistcoat  from  Muller  in  exchange.  The 
cabman  is  therefore  corroborated  in  a  most  striking  manner 
by  Mrs.  Repsch.  But  the  case  does  not  rest  here,  for  there  ia  a 
hatbox  bearing  the  name  of  Messrs.  Walker  &  Co.,  which  was 
found  in  Muller's  lodgings.  Now,  gentlemen,  it  appears  to  me 
impossible  to  overlook  the  importance  of  this  hat  in  the  case. 
If  you  are  satisfied  it  was  the  hat  of  Muller,  left  by  him  that 
night  in  the  railway  carriage,  no  explanation  or  suggestion 
consistent  with  his  innocence  has  been  offered. 

But,  again,  I  have  to  repeat  that  this  case  does 
118 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


not  rest  here.  The  murderer,  whoever  he  was,  in  the  Solieito?- 
confusion  and  hurry  with  which  the  crime  was  com- 
mitted, left  his  own  hat  and  took  away  Mr.  Briggs's  hat. 
Mr.  Briggs's  hat  is  gone;  that  is  quite  clear.  If  he  had 
gone  away  without  a  hat  he  would  have  been  noticed,  and 
Mr.  Briggs's  hat  would  have  been  found  upon  the  railway  some- 
where. The  evidence  is  almost  conclusive  that  the  man  who 
committed  the  murder  went  away  with  Mr.  Briggs's  hat.  Now, 
has  Mr.  Briggs's  hat  been  found  or  not?  That  is  a  question  for 
your  consideration.  With  respect  to  that  other  hat  very 
striking  evidence  has  been  submitted  to  you.  I  have  called 
the  hatter,  Mr.  Digance,  with  whom  Mr.  Briggs  alone  dealt. 
Digance's  name  is  found  in  that  hat,  but  the  evidence  does 
not  stop  there.  Mr.  Digance  tells  you  that  a  hat  was  ordered 
by  Mr.  Briggs  of  what  is  called  the  bell-crowned  shape.  This 
hat  is  of  the  bell-crowned  shape;  it  is  also  of  the  size  of  Mr. 
Briggs's  hats,  and  he  recollects  this  circumstance,  that  it  was 
somewhat  too  large,  and  a  piece  of  silver  tissue  paper  was  placed 
between  the  lining  and  the  hat.  This  paper  has  been  taken 
away,  but  fragments  of  it  are  left.  Now,  this  hat  has  been 
cut  down.  Why  cut  down?  The  first  witness  called  by  my 
learned  friend  with  respect  to  the  hat  said  it  was  not  cut  down 
as  he  would  have  cut  it  down,  or  as  it  was  cut  down  "in  the 
trade.  It  was  not  gummed  in  the  usual  way,  but  merely 
pasted.  The  witness  added  that  it  was  sewn  somewhat  as  he 
would  have  sewn  it ;  but,  in  reply  to  a  question  by  a  gentleman 
of  the  jury,  he  said  the  stitches  were  rather  too  close,  or  rather 
too  far  apart,  I  forget  which,  and  not  as  he  would  have  done 
them. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — He  said  he  would  not  have  put  in  so 
many  stitches. 

The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — The  hat  was  remarkably  dealt  with. 
The  lining  is  cut  down.  No  one  produced  before  you  says  that 
a  man  cutting  down  a  hat  would  cut  down  the  lining.  The  hat 
is  cut  down,  not,  as  has  been  represented  hats  are  sometimes, 
to  make  them  more  fashionable,  more  saleable,  hats  being  worn 
with  somewhat  lower  crowns  than  formerly,  because  this  hat  is 
too  low  for  the  fashion.  Why  should  Miiller  desire  to  cut  down 
the  hat?  Had  he  a  fancy  for  a  low-crowned  hat?  If  you 
believe  the  other  hat  was  his,  it  was  rather  a  high-crowned 

119 


Franz    Muller. 

Solicitor-  one,  you  will  say  what  effect  the  evidence  produces  in  your 
mind — whether  you  think  the  hat  was  cut  down  by  a  hatter  in 
the  ordinary  course  of  business,  or  cut  down  by  some  person 
not  accustomed  to  that  kind  of  work,  though  knowing  how  to 
sew.  You  will  couple  that  with  the  consideration  that  if  it  be 
Mr.  Briggs's  hat,  and  was  not  cut  down,  you  would  see  Mr. 
Briggs's  name  inside  the  lining.  Gentlemen,  these  are  very 
striking  circumstances  indeed.  It  is  not  suggested  by  my 
learned  friend  that  Muller  had  ever  dealt  with  Mr.  Digance. 
Not  a  question  was  asked  of  Mr.  Digance  on  that  subject.  It 
is  suggested  that  Muller  might  have  got  this  hat  second-hand 
from  some  one.  From  whom?  His  advocates  have  called 
several  witnesses,  but  where  is  the  man  from  whom  Muller 
bought  that  hat,  if  he  bought  it  of  any  one?  Could  Muller 
give  no  description  of  him?  If  in  his  statement  before  the 
magistrates,  in  America  or  in  this  country,  he  had  said  he  had 
bought  the  hat  in  the  docks,  described  the  man,  or  given  the 
remotest  clue  to  him,  why,  of  course,  the  Crown  would  have 
instituted  every  possible  inquiry  and  endeavoured  to  find  the 
man  out,  and  they  would  not  have  put  upon  Muller  the  task  of 
calling  him  as  a  witness.  What  is  the  account  of  the  hat  he 
gave  in  America?  He  says  he  had  it  twelve  months,  but  he 
does  not  say  from  whom  he  got  it,  or  give  any  information 
which  would  afford  the  slightest  clue  to  the  person  he  purchased 
it  from.  He  had  before  said  that  he  had  bought  it  within  two 
months. 

This  reminds  me  of  a  somewhat  remarkable  part  of 
the  case.  Putting  aside  for  the  moment  the  direct  testimony 
as  to  the  identity  of  the  hat,  it  appears  that  Muller  was  at 
Repsch's  on  the  Saturday  afternoon,  and  up  to  the  time  he  left 
Mrs.  Repsch  had  noticed  no  change  in  his  dress  or  hat;  but  on 
Monday  morning  she  and  her  husband  noticed  he  had  got  a 
new  hat.  There  must  have  been  a  considerable  difference  for 
them  to  notice  it.  Then  a  conversation  followed.  It  was  said — 
"You  are  very  extravagant  to  get  a  new  hat."  He  said  he 
gave  14s.  6d.  for  it,  and  Mr.  Repsch  said  it  was  a  guinea  hat. 
Now  this  is  a  very  striking  fact.  The  first  thing  on  Monday 
morning  he  is  seen  with  a  new  hat,  a  better  one  than  his  own, 
and  it  was  not  then  noticed,  as  far  as  we  know,  that  it  was 
cut  down. 
120 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


Gentlemen,  that  is  the  evidence  as  to  the  two  hats.  I  Solieitor- 
now  pass  on;  but,  if  you  are  satisfied  with  the  propositions 
I  have  stated,  that  Miiller  left  his  hat  in  the  carriage  that 
night  and  took  away  Mr.  Briggs's  hat,  probably  you  will  not 
require  further  evidence  on  the  part  of  the  prosecution.  Unfor- 
tunately, the  evidence  does  not  rest  here.  There  is  the  watch, 
and  there  is  the  chain.  Everything  taken  from  Mr.  Briggs  that 
night  is  found  on  Miiller.  The  chain  is  proved  to  be  in  bis 
possession  on  the  Monday  morning  after  the  murder.  He  goes 
and  changes  it  for  another.  The  watch,  it  is  true,  is  not  seen 
in  England,  but  subsequently  it  is  discovered  in  his  box  in 
America.  Therefore  he  must  have  had  it  before  he  left  England, 
unless  it  be  suggested  that  he  got  it  on  the  voyage,  and  I 
suppose  that  will  hardly  be  done.  My  learned  friend  says  that 
Miiller  was  a  vain,  boastful  man,  fond  of  showing  and  boasting 
about  his  property — his  watch,  chain,  or  any  trinket  he  had. 
If  Miiller  had  got  the  watch  honestly  would  he  not  have 
boasted  of  and  shown  it  to  his  friends — a  handsome  watch  of 
that  kind  ?  Did  he  buy  the  watch  and  chain  ?  Why,  the  lowest 
value  of  the  watch  and  chain  was  about  £10;  the  watch  was 
originally  worth  £25.  Haffa,  a  respectable  man,  who  knew 
Miiller,  and  naturally  enough  was  anxious  to  say  something 
in  his  favour,  said  he  saw  Miiller  before  the  murder  with  some 
money — he  believed  his  passage  money — but  he  did  not  count 
it.  But  Miiller  was  in  this  condition  just  before  he  started  for 
America,  that  he  pawned  his  coat  for  6s.,  and  it  was  found  that 
he  had  no  overcoat  on  the  voyage.  Where  was  Muller  to  raise 
£10  for  the  watch  or  the  watch  and  chain?  If  he  had  been 
able  to  raise  £10,  or  even  a  half  or  a  quarter  of  £10,  would 
he  not  have  taken  his  own  watch  and  chain  out  of  pawn?  If 
he  had  a  watch  and  chain  in  pawn,  why  should  he  get  another? 
These  are  difficulties  in  the  case  which  my  learned  friend  has 
scarcely  attempted  to  touch. 

Now,  these  are  the  observations  which  I  have  to  address 
to  you  upon  what  I  may  call  the  direct  evidence  of  the  case — 
the  strong,  direct,  circumstantial  evidence  which,  if  entirely 
believed  by  you,  amounts  to  almost  positive  proof.  I  proceed 
to  make  an  observation  or  two  on  the  probabilities  of  the  case 
of  my  learned  friend.  I  think  you  will  see  that  my  learned 
friend  has  failed  to  grapple  with  these  strong  facts.  It  was 


Franz    Muller. 

GefneraF"  *n  Vain  *or  ^m  to  attemPt  *°  grapple  with  them.  They  are 
too  strong  for  any  advocate.  But  my  learned  friend  has  in 
a  great  measure  endeavoured  to  divert  your  consideration 
from  these  great  cardinal  points  to  circumstances  tending  to 
show  the  improbability  of  Muller  having  intended  to  commit 
this  crime.  I  have  before  observed  that  probabilities  and 
improbabilities  are  worth  consideration,  but  probability  is 
*  worth  nothing  against  fact.  My  learned  friend  attempted  to 
show  that  it  was  highly  improbable  that  Muller  would  commit 
this  murder.  I  grant  that  it  was  highly  improbable  that  he 
would  commit  it.  It  was  highly  improbable  that  any  such 
murder  would  be  committed.  It  was  highly  improbable  that 
any  man,  or  any  number  of  men,  should  commit  such  a 
murder.  If  there  is  any  occasion  when  a  man  may  consider 
himself  perfectly  safe,  it  is  when  he  is  travelling  in  a  first- 
class  railway  carriage  in  the  metropolis.  It  is,  as  I  observed 
in  my  opening  speech,  a  most  extraordinary  murder,  and 
there  is  no  difficulty  in  showing  that  it  is  in  the  highest 
degree  improbable  that  a  man,  or  any  number  of  men, 
should  contemplate  such  a  crime.  But  it  was  committed. 
What  is  the  use  of  probabilities  when  you  have  a  fact — 
when  you  have  the  body  of  Mr.  Briggs,  with  the  wound  upon 
his  skull,  inflicted  by  a  blunt  instrument,  and  when  you 
find  that  his  watch  and  chain  have  been  torn  away  from  his 
body,  and  that  his  hat  is  not  in  the  carriage?  These  are 
facts,  and  you  must  deal  with  them.  My  learned  friend  says 
I  ought  to  explain  clearly  and  precisely  in  what  manner  this 
murder  was  committed.  He  says  I  ought  to  propound  some 
clear  opinion  as  to  the  weapon  with  which  the  blows  were 
struck.  I  said  at  the  outset  that  I  was  unable  to  do  so, 
and  I  entirely  demur  to  the  doctrine  of  my  learned  friend 
that  I  am  bound  to  state  what  the  identical  weapon  was. 
Murders  are  not  committed  in  the  presence  of  witnesses.  Is 
it  to  be  said  that,  if  a  man  commits  a  murder,  and  it  is  not 
found  out  under  what  particular  circumstances  the  blow  was 
struck  or  with  what  instrument  the  murder  was  committed, 
the  murderer  must  go  unpunished?  To  say  that  would  be  to 
make  a  proclamation  in  favour  of  the  guilty,  and  most  fatal 
to  the  lives  of  the  innocent.  I  said  at  first  that  I  was 
unable  to  state  with  any  certainty  how  the  blows  were 


Addresses  to   Jury. 


inflicted  or  what  instrument  was  used;  but  this  is  beyond  all  Solleitor- 
doubt,  that  the  blows  were  inflicted  on  the  head  of  Mr.  Briggs 
by  some  blunt  instrument  wielded  with  violence.  The  stick 
of  Mr.  Briggs  will  be  placed  in  your  hands,  and  you  will  be 
able  to  form  an  opinion  whether  that  was  the  instrument 
employed.  You  are  quite  as  capable  of  judging  as  I  am, 
or  any  scientific  man — probably  more  capable — whether  that 
stick,  wielded  with  violence  by  a  young  man  of  average 
strength,  would  or  would  not  inflict  those  blows.  I  cannot 
tell  how  the  blows  were  inflicted.  They  might  have  been 
inflicted  by  a  life-preserver.  My  learned  friend  called  atten- 
tion to  a  certain  pair  of  scissors  found  in  the  luggage  of  the  ' 
prisoner.  It  is  only  fair  and  proper  for  me  to  say  that  there 
is  no  evidence  that  he  had  them  in  his  possession  on  the 
night  of  Saturday,  the  9th  July.  I  believe  no  such  sugges- 
tion was  made.  My  learned  friend  says  he  was  taken  by 
surprise  by  the  reference  to  the  scissors.  So  was  I.  I  had 
no  knowledge  that  they  were  in  his  box.  I  repeat  that  I  am 
not  able  to  show  by  what  instrument  the  wounds  were  caused; 
but  I  have  shown  that  they  were  inflicted  by  a  blunt  instru- 
ment by  some  one  in  that  carriage.  Was  the  prisoner  in  that 
carriage  or  was  he  not?  My  learned  friend  having  found 
fault  with  me  for  speculating  how  this  murder  was  com- 
mitted, he  immediately  proceeds  to  speculate  on  it  himself. 
He  suggests  various  theories,  and  he  must  forgive  me  for 
saying  that  upon  this  part  of  the  case  he  has  drawn  to  some 
extent  upon  his  imagination. 

My  learned  friend  spoke  of  Mr.  Briggs  as  a  very  power- 
ful man,  and  represented  Muller  as  weak  and  feeble, 
and  supposed  that  there  had  been  a  terrific  struggle 
between  them.  Here  my  learned  friend  departed  from 
his  usual  accuracy,  for  there  was  no  evidence  what- 
ever of  any  struggle.  The  evidence  is  the  other  way.  Mr. 
Briggs  was  a  man  of  seventy  years  of  age;  he  had  been 
suffering  from  a  severe  illness,  and  he  might  or  might  not 
have  been  asleep  in  the  carriage — it  is  impossible  to  say. 
Mr.  Briggs  was  not  a  heavy  man,  being  only  between  11  and  12 
stone  in  weight ;  and  therefore  all  the  declamation  of  my  learned 
friend  as  to  his  being  a  powerful  and  heavy  man  is  only  the 
result  of  his  imagination.  As  I  have  said,  my  learned  friend 

123 


Franz    Muller. 

Solicitor-  represented  Muller  as  a  feeble  man.     He  is  twenty-four  years 
of  age.     That  is  the  time  when  the  physical  strength  is  most 

(developed.  There  is  no  part  of  a  man's  life,  I  am  afraid, 
when  he  is  stronger  than  at  twenty-four.  Muller  is  not  tall, 
he  is  not  stout,  but  he  is  a  well-formed  young  man  in  the 
prime  of  his  youth.  Is  there  not  reason  to  suppose  that  he 
possesses  a  good  deal  of  strength  and  is  able  to  strike  a  heavy 
blow?  What  chance  would  an  old  man  of  seventy,  lately  an 
invalid,  have  against  such  a  young  man?  Then,  so  far  from 
there  having  been  a  struggle,  there  was  no  struggle  at  all. 
What  is  said  about  Mr.  Briggs's  dress?  The  only  disorder  in 
it  spoken  of  is  that  his  shirt-front  was  crumpled.  That 
is  accounted  for  by  his  chain  being  snatched  from  him  or 
by  his  being  pushed  out  of  the  carriage.  If  there  had  been 
a  terrific  struggle  his  coat  would  have  been  torn  to  shreds. 
There  were  no  bruises  on  Mr.  Briggs  except  on  his  head,  and 
nothing  on  his  person  or  his  dress  indicated  wrestling  or 
struggling.  Probably  the  first  blow  by  his  antagonist — but 
I  am  wrong  in  using  that  term,  for  there  was  no  antagonist — 
probably  the  first  blow  struck  with  some  instrument — I  don't 
know  what — fractured  his  skull.  What  could  Mr.  Briggs  do 
after  that?  He  might  have  been  dozing  at  the  time,  and 
totally  unprepared,  and  four  or  five  blows  might  have  followed 
each  other  in  as  rapid  succession  as  do  the  same  number  of 
words  fall  from  me.  Whether  afterwards  he  was  carried 
from  one  end  of  the  carriage  to  the  other,  or  whether  the 
murderer  or  murderers  took  him  up  in  their  arms  and  carried 
him,  or  whether  he  had  just  sense  enough  left  to  move  to  the 
door  himself,  either  to  call  the  guard  or  to  attempt  to  get 
out,  I  am  unable  to  say.  If  he  did  get  as  far  as  the  door 
himself,  nothing  could  have  been  easier  than  to  have  pushed 
him  out,  and  then  you  would  have  found  scarcely  any  blood. 
It  must  have  been  a  very  quick  transaction.  There  were  only 
a  few  minutes  to  do  it  in,  possibly  not  a  minute  and  a  half. 
Then,  so  far  as  a  terrific  struggle  is  concerned,  my  learned 
friend's  observations  have  no  weight. 

My     learned     friend     has     represented     this     murder     as 
having     been     committed     by      a     gang     of     men     deter- 
mined    to     murder     Mr.     Briggs.       Well,     it     might     have 
been    so.       It  is  for  you  to  say  whether  the  evidence  does 
124 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


not  point  the  other  way.     If  it  had  been  committed  by  a  soiieitor- 

1111  i,.,.  .  •       i  •    General 

gang   of   men,    would   they   have  left   four   sovereigns    m   his 

pocket,  the  silver  snuffbox,  and  the  diamond  ring  on  his 
finger?  We  can  suppose  that  a  gang  of  thieves,  if  they  sus- 
pected that  he  left  the  bank  with  a  large  sum  of  money, 
might  have  followed  him  on  this  night  from  the  bank  to  the 
railway;  but  it  so  happened  that  on  this  night  he  did  not 
leave  the  bank  for  the  railway,  but  dined  with  some  relatives 
before  he  went  home,  and  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  they 
could  have  got  any  information  about  that.  And,  if  there 
were  more  than  one  party  to  the  deed,  the  probability  is  that 
the  spoil  would  be  divided.  But  where  is  all  the  spoil?  It 
is  found  in  the  possession  of  one  man.  These  considerations 
do  point  to  the  conclusion,  with  almost  certainty,  that  the 
murder  was  not  committed  by  a  gang  of  persons,  but  by  one 
person,  and  there  would  be  no  difficulty  in  one  person,  toler- 
ably strong  and  moderately  active,  overcoming  and  knocking 
down  and  robbing  an  old  man  like  Mr.  Briggs,  and  getting 
rid  of  his  body  or  pushing  him  out  if  he  moved  to  the  door 
himself. 

I  have  said  so  much  with  respect  to  the  probabilities 
to  which  my  learned  friend  has  referred.  He  has  said  that 
it  was  impossible  for  Muller  to  commit  this  crime,  because, 
among  other  things,  Mr.  Briggs  was  a  powerful  man  and 
Muller  a  weak  man.  I  have  shown  there  is  no  foundation 
for  that  argument.  My  learned  friend  has  said  that  Muller 
could  not  have  committed  the  crime  because  he  had  an 
injured  foot,  and  had  a  slipper  on.  Upon  that  subject  I 
refer  to  the  evidence  of  Mrs.  Repsch,  who  said  that  on  the 
Saturday  he  brought  two  slippers,  but  took  one  away.  She, 
however,  said  that  he  took  away  both  his  boots,  and,  if  he 
left  with  one  slipper  on  and  one  boot  on,  he  had  the  other 
boot  in  his  pocket.  I  don't  think,  however,  that  this  matter 
amounts  to  much  one  way  or  the  other.  I  will  merely  observe 
with  regard  to  Muller's  clothes :  it  appears,  no  doubt,  that  he 
wore  a  pair  of  black  trousers  on  this  day.  It  may  or  may 
not  be  that  there  was  blood  on  the  trousers  of  the  man  who 
committed  the  murder.  It  does  not  necessarily  follow  that 
there  should  be.  If  Mr.  Briggs  moved  to  the  window  and  was 
pushed  out,  there  would  be  little  blood  on  the  murderer. 

125 


Franz    Muller. 

Solicitor-  Muller  appears  to  have  worn  the  same  clothes  on  the  day 
and  the  day  after,  but  Mrs.  Repsch  says  that  on  the  Monday 
his  clothes  were  slightly  different.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is 
to  be  said  that  the  pair  of  trousers  which  Muller  wore  on  the 
Saturday  night  in  the  railway  carriage,  if  he  were  there,  are 
not  forthcoming.  We  don't  know  what  has  become  of  them. 
He  is  asked  by  Inspector  Tanner,  pointing  to  his  luggage,  if 
that  is  all  of  it,  and  he  says,  "  That  is  all,"  all  with  the 
exception  of  a  waistcoat  which  he  had  exchanged  for  a  reticule. 
That  waistcoat  was  afterwards  found,  and  Muller  does  not 
say  that  he  had  any  clothes  which  he  disposed  of  on  the 
voyage.  Then  there  is  this  fact  to  be  considered — I  don't 
wish  to  attach  more  importance  to  it  than  it  deserves — that 
the  pair  of  trousers  Muller  wore  that  night  in  the  railway 
carriage,  if  he  were  there,  are  not  forthcoming,  and  no  account 
is  given  of  them.  There  is  also  a  coat  with  a  velvet  collar 
which  he  had  before  he  started  which  is  not  forthcoming.  I 
have  now  said  as  much  as  I  think  necessary  on  the  direct 
evidence  against  Muller  and  on  the  probabilities  suggested  by 
my  learned  friend,  and  I  am  sure  I  need  scarcely  repeat  that 
probabilities  are  as  nothing,  or  as  little  as  possible,  compared 
with  positive  facts. 

Now,  a  few  words  on  the  defence  my  learned  friend  has  set 
up  on  the  part  of  Muller  by  the  calling  of  witnesses.  The  first 
witness  whom  my  learned  friend  called  was  Mr.  Lee.  Mr.  Lee 
was  examined  before  the  coroner,  but  he  was  not  examined 
before  the  magistrate  by  my  learned  friend  Mr.  Giffard,  who 
then  conducted  the  case  for  the  Crown.  I  entirely  approve  of 
the  conduct  of  Mr.  Giffard  in  not  having  called  Mr.  Lee  on  that 
occasion,  and  I  did  not  call  Mr.  Lee  before  you  because  I  did 
not  believe  his  evidence  to  be  of  a  trustworthy  character.  I 
am  bound  to  submit  to  the  jury  all  the  evidence  which  I  think 
tends  to  lead  to  a  correct  conclusion,  be  it  a  conclusion  in 
favour  of  the  Crown  or  of  the  prisoner;  but  I  do  not  deem  it 
my  duty  to  lay  before  them  evidence  which  I  do  not  deem 
trustworthy.  The  evidence  of  Mr.  Lee  was  perhaps  the  most 
remarkable  evidence  that  any  one  ever  heard  in  a  Court  of 
justice.  Mr.  Lee  represented  himself  as  a  friend  of  the  unhappy 
man  who  was  murdered,  as  on  such  intimate  terms  with  him 
that  he  addressed  him  by  his  Christian  name  and  called  him 
126 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


"  Tom,"  and  yet,  according  to  Mr.  Lee's  own  statement,  though  Soiieit»p- 
three  or  four  minutes  before  Mr.  Briggs  was  murdered,  he  saw 
two  men  in  the  carriage  with  him  whom  he  can  identify,  he 
gave  no  information  of  the  circumstance  for  some  days !  He 
gave  no  information  to  the  police,  and  he  further  told  you 
that,  unless  one  of  the  policemen  had  come  to  him,  he  should 
not  have  given  any  information  on  the  subject.  And  when 
asked  why,  he  said  because  he  thought  it  immaterial. 
Immaterial  to  give  a  description  of  two  men  who  were  in  a 
railway  carriage  three  or  four  minutes  before  a  murder  was 
committed  in  it !  And  then  he  said,  "  I  thought  it  a  bother  to 
give  information."  He  thought  it  a  bother  to  give  information 
respecting  the  murder  of  a  man  whom  he  represents  as  an  , 
intimate  acquaintance!  If  such  a  witness  had  been  called  for 
the  Crown  I  would  not  have  believed  a  word  he  said ;  we  should 
not  have  known  whether  it  was  true  or  whether  it  was  false. 
It  is  extremely  difficult  to  understand  him.  What  is  his 
account?  He  says  he  left  his  home  about  eight  o'clock,  that 
he  strolled  about,  that  he  went  to  Bow  for  a  change.  He  was 
asked  if  he  had  any  business  at  Bow? — None.  If  he  spoke  to 
anybody  at  Bow? — No.  "Did  you  go  to  any  house? — Well,  I 
went  to  a  public-house;  I  had  a  pint  of  ale.  Did  you  go  to 
any  other  house? — I  do  not  believe  I  did."  And  then  he  came 
back,  having,  he  says,  spoken  to  no  one.  It  is  a  most  extra- 
ordinary account.  But  the  question  arises,  was  Mr.  Lee  there 
at  all  that  night?  He  says  the  train  stopped  an  unusual  time 
at  Bow  that  night,  but  that  when  he  saw  the  deceased  he  said, 
"  Good-night,  Tom  " — a  strange  expression  for  him  to  use  to  a 
man  whom  it  appears  he  did  not  know  intimately,  and  whom 
he  only  knew  from  occasionally  seeing  him  in  the  city.  He 
says  that  he  got  into  the  next  carriage,  and  that  the  train 
waited  an  unusual  time  at  Bow  that  night.  But,  so  far  from 
the  train  waiting  an  unusual  time  that  night  at  Bow,  it  appears 
that  the  train  was  late,  that  it  had  started  late,  and  that  it 
was  hurried  on.  And  what  is  the  further  evidence  of  Mr.  Lee? 
He  says  that  he  got  out  at  Hackney  Wick.  Now,  according 
to  his  own  account,  he  was  in  the  next  carriage  to  that  in  which 
Mr.  Briggs  was  murdered,  and  it  is  proved  that  immediately 
after  the  train  arrived  blood  was  discovered  in  the  carriage; 
that  Mr.  Jones  and  another  gentlemen  got  into  the  carriage; 

1 37 


Franz    Muller. 

Genera* ~  *^at  *^e  £uarc*  was  ca^e<i>  and  that  he  came  with  a  light ;  that 
other  persons  got  into  the  carriage ;  that  they  were  turned  out, 
and  that  the  carriage  was  locked  up.  But  not  one  word  does 
Mr.  Lee  recollect  of  all  this.  If  he  had  come  into  the  box  and 
had  said,  "  Muller  is  the  man  whom  I  saw  in  the  railway 
carriage  with  Mr.  Briggs,"  I  should  not  have  felt  justified,  on 
the  part  of  the  Crown,  in  calling  him.  He  says  he  cannot  say 
whether  Muller  was  the  man.  He  says  he  can  describe  the 
persons;  and  how  does  he  describe  them?  He  says  there  were 
two  men  sitting  with  Mr.  Briggs,  that  at  the  time  he  did  not 
see  well,  but  that  one  had  dark  whiskers,  and  that  there  was 
another  man,  a  stoutish  man,  who  had  light  whiskers.  I  will 
take  the  liberty  of  reading  a  statement  which  my  learned  friend 
Mr.  Serjeant  Parry  read  to  you.  My  learned  friend  in  his 
speech  said — "  Lee  will  say,  '  I  saw  two  men  in  the  compartment, 
and  I  cannot  say  that  Muller  was  one ;  that  the  man  that  was 
next  to  the  deceased  was  a  tall,  thin  man,  and  had  whiskers, 
and  I  believe  he  had  dark  whiskers;  and  the  other  man  who 
sat  opposite  to  the  deceased  had  light  hair.  I  cannot  tell  the 
age.'  "  There  was  not  one  syllable  about  the  other  man  having 
whiskers,  or  being  a  stout  man,  or  being  anything  of  the  kind. 
Therefore  Mr.  Lee  appears  to  have  thought  of  these  whiskers 
since  he  gave  the  information,  for  since  Mr.  Serjeant  Parry 
was  instructed  he  has  put  a  pair  of  whiskers  on  the  man's  face 
which  were  not  there  before. 

Now,  gentlemen,  I  think  I  need  not  say  another 
word  about  Mr.  Lee.  I  think  you  will  agree  with 
me  that  my  learned  colleagues  and  myself  have  taken  the 
right  course  in  not  bringing  forward  such  a  witness.  And  now, 
gentlemen,  what  is  the  next  evidence?  I  do  not  think  I  need 
say  more  on  the  evidence  as  to  the  hats.  I  have  commented 
upon  that  already.  We  next  come  to  the  alibi  which  my  learned 
friend  has  been  instructed  to  set  up.  Now,  gentlemen,  I  must 
confess  to  some  doubt  as  to  the  wisdom  and  the  prudence  of 
setting  up  that  defence,  for  a  more  unsatisfactory  and  a  more 
dangerous  alibi  was  never  set  up  in  a  Court  of  justice.  Against 
the  evidence  which  I  have  submitted  to  you  on  the  part  of  the 
Crown,  what  is  the  evidence  set  up  by  the  defence?  The  clock 
of  a  brothel,  the  keeper  of  the  house,  and  the  statement  of 
one  of  the  unfortunate  women  who  reside  in  it.  Gentlemen,  in 
128 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


most  alibis  there  is  a  certain  amount  of  truth.  An  altogether  Solicitor- 
fictitious  alibi  one  seldom  meets.  Usually  the  story  is  correct 
as  to  the  main  facts,  but  the  day  is  altered — sometimes  it  is 
Monday,  instead  of  the  Monday  week;  sometimes  the  transac- 
tion spoken  of  occurs  in  the  evening  instead  of  in  the  morning, 
and  there  is  generally  a  clock  to  go  by.  Now,  let  us  see  the 
nature  of  this  alibi.  Mrs.  Jones  or  Mrs.  Kent  is  called  to  say 
that  Miiller  called  at  her  house  at  nine  o'clock  on  the  night 
of  the  9th  July,  and  there  is  a  good  long  story  about  a  telegram, 
which  Miiller  had  nothing  to  do  with,  but  it  is  used  as  fixing 
the  time.  It  does  not  concern  me  on  the  part  of  the  prosecution 
whether  they  are  right  or  wrong  in  saying  that  Miiller  did  call 
on  that  day  (Saturday,  the  9th  of  July),  but,  if  he  did  call 
half  an  hour  earlier  than  they  say  he  did,  it  is  a  strong  fact 
for  the  prosecution.  The  whole  question  of  the  alibi  is  reduced  , 
to  a  question  of  half  an  hour,  and  yet  this  old  lady  and  this 
girl  are  called  before  you  to  speak  to  an  occasion  to  which 
their  attention  was  not  called  for  a  month  or  six  weeks  after- 
wards, to  speak  to  the  exact  time — half-past  nine.  Can  they  ' 
do  that?  How  could  the  old  lady  remember  that  Miiller  called 
at  half-past  nine  o'clock  exactly?  It  did  not  signify  to  her 
what  hour  he  called;  there  was  nothing  to  fix  it  in  her 
recollection.  Then  comes  in  the  clock — the  alibi  clock. 
She  looked  at  the  clock.  Why  should  she  look  at  the  clock? 
Why,  because  Eldred  (one  of  the  unfortunate  women)  went  out 
at  nine.  It  is  a  singular  fact  that  Eldred  does  not  remember 
anything  about  the  clock,  but  she  says  she  went  out  at  nine, 
because  she  always  did  go  out  at  nine.  But  can  they  recollect 
anything  else?  If  there  be  anything  the  old  lady  would 
remember  it  would  be  the  arrival  of  a  telegram.  I  do  not 
suppose  that  telegrams  are  often  sent  to  brothels;  but  she 
cannot  tell  the  time  within  an  hour  or  within  half  an  hour 
that  it  arrived,  nor  can  the  girl  tell  when  she  received  it,  nor 
what  time  she  got  up  that  day;  but  she  says  she  went  out  at 
nine  o'clock.  Do  you  suppose  that  the  proceedings  of  that 
respectable  and  well-conducted  establishment  are  regulated  by 
clockwork?  Why,  it  is  preposterous.  There  is  no  reason  for 
their  fixing  upon  the  clock.  Why,  if  this  girl  had  gone  out  a 
little  before  nine,  and  if  Miiller  had  called  a  little  after  nine, 
that  would  be  quite  consistent  with  the  case  for  the  prosecution. 

K  129 


Franz    Muller. 

Solicitor-  What  does  old  Mrs.  Jones  know  as  to  whether  Muller  called 
General 

half  an  hour  before  or  after  a  certain  time?  She  never  thought 
of  it  till  some  German  gentlemen  and  the  attorney's  clerk  called 
/  upon  her;  and  then  they  did  not  recollect  anything  about  the 
telegram;  they  found  that  out  since,  and,  as  to  their  recollect- 
ing the  precise  hour  or  precise  minute  at  which  anything  took 
place  on  that  day,  it  is  perfectly  idle.  Well,  but  we  will  just 
assume  that  there  is  a  certain  foundation  of  truth  in  what  they 
say,  that  Muller  was  there  a  little  before  nine,  or  about  nine 
o'clock.  Muller  is  at  Mrs.  Repsch's  at  half-past  seven  or  a 
quarter  to  eight.  He  left  somewhere  about  that  time,  and  he 
said  to  Haffa  that  he  was  going  to  see  this  girl.  And  it  is 
said  that  he  went  out  in  one  of  his  slippers.  Suppose  that  to 
be  so,  and  that  he  took  the  omnibus  to  Camberwell,  and  went 
to  see  this  girl,  what  time  did  he  arrive?  He  left  Repsch's  at 
a  quarter  before  eight,  and  would  arrive  at  this  woman's  house 
at  Camberwell  at  half -past  eight  or  a  quarter  to  nine.  He  did 
not  stay  above  a  few  minutes;  there  was  nothing  to  stay  for, 
because  the  girl  was  out.  He  goes  back,  and  might  take  the 
omnibus  that  would  carry  him  to  London  Bridge,  and  if  he 
started  about  a  quarter  past  nine,  or  somewhere  about  that 
time,  he  would  arrive  at  King  William  Street  just  about  the 
same  time  that  Mr.  Briggs  would  arrive  there.  The  station  to 
which  Muller  would  go,  in  order  to  travel  to  where  he  lives,  is 
the  Hackney  Wick  station,  sometimes  called  the  Victoria 
station,  and  he  would  be  going  home  by  the  same  train  in 
which  Mr.  Briggs  was.  Gentlemen,  I  cannot  but  think  that 
this  was  a  most  dangerous  alibi  to  set  up.  If  I  had  known  that 
Muller  was  at  Camberwell,  and  that  he  left  to  go  home  at,  I 
will  not  say  half-past  nine,  but  at  nine  o'clock,  or  a  quarter 
to  nine,  I  should,  on  the  part  of  the  Crown,  have  thought  it 
proper  to  give  you  that  information.  Only  suppose  a  mistake 
of  half  an  hour  by  Mrs.  Jones,  and  a  mistake  by  the  girl  of 
half  an  hour,  and  you  have  Muller  put  in  such  a  situation  that 
he  would  probably  arrive  at  Fenchurch  Street  station  some- 
where about  the  same  time  as  Mr.  Briggs.  I  submit  that  for 
the  defence  the  alibi  has  totally  failed,  and  that,  by  supposing 
the  mistake  of  half  an  hour,  it  strengthens  the  case  for  the 
prosecution.  I  say  nothing  about  the  last  witness,  whom,  I 
suppose,  they  did  not  rely  upon.  He  merely  said  that  some 
130 


Franz  Muller 
(From  a  Photograph  taken  by  the  New  York  Police). 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


time  last  summer  a  gentleman  rode  in  his  omnibus  -who  wore  Solieitor- 
a  slipper,  and  that  he  was  a  stoutish  gentleman,  and  leaned    \ 
on  his  arm  when  he  got  down. 

Gentlemen,  I  have  now  arrived  at  the  close  of  the 
observations  which  I  have  thought  it  right  to  make 
to  you  on  the  part  of  the  prosecution,  and  without  further 
comment  I  will  leave  the  case  in  your  hands,  satisfied 
that  you  will  perform  your  duty.  If  you  see — I  will  not  say 
any  possible  doubt,  because  it  is  not  for  us  to  speculate  on 
remote  possibilities — but  if  you  think  there  is  any  reasonable 
doubt  in  the  evidence  that  is  laid  before  you,  acquit  him;  but 
if  the  evidence  in  this  case,  circumstantial  as  it  is,  brings  to 
your  minds  a  clear  and  abiding  conviction  of  the  prisoner's 
guilt,  I  call  on  you  to  perform  the  duty  you  owe  to  society  by 
pronouncing  the  prisoner  guilty. 


The  Lord  Chief  Baron's  Charge  to  the  Jury. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  BARON  commenced  to  sum  up  the  case  to  Lord  Chief 
the  jury  at  twenty-five  minutes  past  one  o'clock.  His  lord- 
ship said — Gentlemen  of  the  jury,  the  prisoner  at  the  bar, 
Franz  Muller,  is  indicted  for  the  wilful  murder  of  Mr.  Briggs, 
and  it  is  your  duty,  upon  the  evidence  before  you,  to  say 
whether  or  not  you  can  find  him  guilty.  I  shall  not  think  it 
necessary  to  enter  upon  some  of  the  matters  which  have  been 
alluded  to  with  respect  to  the  discussions  and  opinions.  I 
think  that  fair  statements — I  abstain  from  saying  discussions — 
of  anything  that  occurs  in  this  country,  in  which  the  people 
are  interested,  appear  to  be  one  of  the  benefits  of  the  Press 
which  one  would  not  desire  to  see  curtailed,  and  if  you  have  read 
nothing  but  statements,  and  cannot  therefore  be  prejudiced  by 
discussion,  I  think  you  come  to  this  inquiry  of  three  days — I 
may  say  you  come  to  the  inquiry  with  your  minds  furnished 
with  certain  facts  which  are  an  essential  part  of  the  question, 
and  I  think  you  are  better  able  to  enter  into  the  matter  than 
if  you  had  come  here  entire  strangers  to  all  the  circumstances. 
It  is  my  duty  to  present  to  you  the  facts  as  they  are  brought 
forward  on  the  part  of  the  prosecution  and  on  the  part  of  the 
defence,  to  state  to  you  any  point  of  law  on  which  it  is  neces- 


Franz    Muller. 


Lord  Chief  sary  to  give  direction,  and  then  to  leave  you  to  form  your 
own  judgment  as  to  what  are  the  opinions  to  be  drawn  from  the 
facts  that  are  sworn  before  you.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that 
Mr.  Briggs  on  the  evening  or  night  of  the  9th  of  July  in  this 
year  was  murdered.  I  know  nothing,  and  can  say  nothing, 
of  the  manner  in  which  that  murder  was  done,  but  I  apprehend 
that  of  the  fact  there  can  be  no  doubt.  I  shall  presently  state 
to  you  the  circumstances  as  they  appear  to  have  occurred 
according  to  the  evidence,  and  I  shall  leave  it  to  you  to  form 
your  own  fair  opinion,  for  the  verdict  is  to  be  yours  and  not 
mine.  I  shall  call  your  attention  to  certain  parts  of  the  case. 
I  shall  give  you  some  general  directions  as  to  what  I  think  you 
should  do,  and  I  shall  leave  you  to  form  your  own  opinion. 

It  has  been  said,  and  said  very  truly,  that  this  is  a  case  of 
circumstantial  evidence.  I  apprehend  that  circumstantial  evi- 
dence means  this — when  the  facts  stated  do  not  directly  prove 
'the  actual  crime,  but  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the  prisoner 
committed  the  crime — and  I  believe  I  am  right  in  saying  that 
the  majority  of  cases  that  are  investigated  in  criminal  Courts 
in  this  country  are  decided  upon  circumstantial  evidence — it  has 
been  said  that  that  evidence  is  better  than  direct  evidence. 
In  one  sense  that  may  be  true ;  in  another  sense  it  is  not  true. 
If  you  have  the  testimony  of  witnesses  of  undoubted  character 
who  saw  the  crime  committed,  why,  then,  you  can  hardly  have 
better  evidence  than  that — the  direct  evidence  of  some  persons 
who  saw  the  fact  and  can  depose  to  the  crime  as  having  been 
committed;  but,  undoubtedly,  where  there  be  any  doubt  about 
the  veracity  or  honour  of  the  witnesses,  indirect  evidence,  com- 
ing from  different  distances  and  remote  quarters,  and  all  tending 
to  the  same  end,  has  a  force  and  effect  beyond  the  testimony  of 
more  direct  evidence.  For  direct  evidence  may  be  mistaken  in 
various  ways.  There  may  be  an  error  about  the  person.  The 
witness  may  say,  "  I  saw  him  do  it,  or  a  person  like  him."  He 
may  give  a  character  to  the  commission  of  a  crime  which  really 
does  not  belong  to  it;  but  indirect  testimony  from  a  number 
of  facts,  supposing  that  you  believe  them — if  that  is  the  case, 
and  they  all  concur  to  the  same  point,  they  are  free  from  the 
objection  that  there  has  been  either  perjury,  or  omission,  or 
misstatement.  There  is  another  matter  upon  which  I  wish, 
before  I  go  into  the  case,  to  address  you,  and  that  is  upon  the 
132 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


degree  of  certainty  with  which  you  ought  to  give  your  verdict.  Lord  Chief 
I  collected  from  my  brother  Parry's  address  that  he  suggested 
to  you  that  you  ought  not  to  pronounce  a  verdict  of  guilty 
unless  you  were  so  satisfied  of  the  guilt  of  the  prisoner  as  if  you 
had  seen  him  do  the  act,  and  you  yourselves,  too,  witnessed 
the  completion  of  it.  Gentlemen,  I  think  that  is  not  the 
certainty  which  is  required  of  you  to  discharge  your  duty  on 
the  oath  you  have  taken,  to  the  country  to  which  you  belong,  or 
to  the  prisoner,  whose  safety  is  in  your  power.  I  have  heard 
the  late  Lord  Tenterden  frequently  lay  down  a  rule,  which  I 
will  pronounce  to  you  in  his  own  language — "  It  is  not  neces- 
sary that  you  should  have  a  certainty,  which  does  not  belong 
to  any  human  transaction ;  it  is  only  necessary  that  you  should 
have  that  certainty  with  which  you  transact  your  own  most 
important  concerns  in  life."  No  doubt  the  question  before  you 
to-day,  involving  as  it  does  the  life  of  the  prisoner  at  the  bar, 
must  be  deemed  to  be  of  the  highest  importance ;  but  you  are 
requested  to  have  only  that  degree  of  certainty  with  which  you 
can  decide  upon  and  conclude  your  own  most  important  trans- 
actions. Gentlemen,  our  care  should  be  to  prevent  the  com- 
mission of  crime,  which  it  is  the  object  of  criminal  Courts 
to  do.  The  learned  counsel,  brother  Parry,  has  referred  to 
a  common  axiom  in  which  there  is  no  doubt  some  degree  of 
truth,  and  that  is,  that  it  is  better  that  a  great  many  guilty 
persons  should  escape  than  that  one  innocent  man  should  suffer. 
Now,  gentlemen,  it  is  impossible  to  deny  that  the  history  of 
our  criminal  Courts,  and  I  believe  that  of  all  criminal  Courts, 
will  afford  instances  where  innocent  persons  have  been  classed 
with  the  guilty,  and  have  been  found  guilty,  and  have  suffered 
by  it.  But,  gentlemen,  to  make  a  comparison  between  con- 
victing the  innocent  man  and  acquitting  the  guilty  is  perfectly 
unwarranted.  There  is  no  comparison  between  them.  Each 
of  them  is  a  great  misfortune  to  the  country  and  discreditable 
to  the  administration  of  justice.  The  only  rule  that  can  be 
laid  down  is,  that  in  the  question  of  a  criminal  trial  you  should 
exert  your  utmost  vigilance,  and  take  care  that  if  the  man  be 
innocent  he  should  be  acquitted,  and  that  if  guilty  he  should 
be  convicted. 

Now,    gentlemen,    I    think    the    mode    to    investigate     this 
case     on     your     part     should     be     this.       Take     the     facts 

133 


Franz    Muller. 


Baron 


Lord^Chief  that  are  proved  before  you,  separate  those  which  you  believe 
from  those  which  you  do  not  believe ;  take  those  you  are  satis- 
fied you  can  rely  upon,  and  the  conclusions  which  naturally 
and  almost  necessarily  result  from  those  facts  are  to  be  acted 
upon  as  much  as  facts  themselves ;  and  whatever  may  be 
the  conclusion  they  may  lead  you  to — whatever,  on  the  one  side 
or  on  the  other,  that  conclusion  may  be — I  think  you  may  rely 
upon  it  as  a  safe  and  just  one.  The  case  on  the  part  of  the 
prosecution  is  the  story  of  the  death  of  Mr.  Briggs,  told  by 
the  different  witnesses,  who  unfolded  the  circumstances  one 
after  the  other  according  to  their  occurrence,  leading  to  the 
gradual  discovery  of  some  apparent  connection  between  the 
property  which  was  lost  and  the  possession  of  it  by  the  prisoner 
at  the  bar.  The  case  on  the  part  of  the  prisoner  I  collect  to 
be  threefold.  In  the  first  place,  my  brother  Parry  said, 
''  You  have  not  satisfactorily  made  out  the  guilt  of  the 
prisoner.  There  are  links  wanting  in  your  chain.  Some  of 
the  links  are  broken  or  imperfect.  You  have  substituted 
imagination  for  fact,  and  of  these  there  is  no  certainty."  So 
I  understood  brother  Parry  to  say  the  prisoner  would  be  en- 
titled to  your  verdict  of  not  guilty.  That  issue,  no  doubt, 
requires  your  special  attention,  because  it  is  very  much  upon 
that  the  trial  is  to  be  determined.  There  can  be  no  doubt  if 
the  case  on  the  part  of  the  prosecution  does  not  bring  home 
to  your  minds  a  satisfactory  conclusion,  upon  which  you  can 
only  say  that,  acting  upon  your  own  minds,  you  believe  the 
prisoner  guilty,  the  prisoner  is  entitled  to  be  found  not  guilty. 
The  next  point  in  the  defence  was  this,  that  the  prisoner  was 
unable,  that  he  was  not  of  stature  and  strength  competent  to 
the  task  that  apparently  was  performed.  That,  no  doubt, 
if  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  were  a  young  man  under  age  and 
possessed  of  no  strength,  would  be  an  argument  in  his  favour. 
If  you  think  he  was  incompetent,  if  you  think  that  he  could 
not  have  done  that  which  is  imputed  to  him,  of  course,  if  he 
could  not  have  done  it,  then  he  is  entitled  to  be  found  not 
guilty.  The  third  line  of  the  defence  is  an  alibi.  That 
requires  a  word  from  me  before  I  proceed  to  the  particular 
facts  of  the  case. 

Upon     the     whole     case     for     the     prosecution,     if     you 
entertain    any    reasonable  doubt,    if   you    cannot   come   to    a 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


satisfactory  conclusion,  the  prisoner  is  entitled  to  the  benefit  Lord  Chief 
of  that  doubt.  If  you  do  come  to  a  satisfactory  conclusion 
upon  the  case  for  the  prosecution  you  are  then  met  by  an  alibi, 
and  I  think  the  alibi  is  then  to  be  weighed  in  the  scale  against 
the  case  for  the  prosecution.  To  explain  precisely  what  I  wish 
to  show — if  you  entertain  any  serious  doubt  on  the  case  for  the 
prosecution  you  must  acquit  the  prisoner.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  case  for  the  prosecution  and  the  alibi  must  be  thrown  into 
the  same  scale.  Where  an  alibi  is  proposed  and  there  is  some 
doubt,  it  then  becomes  your  province  and  duty  to  examine  the 
alibi,  and  to  decide  between  the  prosecution  and  the  alibi.  All 
the  facts  brought  before  you  on  the  part  of  the  Solicitor- 
General  form  the  case  for  the  prosecution,  and  ought  to  be 
weighed  duly.  The  facts  brought  in  support  of  the  alibi  should 
be  weighed  with  the  case  for  the  prosecution,  and  you  will 
say  which  you  believe.  It  is  a  case  where  both  cannot  be 
true,  and  it  is  for  you  to  decide  to  which  the  truth  belongs. 
Now,  gentlemen,  having  stated  to  the  jury  what  I  consider 
to  be  the  case  on  the  part  of  the  prosecution,  and  the  case  on 
the  part  of  the  defence,  I  think  it  right  to  draw  your  attention 
to  the  facts  themselves. 

Gentlemen,  it  appears  that  Mr.  Briggs  left  London  on  the 
9th  of  July  (Saturday).  After  having  dined  with  his  niece's 
husband,  Mr.  Buchan,  he  proceeded  by  an  omnibus  to  some 
place  near  London  Bridge,  where  he  got  out  and  went  to  a 
train  at  Fenchurch  Street  station  to  take  him  through  Bow 
to  Hackney,  or  Hackney  Wick,  as  it  is  called.  A  Mr.  Lee 
said  he  saw  him  there.  There  is  no  doubt  that  Mr.  Briggs 
left  Fenchurch  Street  and  was  murdered  before  he  reached 
Hackney  Wick,  and,  as  it  is  highly  improbable  that  he  was 
murdered  between  Fenchurch  Street  and  Bow,  you  may 
easily  believe  that  he  was  at  the  latter  place.  Whether  he 
was  there  with  another  person  or  not  I  will  not  say.  Lee, 
who  was  there,  and  did  not  consider  it  his  duty  to  make  a 
statement  respecting  what  he  saw,  is,  I  think,  scarcely  in  that 
frame  of  mind  which  is  deserving  of  approbation.  If,  indeed, 
the  prosecution  had  known  what  Lee  had  to  say  in  examina- 
tion and  cross-examination,  I  am  not  surprised  that  they  did 
not  call  him,  and  they  did  quite  right  not  to  call  him.  Mr. 
Briggs  was  there.  Mr.  Briggs  did  not  arrive  at  Hackney 

135 


Franz    Muller. 

Lord  Chief  Wick.  The  carriage  that  went  from  Fenchurch  Street  to 
Hackney  Wick  was  taken  back  without  being  turned  round. 
That  accounts  in  part  for  what  appears  on  the  depositions 
and  in  the  evidence  before  the  coroner,  for  what  on  going 
down  was  the  near  side  would  in  returning  be  the  offside,  and 
the  offside  would  be  the  near  side.  Mr.  Briggs  was  found 
about  one-third  of  the  distance  from  Hackney  Wick.  His 
body  had  in  some  way  been  removed  from  the  carriage  to  the 
six-foot  way,  and  there  he  was  found,  with  his  head  towards 
Hackney  Wick  and  his  feet  towards  London.  Gentlemen,  I 
think  it  right  that  some  of  you  may  have  remarked  the  circum- 
stance as  well  as  myself.  The  head  pointed  towards  Hackney 
Wick.  The  consequence  of  that  is  that  his  feet  must  have 
touched  the  ground  first.  If  a  man  were  thrown  out  head 
foremost,  and  his  head  touched  the  ground,  his  body  would 
go  forward  with  the  velocity  of  the  carriage,  and  his  head 
would  be  towards  London  and  his  feet  towards  Hackney  Wick. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  he  were  put  out  by  force,  or  if  he  jumped 
out  and  alighted  on  his  feet,  the  effect  would  be  that  of  stop- 
ping his  feet,  his  body  would  go  with  the  velocity,  and  his 
head  would  be  smashed.  This  makes  no  difference  in  the 
charge  against  whoever  it  was  that  committed  the  murder, 
for  it  is  plain  that  before  the  body  was  removed  in  any  way, 
either  by  himself  or  by  the  murderer,  he  had  received  several 
desperate  wounds.  According  to  the  medical  evidence,  there 
was  one  fracture,  and  I  think  it  right  to  say  that,  in  point  of 
law,  whether  Mr.  Briggs  had  been  struck  and  then  stunned 
by  the  blow,  so  as  to  be  unable  to  call  out,  or  believing  that 
he  might  be  got  to  the  door  of  the  carriage  and  then  driven 
out  by  force,  or  the  fear  produced  by  the  violent  action  of 
the  person  menacing  him,  it  would  be  equally  murder,  because 
his  death  would  be  caused  by  his  getting  out  and  then  receiving 
that  violent  wound.  Mr.  Briggs  was  examined  that  evening, 
the  carriage  was  examined  that  evening,  and  there  were  the 
articles  which  Mr.  Briggs  had  lost.  The  only  alteration  with 
respect  to  that  property  was  that  the  watch  and  chain  were 
gone.  That  some  struggle  had  taken  place  in  the  carriage 
was  evident  from  the  fact  that  a  link  of  the  chain  was  found 
pressed  down  in  the  carriage.  The  hat  he  wore  was  gone, 
and  another  hat  was  left  in  its  place.  For  some  days  nothing 
136 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


was  known  about  it,  but,  according  to  the  evidence,  Mr.  Death  Lord  Chief 
was  applied  to  on  the  following  Thursday,  and  was  asked  if  ' 
he  had  exchanged  a  chain.  Mr.  Death  said  "Yes,"  and  he 
gave  in  exchange  for  it  another  chain  (the  one  produced)  and 
a  signet  ring.  At  that  time  it  was  also  discovered  that  there 
was  some  question  about  the  hat.  Every  effort  was  made  to 
discover  the  person  who  was  connected  with  the  transaction, 
and,  when  it  was  discovered  to  be  the  hat  of  the  prisoner  at 
the  bar,  officers  were  sent  out  to  anticipate  his  arrival  in 
America.  On  their  arrival  his  box  was  searched,  and  the 
watch  was  found  in  his  box.  In  that  box  also  was  found  a 
hat,  and  when  that  hat  was  brought  back  to  this  country 
every  inquiry  was  made  respecting  it.  It  was  said  the  hat 
was  not  the  hat  of  Mr.  Briggs — that  it  could  not  be;  it  was  1 
inch  or  1J  inches  too  short.  When  it  came  to  be  examined 
it  was  found  to  be  cut  down.  Then  came  the  question  with 
respect  to  the  watch  and  chain  and  hat  Mr.  Briggs  wore,  and 
the  hat  supposed  to  be  the  prisoner's.  Gentlemen,  there  is 
no  evidence  whatever  to  show  you  whether  that  is  the  hat  Mr. 
Briggs  wore  on  that  day  or  not.  It  is  for  you  to  consider 
how  far  the  evidence  will  show  you  that  was  Mr.  Briggs'  hat. 
Now,  gentlemen,  the  facts  of  the  history  of  this  case,  though 
appearing  to  be  many,  are  in  reality  very  few — the  watch, 
the  chain,  and  the  hat  Mr.  Briggs  lost  that  night.  A  hat  was 
found  in  the  carriage  in  the  place  of  Mr.  Briggs's  hat.  These 
are  the  three  matters  which  constitute  the  case  for  the  prose- 
cution. Gentlemen,  these  are  three  links  of  the  same  chain; 
but  do  not  make  the  mistake  which  it  appears  to  me  Serjeant 
Parry  is  rather  inclined  to  lead  you  into,  that,  if  there  is 
one  link  of  that  chain  broken,  you  have  got  rid  of  the  prosecu- 
tion. There  are  three  separate  and  distinct  links,  having  each 
of  them  a  separate  history,  and  a  failure  on  the  part  of  one 
does  not  in  the  slightest  degree  affect  the  position  of  each  of 
the  others.  For  instance,  if  there  had  been  no  trace  whatever 
of  either  of  the  hats,  if  the  hat  alleged  to  be  the  hat  of  Mr. 
Briggs  had  not  been  found  in  the  box,  that  does  not  at  all 
diminish  the  evidence  of  the  watch  and  chain.  They  all 
stand  on  separate  and  distinct  grounds  apart  from  each  other, 
and  if  one  of  them  is  made  out  to  your  satisfaction,  that  is, 
if  the  result  of  the  evidence  satisfies  you  that  the  prisoner  at 

137 


Franz    Muller. 

Lord  Chief  the  bar  was  on  the  Monday  morning  in  possession  of  the  watch 
and  chain,  then  you  are  to  see  whether  he  has  given  a  true 
account,  or — for  this  is  the  question — has  he  given  a  satis- 
factory account?  Now,  with  respect  to  the  watch  and  chain, 
the  evidence  seems  to  be  this :  on  Monday  morning,  about  ten 
o'clock,  he  exchanged  the  chain  for  a  chain  which  he  took 
from  Mr.  Death,  the  jeweller.  That  chain  he  pawned  on  the 
Wednesday.  But  then  you  say,  what  became  of  the  watch? 
Why,  when  he  was  apprehended  off  New  York  he  had  the 
watch  in  his  box ;  it  was  found  there.  He  said  it  was  his 
watch,  and  he  had  had  it  two  years.  It  will  be  for  you  to  say 
whether  that  is  evidence  to  induce  you  to  believe  that  both  the 
watch  and  chain  were  in  his  possession.  How  did  they  come 
into  his  possession?  Gentlemen,  I  shall  presently  ask  that 
question,  and  call  the  attention  of  my  brother  Parry  to  the 
way  in  which  I  understood  that  he  put  it,  because  I  am  desirous 
that  there  should  be  no  mistake,  and  I  am  desirous  not  to 
speak  in  ambiguous  or  doubtful  language,  but  to  express  myself 
with  perfect  plainness,  and,  if  I  am  wrong,  I  shall  be  glad 
to  be  corrected.  You  will  have  to  ask  yourselves  whether  the 
prisoner  had  the  watch  and  chain  on  the  Monday  morning. 
The  evidence  is  that  he  separated  them  if  he  had  them,  that  he 
took  the  chain  to  Mr.  Death,  that  he  there  had  it  valued  at 
<£3  10s.,  that  he  declined  to  take  a  chain  of  the  value  of  £3  15s., 
which  would  require  him  to  pay  5s.,  and  that  he  took  a 
chain  of  the  value  of  £3  5s.,  and  took  a  ring  instead  of  the 
5s.  Here,  as  I  must  again  say  to  you,  it  is  for  you  to  say 
whether  you  believe  that  part  of  the  case  or  not.  Unless 
you  believe  it,  you  ought  not  to  convict  the  prisoner;  if  you 
believe  it,  I  think  you  ought  to  act  upon  it.  When  he  had  got 
the  chain  he  went  to  the  house  of  a  friend,  and,  showing  it, 
spoke  of  it,  and  mentioned  what  he  had  given  for  it,  and  said 
he  had  bought  it  at  the  docks.  There  is  no  evidence  that  he 
said  anything  to  anybody  about  the  watch — none.  He  gave 
different  accounts  of  the  way  he  got  them.  He  described 
himself  as  buying  the  ring  along  with  the  chain.  He  stated 
to  one  person  that  he  had  the  ring  sent  to  him  by  his  father; 
and  in  America,  when  he  was  questioned  about  the  ring,  he 
said  he  had  bought  it  at  a  shop  in  Cheapside,  very  probably 
meaning  that  he  got  it  at  Mr.  Death's.  Gentlemen,  you  will 
138 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


have  to  consider  whether  you  see  what  is  the  reasonable  con-  Lord  Chief 
elusion  to  be  drawn.       He  never  has  said  on   any  occasion 
that  he  bought  the  watch  and  chain  at  the  docks. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — Will  your  lordship  pardon  me?  Mr. 
Tanner  said  in  evidence  that  in  America  his  counsel  stated  that. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  BARON — Oh,  his  counsel. 

The  SOLICITOR-GENERAL — His  counsel  suggested  it. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — No,   his  counsel  made  that  statement. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  BARON — What  he  said  in  America  was  that 
he  had  the  watch  two  years,  and  the  statement  of  his  counsel, 
as  given  by  Mr.  Tanner  here,  amounts  to  no  evidence.  The 
statement  here  in  London  was  that  he  bought  the  chain,  and 
he  said  nothing  about  the  watch.  I  think  it  my  duty  to  point 
these  matters  out  to  you.  I  come  now  to  the  question  as  to 
which  I  want  to  call  the  attention  of  my  brother  Parry.  My 
brother  Parry  suggests  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  he  did 
not  tell  anybody  in  Amerca  that  he  bought  the  watch  at  the 
docks. 

BARON  MARTIN  (referring  to  his  notes) — Inspector  Tanner 
says,  "  I  did  not  hear  him  say  he  had  purchased  the  watch 
and  chain  at  the  docks.  His  counsel  suggested  that  before 
the  magistrates  at  New  York." 

The  LORD  CHIEF  BARON — I  want  to  call  the  attention  of 
brother  Parry  to  the  matter,  in  order  that  I  may  be  correct 
as  to  what  he  said.  What  I  understood  my  brother  Parry  to 
state  was  this — that  he  bought  the  watch  and  chain  at  the 
docks,  and  that  he  was  quite  aware  that  a  transaction  of  that 
sort  could  not  be  perfectly  right.  I  understood  my  brother 
Parry  to  say  that  every  false  statement  the  prisoner  makes 
in  reference  to  that  matter  might  be  explained  by  his  con- 
sciousness that  he  was  doing  wrong.  I  call  brother  Parry's 
attention  to  it  in  order  that  we  may  understand  distinctly  what 
was  intended  to  be  conveyed  to  your  minds,  viz.,  that,  instead 
of  committing  the  murder  on  Saturday,  he  bought  on  Monday 
morning  at  the  docks  the  watch  and  chain.  That  is  his 
account  of  it.  Sunday  is  not  a  day  for  regular  business, 
but  for  the  transfer  of  property  obtained  by  robbery  or  other 


Franz    Muller. 

Lord  Chief  illegal  means,  that  is  as  good  as  any  other  day.  Property 
taken  illegally  on  Saturday  and  sold  on  Monday  morning  is 
not  so  likely  a  transaction  as  one  of  honest  dealing,  in  which 
Monday  morning  is  the  same  to  Saturday  night  as  Tuesday 
morning  is  to  Monday.  It  is  for  you  to  consider  how  far  that 
is  an  apology  for  being  in  possession  of  these  things,  because 
he  was  aware  there  was  something  wrong  about  his  having 
bought  them;  he  therefore  gave  excuses  and  made  awkward 
statements  about  them.  That  is  not  the  only  thing.  The 
remarkable  matter  about  this  case  is  that  every  part  of  the 
change  of  property — the  loss  of  the  watch  and  chain  and  the 
hat  of  Mr.  Briggs,  and  the  hat  left  in  the  railway  carriage 
by  somebody,  points  with  a  certain  degree  of  strength  more  or 
less  to  the  prisoner  at  the  bar.  Now,  gentlemen,  you  have 
to  consider  the  question  as  to  the  hat.  The  hat  is  proved 
to  be  Mr.  Briggs's  to  such  an  extent  that  my  learned  brother 
Parry  did  not  deny  that  it  probably  was  the  hat. 

SERJEANT   PARRY — I    admitted   that   it  was   a   hat   sold    by 
Mr.  Digance,  but  never  that  it  was  Mr.  Briggs's. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  BARON — My  brother  Parry  does  not  admit 
anything.  No  man  can  admit  anything  in  a  case  like  this; 
but  the  hatter  who  made  it  said,  "  I  made  it  for  Mr.  Digance," 
and  Mr.  Digance  says,  "  I  recognise  this  hat,  as  far  as  I  can, 
as  having  been  made  for  Mr.  Briggs."  He  speaks  of  it  in 
every  respect  as  the  hat.  He  says  it  had  been  cut  down,  and 
in  a  manner  in  which  no  hatter  would  have  cut  it  down,  and 
then  he  points  out  the  peculiarity,  which  I  do  not  think  it 
necessary  to  dwell  upon.  The  hat,  on  being  examined,  turns 
out  to  have  been  sewed  in  a  manner  which  is  said  not  to  be 
the  practice  of  regular  hatters,  and  apparently  not  the  prac- 
tice of  second-hand  hatters.  I  do  not  think  it  necessary  to 
call  your  attention  to  the  evidence  of  the  two  hatters;  they 
both  of  them  said  they  should  not  have  altered  a  hat  in  that 
way.  It  is  for  you  to  say  whether,  on  the  whole  of  the  evi- 
dence, it  is  or  is  not  made  out  to  your  satisfaction  that  that 
was  the  hat  of  Mr.  Briggs.  A  remark  was  made  by  the 
Solicitor  -  General  which  is  of  some  force,  that  the 
prisoner  at  the  bar  has  had,  and  one  is  very  glad 
that  he  has  had,  the  protection  of  a  patriotic  society 
140 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


established  for  the  protection  of  their  countrymen,  and  Lord  Chief 
that  no  expense  has  been  spared  by  them  to  get  all  the 
information  that  could  be  obtained.  It  is  for  you  to  con- 
sider whether  half  the  industry  and  diligence  which  has  resulted 
in  the  production  of  those  old  hats  that  we  saw — I  forget  now 
how  many  there  were — it  is  for  you  to  consider  whether,  if 
that  diligence  had  been  applied  in  finding  out  where  the  prisoner 
bought  this  hat,  which  was  bought  certainly,  according  to  his 
own  account,  not  more  than  a  month  from  the  date  of  the 
murder — whether  half  that  diligence  would  not  have  found  out 
the  very  man  who  sold  it  to  him,  if  anybody  did  sell  it,  and 
the  very  man  who  altered  it,  if,  in  fact,  anybody  did  alter  it 
but  himself.  On  that  question  you  will  have  to  decide,  but 
it  is  a  point  in  the  case  that  appears  to  me  to  be  worthy  of 
your  consideration. 

SERJEANT  PABRT — I  beg  pardon;  but  Mr.  Digance  said,  at 
the  close  of  his  evidence,  "  I  will  not  swear  that  this  is  the 
hat  I  sold  to  Mr.  Briggs." 

The  LORD  CHIEF  BARON — I  dare  say;  but  the  question  is 
whether  he  believes  that  it  was,  and  whether  he  furnished  you 
with  sufficient  material  for  you  to  believe  that  it  was.  A 
man  will  not  swear  positively  to  a  thing,  but  the  question  is, 
does  Mr.  Digance  speak  with  certainty,  the  certainty  that 
you  have  that  I  am  speaking  to  you  now?  He  cannot  be 
certain  in  that  extreme  sense.  Well,  then,  gentlemen,  you 
will  say  how  far  the  history  of  the  hat  leads  you — whether 
it  leads  you  to  the  conclusion  that  the  hat  which  was  found 
in  the  box  belonging  to  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  was  the  hat  of 
Mr.  Briggs.  Then,  with  regard  to  the  said  hat  that  was  found 
in  the  railway  carriage,  undoubtedly  it  was  some  surprise  to 
all  who  are  acquainted  with  the  proceedings  in  criminal  Courts 
that  evidence  of  such  a  character  could  be  produced.  It  was 
stated  that  that  pattern  of  lining  was  not  put  into  more  than 
three  or  four  hats,  and  Mr.  Walker  himself  said,  "  I  got  a 
number  of  samples  from  France,  and  there  were  only  one  or 
two  of  these,  and  certainly  not  more  than  two  or  three  of  the 
hats  that  I  have  made  that  had  this  particular  lining."  Now, 
gentlemen,  it  is  for  you  to  say  what  is  the  conclusion  you 
draw  from  this  Mrs.  Repsch  said  it  had  a  remarkable  lining, 

141 


Franz    Muller. 

Lord  Chltf  and  that  she  never  saw  any  other  hat  with  the  same  kind  of 
Baron  .    .  • 

lining.     Well,   then,   when   these  different  points   of  the  case 

lead  one  with  each  other  to  the  same  conclusion,  it  is  for 
you  to  say  how  far  the  union  of  more  than  one  gives  strength 
to  that  conclusion,  how  far  it  is  better  if  several 
of  them  unite  together  in  a  conclusion,  even  though 
not  so  perfect,  and  lead  to  a  result  more  certain  on 
the  whole.  There  is  a  case  which,  I  think,  will  illustrate 
what  I  mean.  It  is  to  be  found  in  Mr.  Starkie's  book  on 
Evidence.  A  gentleman  was  robbed  of  his  purse  in  a  crowd. 
He  gave  information  to  the  police,  and  a  man  was  appre- 
hended, and  a  purse  corresponding  was  found  upon  him.  The 
prosecutor  was  asked  whether  he  could  swear  to  any  of  the 
pieces  of  money  which  were  discovered  in  the  purse.  He  said 
he  was  convinced  it  was  the  same.  Why?  Because  he  said 
it  contained  five  or  six  separate,  distinct  pieces  of  money,  and, 
though  he  could  not  swear  to  any  particular  piece,  one  of 
which  was  a  seven-shilling  piece,  he  said  that  he  could  swear 
his  purse  contained  a  half-crown,  a  seven-shilling  piece,  and 
so  enumerated  the  several  pieces.  It  was  not  likely  that 
anybody  else  had  a  purse  exactly  like  it.  You  yourselves  will 
see  the  value  of  that  sort  of  identity — not  by  identifying  each, 
but  by  identifying  the  whole.  This  man  said,  "  I  cannot 
identify  each  separate  piece  of  money,  but  I  can  identify  the 
whole,  and  my  impression  is  that  it  is  my  property."  That 
will  prove  what  I  mean  by  a  part  of  a  case  leading  to  one 
conclusion,  by  another  part  of  the  case,  though  imperfect,  yet 
leading  to  the  same  conclusion,  and  strengthening  it;  by  a 
third  leading  to  the  same  conclusion,  although  it  is  not  per- 
fectly made  out,  but  still  it  adds  strength  to  the  general  case 
which  is  involved  in  a  comparison  of  these  different  acts. 
Gentlemen,  that  is  the  true  value  of  circumstantial  evidence. 
If  you  believe  the  facts  to  lead  to  a  conclusion,  I  think  you 
are  bound  to  go  on  with  that  conclusion  to  the  end.  I  shall 
not  trouble  you  further  upon  the  hat  that  was  found  in  the 
prisoner's  box  or  the  watch  or  chain.  With  respect  to  the 
evidence  for  the  defence,  I  will  not  make  any  remarks  on  Mr. 
Lee's  testimony.  If  you  believe  from  the  appearance  of  the 
prisoner  that  he  could  not  do  it  you  will  say  so.  It  is  said 
that  he  was  lame  that  night,  but  it  is  quite  plain  from  the 
142 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


evidence  that  on  the  Sunday  he  was  walking  from  six  to  nine  Lord  Chief 
o'clock  with  his  friends.  If  you  believe  that  he  was  incapable 
of  doing  it,  of  course,  he  did  not,  and,  of  course,  he  is  entitled 
to  your  verdict.  Now  I  come  to  the  alibi.  That  is  entirely 
a  matter  for  your  consideration,  and  I  shall  say  very  little 
upon  it.  The  evidence  of  Mary  Ann  Eldred — whom  it  is  im- 
possible to  see  here  without  some  compassion  for  the  situation 
of  life  which  she  is  in — consists  certainly  very  much  more  in 
saying  what  she  cannot  recollect  rather  than  what  she  can  recol- 
lect. But  certainly  she  stated  that  she  went  out  at  nine  o'clock, 
and  that  Miiller  called  at  half-past  nine  o'clock.  That  is  what 
she  said,  and  that  she  knew  that  he  was  going  to  America.  He 
asked  her  to  go  with  him,  and  said  if  she  did  not  that  he 
would  return  in  six  months.  I  think  it  is  fair  to  say  that 
his  going  to  America  was  perfectly  well  known.  Then  there 
is  the  evidence  of  Mrs.  Jones;  and,  respecting  her  husband,  I 
think  a  man  who  is  living  on  the  profits  of  such  a  calling  as 
that  pursued  by  his  wife  is  about  the  most  infamous  of  man- 
kind. How  far  the  wife  is  some  shades  better  than  her  hus- 
band is  for  you  to  judge.  Her  evidence  is  for  you  to  judge. 
According  to  the  case  for  the  prosecution,  the  prisoner,  between 
seven  and  eight  o'clock,  was  at  Repsch's,  and  left  there,  taking 
his  boots  with  him,  and  saying  he  was  going  to  Camberwell. 
There  was  plenty  of  time  for  him  to  have  gone  to  Camberwell 
and  to  have  returned,  though  not  in  the  same  omnibus  as 
Mr.  Briggs. 

SERJEANT  PARRY — Not  the  same. 

The  CHIEF  BARON — But  he  might  have  returned  to  his  home. 
These,  I  think,  are  nearly  all  the  circumstances  it  is  neces- 
sary for  me  to  call  your  attention  to.  If  you  wish  the  whole 
of  the  evidence  to  be  read  over  to  you  I  will  do  so. 

The  jury  consulted  for  a  moment,  and  the  foreman  said, 
"It  is  not  requisite." 

The  CHIEF  BARON — Or  any  part  of  it? 

The  jury  again  consulted  for  a  moment,  and  the  foreman 
said,  "No,  my  lord,  it  is  not  requisite." 

The  CHIEF  BARON — I  think  that  it  is  the  more  unnecessary 
that  I  should  do  so,  because  you  have  had  two  able  and 


Franz    Muller. 

Lord  Chief  elaborate  addresses  from  the  two  sides,  and  I  have  no  doubt 
Baron 

that  during  the  whole  course  of  the  investigation  you  have 

paid  considerable  attention  to  the  different  evidence — some 
of  which  evidence  emanated  from  questions  put  by  the  jury  of 
considerable  importance.  And  now,  gentlemen,  I  have 
endeavoured  to  discharge  my  duties;  it  remains  for  you  to 
discharge  yours.  I  must  again  tell  you  that  the  verdict  is  to 
be  yours.  It  is  for  you  to  decide  the  great  and  important 
question.  If  I  have  in  any  part  of  my  address  to  you  inti- 
mated any  opinion,  I  have  desired  not  to  express  any.  I 
have  called  your  attention  to  circumstances  which  I  think 
you  ought  to  consider.  As  far  as  I  could,  I  endeavoured  to 
avoid  the  expression  of  my  opinion,  for  it  is  not  for  me  to 
decide.  It  is  for  you  to  deliberate  and  decide  according  to 
the  best  of  your  judgment.  If  you  have  collected  any  opinion 
of  any  sort  from  what  may  have  fallen  from  me — unless  so  far 
as  it  goes  entirely  with  your  deliberate  opinion — treat  it  as  if 
I  had  said  nothing  of  the  sort.  The  verdict  is  yours.  The 
law  and  the  constitution  have  given  to  twelve  men,  sworn  to 
act  according  to  evidence,  to  find  a  verdict  of  guilty  or  not 
guilty.  In  deliberating  on  that  verdict  I  doubt  not  that  you 
will  act  with  impartiality  and  candour.  You  will  remember 
the  duty  which  you  owe  to  the  prisoner — to  believe  him  inno- 
cent until  proved  to  be  guilty;  but  you  will  at  the  same  time 
not  forget  the  duty  which  you  owe  to  the  country  and  to 
society  at  large.  If  the  evidence  leads  you  to  a  conclusion 
of  guilty,  you  will  fearlessly  act  upon  that  evidence.  You 
will  act  according  to  your  consciences,  and  give  that  verdict 
which  you  believe  to  be  just;  and  may  the  God  of  all  truth 
guide  your  judgment  and  conscience  to  the  verdict  which  may 
be  satisfactory  according  to  the  truth  and  justice  of  the  case. 

The  CLERK  OP  ARRAIGNS — Gentlemen  of  the  jury,  please  to 
consider  your  verdict. 

The  jury  signified  that  they  wished  to  retire. 

The  proper  officer  of  the  Court  was  accordingly  directed  to 
take  them  in  charge  to  an  adjoining  room. 

At  three  o'clock  the  jury  returned  into  Court,  having  been 
absent  fifteen  minutes. 
144 


Mr.  Baron  Martin 
(From  a  Painting  by  Sir  Francis  Grant,  P.R.A.,  in  the  possession  of  Lord  Macnaghten). 


The  Sentence. 

The  jury  stood  up  to  answer  to  their  names.  The  foreman 
(Mr.  Isaac  Moore)  and  the  others  having  duly  answered  to 
the  call, 

The  CLERK  OF  AKRAIGNS  said — Gentlemen,  are  you  agreed 
upon  your  verdict? 

The  FOREMAN — We  are. 

The  CLERK  OP  ARRAIGNS — How  do  you  find  the  prisoner  at 
the  bar — guilty  or  not  guilty  of  the  murder  with  which  he  is 
charged  1 

The  FOREMAN — Guilty. 

The  CLBRK  OP  ARRAIGNS — That  is  the  verdict  of  you  all? 
The  FOREMAN — Yes. 
r.  Baron  Martin  here  entered  the  Court. 

The  CLERK  OP  ARRAIGNS — Prisoner  at  the  bar,  you  have  been 
convicted  of  the  crime  of  wilful  murder.  Have  you  anything 
to  say  why  judgment  of  dying  should  not  be  given  t 

The  prisoner  did  not  reply. 

The  CRIER  OP  THE  COURT — Oyez,  oyez,  oyez!  My  lords  the 
Queen's  justices  do  strictly  charge  and  command  that  all 
persons  do  keep  silence  while  sentence  of  death  is  passing 
upon  the  prisoner  at  the  bar,  upon  pain  of  imprisonment. 

Mr.  BARON  MARTIN,  who  had  meanwhile  put  upon  his  head  JJr.  Baron 

Martin 
the   black   cap,    then   passed    sentence.        Franz    Muller,    you 

have  been  found  guilty  by  the  jury  of  the  wilful  murder  of 
Mr.  Briggs.  It  is  no  part  of  our  duty  to  express  generally 
any  opinion  with  respect  to  the  verdict  of  the  jury.  It  is 
their  province  to  decide  upon  your  guilt  or  innocence.  But  it 
is  usual  with  judges  to  state,  in  passing  sentence,  if  they 
entirely  concur  in  that  verdict,  and  they  do  so  for  two  reasons. 
It  is  satisfactory  to  know  if  the  opinions  of  the  judges  concur 
with  that  of  the  jury ;  and  I  am  authorised  by  the  Chief  Baron 
to  state — and  I  state  on  my  own  behalf — that  we  are  perfectly 
satisfied  with  that  verdict.  If  I  had  been  one  of  the  jury  I 
should  have  concurred  in  it;  and  I  state  so,  for  the  second 
reason,  in  order  to  remove  entirely  from  your  mind  the  possi- 
bility that  you  will  live  in  this  world  much  longer.  Within 
i-  i45 


Franz    Muller. 

J*r.  Baron  a  short  period  you  will  be  removed  from  it  by  a  violent  death ; 
and  I  therefore  beseech  you  to  avail  yourself  of  what,  I  have 
no  doubt,  will  be  offered  to  you,  the  means,  as  far  as  possible, 
of  making  your  peace  with  your  Maker,  and  of  preparing  to 
meet  the  fate  which  will  very  shortly  happen  to  you.  I  forbear 
from  going  into  the  particulars  of  the  case,  but  there  are  a 
variety  of  circumstances  in  which,  if  the  evidence  had  been 
gone  into  more  minutely,  would  have  more  and  more  tended 
to  establish  your  guilt.  The  history  of  you  during  that  day 
is  not  difficult  to  judge.  You  left  the  house  of  Mrs.  Blyth 
about  eleven  o'clock.  You  remained  at  the  house  of  Mrs. 
Repsch  until  seven  or  eight,  or  nearly  eight  o'clock.  You 
stated  your  intention  of  going  to  see  a  young  woman.  You 
went  there,  and  it  is  obvious  that  your  account  of  your  time 
is  to  show  us  that  one  hour  and  a  half  were  consumed  in  going 
to  this  house,  and  it  may  be  that  Mrs.  Jones  was  telling  the 
truth  when  she  supposed  that  you  were  at  her  house  at  half- 
past  nine  o'clock  that  night.  I  am  perfectly  satisfied  that 
you  were  there  much  earlier,  that  she  is  in  error  in  thinking 
you  were  there  so  late,  and  that  you  came  from  this  place,  and 
were  probably  tempted  by  seeing  Mr.  Briggs  exhibiting  the  watch 
and  chain ;  and  there  are  other  circumstances  strongly  tending  to 
the  same  conclusion,  as  seen  from  your  history  during  the  few 
days  of  the  following  week  respecting  the  money.  You 
exchanged  the  chain  of  Mr.  Briggs  for  one  that  you  got  from 
Mr.  Death,  and  you  immediately  proceeded  to  pledge  that  to 
raise  a  sum  of  money  upon  it.  Having  raised  it,  you  pro- 
ceeded to  take  out  of  pledge  your  own  watch  and  your  own 
chain.  Having  them  in  your  possession,  you  proceeded  to 
pledge  them  and  get  the  money  with  which,  no  doubt,  you 
paid  your  passage  to  America.  I  have  little  doubt  that  this 
is  the  history  of  the  case — that,  moved  by  the  devil,  and  for 
the  purpose  of  getting  the  money  to  go  to  America — where  it  is 
evident  you  intended  to  go — you  robbed  Mr.  Briggs  of  his 
watch  and  chain.  I  wish  to  remove  from  your  mind  any 
hope  of  an  alteration  of  the  sentence.  After  listening  to  all 
the  evidence  which  has  been  adduced,  I  feel  no  more  doubt 
that  you  committed  this  murder  than  I  do  with  reference  to 
the  occurrence  of  any  other  event  of  which  I  am  certain,  but 
which  I  did  not  see  with  my  own  eyes.  It  only  remains 
146 


The  Sentence. 

for  me  to  pass  upon  you  the  sentence  of  the  law — which  is  Mr.  Baron 
not  the  sentence  of  the  Chief  Baron  or  myself — for  the  crime 
of  wilful  murder  of  which  you  have  been  convicted.  It  is 
that  you  be  taken  from  here  to  the  prison  from  whence  you 
came,  that  from  thence  you  be  taken  to  a  place  of  execution, 
that  there  you  be  hanged  by  the  neck  till  your  body  be  dead; 
that  your  body  when  dead  be  taken  down,  and  that  it  be 
buried  within  the  precincts  of  the  prison  where  you  were  last 
confined.  And  may  God  have  mercy  upon  your  soul. 

Mr.  JONAS  said  that  the  prisoner  had  asked  whether  he 
might  be  allowed  to  speak. 

The  CHIEF  BARON  said  "  Yea." 

The  PRISONER — I  am  perfectly  satisfied  with  my  judges  and 
with  the  jury,  but  I  have  been  convicted  on  false  evidence, 
and  not  a  true  statement.  If  the  sentence  is  carried  out  I 
shall  die  innocent. 

The  prisoner  was  then  removed,  and  the  Court  adjourned. 


'47 


APPENDICES. 


APPENDIX  I. 


EXTRADITION  PROCEEDINGS  AT  NEW  YORK. 


(Daily  Telegraph,  Monday,  September  5,   1864.) 
THB  GERMAN  NATIONAL  VEREIN  AND  FRANZ  MULLER. 

A  meeting  of  the  London  branch  of  the  German  National 
Verein  took  place  on  Saturday,  under  the  presidency  of  Dr. 
Gottfried  Kinkel,  at  Seydr's  Hotel,  Finsbury  Square,  when  the 
committee  for  affording  legal  assistance  to  Germans  in  need,  who 
in  this  country  may  not  be  able  to  obtain  it  from  the  authorised 
representative  of  their  respective  Governments,  brought  up  their 
report.  The  committee  stated  that,  in  compliance  with  the 
expressed  wish  of  the  National  Verein,  they  were  using  all 
means  in  their  power  to  aid  the  legal  authorities  in  clearing 
up  the  mystery  as  to  the  guilt  or  innocence  of  Franz  Mullet 
respecting  the  murder  of  Mr.  Briggs. 


September  6,  1864. 

AMERICA. 
Arrest  of  Muller. 

The  following  telegram  was  received  at  Mr.  Reuter's  office 
this  (Tuesday)  morning  :  — 

(Via  Greenock.) 

New  York,  Aug.  26  (Evening). 

The  "  Victoria  "  has  arrived  at  New  York,  and  Muller  has 
been  arrested.  The  hat  and  watch  of  Mr.  Briggs  were  found  in 
his  possession. 

Muller  protested  his  innocence,  and  the  legal  proceedings  in 
reference  to  his  extradition  are  progressing. 


Franz    Mullet. 

8/9/1864. 
The  Arrest  of  Mutter. 

New  York  journals  to  the  27th  ult.,  per  the  "  City  of  Balti- 
more," containing  details  of  the  examination  of  Muller  before 
the  New  York  police  authorities,  will  not  reach  London  till  a 
late  hour  this  (Thursday)  morning.  Up  to  last  night  the  Chief 
Commissioner  of  Police  at  Scotland  Yard  had  not  received  any 
communication  from  the  detective  officers  sent  out  to  apprehend 
Muller.  In  the  course  of  the  day,  however,  letters  are 
expected . 


12th,   1864. 
Extradition  of  Muller. 

New  York,  Aug.  30  (Evening). 

On  the  27th  inst.  the  hearing  of  the  extradition  case  of  Muller 
was  resumed  before  the  U.S.  Commissioner  Newton. 

The  British  Government  was  represented  by  Mr.  F.  F.  Mar- 
bury,  as  on  the  previous  day,  while  Messrs.  Chauncey  Schaffer 
and  E.  Blankman  appeared  for  the  prisoner. 

The  Court  was  thronged  with  spectators  anxious  to  obtain  a 
view  of  the  accused,  who  sat  with  an  unmoved  countenance. 

Mr.  Blankman,  on  behalf  of  Muller,  applied  for  an  adjourn- 
ment, to  give  time  to  prepare  for  the  defence. 

Mr.  Marbury,  for  the  British  Government,  opposed  the 
adjournment. 

Mr.  Blankman  briefly  responded,  urging  the  motion  for  a 
brief  adjournment. 

Mr.  Schaffer  followed  for  the  defence,  and  maintained  that 
as  yet  there  was  nothing  to  justify  the  committal.  The  accused, 
being  a  foreigner,  he  contended  that  the  treaty  under  which 
the  extradition  was  demanded  had  been  suspended,  and  he 
also  adverted  to  the  "  Florida  "  as  being  a  pirate  sent  out 
by  English  subjects. 

Inspector  Tanner  having  been  re-examined  as  to  the  height 
of  the  prisoner,  Mr.  Schaffer  endeavoured  to  show  that  Muller 
could  not  be  one  of  the  two  men  seen  in  the  compartment  with 
Mr.  Briggs  on  the  night  of  the  murder. 

Commissioner  Newton  then  delivered  his  decision,  stating 
that,  under  the  circumstances,  he  was  constrained  to  grant  a 
certificate,  and  commit  the  prisoner,  being  satisfied  as  to  his 
guilt. 

152 


Appendix   I. 

13/9/64. 
(From  the  New  York  Herald.) 

The  following  detailed  report  of  the  last  day's  proceedings  in 
the  case  of  Miiller  is  from  the  New  York  Herald  of  August  28  :  — 

The  hearing  in  the  extradition  case  of  Franz  Miiller,  charged 
with  the  murder  of  Mr.  Thomas  Briggs,  near  Hackney,  London, 
on  the  9th  July  last,  was  resumed  yesterday  morning  before 
Commissioner  Newton.  The  British  Government,  through  its 
consul  at  this  port,  was  represented  by  Mr.  F.  F.  Marbury; 
the  accused  by  his  assigned  counsel,  Messrs.  Chauncey  Schaffer 
and  Edmond  Blankman. 

The  examination  took  place  in  the  United  States  District 
Court-room,  which  was  thronged  with  persons  who  evinced  the 
greatest  interest  in  the  proceedings,  and  who  anxiously  sought 
for  a  view  of  the  accused.  The  latter  sat  beside  his  counsel 
with  an  unmoved  countenance  and  a  calm  demeanour, 
apparently  the  most  uninterested  and  unaffected  person  in  the 
densely  crowded  Court. 

Mr.  Blankman  said  that,  as  the  prosecution  had  closed  their 
case  yesterday,  having  had  everything  in  preparation  for  sub- 
mitting it  to  the  Court,  it  devolved  upon  him  to  make  a  few 
remarks  in  urging  upon  the  Court  an  application  for  an  adjourn- 
ment, to  give  the  counsel  assigned  for  the  accused  an  oppor- 
tunity to  read  over  the  testimony  and  to  agree  upon  the  proper 
line  of  defence.  There  was,  however,  much  to  urge  prepara- 
tory to  entering  upon  that  stage  of  the  proceedings.  The 
warrant  issued  for  the  apprehension  of  Miiller  set  forth  that  "  on 
the  9th  July  instant,  he  (Miiller)  did  feloniously,  wilfully,  and 
of  malice  aforethought,  kill  and  murder  one  Thomas  Briggs." 
If  a  case  of  murder  had  been  made  out  in  accordance  with  the 
statutes  of  Great  Britain  and  the  law  of  this  land,  the  duty  of 
the  Court  was  certainly  to  be  a  plain  one,  but  if  to  the  mind 
of  the  Court  there  did  not  appear  to  be  (as  it  did  not  appear 
to  him)  legal  evidence  of  murder  having  been  committed,  then 
the  case  did  not  come  within  the  treaty  of  1842,  and  there  was 
no  ground  whatever  for  the  apprehension  and  commitment  of 
the  accused.  If  the  case  even  be  one  of  manslaughter,  it  would 
not  come  within  that  treaty.  Whatever  view  might  be  taken 
of  the  case,  it  would  be  but  an  act  of  simple  justice  to  allow 
counsel  for  the  defence  an  opportunity  to  examine  the  testimony 
adduced  against  their  unfortunate  client.  He  therefore  moved 
that  the  further  hearing  of  the  case  be  adjourned  in  order  to 
give  counsel  time  to  prepare  their  defence. 

Mr.  Marbury,  on  the  part  of  the  British  Government, 
opposed  the  motion  for  adjournment.  On  the  day  of  the 

'53 


Franz    Muller. 

prisoner's  arrest  Mr.  Beehe  had  been  assigned  by  the  Court 
counsel  for  the  accused.  That  gentleman  had  accepted  the 
task,  and  had  an  interview  with  the  prisoner,  and  it  was 
expected  that  he  (Mr.  Beehe)  would  have  been  present  to  defend 
him  on  the  day  fixed  for  the  examination.  The  depositions  in 
the  case  had  been  handed  to  the  two  able  counsel  subsequently 
(in  consequence  of  the  absence  of  Mr.  Beehe)  assigned  for  the 
defence,  and  those  gentlemen  were  present  yesterday  when  the 
testimony  of  the  witnesses  was  given.  This  inquiry  was  a 
preliminary  one.  The  Commissioner  was  sitting  in  the  capacity 
of  an  ordinary  committing  magistrate,  not  for  the  purpose  of 
saying  whether  this  man  was  absolutely  guilty  or  not,  but 
whether  there  was  a  sufficient  degree  of  suspicion  of  criminality 
against  him  to  justify  his  commitment  for  trial,  supposing  the 
offence  charged  had  been  committed  here.  In  other  words, 
supposing,  instead  of  Mr.  Briggs  having  been  murdered 
between  Bow  and  Hackney,  he  had  been  murdered  between 
Twenty-seventh  Street  and  Harlem,  under  precisely  similar  cir- 
cumstances as  appear  in  this  case,  the  question  would  then  be 
whether  the  evidence  that  has  been  presented  would  justify  the 
commitment  of  the  accused  for  trial  in  the  ordinary  way,  and 
according  to  the  due  course  and  progress  of  law.  He  (Mr. 
Marbury)  would  extremely  dislike  to  do  anything  bearing  even 
the  appearance  of  a  desire  to  withhold  from  the  unfortunate 
man  any  privilege  or  right  which  belonged  to  him;  but  it 
seemed  to  him  that  the  request  made  by  counsel  was  not  a 
reasonable  one.  The  whole  facts  lay  within  an  exceedingly 
narrow  compass,  and  from  the  reading  of  the  depositions,  and 
from  testimony  adduced  yesterday,  the  general  conclusion 
arrived  at  must  be  that,  whatever  the  ultimate  fate  of  the 
man  may  be,  whatever  the  result  of  the  more  formal  and  legal 
investigation,  enough  has  appeared  and  transpired  here  to 
justify  his  commitment.  What  follows?  He  is  committed 
for  trial;  he  is  sent  to  the  scene  of  the  murder,  to  the  place 
where  he  can  find  and  produce  witnesses  who  will  state  all  the 
circumstances  of  exculpation  that  can  be  found.  A  great  and 
appalling  crime  has  been  committed,  and  circumstances  of  great 
weight  and  moment  connected  the  accused  with  the  commission 
of  that  crime.  Necessarily  the  case  must  undergo  an  investi- 
gation, and  it  is  not  depriving  the  prisoner  of  the  right  to  the 
fullest  and  amplest  defence  secured  to  him  by  the  common  law 
of  England,  and  by  the  practice  of  English  jurisprudence,  to 
commit  him  for  trial.  He  did  not  think  that  anything  was 
likely  to  arise  in  the  case  that  had  heretofore  failed  to  present 
itself  to  the  experienced  and  acute  counsel  on  this  occasion, 
and  it  appeared  to  him  that  great  inconvenience  and  detriment 
would  arise  from  any  postponement  of  the  case. 

Mr.  Blankman  briefly  responded  to  the  remarks  of  the  counsel 

154 


Appendix  I. 


for  the  prosecution,  urging  anew  his  motion  for  a  brief  adjourn- 
ment. 

Mr.  Chauncey  Schaffer  followed  for  the  defence.  He  advo- 
cated no  new  doctrine,  advanced  no  new  law  when  he  declared 
that  there  was  nothing  in  the  evidence  before  the  Court  to 
justify  the  commitment  of  the  accused  on  the  charge  here  pre- 
ferred against  him.  The  accused  was  a  foreigner,  a  German 
by  birth,  who  had  a  few  days  since  arrived  on  these  shores  in 
the  ordinary  course  of  transit.  When  any  man  thus  lands 
here  he  is  presumed  to  be  innocent  of  any  crime.  The  law 
throws  around  him  that  shield  of  presumptive  innocence,  and 
he  is  secure,  and  that  power  which  sends  forth  fleets  and 
armies,  and  which  on  this  occasion  is  embosomed  in  your 
honour,  is  here  to  shield  and  defend  him  from  any  violation 
of  that  principle.  He  was  not  present  to-day  to  quarrel  with 
the  policy  of  England;  but  here  he  would  fearlessly  state  at 
the  outset  that  he  did  not  regard  the  treaty  under  which  it 
was  sought  to  extradite  this  man  as  anything  else  than  a  viola- 
tion of  the  constitution  of  the  United  States,  and  utterly  inopera- 
tive. But  why  should  he,  a  pigmy,  go  forth  to  meet  in  con- 
flict the  dead  champion  of  the  nation  and  Constitution?  But 
even  he  had  been  overruled  as  a  lawyer.  The  great  Webster 
held,  and  ruled,  and  wrote,  and  declared  that  M'Leod,  who 
crossed  the  Canadian  frontier  and  landed  at  Sloser,  and  who 
murdered  Duprey,  and  set  the  steamer  "  Caroline  "  on  fire, 
and  then  set  her  afloat  so  that  she  went  down  into  the  sublime 
depths  of  old  Niagara — that  he  should  be  set  at  large.  Great 
Britain  defended  M'Leod's  acts  as  justified  by  the  mixed  and 
unsolemn  state  of  war  that  then  existed.  Webster  was  for 
discharging  that  man  after  he  had  been  arrested  on  the 
soil  of  New  York,  and  indicted  and  held  for  trial  and  charge 
of  murder.  But  the  supreme  Court  of  the  State  held  him, 
and  he  was  tried  and  acquitted,  but  the  dignity  and  sovereignty 
of  the  Empire  State  was  vindicated,  and  "  Excelsior  "  is  her 
proud  title  still.  Now,  the  constitution  of  the  United  States 
provides  that  no  man  shall  be  put  in  peril  of  his  life  or  liberty 
except  upon  indictment  by  a  Grand  Jury,  or  presentment  of  a 
Grand  Jury,  which  means  the  same  thing.  The  extradition 
of  this  man  is  claimed  by  virtue  of  a  treaty  between  this  country 
and  England.  Treaties  are  made  by  the  President  and  sub- 
mitted by  him  to  the  Senate;  and  when  ratified  by  that  body 
they  become  part  of  the  law  of  the  land,  with  almost  the  same 
binding  force  as  the  Constitution  itself,  if  the  treaty  be  not  in 
violation  of  the  Constitution.  He  would  not  stand  there  and 
say  that  it  were  better  that  the  nation  should  perish  than 
the  Constitution  be  violated,  but  he  would  say  that  it  would 
be  far  better  for  him  as  an  individual  and  for  all  others  that 
this  once  proud  island  and  all  it  contains  should  be  destroyed 


Franz    Muller. 

— better,  indeed,  that  the  goodly  island  should  become  a  sand- 
bank for  the  storms  of  earth  and  ocean  to  meet  in  conflict  dire 
— that  it  should  be  a  spot  for  sea  monsters  to  fatten  on — than 
that  the  supreme  law  of  the  land  should  be  violated  directly 
by  the  treaty-making  power  or  any  other  power.  Now,  by  this 
treaty  you  are  asked  to  surrender  this  man  to  be  tried  for  his 
life  before  he  is  yet  indicted,  in  that  the  treaty  is  in  contraven- 
tion of  the  Constitution.  You  are  asked  to  do  what  the  Pre- 
sident and  Congress  could  not  constitutionally  do — put  this 
man  in  peril  of  his  life  before  indictment  for  any  offence  is 
found  against  him.  He  did  not  ask  the  Court  to  say  that 
the  treaty  was  unconstitutional,  but  he  would  show  conclusively 
that  it  was  at  present  suspended  after  the  act,  and  the  British 
Government  it  is  who  seeks  here  for  its  enforcement.  The 
ocean  is  as  much  a  portion  of  the  heritage  of  the  American 
people  aa  the  broad  prairies  of  the  West.  He  would  come 
briefly  to  the  main  point  of  his  argument.  It  was  an  ele- 
mentary principle  recognised  by  the  law  of  nations  that  a  state 
of  war  between  two  nations  suspends  the  operations  of  all 
treaties.  But  it  may  be  said  that  there  is  no  war  between 
this  country  and  England;  neither  is  there  in  their  sovereign 
relations  incapacity,  but  there  is  war  notwithstanding.  There 
does  exist  what  the  eminent  Groteus  terms  "  a  mixed  or 
unsolemn  state  of  war  "  between  the  two  nations — between  the 
subjects  of  England  on  the  one  side  and  the  subjects  of  the 
United  States,  as  represented  in  her  commerce  on  the  ocean, 
on  the  other.  The  test  is  easy  of  application.  For 
instance,  the  officers  who  are  here  in  Court  to-day  repre- 
senting their  sovereign  while  in  pursuit  of  this  man  sup- 
posed to  have  his  hands  red  with  the  blood  of  his 
fellow  man,  were  actually  afraid  that  the  supposed  murderer 
would  escape  condign  punishment.  Why?  What  gave  rise 
to  their  fears?  The  fear  that  a  private  vessel,  infesting  the 
ocean — the  highway  of  nations — sent  out  from  the  friendly 
English  ports  by  British  subjects,  would  snatch  from  British 
justice  that  which  British  justice  was  in  pursuit  of — Britain 
committing  suicide  upon  her  own  justice.  That  is  a  state 
of  war,  and  that  state  of  things,  by  the  common  consent  of 
mankind,  suspends  all  treaties  between  the  countries.  There 
is  that  hostility  on  the  part  of  English  subjects  towards  this 
country  which  the  writers  on  international  law  denominate 
"  mixed  and  unsolemn  war,"  and  which  can  be  carried  on 
without  any  formal  declaration  of  war.  There  are  three  sorts 
of  war — public,  private,  and  mixed.  Mixed  war  is  sub-divided 
into  solemn  and  unsolemn  war.  When  hostilities  are  carried 
on  without  any  previous  declaration  of  war,  that  becomes  a 
mixed  and  unsolemn  war;  and  this,  as  in  any  war,  to  the 
suspension  of  treaties  previously  existing,  being  a  war  between 
156 


Appendix   I. 


the  citizens  and  subjects  of  one  nation  against  another  nation ; 
and  that  nation  or  power  which  cannot  prevent  this  state  of 
things,  that  nation  which  cannot  control  its  own  subjects, 
ceases  to  be  a  nation.  England  cannot  say  she  is  neutral  in 
this  matter  when  she  furnishes  our  rebellious  subjects  with 
vessels  of  war,  mans  them,  opens  her  ports  to  them,  furnishes 
them  with  arms  and  ammunition,  and  sends  them  forth  on 
their  errand  of  destruction,  burning  merchant  ships  and  destroy- 
ing the  commerce  on  the  seas  of  a  friendly  power.  The 
"  Alabama,"  built  and  armed  in  England,  and  manned  by 
Englishmen,  sank  and  burned  one  hundred  and  twenty  of  our 
ships ;  and  when  at  last  she  meets  the  fate  she  so  richly  deserved, 
we  find  an  English  subject  on  his  yacht  snatching  from  an 
American  officer  his  legal  rights.  Look  at  the  case  of  the  steamer, 
running  from  port  to  port,  and  in  Maine  seized  by  pirates, 
the  engineer  murdered,  passengers  murdered,  the  vessel  brought 
into  an  English  port,  and  the  murderers  and  pirates  protected 
by  English  subjects.  But,  as  in  the  case  before  the  Court, 
when  a  man  is  found  murdered  near  London,  they  pursue  the 
supposed  murderer  to  our  shores  and  cry,  "  Treaty,  treaty, 
treaty."  They  tore  that  treaty  to  pieces  three  years  ago. 
(Applause.)  Nay,  more  than  that,  great  argosies,  laden 
with  the  choicest  treasures  of  the  nation,  have  been  sunk  in 
countless  numbers,  with  connivance  and  consent  of  this  neutral, 
friendly  power.  The  truce  has  been  applied  by  the  pirate 
"  Florida,"  built  and  sent  out  by  English  subjects — a  robber 
on  the  highway  of  nations,  murdering  our  citizens,  and  destroy- 
ing our  commerce,  and  humiliating  the  nation  before  the  world, 
so  that  no  longer  is  it  an  honour  to  claim  to  be  an  American 
citizen.  This  was  not  so  much  the  act  of  the  Government 
or  of  the  people  as  of  the  aristocracy,  who  misrepresented  the 
Government  and  the  people.  The  latter  were  true  to  liberty 
and  to  the  United  States,  God  bless  them.  This  treaty,  then, 
under  which  the  rendition  of  this  man  is  demanded,  is  suspended, 
and  is  a  dead  letter  until  this  mixed  and  unsolemn  state  of 
war  on  the  part  of  British  subjects  against  the  Government 
ceases.  England,  to  claim  this  man,  must  come  into  Court 
with  clean  hands.  She  must  not  come  here  and  ask  of  us  to 
honour  her  justice  when  she  dishonours  her  own  justice,  breaks 
her  treaties,  and  cries  peace  and  neutrality  while  at  the  same 
time  she  lets  slip  the  dogs  of  war,  and  with  piratical  vessels 
drives  our  peaceful  commerce  from  the  ocean.  This  cannot 
long  continue.  Better  for  us  we  had  war  at  once,  when  we 
could  send  out  our  cruisers  and  assert  our  rights  of  retaliation 
on  the  ocean.  The  Lines  of  Decahur  are  not  forgotten,  and 
we  have  a  Farragut  worthy  to  take  the  first  place  in  any 
contest,  where  the  pride  and  honour  and  courage  of  America 


Franz    Muller. 

is  at  stake.  (Applause.)  Leaving  the  case  of  his  client  in  the 
hands  of  the  Court,  he  would  close. 

Inspector  Tanner  was  re-examined  as  to  the  height  of  the 
prisoner  and  his  personal  appearance,  to  show  that  he  could 
not  be  one  of  the  two  men  seen  in  the  compartment  of  the 
railway  carriage  with  Mr.  Briggs  on  the  night  of  the  murder. 
This  ended  the  case  for  the  defence. 

Mr.  Marbury,  for  the  British  Government,  addressed  the 
Court.  He  did  not  think  it  quite  generous  or  becoming  in 
him  to  enter  upon  a  criticism  of  the  speech  of  the  gentleman 
who  had  just  spoken,  nor  would  he  attempt  to  follow  him 
through  the  wide  and  discursive  range  of  topics  he  had  intro- 
duced into  the  case.  He  would  even  hold  himself  excused 
from  the  necessity  of  even  as  much  as  adverting  to  many  of 
the  irrelevant  matters  which  he  had  dragged  into  the  discussion 
of  this  question.  All  that  was  immaterial.  With  reference 
to  the  treaty  under  which  the  accused  was  claimed,  whether 
that  treaty  was  faithfully  observed  or  not  was  not  a  question 
for  this  Court  to  determine.  That  was  for  the  executive 
Government  to  decide ;  and  when  the  executive  shall  have  taken 
the  ground  that  by  reason  of  the  grievances  to  which  counsel 
has  so  eloquently  referred,  the  Ashburton  Treaty  is  of  no  further 
force  or  effect,  it  will  be  time  enough  for  the  Courts  to  follow 
the  action  of  the  executive,  but  so  long  as  the  Governments  of 
the  two  countries  regard  that  treaty  as  a  subsisting  treaty, 
then  it  holds  its  place  under  the  Constitution,  next  to  which 
and  under  which  it  is  the  supreme  law  of  the  land.  It  would 
be  trifling  with  the  time  of  the  Court  to  pursue  this  point  any 
further.  The  only  excuse  or  apology  counsel  could  possibly 
offer  for  the  introduction  of  such  topics  must  be  in  the  fact  that 
the  case,  on  its  own  merits,  affords  no  entertainment  to  the 
audience,  which  the  counsel  is  always  expected  to  produce  when- 
ever he  appears  in  Court.  This  is  a  very  serious  and  grave  busi- 
ness for  this  young  man,  and,  looking  upon  him,  one  could 
hardly  conceive  that  he  perpetrated  the  dreadful  crime  with 
which  he  stands  charged,  and  if  he  could  escape  from  the 
evidence  of  guilt  that  comes  from  so  many  quarters,  all  con- 
verging and  pointing  to  him,  he  (counsel)  would  experience 
relief  from  a  weighty  responsibility.  This  is  not  a  case  for 
sickly  sentiment  or  sympathy.  If  he  be  really  guilty  of  mur- 
dering the  venerable  man  (Mr.  Briggs)  in  the  way  described, 
then  his  crime  is  one  of  the  blackest  dye,  as  well  as  one  of 
the  meanest  and  most  revolting  in  all  its  aspects  that  has  ever 
been  perpetrated.  The  facts  are  these :  first,  the  corpus 
delicte  is  fully  established.  At  half-past  ten  o'clock,  9th  July, 
1864,  Mr.  Briggs  was  seen  alive  and  in  perfect  health.  In 
two  and  a  half  or  three  and  a  half  minutes  afterwards  he  lay 
moaning  and  insensible  in  the  6 -foot  way  of  North  London 

158 


Appendix   I. 


Railway.  The  carriage  in  which  he  had  been  riding,  and  from 
which  he  was  thrown,  exhibited  proofs  of  a  recent  bloody 
struggle.  Several  mortal  wounds  were  inflicted  upon  the  de- 
ceased, from  the  effects  of  which  he  shortly  afterwards  died. 
Second,  the  evidence  which  has  been  adduced  shows  clearly  and 
conclusively  that  the  prisoner  is  guilty  of  the  murder  of  Mr. 
Briggs,  with  which  he  is  charged.  On  Saturday  evening,  9th 
July,  between  half-past  seven  and  half-past  eight  o'clock, 
Miiller  left  the  house  of  Mrs.  Repsch,  12£  Jewry  Street,  Aid- 
gate.  He  did  not  return  that  evening  to  his  lodgings,  as  it 
was  usual  for  him  to  do.  On  examining  the  compartment  in 
which  Mr.  Briggs  had  been  assaulted  and  murdered,  a  hat  was 
found,  made  by  Mr*  T.  H.  Walker,  44  Crawford  Street,  Mary- 
lebone,  London.  It  was  crushed,  and  had  marks  of  blood 
upon  it.  This  hat  is  proved  by  the  witness  Matthews,  who 
has  been  examined  here,  and  by  Mrs.  Repsch,  whose  depositions 
have  been  taken,  to  have  belonged  to  Miiller,  and  to  have  been 
worn  by  him  up  to  the  time  of  the  murder,  or  nearly  so.  Mr. 
Briggs's  hat  was  taken  by  the  murderer.  Miiller,  on  the  14th 
day  of  July,  had  on  at  Mrs.  Repsch 's  a  nearly  new  hat  with  a 
white  silk  lining.  He  told  Mrs.  Repsch  that  his  old  one  had 
been  thrown  into  a  dust  hole.  When  arrested  here,  a  hat  is 
found  stowed  away  in  his  box.  Mr.  Briggs's  hat  is  gone,  and 
Miiller  is  found  with  one  in  his  box.  From  the  person  of  Mr. 
Briggs  a  gold  watch  and  chain  were  taken  by  violence.  The 
chain  is  proved  distinctly  to  have  been  in  Miiller's  possession 
on  Monday,  the  llth  of  July.  On  that  day  it  was  exchanged 
by  him  at  the  shop  of  Mr.  Death,  55  Cheapside,  London,  for 
another  chain  and  ring.  This  other  chain  was  packed  in  one 
of  Mr.  Death's  card  boxes  and  delivered  to  the  prisoner.  He 
subsequently  exhibited  this  new  chain  and  ring  to  several 
persons.  The  box  with  Mr.  Death's  name  and  address  he 
gave  to  Mr.  Matthews'  daughter.  On  the  12th  July,  1864 
(Tuesday),  the  prisoner  pawned  this  new  chain  to  Mr.  Annis, 
121  Minories,  and  received  a  pawn  ticket  therefor.  On  13th 
July  (Wednesday),  1864,  the  prisoner  sold  this  pawn  ticket 
to  John  Haffa,  his  room  mate,  for  the  sum  of  12s.,  which  sum 
he  needed,  as  he  stated,  to  pay  for  his  passage  to  America. 
On  his  arrival  there  he  is  identified  clearly  by  Mr.  Death  as 
the  person  who  sold  him  Mr.  Briggs's  chain.  He  is  also  identi- 
fied by  Matthews  as  owner  of  the  hat  which  was  found  in  the 
compartment  of  the  railway  carriage  where  Mr.  Briggs  received 
the  wounds  from  the  effects  of  which  he  died.  There  is  also 
found  in  Miiller 's  box  a  heavy  gold  watch,  made  by  Archer, 
of  Hackney,  where  Mr.  Briggs  resided.  Miiller  is  not  known 
to  have  had  any  watch  of  his  own.  If  he  had  he  would  prob- 
ably have  exhibited  it,  or  it  would  have  been  seen  by  Matthews 
and  other  witnesses,  to  whom  he  showed  the  chain  and  ring, 


Franz    Muller. 

and  with  whom  he  was  on  terms  of  intimacy.  Third,  the 
evidence  is  such  as  would  plainly  require  the  commitment  of 
Muller  for  trial  if  the  offence  had  been  committed  here,  and  it 
results  that  a  certificate  leading  to  his  extradition  that  the  case 
may  undergo  an  investigation  in  England  should  be  granted. 
Thus  was  the  chain  of  evidence  complete,  not  a  link  wanting 
to  connect  the  prisoner  with  the  commission  of  the  crime  with 
which  he  stands  charged. 

Commissioner  Newton  then  proceeded  to  deliver  the  decision 
of  the  Court.  Having  complimented  the  counsel  assigned  for 
the  defence  for  the  able  manner  in  which  they  had  advocated 
the  cause  of  their  client,  he  said — "  I  am  not  at  loss  to  see, 
after  carefully  looking  down  the  testimony,  and  weighing  it  in 
my  mind,  that  there  is  sufficient  testimony  for  me,  sitting  in 
the  capacity  of  a  committing  magistrate,  to  commit  this  man 
to  a  trial.  My  simple  duty  is  to  determine  whether  there  is 
sufficient  probable  cause,  from  the  evidence  that  has  been  pro- 
duced to  that  effect,  which  would  cause  me  to  remand  him, 
that  he  may  have  an  opportunity  to  "Be  tried  at  the  place  where 
the  crime  was  committed,  and  there  proving  his  innocence,  or, 
being  found  guilty,  to  be  punished  for  his  crime.  It  is  not 
necessary  for  me  to  determine  absolutely  that  he  is  guilty  of 
the  crime.  The  fact  to  determine  is,  has  a  crime  been  com- 
mitted? If  it  has  been  committed,  is  there  probable  cause  from 
the  evidence  to  show  that  the  party  accused  is  the  party  who 
has  committed  the  crime?  Now,  it  appears  to  my  mind, 
looking  at  it  in  the  light  of  probable  cause,  that  my  duty  is 
very  simple  and  very  plain.  I  do  not  desire  to  sit  in  judg- 
ment upon  this  man ;  far  be  it  from  me.  I  wish  it  was  in  my 
power  to  discover  any  evidence  or  trace  of  innocence  to  justify 
me  to  withhold  the  certificate  of  extradition.  But  I  am  free 
to  say  that,  from  all  the  combined  circumstances,  the  chain 
which  seems  to  have  been  linked  around  this  man  points  fatally 
to  him  as  the  guilty  man.  So  clear  and  distinct  is  the  question 
of  probable  cause  that  I  cannot  for  one  moment  have  a  doubt 
as  to  the  proper  course  to  pursue.  Under  these  circumstances 
I  am  constrained  to  grant  the  certificate,  and  the  prisoner 
therefore  stands  committed." 

The  prisoner  was  then  removed. 


1*0 


Appendix   II. 

APPENDIX  II. 

MEMORIAL  PRESENTED  BY  THE  GERMAN  LEGAJL  PROTECTION  SOCIETY. 

(From  The  Time*,  Friday,  llth  November,  1864.) 

Yesterday  afternoon,  at  half-past  one  o'clock,  a  deputation 
from  the  German  Legal  Protection  Society,  consisting  of  Dr. 
Juch  and  Mr.  Berndas,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Beard,  the  solicitor 
for  the  defence,  proceeded  to  the  Home  Office,  and  presented 
to  Mr.  Everest  the  following  memorial  which,  after  various 
meetings  of  that  society,  was  recently  adopted  in  Miiller's 
behalf.  The  deputation  read  the  heads  of  the  memorial, 
which  prayed  for  a  respite  of  the  sentence  of  death  passed  upon 
the  convict.  Mr.  Everest,  after  hearing  the  deputation,  stated 
that  the  memorial  would  be  forwarded  by  the  post  of  that 
evening  to  Sir  George  Grey,  who  is  at  present  at  Falloden,  and 
that  an  answer  could  not  possibly  be  received  from  him  before 
Saturday  morning,  but  that  the  moment  it  came  to  hand  a 
copy  of  it  should  be  forwarded  to  Mr.  Beard.  Mr.  Beard 
handed  in  a  letter  to  Sir  George  Grey,  which  he  requested 
might  accompany  the  memorial,  and  in  which  he  requested  the 
immediate  attention  of  the  Home  Secretary  to  this  urgent 
matter  of  life  and  death.  Mr.  Everest  promised  to  forward 
Mr.  Beard's  letter,  and  the  interview,  which  lasted  only  a 
very  few  minutes,  terminated.  The  memorial  is  as  follows:  — 

"  Franz  Muller,  a  German,  was  convicted  at  the  Central 
Criminal  Court  on  Saturday,  the  29th  day  of  October,  of  the 
murder  of  Mr.  Briggs  in  a  first-class  railway  carriage  on  the 
night  of  the  9th  of  July  last.  The  evidence  against  him  was 
circumstantial.  It  was  sworn  that  on  the  Monday  following 
the  murder  he  exchanged,  at  the  shop  of  Mr.  Death,  a  silver- 
smith in  Cheapside,  a  gold  watch-chain,  which  was  proved  to 
be  the  property  of  the  murdered  man,  and  that  he  received  a 
new  chain  for  it.  This  last-named  chain  was  packed  in  a 
small  case,  which  was  given  by  Muller  on  the  same  day  to 
the  daughter  of  one  Matthews,  a  cabman,  with  whom  Muller 
was  on  intimate  terms.  On  the  13th  of  July  Muller  redeemed 
a  watch  and  chain  which  he  had  in  pawn,  and  re-pawned  them 
at  a  different  place  for  £4 ;  he  gave  his  own  name  (Muller) 
when  he  did  BO." 

(Then  follows  a  brief  summary  of  the  evidence  against 
Muller ;  and  in  the  succeeding  paragraphs  the  evidence  in  his 
favour,  such  as  was  adduced  at  the  trial,  and  all  the  points 
touched  upon  in  Serjeant  Parry's  speech  for  the  defence  are 
gone  into  at  some  length.  With  respect  to  the  alibi,  it  is 
M  161 


Franz    Muller. 

again  argued  in  the  memorial  that  Muller  could  not  possibly 
have  returned  from  Camberwell  in  time  to  leave  Fenchurch 
Street  station  by  the  same  train  as  Mr.  Briggs.  The  state- 
ments of  Matthews,  his  wife,  and  Mrs.  Repsch  are  called  into 
question,  and  a  hint  is  thrown  out  that  they  might  have  been 
induced  to  swear  as  they  did  for  the  sake  of  participating  in 
the  promised  reward.  It  is  also  asked  why  Muller  should 
be  condemned  because  he  could  not  tell  what  became  of  his 
old  hat,  while  Matthews  is  in  equal  ignorance  of  what  has 
become  of  his.  The  memorial  then  goes  on — ) 

"  One  of  the  most  singular  circumstances  in  this  case  is  that 
these  two  men  should  have  hats  so  nearly  alike.  Muller 
positively  declares  that  he  bought  at  Mr.  Digance's  the  hat 
which  is  said  to  be  that  of  Mr.  Briggs,  and  he  gives  the  very 
dates,  that  is  between  the  14th  and  20th  of  May  last.  It  may 
be  said  that  it  was  too  expensive;  but  Muller  was  a  man  who 
spent  a  great  deal  in  personal  decoration.  He  asserts  that 
after  he  bought  it  he  was  rallied  upon  it  as  being  too  tall  for 
him,  and  that  this  was  the  reason  he  cut  it  down.  He  asserts 
most  positively  that  the  Repsches  saw  him  cut  it  down,  and 
when  he  was  ironing  it  Repsch  advised  him  to  wet  his  rag,  as 
hatters  did.  He  described  to  a  member  of  the  committee  the 
appearance  of  the  shopman  at  Mr.  Digance's,  from  whom  he 
bought  it.  Two  of  the  committee  went  to  Digance's  and  saw 
that  shopman;  his  description  corresponded  exactly  with  that 
given  by  Muller.  Mr.  Digance  himself  was  questioned  about 
the  sale  of  such  a  hat,  and  was  politely  asked  to  let  his  day- 
book for  May  be  seen  ;  but  he  refused  to  give  any  information, 
nor  would  he  let  his  day-book  be  examined,  nor  would  he  permit 
his  assistant  to  give  information,  stating  as  his  reason  that 
Muller  was  a  murderer.  Now,  if  it  could  be  proved  that  this 
hat  was  really  purchased  by  Muller  at  Mr.  Digance's,  the 
case  for  the  prosecution  would  be  greatly  weakened,  if  not 
wholly  destroyed.  Muller  asserts  that  it  can.  It  is  not 
unreasonable,  therefore,  to  ask  only  for  a  respite  that  this 
matter  may  be  inquired  into. 

"  Muller  asserts  that  he  went  to  the  docks  on  the  Monday 
morning,  the  1 1th  of  July ;  that  a  pedlar,  whose  face  was  well 
known  to  persons  employed  there,  offered  him  the  watch  and 
chain,  near  where  the  ships  lay ;  that  he  then  had  his  passage 
money  in  his  pocket  (as  Haffa  says) ;  the  price  which  the 
pedlar  asked  was  £6,  but  Muller  did  not  feel  disposed  to  give 
more  than  £4,  which  he  offered.  The  pedlar  refused,  and 
they  parted.  In  about  half  a  minute  it  occurred  to  Muller 
that  as  the  pedlar  refused  £4  for  the  chain  and  watch  they 
must  be  worth  more,  and  that  he  could  make  a  good  bargain. 
He  returned,  and  offered  him  three  half-crowns  additional,  which 
were  at  once  accepted.  Muller  left  the  docks,  and  when 
crossing  Tower  Hill  he  doubted  the  genuineness  of  his  purchase 
162 


Appendix    II. 


— he  thought  that  they  were  only  gilt  and  worthless,  and  he 
went  to  Mr.  Death's  to  propose  an  exchange  of  chains  for  the 
purpose  of  discovering  whether  the  newly  acquired  property 
was  gold  or  base.  Discovering  that  it  was  gold,  he  resolved 
to  part  with  the  chain  and  keep  the  watch  in  place  of  his  own, 
which  was  in  pawn.  His  vanity  made  him  state  a  falsehood 
as  to  the  chain  and  ring,  that  they  were  presents  from  his 
father,  as  he  also  falsely  stated  that  Mr.  Hodgkinson  was  send- 
ing him  to  New  York  at  £150  a  year,  and,  as  he  pretended 
there,  that  he  had  had  the  watch  two  years. 

"  The  latter  statement,  it  is  suggested,  was  that  of  a  man 
who  had  become  convinced  during  the  voyage  that  the  watch 
purchased  from  the  pedlar  had  been  got  under  doubtful  cir- 
cumstances, and  he  probably  was  under  great  embarrassment 
about  it  when  apprehended.  Had  he  known  that  the  chain  was 
that  of  Mr.  Briggs,  it  is  incredible  that  he  would  have  given 
the  box  which  he  received  from  Mr.  Death  to  Matthews'  child 
as  a  plaything,  for  he  must  have  been  guiltily  suspicious  that 
that  box  would  be  identified  and  traced  to  him. 

"  Jacob  Weist,  porter  at  Mr.  White's,  proved  at  the  trial 
that  he  had  seen  Muller  several  times  at  the  London  Docks.  He 
now  adds  that  three  or  four  days  before  Muller  sailed  he  saw 
him  there  one  morning.  Weist  was  not  at  the  docks  on  either 
Saturday  or  Tuesday,  and  therefore  he  believes  that  it  was  on 
the  Monday  morning  before  he  sailed  he  saw  Muller. 

"  There  are  declarations  that  the  pedlar  described  was  in 
the  habit  of  frequenting  the  docks,  and  that  he  ceased  to  do 
so  about  the  period  when  the  police  were  engaged  in  the 
discovery  of  the  murderer. 

"  Muller  describes  the  pedlar  who  sold  him  the  watch  and 
chain  as  being  a  man  of  middle  size ;  he  had  a  lean  face,  with 
prominent  cheekbones,  brown  whiskers,  and  shaved  clean ;  he 
had  a  little  scar  on  the  lip.  He  wore  a  Melton  morning  coat. 
This,  as  nearly  as  possible,  corresponds  with  the  description 
of  the  missing  man.  This  pedlar  has  since  been  discovered. 
He  admits  that  he  sold  a  gold  chain  and  a  watch  about  July 
to  a  person  in  the  docks,  but  he  asserts  that  the  watch  was 
silver.  It  is  submitted  that  this  last  assertion  cannot  be 
wholly  relied  upon,  and  that  the  coincidence  is  so  extraordinary 
that  Muller  at  New  York  should  have  asserted  this  fact,  and 
that  it  should  be  discovered  to  be  true  in  the  most  material 
particulars,  that  a  respite  of  Muller  is  imperatively  demanded 
by  the  exigencies  of  public  justice  for  a  more  full  investigation 
as  to  where  the  pedlar  got  these  articles,  and  what  he  subse- 
quently did  with  them.  It  was  from  Muller's  description  of 
him  solely  that  he  was  traced  out  and  discovered. 

"  The  passage  money  had  exhausted  Miiller's  finances.  He 
sold  his  coat  and  trousers  on  the  voyage,  and  had  12s.  in  his 
pocket  when  apprehended.  This  accounts  for  the  non-pro- 

163 


Franz    Muller. 

duction  of  his  clothing,  which  was  made  so  much  of  at  the 
trial.  It  is  certain  that  he  was  so  reduced  in  his  finances 
when  he  was  about  to  leave  London  that  he  could  not  have 
paid  his  passage  money  had  he  not  pledged  his  coat  for  6s., 
before  mentioned.  No  person  who  went  out  in  the  ship 
could  prove  that  Muller  had  cut  down  the  hat  during  the 
voyage.  It  was  proved  to  have  been  ironed  after  it  was 
cut  down.  If  he  borrowed  an  iron  on  board  ship,  the  fact 
should  have  been  proved.  It  is  unlikely  in  the  extreme 
that  he  did  so  on  the  Sunday,  as  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Blyth  declare 
that  he  was  with  them  all  that  day,  and  they  both  unite 
in  speaking  that  they  did  not  notice  him  with  a  new  hat. 
Mrs.  Blyth  positively  avers  that  from  the  time  when  Muller 
entered  her  lodging  until  he  left  she  never  saw  but  one  hat 
with  him;  the  prosecutor  did  not  venture  to  put  into  her 
hand  at  the  trial  either  of  the  hats  which  were  supposed  to 
prove  Muller's  guilt.  The  truth  is,  the  hat  was  cut  down 
soon  after  he  bought  it,  and  it  was  cut  before  he  went  to 
lodge  with  Blyth. 

"  In  the  absence  of  direct  evidence,  while  the  indirect 
evidence  is  of  a  doubtful  or  suspicious  nature,  Muller's  char- 
acter should  be  thrown  into  the  scale;  his  demeanour  since 
his  arrest,  and  even  since  his  condemnation,  has  been  that 
of  a  man  who  is  not  guilty  of  the  crime  of  murder ;  and  his 
whole  previous  career  is  as  much  at  variance  with  the  perpe- 
tration of  the  crime  as  his  physical  and  nervous  temperament 
renders  him  apparently  incapable  of  it. 

"It  is  not  reasonable  to  suppose  that  a  man  who  had 
committed  a  murder  of  this  terrible  description,  when  the 
hue  and  cry  was  raised  all  through  London,  would  be  coolly 
walking  about  the  streets  and  would  openly  exhibit  his  newly 
acquired  hat  and  chain  and  ring  which  he  knew  to  be  con- 
nected with  the  crime.  Would  he  dispose  of  the  chain  to  a 
respectable  dealer,  where  he  would  be  most  likely  to  be  detected? 
Would  he  not  rather  sell  it  in  some  haunt  of  thieves?  Would 
he  openly  declare  his  intention  to  leave  the  country,  and  tell 
all  his  friends  the  name  of  the  ship  he  was  going  in,  while 
he  took  his  passage  in  his  own  name?  His  natural  cheerful- 
ness and  kindliness  of  temper  never  were  seen  to  change, 
though,  if  he  had  been  guilty,  it  is  impossible  but  that  he 
must  have  exhibited  some  agitation,  some  traces  of  inward 
or  external  excitement  and  alarm.  Yet  none  was  ever  seen. 

"If  it  be  conceded — and  it  was  virtually  conceded  at  the 
trial — that  Muller  was  at  Jones's  at  all  that  evening,  the 
dates  conclusively  show  that  he  could  not  be  at  Fenchurch 
Street  at  9.50.  He  parted  with  Haffa  at  Jewry  Street, 
Minories,  not  before  7.45.  This  was  ten  minutes'  walk  from 
Gracechurch  Street,  and  he  could  only  catch  the  eight  o'clock 
164 


Appendix  II. 


omnibus  to  Camberwell  Gate.  It  takes  twenty-five  minutes 
to  ride  from  Gracechurch  Street  to  Camberwell  Gate;  and 
to  walk  thence  to  Vassal  Road  at  a  moderate  pace  by  a  lame 
man  with  a  slipper  could  hardly  be  done  in  twenty-five  minutes ; 
that  takes  us  to  8.50.  It  is  in  evidence  that  he  stayed  five 
or  ten  minutes.  Assume  that  he  left  Jones's  about  nine,  he 
would  arrive  at  Camberwell  Gate  at  9.25  or  9.30.  He  could 
not  arrive  there  for  an  earlier  omnibus  certainly  than  9.45. 
This  would  bring  him  to  Gracechurch  Street  about  9.50. 
Thence  to  Fenchurch  Street  is  about  five  minutes,  making  it 
9.55;  but  the  evidence  conclusively  showed  that  the  9.45 
train,  a  few  minutes  behind  its  time,  started  at  9.50.  On 
the  whole,  it  is  improbable  that  he  could  have  caught  all 
those  omnibuses  and  trains  at  the  exact  moment  when  he 
wanted  them,  and  that  he  could  have  made  so  well-timed  a 
race  to  commit  murder.  Muller  positively  declares  that  he 
was  the  passenger  in  the  slipper  who  left  Camberwell  Gate 
in  the  omnibus  at  9.55. 

"  The  Lord  Chief  Baron  told  the  jury  as  follows  upon  this 
point  (The  Times,  31st  October): — 'Between  seven  and  eight 
o'clock  the  prisoner  was  at  Repsch's;  he  then  left,  taking 
his  boots  with  him,  saying  he  was  going  to  Camberwell. 
There  was  plenty  of  time  for  him  to  have  gone  to  Camberwell 
and  to  have  returned.'  It  is  submitted  that  on  the  figures 
just  quoted  this  direction  of  the  learned  judge  was  too  un- 
qualified. Those  figures  are  all  absolute,  and,  being  so, 
they  demonstrate  that  the  judge  was  mistaken  in  asserting 
that  'there  was  plenty  of  time.' 

"  At  the  coroner's  inquest  the  following  important  evidence 
was  given  by  Townsend,  a  ticket  porter  at  Hackney  Wick 
station,  who  collected  the  tickets  in  the  train  in  which  Mr. 
Briggs  had  travelled.  He  said,  '  We  keep  the  doors  locked 
till  the  tickets  are  collected.  I  remember  that  a  man  was 
very  anxious  to  leave  the  platform  and  went  into  the  porters' 
room,  thinking  that  was  the  way  down.  He  seemed  very 
impatient,  and  said,  on  being  told  that  the  door  would  be 

opened  in  a  moment,  "  D the  door,  it  ought  to  have  been 

opened  before,"  and  he  added  that  he  would  report  me.  I 
should  know  him  again.  The  station  is  on  an  embankment. 
We  have  rather  a  rough  lot  there  at  times.'  Muller  was 
shown  to  this  witness,  but  he  could  not  identify  him  as  the 
man.  Like  Mr.  Lee,  he  was  not  called  by  the  Crown.  It 
is  submitted  that  this  is  very  remarkable  evidence  when  taken 
in  connection  with  what  Mr.  Lee  swore,  and  that  this  was 
probably  one  of  the  two  men  seen  by  him  in  the  carriage  with 
Mr.  Briggs.  The  other  may  have  escaped  down  the  embank 
ment,  which  is  steep,  and  not  traversable  by  a  man  who 
limped,  as  Muller  did  on  that  night.  Observe,  also,  that 

165 


Franz    Muller. 

this  man,  whoever  he  was,  has  never  come  forward  to  explain 
his  remarkable  conduct  that  night.  Yet  the  inquest  was  held 
so  long  ago  as  the  19th  of  July  last,  and  the  coroner  might 
have  discovered  him  if  he  were  guiltless. 

"  A  similar  observation  occurs  as  to  the  two  persons  seen  by 
Mr.  Lee.  As  it  is  impossible  to  assume  that  he  has  wilfully 
perjured  himself,  how  is  it  that  neither  of  these  persons  has 
ever  come  forward?  Their  concealment  of  themselves  can 
be  accounted  for  only  on  the  supposition  that  they  possess  a 
guilty  secret,  and  that  they  were,  in  fact,  the  murderers  of 
Mr.  Briggs.  It  is  absurd  to  believe  all  that  Matthews  says 
and  to  disbelieve  all  that  Mr.  Lee  swears. 

"  A  witness  named  declares  that  on  the  night 

of  the  murder,  some  time  after  ten  o'clock,  he  lost  his  way 
going  to  Hackney  Wick  station,  and  found  himself  in  Wallace 
Road,  near  the  canal,  at  a  place  about  100  or  150  yards  from 
where  Mr.  Briggs  was  found.  He  saw  a  man  who  appeared 
stunned  or  drunk,  and  whose  face,  hands,  and  clothing  were 
covered  with  blood;  another  person,  who  appeared  to  be  a 
workman,  and  who  was  there,  remarked  that  the  man  had 
either  been  attacked  or  had  done  some  murder.  The  man 
went  in  the  direction  of  the  canal.  It  is  suggested  that  this 
was  the  second  man  who  sat  in  the  railway  carriage;  that  in 
the  struggle  with  Mr.  Briggs  both  rolled  out  of  the  carriage 
together;  that  this  man  escaped,  and  made  towards  the  canal 
for  the  purpose  of  cleaning  himself,  while  his  companion  rode 
on  to  the  station,  and  naturally  expressed  impatient  anxiety, 
and  perhaps  alarm,  at  finding  the  door  closed,  which  he  could 
not  fail  to  feel  under  the  circumstances  that  surrounded  him. 

"  F M declares  that  about  eleven  o'clock  on  the 

same  night  a  man,  in  a  very  excited  manner,  offered  him  a 
heavy  gold  old-fashioned  watch  for  <£!.  His  hair  was  dark; 

he  had  an  alpaca  coat  and  dark  trousers.  F M 'a 

wife  was  with  him,  and  she  says  she  thinks  she  would  know 

the  watch  again.  F M refused  to  buy  the  watch. 

He  gave  information  to  the  police  a  day  or  two  after,  yet  the 

police  never  showed  Briggs's  watch  to  F M 's  wife. 

This  took  place  at  Street,  St.  George's-in-the-East,  and 

if  the  man  who  exhibited  impatience  at  Hackney  to  get  away 
from  the  station  was  the  person  who  offered  the  watch  to 

F M ,  he  could  easily  have  got  from  the  station  to  the 

place  where  F M met  him.  A  circumstance  so 

pointedly  singular  as  this  demands  a  rigid  and  immediate 
inquiry. 

"  It  was  not  shown  that  Muller  was  in  any  way  acquainted 
with  this  particular  railway  line;  it  was  never  suggested  that 
the  murder  was  premeditated  by  him;  yet  it  is  supposed  that 
this  poor  tailor  got  into  a  first-class  carriage  with  the  chance 
present  to  his  mind  of  his  being  able  to  kill  or  rob  somebody 
166 


Appendix  II. 


IL  a  minute  or  two,  ready  armed  and  prepared  with  a  deadly 
instrument.  Such  an  hypothesis  is  fallacious.  All  hia  ante- 
cedents negative  the  idea.  It  is  more  likely  that  Briggs,  the 
baak  clerk,  was  known  and  followed  by  some  London  thieves, 
who  had  watched  for  him  and  premeditated  the  murder,  and 
who  certainly  tried  his  leathern  bag  before  they  decamped, 
for  blood  was  found  on  its  handle." 

(The  report  recently  put  into  circulation  of  Mr.  Poole,  at 
Edmonton,  having  a  pair  of  trousers  stained  with  blood  thrown 
at  his  window,  on  the  morning  of  10th  July,  is  then  men- 
tioned, and  a  letter  on  the  subject,  signed  "  John  Bennett," 
wiich  appeared  in  a  contemporary,  is  reproduced.  The 
memorial  then  proceeds — ) 

"  If  Muller  were  one  of  the  two  men  seen  in  the  railway 
carriage — though  Mr.  Lee  declares  that  he  was  not — it  is  hard 
tc  conceive  how  he  could  have  been  found  in  possession  of 
the  whole  of  the  property,  as  he  would  have  had  to  share  it 
with  his  confederate.  It  is  more  probable  that  he  pur- 
chased it  all  from  one  of  these  men,  or  from  a  Jew  accomplice 
of  theirs  afterwards,  under  circumstances  that,  when  he  came 
to  reflect  upon  them,  excited  his  own  suspicions. 

"  The  persons  who  proved  an  alibi  had  no  interest  whatever 
in  the  acquittal  of  Muller.  The  full  details  of  this  alibi  were 
known  in  London  to  those  interested  in  his  defence  long  before 
he  was  apprehended  in  New  York. 

"  It  was  clear  also  that  Muller  was  found  guilty  because  he 
was  proved  to  be  connected  with  circumstances  so  suspicious 
that  it  was  difficult  to  believe  such  circumstances  could  be  con- 
sistent with  innocence.  But  it  is  submitted  that  this  is  not 
a  fair  way  of  arriving  at  a  conclusion  so  momentous,  because 
there  are  many  circumstances  of  the  greatest  weight  connected 
with  his  case  equally  indicative  of  his  innocence ;  in  other 
words,  there  are  nearly  as  great  difficulties  in  arriving  at  a 
conclusion  of  Miiller's  guilt  as  there  are  in  concluding  that 
he  is  wholly  innocent.  Instance  the  following: — The 
physical  improbability  and  almost  impossibility  that  a  slight 
young  man,  destitute  of  any  large  amount  of  strength,  and, 
to  some  extent,  disabled  of  the  use  of  one  limb,  could  in  the 
space  of  two  or  three  minutes  overpower  and  throw  out  of  the 
carriage  a  man  so  much  larger,  heavier,  and  more  powerful; 
the  same  man  not  having  been  asleep,  nor  likely  to  be  so  in 
the  short  interval  between  his  getting  into  the  carriage  and 
speaking  to  Mr.  Lee  and  the  moment  when  he  was  attacked. 
There  must  have  been  a  desperate  and  deadly  struggle — body  to 
body ;  the  number  of  the  wounds  and  their  position,  and  the 
heaving  out  of  the  body,  would  indicate  more  than  one  assailant ; 
and  Muller  was  not  shown  to  have  ever  possessed  such  an 
instrument  as  would  have  inflicted  the  wounds  found  on  Mr. 
Briggs. 

167 


Franz    Muller. 

"  The  Lord  Chief  Baron  in  his  summing  up  to  the  jury  inti- 
mated that  Sunday  was  a  dies  non — a  most  unlikely  day  for 
the  murderer,  supposing  him  to  be  another  than  Muller,  to 
dispose  of  the  watch  and  chain  to  a  third  party.  It  is  sub- 
mitted that  Sunday  is,  of  all  others,  the  very  day  most  likeiy ; 
it  is  the  well-known  market  day  of  the  Petticoat  Lane  thieves 
and  dealers. 

"  The  Lord  Chief  Baron  likewise  told  the  jury  that  it  -was 
not  required  of  them  in  finding  a  verdict  of  guilty  agaiist 
Muller  that  they  should  have  no  doubt  of  his  guilt,  but  tley 
should  have  the  same  degree  of  certainty  which  they  required 
in  their  own  most  important  affairs.  Now,  this  direction  being 
addressed  to  men  of  business,  they  would  naturally  take  tie 
analogy  of  business  matters  as  their  standard.  Yet  ye  see 
every  day  that  men  embarking  in  the  most  important  commer- 
cial transactions  require  only  a  slight  preponderance  of  probt- 
bilities  of  success  to  justify  them  in  doing  so  and  runniig 
the  greatest  hazards ;  and  hence  the  vast  number  of  ruined 
speculators,  who,  nevertheless,  are  usually  men  of  sound  judg- 
ment and  well  accustomed  to  mercantile  contingencies.  Ic 
is  submitted,  therefore,  that  such  a  test  is  calculated  to  mis- 
lead ;  and  that  it  was  intended  by  Lord  Tenterden,  on  whose 
authority  it  was  cited,  rather  for  civil  than  criminal  investi- 
gation. 

"  No  imputation  is  intended  to  be  conveyed  on  the  finding 
of  the  jury,  who,  on  the  imperfect  facts  presented  to  them  on 
Muller' s  behalf,  could  have  probably  arrived  at  no  other  ver- 
dict than  that  which  they  did.  Muller  himself,  after  con- 
demnation, said,  '  I  should  like  to  say  something.  I  am,  at  all 
events,  satisfied  with  the  sentence  which  your  lordship  has 
passed,  for  I  know  very  well  it  is  that  which  the  law  of  the 
country  prescribes.  I  have  not  been  convicted  on  a  true 
statement  of  the  facts,  but  on  a  false  statement.'  This  may 
be  taken  as  strong  a  protestation  of  innocence  as  a  foreigner 
knowing  little  of  the  English  language  could  make ;  and  it 
was  a  rejoinder  to  the  judge,  who  said  it  was  the  sentence  of 
the  law,  and  not  of  the  Court.  But  Muller  was  condemned  by 
public  opinion  long  before  he  was  brought  to  England  at  all, 
in  the  same  way  as,  but  in  a  stronger  degree  than,  Dr.  Smet- 
hurst  was.*  This  gentleman  was  convicted  of  poisoning  before 


*  Dr.  T.  Smethurst  was  convicted  and  sentenced  to  death  at  the  Central 
Criminal  Court  before  Lord  Chief  Baron  Pollock  on  19th  August,  1859,  for 
the  murder  by  poisoning  of  Isabella  Bankes.  Serjeant  Ballantine  con 
ducted  the  prosecution,  and  Serjeant  Parry  the  defence.  The  verdict  was 
set  aside  by  the  Home  Secretary  on  the  ground  of  insufficient  evidence  of 
guilt,  and  three  months  later  Smethurst  was  sentenced  by  Baron  Bramwell 
to  one  year's  hard  labour  for  bigamy.  A  clear  and  impartial  account  of 
the  case  will  be  found  in  volume  iii.  of  Sir  James  Stephen's  "  History 
of  the  Criminal  Law." 

1 68 


N     "> 

0    V 


Appendix  III. 


the  Lord  Chief  Baron,  who  expressed  himself  satisfied  with 
the  verdict,  and  gave  him  no  hope ;  yet,  when,  on  a  memorial 
like  this,  he  was  respited,  the  accusation  was  found  to  be 
false,  and  no  one  ever  since  doubted  that  he  was  wrongfully 
convicted  of  the  crime  for  which  he  was  adjudged  to  death. 
It  is  confidently  hoped  that  a  similar  result  would  follow  the 
respite  prayed  for  in  this  case." 


The  Times,  llth  November,  1864. 
(To  the  Editor  of  The  Times.) 

"  Sir, — The  committee  of  the  German  Legal  Protection 
Society  begg  the  powerful  aid  of  your  journal  in  making 
known  to  the  English  public  the  fact  that  their  committee 
will  sit  en  permanence  at  Seyd's  Hotel,  Finsbury  Square,  until 
the  answer  to  their  memorial  has  been  received  from  the  Secre- 
tary of  State.  The  committee  are  stimulated  to  make  this 
special  appeal  by  the  circumstance  that  important  evidence, 
as  tending,  as  they  believe,  to  exonerate  their  countryman  has 
presented  itself  almost  at  the  last  moment  before  the  presenta- 
tion of  their  memorial.  In  the  belief  that  other  persons  may 
recall  circumstances  bearing  on  their  task  connected  with  the 
evening  of  Saturday,  the  9th  of  July,  the  committee  earnestly 
entreat  all  such  persons  to  communicate  with  them  at  once 
at  Seyd's  Hotel,  where  members  of  the  German  committee 
will  always  be  present  and  anxious  to  receive  communications. 
"  I  am,  Sir,  yours  obediently, 

"  ADOLPH  OPPLER, 

"Hon.   Sec.,   Deutscher  Rechtsschutz-Verein 
"  (German  Legal  Protection  Society)  in  London. 

"November  10." 


APPENDIX  III. 

(AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  EXECUTION  OP  MULLER.) 


(From  The  Times,   15th  November,   1864.) 

Yesterday  morning  Muller  was  hanged  in  front  of  Newgate. 
He  died  before  such  a  concourse  as  we  hope  may  never  be 
again  assembled,  either  for  the  spectacle  which  they  had  in 
view  or  for  the  gratification  of  such  lawless  ruffianism  as  yes- 

169 


Franz    Muller. 

terday  found  its  scope  around  the  gallows.  While  he  stood 
firm  on  the  scaffold  as  the  hangman  turned  the  last  bolts 
beneath  his  feet,  Muller,  with  his  last  words,  owned  his  guilt. 
His  quiet  and  almost  instantaneous  death  cut  short  what  might 
have  been  a  full  confession.  The  mere  details,  however, 
matter  not;  enough  at  least  was  disclosed  to  show  that  the 
sentence  of  mankind  was  right.  In  the  quiet,  earnest  words 
with  which  Muller  bowed  his  head  and  said,  "  Ich  habe  es 
gethan  "  (I  did  it),  and  so,  in  speaking,  went  before  his  God, 
he  told  enough  to  vindicate  man's  justice;  and  in  his  late 
repentance  left  those  who  saw  him  die  to  hope  more  than 
justice  for  him  in  the  world  to  come.  Whether  the  scene 
amid  which  the  guilty  man  at  last  faltered  out  the  late  ad- 
mission of  his  crime  was  one  in  which  any  human  being 
should  have  passed  away  is  another  question.  The  gallows 
as  a  moraliser  is  at  the  best  a  rough  one.  It  is  not  as  a  general 
rule  supposed  to  address  the  educated  and  refined,  but  to 
preach  its  bitter  lesson  to  the  hordes  of  lesser  criminals  it 
draws  round  it  to  see  a  greater  criminal  die.  Viewed  from 
this  aspect,  and  only  as  a  solemn  warning  and  example,  it  is 
to  be  wished  that  this  last  and  saddest  offering  to  man's 
justice  could  have  been  made  less  hideous  than  it  was  yesterday. 
A  great  crowd  was  expected  round  the  gallows,  and,  indeed, 
a  great  crowd  came.  The  barriers  to  check  the  crowd  were 
begun  across  all  the  main  streets  which  lead  to  Newgate  as 
early  as  on  Friday  last,  and  all  through  Friday  night,  and  on 
Saturday  and  Sunday,  a  dismal  crowd  of  dirty  vagrants  kept 
hovering  around  them.  These  groups,  however,  were  not 
composed  of  the  real  regular  habitues  of  the  gallows,  but  of 
mere  young  beginners,  whose  immature  tastes  were  satisfied 
with  cat-calls  in  the  dark,  fondling  the  barriers,  or  at  most 
a  hurried  scrambling  throw  of  dirt  at  the  police  when  they 
dispersed  them.  It  was,  however,  different  on  Sunday  night. 
During  the  early  part  of  the  evening  there  was  a  crowd  as 
much  of  loungers  as  of  drunken  men,  which  stood  the  miser- 
able drizzle  with  tolerable  patience,  while  the  public-houses 
were  open  and  flared  brightly  through  the  mist.  But  at 
eleven  o'clock  a  voluntary  weeding  of  the  throng  commenced. 
The  greater  part  of  the  rough  mass  moved  off,  leaving  the 
regular  execution  crowd  to  take  their  early  places.  For  a 
little  time  there  seemed  something  which  was  not  alone  con- 
fusion but  indecision  in  the  throng,  till  the  dirty  chaos  settled 
itself  down  at  last,  and  while  noisy  groups  went  whooping 
and  wrangling  away,  a  thick,  dark,  noisy  fringe  of  men  and 
women  settled  like  bees  around  the  nearest  barriers,  and 
gradually  obliterated  their  close  white  lines  from  view.  It 
was  a  clear,  bright  moonlight  night.  Yet  though  all  could 
see  and  well  be  seen,  it  was  impossible  to  tell  who  formed  the 
170 


Appendix  III. 


staple  part  of  this  crowd  that  gathered  there  so  early.  There 
were  well  dressed  and  ill  dressed,  old  men  and  lads,  women 
and  girls.  Many  had  jars  of  beer ;  at  least  half  were  smoking, 
and  the  lighting  of  fusees  was  constant,  though  not  more 
constant  than  the  cries  and  laughter,  as  all  who  lit  them  sent 
them  whirling  and  blazing  over  the  heads  into  the  thicker 
crowd  behind.  Occasionally  as  the  rain,  which  fell  heavily 
at  intervals,  came  down  very  fast,  there  was  a  thinning  of  the 
fringe  about  the  beams,  but,  on  the  whole,  they  stood  it  out 
very  steadily,  and  formed  a  thick  dark  ridge  round  the 
enclosure  kept  before  the  Debtors'  door,  where  Muller  was 
to  die.  This  was  at  one  o'clock,  when  the  moon  was  bright 
and  the  night  very  clear  indeed,  and  everything  could 
be  seen  distinctly.  Newgate  was  black  enough  in  its  blind 
massiveness,  except  at  one  little  point  high  over  the  walls, 
where  one  window  in  the  new  wing  showed  a  little  gleam 
of  light,  to  which  it  seemed  the  crowd  was  never  tired  of 
pointing  as  the  spot  where  Muller  lay  in  his  condemned  cell. 
Truly  enough,  it  had  been  known  outside  where  he  was  kept, 
and  this  miserable  flicker  in  the  black  outline  of  the  great 
gaol,  which  only  marked  one  wide  division  of  its  wards  where 
Muller  was  imprisoned,  became  the  centre  of  all  eyes,  or  at 
least  of  very  many.  That  all  were  not  so  occupied  in  gazing 
was  at  least  to  be  surmised,  for  every  now  and  then  came 
a  peculiar  sound,  sometimes  followed  by  the  noise  of  struggling, 
almost  always  by  shouts  of  laughter,  and  now  and  then  a 
cry  of  "  Hedge."  What  this  meant  none  then  knew  from 
merely  looking  out  upon  the  dismal  crowd,  which  seemed  to 
writhe  and  crawl  among  themselves.  As  day  dawned,  how- 
ever, all  lookers-on  understood  it  better.  It  is  very  cheap 
morality  to  go  to  the  "  ring's  "  side  and  proclaim  the  brutality 
of  prize  fights,  or  from  beneath  the  gallows  tree  to  preach 
forth  upon  the  demoralising  effect  of  public  executions;  but 
still  the  truth  is  the  truth,  and  how  the  mob  of  yesterday 
behaved  must  be  told.  As  we  have  said,  as  the  showers  came 
more  or  less  heavily,  so  the  crowd  thinned  or  thickened  in 
its  numbers;  but  there  was  always  enough  to  mark,  like  the 
lines  of  a  massive  grave,  where  the  drop  was  to  be  brought 
in.  From  its  great  quadrangle  the  sightseers  never  moved, 
but  from  hour  to  hour,  almost  from  minute  to  minute,  grew 
noisier,  dirtier,  and  more  dense.  Till  three  o'clock  it  was 
one  long  revelry  of  songs  and  laughter,  shouting,  and  often 
quarrelling,  though,  to  do  them  more  justice,  there  was  at 
least  till  then  a  half -drunken,  ribald  gaiety  among  the  crowd 
that  made  them  all  akin.  Until  about  three  o'clock  not  more 
than  some  four  thousand,  or  at  the  most  five  thousand,  were 
assembled,  and  over  all  the  rest  of  the  wide  space  the  white, 
unoccupied  barriers  showed  up  like  a  network  of  bones  above 


Franz    Muller. 

the  mud.  But  about  three  the  workmen  came  to  finish  the 
last  barriers,  after  the  scaffold  had  been  carried  to  the  Debtors' 
door,  and  from  that  time  the  throng  rapidly  increased  in 
numbers.  Some  one  attempted  to  preach  in  the  midst  of  the 
crowd,  but  his  voice  was  soon  drowned  amid  much  laughter. 
Then  there  was  another  lull,  not,  indeed,  of  quiet,  but 
at  least  a  lull  from  any  pre-eminent  attempt  at  noise, 
though  every  now  and  then  it  was  broken  by  that 
inexplicable  sound  like  a  dull  blow,  followed  as  before 
always  by  laughing,  sometimes  by  fighting.  Then,  again, 
another  man,  stronger  in  voice,  and  more  conversant  with 
those  he  had  to  plead  before,  began  the  old  familiar  hymn 
of  "  The  Promised  Land."  For  a  little  time  this  man  sang 
alone,  but  at  last  he  was  joined  by  a  few  others,  when 
another  and  apparently  more  popular  voice  gave  out  some 
couplet  in  which  at  once,  and  as  if  by  magic,  the  crowd  joined 
with  the  chorus  of — 

"Oh,    my, 
Think,   I've  got  to  die," 

till  this  again  was  substituted  by  the  song  of 
"Muller,    Muller, 
He's  the  man." 

All  these  vocal  efforts,  however,  were  cut  short  by  the  dull 
rumbling  sound  which,  amid  cheers,  shouts,  whooping,  clapping 
of  hands,  hisses,  and  cries  of  "  Why  wasn't  it  brought  out 
for  Townley?"*  heralded  the  arrival  of  the  dirty  old  gallows. 
This  was,  for  the  time,  a  great  diversion,  and  the  crowd 
cheered  or  hissed  in  parts,  or  as  the  humour  took  them,  while 
the  horses  were  removed,  and  the  rumbling  black  box  was 
worked  back  slowly  and  with  difficulty  against  the  door  of  the 
gaol.  The  shouts  and  obscene  remarks  which  were  uttered 
as  the  two  upright  posts  were  lifted  into  their  places  were  bad 
enough,  but  they  were  trifles  as  compared  with  the  comments 
which  followed  the  slow  efforts  of  the  two  labourers  to  get 
the  cross  beam  into  its  place.  At  last  this  was  finished, 
and  then,  amid  such  yells  as  only  such  sightseers,  and  so 
disappointed,  could  give  vent  to,  a  strong  force  of  police  filed 
in  and  took  their  places,  doubly  lining  the  enclosure  round 
the  drop,  right  before  the  foremost  of  the  crowd  who  had 
kept  their  places  through  wet  and  dry  since  Sunday  night. 


*  George  Victor  Townley  was  sentenced  to  death  by  Baron  Martin  at  the 
Derby  Assizes  on  12th  December,  1863,  for  the  murder  of  Miss  Goodman 
from  motives  of  jealousy.  He  was  respited  on  the  suggestion  that  he  was 
insane,  but,  on  further  inquiry,  was  found  not  to  be  insane,  and  his 
sentence  commuted  to  one  of  penal  servitude  for  life.  There  is  a  pub- 
lished report  of  his  trial  and  an  account  of  it  in  the  "  Annual  Register" 
for  1863. 

172 


Appendix  III. 


Then,  as  every  minute  the  day  broke  more  and  more  clear, 
the  crowd  could  be  seen  in  all  the  horrible  reality  in  which 
it  had  been  heard  throughout  the  long,  wet  night.  All  the 
wide  space  in  front  of  Newgate  was  packed  with  masses  within 
the  barriers,  and  kept  swaying  to  and  fro  in  little  patches, 
while  beyond  these  again,  out  to  St.  Sepulchre's  and  down 
towards  Ludgate  Hill,  the  mob  had  gathered  and  was  gather- 
ing fast.  Among  the  throng  were  very  few  women;  and 
even  these  were  generally  of  the  lowest  and  poorest  class,  and 
almost  as  abandoned  in  behaviour  as  their  few  better-dressed 
exceptions.  The  rest  of  the  crowd  was,  as  a  rule,  made  up 
of  young  men,  but  such  young  men  as  only  such  a  scene 
could  bring  together — sharpers,  thieves,  gamblers,  betting 
men,  the  outsiders  of  the  boxing  ring,  bricklayers'  labourers, 
dock  workmen,  German  artisans,  and  sugar  bakers,  with  a 
fair  sprinkling  of  what  may  be  called  as  low  a  grade  as  any 
of  the  worst  there  met — the  rakings  of  the  cheap  singing  halls 
and  billiard  rooms,  the  fast  young  "  gents  "  of  London.  But 
all,  whether  young  or  old,  seemed  to  know  nothing,  fear 
nothing,  to  have  no  object  but  the  gallows,  and  to  laugh, 
curse,  or  shout,  as  in  this  heaving  and  struggling  forward 
they  gained  or  lost  in  their  strong  efforts  to  get  nearer  to 
where  Muller  was  to  die.  Far  up  even  into  Smithfield  the 
keen,  white  faces  rose  rank  above  rank,  till  even  where  the 
houses  were  shrouded  in  the  thick  mist  of  the  early  dawn, 
the  course  of  streets  could  be  traced  by  the  gleam  of  the  faces 
alone,  and  all,  from  first  to  last,  from  nearest  to  furthest, 
were  clamouring,  shouting,  and  struggling  with  each  other  to 
get  as  near  the  gibbet  as  the  steaming  mass  of  human  beings 
before  them  would  allow.  Then,  and  then  only,  as  the  sun 
rose  clearer  did  the  mysterious,  dull  sound,  so  often  men- 
tioned, explain  itself  with  all  its  noises  of  laughter  and  of 
fighting.  It  was  literally  and  absolutely  nothing  more  than 
the  sound  caused  by  knocking  the  hats  over  the  eyes  of  those 
well-dressed  persons  who  had  ventured  among  the  crowd, 
and,  while  so  "  bonneted,"  stripping  them  and  robbing  them 
of  everything.  None  but  those  who  looked  down  upon  the 
awful  crowd  of  yesterday  will  ever  believe  in  the  wholesale, 
open,  broadcast  manner  in  which  garrotting  and  highway 
robbery  were  carried  on.  We  do  not  now  speak  of  those  whom 
the  mere  wanton  mischief  of  the  crowd  led  to  "  bonnet  "  as 
they  passed,  or  else  to  pluck  their  hats  off  their  heads  and  toss 
them  over  the  mob,  amid  roars  and  shouts  of  laughter,  as 
they  came  from  all  sides  and  went  in  all  directions,  till  some- 
times even  they  fell  within  the  enclosure  round  the  drop,  and 
were  kicked  under  the  gallows  by  the  police.  The  propriety 
of  such  an  amusement  at  such  a  time  admits  of  question,  to 
say  the  least,  even  among  such  an  audience.  But  even  then 


Franz    Muller. 

rough  play  sinks  into  harmlessness  beside  the  open  robbery 
and  violence  which  yesterday  morning  had  its  way  virtually 
unchecked  in  Newgate  Street.  There  were  regular  gangs, 
not  so  much  in  the  crowd  itself  within  the  barriers  as  along 
the  avenues  which  led  to  them,  and  these  vagrants  openly 
stopped,  "  bonneted,"  and  sometimes  garrotted,  and  always 
plundered  any  person  whose  dress  led  them  to  think  him  worth 
the  trouble;  the  risk  was  nothing.  Sometimes  their  victims 
made  a  desperate  resistance,  and  for  a  few  minutes  kept  the 
crowd  around  them  violently  swaying  to  and  fro  amid  the 
dreadful  uproar.  In  no  instance,  however,  could  we  ascertain 
that  "  police  "  was  ever  called.  Indeed,  one  of  the  solitary 
instances  in  which  they  interfered  at  all  was  where  their  aid 
was  sought  from  some  houses,  the  occupants  of  which  saw 
an  old  farmer  who,  after  a  long  and  gallant  struggle  with  his 
many  assailants,  seemed,  after  having  been  robbed,  to  be  in 
danger  of  serious  injury  as  well.  This,  however,  about  the  farmer 
is  a  mere  episode ;  the  rule  was  such  robbing  and  ill-treatment 
as  made  the  victims  only  too  glad  to  fly  far  from  the  spot 
where  they  had  suffered  it,  and  who,  if  even  they  ventured  on 
giving  any  information  to  the  police,  could  hope  for  no  redress 
in  such  a  crowd.  Such  were  the  open  pastimes  of  the  mob 
from  daylight  till  near  the  hour  of  execution,  when  the  great 
space  around  the  prison  seemed  choked  with  its  vast  multitude. 
Latterly  nearly  fifty  thousand  people  were  crammed  between 
the  walls  of  this  wide  thoroughfare.  Wherever  the  eye  could 
rest  it  found  the  same  dim  monotony  of  pale  but  dirty  faces, 
which  seemed  to  waver  as  the  steam  of  the  hot  crowd  rose  high. 
At  last,  when  it  was  near  towards  eight  o'clock,  there  came 
shouts  of  "  hats  off,"  and  the  whole  mass  commenced,  amid 
cries  and  struggles,  to  wriggle  to  and  fro  as  the  bell  of  New- 
gate began  to  toll,  not  as  on  Sunday  inside  the  prison,  loud 
upon  the  ear  of  the  fast  dying  man,  but  with  a  muffled  and 
foggy  boom  that  never  would  have  quieted  the  yells  of  that 
fierce  mob,  but  that  they  somehow  seemed  to  yearn  and  listen 
always  for  any  token  of  the  last  scene  yet  to  come. 

Inside  the  prison,  meanwhile,  the  scene  had  been  very 
different.  On  Sunday  evening,  about  ten  o'clock,  Mr.  Sheriff 
Dakin  paid  a  last  visit  to  the  prisoner  in  his  cell,  and  before 
leaving  he  again  exhorted  him  with  much  kindness  and  earnest- 
ness, as  he  had  done  on  previous  occasions  since  his  conviction, 
not  to  leave  the  world  with  a  lie  in  his  mouth  if  he  was  really 
guilty.  Laying  his  hand  upon  a  Bible  which  the  convict  had 
been  reading,  Mr.  Dakin  reminded  him  that  the  promises  of 
forgiveness  it  contained  all  assumed  repentance  and  confession. 
Muller  listened  kindly  to  the  adjurations  of  the  Sheriff,  but 
made  no  response.  After  Mr.  Dakin  had  gone  the  convict 
remarked  to  one  of  the  warders  placed  over  him  that  man 

174 


Appendix  III. 


had  no  power  to  forgive  sins,  and  that  it  was  of  no  use  con- 
fessing to  him.  In  this  state  of  mind  he  denied  the  crime 
almost  to  the  very  last.  He  retired  to  rest  at  half-past  ten, 
and  slept  soundly  for  about  four  hours,  but  was  anxious  and 
uneasy  during  the  remainder  of  the  night.  He  rose  at  six 
o'clock  and  dressed.  Shortly  afterwards  Dr.  Louis  Cappel, 
minister  of  the  German  Lutheran  Chapel  in  Alie  Street,  Good- 
man's Fields,  joined  the  convict  in  his  cell,  and  remained  with 
him  until  the  last.  The  interval  was  chiefly  spent  in  religious 
exercises,  and  as  the  hour  fixed  for  the  execution  drew  near 
Dr.  Cappel  administered  the  sacrament  to  him,  having  first 
received  from  the  prisoner  an  assurance  that  he  was  innocent. 
During  the  interview,  which  lasted  nearly  two  hours,  the  con- 
vict frequently  clung  to  him  and  embraced  him,  observing, 
with  tears  in  his  eyes,  that  he  was  the  only  friend  he  had  then 
in  the  world,  and  expressing  his  fervent  gratitude  for  all  the 
kindness  that  he  had  shown  him.  About  half-past  seven 
o'clock  the  Sheriffs  of  London,  Mr.  Alderman  Dakin  and  Mr. 
Alderman  Besley,  with  the  Under-Sheriffs,  Mr.  Septimus  David- 
son and  Mr.  De  Jersey,  went  from  the  London  Coffee-house,  in 
Ludgate  Hill,  where  they  had  passed  the  night,  to  the  Court- 
house of  the  Old  Bailey,  where  they  remained  until  a  quarter 
to  eight.  There  they  were  met  by  Mr.  Jonas,  the  governor 
of  Newgate,  and  by  Mr.  Gibson,  the  prison  surgeon,  and, 
forming  themselves  into  a  procession,  the  authorities  passed 
from  the  sessions-house  to  the  gaol.  The  way  lay  through 
a  series  of  gloomy  passages,  some  of  them  subterranean  and 
dimly  lighted,  and  over  the  graves  of  malefactors  who  had 
been  buried  there  during  the  last  thirty  years.  Emerging 
at  length  into  an  open  courtyard  within  the  precincts  of  the 
prison,  they  paused  for  a  few  moments,  until  a  door  at  the 
further  end  of  the  courtyard  was  unexpectedly  opened  and 
Miiller  presented  himself,  attended  by  a  single  warder,  on 
the  way  from  his  cell  to  the  scaffold.  He  was  pale,  but 
quite  calm  and  collected,  he  walked  with  a  somewhat  measured 
pace,  with  his  hands  clasped  in  front  of  him  and  looking 
upward,  with  a  touching  expression  of  countenance.  He  was 
dressed  with  scrupulous  care  in  the  clothes  which  he  wore  on 
his  trial.  Since  then  he  had  improved  much  in  appearance, 
and  upon  the  whole  he  was  a  comely-looking  young  man. 
Without  the  slightest  touch  of  bravado  his  demeanour  at  this 
time  was  quiet  and  self-possessed  in  a  remarkable  degree. 
From  the  courtyard  he  passed  with  his  attendant  into  the 
press  room,  followed  by  the  authorities.  There  he  submitted 
himself  to  the  executioner,  and  underwent  the  process  of 
pinioning  with  unfaltering  courage.  While  all  about  him 
were  visibly  touched,  not  a  muscle  in  his  face  moved,  and  he 
showed  no  sign  of  emotion.  At  this  trying  moment  Dr. 

175 


Franz    Muller. 

Cappel  approached  and  endeavoured  to  sustain  him  again  and 
again.  Repeating  in  a  docile  and  affectionate  manner  words 
which  the  reverend  gentleman  put  into  his  mouth,  the  convict 
more  than  once  said,  "Christ,  the  Lamb  of  God,  have  mercy 
upon  me."  Dr.  Cappel  repeatedly  turned  an  anxious  look 
first  on  the  prisoner  and  then  on  those  about  him,  as  if  he 
felt  that  all  his  efforts  to  induce  him  to  confess  if  he  was 
really  guilty  were  about  to  be  unavailing.  As  the  executioner 
was  removing  his  neckerchief  and  shirt  collar,  on  the  arrange- 
ment of  which  some  care  had  evidently  been  bestowed,  the 
convict  moved  his  head  about  to  allow  of  that  being  done  the 
more  easily,  and  when  these  little  articles  of  personal  adorn- 
ment were  stuffed  within  the  breast  of  his  coat  he  remained 
callous  and  unmoved.  The  process  of  pinioning  over,  Mr. 
Jonas,  the  governor,  approached  the  convict  and  asked  him  to 
take  a  seat,  but  he  declined  the  offer,  and  remained  standing 
until  the  prison  bell  summoned  him  to  his  doom.  As  he 
remained  in  that  attitude  one  could  not  help  being  struck  with 
the  appearance  of  physical  strength  which  his  figure  denoted, 
and  still  more  with  his  indomitable  fortitude.  Though  short 
in  stature,  he  was  compactly  and  symmetrically  made,  and  there 
were  manifest  indications  of  strength  about  his  chest,  arms, 
hands,  and  the  back  part  of  his  neck  in  particular.  A  signal 
having  been  given  by  the  governor,  the  prisoner  was  escorted 
by  the  Sheriffs  and  Under-Sheriffs  to  the  foot  of  the  scaffold, 
the  Eev.  Mr.  Davis,  the  ordinary,  leading  the  way,  and  reading 
as  he  went  some  of  the  opening  verses  of  the  burial  service. 

At  the  little  porch  leading  to  the  gallows  the  Sheriffs  and 
officers  stopped.  Dr.  Cappel  alone  ascended  it  with  the 
guilty  man.  The  clergymen  at  once  took  their  places  on  the 
line  of  sawdust,  which  had  been  laid  to  mark  the  outline  of 
the  drop  which  falls,  and  which  without  such  a  signal  to  denote 
its  situation,  might  easily  have  been  overlooked  in  the  dusky 
black  of  the  whole  well-worn  apparatus.  Close  after  them, 
with  a  light,  natural  step,  came  Muller.  His  arms  were 
pinioned  close  behind  him;  his  face  was  very  pale  indeed, 
but  still  it  wore  an  easy  and,  if  it  could  be  said  at  such  a 
time,  even  a  cheerful  expression,  as  much  removed  from  mere 
bravado  as  it  seemed  to  be  from  fear.  His  whole  bearing  and 
aspect  were  natural.  Like  a  soldier  falling  into  the  ranks,  he 
took  with  a  steady  step  his  place  beneath  the  beam,  then, 
looking  up,  and  seeing  that  he  was  not  exactly  beneath  the 
proper  spot  whence  the  short,  black  link  of  chain  depended, 
he  shifted  a  few  inches,  and  then  stood  quite  still.  Following 
him  close  came  the  common  hangman,  who  at  once  pulling  a 
white  cap  over  the  condemned  man's  face,  fastened  his  feet 
with  a  strap,  and  shambled  off  the  scaffold  amid  low  hisses. 
While  this  was  being  done  Dr.  Cappel,  addressing  the  djing 
176 


Appendix  III. 


man,  said,  "  In  a  few  moments,  Miiller,  you  will  stand  before 
God;  I  ask  you  again,  and  for  the  last  time,  are  you  guilty 
or  innocent?"  He  replied,  "I  am  innocent."  Dr.  Cappel 
said,  "You  are  innocent?"  repeating  his  own  words  in  the 
form  of  a  question.  Miiller  answered,  "  God  Almighty  knows 
what  I  have  done."  Dr.  Cappel  said,  "  God  Almighty  knows 
what  you  have  done?"  again  repeating  the  convict's  own 
words;  "Does  God  know  that  you  have  done  this  particular 
deed?  "  Miiller  replied,  "  Yes ;  I  did  it,"  speaking  in  German, 
in  which  language  the  whole  conversation  was  conducted.  The 
German  expression  used  by  the  convict,  according  to  his  con- 
fessor, was  "  Ich  habe  es  gethan  "  ;  and  these  were  his  last 
words.  Almost  as  soon  as  these  words  had  left  his  lips  his 
kind  spiritual  guides  quitted  the  platform,  and  the  drop  fell. 
Those  who  stood  close  to  the  apparatus  could  just  detect  a 
movement  twice,  so  slight,  indeed,  that  it  could  scarcely  be 
called  a  movement,  but  rather  an  almost  imperceptible  muscu- 
lar flicker  that  passed  through  the  frame.  This  was  all,  and 
before  the  peculiar  humming  noise  of  the  crowd  was  over 
Muller  had  ceased  to  live,  though  as  he  hung  his  features 
seemed  to  swell  and  sharpen  so  under  the  thin  white  cap  that 
the  dead  man's  face  at  last  stood  out  like  a  cast  in  plaster. 
For  five  or  ten  minutes  the  crowd,  who  knew  nothing  of  his 
confession,  were  awed  and  stilled  by  this  quiet,  rapid  passage 
from  life  to  death.  The  impression,  however,  if  any  real 
impression,  if  it  was  beyond  that  of  mere  curiosity,  did  not  last 
for  long,  and  before  the  slight,  slow  vibrations  of  the  body 
had  well  ended  robbery  and  violence,  loud  laughing,  oaths, 
fighting,  obscene  conduct,  and  still  more  filthy  language  reigned 
round  the  gallows  far  and  near.  Such,  too,  the  scene  re- 
mained, with  little  change  or^  respite,  till  the  old  hangman  slunk 
again  along  the  drop  amid  hisses  and  sneering  inquiries  of 
what  he  had  had  to  drink  that  morning.  He,  after  failing 
once  to  cut  the  rope,  made  a  second  effort  more  successfully, 
and  the  body  of  Muller  disappeared  from  view.  So  greatly 
relieved  was  Dr.  Cappel  by  the  confession  that  he  rushed  from 
the  scaffold,  exclaiming,  "Thank  God!  Thank  God!"  and 
sank  down  in  a  chair,  completely  exhausted  by  his  own 
emotion.  After  recovering,  he  repeated  in  English,  in  the 
presence  of  the  Sheriffs  and  Under-Slieriffs  and  the  representa- 
tives of  the  newspaper  press,  of  whom  there  were  four,  what 
had  just  passed  between  him  and  the  convict,  precisely  as  it 
has  been  related  above.  From  this  it  will  be  seen  that  the 
convict  fenced  with  the  questions  as  to  his  guilt  down  to  the 
latest  moment  of  his  existence,  and  that  it  was  not  until  the 
last  ray  of  hope  had  fled  that  he  confessed.  Dr.  Cappel 
afterwards  stated  to  the  Sheriffs  that  in  his  interviews  with 
him  the  conversation  of  the  prisoner,  whenever  it  touched  upon 
x  177 


Franz    Muller. 

the  murder,  appeared  to  be  intended  to  produce  an  impression 
that  he  was  innocent.  There  were  other  sins  of  which  the  con- 
vict said  he  was  guilty,  but  whenever  he  was  pressed  with 
reference  to  the  murder  he  evaded  the  subject  in  some  way, 
or,  to  use  Dr.  Cappel's  own  words,  "  He  hid  that  particular 
sin  under  his  garment,  as  it  were."  Mr.  Sheriff  Dakin  asked 
if  the  last  words  used  by  the  convict,  "  I  did  it,"  conveyed  to 
the  mind  of  Dr.  Cappel  the  impression  that  he  alone  had  done 
it.  The  reverend  gentleman  replied  in  the  affirmative.  He 
added  that  the  hope  of  life  was  so  strong  in  him  that  he  appeared 
to  have  made  up  his  mind  not  to  confess  until  the  last  moment. 
That  at  least  was  his  impression.  He  even  declared  he  was 
innocent  while  the  sacrament  was  being  administered  to  him. 
Dr.  Cappel  went  on  to  say  to  the  authorities  that  he  exhorted 
him,  in  the  name  of  the  living  God,  if  he  had  committed  the 
murder,  not  to  deny  it ;  and  that  the  convict  made  no  reply. 
From  the  interviews  he  had  had  with  Muller  he  was  convinced, 
he  said,  he  was  not  a  common  murderer.  At  one  of  those 
interviews  he  said  to  the  convict  that  there  was  perhaps  a  loop- 
hole by  which  he  hoped  to  escape — that  if  he  had  a  hand  in 
the  deed  he  perhaps  yielded  to  a  sudden  temptation  to  take 
Mr.  Briggs's  watch,  and  that  in  a  struggle  the  deceased  fell 
out  of  a  carriage  or  that  he  pushed  him  out;  but,  however 
that  might  be,  he  (Dr.  Cappel)  believed  he  had  had  a  hand  in 
it.  To  this  the  convict  made  no  answer,  but,  evading  the 
question,  said  there  were  other  sins  of  which  he  was  guilty. 

The  time  has  been,  and  very  lately  too,  when  the  dress  in 
which  a  felon  died,  or  even  a  cast  of  his  distorted  features, 
would  have  been  worth  their  weight  in  gold.  But  nothing 
of  this  catering  for  the  wretched  curiosity  of  the  gallows  is 
permitted  now.  In  whatever  clothes  our  worst  felons  die, 
these  garments,  whether  good  or  bad,  are  burnt  before  their 
burial,  so  that  all  that  may  be  called  the  traces  of  their  crime 
are  destroyed  with  its  perpetrator.  There  is  something  as 
just  as  it  is  painful,  and  as  just  as  it  is  really  useful,  in  this 
cold  obloquy  of  human  nature  against  its  worst  dead.  There 
is  a  feeling  among  us  all  which  impels  us  to  reverence  the 
earth  in  which  the  bones  of  our  departed  kindred  rest,  but 
from  this  last  consolation  even  the  nearest  and  dearest  relatives 
of  murderers  are  debarred.  For,  for  those  that  die  upon  the 
scaffold,  there  is  no  tomb  but  Newgate — a  tomb  such  as  the 
few  who  love  the  felon  best  can  only  leave  with  shuddering 
hope  that  it  may  be  forgotten.  In  Newgate  there  is  no 
solemnity  of  burial ;  it  is  a  mere  hurried  covering  of  the  body 
of  one  who  was  not  fit  to  live  among  mankind.  So  with  the 
corpse  of  Muller.  It  had  died  publicly;  the  surgeon  had 
certified  to  its  shameful  death.  Towards  the  middle  of  the 
day  the  rough  deal  box  which  held  it  was  filled  with  shavings 
178 


Appendix  IV. 


and  quicklime,  and  the  warders  carried  it  to  the  hole  where 
it  had  to  be  thrust  under  the  flagstones  of  a  narrow,  bleak, 
gaol  pathway.  There,  below  the  massive  cross-barred  grat- 
ings which  almost  shut  out  the  light  of  day — there,  where  none 
pass  the  little  hidden  grave  save  those  who,  like  himself  must 
go  over  it  to  their  great  tomb,  the  body  of  Muller  rests.  In 
a  few  days  the  cruelty  and  singularity  of  his  great  crime 
will  be  commemorated  by  a  rough  "  M  "  cut  in  the  gaol  stone 
near  his  head,  just  as  Greenacre,  Good,  and  others  of  the 
worst  are  marked  beside  him.  In  that  foul  Aceldama  will 
his  bones  bleach  with  theirs  till  the  great  day,  when  he 
must  rise  with  them  and  answer  for  his  great  crime. 

It  is  understood  that  Muller  prepared  a  paper  some  days 
before  his  execution,  and  that  it  came  into  the  hands  of  the 
Sheriffs  on  Sunday  night.  This,  it  is  said,  was  not  a  con- 
fession, but  was,  on  the  contrary,  little  else  than  what  has 
already  been  made  public  at  different  times  by  the  German 
Legal  Protection  Society.  In  consequence  of  the  confession 
actually  made  by  Muller  it  is  understood  that  the  Sheriffs  did 
not  consider  it  just  to  other  persons  referred  to  in  the  paper 
to  make  any  use  of  it;  that  they  sealed  the  document,  and 
will  probably  make  some  communication  to  the  Court  of 
Aldermen  in  reference  to  it  to-day. 


APPENDIX   IV. 


CORRBSPONDHNOB  RELATING  TO  MuLLER's  CONFESSION  ON  THB 
SCAFFOLD. 

On  12th  March,  1887,  in  a  series  entitled  "  Celebrated  Crimes 
and  Criminals,"  then  appearing  in  the  Sporting  Times  under 
the  signature,  "  W.  M.,"  an  account  was  given  of  the  murder 
of  Mr.  Briggs  and  the  trial  and  execution  of  Muller.  The  pub- 
lication of  this  account  led  to  the  following  correspondence, 
which  commenced  in  the  Sporting  Times  of  19th  March  and 
was  continued  on  subsequent  dates. 


MULLER'S  DEATH. 
(To  the  Editor  of  the  Sporting  Times.) 

Dear  Corlett, — In  your  account  last  week  of  the  trial  and 
execution  of  Franz  Muller,  whose  defence,  you  may  remember, 

179 


Franz    Muller. 

was  entrusted  to  my  care,  you  state  that  Muller 's  last  words, 
in  reply  to  Dr.  Cappel's  question,  were,  "  Yes,  I  have  done  it." 
This  is  incorrect.  What  he  said  was,  "  Ich  habe."  He  had 
no  time  to  finish  the  sentence,  which  might  have  been  "  Ich 
habe  es  nicht  gethan"  (I  have  not  done  it).  His  innocence 
or  guilt,  therefore,  so  far  as  his  own  confession  is  concerned, 
must  ever  remain  a  moot  point.  Your  giving  publicity  to  this 
will  oblige,  yours  faithfully,  THO.  BEARD. 

10  Basinghall  Street. 


MULLIR'S  LAST  DYING  SPEECH  AND   CONFESSION. 
(To  the  Editor  of  the  Sporting  Times.) 

Sir, — I  am  astonished  that  Mr.  Beard  should  attribute  in- 
correctness to  the  version  published  in  the  Sporting  Times  of 
the  last  words  uttered  by  Muller,  and  which  are  now,  it  may 
be  said,  a  matter  of  history.  Surely  Dr.  Cappel,  who  stood 
close  to  the  wretched  culprit  on  the  scaffold  at  the  last  moment, 
is  the  only  man  entitled  to  speak  with  any  degree  of  certainty 
as  to  what  Muller  did  or  did  not  say?  And  what  is  Dr. 
Cappel's  version  1  I  would  respectfully  refer  Mr.  Beard  to  the 
Times  newspaper  of  22nd  and  24th  November,  1864.  In  the 
former  is  a  letter  from  Dr.  Cappel  to  the  Hermann,  giving 
Miiller's  last  words  verbatim,  and  as  they  were  given  in  my 
recent  article.  The  next  day  Dr.  Cappel  himself  addressed 
the  Times  as  follows  :  — 

"  Sir, — In  answer  to  the  letter  signed,  '  The  Writer  of  the 
Notes,'  in  the  columns  of  the  Times  of  to-day,  I  beg  to  say 
that  your  reporter,  after  the  execution,  carefully  took  down  the 
last  words  of  Muller  from  my  own  lips,  and  that  they  were 
correctly  given  in  your  journal  of  Tuesday,  the  15th  inst., 
where  they  are  stated  to  have  been,  '  Yes,  I  did  it.'  The 
account  given  to  me  by  the  editor  of  the  Hermann  corresponds 
exactly  with  that  of  the  Times. — I  am,  sir,  your  obedient 
servant,  "  Louis  CAPPEL,  D.D. 

"  November  23." 

This  letter,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  terminated  the  controversy, 
such  as  it  was,  and  it  would  probably  interest  many  others 
besides  myself  if  Mr.  Beard  would  tell  us  what  grounds  he  has 
for  saying,  with  such  apparent  confidence,  that  Miiller's  inno- 
cence or  guilt,  so  far  as  his  own  confession  is  concerned,  must 
ever  remain  a  moot  point. — Yours  faithfully,  W.  M. 

1 80 


Appendix  IV. 

MULLER'S  LAST  WORDS. 
(To  the  Editor  of  the  Sporting  Times.) 

Dear  Corlett, — Before  your  correspondent,  "  W.  M.,"  takes 
exception  to  my  correction,  may  I  ask  him  to  reconcile  the 
various  statements  he  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Muller?  In  your 
issue  of  March  12th  it  was,  "Yes,  I  have  done  it";  on  the 
19th,  "Yes,  I  did  it";  and,  turning  to  Dr.  C'appel's  letter, 
to  which  he  refers  me,  I  find  Muller  did  not  speak  in  English 
at  all,  but  in  German.  When  "  W.  M."  has  made  up  his 
mind  what  Muller  did  say,  he  shall  have  the  reply  of  yours 
faithfully,  THOS.  BEARD. 

10  Basinghall  Street,  London,  E.C. 


MULLER'S  LAST   DYING   SPEECH  AND   CONFESSION. 
(To  the  Editor  of  the  Sporting  Times.) 

Sir, — I  had  hoped  that  my  "  last  words  "  respecting  Muller's 
"  last  words  "  had  already  been  tolerably  explicit;  but,  as  Mr. 
Beard  asks  me  to  "  make  up  my  mind  "  as  to  what  they  were, 
I  must  crave  space  for  another  letter. 

In  the  account  I  wrote  in  the  Sporting  Times  of  March  12th, 
I  said  that  those  words*  (being  interpreted)  were,  "  Yes,  I  have 
done  it."  Of  course  I  know  the  conversation  was  in  German, 
and  I  said  so  in  the  article.  Surely  Mr.  Beard  must  know  that 
the  German  words,  "  Ich  habe  es  gethan,"  are  as  equally  cor- 
rectly translated  by  "  I  have  done  it  "  as  by  "  I  did  it  "1  In 
one  letter  Dr.  Cappel  uses  the  first,  and  in  the  other  the  second 
expression.  But  the  words  are  exactly  synonymous,  and  it 
seems  to  me  mere  hair-splitting  on  Mr.  Beard's  part  to  attempt 
to  establish  any  distinction  between  them. 

I  append  a  letter  from  Muller's  spiritual  adviser  to  the 
editor  of  the  Hermann,  published  in  the  Times  of  November 
22nd,  1864,  and  can  only  again  ask  Mr.  Beard  to  substantiate 
his  assertion  that  I  was*  incorrect,  and  that  Muller  might  have 
said,  "  Ich  habe  es  nicht  gethan,"  a  hypothesis  in  support  of 
which  I  have  failed  to  discover  anything  in  the  correspondence 
of  the  period;  for,  if  Dr.  Cappel  was  not  in  the  best  position 
to  hear  the  last  words  uttered  by  Muller,  who,  may  I  ask,  was? 
—Yours  faithfully,  W.  M. 

ill 


Franz    Muller. 

Honoured  Editor, — I  hereby  discharge  the  duty  intrusted  to 
me  by  Franz  Muller  shortly  before  his  death,  of  thanking  the 
German  Legal  Protection  Society  for  the  efforts  they  made  to 
save  him.  At  the  last  moment  the  unhappy  man  admitted  his 
guilt,  with  a  firm,  clear  voice,  and  in  the  full  possession  of  his 
senses ;  and  it  has  all  the  more  signification  because  of  the  care- 
fully chosen  words  he  used.  The  last  words  exchanged  between 
him  and  me  on  the  scaffold  are  as  follow :  — 

Question — "  Muller,  in  a  few  minutes  you  will  stand  before 
your  God.  I  ask  you  again,  and  for  the  last  time,  are  you 
guilty  or  innocent?  "  (Miiller,  in  wenigen  Augenblicken  stehen 
Sie  vor  Gott;  Ich  frage  Sie  nochmals  und  zum  letzten  Male,  sind 
Sie  schuldig  oder  unschuldig?) 

Answer — "I  am  innocent"  (Ich  bin  unschuldig). 

Question — ' '  You  are  innocent  1 ' '  (Sie  sind  unschuldig  ?) 

Answer — "  God  knows  what  I  have  done  "  (Gott  weiss  was 
Ich  gethan  habe). 

Question — "God  knows  what  you  have  done;  does  he  also 
know  if  you  have  committed  this  crime?  "  (Gott  weiss  was  Sie 
gethan  haben ;  weiss  Er  auch  dass  Sie  dies  Verbrechen  gethan 
haben  ?) 

Answer — "  Yes,  I  have  done  it  "  (Ja,  Ich  habe  es  gethan). 

An  hour  and  a  half  before  his  execution  Muller  had  declared 
himself  innocent.  I  then  told  him  that  I  would  not  press  him 
further,  but  that  my  last  words  to  him  would  be,  "  Are  you 
guilty  or  innocent?  "  With  an  earnest  and  passive  look  he 
remained  one  or  two  minutes  silent,  standing  before.  He  then 
suddenly  cried  out,  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  and  throwing  his 
arms  round  my  neck,  "  Do  not  leave  me;  remain  with  me  to 
the  last."  I  judged  by  this  that  he  had  determined  to  make 
a  confession.  That  this  resolution  was  formed  only  at  the 
last  moment  is  quite  in  keeping  with  the  firmness  of  his  strange 
character,  which  kept  steadily  to  a  denial  of  the  crime  with 
friend  and  enemy  until  the  very  last  glimmering  of  hope  had 
disappeared;  and  really  his  uniform  quietude  and  his  mild  and 
seeming  open  disposition  were  enough  to  enlist  the  sympathy 
of  any  one,  to  disarm  distrust,  and  to  deceive  completely  even 
the  most  experienced  judges  of  human  nature.  The  persistency 
of  Muller  in  his  denial  was  probably  owing  to  his  strong  love 
of  life,  and  his  seeming  frankness  partly  explains  itself  by  the 
supposition — of  which  I  am  fully  convinced — that  no  murder 
had  been  intended,  but  that  the  robbery  led  to  the  death  of  the 
victim.  Happily  for  him  that  even  with  his  last  breath  he  has 
atoned  for  his  heavy  sin  to  God,  to  men,  and  to  his  friends, 
through  the  acknowledgment  of  his  guilt.  I  never  could 
believe  in  his  complete  innocence,  but  after  he  had  repeatedly 
requested  it,  I  attended  him  in  his  cell,  with  the  honest  resolu- 
tion of  accomplishing  my  duty  with  forbearance  and  humanity, 
182 


Appendix  IV. 


and  I  carry  in  my  heart  the  grateful  conviction  that  I  refreshed 
the  unfortunate  man  in  his  sorrowful  hours  and  prepared  and 
strengthened  him  for  eternity.  The  proof  of  this  is  the  sincere 
love  he  had  for  me,  and  in  the  name  of  which  he  confided  to 
my  care  his  last  and  dearest  possessions — a  letter  to  his  father 
and  a  document  he  wrote  in  prison.  I  express  my  dearest 
thanks  to  all  my  German  countrymen  for  the  great  and  touch- 
ing proofs  of  sympathy  and  confidence  I  received  from  them 
on  all  sides.  But  to  the  German  Legal  Protection  Society  and 
you,  Mr.  Editor,  who,  penetrated  by  the  persuasions  of  his 
innocence,  have  spent  night  and  day  in  endeavouring  to  save 
Muller,  and  have  gladly  sacrificed  quietness,  sleep,  and  health 
— to  you,  before  all,  are  the  thanks  of  Germans  due,  and  in 
the  name  of  every  friend  of  humanity  I  warmly  press  your 
hand. — Highly  respectfully,  your  devoted, 

DR.  Louis  CAPPBL, 

Pastor  of  the  German  Lutheran  Church,  St.  George,  in 
Little  Alie  Street,  Goodman's  Fields. 


MULLER' s  LAST  WORDS. 
(To  the  Editor  of  the  Sporting  Times.) 

Sir, — As  I  happen  to  be  the  only  person  now  living  who  was 
on  the  scaffold  when  Muller  uttered  his  last  words,  I  am  able 
to  contribute  something  definite  to  the  controversy  which  the 
article  in  the  Sporting  Times  has  provoked.  I  remember  the 
whole  of  the  circumstances  as  if  they  had  occurred  last  week, 
and  I  believe  I  shall  never  forget  them. 

The  great  public  excitement  caused  by  the  murder  of  Mr. 
Briggs,  and  the  striking  incidents  connected  with  the  capture 
and  conviction  of  Muller,  was  followed  by  more  than  ordinary 
desire  to  be  present  at  the  hanging.  The  Sheriffs  made  un- 
usual preparations  outside  the  prison,  and  resolved  to  admit 
none  inside  beyond  those  whose  duty  it  was  to  be  there,  and 
three  representatives  of  the  Press.  The  three  selected  were 
the  late  Mr.  Sarlsby,  of  the  Times',  the  late  Mr.  Potter,  of 
the  Globe ;  and  Mr.  Clyatt,  who  was  to  represent  all  the  rest  of 
the  papers.  I  was  at  the  time  a  sub-editor  on  the  Globe,  and, 
as  I  felt  my  education  would  not  be  complete  without  having 
seen  a  hanging,  I  arranged  that  I  should  take  Mr.  Potter's 
place.  I  had  an  additional  incentive  in  the  fact  that  Mr. 
Gilpin's  perennial  motion  for  the  abolition  of  capital  punish- 
ment was  making  way,  and  most  people  supposed  that,  because 

183 


Franz    Muller. 

he  was  persistent,  he  would  succeed.  I  was  not  alone  in  think- 
ing it  likely  that  Muller  would  be  the  last  man  hanged  in  this 
country,  and  I  propose  to  tell  the  story  of  what  occurred  on 
that  memorable  morning. 

We  met  the  Sheriffs  in  the  London  Coffee-house,  on  Ludgate 
Hill,  at  seven  o'clock,  and  shortly  afterwards  went  round  by 
way  of  Paternoster  Row  to  a  hole  that  had  been  made  in  the 
wall,  through  which  we  passed  into  the  Court-house  of  the  Old 
Bailey.  After  a  short  halt  we  passed  into  the  chapel  yard  of 
the  prison,  and  there  we  came  in  view  of  Muller,  standing  beside 
his  gaoler,  uncovered  and  apparently  unconcerned,  waiting  for 
us.  The  grey  light  of  the  chill  November  morning  gave  the 
pair  a  weird  look  as  they  stood  on  the  other  side  of  an  open 
doorway,  for  it  was  impossible  to  divest  the  scene  of  the  know- 
ledge of  what  was  about  to  happen.  As  we  approached,  the 
gaoler  led  the  way  with  Muller  through  other  courts,  and  then 
through  a  corridor  with  black  stone  walls  on  each  side,  stone 
pavement  underfoot,  and  an  iron  grating  overhead,  between  us 
and  the  sky.  I  have  often  wondered  since  whether  Muller  knew 
that  this  corridor  was  the  burial  place  of  those  who  were  hanged, 
and  the  place  where  he  would  be  buried  a  few  hours  afterwards, 
buried  in  quicklime  under  those  heavy  paving  stones,  with  no 
record  but  his  initials  rudely  carved  on  the  stone  wall,  and  that 
only  because  he  was  a  more  than  ordinarily  famous  murderer. 
From  this  grim  sepulchre  we  passed  to  the  Press  room,  a  small 
chamber,  low  in  the  ceiling,  and  very  much  like  a  kitchen,  with 
a  deal  table  and  some  wooden  chairs  in  it.  Here  we  met  Cal- 
craft,  and  the  duties  of  the  gaoler  were  at  an  end.  I  had  never 
seen  Calcraft  before,  and  I  was  very  much  struck  with  his 
benevolent  and  even  amiable  appearance.  His  snowy- white 
hair  and  beard,  and  his  quiet,  self-possessed  manner,  was  in 
ridiculous  contrast  to  everything  in  the  nature  of  violence,  and 
I  could  hardly  conceive  it  possible  that  one  of  us  dozen  people 
in  that  little  room  was  going  to  be  hanged  in  five  minutes. 
Calcraft,  however,  was  as  quick  in  his  movements  as  he  was 
noiseless.  Scarcely  had  Muller  been  placed  with  his  back  to 
Calcraft,  and  we  who  had  followed  him  arranged  ourselves  in 
a  half  circle  in  front  of  him,  than  Calcraft  had  buckled  a  broad 
leather  belt  round  Miiller's  waist.  Two  small  straps,  fixed 
to  this  belt  in  the  middle  of  the  back,  were  as  rapidly  passed 
round  the  man's  arms,  and  in  a  trice  his  elbows  were  fixed 
fast  to  his  sides.  Muller  clasped  his  hands  in  the  most  natural 
manner,  and  in  this  position  they  were  strapped  together  by  a 
pair  of  leather  handcuffs.  The  man  was  pinioned  past  re- 
demption ;  and  then  began  a  scene  that  gave  a  thorough  wrench 
to  my  nerves.  Calcraft,  still  noiseless  and  unimpassioned, 
was  moving  around  his  victim  with  ominous  precision.  The 
belt  was  tight,  the  arms  were  fixed,  the  hands  clasped,  and 
184 


Appendix  IV. 


the  whole  frame  at  his  mercy.  He  then  removed  the  necktie, 
and  after  that  the  collar.  With  gruesome  delicacy  he  tucked 
both  within  the  waistcoat,  and  Miiller  was  prepared.  "  You 
may  sit  down,"  said  Caloraft  quietly,  but  Miiller  declined. 
Cool  beyond  any  one  in  the  room,  unless  Calcraft  excelled 
him,  he  stood  with  his  short  round  neck  fully  exposed,  and 
well  placed  on  a  pair  of  broad  shoulders  and  a  firm,  round 
chest.  There  was  not  much  need  to  argue  the  question 
as  to  whether  Miiller  could  or  could  not  handle  poor  old  Mr. 
Briggs.  Muller  was  a  small  man,  but  he  was  the  personifica- 
tion of  strength,  and  with  a  jaw  that  meant  dogged,  resistless 
obstinacy  of  purpose.  He  did  not  appear  to  pay  much  heed 
to  Dr.  Cappel,  the  minister,  who  spoke  to  him  in  the  intervals 
of  the  pinioning,  and  he  listened,  apparently  without  concern, 
as  the  Lutheran  became  more  earnest  in  his  invocation  after 
the  preparations  were  complete.  Calcraft  left  the  room,  and 
we  all  guessed  where  he  had  gone  to.  It  was  at  that  time  I 
felt  as  if  a  little  more  callousness  would  have  served  me  well. 
To  be  a  passive  spectator  at  such  a  scene  is  not  a  sedative. 
The  imagination  will  not  leave  the  bare  neck  and  the  pinioned 
arms.  One  thinks  of  the  hangman  examining  his  rope  and 
the  hinges  and  bolts,  and  one  feels  a  terribly  eerie  feeling 
creeping  over  one.  I  had  to  take  myself  seriously  in  hand, 
and  I  had  resource  to  an  odd  expedient.  I  ate  a  piece  of 
biscuit,  and  the  distraction  carried  me  over  the  horrid  interval, 
which  was  made  all  the  more  impressive  by  the  constant  tolling 
of  the  bell  of  St.  Sepulchre's  Church.  Presently,  to  my  great 
relief,  Calcraft  reappeared,  and  the  action  was  renewed.  Dr. 
Cappel  stood  aside,  and  the  chaplain  of  the  gaol,  Mr.  Davis, 
led  the  way  to  the  scaffold,  reading  the  burial  service.  The 
journey  was  short,  and  those  who  remember  the  old  hanging 
days  know  that  the  scaffold  was  erected  outside  the  gaol  in  the 
Old  Bailey.  It  was  through  the  doorway,  known  as  the 
debtor's  entrance,  that  it  was  approached  from  the  prison,  and 
it  was  up  a  flight  of  about  ten  steps  that  Calcraft  led  Miiller. 
Mr.  Davis  remained  below,  his  duty  ended  there;  but  Dr. 
Cappel  followed  the  hangman  and  his  victim,  and  I  followed 
Dr.  Cappel.  No  one  else  went  up,  and  it  occurred  to  me  that 
perhaps  Mr.  Jonas,  the  governor  of  the  gaol,  to  say  nothing  of 
the  Sheriffs,  regarded  my  presence  on  the  scaffold  as  an  in- 
trusion; but  nothing  seemed  to  me  more  proper,  and  I  was 
well  repaid  for  my  temerity.  I  saw  the  people.  Far  as  the 
eye  could  reach,  to  Ludgate  Hill  on  the  one  hand  and  right 
away  to  Holborn  on  the  other,  the  entire  space,  broad  and 
distant  as  it  was,  presented  an  unbroken  mass  of  human  faces — 
types  of  every  unholy  passion  that  humanity  is  capable  of — 
a  seething  sea  of  hideous  brutality,  that  had  been  surging  over 
the  space  the  live  long  night,  and  was  now  almost  still  with 

185 


Franz    Muller. 

expectation.  The  mouths  of  the  myriad  of  grimy,  yellow 
faces  were  open,  and  all  the  thousands  of  eyes  were  upturned 
upon  the  spot  where  I  stood  with  an  intentness  that  was  more 
appalling  to  me  than  the  methodical  movements  of  Calcraft 
and  the  unimpassioned  attitude  of  Muller.  The  contrast  was 
marvellous.  The  hangman  was  curiously  busy.  He  passed 
a  strap  round  Muller 's  legs'  and  buckled  it;  he  put  the  rope 
round  Miiller's  neck,  and  tightened  the  slip  knot  just  under 
his  right  ear;  he  slipped  a  noose  at  the  other  end  of  the  rope 
over  an  iron  hook  depending  from  the  crossbeam  of  the  scaffold, 
and  last  of  all  he  pulled  a  dirty  yellow  bag  over  the  man's  head 
to  his  chin.  He  then  stood  aside,  and  the  conversation  about 
which  all  the  dispute  has  arisen  commenced  between  Dr.  Cappel 
and  Muller.  The  minister  stood  close  to  Muller,  with  his  feet 
on  the  very  edge  of  the  drop;  I  stood  just  behind  him,  but 
nearer  the  outside  of  the  scaffold.  The  conversation  was 
hurried.  On  Dr.  Cappel's  part  it  was  earnest  and  excited, 
but  Muller  preserved  the  same  stolid,  unimpassioned  manner 
that  had  characterised  his  attitude  throughout.  Calcraft,  I 
noticed,  disappeared  as  soon  as  they  began  to  speak,  and  I 
can  see  Dr.  Cappel  now  leaning  forward,  with  both  hands 
extended,  as  if  to  draw  Miiller's  words  to  him  as  the  drop  fell 
and  Muller  disappeared.  Calcraft  had  done  his  work  well. 
One  strong  convulsion  and  all  was  over.  But  Dr.  Cappel  didn't 
stay  to  see  this.  As  soon  as  he  recovered  from  the  surprise 
and  alarm  caused  by  the  unexpected  fall  of  the  drop  he  dashed 
down  the  stairs  with  his  hands  aloft,  and  shouting  as  he  ran, 
"Confessed,  confessed,  thank  God!"  After  one  more  look 
at  the  crowd,  now  a  roaring  tumult  swaying  to  and  fro,  I 
followed  close  at  his  heels,  and  the  whole  company  pressed 
round  him  in  the  chaplain's  room,  where  he  told  the  story  of 
Miiller's  last  words.  Three  times  he  repeated  the  story  within 
ten  minutes  of  the  scene  on  the  scaffold,  and  each  time  he  told 
it  I  took  down  his  words,  not  partly,  but  wholly  and  com- 
pletely, and  the  story  did  not  vary.  I  take  it  that  no  evidence 
can  be  clearer  of  what  Muller  said  than  what  was  thrice 
repeated,  by  the  only  man  who  heard  him,  immediately  after 
he  did  hear  him.  And  what  Dr.  Cappel  said  was  this — 

"  When  he  was  standing  on  the  drop,  and  all  was  ready,  I 
said,  '  In  a  few  moments  you  will  stand  before  God.  I  ask 
you  again,  and  for  the  last  time,  are  you  innocent  of  this 
crime? ' 

"  He  said,  '  I  am  innocent.' 

"  I  said,  '  You  are  innocent? ' 

"  And  he  said,  '  Yes,  I  am  innocent;  God  knows  what  I  have 
done.' 

"  I  said  this — '  God  knows  what  you  have  done,  but  knows 
He  that  you  have  done  this  particular  deed?  ' 
1 86 


Appendix  IV. 


"  And  then,  instead  of  answering  me  '  No,'  he  said,  '  Ich 
habe  es  gethan  '  ('  I  have  done  it '). 

"  He  had  confessed,  and  I  spoke  to  him — '  Christ  have 
mercy  upon  your  soul ' ;  and  I  believe  his  very  last  words  were 
as  he  fell,  '  My  God,  I  feel  sure  of  it.'  ' 

After  each  recital  of  this  story,  Dr.  Cappel  made  running 
comments  on  Muller 's  demeanour  and  previous  conversations  he 
had  with  him.  These  I  also  took  down,  and  the  tenour  of 
them  was  that  Mtiller  had  never  denied  unequivocally  that  he 
had  attacked  Mr.  Briggs ;  he  always  fenced  the  question,  and 
Dr.  Cappel's  theory  was  that  Mliller  declined  to  admit  himself 
guilty  of  murder  because  he  had  not  premeditated  it. 

Dr.  Cappel  evidently  afterwards  desired  to  make  the  con- 
fession a  little  more  definite  than  his  first  record  justified;  and 
in  his  subsequent  accounts  of  what  occurred  he  inserted  the 
word  "  Ja,"  or  "  Yes,"  before  the  "  I  have  done  it,"  making 
out  that  Muller  answered  "  Yes  "  to  his  question  whether  God 
knew  that  he  had  done  this  particular  deed.  In  his  original 
account  he  says,  "  Instead  of  answering  '  No,'  he  said,  '  I  have 
done  it.'  '  In  his  subsequent  accounts  he  seems  to  have 
assumed  that  Muller  said  "  Yes  "  because  he  did  not  say  "  No." 
In  this  Dr.  Cappel  was>  wrong. 

The  curious  will  find  in  the  record  of  the  execution  in  the 
Times  second  edition  a  true  version  of  the  story.  In  the  next 
day's  Times  the  "Yes  "  was  inserted,  so  that  it  is  probable 
Dr.  Cappel  may  have  thought  of  the  "  Yes  "  before  nightfall. 
I  am  certain  the  "  Yes  "  was  added,  because  it  happened  that 
Mr.  Sarlsby  did  not  take  down  Dr.  Cappel's  account  of  the 
matter.  I  read  my  notes  to  him  before  leaving  the  prison, 
and,  as  we  were  doing  so,  Dr.  Cappel  came  up,  and  not  only 
approved  their  accuracy  but  actually  wrote  the  important  sen- 
tence, "  Ich  habe  es  gethan,"  in  Mr.  Sarlsby's  notebook.  He 
did  not  write  "  Ja  "  before  it.  Still,  it  may  be  taken  that 
Muller  confessed  to  the  fact,  but  declined  to  admit  that  he  had 
committed  murder.  Dr.  Cappel's  words  were  as  I  have  set 
them  down,  and  every  one  can  construe  them  for  himself. — 
Yours,  &c.,  FREDERICK  WICKS. 

Glasgow. 


MULLER'S  LAST  WORDS. 
(To  the  Editor  of  the  Sporting  Times.) 

Sir, — I  have  read  with  much  interest  the  letter  of  my  old 
friend,  Mr.  Frederick  Wicks,  on  this  subject,  and  from  the 
accounts  which  my  late  father  (whose  name  you  misprint 

187 


Franz    Muller. 

Sarlsby)  used  to  give  of  the  incidents  of  the  execution,  I  can 
entirely  corroborate  all  that  Mr.  Wicks  so  ably  narrates.  As 
he  states,  the  Rev.  Dr.  Cappel  wrote  in  my  father's  notebook 
the  exact  words  in  German  which  had  fallen  from  Muller 
immediately  before  the  drop  fell — viz.,  "  Ich  babe  es  gethan." 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  Dr.  Cappel's  mind  this  amounted 
to  a  confession  by  Muller  of  his  guilt  of  Mr.  Briggs's  murder — 
a  confession  which  he  had  purposely  delayed  until  the  failure 
of  every  effort  for  a  reprieve  had  brought  him  to  the  very 
brink  of  eternity.  This  was  my  father's  fixed  impression  on 
the  matter,  and  perhaps  no  one  had  a  better  opportunity  of 
forming  a  judgment  upon  it. — Yours  truly, 

WILLIAM  J.  SOULSBY. 
75  Victoria  Street,  S.W. 


APPENDIX  V. 


SHORT  ACCOUNT  OF  THIS  JUDGES  AND  COUNSEL  ENGAGED  IN  THB 

CASE. 

SIR  JONATHAN  FREDERICK  POLLOCK  (1783-1870)  was  the  son 
of  David  Pollock,  saddler,  of  Charing  Cross,  and  brother 
of  Sir  David  Pollock,  Chief  Justice  of  Bombay,  and  Field 
Marshal  Sir  George  Pollock,  the  hero  of  the  Afghan  war,  in 
1842.  Frederick  Pollock  was  born  in  London  on  the  23rd 
of  September,  1783,  and  educated  at  St.  Paul's  and  Trinity 
College,  Cambridge.  He  was  Senior  Wrangler  in  1806,  and 
in  the  following  year  was  elected  Fellow  of  his  college.  He 
was  called  to  the  bar  in  1807,  at  the  Middle  Temple,  and 
joined  the  Northern  Circuit.  By  his  industry,  ability,  and 
wide  legal  knowledge  he  soon  acquired  a  very  large  practice 
both  in  London  and  on  circuit.  After  twenty  years  of 
ever-increasing  success  he  took  silk  in  1827,  and  in  1831  was 
elected  as  Tory  member  for  Huntingdon,  which  town  he  repre- 
sented continuously  until  his  elevation  to  the  bench.  Sir 
Robert  Peel  made  him  Attorney-General  in  1834,  and  again, 
when  he  resumed  office  in  1841.  Sir  Frederick  Pollock  held 
this  office  till  1844,  when  he  was  appointed  Lord  Chief  Baron 
of  the  Exchequer,  in  succession  to  Lord  Abinger,  and  sworn 
of  the  Privy  Council.  He  presided  over  the  Court  of  Ex- 
chequer for  twenty -two  years,  retiring  on  a  pension  in  1866, 
when  he  accepted  a  baronetcy.  His  judicial  career  was 
1 88 


Appendix  V. 


honourable  and  distinguished.  In  spite  of  his  deep  legal 
learning,  "  his  leaning  was  ever  to  the  side  of  substantial 
justice  rather  than  to  mere  technical  accuracy.  Kind,  gentle, 
and  courteous,  he  made  an  admirable  President  of  his  Court, 
and  there  was  no  judge  more  fitted  to  conduct  great  criminal 
trials  with  dignity  and  distinction."  It  fell  to  his  lot  to  preside 
over  four  famous  trials  for  murder :  those  of  the  Mannings 
for  the  murder  of  O'Connor,  in  1849;  of  Mullins,  for  the 
murder  of  Mrs.  Elmsley,  at  Stepney,  in  1860 ;  of  Muller ;  and 
of  Kohl,  for  the  Plaistow  Marshes  murder,  in  1865.  In  the 
obituary  notice  of  the  judge  in  the  Times,  the  writer  de- 
scribes how  at  Muller 's  trial  "  his  emphatic  eloquence  moved 
the  deepest  feelings  of  the  audience,  among  whom  every  sound 
was  hushed,  and  every  nerve  painfully  strained,  as  the  full 
force  of  some  apparently  trivial  point  of  evidence  was  pointed 
out,  and  its  bearing  explained  to  the  jury."  Pollock  survived 
his  retirement  for  four  years,  dying  of  old  age  on  the  23rd 
of  August,  1870.  He  was  then  eighty-seven.  Married 
twice,  the  Chief  Baron  had  eighteen  children,  distinguished 
among  them  being  Sir  William  Frederick  Pollock,  Queen's 
Remembrancer,  scholar,  and  man  of  letters,  and  Sir  Charles 
Edward  Pollock,  Baron  of  the  Exchequer  (1873-1897),  the  last 
survivor  of  these  now  extinct  dignitaries.  Among  the 
living  grandsons  of  the  Chief  Baron  who  have  achieved  dis- 
tinction in  various  walks  of  life  may  be  reckoned  Sir  Frederick 
Pollock,  Corpus  Professor  of  Jurisprudence,  Oxford,  1883-1903, 
and  a  well-known  writer  on  legal  subjects;  Walter  Herries 
Pollock,  critic  and  man  of  letters;  Ernest  Pollock,  K.C., 
member  for  Warwick  in  the  present  Parliament;  and  Dr. 
Bertram  Pollock,  ex -headmaster  of  Wellington,  now  Bishop  of 
Norwich. 

SIR  SAMUEL  MAKTIN  (1801-1883)  was  the  son  of  Samuel 
Martin  of  Culmore,  Co.  Londonderry;  he  was  born  in  1801. 
On  leaving  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  he  entered  Gray's  Inn  in 
1821 ;  he  was  called  to  the  bar  at  the  Middle  Temple  in  1830, 
after  practising  two  years  as  a  special  pleader.  He  was 
"  devil  "  to  Sir  Frederick  Pollock,  his  friend,  and  later,  in 
1838,  became  his  son-in-law.  He  joined  the  Northern  Circuit. 
A  good  commercial  lawyer,  he  won  his  first  great  success  as  an 
advocate  in  1839,  in  the  "  Bloomsbury  "  case,  in  which  he 
recovered  for  the  plaintiff,  Mr.  Ridsdale,  the  Ascot  Derby  stakes 
that  had  been  won  by  his  colt,  "  Bloomsbury,"  but  had 
been  refused  to  him  on  the  ground  of  a  misdescription  of  the 
horse.  Mr.  Martin  took  silk  in  1843,  and  entered  Parliament 
as  the  Liberal  member  for  Pontefract,  1847.  Three  years  later 
he  was  appointed  a  Baron  of  the  Exchequer.  He  sat  as  a 

189 


judge  for  twenty-four  years,  revered  for  his  practical  knowledge, 
good  sense,  and  pleasant  humour.  Severe  in  his  punishment 
of  crime,  his  severity  was  always  tempered  by  a  natural  kind- 
ness of  heart.  Increasing  deafness  alone  compelled  him  to 
retire  from  the  bench  in  1874,  when  he  was  sworn  of  the  Privy 
Council.  He  survived  his  retirement  eleven  years,  dying  on 
the  26th  of  January,  1883,  at  the  age  of  eighty-two.  His 
only  child,  a  daughter,  married  Mr.  Macnaghten,  who  in  1888 
was  created  a  Lord  of  Appeal,  and  still,  at  the  age  of  eighty- 
one,  continues  to  be  one  of  the  shining  lights  in  that  august 
tribunal. 

SIB  ROBERT  PORRETT  COLLIER,  first  Lord  Monkswell  (1817- 
1886),  was  the  elder  son  of  Mr.  John  Collier,  merchant,  of 
Plymouth.  After  being  educated  partly  at  Plymouth  and 
partly  under  private  tuition,  he  went  to  Trinity  College,  Cam- 
bridge. Ill-health  obliged  him  to  give  up  a  University  career. 
He  was  called  to  the  bar  at  the  Inner  Temple  in  1843, 
joined  the  Western  Circuit,  and  first  won  success  by  his  defence 
of  the  Brazilian  pirates,  at  Exeter,  in  1845.  He  was  appointed 
Recorder  of  Penzance,  and  entered  Parliament  as  Liberal 
member  for  Plymouth,  in  1852.  He  was  appointed  somewhat 
unexpectedly  Solicitor-General  in  1863.  When  the  Liberal 
Government  returned  to  office  in  1868  he  became  Attorney - 
General.  His  appointment  as  a  member  of  the  Judicial  Com- 
mittee of  the  Privy  Council,  in  1871,  excited  some  scandal,  not 
j  on  account  of  any  want  of  merit  on  his  part,  but  on  account  of 
the  circumstances  under  which  it  was  made.  By  the  Privy 
Council  Act  it  had  been  stipulated  that  two  of  the  members  of 
the  Judicial  Committee  should  be  chosen  from  among  the  judges 
of  the  superior  Courts'  at  Westminster.  In  order  to  technically 
fulfil  this  qualification,  Collier  was  appointed  to  a  puisne  judge- 

Iship  in  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas ;  he  held  this  office  for  only 
a  few  days,  sitting  in  the  ill-fitting  robes  of  his  predecessor; 
he  was  then  promoted  to  the  Privy  Council.  The  two  Chief 
Justices,  Cockbura  and  Bovill,  protested  strongly  against  such 
a  violation  of  the  dignity  of  the  judicial  bench,  and  the  matter 
was  taken  up  warmly  in  Parliament  by  Lord  Westbury  and 
Lord  Cairns.  At  the  same  time  no  question  was  ever  raised 
as  to  the  fitness  of  Collier  to  hold  the  position.  He  sat  on  the 
Judicial  Committee  until  his  death,  which  occurred  at  Grasee 
on  the  27th  of  October,  1886.  In  1885  he  had  been 
created  a  peer,  taking  the  title  of  Lord  Monkswell.  In  addition 
to  his  high  legal  reputation,  Lord  Monkswell  was  an  accom- 
plished scholar,  a  writer  of  verse,  and  a  painter.  His  son,  the 
second  Lord  Monkswell,  who  died  in  1909,  was  Chairman  of 
the  London  County  Council  in  1903,  and  another  son,  the  Hon. 
John  Collier,  is  the  well-known  artist. 
190 


Appendix  V. 


WILLIAM  BALLANTINB  (1812-1887)  was  the  eldest  son  of 
William  Ballantine,  police  magistrate;  he  was  educated  at  St. 
Paul's  and  Ashburnham  House,  Blackheath,  and  called  to 
the  bar  at  the  Inner  Temple,  1834.  He  joined  the  Home 
Circuit  and  the  Central  Criminal  Court.  One  of  his  first  suc- 
cesses was  his  cross-examination,  in  a  suit  in  the  House  of 
Lords,  to  annul  the  marriage  of  an  heiress,  Esther  Field,  on 
the  ground  of  coercion  and  fraud,  in  the  year  1848,  when  he 
was  opposed  alone  to  Sir  Fitzroy  Kelly  and  a  number  of  dis- 
tinguished counsel.  From  that  moment  his  professional  pro- 
gress was  steady,  and  he  soon  acquired  a  reputation  as  one 
of  the  most  successful  advocates  of  his  day.  In  1856  he  was 
made  Serjeant  at  Law,  but  it  was  not  till  1863  that  he  obtained 
from  Lord  Westbury  his  patent  of  precedence.  His  name  is 
connected  with  almost  all  the  causes  celebres  of  this  period.  He 
was  counsel  for  the  Tichborne  claimant  in  the  original  action 
for  ejectment,  after  which  he  was  wise  enough  to  withdraw 
from  the  case.  In  1875  he  went  to  India  at  a  fee  of  £10,000  to 
defend  the  Gaekwar  of  Baroda,  who  was*  accused  of  attempting 
to  poison  the  British  Resident.  He  succeeded  in  procuring  the 
acquittal  of  his  client.  This  case  was  the  last  of  his  great 
successes.  Not  long  after  he  retired  from  active  work  at 
the  bar,  and  died  in  comparative  poverty.  In  1882  he  pub- 
lished his  "  Experiences  of  a  Barrister's  Life,"  a  careless  and 
disappointing  work.  Ballantine's  gifts,  particularly  as  a 
cross-examiner,  were  remarkable,  his  knowledge  of  human  nature 
astute.  Had  he  possessed  greater  stability  of  character,  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  he  would  have  risen  to  a  place  of  far 
higher  dignity  in  his  profession.  Montagu  Williams,  who 
knew  him  well,  thus  describes  him — "  The  Serjeant  was  a 
very  extraordinary  man.  He  was  the  best  cross-examiner  of 
his  kind  that  I  have  ever  heard,  and  the  quickest  at  solving 
facts.  It  was  not  necessary  for  him  to  read  his  brief;  he 
had  a  marvellous  faculty  for  picking  up  a  case  as  it  went 
along  or  learning  all  the  essentials  in  a  hurried  colloquy  with  his 
junior.  There  is  no  point  that  the  Serjeant  might  not  have 
attained  in  his  profession  had  he  only  possessed  more  ballast. 
He  was,  however,  utterly  reckless,  generous  to  a  fault,  and 
heedless  of  the  future.  His  opinion  of  men  could  never  be 
relied  upon,  for  he  praised  or  blamed  them  from  day  to  day, 
just  as  they  happened  to  please  or  annoy  him.  He  often  said 
bitter  things,  but  never,  I  think,  ill-naturedly.  His  fault  was 
probably  that  he  did  not  give  himself  time  to  think  before  he 
spoke."  Montagu  Williams  adds  that  Ballantine  had  great 
charm  of  manner,  was  never  afraid  of  a  "  dead  "  case,  and 
"  was  always  cheery  and  bright." 

JAMBS  HANNBN  (1821-1894)  was  the  son  of  James  Hannen, 
wine  merchant.     He  was  educated  at  St.   Paul's  and  Heidel- 

191 


, 


Franz    Muller. 

berg  University,  was  called  to  the  bar  in  1848,  and  joined 
the  Home  Circuit.  After  a  successful  career  as  a  junior,  he  was 
appointed  Attorney-General's  "  devil,"  in  1863,  and  in  1865 
stood  unsuccessfully  for  Parliament  as  a  Liberal  candidate.  He 
was  appointed  a  puisne  judge  of  the  Court  of  Queen's  Bench, 
and  knighted  in  the  year  1868.  In  1872  he  was  transferred  as 
judge  to  the  Court  of  Probate  and  Divorce,  and  in  1875  became 
President  of  the  Probate,  Divorce,  and  Admiralty  Division  of 
the  High  Court  of  Justice.  It  was  while  President  of  the 
Divorce  Court  that  he  was  placed  at  the  head  of  the  Parnell 
Commission,  with  Sir  John  Day  and  Sir  A.  L.  Smith.  He  ful- 
filled the  difficult  duties  of  that  place  with  tact,  dignity,  and 
discretion.  In  1891  he  was  made  a  Lord  of  Appeal,  and  held 
that  office  until  his  death,  in  1894.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say 
that  no  judge  has  left  behind  him  a  higher  reputation  for  fair- 
ness, dignity,  and  learning. 

SIB  HARDINGB  GIFFABD,  first  Earl  of  Halsbury,  the  third  son 
of  Stanley  Lees  Giffard,  editor  of  the  Standard  newspaper, 
was  born  on  the  3rd  of  September,  1823.  He  was  educated 
privately  and  at  Merton  College,  Oxford,  whence  he  graduated 
B.A.  in  1845.  Entering  at  the  Inner  Temple  in  1846,  he 
was  called  to  the  bar,  25th  January,  1850.  Attaching  himself 
to  the  South  Wales  Circuit,  and  attending  regularly  at  the 
Central  Criminal  Court  and  Middlesex  Sessions,  he  from  the 
first  showed  great  capacity  asi  an  advocate,  and  in  1861  he 
became  one  of  the  standing  counsel  for  the  Treasury,  a  post 
which  he  vacated  on  taking  silk  in  1865.  He  figures  largely 
in  the  most  important  prosecutions  of  the  day,  including  the 
trial  of  the  Fenians  for  the  Clerkenwell  explosion  of  December, 
1867.  He  appeared  for  Governor  Eyre  at  the  Market  Drayton 
Sessions  in  the  same  year,  and  for  some  of  the  defendants  in 
the  Overend  and  Gurney  case ;  in  the  ejectment  action  of  Tick- 
borne  v.  Lushington  he  was  led  by  Serjeant  Ballantine  for  the 
claimant.  He  unsuccessfully  contested  Cardiff  in  the  Con- 
servative interest  in  1868  and  in  1874,  and  he  was  returned 
to  Parliament  for  the  first  time  as  member  for  Launceston  in 
March,  1877,  having  been  appointed  Solicitor-General,  though 
without  a  seat  in  the  House  of  Commons,  in  November,  1875, 
when  he  received  the  honour  of  knighthood.  As  law  officer 
he  appeared,  together  with  Sir  John  Holker,  in  a  series  of 
sensational  trials,  to  which  reference  has  already  been  made. 
In  the  1880  Parliament  he  played  a  prominent  part,  being 
especially  conspicuous  in  the  opposition  to  Mr.  Bradlaugh,  and 
he  enjoyed  a  large  practice  at  nisi  prius.  His  most  famous 
verdict  was  that  of  £5000  for  the  plaintiff  in  Belt  v. 
Lawcs.  He  became  Lord  Chancellor  under  the  title  of  Baron 
192 


Appendix  V. 


Halsbury,  in  June,  1885,  and,  following  the  fortunes  of  his 
party,  he  received  the  seals  again  in  July,  1886,  and  June, 
1895.  In  1898  the  dignity  of  an  earldom  was  conferred  upon 
him,  and  his  son  bears  the  courtesy  title  of  Lord  Tiverton. 
Whether  on  the  woolsack,  in  the  Privy  Council,  or  in  the  Court 
of  Appeal,  he  has  shown  himself  a  judge  of  the  highest  rank. 
A  good  authority  has>  declared  that  he  is  in  the  widest  sense 
the  greatest  master  of  the  common  law  since  Lord  Mansfield. 

"  He  quitted  the  bar  in  the  heyday  of  his  fame.  The  dis- 
appearance of  Holker  had  left  him  perhaps  the  most  successful 
advocate  of  his  day  in  that  class  of  case  where  the  appeal  is 
to  the  sentiment,  the  emotions,  or  the  prejudices  of  the  jury. 
An  admirable  speaker  and  a  fine  cross-examiner,  his  pugnacious 
and  combative  spirit  was  kept  in  strict  subordination  to  the 
needs  of  the  hour,  while  it  used  to  be  said  of  him  that  he  was 
the  only  man  at  the  bar  who  would  stand  up  to  Charles  Russell 
with  absolute  and  unmistakable  confidence."  —  Atlay, 
"Victorian  Chancellors,"  ii.  441. 

JOHN  HUMFPRETS  PARRY  (1816-1880)  was  the  eldest  son  of 
John  Humffreys  Parry,  solicitor,  better  known  to  fame  as  a 
learned  Welsh  antiquarian.  Brought  up  to  commerce,  Parry 
preferred  a  place  in  the  printed  book  department  of  the  British 
Museum  to  a  seat  in  a  merchant's  office.  While  there  he 
studied  for  the  bar,  to  which  he  was  called  at  the  Middle 
Temple  in  1843.  Like  many  celebrated  advocates,  he  com- 
menced his  career  in  the  criminal  Courts,  attending  the  Home 
Circuit,  the  Central  Criminal  Court,  and  the  Middlesex  Sessions. 
He  soon  acquired  considerable  civil  business,  was  made  Serjeant 
at  Law  in  1856,  and  granted  a  patent  of  precedence  in  1864. 
He  appeared  in  many  celebrated  cases.  He  defended  Manning 
for  murder  in  1849,  was  one  of  the  counsel  for  the  prosecution 
in  the  trial  at  bar  of  the  Tichborne  claimant,  and  appeared 
for  the  plaintiff  in  the  action  of  Whistler  v.  Euskin  in 
1878.  He  stood  twice  for  Parliament  as  an  advanced  Liberal, 
unsuccessfully  contesting  Norwich,  in  1847,  and  Finsbury,  in 
1857.  He  died  in  London  on  the  10th  of  January,  1880. 

Montagu  Williams,  in  his  "Leaves  of  a  Life,"  draws  a  very 
pleasant  picture  of  Parry — "  Remarkably  solid  in  appearance, 
his  countenance  was  broad  and  expansive,  beaming  with  honesty  ( 
and  frankness.  His  cross-examination  was  of  a  quieter  kind 
than  that  of  Serjeant  Ballantine.  It  was,  however,  almost  as 
effective.  He  drew  the  witness  on  in  a  smooth,  good-humoured, 
artful,  and  partly  magnetic  fashion.  His  attitude  towards  his 
adversary  also  was  peculiar;  he  never  indulged  in  bickering, 
was  always  perfectly  polite,  and  was  most  to  be  feared  when 
he  seemed  to  be  making  a  concession.  If  in  the  course  of  a 

o  193 


Muller    Trial. 

trial  he,  without  being  asked,  handed  his  adversary  a  paper 
with  the  words,  '  wouldn't  you  like  to  see  this,'  or  some 
kindred  observation,  let  that  adversary  beware  that  there  was 
something  deadly  underneath."  The  author  of  a  delightful 
little  book  of  legal  reminiscences  recently  published  ("  Pie 
Powder."  By  a  Circuit  Tramp)  places  Parry  as  an  advocate 
in  certain  respects  pi*e-eminent  among  those  he  recollectsi; 
"though,"  he  says,  "he  may  not  have  had  the  force  of 
Russell,  the  silver  tongue  of  Coleridge,  or  the  incisive  skill  of 
Hawkins  as  a  cross-examiner,"  he  declares  that  in  sheer  power 
of  persuasion  with  a  jury  Parry  has  never  had  an  equal  within 
his  experience.  No  man  was  ever  more  popular  with  his  pro- 
fession. A  good  friend  and  a  genial  host,  Parry  must  have 
been  a  delightful  companion.  He  married  the  daughter  of 
Edwin  Abbott,  a  well-known  writer  on  education,  and  for  some 
time  headmaster  of  the  Philological  School  at  Marylebone, 
where  Parry  had  been  educated.  He  left  two  sons,  the  second 
of  whom,  Edward  Abbott  Parry,  recently  appointed  County 
Court  judge  at  Lambeth,  held  for  some  time  that  office  in  Man- 
chester, and  is  not  only  a  most  popular  and  worthy  judge,  but 
a  well-known  author  and  dramatist. 


194 


UNIFORM   WITH   THIS   VOLUME. 

NOTABLE  ENGLISH  TRIALS. 

Already  published.     Price  5s.  net  each. 

THE  TRIAL  OF  THE  STAUNTONS  (The  Penge  Mystery). 
Edited  by  J.  B.  ATLAY,  M.A.,  Barrister-at-law. 
Dedicated  to  Sir  Edward  Clarke,  K.C. 

"The  Penge  case  has  been  admirably  edited  by  Mr.  J.  B.  Atlay, 
M.A.,  one  of  the  most  brilliant  and  best  informed  of  our  modern 
criminologists." — GEORGE  R.  SIMS  in  The  Referee. 

"  Not  only  a  welcome  addition  to  an  interesting  body  of  literature, 
but  a  valuable  reinforcement  of  legal  libraries." — Manchester  Guardian. 

"  It  is  a  fascinating  story  which  the  editor  has  presented ;  a  tale  of 
real  life  with  real  characters." — Morning  Post. 

"  The  editor  has  produced  a  most  interesting  and  readable  volume, 
and  is  to  be  congratulated  on  an  excellent  piece  of  work." — Scots  Law 
Times. 

THE  TRIAL  OF  FRANZ  MULLER.  Edited  by  H.  B. 
IRVING,  M.A.(Oxon),  Dedicated  to  Lord  Halsbury. 


The  following  trials  are  in  preparation  and  will   be 
published  in  due  course : — 

THE  ANNESLEY  CASE.      Edited  by  ANDREW  LANG. 

WILLIAM    PALMER.      Edited    by    GEORGE    H.    KNOTT, 
Barrister-at-law. 

LORD  LOVAT.     Edited  by  DAVID  N.  MACKAY,  Solicitor. 
Dr.  GEORGE  H.  LAMSON.      Edited  by  H.  L.  ADAM. 
Mrs.  MAYBRICK.     Edited  by  H.  B.  IRVING,  M.A.(Oxon). 


NOTABLE  SCOTTISH  TRIALS. 

THE  object  of  this  series  is  to  present  a  full  and  authentic  record 
of  the  more  notable  Trials  that  have  a  place  in  the  annals  of  our 
Scottish  jurisprudence.  Of  many  of  these  Trials  the  details  are  at 
the  present  time  not  readily  accessible,  being  either  confined  to  the 
pages  of  official  reports  or  buried  in  the  files  of  the  daily  press ;  and 
the  volumes  issued  include  such  a  narrative  of  our  more  important 
causes  c'elebres  as  shall  prove  not  only  of  interest  to  the  general 
reader,  but  also  of  utility  to  those  concerned,  professionally  or 
otherwise,  with  the  study  and  application  of  the  legal  principles 
involved  in  the  various  cases  to  be  dealt  with. 

To  each  Trial  a  separate  volume  has  been  assigned;  and,  where 
available,  the  evidence  has  been  reproduced  in  full,  special  care 
being  taken  to  ensure  accuracy  of  detail. 

The  series  is  founded  upon  careful  research  into  every  available 
source  of  information,  and,  so  far  as  permissible,  the  opportunity  has 
been  taken  of  consulting  with  and  acquiring  reliable  information  from 
gentlemen  who  may  have  been  authoritatively  associated  with  any  of 
the  Trials  in  contemplation. 

"A  remarkable  series." — Glasgow  Herald. 

"Altogether  a  most  interesting  and  welcome  series  these  'Notable  Scottish 
Trials.'" — Law  Journal. 

"Messrs.  William  Hodge  &  Co.  are  doing  distinct  service  not  only  to  the  legal 
profession,  but  also  to  the  general  public  by  the  publication  of  '  Notable  Scottish 
Trials.'  " — Dundee  Courier. 

"  Messrs.  William  Hodge  &  Co.  are  doing  good  public  service  in  issuing  a  series  of 
volumes  dealing  with  '  Notable  Scottish  Trials. '  Since  many  of  these  trials  took 
place  a  new  generation  has  arisen,  to  whom  most  of  the  persons  tried  are  mere  names, 
and  the  series  promised  by  Messrs.  Hodge  &  Co.  will  necessarily  take  the  form  of 
educative  works  of  considerable  historic  value." — The  Scotsman. 

"While  abounding  in  the  dramatic  interest  of  the  'higher  crime,"  they  are  edited 
with  all  the  completeness  and  accuracy  and  attention  to  the  legal  issues  involved  of 
reports  intended  for  lawyers  ;  and  there  is  no  class  of  reading  more  useful  for  students 
of  law  than  the  study  of  the  laws  of  evidence  as  they  appear  in  practice  during  such 
trials.  At  the  same  time  for  the  general  reader  they  have  the  intense  fascination  of 
revelation  of  the  darker  side  of  human  nature. " — Saturday  Review. 


Notable  Scottish  Trials 

THE  TRIAL  OF  MADELEINE  SMITH.  Edited  by  A.  DUNCAN 
SMITH,  F.S.A.(Scot),  Advocate.  Dedicated  to  Lord  Young. 
Fully  illustrated.  Demy  8vo,  400  pp.  Price  53.  I9°5- 

"  As  a  record  of  one  of  the  most  remarkable  criminal  trials  of  modern  times,  the 
book  will  be  found  of  supreme  interest." — The  Scotsman, 

"  The  publishers  are  to  be  congratulated  on  their  selection  of  Mr.  Duncan  Smith  as 
the  editor  of  the  present  number.  He  brings  to  his  task  a  delightful  freshness,  and 
unfolds  the  romantic  tale  in  a  truly  romantic  manner.  .  .  .  It  is  only  when  we 
come  to  the  appendices  that  the  real  importance  of  Mr.  Smith's  report  is  apparent. 
Those  show  an  amount  of  research  unequalled  in  any  report  of  the  trial  yet  issued. 
.  .  .  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that,  if  the  succeeding  volumes  maintain  the  high 
standard  of  work  which  marks  the  present  number,  the  series  should  have  a  ready 
and  abundant  market," — Glasgow  Herald. 


THE  TRIAL  OF  THE  CITY  OF  GLASGOW  BANK  DIRECTORS.  Edited 
by  WILLIAM  WALLACE,  Advocate,  Sheriff-Substitute,  Oban.  Fully 
illustrated  from  contemporary  photographs.  Demy  8vo,  500  pp. 
Price  53.  1905- 

"The  evidence  on  both  sides  is  given  verbatim,  and  the  entire  work  of  editing  has 
been  exceedingly  well  done  by  Mr.  William  Wallace.  There  are  some  excellent 
portraits." — Glasgow  Citizen. 

"Mr.  Wallace,  the  editor,  has  discharged  his  duty  admirably,  and  his  skilful 
guidance  is  exceedingly  helpful  and  valuable.  The  introductory  chapter  is  a 
singularly  lucid  and  effective  piece  of  writing." — Aberdeen  Daily  Journal. 


THE  TRIAL  OF  DR.  PRITCHARD.  Edited  by  WILLIAM  ROUGHEAD, 
W.S.,  Edinburgh.  Dedicated  to  the  late  Sheriff  Brand,  Ayr.  Fully 
illustrated.  Demy  8vo,  346  pp.  Price  55.  1906. 

"The  narrative  is  most  interesting,  and  one  which  lawyers  and  laymen  alike  will 
read  with  fixed  attention." — Law  Times. 

"  Mr.  Roughead's  highly  interesting  book." — Lancet. 

"  One  of  the  most  absorbing  of  a  remarkable  series.  "—Glasgow  Herald. 


Notable  Scottish  Trials— continued. 

THE  TRIAL  OF  EUGENE  MARIE  CHANTRELLE.  Edited  by  A. 
DUNCAN  SMITH,  F.S.A.(Scot.).  Dedicated  to  Sir  Henry  D.  Little- 
john,  M.D.,  LL.D.  Demy  8vo,  250  pp.  Price  53.  1906. 

"The  book  is  a  thoroughly  well-edited  chapbook."— Daily  News. 

"  Apart  from  its  undoubted  interest  as  a  tragic  story,  the  book  is  valuable  as  a 
judicial  record." — Glasgow  News. 

"  Apart  from  its  interest  for  lawyers  and  medical  men,  the  book  possesses  a  strong 
fascination  for  the  general  reader.     It  is  full  of  human  tragedy." — Dttndee  Courier. 

"  Mr.  Duncan  Smith  may  be  congratulated  on  the  able  manner  in  which  he  has 
executed  his  task." — Law  Times. 


THE  TRIAL  OF  DEACON  BRODIE.  Edited  by  WILLIAM  ROUGHEAD, 
W.S.,  Edinburgh.  Dedicated  to  the  Honourable  Lord  Dundas. 
Fully  illustrated.  Demy  8vo,  280  pp.  Price  53.  1907. 

"  The  work  forms  a  valuable  addition  to  the  series  of  '  Notable  Scottish  Trials.' " 
— The  Scotsman. 

"  This  volume  admirably  edited  by  Mr.  Roughead.  .  .  .  The  editor  has  con- 
tributed a  very  full  and  well-handled  introduction." — The  Daily  News. 

"The  volume  is  edited  by  Mr.  Wm.  Roughead,  whose  introduction,  giving  a 
succinct  account  of  the  Deacon's  career,  is  a  thoroughly  capable  piece  of  work." — 
The  Tribune. 

"This  biography  .  .  .  more  interesting  than  many  novels." — The  Daily 
Telegraph. 


THE  TRIAL  OF  JAMES  STEWART  (The  Appin  Murder).  Edited 
by  DAVID  N.  MACKAY,  Writer,  Glasgow.  Dedicated  to  Alex- 
ander Campbell  Eraser.  Fully  illustrated.  Demy  8vo,  386  pp. 
Price  53.  1907- 

"  In  compiling  this  addition  to  an  important  and  valuable  series  of  criminal  trials, 
Mr.  Mackay  has  shown  singular  assiduity  and  industry.  He  has  ransacked  the 
records  and  chronicles  of  the  time  with  care  and  diligence.  His  introductory  sum- 
ming up  of  the  case  is  lucid,  judicious,  and  complete,  grasping  the  facts  with  a  firm 
and  sure  hand,  and  exposing  the  hollowness  of  the  theories  of  the  prosecution  with 
convincing  force." — The  Scotsman. 

"  The  volume  deserves  a  permanent  place  in  one's  library  not  only  because  of  its 
deep  human  interest,  but  by  reason  of  its  political  and  literary  association." — 
Aberdeen  Free  Press. 

"  Mr.  D.  N.  Mackay  has  done  his  work  well,  and  it  will  doubtless  tjive  rise  to  fresh 
controversies  and  be  the  mine  from  which  new  theories  will  be  dug." — The  Tribune. 


Notable  Scottish  Trials— continued. 

THE  TRIAL  OF  A.  J.  MONSON.  Edited  by  J.  W.  MORE,  B.A. 
(Oxon),  Advocate,  Edinburgh.  Dedicated  to  the  Lord  Justice- 
Clerk.  Fully  illustrated.  Demy  8vo,  480  pp.  Price  53. 

"  Mr.  More  has  done  his  work  of  editor  well,  and  he  contributes  a  brief  but  well- 
written  introduction  covering  the  facts  of  the  whole  case.  .  .  .  This  book  gives 
an  accurate  account  of  the  most  famous  Scottish  trial  of  this  generation. " — Edinburgh 
Evening  News. 

"  The  volume  is  got  up  with  the  same  scrupulous  care  that  has  been  bestowed  on 
the  others  of  the  series,  and  is  illustrated  in  a  manner  which  greatly  assists  the  reader 
in  following  the  evidence." — Evening  Dispatch. 

"  The  publishers  have  been  fortunate  in  securing  the  services  of  Mr.  More  as  editor. 
He  has  done  his  work  well.  .  .  .  Everything  has  been  done  to  make  this  report 
accurate  and  full." — Scotsman. 


THE  DOUGLAS  CAUSE.  Edited  by  A.  FRANCIS  STEUART,  Advocate, 
Edinburgh.  Dedicated  to  the  Honourable  Lord  Guthrie.  Fully 
illustrated.  Demy  8vo.  Price  53. 

"Out  of  the  mass  of  material  at  his  command,  the  editor  has  woven  a  narrative 
of  surpassing  interest  which  will  appeal  to  the  layman  as  strongly  as  to  the  lawyer. 
Not  the  least  attractive  part  of  the  volume  is  the  appendix,  containing  the  letters 
written  by  Lady  Jane  Douglas. " — Scotsman. 

"The  volume  is  not  the  least  important  of  the  series  to  which  it  belongs,  and 
should  have  a  place  in  every  well-equipped  library." — Dundee  Advertiser. 


THE  TRIAL  OF  CAPTAIN  PORTEOUS.  Edited  by  WILLIAM 
ROUGHEAD,  W.S.  Dedicated  to  the  Honourable  Lord  Ardwall. 
Fully  illustrated.  Demy  8vo.  Price  53. 

•'The  reader  who  has  mastered  its  contents  may  rest  content  in  the  knowledge  that 
he  has  exhausted  the  subject,  so  thorough  and  complete  have  been  the  researches  of 
Mr.  Roughead. " — Scotsman. 

"  Mr.  Roughead's  introduction  seems  to  us  the  best  thing  yet  published  on  the 
subject.  It  is  admirably  written,  and  the  conclusions  are  sober  and  convincing. " — 
The  Spectator. 

"  It  is  a  deeply  interesting  problem  as  set  forth  with  painstaking  scholarship  by 
Mr.  Roughead."— Outlook. 

"  This  trial  is  one  of  the  best  of  a  very  attractive,  unique,  and  ably  edited  series." 
— Saturday  Review. 


Notable  Scottish  Trials— continued. 


, 


THE  TRIAL  OF  OSCAR  SLATER.  Edited  by  WILLIAM  ROUGHEAD, 
W.S.  Dedicated  to  the  Honourable  Lord  Guthrie.  Demy  8vo. 
Fully  illustrated.  Price  53. 


"  One  cannot  but  admire  the  skill  with  which  the  introductory  chapter  is  drawn, 
the  analytical  examination  of  the  evidence,  the  new  light  thrown  upon  some  aspects 
of  the  tale,  and  the  fresh  and  patient  collection  in  their  proper  order  of  the  facts  and 
circumstances  adduced. " — Scots  Law  Times. 

"  In  this  interesting  dramatic  narrative  are  more  than  glimpses  of  the  tortuous, 
wicked  paths  some  men  tread.  The  volume  has  an  abiding  interest  for  the  lawyer 
and  jurist,  but  it  will  also  have  a  large  constituency  outside  the  profession." — Aberdeen 
Free  Press. 


THE  TRIAL  OF  MRS.  M'LACHLAN.  Edited  by  WILLIAM 
ROUGHEAD,  W.S.  Dedicated  to  Andrew  Lang.  Demy  8vo. 
Fully  illustrated.  Price  55. 

"The  fifty -year-old  mystery  is  as  much  a  mystery  now  as  in  the  sixties,  and  Mr. 
Roughead's  book  will  find  many  readers  among  those  interested  in  the  study  of 
crimes. " —  Westminster  Gatette. 

"  The  editor,  who  has  justly  established  for  himself  a  recognised  position  in  this 
particular  domain  of  literature,  has  written  an  introduction  which  eclipses  all  his 
former  achievements.  .  .  .  The  editor  has  obviously  spared  no  trouble  to  present 
this  embarrassing  trial  to  his  readers  in  a  clear  and  coherent  form,  and  no  better  or 
fuller  statement  of  the  case  could  well  be  given." — Scots  Pictorial. 


WM.    HODGE   &    CO.,    EDINBURGH   AND    GLASGOW. 


Series  9482 


A     000  91 1  860     5 


