IRotable  Scottteb  Griate 


Oscar   Slater 


NOTABLE 
SCOTTISH    TRIALS. 


Madeleine  Smith.  Edited  by  A. 
Duncan  Smith,  F.S.A.(Scot.). 

City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Directors. 
Edited  by  Sheriff  Wallace, 
Campbeltown. 

Dr.  Pritchard.  Edited  by  Win. 
Roughead,  W.S.,  Edinburgh. 

Eugene  Marie  Chantrelle.  Edited 
by  A.  Duncan  Smith,  F.S.A.(Scot.). 

Deacon  Brodie.  Edited  by  Win. 
Roughead,  W.S.,  Edinburgh. 

James  Stewart.  Edited  by 
David  N.  Mackay,  Glasgow. 

A.  J.  Monson.  Edited  by  J.  W. 
More,  B.A.(Oxon.),  Advocate. 

The  Douglas  Cause.  Edited  by 
A.  Francis  Steuart,  Advocate. 

Captain  Porteous.  Edited  by  Wm. 
Roughead,  W.S..  Edinburgh. 

Oscar  Slater.  Edited  by  Wm. 
Roughead,  W.S.,  Edinburgh. 


Photo,  by  Alex.  A.  Inglis,  Edinburgh 

The  Hon.  Lord  Guthrie 


3  tilt 


0 /ftfcr,  05£Ar 


Trial  of 


Oscar    Slater 


EDITED    BY 


William    Roughead 

Writer  to  the  Signet 


EDINBURGH   AND  GLASGOW 

WILLIAM   HODGE   &   COMPANY 


PRINTED  BY 

WILLIAM  HODGE  AND  COMPANY 

GLASGOW  AND  EDINBURGH 

1910 


TO 

THE  HONOURABLE  LORD  GUTHRIE 

THIS   VOLUME 

IS 

BY   KIND   PERMISSION 
RESPECTFULLY   DEDICATED 

BY 
THE   EDITOR 


PREFATORY    NOTE. 

THIS  report  of  the  trial  of  Oscar  Slater  has  been  prepared  from 
the  official  shorthand  writers'  notes  taken  in  Court,  the  evidence 
of  all  the  principal  witnesses  being  printed  verbatim.  The 
Editor  confesses  to  a  certain  diffidence  in  dealing  with  a  case 
so  recent,  in  which  the  actors,  with  the  regrettable  exception 
of  Mr.  Ewing  Speirs,  the  agent  for  the  defence,  are  still  in 
life.  But,  notwithstanding  the  obvious  restrictions  imposed 
by  these  conditions,  the  endeavour  has  been  made  to  give  in 
the  Introduction  a  fair  and  accurate  account  of  this  very 
remarkable  case.  The  facts,  as  disclosed  upon  the  proof,  have 
been  narrated  in  the  order  in  which  they  occurred,  from  the 
evidence  of  the  various  witnesses  at  the  trial,  thus  affording  a 
consecutive  view  of  the  course  of  events,  which,  it  is  hoped, 
will  enable  the  reader  more  easily  to  appreciate  the  purport  of 
the  evidence  led. 

The  Editor  would  here  acknowledge  the  facilities  which  have 
been  afforded  to  him  by  the  learned  Judge  who  presided  at  the 
trial,  as  well  as  by  the  counsel  on  both  sides  of  the  bar,  and 
the  medical  witnesses  for  the  prosecution  and  defence.  The 
Honourable  Lord  Guthrie  has  favoured  the  Editor  by  revising 
his  charge  to  the  jury ;  the  Right  Honourable  Alexander  Ure, 
Lord  Advocate,  and  Mr.  A.  L.  M'Clure,  K.C.,  Sheriff  of  Argyll, 
have  also  done  him  the  favour  of  revising  their  addresses. 
Professor  Glaister,  M.D.,  has  kindly  read  the  proof  sheets  of 
the  medical  evidence  adduced  by  the  Crown;  Dr.  Aitchison 
Robertson  and  Dr.  Alexander  Veitch  those  of  their  evidence 
for  the  defence. 

Messrs.  Joseph  Shaughnessy  &  Son,  solicitors,  Glasgow,  have 
kindly  permitted  the  publication  of  the  memorial  to  the 


PREFATORY   NOTE. 

Secretary  of  State  for  Scotland  on  behalf  of  Oscar  Slater, 
presented  by  his  agent,  the  late  Mr.  Ewing  Speirs,  on  17th 
May,  1909. 

To  Mr.  William  Warnock,  chief  criminal  officer  of  Glasgow 
Sheriff  Court,  the  Editor  is  indebted  for  placing  at  his  disposal 
the  original  of  the  photograph  of  Slater,  now  for  the  first  time 
reproduced  in  the  present  volume.  W.  R. 

EDINBURGH,  April,  1910. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Table  of  Dates           .....                 .... 

The  Trial— 

FIBST  DAY  —  MONDAY,  SRD  MAY,  1909. 

1 

List  of  Productions  for  Prosecution,       

1 

List  of  Witnesses  for  Prosecution,  

5 

List  of  Productions  for  Panel,         

.       10 

List  of  Witnesses  for  Panel,   

-      10 

Plea  of  Panel  to  Indictment,  

-       10 

Appointment  of  Shorthand  Writers,       

-       11 

Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Robert  William  Home,     -               11 

Madge  M'Haffie, 

-      27 

George  Bell,                                  -       11 

Annie  Rankin  M'Haffie,    • 

-      29 

David  Dick,                                         12 

John  Thomson  Trench, 

-      30 

William  Sorley,                                  12 

Christopher  Walker, 

-      37 

Jane  Duff  or  Walker,         -        -       13 

Euphemia  Cunningham,    - 

-      41 

John  Sinclair  Marr,                            15 

William  Campbell,    - 

-      45 

Isaac  Paradise,                                    16 

Robert  Brown  Bryson, 

-      46 

John  Ruthven,                                    17 

Andrew  Nairn,  ... 

-      54 

Jacob  Jackson,                                    17 

Elizabeth  Donaldson, 

-      56 

Francis  Brien,                                       18 

Alexander  Gillies, 

-      56 

Margaret  Dickson  or  M'Haffie,        21 

Frederick  Nichols,     - 

-      57 

Margaret  Dickson  M'Haffie,     -       24 

Helen  Lambie,  - 

-      61 

SECOND  DAY—  TUESDAY,  4TH  MAY,  1909. 

Evidence  for  Prosecution  (continued). 

John  Pyper,      -                                76 

William  Neil,    - 

-    129 

Arthur  Montague  Adams,          -      94 

Annie  Gillies,     - 

-     130 

Laura  Emma  Adams,         -        -     103 

Dr.  John  Glaister, 

•     131 

Rowena  Adams  or  Liddell,        -     104 

Dr.  Hugh  Gait, 

-     147 

Barbara  Barrowman,          -        -     107 

Dr.  Harvey  Littlejohn, 

-    148 

Mary  Barrowman,     ...     108 

James  Barr,       ... 

-     149 

William  Warnock,     -        -         -     115 

Gordon  Henderson,   - 

-     151 

Annie  Armour,           -         -         -117 

Peter  Crawford  M'Laren,  - 

-     153 

James  Dornan,  ....     121 

Alexander  Rankin,    - 

-     155 

John  Ord,  122 

George  Findlay, 

-     156 

THIRD  DAY—  WEDNESDAY,  5rn  MAY,  1909. 

Evidence  for  Prosecution  (concluded). 

John  Bain,         ....     157 

John  Millican,  - 

-     171 

John  Forsyth,    ....     159 

David  Lyon, 

-    172 

Allan  M'Lean,  -        -        -        -     162 

Reginald  George  Tuckett,- 

-    172 

Margaret  Fowlis,       -         -        -     165 

Marion  Carson,  - 

-     175 

Isabella  Fowlis,  -         -        -         -     166 

Mary  Anderson  M'Murdo, 

-     175 

Ruby  Russell,    -        -        -        -     166 

Frederica  Caroline  Lang,  - 

-    175 

John  Cameron,  ....     167 

William  Gordon, 

-    176 

John  Brown,      ....     169 

William  Bancroft, 

-    179 

Declaration  of  Panel,         

•    180 

CONTENTS. 

Evidence  for  Defence. 


James  Dow, 
Hugh  Cameron, 
Max  Rattmaii,  - 
Peter  Johnston, 
Adam  Gibb, 


-  181 

-  183 

-  197 

-  205 

-  206 


PAGE 


Josef  Aumann,  ....     207 


James  Tracey,   -        ...  210 

Hugh  Murphy,  -        -        -        -  212 

William  Kempton,     -        -        -  213 

Andr6e  Junio  Antoine,      -        -  214 

Catherine  Schmalz,    -        -        -  216 

Andre"e  Junio  Antoine  (recalled),  223 


FOURTH  DAY — THURSDAY,  6iH  MAY,  1909. 
Evidence  for  Defence  (concluded). 


Samuel  Reid,     -  -        -    226 

Dr.  W.  G.  Aitchison  Robertson,     229 


Dr.  Alexander  Veitch,       -        -    234 


The  Lord  Advocate's  Address  to  the  Jury, 237 

Mr.  M'Clure's  Address  to  the  Jury, 260 

Lord  Guthrie's  Charge  to  the  Jury,  -        - 283 

Verdict, 296 

Sentence, 297 


APPENDICES. 

I.  Notices  issued  by  the  Glasgow  City  Police  with  reference  to  the 

murder  of  Miss  Gilchrist, 299 

II.  Excerpts    from    Print    of    Productions    in    causa    His    Majesty's 

Advocate  against  Oscar  Slater, 300 

III.  Memorial  addressed  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  Scotland  by  Mr. 

Ewing  Speirs  on  behalf  of  Oscar  Slater,      ...  .     309 

IV.  Deposition  of  Agnes  Brown, 319 

V.  Act  of  Adjournal  relative  to  Capital  Sentences,        ....    320 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTEATIONS. 

The  Hon.  Lord  Guthrie,  Frontispiece 

Miss  Marion  Gilchrist, facing  page         xv 

Oscar  Slater  on  Trial  in  Edinburgh,       ....  )}  xxxii 

Oscar  Slater, „  xlv 

Head  of  Hammer, ,,  Ivii 

West  Princes  Street, „  30 

15  and  14  Queen's  Terrace, „  58 

Outer  Side  of  House  Door, ,,  92 

Hall  (looking  east), „  120 

Dining-room  (looking  west),  „  148 

Dining-room  (looking  east), ,,  182 

Hall  (looking  west), „  208 

Bedroom, „  236 

Facsimile  of  Plan  of  15  Queen's  Terrace,        ...  Jf  320 

Facsimile  of  Plan  of  Streets, 320 


OSCAR    SLATER. 

INTRODUCTION. 

THE  primary  importance  of  the  trial  of  Oscar  Slater  for  the 
murder  of  Miss  Marion  Gilchrist,  and  that  which  well  warrants 
its  preservation  in  such  permanent  form  as  the  present  series 
affords,  is  the  fact  that  a  conviction  was  obtained  by  the 
Crown  upon  evidence  as  to  identity  based  on  personal  impres- 
sions, the  corroboration  supplied  by  the  circumstantial 
evidence,  though  containing  elements  of  strong  suspicion, 
adding  nothing  conclusive  of  the  prisoner's  guilt. 

The  direct  evidence  to  identification  was  twofold  :  firstly,  by 
three  witnesses  who  admittedly  saw  the  supposed  murderer 
leaving  the  scene  of  the  crime ;  and  secondly,  by  twelve  other 
witnesses  who  identified  Slater  as  a  man  they  had  seen  watching 
Miss  Gilchrist's  house  for  weeks  before  the  murder.  Had  the 
identification  by  the  former  been  clear  and  unhesitating,  the 
case  for  the  prosecution  would  have  been  proved  beyond  dis- 
pute ;  but  as  regards  the  evidence  of  at  least  two  of  them, 
such  was  not  the  fact.  The  evidence  given  by  those  who 
saw  the  watcher  is  also  unconvincing  in  respect  of  manifest 
discrepancies  as  to  his  dress  and  personal  appearance ;  while 
the  impossibility  of  reconciling  the  conflicting  testimony  of 
the  various  witnesses  increases  the  difficulties  which  beset 
the  case.  That  these  difficulties  were  appreciated  by  the 
fifteen  jurymen  is  shown  by  the  narrow  majority  of  three 
votes  upon  which  the  verdict  turned  ;  and  the  weight  attached 
to  them  by  the  Scottish  Secretary  and  his  advisers  is  apparent 
in  the  commutation  of  the  sentence. 

The  case  excited  widespread  interest  at  the  time,  and,  by 
reason  of  the  sensational  reports  of  which  it  was  the  occasion, 
exercised  the  popular  imagination  for  many  months.  These 
rumours,  alike  hurtful  to  the  memory  of  the  aged  victim  and 
prejudicial  to  the  accused,  were,  happily,  dissipated  by  the 
evidence  adduced  at  the  trial.  But  apart  from  these,  the 
case  itself  contains  elements  sufficiently  strange  and  sugges- 
tive to  supply,  in  an  unwonted  degree,  a  legitimate  and  lasting 
interest. 

A  crime  of  exceptional  atrocity,  committed  in  a  well-to-do 
B  xiii 


Oscar   Slater. 

quarter  of  a  great  city,  not  in  the  dead  of  night,  but  at  an 
hour  when  the  streets  were  yet  busy  and  many  people  were 
out  of  doors ;  the  age  and  circumstances  of  the  hapless  lady ; 
the  incredible  ruthlessness  of  the  attack;  the  rapidity  with 
which  her  murderer  effected  his  fatal  purpose ;  the  fact  that 
a  witness  was  literally  on  the  threshold  of  the  tragedy,  and 
heard  the  deed  done ;  the  audacity  of  the  criminal  in  making 
good  his  escape  from  the  very  presence  of  two  persons  who 
had  frustrated  the  main  object  of  his  design :  these  are 
indeed  matters  of  more  than  common  note.  The  ability 
with  which,  in  spite  of  serious  obstacles,  the  Glasgow  police 
ran  their  man  to  earth — or  rather,  to  sea — within  a  weekj 
the  extradition  proceedings  in  New  York;  the  trial  at 
Edinburgh,  with  the  curious  glimpses  it  gave  of  that  dark 
under-world  which  lies  beneath  the  surface  of  our  modern 
civilisation ;  the  obvious  weakness  of  certain  links  in  the 
formidable  chain  forged  by  the  Crown ;  the  surprising 
verdict ;  and,  finally,  the  illogical  and  unsatisfactory  reprieve, 
combine  to  merit  for  this  case  a  conspicuous  niche  in  the 
gallery  of  Scottish  causes  celebres. 

In  the  month  of  December,  1908,  there  lived  at  No.  15 
Queen's  Terrace,  West  Princes  Street,  Glasgow,  an  unmarried 
lady  named  Marion  Gilchrist,  eighty-two  years  of  age,  who 
had  been  tenant  of  the  house  for  upwards  of  thirty  years. 
Though  of  independent  means  and  in  comfortable  circum- 
stances, she  kept  but  one  servant ;  and  at  the  date  in  question 
a  girl,  named  Helen  Lambie,  aged  twenty-one,  had  been  in 
her  service  for  the  past  three  years.  The  old  lady  led  a  very 
retired  life,  seeing  little  of  her  relatives  and  less  of  her 
neighbours;  receiving  few  visitors  other  than  Mrs.  Ferguson, 
a  former  servant,  with  whom  she  was  on  intimate  terms. 

The  house,  which  is  situated  in  a  quiet  residential  locality 
in  the  West  End  of  the  city,  consists  of  three  public  rooms, 
two  bedrooms,  bathroom,  and  kitchen,  and  forms  the  first 
flat  of  a  tenement  three  storeys  in  height.  The  top  flat, 
the  only  other  house  upon  the  same  stair,  had  been  unoccupied 
since  the  previous  Whitsunday ;  the  lower  flat,  which  is 
entirely  separate  from  those  above,  having  a  private  entrance, 
No.  14  Queen's  Terrace,  opens  directly  from  the  street  and 
is  what  is  called  in  Scotland  a  maindoor  house.  Immediately 
to  the  left  of  No.  14  another  door,  No.  15,  gives  access  to  a  short 
xiv 


Miss  Marion  Gilchrist 
From  the  Photograph  produced  in  Court 


Introduction. 

passage,  locally  termed  a  "  close,"  extending  from  the  street 
door  to  the  foot  of  the  common  stair,  which  ascends  in  three 
short  flights  to  the  door  of  Miss  Gilchrist's  house  and  continues 
to  that  of  the  empty  house  above.  The  old  lady  and  her  servant 
were  thus  the  only  persons  living  in  No.  15.  The  maindoor 
house  occupies  the  whole  ground  floor  with  the  exception  of 
this  close,  and  the  dining-room  is  situated  immediately 
beneath  that  of  Miss  Gilchrist.  The  maindoor  and  the  close 
door,  which  are  on  the  same  level,  are  approached  from 
the  pavement  by  four  steps  and  a  landing,  common  to  both. 
Queen's  Terrace  is  the  name  of  a  section  of  West  Princes 
Street,  and  forms  the  south  side  of  the  east  end  of  that 
street. 

Miss  Gilchrist  differed  from  the  generality  of  old  ladies 
of  similar  habits  and  condition  in  one  remarkable  particular. 
She  had  a  passion  for  precious  stones,  and  the  collection  of 
jewels  which  she  purchased  from  time  to  time,  chiefly  from 
a  well-known  Glasgow  firm  with  whom  she  had  dealt  for 
twenty  years,  cost  her  over  £3000.  As  a  rule  these  jewels 
were  kept  among  her  clothes  in  her  wardrobe ;  but  when, 
as  was  her  custom,  she  went  to  the  country  for  a  month  in 
summer,  they  were  sent  to  the  jewellers  for  safe  custody 
until  her  return.  In  these  circumstances  it  is  not  surprising 
to  find  that  Miss  Gilchrist  was  extremely  nervoufs  about 
burglars,  and  lived  in  constant  dread  of  her  house  being 
broken  into.  She  was  most  solicitous  as  to  the  fastening 
of  her  windows ;  and  the  house  door,  in  addition  to  such 
securities  as  the  usual  lock  and  chain,  had,  as  further  defences, 
a  heavy  bolt  and  two  separate  patent  locks,  opened  from 
within  by  two  handles,  and  from  without  by  two  different 
keys.  The  street  door  at  the  closemouth  had  only  an  ordinary 
latch-key,  and  was  opened  from  the  house  by  lifting  a 
handle  within  the  hall. 

The  house  below  was  occupied  by  a  family  of  the  name  of 
Adams.  They  had  merely  a  slight  acquaintance  with  Miss 
Gilchrist,  and,  though  they  had  been  neighbours  for  many 
years,  were  not  upon  visiting  terms.  She  ha'd,  however,  an 
understanding  with  them  that  if  at  any  time  she  was  alone 
and  required  assistance,  she  should  knock  upon  the  floor  of 
her  room,  and,  on  hearing  this  signal,  some  of  them  would 
go  up. 

At  seven  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  Monday,  21st  December, 


Oscar  Slater. 

the  servant  Lambie,  having  finished  her  housework,  went  out,  as 
appears  to  have  been  her  nightly  practice,  to  fetch  an  evening 
paper  for  her  mistress,  before  proceeding  to  neighbouring 
shops  upon  such  messages  as  were  required.  She  left  Miss 
Gilchrist  sitting  on  an  ordinary  chair  at  the  table  in  the 
dining-room,  with  her  back  to  the  fire,  reading  a  magazine, 
with  her  spectacles  on.  She  received  from  her  mistress  a 
penny  for  the  paper  and  a  half-sovereign  for  the  messages ; 
the  latter  she  laid  on  the  table,  intending  to  take  it  when 
she  came  back.  The  dining-room  was  lit  with  an  incandescent 
light,  the  gas  in  the  kitchen  was  turned  down,  and  that  in 
the  hall — a  pendant,  with  a  single  jet — was  half  on.  The 
bracket  on  the  landing  outside  the  house  door  was  also  lighted. 
All  the  windows  were  fastened  except  the  kitchen  window, 
which  was  open  two  or  three  inches  at  the  top.  The  girl  shut 
both  the  house  and  close  doors,  taking  with  her  the  two  keys 
required  to  open  the  former  and  the  latch-key  of  the  latter. 
It  was  raining  when  she  left  the  house.  The  newspaper  shop 
was  situated  in  St.  George's  Road  at  the  east  end  of  West 
Princes  Street,  and  her  errand  usually  occupied  less  than  ten 
minutes.  On  this  occasion  she  spoke  for  a  minute  or  two 
to  a  constable  of  her  acquaintance,  in  plain  clothes,  whom 
she  met  at  the  corner  of  St.  George's  Road,  before  buying 
the  paper. 

At  seven  o'clock  Mr.  Arthur  Adams  and  his  two  sisters 
were  in  their  dining-room,  when  they  heard  "  a  noise  from 
above,  and  then  a  very  heavy  fall,  and  then  three  sharp 
knocks."  Miss  Laura  Adams  at  once  said  to  her  brother 
that  something  must  have  happened  to  Miss  Gilchrist,  and 
that  gentleman  instantly  left  his  house  to  see  what  was  wrong. 
He  found  the  close  door  ajar  and,  running  upstairs,  observed 
through  the  glass  panels  at  the  sides  of  the  house  door,  which 
was  shut,  that  the  lobby  was  lighted.  He  rang  the  bell 
loudly  three  times.  Listening  at  the  door,  he  heard  a  noise 
which  he  thought  was  caused  by  the  servant  breaking  sticks 
in  the  kitchen  :  "  It  seemed  as  if  it  was  some  one  chopping 
sticks — not  heavy  blows."  After  waiting  a  minute  or  two, 
during  which  the  sounds  continued,  and  being  unaware  of 
the  servant's  absence,  Mr.  Adams  returned  to  his  own  house. 
Miss  Adams,  meanwhile,  had  heard  further  noises  from  above, 
but  not  so  distinct  as  the  knocks.  She  was  not  satisfied 
with  her  brother's  account  of  what  was  taking  place  and 


Introduction. 

asked  him  to  go  up  again.  He  immediately  did  so,  but  by 
this  time  the  sounds  had  ceased.  He  again  rang  the  bell 
loudly,  and  had  his  hand  upon  the  handle  when  he  heard 
footsteps  in  the  close  below,  and  was  joined  by  Lambie,  who 
was  then  returning  with  the  newspaper. 

The  night,  as  has  been  said,  was  wet,  and  the  girl  noticed 
wet  footmarks  on  the  lower  steps  of  the  inside  stair.  Whether 
these  were  Mr.  Adams'  does  not  appear — he  was  not  asked 
if  he  had  seen  them  when  he  first  went  up.  As  he  had  merely 
to  step  from  the  one  door  to  the  other,  it  is  unlikely  that  his 
feet  were  wet.  Mr.  Adams  told  her  that  there  was  a  noise  in 
the  house,  "  and  that  the  ceiling  was  like  to  crack."  She 
suggested  that  it  was  caused  by  the  pulleys  in  the  kitchen 
(an  appliance  for  drying  clothes),  which  she  thought  might 
have  fallen  down.  This  explanation  did  not  commend  itself 
to  Mr.  Adams,  who,  now  knowing  that  the  old  lady  had  been 
left  alone  in  the  house,  said  there  must  be  something  seriously 
wrong  and  he  would  wait  to  see.  Lambie  thereupon  opened 
the  door  with  her  two  keys. 

According  to  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Adams,  Lambie  then  entered 
the  house,  and  made  for  the  kitchen  door,  in  the  further  left- 
hand  corner  of  the  hall,  he  himself  remaining  on  the  threshold. 
When  she  had  got  past  the  grandfather's  clock  upon  the  left — 
Lambie  states  that  she  was  on  the  door  mat  beside  him  all 
the  time — a  man  appeared  from  the  door  of  the  bedroom,  in 
the  right-hand  corner  at  the  back  of  the  hall.  Keeping  along 
the  wall  on  his  left,  he  passed  the  hatstand,  and  quietly 
approached  the  front  door.  There  was  nothing  in  his  appear- 
ance or  manner  to  excite  suspicion,  and,  as  he  came  up  "  quite 
pleasantly,"  Mr.  Adams'  first  impression  was  that  he  was  a 
visitor,  and  was  going  to  speak  to  him.  Having  reached  the 
door,  however,  the  man  bolted  past  Mr.  Adams  and  rushed 
down  the  stairs  "  like  greased  lightning,"  slamming  the  close 
door  behind  him. 

Lambie  then  entered  the  kitchen,  and  next  the  spare  bedroom, 
the  gas  in  which  she  found  had  been  lit  in  her  absence,  and 
on  Mr.  Adams  calling  to  her,  "  Where  is  your  mistress?  "  she 
finally  went  into  the  dining-room.  Hearing  her  scream,  he 
quickly  joined  her.  The  room  at  first  sight  presented  its 
usual  appearance,  but,  lying  on  her  back  upon  the  hearth  rug 
in  front  of  the  fireplace,  they  saw  the  body  of  Miss  Gilchrist, 
with  a  skin  rug  thrown  across  the  head.  A  glance  showed 

xvii 


Oscar  Slater. 

them  what  had  happened,  and  they  both  ran  downstairs, 
Lambie  to  inform  the  Adams  ladies,  who  had  come  out  on 
hearing  the  rush  of  feet  on  the  stairs,  and  Mr.  Adams  to  see 
if  he  could  overtake  the  murderer.  By  the  time  he  reached 
the  street  the  man  had  vanished. 

Near  St.  George's  Road  Mr.  Adams  met  Constable  Neil, 
with  whom  he  returned  to  the  house.  They  lifted  the  rug, 
and  found  that  the  old  lady  had  been  attacked  with  horrible 
ferocity,  her  head  and  face  being  brutally  smashed.  She 
was  still  breathing,  and  made  a  movement  with  her  left  hand. 
Mr.  Adams  then  ran  across  the  street  for  his  own  medical  man, 
Dr.  John  Adams,  No.  1  Queen's  Crescent,  and,  meeting  Con- 
stable Brien,  informed  him  of  what  had  occurred.  The  latter 
went  up  to  the  house,  and  then  proceeded  to  call  the  ambulance. 
Dr.  Adams  came  forthwith^  reaching  the  house  at  twenty  or 
twenty -five  minutes  past  seven.  Ascertaining  from  an 
examination  of  the  body  that  life  was  extinct,  he  informed  the 
constables  that  the  ambulance  was  unnecessary,  left  the  case  in 
their  charge,  and  at  once  reported  the  matter  by  telephone  to 
the  Western  Police  Office.  In  response  to  his  message 
Superintendent  Douglas,  Detective  Inspector  Pyper,  and 
Detective  Officer  M'Vicar  promptly  arrived  upon  the  scene  of 
the  crime,  and  the  body  was  examined  by  Dr.  Wright,  casualty 
surgeon  for  the  Western  District.  He  found  that  "  nearly 
every  bone  in  the  skull  was  fractured  •  the  brains  were  escaping  ; 
the  head  was  practically  smashed  to  pulp."  The  grate,  fender, 
and  fire-irons  were  splashed  with  blood,  but  the  latter  were  in 
their  usual  places ;  the  coal  scuttle  was  also  bloodstained,  and 
the  lid  was  broken.  There  was  no  blood  except  in  the  immediate 
vicinity  of  the  head,  and  the  furniture  of  the  room  appeared 
to  be  undisturbed.  Near  the  head  stood  the  chair  upon  which 
the  old  lady  had  been  sitting;  upon  the  hearth  rug  beside  the 
body  lay  the  half-sovereign;  the  open  magazine  and  folded 
spectacles  were  upon  the  table,  as  she  had  left  them  when  she 
rose  to  meet  her  sudden  doom. 

A  search  of  the  premises  disclosed  that  a  small  wooden  box, 
in  which  the  deceased  kept  her  papers  in  the  bedroom,  had 
been  wrenched  open  and  its  contents  scattered  upon  the  floor. 
In  a  glass  dish  on  the  toilet  table  were  a  diamond  and  two 
other  rings ;  a  gold  bracelet  and  a  gold  watch  and  chain  lay 
on  the  same  table ;  but  there  was  missing  from  the  dish  a 
valuable  diamond  crescent  brooch,  which  the  girl  Lambie  had 


Introduction. 

seen  there  the  day  before.  A  box  of  matches,  different  from 
those  used  in  the  house,  and  one  spent  match,  with  which  the 
murderer  had  lit  the  bedroom  gas,  were  the  only  clues  he  had 
left  behind.  The  windows  were  in  exactly  the  same  state 
as  when  Lambie  went  out.  No  weapon  of  any  kind  was 
found  in  the  house ;  and  Constable  Walker,  who  was  put  on 
to  watch  the  premises  during  the  night,  searched  the  back 
court  with  his  lantern,  but  discovered  nothing.  Next  day, 
however,  Inspector  Rankin  found  in  the  court  behind  the  house 
an  auger,  having  some  grey  hair  adhering  to  it,  which  was  at 
first  associated  by  the  authorities  with  the  case,  but,  as  will 
appear  later,  had  no  connection  with  the  crime. 

The  unusual  circumstance  that  two  persons  had  actually 
seen  the  supposed  murderer  leaving  the  house  should  have 
greatly  assisted  the  police  in  investigating  this  mysterious 
affair,  but,  unfortunately,  the  description  of  him  which  Mr. 
Adams  and  Lambie  were  able  to  give  was  of  the  vaguest — 

A  man  between  twenty-five  and  thirty  years  of  age,  5  feet  8 
or  9  inches  in  height,  slim  build,  dark  hair,  clean  shaven ;  dressed 
in  light  grey  overcoat,  and  dark  cloth  cap.  Cannot  be  further 
described. 

These  particulars  were  published  in  the  next  day's  papers ; 
an  inventory  was  taken  of  the  jewels  found  in  the  house ;  and 
a  description  of  the  missing  brooch  was  circulated  amongst 
pawnbrokers,  jewellers,  and  dealers. 

The  news  of  the  tragedy  produced  a  profound  sensation, 
not  only  in  Glasgow  but  throughout  the  country ;  crowds  daily 
visited  West  Princes  Street  to  gaze  at  the  ill-fated  house;  the 
mysterious  and  terrible  character  of  the  crime  formed  the  sole 
topic  of  conversation  ;  while  Press  and  public  vied  with  one 
another  in  supplying  the  authorities  with  "  clues  "  for  the 
elucidation  of  the  mystery. 

On  Tuesday,  22nd  December,  on  the  instructions  of  Mr. 
Hart,  Procurator-fiscal  for  Lanarkshire,  Professor  Glaister  and 
Dr.  Gait  visited  and  inspected  the  locus.  On  the  following 
day  these  gentlemen  made  a  post-mortem  examination  of  the 
body  and  the  results  of  their  investigations  were  embodied  in 
reports,  which  will  be  found  printed  in  the  report  of  the  trial. 

On  Wednesday,  the  23rd,  the  police  were  informed  of  a 
fresh  circumstance  of  the  highest  importance.  That  afternoon 
Mrs.  Barrowman,  9  Seamore  Street,  met  Detective  M'Gimpsey, 
who  lived  in  the  same  stair,  and  made  a  statement  to  him,  as 


Oscar  Slater. 

the  result  of  which  the  evidence  of  her  adopted  daughter 
Mary  was  taken  that  night.  This  little  girl  of  fifteen  was  in 
the  employment  of  a  bootmaker  in  Great  Western  Road.  At 
seven  o'clock  on  the  night  of  the  tragedy  she  was  sent  to 
deliver  a  parcel  in  Cleveland  Street.  While  passing  along 
West  Princes  Street,  near  Miss  Gilchrist's  house,  she  saw 
a  man  running  down  the  steps  from  the  close  of  No.  15  Queen's 
Terrace.  He  hesitated  for  a  moment  on  reaching  the  pave- 
ment, looked  east  to  St.  George's  Road,  and  then  turned  west 
and  ran  towards  her.  She  watched  him  approaching,  and 
he  knocked  up  against  her  as  he  passed  her.  She  was  stand- 
ing by  a  lamp-post  at  the  time  and  saw  him  clearly.  [The 
lights  in  West  Princes  Street  are  incandescent.]  She 
followed  him  for  a  short  distance,  but  as  he  turned  down  West 
Cumberland  Street  she  stopped  and  resumed  her  way.  Having 
gone  her  errand,  she  went  to  a  Band  of  Hope  meeting,  where, 
she  said,  she  heard  of  the  murder,  and  going  back  to  West 
Princes  Street  found  a  crowd  assembled  in  front  of  the  house 
from  the  door  of  which  she  had  seen  the  man  emerge.  On  her 
return  home  that  night  she  told  her  story  to  her  mother. 

Following  upon  this  discovery  a  more  particular  description 
appeared  on  Friday,  the  25th,  in  the  two  o'clock  editions  of  the 
Glasgow  evening  newspapers — 

The  man  wanted  is  about  twenty-eight  or  thirty  years  of  age, 
tall  and  thin,  with  his  face  shaved  clear  of  all  hair,  while  a  dis- 
tinctive feature  is  that  his  nose  is  slightly  turned  to  one  side.  The 
witness  thinks  the  twist  is  to  the  right  side.  He  wore  one  of  the 
popular  round  tweed  hats  known  as  Donegal  hats,  and  a  fawn- 
coloured  overcoat,  which  might  have  been  a  waterproof,  also  dark 
trousers,  and  brown  boots. 

The  discrepancies  between  the  two  descriptions  as  to  colour 
of  coat  and  kind  of  headgear  should  be  noted. 

At  ten  minutes  past  six  o'clock  that  same  evening  Allan 
M'Lean,  cycle  dealer,  Glasgow,  called  at  the  Central  Police 
Office  and  informed  Superintendent  Ord  that  a  man  named 
Oscar  Slater,  whom  he  knew  at  the  Sloper  Club,  24  India 
Street,  had  been  trying  to  dispose  in  that  club  of  a  pawn- 
ticket  for  a  diamond  brooch  resembling  the  missing  one,  and 
that  he  answered  to  the  published  description  of  the  wanted 
man.  Accompanied  by  Detective  Powell,  M'Lean  went  to 
St.  George's  Road  and  pointed  out  the  common  stair,  No.  69, 
in  which  he  believed  Slater  lived.  Certain  inquiries  were 
made  in  the  stair  about  half-past  seven,  as  the  result  of  which 


Introduction. 

it  was  found  that  Slater,  under  the  name  of  Anderson,  was 
occupying  a  house  on  the  third  flat.  Accordingly,  at  mid- 
night, Detectives  Powell,  Lyon,  and  Millican  visited  the 
premises  for  the  purpose  of  apprehending  the  suspect.  The 
door,  which  had  the  name-plate  of  "  Anderson  "  upon  it,  was 
opened  by  a  German  servant  girl,  who  denied  that  any  man 
lived  there — "  No  one  but  Madame,  who  was  away  for  a 
short  holiday."  They  searched  the  house,  which  presented 
the  appearance  of  having  been  recently  vacated,  and  found, 
among  some  papers  scattered  on  the  floor  of  the  bedroom,  the 
cover  of  a  registered  postal  packet,  addressed  to  "  Oscar 
Slater,  Esq.,  c/o  A.  Anderson,  Esq.,  69  St.  George's  Road, 
Glasgow,"  bearing  to  have  been  sent  by  Messrs.  Dent,  watch- 
makers, London.  From  the  neighbours  in  the  stair  they 
learned  that  "  Anderson,"  accompanied  by  a  woman,  had 
left  the  house  that  night  between  eight  and  nine  o'clock,  their 
luggage  having  been  previously  removed  by  two  porters. 

Whether  or  not  it  be  proved  that  Slater  was  in  fact  the 
murderer,  it  is  certainly  a  remarkable  circumstance  that 
suspicion  was  first  directed  to  him  by  what  turned  out  to  be  a 
false  clue ;  for,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see,  the  pawned  brooch 
had  no  more  connection  with  the  crime  than  the  fallacious 
auger,  which,  it  appeared,  had  been  thrown  over  the  wall  from 
a  disused  factory  adjoining  the  back  court. 

Next  day,  Saturday,  the  26th,  Detective  Lieutenant  Gordon 
called  at  the  house  69  St.  George's  Road,  saw  the  servant, 
and  inquired  for  "  Anderson."  She  said  that  Madame  and 
"  Anderson  "  had  left  the  previous  night  for  London.  The 
officer  found  two  German  women  in  the  flat,  one  of  whom, 
named  Freedman,  said  it  had  been  arranged  between  Slater 
and  her  that  she  should  occupy  the  house  while  Madame  and 
"  Anderson  "  were  in  Monte  Carlo,  and  that  she  had  lent  him 
£25  before  he  went.  Detective  Gordon  called  daily  thereafter 
to  inquire  if  any  letters  had  come  for  Anderson.  On  the 
night  of  the  26th  the  maid  went  to  London  ;  the  two  women 
left  on  8th  January.  The  day  before  they  went  they  handed 
him  a  letter  with  the  American  postmark,  29th  December, 
addressed  "  Oscar  Slater,  c/o  Mr.  Anderson,  69  St.  George's 
Road,  Glasgow."  Written  upon  the  envelope  were  the  words, 
"  If  not  delivered,  return  to  D.  R.  Jacobs,  326  Third  Avenue, 
New  York,  U.S."  A  copy  of  this  letter  is  given  in  the 
Appendix. 


Oscar  Slater. 

Inquiries  made  at  the  railway  stations  elicited  that  Slater 
and  his  companion  had  left  the  Central  Station  on  Christmas 
night  by  the  9.5  train  for  London — whether  with  London  or 
Liverpool  tickets  was  afterwards  disputed;  and  the  London 
police  were  instantly  advised  of  the  fact.  On  the  29th  the 
Glasgow  authorities  received  information  from  Liverpool  that 
the  persons  wanted  had  arrived  there  on  the  26th,  and  had 
sailed  the  same  day  for  New  York  in  the  "  Lusitania,"  under 
the  names  of  "  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Otto  Sando." 

On  the  31st  Mr.  Stevenson,  Chief  Constable  of  Glasgow, 
caused  a  notice  to  be  issued  offering  £200  reward  to  any  one 
giving  such  information  as  should  lead  to  the  apprehension 
and  conviction  of  the  person  or  persons  who  committed  the 
crime.  The  same  day  Sheriff-Substitute  Glegg,  on  the  applica- 
tion of  the  Procurator-fiscal,  granted  a  warrant  for  Slater's 
apprehension,  intimation  of  which  was  cabled  to  the  New  York 
police. 

When  these  facts  became  known  public  interest  was 
redoubled,  and  news  of  what  would  happen  when  the  ship 
reached  port  was  eagerly  awaited. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  Saturday,  2nd  January,  1909,  the 
great  liner,  after  a  stormy  passage,  arrived  off  Sandy  Hook. 
Acting  on  instructions  received  from  Scotland  Yard,  six  detec- 
tives went  out  in  a  Revenue  cutter,  boarded  her,  and  arrested 
Slater,  who,  having  been  taken  before  Commissioner  Shields, 
of  the  United  States  District  Court,  was  remanded  to  the 
Tombs  Prison,  without  bail,  until  19th  January,  when  the 
papers  in  connection  with  his  extradition  were  expected  to  be 
forwarded  from  Britain.  When  searching  the  prisoner  the 
New  York  police  found  in  his  possession  a  pawn  ticket  for  a 
diamond  crescent  brooch,  upon  which  £60  had  been  lent,  issued 
on  21st  December  (the  date  of  the  murder)  by  a  Glasgow 
pawnbroker.  This  brooch,  as  afterwards  appeared,  had  been 
originally  pledged  by  Slater  for  £20,  in  name  of  "  A.  Anderson, 
136  Renfrew  Street,"  on  18th  November;  he  raised  other  £10 
on  it  on  9th  December;  and  at  mid-day  on  the  21st  obtained 
a  further  advance  of  £30.  The  pawned  brooch  was  therefore 
entirely  distinct  from  that  stolen  from  Miss  Gilchrist's  house 
by  the  murderer;  but  the  coincidence  of  the  dates  and  articles 
is  a  striking  example  of  the  adage  that  "  truth  is  stranger 
than  fiction." 

The   chief   topics   of   discussion    in   Glasgow   were  now   the 


Introduction. 

identity  of  the  suspected  man,  his  possible  connection  -with 
the  crime,  the  probability  of  his  extradition,  and  the 
formalities  connected  therewith. 

The  Treaty  stipulations  between  Great  Britain  and  the 
United  States  relating  to  extradition  are  contained  in  the  tenth 
article  of  the  Treaty  of  1842  and  the  Conventions  of  1889  and 
1890,  the  latter  being  chiefly  important  for  the  extension  of 
the  number  of  extraditable  offences ;  the  procedure  thereunder 
involves  considerable  delay,  formal  application  having  to  be 
made  through  the  Foreign  Office  in  London  to  the  United 
States  Government.  Meanwhile,  the  Procurator-fiscal  was 
making  arrangements  for  the  despatch  of  two  officers  from 
Glasgow  to  proceed  to  New  York  with  the  documents  necessary 
to  support  the  application  for  extradition.  The  depositions  of 
the  witnesses,  whose  testimony  formed  the  basis  of  the  applica- 
tion, were  sworn  to  in  presence  of  the  officers  appointed  to 
appear  in  the  American  Court,  viz.,  Mr.  William  Warnock, 
chief  criminal  officer  of  Glasgow  Sheriff  Court,  and  Detective 
Inspector  Pyper,  of  the  Western  Division  of  the  Glasgow  Police 
Force,  two  of  the  most  experienced  criminal  officers  in  the  city. 
When  the  arrangements  were  completed,  these  officers,  accom- 
panied by  the  three  principal  witnesses — Lambie,  Adams,  and 
Barrowman — sailed  from  Liverpool  on  Wednesday,  13th 
January,  in  the  White  Star  liner  "  Baltic,"  for  New  York. 

On  19th  January,  before  Mr  John  A.  Shields,  U.S.  Commis- 
sioner for  the  Southern  District  of  New  York,  the  proceedings 
were  opened  "  in  the  matter  of  the  application  for  the  extra- 
dition of  Otto  Sands,  alias  Oscar  Slater,  under  the  Treaty 
existing  between  the  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland 
and  the  United  States  of  America."  Mr.  Charles  Fox 
appeared  as  counsel  for  the  demanding  Government,  while  the 
defendant  was  represented  by  Mr.  Hugh  Gordon  Miller  and 
Mr.  William  A.  Goodhart.  Mr.  Fox  moved  for  an  adjourn- 
ment for  one  week,  as  the  witnesses  from  Glasgow  had  not  yet 
arrived;  and  the  Commissioner  adjourned  the  examination  till 
26th  January.  On  the  25th  the  witnesses  reached  New  York. 

The  Court  resumed  on  26th  January.  While  the  witnesses 
Lambie,  Barrowman,  and  Adams  were  waiting  with  Inspector 
Pyper  outside  the  Court-room  before  the  examination  com- 
menced, a  dramatic  incident  occurred.  Three  men  came  along 
the  corridor  in  which  they  were  standing,  passed  them,  and 
went  into  the  Court ;  whereupon  both  of  the  girls  simultaneously 


Oscar  Slater. 

said  to  Mr.  Pyper  that  one  of  the  three  was  the  man  they 
had  seen  on  the  night  of  the  murder,  Lambie's  expression  being, 
"  I  could  nearly  swear  that  is  the  man!  "  As  this  was  their 
real  recognition  of  Slater,  the  subsequent  identification  in  the 
Court-room  being  only  that  of  the  man  they  had  already 
recognised,  the  incident  is  of  some  importance.  Slater  was 
being  conducted  into  Court  by  Messrs.  Chamberlain  and 
Pinckney,  Deputy  United  States  Marshals,  and  it  was  con- 
tended by  Mr.  Miller  for  the  defence  that  he  was  obviously 
in  the  charge  of  those  officials.  He  was  not,  however,  hand- 
cuffed or  otherwise  branded  as  a  prisoner,  while  his  companions 
do  not  appear  to  have  been  in  uniform,  though  one  of  them  wore 
a  badge,  which  the  witnesses  said  they  did  not  notice,  and  the 
other  was  a  very  tall  man.  Both  girls  denied  that  they  had 
been  prepared  to  see  Slater  where  they  did. 

Mr.  Warnock  was  the  first  witness,  and  proved  a  plan  of 
the  district  in  which  Miss  Gilchrist's  house  was  situated.  It 
was  proposed  to  ask  him  whether  several  persons,  other  than 
Slater,  had  not  been  arrested  by  the  Glasgow  police  in 
connection  with  the  crime,  but  this  question  was  disallowed. 

Helen  Lambie  was  next  examined.  She  gave  her  account 
of  what  happened  on  21st  December  at  15  Queen's  Terrace. 
Much  difficulty  was  apparently  caused  by  the  absence  of  a 
plan  of  the  premises,  the  structural  arrangement  of  which 
counsel  could  not  understand,  while  the  meaning  of  the  localism 
"  close  "  was  found  to  be  incommunicable  to  the  American 
mind.  On  the  other  hand,  counsel's  use  of  the  word  "  apart- 
ment "  in  the  French  sense,  as  referring  to  the  whole  house, 
was  equally  puzzling  to  the  witness,  that  term  being  invariably 
used  in  Scotland  to  describe  a  single  room.  When  asked  if 
she  saw  in  Court  the  man  she  had  seen  in  the  hall  on  the 
night  of  the  murder,  Lambie  replied,  "  One  is  very  suspicious, 
if  anything,"  and  added,  "  The  clothes  he  had  on  that  night 
he  hasn't  got  on  to-day;  but  his  face  I  could  not  tell."  The 
Commissioner — "  What  did  you  say  about  his  face?  "  Witness 

V  \f 

— "  I  couldn't  tell  his  face;  I  never  saw  his  face."  She  then 
described  his  dress  so  far  as  she  recollected — a  three-quarter 
length  fawn-coloured  coat,  "  something  like  a  waterproof  coat," 
and  a  cap  which  "looked  like  one  of  these  Donegal  caps  "; 
she  also  gave  a  representation  of  the  peculiarity  in  the  man's 
walk,  upon  which  alone  she  depended  for  recognising  him. 
Finally  she  identified  the  defendant  as  the  man  she  tiad  seen 


Introduction. 

in  the  hall  of  Miss  Gilchrist's  house.  In  cross-examination 
Lambie  repeated  that  she  did  not  see  the  man's  face  that 
night.  "  I  saw  the  walk;  it  is  not  the  face  I  went  by,  but  the 
walk."  She  stated  that  the  missing  brooch  had  one  row  of 
diamonds,  while  that  pledged  by  the  defendant,  which  she 
had  been  shown  in  the  pawnshop  in  Glasgow,  had  three  rows. 
She  denied  that  she  had  been  in  any  way  prompted  to  recognise 
the  defendant  in  the  corridor,  or  that  she  had  ever  been  shown 
his  photograph,  in  the  newspapers  or  otherwise.  [It  will  be 
observed  that  the  colour  of  the  coat  and  character  of  the  hat 
differ  from  those  given  by  Lambie  in  her  original  description 
to  the  police,  and  are  here  assimilated  to  those  given  by 
Barrowman.] 

The  next  witness  was  Mary  Barrowman,  who  recounted  how 
she  had  seen  a  man  run  from  the  house  on  the  night  in 
question.  The  "  close  "  difficulty  was  again  in  evidence.  She 
described  the  man  as  having  a  slight  twist  in  his  nose,  and  as 
wearing  a  fawn-coloured  waterproof,  a  Donegal  hat,  and  brown 
boots.  When  asked  if  she  saw  the  man  present  in  Court,  she 
first  said  that  the  defendant  was  something  like  him,  and  then 
that  he  was  very  like  him.  In  cross-examination  Barrowman 
admitted  that,  before  identifying  the  defendant,  she  had  been 
shown  a  photograph  of  him.  She  had  mentioned  the  twist  in 
the  nose  to  her  mother  on  the  night  of  the  crime,  and  to  the 
police  two  days  later. 

Arthur  Montague  Adams  was  then  examined,  and  described 
what  he  saw  and  did  on  the  night  of  the  murder,  the  "  close  " 
and  "  apartment  "  being  still  a  cause  of  stumbling.  He  said 
the  man  in  the  hall  was  dressed  in  a  light  grey  coat,  which 
looked  like  a  waterproof,  and  dark  trousers;  his  hands  were 
in  his  pockets,  and  his  head  was  slightly  bowed.  Witness 
thought  he  wore  a  hat;  he  was  sharp  featured,  clean  shaven, 
and  "  rather  a  gentlemanly  fellow."  The  defendant  was 
"  very  much  like  him."  In  cross-examination  Adams  said  he 
had  noticed  nothing  extraordinary  about  the  man's  walk,  nor 
did  he  remark  the  twist  in  the  nose.  He  would  not  go  further 
than  that  the  defendant  "  resembled  him  very  much."  The 
hearing  was  then  adjourned  till  28th  January. 

When  the  Court  met  on  that  day  Mr.  Fox  offered  in  evidence 
depositions  of  Helen  Lambie,  Mary  Barrowman,  Agnes  Brown, 
Allan  M'Lean,  George  Sabin,  John  Pyper,  Arthur  Montague 
Adams,  Robert  Beveridge,  Louise  Freedman,  Elsie  Hoppe, 


Oscar  Slater. 

John  Ord,  and  Gordon  Henderson;  also  the  depositions  and 
certificates  of  John  Glaister,  M.D.,  and  Hugh  Gait,  M.D. — 
all  of  which  had  been  taken  in  Glasgow,  as  above  narrated. 
These  documents,  being  duly  authenticated  in  terms  of  the 
Act  of  Congress  of  3rd  August,  1882,  were  admitted  in  evidence; 
and  the  hearing  was  further  adjourned  till  the  29th  to  allow 
defendant's  counsel  to  examine  the  same. 

On  the  resumption  of  the  hearing,  Helen  Lambie  was 
recalled  for  further  examination  by  Mr.  Miller,  and  again  asked 
to  imitate  the  characteristic  in  the  man's  walk  to  which  she 
had  testified.  As  this  peculiarity  consisted  in  the  motion 
of  his  legs,  which  it  was  obviously  impossible  for  a  female 
witness  to  illustrate,  the  girl  was  subjected  to  a  good  deal  of 
useless  browbeating.  She  repeated  that  she  had  been  shown 
no  photograph  of  the  defendant ;  and  being  asked  if  she  could 
give  any  reason  why  none  was  exhibited  to  her,  as  well  as  to 
Adams  and  Barrowman,  replied,  ''  Because  I  couldn't  have 
known  it  if  it  had  been  shown  to  me."  She  now  gave  the 
man's  height  as  an  additional  factor  in  her  recognition.  She 
had  stated  in  her  original  deposition  that  the  man  was  thin ; 
had  deponed,  on  the  same  occasion,  "  I  couldn't  say  whether 
he  had  any  beard,  moustache,  or  whiskers,  or  was  clean 
shaven  " ;  and  the  deposition  made  no  mention  of  the  peculiar 
walk.  With  reference  to  her  recognising  the  defendant  in 
the  corridor,  she  denied  that  she  had  been  told  he  was  coming, 
or  that  Mr.  Pyper  had  described  to  her  the  man  she  was 
there  to  identify.  She  was  long  and  severely  questioned 
as  to  her  relations  with  Patrick  Nugent,  a  bookmaker  of 
her  acquaintance,  who  had  visited  her  at  15  Queen's  Terrace, 
the  suggestion  being  that,  as  she  admitted  having  told  him  her 
mistress  was  a  rich  lady  and  had  a  great  many  jewels,  he  was 
therefore  concerned  in  the  affair.  Mr.  Miller  closed  his 
examination  with  the  following  questions  :  — "  Have  your  sus- 
picions in  this  case  ever  turned  towards  that  gambler 
[Nugent]? — A.  Never.  Q.  Do  you  know  any  other  man  who 
would  be  as  familiar  with  those  premises,  the  wealth  of  the 
old  lady,  her  jewellery,  ancl  the  way  to  get  into  those  premises 
as  that  man? — A.  No,  sir."  The  Commissioner  then  asked, 
"  Was  the  man  you  met  in  that  hallway,  when  you  came  in 
from  buying  the  paper,  this  gambler  he  speaks  of?  "  to  which 
witness  answered,  "  No,  sir."  In  reply  to  Mr.  Fox,  Lambie 
stated  that  she  had  neither  seen  nor  heard  anything  of  Nugent 


Introduction. 

since  the  beginning  of  September.  [It  should  be  explained 
that  no  suspicion  whatever  now  attaches  to  Nugent  in  regard 
to  the  case.] 

Mary  Barrowman  was  recalled  by  Mr.  Miller,  and  admitted 
describing  in  her  deposition  as  tall  and  thin  the  man  she  had 
seen  in  West  Princes  Street.  She  would  describe  the  defendant 
in  similar  terms.  Frederick  F.  Chamberlain,  Deputy  United 
States  Marshal,  gave  evidence  as  to  bringing  the  defendant 
into  Court  along  with  another  official,  and  passing  Lambie 
and  Barrowman  in  the  corridor.  He  was  wearing  his  official 
badge  at  the  time. 

David  Jacobs,  dealer  in  diamond  jewellery,  New  York, 
was  next  examined.  He  had  known  the  defendant  for 
eight  years,  both  in  London  and  New  York,  as  a 
dentist  who  dealt  in  jewellery,  and  he  had  many  dealings 
with  him  in  diamonds.  He  knew  his  handwriting.  He  had 
received  from  the  defendant  the  following  letter :  — 

Glasgow,    29/11/08. 
Dear  Jacobs, 

I  have  been  coming  too  late  to  see  your  wife  in  London,  and 
I  hope  that  your  wife  and  family  are  in  good  health.  I  expecting  to 
be  ready  end  of  January  to  come  over  to  New  York  myself.  Matters 
are  here  very  bad.  The  New  York  bank  affairs  have  done  a  lot 
to  it.  Now  I  have  found  out  here  in  Scotland  it  would  be  easy  for 
me  to  pawn  some  of  your  emeralds  not  only  in  Glasgow ;  there  are  a 
lot  of  small  towns  around  Glasgow,  also  in  Ireland.  If  you  like,  send 
me  a  lot  of  mounted  emeralds  over  without  any  diamonds  around, 
special  scarf  pins,  and  some  loose  emeralds ;  also  send  me  the  price 
list.  Don't  let  me  wait  too  long,  because  I  have  only  two  months  time 
here.  The  profits  I  will  divide  with  you.  I  am  bringing  the  tickets 
over  to  you.  I  have  been  fourteen  days  ago  in  London,  and  have 
spoken  to  Carry.  He  made  some  good  business.  One  lot  I  knowing 
of  from  Russia  over  7000  pounds.  I  was  offered  to  buy  two  lots 
of  loose  coloured  stones,  and  only  you  know  I  am  not  a  correct  judge, 
and  Rogers  has  advised  me  not  to  buy.  Bravington  in  Kings  X 
have  spoken  to  me  about  your  affair,  and  have  told  me  you  would 
be  all  right  with  your  affair,  only  your  friends  there  are  the  people 
is  all  could  do  the  harm.  Rogers  and  I  have  also  seen  Blytell,  and  he 
sends  the  best  regards  to  you.  I  am  coming  over  with  Rogers  end  of 
January  to  start  some  business.  Send  the  kind  regards  to  the  two 
Wrones.  In  case  you  don't  like  to  send  the  stuff,  please  send 
answer.  Best  regards  to  you  and  your  friends. 

OSCAR  SLATER. 
Care  of  Anderson,  69  St.  George's  Road,  Glasgow,  Scotland. 

[Jacobs'  answer  to  this  letter,  which  reached  Glasgow  after 
Slater  had  left  for  America,  is  printed  in  the  Appendix.] 
Witness  saw  no  peculiarity  in  defendant's  walk.  'Cross- 
examined  by  Mr.  Fox,  witness  said  that  he  had  only  heard  that 
defendant  was  a  dentist.  He  never  knew  his  address  in 


Oscar  Slater. 

London.  Beyond  dealing  with  him  in  jewellery,  witness  did  not 
know  how  he  made  his  living.  Henry  P.  Wrone,  jeweller,  New 
York,  stated  that  he  had  known  defendant  for  two  or  three 
years,  and  had  dealt  in  jewellery  and  diamonds  with  him. 
A  year  and  a  half  before,  he  had  repaired  for  the  defendant 
a  diamond  crescent  brooch  with  three  rows  of  stones.  Cross- 
examined  by  Mr.  Fox,  witness  denied  that  he  had  re-set 
jewellery  for  the  defendant;  the  latter  had  never  brought 
him  loose  diamonds  to  sell,  nor  any  jewellery  the  setting  of 
which  appeared  to  have  been  changed.  He  had  bought  no 
English  jewellery  from  defendant. 

Mr.  Adams,  recalled,  said  that  he  had  never  been  asked 
by  the  Glasgow  police  to  identify  Nugent  as  the  man  he  had 
seen  in  the  hall.  In  reply  to  Mr.  Fox,  he  stated  that  he 
had  heard  Lambie  and  Barrowman  say,  "  That  is  the  man," 
when  defendant  came  along  the  corridor.  He  did  not  observe 
that  the  official  who  accompanied  him  was  wearing  a  badge. 
The  hearing  was  then  adjourned  till  6th  February. 

When  the  Court  met  on  that  date,  Mr.  Miller,  for  the 
defence,  said  the  defendant's  counsel  felt  that  the  British 
Government  had  not  established  under  the  Treaty  the  case 
of  identity  which  was  necessary ;  that  the  defendant  was 
innocent,  and  his  counsel  believed  him  innocent:  but  rather 
than  have  any  misapprehension  about  his  connection  with 
Glasgow,  the  defendant  had  determined  to  go  back  and  face 
any  charge  that  might  be  made  against  him.  He  only  asked 
that  the  evidence  of  the  witnesses,  who  testified  to  his  character 
in  New  York,  should  be  admitted  in  the  Scottish  Court.  The 
Commissioner  said  that  a  transcript  of  the  proceedings  would 
be  certified  as  correct  for  production  in  Scotland.  [This  was 
not,  however,  laid  before  the  jury  at  the  trial  in  Edinburgh, 
where  it  was  only  used  by  the  prisoner's  counsel  for  the  purpose 
of  cross-examining  Lambie,  Adams,  and  Barrowman.] 

Mr.  Miller  then  called  Sigmund  Biber,  real  estate  broker, 
New  York,  who  stated  that  he  had  known  defendant  for  two  and 
a  half  years,  and  had  bought  a  diamond  ring  and  a  watch 
from  him  two  years  before.  He  was  introduced  to  him  by 
witness's  brother  in  Germany,  and  considere3  him  a  respon- 
sible man  in  business  affairs.  He  had  only  one  transaction 
with  him.  Bruno  Wolfram,  dealer  in  live  stock,  New  York, 
stated  that  he  had  known  defendant  for  over  two  years.  His 
general  reputation  was  that  of  a  reliable  man.  He  had  sold 


Introduction. 

him  three  fox  terriers,  and  knew  him  as  manager  of  a  social  club 
in  Sixth  Avenue.  He  had  received  a  postcard  from  defendant, 
dated  from  Glasgow  on  25th  December,  1908,  saying  he  was 
returning  to  the  States ;  witness  had  left  the  postcard  at 
home.  He  had  found  him  trustworthy  in  his  business  trans- 
actions. In  cross-examination,  the  witness  admitted  that 
the  sociability  of  the  club  consisted  in  its  members  playing 
cards  for  money.  He  knew  that  defendant  dealt  in  jewellery. 
Mr.  Miller  then  waived  further  examination,  and  Mr.  Fox 
moved  that  the  defendant  be  remanded  in  the  custody  of  the 
United  States  Marshal,  to  await  the  action  of  the  Secretary 
of  State.  The  motion  was  granted  by  the  Commissioner, 
and  the  defendant  was  remanded  accordingly  until  the  warrant 
for  his  extradition  should  be  issued  by  the  proper  authorities 
at  Washington. 

The  witnesses  Lambie,  Adams,  and  Barrowman  having 
sailed  for  England  in  the  "  Baltic,"  reached  home  on  8th 
February,  Mr.  Warnock  and  Inspector  Pyper  remaining  in 
New  York  to  await  the  warrant  for  extradition.  This  arrived 
from  the  State  Department  in  Washington  on  the  1 1th ; 
and  on  the  14th  these  officers,  with  their  prisoner,  sailed 
direct  for  Glasgow  in  the  Anchor  liner  "  Columbia,"  taking 
with  them  his  luggage,  which  had  been  delivered  to  them 
sealed  with  the  United  States  Customs  seal.  The  woman 
who  accompanied  Slater  to  America,  and,  since  his  arrest  on 
the  "  Lusitania,"  had  been  detained  in  the  immigrants' 
quarters  on  Ellis  Island,  took  her  passage  in  the  "  Campania  " 
for  Liverpool,  whence  she  went  to  her  friends  in  Paris.  Though 
referred  to  in  the  New  York  proceedings  as  "  Mrs.  Slater," 
she  was  not  married  to  the  prisoner,  his  wife,  from  whom 
he  had  separated,  being  still  alive.  The  former  was  a  French- 
woman, twenty-three  years  of  age,  named  Andr^e  Junio  Antoine, 
who  had  cohabited  with  him  for  several  years. 

Pending  the  result  of  the  extradition  application,  the 
Glasgow  police  had  been  busy  securing  additional  evidence 
in  the  case.  Several  persons  were  found  who  had  seen  a 
man  watching  Miss  Gilchrist's  house  and  haunting  the 
vicinity  of  West  Princes  Street  for  weeks  before  the  murder. 
The  discovery  of  the  auger,  the  supposed  weapon,  leaked  out, 
and  was  duly  chronicled  in  the  Press,  which  daily  added  to 
the  long  list  of  "  Sensational  Developments,"  "  Startling 
Discoveries,"  "  Important  New  Clues,"  "  Extraordinary 


Oscar  Slater. 

Revelations,"  "  Remarkable  Evidence,"  "  Interesting  Inter- 
views," and  "  Alleged  Confessions,"  with  which  the  popular 
mind  was  persistently  inflamed.  Public  excitement  was 
intense,  and  the  arrival  of  the  "  Columbia  "  was  impatiently 
awaited.  The  liner  reached  the  Tail  of  the  Bank,  off 

Greenock,  at  mid-day  on  21st  February.  Large  crowds  had 
assembled  on  the  chance  of  Slater  landing  at  that  port,  but 
the  tide  being  favourable  the  vessel  proceeded  up  the  Clyde 
towards  Glasgow.  Near  Renfrew,  however,  she  stopped  ;  the 
officers,  with  their  prisoner  and  his  baggage,  were  landed, 
and  left  for  Glasgow  in  two  motor  cars,  thus  evading  the 
great  concourse  of  people  who  were  awaiting  the  ship's  arrival 
at  her  berth  at  Stobcross  Quay.  After  many  difficulties  and 
delays,  Slater  was  at  length  safely  in  the  hands  of  the  authori- 
ties, or,  in  the  more  eloquent  language  of  a  contemporary 
journalist,  "  Hurried  across  the  Atlantic  in  an  ocean  greyhound, 
slung  ashore  at  a  wayside  wharf,  and  whisked  along  the  last 
stage  of  the  4000  mile  journey  in  a  motor  car :  such  was  his 
transit." 

On  the  party's  arrival  at  the  Central  Police  Station,  the 
prisoner's  baggage,  consisting  of  seven  pieces,  was  unsealed 
and  opened  in  his  presence  by  Mr.  Warnock  and  Inspector 
Pyper.  In  a  black  leather  trunk  were  found  a  waterproof 
coat  and  a  claw-hammer,  of  which  we  shall  hear  further  in 
the  sequel.  A  soft  felt  hat  and  two  cloth  caps  were  also 
taken  possession  of  by  the  police.  In  a  leather  case  in  one 
of  his  trunks  was  found  a  business  card,  bearing  the  printed 
name  and  designation,  "  Oscar  Slater,  Dealer  in  Diamonds 
and  Precious  Stones,  33  Soho  Square,  Oxford  Street,  W.," 
and  an  extract  certificate  of  marriage  of  Oscar  Leschziner 
Slater  to  Marie  Curtis  Pryor,  dated  12th  July,  1902. 

On  21st  and  22nd  February  the  prisoner  was  shown  to  a 
number  of  witnesses  in  the  Central  Police  Station  for  the  purpose 
of  identification  by  them.  What  occurred  on  these  occasions 
we  shall  have  to  consider  in  dealing  with  the  evidence  at  the 
trial. 

The  morning  after  his  arrival  the  prisoner  was  brought  up 
at  the  Central  Police  Court  upon  the  following  charge :  — 

Oscar  Slater,  alias  Otto  Sands,  alias  Anderson,  you  are  charged 
with  having,  on  21st  December,  1908,  in  Marion  Gilchrist's  house,  II 
Queen's  Terrace,  West  Princes  Street,  Glasgow,  assaulted  the  said 
Marion  Gilchrist,  and  beaten  her  and  fractured  her  skull,  and 
murdered  her. 


Introduction. 

Mr.  Ewing  Speirs,  of  Messrs.  Joseph  Shaughnessy  <fe  Son, 
solicitors,  Glasgow,  appeared  for  Slater,  who  was  remanded 
for  forty-eight  hours.  On  the  24th  he  was  formally  remitted 
to  the  Sheriff,  before  whom,  later  in  the  day,  he  emitted  the 
following  declaration :  — 

My  name  is  Oscar  Slater.  I  am  a  native  of  Germany,  married, 
thirty-eight  years  of  age,  a  dentist,  and  have  no  residence  at  present. 
I  know  nothing  about  the  charge  of  having  assaulted  Marion  Gil- 
christ  and  murdering  her.  I  am  innocent.  All  which  I  declare  to  be 
truth. 

Thereafter  he  was  removed  to  Duke  Street  Prison,  to  await 
his  trial  in  the  High  Court  of  Justiciary,  at  Edinburgh. 

Meanwhile,  on  22nd  February,  Professors  Glaister  and 
Littlejohn  had  been  requested  by  the  authorities  to  examine 
and  report  upon  the  following  articles: — (1)  Waterproof  coat; 
(2)  hat;  (3)  hammer,  all  of  which  had  been  found,  as  above 
mentioned,  in  the  prisoner's  baggage ;  and  (4)  auger  found 
in  the  back  court  of  Miss  Gilchrist's  house.  The  results  of 
their  examination  were  embodied  in  a  report  which  is  printed  in 
the  report  of  the  trial. 

The  preparation  of  the  case  for  the  prosecution  entailed  an 
immense  amount  of  labour  upon  the  Crown  officials,  and  the 
indictment,  to  which  were  appended  lists  of  sixty-nine  pro- 
ductions and  ninety-eight  witnesses,  was  not  served  on  the 
prisoner  until  6th  April.  It  was  in  these  terms — 

Oscar  Slater,  sometime  residing  at  69  St.  George's  Road,  Glasgow, 
and  presently  a  prisoner  in  the  prison  of  Glasgow,  you  are  indicted 
at  the  instance  of  the  Right  Honourable  Alexander  Ure,  His  Majesty's 
Advocate,  and  the  charge  against  you  is  that  you  did,  on  21st  December, 
1908,  in  Marion  Gilchrist's  house,  15  Queen's  Terrace,  West  Princes 
Street,  Glasgow,  assault  the  said  Marion  Gilchrist,  and  did  beat  her 
with  a  hammer  or  other  blunt  instrument,  and  fracture  her  skull,  and 
did  murder  her. 

The  trial  was  appointed  to  take  place  before  the  High  Court 
at  Edinburgh  on  Monday,  3rd  May.  The  pleading  diet  was 
held  at  Glasgow  on  20th  April,  in  the  Old  Court,  Jail  Square, 
before  Sheriff-Substitute  Mackenzie.  Mr.  Hart,  Procurator- 
fiscal  for  Lanarkshire,  represented  the  Crown,  and  Mr.  Ewing 
Speirs  appeared  for  the  prisoner.  The  indictment  having 
been  read,  the  Sheriff  put  the  question,  "  Are  you  guilty  or 
not  guilty?  "  to  which  the  prisoner  replied,  "  I  am  not  guilty." 
He  was  then  formally  remitted  to  the  High  Court,  and  was 
taken  back  to  Duke  Street  Prison. 

xxxi 


Oscar  Slater. 

In  the  course  of  the  following  week  Slater  was  removed  from 
Glasgow  to  the  Calton  Jail,  Edinburgh,  and  there,  on  28th 
April,  a  consultation  was  held  with  Mr.  A.  L.  M'Clure,  K.C. , 
Sheriff  of  Argyll,  and  Mr.  John  Mair,  advocate,  Edinburgh, 
the  counsel  retained  for  the  defence.  Although  over  four 
months  had  elapsed  since  the  tragedy,  public  excitement  con- 
tinued unabated,  and  the  result  of  the  impending  trial  was 
awaited  with  intense  interest. 

The  High  Court  of  Justiciary  in  Edinburgh  has  been  the 
scene  of  many  a  grim  and  tragic  spectacle,  the  chief  actors 
in  which  are  memorable  in  the  annals  of  Scottish  crime. 
Among  the  famous  occupants  of  its  historic  dock  the  names 
of  Burke,  Madeleine  Smith,  Pritchard,  Chantrelle,  Laurie,  and 
Monson  are  still  preserved,  as  the  protagonists  of  their  respec- 
tive dramas.  The  man  who,  in  his  turn,  sat  in  their  seat  upon 
the  like  awful  occasion,  was  the  central  figure  in  a  tragedy  as 
strange  as  any  of  those  by  which  they  are  remembered. 

Lord  Guthrie  presided ;  the  prosecution  was  conducted  by 
the  Lord  Advocate  (Mr.  Alexander  Ure,  K.C.),  assisted  by  Mr. 
T.  B.  Morison,  K.C.,  and  Mr.  Lyon  Mackenzie,  Advocates- 
depute  ;  the  prisoner,  as  already  mentioned,  was  defended  by 
Mr.  M'Clure  and  Mr.  Mair. 

The  following  record  of  the  trial  contains  a  full  report  of 
the  evidence,  that  of  every  important  witness  being  printed 
verbatim.  The  Lord  Advocate's  address  to  the  jury — than 
which  few  more  powerful  have  been  heard  within  those  walls — 
brilliantly  presents  the  case  for  the  prosecution  in  its  strongest 
light ;  while  that  of  Mr.  M'Clure,  though  lacking  the 
trenchancy  of  the  Lord  Advocate's  speech,  contains  an  elaborate 
criticism  of  the  discrepancies  in  the  Crown  case.  The  weighty 
and  impressive  charge  of  the  presiding  judge  admirably  holds 
the  balance  of  the  momentous  issue.  In  view  of  these  advan- 
tages, the  reader  might  well  be  left  to  a  consideration  of  the 
evidence  as  it  stands ;  but,  regard  being  had  to  its  extent  and 
complexity,  it  may  perhaps  assist  him  in  its  perusal  briefly  to 
examine  here  certain  of  its  more  important  features. 

The  evidence  adduced  for  the  prosecution  was  (a)  direct  and 
(6)  indirect,  or  circumstantial.  By  direct  evidence  the  Crown 
sought  to  establish  from  the  testimony  of  eye-witnesses  the 
identity  of  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  and  (1)  a  man  who  before 
the  murder  haunted  the  vicinity  of  the  house,  (2)  a  man  seen 
leaving  the  house  after  the  murder.  By  circumstantial  evi- 


Oscar  Slater  on  trial  in  the  High  Court  of  Justiciary,  Edinburgh 
i'l-nui  a  I'lintiHjfiiiih  taken  in  Court 


Introduction. 

dence  the  Crown  endeavoured  to  prove,  from  the  behaviour  of 
the  prisoner  himself,  both  before  and  after  the  crime,  and 
from  other  relevant  facts  and  circumstances,  that  his  was 
certainly  the  hand  that  did  the  deed. 

The  accused,  as  already  mentioned,  was,  on  21st  and  22nd 
February,  within  the  Central  Police  Station,  identified  by 
twelve  witnesses  as  the  man  they  had  seen  watching  the  house. 
Prior  to  their  seeing  the  man  in  West  Princes  Street  none  of 
them  (excepting  Constable  Brien)  knew  him  by  sight,  and  none 
of  them  had  ever  seen  Slater.  Some  saw  the  man  five  or 
six  times,  others  once  only ;  some  saw  him  at  night,  others 
by  day.  With  regard  to  the  manner  of  their  identification 
it  may  be  generally  observed  that  all  of  them  had  previously 
seen  in  the  newspapers  photographs  of  Slater,  as  an  obvious 
foreigner,  and  had  read  the  alternative  descriptions  of  the 
wanted  man  furnished  to  the  police  by  (1)  Adams  and  Lambie 
and  (2)  the  girl  Barrowman.  As  the  prisoner,  in  order  to 
identification,  was  placed  among  eleven  other  men,  nine  being 
policemen  in  plain  clothes,  and  two  being  railway  officials,  all 
Scotsmen,  none  of  whom  in  any  way  resembled  him,  it  is  not 
too  much  to  say  that  the  task  of  selecting  the  suspect  was 
unattended  by  serious  difficulty.  All  the  witnesses  picked  him 
out  with  ease,  but  the  effect  of  this  unanimity  was  somewhat 
lessened  when,  in  the  witness-box,  they  had  to  give  the  grounds 
of  their  belief. 

Mrs.  M'Haffie  lived  in  the  first  flat  of  16  West  Princes 
Street,  on  the  opposite  side  from  Miss  Gilchrist's  house,  but 
nearer  St.  George's  Road.  She  observed  from  her  window, 
for  some  weeks  before  the  murder,  a  man  loitering  on  the 
other  side  of  the  street.  She  saw  him  there  on  five  or  six 
occasions,  always  in  the  afternoon,  and  for  half  an  hour  at  a 
time.  He  was  dark,  had  a  moustache,  and  wore  a  light 
overcoat  (not  a  waterproof),  check  trousers,  spats,  and  a  black 
bowler  hat.  She  observed  nothing  peculiar  about  his  nose. 
He  did  not  carry  himself  well,  but  slouched  along  with  his 
hands  in  his  pockets.  She  last  saw  him  eight  or  nine  days 
before  the  murder.  The  prisoner  was  the  man.  He  was  the 
only  man  of  foreign  appearance  who  was  in  the  room  when  she 
identified  him  at  the  Central  Police  Station. 

Margaret  Dickson  M'Haffie,  her  daughter,  gave  similar 
evidence.  On  one  or  two  occasions  the  man  was  wearing  a 
black  morning  coat  instead  of  a  light  overcoat,  as  well  as 


Oscar   Slater. 

light  check  trousers.  She  admitted  that,  in  March,  she  had 
told  the  agent  for  the  prisoner  that  she  was  not  then  quite 
sure  of  the  accused  being  the  man,  and  was  only  prepared  to 
say  there  was  some  resemblance ;  but  she  had  been  thinking 
it  over,  and  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  he  was  the  man. 

Annie  Rankin  M'Haffie,  another  daughter,  said  that  four 
weeks  before  the  murder,  between  seven  and  eight  at  night, 
a  man  rang  the  bell  of  their  front  door,  which  bore  the 
name  "  Mr.  M'Haffie  "  on  a  brass  plate,  and  asked  her  if 
any  one  named  Anderson  lived  there.  She  said  "  No,"  and 
he  turned  and  walked  downstairs.  The  bell  rang  again  within 
a  minute,  and  she  found  her  cousin  Madge  at  the  door,  who 
said  she  had  met  a  man  on  the  stair.  That  was  the  only 
time  she  saw  the  man.  The  prisoner  was  like  him.  In 
reply  to  the  judge,  witness  did  not  notice  anything  about  the 
man's  accent;  he  did  not  appear  to  be  a  foreigner.  [It  is  to 
be  noted  that  Slater  speaks  broken  English,  and  that  his 
accent  is  unmistakably  foreign.] 

Madge  M'Haffie  spoke  to  calling  at  her  aunt's  house  on  the 
occasion  in  question,  and  meeting  a  peculiar-looking  man  on 
the  stair.  He  was  dark,  and  had  a  moustache.  His  nose 
did  not  attract  her  attention.  He  wore  black  check  trousers, 
a  fawn  overcoat,  a  black  bowler  hat,  and  fawn  gaiters.  A 
few  days  later  she  saw  from  her  aunt's  window  the  same  man 
walking  up  and  down.  On  leaving  the  house  she  passed  him 
in  St.  George's  Road.  He  walked  with  a  shuffling  gait.  The 
prisoner  was  fairly  like  the  man  in  general  appearance. 

Constable  Brien  knew  the  prisoner  by  sight,  having  seen 
him  several  times  in  St.  George's  Road  for  seven  weeks  before 
the  murder.  One  night,  a  week  before  21st  December,  he  saw 
him,  at  half-past  nine,  standing  against  the  railings  in  West 
Princes  Street,  a  few  yards  from  the  corner  of  St.  George's 
Road.  Witness  thought  he  was  drunk,  and  took  a  good  look 
at  him,  but  saw  he  was  sober.  He  had  on  a  light  coat  and 
a  hat.  When  witness  identified  the  prisoner  the  other  men 
present  were  constables  in  undress  and  detectives.  [It  may 
be  mentioned,  with  general  reference  to  the  evidence  of  these 
witnesses,  that  the  distance  between  Slater's  house  in  St. 
George's  Road  and  West  Princes  Street  is  less  than  a  quarter 
of  a  mile.] 

Constable  Walker,  who  was  on  night  duty  in  the  beginning 
of  December,  at  a  quarter  to  six  o'clock  on  1st  December  saw  a 


Introduction. 

man  standing  on  the  edge  of  the  pavement  opposite  15  Queen's 
Terrace.  He  thought  he  recognised  him  as  Mr.  Paradise 
(a  Crown  witness),  whom  he  knew,  and  waved  to  him  across 
the  street.  He  saw  he  was  mistaken.  Three  nights  later  he 
met  the  same  man,  at  the  same  hour,  further  down  the  street, 
walking  towards  Queen's  Terrace.  On  17th  or  18th  December 
he  again  saw  the  man,  at  a  quarter  to  seven,  standing  at  the 
east  end  of  West  Princes  Street,  near  St.  George's  Road.  On 
each  occasion  witness  was  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  street. 
When  he  identified  the  prisoner  as  the  man,  he  knew  the  man 
he  was  to  identify  was  a  person  of  foreign  appearance.  The 
other  men  there  were  policemen  and  detectives. 

Euphemia  Cunningham,  employed  in  St.  George's  Road,  was 
going  home  for  dinner  about  one  o'clock  on  Monday,  14th 
December,  through  West  Princes  Street,  when  she  saw  a  man 
standing  at  the  corner  of  Queen's  Crescent  looking  towards 
Miss  Gilchrist's  house.  On  15th,  16th,  and  17th  December 
she  saw  the  same  man  at  the  same  time  and  place.  On  each 
occasion,  when  she  passed  again  about  two  o'clock,  the  man 
had  gone.  He  was  of  foreign  appearance,  very  dark,  with 
a  sallow  complexion,  and  heavy-featured.  He  was  clean 
shaven.  She  saw  no  peculiarity  about  his  nose.  He  wore 
a  dark  tweed  coat  and  a  green  cap  with  a  peak.  She  only 
saw  the  side  of  his  face  and  the  back  of  his  head.  She 
identified  the  prisoner  in  the  police  office  as  the  man,  where 
he  was  shown  to  her  in  a  green  cap,  which  did  not  belong  to 
him.  She  had  previously  recognised  him  from  a  photograph 
of  his  full  face,  with  a  moustache.  When  she  identified  the 
prisoner  the  other  men  present  were  obviously  policemen. 

William  Campbell  accompanied  the  witness  Cunningham  on 
15th,  16th,  and  17th  December,  and  corroborated  her  state- 
ment. He  had  a  better  opportunity  of  seeing  the  man  than 
she  had,  because  he  passed  next  to  him.  There  was  a  general 
resemblance  between  the  prisoner  and  the  man,  but  he  could 
not  positively  identify  him. 

Alexander  Gillies  resided  in  a  flat  at  46  West  Princes  Street, 
directly  opposite  Miss  Gilchrist's  house.  On  the  evening  of 
the  Wednesday,  Thursday,  or  Friday  before  the  murder,  on 
returning  home  at  a  quarter  to  six  o'clock,  he  found  a  man 
standing  at  the  foot  of  the  common  stair  at  the  back  of  the 
close,  the  door  of  which  was  open.  The  man  turned  his  back 
and  blocked  the  passage ;  witness  asked  him  to  let  him  pass, 


Oscar  Slater. 

but  the  man  went  up  to  the  second  flight,  and  still  stood  on  the 
stair.  Witness  had  again  to  ask  leave  to  pass,  passed  him, 
and  entered  his  own  house.  The  man's  face  was  then  towards 
him.  He  was  sallow,  dark-haired,  and  clean  shaven ;  and 
wore  a  long  fawn-coloured  coat  and  a  cap.  The  prisoner 
resembled  him,  but  witness  could  not  say  he  was  the  same 
man. 

Robert  Brown  Bryson  was  walking  from  Queen's  Crescent 
into  West  Princes  Street  at  7.40  p.m.  on  Sunday,  20th 
December,  accompanied  by  his  wife.  He  observed  a  man 
standing  at  the  top  of  the  steps  leading  to  the  close  58  West 
Princes  Street,  a  little  to  the  west  of  Miss  Gilchrist's  house,  on 
the  opposite  side,  staring  up  at  her  windows,  which  were 
lighted.  When  the  man  saw  witness  looking  at  him  he  came 
down  the  steps,  met  witness  about  four  feet  from  the  close,  and 
passed  him  on  the  left,  walking  slowly  westward.  Witness 
turned  round  and  watched  him  as  he  walked  away.  The  walk 
did  not  attract  his  notice,  further  than  that  it  was  not  smart. 
The  man  wore  a  black  coat  (or  jacket)  and  vest,  and  a  black 
bowler  hat,  but  no  overcoat.  He  had  a  black  moustache  with 
a  slight  droop,  was  sallow,  and  of  foreign  appearance.  Wit- 
ness identified  the  prisoner  as  the  man,  first  from  a  photograph 
of  Slater  shown  him  by  a  detective,  afterwards  at  the  police 
station,  and  then  in  Court.  He  had  drawn  his  wife's  atten- 
tion to  the  man  at  the  time,  but  she  did  not  recollect  his  making 
any  remark  on  the  subject.  [She  was  not  called  as  a  witness 
at  the  trial.]  Witness  was  unable  to  describe  what  the  accused 
was  wearing  when  he,  along  with  the  other  witnesses,  identified 
him  at  the  police  office. 

Andrew  Nairn,  at  a  quarter-past  nine  o'clock  the  same 
night  (Sunday,  20th  December),  was  passing  across  West 
Princes  Street  from  Queen's  Crescent  on  his  way  home.  His 
wife  and  children  were  following  some  distance  behind.  On 
the  north  side  of  West  Princes  Street,  about  one  hundred  and 
twenty  yards  from  Miss  Gilchrist's  house,  he  waited  for  them 
to  join  him.  While  doing  so  he  noticed  a  man  thirteen  yards 
away  on  the  same  side  standing  at  the  corner  of  the  gardens 
in  the  middle  of  the  pavement,  with  his  back  to  the  witness, 
looking  towards  15  Queen's  Terrace.  Witness  did  not  see  his 
face.  He  had  broad  shoulders,  a  longish  neck,  and  black 
hair.  He  wore  a  motor  cap  with  the  flaps  up  and  a  light 
overcoat  reaching  below  the  knees.  Witness  watched  him 


Introduction. 

for  five  minutes  till  his  wife  came  up,  and  pointed  him  out 
to  her,  when  they  left  him  standing  in  the  same  place.  [His 
wife  was  not  called  as  a  witness  at  the  trial.]  Nairn  had 
already  identified  prisoner  in  the  Central  Police  Station  as  the 
man ;  and  being  asked  by  the  Lord  Advocate  if  the  accused 
was  the  man,  witness  said  to  the  prisoner,  "  You  might  turn 
your  back.  Yes,  I  am  certain  that  is  the  man  I  saw."  Pressed 
by  Mr.  M'Clure  as  to  how  he  could  be  so  positive  in  his  identi- 
fication of  a  man  he  had  seen  but  once,  seeing  only  his  back,  at 
a  distance  of  thirteen  yards,  at  9.15  on  a  December  night, 
that  man  being  upon  his  trial  for  murder,  witness  replied, 
"  Oh,  I  will  not  swear  in  fact,  but  I  am  certain  that  he  is  the 
man  I  saw;  but  I  will  not  swear,"  adding  that,  not  having 
seen  the  man's  face,  he  would  not  go  the  length  of  being 
positive.  [The  relative  positions  of  this  witness  and  the  man 
are  indicated  by  the  numbers  8  and  7  upon  the  enlarged  plan 
of  West  Princes  Street.] 

No  attempt  was  made  by  the  defence  to  prove  an  alibi  with 
respect  to  any  one  of  the  occasions  spoken  to  by  the  first  nine 
witnesses  above  mentioned.  But,  in  regard  to  the  testimony 
of  the  two  last,  Bryson  and  Nairn,  it  was  contended  that  the 
prisoner  could  not  have  been  the  man  they  had  seen,  as  he  was 
not  out  of  his  own  house  that  night.  Antoine,  his  mistress, 
and  Schmalz,  his  maid-servant,  swore  that  Slater,  during  the 
time  he  was  in  Glasgow,  always  remained  indoors  the  whole 
day  every  Sunday ;  and  that,  in  particular,  he  was  never  out 
of  the  house  at  all  on  Sunday,  the  20th.  They  further  stated 
that  a  friend  of  his,  named  Samuel  Reid,  dined  with  them  at 
69  St.  George's  Road  that  evening,  coming  about  six  o'clock 
and  remaining  until  10.30  or  10.45.  Reid  deponed  that  he 
dined  with  Slater  at  seven  o'clock  that  night.  He  went  at 
six  and  stayed  till  10.30.  He  had  one  of  his  children  with 
him.  Slater  never  left  the  house  during  his  visit.  He  had 
spent  every  Sunday  evening  with  Slater  while  in  Glasgow, 
and  remembered  the  20th,  as  it  was  the  last  time  he  saw  him, 
witness  going  to  Belfast  next  day.  On  the  night  in  question 
Slater's  moustache  was  growing,  and  was  very  noticeable,  his 
hair  being  very  black.  No  one  could  have  mistaken  him  for 
a  clean-shaven  man. 

At  the  trial  the  learned  judge,  with  general  reference  to 
Antoine's  evidence,  alluded  to  the  "  tremendous  motives  "  which 
she  had  for  standing  by  the  prisoner.  In  the  case  of  Schmalz 


Oscar  Slater. 

these  would  not  operate,  as  her  connection  with  the  Slater 
menage  had  terminated  on  26th  December.  The  Lord  Advo- 
cate elicited  from  Keid,  in  cross-examination,  that  he  was  a 
bookmaker ;  but  this  fact  does  not  necessarily  infer  a  proneness 
to  commit  perjury,  and  in  other  respects  his  evidence  was 
unshaken. 

The  last  witness  to  identify  Slater  as  the  watcher  in  the 
street  was  Mrs.  Liddell,  a  married  sister  of  the  witness  Adams. 
On  Monday,  21st  December,  the  night  of  the  murder,  this 
lady  called  at  her  brother's  house  in  Queen's  Terrace  at  five 
minutes  to  seven.  She  approached  from  the  direction  of 
St.  George's  Road.  Before  reaching  the  door  she  saw  a  man 
leaning  with  his  arm  on  the  railing  under  the  eastmost  window 
of  her  brother's  dining-room.  She  stared  at  him  "  almost 
rudely."  She  only  saw  the  left  side  of  his  face.  She  was 
much  struck  by  the  peculiarity  of  his  nose.  He  had  a  very 
clear  complexion,  not  sallow ;  was  very  dark,  and  was  clean 
shaven.  He  wore  a  low-down  collar,  an  ordinary  cap  of 
brownish  tweed,  and  a  heavy  coat,  also  of  brownish  tweed,  the 
collar  of  which  had  a  hemmed  edge.  It  was  a  thick  coat,  of 
different  material  from  the  waterproof  produced.  After  she 
passed  "  he  glided  from  the  railings  and  disappeared."  She  did 
not  mention  having  seen  the  man  till  the  following  Wednesday 
— two  days  after  the  murder.  When  she  identified  Slater  at 
the  police  station  she  was  surprised  at  his  robust  figure ;  the 
man  at  the  railing  had  the  appearance  of  a  delicate  man, 
"  rather  drawn  together."  Finally,  witness  said  she  believed 
the  prisoner  was  the  man. 

We  now  come  to  the  three  crucial  witnesses  for  the  Crown — 
Lambie,  Adams,  and  Barrowman — with  whose  evidence,  as 
given  at  the  extradition  proceedings  in  New  York,  we  have- 
already  dealt.  The  substance  of  the  evidence  of  Lambie 
and  Adams  forms  the  foregoing  account  of  what  occurred  on 
the  night  of  the  murder  in  the  hall  of  Miss  Gilchrist's  house. 
In  reply  to  the  Lord  Advocate,  Lambie  repeated,  with  some 
variations,  the  story  she  had  told  in  America.  She  looked  at 
the  clock  before  she  went  out — it  was  just  seven.  She  saw  no 
one  in  West  Princes  Street  except  her  friend  the  constable. 
She  was  away  from  the  house  about  ten  minutes  altogether.  She 
still  maintained  that  she  had  not  entered  the  house  when  the 
man  appeared  in  the  hall  and  passed  Adams  on  the  threshold. 
Adams  stood  behind  her  while  she  unlocked  the  door.  When 


Introduction. 

she  did  so,  and  saw  the  man,  she  stepped  back.  "  The  man 
when  he  passed  me  was  very  close  to  me.  I  noticed  that  he 
held  his  head  down.  I  turned  round  to  look  at  him,  and  I 
got  a  good  look  at  him.  I  heard  him  going  down  the  stairs. 
He  did  not  go  down  rapidly ;  he  went  deliberately.  I  went 
instantly  into  the  house.  The  man,  when  I  saw  him  first, 
was  coming  from  the  direction  of  Miss  Gilchrist's  bedroom.  He 
had  nothing  in  his  hand.  He  was  wearing  a  dark  cap,  a  fawn 
overcoat,  and  dark  trousers.  His  coat  was  open.  No.  43 
of  the  productions  is  the  coat  that  he  wore." 

It  is  to  be  observed  that,  had  Lambie  been  standing  in  the 
doorway,  she  would  have  seen  the  man  as  he  descended  the 
stairs ;  if,  as  Adams  states,  she  was  in  the  act  of  entering 
the  kitchen  at  the  time,  she  could  only  hear  him  doing  so. 
Her  version  of  the  scene  should  be  compared  with  that  of 
Adams,  the  next  witness  mentioned. 

In  cross-examination,  Lambie  was  asked  by  Mr.  M'Clure 
what  enabled  her  to  identify  the  waterproof  produced  as 
the  very  coat  the  man  was  wearing,  to  which  her  only  reply 
was,  "  That  is  the  coat  " — an  instance  of  her  mental  capacity 
to  which  Lord  Guthrie  referred  in  his  charge  to  the  jury.  As 
she  stated  in  her  examination-in-chief  that  she  had  seen  the 
man's  face,  and  identified  it  as  the  prisoner's,  Mr.  M'Clure 
made  effective  use  of  her  reiterated  statement  in  America 
that  she  never  saw  the  face,  but  went  by  the  walk  alone. 
She  now  said  what  she  then  meant  was  that  she  did  not  see 
the  full  face,  but  only  the  side ;  she  saw  it  when  he  was 
going  down  the  stair.  The  man  was  clean  shaven.  She 
did  not  notice  the  man  coming  out  of  the  bedroom  door;  he 
was  past  the  door  before  she  saw  him.  When  he  passed 
her  and  Adams,  "  they  were  both  on  the  door  mat."  [Had 
this  been  so,  Lambie  must  have  seen  the  man  face  to  face  as 
he  emerged  from  the  bedroom  door.  If,  as  Adams  swears, 
she  was  then  about  to  enter  the  kitchen,  her  back  was  towards 
the  bedroom  door;  which  her  own  expression,  "  I  turned  round 
to  look  at  him,"  confirms.] 

Arthur  Montague  Adams  deponed  to  the  facts  as  already 
narrated.  The  man  was  a  little  taller  than  witness,  a  little 
broader  in  the  shoulders,  not  a  well-built  man,  but  well 
featured  and  clean  shaven.  He  had  on  dark  trousers,  and  a 
light  overcoat ;  whether  fawn  or  grey  witness  could  not  say, 
and  was  not  sure  as  to  the  kind  of  hat,  but  it  was  not  a  cap. 

xxxix 


Oscar  Slater. 

He  seemed  gentlemanly  and  well  dressed.  He  had  nothing 
in  his  hands.  Witness  saw  nothing  special  about  his  nose, 
and  did  not  notice  anything  about  his  way  of  walking.  When 
Lambie  unlocked  the  door  there  was  no  one  in  the  hall.  She 
made  straight  for  the  kitchen,  had  got  as  far  as  the  hall 
clock,  some  eight  or  ten  steps  in,  and  was  just  going  to 
enter  the  kitchen,  when  the  man  appeared  from  the  bedroom. 
She  was  thoroughly  taken  aback ;  "  she  stood  and  stared, 
and  did  not  open  her  mouth."  Witness  had  no  doubt  at 
all  that  he  had  a  better  opportunity  of  seeing  the  man  than 
Lambie,  because  he  met  him  face  to  face.  The  lobby  was 
well  lit.  The  man  "  walked  quite  coolly,  as  if  the  house 
belonged  to  him,"  till  he  got  up  to  witness,  and  then  darted 
down  the  stair  "  like  greased  lightning,  and  banged  the  door 
at  the  foot  of  the  close."  Witness  had  pointed  out  Slater  in 
the  Commissioner's  room  in  New  York,  but  did  not  say  that 
he  was  the  man  ;  he  said  he  closely  resembled  the  man.  He 
went  by  the  general  appearance  only.  In  cross-examination, 
Mr.  Adams,  quite  fairly,  admitted  that,  before  indicating 
Slater  on  that  occasion,  he  had  seen  him  identified  by  Lambie 
and  Barrowman.  Even  after  all  he  had  heard,  witness  did 
not  give  an  absolutely  confident  opinion  that  the  prisoner  was 
the  man ;  "  it  was  too  serious  a  charge  for  him  to  say  from  a 
passing  glance."  [In  justice  to  Mr.  Adams,  it  has  to  be  borne 
in  mind  that  he  said  he  was  somewhat  short-sighted,  and  had 
not  on  his  spectacles  when  he  saw  the  man  in  the  hall.] 

Had  the  Crown  relied  solely  upon  the  testimony  of  Lambie 
and  Adams  to  identify  the  accused  as  the  murderer,  they  could 
hardly  have  expected  a  verdict ;  but  the  prosecution  was  able 
to  produce  a  witness  of  a  different  calibre,  who  saw  the 
murderer  flying  from  the  house.  This  was  Mary  Barrowman, 
the  message  girl  of  fifteen,  who  had  identified  the  prisoner 
in  the  corridor  and  in  the  Commissioner's  room  at  New  York, 
as  already  mentioned,  and  also  at  the  police  station  in  Glasgow. 
She  repeated  how,  at  the  lamp-post,  she  saw  the  man  run 
from  the  close  and  down  the  steps.  He  came  towards  her 
very  fast,  ran  up  against  her,  and  on  towards  West  Cumber- 
land Street,  down  which  he  turned.  She  got  a  good  look 
at  him,  both  as  he  was  coming  up  to  her  and  when  he  knocked 
up  against  her.  When  he  passed  her,  she  turned  to  look 
^fter  him.  It  was  quite  bright  near  the  lamp-post.  The 
man  was  tall  and  broad-shouldered,  and  "  had  a  slight  twist 

xl 


Introduction. 

in  his  nose."  He  was  clean  shaven  and  dark  haired.  "  He 
had  a  Donegal  hat  on,  and  was  wearing  it  down  on  his  face." 
He  wore  a  fawn  overcoat,  a  dark  suit  of  clothes,  and  dark 
brown  boots.  She  then  told  how  she  turned  back,  and 

followed  the  man  as  far  as  the  next  lamp-post,  until  she  saw 
him  run  round  the  corner  into  West  Cumberland  Street,  when 
she   resumed   her   way.        She   had   picked   out  the  prisoner, 
both  in  America  and  at  the  police  station,  without  any  diffi- 
culty.      On  the  latter  occasion  he  was  shown  to  her  wearing 
the    waterproof    No.    43    of    the    productions,    and    the    hat 
No.   44 ;    both  were  very  like  the   articles  worn  by  the  man 
on   the   night  of   the   murder.        She   had    asked   prisoner   to 
pull  the  hat  down  further,  and  then  recognised  it  as  she  had 
seen  it  that  night.       In  answer  to  the  Lord  Advocate's  final 
question,    "Look    at    the  prisoner:    is   that   the    man?"    she 
replied,  "  Yes,  that  is  the  man  who  knocked  against  me  that 
night."        In    cross-examination,    Barrowman    said    that    the 
man  came  down   from  the  close  two  steps  at  a  time ;    when 
he  passed  her,  he  was  running  at  the  top  of  his  speed.     His 
hat  was  pulled  down  "  just  about  as  far  as  his  eyes."       His 
coat  was  not  buttoned ;  he  was  holding  it  up  as  he  ran,  with 
his  hands  in  the  pockets.     When  she  followed  the  man,  she 
thought    he    was    running    for    a    car.        [The    nearest    car 
lines    are   in    Great   Western    Road    and    St.    George's    Road, 
the    opposite    direction    to    that    in    which    the    man    was 
then     running.]       She     did     not     see     his     face     for     more 
than   a   couple  of   seconds.        Slater  had   a   moustache   when 
she   recognised    him   in   America    and   in    Glasgow ;    and    the 
three  photographs  by  which,  in  New  York,  she  had  identified 
him    as    the    man,    also    showed    him    with    a    moustache. 
She  had   recognised    him    in    all    the    photographs,    although 
Inspector    Pyper,    who    was    present    at    the    time,    said    she 
failed  to  do  so  in  any  of  them.        The  nose  of  the  man  was 
twisted  to   the   right   side.        She   and   Lambie  occupied   the 
same  cabin  for   twelve    days  on    the    voyage    out,    but    they 
never  mentioned   the   object   of   their   journey,    nor   discussed 
the   appearance   of    the    man.        Lambie    had    pointed   Slater 
out   in   the   Court-room   before   she   (witness)    identified    him. 
When   she    recognised   Slater    in  the    corridor   at    New    York 
she  did  not  see  that  he  was  in  charge  of  the  two  men,  between 
whom  he  walked.     In  reply  to  the  judge,  no  one  had  told  her 
not  to  talk  to  Lambie  about  the  case.       In  re-examination,  she 

xli 


Oscar    Slater. 

had  now  seen  Slater  several  times,  and  had  no  doubt  he  was 
the  man. 

The  main  objections  to  which  the  strong  evidence  of  this 
witness  is  open  are  her  youth  (she  was  not  fifteen  till  January, 
1909);  the  improbability  of  her  being  able  to  describe,  with 
so  great  minuteness,  the  appearance  of  a  man  rushing  past 
her  at  top  speed,  shortly  after  seven  o'clock  on  a  December 
night;  the  fact  that  the  hat  No.  44  was  not  a  Donegal  or 
tweed  hat,  but  a  soft,  black  felt  hat ;  and  the  obvious 
difficulty  in  believing  that  two  girls  of  fifteen  and  twenty-one, 
in  such  unusual  circumstances  as  a  voyage  across  the  Atlantic 
for  the  purpose  of  identifying  a  murderer,  never  spoke  of  the 
matter  at  all.  On  the  other  hand,  it  has  to  be  kept  in  view 
that  Barrowman  told  her  mother  what  she  had  seen  on  her 
return  home  that  night,  and  then  said  she  would  know  the 
man  again  if  she  saw  him ;  that,  on  23rd  December,  two 
nights  later,  she  described  the  man  to  two  detectives;  and 
that  she  never  varied  her  original  description,  but  stuck  to 
her  story  throughout. 

The    name    of  Agnes    Brown,    teacher,     48    Grant    Street, 
Glasgow,    stands    No.    46    on    the    list    of    witnesses    for   the 
prosecution.     This  witness,  though  in  attendance  at  the  trial, 
was  not  called  either  by  the  Crown  or  the  defence ;   but  her 
testimony  was  embodied  in  a  deposition  which,  among  others, 
had,    as   already   mentioned,    been    admitted    in    evidence   by 
the  Commissioner  at  the  extradition  proceedings  in  New  York, 
and  thus,  though  npt  before  the  jury  at  the  trial,  it  forms  part 
of  the  case  against  the  prisoner.     A  copy  of  the  deposition  will 
be  found  in  the  Appendix.       This  lady  stated  to  Mr.   Speirs, 
the    agent    for    the    defence,    that,    on    the    evening    of    21st 
December,    she   was   going   from   her    house   in    Grant    Street 
to  an  evening  class  in  Dunard  Street.       Leaving  shortly  after 
seven  o'clock,  she  had  reached  the  corner  of  West  Cumberland 
Street  and  West  Princes  Street  at  7.10,  when  two  men  came 
running  westward    along   the    pavement  of  that    street   from 
the  direction  of  St.  George's  Road,  one  of  whom  collided  with 
her,   and  nearly  knocked  her  down.       The  men  continued  to 
run  along  West  Princes   Street  as  far  as  Carrington   Street, 
when   they   left  the  pavement   and  ran  on   in  the  middle   of 
the  road.       They  then  ran  across  the  road,  and  turned  down 
Rupert   Street  to   the  right.       They   were   well-dressed   men, 
and   she  wondered   why  they   were   running   in   that  manner, 
xlii 


Introduction. 

When   one  of  them  collided  with  her  she  obtained   a  profile 

view  of  both  their  faces ;   she  also  had  a  back  view  of  them 

as  they  passed  her.        The  man  next   her,   and   who  collided 

with  her,  was  dressed  in  a  winter  overcoat  of  a  medium  grey, 

three-quarters   length,   reaching  past  his  knees.        He  had  a 

•close-fitting,  dark  cloth  cap,  with  a  scoop  in  front.       It  was 

a  plain  cap,  with  plain  sides  and  no  double  brim,  and  had  no 

buttons.        He    had    on    dark    trousers.        She   was  not   sure 

whether  his   boots    were    black    or    brown.        Hisi    coat  was 

buttoned  close  up,  and  he  had  his  hands  in  his  pockets.       He 

was  a   dark   man,    neither   tall   nor  short.        He  had   neither 

beard  nor  whiskers.       She  could  not  be  positive  whether  he 

had   a  moustache  or  not.        She  saw  nothing  peculiar  about 

his    nose.       He    would    be    about    5     feet    8    inches    or    5 

feet     9     inches     in     height.       The     other     man     was     about 

the    same    height.       He    had    dark    hair.       He    had    neither 

beard  nor  whiskers.       She  was  inclined  to  think  he  was  clean 

shaven.        He  had  no  hat  on,  and  he  was  not  carrying  any 

hat  in  his  hand,  so  far  as  she  saw.       He  had  on  a  navy  blue 

Melton    coat,    with    a    dark    velvet    collar.       His    coat    was 

open.       He  had  on  a  dark  pair  of  trousers  and  black  boots. 

The  man  with  the   blue   coat  had   on  a   spotless   collar.        It 

looked  almost  new.       She  did  not  see  anything  peculiar  about 

his  nose.       This  man  had  his  right  arm  hanging  by  his  side, 

and  seemed  to  be  holding  something  in  his  hand.        He  had 

his  left  hand  at  his  side  as  he  passed  her ;  but,  after  passing 

her,  he  seemed  to  carry  whatever  he  was  carrying  a  little  in 

front  of  him.       She  saw  no  man  running  away  by  himself, 

clad  in   a  waterproof  coat   and   a   Donegal  hat.       She  heard 

of  the  murder  on  her  return  home,   at  ten  o'clock,   and  told 

her  sisters  about  the  men   she  had   seen.        The  same  week 

she  made  a  statement  to  two  detectives.     She  was  interviewed 

later   by   Superintendent  Douglas ;    Mr.    Stevenson,   the   chief 

constable ;     and  Mr.   Hart,  the  Procurator-fiscal.         She  was 

also  at  the  Western  Police  Office  for  the  purpose  of  identifying 

several  suspects,  but  recognised  none  as  being  either  of  the 

men  she  had  seen  running  away.       On  21st  February  she  was 

shown   Slater,    among    twelve  to  fifteen    other    men,    in    the 

Central  Police  Station.       She  could   recognise  none  of  them 

by  their  front  face  view.       Having  seen  them  in  right  profile 

and  also  in  back  view,  she  pointed  out  Slater  as  the  further 

away  from  her  of  the  two  men  who  passed  her  on  the  night 

xliii 


Oscar  Slater. 

of  the  murder.  What  led  her  to  point  out  Slater  was  his 
black  hair,  and  the  fact  that  his  ears  stuck  out  somewhat 
from  his  head  and  were  rather  low  down  on  the  side  of  his 
head,  his  rather  short  neck,  and  his  square  shoulders.  He 
also  had  rather  a  square  jaw,  and  appeared  to  her  to  be 
about  the  same  height.  The  back  view  and  the  profile 
view  made  her  come  to  the  conclusion  that  he  was  very  like 
the  man  she  had  seen.  [This  statement  should  be  compared 
with  the  sworn  deposition  printed  in  the  Appendix.] 

It  is,  of  course,  to  be  kept  in  view  that  the  importance  of 
Miss  Brown's  statement  might  have  been  materially  affected 
by  cross-examination  in  the  witness-box ;  taken  as  it  stands 
it  only  deepens  the  mystery,  and  affords  a  further  example  of 
the  difficulties  attending  evidence  of  identity  based  on  personal 
impressions. 

Two  witnesses  remain  who  recognised  the  accused  in  circum- 
stances alleged  by  the  Crown  to  connect  him  with  the  murderer. 
Annie  Armour,  booking  clerk,  was  on  the  night  in  question 
attending  to  her  duties  in  the  ticket  office  at  the  Kelvinbridge 
station  of  the  Glasgow  District  Subway,  when,  between  half^ 
past  seven  and  eight  o'clock,  a  man  rushed  through  the  turn- 
stile, flung  down  a  penny,  and,  without  waiting  for  his  ticket, 
ran  down  the  stair  to  the  platform.  He  stumbled  on  the  stair 
and  caught  hold  of  the  railing.  He  looked  so  excited,  and 
gave  witness  such  a  fright  that  she  cried  out.  He  was  of 
medium  height,  dark,  clean  shaven,  and  wore  a  light  overcoat — 
she  did  not  know  whether  he  had  on  a  hat  or  a  cap.  She  saw 
his  face.  She  had  no  difficulty  in  pointing  out  Slater  at  the 
police  station ;  the  prisoner  was  the  man.  In  cross-examination 
she  stated  that  the  man's  coat  was  a  shade  darker  than  the 
waterproof  produced,  but  was  otherwise  similar  to  it.  She 
did  not  notice  the  man's  nose,  but  was  quite  certain  he  had  no 
moustache.  She  had  seen  Slater's  photograph  and  read  the 
description  before  identifying  him.  The  time  could  not  have 
been  later  than  a  quarter  to  eight. 

William  Sancroft,  car  conductor,  stated  that  on  Wednesday, 
23rd  December,  at  6.5  p.m.,  a  man  boarded  his  car  at  the  end 
of  Union  Street,  near  Argyle  Street,  and  took  his  seat  on  the 
top.  The  man  was  in  a  hurry.  When  witness  went  upstairs 
to  collect  the  fares  near  West  George  Street  the  man  had  a 
penny  in  his  hand  and  received  a  ticket.  Witness  asked  a 
boy  who  was  reading  an  evening  paper  on  the  opposite  seat 
xliv 


Oscar  Slater 
From  a  Photograph  hitherto  nni>>i)il!xln'il 


Introduction. 

if  there  was  any  clue  to  the  murderer.  The  boy  replied, 
"  No,  there  is  not  any  clue  yet,  and  I  don't  think  there  is  any 
likelihood  of  getting  one."  The  man  then  jumped  up  and, 
pushing  past  them,  ran  downstairs.  Witness  followed  him, 
and  saw  him  running  full  speed  across  to  Garscadden  Street. 
He  left  the  car  before  reaching  the  halfpenny  station.  The 
prisoner  was  the  man.  He  had  been  unable  to  trace  the 
boy,  who  at  that  time  was  a  regular  traveller  on  his  car. 

Having  dealt  in  some  detail,  as  befits  its  importance,  with 
the  evidence  of  all  the  witnesses  who  identified  Slater  either 
as  the  supposed  murderer  or  as  the  watcher  in  the  street,  we 
have  now  briefly  to  examine  the  circumstantial  evidence 
adduced  by  the  Crown  in  its  support. 

The  main  facts,  so  far  as  these  were  ascertained,  of  Slater's 
life  in  Glasgow  during  the  months  of  November  and  December, 
1908,  were  not  in  dispute,  and  may,  for  the  reader's  con- 
venience, here  be  shortly  narrated  in  the  order  in  which  they 
occurred  from  the  evidence  of  the  witnesses  who  spoke  to  them 
at  the  trial.  The  inferences  to  be  drawn  therefrom  formed 
the  question  at  issue. 

Oscar  Slater  (whose  real  surname  appears  to  be  Leschziner), 
a  German  Jew,  thirty-eight  years  of  age,  who  described  him- 
self indifferently  on  his  visiting  card  as  "  dentist  "  or  "  dealer 
in  diamonds  and  precious  stones,"  arrived  in  Glasgow  from 
London  on  or  about  26th  October,  and  put  up  at  the  Central 
Hotel.  He  had  been  in  Glasgow  on  at  least  two  previous 
occasions,  viz.,  for  some  nine  months  in  1901,  the  year  of  the 
Glasgow  Exhibition,  and  again,  for  what  period  is  not  stated, 
in  1905.  On  3rd  November  he  pledged  for  £5  with  J.  L. 
Bryce,  pawnbroker,  two  gold  rings,  three  pearl  studs,  and  other 
articles  in  the  name  of  "  Oscar  Slater,  Central  Station  Hotel." 
On  the  4th  he  was  joined  by  Andr6e  Junio  Antoine  (who  in 
London  was  known  as  Madame  Junio)  and  her  servant, 
Schmalz.  The  three  then  took  lodgings  for  a  week  at  136 
Renfrew  Street.  That  day  Slater  called  on  Stuart  <fe  Stuart, 
house  furnishers,  St.  George's  Road,  saw  the  manager,  Isaac 
Paradise,  and  asked  their  terms  for  furnishing  a  house  on  the 
instalment  system.  He  gave  his  name  as  "  Mr.  Anderson." 
Following  upon  the  above  interview,  Slater,  as  "  A.  Anderson, 
dentist,  36  Albemarle  Street,  Piccadilly,"  called  on  J.  S.  Man-, 
house  agent,  and  proposed  to  take  a  flat  at  69  St.  George's 
Road.  On  the  6th  Mr.  Marr,  being  satisfied  with  the  refer- 
D  xlr 


Oscar  Slater. 

ences  given — Robert  Rogers  and  Davenport  <fe  Co.,  both 
of  London — let  the  flat  to  Slater  from  28th  November  till  28th 
May,  1909,  at  a  rent  of  £42  per  annum.  Slater  again  called 
on  Stuart  &  Stuart,  and  selected  furniture  for  his  house 
to  the  value  of  £178  16s.  6d.,  paid  £10  as  a  deposit,  and 
agreed  to  pay  the  balance  by  monthly  instalments  of  £4.  On 
the  9th  he  ordered  from  W.  Lyon,  stationer,  fresh  visiting 
cards  in  name  of  "A.  Anderson,  69  St.  George's  Road, 
Charing  Cross,  Glasgow,  three  up,  right,"  and,  on  the  10th, 
bought  from  Hepburn  &  Marshall  a  set  of  household  tools,  con- 
sisting of  a  hammer,  screwdriver,  pliers,  &c.,  on  a  card  for 
2s.  6d.  The  furniture  having  been  delivered,  Slater, 
"  Madame,"  and  Schmalz  then  removed  to  the  flat  in  St. 
George's  Road,  the  door  of  which  bore  the  name  of 
"  Anderson."  Antoine  explained  the  false  name  as  a  device 
to  evade  his  wife,  who  had  previously  interfered  with  them. 

During  Slater's  stay  there  his  daily  habits,  according  to 
the  evidence  of  Schmalz,  were  as  follows: — he  rose  about 
9.30,  and  generally  went  out  in  the  forenoon,  returning  for 
lunch ;  went  out  in  the  afternoon,  and  always  dined  at  home, 
the  dinner  hour  being  seven  o'clock — though  Schmalz  had  seen 
it  as  late  as  eight.  He  was  never  out  of  the  house  on  Sundays. 
No  dentistry  business  was  carried  on  in  the  house,  and,  so 
far  as  she  knew,  her  master  had  no  occupation. 

It  appears  from  the  evidence  that  Slater's  chief  friends, 
while  in  Glasgow,  were  the  witnesses  Cameron  and  Rattman, 
with  whom  he  was  in  company  nearly  every  day.  They  fre- 
quented Gall's  public-house,  Cowcaddens ;  the  Crown  Hall 
billiard  rooms,  98  Sauchiehall  Street ;  Johnston's  billiard 
rooms,  126  Renfield  Street;  the  Motor  Club,  26  India  Street; 
and  the  M.O.S.C.  or  Sloper  Club,  24  India  Street,  of  which 
Slater  afterwards  became  a  member.  The  two  last  named 
were  gambling  clubs. 

On  the  12th  November  Slater  opened  a  Post  Office  Savings 
Bank  account  in  name  of  "  Adolf  Anderson,"  and  next  day 
made,  through  the  bank,  a  purchase  of  Consols  in  that  name. 
He  also  redeemed  the  articles  he  had  pledged  with  Bryce. 
On  the  14th  he  pledged  with  A.  J.  Liddell,  pawnbroker,  a 
diamond  scarfpin  for  £5  in  name  of  "  Anderson."  On  the 
same  day  he  called  at  the  shop  of  Jacob  Jackson  and  offered  to 
sell  him  a  diamond  ring,  as  he  was  hard  up.  Jackson  refused 
to  buy  the  ring,  but  offered  him  employment  as  a  canvasser, 
xlvi 


Introduction. 

which  he  declined.  He  did  not  give  his  name  or  address. 
On  the  16th  Slater  called  at  the  shop  of  R.  S.  Bamber,  hair- 
dresser, Charing  Cross,  and  was  shaved  by  the  witness  Nichols. 
He  then  had  a  moustache.  Nichols  observed  a  peculiarity 
about  his  nose — it  was  not  a  twisted  nose,  but  a  nose  that  had 
been  broken.  He  made  some  purchases  there  in  the  name  of 
"Anderson  "  that  day;  deposited  his  own  shaving  materials; 
and  continued  regularly  to  call  to  be  shaved,  several  times 
a  week,  till  25th  December.  On  the  17th  he  pledged  with 
Liddell  a  gold  purse,  fountain  pen,  three  pearl  studs, 
and  a  ring  for  £6,  and  on  the  following  day  he  obtained 
an  advance  of  £20  upon  a  diamond  crescent  brooch, 
giving  his  address  as  "  136  Renfrew  Street. "  Between 
21st  November  and  1st  December  Slater,  in  Bamber's  shop, 
offered  to  sell  to  Nichols,  who  was  shaving  him,  some  blankets, 
curtains,  and  kitchen  furniture,  which  he  said  were  quite  new. 

About  23rd  November  (four  weeks  before  the  murder), 
according  to  the  witness  Rattman,  Slater,  in  Gall's  public- 
house,  wanted  to  sell  him  a  ring.  The  witness  Aumann  made 
an  offer  for  it,  which  Slater  would  not  accept.  About  24th 
or  25th  November  Slater  called  at  the  Motor  Club  and  asked 
for  the  witness  Cameron,  who  came  out  and  took  him  upstairs. 
About  30th  November,  the  witness  Barr  met  Slater  in  the  Sloper 
Club  in  the  company  of  Cameron,  who  asked  him  to  propose 
Slater  as  a  member.  Barr  demurred  to  doing  so,  as  Slater's 
reputation  was  not  good,  but  ultimately  agreed  to  put  his  name 
up. 

On  1st  December  Slater  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Sloper 
Club,  his  address  being  given  as  "  Renfrew  Street."  About 
the  4th  Slater  mentioned  to  Nichols,  who  was  shaving  him, 
that  he  had  lost  a  diamond  pin.  Nichols  advised  him  to 
communicate  with  the  police,  but  he  replied  it  was  best  to  leave 
them  alone  as  much  as  one  could.  About  this  date  Slater 
spoke  to  Aumann  of  his  intention  to  go  to  America.  He  said 
he  would  go  so  soon  as  he  got  rid  of  his  house,  and  mentioned 
a  letter  which  he  had  received  from  San  Francisco.  On  6th 
December  Slater  was  seen  in  the  Motor  Club  with  Cameron  by 
the  witness  Henderson.  He  then  wore  a  black  bowler  hat 
and  a  Melton  coat.  On  the  7th  Slater  pledged  with  Bryce 
a  pair  of  binocular  glasses  for  £2  10s.  About  this  date  Slater 
told  Cameron  of  his  intention  to  go  abroad.  Between  this 

xlvii 


Oscar  Slater. 

time  and  21st  December  Slater  was  seen  by  the  witness  M'Lean 
every  second  or  third  night  playing  cards  at  the  Sloper  Club. 

On  the  9th  Slater  sent  his  watch  to  Dent,  watchmaker, 
London,  for  repair,  giving  his  name  as  "  Anderson,"  and 
requesting  its  return  to  him  at  69  St.  George's  Road  not  later 
than  30th  December.  The  same  day  he  obtained  from  Liddell 
a  further  advance  of  £10  upon  the  diamond  brooch.  About 
this  date  Aumann,  by  Slater's  desire,  inspected  the  flat  and 
furniture  at  69  St.  George's  Road,  with  a  view  to  his  taking 
them  over.  Aumann,  however,  declined  to  do  so,  and  Slater 
said  he  would  look  out  for  some  one  else.  On  the  10th  Slater, 
in  name  of  "  Anderson,"  paid  £4  to  Stuart  &  Stuart  as  an 
instalment  to  account  of  the  price  of  the  furniture  supplied 
by  them.  About  llth  December  Slater  showed  Cameron  a 
letter  he  had  received  from  San  Francisco,  advising  him  to 
come  out,  as  business  was  good.  Slater  said  he  intended  to 
go,  and  gave  Cameron  his  address  there. 

About  ten  days  or  a  fortnight  before  Christmas  (llth  or 
15th  December),  when  Slater  called  at  Bamber's  to  be  shaved 
as  usual,  Nichols  remarked  that  his  moustache  had  been  taken 
off,  and  that  day  he  shaved  Slater's  upper  lip  for  the  first 
and  only  time.  Slater  told  him  he  was  a  dentist,  and  waa 
waiting  for  his  partner  to  join  him.  He  mentioned  several 
places — Queensland  and  San  Francisco.  About  the  middle 
of  December,  Cameron  noticed  that  Slater  had  shaved  his 
moustache ;  he  commented  on  the  fact,  and  Slater  explained 
that  it  was  "  getting  a  bit  scraggy." 

About  15th  December  (ten  days  before  Christmas),  Slater 
showed  Rattman  a  letter,  which  he  had  received  from  San 
Francisco,  and  said  he  intended  going  there  so  soon  as  he 
could  arrange  for  his  house  being  taken  over.  On  the  17th, 
Slater  deposited  £5  in  the  Post  Office  Savings  Bank — the 
last  deposit  he  made.  On  the  18th  or  19th,  Cameron  says 
he  saw  Slater  for  the  last  time  before  the  murder,  and,  on 
one  or  other  of  those  nights,  the  witness  Barr  met  Slater  at 
the  Sloper  Club.  He  generally  saw  him  there  once  or  twice 
a  week.  Slater  was  always  well  dressed.  He  never  saw  him 
wearing  a  drab  or  fawn-coloured  waterproof. 

Between  one  and  three  o'clock,  on  the  morning  of  Sunday 

or  Monday,  20th  or  21st  December,  the  witness  M'Lean,  who 

subsequently   gave  information   to    the  police,    saw    Slater  at 

the  Sloper  Club  playing  "  poker."      He  was  then  clean  shaved, 

xlviii 


Introduction. 

or  had  a  very  small  growth  on  his  upper  lip.  He  wore  a 
dark  suit,  a  fawn  overcoat,  and  a  dark  cap.  On  that  occa- 
sion M'Lean  left  the  club  with  a  friend,  and  walked  home 
some  ten  yards  behind  Slater  and  another  member.  He  saw 
Slater  enter  the  close  in  St.  George's  Road.  Till  then  he 
had  not  known  where  Slater  lived. 

The  divergent  accounts  of  how  Slater  was  occupied  on 
Sunday,  the  20th,  we  have  already  noticed. 

Before  considering  the  evidence  relating  to  the  eventful 
Monday,  21st  December,  the  day  of  the  murder,  it  may  be  con- 
venient to  mention  here  the  statements  of  Cameron  and  Rattman 
as  to  Slater's  ordinary  habits  and  appearance.  Cameron 
said  that  he  saw  Slater  frequently.  Slater  had  no  occupa- 
tion, and  was  seldom  out  until  mid-day;  he  was  a  gambler, 
and  frequented  the  Motor,  Sloper,  and  other  clubs.  He  and 
Slater,  when  in  company,  filled  in  the  time  by  going  to  the 
skating  rink  in  Victoria  Road  in  the  afternoons,  to  a  music 
hall  in  the  evenings,  and  from  thence  to  the  Sloper  Club, 
where  cards  were  played  till  well  on  in  the  morning.  He 
never  saw  Slater  dressed  in  check  trousers  or  light-coloured 
spats  at  any  time  during  November  or  December.  As  a 
rule,  his  clothes,  with  the  exception  of  the  waterproof,  were 
dark.  He  had  seen  him  wearing  a  hat  like  production 
No.  44,  but  never  saw  him  with  a  cloth  hat  with  a  rim  round 
it  and  without  a  split  in  the  centre.  He  had  seen  him  in 
the  cap  produced,  No.  46,  but  Slater  generally  wore  a  black 
bowler  hat. 

Rattman  said  that  he  met  Slater,  while  in  Glasgow,  almost 
daily,  in  Gall's  public-house  and  Johnston's  billiard  rooms 
during  the  day,  and  at  various  clubs  at  night.  He  never 
saw  Slater  wearing  light-check  trousers  or  light-coloured 
gaiters.  Once  or  twice  he  had  seen  him  in  brown  boots. 
He  never  saw  him  with  a  Donegal  hat,  but  had  seen  him 
wearing  a  cap  with  the  sides  up.  His  clothes  were  generally 
dark  or  brown.  When  he  last  saw  him,  on  Thursday,  24th 
December,  Slater  was  wearing  a  dark  suit  and  a  bowler  hat. 

On  Monday,  the  21st,  according  to  the  evidence  of  Antoine 
and  Schmalz,  Slater  received,  by  the  morning  post,  two 
letters  :  one  from  his  friend  Rogers  in  London  (who  was  not 
called  as  a  witness),  saying  Slater's  wife  was  still  bothering 
him  (Rogers)  for  money,  the  other  from  his  partner  Devoto 
in  San  Francisco,  asking  Slater  to  join  him.  These  letters 

xlix 


Oscar  Slater. 

were  not  produced.  There  had  been  a  previous  letter  from 
Devoto  on  the  subject.  In  consequence  of  these  letters, 
Antoine  said,  Slater  decided  to  go  to  San  Francisco,  which 
he  had  intended  doing  since  the  beginning  of  the  month.  At 
12.30  p.m.  Slater  called  at  Liddell's  pawnshop,  and  raised 
£30  more  upon  the  diamond  brooch,  making  £60  in  all.  He 
also  redeemed  the  gold  purse,  fountain  pen,  pearl  studs,  and 
ring,  which  he  had  pawned  on  17th  November,  paying  £6  4s. 
After  lunch,  at  two  o'clock,  Slater  gave  Schmalz  notice,  and 
said  she  could  return  to  London  on  the  following  Saturday. 
Schmalz  overheard  Slater  and  Antoine  say  they  were  going 
to  San  Francisco.  In  the  afternoon  Slater  offered  the  pawn 
ticket  for  the  brooch  to  a  friend  of  the  witness  M'Lean,  named 
Anderson,  in  the  Sloper  Club.  At  4.30  Slater  came  into 
Gall's  public-house  and  offered  the  pawn  ticket  for  £4  to 
Rattman,  who  had  seen  the  brooch.  Rattman  refused,  and 
suggested  that  Aumann,  who  was  present,  should  buy  it ; 
but  the  latter  said  the  pawnbroker  had  already  advanced 
too  much  on  it.  Slater  then  left. 

At  5  p.m.,  as  appears  from  the  postmark  on  the  envelope, 
a  letter,  written  by  Slater,  was  posted  to  the  Post  Office 
Savings  Bank,  West  Kensington,  London,  asking  that  his 
money  be  sent  at  once,  if  possible  by  wire,  as  he  had  an  urgent 
call  to  America  because  his  wife  was  ill.  At  6.12  a  telegram, 
in  the  handwriting  of  Slater,  was  despatched  from  the  Central 
Station,  addressed  to  Dent,  London,  in  these  terms — "  If 
possible  send  watch  at  once." 

According  to  the  evidence  of  Rattman  and  Aumann  they, 
along  with  a  third  man  whom  they  did  not  know,  were  just 
finishing  a  game  of  three  hundred  up,  in  Johnston's  billiard 
rooms,  Renfield  Street,  when  Slater  came  in  about  6.20. 
Rattman  asked  him  whether  he  had  succeeded  in  selling  the 
pawn  ticket,  and  he  replied  that  he  had  not.  Slater  said 
he  was  going  home  to  dinner ;  and  on  Rattman  observing 
that  he  was  going  later  to  the  Palace  Music  Hall,  Slater 
remarked,  "  Very  likely  I  will  come  and  see  you."  Slater 
then  left,  having  remained  for  about  ten  minutes.  The 
game  was  finished  two  or  three  minutes  after  Slater's  depar- 
ture— Rattman  says  at  6.35  ;  Aumann,  at  6.40.  Johnston, 

w 

the  proprietor  of  the  saloon,  and  Gibb,  the  marker,   proved 
that  the  table,    upon   which   these   men  usually  played,    was 
engaged  that  day  from  5.8  to  6.40.       Johnston  had  gone  out 
1 


Introduction. 

for  tea  at  the  time,  and  Gibb  did  not  recollect  who  were 
playing  there  that  afternoon.  Neither  Rattman  nor  Aumann 
could  remember  how  Slater  was  then  dressed,  but  Rattman 
said  he  had  a  moustache  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch  long  which, 
being  dark,  was  quite  noticeable.  Rattman  would  never  have 
taken  him  for  a  clean-shaven  man  that  day. 

Antoine  and  Schmalz  swore  that  Slater  dined  at  home 
that  evening  as  usual  at  seven  o'clock.  The  murder,  as  we 
know,  was  committed  between  seven  and  ten  minutes  past 
seven;  and  the  man  believed  by  Mrs.  Liddell  to  be  Slater  was 
standing  at  the  railing  in  Queen's  Terrace  at  five  minutes  to 
seven. 

About  9.45  that  night  the  door  bell  of  the  Motor  Club, 
24  India  Street,  rang,  and  on  the  witness  Henderson  (the 
clubmaster)  opening  the  door,  he  found  Slater,  who  stepped 
into  the  hall.  He  was  not  a  member  of  the  club,  but 
Henderson  knew  him  by  sight,  having  twice  seen  him  there 
with  Cameron.  Slater  asked  Henderson  if  he  had  any  money 
in  the  club,  and  said,  "  Give  me  what  you  have  and  I  will 
give  you  a  cheque.'*  Henderson  replied  that  his  committee 
did  not  allow  him  to  lend  money,  and  suggested  that  Slater 
should  go  "  next  door  "  (the  Sloper  Club),  and  ask  Cameron 
for  it.  Remarking  that  Cameron  was  "  no  use,"  Slater 
then  left ;  he  did  not  go  into  the  club  next  door,  but  turned 
to  the  right,  to  Elmbank  Crescent.  He  was  not  in  the  hall 
for  more  than  four  or  five  minutes.  He  had  a  short  moustache 
"  like  stubble,"  and  was  wearing  a  waterproof  like  that  pro- 
duced (No.  43),  and  a  Donegal  hat,  of  different  colour  and 
make  from  hat  No.  44.  Henderson  saw  no  discomposure 
about  his  dress ;  but  he  seemed  to  be  excited,  and  witness 
thought  he  had  been  losing  money  at  cards  somewhere,  and 
wanted  to  continue  play.  It  will  be  remembered  that  at 
12.30  that  day  Slater  had  received  £30  from  Liddell  on 
the  brooch. 

With  reference  to  the  incident  spoken  to  by  Henderson, 
there  was  produced  at  the  trial  a  letter,  written  by  Slater 
to  his  friend,  Hugh  Cameron  in  Glasgow,  on  2nd  January, 
from  the  Tombs  Prison,  New  York,  a  copy  of  which  will 
be  found  in  the  Appendix.  He  writes — 

I  don't  deney  I  have  been  in  his  [Henderson's]  place  asking  him  for 
mony  because  I  went  brocke  in  the  Sloper  Club.  He  would  not 
mind  to  get  me  hangt,  and  I  will  try  to  prove  that  from  a  gambling 

li 


Oscar  Slater. 

point,  I  am  right  to  ask  for  some  money.  The  dirty  caracter  was 
trying  to  make  the  police  believe  I  done  the  murder,  was  excitet, 
asking  for  mony  to  hop  off.  ...  I  must  have  a  good  lawyer, 
and  after  I  can  proof  my  innocents  befor  having  a  trial,  because  I 
will  prove  with  five  people  where  I  have  been  when  the  murder  was 
committed. 

On  Tuesday,  22nd  December,  the  day  after  the  murder, 
Slater  called  at  four  o'clock  at  Bryce's  pawnshop,  saw  the 
witness  Kempton,  and  redeemed  a  pair  of  prism  binocular 
glasses,  which  he  had  pledged  on  the  7th.  He  mentioned 
that  he  was  going  to  America,  and  asked  witness  about  the 
Anchor  Line.  He  was  then  dressed  in  a  dark  overcoat  and 
a  hard  hat,  and  had  a  slight,  stubbly  moustache.  On  Tuesday 
or  Wednesday,  22nd  or  23rd  December,  Slater  called  at 
Bamber's  shop  and  was  shaved  by  Nichols,  who  stated  that 
Slater'  told  him  he  was  going  to  Queensland  on  the  following 
Wednesday  (the  30th).  Slater  said  that  his  wife  was  not 
going  with  him,  as  the  weather  was  too  cold,  but  she  was  to 
follow  in  the  summer.  He  showed  no  sign  of  excitement. 
On  one  or  other  of  these  dates  Cameron  met  Slater,  who 
gave  him  the  pawn  ticket  for  the  brooch,  and  asked  him  to 
dispose  of  it  among  his  friends  for  £10.  Cameron  tried 
to  sell  the  ticket  to  two  people,  but  was  unsuccessful,  and 
returned  it  to  Slater. 

On  Wednesday,  23rd,  Slater  received  from  the  Glasgow 
branch  of  the  Post  Office  Savings  Bank  the  amount  standing  at 
the  credit  of  his  account,  £39  18s.  3d.  At  12.1  noon  he  de- 
spatched from  Charing  Cross  Post  Office  a  telegram  to  Dent, 
London,  in  the  following  terms: — "  Must  have  watch,  leaving 
to-morrow  night  for  the  Continent."  Between  four  and  five 
in  the  afternoon,  Slater  called  at  Cooks'  tourist  office, 
Buchanan  Street,  saw  the  witness  Bain,  and  inquired  for  a 
second  class  two-berth  cabin  for  himself  and  his  wife  by  the 
"  Lusitania,"  from  Liverpool,  on  Saturday,  26th.  He  gave 
his  name  and  address  as  "  Oscar  Slater,  c/o  Anderson,  69 
St.  George's  Road,  Glasgow."  He  was  asked  to  call  back 
next  day,  when  the  agent  should  have  heard  from  the  Cunard 
Company,  with  whom  he  was  to  communicate.  That  evening, 
between  ten  and  eleven  o'clock,  as  Rattman  and  Aumann  were 
playing  billiards  in  Johnston's  billiard  rooms,  Slater  and 
Cameron  came  in  and  sat  watching  the  game.  Johnston, 
the  proprietor,  asked  them  if  they  wanted  a  game,  but  Slater 
said  that  they  would  not  play  that  night.  His  upper  lip, 
lii 


Introduction. 

said  Johnston,  was  then  a  little  dark,  he  had  not  much  to 
show,  but  he  was  not  exactly  clean  shaven.  Gibb,  the 
marker,  remembered  seeing  Slater  on  this  occasion,  but  not 
Cameron.  Slater's  moustache  was,  he  said,  quite  noticeable 
from  the  other  end  of  the  room,  sixteen  feet  distant.  He  had 
about  a  fortnight's  growth  on  his  upper  lip ;  no  one  could 
have  taken  him  for  a  clean-shaven  man.  When  the  game 
was  finished  at  11.20,  Slater,  Cameron,  and  Rattman  left 
together,  Cameron  saying  good-night  to  the  others  at  the 
corner  of  Cambridge  Street  and  Sauchiehall  Street,  while 
Rattman  went  on  with  Slater,  and  parted  with  him  at  his 
house  in  St.  George's  Road. 

On  Thursday,  24th  December,  Slater  received  at  the  Glasgow 
branch  of  the  Post  Office  Savings  Bank  the  proceeds  of  the  2£ 
per  cent.  Consols,  which  had  been  sold  on  his  instructions, 
the  amount  paid  to  him  being  £49  7s.  2d.  Rattman  said 
that  on  this  date  he  saw  Slater  for  the  last  time  before  he  left. 
Slater  asked  him  to  come  and  see  him  in  his  house  next  day 
(Christmas  Day),  but  Rattman  did  not  do  so.  Slater  said 
nothing  to  him  on  this  Thursday  as  to  his  intention  of  sailing 
on  the  following  Saturday.  About  four  o'clock  the  same 
afternoon  Slater  called  at  Cooks'  office  in  Buchanan  Street, 
and  again  saw  the  witness  Bain,  who  had  heard  from  the 
Cunard  Company  offering  room  E76,  at  £12  rate,  by  the 
"  Lusitania,"  sailing  on  Saturday,  26th  December.  Bain 
showed  Slater  the  room  on  the  ship's  plan,  but  the  latter  said 
he  preferred  an  outside  cabin,  and  could  do  better  in  Liver- 
pool. Bain  said  if  he  booked  the  one  offered  then  he  could 
adjust  matters  in  Liverpool,  and  Slater  said  he  would  call  back 
next  day.  He  did  not  do  so,  and  that  day  (Friday,  25th) 
Bain  wrote  to  the  Cunard  Company  asking  them  to  release  the 
cabin,  and  to  let  him  know  if  "  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Slater  "  booked 
with  them  on  Saturday. 

Cameron  stated  that  shortly  after  four  o'clock  on  Thursday, 
the  24th,  at  the  corner  of  Gordon  Street  and  Renfield  Street  he 
met  Slater,  who  said  he  was  looking  for  the  Cunard  Line 
shipping  office,  in  Jamaica  Street,  to  make  inquiry  as  to  the 
sailings  to  America.  Cameron  accompanied  him  there ; 
Slater  went  into  the  Cunard  office  and  got  a  pamphlet.  When 
he  came  out  he  remarked  to  Cameron,  who  had  been  waiting 
for  him  outside,  that  perhaps  the  "  Campania,"  sailing  on 
Saturday  week  (2nd  January,  1909),  might  suit  him.  He 

liii 


Oscar  Slater. 

then  asked  Cameron  to  get  a  Bank  of  England  £5  note  for 
five  Scotch  £1  notes,  as  he  wanted  the  note  to  send  to  his 
people  in  Germany,  which  he  had  done,  he  said,  almost  every 
Christmas.  Cameron  having  failed  to  get  it  in  the  Cunard 
office,  they  tried  the  booking  office  at  the  Central  Station,  the 
Central  Station  Hotel,  and  Forsyth's  shop,  all  without  success. 
Finally,  at  the  Grosvenor  Restaurant,  they  got  the  note,  which 
Slater  enclosed  in  an  addressed  envelope,  and  registered  at 
Hope  Street  Post  Office.  Having  had  tea  at  Cranston's 
tea-rooms  in  Sauchiehall  Street,  they  parted  shortly  before 
six  o'clock,  Cameron  arranging  to  call  for  Slater  after  dinner. 
This  was  the  last  time  Cameron  saw  him.  That  day  Slater 
had,  as  described  by  Cameron,  "  a  very  stubbly  moustache," 
which  was  quite  noticeable.  Cameron  called  at  Slater's  house 
as  arranged  about  eight  o'clock,  but  was  told  by  the  servant 
Schmalz  that  he  had  gone  out  half  an  hour  before  with  a 
gentleman.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  Slater  was  in  at  the  time, 
but  had  instructed  Schmalz  to  tell  Cameron  he  was  out. 

On  the  morning  of  Friday,  25th  December,  as  stated  by 
Antoine  and  Schmalz,  Slater  received  a  postcard  from  Mrs. 
Freedman,  who  had  come  from  London  in  pursuance  of  an 
arrangement  whereby  she  should  take  over  the  flat  and  furni- 
ture, intimating  her  arrival  at  the  Alexandra  Hotel,  Bath 
Street.  Antoine  sent  Schmalz  to  bring  her  to  the  house,  and 
Mrs.  Freedman  came  at  12.30  p.m.  She  found  Antoine 
crying;  and  Slater,  who  was  busy  packing  his  luggage,  ex- 
plained the  reason  was  that  he  would  not  take  her  with  him. 
He  asked  and  obtained  from  Mrs.  Freedman  a  loan  of  £25. 
[It  will  be  remembered  that  Mrs.  Freedman,  who  was  not  called 
as  a  witness,  stated  to  Detective  Lieutenant  Gordon,  on  26th 
December,  that  she  understood  their  destination  to  be  Monte 
Carlo.]  Antoine  said  that  Slater  wanted  her  to  go  to  her 
people  in  Paris,  but,  in  the  end,  he  agreed  to  let  her  accom- 
pany him. 

Later  in  the  day  Slater  called  at  Bamber's  shop,  and  was 
shaved,  for  the  last  time,  by  Nichols,  according  to  whom  he 
then  had  a  moustache  "  a  quarter  of  an  inch  or  five-sixteenths 
long."  It  had  been  growing  for  about  ten  days  or  a  fort- 
night. Slater  told  Nichols  he  was  leaving  Glasgow  that  night, 
and  was  sailing  next  day  by  the  "  Lusitania."  When  Slater 
left  the  shop  he  removed  the  shaving  materials  which  he  had 
previously  deposited  there  for  his  own  use.  During  the  last 
liv 


Introduction. 

week  of  his  visits  Nichols  observed  no  difference  in  his  appear- 
ance, except  that  he  was  wearing  a  peculiar  vest.  He  had  seen 
Slater  in  various  suits,  and  wearing  a  dark  blue  overcoat,  but 
not  a  light  fawn-coloured  overcoat. 

That  afternoon  (Christmas  Day)  the  description  of  the  sup- 
posed murderer,  given  by  the  girl  Barrowman,  appeared,  by 
the  authority  of  the  police,  in  the  two  o'clock  editions  of  the 
Glasgow  evening  newspapers — Times,  News,  and  Citizen. 

At  6  p.m.  Slater  again  went  out.  Between  six  and  seven 
o'clock  John  Cameron,  city  porter,  said  that  a  man,  whom  he 
identified  as  Slater,  spoke  to  him  at  the  Central  Station,  and 
told  him  to  call  at  69  St.  George's  Road  for  some  luggage  "  at 
the  back  of  eight  o'clock."  He  gave  the  name  of  "  Anderson." 
Along  with  another  porter  (Mackay)  Cameron  went  to  the  house 
as  directed,  but,  by  mistake,  called  first  at  the  top  flat  instead 
of  the  third.  At  the  latter  he  saw  the  man  who  had  engaged 
him,  and  two  women.  He  removed  ten  articles  of  luggage  on 
his  barrow  to  the  Central  Station  for  the  9.5  train  for  London 
and  Liverpool.  Slater  met  him  at  the  station  and  paid  him. 
Cameron  could  not  say  whether  he  was  then  clean  shaven  or 
not. 

Margaret  and  Isabella  Fowlis,  who  lived  in  the  flat  above 
Slater,  and  knew  him  by  sight  as  "  Anderson,"  remembered 
the  porter  calling  at  their  door  for  luggage.  They  told  him 
that  "Anderson"  occupied  the  house  below;  and,  looking 
over  the  stairs  while  the  luggage  was  being  removed,  saw 
Slater  handing  it  out.  The  time  was  about  8.30.  Slater 
was  then  dressed  in  a  blue  overcoat,  a  hat,  and  patent 
boots.  They  said  he  had  no  moustache.  They  were  sure 
his  upper  lip  was  clean  shaven,  because  he  looked  up  at  them, 
and  saw  them  watching  him.  He  left  the  house  on  foot, 
followed  by  the  two  women.  Ruby  Russell,  a  servant  in  the 
same  stair,  also  witnessed  the  removal  of  the  luggage,  and 
saw  from  her  window  the  departure  of  Slater,  Antoine,  and 
Schmalz.  They  walked  a  few  yards  together,  and  Slater  went 
away  by  himself.  Antoine  and  Schmalz  said  that  they  all 
walked  together  to  Charing  Cross,  where  they  entered  a  cab 
and  drove  to  the  Central  Station. 

On  arriving  there  at  8.45  the  cab  door  was  opened  by  James 
Tracey,  railway  porter,  who  was  waiting  with  the  porter 
Cameron  and  the  luggage.  Slater  and  the  two  women  got 
out.  Slater  told  Tracey  to  have  the  luggage  labelled  for 

lv 


Oscar  Slater. 

Liverpool  by  the  9.5  train ;  and,  ""his  having  been  done,  Tracey, 
by  order  of  the  guard,  put  it  into  the  rear  brake  van.  He 
did  not  know  what  tickets  Slater  had.  Only  one  of  the  two 
women  travelled  with  him.  Tracey  said  Slater  that  night  had 
a  moustache.  It  was  quite  noticeable.  He  had  no  difficulty 
in  identifying  Slater,  but  failed  to  recognise  either  Antoine 
or  Schmalz.  John  Brown,  booking  clerk,  Central  Station, 
said  there  were  few  people  travelling  by  that  train,  being 
Christmas  night.  Among  the  tickets  which  he  issued  by  the 
9.5  were  two  third  class  singles  to  London  and  two  third 
class  singles  to  Liverpool.  He  recollected  selling  the  two 
London  tickets  to  a  man  with  a  slight  moustache,  who  was  very 
like  Slater,  but  he  could  not  swear  to  it.  The  Liverpool 
tickets,  so  far  as  he  remembered,  were  issued  separately  to  two 
different  persons.  It  was  a  regular  practice  to  travel  with  a 
London  ticket,  and  break  the  journey  at  Liverpool. 

On  26th  December,  about  12.30  p.m.,  a  man  wearing  a  soft 
hat  and  a  blue  overcoat  entered  the  offices  of  the  Cunard 
Company  in  Liverpool,  saw  John  Forsyth,  manager  of  the 
second  class  department,  and  asked  for  accommodation  for  a 
gentleman  and  his  wife  by  the  "  Lusitania,"  sailing  that  day. 
Strangely  enough,  Forsyth  offered  him  room  E76,  the  very 
cabin  which  Slater  had  refused  in  Glasgow.  The  man  said, 
"  No,  I  do  not  like  that,  it  is  inside;  it  was  offered  me  by 
your  agents  in  Glasgow."  He  appeared  to  regret  having 
made  the  remark,  and  said  no  more.  He  seemed,  to  witness, 
somewhat  nervous,  and,  while  he  was  talking,  looked  at  the 
door  as  if  expecting  some  one.  Forsyth  asked  him  what  he 
required,  and  he  replied  that  he  wanted  an  outside  room. 
After  some  discussion,  an  outside  cabin  was  agreed  upon, 
and  £28  in  Scotch  notes  paid  for  the  two  tickets.  Forsyth 
asked  the  man's  name,  and  he  said,  "  Otto  Sando."  He 
spelt  it,  "  S-a-n-d-o,"  remarking,  "It  is  not  Sandow,  the 
strong  man."  He  then  filled  up  the  requisite  application  form, 
giving,  inter  alia,  his  destination  and  American  address  as 
"  Chicago,  30  Staate  Street."  Slater  was  undoubtedly  the 
man,  and,  said  Forsyth,  "  he  can  recognise  me,  too." 

While  in  Liverpool  Slater  wrote  from  the  London  &  North- 
Western  Station  Hotel  a  letter  in  German  to  his  friend  Ratt- 
man,  a  translation  of  which  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix, 
giving  as  his  reason  for  not  saying  good-bye,  his 
"  absolutely  suddenly  "  leaving  Glasgow,  "  Freedman's  girl  " 
Ivi 


CliJ 


Head  of  Hammer  (duplicate)  produced  in  Court 

Actual  size 


Introduction. 

having  taken  over  his  flat;  and,  further,  stating,  "  My  French 
girl  leaves  for  Paris  from  here."  Their  arrangements  con- 
cluded, and  the  duties  of  friendship  thus  discharged,  "  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Otto  Sando  "  sailed  the  same  day  in  the  "  Lusitania  " 
for  New  York. 

Whether  or  not  Slater's  departure  from  Glasgow  was,  in 
the  words  of  the  Lord  Advocate,  "  a  flight  from  justice,"  or, 
as  Mr.  M'Clure  put  it,  an  act  in  which  "  nothing  suggesting 
subterfuge  occurs  until  the  tickets  were  taken  at  Liverpool 
in  the  name  of  Otto  Sando,"  was  a  question  for  the  jury;  and 
they  determined  it  against  the  prisoner.  The  explanation  given 
by  Antoine  of  Slater's  concealment  of  his  destination  was,  in 
the  first  place,  because  of  his  wife,  and,  secondly,  in  case  of 
the  landlord  of  the  house  and  the  furniture  company  bothering , 
Mrs.  Freedman  about  the  flat.  This  does  not,  however, 
explain  why  he  failed  to  disclose  the  date  of  his  departure  to 
his  intimate  friends  Cameron  and  Rattman. 

Having  recorded  the  facts  with  regard  to  Slater's  behaviour, 
as  disclosed  in  the  proof,  we  have  now  only  to  consider  the 
purport  of  the  medical  evidence  adduced.  It  will  be  remem- 
bered that  the  police,  when  searching  Slater's  luggage  on  his 
return  from  New  York,  found  in  one  of  his  trunks  a  hammer, 
which  he  had  bought  on  10th  November,  as  before  mentioned. 
With  this  weapon  the  Crown  undertook  to  prove  that  the  murder 
had  been  committed.  Professor  Glaister  deponed  that  he  did 
not  find  in  the  dining-room  of  15  Queen's  Terrace  any  imple- 
ment that  looked  as  if  it  had  been  used  for  the  purpose  of 
murdering  Miss  Gilchrist.  He  was  clear,  from  the  spattering 
of  blood  in  the  neighbourhood,  that  the  injuries  had  been 
produced  practically  at  the  point  where  the  body  was  found, 
within  an  area  bounded  by  a  radius  of  three  feet  from  the  head  ; 
and,  from  his  experience,  his  view  was  that  the  assailant  knelt 
on  the  woman's  chest,  and,  kneeling  upon  the  chest,  struck 
violently  at  the  head  with  the  implement  that  he  employed. 
From  the  nature  of  the  injuries  inflicted  witness  inferred  that 
the  weapon  was  not  uniformly  the  same  at  the  striking  part ; 
the  wounds  were  of  different  sizes  and  shapes,  and  the  left 
eyeball,  in  a  burst  condition,  was  driven  into  the  brain.  That 
indicated  that  the  weapon  must  have  been  of  a  pointed  char- 
acter, because  a  larger  weapon,  that  would  have  been  likely 
to  have  caused  the  larger  wounds,  could  not  have  entered  the 
orbit.  The  hammer,  No.  47,  could,  in  his  opinion,  in  the 
hands  of  a  strong  man  and  forcibly  wielded  (plus  the  kneeling 

Iri 


Oscar  Slater. 

on  the  chest),  have  produced  the  injuries  found  on  the  body. 
That  instrument  accounted  most  easily  for  the  different  classes 
of  wounds,  particularly  the  eye  mischief.  In  cross-examination 
the  witness  could  not  say  positively  that  the  hammer  was  used. 
His  view  of  the  course  of  the  assault  was  that  the  woman  was 
on  her  feet,  facing  her  assailant,  when  she  received  a  blow 
with  something  and  was  knocked  down  on  the  floor;  the 
assailant  instantly  pounced  on  her  and  knelt  on  her,  fracturing 
her  ribs  and  breast  bone  during  the  act  of  the  repeated  blows; 
and  that  the  instrument,  whatever  it  was,  produced  those 
frightful  injuries  upon  her  head  and  face.  To  give  a  rough 
guess,  judging  from  the  wounds  and  the  size  of  them,  between 
twenty  and  forty  blows  must  have  been  inflicted,  with  almost 
lightning  rapidity.  It  must  have  been  a  furious,  continuous 
assault  before  the  assailant  rose  to  do  anything  further.  The 
man  who  applied  the  violence  in  the  way  he  (witness)  thought 
he  did  would  have  his  clothing  to  a  fairly  large  extent 
bespattered  with  blood.  His  hands  could  not  escape,  nor  the 
implement  he  employed.  It  was  one  of  the  most  brutally 
smashed  heads  witness  had  ever  seen  in  his  experience. 

Dr.  Hugh  Gait,  who,  in  conjunction  with  Professor  Glaister, 
had  made  the  post-mortem  examination,  concurred.  The 
number  of  blows  struck  must  have  been  very  great,  certainly 
not  under  fifty  or  sixty,  probably  a  good  many  more.  The 
smashing  in  this  case  was  most  extensive.  The  hammer,  No. 
47,  could  produce  the  injuries  witness  saw.  In  cross-examina- 
tion witness  admitted  that,  a  priori,  he  would  have  expected 
a  heavier  weapon.  It  was  impossible  to  say  exactly  what 
instrument  had  been  employed;  it  was  a  weapon  of  some  weight, 
and  with  sharp  edges.  In  reply  to  the  judge,  the  injury  to  the 
eye  was  the  only  wound  that  could  not  have  been  produced  by  a 
weapon  of  greater  diameter  than  the  hammer  in  question. 

Professor  Glaister  also  deponed  to  the  result  of  his  examina- 
tion of  the  four  articles  submitted  to  him  as  before  mentioned, 
viz.,  (1)  waterproof,  (2)  hat,  (3)  hammer,  and  (4)  auger.  With 
regard  to  the  waterproof,  he  found  twenty  small  stains, 
externally  and  internally,  some  of  which,  after  treatment  and 
on  microscopic  examination,  showed  corpuscular  bodies, 
resembling  in  general  appearances  mammalian  red  blood 
corpuscles;  but,  by  reason  of  the  small  amount  of  material 
at  disposal,  confirmatory  tests  for  blood  could  not  be  employed. 
The  stains  appeared  to  have  been  subjected  to  the  influence 
Iviii 


Introduction. 

of  water.  No  stains  were  found  upon  the  hat.  The  hammer, 
from  the  head  to  halfway  down  the  shaft,  had  the  appearance 
of  having  been  scrubbed,  the  surface  of  the  wood  being 
roughened  and  bleached.  Yellowish  stains  were  found  on  both 
sides  of  the  head  and  on  the  flanges,  which,  on  examination, 
showed  corpuscular  bodies,  resembling  red  blood  corpuscles  of 
the  mammalian  type.  For  the  reason  already  adduced,  witness 
was  unable  to  state  positively  that  these  were  red  blood  cor- 
puscles. The  auger,  on  examination,  gave  no  indication  of  the 
presence  of  blood.  In  cross-examination  witness  said  that 
in  his  first  report  to  the  police,  dated  22nd  December,  it  was 
stated,  "  On  examination  we  found  that  adhering  to  the  metal 
of  the  instrument  [the  auger]  were  several  grey  hairs,  and, 
in  addition,  what  seemed  to  be  blood."  Witness  had  examined 
twenty  stains  in  all  on  the  waterproof,  and  only  in  some  of 
them  did  he  find  the  corpuscular  bodies  referred  to.  He  found 
no  stains  in  the  pockets  of  the  waterproof.  Witness  could 
not  positively  prove  that  any  article  found  in  the  possession 
of  the  accused  contained  blood.  In  reply  to  the  judge,  if  it 
were  not  a  case  of  murder,  but  some  commercial  question, 
judging  from  his  very  long  experience  of  examination  of  such 
stains,  witness  would  without  hesitation  say  that,  in  his  view, 
to  the  best  of  his  knowledge  and  belief,  these  were  red  blood 
corpuscles. 

Professor  Harvey  Littlejohn,  who,  in  conjunction  with 
Professor  Glaister,  had  examined  the  articles,  concurred. 

For  the  defence,  Dr.  W.  G.  Aitchison  Robertson  deponed 
that,  looking  to  the  extent  and  multiplicity  of  the  wounds,  he 
considered  the  hammer  produced  a  very  unlikely  weapon.  He 
had  examined  the  hammer  for  blood  stains,  but  found  no  sign 
of  blood  about  it,  and  he  saw  no  appearance  of  the  handle 
having  been  washed  or  scraped.  The  man  who  committed 
the  murder  as  described  would,  in  the  opinion  of  witness,  be 
more  or  less  covered  with  blood.  Witness  had  examined  the 
waterproof  coat  and  found  no  signs  of  blood  whatever  upon  it. 
In  cross-examination  witness  said  that  his  evidence  was  given  on 
the  facts  as  disclosed  in  Professor  Glaister's  report.  The 
wound  whereby  the  left  eyeball  was  driven  in  was  2  inches 
by  J  inch,  which  was  much  larger  than  the  head  of  the  hammer. 
Witness  thought  a  heavy  poker  or  crowbar  more  likely  to  have 
produced  the  injuries,  by  beating  and  thrusting  with  it.  He 
could  not  see  how  the  spindle-shaped  wounds  could  have  been 

lix 


Oscar  Slater. 

produced  by  the  hammer.  He  made  no  tests  for  the  purpose 
of  ascertaining  the  presence  of  blood. 

Dr.  Alexander  Veitch,  who  had  also  examined  the  hammer 
and  coat,  found  absolutely  no  appearance  of  blood.  He  con- 
sidered the  hammer  produced  an  unlikely  instrument  to 
inflict  the  injuries  described ;  a  blunt  instrument,  such  as  a 
piece  of  railing,  a  crowbar,  or  a  larger  hammer,  would  be  more 
likely.  The  assailant  could  not  escape  getting  a  good  deal 
of  blood  on  his  own  person.  Had  the  hammer  produced  been 
used  by  the  assailant,  it  would  necessarily  have  had  a  lot  of 
blood  about  its  head,  and  probably  all  over  it.  His  hands 
would  probably  be  bloody,  and  witness  would  have  expected 
to  see  some  sign  of  that  on  the  lower  part  of  the  handle. 
There  was  no  sign  of  scraping  or  scrubbing.  In  cross-examina- 
tion, witness  had  never  seen  a  case  where  there  was  such  an 
amount  of  mauling.  The  weapon  used  would,  in  his  opinion, 
be  twice  as  large  as  the  hammer  produced.  Had  the  latter 
been  used,  he  would  have  expected  a  class  of  fracture  which 
was  not  present,  i.e.,  a  depressed  fracture,  penetrating,  and  of 
comparatively  small  size.  He  made  no  analysis  of  the  stains 
found  on  either  of  the  articles. 

With  reference  to  the  failure  of  Drs.  Aitchison  Robertson 
and  Veitch  to  discover  blood  stains  on  the  waterproof,  it  may 
be  remarked  that  twenty-five  suspected  portions  had  been  cut 
out  of  it  by  Professor  Glaister  prior  to  its  being  examined  by 
them.  It  is  also  to  be  observed,  as  a  point  of  interest,  that 
neither  at  the  instance  of  the  prosecution  nor  of  the  defence 
was  the  metal  head  of  the  hammer  removed  from  its  soft  white 
wood  shaft.  Had  this  been  done  the  question  at  issue  would 
probably,  to  that  extent  at  least,  have  been  settled. 

The  condition  of  the  hammer  and  waterproof  was  of  vital 
importance  to  the  Crown  case,  for  these  were  the  only  links 
between  Slater  and  the  murder.  Apart  from  them,  nothing 
incriminating  was  found  in  his  possession.  In  the  seven  trunks 
belonging  to  him  the  police  discovered  neither  Donegal  hat, 
light-coloured  cloth  overcoat,  check  trousers,  fawn  spats,  nor 
brown  boots.  No  proof  was  offered  that  he  had  any  knowledge 
of  the  existence  of  Miss  Gilchrist  or  of  her  jewels ;  none  of  the 
deceased's  property  was  traced  to  him,  and  nothing  proved  to 
be  his  was  found  in  her  house.  With  the  exception  of  the 
disputable  stains  on  the  waterproof,  no  article  of  clothing 
belonging  to  him  was  bloodstained 


Introduction. 

In  this  connection  it  may  be  mentioned  that  both  Antoine 
and  Schmalz  swore  that,  so  far  as  they  knew,  none  of  Slater's 
clothes  were  washed,  burned,  or  otherwise  destroyed  during 
their  last  week  in  Glasgow.  With  regard  to  the  hammer,  they 
stated  that  it  was  solely  used  by  Schmalz  for  breaking  coals. 
It  was  kept  in  the  drawer  of  the  hatstand  in  the  hall — not,  one 
would  think,  the  most  convenient  receptacle  ;  it  was  never  out  of 
the  house,  and,  to  their  knowledge,  was  neither  washed  nor 
scraped.  The  Lord  Advocate,  with  tact  and  good  taste,  waived 
his  right  to  cross-examine  the  girl  Antoine,  whose  position  as 
a  witness  in  the  case  was  plainly  indicated  by  Lord  Guthrie 
in  his  charge  to  the  jury.  Schmalz,  however,  was  subjected 
to  a  trenchant  cross-examination,  from  which  ordeal  she 
emerged  comparatively  unscathed,  either  because  she  told  the 
truth  and  knew  nothing  to  incriminate  Slater,  or  because  she 
was  a  match  for  her  learned  adversary. 

A  fact  most  damaging  to  the  prisoner's  character  was  elicited 
by  the  Lord  Advocate  from  the  witness  Schmalz.  She  admitted 
that  Antoine,  obviously  with  Slater's  concurrence,  had  led, 
both  in  London  and  Glasgow,  an  immoral  life.  From  the 
witness  Cameron  the  Lord  Advocate  had  already  learned  that 
Slater  supplemented  his  gains  as  a  gambler  by  the  proceeds  of 
prostitution,  and  that,  in  Lord  Guthrie's  striking  phrase,  "  He 
had  maintained  himself  by  the  ruin  of  men  and  on  the  ruin 
of  women,  living  for  many  years  past  in  a  way  that  many 
blackguards  would  scorn  to  live."  Of  this  fact  the  Lord 
Advocate  made  deadly  use  in  his  address  to  the  jury,  going 
so  far  as  to  say  that  it  removed  the  one  serious  difficulty  which 
confronted  them — the  difficulty  of  conceiving  that  there  was  in 
existence  a  human  being  capable  of  doing  such  a  dastardly 
deed.  "  That  difficulty  removed,"  proceeded  the  learned 
Advocate,  "  I  say,  without  hesitation,  that  the  man  in  the  dock 
is  capable  of  having  committed  this  dastardly  outrage,  and  the 
question  for  you  to  consider  is,  whether  or  not  the  evidence 
has  brought  it  home  to  him."  With  reference  to  this  point 
the  exception  taken  thereto  by  Mr.  Speirs,  the  agent  for  the 
defence,  in  his  introductory  note  to  the  memorial  prepared  by 
him  on  the  prisoner's  behalf  as  after  mentioned,  may  be 
quoted — 

That  evidence  against  his  character  was  before  the  jury,  and  strongly 
commented  upon  by  the  counsel  for  the  prosecution ;  and  while  the 
jury  was  afterwards  told  by  the  counsel  for  the  prosecution  and  the 

&  Iti 


Oscar  Slater. 

presiding  judge  not  to  allow  the  evidence  against  Slater's  character 
to  influence  them  against  him,  there  is  a  very  strong  general  opinion 
to  the  effect  that  it  must  have  influenced  the  jury.  As  the  accused 
did  not  plead  good  character,  his  character  should  not,  according  to 
the  law  of  Scotland,  have  been  attacked. 

It  must,  however,  be  observed  that  no  objection  was  taken 
by  counsel  for  the  prisoner  to  any  of  the  Lord  Advocate's  ques- 
tions as  to  Slater's  means  of  livelihood.  His  false  assumption 
of  the  designation  of  dentist  made  it  clearly  competent  for  the 
Lord  Advocate  to  ask  the  witnesses  for  the  defence  how  the 
prisoner  maintained  himself.  If  the  defence  desired  to  exclude 
the  evidence  objected  to  in  Mr.  Speirs'  memorial,  they  should 
not  have  examined  either  Cameron  or  Schmalz. 

The  case  for  the  defence  closed  with  the  examination  of  the 
two  medical  men,  and,  contrary  to  expectation,  the  prisoner 
did  not  avail  himself  of  his  right  to  enter  the  witness-box. 
No  reference  to  this  fact  was  made  either  by  judge  or  counsel ; 
but  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  it  told  heavily  against  him 
with  the  jury.  His  agent,  in  the  memorial  before  referred  to, 
with  respect  to  this  circumstance,  states — 

It  is  only  fair  to  the  prisoner  to  point  out  that  he  was  all  along 
anxious  to  give  evidence  on  his  own  behalf.  He  was  advised  by  his 
counsel  not  to  do  so,  but  not  from  any  knowledge  of  guilt.  He  had 
undergone  the  strain  of  a  four  days'  trial.  He  speaks  rather  broken 
English — although  quite  intelligibly — with  a  foreign  accent,  and  he 
had  been  in  custody  since  January. 

Apart  from  this,  however,  the  prisoner,  in  view  of  his  manner 
of  life,  might  well  have  hesitated,  for  reasons  best  known  to 
himself,  to  expose  his  whole  past  career  to  the  scrutiny  of  the 
Lord  Advocate. 

The  total  number  of  witnesses  examined  at  the  trial  was 
seventy-four,  sixty  being  called  by  the  Crown,  and  fourteen 
by  the  defence. 

At  eleven  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  fourth  day  of  the 
trial  the  Lord  Advocate  rose  to  address  the  jury  for  the 
prosecution.  To  those  who  were  present  his  speech  was, 
perhaps,  the  most  impressive  episode  in  this  remarkable  case. 
Out  of  doors  the  day  was  one  of  brilliant  spring  sunshine ;  and 
past  the  drawn  blinds  that  screened  the  windows  of  the  Court- 
room there  streamed  three  shafts  of  light,  one  of  which  fell 
upon  the  strong  features  of  the  Lord  Advocate,  as  he  stood  in 
front  of  the  dock,  facing  the  jury.  He  used  no  ornaments  of 
rhetoric,  made  no  impassioned  appeal ;  but  sternly,  almost 
Ixii 


Introduction. 

relentlessly,  marshalled,  one  by  one,  his  facts  and  inferences, 
crushing  the  while  his  handkerchief  in  his  clenched  right  hand, 
as  though  it  were  a  symbol  of  the  prisoner's  fate.  He 
spoke  for  an  hour  and  fifty  minutes;  and  the  opinion 
was  generally  expressed  that  no  more  masterly  address 
had  been  delivered  in  that  place  since  the  historic  speech 
of  the  late  Lord  President  Inglis,  when,  as  Dean  of  Faculty, 
he  successfully  defended  Madeleine  Smith.  The  impres- 
sion was  heightened  by  the  fact  that  the  learned  Advo- 
cate referred  neither  to  notes  nor  documents ;  but,  by  a  gift 
of  memory,  in  the  circumstances  little  short  of  marvellous, 
wove  into  a  coherent  pattern  the  complex  web  of  the  Crown 
case.  That  he  was  convinced  of  the  justice  of  his  cause  was 
manifest ;  but  in  one  or  two  points  his  argument  would  seem 
to  go  somewhat  further  than  was  warranted  by  the  evidence. 
It  is  noteworthy  that  the  address  contained  no  reference  to 
the  witnesses  Reid,  Antoine,  or  Schmalz.  In  an  early  passage 
the  promise,  "  We  shall  see  in  the  sequel  how  it  was  that  the 
prisoner  came  to  know  that  she  [Miss  Gilchrist]  was  possessed 
of  these  jewels,"  appears  rather  to  beg  the  question,  for 
upon  that  point  no  evidence  whatever  was  led,  nor  did  the 
speaker  again  refer  to  it.  With  regard  to  the  statement 
that  "  there  is  not  a  single  human  being  in  this  case  who, 
having  once  seen  the  prisoner,  has  failed  to  know  him  at  once, 
so  striking,  so  peculiarly  distinctive  is  his  face,"  it  has  to 
be  observed  that  the  instances  given  of  those  who  admittedly 
saw  Slater,  were  of  persons  who,  though  seeing  him  but  once,  all 
spoke  to  him  and  heard  him  speak.  Further,  the  Lord  Advo- 
cate was  mistaken  in  stating,  which  he  did  more  than  once, 
as  a  reason  for  the  prisoner  hastening  his  departure,  that 
Slater's  name,  as  well  as  the  description  given  by  Barrowman, 
appeared  in  the  newspapers  of  25th  December.  As  a  matter 
of  fact,  the  name  of  Slater  was  first  published  in  the  Glasgow 
Herald  of  2nd  January.  On  the  conclusion  of  his  address, 
the  Lord  Advocate  left  the  Court,  to  which  he  did  not  return. 

At  half-past  one  Mr.  M'Clure  commenced  his  speech  for  the 
defence,  occupying  exactly  the  same  time  as  his  learned 
opponent.  His  address  obviously  suffered  in  comparison 
with  that  for  the  Crown,  its  chief  concern  being  to 
refute  seriatim  the  arguments  of  the  Lord  Advocate. 
It  would  therefore  be  unfair  to  contrast  the  speakers  from 
the  oratorical  standpoint.  Mr.  M'Clure  opened  with  a 

Ixiii 
1 


Oscar  Slater. 

strong  protest  against  the  newspaper  campaign,  of  which, 
he  said,  his  client  had  been  the  victim,  and  referred 
to  the  prejudice  created  by  the  false  reports  set  afloat 
concerning  the  case.  In  view  of  what  afterwards  hap- 
pened, it  is  curious  to  note  his  warning  to  the  jury,  that,  if 
they  convicted  the  prisoner,  "  there  was  no  possibility  of  a 
commutation  of  the  capital  penalty."  While  one  may  have 
difficulty  in  assenting  to  his  proposition,  that,  as  regards  the 
behaviour  of  Slater  before  and  after  the  murder,  "  in  the  main 
facts  there  is  nothing  suspicious,"  the  skill  with  which  he 
analysed  the  evidence  of  the  identifying  witnesses,  and  made 
the  most  of  the  many  points  telling  in  the  prisoner's  favour, 
is  worthy  of  all  praise.  His  examination  of  the  evidence 
was  at  once  careful  and  exhaustive ;  and  the  case  for  the 
defence  was  adequately  presented.  He  called  the  jury's  atten- 
tion to  the  fact  that  Slater  was  first  suspected  upon  grounds, 
one  of  which  was  false,  and  the  other  innocent,  viz., 
because  he  had  pawned  a  brooch  which  was  supposed 
to  have  belonged  to  Miss  Gilchrist,  and  because,  when  he 
was  looked  for,  it  was  found  that  he  had  left  Glasgow. 
Mr.  M'Clure  made  effective  use  of  the  American  evidence,  as 
showing  the  obvious  inconsistencies  of  Lambie's  testimony,  and 
satisfactorily  disposed  of  the  Crown  theory  that  Slater  fled  as 
the  result  of  the  description  published  in  the  newspapers.  The 
excellent  point,  too,  was  made  that  Slater,  if  he  were,  in  fact, 
the  watcher  seen  by  the  witnesses,  had  been  so  careful  as  to 
destroy  the  clothes  spoken  to  by  them,  while  preserving  the 
very  garment  in  which  he  did  the  deed.  Upon  the  vexed 
question  of  the  murderer's  moustache,  the  following  summary 
was  given  :  — 

The  man  wanted  is  alleged  to  have  been  clean  shaven  by  Mrs. 
Liddell,  Helen  Lambie,  Barrowman,  Adams,  and  Armour.  It  is, 
on  the  contrary,  proved  that  Slater  had  a  moustache  by  Rattman, 
Aumann,  Cameron,  Reid,  Nichols,  the  barber ;  Gibb,  the  billiard 
man ;  Kempton,  and  Tracey. 

In  conclusion,  Mr.  M'Clure  made  a  legitimate  and  telling 
reference  to  the  notorious  case  of  Adolf  Beck,  as  showing  the 
dangers  attending  evidence  of  identity  based  on  personal 
impressions. 

Lord  Guthrie  began  his  charge  to  the  jury  at  five  minutes  to 
four  o'clock.  His  lordship  suggested  that  the  man  who 
entered  Miss  Gilchrist's  house  did  so  with  the  intention  only 
Ixiv 


Introduction. 

to  rob  her  of  her  jewels,  and  was  not  contemplating  murder. 
When  she  resisted,  and  attempted  to  raise  an  alarm  by  knock- 
ing on  the  floor,  then  arose  the  necessity  to  silence  her — 
"  Dead  men  (and  dead  women)  tell  no  tales."  His  lordship 
then  proceeded  to  explain  to  the  jury  the  nature  and  relative 
value  of  the  evidence,  direct  and  circumstantial.  He  described 
the  evidence  with  regard  to  the  prisoner's  character  and 
financial  circumstances  as  double-edged ;  and  told  the  jury 
that,  if  they  decided  to  convict  him,  they  ought  to  be  able  to 
say  they  had  disregarded  it,  and  had  convicted  him  irrespec- 
tive of  it.  Referring  to  the  mystery,  of  which  the  prisoner 
was  the  key,  his  lordship  said  that  he  never  knew  a  case  like 
the  present,  either  in  his  own  experience  or  from  reading.  As 
to  the  question  of  identification,  his  lordship  held  that  it 
would  be  unsafe  to  convict  on  mere  evidence  of  personal  im- 
pression of  his  identity  on  the  part  of  strangers,  without 
reference  to  any  marked  personality  or  personal  peculiarity.  It 
was  for  them  to  consider  whether  some  of  that  evidence  was 
not  given  by  persons  who  had  an  opportunity  of  familiarising 
themselves  with  the  individual  identified.  One  fact,  his  lord- 
ship said,  was  quite  clear — the  prisoner  resembled  the  mur- 
derer. But  it  was  to  be  kept  in  view  that  the  witnesses  to 
identification  were  all  Scotch,  while  the  prisoner  was  patently 
a  foreigner ;  therefore  the  mere  fact  that  a  witness  thought  the 
prisoner  the  same  as  a  man  he  had  seen,  because  both  had  a 
foreign  appearance,  went  for  very  little,  if  it  went  for  anything 
at  all.  With  these  general  observations,  his  lordship  then 
proceeded  to  review  the  evidence  on  this  part  of  the  case,  and 
having  done  so,  observed — 

The  questions  for  you  are— and  they  are  purely  jury  questions — so 
far  as  identification  is  concerned,  first,  has  the  prisoner  such  a  marked 
personality,  and  had  the  witnesses  Lambie,  Adams,  and  Barrowman 
such  an  opportunity  to  observe  the  man  leaving  Miss  Gilchrist's  house, 
and  are  they  sufficiently  credible  witnesses,  to  enable  you  to  hold  it 
proved  that  the  prisoner  is  the  same  man?  Second,  has  the  prisoner 
such  a  marked  personality,  and  had  the  eleven  or  twelve  witnesses 
above  referred  to  such  opportunities  for  seeing  the  man  who  haunted 
the  otreet,  ae  to  enable  you  to  hold  it  proved  that  the  prisoner  was 
HIP  same  man?  I  assume — but  again  it  is  for  you  to  say — that  there 
can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  as  to  the  identity  of  the  man  haunting 
the  etreet  and  the  murderer.  Lastly,  is  there  corroboration,  in  other 
parts  of  the  evidence,  of  the  personal  impression  given  you  by  these 
witnesses,  assuming  that  they  are  strangers,  and  assuming  that  there 
is  no  such  marked  personality  or  personal  peculiarity  aa  would  add 
weight  to  the  mere  personal  impression? 

Ixv 


Oscar  Slater. 

His  lordship  then  examined  the  purely  circumstantial  evi- 
dence, and  commented  on  the  fact  that  nothing  was  found  in 
the  prisoner's  possession  on  which  the  jury  could  rely  as  being 
connected  necessarily  with  the  murder.  With  regard  to  the 
telegram  said  to  have  been  despatched  by  Slater  from  the 
Central  Station  at  6.12  on  the  night  of  the  crime,  there  was 
no  evidence  that,  although  it  was  in  his  handwriting,  he  per- 
sonally handed  it  to  the  telegraph  clerk.  [Curiously  enough, 
there  was  no  evidence  even  that  it  was  in  Slater's  hand- 
writing.] The  jury  would  consider  whether,  even  accepting 
the  evidence  of  Aumann  and  Rattman,  the  prisoner 
had  not  plenty  of  time  to  walk  from  Johnston's  billiard 
rooms  to  West  Princes  Street  and  to  arrive  at  the 
scene  of  the  murder  by  seven  o'clock.  With  regard  to 
the  evidence  of  Antoine  and  Schmalz  they  would  also  judge 
whether,  in  a  disreputable  house  such  as  Slater's,  they  were, 
without  evidence,  to  credit  the  statement  that  hours  were  so 
punctual  and  so  regular  that  the  inmates  always  dined  at  seven 
o'clock.  As  to  the  alleged  flight  from  Glasgow,  his  lordship 
did  not  think  it  could  be  suggested  that  Slater  was  not  intend- 
ing at  some  time  or  other  to  go  to  America.  It  was  for  the 
jury  to  say  whether,  in  the  circumstances  they  had  heard 
detailed,  there  was  a  hastening  of  that  intention,  which  was 
suggestive,  if  it  did  not  prove,  that  he  had  a  new  and  very 
serious  motive  for  expediting  his  departure.  His  lordship 
noted  that  Antoine,  who  must  have  known,  was  not  asked  by 
counsel  for  the  defence  to  say  that  the  tickets  were  taken  for 
Liverpool,  and  not  for  London.  After  some  observations  on 
what  constituted  reasonable  doubt,  his  lordship  concluded  hia 
impressive  and  impartial  charge  as  follows :  — 

Gentlemen,  I  suppose  you  all  think  that  the  prisoner  possibly  is 
the  murderer ;  you  may  very  likely  all  think  that  he  probably  is  the 
murderer.  That,  however,  will  not  entitle  you  to  convict  him.  The 
Crown  have  undertaken  to  prove,  not  that  he  is  possibly  or  probably 
the  murderer,  but  that  he  is  the  murderer.  That  is  the  question 
you  have  to  consider.  If  you  think  there  is  no  reasonable  doubt 
about  it,  you  will  do  your  duty  and  convict  him ;  if  you  think  there 
is,  you  will  acquit  him. 

The  jury  retired  to  consider  their  verdict  at  4.55  p.m.  Con- 
trary to  the  usual  practice,  the  prisoner,  it  is  understood  by  his 
own  desire,  did  not  leave  the  dock  to  await  their  decision  in  the 
cells  below  the  Court-room.  It  was  obvious  from  the  demeanour 
of  those  in  Court  that  a  verdict  adverse  to  the  accused  was 
Ixvi 


Introduction. 

not  at  first  expected  ;  but  as  the  time  wore  on,  and  the  jury 
did  not  return,  this  anticipation  visibly  decreased.  The 
general  restlessness  communicated  itself  to  the  prisoner,  until 
the  ringing  of  the  jury  bell  at  6.5,  announcing  that  his  fate  had 
been  decided,  was  succeeded  by  intense  silence.  The  jury,  hav- 
ing returned  to  the  box,  and  Lord  Guthrie  having  taken  his 
seat,  the  foreman,  in  reply  to  the  Clerk  of  Justiciary, 
announced  their  verdict  as  follows  : — "  The  jury,  by  a  majority, 
find  the  panel  guilty  of  murder  as  libelled."  Mr.  Morison, 
K.C.,  in  the  absence  of  the  Lord  Advocate,  then  formally 
moved  for  sentence. 

It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  the  verdict  came  with  a  shock 
of  surprise  to  most  of  the  auditors  in  the  crowded  Court-room. 
Upon  none,  however,  did  the  blow  fall  with  such  fearful  effect 
as  on  the  man  in  the  dock.  He  had  been,  it  appears, 
throughout  the  trial,  confident  of  acquittal,  and  had  borne 
himself  from  day  to  day  with  inflexible  composure.  The 
recording  of  the  verdict  and  sentence,  which  followed  upon  the 
jury's  finding,  occupied  an  actual  seven  minutes ;  but  the  tense 
stillness,  broken  only  by  the  sound  of  the  official  pen,  seemed 
interminable.  It  proved  too  much  for  the  prisoner's  iron 
nerve.  He  rose  in  the  dock,  and,  labouring  under  strong 
emotion,  made  an  incoherent  effort  to  address  the  judge.  Lord 
Guthrie  informed  Mr.  M'Clure  that  he  should  advise  the  prisoner 
to  reserve  anything  he  had  to  say  for  the  Crown  authorities ; 
but  Slater  commenced  another  hysterical  appeal,  which  his 
lordship  mercifully  terminated  by  pronouncing  the  inevitable 
sentence,  adjudging  the  prisoner  to  be  hanged  in  Glasgow  on 
27th  May.  A  scene  more  painful  it  is  fortunately  the  lot  of 
few  to  witness,  and  none  who  did  so  on  this  occasion  is  likely 
to  forget  it.  The  prisoner  was  then  removed,  and  the  Court 
rose. 

It  is  satisfactory  to  note  that,  as  the  result  of  what  occurred 
upon  this  trial,  an  Act  of  Adjournal  was  passed  on  1st  June, 
1909,  abolishing  the  unnecessary  and  cruel  delay  between  the 
declaration  of  a  verdict  of  guilty  and  the  pronouncing  of  the 
capital  sentence.  A  copy  of  the  Act  of  Adjournal  will  be 
found  in  the  Appendix. 

The  votes  of  the  fifteen  jurymen  were,  it  is  understood,  given 
as  follows: — Nine  for  "  guilty,"  five  for  "  not  proven,"  and 
one  for  "  not  guilty."  It  is  noteworthy  that,  had  two  of  the 
majority  voted  differently,  Slater  would  have  been  set  free. 

Ixvii 


Oscar  Slater. 

In  England,  of  course,  a  conviction  in  such  circumstances  could 
not  have  been  obtained,  and  a  new  trial  would  have  resulted. 

On  the  night  of  the  last  day  of  the  trial,  Thursday,  6th 
May,  it  was  stated  in  the  Press  that  the  prisoner,  on  being 
taken  to  the  cells  below  the  dock,  exclaimed  to  the  detectives, 
"  I  am  not  the  only  guilty  party  " ;  but  this  alleged  confession 
was  afterwards  emphatically  denied  by  Mr.  Speirs,  the  agent 
for  the  defence,  in  a  letter  to  the  newspapers. 

The  verdict  was  variously  received  by  the  Press.  One  news- 
paper stated  that,  at  the  conclusion  of  Lord  Guthrie's  charge, 
it  appeared  impossible  for  the  prisoner  to  escape  ;  while  another, 
taking  exactly  the  opposite  view,  declared  that  the  judge's 
summing  up  made  it  impossible  for  the  jury  to  convict ! 
Perhaps  the  more  general  view  was  that  a  verdict 
of  "  not  proven  "  would,  in  the  circumstances,  have 
been  a  safer  finding.  Arrangements  were  made  forth- 
with for  the  presentation  of  a  public  petition  for 
commutation  of  the  death  sentence,  to  be  forwarded  to 
the  Secretary  of  State  for  Scotland,  the  grounds  being  (1)  that 
the  evidence  led  against  the  prisoner  was  insufficient  to  justify 
the  jury  finding  him  guilty  of  the  charge,  there  being,  in  the 
petitioners'  opinion,  insufficient  evidence  to  identify  the 
prisoner  with  the  murderer ;  and  (2)  that  the  question  of  the 
prisoner's  immoral  character  was  brought  before  the  jury  and, 
in  the  petitioners'  view,  must  have  influenced  their  judgment. 
This  was  duly  prepared,  and  having  been  signed,  it  is  stated, 
by  over  twenty  thousand  members  of  the  public,  was  for- 
warded to  the  Scottish  Secretary,  Lord  Pentland,  together 
with  a  memorial  in  Slater's  behalf  prepared  by  Mr.  Speirs, 
on  Monday,  17th  May,  ten  days  before  the  date  fixed  for 
the  execution.  A  copy  of  this  memorial,  which  ably  embodies 
in  lucid  and  succinct  form,  the  arguments  on  the  evidence 
against  the  verdict,  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix.  With 
the  exception  of  the  statement  of  Agnes  Brown,  to  which  we 
have  before  referred,  no  new  facts  are  given  ;  nor  does  the 
memorial  contain  any  further  information  regarding  Slater's 
movements  on  the  night  of  the  crime.  If,  as  is  alleged  in  the 
memorial,  the  prisoner  "  was  all  along  anxious  to  give  evidence 
on  his  own  behalf,"  and  only  refrained  from  entering  the 
witness-box  on  his  counsel's  advice,  it  is  difficult  to  understand 
why,  when  he  had  an  opportunity  of  telling  his  own  story  to 
the  Scottish  Secretary,  his  lips  remained  sealed. 
Ixviii 


Introduction. 

Meanwhile  the  "  campaign  "  in  the  Press,  against  which 
Mr.  M'Clure  had  protested  at  the  trial  as  prejudicial  to  his 
client,  was  conducted  more  vigorously  than  ever ;  but  on  this 
occasion  in  favour  of  the  condemned  man.  To  such  lengths 
was  this  crusade  of  sentiment  carried,  that  one  respectable 
Glasgow  journal  actually  despatched  an  emissary  to  an  obscure 
mining  village  in  Upper  Silesia,  for  the  purpose  of  interview- 
ing the  convict's  parents ;  and  for  some  days  improved  its 
readers  with  anecdotes  of  "  Oscar's  Youth,"  and  harrowing 
accounts  of  "  How  the  News  of  the  Verdict  Reached  Them," 
and  "  The  Mother's  Judgment :  '  If  he  has  done  that  he 
deserves  to  die.'  ' 

As  time  went  on,  and  no  word  reached  Glasgow  from 
London,  the  authorities  proceeded  with  the  necessary  arrange- 
ments for  carrying  out  the  sentence  on  27th  May.  Not  till 
seven  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  the  25th  was  the  following 
telegram  received  from  the  Scottish  Office  :  — 

To  the  Lord  Provost  of  Glasgow,  City  Chambers,  Glasgow. — Case  of 
Oscar  Slater.  Execution  of  sentence  of  death  is  respited  until  further 
signification  of  His  Majesty's  pleasure. 

UNDEB-SECBETABY  FOB   SCOTLAND. 

The  news  was  at  once  communicated  by  the  magistrates 
to  the  prisoner  in  the  condemned  cell.  The  next  morning 
the  Lord  Provost  received  the  following  letter  in  confirma- 
tion :  — 

Scottish  Office, 
Whitehall,   May  25th,    1909. 

My  Lord  Provost, — I  am  to  signify  to  you  the  King's  command  that 
the  execution  of  the  sentence  of  death  passed  on  Oscar  Slater,  presently 
in  His  Majesty's  prison  at  Duke  Street,  Glasgow,  be  respited  with  a 
view  to  its  commutation  to  penal  servitude  for  life. — I  am,  my  Lord 
Provost,  your  obedient  servant,  PENTLAND. 

The  Hon.  the  Lord  Provost  of  Glasgow,  City  Chambers,  Glasgow. 

It  is  understood  that  Lord  Pentland,  in  arriving  at  his 
decision,  had  the  assistance  of  the  Lord  Chancellor  and  Mr. 
lluldane,  Minister  for  War;  and  that  Lord  Guthrie,  as  the 
judge  presiding  at  the  trial,  was  also  consulted.  On  8th 
June  the  following  questions  with  reference  to  the  respite 
were  asked  in  the  House  of  Commons  :  — 

Sir  J.  H.  Dalziel  (L.,  Kirkcaldy  Burghs)  asked  the  Lord  Advocate 
whether  he  would  state  the  grounds  on  which  he  advised  that  the 
extreme  penalty  of  the  law  should  not  be  carried  out  in  the  case  of 
Oscar  Slater,  convicted  of  murder,  and  now  detained  in  Glasgow  prison, 
and  on  what  grounds  the  said  prisoner  was  now  detained  in  custody. 

Ixix 


Oscar  Slater. 

The  Lord  Advocate  (Mr.  Ure) — The  Lord  Advocate  does  not  advise 
the  Crown  in  regard  to  the  exercise  of  the  prerogative  of  mercy,  and 
it  would  be  contrary  to  practice  to  state  the  grounds  on  which  the 
prerogative  of  mercy  is  exercised  in  any  particular  case.  Oscar  Slater 
is  detained  in  custody  on  the  ground  that  he  has  been  convicted  of  the 
crime  of  murder. 

Sir  J.  H.  Dalziel — Was  the  Secretary  for  Scotland  in  possession  of 
the  right  hon.  gentleman's  views  before  any  decision  was  taken  with 
regard  to  the  matter?  and,  further,  if  Slater  is  detained  in  custody 
for  the  crime  of  murder,  why  was  he  not  called  upon  to  suffer  the 
extreme  penalty  for  this  brutal  crime? 

The  Lord  Advocate — The  Secretary  for  Scotland  was  in  possession 
of  my  views  before  the  decision  was  taken ;  but  I  think  the  House  will 
agree  that  it  is  entirely  contrary  to  practice  and  to  public  policy  to 
state  the  grounds  on  which  the  Secretary  for  Scotland  exercised  the- 
prerogative  of  mercy. 

Sir  J.  H.  Dalziel — Are  we  to  understand  from  that,  the  view  of  the 
Government  is  that  Oscar  Slater  was  guilty  of  this  brutal  crime? 

The  Lord  Advocate — I  am  afraid  that  is  only  asking  in  another 
form  a  question  which  I  have  declined  to  answer. 

On  8th  July,  Slater,  along  with  seven  other  convicts,  was 
removed  from  Duke  Street  Prison,  Glasgow,  to  the  Convict 
Prison  at  Peterhead,  there  to  undergo  his  commuted  sentence 
of  penal  servitude  for  life. 

The  reward  of  £200,  offered  by  the  Crown  authorities  for 
information  which  would  lead  to  a  conviction,  was  ultimately 
apportioned  as  follows: — Mary  Barrowman,  £100;  John 
Forsyth,  £40 ;  Allan  M'Lean,  £40 ;  and  Gordon  Henderson, 
£20,  all  of  whom  were  witnesses  at  the  trial. 

Of  the  many  mysteries  which  the  four  days'  inquiry  failed 
to  elucidate  two  remained  not  only  unsolved,  but,  as  regards 
one  of  them,  even  unnoticed — (1)  How  did  Slater  (or  the 
murderer)  acquire  his  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  Miss 
Gilchrist's  jewels?  and  (2)  by  what  means  did  he  obtain 
entrance  to  her  house1? 

As  regards  the  first  point,  the  witness  Mrs.  Walker,  a 
former  servant,  was  asked  if  Miss  Gilchrist's  jewels  formed 
a  subject  of  conversation  in  the  neighbourhood,  but  she 
stated  that  she  had  only  heard  it  remarked  among  the  trades- 
people that  her  mistress  was  well  dressed  and  wore  some 
jewellery.  Lambie  swore  that,  so  far  as  she  knew,  no  one 
in  the  neighbourhood  was  aware  of  the  existence  of  the  jewels 
except  a  girl  friend  of  hers,  whom  she  had  informed  of  the 
fact;  and  that  she  had  also  mentioned  the  matter  to  her 
admirer,  Nugent,  a  year  before  the  murder.  These  are 
the  only  references  to  the  subject  which  the  evidence  contains. 
The  members  of  the  Adams  family,  who  had  resided  in  the 
hue 


Introduction. 

house  below  for  many  years,  were  not  asked,  when  examined, 
if  any  report  of  the  old  lady's  jewels  had  reached  them. 

With  regard  to  the  second  point,  no  reference  to  it  was 
made  by  either  of  the  counsel  or  by  the  presiding  judge. 
No  doubt  exists  of  the  fact  that  the  murderer  did  somehow 
obtain  access  to  the  house ;  but  the  manner  of  his  entrance 
was  not  alluded  to.  It  is  clear  that  he  did  not  do  so  by 
the  windows,  for  these,  as  we  have  seen,  were,  with  the 
exception  of  the  kitchen  window,  all  fastened  when  Lambie 
went  out,  and  were  in  tile  same  condition  when  she  returned. 
The  height  of  the  flat  from  the  ground,  in  the  absence  of  a 
ladder,  further  precludes  this  theory.  That  the  murderer 
was  not  concealed  in  the  stair  leading  to  the  empty  house 
above,  but  entered  from  the  street  after  Lambie's  departure, 
is  also  indicated  by  the  wet  footmarks  noticed  by  her  on 
the  lower  steps  of  the  stair,  to  which  attention  has  been 
drawn.  If  the  evidence  of  Lambie  be  accepted,  there  is 
no  question  that  both  the  house  and  close  doors  were  securely 
closed  when  she  left,  and  could  only  be  opened  either  by 
keys  from  without  or  by  Miss  Gilchrist  from  within.  The 
conjecture  that  the  murderer  used  false  keys  is  unlikely ; 
the  close  door  could,  no  doubt,  be  readily  opened  either  by 
a  knife  or  a  common  latch-key,  but  the  house  door,  as  we 
have  seen,  was  guarded  by  two  separate  patent  locks  which 
required  two  different  keys.  The  murderer,  therefore, 
probably  rang  the  street  door  bell.  Mr.  Adams  stated  that 
he  generally,  but  not  invariably,  heard  Miss  Gilchrist's  bell 
when  rung;  he  did  riot  do  so  that  night. 

It  is  in  evidence  that  Miss  Gilchrist  was  apprehensive  of 
attacks  upon  her  property,  and  it  seems,  at  first  sight,  unlikely 
that  she  would  voluntarily  admit  a  stranger,  or  would  not, 
at  least,  have  opened  the  door  upon  the  chain,  till  she  had 
ascertained  his  business.  But,  as  she  kept  only  one  servant, 
she  must  frequently  (as  on  the  servant's  night  out)  have  had 
occasion  to  answer  the  door  herself,  being  alone  in  the  house. 
No  question  was  put  to  Lambie  as  to  her  mistress's  practice 
in  this  regard,  nor  was  she  asked  if,  when  she  went  upon  her 
nightly  errand  for  the  paper,  she  had  not,  on  some  former 
occasions,  forgotten  to  take  the  keys. 

Assuming  that  this  had  happened  before,  it  is  possible  that 
the  murderer  (who  had  presumably  studied  the  habits  of  the 
inmates),  being  on  the  watch  in  one  of  the  adjacent  closes, 


Oscar  Slater. 

rang  the  street  bell  immediately  after  Lambie  left  the  house. 
The  close  door  is  opened  by  raising  a  handle  within  the  hall, 
just  outside  the  dining-room  door.  The  old  lady,  thinking 
that  Lambie  had  forgotten  the  keys,  may  have  removed  her 
spectacles,  laid  them  (as  they  were  found)  beside  her  magazine, 
and,  rising  from  her  chair,  have  gone  to  the  hall  and  lifted 
the  handle.  She  may  then  have  opened  the  house  door,  and 
at  once  have  returned  to  the  dining-room,  the  door  of  which 
immediately  adjoins,  and  is  at  right  angles  to,  the  front  door 
in  the  hall.  That  she  did  so  is  more  probable  than  that 
she  waited  at  the  door  to  see  if  it  were  Lambie,  as,  even  if 
the  difference  of  tread  did  not  apprise  her  that  it  was  not 
the  maid,  she  could  have  seen  a  stranger  coming  up  the 
stairs  in  time  to  close  the  door. 

That  no  struggle  occurred  in  the  hall  or  in  the  dining-room, 
and  that  Miss  Gilchrist  was  felled  as  she  stood  on  the  hearth 
rug,  near  her  chair,  would  appear  for  three  reasons — (1) 
There  was  no  indication  of  such  in  the  position  of  the  furniture 
of  either  the  hall  or  dining-room ;  (2)  the  first  sound  heard  by 
the  Adams  family  was  the  fall  of  a  heavy  body ;  and  (3)  the 
evidence  of  Professor  Glaister  proves  that  the  deed  was  done 
on  the  spot  where  the  body  was  found. 

It  is  therefore  likely,  in  view  of  the  medical  evidence, 
that  the  old  lady  had  regained  her  chair,  when  she  realised 
that  the  footsteps  approaching  were  not  those  of  Lambie. 
She  turned,  and  took  a  step  or  two  towards  the  door  as  the 
murderer  entered  the  room.  With  one  swift  blow  she  was 
struck  down,  her  head  crashing  against  the  lid  of  the  coal 
scuttle  (which,  we  know,  was  broken  and  bloody)  on  the 
right  hand  side  of  the  fireplace;  she  rolled  or  was  dragged 
on  to  the  hearth  rug ;  and,  voluntarily  or  involuntarily,  gave, 
probably  with  her  heels,  the  three  knocks  upon  the  floor. 
Her  assailant  may  then,  furious  at  what  he  perceived  to  be 
a  signal  for  help,  have  snatched  up  the  skin  rug,  which  lay 
in  front  of  the  sideboard,  and  using  it  partly  to  stifle  her 
cries,  partly  as  a  screen  for  himself,  have,  kneeling  upon 
her  chest,  completed  his  ghastly  task. 

The  meaningless  ferocity  of  the  assault  may  have  been  due 
to  the  fury  of  fear ;  for  it  is  to  be  remembered  that,  early  in 
the  attack,  the  three  "  rude  rings  "  of  Mr.  Adams  rang 
through  the  house.  That  these  gave  the  murderer  pause  is 
shown  by  Mr.  Adams'  statement  that  he  "  had  been  standing 
Ixxii 


Introduction. 

at  the  door  for  half  a  minute  or  so "  before  he  heard  the 
gruesome  sound  which  he  described.  On  his  second  visit  to 
the  door,  two  or  three  minutes  later,  the  sounds  had  ceased ; 
the  murderer  was  then  in  the  bedroom. 

Apart  from  such  hypotheses,  one  fact,  however,  is  clearly 
proved :  the  murderer's  hands  were  clean.  The  deed  done, 
he  hurried  to  the  bedroom.  The  match-box  he  had  brought 
with  him,  the  match  he  struck,  the  gas  bracket  he  lighted, 
the  box  he  broke  open,  the  papers  therein  which  he  scattered 
on  the  floor,  the  glass  dish  on  the  toilet  table  from  which 
he  took  the  brooch,  each  handled  by  him  in  turn,  were  all 
free  from  blood.  It  is  remarkable  that,  if  the  murderer 
knew  nothing  of  the  house,  he  made  straight  for  the  spare 
bedroom  in  which  the  jewels  were  kept,  passing  the  door  of 
Miss  Gilchrist's  bedroom  on  his  way,  and  entering,  as  appears, 
none  of  the  other  rooms.  He  was  certainly  in  the  house 
for  less  than  ten  minutes,  yet  had  time  not  only  to  deliver 
the  blows — "  not  under  fifty  or  sixty,  probably  a  good  many 
more  " — which  silenced  his  victim,  but  to  ascertain  in  which 
of  the  six  apartments  the  jewels  were  secreted,  to  light  the 
gas,  to  open  and  examine  the  contents  of  the  box,  to  secure 
the  brooch,  and  to  walk  leisurely  past  Lambie  and  Adams, 
so  soon  as  they  unlocked  the  door. 

The  question  of  time  brings  us  to  the  consideration  of 
another  point.  The  murder,  according  to  the  Lord  Advocate's 
theory,  was  committed  by  a  man  who  had  thoroughly 
familiarised  himself  with  the  movements  and  habits  of  the 
inmates  by  "  careful,  prolonged,  and  steady  watching  with 
a  skilled  eye."  That  being  so,  why  did  he  select  for  his 
purpose  the  shorter  period  of  the  maid's  nightly  errand  to 
the  newsagent's  (which,  she  said,  never  exceeded  ten  minutes), 
rather  than  her  necessarily  longer  absence  for  the  messages 
later  in  the  evening,  or,  better  still,  her  weekly  night  out? 
It  may  be  that  he  had  already  attempted  to  gain  admission 
to  the  house  on  one  or  other  of  these  occasions,  but  found 
that  Miss  Gilchrist  would  not  then  open  the  door.  Even 
assuming  that  his  original  design  was  robbery,  and  did  not 
embrace  the  possibility  of  incidental  murder,  he  must  have 
expected  that  to  obtain  the  jewels  would  require  a  search, 
more  or  less  protracted,  during  which  their  owner  might  raise 
the  alarm,  unless,  indeed,  he  thought  she  would  give  them 
up  at  once.  But,  with  deference  to  the  suggestion  of  the 

Ixxiii 


Oscar  Slater. 

learned  judge  upon  this  point,  it  may  -well  be  that  not  only 
did  the  intruder  contemplate  the  murder  of  Miss  Gilchrist 
from  the  first,  but  chose  his  time  with  reference  to  the  maid's 
short  absence ;  so  that,  had  she  returned,  as  usual,  alone, 
she  might  have  shared  the  fate  of  her  mistress,  thus  leaving 
him  free  to  search  the  premises  at  his  leisure. 

In  this  connection  mention  may  be  made  of  the  case  of 
John  Paul  Foster,  recorded  by  Feuerbach,  the  eminent  jurist, 
in  his  admirable  studies  of  German  criminal  trials,*  which 
presents  some  striking  points  of  resemblance  to  the  present 
case.  This  miscreant  was,  on  22nd  July,  1821,  convicted 
of  the  murder  of  Christopher  Baumler,  a  corn  chandler  of 
Niirnberg,  and  his  maid-servant,  Anna  Katherina  Schutz,  in 
the  following  circumstances: — Baumler,  who  was  reputed 
a  wealthy  man,  lived  above  his  shop,  the  only  other 
occupant  of  the  house  being  the  servant,  a  girl  of  twenty- 
three.  His  ordinary  business  included  the  right  of  selling 
brandy.  On  the  night  of  20th  September,  certain  citizens 
who  had  been  drinking  in  the  shop  left  together  at  nine  o'clock, 
leaving  there  one  customer,  a  stranger  to  them,  drinking  by 
himself.  The  shop  was  usually  closed  at  11  p.m.  At  9.45, 
the  maid  called  at  the  baker's,  "  a  hundred  steps  "  distant, 
and  purchased  two  rolls.  This  errand  could  not  have  occu- 
pied above  five  minutes.  About  the  same  hour,  an  opposite 
neighbour  noticed,  to  his  surprise,  that  Baumler's  shop  was 
closed.  Next  morning,  as  the  shop  remained  shut  after 
its  usual  hour,  the  neighbours  effected  an  entrance  by  an 
upper  window,  when  it  was  found  that  the  whole  house  had 
been  ransacked,  and  two  bags  of  money,  as  well  as  some 
clothing,  stolen.  In  the  parlour,  behind  the  shop,  the  corpse 
of  Baumler  was  discovered  lying  on  its  back  between  the 
stove  and  the  table,  beside  the  stool  upon  which  he  had  sat. 
smoking  his  pipe  ;  while  behind  the  shop  door  lay  the  dead 
body  of  the  maid,  with  the  two  rolls  beside  her.  The 
injuries  inflicted  upon  the  old  man  and  the  girl  were  identical, 
and,  by  a  strange  coincidence,  closely  resemble  those  dis- 
closed on  the  post-mortem  examination  in  the  present  case. 
Both  heads  had  been  shattered,  in  the  opinion  of  the  surgeons, 
"  with  a  heavy  instrument,  having  a  flat  surface,  with  sharp 


*Narratires  of  Eemarkdblt  Criminal  Trials  Translated  from  the 
German  of  Anselm  Ritter  von  Feuerbach  by  Lady  Duff  Gordom. 
London :  John  Murray,  1846. 

Lxxiv 


Introduction. 

edges,  probably  the  back  of  a  hatchet."  In  each  case  the 
sternum  and  ribs  were  fractured,  it  was  thought  by  stamping 
on  the  bodies.  At  the  trial  it  was  proved  that  Foster  had 
been  seen,  for  several  days  before  the  murder,  walking  about 
the  street  in  a  suspicious  manner,  watching  the  house ;  he 
was  identified  as  the  man  who  had  outstayed  the  other  cus- 
tomers, one  of  whom  had  spoken  to  him  casually,  and  it  is 
instructive  to  note  that  the  witnesses,  who  identified  him, 
described  him  as  wearing  a  blue  coat,  when,  in  fact,  its 
colour  was  brown.  The  brown  great-coat  which  he  wore  on 
the  night  of  the  murder  and  had  disposed  of,  was  recovered, 
"  much  stained  and  in  some  places  soaked  with  blood  " ;  an 
axe,  bearing  unequivocal  traces  of  the  deed,  was  found  con- 
cealed in  his  house ;  and,  finally,  some  of  his  victim's  property 
was  traced  to  his  possession.  Having  studied  the  habits  of 
the  household,  Foster  had  entered  the  shop  and  ordered  a 
glass  of  brandy.  Immediately  upon  the  maid's  departure,  he 
had,  in  the  parlour,  felled  Baumler  with  the  axe,  which  he 
carried  hidden  under  his  great-coat,  closed  the  shop,  lay  in 
wait  for  the  girl  behind  the  street  door,  opened  it  for  her, 
end  attacked  her  as  she  returned  from  her  errand.  In  spite 
of  the  strong  circumstantial  evidence  adduced  against  him, 
Foster  escaped  capital  punishment  for  the  singular  reasons 
that  there  were  no  eye-witnesses  to  the  murder,  and  that  no 
confession  could  be  extorted  from  him !  He  was  accordingly 
condemned  to  imprisonment  in  chains  for  life. 

The  statement  of  Agnes  Brown  before  referred  to  raises 
the  additional  question,  was  the  murder  and  robbery  at  15 
Queen's  Terrace  the  work  of  a  single  hand?  This  question 
is  also  suggested  by  the  evidence  led  at  the  trial.  For  instance, 
the  man  seen  by  Mrs.  Liddell  at  five  minutes  to  seven,  stand- 
ing at  the  railings  outside  the  house,  and  minutely  described 
by  her,  was  obviously  a  man  quite  differently  dressed  from  the 
man  seen  and  described  by  Lambie,  Adams,  and  Barrowman. 
It  would  be  unprofitable  to  pursue  the  surmise  that  the  murderer 
had  an  accomplice  further  than  to  remark  that,  if  he  had,  and 
one  of  somewhat  similar  appearance  to  himself,  it  might  go  far 
to  reconcile  the  otherwise  conflicting  testimony  of  the  witnesses 
who  describe  the  watcher  and  the  man  leaving  the  house. 
That  the  man  seen  by  Lambie,  Adams,  and  Barrowman  bore 
no  visible  traces  of  blood  is  certain ;  and  it  is  conceivable 
that  the  actual  murderer  had  made  his  escape  between  Mr. 

Ixxv 


Oscar  Slater. 

Adams'   visits  to  the   door,   while  his  more  callous   associate 
lingered  to  secure  the  jewels. 

It  appears  from  the  evidence  of  all  the  medical  witnesses 
that  the  murderer,  using  the  short  hammer  as  alleged  by  the 
Crown,    would    be    more    or    less    bloodstained.       Upon    this 
point      the     theory      of      Dr.      John      Adams,      1      Queen's 
Crescent,     the    first    medical    man    to    see    the    body,     but 
who  was  not  called  as  a  witness  at  the  trial,  is  of  interest. 
Dr.   Adams,   it  is  understood,  had,   when  returning  home  at 
about  11  p.m.  from  his  professional  duties,   observed,   on  six 
or  eight  occasions  shortly  before  the  murder,   a  man  hanging 
about  the  corner  of  Queen's  Crescent,  outside  his  own  house. 
The  man  walked  with  a  slouching,  rolling  gait,   and  had  his 
hands    in    the    pockets   of   a    fawn-coloured    overcoat.        Dr. 
Adams  mentioned  the  matter,  some  time  before  the  murder, 
to  the  policeman  on  the  beat,  who  said  that  he  had  not  seen 
the  man.       It  will  be  remembered  that  Dr.  Adams  was  sum- 
moned by  Mr.  Arthur  Adams  immediately  after  the  discovery 
of  the  murder,  and  visited  the  scene  of  the  crime  at  7.20  or 
7.25.        He  found   Miss   Gilchrist  lying   on   her   back  on  the 
hearth  rug,  with  the  skin  rug  across  her  face.       Close  to  the 
head,    and    facing    it,    stood   an    ordinary    chair.          Having 
examined  the  body  and  ascertained  that  life  was  extinct,  Dr. 
Adams'  attention  was  attracted  by  the  condition  of  this  chair. 
He  observed  that  the  left  back  leg,  furthest  from  the  head, 
was   soaked   with   blood,    and   that   the   inner   aspect   of   each 
front   leg   was    spotted   with   blood.        The   back   leg,    in    his 
opinion,    had    evidently    been    in   contact    with    the    wounds. 
With  this  instrument,   in  his  view,   the  injuries  to  the  head 
had   been   inflicted.        In   addition  to  the   appearance   of   the 
chair,  he  inferred  that  it  had  been  so  used  from  the  character 
of  the  injuries,  the  comparatively  small  quantity  of  blood  near 
the  head,  and  the  restricted  area  of  the  blood  stains.     In  the 
opinion  of  Dr.   Adams  the   assault  was  committed   by   a  few 
heavy,  swinging  blows  from  the  back  leg  of  this  chair,   the 
assailant,    while   wielding   it,  stamping   upon   the   body,    and 
thereby  fracturing  the  ribs.       The  hands  of  the  assailant  would 
thus  be  clean,  and  the  seat  of  the  chair  would  be  interposed 
between  his  person  and  the  spurting  blood  at  the  moment  of 
impact.       With  reference  to  the  condition  of  the  chair,  it  is  to 
be  kept  in  view  that  the  locus  was  not  inspected  by  Professor 

Ixxvi 


Introduction. 

Glaister    and    Dr.    Gait    until   the    following    day,    when    the 
appearance  it  presented  may  not  then  have  been  marked. 

We  may  close  our  account  of  the  salient  features  of  this 
mysterious  and  perplexing  case  by  quoting  the  dictum  of  Lord 
Collins  from  the  Report  of  the  Royal  Commission  appointed  in 
1904  to  inquire  into  the  affair  of  Adolf  Beck,  prevising  that 
no  parallel  between  the  two  cases  is  here  suggested.  His 
lordship  observed — "  Evidence  as  to  identity  based  on  personal 
impressions,  however  bona  fide,  is  perhaps  of  all  classes  of 
evidence  the  least  to  be  relied  upon,  and  therefore,  unless 
supported  by  other  facts,  an  unsafe  basis  for  the  verdict  of  a 
jury." 


Ixxvii 


Leading  Dates  in  the  Slater  Case. 

1908,  October         29. — Oscar  Slater  arrives  in  Glasgow  from  London. 
November       4. — Antoine  and  Schmalz  join  Slater  in  Glasgow. 

6. — Slater,  as  "Anderson,"  takes  flat  at  69  St.  George's 

Road. 

10. — Slater  buys  hammer  and  other  household  tools. 
12. — Slater  opens  Post  Office  Savings  Bank  account,  and 

buys  Consols  in  name  of  "Adolf  Anderson." 
18. — Slater    pledges    with    Liddell    diamond    crescent 

brooch  for  £20. 
December        1. — Slater  elected  member  of  Sloper  Club. 

Watcher  first  seen  by  Constable  Walker. 
9.  — Slater  sends  watch   to   Dent    for   repair ;    raises 

further  £10  on  brooch. 
14-17. — Watcher    seen    by    Cunningham    and    Campbell 

daily  at  corner  of  Queen's  Crescent. 
20. — Watcher  seen  by  Bryson  (7.40  p.m.)  and  Nairn 

(9.15p.m.). 

21. — 12.30  p.m.  ;  Slater  raises  further  £30  on  brooch. 
6.30  p.m.  ;  Rattman  and  Aumann  say  Slater  left 

Johnston's  billiard  rooms. 
6.55  p.m. ;  Watcher  seen  by  Mrs.  Liddell. 
7-7. 10p.m.;  Miss  GILCHRIST  MURDERED. 
9.45  p.m. — Slater  calls  at  Motor  Club. 
22. — Description  given  by  Adams  and  Lambie  published 

in  newspapers. 

Slater  redeems  binocular  glasses. 
23. — Slater  receives  balance  of  Savings  Bank  account; 

calls  at  Cooks'  office  as  to  "  Lusitania." 
24.  — Slater  receives  proceeds  of  sale  of  Consols ;  calls 

again  at  Cooks'  office. 

25. — Description   given    by    Barrowman   published   in 
newspapers;    M'Lean    gives    information    to 
police. 
Slater  and  Antoine  leave  Central  Station  by  9.5 

p.m.  train  for  Liverpool. 
26. — Slater  and  Antoine  sail  for  New  York. 
31. — Notice  of  £200  reward  issued  by  Glasgow  Police. 

1909,  January  2. — Slater  arrested  on  "  Lusitania's  "  arrival  at  New 

York. 

13. — Witnesses  sail  from  Glasgow  for  New  York. 

19. — Extradition  proceedings  commenced  before  Com- 
missioner Shields. 

25. — Witnesses  reach  New  York. 

26. — Lambie  and  Barrowman  identify  Slater  iu  corridor 
outside  Court-room. 

Ixxix 


Oscar  Slater. 


1909,  February        6. — Slater  by  his  counsel  consents  to  return  to  Scot- 
land for  trial. 

14. — Slater  in  custody  of  Warnock  and  Pyper  sails  for 
Glasgow  in  "  Columbia." 

21. — "  Columbia  "  arrives  in  the  Clyde. 
21-22. — Slater  identified  by  witnesses  in  Central  Police 

Station,  Glasgow. 

24. — Slater  emits  declaration  before  Sheriff. 
April  6.  — Indictment  served  on  Slater. 

20. — Pleading  diet ;    Slater  pleads  "  Not  Guilty,"  and 

is  remitted  to  High  Court  for  trial. 
May  3. — First  day  of  trial ;  evidence  for  prosecution. 

4. — Second  day  ;  evidence  for  prosecution  continued. 
5. — Third  day;  evidence  for  prosecution   concluded; 

evidence  for  defence  commenced. 

6. — Fourth  day ;  evidence  for  defence  concluded  ; 
addresses  of  counsel  and  judge's  charge ; 
verdict  and  sentence.  Execution  fixed  for 
27th  May. 

17. — Memorial  on   Slater's  behalf    presented  by   Mr. 

Speirs  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  Scotland. 

25. — Capital  sentence  commuted  to  penal  servitude  for 

life. 
June  8. — Lord  Advocate  questioned  in  House  of  Commons 

regarding  commutation  of  sentence. 

July  8. — Slater  removed  from  Duke  Street  Prison  to  Peter- 

head. 


Ixxx 


THE  TRIAL. 


MONDAY,  3RD  MAY,  1909. 
The  Court  met  at  Ten  o'clock. 


Judge  Presiding — 
LORD    GUTHRIE. 


Counsel  for  the  Crown — 

THE  LORD  ADVOCATE  (Mr.  Alexander  Ure,  K.C.). 

Mr.  T.  B.  MORISON,  K.C.,  and  Mr.  W.  LYON  MACKENZIE, 

A  dvocates-Depute. 

Agent — 
Mr.  W.  S.  HALDANE,  W.S.,  Edinburgh. 


Counsel  for  the  Panel — 
Mr.  A.  L.  M'CLURE,  K.C.,  and  Mr.  JOHN  MAIR,  Advocate. 

Agent — 

Mr.  EWING  SPEIRS,  of  Messrs.  Joseph  Shaughnessy  &  Sons, 
Solicitors,  Glasgow. 


Oscar  Slater. 

The  panel  was  placed  at  the  bar,  charged  with  the  crime 
of  murder,  as  set  forth  in  the  following  indictment  against 
him,  at  the  instance  of  His  Majesty's  Advocate:  — 

OSCAR  SLATER,  sometime  residing  at  69  Saint  George's  Road, 
Glasgow,  and  presently  a  prisoner  in  the  prison  of  Glasgow, 
you  are  indicted  at  the  instance  of  the  Right  Honourable 
ALEXANDER  URE,  His  Majesty's  Advocate,  and  the  charge 
against  you  is  that  you  did,  on  21st  December,  1908,  in 
Marion  Gilchrist's  house,  at  No.  15  Queen's  Terrace,  West 
Princes  Street,  Glasgow,  assault  the  said  Marion  Gilchrist, 
and  did  beat  her  with  a  hammer  or  other  blunt  instrument, 
and  fracture  her  skull,  and  did  murder  her. 

T.  B.  MORISOK,  A.D. 


LIST  OF  PRODUCTIONS  FOR  THE  PROSECUTION. 

1.  Declaration  of  accused. 

2.  Joint  report  by  John  Glaister,  M.D.,  &c.,  Glasgow,  and 
Hugh  Gait,  B.Sc.,  M.B.,  (kc.,  Glasgow,  dated  22nd  December, 
1908. 

3.  Joint  report  of  a  post-mortem  examination  by  the  said 
John  Glaister  and  Hugh  Gait,  dated  23rd  December,  1908. 

4.  Report  by  Harvey  Littlejohn,  M.B.,  Professor  of  Medical 
Jurisprudence  in  the  University  of   Edinburgh,   and  the  said 
John  Glaister,  dated  llth  March,  1909. 

5.  Photographs    of   said   house    and    street    at    15    Queen's 
Terrace. 

6.  Plan  of  the  said  Marion  Gilchrist's  house  and  stair. 

7.  Plan  of  streets  in  Glasgow,  with  enlarged  section  of  part 
of  West  Princes  Street. 

8.  Cabinet  photograph  of  deceased  with  small  stamp  photo- 
graph on  back. 

Label  No.  9.  Half-set  false  teeth. 

Label  No.   10.  Pair  spectacles,  case,  and  catch  thereof. 

Label  No.  11.  Purse  containing  return  half  railway  ticket, 
excess  luggage  ticket,  and  one  halfpenny  stamp. 

Label  No.   12.  One  half-sovereign  and  one  halfpenny. 

Label  No.   13.  Three  keys. 

Label  No.  14.  Body  clothes,  consisting  of  combinations, 
chemise,  stays,  stockings  and  garters,  white  flannelette  petti- 
coat, maroon  petticoat,  black  lustre  petticoat,  black  dress, 
small  knitted  shawl. 

Label  No.  15.  Coal  scuttle. 

Label  No.   16.  Hearth  rug. 

Label  No.  17.  Skin  rug. 

Label  No.  18.  Box  of  matches  and  a  spent  match. 


The  Trial. 

Label  No.   19.  Bundle  of  papers. 

Label  No.  20.  Box. 

Label  No.  21.  Two  accounts  (1  for  gas  and  1  for  inhabited 
house  duty)  for  15  Queen's  Terrace,  receipted  of  date  21st 
December,  1908. 

22.  Inventory  and  valuation  of  household  furniture,  &c. 

23.  List  of  jewellery. 

24.  Two  designs  of  diamond  crescent  brooch. 
Label  No.   25.  Iron  auger  and  quantity  of  hair. 

26.  Letter,  Oscar  Slater  to  Max  Rattman,  dated  26th 
December,  1908,  in  envelope. 

Label  No.  27.  Letter,  D.  R.  Jacobs  to  Oscar  Slater,  dated 
28th  December,  1908,  and  envelope. 

Label  No.  28.  Torn  paper  wrapper  addressed  to  Oscar 
Slater,  c/o  Anderson,  69  St.  George's  Road,  Glasgow. 

Label  No.  29.  Letter  from  Shanghai  to  Frau  L.  Freedman, 
with  small  label  attached,  bearing  name  and  address  of  Oscar 
Slater. 

Label  No.  30.  Nine  cash  slips  (3  from  Messrs.  Hepburn  & 
Marshall,  and  6  Messrs.  Stuart  <fc  Stuart). 

31.  Sale  note  from  Messrs.  Hepburn  &  Marshall,  of  date 
10th  November,  1908. 

Label  No.  32.  Box  containing  2  visiting  cards  of  "A. 
Anderson." 

Label  No.  33.  Ten  visiting  cards  of  do. 

34.  Missive  of  let  of  house  at  69  St.  George's  Road,  to  A. 
Anderson,  with  visiting  card  of  A.  Anderson  attached. 

35.  Account  of  Messrs.    Stuart  &  Stuart,  house  furnishers, 
to  A.  Anderson,  amounting  to  £176  16s.  6d. 

36.  File    of    telegrams  passing    between    Oscar    Slater    and 
Dent,  London,  dated  21st  and  23rd  December,  1908,  and  letter 
from  Slater  to  Dent,  dated  9th  December,  also  card  of  Oscar 
Slater  with  addresses  thereon. 

37.  File  of  letters,  <fec.,  containing  (1)  letter,  Messrs.  Thomas 
Cook  <fe  Son  to  Cunard  Line,  Liverpool,   23rd  December;    (2) 
telegram  from  Cunard  Line  to  Messrs.  Cook,  24th  December; 
(3)   letter,   Thomas   Cook   <fe   Son   to   Cunard   Line,   Liverpool, 
dater  24th  December  ;   (4)  letter  from  Messrs.  Cook  <fe  Son  +o 
Cunard  Line,  dated  25th  December,  1908  ;  (5)  application  form 
to  Cunard  Company  for  contract  tickets ;    also  (6)  a  contract 
ticket  for  two  berths  from  Cunard  Company  in  name  of  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Otto  Sando. 

38.  Evening  Times  of  25th  December,  1908  (first  edition). 

39.  Evening  News  of  13th  January,  1909. 

40.  Glasgow  News  of    25th    December,   1908    (two    o'clock 
edition). 

41.  Evening  Citizen  of  25th  December,  1908  (fourth  edition). 

42.  Police  Gazette  of  15th  January,  1909. 


Oscar  Slater. 

Label  No.  43.  Waterproof  overcoat. 

Label  No.  44.  Felt  or  woollen  hat. 

Label  No.  45.  Lady's  waterproof  coat. 

Label  No.  46.  Two  cloth  caps. 

Label  No.  47.  Hammer. 

Label  No.  48.  (1)  Screw  driver ;  (2)  pair  pliers ;  (3)  gimlet  > 
(4)  bradawl. 

Label  No.  49.  Trunk  or  travelling  case  with  rope  and  seal 
attached. 

Label  No.  50.  Dark  grey  overcoat  with  blue  velvet  collar. 

Label  No.  51.  Diamond  crescent  3-row  brooch. 

52.  Pawn  ticket  for  same. 

53.  Letter,  Oscar  Slater,  Tombs  Prison,  New  York,  to  Hugh 
Cameron,  Glasgow,  dated  2nd  February,   1909. 

54.  Photograph  of  a  woman. 

55.  Extract  from  Register  of  Births  of  birth  of  Mary  Jane 
Gilmour  Sword  (otherwise  Mary  Barrowman). 

56.  News  of  the   World   newspaper,  dated   27th  December, 
1908. 

Label  No.  57.  Photograph  of  Oscar  Slater. 

58.  Card  bearing  name  and  address,  "  Oscar  Slater,  dealer 
in  diamonds   and  precious  stoaies,    33    Soho   Square,   Oxford 
Street,  W." 

59.  Account,  Oscar  Slater  to  D.  R.  Jacobs,  New  York,  dated 
29th  February,  1908. 

60.  Extract  certificate  of  marriage,  Oscar  Leschziner  Slater 
to  Marie  Curtis  Pryor,  dated  12th  July,  1902. 

61.  Account,  Oscar  Slater,  Glasgow,  to  M.  F.  Dent,  London, 
amounting  to  13s.  6d. 

62.  Extract  registered  trust  disposition   and   settlement  by 
the  deceased   Miss   Marion   Gilchrist,    28th   May,    1908,   with 
codicil  thereto  appended. 

Label  No.  63.  A  tram  car  ticket. 
Label  No.  64.  A  quantity  of  grey  hair. 
65.  Tramway  way-bill,  22nd  December,  1908. 
Label    No.    66.  A    leather    hat    case    with    rope    and    seal 
attached. 

67.  Letter,  Robert  Rogers,  London,  to  J.  S.  Marr,  Glasgow, 
dated  5th  October,  1908. 

68.  Letter,  Davenport  <fe  Co.,  London,  to  J.  S.  Marr,  Glasgow, 
dated  5th  November,  1908. 

69.  Balance  book  kept  by  John  Brown,  Caledonian  Railway- 
Central  Station,  Glasgow,  for  25th  December,  1908. 

T.  B.  MOKISON,  A.D- 


The  Trial. 


LIST   OF   WITNESSES   FOR   THE   PROSECUTION. 

1.  Jane  Duff  or  Walker,  3  Carrickarden  Street,  New  City 
Road,  Glasgow. 

2.  Maggie  Galbraith  or  Ferguson,'  wife  of  and  residing  with 
David  Ferguson,  railway  guard,  86  Kilgour  Terrace,  Bonny- 
town  Road,  Kilmarnock. 

3.  James  Macdonald,  writer,  2  Buckingham  Street,  Billhead, 
Glasgow. 

4.  David  Dick,  4  Maitland  Avenue,  Langside,  Glasgow. 

5.  William  Sorley,  jeweller,  St.  Vincent  Street,  Glasgow. 

6.  John  Stewart,  2  Kelvin  Drive,  Kelvinside,  Glasgow. 

7.  Robert  Perry,   M.D.,   11   Queen's  Terrace,  West  Princes 
Street,  Glasgow. 

8/11.  (8)  William  Moodie,  detective  lieutenant,  (9)  John 
Mowatt,  detective  officer,  (10)  James  Stuart,  sergeant,  and 
(11)  George  Robson,  police  inspector — all  Edinburgh  Police 
Force. 

12.  Ada    Louisa    Payne,    flat    2,   No.    45   Newman    Street, 
London,  W. 

13.  William  Kempton,  889  Argyle  Street,  Glasgow. 

14.  John  S.  Marr,  C.A.,  Brookfield  Cottage,  Kilbarchan. 

15.  Isaac  Paradise,  9  Dunearn  Street,  Glasgow. 

16.  John  Ruthven,  c/o  Sinclair,  70  Renfrew  Street,  Glasgow. 

17.  Jacob  Jackson,  116  South  Portland  Street,  South  Side, 
Glasgow. 

18.  Max  Brooks,  c/o  Samuel  Shaw,  Suffolk  Street,  Glasgow. 

19.  Max  Rattman,  c/o  Fox,   23  Cromwell  Street,  New  City 
Road,  Glasgow. 

20.  Hugh  Cameron,  jun.,  140  Cambridge  Street,  Glasgow. 

21.  John  Crawford,  dairyman,  33  West  Cumberland  Street, 
Glasgow. 

22.  Peter  Johnston,  94  Hill  Street,  Garnethill,  Glasgow. 

23.  Adam  Gibb,  c/o  Ritchie,  12  Rutherford  Lane,  Glasgow. 

24/25.  (24)  Margaret  Dickson  or  M'Haffie  and  (25)  Mar- 
garet Dickson  M'Haffie — both  residing  at  16  West  Princes 
Street,  Glasgow. 

26.  Madge  M'Haffie,  79  West  End  Park  Street,  Glasgow. 

27.  Annie  R.  M'Haffie,  16  West  Princes  Street,  Glasgow. 

28.  Christopher  Walker,  constable,  78  B  Division,  Glasgow 
Police. 

29.  James  Johnston,  sergeant,  Western  District,  Glasgow  Police. 

30.  Euphemia    Cunningham,    114     Soutii   Woodside  Road, 
Glasgow. 

31.  William  Campbell,  photographer,  40  Napiershall  Street, 
Glasgow. 

32.  Robert    Brown    Bryson,    17    Somerville    Drive,    Mount 
Florida,  Glasgow. 


Oscar  Slater. 

33.  Andrew    Nairn,    4    Stanley    Street,    Woodlands    Road, 
Glasgow. 

34.  Elizabeth  Donaldson,  46  West  Princes  Street,  Glasgow. 

35.  Frederick  Nichols,   10  Leyden  Gardens,  Bilsland  Drive, 
Glasgow. 

36.  Elizabeth  M'Intosh,   1  Queen's  Crescent,  Glasgow. 

37.  Josef    Aumann,    diamond    dealer,    309    Hope  Street, 
Glasgow. 

38.  Helen  Lambie,  domestic  servant,  3  Nelson's  Land,  Main 
Street,  Holy  town. 

39.  Ellen  Swanson,  89  Elderslie  Street,  Glasgow. 

40.  Arthur  Montague  Adams,   51   West  Princes   Street  (14 
Queen's  Terrace),  Glasgow. 

41.  Laura  E.   Adams,   51  West  Princes  Street,  Glasgow. 

42.  Rowena   Adams   or  Liddell,   wife   of   and  residing  with 
George  Liddell,  teacher,  63  Elmbank  Street,  Glasgow. 

43.  Mary  Jane  Gilmour  Sword,  otherwise  Mary  Barrowman, 
9  Seamore  Street,  Glasgow. 

44.  Barbara  Macdonald  or  Barrowman,  wife  of  and  residing 
with  Robert  Barrowman,  moulder,  9  Seamore  Street,  Glasgow. 

45.  James  Howatt,  clerk,  36  Cleveland  Street,  Glasgow. 

46.  Agnes  Brown,  teacher,   48  Grant  Street,  Glasgow. 
47/48.  (47)    William   Neill    and    (48)    Francis    Brien— both 

constables,  Western  District,  Glasgow  Police. 

49.  Annie  Armour,  393  Dumbarton  Road,  Partick. 

50/53.  (50)  John  Pyper,  detective  inspector,  (51)  James 
Dornan,  detective  sergeant,  (52)  William  Douglas,  superin- 
tendent, (53)  Alexander  Rankin,  inspector — all  Western  District, 
Glasgow  Police. 

54.  Annie  Gillies,  saleswoman,  6  Brooklyn  Place,  Govan. 

55.  John   M'Gimpsey,    detective     officer,   Northern    District, 
Glasgow  Police. 

56.  John  Wright,  M.B.,  casualty  surgeon,  Western  District, 
Glasgow  Police. 

57.  The  said  John  Glaister. 

58.  The  said  Hugh  Gait. 

59.  The  said  Harvey  Littlejohn. 

60.  Peter     Crawford     M'Laren,      pawnbroker's      manager, 
residing  at  1109  Argyle  Street,  Glasgow. 

61.  James  Barr,  12  Douglas  Street,  Glasgow. 

62.  Gordon  Henderson,  club  master,  26  India  Street,  Glasgow. 

63.  William   Sancroft,    22   Huntershill    Street,    Springburn, 
Glasgow. 

64.  John  Bain,  5  Shaftesbury  Cottages,  Whiteinch,  Partick. 

65.  Allan  M'Lean,  cycle  dealer,  100  Agnes  Street,  Maryhill, 
Glasgow. 

66.  Catherine  Schmalz,  general  servant,  72  Charlotte  Street, 
London. 


The  Trial. 

67/68.  (67)  Isabella  Fowlis  and  (68)  Margaret  Fowlis,  both 
at  69  St.  George's  Road,  Glasgow. 

69.  Ruby  Russell,  domestic  servant,  69  St.  George's  Road, 
Glasgow. 

70.  John  Cameron,  porter,  7  Park  Place,  Stockwell  Street, 
Glasgow. 

71.  John  M'Kay,  porter,  22  James  Watt  Street,  Glasgow. 

72.  John  Brown,  clerk,   80  South  Cromwell  Road,   Queen's 
Park,   Glasgow. 

73/74.  (73)  John  Millican,  detective  constable,  and  (74) 
David  Lyon,  detective  sergeant,  both  Central  District,  Glasgow 
Police. 

75.  John  Thomson  Trench,  detective  officer,  Central  District, 
Glasgow  Police. 

76.  John  Forsyth,  73  Highfield  Road,  Rock  Ferry,  Cheshire. 

77.  John  H.  Chadwick,  19  Holland  Road,  Liscard,  Cheshire. 

78.  Francis   Newcombe,   porter,    17   Bankburn  Road,   Tue- 
brook,  Liverpool. 

79.  James  A.  Latham,  porter,  109  Spencer  Street,  Liverpool. 

80.  "William    Warnock,     Sheriff    criminal     officer,     County 
Buildings,  Glasgow. 

81.  Alexander  Cameron,  detective  officer,  Central  District, 
Glasgow  Police. 

82.  Patrick  Nugent,  commission  agent,  Campsie  View,  Carfin, 
Motherwell. 

83.  John     Ord,      superintendent,     Criminal     Investigation 
Department,  Glasgow  Police. 

84.  Reginald  George  Tuckett,     2    Manor   Cottage,   Merton 
Park,  Merton,   Surrey. 

85.  R.  W.  Horn,  A.R.I. B. A.,  40  Cranworth  Street,  Glasgow. 

86.  George    Bell,    photographer,     326    Sauchiehall  Street, 
Glasgow. 

87.  Mary  Anderson  M'Murdo,  13  Hayburn  Street,  Partick. 

88.  Frederica  Caroline  Lang,  c/o  Cameron,  248  Sauchiehall 
Street,  Glasgow. 

89.  George  Findlay,  Bamsheen,  Troon. 

90.  Alexander  Gillies,  46  West  Princes  Street,  Glasgow. 

91.  James  Jupp,   308  Dumbarton  Road,  Partick. 

92.  John  Logan,  44  Gloucester  Street,  South  Side,  Glasgow. 

93.  William  Gordon,  lieutenant,   Central  District,   Glasgow 
Police. 

94/95.  (94)  George  D.  Balfour,  keeper,  and  (95)  Robert  D. 
Gray,  assistant  keeper — both  of  Register  of  Deeds,  <fec.,  H.M. 
General  Register  House,  Edinburgh. 

96.  James    Neil    Hart,    Procurator-fiscal    of    Lanarkshire, 
Glasgow. 

97.  Andrew  Currie,  77  Marlborough  Avenue,  Broomhill,  Partick. 

98.  Marion  Carson,  40  Grove  Street,  Glasgow. 

T.  B.  MORISON,  A.D. 

7 


Oscar  Slater. 


LIST  OF  ASSIZE. 

For  the  Sitting  of  the  High  Court  of  Justiciary  at  Edinburgh, 
on  the  3rd  day  of  May,  1909. 

CITT  OF  EDINBURGH. 
Special  Jurors. 

1.  Alexander  Garden  Sinclair,  artist,  18  Ann  Street. 

2.  George  Beevers,  engineer,    156  Brunton  Gardens. 

3.  James  Robert  Scott,  retired  farmer,  21  Willowbrae  Avenue. 

4.  James  Drummond  Shiels,  photographer,   13  Cumin  Place. 

5.  William  Perry,  merchant,  8  Leopold  Place. 

6.  James  Ritchie,  watchmaker,  6  Brunton  Place. 

7.  George  Brown,  M.A.,  teacher,  5  Willowbrae  Avenue. 

8.  John  Waldie,  woollen  warehouseman,  20  Thirlestane  Road. 

9.  George  Proudfoot,  picture  dealer,  68  Spottiswoode  Street. 

Common  Jurors. 

10.  William  Wallace,  spirit  merchant,  27  Howe  Street. 

11.  George  Pennycook  Blyth,  estate  factor,  38  Cowan  Road. 

12.  Alexander  Arnott,  cellarman,  13  Roxburgh  Street. 

13.  John  West,  tinsmith,  18  Tay  Street. 

14.  Laurence  Smith  Blanche,  grocer,  19  Bruntsfield  Avenue. 

15.  Peter  Redpath  Logan,  clerk,  18  Briarbank  Terrace. 

16.  James  Morrison  Duncan,  commercial  traveller,   4  Queen's 

Bay  Crescent,  Joppa. 

17.  Alexander  Purves  Boyes,   assistant  clothier,    154  Craiglea 

Drive. 

18.  James  Dickson,  clerk,  Bellevue  Crescent. 

19.  Thomas  Harkness,  schoolmaster,  21  Wellington  Street. 

20.  Robert  Wallace,  builder,  60  Bath  Street,  Portobello. 

21.  Henry  Jobson  Bell,  artist,  27  Greenhill  Gardens. 

22.  John  Sanderson,  brewery  manager,   Meadowfield,  Willow- 

brae Road. 

23.  Robert    William    Findlater,     architect,     30     Buckingham 

Terrace. 

24.  Neil  James  Stewart,  traveller,   15  Queen's  Bay  Crescent, 

Joppa. 

25.  William  Ross,  compositor,  233  Dalkeith  Road. 

26.  George  Arnott,  clerk,  32  Morningside  Road. 

27.  George  Inglis  Alexander,  grocer,  77  Cumberland  Street. 

28.  James  William  Caie,  clothier,  1  St.  Giles'  Street. 

BURGH  OP  LEITH. 
Special  Juror. 

29.  John  Smith,  merchant,  1  East  Restalrig  Terrace,  Leitii. 
8 


The  Trial. 

Common  Jurors. 

30.  James    Ferguson    Milne,    insurance    agent,     70    Cornhill 

Terrace,  Leith. 

31.  William  Dawson,  shipmaster,  48  Albany  Street,  Leith. 

32.  Robert  M'Cabe,  tailor's  cutter,  35  Darnell  Road,  Leith. 

COUNTY  OP  EDINBURGH. 
Special  Jurors. 

33.  William  John  Gulland,  farmer,   Monktonhall,  Inveresk. 

34.  Patrick  Alexander  Guthrie,  C.A.,  The  Loan,  Colinton. 

Common  Jurors. 

35.  William  Terras,  junjor,  gardener,  Quality  Street,  David- 

son's Mains. 

36.  John  Dalling,  blacksmith,  Kaimes,  Liberton. 

37.  Henry  Baillie,  contractor,  Cramond. 

COUNTY  OF  LINLITHGOW. 
Special  Juror. 

38.  Andrew  A.  Ralston,  factor,  Philipstoun  House,  Philipstoun. 

Common  Jurors. 

39.  George  Thomson,  dairyman,  Old  Town,  Broxburn. 

40.  David  Kennedy,  quarryman,  Bridge  Street,  Fauldhouse. 

41.  William  Nicol,  contractor,  Hawthorn  Place,  Uphall. 

COUNTY  OF  HADDINQTON. 
Special  Juror. 

42.  Walter  R.  Munro,  soapmaker,  Prestonpans. 

Common  Juror. 

43.  William  Hardie,  blacksmith,  Cockenzie. 

COUNTY  OF  PEBBLES. 
Special  Juror. 

44.  James  P.  Ketchen,  farmer,  Nether  Horsburgh,  by  Peebles. 

Common  Juror. 

45.  Thomas  Graham,  shepherd,  Cardrona  Mains,  by  Peebles. 


Oscar  Slater. 

LIST   OF   PRODUCTIONS   FOR    THE    PANEL, 

OSCAR   SLATER. 

1.  Stenographer's     minutes,     taken     before     Commissioner 
Shields,  during  the  extradition  proceedings  (in  two  pieces). 

2.  Card  containing  hammer  and  other  tools,  marked,  "  Set 
useful  household  tools." 

3.  Copy  envelope,  with  post  office  mark,  "  Glasgow,  5  p.m., 
December  21,  '08,"  addressed  to  "  The  Controller,  Post  Office 
Savings  Bank,  Blythe  Road,  West  Kensington,  London,  W." 

4.  Copy    of   the   letter   contained    in    said    envelope,    dated 
"Glasgow,  20th/ll/1908,"  and  signed  "  Adolph  Anderson." 

5.  Copy  of  the  reply  to  above  letter,  dated  22nd  December, 
1908,  and  signed  "  H.  Davies,  Controller." 

6.  House  agreement,   dated  26th  May,  1908,   by  Peter  de 
Silvestri,     in    favour    of    Oscar     Slater     and    John     Devoto, 
co-partners. 

7.  Letter,   dated    12th   October,    1908,    from   the   Excelsior 
Savings  Bank,  New  York,  to  Mr.  Oscar  Slater. 

8.  Copy  of  letter,  William  A.  Goodhart,  attorney,  New  York, 
to  Ewing  Speirs,  writer,  190  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

LIST  OF  WITNESSES  FOR  THE  PANEL,  OSCAR  SLATER. 

1.  Andree  Junio  Antoine,  26  Rue  des  3  Freres,  Paris. 

2.  Hugh  Murphy,  Cherryhill  View,  Larkhall. 

3.  James  Tracey,  21  Robson  Street,  Govanhill,  Glasgow. 

4.  Samuel  Reid,  Clarence  Hotel,  Dublin. 

5.  James  T  Makins,  surveyor,  116  Elderslie  Street, 
Glasgow. 

6.  Freedman,  Coventry  Club,  London. 

7.  Robert  Rogers,  36  Albemarle  Street,  London,  West. 

8.  Official  from  the  Post  Office  to  prove  Numbers  3,  4,  and  5 
of  the  productions  for  the  panel. 

9.  William  Kempton,  889  Argyle  Street,  Glasgow. 

10.  Peter  Crawford  M'Laren,  pawnbroker's  manager,  resid- 
ing 1109  Argyle  Street,  Glasgow. 

11.  Catherine  Schmalz,  72  Charlotte  Street,  London. 

12.  Ewing  Speirs,  writer,  190  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 

13.  Dr.  Alexander  Veitch,  12  Gilmore  Place,  Edinburgh. 

The  following  is  a  transcript  of  the  procedure  at  the  Sheriff 
Court  diet,  as  endorsed  on  the  record  copy  of  the  indictment, 
viz.  :  — 

At  Glasgow,  the  twentieth  day  of  April,  nineteen  hundred 
and  nine,  the  said  Oscar  Slater,  having  been  called 
on  to  plead  to  the  following  indictment,  pleaded  not 

g™11*-  A.   0.  M.   MACKENZIE. 

10 


The  Trial. 

The  panel  was  remitted  to  an  assize,  and  the  following 
jurors  were  all  duly  balloted  for,  viz.  :  — 

George  Proudfoot,  picture  dealer,  68  Spottiswoode  Street. 
James    Robert     Scott,     retired    farmer,     21     Willowbrae 

Avenue. 
John    Waldie,     woollen    warehouseman,     20     Thirlestane 

Road. 

George   Brown,   M.A.,  teacher,   5   Willowbrae  Road. 
James  Ritchie,  watchmaker,   6  Brunton  Place. 
James  William  Caie,  clothier,    1   St.    Giles'  Street. 
Lawrence  Smith  Blanche,  grocer,  19  Bruntsfield  Avenue. 
William  Ross,  compositor,  233  Dalkeith  Road. 
Peter  Redpath  Logan,  clerk,  18  Briarbank  Terrace. 
John  West,  tinsmith,   18  Tay  Street. 
Neil  James  Stewart,  traveller,   15  Queen's  Bay  Crescent, 

Joppa. 

William  Wallace,   spirit  merchant,  27  Howe  Street. 
James    Morrison   Duncan,    commercial    traveller,    Queen's 

Bay  Crescent,  Joppa. 
James    Ferguson    Milne,     insurance    agent,    70    Cornhill 

Terrace,  Leith. 
Henry  Jobson  Bell,   artist,   27  Greenhill  Gardens. 

The  Clerk  of  Court  having  read  over  to  the  jury  the  charge 
against  the  panel,  they  were  all  lawfully  sworn  to  try  the 
present  libel. 

Of  consent  of  parties,  the  Court  appointed  the  evidence  to 
be  taken  down  in  shorthand,  and  appointed  Messrs.  Harry 
Hodge,  Robert  Hislop,  and  Thomas  Cowan,  8  North  Bank 
Street,  Edinburgh,  to  take  the  said  evidence  in  shorthand, 
and  the  declaration  de  fideli  was  administered  to  each  of 
them. 

The  trial  then  proceeded. 


Evidence  for  the  Prosecution. 

ROBERT  WILLIAM  HORNB,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE —  R.  w.  Home 
Proved  two  plans  made  by  him,  one  of  Miss  Gilchrist's  house, 
15    Queen's    Terrace,    and   one   of    West   Princes    Street,    and 
adjacent  streets,  being  respectively  Nos.  6  and  7  of  the  pro- 
ductions for  the  Crown. 

GEORGB   BELL,   examined     by     the   LORD   ADVOCATE — Proved  George  Bell 
eight   photographs   of  the   late  Miss  Gilchrist's   house  and   of 
part  of  West  Princes  Street,  being  No.   5  of  the  productions 
for  the  Crown. 

ii 


Oscar  Slater. 

David  Dick  DAVID  DICK,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  made  an 
inventory  and  valuation  of  the  household  furniture,  electro- 
plate, and  jewellery  at  the  late  Miss  Gilchrist's  house. 
No.  22  of  the  productions  is  the  inventory  and  valuation  which 
I  made.  I  found  jewellery  in  the  house  to  the  value  of 
£1382  12s.  If  bought  in  shops  they  would  cost  at  least  twice 
as  much.  We  found  jewels  scattered  all  over  the  wardrobe ; 
some  were  laid  between  dresses,  and  some  were  in  an  old, 
detachable  pocket  with  a  string  on  it  for  tieing  round  the  waist. 
I  made  a  very  careful  examination  for  a  brooch  which  I  was 
told  was  amissing.  I  am  quite  satisfied  that  it  was  not  in  the 
house.  I  was  shown  a  sketch  of  that  brooch.  The  brooch 
was  shaped  like  a  horse-shoe,  crescent-shaped,  with  a  double 
row  of  diamonds.  Judging  from  the  sketch  the  value  would 
be  between  £40  and  £50. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURB — Have  you  not  made  a 
mistake?  You  were  shown  a  sketch  of  the  stolen  brooch. 
Has  not  that  a  single  row  of  diamonds? — Yes. 

And  not  a  double  row? — That  is  so.  I  have  made  a 
mistake. 

You  never  heard  in  connection  with  this  case  of  any  double 
row  of  diamonds  brooch? — No. 

No  one  was  searching  for  that  at  all? — No. 

The  missing  brooch  was  one  with  a  single  row  of  diamonds  t — 
Yes. 

And  none  such  has  been  found? — No. 


W.  Sorley  WILLIAM  SORLEY,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  am  a 
partner  of  the  firm  of  R.  &  W.  Sorley,  jewellers,  Glasgow.  I 
knew  the  late  Miss  Gilchrist.  She  had  been  a  customer  of 
my  firm  for  about  twenty  years  or  more.  About  the  beginning 
of  January  a  detective  called  at  my  firm's  premises  and  asked 
if  I  could  give  a  sketch  of  a  diamond  crescent  brooch  which 
I  knew  that  Miss  Gilchrist  had  possessed.  I  then  cut  from 
one  of  our  catalogues  a  print  of  a  brooch  of  a  similar  kind  and 
gave  it  to  the  officer.  No.  24  of  the  productions  is  the  sketch 
that  I  cut  out.  I  later  on  furnished  a  sketch  of  the  brooch. 
The  last  occasion  on  which  that  brooch  was  in  my  possession 
was  in  March,  1908,  when  we  had  it  for  cleaning.  So  far 
as  I  am  aware  that  was  the  only  diamond  crescent  brooch  that 
she  had. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — How  long  after  21st 
December,  the  date  of  this  murder,  was  it  that  the  police  first 
made  inquiries  at  you  regarding  brooches? — I  think  it  would 
be  early  in  January. 

Did  the  police  produce  to  you  a  diamond  crescent  brooch 
and  ask  you  to  identify  it  if  you  could! — Yes. 

12 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

How  many  rows   of   diamonds   had   the   brooch   the   police  W.  Sorley 
produced  to  you? — Three  rows. 

Were  you  informed  then  that  it  was  one  which  had  been 
pawned  by  Slater? — I  think  I  was. 

Do  you  know  when  it  had  been  pawned? — No,  I  do  not. 

It  was  no  brooch  of  Miss  Gilchrist's  at  all? — No. 

Did  you  know  that  it  had  been  lying  in  the  pawnbroker's 
shop  for  two  months  before  the  murder? — No,  I  did  not. 

Re-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — Did  you  at  once  tell 
the  police  that  that  was  not  her  brooch  ? — I  told  the  officers  that 
were  there  with  the  brooch  that  it  was  not  her  brooch. 

Mrs.  JANE  DUFF  or  WALKER,  examined  by  the  LORD  Jane  Walker 
ADVOCATE — I  knew  the  late  Miss  Gilchrist  well.  I  had  been 
a  servant  with  her  for  about  five  years.  I  left  about  eight 
years  ago  or  more.  I  visited  Miss  Gilchrist  several  times  after 
I  left  her  service.  She  was  not  accustomed  to  wear  her  jewels 
always ;  she  always  wore  some  jewellery,  but  she  had  special 
ones  for  special  occasions.  She  was  quite  well  known  in  the 
locality  round  about  where  she  lived.  She  had  lived  there 
for  about  thirty  years.  I  could  not  say  whether  it  was  known 
that  she  had  a  great  deal  of  jewellery.  I  never  spoke  much 
about  it  to  any  one.  I  found  in  talking  to  other  people  that 
that  was  known,  but  the  information  did  not  come  through 
me.  She  had  not  very  many  friends  visiting  her.  She  had 
very  few  men  friends.  I  am  not  quite  sure  about  the  last 
time  that  I  visited  her,  but  it  was  towards  the  end  of  October, 
1908.  I  recollect  her  saying  something  about  the  house 
above  being  empty.  She  said  occasionally  that  it  was  much 
nicer  to  have  the  people  away,  as  the  stair  was  always  clean, 
and  then  she  said  that  she  would  rather  have  these  people 
there  than  be  alone,  as  it  was  too  quiet.  That  was  all  I 
remember  her  saying  about  that.  Before  that  time  she  spoke 
to  me  about  an  arrangement  she  had  made  with  her  neighbour, 
Mr.  Adams,  downstairs.  She  told  me  that  she  had  arranged 
with  Mr.  Adams  that  when  she  was  left  alone  if  she  wanted 
him  she  would  knock  down  to  him.  Mr.  Adams'  sitting-room 
was  below  her  dining-room.  The  old  lady  was  afraid  of  her 
house  being  broken  into.  She  was  never  afraid  of  any  one 
doing  any  personal  injury  to  her,  but  she  had  a  great  fear 
of  the  house  being  broken  into.  I  do  not  know  why  that 
was,  but  perhaps  she  felt  that  she  was  an  old  lady,  and  she 
was  always  very  careful  to  leave  the  place  in  charge  of  the 
policeman  when  the  house  was  shut  up. 

Do  you  think  that  the  jewels  had  anything  to  do  with  it? — 
They  were  never  in  the  house  when  she  was  away.  They 
were  always  left  with  Mr.  Sorley  when  we  went  to  the  coast 
or  the  country.  When  we  were  at  home  she  took  the  jewels 

13 


Oscar  Slater. 

Jane  Walker  out  for  a  special  occasion,  and  they  usually  remained  in  the 
house  till  we  went  away  again.  She  kept  them  in  a  small 
box  in  the  wardrobe.  They  were  all  kept  in  the  one  box. 
She  was  a  lady  of  about  eighty-three  years  of  age,  I  think. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — Were  you  told  that  she 
had  jewellery  to  the  value  of  £1383,  or  what  would  cost  about 
twice  that  to  buy? — I  cannot  tell  you  that,  because  I  do  not 
know  the  value  of  jewellery. 

Did  she  keep  all  that  stuff  in  her  house? — She  had  it  in  the 
box,  and  it  was  kept  there  till  we  went  to  the  coast,  and  then 
she  put  it  into  Mr.  Sorley's  hands. 

How  long  had  the  girl  Nellie  Lambie  been  there  in  December 
last? — Three  years. 

Have  there  been  a  great  many  rumours  in  connection  with 
this  case? — Yes. 

Have  you  heard  that  Miss  Gilchrist  was  a  resetter? — Yes. 

She  was  not? — No. 

Did  she  have  unset  stones  in  the  house? — I  never  saw  them. 

You  have  heard  that  rumour  also? — Yes. 

Have  you  heard  that  she  was  the  mother  of  Nellie  Lambie? — 
No,  I  did  not  hear  that,  but  I  heard  that  she  was  the  mother 
of  Mrs.  Ferguson. 

Did  you  hear  that  she  was  the  mother  of  Slater? — No,  I  did 
not  hear  that. 

In  point  of  fact,  Nellie  Lambie  was  twenty-one  years  of  age, 
and  the  old  lady  was  over  eighty? — Yes. 

You  said  that  from  conversation  with  people  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood you  thought  that  they  were  aware  that  she  had  a 
lot  of  jewellery? — It  has  been  sometimes  remarked  to  me  in 
shops  when  I  was  shopping. 

What  was  said? — I  cannot  remember  the  words  exactly, 
except  that  Miss  Gilchrist  dressed  very  well,  and  wore  some 
jewellery — it  is  a  long  time  since. 

Did  she  wear  anything  except  a  brooch  and  a  couple  of 
bracelets? — Not  every  day,  except  that  and  three  rings. 

And  she  wore  gloves? — Yes. 

So  that  the  visible  jewellery  that  this  lady  would  carry  would 
be  two  bracelets  ? — Yes  ;  she  was  particular  that  her  jewellery 
was  not  visible. 

What  leads  you  to  say  that  there  was  a  rumour  that  she 
was  a  wealthy  lady? — I  do  not  think  it  was  a  very  special 
remark,  further  than  the  people  speaking  to  me  in  the  shop 
that  she  dressed  well.  That  was  all. 

Did  you  ever  tell  people  outside  that  she  was  a  lady  possessed 
of  a  great  deal  of  jewellery? — No. 

And  you  never  heard  that  said  outside? — No. 

It  was  only  that  she  was  a  well-dressed  lady? — Yes,  and 
wore  jewellery. 

M 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

She   must  have   kept  herself   pretty   much    aloof   from   her  Jane  Walker 
neighbours? — Yes,  she  did. 

Did  you  have  many  visitors  when  you  were  there1? — A  few. 

Did  Miss  Gilchrist  lay  down  any  rules  about  your  visitors? — 
No,  not  particularly.  She  did  not  like  me  to  have  too  many 
visitors,  but  she  always  allowed  me  visitors. 

Did  you  have  a  night  out? — Yes,  Thursday  night. 

Do  you  know  whether  Nellie  Lambie  had  the  same  night 
out? — I  think  she  told  me  that  it  was  Wednesday  night,  but  I 
am  not  sure,  and  I  could  not  say. 

By  the  COURT — Was  that  case  in  which  the  jewels  were  kept 
in  the  wardrobe  locked? — The  wardrobe  and  the  case  were 
always  locked. 

Who  kept  the  keys? — She  always  carried  the  keys  in  her 
pocket. 

Did  she  ever  give  you  the  keys? — Never,  except  when  she 
sent  me  to  open  the  case. 

Did  she  live  comfortably  in  the  way  of  food  and  anything 
else? — Not  extravagantly.  She  was  comfortable,  but  not 
extravagant. 

What  wages  did  you  get? — £12  when  I  went,  and  £16  when 
I  left. 

JOHN  SINCLAIR  MARR,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE —  J.  S.  Marr 
I  am  a  house  factor  in  Glasgow.  In  the  beginning  of 
November  last  I  had  a  telephone  message  from  Stuart  <fe 
Stuart,  in  St.  George's  Road,  that  a  man  was  inquiring  about 
a  house  to  let  in  Woodlands  Road.  I  telephoned  to  Stuart  & 
Stuart  that  I  had  a  house  to  let  at  69  St.  George's  Road  on 
the  third  floor,  and  on  that  day,  or  on  the  following  day, 

1  had  a  call  from  a  man,  who  gave  me  a  visiting  card.     (Shown 
production    No.    34.)     That    is    the   card   he    gave  me.     The 
words  "  A.  Anderson,  dentist,  36  Albemarle  Street,  Piccadilly," 
were  printed  on  the  card,  and  the  words  "  136  Renfrew  Street, 

2  up,"  were  in  pencil.     He  told  me  that  his  purpose  was  to 
start     business     with     some     one     else     as      a     dentist     in 
Glasgow.       He    agreed    to    take    the   house.       I    asked    him 
for      references,      and      he     noted     the      names     which      he 
gave  me  on  the  back  of  his  calling  card.       On  the  same  day 
I  wrote  to  the  persons  whose  addresses  he  gave  me,   and   I 
received  replies  which  were  satisfactory.       On  6th  November 
Anderson   again  called,   and   I  told  him  that  I  was  satisfied 
with  the  references,  and  let  him  the  house  No.  69  St.  George's 
Road   at  a  rent  of  £42.       He  took  the  house  for  eighteen 
months — from  28th  November  till  28th  May  a  year  afterwards. 
(Shown  ^  production    No.    34.)       That    is 'the  missive.        The 
quarter's  rent  was  due  on  2nd  February.       There  was  nothing 
paid.       Shortly  after  Christmas  I  learned  that  the  police  were 

'5 


Oscar  Slater. 

J.  S.  Man?  keeping  an  eye  on  my  premises  69  St.  George's  Road,  and  I 
gave  up  to  the  police  the  letters  and  references  and  the  visiting 
card.  On  10th  March  last  I  went  to  Duke  Street  Prison, 
Glasgow,  to  see  a  prisoner  there,  and  I  identified  him  as  the 
man  who  took  the  house  69  St.  George's  Road,  giving  the 
name  of  Anderson,  a  dentist.  (Shown  the  prisoner.)  That 
is  the  man. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURK — When  did  you  first  know 
that  he  had  gone  away? — Just  about  Christmas. 

Did  you  go  personally  to  the  premises? — No. 

Then  is  your  information  entirely  hearsay  from  the  police 
or  other  people  as  to  the  fact  of  him  being  away? — Yes. 

Were  there  any  other  people  in  the  house? — I  have  heard 
that  there  were  others  in  the  house. 

After  he  left? — Yes,  I  was  told  that  he  had  gone,  and  that 
a  sub-tenant  was  in  the  house. 

I.  Paradise  JSAAC  PARADISE,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — 
I  am  manager  for  Messrs.  Stuart  &  Stuart,  house  furnishers, 
in  Glasgow,  at  65  St.  George's  Road.  On  4th  November  last 
a  man  called  at  our  premises  in  St.  George's  Road  and  asked 
about  our  terms  for  furnishing.  He  gave  me  his  name  as 
Anderson.  I  explained  the  terms  to  him.  He  told  me  that 
he  was  looking  after  a  house  just  above  our  shop,  and  I  believe 
he  asked  me  about  the  rent.  I  ascertained  the  rent  of  the 
house.  I  believe  I  told  him  the  rent.  A  day  or  two  later 
Anderson  returned  to  our  premises,  and  I  saw  him.  He 
selected  furniture  that  day  to  the  value  of  £170  odds.  He 
was  to  pay  £4  a  month,  and  give  £10  as  the  first  deposit. 
That  is  what  we  call  the  hire  system.  The  goods  were 
delivered  at  his  house,  and  he  paid  the  £10  at  the  time  he 
selected  the  furniture.  He  signed  an  agreement  of  hire. 
Anderson  got  and  paid  for  a  few  extra  things  after  the  first 
lot  was  delivered — £2  worth.  On  10th  December  he  paid  £4 
as  an  instalment  to  account.  I  saw  Anderson  two  or  three 
times  after  that  in  our  warehouse.  We  got  the  money  that 
was  paid — £16  in  all,  but  the  balance  does  not  remain  unpaid  ; 
we  took  the  furniture  back.  I  went  to  the  Central  Police 
Office  in  Glasgow  in  February.  I  was  shown  a  prisoner  there, 
and  I  identified  him  as  the  man  who  gave  the  name  of 
Anderson.  (Shown  prisoner.)  That  is  the  man.  (Shown 
production  No.  35  of  process.)  That  is  the  account  for  the 
goods  which  I  furnished  to  Anderson. 

Do  you  recollect  whether  he  sent  you  a  message  that  he 
was  going  away,  and  that  you  might  have  the  furniture  back 
or  not? — I  got  no  message,  but  after  I  heard  that  he  was 
arrested  I  went  up  to  the  house,  and  there  were  two  ladies 
there.  They  told  me  that  Mr.  Anderson  had  left  word  with 
16 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

them  that  they  were  to  stay  on,  and  that  if  he  did  not  return  i.  Paradise 
they  were  to  continue  paying  £4  on  the  15th  of  each  month, 
and  if  they  were  to  leave  the  house  they  were  to  return  the 
furniture  to  us.  When  the  ladies  went  away  they  gave  up 
the  keys,  and  we  removed  the  furniture.  That  was  the  first 
I  heard  of  his  going  away — when  he  was  arrested. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CuiRE — Can  you  remember  how 
long  these  ladies  were  in  the  house  No.  69  St.  George's  Road? — 
I  believe  they  were  there  somewhere  about  three  days  before 
they  left — from  the  time  I  got  to  know. 

Do  you  know  the  date  that  they  handed  over  the  keys? — It 
was  the  same  day  that  they  left  Glasgow — I  do  not  remember 
the  date. 

By  the  COURT — Can  you  tell  me  the  month? — No,  but  it  was 
the  same  day  that  the  ladies  left  the  house. 

Cross-examination  continued — Slater  left  the  house  about 
25th  December,  I  understand,  and  did  the  ladies  come  then  ? — 
I  cannot  say. 

Then  all  you  know  is  that  Slater  left  some  time  in  December? 
— I  do  not  know  when  he  left. 

JOHN   RUTHVEN,    examined    by    the    LORD  ADVOCATE — Gave  John  Ruthven 
evidence  of  taking  an  order  for  visiting  cards  from  a  man  who 
signed  his  name  "  A.  Anderson,"  and  afterwards  identified  the 
prisoner  in  the  Central  Police  Office  as  the  man  who  ordered 
the  cards. 

JACOB  JACKSON,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE —  j.  Jackson 
I  am  a  general  warehouseman  in  South  Portland  Street, 
Glasgow.  I  am  a  German.  About  the  middle  of  November 
last  I  recollect  of  a  man  coming  to  my  shop.  He  wanted  to 
sell  me  a  diamond  ring.  I  said  to  him  that  I  did  not  buy 
any  diamonds  in  that  shop.  I  asked  him  how  it  was  that 
he  came  to  me  with  the  ring.  He  told  me  that  he  was  sent  to 
me  as  a  countryman  of  his — a  German. 

Did  you  ask  him  in  German  why  he  wanted  to  sell  the  ring? 
— Immediately  he  spoke  I  could  tell  he  was  a  foreigner,  and  we 
Germans  have  a  sort  of  mutual  understanding  that  if  we  want 
to  know  whether  the  party  we  are  speaking  to  is  a  German  or 
not,  we  do  not  generally  ask  him  if  he  is  a  German,  but  begin 
just  to  speak  German  immediately.  I  asked  him  why  he 
wanted  to  sell  the  ring,  and  he  would  put  in  other  words  that 
he  was  hard  up  and  required  the  money.  I  think  he  told  me 
he  came  from  Hanover.  I  said,  "  If  you  are  hard  up,  I  do 
not  see  there  is  any  necessity  for  you  to  sell  an  article  of  that 
description,  but  I  can  give  you  a  job  to  do,  to  travel  for  me, 
to  canvass  for  me."  He  refused ;  he  said  he  did  not  think  he 
would  be  suitable  for  that  kind  of  employment.  He  did  not 
c  17 


Oscar  Slater. 

J.  Jackson  tell  me  his  name  or  address ;  I  did  not  ask  him.  I  would  say 
the  value  of  the  ring  was  about  £15.  I  have  never  seen 
him  since.  I  recollect  seeing  in  the  Evening  Times  of  the 
22nd  February  last  a  profile  photograph  of  a  man  named 
Slater,  who  had  been  arrested  in  connection  with  the  murder 
of  Miss  Gilchrist.  When  I  saw  that  I  wrote  at  once  to  the 
detective  department  in  Glasgow  to  the  effect  that  I  thought 
I  could  recognise  from  the  photograph  the  man  who  had  called 
at  my  shop.  In  consequence  I  was  asked  to  attend  at  the 
Central  Police  Office  on  Tuesday,  23rd  February  last.  I  waa 
shown  a  good  few  men — not  prisoners,  but  men — and  I  recog- 
nised the  man  who  is  in  the  dock  just  now  as  the  man.  The 
prisoner  is  the  man  that  I  recognised  immediately. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — All  this  happened  between 
six  and  seven  weeks  before  Miss  Gilchrist  was  murdered? — 
Yes. 

F.  Brien  Constable  FRANCIS  BRIBN,  examined  by  Mr.  MORISON — 
I  am  a  constable  in  the  Western  District  of  the  Glasgow 
Police.  I  was  on  night  duty  in  the  week  beginning  the 
20th  of  December,  1908.  I  had  been  on  night  duty  for  a 
fortnight  before  that.  My  district  included  the  south  side 
of  West  Princes  Street,  in  which  Queen's  Terrace  is  situated. 
I  went  on  duty  at  6  p.m.  I  remained  on  duty  till  two  in 
the  morning.  During  that  period  I  passed  Miss  Gilchrist's 
house  in  West  Princes  Street  about  every  half -hour.  My  beat 
embraces  also  part  of  St.  George's  Road,  part  of  Woodlands 
Road,  and  West  Cumberland  Street.  As  a  rule,  I  go  on 
duty  with  William  Neill.  He  is  a  police  constable  also. 
When  I  am  out  from  six  to  two  he  is  out  from  six  to  nine ;  he 
is  on  the  day-shift  when  I  am  on  the  night-shift.  When  I 
go  on  duty  Neill  and  I  walk  together  along  St.  George's  Road, 
past  West  Princes  Street,  and  then  along  Great  Western  Road 
to  Rupert  Street,  through  Rupert  Street  to  West  Princes  Street, 
and  eastwards  along  that  street  to  St.  George's  Road  again. 
That  was  my  regular  routine  of  duty  during  the  fortnight  I 
have  been  speaking  about. 

Are  there  many  people  or  much  traffic  in  West  Princes 
Street? — No,  not  a  great  many  people.  It  is  par- 
ticularly quiet  at  night,  about  seven  o'clock.  I  some- 
times went  through  it  and  met  nobody.  (Shown  prisoner.) 
I  knew  him  by  sight.  I  saw  him  one  night  standing 
just  a  few  yards  from  the  corner  of  West  Princes 
Street  and  St.  George's  Road.  Roughly,  that  would  be  about 
80  yards  from  Miss  Gilchrist's  house.  I  saw  him  on  the 
occasion  I  am  speaking  to  just  now  the  week  before  the 
murder.  I  cannot  give  any  date.  It  was  about  half-past 
nine  at  night  when  I  saw  him.  He  was  standing  there.  I 
18 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

did  not  notice  what  direction  he  was  looking  in.  He  was  F.  Brien 
alone.  I  left  him  standing.  He  was  standing  against  the 
railings,  and  I  thought  he  was  a  drunk  man.  I  took  a  good 
look  at  him  when  passing  him ;  I  thought  he  might  have  been 
a  drunk  man  ;  as  a  rule,  we  get  them  lying  against  the  railings 
when  drunk.  I  took  a  good  look  at  the  man.  I  saw  he  was 
quite  sober.  When  I  first  saw  him  I  was  just  coming  round 
the  corner  of  St.  George's  Road,  about  8  yards  off  from 
him,  and  then  I  passed  him.  I  did  not  look  round,  but  he 
was  standing  in  the  same  place  when  I  came  round  the  corner 
that  he  was  when  I  passed  him.  (Shown  photograph  No.  5 
of  productions.)  No.  6  marks  the  point  where  I  saw  him  that 
night — just  about  No.  6.  That  was  the  second  week  of  the 
night-shift,  and  the  week  before  the  murder.  That  was  the 
last  time  I  saw  the  prisoner  before  the  murder. 

Had  you  seen  the  prisoner  before  that? — I  have  seen  him 
several  times. 

Within  that  locality? — On  St.  George's  Road.  I  cannot 
exactly  say  which  way  he  was  going.  He  was  always  alone. 
I  should  say  the  first  time  that  I  saw  him  would  be  about  seven 
weeks  before  the  murder,  .so  far  as  I  can  remember.  I  saw 
him  occasionally  in  or  about  St.  George's  Road  between  that 
time  and  the  week  before  the  murder. 

Was  it  always  at  night  when  you  saw  him? — I  saw  him  in 
the  afternoon. 

In  the  late  afternoon? — Late  afternoon,  and  early  too. 
I  saw  the  prisoner  in  West  Princes  Street  only  on  that  one 
night.  The  other  times  were  in  St.  George's  Road.  On  21st 
December  I  passed  along  West  Princes  Street  at  night.  It 
would  be  half-past  six,  I  suppose,  when  I  passed  from  West 
Princes  Street  into  St.  George's  Road.  We  came  round  West 
Princes  Street  again,  and  passed  by  the  house  again  about 
ten  minutes  to  seven.  On  neither  of  these  occasions  was  there 
any  person  in  the  street.  When  I  passed  at  ten  minutes  to 
seven  rain  was  falling.  I  passed  along,  and  there  was  nothing 
that  attracted  my  attention  at  ten  minutes  to  seven. 

When  did  you  pass  it  the  next  time? — The  next  time  I  went 
to  get  Neill's  cape,  as  it  was  raining,  and  I  came  back  about 
twenty  minutes  past  seven.  In  consequence  of  a  statement 
which  a  gentleman  made  to  me,  I  went  to  Miss  Gilchrist's 
house,  and  I  then  learned  of  the  murder.  I  entered  Miss  Gil- 
christ's house.  I  saw  the  old  lady  lying  on  her  back  near  the 
fireplace  in  the  dining-room.  There  was  a  quantity  of  blood 
about  her  face  and  below  her  head.  She  made  a  movement 
with  her  left  hand.  Her  body  was  on  the  hearth  rug.  I 
saw  that  her  head  was  battered.  I  did  not  touch  the  body.  I 
went  for  the  ambulance,  and  I  returned  to  the  house.  I  found 
that  the  body  had  not  been  interfered  with  till  the  police  came. 

19 


Oscar  Slater. 

F.  Brien  It  was  lying,  when  the  police  stretcher  came  and  the  detectives, 
in  the  same  position  as  when  I  found  it. 

You  saw  the  girl  Lambie  when  you  went  to  call  the  ambu- 
lance?— No,  I  went  to  pass  word  for  the  superior,  and  I  met 
the  girl  Lambie  at  Blythswood  Drive;  she  had  been  up  at 
some  friends  of  Miss  Gilchrist.  On  the  22nd  of  February  I 
identified  the  prisoner  from  a  number  of  men  in  the  police 
office.  (Shown  prisoner.)  That  is  the  man. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — How  many  other  people 
were  in  the  room  with  the  prisoner  when  you  identified  him? — 
Three  or  four. 

Were  there  any  foreign-looking  gentlemen? — No. 

Was  there  just  what  you  would  call  police  constables  in 
undress? — Yes. 

And  detective  officers? — Yes. 

Can  you  tell  us  who  were  present  when  you  identified  the 
prisoner? — I  did  not  know  them  all. 

There  were  four  or  five  altogether? — Yes. 

Who  was  it  that  asked  you  to  look  at  him  and  see  if  he  was 
like  the  man? — Superintendent  Douglas. 

You  say  that  the  only  occasion  when  you  saw  the  prisoner 
in  or  about  West  Princes  Street  was  the  week  before  Miss 
Gilchrist  was  murdered? — Yes. 

And  he  was  just  at  the  corner  of  the  street? — He  was  about 
8  or  9  yards  round  the  corner. 

Against  the  railings? — Yes. 

How  was  he  dressed? — He  had  a  light  coat  on  and  a  hat. 

What  kind  of  hat? — I  cannot  say  for  the  hat. 

Can  you  tell  us  anything  more? — Well,  I  know  that  I  passed 
him  by;  I  thought  myself  I  had  seen  him  before;  I  had  seen 
him  previous  to  that. 

You  say  he  was  leaning  against  the  railings? — Yes. 

And  you  thought  he  was  a  drunk  man? — Yes. 

Did  you  speak  to  him? — No,  I  passed  him  by. 

What  made  you  think  he  was  drunk? — Because  we  very  often 
get  a  half-drunk  lying  there,  turning  into  St.  George's  Road;  it 
seems  to  be  a  convenient  place  for  them. 

Was  that  the  only  reason  you  had  to  suppose  he  was  drunk  T 
—Yes. 

Then  what  was  it  that  convinced  you  afterwards  he  was  not 
drunk? — I  had  a  good  look  at  him. 

Did  you  walk  up  to  him  close  and  peer  into  his  face? — Yes. 

And  he  never  said  a  word? — No,  he  never  said  a  word. 

And  you  cannot  say  what  hat  he  had  on? — No. 

Can  you  say  what  trousers  he  had  on? — No. 

Or  what  boots  he  had  on? — No. 

How  long  did  you  stop  to  examine  him  ? — Just  a  passing  look  ; 
but  that  is  the  man. 
20 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Was   he    doing    anything    of    a    suspicious    character  ? — Just  F.  Brien 
standing  leaning  against  the  railings. 

That  is  not  suspicious? — No. 

Was  he  looking  about  him? — I  did  not  notice  him  looking 
about  him. 

Had  he  his  head  hanging  down? — No. 

Was  his  head  up  in  the  air? — Well,  just  in  the  ordinary  way; 
it  was  not  up  in  the  air  exactly. 

Have  you  told  us  everything  you  have  got  to  say  about  this 
incident? — Yes,  that  night. 

Is  that  corner  you  have  spoken  of  a  place  where  nuisance 
is  committed  sometimes? — No. 

He-examined  by  Mr.  MORISON — (Shown  production  No.  43) — 
Was  it  a  coat  like  that  which  the  man  who  was  leaning  against 
the  railings  was  wearing  at  the  time? — Yes,  it  was  like  that. 

Of  course,  you  just  took  a  passing  glance  at  his  figure? — 
Yes. 

And  you  looked  at  his  face  in  passing? — Yes. 

You  wanted  to  ascertain  whether  he  was  drunk  or  sober? — 
Yes. 

Mrs.  MARGARET  DICKSON  or  M'HAFFIE,  examined  by  the  LORD  Mrs.  M'Haffie 
ADVOCATE — I  am  the  wife  of  Alexander  Rankin  M'Haffie,  horse- 
shoer,  and  I  live  at  16  West  Princes  Street.  Our  house  is  one 
stair  up,  and  is  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  street  from  that 
of  the  late  Miss  Gilchrist's.  It  will  be  about  30  yards 
from  her  house.  We  have  a  good  view  of  her  house  from  our 
windows.  For  some  weeks  before  the  murder  of  Miss  Gilchrist 
my  attention  was  directed  to  a  man  loitering  about  on  the 
opposite  side  of  the  street.  He  was  not  always  there  at  the 
same  time,  but  it  was  always  in  the  afternoon  that  I  saw  him. 
He  appeared  to  be  a  dark  man,  and  he  had  a  moustache  ;  he 
was  not  very  tall,  and  I  would  say  he  was  close  on  forty. 
Two  or  three  times  I  saw  him  with  a  light  overcoat,  check 
trousers,  spats,  and  a  black  bowler  hat.  I  should  think  that 
I  saw  him  five  or  six  times  before  the  murder. 

Were  your  suspicions  aroused  by  seeing  him? — Yes,  I 
thought  it  very  strange  to  see  him,  and  I  called  my  daughter's 
attention  to  it.  I  saw  him  walk  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
street  from  the  corner,  up  the  street  a  little.  He  would  have 
time  to  go  as  far  as  Miss  Gilchrist's  house,  but  I  never  looked. 
I  watched  him  from  our  window. 

Where  did  he  look?  Did  he  look  at  the  windows,  or  at 
what? — 

Mr.  M'CLURE — I  think  you  should  ask  what  the  witness  saw 
him  doing. 

The  COURT — She  may  be  asked  if  he  was  looking  anywhere, 
in  what  direction  he  was  looking. 

21 


Oscar  Slater. 

Mrs.  M'Haffie  Examination  resumed — He  was  just  looking  about  him. 
Sometimes  he  looked  up  towards  our  windows,  and  when  he 
saw  us  looking  he  put  down  his  head  and  moved  away.  I 
observed  a  photograph  in  an  evening  newspaper  something 
similar  to  production  39.  The  photograph  seemed  to  me  to 
be  like  the  man  I  had  seen.  I  think  the  last  time  that  I  saw 
him  was  about  eight  or  nine  days  before  the  night  of  the 
murder.  On  21st  February  I  went  to  the  Central  Police 
Office  and  I  saw  there  the  man  that  I  had  seen  loitering  in 
front  of  my  window.  I  identify  the  prisoner  as  the  man. 
When  I  went  to  the  police  office  there  was  a  number  of  other 
men  in  the  room.  I  had  no  difficulty  in  identifying  the  man. 
I  would  see  him  moving  back  and  forward  on  the  street  for 
perhaps  close  on  half  an  hour  at  a  time.  As  regards  his 
walk,  he  did  not  carry  himself  very  well — he  slouched  along, 
with  his  hands  in  his  pockets  sometimes.  I  would  think  that 
he  caught  sight  of  us  watching  him  because  of  the  way  he  put 
down  his  head.  He  put  down  his  head  very  quick  and  moved 
away. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLITRE — You  say  this  man  was  about 
five  or  six  times  altogether  on  the  street? — I  saw  him  that 
number  of  times. 

And  with  a  light  overcoat,  check  trousers,  and  light-coloured 
spats? — Yes. 

What  kind  of  hat? — A  black  bowler  hat. 

Was  he  always  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  street? — I  always 
saw  him  there. 

How  far  is  it  across  the  street? — Not  very  far. 

Was  the  coat  a  waterproof  coat  or  not? — I  do  not  think  it 
was  a  waterproof.  It  was  just  a  light-coloured  coat.  It 
might  perhaps  be  shower-proof. 

It  was  not  like  No.  43  of  the  productions? — No. 

What  is  the  difference  between  it  and  that  coat? — It  was 
scarcely  the  same  colour  as  that.  It  seemed  to  be  softer 
looking  in  appearance. 

What  did  you  see  the  man  do? — He  just  walked  about. 

He  passed  back  and  forward  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
street? — Yes. 

You  say  you  do  not  know  how  far  up  the  street  he  went, 
because  you  did  not  look? — I  did  not  look. 

What  was  it  you  said  was  suspicious  in  his  appearance? — It 
was  very  strange  to  see  him  hanging  about  there  several 
times,  seemingly  with  no  intention  of  doing  anything. 

I  do  not  follow  you.  If  you  see  any  person  walking  back 
and  forward  upon  a  pavement  do  you  suspect  that  person  of 
anything? — Not  always. 

What  made  you  suspect  this  man? — I  thought  him  rather 
peculiar. 

22 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

You  thought  him  peculiar? — I  thought  it  was  very  peculiar  Mrs.  M'Haffie 
— always  about  the  same  time. 

How  long  did  his  visits  to  the  street  last? — He  would  be 
there  about  half  an  hour  at  a  time. 

Just  with  his  head  down  and  strolling? — Yes,  and  looking 
about  him. 

I  again  ask  you,  is  there  anything  in  that  which  occurs  to 
you  as  suspicious;  and  what  did  you  suspect? — I  suspected  he 
was  not  after  any  good  walking  about  there. 

Did  you  see  nothing  more  in  his  appearance  than  you  have 
told  us  now? — No,  I  did  not. 

It  was  in  broad  daylight  all  the  time? — Yes. 

Can  you  tell  us  anything  about  what  sort  of  tie  he  had  on  ? — 
No,  I  could  not  say.  I  never  took  notice. 

Did  you  take  very  much  notice  of  him  altogether? — As  I 
glanced  from  the  window,  as  far  as  I  could  see,  I  could  see 
him  quite  plain. 

Across  the  street? — Yes.  He  would  stand  perhaps  ten 
minutes  or  so  and  then  move  away. 

Did  you  see  anything  peculiar  about  his  nose? — No,  I  did 
not. 

The  man  who  was  described  in  the  newspapers  was  said  to 
have  a  twisted  nose? — I  heard  so. 

You  saw  nothing  of  that  kind  about  the  person  who  walked 
about  in  front  of  your  house? — I  could  not  see  very  well. 

Is  it  not  the  fact  that  you  were  not  exactly  certain  of  the 
man,  and  are  only  prepared  to  say  that  he  resembles  him? — 
He  is  the  man  that  was  loitering  about  West  Princes  Street. 

Did  you  say  he  resembled  him? — I  said  that  he  was  the  man. 

You  had  seen  a  photograph  of  the  prisoner  in  the  papers, 
had  you  not? — Yes. 

What  kind  of  man  did  you  expect  to  see  when  you  went 
down  to  the  police  office? — I  expected  to  see  the  man  I  had 
seen  loitering  about.  It  was  not  the  papers  I  was  going  by. 

The  photograph  in  the  papers  was  something  like  the  man  ? — 
It  was  like  him. 

And  the  man  that  you  saw  in  the  police  office  was  something 
like  him  too? — Yes. 

When  you  got  to  the  police  office  how  many  men  were  in  the 
room  you  were  put? — There  were  a  good  many — I  could  not  say 
the  exact  number. 

By  the  COUKT — Would  there  be  half  a  dozen? — I  am  sure 
there  were  over  a  dozen. 

Cross-examination  resumed — Were  there  any  foreign-looking 
gentlemen  there? — None  but  himself. 

Were  the  rest  of  the  people  who  were  in  the  room  policemen  1 
— I  do  not  know  what  they  were. 

Did  you  not  look  at  their  boots? — No.      They  were  sitting. 

23 


Oscar   Slater. 

Mrs.  M'Haffie  And  the  only  man  in  any  way  having  a  foreign  appearance, 
when  you  went  down  to  identify  the  man,  was  the  prisoner? — 
Yes. 

When  you  were  down  at  the  police  office  who  else  were  there 
for  the  purpose  of  identifying? — There  were  a  good  many. 

Can  you  tell  me  who  any  of  them  were?  Were  there  any 
of  your  own  acquaintance? — My  two  daughters  and  my  niece. 
That  is  all  I  know. 

Those  that  went  down  with  you  were  Madge  M'Haffie,  your 
niece,  Annie  M'Haffie,  and  Margaret  Dickson  M'Haffie? — Yes. 

Did  you  go  in  singly  to  the  room  where  this  man  was? — Yes. 

Re-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — Were  you  house- 
cleaning  for  nine  or  ten  days  before  the  murder? — Yes. 

And  you  were  not  looking  out  of  the  window? — Not  so  much 
then  at  the  front. 

Is  West  Princes  Street  a  very  quiet  street? — Yes. 

Was  there  any  object  that  occurred  to  your  own  mind  that 
the  man  could  have  in  loitering,  moving  back  and  forward 
there? — I  thought  at  first  it  might  be  robbery. 

That  was  the  only  object? — Yes. 

Was  there  any  place  special  to  go  to  up  the  street? — There 
was  no  place. 

Had  you  the  smallest  difficulty  in  identifying  the  man? — I 
had  not. 

Is  the  accused  the  man? — Yes. 

You  recognise  him  quite  easily? — Yes. 

M.  D.  M'Haffie  MARGARET  DICKSON  M'HAFFIE,  examined  by  the  LORD 
ADVOCATE — I  reside  with  my  mother  at  16  West  Princes  Street, 
one  stair  up.  I  remember  several  weeks  before  the  murder  of 
Miss  Gilchrist  seeing  a  man  loitering  about  the  street.  I  just 
saw  him  walking  up  and  down,  and  he  would  stand  for  a 
minute  or  two.  I  would  see  him  for  about  half  an  hour  each 
time  walking  slowly  up  and  down  and  standing.  I  did  not 
see  him  look  at  anything  particular.  I  could  see  from  our 
house  the  whole  way  up  to  Miss  Gilchrist's  house.  I  observed 
that  the  man  walked  further  than  Miss  Gilchrist's  house,  but 
I  did  not  take  any  notice  how  far  he  walked  up  the  street.  I 
know  the  corner  of  West  Cumberland  Street.  I  cannot  see  as 
far  as  that  from  our  window.  The  man  sometimes  walked  so 
far  westwards  that  we  could  not  see  him  from  our  windows.  I 
would  then  see  him  walk  back  again.  I  did  not  observe 
whether  he  ever  saw  me  watch  him.  No  reason  occurred  to 
me  why  the  man  should  be  walking  back  and  forward  in  front 
of  our  house.  I  identify  the  accused  as  the  man  that  I  saw. 
When  I  saw  him  he  had  light  check  trousers  and  a  light  over- 
coat, and  I  think  I  saw  him  once  or  twice  with  a  black  morning 
coat.  I  would  see  him  about  six  times  altogether.  The  last 

24 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

time  I  saw  him  before  the  murder  was  about  a  fortnight  before  M.  D.  M'Haffie 
it  took  place.  We  were  house-cleaning  about  nine  or  ten  days 
before  the  murder,  and  were  not  looking  out  of  the  window 
so  much,  as  we  were  busy  indoors.  I  went  down  to  the  police 
office  on  21st  February  last  to  see  a  man.  1  was  taken  into 
a  room  where  there  were  ten  or  twelve  men  I  think,  and  I 
identified  the  man  I  had  seen  loitering  about.  I  could  do  that 
quite  well. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — Were  you  down  at  the 
Police  Office  for  purposes  of  identification  on  the  same  day  as 
your  mother? — Yes. 

How  many  foreign-looking  people  were  there  in  the  room 
when  you  went  in? — He  was  the  only  one. 

And  he  was  like  a  photograph  you  had  seen? — I  was  not 
going  by  the  photograph  at  all. 

But  was  he  like  the  photograph  you  had  seen? — Yes. 

Had  you  read  of  his  description  in  the  papers? — Yes. 

Is  it  your  evidence  that  the  man  is  like  and  resembles  the 
person  you  saw  in  West  Princes  Street? — No  ;  he  is  the  man  I 
saw  loitering  in  West  Princes  Street. 

Is  it  not  the  case  you  were  not  prepared  to  swear  to  him 
at  first? — Yes,  but  I  thought  over  what  I  said  to  the  Crown, 
and  I  still  adhere  to  what  I  said. 

Why  were  you  not  prepared  at  one  time  to  swear  to  his 
being  the  man  ? — I  did  not  think  it  was  necessary  at  that  time. 
I  was  not  on  my  oath  at  the  time. 

By  the  COURT — But  tell  us  what  was  your  impression  at  the 
first? — I  was  asked  if  he  was  the  man  that  was  loitering  about, 
if  I  was  prepared  to  swear  when  I  was  in  Edinburgh  that  he  was 
the  man,  and  I  said  I  did  not  know,  I  was  not  quite  sure  at 
the  time. 

Cross-examination  resumed — When  were  you  not  quite  sure? 
— When  I  was  interviewed  by  Mr.  Speirs. 

Can  you  tell  us  when  that  was? — I  think  it  would  be  in 
March. 

As  I  understand  it,  that  would  be  about  three  months  after 
you  had  seen  the  man  in  West  Princes  Street? — Yes,  fully. 

And  you  were  not  prepared  then  to  say  he  was  the  man ; 
you  were  only  prepared  to  say  there  was  some  resemblance? — 
Yes. 

What  has  made  you  change  your  mind  since  the  middle  of 
March? — I  said  to  the  Crown  that  he  was  the  man,  and  I  say 
he  is  the  man  still. 

But  that  is  not  the  point.  Seeing  you  were  unable  to  say 
in  the  month  of  March  that  this  was  the  man,  what  has 
enabled  you  to  change  your  mind  and  say  now  that  he  is  the 
man? — I  have  been  thinking  it  over,  and  I  have  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  he  is  the  man  I  saw  loitering  about. 

25 


Oscar  Slater. 

M.  D.  M'Haffie      Did   you  discuss  the  matter  with  your   mother? — No,    not 
very  much. 

Had  your  mother  a  strong  view  that  he  was  the  man? — Yes. 

And  had  that  any  influence  on  your  mind? — No. 

I  ask  you  once  again,  what  was  it  that  led  you  to  change 
your  opinion  between  March  and  now? — The  more  I  thought 
of  it  the  more  I  was  convinced  that  he  was  the  man. 

The  further  you  get  away  from  the  month  of  December  your 
impression  of  the  man's  appearance  becomes  less  distinct? — 
Yes,  but  of  course  I  had  seen  him  between  that  time. 

Did  you  see  him  between  the  month  of  March  and  to-day? — 
No. 

So,  while  in  the  month  of  March  you  were  uncertain  of  his 
being  the  man,  and  never  saw  him  again  till  to-day,  you  have 
changed  your  view? — No,  I  still  say  he  is  the  man. 

Which  you  would  not  say  in  March? — I  did  not  need  to  say 
to  Mr.  Speirs  that  he  was  the  man  at  the  time. 

Can  you  give  us  any  other  explanation? — No. 

How  often  have  you  been  seen  by  the  police  since  March? — 
Not  at  all. 

Or  by  the  fiscal? — No. 

Did  you  notice  any  striking  peculiarity  about  the  man's 
nose? — No. 

Would  you  have  described  his  nose  as  a  twisted  noset — 
No,  I  did  not  take  any  notice  of  it. 

You  saw  him  across  the  street? — Yes. 

Were  you  at  any  time  suspicious  of  him? — When  I  saw  him 
loitering  about  I  wondered  what  he  was  loitering  about  for. 
That  was  all. 

Surely  you  do  not  suspect  people  who  merely  walk  up  and 
down  the  street? — But  seeing  him  so  often,  and  about  the  same 
time. 

What  did  you  suspect  him  of  in  broad  daylight,  walking  up 
and  down  the  street? — I  did  not  suspect  him.  I  just  wondered 
what  he  was  doing  there. 

You  do  not  mean  that  you  had  arrived  at  the  state  of 
suspicion  ? — Yes. 

Were  you  suspicious  of  anything? — I  was  not  suspicious  of 
him  doing  anything  at  the  time. 

Anything  he  was  doing  there  seemed  quite  harmless? — Yes. 

Might  he  have  been  waiting  for  a  friend? — He  might. 

Did  he  see  you  at  the  window? — I  do  not  know. 

Did  you  see  him  do  anything  peculiar? — No. 

Did  you  see  him  do  anything  which  would  lead  you  to 
suppose  he  was  afraid  of  being  seen? — No. 

Did  you  communicate  with  the  police,  or  did  they  come  to 
you  first? — They  came  to  us  first. 
26 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

How  long  after  the  murder  was  it  that  the  police  called  on  M.  D.  M'Haffie 
you? — I  think  it  was  after  the  New  Year;   I  think  it  was  in 
January. 

Re-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — Did  you  ever  see  him 
meeting  a  friend? — No. 

Did  you  ever  before  or  since  see  any  man  loitering  back 
and  forward  for  half  an  hour  at  a  time? — No. 

When  you  went  to  the  police  office  on  21st  February  did 
you  identify  the  man  without  any  difficulty? — Yes. 

And  did  you  tell  the  fiscal  that  that  was  the  man? — Yes. 

Then  in  March  were  you  spoken  to  by  Mr.  Speirs? — Yes. 

Did  he  ask  you  whether  you  were  prepared  to  go  to  Edin- 
burgh and  swear  that  that  was  the  man? — Yes. 

What  did  you  tell  him? — I  said  I  did  not  know. 

You  did  not  know  what? — Whether  I  was  prepared  to  swear 
at  the  time  or  not. 

Had  you  any  doubt  that  was  the  man? — No. 

MADGE  M'HAPFIE,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  reside  M.  M'Haffie 
at  79  West-End  Park  Street,  Glasgow.  I  am  the  niece  of 
Mrs.  M'Haffie.  I  frequently  called  at  her  house  at  16  West 
Princes  Street.  I  recollect  being  there  on  two  occasions  two 
weeks  or  so  before  the  murder.  The  first  of  these  two 
occasions  was  about  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening.  When  I 
was  going  up  stairs  I  met  a  man.  I  had  never  seen  him 
before.  He  was  coming  down  the  steps.  He  wore  black- 
checked  trousers,  a  fawn  over-coat,  a  black  bowler  hat,  and 
fawn  gaiters.  I  saw  that  man  a  few  days  afterwards  in  West 
Princes  Street  in  the  afternoon.  I  was  in  Mrs.  M'Haffie's 
house,  and  he  was  on  the  street,  passing  her  house.  He  was 
walking  slowly.  I  saw  him  pass  the  house,  and  I  saw  him 
coming  back.  I  do  not  know  how  often  he  passed  and  re- 
passed.  I  called  my  aunt's  attention  to  him.  I  do  not 
know  how  long  he  would  be  there,  but  he  might  be  about 
half  an  hour.  I  went  down  stairs,  but  I  was  not  going  home 
then.  I  was  going  towards  Charing  Cross;  that  would  be  east 
from  West  Princes  Street.  I  passed  the  same  man  walking 
towards  Charing  Cross.  It  was  in  St.  George's  Road  that  I 
passed  him — that  is,  down  to  the  place  where  St.  George's  Road 
joins  Sauchiehall  Street.  He  was  walking  slowly  in  that 
direction.  I  noticed  that  he  was  walking  with  a  shuffling 
gait.  On  21st  February  last  I  went  down  to  the  Central 
Police  Office,  and  I  was  taken  into  a  room  where  a  number  of 
men  were. 

Were  you  able  to  pick  out  anybody  in  that  room  that  was 
like  the  man  whom  you  say  you  saw  in  West  Princes  Street? — 
Yes,  he  was  like  the  man. 


Oscar  Slater. 

M. M'Haffle      Were  you  quite  sure  about  him,  or  not? — No,  he  was  just 
like  him. 

Look  at  the  prisoner;  is  that  the  man? — He  is  like  the 
man. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — When  you  saw  him  from 
the  window  of  your  aunt's  house,  who  was  with  you? — My 
aunt. 

Did  she  pass  any  remark  on  the  man  at  the  time? — I  do  not 
remember. 

Had  you  any  suspicions  about  the  man  at  all? — No. 

At  the  time  you  saw  him  from  your  aunt's  window,  was  there 
anything  suspicious  about  what  he  was  doing,  or  was  he  just 
walking  up  and  down  the  street? — I  think  so. 

Then  may  I  take  it  that  till  after  the  murder  was  committed 
in  the  neighbourhood,  and  when  you  were  thinking  back  upon 
it,  you  had  any  suspicions  in  your  mind,  or  had  you  any 
suspicions  at  all? — What  about? 

About  the  man  who  was  there? — I  wondered  what  he  was 
doing  there. 

Is  that  all?— Yes. 

I  think  you  went  home  after  the  time  you  had  been  in  your 
aunt's  house,  and  you  came  back  on  3rd  January? — Yes. 

Do  you  remember  seeing  your  aunt  then,  and  that  she  had 
to  remind  you  that  there  had  been  a  man? — Yes. 

You  had  really  forgotten  all  about  it? — I  had  never  thought 
about  it. 

Do  you  remember  what  the  date  was  when  you  were  taken 
down  to  the  police  office  in  order  to  identify  the  man? — It  was 
in  February. 

About  two  months  after  the  occurrence? — I  think  so. 

When  you  went  into  the  room  was  there  any  person  at  all 
like  the  prisoner — was  there  any  other  dark-haired,  dark- 
complexioned  man  in  the  place  at  all? — I  do  not  know. 

Did  you  notice  from  your  aunt's  window,  or  when  you  were 
passing  the  man  in  St.  George's  Road,  whether  he  was  a  man 
who  had  a  twisted  nose? — No. 

May  I  take  it  that  you  never  saw  any  one  who  answered  that 
description  walking  about  West  Princes  Street? — I  never  saw  a 
man  with  a  twisted  nose. 

Was  this  person  who  was  walking  up  and  down  in  West 
Princes  Street  a  person  whose  nose  did  not  attract  your  atten- 
tion at  all? — I  was  not  attracted  by  his  features.  I  did  not 
see  them  properly. 

If  you  did  not  see  his  features  at  all  what  was  it  that  led 
you  to  say  that  he  resembled  the  person  you  had  seen  in  West 
Princes  Street? — He  was  fairly  like  the  man  in  general 
appearance. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

In  the  general  look  of  him,    although  you  cannot  mention  M.  M'Haffle 
any  particulars? — Yes. 

Were  you  talking  over  this  matter  with  your  aunt  some  time 
since  the  occurrence? — Yes. 

Did  you  find  her  stronger  than  you  were  as  to  the  identity  1 — 
Yes. 

And  did  your  cousins  also  discuss  the  matter  in  your  presence 
with  your  aunt? — Yes. 

Re-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — When  you  went  upstairs 
did  your  cousin  Annie  open  the  door  to  you  on  the  occasion 
when  you  met  the  man  coming  downstairs  ? — I  cannot  remember 
who  opened  the  door. 

Do  you  remember  anything  passing  between  you  and  your 
cousin  Annie? — Yes. 

Will  you  tell  us  what  passed  between  you? — I  said,  "  I  met 
a  peculiar-looking  man  on  the  stairs." 

What  did  she  say  in  answer? — She  said  that  he  had  been 
at  the  door. 

By  the  COURT — You  told  us  that  you  met  a  man  on  the  stairs, 
and  afterwards  you  saw  a  man  walking  up  and  down ;  was  that 
the  same  man? — Yes. 

Then  you  told  us  you  saw  a  man  walking  along  the  street, 
and  you  noticed  that  he  was  shuffling;  was  that  the  same  man 
as  you  had  met  on  the  stairs? — Yes. 

Are  you  sure  about  that? — Yes. 

And  you  think  that  the  prisoner  is  like  that  man,  but  you 
cannot  swear? — Yes. 

Could  you  say  whether  the  man  you  saw  was  dark  or  fair? — 
I  thought  that  he  was  dark. 

Could  you  say  whether  he  had  a  moustache  or  not? — Yes, 
he  had  a  moustache. 

To  that  extent  you  saw  his  features? — Yes. 

ANNIE  RANKIN  M'HAPFIE,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE —  A.  M'Haffle. 
I  am  the  daughter  of  Mrs.  M'Haffie,  and  I  live  at  16  West  Princes 
Street,  Glasgow.  I  recollect  one  day  four  weeks  before  the 
murder  that  a  man  called  at  our  door  and  rang  the  bell.  That 
was  between  seven  and  eight  o'clock  at  night.  I  opened  the 
door.  Our  name,  "  Mr.  M'Haffie,"  is  on  the  door  in  large  letters 
on  a  brass  plate.  When  I  opened  the  door  the  man  asked  if 
any  person  of  the  name  of  Anderson  lived  there,  and  I  said 
"  No."  I  could  not  understand  at  the  time  how  anybody  could 
ask  for  Anderson  at  our  house  with  "  Mr.  M'Haffie "  on  the 
door.  When  I  said  "  No  "  the  man  turned  and  walked  down- 
stairs again.  Within  a  minute  or  so  afterwards  some  one  came 
to  our  door.  I  thought  that  it  was  the  same  man  coming  back 
again.  I  opened  the  door,  and  it  was  my  cousin,  the  last 
witness.  I  asked  her  if  she  had  met  a  man  on  the  stair,  and 


Oscar   Slater. 

A.  M'Haffie  she  said  "  Yes."  I  do  not  remember  what  I  said  to  her.  I 
never  saw  that  man  again.  I  went  to  the  Central  Police  Office 
on  21st  February  last  with  my  mother  and  sister,  and  I  was 
taken  into  a  room  where  there  was  a  number  of  men. 

Did  you  see  anybody  in  the  room  who  was  like  the  man  to 
whom  you  opened  the  door? — I  pointed  out  a  man  as  like  the 
man  who  was  at  the  door. 

You  were  not  quite  certain? — No. 

Is  the  prisoner  like  the  man  to  whom  you  opened  the  door1? 
— He  is  like  the  man.  As  far  as  I  know,  that  was  the  only 
time  I  had  ever  seen  him,  when  he  came  to  the  door. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLUEE — I  suppose  the  question  about 
Anderson  might  be  put  by  anybody  who  was  asking  for  a  lodger 
in  the  house? — Yes. 

Is  there  anything  peculiar  about  that  question? — No,  I  do 
not  think  so. 

By  the  COUBT — Did  you  notice  anything  about  the  man's 
accent? — No,  I  did  not. 

He  did  not  appear  to  be  a  foreigner? — No,  I  do  not  think  so. 

What  kind  of  a  light  was  there  in  the  stair  at  your  house? — 
There  is  a  light  below  our  door. 

Gas  ?— Yes. 

One  jet? — Yes,  below  our  door,  further  down  the  stair. 

There  is  no  light  above  your  door? — No. 

Was  there  any  light  in  your  lobby  that  would  come  out  into 
the  entrance? — Yes. 

Was  the  light  good  or  bad?: — It  was  not  good. 

J.  T.  Trench  JOHN  THOMSON  TRENCH,  examined  by  Mr.  MORISON — I  am  a 
detective  officer  in  the  Central  District  of  Glasgow  Police.  On 
Sunday,  21st  February,  I,  along  with  Detective  Alexander 
Cameron,  went  to  Renfrew  in  a  motor  car  and  met  the  prisoner. 
He  was  in  charge  of  the  witnesses  Warnock  and  Pyper.  I 
accompanied  them  to  the  Central  Police  Station  at  Glasgow. 
I  had  charge  of  the  arrangements  under  which  certain  of  the 
witnesses  were  to  identify,  if  they  could,  the  prisoner. 

What  arrangements  were  made  for  securing  that  the  test 
of  identification  was  a  fair  one? — The  prisoner  was  placed  along 
with  eleven  other  men  in  a  row  in  the  detective  office,  and  the 
witnesses  were  brought  in  one  by  one.  The  other  men  were 
mostly  police  officials,  all  in  plain  clothes.  There  were  also  two 
railway  officials  there.  Two  of  the  men  had  what  I  would  call 
peculiar  noses.  The  twelve  men  were  made  to  stand  up  in  a 
row,  and  the  prisoner  was  allowed  to  take  up  any  position  in 
the  row  that  he  pleased. 

Was  every  precaution  taken  so  that  the  witnesses  should 
not  have  an  opportunity  of  seeing  Slater  before  they  saw  him 
along  with  the  other  men  ? — Yes ;  there  was  every  precaution 

30 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

taken  to  avoid  that.  Slater  was  taken  to  the  doctor's  room,  j.  T.  Trench 
where  he  got  his  tea,  and  during  that  time  the  witnesses  were 
all  collecting  in  the  office,  and  he  was  taken  by  me  from  the 
doctor's  room  through  the  lieutenant's  bar  and  through  the 
telephone  room  and  through  the  detective  office  into  the  officers' 
room  at  the  back,  where  he  could  not  be  seen  by  any  of  the 
witnesses. 

And  accordingly  in  point  of  fact  he  was  not  seen  by  any 
of  the  witnesses  before  they  saw  him  amongst  the  twelve 
people  1 — Not  as  far  as  I  saw ;  I  do  not  think  they  could  see 
him.  The  witnesses  were  also  taken  in  singly,  and  pre- 
cautions were  taken  to  prevent  the  witnesses  from  meeting 
each  other  after  they  had  been  in  the  room  where  the  prisoner 
was.  No  witness  was  brought  into  the  room  for  identification 
purposes  who  had  an  opportunity  of  speaking  with  any  other 
witness ;  they  were  put  into  another  room.  The  witness  Mrs. 
M'Haffie  was  brought  in ;  she  was  the  first  witness  to  see  him. 
She  was  brought  into  the  room  by  me,  and  I  asked  her  if  she 
could  point  out  the  man  that  was  referred  to  in  her  statement 
which  she  had  previously  given,  and  she  pointed  to  the  accused. 
I  said,  "  Now,  go  forward  and  point  out  your  man ;  do  not  be 
afraid,"  and  she  went  forward  and  put  her  hand  on  his  coat 
sleeve.  The  other  M'Haffies  also  identified  him  in  the  same 
way,  one  after  the  other.  I  brought  in  the  witness  Bryson. 
As  he  came  in  at  the  door  he  glanced  along  the  row  of  men, 
and  without  hesitation  he  went  right  forward  to  the  accused  and 
put  his  hand  on  the  man,  and  said,  "  This  is  the  man."  I 
did  not  take  in  the  witness  Mary  Barrowman.  It  was 
Sergeant  Dornan  of  the  Western  District  who  brought  her  in, 
but  I  saw  her  brought  in.  At  the  time  she  was  brought  in 
the  accused  was  dressed  in  a  light  fawn  overcoat,  which  was 
found  in  one  of  his  trunks,  and  a  soft  split  hat.  She  stood 
and  looked  at  him,  and  she  said,  "  Pull  it  down  a  little 
further — further  yet "  ;  then  she  said,  "  That's  it,  that  is  the 
way  you  were  dressed  when  I  saw  you." 

By  the  COURT — Pull  what  down  ? — His  hat. 

Examination  continued — It  was  principally  the  witnesses  in  the 
Central  District  that  I  had  charge  of,  but  I  did  not  have  charge 
of  the  Western  District.  On  the  2nd  of  January  of  this  year 
I,  in  company  with  Superintendent  Douglas,  went  to  the 
prisoner's  house  at  69  St.  George's  Road.  It  is  three  stairs 
up,  and  consists  of  four  rooms  and  a  scullery  and  kitchen. 
There  were  two  German  women  in  the  house.  I  did  not  ask 
where  the  prisoner  had  gone,  but  the  woman  Freedman  made 
a  statement  as  to  the  prisoner.  I  searched  the  house.  (Shown 
production  No.  33.)  These  are  ten  visiting  cards  that  I 
found  in  the  house.  These  visiting  cards  bear  the  name  and 
address,  "  A.  Anderson,  69  St.  George's  Road."  I  found  these 


Oscar  Slater. 

J.  T.  Trench  in  the  house.  (Shown  account  and  invoice  for  furniture,  pro- 
duction No.  35.)  I  got  these  in  the  house  also.  I  took  them 
to  the  Police  Office,  and  labelled  them.  I  have  been  at  the 
locus  of  the  murder.  I  examined  the  close  No.  46  West 
Princes  Street.  The  close  is  what  is  called  here  an  entry, 
but  in  the  west  it  is  called  a  close.  The  close  No.  46  West 
Princes  Street  is  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  street  from  the 
close  leading  into  Miss  Gilchrist's  house,  directly  opposite. 
The  stair  leading  to  the  houses  there  begins  immediately  behind 
the  close  door,  and  takes  a  turn.  It  is  a  spiral  one,  and  is 
continuous  until  the  first  flat  is  reached.  About  six  steps  down 
from  that  landing  there  is  a  staircase  window  fronting  West 
Princes  Street,  and  the  sill  of  that  window  is  about  6  feet  from 
the  steps  of  the  stair.  By  getting  up  to  the  landing  at  the 
first  flat  you  can  see  through  this  window,  and  you  can  see  to 
the  door  of  the  close  of  Miss  Gilchrist's  house.  When  I 
went  up  the  second  flat  I  found  a  staircase  window  there.  That 
staircase  window  is  only  2£  to  3  feet  above  the  stair.  That 
window  looks  directly  into  the  room  of  the  house  where  Miss 
Gilchrist  was  murdered.  If  the  blinds  of  Miss  Gilchrist's 
room  were  up  I  believe  you  could  see  into  the  room.  When 
I  was  there  the  blinds  were  down.  There  is  a  gas  on  that 
stair.  If  one  were  looking  through  the  window  at  night  the 
gaslight  would  not  interfere  with  one's  view — not  the  gas  on 
the  stair. 

Is  there  a  gaslight  that  might  interfere  with  it? — No,  the 
gas  is  on  the  first  flat ;  this  window  I  refer  to  is  one  and  a  half 
stairs  up — half  way  on  the  road  to  the  second  flat.  The 
stair  begins  just  immediately  from  the  door,  and  if  the  door 
is  pushed  back  there  is  a  recess  formed  between  the  outside 
wall  and  the  door.  The  recess  is  of  considerable  size,  and  a 
man  could  quite  easily  stand  behind  it.  I  did  not  notice'  the 
same  in  connection  with  Miss  Gilchrist's  door.  I  did  not  go 
in  to  see. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLTTRE — You  met  the  prisoner  at 
Renfrew,  and  motored  him  into  Glasgow? — Yes. 

Can  you  tell  me  whether  the  arrival  of  your  motor  with  the 
prisoner  in  it  could  be  seen  through  a  glass  door  of  the  room 
in  which  all  the  witnesses  were — in  the  lobby? — There  were 
none  of  the  witnesses  present  when  he  arrived  in  the  motor — 
not  for  two  hours  afterwards. 

From  the  room  in  which  the  witnesses  were  congregated  ia 
there  a  glass  door  which  looks  into  the  lobby? — There  is. 

And  if  the  witnesses  had  been  there  upon  the  arrival  of  the 
prisoner  could  they  have  seen  him? — Some  of  them  could. 

You  say  they  were  not  there  ? — Not  to  my  knowledge  ;  they 
were  not  there  till  four  o'clock,  and  he  arrived  at  two. 

Do  you  say  that  in  point  of  fact  at  the  time  of  his  arrival 

32 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

you  know  that  none  of  the  witnesses  had  arrived  ? — Not  so  far  j.  T.  Trench 
as  I  know ;  I  did  not  see  any  of  them. 

The  prisoner  was  placed  in  a  row  with  eleven  men ;  was 
there  any  foreign-looking  man  amongst  them? — No,  they  were 
all  Scotsmen,  I  think. 

No  person  of  dark  complexion  and  foreign  appearance? — 
There  were  some  of  them  of  dark  complexion. 

And  foreign  appearance  ? — No  ;   not  foreign  appearance. 

So  that  anybody  looking  for  a  foreigner  would,  of  course, 
go  straight  to  the  prisoner? — Possibly,  yes. 

That  is  an  irregular  way  of  conducting  an  identification,  is 
it  not? — I  do  not  think  so. 

I  understood  that  when  you  were  going  to  identify  a  person 
in  connection  with  any  alleged  crime  you  attempted  to  get  him 
placed  amongst  men  who  were  more  or  less  like  him ;  is  not 
that  so? — No,  it  is  not. 

Is  that  not  your  practice  in  Glasgow? — No,  it  is  not. 

Just  as  a  matter  of  ordinary  fairness,  do  you  not  think  that 
that  would  be  a  proper  practice  to  observe? — It  might  be  the 
fah'est  way,  but  it  is  not  the  practice  in  Glasgow. 

So  that  you  had  two  railway  officials  and  eleven  policemen? 
— There  were  eleven  including  the  railway  officials,  and  the 
prisoner. 

Nine  policemen  and  two  railway  officials? — Yes. 

And  you  cannot  mention  any  one  who  resembled  Slater  ? — Oh  ! 
none  of  them  resembled  Slater. 

Slater's  photograph,  as  an  obvious  foreigner,  had  been  pub- 
lished in  the  Glasgow  evening  papers  before  that? — Yes. 

So  that  any  person  who  had  seen  his  photograph  would  look 
for  a  foreigner,  and  could  not  escape  singling  out  Slater  at 
your  identification? — I  do  not  think  they  could  very  well. 

You  said  two  of  the  men  had  peculiar  noses? — Yes. 

Were  you  looking  for  a  man  at  this  time  who  had  a  twisted 
nose? — No.  It  happened  that  two  men  who  were  selected 
had  peculiar  noses. 

What  were  the  peculiarities  ? — One  of  them  has  a  little  hump 
on  his  nose,  and  the  other  has  a  kind  of  flattish  nose;  they 
were  not  noses  like  Slater's  at  all. 

Then  I  may  take  it  that  there  was  no  person  in  the  room 
who  had  a  nose  the  least  like  Slater's? — No,  I  should  think 
it  is  very  difficult  to  find  one  like  it. 

Had  you  anything  to  do  with  the  description  which  was 
published  in  the  papers  after  this  crime  had  been  committed? — 
No,  I  had  nothing  to  do  with  that. 

Do  you  describe  Slater's  nose  as  a  twisted  nose? — No,  I 
would  not  describe  it  as  a  twisted  nose. 

Was  that  not  the  way  it  was  described  by  the  girl  Barrow- 
man  ? — I  could  not  say ;  there  were  so  many  rumours  and 
stories  that  I  did  not  pay  attention  to  them. 

33 


Oscar  Slater. 

J.  T.  Trench  Has  the  Glasgow  public  not  gone  pretty  nearly  mad  over 
this  case  ? — I  would  not  like  to  say  they  have  gone  mad  ;  it 
has  certainly  caused  a  lot  of  sensation  and  talk. 

Have  you  heard  that  old  Miss  Gilchrist  was  a  resetter? — I 
have  heard  that  frequently. 

And  that  she  kept  uncut  diamonds  in  her  house,  which  she 
had  got  from  thieves? — Yes,  I  have  heard  that  too. 

Not  a  word  of  truth  in  it? — Not  a  word  of  truth  in  it,  as  far 
as  I  know. 

Have  you  heard  within  the  last  fortnight  a  rumour  to  the 
effect  that  people  have  been  back  at  her  house  tearing  up  the 
floors  and  throwing  uncut  diamonds,  which  were  found  under 
the  floors,  into  the  street? — No,  I  have  never  heard  that  story. 

Have  you  heard  that  she  was  the  mother  of  the  servant  girl 
Lambie? — No. 

But  of  another? — Yes. 

Have  you  heard  that  she  was  the  mother  of  Slater? — No. 

May  I  take  it  that  the  case  has  given  rise  to  extreme  excite- 
ment amongst  the  Glasgow  public,  and  to  no  end  of  unfounded 
rumours? — There  is  no  doubt  of  that — all  sorts  of  rumours. 

Have  other  men  been  in  custody  in  connection  with  this  case 
besides  Slater? — I  believe  there  were  several  men  arrested 
shortly  after  the  murder,  but  I  had  no  connection  with  them 
at  all. 

And  a  number  of  witnesses  failed  to  identify  these  men? — 
Yes. 

Have  a  number  of  witnesses  failed  to  identify  Slater? — Oh, 
there  have  been  a  number  of  people  who  have  seen  him  who 
did  not  know  him  at  all. 

You  say  that  Mrs.  M'Haffie  pointed  out  Slater? — She  did. 

Do  you  say  that  all  the  other  M'Haffies  did  the  same? — They 
did. 

Is  it  your  evidence  they  were  all  quite  sure  of  him? — Every 
one  of  them  was  absolutely  certain  of  him. 

Do  you  say  that  Madge  M'Haffie  absolutely  identified  the 
man  ? — I  do ;  I  took  them  all  in  myself,  and  every  one  of  them 
was  sure  of  the  man. 

Do  you  say  that  Annie  M'Haffie  absolutely  identified  the 
man? — She  did. 

When  the  witness  Barrowman  was  brought  in  you  say  you 
were  present? — Yes. 

That  is  the  girl  who  was  in  the  street,  some  distance  from 
the  doorway  out  of  which  the  man  rushed,  just  after  the 
murder? — Yes. 

When  the  girl  Barrowman  came  in  to  identify  Slater  this 
was  after  her  visit  to  America? — Yes. 

And  do  you  say  that  she  did  not  identify  him  until  a  hat 
had  been  pulled  down  over  his  nose;  did  the  girl  Barrowman, 

34 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

when  he  was  dressed  in  the  office  with  an  overcoat  and  a  soft  J.  T.  Trench 
split  hat,  say,  as  regards  the  cap,  "  Pull  it  down"? — She  did — 
"  Pull  it  down  more." 

And  was  it  after  the  cap  had  been  pulled  further  down  that 
she  said  "  That's  it "  ? — "  That  is  the  way  you  had  it  when  I 
saw  you,"  referring  to  his  hat. 

Do  you  say  she  was  doubtful  about  the  identification  to  start 
with? — No,  I  do  not  say  that. 

The  hat  which  you  put  on  Slater  you  called  a  soft  split  hat  ? 
—Yes,  a  soft  kind  of  tweed  hat. 

Could  you  tell  me  the  hat  it  was? — I  could  if  I  saw  it. 

(Shown  production  No.  44) — Is  that  what  you  call  a  Donegal 
hat? — No. 

Are  you  aware  that  in  the  first  information  given  by  Barrow- 
man  to  the  police  she  said  that  the  man  who  came  rushing 
out  of  the  close  had  a  Donegal  hat? — No;  but  I  have  heard 
the  Donegal  hat  mentioned  several  times. 

And  as  being  the  thing  which  was  characteristic  of  the  man 
who  came  out  of  the  close? — Yes,  that  is  so. 

That  (production  No.  44)  is  not  a  Donegal  hat? — No. 

Then  what  was  the  purpose  of  dressing  the  man  up  to  Barrow- 
man  with  this  hat,  which  was  not  the  kind  of  hat  which  he  was 
supposed  to  be  wearing  at  the  time  he  came  out  of  the  close? — 
That  was  the  only  hat  which  was  found  in  his  box. 

In  point  of  fact,  there  was  no  Donegal  hat  found  in  the  box? 
—No. 

What  is  a  Donegal  hat? — I  understand  a  Donegal  hat  to  be 
a  soft  tweed  hat  of  round  shape,  with  a  brim  all  the  way  round. 

And  certainly  not  this  at  all? — No. 

Did  you  see  the  boxes  of  clothes? — Yes,  I  saw  them  opened. 

Have  you  produced  in  this  case  all  the  articles  of  clothing 
which  you  suppose  would  assist  the  prosecution  towards  an 
identification  ? — Yes. 

Did  you  find  any  checked  trousers? — I  could  not  say;  I  was 
present  when  the  boxes  were  opened  and  searched,  but  I  really 
could  not  say  whether  there  were  checked  trousers  or  not. 

Were  there  any  light-coloured  fawn  spats  found? — I  could 
not  say. 

But  you  went  through  the  boxes? — I  was  there  when  the 
boxes  were  examined. 

Were  you  looking? — The  men  who  particularly  examined  the 
boxes  were  Mr.  Warnock  and  Detective  Inspector  Pyper. 

And,  as  far  as  you  know,  no  fawn-coloured  spats  were  found? 
—Not  as  far  as  I  know. 
And  no  Donegal  hat  was  found? — No. 

Were  any  brown  boots  found? — No,  I  do  not  think  so;  I 
did  not  see  any  brown  boots ;  there  were  some  lady's  boots — I 
think  a  pair  of  lady's  brown  boots. 

35 


Oscar  Slater. 

J.  T.  Trench  Then  I  may  take  it  this  way :  if  the  man  who  came  out  of 
Miss  Gilchrist's  house  had  a  Donegal  hat  on  and  brown  boots 
you  found  nothing  in  the  contents  of  the  prisoner's  boxes  which 
would  support  the  view  that  he  is  the  murderer? — No,  they  were 
not  there ;  I  did  not  see  anything  of  that  kind. 

And  if  the  prisoner  is  supposed  to  have  walked  up  and  down 
West  Princes  Street  with  checked  trousers  on  and  fawn- 
coloured  spats,  you  found  nothing  in  his  boxes  which  would 
support  the  charge  against  him? — I  did  not  see  anything  like 
that  found  in  the  boxes. 

Did  you  find  any  light,  soft  overcoat? — No,  we  did  not  find 
a  light,  soft  overcoat. 

The  only  light  coat  is  this  waterproof  (production  No.  43)1 — 
Yes. 

Did  you  show  that  at  any  time  to  Mrs.  M'Haffie? — No,  I  did 
not. 

Supposing  Mrs.  M'Haffie  says  that  the  prisoner  was  wearing 
a  light,  soft  overcoat,  which  was  not  a  waterproof,  you  found 
nothing  in  his  boxes  which  would  support  that? — No,  there  was 
not  a  light  cloth  coat  found  at  all  that  I  saw. 

How  many  boxes  of  clothes  or  bags  did  this  man  have? — 
There  were  seven  trunks  altogether. 

And  did  the  police  go  carefully  over  them  all? — Yes. 

By  the  COURT — Were  they  all  full? — They  were  all  full. 

Cross-examination  continued — He  had  a  great  many  suits 
of  clothes? — He  had  a  lot  of  clothing — good  clothing. 

By  the  COURT — And  amongst  them  there  were  old  clothes; 
they  were  not  all  new  clothes? — No,  they  were  not  all  new 
clothes ;  a  lot  of  them  had  been  worn. 

Cross-examination  continued — You  went  into  a  close,  as  I 
understand,  called  No.  46  West  Princes  Street  and  looked  across 
from  it  towards  Miss  Gilchrist's  house? — Going  up  the  stair, 
one  and  a  half  stairs  up,  at  the  staircase  window,  when  you 
were  standing  on  the  stair  looking  through  the  window  you 
saw  right  into  the  window  of  the  room  in  which  Miss  Gilchrist 
was  murdered. 

You  never  actually  had  an  opportunity  of  trying  whether  you 
could  or  not? — No,  the  blinds  were  down. 

He-examined  by  Mr.  MORISON — It  was  not  part  of  your  duty 
to  examine  the  boxes? — No. 

And  the  examination  was  really  conducted  by  two  other 
witnesses  who  are  on  the  Crown  list? — That  is  so. 

And,  of  course,  you  do  not  know  the  details  of  what  was 
found  in  the  boxes? — No. 

But  did  you  see  that  there  was  a  large  variety  of  clothes  ? — 
Yes,  there  was  a  large  variety  of  clothes. 

And  was  there  a  considerable  number  of  overcoats? — Yesr 
there  were  several  overcoats. 

36 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Can  you  tell  me  when  the  boxes  were  opened  and  examined  1  J.  T.  Trench 
— Immediately  on  his  arrival  at  the  Central  Police  Office  on 
the  Sunday,  21st  February. 

Of  course,  Slater  had  been  out  of  Glasgow  from  the  25th  of 
December? — Yes,  from  Christmas  night. 

By  the  COURT — Was   there  any   name  on   the  boxes? — The 
letters  "  O.  S."  were  on  several  of  them. 

CHRISTOPHER  WALKER,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  C.  Walker 
am  a  constable  in  the  Glasgow  Police  Force.  I  was  on 
night  duty  in  the  end  of  December,  1908,  on  the  north 
side  of  West  Princes  Street.  I  was  on  day  duty  in  the 
beginning  of  December.  I  recollect  passing  along  the  north 
side  of  West  Princes  Street  in  the  direction  of  St.  George's 
Road  on  1st  December  about  a  quarter  to  six  o'clock.  I  saw 
a  man  standing  on  the  edge  of  the  pavement.  I  know  15 
Queen's  Terrace.  The  man  was  opposite  that,  standing  on 
the  opposite  side.  I  took  a  good  look  at  the  man.  I  thought 
I  knew  the  man,  and  I  waved  to  him.  I  saw  he  was  not  the 
man  I  knew,  and  I  passed  right  on  to  St.  George's  Road,  leav- 
ing the  man  standing  still  on  the  pavement.  He  was  looking 
in  a  slanting  direction  towards  15  Queen's  Terrace.  I  thought 
he  was  waiting  for  some  party  to  meet  him.  About  three 
nights  after  that  I  met  the  same  man  in  West  Princes  Street 
40  or  50  yards  further  down  towards  St.  George's  Road,  on  the 
north  side  of  West  Princes  Street.  On  that  occasion  he  was 
walking  leisurely  up  the  street,  towards  Queen's  Crescent. 
That  was  about  a  quarter  to  six  o'clock.  I  did  not  look  after 
him.  I  simply  recognised  him  as  the  man  I  had  mistaken  the 
previous  night.  I  did  not  see  him  again  that  night.  The 
next  time  I  saw  him  was  about  a  fortnight  after  that,  on  17th 
or  18th  December,  about  a  quarter  to  seven  o'clock,  standing 
at  the  foot  of  West  Princes  Street,  near  St.  George's  Road, 
opposite  the  chemist's  door.  He  was  on  the  south  side  of 
West  Princes  Street.  I  stood  for  several  minutes,  and  he  stood 
all  the  time,  and  I  went  away  and  left  him  standing.  I  was 
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  street.  When  I  left  I  went  in  the 
direction  of  St.  George's  Cross.  Those  were  the  only  three 
occasions  on  which  I  saw  the  man  in  West  Princes  Street.  I 
am  not  aware  that  I  had  ever  seen  him  before.  On  Monday 
night,  22nd  February,  I  saw  the  man  in  the  Central  Police 
Office,  Glasgow.  I  recognised  him  at  once  as  the  man  I  had 
met  in  West  Princes  Street.  I  had  no  difficulty  in  recognising 
him  at  all.  I  was  put  on  to  watch  Miss  Gilchrist's  house  after 
the  murder,  about  9.30  p.m.  I  was  at  the  close  on  the 
street  until  five  o'clock  in  the  morning.  There  were  very  few 
people  going  about,  and  I  thought  I  would  look  and  see  if  I 

37 


Oscar  Slater. 

C.  Walker  could  find  the  weapon  with  which  the  deed  had  been  done.  I 
went  with  my  lamp  to  the  back  green  and  searched  to  see  if 
anything  had  been  thrown  from  the  house.  I  did  not  find 
anything  at  all. 

Did  you  search  very  carefully? — In  a  hurry.  I  searched 
with  my  lamp.  The  accused  is  the  man  I  identified  at  the 
Police  Office. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — Of  course  you  are  quite 
certain  that  is  the  man  you  saw  in  the  Police  Office? — Yes,  and 
in  West  Princes  Street  also. 

On  each  occasion  when  you  saw  the  man  in  West  Princes 
Street  you  were  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  street? — From  15 
Queen's  Terrace. 

Do  I  understand  that  you  saw  the  man  on  the  other  side  of 
the  street? — The  opposite  side  from  Queen's  Terrace. 

And  you  took  him  for  your  friend? — Yes,  for  a  gentleman 
that  I  knew. 

Who  was  the  gentleman? — He  is  in  Court  here. 

So  much  the  better.       What  is  his  name? — Mr.  Paradise. 

That  was  a  gentleman  who  gave  evidence,  and  who  sold 
furniture? — Yes,  the  very  same. 

He  is  a  foreign-looking  gentleman,  is  he  not? — Yes. 

Of  dark  complexion,  and  with  a  moustache? — Yes. 

How  long  have  you  known  him? — About  twelve  months. 

You  waved  your  hand  to  a  man  you  thought  to  be  Mr. 
Paradise? — Yes.  Before  I  came  up  to  him  I  raised  my  hand, 
but  as  I  reached  him  I  saw  it  was  not  him. 

What  was  he  doing,  the  man  you  took  for  Mr.  Paradise? — 
Simply  standing  on  the  pavement  and  glancing  about  the 
street. 

I  suppose  you  did  not  think  there  was  anything  suspicious  in 
his  actions? — I  saw  nothing  suspicious  about  him. 

Was  he  strolling  about? — He  was  standing  on  the  edge  of 
the  pavement. 

You  say  that  you  saw  him  on  1st  December,  at  a  quarter  to 
six? — Yes. 

When  was  the  next  time  you  saw  him? — Three  or  four  days 
after  that. 

Where  was  he  then? — Forty  or  fifty  yards  further  down  the 
street. 

On  the  same  side? — Yes. 

That  is  to  say,  on  the  north  side? — Yes. 

Where  was  he  the  next  time? — The  foot  of  West  Princes 
Street,  the  opposite  side. 

What  was  he  doing  on  these  later  occasions? — Simply  as 
if  he  was  standing  waiting  for  some  person. 

There  was  nothing  to  attract  your  attention? — No. 

38 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

You  said  you  thought  he  was  waiting  for  somebody? — That  C.  Walker 
was  the  opinion  I  formed  seeing  him  standing  there. 

You  did  not  think  he  was  watching  any  house  in  particular! 
— I  could  not  say  that  I  thought  that.  He  was  simply  looking 
in  the  direction  of  15  Queen's  Terrace. 

You  passed  behind  him? — Yes. 

And  on  the  other  occasions? — I  met  him  coming  up  on  the 
second  occasion,  and  on  the  third  occasion  he  was  standing  on 
the  opposite  side  of  the  street. 

Would  you  undertake  to  identify  positively  a  man  standing 
on  the  opposite  side  of  West  Princes  Street  in  December,  at 
or  about  seven  o'clock? — There  is  a  chemist's  shop  at  the 
corner,  and  they  have  a  door  to  West  Princes  Street  which  is 
well  lighted  up.  He  was  standing  facing  this  door,  and  I 
was  on  the  opposite  side. 

He  was  facing  the  door  of  the  shop? — He  was  right  in  a  line 
with  the  door. 

Was  his  back  towards  you? — No,  his  face  was  towards  me. 

The  chemist's  shop  would  only  light  up  his  back? — Yes. 

That  would  make  it  a  little  more  difficult.  Do  you  say 
under  these  circumstances  you  have  confidence  in  your  identi- 
fication of  the  man  standing  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  street? 
—Yes,  I  have  every  confidence.  There  is  an  electric  lamp 
in  St.  George's  Road  at  that  corner,  which  throws  a  very 
bright  light. 

On  the  second  occasion  he  was  further  down  the  street  than 
on  the  first  occasion.  How  far  was  he  from  St  George's 
Road? — About  50  yards. 

The  electric  light  would  not  help  you  very  much  there? — 
No. 

Would  you  say  that,  on  the  second  occasion,  you  could 
positively  identify  the  man? — Yes,  because  there  was  a  lamp 
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  street. 

What  did  you  identify  him  by? — I  just  thought  he  resembled 
this  man.  That  is  all. 

You  thought  he  was  a  foreign-looking  person  with  a  darkish 
moustache,  something  like  Mr.  Paradise? — Yes. 

Is  that  all  you  can  say  about  him? — Yes. 

You  never  saw  this  man  again  until  22nd  February? — No, 
not  until  22nd  February. 

By  that  time  the  newspapers  had  been  full  of  photographs, 
had  they  not? — Yes,  there  were  lots  of  photographs. 

And  you  knew  the  person  you  were  to  identify  was  a  person 
of  foreign  appearance? — I  daresay  I  did. 

Who  was  at  the  Police  Office  when  you  arrived  there? — I 
could  not  say.  There  were  a  number  of  detectives. 

Was  there  any  person  of  a  foreign  appearance  except  the 
prisoner? — Mr.  Paradise  himself  was  there. 


Oscar  Slater. 

C.  Walker      You  would  not  mistake  him,  of  course? — No. 

Was  there  any  person  of  a  foreign  appearance  except  the 
prisoner? — Not  that  I  saw. 

Was  he  there  among  detectives  and  policemen? — Yes. 

Did  they  go  through  the  farce  of  asking  you  if  you  saw 
any  one  like  the  man? — They  asked  if  I  saw  any  one  that  J 
recognised,  and  I  went  to  him. 

You  at  once  went  to  him? — Yes. 

As  I  understand,  you  knew  the  other  people  in  the  room  to 
be  either  detectives  or  Mr.  Paradise? — I  did  not  know  that 
they  were.  Mr.  Paradise  was  not  in  the  room ;  he  was  in 
some  other  room. 

When  you  went  down,  do  I  understand  that  the  only  person 
of  foreign  appearance  in  the  room  into  which  you  went  was 
the  prisoner? — Yes. 

And  the  others  were  detectives? — I  do  not  know  what  they 
were. 

I  thought  you  said  before  that  they  were  detectives? — Some 
of  them  were,  but  I  do  not  know  whether  they  were  all 
detectives. 

Who  were  the  other  people? — I  do  not  know. 

None  had  a  foreign  appearance? — No. 

So  you  were  able  to  identify  a  foreigner  at  once? — I  did  not 
go  there  to  identify  a  foreigner  at  all. 

There  was  an  auger  found  in  the  back  green  that  you 
searched  with  a  light? — I  am  told  there  was. 

You  had  looked  the  whole  place  with  your  lamp  on  the  night 
after  the  death  of  Miss  Gilchrist? — Yes. 

What  is  the  extent  of  the  back  green? — It  is  a  pretty  large- 
sized  back  green. 

Did  you  make  a  thorough  search? — Yes. 

If  there  was  an  auger  found  in  the  back  green  next  day  do 
you  think  it  had  come  into  the  back  green  between  the  time 
of  your  search  and  the  time  of  its  being  found? — There  were 
some  parts  of  the  back  green  where  there  was  long  grass,  and 
although  I  made,  as  I  thought,  a  careful  examination,  I  did 
not  look  for  so  small  a  weapon  as  an  auger,  and  I  might  have 
passed  it. 

It  was  just  under  the  kitchen  window? — Yes. 

Was  there  long  grass  or  short  grass  there  ? — There  were  long 
weeds  lying  about  where  this  auger  was  found. 

You  did  not  see  it  found? — This  is  the  first  time  I  have 
seen  it. 

Re-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — Look  at  photograph 
No.  1  of  No.  5  of  the  productions.  Do  you  see  a  No.  4  on 
the  photograph? — Yes. 

Was  that  near  the  place  where  you  saw  the  man  the  first 
time? — It  was  further  round  than  that. 
40 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

You  mean  nearer  St.  George's  Road? — Yes.  C.  Walker 

A  foot  or  two? — A  yard  or  two. 

And  nearer  Miss  Gilchrist's  house? — Yes. 

Do  you  see  a  No.  6  on  that  photograph? — Yes. 

Was  that  about  the  place  where  you  saw  the  man  the  third 
time? — Yes,  that  is  about  the  place. 

Do  you  see  a  No.  2  on  the  photograph? — Yes. 

Is  that  near  the  place  where  you  saw  the  man  the  second 
time  when  he  was  walking  westwards? — Yes. 

Are  the  lights  in  West  Princes  Street  incandescent? — Yes. 

And  is  it  electric  light  that  you  have  in  St.  George's  Road? 
—Yes. 

In  the  middle  of  the  road  or  at  the  sides? — The  sides. 

Was  there  an  electric  light  in  St.  George's  Road  near  the 
corner,  near  No.  6? — Immediately  opposite,  on  the  St.  George's 
Road,  right  in  the  centre  of  West  Princes  Street. 

It  throws  a  powerful  light  on  that  corner  where  you  see 
No.  6?— Yes. 

EUPHEMIA  CUNNINGHAM,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE —  Euphemia 
I  live  at  114  South  Woodside  Road,  Glasgow.  I  am  in  the  Cunningham 
employment  of  a  photographer  at  167  St.  George's  Road.  My 
dinner  hour  is  from  one  to  two,  and  I  go  home  daily  at  that 
hour  by  West  Princes  Street  and  Queen's  Crescent.  That  is 
a  very  quiet  district  and  a  quiet  street.  On  Monday,  14th 
December  last,  when  I  was  going  home  for  my  dinner,  I 
observed  a  man  standing  at  the  corner  of  Queen's  Crescent  and 
West  Princes  Street.  I  had  never  seen  him  before.  He  was 
looking  towards  Miss  Gilchrist's  house.  I  should  think  that 
he  would  be  about  60  feet  away  from  the  house,  and  just  at 
the  corner  of  Queen's  Crescent.  I  returned  again  about  two 
o'clock,  but  the  man  was  not  there.  On  the  following  day 
I  went  for  my  dinner  about  the  same  hour.  I  saw  the  man 
again  standing  at  the  same  place.  On  Wednesday,  the  16th, 
I  went  for  my  dinner  at  the  same  hour.  I  saw  the  same 
man  standing  at  the  same  place.  On  Thursday,  the  17th, 
when  going  for  my  dinner  at  the  same  hour,  I  saw  him  again 
standing  at  the  same  place  and  looking  towards  Miss  Gilchrist's 
house.  William  Campbell  was  with  me,  and  I  said  to  him, 
"There  is  that  man  again."  It  occurred  to  me  as  odd,  and 
I  wondered  what  took  the  man  there.  I  never  saw  him  on 
any  occasion  when  I  was  coming  back  from  my  dinner.  I 
thought  his  appearance  was  foreign,  and  he  was  very  dark, 
with  a  sallow  complexion,  and  was  rather  a  heavy-featured 
man.  I  thought  he  was  clean  shaven,  but,  of  course,  I  did 
not  get  a  very  good  view  of  the  front  face ;  it  was  the  side 
face  that  I  always  saw.  He  had  a  dark  tweed  coat  on,  and 
a  green  cap  with  a  peak.  He  was  on  the  same  pavement  as 


Oscar  Slater. 

Euphemia  I  was  on  on  each  occasion,  but  Mr.  Campbell  was  nearer  to 
Cunningham  nim  tnan  j  wag  j  do  not  recoUect  seeing  the  man  before 
14th  December.  I  saw  him  at  the  Central  Police  Office  in 
February.  I  was  taken  into  a  room  there  where  there  were 
a  lot  of  men,  and  I  saw  there  the  man  I  had  seen  on  these 
different  occasions  in  West  Princes  Street.  The  accused  is 
the  man  that  I  saw  in  the  police  office  and  on  the  street. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — Have  you  been  shown  the 
green  cap  that  the  man  was  wearing  since? — Yes. 

Was  it  a  green  cap  with  a  peak? — Yes,  a  dark  green  cap. 

I  show  you  one  of  the  caps  under  label  46? — That  is  not  the 
cap. 

Is  the  other  one  the  cap? — No. 

Is  No.  44  the  cap? — No.      This  cap  that  I  see  is  more  like  it. 

That  is  a  cap  that  is  obviously  of  black  cloth? — Yes. 

Do  you  say  that  is  the  cap  that  the  man  was  wearing? — No, 
there  seemed  to  be  more  green  in  it. 

Who  was  it  that  showed  you  the  green  cap  that  you  identi- 
fied?— Mr.  Hart,  the  fiscal. 

You  were  not  told  that  the  cap  belonged  to  Slater? — No. 

It  conies  to  this,  that  you  say  that  Slater  was  wearing  a 
green  cap  which  has  not  been  shown  to  you  here? — That  is  so. 

Can  you  give  me  the  date  when  you  identified  the  prisoner 
in  the  police  office? — About  28th  February. 

That  is  fully  two  months  after  you  had  seen  the  man  ? — Yes. 

Did  you  notice  any  peculiarity  about  his  nose? — No,  I 
did  not. 

That  is  not  part  of  the  identification? — No.  It  was  the  left 
side  that  I  always  saw. 

The  nose  did  not  appear  to  you  to  be  in  anv  way  striking? — 
No. 

Did  you  ever  see  him  front  face? — No. 

When  you  say  the  man  was  standing  in  a  set  attitude  day 
after  day  looking  towards  Miss  Gilchrist's  house,  what  makes 
you  say  that  he  was  looking  towards  her  house? — Because  his 
face  was  turned  in  that  direction. 

But  equally  well,  I  suppose,  the  man  might  have  been  looking 
down  towards  St.  George's  Road? — His  face  would  have  been 
more  front  if  he  had  been  looking  that  way. 

He  was  doing  nothing  at  all? — No. 

Did  he  seem  to  be  anxious  to  escape  your  observation? — 
No.  He  had  the  collar  of  his  coat  up. 

Did  he  seem  to  you  to  be  hiding  in  any  way? — No.  I 
thought  he  was  waiting  for  some  one  or  looking  for  some  one. 

It  was  always  at  one  o'clock  that  you  saw  him,  and  he  was 
always  away  by  two  o'clock? — Yes. 

Did  you  say  that  he  was  quite  clean  shaven? — Yes,  I 
thought  so. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

I  mean  with  no  moustache  at  all? — I  could  not  say  very  well,  Euphemia 
because  the  collar  of  his  coat  was  up. 

Do  you  suggest  now  that  on  every  occasion  when  you  passed 
the  man  he  had  his  upper  lip  buried  in  his  coat  collar?— -I  do 
not  say  that,  but  I  did  not  get  a  very  good  view  of  the  front 
face.  It  was  more  the  back  of  the  head  and  the  side  of  the 
face  that  I  saw. 

Suppose  if  any  gentleman  of  sallow  complexion  and  clean 
shaven,  with  dark  hair  and  of  foreign  appearance,  had  been 
shown  you  in  the  police  office,  you  would  have  been  quite 
ready  to  say  that  he  was  the  man? — No. 

You  had  seen  this  man's  photograph  in  the  papers? — Yes, 
I  saw  one. 

And  did  you  think  you  recognised  him  from  that? — I  did 
at  once. 

The  man  in  the  photograph  in  the  papers  had  a  considerable 
moustache? — No,  a  slight  moustache. 

Was  that  the  photograph  that  you  saw  (shown  No.  39  of  the 
productions)  ? — Yes. 

There  is  a  very  distinct  moustache  there? — Yes. 

If  the  man  you  saw  at  the  corner  was  clean  shaven,  how  did 
you  recognise  at  once  a  man  with  a  heavy  moustache  as  being 
the  same  ? — It  was  more  the  side  of  the  face  and  the  back  of  the 
head  that  I  recognised,  not  the  front  of  the  face. 

There  is  no  doubt  if  you  saw  the  side  of  his  face  you  would 
see  one-half  of  his  moustache? — I  did  not  notice  that  he  had 
a  moustache. 

That  is  exactly  what  I  am  suggesting.  My  point  is  this, 
if  the  man  whom  you  saw,  as  you  say,  at  the  corner  of  Queen's 
Crescent  had  no  moustache  on  the  14th,  15th,  16th,  and  17th 
December,  how  did  you  come  to  recognise  in  the  paper  of  15th 
January  a  man  with  a  noticeable  moustache  as  the  same 
person? — He  was  quite  easily  recognised.  I  would  not  forget 
the  side  of  the  face. 

But  it  is  a  front  face  that  is  shown  in  the  paper? — Yes. 

Can  you  explain  how  it  was  if,  on  the  14th,  15th,  16th,  and 
17th  December,  you  saw  a  clean-shaven  man,  side  face,  stand- 
ing in  West  Princes  Street,  you  came  to  identify  the  photograph 
of  a  man  full  face  towards  you  and  with  a  considerable  mous- 
tache as  the  person  whom  you  saw? — It  is  not  only  the  photo- 
graph I  am  going  by.  I  was  shown  the  man  down  in  the 
police  office. 

But  you  first  identified  him  from  the  photograph  alone? — Yes, 
I  did. 

Can  you  understand  how  you  failed  to  notice  the  moustache? 
— No,  not  any  more  than  it  was  not  very  prominent.  He  had 
the  collar  of  his  coat  up,  and  it  was  always  this  side  of  the 
face  and  the  back  of  the  head  that  I  saw. 

43 


Oscar  Slater. 

Euphemia  Can  you  have  a  very  confident  identification  from  the  back 

Cunningham 


What  was  peculiar  about  the  back  of  his  head?  —  The  ears 
were  sticking  out  slightly. 

Did  you  ever  see  a  man  with  ears  sticking  out  before?  —  Yes, 
many  a  man. 

It  is  not  very  characteristic,  you  know?  —  Then  there  was 
the  side  of  the  face,  the  heavy  jaw  bones. 

Surely  the  jaw  bone  would  also  be  under  the  coat  collar?  — 
Yes,  it  was  a  little. 

Why  did  you  identify  a  jaw  bone  which  you  never  saw?  I 
am  only  suggesting  to  you  that  you  may  have  been  a  little 
hasty  in  your  identification?  —  I  don't  think  so. 

The  cap  you  saw  is  not  here?  —  No. 

Are  there  any  other  details  of  the  clothes  that  you  noticed? 
—  The  dark  coat. 

Anything  else?  —  That  was  all,  and  the  green  cap. 

Had  he  checked  trousers  or  fawn  spats?  —  I  did  not  notice. 

You  cannot  tell  anvthing  about  his  boots  or  his  trousers?  — 
No. 

Do  you  say  that  his  jaw  was  set  right  down  in  his  coat 
collar?  —  No,  it  was  not  buried  right  down,  but  the  collar  of  his 
coat  was  up. 

Over  his  jaw?  —  Not  right  over,  but  I  did  not  get  a  very  good 
view  of  the  front  face.  What  I  saw  was  more  the  side  and  the 
back  of  the  head  and  the  neck. 

Do  you  not  think  that  if  the  man  was  clean-shaved  you  ought 
not  to  have  identified  a  man  with  a  moustache  as  being  the 
same?  —  I  think  it  is  very  like  the  man  I  saw. 

When  you  went  down  to  the  police  office  to  identify  this 
man  later  on,  on  28th  February,  how  many  people  were  in  the 
room?  —  I  could  not  tell.  I  did  not  count  them. 

How  many  were  with  Slater?  —  I  should  fancy  about  a  dozen. 

Were  there  any  men  there  like  Slater?  —  No,  I  could  not  «ay 
that. 

Was  there  any  foreign-looking  man  in  the  room  except  Slater  ? 
—No. 

In  point  of  fact,  Slater  had  then  a  moustache,  had  he  not?  — 
Yes. 

So  he  was  like  the  photograph  which  you  had  seen  before? 
—Yes. 

When  you  went  into  the  room  where  Slater  was,  was  it 
not  perfectly  obvious  to  you  that  the  rest  of  the  men  who  were 
in  the  room  were  all  detectives  and  policemen?  —  They  certainly 
looked  liked  it. 

Did  you  observe  their  boots?  —  No. 

When  you  saw  Slater  in  the  police  office  what  kind  of  boots 
had  he?  —  I  did  not  look  at  his  boots. 

44 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

What  kind  of  coat  had  he  on  that  day? — The  first  time  I  Euphemla 
saw  him  he  had  on  a  blue  coat. 

How  often  did  you  see  him  in  the  police  office? — Twice. 

Re-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — Did  you  pass  within 
2  or  3  feet  of  him  on  the  pavement? — Yes. 

Had  you  a  clear  view  of  him  each  time? — Yes,  I  had. 

Are  you  sure  the  accused  is  the  very  man  you  saw? — Yes. 

Was  it  raining  when  he  had  up  his  coat  collar? — No,  but  it 
was  cold. 

By  the  COURT — On  each  occasion  were  his  clothes,  including 
his  cap  and  his  greatcoat,  the  same? — Yes,  they  were  always 
the  same  clothes. 

WILLIAM  CAMPBKLL,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  am  W.  Campbell 
a   photographer   in   Glasgow.      On  Tuesday,   Wednesday,    and 
Thursday,  15th,  16th,  and  17th  December  last,  I  was  walking 
home  at  the  mid-day  meal  hour,  one  o'clock.     I  was  going  up 
West  Princes  Street,  which  is  invariably  a  very  quiet  street. 
One  seldom  or  never  sees  anybody  hanging  about  there.     On 
Tuesday,   15th,  when  I  was  going  home  that  way,  I  observed 
a  man  who  was  standing  at  the  corner  of  West  Princes  Street 
and  Queen's  Crescent.      He  was  looking  towards  Mr.   Adams' 
house  on  the  other  side  of  the  street.     That  was  the  door  next 
Miss  Gilchrist's  house.     The  last  witness  was  with  me  at  the 
time.     I  did  not  observe  anything  particular  about  the  man. 
When  I  came  back  I  did  not  notice  him.     On  the  two  succeeding 
days,  Wednesday  and  Thursday,  I  passed  the  same  place  about 
the  same  hour  and  I  saw  the  same  man.     He  was  standing  on 
the  same  spot  looking  over  in  the  same  direction.     I  remember 
Miss  Cunningham  saying,  "  There  is  that  same  man  again ;  I 
wonder  what  he  is  doing  there."     I  do  not  know  whether  he 
heard  what  she  said.     We  were  pretty  close  to  him  at  the  time, 
and  as  we  were  passing  he  turned  round  and  turned  away  hie 
head,  but  that  was  all.      I  formed  no  opinion  as  to  why  he 
should  be  there.     I  have  never  seen  the  man  standing  there 
since.    I  have  never  seen  any  one  standing  there  since,  except  in 
the  week  following  the  murder,  when  there  were  crowds  standing 
there.     After  the  murder  I  saw  a  photograph  of  a  man  Oscar 
Slater  in  the  Evening  News,  and  I  thought  there  was  some- 
thing similar  between  the  features  in  the  photograph  and  the 
man  I  had  seen  at  the  corner.     I  went  down  on  Sunday  after- 
noon,   21st  February,    to  the   police   office,  and    I   was   taken 
into  a  room  where  there  were  a  number  of  men.     There  was  a 
man  there  who  bore  a  general  resemblance  to  the  one  I  saw. 
I   did   not  identify   him   positively,    but  there   was   a   general 
resemblance  to  the  man  I  had  seen.     (Shown  prisoner.)    That 
is  very  like  the  man  I  saw. 

45 


Oscar  Slater. 

W.  Campbell  Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CujRE — You  do  not  go  the  length 
of  saying  that  there  is  more  than  a  general  resemblance? — No. 

I  think  you  had  fully  as  good  an  opportunity  of  seeing  him 
as  Miss  Cunningham,  had  you  not? — Even  better. 

Why? — I  was  next  him.  I  was  between  Miss  Cunningham 
and  him. 

At  the  time  you  saw  him  was  there  anything  in  what  the 
man  was  doing  or  not  doing  that  occurred  to  you  as  casting 
some  suspicion  upon  him? — Nothing  further  than  that  the 
man  was  standing  there  day  after  day  at  the  same  spot,  where 
I  never  saw  a  man  standing — it  is  such  a  quiet  locality. 

But  he  certainly  was  not  screening  himself  from  public 
observation? — Not  so  far  as  I  observed. 

He  was  there  to  be  seen  by  anybody  who  passed  down  the 
street? — That  is  so. 

R.  B.  Bryson  ROBERT  BROWN  BRYSON,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I 
am  a  cabinetmaker  and  live  at  Somerville  Drive,  Mount  Florida. 
For  a  number  of  years  I  was  in  the  employment  of  Mr.  Bruce 
Martin,  cabinetmaker  and  upholsterer,  at  Charing  Cross, 
Glasgow.  While  there  I  was  frequently  employed  in  going  to 
the  houses  in  West  Princes  Street  and  the  district  and  doing 
work.  I  have  been  in  the  house  now  occupied  by  Mr.  Adams, 
and  I  have  also  been  in  Miss  Gilchrist's  house,  but  it  is  twenty 
years  ago.  I  was  frequently  in  West  Princes  Street  in  the 
course  of  my  work  and  going  to  and  from  my  work.  It  is  & 
very  quiet  street.  I  have  seen  the  old  lady  several  times  at 
her  window;  I  do  not  know  that  I  have  seen  her  moving  about. 
It  is  probably  eight  or  ten  years  ago,  more  or  less,  since  I 
was  in  the  way  of  going  about  there.  She  was  living  there 
then.  On  Sunday,  20th  December  last,  my  wife  and  I  were  on 
our  way  from  Mount  Street,  off  the  New  City  Road,  to  Glassford 
Street  to  get  a  car,  and  we  had  occasion  to  pass  through  Queen's 
Crescent  into  West  Princes  Street.  The  time  was  about  7.40 
or  7.43  p.m.  About  that  hour  I  was  in  West  Princes  Street, 
almost  opposite  Miss  Gilchrist's  house.  I  had  occasion  to  pass 
it.  When  there  I  observed  a  man  standing  in  an  entry  or  close, 
on  the  stone  part  of  the  close  at  the  front  of  the  front  door. 
That  close  has  a  front  door,  and  this  man  was  standing  on  the 
stone  area  which  is  the  entrance  to  the  close  door.  He  was 
standing  almost  directly  opposite  Miss  Gilchrist's  house — not 
exactly,  but  at  a  slight  angle  from  Miss  Gilchrist's  house  or 
Adams'  house.  (Shown  photograph  No.  1,  looking  towards  St. 
George's  Road.)  This  man  was  standing  at  the  close  where  the 
board  is  out,  which  is  at  a  slight  angle  from  Adams'  house  or 
Miss  Gilchrist's  house.  He  was  not  standing  against  the  door 
of  the  close;  he  was  standing,  roughly  speaking,  2  or  3  feet 
from  the  close  door  on  the  stonework  above  the  area.  He  was 
46 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

looking  slightly  towards  the  left — towards  the  east.      It  was  R.  B.  Bryson 
his    looking    at    the   windows  of    Miss    Gilchrist's    house    that 
attracted  my  attention.     He  was  staring  up  at  the  windows, 
and  I  thought  that  probably  he  was  looking  for  some  one  or 
waiting  on  somebody.     That  was  the  whole  idea  I  took  from  it. 

Did  his  position  and  attitude  excite  your  suspicion? — I  natur- 
ally looked  at  him  and  stared  at  him,  because  he  was  staring 
up  at  the  windows,  and  I  thought  that  he  was  waiting  for 
somebody,  or  that  there  was  something  peculiar  about  it.  I  did 
not  exactly  think  that  there  was  anything  further  than  that. 
I  accordingly  took  a  very  good  look  at  him.  I  could  see  him 
quite  well.  He  saw  me  looking  at  him,  and  he  took  about  two 
or  three  paces  and  stepped  off  and  passed  me  to  my  left,  going 
westward.  The  close  door  was  closed.  I  looked  after  him  as 
he  walked  away  westward,  and  I  turned  round  and  looked  at 
him  till  he  was  perhaps  half  a  dozen  paces  past  me. 

Did  it  appear  to  you  that  he  moved  off  because  he  saw  you 
taking  a  good  look  at  him? — I  thought  that  it  was  the  fact  of 
my  staring  at  him  that  made  him  go  down  from  the  step.  I 
wondered  at  him  coming  down  from  the  step.  I  stared  at  him 
intensely.  There  was  a  light  in  Miss  Gilchrist's  house  at  the 
time.  She  had  Venetian  blinds,  and  they  were  down.  The  two 
windows  furthest  east  were  lit.  There  is  a  large  square  lamp 
at  the  corner  of  Queen's  Crescent  and  a  very  small  lamp  above 
Dr.  Adams'  door.  The  lamp  at  the  corner  is  an  incandescent 
lamp,  which  gives  a  big  light.  It  was  a  very  clear,  decent 
night — not  a  wet  night.  I  saw  how  the  man  was  dressed.  He 
was  dressed  in  a  black  coat  and  vest,  as  far  as  I  could  see,  and 
I  think  that  he  had  on  older  trousers  than  the  coat  and  vest, 
and  he  had  a  black  boat  hat.  He  had  a  slight  moustache  with 
a  slight  droop,  and  not  pointed  or  turned  up.  Otherwise  he  was 
shaven.  His  gait  or  walk  did  not  attract  me  particularly.  I 
did  not  think  that  he  had  a  smart  walk.  He  walked  past  very 
slowly  and  sluggishly.  I  was  shown  a  photograph  of  two  men 
by  Detective  M'Gimpsey  (No.  57).  That  is  a  photograph  of 
two  men.  M'Gimpsey  came  down  and  handed  me  that  photo- 
graph, and  he  said,  "  Which  of  these  two  men,  or,  rather,  are 
either  of  the  two  men  the  least  like  the  man  you  saw  in  West 
Princes  Street?  "  I  looked  at  the  photograph  and  I  said,  "  Yes, 
that  is  the  man  I  saw  in  West  Princes  Street." 

Had  you  any  difficulty  in  identifying  him? — That  is  exactly 
what  I  am  telling  you.  On  that  Sunday  night,  21st  February, 
I  went  to  the  Central  Police  Office  in  Glasgow,  and  was  taken 
into  a  room  where  there  were  a  number  of  men.  I  was  asked 
to  point  out  a  man  whom  I  saw  on  the  step.  I  was  asked  if  I 
could  point  out  the  man,  or  if  any  of  these  men  was  the  least 
like  the  man  I  had  seen,  and  I  pointed  out  the  man  whom  I  saw 
in  West  Princes  Street.  I  pointed  him  out  as  the  man  I  saw 

47 


Oscar  Slater. 

R.  B.  Bryson  there.      (Shown  prisoner.)     That  is  the  man  I  saw  in  West 
Princes  Street  on  the  Sunday  night. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURB — I  think  Mrs.  Bryson  was 
along  with  you? — Yes. 

I  think  you  spoke  to  her  about  the  man? — I  do  not  know 
whether  I  said  anything  particular. 

Is  it  the  case  that,  in  the  statement  you  made,  you  made 
a  remark  specially  as  to  his  appearance? — I  do  not  think  I 
made  any  remark  about  his  appearance,  but  I  think  I  said 
that  he  was  looking  for  a  ladylove  or  something.  His  inten- 
tions were  not  particularly  good.  I  think  I  said  something  like 
that.  As  to  his  appearance,  I  do  not  think  I  mentioned  that. 

I  do  not  like  to  make  suggestions,  but  did  he  look  to  you  as 
if  he  might  be  a  man  hanging  about  waiting  for  his  sweetheart? 
— He  looked  to  me  as  I  have  explained,  and  I  think  the  remark 
I  passed  to  Mrs.  Bryson  was  that  he  was  after  a  sweetheart,  or 
after  no  good  intentions. 

But  which  did  you  think? — I  think  the  latter  was  the  more 
likely — that  he  was  after  no  good  intentions. 

Why  do  you  say  that? — Because  he  seemed  taken  when  I 
stared  at  him  to  such  an  extent.  It  was  from  the  fact  of  me 
staring  at  him.  He  walked  down  and  walked  away  as  if  he 
took  guilt  to  himself.  That  is  the  only  answer  I  can  give  you. 

Guilt  of  waiting  for  a  girl  or  what? — I  cannot  tell  you  what 
was  in  the  man's  mind,  but  I  think  he  was  after  no  good 
intentions. 

You  thought  that  he  looked  ashamed  of  himself? — I  do.  I 
think  he  was  taken — whatever  he  was  after  I  do  not  know. 

Is  it  the  case  that  you  recalled  this  remark  to  Mrs.  Bryson, 
and  she  could  not  say  any  such  thing? — I  do  not  think  she  paid 
any  attention,  because  I  spoke  to  her  and  she  could  not  recollect 
what  I  said  to  her. 

Is  it  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Bryson  has  no  recollection  of  having 
passed  a  man  at  this  place,  and  has  no  recollection  of  you 
having  made  a  remark  to  her  about  it? — She  has  no  recollection. 
I  do  not  think  she  has  any  recollection  particularly  about  me 
having  passed  any  remark  regarding  the  man. 

Or  having  seen  the  man  at  all? — I  never  asked  her  upon 
that  point. 

Is  it  not  the  fact  that  she  does  not  remember  any  man  being 
there? — I  do  not  know  whether  she  remembers  any  man  being 
there  or  not.  I  spoke  to  her  casually,  but  I  do  not  think  she 
could  recall  anything  about  it. 

Is  it  the  case  that  she  says  that  she  does  not  remember  any 
man  being  there? — It  is  the  case  thus  far,  that  she  does  not 
remember  me  having  said  anything  about  it  at  all.  It  is  quite 
out  of  her  memory. 

But  you  see  the  further  point  I  am  making? — Yes. 

48 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Did  she  not  say  that  she  did  not  remember  passing  any  man  R.  B.  Bryson 
at  all? — No,  she  does  not  remember  distinctly  about  me  passing 
any  remark. 

Do  you  say  that  she  does  remember  passing  this  man  1 — I  say 
that  she  does  not  remember  anything  about  that  remark 
being  passed. 

Nor  about  the  man  being  there? — I  do  not  say  that. 

But  is  it  not  the  fact  that  the  mental  position  of  your  wife 
on  this  subject  is  that  she  does  not  remember  a  man  being 
passed,  and  she  does  not  remember  you  making  any  remark? — 
She  does  not  remember  particularly  me  passing  any  remark 
regarding  the  man  or  anything  else.  She  has  taken  no  notice 
of  my  remark  seemingly. 

Nor  of  the  man? — Well,  according  to  that,  if  you  put  it  in 
that  fashion,  I  say  that  she  does  not  remember  me  passing 
any  remark. 

Can  I  not  get  you  past  that? — No,  I  do  not  think  so. 

Had  you  ever  seen  the  man  before? — Never  in  my  life. 

How  long  did  it  take  you  to  pass  him  ? — Probably  six  paces — 
three  on  either  side  of  him. 

You  did  not  observe  the  man  till  you  were  three  paces  on  ? — 
No,  I  was  six  paces  from  the  corner  of  Queen's  Crescent. 

Is  it  the  case  that  you  did  not  see  him  till  you  were  about 
3  yards  from  him? — No,  it  would  be  the  corner  of  Queen's 
Crescent,  and  it  is  about  six  paces  or  fully  that  from  the  corner. 
I  observed  him  four  or  five  paces  from  that.  I  was  walking 
slowly. 

The  man  came  down  and  walked  to  meet  you ;  did  he  meet 
you  before  you  had  reached  the  close  from  which  he  emerged  ? — 
About  a  pace  or  so.  I  met  him  about  4  feet  from  the  close. 

May  I  take  it  that  what  happened  is  this,  that  when  you  were 
about  four  paces  off  him  he  immediately  came  down  from  the 
step  and  passed  you? — About  four  paces  before  I  came  to  the 
close  I  stared  at  him,  and  by  the  time  I  got  one  pace  he  was 
coming  down  during  that  time,  and  I  was  staring  at  him  all 
the  time. 

The  man  was  only  standing  on  the  step  inside  the  railings 
when  you  saw  him? — No,  he  was  standing  on  the  sandstone, 
the  plat  of  the  entrance,  which  is  about  7  feet  in  from  the 
area.  The  area  bridge  is  the  phrase,  I  understand. 

Whom  did  you  first  communicate  with  about  this? — I  men- 
tioned it  in  the  place  where  I  am  employed. 

At  what  date? — On  the  Tuesday  after  the  Sunday  it  happened. 

Did  you  observe  that  the  man  had  a  foreign  appearance? — 
Yes,  it  struck  me  that  he  had  a  slightly  foreign  appearance. 

Was  that  what  struck  you? — Yes,  his  sallow  complexion  and 
his  peculiar  appearance,  and  his  staring  up  at  the  windows. 

Would  you  have  thought  anything  about  if  he  had  not  been 
staring  at  the  windows? — No,  I  do  not  think  I  would. 

E  49 


Oscar  Slater. 

R.  B.  Bryson  Was  it  because  there  had  been  a  murder  at  Miss  Gilchrist's 
that  you  were  suspicious  that  a  man  should  have  been  looking 
at  the  windows? — I  merely  mentioned  the  fact  when  I  heard 
about  the  thing. 

You  suspected  him  of  nothing  except  of  intense  staring,  which 
might  have  been  directed  to  any  other  house? — The  intense 
staring  was  at  that  house. 

Which  windows  was  he  looking  at? — The  windows  furthest 
east,  which  were  lit.  The  Venetian  blinds  were  down,  and  one 
could  see  a  glimmer  of  light  through  the  Venetian  blinds. 

Did  you  observe  that  as  you  came  round  Queen's  Crescent? — 
No,  when  I  saw  him  staring  I  looked  at  what  he  was  staring 
at.  I  stared  at  him,  looked  up  at  the  windows,  and  then  looked 
at  him. 

And  at  that  time  was  he  coming  down? — Yes. 

Are  there  six  windows  facing  the  street  in  Miss  Gilchrist's 
house? — I  never  counted  them,  but  I  think  there  will  be  six 
or  so.  These  are  the  two  windows  furthest  away  from  Adams' 
house — past  the  close,  next  to  the  other  tenement. 

But  had  you  time,  in  the  glance  which  you  gave  across  the 
street,  to  take  stock  of  the  fact  that  there  were  only  lights 
in  two  windows  out  of  six? — I  had. 

And  while  you  were  making  this  observation  your  attention 
was  directed  from  the  man  standing  on  the  plat  ? — Just  a  glance 
as  I  looked  back. 

Do  you  remember  the  appearance  of  anybody  you  passed  on 
the  street  going  home  that  night? — Do  you  mean  in  West 
Princes  Street? 

Any  street — do  you  remember  the  appearance  of  any  of  the 
pa  ssers-by  ? — Yes . 

Is  that  somebody  you  knew? — No. 

Did  you  pass  a  number  of  people  that  night? — I  must 
have  passed  a  considerable  number.  One  does  not  pass  along 
a  street  without  passing  people. 

But  do  you  recollect  the  appearance  of  any  of  these  people  ? — 
Yes,  I  recollect  the  appearance  of  one  man  I  passed  in  West 
Princes  Street. 

Do  you  mean  the  one  you  were  talking  of? — No,  you  were 
asking  me  about  other  people.  It  was  a  little  gentleman  that 
I  met — the  only  party  that  I  passed  after  I  passed  the  close. 
He  was  another  man,  who  was  out  taking  a  smoke. 

Was  he  observing  any  windows? — No,  he  was  away  down  at 
the  foot  of  West  Princes  Street,  near  St.  George's  Road. 

Would  you  recognise  him  again? — I  would. 

Do  you  remember  what  his  clothes  were  like? — Yes. 

Is  that  the  only  man  you  remember? — The  only  man  in 
West  Princes  Street. 

So 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Do  you  say  that  you  have  an  accurate  recollection  of  the  R.  B.  Bryson 
people  you  meet  on  the  street,  and  can  describe  them 
by  having  seen  them  with  a  rapid  glance? — It  is 
not  a  very  difficult  thing,  passing  down  the  street 
the  length  of  West  Princes  Street  and  not  another 
living  soul  in  it  except  myself  and  my  wife,  when  you  meet  a 
man,  or  see  a  man  standing  in  a  close,  and  taking  a  thorough 
good  look  at  that  man — I  do  not  think  it  is  very  difficult; 
and  if  you  only  meet  another  man  between  that  and  the  end 
of  West  Princes  Street  you  can  remember  him. 

But  do  you  say  that  innocent  passers-by  become  photo- 
graphed in  your  brain  so  as  to  enable  you  to  describe  their 
clothes  and  walk  afterwards? — I  do  not  photograph  anybody 
particularly  in  my  brain,  nor  am  I  an  expert  of  what  people 
wear  or  do  not  wear ;  but  I  am  talking  of  this  particular 
person  and  as  to  how  I  saw  him.  I  do  not  say  that  I  would 
come  out  of  West  Princes  Street  and  go  into  St.  George's  Road 
and  state  what  the  first  fifty  men  I  meet  wear.  I  would 
not  pay  particular  attention  in  an  ordinary  thoroughfare ;  but 
it  was  in  such  a  quiet  street  that  it  was  almost  impossible  for 
me  or  any  other  person  to  pass  a  man  or  woman  without 
noticing  them,  particularly  if  they  were  taking  up  their  atten- 
tion with  any  particular  object. 

And  you  take  in  the  details  of  the  dress? — There  is  not 
much  detail  necessary  to  tell  whether  a  man  has  a  black  coat 
and  a  hat. 

Any  boots? — I  never  looked  at  his  boots. 

But  you  were  sure  that  it  was  a  black  coat  and  vest?  Was 
it  a  tail  coat  or  a  jacket? — I  do  not  know  whether  it  was  a  tail 
coat  or  a  jacket — I  would  not  swear  to  that. 

Was  there  an  overcoat? — No,  there  was  no  overcoat. 

Now,  when  you  went  on  to  the  police  office  you  knew  the 
purpose  for  which  you  had  gone  was  to  identify  Slater  as  the 
man  you  had  seen  in  West  Princes  Street? — Yes,  I  was  asked 
to  come  down  on  the  Sabbath  night. 

And  you  had  seen  Slater's  photograph,  shown  you  by 
M'Gimpsey,  before  that? — Yes. 

What  was  the  date  on  which  he  showed  you  the  photograph? 

-I  could  not  tell  you.     I  never  paid  any  attention  to  it. 

By  the  COURT — About  how  long  before  you  went  down  to  the 
police  office  was  it? — I  think  about  a  fortnight. 

Cross-examination  continued — Can  you  tell  when  you  went 
i<>  the  police  office? — No,  I  do  not  remember  the  date. 

When  you  went  down  were  you  shown  into  a  room  where 
there  was  a  number  of  men? — I  was  shown  into  a  large  room 
where  there  was  a  number  of  men. 

Were  you  told  that  the  man  was  there  that  you  were  to  look 


Oscar  Slater. 

R.  B.  Eryson  for   among  them? — No,   I  was  not  told  that  he  was  amongst 
them,  but  I  naturally  expected  he  would  be. 

What  did  the  policeman  say  to  you? — The  detective  officer 
said,  "  Look  amongst  these  men  there  and  see  if  you  can 
recognise  anybody  the  least  like  the  man  you  saw  in  West 
Princes  Street." 

Were  you  down  on  the  same  day  as  any  of  the  other  witnesses 
who  have  been  here? — Yes,  on  the  Sunday.  There  were 
several  witnesses. 

Was  Mrs.  M'Haffie  there  ? — I  don't  know  them  by  name,  but 
there  were  several  witnesses. 

Among  the  people  in  the  room  when  you  were  asked  to 
look  round  were  there  any  of  foreign  appearance  except  Slater  ? 
— I  do  not  know  how  many  men  there  would  be. 

Were  any  of  them  of  foreign  appearance  except  Slater? — 
Yes,  there  were  some  of  them  of  foreign  appearance. 

How  many  foreigners? — I  do  not  know  whether  you  call  it 
foreign  appearance,  but  some  of  them  had  the  same  sort  of 
way.  I  saw  various  types  of  sallow  complexions,  and  black 
moustaches,  and  broken  noses. 

Were  there  any  policemen  amongst  the  men  whom  you 
inspected? — If  there  were  they  were  not  much  credit  to  the 
force.  I  think  they  were  all  small  looking  persons.  They 
were  not  policemen. 

I  want  to  ask  you — do  you  say  that  there  were  policemen 
amongst  them  or  not? — Do  you  think  that  I  would  know 
whether  they  were  policemen  or  not? 

By  the  COURT — Did  you  know  a  number  of  them  or  any  of 
them  were  policemen? — No,  I  did  not.  I  do  not  know  who 
the  men  were  at  all. 

Cross-examination  continued — How  many  men  in  the  room 
were  of  foreign  appearance? — I  think,  out  of  the  number  of 
men  I  saw,  I  am  quite  sure  there  would  be  three  or  four  with 
sallow  complexions  and  black  moustaches.  I  do  not  say  they 
were  of  foreign  appearance. 

Were  any  of  the  people  except  Slater  people  of  foreign 
appearance,  or  were  any  of  the  people  the  least  like  Slater? — 
Yes,  there  were  one  or  two  not  unlike  him. 

Had  you  any  trouble  in  identifying  him? — None  whatever. 

Although  they  were  like  him? — None  whatever,  although 
they  were  very  like  him. 

How  many  were  very  like  him? — Those  four  that  had  sallow 
faces  and  black  moustaches.  I  would  say  that  there  were 
at  least  four. 

You  were  able,  however,  to  discard  the  four  people  that 
you  have  mentioned,  and  to  select  Slater.  What  enabled 
you  to  do  that? — The  man's  face  was  so  vividly  printed  on 
my  mind  from  the  Sabbath  night — that  was  it. 

52 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

That  is  all  you  can  say? — That  is  how  I  identified  him.         R.  B.  Bryson 

Can  you  tell  me  when  you  saw  these  four  men  what  clothes 
they  had  on? — The  whole  of  the  men  were  dressed  in  plain 
civilian  clothes. 

Light  or  dark? — I  think  they  were,  most  of  them,  in  dark 
clothes.  I  do  not  say  that  they  were,  but  as  far  as  my 
memory  serves  me  the  bulk  of  the  men  that  I  saw  were  all  in 
dark  clothing. 

Was  Slater  in  dark  clothing? — He  was. 

Can  you  tell  me  what  he  was  wearing  on  the  night  you 
identified  him? — I  think  he  had  on  a  black  coat  and  vest. 

Are  you  sure? — The  garments  that  he  had  on  were  dark. 
It  was  not  the  man's  clothing  that  I  was  taken  to  identify ; 
it  was  his  face. 

Had  he  a  tail  coat  or  a  jacket  ? — That  I  won't  swear  to. 

What  trousers  had  he  on  on  the  Sunday  night? — That  I 
won't  swear  to.  It  was  the  man's  face;  I  never  looked  at 
his  garments.  He  had  a  dark  garment,  but  whether  it  was 
a  coat  or  jacket  I  cannot  say. 

How  is  it  if  you  cannot  remember  what  clothes  were  worn 
by  Slater  when  you  saw  him  in  February,  after  he  came  back 
from  America,  that  you  were  so  positive  as  to  the  clothes  he 
was  wearing  when  you  saw  him  for  a  few  seconds  on  the 
Sunday  night? — I  am  not  going  to  commit  myself  by  swearing 
that  he  had  a  coat  and  vest  the  night  that  I  identified  him, 
but  he  had  on  a  dark  coat  or  jacket.  I  did  not  pay  any 
attention  to  what  he  had  on  in  the  police  office  because  I 
had  no  occasion.  It  was  the  man's  face  that  I  was  taken  to 
identify. 

Was  the  light  in  the  police  office,  when  you  went  to 
identify  him,  much  better  than  the  light  in  West  Princes 
Street,  and  should  you  not  have  had  a  better  view? — Yes, 
but  you  do  not  take  such  a  look  at  a  man's  coat  as  to  whether 
it  is  a  coat  or  a  jacket.  It  is  in  my  mind  that  it  was  a 
coat  on  the  Sunday  night,  but  I  won't  swear  to  it.  I  won't 
commit  myself. 

If  your  recollection  is  so  vivid  as  to  the  clothes  worn  by  a 
man  on  20th  December,  why  should  you  forget  the  details 
of  the  clothing  of  a  person  that  you  saw  in  a  better  light  in 
the  end  of  February,  when  you  had  longer  time  for  observa- 
tion?— That  is  one  way  of  putting  it,  why  I  should  forget. 
I  was  not  so  much  interested  in  the  coat  or  jacket.  It  was 
a  dark  garment  that  he  had  on,  and  that  is  all  I  can  say.  I 
won't  swear  to  whether  it  is  a  coat  or  a  jacket. 

By  the  COURT — Had  the  man  that  you  saw  on  the  platform 
anything  in  his  hand? — No,  he  had  nothing.  He  was 

standing  with  his  hands  at  his  back. 

S3 


Oscar  Slater. 

A.  Nairn  ANDREW  NAIRN,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  am  a 
provision  merchant  in  Glasgow.  On  Sunday,  20th  December 
last,  I  was  returning  home  by  Queen's  Crescent  from  visiting 
some  friends.  My  wife  and  children  were  following  at  some 
good  distance  behind.  It  was  a  quarter  past  nine  o'clock. 
When  I  entered  Queen's  Crescent  I  proceeded  westwards  to 
West  Princes  Street,  and  I  stood  there  for  fully  five  minutes 
to  wait  for  my  wife  and  children  coming  up.  I  would  be 
about  120  yards  from  Miss  Gilchrist's  house.  I  was  on  the 
right  hand  side  of  West  Princes  Street  coming  down.  That 
was  on  the  opposite  side  from  Miss  Gilchrist's  house.  When 
I  was  standing  there  my  attention  was  attracted  by  a  man 
standing  at  the  corner  of  the  gardens,  in  the  middle  of  the 
pavement,  with  his  back  to  me,  looking  in  the  direction  of 
Miss  Gilchrist's  house.  The  man  was  in  West  Princes  Street. 
I  just  saw  his  back  at  that  time.  He  was  on  the  north  side 
of  West  Princes  Street  too.  He  seemed  to  be  waiting  for 
somebody.  I  did  not  see  his  face. 

Did  you  see  whether  he  kept  his  face  away  from  you  or  not  ? 
— His  face  was  directed  in  the  one  position  the  whole  time, 
standing  a  little  on  the  angle,  looking  that  way  (witness  illus- 
trated by  turning  sideways).  I  did  not  see  any  part  of  his 
face.  He  was  about  13  yards  away  from  me.  There  was 
a  good  light.  He  had  on  a  light  coat,  about  2  inches 
underneath  the  knee  at  the  back.  He  was  broad  shouldered, 
and  a  little  long  in  the  neck,  and  had  black  hair.  He  had 
what  I  would  call  a  motor  cap,  with  the  flaps  up,  and  a 
broad  back.  I  stood  observing  him  for  some  time,  till  my 
wife  and  children  came  up.  That  was  about  five  minutes 
During  that  time  the  man  continued  standing  and  looking  in 
the  direction  of  Miss  G'lchrist's  house. 

Could  you  tell  whether  he  had  observed  you  or  not? — No, 
he  could  not.  When  my  wife  and  children  came  up  I  went 
on  my  way.  I  made  a  remark  to  my  wife,  pointing  my 
finger.  I  said,  "  There's  a  man  standing  there  watching." 

Did  it  occur  to  you  that  there  was  anything  suspicious  about 
him? — What  caused  me  to  suspect  the  man  was  that  we  had 
had  one  or  two  cases  of  housebreaking  round  about  our  district 
a  fortnight  before,  and  it  was  that  which  caused  me  to  stand 
and  look.  I  afterwards  pointed  out  the  place  where  I  saw 
this  man  standing  to  Detective  Pyper  and  to  Detective  Dornan. 
I  think  that  was  about  three  weeks  or  so  afterwards ;  it 
might  be  fully  that.  I  could  see  Miss  Gilchrist's  house  from 
the  spot.  I  had  a  grand  view  of  the  house :  there  is  a  lamp- 
post nearly  opposite  Miss  Gilchrist's  entrance,  and  there  is  a 
brass  plate — Mr.  Adams'  brass  plate — on  the  other  side,  and 
the  reflection  of  the  light  strikes  the  brass  plate,  and  it  meets 

54 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

and  throws  the  reflection  down,  which  causes  a  good  light  at  A.  Nairn 
Miss  Gilchrist's  door. 

Did  you  notice  whether  that  was  the  best  spot  from  which  to 
observe  Miss  Gilchrist's  house? — Yes,  it  was  a  splendid  view 
of  the  place — a  grand  view.  I  moved  on  when  my  wife  and 
children  came  up.  When  I  went  away,  the  man  was  still 
standing  there,  and  at  the  corner  of  Cumberland  Street  I 
turned  round,  and  he  was  still  standing  in  the  same  place  and 
looking  in  the  same  direction.  On  Monday,  22nd  February 
last,  I  went  to  the  Central  Police  Office  and  I  there  identified 
the  man;  I  am  certain  that  he  is  the  man  that  I  saw  that 
night.  There  were  a  good  number  of  officials  here  and  there 
about  the  room  when  I  identified  him. 

But  you  pointed  out  the  man? — Yes. 

Will  you  look  at  the  prisoner.  Is  that  the  man  you  saw? 
(To  accused) — You  might  turn  your  back.  Yes,  I  am  certain 
that  that  is  the  man  I  saw. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLUKE — Do  you  call  that  a  long- 
necked  man  (pointing  to  accused)? — I  don't  mean  exactly  a 
man  with  an  ordinary  neck. 

You  said  a  longish  neck? — Yes. 

Has  this  man  got  a  longish  neck? — He  has  got  the  average 
man's  neck. 

When  you  spoke  of  a  longish  neck,  did  you  mean  something 
longer  than  the  average? — No. 

Have  most  men  got  longish  necks? — No;  I  did  not  mean  a 
short  neck. 

You  mean  one  that  was  not  the  average,  which  was  on  the 
long  side  of  the  average? — It  depends  very  much  on  the  collar 
that  the  man  wears. 

Name  us  anything  else  by  which  you  identify  this  man 
who  stood  with  his  back  to  you? — Broad  shoulders,  black  hair. 

Anything  else? — No,  that  was  all. 

Do  I  take  it,  then,  that  if  you  see  a  broad-shouldered  man 
with  a  longi&h  neck,  at  9.15  on  a  December  evening,  at  a 
distance  of  13  yards,  without  seeing  his  face  at  all,  you  are 
able  to  be  positive  about  his  identification? — It  was  a  frosty, 
clear  night,  and  the  light  round  about  is  fairly  good;  there 
are  two  lamp-posts  within  a  radius  of  13  or  14  yards  with 
incandescent  light,  which  give  a  very  fair  light. 

You  heard  the  question  I  put.  Are  you  positive  of  your 
identification  of  a  man  whom  you  only  saw  once,  he  being  a 
man  you  had  never  seen  before,  and  you  only  saw  hia  back 
at  a  distance  of  13  yards,  on  a  December  night,  at  9.15,  that 
man  being  upon  his  trial  for  murder?  I  want  you  to  be  fair? 
— Well,  I  am  certain  that  it  is  the  same  man  that  I  saw. 

And  that  is  because  he  has  broad  shoulders,  a  neck  of  the 

55 


Oscar   Slater. 

A.  Nairn  description  you  have  given,  and  black  hair? — Being  suspicious, 
I  certainly  gave  the  man  a  good  look. 

Suspicious  of  what? — We  had  numbers  of  cases  of  house- 
breaking  round  about  our  district,  I  think  three  or  four  in  the 
fortnight  before  that,  and  that  was  what  caused  me  to  look 
at  the  man. 

Do  you  consider  you  are  quite  fair  in  swearing  positively 
to  the  man,  when  you  never  saw  whether  his  eyes  were  blue  or 
brown,  and  whether  he  had  any  hair  on  his  face? — I  cannot 
swear  about  hisi  face,  not  having  seen  his  face. 

Have  you  ever  gone  up  behind  a  man  on  the  street,  thinking 
he  was  a  person  you  knew,  and  clapped  him  on  the  shoulder, 
and  then  discovered  you  had  made  a  mistake? — Not  to  my 
knowledge,  but  I  know  it  has  happened. 

And  the  only  way  of  knowing  whether  it  is  a  man's  friend 
or  not  is  to  see  his  face.  How  can  you,  on  the  face  of  that, 
swear  positively  to  a  man  in  a  murder  trial  whose  face  you 
have  never  seen  at  all? — Oh,  I  will  not  swear  in  fact,  but  I 
am  certain  that  he  was  the  man  I  saw ;  but  I  will  not  swear. 

If  you  are  upon  your  oath,  and  state  you  are  certain  it  is 
the  man,  are  you  not  aware  you  are  swearing  to  it? — Yes,  to 
a  certain  extent,  but  I  will  not  swear,  not  seeing  the  man's 
face,  that  he  is  the  man. 

Then,  do  I  understand  now  that,  after  all  you  have  said, 
your  identification  is  not  positive? — Oh,  well,  I  would  not  go 
that  length. 

You  will  not  go  the  length  of  being  positive? — No. 

E.  Donaldson  ELIZABETH  DONALDSON,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I 
am  housekeeper  to  Mr.  Edward  Gillies,  a  stockbroker,  at  46 
West  Princes  Street,  Glasgow.  The  house  is  up  one  stair, 
and  it  is  directly  opposite  the  house  of  Miss  Gilchrist.  I 
recollect  on  several  occasions  before  the  night  of  Miss  Gil- 
christ's  murder  the  stair  gas  at  the  landing  at  our  door  was 
turned  out.  It  had  been  done  before  several  times.  On  the 
night  of  the  murder,  2 let  December,  I  found  the  gas  turned 
off.  I  re-lit  the  gas. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLTJRE — As  I  understand,  all  you 
can  say  is  that  on  the  night  of  the  21st  December  the  gas  in 
the  stair  was  out  at  6.50? — Yes. 

And  on  the  13th  of  February  it  was  out  again? — Yes. 

Who  put  it  out  on  either  occasion  you  do  not  know? — I  do 
not  know. 

Do  you  know  whether  it  was  lighted  on  either  occasion  first  ? 
—No. 

A.  Gillies  ALEXANDER  GILLIES,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  am 
a  manufacturer  in  Glasgow,  and  reside  at  46  West  Princes 

56 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Street.  My  house  is  directly  opposite  where  Miss  Gilchrist  A.  Gillies 
lived.  It  is  one  flight  up.  On  Wednesday,  Thursday,  or 
Friday  of  the  week  before  the  murder  I  was  returning  home 
about  a  quarter  to  six.  As  I  was  about  to  enter  the  close  I 
observed  a  man  standing  there,  at  the  back  of  the  close,  at 
the  foot  of  the  stair.  The  close  door  was  open  at  the  time. 

Was  the  man  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  passage,  about 
half-way  up  to  the  first  flight? — He  walked  up  there  after  I 
entered  the  close.  He  was  a  stranger  to  the  close.  I  tried 
to  get  past  him.  When  I  did  so  he  rather  blocked  my 
passage.  He  turned  his  back  to  me,  and,  instead  of  allowing 
me  to  pass,  he  sort  of  blocked  the  passage,  and  the  stair  not 
being  wide  enough,  I  had  to  ask  him  to  allow  me  to  pass. 
Instead  of  allowing  me  to  pass  he  walked  up  the  second  flight 
of  stairs,  and  again  blocked  my  passage  in  the  same  fashion, 
and  at  that  time  I  had  again  to  ask  him  to  allow  me  to  pass, 
and  I  got  past  then.  When  I  got  up  to  my  own  landing,  the 
man  was  still  standing  on  the  steps.  His  face  was  towards 
me.  When  I  put  my  latch  key  in  the  door  and  opened  it  he 
was  still  standing.  I  have  not  seen  him  again  since  that 
night,  to  my  knowledge.  He  had  a  long  fawn-coloured  coat 
on,  and  a  cap;  otherwise  I  really  cannot  say  anything  about 
him.  He  was  sallow,  and  had  dark  hair.  He  was  about 
5  feet  8  inches  in  height.  He  was  clean  shaven.  On  the  1st 
of  March  I  went  to  Duke  Street  Prison  and  I  saw  the  prisoner 
there.  He  resembled  the  man  I  saw  on  the  stair,  but  I 
cannot  say  it  was  the  same  man.  (Shown  prisoner.) 

Is  that  like  the  man? — He  resembles  the  man,  but  I  cannot 
say  it  is  the  same  man.  I  had  observed  the  gas  on  the  stair 
turned  off  several  times  before  the  murder.  On  one  or  two 
occasions  shortly  after  the  murder  I  have  observed  that,  and 
during  the  last  fortnight  it  has  occurred  several  times. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CmRE — Of  course,  as  regards  the 
later  occasions  you  do  not  suspect  the  prisoner  at  the  bar ;  he 
has  been  in  jail? — I  cannot  suspect  him  at  all. 

Who  turned  out  the  gas  ;  you  have  no  notion  ? — I  have  not ; 
I  did  not  see  it  turned  out;  I  have  seen  the  gas  out  when  I 
came  in,  when  it  should  have  been  in. 

FREDERICK  NICHOLS,  examined  by  Mr.  MORISOX — I  was  p.  Nichols 
a  hairdresser  with  R.  S.  Bamber,  hairdresser  at  Charing 
Cross,  Glasgow,  at  the  end  of  last  year.  I  remem- 
ber on  the  16th  of  November  last  a  German  coming  to 
get  shaved.  He  did  not  say  at  the  time  where  he  belonged  to  ; 
he  said  he  came  from  America,  as  I  understood.  He  bought 
some  things  at  our  place.  I  asked  his  name  in  order  to  put 
it  on  the  bottles,  and  he  wrote  it  on  himself;  he  put  on  Mr. 
Anderson.  He  did  not  give  any  address.  At  that  time  he 

57 


Oscar  Slater. 

F.  Nichols  had  a  moustache.  After  the  16th  of  November  he  came  in 
several  times  a  week,  up  till  the  25th  of  December.  On  these 
occasions  he  was  shaved  by  me.  The  last  time  that  I  shaved 
him  was  on  Christmas  Day.  On  that  date  he  left,  taking  with 
him  his  bottles  and  his  shaving  utensils.  He  did  not  give 
me  any  address. 

On  Christmas  Day  when  he  came  to  you  what  like  was  his 
upper  lip,  was  there  any  sign  of  a  moustache  there? — Yes, 
a  very  short  moustache.  I  should  say  it  had  been  growing 
for  about  a  fortnight — a  little  more  than  a  fortnight.  It  was 
about  a  £  inch  or  5-16ths  long. 

About  a  fortnight  before  Christmas,  on  one  occasion  when 
he  came  into  your  premises,  had  you  noticed  whether  he  had 
made  any  change  in  his  appearance  from  the  time  you  had 
seen  him  just  before? — Yes.  He  had  had  his  moustache 
shaved  off.  That  was  about  a  fortnight  before  Christmas, 
as  near  as  I  could  say.  When  he  came  in  I  passed  some 
jocular  remark  about  him  having  his  moustache  off,  and  I 
said  that  he  looked  rather  comical  with  it  off,  and  that  was 
all  the  remark  that  I  passed.  I  shaved  his  upper  lip  that 
day.  That  was  the  only  occasion  I  shaved  it ;  I  did  not  take 
his  moustache  off ;  it  was  off  previous  to  him  coming  in  that 
morning.  I  had  shaved  him  before  that,  although  I  had  never 
touched  his  moustache.  I  had  a  talk  with  him  upon  what  line 
of  business  he  was  in.  He  said  he  was  a  dentist.  He  said 
he  was  expecting  to  start  business,  but  he  was  waiting  for  his 
partner  coming. 

From  where? — Well,  he  mentioned  several  places.  He 
mentioned  Queensland  and  San  Francisco,  and  I  understood  he 
was  expecting  one  coming  from  either  the  one  or  the  other  of 
these  two  places.  On  one  occasion,  I  should  say  from  about 
three  weeks  to  a  month  before  Christmas,  he  wanted  to  sell  me 
some  blankets,  curtains,  and  kitchen  furniture.  He  said  they 
were  quite  new.  I  remember  him  calling  on  one  occasion, 
either  on  the  22nd  or  the  23rd  of  December,  to  get  shaved. 
He  said  that  he  was  going  away  to  Queensland.  I  understood 
him  to  say  in  that  week,  on  the  Wednesday,  that  was  some- 
where about  Wednesday,  the  30th.  He  did  not  say  anything 
as  to  his  taking  his  passage,  but  I  understood  he  was  to  sail 
on  the  following  Wednesday.  I  asked  if  his  wife  was  going. 
He  said  not  at  the  present  time  :  the  weather  was  too  cold, 
and  she  was  going  to  follow  in  the  summer  time. 

Did  he  mention  anything  about  the  Sloper  Club  to  you  on 
one  occasion? — Yes. 

What  did  he  say  about  that? — He  was  talking  about  being 
able  to  get  a  shave  on  Sundays,  and  I  understood  him  to  say 
he  could  get  one  there  or  at  the  Central  Hotel.  I  did  not  know 
what  the  Sloper  Club  was  or  where  it  was.  On  another 

58 


2  1    f 

•a  "^  2   «• 

!*s! 

2  ^^  Is 


*J    -      M  .S 

°     ».S    ^ 
•P    'E  'S 

§1! 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

occasion,  in  the  first  week  of  December,  he  mentioned  that  he  p.  Nichols 
had  lost  a  diamond  pin.       He  said  he  was  sorry  that  he  had 
lost  it,  and  I  advised  him  to  go  to  the  police  about  it,  and  he 
said  it  was  best  to  leave  them  alone  as  much  as  you  could. 

Could  you  give  me  a  description  of  the  man? — I  would  say 
he  was  a  well-built  man  with  broad  shoulders,  about  5  feet 
8  inches  or  5  feet  8£  inches  in  height.  There  was  a  peculiarity 
about  his  nose.  I  would  not  describe  it  as  a  twisted  nose ; 
I  would  describe  it  as  a  nose  that  had  been  broken. 

Were  you  shown  the  prisoner  in  Glasgow  Police  Office  on 
21st  February? — I  would  not  say  what  date;  it  was  the  day 
he  arrived  back  from  New  York. 

You  can  take  it  from  me  it  was  the  21st  of  February ;  could 
you  identify  him  as  the  man  you  have  been  talking  of  in  your 
evidence? — Yes,  Mr.  Anderson.  I  had  no  doubt  about  it. 
The  prisoner  is  the  man. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLTTRE — I  think  you  have  got  a 
better  reason  for  knowing  that  the  prisoner  is  the  man.  Did 
he  not  tell  you  that  he  was  going  abroad  on  the  25th  of 
December? — He  came  in  on  the  25th  of  December  and  said 
he  was  going  by  the  "  Lusitania." 

He  told  you  he  was  leaving  Glasgow  that  night? — Yes. 

On  the  25th  of  December,  and  that  he  was  going  to  travel 
to  New  York  by  the  "  Lusitania  "  ? — Yes. 

Of  course  you  know  that  the  "  Lusitania  "  does  not  go  to 
Queensland,  do  you  not? — Yes. 

It  is  for  New  York? — Yes. 

Must  you  not  have  gathered  that  his  destination  was  not 
Queensland,  but  New  York? — Yes,  I  knew  that  on  the  Friday, 
on  the  Christmas  Day  when  he  told  me  he  was  sailing  on  the 
Saturday. 

't  was  on  the  22nd  or  23rd  that  he  mentioned  Queensland? — 
Yes.  He  said  he  had  a  partner  there  that  he  had  written 
for,  and  that  he  was  going  to  start  business.  He  mentioned 
about  San  Francisco  also. 

Did  you  not  know  that  he  was  going  to  San  Francisco  and 
not  to  Queensland  when  he  spoke  to  you  on  the  22nd  or  the 
23rd? — I  did  not  know  which  place  he  was  going  to  ;  he  men- 
tioned both  of  them. 

Do  you  think  you  cannot  have  been  mistaken  about  that! — 
No,  I  do  not  think  I  can  ;  he  mentioned  both  places  distinctly. 

On  the  22nd  or  23rd,  did  he  mention  San  Francisco? — Yes, 
about  that  date  he  did. 

And  then  he  told  you  on  the  Friday,  the  25th,  that  he  was 
travelling  by  the  "  Lusitania,"  and  leaving  Glasgow  that 
night?— Yes. 

For  Liverpool? — He  did  not  say  for  where,  but  he  was 
travelling  by  the  "Lusitania." 

59 


Oscar  Slater. 

F.  Nichols       And  that  day  he  lifted  his  materials  from  your  shop? — Yes. 

Tell  me  what  apparatus  he  had? — His  shaving  brush,  soap, 
sponge,  pot,  and  hair  brush. 

Does  it  come  to  this,  that  in  the  earlier  days  of  his  acquaint- 
ance you  sold  him  a  full  shaving  equipment? — No,  he  had  it 
with  him.  I  sold  him  two  bottles,  one  for  his  hair  and  one 
for  his  face. 

Then  he  deposited  his  own  shaving  equipment  at  your  shop  ? — 
He  brought  it  from  his  house  a  week  or  so  later. 

As  he  was  leaving  on  the  Friday  for  Liverpool  he  got  them 
all  back  again  ? — He  took  everything  with  him. 

Was  the  moustache  which  he  had  when  you  saw  him  during 
that  week  quite  noticeable? — Well,  it  was  quite  noticeable 
to  me. 

His  hair  is  very  black? — Yes,  rather  black. 

And  grows  speedily? — Yes,  it  grows  very  quickly  about  the 
chin — not  so  quickly  about  the  upper  lip.  I  had  a  good 
opportunity  of  seeing  him. 

Then  do  I  take  it  that  your  evidence  is  that  about  a  fort- 
night before  Miss  Gilchrist  was  murdered  he  had  had  his  upper 
lip  shaved? — Yes. 

But  that  from  that  date  it  had  grown  ? — He  had  it  shaved  at 
night,  and  I  shaved  it  the  next  day,  and  it  was  growing  after 
that. 

And  the  time  you  shaved  it  was  about  a  fortnight  before 
the  25th  of  December? — About  ten  days  or  a  fortnight. 

Before  that  week  which  we  have  been  discussing  had  Slater 
informed  you  that  he  was  going  abroad,  without  mentioning 
his  destination? — He  had  mentioned  that  business  in  Glasgow 
was  very  quiet ;  he  thought  that  he  would  clear  out  of  it,  that 
he  could  do  better  elsewhere. 

Can  you  tell  me  how  long  it  was  before  the  25th  December 
that  he  said  that? — Probably  about  a  month  before. 

By  the  COURT — What  kind  of  business  did  you  understand 
him  to  refer  to? — A  dentist's. 

Cross-examination  continued — When  he  said  he  was  going 
away  to  New  York  by  the  "  Lusitania,"  did  he  speak  to  you 
quite  freely? — Yes. 

Did  you  see  during  that  week  when  he  was  attending  your 
shop,  on  the  22nd  or  23rd,  and  again  on  the  25th,  any  sign 
of  excitement  about  him? — None  in  the  least. 

Did  you  see  any  difference  in  him  from  the  previous  time  he 
had  been  in  your  shop  being  shaved? — Only  as  regards  his  dress. 

What  was  that? — He  had  a  peculiar  kind  of  vest  on  that  I 
had  never  seen  on  before;  bar  that  there  was  nothing  else. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.   MORISON — What   sort  of  dress   did   he 
usually  wear  when  he  came  to  your  place? — Generally  a  full 
suit. 
60 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Did  he  come  in  different  suits  sometimes? — Yes.  F.  Nichols 

Did  he  sometimes  have  an  overcoat  and  sometimes  not? — 
Yes. 

Have  you  seen  him  wearing  a  light  fawn-coloured  overcoat? 
— No,  not  to  my  knowledge. 

Have  you  seen  him  wearing  a  dark  blue  overcoat? — Yes. 

When  he  told  you  he  was  going  on  the  "  Lusitania  "  on 
Christmas  Day,  was  that  the  first  you  had  heard  of  his 
going  away  by  the  "  Lusitania  "1 — Yes. 

And  was  it  when  he  was  getting  his  shaving  things  from 
you  that  he  gave  you  that  explanation,  or  when  was  it? — 
During  the  time  that  I  was  shaving  him. 

Did  he  give  any  reason  why  he  was  going  by  the 
"  Lusitania  "? — No. 

Can  you  tell  us  just  what  he  said  about  that? — He  just  said 
that  he  was  going  away  that  night,  that  there  was  nothing 
in  Glasgow,  there  was  no  money  stirring  in  Glasgow,  and 
he  was  going  away  that  night  to  go  by  the  "  Lusitania  "  on 
the  Saturday. 

Did  you  ask  him  where  he  was  going  to? — Not  that  I 
know  of. 

Did  you  know  where  he  was  going  to  ? — Not  that  I  know  of ; 
I  had  no  knowledge. 

Re-cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — Except  to  New  York, 
by  the  "  Lusitania  "  ? — I  did  not  know  he  was  going  to  New 
York;  I  knew  he  was  going  by  the  "  Lusitania,"  but  I  did  not 
know  his  destination. 

By  the  COURT — Can  you  tell  me  how  near  the  time  of  the 
murder  it  was  that  you  saw  the  prisoner?  The  murder  was 
on  Monday,  21st  December? — Yes. 

How  near  can  you  come  to  the  date  before  that  when  you 
saw  him? — About  the  Friday. 

The  18th  or  so? — Yes;  about  that  time. 

Then,  after  21st  December,  Monday,  what  was  the  next? — 
Well,  I  would  not  be  sure  whether  it  was  the  Tuesday  or 
Wednesday ;  it  was  one  or  other  of  these  two  days. 

Did  you  see  the  photographs  in  the  papers  of  Oscar  Slater? — 
I  saw  the  photograph  after  I  had  given  my  evidence. 

HELEN  LAMBIE,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  am  a  Helen  Lamble 
domestic  servant.  I  was  in  the  service  of  Miss  Gilchrist  for 
three  years  and  two  months  before  the  date  of  her  murder. 
She  and  I  were  the  only  occupants  of  the  house.  The  house 
was  one  of  six  apartments  and  a  kitchen,  the  apartments 
being  a  dining-room,  a  drawing-room,  parlour,  and  two  bed- 
rooms. Both  the  bedrooms  look  to  the  back  court,  and  one 
of  them  is  a  larger  room  than  the  other.  The  dining-room 
and  the  drawing-room  look  out  on  West  Princes  Street.  Misa 

61 


Oscar  Slater. 

Helen  Lambie  Gilchrist  had    not    very    many   visitors.        There    were    some 
business    gentlemen    who    came    to    the    house.       The    most 
frequent   visitor  was    Mrs.   Ferguson,   an  old  servant.        Miss 
Gilchrist  always  slept  alone.        I  know  that  she  had  a  great 
many   jewels.     (Shown  production    No.    20.)       Miss    Gilchrist 
did  not  keep  jewels  in  that  box;  she  kept  papers  and  accounts 
there.     She  had  that  box   (No.   20)  on  the  dressing  table  in 
one  of  her  bedrooms.       She  kept  her  jewels  in  her  wardrobe 
in  her  bedroom.       She  wore  jewels  every  day,  usually  a  ring 
and   a   brooch.        She  sometimes  wore   more  than    one    ring. 
When  she  went  out  to  tea  and  to  dinner  she  wore  more  jewels. 
It  was  the  usual  practice  for   me  to   go   out  errands  in  the 
evening.        I    usually    went    out    on    my  errands    about    six 
o'clock  and  sometimes  a  little  later.       The  house  is  one  storey 
up,  and  the  outer  door  is  on  the  stair  landing.       The  door  on 
the  stair  landing  is  secured  by  a  common  lock,  a  patent  lock, 
and  a  Chubb.       When  I  went  out  on  my  errands  I  left  the  door 
on  these  two  locks,  and  I  took  the  keys  with  me.       The  locks 
I   left  the  door    on    were  the   two    upper    locks.     These   two 
upper  locks  are  shown  in  the  photograph  No.   5.       There  is 
a  door  to  the  entrance   to   the   close,    and  that   was   usually 
kept  closed  on  a   check   lock.     The  entrance  to   the  close   is 
about  four  or  five  steps  up  from  the  level  of  the  pavement. 
The  door  at  the  entrance  of  the  close   is   opened  by  raising 
a  handle  inside  the  house.        There  was  no  one  living  above 
us  at  the  time  of  Miss  Gilchrist's  murder;  we  were  the  only 
people  inside  the  close.       On  21st  December  a  girl  friend  of 
mine  paid  a  visit  to  the  house;  she  was  the  only  visitor  that 
day.       Miss  Gilchrist  rose  out  of  bed  that  day  about  twelve 
o'clock,  and  she  was  out  of  doors  in  the  afternoon  and  returned 
about  4.30.       I  went  out  for  a   newspaper   that  night,    and 
I  had  some  other  messages  to  do  after  that.       Miss  Gilchrist 
gave    me    Id.    for  the    newspaper    and     10s.    for    the    other 
messages.       I  looked  at  the  kitchen  clock  just  before  I  went 
out  and  I  saw  that  it  was   just  seven   o'clock.        I  intended 
to  go  for  the  newspaper  first  and   come  back  to  the  house, 
and  then  go   out   again   for  my  other  messages;    I  had   done 
that    before.        I  went  to    St.    George's    Road   for    the   news- 
paper.      Before  leaving  the  house  I  saw  Miss  Gilchrist  sitting 
on   a   chair  at  the  dining-room   table,  with  her   back   to  the 
fire.       She  had  her  spectacles  on  and  was   reading.       There 
was   an   incandescent  light  lit  in   the  dining-room,   and  there 
was   a  light  lit   in   the  lobby.        There  was  no   light   in   the 
bedroom.        I  went     into     the     dining-room     and     saw    Miss 
Gilchrist  just  before  I  left,  and  it  was  then  that  she  ^ave  me 
the  money.       I   recollect  laying  down   the   half-sovereign    on 
the  dining-room  table  before  I  left.       I  intended  to  get  it  when 
I   came  back  with  the  paper.       I  had  to  go  to  St.  George's 
62 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Road    for   the  newspaper.     It    would    take  me    about    three  Helen  Lambie 
minutes  to  walk  from  the  house  to  the  newspaper  shop  in  St. 
George's  Road.     It   usually    took    me   ten    minutes  from    the 
time   I    left  the  house   till    I  got   back    with  the  newspaper. 
Miss  Gilchrist  knew  that   that  was    my    practice.     I    noticed 
the  light  in  the  lobby  as  I  left.       When  I  went  out  I  closed 
the  door  on  the  two  locks  and  took  the  two  checks  with  me. 
I  closed  the  door   at  the  stair  foot.     It  was  raining  when   I 
went  out.        When  I  left  the  house  I  did  not  go  straight  to 
the   newspaper   shop   in    St.    George's    Road.     I   spoke    for   a 
minute  or  two   to   a   constable   in   plain  clothes  whom  I  met 
at  the  corner  of  West  Princes  Street  and  St.   George's  Road. 
When   I   bought  the  newspaper  I  went   straight   back   to   the 
house.       I  would  be  away  from  the  house  about  ten  minutes 
altogether.        I  did  not  see  anybody  except  the  constable  in 
West  Princes   Street    when    I   walked    along  to    St.    George's 
Road.        West  Princes  Street  is   a  very  quiet  street.        When 
I  got  back  to  the  house  I  noticed  that  the  door  at  the  close 
mouth  was    open,    and  was  not    as  I  had  left    it.        I    went 
upstairs.       I  did  not  have  to  use  my  check  to  open  the  door. 
I  saw  a  wet  footmark  on  two  of  the  steps  when  I  got  inside 
the  door.       I  had  not  observed  that  when  I  was  coming  down 
before.        The  footmark    was    on   the  two    steps  nearest  the 
close.       When   I  got  up  to  the  landing  I   found   Mr.    Adams 
there,    a  neighbour   who  lived  down    below.        He  was   never 
a  visitor  at  the  house,  and  I  was  astonished  to  find  him  there. 
He  said  to  me  that  there  was  a  noise  in  our  house,  and  that 
the  ceiling  was  like  to  crack.        The  house  door  was  locked. 
I  unlocked  it  with  my  keys.        I  said   to  Mr.  Adams   before 
I  went  in,    "  Oh,  it  would  be  the  pulleys."     By  the   pulleys 
I  meant  the  clothes-lines  in  the  kitchen.      We  had  an  arrange- 
ment for  drying  the  clothes  in  the  kitchen,  consisting  of  lines 
and  pulleys.       Mr.  Adams  said  that  he  would  wait  and  see  if 
everything  was  all  right.       When  I  unlocked  the  door  I  saw 
a  man  coming,   and  I   stepped  back.       The  man  was  coming 
from  the   direction    of   the   spare  bedroom.     I    saw    that   the 
light  was  lit  in  the  spare   bedroom.     It  was  not  lit   when   I 
1  ft   the  house.       The  light  in  the  lobby  was  still  lit.        The 
m;m  came  through  the  hall  and  passed  me,  and  went  down- 
stairs.      I   then   went  into  the  kitchen  and   saw  that  every- 
thing was  right   there.        I   went  into   the  bedroom.     It  was 
all  right   there.     Then  I  went  into  the  dining-room  and   saw 
Miss   Gilchrist   lying   on   the  rug  in  front   of  the  fire.        The 
rug  was  over  her  head.       I  did  not  see  her  face.     I  went  out 
and   told    Mr.    Adams    that  something  was   wrong,    that    the 
man  had  done  something  to  Miss  Gilchrist.       Mr.  Adams  had 
stood  behind  me  when  I  unlocked  the  door.       The  man,  when 
he  passed  me,  was  very  close  to  me.     I  noticed  that  he  held  his 

63 


Oscar   Slater. 

Helen  Lambie  head  down.  When  he  passed  me  I  turned  round  to  look  at 
him,  and  I  got  a  good  look  at  him.  I  heard  him  going  down 
the  stairs.  He  did  not  go  down  rapidly ;  he  went  deliberately. 
I  went  instantly  into  the  house.  The  man,  when  I  saw 
him  first,  was  coming  from  the  direction  of  Miss  Gilchrist's 
bedroom.  He  had  nothing  in  his  hand.  He  was  wearing  a 
dark  cap,  a  fawn  overcoat,  and  dark  trousers.  I  did  not 
notice  what  else  he  was  wearing.  His  coat  was  open.  He 
was  about  5  feet  7  or  5  feet  8  high.  No.  43  of  the  produc- 
tions is  the  coat  that  he  wore.  I  am  not  sure  about  the 
cap  he  wore,  but  it  was  dark.  He  did  not  say  anything  as 
he  passed.  I  noticed  his  walk;  he  was  forward  a  little.  I 
noticed  a  peculiarity  about  his  walk;  it  was  a  little  shaky. 
When  I  saw  my  mistress  lying  on  the  floor  with  the  rug  over 
her,  I  ran  downstairs,  and  then  I  stood  on  the  steps  when 
I  got  down.  Mr.  Adams  also  ran  downstairs,  and  then  he 
went  in  the  direction  of  Queen's  Crescent.  I  saw  Mr.  Adams' 
sisters  come  out,  and  I  told  them  what  had  happened.  I 
did  not  see  any  trace  of  the  man  when  I  got  downstairs. 
When  I  returned  to  the  house  I  saw  Constable  Neill  there.  I 
did  not  go  straight  back  to  the  house;  I  went  and  told  Miss 
Birrell,  a  niece  of  Miss  Gilchrist's,  what  had  happened. 
Dr.  Adam  was  summoned.  There  were  several  people  in  the 
house  when  I  got  back.  Later  in  the  evening  Detective 
Pyper  asked  me  to  go  into  the  dining-room,  and  I  then  saw 
my  mistress's  body  exactly  as  I  had  seen  it  when  I  first  went 
in.  Her  head  was  near  the  fender  and  her  feet  were  towards 
the  door.  She  was  quite  dead.  Next  day  I  identified  her 
body  in  presence  of  Dr.  Glaister  and  Dr.  Gait.  I  did  not 
find  anything  out  of  its  place  in  the  dining-room.  After 
going  into  the  dining-room  I  went  into  the  spare  bedroom, 
and  I  saw  the  box  there  with  the  papers.  The  papers  had 
been  taken  out  of  the  box  and  were  scattered  about  on  the 
floor.  I  never  saw  anybody  visiting  the  house  the  least  like 
the  man  who  came  out  of  the  bedroom  when  I  opened  the  door 
that  night.  That  night  I  missed  a  brooch  that  belonged  to 
Miss  Gilchrist.  The  brooch  was  usually  kept  in  a  small 
open  dish  on  a  dressing  table  in  the  bedroom.  It  was  a 
diamond  crescent  brooch,  and  about  the  size  of  half  a  crown. 
I  saw  it  in  the  dish  on  the  Sunday,  the  day  before  the  murder. 
I  saw  beside  it  a  gold  and  diamond  ring  which  was  left,  while 
the  brooch  was  taken.  I  mentioned  to  the  detectives  that 
night  that  I  had  observed  that  the  brooch  had  disappeared. 
Miss  Gilchrist  had  that  brooch  all  the  time  I  was  in  her 
service,  and  she  sometimes  wore  it  during  the  day.  On  12th 
January  I  left  Glasgow  along  with  Mr.  Adams,  a  girl  Bar- 
rowman,  Mr.  Warnock,  and  Detective-Inspector  Pyper.  We 
sailed  by  the  s.s.  "  Baltic  "  for  New  York,  and  we  arrived 

64 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

there  on  25th  January.       On  26th  January  I  attended  at  the  Helen  Lambie 
Law  Courts,  along  with  Detective-Inspector  Pyper,  Mr.  Adams, 
Mr.  Warnock,  and  the  girl  Barrowman.     I  remember  standing 
in  a  corridor  there  along  with  Detective-Inspector  Pyper,  Mr. 
Adams,   the  girl  Barrowman,   and  Mr.  Warnock. 

Do  you  remember  whether  Mr.  Warnock  and  Mr.  Adams 
went  into  the  Court-room  before  you? — I  think  Mr.  Warnock 
went  in,  but  I  could  not  say  for  Mr.  Adams.  The  girl 
Barrowman  and  Detective-Inspector  Pyper  remained  with  me. 
When  I  was  standing  in  the  corridor,  and  before  I  went  into 
the  Court,  I  saw  three  men  coming  along  the  corridor.  I 
had  a  good  view  of  them.  They  passed  me. 

Did  you  say  anything  to  Inspector  Pyper  when  you  saw  the 
three  men? — No. 

When  they  passed  you  did  you  say  anything  to  him? — Yes. 
I  said,  "  There  is  the  man  that  passed  me  in  the  hall."  He 
was  one  of  the  three  men.  I  recognised  him  by  his  height 
and  his  walk.  When  I  saw  him  he  had  a  dark  overcoat  and 
a  bowler  hat  on,  different  from  the  hat  and  coat  that  he 
wore  when  I  saw  him  in  the  lobby.  I  saw  part  of  his  face  in 
Glasgow,  on  21st  December,  immediately  after  he  passed  me 
and  when  I  turned  round,  just  before  he  went  down  the 
stairs.  I  recognised  the  man  in  the  corridor  as  the  man  I 
had  seen  in  the  lobby  of  the  house.  He  was  the  middle 
one  of  the  three  men.  I  recognised  his  walk.  No  one  had 
asked  me  to  point  him  out  at  the  time  when  the  three  men 
walked  up  the  corridor  and  passed  me.  I  just  pointed  him 
out  myself.  I  was  not  told  that  he  was  coming  or  anything 
of  that  kind.  I  just  recognised  him  as  one  of  the  three  that 
passed  me.  No  one  asked  me  any  question  about  it  when 
I  spoke  to  Detective-Inspector  Pyper.  That  was  the  only 
chance  I  had  of  seeing  him  before  I  went  into  the  Court-room. 
After  the  three  men  passed  me,  Detective-Inspector  Pyper, 
the  girl  Barrowman,  and  I  went  into  the  Court-room.  The 
two  men  who  were  with  the  man  that  I  recognised  were  in 
plain  clothes.  I  do  not  know  who  they  were ;  they  were 
strangers  to  me.  When  I  went  into  the  Court-room  I 

found  a  number  of  people  there.  I  sat  in  a  chair.  I  saw 
the  man  in  the  room  that  I  had  seen  in  the  lobby  of  the  house. 
I  recognised  him  and  I  identified  him.  He  was  sitting  on 
my  left  side,  about  a  yard  away.  Beside  him  were  sitting 
Mr.  Goodhart  and  Mr.  Miller.  Mr.  Goodhart  was  between 
him  and  me,  but  I  had  no  difficulty  in  pointing  him  out  in 
the  Court  in  New  York.  I  had  to  look  round  the  back  of 
Mr.  Goodhart  to  see  him,  and  I  did  that;  and  when  I  looked 
round  I  pointed  him  out.  There  were  a  number  of  other 
people  in  the  room  besides  these  three.  I  had  no  difficulty 
in  pointing  him  out  as  the  man.  I  had  never  seen  any 

65 


Oscar  Slater. 

Helen  Lambie  photographs  of  him  before.  There  were  in  the  room  at  the 
time  Mr.  Warnock,  Detective-Inspector  Pyper,  the  girl 
Barrowman,  and  Mr.  Adams.  Where  I  was  sitting  I  had  to 
lean  round  to  see  the  man.  I  came  home  a  day  or  two 
afterwards.  On  Monday  night,  22nd  February,  I  went  down 
to  the  Central  Police  Office,  and  was  taken  to  a  room  where 
there  were  a  number  of  men.  I  pointed  out  in  that  room 
the  man  I  had  seen  in  the  lobby,  the  same  man  as  I  had 
seen  in  New  York.  I  had  no  difficulty  in  recognising  him. 
When  I  first  went  into  the  room  at  the  Central  Police  Station 
the  man  was  dressed  in  a  dark  suit.  About  fifteen  minutes 
afterwards  I  was  again  shown  the  man  dressed  in  the  coat 
No.  43  of  productions.  He  had  not  either  of  the  caps 
under  label  No.  46,  nor  had  he  the  hat  No.  44.  It  was  a 
lighter  cap  than  No.  44. 

Look  at  No.  46  again? — It  was  neither  of  these  caps.  I 
recognised  the  coat  No.  43  as  the  coat  he  was  wearing  the 
night  I  saw  him  in  the  lobby.  The  cap  that  he  was  wearing 
the  night  I  saw  him  in  the  lobby  was  a  dark  cap,  and  some- 
thing of  the  shape  of  a  Donegal  hat. 

Is  No.  44  what  you  call  a  Donegal? — Yes,  something  of 
that  shape. 

By  the  COURT — The  cap  he  had  on  when  I  saw  him  at  the 
Central  Police  Office  was  a  light  green  cap.  When  I  saw 
him  in  the  lobby  he  had  a  dark  cap  on.  I  am  not  sure 
what  was  the  difference  between  it  and  the  one  I  am  shown 
now. 

Examination  resumed — You  are  not  sure  that  that  is  the 
cap? — No.  I  think  it  was  more  like  the  light  one  in  No.  46 
as  regards  shape.  I  was  in  West  Princes  Street  on  the 
Sunday  night  before  the  murder,  between  six  and  a  quarter 
to  seven.  I  saw  a  man  passing  back  and  forward  on  the 
street  on  the  same  side  as  I  was  on.  I  did  not  take  any 
particular  notice  of  him.  I  could  not  very  well  recognise 
the  man  I  saw  that  Sunday  night.  He  had  a  dark  overcoat 
on  and  a  bowler  hat.  I  could  not  say  whether  he  was 
clean  shaven  or  not.  He  had  a  sallow  complexion.  The 
prisoner  is  the  man  I  saw  in  the  lobby,  and  he  is  also  the 
man  I  saw  at  New  York  and  in  the  Central  Police  Office. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — You  say  that  you  could 
not  recognise  the  man  that  vou  saw  in  the  street  on  the 
Sunday? — Yes. 

And  so  little  did  you  think  of  that  that  you  did  not  mention 
it  to  any  one  at  all  till  the  12th  of  March? — Yes. 

You  had  been  in  America  in  between,  and  you  had  been 
examined  by  the  fiscal  different  times,  but  you  never  thought 
of  the  man  walking  on  the  street  on  20th  December  till  12th 
March? — No. 

66 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

You  said  that  you  could  not  recognise  him  1 — Not  the  one  Helen  Lambie 
that  I  saw  on  the  Sunday  night. 

As  regards  the  identification  of  the  man  who  was  in  the 
lobby  that  night,  I  wish  to  ask  you  a  few  questions :  When 
you  left  the  house  that  night  you  have  told  us  that  the 
dining-room  gas  was  lit? — Yes. 

And  the  lobby  gas? — Yes. 

How  was  the  lobby  gas  lit? — Half  on. 

By  the  COURT — Was  it  incandescent? — No. 

Cross-examination  continued — An  ordinary  burner? — Yes. 

Has  not  the  lamp  a  burner  inside  the  glass? — Yes. 

What  kind  of  glass  is  it? — Stained  glass. 

Is  it  thick  stained  glass? — Yes. 

What  are  the  colours? — Blue  colour. 

When  you  saw  the  man  in  the  lobby  how  far  was  he  from 
the  door? — About  6  yards. 

The  whole  lobby  is  not  18  feet  long,  is  it? — I  think  it  is. 

When  you  saw  him  first  was  he  standing  or  walking? — 
Walking. 

And  coming  out  of  the  door  at  the  far  end  of  the  lobby? — 
I  did  not  notice  him  coming  out  of  that  door ;  he  was  past 
the  door  a  little. 

He  had  only  about  3  or  4  yards  to  walk  to  you  and  go  out? 
— I  think  it  was  about  that. 

You  have  told  us  that  you  did  not  recognise  any  of  the 
caps  here  as  being  the  cap  that  he  was  wearing  that  night t 
— I  am  not  sure. 

You  said  something  about  a  Donegal  hat,  but  it  is  not  a 
thing  split  in  two  like  that? — You  can  split  it  in  two. 

Is  it  not  an  ordinary  cloth  cap  with  a  rim  right  round 
about  it? — Yes,  and  that  is  one  with  a  rim  like  it. 

Can  you  say  that  it  was  a  Donegal  hat,  or  is  it  just  thinking 
back  that  the  idea  has  come  to  you? — No. 

Is  that  only  an  impression? — No,  I  am  sure  of  that. 

Next,  I  am  going  to  ask  you  about  the  coat;  what  is  it 
that  made  you  use  the  expression  that  not  only  was  the  coat 
one  which  was  like  that,  but  that  that  was  the  very  coat? — 
That  is  the  coat. 

The  same  sort  of  coat? — That  is  the  coat. 
Do  you  say  that  he  wore  a  coat  like  that? — Yes. 
But  that  is  all?— Yes. 

And  dark  trousers? — I  am  sure  he  had  dark  trousers. 
I   wish   to   ask   you   this — what  did   you    recognise   in   him 
which  enabled  you  to  identify  him  afterwards  in  America? — 
By  his  walk  and  height,  his  dark  hair,  and  the  side  of  his 
face. 

Was  it  only  his  walk  and  his  height  and  dark  hair?— Yes, 
and  the  side  of  his  face. 

67 


Oscar  Slater. 

Helen  Lambie  Is  it  not  the  fact  that  you  were  not  quite  sure  of  him  to 
begin  with,  when  you  saw  him  in  America? — Yes,  I  was  quite 
sure. 

I  wish  you  to  be  careful  about  this.  In  America  when 
you  were  asked  if  you  saw  the  man  present  you  said  first, 
"  One  is  very  suspicious,  if  anything  "1 — That  is  a  mistake. 

These  were  your  words? — Yes,  I  quite  believe  it. 

When  the  question  was  put  to  you  you  said,  "  One  is  very 
suspicious,  if  anything  "  ? — Yes,  because  he  walked  up  and 
down. 

That  was  after  you  had  seen  the  man  walking.  You  were 
asked,  "  Now,  do  you  see  the  man  here  you  saw  that  night," 
you  said,  "  One  is  very  suspicious,  if  anything  "  ? — It  was 
the  way  it  was  put.  It  was  what  Miller  meant.  That  was 
the  expression  he  used. 

But  you  used  these  words  in  America.  The  question  was 
put,  "  Now,  do  you  see  the  man  here  you  saw  that  night?" 
and  your  first  answer  was,  "  One  is  very  suspicious,  if  any- 
thing " ;  what  did  you  mean  by  that  ? — Because  it  was  the 
same  man. 

Why  did  you  say  that  you  were  suspicious? — It  was  a 
mistake. 

You  mean  that  you  did  not  say  what  you  intended  to  say? 
— Yes,  I  did  not  intend  to  say  that. 

I  suggest  to  you  that  you  were  not  quite  sure  of  him  then? 
—Yes. 

Why  did  you  say  that  you  were  only  suspicious? — It  was  a 
mistake. 

You  have  told  us  to-day  that  you  recognised  him  by  his 
face? — The  side  of  his  face. 

I  will  read  the  question  again  that  was  put  in  America, 
"  Now,  will  you  describe,  please,  this  man  that  you  saw  on 
that  night  that  passed  you  at  that  doorway,  the  height  if  you 
can  tell,  the  clothes  if  you  can  tell,  or  such  other  description 
of  him  that  would  in  any  way  identify  him  to  anybody  else?  " 
and  your  answer  is,  "  The  clothes  that  he  had  on  that  night 
he  has  not  got  on  to-day,  but  his  face  I  could  not  tell  " — did 
you  say  that? — Not  the  broad  face,  but  the  side. 

The  Commissioner  said,  "  What  did  you  say  about  his  face?  " 
and  your  answer  is,  "  I  could  not  tell  his  face ;  I  never  saw 
his  face."  Now,  when  you  said  these  things  in  America  and 
stated  on  two  different  occasions  that  you  never  saw  his 
face,  why  do  you  go  back  upon  that  now  and  say  that  you 
saw  the  man's  face  and  recognised  him? — I  did  see  his  face. 

Why  did  you  say  that  you  did  not  see  it? — There  has  been 
a  bit  left  out. 

Did  you  say  in  America  that  you  did  see  his  face? — I  do  not 
remember. 
68 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Why  do  you  say  that  a  bit  has  been  left  out? — If  I  did  not  Helen  Lamble 
say  it  there  I  could  say  it  here. 

If  you  had  never  seen  it  in  the  lobby,  why  did  you  say, 
"  I  could  not  tell  his  face;  I  never  saw  his  face  "1 — I  did  not 
see  the  broad  face.  He  held  down  his  head,  and  it  was  only  the 
side  of  his  face. 

But  you  did  not  say  that  1 — I  know  that  I  can  say  that. 

You  are  speaking  now  at  a  distance  of  many  months — four 
months  and  more — since  you  saw  the  man  in  the  lobby  when 
your  recollection  was  fresh,  on  the  26th  of  January,  just  a 
month  after  the  occurrence,  and  you  said  that  you  had  never 
seen  his  face  at  all.  How  do  you  explain  that? — Because  he 
did  not  look  at  me,  but  I  saw  it  when  he  was  going  down  the 
stair. 

Why  did  you  not  say  so  ? — I  am  saying  it  now. 

Why  did  you  not  say  it  then  in  America,  when  you  were 
asked? — (No  answer). 

The  question  was  put  to  you  repeatedly,  and  you  gave  that 
answer? — That  was  what  I  meant,  but  he  did  not  look  at  me, 
and  I  did  not  see  the  broad  of  it. 

Here  is  another  question  I  wish  to  ask  you  about — what  did 
you  mean  in  America  by  saying  that  you  could  not  tell  the 
man's  face,  that  you  never  saw  his  face,  if,  in  point  of  fact, 
you  did  see  it,  so  as  to  help  you  to  recognise  it — what  do  you 
mean  by  that? — Nothing. 

You  meant  nothing  by  it,  and  that  is  the  statement  that  you 
made  within  a  month  of  the  occurrence — why  do  you  contradict 
it  four  months  afterwards? — It  is  not  four  months  since  I  said 
that.  It  is  less  than  that. 

It  is  three  months  then,  is  it? — Yes. 

February,  March,  April — why  do  you  contradict  three  months 
after  you  made  the  statement  in  America  the  actual  words  that 
you  then  used,  that  you  could  not  identify  the  man  by  his 
face?  What  are  you  going  on  now? — I  am  going  on  his  face 
now. 

I  do  not  understand  that.  Listen  to  this  question.  You 
were  asked  by  Mr.  Miller  in  America,  "  Did  you  not  state 
a  moment  ago  that  you  did  not  see  the  man's  face?  "  and  your 
answer  was,  "  Neither  I  did.  I  saw  the  walk.  It  is  not  the 
face  I  went  by,  but  the  walk  "1 — Yes,  I  said  that. 

Is  that  correct? — Yes,  quite  correct. 

What  do  you  mean  by  saying  that  it  is  his  face  if  it  was 
his  walk  that  you  spoke  to  in  America? — I  saw  his  face — 
the  side  of  his  face. 

You  said  in  America  that  you  were  going  on  nothing  but  his 
walk,  and  you  did  not  see  his  face.  Do  you  contradict  that 
now? — Yes. 

What  has  led  you  to  change  your  evidence  from  what  you 
gave  in  America? — Nothing  has  led  me. 

69 


Oscar  Slater. 

Helen  Lambie  Was  the  thing  fresher  in  your  recollection  when  you  were 
examined  in  America,  just  one  month  after  the  occurrence? — 
Not  one  bit  fresher. 

Why  did  you  say  in  America,  confidently,  that  you  never 
saw  the  man's  face,  and  that  you  did  not  go  by  his  face,  and 
only  by  his  walk,  if,  in  point  of  fact,  you  had  seen  his  face, 
and  you  recognised  him? — It  was  the  side  of  the  face.  That  is 
all  I  saw. 

Why  did  you  not  say  in  America  that  you  saw  the  side  of  his 
face? — I  could  say  it  if  I  went  to  America  now,  but  I  was 
excited  the  first  day. 

And  then  you  would  give  different  evidence? — No,  it  would 
be  the  same. 

I  ask  you  again,  can  you  give  any  explanation  at  all? — None. 

Why  did  you  say  that  it  was  his  walk  and  not  by  his  face, 
and  that  you  had  never  seen  his  face,  if,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
you  did  see  his  face — can  you  explain  why  you  said  so? — No. 

You  were  examined  twice  over  in  America.  You  were  taken 
back  the  second  day,  and  asked  some  more  questions? — Yes. 

You  were  asked  again  on  the  second  day  whether  you  had 
seen  his  face,  and  you  said,  "  No,  sir.  Q.  The  photograph  was 
not  shown  to  you  at  all? — A.  No.  Q.  And  you  never  saw 
any? — A.  No.  Q.  The  photograph  of  defendant  before  you 
came  into  Court? — A.  No,  sir.  Q.  And  you  had  never  seen 
his  face? — A.  No,  sir."  On  the  second  day  you  made  the 
same  statement,  that  you  never  saw  his  face.  Why  did  you 
repeat  the  same  mistake  on  the  second  day,  if,  in  point  of  fact, 
you  had  recognised  the  man  by  his  face  all  along?  Have  you 
not  been  talking  too  much  about  this  thing,  Miss  Lambie? — 
I  had  the  side  of  his  face. 

By  the  COURT — Why  did  you  not  say  in  America  that  you 
saw  part  of  his  face — that  is  the  question? — I  cannot  say  any- 
thing for  myself  for  saying  that,  but  I  know  that  I  did  see 
the  side  of  his  face. 

Cross-examination  continued — Did  you  say  that  the  man  was 
clean  shaven? — Yes.  I  saw  that  from  the  side. 

No  hair  about  his  face  at  all? — No. 

You  say  that  you  identified  the  man  by  his  walk? — Yes. 

What  is  the  peculiarity  of  the  walk  to  which  you  allude? — 
He  shakes  forward  a  little. 

What  do  you  mean  by  shaking  forward? — There  is  a 
peculiarity  about  his  walk. 

You  might  name  what  it  is,  because  I  wish  to  know — do  you 
mean  that  he  bends  forward? — -A  little. 

Is  that  all  you  mean  by  shaking  forward? — No. 

What  else  do  you  mean? — That  is  what  I  mean. 

You  say  that  he  bends  forward — is  it  his  head  that  is  bent 
forward? — A  little. 
70 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Anything  else? — His  walk.  Helen Lambie 

What  about  his  walk? — Nothing  about  his  walk,  but  I 
identified  him  by  his  walk. 

But  there  is  nothing  peculiar  about  it? — Yes. 

There  is  nothing  peculiar  about  his  walk,  but  you  identified 
him  by  it? — There  is  a  peculiarity  about  his  walk. 

What  peculiarity? — I  identified  him  by  his  walk.  I  cannot 
tell  you.  His  head  bends  forward,  and  he  shakes  himself  a 
little. 

How  does  he  shake  himself? — His  shoulders. 

What  does  he  do?  Does  he  jog  them  up  and  down  like  this 
(showing)? — Yes,  but  not  so  much  as  that. 

As  I  understand,  this  peculiarity  in  the  walk,  by  which  alone 
you  were  able  to  identify  him  in  America,  you  only  saw  while 
the  man  walked  3  or  4  yards  along  the  lobby,  which  was  dimly 
lighted.  Is  that  so? — It  was  not  dimly  lighted. 

I  thought  you  said  that  the  gas  was  half  on? — Yes,  if  you  put 
it  full  on  it  goes  up  in  a  blaze. 

It  was  quite  a  good  blaze? — Yes. 

I  wish  to  read  another  passage  from  the  American  evidence 
which  sums  it  up.  The  question  is  put  to  you,  "  And  all  that 
you  remember  about  the  difference  in  his  walk  from  other  men's 
walk  is  what  you  have  shown  us  here  when  you  were  standing 
up?"  and  you  say,  "Yes,  sir."  Did  you  give  them  an 
exhibition  of  how  it  was  done? — Yes. 

"  And  that  is  all  you  have  to  identify  this  man  as  the  man 
you  saw  in  the  hallway?  "  and  you  say,  "  Yes."  That  is 
another  passage  in  which  you  refer  to  the  walk  as  the  only 
means  of  identification — why  did  you  on  all  these  occasions  say 
that  it  was  the  walk  only  that  you  have  in  your  mind — that  you 
had  not  seen  his  face,  and  could  not  recognise  him  by  that? — 
It  was  quite  a  good  identification. 

The  walk?— Yes. 

Why  did  you  not  mention  this  appearance  of  the  man's  face 
in  America  when  you  had  three  or  four  different  opportunities  of 
doing  so?  Can  you  give  any  explanation? — Because  when  I 
saw  him  with  his  own  coat  on  I  was  surer  than  when  I  saw  him 
without  it. 

When? — On  the  Monday  night. 

But  why  did  you  not  on  four  different  occasions  in  America 
answer  that  his  face  had  something  to  do  with  the  identifica- 
tion?— If  I  had  seen  him  with  his  own  clothes  on — the  clothes 
that  he  had  on  that  night — I  could  have  done  so. 

How  did  that  alter  his  face? — It  made  a  big  difference. 

Now  when  you  saw  him  walking  down  the  corridor  in 
America,  the  man  was  walking  down  between  the  assistant 
marshal  of  the  United  States  Court  and  a  man  with  a  large 
badge? — Yes. 


Oscar  Slater. 

Helen  Lambie  And  you  were  down  there  for  the  purpose  of  identifying  the 
man  ? — No. 

What  were  you  there  for? — I  do  not  know  what  we  were 
standing  there  for. 

Did  you  not  know  that  you  were  going  to  see  the  man  Slater 
at  the  Courts? — No,  I  did  not  know. 

What  did  you  go  to  do? — To  identify  a  man. 

The  man  Slater? — Yes. 

And  when  you  went  there  did  you  know  that  he  was  the 
party  that  you  went  to  identify? — Yes. 

When  he  was  being  brought  down  the  corridor  did  you  know 
that  that  was  the  man  who  was  coming? — I  picked  him  out 
myself. 

But  you  knew  that  he  was  coming? — No,  I  did  not  know  that 
he  was  coming. 

You  knew  that  the  man  was  coming  down,  or  a  man  who 
was  being  brought  for  identification? — No,  I  picked  him  out 
myself. 

And  you  said  that  that  was  like  the  man  who  was  in  the 
Court? — Yes. 

Of  course,  when  you  came  back  to  this  country,  you  had  no 
difficulty  in  recognising  the  man  who  was  shown  you  at  the 
Central  Police  Station  as  the  man  you  had  seen  in  America? — 
Yes. 

You  knew  before  you  went  down  that  you  were  going  to  see 
him  again? — Yes. 

You  did  all  the  identification  you  had  to  do  in  America,  and 
you  saw  that  it  was  the  same  man  at  the  Central  Police  Station 
and  the  same  man  who  is  here? — Yes. 

I  want  to  know,  when  you  were  standing  at  the  door  with 
Mr.  Adams,  and  had  opened  the  door,  is  it  not  the  case  that 
you  went  in  towards  the  kitchen  at  the  time  the  man  was 
coming  forward? — The  first  time  I  was  standing  at  the  door. 

Had  you  not  gone  inside? — No. 

Where  was  Adams? — Behind. 

Is  it  not  the  case  that  you  turned  round  to  go  to  the  kitchen, 
and  that  the  man  passed  by  when  you  were  inside  by  the 
kitchen  door? — No. 

How  close  did  the  man  pass  to  Adams? — A  little  further 
than  the  distance  that  he  passed  me,  because  he  was  further 
back  than  I  was. 

Was  Adams  not  standing  right  in  the  doorway,  and  the 
man  who  passed  him  almost  touching? — Not  when  I  was  there. 

But  you  were  both  there  together? — Yes. 

Is  it  not  the  case  that  what  happened  was  that  you  opened 
the  door  and  passed  in  towards  the  kitchen,  and  that  the 
man  walked  down  and  came  right  past  Adams,  who  was  still 
on  the  door  mat? — Yes. 

72 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

So  that  the  man  passed  Adams  as  Adams  was  standing  on  Helen  Lambi* 
the  door  mat? — Yes;  we  were  both  on  the  door  mat. 

Was  Miss  Gilchrist  in  the  habit  of  going  out  with  jewellery 
on  her? — Yes. 

What  did  she  wear  when  she  was  out? — If  she  was  going 
to  her  tea  she  put  on  more  jewellery. 

But  what  would  she  wear  if  she  was  going  to  tea? — A  better 
brooch  and  more  rings. 

Did  anybody  in  the  neighbourhood  know  that  she  was  a 
person  who  kept  jewellery  in  her  house! — Some  may. 

But  you  do  not  know  of  any? — Yes. 

Who  ? — A  girl  friend  of  mine  whom  I  told  that  Miss  Gilchrist 
had  a  lot  of  jewellery. 

But  except  for  that  girl  you  have  no  notion  of  anybody 
who  knew? — No. 

Did  you  yourself  inform  a  man  called  Nugent  that  she  had 
jewellery  ? — Yes. 

How  long  ago  was  that? — Shortly  after  the  New  Year. 

Last  New  Year? — The  year  before. 

When  you  went  out,  were  all  the  windows  snibbed  except 
the  kitchen  window? — Yes. 

And  the  kitchen  window  was  slightly  down — 2  or  3  inches 
at  the  top? — Yes. 

When  you  got  back  to  the  house  were  the  windows  in  exactly 
the  same  situation  as  when  you  left  them? — Yes. 

Did  Miss  Gilchrist  use  to  have  a  dog? — Yes;  an  Irish 
terrier. 

What  happened  to  it? — It  got  poisoned. 

When  was  it  poisoned? — I  think  on  the  7th  or  8th  of 
September. 

Was  that  thought  to  be  done  by  somebody? — I  did  not 
think  it,  because  I  thought  that  it  might  have  eaten  some- 
thing; but  Miss  Gilchrist  thought  it  was  poisoned  by  some- 
body. 

Intentionally  to  kill  the  watch  dog — was  that  the  idea  ? — She 
did  not  say. 

What  did  she  say? — She  thought  it  was  a  shame  of  anybody 
to  do  such  a  thing  to  a  dog. 

Was  that  all  that  passed? — Yes. 

There  is  one  thing  I  wish  to  ask  you  also — did  you,  when 
you  saw  the  man  coming  down  the  corridor  in  New  York,  say 
this,  "  Oh,  I  could  nearly  swear  that  was  the  man"? — Yes. 

If  that  was  your  state  of  mind,  do  you  mean  to  suggest  now 
that  you  had  no  doubt  of  any  kind? — Yes. 

Why  did  you  say  that  you  could  nearly  swear  it  was  the 
man? — It  was  from  the  distance.  I  thought  that  it  was  the 
man ;  I  knew  that  it  was  him. 

Re-examined   by  the  LORD   ADVOCATE — Did  you   just  get   a 

73 


Oscar   Slater. 

Helen  Lambie  glimpse  of  him  as  he  was  coming  down  the  corridor  1 — Yes ;  he 
was  walking  on. 

And  you  recognised  the  gait  in  the  corridor? — Yes. 

Do  you  recollect  whether  anybody  asked  you  any  questions 
about  him  when  he  was  coming  down  the  corridor? — No. 

Did  you  know  that  he  was  to  come  that  way? — No. 

Do  you  recollect  whether  you  saw  his  face  in  the  corridor? 
—Yes. 

As  he  passed  you? — Yes;  he  looked  at  me  when  he 
passed  me. 

Is  it  the  case  that  when  you  opened  the  door  that  night, 
when  you  just  caught  sight  of  him,  he  had  his.  head  down? — 
Yes. 

And  as  he  came  across  the  lobby  did  he  keep  his  head  down 
the  whole  time? — Yes. 

So  that  you  could  not  see  his  full  face? — No. 

Was  that  what  you  meant  in  New  York  when  you  said 
that  you  did  not  see  his  face? — Yes. 

Is  it  the  case  that  when  you  turned  round  after  he  had 
passed  you,  you  got  a  glimpse  of  his  side  face  then? — Yes. 

Did  you  have  a  better  opportunity  of  seeing  his  gait,  the 
way  he  walked,  than  you  had  of  seeing  his  face? — Yes. 

Did  you  look  at  him  till  he  disappeared? — Yes. 

As  he  walked  across  the  landing? — Yes. 

Did  Nugent  visit  you  at  Miss  Gilchrist's  house? — Yes. 

Did  he,  on  one  occasion  at  least,  have  a  meal  in  the  house? — 
Yes;  dinner. 

And  did  Miss  Gilchrist  know  that  he  came  into  the  house, 
and  was  she  quite  pleased  that  he  should? — Yes. 

Is  Nugent  the  least  like  the  prisoner? — Not  the  least  like. 

When  did  you  last  see  him? — Last  September. 

Where  does  he  live? — Carfin. 

Were  you  a  good  deal  excited  and  agitated  over  at  New 
York?— Yes. 

You  were  asked  a  great  many  questions  in  the  two  days? — 
Yes. 

Did  you  get  a  better  chance  of  looking  at  the  man  when 
you  were  in  the  room  than  you  had  in  the  corridor? — Yes. 

Had  you  any  doubt  about  him  when  you  saw  him  in  the 
room? — No. 

Look  at  No.  5 ;  that  is  the  photograph  which  you  now  have 
before  you,  showing  very  well  the  outside  door  and  landing? — 
Yes. 

Now,  does  it  show  the  mat  on  which  you  were  standing 
when  the  man  passed  you? — Yes. 

And  was  Adams  standing  immediately  behind  you? — Yes. 

Does  the  door  open  inwards? — Yes. 

And  did  the  man  come  from  your  right  hand? — Yes. 

74 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

When  he  opened  the  door  did  he  come  out  of  the  bedroom,  Helen  Lamble 
or  did  you  see  him  coming  out  of  the  bedroom  ? — No ;  he  had 
come  out. 

Was  he  near  the  bedroom  door  when  you  first  saw  him 
coming  towards  the  door? — He  was  on  the  other  side  of  the 
door  that  goes  into  the  bedroom. 

Can  you  see  in  that  photograph  the  bedroom  door? — No. 

Look  at  this  other  photograph.  Does  that  show  the  bed- 
room door? — No. 

Will  you  tell  me  what  is  the  room  we  see  into  in  that 
photograph? — The  dining-room. 

What  is  the  door  on  the  right  hand  side? — The  kitchen 
door. 

When  you  are  looking  at  the  photographs  are  you  standing 
as  it  were  on  the  same  side  as  the  bedroom  door? — No. 

What  door  is  opposite  the  bedroom  door? — There  is  another 
bedroom  opposite  the  bedroom  door. 

Look  at  No.  5/5.  You  see  the  bedroom  door? — The  side 
of  it. 

Which  of  the  two  doors  is  it? — The  second  one  in. 

Is  that  the  door  from  which  the  man  came? — Yes. 

Do  you  see  the  top  of  the  lobby  light  there? — Yes. 

At  the  bottom  of  the  light  is  there  a  coloured  light  quite 
open? — Quite  open. 

And  was  the  light,  such  as  it  was,  at  its  best? — No. 

Could  you  have  made  it  better? — Yes,  by  screwing  it  higher. 

Quite  sufficient  to  enable  you  to  see  the  man? — Yes,  quite 
sufficient. 

By  Mr.  M'CLURE — You  saw  the  man's  walk  in  the  corridor  in 
America  ? — Yes. 

Now,  after  he  went  into  the  room  you  saw  him,  but  you 
saw  him  sitting  down? — Yes. 

Was  that  the  only  time  you  saw  him  walking  as  he  came  down 
the  corridor? — Yes. 

How  far  did  you  see  him  walking  down  the  corridor? — 12 
yards. 

And  inside,  while  you  saw  him  close  at  hand,  you  did  not 
see  him  walking? — I  saw  him  walking  into  the  room,  coming 
through  the  corridor. 

But  after  he  was  in  the  room  you  did  not  see  him  walking? — 
No ;  he  was  sitting  all  the  time. 

The  Court  adjourned  at  half-past  six  o'clock. 


75 


Second  Day— Tuesday,  4th  May,  1909. 

The  Court  met  at  ten  o'clock. 

John  Pyper  JOHN  PYPER,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  am  a 
detective  inspector  in  the  Western  District  of  the  Police, 
Glasgow.  About  twenty  minutes  to  eight  on  Monday,  21st 
December,  while  I  was  in  the  Western  Police  Office,  a  telephone 
message  came  from  Dr.  Adams,  of  No.  10  Queen's  Crescent, 
to  the  effect  that  a  lady  had  been  murdered  at  15  Queen's 
Terrace.  Along  with  Detective  M'Vicar  I  immediately  went  to 
the  house,  and  arrived  there  about  five  minutes  to  eight.  I 
went  upstairs  and  found  Constables  Neil  and  Brien  in  charge. 
The  house  consists  of  six  rooms  and  kitchen  on  one  floor,  and 
there  is  only  one  other  house  upstairs  to  which  the  stair  gives 
access,  that  house  being  unoccupied.  The  lobby  of  Miss 
Gilchrist's  house  is  about  18  feet  long  and  about  10  feet  wide. 
Entering  from  the  door  the  dining-room  is  immediately  on  the 
left  hand  side.  The  dining-room  is  about  21  feet  long  by  15  feet 
wide.  I  observed  that  the  handle  for  opening  the  door  at  the 
stairfoot  was  just  inside  the  lobby,  between  the  dining-room 
door  and  the  door  leading  to  the  house.  I  entered  the  dining- 
room,  and  I  found  the  deceased  lady  lying  on  her  back  in  front 
of  the  fireplace,  with  her  feet  stretched  out  towards  the  door. 
Her  right  hand  was  stretched  out,  and  her  left  hand  was 
partly  on  her  breast.  Her  face  and  head  were  smashed  and 
very  much  disfigured.  I  saw  a  set  of  false  teeth  lying  on  the 
rug  just  opposite  her  head.  There  were  sparks  of  blood  on 
the  grate,  on  the  fire-irons,  and  on  the  coal  scuttle.  I  saw  a 
half-sovereign  on  the  rug  beside  her  left  hand.  Constable  Neil 
picked  up  that  half-sovereign  and  put  it  on  the  mantelpiece. 
I  searched  the  house  carefully  to  see  if  there  were  any  imple- 
ments left  which  had  caused  the  injuries,  but  I  found  nothing. 
The  poker  and  tongs  in  the  dining-room  were  lying  on  the 
fender  in  their  usual  place.  (Shown  plan  No.  6  of  the  pro- 
ductions.) The  red  mark  indicates  where  the  deceased  lady 
was  lying.  (Shown  photograph  4/5  of  productions.)  In  that 
photograph  I  see  the  handle  by  which  the  door  at  the  foot  of 
the  close  is  opened.  It  is  shown  in  the  corner  between  the 
door  of  the  house  and  the  door  of  the  dining-room.  Although 
the  poker  and  tongs  bore  sparks  of  blood  upon  them,  there 
was  nothing  to  indicate  that  they  had  been  used  to  maul  the 
old  lady.  They  certainly  had  not  been  used.  When  I  was  in 
the  house  the  servant,  Helen  Lambie,  searched  it  to  see  if 
76 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

anything  was  amissing,  and  she  reported  to  me  that  she  missed  John  Pyper 
a  crescent  brooch  in  the  bedroom,   and   nothing  else.        She 
pointed  to  a  wooden  box  on  the  floor  of  the  bedroom,  that  box 
being  label  No.  20.     She  also  pointed  out  a  number  of  letters 
and  papers  scattered  on  the  floor. 

By  the  COURT — Helen  Lambie  was  a  little  excited,  but  not 
much,  considering  the  position  of  matters. 

Examination  resumed — Label  No.  19  contains  the  letters  and 
papers  that  were  scattered  on  the  floor  of  the  bedroom.  (Shown 
plan  No.  6  of  the  productions.)  The  bedroom  where  these 
papers  and  the  box  were  found  is  the  room  in  the  top  right  hand 
corner.  The  servant  Lambie  told  me  that  these  papers  and 
letters  used  to  be  kept  in  the  box.  There  was  a  diamond  ring 
and  there  were  two  other  rings  in  a  little  glass  dish  on  the 
toilet  table.  Helen  Lambie  told  me  that  the  missing  brooch 
used  to  lie  on  that  same  table.  There  were  also  on  the  table 
a  gold  bracelet  in  a  case  and  a  gold  watch  and  chain.  Nothing 
else  in  that  room  or  in  the  other  rooms  had  been  interfered 
with.  None  of  the  furniture  was  displaced.  The  hearth  rug 
was  very  much  stained  with  blood.  Constable  Neil  informed  me 
that  he  had  found  a  skin  rug  lying  on  the  top  of  the  deceased's 
body  when  he  went  in.  When  I  went  in  that  skin  rug  was  lying 
beside  her  head.  (Shown  labels  No.  16  and  17.)  No.  16  is 
the  hearth  rug  and  No.  17  is  the  skin  rug  that  was  lying  on 
the  top  of  the  deceased.  On  the  dining-room  table  I  found  a 
magazine  and  the  lady's  spectacles  lying  beside  it.  Her 
spectacle  case  was  attached  to  her  dress.  The  outer  door  of 
the  house  is  secured  by  a  Chubb  lock,  a  patent  lock,  and  a 
common  lock.  I  saw  that  the  common  lock  was  used  for 
securing  the  door  at  night,  while  the  patent  and  Chubb  locks 
were  used  by  day.  It  required  two  keys  to  open  the  door.  I 
instructed  Inspector  Rankin  to  search  the  back  green  the 
following  morning  as  soon  as  daylight  came  in.  When  the 
back  green  was  searched  a  piece  of  an  old  broken  auger  was 
found ;  that  was  the  only  thing  that  was  found.  (Shown 
production  No.  25.)  That  is  what  was  found  in  the  back 
green.  I  took  possession  of  the  two  rugs,  the  coal  scuttle,  and 
the  deceased  lady's  spectacles.  I  superintended  the  removal  of 
the  body  to  the  Royal  Infirmary.  It  had  been  previously 
identified  in  presence  of  Professor  Glaister  and  Dr.  Gait. 
A  description  of  the  missing  brooch  was  circulated  amongst 
pawnbrokers  and  jewellers  and  dealers.  (Shown  production 
No.  42.)  That  is  the  description  of  the  brooch.  I  was  present 
on  several  occasions  between  24th  December  and  7th  January 
in  the  house  at  15  Queen's  Terrace,  when  a  large  quantity  of 
jewels  were  found.  A  list  was  made  by  Mr.  Dick,  and  it  is 
correct;  I  saw  it  and  went  over  it  carefully.  On  22nd  December, 
1908,  I  saw  a  purse  containing  a  number  of  tickets,  and  so  on, 

77 


Oscar  Slater. 

John  Pyper  found  in  the  pocket  of  the  late  Miss  Gilchrist  when  the  body 
was  undressed.  I  took  possession  of  it  and  of  the  half-sovereign. 
Superintendent  Douglas  took  possession  of  a  box  of  matches 
and  a  spent  match  which  were  found  in  the  bedroom.  (Shown 
production  No.  18.)  These  were  found  in  the  bedroom.  The 
servant  girl  said  that  these  matches  did  not  belong  to  the 
house.  On  the  morning  of  24th  December  I  saw  the  girl  Mary 
Barrowman,  and  she  described  to  me  a  man  she  said  she  had 
seen  running  out  of  Miss  Gilchrist's  close  on  the  night  of  the 
murder.  On  the  same  day  I  forwarded  that  description  to 
Superintendent  Ord  at  the  Central  Police  Office,  and  on  the 
following  day,  25th  December,  the  description  appeared  in  the 
newspapers.  (Shown  productions  Nos.  38,  40,  and  41.)  These 
are  the  newspapers  containing  the  description.  These  would 
appear  in  the  five  o'clock  edition  of  the  evening  papers  of  25th 
December. 

Did  you  cause  inquiry  to  be  made  that  night  at  the  house, 
69  St.  George's  Road,  at  which  Anderson,  a  dentist,  was  said 
to  live? — No,  I  did  not  cause  inquiry  to  be  made,  but  I  learned 
that  inquiry  was  made.     I  learned  that  Anderson,  the  dentist, 
disappeared  that  night.     On  the  12th  of  January,  1909,  I  was 
instructed    to    accompany    Mr.    Warnock    and    the    witnesses 
Lambie,  Barrowman,  and  Adams  to  New  York,  and  I  accom- 
panied them.     I  arrived  in  New  York  on  the  25th  of  January, 
1909.    On  the  following  day  I  went  to  the  Court  there  with  the 
witnesses.    The  examination  was  conducted  in  Mr.  Commissioner 
Shield's   room.         Before   the   examination   commenced   I  was 
standing  in  a  corridor  leading  to  the  room.     The  girls  Lambie 
and  Barrowman  were  with  me.     They  were  standing  beside  me. 
Will  you  describe  to  us  in  your  own  words  what  happened 
when  you  and  the  two  girls  were  standing  in  the  corridor? — 
I  was  looking  along  to  see  if  Mr.  Fox,  the  Crown  agent,  was 
coming  along,  when  both  of  the  girls  touched  me  on  the  shoulder 
at  the  same  time  and  said,  "  Oh !  there's  the  man  away  into 
the  Court."    I  did  not  see  the  man  to  whom  they  referred ;  there 
were  quite  a  number  of  people  there;  I  could  not  distinguish 
one  from  another.     I  knew  that  some  men  had  passed  me ;  there 
were  quite  a  number  of  people  going  out  and  in  to  the  Court. 
The  girls  identified  some  man — both  at  the  same  time.     I  had 
not  told  them  to  expect  the  man  to  come  along  the  corridor; 
I  told  them  nothing.     I  had  not  asked  them  any  question.     That 
came  entirely  from  themselves.      I  then  went  into  the  room. 
The  girls  went  in  also.        I  did  not  myself  see  Slater  enter 
the    room.       When     I    went    into    the    room    there    were    a 
number  of  people  there.     There  were  about  forty,  I  should  say, 
altogether.     I  think  there  was  one  woman,  at  any  rate,  besides 
the  two  female  witnesses.     Some  of  them  were  sitting ;  some  of 
them  were  standing.     It  was  a  comparatively  small  room.     It 

78 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

was  crowded  all  round  about.  I  and  the  two  witnesses  stood  John  Pyper 
at  the  window  near  the  Commissioner's  desk.  He  was  seated 
at  a  table  with  a  desk  on  it.  Slater  was  seated  on  a  chair 
alongside  one  of  the  marshals  behind  his  two  agents,  Mr.  Good- 
hart  and  Mr.  Miller.  He  was  not  handcuffed  or  distinguished 
in  any  way.  The  girl  who  was  giving  evidence  had  a  seat, 
but  the  others  were  standing.  I  was  present  when  the  girl 
Helen  Lambie  gave  her  evidence.  In  my  presence  she  was 
asked  to  identify  the  man  she  saw  on  the  night  of  the  murder. 
She  stood  up  and  looked  round  the  Court,  and  Mr.  Goodhart, 
who  was  immediately  in  front  of  the  accused,  also  stood  up  and 
spread  out  his  frock  coat,  and,  after  looking  round  for  a  little 
bit,  she  looked  over  his  shoulder  and  pointed  to  the  accused. 
She  had  not  any  hesitation  about  him.  She  had  to  lean  over 
to  get  a  sight  of  him.  I  was  present  when  the  girl  Barrowman 
was  examined.  She  pointed  him  out  also,  and  said  that  he  was 
very  like  the  man.  She  had  no  hesitation.  I  cannot  tell  myself 
whether  it  was  the  same  man  that  they  had  seen  going  in ;  I 
did  not  see  him  going  in.  I  was  present  when  Mr.  Adams  was 
examined ;  he  said  he  was  very  like  the  man,  but  he  was  not 
too  confident,  or  something  to  that  effect.  Adams  was  examined 
when  there  were  a  number  of  men  in  the  Court-room  too.  No 
assistance  of  any  kind  was  given  to  him.  He  was  just  asked 
to  look  round  to  find  the  man  that  he  had  seen  that  night.  In 
Adams'  case,  as  in  the  case  of  the  two  girls,  Slater  was  seated, 
but  he  was  told  to  stand  up  afterwards.  I  took  possession  of 
all  Slater's  luggage  in  New  York.  Each  parcel  was  sealed  with 
the  Government  seal.  There  were  seven  packages.  They  were 
portmanteaus  and  bags.  There  were  initials  on  some  of  them — 
"  0.  S."  They  were  brought  to  this  country  in  the  same  ship 
that  I  and  the  prisoner  and  Mr.  Warnock  came  back  in.  I 
arrived  in  Glasgow  on  the  21st  of  February,  1909.  I  came 
home  in  the  same  ship  as  Slater.  The  witnesses  came  in  a 
different  ship.  I  was  in  charge  along  with  Mr.  Warnock.  When 
•we  arrived  the  accused  claimed  all  the  baggage,  and  I  opened 
and  searched  it.  In  a  black  leather  trunk  I  found  a  fawn- 
coloured  waterproof  coat.  (Shown  label  43.)  That  is  the  coat. 
Slater  claimed  it  as  his  property.  I  found  in  the  same  black 
leather  trunk  a  hammer.  (Shown  label  47.)  That  is  the 
hammer.  Slater  claimed  that  as  his  property.  I  examined  the 
coat  and  the  hammer.  I  found  several  dark  stains  on  the  coat, 
in  front,  mostly  on  the  shoulders.  The  polish  appears  to  have 
been  removed  from  the  handle  of  the  hammer,  particularly 
towards  the  bottom  end  of  the  handle.  It  seems  to  be  scraped 
from  the  middle  to  the  head.  I  further  found  in  the  baggage  a 
soft  hat.  (Shown  label  44.)  That  is  the  hat.  Slater  claimed 
that  hat.  I  also  found  two  cloth  caps.  (Shown  label  46.) 
These  are  the  caps.  Slater  claimed  these  caps.  There  was  a 

79 


Oscar  Slater. 

John  Pyper  large  quantity  of  clothes  in  the  baggage — overcoats,  coats,  and 
other  things  of  all  descriptions.     I  saw  no  dentist's  apparatus. 
Mr.  Warnock  and  I  went  over  the  baggage  very  minutely.     On 
21st  and  22nd  February  the  accused  was  shown  to  a  number  of 
witnesses.     He  was  placed  among  other  eleven  men,  all  in  plain 
clothes.     Some  of  these  men  were  railway  men  and  the  others 
were  police  officials,  but  all  in  plain  clothes.     The  accused  was 
allowed  to  take  up  any  position  among  them  that  he  pleased. 
I  was  present  when  a  few  of  the  witnesses  identified  the  accused. 
I  was  present  when  Adams,  Barrowman,  Armour,  and  several 
others  identified  him — I  forget  their  names.     These  witnesses 
had  no  difficulty  in  identifying  him.     They  were  not  assisted 
in  any  way.     On  23rd  February  I  met  the  witnesses  Barrowman, 
Bryson,  and  Nairn  in  West  Princes  Street.     They  pointed  out 
to  me  the  places  in  the  street  on  which  they  said  they  had  seen 
the  accused.     I  observed  that  from  all  these  places  there  was 
a  good  view  of  Miss  Gilchrist's  house  obtained.     I  remember  in 
particular  the  position  that  Nairn  pointed  out.     He  pointed  out 
the  corner  of  Queen's  Crescent  and  West  Princes  Street,   and 
said  that  he  was  standing  just  at  the  corner  of  the  turning 
looking  towards  the  house,  and  from  there  a  good  view  could 
be  obtained  of  the  house.     There  is  a  lamp  8  yards  from  the 
entrance  with  a  very  good  incandescent  light.     There  is  a  good 
view  obtained  of  the  house  from  the  stair  opposite.     That  is 
the  place  where  Bryson  pointed  out  that  the  man  was  standing. 
When  the  witnesses  were  asked  to  identify  Slater  he  was  dressed 
in  a  dark  suit  with  a  dark  overcoat  and  bowler  hat.     He  was 
afterwards  shown  to  some  of  the  witnesses  with  a  fawn  coat 
and  the  soft  hat  (label  44).     All  the  other  men  had  their  hats 
on — bowler  hats.     I  recollect  of  Slater's  dress  being  changed 
when  the  witness  Barrowman  was  asked  to  identify  him  in  the 
Central  Police  Office.     She  asked  that  his  hat  should  be  put 
down  a  little,  and  he  did  so.     Then  she  said,  "  A  little  further, 
please,  pull  it  down  a  little  further,"  and  he  did  so.     Then  she 
said,  "  That  is  how  it  was  on  that  night "  or  "  That  is  it."    The 
hat  that  he  had  on  was  the  soft  felt  hat  (label  No.  44).     (The 
witness  showed  how  the  hat  was  placed  on  the  head.)     The 
witness   Annie   Armour   identified  the   accused   with   the  dark 
clothes  and  the  bowler  hat.    The  witness  Euphemia  Cunningham 
also  picked  him  out.     The  witness  William  Campbell  seemed 
to  have  a  doubt  about  him.     He  said  he  was  like  him,  but  he 
seemed  to  hesitate  a  little.    The  accused  was  dressed  in  the  fawn- 
coloured  coat  for  Helen  Lambie  to  identify  him,  and  she  did  so 
without  any  difficulty.     There  is  a  gas  jet  at  the  top  of  the  first 
flight  of  stairs,  that  being  the  first  jet  that  you  come  to.     Then 
there  is  another  jet  at  the  deceased's  door,  and  there  are  two 
on  the  top  flat.     The  jet  at  the  door  is  close  by  the  door,  pro- 
jecting from  the  wall.     In  the  lobby  of  the  house  there  is  a 
80 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

pendant  hanging  from  the  ceiling  in  about  the  middle  of  the  John  Pyper 
hall  and  with  one  burner.  It  is  open  below.  I  have  on  several 
occasions  seen  the  light  on  the  wall  of  the  stair  just  outside 
the  door  lit,  and  the  light  in  the  lobby  lit  with  the  door  open. 
There  is  quite  a  good  light.  Photograph  No.  5/7  shows  the 
jet  immediately  outside  the  door  of  which  I  have  spoken. 
Photograph  No.  5/6  shows  the  jet  in  the  lobby.  If  the  dining- 
room  door  was  open  and  the  gas  lit  there  that  would  make  the 
light  in  the  lobby  stronger.  I  have  tried  the  light.  I  have 
seen  the  light  at  the  door  on  the  stair  lit  with  the  light  in  the 
lobby  half-on.  There  is  quite  a  good  light.  The  light  in  the 
pendant  when  it  is  half-full  on  is  quite  strong  enough  for  usual 
service.  I  had  an  opportunity  on  the  night  of  the  murder 
immediately  after  I  came  to  the  house  of  seeing  the  lights  as 
I  have  described  them. 

By  the  COURT — When  I  say  that  the  light  is  quite  good  I 
mean  that  by  it  one  could  read  ordinary  print. 

Examination  resumed — If  the  girl  was  standing  just  at  the 
entrance  from  the  door  into  the  house  and  looking  in,  I  should 
say  that  she  should  have  quite  a  good  view  of  a  man  coming 
out  of  the  bedroom  towards  her.  The  full  length  of  the  lobby 
is  18  feet.  From  the  entrance  door  to  the  door  of  the  bedroom 
which  was  lit,  and  where  I  saw  the  box  and  the  papers  scattered, 
the  distance  is  12  feet,  I  should  say.  If,  as  the  man  passed, 
the  girl  turned  round  to  look  at  him,  she  should  see  him  quite 
well  on  the  stair  with  the  gas  lit.  West  Princes  Street  is  a 
very  quiet  street  in  a  quiet  residential  locality.  If  the  man 
ran  from  Miss  Gilchrist's  house  to  Kelvinbridge  Subway  station 
his  direct  course  would  be  along  this  quiet  street  and  turning 
to  the  right  at  the  end,  that  being  rather  less  than  half  a  mile. 
I  have  walked  the  distance;  it  takes  seven  and  a  half  minutes. 
From  end  to  end  there  is  very  little  traffic  either  of  foot 
passengers  or  otherwise.  It  is  very  seldom  you  see  any  one 
there  except  an  odd  passer-by.  Kelvinbridge  Subway  station 
is  not  the  nearest  subway  station  to  the  place  where  the  murder 
was  committed.  There  is  one  at  St.  George's  Cross,  which  would 
be  nearer,  but  in  order  to  get  to  that  station  one  would  require 
to  pass  through  more  traffic  and  to  get  into  a  busy  thoroughfare. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURB — Are  you  detective  inspector? 
—Yes. 

And  may  we  take  it  you  are  the  person  who  had  charge  of 
this  case? — Yes,  I  believe  I  have  made  the  greatest  inquiry 
in  connection  with  the  matter,  but  not  altogether. 

Had  you  charge  of  the  arrangements  under  which  the  wit- 
nesses attended  to  identify  the  accused? — No. 

Who  had  charge  of  that? — Superintendent  Ord. 

You  said  it  was  about  ten  minutes  to  eight  when  you  arrived 
at  the  house  on  the  night  of  the  21st? — About  five  minutes  to 
eight. 

a  81 


Oscar  Slater. 

John  Pyper  And  you  examined  the  witness  Lambie  that  night,  or  got  a 
statement,  at  any  rate,  from  her? — Yes. 

You  said  you  were  also  present  in  America  when  Lambie 
made  a  statement? — I  was. 

Now,  in  the  boat  over  did  you  have  any  conversation  at  all 
with  the  witnesses? — None  whatever  relative  to  the  case. 

About  the  crime? — None. 

Were  the  witnesses  Lambie  and  Barrowman  companions 
during  the  voyage? — They  were. 

Were  there  just  you  three  and  Mr.  Adams  on  board  the  boat 
of  a  party? — And  Mr.  Warnock. 

By  the  COURT — Did  Lambie  and  Barrowman  occupy  the  same 
cabin? — Yes,  Lambie  and  Barrowman  occupied  the  same  cabin. 

Cross-examination  continued — Did  you  and  Warnock  occupy 
the  same  cabin? — And  Adams;  we  occupied  a  cabin  of  a 
different  class. 

You  had  spoken,  of  course,  to  Adams  about  what  he  had 
seen  on  the  night  of  the  21st? — Oh,  yes. 

Did  you  revert  to  that  in  any  way  on  the  way  across? — No. 

You  never  mentioned  at  all  the  purpose  of  the  voyage  on 
the  way  over? — They  knew  the  purpose  of  the  voyage;  they 
were  being  sent  there  to  see  if  they  could  recognise  the  man  as 
the  murderer — as  the  man  they  had  seen  that  night. 

When  you  got  across  to  America  I  think  a  man  called  Mr. 
Fox  was  attending  to  the  Crown's  interests? — That  is  so. 

And  on  the  day  when  the  man  Slater  was  to  be  exhibited  to 
the  girls  for  identification  Barrowman  had  first  of  all  an 
interview  with  Mr.  Fox  in  his  office? — Yes,  I  understand  she 
had. 

At  which  two  photographs  were  submitted  to  her? — Photo- 
graphs of  newspaper  cuttings. 

Why  did  you  show  the  photographs  in  America? — I  did  not 
show  the  photographs ;  it  was  Mr.  Fox  who  showed  them. 

You  were  present  at  the  time? — I  was  present. 

Were  these  shown  as  the  photographs  of  the  suspected  man  t — 
Yes. 

And  did  they  show  a  dark  complexioned  man  with  a  dark 
moustache? — Well,  I  could  not  take  it  as  that;  they  were  very 
defective  photographs. 

Did  they  show  the  general  appearance  of  Slater? — I  presume 
they  did,  but  they  were  very  bad  photographs ;  no  person,  to  my 
mind,  could  recognise  any  person  from  them. 

Do  you  say  that  they  were  not  the  least  like  the  man? — Yes, 
I  say  they  are  not  the  least  like  the  man. 

Were  they  recognised  in  your  presence  by  Barrowman  as 
being  the  man? — She  could  not  recognise  the  photographs. 

You  say  so? — I  say  so. 

Now,  when  you  were  out  in  the  passage  and  this  man  was 
82 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

brought  down  a  corridor,  as  I  understand,  you  did  not  see  him  John  Pyper 
come  down  the  corridor  at  all? — I  did  not. 

The  two  girls  were  standing  together? — They  were  standing 
together. 

And  what  view  could  they  have;  for  how  far  could  they  see 
the  man  walking  down  the  hall  if  they  were  looking? — Well, 
it  depended  on  where  they  had  seen  him  first;  he  might  have 
been  close  up  to  them  before  they  observed  him,  or  he  might 
have  been  20  yards  away  from  them;  it  is  a  long  passage. 

What  were  you  attending  to  when  the  girls  were  looking? — 
I  was  looking  in  the  opposite  direction ;  they  were  standing  at  my 
back. 

And  the  first  thing  that  attracted  your  attention  was  when 

you  heard  one  say ? — Both  touched  me  on  the  arm  at  the 

same  time. 

Both  on  the  same  arm  and  at  the  same  time? — Yes. 
And  both  spoke  at  once? — Both  spoke  at  once. 
And  both  said  the  same  thing? — Both  said  the  same  thing. 
What  did  they  say  ? — They  said,  "  Oh,  there's  the  man  away 
into  the  Court " ;  I  looked  into  the  Court,  but  I  could  not  distin- 
guish any  person. 

Is  it  not  curious  that  the  girls  used  the  same  words  at  exactly 
the  same  time  and  clapped  you  on  the  shoulder? — It  may  seem 
curious,  but  it  is  the  fact  all  the  same. 

Did  you  hear  the  girl  Lambie  say,  "  I  could  almost  swear 
that's  the  man  "  ? — I  cannot  say  that  I  heard  her  say  that. 

Did  you  hear  her  make  any  remark  at  all  till  the  remark  you 
have  quoted  to  us? — No,  that  was  the  first. 

Are  you  prepared  to  say  there  was  no  remark  made  till  the 
one  quoted  by  you? — Yes,  there  was  no  remark  made. 

So  that  if  the  girl  Lambie  says,  "  I  could  almost  swear  that's 
the  man,"  are  you  in  a  position  to  contradict  that? — She  may 
have  said  it  after  that,  but  not  before  that. 

I  am  talking  of  before? — She  did  not  say  that  to  me  before; 
I  did  not  hear  her  say  so. 

Do  you  mean  that  the  remark  was  never  made,  or  that  you 
did  not  hear  it? — I  did  not  hear  it. 

Is  that  all  you  can  say? — That  is  all  I  can  say. 
Did  the  girl  Lambie  tell  you  how  she  recognised  him! — She 
said  in  the  Court-room  from  his  walk. 

Was  that  the  first  you  heard  about  it? — Yes. 
In  the  Court  did  he  walk  at  all? — He  did  not. 
So  that  if  she  recognised  him  by  his  walk  it  must  have  been 
only  from  having  walked  down  the  passage  outside  the  Court 
when  you  were  looking  the  other  way? — I  presume  so. 

Did  she  say  she  could  not  recognise  him  by  anything  else? — 
No,  I  did  not  hear  her  say  that. 
Were  you  in  the  Court? — I  was. 

83 


Oscar  Slater. 

John  Pyper       I  mean,  you  give  that  now  as  your  accurate  testimony? — Yes. 

When  she  was  in  the  Court,  do  you  say  that  she  positively 
identified  the  man  at  the  first  attempt? — No,  I  do  not  think 
she  did;  I  think  she  said,  "That  is  very  like  the  man,"  or 
some  words  to  that  effect. 

Did  she  use  the  words  when  she  was  asked,  "  Q.  Now,  do  you 
see  the  man  here  you  saw  that  night? — A.  One  is  very 
suspicious,  if  anything  "1 — Yes,  she  made  a  remark  something 
to  that  effect. 

And  that  was  the  first  remark  she  made? — After  the  accused 
was  in  the  Court. 

That  was  the  first  remark  she  made  under  examination  by 
Mr.  Fox? — I  think  it  was.  "I  am  not  quite  sure,  but  I  think 
it  is  " ;  I  did  not  hear  all  that  she  said,  but  I  remember  hearing 
that  remark. 

I  mean,  one  would  like  to  know  how  much  you  heard  and 
how  much  you  did  not;  were  you  present  during  the  whole 
examination  of  Lambie,  and  are  you  prepared  to  tell  us  what 
she  said? — I  am  not  prepared  to  tell  you  all  she  said. 

But  you  remember  this,  however,  that  the  first  remark  she 
made  was  that  she  was  suspicious,  if  anything? — Yes. 

Now,  later  did  you  hear  her  say  that  "  the  clothes  he  had 
on  that  night  he  has  not  got  on  to-day,  but  his  face  I  could 
not  tell " ;  did  you  hear  her  say  that  ? — I  did  not. 

How  can  you  account  for  missing  that? — Well,  there  was  a 
big  noise  going  on,  bustling  about,  and  you  could  not  hear  all 
that  she  said,  and  she  spoke  very  low ;  I  was  some  little  distance 
from  her,  and  I  could  not  hear  all  she  said,  but  it  is  quite 
possible  she  said  that. 

By  the  COURT — How  far  would  you  be  away  from  her  ? — About 
8  yards,  I  would  say. 

Cross-examination  continued — I  want  to  ask  you  this ;  I  think 
you  said  that  she  identified  the  man  without  hesitation? — 
Commissioner  Shields  asked  her  to  look  round  the  Court-room 
and  see  if  she  could  point  to  the  man  that  she  had  seen  in 
the  hall  that  night,  and  she,  as  I  have  already  described, 
looked  round  and  pointed  out  the  accused. 

Do  you  say  it  was  without  hesitation  when  she  began  by 
intimating  that  she  was  very  suspicious,  if  anything? — Well, 
it  depends  on  how  you  put  it. 

Well,  it  is  a  great  deal  in  this  case  how  it  is  put ;  would  you 
tell  me  whether  you  call  that  unhesitating  identification? — 
Certainly  it  was  hesitating. 

Not  confident? — There  seemed  to  be  a  want  of  confidence  to 
speak  straight  out,  or  stupidity,  I  could  not  say  which;  she 
seemed  a  bit  excited. 

She  was  stupid  and  excited? — There  is  no  doubt  she  was. 

And  hesitating? — Yes,  a  little. 

84 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

What  did  she  say  about  his  walk  which  identified  him  ? —  John  Pyper 
Well,  she  was  asked  to  exhibit  the  manner  in  which  he  walked, 
and  she  tried  to  do  so. 

Was  there  anything  very  characteristic? — No,  I  could  not 
see  very  much  about  it. 

You  saw  nothing  very  peculiar  in  it? — No. 

Nothing  to  distinguish  the  walk  from  the  walk  of  many  other 
men? — Well,  the  only  thing  that  I  have  seen  about  his  walk 
is  that  his  left  foot  is  a  little  in-toed. 

Is  that  the  only  thing  you  have  observed? — That  is  the  only 
thing  I  have  observed. 

What  is  the  thing  called  a  shaking  of  the  shoulders  which 
is  mentioned  by  Lambie? — I  should  fancy  a  rocking  gait. 

Have  you  observed  a  rocking  gait  also? — Slightly. 

Why  did  you  not  tell  us  that  just  now  when  you  told  us  all 
you  observed  was  a  hen-toe  ? — That  is  all ;  he  shoves  his 
shoulders  forward  a  little. 

And  you  have  told  us  you  have  seen  nothing  characteristic 
except  the  hen-toe? — It  is  not  very  conspicuous. 

Do  you  say  that  an  identification  from  Slater's  walk  would 
Jbe  one  that  would  impress  you? — Not  from  his  walk  altogether. 

Suppose  you  had  nothing  but  the  walk  to  go  upon,  would 
you  have  any  confidence  in  your  identification? — No,  not  quite 
absolute. 

By  the  COURT — Is  there  anything  characteristic  in  his  walk 
at  all,  and,  if  so,  what? — Well,  he  is  a  little  in-toed  in  the  left 
foot,  and  when  he  lifts  his  foot  to  walk  he  throws  out  his  knee 
a  little ;  you  require  to  look  minutely  at  him  before  you  observe 
it. 

Nothing  that  would  attract  your  attention  specially? — No,  I 
do  not  think  I  would  take  any  particular  notice  of  it,  except 
if  I  was  asked  to  do  so  or  taking  particular  notice. 

Cross-examination  continued — Did  you  hear  the  girl  Lambie 
Bay  over  in  America  in  answer  to  a  question  this — the  question 
is  "  Q.  Didn't  you  state  a  moment  ago  that  you  did  not  see 
the  man's  face? — A.  Neither  I  did,  I  saw  the  walk;  it  is  not  the 
face  I  went  by,  but  the  walk";  did  you  hear  her  say  that? — 
Yes. 

And  you  say  now  that  the  walk  is  not  one  that  would  attract 
your  attention? — It  is  not  very  conspicuous,  except  if  you  are 
looking  carefully  at  the  person. 

Is  it  a  thing  that  you  would  expect  to  be  picked  out  in  a 
walk  of  some  3  yards  across  a  lobby  ? — It  depends  entirely  upon 
how  you  are  looking  at  it;  one  might  observe  it  and  another 
might  not. 

But  you  would  have  no  great  confidence  in  that  being  picked 
out?— No. 

By  the  COURT — The  period  of  observation  would  be  some- 
thing under  two  seconds? — Yes. 

85 


Oscar  Slater. 

John  Pyper  Cross-examination  continued — Do  you  not  think  that  the 
attention  of  the  people,  if  they  were  looking  at  a  man  who  was 
in  the  lobby,  would  be  mainly  directed  to  his  face? — I  should 
think  so,  but  it  is  not  for  me  to  say;  I  do  not  know  how  they 
were  looking. 

If  you  saw  a  stranger  in  the  lobby  you  would  not  look  to 
see  if  he  had  a  hen-toe  at  first? — No. 

Did  the  woman  Lambie  tell  you  he  was  a  clean-shaven  man  ? — 
She  told  me  he  was  clean  shaven  that  night. 

If  she  never  saw  his  face  could  you  understand  that? — Well, 
it  is  difficult. 

Now,  I  may  take  it,  I  suppose,  from  you  who  were  present 
time  after  time  in  the  examination  in  America,  Lambie  was 
asked  by  what  she  identified  him,  and  she  said  consistently 
that  she  did  not  see  his  face,  and  it  was  by  his  walk  alone? — 
That  is  so. 

The  girl  called  Barrowman  was  examined  in  America  also 
in  your  presence? — Yes. 

Did  you  say  that  when  she  was  first  examined  in  America 
her  identification  was  confident? — She  picked  out  the  man. 
She  was  asked  to  point  him  out. 

Did  she  say,  "  That  is  the  man "  ? — She  pointed  out  the 
accused. 

But  did  she  say  that  that  was  the  man? — She  said  that  he 
was  very  like  the  man  at  first,  and  then  she  said  that  he  was 
the  man. 

Do  you  remember  her  being  asked  whether  the  man  was 
there,  and  she  replied,  "That  man  here  is  very  like  him"? — 
Yes. 

Then  the  two  lawyers  got  talking,  the  one  saying,  "  The  man 
here  is  something  like  it,"  while  Mr.  Fox  said,  "  Very  like  it," 
and  the  witness  said,  "  I  said  something  like  him  the  first  time, 
and  then  very  like  him  after  I  had  said  something  like  him  "  ? — 
Yes,  I  remember  that. 

Would  you  call  that  a  confident  identification? — No,  I  would 
not. 

That  identification  by  both  of  these  women  which  I  have  put 
to  you  just  now  is  after  the  remark  outside  the  Court  which 
you  say  you  heard? — That  is  so. 

And  in  the  case  of  Barrowman,  at  least,  it  was  after  she  had 
seen  the  photograph  of  the  man? — Yes,  quite  so. 

Can  you  tell  me  if  there  was  anything  special  about  the  man 
by  which  the  girl  Barrowman  claimed  to  identify  him? — She 
identified  his  nose  principally. 

Was  not  that  the  only  thing  she  professed  to  go  by? — Yes, 
by  the  face. 

And  her  previous  opportunity  of   seeing  that  had  been,   I 

86 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

think,  while  the  man  was  running  past  her  on  the  street  on  John  Pype? 
21st  December  in  the  vicinity  of  a  lamp? — Yes. 

She  described  it,  I  think,  as  a  twisted  nose? — Yes,  or  turned 
a  little  to  the  right  side. 

I  ask  the  accused  to  stand  up.  Does  that  man's  nose  turn 
any  way  to  the  side  when  you  regard  his  front  face? — No,  I  do 
not  see  much  twist  in  it.  It  is  somewhat  peculiar,  but  otherwise 
there  is  no  twist  in  it. 

The  profile  creates  an  impression  which  the  front  face  does 
not? — That  is  so. 

By  the  COURT — Did  the  witness  Barrowman  say  for  about 
what  distance  she  had  had  the  man  in  view? — She  explained 
to  me  at  the  time  that  when  he  came  down  the  stair  he  stood 
at  the  bottom  step  leading  to  the  pavement  for  a  little, 
hesitating,  looking  to  the  right,  and  then  he  turned  towards 
her  and  ran  past  her  while  she  was  standing  under  the  lamp- 
post. 

Cross-examination  resumed — Now,  after  this  identification  in 
America  the  girls  were  brought  back? — Yes. 

And,  of  course,  when  they  were  taken  into  the  police  office 
to  identify  Slater  they  were  looking  for  the  man  they  had  seen 
in  America? — I  presume  they  were. 

May  I  take  it  that  when  they  looked  for  the  man  they  had 
seen  in  America  among  these  policemen  at  the  police  office  and 
the  two  railway  officials  there  was  no  person  who  bore  a 
foreign  appearance  or  was  the  least  like  Slater  except  himself  ? — 
That  is  so. 

I  wish  to  ask  you  this — I  have  already  asked  Detective 
Trench — have  you  considered  that  to  be  a  fair  way  of  conducting 
an  identification,  to  have  the  only  man  that  they  hope  to  identify 
in  the  presence  of  a  number  of  others  who  do  not  bear  to  him 
the  least  resemblance? — I  do  not  know  that  it  is  for  me  to  say 
whether  it  is  fair  or  not.  It  is  a  matter  over  which  I  had  no 
control. 

What  you  mean  is  that  you  do  not  want  to  criticise  your 
superior  officer? — I  do  not. 

When  you  said  that  Slater  was  allowed  to  take  up  any  position 
he  chose  in  the  police  office  that  was  really  no  use,  was  it?  He 
was  the  only  man  the  least  like  Slater  there? — Yes,  he  was  the 
only  man  like  Slater. 

Did  he  ask  to  be  allowed  to  take  up  any  special  position? 
—No. 

He  allowed  you  to  show  him  off  to  these  people  in  any  position 
you  chose? — Yes. 

Did  you  march  them  and  make  them  turn  their  heads,  and 
so  on,  and  Slater  never  objected? — That  is  so. 

Were  you  present  when  Miss  Cunningham  was  down  to 
identify  the  man? — Yes. 

87 


Oscar  Slater. 

John  Pyper       Had  she  been  shown  a  photograph  before? — I  cannot  tell. 

During  the  process  of  identification  did  you  put  any  coat 
upon  the  accused  that  was  not  his  own? — Yes. 

Whose  coat  did  you  put  on? — I  cannot  tell  you.  I  did  not 
put  it  on,  but  I  saw  one  put  on. 

Was  he  identified  in  that  coat? — Yes. 

By  whom? — The  girl  Barrowman. 

Did  the  coat  differ  from  the  waterproof  coat? — No,  it  was 
exactly  the  same  pattern  and  colour. 

Was  it  a  different  length? — No,  it  was  the  same  length. 

Why  did  you  not  put  on  his  own  coat? — It  was  not  available 
at  the  time. 

Was  the  coat  you  put  on  a  short  coat? — I  did  not  put  it  on. 

Did  you  see  it  put  on? — I  saw  him  with  a  coat  on,  but  I  do 
not  know  where  it  came  from. 

Was  it  down  to  his  knees  ? — It  was  below  his  knees  a  little. 

In  America  you  took  possession  of  the  man's  luggage? — Yes. 

Have  you  been  through  the  whole  of  his  luggage  ? — Along  with 
Mr.  Warnock  I  went  through  it  all.  I  did  not  take  an  inventory. 

You  went  through  it  with  the  express  purpose  of  finding 
garments  in  his  baggage  which  would  tally  with  the  descriptions 
you  had  got? — Yes. 

And  also  with  the  purpose,  I  suppose,  of  looking  for  blood 
stains? — Yes. 

How  many  suits  had  he? — A  great  number. 

May  I  take  it  that  there  is  no  coat,  waistcoat,  or  pair  of 
trousers  found  in  his  baggage  which  bears  the  slightest  appear- 
ance of  blood? — I  saw  no  blood  on  any  of  his  garments. 

And  you  searched  for  it? — Yes. 

Did  you  find  among  his  baggage  anywhere  a  pair  of  brown 
boots? — No,  I  did  not  see  them. 

If  you  had  found  them  you  would  have  produced  them.  Did 
you  find  other  boots? — Yes.  I  think  there  was  another  pair  of 
boots  and  some  slippers. 

Do  you  mean  there  was  only  one  other  pair  of  boots? — Yes. 
There  may  have  been  more,  but  I  do  not  remember  of  there 
being  more. 

But  were  you  not  searching? — I  looked  over  them;  I  looked 
simply  for  garments  that  he  was  described  as  having  been  seen 
wearing,  or  I  was  looking  for  blood  stains. 

You  searched  for  brown  boots  and  you  got  none? — I  did  not 
see  any  brown  boots. 

Did  you  get  what  is  commonly  called  a  Donegal  hat  any- 
where?— The  hats  that  have  been  produced  are  the  only  ones  I 
found. 

Were  there  not  a  great  many  hats  and  caps  in  the  man's 
baggage? — I  did  not  see  a  great  many. 

There  were  more  than  those  that  have  been  produced? — I  do 
not  remember  seeing  any  more  hats. 
88 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

I  put  it  to  you  there  were  about  seven  or  eight  hats  and  John  Pypw 
caps  in  his  baggage? — That  is  possible.     I  did  not  see  them. 

Who  would  see  them? — Mr.  Warnock  may  have  seen  them. 

There  is  none  that  you  would  describe  as  a  Donegal,  and  you 
did  not  find  brown  boots.  Did  you  find  any  checked  trousers? — 
No,  I  do  not  think  so.  There  were  some  striped  trousers. 

Any  fawn-coloured  spats? — No,  no  spats  at  all.    I  saw  none. 

A  great  many  coats? — Yes. 

And  they  were  all  minutely  examined? — Yes. 

Now,  with  regard  to  the  coat  which  is  produced,  what  did  you 
find  on  it?  Anything  of  an  incriminatory  nature? — I  cannot 
say  what  that  is.  There  were  several  dark  stains,  but  what 
these  are  I  do  not  know. 

Are  they  very  minute? — They  are  not  very  distinct,  but  they 
are  visible. 

Did  you  see  the  room  and  the  body  lying  in  it? — Yes. 

Was  there  not  a  great  deal  of  blood  splashed  about? — Yes. 

Were  the  fire-irons  not  merely  covered  with  mere  sparks,  but 
with  a  great  deal  of  blood? — Quite  a  number  of  sparks. 

Does  not  the  coal  scuttle  show  lots  of  blood? — Yes,  quite  a 
number  of  sparks. 

Are  there  not  splashes  running  right  down  it? — Yes. 

There  are  signs  on  it  of  blood  having  run  down  the  whole 
length  of  the  coal  scuttle? — Yes. 

There  were  bits  of  the  woman's  brain  found  on  the  rug? — Yes. 

And  a  great  deal  of  blood  on  the  carpet? — Yes. 

There  was  a  rug  over  the  top  of  her? — Yes. 

Had  not  that  rug  blood  on  both  sides? — Yes. 

Did  it  bear  the  appearance  of  having  been  put  over  her  to 
cover  her  after  she  was  dead? — Yes. 

There  was  blood  on  the  top  side  of  the  rug  as  it  lay  over 
her.  I  show  you  label  No.  17,  the  second  rug.  Was  not  the 
hairy  side  of  that  rug  covered  with  blood — was  there  not  a  lot 
of  blood  on  it? — Yes. 

Was  not  the  end  doubled  back  over  the  woman? — It  was 
lying  flat,  I  think. 

Was  it  not  doubled  back  over  the  woman? — Yes,  it  was  lying 
right  over  her  body.  That  may  have  been  caused  by  the  con- 
stable who  lifted  it  before  I  went  there.  He  lifted  it  and  saw 
the  body. 

Was  she  lying  upon  this  rug  to  any  extent? — No,  she  was 
not  on  it  at  all.  She  was  lying  on  the  other  rug. 

This  second  rug  was  on  the  top  of  her? — Yes. 

With  the  hairy  side  on  the  top  of  her  body? — Yes. 

If  that  be  so,  how  would  the  blood  which  appears  on  the 
other  side  have  come  there? — The  place  was  smeared  with  blood, 
and  throwing  it  off  and  throwing  it  down  blood  may  have  gone 
on  to  the  other  side  in  that  way. 

89 


Oscar   Slater. 

John  Pyper  Would  it  have  come  from  the  weapons  or  from  the  clothes 
of  the  murderer? — It  might  have  come  from  the  clothing  or 
from  the  other  rug.  It  could  have  got  there  in  different  ways. 
From  the  condition  in  which  you  found  the  room,  and  from 
the  amount  of  blood  that  was  spread  about,  can  you  conceive 
of  the  man  having  executed  that  murder  without  having  splashed 
himself  a  good  deal  with  blood? — I  would  fancy  he  would  have 
stains  of  blood  over  his  clothing. 

And  a  lot  of  it? — Yes,  I  should  say  a  good  deal  of  it. 
Would  you  expect  more  than  the  doubtful  spots  you  found 
upon  that  waterproof? — Yes. 

By  the  COURT — Why?  Was  there  any  mark  of  blood  behind 
the  chair? — No. 

Suppose  the  old  lady  was  hit  from  behind,  would  the  person 
so  hitting  her,  do  you  expect,  bear  any  mark  of  blood  if  no 
blood  was  found  behind  the  chair? — I  cannot  say;  the  blood 
might  have  been  on  the  clothes  or  it  might  not.  It  depends  on 
how  the  blow  was  given. 

There  was  no  blood  on  the  table? — No. 
Cross-examination  resumed — Was  not  the  chair  set  in  to  the 
table  as  if  the  old  lady  had  been  reading  at  the  table? — Yes. 

And  her  back  was  rather  towards  the  door? — She  was  lying 
on  her  back. 

Must  not  the  murderer  have  dealt  considerably  with  her 
body,  because  was  not  her  chest  found  completely  collapsed? — 
I  cannot  tell. 

The  ribs  were  all  broken  ? — The  doctors  will  be  able  to  speak 
to  that. 

Do  you  not  know  that? — No. 

Was  not  her  head  all  smashed  to  pieces? — Yes,  I  saw  that. 
Do  you  not  think  that  the  probabilities  are  that  the  person 
who    achieved    all   that   upon   the   body   of   the   woman   would 
exhibit    blood    stains  on    himself? — It    depended    on    how    the 
sparks  of  blood  went  and  how  the  woman  was  struck. 
By  the  COURT — But  you  assent  to  the  probabilities? — Yes. 
Cross-examination   resumed — The    probability    is  that   there 
would   be   a   great  deal   more   blood  than   was   found  on   that 
coat? — I    should   fancy   that   there   would   be   some   sparks   of 
blood. 

By  the  COURT — Do  you  know  where  that  red  rug  usually 
lay? — It  usually  lay  in  front  of  a  sideboard,  on  the  other  side 
of  the  room  altogether  from  where  the  lady  was  sitting.  It 
had  evidently  been  lifted  from  there  and  thrown  over. 

That  would  all  increase  the  probability  of  the  man  getting 
some  blood  on  him? — (No  answer.) 

Cross-examination  resumed — Now,  about  the  hammer  (label 
No.   47),  take  it  that  the  head  of  the  woman  was  extensively 
smashed  so  that  the  brains  were  out  in  portions  and  the  head 
90 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

had  deep  holes  in  it  and  the  ribs  were  smashed,  is  that  weapon  John  Pyper 
that  you  have  in  your  hand  the  least  likely  to  have  caused 
injuries  to  that  extent? — It  would  certainly  have  required  great 
force  to  do  it. 

Is  it  in  the  least  likely  to  be  a  weapon  to  do  it? — I  would  not 
say  it  is  not. 

But  would  you  say  that  it  was? — I  would  not  like  to  say. 

Would  it  not  give  the  man  a  great  deal  of  trouble  and  an 
immense  deal  of  labour  to  smash  the  woman  up  in  that  way 
with  a  hammer  like  that? — It  would  require  a  great  deal  of 
force. 

Would  you  have  thought  that  a  hammer  with  a  larger  surface 
would  have  been  necessary  for  the  extensive  smashing  that 
there  was  in  this  case? — I  would  not  say  so. 

That  is  a  light  hammer? — Yes,  but  if  it  was  used  with  force 
it  would  have  bad  effects. 

Show  me  where  the  blood  stains  are  on  that  hammer? — I  do 
not  say  that  there  are  any. 

Is  it  your  theory  that  that  hammer  has  been  scraped? — It 
seems  to  me  to  have  been  scraped. 

Is  it  your  theory  that  the  hammer  was  originally  varnished 
or  anything  of  that  kind? — You  can  see  that  it  has  been 
tampered  with  in  some  way.  Something  has  been  done  in 
the  way  of  cleaning  it  up 

Do  you  see  coal  dust  at  the  top  of  the  stick  where  it  joins 
the  hammer  head? — Yes. 

Towards  the  lower  part  of  the  shaft,  where  there  is  a  differ- 
ence between  it  and  the  upper  part  of  the  shaft,  does  not  that 
look  as  if  a  dirty  hand  had  grasped  the  hammer? — It  is 
possible. 

Is  there,  in  your  opinion,  any  more  difference  between  the 
top  and  the  bottom  of  that  hammer  than  what  you  would 
expect  if  the  hammer  had  a  plain  wooden  handle  and  a  dirty 
hand  had  been  in  the  habit  of  grasping  it  at  the  foot? — It  is 
rough  at  the  top  as  if  it  had  been  rubbed  with  something. 

Look  at  that  new  hammer  which  we  have  produced.  Is 
that  an  exact  replica  of  the  hammer  (label  No.  47)? — Yes. 

The  same  size  exactly? — Yes. 

Has  it  not  got  the  same  kind  of  handle? — Yes. 

Is  there  any  more  sign  of  scraping  on  the  one  than  on  the 
other? — The  one  is  new  and  the  other  has  been  used. 

But  is  there  any  sign  on  either  of  scraping  up  towards  the 
hammer  head? — Yes,  the  new  hammer  is  all  the  same,  whereas 
the  other  is  smooth  at  the  top  and  the  bottom  half  is  rough. 

I  show  you  label  No.  48.  Did  you  find  in  Slater's  box  four 
different  implements  exactly  corresponding  to  the  four  imple- 
ments which  I  show  you  on  this  card? — Yes. 

Were  these  recovered? — I  did  not  recover  these. 


Oscar  Slater. 

John  Pyper  Suppose  somebody  with  a  hand  covered  with  coal  dust  gripped 
this  new  hammer,  would  you  expect  that  the  clean  hammer 
would  become  exactly  like  that  after  a  little  use? — It  might. 

Do  you  persist  at  all  that  there  has  been  obvious  scraping? — 
I  cannot  say  what  it  has  been.  I  simply  say  there  has  been 
some  rubbing.  Whether  it  has  been  tear  and  wear  I  do  not 
know. 

You  mean  rubbing  at  the  lower  part? — Yes. 

But  there  is  nothing  like  scraping  at  the  other  part? — You 
call  it  the  upper  part. 

(The  hammers  were  handed  to  the  jury  for  inspection.) 

You  said  at  the  end  of  your  examination — I  do  not  know 
why  you  emphasised  it — that  it  took  seven  and  a  half  minutes' 
walking  to  go  from  the  door  of  Miss  Gilchrist's  house  to  a 
Subway  station.  Which  Subway  station? — The  station  in  South 
Woodside  Road. 

Is  that  by  Kelvinbridge  ? — By  West  Princes  Street.  It  is 
near  Kelvinbridge,  and  is  called  the  Kelvinbridge  station. 

Was  the  person  who  was  supposed  to  have  committed  this 
crime  seen  at  the  Kelvinbridge  station,  or  reported  to  have 
been  seen  there? — Yes. 

Somebody  answering  to  the  description? — Yes. 

At  what  hour  ? — I  do  not  know.  I  did  not  take  the  statement 
from  the  person  who  spoke  to  that. 

At  what  hour  do  you  take  it  that  this  crime  was  committed? 
— It  must  have  been  between  7  and  7.15,  or  between  7  and 
7.30. 

So  a  direct  run  by  the  murderer — if  it  was  he — on  the  route 
you  have  mentioned  should  have  brought  him  up  there,  I 
suppose,  bv  something  about  twenty  minutes  past  seven? — 
Yes. 

A  walk  would  have  taken  him  there  just  after  twenty 
minutes  past  seven? — Yes. 

Then  there  is  another  thing  I  want  to  ask  you;  was  any- 
body seen  running  in  the  direction  you  have  spoken  of? — The 
girl  Barrowman  described  that  the  man  was  running  west  along 
West  Princes  Street. 

How  far? — As  far  as  West  Cumberland  Street  she  took  notice 
of  him,  she  said. 

I  mean,  he  did  not  run  straight  along  to  this  Subway,  but 
turned  to  the  left  along  West  Cumberland  Street? — Yes. 

Was  anybody  else  seen  running  along  there? — A  Miss  Brown 
speaks  to  two  men  running  along  this  direction. 

That  is  two  other  men  entirely  separate? — They  were  two 
together. 

I  mean,   they  were   not    Slater;     they   were  not  the    man 
who   went  down   West   Cumberland    Street? — Well,    I   do    not 
know   whether   it  was   or   not ;    you   will   get   that   from   the 
witnesses. 
92 


o 
p.  ^ 

to    s 

«  a 

a 


c?  ~ 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

At  any  rate,  running  straight  down  in  the  direction  of  the  John  Pyper 
Subway,  there  were  two  men  seen  running? — Yes,  Miss  Brown 
speaks  to  that. 

And  then  Barrowman  says  there  was  a  single  man  seen 
running,  who  turned  to  his  left  down  West- Cumberland  Street? 
—Yes. 

And  was  that  at  or  about  the  same  time — both  of  them? — 
Well,  near  the  same  time. 

Is  Miss  Brown  coming? — She  is  here  to-day. 

Re-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — Were  there  a  number 
of  men  who  were  clean  shaven  in  the  Court-house  at  New 
York? — Oh,  quite  a  number. 

Were  there  a  number  of  clean-shaven  men  in  the  Central 
Office  in  Glasgow? — There  were. 

Were  all  the  men  different — just  ordinary  types  of  men  that 
you  see  in  the  streets? — That  is  so. 

Did  either  of  the  girls  ever  point  to  anybody  in  the  room, 
either  in  New  York  or  in  the  Central  Office,  except  Slater? — 
Except  the  one  man,  no. 

Did  they  ever  hesitate  between  him  and  somebody  else? — 
Never. 

Do  you  recollect  that  the  girl  Barrowman  in  your  presence 
was  asked  the  question  in  New  York,  "  Do  you  see  the  man 
here  you  saw  that  night?"  and  then  the  accused's  agent  said, 
"  I  think  she  ought  to  be  asked  to  describe  him  "? — Yes. 

And  then  she  described  him? — She  described  him. 

And  then  do  you  recollect  the  Commissioner  said,  "  Is  the 
man  in  this  room  among  all  these  men  here  that  you  saw 
that  night  "  ?  and  Barrowman  answered,  "  That  man  here  is 
very  like  him  "? — These  are  her  words. 

And  then  do  you  recollect  that  the  accused's  agent,  Mr. 
Miller,  said,  "  The  man  here  is  something  like  him  "  ? — Yes. 

And  Mr.  Fox,  for  the  Crown,  said,  "  She  said  very  like 
him  "  ?— Yes. 

And  is  it  not  the  fact  that  the  girl  Barrowman  said,  "  He 
is  very  like  him"? — Yes. 

And  then  do  you  recollect  the  witness  saying,  "  I  said, 
'  something  like  him  '  the  first  time,  and  then  '  very  like  ' 
after  I  had  said  '  something  like  him  '  "? — Yes. 

Now,  did  she  take  a  careful  look  at  the  man? — She  did. 

It  was  not  a  mere  casual  glance? — No. 

She  looked  carefully  at  him? — Yes,  he  was  asked  to  stand  up. 

And  when  she  had  looked  carefully  at  him  did  she  then  say 
he  was  very  like  him? — Yes. 

And  then  do  you  recollect  the  Commissioner  said,  "Point 
the  man  out,"  and  did  she  point  him  out? — She  pointed  him 
out. 

Without  hesitation? — Without  hesitation. 

93 


Oscar  Slater. 

John  Pyper  Now,  do  you  say  the  same  of  the  witness  Helen  Lambie, 
that  she  never  hesitated  between  this  man  and  anybody  else? — 
Never. 

Did  you  see  anything  in  his  gait  apart  from  the  way  in 
which  be  turned  in  his  left  toe ;  did  you  see  anything  in  his 
gait  when  he  moved  along  which  is  peculiar? — He  puts  his 
shoulders  forward  as  he  steps  along  in  a  rocking  gait,  slightly. 

Suppose  you  saw  him  walking,  taking  both  this  rolling 
movement  you  have  described  and  this  turn  of  his  left  foot, 
would  that  strike  you  as  peculiar? — Putting  everything 
together  it  is  noticeable,  I  should  fancy;  it  is  observable  if 
you  were  looking  at  the  person  minutely. 

And  with  such  light  as  you  saw,  and  the  distance  from  the 
room  out  to  the  stair,  would  there  be  sufficient  opportunity 
for  the  girl  to  see  his  way  of  walking? — Yes,  if  she  looked 
to  see — if  she  was  looking  at  his  feet. 

Or  his  shoulders? — Yes. 

Did  you  hear  her  say  in  New  York  that  the  man  held  down 
his  head  as  he  came  out? — Yes. 

By  the  COURT — Did  you  recover  Slater's  luggage  from  the 
boat? — No,  we  recovered  it  from  the  Government  stores  in  New 
York — sealed. 

You  do  not  know  where  the  box  containing  the  coat  and  the 
hammer  was  during  the  voyage — whether  it  was  down  in  the 
hold  or  whether  it  was  under  Slater's  control? — It  was  down 
in  the  hold,  and  Mr.  Warnock  had  the  keys  of  all  the  boxes. 

Do  you  know  whether,  at  the  time  that  the  warrant  was  issued 
for  Slater's  apprehension,  it  was  known  that  the  diamond 
brooch  which  he  had  pawned  was  not  the  same  as  that  which 
was  amissing? — It  was  known  from  the  very  start  that  it  was 
not  the  same. 

A.  H.  Adams  ARTHUR  MONTAGUE  ADAMS,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — 
I  live  at  51  West  Princes  Street,  Glasgow.  It  is  called  14 
Queen's  Terrace.  It  is  next  door  to  No.  15,  Miss  Gilchrist's 
house,  immediately  to  the  west.  My  house  is  on  the  ground 
floor.  It  is  entered  by  a  front  door  up  six  steps  from  the 
pavement.  My  door  is  on  the  same  level  as  the  door  of  the 
closemouth  leading  to  Miss  Gilchrist's  house.  Her  dining- 
room  is  just  over  my  dining-room.  I  knew  Miss  Gilchrist 
as  a  neighbour  only.  I  did  not  visit.  My  mother  and  five 
sisters  live  in  the  same  house  with  me.  On  Monday  night, 
21st  December  last,  I  was  in  my  house  after  six  o'clock.  About 
seven  o'clock  I  was  sitting  in  the  dining-room  with  my  two 
sisters,  Laura  and  Rowena.  When  I  was  sitting  there  I  heard 
a  sound  like  a  thud,  and  three  distinct  knocks,  as  if  wanting 
assistance,  up  above  in  Miss  Gilchrist's  dining-room.  My 
sister  Laura  drew  my  attention  to  it. 

94 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Did  she  suggest  that  you  should  go  up  and  see  if  anything  A.  M.  Adams 
was  wrong? — She  sent  me  up  instantly.  The  door  at  the  close- 
mouth  was  ajar.  I  did  not  require  to  ring ;  it  was  open.  I 
went  right  upstairs  to  Miss  Gilchrist's  door.  I  rang  the  bell 
three  times  for  certain.  I  rang  it  hard — rude  rings.  Her 
house  door  was  apparently  locked.  There  is  a  glass  panel 
on  each  side  of  the  door.  Looking  through  it  I  could  see 
quite  distinctly  that  the  lobby  gas  was  lit.  I  listened  for  any 
sounds  inside  the  house.  After  I  had  been  standing  at  the 
door  for  half  a  minute  or  so  I  heard  what  I  thought  was  the 
servant  breaking  sticks  in  the  kitchen ;  I  could  not  say  what 
it  was ;  that  was  only  my  surmise.  It  seemed  as  if  it  was 
some  one  chopping  sticks — not  heavy  blows.  At  that  time  I 
did  not  know  whether  Miss  Gilchrist's  maid-servant  was  out 
or  not;  I  imagined  that  she  was  in.  I  know  her  by  sight 
quite  well.  I  waited  fully  a  minute  or  a  minute  and  a  half 
at  the  door. 

Did   you   hear    any   further    sound? — I    just   heard   what   I 
thought  was  the  girl  breaking  sticks. 
Afterwards? — While  I  was  at  the  door. 

But  did  you  hear  it  going  on  and  then  stopping,  and  then 
resuming  again,  or  was  it  continuous? — I  formed  the  opinion 
that  the  girl  was  doing  up  her  kitchen,  and  that  she  was  not 
going  to  open  the  door.  I  could  not  really  properly  explain 
it.  After  waiting  for  a  minute  or  two  I  went  downstairs 
again  and  entered  my  own  house.  I  left  the  door  at  the  close- 
mouth  ajar  just  as  I  had  found  it.  I  went  into  the  dining- 
room  again.  I  told  my  sisters  the  house  was  all  lit  up,  and 
I  did  not  think  there  was  anything  wrong ;  I  thought  it  was 
the  girl.  My  sister  Laura  thought  otherwise.  She  made 
me  go  back  again.  She  thought  there  must  be  something 
wrong.  Without  sitting  down  or  waiting  any  time  I  returned 
upstairs  to  Miss  Gilchrist's  door.  I  gave  the  door  bell  an 
ordinary  good  pull.  I  did  not  hear  any  sound  the  second  time. 
I  stood,  after  pulling  the  bell ;  I  had  my  hand  on  the  door 
bell  when  I  heard  footsteps  in  the  close.  This  was  the  servant 
girl,  Helen  Lambie.  When  the  girl  came  up  I  told  her  I 
thought  there  was  something  wrong,  or  something  seriously 
wrong ;  I  cannot  give  you  the  exact  words.  She  told  me  that 
it  was  the  pulleys  in  the  kitchen  that  I  had  heard. 

Did  the  girl  put  two  keys  into  the  locks  and  open  the  doors t 
— She  opened  the  door,  but  I  cannot  say  whether  there  were 
two  keys  or  not.  I  was  standing  at  the  back  of  her.  I  said 
I  would  wait.  She  opened  the  door. 

Will  you  now  tell  us  what  happened  in  your  own  words? — 
Well,  there  is  a  bedroom  over  there  (pointing  to  the  right); 
say,  that  is  the  bedroom,  and  there  is  the  drawing-room, 
this  is  the  door  where  I  nm  standing  now.  The  dining-room 

95 


Oscar  Slater. 

A.  M.  Adams  is  on  the  left  hand  side,  and  then  there  is  an  old-fashioned 
grandfather's  clock  between  that,  and  just  over  on  that  side 
is  the  kitchen.  I  stood  at  the  door  on  the  threshold,  half  in 
and  half  out,  and  just  when  the  girl  had  got  past  the  clock  to  go 
into  the  kitchen  a  well-dressed  man  appeared.  I  did  not 
suspect  him,  and  she  said  nothing,  and  he  came  up  to  me 
quite  pleasantly.  I  did  not  suspect  anything  wrong  for  a 
minute.  I  thought  the  man  was  going  to  speak  to  me,  till 
he  got  past  me,  and  then  I  suspected  something  wrong,  and 
by  that  time  the  girl  ran  into  the  kitchen  and  put  the  gas  up, 
and  said  it  was  all  right,  meaning  her  pulleys.  I  said, 
"  Where  is  your  mistress?  "  and  she  went  into  the  dining-room. 
She  said,  "  Oh,  come  here " ;  I  just  went  in  and  saw  this 
horrible  spectacle,  and  I  said,  "  Go  to  the  closemouth  and 
stand  there  till  I  come  back."  I  went  down  to  St.  George's 
Road,  and  I  could  see  no  people  there,  but  I  could  see  up  to 
Park  Road,  and  could  see  people  in  the  distance,  and  I  made 
after  him  as  hard  as  I  could  go,  but  it  was  no  use. 

Did  you  see  the  man  go  downstairs? — I  saw  the  man  walk 
quite  coolly  till  he  got  up  to  me,  and  then  he  went  down 
quickly,  like  greased  lightning,  and  that  aroused  my  suspicions. 
He  walked  coolly  till  he  got  past  me,  and  then  he  went  down 
quickly  and  banged  the  door  at  the  foot  of  the  close.  I  heard 
him  going  rapidly  down  the  stair. 

Will  you  describe  the  man  you  saw  to  the  best  of  your 
ability? — Well,  it  was  a  passing  view  I  got  of  him.  He  was 
a  man  a  little  taller  than  me,  a  little  broader  in  the  shoulders ; 
not  a  well-built  man,  but  well  featured  and  clean  shaven, 
and  I  cannot  exactly  swear  to  his  moustache,  but  if  he 
had  any  it  was  very  little.  He  was  rather  a  commercial 
traveller's  type  or  perhaps  a  clerk,  and  I  did  not  know  but 
what  he  might  be  some  of  her  friends.  He  had  on  dark 
trousers  and  a  light  overcoat;  whether  it  was  fawn  or  grey  I 
could  not  really  say.  I  do  not  recollect  what  sort  of  hat  he 
had ;  I  am  not  sure  on  that  point.  He  seemed  gentlemanly 
and  well  dressed.  He  had  nothing  in  his  hand  so  far  as  I 
could  tell.  I  did  not  notice  anything  about  his  way  of  walking 
at  all. 

Did  you  see  him  at  all  after  he  passed  you;  did  you  look 
round  to  see  him  disappear  down  the  stairs? — I  got  a  good 
view;  I  saw  him  run  down  the  stair,  but  he  was  too  quick 
for  me.  I  mean  he  darted  down  immediately  he  had  passed 
me. 

By  the  COURT — He  left  the  house  door  open. 

Examination  continued — Could  you  tell  he  was  coming  from 

the  direction  of  the  large  bedroom? — Yes,  now  that  I  know 

where  the  bedroom  is.     I  just  took  a  look  into  the  dining-room 

before  I   went  down  the  stairs.      I  saw  Miss   Gilchrist  lying 

96 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

covered  up  with  a  rug,  with  her  feet  towards  the  door  and  her  A.  M.  Adams 
head  towards  the  fireplace,  but  I  did  not  touch  her;  I  thought 
my  best  plan  was  to  make  after  the  man  as  quickly  as 
possible.  When  I  failed  to  get  on  his  track  I  came  back  to 
the  house.  I  then  found  the  servant  and  a  constable  in  it. 
The  constable  and  I  entered  the  dining-room  together.  We 
uncovered  the  body  and  found  she  had  been  battered  to  death, 
but  she  was  breathing — just  breathing.  I  went  for  Dr.  Adams 
as  hard  as  I  could  go.  I  brought  another  constable,  and  I 
'phoned  to  the  police  office.  I  myself  waited  in  the  house  for 
the  police ;  I  waited  there  till  eleven  o'clock.  I  had  not  on 
my  spectacles  at  the  time. 

Did  you  form  any  sort  of  idea  about  the  age  of  the  man? — 
Well,  I  said  in  my  deposition  he  was  between  twenty-five  and 
thirty,  I  thought.  I  did  not  hear  any  sound  as  of  Miss 
Gilchrist's  bell  being  rung  that  night.  I  noticed  her  bell  being 
rung,  but  I  did  not  notice  it  that  night.  I  might  miss  that. 
I  was  occupied  at  the  time  in  the  dining-room.  I  was  tieing 
up  a  parcel  for  a  young  lady  to  send  away  some  groceries. 
I  do  not  always  notice  when  her  bell  is  rung.  I  did  not  see 
the  girl  go  out  for  a  newspaper;  I  got  the  girl  in  the  close.  I 
did  not  know  at  the  time  that  there  was  nobody  in  the 
house  except  Miss  Gilchrist;  I  know  that  there  were  just  her 
and  a  maid  living  there — that  there  were  just  the  two  of  them. 
I  went  to  America  with  Warnock  and  Pyper,  and  with  the 
two  female  witnesses  Lambie  and  Barrowman.  When  I  arrived 
there  I  recollect  that  before  going  to  the  Court-house  I  was 
shown  a  photograph  in  Mr.  Fox's  office.  That  was  a  newspaper 
cutting. 

Was  it  a  good  photograph  or  a  bad  one  as  far  as  you  could 
judge? — I  really  could  not  judge  from  the  photograph  at  all. 
When  we  were  being  examined  we  were  all  together  in  the 
Commissioner's  room  in  New  York.  There  were  a  number  of 
people  in  the  room.  I  did  not  see  Slater  come  into  the  room. 
He  was  in  the  room  before  I  came  in.  When  he  came  in  I 
was  standing  up  against  the  wall.  There  were  a  number  of 
men  in  the  room.  I  think  I  sat  on  a  chair  when  I  was  being 
examined.  I  was  asked  to  point  out  among  the  men  present 
the  man  that  I  had  seen  that  night.  I  pointed  out  Slater,  but 
I  did  not  say  that  he  was  the  man.  I  said  he  closely  resembled 
the  man.  Slater  was  the  only  man  I  did  point  out  as  closely 
resembling  him. 

Had   you   any   difficulty   between  him   and   the   other   men 
there? — The  general  appearance  of  the  man  was  all  I  went  by. 
Was  he  the  only  man  amongst  all  the  men  you  pointed  out  1 — 
Yes,  as  resembling  the  man  that  came  out  of  that  house. 

From  what  was  it  that  you  judged  that  he  was  like  the  man 
or  resembled  the  man  you  saw? — His  general  appearance. 
H  97 


Oscar  Slater. 

A.  M.  Adams  Did  you  notice  if  there  were  other  clean-shaven  men  there? — 
Oh,  there  were  all  sorts  of  men.  The  room  was  pretty  full; 
there  were  a  good  few  people  there. 

Was  he  handcuffed,  or  was  there  anything  distinctive  about 
his  appearance? — I  thought  he  had  rather  a  superior 
appearance. 

By  the  COURT — There  was  nothing  to  mark  him  out  as  a 
prisoner.  He  was  just  sitting  twiddling  his  thumbs  like  that. 
(Illustrating.) 

Examination  continued — I  came  home  from  America  after 
being  examined  in  New  York.  I  was  examined  twice  in  New 
York,  on  two  successive  days,  but  on  the  second  day  there  was 
nothing  asked  hardly;  it  was  only  a  word  or  two.  The  first 
day  was  the  day  of  examination  for  identification.  After  I 
came  back  to  this  country  I  saw  Slater  again  in  the  Central 
Police  Office.  I  am  not  sure  of  the  date,  but  it  was  in  February 
some  time.  I  should  think  there  would  be  a  dozen  men  any 
way — perhaps  more — in  the  room  at  the  Central  Police  Office. 
I  pointed  out  Slater  again.  I  said  of  him  in  the  Central  Police 
Office  the  same  as  I  said  in  New  York.  I  had  no  difficulty  in 
pointing  him  out  from  all  the  other  men  in  the  room  in  Glasgow, 
as  in  New  York.  I  did  not  hesitate  between  him  and  somebody 
else. 

And  was  it  again  just  from  your  general  recollection  and 
the  general  appearance  of  the  man? — That  is  so. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLTJRE — In  New  York  you  were  all 
together  in  a  room  while  the  depositions  were  made  before  the 
Commissioner  ? — Yes. 

And  you  were  taken  successively  on  to  this  chair? — The 
second  day  I  was  examined;  the  first  day  I  had  nothing  to  say 
at  all;  it  was  the  second  day,  as  far  as  I  remember,  that  I  was 
asked. 

Were  you  not  examined  on  the  26th  of  January? — I  could 
not  give  the  exact  date. 

Was  it  the  day  after  your  arrival? — No,  I  was  not  examined 
that  day;  it  must  have  been  the  following  day,  as  far  as  I 
can  tell  you. 

Were  you  present  when  the  girl  Barrowman  and  the  other 
girl  Lambie  made  their  statements  in  America? — Yes. 

And  they  made  their  statements  before  you  did? — Yes. 

And,  of  course,  both  Lambie  and  Barrowman  had  indicated 
that  Slater  was  very  like  the  man  before  you  went  on  to  the 
witness  stand  to  give  your  statement? — Yes. 

And  you  knew  precisely  where  the  man  in  question  was 
sitting  when  you  went  on  to  the  chair? — Yes,  I  admit  that. 

So  that  when  he  was  shown  to  you  in  America  he  was  not 
placed  among  a  l°t  °f  other  men  of  the  same  appearance? — 
There  was  Slater,  and  then  came  Mr.  Goodhart  and  Mr.  Miller, 
98 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

but  I  knew  who  Mr.  Miller  was,  because  he  asked  me  if  my  A.  M.  Adams 

name  was  Adams,  and  if  I  was  a  Crown  witness,  and  I  said 

yes. 

Sitting  in  a  row  there  was  Mr.  Miller,  that  was  Slater's 
counsel  or  agent  in  America? — I  suppose  they  are  both  his 
agents. 

And  then  Goodhart  had  something  to  do  with  the  case 
also? — Yes,  he  had  got  to  do  with  it,  but  Mr.  Miller  was 
pleading. 

Mr.  Miller  was  pleading,  and  Mr.  Goodhart  was  telling  him 
what  to  plead? — I  suppose  so. 

And  Slater  was  there? — I  suppose  that  is  the  way  of  it. 
And  Slater  had  been  pointed  out  twice  already  before  you 
proceeded  to  give  your  evidence? — That  is  so. 

And  even  after  all  you  have  heard  you  do  not  give  an 
absolutely  confident  opinion  that  that  was  the  man? — No,  it 
is  too  serious  a  charge  for  me  to  say  from  a  passing  glance. 

Do  you  say  you  had  a  passing  glance? — Well,  you  know 
the  time  it  takes  for  a  man  to  come  from  a  room. 

You  identified  him  as  a  clean-shaven  man? — I  meant  from 
here  (indicating  the  upper  lip) ;  but  there  was  very  little  on  it. 
Did  you  not  say  clean  shaven? — If  he  had  a  moustache  he 
had  not  any  more  than  I  have  got,  and  that  is  not  much. 
You  are  not  clean  shaven  ? — Well,  very  near  it. 
I  see  in  America  you  were  asked,  "  What  did  his  face  look 
like?"  and  you  said,  "Just  an  ordinary  face,  a  sharp-featured 
man,  nothing  special  about  him,  clean  shaven"? — Yes. 
That  is  what  you  mean  still? — Yes. 

Then  the  agent  asked  you,  and  you  said  he  had  a  hat  on; 
you  said,  "  I  think  it  was  a  hat,  I  do  not  say  he  had,  but  I 
think  so  "  1 — Yes,  I  said  it  was  not  a  cap ;  I  wanted  to  explain 
to  him  that  I  could  not  be  sure  on  that  point. 

Was  it  a  bowler  hat,  or  do  you  mean  you  do  not  know  what 
it  was? — I  have  said  I  am  not  sure  on  that  point;  I  have  said 
that  all  along. 

You  would  not  identify  it  as  a  Donegal  hat? — No,  I  did  not 
know  what  a  Donegal  hat  was  until  I  was  told  about  it. 
You  have  heard  about  that  now? — Yes,  plenty. 
Do  you  know  now  what  a  Donegal  hat  is? — Yes. 
Well,  it  was  not  that? — No;  of  course,  I  did  not  pay  much 
attention  to  the  hat. 

Then  I  think  you  were  asked,  "  Did  you  notice  anything 
remarkable  about  his  gait  and  walk?"  and  you  said,  "No,  I 
thought  he  walked  like  a  commercial  traveller"? — No,  I  said 
I  thought  he  had  the  appearance  of  a  commercial  traveller. 

And  then  you  were  asked  "  An  ordinary  walk?  "  and  you  said 
"  Just  an  ordinary  walk  "? — As  far  as  I  could  tell. 

At  the  time  you  went  to  this  door,  the  door  was  opened  by 
Lambie,  who  had  the  keys? — Yes. 


Oscar  Slater. 

A.  H.  Adams      Now,  did  you  stand  upon  the  mat  outside? — No,  I  stood  over 
the  threshold  of  the  door. 

Where  did  Lambie  go? — Lambie  mad©  straight  for  the 
kitchen. 

Now,  when  the  door  was  opened  the  first  time  was  anybody 
in  the  hall?— No. 

I  think  I  heard  you  say  that  Lambie  had  got  along  as  far 
as  the  clock  on  her  way  to  the  kitchen  before  a  man  appeared  I 
— That  is  so. 

Then,  would  it  be  incorrect  for  Lambie  to  say  she  was  at 
the  door  when  the  man  passed  her? — Well,  I  think  so,  but  I 
think  the  girl  was  excited. 

That  is  not  in  accordance  with  your  recollection? — No,  I 
have  nothing  to  do  with  her  recollection. 

At  the  time  the  man  passed  you  where  was  Lambie? — She 
was  in  the  hall. 

By  the  clock,  you  mean? — No,  the  man  passed,  and  she 
went  into  the  kitchen  and  just  came  out  and  told  me  it  was 
all  right.  I  took  that  to  mean  that  it  was  the  pulleys  in  the 
kitchen. 

Where  was  the  man  who  had  come  out  of  the  room  when 
Lambie  came  back  and  said  to  you,  "  It's  all  right  "  ? — He  was 
down  the  stair. 

Had  Lambie  gone  into  the  kitchen  by  the  time  the  man 
passed  you? — No,  I  think  the  man  had  passed  me  before  she 
went  into  the  kitchen,  as  far  as  I  remember. 

And  then,  as  I  understand,  if  you  stood  at  the  door  the  man 
was  walking  towards  the  door  from  the  right  hand  side  of  the 
hall?— Yes. 

And  Lambie  was  going  towards  the  left  hand  corner  to  get 
into  the  kitchen? — Yes. 

Past  a  clock  halfway  down? — Yes. 

You  said  you  had  a  passing  glance  at  the  man  as  he  went 
past  you? — Yes. 

Did  you  see  anything  special  about  his  nose? — No. 

It  did  not  attract  your  attention? — No. 

His  walk  did  not  attract  your  attention? — No,  but  his  dress 
did. 

But  not  the  hat? — No. 

And  not  the  boots  ;  you  did  not  see  them? — No. 

What  kind  of  trousers  had  he? — They  were  dark. 

And  a  light  coat? — Yes. 

You  said  that  the  coat  was  either  fawn  or  grey ;  are  you 
definite  about  its  colour? — No,  it  was  a  light  coat. 

That  is  all  you  know? — That  is  all. 

How  far  had  the  man  got  down  the  stair  before  you  started 
going  down  after  him? — I  had  just  time  to  go  into  the  room — 
I  looked  into  the  room,  and  the  girl  said,  "  Oh,  you  go  down 

TOO 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

the  stairs  as  quick  as  you  can,"  and  I  went  down  the  steps,  A.  M.  Adams 
and  nearly  fell  down. 

Can  you  give  any  idea  as  to  how  long  you  would  be  in  the 
house  after  the  man  passed  you  at  the  door  before  you  started 
after  him? — Not  more  than  half  a  minute. 

Did  you  say  that  he  went  down  like  greased  lightning? — 
Yes. 

You  mean  that  he  went  down  as  fast  as  he  could? — Yes. 

And  you  thought  at  that  time  that  he  was  anxious  to  get 
away  as  fast  as  possible? — I  knew  he  was  a  thief  then. 

When  you  went  into  the  dining-room  Miss  Gilchrist  was  lying 
on  her  back? — Yes,  but  I  did  not  uncover  her  at  all  the  first 
time. 

What  had  she  over  her? — She  had  a  big  rug  over  her. 

She  was  lying  on  the  top  of  the  hearth  rug,  with  her  head 
rather  towards  the  fire? — Yes,  and  with  her  feet  towards  the 
door. 

In  a  diagonal  position? — Yes. 

There  was  a  lot  of  blood  about  her,  as  you  saw  afterwards  t 
—Yes. 

The  other  rug  that  had  been  produced  was  laid  on  the  top 
of  her? — Yes. 

Do  you  remember  whether  it  had  the  hairy  side  up? — Yes, 
the  hairy  side  was  up. 

And  the  other  side  was  on  the  top  of  the  lady  ? — Yes. 

Did  you  notice  that  there  was  a  great  deal  of  blood  on  the 
hair  also  of  that  rug? — No,  I  did  not  observe  that.  It  nearly 
made  me  sick. 

You  did  not  look   at  it  much? — No. 

From  where  you  were  when  the  man  came  out  do  you 
think  you  were  in  a  better  position  to  observe  the  man  than 
Helen  Lambie? — Yes. 

Why  do  you  say  so? — Because  I  practically  faced  him.  He 
did  not  cross  the  hall,  but  walked  quite  coolly  as  if  th'e  house 
belonged  to  him. 

Lambie  in  the  meantime  was  on  the  other  side  of  the  hall, 
near  the  clock? — Yes. 

You  say  decidedly  that  you  had  a  better  opportunity  of 
seeing  him? — Yes,  I  have  no  doubt  about  that  at  all. 

At  this  time,  I  understand,  it  was  your  sister,  Miss  Laura 
Adams,  who  asked  you  to  go  upstairs? — Yes. 

Was  Mrs.  Liddell  also  in  the  house  at  the  time? — Yes. 

How  long  had  she  been  in? — She  came  in  at  five  minutes 
to  seven  with  my  mother.  The  whole  thing  was  done  by  ten 
minutes  past  seven. 

Re-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — Would  a  couple  of  steps 
or  so  take  Helen  Lambie  in  so  far  as  you  saw  her? — She  was 
further  in  than  that. 

101 


Oscar  Slater. 

A.  H.  Adams  How  many  steps  was  she  in  ? — Eight  or  ten  I  would  say — 
perhaps  a  little  more — between  the  kitchen  and  the  dining- 
room. 

How  many  steps  would  she  be  in  at  the  time  when  the 
man  appeared? — She  was  just  going  to  enter  the  kitchen. 

Did  she  have  an  opportunity  of  seeing  the  man? — Yes,  she 
saw  the  man,  because  she  stood  and  stared  and  did  not  open 
her  mouth. 

When  he  passed  her? — Yes,  she  had  a  good  enough  view  of 
the  man. 

She  turned  round? — Yes,  she  stood  and  looked,  and  never 
said  a  word. 

Was  she  plainly  taken  aback? — Yes,  thoroughly.  That  is 
my  impression. 

And  excited? — I  think  so. 

You  saw  her  turn  round? — Yes,  she  turned  round  and  stood. 

Was  the  man  in  your  view  until  he  disappeared  down  the 
stair? — Yes,  till  he  got  past  me. 

Did  you  turn  round  a  little,  too? — Yes. 

Is  the  prisoner  the  man  you  saw  in  New  York  and  the 
Central  Police  Station? — I  would  not  like  to  swear  to  it.  I 
am  a  little  near-sighted. 

Go  nearer  to  him  and  say  whether  he  is  the  man  you  saw 
in  New  York  and  the  Central  Police  Office? — Yes,  that  is  the 
man. 

He  is  the  man  that  you  think  resembled  the  man  that  you 
saw? — Yes,  closely. 

By  the  COURT — What  kind  of  light  was  there  in  the  lobby? 
— It  was  well  lit.  There  was  an  ordinary  lamp  with,  I  think, 
a  blue  glass,  but  I  could  not  be  positive.  It  is  a  nice  hall 
lamp.  The  house  is  well  furnished. 

It  was  fully  lit?— Yes. 

Was  there  any  light  from  the  rooms,  the  doors  of  which 
were  open,  as  well  as  from  the  lobby  lamp? — The  only  light 
I  could  see  was  from  the  dining-room. 

Did  it  throw  any  light  into  the  lobby? — The  lobby  light 
there  was  the  light  above. 

When  you  saw  the  man  was  his  head  up  or  down ;  was 
there  anything  noticeable  about  that? — It  might  be  slightly 
down,  but  very  little. 

It  did  not  attract  your  attention? — No,  I  was  thoroughly 
off  my  guard. 

Was  he  dark  or  fair? — Dark. 

He  had  a  hat  on? — I  am  not  certain  of  that. 

Had  he  a  covering  on  his  head  or  not? — I  am  not  certain. 

Had  he  his  coat  collar  turned  up  or  down? — Just  ordinary, 
I  think,  so  far  as  I  could  tell.  Hisi  dress  put  me  thoroughly 
off — I  thought  he  was  a  visitor. 

102 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Till  he  came  up  to  you,  you  did  not  pay  the  special  attention  A.  M.  Adams 
that  you    would    have    done    if  you   had  thought  there    was 
anything  suspicious? — That   is  so. 

Then  when  he  passed  you  and  ran,  you  looked  at  him  also? 
—Yes. 

By  that  time  you  could  only  see  his  back? — Yes,  that  is  all 
I  saw. 

Is  it  your  evidence  that  what  Helen  Lambie  saw  would  be 
a  side  view,  whereas  you  had  a  front  view  of  the  man? — I  had 
a  front  view,  and  she  got  a  good  side  view. 

But  you  had  a  front  view  only  af  the  time  when  your  atten- 
tion was  not  drawn  specially  to  him  from  any  idea  of  wrong- 
doing ? — Yes. 

LAURA  EMMA  ADAMS,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  live  Laura  Adams 
with  my  brother,  the  last  witness,  at  51  West  Princes  Street. 
Our  dining-room    is   immediately    below    Miss  Gilchrist's.        I 
knew  Miss  Gilchrist  as  a  neighbour. 

By  the  COURT — I  had  never  been  in  Miss  Gilchrist's  house. 

Examination  continued — I  came  into  our  own  house  about 
ten  minutes  to  seven  on  the  evening  of  21st  December  last. 
I  went  to  my  own  room  and  then  into  the  dining-room,  which 
was  immediately  below  Miss  Gilchrist's  dining-room.  I  was 
reading  the  paper  in  the  dining-room  about  seven  o'clock.  I 
heard  a  noise  from  above,  then  a  very  heavy  fall,  and  then 
three  sharp  knocks.  I  looked  up  and  said  to  my  brother, 
"  Miss  Gilchrist  evidently  wants  something."  I  connected 
the  three  sharp  knocks  with  Miss  Gilchrist's  house  because 
at  one  time  we  said  that  if  she  wanted  anything  she  was  to 
knock,  and  some  of  us-  would  go  up.  My  brother  instantly 
went  upstairs.  He  came  back  in  two  or  three  minutes  and 
told  me  he  had  rung  the  bell  two  or  three  times,  but  he  thought 
there  was  nothing  wrong,  because  the  house  was  lit  up,  and 
he  heard  the  girl  cracking  sticks.  I  said  to  him,  "  That  is 
not  cracking  sticks,"  and  he  said,  "  If  it  will  please  you,  I 
will  go  up  again."  When  my  brother  was  upstairs  I  heard 
something  going  on,  but  not  so  distinct  as  the  knocks.  I 
could  not  say  what  the  noise  I  heard  resembled.  It  was  very 
unusual.  I  advised  my  brother  to  go  up  again,  and  he  went 
instantly. 

Two  or  three  minutes  after  he  went  up  again,  what  did  you 
hear? — I  heard  nothing  until  I  heard  a  rush  down  the  stair. 
When  I  heard  the  rush  I  said  to  my  sister,  "  Something  is 
wrong,"  and  we  went  to  look  out.  One  of  us  went  to  the 
window  and  the  other  flew  to  the  door.  I  looked  out  of  the 
window  and  I  saw  the  maid  wringing  her  hands.  I  could  then 
see  something  was  wrong,  and  I  went  to  the  door.  I  went 
upstairs  immediately  afterwards.  There  was  not  a  soul  in 

103 


Oscar  Slater. 

Laura  Adams  the  house  when  I  went  up.     I  had  to  get  the  key  from  the  maid 
and  open  the  door. 

Was  the  sound  that  of  some  one  rushing  down  the  stairs? — 
We  could  hear  the  feet.  It  must  have  been  my  brother  and 
the  maid,  and  probably  some  one  else.  It  was  a  rush  of  feet 
down  the  stairs. 

Mrs.  ROWBNA  ADAMS  or  LIDDELL,  examined  by  the  LORD 
ADVOCATE — I  am  a  sister  of  the  last  witness,  and  I  reside  at 
63  Elmbank  Street,  Glasgow.  On  Monday,  21st  December 
last,  I  went  along  with  my  mother  to  her  house  at  14  Queen's 
Terrace.  I  reached  the  house  from  the  St.  George's  Road 
direction  about  five  minutes  to  seven.  My  mother  is  an  old 
lady.  Before  I  reached  the  door  of  the  house  I  saw  a  dark 
form  leaning  against  the  railing,  just  under  my)  mother's 
dining-room  window.  I  only  saw  a  dark  form,  but,  as  I 
approached,  I  looked  at  the  face  of  the  man  who  was  standing 
there.  I  gave  a  good  stare — almost  a  rude  stare — and  I  took 
in  the  face  entirely,  except  that  I  did  not  see  his  eyes.  He 
had  a  long  nose,  with  a  most  peculiar  dip  from  here  (pointing 
to  the  bridge  of  the  nose).  You  would  not  see  that  dip 
amongst  thousands.  He  had  a  very  clear  complexion ;  not 
sallow  nor  a  white  pallor,  but  something  of  an  ivory  colour. 
He  was  very  dark,  clean  shaven,  and  very  broad  in  this  part 
of  the  head  (points  to  the  cheek  bone  or  temple).  He  had 
a  low-down  collar.  His  cap  was  an  ordinary  cap,  I  think,  of 
a  brownish  tweed.  He  was  very  respectable.  The  man  was 
just  under  the  eastmost  window,  the  window  furthest  away 
from  the  close,  facing  towards  St.  George's  Road.  He  was 
on  the  same  side  of  the  street.  He  was  leaning  with  his 
arm  on  the  railing,  nearer  St.  George's  Road  than'  the  close 
entrance.  After  I  passed  him  I  looked  over  my  shoulder, 
and  he  glided  from  the  railing  and  disappeared,  and  I  thought 
no  more  about  him.  West  Princes  Street  is  becoming  a 
thoroughfare  now  a  good  deal. 

But  it  is  a  quiet  street  as  compared  with  Great  Western  Road, 
for  example? — Yes,  it  is  not  a  main  thoroughfare.  I  did  not 
look  where  the  man  went.  The  whole  thing  passed  in  a 
few  seconds. 

Would  you  recognise  the  man  again? — I  believe  I  have 
recognised  him.  I  believe  so,  but,  of  course,  I  might  be 
liable  to  error. 

Look  at  the  prisoner? — I  cannot  recognise  him  on  this  side. 
It  was  the  other  side  I  saw.  (The  accused  turned  round  with 
his  left  side  to  the  witness.)  I  do  believe — I  am  afraid  he  was 
there — he  was  there  at  any  rate;  I  believe  he  was  the  man 
that  was  standing  at  the  railings. 

Do  you  say  that  just  from  what  you  recollect  of  the  appear- 
104 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

ance  of  the  man's  face? — Yes.     It  was  hardly  a  passing  glance;  R.  Liddell 
it  was  a  stare.     I  heard  the  noise  when  I  was  in  the  house,  all 
but  the  fall  of  the  body.     I  joined  in  sending  my  brother  up. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M/CLURE — Have  you  forgotten  to 
mention  to  us  that  the  man  was  wearing  a  coat? — He  had  on 
a  big  coat. 

A  tweed  coat? — I  believe  it  to  be  a  brownish  tweed. 

A  heavy  coat? — I  believe  so. 

Not  a  waterproof? — I  cannot  say  whether  the  material  was 
waterproof  or  not,  but  it  was  not  what  you  would  call  a 
gentleman's  waterproof. 

Not  like  the  waterproof  that  has  been  produced? — Let  me 
see  the  collar. 

Have  you  not  seen  this  before  ? — No ;  they  have  not  bothered 
me  before  but  once.  Show  me  the  hem. 

Did  you  see  the  hem  that  night? — Yes.  I  am  going  by 
the  hem  considerably,  because  it  was  not  a  thin  paper-like 
edge.  It  was  a  hemmed  edge,  whatever  the  coat  was. 

Do  you  mean  a  heavy  seam  inside  the  edge  of  it? — It  waa 
not  like  a  thin  waterproof. 

It  was  not  like  the  waterproof  which  has  been  produced  ? — It 
was  not  that  material.  It  was  a  thick  coat.  I  have  stuck  to 
that  all  along,  and  I  will  stick  to  it  still. 

You  also  said  it  was  not  a  fawn  coat? — Well,  first  of  all, 
I  said  browny  fawn,  but  Mr.  Hart  seemed  to  have  a  good  deal 
of  difficulty  about  browny  fawn,  and  so  I  was  quite  agreeable 
that  it  should  pass  as  a  coat  the  predominant  colour  of  which 
was  brown. 

You  were  ready  to  slightly  change  the  colour  to  please  Mr. 
Hart? — No.  I  have  said  all  along  that  it  was  brown  or 
fawn.  Of  course,  there  are  so  many  shades,  you  see. 

I  understand.  It  was  a  brown  coat  and  a  heavy  coat. 
When  did  you  first  make  a  statement  about  this  man? — On 
the  Wednesday  following  the  murder. 

You  had  not  thought  of  this  man  for  two  days? — He  never 
came  back  to  me  for  two  daya  The  murder  was  so  unusual 
and  exciting  that  everything  else  was  out  of  our  heads. 

Your  brother  was  the  first  man  on  the  spot? — Yes. 

Did  you  not  mention  this  man  to  him? — I  mentioned  it  on 
the  Wednesday,  and  they  laughed  at  the  matter. 

Why? — They  said,  "  What  was  the  man  doing  at  the  rail- 
ing? What  had  he  to  do  with  the  murder?  "  That  was  very 
reasonable. 

May  I  take  it  your  family  treated  your  alleged  man  at  the 
railing  as  rather  a  jest? — They  did,  and  they  said,  "  There 
are  quite  enough  mixed  up  in  this  miserable  affair,"  and  why 
should  I  have  anything  to  do  with  it. 

When  you  were  taken  to  identify  this  man  at  the  police 

105 


Oscar  Slater. 

R.  Liddell  office,  did  you  not  say  that  he  resembled  the  man  slightly? — 
I  said  in  front  of  the  prisoner,  when  Mr.  Douglas  asked  me, 
"  Yes,  slightly."  He  was  in  his  blue  coat  then. 

Is  that  still  your  view? — I  saw  him  again  in  another  coat. 
I  went  back  to  look  at  him,  and  then  1  got  the  thicker  coat 
as  I  had  seen  it.  He  was  not  standing  upright;  he  was  bend- 
ing, and  had  the  appearance  of  a  delicate  man  even  at  that 
time.  He  was  drawn  together. 

Was  your  first  impression  of  him  that  he  was  a  delicate 
man? — He  had  not  the  robustness  of  youth  to  look  at. 

The  man  you  saw  against  the  railings  you  thought  was 
delicate? — He  was  not  standing  as  a  robust  young  man  would. 
He  was  rather  drawn  together. 

Were  you  rather  surprised  when  you  saw  a  man  of  Slater's 
build  down  at  the  Police  Office? — Very  much. 

It  was  not  like  the  man  you  had  seen  1 — The  face  was  there, 
but  in  that  coat  he  was  totally  different  from  what  he  was  in 
the  first  coat. 

You  would  never  have  recognised  him  in  the  first  coat? — 
No;  but  a  tailor,  you  know 

You  had  never  seen  him  really  till  this  day  in  the  coat 
which  you  thought  he  was  wearing  that  night? — I  had  never 
seen  him  since  I  looked  at  him  that  night. 

On  what  date  was  it  that  you  went  to  the  police  office  for 
the  purpose  of  identifying  him? — I  cannot  remember,  but  I 
could  easily  find  out.  I  went  down  with  the  crowd. 

Did  you  see  any  other  man  like  him? — No. 

He  was  the  only  man  who  was  the  least  like  the  person 
you  recollected? — Yes;  I  scanned  him  closely  as  a  matter  of 
form.  I  would  rather  not  even  say  that  he  resembles  the  man, 
but,  still,  I  am  on  oath,  and,  being  called  as  a  witness,  I  must 
say 

You  must  say  as  near  the  truth  as  you  can  speak? — Yes. 

Then,  do  you  go  back  from  your  original  statement  that  he 
was  slightly  like? — No.  I  told  Mr.  Douglas  that  he  strongly 
resembled  him  and  I  said,  "  May  I  look  at  him  again? "  because 
if  I  could  have  only  said  that  he  was  not  a  bit  like  I  should 
have  been  pleased,  but  when  I  saw  him  again  he  came  back 
so  strongly  on  me.  Then  he  had  a  cap  on ;  it  was  pretty  well 
down  and  I  got  the  face  much  better. 

The  delicacy  you  spoke  of  was  totally  absent? — No.  He 
did  not  look  the  same  figure  in  this  waterproof — he  did  not 
look  so  nice  as  in  the  blue  coat.  He  was  a  fine  figure  in 
the  blue  coat. 

When  did  you  see  him  in  the  blue  coat? — In  the  row  of 
people  to  be  identified. 

The  waterproof  did  not  show  him  so  well  off? — No. 

Neither  the  waterproof  nor  the  blue  coat  is  the  coat  that 
you  saw  him  in  that  night? — No. 
106 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Re-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — Do  I  understand  you  R.  Liddell 
to  say  that  it  was  by  his  face  you  judged  1 — Yes.  I  was 
shown  his  photograph  in  the  paper,  and  I  could  not  tell  that 
I  identified  him.  When  I  went  down  to  see  him  I  thought 
that  he  was  not  certainly  the  man  I  had  seen,  and  therefore 
going  down  I  said  to  myself — of  course  I  had  heard,  I  confess, 
about  the  beautiful  blue  coat — I  said  to  myself  I  shall  only 
make  for  the  features  that  are  strong  in  my  memory,  and  if 
they  satisfied  me  then  I  could  identify  him  again.  The  figure 
and  the  clothes  came  as  secondary  to  me.  I  do  not  know 
whether  I  was  right  or  not. 

When  you  say  the  features  had  strongly  impressed  themselves 
on  you,  do  you  mean  the  side  face  that  you  saw? — Yes.  I 
could  not  recognise  any  other. 

You  did  not  see  the  full  face? — No,  nor  the  other  side.  They 
are  both  quite  different. 

May  I  take  it  that  your  identification  is  entirely  from  your 
view  of  the  side  face  that  you  stared  at? — Yes.  First  I 
thought  he  was  a  loiterer,  and  I  have  a  special  animus  against 
loiterers,  and  I  was  beginning  to  get  bristly.  Then  I  wondered 
and  thought  that  perhaps  he  might  be  waiting  for  the  maid 
upstairs.  Then  I  thought  he  might  be  waiting  for  one  of 
my  sister's  pupils,  and  therefore  I  stared  at  him. 

And  only  at  that  one  feature,  the  side  face? — Yes.  He 
was  clean  shaven. 

Mrs.  BARBARA  MACDONALD  or  BARROWMAN,  examined  by  the  Barbara 
LORD  ADVOCATE — I  am  the  wife  of  Robert  Barrowman,  a  Barrowman 
moulder,  and  I  live  at  9  Seamore  Street,  Glasgow.  The 
witness  Mary  Barrowman  is  an  adopted  daughter  of  mine. 
She  has  lived  with  me  and  my  husband  since  she  was  nine 
days  old,  when  her  mother  died.  She  has  always  considered 
me  and  my  husband  to  be  her  mother  and  father.  She  was 
born  on  16th  January,  1894.  No.  55  of  the  productions  is 
her  birth  certificate.  She  has  been  known  as  Mary  Barrowman 
all  along.  She  was  employed  in  December  last  with  Mr. 
M'Callum,  bootmaker,  in  Great  Western  Road,  and  her  hours 
were  from  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning  till  eight  at  night.  I 
remember  on  Monday,  21st  December,  Mary  coming  home  late 
at  night.  She  said  that  an  old  lady  had  been  murdered  in 
West  Princes  Street,  and  she  went  down  from  her  Bnnd  of 
Hope  with  some  of  the  children  to  see  where  it  was,  as  she  had 
seen  a  gentleman  coming  out  of  the  close,  and  she  wondered 
what  he  was  doing.  She  said  that  she  did  not  know  that  the 
murder  had  happened  then,  but  she  said  it  was  out  of  that 
very  same  close  that  the  man  came.  She  said  she  was  sure 
she  would  know  his  face  if  she  saw  him  again.  I  took  no 
notice  because  I  thought  it  was  just  a  story,  and  I  said,  "  Now, 

107 


Oscar  Slater. 

Barbara  Mary,  hold  your  tongue,  because  you  do  not  know  anything 
Barrowman  about  it."  There  was  no  more  said  that  night.  She  said 
she  was  sure  she  would  know  the  man  if  she  saw  him  again.  In 
the  afternoon  of  Wednesday,  23rd  December,  when  I  was 
going  upstairs  to  my  house,  I  met  Detective  M'Gimpsey,  who 
lives  in  the  flat  immediately  below  us.  I  asked  him  if  he 
had  not  got  any  word  of  that  man  yet,  meaning  the  murderer 
of  Miss  Gilchrist,  and  he  said  that  he  had  nothing  to  do  with 
it,  that  he  was  in  the  Northern  Department,  and  that  it  was 
the  Western  Department  that  had  to  do  with  it,  and  they  had 
got  no  word  of  it.  I  said  to  him,  "  Then,  if  it  will  do 
any  good  our  Mary  saw  a  man  coming  running  out,  and  she 
would  know  him  if  she  saw  him.  She  says  he  has  a  turned 
nose,  and  he  came  out  just  at  that  time."  Mr.  M'Gimpsey 
said,  "  Well,  I  will  tell  that,  and  you  may  expect  the  detectives 
up."  I  said,  "  I  don't  want  anything  to  do  with  it,  because 
I  do  not  know  anything  more  about  it."  Following  on 
this  conversation  a  detective  came  up  about  an  hour  afterwards, 
but  Mary  was  not  in.  He  said  he  would  call  back  again. 
Then  two  came  up  after  that.  Mary  had  gone  to  a  Rechabite 
meeting,  and  they  said  that  they  would  wait  for  her,  which 
they  did,  and  then  she  gave  her  statement  to  them.  That 
was  on  the  night  of  23rd  December. 

Mary  MART  BARROWMAN,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  am 

Barrowman  now  fifteen  years  of  age.  I  am  employed  with  a  Mr.  Malcolm 
M'Callum,  bootmaker,  Great  Western  Road,  Glasgow,  and  I  live 
at  No.  9  Seamore  Street,  Glasgow.  I  remember  that  on  the  night 
of  21st  December  last  I  left  my  employer's  shop  in  the  Great 
Western  Road  with  a  parcel  to  be  delivered  at  Cleveland  Street, 
off  St.  Vincent  Street.  I  left  my  employer's  place  about 
seven  o'clock,  and  I  went  from  Great  Western  Road  up  Bar- 
rington  Drive  into  West  Princes  Street,  and  I  walked  along 
West  Princes  Street  in  the  direction  of  St.  George's  Road.  I 
walked  eastwards  on  the  south  side  of  West  Princes  Street. 
West  Princes  Street  is  a  quiet  street.  When  I  came  opposite 
the  close  a  man  came  running  out  of  it  and  knocked  tip  against 
me.  He  wore  a  fawn  overcoat,  a  dark  suit  of  clothes,  and  a 
Donegal  hat ;  he  had  dark  brown  boots.  He  ran  towards 
West  Cumberland  Street,  and  I  could  see  he  turned  down 
there.  I  was  just  at  the  lamp-post  near  the  close  when  this 
happened.  I  saw  him  coming  out  of  the  close.  I  saw  him 
coming  down  the  steps.  He  was  coming  very  fast.  When 
he  came  down  to  the  foot  of  the  steps  he  turned  towards  me. 
He  was  running.  I  did  not  see  anything  in  his  hands.  I 
was  at  the  lamp-post  when  he  ran  up  against  me.  I  was 
walking  towards  St.  George's  Road.  It  was  quite  bright 
near  the  lamp-post  where  I  was  when  the  man  knocked  up 
108 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

against  me.       I  had  a  look  at  him  coming  towards  me  when  Mary 

.  ,,         ,  ,,  Barpowman 

he  got  out  of  the  closemouth. 

Did  you  see  whether  the  man  saw  you? — He  knocked  up 
against  me.  He  did  not  say  anything,  but  just  ran  on. 
When  he  passed  me  I  turned  to  look  after  him.  I  walked 
after  him  a  bit,  but  I  did  not  keep  up  with  him.  I  kept 
looking  in  the  direction  in  which  he  was  going.  I  did  not 
walk  fast ;  he  was  getting  away  from  me  all  the  time.  When 
he  turned  round  into  West  Cumberland  Street  I  stopped  and 
went  back  in  the  direction  from  which  he  had  come.  I  got 
a  good  look  at  him  both  when  he  was  coming  up  to  me  and 
when  he  knocked  against  me.  He  was  tall  and  broad- 
shouldered,  and  he  had  a  slight  twist  in  his  nose.  He  was 
clean  shaved,  and  had  dark  hair.  He  had  a  Donegal  hat  on, 
and  was  wearing  it  down  on  his  face.  I  got  a  look  at  his  face. 
I  would  know  him  again  if  I  saw  him.  When  I  went  back  to 
the  closemouth  I  did  not  see  anybody  there,  and  I  went  on 
with  my  message.  When  I  went  home  that  night  I  told  my 
mother  what  I  had  seen.  I  told  her  that  I  thought  there 
had  been  an  old  lady  murdered  there.  I  had  gone  with  my 
message  and  then  back  to  my  employer's  shop,  and  then  to  a 
Band  of  Hope  meeting,  where  I  heard  about  the  murder,  and 
then  I  went  back  to  West  Princes  Street.  I  went  there 
because  of  hearing  about  the  murder.  I  saw  a  number  of 
people  there.  I  told  my  mother  that  I  thought  I  would  know 
the  man  if  I  saw  him  again.  Two  nights  afterwards,  on  23rd 
December,  two  detectives  came  to  our  house  to  see  me.  I 
told  them  what  I  had  seen,  and  I  described  the  man  to  them 
just  as  I  have  described  him  to-day.  On  12th  January  I 
started  for  America  with  the  girl  Lambie,  and  Mr.  Adams, 
Mr.  Warnock,  and  Detective  Pyper.  The  day  I  arrived  at 
New  York  Mr.  Pyper  took  me  and  the  girl  Lambie  to  the  Law 
Courts,  where  we  were  to  be  examined.  I  remember  standing 
in  a  corridor  or  passage  along  with  Mr.  Pyper  and  Helen 
Lambie,  before  going  into  the  room.  There  were  three  men 
coming  along  the  corridor,  and  in  between  the  two  men  I  saw 
this  man,  the  man  I  had  seen  on  the  night  of  the  murder.  I 
told  Mr.  Pyper  that  this  was  him  coming.  I  had  no  difficulty 
in  telling  that  he  was  the  man.  Mr.  Pyper  had  not  asked 
me  any  questions  about  him  in  the  corridor.  Nobody  had 
told  me  when  I  was  in  the  corridor  that  I  would  see  the  man 
pass.  I  just  picked  him  out  that  way  without  anybody 
speaking  to  me.  I  remember  Helen  Lambie  doing  the  same. 
I  saw  him  going  into  the  Court-room.  Afterwards  I  went  into 
the  Court-room  along  with  Mr.  Pyper  and  Helen  Lambie. 
There  were  a  great  number  of  men  in  the  Court-room  when 
I  went  in.  They  were  nearly  all  standing  when  I  went  in. 
I  was  examined  there  to  see  if  I  could  recognise  the  man.  I 

109 


Oscar  Slater. 

Mary  was   seated  when    I   was  being   examined.          There   were   a 

Barrowman  number  of  other  men  seated  in  the  room  at  the  time  I  was 
seated.  I  was  asked  to  point  out  the  man,  and  I  did  so. 
He  was  sitting  about  10  feet  away  from  me.  Mr.  Goodhart 
was  standing  in  front  of  him  when  I  was  asked  to  point  him 
out. 

How  did  you  see  him  and  point  him  out? — I  looked  round 
the  Court,  and  I  could  not  see  him,  and  then  I  saw  a  man 
at  the  back  of  Mr.  Goodhart,  and  I  looked  at  that  man,  and 
it  was  him,  and  I  pointed  him  out.  I  had  no  difficulty  in 
pointing  him  out. 

Did  you  think  anybody  else  in  the  room  was  the  man  except 
this  man? — No. 

How  did  you  recognise  him;  was  he  dressed  the  same  or  not? 
— No,  he  was  not  dressed  the  same.     I  recognised  him  by  the 
face.     When  I  saw  him  in  New  York  he  had  a  black  coat  on, 
with  a  navy  blue  collar  and  a  hat.     The  hat  was  one  of  those 
hard  hats,  a  bowler  hat.     That  was  the  only  dress  I  saw  him 
in  at  New  York.     I  came  home  after  I  was  examined  in  New 
York.        After  I  came  home  I  remember  going  down  to  the 
Central  Police  Office.     That  was  shortly  after  I  came  home. 
When  I  went  down  to  the  Central  Police  Office  I  went  into  a 
room  where  there  were  a  number  of  men.     There  were  ten  or  a 
dozen  men  in  the  room.     I  was  asked  to  point  out  the  man 
I  had  seen  in   New  York.        I  pointed  him  out.     It  was  the 
same  man.     That  was  the  man   I  had   seen  the  night  that  I 
was  going  my  message.     I  had  no  difficulty  in  recognising  him. 
I   did  not  think  that  any   of  the  other  men  who  were  there 
was  the  man.     When  I  first  went  into  the  room  at  the  Central 
Police  Office  he  was  dressed  in  the  same  clothes  as  he  had  on 
at  New  York.     A  little  while   afterwards  I  remembered   that 
he  had  other  clothes  on.     He  had  on  a  fawn  overcoat  and  a 
Donegal  hat.     (Shown  production  No.   43.)     That  is  the  coat 
that  I  saw.     That  is  like  the  coat  he  had  on  that  night  when 
he  knocked  up  against  me.     (Shown  production  No.  44.) 
Is  that  the  hat? — He  had  it  bashed  down  in  the  crown. 
Is  that  the  hat? — Yes,  it  is  very  like  it.     That  is  very  like 
the  hat  he  was  wearing  the  night  he  knocked  up  against  me. 
I  remember  asking  if  he  would  pull  the  hat  down  a  little  more. 
I  asked  that  because  it  was  not  far  enough  down,  the  way  I 
saw  him  that  night.     When  he  pulled  it  down  I  then  recognised 
it  as  I  had  seen  it  that  night.     I  said  so  to  the  police.     It  was 
pulled  pretty  well  down  that  night.     I  had  no  difficulty  about 
recognising  him. 

Look  at  the  prisoner;  is  that  the  man? — Yes,   that  is  the 
man  who  knocked  against  me  that  night. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — Did  it  strike  you  when  he 
came  out  of  the  close  as  if  he  was  running  away  from  some- 
no 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

thing? — No,    I   thought   he   was   running   for    a    car,    or   that  Mary 

'.        ,!    j  i  i  Barrowman 

something  had  happened. 

He  was  running  fast? — Yes. 

As  hard  as  he  could  go? — Yes. 

Did  he  come  running  down  the  steps  fast? — Yes,  he  took 
about  two  at  a  time. 

He  came  down  two  at  a  time,  and  then  did  he  bolt  along  as 
fast  as  he  could  in  the  direction  of  West  Cumberland  Street? 
—Yes. 

Then  when  he  passed  you  he  was  running  at  his  top  speed? 
—Yes. 

And  with  his  hat  over  his  eyes? — Yes. 

Tell  me  how  far  it  was  pulled  down? — A  good  bit  down  his 
brows. 

Was  it  further  down  the  face  than  it  is  generally  worn  by  a 
man? — Yes. 

Was  it  down  as  far  as  his  eyes? — Yes,  just  about  as  far  as 
his  eyes. 

And  with  the  brim  hanging  over? — No. 

Can  you  tell  me  what  the  kind  of  hat  was;  wasn't  it  a  cloth 
cap? — Yes. 

Could  you  tell  me  whether  it  was  a  light  cloth  or  not? — Dark. 

And  was  it  a  round  hat  with  a  brim  all  round  it? — Yes. 

Did  you  see  that  quite  distinctly? — Yes. 

You  said  the  man  was  clean  shaven? — Yes. 

Did  you  have  a  good  look  at  him  as  he  was  passing  under 
the  lamp? — Yes. 

Are  you  quite  distinct  about  that? — Yes. 

You  have  no  doubt  about  that  whatever? — No. 

No  hair  on  his  face? — No. 

Had  you  time  to  see  whether  his  coat  was  a  waterproof  or  a 
cloth  coat? — Yes. 

Was  it  a  cloth  coat? — No,  it  was  a  waterproof. 

Tell  me  how  you  could  distinguish  that? — Because  I  saw  it 
when  he  was  running  out  of  the  close. 

You  have  just  told  us  that  the  man  was  running  past  you 
as  hard  as  ho  could  go? — Yes. 

Do  you  say  that  just  in  the  flash  in  which  he  went  past  you 
were  able  to  take  in  all  these  details? — Yes. 

By  the  COURT — Was  it  fully  buttoned? — No,  it  was  not 
buttoned  at  all. 

Cross-examination  resumed — Was  he  holding  it  up  as  he 
ran? — Yes. 

How? — With  his  hands  in  his  pockets  like  that  (illustrating) 
and  holding  it  up. 

And  running  hard  along? — Yes. 

As  I  understand,  you  distinguished  the  man  by  the  twist  in 
his  nose? — Yes. 

in 


Oscar  Slater. 


Mary  That  was  really  what  you  made  him  out  by?  —  It  was  by  the 

Barrowman 


His  clothes  had  nothing  to  do  with  it,  because  in  America 
you  picked  him  out  at  once  in  different  clothes  ?  —  Yes. 

And  when  he  came  back  to  this  country  you  saw  him  in 
two  different  sets  of  clothes,  and  you  identified  him  from  his 
face  at  once?  —  Yes. 

When  you  saw  him  in  the  police  office  and  identified  him 
there  you  noticed  he  had  a  moustache  on?  —  Yes. 

Well,  that  was  different  from  the  man  you  saw  coming  out 
of  the  close?  —  Yes. 

And  the  man  whom  you  saw  in  America  had  a  moustache 
on?  —  Yes. 

And  the  man  in  the  photographs  you  saw  in  America  had 
a  moustache  on?  —  Yes. 

And  all  these  were  different  from  the  man  you  saw  coming 
out  of  the  close  in  that  particular?  —  Yes. 

You  have  made  no  mistake  about  that  at  all?  —  No. 

Now,  a  hat  was  shown  you  just  now,  and,  while  you  say 
that  that  hat  was  like  the  hat,  you  do  not  profess  to  say  more 
than  that?  —  It  is  very  like  the  hat. 

The  hat  was  like  and  the  coat  was  like?  —  Yes. 

Did  you  and  Helen  Lambie  occupy  the  same  cabin  when  you 
were  going  across  to  America?  —  Yes. 

And  did  you  have  a  talk  about  this  on  the  way  over?  —  No. 

You  mentioned  it  sometimes?  —  No. 

Do  you  mean  to  say  that  you  and  Helen  Lambie,  going  across 
to  America  to  try  and  identify  the  man  who  had  done  this 
thing,  never  once  spoke  to  one  another  on  the  subject?  —  Not 
that  I  can  remember. 

Did  you  ever  ask  Helen  Lambie  what  she  thought  he  was 
like?—  No. 

Or  did  she  ask  you  what  you  thought  he  was  like?  —  No. 

Had  anybody  told  you  not  to  mention  it,  or  was  it  just 
yourself  ?—  -  Just  myself. 

Did  you  wonder  what  the  man  in  America  would  be  like 
when  you  went  over?  —  Yes. 

Did  Helen  Lambie  wonder?  —  I  do  not  know. 

Did  Helen  Lambie  never  say  at  any  time  to  you  what 
she  thought  would  bring  the  man  back  to  her?  —  No. 

And  you  never  said  to  Helen  Lambie  that  if  the  man  had  a 
twisted  nose  in  his  face  you  would  know  him?  —  No. 

You  never  spoke  about  it?  —  No. 

Was  it  not  an  interesting  subject  to  you  both?  —  Yes. 

Tell  us  why  you  never  mentioned  it  to  one  another  when  you 
were  occupying  the  same  cabin  for  about  twelve  days?  —  She 
had  her  own  ideas  and  I  had  my  own  ideas,  and  I  did  not 
want  to  tell  her  what  I  knew. 

112 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

How  do  you  know  she  had  her  own  idea  of  the  man? — She  Mary 

,  •       .1     .      •   I,.  Barrowman 

saw  him  that  night. 

Did  she  tell  you  she  had  seen  him? — She  saw  him  coming 
out  of  the  house. 

Did  she  tell  you? — No. 

Who  told  you  that  she  had  seen  him? — I  knew  she  saw  him 
coming  out  of  the  house. 

Who  told  you? — It  was  in  the  papers. 

Had  you  seen  it  in  the  papers  stated  anywhere  how  Helen 
Lambie  would  likely  identify  the  man? — No. 

Was  anything  said  to  you  at  all  about  the  man  having  a 
peculiar  walk? — In  the  Court-room  she  said  something  about 
what  a  funny  walk  he  had. 

Did  he  say  that  at  any  time  to  you  before  she  was  in  the 
witness  chair  in  the  Court-room? — No. 

Did  you  and  she  never  speak  about  this  at  all  until  you  were 
in  the  Court-room? — No. 

You  did  not  converse  about  it  outside  before  going  in? — No. 
You  were  shown  a  photograph  at  Mr.  Fox's  office  before  you 
went  to  the  Court? — Yes. 

How  many  photographs? — Three. 
And  were  any  of  them  like  the  man  at  all? — Yes. 
Now,  as  soon  as  you  saw  the  photographs,  did  you  recognise 
the  man? — Yes. 

And  was  Mr.  Pyper,  the  detective,  there  then? — Yes. 
I  want  you  to  be  particular  about  this;  he  said  you  did  not 
recognise  any  of  them;  is  that  the  fact? — No. 

You  recognised  the  photographs  at  once? — One  of  them. 
Then  when  you  went  down  to  the  Court  were  you  looking 
for  a  man  who  was  like  the  photograph? — Yes. 

And  when  you  went  into  the  Court  there  was  nobody  there 
the  least  like  the  photographs,  except  the  man  you  saw  and 
pointed  out;  is  that  so? — Yes. 

Helen  Lambie  had  given  evidence  in  the  Court  before  you 
did?— Yes. 

And  you  were  sitting  there  present? — Yes. 
Did  you  see  Helen  Lambie  point  out  the  man? — Yes. 
And  when  it  came  to  your  turn  you  pointed  out  the  same 
man? — Yes. 

What  was  it  that  was  funny  about  the  man's  nose? — It  had 
a  peculiar  twist  in  it. 

Could  you  see  that  from  in  front  as  he  was  coming  to  you? — 
Y»  s. 

Is  it  twisted  to  one  side? — To  one  side. 
Which  side  is  it  twisted  to? — To  the  right. 
Are  you  quite  sure  it  is  to  the  right? — Yes. 
Is  it  much  twisted  to  the  right? — Not  very  much. 
How  fast  do  you  think  the  man  was  going  past  you  that 
night  when  he  ran;  was  he  going  very  quick? — Yes. 

i  113 


Oscar  Slater. 

Mary  Were  you  looking  more  at  his  face  or  at  his  boots  as  he 

<n  came  along?     Did  you  manage  to  see  he  had  brown  boots  on? 
—Yes. 

Do  you  know  whether  they  were  brown  boots  of  the  yellow 
type  or  of  a  darker  type? — A  dark  type. 

Do  you  know  whether  they  were  laced  boots  or  buttoned 
boots? — I  did  not  look. 

Did  I  understand  you  to  say  that  you  went  after  the  man? — 
Yes. 

You  said  you  thought  the  man  might  perhaps  be  running  for 
a  car? — Yes. 

Why  did  you  go  after  him? — I  looked  to  see  where  he  was 
going  to. 

Do  you  mean  you  just  turned  and  looked  over  your  shoulder? 
— No,  I  turned  right  round. 

Did  you  go  after  him? — Just  about  the  next  lamp-post  or  so. 

Did  you  run? — No. 

You  walked  for  about  50  yards  along  the  street? — I  do  not 
know  how  many  yards  it  was. 

What  were  you  going  to  see  that  you  went  after  a  man  who 
was  running  fast;  you  said  you  thought  perhaps  he  was  going 
to  the  car? — Yes. 

What  did  you  go  after  a  man  who  was  going  to  the  car  for  ? — 
I  thought  he  was  running  to  catch  a  car,  or  there  had  been 
something  wrong  as  he  was  running. 

Did  you  want  to  see  him  climb  on  to  the  car? — (No  answer.) 

Did  you  think  he  was  running  from  a  place  where  something 
had  happened,  or  running  to  a  place  in  order  to  get  something  ? 
— To  a  place. 

When  you  were  in  America  and  saw  the  man  for  the  first 
time,  I  think  you  said  first  that  he  was  something  like  the 
man  you  had  seen? — Very  like  him. 

But  you  said  "something  like"  first,  did  you  not? — Yes. 

And  then  you  said  afterwards,  "  I  said,  '  something  like  him ' 
the  first  time,  and  then  '  very  like  him '  after  I  said  '  some- 
thing like '  " ;  is  that  just  your  frame  of  mind — that  is  what 
you  meant? — Yes. 

I  suppose  you  would  not  see  his  face  for  more  than  a  couple 
of  seconds  altogether? — No. 

When  he  came  down  the  steps  did  he  just  come  down  as  you 
said,  two  at  a  time,  and  instantly  turn  and  run  past  you? — He 
looked  towards  St.  George's  Road  and  then  ran  to  West 
Cumberland  Street. 

As  fast  as  he  could  lay  his  feet  on  the  ground? — Yes. 

Were  you  carrying  anything  at  the  time? — I  was  carrying 
a  parcel. 

The  first  time  you  saw  this  man  in  America  was  he  coming 
walking  down  the  corridor  between  a  great  big  man  and  another 
man  with  a  medal  on  his  breast? — Yes. 

"4 


Evidence   for   Prosecution. 

And  as  they  came  down  they  just  walked  him  into  this  room?  Mary 
Yeg  Barrowman 

I  suppose  you  saw  quite  well  that  he  was  in  charge  of  these 
two  people? — No. 

What  did  you  think  he  was  doing  between  them? — (No 
answer.) 

By  the  COURT — Were  there  other  people  coming  down  the 
corridor  at  the  same  time,  or  were  these  the  only  people? — 
No,  there  were  other  people. 

Cross-examination  resumed — What  length  of  view  had  you 
of  these  men  coming  walking  down  the  corridor? — About  over 
to  that  wall  there  (pointing  to  the  wall  behind  the  jury). 

And  there  was  no  person  between  him  and  you  at  that  time? 
—No. 

And  he  was  marched  down  between  the  big  man  and  the 
man  with  the  badge  on? — Yes. 

Where  was  the  door  into  which  he  turned;  was  that  close 
by  where  you  were? — Yes. 

And  I  understand  you  saw  nothing  peculiar  about  his  walk 
in  any  way,  but  just  noticed  his  nose? — Yes. 

Re-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — When  you  saw  him 
coming  down  the  corridor  first  was  he  just  about  as  far  off 
from  you  as  when  you  saw  him  coming  out  of  the  close? — Not 
so  far. 

When  you  were  first  asked  if  you  could  identify  him  in  New 
York  did  you  say  he  was  like  the  man? — Yes. 

After  you  took  a  good  look  at  him  did  you  think  it  was 
very  like  him? — Yes. 

Have  you  any  doubt  now  that  that  is  the  man? — No. 

You  have  seen  him  now  two  or  three  times? — Yes. 

Do  you  recollect  whether  before  you  started  for  America 
you  were  told  not  to  converse  with  Helen  Lambie  about  the 
case;  just  try  and  recollect  whether  anybody  told  you  not  to 
speak  about  it  on  the  way  out? — (No  answer.) 

By  the  COURT — Do  you  remember  anything  about  that? — No. 

Re-examination  resumed — Did  you  know  that  the  man  you 
were  to  see  out  in  America  was  accused  of  being  the  murderer? 
—No. 

Did  you  know  that  he  might  be  accused? — Yes. 

And  did  you  know  it  was  a  very  serious  matter  that  you 
were  going  out  about? — Yes. 

WILLIAM  WAHNOCK,  examined  by  Mr.  MORISON — I  am  a  Sheriff  W.  Warnock 
criminal  officer  in  Glasgow.  I  accompanied  Mr.  Pyper  and 
the  three  witnesses  to  New  York  in  connection  with  the 
prisoner's  extradition  proceedings.  I  got  possession  of  Slater's 
luggage.  It  was  in  New  York  before  I  arrived  there.  There 
were  seven  pieces  of  luggage  sealed  with  the  United  States 

"5 


Oscar  Slater. 

W.  Warnoek    Customs  seal,  and  they  were  handed  over  to  me  and  Mr.  Pyper. 
I  had  it  transferred  to  the  "  Columbia,"  by  which  I  returned  to 
Glasgow.     The  baggage  was  delivered  sealed  to  the  Central 
Police  Office,  and  on  Sunday,  21st  of  February,  it  was  opened 
in  Slater's  presence.     (Shown  productions  Nos.  43,  47,  and  44.) 
No.  43  is  a  waterproof  coat,  No.  47  is  a  hammer,  and  No.  44 
is   a  hat.     These  were  all  found   in   Slater's  luggage.        The 
hammer  was  found  in  a  black  leather  travelling  case,  which  is 
produced.     The  hat  was  in  a  hat  bos,  which  is  here  too.     The 
waterproof  coat  was  got  in  this  same  travelling  case.     It  was 
part  of  my  duty  also  to  search  Slater.    I  found  in  his  possession 
a  pocket-book  which  contained   a  pawn  ticket,   which  is  pro- 
duction No.    52.      I  examined  some  papers  also  in  a  leather 
case  which  was  found  in  one  of  his  trunks,  and  from  it  I  took 
the  production  No.    58.      No.    58  is  a   business  card  with  the 
name  and  designation,  "  Oscar  Slater,  dealer  in  diamonds  and 
precious  stones,  33  Soho  Square,  Oxford  Street,  West."     That 
is  printed   on   the   card.      I    also  obtained    an    account   form 
(label  No.  59),  showing  a  purchase  transaction  by  the  prisoner 
from  one  D.  R.  Jacobs,  diamond  merchant,  New  York,  of  a 
brilliant   of   extra   fine  quality,    dated   29th   February,    1908. 
I  found  also  an  extract  entry  of  his  marriage  (label  No.  60). 
(Shown  production  No.  46.)     These  caps  were  found  in  the  hat 
case.     There  were  only  two  caps.    There  were  no  other  caps  in 
his  luggage.     There  was  no  other  hat  of  the  pattern  of  pro- 
duction No.  44  in  his  luggage.     I  took  certain  articles  to  Pro- 
fessor   Littlejohn — these    were    the    hammer,    the    waterproof 
coat,  and  the  auger.     Th'ere  were  no  dentist's  instruments  or 
materials  in  his  luggage.      There  were  no  brown  boots  found 
in  his  luggage.     The  waterproof  coat  was  the  only  light-coloured 
coat  that  he  had.     I  have  seen  the  prisoner  walk.     He  walks 
with  his  toes  slightly  pointing  inwards,   and  when  he  raises 
his  left  foot  his  knees  point  slightly  outwards.     His  left  knee 
projects  outwards  slightly  when  walking. 

By  the  COURT — More  than  his  other  knee  does? — Yes,  I 
observed  it  more. 

Examination  resumed — I  heard  the  witnesses  examined  before 
the  Commissioner  in  New  York.  I  heard  the  girl  Lambie 
referring  to  the  peculiarity  in  Slater's  walk. 

Was  her  description  of  it  very  much  what  you  had  observed  ? 
— Well,  I  did  not  see  her  description  of  it,  but  she  did  imitate 
the  walk  before  Mr.  Miller,  the  counsel;  I  was  rather  to  the 
side,  and  I  did  not  see  it;  there  were  a  number  of  people 
between.  All  I  know  is  that  she  was  asked  to  give  this 
demonstration  of  his  walk.  I  did  not  see  what  she  did,  but 
she  was  asked  several  times,  and  did  it  more  than  once.  I 
heard  the  witnesses  Mary  Barrowman,  Mr.  Adams,  and  Miss 
Lambie  being  examined  by  the  solicitors  or  counsel  in  New 
York  and  by  the  Commissioner. 
116 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURB  —  I  am  sorry  to  put  a  per-  w.  Warnoek 
sonal  question  ;    is  it  the  fact  that  the  girl  Barrowinan,   in 
describing   the   nose   of  the   man   that    she   had   seen   in   the 
street,   said   it  was  very  like  yours?  —  Yes,   she  was   led   into 
saying  that. 

Do  you  remember  this  being  said  ;  the  agent  asks  a  question 
of  the  girl,  "  How  was  the  nose  bent,  was  it  bent  anything 
like  Mr.  Fox's  nose  towards  the  end?  "  and  the  answer  is 
"  No  "  ;  then,  "  Was  it  bent  down  the  middle  like  the  Lord 
High  Marshal  of  Glasgow's  nose?"  —  that  is  the  name  the 
American  gives  you  —  and  Barrowman  said,  "  Yes.  It  was 
bent  down  the  middle?  —  Yes.  Kind  of  hollowed  out,  so  to 
speuk?  —  Yes.  Very  much  of  the  order  of  the  gentleman  from 
Glasgow,  who  is  the  High  Sheriff  of  the  King's  forces  of  the 
city?  —  Yes.  Who  testified  just  now,  Mr.  Warnoek?  —  Yes. 
Is  it  not  of  that  order,  and  bent  that  way?  "  and  Barrowman 
says  "  Yes."  You  heard  all  that  said?  —  Yes. 

She,  in  point  of  fact,  said  that  the  man  whom  she  had  seen 
had  a  nose,  not  like  Mr.  Fox's  in  America,  but  like  yours?  — 
Yes,  she  was  led  into  saying  that. 

As  regards  the  walk  of  this  man,  would  you  say  that  was  a 
very  noticeable  feature?  —  Oh,  yes,  it  is  very  noticeable. 

Mr.  Pyper,  who  was  out  with  you  in  America,  says  that  it  is 
not  a  thing  that  would  make  any  impression  upon  him  ;  do  you 
agree  with  that  or  not?  —  I  differ  from  him  in  this  respect, 
I  made  it  a  point  to  observe  his  mode  of  walking,  and  I  did 
observe  his  movement. 

Is  it  a  peculiarity  that  a  person  would  pick  up  just  in  a 
casual  glance?  —  Well,  it  depends;  the  person  who  saw  the 
movement  of  the  feet  might  not  take  any  notice  of  it. 

Would  you  require  to  look  closely  at  the  feet  before  you  would 
notice  this  peculiarity?  —  Yes. 

By  the  COURT  —  You  said  at  a  casual  glance  you  would  not 
notice  it?  —  Well,  if  you  were  taking  notice  of  the  movements 
of  his  feet  you  would  notice  it. 

But  Mr.  M'Clure  put  it  as  a  casual  glance  passing  along 
the  street?  —  Well,  I  would  not  like  to  give  an  opinion  on  that. 

Cross-examination  continued  —  When  the  girl  Lambie  pro- 
fessed to  recognise  the  man  in  America  she  referred  to  his 
walk,  but  did  she  refer  either  to  his  having  a  turned-in  toe  or 
to  any  movement  of  the  knee?  —  She  referred  to  the  movement 
of  the  knee  —  a  bend  of  the  log. 

Did  she  not  refer  to  a  kind  of  shaking  of  the  shoulders?  — 
She  did. 

Well,  that  has  not  got  to  do  with  either  the  knee  or  the 
foot?—  No. 


ARMOUR,   examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE  —  I  am  a  Annle  Armour 
booking  clerk  with  the  Glasgow  District  Subway  Company,  and 


117 


Oscar   Slater. 

Annie  Armour  I  am  at  the  Kelvinbridge  station.  I  was  there  on  the  21st 
of  December  last  in  the  evening.  I  was  standing  there 
giving  out  tickets  at  the  turnstile.  I  am  inside  a  box,  and 
there  is  a  small  window  to  which  the  people  come  to  buy  their 
tickets.  It  is  the  ordinary  size  of  a  kitchen  pane  window. 
It  is  about  that  size.  (Indicates.) 

By  the  COUBT — Is  it  about  2  feet  by  2? — I  could  not  say. 

Examination  continued — Just  what  you  have  shown  us  with 
your  hands? — Yes.  It  is  clear  glass.  You  can  lift  it  up 
and  give  the  ticket  out  and  take  the  money.  The  turnstile 
is  at  the  side  of  the  window.  I  look  right  out  on  the  turn- 
stile. When  I  was  there  that  evening,  21st  December,  I 
remember  something  happening.  I  was  leaning  against  the 
counter,  and  a  man  came  rushing  in,  flung  down  a  penny, 
and  did  not  wait  for  the  ticket.  He  was  so  excited  looking, 
and  he  gave  me  such  a  fright  that  I  shouted,  "  Oh."  He  ran 
down  the  stairs,  and  I  shouted  "  Here,"  but  he  never  paid  any 
heed.  He  ran  on,  and  did  not  wait ;  he  never  looked  back.  I 
heard  him  clattering  down;  he  ran  right  downstairs.  I 
noticed  that  he  sort  of  stumbled  and  caught  hold  of  the  railing, 
he  was  in  such  haste.  He  was  of  medium  height,  dark,  clean 
shaven,  and  wore  a  light  overcoat,  but  I  could  not  say  whether 
it  ;was  a  hat  or  cap  that  he  had  on,  but  I  know  it  was  some- 
think  dark  he  had  on  his  head.  I  saw  his  face.  I  could 
see  after  him  from  where  I  was ;  you  can  see  right  down  the 
stairs  and  to  the  first  step  of  the  turn.  There  are  eight 
steps,  so  that  I  would  see  him  when  he  was  going  down  these 
eight  steps  until  he  turned.  I  looked  out  at  him,  and  shouted 
"  Here,"  but  he  paid  no  attention. 

I  suppose  it  is  very  unusual  for  a  man  to  pass  you  at  that 
breakneck  speed? — Yes,  it  is  very  seldom  that  one  goes  away 
without  their  ticket.  Trains  go  every  four  minutes  on  the 
Subway.  I  went  down  to  the  Central  Police  Office  on  21st 
February  last.  I  was  shown  into  a  room  where  there  were 
a  number  of  men — about  a  dozen  men.  There  were  some  with 
hats  and  others  with  caps.  I  was  asked  to  point  out  the  man 
who  had  run  past  me  without  his  ticket  that  evening.  I 
pointed  him  out.  I  had  no  difficulty  in  pointing  him  out. 

Will  you  look  at  the  prisoner ;  is  that  the  man  1 — That  is 
like  him.  That  is  the  man  whom  I  saw  in  the  Central  Police 
Office.  There  was  no  other  man  there  that  I  thought  was 
like  him.  I  had  no  difficulty  in  picking  him  out.  I  have 
no  difficulty  now  in  knowing  that  that  was  the  man  I  saw  in 
the  Central  Police  Office  or  who  passed  me  that  night. 

Did   you   take   the  time   when   the   man   passed? — Well,    I 

looked  at  the  clock  either  before  he  passed  or  just  at  the  time, 

and  it  was  between  the  hour  of  half-past   seven   and   eight, 

but  I  could  not  say  to  the  exact  time.        It  was  some  time 

118 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

between  these  two  hours  I  have  mentioned.       Sometimes  my  Annie  Armour 
inspector  comes   at  eight,   and   at  other  times  at  nine.        It 
was  before  the  inspector  came.       (Shown  production  No.  43.) 

Is  that  like  the  coat  the  man  wore  who  rushed  past  you 
that  night? — Yes,  that  is  like  it — no,  I  think  it  was  a  shade 
darker  than  that.  I  think  his  coat  was  buttoned;  the  one 
side  of  the  collar  was  turned  up.  (Shown  production  No.  44.) 
I  could  not  exactly  say  whether  it  was  a  hat  or  a  cap  he  had 
on,  but  it  was  something  dark.  It  was  by  his  face  that  I 
recognised  the  man ;  I  thought  he  was  so  excited  looking,  and 
he  gave  me  such  a  fright  when  he  passed  me  that  I  had  a  good 
look  at  his  face. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURB — I  take  it  that  you  cannot 
say  what  boots  he  had  on? — No. 

You  cannot  say  what  colour  of  trousers  he  had  on? — I  think 
they  were  dark ;  they  were  darker  than  the  coat  was. 

But  the  coat  was  not  a  light  coat  like  that,  but  a  pretty 
dark  one — a  darker  coat  than  the  one  that  was  shown  you  just 
now? — Well,  not  much  darker. 

Was  it  much  darker  ? — A  shade  darker. 

Then  you  mean  it  was  not  the  same  coat  as  that? — Well, 
it  was  the  same  style  of  coat,  but  a  shade  darker. 

Then  you  mean  that  it  was  not  the  same  coat? — Perhaps 
it  was  in  the  light  that  I  thought  it  was  darker. 

Then  may  the  colour  of  all  his  clothes  have  looked  differently 
to  you  from  what  they  look  now? — And  it  was  raining  that 
night. 

I  want  to  know,  are  you  able  to  identify  now  any  of  the 
articles  here  as  articles  which  were  worn  that  night  by  the 
man? — Yes,  that  is  the  kind  of  coat  the  man  had  on. 

But  you  cannot  say  it  was  the  same? — Only  a  shade  darker; 
of  course  the  rain  could  make  the  coat  darker. 

You  are  not  sure  of  the  trousers? — No. 

And  not  sure  of  the  boots? — No. 

And  not  sure  of  the  hat? — No. 

And  it  may  have  been  a  bowler  hat? — No,  it  was  not  a 
bowler  hat,  it  was  a  cloth. 

You  said  it  was  a  hat  or  cap? — Yes,  but  it  was  not  a  bowler 
hat. 

It  was  either  a  dark  hat  or  a  dark  cap  of  cloth? — Yes. 

Can  you  say  whether  it  was  a  black  one? — I  only  know  it 
was  dark  ;  I  cannot  say  the  exact  colour. 

Did  you  have  to  press  your  foot  upon  the  turnstile  to  let  him 
through? — Yes. 

How  long  did  it  take  passing  your  window? — It  does  not 
take  long  to  pass  the  window. 

Did  he  fly  through? — Yes. 

As  fast  as  he  could? — Yes. 

119 


Oscar  Slater. 

Annie  Armour  But  you  had  time  to  observe  he  had  no  moustache  of  any 
kind  ? — No  moustache  of  any  kind. 

Was  there  a  train  due  about  the  time? — I  do  not  know. 

Did  you  ever  see  people  rush  in  a  hurry  for  the  trains  at 
this  place? — Yes,  but  not  in  such  a  great  hurry,  and  going 
in  without  their  tickets. 

I  think  you  said  they  sometimes  go  in  without  their  tickets, 
too  ? — I  said  it  was  not  very  often  ;  it  is  very  seldom. 

But  still  you  know  they  do  on  occasion  go  without  their 
tickets? — Well,  an  odd  one. 

Could  you  see  the  man's  face  quit©  well  through  the  window? 
—Yes. 

Had  he  any  peculiarity  about  his  nose? — I  never  noticed  the 
man's  nose. 

It  had  not  a  twist? — I  never  noticed  his  nose. 

Which  part  of  his  face  did  you  concentrate  your  attention 
on? — I  had  a  view  of  the  side  of  his  face. 

You  are  quite  certain  he  had  no  moustache  at  all? — Quite 
certain. 

Had  the  man  you  saw  at  the  police  office  on  21st  February 
a  moustache? — Yes. 

Before  you  went  down  to  the  Central  Police  Office  to  identify 
the  man,  I  think  you  had  seen  his  photograph  and  his  descrip- 
tion ? — Yes. 

And  when  you  went  down  there,  there  was  nobody  the  least 
like  him  except  this  person? — No,  not  that  I  saw. 

The  other  people  were  quite  .different  in  appearance? — Well, 
there  were  some  of  a  sallow  complexion — dark. 

None  the  least  like  this  man? — No;  none  the  least  like 
him. 

As  regards  the  hour  when  this  happened,  you  said  you 
looked  at  the  clock? — Yes. 

What  was  the  hour? — Well,  I  cannot  say  the  exact  hour, 
but  it  was  between  the  hour  of  half-past  seven  and  eight. 

If  you  looked  at  the  clock  you  can  surely  tell  us  ? — No ;  I 
cannot  remember.  It  might  have  been  half-past  seven  or  it 
might  have  been  eight.  It  was  not  exactly  eight;  it  might 
have  been  half -past  seven  or  twenty-five  to  eight,  but  I  am  not 
sure  of  the  exact  time. 

But  you  looked  the  clock? — Yes. 

Can  you  tell  us  what  the  clock  indicated? — No. 

Might  it  have  been  a  quarter  to  eight? — It  might  have 
been. 

Might  it  have  been  ten  minutes  to  eight? — No;  it  could 
not  have  been  any  later. 

Why? — Because  I  was  expecting  the  inspector  to  come,  and 
it  was  not  ten  minutes  till  the  time  he  came. 

120 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

And   he  comes    at   eight? — Sometimes  at   eight,   and  other  Annie  Armour 
times  at  nine. 

So  that  it  may  have  been  ten  minutes  to  nine? — No. 

If  you  were  judging  the  time  by  the  fact  that  you  were 
looking  for  the  inspector,  and  he  comes  sometimes  at  eight 
and  sometimes  at  nine,  do  you  know  what  hour  you  are 
referring  to? — Yes,  I  know  it  was  about  half -past  seven  or 
eight,  and  that  is  all  I  know ;  it  was  between  these  hours. 

May  I  take  it  that  you  cannot  tell  us  to  within  half  an  hour? 
— It  was  between  half-past  seven  and  eight. 

By  the  COURT — Do  you  know  where  Miss  Gilchrist's  house 
is? — No;  I  do  not  exactly  know  where  the  house  is,  but  I 
know  where  the  street  is. 

How  far  is  it  from  your  place? — I  could  not  exactly  say;  I 
have  never  gone  that  way;  I  have  been  in  St.  George's  Road, 
and  seen  the  street  from  St.  George's  Road,  that  is  all. 

You  cannot  tell  me  how  long  it  would  take  one  to  walk? — 
No. 

JAMES  DORNAN,  examined  by  Mr.  MORISON — I  am  a  detective  J.  Dornan 
sergeant  in  the  Western  District  of  the  Glasgow  police  force. 
I  pointed  out  to  the  witness  George  Bell,  photographer,  the 
points  marked  Nos.  1  to  6  on  the  photograph  of  West  Princes 
Street.  No.  1  signifies  15  Queen's  Terrace;  No.  2  is  the  close, 
46  West  Princes  Street;  No.  3  is  58  West  Princes  Street; 
No.  4  is  the  corner  of  Queen's  Crescent  and  West  Princes 
Street;  No.  5  is  16  West  Princes  Street;  and  No.  6  is  a  point 
in  West  Princes  Street  quite  near  St.  George's  Road.  I  know 
the  locality  round  about  Miss  Gilchrist's  house.  West  Princes 
Street  is  a  very  quiet  street  at  night.  There  are  a  variety 
of  ways  by  which  you  can  reach  the  Woodlands  Road  Subway 
station  from  West  Princes  Street;  a  variety  of  routes  can  be 
taken. 

How  long  would  it  take  you  to  walk  between  Miss  Gilchrist's 
house  and  that  Subway  station? — By  West  Cumberland  Street, 
Grant  Street,  Arlington  Street,  Woodlands  Road,  and  South 
Woodside  Road,  nine  and  a  half  minutes  or  thereby;  going 
direct  by  West  Princes  Street  to  South  Woodside  Road  and 
then  to  the  Subway,  seven  and  a  half  minutes  or  thereby. 

By  the  COURT — That  is  walking  at  an  ordinary  pace. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURB — I  want  to  ask  one  question, 
because  I  know  Glasgow  pretty  well.  Woodlands  Road  is  a 
main  car  line? — There  are  cars  perpetually  running  on  the 
Woodlands  Road. 

Isn't  it  the  fact  that  the  Woodlands  Road  is  the  main  artery 
for  all  pedestrians  who  are  walking  from  the  Billhead  district 
into  Glasgow  and  out  again? — I  would  not  say  that.  For  the 
West  End  of  Glasgow,  from  Billhead,  I  would  say  Great 

121 


Oscar  Slater. 

J.  Dornan  Western  Road  was  by  far  the  most  busy  thoroughfare,  which 
is  the  route  to  the  Subway. 

I  am  referring  to  pedestrians? — There  may  be  some  of  them 
frequent  that  road,  but  it  is  not  so  frequented  aa  the  Great 
Western  Road. 

Isn't  it  the  fact  that  Woodlands  Road  is  very  much  fre- 
quented, and  that  a  person  passing  any  time  between  seven 
and  eight  would  be  likely  to  pass  dozens,  or  even  hundreds, 
of  people? — No;  not  hundreds  of  people. 

How  many  would  you  put  it  at — a  much  frequented  road? — 
No ;  it  would  not  be  to  the  extent  of  hundreds  of  people. 

Dozens  of  people? — There  might  be  a  dozen  of  people,  but 
it  is  not  a  busy  road  at  all. 

John  Ord  JOHN  ORD,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  am  the 
superintendent  of  the  Criminal  Investigation  Department 
of  the  Glasgow  police.  On  the  evening  of  the  21st  December 
last  I  received  a  telephone  message  which  had  been  transmitted 
from  the  Western  District  of  the  city.  I  at  once  proceeded  to 
the  Central  Police  Office  and  'phoned  to  the  Western  for 
information.  I  then  sent  a  telephone  message  to  all  the 
detective  offices  that  all  the  officers  should  remain  at  their 
posts  at  the  various  offices.  I  then  went  to  the  scene  of  the 
murder  along  with  Detective  Gordon.  I  reached  Miss  Gil- 
christ's  house  about  half-past  eight  at  night.  Superintendent 
Douglas  and  Detective  Pyper  were  there  at  that  time,  and  a 
constable.  I  went  into  the  dining-room.  I  was  informed 
that  the  body  was  lying  just  in  the  same  position  as  they  had 
found  it.  There  were  spots  of  blood  on  the  fire-irons  and 
fender,  and  also  on  the  coal  scuttle,  and  I  found  some  on 
the  hearth  rug  too.  I  went  into  the  larger  of  the  two  bed- 
rooms and  I  saw  there  a  small  box  lying  on  the  floor,  with 
a  number  of  papers  scattered  about.  On  the  evening  of  23rd 
December  I  got  information  by  telephone  of  a  girl,  Barrow- 
man,  being  able  to  give  information,  and  I  instructed  her 
evidence  to  be  taken.  It  was  taken  that  night;  it  was  the 
next  morning  before  I  got  the  evidence  in  full,  on  the  24th. 
On  the  25th  I  issued  to  the  Glasgow  newspapers  a  notice  con- 
taining a  description  of  the  man  as  given  by  the  girl  Barrow- 
man.  I  did  that  after  approaching  the  chief  constable  and 
asking  whether  it  would  be  judicious.  Accordingly,  a  notice 
appeared  giving  the  description  of  the  man  in  the  Evening 
Times,  the  Evening  News,  and  the  Evening  Citizen.  It  would 
be  published  about  two  o'clock  on  the  25th.  About  6.10  on 
the  same  evening,  on  the  25th  of  December,  the  witness  Allan 
M'Lean  called  at  the  Central  Police  Office.  He  gave  me 
information  where  a  man  of  that  description  was  to  be  found. 
He  said  that,  in  consequence  of  the  description  having 

122 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

appeared  in  the  papers,  he  had  called  to  give  me  information  John  Ord 
about  the  man.  I  found  he  was  known  at  a  club  which  is 
known  as  the  Sloper  Club,  and  that  his  name  was  Oscar  Slater. 
On  the  night  of  the  murder  we  knew  that  a  valuable  diamond 
brooch  was  amissing  from  the  house.  I  heard  that  the  man 
Slater  had  been  trying  to  dispose  of  a  pawn  ticket  for  a  brooch 
in  the  club.  I  subsequently  discovered  that  that  was  not  the 
brooch.  In  consequence  of  the  information  received  from 
M'Lean  I  sent  Detective  Powell  along  with  M'Lean  to  the  place 
where  Slater  was  said  to  live.  M'Lean  said  he  could  not  give 
the  address,  but  he  thought  he  could  point  out  the  close.  It 
was  reported  to  me  that  night  that  he  was  believed  to  be 
living  at  69  St.  George's  Road  under  the  name  of  Anderson. 
About  midnight  I  instructed  Detectives  Lyon  and  Millican  to 
go  with  Detective  Powell  to  Anderson's  house  for  the  purpose 
of  apprehending  the  man.  About  three  o'clock  in  the  morn- 
ing it  was  reported  to  me  by  telephone  that  the  man  had  gone. 
There  was  handed  to  me  a  piece  of  wrapper  paper  which  was 
said  to  have  been  found  by  our  detectives  in  the  house. 
No.  28  of  the  productions  is  that  torn  paper  wrapper.  It 
is  registered  and  addressed  to  Oscar  Slater,  c/o  A.  Anderson, 
Esq.,  69  St.  George's  Road,  Glasgow,  and  the  word  "Dent" 
is  underlined.  Dent  is  the  name  of  a  jeweller  in  London. 
I  immediately  gave  instructions  that  all  south-going  trains 
should  be  carefully  watched.  In  consequence  of  inquiries 
made  at  the  railway  stations,  it  was  reported  to  me  that  two 
single  tickets  for  London  had  been  issued  for  the  9.5  train 
from  the  Central  Station.  I  wired  to  the  London  police.  On 
29th  December  I  received  information  from  Liverpool  that 
Oscar  Slater  and  a  woman  had  arrived  there  early  on  the 
26th.  We  had  several  telegrams  with  regard  to  men  believed 
to  be  Oscar  Slater.  The  information  we  received  from  Liver- 
pool was  that  Oscar  Slater  and  this  woman  had  sailed  by  the 
"  Lusitania  "  for  New  York,  under  the  name  of  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Otto  Sando.  A  cablegram  was  sent  to  New  York.  I  made 
the  arrangements  necessary  for  the  identification  of  the  man 
when  he  returned.  I  arranged  to  have  quite  a  number  of 
people  in  the  room  where  he  was  to  be  seen  by  the  witnesses. 
I  did  not  go  myself.  I  set  apart  two  officers,  Trench  and 
Cameron,  to  look  after  the  identification.  I  arranged  to  have 
a  number  of  people  there,  some  policemen  in  plain  clothes, 
some  railway  servants,  and  others.  There  were  about  twelve 
altogether.  Some  people  were  coming  in  making  inquiries, 
and  we  asked  them  to  step  into  the  room  also. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURB — You  were  not  there  when 
the  identification  was  going  onl — No,  I  did  not  go  into  the 
room. 

We  have  been  told  that  there  were  just  two  railway  officials, 


Oscar  Slater. 

John  Ord  and  that  the  rest  of  the  men  were  policemen  along  with  Slater, 
is  that  correct? — I  am  confident  that  there  were  more  civilians 
than  that.  I  sent  several  people  into  the  room. 

We  have  been  told  there  was  no  other  person  put  in  the  least 
like  Slater? — One  of  the  railway  servants  is  very  like  him.  I 
refer  to  Inspector  Lang,  of  the  railway. 

Is  he  here? — I  do  not  know  that  he  is  here.  He  has  dark 
hair  and  his  nose  is  slightly  of  the  same  description. 

Detective  Trench  has  given  us  a  contrary  impression? — I  do 
not  know  about  that,  but  the  others  will  bear  me  out  that  this 
railway  man's  nose  is  slightly  like  that  of  Slater's.  It  is 
not  so  pronounced  a  Jewish  one. 

Did  you  understand  the  twisted  nose  that  was  referred  to 
by  the  girl  Barrowman  to  be  just  a  Jewish  nose? — No,  not  at 
first,  not  particularly  Jewish. 

You  expected  something  different,  in  fact,  from  what  Slater's 
nose  turned  out  to  be? — I  did  not  expect  anything. 

But  when  you  put  in  "  twisted  nose  "  you  were  not  describing 
an  ordinary  Jewish  nose? — The  description  was  "  thinks 
slightly  twisted  to  the  right." 

Quite  noticeable? — Those  are  exactly  the  words.  I  cannot 
tell  what  the  person  meant  by  it. 

Why  did  you  say  that  you  discovered  that  upon  the  Friday 
night  there  were  two  single  tickets  taken  for  London? — That 
was  reported  to  me,  I  said.  I  had  officers  making  inquiries 
at  all  the  railway  stations,  and  it  was  reported  to  me  that 
two  single  tickets  had  been  taken  for  London. 

And  you  naturally  thought  that  Slater  and  his  travelling 
companion  had  taken  tickets  for  London,  and  then  changed  to 
Liverpool  to  put  the  police  off  the  scent? — Yes,  I  believed  that 
at  the  time. 

Have  you  discovered  since  that  the  Caledonian  Railway 
time  books  of  that  night  show  that  two  single  third-class 
tickets  were  taken  from  Glasgow  to  Liverpool,  and  that  Slater 
and  his  travelling  companion  travelled  in  a  through  carriage 
to  Liverpool? — I  have  not  discovered  anything,  because  I  have 
not  seen  a  railway  book  belonging  to  any  of  the  railway 
officials,  nor  have  I  interviewed  any  of  them. 

Look  at  production  No.  69.  You  see  the  9.5  train  from 
the  Central.  Did  Slater  travel  by  the  9.5  train  from  the 
Central? — I  cannot  tell  you  definitely,  because  I  was  not  there. 
It  was  reported  to  me  that  he  was  supposed  to  be  travelling. 

In  point  of  fact,  the  reports  you  received  are  to  the  effect 
that  Slater  and  his  travelling  companion  left  the  Central 
Station  at  9.5  p.m.? — Yes,  it  was  reported  that  a  man  and 
woman,  believed  to  be  Slater,  had  left. 

Do  you  find  that  two  single  tickets  for  Liverpool  were  issued 
for  that  train? — I   see  Liverpool,    Birmingham,   and   London 
mentioned  here. 
124 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Do  you  see  that  two  tickets  were  issued  for  Liverpool  for  John  Ord 
the  9.5  train? — Yes. 

And  these  are  the  only  tickets  for  Liverpool  that  night? — 
That  is  all  that  is  there. 

Do  you  know  whether  the  man's  luggage  was  labelled 
"  Glasgow  Central  to  Liverpool  "  ? — I  cannot  tell  you  anything 
about  that. 

Are  you  satisfied  now  that  the  man  did  not  start  with  the 
London  tickets? — No,  certainly  not. 

Have  you  heard  of  any  other  people  who  travelled  that  night 
to  Liverpool? — No,  it  would  need  a  great  deal  more  than  an 
entry  in  a  book  to  satisfy  me  that  Slater  did  not  travel  with 
London  tickets. 

Do  you  not  know  that  the  railway  official  has  to  keep  a 
record  of  the  tickets  issued  with  these  trains? — Yes. 

And  there  are  entered  two  single  tickets  for  Liverpool  by 
the  9.5  train?— Yes. 

Have  you  by  any  investigation  got  upon  the  track  of  any 
persons  who  were  travelling  to  Liverpool  from  the  Central  that 
night? — I  cannot  say  that  I  have. 

And  you  are  not  satisfied  that  Slater  went  by  that  train  to 
Liverpool? — I  am  satisfied  of  that. 

But  not  with  Liverpool  tickets? — I  cannot  say  that.  I 
have  other  information  to  the  effect  that  he  did  not,  but  that 
is  not  evidence. 

Did  you  see  the  labels  on  his  luggage? — No. 

Have  you  not  examined  that? — No. 

"  Liverpool,  Lime  Street,"  is  on  his  luggage? — Yes. 

Is  it  probable  now  that  he  travelled  with  London  tickets? — 
Yes,  very. 

Why  do  you  say  so? — Because  I  know  he  covered  up  his 
tracks  as  far  as  he  could. 

Have  you  made  any  investigation  to  try  and  find  out  any 
other  passenger  except  Slater  and  the  woman  who  went  from  the 
Central  Station  to  Liverpool  that  night? — Yes. 

And  you  found  no  persons  who  travelled  except  these  two? — 
That  is  so.  It  was  several  days  after  that  before  we  got 
information  that  he  had  gone  to  Liverpool. 

Have  you  got  any  information  that  Slater  took  out  two 
London  tickets  at  the  station? — Yes. 

From  any  person  who  still  remains  of  that  opinion? — Yes. 
•  is  an  official  of  the  Central  Station  I  believe  who  could 
have  spoken  to  that  if  his  name  had  been  on  the  Crown  list. 

It  is  not  on  the  Crown  list? — No. 

So  the  only  person  who  could  have  proved  that  Slater  and 
this  woman  took  tickets  for  London  and  then  changed  to 
Liverpool  is  not  present? — So  far  as  I  know.  Of  course,  the 
whole  of  that  is  hearsay.  I  was  not  at  the  station. 


Oscar   Slater. 

John  Ord      But  everything  is  reported  to  you? — Yes. 

That  naturally  would  have  been  a  very  suspicious  circum- 
stance if  a  person  had  taken  a  London  ticket  and  changed  to 
Liverpool  ? — Yes. 

Do  you  still  persist  in  saying  that  that  is  what  Slater  did? 
— I  do  not  say  that  I  persist,  because  I  do  not  know  definitely. 

Do  you  not  give  him  even  the  benefit  of  that  doubt? — In  this 
case  I  do  not. 

As  regards  the  pawn  ticket,  was  it  reported  to  you  by 
M'Lean  that  this  pawn  ticket  for  a  crescent  brooch  with  diamond 
stones  was  being  offered  for  sale  by  Slater? — It  was  a  man 
Cameron  that  had  been  offering  it  for  sale  on  behalf  of 
Slater. 

And  naturally  you  thought  this  might  be  a  clue? — We 
associated  it  with  the  case. 

You  knew  that  the  old  lady  had  lost  a  crescent  brooch? — 
Yes. 

Did  you  find  out  that  the  crescent  brooch  which  Slater  was 
endeavouring  to  sell  through  Cameron  was  one  which  had  been 
in  pawn  originally  in  the  month  of  November? — Yes. 

And  that  two  sums  of  £10  and  £20  had  been  advanced  on 
it,  and  then  on  21st  December  (the  day  of  this  murder)  an 
additional  £30  had  been  advanced  on  it? — Yes,  that  was 
reported  to  me. 

Was  it  the  coincidence  in  the  date,  21st  December,  of  the 
last  advance  upon  this  brooch  that  made  you  think  it  might 
be  Miss  Gilchrist's  brooch? — Most  assuredly  that  had  some 
bearing  on  the  case. 

Did  you  discover  immediately  that  this  was  not  the  brooch 
at  all? — We  knew  that  that  morning. 

Did  you  make  inquiry  at  Cook's  office? — I  made  no  personal 
inquiries  at  all. 

Did  you  direct  inquiries  to  be  made? — Yes. 

Did  you  find  that  some  days  before  the  25th  Slater  had 
been  at  Cook's  office  to  find  out  about  the  sailings  for  America  1 
— Yes,  I  heard  that,  too. 

And  that  he  had  been  at  the  Cunard  office? — I  did  not  hear 
that  until  about  the  29th  or  30th. 

In  point  of  fact,  have  you  not  information  which  goes  to 
show  that  from  the  21st  Slater  was  going  about  billiard  rooms 
and  other  places  quite  publicly  in  Glasgow,  from  the  21st  until 
the  25th? — No,  the  information  is  just  the  other  way.  The 
information  was  that  he  had  not  been  seen  at  the  club  that 
he  used  to  frequent  regularly.  He  was  not  back  at  it  after 
the  night  of  the  murder. 

Did  you  find  he  was  going  to  billiard  rooms  in  the  city? — I 
did  not  find  that. 

Do  you  know  that  that  was  found  by  your  agents? — I  do 

126 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

not   know   that.     I  have   not   heard   that   part   of   the   case.  John  Ord 
That  was  one  of  the  things  that  the  man  M'Lean  put  some 
stress  upon,   the  fact  that   Slater  had   not  been   seen   at  the 
club  after  the  night  of  the  murder. 

Has  he  been  to  Johnston's  billiard  room  since? — I  do  not 
know. 

Or  Gall's  public-house? — I  do  not  know. 
And  the  Cunard  offices  and  Cook's  office  on  two  dates? — I 
do  not  know  that  he  was  at  Cook's  office. 

And  Messrs.  Cook  afterwards  telegraphed  to  Liverpool  to 
see  about  the  sailings  of  the  Cunard  steamers,  and  it  was 
for  Oscar  Slater  that  their  inquiries  were  made? — I  cannot 
personally  answer  that  question  because  I  did  not  make 
inquiries,  neither  were  they  done  by  my  department.  A  good 
many  of  these  inquiries  were  done  from  the  Fiscal's  office. 

But  is  that  not  your  information? — I  heard  something  about 
them,  but  I  do  not  know  the  particulars. 

Do  you  know  that  a  telegram  was  sent  to  Dent  in  London 
for  the  return  of  a  watch  by  Slater,  and  it  was  sent  to  him  in 
his  name? — The  account  was  handed  to  me.  It  was  found 
in  his  house.  I  wrote  to  find  out  what  relations  he  had  with 
Dent,  and  I  got  the  telegrams  referred  to  there. 

Did  you  find  it  was  about  a  watch  that  Slater  wanted  to 
get  back  because  he  was  going  abroad? — Yes. 

Did  you  find  also  that  in  a  letter,  dated  20th  December  and 
despatched  at  five  o'clock  on  21st  December,  Slater  wrote  to 
the  Post  Office  Savings  Bank  in  London  before  the  murder 
asking  that  his  deposit  should  be  forwarded  to  Glasgow  as  he 
was  going  abroad? — This  is  the  first  time  I  have  heard  about 
that  letter. 

I  refer  to  Nos.  4  and  5  of  the  defence  productions.  Did  you 
know  of  these  letters? — I  never  heard  of  them. 

You  have  assumed  all  through  that  this  man  was  going 
abroad  as  the  result  of  a  published  description  in  the  evening 
papers  of  25th  December,  1908? — Not  necessarily. 

But  was  not  that  the  evidence  you  were  suggesting  just 
now? — I  had  no  doubt  in  my  mind  that  that  was  partly  the 
result — that  is  to  say,  the  hurried  leaving  of  Glasgow  at  the 
time  I  supplied  the  first  information  to  the  Crown — I  was 
satisfied  he  was  leaving  hurriedly  on  account  of  his  description 
having  appeared  in  the  newspapers  on  the  25th.  That  was 
the  inference. 

Did  you  find  that  he  informed  the  barber  Nichols,  who  is 
on  the  Crown  list,  in  the  forenoon  of  25th  December,  that  he 
was  going  to  sail  from  Liverpool  by  the  "  Lusitania  "  the  next 
day,  and  was  leaving  that  night  from  the  Central  Station? — I 
never  interviewed  the  barber.  His  evidence  was  supplied  by 

127 


Oscar  Slater. 

John  Ord  another  officer.  I  heard  that,  but  I  never  interviewed  him. 
I  found  from  the  letter  from  Jacobs  that  he  was  going.  I 
inferred  he  had  meant  to  go  then,  because  Jacobs  says  that 
he  could  not  lie  out  of  his  money  for  three  months.  That 
letter  was  written  on  28th  December,  1908. 

Do  you  admit  that  all  that  information  which  has  come  to 
you  since  puts  a  different  complexion  on  the  matter? — No  doubt 
it  modifies  it  to  a  certain  extent. 

Re-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — You  said  to  Mr.  M'Clure 
that  you  were  informed  that  there  was  an  official  or  servant 
at  the  Central  Station  who  knew  about  the  issue  of  the  tickets, 
and  you  added  that  his  name  was  not  on  the  list? — That  is  so, 
because  we  were  too  late  in  getting  him.  The  explanation 
is  that  the  man's  name  and  address  were  obtained  after  the 
prisoner  had  been  served  with  a  copy  of  his  indictment,  and 
he  could  not  be  added  to  the  list. 

Do  you  know  whether  the  two  tickets  for  Liverpool  were 
issued  to  separate  people? — I  could  not  answer  that. 

Was  that  the  reason  why  you  said  to  Mr.  M'Clure  that  the 
entries  in  a  book  alone  would  not  satisfy  you? — My  reason  for 
giving  the  answer  was  that  I  was  satisfied  that  really  the 
tickets  issued  to  him  were  tickets  to  London. 

In  the  course  of  your  inquiries  did  you  ascertain  that  on 
9th  December  Oscar  Slater  communicated  with  Dent  in  London 
regarding  his  watch? — I  could  not  repeat  the  date  from  memory. 

Look  at  the  print  of  productions,  page  18.  Did  you  ascer- 
tain in  the  course  of  your  inquiries  that  on  9th  December  Oscar 
Slater,  whoever  he  may  be,  communicated  with  Dent  regarding 
his  watch,  and  bid  him  not  return  same  till  the  30th  of 
December,  the  address  being  69  St.  George's  Road? — Yes. 

Did  you  ascertain  that  Oscar  Slater  on  21st  December  asked 
Dent,  if  possible,  to  send  the  watch  at  once? — Yes. 

He  asked  that  by  a  wire? — Yes. 

Did  you  ascertain  that  two  days  later,  viz.,  on  23rd  Decem- 
ber, Oscar  Slater,  care  of  A.  Anderson,  telegraphed  to  Dent, 
"  Must  have  watch.  Leaving  to-morrow  night  for  the  Con- 
tinent "?— Yes. 

Did  you  ascertain  when  the  telegram  of  21st  December  was 
sent  off? — No,  I  do  not  know  the  hour. 

Did  you  ever  hear  of  Slater  going  to  the  Continent? — No.  I 
did  not  hear  of  him  having  gone  to  the  Continent. 

When  you  saw  the  telegram  you  saw  that  apparently  it  was 
his  intention  on  the  24th  to  go  to  the  Continent? — That  is  the 
inference  to  be  drawn  from  it.  He  says  that  he  is  going  to  the 
Continent. 

Did   you  ascertain   that   the   house  he   occupied   at  69    St. 
George's  Road  was  taken  in  an  assumed  name? — Yes,  in  the 
name  of  Anderson  till  May,  1910. 
128 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Did  you  ascertain  also  that  there  was  no  dentistry  carried  on  John  Ord 
there  and  no  dentistry  implements? — That  is  so. 

By  the  COURT — Did  all  the  advertisements  or  police  notices 
in  the  papers  contain  a  description  with  reference  to  the 
peculiarity  of  the  nose? — Yes.  After  we  got  the  girl's  statement 
in  any  public  notice  that  we  issued  we  always  referred  to  the 
nose,  although  I  may  explain  that  we  kept  the  matter  open 
and  suggested  that  there  might  be  two  men,  and  we  kept  the 
first  description  alongside  the  second  one. 

The  first  description  containing  no  reference  to  the  nose? — 
No. 

Did  either  of  the  descriptions  contain  any  reference  to  the 
peculiar  walk? — I  could  not  answer  that.  There  is  nothing 
apparently  about  the  walk  in  any  of  the  intimations. 

You  referred  to  Slater  having  had  another  name,  the  Scotch 
name  of  Anderson.  Is  there  anything  peculiar  in  that  in  the 
case  of  foreigners,  especially  Jews,  working  in  this  country? — 
If  they  cannot  speak  the  English  language  very  well,  and  if 
other  people  cannot  pronounce  their  names,  then  they  often 
adopt  a  Scotch  name,  but  an  educated  man  usually  keeps 
his  own  name. 

Have  you  not  met  many  cases  of  men  like  Slater  taking 
a  Scotch  name? — No,  not  a  man  of  his  intelligence.  In  the 
mining  class  they  nearly  all  adopt  Scotch  names. 

Did  you  attach  importance  to  the  fact  that  he  had  taken 
another  name? — I  did  not  attach  much  importance  to  that. 

But  did  you  attach  any  importance? — Yes. 

He  took  this  other  name  before  the  murder? — Yes.  He  was 
known  to  some  persons  as  Anderson  and  to  others  as  Slater. 

Did  you  attach  any  importance  to  it  in  connection  with 
the  murder? — After  we  got  the  third  name,  0.  Sando,  then 
the  coincidence  struck  me  as  singular.  That  was  three  names. 

WILLIAM  NEIL,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  am  a  William  Neil 
constable  in  the  Western  District,  Glasgow.  About  a  quarter 
past  seven  on  21st  December  last  I  was  on  duty  in  West  Princes 
Street.  The  witness  Adams  came  to  me  and  informed  me  that 
Miss  Gilchrist  had  been  murdered  in  her  house.  I  went  straight 
to  the  house.  I  had  passed  the  house  six  or  seven  minutes 
before  that  on  the  north  side.  When  I  went  up  to  the  room 
I  found  the  old  lady  was  lying  murdered  in  her  dining-room  with 
a  mat  right  over  her.  I  was  the  first  officer  there.  Her  body 
was  kept  in  the  same  position  in  which  I  found  it  till  after 
the  doctors  came.  I  found  a  set  of  false  teeth  and  a  half- 
Bovereign  lying  on  the  table  close  beside  her.  I  went  to  the 
police  office  on  Monday,  22nd  February,  and  I  saw  a  man  there 
whom  I  recognised.  I  did  not  know  his  name  previous  to  that. 
The  prisoner  is  the  man  whom  I  saw  in  the  police  office.  I 

K  139 


Oscar  Slater. 

William  Neil  have  seen  him  in  St.  George's  Road  several  times  in  November 
and  December.  I  saw  him  there  about  the  latter  end  of 
November  and  twice  in  December. 

You  had  known  him  before  in  Glasgow? — Yes,  about  five  or 
six  years  ago.  I  had  seen  him  then  in  Grant  Street,  which  is 
the  next  street  to  West  Princes  Street.  There  was  a  club  there 
that  he  used  to  frequent.  I  saw  him  occasionally  then  for  about 
a  minute,  I  would  say.  I  did  not  know  his  name,  but  I  recog- 
nised him  as  the  same  man  as  I  had  known  before. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — Was  that  about  the  time 
of  the  Glasgow  Exhibition  of  1901  or  later? — I  think  it  would 
be  about  that  time. 

Annie  Gillies  ANOTE  GILLIES,  examined  by  Mr.  MORISON — I  am  twenty-three 
years  of  age,  and  saleswoman  with  Messrs.  Hepburn  &  Marshall, 
hardware  merchants,  Charing  Cross,  Glasgow.  I  recognise 
the  prisoner.  He  first  came  to  our  premises  on  7th  November, 
and  he  made  a  purchase.  He  gave  us  the  name  of  Anderson, 
69  St.  George's  Road.  He  came  back  afterwards  on  10th 
November  and  bought  a  set  of  tools.  Production  No.  31  is  the 
duplicate  sale  note  for  these  tools  and  a  few  other  things. 
(Shown  labels  Nos.  47  and  48,  consisting  of  a  hammer,  screw 
driver,  pliers,  &c.)  These  are  the  articles  that  we  sold  on 
the  card  of  household  tools.  I  was  shown  that  hammer  in  the 
prisoner's  presence  in  the  police  office.  I  identified  it  as  the 
one  I  had  sold  him. 

Did  you  notice  anything  about  the  handle  at  the  time  you 
saw  it  in  the  police  office? — I  thought  it  was  not  the  same  as 
when  I  had  sold  it  on  the  card.  I  thought  it  had  the  appearance 
of  having  been  washed.  I  do  not  think  that  the  lower  part 
had  been  washed,  but  the  part  towards  the  head  had  been 
washed.  The  wood  there  was  different  from  the  lower  part. 
Looking  at  it  now  I  think  it  shows  the  same  appearance  of 
having  been  washed  as  I  noticed  in  the  police  office.  I  think 
it  still  shows  that  the  portion  of  it  towards  the  head  had  been 
washed. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLTJKE — You  do  not  say  that  with 
any  confidence,  do  you?  You  can  see  that  the  lower  part  of  the 
hammer  has  been  dirty,  but  can  you  say  that  the  top  has  been 
washed? — It  has  not  the  appearance  of  a  new  piece  of  wood. 

I  quite  agree.  It  has  been  in  use  for  a  good  while? — Yes, 
six  weeks. 

You  do  not  suggest  seriously  that  your  evidence  is  that  that 
bit  has  been  washed  at  the  top,  and  the  lower  bit  has  been 
unwashed?  You  are  not  very  confident  about  it,  I  think? — It 
has  not  the  appearance  of  new  wood. 

By  the  COURT — Is  it  the  lighter  colour  as  compared  with  the 

130 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

darker  colour  below  that  makes  you  say  that? — As  compared  Annie  Gillies 
with  a  new  one. 

Cross-examination  resumed — Did  you  not  sell  us  this  card 
with  tools  since? — Yes. 

On  10th  November,  when  you  sold  the  card  with  the  pincers 
and  hammer  and  other  implements  to  A.  Anderson,  69  St. 
George's  Road,  it  was  just  a  card  like  that  which  you  sold  for 
2s.  6d.?— Yes. 

Except  that  the  hammer  is  dirty,  do  you  see  any  difference  1 
— Just  a  slight  difference  in  the  wood. 

You  do  not  profess  to  say  whether  it  has  been  washed  or 
what  has  been  done? — No. 

You  see  some  coal  dust  under  the  head  there? — It  is  difficult 
for  me  to  tell  what  is  on  the  handle  now.  It  is  not  in  the 
same  condition  as  it  was  when  I  sold  it. 

Professor  JOHN  GLAISTEK,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE —  John  Giaister 
I  am  Professor  of  Forensic  Medicine  in  Glasgow  University. 
On  the  instructions  of  the  Procurator-Fiscal  there,  I  visited  and 
inspected  on  22nd  December  the  house  at  15  Queen's  Terrace 
occupied  by  the  late  Miss  Gilchrist.  In  conjunction  with  Dr. 
Gait,  I  prepared  the  report  No.  2  of  the  productions.  That 
report  is  correct. 

University  of  Glasgow, 
22nd  December,  1908. 

At  the  request  of  James  Neil  Hart,  Esq.,  Procurator-fiscal 
of  the  county  of  Lanark,  we,  the  undersigned,  on  this  date 
visited  and  inspected  the  house  at  15  Queen's  Terrace,  or  49 
West  Princes  Street,  in  which  on  the  previous  evening  a  murder 
was  alleged  to  have  been  committed  on  the  person  of  Miss 
Marion  Gilchrist.  The  police  were  in  possession  of  the  premises 
on  our  arrival. 

The  body  was  identified  as  that  of  Miss  Marion  Gilchrist  in 
our  presence  by  the  following  persons,  viz.  :  — 

1.  Nellie  Lambie,  domestic  servant  to  the  said  Miss  Gilchrist, 
residing  at  15  Queen's  Terrace; 

2.  Arthur  M.  Adams,  residing  at  14  Queen's  Terrace;  and 

3.  William  Neil,  police  constable,   178  B,  Western  Division 
of  Police. 

We  first  examined  the  apartment  in  which  the  body  of  the 
said  Miss  Gilchrist  had  been  found,  viz.,  the  dining-room.  The 
body  had  been  left  undisturbed  in  the  position  in  which  it  had 
been  found,  and,  with  the  exception  of  a  chair  and  a  hair  rug 
which  had  been  displaced  from  their  original  position  when 
first  found,  and  of  a  coal  scuttle  the  position  of  which  had 
been  slightly  altered,  all  the  other  contents  of  the  room  were  in 
their  respective  positions  as  when  the  body  was  first  found. 


Oscar  Slater. 

JohnGlaister  The  dining-room  is  a  fairly  large  apartment.  Its  windows 
(two  in  number)  look  into  West  Princes  Street.  Along  the 
east  wall  of  the  room  is  the  fireplace  of  the  apartment.  On  a 
carpet  rug  in  front  of  this  fireplace  the  body  was  lying.  The 
head  was  pointing  diagonally  to  the  fireplace,  and  the  feet 
towards  the  dining-room  door.  The  right  arm  was  extended  at 
right  angles  from  the  body,  and  the  left  arm  was  lying  alongside 
of  and  parallel  to  the  body.  The  left  leg  was  crossed  over  the 
right  below  the  knees. 

Without  disturbing  the  body,  it  was  observed  that  the  head 
and  face  had  been  very  much  smashed.  There  were  wounds 
on  the  right  cheek  extending  from  the  mouth,  wounds  of  the 
right  forehead,  and  of  the  right  side  of  head.  There  was  a  deep 
hole  on  the  left  side  of  the  face  between  the  eye  socket  and  the 
left  ear. 

The  left  eyeball  was  entirely  amissing,  having  either  been 
driven  into  the  cavity  of  the  brain  or  having  been  gouged  out. 
The  right  eye  was  partially  torn  out  of  its  socket  by  the  deep 
fracture  of  the  right  side  of  the  brow.  There  was  much  blood 
on  and  among  the  hair  of  the  head.  On  the  carpet  rug  beneath 
the  head  on  both  sides  was  a  considerable  amount  of  clotted 
blood,  and  fluid  blood  had  soaked  into  the  substance  of  the 
rug.  Between  the  head  and  the  fender  of  the  fireplace  a  piece 
of  brain  tissue  weighing  about  three-quarters  of  an  ounce,  as 
well  as  smaller  pieces,  and  several  pieces  of  bone  covered  with 
blood,  were  found.  Two  of  these  pieces  were  retained. 

The  fire-irons  were  in  their  places.  They  were  bespattered 
with  blood,  as  was  also  the  grate  and  the  fire-bars.  The  legs 
of  some  of  the  chairs  in  the  neighbourhood  and  the  coal  scuttle 
were  also  bespattered  with  blood.  All  these  signs  indicated 
that  the  injuries  had  been  inflicted  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
where  the  body  was  found  lying,  and  that  the  injuries  had  been 
produced  by  very  forcible  application  of  some  instrument. 

There  was  also  found  between  the  head  and  the  fender  a 
complete  plate  (gold)  of  artificial  upper  teeth. 

Both  hands  were  remarkably  pallid.  There  was  no  blood  on 
the  right  hand  or  fingers,  but  there  was  dried  blood  between  the 
fingers  of  the  left  hand.  The  skin  rug  already  referred  to  was 
found  when  the  body  was  first  discovered  to  be  more  or  less 
covering  the  body.  On  examination  of  it  blood  was  found  among 
the  hair  about  the  middle  of  the  rug. 

The  spectacles  of  the  deceased  were  found  on  the  table  in 
front  of  an  open  magazine.  The  chair,  referred  to  as  having 
been  removed,  originally  stood,  when  the  body  was  found,  in 
front  of  this  magazine,  standing  on  its  four  legs. 

The  body  was,  in  accordance  with  our  instructions,  approved 
by  the  said  Mr.  Hart,  removed  to  the  mortuary  of  the  Glasgow 
Royal  Infirmary  for  further  examination  and  dissection. 

132 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

We  examined  the  room  for  any  likely  weapons.  From  our  John  Glalster 
examination  it  did  not  appear  that  any  of  the  fire-irons  had  been 
used  for  the  purpose  of  inflicting  the  injuries;  nor  had  any  of 
the  mantelpiece  ornaments.  We  were  shown  a  piece  of  a  large 
auger  or  screw-bit,  which  we  were  informed  had  been  found 
in  the  back  green  in  a  line  with  the  kitchen  window  of  the 
house.  On  examination  we  found  that  adhering  to  the  metal 
of  the  instrument  were  several  grey  hairs,  and,  in  addition, 
what  seemed  to  be  blood.  We  appended  our  signatures  to  the 
label  attached  to  the  instrument. 

JOHN  GLAISTBB,  M.D.,  &c. 
HUGH  GALT,  B.Sc.,  M.B.,  &c. 

Subsequently,  on  23rd  December,  I  received  a  warrant  from 
the  fiscal  for  the  purpose  of  making,  along  with  Dr.  Gait,  a 
post-mortem  examination  of  the  body,  and  I  did  so.  No.  3  of 
the  productions  is  the  report  by  me  and  Dr.  Gait.  It  is  correct. 

University   of   Glasgow, 
23rd  December,   1908. 

By  virtue  of  a  warrant  of  the  Sheriff  of  Lanarkshire  and  at 
the  instance  of  James  Neil  Hart,  Esq.,  Procurator-fiscal  of  the 
said  county,  we,  the  undersigned,  on  this  date  and  within  the 
mortuary  of  the  Glasgow  Royal  Infirmary,  made  a  post-mortem 
examination  of  the  body  of  Miss  Marion  Gilchrist,  which  was 
removed  thither  for  the  purposes  of  examination  from  15  Queen's 
Terrace,  and  which  was  identified  in  our  presence  by  the 
following  persons,  viz.  :  — 

1.  Nellie  Lambie,  domestic  servant  to  the  said  Miss  Gilchrist, 
residing  at  15  Queen's  Terrace; 

2.  Arthur  M.  Adams,  residing  at  14  Queen's  Terrace;  and 

3.  William  Neil,  police  constable,   178  B,  Western  Division 
of  Police. 

EXTERNAL  EXAMINATION. 

The  body  was  that  of  a  well-nourished  elderly  woman.  Death- 
stiffening  had  disappeared  from  the  body.  The  skin  was 
markedly  pallid  in  appearance. 

The  following  marks  of  violence  were  seen  externally :  — 
Generally  speaking,  the  face  and  head  were  both  badly  smashed. 
In  particular,  the  following  injuries  were  found: — (1)  Extend- 
ing from  the  right  angle  of  the  mouth  backwards  on  the  right 
cheek  for  2£  inches  was  a  gaping,  ragged  wound,  divided  into 
two  parts  by  a  bridge  of  skin  1J  inches  broad,  the  mouth 
cavity  and  the  wound  being  one  continuous  cavity.  At  the 
base  of  this  wound  several  fractures  of  the  lower  jaw,  upper 

133 


Oscar  Slater. 

John  Glaister  jaw,  and  cheek  bones  were  found,  the  bones  being  driven  into 
the  mouth.  (2)  On  the  inner  side  of  the  right  orbit  was  a 
lacerated  wound,  irregular  in  shape,  If  inches  long  and  £  inch 
broad,  which  extended  deeply  into  the  base  of  the  nose.  On 
deeper  examination  it  was  found  that  the  bones  of  the  orbit, 
the  nose,  and  the  forehead  were  completely  smashed  in  and 
broken  into  many  pieces.  (3)  From  the  upper  part  of  the  former 
wound  (2),  a  wound  extends  upwards  on  the  brow  and  head  for 
a  distance  of  3  inches  and  towards  the  right  temple  for  a  dis- 
tance of  2  inches,  in  which  the  right  frontal  bone  of  the  skull 
had  been  smashed  asunder  from  the  rest  of  the  bones  of  the 
skull  and  exposing  the  brain  and  brain  substance,  from  which 
a  considerable  portion  of  brain  matter  has  escaped.  (4)  The 
lobe  of  the  right  ear  was  completely  torn  away  from  the  cheek 
connections.  (5)  In  front  of  right  ear  (f  inch)  was  a  spindle- 
shaped  wound  measuring  f  inch  long  and  J  inch  broad,  which 
extended  deeply  into  tissues  down  to  the  bone.  (6)  Behind  the 
right  ear  was  a  series  of  wounds — (a)  at  a  distance  of  \  inch 
from  ear  was  a  spindle-shaped  wound  of  like  dimensions  to  the 
last;  (6)  a  wound  of  similar  shape  1  inch  long  by  \  inch  broad; 
and  (c)  a  like  wound  \  inch  long  by  f  inch  broad.  (7)  At  a 
distance  of  \  inch  behind  the  series  just  described  was  an 
irregular-shaped,  lacerated  wound  which  measured  3£  inches 
long  by  1  inch  at  greatest  breadth,  and  which  was  divided 
in  the  middle  by  a  bridge  of  tissue,  at  the  bottom  of  which 
several  fractures  of  the  bones  forming  the  right  temple  and 
back  of  the  head  were  found,  some  of  the  broken  pieces  of 
which  were  driven  in  upon  the  brain.  (8)  On  the  top  of  the 
head  behind  the  line  of  hair  at  top  of  the  right  brow  was  a 
lacerated  wound  \\  inches  long  by  1  inch  broad,  which  led 
down  to  a  fracture  of  the  bone  beneath,  which  communicated 
with  the  skull  cavity.  (9)  Half  an  inch  to  the  right  side  of 
wound  last  described  was  a  lacerated  wound  2  inches  long  by 
|  inch  broad,  at  bottom  of  which  was  a  large  fracture  of  the 
skull  from  which  brain  matter  was  protruding. 

10.  On  left  side  of  face  there  were  the  following  injuries  :  — 
(a)  A  lacerated,  irregular-shaped  wound  at  left  side  of  nose  and 
left  lower  eyelid,  which  measured  2  inches  by  f  inch.  In 
this  wound  the  entire  eyeball  and  parts  of  both  eyelids  were 
found  to  have  been  driven  into  the  brain  cavity,  the  eyeball 
itself  being  burst  and  collapsed.  Dissection  of  this  further 
showed  that  the  floor  of  the  left  orbit  had  been  completely 
broken  away  from  surrounding  bones.  It  was  also  found  that 
the  fracture  of  the  right  frontal  bone  extended  across  the 
brow  into  the  left  frontal  bone;  (6)  on  the  left  cheek,  1  inch 
from  outer  angle  of  the  left  eye,  and  on  the  same  level  was  a 
lacerated  wound  2|  inches  long  by  \\  inches  broad,  the 
backmost  part  of  which  extended  into  the  middle  and  upper 

»34 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

portions  of  the  cartilage  of  the  left  ear.       At  bottom  of  this  John  Glalster 

wound   fractures  of  the  upper   jaw   and  upper  part  of  lower 

jaw  were  found  which  were  quite  loose;   (c)  1  inch  above  the 

upper  level   of   the   last  wound   was   a  spindle-shaped   wound 

passing  down  into  the  deeper  tissues,  which  measured  J  inch 

by  £  inch,   and  at  the  lower  edge  of  this  another  wound  of 

like  shape  and  dimensions,  but  not  so  deep ;  (d)  on  the  upper 

left  temple,  2  inches  back  from  the  outer  side  of  the  left  eye, 

was  a  semi-circular-shaped  wound  with  comparatively  clean-cut 

edges,  which  measured  2£  inches  round  its  outer  edge.       In 

the  base  of  this   wound   was   an   area   of  exposed  skull  bone 

measuring  f  inch  in  breadth,  in  which  was  a  linear  fracture 

of  vault  of  skull. 

The  entire  hair  of  the  scalp,  which  was  greyish  at  the 
roots,  was,  with  the  scalp  itself,  saturated  and  covered  with 
blood. 

INTERNAL  EXAMINATION. 

Head  Cavity. — The  deep  tissues  of  the  scalp,  more  or  less 
over  the  whole  head,  were  considerably  bruised  and  discoloured 
with  effused  blood,  but  more  especially  over  the  vertex  and 
right  side  of  the  head. 

The  coverings  of  the  brain  were  torn  through  in  different 
places  where  were  the  fractures.  The  brain  itself  was  greatly 
torn  and  disorganised.  Several  pieces  were  amissing,  especi- 
ally from  the  front  portion  of  the  right  side  of  the  brain. 
Several  pieces  of  bone  of  different  sizes  were  found  driven 
into  the  brain  substance  at  different  points. 

On  removal  of  the  brain  it  was  found  that  the  skull  was 
fractured  through  its  base,  extending  from  the  front  right  to 
the  back.  The  skull  bones  were  thicker  than  usual  in  the 
average  woman. 

Chest  Cavity. — On  dissecting  this  cavity  it  was  found  that 
the  breast  bone  had  been  fractured  completely  through  its 
entire  thickness,  about  its  middle,  the  area  of  fracture  being 
surrounded  with  bruised  blood.  On  the  right  side  of  the 
chest  in  front,  fractures  of  the  third,  fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth 
ribs  were  found,  the  third  rib  being  broken  in  three  different 
places,  the  fourth  and  fifth  in  two  places,  and  the  sixth  in  one 
place  only.  On  the  left  side  of  front  of  chest  the  fourth  rib 
was  found  to  be  broken  close  to  the  junction  of  bone  and 
cartilage. 

The  right  breast  was  slightly  discoloured  on  the  surface  from 
bruising.  Both  lungs  were  healthy.  The  heart  was  very 
healthy  for  an  old  woman.  Any  slight  departure  from 

normal  was  due  to  degenerative  change  from  age. 

Abdominal  Cavity. — All  the  organs  of  this  cavity  were 
examined  separately  and  in  detail.  The  stomach  contained 

135 


Oscar  Slater. 

John  Giaister  some  partially  digested  food.  Both  kidneys  were  granular 
from  chronic  kidney  affection.  There  were  small  tumours 
of  the  womb  and  appendages.  The  rest  of  the  organs  were 
normal. 

Opinion. — From  the  foregoing  examination  we  are  of 
opinion  that  the  cause  of  death  of  the  said  Marion  Gilchrist 
was  extensive  wounds  and  fractures  of  bones  of  face  and  skull, 
already  described,  and  fractures  of  breast-bone  and  ribs, 
together  with  shock  and  bleeding  therefrom,  that  the  said 
injuries  were  produced  by  forcible  contact  with  a  blunt  weapon, 
and  that  the  violence  was  applied  with  considerable  force. 
These  are  testified  on  soul  and  conscience. 

JOHN  GLAISTER,  M.D.,  <fec. 
HUGH  GALT,  B.Sc.,  M.D.,  &c. 

I  did  not  find  in  the  dining-room  any  implement  which 
looked  as  if  it  had  been  used  for  the  purpose  of  murdering  Miss 
Gilchrist.  The  fire-irons  were  undisturbed  in  their  places,  and 
all  the  ornaments  were  undisturbed.  I  saw  marks  of  blood 
on  the  fire-irons.  The  fire-irons,  the  tongs,  the  poker,  and  the 
fender,  the  fire-bars  and  sides  of  the  grate  and  the  coal  scuttle 
all  bore  marks  of  blood,  as  well  as  the  legs  of  an  easy-chair  and 
a  portion  of  the  tablecloth  which  stood  opposite  the  fireplace. 
That  was  not  owing  to  any  contact  with  the  blood ;  they  were 
bespattered  with  blood.  I  was  clear  that  the  injuries  had  been 
produced  practically  at  the  point  where  the  body  was  found. 
I  inferred  that  from  the  spattering  of  blood  in  the  neighbour- 
hood, and  also  from  the  fact  that  round  the  head  there  was  a 
considerable  quantity  of  blood.  From  my  experience,  my  view 
is  that  the  assailant  knelt  on  the  woman's  chest,  and,  kneeling 
upon  the  chest,  he  struck  violently  at  the  head  with  the  imple- 
ment that  he  employed.  The  weight  of  his  body,  plus  the  force 
exercised  in  violently  attacking  the  head,  accounted  for  the 
rib  fractures  and  other  fractures  of  the  chest  bone.  The  bones 
in  a  person  over  eighty  years  of  age  are  much  more  brittle 
than  in  younger  persons.  I  formed  an  opinion  as  to  the  char- 
acter of  the  weapon  with  which  the  injuries  to  the  face  and  head 
had  been  inflicted.  From  the  nature  of  the  wounds  I  arrived  at 
the  conclusion  that  the  weapon  was  not  uniformly  the  same 
at  the  striking  part,  for  this  reason  :  we  found  several  wounds 
of  different  sizes  and  of  different  shapes;  and  also  for  the 
reason  that  we  found  the  left  eyeball,  in  a  burst  condition, 
driven  into  the  brain.  That  indicated  that  the  weapon  must 
have  been  of  a  pointed  character  to  have  enabled  the  eyeball 
to  have  been  driven  into  the  brain,  because  a  large  weapon  that 
would  have  been  likely  to  have  caused  the  larger  wounds  could 
not  have  entered  the  orbit,  because  the  orbit  is  bounded  by 
bone.  The  spindle-shaped  wounds  were  either  produced  by  a 

136 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

relatively  sharp  surface  of  a  blunt  instrument,  such  as  the  head  John  Glaister 
of  a  hammer,  or  the  claw  end  of  a  hammer,  or  any  such  similar 
instrument.  (Shown  hammer,  label  No.  47.)  I  have  examined 
this  hammer  before  for  another  purpose.  This  hammer  could, 
in  my  opinion,  in  the  hands  of  a  strong  man  and  forcibly 
wielded,  have  produced  the  injuries  found  on  that  body. 

Plus  the  kneeling  on  the  chest? — Yes.  Of  course,  the  pur- 
chase which  the  assailant  could  have  when  kneeling  on  the 
victim's  chest  would  be  all  the  greater  than  if  he  was  stand- 
ing on  his  feet  and  usdng  the  same  violence  to  a  body  prostrate 
on  the  ground. 

If  the  assailant  had  five  or  six  minutes  at  his  disposal,  and 
used  the  time  well,  could  he  with  that  hammer  have  inflicted 
the  wounds  you  saw  on  the  old  lady's  head  and  face? — Yes,  I 
have  very  little  doubt  from  experience  of  similar  injuries  and 
relatively  similar  weapons  that  these  injuries  could  have  been 
produced  in  that  way.  I  carefully  examined  the  claws  of  the 
hammer;  I  made  measurements  of  the  hammer.  The  total 
length  of  the  metal  head  is  3£  inches,  the  breadth  of  each 
individual  claw  is  £  of  an  inch,  and  the  gap  between  mea- 
sures 5-16ths  of  an  inch,  so  practically  the  whole  distance 
from  the  point  of  one  claw  to  the  point  of  the  other  claw  is 
about  £  of  an  inch,  corresponding  very  closely  to  certain  of 
the  spindle-shaped  wounds  found  in  the  skull.  The  diameter 
of  the  head  is  £  of  an  inch  one  way  and  §  of  an  inch  the  other 
way,  also  closely  corresponding  with  certain  of  those  spindle- 
shaped  wounds  I  have  mentioned  in  my  report.  That  is  to 
say,  the  length  of  the  hammer  from  my  finger  there  (pointing) 
is  £  of  an  inch,  and  the  cutting  margin  would  be  f  of  an  inch. 

That  instrument,  used  in  the  different  ways  you  have 
described  by  a  strong  man,  could  have  inflicted  all  the  wounds 
you  have  found? — I  can  only  say  that  this  instrument  accounts 
most  easily  for  the  different  classes  of  wounds,  and  particularly 
the  eye  mischief.  I  cannot  see  any  other  instrument  that 
could  do  it  unless  an  instrument  of  the  same  type,  the  head 
of  a  crowbar  of  varying  sizes. 

Is  it  the  case  that,  in  the  case  of  a  very  old  lady  like  this, 
the  bones  being  brittle,  the  injuries  could  be  more  easily  inflicted 
than  on  a  young  person? — Once  a  fracture  of  the  skull  was 
produced,  then  it  would  be  much  easier  later  to  extend  the 
fractures  by  repeated  blows. 

I  was  asked,  along  with  Professor  Harvey  Little  John,  to 
examine  certain  articles  that  were  submitted  to  us,  and  to 
make  a  chemical  examination  of  certain  stains  found  upon  them. 
We  made  chemical  and  microscopical  and  other  examinations 
of  certain  stains.  On  llth  March  Professor  Harvey  Littlejohn 
and  I  issued  a  report  upon  the  examination  we  had  made  on 

137 


Oscar  Slater. 

John  Glaister  the  articles  handed  to  us.     No.   4  of  the  productions  is  our 
report,  and  it  is  correct. 

University  of  Edinburgh, 
llth  March,  1909. 

We  hereby  certify  on  soul  and  conscience  that  on  the  24th 
day  of  February  and  following1  days  we  examined  certain 
articles  which  were  handed  to  one  of  us,  Harvey  Littlejohn, 
on  23rd  February,  within  the  Forensic  Medicine  Laboratory 
of  this  University,  by  William  Warnock,  Sheriff  criminal 
officer,  Glasgow. 

I.  A  coat  labelled  "  Waterproof  coat.  Police  Office,  Central 
Division,  Glasgow,  21st  February,  1909.  Found  in 
trunk  belonging  to  Oscar  Slater,  and  referred  to  in 
the  case  of  himself  by  John  Pyper,  William  Warnock, 
Harvey  Littlejohn,  A.  Cameron." 

II.  A  hat  labelled  similarly. 

III.  A  claw-hammer  labelled  "  Claw-hammer.       Police  Office, 

Central  District,  Glasgow,  21st  February,  1909. 
Found  in  trunk  belonging  to  Oscar  Slater,  and 
referred  to  in  the  case  of  himself  by  John  Pyper, 
William  Warnock,  Annie  Gillies,  Harvey  Littlejohn, 
A.  Cameron." 

IV.  An   auger   labelled    "  Police   Office,    B    District,  Glasgow, 

22nd  December,  1909.  Found  in  back  court  at  15 
Queen's  Terrace,  and  referred  to  in  the  case  of  Marion 
Gilchrist  (murdered),  by  Alexander  Rankin,  William 
Warnock,  Harvey  Littlejohn,  John  Glaister,  Hugh 
Gait." 

Coat. — This  article  appeared  to  be  a  new  waterproof  coat. 

On  inspection  small  stains  were  visible  on  different  parts 
of  the  garment,  externally  and  internally.  These  numbered 
twenty-five  in  all.  They  varied  in  size  from  f  inch  long  by 
£  inch  broad  down  to  pinhead  size,  and  varied  also  in  shape, 
many  of  them  having  the  appearance  of  spatters. 

To  the  naked  eye  most  of  them  presented  a  brownish-red 
colour,  the  remainder  being  blackish  in  colour.  The  latter  on 
examination  with  a  hand  lens  proved  to  be  frayed  rubber. 

After  treatment  of  the  brownish-red  stains,  and  on  micro- 
scopic examination,  corpuscular  bodies  resembling  in  general 
appearances  mammalian  red  blood  corpuscles  were  found  in 
certain  of  the  stains. 

We  are  unable,  however,  to  affirm  positively  that  these  were 
red  blood  corpuscles,  because  by  reason  of  the  small  amount 
of  material  at  disposal  confirmatory  tests  for  blood  could  not 
be  employed. 

138 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Hat. — No  stains  were  found  upon  this  article.  John  Glaister 

Hammer. — From  the  head  of  this  instrument  to  about 
half-way  down  the  shaft  the  shaft  had  the  appearance  of  having 
been  scrubbed,  the  surface  of  the  wood  being  roughened  and 
bleached. 

Yellowish  stains  were  found  on  both  sides  of  the  head  of  the 
hammer  and  on  both  flanges. 

Portions  of  these  stains,  as  well  as  some  adherent  matter 
found  between  the  claws,  were  scraped  off  and  examined 
microscopically . 

In  addition  to  particles  of  rust  and  of  a  tissue  which  in  our 
opinion  was  vegetable  in  character,  corpuscular  bodies  were 
found.  These  resembled  red  blood  corpuscles  of  the  mammalian 
type. 

For  the  reason  already  adduced,  however,  we  are  unable  to 
state  positively  that  these  were  red  blood  corpuscles. 

Auger. — This  instrument,  which  measured  13  inches  in 
length,  was  thickly  coated  with  rust.  To  it  there  was  attached 
by  means  of  string  a  small  quantity  of  loose  human  hairs. 

Examination  of  scrapings  of  material  from  various  portions 
of  the  instrument  gave  no  indications  of  the  presence  of  blood. 

The  hairs  above  mentioned  were  found  to  be  greyish  in 
colour,  to  measure  in  length  from  18  inches  downwards,  and 
to  have  well-defined  diameters.  Some  of  these  hairs  possessed 
roots  which  on  microscopic  examination  proved  to  be  healthy 
roots. 

These  hairs  were  compared  with  a  quantity  of  hair  cut  by 
one  of  us — John  Glaister — from  the  head  of  the  deceased  Marion 
Gilchrist  at  the  post-mortem  examination  of  the  body,  and 
which  bore  the  following  label :  — "  Hair  of  scalp  of  the  late 
Miss  Marion  Gilchrist,  15  Queen's  Terrace,  West  Princes  Street, 
which  was  removed  at  post-mortem  examination  by  Professors 
Glaister  and  Gait,  on  23rd  December,  1908.  John  Glaister, 
Hugh  Gait." 

These  hairs  when  compared  with  hairs  attached  to  auger 
were  found  to  correspond  generally  in  length,  colour,  and 
diameter. 

HAKVBT  LITTLE  JOHN,  M.B. 
JOHN  GLAISTER,  M.D.,  &c. 

The  hammer  referred  to  in  our  report  is  the  one  which  I 
have  beside  me  now  (label  No.  47).  I  see  upon  it  now  what  we 
described  in  our  report,  the  shaft  having  the  appearance  of 
having  been  scrubbed.  Between  the  flanges  by  which  the  head 
is  joined  to  the  wooden  shaft,  and  particularly  at  the  sides 
and  half-way  down,  the  shaft  looks  as  if  it  had  been  washed, 
scrubbed,  or  sand-papered.  The  iron  has  the  same  appear- 
ance, but  that  I  have  seen  also  in  a  comparatively 

139 


Oscar   Slater. 

John  Glaister  cheap  hammer  where  the  polishing  has  not  been  very 
carefully  done.  I  do  not  attach  importance  to  the 
auger.  The  auger,  when  I  first  saw  it,  was  wet. 
It  was  an  old  auger  covered  with  rust.  In  my  first 
report  I  said  that  the  auger  seemed  to  have  what  might  be 
blood,  but  it  proved  on  examination  not  to  be  blood.  If  there 
had  been  blood  stains  upon  the  coat,  they  could  have  been 
much  more  readily  detected  by  analysis  if  the  coat  had  been 
obtained  by  me  sooner.  To  my  mind,  these  stains  had  been 
subjected  to  the  influence  of  water.  When  a  waterproof  coat 
gets  wet  with  rain,  the  water  keeps  on  the  surface  of  the  cloth. 
I  do  not  know  whether  it  was  rain  that  got  on  the  stains  or 
whether  they  had  been  subjected  to  washing,  but  they  were 
not  stains  as  I  should  have  expected  them  to  be  after  immediate 
effusion  on  the  cloth.  They  were  paler  in  colour.  We  could 
not  tell  from  the  appearance  of  the  cloth  whether  the  coat  had 
been  actually  scrubbed  or  whether  there  had  simply  been  rain 
upon  it. 

I  suppose  there  was  no  doubt  that  the  injuries  could  have 
been  inflicted  by  only  one  implement  that  you  saw,  viz.,  the 
hammer? — That  is  the  most  likely  of  all  the  instruments  I  saw 
in  the  place  or  have  seen  since  to  have  produced  the  injuries. 
I  was  quite  satisfied,  after  my  examination,  that  none  of  the 
fire-irons  had  been  used. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — I  understand  that  you 
cannot  say  even  that  the  hammer  was  used? — I  cannot  say 
positively  that  the  hammer  was  used. 

There  is  no  trace  of  blood  on  it  whatever? — We  found  certain 
corpuscular  bodies  that  looked  like  blood  corpuscles,  but  I  am 
not  able  to  say  positively  that  they  were  blood. 

You  cannot  say  that  there  was  any  blood  on  the  hammer  t — 
I  cannot  say  it  positively. 

You  cannot  say  positively  that  the  hammer  was  washed? — 
No,  I  said  it  bore  the  appearance  of  having  been  probably 
washed  and  scrubbed  or  sand-papered,  but  I  cannot  say 
positively. 

Do  you  observe  that  it  has  coal  dust  at  the  top  where  the 
handle  meets  the  head? — I  am  not  so  clear  as  you  are  about 
that.  I  think  it  is  ordinary  dirt,  a  miscellaneous  collection 
of  material  which  accumulates  on  any  instrument  that  is 
exposed  to  the  air  in  a  dirty  room. 

If  any  washing  of  the  hammer  had  taken  place  that  dirt  would 
have  been  washed  up  into  the  head? — It  depends  how  it  was 
washed.  If  it  was  washed  by  a  scrubbing  brush  that  is  where 
they  would  try  to  get  the  dirt  out. 

We  are  now  in  the  region  of  hypothesis? — Speculation. 

So  much  for  the  hammer.  I  understand  that  you  cannot 
Bay  that  there  is  any  blood  on  the  coat  ? — For  the  reasons  I  have 
140 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

given   you,    that   the   corpuscular   bodies,    which   I   personally  John  Glaister 
believe  to  be  blood  corpuscles,  I  cannot  in  a  case  like  this  be 
positive  about,  because  I  cannot  get  the  necessary  corroboration 
from  what  was  at  my  disposal. 

And  yet  you  would  say  it  is  blood? — Not  in  the  absence  of 
corroborative  tests  in  a  case  of  this  kind. 

Do  you  say  that  the  coat  bears  any  trace  whatever  of  having 

been  washed? — I  said  an  application  of  water.     I  cannot  say 

here  that  the  appearance  of  the  stains  was  due  to  their  being 

washed,  but  I  am  clear  that  it  was  due  to  the  influence  of  water. 

Rain? — It  might  be  rain. 

That  is  what  a  waterproof  is  generally  made  to  do,  to  keep 
the  rain  off  the  body? — I  think  I  am  aware  of  that. 

As  regards  the  coat,  you  cannot  say  that  there  is  blood  on  it, 
and  you  cannot  say  that  it  had  been  washed? — For  the  reasons 
I  have  stated. 

A  great  many  of  the  stains  were  other  things  altogether? — 
Some  of  them,  of  course,  were.  In  examining  a  garment  we 
look  at  everything.  Some  of  these  were  little  frayed  pieces  of 
rubber  due  to  the  manufacture.  We  examined  twenty  stains  in 
all,  and  it  was  only  in  some  of  them  we  got  these  corpuscular 
bodies  that  I  have  named. 

Suppose  the  murderer  had  knelt  upon  the  body  of  his  victim 
and  used  an  instrument  like  a  hammer  or  a  crowbar,  or  any- 
thing which  would  cause  these  wounds,  looking  to  the  extensive 
spattering  of  Wood  that  there  was  about  this  room  and  on  the 
articles  of  furniture,  would  you  not  expect  that  the  murderer 
himself  would  get  badly  bespattered  with  blood? — I  would 
expect  the  man  who  applied  the  violence  in  the  way  I  think  he 
did  would  have  his  clothing  more  or  less  bespattered  with  blood. 
To  a  large  extent? — That,  of  course,  would  depend.  Judg- 
ing from  the  amount  of  injury  in  this  case,  I  would  say  to  a 
fairly  large  extent. 

His  hands  could  not  escape,  I  suppose? — I  should  hardly 
think  not,  nor  the  hammer,  nor  any  other  instrument  he 
employed. 

He  would  likely  have  blood  upon  his  sleeves  and  hands? — He 
might  have  gloves  on — I  cannot  say. 

Or  on  his  gloves? — Anything  that  came  in  contact  with  the 
body  would  have  blood  on  it. 

This  was  a  head  that  was  so  smashed  that  bits  of  the  brain 
tissue  were  found  on  the  hearth  rug? — Yes,  it  was  one  of  the 
most  brutally  smashed  heads  I  have  ever  seen  in  my  experi- 
ence. A  good  deal  of  blood  came  from  the  old  lady  after 
death. 

As  regards  the  direction  the  blood  went,  I  understand  that 
not  only  were  the  fire-irons  and  grate  bespattered  with  blood, 
but  also  the  coal  scuttle  to  a  considerable  extent? — A  fairly 
large  extent. 


Oscar   Slater. 

John  Glaister  And  also  the  tablecloth  that  was  on  the  table? — The  drooping 
portion  at  the  side  next  where  the  head  was  was  bespattered, 
but  not  so  freely  as  some  of  the  other  parts. 

The  body  was  covered  with  the  rug  with  the  red  hair? — I 
was  told  so.  I  did  not  see  it. 

Can  you  tell  me  which  side  of  the  rug  was  resting  on  the 
old  lady's  body? — No.  I  can  only  say  that  the  furry  side 
was  said  to  be  downwards. 

From  the  description  you  got  it  had  been  drawn  over  the 
body  by  the  murderer? — That  I  could  not  say.  It  was  a 
matter  of  very  little  consequence  to  me.  I  was  not  concerned 
with  the  rug.  I  was  concerned  with  the  body. 

Suppose  the  hairy  side  was  on  the  top  of  the  body,  and  on 
the  upper  side  there  was  found  to  be  a  considerable  stain  of 
blood,  where  might  that  come  from? — That  might  easily  come 
from  some  of  the  blood  bespattered  on  the  old  lady's  clothes. 

If  this  was  found  on  the  top  of  the  rug,  after  it  was  laid  on 
the  body,  is  it  not  probable  that  it  came  from  the  instrument 
which  had  been  used  to  murder  the  old  lady  or  some  part  of 
the  murderer's  person? — That  is  again  a  speculation.  I  can 
give  no  view  except  this,  that  that  is  not  a  large  stain ;  it 
could  not  have  been  a  stain  produced  from  contact  with  the 
weapon.  It  looks  like  a  small  soaking  or  staining  from  the 
place  where  the  blood  was. 

Did  you  examine  the  coat  that  was  found,  internally  as 
well  as  externally? — Yes,  we  examined  certain  stains  from  the 
interior  of  the  coat  as  well  as  from  the  exterior. 

Provided  the  person  who  did  this  deed  murdered  the  old 
lady  with  his  coat  on  there  probably  would  be  a  good  deal  of 
external  blood  stains? — Yes,  that  is  where  you  would  expect 
it  to  be,  unless  the  coat  was  open  and  reflected  back  during  the 
actual  assault. 

And  if  the  deed  was  committed  with  the  coat  off,  then,  I 
suppose,  if  he  put  on  his  coat  again  the  inside  would  be 
extensively  stained? — It  would  be  more  or  less  stained.  The 
stain  might  not  be  so  defined,  but  there  would  be  smears  on 
the  inside  of  the  coat. 

And  the  sleeves,  of  course,  would  show  internally? — Yes. 

They  would  show  stains  of  blood? — Naturally  anywhere 
where  there  were  stains  on  the  inner  coat  those  would  be 
reflected  on  the  waterproof  coat,  if  that  were  put  on  after  the 
assault  had  been  committed. 

And  if  the  person  put  a  bloody  hammer  into  his  pocket  then 
the  pocket  would  be  stained  with  blood? — Yes,  unless  the 
hammer  was  wiped  or  washed  beforehand. 

Were  there  any  stains  in  the  pockets? — No,  we  examined 
the  pockets. 

So  what  you  have  given  us  to-day  is  the  result  of  a  thorough 

142 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

and  exhaustive  examination  of  all  the  clothing? — Yes.      I  think  John  Glaister 
I  may  claim  that  for  the  examination. 

I  suppose  if  the  murderer  took  up  and  put  on  his  hat  he 
would  probably  leave  blood  stains  on  his  hat? — That  depends 
on  whether  his  hands  were  clean  or  not,  or  whether  he  wore 
gloves  or  not.  It  is  too  speculative  to  answer. 

This  whole  thing  is  speculative  ? — I  would  not  like  to  say  that, 
but  I  think  the  question  is  too  speculative  to  enable  me  to  give 
an  intelligent  answer. 

Do  you  not  think  that  any  of  these  wounds  were  caused  by 
the  auger? — Some  of  them  could  have  been  produced  by  the 
auger. 

Which  ones? — Some  of  those  slighter  ones. 

The  spindle-shaped  ones  ? — One  or  two  of  the  smaller  of  these 
might  have  been,  but  they  would  be  very  limited  as  regards 
the  wounds  we  found. 

I  notice  in  your  report  you  say  that  there  was  a  deep  hole  on 
the  left  side  of  the  face  between  the  eye  socket  and  the  left 
ear.  Might  that  have  been  the  result  of  a  blow  with  the 
auger? — No.  An  auger  could  not  have  gone  through  the 
bone  there. 

The  auger  had  attached  to  it  some  grey  hair.  What  is  your 
theory  as  to  how  the  grey  hair  became  attached  to  the  auger  if 
the  auger  had  not  been  used  at  all  in  connection  with  this 
offence? — I  have  not  any  theory  at  all.  I  was  shown  the 
auger  with  a  certain  number  of  grey  hairs  attached  to  it,  which 
auger,  I  was  informed,  had  been  found  in  the  back  court 
immediately  below  the  kitchen  window. 

Do  you  think  that  the  attachment  of  the  grey  hairs  is  a 
mere  coincidence,  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  this  crime? — 
That  I  cannot  say.  The  finder  of  the  instrument  will  be 
probably  better  able  to  tell  you  than  I. 

I  see  in  your  earlier  report,  dated  22nd  December,  you 
state,  "  On  examination  we  found  that  adhering  to  the  metal 
of  the  instrument  were  several  grey  hairs,  and  in  addition 
what  seemed  to  be  blood."  Did  you  think  it  was  blood  at  that 
time? — Yes.  It  is  one  of  the  commonest  possible  mistakes 
people  make  to  think  that  when  they  have  got  a  very  rusty 
instrument,  particularly  an  auger,  which  has  a  spiral  screw  on 
it,  when  that  implement  is  wet,  the  colour  is  due  to  blood. 
I  protected  myself  by  using  the  words,  "  What  seemed  to  be 
blood." 

Of  course,  naturally  your  report  was  the  first  report  drawn 
up  immediately  after  the  occurrence  for  the  police? — I  under- 
stand it  was  simply  to  visit  the  locus  of  the  crime  in  order  to 
find  out  if  there  was  anything  there  to  throw  any  light  on 
the  mode  of  causation  of  the  crime. 

Further  examination    led    you  to    say,     "  Examination   of 


Oscar  Slater. 

John  Glaigter  scrapings  of  material  from  various  portions  of  the  instru- 
ment gave  no  indications  of  the  presence  of  blood  "1 — I  have 
said  so — it  was  not  blood  on  the  auger  that  we  discovered, 
and  we  looked  very  carefully  for  its  presence. 

The  result  of  your  examination  comes  to  this,  that  no  blood 
has  been  found  anywhere  except  on  the  rug  in  the  house,  upon 
the  old  lady's  body  itself,  upon  the  various  surroundings,  the 
fire-irons,  coal  scuttle,  upon  the  tablecloth  in  the  room,  and 
upon  the  mat  that  was  covering  the  old  lady? — Your  view  is 
quite  right,  subject  to  the  explanation  I  have  already  given  with 
regard  to  these  corpuscular  bodies. 

And  you  cannot  say  it  is  blood? — By  reason  of  the  absence 
of  corroborative  tests  I  am  not  able  to  say  here  that  it  is 
blood,  but  I  have  no  doubt  in  my  own  mind  that  these  were 
blood  corpuscles. 

Is  not  that  a  funny  thing  to  say — a  thing  you  will  not 
swear  to  1  Is  there  anything  except  those  articles  in  the  room 
which  I  have  mentioned  which  you  can  say  are  blood  stains? — 
No.  Putting  it  as  you  want  me  to  put  it,  I  am  inclined  to 
say  that  I  cannot  positively  prove  that  any  instrument  found  in 
the  possession  of  the  accused  contained  blood. 

Or  any  article  of  raiment? — Or  any  article  found  in  the 
possession  of  the  accused. 

By  the  COURT — Looking  to  the  length  of  the  hammer,  if  the 
hammer  had  been  put  into  any  of  the  pockets  of  that  coat 
would  it  have  disappeared,  or  would  a  portion  stick  out? — My 
recollection  is  that  a  portion  of  the  handle,  if  it  had  been  put 
head  downwards,  would  have  stuck  out  from  the  top  of  the 
pocket  by  perhaps  4  inches. 

How  far  had  any  of  the  blood  gone  in  distance  from  where 
the  body  was  lying? — Well,  I  can  answer  that  by  explaining  the 
precise  surroundings.  The  body  was  lying  on  the  rug  in 
front  of  the  fireplace,  the  head  being  about  15  to  18  inches 
from  the  edge  of  the  fender.  The  feet  were  towards  the  door- 
way of  the  dining-room.  On  the  left  side  of  the  head  of  the 
body  came  the  fender,  the  fire-irons,  the  grate,  and  the  fire 
bars — the  back  of  the  grate.  On  the  right  of  the  body  came 
the  table  at  which  the  deceased  had  been  sitting,  within  not 
more  than  2  feet  at  the  very  furthest,  perhaps  less  than  that ; 
then  the  chair  upon  which  the  deceased  had  been  sitting,  and 
next  to  that  the  droop  of  the  table-cloth  from  the  table.  Beyond 
the  head  of  the  deceased  was  a  soft  bottomed  easy-chair,  some 
of  the  fronts  of  the  legs  of  which  were  also  bespattered  with 
blood,  towards  the  head  of  the  deceased;  that  would  be  prob- 
ably 2 1  and  3  feet.  Then  towards  the  feet  of  the  body,  but 
on  the  left  side  of  the  body,  came  the  coal  scuttle,  which 
stood  beside  the  fireplace;  and  then  there  was  a  smaller  chair 
which  stood  at  the  head. 
144 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Was  it  marked  1 — The  coal  scuttle,  but  not  the  easy-chair  ;  my  John  Glaister 
impression  is  that  the  deed  occurred  within  an  area  bounded 
by  a  radius  of  3  feet  from  the  head. 

When  the  injuries  were  inflicted  would  there  be  a  spurt 
of  blood  from  any  artery,  or  simply  the  scattering  of  the 
material  ? — It  depends  entirely  upon  where  the  first  stroke  was ; 
it  is  quite  obvious  that  there  must  have  been  spurting  of  the 
blood  where  the  wounds  were  caused  over  the  temporal  arteries ; 
there  were  large  wounds  there ;  and  then  there  would  be 
spurting  of  blood  where  certain  arteries  on  the  front  of  the 
brows  were  opened  up,  but  I  cannot  say  in  point  of  time  when 
that  had  happened. 

Suppose  the  old  lady  was  on  the  ground  and  blows  were 
then  inflicted  by  a  person  bending  over  her,  if  there  was  a 
spurt  then  that  would  probably  come  in  contact  with  this 
person? — It  might.  It  would  depend  altogether  on  the  incidence 
of  the  angle  and  the  force. 

What  is  your  view,  from  what  you  saw  of  the  position  and  the 
nature  of  the  wounds,  as  to  the  course  of  the  assault ;  take  it 
that  she  was  sitting  at  the  table  reading,  the  door  opens,  and 
the  murderer  enters  ;  what  is  your  view  as  to  what  happened  ? — 
My  view  is  that  the  old  lady  was  not  sitting  when  she  received 
the  blow.  The  chair,  I  am  told,  was  standing  on  its  four 
legs  beside  the  place  at  which  it  was  left  when  the  servant 
girl  went  out.  My  view  is  that  the  woman  when  she  saw 
a  stranger  entering  her  room  stood  to  her  feet,  that  she 
received  a  blow  with  something,  and  was  knocked  down. 

Front  or  back  ? — I  think  the  front ;  she  was  knocked  down 
on  the  floor ;  the  assailant  instantly  pounced  on  her,  and  knelt 
on  her,  fracturing  her  ribs  and  breast  bone  during  the  act  of 
the  repeated  blows,  and  that  the  instrument,  whatever  it  was, 
produced  those  frightful  injuries  upon  her  head  and  face. 

Have  you  any  idea  how  many  blows  might  probably  have 
been  inflicted  T — No,  but  there  must  have  been  several — a  very 
large  number  I  should  say ;  to  give  a  rough  guess,  judging 
from  the  wounds  and  the  size  of  them,  anything  between  twenty 
and  forty  blows. 

Of  course,  looking  to  the  time  available,  with  great 
rapidity? — Oh,  it  must  have  been  with  almost  lightning 
rapidity.  It  must  have  been  a  iurious  assault,  a  continuous 
assault,  before  the  assailant  rose  to  do  anything  further  he 
wanted. 

And  then,  if  it  be  the  fact  that  the  nig,  which  had  been 
in  front  of  the  sideboard,  was  found  on  the  old  lady,  he  had 
then  taken  the  rug  and  put  it  over  her? — That  is  so. 

You  say  in  your  report  that  you  cannot  affirm  positively  as 
to  the  red  blood  corpuscles,  "  because  by  reason  of  the  small 
amount  of  material  at  disposal,  confirmatory  tests  for  blood 

L  MS 


Oscar  Slater. 

John  Glaister  could  not  be  employed."  Suppose  you  had  had  such  an 
amount  as  would  have  enabled  you  to  apply  confirmatory 
tests,  is  it  your  view  that  they  might  either  have  confirmed 
your  first  view  or  they  might  have  failed  to  confirm,  or  they 
might  have  disproved  it? — That  is  so;  one  of  these  three  con- 
clusions might  have  been  arrived  at.  The  presumption,  of 
course,  is  when  we  find  corpuscular  bodies  in  a  red-coloured 
stain  we  then  proceed  to  the  corroboratory  tests,  both  spectro- 
scopic  and  chemical.  Now,  if  we  do  not  find  corroboratory 
tests,  both  spectro&copic  and  chemical,  then  we  must  give  up 
the  idea  of  there  being  blood.  We  do  not  feel  justified,  I 
do  not  feel  justified  personally,  in  the  case  of  a  serious  charge 
like  this,  to  say,  merely  on  the  presence  of  corpuscles,  that 
there  was  blood,  without  corroboratory  tests. 

It  is  quite  reasonably  possible,  even  in  the  case  of  what  you 
ascertained,  viz.,  "on  microscopic  examination,  corpuscular 
bodies  resembling  in  general  appearances  mammalian  red  blood 
corpuscles  " — it  is  quite  reasonably  possible  that  confirmatory 
tests  might  have  disproved  there  being  mammalian  blood 
corpuscles? — We  must  assume  that;  I  am  quite  willing  to 
assume  that. 

Apart  from  disproving,  it  might  have  altogether  failed  to 
prove  it? — If  we  had  had  sufficient  material  we  should  either 
have  been  able  to  prove  it  or  to  disprove  it;  there  should  be 
no  difficulty  about  either  one  or  other  of  these  conclusions. 

You  said,  "  In  a  case  of  this  kind."  Suppose  it  were  not  a 
case  of  this  kind,  but  some  commercial  question,  how  would 
you  act?  Having  found  what  you  thought  resembled  mam- 
malian blood  corpuscles,  but  not  having  sufficient  to  apply 
confirmatory  tests,  would  you  or  would  you  not  proceed  on  the 
footing  that  they  were  blood  corpuscles  ? — If  it  were  not  a  case 
of  the  kind  it  is,  judging  from  my  very  long  experience  of 
examination  of  these  stains,  I  would,  without  hesitation,  say 
that,  in  my  view,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  and  belief, 
these  were  red  blood  corpuscles. 

What  is  the  difference;  why  do  you  put  mammalian  red 
blood  corpuscles? — Because  the  red  corpuscles  of  different 
classes  of  animals  differ  in  appearance.  The  mammalian 
corpuscle  is  a  circular  disc  with  no  nucleus  in  it,  no  little  kernel 
in  it  inside.  In  birds,  and  fishes,  and  reptiles  they  are  oval 
shaped,  with  a  nucleus  or  kernel. 

But  in  mammalian  animals,  whether  lower  animals  or  man, 
there  is  no  characteristic  distinction,  is  there,  between  the 
blood  corpuscles? — Do  you  mean  in  the  mammalian  class? 

Yes? — No,  except  with  regard  to  one  class,  the  camel  tribe. 

As  between  man  and  certain  of  the  lower  animals,  there  is 
no  distinction? — You  mean  as  differentiating  by  the  corpuscle 
the  nature  of  the  animal? 
146 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Yes  1 — No ;    I  should  not  like   to  say,    from   what   is  here,  John  Cloister 
that  there  is  anything  to  differentiate  between  the  human  and 
the  general  class  of  mammalian. 

Dr.  HUGH  GALT,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  have  Hugh  Gait 
been  in  practice  as  a  physician  and  surgeon  for  about  seven- 
teen and  a  half  years.  I  hold  the  degrees  of  Bachelor  of 
Medicine,  Master  of  Surgery,  Bachelor  of  Science,  Fellow  of 
the  Faculty,  and  Diplomate  in  Public  Health  of  Cambridge. 
Along  with  Professor  Glaister,  the  last  witness,  I  made  an 
examination  of  the  surroundings  of  the  murder  at  15  Queen's 
Terrace,  Glasgow.  (Shown  production  No.  2.)  That  is  our 
report.  It  is  correct.  On  the  following  day  I,  in  conjunction 
with  Professor  Glaister,  made  a  post-mortem  examination  of 
the  body  of  the  late  Miss  Gilchrist  at  the  Royal  Infirmary. 
(Shown  production  No.  3.)  That  is  the  report.  It  is  a  true 
report.  From  what  I  saw  at  the  house  on  the  22nd  December, 
it  is  my  opinion  that  none  of  the  fire-irons  had  been  used,  and 
nothing  else  in  the  room  had  been  used  as  the  implement 
with  which  the  wounds  were  inflicted.  I  found  that  the  fire- 
irons  were  in  their  places.  They  had  simply  spatters  of 
blood  on  the  top  surface. 

Was  the  area  within  which  you  found  blood  spots  compara- 
tively limited  round  the  old  lady's  head? — In  one  direction 
it  was  limited;  it  was  limited  in  the  direction  of  the  chair  and 
table,  but  it  extended  pretty  far  over  the  fire-irons  and  grate. 
That  is  to  say,  in  the  direction  of  her  feet  there  was  little, 
but  in  the  direction  away  from  her  feet,  on  one  side  of  her 
head,  there  was  a  good  deal.  That  was  just  what  I  would 
have  expected  from  the  character  of  the  wounds.  There  were 
a  great  many  wounds  on  the  head  and  face,  and,  of  course, 
a  number  had  coalesced  to  form  one  large,  ragged  wound.  The 
number  of  blows  that  had  been  struck  must  have  been  very 
great,  certainly  not  under  fifty  or  sixty,  I  should  fancy;  prob- 
ably a  good  many  more.  They  must  have  been  delivered  by 
a  strong  hand  or  a  powerful  weapon.  I  formed  an  opinion 
aa  to  the  way  in  which  the  ribs  and  the  breast  bone  had  got 
fractured.  They  were  broken  by  the  assailant  either  kneel- 
ing or  jumping  on  the  old  woman's  chest.  I  think  she  was 
standing  first  and  facing,  and  was  knocked  down,  and  then 
battered.  From  the  character  of  the  injuries,  I  conjecture 
that  her  assailant  was  kneeling  upon  her  body,  probably  while 
she  lay  on  the  rug.  I  saw  this  morning  the  hammer 
produced  in  this  case.  (Shown  production  No.  47.)  If  that 
hammer  was  wielded  by  a  strong  man  kneeling  on  the  old 
lady's  body,  and  a  succession  of  severe  blows  were  struck,  it 
could  produce  the  injuries  I  saw. 

'47 


Oscar  Slater. 

Hugh  Gait  Is  that  the  kind  of  implement  that  you  think  must  have 
been  used  to  inflict  the  wounds?  I  do  not  say  that  that  was 
the  exact  implement,  but  an  implement  of  that  kind? — Some- 
thing of  this  nature.  All  the  wounds  that  I  saw  could  have 
been  inflicted  by  using  that  hammer  in  one  or  another  of 
several  different  ways;  sideways,  or  with  the  claw,  or  with 
the  head. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — Isn't  it  more  likely  to 
have  been  a  heavier  hammer  that  did  this  extensive  damage? 
— Well,  if  I  had  been  asked  in  the  abstract,  I  would  have  said, 
"  Yes,  the  weapon  was  likely  a  heavier  weapon." 

I  mean  the  smashing  in  this  case  is  very  extensive? — Most 
extensive. 

And,  in  fact,  the  different  blows  had  been  administered  over 
areas  of  the  skull  repeatedly  so  as  to  make  one  large  wound? — 
In  a  number  of  the  cases. 

I  suppose  it  is  really  impossible  to  say  now  what  instrument 
exactly  was  employed? — It  is  impossible  to  say  exactly;  it  just 
means  that  it  was  a  weapon  with  some  weight,  and  with  sharp 
edges  to  it;  something  of  the  nature  of  this  undoubtedly. 

But  unlikely  to  have  been  this,  you  would  have  thought? — 
A  priori,  yes. 

Re-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — Why  do  you  say 
a  prioril — If  I  had  heard  the  story  and  was  asked  what  kind 
of  weapon  was  employed,  I  would  have  said  probably  some- 
thing heavier,  of  the  nature  of  a  butcher's  cleaver. 

A  heavier  weapon? — A  heavier  weapon. 

But  if  that  weapon  were  wielded  by  a  powerful  hand,  it 
would  be  quite  capable  of  inflicting  all  the  wounds? — That 
comes  to  the  same  thing,  greater  force  with  a  lesser  weapon. 

By  the  COURT — Were  there  any  holes  where  the  eye 
was  driven  into  the  brain  that  must  have  been  produced  by  a 
weapon  with  no  greater  diameter  than  a  hammer,  as  com- 
pared, I  mean,  with  a  coal  hammer? — Yes,  a  smaller  head  than 
an  ordinary  coal  hammer. 

Were  there,  or  were  there  not,  certain  wounds  which  could 
not  have  been  produced  by  a  heavy  coal  hammer  or  anything 
of  that  kind? — That  was  one,  the  one  you  have  mentioned; 
that  was  really  the  only  one. 

But  if  that  existed,  there  must  have  been  for  that  one  a 
small  weapon  such  as  that  hammer? — Yes,  with  a  weapon  of 
that  nature,  with  a  head  of  no  greater  diameter,  or  very  little, 
at  all  events. 

H.  Littiejohn      Professor    HARVEY    LITTLEJOHN,    examined     by    the     LORD 
ADVOCATE — I  am  Professor  of  Medical  Jurisprudence  in  Edin- 
burgh University.        In  conjunction  with  Professor  Glaister  I 
examined  certain  articles  that  were  handed  to  me  by  the  police 
148 


§ 

£ 


® 

H     4 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

authorities   at  Glasgow,  and  in  conjunction  with  him  I  made  H.  Littlejohn 

a   report.     (Shown   production   No.    4.)       That  ia  my  report. 

It  is  a  correct  report.       I  examined  carefully  the  auger  that 

is  mentioned  in  the  report.       I  have  read  the  two  reports  made 

by  Professor  Glaister  and  Dr.  Gait.       I  think  it  is  impossible 

that   the   auger   could   have   inflicted  the   wounds  that    I    see 

described  in  Professor  Glaister's  and  Dr.  Gait's  report,  because 

the  injuries  are  very  serious;  the  auger  is  comparatively  short, 

only  13  inches  long,   and  it  is  comparatively  light. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURB — Have  you  any  theory  as 
to  the  attachment  of  the  grey  hair  to  the  auger? — No,  I  cannot 
say  that  I  have  thought  about  it. 

JAMES  BARB,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  am  a  fish-  James  Barr 
monger  in  Glasgow.  I  am  a  member  of  a  club  called  the 
Sloper  Club  at  24  India  Street.  I  am  also  a  member  of  the 
Motor  Club  next  door,  at  Nos.  26  and  28  India  Street.  I  know 
the  prisoner.  I  knew  him -by  the  name  of  Oscar  Slater.  I 
knew  him  by  sight  about  ten  years  ago  in  Glasgow.  He  lived 
there  ten  years  ago.  I  do  not  know  the  address;  I  understood 
he  lived  in  Kelvinhaugh.  I  could  not  say  how  long  he  was  in 
Kelvinhaugh  when  I  knew  him.  It  would  be  a  short  period. 
After  losing  sight  of  him  for  five  or  six  years  I  saw  him  in  Novem- 
ber last  year.  I  first  saw  him  in  Kelvinhaugh  Street,  Glasgow. 
I  saw  him  in  a  public-house  there.  I  could  not  fix  the  date.  It 
was  in  November.  About  ten  days  afterwards  I  met  him  in 
the  Sloper  Club.  He  was  with  a  person  named  Hugh  Cameron, 
whom  I  knew.  He  was  not  introduced  to  me  at  that  time  by 
Cameron.  He  went  out,  and  Cameron  asked  me  to  propose 
him  as  a  member  of  the  Sloper  Club.  I  demurred  to  doing  so. 

Why? — Well,  his  reputation  was  not  good,  and  I  objected 
to  him.  I  agreed  to  do  it  afterwards.  I  do  not  think  he  was 
introduced  to  me  before  I  did  it.  I  put  him  up  under  the  name 
of  Oscar  Slater.  The  address  was  an  address  in  Renfrew 
Street;  I  do  not  remember  the  number.  That  was  in  November. 

Was  it  towards  the  end  of  November  or  near  the  middle  of 
it? — I  could  not  be  sure  what  date  it  was.  There  was  no 
designation  given  that  I  remember.  The  name  remained  on 
the  notice  board  of  the  club  for  fourteen  days,  I  think.  He 
was  then  elected  a  member. 

Was  he  elected  a  member  by  the  beginning  of  December? — I 
could  not  be  sure  about  the  date. 

Was  it  about  that  time? — It  would  be  near  December  if  it 
was  not.  After  he  became  a  member  I  saw  him  in  the  Sloper 
Club  at  nights  very  frequently. 

Can  you  say  whether  or  not  he  came  every  week-night? — 
Not  every  night;  I  saw  him  very  often  while  I  was  there.  I 
do  not  think  I  was  in  the  club  on  the  night  of  Miss  Gilchrist's 

149 


Oscar  Slater. 

James  Barr  murder,  the  21st  of  December;  I  could  not  be  certain.  I 
remember  hearing  about  the  murder. 

Can  you  try  and  recollect  whether  you  were  in  the  club 
that  day  or  not? — No,  it  was  the  next  day  I  heard  about  it. 
I  do  not  think  I  was  in  the  club  on  the  night  of  the  murder. 
I  could  not  be  certain  whether  I  was  in  the  Motor  Club  that 
night.  I  think  the  last  time  I  saw  Oscar  Slater  was  about  the 
week-end  previous  to  the  murder.  I  had  no  official  connection 
with  the  club;  I  was  not  on  the  committee  at  that  time. 

When  you  saw  him  in  the  club  did  you  notice  what  he  was 
dressed  in? — He  was  in  a  grey  worsted  suit  at  one  time;  he 
was  always  well  dressed. 

Did  you  see  him  in  different  dresses? — Well,  he  had  a  different 
suit  on  one  or  two  occasions.  I  never  saw  him  on  any  occasion 
wearing  a  drab  or  fawn-coloured  waterproof. 

Did  he  intimate  his  intention  to  resign  the  membership  of 
the  club,  or  intimate  that  he  was  going  away? — I  heard  a 
remark  passed  one  night  that  he  intended  going  to  America. 
That  was  some  time  previous  to  the  murder. 

By  the  COURT — I  could  not  say  whether  that  remark  was 
passed  by  him  or  by  another  member. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CujRB — How  long  was  it  before 
Miss  Gilchrist's  murder  that  you  heard  he  was  going  off  to 
America? — I  think  it  would  be  some  days  before  that. 

Would  you  put  it  at  the  week  preceding? — Quite  possible. 

Might  I  ask  you  a  question ;  why  cannot  you  remember 
whether  you  were  in  the  Motor  Club  upon  the  Monday  night 
or  the  Sloper  Club? — I  cannot  remember  whether  I  was  in 
either  of  the  clubs  that  night. 

Why  not? — Well,  I  do  not  keep  a  diary. 

I  suppose,  looking  back  at  this  distance  of  time,  you  find 
it  rather  difficult  to  say  what  nights  you  were  in  the  club  and 
what  nights  you  were  not? — That  is  so. 

About  the  address  in  Renfrew  Street,  I  meant  to  ask  you 
this,  do  you  know  whether  the  man  was  living  at  Renfrew 
Street  at  that  time? — I  could  not  tell  you. 

Who  entered  his  address  in  the  club  book;  would  it  be 
Cameron? — That  would  be  the  secretary's  work. 

Who  would  provide  the  secretary  with  the  address  in  Renfrew 
Street ;  it  would  be  either  the  proposer  or  seconder  ? — I  do 
not  think  so ;  a  form  was  filled  up  and  I  was  asked  to  propose 
him. 

Re-examined  by  the  LOKD  ADVOCATE — Was  the  address  on  the 
form? — Yes. 

By  the  COURT — Did  you  know  him  under  any  other  name 
than  Oscar  Slater? — No. 

Did  you  know  what  his  occupation  was? — I  certainly  had 
formed  opinions  previously,  but  I  did  not  express  them. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Did   you   know  whether  he  had   any   regular  occupation   or  James  Haw 
did  you  not? — I  do  not  think  so. 

You  mean  that  you  do  not  think  he  had  any? — I  do  not 
think  so;  of  course,  that  is  only  my  opinion. 

Did  he  appear  to  be  a  man  of  education? — Yes,  he  was  very 
cultured. 

Did  he  speak  English  well? — Pretty  well. 

With  a  foreign  accent? — You  would  know  he  was  a  foreigner. 

Do  you  know  what  other  languages  he  spoke? — No,  I  do  not. 

Have  you  ever  had  a  letter  from  him? — No,  I  had  no  personal 
connection  with  him. 

GORDON  HENDERSON,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  am  G.  Henderson 
clubmaster  of  the  Motor  Club  at  26  India  Street,  Glasgow. 
I  reside  in  the  club-house.  The  Motor  Club  was  registered  in 
November  last.  We  have  a  membership  of  about  150  now. 
There  was  a  member  of  the  club  called  Hugh  Cameron.  He 
was  a  frequent  visitor.  I  could  not  tell  the  date  in  November 
when  the  Motor  Club  was  registered,  but  it  was  about  the 
4th  of  November  when  we  opened.  About  three  weeks  after 
the  club  was  opened  I  remember  a  stranger  calling  at  the 
club  and  asking  for  Mr.  Cameron,  and  my  son  went  next  door 
to  the  Sloper  Club  and  inquired  for  Mr.  Cameron  and  brought 
him  out.  The  gentleman  remained  at  the  door  in  the  hall 
until  Mr.  Cameron  came  out,  and  then  Mr.  Cameron  took 
him  upstairs.  I  saw  the  man  that  Cameron  brought  upstairs. 
I  could  not  tell  at  that  time  what  his  name  was ;  he  went  under 
the  name  of  Oscar  Slater.  (Shown  prisoner.)  That  is  the 
gentleman.  As  far  as  I  can  remember  Mr.  Slater  was  in  the 
club  about  three  times.  The  second  time  would  be  about  a 
fortnight  afterwards,  as  near  as  I  can  remember.  It  was  Mr. 
Cameron  who  brought  him  that  time.  His  name  was  not 
entered  in  the  visitors'  book.  As  far  as  I  can  see,  it  was  not 
entered  as  Oscar  Slater.  The  third  time  that  Oscar  Slater  came 
to  the  club,  to  my  memory,  was  on  the  21st  of  December,  a 
Monday  night.  He  came  somewhere  about  a  quarter  to  ten, 
as  near  as  I  could  remember.  He  rang  the  bell.  I  answered  it. 
When  I  opened  the  door  when  the  bell  was  rung  I  found  Mr. 
Slater  there.  Mr.  Slater  stepped  into  the  hall,  and  he  said 
to  me,  "Have  you  any  money  in  the  club,  Mr.  Henderson?" 
and  I  said  "  No."  He  said,  "  Give  me  what  you  have  and  I 
will  give  you  a  cheque  for  it."  I  said,  "  My  committee  do  not 
allow  me  to  lend  money,  and  all  I  have  got  is  just  a  few  shillings 
and  coppers  for  change,"  but  I  said,  "  If  you  go  next  door  you 
will  find  Mr.  Cameron  there  likely,  he  might  assist  you."  He 
made  the  remark  that  Mr.  Cameron  was  no  use,  and  he  turned 
to  go  out,  and  I  opened  the  door  and  he  went  downstairs. 
By  "  next  door  "  I  meant  the  Sloper  Club.  I  saw  the  man  was 


Oscar  Slater. 

6.  Henderson  excited  a  little.  He  seemed  to  be  very  anxious  to  get  money. 
He  was  dressed  that  night  with  a  fawn-coloured  overcoat  and 
a  round  felt  hat  which  we  call  a  Donegal  hat.  I  did  not 
observe  his  boots  at  all.  It  is  not  a  usual  thing  for  members 
of  the  club  or  their  friends  to  come  late  at  night  asking  money 
from  me.  On  Monday  night,  22nd  of  February,  I  went  to  the 
Central  Police  Office  in  Glasgow.  I  went  into  a  room  where 
there  were  a  number  of  men.  I  was  asked  to  point  out  the 
man  that  had  come  to  me  at  the  club  for  money.  I  pointed 
out  Mr.  Slater,  the  man  in  the  dock.  I  had  no  difficulty 
whatever  in  pointing  him  out. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CujRE — You  knew  him  personally, 
and  had  known  him  a  good  long  time? — No,  I  only  spoke  to  the 
gentlemen,  I  think,  twice. 

And  you  knew  him  then  as  Oscar  Slater? — I  did  not. 

When  did  you  get  to  know  his  name  as  Oscar  Slater  1 — When 
the  two  detectives  came  in  four  or  five  days  after  the  murder. 

At  any  rate,  it  was  the  same  man  who  had  been  at  the  club 
before,  and  you  recognised  him  at  once? — Yes. 

Was  Slater  at  any  time  a  member  of  the  club? — No. 

Had  he  ever  a  member's  card? — Not  that  I  am  aware  of;  he 
might  have  had  one. 

I  want  to  ask  you  this,  what  did  you  mean  just  now  when 
you  said  he  had  a  Donegal  hat  on  his  head? — I  mean  one  of 
these  round  hats  with  a  rim  right  round — a  soft  hat. 

Anything  about  its  colour  ? — I  think  it  was  a  greyish  colour — 
a  dark  greyish  colour. 

How  long  did  he  stop  there  on  the  night  he  came  in? — About 
four  or  five  minutes  altogether  that  night  he  came  in  to  borrow 
the  money. 

And  he  was  inside  the  hall? — He  was  inside  the  doorway. 

Was  he  wearing  a  moustache  that  night? — Well,  he  was 
wearing  a  moustache,  but  it  was  like  a  stubble. 

A  short  moustache? — Yes,  a  short  moustache. 

And  when  he  came  in  he  had  a  waterproof  coat  on! — Yes. 

(Shown  production  No.  43.)  A  thing  like  that? — Something 
after  that  style. 

Did  you  notice  any  discomposure  about  his  dress  at  all! — 
No,  I  did  not. 

Do  you  know  whether  you  had  ever  seen  him  with  that 
waterproof  on  before? — No,  I  could  not  say  I  had. 

Had  you  taken  any  particular  note  of  the  dress  that  he 
wore  on  previous  occasions  when  you  had  seen  him? — No,  I 
had  no  occasion  to  take  particular  note  of  the  gentleman  at 
all ;  all  I  know  is  that  when  he  came  into  the  place  he  was 
a  gentleman ;  he  conducted  himself  like  a  gentleman,  and  I 
had  no  reason  to  come  into  contact  with  him  other  than 
passing  him  along  with  a  member. 

152 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Do  you  know  what  kind  of  clothes  he  was  wearing  at  the  G.  Henderson 
previous  time  he  was  in  the  club — about  the  second  time 
he  was  in  the  club? — I  think  he  had  a  bowler  hat 
on,  and  a  Melton  overcoat,  or  something  of  that  style.  I 
could  not  give  you  a  description  of  the  gentleman's  clothing 
at  all,  but  I  only  refer  to  the  Monday  night,  I  know  what 
he  had  that  night. 

You  said  you  thought  he  was  excited ;  what  did  you  mean 
by  that? — Well,  I  may  tell  you  that  when  Mr.  Slater  asked  me 
for  money  I  thought  it  very  strange  that  he  should  ask  me 
for  money,  and  I  just  thought  to  myself  that  Mr.  Slater  had 
been  playing  cards  somewhere  and  had  lost  some  money,  and 
he  wanted  something  to  go  on  playing  with  to  get  it  back. 
At  that  time,  or  even  the  day  after,  I  knew  of  no  event  that 
would  make  me  take  any  particular  notice  of  Mr.  Slater. 

He  did  not  go  into  the  club  next  door? — No,  I  happened  to 
look  down  the  stairs  while  Mr.  Slater  wae  going ;  he  turned  to 
the  right,  to  Elmbank  Crescent. 

Is  your  club  up  a  stair  ? — Ours  is  up  about  six  steps ;  the 
Sloper  Club  enters  off  the  pavement  direct  to  the  left  of  mine. 

(Shown  production  No.  44.)  By  the  COURT — Would  you  look 
at  that  dark  hat  that  is  there ;  was  the  hat  that  Slater  had 
that  night  at  the  club  like  that  or  unlike  it  in  colour  and  in 
shape? — Well,  my  idea  of  the  hat  that  he  had  on  that  night 
was  of  a  different  make  from  that — a  Donegal. 

You  do  not  call  that  a  Donegal? — Well,  no — not  me. 

Is  your  idea  of  the  Donegal  hat  one  that  goes  down  in  the 
centre  with  a  cock  or  is  worn  without  being  touched? — No,  my 
idea  of  the  Donegal  hat  is  a  complete  round  hat ;  you  can  put 
it  into  any  shape  you  like. 

Is  it  like  a  bowler  hat  but  soft? — Soft. 

So  that  you  may  have  a  depression  if  you  choose? — Yes. 

What  is  the  difference  between  a  Donegal  hat  and  that  one  t 
—Well,  I  could  not  tell  you  the  name  of  this  one. 

In  what  respect  does  that  hat  differ  from  a  Donegal  hat? — 
Allow  me  to  shift  this ;  the  Donegal  hat  is  more  like  that 
(illustrating),  with  the  rim  coming  that  way,  coming  up;  the 
rim  sits  up  right  round,  and  you  can  put  the  Donegal  hat 
any  way  you  like.  My  idea  of  this  hat  is  that  it  is  too 
dark. 

It  is  not  the  shape,  and  it  is  not  the  colour? — Not  to  my 
idea. 

PETER  CRAWFORD  M'LARBN,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE  pt  ^  n'Laren 
— I   am  manager  to  Alexander   Liddell,    a   pawnbroker,   at  8 
Sauchiehall   Street,   Glasgow.        I  recollect  of   a  man   coming 
to  my  premises  on  the  18th  of  November  last.       He  signed  his 
name  as  "  A.   Anderson."       He  pledged   a   diamond   brooch, 


Oscar  Slater. 

P.  c.  M'Laren  and  he  got  £20  on  it.  (Shown  production  No.  51.)  That  is 
the  brooch.  I  handed  him  over  the  £20  in  notes.  The  address 
he  gave  was  136  Renfrew  Street.  He  signed  his  name  and 
address  in  that  way  in  our  private  loan  book.  (Shown  pro- 
duction No.  52.)  He  got  a  copy  of  the  contract  with  him  like 
this.  I  had  seen  the  man  before,  on  the  14th — four  days 
before.  He  was  at  our  premises  then,  and  he  pledged  a 
diamond  scarf  pin  for  some  £5.  On  that  occasion  he  gave 
the  same  name  and  address,  "  Anderson,  136  Renfrew  Street." 
The  same  man  returned  to  my  place  of  business  on  the  9th 
of  December  last.  He  then  wanted  other  £10  on  the  brooch, 
which  he  got.  On  that  occasion  he  signed  his  name  as 
before,  "  A.  Anderson,  136  Renfrew  Street."  The  next  time 
that  he  came  was  on  the  21st  December.  He  got  £30  more. 
I  think  it  would  be  about  half-past  twelve  mid-day  when 
he  came  on  the  21st  December.  He  redeemed  a  pledge,  which 
cost  him  £6  4s.  That  pledge  was  a  gold  purse,  a  fountain 
pen,  three  pearl  studs,  and  a  ring.  I  think  he  would  get 
about  £23  5s.  of  money.  I  think  the  money  was  partly  in 
notes  and  partly  gold,  as  far  as  I  remember.  These  articles 
that  he  redeemed  were  pledged  by  him  on  Tuesday,  17th 
November,  for  £6.  I  was  not  present  when  he  pledged  them. 
I  am  only  speaking  from  having  seen  the  signature  in  the 
book.  I  had  no  hesitation  in  giving  him  back  the  articles ; 
he  presented  the  ticket  for  them.  (Shown  prisoner.)  That 
is  the  man.  I  was  asked  to  go  down  to  Duke  Street  Prison 
on  the  10th  of  March,  and  I  identified  him  there.  I  had  no 
difficulty  in  identifying  the  man  as  the  man  who  had  called  at 
my  premises. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — As  I  understand,  this 
diamond  crescent  brooch  was  pledged  on  the  18th  November ; 
is  that  right? — Yes. 

And  £20  advanced  on  it? — Yes. 

On  9th  December  there  was  a  further  advance  of  £10, 
making  £30  in  all? — Yes. 

And  on  21st  December  he  got  a  further  advance  of  £30  on 
it,  making  £60  upon  this  diamond  crescent  brooch? — Yes. 

He  had  had  some  dealings  with  you  in  between  for  some 
smaller  articles? — The  14th  November  was  the  first  time  I 
saw  him. 

The  14th  November  was  one  time;  was  that  the  time  he 
pledged  the  other  articles? — Personally  with  me — the  second 
was  on  17th  November. 

On  the  21st  of  December,  what  he  did,  I  understand,  was 
to  raise  £30  more  upon  this  diamond  brooch,  and  lift  the 
other  things  he  had  pledged  with  you? — Yes,  to  the  extent 
of  £6. 

From  that  date,  21st  December,  you  held  only  the  one 
article,  and  there  was  £60  advanced  on  it? — Yes. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Is  this  kind  of  transaction  one  which  is  common  enough  in  P.  C.  M'Laren 
your  business? — It  is  quite  common  in  our  office  anyway. 

For  people  to  deposit  things  with  you  and  to  get  advances 
from  time  to  time? — Yes. 

Is  it  a  fact  that  Oscar  Slater  had  done  business  with  vour 
employer,  Mr.  Liddell,  before? — Yes,  about  January,  1900, 
his  name  appears  in  our  books. 

Is  that  the  only  time  it  is  in  your  books? — Well,  a  few 
months  after  that  it  continues,  until  1902,  periodically. 

Did  your  master,  Mr.  Liddell,  know  him  as  Oscar  Slater? — 
Yes. 

Did  you  know  him  as  Oscar  Slater? — Well,  Mr.  Liddell 
told  me  on  the  17th;  he  had  seen  the  scarf  pin  on  the  14th 
and  on  the  17th  he  said,  "  Do  you  know  who  pledged  the  scarf 
pin?  "  and  I  said,  "  No,"  and  he  said,  "  That  is  Oscar  Slater." 

There  is  another  thing  I  want  to  ask  you  :  are  pawn  tickets, 
to  your  knowledge,  ever  sold? — Quite  commonly,  I  believe. 

And  of  course  the  person  who  presents  the  pawn  ticket, 
as  I  understand,  is  the  person  with  whom  you  settle? — He  is 
the  owner  of  the  goods,  as  far  as  we  are  concerned. 

So  that  if  a  person  sold  a  pawn  ticket  in  order  to  raise 
money  you  would  recognise  the  buyer  as  the  owner  of  the 
goods,  and  all  he  would  have  to  do  to  get  the  goods  back 
would  be  to  pay  your  advances  on  it? — That  is  so. 

So  that  any  person  to  whom  Slater  sold  the  pawn  ticket 
for  the  crescent  brooch  would  be  entitled  on  payment  of  the 
£60  to  receive  the  brooch  back? — Yes. 

You  say  that  kind  of  transaction  is  a  common  enough  one 
amongst  people  who  lodge  deposits? — Quite  common. 

ALEXANDER  RANKIN,  examined  by  Mr.  MORISON — I  am  an  A.  Rankin 
inspector  in  the  Western  District  of  the  Glasgow  Police.  In 
consequence  of  instructions  which  I  received  from  Detective- 
Inspector  Pyper  I  went,  on  22nd  December  last,  to  the  house 
at  15  Queen's  Terrace.  That  was  to  search  the  back  green 
there,  to  ascertain  if  anything  could  be  discovered  that  had 
some  connection  with  the  murder  that  had  taken  place  the 
night  before.  I  reached  the  back  green  about  10  a.m.  on 
that  day.  I  searched  the  back  green.  I  found  a  piece  of 
iron,  or  an  auger.  I  found  it  lying  in  the  grass  opposite 
Miss  Gilchrist's  kitchen  window.  It  was  on  the  grass.  There 
was  grass  below  it — only  grass.  I  lifted  up  the  auger.  I 
saw  something  else  below  it  when  I  lifted  it  up.  Some  lady's 
hair  came  up  along  with  it.  I  did  not  form  any  opinion 
as  to  how  the  hair  had  come  there.  It  was  like  combings. 
The  hair  was  sticking  to  the  auger.  It  was  raining  at  the 
time,  and  the  hair  and  the  auger  were  both  wet.  I  did 
not  see  any  mark  on  the  ground  that  could  have  been  made 

155 


Oscar  Slater. 

A.  Rankin  by  the  auger  having  been  thrown  from  a  height.  I  cannot 
say  from  my  examination  of  the  ground  whether  the  auger 
had  been  thrown  out  or  not.  I  examined  to  see  whether 
there  was  any  mark  on  the  ground  round  about  it,  but  there 
was  none.  The  grass  upon  which  the  auger  rested  was  not 
in  any  way  pressed  down.  It  seemed  to  have  been  there  for 
a  short  time  only.  If  it  had  been  lying  there  for  a  long 
time  the  grass  would  have  been  stained  with  the  rust.  I 
took  the  auger  and  the  hair  to  the  police  court  and  labelled 
them.  (Shown  label  35.)  That  is  the  auger.  I  looked  to 
gee  what  had  caused  the  hair  to  stick  to  the  auger,  but  I  could 
not  say  whether  it  was  rust  or  blood.  It  was  some  wet 
substance.  The  hair  was  sticking  on  the  smooth  part  of  the 
auger  up  to  the  point. 

Cross-examined  Vy  Mr.  M'CLURE — Was  it  your  idea  that  this 
had  been  used  in  any  way  in  connection  with  the  murder? — 
That  was  my  opinion  at  the  time  because  of  the  hair. 

G.  Findlay  GBOROI  FINDLAY,  examined  by  Mr.  MORISON — I  am  a  timber 
merchant  in  the  firm  of  James  Dowie  &  Co.,  50  Wellington 
Street,  Glasgow.  Before  that  I  carried  on  business  for  a 
number  of  years  under  the  name  of  J.  &  D.  Findlay,  wrights 
and  contractors,  Grant  Street,  Glasgow,  where  we  had  premises 
consisting  of  an  engine  house,  sheds,  and  so  on.  We  stopped 
work  there  about  the  end  of  1907.  Although  the  gates  were 
closed  access  could  easily  be  got  to  the  premises.  Part  of 
our  premises  were  just  behind  Miss  Gilchrist's  house.  We 
had  augers  in  our  premises.  The  auger  under  label  No.  25 
is  like  the  type  of  auger  that  we  had  in  our  premises  "just 
behind  Miss  Gilchrist's  house.  That  type  of  auger  is  used 
for  a  steam  boring  machine. 

Are  you  aware  that  after  your  works  were  stopped  boys 
used  to  frequent  your  premises? — I  am  not  aware  of  that,  but 
it  is  possible  that  they  would  do  so.  It  frequently  happened 
that  some  of  our  augers  disappeared.  Inspector  Rankin 
showed  me  the  place  where  that  auger  was  found.  I  noticed 
that  our  workshop  windows  were  broken  just  opposite  the 
garden.  There  were  similar  augers  in  the  machine  shop 
at  that  point.  Although  I  cannot  particularly  swear  to  the 
auger  that  has  been  produced,  still  it  is  like  those  that  we 
had. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURB — It  might  belong  to  any- 
body so  far  as  you  know? — Yes,  it  might. 

And  you  do  not  know  how  it  came  there? — No. 

You  had  been  away  from  these  premises  over  a  year  before? 
Yes,  quite  a  year  before. 

And  that  is  all  you  know  about  it? — Yes. 

The  Court  adjourned   at  half-past  six  o'clock. 


Third  Day— Wednesday,  5th  May,  1909. 

The  Court  met  at  ten  o'clock. 

JOHN  BAIN,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  am  a  clerk  John  Bain 
in  the  employment  of  Thomas  Cook  &  Son,  tourist  and  shipping 
agents,  Buchanan  Street,  Glasgow.  I  remember  that  on 
Wednesday,  23rd  December  last,  a  man  called  at  the  office 
when  I  was  in,  between  four  and  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon. 
He  gave  me  as  his  name  and  address  "  Oscar  Slater,  c/o 
Anderson,  69  St.  George's  Road,  Glasgow."  He  wanted  a 
two-berth  cabin  in  the  Cunard  Line  steamer  "  Lusitania," 
second-class,  for  himself  and  wife.  The  "  Lusitania  "  was 
to  sail  on  the  Saturday,  26th  December.  I  told  him  that  the 
fare  was  £12  each,  and  I  said  that  that  was  the  minimum 
rate,  that  the  price  would  rise  according  to  the  accommoda- 
tion. I  told  him  that  it  was  too  late  to  wire  the  company  at 
Liverpool  that  night,  but  I  promised  to  write  and  ask  the 
company  to  wire  in  the  morning.  (Shown  production  No. 
37/1.)  I  wrote  that  letter. 

83  Buchanan  Street, 
Glasgow,  23  Deer.,    1908. 
Messrs.   Cunard  Line,  Liverpool. 

"  Lusitania,"  26  Deer.,  1908. 

Dear  Sirs, — Kindly  wire  us  to-morrow  if  you  can  offer  married  couple 
a  second-class  room  at  £24  (£12  each),  per  the  above  to  New  York, 
and  oblige. — Yours  truly,  THOMAS  COOK  &  SON, 

per  J.  B. 

I  asked  the  man  before  he  left  to  call  next  morning  at  11.30, 
but  he  did  not  call  then.  He  called  in  the  afternoon  about 
the  same  time,  between  four  and  five.  By  the  time  he  had 
arrived  we  had  received  the  telegram  No.  37/2. 

To  COTTPON,  Glasgow.  Seconds,  "Lusitania."  Saturday.  Offer 
couple  room  E76,  twelve  pounds  rate. — CUNABD. 

I  told  him  what  the  contents  of  the  telegram  were ; 
I  believe  he  would  see  the  telegram.  I  showed  him 
the  ship's  plan  and  the  room  offered,  but  he  was 
not  satisfied.  He  said  he  thought  he  could  do  better 
in  Liverpool,  that  he  preferred  an  outside  cabin.  I 
told  him  that  if  he  booked  the  cabin  that  was  offered  he  could 


? 

Oscar  Slater. 

John  Bain  adjust  matters  at  Liverpool.  He  said  he  would  look  back 
next  day  (Friday,  Christmas  Day).  He  did  not  come  on 
Christmas  Day.  That  is  all  that  passed  between  him  and 
me.  In  consequence  of  his  call  we  wrote  the  letter  to  the 
Cunard  Line,  No.  37/3  of  productions. 

83  Buchanan  Street, 
Glasgow,  24th   December,    1908. 
Messrs.  Cunard  Line,  Liverpool. 

"  Lusitania,"  26th  December. 

Dear  Sirs, — We  beg  to  thank  you  for  your  wire  of  date,  offering 
room  E76  at  the  £12  rate  in  favour  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Oscar  Slater. 
This  gentleman  has  called  to-day,  and  is  very  much  disappointed  at 
not  having  an  outside  room.  We,  however,  explained  to  him  that 
the  rate  of  £12  provided  only  for  inside  accommodation.  He,  however, 
replies  that  he  could  do  better  with  you  in  Liverpool.  We  asked  him 
if  he  would  take  out  ticket  for  room  E76  and  endeavour  to  adjust 
with  you  in  Liverpool  on  Saturday.  He  has  promised  to  give  us  his 
decision  to-morrow,  on  receipt  of  which  we  will  advise  you. — Yours 
truly,  THOS.  COOK  &  SON, 

per   W.    Dalziel. 

That  correctly  represents  what  passed.  When  he  failed 
to  call  as  he  had  promised  on  Christmas  Day  we  wrote  the 
letter  of  that  date  to  the  Cunard  Company,  No.  37/4. 

83  Buchanan   Street, 
Glasgow,  25  Deer.,   1908. 
Messrs.  Cunard  Line,  Liverpool. 

"  Lusitania,"  26.12.08  to  New  York. 

With  further  reference  to  your  wire  of  yesterday  offering  Cabin  E76 
per  the  above  in  favour  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Slater,  please  note  they  have 
not  called  here  to-day  as  promised,  so  we  shall  be  glad  if  you  will 
kindly  release  cabin. 

We  shall  be  glad  to  know  if  they  book  with  you  to-morrow. — Yours 
truly,  THOS.  COOK  &  SON, 

per  W.  D. 

We  got  a  letter  from,  the  Cunard  Company  saying  that 
no  one  of  his  name  had  sailed  with  the  steamer.  I 
identified  the  prisoner  as  the  man  who  called  at  the  office. 
I  went  down  to  the  Central  Police  Office  on  21st  February 
last,  and  I  identified  him  amongst  a  number  of  other  men. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — When  he  called  did  he  seem 
to  be  quite  cool  and  collected? — Yes. 

He  just  made  inquiry  for  a  berth  in  the  usual  way? — Yes. 

When  you  showed  him  that  he  was  to  get  room  E76,  and 
that  was  an  inside  berth,  did  he  express  disappointment? — 
Yes.  He  said  that  one  reason  was  that  his  wife  was  a  bad 
sailor.  That  was  all. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

An  outside  berth  is  fresher? — Yes.  John  Bain 

He  called  back  on  the  Thursday,  but  not  so  early  as  you 
expected? — That  is  so. 

When  did  he  call? — To  the  best  of  my  knowledge  it  was 
between  four  and  five  on  Thursday  afternoon. 

Your  letter  of  24th  December  expresses  accurately  what 
Slater  expressed  to  you? — Yes. 

He  suggested  that  he  might  arrange  with  them  in  Liverpool? 
—Yes. 

You  expected  him  back  on  the  Friday  to  say  whether  he 
would  take  it  or  not? — Yes. 

And  he  did  not  turn  up? — That  is  so. 

By  the  COURT — How  was  he  dressed? — I  cannot  remember. 

You  cannot  remember  his  coat  or  hat  or  anything? — No. 

Did  you  think  he  was  a  foreigner? — Yes,  that  was  my 
impression. 

When  you  saw  him  and  identified  him  was  there  anything 
except  his  general  appearance  that  enabled  you  to  identify 
him? — No,  I  knew  him.  I  had  seen  him  twice,  on  the 
Wednesday  and  on  the  Thursday. 

But  had  you  noticed  anything  peculiar  about  his  appearance 
on  which  your  identification  went,  or  was  it  merely  his  general 
appearance? — I  noticed  this  much,  that  he  looked  much  older 
then  than  when  I  had  seen  him  before. 

But  did  you  identify  him  by  any  peculiarity  distinguishing 
him  from  other  people  or  by  his  general  appearance? — I  knew 
him  by  his  face. 

Did  you  notice  any  peculiarity  in  his  face  or  general  appear- 
ance?— No. 

There  was  nothing  about  either  his  nose  that  struck  you,  nor 
his  walk,  nor  anything  else? — No. 

JOHN  FORSYTH,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  am  John  Forsyth 
manager  of  the  second-class  department  in  the  offices  of  the 
Cunard  Steamship  Company  in  Liverpool.  About  12.30  on 
26th  December  a  man  came  to  the  office.  I  saw  him  personally. 
He  asked  for  accommodation  in  the  "  Lusitania  "  sailing  that 
day.  I  told  him  that  we  could  give  him  accommodation, 
and  I  asked  whether  the  accommodation  was  required  for  him- 
self or  for  a  gentleman  and  wife.  He  replied  that  it  waa 
for  gentleman  and  wife.  I  offered  him  a  certain  room. 
Strange  to  say,  I  offered  him  the  identical  room  that  had 
been  offered  to  Messrs.  Cook.  He  said  he  would  not  take 
that  as  it  had  been  offered  through  an  agent  in  Glasgow,  and 
he  kind  of  turned  to  withdraw  the  statement,  but  he  made 
no  remark. 

How  do  you  mean? — I  offered  him  E76,  and  he  said,  "  No, 
I  do  not  like  that,  it  is  inside ;  it  was  offered  by  your  agents  in 
Glasgow."  He  kind  of  wanted  to  withdraw  the  remark.  He 


Oscar  Slater. 

John  Forsyth  made  no  further  remark.  I  offered  him  another  room,  which, 
being  inside,  was  again  refused.  I  asked  what  he  required, 
and  he  said  he  wanted  an  outside  room.  I  offered  him 
another  room,  an  outside  room,  but  the  price  was  somewhat 
excessive.  I  stuck  to  my  figure,  however,  and  eventually  he 
accepted  the  room.  He  paid  me  £28  for  two  tickets — at 
least  he  paid  £30  in  notes,  and  I  gave  him  £2  in  change.  He 
produced  a  £1  Scotch  note,  for  which  I  gave  him  a  sovereign. 
The  money  he  paid  me  was  in  the  form  of  Scotch  notes,  to  the 
best  of  my  knowledge  £5  notes.  I  asked  him  his  name, 
and  he  said  "  Otto  Sando." 

Did  he  ask  you  whether  you  wanted  his  full  name? — I  cannot 
recollect  the  circumstances  exactly.  He  told  me  how  to  spell 
his  name.  He  repeated  it,  "S-a-n-d-o,"  and  he  remarked, 
"  It  is  not  Sandow  the  strong  man."  I  then  handed  him  the 
application  form  No.  37/5  of  the  productions  in  accordance  with 
the  United  States  law,  which  makes  it  necessary  that  the  form 
should  be  filled  in  by  all  passengers.  He  filled  in  the  form 
himself  in  my  presence. 

APPLICATION  FORM  to  Cunard  Co.,  for  Contract  Tickets. 
CUNABD  LINE. 

(1)  Steamer,  "  Lusitania,"  sailing  from  Liverpool  on  the  26.12.08; 
(2)  Name  in  full,  Otto  Sando  and  Anna  Sando  j  (3)  Age  38  years ;  (4) 
Sex,  ;  (5)  Married  or  single.  Married ;  (6)  Calling  or  Occupa- 

tion, Dentist ;  (7)  Able  to  read  and  write,  Yes ;  (8)  Nationality  (country 
owning  political  allegiance  or  of  which  citizen  or  subject),  Germany, 
U.S.  citizen,  American  address,  Chicago,  30  Staate  Street. 

I  recognise  the  prisoner  as  the  man  that  came  to  me  on  the 
day  I  have  spoken  to.  He  is  clearly  the  man,  and  he  can 
recognise  me,  too. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — Was  this  matter  carried 
through  by  the  man  apparently  just  in  ordinary  course? — 
Just  in  ordinary  course — just  an  ordinary  business  arrange- 
ment. 

And  he  indicated  to  you  that  he  had  come  from  Glasgow? — 
Yes. 

But  because  he  signed  on  board  as  Otto  Sando,  you  did  not 
identify  him  with  the  Oscar  Slater  you  had  been  reading 
about? — Not  at  the  time. 

When  he  said,  "  Your  agents  in  Glasgow,"  did  that  indicate 
to  your  mind  that  he  was  about  to  refer  to  the  previous  corre- 
spondence?— Well,  I  had  previously  no  knowledge  of  anything 
having  gone  wrong,  and  furthermore,  I  have  so  many  people 
coming  in  and  making  various  inquiries  that  unless  there 
is  something  actually  drawn  to  my  mind  at  the  time  I  take  no 
notice,  and  when  Mr.  Sando  or  Mr.  Slater  came  in  and  made 
the  reference,  "  I  had  this  offered  from  another  agent,"  and 
when  he  filled  in  the  contract,  I  thought  nothing  more  about  it. 
160 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

And  you  would  not  identify  him  as  the  man  you  had  the  John  Forsyth 
correspondence  about? — Not  at  the  time. 

Are  there  any  regulations  about  the  entry  of  people  into 
the  United  States ;  I  mean  have  they  strict  rules  about 
allowing  people  to  land? — Yes. 

And  is  the  object  of  this  thing  which  was  filled  up  practically 
to  satisfy  these  rules? — To  satisfy  the  authorities  as  to  the 
intentions  of  the  parties  entering  the  States ;  to  show  they 
have  visible  means  of  support  or  to  show  what  they  intend 
to  do  there. 

Is  there  anything  which  asks  about  their  financial  condi- 
tion?— Yes. 

In  this,  is  there? — Yes,  question  No.  30,  27  to  30 — not  on 
the  contract,  but  on  another  pink  form.  They  must  have 
not  less  than  fifty  dollars. 

Then  do  you  take  the  man's  word  as  to  his  possession  of 
fifty  dollars? — You  must  do  that;  you  cannot  put  your  hand 
in  the  man's  pocket  and  satisfy  yourself. 

Then  as  to  the  occupation  given  as  the  occupation  of 
dentist,  you  do  not  know  anything  about  that  either? — No. 

So  far  as  you  recollect,  was  the  man  quite  cool  and  collected 
when  he  was  transacting  this  business? — I  rather  fancied  he 
was  somewhat  nervous ;  I  do  not  know ;  it  happened  that 
while  he  was  talking  to  me  he  looked  at  the  door  as  if  he 
expected  some  one  to  come  in ;  I  thought  he  was  expecting  his 
wife  or  some  one  else. 

There  was  nothing  at  the  time  to  draw  special  attention? — 
Nothing  out  of  the  ordinary. 

I  suppose  you  have  seen  many  passengers  more  nervous? — 
Yes. 

By  the  COURT — When  he  spelt  the  name  "  Sando,"  and  added 
that  he  was  not  "  Sandow,"  did  he  say  the  strong  man? — 
"  Not  the  strong  man." 

Did  he  make  that  remark  in  an  easy,  jocular  way,  or 
was  it  simply  to  guide  you  in  the  spelling,  seriously  said? — 
A  jocular  way. 

Did  he  laugh  at  it? — Just  a  smile,  merely  "  Otto  Sando, 
not  Sandow,  the  strong  man,"  with  a  smile. 

Did  you  notice  what  kind  of  clothes  he  had  on? — Well,  it 
is  rather  a  hard  question  to  answer ;  I  have  so  many  people 
coming  in,  but,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  he  had  a  soft 
hat  on  and  a  blue  overcoat,  either  a  blue  serge  or  vicuna 
overcoat ;  I  could  not  just  specify  myself. 

Was  the  soft  hat  dark  or  light  ? — To  the  best  of  my  knowledge 
it  was  a  dark  one ;  of  course,  I  had  quite  a  number  of  pas- 
sengers, ladies  and  gentlemen,  afterwards. 

That  day,  Saturday,  the  26th,  interviewing  you  or  you  inter- 
viewing them,  could  you  give  an  idea  how  many  you  would 
M  161 


Oscar  Slater. 

JohnForsyth  have — 100  in  the  course  of  the  day? — Oh  yes!  more  than  that. 
With  that  particular  steamer  I  had  somewhere  about  200 
people. 

But  you  identify  him  now  quite  easily? — Quite  easily  and 
distinctly. 

Is  that  from  his  general  appearance,  or  did  you  notice  any 
peculiarity  about  him  that  struck  you? — No,  nothing  peculiar; 
I  have  a  very  good  memory  for  faces. 

When  he  referred  to  agents,  just  tell  me  to  the  best  of  your 
recollection  what  he  said? — When  he  came  and  asked  for  the 
accommodation  I  offered  him  E76  or  E77,  whichever  room 
it  would  be,  and  he  said,  "  No,  I  will  not  take  that ;  it  was 
offered  me  in  Glasgow." 

He  said  in  Glasgow? — In  Glasgow. 

And  did  he  also  refer  to  agents  ? — "  Your  agents  in  Glasgow," 
and  kind  of  withdrew  it. 

And  when  you  say  he  apparently  wanted  to  withdraw  that, 
do  you  mean  he  did  not  want  to  pursue  that  or  seemed  to  regret 
having  said  that? — Well,  it  seemed  to  me  that  he  was  rather 
sorry  he  had  made  the  remark. 

Allan  M'Lean  ALLAN  M'LEAN,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  am  a 
cycle  dealer  in  Glasgow.  I  am  a  member  of  a  club  called  the 
Sloper  Club.  The  club-house  is  at  24  India  Street,  Glasgow. 

Was  there  a  man  named  Oscar  Slater  a  member  of  the  club 
in  December  last? — Well,  I  cannot  say  whether  he  was  a 
member  or  not,  but  I  have  seen  him  in  the  club  often. 

Could  you  describe  the  man  to  us? — Yes.  He  is  about  5  feet 
8  or  5  feet  9,  of  sallow  complexion,  pointed  jaws,  and  I  think 
he  was  clean  shaved  the  last  time  I  saw  him,  or  he  had  a 
very  small  growth  on  his  moustache.  He  wore  a  dark  suit 
and  a  fawn  overcoat — a  rainproof  coat,  I  think  it  was — and 
a  dark  cap.  I  noticed  a  peculiarity  about  his  nose;  he  had 
a  twisted  nose — a  twisted  or  broken  nose.  (Shown  prisoner.) 
That  is  the  man.  I  recollect  the  night  of  Miss  Gilchrist's 
murder.  I  never  saw  Oscar  Slater  in  the  Sloper  Club  after 
that  night.  He  had  been  there  pretty  regularly  before  it. 

Could  you  give  us  an  idea  how  often  he  would  be  in  the  club 
during  the  preceding  fortnight;  I  mean  in  the  fortnight  before 
you  heard  of  the  murder? — Well,  he  may  have  been  every 
second  or  third  night.  On  the  25th  of  December — Christmas 
Day — I  went  to  the  Central  Police  Office  and  gave  certain 
information  to  the  authorities. 

What  led  you  to  do  that? — Well,  a  friend  of  mine  had  been 
offered  a  pawn  ticket  of  a  diamond  brooch,  and  when  I  saw 
in  the  papers  about  the  murder  I  thought  that  the  brooch 
corresponded  with  the  one  for  which  the  ticket  had  been  offered 
for  sale,  and  it  had  been  offered  by  Oscar  Slater  to  a  friend  of 

162 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

mine.     I  read  the  description  in  the  paper.     When  I  saw  the  Allan  H'Lean 
•description  in  the  paper  I  thought  he  was  the  man,  and  that 
is  the  reason  I  went  and  informed  about  him.     I  undertook 
to  show  the  detectives  where  Oscar  Slater  lived.     I  accompanied 
Detective  Inspector  Powell  to  the  house. 

How  did  you  know  where  he  lived? — I  had  seen  him — I 
cannot  remember  whether  it  was  the  morning  before  the  murder 
or  two  mornings  before  the  murder — but  we  came  up  from  the 
•club  and  he  walked  in  front  of  us,  and  I  saw  him  go  up  that 
close,  and  I  thought  he  stayed  there  when  he  went  up  that 
close.  When  I  say  in  the  morning,  it  would  be  between  one 
and  three  o'clock  in  the  morning.  I  never  spoke  to  the  man. 
I  never  knew  him  under  any  other  name  than  Oscar  Slater. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURB — I  suppose  this  murder 
attracted  a  good  deal  of  interest  and  notice  in  the  club? — Yes. 

Can  you  tell  me  when  it  was  that  you  heard  that  a  man 
whom  you  thought  corresponded  with  Oscar  Slater,  according 
to  the  description,  was  offering  a  diamond  brooch? — It  was 
on  the  Monday  of  the  murder. 

On  the  Monday  of  the  murder  a  diamond  brooch  was  offered 
to  a  friend  of  yours  called  Anderson  by  Slater? — Yes. 

And  did  you  later  in  the  week  notice  that  a  diamond  brooch 
of  the  same  kind  of  description  was  missing  from  Miss 
Gilchrist's  house? — Yes. 

And  you  put  two  and  two  together  and  thought  that  very 
probably  that  might  be  the  brooch? — Yes. 

Then,  I  suppose,  taken  along  with  that,  was  the  fact  that 
the  man  was  described  as  having  a  sallow  complexion — was  it 
a  sallow  complexion? — Yes. 

And  that  he  had  not  been  in  the  club  since  you  had  seen 
him  the  previous  Sunday;  was  that  what  brought  suspicion 
into  your  mind  and  led  you  to  go  to  the  police? — Yes. 

You  found  out  afterwards  that  the  brooch  that  had  been 
pawned  had  really  nothing  to  do  with  Miss  Gilchrist? — Yes. 

You  knew  Slater  quite  well  by  sight? — Yes,  I  knew  him  by 
sight. 

How  often  had  you  been  in  his  company  in  the  club? — Well, 
I  had  never  been  in  his  company  in  the  club,  but  I  had  seen 
him  there  often. 

What  do  they  do  to  amuse  themselves  in  your  club? — Well, 
sometimes  we  play  at  cards  and  have  concerts. 

Was  the  purpose  of  your  going  to  the  club  so  late  as  that 
generally  to  play  cards? — Yes. 

And  you  have  seen  Slater  playing  cards? — Yes. 
You  do  not  know  whether  he  was  a  member  of  the  club  or 
not? — I  do  not  know. 

Did  you  not  ever  yourself  walk  home  with  Slater  and 
-Anderson  ? — No. 

163 


Oscar  Slater. 

Allan  H'Lean  I  think  you  have  walked  home  in  the  company  of  Slater 
before  now? — No — well,  he  has  been  walking  in  front  of 
Anderson  and  me;  that  is  the  only  time,  but  he  never  walked 
alongside  me. 

And  you  and  he  and  Anderson  have  gone  home  together, 
walking  along  the  street  together? — Well,  he  has  walked  in 
front  of  me. 

Were  the  three  of  you  together,  you  and  Slater  and  Anderson?' 
— There  was  Slater  and  some  other  party  that  morning  walking 
in  front  of  Anderson  and  me,  perhaps  about  10  yards  in  front 
of  us. 

Had  you  all  left  the  club  together? — Yes. 

Had  you  all  been  playing  cards  together? — I  do  not  know 
whether  we  had  been  playing  cards  that  night  or  not. 

Try  and  remember;  would  you  not  be  playing  cards? — Well, 
we  did  play  probably  nearly  every  night. 

Tell  me  this — this  is  no  idle  curiosity — what  was  the  game  of 
cards  you  did  play? — A  game  called  "  muckie." 

It  is  not  played  by  partners,  but  each  man  for  himself? — 
It  is  played  by  partners. 

Is  it  a  game  for  four,  or  what  is  it? — Any  number  can  play. 

By  the  COURT — Was  he  one  of  the  partners? — No,  he  was 
playing  at  "  poker  "  that  night. 

Cross-examination  resumed — Did  he  lose  money  that  night? — 
Well,  I  really  cannot  say. 

Can  you  not  remember;  I  am  wanting  you  to  remember? — 
Well,  you  know,  the  poker  room  is  off  the  other  rooms;  there 
are  different  rooms  laid  off  in  the  club,  so  that  I  was  in  another 
room  altogether. 

And  you  do  not  know  whether  he  lost  money  or  not  ? — I  do  not 
know ;  I  have  seen  him  lose  money. 

You  went  down  about  llth  March,  or  was  it  in  February  you 
went,  to  identify  him  when  he  came  from  America? — I  think 
it  must  have  been  March,  I  cannot  really  say. 

You  had  no  trouble  whatever  in  recognising  him  as  Oscar 
Slater  whom  you  had  known  at  the  club? — None  whatever. 

By  the  COURT — You  know  the  murder  was  on  Monday,  21st 
of  December? — Yes. 

How  long  before  that  had  you  seen  Slater  in  the  Sloper 
Club,  to  the  best  of  your  recollection? — Well,  I  think  it  would 
be  three  or  four  weeks  before  that  that  I  had  known  him. 

What  was  the  last  time  before  that  that  you  had  seen  him  ? — 
I  saw  him  either  on  the  Sunday  morning  or  the  Monday  morning 
previous  to  the  murder. 

Do  you  mean  the  same  morning  as  the  murder  and  the 
Sunday,  the  day  before  the  murder? — Yes. 

What  hours  is  it  open  on  Sundays  and  other  days;  when 
does  it  open  in  the  morning? — I  could  not  really  say. 

164 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

The  club  is  open  on  Sundays? — Yes.  Allan M'Lean 

A  member  can  get  in  at  any  time? — You  can  get  in  at  any 
time. 

Did  you  know  what  Slater  did — what  his  business  was? — No. 
Did  you  know  whether  he  had  any  business? — No. 

MARGARET  FOWLIS — Examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  live  M.  Fowlls 
at  69  St.  George's  Road,  Glasgow,  on  the  top  flat.  I  recollect 
in  November  last  of  a  house  on  the  flat  immediately  below  ua 
being  taken.  I  observed  a  name-plate  being  put  on  the  door 
of  the  house  with  the  name  Anderson.  I  saw  a  servant  maid 
at  night  going  out  and  in,  and  various  men  went  out  and  in 
at  all  times.  I  saw  one  lady  besides  the  servant  maid.  I 
never  spoke  to  her.  I  once  passed  the  man  Anderson  on  the 
stair.  I  would  recognise  him.  (Shown  prisoner.)  That  is 
the  man  I  passed  on  the  stair.  I  do  not  know  whether  he 
carried  on  any  business  or  not ;  I  did  not  know  anything  about 
him.  I  recollect  on  Friday,  25th  December  last,  two  men 
called  for  luggage.  My  sister  opened  the  door  to  them. 
We  said  we  had  no  luggage  to  go.  They  handed  a  paper  with 
Anderson  on  it,  and  we  said  that  the  house  was  downstairs. 
We  stood  looking  over  the  stair  when  the  porters  went  away, 
and  we  saw  boxes  being  taken  downstairs.  Mr.  Anderson  was 
throwing  them  out  of  the  house  and  getting  the  men  to  carry 
them  downstairs.  That  was  the  man  that  I  had  passed  on 
the  stair,  but  he  had  no  moustache  then.  The  time  was 
between  half-past  eight  and  twenty  minutes  to  nine  at  night. 
He  had  black  trousers  and  vest,  and  was  in  his  shirt  sleeves. 
He  had  a  blue  overcoat,  and  a  hat,  and  patent  boots,  or  what 
looked  like  patent  boots.  He  had  a  long  blue  overcoat  with 
a  velvet  collar.  He  did  not  leave  the  house  in  a  cab;  he 
walked,  and  he  was  followed  by  two  ladies,  one  of  whom  was 
the  servant.  That  was  the  last  I  saw  of  them.  I  was  taken 
to  the  Central  Police  Office  on  22nd  February  last,  and  I  there 
identified  Anderson  amongst  a  number  of  other  men.  The 
prisoner  is  the  man  that  I  identified. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURB — Was  it  about  the  beginning 
of  December  that  you  saw  him  first? — No;  it  would  be  about 
the  middle  of  December. 

You  met  him  on  the  stair  at  that  time? — Yes;  I  passed  him. 

Had  he  a  moustache? — I  think  so. 

Now,  then,  the  next  time  you  saw  him  was  the  time  he  wa§ 
going  away  on  Christinas  Day? — Yes. 

I  wish  to  ask  you  now,  and  to  seriously  consider  this  ques- 
tion. Had  he  a  moustache  then? — No. 

Had  you  an  opportunity  of  observing? — Yes,  because  he  came 
out,  and  he  looked  up.  My  siister  and  I  and  a  man  were 
standing  talking,  and  he  came  and  looked  up. 


Oscar  Slater. 

M.  Fowlis  I  am  putting  this  question  with  a  definite  intention,  and  I 
hope  you  will  give  it  a  deliberate  answer,  as  we  have  had  some 
evidence  about  this.  Is  it  the  case  that  at  that  time  he  had 
a  three  weeks'  growth  of  black  hair  or  a  noticeable  moustache 
to  any  one  who  looked  at  that  time,  on  25th  December? — I 
said  he  had  no  moustache. 

By  the  COURT — Was  his  upper  lip  clean  shaven? — Yes. 

Cross-examination  continued — And  you  had  a  good  oppor- 
tunity of  iseeing  that? — Yes. 

How  far  would  they  be  in  your  sight  ? — Just  a  few  minutes, 
till  he  went  round  Charing  Cross. 

Where  is  the  nearest  cab  stand  to  your  house? — In  North 
Street,  in  the  direction  they  were  going. 

Did  the  porters  take  the  luggage  down  in  a  barrow? — Yes. 

Do  you  know  whether  the  servant  was  in  the  house  the  same 
night  and  handed  over  possession  of  the  house  to  two  women 
who  came  next  morning? — I  do  not  know.  Two  women  took 
possession,  but  I  did  not  see  them. 

And  they  lived  on  there  for  some  time? — Yes. 

I  suppose  at  that  time  the  house  would  be  under  the 
constant  supervision  of  the  police? — It  was. 

I.  Fowlis  ISABELLA  FOWLIS,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  live  at 
69  St.  George's  Road,  Glasgow.  I  am  a  sister  of  the  last 
witness. 

(This  witness  corroborated  the  evidence  of  the  previous 
witness.) 

Ruby  Russell  RUBY  RUSSELL,  examined  by  Mr.  MORISON — I  am  twenty-two- 
years  of  age.  I  am  a  domestic  servant  with  Mrs.  Bernstein  at 
69  St.  George's  Road,  Glasgow.  I  remember  the  house  on  the 
flat  immediately  above  our  one,  which  had  been  empty  for 
some  time,  being  tenanted  in  the  month  of  November  last. 
After  the  tenants  came  there  was  a  plate  put  on  the  door  with 
the  name  Anderson.  Prior  to  Christmas  Day  I  had  on  two- 
occasions  seen  the  man  who  lived  there.  When  I  saw  him 
before  Christmas  he  had  a  moustache  on.  I  identify  the- 
prisoner  as  the  gentleman.  He  was  always  dressed  in  dark 
clothes,  but  I  could  not  &>ay  whether  it  was  the  same  suit  that 
he  had  on.  I  remember  a  detective  calling  at  our  house  and 
making  inquiries  about  seven  o'clock  or  7.30  on  Christmas 
Day.  My  attention  was  attracted  by  something  on  the  stair 
shortly  after  that,  two  men  taking  luggage  downstairs  from 
Anderson's  house.  Anderson  was  dressed  in  dark  clothes  that 
night.  There  was  a  woman  standing  on  the  other  side  of  the 
street.  I  was  standing  at  the  window,  and  I  saw  the  prisoner 
going  across  to  the  lady,  and  then  they  walked  away  together. 
1 66 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

They  walked  a  few  yards   and  then  separated,  and  he  went  Ruby  Russell 
away  himself. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURB — What  do  you  suggest  was 
their  object  in  separating? — I  think  they  saw  me,  and  did 
not  want  to  go  away  together. 

Did  you  know  Slater  personally? — No. 

Did  Mrs.   Bernstein  have  any  dealings  with  Slater? — No. 

Was  there  any  communication  at  any  time  between  Mrs. 
Bernstein  and  her  household  and  Slater  and  his  household? — 
No. 

Do  you  happen  to  know  that  a  detective  called  on  Mrs. 
Bernstein  ? — Yes. 

How  long  was  that  before  Slater  left? — About  half  an  hour. 

Do  you  suggest  that  Slater  left  because  the  detective  had 
called  at  Mrs.  Bernstein's? — I  thought  it  was  very  funny. 

His  visit  to  Mrs.  Bernstein  had  never  been  communicated  at 
any  time  to  Slater  or  his  household? — Not  that  I  know  of. 

How  many  boxes  and  bags  went  away  upon  the  barrow? — 
I  saw  one  large  trunk. 

Were  there  not  nine  packages  taken  away  by  the  porter? — 
I  never  saw  nine  packages. 

Do  you  suggest  that  Slater  did  all  his  packing  in  the  half- 
hour  which  intervened  between  the  visit  of  the  detective  1o 
Mrs.  Bernstein  and  his  leaving  the  house? — I  do  not  say  that. 

Would  you  kindly  explain  if  you  can  what  it  is  that  connects 
in  your  mind  the  departure  of  Slater  from  this  house  with  the 
visit  of  a  detective  to  Mrs.  Bernstein  which  had  not  been  com- 
municated to  Slater  by  Mrs.  Bernstein?  Did  you  just  think 
it  funny? — I  thought  it  very  funny,  going  away  so  quickly. 

JOHN  CAMERON,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — 1  am  a  j.  Cameron 
city  porter  in  Glasgow,  stationed  at  the  Central  Station.  On 
the  evening  of  Christmas  last,  25th  December,  I  was  at  the 
Central  Station,  in  Gordon  Street,  Glasgow,  with  my  barrow. 
Between  six  and  seven  o'clock  a  man  called  and  asked  me  to  go 
on  a  job.  He  wanted  me  to  go  to  69  St.  George's  Road  and 
lift  some  luggage  and  take  it  to  the  Central  Station.  He 
told  me  that  the  name  was  Anderson.  I  had  never  seen  the 
man  before.  He  told  me  to  be  at  the  house  at  the  back  of 
eight  o'clock.  I  went  there  and  found  the  house  three  stairs 
up.  By  mistake  I  went  to  the  top  flat,  and  then  I  came  down 
when  I  found  my  mistake.  I  found  at  the  house  the  man 
that  had  engaged  me,  and  I  think  there  were  two  women  in 
the  house.  The  man  gave  me  the  luggage  and  told  me  to 
carry  it  downstairs.  There  was  another  porter,  Mackay,  with 
me  to  give  me  a  hand.  There  were  ten  pieces  altogether,  com- 
posed of  trunks,  portmanteaus,  and  a  parcel.  Mackay  and  I 
took  them  to  the  Central  Station.  The  man  let  me  out  of  the 

167 


Oscar  Slater. 

J.  Cameron  close,  and  said  that  he  would  go  in  the  car  and  meet  me  at 
the  station.  I  did  not  see  how  he  went  down.  He  was  wait- 
ing on  me  when  I  got  down  to  the  station.  I  could  not  say 
whether  the  women  were  with  him ;  I  would  not  swear  to  that. 
I  saw  one  at  a  fruiterer's  store  at  St.  George's  Road,  but  I 
do  not  think  I  saw  her  after  that.  I  am  not  quite  sure 
whether  I  saw  her  at  the  station.  I  am  not  sure  whether  the 
man  that  ordered  me  to  do  this  work  was  clean  shaved.  I 
would  know  him  again  if  I  saw  him.  I  recognise  the  prisoner 
as  the  man  that  engaged  me  to  remove  his  luggage.  I  did 
not  wait  to  see  him  enter  the  train.  As  soon  as  he  paid  me  I 
came  right  away. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CujRE — Did  you  hear  him  telling 
the  porter  to  label  his  luggage? — I  heard  him  giving  the  porters 
instructions,  but  I  am  not  isure  where  he  told  them  to  label  the 
luggage  to. 

Have  you  not  got  an  idea? — I  think  it  was  Liverpool,  but 
I  would  not  swear  to  it. 

Before  leaving,  did  you  not  see  the  two  women  at  the  station  ? 
— I  saw  one,  but  I  would  not  swear  to  two.  I  saw  them  up 
at  the  train  along  with  the  prisoner. 

Did  you  put  the  luggage  into  the  train? — I  backed  the 
barrow  up,  and  the  porter  took  the  luggage  off  and  gave  me 
a  hand. 

What  van  did  you  put  it  into? — I  think  it  was  a  back  van. 

Do  you  remember  if  it  was  a  van  in  a  composite  carriage 
which  was  through  for  Liverpool? — I  am  not  sure. 

Would  you  recognise  any  of  the  baggage  if  I  showed  it  to 
you? — Yes,  I  think  so. 

Is  that  box  that  I  show  you  one  of  the  baggage  ? — 1  think  so. 

Do  you  see  the  label  there,  "  Lime  Street,  Liverpool,  from 
Glasgow  Central"? — Yes;  but  I  never  paid  any  particular 
notice. 

When  was  it  that  you  got  your  orders  from  the  man  to  be 
up  at  his  house  in  order  to  take  away  the  baggage? — Between 
six  and  seven  o'clock,  at  the  Central  Station,  as  far  as  I  can 
remember. 

Were  you  informed  at  the  time  what  train  you  were  to  take 
the  luggage  to? — Yes;  the  9.5  train. 

When  you  got  orders  to  remove  the  luggage,  did  the  gentle- 
man help  you  in  any  way  to  put  the  luggage  on  to  your  barrow? 
—No. 

Did  he  hand  the  luggage  out  to  you? — Yes;,  from  the  house. 
He  told  us  to  carry  the  luggage  down  the  stair,  and  we  did  so, 
and  put  it  on  the  barrow. 

Did  you  go  into  the  house  and  get  it  yourself  and  carry  it 
down? — Yes,  as  he  instructed  me  to  do. 

Did  the  gentleman  seem  in  any  way  excited? — No. 
168 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

He  did  not  seem  to  be  in  any  special  hurry? — No,  not  to  my  j.  Cameron 
knowledge. 

Do  you  remember  whether  he  said  anything  about  your  being 
late  for  the  train? — I  remember  him  saying,  "  You  will  have 
to  hurry  up,  or  you  may  be  late." 

Did  you  see  anything  in  this  man's  demeanour  or  behaviour 
that  night  to  suggest  to  you  that  he  was  more  in  a  hurry  than 
any  other  person  to  catch  a  train  ? — No ;  not  at  all. 

JOHN  BROWN,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  am  John  Brown 
booking  clerk  at  the  Central  Railway  Station,  Glasgow.  I  was 
on  duty  there  on  the  evening  of  25th  December  last.  There  is  a 
train  leaves  the  Central  Station  at  9.5  p.m.  for  London,  Liver- 
pool, Birmingham,  and  Preston.  There  is  not  usually  a 
through  carriage  for  Liverpool  on  that  train.  I  understand 
there  was  a  through  carriage  for  Liverpool  on  the  25th  of 
December  last.  Usually  passengers  change  carriages  at  Preston 
or  Wigan.  A  single  ticket  from  Glasgow  to  London  is  avail- 
able to  go  via  Liverpool.  You  stop  at  Liverpool  and  then 
prosecute  your  journey  afterwards.  I  recollect  what  tickets 
were  taken  out  for  that  train,  the  9.5,  on  the  evening  of  25th 
December ;  I  have  them  before  me  here.  There  were  compara- 
tively few  people  travelling  by  that  train  that  night,  being 
Christmas  night.  I  have  in  my  hand  a  scroll  balance  book. 
I  keep  it  myself — the  booking-office  clerk.  It  is  taken  after 
each  issue  for  the  train.  I  made  it  up  immediately  after  the 
train  departed.  Amongst  the  tickets  which  I  issued  for  that 
train  were  two  singles  Liverpool,  third-class,  and  two  third 
singles  to  London.  I  recollect  it  was  a  man  who  bought  the 
two  single  thirds  to  London.  I  saw  him  at  the  window  of  the 
booking  office.  I  recollect  selling  him  the  two  tickets. 

Do  you  think  you  would  know  the  man  again  if  you  saw  him  ? 
— Well,  I  might  give  my  recollection.  (Shown  prisoner.)  That 
is  very  like  the  man,  but  on  oath  I  could  not  swear  to  it.  I 
did  not  observe  any  one  with  him.  My  recollection  is  that  the 
two  thirds  for  Liverpool  were  issued  to  separate  parties — issued 
separately. 

One  man  bought  one  ticket  ? — Either  a  man  or  lady ;  I  cannot 
remember.  I  was  not  very  busy  that  night,  nothing  extra. 

Had  you  time  to  observe  the  man  who  bought  the  two  London 
tickets? — Well,  just  a  passing  glance,  as  it  were.  I  have  no 
recollection  of  what  money  he  offered.  With  a  single  third  for 
London  you  can  travel  by  Liverpool  and  break  your  journey 
there.  If  you  did  so  you  could  retain  the  ticket. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLUUB — So  far  as  the  book  goes, 
the  entries  just  show  Liverpool  two  third-class,  £1  10s.  1 — That 
is  so. 

London  two  third-class,  £3  6s.  ? — That  is  so. 

169 


Oscar  Slater. 

John  Brown      Do  you  remember  to  whom  you  issued  the  Liverpool  tickets!' 
—No. 

May  you  have  issued  the  Liverpool  tickets  to  a  man? — I 
may  have. 

Is  there  any  way  of  finding  out  whether  London  tickets  are- 
collected  at  Liverpool? — They  might  be;  of  course,  they  do  not 
collect  them  if  they  are  going  on  to  London. 

Suppose  a  person  with  a  London  ticket  was  going  to  change 
his  journey  and  going  to  Liverpool,  he  would  give  up  the 
London  tickets  at  Liverpool? — Not  necessarily. 

What  would  happen  with  them?; — He  could  break  his  journey 
at  Liverpool  and  proceed  on  with  them  within  ten  days. 

Would  they  be  snipped  at  Liverpool? — Quite  likely  they 
would  be. 

Suppose  a  person  has  got  tickets  for  London,  and  he  changes 
his  journey  at  Liverpool  upon  the  London  ticket,  what  happens 
as  regards  the  ticket  when  he  arrives  at  Liverpool? — I  really 
cannot  tell  you  that;  the  tickets  would  be  checked  at  the 
collecting  station  for  Liverpool,  and  the  passenger  would  be 
allowed  to  retain  them. 

And  if  the  person  went  to  America  without  ever  going  on  to 
London,  would  it  not  be  quite  possible  to  find  out  from  the 
numbers  at  the  Clearing-house  that  these  two  tickets  had  dis- 
appeared?— I  cannot  say  as  to  that. 

If  the  tickets  with  the  numbers  on  them  did  not  turn  up  at 
the  Clearing-house,  it  would  be  known  there  that  two  tickets 
of  a  certain  number  had  been  issued  and  they  had  never  come 
back? — I  should  think  it  would. 

Has  any  inquiry  been  made,  as  far  as  you  know,  to  find  out. 
whether  the  two  tickets  issued  for  London  have  disappeared 
altogether  or  not? — Not  that  I  know  of. 

Do  you  know  whether  the  two  tickets  for  Liverpool  issued 
that  night  were  collected  in  due  course  at  Liverpool? — I  do  not. 
know. 

When  was.  it  that  you  were  asked,  to  begin  with,  about  the 
issue  of  tickets  on  the  25th? — On  the  night  after. 

At  your  place  are  tickets  issued  for  anything  except  the 
English  train? — Just  the  English  train. 

And  I  understand  your  evidence,  then,  to  be  this,  that  you 
have  a  recollection  that  a  man — had  he  a  moustache? — Slight. 

With  a  slight  moustache  took  the  two  tickets  for  London; 
is  that  so? — That  is  so. 

And  you  think  on  your  recollection  that  he  was  like  this 
man  here? — Very  like  the  man. 

Who  took  the  tickets  fot1  Liverpool,  whether  a  man  or  a 
woman,  whether  a  person  with  a  moustache  or  not,  you  cannot 
possibly  tell? — No. 

Can  you  tell  me  this  :  in  ordinary  course,  I  suppose  the  tickets 
170 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

would  be  checked  before  the  train  started,   when   the  people  John  Brown 
had  taken  their  seats? — They  usually  are. 

And  if  a  man  was  sitting  in  a  through  carriage  for  Liverpool 
with  a  London  ticket,  I  suppose  the  ticket  collector  would  speak 
to  him  about  it? — Perhaps  not;  he  might. 

Do  you  think  a  man  would  be  allowed  to  sit  in  a  Liverpool 
carriage  with  a  London  ticket  and  not  be  given  a  hint  to 
change? — He  might  be. 

Suppose  a  person  were  wanting  to  go  to  Liverpool,  this,  of 
course,  would  be  the  only  train  he  could  go  in  that  night? — 
There  is  one  at  ten  minutes  to  six. 

I  mean  there  is  no  later  train? — Not  after  that. 

And  there  is  not  another  one  till  ten  o'clock  next  morning? — 
That  is  so— 10.10. 

Would  the  10.10  train  in  the  morning  take  a  person  in  time 
for  the  sailing  of  the  "  Lusitania  "  at  four  in  the  afternoon? 
—Yes. 

Re-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  suppose,  if  a  man 
broke  his  journey  at  Liverpool  and  retained  his  ticket  he  could 
hand  it  over  or  sell  it  to  somebody  else? — That  is  so. 

And  so  it  would  be  used? — That  is  so. 

You  know  that  is  sometimes  done? — I  understand  so. 

But  is  it  a  perfectly  regular  practice  to  travel  from  Glasgow 
to  London  with  a  London  ticket  and  break  your  journey  at 
Liverpool  ? — Yes. 

JOHN  MILLICAN,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  am  a  John  Miliican 
detective  constable  in  the  Central  District  of  Glasgow.  By 
instructions  of  Superintendent  Ord,  I,  on  the  25th  December 
last,  accompanied  by  Detective  Sergeant  Lyon  and  Detective 
Inspector  Powell,  went  to  the  house  at  69  St.  George's  Road 
about  twelve  o'clock  at  night.  We  went  there  to  see  who  was 
the  resident  there — for  a  Mr.  Oscar.  I  heard  the  name 
Anderson  given;  I  saw  the  name  Anderson  on  the  door.  We 
rang.  The  door  was  opened  by  a  maid — a  German.  We 
asked  for  Mr.  Oscar.  She  said,  "  No  man  here."  We  asked 
who  lived  there,  and  she  said,  "  No  one  but  Madame."  We 
asked  where  Madame  was,  and  she  said  that  Madame  was 
away  for  a  short  holiday.  We  then  asked  her  to  go  inside 
the  house,  and  she  allowed  us  to  go  into  the  house.  We  went 
into  the  house  and  looked  all  round,  and  there  were  a  lot  of 
papers  lying  in  the  front  bedroom,  and  amongst  the  papers  I 
picked  up  a  piece  of  paper.  Wo  did  not  search  the  house 
minutely;  wo  just  looked  round  the  house.  We  went  into  all 
the  rooms.  We  found  nothing  in  the  way  of  baggage. 

Could  you  tell  from  the  appearance  of  the  house  that  baggage 
had  been  taken  away? — By  the  appearance  of  papers  lying 
about,  as  if  things  had  been  packed.  We  did  not  find  any 


Oscar   Slater. 

John  Milliean  dentist's  instruments  in  the  house  or  see  any.  I  did  not  see 
any  appearance  of  a  dentist's  business  having  been  carried 
on  there.  The  servant  said  that  no  man  lived  there.  (Shown 
production  No.  28.)  That  is  the  piece  of  paper  I  picked  up. 
The  following  is  on  it :  — "  Registered  fragile,  with  care — fee 
paid — Oscar  Slater,  Esq.,  c/o  A.  Anderson,  Esq.,  69  St. 
George's  Road,  Glasgow.  Dent — R.,  London,  W.C.,  1,  No. 
1292."  I  examined  the  other  papers  on  the  floor  and  found 
nothing  of  any  importance  amongst  any  of  them.  On  finding 
that  paper  with  the  address  on  it,  I  pointed  it  out  to  the 
servant  girl  who  was  there  and  asked  her  what  about  the  man. 
She  said,  "  That  is  a  friend  of  Madame's ;  he  is  away  with 
Madame  for  a  short  holiday."  I  asked  her  if  she  knew  where 
he  had  gone.  She  did  not  know.  I  looked  through  the  other 
four  rooms  and  kitchen,  and  found  nothing  in  any  of  them. 
From  the  people  below  I  learned  that  a  man  Anderson  had 
disappeared  that  night  shortly  after  eight  o'clock,  and  that  a 
woman  had  gone  with  him;  he  was  joined  by  a  woman  on 
the  opposite  side  of  the  street. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — Who  gave  you  that 
information? — The  servant  of  White,  two  stairs  up. 

What  is  the  name  of  this  servant  of  the  Whites? — I  do  not 
know. 

She  is  not  here  as  a  witness? — Not  that  I  am  aware  of. 

When  you  went  into  the  place  to  begin  with,  did  you  explain 
to  the  servant,  who  was  alone  in  the  house,  that  you  were 
detectives? — We  did. 

And  that  was  twelve  o'clock  at  night? — It  was. 

Did  you  explain  any  special  mission? — We  did  not;  we  only 
wanted  to  see  Mr.  Oscar. 

Did  you  not  know  hip  name  was  Slater? — I  did  not. 

Who  gave  you  the  information  that  his  name  was  Oscar? — I 
got  the  information  from  Detective  Inspector  Powell. 

And  he  did  not  call  him  Oscar  Slater,  but  Mr.  Oscar? — 
Just  Mr.  Oscar. 

Then  you  went  into  the  place  and  looked  through  the  room? 
—Yes. 

Did  you  notice  that  the  paper  from  Dent's  address  to  Oscar 
Slater,  c/o  Anderson,  69  St.  George's  Road,  was  dated  23rd 
December,  1908? — Yes,  I  read  the  date. 

And  it  showed  that  it  came  from  Dent's,  in  London? — Yes. 

Does  the  servant  speak  English  well? — Well,  broken  English. 

David.Lyon  DAVID  LTON,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  am  a  detec- 
tive officer  in  the  Central  District,  Glasgow.  (This  witness 
corroborated  the  evidence  of  the  previous  witness.) 

R.  G.  Tuekett      REGINALD  GEORGE  TUCKETT,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE 
172 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

— I  am  chief  assistant  to  Messrs.  Dent,  watchmakers,  34  R.  G.lTuckett 
Cockspur  Street,  London.  I  know  a  man  named  Oscar  Slater, 
and  we  had  some  dealings  with  him.  Our  first  transaction 
with  him  was  on  24th  November,  1905,  in  connection  with 
the  repair  of  a  watch.  He  was  then  in  London.  Our 
second  transaction  was  on  25th  August,  1908.  So  far  as  I 
remember  he  handed  me  the  watch  at  that  time;  I  will  not 
be  positive  about  that.  He  gave  the  address  of  No.  36 
Albemarle  Street,  Piccadilly.  He  paid  me  for  the  repairs 
of  the  watch  on  21st  October,  1908.  I  do  not  recollect  of 
him  calling  at  our  shop  on  10th  December  last;  I  do  not 
think  he  called  in  person.  As  far  as  I  remember,  the  watch 
was  sent  on  that  date.  I  received  the  letter,  dated  9th 

December,  addressed  69  St.  George's  Road,  c/o  Anderson — 
"  Enclosed  you  will  find  my  watch  you  delivered  at  36 
Albemarle  Street.  The  watch  is  15  minutes  or  20  minutes 
fast.  Kindly  put  the  watch  in  order  and  return  same  to 
this  address  till  30th  December."  On  21st  December  I 
received  the  telegram  No.  36/2,  "  Dent,  watchmaker,  Trafal- 
gar Square,  London.  If  possible  please  send  watch  at  once. 
Oscar  Slater."  The  watch  was  still  in  our  keeping.  I 
received  that  telegram  on  the  same  day  on  which  it  was 
despatched.  At  that  time  we  closed  at  seven  o'clock  in  the 
evening.  On  23rd  December  I  received  a  subsequent  tele- 
gram, addressed  34  Cockspur  Street,  London.  "  Must  have 
watch,  leaving  to-morrow  night  for  the  Continent.  Oscar 
Slater,  c/o  A.  Anderson,  69  St.  George's  Road."  The 
previous  telegram  was  signed  "  Oscar  Slater."  I  sent  the 
watch,  I  think  on  the  23rd,  but  I  will  not  be  positive  about 
that.  It  was  sent  to  the  address  given.  That  was  the  last 
transaction  that  I  had  with  Slater,  and  I  have  not  heard 
of  him  since.  (Shown  production  No.  28.)  That  is  the 
label  upon  the  watch  which  I  returned.  It  is  addressed  in  my 
handwriting.  To  the  best  of  my  belief  Oscar  Slater  is  the 
prisoner ;  I  think  I  have  waited  on  him. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — Did  he  stop  in  London 
at  the  time  of  the  previous  transaction  with  you  while  he  was 
there? — Yes. 

On  9th  December,  as  is  shown  by  the  letter  signed  Oscar 
Slater,  No.  69  St.  George's  Road,  Glasgow,  did  he  send  you  a 
watch  for  repair? — No,  it  was  sent  to  us  while  he  was  in 
London.  We  received  the  watch  from  Albemarle  Street. 

I  show  you  No.  36.  Are  you  not  wrong  in  saying  what 
you  have  said? — I  may  be  wrong;  my  impression  was  that 
it  was  left  by  hand.  In  any  case  I  received  it,  and  my 
statement  was  to  the  effect  that  the  watch  had  received  a 
blow  or  fall. 

Did  you  receive  the  letter  dated  9th  December,  which  says, 

173 


Oscar  Slater. 

R.  G.  Tuekett  "  Enclosed  you  will  find  my  watch  you  have  delivered  to  36 
Albemarle  Street,  London  "1 — Yes. 

Is  that  dated  from  69  St.  George's  Road,  Glasgow? — Yes. 

And  one  would  think  that  the  watch  was  enclosed  along 
with  it? — Yes.  My  impression  was  that  it  was  left  by  hand, 
but  about  that  I  will  not  be  sure. 

Was  the  same  watch  twice  with  you? — Yes. 

May  it  not  have  been  that  the  first  time  it  arrived  it  was 
handed  in  by  hand,  and  the  second  time  that  it  came  in  a 
package  along  with  that  letter? — That  may  be. 

Was  there  enclosed  also  a  card? — That  may  have  been 
enclosed. 

Was  that  not  enclosed  with  the  letter? — It  may  have  been. 

"  Address  till  30th  December,  69  St.  George's  Road,  c/o  A. 
Anderson,  Glasgow"? — No. 

Does  that  card  in  front  of  you  have  on  the  face  of  it 
"  Oscar  Slater,  dentist,  36  Albemarle  Street,  W.  Telephone, 
1624  Mayfair"?— Yes. 

And  on  the  back  is  there  written  "  Address  till  30th 
December,  69  St.  George's  Road,  c/o  A.  Anderson,  Glasgow"? 
—Yes. 

Do  you  remember  receiving  that? — It  was  with  the  letter 
of  9th  December. 

And  that  was  an  intimation  to  you  that  the  address,  69  St. 
George's  Road,  was  good  till  30th  December? — Yes. 

You  apparently  have  had  this  watch  in  your  possession  for 
repairs  from  9th  December  right  up  to  the  21st? — Yes. 

There  is  a  telegram  there  to  "  Dent,  watchmaker.  If 
possible  send  watch  at  once  "? — Yes. 

Did  you  see  from  the  telegram  that  it  was  handed  in  in 
Glasgow  at  6.12  at  the  Central  Station? — Yes. 

Apparently  the  watch  had  not  arrived  by  the  23rd.  Did 
you,  on  the  23rd,  receive  another  telegram,  "  Dent,  34 
Cockspur  Street,  London.  Must  have  watch,  leaving 
to-morrow  night  for  Continent.  Oscar  Slater  "? — Yes. 

All  your  communications  were  with  him  under  the  name  of 
Oscar  Slater? — Yes. 

And  he  put  "  c/o  Anderson  "  when  he  went  to  Glasgow? — 
Yes. 

Do  you  see  the  last  telegram  of  23rd  December,  handed  in 
at  Charing  Cross,  Glasgow,  one  minute  past  twelve? — Yes. 

And  it  was  sent  off  at  12.7  and  it  arrived  in  London  at 
12.44?— Yes. 

It  was  in  answer  to  that  telegram  that  you  sent  off  the 
parcel  which  was  in  the  wrapper  No.  28? — Yes. 

And  it  contained  the  watch  ? — Yes. 

I  suppose  when  you  got  notice  by  the  second  telegram  that 

174 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

they   were  leaving   to-morrow    night  for  the    Continent    that  R.  G.  Tuekett 
-hurried  you  up? — Yes,  it  hurried  us  up  considerably. 

You  had  thought  that  they  were  to  be  there  for  a  week 
longer? — Yes,  our  intention  was  to  send  it  off  after  Christmas. 

MARIAN     CARSON,      examined     by     Mr.     MORISON — I      am  M-  Carson 

twenty-four  years  of  age.  I  am  a  telegraphist  in  the 

employment  of  the  Caledonian  Railway  at  the  Central  Station 
Telegraph  Office,  Glasgow.  I  was  on  duty  on  21st  December 
till  6.37.  (Shown  production  No.  36,  addressed  "  Dent, 

watchmakers.")  I  can  tell  from  the  marking  of  the  code 
time  on  the  telegram  when  I  received  that.  I  took  it  in. 
It  was  handed  in  at  6.12,  and  it  would  be  sent  into  the  tube 
and  sent  to  the  Post  Office  at  once.  I  cannot  tell  whether 
it  was  handed  in  by  a  man  or  a  woman ;  I  do  not  remember 
anything  about  it. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — Is  it  signed  "  Oscar 
Slater"?— Yes. 

(Shown  prisoner.)  Is  that  the  man? — I  do  not  remember 
him. 

MART  ANDERSON  M'MuRoo,  examined  by  Mr.  MORISON — I  am  M.A.M'Murdo 
a  sorting  clerk  and  telegraphist  at  Charing  Cross  Branch  Post 
Office.  (Shown  production  No.  36,  addressed  "  Dent,  34 
Cockspur  Street,  London,"  and  signed  "  Oscar  Slater,  69  St. 
George's  Road,  c/o  Anderson.")  That  telegram  was  handed 
in  at  my  branch  on  23rd  December.  It  says,  "  Must  have 
watch,  leaving  to-morrow  night  for  the  Continent.  Oscar 
Slater."  That  was  handed  in  at  my  branch  post  office  at  one 
minute  past  twelve  on  23rd  December.  The  message  was 
despatched  at  12.7.  That  was  two  days  before  Christmas, 
and  we  must  have  been  specially  busy  that  day.  I  cannot 
recollect  whether  it  was  a  man  or  woman  who  handed  in  that 
telegram  to  me ;  I  have  no  recollection  who  handed  it  in. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — Look  at  the  prisoner — 
was  that  the  man? — I  could  not  say. 

FREDERICA  CAROLINE  LANO,  examined  by  Mr.  MORISON — I  P.  C.  Lang 
am  a  sorting  clerk  and  telegraphist  in  the  General  Post  Office, 
Glasgow.  Prior  to  November  last  I  was  acting  in  the  same 
capacity  in  the  Hope  Street  Branch  Post  Office,  and  aftor 
leaving  it  I  was  temporarily  employed  on  23rd,  24th,  and 
25th  December.  While  in  the  Hope  Street  Post  Office  it 
was  part  of  my  duty  to  keep  the  book  called  the  Counter 
Register  Letter  Book.  I  have  examined  the  letter  book  of 
24th  December,  and  on  that  date  I  find  a  registered  letter 
or  packet,  No.  421,  sent  off  to  an  address  in  Germany — the 

175 


Oscar  Slater. 

F.  C.  Lang  address  being,  Adolf  Leschzinger,  5  Klukowitzer  Strasse> 
Bentham  O/  Sohl,  Germany.  I  cannot  recollect  whether  I 
saw  the  person  who  handed  it  in. 

Have  you  seen  the  prisoner  before  as  far  as  you  know? — I 
think  I  have  seen  him  before. 

Where  at? — I  could  not  say. 

But  can  you  say  whether  it  was  in  your  branch  post  office 
on  the  24th  or  not? — I  could  not  say. 

Can  you  say  whether  he  was  there  on  22nd  or  23rd? — I 
could  not  say. 

Do  you  just  remember  the  face? — Yes. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLTJRB — You  saw  the  prisoner  in 
Duke  Street?— Yes. 

Is  it  from  that  recollection  that  you  think  that  you  have 
seen  him? — No,  I  think  I  have  seen  him  before. 

But  you  cannot  recollect  whether  he  sent  the  package  to 
Germany  ? — No. 

Was  it  a  registered  letter? — It  was  either  a  letter  or  a 
packet.  Each  one  has  the  same  entry. 

W.  Gordon  WILLIAM  GORDON,  examined  by  Mr.  MORISON — I  am  a 
detective  lieutenant  in  the  Central  District  of  the  Glasgow 
police.  I  called  at  the  house  69  George's  Road  on  26th 
December,  1908,  in  order  to  make  inquiry  at  the  accused's 
house.  I  saw  a  person  who  said  that  she  was  the  maid 
there,  and  she  told  me  that  they  were  away  to  London.  I 
asked  for  Anderson,  because  the  name  was  on  the  plate  on 
the  door.  I  called  again  on  Monday,  28th,  and  Tuesday, 
29th  December,  to  see  if  any  letters  had  come  for  Anderson. 
There  were  no  letters.  I  learned  on  the  7th  of  January 
that  the  two  women  who  occupied  the  house  were  going  to 
London.  I  did  not  see  the  maid  then;  she  was  away.  She 
went  to  London  on  the  night  I  called,  on  the  26th. 

By  the  COURT — How  do  you  know  that? — She  told  me  that 
she  was  going  to  London. 

Did  she  say  whether  she  was  to  join  them? — No;  she  said 
that  she  was  going  to  72  Charlotte  Street,  London,  that  night, 
care  of  a  Mr.  Sancroft. 

Examination  continued — The  maid  told  me  that  Madame 
and  Anderson  had  left  the  night  before,  for  London.  I 
made  inquiries  as  to  the  movements  of  Anderson  on  the 
Monday  night,  and  she  told  me  that  he  was  in  at  seven 
o'clock  at  dinner,  but  that  she  did  not  know  anything  further 
about  his  movements  after  that.  I  called  afterwards  on 
7th  January.  (Shown  production  No.  27.)  I  was  handed 
that  letter  on  7th  January.  The  envelope  is  addressed, 
"  Oscar  Slater,  c/o  Mr.  Anderson,  69  St.  George's  Road,  Glas- 
gow, Scotland,  Eng."  There  is  also  an  intimation,  "  If  not 
176 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

delivered,   return   to   D.   R.  Jacobs,   326   Third  Avenue,  New  w.  Gordon 
York,    U.S."     The  letter   bears  the  American  postmark,    and 
appears  to  have  been  posted  at  Madison  Square,  at  New  York, 
on  29th  December.     The  letter  itself  is  dated  28th  December. 

Do  you  know  when  the  two  women  actually  left  the  house? — 
It  was  reported  to  me  that  they  left  on  the  8th  of  December. 
They  told  me  on  the  night  of  the  7th  that  they  were  leaving 
on  the  8th. 

When  did  these  two  women  arrive  in  Glasgow? — They  told 
me  that  they  would  arrive  here  about  the  24th  of  December.  I 
did  not  see  them  until  the  26th,  a  Saturday. 

Did  you  see  them  in  the  flat  that  had  been  occupied  by  Slater 
when  you  called  on  the  26th? — I  did. 

Did  you  find  that  the  keys  of  the  flat  had  been  handed  over 
by  Slater's  servant  to  them? — She  told  me  so. 

And  did  she  inform  you  that  these  people  were  taking  up 
the  occupancy  of  the  house? — No.  The  maid  did  not  tell  me, 
but  they  themselves  told  me  so. 

Can  you  tell  me  when  these  two  women  came  to  Glasgow! — 
They  told  me  that  they  had  come  two  days  previously. 

Do  you  know  where  they  had  been  between  times? — In  the 
Alexandra  Hotel,  in  Bath  Street. 

Did  you  make  inquiry? — No,  I  did  not. 

Where  did  you  get  the  letter  dated  7th  January? — I  got  it 
from  Mrs.  Freedman. 

Did  she  isay  that  she  had  come  from  London? — Yes. 

And  was  to  continue  the  occupancy  of  the  flat  after  the 
letter  had  gone? — She  said  that  it  was  arranged  between  Slater 
and  her  that  she  should  do  so. 

Was  it  not  between  Slater  and  Mr.  Freedman,  in  London? — 
No ;  it  was  between  Slater  and  her.  The  words  she  said  were 
that  they  were  away  to  Monte  Carlo. 

Who  were  away? — Madame  and  Mr.  Anderson.  She  called 
the  lady  Madame.  She  said  that  they  were  away  to  Monte 
Carlo,  and  that  he  had  asked  if  they  had  any  money  and 
wanted  a  loan  of  £25. 

Who  wanted  it? — Mr.  Anderson.  He  asked  it  from  Mrs. 
Freedman. 

Do  you  understand  that  the  sitory  was  that  they  had  gone  off 
to  London  and  then  to  Monte  Carlo? — It  was  the  maid's  story 
that  they  had  gone  to  London,  and  Mrs.  Freedman's  story  was 
that  they  had  gone  to  Monte  Carlo. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — I  show  you  the  envelope 
No.  27 ;  you  were  asked  about  something  that  appears  on  the 
envelope  at  the  foot  of  page  17 — "  If  not  delivered,  return  to 
D.  R.  Jacobs,  326  Third  Avenue,  New  York,  U.S.,"  and  it  is 
headed  "  Scotland,  Eng."?— Yes. 

The  words,  "  If  not  delivered,  return  to  D.  R.  Jacobs,  326 
N  177 


Oscar  Slater. 

W.  Gordon  Third  Avenue,  New  York,  U.S.,"  are  not  in  any  printed  form, 
but  written  in  ink? — Yes. 

Apparently  by  the  person  who  wrote  the  letter? — It  looks 
very  much  like  it. 

Would  not  that  suggest  to  you  as  a  detective  that  the  person 
who  sent  off  the  letter  had  in  his  mind  that  perhaps  the 
addressee  would  be  away  from  the  address  at  the  time  the  letter 
had  arrived? — There  was  no  indication  on  the  letter  to  that 
effect. 

For  what  purpose  would  he  write  on  the  envelope,  in  his 
own  handwriting,  "  If  not  delivered,  return  to  D.  R.  Jacobs," 
unless  he  thought  that  there  was  a  probability  of  the  man 
being  away  at  the  time  the  letter  arrived  there? — There  might 
have  been  a  change  of  address. 

He  might  be  away  from  there? — Yes,  supposing  he  was  still 
in  Glasgow. 

There  is  another  thing  I  call  your  attention  to.  From  the 
terms  of  the  letter  itself,  is  it  quite  plain  that  Mr.  Jacobs, 
who  wrote  the  letter  to  the  accused,  wagi  expecting  to  be  shortly 
over  in  America,  as  he  says,  "  Buy  all  you  can  when  you  come 
over"? — Yes,  there  is  something  there  about  that. 

Putting  these  two  together,  does  that  seem  a  fair  inference 
that  he  wrote  the  letter  to  a  man  whom  he  expected  was  going 
over  to  America,  and  who  might  not  be  at  the  address  at  the 
time  the  letter  went  there? — There  is  a  possibility  that  he 
might  do  it,  but  the  other  probability  is  just  the  same  that 
he  might  change  his  address  from  that  house. 

But  the  words,  "  come  over  "  mean  that  he  was  going  over 
to  America,  do  they  not? — Yes. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  MOEISON — When  was  it  that  Mrs.  Freed  - 
man  told  you  this  about  Slater  having  gone  to  Monte  Carlo? — 
On  Saturday,  26th  December. 

Did  she  say  when  she  had  come  to  the  address  69  St. 
George' si  Road? — She  had  arrived  that  morning. 

You  said  something  about  £25  which  I  did  not  quite  catch. 
Did  she  tell  you  that  she  had  given  Slater  the  loan  of  £25,  or 
that  he  had  asked  the  loan? — Mrs.  Freedman  told  me  that  she 
had  called  the  previous  evening  at  the  flat  and  found  Mr. 
Anderson,  the  accused,  busy  packing  up  his  luggage,  and 
Madame,  as  she  called  her,  was  crying,  and  she  had  asked 
what  was  up,  or  what  was  the  matter,  and  then  Anderson  said 
that  he  had  received 

Mr.  M'CLURB — If  Mrs.  Freedman  is  not  coming,  this  is  not 
relevant. 

LORD  GUTHRIE — If  you  object,  we  cannot  take  anything. 

By  Mr.  MORISON — What  about  £25?       Did  Mrs.   Freedman 
tell  you  that  she  had  given  the  prisoner  the  £25,  or  merely 
that    the  prisoner    had   asked  it? — Mrs.    Freedman    told    me 
distinctly  that  she  gave  him  £25. 
178 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

[The  Lord  Advocate  here  proposed  to  recall  the  witness 
Lambie. 

Mr.  M'CLURE — My  lord,  my  friend  is  proposing  to  recall  the 
girl  Helen  Lambie,  with  whom  we  parted  some  two  days  ago. 
I  do  not  know  the  purpose  of  her  being  recalled  at  the  present 
time,  but  I  think  it  is  quite  enough  for  me  to  say  that  she  has 
been  in  Court  since  she  was  examined,  and  has  heard  certain 
of  the  evidence,  how  much  I  do  not  know.  I  should  suggest  that 
this  is  an  absolute  disqualification,  although  I  am  absolutely 
ignorant  of  the  points  she  is  to  be  examined  on. 

The  LORD  ADVOCATE — If  my  friend  says  she  was  in  Court  I 
cannot  contradict  him. 

LORD  GUTHRIE — She  was  in  Court. 

The  LORD  ADVOCATE — My  friend  may  be  perfectly  correct.  I 
do  not  propose  to  ask  her  a  question  about  anything  that  has 
been  said  in  the  evidence.  I  will  put  to  my  friend  the  few 
questions  that  I  proposed  to  ask.  If  he  adheres  to  his  objection, 
then  I  do  not  insist. 

Mr.  M'CLURE — I  would  rather  not  know  anything  about  it, 
because  it  would  seem  to  be  departing  from  the  strict  line  I  am 
entitled  to  take  up,  and  I  do  not  wish  to  have  anything  like 
negotiation  in  a  case  of  this  kind. 

LORD  GUTHRIE — If  something  had  come  out  in  cross-examina- 
tion, it  is  conceivable  that  occasion  might  have  arisen  for  a 
witness  to  be  recalled.  It  would  be  a  very  unfortunate  thing 
if  the  occasion  did  arise,  but  it  might  arise. 

The  LORD  ADVOCATE — Yes,  it  did  arise  out  of  one  or  two 
questions  put  by  my  friend  in  cross-examination. 

LORD  GUTHRIE — You  do  not  insist  on  recalling  the  witness? 

The  LORD  ADVOCATE — No. 

Mr.  M'CLURE — I  am  objecting  in  absolute  ignorance  of  what 
the  questions  were  to  be.] 

WILLIAM  BANCROFT,  examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  am  w.  Sancroft 
employed  by  the  Glasgow  Corporation  in  the  Tramways  Depart- 
ment. On  23rd  December  last  I  was  conductor  on  a  car  on 
the  passage  northwards  at  Union  Street,  about  five  minutes 
past  six  on  that  evening.  I  remember  one  man  in  particular 
joining  the  car  at  the  end  of  Union  Street  next  Argyle  Street. 
He  went  upstairs  in  a  hurry  and  seated  himself  at  the  far  end 
of  the  car.  There  was  a  boy  reading  the  Citizen  on  the  opposite 
side  of  the  standard,  on  the  left  hand  side.  Near  West  George 
Street  I  went  upstairs  to  collect  the  fares  from  the  passengers. 
I  asked  the  man  where  he  was  going,  and  he  mumbled  some- 
thing. He  had  a  penny  in  his  left  hand.  I  took  it  for  granted 
that  he  wanted  a  penny  ticket,  and  I  punched  it.  When  stand- 
ing at  the  standard,  half-way  covering  his  seat,  I  asked  the  boy 
if  there  was  any  clue  to  the  murderer, and  he  said,  "No,  there 
is  not  any  clue  yet,  and  I  don't  think  there  is  any  likelihood 

179 


Oscar  Slater. 

W.  Sancroft  of  getting  one."  All  of  a  sudden  this  man  who  was  sitting  on 
the  seat  got  up  in  a  hurry  and  passed  by,  pushing  me  to  the 
side.  He  went  downstairs  in  a  hurry.  I  went  after  him  and 
tried  to  tap  him  on  the  shoulder,  as  I  usually  do  to  draw  the 
attention  of  passengers  in  case  they  have  made  a  mistake.  I 
was  three  steps  down  when  I  saw  the  man  running  full  speed 
across  to  Garscadden  Street.  That  was  long  before  he  had  got 
his  pennyworth  or  even  a  halfpennyworth.  I  spoke  to  the 
motorman  about  what  had  happened,  and  I  delayed  the  car 
about  a  minute  or  so.  I  would  most  assuredly  know  the  man 
again.  I  recognise  the  prisoner  as  the  man. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — Did  you  think  that  night 
he  was  the  murderer? — No,  I  did  not. 

That  night,  I  suppose,  you  only  thought  this,  that  there  was 
a  dark-complexioned  man  on  the  car  who  came  on  for  a  little 
while  and  left  in  a  hurry,  before  he  got  his  penny's  worth? — 
A  dark-complexioned  man  resembling  very  much  the  descrip- 
tion given  in  the  papers,  I  think,  the  night  after  the  murder. 

You  did  not  think  that  this  was  the  murderer  that  night? — 
Not  at  the  time  he  was  on  the  car. 

He  seemed  to  be  in  a  hurry  to  join  the  car,  and,  later  on, 
in  a  hurry  to  leave  the  car? — Yes. 

Is  that  the  only  thing  you  have  got  against  him? — Another 
thing  was  taking  Id.  ticket  and  going  off  before  the  £d. 
station. 

I  understand  that  you  said  that  you  did  not  know  whether 
the  man  had  heard  your  remark  to  the  boyi? — I  do  not 
remember  if  I  said  so.  I  think  I  said  that  when  the 
remark  was  passed  as  to  there  being  any  clue  of  the  mur- 
derer, this  man,  according  to  my  opinion,  must  have  heard  us. 

You  said  the  car  was  not  very  well  lighted  where  the  man 
was  sitting? — It  is  not  very  well  lighted  in  a  December  night. 

Who  is  the  boy  that  was  reading  the  paper? — I  tried  to 
trace  that,  but  I  have  not  been  able  to  get  hold  of  him.  I  have 
been  told  that  he  has  been  in  some  employment  in  the  city, 
about  St.  Vincent  Street,  as  a  clerk,  and  has  been  dismissed. 
He  was  a  regular  traveller  at  that  time  of  the  night.  I  have 
not  been  able  to  get  a  hold  of  him.  I  have  tried  my  best. 

The  Clerk  of  Court  then  read  the  following  declaration 
which  had  been  emitted  by  the  prisoner  :  — 

At  Glasgow,  the  twenty-fourth  day  of  February,  one 
thousand  nine  hundred  and  nine,  in  presence  of 
Arthur  Thomson  Glegg,  Esquire,  Advocate,  Sheriff- 
Substitute  of  Lanarkshire, — 

Compeared  a  prisoner,  who  had  had  a  private  interview  with 
a  law  agent  prior  to  this  examination,  and  the  charge  against 
him  having  been  read  over  and  explained  to  him,  and  he  having 
been  judicially  admonished  and  examined,  declares :  My  name 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

is  Oscar  Slater.     I  am  a  native  of  Germany,  married,  thirty- 
eight  years  of  age,  a  dentist,  and  have  no  residence  at  present. 

I  know  nothing  about  the  charge  of  having  assaulted  Marion 
Gilchrist  and  murdering  her.  I  am  innocent.  All  which  I 
declare  to  be  truth. 

OSCAR  SLATER. 
A.  T.  GLBQQ. 

James  N.  Hart,  1 

Duncan  Lee,          >  Witnesses. 

Wm.  Warnock, 

The  Lord  Advocate  then  intimated  that  this  closed  the  case 
for  the  Crown. 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

JAMES  Dow,  examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — I  am  in  the  James  Dow 
accountant's  office  in  the  Post  Office,  Edinburgh.  I  have  been 
cited  as  a  witness  to  speak  to  a  letter  which  was  addressed  to 
the  Comptroller  of  the  Post  Office  Savings  Bank,  West  Ken- 
sington, London.  The  letter  is  dated  20/11/08,  Glasgow. 
The  letter  is  addressed  from  69  St.  George's  Road,  Glasgow, 
to  the  Comptroller  of  the  Post  Office  Savings  Bank  in  London. 
It  is  dated  the  20th  of  the  eleventh  month  of  1908,  which 
apparently  would  be  20th  November,  but  it  arrived  at  its 
destination  in  an  envelope  which  has  got  the  Glasgow  post- 
mark of  21st  December,  1908,  5  p.m. 

That  is  5  p.m.  on  the  21st  December,  about  two  hours 
before  the  murder? — I  do  not  know  when  the  murder  was. 
The  letter  is  in  these  terms — 

Glasgow,  20th/l  1/1908, 

69  St  Georges  Road. 

Dear  Sir,— Enclosed  you  will  find  my  Savings  Bank  book.  Be  kind 
enough  to  send  me  the  money  at  once  as  I  have  a  urgent  call  to  America 
because  my  wife  is  ill. 

If  possible  wire  the  money  on  and  I  will  pay  all  expenses  here.  — Yours 
truly. 

ADOLPH  ANDERSON. 

In  answer  to  that  letter  there  was  one  addressed  from  the 
Post  Office  Savings  Bank,  West  Kensington,  London,  to  Mr. 
A.  Anderson.  Thut  was  dated  22nd  December,  1908.  The 
letter  was  in  these  terma — 

Post-Office  Savings  Bank, 
West  Kensington,  London,  W., 

22nd  December,  1908. 

Sir, — I  am  directed  by  the  Post  Master  General  to  acknowledge  receipt 
of  your  Deposit  Book,  Investment  Certificate,  application,  and  letter  of 
the  20th  inst.,  and  to  inform  yon  that  steps  are  being  taken  to  sell 

181 


Oscar  Slater. 

James  Dow  £59  2s.  7d.  2£  per  cent.  Consolidated  Stock  on  your  behalf,  but  the 
transaction  cannot  be  completed  until  to-morrow.  A  warrant  for  the  sum 
due  in  your  Savings  Bank  account  is,  however,  enclosed,  and  instructions 
have  been  sent  to  the  Postmaster  of  Glasgow  to  pay  the  amount  without 
production  of  the  Deposit  Book. — I  am,  Sir, 

Your  obedient  Servant, 

H.  DAVIES,  Controller. 

Do  you  find  that,  following  upon  that,  the  2£  per  cent, 
stock  which  stood  in  the  name  of  Slater  was  sold  on  his 
h  structions,  and  the  proceeds  given  to  him  at  the  Glasgow 
Post  Office  on  24th  December,  1908? — In  the  name  of  A. 
Anderson,  yes,  that  is  so.  He  received  £49  7s.  2d.  I  find 
also  that  the  balance  remaining  due  in  his  Post  Office  Savings 
Bank  account,  namely,  £39  18s.  3d.,  was  paid  to  him  on  23rd 
December. 

Take  it  from  me  that  the  murder  of  this  lady  was  accom- 
plished at  seven  o'clock  upon  the  21st  December,  1908.  Were 
instructions  given  for  the  delivery  of  the  Savings  Bank 
deposits  and  stock  of  Slater  by  the  letter  posted  at  5  p.m. 
on  the  21st  December,  and  therefore  before  the  murder? — I 
should  say  so. 

You  take,  I  suppose,  the  post  office  stamp  as  conclusive  of 
the  date? — Well,  I  am  not  conversant  absolutely  with  the 
stamp,  but  I  should  say  it  was. 

Cross-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — Who  is  Adolf 
Anderson? — I  could  not  say — a  depositor  in  the  Post  Office 
Savings  Bank. 

Did  you  ever  see  him? — No,  never  to  my  knowledge. 

Do  you  know  anything  about  him?^No,  not  at  all. 

You  mentioned  the  name  Oscar  Slater? — No,  not  I. 

I  heard  it  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  consolidated 
stock? — "A.  Anderson,"  I  think  I  corrected;  A.  Anderson 
was  the  name  the  stock  was  in. 

Did  you  ever  hear  the  name  Oscar  Slater  in  connection  with 
this  person  Adolf  Anderson? — No,  not  to  my  knowledge. 

Do  you  know  when  the  bank  account  was  opened? — Yes. 
On  the  12th  of  November,  1908. 

In  London? — In  Glasgow. 

And  what  is  the  designation  of  the  person? — Dentist. 

And  the  address? — 69  St.  George's  Road,  Glasgow. 

When  was  the  last  transaction — the  last  deposit  of  money? 
—On  the  17th  December,  1908. 

How  much  was  deposited  that  day? — £5. 

Then,  when  was  the  last  money  drawn  out? — The  last  sum 
was  drawn  out  on  the  24th  December,  1908. 

Do    you    know    whether    the    depositor,    Adolf    Anderson, 
attended  at  the  bank  to  get  the  money? — Well,  I  could  not 
say.       It  was  paid  at  the  Glasgow  head  office. 
182 


Is 

W    o 

60    5 

C    '5 

3  1 

O    a. 
o    w. 


O  o 

O  5 

V  * 

be  = 

a  - 

£  § 

Q  S 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

When  was  the  consolidated  stock  that  you  have  mentioned  James  Dow 
bought? — On  the  13th  November,  1908. 

Is  it  bought  from  Glasgow? — It  is  bought  through  the 
Savings  Bank  in  London,  by  request  of  the  depositor  in 
Glasgow. 

Was  there  any  interest  paid  upon  it  when  it  was  paid  up? — 
Not  yet;  there  has  been  no  interest  yet. 

How  long  does  Government  stock  require  to  be  deposited 
before  any  interest  is  paid  on  it? — I  think  there  is  interest 
payable  for  any  length  of  time. 

Was  any  interest  paid  on  the  £59  2s.  7d.  worth? — No. 

Was  there  any  claim  made  for  any  interest? — Not  that  I 
am  aware  of. 

If  it  had  been  left  for  a  further  period  would  interest  have 
been  paid  upon  it? — Upon  the  stock,  yes;  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  there  is  interest  due;  it  has  been  added  to  it,  I  believe, 
for  the  time  it  was  in. 

That  has  not  been  claimed,  as  I  understand? — No. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLORE — Adolf  Anderson  opened  an 
account  on  the  12th  November,  1908? — That  is  so. 

In  the  Post  Office  Savings  Bank? — Yes. 

And  he  requested  payment  of  that  on  the  23rd  of  December, 
and  was  paid  £39  18s.  3d.  ? — He  requested  payment  with  a 
letter  that  reached  London  on  the  22nd. 

And  he  got  paid? — He  got  paid  at  Glasgow,  by  London's 
request. 

On  the  13th  November,  in  London,  2£  per  cent,  consolidated 
stock  was  bought  for  a  certain  amount  for  Adolf  Anderson! 
— For  Adolf  Anderson,  69  St.  George's  Road,  Glasgow. 

And  he  requested  that  that  should  be  sold  by  the  letters 
which  have  been  referred  to? — That  is  so. 

And  it  was  sold  and  he  was  paid  £49  7s.  2d.,  the  proceeds, 
upon  24th  December? — That  is  so. 

The  point  I  wish  to  make  clear  is  this,  the  instructions  as 
regards  the  uplifting  of  the  amount  in  his  savings  bank  book 
were  given  on  the  21st  December,  at  5  p.m.  ? — That  is  the 
date  on  the  envelope. 

HUGH  CAMBRON,  jun.,  examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — I  reside  H.  Cameron 
in  Cambridge  Street,  Glasgow.  I  am  a  bookmaker's  clerk. 
I  have  been  at  odd  times  a  dealer  in  jewellery.  I  go  about 
clubs  in  Glasgow  where  gambling  takes  place.  In  particular 
I  know  the  Sloper  Club,  24  India  Street,  and  the  Motor  Club, 
26  India  Street.  I  also  went  to  the  Mascot  Club,  Renfield 
Street.  That  club  is  now  out  of  existence.  With  regard  to 
what  the  people  do  in  the  club  at  night,  some  utilise  the 
reading  rooms,  some  play  billiards,  and  others  play  games  at 

183 


Oscar  Slater. 

H.  Cameron  cards.  I  play  cards  a  good  deal  at  these  various  clubs.  I 
have  known  Oscar  Slater  since  1901,  the  year  of  the  Glasgow 
Exhibition.  I  met  him  first  in  the  Crown  Hall  billiard 
rooms,  Sauchiehall  Street.  I  met  him  a  good  deal  at  that 
time.  He  did  not  play  cards  at  that  time;  he  backed 
horses.  He  was  not  a  member  of  a  club  in  Grant  Street  at 
that  time.  It  was  later  on  that  he  became  a  member.  I 
should  say  that  he  was  in  Glasgow  about  nine  months  in  1901. 
I  saw  him  about  three  or  four  years  afterwards,  in  1905  or 
thereabout.  After  another  interval  of  something  like  three 
years  I  saw  him  again  in  November,  1908.  I  met  him  in 
Sauchiehall  Street.  He  had  been  in  town  some  little  time. 
He  was  staying  at  the  Central  Station  Hotel  under  the  name 
of  A.  Anderson.  After  that  he  went  to  lodgings  in  136 
Renfrew  Street,  and  later  on  he  removed  to  a  flat  in  St. 
George's  Road,  which  he  took  in  the  name  of  Anderson.  From 
the  time  he  came  in  November,  1908,  to  stop  in  Glasgow  at 
the  Central  Station  Hotel,  in  lodgings  in  Renfrew  Street,  and 
in  St.  George's  Road,  he  was  known  as  Anderson.  I  saw 
a  considerable  deal  of  him  from  the  time  he  arrived  in  November 
until  he  left  on  25th  December.  I  would  not  say  that  we 
met  very  nearly  daily,  but  we  met  pretty  frequently.  We 
employed  ourselves  probably  by  filling  in  the  time,  such  as 
going  to  the  skating  rink,  and  then  to  a  music  hall  in  the 
evening,  and  from  there  to  the  Sloper  Club,  where  he  subse- 
quently became  a  member.  When  meeting  in  the  clubs  in 
the  evening  card  playing  was  indulged  in  until  well  into  the 
morning.  That  was  the  ordinary  kind  of  way  that  I  and 
others  had  of  passing  the  time.  There  is  not  much  horse 
racing  in  December;  it  is  practically  the  close  season.  So 
far  as  I  know  Slater  was  never  a  dentist.  I  heard  later  on 
from  him,  after  he  had  been  in  Glasgow  for  some  time,  of 
his  purpose  to  go  to  America,  and  I  got  his  address.  It  would 
be  fully  a  fortnight  before  21st  December  that  I  heard  from 
Slater  of  his  intention  to  go  abroad.  He  spoke  quite  freely 
about  his  intention  among  his  friends.  I  got  the  address 
from  him  in  his  handwriting,  and  I  have  it  here.  This 
matter  was  brought  to  my  notice  specially  by  a  letter  I  saw 
from  San  Francisco.  That  letter  was  shown  to  me  about  a 
fortnight  before  he  went  away.  I  cannot  say  whom  the  letter 
was  from.  I  do  not  remember  anything  about  the  terms 
of  the  letter  further  than  that  things  were  going  very  well  and 
asking  him  to  go  out.  That  was  the  gist  of  the  letter. 
Either  at  that  time  or  shortly  afterwards  Slater  gave  me  his 
address  in  San  Francisco.  It  was  Oscar  Slater,  c/o  Caesar 
Cafe,  544  Broadway,  San  Francisco. 

Do  you  swear  you  got  that  a  week  or  ten  days  before  21st 
184 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

December  ? — I  cannot  swear  to  that.       I  cannot  swear  that  I  H.  Cameron 
got  it  at  a  given  time,  but  I  know  I  got  this  given  in  his  own 
handwriting,  I  got  it  from  himself,  but  as  regards  the  time  I 
got  it  I  cannot  swear. 

May  I  take  it  that  you  got  it  before  there  was  any  question 
about  this  murder? — Yes.  I  am  not  definite  as  to  when  I  had 
seen  Slater  before  the  day  of  the  murder,  21st  December,  but 
it  must  have  been  somewhere  about  the  week-end ;  either  the 
Friday  or  the  Saturday  of  the  previous  week.  I  saw  him  on 
the  Tuesday  or  the  Wednesday  after  the  murder  had  taken 
place,  but  I  am  not  quite  certain  about  that.  When  I  met 
him  I  received  from  him  a  pawn  ticket  to  dispose  of,  for  a 
brooch  which  had  been  in  pawn  for  £60.  He  gave  me  the 
ticket,  and  said  that  I  knew  a  great  many  more  people  about 
the  city  than  he  did,  and  that  I  was  perhaps  in  a  better  position 
to  dispose  of  the  ticket,  and  I  might  dispose  of  it  for  him. 
I  took  the  ticket  from  him,  and  I  approached  two  people,  Mr. 
Donaldson,  who  has  a  billiard  room  in  Crown  Street,  and  Mr. 
Allan,  the  poulterer  in  Sauchiehall  Street.  I  was  not  successful 
in  disposing  of  the  ticket,  however,  and  I  gave  it  back  to 
Oscar.  It  was  a  ticket  for  a  diamond  crescent  gold  brooch, 
upon  which  £60  had  been  already  advanced.  There  had  been 
an  advance  of  £20  in  November,  and  in  December  another 
advance  of  £10,  and  a  further  advance  of  £30  had  been  made 
on  it  on  21st  December,  the  day  of  the  murder,  making  £60 
in  all.  The  sale  of  the  pawn  ticket  would  involve  this,  that 
the  brooch  would  be  delivered  up  to  the  person  who  purchased 
the  pawn  ticket  upon  payment  of  the  £60,  with  interest,  to  the 
pawnbroker.  That  is  a  sort  of  transaction  with  which  I  am 
familiar  enough.  The  brooch  was  in  the  pawnshop  of  Mr. 
Liddell,  Sauchiehall  Street.  I  do  not  know  Mr.  P.  C.  M'Laren 
in  that  shop.  When  I  failed  to  dispose  of  the  ticket,  either 
to  Mr.  Donaldson  or  Mr.  Allan,  I  returned  it  to  Oscar  Slater. 
I  do  not  think  he  made  any  remarks  about  making  further 
efforts.  I  remember  meeting  him  after  the  time  I  have  men- 
tioned, the  Tuesday  or  Wednesday.  I  had  made  an  arrangement 
to  meet  him  in  the  Crown  Hall  billiard  room  at  5  p.m.  on 
Thursday,  24th  December,  but  I  did  not  meet  him  then.  I 
met  him  passing  the  corner  of  Gordon  Street  and  Renfield 
Street.  I  was  along  with  my  wife,  and  I  saw  him  passing 
there.  I  mentioned  to  my  wife  that  I  had  a  prior  engagement 
with  him  at  five  o'clock  in  the  Crown  Hall  billiard  rooms,  and 
I  said  it  was  no  use  going  there  when  I  could  see  him  now.  I 
told  her  that  I  would  be  home  about  six  o'clock,  and  left  her, 
and  followed  him.  I  met  him  either  at  four  o'clock  or 
shortly  after  four  on  24th  December.  I  asked  where  he  was 
going1,  and  he  said  he  was  looking  for  the  Cunard  Line  shipping 
office  in  Jamaica  Street.  I  went  down  to  Jamaica  Street  with 

185 


Oscar  Slater. 

H.  Cameron  him,  and  he  went  into  the  Cunard  offices.  Immediately  he 
came  out  he  asked  me  if  I  would  mind  going  upstairs  to  get 
an  English  £5  note  for  five  Scotch  £1  notes.  I  went  upstairs, 
but  I  was  not  successful  in  getting  the  £5  note.  He  told  me 
that  he  wanted  the  note  to  send  to  his  people  in  Germany, 
which  he  had  done,  as  he  stated,  almost  every  Christmas. 
I  did  not  get  the  £5  note  at  the  Cunard  offices.  We  went 
next  to  the  Central  Station  and  tried  the  booking-office  there, 
but  were  unsuccessful.  We  then  went  to  the  Central  Station 
Hotel,  where  he  had  originally  been,  but  he  was  not  successful 
there.  Then  we  went  to  Forsyth's,  and  then  to  the  Grosvenor 
Kestaurant,  where  he  got  the  note.  On  getting  the  £5  note  he 
enclosed  it  along  with  a  letter  in  an  addressed  envelope.  I 
went  with  him  to  the  Hope  Street  Post  Office.  He  got  the 
letter  registered  there,  and  the  money  was  sent  off.  I  saw 
the  letter  handed  over  and  the  registration  fee  paid  at  Hope 
Street.  After  that  we  went  to  Miss  Cranston's  tea-rooms  in 
Sauchiehall  Street,  and  then  to  Brechin,  the  butcher's  shop. 
We  parted  after  that  in  Sauchiehall  Street.  I  arranged 
to  see  him  after  he  had  taken  his  dinner.  He  dined,  as  a 
rule,  at  seven  o'clock.  I  had  tea  at  six  o'clock.  I  called  at 
his  house  a  few  minutes  before  eight.  I  was  told  by  the 
servant  girl  he  had  gone  out  half  an  hour  ago,  that  a  gentle- 
man had  called  for  him.  The  last  I  saw  of  Slater  was  a  few 
minutes  before  six  o'clock  on  24th  December.  As  early  as 
two  o'clock  on  the  Saturday  morning,  26th  December,  some 
detectives  came  to  my  house  and  asked  me  if  I  knew  Oscar 
Slater.  I  said  that  I  did.  I  never  saw  Oscar  Slater  dressed 
in  checked  trousers  or  light-coloured  spats  at  any  time  during 
November  and  December.  As  a  rule  his  clothes  were  dark, 
with  the  exception  of  the  waterproof  coat,  of  course.  I  am 
not  very  clear  as  to  the  shape  of  a  Donegal  hat.  I  have  seen 
him  wear  a  cloth  hat  with  a  circular  rim  right  round,  and  with 
a  split  in  the  centre — I  mean  the  kind  of  hat  like  the  produc- 
tion No.  44.  I  never  saw  him  with  a  cloth  hat  with  a  rim 
round  it,  and  without  the  split.  He  generally  wore  a  black 
bowler  hat.  I  have  seen  him  with  the  cloth  cap,  No.  46  of 
productions. 

Do  you  remember  being  in  Johnston's  billiard  rooms  with 
him  on  the  Wednesday  night  before  he  left,  the  23rd? — I 
cannot  say  that  I  do.  At  the  time  I  saw  him  last  on  Thursday, 
24th  December,  he  had  a  very  stubbly  moustache  which  was 
quite  noticeable.  I  am  aware  that  Slater,  before  he  left,  had 
lost  money  at  the  Sloper  Club.  I  knew  that  because  I  had  seen 
him  lose  money  at  the  club.  I  did  not,  in  point  of  fact,  know 
that  Slater  was  going  off  on  Friday,  the  25th.  I  understood 
that  he  was  going  to  America  soon,  but  I  did  not  know  the 
precise  date.  I  did  not  know  that  he  was  making  inquiry 
186 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

at  shipping  offices  during  the  week  of  his  departure.  I  under-  H.  Cameron 
stood  that  he  went  to  the  Cunard  office  to  make  inquiry  as 
regards  the  sailings  of  the  Cunard  Line  to  America.  That 
was  upon  Thursday,  the  24th.  He  did  not  communicate  to 
me  any  definite  plan  at  that  time  as  to  when  he  was  leaving, 
further  than  he  said,  when  he  came  out  of  the  Cunard  office, 
that  perhaps  the  "  Campania,"  sailing  on  Saturday  week,  might 
suit  him. 

You  saw  Slater  two  or  three  times  between  the  day  of  the 
murder,  21st  December,  and  25th  December  ;  did  it  occur  to  you 
that  there  was  anything  in  his  demeanour,  his  manner,  or  his 
habits  different  from  usual? — No,  there  was  nothing. 

Did  he  show  any  anxiety  at  all  to  secrete  himself  or  to  hide 
himself? — Not  that  I  know  of.  In  fact,  it  was  the  opposite. 

You  were  round  about  in  public  places  with  him  during  the 
afternoon,  as  you  have  mentioned? — Yes,  on  the  Thursday 
afternoon. 

And  you  saw  nothing  that  would  lead  you  to  suppose  that 
he  was  a  fugitive  from  justice? — No. 

Cross-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — Under  what  different 
names  did  you  know  the  prisoner? — Anderson  and  Oscar  Slater. 

Adolf  Anderson  ? — I  never  heard  of  the  Adolf ;  any  indication 
was  "  A.  Anderson  "  on  a  card  that  I  always  saw. 

When  you  first  knew  him  in  1901  what  was  the  name  he 
went  by? — Oscar  Slater. 

What  was  he? — I  was  not  aware  when  I  met  him  what  he  was. 

After  you  became  acquainted  with  him  did  you  become  aware 
what  he  was? — He  was  a  gambler. 

Anything  more? — Yes,  I  had  it  that  the  man,  like  a  great 
number  of  those  who  came  to  Glasgow,  lived  on  the  proceeds 
of  women. 

Did  you  not  know  from  the  first  that  his  mode  of  living  was 
on  the  proceeds  of  women's  prostitution? — I  cannot  say  that 
I  knew  from  the  first ;  I  had  no  knowledge  of  the  people. 

When  did  you  come  to  know  that? — When  we  came  to  have 
sufficient  knowledge  to  know  the  people  that  came  about  the 
locality  the  story  went  round. 

When  was  that? — Some  time  after  they  arrived  in  Glasgow. 

Can  you  fix  the  year? — The  year  of  the  Glasgow  Exhibition, 
1901.  ' 

Where  did  he  live? — I  do  not  know. 

Had  he  any  place  of  abode  in  Glasgow  that  you  knew  of? — 
I  did  not  know  of  his  address  in  Glasgow  at  that  time. 

For  how  long  did  you  know  him  in  1901  without  knowing 
whether  he  had  any  address  or  not? — I  knew  him  all  the  time 
he  was  there  till  he  left  without  knowing  his  address. 

Did  you  ever  ask  him  where  he  lived? — I  did  not. 

What  part  of  the  city  did  you  and  he  frequent,  or  did  h« 

187 


Oscar  Slater. 

H.  Cameron  frequent? — We  did  not  at  that  time  frequent  any  part  of  the 
city  together. 

Where  did  you  meet  him? — In  the  Crown  Hall  billiard  rooms 
in  Sauchiehall  Street. 

Is  that  the  only  place  you  met  him  then  ? — At  that  time,  yes. 

Later  on  did  you  meet  him  in  a  club  in  Grant  Street? — Yes. 

How  far  is  Grant  Street  from  Queen's  Terrace? — It  is  a 
street  further  along ;  I  should  say  about  70  yards,  to  the  west. 

Did  you  meet  him  there  often  ? — Yes. 

Was  that  a  gambling  club? — Yes. 

In  what  year  was  it  that  you  met  him  often  in  the  Grant 
Street  gambling  club? — As  near  as  I  can  remember,  the  latter 
part  of  the  year  of  the  Glasgow  Exhibition. 

How  long  did  he  remain  in  Glasgow  at  that  time? — I  cannot 
be  definite  as  regards  that. 

A  year? — I  have  stated  about  nine  months,  I  think,  but  I 
am  not  very  sanguine  about  it. 

Where  did  he  go  to  then? — I  do  not  know. 

Did  he  never  tell  you? — No. 

Did  he  just  disappear,  as  far  as  you  were  concerned? — As 
far  as  I  was  concerned,  yes. 

Did  you  know  of  him  being  a  dealer  in  diamonds  and  precious 
stones? — I  cannot  say  that  I  have  known  him  to  be  a  dealer 
in  diamonds  and  precious  stones. 

Is  that  news  to  you  now? — No,  it  is  not  exactly  news,  because 
I  know  that  he,  along  with  many  others,  all  did  in  that  way, 
buying  and  selling,  but  whether  it  embraced  the  words 
"  diamond  merchant "  I  would  not  say ;  they  all  more  or  less 
deal  in  jewellery. 

When  he  disappeared,  had  you  no  communication  with  him? 
— None  whatever. 

Did  you  never  hear  of  him  being  in  Soho  Square,  London, 
dealing  in  diamonds  and  precious  stones? — No. 

When  did  he  reappear? — I  am  not  definite  as  regards  that 
either. 

Was  it  years  or  months  afterwards? — Oh,  it  was  some  years, 
I  think. 

Where? — In  Glasgow. 

What  part  of  Glasgow? — In  Sauchiehall  Street. 

What  part  of  Sauchiehall  Street?— Hope  Street. 

Was  it  a  house? — No. 

You  mean,  you  met  him  casually  on  the  street  there? — I 
cannot  say  where  I  met  him. 

Why  did  you  mention  Hope  Street ;  what  happened  in  Hope 
Street? — That  is  the  street  adjacent  to  the  Crown  Hall  billiard 
rooms,  which  we,  as  a  rule,  frequent. 

Was  it  again  in  the  Crown  Hall  billiard  rooms  that  you  saw 
him  when  he  reappeared  in  Glasgow? — I  cannot  say  that. 
1 88 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Can   you   recollect  any   place   that   you    met  him    after  he  H.  Cameron 
reappeared  in  Glasgow? — No,  I  cannot  say  that  I  can. 

Did  you  see  him  at  all  at  the  time  that  he  reappeared  1 — Yes. 
You  could  not  fix  the  date  of  his  second  appearance? — No. 
Can  you  not  recollect  any  place  you  met  him  in  Glasgow 
that  second  time  he  reappeared? — No,  I  cannot  say  that  I  can. 
You    just    remember    that   he    was    in    Glasgow? — Yes;     I 
remember  that  he  was  in  Glasgow. 
And  you  saw  him? — Yes. 

Under  what  name  was  he  going  then? — Oscar  Slater,  as  far 
as  I  remember. 

How  long  was  he  in  Glasgow  at  that  time? — I  cannot  say. 
And  you  tell  us  that  you  cannot  remember  a  single  place 
you  met  him  in  Glasgow  during  his  second  visit;  do  you  really 
say  that? — Well,  I  may  have  met  him   in   the  Crown   Halls, 
but  that  is  not  definite,  so  that  I  cannot  definitely  state  any 
particular  place  that  I  met  him  on  his  second  visit  to  Glasgow. 
Did  you  meet  him  in  any  of  the  gambling  clubs  on  his  second 
visit  to  Glasgow? — I  do  not  know  that  any  of  the  clubs  were 
in  existence  at  that  time  during  his  second  visit  to  Glasgow. 

Had  the  Grant  Street  Club  been  suppressed  or  not? — Yes; 
it  only  lasted  the  one  year  or  part  of  a  year. 

And  was  there  not  another  club  where  you  met  him  the  first 
time  in  1901?— The  West  End  Club. 

Was  it  suppressed  also? — Yes;  it  was  suppressed  also. 
Then,    after  his   second  visit,    when   you  do   not  remember 
where  you  met  him,  did  he  disappear  again? — Yes. 

Did  he  tell  you  when  he  was  going  away,  or  did  he  just 
vanish? — I  do  not  remember  him  having  stated  anything  about 
when  he  was  going  or  where. 

How  long  did  he  disappear  for  the  second  time? — Till 
November,  1908. 

And  then  did  you  meet  him  casually  on  the  street? — Yes. 
Do    you    know   under    what   name    he   was   going    then? — 
Yes. 

What  was  it? — A.  Anderson. 

Did  he  tell  you  that  himself? — He  gave  me  his  card. 
Did  he  tell  you  why  he  had  taken  the  name  A.  Anderson 
at  this  time? — He  did  not. 
Did  you  ask  him? — I  did  not. 

Did  you  not  think  it  curious  that  he  should  have  changed 
his  name  the  third  time  he  came  to  Glasgow  ? — Yes. 

And  when  you  thought  so,  did  you  not  ask  him  what  reason 
he  had  for  taking  a  different  name? — No. 

Does  it  not  seem  curious  to  you  now  that  you  did  not  inquire 
of  him? — I  meet  many  men  in  that  kind  of  way.  I  never  was 
sufficiently  curious  to  ask  the  man  why  he  had  changed  his 
name. 

189 


Oscar  Slater. 

H.  Cameron      But  amongst  yourselves,  in  the  clubs,  is  he  still  known  by 
the  name  of  Oscar  Slater? — Yes. 

Did  you  know  his  German  name;  did  you  ever  hear  it? — I 
did  not. 

Did  you  know  that  he  had  another  name? — I  was  always 
under  the  impression  that  Oscar  Slater  was  his  name. 

Now,  did  you  meet  him  very  often  at  nights  during  the 
second  half  of  November  and  the  first  three  weeks  of  December 
in  the  Sloper  Club? — Yes. 

In  the  Motor  Club  also? — Yes. 

Were  these  both  clubs  very  much  of  the  same  kind  as  the 
Grant  Street  Club  and  the  West  End  Club? — Very  much. 

And  had  they  been  started  comparatively  recently? — Both 
clubs — well,  the  one  is  a  transfer  from  another. 

Did  he  still  continue  to  gamble  at  both  the  clubs? — Not  so 
much  in  the  Motor  as  in  the  Sloper  Club. 

Was  he  practically  at  the  Sloper  Club  every  night  gambling 
during  the  latter  end  of  November  and  the  beginning  of 
December? — No,  not  every  night. 

But  almost  every  night? — I  should  not  say  that;  not  every 
night. 

Give  us  an  idea  how  many  nights  a  week? — Three  or  four. 

And  sometimes  more,  I  suppose? — Three  or  four. 

Do  you  know  where  he  went  on  the  other  nights? — I  do  not 
know,  I  am  sure. 

Do  you  know  what  he  did  during  the  day? — As  far  as  I 
understand,  he  was  not  much  out  until  mid-day. 

And  from  mid-day  onwards  do  you  know  what  he  did? — 
Sometimes  he  was  along  with  me. 

Where? — At  the  skating  rink  in  Victoria  Road,  Glasgow. 

In  the  afternoons? — Yes. 

And  at  other  times? — Walking  round  the  town. 

So  far  as  you  know,  had  he  any  occupation? — Not  that  I 
know. 

Did  you  know  that  he  was  in  the  way  of  pawning  jewels? — 
I  was  conversant  with  the  fact  of  anything  having  been  pawned, 
such  as  the  brooch  and  the  pin,  and  some  other  things,  on 
account  of  him  being  short  of  money. 

Did  you  know  in  the  middle  of  November  that  he  was  short 
of  money  and  went  with  a  diamond  ring  to  a  man  called 
Jackson,  South  Portland  Street? — No;  I  was  not  conversant 
with  that  fact. 

How  did  you  come  to  know  that  he  was  short  of  money? — 
I  was  in  a  position  to  lend  him  some. 

Did  you? — I  did. 

When? — I  cannot  state  the  date. 

Was  it  November  or  December? — I  could  not  be  certain. 

How  much? — £4. 
190 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Did  he  repay  it? — He  did.  H.  Cameron 

When  was  that? — In  December,  I  think. 

You  said  that  he  lost  money  at  gambling;  do  you  know  how 
much  he  had  lost  just  before  he  went  away? — I  could  not  say. 

Did  he  tell  you  what  money  he  had — what  he  possessed? — 
No,  he  did  not. 

Did  you  know  that  he  had  money  at  his  credit  in  the 
Savings  Bank? — I  did  not. 

Did  you  know  that  he  had  pawned  jewels  with  Liddell? — 
Yes. 

Did  he  tell  you  that? — Yes. 

Did  you  know  where  he  got  the  jewels  ? — I  do  not. 

Do  you  know  what  he  got  for  them  at  the  pawnshop? — Yes. 

Did  you  know  that  he  had  obtained  £30  upon  a  brooch? — 
Yes. 

And  did  you  know  that  on  the  21st  of  December  he  raised 
other  £30  upon  it? — I  got  to  know  that  afterwards. 

From  whom? — From  himself. 

Now,  why  was  it  that  he  wanted  to  sell  the  pawn  ticket 
to  you,  or  you  to  get  a  purchaser  for  the  pawn  ticket? — 
Because  it  would  very  likely  realise  money. 

What  did  he  want  money  for  at  that  time? — As  far  as  I 
understand,  he  did  not  wish  to  redeem  the  pledge  when  he 
took  the  extra  £30  on  it,  and  he  wanted  to  take  any  little 
value  out  of  the  ticket  that  remained  then. 

Did  he  tell  you  why  he  was  eager  to  get  the  balance  of  value 
out?— No. 

Was  he  so  anxious  for  the  money  that  he  trusted  you  with 
the  pawn  ticket  to  try  and  find  a  purchaser? — Well,  I  do  not 
know.  I  trusted  him  before. 

Did  he  trust  you  this  time? — Yes,  with  the  pawn  ticket. 

And  was  he  very  anxious  that  you  would  find  a  purchaser  ? — 
Yes. 

And  did  you  do  your  best  for  him  ? — I  applied  at  two  different 
places. 

And  failed? — And  failed. 

By  the  COURT — How  much  was  he  willing  to  take;  did  he 
give  you  a  limit? — I  think  he  mentioned  £10. 

Cross-examination  continued — Did  he  tell  you  at  that  time 
what  he  wanted  the  money  for? — He  did  not. 

Did  he  tell  you  at  that  time  that  he  could  get  command 
of  about  £80  from  the  bank? — No. 

Now,  you  said  that  he  told  you  about  a  fortnight  before 
the  murder  that  he  was  going  to  America? — Yes. 

Did  he  tell  you  why? — On  account  of  a  letter  that  he  had 
got  from  a  friend. 

Did  he  show  you  the  letter? — Yes. 

Who  was  the  friend? — I  do  not  know;  I  did  not  read  the 
signature. 

191 


Oscar   Slater. 

H.  Cameron      Where  did  the  letter  come  from  ? — I   understand  from  San 
Francisco. 

Who  was  the  friend  in  San  Francisco? — I  cannot  tell  you. 
What  did  he  want  him  to  come  over  to  San  Francisco  for? 
— Business  was  pretty  fair;   very  good,  it  stated,  I  think   in 
the  letter. 

By  the  COURT — What  language  was  it  in? — In  the  English 
language. 

Cross-examination  continued — I  thought  you  told  us  that 
the  man  had  no  business ;  I  thought  you  said  that  the  man 
had  no  calling? — Not  as  far  asi  I  knew. 

Then  what  did  you  understand  by  a  letter  from  San 
Francisco  bidding  him  go  there  because  business  was  good? — 
Well,  I  understood  that  Slater  and  this  man  had  had  a  club  in 
conjunction  before,  and  he  wanted  him  to  come  out  and  join 
him  again. 

To  run  a  club? — Yes. 

Can  you  not  recollect  anything  more  about  the  letter  about 
which'  you  have  just  told  us? — No,  I  cannot. 

Why  did  he  not  go? — I  do  not  know. 

Did  he  tell  you  why  he  did  not  go? — No,  he  did  not,  but 
his  intentions  were  sincere ;  he  intended  to  go  as  soon  aa 
possible. 

Did  he  ever  tell  you  of  a  friend  Jacobs  in  New  York? — No. 

Do  you  know  anything  about  his  dealing  in  emeralds? — No. 

Did  you  never  hear  of  that? — No. 

Did  you  ever  hear  of  him  going  to  Chicago? — No. 

Did  you  know  when  he  left  on  the  25th  of  December  that 
his  destination  was  Chicago? — I  did  not. 

Were  you  surprised  to  hear  that? — Yes. 

Did  he  ever  tell  you  that  he  meant  to  go  to  Queensland? — 
No. 

Did  you  never  hear  of  that? — No. 

Did  he  ever  mention  to  you  that  he  intended  to  go  to  Monte 
Carlo?— Yes. 

When? — I  think  it  was  prior  to  this  letter  arriving. 

That  would  be  early  in  December? — Yes,  I  believe  it  would. 

By  the  COURT — Had  he  been  there  before? — Yes,  he  had 
been  at  Monte  Carlo  before. 

Cross-examination  continued — Did  he  tell  you? — On  account 
of  some  friends  in  the  club  stating  he  was  going  to  Monte 
Carlo ;  that  was  before  he  produced  the  letter  from  San 
Francisco. 

Do  you  know  why  he  did  not  go  to  Monte  Carlo? — I  do 
not. 

Did   he  ever  tell  you   that  he  had   changed   his  mind? — I 
think  I  heard  him  mention  to  these  people  who  spoke  of  going 
that  he  would  not  manage  to  get  to  Monte  Carlo. 
192 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Why? — He  did  not  mention  or  state  reasons.  H.  Cameron 

Did  you  know  by  the  middle  of  December  that  he  had 
abandoned  his  intention  of  going  there? — Yes,  I  believe  so. 

Did  you  ever  hear  it  said  that  he  intended  to  go  to  London  1 
—No. 

Or  to  the  Continent  generally,  just  across  to  the  Continent ; 
you  never  heard  him  say  that? — Of  course  Monte  Carlo  is  the 
Continent. 

Did  he  ever  say  that  he  was  just  going  to  the  Continent, 
without  mentioning  any  particular  place? — No,  Monte  Carlo 
was  what  I  heard  said. 

Did  he  seem  to  think  the  day  when  you  saw  him  going  to 
the  Cunard  Line  that  the  "  Campania  "  that  sailed  a  week  later 
would  do  him  well  enough? — Yes. 

And  did  he  tell  you  that  he  was  at  the  Cunard  office  to 
inquire  about  the  sailings? — Yes,  about  the  sailings,  and  he 
got  a  pamphlet. 

Did  you  know  when  he  was  speaking  to  you  about  going  off 
to  America  or  Chicago  and  the  rest  that  he  had  taken  his 
house  for  eighteen  months  from  the  28th  November? — I  did 
not. 

Did  you  know  that  he  had  bought  a  considerable  quantity  of 
furniture  and  furnished  the  house? — On  the  hire-purchase 
system,  yes. 

He  told  you  that? — Yes.       I  knew  that. 

And  did  you  know  that  he  had  set  up  as  a  dentist? — So  the 
card  read. 

By  the  COURT — You  saw  the  card? — Yes. 

Cross-examination  continued — I  suppose  you  knew  other- 
wise; did  you  not  know  otherwise? — Well,  I  thought  I  did. 

You  have  been  up  in  his  house  at  69  St.  George's  Road? — 
I  have. 

Did  you  ever  see  any  dentist's  instruments  there? — No. 

Or  any  sign  of  any  business  being  carried  on? — No. 

You  knew  him  well ;  how  do  you  account  for  him  taking 
his  house  for  eighteen  months  and  going  away  without  men- 
tioning the  fact  to  the  landlord? — I  cannot  say. 

Does  it  strike  you  as  curious? — With  a  man  such  as  he  is, 
I  should  look  upon  nothing  with  surprise. 

Was  the  last  time  you  saw  him  24th  December? — Yes. 

And  did  you  make  an  appointment  with  him,  which  he  did 
not  keep,  immediately  after  that? — On  the  24th  I  had  to  see 
him  in  his  own  house,  and  I  was  told  he  had  gone  out. 

Did  you  call  at  a  certain  time  to  see  him,  and  when  you 
went  were  you  not  told  that  he  was  out? — Yes. 

And  you  never  saw  him  afterwards? — I  did  not. 

And  you  had  no  idea  that  he  was  going  off  the  following 
night? — None  whatever. 

0  193 


Oscar  Slater. 

H.  Cameron      He  did  not  tell  you  that? — No. 

Had  he  not  a  large  quantity  of  clothes? — Yes. 

He  had  eight  or  nine  different  packages  full  of  clothes? — 
He  had  eight  or  nine  different  suits  of  clothes  and  so  many 
coats ;  I  do  not  know  about  packages. 

Did  you  know  that  he  shaved  hia  moustache  off  in  the 
middle  of  December? — Yes. 

Did  you  remark  it  at  the  time? — Oh,  yes. 

Did  he  tell  you  why? — He  mentioned  to  me  that  it  was 
getting  a  bit  scraggy. 

Did  you  notice  there  was  a  few  days'  growth  the  last  time 
you  saw  him? — Yes. 

Did  he  write  you  a  letter  from  New  York? — Yes. 

Were  you  his  most  intimate  friend  in  Glasgow? — I  question 
that  very  much. 

Do  you  know  anybody  that  was  more  intimate  with  him 
than  you  were? — Well,  there  were  some  of  his  own  country- 
men ;  I  don't  know  who  they  were. 

(Shown  No.  53  of  productions.) — Was  that  the  letter  which 
he  sent? — That  is  the  letter. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURB — My  friend  says  he  had  "  a 
few  days'  growth  "  of  the  moustache  the  last  time  you  saw 
him;  do  you  know  when  he  was  shaved? — I  do  not  exactly 
know  the  date. 

Well,  the  barber  has  told  us  that  he  shaved  it  a  fortnight 
before  the  21st ;  was  the  moustache  perfectly  observable  the 
last  time  you  saw  him  ? — Yes. 

I  mean,  a  feature  in  his  face? — Yes. 

Would  it  be  incorrect  to  describe  it  as  a  few  days'  growth? 
— Rather  more  than  a  few  days'  growth  I  should  say. 

And  he  has  a  very  black  moustache? — Very  dark. 

You  never  would  have  taken  him  for  a  clean-shaven  man 
when  you  saw  him  last? — No. 

As  regards  dentist,  have  you  any  notion  of  the  purpose  for 
which  Slater,  and  I  suppose  other  people,  take  a  designation 
of  that  kind? — To  have  a  vocation  of  some  kind,  if  they  are 
required  to  state  what  their  business  is. 

He  has  not  pretended  to  be  a  dentist  at  any  time  to  vou? — 
No. 

And  you  never  knew  him  touching  anybody's  teeth? — No. 

So  far  as  you  knew  him,  was  he  a  man  who  lived  like  the 
rest  of  the  people  in  these  clubs,  mainly  by  backing  horses 
in  the  season  or  gambling  at  clubs? — Or  gambling  at  clubs. 

And  that  was  the  ordinary  life  of  a  lot  of  them  who  were 
there? — Yes,  I  may  say  that. 

Now,  did  you  hear  him  complain  over  and  over  again  of 
what  he  called  business  being  bad  in  Glasgow? — Yes,  I  have 
heard  him  state  that. 
194 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

And  you  are  quite  familiar  with  the  idea  that  he  was  on  H.  Cameron 
the  move,  so  to  speak,   and  was  going  away? — He  spoke  of 
going  to  America  certainly,  but  I  did  not  expect  that  he  would 
go  so  soon  as  he  did. 

You  thought  it  was  to  be  the  "  Campania,"  instead  of  which 
it  was  the  "  Lusitania,"  a  week  earlier? — Yes. 

Did  you  ever  hear  him  saying  that  he  would  go  when  he 
got  some  one  to  take  over  his  flat? — I  know  that  he  was 
negotiating  for  his  flat  being  taken  over,  because  I  came  in 
contact  with  a  man  who  came  up  for  a  negotiation  of  that 
kind  and  saw  him  in  Slater's  apartments. 

Tell  me  who  that  was? — A  man  called  Aumann,  as  far  as  I 
understand. 

Was  Aumann  up  seeing  Slater's  flat? — Yes. 

With  a  view  to  taking  it  over? — Yes. 

Can  you  tell  me  how  long  that  was  before  Slater  left? — 
Some  considerable  time ;  I  cannot  tell  you  just  exactly  how 
long. 

Do  you  know  anything  at  all  about  Mrs.  Freedman,  who 
ultimately  came  into  the  flat  after  Slater  left? — No. 

In  order  to  have  lifted  the  brooch  which  had  been  deposited, 
he  would  have  had  to  pay  £60  down? — Considerably  more — 
£61  odds  he  would  have  required  to  pay  for  the  brooch. 

And  having  raised  as  much  money  as  he  could  by  advances 
on  the  brooch  he  was  then  willing  to  sell  any  odd  value  it 
might  have  to  a  purchaser? — He  was  ;  the  ticket  was  a  valuable 
asset — a  brooch  pawned  for  £60. 

You  said  he  intended  to  go  abroad,  you  thought  to  San 
Francisco  ? — Yes. 

That  was  your  understanding? — Yes. 

And  it  is  only  a  question  whether  it  was  sooner  or  later? — 
Exactly  so. 

By  the  COURT — Do  you  know  whether  Slater  had  any  training 
as  a  dentist  ? — I  do  not  know  whether  he  may  have  had  before 
he  came  to  this  country  or  not,  but  not  since  I  knew  him 
here. 

And  you  think  he  merely  took  that  name  just  to  give  an 
appearance  of  having  an  occupation? — Yes. 

Do  you  know  that  in  his  declaration  he  calls  himself  a 
dentist? — T  did  not  know. 

At  the  time,  on  21st  December,  was  he  well  off  or  hard  up? 
— Well,  you  see,  there  were  £30  got  at  mid-day  on  the  21st, 
so  that  you  would  not  say  that  a  man  in  possession  of  £30  was 
hard  up. 

You  told  us  he  had  no  occupation,  that  he  lost  money  at 
gambling,  and  that  he  was  anxious  to  sell  the  pawn  ticket; 
how  did  he  live,  if  he  had  no  occupation  and  had  lost  money ; 
what  was  he  living  on? — On  the  gambling. 

195 


Oscar  Slater. 

H.  Cameron  But  he  had  lost  in  gambling,  you  told  us  1 — Well,  not  all ; 
he  was  still  in  possession  of  jewellery  which  he  had  pawned, 
and  up  till  then  he  got  £30  more,  and  what  he  still  holds, 
and  I  believe  he  had  other  things  that  he  could  have  realised 
money  on,  had  he  not  gone  away,  so  that  he  was  not  absolutely 
penniless. 

You  have  told  us  that  he  called  himself  a  dentist  so  as  to 
have  an  occupation ;  he  had  an  occupation  as  a  dealer  in 
diamonds  and  precious  stones ;  you  have  seen  his  card  with 
that  on  it? — Yes. 

Having  an  occupation  as  a  dealer  in  diamonds  and  precious 
stones,  why  did  he  require  to  call  himself  a  dentist,  or  can 
you  tell? — I  have  no  explanation  for  that. 

Where  was  he  on  Monday,  21st  December? — That  I  have 
no  conception  of. 

Where  was  he  on  Sunday,  the  20th  of  December? — I  could 
not  say. 

Was  it  on  the  19th,  the  Saturday,  that  you  saw  him? — I 
am  not  certain  about  that — either  the  Friday  or  the  Saturday ; 
it  was  the  week-end  prior  to  the  21st,  some  time  about  the 
week-end  I  saw  him. 

He  was  not  with  you  on  Monday,  21st  December,  at  all? — 
No. 

He  refers  in  his  letter  to  you  to  his  friends  ;  in  his  letter 
to  you  he  winds  up  by  saying,  "  My  best  regards  to  you  and 
all  my  friends  "  ? — Yes. 

Will  you  name  them? — I  take  it  that  it  was  members  of  the 
club  that  had  been  in  the  habit  of  playing  with  him,  a  matter 
of  seven  or  eight  of  us  altogether  ;  we  played  at  poker,  and  I 
think  that  his  reference  to  "  friends  "  there  meant  those  boys 
that  played  at  cards,  at  poker,  in  the  club,  because  outside 
of  that  I  know  of  no  others. 

He  says  in  his  letter  to  you,  "  I  will  prove  with  five  people 
where  I  have  been  when  the  murder  was  committed  " ;  did 
you  understand  these  were  among  his  friends? — No,  I  did  not — 
not  the  friends  that  I  refer  to,  the  club  friends. 

And  you  do  not  know  who  these  people  are? — No. 

I  did  not  catch  the  name  of  the  person  to  whose  care  the  San 
Francisco  address  was  to  be  sent,  544  Broadway,  San 
Francisco ;  what  was  the  name? — Csesar  Cafe. 

Have  you  heard  him  speak  in  any  other  language  besides 
English  in  the  club  or  elsewhere? — No. 

Had  he  associates  who  were  not  Scotch  or  English? — Yes. 

Germans  ? — Yes. 

How  much  have  you  known  him  lose  at  the  Sloper  or  the 
Motor  or  the  Mascot  Clubs  on  any  one  occasion? — From  £15 
to  £20 ;  the  bulk  of  his  money  was  lost  at  clubs  before  he  was 
a  member  of  the  Sloper  Club- — a  club  that  I  did  not  frequent 
at  all,  a  club  in  Glasgow. 

196 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

You  said  in  reference  to  Monte  Carlo  that  there  were  people  H.  Cameron 
in  the  club  who  were  going  there? — Yes. 

Who  were  these? — Mr.  Dewar  and  Mr.  Dillon  and  a  Mr. 
Maclean. 

Are  they  still  in  Glasgow? — Yes. 

And  were  those  friends  of  his ;  did  he  go  about  with  them  7 — 
At  the  club. 

And  outside? — I  will  not  say  outside. 

Who  besides  you  did  he  go  about  with  outside? — German 
friends  of  his  own. 

Can  you  name  any  of  them? — I  did  not  come  into  contact 
with  these  people  at  all — his  German  friends,  but  still  I  know 
that  he  had  them. 

Can  you  name  any  of  them? — Rattman,  Aumann,  and  Max 
Brooks. 

Do  you  recollect  any  others  ? — That  is  all  I  know  of. 

MAX  RATTMAN,  examined  by  Mr.  M'CLTJBB — I  was  cited  here  Max  Rattman 
for  the  Crown,  but  I  was  not  called.  I  know  Oscar  Slater,  and 
have  known  him  for  the  last  six  years.  He  and  I  are  fellow- 
countrymen.  I  was  in  Glasgow  when  he  came  to  it.  I 
arrived  one  train  later  than  he  did  about  29th  October,  1908. 
I  met  him  frequently  between  that  date  and  the  25th  of 
December,  when  he  left;  I  met  him  nearly  every  day.  I  met 
him  generally  in  Gall's  public-house  in  the  Cowcaddens,  and 
I  met  him  at  various  clubs  in  the  evening,  sometimes  in  the 
Mascot  Club,  in  Virginia  Street,  and  sometimes  in  the  Motor 
Club,  in  India  Street,  and  I  met  him  in  Johnston's  billiard 
saloon,  opposite  the  Pavilion,  in  Renfield  Street.  I  heard  of 
Slater's  intention  to  leave  this  country.  As  soon  as  he 
arrived  in  Glasgow  he  expected  a  letter  from  San  Francisco 
or  New  York  from  a  friend,  and  as  soon  as  he  received  an 
answer  he  was  willing  to  leave.  About  ten  days  before  he 
left  I  saw  a  letter  that  came  to  him  from  San  Francisco.  It 
was  sent  to  him  by  a  friend  of  his,  I  believe,  but  I  do  not 
know  the  name,  but  it  was  signed  by  some  one. 

Would  you  recognise  the  name — was  it  anything  like 
Devoto? — I  am  not  positive  about  that.  I  read  the  letter. 
He  said  something  about  the  reason  for  his  stopping  in  this 
country,  as  he  expected  some  one  from  London  to  take  the 
house,  and  he  could  not  leave  till  that  party  arrived.  He 
was  intending  to  go  out  in  response  to  that  letter  as  soon  as  he 
could  arrange  for  the  house  being  taken  over.  He  told  me 
that  at  the  time  he  showed  me  the  letter.  On  21st  December 
I  was  with  Slater  at  half-past  four  in  Gall's  public-house. 
Slater  came  in,  and  he  asked  me  to  come  over  with  him  to  the 
bar,  and  he  spoke  to  me  about  a  pawn  ticket  which  he  would 
sell  me  for  £4.  He  said  that  he  had  a  brooch  which  was 

197 


Oscar  Slater. 

Max  Rattman  pawned  for  <£60  in  Sauchiehall  Street,  corner  of  Buchanan 
Street,  in  Mr.  Liddell's  pawnbroking  office.  I  had  seen  the 
brooch  before;  I  have  seen  his  wife  wearing  it.  It  was  a  half- 
moon  with  a  row  of  diamonds.  I  refused  to  buy  it  myself,  and 
I  asked  Mr.  Aumann,  with  whom  I  had  dealings  at  the  time, 
whether  he  was  willing  to  buy  it.  I  said  that  it  was  pawned 
at  the  corner  of  Sauchiehall  Street.  Mr.  Aumann  said  that 
it  was  no  use,  as  the  pawnbrokers  had  already  advanced  too 
much  on  it,  and  he  would  not  have  any  profit,  because  he 
would  have  to  repay  £60.  It  was  I  who  spoke  to  Mr. 
Aumann  on  Slater's  behalf  in  Gall's  public-house.  Slater  then 
left,  and  soon  after  Mr.  Aumann  and  another  person,  whom  I 
did  not  know,  left,  and  had  a  game  of  billiards  in  Johnston's 
billiard  room.  We  stopped  playing  a  little  later  than  half-past 
six.  I  saw  Slater  that  evening  before  I  left  the  billiard  room. 
He  came  into  the  billiard  room  about  twenty  minutes  past  six, 
and  I  asked  him  whether  he  had  sold  the  ticket  or  not,  and  he 
said  no. 

I  find  a  telegram  was  sent  by  Slater  from  the  Central  Station 
at  twelve  minutes  past  six  that  night ;  would  it  take  him  about 
six  or  seven  minutes  to  go  from  the  Central  Station  up  to  the 
billiard  room? — Not  much  more. 

Does  that  support  your  view  that  it  was  about  twenty 
minutes  past  six  when  he  came  to  the  billiard  room  1 — I  think  it 
was  twenty  minutes  past,  because  soon  after  he  left  we  finished 
off  playing,  and  he  was  only  there  for  about  ten  minutes.  I 
am  speaking  generally,  because  I  was  not  looking  at  my 
watch  at  the  time.  Slater  left  Johnston's  billiard  room  on 
the  night  of  the  21st  about  half-past  six.  I  am  sure  about 
that.  He  said  that  he  was  going  home  for  dinner,  and  he 
asked  me  where  I  was  going.  I  said,  "  Very  likely  to  a  music 
hall,"  and  he  said  that  he  would  see  me  there,  if  possible. 
I  think  I  said  that  I  was  going  to  the  Palace,  and  he  said, 
"  Very  likely  I  will  come  and  see  you."  I  knew  that  he  dined 
about  seven  o'clock  every  night.  I  did  not  go  to  the  Palace 
Music  Hall.  I  saw  some  one  off  to  Germany  by  the  9.30  train 
from  St.  Enoch  Station.  I  got  home  about  twelve  o'clock. 
That  was  on  the  Monday,  and  I  believe  it  was  the  Wednesday 
night  when  I  next  saw  Slater  after  ten  o'clock  in  Johnston's 
billiard  room.  It  was  after  ten  or  eleven,  because  I  had  been 
at  a  music  hall,  and  I  would  get  to  Johnston's  billiard  room 
about  a  quarter  to  eleven.  He  was  sitting  there  with  Mr. 
Cameron,  the  last  witness.  I  think  that  would  be  about  eleven 
o'clock  at  night.  He  was  sitting  on  a  bench  near  the  door ; 
I  was  playing  with  Mr.  Aumann,  and  he  was  watching  us. 
Aumann  and  I  had  a  game  at  a  table  opposite  him.  We  had  only 
100  up,  and  we  left  about  twenty  minutes  past  eleven  o'clock. 
Slater,  Cameron,  and  I  left  together.  Cameron  left  us  at  the 
198 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

corner  of  Cambridge  Street  and  Sauchiehall  Street,  and  I  went  Max  Rattman 

on  with  Slater  as  far  as  his  place  in  St.   George's  Road.     I 

never  saw  Slater  wearing  light,  checked  trousers  of  any  kind. 

I  have   seen  him   wearing  brown   boots   sometimes,   but   very 

seldom — once  or  twice.        I  never  saw  him  with   a   Donegal 

cap  on,  but  I  have  seen  him  with  a  cap  with  the  sides  up.       I 

never    saw    him   with    light-coloured    gaiters.        His    ordinary 

clothes  were  generally  dark  or  brown.       I  was  aware  of  his 

desire  to  get  some  one  to  take  over  his  flat  before  leaving.       I 

received  a  letter  from  him  from  Liverpool.       It  was  a  letter 

in  German,  and  is  on  page  16  of  the  print.       I  translated  it. 

(Shown  production  No.  26.)     That  is  the  letter  I  received  from 

him.        He   says  there   <:  that  Freedman's   girl  took   over  my 

flat."      I  see  that  the  translation  says,  "  Dear  Max,  surprisingly 

leaving  Glasgow." 

Does  that  mean  unexpectedly? — I  did  not  translate  it  like 
that.  I  would  translate  it,  "  Having  left  Glasgow  suddenly, 
I  am  very  sorry  I  was  not  able  to  say  good-bye."  I  was 
aware  that  he  was  negotiating  with  Freedman.  He  expected  a 
letter  every  day,  but  the  letter  never  came,  and  when  Mrs. 
Freedman  came  she  was  sitting  in  the  flat  waiting  for  him.  I 
know  that  he  was  expecting  Mrs.  Freedman  to  come  down. 
That  letter  was  the  last  that  I  heard  of  him  before  this  affair. 
I  am  perfectly  certain  that  I  can  speak  to  the  fact  that  the 
accused  was  in  my  company  till  at  least  6.30  on  the  night  of  the 
21st.  So  far  as  my  recollection  goes,  we  left  off  playing  at 
6.35,  and  Slater  left  before  we  stopped  playing  billiards.  I 
know  that  he  was  in  the  billiard  room  for  a  very  short  time — 
about  eight  or  ten  minutes.  I  believe  it  would  take  some 
seven  or  eight  minutes  to  come  from  the  Central  Station, 
where  the  telegram  was  sent  off  at  6.12,  up  to  the  billiard 
room  where  we  were.  On  the  21st  of  December  last  Slater 
hud  a  moustache  about  J  inch  long.  It  was  quite  noticeable, 
it  being  dark.  I  would  never  have  taken  him  for  a  clean- 
shaven man  that  day.  I  am  not  quite  positive  how  he  was 
dressed  when  I  saw  him  last,  but  I  know  that  he  had  a  dark 
suit  of  clothes  and  a  bowler  hat. 

Cross-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — What  are  you? — I 
am  a  commercial  traveller  representing  a  firm  in  Germany. 

Where  are  you  situated? — In  Edinburgh  now. 

Where  is  your  place  of  business? — I  have  not  got  a  place 
of  business.  I  am  a  traveller. 

Is  your  real  name  George  Schmidt? — No;  my  real  name  is 
Max  Rattman. 

Do  not  you  often  go  by  the  name  of  George  Schmidt? — No. 

Never? — I  once  did. 

When  did  you  come  to  know  the  prisoner? — About  five  or 
six  years  ago. 

199 


Oscar  Slater. 

Max  Rattman      Where? — In  several  places  in  London. 

Where? — In  the  Traveller's  Retreat,  for  instance. 

Where  else? — Denmark   Street. 

What  are  these  places? — Gambling  places  or  clubs. 

What  was  his  means  of  livelihood? — As  far  as  I  could  see 
he  was  gambling;  he  was  a  sportsman  and  making  a  book. 

How  long  did  you  know  him  at  that  time  in  London  as  a 
gambler? — I  did  not  know  him  long;  in  fact,  I  did  not  know 
him  personally  at  all  in  London.  I  got  to  know  him  better 
personally  in  Glasgow. 

What  were  you  doing  in  London  at  that  time? — I  had  a 
restaurant. 

And  he  came  about  that? — No;  he  did  not. 

When  did  you  meet  him  again  in  Glasgow? — About  29th 
October. 

What  name  was  he  going  under? — I  only  knew  him  under 
the  name  of  Slater.  Having  been  at  his  place,  I  saw  that  he 
went  under  the  name  of  Anderson. 

Why  did  he  go  under  the  name  of  Anderson? — I  could  not 
tell  you. 

Do  you  know  that  he  called  himself  a  dentist? — I  do  not 
know  anything  about  that. 

Did  you  not  know  that  he  called  himself  a  dentist? — No. 

You  never  heard  of  that  ? — No ;  I  never  heard  anything  about 
being  a  dentist. 

Did  you  ever  see  him  in  possession  of  jewels? — Yes,  I  did. 

Where? — One  day  he  offered  me  a  ring  for  sale,  but  not 
for  myself. 

When? — About  four  weeks  before  the  murder. 

Did  you  know  that  he  called  himself  a  dealer  in  diamonds 
and  precious  stones? — I  did. 

Was  that  correct? — He  was  known  to  me  as  a  dealer  in 
diamonds. 

When  ? — Lately. 

What  do  you  mean  by  lately? — Since  I  knew  him  again  in 
Glasgow. 

Who  told  you,  when  you  knew  him  in  Glasgow,  that  he 
was  a  dealer  in  diamonds? — He  often  had  some  diamonds 
about  him. 

Where  did  he  get  them? — I  do  not  know. 

You  just  knew  that  he  was  a  dealer  in  diamonds  and  precious 
stones  because  he  had  them? — Yes. 

And  he  tried  to  sell  one  to  you? — One  ring. 

Do  you  know  any  other  people  besides  yourself  to  whom  he 
tried  to  sell  them? — He  tried  to  sell  to  Mr.  Aumann. 

Any  one  else? — No. 

Do  you  know  that  he  tried  to  sell  to  another  of  your  country- 
men, Jackson? — No. 

200 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Did  you  know  about  him  pawning  a  brooch  at  the  time  he  Max  Rattman 
did  it? — I  knew  about  it. 

Where  did  it  come  from? — I  do  not  know;  I  could  not  tell. 

Are  you  sure  he  had  no  place  of  business  then  1 — Not  so  far  as 
I  know. 

Can  you  fix  the  date  when  you   saw  the  letter  from   San 
Francisco? — No.     It  was   some  time  before  the  murder. 

But  how  long  you  do  not  know? — No.     It  was  eight  or  ten 
days,  or  something  like  that. 

Who  was  the  man  who  wanted  him? — His  friend,  with  whom 
he  had  a  club  in  New  York. 

Was  it  a  man  Jacobs? — Jacobs  was  mentioned  in  the  letter, 
but  I  do  not  know  whose  was  the  signature. 

Was  it  not  a  man  Jacobs  who  dealt  in  precious  stones? — I 
do  not  know. 

Try  and  recollect? — I  could  not  tell  you. 

Did  he  say  he  woxild  join  his  friend  in  San  Francisco? — Yes. 

Did   you    know   that    when    he    went    his   destination    was 
Chicago? — No;  he  said  America. 

Did  you  ever  hear  of  that  till  to-day? — No. 

From  your  knowledge  of  his  manner  and  ways,  can  you 
account  for  him  going  to  Chicago? — No. 

You  cannot  explain  that? — No. 

Under  how  many  different  names  did  you  know  him  going? — 
Only  Slater  and  this  name  Anderson. 

Did  you  ever  hear  of  a  name  Otto  Sando? — No. 

Did  you  know  that  when  he  went  away  he  took  that  namel 
— I  read  it  in  the  paper;  that  was  all. 

Can  you  explain  that? — No. 

You  don't  know  why  he  took  that  name? — No;  I  could  not 
tell  you. 

lie  had  no  reason  to  conceal  his  going  away  from  you? — No; 
he  did  not  conceal  it  from  me. 

Why  did  he  go  away  so  quickly? — Because  the  person  was 
waiting  in  the  flat  for  him,  and  he  packed  up  his  things. 

Did  you  not  know  that  the  person  was  not  waiting  in  the  flat 
for  him  but  in  the  Alexandra  Hotel? — I  do  not  know. 

You  thought  the  lady  was  waiting? — In  the  flat. 

And  he  left  suddenly  because  she  was  to  take  possession  of 
it?  You  just  judged  that  from  the  letter? — Yes. 

From  what  passage  in  the  letter  is  it  that  you  judge  that 
the  lady  was  in  the  flat,  and  he  had  to  get  out  of  it? — "As 
soon  as  I  arrived  home  I  found  Mrs.  Freedman  waiting."  That 
is  what  he  says  in  my  letter  here. 

Is  it? — No;  I  find  it  says,  "  Freedman's  girl  has  taken  my 
flat  over." 

Did  you  think  he  had  suddenly  departed  because  Freedman's 
girl  had  appeared  on  the  scene? — I  believed  so. 

201 


Oscar   Slater. 

Max  Rattman      Who  was  Freedman's  girl? — I   do  not  know. 

Did  you  never  hear  of  her  before? — No. 

Did  he  say  in  his  letter  that  he  was  sorry  he  had  forgotten 
to  say  good-bye  to  you? — Yes. 

Did  he  say  good-bye  to  you? — No;  simply  in  the  letter. 

Did  he  say  he  forgot  to  say  good-bye  to  you  because  Freed- 
man's girl  had  appeared? — No;  it  was  because  I  did  not  go 
up.  He  asked  me  to  go  up  on  the  Friday,  and  I  did  not  go 
up.  That  is  the  reason  I  did  not  see  him  any  more. 

Did  you  know  he  was  sailing  on  the  Saturday? — I  did  not 
know — yes,  he  said  in  the  letter  that  he  was  in  Liverpool, 
and  was  leaving  for  San  Francisco,  and  his  wife  was  going  to 
Paris. 

Did  you  know  he  was  sailing  on  Saturday  before  you  got  the 
letter? — No;  I  did  not  know  until  I  got  the  letter. 

Was  the  last  time  you  saw  him  the  Thursday? — Yes;  I 
think  so. 

And  he  said  nothing  to  you  on  the  Thursday? — He  said  I 
was  to  come  up  on  Friday  and  see  him,  being  Christmas  Day. 

He  said  nothing  to  you  on  the  Thursday  about  starting  for 
Chicago  on  the  Saturday? — He  said  San  Francisco. 

Did  he  say  anything  to  you  on  Thursday  about  starting  by 
ship? — He  said  nothing  on  Thursday.  He  simply  said  I  was  to 
come  up  on  Friday,  and  nothing  else. 

By  the  COURT — There  is  nothing  about  that  in  the  letter? — 
He  says  in  the  letter  he  was  leaving  for  San  Francisco. 

Where  is  that?     I  do  not  see  that? — (No  answer.) 

Cross-examination  resumed — Would  you  be  so  kind  as  to 
translate  for  us  the  two  sentences,  the  one  about  the  French 
girl  and  the  other  about  San  Francisco  1 — It  says  here,  "  The 
French  girl  is  going  to  Paris  from  Liverpool,  and  I  go  on  to 
San  Francisco,  and  I  shall  write  you  a  letter  how  things  are." 

By  the  COURT — Where  does  he  say  he  is  going  on  Saturday? 
— He  says  it  in  the  letter. 

Read  the  portion  in  the  letter  where  he  says  he  is  going  to 
San  Francisco  on  the  Saturday? — He  says  the  girl  is  going 
to  Paris,  Saturday  morning. 

Does  he  say  Saturday  morning? — No. 

Why  did  you  say  that  if  the  letter  does  not  have  Saturday 
morning? — The  letter  was  Saturday  morning.  "  And  I  shall 
let  you  know  how  things  are  in  San  Francisco."  That  is  all. 
"  Give  my  best  respects  "  to  So-and-So.  There  is  nothing  else 
mentioned  except  that  he  will  let  me  know  from  San  Francisco. 
It  does  not  say  when  he  is  leaving  Liverpool? — Not  in  the 
letter. 

Cross-examination  resumed — Did  you  know  to-day  for  the 
first  time  that  he  was  not  on  his  way  to  San  Francisco,  but 

202 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

was  on  his  way  to  Chicago  ? — I  do  not  know  anything  about  Max  Rattman 
Chicago. 

Who  was  the  French  girl  referred  to  in  the  sentence 
immediately  before? — That  was  the  person  who  was  living 
with  him  at  the  time. 

Where? — 69  St.  George's  Road. 

Does  he  say  that  she  is  going  to  Paris  from  Liverpool? — 
Yes. 

You  knew  that  she  went  with  him  to  America? — I  did  not 
know.  I  only  read  that  after  he  was  arrested  that  the 
girl  was  in  his  company. 

You  found  that  out  afterwards,  that  that  was  not  true 
about  going  to  Paris? — Yes. 

Tell  us  what  is  the  word  that  you  have  translated  here  by 
"surprisingly"? — It  says  "absolutely  suddenly,"  literally 
translated. 

"  Absolutely  suddenly  "? — "  Having  left  Glasgow,  I  forgot  to 
say  good-bye  to  you  because  Freedman's  missus  has  taken 
my  flat  over." 

Does  he  really  say  that  he  forgot  to  say  good-bye  to  you 
because  Freedman's  girl  had  taken  over  his  flat? — Yes, 
absolutely. 

We  may  take  it  as  "  absolutely  suddenly  leaving."  Did  he 
give  any  explanation  in  his  letter  to  you  for  his  absolutely 
suddenly  leaving  Glasgow? — Because  Mrs.  Freedman  had  taken 
the  flat  over. 

That  is  the  explanation? — That  is  the  explanation  in  the 
letter. 

Who  is  the  marker  in  the  billiard  room  in  Renfield  Street? — 
A  very  old  man ;  I  do  not  know  his  name. 

Was  he  in  the  billiard  room  on  the  21st  of  December? — I 
could  not  tell  you.  I  did  not  take  any  notice. 

How  do  you  recollect  it  was  21st  December? — Because,  as 
goon  as  I  arrived  home,  I  heard  about  the  murder.  I  was  not 
living  far  from  it. 

Was  there  anybody  else  in  the  billiard  room  at  the  time? — 
I  believe  there  were  two  or  three  other  persons,  but  I  could 
not  tell  you. 

What  were  their  names-? — We  were  playing  three — Aumann, 
myself,  and  another  man  that  I  do  not  know — we  were  playing 
a  three  hundred  game  when  Slater  came  up. 

Are  you  just  giving  us  your  idea  of  the  time? — Yes. 

As  I  understand,  you  did  not  look  at  the  clock? — No,  but 
I  was  home  about  ten  minutes  to  seven,  because  I  was  wanting 
to  see  some  one  off  at  the  station. 

You  are  giving  us  your  guess  at  the  time? — Yes. 

You  say  you  reached  your  home  at  ten  minutes  to  seven? — 
JTes. 

203 


Oscar  Slater. 

Max  Rattman  Where  is  your  home? — At  that  time  it  was  at  23  Cromwell 
Street,  New  City  Road. 

Did  you  finish  your  game  after  Slater  left? — Yes,  there 
was  only  a  minute  of  difference  when  we  finished  the  game 
and  when  Slater  left. 

That  is  to  the  best  of  your  recollection? — Yes. 

You  neither  took  the  time  when  he  came  in  nor  did  you 
take  the  time  when  he  went  out? — No. 

All  you  know  is  that  you  reached  your  own  home  at  23 
Cromwell  Street  at  ten  minutes  to  seven? — Yes. 

And  you  were  in  the  billiard  room  after  Slater  left? — Yes. 

For  some  time,  which  you  have  guessed  at? — Yes. 

May  I  take  it  that  you  do  not  recollect  what  clothes  he  was 
wearing  that  night? — No,  but  I  am  certain  that  he  had  a  dark 
suit  and  patent  boots. 

Had  he  a  great  number  of  suits? — Yes. 

And  hats? — Mostly  a  bowler  hat  or  this  one  cap  that  I  have 
mentioned. 

Did  he  tell  you  why  it  was  that  he  was  so  anxious  to  get 
money  on  the  pawn  ticket  on  the  20th  or  21st? — He  said  he 
had  no  chance  at  present  to  get  it  out,  as  he  was  going  away. 

Was  he  very  anxious  to  get  the  money? — No.  He  simply 
offered  it  for  £4  or  £5 — he  said  he  would  let  me  have  it  for 
that  price,  but  he  would  not  let  others  get  it  for  that.  He 
said  he  was  to  offer  it  to  Miller  in  a  public-house  in  Cambridge 
Street. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — Suppose  Slater  was  at  the 
Central  Station  telegraph  office  at  twelve  minutes  past  six, 
can  you  give  us  any  idea  how  long  it  would  take  him  to  walk 
up  Renfield  Street  and  along  Sauchiehall  Street  to  where  he 
lived,  the  corner  of  St.  George's  Road? — About  twenty 
minutes. 

So  that  even  if  he  went  quite  straight  from  the  Central 
Station  to  St.  George's  Road  it  would  take  him  that  time? — I 
think  so. 

How  long  do  you  think  he  stopped  in  the  billiard  room? — 
About  ten  minutes. 

So  in  that  way  he  could  not  have  arrived  until  after  twenty 
minutes  to  seven? — No,  because  he  only  left  at  6.30. 

Suppose  he  left  Johnston's  billiard  room  at  6.30,  how  long 
would  it  take  him  to  walk  at  an  ordinary  pace? — About  twenty 
minutes. 

Johnston's  billiard  room  down  to  the  Central  Station,  down 
Renfield  Street,  is  a  considerable  distance? — I  think  I  could 
do  it  in  about  eight  minutes.  Of  course,  Slater  was  a  very 
fast  walker. 

You  have  no  manner  of  doubt  at  all  that  it  was  on  21st 
204 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

December  that  you  saw  him  there  up  till  6.30? — I  am  positive  Max  Rattman 
about  that. 

By  the  COURT — What  country  was  it  that  you  and  Slater 
came  from? — From  England. 

You  said  you  were  a  fellow-countryman  of  his? — Yes, 
German  by  birth. 

Is  Slater  a  German  by  birth? — I  am  not  positive.  I  do  not 
know  where  he  comes  from  or  where  he  was  born. 

You  said  you  were  a  fellow-countryman  of  his? — He  told 
me  he  was  a  German. 

Do  you  know  what  he  was  trained  as? — No. 

Do  you  know  whether  he  was  ever  trained  to  any  occupation  t 
—No. 

I  notice  in  the  letter  that  was  written  to  you  there  is  a 
reference  to  Carl  Kunstler,  Soldata,  and  Willy.  Who  are 
they? — People  living  in  Glasgow. 

Are  they  all  Germans? — Yes. 

Who  is  Willy? — A  little  wrestler. 

What  is  his  name? — Hoyne. 

Is  Slater  an  English  name? — As  far  as  I  know  it  is  an 
English  name. 

Do  you  know  what  the  prisoner's  German  name  was? — No. 

You  have  no  doubt  that  he  has  one? — I  could  not  say. 

Do  you  know  any  person  in  Germany,  of  German  birth, 
called  Slater? — I  do  not  know. 

PETER  JOHNSTON,  examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — I  am  a  billiard  p.  Johnston 
room  proprietor  in  Renfield  Street,  Glasgow.  I  know  the 
prisoner  Slater.  He  frequented  my  billiard  rooms.  He 
came  to  Glasgow  about  November.  He  was  in  the  habit  of 
coming  to  my  billiard  rooms  pretty  frequently  between  that 
and  the  time  he  left  Glasgow.  I  do  not  know  the  names  of 
those  who  came  with  Slater  to  the  billiard  room.  Sometimes 
he  came  himself  and  mixed  up  with  the  company.  I  know 
a  man  called  Cameron.  He  was  in  with  Slater  two  or  three 
times.  I  know  Rattman  and  Aumann.  These  are  all  people 
who  were  pretty  frequently  about  my  rooms.  The  table  at 
which  these  people  usually  played  was  No.  6,  in  the  far-away 
corner.  I  could  not  say  whether  Slater  was  playing  in  my 
rooms  on  21st  December  or  not.  I  find  that  table  No.  6  was 
continuously  engaged  from  5.8  to  6.40.  I  do  not  remember 
who  were  playing  at  that  table.  I  was  away  for  my  tea  at 
the  time.  I  remember  Slater  coming  in  on  Wednesday,  23rd 
December,  about  10.25  at  night,  along  with  Cameron.  I 
would  ask  him  when  he  came  in  if  he  wanted  a  game.  He 
said  that  they  did  not  care  about  playing  that  night.  They 
stayed  on  for  some  time  in  the  place. 

Cross-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — Is  it  not  the  fact 

205 


Oscar  Slater. 

P.Johnston  that  you  saw  Slater  in  your  billiard  room  only  twice? — I  have 
seen  him  two  or  three  times.  I  have  seen  him  more  than 
twice. 

When  was  the  first  time? — I  could  not  say — he  was  coming 
about  it  for  a  month. 

Was  not  the  first  time  you  saw  him  in  your  rooms  about 
14th  or  15th  December? — I  do  not  remember  the  dates. 

Did  he  play  the  first  time? — I  could  not  really  say. 

Did  you  see  him,  do  you  think,  more  than  three  times 
altogether? — Yes,  I  would  see  him  maybe  six  or  eight  times. 

From  what  time  till  what  time? — He  generally  came  in  in 
the  evening. 

But  can  you  tell  us  what  was  the  earliest  date,  or  about 
the  earliest  date,  that  you  saw  him? — He  might  come  in  about 
five  or  six  o'clock.  It  was  generally  about  eight  or  nine. 

That  was  in  November  or  December? — November,  I  suppose. 

You  do  not  know? — No. 

On  the  last  occasion,  on  23rd  December,  he  came  in  about 
eleven  o'clock  at  night? — About  10.25. 

And  waited  till  midnight? — He  waited  till  his  two  friends 
played  their  game. 

Did  you  see  him  on  21st  December  at  all? — I  do  not 
remember. 

Was  he  clean  shaven? — I  would  not  like  to  say.  I  rather 
think  he  was  a  little  dark,  but  he  might  not  have  very  much 
to  show.  I  do  not  know  that  he  was  exactly  clean  shaven. 

If  he  had  anything  on  his  upper  lip  it  was  very  little? — 
Yes. 

By  the  COURT — Except  on  the  23rd,  had  he  always  played 
any  time  you  saw  him  in  the  rooms  before? — He  played  very 
regularly  when  he  did  come  in. 

Adam  Gibb  ADAM  GIBB,  examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — I  was  a  billiard 
marker  in  Johnston's  employment  on  21st  December  last.  I 
have  seen  Slater  at  various  times  in  the  billiard  rooms,  two  or 
three  times  a  week  at  least.  I  could  not  tell  the  names  of 
the  friends  that  he  played  with,  but  I  could  recognise  them. 
Being  foreign  to  me,  I  did  not  know  their  names.  They  were 
German.  (Shown  witness  Max  Rattman.)  I  recognise  that 
man  as  being  one  of  his  friends.  (Shown  witness  Josef 
Aumann.)  I  also  recognise  that  man.  I  remember  seeing 
Slater  in  the  billiard  rooms  on  23rd  December  about  eleven 
o'clock  at  night.  He  was  by  himself.  He  was  not  joined 
by  somebody  that  I  saw.  I  did  not  see  Cameron  that  night. 
I  remember  distinctly  that  he  had  a  moustache  on  that  night. 
It  was  quite  noticeable  to  me  and  I  was  at  a  billiard  table 
at  the  opposite  end,  16  feet  away.  No  person  -who  had  a 
look  at  him  could  have  taken  him  for  a  clean-shaven  man 

206 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

that   night.        He   appeared   to    me  to   be    a    man   that   had  Adam  Gibb 
neglected  to  shave  his  upper  lip  for  about  a  fortnight. 

Cross-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — When  did  you  first 
see  him  coming  about  your  saloon? — I  could  not  specify  any 
date.  He  came  back  and  forward  for  about  three  months. 

Do  you  "remember  any  time  when  he  had  a  full  moustache? 
— No,  never  at  any  time.  It  was  always  short  and  stubbly. 

Did  you  know  or  did  you  not  know  that  his  moustache  was 
shaved  off  in  the  middle  of  December? — I  did  not  know. 

Did  you  see  at  any  time  during  the  period  he  was  frequenting 
your  rooms  that  he  had  shaved  his  moustache  off? — No;  I 
cannot  say  that  he  did  shave  it  off. 

Did  you  notice  at  any  time  during  the  three  or  four  months 
any  difference  in  his  appearance? — There  have  been  times  that 
he  came  about  the  rooms  and  has  been  playing  when  I  prob- 
ably have  not  looked  much  at  him.  In  a  public  billiard  room 
I  do  not  take  exact  stock  of  every  one.  It  was  always  a  short 
moustache  that  he  wore. 

You  saw  him  going  about  the  room  in  November  and 
December,  and  you  never  saw  any  change  in  his  appearance  so 
far  as  his  moustache  was  concerned  ? — I  never  saw  much  change 
in  him. 

You  did  not  observe  it? — No. 

Do  you  say  that  the  last  time  you  saw  him  he  had  a  stubbly 
moustache  ? — Yes. 

Were  you  in  the  billiard  room  on  21st  December? — Yes. 

The  day  of  the  murder? — Yes. 

Did  you  see  him  there  that  day? — No. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — Was  the  table  engaged  upon 
the  Monday,  as  you  find  from  your  books,  from  5.8  till  6.40? — 
Yes. 

Is  that  the  table,  No.  6,  which  was  usually  played  on  by 
Slater  and  his  friends  ? — Yes ;  that  was  the  table  they  generally 
played  on. 

As  I  understand,  you  do  not  remember  who  was  playing  that 
afternoon? — I  cannot  remember. 

JOSEF  AUMANN,  examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — I  live  at  282  Josef  Aumann 
Buchanan  Street,  Glasgow.  I  have  known  Slater  from  October 
last  year.  I  met  him  first  in  Gall's  public-house  in  Cow- 
caddens,  and  I  saw  him  sometimes  after  that.  I  remember 
Slater  speaking  to  me  about  going  to  America.  He  spoke  to 
me  three  weeks  before  about  going  to  America.  He  told  me 
that  as  soon  as  he  could  sell  his  house  he  was  going  to  America. 
He  also  told  me  about  a  letter  that  he  had  from  America,  but  I 
did  not  see  that  letter.  I  did  not  see  him  showing  it  to 
anybody.  Mr.  Rattman  told  me  that  he  had  seen  the  letter. 
I  did  not  see  it  myself,  but  Slater  told  me  that  he  had  received 

207 


Oscar  Slater. 

Josef  Aumann  the  letter.  After  that  he  came  to  me  and  asked  me  to  take 
his  flat  off  his  hands.  He  said  that  he  would  sell  his  house, 
and  asked  me  to  take  it.  He  offered  to  show  it  to  me,  and 
I  said  that  if  I  liked  the  house  I  would  take  it  over.  I  went 
to  the  house  to  see  it.  I  went  one  evening  about  seven 
or  eight  o'clock,  and  I  looked  over  the  house  and  looked  at  the 
furniture.  I  did  not  take  it  because  my  wife  did  not  wish 
me  to  buy  a  house.  She  would  not  have  the  house.  He  did 
not  say  anything  to  me  as  to  what  he  was  going  to  do  with  it 
when  I  did  not  take  it.  He  told  me  that  he  would  look  out 
for  somebody  else.  I  remember  that  on  21st  December  I 
was  in  Gall's  public-house  in  Cowcaddens,  about  three  o'clock 
or  half -past  three,  and  I  stayed  on  for  some  time.  I  played 
billiards  that  afternoon  in  Johnston's  billiard  room,  and,  while 
I  was  playing,  Slater  came  in  from  five  o'clock  to  half -past; 
I  am  not  exactly  sure.  I  played  at  billiards  that  night  till 
about  a  quarter  to  seven  o'clock,  and  then  I  went  home. 
Rattman  did  not  come  with  me.  I  had  been  playing  Iwith 
Rattman,  and,  while  we  were  playing,  Slater  was  looking  on. 
I  think  I  went  home  by  myself  about  a  quarter  to  seven. 
I  do  not  know  whether  Slater  left  the  billiard  room  to  go  home 
before  I  had  finished  playing  my  game.  I  do  not  remember 
Slater  or  Rattman  going  out.  When  I  left  I  do  not  remember 
whether  Slater  was  still  there  or  whether  he  had  left  us. 

I  must  ask  you  again,  in  case  there  is  any  mistake,  can 
you  tell  me  whether  Slater  was  for  some  time  in  the  billiard 
room  that  afternoon  when  you  were  playing  billiards? — I  do 
not  think  he  stayed  long. 

Can  you  tell  me  when  he  went  out? — Yes,  in  the  afternoon  he 
was  there.  I  was  with  Rattman,  and  Slater  came  up  and 
asked  Rattman  about  this  ticket.  Slater  went  out  by  himself, 
and  by  that  time  the  game  was  finished.  That  was  some 
minutes  before  the  game  was  finished.  I  think  I  left  the 
billiard  room  about  a  quarter  to  seven.  I  left  a  short  time 
before  I  got  my  supper,  and  I  went  directly  from  the  billiard 
room  for  my  supper  at  home.  I  think  Slater  was  away  from 
the  billiard  room  a  short  time  before  me.  I  do  not  think 
the  game  was  quite  finished  when  he  left.  I  think  the  game 
was  finished  a  short  time  after  Slater  went  away.  After 
Slater  went  away  the  game  was  finished  in  two  or  three 
minutes.  My  house  where  I  stay  is  about  three  minutes' 
walk  from  Johnston's  billiard  room.  I  lived  in  Hope  Street 
at  that  time,  at  the  Theatre  Royal,  and  I  walked  home  for 
my  supper.  The  flat  which  Slater  wished  me  to  take  over 
from  him  is  a  good  bit  further  out  west;  it  was  in  St.  George'8 
Road.  That  is  a  good  way  out  beyond  Hope  Street;  about 
ten  minutes'  walk  further  than  Hope  Street.  I  remember  on 
the  Wednesday  'after  that,  which  was  the  23rd,  being  in 
208 


a 

<y 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Johnston's  billiard  room  again,  and  I  saw  Slater   again.        I  Josef  Aumann 
think  that  was  after  closing  time. 

Was  that  after  the  public-houses  were  closed? — Yes. 
Mr.  Cameron  was  with  him.  (Shown  the  witness,  Hugh 
Cameron.)  That  is  the  gentleman  I  mean.  Slater  sat  down 
with  his  friend  Cameron,  and  he  stopped  a  longer  time  for  a 
drink  along  with  his  friends.  I  saw  Slater  about  two  times  or 
three  times  in  the  billiard  room.  I  did  not  see  him  more  than 
two  or  three  times  altogether  when  he  was  in  Glasgow.  I 
have  been  with  him  only  two  or  three  times,  but  I  have  seen 
him  at  other  times.  I  saw  him  in  black  clothes.  I  never 
saw  him  with  light,  checked  trousers  or  with  light-coloured 
spats.  He  was  only  in  dark  clothes.  He  wore  black  boots, 
I  think. 

Was  it  patent  leather  ones'? — He  had  sometimes  clean  boots. 

Do  you  mean  bright,  shiny  boots? — Yes. 

Cross-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — Did  you  say  that 
Slater  came  into  the  billiard  room  between  five  and  half-past 
five  o'clock  on  the  afternoon  of  the  21st? — Yes,  I  did. 

When  he  came  in  between  five  and  half-past  five,  were  you 
playing  a  game  of  billiards  with  Rattman? — Yes. 

Did  you  commence  the  game  before  Slater  came  in? — Yes; 
I  was  playing  a  game  as  he  came  in. 

Did  Slater  stop  a  very  short  time  in  the  billiard  room? — 
Yes. 

And  then  did  he  go  away? — About  some  minutes  before  I 
finished  the  game. 

But  your  game  had  begun  before  he  came  in? — Yes. 

And  he  came  between  five  and  half-past  five? — Yes. 

Do  you  remember  for  what  purpose  Slater  came  to  the  billiard 
room? — He  came  and  asked  Mr.  Rattman  about  this  pawn 
ticket  for  the  brooch. 

Was  his  purpose  in  coming  to  the  billiard  room  to  get 
Rattman  to  give  him  money  for  a  pawn  ticket? — Yes. 

And  did  Rattman  refuse  ? — He  said  that  he  would  not  buy  it. 

When  Rattman  said  that  he  would  not  buy  it,  did  Slater 
then  go  away? — Yes. 

You  understood  that  he  was  going  to  try  and  get  money 
somewhere  else? — Yes;  he  only  spoke  to  me  and  Rattman. 

Just  about  the  pawn  ticket? — Yes. 

Did  you  look  at  the  clock  when  Slater  came  in? — No,  I  do  not 
think  so. 

Nor  when  he  went  out? — No,  I  do  not  think  ao. 

When  did  you  look  at  the  clock  that  night  ? — I  never  looked 
at  the  clock. 

Do  you  recollect  whether  it  was  a  wet  evening;  WBB  it 
raining? — I  do  not  know. 

Had  Slater  a  waterproof  on? — I  think  he  had  a  waterproof 
p  209 


Oscar  Slater. 

Josef  Aumann  on  in  the  afternoon.  I  do  not  know  whether  he  had  a  water- 
proof on  in  the  billiard  room. 

Had  he  a  waterproof  on  when  he  was  in  Gall's  public-house? 
— Yes,  I  think  he  had  a  waterproof;  I  cannot  remember 
exactly. 

Look  at  No.  43  of  the  productions.  Did  you  sign  that 
card  ? — Yes. 

Is  that  the  waterproof  you  have  seen  Slater  wearing? — 
Yes.  It  is  a  waterproof  like  his,  but  I  do  not  say  that  is  it. 
He  had  a  waterproof  of  the  same  colour. 

And  you  signed  that  label? — Yes. 

Was  it  a  waterproof  like  that  that  he  was  wearing  that 
afternoon  ? — Yes. 

Do  you  recollect  what  sort  of  hat  he  was  wearing? — He  had 
sometimes  a  cap. 

Was  it  a  black  hat  that  you  could  pull  down? — No. 

What  kind  of  hat  was  it?  Was  it  like  any  one  of  these 
hate? — He  had  a  hat  sometimes  like  a  bowler  hat. 

Can  you  say  what  hat  he  had  that  night? — No. 

Did  you  know  of  him  doing  anything  except  selling  jewels? — 
No;  I  did  not  see  Slater  much. 

Did  you  know  of  him  doing  any  business  except  selling 
jewels? — No. 

Do  you  remember  meeting  him  in  Gall's  public-house  in 
Cowcaddens  one  day  in  December,  1908? — Yes,  with  Rattman. 

Do  you  remember  him  offering  for  sale  a  diamond  ring, 
with  twenty-five  diamonds  in  it? — Yes.  He  showed  it,  and 
he  asked  me  what  I  would  give  for  it.  I  offered  him  £30 
or  £35,  and  he  said  he  would  not  sell  it. 

Did  you  think  that  Slater  was  the  owner  of  the  house  that 
he  wanted  you  to  take  over — did  you  understand  he  was  able 
to  sell  you  the  house  that  he  asked  you  to  buy? — I  do  not 
understand  very  well. 

Did  you  understand  from  him  that  if  he  could  find  a  buyer 
for  the  house  he  would  go  off  to  America? — Yes. 

Did  you  understand  that  he  was  only  waiting  on  in  Glasgow 
till  he  could  get  the  house  taken  off  his  hands? — I  do  not 
understand. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURB — What  o'clock  do  you  have 
supper? — Seven  o'clock,  and  sometimes  after  eight. 

Is  seven  o'clock  the  hour  of  supper  in  your  house? — Yes. 

When  you  left  the  billiard  room  on  Monday,  21st  December, 
was  that  shortly  before  seven  or  shortly  before  eight? — 
Shortly  before  seven. 

How  long,  do  you  think,  after  Slater  left  the  billiard  room? 
— He  went  away  about  half-past  six. 

James  Traeey      JAMES  TRACBT,  examined  by  Mr.  M'CLUBE — I  am  a  porter  in 

2IO 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

the  employment  of  the  Caledonian  Railway  Company   at  the  James  Traeey 

Central  Station,  Glasgow.       I  was  on  night  duty  on  Christmas 

Day,  1908.       I  remember  being  down  about  the  weighs  before 

the  9.5  train  started  for  London  and  Liverpool.       I  remember 

a  badge  porter  coming  with  a  lot  of  luggage  on  his  barrow. 

He  told  me  that  he  was  waiting  for  the  arrival  of  the  party  to 

whom  it  belonged.       I  saw  a  cab  arrive  after  that,  about  8.45. 

There  were  a  gentleman  and  two  ladies  in  it.       The  gentleman 

came  out  and  claimed  the  luggage  which  the  badge  porter  had. 

I  am  quite  certain  they  all  arrived  together — the  three  of  them. 

I  opened  the  cab  door,   and  they  got  out.        The  gentleman 

told  me  the  destination  of  his  luggage.       He  told  me  to  have 

it  labelled  for  Liverpool,   and  that  he  was  going  by  the  9.5 

train.       I  got  luggage  labels,  and  I  labelled  all  the  pieces  of 

luggage.       There  were  nine  altogether.       I  took  the  luggage 

up  to  the  train ;   it  was  taken  up  to  the  train  on  the  badge 

porter's  barrow.       I  put  it  on  board  the  train.       I  put  it  in  the 

rear  brake  van  of  the  9.5  train. 

Was  the  rear  brake  van  a  through  van  for  Liverpool? — Well, 
when  I  took  up  the  luggage  I  asked  the  guard  where  he  would 
have  it,  and  he  told  me  to  put  it  into  the  rear  van.  I  had 
told  him  by  this  time  that  it  was  destined  for  Liverpool,  and 
he  told  me  where  to  put  it.  I  do  not  know  what  tickets  the 
gentleman  had.  He  asked  me  to  send  a  parcel  to  Paris.  It 
was  a  small  paper  parcel,  about  1  foot  square.  He  asked 
me  if  he  could  have  it  forwarded  through  to  Paris,  and  I  went  to 
the  excess  clerk,  and  I  told  him  that  the  gentleman  wanted 
to  have  it  forwarded  through  to  Paris,  and  the  excess  clerk 
informed  me  that  the  parcels  office  was  shut,  but  that  he 
could  have  it  forwarded  by  post,  and  I  told  the  gentleman  he 
could  have  it  forwarded  straight  from  Liverpool  when  he 
arrived  there.  One  lady  travelled  with  the  gentleman.  The 
gentleman  had  a  dark  coat  and  a  dark  cap.  I  saw  him  in 
the  train,  and  the  tickets  being  checked  ;  he  was  in  a  com- 
partment a  few  compartments  from  where  the  luggage  was 
placed.  The  other  porter  had  let  him  in  for  some  excess. 
He  was  grumbling  a  bit  at  that. 

Except  for  the  grumbling  about  the  excess  luggage  he  had 
to  pay  for,  did  you  see  anything  remarkable  about  the 
passenger? — No,  nothing.  He  seemed  to  be  quite  cool  and 
collected,  but  he  was  annoyed  at  having  to  pay  the  excess ; 
that  was  the  only  thing. 

He  did  not  seem  to  be  hiding  from  anybody  ? — No ;  he  told 
me  he  had  travelled  all  over  the  world,  and  he  had  never 
been  asked  to  pay  excess  before. 

But  he  did  not  seem  to  be  wanting  to  escape  observation  ? — 
No,  he  was  just  the  same  as  any  other  passenger.  (Shown 
prisoner.)  That  is  the  gentleman.  The  night  he  travelled 
to  Liverpool  he  had  a  moustache.  It  was  quite  noticeable. 

2IZ 


Oscar  Slater. 

James  Tracey  Cross-examined  by  the  LOBD  ADVOCATE — Did  you  just  see 
him  at  the  station  when  you  were  putting  in  his  baggage ;  had 
you  ever  seen  him  before? — No,  I  never  saw  the  gentleman 
before. 

And  you  just  saw  him  when  you  were  putting  his  baggage 
into  the  luggage  van? — Yes. 

And  have  you  any  difficulty  at  all  in  recognising  him? — No, 
that  is  the  man  there. 

You  recognise  him  at  once? — Yes. 

Did  you  notice  whether  he  had  a  slight  moustache  or  a 
moustache  like  he  has  now? — He  had  a  moustache  something 
similar  to  the  one  he  has  now. 

Was  there  as  much  as  he  has  now? — Yes,  something 
similar  to  the  moustache  he  is  wearing  now. 

Did  you  know  what  tickets  he  had? — No. 

Did  you  see  them  examined? — No. 

By  the  COURT — Have  you  seen  either  of  the  ladies  here? — No. 

About  what  age  was  the  one  that  went  with  him? — She 
would  be  a  woman  about  forty  or  thereabouts. 

The    one  that  went   with   him? — Yes,    thirty-five  or   forty. 

(Shown  Andree  Junio  Antoine.)  Is  that  the  one  that  went 
with  him? — I  could  not  say. 

You  do  not  identify  her? — I  could  not  say. 

(Shown  Catherine  Schmalz.)     Do  you  know  that  one? — No. 

Hugh  Murphy  HUGH  MURPHY,  examined  by  Mr.  MAIR — I  stay  at  City 
View,  Larkhall.  I  am  a  railway  official  at  the  Central  Station, 
Glasgow.  I  am  in  charge  of  the  train  running  department 
books.  I  have  examined  the  books  for  the  night  of  25th 
December,  1908.  There  were  two  carriages  for  Liverpool 
on  the  9.5  train  that  night — a  brake  composite  and  brake 
third.  One  of  these  carriages  went  direct  to  Liverpool  and 
one  did  not ;  the  brake  third  went  direct  to  Liverpool.  That 
carriage  would  leave  the  London  train  at  Wigan  to  go  to 
Liverpool. 

Suppose  passengers  were  in  a  London  carriage  of  that  train 
would  they  have  to  change  at  Wigan? — That  is  the  last  point 
for  changing.  They  would  have  to  change  somewhere.  Their 
luggage  would  have  to  be  changed  unless  it  was  loaded  in  the 
Liverpool  carriage  van.  There  was  luggage  accommodation 
in  the  Liverpool  carriage. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  MORISON — It  would  not  be  necessary 
with  a  London  ticket  to  travel  by  a  London  carriage? — No, 
not  necessarily. 

A  passenger  with  a  London  ticket  might  desire  to  go  to 
Liverpool  first,  and  he  could  do  so  with  his  London  ticket 
without  extra  charge? — He  could. 

212 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

WILLIAM  KEMPTON,  examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — I  am  manager  w.  Kempton 
to  James  L.  Bryce,  pawnbroker,  in  Oswald  Street,  Glasgow.  I 
saw  Slater  on  3rd  November.  I  had  known  him  before,  about 
the  Glasgow  Exhibition  year,  but  on  this  occasion  I  saw  him 
about  3rd  November.  I  did  not  see  him  frequently  between 
3rd  November  and  the  time  he  left;  I  only  saw  him  once, 
when  he  redeemed  a  pledge.  On  the  3rd  November  he 
pledged  with  me  two  gold  rings,  three  pearl  studs,  a  gold 
pencil-case,  a  gold  purse,  and  a  fountain  pen,  and  he  got  £5 
for  these  articles.  He  redeemed  them  on  13th  November. 
He  dealt  with  me  as  Oscar  Slater.  The  last  time  I  saw  him 
was  on  22nd  December.  He  called  in  the  afternoon  about 
four  o'clock,  and  he  redeemed  a  pair  of  prism  binocular  glasses. 
He  had  pledged  them  on  7th  December  for  £2  10s.  When 
he  came  in  he  was  dressed  in  a  dark  overcoat  and  a  hard  hat. 
He  did  not  seem  in  any  way  excited  in  his  manner.  Upon 
Tuesday,  22nd  December,  he  told  me  he  was  going  to  America. 

Did  he  say  he  was  making  any  inquiries  about  steamers  1 — He 
wondered  whether  he  would  go  by  the  Anchor  Line ;  he  thought 
he  might  go  by  the  Anchor  Line,  and  he  asked  me  about  that ; 
of  course  we  could  give  him  no  information.  I  am  quite  cer- 
tain that  was  on  the  22nd  December,  because  that  was  the 
day  the  prism  binoculars  were  redeemed.  At  that  time,  on 
the  22nd  December,  he  had  a  slight  stubbly  moustache.  It 
was  quite  noticeable. 

Cross-examined  bv  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — Did  you  know  him 
in  19017— Yes. 

How  long  was  he  in  Glasgow  then? — Well,  I  could  not 
exactly  say,  but  most  of  the  Exhibition  time. 

Did  you  do  business  with  him  then? — Yes. 

What  sort  of  business  ? — Pledging  jewellery ;  he  always 
redeemed  it. 

Did  you  know  that  he  was  a  dealer  in  precious  stones, 
diamonds,  and  jewels? — Well,  I  had  an  idea  that  he  was  buying 
and  selling. 

Where  he  got  them  you  did  not  know? — No. 

Did  that  business  dealing  between  you  and  him  continue 
during  the  time  he  was  in  Glasgow  in  1901? — Yes. 

Then  did  he  disappear  for  some  years? — Yes. 

And  then  did  he  reappear  on  the  3rd  November,  1908? — 
That  was  the  first  time. 

What  address  did  he  give  on  the  3rd  November? — Central 
Hotel,  Glasgow. 

Did  you  ever  know  he  had  any  other  address  in  Glasgow 
during  November  and  December  at  that  time? — No. 

Did  you  think  that  it  was  the  Central  Hotel  all  the  time? — 
Yes. 

Did  you  notice  whether  on  the  3rd  November  he  had  a 
moustache? — No,  I  really  could  not  say  then. 

213 


Oscar  Slater. 

W.  Kempton  Can  you  say  whether  he  had  one  when  he  was  in  Glasgow 
in  1901 ;  did  he  wear  a  moustache? — Well,  I  would  say  he  had 
always  a  slight  moustache. 

Did  you  notice  it  was  stubbly  on  the  22nd  December? — Yes, 
just  growing. 

How  was  it  he  came  to  speak,  on  the  22nd  December,  about 
taking  a  ship  for  America? — Well,  I  really  could  not  say, 
except  that  it  might  be  in  regard  to  saying  something  about 
these  glasses  he  was  redeeming. 

He  wanted  the  binoculars  for  the  voyage? — Well,  I  thought 
perhaps  he  might  want  them. 

What  did  he  say  to  you  about  going  to  America? — Oh,  well, 
he  did  not  say  what  he  was  going  to  do  when  he  got  there. 

Did  he  say  anything  about  the  time  he  was  going  to  start? — 
No,  he  did  not  say. 

Or  the  line  he  was  going  by? — Well,  that  was  all  he  asked 
about — the  Anchor  Line ;  of  course  I  could  give  him  no 
information. 

Did  he  say  anything  about  where  he  was  going  to  in 
America? — No,  he  did  not  say  definitely. 

Or  why  he  was  going? — No. 

You  say  that  he  was  redeeming  the  binoculars  on  the  22nd  ? — 
Yes. 

Do  you  recollect  when  he  pledged  them  on  the  7th  December 
what  address  he  gave? — No,  his  address  was  not  asked;  it 
was  taken  for  granted. 

You  just  kept  it  on  the  books  as  it  was? — Yes. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — I  suppose  you  do  not  care 
what  the  man's  address  is? — Well,  we  ask  the  address,  but 
knowing  Slater  so  well  we  thought  it  was  good  enough  at 
the  Central  Hotel. 

After  all,  he  would  not  get  his  pledge  back  without  paying 
you  your  advances  and  interest? — Certainly  not. 

And  if  he  changes  his  address  in  the  meantime  it  makes  no 
difference  to  you? — None  to  us. 

My  learned  friend  always  asked,  "  Did  he  disappear?  " — 
it  is  an  awkward  way  of  putting  it ;  when  my  friend  put  the 
words,  "Did  Slater  then  disappear?"  into  your  mouth,  do 
you  not  just  mean  that  he  left  Glasgow? — I  do  not  know 
where  he  went  to. 

And  when  he  came  back  he  reappeared,  I  suppose? — Yes. 

Were  all  your  transactions  with  the  man  bona  fide  loans 
upon  property  deposited? — Yes. 

And  do  you  say  he  always  redeemed  by  and  by  the  goods 
he  left  with  you? — Yes. 

A.  J.  Antoine      ANDREE  JUNIO  ANTOINE,  examined  by   Mr.   M'CLURE — I   was 
born  in  Paris,  and  I  am  now  twenty-three  years  of  age.     It  is 
214 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

about  five  years  since  I  first  met  Slater.  I  met  him  in  the  A.  J.  Antolne 
Empire  Theatre  in  London.  He  was  a  married  man.  He 
did  not  take  up  living  with  me  at  that  time.  When  I  met 
him  first  he  was  living  alone,  and  not  with  his  wife.  He 
called  himself  a  dentist.  I  never  knew  of  him  doing  any- 
thing in  the  dentist  line  at  all.  He  never  worked  as  a 
dentist  so  far  as  I  am  aware.  He  used  to  manage  clubs.  I 
cannot  tell  whether  he  had  any  connection  with  clubs  where 
cards  were  played  in  London,  but  I  knew  that  he  used  to  go  to 
clubs.  About  three  years  ago  I  went  with  him  to  America. 
I  was  living  with  Slater  in  Brussels  at  that  time,  and  we  left 
from  Boulogne  for  America.  Slater  went  to  America  because  of 
his  wife,  as  she  was  always  bothering  him,  and  came  after  him. 
He  went  to  New  York.  In  New  York  he  managed  a  club. 
We  travelled  to  New  York  under  the  name  of  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
A.  George.  We  took  that  wrong  name  so  that  his  wife 
might  not  find  him.  There  is  produced  a  house  agreement 
between  Peter  de  Sylvestri,  Oscar  Slater,  and  John  Devoto, 
taking  premises  114  West  Twenty-Sixth  Street,  in  the  burgh 
of  Manhattan.  That  is  the  first  place  where  Slater  carried 
on  business.  Devoto  was  his  partner  and  de  Sylvestri 
was  his  landlord.  The  rent  was  sixty  dollars  a  month.  On 
the  first  occasion  we  were  in  America  for  one  year,  and  then 
we  returned  to  Paris  for  my  health. 

And  to  visit  your  people? — The  principal  thing  was  my 
health.  We  were  away  from  America  for  about  two  months, 
and  then  we  returned  under  the  name  of  A.  George.  While 
Slater  was  over  in  America  he  carried  on  the  business  of  the 
club  as  Oscar  Slater.  We  came  back  again  to  France  in 
June,  1908.  We  came  to  England  in  August,  and  to  Glasgow 
in  October.  When  we  came  to  Glasgow  first  we  stayed  in 
Renfrew  Street.  We  were  only  a  few  days  there  before  we 
got  a  flat  at  St.  George's  Road.  We  went  to  Glasgow  because 
Slater  thought  that  there  was  good  business  to  be  done  there. 
After  we  were  there  for  some  time  he  found  that  there  was 
no  good  business  to  be  had,  and  he  made  up  his  mind  to 
return  to  America.  He  made  up  his  mind  to  do  so  a  month 
after  we  arrived  in  Glasgow,  somewhere  about  the  beginning 
of  December.  When  in  Glasgow  Slater  went  about  the  clubs 
gambling.  He  had  one  or  two  friends  who  came  to  the 
house,  namely,  Cameron  and  Reid.  I  never  saw  Rattman. 
Slater  received  a  letter  from  San  Francisco,  from  John 
Devoto,  the  person  who  was  his  partner  in  New  York,  tell- 
ing him  to  come,  that  there  was  good  business  over  there. 

Was  there  anything  that  prevented  him  going  off  at  once? — 
Yes,  because  we  had  the  flat.  I  knew  that  he  intended  to 
leave  if  he  got  the  flat  disposed  of.  I  remember  of  Aumann 
coming  up  to  look  over  the  flat,  but  he  did  not  take  it.  Mr 

215 


Oscar  Slater. 

A.  J.  Antoine  Freedman,  a  German  gentleman  in  London,  wrote  saying  that 
if  Slater  could  find  a  place  where  Mrs.  Freedman  could  live, 
she  would  come  down.  Slater  offered  him  the  flat.  We 
left  Glasgow  for  America  on  25th  December.  Before  we  left 
Mrs.  Freedman  had  arrived.  She  arrived  on  the  Friday 
morning,  25th  December.  I  got  a  postcard  from  the  Alexandra 
Hotel,  in  Bath  Street,  saying  that  she  had  arrived.  I  sent 
my  servant  over  to  tell  her  to  come  to  the  flat. 

[At  this  stage  the  witness,   feeling  faint,  had  to  leave  the 
Court,  and  the  examination  was  adjourned.] 

C.  Sehmalz  CATHERINE  SCHMALZ,  examined  by  Mr.  M'CLtmE — I  came  to 
Glasgow  from  London  along  with  Madame  Junio  on  4th 
November.  Madame  Junio  is  the  last  witness,  Andree  Junio 
Antoine,  but  she  was  known  in  London  as  Madame  Junio.  We 
took  up  house  at  136  Renfrew  Street.  We  were  about  a  week 
there  before  changing  to  the  house  at  St.  George's  Road.  Oscar 
Slater  left  Glasgow  on  25th  December.  From  the  time  we 
arrived  in  November  until  that  time  I  acted  as  the  servant  in 
the  house.  Slater  usually  got  up  about  nine  o'clock  or  9.30 
in  the  morning,  and  he  sometimes  went  out.  He  was  al',vays 
in  for  lunch.  He  took  dinner  at  home  at  seven  o'clock. 

Did  he  take  dinner  always  at  seven,  or  was  it  sometimes  a 
little  later? — It  all  depended  on  whether  I  was  ready  with  the 
dinner,  but  it  was  generally  at  seven  o'clock.  I  do  not 
remember  of  him  being  away  at  dinner  time  so  long  as  I  was 
there.  I  heard  it  proposed  that  Slater  should  go  back  to 
America.  That  was  three  weeks  or  a  month  before  25th 
December.  I  remember  a  gentleman  coming  up  to  look  over 
the  flat.  He  was  a  German,  and  I  think  his  name  was 
Aumann.  He  came  into  the  kitchen  as  well  as  going  over  the 
rest  of  the  house.  His  purpose  in  looking  over  the  house 
was  that  he  proposed  taking  it.  If  he  had  taken  the  flat  then 
Slater  was  going  to  America.  I  heard  that  spoken  of  in  the 
house  three  or  four  weeks  before  Slater  left.  Aumann  did  not 
take  the  flat.  After  that  fell  through  I  heard  conversation 
about  some  one  named  Freedman  coming  from  London.  Slater 
was  writing  to  Freedman  to  take  over  the  flat.  I  was  not  sure 
that  he  would  take  it,  but  I  heard  them  talking  about  it.  I 
remember  the  Sunday  before  Slater  left,  that  being  Sunday, 
20th  December.  Slater  was  never  out  of  the  house  on  a 
Sunday,  and  on  that  particular  Sunday  he  wag  in  the  house, 
in  his  dressing  gown.  He  was  at  dinner  in  the  house  that 
night.  Reid  and  his  little  boy  and  Madame  were  also  at  dinner 
that  night.  I  am  quite  positive  on  that  point.  I  know  now 
that  Monday,  21st  December,  was  the  date  of  the  murder  that 
was  committed. 
216 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

As  regards  Monday,   was  there    any  difference    in    Slater's  c.  Schmalz 
ordinary  habit  of  coming  home  to  dinner  ? — No ;  I  never  noticed 
anything. 

During  that  week  was  there  any  departure  from  his  ordinary 
habit  of  coming  home  for  dinner  about  seven  o'clock? — No. 

On  Monday,  the  21st,  did  he  come  home  for  dinner? — Yes. 
I  remember  two  letters  arriving  by  the  morning  post  on 
Monday,  21st  December.  In  the  ^afternoon,  after  lunch, 
Slater  said  that  I  could  go  away  to  London  to  find  another 
situation  on  the  Saturday.  One  of  the  two  letters  came  from 
London  and  the  other  came  from  San  Francisco.  I  do  not 
know  anything  more  about  them  than  that.  Mrs.  Freedman 
came  on  the  Friday  of  that  week.  Mr.  Slater  sent  me  in  the 
morning  to  the  Alexandra  Hotel,  as  they  had  received  a  post- 
card in  the  morning  saying  that  Mrs.  Freedman  was  at  that 
hotel.  I  went  over,  but  I  did  not  bring  her  back,  because  the 
porter  told  me  that  she  was  not  up  yet.  I  went  back  about  half 
an  hour  later,  and  she  said  that  she  would  come  directly.  She 
came  at  12.30.  Upon  that  Friday  preparations  were  being 
made  by  Mr.  Slater  for  going  away;  he  was  packing.  Later 
on,  about  8.20,  men  came  for  the  luggage,  and  it  was  then 
taken  off  in  a  barrow.  We  went  down  to  the  station  in  a  cab, 
which  we  got  in  Sauchiehall  Street. 

Did  anything  like  this  happen,  that  you  and  Slater  and 
Madame  went  down  to  the  station  by  separate  ways? — No; 
we  all  went  together.  When  I  got  down  to  the  station,  I 
remember  the  door  of  the  cab  being  opened  by  a  porter.  After 
getting  out  of  the  cab  I  went  with  Madame,  and  Mr.  Slater 
went  for  the  tickets.  By  and  by  the  train  left.  They  went 
to  Liverpool.  I  got  instructions  from  Mr.  Slater  before  leaving  to 
hand  over  the  keys  to  Mrs.  Freedman.  Mrs.  Freedman  came 
at  10.30  on  Saturday  morning  and  got  the  keys  of  the  house. 
I  stayed  on  in  Glasgow  till  ten  o'clock  at  night,  when  I  took 
the  train  for  London.  Before  Mr.  Slater  left  Glasgow,  he 
gave  me  instructions  that  I  was  to  say  to  any  one  asking 
where  they  were  that  they  were  off  to  Monte  Carlo.  He  did 
not  explain  to  me  why  he  wanted  that.  At  twelve  o'clock  at 
night  the  police  came. 

Did  you  say  then  that  they  were  off  to  Monte  Carlo  ? — I  said 
I  did  not  know  then. 

Did  you  explain  to  another  policeman  that  they  were  off  to 
Monte  Carlo? — Yes,  on  the  Saturday  morning. 

Do  you  know  of  any  reason  why  they  should  have  fled  from 
Glasgow? — Mr.  Slater's  wife  bothered  him. 

But  do  you  know  anything  which  would  associate  Slater 
with  the  murder  of  Miss  Gilchrist? — No. 

Did  you  see  any  change  during  that  week  from  the  ordinary 
habits  of  the  household? — No. 

217 


Oscar  Slater. 

C.  Schmalz  Did  you  see  any  attempt  to  burn  clothes  or  to  wash  clothes 
which  had  been  stained  in  any  way? — No.  The  house  went  on 
just  as  usual.  I  am  perfectly  certain  that  upon  the  Sunday 
night  Mr.  Slater  dined  in  and  was  never  over  the  door,  and 
upon  the  Monday  he  was  home  about  his  usual  hour.  I  have 
seen  the  hammer  (label  No.  47).  I  used  that  to  break  coals 
with.  I  remember  the  hammer  coming  into  the  house  when 
we  moved  into  the  flat.  It  was  bought  upon  a  card  with  some 
other  tools  on  it,  exactly  like  the  new  card  that  is  now  shown 
to  me.  The  hammer  was  kept  in  a  drawer  in  the  hat-stand  in 
the  hall.  So  far  as  I  know,  the  hammer  was  never  out  of 
the  house.  I  never  saw  that  hammer  being  washed  or  scraped, 
or  having  anything  done  to  it.  About  three  weeks  before  Mr. 
Slater  left  Glasgow  he  got  his  moustache  taken  off.  I  do  not 
know  why  he  had  it  taken  off.  At  the  time  he  left  Glasgow 
his  moustache  was  growing  again ;  it  was  quite  noticeable,  and 
one  would  not  have  taken  him  for  a  clean-shaven  man  at  that 
time. 

Cross-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — Who  engaged  you? 
— Madame  Junio. 

Was  she  living  then  at  45  Newman  Street,  London? — Yes. 

She  received  gentlemen  there? — Yes. 

And  among  the  gentlemen  was  Oscar  Slater  one? — Yes. 

Did  he  come  oftener  than  the  other  gentlemen  did? — Yes. 

Did  he  sometimes  live  there? — He  stayed  sometimes  there. 

For  a  night? — Yes. 

Stayed  there  as  the  husband  of  Madame  Junio? — Yes. 

Did  you  ever  hear  her  called  by  the  name  of  Kiebrow? — No. 

Did  you  know  what  Slater  was  doing  in  London? — I  do  not 
know. 

Do  you  know  when  he  went  to  Glasgow? — In  the  end  of 
October. 

Why  did  he  go  there? — I  think  to  start  some  business. 

What  sort  of  business? — As  a  dentist. 

Was  he  a  dentist? — I  do  not  know. 

Why  did  you  say  just  now  that  he  went  to  Glasgow  to  start 
business  as  a  dentist? — I  do  not  understand  properly  what 
you  mean. 

Why  did  you  say  that  he  went  to  Glasgow  to  start  business 
as  a  dentist? — I  think  I  heard  it  in  conversation. 

Between  him  and  who? — Madame. 

Did  you  hear  him  saying  that  to  Madame? — Yes. 

Did  you  know  at  that  time  that  he  was  a  dentist? — No. 

After  he  went  to  Glasgow  did  he  write  asking  you  and 
Madame  to  come? — Yes. 

Did  Madame  ask  you  if  you  would  go  to  Glasgow? — Mr.  Slater 
asked  me  before  he  went  away  if  I  would  like  to  go  to  Glasgow, 
and  I  said  "  Yes." 
218 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

When  you  went  to  the  house  at  69  St.  George's  Road,  did  c.  Sehmalz 
you  see  that  he  had  a  brass  plate  on  the  door  with  the  name 
Anderson  1 — Yes. 

Did  you  ever  know  him  in  London  as  Anderson? — No. 

Did  you  think  it  strange  to  see  that  on  the  door? — I  thought 
he  took  the  name  because  his  wife  might  not  find  him. 

Where  was  his  wife? — I  do  not  know. 

Did  you  ever  see  her? — No. 

Or  know  anything  about  her? — No. 

Is  she  alive  or  dead  ? — I  think  she  is  alive,  but  I  do  not  know. 

By  the  COURT — Who  told  you  about  her? — I  heard  her  name 
from  other  people. 

From  whom? — From  strange  people. 

In  Glasgow? — No,  Inspector  Fowler  asked  me  if  I  knew 
where  his  wife  was  living  in  London. 

Cross-examination  continued — Was  Slater  quite  safe  from  his 
wife  in  London  by  the  name  Slater — was  he  bothered  in  London 
by  his  wife  at  45  Newman  Street  living  under  the  name  Slater? 
— Mrs.  Slater  was  not  living  there. 

Why  did  he  take  the  name  Anderson  when  he  went  to 
Glasgow,  when  he  was  safe  in  London  with  the  name  Slater? — 
Mrs.  Slater  did  not  find  out  where  he  went  to  when  he  went 
to  Glasgow. 

When  you  went  to  Glasgow,  to  69  St.  George's  Road,  did 
you  find  that  he  was  not  a  dentist  there? — Yes. 

Did  anybody  come  to  have  their  teeth  extracted  in  the 
house? — No. 

Did  anybody  come  to  the  house  at  all  except  Madame  and 
Slater  himself? — Yes,  friends  of  Madame  came. 

Gentlemen  in  the  evening? — Yes. 

And  did  Madame  go  to  the  Empire  and  Palace  Music  Halls? 
—Yes. 

Where  did  Slater  go? — I  do  not  know. 

Did  Madame  go  out  immediately  after  dinner? — No,  she 
went  out  about  ten  o'clock  to  the  music  halls — not  always. 

I'sually  did  she? — (No  answer.) 

What  did  Slater  do  during  the  day? — He  went  out  some- 
times in  the  morning  and  in  the  afternoon — I  do  not  know 
what  he  did. 

So  far  as  you  know,  he  did  no  business? — Not  so  far  as  I 
know. 

Did  he  usually  come  home  to  dinner? — Yes,  always. 

Was  the  dinner  sometimes  later  and  sometimes  earlier? — 
Seven  o'clock  was  the  usual  hour. 

Was  it  sometimes  nearly  eight  when  he  had  dinner? — It 
was  my  fault;  Mr.  Slater  was  in. 

But  owing  to  your  fault  was  it  about  eight  o'clock  before 
the  dinner  was  served? — No.  Mr.  Slater  was  in  after  seven, 
and  was  waiting  for  his  dinner. 

219 


Oscar  Slater. 

C.  Schmaiz      How   late   have   you   seen   the   dinner? — Between    half -past 
seven  and  eight  o'clock. 

Do  you  recollect  of  any  particular  date  last  December — 
can  you  remember  the  19th,  for  example? — (No  answer.) 

Did  you  read  about  the  murder  in  the  newspapers? — No. 

Did  you  ever  hear  about  the  murder? — No. 

As  I  understand,  you  did  not  know  that  a  murder  had  been 
committed  ? — No. 

Did  you  know  the  day  of  the  month  during  December? — 
When  the  murder  was  committed? 

No,  did  you  know  the  day  of  the  month,  any  day? — Yes. 

How  did  you  know  that;  did  you  read  the  newspapers? — No. 

How  did  you  know  what  the  day  of  the  month  was? — On  the 
calendar. 

Did  you  look  up  the  calendar  every  day? — No,  I  knew  the 
day  of  the  month. 

Did  you  have  a  calendar  beside  you  ? — Yes. 

Do  you  remember  what  day  of  the  week  the  21st  was? — 
On  a  Monday. 

How  do  you  recollect  that  particular  Monday? — Because 
I  got  notice  on  the  Monday. 

How  long  had  you  been  engaged  for? — I  was  only  for  a 
week — a  weekly  engagement. 

What  wages  were  you  engaged  at? — Eight  shillings. 

Were  you  surprised  to  get  notice  to  go  away? — No,  because 
I  heard  Mr.  Slater  say  that  he  was  going  to  leave  because  he 
did  not  like  Glasgow. 

Did  he  say  why  he  did  not  like  Glasgow? — The  climate  did 
not  suit  Madame. 

Was  that  the  reason  why  he  was  going  to  leave? — I  think 
it  was,  as  far  as  I  know. 

Did  he  say  on  the  21st  where  he  was  going  to  get  a  better 
climate  for  Madame? — No,  but  I  heard  the  conversation  that 
he  was  going  away. 

Was  it  a  conversation  between  Madame  and  Slater? — Yes. 

Where  did  they  say  that  they  were  going? — San  Francisco. 

Did  you  ever  hear  them  mention  Chicago? — No. 

Or  Monte  Carlo?— No. 

Or  Queensland? — No. 

Do  you  know  what  he  was  going  to  do  in  San  Francisco? — I 
do  not  know. 

Did  he  tell  you  what  day  he  was  going  away? — No,  it  was 
at  the  end  of  the  week,  because  I  had  to  leave  on  the  Saturday. 

You  got  a  week's  notice? — Yes. 

And  you  were  to  wait  till  the  end  of  the  week? — Yes. 

Did  he  ask  you  whether  you  would  be  afraid  to  go  back? — 
He  asked  me  if  I  could  find  my  way  back  to  London. 

Did  you  ever  see  Madame  Freedman  till  she  came  to  Glasgow  ? 
—No. 
220 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Do  you  know  whether  she  had  been  sent  for — did  Slater  send  C.  Schmalz 
for  her  or  did  she  offer  to  come? — I  do  not  know. 

Did  she  send  a  letter  or  a  message  when  she  arrived  at  the 
Alexandra  Hotel,  Glasgow? — Yes,  on  the  morning  of  the  25th — 
a  postcard. 

Did  she  and  another  lady  come  in  the  afternoon? — Yes. 

By  that  time  had  Slater  begun  to  pack  up  his  baggage? — Yes. 

Do  you  remember  when  Madame  Freedman  came  that 
Madame  was  crying — weeping? — Yes. 

Do  you  remember  Madame  Freedman  asking  what  was  the 
matter  and  Slater  saying  to  her,  "  We  must  go  to  Monte  Carlo 
at  once"? — I  do  not  know  that. 

Do  you  remember  anything  like  that? — No. 

Do  you  remember  Madame  Freedman  asking  why  it  was  that 
Madame  was  weeping? — I  do  not  know. 

Do  you  know  why  she  was  weeping? — Because  Mr.  Slater 
would  not  take  her  with  him. 

Did  you  hear  him  saying  to  Madame  Freedman,  "  I  do  not 
want  to  take  her  with  me ;  I  want  to  go  by  myself.  She  is  to 
go  home  to  Belgium"? — No,  I  did  not  hear  the  conversation 
between  Mr.  Slater  and  Madame  Freedman. 

Was  it  before  Madame  Freedman  came  that  you  knew 
Madame  was  weeping  because  Slater  said  he  would  not  take 
her  with  him? — Mr.  Slater  told  me  that  I  should  speak  to 
Madame — that  the  time  was  no  good  for  her  to  go. 

Did  you  think  it  curious  that  he  should  be  going  to  San 
Francisco  for  Madame's  health  and  then  trying  to  get  Madame 
not  to  go  with  him? — I  do  not  know. 

Did  you  understand  why  it  was  that  he  wanted  Madame  to 
stay  at  home  if  he  was  going  to  San  Francisco  for  her  health — 
do  you  understand? — Yes,  because  the  time  was  so  bad  that 
she  might  be  ill  on  the  way. 

Then  you  told  me  that  he  was  going  to  San  Francisco 
because  the  climate  in  Glasgow  did  not  suit  Madame's  health  ? 
—Yes. 

On  this  day,  25th  December,  when  Madame  was  weeping, 
was  it  because  he  was  not  going  to  take  her  with  him? — Yes; 
he  arranged  that  Madame  should  come  later  on. 

Did  he  say  why  he  was  going  ahead  of  Madame? — I  do  not 
know. 

Did  Madame  say  that  she  wanted  to  go  with  him? — Yes, 
that  she  would  like  to  go. 

Did  he  give  any  reason  to  you  when  he  said  that  if  any 
one  came  inquiring  for  him  you  were  to  say  that  he  had  gone 
to  Monte  Carlo  for  a  holiday? — Yes. 

What  reason  did  he  give  you? — I  do  not  know.  1  did  not 
ask  for  reasons. 

By  the  COURT — He  gave  none? — No. 

221 


Oscar  Slater. 

C.  Sehmalz  Cross-examination  continued — Did  he  tell  you  where  to 
forward  letters? — Yes;  to  San  Francisco. 

General  Post  Office,  San  Francisco? — Yes. 

Did  he  appear  to  be  in  a  hurry  to  get  away  from  Glasgow  ? — 
He  was  going  away  because  Mrs.  Freedman  took  the  flat. 

When  they  left  at  night,  did  a  cab  drive  up  to  the  door  and 
take  you  and  Madame  and  Slater  to  the  station  ? — No ;  we  took 
the  cab  in  Sauchiehall  Street. 

Did  you  leave  the  house  with  Madame? — Yes,  and  Mr.  Slater. 

Did  you  walk? — Yes;  up  to  Sauchiehall  Street. 

To  the  cab  stand  there? — Yes. 

Did  you  walk  all  together  or  did  he  walk  in  front? — We  all 
three  walked  together. 

When  you  went  back  that  night,  do  you  remember  detectives 
coming  about  midnight? — Yes;  twelve  o'clock. 

Do  you  remember  them  asking  if  Mr.  Oscar  Slater  lived 
there?— Yes. 

Do  you  remember  saying  that  no  man  lived  there? — He  asked 
if  a  young  man,  a  lodger,  Oscar  Slater,  lived  there,  and  I 
said,  "  No;  he  was  not  a  lodger." 

Did  you  know  him  as  Oscar  Slater? — Yes. 

Never  as  Anderson? — No. 

Did  any  one  come  to  the  house  asking  for  him  under  the 
name  of  Anderson? — No. 

Do  you  remember  the  detectives  finding  an  address  on  the 
floor? — Yes. 

And  did  they  ask  you,  "  What  about  this  man?  " — Yes. 

What  did  you  tell  them  then? — I  do  not  know. 

Did  you  not  tell  them  that  he  had  gone  off  for  a  holiday 
with  Madame? — Yes. 

Did  you  say  to  Monte  Carlo  ? — Not  that  night. 

What  did  you  say? — I  do  not  know — that  they  had  gone  off 
for  a  holiday. 

Did  you  know  that  Slater  did  not  want  you  to  tell  anybody 
that  he  had  gone  to  San  Francisco  only  that  his  wife  should 
not  find  where  he  went  to? — (No  answer.) 

By  the  COURT — Did  he  give  that  as  a  reason  why  you  were 
to  say  that  he  had  gone  to  Monte  Carlo — that  his  wife  might 
not  find  out? — No,  I  thought  so. 

But  he  did  not  say  so? — No. 

For  some  reason  or  another,  did  you  know  that  he  did  not 
want  to  tell  anybody  that  he  had  gone  to  San  Francisco? — I 
do  not  know  the  reason. 

Did  he  not  tell  you? — No. 

Did  he  not  tell  you  that  you  were  to  say  that  he  had  gone 
to  Monte  Carlo?— Yes. 

Did  he  give  you  any  reason? — No. 

222 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Do  you  know  that  on  the  evening  of  25th  December  he  went  c.  Sehmalz 
out  about  six  o'clock? — Yes. 

Do  you  remember  him  telling  you  that  if  Cameron  came  that 
he  (Slater)  had  gone  out? — That  he  was  not  in. 

Do  you  remember  Cameron  calling  at  eight  o'clock? — Yes. 

Were  you  taking  in  the  dinner  at  that  time? — They  had 
had  dinner. 

When  Cameron  called  at  eight  o'clock,  did  you  tell  him  that 
Slater  was  not  in? — Yes. 

Was  Slater  in?— Yes. 

Did  he  give  you  any  reason  why  he  did  not  want  to  see 
Cameron  that  night? — No. 

You  say  that  he  had  shaved  off  his  moustache — how  long 
before  he  went  away? — A  fortnight. 

Do  you  know  whether  he  had  shaved  it  a  second  time? — No, 
I  do  not  think  so. 

Was  it  just  stubbly? — Yes. 

At  the  time  that  he  went  away? — Yes. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — No  person  could  fail  to  see  it? 
— I  do  not  know. 

The  moustache  that  he  had  was  one  that  you  could  not  help 
seeing? — You  could  see  it  easily. 

You  say  that  Madame  broke  down  and  was  crying  because 
she  was  not  to  be  taken  to  San  Francisco? — Yes. 

Did  you  hear  that  matter  discussed  between  Slater  and 
Madame — speaking  about  it  at  all? — If  Mr.  Slater  was  going, 
I  should  tell  Madame  not  to  go,  because  the  time  was  too  rough, 
and  she  might  come  later  on. 

ANDBEE     JUNTO     ANTOINE — Examination     resumed — A     post-  A.  J.  Antoine 
card  had  arrived  in  the  morning,  and  the  result  was  that  I  sent 
over  for  Mrs.  Freedman.     She  did  not  come  the  first  time,  and 
I  sent  the  maid  back  again,  and  then  she  came. 

Would  you  tell  me  how  it  was  that  Mrs.  Freedman  came  down 
to  Glasgow  from  London? — I  think  she  wanted  to  stay  for  a 
time  in  Scotland.  There  was  an  arrangement  made  that  if  she 
came  down  she  would  get  the  flat. 

Was  Slater  anxious  to  get  the  flat  off  his  own  hands  at  that 
time? — Not  so  very  anxious. 

But  was  he  wishing  to  go  away  from  Glasgow  1 — Yes ;  to 
San  Francisco.  This  had  been  spoken  of  for  some  time  before 
the  20th.  I  remember  Sunday,  the  20th,  which  was  the  last 
Sunday  that  we  were  in  Scotland.  Mr.  Slater  was  not  out  that 
day.  The  time  he  was  in  Scotland  he  never  went  out  any 
Sunday.  Mr.  Reid  and  his  little  boy  came  to  see  Mr.  Sinter 
about  six  o'clock  on  that  Sunday,  and  they  remained  till  10.30 
or  10.45.  The  ordinary  dinner  hour  was  seven  o'clock;  it 
was  always  ordered  for  that,  but  it  was  sometimes  as  late  as 

223 


Oscar  Slater. 

A.J. Antoine    ten  minutes.       Mr.    Slater  always   dined   at   home;  he  never 
missed  his  dinner. 

On  Monday,  the  21st,  or  on  any  other  day  during  this  last 
week  that  you  were  in  Glasgow,  did  he  depart  from  his  ordinary 
practice  of  dining  at  seven  o'clock? — No,  he  always  dined  at  seven 
o'clock.  There  was  no  day  that  he  missed  having  his  dinner 
at  home.  I  did  not  notice  any  difference  in  his  manner  on 
any  day  during  that  week.  I  do  not  know  of  any  clothes 
belonging  to  Mr.  Slater  having  been  washed  that  week.  I 
do  not  know  of  any  clothes  having  been  burned  or  anything  of 
that  kind  at  all. 

Did  you  see  anything  at  all  that  would  lead  you  to  believe 
that  he  had  any  hand  in  this  affair  that  happened  on  the  21st? 
— Oh  no  !       I  did  not  see  any  change  in  his  ordinary  habits. 
After  dining  at  seven  o'clock  he  usually  went  out.     I  do  not 
know  where  he  went,  but  I  have  heard  from  him  where  he  had 
been  at  times.       He  did  not  tell  me  where  he  was  going  as  a 
rule.     Two  letters  were  received  on  the  Monday  morning,  one 
being  from  San  Francisco  and  the  other  from  London.       The 
letter  from   London   was  from    a   friend    of    Mr.    Slater,   Mr. 
Rogers,  saying  that  Mr.  Slater's  wife  was  still  bothering  him 
for   money.       Mr.    Rogers  had  paid   her   money  on    frequent 
occasions  for  Mr.  Slater.     The  letter  from  San  Francisco  was 
from  John  Devoto,  saying  that  there  was  very  good  business 
there,  and  to  go  there.       There  had  been  a  previous  letter  from 
Devoto.       After    receiving    these    letters     Mr.      Slater    gave 
Catherine  Schmalz  notice  on  the  Monday.       When  he  received 
the  letters  he  said  that  he  was  going  to  America,  and  in  the 
afternoon  he  gave  notice  to  Schmalz.       On  that  day  he  wrote 
for   money   from  the  Post   Office  Savings    Bank.        I    do  not 
remember  whether  he  got  that  money  later  on  in  the  week.     I 
knew  about  his  raising  some  money  upon  a  diamond  brooch. 
That  brooch   was  mine.     It   was  given   to   me  by   Mr.   Slater 
about  two  years  ago.     I  began  to  pack  up  myself  on  the  Friday 
afternoon  at  four  o'clock,  and  Mr.  Slater  packed  some  time  in 
the  morning,  after  Mrs.   Freedman  went   away.        Mr.    Slater 
said  I  was  to  go  home  to  my  people  in  Paris,  but  I  did  not 
wish  to  do  that;  I  wished  to  go  with  him.     The  girl  Schmalz 
also  spoke  to  me  and  said  that  I  should  go  to  my  people.       In 
the  end  I  said  that  I  would  go  with  Mr.  Slater,  and  he  said  that 
I  could  go  with  him.     One  reason  he  gave  for  not  wanting  to 
take  me  was  the  bad  weather  in  America  at  the  time;  it  was 
not  good  for  my  health  to  travel  in  the  winter  season.       He 
said  that  I  could  go  to  him  in  the  summer  time ;  but  I  wished 
to  go  with  him.     A  man  came  up  to  our  house  to  take  away 
our  luggage  to  the  station,  and  he  took  it  away  in  a  barrow. 
Mr.  Slater,  Schmalz,  and  I  walked  to  Charing  Cross,  Sauchie- 

224 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

hall  Street,  and  took  a  four-wheeler  there  and  drove  to  the  A.  J.  Antoine 
station.  It  is  not  the  case  that  we  all  went  away  separately. 
I  remember  when  we  arrived  at  the  station  a  porter  came  and 
opened  the  door  of  the  cab,  and  we  came  out.  I  went  to  buy 
some  newspapers  for  the  journey.  Mr.  Slater  and  I  left  for 
Liverpool,  while  Schmalz  went  back  to  the  flat.  She  had 
instructions  to  hand  over  the  keys  of  the  flat  to  Mrs.  Freedman. 

Were  you  present  when  Slater  gave  Schmalz  instructions  to 
tell  any  person  who  asked  that  you  were  off  to  Monte  Carlo? — 
I  cannot  remember  that.  I  think  he  said  that,  that  if  *  any 
one  called  for  him  to  say  he  was  in  Monte  Carlo. 

Have  you  any  notion  why  he  did  not  want  it  to  be  known 
where  he  was  going? — In  the  first  place,  because  of  his  wife; 
and  secondly,  in  case  of  the  landlord  of  the  house  and  the 
furniture  company  bothering  Mrs.  Freedman  about  the  flat. 
I  have  seen  the  hammer  (label  47).  The  maid  used  that 
hammer  for  breaking  the  coals.  It  was  not  used  for  anything 
else.  I  remember  that  it  was  bought  when  we  took  the  house 
in  St.  George's  Road.  It  was  bought  on  a  card  with  a  number 
of  other  articles.  It  was  not  washed  or  scraped  in  any  way  to 
my  knowledge.  I  never  saw  Mr.  Slater  washing  his  water- 
proof. I  never  saw  him  doing  anything  which  might  be  sup- 
posed to  be  concealing  stains  upon  his  clothes.  His  conduct 
during  that  last  week  in  Glasgow  was  in  no  way  different  from 
his  ordinary  conduct.  I  knew  that  during  that  last  week 
he  was  making  inquiry  at  shipping  offices.  I  never  knew  of 
him  having  any  checked  trousers  or  light-coloured  spats.  He 
had  a  moustache  when  he  left  for  America ;  it  was  quite  a 
noticeable  moustache.  I  do  not  think  that  any  person  seeing 
him  could  have  mistaken  him  for  a  clean-shaven  man  at  that 
time. 

The  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  have  no  questions  to  ask. 

The  Court  adjourned  at  a  quarter  to  seven  o'clock. 


Fourth  Day— Thursday,  6th  May,  1909. 

The  Court  met  at  ten  o'clock. 

Samuel  Reid  SAMUEL  REID,  examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — I  am  acquainted 
with  the  prisoner  Slater.  I  was  in  Glasgow  when  Slater  came 
to  the  city,  about  the  beginning  of  November  last  year.  I 
met  him  in  Hope  Street.  When  I  met  him  he  had  not  taken  the 
flat  at  69  St.  George's  Road;  he  was  staying  in  Renfrew  Street. 
He  told  me  he  was  taking  a  flat  at  St.  George's  Road.  I 
was  up  in  that  house  before  the  furniture  was  put  in,  and  I 
saw  the  house.  At  the  time  the  furniture  was  put  into  the 
house  I  put  in  two  sacks  of  coal.  After  they  were  living  in 
the  house  I  was  there  on  the  Sundays.  I  remember  the 
Sunday  before  Christmas.  I  left  for  Belfast  on  the  Monday 
before  Christmas,  that  being  Monday,  the  21st  December.  I 
went  to  the  house  on  Sunday,  the  20th,  at  six  o'clock,  and  I 
stayed  there  till  about  10.30.  I  dined  with  Slater.  I  had 
my  little  boy  with  me.  I  have  got  a  little  girl  as  well. 
There  was  a  Sunday  before  that  when  I  was  in  the  house  and 
dined  with  Slater,  and  had  both  my  children  there.  The 
latest  I  would  leave  on  the  20th  would  be  10.30,  but  any  other 
Sunday  I  stopped  a  bit  later.  During  the  time  I  was  in  the 
house  on  the  20th  Slater  was  there.  My  little  boy  is  getting 
on  for  five  years  old.  After  the  murder  the  Glasgow  police 
followed  me  to  Belfast.  They  saw  me  there,  and  I  made  a 
statement  and  told  them  that  I  had  been  in  Slater's  house  on 
the  Sunday.  On  the  day  when  I  was  dining  with  Slater  hia 
moustache  was  growing.  It  was  very  noticeable.  His  hair, 
of  course,  is  very  black,  and  I  do  not  think  that  any  person 
could  have  mistaken  him  for  a  clean-shaven  man. 

Cross-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — What  are  you? — I 
am  an  agent. 

For  what? — A  commission  agent. 

For  what? — For  anything — horse  racing. 

Were  you  a  bookmaker  in  Glasgow? — I  was. 

When  did  you  first  come  to  know  Slater? — I  have  known 
Slater  these  last  twelve  or  fourteen  years. 

When  did  you  first  come  to  know  him? — In  London  some 
time  ago. 

How  many  years  ago? — Twelve  or  fourteen  years  ago. 

What  was  he  then? — Supposed  to  be  a  dentist. 

Was  he? — I  could  not  say  whether  he  was,  but  I  was  told 
he  was. 
226 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Who  told  you? — Different  people.  Samuel  Held 

Were  you  ever  at  his  place? — Not  in  London. 

Where  did  he  live? — I  could  not  say. 

Where  did  you  meet  him? — In  a  restaurant. 

Where? — Broad  Street,  Golden  Square. 

Where  after  that? — In  different  clubs. 

Do  you  mean  gambling  clubs? — Yes. 

How  did  he  make  his  living? — I  think  by  gambling. 

How  else? — That  is  all  I  know. 

Do  you  know  he  had  another  way  of  making  his  living? — 
I  could  not  say. 

Tell  the  truth? — I  am  speaking  the  truth. 

Do  you  not  know  quite  well  that  he  had  another  way  of 
making  his  living? — No. 

Gambling  was  the  only  way  you   knew? — That  is  what  I 
understood. 

Did  he  deal  in  jewels? — I  could  not  say. 

Did  you  ever  see  him  with  jewels? — I  have  seen  some  of  his 
things,  but  I  have  never  seen  him  dealing  with  them. 

Do  you  know  that  he  pawned  jewels? — I  could  not  say. 

Have  you  not  seen  pawn  tickets  in  his  possession? — No. 

How  long  did  you  know  him  in  London? — I  could  not  say 
exactly,  but  I  have  known  him  for  some  years. 

Did  you  then  come  to  Glasgow? — Yes. 

Where  did  you  live  in  Glasgow? — In  Renfrew  Street  at  first, 
and  then,  after  I  was  married,  I  stayed  off  the  New  City  Road. 

Were  you  a  bookmaker  in  Glasgow? — Yes. 

When  did  Slater  come  to  Glasgow  ? — This  last  time  ? 

Yes? — I  could  not  say  exactly.     I  think  it  was  in  November. 

Where  did  you  meet  him? — On  the  Friday,  in  a  public-house 
in  Hope  Street. 

Just  casually  on  the  street? — In  a  public-house. 

What  public-house? — Galloway's. 

During  the  day? — Yes. 

Were  you  surprised  to  see  him  in  Glasgow? — I  was. 

Did  he  tell  you  why  he  had  come? — I  could  not  say  what  he 
had  come  for. 

Did  he  tell  you  where  he  was  living? — Not  at  the  time. 

Where  did  you  meet  afterwards? — In  the  clubs. 

What  clubs?— In  the  Vaudeville. 

Where? — At  the  back  of  the  General  Post  Office. 

Is  that  a  gambling  club? — Yes. 

Where  else? — Main  Street,  Gorbals. 

What  was  there? — A  club. 

A  gambling  club? — Yes. 

Did  you  see  him  frequently  at  these  two  clubs  in  November 
and  December? — Yes. 

Was  he  gambling  there? — Yes. 

227 


>scar 


Slate 


r. 


Samuel  Reid        When  did  you  come  to  know  where  he  lived? — I  could  not 
say  the  date. 

Did  he  tell  you  where  he  lived  when  you  first  met  him  at 
the  public-house? — No. 

How  did  you  come  to  know  where  he  lived? — We  went  home 
together,  and  he  told  me  to  meet  him. 

Where? — In  his  private  house. 

Where? — Lodgings  in  Renfrew  Street. 

Did  you  meet  him  there? — Yes. 

When? — On  the  Saturday  morning. 

In  the  beginning  of  November? — I  could  not  say  whether  it 
•was  the  beginning  or  the  end;  I  could  not  say  the  date. 

When  did  he  leave  from  there? — He  shifted,   I  believe,  on 
the  Saturday. 

Did  he  tell  you  where  he  was  going? — Yes. 

Did  he  tell  you  under  what  name  he  was  going? — Anderson, 
I  believe. 

Did  he  tell  you  why? — No. 

Did  you  ask? — No. 

Did  he  tell  you  he  was  going  as  a  dentist? — No,  I  could  not 
say;  he  never  said  anything  to  me. 

In  November  or  December  did  you  hear  anything  about  his 
carrying  on  business  as  a  dentist? — I  could  not  say. 

Did  he  invite  you  to  come  and  see  him  at  his  house? — Yes, 
on  the  Sundays. 

Every  Sunday? — Yes,  every  Sunday. 

Did  you  go  every  Sunday? — Yes,  four  Sundays. 

On  his  invitation? — Yes. 

Did  he  just  give  you  a  standing  invitation  at  the  beginning- 
to  go  on  the  Sundays? — Yes. 

Did  you   ever  meet  anybody  else  at  his  house? — I  do  not 
remember  meeting  anybody. 

Have     you     any     special     recollection     of     Sunday,      20th 
December  ? — No . 

You  did  not  note  the  date  at  the  time? — No. 

And  you  have  no  special  recollection? — No. 

What  hour  did  you  usually  go? — Six  o'clock. 

And  sometimes  later? — No. 

Did  he  dine  at  six? — No,  we  dined  at  seven. 

How  did  you  spend  your  time? — Playing  with  the  children. 

Did  you  see  anybody  else  there  besides  yourself  and  your 
children? — I  do  not  think  so;  I  could  not  say. 

Was  there  any  woman  there? — Yes,  there  was  a  lady  there. 

Do  you  know  her? — Yes. 

Do  you  recollect  of  him  telling  you  on  any  Sunday  that  he 
was  going  to  America? — No,  I  could  not  say  that. 

Had  you  ever  any  talk  at  any  of  your  Sunday  meetings  about 
his  leaving  Glasgow? — No,  he  did  not  say  that,  but  he  said  he 
liked  America  better,  that  there  was  more  business  there. 
228 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

What  sort  of  business? — I  could  not  say.  Samuel  Reid 

Did  you  ask  him? — No. 

What  did  you  think  at  the  time? — I  did  not  think  anything. 

Did  you  know  how  he  was  getting  his  living? — By  gambling. 

In  Glasgow? — Yes. 

Did  you  know  whether  he  was  making  money  or  losing 
money? — I  could  not  really  tell  you. 

Did  he  never  tell  you? — No. 

Were  you  surprised  to  find  that  he  had  left  Glasgow  without 
saying  good-bye  to  you? — I  said  good-bye  to  him. 

Where? — In  his  house. 

When? — On  the  last  Sunday  I  was  up.  I  went  away  to 
Belfast. 

Were  you  surprised  to  hear  that  he  had  left  Glasgow  ? — I  was 
surprised  for  the  time. 

He  had  never  indicated  to  you  that  he  was  going  away? 
—No. 

Dr.  WILLIAM  GEORGE  AITCHISON  ROBERTSON,  examined  by  William  G.  A. 
Mr.  M'CLTJRE — I  am  a  Doctor  of  Medicine,  a  Doctor  of  Science  °  epts01 
of  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  and  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal 
College  of  Physicians  and  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh. 
I  have  specialised  in  medical  jurisprudence,  and  have  lectured 
on  it  for  the  last  twelve  years,  and  I  am  the  author  of  a  work 
upon  medical  jurisprudence.  I  examine  in  that  subject  for  the 
Royal  College  of  Physicians.  I  have  had  submitted  to  me 
certain  productions  in  this  case — a  skin  rug,  a  carpet  rug,  a 
claw  hammer,  and  a  waterproof  coat.  I  have  read  the  medical 
reports  of  Dr.  Glaister  and  Dr.  Gait.  I  read  also  the  medical 
report  of  Dr.  Glaister  and  Dr.  Littlejohn  as  regards  the  tests 
for  blood.  Looking  to  the  extent  of  the  injuries  inflicted  upon 
this  woman,  Miss  Gilchrist,  I  think  the  sort  of  instrument  used 
was  some  blunt  weapon.  The  hammer  produced  does  not 
strike  me  in  the  least  as  being  a  likely  one,  because  the  multi- 
plicity of  wounds  and  their  extent  is  out  of  all  proportion  to 
the  size  of  the  hammer.  The  hammer  is  a  very  light  one. 
Of  course,  theoretically,  if  a  light  hammer  is  wielded  with 
terrific  force,  it  may  cause  injuries  which  a  heavier  weapon 
would  with  less  force,  but  from  the  very  extensive  smashing 
of  the  skull,  I  would  consider  that  this  small  hammer  is  a  very 
unlikely  weapon.  I  examined  that  hammer  for  blood  stains, 
and  there  are  no  blood  stains  upon  it.  I  see  under  the  head  of 
it  some  material  which  looks  like  coal  dust. 

Do  you  see  anything  which  suggests  to  you  that  the  top  of 
the  hammer,  the  upper  part  of  the  handle,  has  been  washed 
or  scraped? — No  appearance  whatever  of  either  having  been 
washed  or  scraped,  but  the  lower  part  somewhat  dirtied  by 
being  held  in  a  dirty  hand.  That  is  all  I  can  discover  about 
th«  handle. 

229 


Oscar  Slater. 

William  G.  A.  Have  you  made  as  careful  an  examination  as  you  could  for  the 
Robertson  purpose  of  detecting  the  presence  of  blood  corpuscles  upon  it  ? — 
I  have  not,  but  I  see  that  there  are  no  clots  of  blood  upon  it, 
absolutely  no  appearance  of  blood  whatever,  even  in  the 
crevices  where  it  might  have  lodged,  where  it  would  be  impossible 
almost  to  remove  it  by  washing  or  by  scraping.  There  is  abso- 
lutely no  sign  of  scraping.  The  hammer  has  absolutely  no 
signs  of  blood  about  it. 

Would  the  murderer  who  carried  through  this  murder  be 
likely  to  have  blood  upon  his  clothes  ? — I  should  think  he  would 
be  bespattered  thoroughly  with  blood.  I  say  so  because  of  the 
injuries,  which  would  splash  up  blood  on  the  surrounding 
objects  for  a  very  considerable  distance.  I  am  informed  that 
the  fire-irons  had  blood  over  them,  that  there  was  a  consider- 
able quantity  upon  the  coal  scuttle,  that  the  hearth  rug  had  a 
great  deal  of  blood  upon  it,  and  that  the  tablecloth,  which  was 
hanging  down  the  table  on  the  other  side  of  the  body,  had  a 
considerable  amount  of  blood  upon  it. 

Do  you  think  it  would  be  possible  for  a  person  who  knelt 
upon  the  body  and  smashed  at  the  face  with  the  implement 
to  escape  considerable  blood  marking? — I  should  think  he 
would  be  more  or  less  covered  with  blood.  I  have  looked  at 
the  waterproof  coat  (production  No.  43).  I  have  found  no 
signs  of  blood  whatever  upon  it.  Supposing  the  murderer  had 
done  the  deed  with  that  coat  on,  I  certainly  agree  that  the 
outside  of  the  coat  should  be  much  marked  with  blood.  I 
would  expect  that. 

Would  you  expect  that  his  clothes,  and  about  his  wrists  and 
the  ends  of  his  sleeves  where  his  hands  were,  would  probably 
show  signs  of  blood,  almost  certainly? — Certainly. 

Suppose  he  had  concealed  the  instrument  with  which  thia 
was  done  in  his  pockets,  would  you  expect  to  find  blood  in  the 
pockets? — There  are  no  signs  whatever  of  blood  in  the  pockets. 
If  he  had  done  this  with  his  ordinary  clothes  on  and  then  put 
on  the  coat,  I  would  expect  to  find  the  inside  of  the  coat  show- 
ing blood  deeply.  I  have  made  an  examination,  and  I  find 
no  trace  of  blood  whatever.  There  are  some  small  spots  on 
the  coat;  larger  ones  have  been  cut  out,  and  therefore  I 
have  not  seen  them.  They  are  not  produced  here  at  all. 

From  the  spots  that  are  on  the  coat,  is  there  any  one  of 
them  indicative  of  blood? — Not  in  the  least  resembling  blood 
stains.  The  coat  showed  no  signs  whatever,  so  far  as  I  can 
make  out,  of  having  been  washed. 

Were  those  stains  which  were  upon  it  stains  that  looked  as 
if  something  had  dropped  on  the  coat  and  there  remained? — 
They  might  have  been  drips  from  an  umbrella,  or  mud  stains. 

But  you  do  not  think  in  any  way  characteristic  of  blood? — 
Not  in  any  way  characteristic  of  blood.  There  is  no  spreading 
230 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

of  the  stains  which  I  can  see   as  if  water  had  been  applied.  William  G.  A. 

They  are  quite  clean  where  they  occur,  and  are  quite  distinct.  Robertson 

I  also  examined  the  auger  (production  No.  25).     The  result  of 

my  examination  of  it  is,  that  the  upper  part — at  least  the  part 

nearest  the  hands,  not  the  curling  bit,  but  the  plain  bit,  and 

the  upper   circles  here  (indicating),  are   much  more   corroded 

with  rust  than  is  the  lower  part;    and   an   examination   of  a 

part  of  this  deep  corrosion  yields  the  presence  of  one  test  for 

blood.        I    cannot   say   definitely    whether  there  is    blood   on 

that  or  not.       I  have  no  theory  as  to  how  the  grey  hair  became 

attached  to  it. 

Do  you  think  that  it  is  a  likely  weapon  to  cause  the  wounds 
which  were  described? — Of  the  two  it  is  more  likely  to  have 
caused  the  wounds  than  the  hammer,  but  I  do  not  think  it  is 
the  instrument.  I  should  expect  to  find  an  instrument  of 
heavier  weight  than  that.  There  was  a  skin  rug  laid  over 
the  top  of  the  head  of  Miss  Gilchrist,  with  long  hairs;  there 
was  a  considerable  amount  of  blood  upon  the  hairy  side  of 
that  rug,  which  I  was  led  to  understand  was  next  the  body. 

Did  you  find  blood  upon  the  other  side  of  it,  on  the  top? — 
There  are  a  few  stains,  one  large  one,  about  1£  inches 
square,  with  from  it  a  trail  of  three  or  four  drops,  as  if  it  had 
dropped  from  perhaps  the  coat  of  the  assailant. 

If  only  one  side  of  the  rug  was  in  contact  with  the  body, 
what  would  you  expect  to  have  caused  the  stains  on  the  other 
side? — It  could  only  be  droppings  from  something.  That  is 
only  a  surmise. 

Cross-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATE — I  understand  that 
your  evidence  is  given  entirely  upon  the  facts  disclosed  in 
Professor  Glaister's  report? — That  is  so. 

I  suppose  you  would  agree  that  the  two  medical  gentlemen 
who  actually  saw  the  body,  and  saw  the  wounds,  would  be 
in  a  much  better  position  to  judge  than  you  who  only  read 
their  report? — Yes. 

You  offer  the  opinion  that  because  of  the  multiplicity  and 
the  extent  of  the  wounds,  you  do  not  think  the  hammer  could 
do  it?— I  do. 

What  do  you  judge  to  be  the  number  of  blows  inflicted? — 
That  would  be  impossible  to  say. 

What  would  you  judge  to  be  the  number  of  wounds  inflicted? 
— I  think  they  are  narrated  in  the  report  given. 

Do  you  infer  from  the  report  that  the  old  lady's  face  and 
head  were  simply  battered  in? — Yes. 

Did  you  notice  that  a  number  of  wounds  were  spindle- 
shaped? — I  did. 

Did  you  observe  that  one  of  the  blows,  at  all  events,  had 
just  driven  in  the  left  eyeball? — Yes. 

Leaving  a  round  hole? — Yes. 

231 


Oscar  Slater. 

WilliamTG.  A.  Must  that,  therefore,  have  been  done  by  a  probably  rounded 
instrument  of  comparatively  small  diameter,  driven  straight 
in? — I  see  the  wound  to  which  you  refer  is  2  inches  by  £  of 
an  inch;  that,  of  course,  is  much  larger  than  the  head  of  the 
hammer  we  have  here. 

Do  you  say  that  if  the  hammer  was  wielded  by  a  powerful 
hand  and  a  rapid  succession  of  blows  struck  with  it  by  a 
powerful  hand  on  the  head  of  a  lady  over  eighty-three  years 
of  age,  these  wounds  could  not  have  been  inflicted? — It  is 
possible,  but  not  probable. 

What  instrument  do  you  think  would  be  more  likely? — I 
should  think  a  heavy  poker. 

Do  you  mean  a  long  instrument  ? — It  might  be  long  or  short ; 
it  might  be  a  crowbar. 

Beating  with  it? — Beating  and  thrusting  with  it. 

By  a  crowbar  you  mean  a  bar  about  2  or  3  feet  long! — It 
may  be  any  length. 

Well,  the  usual  crowbar  is  2  or  3  feet  long? — Yes. 

You  think  that  might  be  it? — Yes. 

With  the  head  of  the  hammer,  and  with  the  hammer  turned 
sideways,  and  by  the  use  of  the  claws  of  the  hammer,  could 
not  all  the  wounds  that  you  have  seen  described  in  the  report 
have  been  inflicted? — No,  I  cannot  see  how  these  spindle- 
shaped  wounds  could  ever  have  been  inflicted  by  the  hammer. 

Do  you  not  see  how  with  the  claws  of  the  hammer  it  could 
be  done? — Then  there  would  be  a  portion  of  skin  between; 
each  claw  would  make  its  own  injury. 

Have  you  measured  carefully  the  claws  of  the  hammer? — 
Yes. 

And  the  distance  between  the  claws? — Yes. 

What  are  your  measurements? — I  have  not  got  them  here, 
but  I  have  compared  them  with  the  wounds  that  are  described, 
and  the  wounds  do  not  in  the  least  degree  appear  to  me  to 
correspond  to  the  injuries  which  might  be  inflicted  by  the  claw 
end  of  the  hammer. 

But  you  would  riot  expect,  would  you,  that  they  would  leave 
the  exact  marks  of  the  claws  of  the  hammer  on  the  face  or 
head? — I  should  think  that  we  should  have  at  least  had  some 
that  would  show  the  direct  impression  of  the  claw  end. 

Do  you  mean  with  a  rain  of  thirty  or  forty  blows? — I  do. 

When  did  you  examine  the  hammer? — On  Friday  and  Satur- 
day of  last  week,  on  30th  April  and  1st  of  May. 

Do  you  say  that  about  halfway  down  the  shaft,  the 
shaft  of  the  hammer  has  no  appearance  of  having  been 
scrubbed,  or  the  surface  of  the  wood  of  the  hammer  having 
been  roughened  and  bleached? — Yes,  I  say  that. 

Is  there  no  difference  to  your  eye  between  the  half  near 
232 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

the  head  and  the  half   near  the  handle? — Do   you   mean    in  William  G.  A. 
colour?  Robertson 

Yes  ? — Certainly  there  is  the  dirty  end  of  it. 

And  do  you  see  no  evidence  of  scraping  or  scrubbing? — 
None. 

Or  of  the  wood  having  been  roughened  or  bleached? — It  is 
natural.  If  you  look  at  any  ordinary  hammer  you  will  see 
that  in  the  wood. 

Did  you  make  any  test  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining 
whether  there  was  any  blood? — I  did  not. 

Are  blood  stains  easily  removed  by  water? — If  they  are 
immediately  removed  they  are,  but  not  when  the  blood  clots 
or  coagulates. 

But  if  they  are  treated  afterwards  with  water,  are  not 
blood  stains  very  easily  removed? — By  no  means;  they  are 
exceedingly  difficult  to  remove,  and  in  the  soft  wood  of  this 
hammer  they  would  be  very  difficult  to  remove  indeed. 

If  you  take  the  waterproof  coat  or  the  head  of  the  hammer, 
what  would  be  the  best  means  of  removing  blood  stains? — 
A  little  cold  water,  or  cold  water  in  which  a  little  salt  has 
been  dissolved. 

And  will  that  effectually  remove  them? — It  would  not 
effectually  remove  them ;  it  would  remove  a  few  of  the  corpuscles. 

Would  you  be  able  by  analysis  to  find  traces  of  the  blood  if, 
shortly  after,  the  blood  on  the  hammer  or  on  the  coat  had 
been  treated  as  you  have  described? — I  think  so. 

How? — Do  you  mean  me  to  describe  the  tests  for  blood? 

No,  I  mean,  suppose  it  is  treated  effectually  as  you  have 
described  with  water  or  with  water  and  salt,  would  you  still 
find  traces  of  the  blood? — Yes,  in  a  hammer  such  as  this,  which 
is  full  of  crevices,  it  would  be  impossible  to  wash  the  blood 
clots  out  from  those  crevices. 

Suppose  that  the  man  took  means  with  water  and  salt  to 
remove  the  blood  from  the  crevices,  do  you  say  that  could  not 
be  done? — I  should  think  it  almost  impossible  to  be  done,  and 
if  the  hammer  head  were  removed  one  would  then  find  under- 
neath the  flanges  evidence  of  the  blood. 

Then  is  it  your  evidence  that  once  you  get  the  blood  on  the 
hammer  you  cannot  effectively  remove  it  with  water,  even 
with  water  mixed  with  salt? — Unless  it  is  immediately  removed. 
If  the  hammer  was  put  immediately  under  a  water  tap  then 
it  might  be  washed  off  with  the  water. 

That  would  do  it? — I  do  not  say  it  would ;  I  say  that  it  might 
do  it. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  M'CuiRE — Your  conclusions  really  agree 
with  the  conclusion  of  Professor  Glaister  and  Professor  Little- 
john? — Perhaps  you  will  state  what  they  are. 

233 


Oscar  Slater. 

William  G.  A.  You  have  seen  their  report  where  they  say  that  they  cannot 
Robertson  etate  positively  that  there  are  blood  corpuscles? — That  is  so. 

You  find  no  trace  thereof  whatsoever? — That  is  so. 

Look  at  that  card  with  a  hammer  and  other  implements  upon 
it,  and  take  it  from  me  that  this  was  bought  at  the  same  shop 
as  the  other  hammer,  and  that  similar  implements  were  upon 
another  card  containing  the  hammer  produced  in  the  present 
case,  do  you  see  a  general  similarity  between  the  shafts  of  the 
two  hammers? — A  very  great  similarity. 

Can  you  really  say  anything  more  than  this,  that  the  older 
hammer  is  dirtier? — It  has  been  used. 

It  is  dirtier  at  the  lower  end  than  at  the  upper  end? — Yes. 

In  fact,  where  the  hand  would  be  it  is  dirtier  than  higher 
up? — That  is  so. 

Is  not  that  the  whole  matter? — That  is  so. 

Alex.  Veitch  Dr.  ALEXANDER  VEITCH,  examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — I  am  a 
Bachelor  of  Medicine  and  Master  of  Surgery  of  Edinburgh 
University.  I  have  been  in  practice  for  almost  nineteen  years. 
I  have  had  very  many  cases  of  injuries  to  the  human  body 
to  investigate.  I  do  not  hold  any  appointment,  but 
several  firms  of  lawyers  employ  me  to  investigate  accidents 
and  alleged  accidents.  I  have  examined  the  produc- 
tions in  this  case,  especially  the  hammer,  for  blood.  I 
found  absolutely  no  appearance  of  blood  whatsoever.  I  read 
the  medical  reports  as  to  the  injuries  inflicted  upon  the  body 
of  Miss  Gilchrist.  I  consider  the  hammer  that  has  been  pro- 
duced to  be  an  unlikely  instrument  to  inflict  the  extensive 
injuries  which  are  narrated  in  the  report.  My  opinion  is  that 
it  is  quite  impossible  to  determine  either  the  size,  the  shape, 
or  the  weight  of  the  instrument  that  could  produce  such  injuries. 
From  the  injuries  I  could  not  myself  say  what  the  instrument 
was  that  was  used. 

Professor  Glaister  suggested  that  not  only  that  hammer  but 
other  hammers  or  crowbars  might  have  inflicted  the  injuries. 
Do  you  agree  with  that  opinion? — Yes.  I  would  suggest  that 
a  piece  of  a  crowbar  or  a  larger  hammer  would  be  more  likely 
to  have  produced  the  injuries,  but  what  instrument  was  used  I 
really  cannot  say. 

Suppose  that  hammer  were  used,  could  it  possibly  have 
inflicted  the  injuries? — I  should  say  conceivably,  but  there  is 
absolutely  no  evidence  in  my  mind  to  support  it.  In  my 
opinion,  it  is  not  a  likely  instrument.  I  examined  the  coat 
which  has  been  produced,  and  which  belongs  to  the  prisoner. 
I  inspected  it  for  blood  stains.  Considering  the  amount  of 
blood  that  was  scattered  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Miss  Gilchrist's 
body  the  assailant  could  not  escape  getting  a  good  deal  of 

234 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

blood  on  his  own  person,  because  he  must  have  been  kneeling,  Alex.  Veitch 

or  standing,  or  resting  with  one  knee  upon  the  chest  of  the 

old  lady.     Being  told  that  Professor  Glaister's  theory  is  that 

the  assailant  was  kneeling  upon  the  body  of  Miss  Gilchrist, 

and  inflicting  blows  upon  her  head  while  in  that  position — I 

think  he  would  be  certain  to  come  in  for  a  good  deal  of  blood 

splashing.     If  he  was  wearing  that  coat  at  the  time,  or  if  he 

put  it  on  afterwards,  it  was  bound  to  have  shown  marks  of 

blood.     I  have  seen  no  semblance  of  a  blood  stain  on  the  coat — 

there     is     no     stain     with     the     characteristic     appearances 

of    a    blood   stain.       Such    slight    markings    as     are    on    the 

coat    are    not    of    the    appearance    of    blood.       I    examined 

the     inside     of     the     coat,     the     pockets,     and     the     sleeve, 

and    nowhere    did    I    find    any     trace    of     blood    whatsoever. 

The  coat,   so  far  as  I  could  see,  showed  no  signs  of  having 

been  washed.     The  stains  which  were  on  the  coat  showed  no 

signs  of  having  been  tampered  with  water.     If  water  had  been 

applied  to  the  stains  I  think  that  there  would  have  been  some 

appearance   indicative  that  washing  had   been   attempted.     I 

would  have  expected  certain  appearances  which  are  not  there. 

I  should  have  expected  that  the  outer  ring  of  the  stain  would 

have  been  denser  than  the  centre.     If  the  washing  had  gone 

to   any  extent  the  outer  ring  of  the   stain   would   have  been 

indefinite.       Such    stains     as    are    on     the    coat     are     quite 

distinct,  and  I  would  say  that  they  are  untampered  with.     To 

the  best  of  my  belief  they  are  not  blood.     I  found  no  trace  of 

blood  about  the  hammer.     I  am  of  opinion  that  it  has  neither 

been  washed  nor  scraped.     Close  up  to  the  end  of  the  shaft 

the  handle  has  been  gripped  more  frequently,  and  there  is  an 

appearance  of  coal  dust  near  the  hammer  head  which  would  give 

a  difference  to  the  staining  along  the  shaft.     It  is  dirtier  and 

blacker  towards  the  lower  end  where  the  person  chipping  the 

coals  would  be  clutching  it.     I  saw  some  rust  on  the  hammer, 

but  there  is  absolutely  nothing  to  suggest  to  me  that  that  rust 

is  blood  in  any  form  at  all.     Supposing  that  this  hammer  had 

been  wielded  by  the  assailant,  and  Miss  Gilchrist's  head  was 

smashed,   as   we  know   it  was,  by   many  blows,   the  hammer 

necessarily  would  have  had  a  lot  of  blood  about  its  head  and 

probably  all  over.     I  see  no  signs  of  scraping  or  scrubbing  on 

the  lower  portion  of  the  handle.     If  the  assailant  was  wielding 

this  weapon  his  hands  would  probably  be  bloody,  and  I  should 

expect  to  see  some  sign  of  that  on  the  lower  part  of  the  handle. 

There  is  no  sign  of  scraping  or  scrubbing  whatsoever.     I  am 

certainly  dealing  with  probabilities  here. 

Cross-examined  by  the  LORD  ADVOCATB — From  your  examina- 
tion of  the  report  how  many  blows  do  you  think  were  struck  ? — 
It  is  impossible  to  tell. 

235 


Oscar  Slater. 

Alex.  Veiteh  Would  you  judge  that  there  had  been  a  great  many  blows 
struck? — A  good  many. 

Have  you  ever,  in  your  experience,  seen  a  case  where  there 
was  such  an  amount  of  mauling? — Never. 

In  your  judgment,  must  it  have  been  effected  by  a  succession 
of  blows? — I  should  expect  so. 

The  assailant  probably  kneeling  on  the  body  of  the  victim? — 
Probably. 

Do  you  judge  it  was  in  that  way  that  the  fractures  of  the  ribs 
and  breast  bone  were  caused? — That  is  my  theory. 

Are  you  in  as  good  a  position  to  judge  of  the  appearance  of 
the  wounds  as  the  men  who  made  the  examination? — Certainly 
not. 

Did  you,  in  trying  to  conjecture  what  sort  of  implement  had 
been  used,  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  a  large  instrument 
or  a  small  one? — I  thought  it  more  likely  to  be  something  of 
the  nature  of  a  crowbar — I  mean  a  portion  of  a  crowbar,  or  a 
piece  of  railing,  or  something  of  that  sort — a  blunt  instrument. 

And  used  in  two  different  ways  by  beating  and  thrusting? — 
Yes. 

That  would  have  done  it? — Yes. 

And  you  say  conceivably  the  hammer,  wielded  by  a  powerful 
hand,  would  do  it? — Conceivably,  but  unlikely.  I  should  have 
thought  of  a  larger  hammer. 

The  shape  of  the  instrument  would  do,  but  you  think  not 
the  size? — I  could  not  go  that  length. 

What  length  do  you  go?  You  said  you  thought  a  larger 
hammer  would  have  been  necessary.  How  much  larger  do 
you  think? — I  thought  you  dissociated  shape  from  size. 

I  thought  you  said  that  you  would  have  expected  a  larger 
hammer  ? — Of  course  the  shape  of  the  thing  depends  on  the  size. 

Certainly,  to  some  extent.  Describe  to  us  the  kind  of  hammer 
that  you  think,  judging  from  the  report,  would  have  been 
sufficient? — Nearly  twice  as  large  as  that  hammer. 

Would  not  a  smaller  hammer,  if  wielded  by  a  powerful  hand 
upon  a  very  old  lady,  have  effected  the  same  purpose? — No, 
I  should  have  expected  different  wounds. 

You  mean  different  in  shape? — I  should  have  expected  a  class 
of  fracture  that  is  not  present  in  this  case. 

What  class  of  fracture  would  you  have  expected  to  have  been 
produced  by  a  lighter  hammer? — A  depressed  fracture,  pene- 
trating, and  of  comparatively  small  size. 

Would  not  that  again  depend  on  the  number  of  blows  struck  1 
— I  should  expect  that  any  one  wielding  a  hammer  for  that 
purpose  would  strike  to  the  best  of  his  effort,  at  every  stroke. 

I  suppose  you  made  no  analysis  of  the  stains  found  either 
on  the  coat  or  on  the  hammer? — No,  I  made  none. 

And  do  you  agree  that  water  used  immediately  afterwards 

236 


Bedroom,  15  Queen's  Terrace,  showing  toilet  table  and  g&s  bracket 

l''r/nn  tin'   l'lioln;iriii>li  /)(Wn<vi/  in   Court 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


would     remove     the     blood     stains     very     effectually  ? — Very  Alex.  Veiteh 
effectually. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  M'CLURE — You  had  no  opportunity  of 
seeing  this  body? — No. 

Miss  Gilchrist  was  buried  a  long  time  before  you  were  brought 
into  connection  with  this  case1? — Yes. 

And  you  are  giving  your  evidence  on  a  criticism  of  the  report 
that  has  been  lodged  from  the  experience  which  you  have 
gained? — Yes. 

The  evidence  for  the  defence  was  then  closed. 


The  Lord  Advocate's  Address  to  the  Jury. 

The  LORD  ADVOCATE  then  addressed  the  jury  as  follows :  —  Lord 
May  it  please  your  lordship — Gentlemen  of  the  jury,  v 
on  the  evening  of  the  21st  December  last  a  lady, 
upwards  of  eighty-three  years  of  age,  who  had,  so 
far  as  we  know,  not  a  single  enemy  in  the  world,  was 
found  murdered  in  her  own  dining-room,  under  circumstances 
of  such  savage  ferocity  as  to  beggar  all  description.  There 
are  no  rival  or  conflicting  theories  in  this  case  as  to  the  way 
in  which  this  aged  and  defenceless  lady  met  her  tragic  end. 
She  was  literally  battered  to  death  by  her  assailant,  who  knelt 
on  the  body  of  his  victim  whilst  he  was  inflicting  a  rain  of 
fatal  blows.  I  say,  gentlemen,  that  the  hand  which  dealt 
these  blows  was  the  hand  of  the  prisoner,  and  I  hope  to  be 
able  to  satisfy  you  that  he,  and  he  alone,  was  the  perpetrator 
of  an  act  of  savagery  which  happily  finds  few,  if  any,  parallels 
in  the  annals  of  crime.  Up  to  yesterday  afternoon  I  should 
have  thought  that  there  was  one  serious  difficulty  which  con- 
fronted you — the  difficulty  of  conceiving  that  there  was  in 
existence  a  human  being  capable  of  doing  such  a  dastardly 
deed.  Gentlemen,  that  difficulty,  I  think,  was  removed  yes- 
terday afternoon  when  we  heard  from  the  lips  of  one  who 
seemingly  knew  the  prisoner  better  than  any  one  else,  who 
had  known  him  longer  and  known  him  better  than  any 
witness  examined,  that  he  had  followed  a  life  which  descends 
to  the  very  lowest  depths  of  human  degradation,  for,  by  the 
universal  judgment  of  mankind,  the  man  who  lives  upon  the 
proceeds  of  prostitution  has  sunk  to  the  lowest  depths,  and 
all  moral  sense  in  him  has  been  destroyed  and  has  ceased  to 
exist.  That  difficulty  removed,  I  say  without  hesitation 
that  the  man  in  the  dock  is  capable  of  having  committed  this 
dastardly  outrage,  and  the  question  for  you  to  consider  is 
whether  or  not  the  evidence  has  brought  it  home  to  him. 

Now,  the  motive  for  the  crime  is  as  plain  as  daylight.     This 

237 


Oscar  Slater. 

Lord  old  lady,  living  in  a  plain,  simple,  and  unostentatious  way, 
Advocate  &s  vou  ^ave  ha(j  described,  with  only  a  single  servant,  living 
in  a  respectable  house,  though  no  doubt  a  comparatively 
small  house,  had  an  exceptionally  and  inordinately  large 
number  of  jewels.  This  seems  to  have  been  her  only  extrava- 
gance. At  the  time  of  her  death,  according  to  the  evidence 
given  before  you,  she  was  actually  possessed  of  and  had  in 
her  house  jewels  to  the  value  of  upwards  of  £1380, 
jewels  which,  if  bought  in  a  shop  in  the  ordinary  way,  would 
have  cost  no  less  than  £3000.  It  was  so  remarkable  that  it 
had  become,  as  it  were,  the  tittle  tattle  of  the  neighbourhood 
that  she  was  possessed  of  these  valuable  jewels;  it  was  not 
money  in  the  house,  it  was  this  exceptional  possession  held  by 
this  lady  living  in  this  simple  and  defenceless  way.  We  shall 
see  in  the  sequel  how  it  was  that  the  prisoner  came  to  know 
that  she  was  possessed  of  these  jewels. 

If  you  will  turn  with  me  and  examine  for  a  few  minutes  the 
bare  outlines,  the  undisputed  facts,  of  this  case,  I  believe  you 
will  find  that  they  yield  six  or  seven  priceless  inferences  to 
enable  you  to  form  a  judgment  on  the  case.  Gentlemen,  the 
old  lady  and  her  servant  were  the  only  inmates  of  the  house, 
a  house  situated  in  a  respectable  and  very  quiet  and  not  much 
frequented  street,  in  the  West  End  of  Glasgow.  The  house 
was  one  stair  up,  and  it  was  the  only  occupied  house  on  that 
stair,  there  being  no  inhabitants  in  the  house  above  at  this 
time.  The  habits  of  the  two  inmates  were  simple  and  regular, 
almost  monotonous.  The  old  lady  had  a  few  visitors,  but 
practically  no  male  visitors.  Her  servant  was,  as  a  rule,  the 
only  other  occupant  of  the  house,  and  former  servants  seem 
to  have  been  almost  her  only  visitors  to  the  house.  The 
practice  of  the  servant  was  to  go  out  in  the  evenings  about 
seven  o'clock  to  do  the  messages  and  to  fetch  the  old  lady 
her  newspaper.  On  the  night  of  21st  December  last,  the 
servant  left  as  usual  to  get  the  newspaper  and  to  come  back 
with  it,  and  then  to  go  out  for  the  rest  of  the  messages. 
There  were  three  locks  on  the  door  of  the  stairhead,  two  of 
which  were  opened  by  the  latch  keys  which  the  servant  had 
with  her  as  a  rule.  The  door  at  the  foot  of  the  stair,  out  of 
the  close,  as  the  Glasgow  people  say,  was  locked  by  one  key. 
That  door  at  the  closemouth  could  be  opened  by  means  of  a 
handle,  you  will  remember,  close  by  the  dining-room  door 
inside  the  house.  The  servant  took  her  latch  keys  with  her 
as  usual,  and  left  the  outer  door  of  the  close  on  the  check, 
closed,  so  that  no  one  could  enter  without  the  key  unless 
the  occupant  of  the  house  admitted  him.  According  to  the 
evidence  she  was  out  and  away  from  the  house  for  the  best 
part  of  ten  minutes.  She  had  only  to  go  to  St.  George's 
Road  to  buy  the  newspaper  and  come  back.  She  met  some 
one  on  the  road  and  that  detained  her.  She  had  left  her 
238 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


mistress  sitting  at  the  dining-room  table,  with  her  back  to  Lord 
the  fire,  reading  a  magazine.  When  she  came  back  she  found  Advocate 
the  outer  door  of  the  closemouth  open,  and  when  she  ascended 
the  stair  she  found,  standing  at  the  door  of  the  house,  her 
neighbour,  Mr.  Adams.  Mr.  Adams  told  her  that  there  was 
something  wrong  inside,  that  he  had  heard  noises  down  below, 
and  had  come  up ;  he  had  rung  at  the  door,  and  the  door  was 
not  opened.  They  were  both,  therefore,  on  the  alert;  they 
both  knew  to  expect  something  unusual,  something  wrong. 
The  servant  maid  thought  the  sounds  were  possibly  those  of 
the  clothes  line  pulleys.  She  opened  the  door  and  immediately 
stepped  inside — Mr.  Adams  was  just  at  the  threshold — when 
there  emerged  from  the  bedroom  door  a  man.  The  bedroom 
was  lighted ;  it  had  been  left  in  darkness  when  the  servant  went 
out.  The  man  walked  steadily,  deliberately,  from  the  bed- 
room door  to  the  outer  door,  and  passed  the  servant,  passed 
Mr.  Adams.  Immediately  he  passed,  he  darted  down  the  stair 
at  full  speed.  When  he  had  reached  the  closemouth  he 
glanced  to  the  east  along  St.  George's  Road,  turned  to  the 
west,  and  ran  along  West  Princes  Street,  westwards.  A  few 
yards  from  the  door  he  knocked  against  a  little  girl  and  pushed 
past  her,  and  turned  down  West  Cumberland  Street.  He 
must  have  doubled  on  his  path  probably  more  than  once, 
because  between  7.30  and  eight  o'clock  he  appeared  at  the 
Kelvinbridge  Subway  Station,  which  could  have  been  reached 
in  some  seven  or  ten  minutes'  walking,  and  with  running  could 
easily  have  been  reached  in  some  five  minutes.  Probably  he 
cannot  have  gone  directly.  He  dashed  past  the  turnstile 
and  downstairs  to  the  Subway,  and  probably  caught  a  passing 
train.  The  man  who  passed  Mr.  Adams,  and  the  servant  girl, 
and  the  girl  on  the  street,  and  the  girl  at  the  Subway,  had 
nothing  in  his  hands.  There  were  no  marks  upon  him  to 
distinguish  him  from  other  men.  The  only  feature  about  him 
was  this,  that  he  held  his  hands  in  his  pockets,  close  to  his 
side;  his  waterproof  coat  was  open,  and  he  held  his  hands 
in  his  pockets,  pressing  them  to  his  sides.  It  is  certain  that 
the  murderer  took  the  weapon  with  which  he  inflicted  the 
blows  into  the  house  with  him,  it  is  certain  he  took  it  out 
of  the  house  with  him,  it  is  certain  it  was  of  a  size  which 
would  go  into  hisi  pocket.  When  the  servant  girl  and  Mr. 
Adama  rushed  to  the  dining-room  they  there  found  the  old 
lady  drawing  her  last  breath  upon  the  floor,  with  her  head 
towards  the  fire  and  her  feet  towards  the  door,  the  fire-irons 
all  round  undisturbed,  not  a  weapon  or  implement  of  any 
kind  left  in  the  room,  the  fire-irons  bespattered  with  blood. 
They  found  that  the  lady  had  been  done  to  death.  The 
medical  examination,  made  a  short  time  afterwards,  showed 
unmistakably  that  her  assailant  knocked  her  down,  and  had 
knelt  with  his  knees  upon  her  body,  fractured  her  ribs  and  her 

239 


Oscar  Slater. 

Lord     t    breast  bone,    and  there,    whilst   kneeling   upon   her   prostrate 
voca  e 


^  absolutely  and  literally  rained  blows  on  her  face  and 
head  in  rapid  succession.  The  doctors  who  saw  and  examined 
the  old  lady  say  that  the  blows  must  have  been  inflicted  by  a 
powerful  hand,  wielding  probably,  as  they  judge  from  the 
appearance  of  the  wounds,  a  hammer.  From  the  appearance 
of  certain  wounds,  some  of  them  being  spindle-shaped,  one 
of  them  having  simply  driven  in  an  eyeball,  they  judged  that 
the  deed  must  have  been  done,  not  by  a  big  coal  hammer, 
but  by  a  small  hammer;  and  they  say  that  the  hammer  found 
in  the  prisoner's  possession  afterwards  was  an  implement 
with  which,  wielded  by  a  powerful  hand,  all  the  blows  and 
the  injuries  which  they  saw  could  have  been  inflicted.  When 
Mr.  Adams  and  the  servant  girl  went  to  the  bedroom,  where 
the  gas  had  been  lit,  they  found  that  a  box  had  been  opened 
in  which  the  old  lady  had  kept  merely  her  papers.  These 
papers  were  scattered  about  the  floor.  They  found  that  one 
brooch,  which  the  servant  proved  had  been  left,  was  taken 
away  —  a  valuable  brooch  —  and  a  ring  which  was  not  of  much 
value  had  been  left.  The  rest  of  the  old  lady's  jewels,  which 
she  kept  in  her  wardrobe  amongst  her  clothes  and  otherwise, 
were  left  untouched.  Obviously  the  assailant  had  been  dis- 
turbed before  his  work  was  complete. 

Now,  these  are  the  bald,  plain,  undisputed  facts,  and  from 
these  facts  you  can  draw  the  following  priceless  inferences  :  — 

(1)  That   the   murder   was   coolly    and    deliberately   planned 
and  executed  by  no   bungler,  but  by   a  daring,  clever,   cold- 
blooded,   expert    performer. 

(2)  The    murder    was    accomplished    by   a    man    who    was 
familiar  with  the   neighbourhood    and  with    the   surrounding 
streets. 

(3)  It    was   accomplished   by   a   man    who  had   familiarised 
himself  with  the  number  and  character  of  the  inmates  of  the 
house,   and  with  their  habits  and  ways. 

(4)  It  was  accomplished  by  a   man   who   had  watched  and 
knew  the  movements  of  the  policemen  on  the  beat. 

(5)  It  was  accomplished  by  a  man  who  had  taken  his  weapon 
with  him,  and  taken  his  weapon  away  from  the  house. 

(6)  It  was   accomplished  by   a  man   who  was  on   the  hunt 
for    jewels  —  not    money  —  and    who   knew    how    to    deal   with 
jewels,    how  to   make   away  with   them  when   he   got   them. 
Jewels  are  difficult  things,  for  those  who  are  not  experts,  to 
handle  if  they  do  not  come  by  them  by  honest  means. 

(Last)  It  was  accomplished  by  a  man  who  was  not  familiar 
with  the  place  in  which  the  jewels  were  kept,  who  had  never 
been  in  the  house,  and  therefore  was  not  familiar  with  more 
than  the  fact  that  there  were  jewels  there,  and  that  he  had 
to  find  them  when  his  deed  was  done. 
240 


Addresses  to   Jury. 


Are  there  any  of  the  inferences,  think  you,  that  clash  with  Lord 
the  evidence  which  we  have  heard  in  this  case  relating  to  the  dvoeate 
prisoner?  Are  there  any  of  these  characteristic  qualifications 
of  the  hypothetical  murderer  which  the  prisoner  has  not  1  There 
are  none.  He  was  a  man  who  was  well  acquainted  with  this 
locality  and  the  streets  round  about.  He  had  frequented 
clubs  in  the  immediate  vicinity  six  or  seven  years  ago.  He 
had  taken  a  house  early  in  November  within  three  minutes' 
walk  of  this  old  lady's  house  in  West  Princes  Street.  I  will 
show  by  and  by  that  he  was  a  man  well  acquainted,  not  only 
with  the  habits  of  the  inmates  of  the  house  and  the  movements 
of  the  police  outside,  but  he  was  a  man  who  knew  about  jewels, 
and  was  accustomed  to  handle  jewels.  In  his  pocket  book  was 
found  a  card  which  intimated  at  one  time  or  another  that  he 
was  a  dealer  in  diamonds  and  precious  stones.  We  know  from 
the  earliest  date  that  we  know  anything  at  all  about  him — to 
wit,  back  in  1901 — that  he  was  dealing  in  jewels  and  precious 
stones.  We  know  in  this  case  that  that  was  the  way  in  which 
he  raised  money  during  all  the  weeks  he  was  staying  in  Glasgow. 
He  went  to  Jackson,  on  the  South  Side,  and  raised  money 
upon  a  ring.  He  goes  to  M'Laren  and  raises  money  three  times 
on  a  brooch.  He  tries  to  sell  the  pawn  ticket  for  the  brooch, 
and  He  tries  to  raise  money  on  it.  We  hear  of  him  in  no 
other  connection  but  in  connection  with  diamonds  and  jewels. 
When  he  leaves  the  place  there  comes  a  letter  from  some 
gentleman  named  Jacobs,  in  New  York,  telling  him  that  he 
will  send  him  over  emeralds  when  he  can  get  the  money  for 
them,  and  he  bids  him  when  he  comes  over  bring  as  many 
as  he  can.  We  hear  a  great  deal  in  the  case  about  his  dealing 
with  jewels  from  the  selling  point  of  view,  but  we  hear  nothing 
about  his  dealing  with  jewels  from  the  purchasing  point  of 
view.  You  will  observe  that  none  of  these  gentlemen  was 
able  to  give  you  any  account  of  how  he  had  come  into  possession 
of  these  jewels.  No  man  was  examined  in  the  past  three  days 
who  had  ever  sold  jewels  to  him.  You  will  draw  your  own 
inferences.  He  was  a  man  who  had  no  acquaintance  with  the 
inside  of  the  house,  and  did  not  know  where  the  jewels  were 
kept.  That  answers  to  the  prisoner.  He  was  a  man  who  was 
certainly  in  possession  of  a  weapon  with  which  admittedly  the 
deed  could  be  done.  It  is  no  use  speculating  upon  the  size  or 
shape  of  the  implement.  It  was  an  implement  that  could  go 
and  did  go  into  the  man's  pocket,  for  he  was  seen  by  at 
least  four  people  immediately  after  the  murder  was  committed, 
and  not  one  of  them  saw  a  weapon  in  his  hand,  and  you 
know  that  no  weapon  was  left  in  the  house.  He  was  in  pos- 
session of  an  implement  which,  say  the  two  doctors  who 
examined  the  body,  could  quite  well  have  inflicted  the  wounds. 
Every  wound,  including  the  spindle-shaped  wounds,  could  have 

R  2-1 


Oscar  Slater. 

Lord         been  produced  by  that  hammer;  the  wound  which  drove  in 
A  vocate  ja(jy's   eyeball  could   have   been   produced   by   that 


hammer.  That  hammer,  wielded  by  a  powerful  hand,  is  the 
only  kind  of  implement,  they  say,  which  could  have  inflicted 
all  the  wounds  which  were  found  upon  her  face  and  her  head. 
The  man  who  was  seen  emerging  from  the  bedroom  was  the 
rr  iirderer.  The  man  who  was  seen  at  the  foot  of  the  close 
running  westwards  was  the  murderer.  The  man  who  rushed 
at  great  pace  past  the  turnstile  at  the  Subway  was  the  mur- 
derer. And  that  man,  I  say,  was  the  prisoner. 

We  shall  now  look  at  the  evidence  with  regard  to  two  of 
my  inferences  —  first,  that  he  was  acquainted  with  the  habits 
of  the  inmates  of  the  house,  and,  second,  that  he  was  acquainted 
with  the  movements  of  the  police.  It  is  perfectly  well  known 
that  blackguards  who  commit  crimes  of  this  order  upon  inno- 
cent, feeble,  and  defenceless  people  are  themselves  cravens  at 
heart.  There  is  nothing  they  dread  so  much  as  the  noose. 
The  only  human  instinct  that  animates  them  is  the  instinct 
of  self-preservation.  They  never,  under  any  circumstances, 
commit  crimes  of  this  kind  without  taking  the  most  careful 
and  elaborate  precautions  to  secure  their  own  safety  in  the 
end;  and,  happily,  it  is  by  these  very  elaborate  precautions 
that  the  hand  of  justice  is  often  able  to  reach  them  and  we 
are  able  to  hunt  down  the  miscreant.  So  it  is  in  this  case. 
This  man  appears  on  the  scene  early  in  the  month  of  November. 
He  takes  a  house  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  the  old  lady's 
house.  He  takes  it  under  a  false  name  ;  he  takes  it  under  a 
false  designation.  He  takes  the  house  under  the  name  of 
Adolf  Anderson,  and  he  calls  himself  a  dentist.  He  takes  the 
house  for  eighteen  months.  Is  there  any  reason  that  suggests 
itself  to  your  mind  why  he  should  have  taken  a  false  name 
and  a  false  designation  unless  it  be  to  cover  up  his  tracks 
and  to  baffle  the  hand  of  justice  after  his  deed  was  done? 
There  is  no  reason  suggested,  none  whatever.  He  had  no 
customers  there;  he  had  no  people  who  came  to  trade  with 
him;  he  had  no  reason  to  deceive  anybody  at  that  time;  he 
had  no  character  to  lose  and  none  to  gain.  There  can  be  and 
there  was  no  other  object  except  to  remove  all  traces  of  him  when 
his  deed  was  done  and  he  found  it  necessary  to  make  his  escape. 

Then,  gentlemen,  he  required  as  part  of  his  elaborate  precau- 
tions to  familiarise  himself  with  the  inmates  of  the  house,  with 
their  movements  and  their  habits,  and  also  with  the  movements 
of  the  police.  There  was  one  method,  and  one  only,  by  which 
that  object  could  be  accomplished,  and  that  was  by  careful, 
prolonged,  and  steady  watching  with  a  skilled  eye.  He  is 
seen  early  in  the  month  of  December  by  a  number  of  people, 
to  whose  evidence  I  am  going  to  call  your  attention,  carefully 
watching  the  house  and  the  movements  of  its  inmates,  and 
242 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


also  the  movements  of  the  policemen  on  the  beat.  There  was,  Lord 
as  you  will  remember,  a  Mrs.  M'Haffie,  who  lived  at  16  West  Advoeat* 
Princes  Street,  very  nearly  opposite  the  house  where  the  old 
lady  lived,  probably  a  little  further  to  the  east  in  the  direction 
of  St.  George's  Road.  Gentlemen,  Mrs.  M'Haffie,  looking  out 
of  her  window  on  to  this  quiet,  unfrequented  street,  saw,  she 
says,  the  prisoner  moving  slowly  backward  and  forward  on  at 
least  half  a  dozen  separate  and  distinct  occasions,  for  thirty 
minutes  at  a  time.  There  was  nobody  in  the  case  who  had 
anything  approaching  so  good  an  opportunity  of  seeing  and 
observing  his  movements.  She  seemed  not  to  be  particularly 
busy  with  her  housework  at  the  time,  and  she  was  struck  to 
find  in  this  quiet  neighbourhood,  where  she  had  never  seen  the 
like  before,  this  man  moving  backward  and  forward  between 
the  corner  of  St.  George's  Road  and  the  old  lady's  dwelling. 
She  sees  him  coming  back  time  after  time,  and  observes  that 
it  is  the  same  man.  She  is  shown  the  prisoner,  and  she  has 
not  the  smallest  doubt  that  he  is  the  man.  Why  should  she 
have  any  doubt?  Who,  having  once  seen  him,  could  forget 
his  face?  Her  daughter  had  the  same  opportunities  for 
observation,  and  took  advantage  of  them.  She,  too,  saw  the 
man  walking  slowly  backward  and  forward,  examining  the 
windows  of  the  house,  and  looking  up.  Once  or  twice,  says 
the  mother,  when  he  caught  sight  of  them  observing  him  he 
turned  his  face  away  and  moved  out  of  their  sight.  The 
daughter,  too,  was  perfectly  clear  and  unhesitating  in  her 
identification  of  the  man.  She  was  asked  whether,  in  the 
month  of  March,  when  being  precognosced  by  the  agent  for 
the  accused,  she  would  swear  to  the  man  when  she  came  to 
Edinburgh,  and  she  very  properly  said  that  she  would  not. 
It  was  a  very  improper  question  to  put  on  the  part  of  anybody 
precognoscing,  and  it  was  only  by  my  consent  that  the  question 
was  allowed  in  Court.  That  was  the  girl's  answer.  You  will 
judge  whether,  when  she  was  in  the  witness-box,  she  appeared 
to  have  any  more  hesitation  than  her  mother  had  in  identifying 
this  man.  A  niece  of  Mrs.  M'Haffie  paid  a  visit  one  evening 
in  December,  about  a  fortnight  before  the  murder,  and  when 
she  was  going  upstairs  she  met  a  man  coming  down  who,  she 
suys,  was  very  like  this  man.  When  she  went  up  she  found 
from  her  cousin  that  he  had  come  to  the  door  and  asked  if 
there  was  any  one  of  the  name  of  Anderson  living  there,  a 
peculiar  question  to  ask  when  there  was  the  name  "  M'Haffie  " 
on  the  door.  This  niece  came  back  to  the  house  a  second 
time,  four  days  later,  and  from  the  window  there  was  pointed 
out  to  her  by  Mrs.  M'Haffie  this  very  man  walking  backward 
and  forward  and  making  his  observations.  When  the  niece 
came  downstairs  she  found  him  moving  off  towards  St.  George's 
Road,  and  she  followed  him  as  he  was  walking  down,  no  doubt 

243 


Oscar  Slater. 

Lord         to  his  own  house.     She  noticed  that  he  had  a  sort  of  slouching 
voca  e  gaj£  amj  wag  gOing  at  a  glow  pace.     The  cousin  who  opened  the 
door  said  that  he  was  very  like  the  man  who  had  come  up  and 
asked  for  Anderson. 

Now,  gentlemen,  it  does  not  stop  there.  On  14th,  15th, 
16th,  and  17th  December  he  was  seen  by  a  very  intelligent 
girl  who  had  a  most  excellent  opportunity  of  observing  him, 
namely,  the  girl  Euphemia  Cunningham,  employed  in  the 
photographer's  shop,  whose  habit  it  was  to  go  home  for  dinner 
about  one  o'clock,  passing  through  West  Princes  Street  on 
her  way.  At  the  corner  of  West  Princes  Street  and  Queen's 
Crescent,  in  full  view  of  Miss  Gilchrist's  house,  she  observed 
the  man  standing  and  staring  up  at  Miss  Gilchrist's  window. 
She  had  a  most  excellent  view  of  his  side  face.  She  observed 
this  same  man  on  the  three  succeeding  days,  and  she  was  very 
much  astonished,  as  she  had  never  seen  loiterers  there  before. 
There  was  nothing  to  loiter  about  there  for.  On  the  three 
days,  15th,  16th,  and  17th  December,  she  called  the  attention 
of  her  companion,  William  Campbell,  to  the  fact.  She, 
without  hesitation,  said  there  was  no  doubt  that  this  was  the 
man  she  saw,  because  she  took  a  good  look  at  him,  as  it  struck 
her  as  curious  at  the  time.  William  Campbell,  who  was  with 
her  on  the  15th,  16th,  and  17th,  says  that  he  was  very  like 
the  man  he  saw,  and  he  remembers  when  Euphemia  Cunning- 
ham said  to  him,  "  There  is  the  same  man  again."  The  man 
apparently  heard,  and  rapidly  turned  away  his  face.  On  the 
night  before  the  murder,  about  twenty  minutes  to  seven,  Mr. 
Bryson,  a  cabinetmaker,  an  intelligent  and  respectable  man, 
was  going  home,  passing  eastwards  along  West  Princes  Street. 
As  he  passed  the  house  of  Mr.  Gillies,  almost  straight  opposite 
Miss  Gilchrist's  house,  he  was  struck  by  a  man  standing  on 
the  flat  stone  at  the  top  of  the  little  flight  of  steps  leading  to  the 
close  door,  standing  with  his  back  to  the  close  door  and  looking 
over  at  Miss  Gilchrist's  windows,  two  of  which  were  lighted. 
He  was  so  struck  with  the  appearance  of  this  man,  and  his 
long,  steady  gaze,  that  he  actually  went  up  and  stared  at  him, 
thinking  that  there  was  something  wrong.  When  the  man  saw 
him  staring  he  was  taken  aback;  he  moved  on,  and  walked 
away  towards  Queen's  Crescent.  Mr.  Bryson  had  a  most 
excellent  opportunity  of  seeing  him ;  he  went  for  the  purpose 
of  seeing  him.  He  took  a  long,  fixed  stare  at  him,  and  he 
had  not  the  slightest  hesitation  in  saying  that  the  prisoner 
in  the  dock  is  the  man  he  saw  there.  An  hour  and  a  half  later 
Mr.  Nairn,  a  provision  merchant,  a  very  respectable  man,  was 
passing  in  the  same  direction  eastwards.  He  was  ahead  of 
his  wife  and  children,  and  he  stood  near  the  corner  of  Queen's 
Crescent  to  wait  for  them.  While  he  was  standing  there  he 
says  that  within  a  very  few  yards  further  to  the  east  he  saw 
244 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


a  man  with  his  back  to  him  staring  steadily  at  Miss  Gilchrist's  Lord 
house.  It  appears  that  that  was  the  position  from  which  Advoeate 
you  had  by  far  the  best  view  of  the  house.  Inspector  Dornan 
went  down  there  and  had  it  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Nairn,  and  he 
says  that  that  is  the  place  where  you  have  the  best  view  of 
Miss  Gilchrist's  house.  There  the  man  stood,  says  Mr.  Nairn, 
for  the  best  part  of  five  minutes.  Mr.  Nairn  was  very  much 
impressed  with  the  fact,  and  you  will  remember  he  said,  "  I 
did  not  have  an  opportunity  of  seeing  the  man's  front  face." 
But  when  the  prisoner  turned  he  had  no  hesitation  in  saying, 
"  That  is  the  man."  Then,  in  addition,  you  have  the  evidence 
of  Constable  Walker,  who  saw  him  on  three  different  occasions, 
the  first  time  standing  at  that  very  corner,  in  full  view  of 
Miss  Gilchrist's  house,  the  second  time,  a  few  days  later,  walk- 
ing westwards  on  the  north  side  of  West  Princes  Street,  right 
opposite  Miss  Gilchrist's  house,  and  the  third  time  loitering 
near  the  corner  of  St.  George's  Road.  Last,  you  have  Con- 
stable Bryan,  who  saw  him  the  week  before  the  murder  close 
by  the  corner  of  St.  George's  Road  and  West  Princes  Street. 

Gentlemen,  if  that  was  the  prisoner,  how  do  you  account 
for  his  presence  there?  What  was  a  respectable  dentist  doing 
day  after  day,  hour  after  hour,  carefully  observing  this  house? 
I  say  that  there  was  no  other  object  that  he  had  than  to 
observe  closely  what  was  going  on,  so  far  as  he  could,  with 
his  skilled  eye,  to  learn  from  prolonged  observation  what 
were  the  movements  of  the  people  in  that  house,  who  were 
the  inmates  of  the  house,  and  what  were  their  habits  and 
customs ;  when  the  servant  went  out,  and  when  the  old  lady 
was  left  alone  at  home;  what  were  the  movements  of  the 
policemen  on  the  beat,  how  often  they  passed,  at  what  inter- 
vals, and  at  what  times.  If  any  other  explanation  suggests 
itself  to  your  minds,  I  should  be  astonished.  I  am  at  a  loss 
to  give  any  explanation  other  than  that  the  man  was  there 
with  a  purpose,  namely,  to  make  all  secure  when  the  supreme 
moment  came. 

It  is  said  that  in  cases  of  this  kind  you  are  not  safe  to 
proceed  upon  the  evidence  of  those  who  have  had  no  personal 
knowledge  of  a  man,  and  who  merely  speak  to  their  having 
recognised  his  face.  A  mere  passing  glance  at  a  man,  a  stare 
at  a  man,  a  long  look  at  a  man  is  not  sufficient  if  you  have 
not  known  him,  because  you  may  be  mistaken.  Now,  I 
agree  that  that  is  true.  I  myself  consider — but  his  lordship 
will  guide  you  here — that  it  would  be  dangerous  to  go  upon 
mere  personal  impressions  formed  of  a  man's  appearance, 
because  you  may  be  mistaken.  Gentlemen,  you  can  be 
under  no  misapprehension,  and  there  can  be  no  mistake,  if 
the  man's  appearance  is  distinctive  and  peculiar.  In  the  case 
of  ordinary  and  commonplace  faces,  faces  which  you  see  every 

245 


Oscar   Slater. 

Lord  day  in  the  street,  it  would  be  a  dangerous  thing  to  go  on 
Advocate  your  mere  passing  recollection  that  you  had  seen  this  man  or 
that.  But  where  you  have  a  man  with  a  peculiar,  well- 
marked  face,  a  face  that  you  would  not  see  every  day,  or 
once  in  a  year,  if  even  ever,  then  you  are  in  a  very  different 
region.  I  say  that  the  prisoner's  face  is  one  which  no  man 
with  any  observation  at  all  could  forget,  having  once  seen  it. 
You  are  capital  judges  yourselves,  there  are  none  better  than 
you.  Judge  for  yourselves  in  this  matter.  I  would  remind 
you,  however,  of  some  very  striking  testimony  in  this  case. 
Mr.  Marr,  the  house  factor,  saw  the  man  once,  and  he  had 
no  hesitation  in  recognising  him  again.  There  is  no  dispute 
about  it  that  the  prisoner  was  the  very  man  with  whom  Marr 
had  bargained.  The  printer  who  printed  his  cards  saw  him 
once,  or  perhaps  twice,  for  the  briefest  possible  time,  and  he 
at  once  recognised  him.  The  clerk  in  the  Cunard  office  saw 
him  once — he  sees  hundreds  of  passengers — and  he  recognised 
him  instantly  after  the  one  brief  look  that  he  had  had  at  him 
when  giving  him  his  tickets.  The  porter  who  carried  his 
baggage  had  never  seen  him  before,  and  had  never  seen  him 
since,  and  yet  he  recognised  him  without  hesitation.  The 
porter  at  the  railway  station  saw  him  once,  and  recognised 
him  instantly  and  without  the  slightest  doubt.  He  could 
not  recognise  the  ladies  who  were  with  him,  although  he  had 
just  as  good  an  opportunity  of  seeing  them;  but  he  had  not 
the  slightest  hesitation  in  recognising  the  prisoner.  Mr. 
Jackson,  to  whom  he  went  once  in  November  to  sell  a  ring, 
had  never  seen  him  before,  and  has  never  seen  him  since, 
and  yet  he  recognised  him  without  a  moment's  hesitation. 
There  is  not  a  single  human  being  in  this  case  who,  having 
once  seen  the  prisoner,  has  failed  to  know  him  again  at  once, 
so  striking,  so  peculiarly  distinctive  is  his  face. 

Gentlemen,  that  is  testimony  which,  I  submit  to  you,  is 
absolutely  overwhelming.  You  are  not  dealing  here  with  the  case 
of  a  man  who  is  like  or  who  resembles  thousands  of  other  men, 
you  are  dealing  here  with  a  man  who,  once  seen  by  a  com- 
petent and  intelligent  observer,  is  never  forgotten,  and  these 
are  very  striking  instances  which  I  have  just  given  you.  I 
purposely  selected  people  who  saw  him  once,  but  did  not  fail 
to  recognise  him  instantly  they  saw  him  again,  and  who,  it 
is  admitted,  have  recognised  the  right  man.  I  ask  you 
whether  you  are  really  going  to  accept  the  perfectly  sound, 
good  evidence  of  Mr.  Marr,  the  Cunard  man,  the  railway 
porter,  and  the  others  who  did  inevitably  and  surely  recognise 
this  man,  and  to  put  aside  the  evidence  of  the  eleven  people 
who  saw  him  on  that  street  watching  the  house  carefully, 
several  of  whom  had  much  better  opportunities  of  observing 
him  than  Mr.  Marr  and  the  others  had.  Is  it  possible  that 
246 


Addresses  to   Jury. 


these  ten  or  eleven  people  may  have  made  any  mistake?       1  Lord 
submit  that  it  is  not  possible. 

In  a  case  of  mistaken  identity  where  a  respectable  man  is 
had  up,  charged  with  having  committed  some  crime,  there 
is  always  some  way  to  satisfy  the  jury  that  he  is  the  wrong 
man,  that  there  has  really  been  a  great  mistake  committed, 
that  he  is  a  perfectly  respectable  man  who  was  not  near  the 
place.  There  is  no  man  so  destitute  of  friends  and  acquaint- 
ances that  he  cannot  establish  his  identity,  and  show  who  he 
is  and  what  he  is,  and  what  his  movements  were,  and  where 
he  was  at  the  time  when  the  crime  was  committed  which  is 
laid  at  his  door.  This  man  had  a  communication  with  his 
intimate  friend  Cameron  after  the  charge  was  made  against 
him,  and  when  he  knew  quite  well  what  the  situation  was. 
He  writes  to  his  friend  Cameron  a  letter,  dated  2nd  February, 
in  which,  after  railing  very  hard  at  Gordon  Henderson,  whose 
evidence  I  will  come  to  in  a  moment,  he  says,  "  I  can  prove 
my  innocence  before  having  a  trial,  because  I  will  prove  with 
five  people  where  I  have  been  when  the  murder  was  com- 
mitted." He  professes  that  he  could  meet  the  charge  by 
producing  five  people  to  the  authorities,  and  satisfy  them 
where  he  had  been  when  the  murder  was  committed.  Where 
are  the  five?  Who  are  the  five?  What  steps  have  been 
taken  to  show  that  he  is  an  honest  dentist,  practising  at  69 
St.  George's  Road,  and  that  this  was  an  entire  misapprehension 
on  the  part  of  the  police?  Not  one.  You  heard  the  evi- 
dence. It  is  said  that  on  the  night  of  the  murder  he  was 
seen  in  a  billiard  room  in  Renfield  Street.  The  billiard  room 
keeper  and  the  billiard  room  marker  were  examined.  One 
or  other  of  them  must  have  been  in  the  billiard  room,  but 
neither  of  them  would  say  that  the  prisoner  was  there.  His 
friend  Rattman,  to  whom  he  wrote  the  letter  to  which  I  shall 
refer  a  little  later,  was  produced,  but  all  Rattman  says — and 
it  is  the  best  he  can  say — is  that  he  was  there  playing  billiards 
that  evening,  that  the  prisoner  came  in  but  did  not  play 
billiards,  that  he  stopped  a  short  time  and  then  went  away. 
Rattman  never  looked  at  the  clock,  either  when  he  came  in 
or  when  he  went  away;  he  never  looked  at  the  clock  that 
evening.  Rattman  says  it  was  his  habit  to  be  home  a  little 
before  seven ;  he  says  he  expected  to  reach  his  home,  which 
was  two  or  three  minutes  away  from  the  billiard  room,  at 
ten  minutes  to  seven.  Rattman  never  looked  at  the  clock 
at  any  time,  and  he  is  only  giving  you  a  hazard  guess  or  con- 
jecture, with  no  foundation  whatever.  The  other  man  who 
was  present  in  the  billiard  room  was  a  man  named  Aumann. 
He,  like  Rattman,  never  looked  at  the  clock  at  all.  He  says 
that  the  prisoner  came  in  any  time  between  5  and  5.30, 
that  his  object  was  to  get  his  friend  Rattman  to  buy  the 

247 


Oscar  Slater. 

Lord  pawn  ticket  for  the  brooch,  and  when  Rattman  declined  to 
Advocate  buy  ^  the  prisoner  left.  Remember  this  is  21st  December. 
It  is  vain  to  say  that  Aumann  subsequently  added  that  it  was 
6.30  when  the  prisoner  left.  Aumann  never  looked.  If 
Aumann'si  evidence  is  correct,  then  the  prisoner  came  into 
that  billiard  room  between  5  and  5.30  and  tried  to  get 
Rattman  to  buy  his  pawn  ticket,  and,  when  he  failed,  off  he 
went.  That  is  all  you  know.  There  is  no  evidence  on  the 
part  of  these  two  men  that  the  prisoner  was  in  the  billiard 
room  at  or  near  the  time  when  the  murder  was  committed. 
Keep  in  view  that  the  billiard  room  is  less  than  a  mile  from 
the  scene  of  the  murder,  and  the  prisoner  is  said  to  be  a 
remarkably  rapid  walker.  Aumann  and  Rattman  said  he 
was  a  remarkably  rapid  walker  when  he  pleased.  Well,  then, 
out  of  the  five  people  "  who  will  prove  where  I  have  been," 
that  is  the  best  that  can  be  done.  You  are  quite  safe  to 
assume  that  there  is  no  case  of  mistaken  identity  here.  The 
prisoner  is  hopelessly  unable  to  produce  a  single  witness  who 
saw  that  he  was  anywhere  else  than  at  the  scene  of  the  murder 
that  night. 

Having  seen  the  elaborate  precautions  that  were  taken  to 
ensure  safety,  to  ensure  that  he  would  not  be  confronted  by 
some  man  who  could  say  that  he  entered  the  house, 
I  now  turn  to  the  evidence  of  those  who  saw  the  man  who 
committed  the  murder;  for,  of  course,  the  man  who  com- 
mitted the  murder  was  the  man  who  came  out  of  the  bedroom, 
was  the  man  who  emerged  from  the  close,  was  the  man  who 
dashed  past  the  turnsitile.  Was  that  man  the  prisoner? 
That  is  the  question  which  you  have  to  decide.  Well,  gentle- 
men, the  first  witness  who  speaks  to  the  prisoner's  presence 
at  the  scene  of  the  murder,  and  within  minutes  of  the  murder, 
is  Mrs.  Liddell,  the  married  sister  of  Mr.  Adams,  who  was 
coming  home  with  her  old  mother  to  14  West  Princes  Street, 
next  door  to  Miss  Gilchrist's  house.  As  she  approached  Miss 
Gilchrist's  house  she  saw  a  strange  man  standing  against  the 
railings,  with  his  left  side  to  her.  She  was  much  struck  by 
his  appearance,  and  she  stared  at  him;  not  a  mere  passing 
glance,  but  she  stared  at  the  man  she  saw  standing  in  this 
position  against  the  railings.  She  describes  his  face  with 
minute  accuracy.  She  said  that  his  was  one  face  in  a 
thousand.  She  said  that  she  could  not  be  mistaken  as  to  it. 
She  would  pledge  herself  to  nothing  but  what  she  herself  had 
actually  seen,  and  what  had  impressed  itself  on  her  memory. 
She  said  she  was  rather  struck  with  the  appearance  of  this 
man,  at  this  unexpected  time  and  place.  Gentlemen,  she 
may  have  been  theatrical  in  her  way  of  giving  evidence,  but 
I  am  sure  you  will  not  deny  she  was  a  conscientious,  careful, 
and  unbiassed  witness.  She  refused  to  give  any  evidence  on 
248 


Addresses  to   Jury. 


the  identification  until   she  had   seen  the  man  placed  in   the  Lord 
exact   position  in  which  she   had   seen    him   that   night;    and  Advoeate 
then  she  said,  "  Yes,  I  believe,  I  must  believe,  that  that  man 
was  there."       She  hesitated,  no  doubt,  because  she  knew  and 
realised  the  serious    issue   depending   on    her  testimony    in   a 
case  like  this,  but  she  says,  "  I  know  the  face  at  once,  now 
that  I  see  it  as  I  saw  it  that  night."     Then  she  describes  his 
nose,  his  cheek,  his  complexion,  in  perfectly  graphic  language, 
and  she  cannot  doubt  it  was  the  prisoner  she  saw  that  night, 
a  few  minutes  before  seven. 

The  next  witness  is  the  witness  Adams.  Now,  he  is  a 
little  short-sighted — that  must  be  said — but  when  he  stood 
at  the  door  he  expected  that  something  was  wrong.  He  had 
heard  gruesome  sounds  down  below  a  few  minutes  before,  he 
had  been  sent  up  by  his  sister  to  see  what  was  wrong,  he 
had  rung  the  bell  three  times  and  had  got  no  answer,  and 
while  he  was  waiting  there  he  again  heard  the  gruesome  sound 
of  this  old  lady  being  done  to  death  by  her  murderer.  He 
went  downstairs  and  told  his  sisters  what  had  happened,  and 
they  bade  him  go  up  again  as  something  surely  must  be  wrong. 
He  went  up  again,  and,  standing  beside  the  maid-servant  when 
she  opened  the  door,  he  was  certainly  on  the  alert.  The 
man  came  out  and  passed  him  close  by.  He  saw  him,  he 
saw  his  face.  As  he  passed  him  he  dashed  off,  and  he  turned 
round  and  followed  him  with  his  eye  till  he  disappeared  down 
the  stair.  Now,  Mr.  Adams  had  just  as  much  time  as  I  have 
described — I  do  not  say  he  had  a  long  time — to  make  his  observa- 
tion. But  I  say  that  under  these  awful  circumstances,  and 
knowing  as  he  did  that  something  was  wrong,  he  was  on  the 
alert.  And  he  says  that  the  prisoner  was  the  man.  When 
he  was  taken  to  New  York  he  identified  him.  He  was  taken 
to  a  room  where  there  were  upwards  of  forty  men,  and  he  had 
no  difficulty  whatever  in  picking  this  man  out  as  being  very 
like  the  man  he  had  seen  that  night.  That  is  to  say,  he  did 
not  hesitate  between  this  man  and  the  thirty  or  forty  other 
people  who  were  in  the  room.  Never  for  a  moment  did  he 
flinch.  He  picked  out  that  man  as  the  only  man  that  was  like, 
or,  as  he  said,  very  like,  the  man  he  had  seen  that  night. 

Now,  do  not  misunderstand  a  witness  who  says,  "  That  ia 
very  like  the  man  I  saw ;  he  has  a  very  close  resemblance  to 
the  man  I  saw."  What  more  can  a  man  say,  what  more 
ought  a  man  to  say  who  was  not  familiar  with  the  man,  and 
had  only  an  opportunity  of  seeing  him  once?  It  is  really 
&  matter  of  phrase.  "  Yes,"  some  one  says,  "  that  is  the 
man,"  and  he  means  no  more  than  "  That  is  very  like  the 
man,"  unless  he  adds,  as  you  have  sometimes  heard,  "  But 
there  is  something  about  this  man  that  is  not  like  the  one 
I  saw,"  or  "  There  is  something  about  the  man  I  saw  which 

249 


Oscar  Slater. 

Lord  is  not  like  this  man ;  he  is  very  like  him,  but  there  are  some 
Advocate  features  different."  Now,  you  must  have  observed  that  not  a 
single  witness  in  the  box  who  said,  "  That  is  very  like  the 
man,"  added,  "  But  there  are  some  features  present  here  that 
were  not  present  in  the  man  I  saw,"  or  the  reverse.  And, 
accordingly,  do  not  be  misled  by  phrases  or  words.  No  man, 
who  has  testified  that  he  recognises  the  man  in  the  dock  now 
as  the  man  he  had  seen  on  a  former  occasion,  and  only  once, 
can  ever  say  more  than  this,  "  That  is  very  like  him ;  that 
closely  resembles  him.  I  do  not  hesitate  between  that  man 
and  any  other  man  I  see  before  me."  Mr.  Adams  came  home 
and  again  saw  him  in  the  police  office,  and  again  identified 
him,  and  he  gave  the  same  story  here  in  the  witness-box.  You 
cannot  deny  that  Adams  was  a  perfectly  impartial  and  a  per- 
fectly respectable  man.  You  cannot  deny  that  he  was  under 
circumstances  in  which  he  could  observe  the  prisoner.  You 
cannot  deny  that  he  has  never  hesitated  or  flinched  between 
this  man  and  any  other  man  ;  and  he  has  not  pointed  out  a 
single  feature  that  the  man  he  saw  had  and  that  this  man 
has  not.  He  recollects  the  kind  of  coat  he  wore  and  the  kind 
of  hat.  It  was  the  man's  face  that  impressed  him,  as  it 
impressed  every  other  person. 

I  come  now  to  the  servant  girl,  Helen  Lambie.  There  is 
a  discrepancy  between  her  evidence  and  the  evidence  of  Mr. 
Adams,  of  which  you  must  judge,  a  discrepancy  as  to  the 
place  where  she  was  in  the  house  when  ishe  observed  the 
murderer  coming  out  of  the  bedroom.  She  herself  said  in  the 
witness-box  that  she  did  not  get  past  the  threshold  of  the 
door.  Mr.  Adams  said  she  had  taken  several  steps  into  the 
house,  and  that  accordingly  her  observation  of  the  man  coming 
would  be  shorter  than  she  says  it  was ;  but,  on  the  other 
hand,  her  observation  of  the  man  as  he  was  going  away  from 
her  would  be  longer  than  she  says  it  was,  because  Mr.  Adams 
agrees  in  saying — and  it  is  very  important  that  you  should" 
remember  this — that  when  the  man  passed  her  she  turned  round 
and  watched  him  until  he  had  disappeared  down  the  stairs. 
She  had  therefore  an  opportunity,  she  says,  not  of  seeing  his 
face* — his  head  was  down  when  she  saw  him — but  she  saw  his 
side  face,  his  height,  his  general  appearance,  and  his  gait. 
Now,  when  she  was  taken  out  to  America  a  very  striking 
incident  took  place  before  the  examination  proper  before  the 
Commissioner.  She  and  the  girl  Barrowman  were  standing 
with  Inspector  Pyper  in  the  corridor  of  the  Court.  They  had 
no  reason  to  expect  that  the  murderer  would  come  that  way. 
They  were  not  told  that  the  murderer  was  to  be  brought  in. 
They  were  not  asked  any  questions.  They  were  standing  there 
silent,  whilst  a  number  of  different  people  were  passing  into 
the  Commissioner's  room,  when  there  appeared  in  the  corridor 
250 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


the  prisoner  at  the  bar  and  two  other  men.       Simultaneously  Lord 
the  two  girls  said  to  Inspector  Pyper,  "  Oh  1  there  is  the  man  "  Advocate 
— an  involuntary  exclamation.     There  was  no  question  put  to 
them,  there  was  no  information  given  beforehand  to  lead  them 
to  expect  that  they  would  see  the  man.       They  see  him  unex- 
pectedly,   and    involuntarily    and    instantly    they    say,    "  Oh  1 
there  is  the  man." 

Now,  evidence  of  that  kind  is  infinitely  better,  I  should 
imagine,  in  your  judgment  than  even  evidence  given  upon  oath 
in  the  witness-box.  People  get  flurried  and  excited  and 
agitated  when  they  are  placed  in  an  unaccustomed  position, 
and  many  witnesses  do  themselves  very  poor  justice  indeed  in 
the  witness-box.  Here  were  the  two  girls  standing  there 
without  expecting  anything,  without  any  questions  being  asked, 
and  instantly  they  recognise  the  man.  Now,  when  she  was 
taken  subsequently  into  the  Commissioner's  room  I  am  bound 
to  say  that  she  was  not  treated  very  fairly.  There  were 
thirty  or  forty  people  in  the  room ;  the  man  Slater  was  seated 
in  a  position  in  which  the  girl  Lambie  could  not  see  him  from 
the  place  where  she  was  standing.  It  appears  from  the 
evidence  of  Inspector  Pyper  that  the  agent  or  counsel  repre- 
senting Slater  stood  up  in  front  of  him  and  spread  out  his  frock 
coat,  and  when  the  girl  was  asked  if  she  recognised  the  man 
in  the  room  she  looked  round  thirty  or  forty  men  of  all  kinds 
that  were  gathered  in  the  room,  and,  not  seeing  him,  she  leaned 
back  in  the  way  Inspector  Pyper  describes  and  caught  sight 
of  him  behind  Mr.  Goodhart,  and  said,  "  That  is  the  man 
there."  Now,  that  is  very  striking  evidence.  We  conduct 
our  business  in  this  Court  with  much  greater  propriety,  much 
greater  attention  is  given  to  fairplay  and  justice.  There  the 
girl  was  put  in  a  distinctly  disadvantageous  position,  yet, 
without  hesitation,  she  picked  that  man  out  of  the  thirty  or 
forty  men  who  were  there.  You  must  keep  these  two  incidents 
in  view,  I  think,  in  judging  of  Helen  Lambie's  evidence.  There 
is  no  doubt  she  said  in  New  York  that  she  did  not  see  his 
face,  and  that  she  was  judging  by  his  gait  and  general  appear- 
ance. No  doubt  about  that.  She  says  now  that  although 
she  did  not  see  his  full  face,  she  saw  his  side  face,  as  not  only 
she  says,  but  Mr.  Adams  says,  that  she  looked  over  her  shoulder 
when  the  man  passed.  It  is  for  you  to  judge  whether  the 
girl  who  saw  the  side  face  was  not  labouring  under  excitement, 
agitation,  and  may  be  confusion,  owing  to  the  strange  and 
unaccustomed  surroundings  in  which  she  found  herself  after 
having  been  taken  over  to  New  York,  in  this  room  full  of 
men,  and  subjected  to  such  questioning  and  badgering  as  we 
do  not  tolerate  here.  That  is  the  question  pre-eminently  for 
you  to  judge.  Now,  when  she  was  here  she  unquestionably 
told  you  that  there  were  three  things  from  which  she  drew 

251 


Oscar   Slater. 

Lord  the  inference  of  recognition — first,  the  side  face;  second,  the 
Advocate  8-ZQ  an(j  generaj  appearance;  and  third,  the  gait.  It  is  also 
true  that  Inspector  Pyper  observed  the  man's  gait,  and  said 
that  it  was  not  very  distinctive.  He  says  he  could  not  rely 
on  that.  No  doubt  he  has  seen  the  slight  in-toe  and  the  slight 
turn-out  of  the  knee,  but  he  adds,  with  fairness  and  justice, 
that  what  impresses  one  man  most  may  not  impress  another. 
It  is  the  general  appearance  on  which  the  girl  relies.  Further- 
more, she  remembers  what  he  was  wearing,  and  she  says  that 
this  coat  which  has  been  exhibited  was  the  coat  that  the  man 
was  wearing  that  night,  and  she  remembers  the  dark  hat, 
and  nothing  more.  You  are  the  best  judges  of  all  this.  What 
I  pray  of  you  is,  that  when  you  are  considering  her  evidence 
remember  her  natural  agitation  and  excitement,  first,  when  she 
saw  her  dead  mistress  lying  on  the  floor  on  that  awful  night, 
and  second,  the  unaccustomed  surroundings  in  New  York, 
when  she  was  subjected  to  a  good  deal  of  badgering  and  ques- 
tioning by  the  Commissioner  and  the  agent.  And  I  pray  you 
not  to  forget  the  two  incidents  to  which  I  have  called  your 
attention,  the  incident  in  the  corridor  and  the  incident  in  the 
Commissioner's  room. 

The  third  witness  who  saw  the  murderer  that  night  was  the 
girl  Barrowman.  She  was  going  a  message  at  the  time,  and 
she  walked  eastwards  along  West  Princes  Street.  As  she 
came  within  12  or  13  yards  of  Miss  Gilchrist's  house  she  saw 
a  man  coming  out  at  a  break-neck  pace.  If  you  recollect, 
there  is  an  incandescent  lamp  just  a  few  yards  to  the  west  of 
the  entrance  to  Miss  Gilchrist's  house,  and  that  incandescent 
lamp  throws  an  admirable  light  upon  Miss  Gilchrist's  steps  and 
the  intervening  pavement.  This  little  girl  had  a  full  view 
of  the  man.  She  saw  him  glance  towards  St.  George's  Road, 
and  then  he  ran  westwards,  and  ran  against  her.  She  gives 
a  graphic  description  of  what  the  man  was  like.  She  describes 
his  coat;  she  describes  his  hat;  she  describes  his  appearance. 
When  he  dashed  against  her  he  still  continued  to  pursue  his 
flight  westward,  and  she  turned  round  and  followed  him  a 
considerable  number  of  paces,  until  she  saw  him  turn  round 
into  West  Cumberland  Street,  and  then  she  lost  sight  of  him. 
She  went  home  and  told  her  mother  what  she  had  seen.  Her 
mother  bade  her  be  silent,  because  she  might  have  been  mis- 
taken, though  she  said  that  she  was  not.  By  pure  accident 
her  testimony  came  to  the  knowledge  of  the  police,  and  it  was 
from  her  description  that  the  man  was  traced.  She  never 
swerved — you  saw  her  in  the  witness-box,  and  you  will  judge 
whether  she  was  not  a  remarkably  intelligent  and  clear 
observer — she  never  swerved  from  the  description  she  had 
given.  She  said  he  was  clean  shaven.  You  will  recollect 
about  that.  The  prisoner  was  shaved  about  the  middle  of 
252 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


December,  and  there  was  only  some  growth.  Is  it  not  per-  Lord 
fectly  natural  that  the  girl  who  had  only  a  comparatively  short  Advocat6 
opportunity,  but  a  very  good  opportunity  of  observing  the 
man,  should  not  see  what  is  called  this  stubbly  growth  on  the 
upper  lip,  a  growth,  the  barber  said,  of  about  3-16  of  an  inch? 
That  is  the  one  point  on  which  it  is  said  that  her  recognition 
of  the  features  and  the  appearance  of  the  man  is  defective. 
You  will  judge  whether  that  is  sufficient.  She  identifies  him 
without  hesitation  from  amongst  the  forty  people  in  the  Com- 
missioner's room  in  New  York,  and  she  identifies  him  here. 
I  ask  you  to  remember  the  very  striking  incident  which  took 
place  in  the  Central  Police  Office.  She  asked  that  he  should 
be  dressed  as  he  was  on  the  night  in  question.  He  puts  on 
the  coat  No.  43  of  the  productions,  he  puts  on  the  hat,  and 
she  makes  him  pull  it  down  a  little,  and  a  little  more,  and 
then  she  says,  "  That  is  it ;  that  is  as  I  saw  him  on  the  night 
of  the  murder."  Now,  that  is  very  striking  testimony.  I 
do  not  know  that,  under  the  circumstances,  you  could  possibly 
have  better  testimony  than  that.  I  leave  it  with  you  to  say 
whether  it  is  likely,  putting  all  things  together,  that  that 
very  intelligent  and  wholly  unbiassed  observer,  that  girl  who 
had  an  excellent  opportunity  of  seeing  the  murderer,  could 
possibly  have  been  mistaken. 

The  last  witness  who  saw  the  murderer  was  the  girl  at  the 
turnstile.  Now,  so  far  as  I  know,  the  only  observation  upon 
her  evidence  is  with  regard  to  the  time.  She  said  it  was  any 
time  between  7.30  and  eight  o'clock  when  the  passenger  passed 
her  at  a  break-neck  speed.  All  she  can  say  is  that  it  was 
after  7.30,  she  says  between  7.30  and  twenty-five  minutes  to 
eight,  but  let  it  be  later,  if  you  please.  I  do  not  contend — 
no  man  would  contend — that  this  man  made  a  straight  course 
from  the  scene  of  the  murder  to  the  underground  station.  If 
he  had  done  so  he  could  have  covered  the  distance  in  about 
five  or  six  minutes,  and  we  know  that  the  murder  must  have 
taken  place,  and  the  murderer  must  have  escaped  from  the 
house  by  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  past  seven.  Of  course, 
there  is  a  network  of  streets  there,  a  network  of  streets  that 
were  perfectly  familiar  to  Slater,  up  and  down  which  he  might 
have  doubled,  and  no  doubt  did  double,  before  he  reached  the 
Subway  station.  My  point  is  that  he  knew  perfectly  where 
was  the  best  place  to  get  underground  and  to  elude  observa- 
tion. He  knew  the  whole  locality,  and  he  knew  his  best 
means  of  covering  up  his  tracks  was  to  get  down  below,  to  get 
to  the  Subway,  and  to  be  taken  by  a  train  to  some  remote  part 
of  the  city  and  then  come  strolling  back  to  his  house.  The 
girl  had  an  excellent  opportunity  of  observing.  He  comes 
up,  pitches  down  his  penny,  passes  the  turnstile  without  pick- 
ing up  his  ticket,  and  she  looks  out,  and  haa  an  opportunity 

253 


Oscar   Slater. 

Lord  of  seeing  him  while  he  goes  down  the  flight  of  steps.  She 
"e  describes  him  exactly  as  Barrowman  describes  him.  You 
would  notice  that  both  of  them  observed  that  he  was  holding 
his  hands  in  his  pockets,  and  that  his  coat  was  open.  I 
suggest  that  the  weapon  was  in  his  inner  coat  pocket,  and  he 
was  holding  it  tight  to  prevent  it  falling  out.  Now  this  girl, 
having  seen  the  man,  having  seen  his  face  when  he  paid  his 
money,  has  not  the  slightest  doubt.  She,  like  the  others, 
picked  him  out  from  amongst  the  ten  or  twelve  people  she  saw 
in  the  Central  Police  Office,  and  she  never  swerved  between  him 
and  any  one  else.  You  have  heard  a  body  of  evidence  that 
cannot  be  lightly  set  aside,  testimony  which  is  in  exact  agree- 
ment with  all  the  other  evidence  in  the  case,  on  the  part  of  the 
four  people  who  saw  the  murderer.  The  only  question  is, 
are  you  satisfied  that  their  recollection  of  him  and  his  appear- 
ance is  so  good  that  you  can  believe  them  when  they  say, 
without  hesitation,  that  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  is  the  man 
they  saw? 

Now,  gentlemen,  I  come  to  a  different  class  of  evidence  alto- 
gether. We  know  nothing  of  the  man's  movements  until  a 
quarter  to  ten  at  night,  when  he  appears,  excited,  at  the  Motor 
Club  in  India  Street.  He  interviews  Gordon  Henderson,  the 
clubmaster,  whom  he  has  seen  only  two  or  three  times  before ; 
he  begs  him  to  give  him  all  the  money  he  has  in  the  club, 
and  he  will  give  him  a  cheque  for  it.  Now,  that  is  a  strange 
request.  Why  does  he  now  begin  on  this  very  day,  21st 
December,  to  collect  together  all  the  money  that  he  can?  Why 
was  it  he  could  not  even  wait  till  the  next  day  to  cash  his 
cheque?  I  dare  say  you  have  your  own  ideas  as  to  whether 
that  cheque  would  have  been  honoured.  Why  does  he  go, 
gasping  and  panting,  for  money  to  this  Motor  Club,  where  he 
was  but  little  known  as  compared  with  the  club  adjoining,  the 
Sloper  Club?  How  is  it  that  Henderson  had  his  suspicions 
aroused  by  the  excited  man  coming  at  this  late  hour,  not  a 
member  of  the  club,  and  begging  him  for  all  the  money  he  can 
lay  his  hands  on  ?  Henderson  is  not  able  to  give  him  anything, 
except  a  very  little  loose  change,  which  is  insufficient,  and  he 
suggests  that  he  should  go  next  door  to  the  Sloper  Club,  where 
he  would  find  his  friend  Cameron.  I  suppose  he,  knowing 
Cameron's  financial  resources  better  than  you  or  I  do,  said 
that  it  was  no  use,  and  then  he  left.  Slater  himself  obviously 
felt  that  this  was  a  very  suspicious  incident.  Here  is  what  he 
says  about  it  in  his  letter,  "  I  am  very  down-hearted,  my  dear 
Cameron,  to  know  that  my  friends  in  Glasgow,  like  Gordon 
Henderson,  can  tell  such  lies  about  me  to  the  Glasgow  police. 
I  have  seen  here  his  statements  he  made  in  Glasgow  telling  the 
police  that  a  German  came  up  to  him  and  had  told  him  Oscar 
Slater  had  committed  the  murder,  and  also  that  I  have  been 

254 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


on  the  night  of  the  murder  in  his  place  asking  him  for  mony,  Lord 
I  was  very  excited  and  in  hurry,  I  didn't  think  it  was  very 
clever  from  him,  because  he  like  to  make  himself  a  good  name 
by  the  police  to  tell  such  lies.  I  don't  deny  I  have  been  in  his 
place  asking  him  for  mony,  because  I  have  been  brocke  in  the 
Sloper  Club.  Only  I  will  fix  Mr.  Gordon  Henderson.  I  will 
prove  with  plenty  of  witnesses  that  I  was  playing  there  mucky, 
and  I  am  entitled  to  ask  a  proprietor  from  a  gambling  house 
when  I  am  broke  for  mony.  He  would  not  mind  to  get  me 
hangt,  and  I  will  try  to  prove  that  from  a  gambling  point  I 
am  right  to  ask  for  some  money.  I  hope  nobody  propper 
mindet  will  blame  me  for  this."  I  wonder  who  are  the  gentle- 
men who  were  brought  to  prove  that  he  was  at  the  Sloper  Club 
that  night,  that  he  was  playing  cards,  that  he  had  lost  money 
and  could  not  get  money  from  his  friends  in  the  Sloper  Club, 
and  that  he  went  to  the  adjoining  club,  where  he  was  not  a 
member,  and  asked  the  clubmaster  at  a  late  hour  of  night  to 
give  him  money  to  pay  his  debts  in  the  adjoining  club,  and 
offered  him  a  cheque.  He  did  not  ask  for  any  sum  of  money; 
he  asked  for  all  the  money  that  the  clubmaster  had.  I  suggest 
to  you  that  Slater  at  this  time,  having  committed  the  murder, 
was  now  getting  all  the  means  he  could  collect  in  order  to  enable 
him  to  effect  his  escape,  for  you  will  recollect  he  was  disturbed 
before  he  had  possession  himself  of  more  than  one  of  the  old 
lady's  jewels. 

There  is  one  other  instance,  and  it  is  a  very  striking  one. 
In  the  evening  of  24th  December — or  it  may  have  been  the 
23rd — there  mounted  on  the  car  at  the  foot  of  Union  Street 
a  man  whom  the  conductor,  who  was  a  very  good  observer, 
identified  as  the  prisoner.  He  went  up  on  the  top  of  the  car 
and  took  his  seat  a  little  bit  in  front  of  the  place  where  the 
electricity  comes  down  to  drive  the  car.  On  the  opposite  side 
there  was  sitting  a  boy  reading  about  the  murder  in  the  Evening 
Citizen.  As  the  car  conductor  comes  up  and  asks  the  man  where 
he  is  going  there  is  a  mumbled  answer,  and  the  conductor  gives 
him  a  penny  ticket.  Then  he  turns  to  the  boy,  who  has  been 
reading  about  the  Glasgow  West-End  murder,  and  asks  him 
if  the  man  has  been  got  yet;  and  the  boy  answers,  "No,  and 
I  do  not  think  they  are  likely  to  get  him."  The  conductor  sees 
this  man  fidgetting  and  looking  suspiciously  at  him,  and  within 
a  few  seconds  after  he  has  paid  his  fare  he  rises,  darts  down 
the  stair,  runs  up  a  side  street,  and  runs  full  speed  up  the 
street,  without  waiting  for  the  car  to  stop.  Well,  it  is  suggested 
that  it  is  not  very  economical  for  a  man  to  pay  a  penny  and 
leave  before  he  has  reached  his  destination,  but  that  is  not 
the  observation  I  think  that  you  are  likely  to  make.  He  was 
very  brave,  he  was  perfectly  cool,  he  was  perfectly  composed, 
amongst  his  cronies  in  the  few  days  after  the  murder.  He 

355 


Oscar  Slater. 

Lord  never  went  to  any  of  his  clubs  or  any  of  his  other  familiar 
dvoeate  hauntg>  an(j  the  only  time  we  hear  of  him  in  the  presence  of 
members  of  the  general  public  we  find  that  his  guilty  conscience 
is  aroused,  and  he  feels  that  the  sooner  he  is  out  of  the 
neighbourhood  the  better.  At  all  events,  there  is  that  very 
striking  incident.  The  conductor,  having  seen  the  man  on  the 
roof  there,  said  of  the  prisoner,  "  That  is  the  man  " ;  and  he 
has  not  the  slightest  hesitation  about  him  any  more  than  the 
other  witnesses  have. 

I  come  now,  finally,  to  his  flight  from  justice.  I  say, 
deliberately,  "  his  flight  from  justice,"  because  I  am  going  to 
demonstrate  that  there  was  one  reason,  and  one  reason  only, 
for  his  leaving  Glasgow  at  that  time,  and  that  was  to  escape 
the  hands  of  justice.  His  departure  from  Glasgow  was,  to  use 
his  own  expression  in  his  letter  to  his  friend  Rattman,  "  abso- 
lutely suddenly."  That  is  Rattman's  translation,  "  absolutely 
suddenly,"  or,  as  we  say  in  the  letter  as  printed,  "  surprisingly." 
Gentlemen,  he  left  Glasgow  on  the  night  of  25th  December 
without  saying  farewell  to  a  single  one  of  his  intimate  friends 
and  cronies,  without  a  single  one  of  his  friends  knowing  that 
he  was  going  away.  It  is  said  that  a  fortnight,  or  three  weeks, 
or  a  month  before  he  spoke  of  going  to  America.  I  dare  say 
he  did;  I  am  certain  he  did.  There  is  no  doubt  whatever  he 
had  made  up  his  mind,  as  soon  as  the  deed  was  accomplished, 
that  he  would  not  stay  in  this  country  one  moment  longer  than 
was  absolutely  necessary.  He  had  in  view  to  go  to  America  or 
somewhere  else,  and  that  he  stated  that  to  his  cronies  three 
weeks  or  a  month  before  is,  I  think,  not  only  highly  probable, 
but  absolutely  certain.  What  I  say  is,  that,  having  this  inten- 
tion of  going  abroad  unquestionably  fixed  in  his  mind,  he  did 
go  at  the  precise  moment  when  he  went  suddenly,  unexpectedly, 
and  without  giving  a  word  of  warning  to  a  single  one  of  hia 
friends.  I  say  that  his  flight  was  precipitated,  and  the  moment 
fixed  by  the  publication  of  his  description  in  the  newspapers 
at  two  o'clock  on  the  afternoon  of  the  25th  December.  He  had 
taken  his  house  for  eighteen  months.  Do  you  think  that  a 
respectable  man,  dentist  or  no  dentist,  having  taken  a  house 
for  eighteen  months,  and  having  made  up  his  mind  to  leave 
his  house,  would  not  have  given  some  notice?  I  am  assuming 
at  this  moment  that  he  is  a  respectable  man,  who  has  fallen 
into  the  hands  of  the  authorities  by  a  mistake.  Do  you  really 
think  that  a  respectable  man  who,  having  taken  a  house  for 
eighteen  months  from  respectable  people,  would  have  left 
without  giving  a  word  of  warning?  He  gives  no  notice,  and  he 
leaves  the  house  with  the  rent  unpaid,  of  course.  He  has 
bought  £178  worth  of  furniture,  and  he  leaves  that.  Happily, 
that  was  purchased  on  the  hire-purchase  system,  and  the 
furniture  people  got  back  the  furniture.  No  notice  is  given  to 

256 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


them.  You  would  expect  that  a  respectable  man  would  go  to  Lord 
the  furniture  people  and  would  say,  "  I  am  going  away.  Pray,  voc 
take  back  the  furniture."  He  leaves  without  giving  any  notice. 
On  9th  December  he  sends  his  watch  up  to  London  to  be 
repaired,  and  he  tells  the  watchmaker  that  his  address  till 
30th  December  will  be  69  St.  George's  Road.  At  6.12  p.m.  on 
21st  December  a  telegram  is  sent  off  saying  that  he  must  have  his 
watch  at  once,  and  on  23rd  December  he  sends  another  telegram 
saying,  "  Must  have  watch  now,  leaving  to-morrow  night  for  the 
Continent."  That  was  a  falsehood,  and  he  knew  it,  because  on 
that  very  day,  the  23rd  December,  he  was  at  Cooks'  office  in 
Glasgow  finding  out  about  sailings  for  America.  He  was 
minded  to  go  on  board  the  "  Lusitania,"  which  left  Liverpool 
for  New  York  on  Saturday,  the  26th.  He  was  too  late  on  the 
23rd  to  effect  arrangements  for  a  berth,  and  he  was  asked  by 
the  clerk  to  come  back  the  next  day,  that  they  were  com- 
municating with  Liverpool,  and  would  give  him  an  answer  then. 
On  the  afternoon  of  the  24th  this  man,  who  was  instantly 
leaving  for  the  Continent,  comes  back  to  Cooks'  office,  and  is 
offered  an  inside  berth,  which  he  thinks  is  unsuitable.  He 
thinks  he  would  like  an  outside  berth,  and  he  does  not  take 
the  berth  that  is  offered.  The  clerk  asks  him  to  come  back 
next  day,  and  he  agrees  to  come  back  the  next  day, 
the  25th.  He  never  appeared  on  the  25th.  Now,  mind 
you,  at  this  time  he  had  given  his  name  to  Cooks'  people 
in  Glasgow  as  Oscar  Slater.  On  the  25th — the  day  he 
was  to  go  back  to  Cooks'  office — his  name  and  his  description, 
and  all  the  rest  of  it,  appear  in  the  Glasgow  papers,  and  he 
sees  that  the  last  thing  in  this  world  that  he  ought  to  do,  if 
he  studies  his  own  safety,  is  to  go  back  to  Cooks'  office  as  Oscar 
Slater.  He  accordingly  straightway  proceeds  to  pack  up  all 
his  goods  and  effects  on  the  25th.  So  far  as  we  know,  he 
never  leaves  the  house  from  the  time  he  sees  the  paper  until 
a  little  after  six  o'clock,  when  he  goes  down  to  the  Central 
Station,  and  gets  a  porter  to  go  up  to  his  house.  No  arrange- 
ment was  made  beforehand.  He  walks  down  to  the  Central 
Station  at  six  o'clock  and  gets  a  porter  to  come  up  for  his 
baggage  at  8.20,  and  he  goes  on  with  his  packing.  The  porter 
comes,  and  then  you  will  remember  the  curious  departure. 
The  cab  does  not  drive  up  to  the  door.  Down  he  goes  with 
the  lady  and  the  servant.  You  will  remember  what  the  servant 
upstairs  and  the  neighbours  said.  He  looks  suspiciously  about, 
and  the  lady  is  behind  him.  No  doubt  they  go  on  and  find 
their  way  down  to  the  Central  Station  and  take  their  places 
in  the  train.  The  booking  clerk  at  the  Central  Station  says 
that  a  man  very  like  Slater  came  and  bought  two  London 
tickets,  third  class.  He  says  that  he  cannot  recollect  who  it 
was  that  bought  the  other  tickets  that  are  down  in  his  book, 

»  257 


Oscar   Slater. 

Lord         the  two  third-class  tickets  to  Liverpool.     I  do  not  attach  very 
Advocate  JQUQ^  importance  to  this,  and  I  will  tell  you  frankly  it  depends 
entirely  on  the  evidence  of  the  booking  clerk,  who  simply  says, 
"  I  recollect  seeing  that  man,  a  man  very  like  that  man,  buying 
two  third-class  single  tickets  for  London";  and  he  says,  what 
is  perfectly  true,  that  a  man  with  a  London  ticket  may  travel 
to  Liverpool  and  break  his  journey  there,  going  in  the  Liverpool 
carriage.     It  seems  to  be  the  regular  practice  to  take  a  ticket 
for  London  and  break  the  journey  at  Liverpool,  and  no  question 
is  asked.     When  he  arrives  at  Liverpool  he  does  not  go  to  the 
Cunard  office  and  say,  "  I  am  Oscar  Slater,  the  man  who  was 
communicating  with  you  through  your  agent  Cook  in  Glasgow," 
but  he  lets  slip,  as  some  men  do  even  when  they  seek  to  be 
most  careful,  what  he  thinks  to  be  rather  a  suspicious  expres- 
sion.    When  he  is  offered  a  berth  he  says,  "  Oh,  well,  I  was 
offered  that    by    your   Glasgow    agents,"    and    then,    says   the 
booking  clerk,  he  seemed  to  have  regretted  having  used  the 
words  "  Glasgow  agents."     Whatever  impression  he  may  have 
produced   upon   the   Cunard   agent,    he   takes  his   passage   on 
board  the  "  Lusitania  "  under  the  name  of  Otto   Sando,   and 
the  lady  under  the  name  of  Amy   Sando.      Why?     For  two 
reasons.     In  the  first  place,  because  he  knew  that  the  police 
were  on  the  track  of  Oscar  Slater,   and,  in  the  second  place, 
because  he  knew  that  upon  a  number  of  his  packages  were  the 
initials  "O.S.,"  and  it  would  not  do  for  him  to  travel  under 
the  name  of  Adolph  Anderson,  or  George,  or  any  other  name 
but  a  name  beginning  with  0  and  S.     And,  accordingly,  for 
some  reason  or  another  which  has  not  been  explained,  which 
cannot  be  explained  consistently  with  innocence,  the  man  takes 
his  passage  for  himself  and  the  lady  under  false  and  assumed 
names.     He  does  more.     In  the  application  form  for  tickets  he 
puts  in  his  name  as  Otto  Sando,  and  his  occupation  as  dentist. 
Where  is  his  destination?     His  destination  was  Queensland  to 
the  barber,   his  destination  was  San  Francisco  to  the  watch- 
maker, his  destination  was  Monte  Carlo  to  the  servant  who 
was  left  behind.     His  destination  was  America  generally.     His 
destination    is    now    changed,    because    the    newspapers    have 
reported  his  name  and  his  description,  and  his  destination  now 
is,   "American  address,  Chicago,   30  Staate  Street."     On  the 
back  of  his  ticket  you  find  the  name  "  Otto  Sando  and  Mrs. 
Amy  Sando."     You  find  his  occupation  given  as  dentist,  you 
find  his  final  destination  Chicago,  and  you  find  in  pencil  "  Hotel 
Chicago."     Now,    I   ask  you,    how   can   you    account   for   this 
remarkable  history  of  deception  if  this  was  an  honest  man, 
simply  leaving  this  country  for  America  in  order  to  take  up 
some  business,  in   order  to   visit   a   friend   for   some   entirely 
innocent  purpose?     Is  there  any  sort  of  explanation  consistent 
with  innocence?     I  submit  to  you  there  is  no  explanation  of 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


it   which  is   consistent  with  anything   but  the   view   that  he,  Lord 
knowing  that  the  police  were  on  his  track,   took  every  step      voca 
possible  in  order  to  baffle  the  ends  of  justice  and  to  escape 
the  hands  of  the  authorities. 

That  was  not  the  end  of  his  deception.  In  the  course  of  his 
preparations,  when  he  was  collecting  his  money,  he  had  to 
lift  some  money  from  the  Savings  Bank  and  some  money  that 
was  invested  in  the  public  funds ;  and  he  had  to  write  a  letter 
to  London  in  order  to  get  that  money.  He  wrote  that  letter 
to  London  on  the  21st,  and  he  got  his  money  from  the 
Savings  Bank,  some  £39,  on  the  23rd,  and  his  money  from 
the  public  funds,  some  £49,  on  the  24th.  In  the  letter 
which  he  wrote  to  the  authorities  asking  for  his  money,  he 
asks  them  to  send  it  at  once,  "  as  I  have  an  urgent  call  to 
America  because  my  wife  is  ill."  The  postmark  upon  that 
letter  is  "Glasgow,  5  p.m.,  December  21st."  There  is  no 
talk  here  about  escape  from  an  importunate  wife.  We  were 
told  that  the  whole  object  of  the  visit  to  America  was  either 
to  benefit  the  health  of  one  lady  or  to  escape  the  pursuit  of 
another,  but  here  he  is  now  going  to  America,  not  to  escape, 
but  on  the  urgent  call  of  his  wife,  who  is  said  to  be  ill. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  all  this  deception,  what  is  the 
meaning  of  all  these  deliberate  falsehoods,  what  is  the  mean- 
ing of  this  collection  of  all  his  available  resources,  what  is 
the  meaning  of  his  call  on  the  pawnbrokers  on  21st  December 
to  get  £30  more  upon  this  brooch?  What  is  the  meaning 
of  his  attempt,  his  eager  attempt,  to  sell  even  the  reversion 
of  the  pawn  ticket,  having  got  into  his  hands  upwards  of, 
roughly,  £135?  Why  was  he  collecting  all  this  money?  This 
man,  who  was  hard  up  some  weeks  before,  had  begun  to 
collect  all  his  available  resources  in  order  that  he  might 
make  his  flight  from  justice  absolutely  certain  and  secure. 
My  submission  to  you  is  that  the  circumstances  connected 
with  his  flight  bring  home  inevitable  guilt  to  this  man.  These 
subterfuges  and  deliberate  lies  and  falsehoods  which  he  told, 
and  the  efforts  which  he  made  to  conceal  his  tracks,  are 
consistent  with  nothing  but  guilt  on  hie  part,  and  that  syn- 
chronised in  a  remarkable  degree  with  the  publication  of  his 
description  in  the  newspapers  and  the  knowledge  that  was 
so  brought  home  to  him  that  the  authorities  were  upon  his 
track. 

Gentlemen,  I  submit  to  you  in  summary  that  the  evidence 
shows,  clearly  and  beyond  all  dispute,  that  this  man  was  a 
man  who  was  capable  of  this  atrocious  crime;  it  shows  that 
this  man  was  a  man  who  had  the  whole  knowledge  necessary 
to  enable  him  to  commit  the  crime  with  success;  it  shows 
that  he  was  one  of  the  few  men  who  could  commit  a  crime 
of  this  kind  with  any  reasonable  chance  of  escaping.  As  I 

259 


Oscar  Slater. 

Lord  said  before,  jewels  are  difficult  things  to  deal  with  and  to 
Advoeate  disp0se  of .  This  was  a  man  who  had  been  seen  elaborately 
taking  the  precautions  necessary  to  accomplish  a  crime  which 
was  carefully  planned,  which  was  deliberately  carried  out  by 
cool  and  abandoned  ruffianism.  The  evidence  shows  con- 
clusively, not  only  had  he  taken  elaborate  precautions  to 
cover  up  his  tracks  first,  in  anticipation  of  the  accomplish- 
ment of  his  nefarious  object,  but  he  took  the  greatest  pains 
when  the  supreme  moment  came  to  conceal  his  escape  and  to 
effect  his  flight  with  perfect  safety. 

Gentlemen,  I  have  done.  I  cannot  prove  more  in  this 
case.  I  do  not  for  a  moment  deny  that  you  have  to-day  to 
discharge  the  most  serious  and  the  most  responsible  duty 
which  you  will  probably  have  to  discharge  during  the  whole 
course  of  your  natural  lives.  On  your  verdict  undoubtedly 
depends  a  man's  life;  and  I  need  say  no  more  to  bring  home 
to  you  a  sense  of  the  responsibility  which  now  lies  upon  you. 
If  any  reasonable  doubt  occurs  to  you,  if  you  entertain  any 
reasonable  doubt  as  to  the  evidence  bringing  home  guilt  to 
this  man,  then  you  are  bound  to  give  him  the  benefit  of  that 
doubt.  He  may  be,  and  probably  is:,  the  worst  of  men ;  but 
he  is  entitled  to  as  fair  a  trial  as  if  he  was  the  best  of  men. 
He  may  be  one  of  the  most  degraded  of  mortals,  he  may  be 
a  cheat,  he  may  be  a  robber,  a  burglar,  or  the  worst  of 
characters,  but  that  does  not  infer  that  he  committed  murder. 
He  is  entitled,  therefore,  to  have  all  the  benefit  of  as  fair  a 
trial  as  you  can  give  to  a  citizen  of  most  unimpeachable 
respectability.  Gentlemen,  he  is  entitled  to  justice,  to  no 
less  than  justice,  but  to  no  more  than  justice.  My  submission 
to  you  is  that  his  guilt  has  been  brought  fairly  home  to  him, 
that  no  shadow  of  doubt  exists,  that  there  is  no  reasonable 
doubt  that  he  was  the  perpetrator  of  this  foul  murder.  I 
adjure  you  to  allow  no  feeling  of  sentiment — if,  indeed,  senti- 
ment is  admissible  in  a  case  like  this  at  all — and  no  feeling 
of  aversion  to  the  consequences  that  may  follow,  to  deter 
you  from  discharging  the  duty  which  you  owe  to  your 
country,  and  the  duty  which  is  laid  upon  you  by  the  oath 
which  you  took  on  Monday  morning,  to  prevent  you  from 
finding  and  returning  the  verdict  to  which  the  evidence 
inevitably  leads. 


Mr.  M'Clure's  Address  to  the  Jury. 

HP.  M'Clure      Mr.   M'CLURB  then  addressed  the  jury  as  follows  :  — Gentle- 
men of  the  jury,   I  must  confess  to   a  feeling  of  very  great 
responsibility  in  rising  to   address  you  now  on  behalf  of  the 
accused.        Not  only    has    he  got,   with  slight   resources    and 
260 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


the  assistance  of  a  few  friends,  to  fight  his  case  single-  Mr.  M'Clure 
handed  against  the  forces  of  the  Crown  and  the  power  of  the 
Lord  Advocate,  but  I  think  he  has  also  to  fight  a  most  unfair 
fight  against  public  prejudice,  roused  with  a  fury  I  do  not 
remember  to  have  seen  in  any  other  case.  Certainly  the 
newspaper  campaign  which  has  been  conducted  against  this 
man  Slater  is  without  parallel  for  its  absolutely  irrespon- 
sible character,  for  the  rumours  it  has  set  afloat,  for  the 
prejudice  it  has  created.  I  am  not  saying  this  to  you 
because  I  believe  you  have  been  moved  by  it,  but  I  mention 
it  because  it  is  right  that  it  should  be  mentioned  and  con- 
demned. This  man,  in  many  quarters,  has  been  convicted 
before  he  has  been  tried;  but  I  ask  you  to  bear  in  mind  that 
you,  gentlemen,  and  all  of  us  here  who  have  been  present 
during  these  last  three  days  listening  to  the  evidence,  are 
better  judges  than  any  outsider  can  possibly  be  of  the  rights  and 
•wrongs  of  this  matter.  If  you  ever  had  any  preconception  in 
your  minds  because  of  what  you  have  seen  in  the  newspapers 
before  you  were  empanelled — even  as  late  as  Saturday  last 
there  was  a  disgraceful  attack  upon  the  prisoner  in 
an  evening  newspaper !  —  lay  that  aside,  and  remember 
that  the  accused  has  to  be  tried  by  you  upon  the 
evidence  that  has  been  laid  before  you  upon  oath. 
I  am  certain  you  will  do  nothing  that  is  unfair,  and  I  am 
certain  you  will  act  up  to  the  high  conception  of  duty  which, 
I  trust,  you  entertain.  The  case  has  many  difficulties,  and 
you  will  weigh  them;  but  you  will  remember  this,  that  if 
you  come  to  an  adverse  verdict  against  this  man  there  is  not 
the  least  doubt  that  it  will  be  followed  by  sentence  of  death, 
and  that  will  be  followed  by  his  certain  doom.  If  he  is  con- 
victed, I  would  have  you  remember  that  there  is  no  possibility 
of  a  commutation  of  the  capital  penalty;  and  I  say  this  to 
make  you  bear  in  mind  the  terrible  power  which  you  wield, 
and  also  to  impress  upon  you  your  duty  to  weigh  fairly  the 
great  issues  which  are  before  you. 

There  is  no  doubt  whatever — it  has  been  mentioned  as  the 
main  thing  against  him — that  the  person  you  are  trying  is 
what  is  ordinarily  described  asi  a  person  of  disreputable  life. 
People  who  frequent  the  clubs  to  which  he  resorted,  who  have 
no  means  of  livelihood  except  gambling,  and  have  for  their 
friends  all  kinds  of  outcasts,  live  a  life  of  their  own,  and  none 
of  us  here  touches  it.  Therefore,  when  appeals  are  made  to 
you  by  the  Lord  Advocate,  asking  you  to  conceive  what  a 
respectable  man  would  do  under  circumstances  of  this  kind 
or  of  that,  his  appeal  is  beside  the  point.  These  people  do 
not  have  influential  friends,  they  have  only  friends  of  their 
own  class;  and  surely  this  is  certain,  that  if  one  of  them  is 
charged  with  murder,  and  may  have  to  die  for  it,  you 

261 


Oscar   Slater. 

Mr.  M'Clure  cannot,  in  common  fairness,  disregard  the  evidence  of  the* 
people  he  has  been  living  among.  You  cannot  say,  "  Because 
I  cannot  get  people  living  under  respectable  social  conditions 
to  say  something  in  his  favour,  he  is  therefore  doomed." 
The  Lord  Advocate  says,  "'  Where  was  he?  If  he  cannot 
show  to  demonstration  by  respectable  witnesses  where  he 
was,  what  do  you  think  of  him?  Is  he  not  guilty?  " 
Gentlemen,  that  comes,  in  simple  language,  to  this,  that 
unless  the  man  could  demonstrate  an  alibi  by  the  evidence  of 
the  respectable — that  is,  by  persons  he  never  mixed  with  and 
never  met — then  he  is  to  pay  the  last  penalty.  That  surely, 
gentlemen,  is  not  the  way  in  which  this  case  can  be  dealt 
with.  If  you  can  find  proof  convincing  to  your  mind  that  the 
prisoner  did  the  deed,  then  I,  no  less  than  the  Lord  Advocate, 
would  not  ask  you  to  hold  your  hand.  But  your  judgment 
must  be  a  careful  and  considerate  judgment.  When  a  man 
is  being  tried  for  his  life  he  has  a  right  to  the  benefit  of  all 
the  doubts  there  may  be.  If  you  see  any  doubts  in  the 
evidence,  then  weigh  them  well.  Remember  that  a  fellow- 
creature  is  not  to  be  sent  to  death  unless  his  guilt  is 
clear.  Remember  this  also,  that  it  is  well  to  give  a  verdict 
in  which  there  will  be  no  after  reproach  for  yourselves. 

Gentlemen,  there  were  some  circumstances  in  connection 
with  this  case — occurring  before  the  case  itself  was  investi- 
gated— which  started  an  almost  overwhelming  prejudice  against 
the  prisoner.  Sympathy,  of  course,  exists  in  the  breasts  of 
none  of  us  for  the  crime  which  was  committed;  and  if  we  had 
the  perpetrator,  there  is  no  doubt  what  we  would  do  with  him. 
But  the  horror  of  this  murder  overhung  the  city  of  Glasgow, 
and,  as  you  have  heard  in  the  evidence,  all  sorts  of  absurd 
rumours  were  in  circulation.  These  rumours,  some  of  which 
were  put  to  the  witnesses,  were  things  that  I  had  heard 
myself — that  this  old  lady  was  the  friend  of  thieves,  the 
recipient  of  stolen  property ;  her  house  full  of  jewels ;  one 
person  said  to  be  her  illegitimate  daughter,  and  Slater  himself 
said  to  be  her  illegitimate  son !  There  was  not  a  word  of 
truth  in  all  that,  but  it  shows  how  the  public  mind  was  taken 
possession  of.  It  was  something  to  strike  horror  into  the 
heart  of  every  household,  that,  in  a  common  stair  in  Glasgow, 
at  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening,  when  an  old  lady  was  left 
casually  alone,  a  murderer  could  come  across  her  threshold 
and  kill  her,  and  nobody  know  where  the  murderer  was.  It 
was  the  same  excitement  as  there  was  in  London  when 
Jack  the  Ripper  was  feared — feared,  indeed,  not  only  in 
London,  but  all  over  the  country.  When  excitement  of  that 
kind  takes  possession  of  the  public  mind,  the  judgment 
becomes  dangerously  overbalanced;  and  I  will  make  clear 
to  you  two  matters  creating  totally  unfounded  prejudice  against 
262 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


the   prisoner  which  took   possession   of  the   public    mind    and  Mr.  BTClure 
influenced  it  wildly  against  him. 

In  the  first  place,  when  the  pawning  of  a  diamond  crescent 
brooch  was  found  to  have  taken  place  exactly  upon  the  21st 
of  December,  the  very  day  of  the  murder,  the  whole  place  was 
agog.  A  diamond  crescent  brooch  was  missing  from  the 
old  lady's  house,  and  it  was  said,  "  There  is  the  murderer 
already  disposing  of  the  stolen  property!  "  How  did  this 
matter  get  to  the  police?  It  got  to  the  police  in 
this  way,  that  Allan  M'Lean  was  casually  told  at  the 
club,  by  a  friend  of  his  called  Anderson,  that  Slater, 
who  had  been  a  member  of  the  club,  and  had  been  gambling 
there  regularly  for  a  period  of  weeks,  had  been  disposing  in 
Glasgow  of  a  diamond  crescent  brooch  in  a  pawnshop.  This, 
we  now  know,  was  not  Miss  Gilchrist's  brooch  at  all,  yet  it 
is  responsible  for  the  blaze  of  suspicion  against  this  man 
which  immediately  ensued.  Two  days  after,  a  newspaper 
came  out  with  a  description  of  the  supposed  culprit.  He  was 
said  to  be  a  sallow-complexioned  man,  a  dark  man.  And  so 
was  Slater !  And  for  some  days  Slater  had  not  been  seen  about 
the  club !  Then  Allan  M'Lean — I  do  not  blame  him  for  it ; 
he  was  quite  right  —  went  to  the  police  and  said,  "  I 
know  a  man  who  answers  that  description,  and  I  know  he 
was  pawning  a  diamond  crescent  brooch."  So  he  took  the 
police  up  to  show  them  the  place  where  this  man  Slater  lived 
— and  this  fatal  suspicion  was  afloat.  Gentlemen,  we  all  know 
now,  as  I  have  said,  that  the  diamond  brooch  had  nothing  at 
all  to  do  with  this  old  lady.  It  was  a  diamond  brooch  which, 
so  far  back  as  the  month  of  November,  had  been  pawned  by 
Slater  in  the  pawnshop  of  Mr.  Liddell.  Twenty  pounds  had 
originally  been  advanced  on  it;  on  9th  December,  a  fortnight 
before  the  murder,  .£10  more  had  been  advanced  on  it ;  and 
on  the  day  of  the  murder  the  prisoner,  who  owned  it,  and 
was  going  abroad,  went  back  and  got  as  much  more  as  he 
could  get.  on  it,  viz.,  £30.  That,  of  course,  has  nothing 
to  do  with  this  case,  as  we  now  know,  but  the  coincidence 
eet  the  public  mind  on  fire. 

Another  circumstance — also,  I  shall  show,  of  mere  coinci- 
dence— strongly  affected  public  opinion.  When  Allan  M'Lean 
guided  the  police  to  Slater's  residence,  Slater  had  disappeared ; 
he  was  gone!  What  more  natural  than  to  suppose  that  this 
was,  as  my  learned  friend  said,  a  "flight  from  justice"?  It 
was  a  natural  supposition,  yet  I  will  be  able  to  show  you,  I 
think,  quite  conclusively,  that  this  was  no  flight  from  justice. 
I  shall  show  you  that  Slater  had  long  purposed  going  abroad, 
and  you  will  judge  whether  the  steps  that  were  taken  to  that 
end  long  before,  and  the  things  which  he  did  on  the  very  day 
of  the  murder,  are  consistent  with  the  action  of  a  man  who 

263 


Oscar  Slater. 

had  still  a  murder  to  perpetrate — a  man  taking  decisive  steps 
to  depart  before  he  had  murdered  anybody — apparently,  the 
suggestion  must  be,  on  the  chance  that  he  would  commit  a 
murder  at  some  later  time !  That  is  what  it  must  come  to, 
for  the  prisoner  had,  in  fact,  concluded  a  number  of  his  arrange- 
ments to  leave  for  America  before  this  murder  was  perpe- 
trated. I  have  told  you  about  the  pawning  of  the  brooch 
being  an  entirely  false  scent.  Everybody  admits  that  now. 
What  about  this  "  flight  from  justice  "  ?  Let  us  see  how  this 
stands. 

The  key  to  the  situation  is  to  be  got  in  the  domestic 
establishment.  What  do  Schmalz  and  Antoine  say?  Slater, 
according  to  their  evidence — which,  by  the  way,  was  not  alluded 
to  in  the  speech  of  the  Lord  Advocate — had  come  down  from 
London  in  November  because,  as  he  said,  trade  in  his  line  of 
business  was  bad  in  London.  No  doubt  that  was  the  motive 
that  brought  him.  He  had  not  been  very  long  in  Glasgow  before 
he  was  equally  disgusted  at  the  opportunities  offered  there, 
and  he  thought  of  moving.  It  is  not  as  if  this  purpose  was 
known  only  to  himself  and  his  immediate  household — I  mean 
Schmalz  and  Antoine.  It  was  not  so  at  all.  It  is  absolutely 
proved,  without  any  possibility  of  doubt,  by  a  series  of  wit- 
nesses, that  for  at  least  three  weeks  before  this  murder 
occurred  he  had  expressed  to  various  people  his  intention  to 
go  abroad  to  America — to  San  Francisco.  I  want  you  to 
follow  me  here,  because  this  does  a  great  deal  to  clear  up  the 
situation.  The  intention  of  going  to  America  was  expressed 
at  least  three  weeks  before  to,  first  of  all,  Hugh  Cameron. 
Hugh  Cameron  has  sworn  thisi  explicitly;  and,  let  me  say  this 
of  him,  that  he  cannot  be  called  a  witness  who  is  specially 
favourable  to  the  prisoner,  because,  whatever  line  of  life  was 
followed  by  the  prisoner  in  Glasgow,  to  whatever  depth  he 
may  have  gone  in  his  life,  our  information  upon  that  depends 
entirely  upon  the  evidence  of  Hugh  Cameron.  The  Lord 
Advocate,  in  connection  with  the  prisoner's  habit  of  gambling, 
asked,  "  Did  you  ever  hear  of  him  living  in  any  other  way?  " 
and  the  answer  of  Cameron  was,  "  Not  at  that  time."  Then 
the  Lord  Advocate  asked,  "Did  you  subsequently?"  and  the 
witness  said,  "  I  heard  it  " — and  you  know  what  it  was.  There 
is  no  more  evidence  on  that  matter,  unless  what  the  girl 
Antoine  said  herself,  that  in  the  prisoner's  absence  she  received 
gentlemen.  That,  however,  is  a  subject  we  are  not  to  go  into. 
It  should  not  have  been  referred  to,  and  is  not  in  the  case; 
but  you  will  remember  the  suggestion  that  was  made  upon 
it  by  the  Lord  Advocate — that  a  man  of  a  type  so  degraded 
was  capable  of  anything.  The  prisoner  does  not  look  like 
it,  but  still,  because  of  this  vague  and  irrelevant  accusation, 
he  is  supposed  to  be  a  man  of  such  extraordinary  brutal 

264 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


disposition  that  he  will  kill  a  woman.       Well,  Hugh  Cameron,  Mr.  M'CIure 

whose    evidence    raised    this    issue,     cannot    be    accused    of 

undue  partiality.       And  what  was  his  evidence?       He  stated 

that,  three  weeks  before  the  murder  was  committed,  this  man 

was  talking  of  leaving  Glasgow,  and  the  only  thing  that  kept 

him    from    going   was   that    he   had   a    house    on    lease,    and 

furniture  on  the  hire-purchase  system,  and  that  he  had  to  get 

some  one  first  to  take  these  over.     When  Cameron  was  asked, 

"  Did  he  tell  you  that  he  was  just  on  the  eve  of  departure?  " 

he   said,    "  No,    he  did   not   tell   me."     But   he   added   this — 

and  you  will  bear  it  in  mind — "  I  did  not  understand  he  was 

just  going;    I  thought  it  might  be  by  the  '  Campania  '   the 

following  week."     The  witness  Rattman  said  the  same  thing. 

He  said,  "  Not  only  did  I  know  he  was  going,  but  I  saw  a  letter 

from  San  Francisco ;  I  do  not  remember  the  name  of  the  writer 

of   it."       Antoine   gave   the   name  as   that    of   a  man   called 

Devoto,    and   his  letter   was   not  only   seen   by   Cameron   and 

Rattman,    but   Cameron    stated    explicitly,    "  Although   I    did 

not  know  he  was  going  that  week,  I  knew  that  his  departure 

was  imminent." 

Now,  that  being  the  state  of  mind  in  which  the  prisoner  was, 
he  did  make  an  effort,  which  was  spoken  to  yesterday,  to 
dispose  of  his  house  and  furniture.  How  did  the  witness 
Aumann  impress  you,  gentlemen?  He  did  not  seem  to 
be  telling  an  untruth,  and  he  stated  that  he  was  personally 
asked  if  he  would  take  over  the  flat.  He  told  you  that  he 
went  over  the  flat  with  Slater,  and  saw  the  woman  Antoine 
there ;  that  he  went  home  and  asked  his  wife  if  he  should  take 
it,  but  that  she  dissuaded  him.  It  therefore  comes  to  this, 
that  three  weeks  at  least  before  the  murder  the  prisoner's 
intention  to  leave  was  expressed  to  various  friends,  and,  in 
point  of  fact,  one  of  them  had  actually  gone  to  look  at  the 
house  with  the  view  of  taking  it  over  from  him.  We  have  it 
in  the  evidence  that  some  person  in  London  called  Freedman 
had  also  been  approached  with  the  same  object. 

Let  us  now  come  to  the  Monday  morning,  21st  December. 
Two  letters  arrived  that  morning  for  Slater,  and  these  letters 
were  followed  by  results  which,  I  think,  you  will  appreciate. 
There  was  a  letter  that  morning  from  Devoto  in  San  Fran- 
cisco, and  there  was  another  that  came  from  Mr.  Rogers  in 
London.  It  is  said  by  Antoine  that  she  and  Slater  had  been 
living  together  for  practically  the  last  three  or  four  years. 
Slater  has  a  wife,  and  his  wife,  apparently,  when  he  and 
Antoine  were  together  in  Brussels,  managed  to  make  it  so 
hot  for  them  that  they  left  for  Boulogne.  They  travelled 
across  to  America  under  the  names  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  A.  George, 
BO  as  to  give  his  wife  no  clue.  On  this  morning  of  21st 
December,  when  there  came  the  letter  from  San  Francisco, 

265 


Oscar   Slater. 

Mr.  M'CIure  and  the  intimation  from  Mr.  Rogers  that  Mrs.  Slater  was 
making  further  inquiries  regarding  her  husband's  where- 
abouts, Slater  made  up  his  mind  that  he  would  go  to  America, 
and  expressed  his  intention  in  presence  of  Antoine  and 
Schmalz.  Now,  it  is  not  as  if  nothing  followed  upon  that. 
You  will  ask  me,  "  Where  are  the  two  letters  you  are  talking 
about?"  They  are  not  here.  But  I  ask  you  to  note  what 
followed.  At  two  o'clock  that  day  Schmalz  was  told  that 
her  services  were  dispensed  with  from  the  next  Saturday,  and 
that  she  could  go  back  to  London.  Slater  said  to  her,  when 
he  gave  her  her  dismissal  at  lunch  time  that  Monday,  "  You 
will  be  able  to  find  your  way  back  to  London  by  yourself." 
Now,  that  was  before  the  murder.  The  next  thing  is  this, 
that,  as  we  know,  he  posted  a  letter,  the  envelope  of  which 
bears  five  o'clock  as  the  time  of  posting.  That  letter  was  sent 
from  69  St.  George's  Road,  and  was  written  before  the  murder. 
Here  is  the  letter — 

Dear  Sir, — Enclosed  you  will  find  my  savings  bank  book.  Be  kind 
enough  to  send  me  the  money  at  once,  as  I  have  an  urgent  call  to 
America  because  my  wife  is  ill. 

If  possible,  wire  the  money  on,  and  I  will  pay  all  charges  here. — 
Yours  truly,  ADOLF  ANDEKSON. 

The  Lord  Advocate,  commenting  on  the  terms  of  this  letter, 
says  that  the  prisoner's  wife  was  not  ill,  and  he  asks,  "  What 
does  he  mean  by  saying  that  ?  He  is  a  liar,  and  therefore  he  is 
the  murderer."  That  hardly  follows,  nor  is  it  to  the  point. 
The  letter  was  all  true  except  the  words,  "  my  wife  is  ill." 
Here,  then,  is  a  letter  posted  two  hours  before  the  murder, 
following  upon  the  dismissal  of  the  servant.  It  says  that 
the  writer  is  going  to  America,  and,  in  order  to  hurry  up  the 
Savings  Bank  people  and  to  get  attention,  that  he  is  going 
immediately,  as  his  wife  is  ill.  I  should  think  a  stimulus  of 
that  kind  is  not  unusual.  Then  we  have  this  further 
circumstance,  that  he  sent  a  wire  to  Dent,  in  London,  who  was 
doing  something  to  his  watch.  In  that  wire  he  says,  ''  Dent, 
watchmaker,  Trafalgar  Square,  London.  If  possible,  please 
send  watch  at  once. — Oscar  Slater."  That  was  sent  off  from 
the  Central  Station,  Glasgow,  at  twelve  minutes  past  six  on 
Monday,  21st  December,  and  it  is  in  Slater's  handwriting. 
Now,  the  murder  was  not  yet  committed.  It  has  been  proved 
to  you  that  he  had  got  letters  that  morning  which  made  him 
resolve  to  leave  for  America,  and  here  are  three  facts  which  all 
go  to  show  that  he  proceeded  at  once  to  make  arrangements 
and  realise  what  property  he  had.  First,  he  dismisses  the 
servant;  second,  he  writes  to  the  Savings  Bank  that  he  is 
going  to  America,  and  asks  for  his  money;  third,  his  watch 
being  at  Dent's  in  London,  a  wire  is  sent  at  6.12,  asking 
that  it  be  returned  at  once.  These  are  three  things  which 
266 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


show  that  he  was  on  the  move  before  the  murder  was   com-  Mr.  M'Clure 

mitted.     Another  thing  is  this  :   he  had  now  raised  £60  upon 

this    diamond  crescent    brooch    which    never   belonged   to    the 

deceased  lady  at  all.       Having  got  the  last  advance  of  £30 — 

I    suppose    all    the    pawnbroker  would   give   for    it — he    went 

immediately,   as  has  been  proved  by  Rattnian  and  Aumi'iin, 

to  Gall's  public-house,    and   he  was   there  between   four   and 

five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  with  the  pawn  ticket,  to  see  if 

he  could  raise  some  further  money  on  it.     That  is  to  say,  he 

wished    to   transfer   his    remaining    interest    in    this    diamond 

brooch,   on  which  he  had  raised  £60,  and  he  asked  Aumami 

if  he  would   be  prepared  to   buy  the  pawn  ticket.     Is  it  not 

obvious  that  the  person  who  was  doing  all  these  things,  was 

carrying    out   his    expressed    intention   to    leave  the    country? 

He  began   by  collecting  whatever   assets  he  had,    and   he  was 

doing  this  up  to  the  late  afternoon  of  21st  December.       There 

is  no  gainsaying  that  at  6.12  he  was  in  the  Central  Station 

sending  off  a  telegram.       The  telegram  is  in  his  handwriting, 

and  6.12  is  the  hour  at  which  it  was  despatched.     Accordingly, 

we  have  the  prisoner,  on  the  night  when  the  servant  girl  says 

she   left   her  mistress's  house   to  buy   an   evening  newspaper, 

at  the  Central  Station  sending  off  a  telegram  asking  Dent  to 

send  on  his  watch.        That  is  at  6.12  p.m.     It  seems   to  me 

an  extremely  unlikely  preparation  for  a  man  who  was  going 

to   murder   some   one  at  seven   o'clock,  to   be  entirely  absent 

from  the  locality   of  the  crime   during   the   whole   afternoon, 

to  be  walking  about  raising  money  on  his  possessions,  to   be 

writing  for  the  money   in  his   Savings   Bank   account,   to   be 

wiring  for  his  watch  to  be  sent  on.     Is  the  person  so  employed 

going  to   commit   a  crime   at  or   about   seven   o'clock?        But 

there  is  this  further  to  be  said.     The  telegram  to  Dent  involved 

this,  that  he  could  not  get  the  watch  for  a  day  or  two.     The 

Post  Office  Savings   Bank  letter  involved  this,  that   he  could 

not  get  paid  that  money  for  some  days  to  come.       In  point 

of  fact,  he  was  not  paid  it  till  the  23rd,  and  he  did  not  get 

the  proceeds  from  the  sale  of  his  2£  per  cent,   stock  till  the 

24th.       Can  you  conceive  a  man,  who  has  been  watching  his 

chance  to   murder   this   old   lady,  spending   the   whole  of   his 

afternoon  in  walking  round  the  pawnshops  where  his  property 

happens  to  be,  interviewing  his  friends  and  trying  to  sell  them 

pawn  tickets  for  the  residue  of  his  pawned  property,  writing 

letters  for  money,  telegraphing  for  a  watch,  involving  himself 

so  as  to  hinder  an  early  departure?     Can  you  conceive  that 

as  being  a  probable  or  likely  thing?     Can  you  conceive  it  as 

the  act  of  a  person  who  has  his  victim  in  view,  and  means  to 

commit  murder? 

What  was  said  about  his  movements  afterwards?       Rattman 
was  absolutely  clear  on  the  subject.     He  said  that  after  6.12 

267 


Oscar  Slater. 

Mr.  M'Ciure  — about  twenty  minutes  past  six — the  prisoner  came  over  to 
a  billiard  room  where  he  (Rattman)  was  playing  a  game  with 
Aumann.  They  did  not  say  that  Slater  stayed  long  with  them ; 
they  both  told  you  quite  distinctly  that  Slater  did  not  stay 
till  the  game  was  finished,  that  he  left  a  few  minutes  earlier, 
and  they  put  down  the  time  as  about  6.30.  Slater  had  to 
go  considerably  further  than  Aumann;  he  had  to  go  some  1400 
yards  in  order  to  reach  the  vicinity  of  the  deceased  lady's 
house;  he  had  just  the  same  distance  to  go  to  reach  his  own 
home.  I  do  not  know  how  long  he  would  take  to  do  that 
distance,  but,  suppose  he  took  between  ten  minutes  and  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  then  it  would  be  a  quarter  to  seven  by 
the  time  he  could  be  at  the  spot.  For  a  murderer  who  has 
got  a  victim  in  view,  he  is  cutting  it  very  fine,  do  you  not 
think?  What  is  the  idea  of  the  prosecution,  I  wonder?  Is 
it  that  the  prisoner  secreted  himself  in  some  passage  round 
about,  and  watched  for  his  chance  in  the  absence  of  the 
servant  girl?  That  must,  I  should  think,  be  the  case  for  the 
Crown,  but  how  can  it  be  reconciled  with  the  fact  that  the 
prisoner  absented  himself  from  the  locality  throughout  the 
whole  afternoon?  Well,  what  about  his  subsequent  proceedings? 
We  cannot  prove  absolutely  an  alibi,  but  the  evidence  comes 
very  near  it.  We  have  Antoine  and  the  girl  Schmalz,  who  both 
said  that  seven  o'clock  was  the  prisoner's  ordinary  dinner  hour ; 
and,  looking  back,  they  can  remember  nothing  exceptional 
that  night.  He  was  not  absent  from  dinner.  Dinner 
may  have  been  earlier  or  later  by  a  few  minutes — that  Schmalz 
admitted ;  but  at  any  rate  nothing  happened  to  give  these 
women  an  idea  that  they  were  living  in  the  presence  of  the 
brutal  murderer  who  had  just  despatched  Miss  Gilchrist. 
Things,  they  said,  proceeded  in  the  ordinary  way;  there  was 
nothing  to  attract  their  attention.  So  far  as  I  can  see,  we 
have  proved  that  he  could  not  have  been  near  the  scene  till  a 
quarter  to  seven ;  and  his  own  people  think  that  he  was  in 
about  seven  as  usual,  or  a  few  minutes  after.  I  would  press 
upon  you,  gentlemen,  the  evidence  given  by  Schmalz,  the 
servant,  and  by  the  girl  Antoine.  You  may  call  Antoine  what 
you  like,  but  did  she  look  yesterday  as  if  she  was  telling  a 
pack  of  lies?  Schmalz  was  cross-examined  for  about  half  an 
hour,  and  never  lost  a  feather.  She  told  a  simple  story,  and 
she  stuck  to  it,  although  she  was  tried  and  tested  in  every 
way.  The  girl  Antoine — you  saw  how  much  moved  she  was ! 
What  happened  to  her?  Was  it  mercy,  or  was  it  because  there 
was  no  success  with  Schmalz?  The  Lord  Advocate  never  asked 
her  a  single  question  in  cross-examination.  If  a  witness  is 
dismissed  without  any  questions  being  asked,  is  her  story  being 
accepted?  The  Lord  Advocate  may  say,  "  It  was  not  worth  my 
while  " ;  but  it  remains  the  fact  as  regards  this  important 
268 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


evidence  that  he  has  not  spoken  about  it  to-day — he  has  not  Mr.  M'Clure 
mentioned  the  name  of  Schmalz  or  of  Antoine.  Did  either 
woman  strike  you  as  being  an  untruthful  witness?  And  if 
Antoine  lives  the  life  that  is  alleged,  is  she  to  be  deprived  of 
every  human  right?  If  she  speaks  a  word  for  a  man  whom 
she  believes  to  be  innocent,  is  she  to  be  told,  "  We 
know  what  you  are,  and  we  will  not  accept  a  word  of 
what  you  say  "I  If  the  man  who  is  being  tried 
for  his  life  says,  "  Here  is  a  person  who  has  something  to 
say  in  my  favour  " — is  your  reply  to  be,  "  We  cannot 
accept  it :  it  may  be  the  only  thing  you  have  to  rest  on,  but 
still  it  is  not  to  be  accepted,  because  you  lead  a  life  that 
is  deplorable "  !  In  the  concluding  remarks  of  the  Lord 
Advocate  he  did  tell  you  that  you  must  have  no  reasonable 
doubt  left  in  your  mind  before  convicting  the  prisoner  in  this 
case.  Do  you  see  any  reason  whatever  to  doubt  the  evidence 
that  was  given  by  that  loyal  woman,  be  she  what  you  like? 
The  servant  girl  told  us  a  plain  story.  Is  she  not  to  be  believed 
either?  Remember  their  evidence  squares  absolutely  with  the 
evidence  given  by  Rattman  and  Aumann,  and  almost  demon- 
strates the  impossibility  of  the  prisoner  being  guilty.  The 
murderer  must  have  been  long  about  the  place;  how  else  could 
he  see  if  there  was  anybody  going  in  or  out,  or  that  the  coast 
was  clear?  Yet  Slater  was  elsewhere. 

Now,  gentlemen,  the  murder  is  committed,  and  there  was  the 
hue  and  cry.  Everybody  in  Glasgow  is  up  to  see  if  they  cannot 
hunt  the  murderer  down.  What  is  done  by  the  alleged 
murderer  ?  What  about  his  "  flight  from  justice  "  ?  On  Tuesday 
he  is  at  the  pawn  office  redeeming  his  binocular  glasses.  When 
he  was  redeeming  them  he  told  the  witness  Kempton,  "  I  am 
going  to  America,"  and  he  discussed  the  advantages  of  going 
by  the  Anchor  Line.  Now,  that  is  on  the  day  when  all  the 
papers  are  full  of  the  murder.  Is  that  like  the  action  of  a 
murderer — just  doing  the  same  thing  as  he  had  done  the  day 
before  when  he  was  collecting  his  things,  and  taking  measures 
to  get  his  money  paid  and  his  property  realised?  I  ask  you 
to  consider  this — he  had  succeeded  (it  is  said)  in  perpetrating 
this  crime,  and  next  day  he  walks  quietly  down  to  the  pawn- 
broker's, and  does  the  same  as  he  did  the  day  before — only  thia 
time  it  is  his  binocular  glasses !  That  does  not  strike  one  as  the 
proceeding  of  a  man  who  was  engaged  in  a  "  flight  from  justice." 
One  other  strange  thing  is  this,  which  I  omitted  to  mention,  the 
prisoner  was  seen  after  the  murder — upon  the  same  night.  His 
people  say  (as  I  have  already  said)  that  he  went  home  in  the 
usual  course  for  dinner  about  seven  o'clock  on  the  21st.  Well, 
at  9.45  he  presents  himself  at  a  club  to  see  if  he  could  raise 
the  wind.  The  clubmaster  refuses  to  give  him  any  money  on 
his  cheque.  What  was  his  appearance  when  he  presented 

269 


Oscar  Slater. 

JMr.  M'Clure  himself  there?  The  clubmaster  says  that  he  was  absolutely 
composed ;  well,  he  said  (I  think)  that  he  was  excited  a  little,  but 
so  little  that  he  thought  he  had  been  losing  money.  That  is  the 
man  who  was  fleeing  from  justice;  yet,  at  9.45  he  presents  him- 
self to  the  clubmaster  Henderson,  and  Henderson  sees  nothing 
at  all  in  his  appearance  to  suggest  that  he  had  come  from 
murder.  He  asks  for  money,  and  he  is  refused.  He  goes  away 
making  use  of  the  expression  that  his  friend  Cameron,  to  whom 
he  was  referred,  is  "  no  use."  If  these  are  blood  spots  that  are 
on  that  coat  now,  these  blood  spots  were  freshly  on  it  then, 
and  yet  they  were  not  seen !  If  he  was  the  murderer,  what 
did  he  do  with  his  coat?  Where  was  he  washing  his  coat  so 
that  nothing  was  seen,  and  there  is  not  a  speck  of  blood  to 
be  found  on  it?  And,  mind  you,  he  has  done  the  whole  of  that 
between  7.10  and  9.45.  He  has  washed  his  clothes  so  thoroughly 
that  the  medical  men  cannot  find  a  speck  of  blood  now !  This 
is  the  coat  that  the  murderer  was  wearing,  if  the  Crown  is 
right.  Now,  is  there  a  man  anywhere  of  such  extraordinary 
callousness  that  he  can  remain  in  a  billiard  room  to  within  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  of  such  a  tragedy,  and  after  it  coolly 
call  upon  this  man  at  the  club,  wearing  the  very  garments 
in  which  he  committed  the  murder?  The  clubmaster  says, 
"  I  saw  no  sign  of  his  being  put  out  in  any  way;  I  thought 
he  had  been  losing  money  at  cards,  as  he  seemed  annoyed." 
That  is  all.  If  this  case  is  fairly  considered,  gentlemen,  there 
is  no  answer  to  the  case  put  forward  for  the  defence. 

But  to  proceed.  Cameron  says  that  on  the  22nd  or  on  the 
23rd — I  am  not  sure  which  he  says — he  got  the  pawn  ticket 
himself.  Slater  had  tried  Rattman,  and  he  had  tried  Aumann 
with  the  pawn  ticket,  but  they  would  not  purchase.  Rattman 
gave  the  ticket  back  to  Slater,  and  Slater,  on  the  Tuesday 
or  Wednesday,  handed  it  to  Cameron,  who  tells  you  that  he 
tried  Mr.  Donaldson  and  Mr.  Allan,  but  with  no  result.  Now, 
that  is  Tuesday  or  Wednesday.  Is  this  procrastination  what 
you  would  expect  from  a  man  who  had  committed  the  crime? 
Again,  either  on  the  22nd  or  the  23rd,  I  do  not  remember 
which,  Nichols,  the  barber,  who  has  no  association  in  any  way 
with  the  prisoner,  says  that  Slater  came  into  his  shop  and 
talked  about  going  to  Queensland,  and  he  adds  that  he  also 
talked  about  going  to  San  Francisco.  We  all  know  that  the 
latter  is  quite  probable;  and  it  is  worthy  of  remark  that, 
according  to  Nichols,  he  had  then  a  very  noticeable  moustache. 
I  shall  refer  to  that  circumstance  later.  On  the  23rd  he  wired 
Dent  again  from  the  Charing  Cross  Post  Office,  and,  in  order 
to  hurry  up  Dent,  I  suppose,  he  wired,  "  Must  have  watch  ; 
leaving  to-morrow  night  for  the  Continent."  Well,  he  was 
not  going  to  the  Continent;  he  was  going  to  America.  By 
this  time  actually  Rattman  and  Cameron  had  his  address  as 
270 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


"Caesar  Cafe,  344  Broadway,  San  Francisco."  Not  only  at  Mr.M'Clure 
twelve  o'clock  does  he  wire  to  hurry  up  Dent,  but  at  four 
o'clock  he  is  at  Cooks'  to  see  about  tickets  by  the  "  Lusitania  " 
for  New  York  on  the  Saturday.  He  told  Cooks'  that  he  was 
going  to  America,  and  the  only  question  was  as  to  the  price 
of  a  berth.  A  question  was  raised  the  following  day  as  to 
whether  it  was  to  be  an  outside  or  an  inside  berth — but  does 
not  all  this  show  that  every  action  is  directed  towards  getting 
his  affairs  put  right  and  starting  for  San  Francisco  as  the 
result  of  his  resolve  upon  the  Monday  morning?  We  have 
the  letter  from  Messrs.  Cook  to  the  Cunard  Line,  and  the 
answer  of  the  24th  that  the  applicants  could  have  Room  E76. 
The  steamer  plan  was  shown  on  the  24th  to  Slater,  and  he 
said,  "  That  is  an  inside  berth;  I  would  much  prefer  an  outside 
one."  And  then  the  letter  of  Messrs.  Cook  to  the  Cunard 
Line  proceeds — "  He,  however,  replied  that  he  could  do 
better  with  you  in  Liverpool.  We  asked  him  if  he 
would  take  out  ticket  for  Room  E76  and  endeavour 
to  adjust  with  you  in  Liverpool  on  Saturday.  He  has 
promised  to  give  us  his  decision  to-morrow,  on  receipt 
of  which  we  will  advise  you."  Gentlemen,  the  murder  had 
been  committed  three  or  four  days  ago  by  this  time ;  the  flight 
from  justice  has  not  yet  begun !  The  prisoner,  in  the  most 
leisurely  manner,  is  going  round  the  ordinary  places  that  a 
man  would  go  to  when  he  is  preparing  a  departure.  The 
man  in  Cooks'  office  says  that  in  manner  he  was  perfectly  cool 
and  collected  on  the  23rd,  and  yet  on  the  23rd  that  extra- 
ordinary man  Sancroft,  the  tramway  car  conductor,  says  that 
his  mere  asking  of  a  boy  if  there  was  anything  found  out 
about  the  murderer  led  Slater  to  jump  from  a  car  and  race 
for  his  life,  apparently,  up  a  side  street.  This  is  the  man 
who  is  going  about  quite  cool  and  collected !  Sancroft  made 
his  evidence  quite  absurd  when  he  said,  "  I  cannot  say  whether 
the  man  heard  the  conversation  between  the  boy  and  myself, 
but  I  thought  it  strange."  Sancroft  did  not  know  at  that 
time  even  what  the  suspected  man  was  like — he  said  he  had 
not  yet  got  the  published  description  of  the  man;  yet,  having 
seen  a  person  leaving  a  tramway  car  in  a  hurry,  and  thinking 
back  on  it,  Sancroft  realises  he  is  an  amateur  detective,  and 
that  he  has  got  the  man.  As  against  that  you  have  the 
evidence  of  those  people  among  whom  the  prisoner  went,  cool 
and  collected. 

Slater  did  not  go  back  to  Messrs.  Cook  on  the  25th,  as  was 
expected,  and  the  reason  is  quite  simple.  These  people,  called 
Freedman,  arrived  in  Glasgow  on  the  morning  of  the  25th.  It 
is  suggested  that  this  is  all  a  story,  that  it  is  not  true  that 
the  accused  was  trying  to  dispose  of  his  flat  before  leaving  for 
America;  but  you  have  got  this  fact,  in  the  first  place,  that 

271 


Oscar  Slater. 

Mr.  M'Clure  Aumann  was  up  and  looked  over  the  flat,  and  you  have  this 
also  definitely  proved,  that  Mrs.  Freedman  and  another  person 
arrived  on  the  Friday  morning  from  London.  They  were  at 
the  Alexandra  Hotel.  In  reply  to  a  post-card  from  them, 
Schmalz  was  sent  over  to  the  Alexandra  Hotel  twice  on  the 
Friday  morning.  She  said  that  she  did  not  see  Mrs.  Freedman 
the  first  time,  but  on  the  second  occasion  she  brought  her  over 
to  the  flat.  It  was  then  arranged  that  Schmalz  was  to  stop 
and  hand  over  the  keys  to  Mrs.  Freedman  on  the  Saturday, 
and  then  leave  for  London  herself,  and  this  she,  in  point  of 
fact,  did  at  10  p.m.  The  Freedmans  did  arrive,  and  that  put 
the  arrangements  a  little  out,  and  led  to  Slater  failing  in  his 
appointment  at  the  office  of  Messrs.  Cook.  Anyhow,  we  are 
now  arrived  at  this  point :  on  the  23rd  the  prisoner  has  lifted 
his  £39,  and  on  the  24th  he  has  got  £49  as  the  proceeds  of 
his  2£  per  cent,  stock.  He  saw  Cameron  the  same  evening. 
Further,  Cameron,  during  the  day  of  the  24th,  went  with  him 
to  the  Cunard  offices  and  tried  to  get  a  £5  note  for  five  single 
notes.  They  were  ultimately  successful  after  trying  two  or 
three  places ;  he  got  a  £5  note  at  the  Grosvenor  Restaurant. 
They  then  went  to  the  post  office  in  Hope  Street,  where  the 
accused  got  a  letter  registered  and  sent  to  Germany.  Cameron 
says  that  he  was  told  it  was  the  prisoner's  Christmas  present 
to  his  people.  The  post  office  girl  proved  the  despatch  of 
that  letter.  Now  we  are  at  Friday,  the  25th,  the  day  they 
leave  for  America. 

All  these  preparations,  you  will  bear  in  mind,  were 
carried  through  by  the  prisoner  under  the  name  of 
Oscar  Slater.  When  it  comes  to  the  Friday  he  goes 
down  to  Nichols,  the  barber,  and  recovers  the  bottles, 
shaving  materials,  and  things  of  that  kind  which  he  had 
deposited  there.  He  tells  Nichols,  the  barber,  that  he  is 
leaving  that  night  to  join  the  "  Lusitania  "  at  Liverpool.  He 
has  gone  as  Oscar  Slater  all  through  the  week,  doing  these 
things  openly,  and  he  tells  the  barber  on  the  very  night  of 
his  departure  that  he  is  going  to  travel  by  the  "  Lusitania  " 
to  New  York.  Is  there  a  vestige  of  suspicion  in  all  this  of  a 
person  who  is  on  a  flight  from  justice?  What  plausibility  is 
there  in  the  suggestion  that  it  was  because  of  the  evening 
papers  on  the  Friday  afternoon  that  he  fled  from  justice?  He 
has  been  doing  all  this  through  the  week,  and  has  not  concealed 
his  movements  or  his  name  in  any  way  at  all.  On  the  Friday 
evening  he  goes  down  to  the  Central  Station  and  engages  a 
badge  porter  about  six  o'clock.  The  porter  goes  up  to  his 
house  about  8.20.  What  possible  suspicion  is  there  about 
anything  that  happened  that  evening?  Those  two  ladies,  the 
Misses  Fowlis,  who  lived  in  the  flat  above,  took  a  very  keen 
interest  in  the  proceedings  of  the  Slater  household,  and  hung 
272 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


over  the  banisters  to  see  what  was  happening;  they  said  they  Mr.  M'Clure 
were  waiting  for  the  postman !  They  saw  the  baggage  being 
taken  out  of  the  house.  Now,  we  know  that  was  arranged 
for  before.  There  was  a  servant  from  the  Bernsteins'  house, 
which  was  on  the  same  stair.  She  said  she  thought  it  was 
very  strange,  these  people  going  away,  because  a  detective  had 
come  to  Bernstein's  house  half  an  hour  before,  and  she  thought 
that  Slater  was  clearing  out  because  the  detective  had  been 
there.  This,  gentlemen,  is  a  mere  afterthought.  You  know 
that  the  prisoner  had  been  preparing  to  go  away  for  days 
before,  and  he  knew  nothing  of  the  detective's  visit. 
There  was  another  strange  suspicion.  After  the  porters 
had  carried  away  the  baggage  the  Misses  Fowlis  looked 
out  of  the  window,  and  they  suggest  that  these  people  went 
away  separately,  as  guilty  people  might — that  Slater  went 
by  himself  and  the  others  went  behind.  Suppose  you  were 
going  to  the  station  with  two  ladies  and  wanted  a  cab.  Would 
you  not  go  in  advance  to  get  the  cab?  We  know  from  the 
railway  porter  and  from  the  badge  porter  that  they  all  arrived 
at  the  station  in  a  cab.  What  ground  is  there  for  suspicion 
in  this  simple  matter?  Then  it  is  said  that  the  prisoner  took 
tickets  for  London,  and  went  off  to  Liverpool  instead.  This 
is  a  matter  which  has  not  been  definitely  cleared  up ;  but  is  it 
not  a  curious  thing  that  there  were  two  third-class  tickets 
taken  for  Liverpool  by  the  9.5  train  that  night,  and  no  one 
can  suggest  whose  tickets  they  were  unless  those  of  Slater  and 
Antoine?  Where  is  the  flight  from  justice?  It  has  not  begun 
yet,  and  nothing  suggesting  subterfuge  occurs  until  tickets  were 
taken  at  Liverpool  in  the  name  of  Otto  Sando.  Let  me  say  a 
word  upon  that  matter.  I  ask  you  to  remember  this,  that  the 
accused  was  a  man  living  with  a  woman  who  was  not  his  wife, 
and  she  was  travelling  with  him  to  the  States.  On  the  previous 
occasion  when  they  went  abroad  they  took  a  false  name,  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  George.  They  are  going  abroad  again,  partly  because 
of  this  bother  with  Mrs.  Slater  in  London,  which  Mr.  Rogers 
had  written  about,  and  also  because  Devoto  had  written  for 
Slater  to  go  to  San  Francisco.  Remember  the  woman  pleaded 
to  be  allowed  to  go  when  the  prisoner  thought  it  would  be 
unwise  for  her  to  go  in  the  winter,  and  it  was  her  weeping  that 
eventually  led  to  her  being  taken.  In  the  main  facts  there 
is  nothing  suspicious.  Taking  the  name  Otto  Sando  was  very 
natural,  because  whatever  name  he  took  must  coincide  with 
the  initials  already  on  the  luggage.  They  wanted  to  travel 
under  some  other  name  than  that  of  Slater,  and  they  wanted 
to  arrive  at  America  as  man  and  wife,  because  there  is  trouble 
upon  landing  if  a  man  comes  with  a  woman  who  is  not  his  wife. 
Now,  that  is  plain  enough.  I  have  no  idea  why  he  put  down 
"  Chicago  "  as  his  destination.  I  do  not  know  why  he  did  a 
T  273 


Oscar  Slater. 

Mr.  M'Clure  lot  of  things ;  but,  on  the  broad  facts  and  grounds  of  this  case, 
it  is  surely  very  plain  that  this  cannot  be  called  a  flight  from 
justice.  You  see  how  slow  the  flight  was ;  and  it  was  only 
because,  by  a  mere  coincidence,  the  police  visit  inspired  by 
M'Lean  happened  on  the  day  already  fixed  for  the  prisoner's 
departure — the  very  day,  too,  upon  which  the  description  was 
published  in  the  newspapers — that  he  was  supposed  to  have 
fled  at  all.  When  this  matter  is  examined  there  is  nothing, 
I  earnestly  submit,  to  lead  you  to  say  that  this  man  had 
anything  to  do  with  the  perpetration  of  the  crime. 

I  have  disposed,  I  think,  of  those  prejudicial  matters  which 
led  everybody  to  regard  Slater  as  being  undeniably  the 
murderer  of  this  old  lady.  It  was  because  he  had  pawned  a 
brooch  which  was  supposed  to  have  belonged  to  her,  and 
because,  when  he  was  looked  for,  it  was  found  that  he  had 
apparently  fled  from  justice. 

I   now   come   to   the   direct    evidence   which    has    been    led 
to  support  the  allegation  that  he  is  the  perpetrator   of  the 
crime.        My  learned   friend   began   by   saying   that  the   first 
witness  he  had  against  the  prisoner  was  Mrs.   Liddell.     Just 
about  five  minutes  before  seven,  on  the  night  of  21st  December, 
when  she  was  going  home,  she  saw  a  man  (so  she  said)  leaning 
against  the  railings.     She  said  she  got  "  bristly,"  and  she  gazed 
at  him.     His  face  was  not  sallow ;  it  was  not  white — but  it  was 
ivory   white.      She   also  explained  the   coat   he   was   wearing, 
and  she  said  it  was  this  man  Slater.     She  was  a  person  who  was 
anxious   to   give   you   the   idea  that  she   had    very    critically 
examined  everything,  and  she  asked  the  prisoner  to  turn  round 
in  the  dock.     This  was  unnecessary.     She  had  seen  him  before 
at  the  police  office.     She  was  asked  if  the  coat  produced  was 
the  coat  he  was  then  wearing,  and  she  said  it  was  not,  because 
she  had  examined  the  man's  clothing  very  carefully,  and  there 
was  a  broad  hem  on  his  coat.     She  said  his  coat  was  not  a 
waterproof  coat,  but  was  a  heavy  cloth  coat.     She  just  looked 
over   her   shoulder — and  he  glided   away,    and   she   knows   no 
more  about  the  man.     That  is  not  very  convincing,   and  the 
coat  she  speaks  to  is  not  Slater's  coat.     Then  how  were  you 
impressed   with   her  evidence?     The   murder   was   perpetrated 
within  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  she  never  thought  of  mention- 
ing this  mysterious  man  at  all.     She  never  mentioned  him  till 
Wednesday,  the  23rd,  and  she  said  her  statement  was  received 
as  a  jest  in  the  family.     Her  brother  said  to  her  that  there 
was  no  use  in  more  of  the  family  mixing  themselves  up  in  this 
affair,  and  the  other  members  of  the  family  received  her  story 
as  a  jest! 

The  next  witness  is  Helen  Lambie.     I  frankly  confess  that 
I  do  not  know  where  I  would  have  been  in  this  case  with  the 
evidence  of  Helen  Lambie,  unless,  by  good  fortune,  I  had  got 
274 


Addresses  to  Jury. 

the  shorthand  notes  of  the  inquiry  in  New  York.     It  is  deplor-  Mr.  M'Clure 
able  to   think  that   a   man's   life  might  depend   on   a   chance 
circumstance  of  that  kind.     You  got  a  story  in  the  witness-box 
here  months   after   the  event,    and   I   must   say   it   had  little 
correspondence    with    the    first    impressions    of    some    of    the 
witnesses.     It  is  not  that  the  people  are  consciously  dishonest; 
but,  having  first  thought  the  prisoner  was  only  like  the  man, 
when  they  are  taken  back  and  are  shown  him  another  time 
they  say,  "  Yes,  that  is  the  man  we  saw  before."    They  identify 
him  really  as  the  man  shown  at  the  previous  inspection,  but 
from  this  gradually  they  become  convinced  that  they  were  certain 
at   first  sight.      The  important  thing,   however,   is,   what  did 
they   say  when   they   saw  him  the   first  time?     Now,   this   is 
crucial,  and  I  must  refer  you  to  the  evidence  that  was  given 
in   America.      Let  me  make  a   few   preliminary   observations. 
You  remember  that  Helen  Lambie  travelled  to  America  with 
the  little  girl  Barrowman,  and  they  occupied  the  same  cabin. 
I  do  not  know  what  you  think  would  be  likely  to  occur  in  the 
way  of  conversation  between  a  girl  of  twenty-one  and  a  girl  of 
fifteen  who  were  occupying  the  same  bedroom  for  ten  days, 
and   who  were  both   going  to   give   evidence   as   regards   this 
strange    affair — they   knew   they   were   both   to    be   witnesses. 
The  Lord  Advocate  said  to  Mary  Barrowman,  "  But,  of  course, 
Mary,  you  were  advised  by  the  people  connected  with  the  case 
not  to  speak  about  it,"  and  she  said,  "  Yes,  I  was  not  to  speak 
about  it."     Do  you  believe  they  did  not ?     What  happened  next 
was  this.     These  two  girls  were  in  the  corridor  of  the  Court, 
and  Slater  came  down  between  a  man,  who  is  6  feet  3  inches, 
and  another  man  who  was  wearing  a  medallion.       Neither  of 
these  two  was  at  all  like  the  man  who  was  wanted.     With  the 
two  girls  there  was  Detective  Pyper.        Detective  Pyper  tells 
you  that  he  never  saw  the  men  approaching;  the  first  he  kne\? 
about  it  was  both  girls  exclaiming,   "  Oh,   there   he  is  going 
into  the  Court !  "     He  says  that  he  was  looking  in  the  other 
direction,  because  he  was  expecting  the  arrival  of  a  Mr.  Fox, 
who  was  conducting  the  Crown  case  in  America  in  the  extradi- 
tion  proceedings.        While  he  was   looking   for   Mr.   Fox  the 
man   had  walked    about    10  or    12   yards  down   the   corridor. 
Helen  Lambie's  first  remark  was,  "  Oh,  I  could  almost  swear 
that    is    the    man."        The    little    girl   Barrowman,    you    will 
remember,  had  been  to  Mr.  Fox's  office  already  in  the  fore- 
noon, and  had  been  prepared  by  photographs  of  Slater  which 
had  been  submitted  to  her.     Detective  Pyper  said  that  they 
were   not  very   good,  and   that   she   failed   then   to   recognise 
them  as  photographs  of  the  man  whom  she  had  seen  running 
down  the  street  in  Glasgow.     But  when  the  girl  saw  the  man 
walking  down  the  corridor,  a  man  who  was  like  (I  suggest)  the 
man  in  the  photographs,  she  said  that  she  identified  him.    What 

275 


Oscar  Slater. 

Mr.  M'Clure  happened  between  Helen  Lambie  and  the  girl  Barrowman  while 
the  man  was  walking  towards  them  nobody  knows,  because  no 
independent  witness  can  speak  to  it;  may  the  suspicion  of  one 
not  have  prompted  the  other?  Well,  at  any  rate,  the  evidence 
is  distinct  that  all  Helen  Lambie  said  at  first  was,  "  I  could 
almost  swear  that  is  the  man."  Now,  let  us  see  why  she  could 
almost  swear  it  was  the  man.  When  she  came  into  the 
American  Court  she  was  asked,  "  Now,  do  you  see  the  man 
here  you  saw  that  night?  "  Here  is  her  answer,  which  has 
been  read  to  you  before,  "  One  is  very  suspicious,  if  anything." 
Gentlemen,  is  that  an  identification  1  She  then  proceeds,  "  The- 
clothes  he  had  on  that  night  he  has  not  got  on  to-day,  but  his 
face  I  could  not  tell."  She  was  then  asked,  "  What  did  you 
say  about  his  face?  "  and  she  replied,  "  I  could  not  tell  about 
his  face;  I  never  saw  his  face."  Gentlemen,  she  did  not  see 
his  face — but  perhaps  it  will  be  more  satisfactory  if  I  read  her 
evidence  in  detail.  It  proceeds  thus — 

Tell  us  what  kind  of  clothes  he  had  on,  if  you  can — a  description? — 
It  was  a  three-quarter,  something  like  a  waterproof  coat,  three-quarter 
length. 

Had  it  any  colour  that  you  could  recognise? — It  was  a  kind  of 
fawn  colour. 

What  kind  of  a  hat  or  cap  or  what  did  he  have  on? — It  looks  like 
one  of  these  Donegal  caps. 

Now,  can  you  give  us  anything  further  in  connection  with  this  man 
that  you  can  tell  us  about  ? — No ;  I  could  not. 

Did  you  notice   anything  about  his  walk? — Yes,  sir,   I  did. 

Tell  us  what  about  his  walk  that  impressed  you? — He  didn't  walk 
straight,  but  it  was  some 

But  his  gait,  his  manner  of  walking,  was  there  anything  about 
that  that  you  noticed?  Did  you  notice  anything  about  the  style 
of  walking? — Yes,  sir. 

What  was  there  about  that  that  impressed  you? — He  was  sort  of 
shaking  himself  a  little.  I'll  show  you  how  he  was  walking. 
(Illustrating.) 

Since  you  have  been  here  have  you  seen  anybody  walking  like  thatf 
— Yes,  sir,  I  have,  sir. 

Is  that  man  in  this  room? — Yes,  he  is,  sir. 

Point  him  out  to  us  if  you  can? — I  wouldn't  like  to  say. 

Now,  point  out  the  man ;   that  is  all  we  ask  you   to  do. 

Mr.  MILLER — I  object  unless  you  ask  her  whether  she  has  seen 
more  than  one  man  walk  like  that. 

The  COMMISSIONER — The  question  is,  do  you  see  in  this  room  among 
all  of  us  people  here  the  man  that  you  passed  that  night? — I  think 
you  ought  to  let  the  man  walk,  and  I  can  pick  him  out. 

You  have  seen  him  walk  ? — Let  him  get  another  chance ;  give  the 
man  a  chance. 

Cross-examination  by  Mr.  MILLER — Didn't  you  state  a  moment 
ago  that  you  did  not  see  the  man's  face? — Neither  I  did.  I  saw 
the  walk ;  it  is  not  the  face  I  went  by,  but  the  walk. 

Now,   gentlemen,   that  is  the  evidence  that  Helen   Lambie- 
gave  in  America. 
276 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


LORD  GUTHBIE — You  might  read  the  two  or  three  intervening  Mr.  M'Clure 
•sentences. 

Mr.  M'CLURE — Very  well.     They  are  as  follows:  — 

The  COMMISSIONEE — Is  the  man  in  this  room  that  passed  you  in 
that  hallway? 

The  WITNESS — Yes,   sir. 

The  COMMISSIONEE — Where  is  he?  Point  him  out? — He  is  sitting 
here.  (Indicating  the  defendant.) 

Is  that  all  you  have  to  identify  this  man  as  the  man  you  saw  in 
the  hall— Yes. 

Now,  that,  of  course,  is  not  the  story  that  was  given  by 
Helen  Lambie  here.  It  was  the  walk,  and  the  walk  only,  in 
America.  I  know  that  yesterday,  owing  to  the  request  of  some 
of  the  jurymen,  Slater  was  made  to  walk  down  one  of  the 
passages  after  the  Court  rose,  and  the  gentlemen  of  the  jury 
were  present.  I  cannot  tell  what  impression  the  parade  made 
upon  the  minds  of  the  jury — you  will  consider  that  for  your- 
selves. I  would  submit  that  the  way  the  man  walked  was  in 
no  way  characteristic.  There  was  nothing  in  his  gait  that  would 
enable  you — much  less  a  person  who  saw  a  man  walk  across 
Miss  Gilchrist's  hall  for  two  seconds  before  he  got  out  of  the 
door — to  identify  him  as  the  person  who  had  been  in  that 
hall.  That  is  a  matter  for  you  to  judge  of;  but  you  will  also 
recollect  that  Detective  Pyper  was  asked  whether  he  saw 
anything  characteristic  in  Slater's  walk  by  which  he  could 
recognise  him,  and  he  said  there  was  nothing  in  the  walk  of 
the  man  that  impressed  him.  Mr.  Warnock,  who  was  in 
America,  said  that  by  looking  very  closely  he  thought  he  could 
see  some  sort  of  pitch  of  the  knee.  I  only  put  it  to  you  as 
fair  men,  is  that  evidence  upon  which  you  would  ever  think 
of  taking  a  man's  life?  But  Helen  Lambie  has  gone  back  on 
her  original  story.  She  now  says  that  she  got  a  look  at  his 
face,  and  she  says  the  man  was  clean  shaven.  Well,  Slater 
was  not,  if  you  accept  the  evidence  of  Nichols,  who  shaved  him 
on  the  25th  1  He  had  then  a  very  noticeable  moustache. 

The  next  witness  is  Mr.  Adams.  Mr.  Adams  says  to  you 
that  he  was  standing  in  a  better  position  than  Helen  Lambie 
to  see  the  man  who  was  in  the  house,  and,  while  he  thought 
the  prisoner  is  very  like  him,  he  would  not  swear  to  him.  Here 
is  what  he  said  in  America — and  I  ask  you  to  remember  that 
he  and  the  little  girl  Barrowman  and  Helen  Lambie  were  all 
in  the  room  together  when  this  took  place — 

The  COMMISSIONER — Is  there  anybody  in  the  room  that  you  identify 
as  the  man? 

The  WITNESS — I  couldn't  say  positively.  This  man  (indicating 
the  defendant)  is  not  at  all  unlike  him.  I  only  got  a  passing  glance 
at  him. 

277 


Oscar  Slater. 

Mr.  M'Clure  Mr.  Adams  I  thought  was  very  fair,  and  he  said  undoubtedly 
that  there  was  a  resemblance.  Then  I  read  this  further  from 
his  evidence  in  America — 

Did  you  notice   his  crooked   nose? — No. 

Did  you  notice  anything  remarkable  about  his  gait  and  walk? — No,. 
I  thought  he  walked  like  a  commercial  traveller. 
An  ordinary  walk? — Just  an  ordinary  walk. 

What,  gentlemen,  becomes  of  Helen  Lambie's  identification? — 

You  don't  swear  this  is  the  man  you  saw? — No,  sir. 
You  don't   identify  him   with  the  man   that  passed  you? — I   say  he 
resembles   him  in   appearance.     That  is   all   I    can   say. 

He  had  also  seen  a  photograph  before.  Now,  you  are  trying 
a  man  for  his  life,  and  there  are  two  witnesses  who  (let  us 
suppose)  had  equal  opportunities  of  seeing  the  culprit,  and  the 
one  said,  "  I  will  not  swear  to  this  man ;  he  is  like  him,  but  I 
will  not  go  further  than  that " ;  and  the  other  said,  "  I  could 
almost  swear  that  is  the  man " ;  would  you  be  prepared  on 
that  evidence  to  find  it  proved  that  he  was  the  man  and  to  take 
his  life?  Would  you  not,  gentlemen,  be  taking  a  large  responsi- 
bility? Mr.  Adams,  who  failed  to  identify,  says  that  he  was 
in  a  better  position  to  see  than  Helen  Lambie;  Helen  Lambie 
says  it  was  not  his  face  at  all  that  attracted  her  attention,  but 
only  his  walk — which  has  no  marked  peculiarity — surely  it  is 
plain  that  the  safe  evidence  was  that  given  by  Mr.  Adams,  and 
not  by  Helen  Lambie !  The  witnesses  for  the  Crown  have  said 
that  this  man's  walk  is  not  peculiar  in  any  respect  at  all. 

Now,  what  about  Barrowman?  She  is  going  along  the  road, 
when  out  of  a  close  comes  a  man.  You  will  remember  it  is 
seven  o'clock  on  a  December  night.  He  ran  down  the  steps 
very  fast,  we  know — that  is  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Adams,  who 
used  the  expression  "  like  greased  lightning."  The  person — 
whoever  he  was — hesitated  for  a  moment,  then  turned  and  ran, 
as  hard  as  he  was  able,  past  the  -little  girl,  and  down  West 
Cumberland  Street  to  the  left.  Can  you  take  it  that  the  little 
girl's  identification  is  worth  your  serious  regard  1  It  is  said  that 
the  man  had  on  a  Donegal  hat.  A  Donegal  hat  is  a  tweed  hat 
with  a  rim  all  round  it.  It  is  also  said  that  he  had  brown  boots. 
Gentlemen,  they  have  been  through  all  his  baggage — they  have 
produced  everything  that  would  assist  them — but  there  are  no 
brown  boots,  and  there  is  no  Donegal  hat !  The  only  thing 
similar  is  the  waterproof.  Now,  this  man  was  running  as  fast 
as  he  could.  I  would  ask  you,  would  you  undertake  to  identify  a 
man  who  raced  past  you  on  the  street — in  the  vicinity  of  a  lamp, 
it  is  quite  true?  The  description  originally  given  in  the  paper 
was  this — and  this  is  from  Barrowman — "The  man  wanted  is 
about  twenty-eight  or  thirty  years  of  age,  tall  and  thin,  with 

278 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


his  face  shaved  clear  of  all  hair.  A  distinctive  feature  is  that  Mr.  M'Clure 
his  nose  is  slightly  turned  to  the  right  side."  How  could  the 
little  girl  Barrowman  possibly  see  all  that  when  the  man  was 
flying  past  1  "  He  wore  one  of  the  popular  round  tweed  hats 
known  as  Donegal  hats,  and  a  fawn-coloured  overcoat,  which 
might  have  been  a  waterproof,  and  also  dark  trousers  and  brown 
boots."  Who  has  come  to  say  that  the  possessions  of  this  man 
included  brown  boots  or  a  Donegal  hat?  Can  you  yourselves 
now  say  that  "  a  nose  slightly  twisted  to  one  side "  is  rightly 
descriptive  of  the  prisoner's  nose  1  Would  you  say  that  all  these 
things  could  be  accurately  observed  by  a  young  girl  in  a 
momentary  glance  like  that?  It  is  past  belief. 

The  next  witness  is  Annie  Armour,  who  was  employed  at  the 
Subway  station.  Her  evidence  is  not  of  great  importance.  She 
heard  about  the  murder  some  time  after,  and  it  recalled  to  her 
mind  that  one  night  between  7.30  and  8 — she  cannot  exactly 
tell  when — a  man  hurried  up  to  the  booking  office,  flung  down 
a  penny,  passed  on  without  waiting  for  a  ticket,  and  went 
down  the  stair  to  the  station.  She  said  that  his  coat  was 
darker  than  the  coat  of  the  prisoner  produced,  and  she  had  no 
doubt  he  was  clean  shaven.  Now,  the  prisoner  was  not  clean 
shaven.  You  know  from  Nichols,  the  barber,  that  he 
had  a  very  noticeable  moustache  at  the  time,  and  I  say  no 
more  upon  this. 

Accordingly,  you  have  these  three  leading  witnesses  for  the 
Crown,  Lambie,  Adams,  and  Barrowman — Adams  declining  to 
say  more  than  that  the  prisoner  is  like;  Barrowman  alleging 
that  she,  with  an  instantaneous  glance  at  a  man  flying  along 
the  street,  is  able  to  give  a  detailed  description,  which,  however, 
does  not  tally  closely  with  the  prisoner;  and  Lambie — if  we 
take  her  American  evidence,  which  was  the  first — only  referring 
to  his  walk.  As  you  saw,  the  walk  has  no  peculiarity,  and 
Detective  Pyper  said  there  was  nothing  in  it  to  attract  his 
attention.  I  do  not  see  how,  in  a  matter  of  this  gravity,  you 
can  accept  and  act  upon  evidence  so  inconclusive  and  uncertain. 
And  that  is  the  only  evidence  of  real  moment  in  the  case. 

I  make  also  this  remark — do  you  not  generally  find  that 
when  a  bloody  murder  has  been  perpetrated,  the  person  who 
perpetrates  the  murder  has  blood  upon  him?  The  man  who 
escaped  that  night  certainly  had  blood  about  him.  Where  he 
is  God  knows,  but  we  know  where  this  man  is !  We  have  got 
this  man's  clothes,  and  they  bear  no  trace  of  blood.  Where 
did  he  wash  his  clothes  between  7  and  9.45?  How  had  he  got 
rid  of  everything?  Again,  what  about  the  weapon?  The 
doctors  are  uncertain  as  to  the  hammer  being  a  likely  instrument 
to  cause  the  injuries  that  resulted  in  death,  but,  even  if  it 
were,  hammer  and  coat  alike  are  absolutely  free  from  blood. 
Do  you  see  any  plausibility  in  the  suggestion  that  the  hammer 

279 


Oscar  Slater. 

Mr.  M'Clure  has  been  scraped  and  washed  to  remove  traces  of  blood?  Our 
doctors  tell  you  that  they  would  have  great  difficulty  in 
removing  traces  of  blood  in  that  way ;  but,  suppose  it  was  tried, 
why  did  the  murderer  not  wash  and  scrape  the  whole  handle, 
and  especially  where  his  hand  gripped  the  weapon?  It  must 
have  been  covered  with  blood  if  it  was  used,  yet  it  has  not  been 
cleansed,  and  upon  it  there  was  no  blood  found.  Why  is  the 
prisoner  so  different  from  all  other  murderers?  There  is  no 
trace  of  blood  on  anything  belonging  to  him,  and  how  could 
he  get  rid  of  it  all  in  two  hours? 

There  is  only  one  other  point  remaining,  that  is,  as  regards 
the  very  extraordinary  identification  of  the  prisoner  as  a  man 
who  was  going  about  the  neighbourhood,  lurking,  and  secreting 
himself  in  closes.  First  of  all,  there  was  the  family  of  M'Haffie. 
Mrs.  M'Haffie  identified  the  prisoner  as  the  man  who  had  walked 
backward  and  forward  in  this  street.  That,  of  course,  would 
not  prove  that  he  was  the  man  who  committed  the  crime;  it 
would  only  show  that  he  was  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  no  more. 
The  daughter,  again,  in  the  month  of  March,  would  not  say 
that  this  was  the  man,  although  she  now  agrees  with  her 
mother.  But  there  is  another  point — all  the  M'Haffies  have 
described  the  man  they  saw  as  a  man  who  was  wearing  checked 
trousers  and  light-coloured  spats.  The  prisoner  has  never  been 
seen  anywhere  with  checked  trousers  or  with  light-coloured 
spats,  and  none  of  these  has  been  found  in  his  baggage.  Was 
he  so  careful  as  to  destroy  not  only  the  clothes  that  he  wore  on 
the  night  of  the  murder,  but  also  all  the  clothes  that  he  had 
worn  at  any  other  time !  And  you  will  recollect  this  :  one  of 
the  Miss  M'Haffies  was  asked  by  his  lordship  if,  when  the  man 
asked  at  the  door  for  Anderson,  he  had  a  foreign  accent,  and  she 
said  "  No."  Now,  the  prisoner's  foreign  accent  is  pronounced. 
That  is  the  family  of  M'Haffies.  Nearly  every  one  of  these 
witnesses  contradicts  the  other. 

Take  now  Miss  Cunningham,  who  walked  with  the  witness 
Campbell  to  dinner  every  day,  and  saw  this  strange  man.  She 
identified  the  prisoner,  curiously,  from  a  photograph.  She  says 
that  "  the  man  was  absolutely  clean  shaven,  and  that  she  had 
a  good  opportunity  of  seeing  him,"  while  the  photograph  from 
which  she  recognised  the  prisoner  was  that  of  a  man  with  a 
black  moustache.  That  is  not  very  convincing.  When  she  saw 
the  accused  she  said,  "That  is  the  man."  Campbell,  on 
the  other  hand,  says  that  he  was  nearer  the  man  than  she 
was,  and  he  declines  to  say  that  the  prisoner  was  the  man. 
He  will  only  say  that  he  resembles  the  man,  and 
that  is  all.  Then  there  are  two  oiher  witnesses,  Bryson 
and  Nairn.  These  are  both  witnesses  as  to  Sunday, 
20th  December.  Bryson  says  that  at  twenty  minutes  to 
eight  he  was  walking  along  the  street  and  saw  a  dark-haired 
280 


Addresses  to  Jury. 


man  with  a  sallow  complexion,  who  had  a  long  nose  of  a  peculiar  Mr.  M'Clure 
shape,  prominent  in  the  middle,  broken,  and  had  a  slight 
moustache.  He  told  you  how  this  man  was  gazing,  with  an 
intentness  that  he  had  never  seen  equalled,  at  the  house 
opposite.  The  man  was  at  that  time  in  a  black  morning  coat 
or  jacket,  and  with  slightly  grey  trousers.  Nairn  saw,  it  is 
supposed,  the  same  person  at  9.15.  Nairn  is  the  witness 
who  only  saw  his  back,  and  he  says  that  the  man  had  dark 
hair.  Now,  there  is  an  hour  and  a  half  between  these  two 
witnesses.  When  Bryson  saw  the  man  he  had  a  black  morning 
coat  and  slightly  grey  trousers ;  when  Nairn  saw  him  he  had  a 
light  coat  and  a  black  cloth  cap.  Between  7.40  and  9.15  this 
man  had  presumably  gone  home  and  changed  his  coat  before 
coming  out  for  a  second  period  of  observation  ! 

Against  all  that,  I  want  to  know  what  weight  you  are  going 
to  give  to  the  evidence  given  by  the  witness  Reid  to-day  and 
the  evidence  given  yesterday  by  Schmalz  and  Antoine?  Reid 
left  for  Belfast  on  21st  December,  and  his  last  Sunday  in 
Glasgow,  the  20th,  was  passed  dining  with  Slater  along  with 
his  little  boy  aged  five.  He  positively  swore  that  on  20th 
December  he  dined  with  Slater,  going  there  about  six  and  not 
leaving  till  10.30.  If  there  is  any  truth  in  that — which  is 
spoken  to  by  three  witnesses — what  comes  of  the  evidence  of 
Bryson  at  7.40  and  of  Nairn  at  9.15?  It  cannot  have  been 
Slater.  Then  also  I  ask  you  to  remember  Bryson's  statement 
that  he  made  a  remark  to  his  wife  upon  the  appearance  of  the 
man,  and  said  that  he  was  there  for  no  good ;  but  his  wife  does 
not  remember  of  any  man  being  there,  or  of  her  husband 
making  any  remark  whatsoever.  Would  any  one  with  a  sense 
of  responsibility  accept  such  evidence? 

Finally,  there  are  two  policemen.  One  of  them  said  he  saw 
a  man  fefgning  that  he  was  drunk,  and  the  other  said  that 
he  saw  the  prisoner — and  he  identified  him  rather  curiously. 
He  had  waved  his  hand  to  a  man  because  he  thought  he  knew 
him — mistaking  him  for  his  friend  Paradise,  to  whom  he 
thought  he  was  waving  his  hand.  If  he  could  make  a  mistake 
like  that,  surely  he  might  quite  well  mistake  some  one  else 
for  the  prisoner.  This  kind  of  evidence  is  really  no  good  at 
all ;  the  possibility  of  error  is  manifest.  Just  take  this  con- 
trast :  the  man  wanted  is  alleged  to  have  been  clean  shaven  by 
Mrs.  Liddell,  Helen  Lambie,  Barrowman,  Adams,  and  Armour. 
It  is,  on  the  contrary,  proved  that  Slater  had  a  moustache  by 
Rattman,  Aumann,  Cameron,  Reid,  Nichols,  the  barber;  Gibb, 
the  billiard  room  man;  Kempton,  and  Tracey.  It  is  demon- 
strated by  these  people  who  knew  him  well  that  the  prisoner 
had  a  noticeable  moustache  at  the  time  the  murder  was  com- 
mitted. Now,  I  have  really  done  with  the  evidence,  and  I 
believe  I  have  demonstrated  that,  upon  anything  like  a  fair 

281 


Oscar  Slater. 

Mr.  M'Clure  view  of  it,  the  prisoner  cannot  be  identified  as  the  murderer. 
No  responsible  jury,  I  think,  would  ever  venture  to  convict. 

I  should  like  now,  in  concluding,  to  make  a  remark  upon  a. 
case  that  happened.  Do  you  remember  the  case  of  Adolpli 
Beck?  He  was  a  man  against  whom  allegations  were  made 
by  a  number  of  women  in  London.  Beck,  in  mistake  for  a 
man  called  Smith,  was  sworn  to  by  ten  women  and  two  police- 
men, and  he  got  seven  years'  penal  servitude.  The  women 
had  all  had  full  opportunities  of  knowing  him;  he  had  sat  and 
talked  with  them  all,  at  times,  for  half  an  hour  or  an  hour; 
and  all  ten  women  swore  that  Beck  was  the  man  who  had  got 
jewellery  from  them  on  various  representations.  The  charges 
were  backed  up  by  the  evidence  of  two  police  constables  who 
knew  Smith;  and  so  Beck  got  seven  years'  penal  servitude. 
The  unfortunate  man  served  the  whole  of  his  time  and  then 
came  out.  Smith  had  not  been  convicted,  and  was  by  this 
time  at  his  old  game,  with  the  same  class  of  fraud  on  a  new 
lot  of  people.  Again  some  women  who  had  been  defrauded 
in  this  way  came  forward,  and  they  accused  Adolph  Beck.  He 
was  once  more  tried,  protesting  his  innocence  as  he  had  done 
during  the  earlier  trial ;  but  he  was  convicted  again  on  positive 
evidence  given  by  people  who  said  they  had  passed  a  certain 
time  with  him,  to  whom  he  had  talked,  and  whom  he  had 
defrauded.  He  was  sentenced  to  five  years'  penal  servitude. 
The  judge  who  tried  the  case,  on  reflection,  thought  that  there 
was  something  wrong  about  this  conviction,  and  the  result 
was  a  Parliamentary  inquiry  before  Lord  Justice  Collins.  After 
everything  had  been  sifted  out,  both  the  convictions  against 
Beck  were  quashed,  and  the  taxpayers  of  this  country  paid 
him  £2000  as  a  solatium  for  the  injury  that  had  been  done 
to  him. 

Now,  ten  witnesses  in  Beck's  case  swore  to  the  accused  as  a 
man  whom  they  knew  and  had  spoken  to.  In  the  subsequent 
inquiry  witnesses  came  who  said  that,  knowing  both  Smith  and 
Beck,  they  did  not  think  there  was  a  great  resemblance  between 
them.  Gentlemen,  Beck  was  not  tried  on  a  capital  charge. 
If  he  had  been  tried  on  a  capital  charge  and  convicted,  what 
would  have  been  the  reparation?  You  cannot  give  £2000  to 
a  dead  man !  In  that  case  there  was  the  sworn  testimony  of 
ten  concurring  witnesses  who  had  ample  opportunity  of  knowing 
him.  Was  that  class  of  evidence  not  better  than  the  stuff  you 
have  got  here — self-contradictory,  inconclusive,  given  by 
witnesses  who  had  no  personal  acquaintance  with  the  accused? 
What  are  you  to  do  in  this  case?  Are  you  going  to  say,  with 
that  warning  in  front  of  you,  that  you  find  this  man  guilty  of 
the  murder  of  this  old  lady?  If  you  do  so,  then  it  is  quite 
certain  that  it  is  final ;  no  reparation  can  follow.  I  ask  you 
to  bear  that  in  mind.  I  do  not  believe  I  am  speaking  at  present; 
282 


Lord  Guthrie's  Charge. 


to  men  who  are  in  the  least  wanting  in  a  sense  of  responsibility.  Mr.  M'Clure 
I  am  speaking  to  men  who  have  listened  with  great  care, 
and  are  thoroughly  prepared,  I  believe,  to  lay  aside  all  pre- 
possessions created  by  the  newspapers,  and  to  judge  the  case 
only  by  the  evidence  which  has  been  led.  Can  you  lay  your 
hands  on  your  hearts  now  and  say  that  you  are  convinced  that 
this  is  the  man  who  committed  that  murder?  If  you  are,  then 
the  responsibility  is  yours,  and  not  mine.  If  you  are  not 
convinced  up  to  that  point,  surely  you  will  give  this  man — I 
will  not  say  the  benefit  of  the  doubt — but  the  benefit  of  the 
evidence  which  has  been  led.  I  think  it  is  proved  that  he  was 
not  out  of  his  house  on  the  20th,  and  there  is  only  a  blank 
of  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  unaccounted  for  on  the  21st, 
when  this  murder  was  committed.  That  might  happen  to  any 
of  us,  and  are  you  on  that  account  to  sacrifice  a  life?  I 
do  not  believe  it  for  a  moment :  the  evidence  warrants  an 
acquittal.  And,  while  nobody  expects  any  of  you  sitting  in 
the  jury-box  to  do  more  than  exercise  a  sound  judgment,  you 
will  take  care,  I  trust,  that  your  judgment  is  sound.  If, 
contrary  to  my  expectation,  it  should  lead  to  an  irreparable 
wrong,  then  yours  alone  will  be  the  responsibility. 


Lord  Guthrie's  Charge  to  the  Jury. 

LORD  GUTHRIB,  in  charging  the  jury,  said — Gentlemen  of  Lord  Guthrie 
the  jury,  there  are  cases  in  the  criminal  Courts,  as  well  as 
in  the  civil  Courts,  where  the  judge,  addressing  the  jury, 
draws  their  attention  to  the  important  nature  of  the  issue 
they  have  to  try.  Obviously,  in  this  case,  any  such  observa- 
tion would  be  an  impertinence.  You  have  shown  by  your 
close  attention  that  you  thoroughly  realise  the  gravity  of 
the  charge  against  the  prisoner,  that  this  is  a  case  where  a 
human  life  is  involved. 

When  a  man,  going  on  an  unlawful  errand,  uses  force 
which  results  in  death,  that  is  murder,  whether  he  intends 
to  kill  or  only  means  to  overcome  resistance,  or  to  prevent 
an  alarm.  In  this  case,  looking  to  the  nature  and  number 
of  the  injuries,  it  is  certain  that  the  man  who  killed  Miss 
Gilchrist  meant,  at  all  events  in  the  later  blows,  not  only  to 
prevent  her  giving  an  alarm,  but  also  to  make  certain  that 
she  should  not  ultimately  recognise  and  identify  him.  In 
short,  "dead  men  (and  dead  women)  tell  no  tal<-."  I  do 
not  agree  with  Mr.  M'Clure  when  he  assumed,  in  the  powerful, 
accurate,  and  judicious  speech  which  he  made  for  his  client, 
that  the  man  who  entered  Miss  Gilchrist's  house  went  witli 
deliberate  intention  to  murder  her.  He  argued  that  the 
prisoner  could  not  be  the  man  who  killed  Miss  Gilchrist, 

283 


Oscar  Slater. 

Lord  Guthrie  because  his  conduct  immediately  before  was  inconsistent  with 
his  having  murder  in  his  heart.  Gentlemen,  it  may  well  be 
that  the  man  who  killed  Miss  Gilchrist  went  without  any 
intention  to  murder.  Why  should  he?  She  was  at  the  time 
the  only  person  in  the  common  stair  (the  servant  had  gone 
out  for  an  indefinite  period),  a  feeble  old  lady  of  eighty-three 
years  of  age.  He,  no  doubt,  expected  she  would  make  no 
resistance,  that  she  would  give  him  the  keys,  and  that  he 
would  get  away,  possibly  masked  so  as  to  avoid  her  identifica- 
tion, without  touching  her  at  all.  This  expectation  failed. 
She  did  resist,  she  cried  out,  she  knocked  on  the  floor  (the 
meaning  of  which  he  would  at  once  know),  and  then  arose 
the  necessity  to  silence  her. 

In  this  case  there  is  no  question  of  law  for  me  to  discuss 
and  determine.  There  are  questions  of  fact  and  of  fact 
alone,  and  yours  must  be  the  responsibility,  because  it  is 
your  opinion  on  the  facts  that  must  determine  the  verdict. 
Therefore,  it  might  be  enough  that  I  should  now  leave  the 
case  with  that  statement  in  your  hands,  but  long  experience 
in  criminal  matters  and  professional  training  may  enable  a 
judge  to  help  a  jury  to  make  up  their  own  minds,  first  by 
observations  on  the  different  classes  of  evidence  led,  and  then 
by  directing  attention  to  the  vital  parts  of  the  evidence. 

As  Mr.  M'Clure  well  said,  it  is  only  evidence  that  we  have 
got  to  look  at,  not  rumour,  whether  in  the  newspapers  or 
outside  the  newspapers,  and  we  have  surely  got  enough  evi- 
dence in  this  case  to  serve  the  turn,  for  the  Crown  examined 
sixty  witnesses  and  the  defence  examined  fourteen,  making 
seventy-four  in  all. 

The  case  appears  to  have  given  rise  to  the  usual  crop  of 
rumours,  mostly  unfounded,  or  so  entirely  exaggerated  as  in 
no  way  to  represent  the  truth.  It  would,  again,  be  imperti- 
nent to  suggest  that  you  need  to  be  warned  not  to  take  any 
of  these  into  consideration. 

First,  let  us  consider  the  evidence  as  a  whole.  You  have 
direct  evidence,  and  you  have  circumstantial  evidence.  By 
direct  evidence,  I  mean  evidence  directly  identifying  the 
prisoner  with  the  person  who  was  undoubtedly  the  murderer. 
You  will  have  no  doubt  that  the  man  that  Lambie  and  Adams 
saw  leaving  the  house,  and  the  man  that  Barrowman,  the 
message  girl,  saw  on  the  street  coming  out  of  the  close  was 
the  same  man,  and  was  the  murderer.  You  may  probably 
also  think  the  man  who  haunted  the  street  in  the  vicinity 
of  the  house  for  days  before  the  murder  was  identical  with 
the  person  who  was  seen  leaving  the  house  by  Lambie,  Adams, 
and  Barrowman.  If  you  think  he  was  the  murderer,  then, 
in  regard  to  him  also  you  have  direct  evidence.  But, 
whether  he  was  the  prisoner  or  not,  whether  the  man  leaving 
the  house  was  the  prisoner  or  not,  is  for  you  to  determine. 
284 


Lord  Guthrie's  Charge. 


Then  we  have  a  good  deal  of  circumstantial  evidence  in  Lord  Guthrie 
regard  to  the  prisoner's  conduct  before,  on,  and  after  21st 
December,  which  I  shall  refer  to  later.  Much  of  that  evidence 
is  important,  when  taken  along  with  its  surroundings,  although 
taken  by  itself  it  may  be  of  little  or  no  consequence.  For 
instance,  a  man  passing  under  an  alias,  a  man  giving  a  false 
address  and  a  false  profession,  a  man  showing  excitement,  a 
man  wanting  to  release  his  funds,  a  man  wanting  to  go  hur- 
riedly to  another  country — these  things  by  themselves  are 
consistent  with  innocence,  but,  coupled  with  the  direct  evi- 
dence, if  you  accept  it  as  applying  to  the  prisoner,  they  may 
be  suggestive  or  even  conclusive  of  guilt.  They  may,  to 
put  it  otherwise,  afford  important  material  in  the  way  of 
corroboration. 

You  have  heard  a  good  deal  about  evidence  of  character 
and  about  evidence  of  financial  circumstances.  I  think  you 
will  agree  that  both  are  double-edged.  The  prisoner  may 
found  upon  these  elements  as  being  in  his  favour,  and  the 
Crown  may  found  on  them  as  being  against  him. 

About  his  character,  proved  by  his  own  witnesses,  by 
Cameron,  his  companion  and  friend,  and  by  Schmalz,  his 
servant,  there  is  no  doubt  at  all.  He  has  maintained  him- 
self by  the  ruin  of  men  and  on  the  ruin  of  women,  living  for 
years  past  in  a  way  that  many  blackguards  would  scorn  to 
live.  That  is  an  illustration  of  what  I  mean  when  I  talked 
of  evidence  being  double-edged.  It  is  nothing  remarkable 
to  find  a  man  of  that  kind  taking  a  wrong  name,  telling  a 
lie  about  his  destination,  going  by  different  names,  murder  or 
no  murder.  He  called  himself  Otto  Sando  after  the  murder, 
in  view  of  going  to  America,  the  particular  name  being 
selected  apparently  to  square  with  the  O.S.  (Oscar  Slater)  on 
his  boxes,  but  then  he  had  long  before  gone  by  the  names  of 
George  and  Anderson,  and  it  is  possible  that  a  desire  to  avoid 
the  pursuit  of  his  wife — rather  a  nebulous  person,  so  far  ars 
the  evidence  is  concerned — may  have  had  something  to  do 
with  this  concealment.  He  called  himself  a  dentist  in  Glas- 
gow, although  he  did  not  possess  a  single  dentist's  tool;  but 
he  had  assumed  the  same  blind  years  before  in  London.  He 
says  to  one  person  he  is  going  to  the  Continent,  to  another 
that  his  destination  is  Monte  Carlo,  to  another  Chicago,  to 
another  San  Francisco.  If  you  or  I  had  told  false  stories 
about  where  we  were  going,  if  we  were  to  travel  under  an 
assumed  name,  there  would  be  a  strong  inference  that  we 
had  been  doing  something  of  a  serious  kind  that  we  wanted 
to  conceal.  In  the  case  of  a  man  like  Oscar  Slater,  whose 
life  has  been  a  living  lie,  that  inference  does  not  necessarily 
arise.  These  stories  I  have  referred  to  are  all  lies.  But, 
then,  the  man's  life  has  been  not  only  a  lie  for  years,  but  is 
BO  to-day. 

285 


Oscar  Slater. 

Lord  Guthrie  Gentlemen,  I  use  the  name  "  Oscar  Slater."  But  that  is 
not  his  name.  I  never  knew  a  case  like  the  present,  either 
in  my  own  experience  or  from  reading.  What  is  his  name? 
He  knows,  and  probably  Antoine  knows;  but  the  Crown,  with 
all  its  means  of  investigation,  has  failed  to  find  out.  We 
do  not  know  who  that  man  sitting  in  the  dock  really  is.  His 
fellow-countryman  admitted  that  there  was  no  such  German 
name  as  Slater.  We  do  not  know  where  he  was  born,  who 
his  parents  are,  where  he  was  brought  up,  what  he  was  brought 
up  to,  whether  he  was  trained  to  anything.  We  do  not 
know  whether  he  ever  did  an  honest  day's  work  in  his  life. 
The  man  remains  a  mystery  as  much  as  when  this  trial  began. 
The  Lord  Advocate  founds  on  the  prisoner's  admittedly 
abandoned  character  as  a  point  in  support  of  the  Crown.  He 
is  entitled  to  do  so,  because  a  man  of  that  kind  has  not  the 
presumption  of  innocence  in  his  favour  which  is  a  form  in 
the  case  of  every  man,  but  a  reality  in  the  case  of  the  ordinary 
man.  Not  only  is  every  man  presumed  to  be  innocent, 
but  the  ordinary  man,  in  a  case  of  brutal  ferocity  like  the 
present,  has  a  strong  presumption  in  his  favour.  In  addition, 
a  man  with  the  prisoner's  sinister  record  may  be  capable  of 
exhibiting  a  callous  behaviour  even  immediately  after  com- 
mitting a  murder.  You  will  remember  that  Mr.  M'Clure 
founded  upon  the  prisoner's  demeanour  shortly  after  the  time 
of  the  murder.  The  Lord  Advocate  replies  that  a  man  of 
such  a  character  after  the  crime  is  over  does  not  exhibit  the 
symptoms  that  you  would  expect  in  the  case  of  a  man  of 
ordinary  respectability,  who  had  been  goaded  into  violence 
by  drink  or  passion.  You  will  consider  that  matter  from 
both  points  of  view,  telling  in  favour  of  the  prisoner  and 
telling  against  him. 

The  financial  circumstances  also  have  been  mentioned.  The 
man  is  said  to  have  been  hard  up;  he  urgently  wanted  to 
realise  money.  I  do  not  think  that  these  two  circumstances, 
if  they  existed,  would  have  much  significance.  They  were 
not  confined  to  that  period.  He  was  hard  up  and  wanting 
to  realise  money  for  years  before  this  murder  was  committed. 
Gentlemen,  all  these  circumstances  are  relevant  to  the  case, 
but,  if  you  make  up  your  minds  to  convict  the  prisoner,  you 
ought  to  be  able  to  say  to  yourselves,  "  We  have  disregarded 
his  character,  we  have  disregarded  his  financial  circumstances, 
we  have  convicted  him  irrespective  of  these."  But,  if  you 
reach  a  conclusion  against  him,  it  may  well  strengthen 
that  conclusion  to  reflect  on  the  two  elements  that  I  have 
mentioned.  In  short,  they  should  not  be  factors  in  reaching 
a  conclusion,  although  they  may  very  well  support  the  con- 
clusion after  it  had  been  reached. 
286 


Lord  Guthrie's  Charge. 


Next  we  must  consider  the  evidence  of  identification  and  Lord  Guthrie 
its  value.  Not  a  word  too  much  has  been  said  on  that 
matter  by  the  Lord  Advocate  and  Mr.  M'Clure.  It  is 
extremely  important.  I  express  the  point  thus — it  would 
not  be  safe  to  convict  the  prisoner  merely  on  the  evidence  of 
personal  impression  of  his  identity  with  the  man  seen  flying 
from  the  house,  on  the  part  of  strangers  to  him,  without 
reference  to  any  marked  personality  or  personal  peculiari- 
ties, and  without  corroboration  derived  from  other  kinds  of 
•evidence.  My  proposition  involves  a  distinction  between  the 
identification,  by  personal  impression,  of  a  strange  person, 
and  the  identification,  by  personal  impression,  of  a  familiar 
person.  Suppose  a  father  told  you  that  his  son,  who  was 
resident  in  his  house,  had  been  seen  by  him  in  Princes  Street 
yesterday.  That  would  be  admirable  evidence.  But  if  a 
person  who  had  only  seen  the  son  once  in  his  life  told  you 
that  he  had  seen  him  in  Princes  Street  yesterday  that  would 
be  evidence  of  slender  value,  unless  the  son  had  a  marked 
personality,  or  unless  he  had  some  peculiarity  about  him, 
such  as  a  very  peculiar  walk,  or  unless  there  were  cor- 
roboration, such  as  that  the  man,  when  spoken  to, 
answered  to  the  name  of  the  particular  individual.  The 
distinction  may  be  vitally  important  in  this  case.  Some  of 
us  may  have  doubles.  We  have  been  told  that  we  have  been 
in  such  and  such  a  place  by  a  competent  and  honest  witness, 
who  is  quite  sure  about  it,  and  yet  we  had  never  been  there 
at  all.  The  most  august  case  is  that  of  His  Majesty  the  King. 
The  illustrated  papers  are  fond  of  publishing  a  double  of  His 
Majesty,  a  person  who  has  superficially  a  startling  resemblance 
to  the  King,  but  who  would  never  be  mistaken  for  the  King 
by  any  one  about  the  Court.  Then,  again,  people  differ  as  to 
the  extent  of  a  resemblance,  or  even  whether  there  is  any. 
You  may  have  seen  a  strong  resemblance,  but  one  of  your 
friends  says  that  he  can  see  no  resemblance  at  all,  and,  when 
the  two  people  are  brought  together,  you  see  that  there  is 
nothing  but  a  very  general  similarity.  That  applies  to  the 
personal  impression  of  a  stranger  in  reference  to  a  stranger. 
Now,  obviously,  if  the  persons  are  not  strangers,  then  the 
]His.ition  is  entirely  different,  and  it  will  be  for  you  to  say 
in  this  case  whether  some  of  the  evidence  of  identifi- 
cation— such  as  that  of  the  M'Haffies,  who  say  that 
they  saw  the  person  watching  the  house  for  days — is  to  be 
taken  as  the  evidence  of  strangers,  or  as  the  evidence  of 
persons  who  had  an  opportunity  of  familiarising  themselves, 
and  who  did  familiarise  themselves,  with  the  individual. 
Then  you  will  say  whether  in  this  case  there  were  the  marked 
personality  and  also  the  personal  peculiarities  which  may 
very  well  enable  a  man  to  be  identified  with  certainty  even 

'287 


Oscar  Slater. 

Lord  Guthrie  by  persons  who  are  strangers  to  him.  And  you  will  say,, 
thirdly,  apart  from  all  that,  whether  the  points  of  corrobora- 
tion  detailed  to  you  by  the  Lord  Advocate  are  or  are  not 
sufficient  to  show  that,  if  the  identification  is  not  by  itself 
sufficient,  at  all  events  it  is  sufficient  when  taken  along  with 
the  corroboration  on  which  he  founded. 

The  case  of  Adolph  Beck  was  most  properly  dwelt  upon  by 
Mr.  M'Clure — a  very  startling  narrative.  In  that  case 
women — not  of  respectable  character,  but  acting  admittedly 
bona  fide,  and  competent  to  form  a  reliable  opinion,  with  no 
motive  to  make  a  wrong  statement — swore,  without  doubt  or 
hesitation,  that  the  man  in  the  dock,  Adolph  Beck,  was  the 
man  who  had  defrauded  them.  And  it  turned  out  that  they 
were  wrong.  They  had  mistaken  Beck  for  another  man, 
Smith,  the  real  criminal.  There  was  no  corroboration,  and 
in  point  of  fact  Adolph  Beck  had  a  resemblance  to  the  man 
Smith.  Sad  to  say,  Beck  was  convicted.  Now,  in  this  case, 
there  is  one  thing  quite  clear — the  prisoner  is  like  the  mur- 
derer. But,  then,  he  is  not  charged  with  being  like  the 
murderer;  he  is  charged  with  being  the  murderer.  Yet  I 
do  not  think  you  can  doubt,  after  the  body  of  evidence  led 
before  you,  that  he  has  at  least  a  marked  resemblance  to  the 
man  who  haunted  the  street  outside  Miss  Gilchrist's  house, 
and  to  the  man  who  was  seen  coming  from  the  house.  You 
have  to  say  whether  the  Crown  has  proved  that  he  is  the 
man.  Keep  this  also  in  view — the  witnesses  brought  before 
you  to  identification  were  all  Scotch,  while  the  prisoner  is  a 
foreigner.  A  Scotch  person  has  a  much  more  delicate  sense 
of  identification  in  regard  to  one  of  his  own  people  than 
he  has  in  regard  to  a  foreigner.  Suppose  you  are  dealing 
with  a  negro.  White  people  say  that  they  cannot  see  any 
difference  between  negroes.  That  is  because  we  are  not 
accustomed  to  see  them.  In  the  same  way  with  a  foreigner. 
A  Scotchman  is  apt  to  say,  "  Oh,  he  is  a  foreign-looking  man," 
and  he  does  not  know  the  subtle  differences  that,  of  course, 
exist  among  foreigners  as  they  do  among  our  own  people. 
Therefore  the  mere  fact  that  a  witness  thought  that  the 
prisoner  was  the  same  as  the  man  seen  leaving  the  house, 
because  both  of  them  had  a  foreign  appearance,  goes  for 
very  little,  if  it  goes  for  anything  at  all. 

These  are  the  observations  I  think  it  proper  to  make  in 
regard  generally  to  the  different  classes  of  evidence,  and  that 
brings  me  to  the  question  of  what  the  direct  evidence  is.  It 
has  been  gone  into  very  fully  and  very  fairly  and  moderately 
by  the  Lord  Advocate  and  by  Mr.  M'Clure,  and  I  do  not  intend 
to  go  through  it,  but  I  may  tell  you  that  I  have  a  note  of 
the  pages  where  each  witness  expresses  the  exact  state  of  his 
or  her  impression,  and  I  shall  detail  them,  if  you  express  a 


Lord    Guthrie's    Charge. 


desire  that  I  should  do  so.       Some  say,  "  I  think  he  was  like  "  ;  Lord  Guthrie 

some  say,  "  I  think  he  was  very  like  "  ;   some  say,  "  That  is 

the    man";     some   say,     "I   will   swear  that  is  the   man." 

Gentlemen,  I  do  not  think  you  will  attach  cardinal  importance 

to  the  mere  form  of  expression.       That  depends  largely  upon 

the  idiosyncrasy  of  the  witness.       I  take  a  single  illustration. 

The  girl  Lambie  was  shown  the  coat  No.   43,  and  when  she 

was  asked  if  that  was  like  the  coat,  she  said,  "  No,  it  is  the 

coat."       That  is  evidently  inaccurate.       Why,  dozens  of  coats 

like  that  could  be  produced  out   of  the   shops,    and,   in   the 

absence  of  accidental  marks,  nobody  could  be  certain   of  the 

particular  coat.        If   they   professed   to  be   certain,   it  would 

simply  show  that  they  did  not  know  the  meaning  of  language. 

They  could  only  say,   "  It  resembles  the  coat  in  every  way." 

That  is  an  illustration  of  how  one  witness — in  this  instance,  a 

superficial  and  unreflective  girl  of  small  mental  capacity — fails 

to    see    the   difference    between    two    things    that    are    quite 

different,  being  able  to   say,  "  That   is  like   the  thing,"   and 

being  able  to  say,  "  It  is  the  thing."       If  you  agree  with  the 

remark  I  have  made  about  Lambie's  evidence  in  regard  to  the 

coat,  as  involving  a  want  of  power  of  discrimination  on  her 

part,  you  may  come  to  the  same  conclusion  in  regard  to  her 

identification  of  the  man  leaving  the  house.       When  she  says 

that  the  prisoner  is  the  man,  you  may  think  she  only  means 

that  he  is  like  the  man. 

But  the  real  question  for  you  is,  however  they  may  phrase 
it,  had  the  witnesses  any  doubt  in  their  own  minds  that  the 
prisoner  was  the  man  whom  they  saw  haunting  the  street  out- 
side the  house,  and  leaving  the  house?  The  Lord  Advocate 
has  pointed  out  to  you  that,  neither  in  regard  to  the  crucial 
witnesses  nor  in  regard  to  the  witnesses  who  came  into  inci- 
dental contact  with  the  man,  have  any  of  them  expressed 
any  positive  doubt.  By  positive  doubt,  I  mean  what  occurs 
every  day  in  the  criminal  Courts.  A  witness  brought  up 
for  identification  says  when  asked,  "  Was  that  the  man  who 
robbed  you?" — "Well,  I  think  so,  but  I  think  he  was  taller 
than  that  man,  or  I  think  he  had  darker  hair,  or  I  think  he 
had  a  mark  on  his  face,"  and  so  on.  The  witness,  although 
identifying  the  person,  expresses  a  doubt.  Now,  the  Lord 
Advocate  quite  properly  stated  that  in  this  case  not  one  of 
the  witnesses  has  stated  a  doubt  in  that  sense ;  they  have 
not  said  that,  while  they  think  he  is  the  man,  there  is  a 
difference.  A  difference  of  dress  amounts  to  nothing,  because 
the  way  in  which  the  prisoner  is  dressed  now  is  not  necessarily 
the  way  he  was  dressed  at  that  time. 

In  considering  the  question  of  identification,   you  will   also 
keep  in  view  that  the  prisoner  appears  to  have  a  distinct  per- 
sonality,  a   marked  individuality — you  have  only  to  look  at 
u  289 


Oscar  Slater. 

Lord  Guthrie  him  to  see  that  he  has — because  the  most  casual  people, 
such  as  the  Cunard  office  clerk,  who  only  met  him  once  or 
twice  for  a  short  time,  have  identified  him  in  reference  to 
occasions  when  the  defence  does  not  dispute  that  he  was  the 
man.  It  is  suggested  that  there  was  failure  of  identification 
on  the  part  of  the  telegraph  clerk,  who  said  she  did  not  know 
who  gave  in  a  certain  telegram  sent  by  the  prisoner.  But 
we  have  no  evidence  that  it  was  the  prisoner  who  gave  it  in ; 
the  fact  that  the  telegram  was  signed  by  him  does  not  imply 
that  he  handed  it  in.  It  is,  therefore,  clear  that  the 
prisoner  is  not  just  the  ordinary  type  of  person  of  whom 
we  say,  "  You  cannot  expect  anybody  to  identify  that  man ; 
he  is  like  a  hundred  other  persons."  Instead  of  that,  the 
prisoner  impressed  his  individuality  on  every  one  he  met  under 
totally  dissimilar  circumstances. 

In  regard  to  the  three  crucial  witnesses — Lambie,  Adams, 
and  Barrowman — Mr.  M'Clure  has  properly  said  that  you 
must  not  throw  out  of  account  what  they  said  in  New  York. 
No  doubt,  as  the  Lord  Advocate  put  it,  they  were  there  in 
difficult  and  unfamiliar  circumstances,  and  perhaps  methods 
were  used  there  that  would  not  be  allowed  here.  Still  we 
have  their  evidence  recorded,  and  you  have  to  consider  the 
identification  in  New  York  as  well  as  in  the  Glasgow  Police 
Office  and  in  this  Court.  The  girl  Lambie  said  three  things 
in  New  York  which  are  important  for  you  to  notice.  First, 
she  said,  "  One  is  very  suspicious,  if  anything."  It  is  a  little 
difficult  to  know  what  she  meant,  because  the  sentence  does 
not  explain  itself,  and  the  reporter  may  not  have  caught  the 
whole  answer.  Then  she  said,  "  I  saw  the  walk.  It  is  not 
the  face  I  went  by,  but  the  walk."  Third,  she  said,  "  I  could 
nearly  swear  that  was  the  man."  You  have  heard  her  evi- 
dence here,  and  I  do  not  go  over  it.  Here  she  is  positive  that 
the  prisoner  is  the  man,  but,  again,  I  suggest  to  you  that 
you  should  take  that  in  connection  with  her  identification  of 
the  coat,  and  you  will  probably  hold  that  what  she  really 
means  is,  "  So  far  as  I  can  see,  he  resembles  him  in  every 
particular."  One  witness  will  say,  "  I  swear  that  is  the 
man  "  ;  another,  sensitive  and  timid,  but  meaning  precisely  the 
same  thing,  will  say,  "  I  will  not  swear  it,  but  I  believe 
that  is  the  man."  The  question  is,  had  they,  when  they 
were  first  examined,  any  doubt  on  the  matter?  If  they  had  a 
doubt  on  the  matter,  then  that  will  necessarily  weigh  with  you 
in  your  opinion  as  to  the  weight  of  their  evidence.  Mr. 
Adams  sums  up  his  view  by  saying  that  he  identifies  the 
prisoner.  He  was  asked  by  Mr.  M'Clure,  "  You  do  not  give 
an  absolutely  confident  opinion  that  that  was  the  man?  "  and  he 
answers,  "  No,  it  is  too  serious  a  charge  for  me  to  say 
from  a  passing  glance."  Gentlemen,  one  cannot  but  regret — 
290 


Lord  Guthrie's  Charge. 


I   do   not  blame    Mr.    Adams,     the  circumstances  were   very  Lord  Guthrie 

peculiar — that  he  did  not  slam  that  door.       The  man  escaped, 

and  Mr.  Adams  had  only  a  passing  glance  at  him,  and  Mr. 

M'Clure  rightly  tells  you  that  it  is  for  you  to  judge  whether 

that  passing  glance  in  the  case,  on  the  one  hand,  of  a  man, 

who  undoubtedly  resembles  the  prisoner,  and  in  the  case,   on 

the  other  hand,  of  a  prisoner  who  has  undoubtedly  a  strong 

personality,  is  or  is  not  sufficient  when  taken  along  with  other 

things 

Then  as  to  the  girl  Barrowman.  You  will  consider  whether, 
young  as  she  is,  she  was  not  a  more  impressive  witness  than 
Lambie.  She  showed  no  sign  of  want  of  mental  capacity, 
or  of  want  of  judgment  and  good  sense,  and  she  displayed 
no  animus.  She  says  she  had  no  difficulty  in  telling  that 
the  prisoner  was  the  man,  when  she  saw  him  in  New  York. 
You  heard  about  the  dramatic  incident  of  the  two  girls  point- 
ing out  the  man,  when  they  were  standing  with  Detective 
Pyper.  Then  you  will  remember  that,  on  being  confronted 
with  him  in  the  room  at  New  York,  she  first  said  that  he  was 
something  like,  then  that  he  was  very  like,  and  then  that 
he  was  the  man,  and  she  has  no  doubt  now  that  he  is  the 
man.  It  is  for  you  to  consider  whether  that  sequence  can  be 
fairly  founded  on  as  weakening  her  evidence,  or  whether  it 
has  not  the  opposite  effect,  as  indicating  caution  and  dis- 
crimination— he  is  something  like  him;  he  is  very  like  him; 
he  is  the  very  man  t  At  the  same  time,  you  will  not  forget — 
what  Mr.  M'Clure  strongly  founded  on — that  she  bases  her 
opinion  on  what  she  calls  the  twist  in  the  nose.  Call  it  a 
twist  in  the  nose,  or  a  broken  nose,  or  a  peculiar  nose,  it  is 
for  you  to  judge  whether  the  prisoner's  face  has  not  such 
personal  peculiarity  as  makes  all  the  difference  in  a  question 
of  identification  by  personal  impression. 

In  addition  to  these,  there  are  Mrs.  Liddell  and  the  other 
witnesses,  eleven  in  all,  who  speak  to  a  person  haunting  the 
part  of  the  street  opposite  the  house.  Four  of  these  witnesses 
say  that  they  are  positive  that  the  prisoner  is  the  man,  viz., 
Mrs.  M'Haffie,  Police-Constable  Walker,  Euphemia  Cunning- 
ham, and  Bryson.  The  other  witnesses — 'Margaret  M'Haffie, 
Madge  M'Haffie,  Annie  M'Haffie,  Campbell,  Nairn,  and  Gillies 
— say,  generally — I  can  give  it  in  detail  if  you  like — that  he 
resembles  the  man,  but  they  will  not  swear  it.  Margaret 
M'Haffie  says  that  she  can  identify  him  quite  well,  but  she 
adrls  that,  at  one  time,  she  was  not  quite  sure.  Madge 
M'Haffie  says  she  is  not  quite  sure ;  he  is  just  like  the  man, 
but  she  cannot  swear.  Annie  M'Haffie  says  that  she  is  not 
quite  certain,  but  he  is  like  the  man.  William  Campbell 
says  that  there  is  a  general  resemblance  ;  he  will  not  say  more. 
Nairn  says  that  he  is  certain  he  was  the  man  he  saw,  but  he 

291 


Oscar  Slater. 

Lord  Guthrie  will  not  go  the  length  of  being  positive,  which  is  an  obvious 
contradiction  in  terms,  although  we  may  understand  what  he 
means.  Gillies  says  that  he  resembles  the  man,  but  he 
cannot  say  that  he  is  the  same  man.  That  leaves  Mrs. 
Liddell,  in  regard  to  whom  you  have  a  very  distinct  remem- 
brance, I  am  sure,  of  the  way  she  gave  her  evidence,  how  she 
left  the  witness-box,  got  the  prisoner  to  stand  up,  looked  at 
him  from  the  side,  as  she  saw  the  man  who  haunted  the 
street,  and  then  said  emphatically,  "  I  believe  the  prisoner 
was  the  man  standing  at  the  railings." 

The  questions  for  you  are — and  they  are  purely  jury  ques- 
tions— so  far  as  identification  is  concerned,  first,  has  the 
prisoner  such  a  marked  personality,  and  had  the  wit- 
nesses Lambie,  Adams,  and  Barrowman  such  an  opportunity 
to  observe  the  man  leaving  Miss  Gilchrist's  house,  and  are  they 
sufficiently  credible  witnesses,  to  enable  you  to  hold  it  proved 
that  the  prisoner  is  the  same  man?  Second,  has  the  prisoner 
such  a  marked  personality,  and  had  the  eleven  or  twelve 
witnesses  above  referred  to  such  opportunities  for  seeing  the 
man  who  haunted  the  street,  as  to  enable  you  to  hold  it  proved 
that  the  prisoner  is  the  same  man?  I  assume — but  again 
it  is  for  you  to  say — that  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt 
as  to  the  identity  of  the  man  haunting  the  street  and  the 
murderer.  Lastly,  is  there  corroboration,  in  other  parts  of 
the  evidence,  of  the  personal  impression  given  you  by  these 
witnesses,  assuming  that  they  are  strangers,  and  assuming  that 
there  is  no  such  marked  personality  or  personal  peculiarity  as 
would  add  weight  to  the  mere  personal  impression? 

Come,  then,  gentlemen,  to  the  purely  circumstantial  evidence. 
You  may  think  the  direct  evidence  sufficient,  and  in  that  case 
the  circumstantial  evidence  will  only  be  of  interest  to  you  as 
confirming  the  view  otherwise  reached.  If  you  do  not,  that 
may  be  either  because  you  throw  the  direct  evidence  aside 
altogether  and  think  it  of  no  value — which  I  do  not  think  you 
will  do — or  because  you  think  it  not  sufficient  in  itself.  If 
you  throw  it  aside  altogether,  there  is  in  this  case  no  such 
circumstantial  evidence  as  would  entitle  you,  taking  that 
evidence  by  itself,  to  convict  the  prisoner.  But  if  you  are 
impressed  by  the  direct  evidence,  although  not  satisfied  that 
it  is  sufficient  by  itself,  you  will  then  proceed  to  consider 
anxiously  the  alleged  circumstantial  evidence.  You  have  points 
both  for  and  against  the  prisoner.  In  his  possession  nothing 
was  found  belonging  to  Miss  Gilchrist.  The  police  at  first 
thought  that  the  diamond  brooch,  which  he  had  pawned  on 
the  21st,  had  been  part  of  Miss  Gilchrist's  belongings,  but  that 
turned  out  to  be  a  mistake.  In  her  premises  nothing  was 
found  belonging  to  him.  As  you  know,  robberies  and  murders 
have  often  been  traced  by  the  offender  having  in  his  hurry 
292 


Lord  Guthrie's  Charge. 


left  behind  him  a  cap  or  other  article  belonging  to  him,  which  Lord  Gutfarie 

has  been  proved  to  be  his,  and  which  has  convicted  him.     Then 

nothing  was  found  in  his  possession  on  which  you  can  rely  as 

being  connected  necessarily  with  the  murder.     You  have  heard 

about  the  coat,  and  you  have  heard  about  the  hammer.     The 

doctors  say  that,  while  the  stains  on  the  coat  and  the  marks 

on  the  top  part  of  the  hammer  were  thought  by  them  to  be 

due  to  mammalian  blood,  there  was  not  enough  material  for 

them  to  apply  confirmatory  tests  to  show  that  the  stains  and 

marks  were  produced  by  mammalian  blood,  or  even  blood  at 

all.       The  hammer  in  itself  is   a  perfectly   innocent  weapon, 

but   it  is  a  weapon   which   might  have   been   used  to   do   the 

deed.       If  my  suggestion  to  you  at  the  beginning  is  correct, 

viz.,    that    the    person    who    went    to    get    the    jewels    from 

Miss     Gilchrist     never     thought     that      murder     would      be 

necessary,  he    would    have    a    hammer    with    him    not    for    a 

murderous  purpose,  but  to  break  open  any  box  in  which  Miss 

Gilchrist's  jewels  might  be  kept.      These  are  strong  points  in 

favour  of  the  prisoner,   and  you  will  give  them  due  weight. 

Had  the   facts   been  the   other  way,    there  might   have    been 

enough  in  any  of  these  points  to  convict  the  prisoner,  taken 

along   with   the  evidence    of  identification.     If,    the  following 

day,  he  had  pawned  some  jewel  of  Miss  Gilchrist's,  you  would 

have   convicted    him,    or  if   his  cap    had   been    found    in  her 

premises.       There  is  nothing  of  that  kind  in  the  case. 

Two  points  remain.  What  about  his  conduct  after  the 
murder?  There  is  material  there  for  your  serious  considera- 
tion. The  incidents  may  be  significant,  although  minute,  such 
as  the  incident  on  the  top  of  the  tramway  car. 

Mr.  M'Clure  has  put  it  to  you  that  at  6.12  the  prisoner  is 
proved  to  have  calmly  taken  a  telegram  to  the  post  office, 
and  to  have  sent  it  off,  and  signed  it.  Such  conduct  is 
said  to  be  inconsistent  with  the  idea  of  his  then  plotting 
murder  within  less  than  an  hour  of  the  murder.  You  will 
consider  whether  there  is  any  evidence  to  support  either  of 
t^.ese  suggestions.  I  have  pointed  out  that  probably  the 
man  who  went  to  get  the  jewels  never  thought  of 
murder  being  necessary.  As  to  the  telegram,  there  is 
no  evidence  that  the  prisoner  sent  off  a  telegram  at 
6.12.  A  telegram  signed  "Oscar  Slater"  was  sent  off,  but  the 
telegraph  clerk  cannot  tell  whether  it  was  sent  by  a  man  or  by 
a  woman.  Slater  may  have  sent  the  telegram  or  he  may  not, 
but  we  do  know  that  he  was,  according  to  the  statement  of  his 
friends  Aumann  and  Rattman,  at  Johnston's  billiard  rooms 
some  time  about  five  or  six.  The  suggestion  is  that  their 
evidence  is  inconsistent  with  his  having  committed  the  offence, 
because  you  cannot  conceive  a  man  plotting  murder  being  in  a 
billiard  room  within  half  an  hour  of  the  offence.  If  he  was  not 

393 


Oscar  Slater. 

Lord  Guthrie  plotting  murder,  but  only  plotting  the  getting  of  jewels  from  an 
unresisting  old  lady,  there  does  not  seem  to  be  much  in  that. 
But,  then,  the  second  suggestion  is  that  he  had  not  time,  after 
leaving  the  billiard  room,  to  be  at  the  place  of  the  murder  by 
the  hour  it  -was  undoubtedly  committed.  You  will  consider 
whether,  suppose  he  left  at  6.30,  and  suppose  he  walked  out 
to  West  Princes  Street,  he  had  not  plenty  of  time  to  be  there, 
and  to  see  the  servant  girl  leaving,  and  to  see  that  his  oppor- 
tunity had  come.  The  servant  girl  talks  about  being  usually 
out  seven  minutes.  We  know  quite  well  how  variable  the  time 
of  her  absence  would  be.  He  may  have  trusted  to  her 
being  a  good  deal  longer  than  that  on  this  occasion,  as  she 
had  no  doubt  been  before.  Suppose  you  are  not  to  take 
Aumann's  evidence,  which  was  that  Slater  was  at  the  billiard 
room  about  5.30  to  sell  the  pawn  ticket  for  the  brooch,  and 
did  not  stay  long,  suppose  you  prefer  Rattman's  statement  that 
the  prisoner  left  somewhere  about  6.30,  you  will  consider 
whether  the  prisoner  would  have  had  any  difficulty  in  being 
at  the  scene  of  the  murder  by  seven  o'clock. 

As  to  what  happened  after  seven  o'clock,  you  will  remember 
what  was  said  by  Antoine — that  poor,  pathetic  figure  we  saw 
yesterday — and  by  the  servant  Schmalz.  They  do  not  speak 
definitely  about  that  particular  occasion,  but  their  evidence  is 
that,  during  that  week,  Slater  was  always  home  for  dinner  by 
about  seven  o'clock.  You  will  judge  whether,  in  a  disreputable 
house  such  as  Slater's,  we  are,  without  evidence,  to  credit  the 
statement  that  hours  were  so  punctual  and  so  regular  that  the 
inmates  always  dined  at  seven  o'clock,  or  ten  minutes  after- 
wards. Schmalz  admits  that  the  dinner  was  sometimes  as 
late  as  7.30  or  eight,  so  that  there  is  nothing  in  her  evidence 
to  exclude  the  Crown's  case  that  Slater  left  the  billiard  room 
at  6.30,  committed  the  murder,  fled  from  the  house  empty- 
handed,  being  surprised  by  Adams  and  Lambie,  and  was  at 
home,  say,  by  7.30. 

Gentlemen,  the  prisoner  was  not  bound  to  prove  that  he  was 
not  the  murderer.  He  was  quite  entitled  to  say,  "  I  defy  you, 
the  Crown,  to  prove  that  I  am  the  murderer."  He  was  entitled 
to  lead  no  evidence  at  all,  and  to  rest  his  defence  on  the 
inadequacy  of  the  Crown's  case.  But  he  has  chosen,  in  accord- 
ance with  the  letter  he  wrote  to  Cameron,  to  bring  evidence  to 
show  that  at  the  time  of  the  murder  he  was  engaged  elsewhere, 
and  could  not  have  committed  the  offence.  You  will  judge 
whether  or  not  he  has  done  so  satisfactorily  to  your  mind. 
Suppose  he  has  not,  that  would  not  entitle  you  to  convict  him. 
It  is  not  for  him  to  disprove  the  charge ;  it  is  for  the  Crown  to 
prove  it,  and  unless  they  prove  it  to  your  mind  satisfactorily, 
then  he  is  entitled  to  your  verdict. 

As  to  the  time  immediately  after  the  hour  of  the  murder,  you 

294 


Lord  Guthrie's  Charge. 


have  heard  how,  at  9.45  that  night,  Slater  went  to  the  club  Lord  Guthrle 
and  saw  Gordon  Henderson.  Henderson  says  that  Slater 
seemed  excited,  but  his  excitement  did  not  connect  itself  in 
his  mind  with  the  commission  of  any  crime.  He  thought  he 
might  have  been  losing  money  at  cards.  That  exhausts  the 
evidence  so  far  as  relating  to  the  night  in  question. 

Mr.  M'Clure  spoke  of  his  witnesses  as  a  credible  body  of 
witnesses.  You  have  seen  them.  You  know  their  occupa- 
tion, you  know  how  Antoine's  fate  is  bound  up  with  the 
prisoner's  in  the  past  and  will  be  in  the  future,  you  know 
what  kind  of  person  the  servant  is,  and  in  what  employment 
she  has  been,  and  it  is  for  you  to  say  whether  such  witnesses 
form  a  credible  body  of  evidence  or  not.  But,  even  if  you 
think  they  do  not,  still  you  have  to  come  to  a  conclusion 
as  to  whether  the  Crown  have  proved  the  case  on  their  own 
evidence. 

With  regard  to  the  alleged  flight  from  Glasgow,  it  is  quite 
clear  that  Slater  intended,  at  some  time  or  other,  to  go  to 
America.  It  may  be  doubtful  what  place  he  was  going  to  in 
America,  but  I  do  not  think  it  can  be  suggested  that  he  was 
not  intending  to  go  abroad.  It  is  for  you  to  say  whether,  in 
the  circumstances  detailed  to  you,  there  was  a  hastening  of 
that  intention,  which  is  suggestive,  if  it  does  not  prove,  that 
he  had  a  new  and  very  serious  motive  for  expediting  his  going 
abroad.  The  realisation  of  the  money,  and  the  attempt  to  sell 
the  pawn  ticket,  were  all  before  the  murder.  The  limit  of  £10 
was  given  to  Cameron,  and  afterwards,  apparently,  the  prisoner 
was  willing  to  take  any  money — he  was  willing  to  take  £4 — 
but  you  will  judge  whether  that  was  sufficient  to  show  that 
there  was,  as  the  Lord  Advocate  called  it,  a  flight  from  Glasgow, 
which  could  only  be  consistent  with  his  desire  to  escape  from 
the  consequences  of  a  crime  of  a  serious  nature.  It  is  quite 
certain  he  was  not  back  in  the  clubs  after  the  21st,  and,  although 
he  was  in  Johnston's  billiard  rooms  on  the  23rd,  for  the  first 
time  he  did  not  play.  Then  you  have  got  the  incident  con- 
nected with  his  being,  or  alleged  to  have  been,  on  the  top  of 
the  tramway  car.  The  weight  and  effect  of  all  that  is  eminently 
matter  not  for  me  to  enlarge  upon  or  discuss,  but  for  you,  as 
men  of  the  world,  to  consider. 

That  is  the  whole  case.  Mr.  M'Clure  has  made  some  observa- 
tions on  the  Lord  Advocate  not  having  cross-examined  Antoine. 
You  will  keep  in  view  her  position,  and  the  weight  to  be  given 
to  a  witness  with  such  tremendous  motives  as  she  has  for 
standing  by  the  prisoner,  and  with  the  record  that  she  has  in 
the  past.  But  you  will  also  remember  that,  if  you  read  the 
evidence  as  I  do,  her  statements  were  not  inconsistent  with  the 
Crown  case.  I  noted  that  she  did  not  say  that  the  tickets 
were  taken  for  Liverpool.  There  is  a  question  there,  which  has 

295 


Oscar  Slater. 

Lord  Guthrie  not  been  cleared  up,  as  to  whether  tickets  were  taken  for 
London  or  Liverpool.  She,  who  must  know,  did  not  say, 
and  was  not  asked  to  say,  that  the  tickets  were  not  taken  for 
London,  but  for  Liverpool.  If  she  had  said  that,  and  had 
not  been  cross-examined  on  it,  the  defence  might  have  made 
a  point  which  is  not  open  to  them. 

Gentlemen,  the  case  is  entirely  in  your  hands.  If  the  whole 
matter  is  in  the  region  of  speculation  or  suspicion,  then  you 
cannot  convict.  Mr.  M'Clure  said  that,  if  you  had  a  doubt  on 
the  matter,  you  could  not  convict.  One  knows  what  he  meant 
by  that — he  meant  reasonable  doubt,  and  the  distinction  is  an 
important  one.  There  is  nothing  almost  in  human  affairs 
that  does  not  admit  of  speculative  doubt.  Many  eminent 
persons  have  doubted  whether  we  really  existed.  A  brilliantly 
satirical  treatise  was  written  to  show  that  the  great  Napoleon 
never  existed,  but  we  do  not  look  upon  these  as  reasonable 
doubts.  If  you  have  a  reasonable  doubt  on  the  matter,  you 
will  acquit  in  one  form  of  verdict  or  another.  It  is  a  serious 
thing  that  a  brutal  offence  of  this  kind,  on  an  unoffending  old 
lady,  in  a  crowded  part  of  a  town  alleged  to  be  civilised,  in  an 
age  alleged  to  be  civilised,  should  go  undiscovered  and 
unpunished,  but  it  is  a  much  more  serious  thing  to  convict 
any  prisoner  on  insufficient  evidence. 

Gentlemen,  I  suppose  you  all  think  that  the  prisoner  possibly 
is  the  murderer;  you  may  very  likely  all  think  that  he  prob- 
ably is  the  murderer.  That,  however,  will  not  entitle  you  to 
convict  him.  The  Crown  have  undertaken  to  prove,  not  that 
he  is  possibly  or  probably  the  murderer,  but  that  he  is  the 
murderer.  That  is  the  question  you  have  to  consider.  If  you 
think  there  is  no  reasonable  doubt  about  it,  you  will  do  your 
duty  and  convict  him;  if  you  think  there  is,  you  will  acquit 
him. 

The  jury  retired  to  consider  their  verdict  at  five  minutes 
to  five  o'clock,  and  returned  in  an  hour  and  ten  minutes. 

CLERK  OP  COURT — What  is  your  verdict,  gentlemen  1 

FOREMAN  OF  THE  JURY — The  jury,  by  a  majority,  find  the 
prisoner  guilty  as  libelled. 

The  PRISONER — My  lord,  may  I  say  one  word?  Will  you 
allow  me  to  speak? 

LORD  GUTHRIE — Sit  down  just  now. 

The  CLERK — Then  this  is  your  verdict,  "  The  jury,  by  a 
majority,  find  the  panel  guilty  of  murder  as  libelled  "1 

The  FOREMAN — Yes. 

Mr.  MORISON — I  move  for  sentence. 

While  the  verdict  and  sentence  were  being  recorded, 

The  PRISONER — My  lord,  my  father  and  mother  are  poor  old 
people.  I  came  on  my  own  account  to  this  country,  I  came 
296 


Sentence. 

over  to  defend  my  right.       I  know  nothing  about  the  affair.  Lord  Guthrie 
You  are  convicting  an   innocent  man. 

LORD  GUTHRIE  (to  Mr.  M'Clure) — I  think  you  ought  to  advise 
the  prisoner  to  reserve  anything  he  has  got  to  say  for  the 
Crown  authorities.  If  he  insists  on  it,  I  shall  not  prevent 
him  now — will  you  see  what  he  says? 

The  PRISONER — My  lord,  what  shall  I  say?  I  come  over  from 
America,  knowing  nothing  of  the  affair,  to  Scotland  to  get  a 
fair  judgment.  I  know  nothing  about  the  affair,  absolutely 
nothing.  I  never  heard  the  name.  I  know  nothing  about 
the  affair.  I  do  not  know  how  I  could  be  connected  with  the 
affair.  I  know  nothing  about  it.  I  came  from  America  on 
my  own  account.  I  can  say  no  more. 

Assuming  the  black  cap,  Lord  Guthrie  then  pronounced 
sentence  of  death  in  the  usual  form,  adjudging  the  panel  to 
be  executed  in  Glasgow  prison  on  Thursday,  27th  May. 

Lord  Guthrie  thanked  the  jury  for  their  attendance  at 
that  long  and  complicated  trial,  and  said  they  would  be 
excused  from  jury  service  during  the  next  three  years. 

The  prisoner  was  then  removed,  and  the  Court  rose. 


297 


APPENDIX   I. 


NOTICES  ISSUED  BY  THE  GLASGOW  CITY  POLICE  WITH  REFERENCE  TO 
THE  MURDER  OF  Miss  GILCHKIST. 


(1) 
GLASGOW  CITY  POLICE. 


MURDER. 


About  7  p.m.  on  Monday,  21st  December  current,  an  old  lady  named 
Marion  Gilchrist  was  brutally  murdered  in  a  house  at  15  Queen's 
Terrace,  West  Princes  Street,  where  she  lived,  the  only  other  occupant 
being  a  servant  woman,  who,  about  the  hour  mentioned,  left  the 
house  to  purchase  an  evening  paper,  and  on  her  return  in  less  than 
fifteen  minutes  afterwards  found  that  her  mistress  had  been  brutally 
murdered  in  the  room  in  which  she  had  left  her. 

On  h«r  return  with  the  paper  the  servant  met  the  man  first  described 
leaving  the  house,  and  about  the  same  time  another  man,  second 
described,  was  seen  descending  the  steps  leading  to  the  house,  and 
running  away. 

DESCRIPTIONS. 

(First)  A  man  from  twenty-five  to  thirty  years  of  age,  5  feet  7  or. 
8  inches  in  height,  thought  to  be  clean  shaven ;  wore  a  long  grey 
overcoat  and  dark  cap. 

(Second)  A  man  from  twenty-eight  to  thirty  years  of  age,  tall  and 
thin,  clean  shaven,  nose  slightly  turned  to  one  side  (thought  to  be 
the  right  side) ;  wore  a  fawn-coloured  overcoat  (believed  to  be  a  water- 
proof), dark  trousers,  tweed  cloth  hat  of  the  latest  make,  and  believed 
to  be  dark  in  colour,  and  brown  boots. 

Please  have  every  possible  inquiry  made  within  your  jurisdiction, 
and  communicate  any  information  that  may  be  obtained  to  the 
Superintendent,  Criminal  Investigation  Department,  or  to 

J.   V.   STEVENSON, 

Chief  Constable. 

Police   Headquarters,  St.   Andrew's  Square, 
Glasgow,   25th   December,    1908. 

[Note. — This  bill  was  issued   to   the  police  forces  only.] 


299 


Oscar  Slater. 

(2) 
GLASGOW  CITY  POLICE. 


£200  REWARD. 


MURDER. 


Whereas  on  Monday  night,  21st  December,  1908,  Miss  Marion 
Gilchrist,  an  old  lady,  was  foully  murdered  in  her  house  at  15  Queen's 
Terrace,  West  Princes  Street,  Glasgow,  by  some  person  or  persons 
unknown, 

Notice  is  hereby  given  that  the  above  reward  will  be  paid  by  the 
Chief  Constable  of  Glasgow  to  any  one  giving  such  information  as 
shall  lead  to  the  apprehension  and  conviction  of  the  person  or  persons 
who  committed  the  crime. 

Such  information  may  be  given  at  any  Police  Office  in  the  City,  or 
to  the  Subscriber,  J.  V.  STEVENSON, 

Chief  Constable. 
Central   Police  Office, 

Glasgow,   31st    December,    1908. 


APPENDIX  II. 


EXCEBPTS  FBOM   PBINT   OF   PRODUCTIONS  IN   CAUSA   HlS   MAJESTY'S 
ADVOCATE  AGAINST  OSCAB  SLATER. 

No.  6. 

LIST    OF    JEWELLEBY    BELONGING   TO    DECEASED,    PREPARED    BY 
MB.  DlCK,  AUCTIONEEB  AND  VALUATOR,  GLASGOW. 

Gold  bracelet 

Silver    card   case. 

Morocco   manicure  case. 

Silver  necklet,  brooch,  and  earrings. 

Silver  solitaires. 

Pair  gold  eyeglasses  and  chain. 

Brass  button  hook. 

Lace   pin. 

Curb  bangle. 

Gold  bangle  with  pendant. 

Half  hoop  ring  with  5  diamonds. 

Half  hoop  ring  with  6  emeralds. 

Half  hoop  ring  with  5  sapphires. 

Half  hoop  ring  with  5  lubiea. 

300 


Appendix    II. 


Scent  bottle  with  silver  top. 

Silver  guard  and  pencil  case. 

Pair  gold  spectacles. 

Rope  of   pearls. 

Set  3  diamond  star  brooches. 

Gold  onyx  pearl  and  diamond  brooch. 

Gold  onyx  pearl  and  diamond  bracelet. 

Lace  brooch  and  pair  earrings  with  topaz. 

Small  ring  with  diamond  and  rubies,  and  gold  enamelled  ring. 

Gold  bangle  with  3  rubies. 

Gold  watch  with  black  dial,  and  albertina  and  Bealfl. 

Single  stone  gipsy  ring  with  diamond. 

Gold  bangle,  9  carat. 

Signet  ring. 

Two  keeper  rings. 

Pair  gold  sleeve  links. 

Emerald  and  diamond  ring. 

Ruby  and  diamond  ring. 

Pair  diamond  earrings. 

Circular  diamond  brooch  pendant. 

Diamond  necklace. 

Two  pairs  gold  earrings. 

Gold  catch  with  diamonds. 

Pair  gold  solitaires. 

Thin  gold  eyeglass  chain. 

Two  small  plain  gold  rings. 

Gold  keeper  ring. 

Cameo  brooch  with  gold  mounts. 

Two  silver  bracelets. 

Silver  pebble  brooch. 

Gent.'s  gold  watch  with  gold  fob,  seal,  and  key. 

Florentine  brooch  with  gold  mounte. 

Gold-mounted  brooch  with  hair. 

Pair  gold  eyeglasses. 

Silver  shaving  brush  holder. 

Pair  pearl  and  onyx  earrings  and  small  brooch. 

Gold  bangle  with  pearl  and  turquoise. 

Garnet  and  ruby  lace  brooch  "  arrow." 

Pearl  and  ruby  brooch. 

Gold  eyeglasses. 

Gold  necklet  with  onyx,  pearl,  and  diamond  pendant. 

Pair  cameo  earrings  with  gold  mounts      ....     £1132  12    0 

Two   diamond  bracelets 250    0    0 


£1382  12    0 


No.  7. 


LETTER  in  German,  Accused  to  Max  Rattmann,  dated  26th  December, 
1908  (in  envelope),  of  which  the  following  is  translation : — 

Oscar  Slater, 

c/o   Caesar  Cafe", 

544  Broadway,  San  Francisco. 

North  Western    Hotel, 

Liverpool,  26/12/1908. 

Dear  Max, — Surprisingly  leaving  Glasgow.  Forgot  to  say  good-bye. 
Let  me  hear  from  you  as  you  have  my  address.  Freedman  s  girl  took 
over  my  flat ;  keep  yourself  as  well  as  your  wife  well,  and  remain. — 
Your  friend,  O.  SLATIB. 


Oscar  Slater. 

My  French  girl  leaves  for  Paris  from  here.  I  will  inform  you  over 
certain  matters  regarding  San  Francisco  later.  Tell  Carl  Kunstler, 
Soldata,  and  Willy,  and  respectfully  Beyer  to  write.  You  can  also 
make  enquiries  whether  Beyer  has  paid  the  £15.  He  looked  very  pale 
latterly. 

Best  wishes  to  Soldata,  Kunstler,  and  Willy. 


No.   8. 
(a)  LETTER,  D.  R.  Jacobs  to  Accused,  dated  28th  December,  1908. 

New  York,  Dec.  28th,  1908. 

326  Third  Avenue. 

Dear  Oscar, — Just  a  line  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter, 
and  pleased  to  know  that  you  are  well,  also  Mr.  Rogers  and  my  friend 
Arthur  Playdell.  As  for  sending  you  emeralds  I  would  be  only  too 
pleased  if  you  sent  me  the  cash,  but  I  cannot  afford  to  send  goods  to 
Scotland  and  wait  for  months  for  the  money.  I  get  rid  of  all  I  have 
made  and  have  to  pay  cash  for  them  before  my  man  makes  them,  and 
no  sooner  you  send  cash  I  can  forward  you  anything  you  want,  and 
if  you  want  anything  quick,  communicate  with  Joseph  Oesterman,  58 
Trinity  Square,  Boro,  S.E.,  London,  England,  who  has  got  my  code 
cable  book  and  can  communicate  with  me  on  all  business  matters. 
Mr.  Rogers  knows  him  and  saw  him  when  Wrone  was  in  London.  We 
all  send  our  best  respects  to  you,  the  wife,  and  Mr.  Rogers. — Yours 
truly,  D.  R.  JACOBS. 

Buy  (?  or  bring)  all  you  can  when  you  come  over. 

(b)  ENVELOPE  in  which  above  letter  was  enclosed,  with  note  on  back 

thereof. 

Oscar  Slater,  Esq., 

c/o  Mr.  Anderson 

69  St.  George's  Road, 

Glasgow. 
Scotland,  Eng. 
If  not  delivered  return  to 

D.  R.  Jacobs, 

326  Third  Avenue, 

New  York,  U.S. 


No.  9. 
(a)  LETTER,  Accused  to  Dent,  London,  dated  9th  December,  1908. 

Glasgow,  9/12,  1908. 
69  St.   George's   Road, 

c/o  A.  Anderson. 

Dear  Sir, — Enclosed  you  will  find  my  watch  you  have  delivered  to  36 
Albemarle  Street,  London.  The  watch  is  15-20  minutes  daily  to  slow 
in  time. 

Kindly  put  the  watch  in  order,  and  retourn  same  till  the  30th  of 
December.  Cr. — Yours  truly,  OSCAR  SLATER. 

J.  Dent,  Esq.,  London. 
302 


Appendix  II. 


G.  watch  received.  Must  have  had  a  fall  or  heavy  blow.  Bal.  pivot* 
are  badly  bent,  and  back  cover  strained.  We  will  repair  and  send 
in  10  days. 

(b)  TELEGRAM,  Accused  to  Dent,  21st  December,  1908. 

December  21,   08. 

Dent,  watchmaker,  Trafalgar  Square,  London.  If  possible  please 
send  watch  at  once.  OSCAB  SLATER. 


(c)  TELEGRAM,  Accused  to  Dent,  23rd  December,  1908. 

December  23,  08. 

Dent,  34  Cockspur  Street,  London.       Must  have  watch.       Leaving 
to-morrow  night  for  the  Continent.  OSCAR  SLATER. 

69  St.  George's  Rd.  c/o  A.  Anderson. 

(d)  ACCUSED'S  CARD  with  address. 

Oscar  Slater, 

Dentist, 

36  Albemarle  Street,   W. 
Telephone  1624,  Mayfair. 
Address  till  30th  December — 

69  St  Georges  Road, 

c/o  A.  Anderson, 
Glasgow. 


No.   10. 

CARD  bearing  name  and  address,  Oscar  Slater,  Dealer  in  Diamonds 
and  Precious  Stones,  &c.,  Ac. 

Oscar  Slater, 
Dealer  in  Diamonds  and  Precious  Stones, 

33  Soho  Square, 

Oxford  Street,  W. 


No.    11. 

FILE  OF   LETTERS,   &c.,  containing 

(1)  LETTER,  Thos.  Cook  ft  Son  to  Cunard  Line, 
Liverpool,    23rd  December. 

83  Buchanan   Street, 
Glasgow,  23  Deer.,  1908. 
Messrs.    Cunard  Line,   Liverpool. 

"Lusitania,"    26  Deer.,  1908. 

Dear  Sirs, — Kindly  wire  us  to-morrow  if  you  can  offer  married  couple 
a  second-class  room  at  £24  (£12  each),  per  the  above  to  New  York, 
and  oblige. — Yours  truly,  THOMAS  COOK  ft  SON, 

per  J.  B. 

303 


Oscar  Slater. 


(2)  TELEGRAM  from  Cunard  Line  to  Messrs.  Cook, 
24th  December. 

To  COUPON,  Glasgow.       Seconds,    "  Lusitania."       Saturday.       Offer 
couple  room  E76,  twelve  pounds  rate. — CUNARD. 


(3)  LETTER,  Thos.  Cook  &  Son,  to  Cunard  Line,  Liverpool,  dated 
24th  December. 

83   Buchanan   Street, 
Glasgow,    24th  December,    1908. 
Messrs.  Cunard  Line,  Liverpool. 

"  Lusitania,"    26th  December. 

Dear  Sirs, — We  beg  to  thank  you  for  your  wire  of  date,  offering 
room  E76  at  the  £12  rate  in  favour  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Oscar  Slater. 
This  gentleman  has  called  to-day,  and  is  very  much  disappointed  at 
not  having  an  outside  room.  We,  however,  explained  to  him  that 
the  rate  of  £12  provided  only  for  inside  accommodation.  He,  however, 
replies  that  he  could  do  better  with  you  in  Liverpool.  We  asked  him 
if  he  would  take  out  ticket  for  room  E76  and  endeavour  to  adjust 
with  you  in  Liverpool  on  Saturday.  He  has  promised  to  give  us  his 
decision  to-morrow,  on  receipt  of  which  we  will  advise  you. — Yours 
truly,  THOS.  COOK  &  SON, 

per   W.  Dalziel. 


(4)  LETTER  from  Messrs.  Cook  &  Son  to  Cunard  Line,  dated  25th 
December,  1908. 

83   Buchanan  Street, 
Glasgow,  25  Deer.,  1908. 
Messrs.  Cunard  Line,  Liverpool. 

"  Lusitania,"  26.12.08  to  New  York. 

With  further  reference  to  your  wire  of  yesterday  offering  Cabin  E76 
per  the  above  in  favour  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Slater,  please  note  they  have 
not  called  here  to-day  as  promised,  so  we  shall  be  glad  if  you  will 
kindly  release  cabin. 

We  shall  be  glad  to  know  if  they  book  with  you  to-morrow. — Yours 
truly,  THOS.  COOK  &  SON, 

per  W.  D. 


(5)  APPLICATION  FORM  to  Cunard  Co.,  for  Contract  Tickets. 
CUNARD  LINE. 

(1)  Steamer,  "Lusitania,"  sailing  from  Liverpool  on  the  26.12.08; 
(2)  Name  in  full,  Otto  Sando  and  Anna  Sando ;  (3)  Age  38  years ;  (4) 
Sex,  ;  (5)  Married  or  single,  Married ;  (6)  Calling  or  Occupa- 

tion, Dentist ;  (7)  Able  to  read  and  write,  Yes ;  (8)  Nationality  (country 
owning  political  allegiance  or  of  which  citizen  or  subject),  Germany, 
U.S.  citizen,  American  address,  Chicago,  30  Staate  Street. 

304 


Appendix  II. 


(6)  CONTRACT  TICKET  for  two  Berths  from  Cunard  Co. 
in  name  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Otto  Sando. 

CUNARD  LINE. 


Second  Cabin. 


The  Cunard  Steamship  Company  Limited, 
Royal   Mail  Steamers. 


Second  Cabin  Passenger's  Contract  Ticket. 
Not  Transferable. 


British    steamship    "  Lusitania,"   of  tons    register,    to    take 

in  passengers  at  Liverpool  for  New  York  on  the  26th  day  of  December, 
1908. 


Names. 

Ages. 

No.  of  Statute 
Adults. 

Mr.  0.  Sando,        .... 
Mrs.         ,,              .... 

A 
A 

1 
1 

Deposit   -        -        £28    0    0 
Balance    -                     000 

Total  - 


£28    0    0 


I  engage  that  the  person  named  in  the  margin  hereof  shall  be 
provided  with  a  second  cabin  passage  to  and  shall  be  landed  at  the 
Port  of  New  York  in  the  United  States  of  America,  in  the  British 
steamship  "  Lusitania,"  with  not  less  than  20  cubic  feet  for  luggage 
for  such  statute  adult,  and  shall  be  victualled  during  the  voyage  and 
the  time  of  detention  at  any  place  before  its  termination  according  to 
the  subjoined  scale,  for  the  sum  of  £28  including  Government  dues 
before  embarkation  and  head-money,  if  any,  at  the  place  of  landing, 
and  every  other  charge  except  freight  for  excess  of  luggage  beyond  the 
quantity  above  specified,  and  I  hereby  acknowledge  to  have  received 
the  sum  of  £28  in  full  payment. 

The  luggage  carried  under  this  engagement,  whether  in  excess  of 
20  cubic  feet  or  not,  shall  be  deemed  to  be  of  a  value  not  exceeding 
£10,  unless  the  value  in  excess  of  that  sum  be  declared  and  paid  for. 


[Bill  of  fare.] 


For  and  on  behalf  of  the  Cunard  Steamship  Company,  Ltd., 

ANDREW  DANIEL  M EARNS. 

per  J.  FORSYTH. 
26th  December,  1908. 

*  305 


Oscar  Slater. 


On  back  of  Ticket. 


Name, 

Age, 

Married  or  single, 
Occupation,  -        -        -        - 
Country  of  birth, 
Last  legal  residence,     - 

Country  claiming  allegiance, 
(Nationality), 

Final  destination, 
(Town), 

If  ticket  to  destination, 

If  in  possession  of  $50  or  less, 

If  ever  in  the  United  States 
before,  - 

No.  of  packages  of  luggage, 


The  following  information  is  required  for 
use  of  the  United  States  authorities. 


Mr.  Otto  Sando. 
Mrs.  Anny  Sando. 

38. 
27. 

Married. 
» 

Dentist. 


Germany. 
England. 

Scotland. 
Scotland. 

U.S.A. 


Chicago. 
Chicago. 


Yes. 

Yes. 
Yes. 


(Hotel)  Chicago, 
(in  pencil.) 


Notice  to  Passengers. 


For  and  on  behalf  of  the  Cunard  Steamship  Company,  Ltd., 

ANDREW  DANIEL  MEARNS. 


No.  12. 

LETTER,   Accused  to   Hugh  Cameron,  Glasgow,  addressed   from  Tombs 
Prison,  New  York,  dated  2nd  February,  1909. 

New  York, 

Centre  Street, 

Tombs,   2/2/1909. 

Dear  Friend  Cameron, — To-day  it  is  nearly  five  weeks  I  am  kept  here 
in  prison  for  the  Glasgow  murder. 

306 


Appendix  II. 


I  am  very  down-hearted  my  dear  Cameron  to  know  that  my  friends 
in  Glasgow  like  Gordon  Henderson  can  tell  such  liars  about  me  to  the 
Glasgow  police. 

I  have  seen  here  his  statements  he  made  in  Glasgow  telling  the 
police  that  a  German  came  up  to  him  and  had  told  him  Oscar  Slater 
had  committed  the  murder,  and  also  that  I  have  been  on  the  night  of 
the  murder  in  his  place  asking  him  for  mony,  I  was  very  excited  and 
in  hurry,  I  didn't  think  it  was  very  clever  from  him,  because  he  like 
to  make  himself  a  good  name  by  the  police  to  tell  such  liars. 

I  don't  deney  I  have  been  in  his  place  asking  him  for  mony  because 
I  went  brocke  in  the  Sloper  Club.  Only  I  will  fix  Mr  Gordon 
Henderson  I  will  prove  with  plenty  of  witnesses  that  I  was  playing 
there  mucky,  and  I  am  entitled  to  ask  a  proprietor  from  a  gambling 
house  when  I  am  broke  for  mony. 

He  would  not  mind  to  get  me  hangt  and  I  will  try  to  prove  that 
from  a  gambling  point,  I  am  right  to  ask  for  some  money.  I  hope 
nobody  propper  mindet  will  blame  me  for  this. 

The  dirty  caracter  was  trying  to  make  the  police  believe  I  done  the 
murder,  was  excitet,  asking  for  mony  to  hop  off. 

I  think  you  know  different  remember  whe  have  been  in  the  Cunard 
Line  office  trying  to  change  for  a  £5  :  0  :  0  note,  we  have  been  in 
three  or  four  differend  place  after  found  some  change  in  the  Gros- 
venor  have  posted  with  you  on  Hope  Street  office  a  registered  letter. 

I  shall  go  back  to  Glasgow  with  my  free  will,  because  you  know  so 
good  than  myselfs  that  I  am  not  the  murder. 

I  hope  my  dear  Cameron  that  you  will  still  be  my  friend  in  my 
troubel  and  tell  the  truth  and  stand  on  my  side.  You  know  the  best 
reason  I  have  left  Glasgow  because  I  have  shown  to  you  the  letter 
from  St  Francisco  from  my  friend,  also  I  have  left  you  my  address 
from  St  Francisco. 

I  reelly  was  surprised  I  don't  have  seen  your  statement  because 
I  think  you  was  too  strait  forvard  for  them.  They  only  have  taken 
the  statement  against  me  and  not  for  me.  Likely  I  will  be  in  Scot- 
land in  fourteen  days  and  so  quicke  your  hear  that  I  am  in  prison  in 
Glasgow  send  me  the  best  criminal  lawyer  up  you  get  recomendet 
in  Glasgow  I  stand  on  your  dear  Cameron. 

Keep  all  this  quiet  because  the  police  is  trying  hard  to  make  a  frame 
up  for  me.  I  must  have  a  good  lawyer,  and  after  I  can  proof  my 
innocents  befor  having  a  trial,  because  I  will  prove  with  five  people 
where  I  have  been  when  the  murder  was  committed. 

Thanking  you  at  present,  and  I  hope  to  have  a  true  friend  on  you, 
because  every  man  is  able  to  get  put  in  such  a  affair  and  being 
innocent. 

My  best  regards  to  you  and  all  my  friends. — I  am,  your  friend, 

OSCAR  SLATER, 
Tombs,   New  York. 


No.    13. 

LETTER,  Robert  Rogers,  London,   to  John  S.   Marr,  Glasgow, 
dated  5th  October,  1908. 

36  Albemarle  Street,   W. 

London,  Oct.  5,  1908. 

Dear  Sir,— In  reply  to  yours  of  the  4th  inst.  I  beg  to  state  that 
Mr.  A.  Anderson  has  been  my  tenant  for  over  two  years.  He  is  a 
highly  respectable  gentleman,  and  has  always  been  prompt  in  his 
payments.— Yours  faithfully,  ROBERT  ROGERS. 

307 


Oscar  Slater. 


No.  14. 

LETTER,  Davenport  &  Co.,  London,  to  John  S.  Marr,  Glasgow, 
dated  5th  November,   1908. 

7  and  8  New  Coventry  Street,  Piccadilly, 
London,  W.,  Novr.  5,  1908. 

The  person  referred  to  in  your  letter  of  yesterday's  date  was  a  tenant 
of  a  client  of  ours,  and  he  always  paid  his  rent  regularly  and  left  the 
place  in  good  condition,  and  we  have  had  no  complaints,  and  as  far 
as  we  know  of  him,  should  consider  him  a  desirable. — Yours  faithfully, 

DAVENPOKT  &  Co. 


No.  15. 

TORN  PAPER  wrapper  of  a  Registered  Parcel  addressed  to  Accused, 
23rd  De  :  1908. 

Registered    Fragile  with    care 
f 


R  London  W.C.  1 
No.  1292 


Fee  paid. 


Oscar  Slater,  Esq., 

c/o  A.  Anderson,  Esq., 
69  St  Georges  Road, 

Glasgow. 
Dent 


No.  16. 

MISSIVE  of  LET  of  house  at  69  St.  George's  Road,  to  A.  Anderson, 
with  Visiting  Card  of  A.  Anderson  attached. 

(a)    Missive 

Glasgow  6th  Novr.  1908. 


Mr.  John  S.  Marr, 

175  St.  Vincent  Street. 

Sir, — I  hereby  take  from  you  that  house  3  up  1  situated  at  69 
St  Georges  Road  from  28th  Novr.  1908  until  28  May  1910  at  the  rent 
of  £42  :  -  :  -  say  Forty  two  pounds  stg.  per  annum  Sterling  payable 
quarterly  in  equal  proportions  at  the  usual  terms. 

I  also  agree  to  pay  my  proportion  of  stair  lighting  at  each  term  of 
Martinmas. 

I  accept  the  premises  in  good  tenantable  condition,  and  will  leave 
them  in  the  same  state  (ordinary  tear  and  wear  excepted).  I  agree 
to  replace  any  glass  broken  from  within.  I  bind  myself  to  observe 

308 


Appendix  III. 


all  the  usual  regulations  as  to  stair,  close,  and  washing-house,  and  I 
will  not  keep  any  dog  on  the  premises.  I  also  bind  myself  to  flit  and 
remove,  and  deliver  up  all  keys  at  the  end  of  this  lease  without  any 
warning  or  Process  at  Law,  ana  not  to  assign  the  lease  or  let  the  whole 
or  any  part  of  said  premises  without  your  consent  in  writing. 

I  will  not  hold  you  liable  for  any  damage  done  to  my  effects  from 
any  bursting  of  water  pipes,  or  flooding  from  without  or  within ;  and  I 
will  at  the  letting  season  give  every  facility  to  show  the  premises  to 
any  intending  future  tenant  until  they  are  let  or  unoccupied  by  me. 

Name,  A.  Anderson. 
Occupation,  Dentist. 
Address,  136  Renfrew  Street. 

(b)  VISITING  CARD  with  (2)  addresses  on  the  back  thereof. 

136  Renfrew  Street,  2  up, 

c/o    Campbell. 

A.   Anderson, 

Dentist, 

Telephone. 
1624,    Mayfair. 
Addresses  on  back. 

36  Albemarle  Street, 
Piccadilly. 

R.  Rodgers,  same  address. 

Devonport  &  Co., 

7  &  8  New  Coventry  Street, 
London. 


APPENDIX  III. 

MEMORIAL   ADDRESSED   TO   THE   SECRETARY   OF  STATE  FOR   SCOTLAND 
BY  MR.  EWINQ  SPEIRS  ON  BEHALF  OF  OSCAR  SLATER. 


NOTE. 

THE  following  is  a  copy  of  the  Memorial  which  I,  as  the  Solicitor 
acting  for  Oscar  Slater,  addressed  on  his  behalf  to  the  Secretary 
for  Scotland,  craving  commutation  of  the  death  sentence.  I  also 
sent  to  the  Secretary  for  Scotland  a  Public  Petition,  signed  by  over 
20,000  members  of  the  public,  on  Slater's  behalf. 

Thereafter  the  Lord  Chancellor,  Mr.  Haldane,  Minister  for  War, 
and  Lord  Guthrie  (the  Judge  who  presided  at  the  trial)  were,  it  is 
understood,  consulted,  with  the  result  that  the  Secretary  for  Scotland 
advised  His  Majesty  to  commute  the  death  sentence  to  sentence  of 
penal  servitude  for  life. 

309 


Oscar  Slater. 

As  will  be  seen  from  the  Memorial,  the  principal  points  which  I 
emphasised  on  Slater's  behalf  were — 

(1)  That   evidence   against  his   character   was  before   the   Jury,   and 
strongly  commented    upon   by   the   Counsel    for  the   Prosecution ;    and 
while  the  Jury  was  afterwards  told  by  the  Counsel  for  the  Prosecu- 
tion   and    the    presiding    Judge    not    to   allow    the    evidence    against 
Slater's   character   to    influence    them   against    him,    there   is    a    very 
strong   general    opinion    to    the    effect   that    it   must   have    influenced 
the  Jury.     As  the  Accused  did  not  plead  good  character,  his  character 
should  not,  according  to  the  law  of  Scotland,  have  been  attacked. 

(2)  That  the   evidence    of    the   identifying   witnesses    was   weak  and 
contradictory ;  and  that  all  the  identifying   witnesses  had   either  read 
Slater's  description,   or  seen  his  photograph  in  the  newspapers,  before 
pointing    him    out.     It   is    surely    plain    that   such    evidence    is    most 
unreliable,  and  is  not  identification  evidence  in  the  proper  sense. 

A  quite  separate  point  against  the  conviction,  and,  in  my  opinion, 
one  of  vital  importance,  is  set  forth  on  pages  8  and  9  of  the  Memorial 
regarding  the  evidence  of  the  Crown  witness,  Miss  Agnes  Brown, 
who,  although  cited  as  a  witness  for  the  Prosecution,  and  although 
in  attendance  at  Court  during  the  whole  trial,  was  not  examined 
as  a  witness,  and  so  neither  Judge  nor  Jury  heard  her  evidence. 
Had  the  Jury  heard  her  evidence,  contradicting  as  it  does,  on  most 
essential  points,  the  evidence  of  the  main  Crown  witness  (the 
message  girl  Barrowman),  I  venture  to  think  that  the  already  weak 
identification  evidence  would  have  been  rendered  contradictory  beyond 
the  possibility  of  a  conviction. 

It  is  worthy  of  special  note  that  Miss  Brown  was  one  of  the 
original  Crown  witnesses,  and  her  deposition,  taken  for  the  Prose- 
cution, was  sent  to  New  York,  and  produced  in  the  extradition 
proceedings  there. 

It  is  the  general  opinion  that  Oscar  Slater  is  in  a  very^  anomalous 
position.  There  were  no  extenuating  circumstances  in '.connection 
with  the  crime,  but  the  death  sentence  has  been  commuted.  Slater, 
however,  is  still  a  prisoner.  If  there  is  a  doubt  about  his  guilt,  he 
ought  to  be  free. 

It  appears  to  me  that,  in  the  whole  circumstances,  and  especially  in 
view  of  what  has  been  said  with  reference  to  the  evidence  of  the 
witness  Agnes  Brown  not  having  been  laid  before  the  Jury,  there 
is  strong  reason  for  a  further  inquiry  into  this  unfortunate  man's 
case. 

EWING   SPEIKS. 

190  West  George  Street,  Glasgow. 


3X0 


Appendix  III. 


UNTO  THE  RIGHT  HONOURABLE  LORD  PENTLAND,  His  MAJESTY'S 
SECRETARY  OP  STATE  FOR  SCOTLAND. 

MEMORIAL 

ON    BEHALF   OF 

OSCAR    SLATER. 


This  Memorial  is  humbly  presented  on  behalf  of  Oscar  Slater, 
presently  a  Prisoner  in  the  Prison  of  Glasgow,  who  was,  in  the 
High  Court  of  Justiciary  at  Edinburgh,  on  Thursday,  the  sixth  day 
of  May,  Nineteen  hundred  and  nine,  found  guilty  of  the  charge  of 
murdering  Miss  Marion  Gilchrist  in  her  house  in  West  Princes  Street, 
Glasgow,  and  sentenced  to  death.  The  Prisoner  is  a  Jew,  and  was 
born  in  Germany.  He  is  37  years  of  age. 

The  Jury  returned  a  verdict  of  "  Guilty  "  by  a  majority  of  nine 
to  six,  and  the  legal  advisers  of  the  condemned  man  hold  a  very 
strong  opinion  that  the  verdict  of  the  majority  of  the  Jury  was  not 
in  accordance  with  the  evidence  led,  and  that  this  evidence  was 
quite  insufficient  to  identify  the  Prisoner  with  the  murderer,  and 
so  to  establish  the  Prisoner's  guilt.  This  view,  they  believe,  is  shared 
by  the  general  public  of  all  classes  in  Scotland,  and  by  the  Glasgow 
press  (vide  leading  article  in  The  Glasgow  Herald  of  7th  May,  1909, 
sent  herewith). 

Your  Memorialist  has  endeavoured  in  this  paper  to  deal  with  the 
matter  as  briefly  and  with  as  little  argument  as  possible ;  but  in  view 
of  the  fact  that  the  trial  of  the  Prisoner  occupied  four  days,  it  is 
inevitable  that  the  Memorial  should  extend  to  some  length. 

It  is  common  ground  that  the  late  Miss  Gilchrist,  a  lady  of  about  The  murder 
82   years   of    age,    resided    alone    with    her    domestic    servant,    Nellie 
Lambie,  a  girl  of   about   21  years  of   age. 

According  to  the  evidence  of  Lambie,  the  latter  left  Miss  Gilchrist 
alone  in  the  house  at  seven  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  21st  December, 
1908,  and  went  to  purchase  an  evening  paper.  Lambie  deponed 
that  she  securely  shut  the  house  door  behind  her,  and  also  the  door 
at  the  close,  or  street  entry ;  that  she  was  only  absent  about  ten 
minutes ;  that  on  returning  about  ten  minutes  past  seven  o'clock 
she  found  the  close  door  open ;  that  upon  ascending  the  stair  ehe 
found  Mr.  Adams,  a  gentleman  who  resides  in  the  flat  below,  stand- 
ing at  Miss  Gilchrist 's  house  door;  that  Adams  informed  her  that 
he  had  gone  up  to  Miss  Gilchrist's  door  because  he  had  heard  knock- 
ing on  the  floor  of  Miss  Gilchrist's  house,  and  had  rung  the  bell, 
but  that  he  could  obtain  no  admittance ;  that  the  lobby  was  lighted 
by  one  gas  jet  turned  half  up,  but  giving  a  good  light;  that  Lambie 
thereupon  opened  the  house  door  with  her  keys;  that  upon  the  door 

3" 


Oscar  Slater. 


Reason  why 

su^ife'ete 
arrested 


Reward  of 
£200 


Witnesses 
who  saw 
murderer 
leaving  the 
house 


Lambie 


being  opened  a  man  came  through  the  lobby  or  hall  of  Miss  Gil- 
christ's house,  passed  Lambie  and  Adams,  went  downstairs,  and 
disappeared ;  and  that,  upon  Lambie  and  Adams  entering  the  house, 
they  found  Miss  Gilchrist  lying  on  the  dining-room  floor  dead,  her 
head  having  been  smashed. 

Upon  the  Wednesday  following  the  murder  (23rd  December,  1908),  the 
Glasgow  Police  were  informed  by  a  message  girl  named  Mary  Barrow- 
man  (about  15  years  of  age),  that  she  had  seen  a  man  wearing  a 
Donegal  hat  and  a  light  coat  running  out  of  the  close  which  leads 
from  the  street  to  Miss  Gilchrist's  house  shortly  after  seven  o'clock 
on  the  night  of  the  murder;  that  the  man  passed  her,  running  at 
top  speed ;  that  she  noticed  that  he  was  dark,  and  clean  shaven,  and 
that  his  nose  was  twisted  towards  the  right  side.  The  servant 
Lambie  had  also  informed  the  Police  that  a  gold  crescent  brooch, 
set  in  diamonds,  had  disappeared  from  Miss  Gilchrist's  house  on 
the  night  of  the  murder,  and  that  this  was  all  of  Miss  Gilchrist's 
property  that  she  missed.  These  statements  were  published  in  the 
Glasgow  newspapers  on  Friday,  25th  December,  1908,  and  following 
upon  this  the  witness  Allan  Maclean,  a  member  of  a  club  to  which 
Slater  belonged,  informed  the  Police  that  Slater's  appearance  some- 
what corresponded  with  the  description  advertised,  and  that  he  had 
been  trying  to  sell  a  pawn  ticket  for  a  diamond  brooch.  Following 
up  this  clue,  the  Police  went  to  Slater's  house  at  69  St*  George's 
Road,  Glasgow,  on  the  night  of  Friday,  25th  December,  and  learned 
that  he  and  Miss  Andree  Antoine,  with  whom  he  had  been  cohabit- 
ing, had  left  Glasgow  that  night  with  their  belongings.  The  Police 
thereafter  ascertained  that  Slater  had  sailed  on  the  "  Lusitania " 
for  New  York  from  Liverpool  on  Saturday,  26th  December,  and 
cabled  to  the  Authorities  at  New  York  to  detain  and  search  him  on 
his  arrival.  This  was  done,  and  the  pawn  ticket,  which  he  had 
been  trying  to  sell,  was  found  upon  him,  but  turned  out  to  be  a 
pawn  ticket  for  a  brooch  which  belonged  to  Mi-ss  Antoine,  had  never 
belonged  to  Miss  Gilchrist,  and  had  been  pawned  a  considerable 
time  before  the  murder.  Proceedings,  however,  were  instituted  for 
Slater's  extradition.  The  witnesses  Lambie,  Adams,  and  Barrow- 
man  gave  evidence  in  America,  purporting  to  identify  him  as  the 
man  seen  leaving  Miss  Gilchrist's  house,  and  Slater  was  (he  states 
of  his  own  consent)  extradited,  and  brought  back  to  Scotland  for 
trial. 

An  advertisement  was  published  by  the  Authorities  in  Glasgow 
offering  a  reward  of  £200  for  information  which  would  lead  to  the 
arrest  of  the  murderer. 

The  only  evidence  against  Slater,  which  might  be  called  direct 
evidence,  was  the  evidence  of  the  persons  who  saw  a  man  walk  out 
of  the  lobby  or  hall  in  Miss  Gilchrist's  house  on  the  night  of  the 
murder  (Lambie  and  Adams),  or  leaving  the  close  leading  therefrom, 
or  running  along  the  street  (Barrowman). 

At  the  trial  Lambie  professed  to  identify  Slater,  as  the  man  whom 
she  had  seen  leaving  the  house,  by  the  side  of  his  face.  It  was  put 
to  her,  however,  and  clearly  proved,  that  when  she  gave  evidence  in 
New  York  in  the  extradition  proceedings  she  stated  in  Court  there 
that  she  did  not  see  the  man's  face,  and  professed  to  identify  him 
by  his  walk.  When  Slater's  own  coat,  the  one  found  in  his  luggage, 
was  shown  to  her  at  the  trial,  she  at  once  remarked,  even  before 
it  was  unrolled,  that  it  was  not  like  the  coat  the  man  in  the  lobby 

312 


Appendix  III. 


wore — it  was  the  coat.  It  was  obviously  impossible  that  she  knew 
it  to  be  the  same  coat.  Lord  Guthrie  referred  to  this  in  his  charge 
to  the  jury  as  a  typical  example  of  the  nature  of  her  evidence. 
With  regard  to  the  positive  nature  of  her  evidence  generally,  it  is 
interesting  to  note  that  her  first  answer  in  America,  when  Basked 
if  she  saw  the  man,  was,  "  One  is  very  suspicious,  if  anything."  She 
stated  that,  when  she  saw  Slater  in  the  Central  Police  Office  at 
Glasgow,  she  recognised  him  in  his  "  own  coat."  It  was  proved 
that  he  was  not  then  wearing  his  own  coat,  but  one  with  which  he  had 
been  dressed  for  identification  purposes. 

The  witness  only  saw  the  man  who  was  leaving  the  house  for  a 
moment  or  two.  Adams  and  she  contradicted  each  other  as  to 
where  she  was  when  the  man  walked  across  the  lobby.  Adams 
deponed  that  she  was  by  the  lobby  clock  and  walking  towards  the 
kitchen.  If  so,  she  must  practically  have  had  her  back  to  the 
man.  She  says  she  was  on  the  threshold  of  the  door.  In  any 
«vent,  her  view  was  momentary. 

The  witness  Adams,  who  deponed  that  he  had  a  better  view  of  the  Adams 
man  in  the  house  than  Lambie,  stated  at  the  trial  that  he,  standing 
at  the  threshold,  saw  the  man's  face  as  he  approached,  that  their 
eyes  met,  and  that  the  man  walked  slowly  towards  him,  face  to 
face,  but  Adams  would  not  go  further  than  to  say  that  Slater 
resembled  the  man  very  much.  He  is  superior  to  Lambie  and 
Barrowman  in  years,  education,  and  intelligence.  Your  Memorialist 
begs  to  emphasise  the  fact  that  this  witness  had  a  much  better 
view  of  the  man  than  any  of  the  other  witnesses. 

The  witness  Barrowman  stated  at  the  trial  that  the  man  ran  Barrowman 
out  of  the  close  and  rushed  past  her  at  top  speed,  brushing  against 
her,  and  that  he  had  his  hat  pulled  well  down  over  his  forehead. 
The  witness  is  a  message  girl,  about  15  years  of  age.  She  also 
stated  that  the  man  had  on  brown  boots,  a  Donegal  hat,  and  a 
fawn  coat,  and  that  he  was  dark,  and  clean  shaven,  and  that  his 
nose  had  a  twist  to  the  right.  She  professed  to  have  noticed  all 
these  things  as  he  rushed  past  her  at  top  speed.  At  the  trial  this 
witness  stated  in  cross-examination  (1)  that  she  was  proceeding  in 
the  opposite  direction  from  the  man,  to  deliver  a  parcel,  but  that 
she  turned  and  went  some  distance  after  him ;  that  she  thought  he 
was  probably  going  to  catch  a  tramcar ;  but  she  could  not  explain 
why  she  should  go  out  of  her  way  to  turn  and  follow  a  man  running 
for  a  car  in  a  busy  city  like  Glasgow ;  and  (2)  that,  although  the  girl 
Lambie  and  she  had  occupied  the  same  cabin  on  the  voyage  to 
America,  which  lasted  about  twelve  days,  she  had  not  once  dis- 
cussed the  appearance  of  the  man,  and  that  no  one  had  warned 
her  not  to  do  so.  These  two  statements  do  not  impress  your 
Memorialist  as  bearing  the  stamp  of  truth.  This  girl  started  the 
description  of  the  twisted  nose.  She  is  the  only  witness  who  refers 
to  it.  Her  view  of  the  man's  face  must  necessarily  have  been 
momentary^.  Slater's  nose  cannot  properly  be  described  as  "  twisted  to 
the  right."  It  has  a  noticeable  prominence  in  the  centre. 

All  of  these  three  witnesses  had,  as  has  been  said,  only  a  momentary 
view  of  the  man,  and  it  was  proved  that  before  Barrowman  pro- 
fessed to  identify  Slater  in  New  York  she  was  shown  his  photo- 
graph, and  that  both  she  and  Lambie,  before  attempting  to  identify 
him  in  New  York,  saw  him  being  brought  into  Court  by  a  Court 
official,  wearing  a  badge.  In  her  New  York  evidence  she  first  said. 

He  is   something  like  the  man  I  saw."     She  afterwards  said. 
as  very  like  the  man  that  I  saw."       At  the  trial  she  stated  that  he 

313 


Oscar  Slater. 


was  the   man. 
gether    vitiate, 
witnesses. 


These  facts  very  much   reduce,  if  they   do  not  alto- 
the     value     of    the     evidence     of     these     identifying 


Liddell  Another  witness,    Mrs.    Liddell,    who    is    a   married    sister   of    the 

witness  Adams,  stated  that,  at  five  minutes  to  seven  on  the  evening 
of  the  murder,  she  saw  a  dark,  clean-shaven  man  leaning  against 
a  railing  at  the  street  entry  to  Miss  Gilchrist's  house,  but  that  this 
man  wore  a  heavy  brown  tweed  coat  and  a  brown  cap.  It  is  to  be 
observed  that  Constable  Neil,  who  passed  the  house  at  ten  minutes 
to  seven,  saw  no  one  there ;  and  Lambie,  who  left  the  house  promptly 
at  seven,  or,  as  she  said  in  America,  "  perhaps  a  few  minutes  before 
seven,"  saw  no  one  there.  Further,  Mrs.  Liddell  did  not  observe 
where  the  man  went  to ;  according  to  her  he  merely  glided  away ; 
and  although  she  was  in  Miss  Gilchrist's  house  that  night  and  saw 
the  body,  and  would  naturally  be  greatly  concerned  over  the  murder, 
she  did  not  recollect  having  seen  this  man  until  the  Wednesday 
after  the  murder.  Even  taking  her  evidence  as  absolutely  true 
and  reliable,  it  provides  an  excellent  object-lesson  on  the  difficulty 
and  responsibility  of  convict;ng  on  such  evidence  as  this,  because 
the  man  she  saw  was  obviously  dressed  differently  from  the  man 
seen  by  the  other  three  witnesses.  Her  evidence  does  not,  to  any- 
appreciable  extent,  further  the  case  against  Slater,  as  she  stated 
that  she  thought  this  man  was  Slater,  but  admitted  that  she  might 
be  in  error. 

Armour  The   other  witness  is   a  girl  named   Annie   Armour,    a   ticket  clerk 

in  the  Subway  Station  at  Kelvinbridge,  who  says  that  between  7.30 
and  8  that  evening  a  man,  whom  she  identified  as  Slater,  rushed  past 
her  office  without  waiting  for  a  ticket,  and  seemed  excited.  Lord 
Guthrie  in  his  charge  to  the  Jury  did  not  refer  to  this  witness,  and 
your  Memorialist  thinks  advisedly.  The  mere  question  of  time  is 
sufficient  to  render  her  evidence  valueless.  She  is  sure  the  incident 
did  not  happen  before  7.30.  According  to  the  other  witnesses,  the 
murderer  must  have  run  from  the  house  by  at  least  7.15.  It  was 
proved  that  it  would  only  take  a  man  five  or  six  minutes  to  run 
from  the  scene  of  the  tragedy  to  this  station,  either  by  the  most 
direct  route  or  by  the  route  which  Barrowman's  evidence  suggests 
he  took.  Then  it  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  she  could  get 
anything  like  a  good  view,  even  of  the  side  face,  of  a  man  who  rushed 
past  her  in  the  way  she  described. 

Moustache  All  the  witnesses   who   saw   the   man  on   the   night   of   the   murder 

Clean  shaven    (Monday)    say  that   he   was  clean   shaven.        It  was    proved   that    on 

the    next   day   or   two  after   the   murder   Slater    had   a  short,    black, 

stubbly  moustache. 


Witnesses 
who  spoke  to 
seeing  Slater 
in  West 
Princes  Street 
on  occasions 
previous  to 
date  of 
murder 


These  were  the  only  witnesses  called  by  the  Crown  to  identify 
Slater  with  the  murderer.  Further  circumstantial  evidence,  how- 
ever, was  led  by  the  Crown  to  show  that,  on  occasions  before  the 
day  of  the  murder,  Slater  had  been  seen  standing  in  or  walking 
np  and  down  West  Princes  Street — Mrs.  M'Haffie,  her  daughters 
and  niece,  Campbell,  Cunningham,  Bryson,  Nairn,  and  O'Brien  and 
Walker  (two  policemen).  It  may  be  noted  that  Slater's  house  was 
situated  about  three  minutes'  walk  from  West  Princes  Street. 

These  witnesses  did  not  all  agree  in  their  evidence.  Some  said 
that  Slater  was  the  man  they  had  seen ;  others,  equally  or  perhaps 
better  able  to  judge,  only  said  that  he  was  very  like  him.  The 
Memorialist  does  not  propose  in  this  paper  to  deal  at  length  with 

3M 


Appendix  III. 


this  part  of  the  evidence,  except  to  point  out  that  two  witnesses  (Nairn 
and  Bryson)  say  they  saw  Slater  in  West  Princes  Street  on  the 
Sunday  evening  previous  to  the  murder.  Against  this  there  is  the 
evidence  that  Slater  on  this  day,  as  usual,  spent  all  Sunday  (day 
and  evening)  in  his  house.  Three  witnesses  from  Paris,  London, 
and  Dublin  spoke  to  this.  Coming  from  different  places,  they  had 
no  chance  to  concoct  a  story. 

At   Slater's  trial  it   was  suggested   that  there  were   various  circum- 
stances   tending    to    create   an    atmosphere    of   suspicion    around   him;cjpeum. 
but   it  is  submitted  that   all  these  were   capable   of   explanation,    and  stances 
in   no    way   pointing    to   Slater's    guilt    as   a    murderer.        Slater   had 
written  to  Cameron  that  he  could  prove  where  he  was  on  the  evening 
of    the    murder   "  by    five    people."       When    this  letter    was   written, 
he  thought  that  the  date  of  the  murder  was  the  Tuesday,   the  22nd. 

The  evidence  of  his  witnesses  was  to  the  effect  that  on  the  evening 
of  the  murder  he  was  in  a  billiard  room  until  6.30  p.m.,  after  which 
he  went  home  for  dinner. 

It   was   shown    that  Slater    dealt   in    diamonds.       There    was,   how-  Dealer  in 
ever,  no  evidence  of  any   dishonest  dealing   of  any  kind.     The  brooch  diamonds 
said   to  have   been  missing   from  Miss  Gilchrist's  house  has  not   been 
traced.       There  was  no  evidence  of  any  kind  led  to  show  that  Slater 
ever  knew,   or  even  heard   of,  Miss   Gilchrist  or  her  house,   and    the 
Memorialist  would  emphasise  the  fact  that  it  was  the  missing  brooch 
that  put  the  Police  on  the  track  of  Slater. 

With  reference  to  Slater's  departure  for  America  on  25th  December,  Intention  to 
1908,  it   was  proved   that   he  had   formed  the   intention,    some    weeks  f0Ormedb|f0 
before   the   murder,   of   going  to   America.       Cameron,    Rattman,    and  the  murder 
Aumann    proved   this.        Slater   had,   in    fact,    tried    to   get    the    last 
named    to    take    over    his   flat.        The    letter    from    Jacobs,    of    28th 
December,   and    the     card     bearing     the     words    "  address     till     30th 
December,"    produced   by    the   Crown,    also    corroborate   the    evidence 
of   this    intention    of    leaving,    which    is    further   corroborated    by   the 
evidence  of  Nichols,  the   barber,   a  Crown   witness. 

On  the  morning  of  21st  December,  1908,  Slater  received  two  letters 
— one  from  London,  stating  that  his  wife  was  demanding  his  address, 
and  the  other  from  San  Francisco,  asking  him  to  come  over.  These 
were  spoken  to  by  Schmalz,  his  servant  girl,  and  Miss  Antoine. 
Further  corroboration  of  his  intention  to  leave  is  (1)  on  the  morning 
of  21st  December  he  raised  a  further  £30  from  Mr.  Liddell,  pawn- 
broker, on  his  brooch,  and  on  the  same  day  tried  to  sell  the  ticket; 
(2)  he  wrote  to  the  Post  Office  for  payment  of  the  money  at  his 
credit ;  (3)  he  wired  to  Dent,  London,  to  send  on  his  watch,  which 
was  being  repaired,  immediately ;  (4)  on  the  Monday  morning  he 
gave  notice  to  the  servant  girl  that  she  would  not  be  required  after 
the  following  Saturday  (these  events  all  happened  before  the  murder) ; 
(5)  on  the  Tuesday  morning  he  redeemed  a  pair  of  binoculars  from 
another  pawnbroker  whose  assistant,  Kempton,  proved  this,  and 
who  stated  that  he  was  in  no  way  excited  ;  (6)  on  the  23rd  and  24th 
December  he  made  inquiries  at  Cook's  Shipping  Offices  regarding 
berths,  and  betrayed  no  signs  of  any  excitement ;  on  the  23rd  he 
was,  in  the  evening,  in  Johnston's  billiard  room,  which  he  used 
to  frequent ;  and  on  the  24th  he  spent  the  afternoon  about  Glasgow 
with  his  friend  Cameron,  who  gave  evidence ;  (7)  on  Friday  morning 
a  Mrs.  Freedman  and  her  sister  arrived  from  London  to  "take  over 
his  flat,  so  that  he  and  Miss  Antoine  left  on  Friday  night. 


Oscar  Slater. 


Untrue 
rumour  that 
he  booked  to 
London  and 
left  the  train 
at  Liverpool 


Aliases 


Occupation- 
Title  of 
dentist 


Nothing  in- 
criminating 
four.d  in  his 
possession 


Value  of 

identification 

evidence 


Method  of 
identification 


A  rumour  got  abroad  at  the  time  to  the  effect  that  he  booked  to 
London  and  left  the  train  at  Liverpool.  This  rumour  was  published 
in  the  various  newspapers,  to  Slater's  great  prejudice,  but  nothing  of  the 
kind  was  proved  at  the  trial.  The  Police  were  evidently  misled  by 
the  fact  that  he  went  by  a  London  train,  but  it  was  proved  that 
there  were  two  carriages  in  that  train  for  Liverpool,  and  also  that 
Slater's  luggage,  consisting  of  nine  boxes,  was  labelled  to  Liverpool. 
The  Porter  who  labelled  the  luggage  was  called,  and  stated  that 
Slater  told  him  that  he  was  going  to  Liverpool,  and  entered  a 
Liverpool  carriage. 

The  point  was  also  raised  against  Slater  that  he  used  various 
aliases.  He  had  been  staying  apart  from  his  wife  for  about  four 
years,  during  which  time  he  cohabited  with  Miss  Antoine.  She 
stated  that  Slater's  wife  was  a  drunken  woman,  and  caused  him  a 
deal  of  trouble.  At  one  time  he  adopted  the  name  of  "  George," 
and  when  he  came  to  Glasgow  on  the  last  occasion  he  took  the  name 
of  "  Anderson."  On  the  voyage  to  America  he  took  the  name  of 
Otto  Sando,  because  his  luggage  was  labelled  O.S.  At  times  he 
called  himself  a  dentist.  There  was  no  evidence  that  he  really  was 
a  dentist.  Miss  Antoine  explained  that  he  adopted  the  title  of 
dentist,  as  he  required  a  designation  of  some  sort,  although  he  was 
a  gambler.  A  great  deal  was  published  in  the  newspapers  about 
a  hammer  that  had  been  found  in  one  of  his  boxes.  This  turned  out 
to  be  an  ordinary  small  domestic  nail  hammer,  purchased  on  a  card 
containing  several  other  tools,  the  lot  costing  only  2s.  6d.  He,  of 
course,  took  the  hammer  to  America  with  him  with  all  the  rest  of 
his  belongings. 

Nothing  incriminating   was  found  in  any  of  his   boxes. 

No  evidence  whatever  was  led  to  show  how  the  murderer  gained 
access  to  the  house. 

It  will  be  conceded  that  identification  evidence,  especially  in  a 
serious  charge  of  this  kind,  must  be  examined  very  carefully,  and 
should  have  little  weight  attached  to  it,  unless  it  is  very  clear. 

To  sum  up,  the  only  real  evidence  in  the  case  is  that  of  those  who 
saw  a  man  running  away  on  the  night  of  the  murder ;  and.  as  has 
been  pointed  out,  these  witnesses  had  only  a  momentary  glance  at 
him.  Adams  does  not  positively  identify  the  prisoner  as  the  man. 
He  says  he  closely  resembles  him. 

Lambie's  New  York  evidence  has  already  been  referred  to,  and  her 
evidence  at  the  trial  cannot  be  reconciled  with  it. 

Lambie  and  Barrowman  both  saw  him  in  custody  before  trying  to 
identify  him  in  New  York,  and  the  latter,  before  identifying  him, 
was  shown  his  photograph. 

All  the  other  identifying  witnesses  called  to  give  evidence  as  to 
his  having  been  seen  in  the  vicinity  on  days  previous  to  the  murder 
were  taken  down  to  the  Central  Police  Office  when  Slater  returned 
from  America  to  identify  him.  They  were  shown  into  one  room 
together,  and  then  separately  taken  into  a  room  in  the  Police  Office, 
where  Slater  was  amongst  about  a  dozen  men,  none  of  whom  were 
like  him.  (Cunningham  says  she  could  see  that  the  other  men  were 
policemen  in  plain  clothes.)  All  these  witnesses  knew  that  Slater 
had  arrived  from  America,  and  was  in  the  room.  They  had  all 
read  his  description  in  the  newspapers,  or  had  seen  his  photograph. 
They  all,  therefore,  looked  for,  and  had  no  difficulty  in  pointing  out, 
a  dark,  foreign-looking  man,  with  a  somewhat  peculiarly  shaped  nose. 
It  is  submitted  that  this  is  not  identification  evidence  in  the  proper 
sense  at  all.  Had  these  people  been  able  to  pick  out,  as  their 

316 


Appendix  III. 


man,  from  amongst  several  others,  a  man  whose  description  they 
only  knew  from  what  they  had  previously  seen  of  him,  unassisted 
by  description,  and  unassisted  by  a  photograph,  the  value  of  their 
evidence  would  have  been  entirely  different. 

Some  Crown  witnesses  identified  him  as  the  man  they  had  seen 
and  talked  to  (Shipping  Clerk,  Porter,  &c.),  but  they,  of  course, 
were  able  to  do  so.  None  of  the  identifying  witnesses  had  ever 
spoken  to  him. 

Identification  evidence  is  a  class  of  evidence  which  the  law  distrusts. 
The  most  famous  authority  is  the  case  of  Adolf  Beck.  Beck  was, 
in  1896,  sentenced  to  seven  years'  penal  servitude,  on  the  evidence 
of  ten  women,  who  swore  positively  that  he  was  a  man  whom  they 
had  each  met  on  two  occasions,  and  spent  some  time  with  in  their 
own  houses,  and  who  had  defrauded  them,  and  on  the  evidence  of 
two  policemen,  who  swore  positively  that  Beck  was  the  man  who 
had  been  previously  convicted  of  similar  crimes,  taken  along  with 
certain  circumstantial  evidence — that  he  was  known  to  frequent  a 
hotel,  on  the  notepaper  of  which  one  of  the  women  had  received  a 
letter.  Again,  in  1904,  Beck  was  convicted  of  similar  crimes  on  similar 
evidence.  It  was  subsequently  demonstrated  that  Beck  committed 
none  of  the  crimes,  but  that  a  man  bearing  a  general  similarity  to 
him  was  the  criminal. 

In  the  report  issued  by  the  Commission  appointed  to  investigate 
the  matter,  consisting  of  Lord  Collins,  Sir  Spencer  Walpole,  and  Sir 
John  Edge,  the  following  passage  occurs: — "Evidence  of  identity, 
upon  personal  impression,  however  bona  fide,  is  of  all  classes  of 
evidence  the  least  to  be  relied  upon,  and,  unless  supported  by  other 
evidence,  an  unsafe  basis  for  the  verdict  of  a  Jury." 

Now,  the  evidence  in  the  Beck  case  was  infinitely  more  overwhelm- 
ing and  consistent  than  in  this  case ;  and  the  report  in  the  Beck 
case,  and  the  report  on  which  it  followed,  make  it  clear  that  on  the 
evidence  in  this  case  the  Jury  had  no  right  to  bring  in  a  verdict  of 
"  Guilty." 

A  good  deal  was  said  by  the  learned  Lord  Advocate  to  the  Jury  Character 
about  Slater's  immoral  character.  It  was  not  disputed  that  he  was 
a  gambler.  It  was  also  admitted  that  he  had  cohabited  for  about 
four  years  with  Madame  Antoine,  who  was  of  doubtful  virtue,  and 
who  gave  evidence.  Yet  the  learned  Lord  Advocate  addressed  the 
Jury  to  the  effect  that  the  prisoner  "  had  followed  a  life  which 
descended  to  the  very  depth  of  human  degradation,  for,  by  the 
universal  judgment  of  mankind,  the  man  who  lived  upon  the  proceeds 
of  prostitution  has  sunk  to  the  lowest  depth,  and  all  moral  sense 
in  him  had  been  destroyed."  This  he  cited  as  proof  of  the  dis- 
appearance of  an  obstacle  which  had  previously  been  in  his  way, 
viz.  : — Whether  it  was  conceivable  that  such  a  man  as  Slater  could 
commit  such  an  inhumanly  brutal  crime.  The  only  evidence  on 
that  point  was  that  of  Cameron,  Slater's  friend,  who,  in  cross- 
examination,  said  he  had  heard  that  Slater  lived  on  the  earnings  of 
prostitution,  but  who  did  not  say  he  knew.  The  Jury  were  dis- 
tinctly told  by  the  Lord  Advocate,  and  by  the  prisoner's  Counsel, 
and  by  the  Judge,  to  banish  from  their  minds  anything  they  had 
heard  regarding  the  man's  character;  but  they  had  previously  heard 
all  about  it,  and  the  Memorialist  feels  strongly  that  they  were 
evidently  unable  to  do  so. 

Public  feeling  is  also  very  strong  on  the  point  that  the  question 
of  Slater's  character  should  never  have  been  brought  before  the 
Jury. 

3'7 


Oscar  Slater. 


Slater  was  The  Memorialist  thinks  it  is  only  fair  to  prisoner  to  point  out  that 

willing  to          he  was  all  along   anxious  to   give  evidence  on  his  own   behalf.       He 
give  evidence   wag   a(jviseci   by  his  Counsel   not  to  do   so,  but  not  from   any   know- 
ledge of  guilt.       He  had  undergone   the  strain   of  a  four  days'  trial. 
He   speaks   rather    broken   English — although   quite    intelligibly — with 
a  foreign  accent,   and   he  had   been  in  custody   since  January. 

Apart  from  what  has  been  set  forth  above,  your  Memorialist  begs 
to  draw  attention  to  the  fact  that  on  the  Crown  list  of  witnesses  is 
the  name  of  a  witness,  Miss  Agnes  Brown  (No.  46).  This  lady  is 
30  years  of  age,  and  a  very  intelligent  school  teacher.  Your 
Memorialist  is  informed  that  she  told  the  Police  and  Procurator- 
Fiscal  that  on  the  night  of  the  murder,  about  ten  minutes  past  seven 
o'clock,  two  men  in  company  rushed  along  West  Princes  Street  from 
the  direction  of  Miss  Gilchrist's  house,  and  passed  close  to  her  at 
the  corner  of  West  Princes  Street  and  West  Cumberland  Street ;  that 
one  of  them  was  dressed  in  a  blue  Melton  coat  with  a  dark  velvet 
collar,  black  boots,  and  without  a  hat ;  that  both  men  ran  past  the 
opening  of  West  Cumberland  Street,  straight  on  along  West  Princes 
Street,  crossed  West  Princes  Street,  and  ran  down  Rupert  Street, 
a  street  further  west,  and  opening  off  the  opposite  side  of  West 
Princes  Street.  Your  Memorialist  understands  that,  in  the  identifi- 
cation proceedings  before  referred  to,  this  witness  pointed  out  Slater 
as  the  man  in  the  Melton  coat,  as  she  thought.  This  witness's 
evidence  is  thus  in  sharp  contradiction  on  material  points  to  that 
of  the  message  girl  Barrowman  (who  had  only  a  momentary  glance 
at  the  man),  but  upon  whose  evidence  so  much  weight  has  evidently 
been  laid,  and  who  says  that  Slater  was  dressed  in  a  light  coat,  a 
Donegal  hat,  and  brown  boots,  was  alone,  and  ran  down  West 
Cumberland  Street. 

Your  Memorialist  respectfully  submits  that  this  illustrates  the 
danger  of  convicting  a  man  upon  the  kind  of  evidence  given  in  this 
case.  Miss  Brown  was  in  attendance  at  the  trial,  but  was  not  called 
as  a  witness.  Even  on  the  evidence  led,  the  votes  of  two  more 
jurymen  in  his  favour  would  have  liberated  the  prisoner.  In  England 
the  probability  is  that  a  conviction  would  never  have  been  obtained. 
Your  Memorialist  is  authorised  to  state  that  Slater's  Counsel  agree 
that  the  evidence  did  not  justify  the  conviction. 

Your  Memorialist,  who  has  all  along  acted  as  Slater's  Solicitor 
since  he  was  brought  back  from  America  after  the  Extradition  Pro- 
ceedings, and  who  has  had  very  many  interviews  with  Slater,  begs 
respectfully  to  state  his  absolute  belief  in  Slater's  innocence. 

May  it  therefore  please  the  Right  Honourable  the  Secretary 
of  State  for  Scotland  to  take  this  Memorial  into  his  most 
favourable  consideration,  and  thereafter  to  advise  His 
Most  Gracious  Majesty  to  exercise  his  royal  prerogative 
to  the  effect  of  commuting  the  sentence  passed  upon  the 
prisoner,  or  to  do  otherwise  as  in  the  circumstances  may 
seem  just. 

And   your   Memorialist   will   ever  pray. 

EWING   SPEIRS, 

190   West  George  Street,   Glasgow, 
Oscar  Slater's  Solicitor. 

Dated  this   seventeenth    day  of  May,    One 
thousand   nine   hundred  and  nine. 

318 


Appendix  IV. 

APPENDIX  IV. 

DEPOSITION  OF  AGNES  BROWN. 

At    Glasgow,    the    thirty-first    day    of    December,    One    thousand 

nine    hundred    and   eight    years. 
In   presence   of   Arthur   Thomson   Glegg,    Esq.,    advocate,   Sheriff  - 

Substitute    of   Lanarkshire, 
Compeared     AGNES     BROWN,     who,    being    solemnly    sworn    and 

examined,    declares — 

I  am  thirty  years  of  age,  a  school  teacher,  and  reside  at  48  Grant 
Street,  Glasgow. 

On  Monday,  21st  December,  1908,  about  7.8  p.m.,  I  left  the 
house  there  to  attend  evening  classes  in  Dunard  Street  School. 
I  went  west  along  Grant  Street  to  West  Cumberland  Street,  and 
turned  north  along  the  east  side  of  that  street  till  I  came  to  West 
Princes  Street.  I  was  in  the  act  of  stepping  off  the  foot  pavement 
there  to  cross  West  Princes  Street  at  an  angle  towards  Carrington 
Street  (a  north-westerly  direction)  when  two  men  came  rushing  past 
me  from  the  direction  of  George's  Road.  They  were  on  foot  pave- 
ment (south  foot  pavement  of  West  Princes  Street).  They  were 
going  very  quickly,  and  the  one  nearest  me  came  against  me  in 
passing ;  he  merely  touched  me.  He  never  spoke,  however,  and  both 
continued  running  west  along  West  Princes  Street.  They  kept  on 
the  foot  pavement  for  a  little  distance,  and  then  they  crossed  to 
the  centre  of  the  street. 

I  stood  for  a  moment  at  the  corner  of  Carrington  Street  to  see 
where  they  went,  and  they  turned  down  Rupert  Street  towards  Great 
Western  Road.  I  then  passed  down  Carrington  Street  to  Great 
Western  Road,  but  I  saw  no  more  of  them.  In  crossing  that  road 
I  saw  the  time  on  a  clock  in  a  chemist's  shop — that  it  was  then  7.12. 

I  returned  home  from  my  classes  shortly  after  ten  o'clock  and 
then  learnt  of  Miss  Gilchrist's  murder  from  my  two  sisters. 

I  did  not  at  the  time  associate  the  two  men  with  the  murder,  but 
next  morning,  after  reading  a  description  in  the  Glasgow  Herald  of 
a  man  who  was  said  to  have  left  deceased's  house,  I  thought  he 
might  be  one  of  the  two  men  referred  to. 

I  did  not  see  the  face  of  either  man,  but,  so  far  as  I  could  make 
out,  they  were  each  about  thirty  years  of  age,  and  about  5  feet 
9  inches  in  height.  The  one  next  me  was  of  medium  build,  with 
dark  hair,  and  seemed  to  be  clean  shaven.  He  wore  a  three- 
quarter  length  grey-coloured  overcoat — I  think  tweed — dark  trousers, 
probably  brown,  dark  tweed  cap  without  flaps,  and  had  both  hands 
in  his  coat  pockets  as  he  ran  away.  I  took  no  notice  of  his  boots. 

The  man  furthest  from  me  was  of  medium  build,  but  seemed  to 
be  squarer  than  the  other  man.  He  had  very  dark  hair,  probably 
jet  black,  well  groomed  and  glossy,  and  was  bareheaded. 

He  wore  a  navy  blue  overcoat  with  velvet  collar,  dark  trousers, 
and  black  boots. 

He  had  also  a  stand-up  white  collar,  which  seemed  very  clean, 
and  carried  something  in  his  left  hand,  the  one  furthest  from  me. 

I  could  not  say  what  this  was.  It  might  have  been  a  walking- 
stick,  but  I  thought  it  looked  clumsier  than  a  walking-stick. 

I    know    the    house    which    was   occupied    by   Miss    Gilchrist. 

It  is  about  200  yards  east  from  the  corner  of  West  Cumberland 
Street  and  Princes  'Street,  where  the  two  men  ran  past  me. 

All  which  I  declare  to  be  truth. 

AGNES  BROWN. 
A.  T.  GLEOO. 

319 


Oscar  Slater. 


Re-examined,    says 


I  adhere  to  the  above  statement  as  correct,  and  have  to  add  that 
on  Sunday,  21st  February,  I  saw  in  the  Central  Police  Office  prisoner, 
Oscar  Slater. 

He  was  then  dressed  in  a  grey  Melton  overcoat  with  velvet  collar, 
and  was  bareheaded. 

I  recognised  him  as  one  of  the  two  men  I  had  seen  running  away 
on  the  Monday  night  in  question.  He  was  bareheaded  when  I  saw 
him  running  away,  and  the  man  who  was  with  him  was  wearing  a 
dark,  close-fitting  cap. 

It  is  possible  that  Slater  might  be  wearing  another  coat  under 
the  Melton  overcoat,  as  the  latter  is  large  enough  to  cover  another 
overcoat. 

I  also  recognised  Slater  by  his  profile.  I  did  not  get  a  front  view 
of  his  face,  but  I  picked  him  out  of  a  number  of  men,  twelve  to 
fourteen,  as  I  think,  in  the  police  office,  and  I  have  not  the  slightest 
doubt  about  him. 

It  was  not  only  by  his  profile  and  back  view  but  the  shape  of  his 
neck  and  ears  and  square  shoulders. 

I  did  not  see  Slater  with  a  cap  or  hat  when  he  was  running  away, 
but  the  man  who  was  with  him  had  a  cap  like  the  dark  greenish 
cap  shown  me. 

I  think  the  second  man  resembles  a  man  whom  I  had  seen 
repeatedly  in  Grant  Street,  always  between  seven  and  eight.  That 
street  runs  parallel  with  West  Princes  Street. 

I  have  seen  Miss  Gilchrist  frequently  at  her  back  bedroom  window, 
and  I  have  seen  her  lift  the  window.  I  cannot  say  that  I  saw  her 
put  anything  out.  These  occasions  were  when  she  seemed  to  be 
dressing. 

Also  truth. 

AGNES  BROWN. 


APPENDIX  V. 

ACT  OF  ADJOUHNAL  RELATIVE  TO  CAPITAL  SENTENCES. 

At  Edinburgh,  the  first  day  of  June,  Nineteen  hundred  and  nine. 
Present — 

The   Right  Hon.    the   Lord   Justice-General. 

The   Right   Hon.  the  Lord  Justice-Clerk. 

The    Right  Hon.  the  Lord   Kinnear. 

The   Hon.    Lord   Guthrie. 

The  Lord  Justice-General,  Lord  Justice-Clerk,  and  Lords  Com- 
missioners of  Justiciary,  by  virtue  of  the  powers  conferred  upon  the 
Court  by  an  Act  passed  in  the  third  session  of  the  second  Parliament 
of  King  Charles  the  Second,  entituled  "  Act  concerning  the  Regula- 

ilDor^..°LJ«S?C!?1catories'"  and   "The  Criminal  Procedure   (Scotland)  Act, 
Id/,     50  &  51  Viet.  cap.  35,  do  hereby  enact  and  declare  that  from  and 
alter  the   passing   hereof   the  mode  of  pronouncing   and   recording  the 
sentence  of  death  shall  be  as  follows,  videlicit:— 

1.  After  the  verdict  of  the  jury  finding  the  pannel  guilty  has   been 
re-orded,  the  judge  or  judges  present  shall  sign  the  sentence  of  death 
320 


- 


As\ 


-> 


Appendix  V. 


on  a  paper  separate  from  the  record,  and  immediately  thereafter  the 
presiding  judge  shall  pronounce  sentence.  The  said  sentence  may 
be  wholly  written  or  partly  written  and  partly  printed. 

2.  Immediately  thereafter  the  clerk  shall  engross  the  said  sentence  in 
the  record,  and  the  judge  or  judges  present  shall  sign  the  same. 

3.  It  shall  not  be  necessary   that   the  pannel  should  be   present   in 
Court  after  the  presiding  judge  shall  have  pronounced  sentence. 

4.  The    Court  shall    not   proceed  to   other  business    until    the    said 
sentence  has  been  engrossed  in  the  record  and  signed  as  above  provided. 

The  said  Lords   ordain   this   Act   to   be  recorded  in   the  Books    of 
Adjournal  and  printed. 

DUNBDIN,    I.P.D. 


Notable  Scottish  Trials. 

The  Scotsman — "  Messrs.  William  Hodge  &  Co.  are  doing  good  public  service  in 
issuing  a  series  of  volumes  dealing  with  '  Notable  Scottish  Trials.'  Since  many  of 
these  trials  took  place  a  new  generation  has  arisen,  to  whom  most  of  the  persons  tried 
are  mere  names,  and  the  series  promised  by  Messrs.  Hodge  &  Co.  will  necessarily 
take  the  form  of  educative  works  of  considerable  historic  value. " 

Glasgow  Evening  Times — "The  series  of  'Notable  Scottish  Trials '  which  has 
just  been  initiated  with  a  volume  dealing  with  the  trial  of  Madeleine  Smith  forms 
an  enterprise  on  which  the  publishers  are  to  be  heartily  congratulated." 


VOLUMES    ALREADY    PUBLISHED. 

Price  5s.  net  each. 

Madeleine   Smith.      Edited   by  A.   DUNCAN  SMITHS   F.S.A.(Scot.), 
Advocate. 

Daily  News — "  If  all  subsequent  volumes  are  as  full  of  interest  as  the  present,  their  publication 
should  be  an  assured  success." 

Dr.  Pritchard.      Edited  by  WM.  ROUGHEAD,  W.S.,  Edinburgh. 

Glasgow  Herald — "    .     .     .     One  of  the  most  absorbing  of  a  remarkable  series," 

The  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Directors.     Edited  by  WILLIAM 
WALLACE,  Advocate,  Sheriff-Substitute,  Campbeltown. 

Glasgow  Citizen — "  Interesting  alike  to  lawyers  and  laymen.  The  evidence  on  both  sides  is 
given  verbatim,  and  the  entire  work  of  editing  has  been  exceedingly  well  done  by  Mr.  William 
Wallace,  advocate.  There  are  some  excellent  portraits." 

Eugene    Marie    Chantrelle.      Edited    by    A.    DUNCAN   SMITH, 
F.S.A.(Scot),  Advocate. 

Law  Times — "Mr.  Duncan  Smith  may  be  congratulated  on  the  able  manner  in  which  he  has 
executed  his  task." 

Deacon  Brodie.     Edited  by  WM.  ROUGHEAD,  W.S.,  Edinburgh. 

Law  Magazine — "The  full  report  of  the  trial  is  here  given,  and  the  book  is  illustrated  with  a 
number  of  portraits  of  judges,  counsel,  and  prisoners,  which,  together  with  an  admirable  introduction, 
make  a  work  of  considerable  interest." 

James  Stewart  (The  Appin  Murder).     Edited  by  DAVID  N. 
MACKAY,  Writer,  Glasgow. 

The  Scotsman — "  In  compiling  this  addition  to  an  important  and  valuable  series  of  criminal 
trials,  Mr.  Mackay  has  shown  singular  assiduity  and  industry.  He  has  ransacked  the  records  and 
chronicles  of  the  time  with  care  and  diligence.  His  introductory  summing  up  of  the  case  is  lucid, 
judicious,  and  complete,  grasping  the  facts  with  a  firm  and  sure  hand,  and  exposing  the  hollowness 
of  the  theories  of  the  prosecution  with  convincing  force." 

A.  J.  Monson.     Edited  by  J.  W.  MORE,  B.A.(Oxon.),  Advocate. 

The  Scotsman— "  The  publishers  have  been  fortunate  in  securing  the  services  of  Mr.  More  as 
editor.  He  has  done  his  work  well  .  .  .  Everything  has  been  done  to  make  this  report  accurate 
and  full." 

The  Douglas  Cause.     Edited  by  A.  FRANCIS  STEUART,  Advocate. 

The  Scotsman — "  Out  of  the  mass  of  materials  at  his  command,  the  editor  has  woven  a  narrative 
of  surpassing  interest,  which  will  appeal  to  the  layman  as  strongly  as  to  the  lawyer." 

Captain  Porteous.      Edited  by  WM.  ROUGHEAD,  W.S.,  Edinburgh. 
Oscar  Slater.      Edited  by  WM.  ROUGHEAD,  W.S.>  Edinburgh. 

IN    PREPARATION. 

Lord  Lovat.      Edited  by  DAVID  N.  MACKAY,  Writer,  Glasgow. 
Particulars  of  other  volumes  will  be  duly  announced 


PRINTED  BY 

WILLIAM    HODGE  AND  COMPANY 

GLASGOW  AND  EDINBURGH 

1910 


s 

CD 


cv 


I) 

O! 


•gf 

-Pi 
•Hi 
tJ; 

0): 


I 

•P 


a 

o 

CQ 

o; 


o 


•<        H 


University  of  Toronto 
Library 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 

Under  Pat.  "Ref .  Index  File- 
Made  by  LIBRARY  BUREAU 


:H  A  SOWS  LIBRARY. 

186  STRAND,  LI 

•>carcc 


