




•Notable griQligb ZTrials 


Mrs 


Maybrick 



NOTABLE 
ENGLISH TRIALS. 

^he Statmtons* Edited by J. B. 
Atlay, M.A., Barrister -at- Law. 

Franz Muller* Edited by H. B. 
Irving, M.A.(Oxon). 

Lord Lovat* Edited by David N. 
Mackay, Solicitor. 

'William Palmer* Edited by 
Geo. H. Knott, Barr ister-at- Law. 

The Anncsley Case* Edited by 
Andrew Lang. 

Mrs* Maybrick* Edited by H. B. 
Irving, M.A.(Oxon). 

Dr* Lamson* Edited by H. L. 
Adam. 

Mary Blandy* Edited by William 
Roughead. 

JBugrene Aram. Edited by Eric 
Watson, Barrister-at-Law. 





Sir William Pickford. 




Xrial of 


Mrs. Maybrick 


Sdited by 

H. B. Irving, M,A.(Oxon) 

Author of “The Life of Judge Jeffreys,*’ “French Criminals of the 
Nineteenth Century,” “ Occasional Papers,” etc. 



CALCUTTA 

BUTTERWORTH & CO, (INDIA), LIMITED 

8/2 Hastings Street 

( Post Box 251) 


1912 


PRINTED BY 

"WILLIAM HODGE AND COMPANY 
GLASGOW AND EDINBURGH 
1912 



TO THS HONOOItABLK 

SIR WILLIAM RICKFORL, 

NOW ONE OE THE JUDGES OE THE 
HIGH COURT OE JUSTICE, JUNIOR COUNSEE EOR 
IVIRS. mayrrick: at her TRIAE, 

THIS VOEUME IS 
RESEECTEUEEY DEDICATED 

RY 


THE EDITOR 




PREFACE. 


The most complete report of Mrs. Maybrick^s trial is to be found 
in a volume ‘ The Necessity for Criminal Appeal as Illustrated by 
the Maybrick Case, and the Jurisprudence of Various Countries,” 
edited by J. H. Levy, of the Personal Rights Association. Mr. Levy 
has bestowed grea*: care in the preparation of the report of the trial, 
which is an outstarding feature of the book, and to his courtesy 
and that of his publishers, Messrs. P. S. King <k Son, I am 
indebted for permission to make use of it in preparing the 
present report. Besidea the trial itself, Mr. Levy’s book contains 
a full account of the various efforts made after the trial to procure 
Mrs. Maybrick’s release, and gives copies of many of the 
aflBdavits sworn in connection with these attempts. 

Another book containing much useful and interesting infor- 
mation is “ The Maybrick Case,” a Treatise by A. W. Macdougall, 
barrister-at-law. The work is an earnest and elaborate plea in 
defence of Mrs. Maybrick’s absolute innocence, not always 
temperate or judicial in tone. 

Mrs. Maybrick’s Own Story : “ My Fifteen Lost Years,’* by 
Florence Elizabeth Maybrick, published after her release from 
prison in 1904, deals in its latter portion with some of the facts of 
the case. 

Sir Leslie Stephen’s “Life of Sir James Fitzjames Stephen,” 
and Mr Barry O’Brien’s “ Life of Lord Russell, of Killowen,” have 
been of service. 

I have to thank my friends, Sir Douglas Straight, Mr. 
Reginald Smith, K.C., and Dr, Dawson Williams, for some 
helpful suggestions in the preparation of this volume. To the 



PREFACE. 


kindness of Sir Herbert Stephen, the Hon. Charles RusseU 
Mr. Joseph Addison, I am indebted for the photographs rf their 
fathers, who took part in the trial, and to Mrs. W. R. M Connell 
for the photograph of her husband. Lastly, I would thank Mr. 
Justice Pickford for accepting the dedication of this bo'>k, and for 
kindly giving me some useful information on certain points in the 
case. 

For obvious reasons it has been my purpose in editing this 
trial to give as impartial an account as possible of the facts of 
the case, and to abstain from comment or criticism, except where 
it seemed necessary or unavoidable. 



CONTENTS 


PAGE 

Introduction, - -- -- -- -- -- - xiii 

Table of Dates, xlv 

List of Counsel, xlvii 

The Trial— ----- - xlix 


First Day — Wednesday, 31st July, 1889. 

Mr. Addison’s Opening Speech for the Prosecution, - - - - 3 

Evidence for the Prosecution. 

W. H. Clemmy, . - . 24 T. S. Wokes, - - - - 52 

Michael May brick, - - - 24 C. Hanson, - - - - 53 

Dr. A. R. Hopper, - - - 32 J. Sefton, - - - 55 

Mrs. Briggs, - - - - 39 George Smith, - - - - 55 

Mrs. Hughes, - - - - 45 Thomas Lowry, - - - 56 

Edwin May brick, - - - 46 Mrs. Busher, - - - - 57 

Second Day — Thursday, 1st August, 1889. 

Evidence for the Prosecution ( continued ). 

Dr. Charles Fuller, - - - 58 Elizabeth Brierley, - - - 72 

Christopher Robinson, - - 63 Mary Cadwallader, - - - 74 

Frederick E. Tozer, - - 63 Elizabeth Humphreys, - • 79 

Alice Yapp, - - - - 64 Dr, Richard Humphreys, - 87 

Third Day — Friday, 2nd August, 1889. 

Evidence for the Prosecution ( continued j. 

Dr. Richard Humphreys (recalled), 99 Inspector Baxendale, - - 128 

Dr. William Carter, - - 112 Edward Davies, - - 129 

Dr. Alexander Barron, - - 124 Ellen Ann Gore, - - - 141 

Isaac Bryning, - - - 127 

Fourth Day — Saturday, 3rd August, 1889. 

Evidence for the Prosecution ( concluded ). 

Helen Ann Gore (recalled), - 146 Alfred Schweisso, - - - 156 

Margaret Jane Gallery, > - 151 Dr. Thomas Stevenson, - • 157 

Nurse Wilson, - - - - 154 

Sir Charles Russell’s Opening Speech for the Defence, - 


176 



CONTENTS. 


Nicholas Bateson, 

R. Thonroson, - 
Thomas Stansell, 

Edwin Garrett Heaton, 


Evidence for the Defence. 


- 185 

- 187 

- 189 

- 191 


Dr. J. Drysdale, 

William J. Thomson, 

Hr. Charles Meymott Tidy, 


FACE 


195 

197 

198 


Fifth Dav-»-Monday, 6th August, 1889. 


Evidence for the Defence ( concluded ). 


Dr, Rawdon Macnamara, 
Dr. Frank Thomas Paul, 
Hugh Lloyd Jones, - 


211 

215 

224 


James Bioletti, 

Edwin Maybrick (recalled). 
Sir James Poole, 


Mrs. May brick’s Statement, - 


224 

226 

226 

227 


Sir Charles Russell’s Closing Speech for the Defence, - - - - 229 


Mr. Addison’s Closing Speech for the Prosecution, . - . . 256 


Sixth Day — Tuesday, 6th August, 1889. 


Mr. Justice Stephen’s Summing Up, 274 

Seventh Day — Wednesday, 7th August, 1889. 

Mr. Justice Stephen’s Summing Up (concluded), 314 

The Verdict, - 355 

The Sentence, - - - 355 


APPENDICES. 

I. Passage from Mr. Justice Stephen’s Charge to the Grand Jury at 
the Liverpool Assizes, July 26, 1889, relating to Mrs. May brick’s 
Case, . 359 

II. Short Account of the J udge and Counsel engaged in the Maybrick 
Trial, 


362 



LIST OF ILLUSTEATIONS. 


Sir William Pickford, 

Mr. John Addison, Q.C., M.P., 

Facsimile of Letter from Mrs, Maybrick to Mr. Brierley, 

Mr. W. R, M‘Connell, 

Sir Charles Russell, Q.C., M.P., 

Mr. Justice Stephen, 


Frontispiece 
facing page 3 

71 
87 
229 
275 


19 


99 


99 


99 




TRIAL OF Mrs. MAYBRICK. 


INTRODUCTION. 

James Maybrick, a Liverpool cotton broker, died at his 
residence, Battlecrease House, Aigburth, on Saturday, the 11th 
of May, 1889, under mysterious circumstances. A suspicion had 
arisen in the minds of some of those attending on Mr. Maybrick 
during his illness that his wife was attempting to poison him. 
She was arrested after his death, and tried for his murder at 
the Liverpool Assizes. She was convicted and sentenced to 
death on the 7th of August, 1889. On the 22nd of August this 
sentence was commuted by the Home Secretary to one of penal 
servitude for life. Mrs. Maybrick served fifteen years of im- 
prisonment, and was released on the 25th of January, 1904. 
The justice of Mrs. Maybrick’s conviction was gravely questioned 
at the time, and has been the subject of criticism ever since. 

Two questions are raised by a study of the facts — 

1. Did James Maybrick die of poisoning by arsenic? 

2. If he did, was the arsenic that killed him administered 
to him by his wife with intent to murder? 

It is not the purpose of this Introduction to answer these 
questions decidedly in one sense or another, but to give as 
impartial an account as possible of the case, and leave it to the 
reader, who may study the trial itself, to form his own con- 
clusion, if, after such study, he feels confident of being able 
to form any conclusion at all. 

James Maybrick was fifty years old at the time of his death. 
His business taking him to America, he married there, in the 
year 1881, Florence Elizabeth Chandler, daughter of a banker 
of Mobile, Alabama. She was twenty-four years younger than 
her husband. In 1884 Mr. and Mrs, Maybrick settled in Liver- 
pool. Two children were born to them, a boy and a girl. 
Before and after his marriage Maybrick had been in the habit 
of taking drugs, among them strychnine and arsenic, both 


XUl 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

reputed as being tonic and aphrodisiac in their effect. His 
habit of dosing himself was well known among his friends. But 
for his indulgence in this unwholesome habit, Maybrick would 
appear to have been an ordinarily healthy man. 

Some short time before his death the domestic happiness of 
Maybrick and his wife had become clouded. Mrs. Maybrick 
had, it would seem, some ground of complaint against her 
husband in regard to a woman, while she herself had conceived 
an illicit passion for a man of the name of Brierley. It is with 
her abandonment to the temptation of this passion that the 
history of the case may be said to have begun. 

On Thursday, the 21st of March, 1889, Mrs. Maybrick, having 
previously engaged rooms for “ Mr. and Mrs. Thomas May- 
brick,'^ left Liverpool for Flatman's hotel, London. From 
the 22nd to the 24th of March she and Brierley stayed there as 
man and wife. They left the hotel on the 24th, and Mrs. 
Maybrick went to the house of some friends until her return to 
Liverpool on the 28th. On the following day she went with 
her husband to the Grand National Steeplechase. There she 
met Brierley, and in consequence of something that occurred 
on that occasion, on Mrs. Maybrick' s return home a violent 
quarrel took place between her and her husband, in the course 
of which he gave her a black eye. Mrs. Maybrick threatened 
to leave the house, but was persuaded, for the sake of her 
children, to remain. There was some talk of a separation, 
but finally, by the intervention of the family doctor, the husband 
and wife were reconciled, and Maybrick paid some debts which 
his wife had incurred without his knowledge. 

On two occasions in April Maybrick, who was always morbidly 
anxious about his health, consulted his brother Michael's doctor 
in London. Dr. Fuller found him nervous and apprehensive 
of paralysis, but, in fact, only suffering from indigestion. 
Nothing was said in the course of consultation as to Maybrick' s 
habit of taking arsenic, and no arsenic was contained in the 
three prescriptions given him by Dr. Fuller. Maybrick returned 
to Liverpool on the 22nd April. Dr. Fuller's prescriptions 
were made up for Maybrick in Liverpool, but on April the 
26th he received from London a bottle of medicine in a card- 
board box. 


XIV 



Introduction. 


On or about April the 23rd or 24th Mrs. Maybrick bought 
a dozen fly papers from a chemist in Aigburth. She said that 
the flies were troublesome in her kitchen. She paid for the 
papers, but did not take them with her, leaving them to be 
sent home by the chemist’s boy. On the 28th Mrs. Maybrick 
bought another two dozen fly-papers and a cosmetic lotion from 
a chemist in the neighbourhood of Aigburth, with whom she had 
a running account. She paid for the papers and took them 
with her, but not the lotion. All these fly-papers contained 
arsenic. At some date about this time, the 23rd or 24th, 
Mrs. Maybrick was seen by two of her servants soaking these 
fly-papers in a basin of water in the bedroom occupied by her 
husband and herself. She said afterwards that her object 
in doing this was to extract the arsenic from the papers for 
use as a cosmetic. Mr. Davies, the analyst, stated in evidence 
at the trial that one of these fly-papers contained rather more 
than two grains of arsenic. Dr. Coates, who analysed these 
papers after the trial, reduced this quantity by a half. By 
soaking one of them in water for an hour, Mr. Davies said at 
the trial that he obtained three-quarters of a grain of arsenic. 
Mr. Clayton, who analysed similar papers in 1890, obtained 
rather over a grain after soaking them in water for twenty- 
four hours.* 

The last illness of James Maybrick was said to have com- 
menced on the 27th of April. That morning he had an attack 
of vomiting which he attributed to an overdose of strychnine 
contained in some medicine he had received from'Xiondon. He 
then went to the Wirral races, where he would seem to have 
got wet, and afterwards dined with friends. He complained 
that during dinner his hand had been so imsteady that he had 
upset some wine. On the next day, Sunday, the 28th, May- 
brick was attacked by illness, Mrs. Maybrick gave him some 

* The important ^int would be how much arsenic could be extractcsd 
from each paper. Experiments made in the case, H. v. tSeddon, Central 
Criminal Court, March, 1912, showed that the actual boiling of the paper in 
water extracted almost the whole of the arsenic, whereas soaking in cold 
water for several hours would only extract a relatively small portion of the 
arsenic, e,g.^ J (evidence of Dr. Willoox). The analysis of the fly-papers 
in this case showed that the paper was saturated with solution of arsenic 
to which was added an infusion of quassia and sugar, and a little brown 
colouring matter. Thus a watery extract from a fly-paper would be of 
the colour of tea, and would have a bitter taste. In the iSeddon case 2*01 


XV 



Trial of Mrs May brick, 

mustard and water as an emetic to get rid of some brandy 
which he had taken during the morning. He saw Dr. Humphreys, 
and complained of his chest and heart, and feared paralysis. 
The doctor attributed the symptoms of the previous day to an 
overdose of stry^chnine which he knew had been prescribed for 
May brick by Dr. Fuller. Mrs. Maybrick had told him some 
time in March that her husband was in the habit of taking a 
white powder which she thought was strychnine. Early in 
the same month she had written to Maybrick's brother Michael, 
saying she had found a white powder that her husband had been 
taking, which might account for the pains in his head. When 
his brother mentioned this to him in London, Maybrick, who 
seems to have been secretive about his habit of dosing himself, 
said, “Whoever told you that? It is a damned lie 1 ’’ In 
the evening Maybrick w^as better. The next day, the 30th, 
Dr. Humphreys saw him again, and came to the conclusion that 
he was a chronic dyspeptic. He put him on a diet and pre- 
scribed for him, and on the 1st of May found him so much better 
that it w’as tliought unnecessary that he should call again. On 
the night of the 30th of April Mrs. Maybrick went with her 
brother-in-law, Mr. Edwin Maybrick, to a fancy dress ball. 
She said that it was as a cosmetic to be used on this occasion 
that she had procured arsenic from the fly-papers. 

On the 1st of May Maybrick went down to his office, taking 
with him some Barry ^s revalenta, prepared by the cook, in a 
brown jug given her by Mrs. Maybrick, He was at the office 
again on the 2nd and 3rd. On the first two of these days he 

grains of arsenic were found in the body of the victim, Miss Barrow. 
Arsenic in varying quantities was found in the stomach, liver, intestines, 
muscles, kidneys, spleen, lungs, heart, brain, and nails. Arsenic was also 
present in the skin and hair. Miss Barrow was taken ill about September 
the let, 1910, with symptoms of vomiting, diarrhoea, and abdominal pain, 
which continued more or less until death took place on September the 14th. 
It was hardly disputed in the case that the deceased must have had a 
fairly large and fatal dose of arsenic, probably from 10 to 15 grains, 
administered to her within three days of her death. Unless the poison had 
been administered within a short period from death, it would have been 
eliminated from the stomach and intestines by the vomiting and diarrhoea 
which occurred. As it was { of a grain of arsenic was present in the 
stomach and intestines of the deceased after death. In all probability the 
whole of Miss Barrow’s illness was due to arsenical poisoning, though it 
was suggested by the defence that in the early stages of it she was 
suffering from summer diarrhoea. The presence of arsenic in a large relative 
amount in the hair, skin, and nails of the deceased suggests that other 
doses than the fatal one had been given her during the course of her illness. 
The man Seddon was convicted of murder, and executed. 

xvi 



Introduction . 


had taken his lunch with him to the office, and had complained 
of sickness there, due, he thought, to some inferior therry put 
into the revalenta. Late on the night of the 3rd, Dr. 
Humphreys was sent for, and found May brick suffering from 
great pain in the legs, extending from the hip to the knee. He 
had had a Turkish bath during the afternoon, and had been 
eick twice since then. Dr. Humphreys gave him a morphia 
suppository. Mrs. Maybrick told Alice Yapp, her children’s 
nurse, that Dr. Humphreys attributed her husband’s illness to 
liver. But,” she added, ''all doctors are fools; they say 

that because it covers a multitude of sins.” On the 4:th the 
pain had gone, but the vomiting continued. This Dr. Humphreys 
attributed to the morphia. Maybrick complained of thirst, 
but the doctor advised him not to drink anything, but to relieve 
his thirst by using a gargle or putting a damp cloth to his 
mouth. On the 5th, though still vomiting or hawking,” 
Maybrick seemed better. On the 6th his condition remained 
about the same. Dr. Humphreys stopped his taking Valen- 
tine’s meat Juice, which had made him sick, and prescribed 
for him Fowler’s solution of arsenic, of which Maybrick took in 
all three doses, amounting to about 1 -250th of a grain. The 
same evening Dr. Humphreys applied a blister to the patient’s 
stomach, which gave him great relief. On Tuesday, the 
7th of May, at Mrs. Maybrick’s suggestion, another doctor. Dr. 
Carter, was called in, and Mrs. Maybrick telegraphed for a 
nurse. Dr. Carter Judged the patient to be suffering from 
acute dyspepsia, due possibly to some irritant present in the 
stomach, and prescribed some sedative medicine. On Wednes- 
day morning Dr. Humphreys, who the previous evening had 
formed a more hopeful prognosis and looked forward to a near 
recovery, found his patient’s condition about the same. 

This Wednesday, the 8th of May, is an important day in the 
history of the case. It was on this day that suspicions were 
first aroused in the minds of those attending on Maybrick that 
his wife was responsible for his illness. That morning Alice 
Yapp, the nurse, informed Mrs. Briggs and Mrs. Hughes, two 
friends of the Maybricks, of the soaking of the fly-papers. There- 
upon Mrs. Briggs telegraphed to Maybrick’s brother Michael, 
in London, ” Come at once; strange things going on here,*’ 
and repeated to the brother Edwin, who was living in the house. 


XVll 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

Alice Yapp’s statement. When Nurse Gore, who had been 
sent for to attend the patient, arrived at half-past two that 
afternoon, Mr. Edwin Maybriok instructed her that no one 
except the nurses was to be allowed to attend on his brother. 
At three o’clock the same afternoon Mrs. Maybrick gave Alice 
Yapp a letter to post addressed, A. Brierley, Esq.,” at an 
address in Liverpool. Instead of posting it Alice Yapp opened 
the letter, and at five o’clock handed it to Mr. Edwin May- 
brick. This letter and Alice Yapp’s previous statement were 
communicated to Mr. Michael Maybrick, who arrived that 
evening. The following day he saw Drs. Humphreys and 
Carter. He imparted to them his suspicions, telling them of 
Mrs. Maybrick ’s infidelity to her husband as revealed by her 
letter, and of her purchase of fly-papers. 

Mrs. Maybrick’ s letter to Brierley, opened by Alice Yapp, 
was written in answer to one received from him on May the 
6th ; it had come under cover. In it Brierley expresses appre- 
hension lest Maybrick should be trying by means of advertise- 
ment to discover what had occurred during their visit to 
London ; he says he is going away, and hopes to see Mrs. 
Maybrick again in the autumn ; he cannot trust himself to 
write about this unhappy business,” but hopes later on to 
be able to show her that he does not deserve the strictures ” 
contained in her last two letters. In the course of her reply 
Mrs. Maybrick wrote — Since my return I have been nursing 
Maybrick night and day. jGTe is sick unto death. The doctors 
held a consultation yesterday, and now all depends on how 
long his strength will hold out.” She tells her lover that he 
need have no fear of discovery, as Maybrick knows nothing, 
and begs him not to leave England till he has seen her once 
again. The warmth of Mrs. Maybrick’s letter is in contrast 
with the lukewarmness of Brierley ’s. 

On the morning of the 9th of May Mrs. Maybrick, who was 
ignorant of the discovery of her letter to Brierley, said to 
Alice Yapp— — Do you know that I am blamed for this? ” 
The nurse asked, ‘'For what?” “For Maybrick’s illness,” 
she replied, and added that she had done her best to carry 
out Dr. Humphreys’ instructions. That day Maybrick’s con- 
dition was less favourable ; he was suffering from diarrhoea and 


XVlll 



Introduction 


tenesmus, or straining. During the day a bottle of brandy, 
a bottle of Neave^s food, and some of the fseces and urine of 
the patient were taken away and afterwards examined by the 
doctors for arsenic, but none was found. That night occurred 
the incident of the meat juice. 

Nurse Gore came on duty at eleven ohlock. About mid- 
night she gave May brick some Valentine's meat juice, which 
she took from a fresh bottle given her the night before by Mr. 
Edwin May brick. Shortly after, Mrs. May brick entered the 
room, took this bottle of meat juice from the chest of drawers, 
and carried it with her into the dressing-room opening out of 
Maybrick's bedroom, in which she was then sleeping. She 
closed the door after her. She then came back and asked 
the nurse to fetch some ice to cool the water for bathing 
Maybrick's head. While speaking she placed the bottle on 
the table in a manner which, in the nurse's opinion, waa 
'' surreptitious." The nurse did not leave the room. Mrs. 
Maybrick then returned to the dressing-room, but, when her 
husband awoke later, came back into the bedroom, and moved 
the meat juice from the table to the wash stand. This bottle 
of meat juice and another bottle of brandy were given to the 
doctors on the 10th for analysis. No arsenic was found in the 
brandy, but half a grain was found in the meat juice. 

On Friday, the 10th of May, Mr. Michael Maybrick saw Mrs. 
Maybrick changing as he thought some medicine from a small 
bottle to a larger. He asked, Florrie, how dare you tamper 
with the medicine? " Mrs. Maybrick said there was so much 
sediment in the small bottle that its jcontents had to be put 
into a larger one in order to be properly shaken up. The 
contents of the small bottle were afterwards analysed, but no 
arsenic was found. When, the same day, Nurse Gallery was 
offering Maybrick some medicine, Mrs. Maybrick tried to per- 
suade her husband to take it. He said to her, ‘‘ You have 
given me the wrong medicine again." Mrs. Maybrick replied. 

What are you talking about? You never had wrong 
medicine." About six o'clock in the evening one of the nurses 
heard Maybrick say to his wife, who was in the room, Oh, 
Bunny, Bunny, how could you do itt I did not think it of 
you 1 ” He said it three times, and Mrs. Maybrick replied, 

six 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

'' You silly old darling, don’t trouble your head about things.” 
She also told him that she could not tell him what was the 
matter with him, or the cause of his illness. 

The same day May brick became much worse. That night 
his relations were warned of the seriousness of his condition. 
On the Saturday morning the doctors gave up all hope of saving 
his life, and at half-past eight in the evening he died. Mrs. 
May brick, some hours before her husband’s death, had fallen 
into a swoon, in which she remained for twenty-four hours. 
She continued ill in bed until she was taken to Walton Jail on 
the 18th of May. 

Shortly before and after May brick’s death a search was 
made in the house. The object of this search was undoubtedly 
to look for proof of Mrs. Maybrick’s guilt, which, since the 
incident of the meat juice, was more or less assumed by 
Maybrick’s brothers, by Mrs. Briggs, and some of the servants. 
Alice Yapp found in the tray of a trunk belonging to Mrs. 
Maybrick a sealed package labelled Arsenic — Poison for 

cats,” and a chocolate box containing two bottles, and a piece 
of handkerchief which she said was Mrs. Maybrick’s. On the 
day following Maybrick’s death Mrs. Briggs found in the 
dressing-room two hatboxes belonging to Maybrick. In the 
first was a small wooden box containing three bottles, and on 
the top of the box a bottle of Valentine’s meat juice ; and in 
the second box a glass with milk in it and a rag, Weighable 
arsenic was found in the three bottles, in the glass, and on the 
rag, and traces of arsenic on the handkerchief, and in the 
pocket of a dressing-gown worn by Mrs. Maybrick. Arsenic 
was found in minute quantities in two jars of sediment, one 
from the closet and one from the area. A very considerable 
quantity of arsenic was contained in the packet marked 
Poison for cats.” Arsenic was found in a bottle of aperient 
mixture made up from Dr. Fuller’s prescription by a Liverpool 
firm of chemists, and in a bottle of Price’s glycerine. It 
would not be incorrect to say that, taking all the articles found 
in the house, there was discovered in them arsenic sufficient in 
quantity to poison fifty people, assuming two grains to be a 
fatal dose. But how this considerable quantity of arsenic had 
got where it was there was no evidence to show. Some twenty 
bottles or packets of drugs were taken from Maybrick’s office. 


XX 



Introduction 


None of them was found to contain arsenic, but, in the jug 
in which May brick had brought his lunch from home, and in 
the pan and basin in which it had been warmed, traces of 
arsenic were found. 

On the 13th of May Drs. Humphreys, Carter, and Barron held 
a post-mortem on the body of May brick. From the appear- 
ances they formed the opinion that death was due to inflamma- 
tion of the stomach and bowels set up by some irritant poison. 
The intestines, the contents of the stomach, and the liver were 
taken out and placed in sealed jars. On the following day, 
the 14th, Superintendent Bryning, of the County police, 
went into the room in which Mrs. Maybrick was lying and 
told her that she was in custody on suspicion of having caused 
her husband’s death. Later in the day Mrs. Briggs told her 
of the arsenic which had been found in the meat juice. Mrs. 
Maybrick was about to make some reply when the policeman, 
who had been placed on guard outside the door, put a stop to 
the conversation. The same day Mrs. Maybrick told Mrs. 
Briggs that she had no money whatever for stamps or tele- 
grams, and so was unable to communicate with her friends. 
Mrs. Briggs in sarcasm ” suggested that she should write 
and ask Brierley for money, Mrs. Maybrick took the sugges- 
tion seriously, and then and there wrote to Brierley. She said 
that she was in fearful trouble, in custody, without friends, 
and begged him to send her some money : Your last letter 

is in the hands of the police. Apj>earances may be against me, 
but, before God, I swear I am innocent.” This letter, which 
Mrs. Briggs told Mrs, Maybrick she must hand to the police, 
did not reach its destination. 

The coroner’s inquest was opened on the 14th of May, and, 
after formal identification of the body, adjourned until the 
28th. On the 18th a magistrate had visited Mrs. Maybrick 
in her bedroom, and formally opened an investigation, at the 
conclusion of which he had ordered her to be removed to 
Walton Jail, where she was placed in the hospital. At the 
resumed inquest on the 28th Mrs. Maybrick was represented 
by Mr. William Pickford, barrister, now one of the judges of 
the King’s Bench. At this hearing the evidence of the nurses 
and servants, and the chemists as to the purchase of the 
fly-papers, was heard, and that of a Mrs. Samuelson. 


XXI 



Xrial of Mrs Maybrick. 

This lady, who was not called before the magistrates nor 
at the trial, owing, it was said, to her disappearance, stated 
that Mrs. Maybrick had told her about a fortnight before the 
Grand National that she hated her husband. Mrs. Maybrick ’a 
account of this incident, which occurred in a hotel at Birkdale, 
represented it as arising out of a remark made by Mrs. 
Samuelson to her husband during a game of cards. In course 
of a dispute with her husband Mrs. Samuelson said I hate 
you 1 whereupon Mrs. Maybrick had said, ''You must not 
take serious notice of that; I often say I hate Jim.’’ 

The case was adjourned until the 5th of June. On the 30th 
of May Maybrick’s body had been exhumed and portions of it 
removed for further analysis. The case had by this time 
greatly excited the public mind. The air was filled with 
rumours and stories of various kinds, for some of which the 
local newspapers were responsible. At the inquest on the 
5th and 6th of June evidence was given for the first time as 
to the cause of Maybrick’s death. The doctors attending on 
Maybrick were called. As a result of the examination of the 
portions of Maybrick’s body taken for analysis Mr. Davies, 
the analyst, stated that he had found arsenic in the liver and 
traces of arsenic in the kidneys and intestines, in all about 
one- tenth of a grain. In none of the other organs examined 
— stomach, spleen, heart, or lungs — nor in the bile, nor in 
the bedding by exudation from the body, w^as any trace of 
arsenic discovered. The coroner’s jury found unanimously 
that Maybrick had died from the administration of an irritant 
poison — by thirteen to one that the poison had been adminis- 
tered by Mrs. Maybrick — and twelve were of opinion that it 
had been administered with the intention of taking away life. 
These findings amounted to a verdict of wilful murder against 
Mrs. Maybrick, who was committed by the coroner to take her 
trial at the next Liverpool Assizes. 

The magisterial hearing commenced on the 13th of June, and 
ended the following day. With the exception of Mrs. Samuelson, 
whose evidence was alluded to in Superintendent Bryning’e 
opening, but who was not called, the witnesses heard were the 
same as those examined at the inquest. At the conclusion of 
the first day’s proceedings Mrs. Maybrick was loudly hissed by 
a number of women as she left the Court. When, on the 

xxM 



Introduction. 


14th, the evidence for the prosecution had been completed, Mr. 
Pickford asked the bench whether they had made up their 
minds to send the case to a jury, as, if so, he did not propose 
to trouble them with an address. After a brief consultation 
the magistrates said that they thought the case one that must 
be decided by a jury. Mr. Pickford therefore reserved his 
defence. On Mrs. Maybrick being formally charged, Mr. 
Pickford said to her, Do not speak; I will reply for you. I 
reserve my defence.^’ Such was the usual course adopted by 
counsel when magistrates had decided to commit, and, in a 
case as complicated as Mrs. Maybrick’s was likely to be, to 
have presented part of it before the magistrates might have 
proved afterw^ards embarrassing to the leader to whom it had 
been decided to entrust the case. It will be noted that, in reply 
to some comments by the judge in his charge to the jury at the 
trial, Mr. Pickford took entire responsibility for reserving 
the whole of the defence. Mrs. Maybrick was then committed 
for trial. 

Tho question of removing Mrs. Maybrick’ s trial to London 
was anxiously considered by her advisers. The extraordinary 
excitement the case had aroused in Liverpool, the rumour and 
speculation to which it had given rise, and the local associations 
of the May bricks, were matters to be weighed carefully by those 
conducting her defence. Mrs. Maybrick herself, according to a 
letter of the 28th of June written to her mother, was in favour 
ot removal. I sincerely hope the Cleavers (her solicitors) 

will arrange for my trial to take place in London. I shall 
receive an impartial verdict there, which I cannot expect from 
a jury in Liverpool, whose minds have come to a ‘ moral con- 
viction ’ cn aMcndant which must influence their decision to 
a certain extent. The tittle-tattle of servants, the public, 
friends, and enemies, and from a thousand by-currents, besides 
their personal feeling for Jim, must leave their traces and 
prejudice their minds, no matter what the defence is.” Her 
advisers, however, decided that it was the stronger and wiser 
course to face a trial in Liverpool, that the feeling against Mrs. 
Maybrick was not so strong as had been supposed^ and Mrs. 
Maybrick accepted their decision. The leading brief for her 
defence was accepted by Sir Charles Russell, Q.C., M.P. 

The Assizes were opened on the 26th of July, on which day 

• • • 

XXUl 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

Mr. Justice Stephen, to whom was assigned the criminal busi- 
ness, charged the grand jury. His charge has been criticised 
on the ground that he laid undue weight on Mrs. Maybrick 
intrigue with Brierley as a motive likely to induce her to 
murder her husband. His exact words in dealing with this 
part of the case were — But certainly if she stood in these 
relations to him (Brierley), I hardly know how to put it other- 
wise than this, that, if a woman does carry on an adulterous 
intrigue with another man, it may supply every sort of motive — 
that of saving her own reputation ; that of breaking through the 
connection which, under such circumstances, one would think 
would be dreadfully painful to the party to it. It certainly 
may quite supply — I won’t go further — a very strong motive 
why she should wish to get rid of her husband.” The Judge 
called the attention of the grand jury to the purchase of fly- 
papers by Mrs. Maybrick, to her letter to Brierley, in which 
she described her husband as sick unto death,” to the presence 
of arsenic in his body, and in the articles found in the house, 
and to the fact that she had nursed him during the greater 
part of his illness. The grand jury returned a true bill, and 
the trial was fixed for Wednesday, the 31st of July. In the then 
excited state of the public mind it was unfortunate that, after 
the date of the trial had been decided, to a barrister who applied 
to him to fix a day for another case which was to follow that of 
Mrs. Maybrick, Mr. Justice Stephen said, possibly in a spirit 
of grim humour, But Sir Charles Russell may plead guilty.” 
Such a remark, made at such a time, and coming from the 
bench, was likely to be misconstrued by many into a hint of 
judicial opinion on the merits of the case. 

Sir James Fitzjames Stephen, who presided at Mrs. May brick's 
trial, was at that time, apart from his judicial eminence, one 
of the most distinguished occupants of the bench. Not only 
as the historian of our criminal law and one of the authors of the 
Indian Code, but as a well-known writer on literary, historical, 
and philosophical subjects, Sir James Stephen had acquired 
a high reputation as a historian and a critic. His ‘‘ Liberty, 
Equality, and Fraternity,” his defence of Sir Elijah Impey 
against the unjust strictures of Macaulay, his contributions 
to the Saturday Review were all works of intellectual power, 
of a strong and vigorous character, impressive by their grasp of 

xKiv 



Introduction 


fact and downright logical force. As a judge Sir James Stephen 
was considered to be at his best in a criminal court; of nice 
legal subtleties and fine distinctions his mind was apt to be 
impatient. It is impossible for the historian of the May brick 
case to ignore the statement, frequently made, that at the time 
of her trial the Judge’s mind was suffering from the early attacks 
of an insidious disease which, two years later, compelled Sir 
James Stephen to retire from the bench. The Judge had had 
a slight stroke of paralysis at Derby in 1885, and been obliged 
to give up work for a time. Whether on his return to work 
his mind had entirely recovered its former vigour, or was suffer- 
ing a gradual loss of strength, is a matter that need not be 
discussed. But those familiar with the Judge’s powers during 
his earlier years on the bench may well doubt, in reading the 
report of Mrs. Maybrick’s trial, whether those powers were 
as conspicuous and effective in the trial of her case as they 
would have been had it taken place some few years before. 
Of the Judge’s scrupulous anxiety to be fair, just, and con- 
siderate towards the prisoner no impartial reader can doubt. 

Mr. John Addison, Q.C., M.P., led for the prosecution. Mr. 
Addison was one of the leaders of the Northern Circuit, Recorder 
of Preston, and Conservative member of Parliament for Ashton- 
under-Lyne ; he was afterwards a County Court judge. With 
him were Mr. W. R. McConnell and Mr. Thomas Swift, in- 
structed by the Treasury. Mr. McConnell, one of the leading 
juniors of the circuit, wa.s afterwards Chairman of the County 
of Liondon Sessions, in succession to Sir Peter Edlin. An 
exceedingly popular member of the bar, he was a merciful and 
painstaking judge. 

It was of no small advantage to Mrs. May brick that her 
defence had been entrusted to Sir Charles Russell. Russell 
may be said at this time to have been at the zenith of his 
career as an advocate, in the opinion of many the foremost 
advocate of his day, though it was not in the criminal courts 
that his most signal triumphs had been won. In Gladstone’s 
short-lived Administration in 1886 he had been appointed 
Attorney-General, the first Roman Catholic to hold that office 
since the Reformation. In the April preceding Mrs. Maybrick’s 
trial he had concluded his speech before the Parnell Commission 
in defence of the members of the Irish party, the greatest 


XXV 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


achievement of his forensic career. Those who have criticised 
the entire effectiveness of RusselFs defence of Mrs. Maybrick 
must bear in mind the fact that the undertaking of her case 
came to him after the strain and stress of a task of unexampled 
magnitude, such as has seldom, if ever, fallen to the lot of an 
advocate, the defence not only of an accused client, but of the 
conduct of a political party through years of struggle and 
agitation. Sir Henry Lucy, who met Russell in Liverpool the 
morning on which Mrs. Maybrick^s trial opened, says that he 
told him that he was confident of his client’s acquittal. As 
junior Russell had the assistance of Mr. (now Mr. Justice) 
Pickford. 

By a coincidence Mr. M*^ Connell and Mr. Pickford had been 
concerned together in the trial in 1884 of the women Flanagan 
and Higgins, who had been tried in Liverpool for poisoning by 
arsenic a number of persons. Mr. M 'Connell had appeared for 
the prosecution, led by Mr. Aspinall, Q.C., then Recorder of 
Liverpool, and Mr. Shee, afterwards Q.C. and Recorder of 
Liverpool ; Mr. Pickford had defended the prisoners at the 
request of the judge, Mr. Justice Butt. A remark made in 
court, overheard and repeated to the prosecution, gave to the 
police the clue that it was from certain " infallible fly-papers ” 
that the prisoners had procured arsenic. Similar papers were 
bought and submitted to Dr. Campbell Brown for analysis. 
There were also submitted to him some fluff from the corners 
of the prisoners’ pockets, and a bottle found on Mrs. Flanagan, 
to the outside of which some brownish substance was adhering. 
The analysis showed that arsenic could be obtained from the 
fly-papers by soaking, and that the fluff and the brown substance 
contained fibres of brown paper similar to that used in fly- 
papers, and also traces of arsenic. In 1873 Sir Charles (then 
Mr.) Russell had prosecuted at Durham Mary Ann Cotton, who 
had poisoned many persons by arsenic extracted from a mixture 
of soft soap and arsenic used to kill vermin. 

The jury that tried Mrs. Maybrick was a Lancashire, and 
not a Liverpool, jury, as has been incorrectly stated. Accord- 
ing to a statement made by the clerk of Mr. Bigham, Q.C., 
now Lord Mersey, who was in Liverpool during the trial, the 
precautions for secluding the jury during its progress were 
ecandalously neglected. They would appear to have spent some 


XXVI 



Introduction. 


of their time in the public billiard-room of a well-known hotel > 
mixing freely with the ordinary frequenters. 

The first part of the trial was taken up with the evidence as 
to the circumstances of Maybrick's death, when those facts 
already recapitulated were sworn to by the various witnesses, 
whose testimony and cross-examination are given fully in the 
report of the trial. How far their evidence proved conclusively 
the felonious administration of arsenic to Maybrick by his wife 
is a matter on which the reader must form his own judgment. 

Then followed the medical witnesses. Of these the pro- 
tagonists were, for the Crown, Dr. (afterwards Sir) Thomas 
Stevenson, the Government analyst, and for the defence Dr. 
Charles Tidy, of the London Hospital. It was not the first 
time these gentlemen had been opposed to each other in the 
witness-box. Both sides admitted that Maybrick had died of 
gastro -enteritis. But they disputed as to whether that disease 
had been set up by arsenic administered in poisonous doses 
between the 27th of April and the 8th of May, or by impure food, 
or by a chill contracted by Maybrick at the Wirral races. Any 
one of these conditions might have caused the disease. Ad- 
mitting the highest computation, that of Dr. Stevenson, it was 
agreed by both sides that the amount of arsenic found in May- 
brick’s body was less than half a grain. Was that small 
quantity of arsenic the remains of a fatal dose or doses, 
administered to Maybrick by his wife between these two dates, 
or was it what might have been reasonably expected to have been 
found in the body of a habitual taker of that drug 1* Another 


* In the 1883 edition of Taylor’s “Medical Jurisprudence,” edited by 
Dr. Stevenson (vol. I., p. 277), occurs the following passage on the subject, 
of the quantity of arsenic found in a body. “It need hardly be observed 
that the qiuintity of arsenic found in the stomach or other organs can 
convey no accurate idea of the quantity actually taken by the deceased, 
since more or less of the poison may have been removed by violent vomiting 
or purging, as well as by absorption and elimination. A large quantity 
found in the stomach indicates a large dose ; but the finding of a small 
quantity does not prove that the dose actually taken was small. Not- 
withstanding these very obvious causes for a removal of the poison from 
the body, there is a prejudice that the chemical evidence is defective, 
unless the quantity found is sutficient to cause death. The value of 
chemical evidence does not always depend on the discovery of any particular 
quantity of poison in the stomach, but the evidence of its presence should 
be clear, distinct, conclusive, and satisfactory. At the same time a 
reasonable objection may be taken to a dogmatic reliance upon the alleged 
discovery in a dead body of minute fractional portions of a grain.” 

xxvii 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

and equally important question was whether Maybrick had shown 
in the course of his illness the distinctive symptoms caused by 
arsenical poisoning. These are violent purging, violent sick- 
ness, acute pain in the pit of the stomach, cramps in the calves 
of the legs, and the presence, after death, of petechise, or small 
blood spots, on the membranes of the stomach. Of these 
symptoms only great sickness and some abdominal pain were 
present in marked and unmistakable form during Maybrick ^s ill- 
ness. The judge put it fairly in his summing up when he said. 

There is an absence of the characteristic symptoms which 
are necessary to establish the arsenical state of this man’s body.’' 
Dr. Stevenson, called for the prosecution, said that such 
symptoms were, however, “ very anomalous,” and that he had 

no doubt that Maybrick had died from the effects of a 
poisonous dose of arsenic.” Dr. Tidy and Dr. Macnamara, 
of the Lock Hospital, Dublin, called for the defence, were as 
positive that the absence of so many of these symptoms com- 
pletely negatived the suggestion of death from arsenical poison- 
ing. Sir Charles Russell, in dealing with this aspect of the 
case — the strong differences on these points between the doctors 
called by either side, their contrariety of opinion” — sub- 
mitted to the jury that they had no safe resting-place on 
which they could securely and satisfactorily justify to them- 
selves a finding that this was a death due to arsenical 
poisoning. ” 

For the defence Sir Charles Russell called three witnesses 
from America, who deposed to Maybrick’s habit of taking 
arsenic while in that country, and a chemist in Liverpool, who, 
from a photograph, identified Maybrick as a gentleman to whom 
he had frequently supplied a pick-me-up containing arsenic for 
eighteen months previous to April, 1888, in doses increasing 
from four to seven drops two to five times a day, or the 
equivalent to nearly one-third of a grain of white arsenic 
per day.* This chemist’s name was Edwin Garnett Heaton, 
and his place of business at the time of this gentleman’s 
visits Exchange Street East, Liverpool. In the police list of 
bottles found in Maybrick’s office is one described as Spirits 

* The official pharmacopecia solutions of arsenic contain 1 -per cent, of 
arsenic. 


XXVIll 



Introduction 


of sal volatile — Edwin G. Easton, Exchange Street East, Liver- 
pool. Contents — light-coloured liquid.’’ This circumstance 
may have escaped the notice of Sir Charles Russell, suggesting, 
as it does, some corroboration of Heaton’s evidence, if, as is 
more than likely, the police in their list had given the name on 
the bottle incorrectly. The evidence of a hairdresser was called 
as to the use of arsenic in toilet preparations, and of a chemist 
as to the purchase of fly-papers by ladies at times when no 
flies were about.” Sir James Poole, an ex-Mayor of Liverpool, 
said that Maybrick had admitted to him that he was in the 
habit of taking poisonous medicines,” to which Sir James 
had replied, “ How horrid 1 Don’t you know, my dear friend, 
that the more you take of these things the more you require, 
and you will go on till they carry you off ” — a wholesome but 
seemingly unavailing caution. 

At the close of his opening speech on Saturday, the 3rd of 
August, Sir Charles Russell told the judge that it was the wish of 
Mrs. Maybrick, expressed before the inquest, to make a state- 
ment, and he now asked that she should be allowed to do so. The 
Judge assented, but said that he could not allow it to be written, 
though it might be made from notes. Sir Charles said he should 
offer evidence that Mrs. Maybrick had made this statement 
before any evidence had been given at the inquest. It was 
agreed that Mrs. Maybrick should make her statement at the 
close of the case for the defence, and that in the meantime she 
should have no communication with any one outside. The 
Court then adjourned until Monday, the 5th. 

When on that day the evidence for the defence had concluded. 
Sir Charles Russell asked his client whether it was still her 
wish to make a statement; she said, ‘‘Yes.” Her statement 
resolved itself into an explanation on her part of her purchase 
of fly-papers and the incident of the meat juice. 

In regard to the first she had, she said, lost or mislaid in 
April a prescription for a face wash which she had been in the 
habit of using, given her by a Dr, Greggs, of Brooklyn, con- 
taining arsenic. As at the time of her husband’s illness she 
was suffering from a slight eruption on the face, she had wanted 
to get rid of it before the ball on the 30th of that month, and 
had heard from friends that a solution of arsenic could be 

xxix 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

obtained from fly-papers. With that purpose she had bought 
and soaked the papers. According to an affidavit sworn by her 
mother, the Baroness de Roques, and submitted to Mr. Asquith 
in 1894, the Baroness had, in 1890, found in a Bible belonging 
to Mrs. Maybrick, and given up to her solicitors by Maybrick’s 
brothers after his death, a prescription for a face wash, written 
by a Dr. Bay, of New York. This prescription is undated, and 
contains arsenic. It is signed Bay, 69 W. 23rd Street,” and 
on the back of it is the printed label of a New York pharmacy. 
From a certified copy in a Parisian chemist’s book this prescrip- 
tion was made up in Paris on the 17th of July, 1878. Neither 
on the prescription itself nor in the chemist’s book appears the 
name of the person for whom the prescription had been written 
by Dr. Bay. 

As to the presence of arsenic in the meat juice, Mrs. 
Maybrick’s explanation was that at her husband’s request she 
had put into the meat juice a powder which he had implored 
her to give him. 

Mrs. Maybrick concluded her statement by saying that a 
perfect reconciliation ” had taken place between her and her 
husband before his death, that she had made a full and free ” 
confession to him, and had received his entire forgiveness ” 
for the fearful wrong ” she had done him. In a signed note 
at the end of “ Her Own Story,” published after her release from 
prison, Mrs. Maybrick gives a rather unexpected sense to her 
confession of guilt to her husband. It had not been apparently 
a confession of her intimacy with Brierley. She writes — The 
motive {i.e., to get rid of her husband), however regarded, was 
surely no incentive to murder, as inasmuch as if I wanted to be 
free there was sufficient evidence in my possession, in the nature 
of infidelity and cruelty, to secure a divorce, and it was with 
regard to steps in that direction that I had already taken that 
I made confession to my husband after our reconciliation, and 
to which I referred as to the ‘ wrrong ’ I had done him, because 
of the publicity and ruin to his business it involved.” In this 
note Mrs. Maybrick states further that the expression sick 
unto death,’* underlined in her letter to Brierley of the 8th of 
May, is an American colloquialism, especially of the South, and 
commonly employed with reference to any illness at all serious,” 


XXX 



Introduction. 


and that, though the doctors may not at that date have con- 
sidered Maybrick^s illness likely to prove fatal, Mrs. Briggs, 
Nurse Gore, Mr. Michael Maybrick, and the patient himself 
considered the illness very serious. 

At the conclusion of Mrs. Maybrick’s statement Sir Charles 
Russell said he wished to call two witnesses to whom Mrs. 
Maybrick had made a similar statement before the inquest. 
When Sir Charles had told the Judge on the Saturday that he 
proposed to call evidence to this effect, the Judge had made no 
comment. Now Mr. Justice Stephen said that, very painful to 
him though it was, he could not allow such evidence to be given ; 
he could not, he said, go beyond what the law allowed. 

That Mrs. Maybrick was wise in making any statement no 
one would assert. She gained nothing by it. In the then 
unsatisfactory state of the law as to a prisoner's right to make 
any statement in court by way of evidence, such a course was 
bound to be very hazardous, the more so as the statement was 
made at the very close of her case immediately before the con- 
cluding address of counsel. Any corroboration it might have 
received was then inadmissible ; cross-examination of any kind 
was out of the question. As it was, Mr. Addison criticised with 
some severity this ‘‘ carefiilly prepared " statement. He asked 
why, in purchasing the fly papers to procure arsenic for cosmetic 
purposes, the prisoner had not given the chemists from whom 
she bought them the true reason, and, in regard to her giving 
her husband the powder in the meat juice, knowing the serious- 
ness of his illness, why had she not told the doctors at the time 
what she had done? The Judge, in summing up, commented on 
the fact that, though the substance of this statement must have 
been known for some time to her advisers, they had called no 
evidence in the course of the case to substantiate any of the 
facts asserted in it, and the circumstance that Sir Charles 
Russell in his concluding speech had taken so little notice of his 
client's statement was, he said, a matter of fair observation." 

The making of Mrs. Maybrick' s statement was a mistake, 
one for which her counsel were responsible, in the sense that 
it was made with their consent, and would not have been made 
had they forbidden it. It was felt that matters had been 
proved in the course of the trial which called for explanation. 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

and that, if such explanation were not given, the Judge might 
have commented on the fact that it was known that he would 
have allowed the prisoner to give an explanation if she could 
have done so. The law did not then, as it does to-day, invite a 
prisoner to give evidence ; he or she gave it by permission of 
the Judge alone, and under conditions very unsatisfactory for 
testing its reliability. Mrs. Maybrick volunteered her evidence, 
at her peril, and the result was all that might have been feared 
by her adv^isers. 

In the final speeches of counsel it is noticeable that Sir Charles 
Russell dwelt with great force on the contrariety of the medical 
evidence and the failure of the prosecution to fix with certainty 
the cause of death; while Mr. Addison, for the prosecution, 
dealt with the medical evidence very briefly in his address, and 
devoted most of his attention to the evidence that Mrs. 
Maybrick had administered arsenic to her husband. If, 
however, Sir Charles Russell w^as right, and the cause of death 
in grave doubt, then Mrs. Maybrick was clearly entitled to a 
verdict of acquittal on the charge against her, that of wilful 
murder. 

The summing up of Mr. Justice Stephen lasted tw^o days. It 
is anxious and painstaking, indeed over-anxious. At times 
the Judge seems almost over-weighted by the gravity and diffi- 
culties of the case. His grasp of the case is by no means sure, 
and there are errors in dates and facts and in the recapitulation 
of the evidence that would hardly have been expected in a Judge 
of Sir James Stephen's experience. The earlier part of the 
charge, occupying the first day and a portion of the second, 
dealt with the conflict of medical testimony, and, on the whole, 
may be said to have been favourable to the j)risoner. The 
second and concluding portion, dealing with the facts given in 
evidence as to the conduct of Mrs. Maybrick, her motive, and 
actions, was distinctly unfavourable. In linking the two 
portions of the case together the Judge said — “ There are three 
or four circumstances in the case which are circumstances of 
very grave suspicion indeed; and when you find a case in which 
this dreadful accusation is made, and is accompanied by circum- 
stances which, apart from the physical, chemical, and medical 
aspects of the case, are of such a character as are likely to 
xxxii 



Introduction. 


produce Buspicion, you must consider how far they corroborate 
the other evidence that has been given. . . . Supposing you 

find a man dying of arsenic, and it is proved that a person put 
arsenic in his plate, and if he gives an explanation that you do 
not consider satisfactory, that is a very strong question to be 
considered.” But the Judge did not, in his concluding words 
to the jury, revert to what the earlier portion of his charge 
had suggested, that there 'was serious doubt as to whether 
Maybrick had died of arsenic at all. He had, however, told 
the jury at its commencement, “ It is a necessary step, and it 
is essential to this charge, that the man died of poison, and 
the poison suggested is arsenic. This is the question you have to 
consider, and it must be the foundation of a judgment unfavour- 
able to the prisoner that he died of arsenic. 

After an absence of nearly three-quarters of an hour, the 
jury found Mrs. Maybrick guilty of murder. The Judge, with- 
out expressing any concurrence in the verdict, sentenced her to 
death.* As he left St, George’s Hall, Mr. Justice Stephen was 
the object of a hostile demonstration from the large crowd who 
had been awaiting the result of the trial. 

The verdict was received by the public at large with con- 
siderable astonishment. The Times of the following day 
wrote — It is useless to disguise the fact that the public are 
not thoroughly convinced of the prisoner’s guilt. It has been 
noticed by them that the doctor’s differed beyond all hope of 


* In the following passage from Sir James Stephen’s “ General View of 
the Criminal Law of England ” (1890), p. 173, he alludes to the case of Mrs. 
Maybrick. In writing on the question of criminal appeal he says, “In the 
course of the last five years (January, 1885, to September, 1889) 1216 
criminal cases came before me. . . . Practically one out of a thousand 

cases proved to be a case of false conviction. In twenty-eight of these 
references have been made to the Home Office. In one case only was a 
convict pardoned on the ground of his innocence. He was convicted of a 
burglary, and the mistress of the house came out of her room, met the 
burglar, and swore to the prisoner as the man. It was afterwards 
discovered that she was mistaken in his identity, though there were some 
other suspicious circumstances in the case. One of the cases was that of 

which attracted so much attention in the Summer Circuit 
or 1889. I mention it not in order to say anything about it, but merely in 
order to remark that it was the only case in which there could be any doubt 
about the facts. In the remaining twenty-six cases there was more or less 
ot a question as to the severity of the punishment inflicted, but little as to 
the tacts. There was one famous case in which a certain number of news- 
papers made a great noise, but the prisoner made a full confession before 
his execution. He was a man called Lipski, a Polish Jew.” 

xxxiii 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


agreement as to the cause of death/' Petitions for reprieve 
poured in on the Home Ofl&ce from all parts of the kingdom, 
the signatures to which were said to amount to nearly half a 
million. Among them were petitions from members of the 
Liverpool Exchange, and a number of medical practitioners in 
that city. These latter based their action on the ground that 
the symptoms of arsenical poisoning during life and after death 
were insufficient, that only the discovery of arsenic in the viscera 
suggested such a cause of death, and that the quantity of 
arsenic found in the viscera was less than in any previous case. 
The Times and most of the leading papers were inundated with 
correspondence from doctors, lawyers, arsenic-takers, and 
friends and acquaintances of the deceased. Perhaps one of the 
most sensible communications came from Mr. Auberon Herbert, 
who, in a letter to the Times ^ asked whether it was necessary 
to inquire what irritant in the way of food may have set up 
gastro -enteritis in May brick, when the sick man's stomach had 
for some days been used as a druggists' waste-pipe " for such 
a variety of drugs as strychnine, arsenic, jaborandi, cascara, 
henbane, morphia, prussic acid, papaine, iridin, and all the 
many other medicines that had been administered to the unfor- 
tunate patient in the course of his illness. In the same news- 
paper Mr. (now Lord Justice) Fletcher-Moulton, Q.C., wrote 
that the evidence for the prosecution had failed to negative the 
explanation that “ May brick's death had been due to natural 
causes operating upon a system in which a long course of 
arsenic -taking had developed a predisposition to gastro- 
enteritis." 

Meetings in favour of Mrs. May brick were held in London 
and Liverpool ; a petition in her favour was signed by a number 
of members of Parliament; and petitions were addressed direct 
to the Queen and to the Prince and Princess of Wales. 

Mr. Cleaver, Mrs. Maybrick's solicitor, forwarded an affi- 
davit of his own to the Home Secretary, in which he stated that 
on the 23rd of May, before any evidence had been given at the 
inquest, Mrs. Maybrick had told him that she had mentioned to 
both Dr. Humphreys and Mr. Michael Maybrick the fact that her 
husband was in the habit of taking a white powder, and she 
had gone on to say, At the time he was ill a white packet 


XXXIV 



Introduction. 


containing his powder wets on the table by the bed — certainly 
from the Simday to the Thursday — an ordinary packet, tied 
with string, open at the end. When the nurse came I cleared 
it of all the medicines on it, leaving the photos., books, &c., 
and took them to another table. As well as I remember, 
about 6 p.m. on Thursday he asked me for some of his powder. 
I told him the nurse would not permit me, and he suggested 
putting it into something he was taking. He was taking 
beef juice and milk. The milk jug was big, and so I took the 
beef juice into the dressing-room. There was very little 
powder in the packet, about as much as would lie on a three- 
penny bit; I put it all in. He pointed where the powder was 
among the books on the table. I threw the paper in which 
the powder was on the ground, and it should be there now if 
not removed. Mr. Cleaver stated that these words of Mrs. 
Maybrick were a transcript verbatim of his original note. 
Mr. Davies, the analyst, had given in evidence that the arsenic 
foimd in the meat juice had been put in in solution. If that 
were so — and his evidence was not quite positive on the point — 
either Mrs. Maybrick in her statement was telling an untruth, 
or the powder contained some other drug than arsenic, strych- 
nine perhaps. But it is a well-known fact, recorded in all the 
authoritative text-books, that cold water dissolves about J grain 
to 1 grain of arsenic per ounce (see Dixon Mann, “ Forensic 
Medicine and Toxicology, p. 4.54, 4th edition). Hence it is 
quite possible that one J of a grain of arsenic added in the solid 
form to a bottle of Valentine’s meat juice would completely 
dissolve, a fact confirmatory of Mrs. May brick's statement. It 
may be well here to state that, though no question was 
raised at the trial by either the prosecution or the 
defence as to the identity of this particular bottle of meat 
juice, some doubt was raised on the point after the trial. There 
were apparently three bottles of Valentine’s meat juice present 
in the house. One pui’chased on the 4th of May by Dr. 
Humphreys, some of which was given to Maybrick, but its use 
discontinued on account of his sickness ; a second fresh bottle 
opened by Nurse Gore, and said to have been tampered with by 
Mrs. Maybrick ; and a third foimd at Battlecrease House by 
Inspector Baxendale on the 18th of May. Of these three the two 


XXXV 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

last were given to Mr, Davies, the analyst; but the first had 
seemingly disappeared. No arsenic was found in the third 
bottle. 

Another affidavit forwarded at this time to the Home Secre- 
tary w’as that of a Mr. Morden Rigg, who had known Maybrick 
in America as a man always worrying about his health, and 
taking all sorts of medicines. At Wirral races, on the 27th of 
April, Maybrick had told Mr. and Mrs. Rigg, who were present, 
that he had that morning taken an overdose of strychnine. To 
Captain Irving, of the ‘ ' Germanic, who dined with the May- 
bricks about the same date, Maybrick made a similar state- 
ment. In an affidavit, Brierley, who had attended as a witness 
but had not been called, at the trial of Mrs. Maybrick stated 
that he had knowm the Maybricks for some two years, that he 
had never been improperly intimate with Mrs. Maybrick except 
at Flatman’s hotel in March, that they had then parted 
abruptly on the understanding that they were never to meet 
again except in public, and that he believed that her intimacy 
with him was Mrs. Maybrick’ s only act of infidelity towards her 
husband. 

On his return to London from Liverpool, Mr. Justice Stephen 
had a long interview with the Home Secretary. That office 
was held at the time by Mr. Henry Matthews, Q.C., M.P. (now^ 
Viscount Llandaff), who, before taking office under Lord Salis- 
bury, had had a distinguished career at the bar. On the 16th 
another conference, lasting four hours, was held, at which the 
Lord Chancellor, Lord Halsbury, was present. Among other 
witnesses Dr. Tidy was summoned. 

In the Lancet of the 17th appealed a long article highly 
unfavourable to Mrs. Maybrick. The British Medical Journal of 
the 10th had contained an article hardly less unfavourable. In 
their issue of the 17th they published letters from seven professors 
of medical jurisprudence in different parts of the country, whose 
opinion they had asked on the justice of the conviction ; of these, 
four supported and three dissented from the verdict. In the 
same issue, the Liverpool correspondent of the newspaper sent a 
long article pointing out the “ striking anomalies ” in the case, 
which removed it from the category of those in which there is no 
room for doubt. 


XXXVl 



Introduction 


Further prolonged conferences were held between the Home 
Secretary and Mr. Justice Stephen on the 20th and 2 let, at the 
second of which Mr. Addison was present. Sir Charles Russell, 
who was in Homburg, took no pai*t in these conferences. But 
immediately after the trial he had sent a printed memorandum 
to the Home Secretary in which he pointed out that, though 
the means of poisoning her husband were undoubtedly within 
reach of Mrs. Maybrick, there was no direct evidence of her 
having administered arsenic to him, that the symptoms were 
agreed by all to be those of gastro-enteritis, but that, while 
some witnesses attributed the disease to arsenical poisoning, 
there was a strong body of evidence that it was not so. 

The gallows had already been erected in Walton jail, within 
hearing of Mrs. Maybrick, when, on the 22nd of August, the 
Home Secretarj^’s decision was announced. It ran as follows : — 

'' The Home Secretary, after fullest consideration, and 
after taking the best legal and medical advice that could 
be obtained, has advised Her Majesty to respite the capital 
sentence on Florence Maybrick, and to commute the punish- 
ment to penal servitude for life, inasmuch as, although the 
evidence leads clearly to the conclusion that the prisoner 
administered and attempted to administer arsenic to her 
husband with intent to murder, yet it does not wholly 
exclude a reasonable doubt whether his death was in fact 
caused by the administration of arsenic. 

“ This decision is understood not to imply the slightest 
reflection on the able and experienced practitioners who 
gave evidence, or on the tribunal by which the prisoner 
was tried. 

We understand the course adopted has the concurrence 
of the learned judge/’ 

In commenting on this decision the following day, the Times 
said, ‘‘ The case against Mrs. Maybrick was and remains a case 
of terribly strong suspicion, but suspicion which, after all is 
said, just misses moral certainty.” The jury, it added, might 
have found a verdict of unsuccessful attempt to murder, if it 
had been put to them, but, as it was not suggested to them, 
could hardly have been expected to do so. Its criticism of the 
Home Secretary’s finding is amiably cynical — “ It makes idlings 

xxxvii 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


comfortable all round — presumably even, though in a strictly 
limited degree, for Mrs. Maybrick, who, in the words of Sir 
Charles Russell, was to suffer imprisonment on the assump- 
tion of Mr. Matthews that she had committed an offence, for 
which she was never tried by the constitutional authority, and 
of which she has never been adjudged guilty.” 

In 1891 an opportunity occurred which might conceivably 
have been used to re-open the whole facts of Mrs. Maybrick’s 
case. Mr. Cleaver, Mrs. Maybrick’s solicitor, as assignee of a 
policy of insurance for ^2000 on the life of James Maybrick, 
executed in favour of his wife, brought an action to recover 
that sum from the Mutual Reserve Fund Life Association. Had 
the case come to trial before a jury, and had Mrs. Maybrick 
gone into the witness-box, it would have been legally permissible 
on the issue to have raised afresh the question of her guilt or 
innocence, and to have gone once again into the facts of her 
case. As it was, the case was decided on a question of law, 
raised by the pleadings, when it was held by the Court of Appeal 
that Mr. Cleaver as Mrs. Maybrick^s assignee had not made 
out his claim. The case is reported in the Law Reports, Q.B.D. 
1892. 

In 1892, when, by a change of Government, Mr. 
Asquith succeeded Mr. Matthews at the Home Office, a deter- 
mined attempt was made to procure the release of Mrs. 
Maybrick. An elaborate brief was prepared by Messrs. Lumley 
& Lumley, solicitors, setting forth in full detail all possible 
points in Mrs. Maybrick ^s favour, alleging serious misdirec- 
tion on many points of evidence by the Judge, and emphasising 
the medical disagreement in the case. The conclusions sub- 
mitted were — 

That there was no conclusive evidence that Mr. Maybrick 
died from other than natural causes. 

That there was no conclusive evidence that he died 
from arsenical poisoning. 

That there was no evidence that the prisoner adminis- 
tered or attempted to administer poison to him. 

That there was no evidence that the prisoner, if she 
did administer or attempt to administer arsenic, did so 
with intent to murder. 

xxxviii 



Introduction 


That the Judge, in summing up, placed himself in a 
position where his mind was open to the influence of public 
discussion and prejudice, to which was probably attribut- 
able the evident change in his summing up between the 
first and second days ; and he also assumed facts against 
the prisoner which were not proved. 

That the jury were allowed to separate and frequent 
places of public resort and entertainment during such 
summing up. 

That the verdict was against the weight of evidence. 

That the jury did not give the prisoner the benefit of 
the doubt suggested by the disagreement of expert witnesses 
on a material issue in the case. 

That the Home Secretary should have remitted the 
entire sentence by reason of his being satisfied that there 
existed a measurable doubt of her guilt which, had it been 
taken into consideration at the time, would have entitled 
her to an acquittal. 

This brief was submitted to four eminent counsel with a view 
to an opinion as to the possibility under English law of obtain- 
ing a new trial. In an opinion signed by Sir Charles Russell, 
Sir Harry Poland, Mr. Fletcher- Moulton, Q.C., and Mr. 
Reginald Smith, Q.C., these gentlemen wrote — “ In English 
criminal procedure there is no possibility of procuring a 
re-hearing in the case of felony, where the verdict has been 
found by a properly constituted jury upon an indictment which 
is correct in form. This rule is absolute, unless circumstances 
have transpired, and have been entered upon the record, which, 
when there appearing, would invalidate the tribunal and reduce 
the trial to a nullity by reason of its not having been before 
a properly constituted tribunal. None of the matters proposed 
to be proved go this length.’^ But, these gentlemen added, 
had a Court of Criminal Appeal existed, these would have 
been matters for its grave consideration. 

Messrs. Lumley's brief was forwarded, through the United 
States Ambassador, Mr. Lincoln, to Mr. Blaine, then the 
American Secretary of State. Mr. Blaine replied that, since 
through her English marriage Mrs. Maybrick had lost her 
American citizenship, he could not act officially in the matter. 


XXXIX 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


On the subject of her marriage he wrote — That she may have 
been influenced by the foolish ambition of many American 
girls for a foreign marriage, and have descended from her own 
rank to that of her husband’s family, which seems to have 
been somewhat vulgar, must be forgiven to her youth, since 
she was only eighteen at the time of her marriage.” He 
then went on to say, with gi'eater relevance, that there was a 
strong belief among American lawyers in the illegality of her 
imprisonment, and urged the Ambassador to do what he 
individually could for the relief of an American woman help- 
lessly enduring a great wrong.” A petition from America, 
signed by Mr. Blaine, Cardinal Gibbons, the Vice-President, 
some of the Federal Ministers, and certain officers of high 
rank in the army, was sent to Mr. Matthews shortly before the 
change of Ministry, asking for Mrs. May brick’s release on the 
ground that ” the conduct of her trial had resulted in a pro- 
found impression of a miscarriage of justice.” 

On Mr. Asquith’s accession to office a petition, signed by 
over 3000 persons, praying for a public inquiry into the case, 
was presented to him, but their prayer was not granted. 

In 1894 a fresh bodv of evidence was submitted to Mr. 
Asquith in the form of affidavits. Three affidavits from Mrs. 
May brick’s mother, the Baroness de Roques, her servant, and 
a solicitor’s clerk in Paris, described the finding of Dr. Bay, 
of New York’s, prescription for a face wash and its making 
up by a Parisian chemist in 1878, as already narrated. 

An interesting affidavit was that of Mr. Valentine Blake, 
the son of an Irish baronet. Mr. Blake had assisted a Mr, 
W. B. Nation in developing a process by which rhea grass, or 
ramie, could be used as a substitute for cotton. This result 
was achieved hy the use of chemicals, among them arsenic. In 
January^ 1889, Mr. Nation sent Mr. Blake to see Mr. James 
Maybrick, a Liverpool cotton broker, with a view to his assist- 
ance in placing the perfected ramie on the Liverpool market 
as a substitute for cotton. In the course of interviews 
Maybrick asked Mr. Blake, as a matter of business, what 
chemicals were used in perfecting the fabric, and Mr. Blake 
told him that arsenic was one of them. In course of further 
conversation Maybrick asked Mr. Blake if he had heard of 

xl 



Introduction. 


the Styrian peasants, who were well known arsenic takers and 
throve on it, and mentioned De Quincey^s '' Confessions of an 
Opium-eater/^ Mr. Blake expressed astonishment at De 
Quincey having been able to take as much as 900 drops of 
laudanum in a day. Maybrick said that arsenic was much the 
same to him, it was " meat and liquor to him.’^ I don't 
tell everybody," he said, '' I take it when I can get it, but 
the doctors won't put any into my medicine except now and 
then; that only tantalises me." Finally Maybrick asked 
Mr. Blake to get him some arsenic, as he found a difficulty in 
obtaining it in Liverpool. Mr. Blake agreed to give 
Maybrick what arsenic he had, in return for Maybrick 's help 
in pushing the ramie product. In February Mr. Blake saw 
Maybrick again, and gave him about 150 grains, some white " 
and some black " arsenic, in three separate pap)er packets. 
At the time of the trial Mr. Blake wrote to Mrs. Maybrick' s 
solicitor giving this information, but received no reply to his 
letter. As he was at that time greatly concerned over the 
loss of his son at sea, he did not pursue the matter further. 
Seeing in the newspaper in 1894 that the case had been 
reopened, he communicated with Mr. Harris, who was then 
acting for Mrs. Maybrick and her mother. Mr. Nation cor- 
roborated by affidavit Mr. Blake’s statements as to his associa- 
tion with him in business and his visit to Maybrick in Liverpool. 

Mr. Blake’s affidavit is of interest as going some way to 
explain possibly the large quantity of arsenic, some “ blswik " 
arsenic, that is arsenic mixed with charcoal, and some white 
arsenic in solution, found in Maybrick’s house. There seems 
no reason on the face of it to doubt the truth of the facts 
stated by Mr, Blake. It becomes an interesting question 
whether the very large quantity of arsenic, undoubtedly found 
in Maybrick' s house after his death, had been procured by 
Maybrick in order to gratify his liking for arsenic as a drug, 
or by Mrs. Maybrick for the purpose of a face wash or the 
murder of her husband. Unless the arsenic was placed there 
by some other person, there are no other ways of accounting 
for its presence. There is no evidence of Mrs. Maybrick having 
procured such a considerable quantity of arsenic. If Mr. 
Blake's affidavit be correct, there is some evidence of its 

3di 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

having been procured by May brick. If Mrs. May brick knew 
of the presence of so much arsenic in the house, why was it 
necessary for her to purchase fly-papers? 

Another affidavit sent to Mr. Asquith was that of Mr. John 
Fleming, of Halifax, Ontario, master mariner. He had known 
Maybrick in Norfolk, Virginia, somewhere between 1882 and 
1884, He stated that he had seen Maybrick, at his office, put 
some grey powder into some food which he was cooking. 
Maybrick said to him, You would be horrified, I dare say, 
if you knew what this (powder) is — it is arsenic. '' Mr. Fleming 
expressed astonishment. Maybrick said, We all take some 
poison more or less ; for instance, I am now taking arsenic 
enough to kill you. I take this arsenic once in a while because 
I find it strengthens me.^^ Mr. Fleming said that since then 
he had frequently seen Maybrick putting a similar powder into 
his food. At the time of Mrs. Maybrick’s trial Mr. Fleming 
was in the Dutch East Indies. 

Neither with Mr. Asquith, however, nor with his successor, 
Sir Matthew White Ridley, were the efforts of Mrs. Maybrick' s 
supporters successful. But one man continued unremitting 
in his efforts to procure her release — that man was Sir Charles 
Russell. Shortly after he became Lord Chief Justice of 
England, in 1895, Lord Russell wrote to Mrs. Maybrick in 
reply to a letter which she had sent him — I beg to assure 
you that I have never relaxed my efforts, where any suitable 
opportunity offered, to urge that your release ought to be 
granted. I feel as strongly as I have felt from the first that 
you ought never to have been convicted, and this opinion I 
have clearly expressed to Mr. Asquith, but I am sorry to say 
hitherto without effect. Rest assured that I shall renew my 
representatoiis to the incoming Home Secretary, whoever he 
may be, as soon as the Government is formed and the Home 
Secretary in a position to deal with such matters.’^ 

In accordance with his promise, as soon as Sir M. W. Ridley 
had succeeded Mr. Asquith at the Home Office, Lord Russell 
wrote strongly urging Mrs. Maybrick’s release. “ The founda- 
tion,’’ he wrote, “ on which the whole case for the Crown rested 
was rotten, for there was in fact no mrirder ; on the contrary, 
the deceased had died from natural causes.” This, he said, 
xlii 



Introduction. 


was the stress of the argument, but had the case been one of 
an attempt to murder, then the fact that the alleged circum- 
stances pointing to a guilty intent on Mrs. Maybrick’s part 
** were capable in part of being explained, in part of being 
minimised, and in part of being attacked as unreliably vouched, 
cannot, I think, be doubted by any one who has with a critical 
eye scanned the evidence.’^ If, added Lord Russell, he were 
called upon to advise, as head of the Criminal Judicature of this 
country, '' I should advise you that Florence Maybrick ought 
to be allowed to go free.” 

In 1898 Lord Russell wrote again to the Home Secretary. 
The case, he said, reflected discredit on the administration of 
the criminal law — I think my protest ought to be attended 
to at last.” He pointed out that Mrs. Maybrick had now served 
a period of imprisonment four times as long as the minimum 
punishment fixed by law for the commission of a crime of which 
she had never been convicted. His protest was ineffectual. In 
1900, the year of his death. Lord Russell, who was then on 
circuit, visited Mrs. Maybrick in Aylesbury Prison, and spent a 
short time alone with her in her cell. He wrote to the Home 
Secretary telling him that he had seen the wretched woman, 
looking wretched, although I believe she is not ill in the ordinary 
sense.” He went on to I'epeat his objections to Mr. Matthews’ 
original decision, and commented on the fact that Mr. Justice 
Stephen, in his charge, had failed to give due weight to the 
entirely reliable evidence of Sir James Poole as to May brick’s 
habit of dosing himself, which might well have accounted for the 
infinitesimal quantity of arsenic found in the body. 

Whether Lord Russell believed in the complete innocence of 
Mrs. Maybrick has been made the subject of some not very 
profitable discussion. Whatever his actual belief, it is unlikely, 
having regard to the traditions of his profession and his pro- 
fessional connection with the case as Mrs. Maybrick’ s advocate, 
that he would have given expression to such a belief one way or 
the other. In 1911 the question was raised by some comments 
of Mr. G. R. Sims in the Referee newspaper on the case. 
Dr. Forbes Winslow wrote stating that Lord Russell had 
always believed in Mrs. Maybrick ’s innocence. In reply, the 
late Sir George Lewis, a personal friend of Russell’s, wrote to 

xUii 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

the Referee on the 1st of May, '' In justice to a great advocate 
and a great judge, permit me to say that I had many con- 
versations in connection with this case with Sir Charles Russell 
both before and subsequent to the trial, and that at no time 
did he suggest that Mrs. May brick was innocent. His conten- 
tion always was that the quantity of poison found in her 
husband^s body was not sufficient to cause his death, and for 
that reason alone she ought not to have been convicted, not- 
withstanding the evidence of her purchase and possession of the 
poison, which the jury decided she administered, and which 
they were satisfied was sufficient to have caused her husband^a 
death.'’ 

Tlie latter part of Sir George Lewis’ letter does not alto- 
gether coincide with Lord Russell’s letter to the Home Secretary 
in 1892, quoted above. In that he says that, apart from the 
medical question, the alleged circumstances showing Mrs. 
Maybrick’s guilt of an intent to murder were such as could 
have been successfully explained, minimised, or attacked. In 
the course of a case tried before Lord Russell as Chief Justice, 
Monson v. Tussaud, an action for libel brought by a man of 
the name of Monson against Madame Tussaud ’s for placing a 
figure of him in the ante-room of the Chamber of Horrors, the 
name of Mrs. May brick was mentioned. Lord Russell, in 
alluding to her case, said, “ a woman who, in the opinion of 
some of those who had most knowledge of the facts, should 
not have been convicted.” 

Mrs. Maybrick, having served fifteen years’ imprisonment in 
Woking and Aylesbury Prisons, was released from the latter in 
January, 1904. Shortly after her release she left England for 
America. 

In spite of the strong arguments of Lord Esher, then Master 
of the Rolls, Lord Fitzgerald, and others, the Maybrick case 
did not lead immediately to the institution of a Court of 
Criminal Appeal. It required the additional impetus of the 
Beck case, some fifteen years later, to bring about the establish- 
ment of such a Court. 


xliv 



Leading; Dates in the Maybrick Case. 


1881. — James Maybrick marries Florence Elizabeth Chandler in 
America. 

1884. — Mr. and Mrs. Maybrick settle in Liverpool. 

March 22nd to 24th, 1889. — Mrs. Maybrick spends two days and 
nights with Brierley at Flatman’s Hotel in London. 

March 28th. — Mrs. Maybrick returns to Liverpool. 

March 29th. — Mr. and Mrs. Maybrick and Brierley are at the 
Grand National Steeplechase. On returning home there is 
a violent quarrel between Maybrick and his wife. 

March 30th. — Dr. Hopper effects a reconciliation between Mr. 
and Mrs. Maybrick. 

April 14th and 20th. — Maybrick consults Dr. Fuller in London. 

April 22nd. — Ma^'brick returns to Liverpool. 

April 23rd or 24th (about). — Mrs. Maybrick buys fly-papers from 
Wokes, and is seen soaking them in w^ater by her servants. 

April 26th. — Maybrick receives by post bottle of medicine from 
London. 

April 27th. — Maybrick taken ill. He goes to Wirral Races. 

April 28th. — Dr. Humphreys called in. 

April 29th. — Mrs. Maybrick buys fly-papers from Hanson. 

April 30th. — Fancy Dress Ball attended by Mrs. Maybrick. 

May 1st and 2nd. — Maybrick takes lunch at his oflice, prepared 
at home. 

May 3rd. — Maybrick ill again. Dr. Humphreys sent for. 

May 6th. — Brierley writes to Mrs. Maybrick telling her lie is 
leaving England for a few w^eeks. 

May 7th. — Dr. Carter called in. 

May 8th. — Alice Yapp makes a communication to Mrs. Briggs. 
Mr. Michael Maybrick sent for from London. 

Alice Yapp opens Mrs. May brick’s letter to Brierley, 
in which she writes that her husband is “ sick unto deaths 

May 9th. — Mr. Michael Maybrick communicates his suspicions to 
Drs. Carter and Humphreys. 

Nurse Gore arrives. Incident of the meat-juice. 

May 11th. — Maybrick dies. 

xlv 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


May 13 th. — Post-mortem on May brick. 

May 14th. — Mrs. Maybrick placed under arrest. Mrs. Maybrick’s 
second letter to Brierley. Inquest opened. 

May 18th. — Magisterial investigation opened in Mrs. Maybrick’s 
bedroom. She is removed to Walton Jail. 

May 28th. — Inquest resumed. 

May 30th. — May brick’s body exhumed. 

June 6th. — At resumed inquest Mr. Davies, analyst, gives evidence 
of discovery of arsenic in May brick’s body. Coroner’s jury 
return verdict of wilful murder against Mrs. Maybrick. 

June 14th. — Magisterial hearing concluded. Mrs. Maybrick com- 
mitted for trial. 

July 26th. — Mr. Justice Stephen charges Grand Jury at Liverpool 
Assizes. True bill returned. 

July 31st. — Trial of Mrs. Maybrick commences. 

August 7th. — Mrs. Maybrick convicted of murder and sentenced 
to death. 

August 22nd. — The Home Secretary commutes her sentence to 
one of penal servitude for life. 

January 25th, 1904, — Mrs. Maybrick released from Aylesbury 
Prison. 


xlvi 



THE TRIAL. 


Liverpool Summer Assizes, 
Wednesday, 31st July, 1889. 


Jvbdge — 

Sir JAMES FITZJAMES STEPHEN, K.C.S.I., one o£ 
the Judges of the Queen’s Bench Division of the 
High Court of Justice. 


Govunstl for the Crown — 

Mr. John Addison, Q.C., M.P. 

Mr. W. R. McConnell. 

Mr. Thomas Swift. 

Instructed on behalf of the Treasury by Messrs. Eaton 
& Swift. 


Counsel for the Pnriaoner — 

Sir Charles Russell, Q.C., M.P, 

Mr. William Pickford. 

Instructed by Messrs. Cleaver, Holden & Co. 





Mr. Jolin Addison, Q.C., M.P. 





opening Speech for the Prosecution. 


Florbnob Ei/Izabbth Matbmcb:, aged twenty-six, was indicted 
Sot having, at Garston, on the 11th of May, feloniously, wilfully, 
and of her malice aforethought, killed and murdered one James 
Hay brick. 

On being called upon the prisoner pleaded not guilty. 

The following jury was empanelled and sworn : — 

Thomas Wainwright, Plumber, 32 Neville Street, Southport 
(foreman). 

T. Ball, Plumber, Ormskirk. 

A. Harrison, Woodturner, Bootle. 

W. Walmsley, Provision Dealer, North Meols. 

W. H. Gaskell, Plumber, North Meols. 

J. Taylor, Farmer, Melling. 

G. H. Welsby, Grocer, St. Helens. 

B. G. Brook, Ironmonger, St. Helens. 

J. W. Sutton, Milliner, North Meols. 

J. Tyrer, Painter, Wigan. 

J. Bryers, Farmer, Scarth Hill, Bickerstaflfe. 

J. Thierens, Baker, Ormskirk. 


Opening Speech for the Prosecution, 

Mr. Addison — May it please your lordship— Gentlemen of the *** Addlaon 
jury, it is my duty, in conjunction with my learned friends, 
to lay before you evidence in support of the indictment you have 
just heard read, and to make a statement to you from that 
evidence in regard to the facts upon which they rely on behalf 
of the prosecution. Each and every one of you know that 
the charge against the prisoner at the bar is that she murdered 
her husband by administering to him doses of arsenic, and it 
would be idle in me to suppose that each and every one of you 
do not know some of the circumstances of the case either by 
means of the Press or in other ways, and that probably you have 

discussed the matter, but I know equally well that now 

Sir Charles Russell leaned across and whispered to Mr. 

Addison, who, nodding assent, said — It has been suggested to 
me, and probably it is right, that, except the scientific witnesses, 
all the witnesses be requested to leave the Court. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — I understand that all arrangements 
have been made for their comfort. 

[The witnesses then withdrew with the exception of the first 
witness, Mr. Michael Maybrick, who was allowed to remain.] 

Mr. Addison — I was saying, when I corrected myself, as it 
were, that it would be idle in me to suppose that each and 
every one of you were not acquainted to a very considerable 

3 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

Mr Addison d^^ee with the facts of the case, either from seeing the case, 
or hearing it, or reading of it in the public prints ; but I know 
perfectly well that now you have ceased to be irresponsible 
members of the community, and are a jury who are sworn to 
decide the case according to law between the prisoner and the 
Crown, you will have no difficulty whatever in dismissing from 
your minds all that you have so heard and seen. Even the 
statement I am about to make to you is only intended to enable 
you — and I hope it may enable you — the more readily to know 
the evidence we are going to call, and to follow it when we 
call it. There is no other fact whatsoever. It is upon the 
evidence, and upon the evidence alone, and upon the impression 
that it makes upon your minds, who are the true judges of this 
case, that the issue must depend. The prosecution have a 
simple duty to perform. We have by means of that evidence 
to produce in your minds a firm and clear conviction that this 
woman is guilty. If when you have heard the evidence, when 
you have heard it sifted and criticised and analysed by my 
friend Sir Charles Russell ; when you have heard other evidence 
called by him to vary and contradict it ; if at the end of the 
patient attention you give to this evidence you find your minds 
In doubt and hesitation, or even discussion amongst yourselves 
that you are not able to remove, then we shall have failed in 
the duty incumbent upon us, and in what we are bound to do 
before we can ask your verdict for the Crown. We shall have 
failed in that, and it will be undoubtedly your duty to give 
the benefit of this strong hesitation and doubt to the prisoner at 
the bar. 

With these hardly necessary words of introduction, let me 
tell you what the facts are, as upon my present information I 
understand them. James May brick, the husband of this woman, 
whose death she is charged with causing, belonged to a Liverpool 
family and was a native of Liverpool. He was in the cotton 
business either as a broker or as a merchant, and in the earlier 
part of his career seems to have been called a good deal to 
America, his business connection being between America and 
Liverpool, and it was in this way, in 1881, and either in America 
or in coming home from America, he made the acquaintance of 
the prisoner at the bar, who is of American family and by birth 
an American, and they were married in London in July, 1881. 
For some time after their marriage he still was taken a good deal 
away to America ; but, about four or five years ago, he settled, 
so to speak, permanently in Liverpool, carrying on his business 
entirely here, and having an office in the Knowsley Building^, 
which is somewhere off Tithebarn Street. Of the marriage there 
were two children; there is a boy of seven years of age and 
there is a girl of Hiree years of age. After settling permanently 
in Liverpool he lived somewhere in the neighbourhood, but 


4 



Opening Speech for the Prosecution. 

about some two or three years ago he went to live with his Mr Aiiitom 
wife and family at a place called Battlecrease Hoiise, which is 
a place at Aigburth or Garston, or in the neighbourhood of 
Aigburth. From and at the beginning of this year and during 
the last year he lived there with his wife and two children, and 
the remainder of his household, consisting of four of a family 
and servants. There was a nurse who had lived longer with, 
and was more connected with, the master and mistress than 
any of the other servants, by name Alice Yapp. There was a 
housemaid of the name of Brierley, a cook of the name of 
Humphreys, and a housemaid waitress of the name of Cad- 
wallader. These four servants, with the master and mistress 
and two children, constituted the inmates of Battlecrease House. 

At the time of his death Mr. Maybrick was a man of about forty- 
nine or fifty years of age. His wife was younger, being some- 
where between twenty- seven and thirty years of age. I do 
not accurately know what her age was, but she was about that. 

I do not think I need call your attention to anything particular 
in their mode of living up to this time. 

Mr. Maybrick was a man who, so far as his friends and rela- 
tions knew, was a strong and healthy man, going regularly to 
his office every day, as a cotton broker in Liverpool. There was 
no doubt that though he was a man generally spoken of as a 
healthy man, he was a man who complained very much about 
his liver and nerves. He used often to complain of being out 
of sorts; and, from 1881 , Dr. Hopj)er, of Rodney Street, who 
was the medical attendant of the family, prescribed for him 
from time to time. Mr. Maybrick complained of pains in the 
head and of numbness in his limbs. This numbness he seems 
to have complained of more than once, and he seemed to have 
a sort of dread that it would lead to paralysis. Dr. Hopper 
aeems to have treated him as a little short-hipped, as it was 
called in these matters, and gave him occasion^y medicines, 
such as were given to people of sedentary habits, and out of 
sorts. Mr. Maybrick had three brothers — Mr. Michael 
Maybrick, who, I believe, was and is a distinguished musician 
in London ; there is a brother Thomas, a shipping agent, carry- 
ing on his business in Manchester ; and Edwin, who is a cotton 
merchant in Liver{>ool, living in Rodney Street, but who paraes 
half his time in America-dividing his time between Liverpo<d 
and America. Dr. Hopper will tell you how from time to time 
he used to give Mr. Maybrick nerve tonics, having the usual 
ingredients of such tonics, and including nux vomica and 
homcBopathic doses of strychnine and medicine of that kind, 
wid will further tell you that, with the exception of that, he 
never knew Mr. Maybrick to be ill during the eight years sinoe 
the marriage. His brothers, all three, speak of him as a heaHhy 
and strong man ; and in addition to them you will have befoiw 

i 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


Mr AidlM» you the two clerks in the office. One (Smith, the book-^ 
keeper) had been with him about four years, and he will tell 
you that he occasionally complained of his liver, and discussed 
homcBopathy. Lowry, the other man in the office, will speak 
to the same effect; and you will find that he was undoubtedly 
one of those men who, as people suffering in this way often 
are, was fond of discussing his ailments very freely, and listen- 
ing to other people as to what they did with their ailments in 
adopting pills and doses, and often attended very much to the 
recommendations they would make. I have tried to tell you 
all that he ever suffered from, as far as we know, apart from 
that which we are going to investigate. With regard to the 
servants who lived in the house, including the nurse, they knew 
nothing about these matters. They considered their master a 
healthy and strong man, going regularly to his office — a regular 
condition of things up to the end of last year and the beginning 
of this, to which I need not now go back. 

The first date in connection with this case to which we may 
have to draw your attention is the 16th March in this year, and 
all through this case, when you are watching the evidence, I 
should ask you, as a very convenient note to yourselves, to 
follow closely, as it were, the different occurrences that occurred 
from time to time. Upon the 16th March, Mrs. Maybrick had 
to telegraph to London to a hotel in Henrietta Street, Cavendish 
Square, for a sitting-room and bedroom. You will have before 
you the letters which she wrote, and which will be put in 
evidence. The effect of them is this — On the 16th March she 
telegraphed for a sitting-room and bedroom at this private hotel. 
Having received no answer, she wrote again to the landlord, and 
told him that the rooms were engaged for Mrs. Maybrick, of 
Manchester, and she wrote again as to details as to the sort of 
dinner which ** Mr. and Mrs. Maybrick would like to have, 
Baying that her “sister-in-law” was inexperienced in such 
matters. On the 18th March (Monday) she wrote again to this 
hotel, saying that Mr. and Mrs, Maybrick would arrive on the 
21st (Thursday), that her sister-in-law would stay there a week 
— from the 21st to the 28th — and that she was not particular 
as to price. '' You have her then writing these letters from the* 
16th to the 18th March, engaging this sitting-room and bed- 
room for her “ sister-in-law. '' On the 21st March (Thursday)* 
she left Battlecrease House to go to London. You will find that 
in the evidence which occurs later on, and the reason she gave 
her husband for going to London was that she had an aunt who 
was going to undergo an operation under the care of Sir James 
Paget, and the aunt wanted her niece— that was herself — ^to be 
present, and she was going to London for a week for this 
purpose. This she told the nurse Yapp, and her letters were 
to directed to the Grand Hotel, London. Having done that^ 

6 



Opening Speech for the Prosecution. 

she went straight to London to this place. She arrived there Mv AdAlaon 
on Thursday, the 21st of last March, at about one o'clock; and 
at about half -past six a gentleman, whose name we do not 
know, but who never appears again as far as we know anything 
about him in this case, came and fetched her. And they went 
away together in a cab, and at eleven at night, when the waiter 
went to bed, he saw they had not returned. That was on the 
21st. But, however that may be, the next morning she was 
undoubtedly at breakfast with a Liverpool gentleman, a cotton 
broker, living in Huskisson Street here, whose name cannot 
possibly be kept out of the case, a gentleman named Brierley. 

She was found with him on Friday, the 22nd, and on Saturday, 
the 23rd. They lived there together as man and wife, slept 
together , and went out together ; and on the Sunday — ^you will 
remember she took rooms for a week — about one o'clock they 
unexf^tedly left together, he paying the bill. Gentlemen, what 
she did for the rest of the week until Thursday, the 28th, when 
she was timed to come home, I do not know. But on the 28th 
of March (Thursday), exactly a week after she had gone away 
to London, she returned to Battlecrease House. 

The next day, the 29th of March, the Grand ^National was 
^n near Liverpool, and both she and her husband went there. 

JBte came back at seven o'clock at night, and it was evident to 
his servants that there had been a quarrel between them. She 
followed ten minutes after him. He began nursing the youngest 
child, without speaking to her or she to him. Presently a cab 
was sent for, as if she was going away ; and then the servants 
heard him say , Such a scandal as this will be all over Liver- 

pool to-morrow." She went down to the haU with her hat on 
apparently waiting for the cab ; and then he was heard to sayi 
If you once leave this house, you will never enter it again," 

A sort of quarrel was going on, but the nurse put her arm round 
the prisoner s waist and coaxed her upstairs ; and, as the 
prisoner and her husband were evidently not on speaking terms 
she ^ade up a bed for her in the dressing-room, which adjoins 
the bedroom, where she slept that night. 

Saturday, the 30th March, early in the morning, Mrs, 

Maybrick went to see an old friend of the family, Mrs. Brims 
who h^ known them both since they were married. Mrs' 

Maybrick went undoubtedly with the intention of getting a 
separation from her husband. She complained to Mrs. Brii^ 

her husband had complained of her because at^e 
Grand National Meeting, in spite of his orders, she had left 
S to go with Mr. Brierley. She said, further, that 

she had quarrel!^ with her husband, and that he had hit her 

^ Mrs. Brigga did 

what she could to settle matters. The two went to Dr 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


9r AddiMi Hopper, and the prisoner there repeated what she had told 
Mrs. Brigigs. He persuaded her not to try a separation, but 
she said she could not bear her husband to come near her. 
They afterwards went to Mrs. Briggs* solicitor, and there there 
was a similar conversation, after which the prisoner and Mrs. 
Briggs went to the post office, and there the former desired to 
have a separate letter box. She afterwards returned home, and 
Dr. Hopper a short time afterwards, acting both in his capacity 
of medical adviser and as a friend of the family, came up to try 
to make peace. He heard from Mr. May brick what his com- 
plaints were, and then he went to Mrs. May brick, and they 
discussed the case together, the husband at the time making 
a complaint of her going off with Brierley at the Grand National 
against his wishes. That was all the husband knew about the 
matter. At that time the prisoner owed .£1200, and Dr. 
Hopper, acting as the peacemaker, succeeded, so far as he could 
judge, in making matters up between them, Mr. Maybrick 
undertaking to pay off those debts ; and from what passed on 
the Ist of April between Mr. and Mrs. Maybrick and the doctor, 
the latter was led to infer that the quarrel had been made up. 

Now, gentlemen, that brings us up to the end of March ; 
and the next date to which I am desir^ to direct your attention 
is about a fortnight after the Grand National — that is, on 
Saturday, the 13th April. On this Saturday Mr. Maybrick went 
up to London to consult with his brother (Mr. Michael May- 
brick). His chief object in going up apparently was to make 
arrangements in connection with money matters. He had pro- 
mised, as I told you, a fortnight previously that he would pay 
the debts his wife had contracted with certain moneylenders, 
and one of them was in London. This was his principal object 
apparently in going up to consult his brother. But in addition 
to this, he made certain complaints to his brother about not 
feeling well, which made his brother suggest, on Sunday, the 
14th of April, that he should consult Dr. Fuller, who was Mr. 
Michael Maybrick *s doctor. Accordingly, on Sunday, the 14th, 
he went and consulted Dr. Fuller. To Dr. Fuller he complained 
of pains in the head and numbness, matters which undoubtedly 
at that time, rightly or wrongly, probably rightly. Dr. Fuller 
attributed to dyspepsia. He was a man with whom there was 
nothing wrong organically of any kind, and Dr. FtiUer seems 
to have made him a great deal more cheerful by telling him so. 
According to the doctor's opinion, and from what he had seen 
and heard, he was a man apt to make a great deal out of trifling 
matters. The doctor gave him a prescription, which, in the 
course of this case, will be laid before you, which was in the 
nature of a tonic, and in which there was no arsenic of any kind. 
Dr. Puller will tell you that at that time Mr. James Maybrick 
was a healthy and a strong man, and when he gave him the 

8 



Opening Speech for the Prosecution. 

prescription he told him to come again on the next Sunday, the Ifr Addliwi 
21st, to gee him. Undoubtedly the numbness and the pains in 
the head would not be accounted for in the way in which Dr. 

Fuller described the case. Although numbness is one of the 
symptoms which occur in cases of poisoning by arsenic, it is 
also common in other cases where weakening of the nerves 
produces numbness, and the doctor merely supposed he was 
dyspeptic, and treated him in this way. This was on the 14th, 
remember, of April, and on the 16th, having only gone away 
for the week-end, Mr. Maybrick returned, apparently better. 

And it is at this stage that I must call attention to this fact. 

On that very 14th, when he was consulting Dr. Fuller and his 
brother in the way I have told you, Mrs. Maybrick received a 
letter from a friend in London. Whatever the facts which are 
stated in that letter, they would be no evidence at all against 
the prisoner at the bar, and it is not for that purpose that we 
put it in, or intend to put it in. It is rather that you may 
know what was being said of her and what was upon her mind 
upon that 14th of April (Sunday) when her husband was in 
London. Probably on that date she received the letter, because 
it is dated the 13th of April, from Kensington Palace Gardens 
Terrace. This is the very date upon which Mr. James Maybrick 
went to London, and the letter would be received in the ordinary 
course on Sunday. This letter reads: — 

My Dear Florie, — In the first place, I should wish to say that 
when I received your mother’s letter last Monday I was quite satisfied 
with the explanation she gave, and the reasons of your letters being 
returned here, and to your friend’s name not being on the books of 
the Grand Hotel. You can’t understand the state of anxiety we were 
in about you on this day fortnight. 

That day fortnight, if it was exactly that day fortnight, would 
be Saturday, the 29th March, the very day after she returned. 

You left us for home on Thursday, and the inference would be that 
when you left you warned your servants of your coming, and that they 
would not forward any more letters. Those that arriv^ on Thursday 
might be accounted for, but they came on Friday and l^turday morning, 
and letters written to you were returned here. What could we thjnk 
but that you were not at home? Kate was going away, and we ha d 
no way of relieving our anxiety. I suggested that you might have 
returned to your hotel, and Harriet went there, and asxed if you were 
there. She found that you had not been staying there. This added 
more perplexity to our feelings, and there wae nothing I could think 
of but to write to your mother. Happily she was able to say that she 
had heard of you twice since your return here, and therefore had no 
anxiety. It was only at her special request that I told her afterwards 
iihe cause of our alarm. This you see was caused by the serious mis- 
understanding. The forwarding of the letters was quite an innocent 
thing. When you were with your friend it did not matter where you 
were living, but you expressly stated that it was at the Grand Hotel, 

«nd this want of Accuracy, you see, misled ns. We are plain pec^le, 

9 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


Mr Addten and acouatomed to beliove what is told ua. I had no unkindly feeling^ 
in writing to your mother. I am sorry if it has in any way vexed you. 
I am sorry about your little girl. — I am, dear Florie, yours truly, 

Margaret Baizj.is. 

I make no comment on that letter, because the facts to which 
it refers are not in the least evidence. The only importance 
as regards a letter of that kind is to show what was going on 
at the time, and what effect it might have upon the state of 
mind of the prisoner on the date of the 14th. 

The next date I will call your attention to is one which is 
apparently not accurately fix^, but it is a period which began 
on the 15th and ended on the 20th ; it may be open to be 
varied or altered when you hear the story detailed, or in cross- 
examination — as I understand from the 15th to the 20th Aprils 
and particularly, for reasons which I will give you presently, 
and somewhere before the 20th, or somewhere about that day^ 
in that week, about the time, no doubt, Mrs. Maybrick went 
to a chemist, and a chemist who lived in her own neighbourhood, 
and who keeps the post office at Aigburth or Garston, and she 
then asked him for one dozen of fly-papers, giving as a reason 
for wanting them that the flies had begun to be troublesome in 
the kitchen. Generally these fly-papers contained each of them 
from 2 to 2^ or 3 grains of arsenic. She got them on a date 
which is described by the servants as being somewhere about 
three weeks after the day of the Grand National, and some time 
before the master was taken ill, which would be somewhere 
about the 20th April. After getting these fly-papers, the 
housemaid, Brierley, was doing Mrs. Maybrick ^s bedroom, and 
was attracted by the appearance of the basin, which had a towel 
over it. She removed this, and found another basin, also 
covered with a towel, and in it were some fly-papers, which 
were soaking in water. She was so struck by this that she 
called the attention of Nurse Yapp to it. Next day pieces of 
fly-papers were noticed by Brierley upon the top of the slop 
basin. But with that exception they were never seen in the 
house or heard of again. So far as the servants knew there 
were no flies in the kitchen, and to their knowledge no fly-papers 
were brought into the house at all. If you find there is no 
trace of these, it is for you to say for what purpose these 
fly-papers were bought. 

It was just about that date — the 20th April — that Mr. 
Maybrick went again to London, as he told Dr. Fuller the 
week before he would do. He went to London and saw Dr. 
Fuller, who varied his prescriptions to a small extent, and on 
the 22nd Mr. Maybrick came back again. Having done so, he 
went with Dr. Fuller’s prescriptions to Messrs. Clay k Abraham, 
who are chemists in Castle Street, and they made up two pre- 
scriptions. You will hear what these prescriptions were, and 

lO 



Opening Speech for the Prosecution. 

this, at least, will be a matter requiring your attention — ^that Addiioii 

whereas one prescription made up in this manner contained no 
arsenic, that (one of these bottles was kept in the office, and 
afterwards, when an investigation was made, it was fotmd in 
the condition in which it was made up) the second bottle, which 
he got from the same firm, was afterwards foimd to contain 
arsenic. That brings us up to the 24th of April, and I will 
call your attention in the order in which they occur to these 
different events which took place between the 27th April and 
the 11th May — because it is between these dates that occurred 
the serious illness that ended in the death of Mr, Maybrick on 
the 11th May. Before I put these events to you let me make 
a few remarks upon the general nature of arsenic and its effects. 

They will be spoken to by a very eminent Liverpool chemist, 

Mr. Davies, and by Dr. Stevenson, who is the physician to Guy’s 
Hospital, and an eminent chemist in London, of whom, no 
doubt, some of you have heard. All I need tell you about 
arsenic just now is this. It is, as you all know, a mineral 
poison. It is taken sometimes as a solid powder and sometimes 
in solution. A single deadly dose — that is to say, a dose of 
arsenic which is capable of killing a man by one administration, 
would be a dose of at least 2 grains and upwards. That would 
take away life in the course of about twelve hours. If it were 
dissolved, and it would take a wineglassful of water to dissolve 
it, half an hour would elapse before any effect would be pro- 
duced. The symptoms that usually accompany a dose of that 
kind are nausea, a sinking, and, in addition to that, there 
usually is purging and vomiting to a very excessive degree. 

But the vomiting, unlike all other vomiting, is accompanicSd by 
no sort of relief whatever. There are burning pains in the 
throat and in the stomach, and great irritation of the stomach 
is apt usually to produce a tenderness, which is discovered out- 
side on pressure. There is also cramp of the thighs and of the 
stomach. There is a furred tongue, intense thirst, and from 
the condition of the intestines there is tenesmus — ^that is to 
say, a great straining in those parts, and a desire to evacuate, 
without any relief w hatever being the result. Any one of these 
symptoms taken by itself might be produced from other causes ; 
but taken together they would indicate an irritant poison, such 
as arsenic. The same symptoms are produced by what may 
be called smaller doses. If you administer a dose of arsenio 
less than a fatal dose, one of three-quarters of a grain, or half 
a grain, twice a day, the same symptoms will be produced. 

But in the course of twelve hours or a couple of days the 
patient will get better. But if before he gets better he goes on 
repeating the dose before there is a complete recovery, then in 
the course of time he will die. Another word on this subject. 

It is not a cumulative poison when taken in these small doses. 


XI 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


Vp Addtaon for. Mrs. Maybrick, however, said that he had no necessity 
for it. He had had a good nursing, and doctors were all fools, 
or something to that effect, which does not matter much to 
this case. At the time she said there was no necessity for a 
second opinion. He himself said he would like to have a 
Turkish bath, and he went on the Friday night, and undoubtedly 
had a Turkish bath. At twelve o’clock at night, however — 
midnight — Dr. Humphreys was called. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — Friday, the 3rd May? 

Mr. Addison — Yes ; I thank his lordship for the remark. I 
have myself been careful in laying this case before you to draw 
your attention to the dates, and to occurrences which took place 
on each one of those dates, because I think that it is very 
important that you should do it to rightly understand the case. 
Friday was the 3rd of May, and on Friday, when they sent for 
Dr. Humphreys at ten o’clock in the morning, he complained that 
he had not been well since his lunch on the Thursday before. 
After the Turkish bath, Dr. Humphreys was summoned at mid- 
night, and then Mr. Maybrick complained for the first time of 
deep-seated pains. He complained very much, and Dr. Hopper 
thought it was something consistent with sciatica, pains in the 
thighs and hips, which will be described by the doctor. He 
complained to the doctor that he had been sick twice, and he 
attributed it to some inferior sherry he had taken. At that 
time there were indications of straining of the rectum, and an 
application of morphia for those parts was given to him to allay 
that straining, and the great pain he was suffering from. That 
was on the night of Friday, the 3rd May, and the next, Satur- 
day, Mr. Maybrick was still in bed ; on Saturday, in fact, he 
was a great deal worse. He was so sick he could retain 
nothing at all ; he could eat nothing, and Mrs. Maybrick, who 
was attending on him at that time, was directed to apply some 
particles of ice to his mouth. Some stock soup was also made 
in the kitchen, strengthened with some beef essence and some 
ingredients of that kind. She was told that day to apply — and 
to this I will have particularly to draw your attention — to apply 
moistened handkerchiefs to his mouth, and Mrs. Maybrick gave 
directions that no medicine was to be given to her husband 
unless she had seen it. That was on the 4:th May, and 
undoubtedly on that date Mr. Maybrick was very ill indeed. 
The next day was Sunday, the 5th May, and on that day Mr. 
Maybrick was in bed all day. He was vomiting, and complained 
very much of pains in the throat, and Mr. Edwin Maybrick 
and the doctor stayed in the house. Mr. Maybrick was given 
some soda and milk, but this he vomited back, after, as Mr. 
Edwin Maybrick would say, some medicine had been given to 
him by Mrs. Maybrick. The doctor then recommended that 
some beef essence, which is highly recommended, should be 



Opening Speech for the Prosecution. 

giv«n to him. This was Valentine’s beef essence or juice. Mr Ad4l«on 
She said that he was very ill, that he had taken another dose 
of that horrid medicine from London, that it had made him 
very ill, and if he had taken much more of it he would have 
been a dead man. That is very remarkable in view of what 
had been put into the medicine on that very day. Well, gentle> 
men, on Monday, the 6th of May, he was still in bed. He 
complained that his mouth was very offensive, though nothing 
was perceived of it in his breath by the doctor. His throat 
distressed him very much — a feeling as of hairs in it. He 
complained that the beef extract ordered him always made him 
sick. So strongly did he complain of this that the doctor 
recommended that Brand’s beef tea should be given him instead. 

There was a great straining about the rectum, for which on 
Monday, the 6th May, the doctor advised a blister. In addition 
to that he ordered a drug containing a small portion of arsenical 
liquor. I think there were five draughts of it, each containing 
a tablespoonful, but that did him no good, and the remainder 
was thrown away. I will now call your attention, gentlemen, 
to this fact, that Valentine’s meat juice, of which, after taking 
it, he always complained about being sick — undoubtedly in 
that meat juice arsenic was found. 

Sir Charles Russell — No, no. 

Mr. Addison — I am sorry to see that my friend, who is 
anxiously watching this case, says that what I state is not 
absolutely correct. But I am told that a bottle was analysed, 
and that in it arsenic was found. That, of course, is a matter 
of evidence which I can only state if I have gathered it cor- 
rectly. This is the state of things upon the Monday. We 
now come to Tuesday, the 7th of May. On Tuesday again he 
seemed a little better of his sickness. These fluctuations are 
important matters for you to consider in connection with the 
way we suggest arsenic was administered. He was better of 
his sickness, but complained of his throat to his brother Edwin, 
who did not like his looks, and did not think he was better. 

The effect of this was that on Tuesday, 7th May, for the first 
time Mr. Edwin Maybrick suggested that Dr. Carter, of Rodney 
Street, should be called in, and at half -past five the same day 
Dr. Carter came to consult with the local practitioner. Dr. 
Hxunphreys. Now, when Dr. Carter came deceased complained 
to the doctor that he had had vomiting and diarrhoea for some 
days. He said there was a pain in his throat as if a hair was 
there. He complained also of intense thirst, and when the 
doctor looked at his throat it was red, dry, and glazed, and 
although he was in a weak condition he seemed to be very 
restless under the bedclothes. Dr. Carter looked at these 
symptoms together, and attributed them to acute dyspepsia 
and acute inflammation of the stomach. Mrs. Maybrick asked 

15 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


Hr AddiMn whether the restlessness was due to his eating and drinking 
during his bachelorhood, but Dr Carter said this would not 
account for it at all. On the Tuesday Nurse Yapp noticed 
Mrs. May brick pouring from one bottle into another, but 
although she had an opportunity to manipulate the medicines 
I do not say that anything follows from it. The pouring from 
one bottle to another may have been a perfectly innocent act. 
I do not attach any importance to it. I only suggest it to 
you as showing that she was, so to speak, regulating his 
medicines up to the 7th of May, when Dr. Carter was called 
in. That brings us to the 8th of May. I remember that Dr. 
Carter was not coming back until the Thursday. It will 
be for you to bear in mind that according to both doctors 
the deceased was suffering from acute dyspepsia on the 7th 
of May, that being the result of their consultation. On the 
8th Dr. Humphreys came, and it appeared that the patient 
had passed a very poor night. At the same time he said 
there was no sickness, which seemed to have passed away,, 
and he thought the medicine he had taken had relieved his 
throat a little. But when Mrs. Briggs entered, and saw him 
suffering from these recurring symptoms, she thought it right 
to send for a sick nurse, and at the same time she despatched 
a telegram to London for Mr. Michael Maybrick, asking him 
to come at once to Liverpool. A nurse named Gore arrived 
about a quarter past two on the Wednesday afternoon, and a 
quarter of an hour after she gave him some medicine Mrs. 
Maybrick handed her to give to her husband. At that time 
Mrs. Briggs fully believed that he would get better, although 
he was in a condition on the 8th in which he could not get in 
or out of bed without assistance. That was the state of 
things at three in the afternoon, which it will be important 
for you to bear in mind, in conjunction with his wife^s acts. 
About three o’clock Mrs. Maybrick gave Nurse Yapp a letter, 
telling her that she wanted it posted by the 3.45 post. The 
nurse took the letter, and will give you a reason why she 
opened it. But whether that be the true and Just reason — 
viz., that she let it fall in the mud and opened it, or whether 
she was animated by curiosity or suspicion, or whatever other 
motive, it will not be very important to inquire. As a matter 
of fact, she not only opened the letter, but it is produced 
before you to-day, because later on in the day, at 5.30, she 
gave it to Edwin Maybrick. That letter will be for you to 
consider. But she received on the Monday before, the 6th 
of May, a letter from Brierley, which had crossed the letter 
she wrote to him on the 8th. Indeed, before the latter date 
she had written at least two letters to Brierley, and now, 
that you may understand what was going on between them 
and what was in her mind, I will read you the letter of the 

i6 



Opening Speech for the Prosecution. 


6th of May, which Brierley had written to her. There is no Mr Ad ils s n 
date, but clearly it was written on that date. It is as 
follows : — 

Mt Deab Flobib, — I suppose now you have gone I am safe in writ- 
ing to you. 1 don’t quite understand what you mean in your last about 
explaining my line of action. You know 1 could not write, and was wili- 
ng to meet you, although it would have been veiy dangerous. Most 
certainly your telegram yesterday was a staggerer, and it looks as if the 
result was certain, but as yet 1 cannot find an ^vertisement in any London 
paper. 

Now it is quite clear that this refers to certain investigations 
which might lead to the discovery of what had passed between 
them in London. 

I should like to see you, but at present dare not move, and we 
had better perhaps not meet until late in the autumn. 1 am going to try and 
get away in about a fortnight. I think I shall take a round trip to the 
Mediterranean, which will take six or seven weeks, unless you wish me to 
stay in England. Supposing the rooms are found, I think both you and I 
would be better away, as the man’s memory would be doubted after three 
months. I will write and tell you when I go. I cannot trust myself at 
present to write about my feelings on this unhappy business, but I do hope 
that some time hence 1 shall b^e able to show you that 1 do not quite 
deserve the strictures contained in your last two letters. I went to the D. 
and D. , and, of course, heard some tales, but myself knew nothing about 
anything. And now, dear, “Good-bye,” hoping we shall meet in the 
autumn. I will write to you about sending letters just before I go. 

A. B. 

To that she wrote a letter which was intercepted by Nurse 
Yapp. It was as follows: — 

Wednesday. 

Deabest, — Your letter under cover to John K. came to hand just 
after I had written to you on Monday. I did not expect to hear from you 
so soon, and had delayed in giving him the necessary instructions. Since 
my return I have been nursing M. day and night. He is sick unto death. 

The doctors held a consultation yestesday, and now all depends upon how 
long his strength will hold out. Both my brothers- in -law are here, and we 
are terribly anxious. I cannot answer your letter fully to-day, my dar- 
ling, but relieve your mind of all fear of discovery now and in the future. 

M. has been delirious since Sunday, and I know now that he is perfectly 
ignorant of everything, even of the name of the street, and also that he has not 
been making any inquiries whatever. The tale he told me was a pure 
fabrication, and only intended to frighten the truth out of me. In fact he 
believes my statement, although he will not admit it. You need not there- 
fore go abroad on that account, dearest ; but, in any case, please don’t 
leave England until I have seen you once again. You must feel that those 
two letters of mine were written under circumstances which must even 
excuse their injustice in your eyes. Do you suppose that I could act as I 
am doing if I really felt and meant what I inferred then ? If you wish to 
write to me about ai^thing do so now, m all the letters pass through my 
hands at present. Excuse this scrawl, my own darling, but I dare not 
leave the room for a moment, and I do not know when I shall be able to 
write to you again. — In haste, yours ever, 

(Signed) Florib. 

That letter was given to Mr. Edwin Maybrick at 5.30. 


B 


17 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


IAp A^dfsiAi At 6.30 the same day Nurse Oore noticed that a tumbler, 
a medicine glass, was gone, and Mrs. Maybrick put some 
medicine into it, and said it must be put in a tumbler of cold 
water — it must have so much water or it would burn his 
throat. Nurse Gore did not administer that medicine at all. 
She said she wanted the glass for some other purpose, and for 
that reason, and that, I take it, only, she threw the medicine 
into a sink in the housemaid's closet. Whether from that 
cause or some other — it is not fair to trace it to any particular 
cause — but undoubtedly in the sink of the housemaid's closet 
there were traces of arsenic found. The 9th of May was 
Thursday. Nurse Gore had been on duty a long time on 
Thursday, and at eleven o'clock the institution sent another 
nurse, named Gallery, who relieved Nurse Gore. Dr. Carter, 
head physician, came on the afternoon of the 9th, when Nurse 
Gallery was there. On Tuesday both doctors could only attri- 
bute the symptoms of Mr. Maybrick to acute dyspepsia, but 
on Thursday there came on with increased violence during the 
night a symptom which at once attracted the marked attention 
of Dr. Carter. He found this tenesmus, this straining and 
retching, was very painful and persistent, and he then for 
the first time seems to have come to the conclusion that they 
showed a symptom which an acute dyspepsia w^ould not account 
for, and there was then a strong presumption that the symp- 
toms were those, and those only, of an irritant poison. That 
went on during the day on Thursday, and at eleven o'clock 
at night Nurse Gore returned. She had been away for twelve 
hours, from eleven o'clock in the day. A circumstance 
occurred then to which I am compelled to ask your careful 
attention, being one of the serious features in the case. When 
Nurse Gore returned she opened a bottle of Valentine's juice 
essence. The other bottle had been discontinued since the 
Monday before, and this was substituted. On Thursday Nurse 
Gore opened a fresh bottle, which she had previously got from 
Mr. Edwin Maybrick. Mrs. Maybrick, after it had been 
opened, said he had had that before, and somehow it had 
always made him ill. That was true, and for that reason the 
medicine had been discontinued on the Monday. However, 
the nurse opened it, and having done so, she saw Mrs. 
Maybrick take that bottle into the dressing-room, which leads 
out of the bedroom, and she was aw^ay for about two minutes. 
After she came back Mrs. Maybrick addressed herself to Nurse 
Gore, and told her to leave the room for some ioe. She would 
not go, and did not leave the room. Thereupon the nurse 
will tell you she saw Mrs. Maybrick in a sort of concealed 
manner, as if she were desirous not to be seen, take the bottle 
she bad taken into the dressing-room and put it on the table, 
and afterwards, when the patient awakened, she saw her 

rS 



Opening Speech for the Prosecution. 

move it from the table and put it on the washstand. On the Wi* Jurtlewi 
next day, Friday, the 10th May, Nurse Gore was relieved by 
another nurse, Calleiy’', to whom she pointed out this bottle, 
on which she had kept her eye the whole time, and gave her 
certain instructions upon it, and Nurse Gallery ultimately gave 
it up to Michael Maybrick. On the Friday Mr. Maybrick 
thought he was himself a little better, but it was evident that 
he was a great deal worse. He had pains in his throat and 
in his abdomen, and he said to his wife, in the presence of 
Nurse Gallery, Don^t give me the wrong medicine again,'' 
to which Mrs. Maybrick answered, What are you talking 
about? You never had the wrong medicine." About two 
or three o'clock Mrs. Maybrick Avas noticed apparently chang- 
ing the medicine from one bottle to another. This was a 
most serious department of the case, as it was suggested that 
she might, if she liked, alter the medicine. At half -past 
four Dr. Carter came, and at a quarter to five Nurse Wilson 
came to relieve Nurse Gallery. Wilson heard Mr. Maybrick 
say, Oh, Bunny, Bunny, how could you do it? I did not 
think it of you." lliat was a somewhat ambiguous expres- 
sion, and the prosecution would not attach more importance 
to it than it was worth. But now Dr. Carter, who had been 
there that afternoon, had received from Michael Mavbrick a 
bottle of Valentine's juice, which he took home. That night 
and next morning he examined it, and both examinations 
showed that arsenic had been put into it. The accurate 
examination afterwards by Mr. Davies showed that in that bottle 
there was half a grain of arsenic. If that was so, it is very 
serious from both points of view, because it leads to a very 
strong conclusion that she had put arsenic into this medicine. 

And it does more ; because if half a grain of arsenic was put 
into it, and no more, it showed that he was being poisoned 
by doses repeatedly administered. Half a grain of arsenic 
administered about twice a day would produce these illnesses, 
with all their variations, of which you have heard. So 
serious was the patient's condition, that Dr. Carter came 
about half-past twelve next day, which was Saturday the 11th 
of May. On that morning it was clear to everybody that Mr. 

Maybrick was dying, and his children were brought to him. 

He could take nothing in the way of nourishment. The 
doctors were with him when he died, about half -past eight in 
the evening. Now, gentlemen, you must watch the evidence 
carefully. On Friday he had had meat juice, part of which 
he did not take. Arsenic was found in the jug containing it, 
as also in the closet, or rather the mere trace of arsenic. 

Now, directly he was dead (on Saturday, the 11th of May), 

Michael Maybrick directed the nurse and the housemaid to 
look and see what they could find. In a closet they found a 

19 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


Mr Adlditoii box containing children’s clothes ; they found a chocolate box» 
in which there was a parcel labelled ‘‘ Arsenic — Poison,” and 
written after it the words “ for cats.” There was also a 
handkerchief found, a matter to which I must direct your 
special attention, for in it arsenic was found. On the next 
day, Mr. Edwin Maybrick, Mr. Michael Maybrick, and the 
two Briggses, who, as I have said, were old friends of the 
family, made a further search, and they then found in the 
dressing-room two hat boxes containing hats belonging to Mrs. 
Maybrick. 

[Sir Charles Russell leaned across to Mr. Addison and cor- 
rected him in regard to that matter.] 

Mr. Addison — I understand it is not as I had said — they 
contained men’s hats ; but at the top of one of these boxes 
was found a bottle of Valentine’s meat essence containing 
arsenic. 

[Mr. M^CoNNEtt/L upon this assertion whispered a correction 
to his leader in regard to the matter.] 

Mr. Addison — It may be as my learned friend says ; there 
was one bottle not sufficiently identified, but the bottle found 
at the top of the box with Valentine’s meat essence did not 
contain arsenic. Anything I have said contrary to that will 
rather clear up the matter which wanted clearing up, that 
when Mr. Maybrick complained to Humphreys that Valentine’s 
meat extract made him ill — well, I would rather wait until 
I hear the evidence, because I am not clear on the point. 
However that may be, this bottle of Valentine’s extract 
was found at the top of the box, and there were also found 
three other bottles, each of them containing arsenic in the 
process of solution — that is, being converted into a liquid form. 
One bottle contained a strong solution of arsenic, with several 
grains in a solid form in the bottle ; another bottle contained 
several grains solid and also a strong solution ; and a third 
bottle contained 15 or 20 grains solid arsenic, but only two 
drops of the solution. In each of these three bottles there 
was arsenic in different stages of solution. In the second 
hatbox there was found a tumbler which contained a fluid 
resembling milk, and in that tumbler was a piece of a hand- 
kerchief soaking. In this tumbler were found 20 grains of 
arsenic. Undoubtedly that was an important point, because 
you will remember it has been suggested that at an early 
stage of Mr. Maybrick’s complaint a handkerchief was placed 
over his mouth. Well, later on in June, the dressing-gown 
which Mrs. Maybrick had worn during the illness was examined, 
and in the pocket of the gown and in a pocket handkerchief 
traces of arsenic were found to an extent which will be spoken 
of by Dr. Stevenson and Mr, Davies. This brings me to 

20 



Opening Speech for the Prosecution. 

Sunday, 12th May. On the next day, Monday, the 13th, 
there was a post-mortem and an analysis of some of the viscera. 
The general result was this — ^it was foimd that all the organs of 
the deceased man were healthy. Hie intestines and bowels were 
very much irritated, and traces of arsenic were discovered. 
The stomach was in a state of acute inflammation, such as is 
produced by an irritant poison. The kidneys showed traces 
of arsenic, and in the liver undoubtedly arsenic was found in 
a weighable quantity. Undoubtedly the result of the examina- 
tion is this, that all the doctors will say, having regard to the 
post-mortem and the s 3 n 2 iptonis he showed in his illness, that 
they have no doubt Mr. May brick died from the administra- 
tion of arsenic. Dr. Stevenson and Mr. Davies, who have had 
large experience in these matters, will tell you, if there 
were repeated doses of arsenic, such as the history of this 
case would seem to indicate, and if for a day or two before 
he died no arsenic was given to him, that is precisely a case 
in which they would expect to find the body of Mr. Maybrick 
in the condition they describe, because it is not the arsenic 
which is found in the system which kills, but the arsenic which 
kills is that which has passed away. Now, on the 14th of 
May, Mrs. Maybrick was in custody in her own house. She 
at that time wanted some money to pay for telegrams and 
stamps, and Mrs. Briggs, who was there, said, Perhaps Mr. 
Brierley will help you.'" In which sense she used the words 
she will explain herself. Thereupon prisoner wrote a letter 
to Mr. Brierley. She was then in custody and in trouble, 
and her husband had died in this terrible way on the Saturday 
before. She said in this communication to Brierley — 

Battlecrease House, Aigbubth. 

I am writing to you to give to me every assistance in your power in 
my present fearful trouble. 1 am in custody, without any of my family 
with me, and without money. I have cabled to my solicitor in New York 
to come here at once. In the meantime, send some money for present 
needs. The truth is known about my visit to London. Your last letter is 
in the hands of the police. Appearances may be against me, but before 
God I swear I am innocent. 

Fix)rekcx £. Maybbioe:. 

Gentlemen, we know the relations that existed between her 
and j^rierley, and we know the correspondence that went on 
between them whilst her husband was on his sick bed ; and I do 
not know that the fact of her applying to Brierley for assistanoe 
when the suggestion is made to her adds really very much to our 
knowledge of the case. After that she was charged by Mr. 
Inspector Bryning with causing her husband’s death, and to 
that she made no reply. But it is fair to add that the officer 
cautioned her, and told her to be careful, as what she said might 

ai 



Trial of Mrs Mayhrick 

Itei MAIsott be given in evidence against her. And that she made no 
reply under the circumstances is not a matter which I, for the 
Grown, will make any observations upon. On the 14th May 
the charge was more formally made to her by Mr. Bryning, and 
again in the same words of caution, of having killed and mur- 
dered her husband. She again made no reply. When before 
the magistrates she was represented by my friend Mr. Pick- 
ford, and he, of course, reserved the defence until the assizes. 
I have now to say that I have no knowledge up to this time, 
no notion w^hatever, of w'hat explanation may be given to explain 
away, if it is possible, the facts which I have laid before you. 
Gentlemen, there is no reason to doubt what the doctors wiD 
swear without doubt, and what the chemists will swear without 
doubt, that James May brick died by arsenic, and arsenic given 
to him by repeated doses. And if he did, the question will be 
for you, who gave him the arsenic of which he died^ Un- 
doubtedly the whole household, whom you see, knew and had 
nothing to do with it. It cannot be suggested that the doctor, 
or his brothers, or the four maidservants, had anything to do 
with it. It will be for you to say whether the wife, who until 
the 8th of May attended and administered everything that was 
given to him, and afterwards gave medicine to him through the 
nurses — whether she was oi* was not the person who did it. It is 
deal’ that he was not a man who administered this himself by 
way of killing himself. That the whole case demonstrates. 
You will find the deceased was a man who was distressed at the 
bare notion of death, who was cheered by every ray of hope. 
Whenever he was a little better was glad to tell it, and was 
anxious and pleased to describe to his doctors all that he had 
taken and all that happened. It is clear, besides, that by no 
mistake was arsenic administered to him. It is clear that he 
was quite unconscious all through his illness — and apparently 
his wife too — that he was taking arsenic. The name arsenic 
was never mentioned or brought into the question. The illnes# 
was attributed to an overdose of the medicine from London, to 
the wrong medicine being administered, to brandy, sherry, and 
another time to beer, and different matters. There was never 
for one moment any notion that he was taking in any shape 
or form arsenic. Whether by the beer, the sherry, the 
brandy, or by the many medicines, it is clear that arsenic was 
being administered to him without his knowledge or the know- 
ledge of any one about the place. Gentlemen, who did it? I 
shall be compelled, and am compelled, to submit there is very 
oogeot and powerful evidence to show that it was his wife who 
administered it. Undoubtedly if she was the person who 
administered these repeated doses to him, then, gentlemen, she 



Opening Speech foi the Prosecution. 

is guilty of the cruel offence of wilful murder, and it will be Mr AdAtson 
your painful but bounden and incumbent duty to say so. 

[As the first witness was about to enter^the box, Mr. Addison 
said he should like to make it plain that the only meat juice in 
which arsenic was found was that to which Nurse Gore spoke, 
in which half a grain of arsenic was found, and from which juice 
nothing was administered to deceased.} 




Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


Evidence for the Prosecution. 

William Hbnrt Clemmt, surveyor, Bootle, examined by Mr. 

W. H. ClemmT produced plans of Battlecreaee, the residence of the 

deceased. 

Micthael Maybrick, examined by Mr. M 'Connell — I am a 
M. Maybriek composer, residing at Wellington Chambers, Regent’s 

Park, London. James Maybrick of Battlecrease was my 
brother. He was fifty years of age. The prisoner and he 
were married in July, 1881. There are two children of the 
marriage, a boy, seven years, and a girl, three years of age. 
My deceased brother was in the habit of visiting me occasionally 
in London. On 13th April he came up to see me there, and 
remained with me until the Monday following. On Sunday, 
the 14th, Dr. Fuller came to my chambers, and my brother con- 
sulted him in my presence. Dr. Fuller prescribed for him. 
My brother’s object in coming to London was primarily to see 
about his wife’s debts, and he took advantage of his visit to 
see my doctor. I had a conversation with my brother in 
reference to the objects of his visit. He came up the week 
after and stayed at a hotel, but I was out of town and did 
not see him. 

On Wednesday, 8th May, I received three telegrams, one 
from Mrs. Briggs; and in consequence of the contents of these 
messages I left London the same day for Liverpool. On arriv- 
ing at Edgehill I was met by my brother Edwin, and with him I 
drove to Battlecrease House. In the cab we had a conversation 
as to my brother James’s health, and on arrival at the house 
Edwin show'ed me a letter, dated 8th May, in the prisoner’s 
handwriting, addressed to Mr. Brierley. I met Mrs. Maybrick 
at my brother’s bedroom door. I asked where my brother was, 
and then I entered the room, Mrs. Maybrick following me. 
Nurse Gore was in charge. I was very much shocked to see 
the state he was in, he being only semi-conscious. Shortly 
afterwards I saw Mrs. Maybrick in the morning- room, and I 
said to her that I was not satisfied with my brother’s treat- 
ment. She asked me what I meant, and I said that she ought 
to have called in professional nurses, and also another doctor 
earlier. At that time I had heard that Dr. Humphreys was 
in attendance, and that a nurse had been procured that day. 
I also learned that Dr. Carter had been called in as a consulting 
physician. Mrs. Maybrick said that no one had a better right 
to nurse the husband than his wife, and I agreed with her, but 

*4 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


repeated that 1 was dissatisfied with the case, and that I would M. HarMsk 
go and see Dr. Humphreys, which I did. I had some conversa- 
tion with Nurse Gore that night. I slept in the house that 
night, on the top floor. On Thursday my brother seemed 
rather better, and Dr. Humphreys seemed to be satisfied with 
the case. I saw Dr. Carter that same day, and told him what 
I had told Dr. Humphreys. On Friday morning, in conse- 
quence of a conversation that I had with Nurse Gore, I went 
into the sick-room and took away about half a bottle of brandy. 

I again saw Nurse Gore in the afternoon, and following on our 
conversation I took from the wash-stand in the bedroom part 
of a bottle of Valentine’s meat juice, which I gave, precisely as 
I had found it, to Dr. Carter, about a quarter past foiu" that same 
afternoon. The bottle of extract was a little more than half 
full. On going back to my brother’s room that afternoon I 
saw Mrs. Maybrick changing, as 1 thought, the medicine from 
one bottle to another, and I said to her, " Florie, how dare 
you tamper with the medicine.” 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — She was putting the label on the 
bottle. 

Examination continued — She explained that there was so 
much sediment in the smaller bottle that it was im- 
possible to dissolve it, and she was putting it into 
the larger bottle so that the medicine might be more 
easily shaken. I now identify the bottle into which the 
medicine was being poured. I told her that I was much 
annoyed and dissatisfi^, and that I would have the prescription 
immediately remade, which I did. My brother grew gradually 
worse from that time, and at six o’clock he was highly delirious. 

He was conscious when not delirious. About three or four 
•o’clock Mrs. Maybrick, when in the garden, asked why Dr. 

Fuller was not brought, and I replied that I believed that 
Dr. Carter fully understood the case, and that it was rather late 
in the day to send for Dr. Fuller. 

Mrs. Maybrick came to my room about three o’clock the next 
morning and said that matters were much worse. I found my 
brother, who was in charge of Nurse Gore, to be very ill indeed. 

About five o’clock he saw his children. Dr. Carter saw my 
brother about noon. About 8.40 that same evening my brother 
died. About half -past eleven in the evening Nurse Yapp 
brought me a chocolate box containing several small bottles 
and a small parcel labelled with a long red label, ‘‘ Arsenic: 

Poison.” 

Mr. Justice Stephen (examining the parcel) — Arsenic: 

Poison ” is the label, and in another hand are the words, For 
•cats.” 

Examination continued — In the presence of Mr. Steel, 
eolicitor, who resided next door, and who came in, I sealed the 

as 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


H, lUjrbBieli box with my private seal, and placed it in the wine cellar. Sub- 
sequently I gave it to Inspector Baxendale. On Sunday morn- 
ing, the 12th, I, along with my brother Edwin, made a search 
of the bedroom. We found some letters which 1 afterwards 
gave to Inspector Baxendale, but I looked at these letters before 
doing so. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — You first saw your 
brother on Sunday, the 14th April? — No; I first saw him at 
Kensington. 

On the occasion of that visit? — Yes. 

It is the fact, is it not, that he had telegraphed when he came 
to London and asked for an appointment to be made with Dr. 
Fuller? — Yes; I believe that was so. 

But, as you understand it, one of his principal objects in 
coming to London was to consult Dr. Fuller about his health? — 
Yes. 

When you came down on Wednesday. 8th May, what time did 
you arrive at Battlecrease ? — At about half-past nine o’clock. 

Where did you first see your brother Edwin? — ^At Edge Hill. 

Did he then show you the Brierley letter? — No, he told me 

of it. 

Told you the purport of it? — Yes. 

And I suppose told you the circumstances under which he had 
obtained it from the nurse Yapp? — Yes. 

You were astonished to see the state your brother was in? — 
I was. 

You saw that he was very ill? — Very ill indeed. 

In a semi-conscious condition ? — A sort of semi-conscious 
condition. 

I think Mrs. Briggs was there, was she not? — No. 

Was she not there at the time you arrived? — No; certainly 
not. 

Did you learn that she had been there earlier in the day? — 
Yes, I was told so. 

Did you see her the next morning? — I did. 

She took a very serious view of the case, did she not? — 
Yes. 

She intimated to you that she had taken a very serious view 
from the first? — Yes. 

And that she had been there early on the previous morn- 
ing? — Yes. 

Except upon Thursday, he expressed himself as free from 
pain, did he not, but it seemed to you that from Wednesday 
he gradually sank, until he died on Saturday? — Well, no; 
that is not my opinion at all. 

What is your view? — My view is that there was a decided 
improvement up to Friday morning. 

26 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

And then began the collapse 1 — ^And then he collapsed hour H. 
by hour. 

In what way did it seem to you that he was better? — He 
was better in spirits, and from his conversation he seemed to 
think himself better — in fact, he remarked himself that he 
thought he was better. 

Just tell me — I want to get at all these matters — ^had you, 
from the first a strong suspicion in the case? — I had. 

And you expressed this suspicion very openly to Mrs. May- 
brick, and to the nurses? — Not to the nurses. 

Did you not, sir? Are you not aware that instructions were 
given to the nurses? — Oh! you mean the hospital nurses? 

I said the nurses? — Yes, I was aware that they had instruc- 
tions. 

You are aware that there were instructions given to them 
which would convey the idea that there was felt, by those 
interested in the case, considerable suspicion? — Yes, that is 
so. 

Did you, on your arrival, give any instructions to Nurse 
Gore? — Yes. 

Did you become aware on the Wednesday that Mrs. Maybrick 
herself had telegraphed for a nurse? — No, I did not know 
then ; I learned it subsequently, but I do not know how I 
learned it. 

Did you not learn it from your brother? — No, I do not think 
he knew it at that time. I could not say where or how I learned 
it ; but I certainly did hear it afterwards. 

Did you hear from your brother that Mrs. Maybrick had 
urged him to call in Dr. M^Cheyne? — I did not understand it 
that way. My brother said he had seen Dr. M^Cheyne. 

I ask you whether Mrs. Maybrick suggested to you that 
you should call in Dr. M^Cheyne? — I cannot recollect that 
conversation. 

The first matter, I think — I wish to follow this out in order 
that there may be no misapprehension — the first matter your 
attention was called to was by Nurse Gore, in reference to a 
bottle of brandy? — Yes. 

On Friday, was it not? — On Friday morning. 

In consequence of what she said, you were led to have the 
bottle, which was apparently half-full of brandy, removed? — 
Yes. 

And vou handed it over for examination afterwards? — Not 
then ; I locked it up first. 

That was on the Friday? — Yes. 

To whom did you hand it? — I locked it up at once, but 
afterwards I gave it to Inspector Baxendale. 


27 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


H. lUirtelak 


You are aw8u?e that from that bottle your brother received 
nothing after it was taken care of? — Nothing from that bottle. 

I am speaking of that bottle? — No; not from that bottle. 

You subsequently handed it over to Dr. Carter on the 
Friday? — Yes. 

And it was subsequently found to be harmless? — ^Yes. 

The next thing was a small bottle of Valentine’s meat 
extract, to which reference was made by Nurse Gore? — ^Yes. 

And in consequence of which you took charge of it? — ^Yes. 

After Nurse Gallery called your attention to it, I take it 
that nothing was administered to your brother from that 
bottle ? — Yes. 

I wish to ask you what time was it you observed, or thought 
you observed, Mrs. Maybrick changing the medicine from the 
smaller into the larger bottle? — I think it was, as nearly as 
I could tell, about two o’clock ; it might have been a little 
after or a little before. 

That was on the Friday? — Yes. 

You did not know the ingredients of that medicine? — No. 

In consequence of what you saw her doing you spoke to 
her very sharply? — Yes, I did. 

What did you do with the bottle? — I took it away, and 
gave it to Dr. Humphreys. 

Mrs. Maybrick, you think, was in the act of putting a label 
on? — She was putting it on. 

At that time Nurse Gallery was in the room? — Yes. 

And you axe aware the contents of this were also analysed? — 
Yes. 

And you are aware there was no arsenic in it? — Yes. 

So far as you are aware there was no concealment about 
the matter? — None whatever. 

What was it Nurse Yapp brought to you about eleven o’clock? 
— She brought me a chocolate box. 

Look at it ; take it in your hands and tell me what is in 
it? — There were several things, bottles, piece of linen. 

Are those things in now? — ^Yes. I think they are very 
much the same. 

Where did she find them? — In the trunk which had been 
taken from the closet in which to put the children’s clothes. 

One side of this bottle had been ticketed poison, and the 
other was endorsed in a bold hand — '' Arsenic — Poison for 
eats ” ? — Yes. 

There is this box of quinine pills? — I do not remember. I 
did not examine them myself. 

I really want to know what you did see, because it may be 
important. Is there a suggestion that there was any arsenic 
in either of these bottles which have been examined? (holding 
up some small phials)? — really do not know. 

2 $ 



Evidence for Prosecution 


I notioe this bottle is labelled, Solution of morphia, twenty M* ■arbHak 
to twenty-five drops a dose.’* Apparently the name of the 
chemist is scratched out. Do you know what is in this smaller 
bottle f — No, I do not. I am not aware what their contents 
are. 

Then there is this handkerchief (holding up one). You are 
aware that this is a lady’s one, with the name ** Maybriok ” 
in the comer of it? — Yes. 

The evidence at the inquest was that there was a red stain 
on this handkerchief. Except that, is there anything in 
relation to the contents of the chocolate box that in any way 
suggests arsenic? — Not that I am aware of. I did not follow 
the evidence as to the different bottles. 

What else did Yapp give you? — brown paper parcel. 

Inside it was a white parcel. 

Does that contain insect powder? — I do not know. 

Was the parcel open ? — It was open at one end, and the stuff 
was running out. 

Was there anything poisonous in that that you are aware of? 

— I do not know. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — I think it is admitted there was no 
poison in that? 

Mr. Addison — I believe that is so, my lord. 

Cross-examination resumed — Was there anything else in that 
parcel? — Nothing that I know of. 

Did she give you anything else that night? — Not that I 
remember. 

I may, just in passing, call attention to this smaller parcel 
which was labelled Arsenic,” and which is endorsed, Poison 
for cats ” — ^that is discoloured, isn’t it? — Yes; I believe it is. 

In other words, it is carbonised arsenic, or mixed with char- 
coal? — ^Yes; I believe so. 

You are aware that for cats it is mixed with carbon in this 
way ? — ^Yes. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — There is no evidence to prove that it 
is arsenic. 

Sir Charles Russell — I believe it is arsenic. 

Cross-examination resumed — ^Your brother was a cotton 
broker? — He was a cotton merchant. 

He had lived some years in America, had he not? — ^Yes. 

Did he go there and stay off and on till he was married? — 

Yes. 

He lived in America for some time? — ^Yes, but he came back- 
wards and forwards. 

That took place practically down to the time he was married ? 

— ^Yea. 

I think that since his marriage he has also gone to America! 

— Yes ; he went there three or four times after his marriage. 

29 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

It. ttaybriek I will just ask you one or two questions about your brother. 

Was he a man rather fond of his personal appearance? — He 
was particular about it. 

Was he a man given to dosing himself? — Not that I am aware 
of. I never saw him. At times he took a little phosphorus, 
I know. 

Have you ever heard about his dosing himself? — never 
heard, except in a letter from Mrs. Maybrick. 

I should be glad to see that letter? — Well, unfortunately, I 
destroyed it. I did not think it of any importance. 

Can you tell me whether it was early in March when you 
received it? — I should think it was early in March. I do not 
remember the day. 

To the best of your recollection, was it in the beginning of 
March? — I believe so. 

Might it not have been earlier than the beginning of March? 
— I have nothing to remind me. I cannot say more than that 
it was at the beginning of March. 

You say you destroyed the letter at the time? — Certainly, 
three or four hours after receiving it. 

Tell us what your recollection is? — As far as I can recollect, 
she stated that she had found my brother was taking a white 
powder, and that she thought it might have something to do 
with the pains in his head. I know it was a statement to that 
effect, to which I attached very little importance at the time. 
She also stated in the letter that he had not the slightest sus- 
picion she had discovered it, and she would not like him to 
know it. I was given to understand that I was not to mention 
it to him. 

You were asked about this before the magistrates, were you 
not? — Yes. 

What action did you take upon that? — The only action I took 
was to communicate it to the deceased when he came to London. 

Tell us what he said? — On Saturday night, when my brother 
arrived, we were speaking about different things, and I said, 

What is it with reference to those white powders I am told 
about? ’’ I said, I am told you take a certain powder.’^ 
He said, Whoever told you that, it is a damned lie.^* 

Did you pursue the subject further? — I did not. 

Do you recollect whether Mrs. Maybrick said in her letter 
that her husband was again ill, and nervous and irritable? — Yes, 

I believe she did refer to his irritability. 

Did she say she was certain be was still physicking himself? 
— Well, I really could not be sure on that point, but the letter 
was to that purport. 

Did she say she had seen him take a white powder on several 
occasions, and that when she referred to it he flew into a passion 

30 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


and did not liko it to be talked about? — ^Yes, I believe she did mijFMdk 
eay something to that effect. 

Did she say she herself had searched for the powder, and 
could not find any trace of the powder he took ? — That I do not 
remember; I have no recollection of it. 

Do you recollect what she suggested? Do you recollect that 
she suggested it was perhaps strychnine, or some other drug? 

Do you recollect the word strychnine? — I cannot say I do. 

Can you undertake to say, from your recollection, that she 
did not, referring to a white powder, say it might be strychnine? 

— I should not like to say one way or another; my recollection 
is too vague. 

Your own family doctor is Dr. Fuller? — He is. 

That fact was known to your brother and his wife? — Yes, it 
was. I mentioned” it at Christmas time, when 1 asked him to 
come up to London to see Dr. Fuller. 

Do you remember whether she mentioned Dr. Fuller's name 
in the letter? — I really cannot say. It is very possible, but I tell 
you I have a very poor recollection. The idea in my mind 
is that she referred to his taking a powder. I believe she said 
she thought she ought to tell me about it. That was the whole 
of the letter as far as I remember it. 

You understand, Mr. May brick, that I am accepting your 
recollection as far as it goes. Do you remember that one 
of the objects of your brother's visit to London was to obtain 
a settlement of some debts which his wife had incurred? — Yes. 

You were aware, of course, were you not, of a dispute having 
arisen in reference to this man Brierley?— I did not hear the 
nature of the dispute. I had heard there had been a dispute. 

As far as you are aware, your brother died entirely in ignor- 
ance of the guilty meeting in London? — Yes, I am convinced 
of it. 

The only complaint having to do with her was in reference to 
the quarrel about the Grand National? — Yes, I believe so. I 
firmly believe he knew nothing except what took place on the 
racecourse. 

You are aware there were complaints on both sides? — ^Yes. 

You know the name of a woman has been introduced into this 
case? — Yes. 

You are aware that, at the instance of Mrs. Briggs, Mrs. May- 
brick went to consult a friend in reference to this woman?— 

Yes, I am aware of it. 

And a reconciliation was supposed to have been brought about 
between Mr. Maybrick and his wife? — ^Yes. 

Have you examined your brother's papers? — Not very much 
myself, but my brother has. 

Well, I prefer to examine him in regard to them. Did you 

5 « 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


M. BajrMek ooxne across, or has your brotiior shown you, a bundle of pre< 
scriptionsf — have not seen them. 

Have you come across the cashboz from Mrs. Maybrick'e 
wardrobe t — I have seen it, but it is not here. 

Axe you aware it has been asked for by the representatives 
of Mrs. Maybrick? — No, I am not aware; I have not heard of it 
at all BO far. 

Re-ezamined by Mr. Addison — The only way I can fiz the 
date when my sister-in-law wrote to me is by a certain event 
which took place in London on 26th March, and I think it must 
have been a fortnight before then. When I mentioned the 
powder to my brother, and he told me that it was a lie, I 
dropped the subject, as he seemed to be annoyed. 

Mr. Addison asked that all the exhibits in the Court should 
be properly taken care of, and that they should be placed some- 
where all together. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — The proper custodian of these things 
is the custodian of the Court. 

1, R. Hopper Dr. Arthur Richard Hopper, examined by Mr. Addison — I 
am a physician and surgeon in Rodney Street, Liverpool. I 
have attended Mr. and Mrs. Maybrick since 1881, shortly 
after their marriage. He was a very healthy man, but he 
complained from time to time of symptoms which to my mind 
were not very serious — slight dyspepsia and nervousness, which 
I thought to be exaggerated. After June, 1888, he complained 
more than formerly. I usually prescribed nerve tonics. I 
never prescribed arsenic for him in any shape or form, but 
I remember having a conversation with him some years ago 
about it. My impression of the conversation is that he told 
me that he knew it as an antiperiodic. When he returned from 
America, I think he said he had been taking quinine, and 
as he said that quinine did not suit him, I suppose I suggested 
arsenic. Arsenic is an antij>erio<lic, and it is given in cases 
of disease in which there is a liabilitv to periodic recurrence. 
It is for intermittent fevers, marsh fevers, &c. The nerve 
tonics which I prescribed were very ordinary ones, nux vomica 
and phosphoric acid. With that exception my impression was 
that he was a fairly healthy man. 

I remember the day after the Grand National, 30th March. 
Mrs. Maybrick called upon me. She complained that she was 
very unwell, that she had been up all night, had taken very 
little food, and was out of sorts, and she asked my advice. 

I saw that she had a black eye. She said that her husband 
had been very unkind to her, that they had had a serious 
quarrel the night before, and he had beaten her. The quarrel 

32 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

she explained was the outcome of a disagreement at the Grand A. & topper 

National, but I do not think she told me at that time what 

that disagreement was about. She said that she had a very 

strong feeling against him, and could not bear him to come 

near her. She also said that it was her intention to go to a 

lawyer and ask for a separation to be arranged. About half- 

past three the next day I went to Battlecrease House. I first 

saw Mrs. May brick alone, and afterwards I saw her along with 

her husband. They stated their respective complaints against 

one another in my presence, as to her repugnance for him 

and as to the quarrel the night before. Mr. Maybrick said 

that his wife had annoyed him very much at the Grand 

National, that she had gone off with a gentleman and walked 

up the course although he had distinctly told her not to do so. 

I do not think there was any other grievance. In the course 
of a conversation with Mrs. Maybrick she told me she was 
very much in debt, and that that was the great obstacle to a 
reconciliation. I told her I did not think it would be a serious 
obstacle, and I strongly recommended her to make a clean 
breast of it, and to get her husband’s forgiveness for the 
debts, and then everything would be right. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — After seeing Mr. and Mrs. 

Maybrick separately I understood that he was to pay all her 
debts, whatever they were. He made very light of it. 

Examination continued — Mrs. Maybrick had no grievance 
against her husband more than I have told as to her repug- 
nance to him except that she said he was frequently xmkind 
to her. As far as I knew reconciliation took place. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — When did you first 
attend Mr. Maybrick? — I began to attend him as far back as 
1882. 

And did you attend him from time to time up to the end of 
1888?— Yes. 

Between 1882 and June, last year, you have seen him a 
number of times? — ^Yes. 

As I understood you, from June to September you saw him 
very frequently? — ^Yes. 

How often do you say you have seen him? — ^Fifteen times 
or more. 

And oftener? — Perhaps twenty. 

Did he visit your house? — ^He came to my house. 

Were his complaints always the same ? — No ; on one occa- 
sion he had a cold and sore throat, but generally they were 
the same. 

Were these complaints connected with the liver and the 
digestive organs? — Yes. 

And the nerves? — Yes. 


0 


33 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

t. Hopp«r Was he a man that was rather given to exaggerate symptoms? 

— Not so much to exaggerate them as to attach undue import- 
ance to them. 

You would call him hypochondriacal? — ^Yes. 

Distinctly so? — Yes. 

Seeing him for so long a period of time and so frequently, 
you can pretty well form an opinion about the man from his 
conversations and admissions? — ^Yes. 

Was he a man given to dosing himself? — ^Yes, he was. 

Distinctly ? — Distinctly. 

I would like you to tell the jury what you mean by that? — 
I mean that, when he came to consult me, I was disappointed 
to find that between the visits he had been trying some new 
remedy recommended him by friends, and different from the 
medicines I had prescribed. 

Do I understand that this happened more than once? — ^Yes. 

Somebody suggested something to him and he took it? — 
Yes. 

When you say more than once, do you mean frequently? — 
Yes, frequently. 

Has he ever said anything to you as to whether he confined 
himself to the appointed doses of particular medicines or 
whether he exceed^ them? — He told me that, finding no effect 
from his medicine, he had doubled the dose, and that it had 
or had not disagreed with him. 

Did that apply to the medicines obtained from other sources, 
or to your own prescriptions? — From my memory, I should say 
it applied to my own prescriptions only. 

What did you say when it was mentioned to you that he was 
taking double doses of this kind? — I said to him it was a 
dangerous habit ; although he might escape scot free, he would 
some time do himself great injury. 

He might have taken or not what would seriously injure him, 
although it might not prove fatal? — Quite so. 

I want you to carry your mind back to the first time he 
consulted you. Were the symptoms mentioned to you nervous 
symptoms? — ^Yes ; they were. 

For instance, did he complain of numbness ? — ^Yes ; that was 
a frequent complaint. 

Numbness — in what part? — In the extremities. 

What part of the extremities? — In the hands, feet, and also 
the legs. 

That was a symptom he frequently complained of? — ^Yes, 
frequently. 

You were aware that he lived in America for a considerable 
time ? — ^Yes. 


34 



Evidence for Prosecution, 


He had been in the habit of going over to and back from Hopper 
America? — ^Yea. 

Do you know a Dr. Seguard, of New York? — Yes, well. 

Did deceased give you on any occasion a bundle of prescrip- 
tions written by Dr. Seguard?— Yes. 

Tell me first what became of those prescriptions ? — I destroyed 
them. 

When? — A few months since. 

Were they principally prescriptions of the aphrodisiac kind? 

— ^Yes ; strychnine was the chief, and nux vomica. 

That is a sexual nerve tonic? — Yes. 

And so far as you recollect there was no arsenic in Dr. 

Seguard’s prescriptions? — No. 

Are you aware that arsenic is a nerve tonic of the aphro- 
disiac character? — Yes; it is commonly used as such. 

I want to ask you a particular question. You have spoken 
particularly of having b^n in charge and attendance upon this 
gentleman from June, 1888, to December, 1888. As early 
as June, 1888, did not Mrs. May brick make a communication 
to you as to certain habits of her husband? — In June or 
September, I am not quite sure which. 

I put it to you, was it not in June when you first began the 
attendance upon him? — It was either at the beginning of the 
attendance or shortly after my return from my holidays ; but 
1 am not clear which. My impression was she was not 
unreasonably anxious about the matter. 

What did she say to you? — She told me that Mr. Maybrick 
was in the habit of taking some very strong medicine which 
had a bad influence on him ; for he alwavs seemed worse after 
each dose. She wished me to see him about it, as he was very 
reticent in the matter. 

She wished you to remonstrate with him? — Yes. 

You understood that she wished you to do that with a view 
of putting a stop to it? — Yes. 

And you did, I think, upon the next occasion of your visit 
to the house, make some kind of search, and found nothing, 
at all events of a poisonous nature? — Yes. 

Do you remember whether she spoke at that time of his 
taking medicine or powder? — I do not remember that. I 
did not look for a powder. I looked in his dressing-room for 
bottles, but I did not find anything. 

On the occasion of her coming to you in March, when she 
was accompanied by Mrs, Briggs, she had a black eye. Did 
you afterwards learn from her husband how that was inflicted? 

— Yes ; I found that he had given it. 

Now, I wish to draw your attention to one or two points 
in the evidence which you have given. You said that he had 

35 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


A. K. Homr a strong habit of taking almost any medicine which was recom- 
mended him, and of taking larger doses than was prescribed! 
— ^Yes. 

He knew arsenic as a nerve tonic, and that it had similar 
properties to nux vomica and strychnine? — ^Yes, I believe so. 

And I believe he told you that he had taken arsenic as 
an antiperiodic when he was in America? — I gathered as much 
from his conversation — ^that he had taken it in America as an 
antiperiodic, and knew all about its properties. 

Now, I ask you whether that conversation took place, or 
something like it, about the time when Mrs. Maybrick told 
you about his dosing himself by taking the medicine? — It did 
not. It took place a considerable time before, and, in my 
mind, the two conversations had no connection. 

Are you clear on that point in your own mind? — Certainly. 

Had you that conversation with regard to his taking the 
arsenic as an antiperiodic in your mind when she made the 
statement to you about the middle of 1888 ? — No ; it was not 
in my recollection at the time. 

You did not follow it up by any inquiry from him? — No, I 
had no anxiety about him. 

What was Mr. Maybrick’s appearance. Was he a smooth- 
skinned man? — ^Yes, he had a smooth and rather pale com- 
plexion. 

Have you had any experience with the use of arsenic in this 
country? — I use arsenic very frequently. 

Principally in Fowler ^s solution, I believe? — ^Yes. 

Has any case come across you in this country of men who 
have used arsenic habitually? — I have no personal experience. 

Your experience is from books? — ^Yes. 

Can you tell me from experience what would probably be 
the effect of suddenly leaving off the use of arsenic by one who 
had been accustomed to taking it in small doses? — I cannot 
tell you from my experience the symptoms. 

Is it a fact that, as regards stimulants, it is true to say that 
the sudden cessation of them is injurious? — I would say risky 
rather than injurious. 

Is it the case with one class of stimulants — alcoholic stimu- 
lants — ^that the sudden disuse of alcohol by persons who have 
been taking a quantity may bring on delirium tremens? — ^Yes. 

And frequentiy it does?— That is so. 

You did say when you were asked about this conversation 
that it was in June or September, you could not tell which! 

Mr. JiJSTiCB Stbphbn — ^H e said so to-day. 

Cross-examination continued — Are you sure you did not 
prescribe arsenic yourself? — I am morally certain. 

Can you tell me the last occasion when you saw him? — It 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


would be in December, 1888, when I last saw him profession- A. I, BopM 
ally. 

The matters of which he complained, with the exception of 
the case in which you spoke of his having a cold, were uni- 
formly the same? — Yes. 

Would this be a correct description — ^that he suffered fre- 
quently from an impaired digestion and symptoms of nervous 
disease? — Yes. 

And during the whole of the period it was that deranged 
digestion and his nervous system for which you were treating 
him off and on from 1882 to the end of 1888, and that was so 
in December, 1888? — ^That is so. 

Did Mrs. Maybrick write to you a long letter on the eve 
of her husband’s death? — ^Yes. 

Have you got it? — I haven’t it with me. 

Can you get it? — Yes. 

I will ask to see it. 

By Mr. Justice Si-ephen — Did you attend Mr. Maybrick in 
his last illness? — ^Oh, no, my lord. 

Re-examined by Mr. Addison — You were saying that he had 
been hipped. What do you mean by that? — I mean that he 
attached too much importance to trifling symptoms. 

That is what you mean by being hipped? — ^Yes. 

You say these symptoms are accompanied by complaints 
about the liver. Is it usual for them to go together? — I 
think a derangement of the liver is an exciting cause of hypo- 
chondriacal condition of mind. 

You say he was given to dosing himself, and told you of 
remedies that friends had suggested. Did he ever tell you 
what the nature of the remedies were ? — ^Yes ; I remember he 
told me that he had habitually taken Fellows’ syrup as a 
tonic. 

What is that made of? — Quinine, iron, arsenic, and hypo- 
phosphites. And it also contains strychnine. 

Is it a common remedy? — ^Yes. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — ^You mentioned arsenic. Per- 
haps you will be kind enough to repeat the articles used in 
the composition of the medicine? — Hydrosulphate of quinine, 
iron, and strychnine. 

Re-examination continued — ^You mentioned strychnine. We 
know that in certain doses it is a serious poison. When given 
as a nerve tonic in what proportions do you use it? — ^Very 
minute doses in solution is what I frequently prescribed to 
him. 

Fellows’ syrup— is that a sort of patent medicine? — ^Yes. 

Did he mention to you any other sort of medicine he ever 
took? — ^Podophyllin piUs. 


37 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

^ a. Hopptp Tiiey act primarily upon the liver 1 — ^Yes. 

Two or three years ago it became a very popular remedy for 
the liver? — ^Yes. 

Did he mention anything else his friends ever suggested to 
him? — I also rememl^r hop bitters, an American proprietary 
article. 

What is it made of as far as you know? — Medicinal bitters 
of an innocent character. 

Did he ever mention anything else? — I do not know exactly. 

Was he very free with you as to what he had taken? — I 
found him quite candid as to what he had taken. 

Had he been quite candid at all times up to December, 
1888? — He was always unreserved. 

By Mr. Justicb Stephen — ^Were you an intimate personal 
friend at all? — I was merely the family doctor, and attended 
his wife in her confinement. 

Re-examination continued — Did he from first to last ever 
mention arsenic as the thing he was taking? — No, he never 
did. 

Except when he came from America in 1882? — I really 
cannot remember the date of that conversation, or how long 
after he came home from America. 

Did you know what part of America he had been to? — 
Norfolk, Virginia. 

Can you tell me whether, in that part of the world, ague, 
malaria, or other fevers are known? — I believe so. 

But at this period there was nothing, as far as you know, 
the matter with him? — No. But, roughly speaking, about 
June of last year he told me he had taken a bottle of mixture 
in half the time I prescribed. 

Do you remember what it was? — Bromide of potassium. 

It was on that occasion you told him? — That was one of 
the occasions. 

On other occasions? — I had occasion to warn him not to be 
so free with medicines or so careless about them. 

Strychnine and nux vomica are nerve tonics? — Yes. 

In what sort of doses do you give these tonics? — In solution 
|of strychnine. 

What is the dose ? — Three or four minims is a common dose. 

And nux vomica? — ^About ten minims. 

In the same way? — Yes. 

Had you, from anything he communicated to you, or from 
any other source, any reason to suppose that he was in the 
habit of using any arsenic whatever? — No; I never thought 
of arsenic in connection with this discussion before. 

Is arsenic a stimulant? — It would not be looked upon as a 
stimulant. 

38 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


Is it a tonic? — ^Yes. 

What is it taken in, and what for? — It is generally taken in 
solution, and with a form of ginger. 

Mrs. Matilda Briggs, examined by Mr. McConnell — I am 
the wife of Thomas Charles Briggs, and I live at Livingstone 
Avenue, Sefton Park. I knew the deceased Mr. Maybrick 
before his marriage, and I afterwards became acquainted with 
Mrs. Maybrick. In 1882 Mr. and Mrs. Maybrick took a house 
belonging to us. His general health was that of a man who 
was always quite well. On 30th March last Mrs. Maybrick 
called at my house and made a statement to me with reference 
to a quarrel that had taken place between her husband and her- 
self. I went with her to Dr. Hopper, and afterwards to her 
own lawyer. I also went to the General Post Office in Liver- 
pool to get a private letter for her. I next saw her on Friday, 
3rd May, the week before Mr. Maybrick died. She only 
made a complaint about her husband after the Grand National. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — How long after? — The day after. 

Examination continued — I heard of no quarrel of any con- 
sequence before that. I went to Battlecrease House on Wed- 
nesday, 8th May, and saw Nurse Yapp there, who made a 
statement to me. I went upstairs to Mr. Maybrick ^s bedroom, 
Mrs. Maybrick following immediately behind me. I had a 
conversation with Mr. Maybrick in her presence. He tried 
to tell me his symptoms, and said that he was very weary and 
very restless. Upon that Mrs. Maybrick asked me to come 
downstairs and she would tell me what was the matter with 
him. I went downstairs, but I do not remember what Mrs. 
Maybrick told me. I suggested that she should send for a 
nurse, but she said there was no occasion for one, as she 
could nurse him herself. She gave that as also being the 
opinion of the doctor. I left the house about eleven or twelve 
o^clock, and I afterwards saw Mr. Edwdn Maybrick, to whom 
I made a communication. 

I again went to the house on the following Saturday. I 
was sent for between four and five o’clock in the morning, 
and I remained in the house till Mr. Maybrick died. On the 
following day I made a search of the house along with my 
sister and the two Mr. Maybricks. In the writing table in 
the dressing-room I found a small bottle containing fluid and 
a handkerchief (produced). I also found a small blue box in 
an ordinary hatbox in the same room. The hatboi contained 
a man’s hat, and the smaller box contained three bottles (pro- 
duced). In addition there was on the top of the bo* a bottle 
that had contained Valentine’s extract. There was also a 
tumbler in another hatbox. In that tumbler there was a rag 

39 


A. B. Hoepsr 


M. Brlaas 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

M. BrUttfM soaking in a whitish fluid, which looked like milk. I left 
the articles as I found them, and the same evening (Sunday) 
I saw them given over to the inspector. I was at the house 
again on Tuesday, the 14th. I saw Mrs. Maybrick in bed 
in the spare bedroom. I saw her writing a letter which, when 
she had signed, she gave to me. In that letter, which has 
been produced, Mrs. Maybrick asked Mr. Brierley to send her 
money. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — On your reading 
the letter did you say anything? — I said it would be seen by 
the police, and gave it to the policeman at the door. 

I understand it was in your character as friend that you 
accompanied her to Dr. Hopper? — Yes. 

And in the same character you took her to your solicitor’s — 
I believe it was your own solicitor you recommended her to? — 
Yes. 

So that you were really very confidential in your relations to 
her? — That is so. 

Except calling to inquire how Mr. Maybrick was, you were 
not at the house during the illness until the 8th — the Wednes- 
day, that would be three days before Mr. Maybrick died? — 
That is the case. 

You were aware, were you not, that his brother, Mr. Edwin 
Maybrick, had been in Liverpool since the 25th of April? — I 
knew of his arrival in Liverpool. 

And you knew that he was in communication with Mr. 
Michael Maybrick, his brother? — Yes. 

So that if it was considered necessary to communicate with 
Mr. Michael Maybrick, Mr. Edwin Maybrick could have done 
so ? — Yes. 

The fact was, Mrs. Briggs, when you saw this poor gentle- 
man you came to the conclusion he was in a very bad way? — 
Yes. 

And you expressed your opinion to that effect? — Yes. 

Is it not a fact that he was in a very much more serious con- 
dition than you would have thought up to that time? — Yes. 

Mr. Edwin Maybrick had been stopping in the house for some 
time? — ^Yes. 

And had been, I don’t know whether every night, but off and 
on, from his arrival on the 25th April, had been actually 
sleeping in the house? — I don’t know that. 

You in fact formed a very bad opinion of the man’s con- 
dition ? — ^Yes. 

You formed a very serious opinion of it. You thought him 
in peril? — Yes. 

^rious peril? — ^Yes. 

I must ask you to remember one or two things you have not 
40 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


told US about wbich occurred that morning. Don’t you know M. BriMt 
that on Wednesday, before your visit, Mrs. May brick had tele- 
graphed to Hale for a nurse? — I know now. I did not know 
then. 

You did not know then? — No, she did not tell me herself. 

You have now ascertained it? — ^Yes- 

Was it your suggestion that the nurse sent for should be a 
trained nurse? — Yes. 

And did she fall in with your suggestion? — Yes, in the end. 

Did you hear that after the arrival of Dr. Humphreys? — I 
don’t know who told me. 

I think you wrote the telegram in her name, showed it to 
her, and she paid for it and sent it by a messenger? — No, I 
took it myself. 

She paid for it? — Yes. 

With regard to that letter (to Mr. Brierley), is it not a fact 
that you suggested the writing of it? — I did in sarcasm. 

You were examined on this before the coroner’s jury; did 
you say one word about making the suggestion in sarcasm 
then? — No, I was too nervous. 

At all events, whether you suggested it in sarcasm or not, 
you suggested it? — Yes. 

And when handed to you it was open? — Yes. 

You did not require to tear the envelope open to see the 
contents ? — No . 

You were asked to read it? — Yes. 

And when you saw the writing did you expostulate with her 
for writing? — No. 

Then when she had written it and handed it to you to read, 
did you say you would hand it to the policeman? — Yes, if she 
wished it to go. 

And you know, as a matter of fact, that it never reached its 
destination ? — Yes. 

I wish to get from you a few particulars. The first article 
you have mentioned in which arsenic was found was the writing 
table ? — Yes. 

Where was the writing table? — ^In the inner room off the 
bedroom. 

Is that the room in which there was a bed? — ^Yes, 

And did you know enough to know that the bed in that 
room was used? — Yes. 

It was used by him? — ^Yes. 

Where did the writing table stand? — Near the window, right 
away from the bed on the opposite side of the room. 

As you enter the inner door from the principal bedroom there 
is a window on the left of the room?— Yes. 

And a window facing as you enter? — ^Yes. 


41 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


II* Briffss llien how was the table with reference to the windows — ^was 
it between them or opposite? — It was opposite the window to 
the left. 

Was the writing table unlocked? — Yes; there was a little 
cupboard under the witing table. 

What did you find in it? — Odds and ends. 

Amongst other things, did you find some picture cord, 
hammer, and nails? — Yes, that kind of thing. 

And did the small bottle and handkerchief meet your eye 
when you opened it? — No, they were quite far back. 

I do not know whether you know that the small bottle con- 
tained oxide of zinc? — I do not know. 

The first hatbox you found in your search — where was it? — 
In the comer of the room. 

Whereabouts? — Behind the bed, and at the foot of the bed. 

Further out in the room? — Yes, in the corner. It was in 
the furthest corner at the right-hand side. 

[The position of the bed in the room was pointed out to the 
judge by Sir Charles Bussell.] 

Cross-examination continued — I want to clearly understand 
these things. Was the hatbox on the floor? — Yes. 

It was not secured or fastened? — No. 

And it did, in fact, contain a hat? — Yes. 

What sort of a hat was it? — One was a soft hat, and another 
was a tall one. 

Yes, but I am asking you about the first hatbox — were the 
hatboxes standing beside each other, or one on the top of the 
other? — I think beside each other. 

When you opened the first you found a small wooden box, 
and it contained three bottles, and on the top of the box there 
was a bottle of Valentine's meat extract? — Yes. 

In the second hatbox, which you say was standing near the 
first, you found a glass, and there was something like milk in 
it with a rag? — Yes. 

Have you told us, Mrs. Briggs, the result of the search so 
far as you took part in it? — Yes. 

Was there anything, so far as your observation extended, 
except Mrs. Maybrick' s wardrobe, that was in any way secured 
or locked? — No. 

You are aware that no bottles or anything else connected 
with this case were found in the wardrobe? — No. 

Did you in the course of your observations see that a large 
number of bottles were in the house? — Yes. 

Presumably the class of medicine bottles? — ^Yes. 

A very large number, was there not? — Yes. 

Would it be an exaggeration to say that there were more 
than one hundred? — ^Well, I could not say. There were several. 

4 * 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


But several is a very long way short of one hundred. Were M* Brlwr* 
there as many as fifty in one room! — I could not tell, but I 
know there were a good many. 

Do you know anything about this habit which is imputed to 
the dead man of his dosing himself with medicine and things 
^'^gF^sted by friends? — Yes. 

Was that well known among his friends? — ^Yes, I think so. 

Has he been remonstrated with or rallied about it in your 
presence? — Yes. 

How did you come to know it? — He used to recommend me 
medicines. He recommended me to take hypophosphites and 
things like it. 

Do you know what hypophosphites are? — A tonic, I think, to 
give you an appetite. That was a long time ago. 

Anything else? — Not that I remember. 

By Mr. Addison — You say you suggested this letter to the 
prisoner. What did you say to her? — I think I said to her that 
Mr. Brierley might help her, as he knew her troubles. 

Cross-examination continued — Did it come to your knowledge, 
or was it put to you, that traces of arsenic were found in one 
bottle of Valentine^s meat juice which had not been adminis- 
tered to the deceased man. Do you recollect that? — Yes. 

Did it also come to your knowledge that arsenic was found 
in some one or most of certain bottles, which will be pointed 
to particularly hereafter? That was so, was it not? — Yes. 

Do you recollect of hearing that arsenic was found in certain 
bottles ? — Yes. 

I am alluding to the time when you had the conversation 
with Mrs. Maybrick herself? — Yes. 

Do you recollect telling her that fact? — I think I mentioned 
it. 

Do you remember your mentioning particularly Valentine’s 
meat juice? Let me recall your mind to the fact. Dr. Carter 
took it away on the Friday night, and came back on Saturday 
morning, having tested it. You learned that before you left 
the house? — do not remember. 

Did you not mention that to Mrs. Maybrick? — Something 
was said about it by Nurse Wilson, 

Do you recollect Mrs. Maybrick beginning a sentence when 
a policeman came into the room and stopped her ? — (The witness 
hesitated.) 

Do you recollect the policeman coming into the room? — No. 

On the occasion of the conversation at which one of the 
nurses was present, did not a policeman come into the room 
and interrupt the conversation? — do not recollect. 

Try to recollect. This lady was practically in custody, and 
there was a policeman in the house. Was Mrs. Maybrick ill in 
bed? — ^Yes, 


43 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

■. Bptcfft Were you in her room? — Yes. 

Was your sister, Mrs. Hughes, in her room? — No; at the 
door. 

Was a nurse in the room? — Yes. 

You and the nurse were in the room, and your sister at the 
door. On that occasion was there any conversation which was 
interrupted? — Yes. My sister said to me, “You are not to say 
anything,” and the policeman said, “ You are not to speak.” 

And was that at the time, as well as you can recollect, w^hen 
you were mentioning to Mrs. Maybrick what had been found in 
relation to Valentine’s meat juice? — Yes, I think it was. 

Did you gather from what your sister said that it was the 
policeman who desired that there should be no conversation 
with Mrs. Maybrick about this? — Yes. 

The door was open? — ^Well, yes; it was partly open — it was 
not shut. 

Exactly. Your sister and the policeman being on the land- 
ing could hear the fact that there was a conversation going on? 
— ^Yes, they could. 

These rooms are not very large, I believe? — Not very, but 
they are a good size. 

^d they could hear the conversation? — Yes, every word. 

It was upon the conversation in this room on Valentine’s 
meat juice that the policeman said you must have no con- 
versation ? — Yes. 

Then the conversation, if there was any, was interrupted in 
that way? — Yes. 

Had you been more than a moment or two in that room at 
that time? — I was never very long at any time in the room. 

On this occasion you had gone into the room and opened the 
conversation, and your sister interrupted? — Yes. 

Do you know the policeman’s name? — No, I do not. 

Re-examined by Mr. Addibon — W hen did you first know there 
were traces of poison in the Valentine meat juice? — I really 
cannot remember. 

When did you first learn it? You know you left the house 
on the Wednesday, and he died on the Saturday. Did you 
know it before he died? — I think so. 

When did you know poison was found in the bottle? — I can- 
not remember the exact day, but my impression is that I heard 
it before I left the house. 

Before or after his death? — Before his death. 

Now, did you mention that in any shape or form to Mrs. 
Maybrick? — really could not say for certain. I think Nurse 
Wilson mentioned it. 

To Mrs. Maybrick? — ^Yes. 

Did you mention anything about it? — I may have done, but 
I have forgotten, and could not say positively. 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Now, do you know whether any other poison was found in M* Brlwrs 
the house? — I do not remember; there were so many bottles 
that I cannot remember. I heard there had been poison found 
in the bottles. 

When did you hear about the fly papers? — I heard about 
them on Wednesday. 

And did you speak about them to Mrs. Maybrick? — No. 

Now, with regard to handing the letter to the policeman at 
the door, all letters or messages had to go through him, had 
they not? — ^Yes; I handed it to him, so that it might be 
forwarded. 

Dr. Fuller was then called, but did not appear. 

Mrs. Martha Louisa Hughes, examined — I am a sister of 
Mrs. Briggs. I live in Sefton Park, Liverpool, and was 
acquainted with the late Mr. Maybrick for a considerable time. 

We met several times at Battlecrease House, where I went with 
my sister. I was at the house the day after his death. I 
found some letters (produced) in the middle drawer of the 
dressing-table, and handed them to Mr. Michael Maybrick. The 
dressing-table was in Mrs. Maybrick’s bedroom. A day or 
two after Mr. Maybrick ’s death I heard a conversation take 
place between Mrs. Maybrick and my sister in the morning- 
room downstairs. The conversation was with reference to a 
telegram to a nurse. I don't remember saying anything about 
a policeman being there. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — How long were you 
in the house? — ^Till Tuesday evening. 

Were the circumstances of the death the subject of the con- 
versation between you and your sister and the nurse? — Yes. 

Do you recollect hearing that arsenic was traced, and that it 
had been found in a bottle of Valentine’s meat juice? — ^Yes. 

And you also heard something about fly-papers? — ^Yes. 

Did you hear also of a packet labelled “ Poison ” being 
found? — Yes. 

Now, when did you hear about these things? — I do not quite 
know what you mean. 

When did you learn about Valentine’s meat juice? Did 
you learn that on Saturday or Sunday? — I heard it on the 
Saturday. 

Was it from Dr. Carter you heard it? — ^No. 

Prom whom? — Mr. Michael Maybrick. 

And when did you learn about the fly-papers? — On the Wed- 
nesday before the death. 

Also from Mr. Michael Maybrick? — No. 

Prom whom? — From Nurse Yapp. 


45 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


M. L. Hugliet And when did you leam about the packet being found 
labelled poison? — I heard that on the Sunday after the death. 

By Mr. Justicb Stephen — On what day did you hear about 
the Valentine’s meat juice? — On the Saturday evening. 

And the day of the fly-papers? — On the Wednesday before 
his death. 

Cross-examination continued — ^Were you there when Mrs. 
May brick was very ill and was in bed? — Yes. 

And I do not know whether you were there when she was 
carried from the dressing-room into the spare room? — I was in 
the passage. 

Do you recollect your being on the landing outside the spare 
room where Mrs. Briggs, your sister, and one of the nurses was 
in the room with Mrs. Maybrick? — Yes; I was out on the 
landing every time my sister was in the room. 

Do you recollect a policeman being on the landing also and 
interrupting a conversation? — ^Yes. 

And were you and he both in the position of hearing a con- 
versation ? — ^Yes. 

Do you recollect what that conversation was about? Had it 
reference to the Valentine’s meat juice, and the traces of arsenic 
supposed to be found in it? — ^Yes. 

Can you recollect whether Mrs. Maybrick was beginning to 
make any statement with reference to it or not? — No. 

Or upon your sister mentioning this? — I do not remember. 

Did the policeman intervene and say there must be no con- 
versation ? — Yes. 

And that you conveyed into the other room? — The door was 
open; I did not go in. 

But did you convey that into the room? — Yes. 

Which put an end to any explanation or conversation? — Yes. 

Re-examined by Mr. Addison — Do you remember what the 
conversation was about? — No. 


You can only say there was something said. You said the 
policeman had said nothing was to be said, and you repeated 
it? — ^Yes. 


When had you a conversation with Nurse Yapp? — On the 
Wednesday. 

What did Nurse Yapp say? 

Sir Charles Russell — I object. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — S ir Charles Russell is quite right. 


Maybriek Edwin Maybrick, examined by Mr. Addison — I am a brother 
of the deceased. I am a cotton merchant in Liverpool, and 
spend a good deal of my time in America. I returned from 
that country on 25th April, and on the following day I saw 

46 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


my brother in his office. 1 dined with him that evening. He M* MafMek 
appeared to be in his usual health. So far as 1 knew my 
brother on the whole enjoyed very good health. From time 
to time he took ordinary liver medicine. 

Any sort of arsenic? — No. 

On Saturday, 27th April, I saw my brother for a moment 
when passing to the Wirral races. On Sunday, the 28th, I went 
to his house and found him lying on a sofa, apparently ill. He 
said he had been taken ill on the previous morning, but that 
feeling somewhat better, he had gone out to the Wirral races, 
where he had not felt himself the whole day. He also said 
that he had numbness in the legs and in the hands. After he 
retired, about eight o’clock in the evening, Mrs. May brick sat 
talking to me in the breakfast-room for neafly an horn*. A 
ring then came from the chamber bell, and Mrs. May brick went 
upstairs. I followed, and found my brother lying in bed. He 
had almost lost the use of both legs and his right hand. He 
asked me to rub them for him, and Mrs. May brick and I did 
so until Dr. Humphreys came. I stayed at the house that 
night, at my brother’s request, and on Monday morning I 
found him rather better. I went out and did not see him 
again till the next day. He was then pretty much the same 
as on Monday. 

On Wednesday, 1st May, my brother went to business. 

Mrs. May brick gave me a parcel to take to his office. I after- 
wards learned that it contained a brown jug in which there was 
some farinaceous food in liquid form. My brother poured 
the liquid into a saucepan and heated it over the fire, and he 
then poured it into a basin and partook of it. He remarked, 

“ The cook has put some of that sherry into it, and she 

knows I don’t like it.” Some time after that I asked him 
how he was, and he said that he had not felt so well since his 
lunch. I went in the evening to Battlecrease House to dinner. 

My brother was not quite so well then as in the morning, but 
he complained of nothing particular. I did not see my brother 
take his lunch on the Thursday. On Friday I was informed 
that he had gone to have a Turkish bath. 

I did not see my brother again until Sunday, the 5th, when 
I went to the house. He told me he had been very sick, and 
that he vomited, and could not retain anything in his stomach. 

I gave him a brandy and soda, which he retained for about 
half an hour, but on my giving him a dose of physic he vomited 
it. He was very sick all that afternoon. Dr. Humphreys 
came that evening and said he had better not take anything to 
eat or drink for the present, and if he were thirsty he was to 
have a wet towel put to his mouth. I did not see any towel 

47 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

B« KayMek put to his mouth. My brother asked me to stay for the night, 
and after that day he never left his bed. 

On the Tuesday he was still very sick, but he was rather 
better than he was on the previous day. In consequence of a 
telegram which I received from Mrs. Maybrick on the Tuesday 
I arranged with Dr. Carter to be at Battlecrease House at half- 
past five, and I also telegraphed to Dr. Humphreys to join us 
there. On arriving at Battlecrease by the 4.45 train, I met 
the doctors there, and told them what I knew of my brother's 
condition. On that night my brother's condition was pretty 
much the same; he was very weak, he was vomiting, and he 
was pained in the bowels as well. He complained very much 
about his throat and about having a difficulty in swallowing. 

On Wednesday, the 8th, he seemed a little better. I asked 
him whether he would like me to bring my brother Michael 
down, but he said no — that he did not think it was necessary, 
that he had been very ill, but he felt a little better. He asked 
me what I thought about sending for a nurse, and I told him 
that I would ask the doctor. Mrs. Maybrick said she thought 
of sending to Hale wood for a nurse who had been attending her, 
because my brother knew her and liked her. I saw Dr. Carter 
that morning, and, in consequence of what he told me, I did 
not telegraph for my brother at that time. About twelve 
o'clock that day I received another telegram from Mrs. May- 
brick. I do not have that telegram here; I am not quite 
certain as to whether it was destroyed. In it she said, “Jim 
worse again; have wired for a nurse.” On receipt of that 
message I telegraphed to my brother Michael to come down, 
and I went myself to Battlecrease by the 12.40 train. I met 
Mrs. Briggs and Mrs. Hughes there, and in consequence of a 
conversation which I had with them I went to the Nurses' 
Institution. I found that Nurse Gore had already been sent 
to Battlecrease. Approaching the house, I saw Nurse Yapp 
in the drive. We went to a seat in the garden, out of sight 
of the house, and there she gave me the letter addressed to 
Mr. Brierley. Later in the day I met my brother Michael as he 
arrived from London. On the way to the house we had a con- 
versation, and when we got to Battlecrease I gave certain in- 
structions to Nurse Gore. 

The following day my brother was better, and I went to town 
to arrange for nurses. On Friday morning I went to bring 
Dr. Humphreys. About one o'clock my brother became worse 
and could not take any nourishment, and at half-past eight in 
the evening of Saturday, the 11th, he died. I first saw the 
chocolate box in the breakfast room when it was brought down 
by Nurse Yapp. The policeman came on the Sunday evening. On 
Monday a post-mortem examination was held, and the prelimin- 
48 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

ary inquest was held on the Tuesday. The dressing-gown pro- K. Maybrlek 
duoed is, I think, Mrs. Maybrick's. It was worn by her when she 
was attending to my brother at night, and also in the morning. 

The gown was taken by one of the professional nurses out of 
the room, and was hung up in the lavatory, which was then 
open. I took it out of there and put it into a cupboard, which 
I locked. That might have been on the Tuesday. I kept the 
key of the cupboard. The next time I had anything to do 
with the gown was on 13th June, when I hand^ it over to 
Inspector Baxendale. The apron produced was also, I believe, 
with the dressing-gown, but I cannot be quite certain. I 
noticed a handkerchief in the pocket of the dressing-gown, and 
I handed it and the apron to Inspector Baxendale. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — When did you 
arrive at Battlecrease ? — On the 25th April. 

Were you backwards and forwards at Battlecrease up to the 
time of your brother’s death? — Yes. 

Did you sleep at the house a number of days? — Yes. 

How many? — I slept there on the Sunday after I arrived, on 
the Tuesday, the 30th April, and not again until the Sunday 
following, and then I slept there every night until his death. 

And, with the exception of a few nights, you were there the 
greater part of the time? — Yes. 

Did Mrs. Maybrick seem attentive to her husband? — Yes. 

Did she sit up at night? — Yes, most nights, I believe. 1 
understand so. 

Were you in the house on Sunday, the 28th April? — Yes. 

Were you there when she sent for Dr. Humphreys on the 
Sunday? — Yes, in the evening. He had already been there 
in the morning before I arrived. 

Were you there when she sent for him in the first instance? — 

No. 

But you have ascertained, I presume, that she had sent for 
him in the morning? — ^Yes. 

Were you there at the time? — No. 

He w^as the only medical man living near to the house? — Yes. 

He only lived ten minutes’ 'walk away. 

Dr. Humphreys was in sole attendance upon him up to 
Tuesday, the 7th? — Yes, as far as I know. 

And on Tuesday, the 7th May, Dr. Carter was called in, and 
he and Dr. Humphreys were in attendance upon the patient 
up to his death? — ^Yes. 

Do you recollect on the Tuesday Mrs. Maybrick suggesting 
that you should send your o’wn medical man?-^he telegraphed 
to me suggesting that Dr. M^Cheyne (a medical man and a 
friend of mine) should be sent for. Dr. M‘Cheyne did not 
go out as a rule, but held consultations. Mrs. Maybrick had 


D 


49 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

B. Ifaybriok heard me mention the name to my brother James, and that 
was how she came to know the name. 

You went to Dr. Carter? — Yes. 

Had you any communication with Dr. Carter befoi e you went 
to Battlecrease ? — No. I never saw him. 

You had not written to him? — I telephoned to him. 

You communicated with him to make an appointment, but 
had no communication with him until he came to Battlecrease ? 
—Yes. 

That was on Tuesday? — Yes. 

Had he any communication with Dr. Humphreys before he 
came out to Battlecrease? — Not to my knowledge. 

Another matter I wish to ask you about. Did she speak 
about a nurse? — Yes. 

Was that first mentioned on Tuesday or Wednesday? — It was 
first mentioned on Wednesday morning. 

Do you recollect whether the nurse was Mrs. Low, of Hale? — 
I don’t recollect any name being mentioned. 

Was it some one at Hale? — Yes. 

Was the telegram sent to that person? — I do not know. 

Have you heard since? — I have since learned that she was 
telegiaphed for. 

The conversation about the nurse being sent for was early 
on Wednesday morning, was it not, before you went to town? 
—Yes. 

From the Wednesday morning until the death had you 
privately forbidden any intervention by Mrs. Maybrick in the 
nursing or administration of medicine or food? — I instructed 
Nurse Gore. I gave orders on Wednesday night, and repeated 
them on Thursday morning. 

Were the orders on Wednesday night or on Wednesday morn- 
ing? — On Wednesday night. The nurse did not arrive till 
Wednesday afternoon. 

Which nurse? — Nurse Gore. 

At two o’clock, did she not? — Yes; but I did not see her. 

What time of day did you see her? — ^As far as I can recollect, 
at about five o’clock. 

As far as you know and have observed, were your 
orders on that point observed and carried out? — Upon the 
whole, I think they were. 

The nurses are here who had successive charge of him — one 
relieving the other, I believe? — They are, I believe. 

Now, I want this quite definitely — ^your instructions were 
specific and distinct, that neither as to medicine, nor as to food, 
was Mrs. Maybrick to have anything to do with it? — I never 
mentioned her name in the matter, but I told the nurses I 
should hold them responsible for all foods and all medicines 

50 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


given to him, and that nobody was to attend to him at all except B. NajMek 
the nurses. But I did not mention any names. 

Still, that would be the effect of the orders? — ^Yes, it would. 

I would exclude her and everybody else except the nurses. 

But there was nobody else to exclude? — There might have 
been a servant for all I knew. 

But, at all events, it was Mrs. Maybrick you had in your 
mind? — Yes. 

Did you tell her you had given these instructions? — No. 

Or did you address any statement, or advice, or direction to 
her on the matter? — No, none whatever, as far as I can 
recollect. 

Now, as to another matter. What was the day on which 
you took down food to the office? — Wednesday, Ist of May. 

Can you tell me if the previous occasion on which food was 
taken to the office was on the Tuesday? — The only days on 
which food was taken down were Wednesday and Thursday. 

So far as you know, food was not taken down to the office 
except on those two days? — So far as I know. 

Now, I ask you this — Did you learn how the food affected 
your brother on the Wednesday ; do you suggest that he was 
sick after it? By sick do you mean vomiting? — Oh, no. I do 
not suggest any such thing. No, I have never stated that. I 
spoke to him on that occasion, and he said that he did not feel 
so well since his lunch. 

Is it not the fact that, on that same day, he dined at home 
in company with your wife? — I beg your pardon, I am not 
married. 

It is my mistake. The company consisted of Captain Irving, 
of the White Star Line, yourself, your brother, and his wife? — 

Yes. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — The food was taken down by you on 
Wednesday and by some one else on the second day ; which 
day w^as it when you asked him how he felt, and when he said 
he did not feel so well after luncheon? 

Sir Charles Russell — That was on Wednesday, my lord ; it 
was the day when he had dinner at home with Captain Irving 
and his brother. (To Witness) — Now, there is another matter 
I should like to ask you about, and that is, if you have seen 
the cash-box which Mrs. Maybrick said was hers? — Yes, it is 
a small cash-box. 


You are aware that possession of the box was demanded by 
Mr. Cleaver. Where is it? — It is at the house now ; it is locked 
up in the linen closet. The house, with the exception of the 
linen closet, is empty. 


Is there any objection to its being produced? — None, so far as 
I know. 


51 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

B. Majrbriek Did you find amongst your brother’s papers a bundle of pre- 
scriptions ? — There were several prescriptions found in the room 
on its being searched by Mr. Baxendale. 

Where are they? — Mr. Baxendale took possession of them. 

Where are they? — I do not know. 

Are you sure you do not? — So far as I know, I did not see 
a prescription of Dr. Ward. 

There may have been one amongst those which Mr. Baxendale 
took? — There may have been. 

Have you not said to Mr. Baxendale that you had seen them? 
— I do not remember. 

Are they in Court? — I cannot say. 

Did you find any of these prescriptions — any from Dr. Ward, 
of Norfolk, Virginia? — Not that I am aware of. I should 
have noticed them at once, knowing the gentleman, if I had 
seen anything of the kind. 

So far as vou recollect, vou did not see them? — I did not. 

But they may have been amongst these prescriptions? — Yes ; 
they may have been. 

Did you not get any prescriptions at the office among your 
brother’s papers? — Mr. Baxendale went to the office; and, if 
there were any, he must have taken them away. 

My first question was, did you find any there? — So far as I 
remember, no ; but Mr. Baxendale may have done. 

In addition to these, there were a large number of bottles 
found at the office? — Yes, I believe so. 

I am told as many as twenty-eight. There was no arsenic 
in these? — I believe not. 

Can you make it convenient to look at the prescriptions to- 
night, and see whether there are any from Dr. Ward, of Vir- 
ginia? — Certainly, if they are handed to me. 

There is another matter to which I should allude now. On 
the 30th of April, you did not think your brother was very 
unwell? — No; not seriously so. 

You escorted his wife to some entertainment — to a domino 
ball? — ^Yes ; to a private domino ball at Wavertree. 

You were her escort on that occasion? — ^Yes. 

Did you know that he was taking ipecacuanha wine at the 
time? — I don’t know. 

T. S. Wokes Thomas Symington Wokes, examined by Mr. Swift — I am a 
chemist in Aigburth, and I also have the post office there. I 
knew the late Mr. Maybrick and his wife. 

[The judge here interrupted for a moment, and said that he 
had received from Mr. Edwin Maybrick a number of prescrip- 
tions, and he asked if Sir Charles Russell wished to see them. 
Sir Charles answered in the affirmative.] 

52 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


Examination continued — I remember an occasion when Mrs. T- 8. Wokw 
Maybrick called upon me, somewhere about the 24:th April last, 
and purchased from me a dozen fly-papers. The fly-papers 
(produced) are of a similar kind to the ones I sold her. She 
made a remark to me at the time that the flies were beginning 
to get troublesome in the kitchen. I had sold only one lot of 
fly-papers before that during the present year. I had an 
account against the deceased, but Mrs. Maybrick paid for the 
fly-papers. I sent my boy with the fly-papers to the house. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — You knew Mrs. 

Maybrick very well? — Yes. 

She lived close to you? — ^Yes. 

Probably you would address her by her name? — Yes. 

You sold fly-papers at other times not in hot weather? — ^Yes. 

Are you aware that washes for the hair are made from it? — I 
am not aware of it. 

Or face? — I have never heard of it. 

But you have yourself sold papers in the season when they 
have not been wanted for killing flies? — I cannot remember a 
similar instance except the lot I sold — the one previous to this 
lot. But the first lot was not for a wash or flies. 

What were they wanted for? — For beetles. 

When was that, do you recollect? — I believe it was in the 
month of February. 

It was for some one whom you knew, also? — Yes. 

Was this parcel rolled up with the ends open? Was it 
wrapped up with the ends turned in cylindrical form? — Yes. 

'She didn't take them with her? — No. 

What are they a dozen? — Sixpence a dozen. 

How long have you been in business there? — One year and 
eleven months. 

Re-examined by Mr. Addison — Have you any means of fixing 
the date when these fly-papers were purchased? — -It was not 
earlier than the 15th nor later than the 25th of April. 

CHRISTOPHER Hanson, examined by Mr. Swift — am a c. Hanson 
chemist and druggist at Cressington. Mrs. Maybrick was a 

customer at my shop. On the 29th April last she came to my 
shop for a lotion and purchased two dozen fly-papers, which cost 
one shilling. The fly-papers were similar to those produced. 

She had an account running, and did not usually pay at the 
time of ordering. Upon this occasion she paid for the fly- 
papers, but not for the lotion. She took the fly-papers with 
her. I have since analysed some of my fly-papers, and have 
found each paper to contain from one to two and a half grains 
of arsenic. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles RussHLL--Wa8 it not arsenite 
of soda? — No, it was arsenical acid, or white arsenic. 


S3 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

C. Hanson White arsenic is another name for it? — ^Yes. 

How long have you been in your business, Mr. Hanson? — 
Two and a half years. 

Cressington is close to Battlecrease ; it is in the neighbour- 
hood of Aigburth? — Yes, it is about ten minutes* walk from it. 

How long have you known Mrs. Maybrick? — From a few days 
after going to Cressington. 

You had an account from the house? — Yes. 

These lotions and things which you have to make up are such 
that the price must be computed in accordance with the in- 
gredients? — ^Yes. 

But in the case of fly-papers that is not so? — No, they have 
their regular price. 

You just describe to us what took place in the shop when 
Mrs. Maybrick bought the things? — She came into the shop 
and brought a paper with the ingredients of a lotion written 
down ; it was not a doctor’s prescription. She had that made 
up, and while waiting, and I suppose seeing the fly-papers on 
the counter, she asked for some. 

They were on the counter, were they? You have not told 
us about that yet? — Yes. 

They were in a conspicuous position? — ^Yes. 

Just explain how that was? — There was a glass case, and on 
either side of the glass case there was a shelf, and it was on the 
shelf nearest the door that these fly-paj>ers were. 

And while the lotion was being prepared she gave the order 
for the fly-papers? — Yes. 

What was the lotion which she ordered — what were the in- 
gredients? — Tincture of benzoin and elderflowers. 

That is a cosmetic, is it not? — ^Yes. 

Is it within your experience that arsenic is an ingredient in 
many cosmetic preparations? — It is, sir; quite common. 

It softens the skin? — I don’t know what it is for. 

You know, I presume, it is a depilatory? 

Mr. Justice Stephen (to the jury)— That is, it takes off hairs. 

The Witness — I am not aware it has that quality. 

Cross-examination continued — You know that it is sold by 
artists in hair for that purpose? — I don’t know, sir. 

I must further ask you — ^knowing, as you have told us, that 
arsenic was common as an ingredient in cosmetics, is not that 
mixture of benzoin and elderflowers a lotion in which arsenic 
would very likely be used? — Yes, sir, it is. 

Is it not a very common thing to sell arsenical fly-papers at 
seasons when they are not wanted for the destruction of insects? 
Have you not so sold them? — Not in the depth of winter. 

But in the spring and autumn? — Yes. 

Did you know the purposes for which they were going to be 
applied ? — No. 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


I understand that you have sold them at a time when they C. Hanson 
were not needed for the destruction of flies? — Sometimes. 

Now I don’t know whether you, as a chemist, make up and 
sell lotions for toilet purposes? — I do ; but I don’t make up any 
lotions containing arsenic. 

I do not suggest that; but lotions for toilet purposes? — Oh, 
yes. I very frequently make up similar lotions to what Mrs. 

May brick had, but I have no proprietary lotion. 

You make them up if you are asked? — Yes. 

And only when you are asked? — Yes, 

Re-examined by Mr. Addison — Did you ever sell fly-papers 
for the puipose of making cosmetics? — No. 

Is it not a fact that in cosmetics arsenic is used? — Not in my 
case. 

In what form is it generally used? — It is used as a paste, and 
it is combined with bismuth. 

You believe, as a matter of knowledge in your profession, it 
is used in these cosmetics? — Yes. 

What are its effects? — I do not know. 

Did you ever hear of its being used as a cosmetic except in 
the regular form? — No. 

Not fly-papers? — Certainly not. 

John Sbfton, examined — I am an assistant to Mr. Wokes. John Sefton 
I do not recollect how long ago I was sent with a parcel to 
Battlecrease House, and went to the back door with it. I was 
told to put it on the stairs, and I did so, and left it there. It 
was a parcel given to me by Mr. Wokes for Mrs. Maybrick. 

George Smith, examined by Mr. Addison — I was bookkeeper Georse Smith 
to the late Mr. James Maybrick for a period of four years. The 
deceased’s health was generally good. He sometimes com- 
plained of his liver. He had discussed the question of homoeo- 
pathy, but not with me. On the day of the Wirral races 
deceased came to the office at about half-past ten in the morn- 
ing. He was not looking well, and went away between twelve 
and one o’clock. On the following Monday, the 29th, he came 
to the office at about two o’clock. He did not look verv well. 

«k 

On the 30th he came to the office at one o’clock, and still did 
not look well. On Wednesday, the Ist May, he came to the 
office, and I saw him warming food in a pan for his lunch. I 
did not notice him particularly after his lunch. He said on the 
Wednesday that he was very seedy. On Thursday he came to 

4-' *■ ft/ 

the office again, and also on Friday. On that day he did not 
seem at all well. He was very pale. He left, and never 
came again. 

C?roS8-examined by Sir Charles Rttssbll — There were no medi- 

55 



Georare Smith 


T. Lowpy 


Trial of Mrs May brick. 

cine bottles sold from the office ? Do you know what was done 
with the bottles, or whose perquisites they were? — They never 
were sold with my knowledge. 

If they were sold, who would have the right to selll — I don’t 
know. 

Are you aware of any of these bottles being sold? — I am not 
aware. 

How many were found in the office at the time of his death? 
— I think twenty. 

I am told twenty-eight. But, however, were some of these 
endorsed in writing by the deceased himself? — I don’t know. 

You didn’t examine them? — No. 

Beyond your observation that he did not look very well, was 
there anything at all in his condition to attract your attention ? 
— No ; he seemed to be very pale. 

Was there anything further? — No. 

Was he ever sick in the office? — No. 

Re-examined by Mr. Addison — Were all the medicine bottles 
found in the office given up to Inspector Baxendale? — Yes. 

Thomas Lowry, examined by Mr. McConnell — I was in the 
employment of the late Mr. James Maybrick for nearly five 
years. On Saturday, the 27th April, the deceased came down 
to the office about eleven o’clock, and in my hearing he made 
complaint of stiffness in his limbs. He left the office between 
twelve and one to go to some races. On Monday, the 29th, the 
deceased came down to the office between eleven and twelve, 
looking unwell. To the best of my recollection, he came down 
on the Tuesday, and stayed about half an hour. I was sent 
out with a parcel, and I took out some letters. The parcel 
contained some of Du Barry’s food, Revalenta Arabica,” and 
I took it from the office to the house. I recollect Mr. Maybrick 
coming to the office on the 1st May, about eleven o’clock. He 
sent me out to buy a saucepan, a basin, and a spoon. The 
articles produced are something like those I purchased. Upon 
giving the articles to Mr. Maybrick, he poured some liquid into 
the saucepan out of a jug, and put it on the fire, and he after- 
wards partook of it. The vessels were afterwards left in the 
office. On the next day, when he came to the office, he wasn’t 
very well. He had lunch again, and warmed the food as he 
had done on the previous day. He only took some of it. On 
Friday, the 3rd May, he was down at the office, but he was 
never there after. There were a number of bottles at the 
office, having accumulated since I had been there. Before 
this time the general health of Mr. Maybrick had been good. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — Do you recollect 
his having been ill once at the office three or four years ago? — 
Yes. 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


Except on that occasion, had anything occurred to attract T. Lowry 
attention in relation to his health? — ^Not previous to the be- 
ginning of April. 

In April you did not think he seemed very well? — ^No, he 
looked pale- 

Mrs. Eliza F. Bushdr, examined — I am a charwoman. I E. F. Bushor 
cleaned the offices of the late Mr. James May brick. On the 

morning of 2nd May I washed the pan and other vessels pro- 
duced. On the following morning I saw the vessels had been 
used again, and that particles of food were left adhering to 
them, some white and some black. I cleaned the vessels, and 
put them on the mantelpiece. There were not many old medi- 
cine bottles in the office. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — Did you see the 
food? — Yes ; the dark food was like beef tea, but I do not know 
what the white food was made of. 

Did you see what was in the cupboard? — No, sir. 

The Court adjourned. 


57 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


Second Day — Thursday, ist Aug^ust, 1889. 

The Court met at ten o^clock. 

Fuller Dr. CHARLES FuLLBR, examined by Mr. Addison — I am a 
member of the Royal College of Surgeons, practising at Alwyn 
Street, near Wellington Mansions, Regent's Park. In April 
last I was in medical attendance on Mr. Michael Maybrick. In 
consequence of a letter from Mr. Michael Maybrick, I went to 
his chambers, Wellington Mansions, Regent's Park, on Sunday, 
14th April, for the purpose of examining his brother, James 
Maybrick. I saw Mr. James Maybrick, and made an examina- 
tion of him, and heard what he had to say. He complained 
of pains in his head and of numbness, and said he was appre- 
hensive of being paralysed. 

What made him think that? — He had lost some sensation, 
and felt numb. The examination lasted over an hour. I 
found there was nothing the matter with him. I told him there 
was very little the matter with him, but that he was suffering 
from indigestion, and that I was perfectly certain there was no 
fear of paralysis. The sy^mptoms were those which might be 
attributed to indigestion. When I told him this he seemed 
more cheerful. I did prescribe for him. Those two pre- 
scriptions (produced) are the ones I prescribed on the 14th foi 
him. The one is an aperient and the other a tonic, with liver 
pills. On the following Saturday, the 20th, deceased came 
to my house and told me that he felt much better. I examined 
him again, and found him better. The dyspeptic symptoms 
of which he complained had partially disappeared. I there- 
upon slightly altered the prescription and wrote another (pro- 
duced). In it compound sulphur lozenges were substituted for 
pills, and a little sweet spirits of nitre added. The third pre- 
scription I would describe as a tonic — a stomach and nerve 
tonic. None of the three prescriptions contained arsenic in 
any shape or form. Deceased told me he had been taking a 
pill which he said I had prescribed for his brother. This, how- 
ever, was not the case. I had not prescribed it. That pill 
contained powdered rhubarb, extract of aloes, and extract of 
camomile flowers, and was a mild aperient. He told me of 
nothing else he had been taking. He never suggested to me 
that he had been taking arsenic during any part of his life. 
I knew nothing about it at that time. It was never suggested 
to me by him. I asked him if he had been taking any medi- 
cine, and he said that the pill was the only thing he had been 



Hvidcncc lot Pt^MCctftMWu 

taking. I h»v* had thirty jmn' ^ 

I know the BympUmM whn^ 

Take away from your mind all «r»am*«i peworas 

—bow is arsenic geoeraUy t^eiil--lt la ” * ”***-“ * 

fluid form, in Fowler’s solution, wbwh u made from 
acid dissolved in a solution of potash. Tim ^ 
one to eight minims. I saw no indicaUon in Mr. Mnjrnrn^ of 
his having been a person who had been in tbo hnhtt erf tuinf 

arsenic. .1.-1 # 

Are there symptoms which accompany the habitoai uee of 

arsenic ? — Yes, but they were not present in this case. Arweaw 
is given in cases of intermittent fever; but Mr. Maybrick did 
not complain of that. I had no reason to suppose he was 
taking arsenic. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Bussell — Your attention waa 
not directed to the matter at all ? — No. 

You did not examine him for any symptoms of the use of 
arsenic ? — No. 

I believe he complained of pain in his head and numbness 
of his right leg ; he was apprehensive of paralysis on that side ? 

— Yes, I believe he was. 

Did he also complain of derangement of the digestion? — Yes. 

Did he tell you these symptoms were symptoms of old stand- 
ing? — No, he did not. 

Did he tell you he had had the numbness before? — I cannot 
recollect. 

Do you know now that they were of old standing — that he 
had complained of them as far back as 1882? — I have not that 
knowledge. 

You examined him, and found him free from organic disease? 
—Yes, I did. 

He told you he had been taking some pills you had prescribed 
for his brother, and you understood him to say that was the 
only medicine he had been recently taking? — Yes. 

Was he a man who seemed inclined to exaggerate his symp- 
toms? — I thought so. He seemed a nervous man. 

A<s regards the pills, they are described as Plummer's pills? — 

Yes. 

Plummer's pills contain from a grain to a grain and a quarter 
in each pill? — Yes, of the sulphuret of antimony. 

I don't think that you on the second occasion gave any fresh 
directions about Plummer's pills; you simply told him to con- 
tinue? — I told him to omit the pills, and take lozenges as a sub- 
stitute. 

I was struck by one observation you made in answer to a 
question my friend put to you as to whether any suggestion was 
made about his taking arsenic, your answer being, as I took it 

59 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


Fuller down, No, it was not suggested to me by him then — It 

was never suggested to me. 

Then you do not mean to qualify your answer? — No; if I 
have suggested that subsequently a suggestion of the kind was 
made, I do not wish to do so. 

You mean to say, then, that it has never been suggested to 
you ? — Yes. 

I understand you. You mean that it was never suggested to 
you by any one? — Never suggested by any one. 

No opinion has been asked of you with reference to the sup- 
position of his having at any time taken arsenic habitually? — 
No ; I have never been asked about it. 

In reference to the use of arsenic, I think when conveyed 
medicinally it is frequently conveyed in Fowler’s solution? — 
Yes, frequently ; but I ought to say there is another solution of 
arsenic made with hydrochloric acid. 

Fowler’s solution is the more common one? — Yes. 

I wish to make it quite clear; it contains arsenic which has 
been made completely dissoluble — it has been completely dis- 
solved? — Yes. 

May I presume generally that it is made from crude or 
arsenious acid?- — Yes. 

It is arsenious acid in a state of solution? — Yes. 

It also dissolves in water? — Yes; but not so easily. 

Have you ever known a case at all in your experience of a 
person in the habit of taking arsenic not prescribed in doctor’s 
doses — any case in your own experience? — Yes, several cases. 

Under prescriptions? — No; they had a prescription first, and 
subsequently got it from the chemist on their own account. 

In small m^icinal doses? — ^Yes. 

Any experience of your ovui of this kind? — Yes, one. 

When was that? — About six years ago. 

Had you prescribed it? — Yes, originally. 

And after your prescription it had been continued without, 
as I understand, your authority? — It had. 

And what was the result? — He got a swelling about the eye- 
lids and a redness of the eyes, together with a tenderness over 
the stomach. 

Would those be the symptoms which you would say would be 
produced by an undue use of arsenic — redness of the eyelids, 
intolerance of light? — No, I do not think there would be an 
intolerance of light. 

But there would be a swelling about the eyelids, redness of 
the eyes, and a tenderness over the stomach, especially in pres- 
sure? — Yes. 

As far as there are any distinctive indications, would you say 
those are the most prominent? — I do. 

6o 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


But you have found them associated wiUi other cases, cases C. Fuller 
of undue use of arsenic? — I have. 

Is it not correct to say that it is impossible to mention one 
symptom and say that it is distinctly from an over-use of 
arsenic and from nothing else? — should say so, any one of 
them. 

Did you in the case of the patient come to the conclusion that 
he or she — I don^t know whether it was a lady or a gentleman? — 

It was a gentleman. 

Did you come to the conclusion that he had foolishly pre- 
scribed for himself and taken what were excessive doses ? — 

They were not excessive doses according to the Pharmacopoeia, 
but they were excessive doses for him. 

That is to say, the effect of doses varies according to the 
idiosyncrasy of the particular person? — It does vary in that 
way. 

And regarding the particular state of health and the course 
of life of the individual? — Yes. 

And the kind of treatment he was undergoing in other 
respects? — All those things would interfere very much with 
the action of arsenic. 

Have you had a case where you had to consider whether 
the effect of antimony upon a person who was taking arsenic 
had accentuated the action of arsenic? — Personally I have not. 

Can you tell me this — whether if a person has been in the 
habit of taking arsenic the desire for it grows strong; in other 
words, whether the passion for it increases? — No, it is not like 
opium. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — Your words are, Nothing like 
opium.'' Do I understand you that you know it is not like 
opium? — Yes, my lord. 

Cross-examination continued — Just see, Dr. Fuller, if you 
realise what his lordship is putting to you? — Yes. 

I was asking you about your own experience, and I imder- 
stood you to say not. Do you undertake to say that arsenical 
dosing does not grow upon a person? — I am unable to say one 
way or the other from my own experience. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — Do you, as the result of your 
general knowledge on the subject, believe that the habit does 
grow or that it does not grow? — That it does not grow. 

Cross-examination continued — I must press you upon this. 

Did the leaving it off in the case of the person to whom you refer 
cause any depression? — Although that case is six years ago, I 
called upon the gentleman to inquire whether he felt any differ- 
ence whatever, and he said he did not. 

How long did he take it? — I cannot tell you exactly, but for 
some months. 

Very well, then, I must press you upon this. Do you 

6i 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


C. Fuller remember the well-known case, which attracted a great deal 
of attention among medical men, of the Styrian peasants? — 1 
do. 

Do you agree that much depression occurs on the withdrawal 
of the drug from those who take it ? — Only with those who take 
it in very large doses. 

But those are doses which begin by very small doses? — The 
case to which I refer was very small doses indeed — only about 
three drops — and therefore there would not be much depression. 
I account for the absence of depression by the smallness of the 
doses. 

Re-examined by Mr. Addison — My friend has implied that 
there is some pleasure in taking arsenic or a passion for it. 
Have you ever heard of such a thing in your experience? — No, 
I never have. 

My friend speaks of an arsenic habit. Do you recognise any 
such? — No; I really have had no experience. 

Well, but as far as your experience of and treatment of 
patients go, does the taking of arsenic, as opium, produce 
pleasure? — I never heard of such a thing. 

Did you ever hear of it being taken except by some one who 
thought it would do him good? — No, I never did. 

When you speak of people who have taken arsenic having 
redness in the eyes and eyelids, have they taken it for medicinal 
purposes? — It may be so. 

What do they generally take it for? — Generally for skin 
eruptions. 

Anything else? — Sometimes as a tonic. 

I think the word my friend suggested, something about an 
aphrodisiacal tendency, it being taken by him for sexual pui- 
poses. Did you ever hear that? — I have never heard of it. 

To create a desire? — I have never heard of arsenic being taken 
for such purposes. 

Did Mr. Maybrick, in any shape or form, when speaking of 
his nervousness, ever suggest anything of the kind? — He did 
not. 

Did you ever hear it spoken of in connection with him imtil 
this moment? — No. 

You were not here yesterday? — No. 

What was the cause of the numbness of which he complained ? 
— Functional disturbance of the nerves, I suppose. 

Will any disturbance of the nerves produce numbness? — 
Certain disturbances will. 

Such as disturbances produced by dyspeptic derangements 
generally? — It is almost impossible to say what is the cause of 
constant disturbances in the nerves. 

How do those who take arsenic for their skins or as a tonic 
usually take it? — It is usually taken by Fowler’s solution. 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


Did you ever hear of it being mixed with food or drink or C, Fullap 
medicine ordered by doctors? — Never. 

As a cosmetic, how is it taken? — It is taken in water, the 
same as for other purposes. 

My friend has examined you about Styrian peasants. They 
say that by gradually increasing the dose, these people get to 
take large doses, beyond even poisoning doses? — So I have 
read. 

Styrian peasants can take more than those who are un- 
accustomed to it? — So it is said. 

What do they take it for? — I don't know. 

Is there any such habit in England? — I never heard of such 
a thing. 

How many Plummer's pills did he take? — I saw him first 
on the 14th and again on the 20th. He had taken one every 
night. 

You don't know how many he had taken before the 14th? — 

He had taken none. I prescribed them for him. 

Christopher Robinson, examined — I am an assistant to C. Robinson 
Messrs. Clay & Abraham, chemists, Liverpool. I recollect the 
late Mr. May brick bringing a prescription to the shop on the 
16th April, and this was compound^ in the ordinary way, 
and handed to Mr. Maybrick. I identify the two bottles (pro- 
duced). They were given to Mr. Maybrick on the 24th April. 

Before they were handed to Mr. Maybrick they were carefully 
tested in the usual way. There was no arsenic in the medi- 
cine; and if Fowler's solution had been present I should have 
detected it by the smell. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — Do you see a mark 
on the top of the prescription, '‘Bell & Co."? They are well- 
known chemists in London. Now, was that on the prescrip- 
tion when it was handed to you on the 16th? — It may or may 
not have been. I cannot say. 


Frederick Early Tozer, examined — I am a chemist in the F. E. Tozer 
employ of Messrs. Clay & Abraham, Castle Street. I recollect 
prescriptions being brought to my firm by the late Mr. May- 
brick to be made up. "C" prescription, I believe, I dis- 
pensed; and also “ D," though the mixture only. Of the 
" E " prescription I dispensed two articles. I compounded 
them according to the prescription. There was no arsenic in 
the ingredients. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — When you get a 
prescription to make up in certain proportions, you have to 
measure, or weigh, the quantities? — ^Yes. 

63 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


F. E. Tozer Yes, if it is an article in the Pharmacopoeia ; but pills, 1 
suppose, are already made up? — No, I have to make them. 

You don’t keep them ready made? — We keep one or two 
ready made in the rolled mass. 

That is what I mean. You have the material ready made 
for some, and then you simply put them in the form of pills ? — 
Yes. 

You don’t compound them for the purpose of each particular 
prescription? — Some I do. 

Re-examined — Part of one of the prescriptions was already 
made. 


Alice Yapp Alice Yapp, examined by Mr. Addison — I was a nurse in 
the family of the Maybricks, and when Mr. Maybrick died 1 
had been with them one year and eight months. During that 
time there had been nothing the matter with my master. There 
was an inner room near the bedroom in which Mr. Maybrick 
slept sometimes, but I am not certain. I remember the day 
of the Grand National, the 29th April, and before that I was 
aware that my mistress had gone to London. Before going 
she said she was visiting London to see her mother, and I 
promised to write to her. On the day of the Grand National 
Mrs. Maybrick came home at ten minutes to seven, and my 
master returned a few minutes after. Mrs. Maybrick entered 
the nursery and so did Mr. Maybrick ; but neither spoke. My 
master left the nursery with one of the children. 

[Mr. Addison — Do try and keep up your voice. You give us 
a great deal of trouble.] 

Examination continued — Mr. Maybrick carried the youngest 
child down to the nursery. I heard Mr. Maybrick say to Mrs. 
Maybrick, This scandal will be all over the town to-morrow.” 
They then w^ent down into the hall, and I heard Mr. Maybrick 
say, Florie, I never thought you could come to this.” That 
was all I heard. They then went into the vestibule, and I 
heard Mr. Maybrick say, If you once cross this threshold 
you shall never enter these doors again.” I did not know 
that a cab had been ordered at that time. I went down to 
Mrs. Maybrick, and asked her to come to her bedroom. She 
did not answer, and I put my arm around her waist, and took 
her upstairs. I made the bed for her that night, and she 
slept in the dressing-room. The next day, on the Saturday, 
Mrs. Maybrick went out, and Dr. Hopper came in the afternoon. 

Can you tell me how long about after the Grand National 
that the housemaid Brierley drew your attention to something? 
— About a fortnight or three weeks after. 

What did she tell you ? — She told me something in the nursery 
which caused me to go into Mrs. Maybrick ’s b^room. 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


What did you find? — I saw the washbasin covered with a Alice Yapp 
towel, and I took the towel off. There was another towel on 
a plate, and 1 lifted the plate and saw a basin containing some 
fly-papers. 

About how many? — I cannot say. 

How do you know they were fly-papers? — I saw " fly-papers 
written upon them. 

Was there anything else? — They were in the basin, and there 
was a small quantity of liquid. 

What did you do? — I did not meddle with them, and put 
back the things as I found them. 

What did the household consist of besides Mr. and Mrs. May- 
brick? — I was nurse, Brierley was housemaid, Humphreys was 
the cook, and the waitress Cadwallader. 

Did you ever, up to that time, see any fly-papers in the house 
at all for killing flies, or anything of that kind? — No, sir. 

So far as you know, were there any flies giving trouble? — 

No, sir. 

Did you ever see the fly-papers again? — No, sir. 

Do you know what became of them? — No, sir. Afterwards 
I never saw any fly-papers in the house. I don’t know what 
became of them. The Wirral races were on the 27th April. 

I saw master on that day when he left to go to the office. Mrs. 

May brick did not go to the races. On the morning she spoke 
to me about the condition of the master. 

What time was that? — Somewhere about ten in the morning. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — That was ten o’clock in the morning 
of the Wirral races? 

Mr. Addison — Yes, my lord, the 27th April. 

(To Witness) — On this Saturday, about ten o’clock, your 
master was going to the office when Mrs. Maybrick spoke to 
you. What did she say? — She said Mr. Maybrick had taken an 
overdose of medicine. I asked what kind of medicine, and she 
said, Some ordered him by a doctor in London. He was 
very sick, and in great pain.” 

That was all? — Yes. 

When you went to bed that night, your master had not re- 
turned? — No, sir. 

Do you remember the next day, Sunday, the 28th of April? 

Did you on that day hear the bedroom bell ring? — ^Yes. 

It was not your duty to answer the bell? — No, sir. 

What was the next thing you saw? — I was coming downstairs 
and saw Mrs. Maybrick on the landing. 

What next? — She came to the night nursery door and asked 
if I would stay with the master. 

Did you go into the room? — Yes. 

Was he in bed? — He was lying on the bed with his dressing- 

65 


K 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

Alice Tfkpp gown on. My mistress came to the bedroom a few minutes 
afterwards with a cup in her hand. She said to her husband, 

Do take this mustard and water ; it will remove the brandy, 
and make you sick again if nothing else." I did not see much 
of him on the Monday and two following days. I was attend- 
ing to the children at the top of the house. I only know 
generally from what I heard from the other servants. On 
Friday, 3rd May, in the evening, Mrs. Maybrick brought the 
children up to see him, and I followed them into the room. I 
heard him say he had been sick again. Later on Mrs. May- 
brick told me that he had been sick again. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — Did she say sick or ill? — I am not 
quite sure which. 

Examination continued — I said it was very strange he was 
sick so long, and that she had better get another doctor. 
She said that Dr. Humphreys said it was only his liver that 
was out of order, and then she added, ** But all doctors are 
fools; they say that because it covers a multitude of sins." 
On Monday, the 6th of May, Mrs. Maybrick went out shopping. 
After she had gone I went into the bedroom, as I heard the 
master moaning. He seemed flushed and hot, and was moving 
from one side cf the pillow to another. He asked me if I 
would rub his hands, as he complained of numbness. I did this ; 
I sat with him, I should think, for ten minutes. When I went 
out he said he thought he could go to sleep. I did not see 
my mistress until the afternoon, when I spoke to her, and said 
I had seen Mr. Maybrick. I also added that I thought she 
should call in another doctor. I wanted to send for Dr. 
Hopper, but Mrs. Maybrick said if he came Mr. Maybrick would 
not take anything he prescribed. 

What did you say to that? — I said I did not think but what 
he would see him if he came. 

Where were the medicines kept at that time? — Some on the 
table in the bedroom, and some in Mr. Maybrick h room. 

On Tuesday, the 7th May — you have already told us there 
was a table with medicine bottles near the bedroom door— did 
you see Mrs. Maybrick? — Yes. 

Where ? — She was on the landing near the bedroom door. 

What was she doing? — She was apparently pouring something 
out of one bottle into another. 

What sort of bottles? Were they wine bottles, medicine 
bottles, or what? — ^Medicine bottles. 

On Wednesday, the 8th of May, did you inquire from Mrs. 
Maybrick about your master? — asked how he was, and she 
said, ‘'About the same." I was then near the bedroom. 

Did you hear anything? — I heard Mr. Maybrick ask Mrs. 
Maybrick to rub his hands. 

66 



]Evi4<ei3Lce for ProsecijtiQn. 

What did she say? — She said, ** You are always wanting your 4L|ies ffpp 
hands rubbed; it does you no good.’^ 

Were you in the roadway near the house that afternoon! — 

Yes. 

About what time! — Three o’clock. 

Did Mrs. Maybrick come to you at the garden gate? — Yes. 

What did she give you? — letter (produced). 

Did she give you that to post? — Yes. 

What post were you to send it by? — By the 3.45 post. 

You opened the letter and you read part of it ; in consequence 
of what you read you did not post it? — 1 did not post it. 

You gave it to Mr. Edwin Maybrick? — I did. 

Mr. Michael Maybrick and Mr. Edwin Maybrick were both in 
the house that night? — Yes. 

And you spoke to both of them? — Yes. On the next morn- 
ing, 9th of May, I saw Mrs. Maybrick in the night nursery ; 
and the prisoner then said, Do you know I am blamed for 
this?” I said, For what?” To which she answered, 

^^For Mr. Maybrick’s illness.” 

Were you instructed to look at the linen closet? — No, sir. 

From what Mr. Michael Maybrick told you, did you and 
Bessie Brierley go to the linen closet? — Yes. 

What did you find there? — We did not find anything there, 
but in the night nursery we found a chocolate box and 
packet. They were in a tray inside a trunk belonging to Mrs. 

Maybrick. I opened the chocolate box in presence of Nurse 
Wilson. I noticed the label, ‘^Arsenic — Poison for cats.” I 
took the chocolate box and parcel as they were found to Mr. 

Michael Maybrick, and I saw him take the lid off the box. I 
observed a piece of handkerchief in the box with two bottles 
underneath. 

This is still Mrs. Maybrick’s trunk? — ^Yes. 

Do you know whose handkerchief it was? — It was Mrs. May- 
brick’s. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — ^Do you remember 
Mrs. Maybrick coming to you and saying that she had been 
blamed for his illness? — ^Yes. 

Did you say, ^^Why”? — Yes. 

What did she say? — She said it was for not sending for 
another doctor and nurse. 

I want to go back a little, and understand the position of 
things. You heard the quarrel after the day of the Grand 
National ? — Yes. 

There had been up to that time no quarrel of any serious 
nature? — No. 

And none after the reconciliation? — No. 


67 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

AUm y*pp They appeared to be reconciled ? — ^Yes. 

Were you aware that Dr. Hopper had, in the matter of bring- 
ing about the reconciliation, acted as Mrs. May brick’s friend? — 
Yes, sir. 

On that night you knew that Mrs. Maybrick had ordered a 
cab? — I heard afterwards. 

You knew the cab was there waiting, and she was apparently 
going away? — Yes. 

She came down into the hall dressed, apparently for that 
purpose? — Yes. 

And I think you made some appeal to her yourself, and made 
some reference to the children? — Yes. 

You appealed to her to come and see the baby? — Yes. 

Did she yield? — When I put my arm round her waist she 
came with me. 

About this question of the fly-papers. Have you ever acted 
as lady’s maid? — No, sir; only as nurse. 

Was it in the morning that the girl Bessie Brierley told you 
as to having seen these fly-papers? — No, sir ; it was soon after 
dinner. 

But did she tell you that she had seen them in the morning 
when she was doing up the room? — Yes, sir. 

And you, out of curiosity, went into the room after the dinner 
was over? — It was about two hours after when I went into the 
room. 

Out of curiosity? — Yes. 

You had no business in the room? — No. 

And having been told by Bessie Brierley that she had seen 
them in the morning, you found them still there as she had 
described them? — Yes. 

Where were they? — On the washstand. 

In the principal bedroom? — Yes, sir. 

That is to say, in the bedroom which is directly approached 
from the landing? — Yes, sir. 

Whereabouts was this washstand placed? — By the door lead- 
ing to the inner room. 

And in a position in which you could see it on entering the 
door of the bedroom ? — Yes, sir. 

These were reported to you by Bessie Brierley as having been 
there early in the morning, and you have no reason to suppose 
that they did not continue there the whole of the day till you 
saw them? — No, sir. 

That would be about three o’clock? — Yes, sir. 

You did not think it right to ask your mistress anything about 
them? — No, sir. 

You were asked about Mr. Maybrick’ s health. Do you know 

that he had been attended to by Dr. Hopper almost constantly, 

68 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


or that he had gone twice to London to consult another doctor 9 Alice Tapn 
— No, sir, I did not know that. 

But 70U said before the coroner, at the inquest, that although 
you did not hear him complain, he had not looked well for some 
time. When you say he was in good health, you mean he did 
not make any complaint which came to your ears? — I mean not 
before the Grand National. 

Now, you were examined at the coroner’s inquest. Do you 
remember giving an answer to this question, Do you really 
mean to say that up to the 27th of April he seemed to everybody 
to be in perfect health? ” You answered, did you not, No he 
did not look well for some time, but I did not hear him com- 
plain? ” Now, is it true that he did not look well for some 
time? — Yes, he did not look well after the Grand National. 

The fact is that, whatever time you refer to, he did not look 
well for some time? — No. 

Do you know that he had been ordered to Harrogate for his 
health in the previous year ? — I remember him going there ; but 
I do not know what it was for. 

Now I come to the 27th of April, when he went to the Wirral 
races, at the other side of the river. Did you hear that he had 
been riding there on a wet day? — Yes, I have heard so. 

And he dined on the other side of the water with some friends. 

He did not dine at home, at all events? — No, he did not. 

What time did he come home? — I cannot recollect. 

You did speak to your master on one or two occasions when 
you went to his room? — Yes. 

Did you ever see him about this medicine which it was said 
disagreed with him? — No. 

I wish to call your attention to the fact that, from the 25th 
April, Mr. Edwin Maybrick was in the house? — Yes. 

He slept there from the 25th April to the 11th May, when 
your master died? — Yes. 

Therefore he saw your master every day? — I should think so. 

Mr. Addison — I object to this. She does not profess to 
know anything about it; she says she should think so. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — She does not definitely affirm he did 
see him. 

Cross-examination continued — At all events, he had the oppor- 
tunity of seeing him? — Oh, yes. 

Do you recollect, on Sunday, the 28th, hearing your mistress’s 
bell violently rung, but it was not your business to attend to 
it?— Yes. 

Don’t you know on that occasion that it was rung violently 
in order to send for Dr. Humphreys? — ^Yes. 

And you know that as soon as possible after that time — as 
soon as possible after the bell had rung — ^Dr. Humphreys had 
come and was in attendance on your master t — Yes. 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


AUe# tikpp Yoti have referred to the drinking of mustard and water — 
that was on the Sunday? — Yes. 

Did you know whether that was made by Humphreys, the 
cook? — I don't know. 

What? — I don't know. 

I think you heard Mrs. Maybrick say to her husband that he 
should take it, and that it would make him sick? — Yes. 

That it would relieve his stomach? — Yes. 

I think you said that she went down for the mustard, and 
that she asked you to go and see Mr. Maybrick while she was 
getting it ready? — Yes. 

Did you say that you saw your mistress on Tuesday, the 7th 
May — is that the right date? — apparently pouring or putting 
medicine from one bottle into another? — Yes. 

I wish you to follow this again. Was that on the landing on 
the first floor? — ^Yes. 

Opposite the bedroom? — Yes. 

And is that the landing which all the servants — all the per- 
sons in the house, in fact— who desire to go up and down stairs 
must pass? — Yes. 

For instance, if you wanted to go up to the nursery? — Yes. 

At that time you did not attribute any importance to the 
incident, I presume? — No. 

Now, with regard to this letter, you had heard the name 
of yoin' mistress coupled with the name of Brierley before you 
got the letter? — Never. 

Why did you open the letter? — Because Mrs. Maybrick wished 
that it should go by that post. 

Why did you open that letter? — (No reply.) 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — Did anything happen to the letter? 
— Yes, it fell in the dirt, my lord. 

Cross-examination continued — Why did you open that letter? 
— I have answered you, sir. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — She said because it fell into the dirt. 

Sir Charles Russell — I think, with great deference to your 
lordship, she did not say so ; your lordship is referring to some- 
thing before. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — She has just said so now. 

Sir Charles Russell — Well, I did not catch it, anyhow, I 
want to have it out again. 

(To Witness) — Why did you open that letter? — I opened the 
letter to put it in a clean envelope. 

Why didn't you put it in a clean envelope without opening 
it? — (No reply.) 

Was it a wet day? — It was showery. 

Are you sure of that? — Yes. 

Will you undertake to say that? I ask you to consider. 
Was it a wet day?— (No reply.) 








to Mr. Brierlev. 








Evidence for Prosecution. 


Aye or no? — (No reply.) 

Was it a wet or a dry day? — (No reply.) 

Had the day before been a dry day ? — It was showery. 

Will you swear that on Wednesday it was showery ? — I cannot 
say positively. 

Was the child in a perambulator? — No, sir. 

Was the child able to walk? — ^Yes, sir. 

What do you say you did with the letter? — I gave it to Mr. 
Edwin Maybrick. 

No, no. I mean when you got it from Mrs. Maybrick? — I 
gave it to the child to post. 

Did you ever do that before? — Always, and Mrs. Maybrick 
always gave letters to the baby to carry to the post. 

I was asking what you did with it? — I gave it to the baby. 

Always did? — Yes. 

Did this incident ever happen, or anything like it, before? 
— No, sir. 

Let me see the letter. Have you got the envelope? Where 
did the child drop it? — Right by the post office, in crossing the 
road. 

Which side? — Near the post office. 

Then you had securely passed the road and were stepping on 
to the kerbstone? — Yes. 

Did any one see it but yourself? — I don’t know. 

Then you picked it up? — Yes. 

And saw this mark upon it, did you? — Yes. 

Just take it in your hand. Is the direction clear enough? 
— It was very much dirtier at the time. 

It hasn’t obscured the direction, which is plain enough? — 
No. 

You didn’t rub the mud off. What did you do? — I went into 
the post office and asked for a clean envelope to re-address it. 
I opened it as I was going into the post office. 

Did it never occur to you that you could get a clean envelope, 
if you were particular about cleanliness, and put it unopened 
into that? — Oh, I never thought of that. 

Then, between the picking of it up on the post office side of 
the pathway and your going into the shop you formed the 
design of opening it, and did, in fact, open it as you were 
going in? — ^Yes. 

If, as you suggest, this fell in the mud and was wet, there 
is no running of the ink on the direction. Look at it? — No, 
sir. 

Can you suggest how there can be any damp or wet in con- 
nection with it without causing some running of the ink? — I 
cannot. 

On your oath, girl, did you not manufacture that stain as an 
excuse for opening your mistress’s letter? — I did not. 


Alice Yapp 


71 



Alice Tapp 


E. Brierley 


Trial of Mrs May brick. 

Have you any explanation to offer about the running of the 
ink? — I have not. 

I put it to you again for the last time. Did you not open 
the letter deliberately, because you suspected your mistress! — 
No, sir, I did not. 

Re-examined by Mr. Addison — Did you suspect your 
mistress? — No, sir. 

When you saw the fly-papers did you suspect her? — No, sir. 

Why did you look at them? — I thought that Bessie Brierley 
had made a mistake when she said thei'e were fly-papers in 
the bedroom. 

Was that your reason? — Yes, sir. 

When you did see them, what then? — I did not think any- 
thing of them. 

When you opened the letter you still thought nothing of it? 
— ^Yes, when I saw what was in the letter. 

Was that the first time that you had any suspicion about 
it? — No, sir; I had been told of soup, and bread and milk, 
and things tasting differently. 

Had you been told this by some of the other servants? — ^Yes. 

By which of them? — By Cadwallader and the cook. 

By Cadwallader and the cook Humphreys? — Yes. 

That was before you opened the letter? — Yes. 

Elizabeth Brierley, examined by Mr. McConnell — I was 
housemaid at Mr. Maybrick^s house at the time of his death. 
I had been there seven weeks. I remember, about the 21st 
March, Mrs. Maybrick^s going to London and returning the day 
before the Grand National. Mrs. Maybrick came home on the 
evening of the Grand National about seven or half -past. I 
did not know when Mr. Maybrick came home. I heard, how- 
ever, some loud talking in the bedroom and heard the bell 
ring. I went for a cab by orders, and afterwards, without any 
orders, sent it away. I remember seeing some fly-papers in 
one of the rooms about twelve o^clock one day. They were in 
the bedroom. This was one day after the Grand National. 
They were in a small spK)nge basin on the washstand in my 
master and mistress’s b^room. I did not see how many fly- 
papers there were, but I called the attention of Afice Yapp to 
them. I never mentioned the matter to Mrs. Maybrick again. 
At that time Mrs. Maybrick was in the house. I found some 
traces of the fly-papers afterwards in the slop pail next morn- 
ing. There were no fly-papers in use in the house for killing 
flies, either before or immediately after I saw them in steep 
in the room. The flies were not troublesome at that time. 
On the 27th April my master went to Wirral races. I heard 
him complain that his feet and legs were dead to the knees. 

72 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

On the following morning he was taken ill, and, acting on Mrs. B. Brt^rlay 
Maybrick’s instructions, I prepared a hot-water bottle, which 
I took to his bedroom. I saw him later on in the week, but 
I did not notice anything the matter with him. On Friday, 3rd 
May, he came home from business and was seized with vomit- 
ing at that time. ^My mistress told me to prepare the bedroom 
at once, as the master was going to bed. I did so, and filled 
a hot-water bottle, giving it afterwards to Mrs. Maybrick. 

At that time Mr. Maybrick was in bed, where he remain^ until 
the next day. I do not remember taking any food to him on 
the next day; but in the evening I got from cook Humphreys 
a glass of milk, which I took up to him. On Sunday I asked 
how the master was, and I think Mrs. Maybrick replied that 
he was no better. I do not think she gave me any orders to 
prepare any mustard and water again. I prepared a small foot- 
bath, which I left at the bedroom door. On Monday, about 
eleven o’clock, I asked Mrs. Maybrick if I should change the 
bedclothes, and she said that the master’s bed had better not 
be disturbed. Afterwards the clothes from the bedroom were 
brought out by Mrs. Maybrick herself. She left them outside 
the bedroom door. On Tuesday I asked how the master was, 
and she said she thought he was no better. On Thursday I 
remember taking a cup of tea into the mistress’s bedroom. It 
was the front room I took it to. I passed through the chamber. 

Mr. Maybrick was in bed, and the nurse was rubbing his hands. 

When I passed through on returning, Mr. Michael Maybrick was 
in the room, and I saw him take something off the washstand. 

I think that this occurred on the evening of Thursday, the 
9th May. I do not remember having seen the bottles, and I 
therefore could not identify them. Before Mr. Maybrick ’s 
illness it had been my duty to empty the slops ; but from the 
beginning of his illness I suppose Mrs. Maybrick did this, for 
I only emptied them twice. Generally, before this period, 

Mr. Maybrick seemed to be a healthy man. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — ^Was it in the morn- 
ing when you weie doing up the rooms that you saw the fly- 
papers? — Yes, sir, before dinner time. 

And it was before dinner time that you mentioned it to your 
fellow-servants? — No, sir; it was later than that. 

About what time? — About three or four o’clock. 

Is it not a fact that Mrs. Maybrick was in the room upon the 
occasion when you noticed the fly-papers? — ^Yes, sir. 

You said so in your examination before? — Yes. 

At that time both Mr. and Mrs. Maybrick occupied the same 
room? — Yes, sir. 

When the inner room was used as a bedroom it waa occupied 
by Mr. Maybrick? — ^Yes, sir. 


73 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

Maipy And Dr. Humphreys was sent for a second time? — Yes. 

^ ^ ^ And from that time he was in attendance up to Tuesday, 

7th May, when Dr. Carter was also called in? — Yes. 

In reference to this arrowroot you have been speaking about, 
did you notice anything dark in it? — Yes. 

Did you put anything dark in it? — No, sir. 

What was it caused the dark colour? — The cook explained 
it by saying that some vanilla had been put into it. There 
was a new bottle of vanilla that I thought had not been 
opened ; but, when I came to look at it, I found that it was. 

Did that account for the dark colour? — Yes. 

As regards the bread and milk, you did not ordinarily sweeten 
it. You left that to the person who used it? — Yes, sir. 

As he or she thought right and to their taste? — Yes. 

You recollect the statement you have just made as to some- 
thing that Mr. Maybrick said to you on that Sunday morning 
as to the cause of his illness. I wish you to repeat it again ? 
— He said he had taken an overdose of medicine from London. 

Do you recollect his having said anything more about 
medicine? Did he refer to the medicine that came by post? 
— Yes, sir, he did, because I took it in. 

Tell us what he did say? — He said he had taken an over- 
dose of London medicine, and it was the same as I had taken 
in on the Friday. 

Then some medicine had come from London by post? — ^Yes. 

And you yourself had taken it in ? — Yes, sir. 

There is no mistake about this? — No, there is not. 

Your master told you this? — Yes. 

He asked you if the medicine had come on Friday morning, 
the 26th? — Yes. 

The next day was Saturday, the 27th, the Wirral races 
day? — Yes. 

And the conversation took place on Sunday, the 28th? — 

Yes. 

What day did the medicine come? — On Friday morning, at 
half -past eight. 

Did you see it? — No, it was in a box. 

Do you know whether it was pills or in a bottle? — It was 
in a bottle. I could tell by the shape of it. 

Can you say what kind of a box it was? — A small box made 
of pasteboard. 

Did you learn where it had come from? — I believed it came 
from Dr. Fuller, but I did not hear the name. 

You recollect the Monday before Dr. Carter came to the 
house? — Yes, sir. 

You recollect being in Mr. Maybrick’s room on the Monday? 
—Yes. 

76 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


Wa« he sitting up in his bed? — ^Yes. 

Beading papers and writing letters? — ^Yes. He sent some 
telegrams away. 

That would be Monday, the 6th? — ^Yes. 

Do you remember making up any food for Mr. Maybrick 
to take to the office? — I do not remember. 

Do you remember the parcel of fly-papers coming? — ^Yes. 

When the parcel arrived where did you put it? — On the 
table. 

Was it rolled up with paper? — ^Yes. 

And open at both ends? — Yes. 

Did any one go through them? — Mr. Maybrick saw them. 

Did he look at them? — Yes. I saw him pick them up and 
look at them. 

I think it was you that took the telegram to Mr. Edwin 
Maybrick asking him to send the doctor? — ^Yes. 

I don’t know whether you also took the telegram from 
Mrs. Maybrick to the nurse at Hale? — No, sir. 

Do you know who took it? — No, sir. 

Now, about these fly-papers. Did you and the servants 
talk about them at all? — Well, sir, they were mentioned one 
day. 

Do you recollect if any one suggested what they were used 
for? — Yes; the cook said they were used for cleaning silk. 

That was what the cook suggested? — Yes. 

Did you at that time think anything of consequence of 
them? — No. 

Let me ask you this — you said your mistress seemed very 
attentive to your master during his illness? — Yes. 

Until after his death, and it was discovered that there were 
traces of poison about, did you think there was anything 
suspicious about what was done or not done? — No, I did not. 

Now, I want to take you to another thing in connection 
with the fly-papers. Do you recollect the domino party or 
ball to which Mr. Edwin Maybrick escorted Mrs. Maybrick? 
— Yes. 

Do you recollect how long before that you saw these fly- 
papers in the hall? — About a week before that. 

Have you anything to fix the time you saw them in the 
basin ? 

[Sir Charles Russell spoke to Mr. Addison, and the question 
was not pressed.] 

Did you see any fly-papers after this trouble arose in the 
house? — No, I did not see them afterwards. 

Now, just think. Have you not said that you and th^' 
cook saw some papers downstairs and destroyed them? — Oh, 
yes ; that was afterwards. 


Mapt 

CadwalUder 


77 



Tria] of Mrs May brick, 


Mary It wa« before his death? — ^Yes, sir; I think it was the same 

Cadwallader that he died. 

Did you see the cook destroy them, or did she tell you? — I 
saw her. 

Did you destroy any papers? — ^Yes, I did, but I don't know 
how long they had been there. 

Do you know how many? — No. 

Re-examined by Mr. Addison — When did you say so? — I 
said so to the solicitor. 

When did you say so? — ^About three weeks since. 

That is since you have been before the coroner and the 
magistrates ? — Yes. 

Did you mention it before the coroner or before the magis- 
trates? — No, I did not mention it. I did not think of it. 

Were you asked about fly-papers? — Yes. 

At that time what did you recollect about them? — I did not 
remember that I had burned a lot of them. 

You said at that time you had never seen any fly-papers. 

Sir Charles Russell — She did not say that. 

Mr. Addison — Well, we will see what there is on the deposi- 
tions. 

The Witness — I do not think I was asked if I destroyed any. 

Re-examination continued — When you were asked about it 
you did not at that time remember it, but when Mr. Cleaver 
spoke about it some weeks ago you did remember? — Yes. 

What did you remember then and now about the fly-papers ? 
— I remember destroying them three or four days before he 
died. 

How long before he died? — About three or four days. 

Where did you find some fly-pa}>ers? — In the butler's pantry. 

Had you charge of the pantry? — Yes. 

Did you know how they got there? — I think they had been 
there a good bit. 

Had you ever seen them before? — They were behind some 
things. 

What sort of things? — Behind a tray. 

Had you ever seen them there before? — I had not noticed 
them. 

Do I understand that two or three days before he died you 
found some fly-papers behind a tray? — ^Yes. 

How many? — I did not notice. About five or six. 

What did you do with them ? — I took them down and burned 
them. 

Where? — I took them to the kitchen and burned them. 

Did you show them to the cook? — The cook was there when 
I went down. 

You burned them in presence of the cook? — Yes. 

78 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


Why did you burn them ? — I thought it best to burn them. HavF 

You said something about a policeman? — I thought it was 
best to bum them before a policeman arrived. 

And that was forgotten, was out of your mind, when you 
were before the coroner and the magistrates? — ^Yes. 

You remembered it when, two or three weeks ago, the 
solicitor for Mrs. May brick came to know what you had to say? 

That is the way it came about? — ^Yes. 

When was this talk about the fly-papers? — It was a week 
before he died, when Bessie Brierley spoke of it downstairs. 

Was that the first time, Cadwallader, that you heard of fly- 
papers? — Yes. 

That was the week before when Bessie Brierley had talked 
about it? — Yes. 

And was that the time that the cook suggested they were used 
for cleaning silk? — ^Yes, sir. 

Did you say anything upon that? — No, sir. 

Then, this tray of yours, was it one that you used? — It was 
one that was left there. 

Then some time after you found some fly-papers behind the 
ti’ay, and burned them in the way you have told us? — Yes. 

Did you speak to any one about burning them? — No, I did 
not mention it except to the cook. 

Was that before you burned them that you mentioned it to 
the cook? — No, but finding she was there when I burned them, 
and there was a smell, I told her that perhaps the best thing 
to do was to destroy them. 

Then Mr. Maybrick was expecting his medicine from London? 

— Yes. 

Do you remember if he told you where it was to come from ? 

— No, sir. I am quite sure of that. 

What is your recollection? — He told me he had been up to 
London, and was expecting medicine a day or two before it 
came. 

It ought to have been a day or two before it actually 
arrived ? — ^Yes. 

Then at last the bottle arrived. Did you look inside to see 
the chemist’s name? — No. 

Do you remember whether Dr. Fuller’s name was mentioned 
or not? — No, sir, I don’t. 

Elizabeth Humphreys, examined by Mr. Swift — I was cook e. Hamphreys 
at Mr. Maybrick ’s at the time of his death, and had been there 
about seven months. I remember the day of the Grand 
National. Mrs. Maybrick went away from home about a week 
before, and returned before the race. Mr. Maybrick was at 

79 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

1- Humphivyg home during that week. On the day of the Grand National 
both were away from home, Mrs. Maybrick going out first and 
returning first. After they returned, in consequence of what 
Mary Cadwallader told me, I went to the front of the house. I 
saw my master and mistress, and heard the master say, By 
heavens, Florie, be careful. Once you go through this door 
you shall not enter the house any more.^' My work was in the 
kitchen; and, during the present year, up to the month of 
May, no fly-papers had been used in the house, and there was no 
necessity for them at all. I never asked the mistress for them. 

Do you remember Bessie Brierley speaking to you about the 
fly-papers some days after she had spoken the first time? — No. 
I had no conversation with Bessie Brierley, but with Mary Cad- 
wallader. 

Had you any conversation w’ith one of your fellow-servants? 
— Yes, but not for some time afterwards. 

About when was it you had the conversation with Cad- 
wallader? — Before the death of Mr. James Maybrick. I entered 
the service of Mr. Maybrick in October. It w^as in October I 
found some fly-papers on the window sill in the kitchen. There 
would he about half a dozen. T'hey lay there a long time. 
Mary Cadwallader then arranged to destroy them. 1 ulti- 
mately destroyed them shortly before Mr. Maybrick^s death. 
They had been in the kitchen all the time. Mary Cadwallader 
was with me when I destroyed them. I remember Sunday, 
the 28th April, the day after the Wirral races. On that morn- 
ing, about nine o'clock, I saw Mrs. Maybrick. She asked me 
for some mustard and water immediately. The master had 
taken a dose of medicine, she said, and she wanted it at once. 
She was in a great hurry, and mixed the water with her finger. 
I followed with another cup, but the first had been given to 
the master when I got up. I met the mistress on the landing 
at the bedroom door. I gave the water to Mrs. Maybrick, 
and she took it in. I did not see Mr. Maybrick, but heard 
him vomiting. Subsequently I saw Mr. Maybrick and Mr. 
Edwin Maybrick together in the breakfast room. The mistress 
w’as not there. I took the children in on the 28th April, 
and saw the master, who said he was a little better. Later 
on in the day I w^as asked by Mrs. Maybrick to prepare some 
oxtail soup. 1 gave it to her, and she took it into the morn- 
ing room. 1 do not know what became of it afterwards. I 
do not remember Dr. Humphreys calling on the following 
day, but about eleven o'clock Mrs. Maybrick brought in some 
Du Barry's food, which she asked me to prepare. She gave 
me a brown jug, and said that the master was going to take 
the food down to the office. I gave the jug to the witness 
Cadwallader, and do not know what became of it. On the 
8o 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


following day I made the master’s breakfast. He had bread 1. Hoambpaf i 
and milk, which was taken into the breakfast room by Cad- 
wallader. In consequence of something which she said to 
me when she brought back the remains of the milk, I tasted 
it, and found it was sweetened as if sugar had been put in it. 

It was different to what it was when it left, for I put salt in 
it, I put no sweetening mixture in it. I prepared food for 
taking down to the oflfice about four times altogether during 
the week, but on one occasion it was not taken. I never gave 
the jug to Ml’. Maybrick myself. I handed it to Cadwallader. 

On the night after the Wirral races Mrs. Maybrick brought 
some meat juice in to me and instructed me to make smne 
beef tea, with the addition of some stock. This I did, but 
I am not sure who took the beef tea from the kitchen. On 
the 4th May the chemist’s lad brought some medicine, which 
I took up to the bedroom. I afterwards told Mrs. Maybrick 
what I had done, and she asked me why I had taken the 
medicine up, as she had given instructions that nothing was 
to be taken into the sick-room unless she saw' it herself first. 

Later on that same day I saw Mrs. Maybrick again. I asked 
for the master, and she said he was no better. She said 
something about the medicine he had been taking. She 
remarked that if he had taken that much more (pointing to 
her finger) he would have been a dead man. 

What did she do witli the medicine? — She threw' it all down 
the sink. 

Did you suppose that she meant the London medicine, or 
did she say the London medicine? — I thought she meant the 
London m^icine. She said that ‘‘ horrid ” medicine. 

I don’t want to know what she meant, but what she said? 

— She said that horrid ” medicine. On the following 
morning, when I came downstairs, I saw Mrs. Maybrick. I 
spoke to her, asking how the master was, and she replied 
that he was much worse. She said he had been ill all night. 

At that time, no professional nurses had been called in. I 
suggested going in to look after the master. 

What did she say to that? — She said the master would 
not recognise me. She said that ^e could manage, and 
she asked me to make a cup of tea. 

Did you go into the bedroom? — ^No, 

Upon the following day, did you go upstairs to get some 
order about dinner? — ^Yes. 

Where was Mrs. Maybrick then? — She was standing on the 
landing near the master’s bedroom. 

Did you get the order? — ^Yes ; and I asked how the master 
was. 

Did you make any request? — I asked to see the master for 
a moment. 


F 


Si 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

, £• HvmplireF* She did not give permission? — No, but I followed in without 

permission. 

How was the master then? — ^He was very poorly. He 
recognised me the moment I entered the room, and called 
me to him. I asked him how he was, and he replied that 
he was very sick and wanted a drink of something. He then 
requested me to get him some lemonade with a little sugar. He 
said he wanted a good drink to rinse his mouth out with, 
and he wanted to feel that he had rinsed it out. He also 
said — I want you to make it as you would for any poor 
man dying of thirst.'^ He then told me how to make the 
lemonade, viz., to cut up a lemon in slices and put a little 
sugar in. Mrs. May brick, who was in the room, oJffered him 
lemon juice, but he said he didn’t want lemon juice in a glass, 
but lemonade from the kitchen. His wife thereupon replied 
— '' You cannot have it except as a gargle.” I then 
asked the master if he w^ould like anything — any lemonade, 
lemon jelly, or barley-water, and he leplied that he would 
like something, anything of that sort. Mrs. May brick did 
not say anything at that time, but immediately afterwards 
she said it was no use making anything, as he could not 
take it except as a gargle. I made some lemonade and 

took it up to Mr. Maybrick, going to the right side of 
the bed; but Mrs. Maybrick took the lemonade from me, 
and put it on the washstand at the left side of the bed. She 
said to him, “You can’t have it, dear, except as a gargle,” 
and he replied, “ Very well ” ; but he looked very wistfully 

after the glass as his wife took it away from him, as though 

he would like to drink it. I then left the room, and 

the deceased had none of the lemonade while I was there. 
I did not see him again imtil after Nurse Gore had arrived, 
at which time I and the nurse were in the room together. 
I asked him if he felt any better, and to this he replied 
that he did not feel any better at all. Mrs. Maybrick then 
entered the room and said, “What is it, dear!” I 
leaving at that point. Mr. Michael Maybrick arrived the 
same evening. On Thursday evening, the 9 th May, I 
went to my master’s bedroom, and, as I got to the bed- 
room door, I met Mrs. Maybrick coming out. I afterwards 
returned to the kitchen, and Mrs. Maybrick followed me. 
The accused ordered dinner, and after giving the order she 
began to complain, and used the words, ** I am blamed for 
all this.” I asked her in what way; and Mrs. Maybrick replied, 
“ In not getting other nurses and doctors.” After saying this, 
she went into the servants’ hall, and there commenced to cry. 
She said she was very much put out, and added that her position 
in the house was not worth anything. 

82 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — Mrs. Maybrick said, ‘‘This is 
all through Mr. Michael Maybrick.” 

Examination continued — Tell us all she did say? — That he 
had always had a spite against her since her marriage. Mrs. 
Maybrick told me that she had been turned out of the 
master’s bedroom, and not allowed to give him his medicines. 
In speaking about Mr. Michael Maybrick, I remember 
her saying that if he went out of the house she should not 
allow him to enter it again. She said that, if she could, 
she would turn us every one out of the house. I asked her 
if I had done anything to her, and she said,“ No.” I saw 
her several times after that before Mr. Maybrick died. On 
the Thursday I asked her how the master was, and she replied 
that he was no better. She said that inflammation had set 
in, and I replied that it was very dangerous. 

Do you remember asking your mistress a question? — No. 

Do you remember asking her something about pulling 
through ? 

Sir Charles Russell — I must ask you not to ask leading 
questions. 

Examination continued — I do not remember Mrs. Maybrick 
getting some ice from the landing. The professional nurse 
came on the Wednesday. 

Nurse Gore was the first, was she? — Yes. 

And from that time did you cook anything more for the 
master ? — No. 

Or know of anything being cooked except by nurses? — No. 

Upon the Friday did you see Mrs, Maybrick in the kitchen? 
—Yes, I did. 

About what time? — As far as I remember, it was Friday 
night about nine o’clock. 

Did you give her something she asked you for? — Yes. 

What was it? — She asked me for a sandwich and a glass of 
milk. She had a sandwich or two in the kitchen ; and, as 
she was leaving, she asked me to get her some soup and a sand- 
wich ready for night. 

Did she say anything else? — She thanked me for my kind- 
ness to her. 

Anything else? — And she kissed me. 

Was there any further conversation? — I asked her how the 
master was, and she said he was sinking very fast. 

Do you remember anything about hope?— Oh, yes, she 
said there was no hope, and seemed very much distressed. 

Now, upon the Saturday morning, I believe Mrs. Maybrick 
came to your bedroom door? — ^Yes, about three o’clock in the 
morning. 

What did she request you to do? — She wanted one of us to 
go and fetch Mrs. Briggs. 


B. Bamiihp^yt 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

B. Huatplupeyf What reason did she give? — She said that the master was 
dying. I believe CadwaUader and Brierley went. The last 
thing I remember making for Mr. Maybrick was some 
broth on Saturday night. Mrs. Maybrick requested me to 
make it. That was the Saturday before he died. I never 
made anything but the lemonade after that. During the 
days following that Saturday I suggested several things I 
thought Mr. Maybrick might like made for him. I made these 
suggestions to Mrs. Maybrick. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — Are you married 
or single? — Single. 

Now, in reference to these fly-papers, you saw some of 
them on the window sill of the kitchen? — ^Yes. 

Had they been in the house some time — when was it? — I 
went back to the house in October, 1888, and it was directly 
tliat I went back that I saw them. 

There were also some found behind a tray in the pantry, I 
believe? — I know nothing about them. 

I think you are aware that CadwaUader had destroyed some? 
— I knew nothing about it at the time ; she came afterwards 
and told me. 

Afterwards? Ob, very well. Now, on the 28th April you 
yourself saw Mr. Maybrick; did not he tell you he had had a 
very bad turn that morning? — ^Yes, he did. 

And it was later on that evening that your mistress ordered 
some oxtail soup? — Yes, I had made some for dinner that day. 

Do you remember when you got the direction to make the 
soup whether Dr. Humphreys was in the house? — I believe 
he was in the morning room at the time. 

Do you know whether it was he who suggested the soup? — 
I do not remember. 

Now, as regards the food on the 29th April, you said you 
got a tin of the food from Mrs. Maybrick? — Yes. It was Du 
Barry's food. 

Was it a fresh tin, and unopened? — Yes, it was a fresh and 
unopened tin which had been sent for. 

We have heard that your master did not take much of that : 
it was brought down to the kitchen uneaten? — k. good deal 
of it was. 

That was on the Tuesday, I think? — Yes. 

Had he eaten the bread and milk, or only a little of it? — 
Only just tasted it. 

Not eaten much of it? — No. 

And when you came back you found it sweetened? — Yes. 

Did you taste it? — Yes. I put my finger in and found it 
had been sweetened. 

And he inquired whether you had sweetened it? — ^Yes. 

84 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


As regards his habits of taking sugar or not, Mary Cad- E.Hu»plup«ys 
wallader would know more about that than you t — Wo ; he 
used to give me his instructions. 

Oh, did he? But Mary Cadwallader would know something 
about it? I must have this cleared up. Has Cadwallader 
gone? 

Mr. Addison — No; I think not. 

Cross-examination continued — I must ask you at once about 
this. Did it seem to you there was anything suspicious in 
the food having been sweetened? — ^No ; not at the time. 

And you found it had been sweetened ; there was no mis- 
take about it at all? — No; I found it had been sweetened. 

Sweetened with sugar, I suppose? — ^Yes. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — D id you know who sweetened 
it?_No. 

Cross-examination continued — ^You have spoken about meat 
juice essence being brought for the purpose of making strong 
stock? — ^Yes. 

I suppose you tasted it before you sent it up? — I did not. 

Now, in reference to the intervening days up to the 8th, I wish 
to ask you do you recollect on Monday, the 6th, going into Mr. 

Maybrick^s room? — ^Yes. I asked if he wanted anything. 

What was the answer? — No, thank you; Mrs. Maybrick 
will attend to all my wants.’’ 

You went, in fact, to ask whether you could do anything for 
him? — I went in with some papers and telegrams. 

And on the 6th he was sitting up in his bed reading the 
papers and letters, and sending some telegrams? — Yes. 

And when you asked if he wanted anything, he said that 
Mrs. Maybrick would attend to his wants when she returned? — 

Yes. 

Where was she at that time? — I don’t think she was in the 
house. 

Who brought his letters and telegrams? — Lowry. 

On the 5th, did you see him? — Yes, I did. 

And on Monday, the 6th, did you see him? — No. 

You have just told us that it was on that day you saw him. 

Let me remind you again, wasn’t it on Monday, the 6th, that 
the boy came up from the office with letters and telegrams? — 

Yes, it was. 

You saw him on the 7th? — No, I did not. 

Dr. Carter came on Tuesday, that day? — I heard of that. 

Do you recollect on the W^nesday morning saying to your 

mistress she ought to lie down, she looked so worn and tired ? — 

Yes. 

And it was a fact that she did look worn and tired ? — ^Yes. 

Did you learn that she had been up all night? — ^Yes. 


«5 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


B. Humphreys 1 will put to you the question. Until after you heard of the 
result of the examination showing that there was arsenic, did you 
regard your mistress’s conduct at any part of the story as in 
any way suspicious? — ^No, I did not. 

Did it seem to you that she was attending to her husband? — 
She seemed very kind to him, and spent all her time with him. 

You have already said so, have you not? — Yes, I did. 

And when she told you she had been blamed you took her 
part — ^you sided with her? — Yes, I did, because I thought she 
was doing her best under the circumstances. 

You sympathised with her, in fact? — I did, certainly. 

And she was in great distress? — She was very much grieved 
over it, and was very sorry. She was crying. 

Crying in a manner painful to witness? — Yes, she was indeed. 

At the time were you aware that what particularly distressed 
her was that she was no longer recognised as mistress of her 
house? — Yes, and I told her I would rather be in my own shoes 
than hers. 

You know she was set aside by his brothers and these nurses ? 
— ^Yes ; she was set aside. 

I am not criticising the action of the brothers for a moment, 
but I ask the question for present purposes. I notice in giving 
directions for the lemonade he told you, you say, to cut the 
lemon up, and put a little sugar with it ? — Yes ; I asked him 
the question about it. 

With reference to that, do you know, in point of fact, that 
the doctor had ordered he was to have as little as possible to 
drink, and to use the lemon only as a gargle? — I did not know 
it at the time. 

Did not Mrs. May brick say so? — She did afterwards when 
I took up the lemonade. I made it notwithstanding what she 
said. 

Is this what she said, ** The doctor says he is not to have 
anything like that except as a gargle”? — ^Yes, she did say so 
to me at the time. 

I don’t know whether you were present at the inquest when 
Dr. Humphreys was examined? — I was. 

And he said something very much to that effect? — He did. 

Upon the occasion Mr. Maybrick observed there were strange 
things knocking about him, I don’t know whether you could 
pledge yourself to the exact form of words he used? — Those 
were the words he used. 

Was not that after Nurse Gore had come? — It was. 

And didn’t you say, when you were examined with reference 
to that observation, that he made the statement at the time 
there was a stranger in the room? — I did. I thought he was 
referring to the nurse. 

86 




Mr. W. R. M‘Connell, 




Evidence for Prosecution. 


Whom he did not know before? — ^Yes. E.Humphws 

And did you also add that he was a little delirious? — ^Yes, he 
was certainly. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — The nurse will be called, I presume? 

Sir Charles Russell — Yes, my lord. 

(To Witness) — On the 9 th May you mentioned Mrs. May brick 
coming down to the kitchen when you were at your ordinary 
dinner? — Yes. 

At that time the two brothers of the master were in the 
house, and she was ordering dinner? — Yes. 

You spoke to her sympathetically in her trouble, I believe? — 

Yes. 

On Saturday, in the early part of the day, she came down to 
the kitchen and put her arms round your neck and kissed you? 

— ^Yes ; she was always very good to me. 

Have you known your master sometimes to use sugar in his 
bread and milk? — Yes. 

Dr. Richard Humphreys, examined by Mr. McConnell — I am R.Huinpkp«ys 
a surgeon and general practitioner, residing in Garston Old 
Road, Garston. In the early months of 1887 I was attending 
the children of Mrs. May brick for whooping-cough. That was 
not the first time I had been in the house. I had attended 
Mrs. May brick. I had never, however, attended Mr. Maybrick 
but once, when he had a slight injury to the nose, and I washed 
it for him. When I was attending the children in the early 
part of March, Mr. Maybrick never complained to me. I 
did not ask Mr. Maybrick purposely about his health. I just 
casually said, how are you? but I asked Mrs. Maybrick about 
her husband’s health when I was attending the children. I 
do not remember the exact words spoken, but Mrs. Maybrick 
made a specific complaint about her husband taking 
something. That conversation took place some time in March 
this year. She said he was taking some white powder, which 
she thought was strychnine, and she asked what was likely to 
be the result. I said that if he took a large enough dose he 
would die. That would be before the 2l8t March ; I cannot 
bring the date nearer than that. I said to Mrs. Maybrick, not 
meaningly, however, Well, if he should ever die suddenly 
call me, and I can say you have had some conversation with me 
about it.” 

When were you first called in to see Mr. Maybrick? — On 
Sunday, the 28th April. 

What time was that ? — About eleven o’clock ; a few minutes 
to eleven. 

Where did you see Mr. Maybrick? — In bed. 

Was Mrs. Maybrick present when you saw him? — ^Yes. 

87 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

1. HurnpiMys What did Mr. May brick say to you? — He said to me that h© 
was not well. 

Did he complain specially that morning of some peculiar 
condition ? — ^Yes, about his chest and his heart He was afraid 
of being paralysed. 

Did he say so to you? — ^Yes. 

Did you ask him how long he had been suffering from these 
symptoms? — ^Yes. 

And what was his reply ? — He said they came on that morning. 

Did he assign any cause? — Yes, he said it was the result of a 
strong cup of tea. 

Did he say whether he had experienced these symptoms before ? 
— ^Yes, he said that tea had upon other occasions produced 
similar inconvenience. Witness attributed the symj items to 
distress and palpitation of the heart. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — ^Would a cup of strong tea have 
produced all these symptoms? — Not usually, my lord, but I have 
known it to have done so. 

Examination continued — Deceased complained as to the state 
of his tongue, saying that it had been furred for a long time, 
and that he could not get it clean. He told me that he was 
not well the previous day. He said he had been at Wirral 
races, and before starting, in going downstairs, he felt very 
funny and his legs were very stiff, and duiing the whole day 
ho was at the races he felt in a peculiar state — in a dazed con- 
dition. After coming from the races he went to dine with a 
friend, and whilst there his hands were so unsteady and twitch- 
ing that he upset some wine, and he was greatly distressed lest 
his friends would think he was drunk. 

Did you prescribe anything for him? — Yes. 

What did you give him? — I gave him some dilute prussic 
acid, and advised him to drink nothing but soda water and 
milk that day. 

If you had kno'VMi that he had been sick on the previous 
day w^ould you have attributed it to the cup of tea taken that 
morning? — Probably not. 

I saw him next on the evening of the same day, and witness 
Cadwallader met me at the house. Deceased was then in 
quite a different condition from that presented a few hours 
before. All that he had complained of in the morning had 
disappeared, and he was then suffering from stiffness of the legs. 
He showed me Dr. Fuller’s prescription in the morning, after 
which I directed him to discontinue it, and gave him another 
prescription to replace it. Deceased knew he was taking nux 
vomica in the prescription which Dr. Fuller had given to him, 
and he had an idea that the stiffness in the limbs wag due to 
that. He was a man who prided himself on his knowledge of 
medicine. 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


You say that after having seen him three times onlyt — Oh, 
no! he told me so himself. He said, ‘^Humphreys, I think I 
know a great deal of medicine; I have read a good deal of 
medicine.’^ And, knowing he was taking nux vomica, he 
thought the stiffness of the previous morning was due to that. 
Consequently, I advised him not to take any more. He said 
his liver was wrong, and I made an examination and did not 
contradict him. The deceased also complained of other things 
already referred to, and I remained with him for about an hour, 
and advised him to stay in bed the following morning. 

Did he say anything about his friends saying he was hypo- 
chondriacal? — Yes; but he said, “I am not. I know how I 
feel.’^ 

Anything said about mustard and water being used? — I do 
recollect something about mustard and water, but when, I don’t 
know. I called again on the deceased in the evening and found 
him in bed, having been sent for as Mr. Maybrick was suffering 
from stiffness in the limbs — the two lower limbs. I prescribed 
for that bro-mide of potassium and tincture of henbane. I 
promised to call again the following morning, Monday, 29th 
April, and called shortly after ten o’clock. I found him in bed, 
where he had remained at my request. He did not complain 
of anything, and all the symptoms had disappeared, except 
the furred tongue. I made an examination of him, and arrived 
at the conclusion that he was a chronic dyspeptic, and pre- 
scribed a dietary for him in wTiting, and gave it to him himself. 
I believe I saw Mrs. Maybrick every day I was at the house. 
The dietary consisted of coffee, toast, and some bacon for 
breakfast, some l^evalcnta food and tea for luncheon, and for 
dinner he was to take alternate meals of fish and bacon. I 
prescribed for him Seymour’s preparation of papaine and iridin. 
The papaine was a vegetable digestive, and the iridin a slight 
laxative to act on the liver. The quantity to be taken was 
one teaspoonful three times a day. On leaving I promised to 
call again on the evening of Wednesday, the 1st. This I did, 
and found Mr. Maybrick much better. I advised him to con- 
tinue the same treatment. Mr. Maybrick told me I need not 
call again, as he would call on me. On Friday, however, I 
reoeiv^ a message to go and see Mr. Maybrick. It would be 
about ten o’clock on the 3rd May. I found Mr. Maybrick in 
the moming-room on the ground floor. He said he had not 
been so well since the day before, and he added that he did 
not think my medicine agreed with him. Mrs. Maybrick 
was present, and said, You always say the same thing about 
anybody’s medicine after you have taken it two or three days.” 
I said to Mr. Maybrick, I really cannot see anything the 

89 


R. SiiaiviMys 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

R. Humphreys matter witli you. Your tongue is certainly not so clean as it 
ought to be; but otlierwise I cannot see any difference in you. 
My advice is to go on the same for two or three weeks; the 
medicine cannot disagi*ee with you, as it tends more to assist 
your digestion than anything else.’’ Mr. Maybrick then asked 
me whether he ought to get a Turkish bath, and the reply 
was in the affirmative. Later on in the day I saw Mr. Maybrick 
at about four o’clock, but he only said, “ Good afternoon." 
About midnight that night I was called up to see Mr. Maybrick. 
He was then in bed, and he was in great pain. The pain was in 
the two thighs, running from the hips down to tlie knee. 

Who was present when you saw him in bed? — ^Mrs. Maybrick. 

Had anything been done to alleviate the pain? — ^Yes, they 
had rubbed his legs with turpentine. 

Where had the rubbing b^n applied? — To the inner aspect 
of the thighs. 

Was there any rubbing going on in your presence? Did you 
rub or apply your hand to the part? — I am sure I did. 

What sort of pain was it? — He complained of gnawing pain. 

Not pain from pressure? — No. It extended from the hips 
down to the joints, and was more particularly located in the 
back aspect of the joint. 

That is the seat of the great sciatic nerve? — It is. 

Do you know that he had taken the Turkish bath spoken of 
in the morning? Did you connect his symptoms in any way 
with the bath? — I did. 

In what way? — I thought it might have been caused by an 
excessive towelling and rubbing. Mr. Maybrick told me that 
when he arrived home that day he was sick. 

V 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — That was after the Turkish bath? 
—Yes. 

Examination continued — Deceased had been sick twice after 
arriving home, and he said he thought it was due to some 
inferior sherry having been put into Du Barry’s Revalenta food. 
I did not inquire whether it was put in or not. As the pain 
continued, I gave him a morphine suppository. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — What is that? — It is in the form 
of small capsules of gelatine which is mixed up with morphia, 
and introduced into the lower bow^els instead of swallowing. 

Examination continued — There was a quarter of a grain in 
one of them, which had been prescribed for Mrs. Maybrick at 
one time or another. On Saturday, the 4th May, I saw Mr. 
Maybrick early, and found that the pain had passed away, but 
there were other symptoms, and he was sick and vomiting. 
He could retain nothing on his stomach, and that was a common 
result of the administration of morphia. I advised deceased to 
take nothing at all, but to abate his thirst by washing out with 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


water, or by sucking ice or a damp cloth, and to take nothing 
else. I prescribed also some ipecacuanha wine for allaying the 
vomiting. It was a prescription either homoeopathic or allo- 
pathic, according to how it was regarded. I saw him again 
on the Saturday, but I do not recollect the visit. I saw him the 
following morning — Sunday — when he was still vomiting, or 
hawking more than vomiting, and complained of his mouth 
being very dirty, and his throat was troubling him. His 
throat showed a slight redness, but his tongue was very dirty 
and furred. I changed his medicine, because deceased had not 
made the improvement I had expected. I prescribed 
again prussic acid from the bottle which he had not finished the 
previous week. I told deceased also to take Valentine’s beef 
juice, and wash his mouth with Goody’s fluid. Mrs. May brick 
was present at the house every day. I saw her on Monday, and 
asked her if — as her husband was worse than ever he had been 
before — ^would she not like to have another medical man? She 
replied, No, Dr. Humphreys; as he has seen so many before, 
and they have done him so little good, I don’t think it is neces- 
sary.” At that time I was not exactly bothered by the symp- 
t(»ns, but deceased had not made the progress I had anticipated. 

You considered he was getting worse? — No, I can’t say that. 
On the whole he was rather better. 

But you have just told us he was worse than ever he had 
been? — His illness was worse than any illness he had ever 
had. I again saw deceased on the Sunday, but did not notice 
anything particular about him. I saw him on Monday, the 
6th May, at 8.30 in the morning, and his state was then 
something similar, but he still complained of his tongue very 
much. He was, however, better able to retain a little food. 
Some of the Valentine’s extract of meat had been taken, but 
it did not agree with the deceased, and it made him vomit. I 
do not remember him vomiting in my presence, but he com- 
plained of it. I told the deceased to stop the Valentine’s beef 
juice, and said I was not surprised at it making Mr. May- 
brick sick, as it made many people sick. I also stopped the 
medicine, and gave deceased some arsenic — it was Fowler’s 
solution. I could not say whether that was Sunday or 
Monday, but it was not Tuesday. Fowler’s solution is a "mix- 
ture of white arsenic, carbonate of potash, and lavender water. 

What per cent, of arsenic? — One per cent. I gave the 
deceased four drops in about five tablespoonfuls of water. Ho 
was to have a few drops of that in less than half a teaspoonful 
every hour. I made the medicine myself while I was there. 
It was put into a medicine glass, which contained about 
sixty or eighty doses. In the whole of the doses there 
was about l-26th of a grain. I showed him how to take it^ 
and gave it to him myself. He took three doses altogether. 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

MwMite«srf By Mr. Justicb Sthphen — How much arsenic would there 
be in the three doses? — About l-250th of a grain. 

Examination continued — I saw him in the evening, and 
ordered him some Brandis beef tea, some chicken broth, 
Neave’s food, and some milk and water. On the Monday 
night I recommended the application of a blister to the stomach, 
thinking it would put an end altogether to the vomiting. I 
had seen two samples of the vomit. One was greenish, 
bilious “looking, and the other was yellowish. On Tuesday I 
saw Mr. Maybrick in the morning, and he appeared better. He 
said, Humphreys, I am quite a different man altogether 
tO“day, after you put on that blister last night. He was 
constantly complaining of the offensive feeling of his mouth. 
I advised him to wash his mouth with sanitas to clear it. He 
was able to retain a tablespoonful of food every hour. In the 
afternoon of the same day I was there with Dr. Carter. I threw 
the remainder of the medicine containing the Fowler’s solution 
away on the Monday morning. I threw it into the basin on the 
washhand stand — ^the slop basin. The object of administering 
the solution was to allay his condition and improve him. Mr. 
Edwin Maybrick made the appointment for me to meet Dr. 
Carter. Mrs. Maybrick told me that she had not sent for 
him, but that Mr. Edwin Maybrick had. I saw Mr. James 
Maybrick with Dr. Carter in the afternoon, at half -past five. 
Mr. Maybrick seemed to be much the same as in the morn- 
ing, and was certainly no worse. He complained to Dr. 
Carter, in my presence, about his throat. 1 think he was 
able to retain his food that day. I had a consultation with 
Dr. Carter, and we resolved to administer certain medicines. 
He was prescribed tincture of jaborandi and antipyrine. The 
antipyrine was to allay his restlessness and to allay the 
pain of the throat. The jaborandi was given to in- 
crease the saliva and to relieve the throat. We also gave 
him a wash for the mouth of chlorine water. We held the 
opinion that he was going on very favourably, and would be 
well in a few days. I formed the opinion that Mr. Maybrick 
was suffering from congestion of the stomach. I could not 
remember telling this to Mrs. Maybrick that day, but I did 
tell Mr. Maybrick. I formed a hopeful prognosis, and thought 
Mr. Maybrick would soon recover. My next visit was on Wed- 
nesday, when I found him better. I made no change in his 
treatment, there being no sickness. 

No more symptoms than there were on the afternoon of the 
7th T — No, but he had had a restless night. 

And his condition was still as hopeful as it had been the 
night before? — Yes. 

Did you say to Mr. Maybrick, or use any words to the effect 
that all depended on how long he could hold out? — No. 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Did you say that he was sick unto death, or any words to R. BiiniRiMf i 
that effect? — No. 

Had he been in any way delirious since the Sunday, or did 
you say so? — No. 

Did you see him again on Wednesday, the 8th May? — ^Yes. 

Did you send any telegram about a nurse? — ^Yes, one about 
nine o’clock in the morning. Mrs. Maybrick asked me on 
the morning of the Wednesday prior to the death to telegraph 
to Mrs. Howell, her nurse, who had been with her on her con- 
finements, to come to attend on her husband, as she was 
getting tired herself. I had no other conversation beyond that. 

I went to a telegraph office and sent a message to the nurse at 
Halewood, signing no name, but saying Mrs. Maybrick would 
like to have a nurse. About seven o’clock I went to the 
house and found Nurse Gore there. 1 have not been informed 
up to the present time why Mrs. Howell was not called. At 
that time the patient was not worse. I could not state whether 
my attention was called to the state of Mr. Maybrick’s bowels. 

I did not make any change in the medicine or prescribe any- 
thing that afternoon. About 10.30 Mr. Michael Maybrick 
came to my house and asked about his brother’s health and 
prospects. The interview was lengthy, but I did not go to 
the house with the brother. I visited the patient again on 
the following morning, and found that there had been consider- 
able straining, the bowels being loose. This was what was 
termed ‘‘ tenesmus.” He complained of pains in the rectum 
before I introduced the suppository. It had to be made, and 
was ^tei wards introduced. Mr. Maybrick was complaining 
of great pain. Dr. Carter was present that afternoon. 

Did you consider your patient’s condition then as favourable 
as before? — Not so favourable. 

What were the unfavourable symptoms ? — They were 

diarrhoea and straining. I saw the faeces that afternoon. 

Did they present any characteristic that led you to make 
more than a casual observation? — They themselves did not; 
but I had a conversation with Mr. Michael Maybrick which 
led me to believe that something more might be seen if a 
further examination were made. 

Was any further examination made? — ^Yes. 

Of the faeces? — ^Yes. 

You made a slight examination? — ^Yes. 

Dr. Carter was aware of what you were doing? — Yes. 

What examination did you make? — I boiled them in copper 
with a little acid. 

What acid? — Hydrochloric acid. 

What were you testing for then? — I was testing for some 
metal, probably antimony, arsenic, or mercury. 


93 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

R. ■umphreys Some metallic irritant 9 — ^Yes. 

How much did you subject to the test? — ^About a table- 
epoonful. 

With what result? — Nothing conclusive. 

Be a little more explicit, doctor? — I got no deposit on the 
copper. 

Had your patient had bismuth in his medicine before? — ^He 
had. 

Was there any deposit of bismuth on the copper? — ^There 
was no deposit of any metal. 

The result was negative? — Yes. 

Did you examine the urine at all? — I did the same after- 
noon, and subjected it to a similar test, but the result was 
negative. There was no mineral deposit found in the urine. 
On Thursday evening Mr, Maybrick was in a state of restless- 
ness, complaining of his tongue and his throat and his bowels, 
but his strength was maintained pretty well, and he could take 
nutriment to swallow. I did not apprehend any serious 
results on the Thursday. I felt his pulse, but did not think 
that there was anything characteristic about it, though it was 
certainly quicker than at the beginning of the week. I 
made some temperature tests on the Saturday and Sunday 
previous, nearly a week before his death. The first day he 
was slightly feverish, the temperature being 99.4. After 
that day it was normal, the average normal temperature 
being taken as 98.4. I did not try the thermometer during 
the Friday. On Thursday [Friday?] afternoon deceased asked 
for Dr. Carter, and I said I would tell Dr. Carter, which I 
did, and the doctor came out the same afternoon. On Friday 
morning I found the deceased weaker, pulse more rapid, and 
bowels not moved so frequently as during the previous day. 
There was hardly any sickness, but I thought deceased was 
rather worse, especially as he himself seemed much depressed 
about his condition. In the afternoon the patienFs pulse 
was still more rapid, and one of his hands was booming white. 
Generally he was weaker, and decidedly worse. The ton^e 
was simply filthy, and Mr. Maybrick was very restless, having 
had no sleep. I ordered some sulphonal for his restlessness, 
the dose being thirty grains, in the form of a powder; nitro- 
glycerine for his hand; and he was tio continue cocaine, 
or^red the previous day, for his throat, and also some phos- 
phoric acid for his mouth. On Friday afternoon I considered 
deceased’s condition to be serious, and the doctors had reason 
to suppose then that the suggestion made to them the day 
before might have some grounds. 

Was Dr. Carter given a bottle to examine? — ^Yes, on Friday. 

I visited my patient again about 10.30 on Friday night. 

94 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


By Mr. Jtjstich Stephen — ^What time was your consultation t R. Humphreys 
— In the afternoon about half -past four. 

Examination continued — ^What was this bottle 1 — ^The bottle 
containing the meat juice. 

When you visited your patient again at about 10.30, how did 
you find him? — Very ill; his pulse was very bad, almost un- 
countable. He was getting weaker. I told Mr. Michael 
Maybrick his state so that a solicitor might be seen as to his 
affairs. At that time I apprehended danger. 

Had you any diflSculty in administering nourishment? — On 
that day, yes. 

What had you been administering? — Nutritive suppository. 

Did you do anything on the 10th? — I don't remember. 

On Saturday, the 11th, what time did you see him in the 
morning? — About 8.30. 

How was he then? — He was then dying. 

Did you see Dr. Carter on that day? — Yes. 

Did you have a consultation as to his state? — ^Yes. 

What time was that? — Between twelve and one o’clock. 

What conclusion did you arrive at as a possibility of doing 
anything? — There was no possibility of doing anything. 

At that time did you consider the case hopeless? — Certainly. 

Was the man dying? — ^Yes. 

You determined as there was nothing more to be done to take 
no steps? — I think it would have been useless. 

And I suppose from that time he gradually sank? — Yes. 

Were you present at his death? — was in the house. 

It took place about 8,30 on Saturday, the 11th? — Yes, 

Except the examination you told us about, you made no ex- 
amination of the excreta afterwards? — No. 

Did you at any time tell Mrs. Maybrick that if he had taken 
so much of that horrid medicine he would be a dead man? — No. 

Did you direct that nothing nutritious or medicinal should be 
given to the patient except by Mrs. Maybrick? — No. 

On the night of the 11th, about 12.30, did Dr. Carter make 
any communication to you of what he found in the bottle of 
meat juice? — No, it was 12.30 in the afternoon. 

Did you make a post-mortem examination on Monday the 
13 th?— Yes. 

Who were present? — ^There were present Dr. Carter, Dr. 

Barron, and myself, and Superintendent Bryning. Dr. Carter 
took the written statement, and we all assisted. The examina- 
tion was made in the room he died, ^igor mortis was present 
and well developed. I have made notes of the post-mortem. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — It has been the practice, first intro- 
duced by Lord Campbell, it being allowed in the Scotch Courts, 
that notes should be read, although they cannot be called the 
strictest evidence. You can now do as you please. 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


1. aanplirtys The Witkess (with the notes before him) — The frame and 
condition of the man were well developed, his countenance being 
classical. The pupils of the eye were mediumly and equally 
dilated. There was a discharge from the lower bowel, and 
when turned over, a slight discharge of fluid from the mouth. 
The discharges were chemically tested. [The witness then de- 
scribed the post-mortem appearances resulting upon examination,^ 
and said that when they opened the chest the first rib on each 
side was found to be slightly ossified.] The lung was found in 
the left chest to be adherent ; it was fixed by an old adhesion, 
and that meant the evidence of pleurisy. The right lung was 
free from adhesion, but it contained some fluid. The lung was 
taken out, and was found to be normal. When the sac of the 
heart was cut into, fluid was found ; and the heart itself was 
found to be covered wdth fat. Upon cutting into the heart 
itself it was found that the right ventricle contained a little 
clot, but the left side of the heart was empty and in a normal 
state. The valves of the heart were natural, and the condition 
of the windpipe was normal. Upon taking the tongue and the 
larynx out, and the oesophagus and the gullet, we found that 
the tongue was black, and the gullet at the top of the throat 
was slightly red. Below that for some distance the appearances 
were quite natural ; but lower down again before getting to the 
stomach, on the lower part of the mucous membrane, there was a 
gelatinous appearance, which had the appearance of frogs^ 
spawn, of a yellowdsh colour, with black patches. In the 
larynx, at the posterior part of the epiglottis, we found that 
there was a little ulcer, about the size of a pin head. It was red 
and very shallow, and that also the free margin of the epiglottis 
was eroded or rotten. Upon the posterior aspect of the 
cartilage, which goes to form the voice box, we found two little 
red patches. The stomach was tied at each end and taken out, 
and we found that it contained some fluid — some five or six 
oimces of a bro^vnish fluid. When the stomach was opened and 
the fluid poured out w^e found each end of the stomach was red, 
and here and there there were small ecchymoses or blood spots 
effused imder the lining of the stomach. Getting out of the 
stomach into the duodenum we found there about three inches 
of red inflammation, and this appearance continued down for 
about three feet in the intestines. About eighteen feet lower 
down in the intestines we foimd another area of red inflamma- 
tion, and it corresponded to the blue patch I referred to first, 
with the vessels running over it. The very extremity of the 
bowels — the rectum — was also slightly red. The liver seemed 
natural, and the kidneys were natural. The spleen weighed five 
or six oimces, and was of a kind of mahogany colour, ^e brain 
was natural. Some parts of the viscera were put into jars, but 

96 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


I have not copies of the numbers, although I know some of R^Htuaphreji 
them. I placed the stomach with its contents into a jar, 
whole of the intestines and parts of the liver, and I th ink 
the spleen. 

By Mr. JusTiCB Stephen — Were they all put in jars? — ^Yes. 

I closed the jars, and after sealing them gave them to Mr. 

Baxendale. 

[A description of the jars as handed to the inspector was hero 
re^ out by his lordship.] 

Examination continued — ^From what you saw during his life 
and from the post-mortem examination, what do you say was 
the cause of death? — Arsenic. Arsenical poisoning. 

Did you have anything to do with the sealing up of certain 
fluids and other matters that came from the drains? — Yes. 

Were you present when the matters contained in these four 
jars were taken? — I was. Just now you asked me what I 
thought was the cause of death. I said arsenical poisoning. 

I said that knowing as I do that an examination has been made 
of the contents of the stomach; but, asking me what conclusion 
I came to after having made the post-mortem, recollecting the 
symptoms that he died of, I could only say that it was due to 
some irritant poison, most probably arsenic, but I should not 
like to swear that it was. 


You were present at the taking of the list of the articles with 
the jars numbered 1, 2, 3, and 4? — I was. 


The body was afterwards exhumed. 
— I was. 


Were you present then ? 


Did you see certain further parts removed? — Yes. 

Were they placed, like the others, in bottles? — No. In one 

large jar, which was given to Mr. BaxendaJe. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — When you gave the 
answer in the first instance you were taking into account not 
merely the symptoms before death, but the statements of the 
results indicated to you by others? — I was when he asked me 
the question. 

Excluding these results, were you when examined before, and 
are you now, able to say more than that the symptoms during 
life, and the post-mortem appearances after death, are con- 
sistent with death from some irritant poison? 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — The word consistent is so very 
misleading. Do you mean to say any two things which exist 
together must always be consistent? There is a great difference 
between one thing indicating another with a less degree of 
strength, and one thing consistent with another. When you 
say that there are symptoms consistent with death in conse- 
quence of some irritant poison, do you mean to say that there 
are symptoms consistent in the strict sense of the word, or 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

M, Hnmplupeys that they indicate or point to death by irritant poison t — mean 

to imply that they point to death by irritant poison. 

Did you, in fact, use these words, when first asTted, ** Haring 
regard to the post-mortem appearance, the symptoms before 
death, and the symptoms described by the witnesses, what is 
your opinion Was your answer this, and this only, “ They 
are consistent with arsenical poisoning^’? — It was. 

And that is what you mean now to convey? — ^They are con- 
sistent, taking the symptoms collectively. 

I must ask you not to use the word consistent,’’ but I will 
understand by it ‘‘ indicate,” point out.” 

Cross-examination continued — Did you not go on to explain 
that, when you used the word irritant poison, you meant any- 
thing, as, for instance, impure food, would cause these 
symptoms? — I mean (taking it apart from the analysis and the 
corrected statement) that I did not know what the post-mortem 
appearance of an irritant would have been; but I say that an 
irritant food, causing certain symptoms during life, like those 
produced by an active poison, would probably produce a similar 
appearance after death. 

You have never assisted at a post-mortem examination of any 
person supposed to have died from arsenical poison? — ^No. 

I think I might also ask you whether you have ever assisted 
at a post-mortem where it was alleged that death had been due 
to irritant poisoning? — No. 

Up to the time that the communication was made to you 
which, to use your own language, suggested that there might 
be some foundation for supposing foul play, did it in any way 
occur to you that there were symptoms present during life of 
arsenical poisoning? When was it that the idea was first 
suggested to you? — I think on Thursday, or on the Wednes- 
day night, when Mr. Michael Maybrick came to me. 

From a communication made to you by Mr. Michael May- 
brick? — Yes, that there was something unsatisfactory. 


The Court then adjourned. 



Evidence for Prosecntion. 


Third Day— Friday, 2nd August, iSSp, 

The Court met at fen o^olock. 

Dr. Richard Humphreys, recalled, further cross-examined by iLHumpliF*] 
Sir Charles Russell — You were in attendance upon the late Mr. 

Maybrick continuously from the 28th of April imtil he died? — 

I was. 

Therefore you know something of the history of the case, 
and the symptoms manifested during the progress? — Yes, sir. 

Now, when you saw him on the 28th, the day after the 
Wirral races, did he give you a history of what he had gone 
through the day before? — ^Yes. 

Did he tell you that he had been at the Wirral races riding? 

— He told me that he had been there on horseback. 

He had been there riding? I do not suggest that he was 
riding in the races? — Yes, he was there on horseback. 

He said he did not feel very well, and that he had got wet? 

— He said that he was not very well, but did not tell me that 
he got wet. 

I don^t know whether you are able to recall from your 
recollection the weather on that day? — I cannot. 

You don't know whether it was, in fact, a wet day? — I do 
not. 

Did he tell you that he had dined with a friend over the 
water? — He said he had dined with a friend. 

Did he tell you that he had been ill during the dinner? — 

He said that he had been seized with some twitchings erf the 
arm. 

Let me understand clearly, please, the symptoms which he 
repeated to you. He made reference to a strong cup of tea, 
did he not? — He did. 

And he attributed the nervous symptoms to that fact? — ^He 
did. 

It is a fact if a man has a weak action of the heart that 
a strong cup of tea might produce nervousness? — ^Yes, I think 
it might be the case without a man having a weak heart. 

He also complained, did he not, of he^ache? — ^Yes. 

Was it of long standing, do you know? — It had existed for 
about twelve months. 

I don't know whether you remember he said that he had 
suffered from headache as far back as the Ascot races that 
year? — He told me so. 


99 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

E»Hiiiii|rfireys I tliink Hie further complained of pains on the left side in 
the region of the heart? — It was not a pain, it was a discom- 
fort. An indescribable feeling of nervousness, which I presume 
was from palpitation. 

It was in the neighbourhood of the heart? — Yes, on the 
left side. 

Now, on the evening of the same day you were called in 
again ? — I was. 

And you found him on that occasion complaining of a stiff- 
ness of the lower limbs? — Yes. 

That would be natural, if he had been riding and caught 
cold? — I should not expect such symptoms as this from a man 
riding and catching cold. 

This stiffness ; what would you call it ? How do you sug- 
gest it arose? — I think it arose from a mental condition from 
the conversation I had had with him in the morning. 

I do not understand how the stiffness of the lower limbs is 
connected with his mental condition. From his conversation 
in the morning do you mean to suggest that he fancied his 
limbs were stiff? — I won’t say that altogether he fancied they 
were stiff, but after I got there the stiffness passed away in 
two or three minutes. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — Could you feel if the muscles 
were stiff? — Upon rubbing them a few minutes, and taking 
his attention a^vay from the stiffness, the symptoms seemed to 
disappear. 

Cross-examination continued — Where was the stiffness? — In 
both limbs, extending from the hips down to the feet. 

Along the sciatic nerve? — The sciatic nerve and the whole 
limb. 

Did you connect that with the nux vomica in your own 
mind? — ^Yes, from the conversation I had with him in the 
morning. 

Which was? — ^About the nux vomica. He told me he knew 
the symptoms of nux vomica, and he said he thought the 
stiffness was due to that and to Dr. Fuller’s mixture. 

Did you accept that as a full explanation? — ^Yes. 

You found him next day suffering from a dirty tongue? — 
Yes. 

That, in your opinion, was symptomatic of chronic derange- 
ment of the stomach? — ^Yes. 

On Wednesday, the 1st of Mav, you found him better? — 
Yes. 

His tongue cleaner? — ^His tongue was cleaner than it was on 
the Monday. 

And his headache gone? — ^Yes. 

You saw him on the 1st of May, after he had returned from 
business, somewhere about half-past six in the evening? — ^Yes. 


lOO 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


On tlie 2n(i of May you did not see himf — No. B. Hmankrefi 

On Friday, the 3rd, he complained of his medicine not 
agreeing with himt — Yes. He thought his medicine did not 
agree with him. 

Mrs. Maybrick made an observation that he had frequently 
said that about other medicines! — ^Yes. 

And you said to him that you could not see that there was 
anything the matter with him? — Quite so. 

And that was your view? — Yes. I could not see anything 
worse with him than that his tongue was a little more furred. 

In other words, they were the symptoms of some gaatrio 
disturbance — dyspepsia, greater or less? — I was of the same 
impression as I was on the previous day. 

On Friday, the 3rd of May, you saw him again? — Yes. 

You were sent for, and you came to see him again later at 
night! — I did. 

And you arrived, I think, somewhere about midnight! — I 
arrived between eleven and twelve. 

On that occasion you have told us he complained of pain 
in the thighs? — He complained of pain in both legs, from the 
hips down to the knees. 

And it was in relation to that you suggested the application 
of a morphia suppository f— Yes, that is so. 

That was all he complained of in the way of pain on that 
occasion! — ^Yes. 

the way, he said he had been sick? You understood 
that he had vomited? — Yes. 

He was sick twice after he had had a Turkish bath? — ^Yes, 
but I did not connect the two incidents. His lordship asked 
me the question yesterday. 

On the Saturday you saw him in the morning in his house. 

He was then in bed? — Yes. 

The pain had disappeared ? — Entirely ; but his tongue was 
still dirty. 

And you advised that he should take no food. For how 
long did that continue? — It continued until the Monday fore- 
noon. 

From the Friday about twelve o’clock up to the Monday 
about what time? — I cannot say, but it was somewhere afte^ 
half -past ten. 

At this time, after the Turkish bath, it was the first occa- 
sion he was able to retain anything upon his stomach! — It 
was. 

He was suffering more from hawking than vomiting! — Not 
that day. 

How do you describe him on the Saturday! — ^He oould retain 
nothing on his stomach except a little water. 

lOX 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

K.lbiaBgphMys Do you attribute it to the morphia 1 — 1 do. 

And you have found that in persons unaccustomed to take 
morj^ia it has that effect? — It has in some people, according 
to their idiosyncrasies. 

With a view to stopping the retching you prescribed ipeca- 
cuanha wine. Tliat would be upon the homceopathic 
principle? — It was upon the knowledge that small doses of 
ipecacuanha wine would stop vomiting. 

If taken in large doses it would be a thing to cause vomiting? 
—Yes. 

Then you applied it on the principle simUia similibusf — 
Upon that knowledge. 

Now, on Sunday you found him better? — ^Yes. 

He made some complaint of his throat, but you were not 
sure whether it was on the Sunday or on the previous evening. 
I mean the tickling sensation as of a hair in the throat? — I 
am not sure of the day. 

Now, on Monday you found him rather more inclined to 
hawk than to vomit? — The tickling sensation in the throat 
caused him to retch, and produced an uncomfortable sensation. 

With a view to stop that, did you cause a blister to be put 
on the stomach? — ^Yes. 

With a view to stop the retching you stopped the vomiting? 
—Yes. 

It was not with reference to any pain? — No, certainly not. 

He was not, in fact, complaining of any pain, either in the 
stomach or the pit of the stomach? — No. 

At no time? — ^At no time. 

Did you at any time notice any effect upon his eyes? — I did 
not. 

No redness of the eyes or eyelids? — I did not. 

There was none? — I am positive there was not. 

And no complaint of any itching in the eyes or eyelids? — 
There was not. 

Now, you saw him later on that day, and you found that your 
blister had a good effect? — I saw him the morning of the day 
after the blistering, the Tuesday morning. I applied the blister 
on Monday night. 

You saw him since, on Tuesday, the 7th? — Yes. 

I will read you this, and you can remember it — He was able 
to retain a pretty good quantity of fluid food without being sick, 
but still complained of a tickling in his throat. — That is so. 

And these were the only things of which he then complained! 
— ^Yes. 

You saw him again on Wednesday, the 8th. How did you 
him going on? — Going on favourably. 

On Wednesday, the 8th, there was no sickness? — No pio* 

103 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

min6nt sickness. There might be si<^ness, but I knew that it R. Humpiupsys 
was very rare. 

He was still going on favourably that morning? — ^No, I could 
not say so. 

Now, I want to call your attention to Thursday, the 9th 
May? — On Thursday I again visited him, and foimd him no 
better or worse. He was then under the care of the nurse. 

The patient was suffering from looseness of the bowels? — 

That is right. 

And this is the first time that symptom presented itself to 
you in any excessive or marked way? — ^Yes, to draw my atten- 
tion to it seriously. 

In fact, up to that there had been nothing in the way of 
excessive purging or diarrhoea to call your attention to it in a 
marked way? — There had been no excessive purging or 
diarrhoea, but there was a disturbance of the bowels. 

That would not be harmful, would it? — Oh, no, not at all. 

And this first presented itself as a matter of any moment on 
Thursday? — Yes, as a matter of moment it did. 

At what time did this visit take place when this symptom was 
so marked? — In the morning, most probably at half-past eight. 

Very well, early in the morning he could take nutriment, 
could he not? — He could. 

And did you find, on inquiry that Thursday, that he was 
suffering from straining when at stool? — He was. 

Which may arise from many causes? — I should not like to 
say it arises from many causes, but it arises from some. 

I mean in any state of disordered stomach and bowels, it is 
not unusual? — I can’t say in the ordinary state of disordered 
bowels. It is very rare, in fact. 

Then what do you suggest as the cause from which it arose? 

— Any severe irritation of the bowels may produce it; very 
frequently it results from irritation of the lower membrane of 
the bowels. 

Have you not known it to arise where strong purging medi- 
cine is given? — I have not known it. I have never had 
complaints of it, but I can easily conceive that it might arise, 
certainly. 

Is it not frequently present, commonly present, in any form 
of diarrhcBa? For instance, is it common in summer diarrhoea? 

— ^Yes, in summer diarrhoea it is present. 

I wish you to go back to the 7th. You met Dr. Carter on 
that day? — The Tuesday; yes. 

You had no intimation from him that he was to be there ? — I 
had not. 

But some one made an appointment with you ? — ^I was 
requested to meet Dr. Carter at half-past five. 


103 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick, 


B. Unmplireys By whom f — I think the letter I got wa» from Edwin 
Maybrick. 

And I presume you gave to Dr. Carter a history of the case 
as you have given it to-day to my lord and the jury! — ^Yes. 

On that morning do you recollect something you said — on 
the morning of the 7th? You had ordered the application of a 
blister for the retching, and it was on that morning he said, 
wasn't it, that he was quite a different man, and that the 
retching had gone down? He said these words? — Yes, he said, 

I am quite a different man.” 

I think the first reference to anything that had passed away 
fro-m him was on the Thursday? — Yes. 

But, as a matter of fact, the slops were preserved for you? — 
They were preserved from time to time. 

By Mrs. Maybrick? — I don’t know. 

Well, they were shown to you by her? — ^From time to time 
they were shown to me. I don’t know if by her. 

At any rate, they were preserved for you from time to time? 
— Yes, from time to time. 

You could have seen them on any occasion you desired? — Yes. 

And they would have been kept for you if you desired it? — 
Yes. 

You took on the Thursday, as I understand, some faeces which 
had been passed that afternoon, and you applied what is known 
as Reinsch’s test? — ^Yes. 

Did you make more than one test? — I did not. 

You applied that test both to the urine and the faeces — ^that 
is to say, you added hydrochloric acid in each case, and then 
introdu<^ a piece of copper foil? — Yes. 

And you found no deposit? — No. I got no deposit. 

Did you report that to Dr. Carter? — I cannot tell whether I 
did then or not; but I am positive that I told him some time or 
other. 

That would be a negative test? — No, not of neoessity. 

Why? — Because the quantity that I used was so small, and 
the time I boiled it such a short period, that there might not 
have been time for any deposit of any kind to take place. 
Further, I am not skilled in the details of testing, and my test 
might have been inefficient. 

That is candid, doctor. Then you mean to convey that, 
although you tried this experiment, you were not able to conduct 
it successfully? — I cannot say whether it was conducted success- 
fully or not. I do not pretend to have any skill in these matters. 

It is not a difficult test? — No. 

And if there is arsenic, it is supposed to make a deposit upon 
the copper? — ^Yes, if it is boiled long enough, and if there is 
some quantity there. ^ 

104 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


I must ask you how long did you boil it? — About two R« Hnmphraft 
minutes. 

That is to say, it was at the boiling point two minutest— I 
am sure two minutes were passed from the time I put the spirit 
lamp underneath the fluid. 

It may not have been boiling at all? — I am positive it was 
boiling. 

Positive ? — Positive . 

You are quite clear on that? — I am positive it was boiling. 

Why did you not try a larger quantity? — Because I did not 
take a larger quantity with me. 

But why did you not take a larger quantity? — I cannot teU 
you why at this moment. 

What quantity did you take? — Perhaps an ounce. 

Do you suggest that for an experiment properly conducted 
that was sufficient? — It was a sufficient quantity if there had 
been an appreciable quantity of arsenic in it. 

The point is, was there arsenic in it? — ^I could not say. 

My point is whether, in your opinion, this quantity was, or 
was not, sufficient? — An ounce would be quite sufficient. 

So I should have thought. Now, so far as the boiling point 
is concerned? — I could not boil the whole of it; my test tube 
was not large enough ; if I had attempted it I should have lost 
some of the substance. I am certain I brought the whole 
quantity in the tube to boiling point. 

Did you at that time think your experiment was properly 
conducted or not? — I really could not tell. 

You were making the experiment with some object? — Yes. 

Were you satisfied it was properly conducted at the time? 

— I was satisfied there was nothing on the copper. I had no 
books at the time to refer to; it was only from recollection I 
worked. 

Is there anything in the way of working the experiment in 
books which you have since consulted that you did not do? — ^No. 

You were quite satisfied, when you came to refresh your 
memory, that there was nothing omitted by you? — ^Yes. 

Well, but is not the test well known to treat all matters 
connected with the intestines on the same principle? — I don^t 
know. 

So far as your reading tells you, is there any difference with 
the way of testing? — I cannot teU. 

So far as you know, is there? — No. 

You have still apparently some doubt in your mind. So far 
as the urine is concerned, you followed the right course? — Yes, 
so far as the deposit upon it is concerned. I do not know 
whether the copp>er was absolutely pure, but I have a vary 
etrong impression that it was pure. 

los 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


B. HunpliMyi 


But, 8oe, Dr. Humphreys, in proportion as there is any doubt 
about the purity of the instruments you were using, would 
there not be a greater certednty of getting a deposit? — I should 
like you to say that again. 

You say you are not sure that the instruments were perfectly 
pure? — I was told they were pure, but I am not sure. 

But if they were not pure would you not get a greater 
deposit? — If they were not pure, it depends on what the im- 
purity was. 

Well, I will just put it to you again. What impurity do 
you suggest may have existed? — In the copper, arsenic. 

Then if there were impurities in that form of arsenic in the 
copper, would it not make it the more certain that you would 
get a deposit on the copper? — If there was that impurity. 

Did you find any? — I found none. 

Where did you get your hydrochloric acid ? — From the 
chemist. 

Some good chemist, I suppose? — ^Yes. 

Now I come to Friday, the 10th. When did you hear first 
that the letter was intercepted by the woman Yapp? — I think 
it was on the Thursday. 

At what time? — I don’t know. 

Moniing or evening? — I cannot tell you. 

Was it the same Thursday or was it later when you heard of 
the bottle of meat juice? — It was later — the next day, Friday. 

Did you hear an^hing about the bottle of Neave’s Food which 
was taken on the 9th and found by Humphreys? — I remember 
there was a bottle of Neave’s Food. 

On what day? — During the night of Thursday. 

It was delivered up on the 9th? — Yes. 

From whom had you heard this? — I saw it given up. 

By whom — To Dr. Carter. 

By whom — By Mr. Michael May brick. 

And were you there when the bottle was delivered up? — Yes, 
by Mr. Michael Maybrick to Dr. Carter. 

Can you tell me at what time on Friday the meat juice was 
delivered up? — In the afternoon. 

And taken away by Dr. Carter? — ^Yes. 

When you say afternoon, do you mean about two or three 
o’clock? — I mean later than that, half-past four. 

Did you hear anything from Dr. Carter in relation to it until 
about half-past twelve on Saturday? — No. 

And then you heard from him? — Yes. 

I wish to ask you this, you have said, have you not, that but 
for the suggestion of arsenic, you would have been prepared to 
give a certificate of the cause of death? — No, I did not say so. 
i said the suggestion was made before I conceived it, before I 
thought of it, on Wednesday or Thursday. 

io6 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


I think you said so yesterday, Dr. Humphreys — ^that the idea R.Sniiiplirefs 
of arsenic did not occur to your mind until it was suggested to 
you ? Had it not been for the suggestion of arsenic, were you 
prepared to give a certificate of death if he had died on Wed- 
nesday ? — Yes. 

And in your judgment what was the cause of death? — Acute 
congestion of the stomach. 

Did you call that gastritis or gastro-enteritis ? — Yes, gastritis 
or gastro-enteritis. 

What would you call gastritis ? — I should call it infiammation 
limited to the stomach itself. 

You say it is inflammation of the stomach, while gastro- 
enteritis is ? — That in which there is congestion in addition 

to the stomach being inflamed. 

The bowels are also? — ^Yes, the bowels are also involved. 

That is, gastro-enteritis would include congestion and in- 
flammation extending to the bowels? — Yes, quite so. 

By Mr. Jusiicb Stephen — Then if nothing about poisoning 
had been suggested to you, you would have certified that he 
had died of gastritis or gastro-enteritis? — Yes, my lord. 

Cross-examination continued — Now, Dr. Humphreys, I wish to 
ask you this question, and just consider, please, before you 
answer it. Mention any post-mortem symptom — never mind the 
analysis for the present — but mention any post-mortem symptom 
which is distinctive of arsenic poisoning and which is not also 
distinctive of gastritis or gastro-enteritis? — I can’t give you 
any. 

There is none? — I can’t give you it. 

That is because you believe there is none? — I should not like 
to swear to distinguish between them. 

It comes to this, you are not able to point it out? — I am not 
able to point it out. 

No distinctive symptom apparent to a post-mortem examina- 
tion distinguishes arsenic poisoning which does not distinguish 
gastritis or gastro-enteritis? — I can’t swear to distinguish be- 
tween them. 

Now, I must ask you one or two further questions. I want 
to ask you about the following things given to this man. 

Cascara — is it an aperient? — It is. 

Nitro-hydrochloric acid, is it a stomach tonic? — I don’t know. 

A tonic? — Well, it is given for such a variety of things I 
would not like to say it was a stomach tonic. 

Now, nux vomica — what is that? — Strychnine and brucine 
enter into it. 

What is their object? — They are the active principles of the 
drug. 

Yes, yes. But are they tonics? — ^Not in the ordinary senae 
of the term. 


107 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


lU Hunphreys 


What are they administered for? — ^They are administered 
sometimes to improve the general health. 

What are they? What is brucine? — I don’t know what it 
is used for. 

What is nux vomica for? — It is administered for chronic 
indigestion. 

Old stomach derangement? — ^Yes. 

In Plummer’s pills antimony and mercury are found in the 
form of calomel? — ^Yes. 

Prussic acid you have already described? — I gave it to allay 
his palpitation on the first occasion, and vomiting on the second. 

That was addressed to the action of the heart? — ^Yes. 

Bromide of potassium, is that a sedative? — ^Yes. 

And depressing? — I do not know that it is depressing. 

Tincture of hyoscyamiis, that is a sedative also? — ^Yes. 

Depressing? — No, I do not think it is depressing. 

Is not bromide of ammonia sometimes substituted for bromide 
of potassium because the latter is so depressing ? — If it is given 
for a long time. I think I should choose it between the two 
if I was going to give it in large doses for a long time. 

Antipyrin, is that given in cases of fever? — ^Yes. 

Is it depressing? — No ; I do not think so, not in the ordinary 
doses in which it is administered. 

Is it lowering? — Not in the ordinary doses. 

Jaborandi, has that a powerful action on the nerves and 
heart? — Not in the small doses in which it is prescribed in the 

Pharmacopoeia.” 

Is it in the Pharmacopoeia ” ? — Yes, tincture of jaborandi. 

You gave him chlorine to wash his mouth, morphia to allay 
pain, and bismuth and opium suppository? — Yes, all those were 
given. 

Nitro-glycerine, that was externally used? — No, it was ad- 
ministered internally. 

And sulphonal? — ^Yes. 

That is not in the Pharmacopoeia ”? — No. 

Have you used it before? — Many times. 

And, in addition, cocaine? — Yes. 

Is that in the ' ‘ Pharmacopoeia ” ? — I do not know. 

Are those two — nitro-glycerine and cocaine — depressing or 
not? — Not in the doses which were given. 

You saw this gentleman. Did you give directions that he 
was to be properly looked after and kept quiet? — I am almost 
sure I did. I should in the ordinary course of my practice. 

And you would in your ordinary course enjoin careful attention 
Mid re^arity in food and medicine? — Yes. 

I presume in leaving such directions you would leave the lady 
of the house to carry them out? — ^Yes. 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Did she seem to be anxious and careful in her attention 1 — R.*iimrt»ws 
Yes ; she did everything I requested her. 

Did you find that she had practically before Friday become 
exhausted with watching ? — She told me herself she was tired on 
Wednesday morning. 

Could you see that she was tired ? — No, I could not say that. 

Could you see whether she had the appearance of being 
tired? — I have no recollection of noticing it. 

Now, with regard to the post-mortem Oh I before I 

ask you that, you did give directions, did you not, that he 
was to have something to cool his mouth, but was to drink 
as little as possible? — Yes, that would be on the Saturday or 
Sunday, the 4th or 5th May. 

When you assisted at the post-mortem, was the poor man 
lying on his back? — ^Yes. 

Is it your experience that, by the influence of gravitation 
after death, the blood flows to the lower parts? — It does. 

The stomach was nearly empty, was it not? — It contained 
about 5 or 6 ounces of food. 

Was there a very bright redness? — ^Yes. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — If the person was lying on his 
back, the fluid would gravitate to the cardiac, or larger end of 
the stomach? — Yes. 

Cross-examination continued — Then that end would be lower 
than the opening of the pyloric duct? — If there was much fluid 
in it. 

The redness you speak of was a bright redness? — Yes, a 
bright red tinging. 

At the cardiac, or upper end, there was redness? — That was 
where it was most marked. 

At the pyloric end there was redness? — Yes. 

In the intermediate space there was no marked redness? — 

No ; it was almost natural. 

And was the redness more extensive posteriorly than 
anteriorly? — I think it was. 

You speak of a small ulcer? — That was upon the epiglottis. 

And you speak of one or two clots of blood? — I spoke of a 
clot of blood in the stomach. 

Was that the only thing that attracted your attention? — 

No, there were many very minute spots, but none so marked 
as that. 

Very minute what? — Very minute spots ; very minute indeed. 

Have you ever mentioned them before? — I don’t know that 
I have. 

Turn to your notes and see whether you have any trace of 
them? — They are much smaller than the other, and quite 
dissimilar. 


109 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

R. Humplmyt Will you refer to your notes and show me it in any part of 
t^e post-mortem? — They would be similar to that of a flea’s 
bite. I find in my notes that 2 inches from the pylorus was 
tolerably free from injection, being only marked in small spots 
of brilliant arborescent vascularity here and there. 

Now, Dr. Humphreys, I must seriously ask you, do you mean 
to allege that this reference means these spots of which you 
speak ? — Yes. 

That is to say, the place where these marks were was not in 
itself congested? — Yes, that is so. 

That is the meaning of it, isn’t it? — ^Yes. 

You have another long adjective in connection with it — 
arborescent I think you call it? — ^Yes. 

That signifies, I suppose, branching out like a tree, branching 
out from it. It does not mean spots, but lines? — Yes, of a 
line-like character. 

Re-examined by Mr. Addison — You said something about 
the effects of the cup of tea producing symptoms in the case 
of a weak heart? — Yes. 

Was there anything which you found after he died indicating 
a weak action of the heart? — No. 

What would you say of his heart? — I would say it was the 
heart of a healthy man at that age. 

On the 1st May (Wednesday) you attributed his condition 
to dyspepsia?— Yes. 

Well, now, is there any irritation of the stomach in dyspepsia? 
—Yes. 

And what is the ordinary effect of arsenic on the stomach, 
when it is taken, I mean, in an overdose, or beyond what is 
good for a man? — In a dose sufficient to kill or not? 

Suppose it were taken in a dose suflBcient to kill? — I can’t 
say. 

Do you know anything by which you can distinguish at one 
stage of illness what is produced by arsenic from what is pro- 
duct by dyspepsia? — No; I should not like to swear. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — What was it you were asking? 

Mr. Addison — I was speaking, my lord, about irritability of 
the stomach in dyspepsia. 

(To Witness) — Does an irritant poison produce irritability of 
the stomach? — Yes. 

And can you in some of its stages distinguish it from irrit- 
ability caused by dyspepsia? — No ; I could not. 

You didn’t suspect irritant poison at that time? — No; I did 
not. 

Was dyspepsia the only natural alternative that could suggest 
itself to your mind? — Nothing else suggested itself to my mind. 

There was no other suggestion offered itself to your mind? — 
No. 


T TO 



Evidence for Prosecuticm. 


Yau did not suspect arsenic given on purpose! — No. K. 

And you knew it had not been given for his illness! — So far 
as I knew. 

Did he tell you on the Friday, the 3rd of May, how long he 
had been at home before he was taken twice ill? — ^He told me 
he was sick twice after he came home. 

Did you ask him at all whether he had his tea before he was 
sick ; did you suggest anything to him? Did he merely say 
he was sick twice after he came home? 

Sir Charles Russell — The witness said first that Mr. May- 
brick told him he was twice ill as soon as ’’ he came home. 

Mr. Addison — Did he say he was twice ill after he came 
home? 

Sir Charles Russell — I must insist: the words were '‘as 
soon as he came home. 

Re-examination continued — ^What did he say? — The words 
that Mr. Maybrick used to me were " he was twice sick after he 
came home.’’ 

Very well. Have you had occasion to attend any one who 
has b^n poisoned by arsenic? — Never. 

Then probably you cannot tell me whether this irritation of 
the stomach could exist without pain or complaints of pain? — 

I think it is very frequent to have irritation in the stomach 
without complaints of pain. 

But you are not able to say one way or the other whether 
the irritation was from dyspepsia or poison? — I could not say. 

This tenesmus was worse on the Thursday? — Yes, decidedly. 

Do you know when it began to be worse? — I cannot remem- 
ber. My attention was drawn to it distinctly on the Thursday. 

Tenesmus, as we understand, is straining? — Yes. 

What are the indications of it? — The complaint of the patient 
is that he goes to stool without any avail, and feels a burning 
sensation in the lower portion of the bowels. 

Have you attended cases of dyspepsia very often, and have 
you ever known it accompanied by tenesmus? — Never. 

Have you ever seen a case of tenesmus to the same degree 
as this? — I never recollect having seen it to this degree. 

Did you ever make an analysis of this nature before? — Yes, 
on one occasion, where I was making an experiment. I used 
arsenic as a test to see whether the test was reliable. 

Do you remember what sized slip of copper you used? — (The 
witness cut off a piece of paper about half an inch long, and 
said that was the size.) 

Now, up to the 8th May (Wednesday) you would have given 
a certificate that he died from acute congestion of the stomach ? 
— Yes. 

You would have said he was improving on the Monday and 
the Tuesday? — ^Yes, the symptoms led me to believe that. 

Ill 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

S* Miuiipbrey t Would you now, leaving out what was said to you about 
suspicion, have given a certificate of death if he had died on 
Thursday or Friday ? — I cannot say ; it is difficult to separate 
from one’s mind the information which has been suggested. I 
could not say what I would have thought if it had not been 
suggested to me. 

On the Saturday when he died what was your opinion ? — That 
he was suffering from some irritant poison. That was before 
the post-mortem. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — If he had died on Saturday and 
you had not heard anything, would you have suggested poison? 
— I should haVb thought it an unsatisfactory case. 

What is the usual course; did you send to the coroner? — 
No, my lord ; the usual course is to refuse to give a certificate 
of death, and then the police are sent for. 

Re-examination continued — Before the post-mortem would 
you have refused a certificate? — I really cannot say. 

But you did refuse it? — I did. 

You had had certain knowledge at that time. Assuming that 
you had not had any information given to you, would you 
have refused the certificate of death on the Saturday ? — I really 
cannot say. 

Have you any doubt from the s 3 anptoms, the post-mortem, 
and the analysis made by Mr. Davies, and the case altogether 
— ^have you any doubt of the cause of death? — No, I have no 
doubt whatever. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — I want your last sentence ex- 
plained. When you say — I have no doubt whatever,” do 
I understand you to include in that opinion your knowledge 
of the result of the chemical analysis? — It includes everything 
collectively, with all the symptoms during life, all the appear- 
ance after death, and the result of the analysis of the contents 
of the stomach. 

And the other things that have been found and examined — 
the meat juice and things of that kind, have you included that 
in your opinion? — No, my lord. I do not include that in my 
opinion. All about the body and the result of the examination 
of the body. 

W. Carter Dr. William Carter, examined by Mr. Addison — I am a 
physician of considerable experience in Liverpool, practising 
in Rodney Street. My experience includes cases of overdosing 
medicinally with arsenic. I had been a perfect stranger to 
the May brick family ; but on Tuesday, 7th May, I was called 
in in consequence of my general position in the town. I was 
not even aware imtil the inquest that it was Dr. Humphreys 
who sent for me. I was telephoned for at 3.30 on Tuesday, 


1 12 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


the 7th May. I saw the deceased at Battlecrease House, Dr. w. CaFtsr 
Humphreys being there, and taking me to the bedroom. He 
said deceased had been suffering for some days from vomiting. 

I must make a slight correction in the sequence of the symp- 
toms. Diarrhoea was just appearing. His principal complaint 
was of extreme dryness and irritability in the throat; of a 
sensation as if a hair was in it, and the extremely foul taste 
which he had in his mouth. He was restless during the 
examination. He said he had been vomiting for several days. 

I judged that his lestlessness was due to the discomfort of a 
blister. Upon examining his throat I found it acutely in- 
flamed, very dry, and red. He was also rather weak, but 
the weakness was not very prominently shown. I saw the 
vomited matter and other excretions. Mrs. Maybrick fol- 
lowed me into the bathroom, where w^e had some conversation 
about the irritation, seeking a cause for it. Mrs. Maybrick 
made a suggestion that his constitution might have been injured 
by indiscretions as to food before his marriage, but I thought 
nothing of that, not thinking it implied anything in reference 
to his then illness. After consultation wnth Dr. Humphreys, 

I concluded that deceased was suffering from acute dyspepsia, 
resulting from indiscretion of food, or drink, or both. Acute 
dysfKjpsia would include the result of such irritants as we 
thought deceased had been suffering from. We did think 
deceased was suffering from some irritant, and the symptoms 
were such as to indicate that in the absence of disease in any 
other organ, they were such symptoms as might be produced 
by an irritant poison. 

But you did not suspect the presence of any poison? — No, 
certainly not. 

As a doctor you would not do so? — No; decidedly not. It 
is the last thing — the very last thing — we would think of. We 
prescribed a careful diet, to be carefully increased as the 
stomach would bear it. To remove the distressing symp- 
toms of restlessness we ordered small doses — very small 
doses — of antipyrin, and a small dose of tincture of jaborandi, 
thinking that the last would produce a gentle flow of saliva 
and relieve him from the distressing dryness and sensation 
as of a hair, and that the other drug would calm his restless- 
ness. 

What did you prescribe in addition to the medicines? Did 
you prescribe chicken broth, milk, and lime water? — ^Yes, with 
Neave’s food, and lime water at longer intervals. 

What else did you order? — Diluted chlorodyne, which it was 
hoped might relieve this feeling of foulness, which was not, 
however, associated with any bad breath, though it was very 
distressing to the patient. 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


Carter Did you infer anything from the absence of foulness of 
breath ? — Nothing. 

As to the antipyrin, would you tell me whether that would 
be harmful? — None whatever. It is a dose given to a child 
of five years of age, and repeated again and again, and four 
times that dose is given every hour for three hours to adults. 

Tincture of jaborandi ; tell us something about it in a popular 
manner? — It was the minimum dose of the Pharmacopoeia that 
we ordered. 

Would that dose have a harmful effect upon his condition ? — 
No; the effect varies with the dose. 

What dose was it? — A half drachm of the tincture. 

Was that to produce saliva? — Yes; and to overcome the 
feeling of dryness. 

I was again called in on Thursday, the 9th, at half -past 
four in the afternoon, when Nurse Gallery, Dr. Humphreys, 
and Mr. Michael Maybrick were there. Up to this time the 
symptoms were such as I could find consistent either with an 
irritant poison or with dyspepsia, but now I found in addition 
that tenesmus of a very distressing character had set in. He 
complained of having been up and down all night, and that 
the bowels were quite loose. I endeavoured to make an 
examination of the lower bowel, but it caused the patient 
such extreme pain that I was unable to do it. The appear- 
ance of tenesmus puzzled me somewhat, for it was unusual on 
the hypothesis that I had formed as to the cause of his illness. 

I then imagined that inflammation had extended to the large 
bowels, and that added to the seriousness of the matter. This 
indicated a very serious state of things. I had a conversa- 
tion with Mr. Michael Maybrick, and afterwards I had a con- 
sultation with Dr. Humphreys. I found that the latter had 
ordered bismuth, and it was agreed between us to give double 
doses if the illness continued, and, if necessary, to add brandy 
diluted. The nature of bismuth was astringent, and it was 
a stomachic sedative. 

On the Thursday I made an analysis of some of Neave’s 
food which was given me, but I found nothing wrong with it, 
nor did I find anything wrong with some brandy which was 
given to me for the purpose of analysis. On Friday, the 10th 
May, I received a bottle at the house from Mr. Michael May- 
brick, in the presence of Dr. Humphreys. Cocaine was ordered 
on that day, and was applied to the throat externally. Cocaine 
is an alkaloid extracted from a vegetable coca, with which 
the Peruvians used to sustain their strength, and is a Phar- 
macopoeia preparation. On the Friday I went again, and saw 
the patient in the presence of Dr. Humphreys. We also saw 
Mr. Michael Maybrick, who gave me a bottle of Valentine’s 

1 14 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


meat juice. We were not satisfied with the condition of the w, c«rtar 
patient. He said he was better, but we found that the pulse 
was much quicker, and noticed a whiteness on the right hand. 

He said he had had a restless night again, and asked if we 
could give him something to make him sleep. The diarrhcea 
had not been entirely subdued, but it was not so intense. 

My impression was that the nurses told me that it was not so 
bad. The tenesmus, although not entirely absent, was 
better. His mind at the time was quite clear. On the 
Friday, Thursday, and Tuesday his mind was always clear. 

He was never in the slightest degree delirious. I am not 
sure whether I said anything about what the deceased was 
suffering from on the Tuesday to Mrs. Maybrick. He was 
at that time suffering from acute dyspepsia. Dr. Humphreys 
would have communicated our joint opinion to her. 

On the Friday we suggested that the deceased should have, 
in addition to his food, some nutrient suppository if it could 
be retained, and a dose of sulphonal to make him sleep, and 
one nitro-glycerine tablet, the smallest dose in the Pharma- 
copoeia. These were the only medicines that we prescribed 
on that day, with the exception of the brandy. He was 
taking brandy and champagne. With regard to the supposi- 
tory, he could not take food by his throat. He had vomited 
once, and they wanted to supplement the nutrition if they 
could. The sulphonal was a simple hypnotic — a sleep pro- 
ducer, having no other effects whatever. It was a white, 
tasteless, odourless powder. I gave deceased the sulphonal in 
tablet form. Neither of the medicines given could have any 
ill effect upon deceased. On the Friday evening I examined 
the meat juice by Reinsch’s test, and discovered a marked 
deposit on the copper foil introduced upon boiling it in hydro- 
chloric acid. That meant there was some metallic substance 
in the sample. On Saturday evening, when I had leisure, I 
again tested the meat juice. What I stated was discovered by 
Reinsch's test on the Friday evening. On Saturday morn- 
ing I took the sample back with me. On visiting Mr. May- 
brick about 10.30, I met Dr. Humphreys at the house, and 
told him the result of the test. I also said that I must get 
a bottle which I could be quite certain had not been opened, 
for the purpose of further test, as the sample tested might 
have had some impurity in it. On Saturday the patient was 
weaker, he having been delirious the previous night, and he 
had difficulty even in fully protruding his tongue. It was 
difficult to make him understand what was said to him, and he 
could not retain the suppositories. It was evident, in my 
opinion, that deceased could not live, and I did not think any- 
thing could do him either good or harm. Nothing was done 

IIS 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


Carter in regard to the discovery made by the test, but I said that 
if the matter turned out to be so bad as I feared it was, it 
would be taken out of our (the doctors’) hands entirely. It 
was too late then to do anything for the protection of the 
patient. 

I was not present when Mr. Maybrick died, but I was in the 
house at the time. After I left the house I took to Mr. Davies 
the bottle of Valentine’s meat extract. Before I gave it to 
Mr. Davies I had made tests in my workroom in Rodney 
Street, and found traces of arsenious acid. I made several 
experiments wuth the meat juice, testing in every case the 
tests themselves beforehand. When I got the bottle it was 
about two-thirds or three-quarters full, and I took about three 
teaspoonfuls out of it. It -was half-full perhaps w’hen I handed 
it over to Mr. Davies. I made some further search, pouring 
out some, when I found there was arsenic, on a white plate, 
shaking it up to see if I could find specks of white arsenic, soot, 
or antimony. I thought probably that it had been introduced 
in solution, and thought if that had been the case the specific 
gravity must have been diminished, and with such means as I 
had at command I tested again. I wrote to Mr. Davies direct- 
ing his attention to what I had found. I have heard the account 
of the post-mortem examination by Dr. Humphreys, but would 
like to add a few details. 

[Witness then gave a minute and highly technical account 
of the post-mortem appearances, supplementing some details 
omitted in the evidence of Dr. Humphreys in this respect.] 

Will you tell us shortly which of these symptoms was the 
cause of death? — -Mainlv the stomach inflammation, as indicat- 
ing that which caused death. 

Tell us in more popular language what the condition of the 
stomach w^as — what was the inflammation? — It was acute 
inflammation. 

Was there anything else outside that to account for death? — 
Simply the inflammation ; there were parts of the small intes- 
tines and of the rectum also inflamed. 

Now, taking those appearances altogether, to what do you 
attribute death? — To arsenical poisoning. 

Now, taking the post-mortem symptoms altogether, could 
they point to anything except death by irritant poisoning? — 

I think not. 

Were they consistent with death by acute dyspepsia? — No. 

I mean the appearances of the post-mortem? — There was no 
disease of any other organs except the stomach to account for 
congestion — but this was more than congestion, it was acute 
inflammation. It was the acute inflammation of the mucous 
membrane of the stomach and the bowels which led me to 
believe that there was arsenic. 

ii6 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


Now, confining yourself to the point when you first saw the W. Caner 
patient, when you thought it might be a case of acute dyspepsia 
— because poison was the last thing you would think of — what 
was the chief appearance of the body? — Acute inflammation of 
the stomach. Dyspepsia might leave no morbid appearance 
whatever in the stomach. From the post-mortem examination 
I came to the conclusion that there had been an irritant of 
some kind, and now, since I have heard the evidence given by 
Mr. Davies, I have no doubt whatever that arsenical poisoning 
was the cause of death. I judge that the fatal dose had been 
given on Friday, the 3rd, but a dose might have been given 
after that. When he was so violently ill on the Friday I 
thought it would be the effects of the fatal dose, but there 
must have been subsequent doses. 

Can you tell us now when the doses were commenced? — I 
judged that the previous illness on the 27th was due to an 
irritant food, but now I should think it was due to irritant 
poisoning. 

But not in sufficient quantities to cause death? — No, not at 
once. 

What do you mean by at once? — There may have been others. 

Now, what is a fatal dose of arsenic? What is the amount 
taken in one dose that kills a man? — Two grains given in five 
successive doses of 2-5ths of a gi’ain in Fowler^s solution killed 
a woman after the fifth dose. 

But these five successive doses must be administered before 
they recover from the last?— That is just what I mean. 

And suppose half a grain or one grain be given, she would 
recover? — After great illness. 

And would a repeated dose have to be taken before recovery? 

— I don't quite understand. 

Would a repeated dose have to be given before recovery from 
the previous dose to produce death?— Oh, yes. If a small dose 
were given by which there would be illness and complete 
recovery, a similar dose six months hence would do no harm. 

If, however, a similar dose was taken five days afterwards 
before complete recovery, it would be dangerous. 

Tell me what are the symptoms of arsenical poisoning?— With 
many variations, they are vomiting, foUowed after some time 
by diarrhoea, prostration, tenesmus, failure of the heart, and 
death. There are, however, many variations to this. Some- 
times coma comes early, as if the nervous system alone were 
affected by a narcotic poison. 

Supposing a dose less than, a fatal dose were given an over- 

dose— and produced serious illness, what would be the result!— 
Inflammation of the stomach, with diarrhoea, vomiting pw- 

117 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


w. Carter sistenily, with great pain, and less commonly in large doses 
irritation of the eyes. That occurs in large medicinal doses. 

Something was said about gastritis, or gas tro -enteritis. Is 
gastritis a natural complaint? — I may say this, I never saw a 
case of gastritis quite apart from irritation, putting aside, of 
course, cancer of, and ulcer in, the stomach, 'wiiich is a distinct 
disease. 

I think we may eliminate that from this case, both ulcer of 
the stomach and cancer? — ^Yes, and I may say that gastritis 
does not exist as a natural disease. 

Then this gastritis of the stomach you found must have been 
due to an external substance? — ^Yes. 

Now, taking the whole history of the case, your conclusion is 
? — can have no doubt about it. 

Excuse me, you can’t have any doubt about what, doctor? — 
That it was arsenical poisoning. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — When examined 
before the coroner, I want to call your attention to something 
you said. You said you had no idea of irritant poison until a 
suggestion was made to you? — I did. 

Did you say in your answer to the coroner that you didn’t 
form any opinion that he was suffering from poison until the 
suggestion was made to you? — ^That is so. 

I want to read this to you — Having heard the account I did 
of that afternoon at the Wirral races, and not knowing the 
gentleman, I thought he must have taken some improper food. 
I thought he must have accidentally taken something which 
caused the illness.” The coroner asked you — Had you any 
reason to suppose he had taken poison until your attention 
had been called to it? ” You answered — He must have taken 
something; it might be the food at the race dinner, and that 
something set up gastritis? — ^Yes, and I agree with that. 

You say that gastritis or gastro-enteritis you don’t know as 
what you call an idiopathic disease? — I do. 

That means and amounts to this, there must be some external 
cause to set it going, to set it up? There must be some irritant 
poison? — ^Yes, quite so. 

Some external cause introduced? — Yes. 

It may be a metallic substance or an irritant poison, impure 
food, or any other such cause? — Just so. 

You never recognise that if, from any external cause, gastritis 
is set up by any irritant cause, the symptoms which you would 
find would be the same when that irritant cause was poison — I 
mean a distinctive poison like arsenic— or some other irritant 
cause? — I include in poisons decomposing food. 

Therefore, if it came from impure food or arsenic, would you 

118 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

expect the symptoms to be the same? — They might be the same. W. Cartep 

Would you expect them to be the samel — I should not. 

Then it follows that if there were any cause apart from the 
improper use of poisonous things which would set up gastritis, 
the symptoms would be accounted for? — Except generally the 
last symptom of all, which is less common — death. 

I should not have called that a symptom, doctor. You mean, 
in other words, that unless it were a poisonous substance in 
the sense of a metallic poison you would not commonly expect 
to find gastritis fatal? — I don’t think it would be fatal. Nor 
would the symptoms be so intense. 

Have you yourself ever assisted at the post-mortem examina- 
tion of a person as to whom it was alleged death had been caused 
by arsenic? — Not by arsenic. 

Have you ever before attended a patient as to whom it was 
alleged that death had resulted from arsenic? — Not death. 

Have you had in your capacity as a doctor anything to do 
with patients except patients who had taken doses of arsenic 
medicinally? — In over-medicinal doses. 

In the case you refer to in the death of a person by two 
grains extending over a period of five days, you are aw^are that 
it is also recorded that the doses were taken on each of the 
days? — I explained it myself. 

Two-fifths of a grain successively in each of the five days ? — I 
have said that. 

That was the lowest quantity recorded? — Yes. 

I must put this to you. You have expressed your views, as 
you were bound to do. Now, is not the pain in the stomach, 
especially pain in the pit of the stomach, one of the strongest 
indications of poisoning by arsenic? — It is often there, and often 
not. 

Do you understand what I said? Is the pain in the stomach 
not one of the most distinctive symptoms or signs of poisoning 
by arsenic? — It is very often. 

After a fatal dose is given, how soon would you expect it to 
operate on a patient ? — Sometimes it comes soon ; sometimes it 
is delayed for hours. 

What? I said how soon would you expect a fatal dose to 
operate on a patient ? — Sometimes it would be soon ; sometimes 
it would be delayed for ten hours. 

That is the longest on record, I believe? Ordinarily it is 
within half an hour or so, is it not? — Ordinarily it is. 

Is not ten hours mentioned by you — I suppose you have been 
reading up this question? — ^I have. 

Is it not a fact that ten hours is a most exceptional period? — 

It is the longest time known, as I have said. 

Therefore you mention it as extreme? — ^Yes. 

1 19 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


W. Carter It is commonly from half an hour to an hour? — That is so. 

In the case of a fatal dose you would not expect to hnd a 
perceptible redness of the eyes £uid of the eyelids? — No, I should 
not. 

But if there were a succession of doses, would you not ex- 
pect to find it? — It is common when medicinal overdoses are 
taken. 

I am not asking you about medicinal doses ; that would be a 
common symptom, provided there had been a succession of 
overdoses? — It would. 

With an itching sensation in the eyelids? — That is commonly 
present. 

And a redness and a bloodshot appearance of the eyes? — 
That is so. 

Were there any signs of redness of the eyes or the eyeballs ? — 
No. 

Or of an itching sensation? — There were not. 

Following out your view of the case, was it a case of chronic 
or acute poisoning? — Acute poisoning. Perhaps I may modify 
it by saying that it was not an instantaneous case of poisoning 
with the symptoms beginning and terminating on the same 
day. 

Your opinion is that it was acute ? — Yes ; but, of course, I 
cannot be bound by a word. 

What do you mean by acute? — If a gentleman takes a large 
dose and is known to have taken it, and perhaps sixteen days 
afterwards he is known to have died from it, I should call that 
acute. 

It would point rather to the administration of a large dose 
than a succession of small doses? — Not if I have to consider a 
number of illnesses about which I know nothing. 

You were asked to give your opinion as to when the fatal 
dose was administered, and you fixed Friday, the 3rd May. I 
want to know why you fixed that date? — I had that date in my 
mind. 

Now, this is what Dr. Humphreys tells us — that on that 
day Mr. Maybrick had taken a Turkish bath ; that he came 
home, and in language which conveyed to Dr. Humphreys that 
it was as soon as he came home, he was sick and vomiting, and 
that the only thing further that he complained of was pain in 
both thighs, which he had had rubbed with turpentine to relieve 
the pain. Now, is it not a fact that when pain in the legs 
is associated with arsenical poisoning, it is with cramp or pain in 
the calf of the leg? — Yes. 

Have you ever heard, or can you refer to any case with that 
symptom of arsenical poisoning? — I cannot. 

Now, what was the great illness that you refer to on Friday? 

120 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


— I was told that he was unable to retain anything in his W. Carter 
stomach for several days. 

That, I am afraid, does not fit with the other evidence, but 
it does not matter at present. Now, I will put on some 
leading symptoms. It is a leading symptom to vomit? — Yes. 

According to your reading, how soon after arsenical poisoning 
do you expect diarrhoea to set in? — Varying from hours to days. 

Ordinarily? — I cannot say to that. 

Is not the ordinary condition of things that diarrhoea sets in 
within two hours after the administration of the article? — I am 
inclined to think not, but I speak from reading. 

You are aware in this case that Dr. Humphreys has told us 
that diarrhoea set in on Thursday, the 9th? — I said that I noticed 
something on the 7th. 

Do you desire to express any difference from Dr. Humphreys 
as to what I have told you? — I noticed something on the 7th, 
and it gradually increased, as I understand. I take Dr. 
Humphreys, of course, to be correct, but I make that statement 
within my own personal knowledge. 

Now, I ask you if there had been an administration of poison, 
causing the illness which began on the 28th of April and 
appeared intermittently, would there not have been a marked 
appearance of diarrhoea long before? — I should say it would 
be rather unusual. 

You were given a bottle of Neave’s Food. Did you find any* 
thing in it? — No. 

Did you find anything in the bottle of meat juice? — I found 
arsenic. 

Did you endeavour to make any quantitative analysis? — No, 

I did not ; I got a deposit immediately with a few drops. 

Arsenic is a poison which shows itself in the shape of a 
deposit, does it not, when boiled with hydrochloric acid?— Yes. 

That deposit would come from any metallic substance? — ^Yes. 

What is the effect of the test? — ^To drive away everything 
except arsenic, if there be arsenic, and to leave it in a crystalline 
form. 

[A test tube Tvas here produced with the deposit of arsenic on 
copper foil.] 

You speak only of a few drops. Did you not, in fact, use 
two teaspoonfuls? — Yes, altogether. 

How many drops would that be? — About one hundred and 
twenty drops, but that was of the whole testing. I used 
Marsh’s test several times over. 

With reference to the effect of the arsenic, the diarrhoea 
appearing so long after the taking of the stuff, I think you 
said it was unusual ? — Yes ; I said not impossible. 

Now, I am curious to ask you this. Dr. Carter, did you make 

I2I 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

W. Carter any testing of the water? — No, I did not. I could not do more 
than I did. Dr. Humphreys took the water. 

Did he tell you he had done it? — He took it in my presence. 

Did he tell you the result? — He did. 

Did he tell you he had analysed it? — He did. 

Now, on the Friday, you satisfied yourself by Reinsch’s test 
that there was some arsenic in it? — ^Yes. 

What time would it be? — I think about ten or eleven o’clock. 

And you did nothing next day? — No, I could carry the matter 
no further. I knew I should see Dr. Humphreys later. 

Re-examined by Mr. Addison — ^You have talked of a number 
of different illnesses in the history of the case. Do you call 
It different illnesses, or the one? — I thought there were two, 
one of which had been recovered from, and the second which 
had come on afterwards. 

And when do you date the first illness? — At the time of the 
Wirral races. 

And till when do you find it remained? — I heard he had gone 
to the oflfice a day or two before the 30th, and I concluded he 
was pretty well. 

Then what you call the fatal dose was upon the 3rd ; can 
you tell us whether it was repeated or not? — I don’t know; I 
can’t tell you. 

You have told us about the illness being set up by impure 
food. Have you ever known of people being made ill by impure 
food? — Many a time. 

Tell me how you differentiate the symptoms from these? — 
Generally they are less intense, but they may be intense. From 
the symptoms alone, or any one symptom, or the absence of 
symptoms, I never would decide; you must take the whole 
history, the symptoms if possible, and the appearance if pos- 
sible, before you venture to give a decision. 

And that decision you have gdven as the result of all these 
matters? — That is so; upon all these matters together. 

Have you ever knowm tenesmus in cases of impure food? — No ; 
I do not think I have. But anything that would cause inflam- 
mation, such as dysentery, would cause tenesmus. 

Was there any indication of dysentery from the post-mortem? 
— No, none. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — You say that dysentery is the 
only disease which has a name to it that causes tenesmus? — 
As a common symptom. It is the most common symptom. 

Re-examination continued — You told us that in a fatal dose of 
arsenic you would not expect to find redness in the eyes or 
redness in the region of the eyelids. Why? — It is so often 
absent, as a matter of fact. 

In fatal cases? — Yes. 


122 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Why not also in cases of arsenical poisoning, which do not W. Carter 
end fatally? — It is also found in these cases. 

Why do you call this acute or sub-acute rather than chronic? 

— Because the acute irritative signs were present. 

That is what I wanted you to explain. In cases of chronic 
poisoning what do you find as distinctive from acute poisoning? 

— A poison may be indicated by derangement of the stomach 
caused by small excessive doses, these symptoms often following 
weak health. 

What are the distinctive symptoms of arsenical poisoning? — 

I would not give any one particular symptom. I would take 
all the symptoms in this case — ante-mortem and post-mortem — 
as well as my experience of the fact that arsenic was discovered 
in the body, but I would not commit myself to any one 
particularly. 

Where would you expect to find arsenic? — In this case 1 
should say the liver would be very likely to give evidence of it. 

Any other organ of the body? — The kidneys, perhaps. 

Re-cross -examined by Sir Charles Russell — If it were a 
case of acute poisoning — that is to say, of death following from 
overdose — would you not expect to find arsenic in the stomach 
and in the liver? — I would not if time for elimination had 
occurred. 

Let me remind you that you said in the case of a fatal dose 
it generally operated on the patient within two hours, occa- 
sionally longer? — Yes. I also said that there was a case of 
fatal dose, and it did not operate till sixteen days aftei'^ards, 
yet it was called acute, and no arsenic was found in the body. 

Yes. What case was that? — Dr. Alexander's. 

Very well ; we shall have it looked into. But ordinarily you 
would expect a fatal dose to operate on a patient within two 
hours or about that time? — Yes, I have said I should. 

And should you not ordinarily expect to find arsenic in the 
stomach? — ^After four or five days intervening? 

I am speaking about four or five days intervening. Would 
you not expect to find it? — It would depend upon the dose 
taken before death, and the intensity of the vomiting, which 
might have cleared it away. 

And do you not find traces in the coats of the stomach 
ordinarily? — Not within four or five days. 

One other question. You said that on the 9th you discovered 
there was inflammation at the end of the bowels? — I said I 
believed there was tenesmus, which I attributed to the inflam- 
mation. Of course, I could not discover the inflammation, as 
I could not examine the bowels. 

That is what I want. You came to the conclusion that there 
was inflammation of the bowels, and you regarded it as a 
serious thing? — did. 


123 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


w. Cartel* And you mentioned it, I think, to Dr. Humphreys and Mrs. 
Maybrick? — No, not to her. 

Well, to Dr. Humphreys in her presence? — It might be. 

At all events, on the day when you came to the conclusion 
that there was inflammation of the bowels, Mrs. Maybrick told 
cook Humphreys that there "was inflammation? — I believe that 
is so. 

A. Barron Dr. Alexander Barron, examined by Mr. Swift — I am Pro- 
fessor of Pathology at University College, and I practise as 
a physician in Liverpool. I am a member of the Royal College 
of Surgeons. I did not attend the late Mr. Maybrick during 
his lifetime, but I assisted at the post-mortem examination of 
the body on the 13th May. I understood that I attended the 
post-mortem on Mrs. Maybrick's behalf, and I assisted at it 
with Dr. Carter and Dr. Humphre3^s. I came to the conclusion 
that death was due to acute inflammation of the stomach, 
probably caused by some irritant poison. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — Do you agree with 
Dr, Carter that impure food would do that — in other words, 
that the gastritis or gastro-enteritis might be set up in that 
way? — The latter might. 

Have you had much to do with post-mortem examinations ? — 
I have been Pathologist to the Royal Infirmary for four years. 
I do not know how many post-mortem examinations I have 
been present at. I should think about five hundred. 

You have had a considerable experience in that direction 
then ? — Yes. 

Now, I understand you to say that the proper cause of death 
was inflammation. As regards arsenical poisoning, what would 
you say were the leading characteristics or symptoms of 
arsenical poisoning? — Of acute arsenical poisoning or gradual? 

Acute? — I should say the leading symptoms are sickness, or 
rather vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain and tenderness, 
tenesmus, and frequently nervous symptoms. 

Now, as regards diarrhoea. How soon after the administra- 
tion of arsenic would you expect diarrhoea to set in? — Well, in 
the great majority of cases it would come on within a number 
of hours, probably some time in twenty-four hours, but some- 
times quite early. 

Does not experience show that in the great majority of cases 
it comes on within one to five hours? — I am not quite certain 
that this is the case with diarrhoea; it certainly is with 
vomiting. 

Is that pain in the pit of the stomach considered a very dis- 
tinctive mark of arsenical poisoning? — It is not a distinctive 
124 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

mark of arsenical poisoning, as it sometimes happens in cases A. Barron 
of poisoning by antimony. 

Is it a distinctive mark of irritant poison? — Yes. 

As regards gastro-enteritis, is it within your experience pro> 
ducible by other causes than arsenical poisoning, or poisoning 
by some irritant? — It is always produced, to my mind, by some- 
thing entering the body from without. I agree with Dr. Carter 
that it never arises idiopathically. 

In other words, from some foreign cause — it may be impure 
food? — Yes, such as sausages in Germany. 

I don’t know whether you have ever known it to be caused in 
England by meat? — I can’t say I have. 

In cases where it is said to be from causes of the kind, is it 
possible to differentiate the symptoms from arsenical poisoning? 

— I should not be able to do so myself. 

I don’t know whether you can speak as to the length of time 
after administration in which arsenic may be found in the 
body? — It has been found seven months after administration. 

There are cases as long as that? — ^Yes. 

And it has been found as late as six weeks in the stomach? 

—Yes. 

And with regard to the appearance of the stomach? — ^That 
would depend on the malady and the length of time and so 
forth. 

It would be found in these cases in the liver and musclevs 
of the heart? — Very likely in the liver and flat bones, such as 
the skull bone, the scapula, and the bones which make up the 
spine. 

And I understand you to say that within six weeks or so 
traces may be found in the water? — ^Yes. 

Have you at all in your experience known cases of persons 
taking arsenic and then giving it up? — Taking it medicinally, 
you mean, and then giving it up? 

Yes. What effect has it had on them? — Only a few days 
^ gentleman gave it up, and asked me particularly if it 
produced such effects as he complained of — that is, he felt ill 
and very weak, and did not feel inclined to do anything at 
all. I concluded, having previously had similar cases, that 
he was probably right. 

He had been taking arsenic medicinally, and he felt, as you 
say, lowered? — Yes, weak, and inclined to sit all day in the 
armchair. 

Was he a professional man? — Yes, he was a medical man. 

I should like to ask you one or two questions about the post- 
mortem. You know what is called a petechious condition of 
the stomach? — Yes. 

You have some notes on this? — ^Yes, on this particular post- 
mortem. 


125 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

Barron And you have compared them with Dr. Carter's notes?-- 
Yes. 

And what is this condition? — There are numbers of spots 
such as would be produced on the skin by a flea-bite, rather 
larger and darker, scattered over the stomach. 

Was there anything of that kind in connection with this 
post-mortem, such as are characteristic of arsenic? — No, I 
have no mention of such on my notes. There may have been 
one or two, but they must have been doubtful, or we should 
have made some mention of them on our notes. 

Will you just look at that diagram a moment, and see if it 
gives any idea of a petechious stomach. 

Mr. Addison — I must object, my lord. It is the first objec- 
tion I have taken in this case. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — You have a right to do so; you have 
a right to object to this. 

Mr. Addison — (to a juryman who was examining the book) 
— Put it down, if you please. 

Sir Charles Russell — Will your lordship look at it. Do 
you object to that? 

Mr. Addison — Yes, I must object even to that. 

Cross-examination continued — In the notes on the post- 
mortem taken by Dr. Carter there is no account of any 
petechious condition of the stomach? — No. 

Is that condition of the stomach usual in cases of arsenical 
poisoning? — I believe so. It is so stated to me. 

You have given me distinctive symptoms of acute poison- 
ing. In what respect do the symptoms differ in the case of 
chronic poisoning? — In chronic arsenical poisoning, if the 
doses are not sufficiently large to produce discomfort, diarrhoea 
or vomiting, the symptoms are more of a nervous kind. 

Assuming that the doses are given over a considerable 
period of time — proper doses — would you expect the same symp- 
toms of diarrhoea, pain over the middle of the stomach, and 
so forth? — ^With arsenic, as with many other drugs, personal 
idiosyncrasies must be considered. 

In the case of overdoses of arsenic impeccably given, extend- 
ing over a period of time, would you expect to find the symp- 
toms of diarrhoea, pain in the stomach, and so on? — If the 
dose was sufficiently large and continued long enough. 

Re-examined by Mr. Addison — ^You have explained to my 
friend that, in your large experience, you have found poisoned 
meat would produce gastritis or inflammation of the stomach? 
— ^Yes. In one case I remember it was a leg of mutton which 
had gone bad; in another case it was grouse. In fact, in 
four or five cases. On one occasion there were three people 

126 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


who had grouse, and they were all taken ill with similar a. Barron 
symptoms. The meat was tainted; but the grouse seemed 
to be all right. And then I want you to understand that when 
I say the meat was bad it was not putrid. 

Did the three persons get better? — Yes. 

How long were they ill? — I think the illness lasted about 
seven days, but I am not prepared to swear. 

Did they from day to day get better or worse? — One thing 
I remember — they got better and worse for some days. 

Do you ever remember a death from poisoned meat? — Not 
within my knowledge. 

In your present knowledge do you never remember a death 
from poisoned meat? — No. 

I think you say that symptoms vary according to the idio- 
syncrasies of the patient? — Quite so. 

In this case was there inflammation in the stomach? — ^Yes. 

That is the immediate cause of complaint of pain on pressure 
when this patient was alive? — I should presume so. 

You say, I think, you would expect to And arsenic in the 
liver? — After death. 

Whether there was arsenic there or not would depend upon 
the irritation and the amount of vomiting? — Yes, and upon 
the form of administration. I mean whether it was in the 
solid state or in solution. 

But if it were in solution? — You might then find the traces 
of it anywhere. 

Would you find traces of arsenic in the stomach and liver? — 

Yes. 

Superintendent Isaac Brtning, examined — I am a super- l. Bryninir 
in ten dent of the county police for the West Derby district. On 
1 3th May I went to Battlecrease House. It was by my direc- 
tion that the pipes and drains were opened. Dr. Humphreys 
was there, and took samples of sediments and liquid from 
there. These samples are described in the printed list. On 
the 14th May I saw Mrs. Maybrick in the same house. I 
said, I am superintendent of police, and I am about to say 
something to you. Pray listen to what I say and consider 
before you reply, if you do reply. You are in custody on 
suspicion of causing the death of your husband, Mr. James 
Maybrick, on the 11th May.’^ She made no reply. After- 
wards, on the 27th, I again charged her formally. That 
was in gaol at Walton, when I said to her, after repeating the 
caution, You are now charged with the murder of your 
husband, Mr. James Maybrick, at Garston, on the 11th May.’’ 

She made no reply. On that occasion her solicitor was pre- 
sent, but not on the first occasion. 


127 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


J. DaTeaport Sergeant James Davenport, examined — I am a sergeant in 
the county police, and stationed at Garston. On 17th May 1 
examined the linen closet, and found a small bottle containing 
a white liquid. I handed it over to Inspector Baxendale. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Pickpord — The bottle was on a tray 
which ivas placed outside the box, and I also found a quantity 
of pills and powders in a dressing-bag. 

Inspector Baxendale, examined — I am stationed at Garston. 
On Sunday, 12th May, in consequence of information received, 
I went to the house of deceased. I saw Mr. Maybrick ’s 
corpse. Afterwards I went into the inner bedroom, or dress- 
ing-room, with Mr. Edwin Maybrick. I there saw two band- 
boxes or hat-boxes on the floor, on a little elevation, about 
four inches from the floor, at the head of the bed. There 
was there a little raised place connected with the heating or 
ventilating apparatus. The hat-boxes were side by side. 
I heard from Mr. Michael Maybrick what was found in the 
boxes. There was a box writh certain articles found in it. 
There was a glass with a white liquid and a rag in it. I took 
possession of all the articles. On another day I foimd some 
other things in the house. I saw at Battlecrease House the 
collection of certain matters from the lavatory, the house- 
maid's closet, the butler’s pantry, and the area. I have seen 
all the articles in the printed list taken from the house. I 
also made a search at Mr. Maybrick’s office. I took all the 
articles mentioned found from time to time at Battlecrease House 
to the analyst. The di^ssing-gowu identified by Mr. Edwin 
Maybrick has not been include in the printed list. I received 
three letters and a telegram from Mr. Flatman, a hotel pro- 
prietor. I was present at the exhumation of the body, and 
at the second examination I received certain portions of the 
viscera, which I took to Mr. Davies, the analyst. I after- 
wards received from him some jars, and on the 22nd of last 
month I took them to Dr. Stevenson, of Guy’s Hospital, 
London. They were in the same state as that in which I 
received them. I got from the chemist Hanson twelve fly- 
papers, and of these I gave nine to Mr. Davies and kept three. 

I got eight fly-papers from the chemist, Mr. Wokes, and some 
of these I handed to Mr. Davies. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Pic?kpord — The greatest number of 
bottles were got in the house, were they not? — Yes. 

How many visits did you make to the house altogether? — 
Three. 

I may take it that of all these things none were locked or 
sealed? — No ; none were locked or sealed. 

Re-examined by Mr. Addison — Nothing at all was sealed; 
that is to say, nothing was locked? — No. 

128 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


Mr. Addison — With your permission, my lord, I should like to Inipeetop 
recall Mr. Michael May brick to prove the handwriting of these ® 

letters before I put them in. 

Michael Matbrice:, recalled, examined by Mr. Addison — ^Will Maybrlck 

you look at those letters, and tell me in whose handwriting 
they are? — Mrs. Maybrick’s. 

Edward Davies, examined by Mr. Addison — I am an Davies 
analytical and consulting chemist, Liverpool, Fellow of ^ the 
Pharmaceutical Society, and of the Institute of Chemists, 

London. I received various matter for analysis in connection 
with this case. On 11th May, Saturday, Dr. Carter came to 
me, and gave me a bottle of Valentine’s meat juice. That 
was the first matter I had in connection with the case. On 
the Sunday morning I examined the meat juice, it having been 
locked up during the night. 

With what result? — I found presence of arsenic. At a subse- 
quent period I determined the amount. On the 23rd May 1 
found in the quantity of meat juice which had been brought to 
me originally half a grain of arsenic. By that I mean white 
oxide of arsenic. 

Can you tell me whether that arsenic had been put in in 
solution or solid? — It had been put in, I believe, in solution, 
because there was no solid arsenic in it. I examined it care- 
fully, and the specific gravity of it was less than that of another 
sample which did not contain arsenic. 

Did you also test another bottle of Valentine’s meat juice 

found in the box? — Yes, I did. 

And that? — It was free from arsenic, and I also tested 
another sample, which was sent to me from the importers, and 
there was no arsenic in that. Valentine’s meat juice is a 
pleasant food extract. The first in the list of articles brought 
to me by Inspector Baxendale was a large stone jar covered with 
muslin, and sealed ‘"A. B.” It contained the intestines and 
part of the spleen, and contained arsenic. The intestines and 
part of the spleen w^ere in the sarue jar, all together. I did 
not determine the amount. I did not detect arsenic in the 
spleen, but I did detect it in the intestines. I did not deter- 
mine the amount. I thought it was too small. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — ^The spleen contained no arsenic? 

— I did not detect any arsenic. ^ 

Examination continued — What is the next that contained 
arsenic ?— Three glass jars, 1, 2, and 3. They contained 

arsenic. . i- 

What are they?— The stomach, no arsenic; the hver, arsenic 

distinctly. There was a fourth glass covered with white pai»r, 

and sealed No. 2 and 4, containing arsenic. They are deposits. 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

S. Davies I have no description of what they are. They were taken from 
the sinks or from the lavatory of the house. I only know them 
by the numbers. No. 8, containing arsenic, was a bottle with 
a black powder and a handkerchief. There was no arsenic 
in the bottle, but there was in the handkerchief. [Witness, 
holding up the handkerchief, pointed to a hole in it, and said 
he cut a piece out of the handkerchief.] It had red spots on 
it. I cut out the different parts, and found distinct traces 
of arsenic. 

No. 9, what is that? — This is (pointing to a label) a label I 
put on which marks the level of the liquid that was in. 

What is the bottle? — It is a bottle with liquid and black 
powder found in Mrs. Maybrick’s bedroom. 

[Some confusion here arising as to the identification of the 
articles produced by the witness, the judge directed that In- 
spector Baxendale should be recalled, and stand by Mr. Davies 
in the witness-box.] 

Mr. Addison (to Inspector Baxendale) — Where did you find 
that bottle? — In the bandbox in the dressing-room. 

By Sir Charles Bussell — There was a small wooden box found 
in the hatbox in the inner room? — That is so. 

By Mr. Addison — How do you describe the bottle? — It con- 
tains liquid up to the top of this paper (pointing to the paper), 
and in it I found some twelve to fifteen grains of solid arsenic. 

By Mr. JusncB Stephen — Could you tell us what else the 
bottle contained besides arsenic? — Powdered charcoal. 

By Mr. Addison — To all apj)earances the powder was identical 
with that marked Poison ’’? — Yes. 

Now, w'hat was the next article? — It was No. 10 in the list. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — That was out of the same box? — 
Yes, out of the same box. 

By Mr. Addison — I take it the list is quite correct? — Oh, yes, 
sir. 

Examination of Mr. Davies continued — Now, what did you 
find in that — what did it contain ? — It contained a saturated 
solution of arsenic, with a small portion of solid arsenic at the 
bottom. 

Do you know in what it has been dissolved? — ^Water. 

What do you mean by a saturated solution ? — ^I mean the 
point at which the water will not dissolve any more. 

Now, the next article, No. 11, where was that found? 

Inspector Baxendale — Still in the same box. 

Examination continued — What did you find in that? — I found 
several grains of solid arsenic and a small quantity of fluid. 
There is a label on the bottle bearing the name of Humphrey 
Jones, chemist, Llangollen. There would be ten to twelve 
grains in the bottle. 

130 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


Well, now, the next article is No. 12? — ^That is a tumbler. 

Mr. JusTiCB Stephen — ^W here was it found? 

Inspector Baxendalb — It was found in the hatboi in the 
dressing-room of the house. 

Examination continued — It contained a liquid, evidently milk, 
and there was a handkerchief in it thoroughly soak^. I 
squeezed the handkerchief, and took a portion of it and some 
of the liquid and tested it for arsenic. I found a very large 
quantity, so I took the remainder semi-fluid, a portion of which 
I had used, and which would be about one-half, and found that 
what still remained in the handkerchief would be 4*50 grains. 
That contained 2*94, or practically three grains of arsenic. 
That would be altogether in the portion that remained between 
thirty and forty grains in the whole lot. The handkerchief is 
identical with two others, but there is no name on it, and one 
corner is missing. The next article is No. 17. This is a box 
described as a chocolate box, and it contained a package marked 

Arsenic, poison for cats.’* This now contains, with what 
was taken for the analysis, 71 grains. Of these 65*2 were 
arsenic, the remainder being charcoal in a fine powder. This 
mixture corresponds with what was found in solution in a 
bottle. There was also a handkerchief in the box. There 
was a stain upon it, from which evidently some liquid had 
flowed downwards and made it stiff. Another spot is charcoal, 
the same as was in the box. The charcoal has remained, and 
the liquid apparently spread and disappeared. Page 3, No. 
27 of the list, was the pan, basin, and jug, which I received 
for examination. Pan and basin, when first examined, were 
apparently clean, but under the ledge of the jug were two little 
drops of dried skim, rather less than a quarter of an inch long, 
such as might have come from gruel. I boiled the water in 
the pan and poured it into the basin, thence back to the pan, 
and then into the jug, after having made the water boiling hot 
again. I then rinsed them out again with distilled water, and 
reduced the bulk, which I tested for arsenic. 

With what result? — I got distinct stain in the first instance, 
and with Reinsch’s test afterwards I got veiy marked and dis- 
tinct crystals of arsenic. I then bought a new pan of the 
same kind as the other, and boiled distilled water in it for 
two or three hours, and reduced it to a small bulk, and tested 
it for arsenic, thinking there might be something in the glaze. 

Where, then, do you think the arsenic came from? — The only 
possible thipg from which it could have come was the substance 
adhering to the jug. 

Can you say whether there was any considerable quantity of 
arsenic in the original mixture? — There must have been, because 
the quantity of solid which was in the test was very small, 





Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


£• Davies only about a grain. I took all the fluid, because I scarcely 
expected to get any trace. The next thing was a small round 
bottle that was found in the linen-room, and that contained a 
very weak solution of arsenic. It had no inscription on it, 
and appeared to have contained scent of some kind or some 
substance. Perhaps there might have been one-tenth of a grain 
of arsenic, supposing the bottle had been full. The next article 
was a bottle of Valentine^s meat juice that was handed to me 
by Dr. Carter, being already described. Then I found a bottle 
labelled Mixture, a sixth part to be taken early every morning 
— James Maybrick, 24th April. That was from Clay & 
Abraham. There was a very small quantity of thick liquid in 
the bottle — perhaps half a teaspoonful. There was also some 
thick material adhering to the side, as if it had been lying 
on its side. I put some distilled water in and shook it well, 
and took half for examination. I found very distinct evidence 
of arsenic. I cannot tell the amount of arsenic I found. It 
was not enough to make a quantity for examination, but there 
was distinct evidence of arsenic, more than a trace. I went 
to Messrs. Clay & Abraham’s and saw Dr. Fuller’s prescription. 

I took one of the firm down to Castle Street, and then, without 
letting any one of them know what was wanted, I had all the 
dispensing and stock bottles, the things mentioned in the 
prescription, brought down, and I took samples of each one. 

Sir Charles Kussell — This is going too far. 

Examination continued — There were certain ingredients 
pointed out to you by Tozer, the dispensing clerk, which you 
yourself examined? — Yes, I took samples and analysed them. 

The bottle we have been speaking about, and which you say 
contained arsenic, was found in Battlecrease House? — Yes. 

Where was it found? 

Inspector BAXENDAns — In the lavatory. 

Examination continued — Did you test another medicine 
bottle, made up on the 24th at Clay & Abraham’s, and which 
was found in Mr. Maybrick’s office? — ^Yes. 

What do you say about the second medicine bottle? — There 
was no arsenic in it. 

What is the next thing? — It is a blue bottle with nitro- 

did you find that? — In the same place. 

What is in that? — It contained nitro -glycerine. 

Was there much in the bottle ? — It looked very nearly full. 

It looked like a fresh bottle? — ^Yes. 

What did you find in that? — I found arsenic in the glycerine. 

I took 1000 grains and determined the amount. 

How much arsenic was in it? — Two-thirds of a grain if the 
whole bottle was fnll. There would be about one-tenth of a 

13a 


glycerine 

Where 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


grain of arsenic to a thousand of glycerine. I recognise the B. Oavits 
dressing gown (produced), which has been proved to have been 
worn by Mrs. Maybrick. I received it from Inspector Baxendale 
on the 1st July. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — And when did you get it from Mrs. 
Maybrick, Inspector Baxendale? 

Inspector Baxendale — On the 28th June. 

Examination continued — I examined the dressing gown, and 
in the pocket I found some stains, not very much. I cut the 
pocket out, and, testing it, found distinct traces of arsenic. 

From subsequent tests I found there was no arsenic in the 
material or dye of the dress. There was a handkerchief found 
in the dressing gown, which bore Mrs. Maybrick's name, and 
was similar to the one bearing the black stain. There "was a 
brown stain upon it, and, not thinking it worth while to test 
the stain, I steeped the handkerchief in dilute acid. I found 
2-lOOths of a grain of arsenic in the whole handkerchief. In 
the pocket there was a little bit of label, and in the corner 
there w^as a fluff or powder. An apron was brought to me at 
the same time as the dressing gown. It was stained a good 
deal in the front below the waistband. I cut that out and 
tested it, and found a trace of arsenic. I then took the larger 
piece, but found no arsenic there. There were two kinds of 
fly-papers — Han.son’s and Woke's. One of Hanson's contained 
grains of arsenic, partly as arsenite of potassium and partly 
arsenious acid. I only examined one of Woke’s, and took two 
halves of two different papers and found 2*95 grains of arsenic. 

I was asked at the inquest how much there was in each paper, 
and did not know. The other two halves I soaked in Avater for 
an hour, and then poured it off without squeezing or anything. 

I found thi’ee-quarters of a grain of arsenic had dissolved in 
that time from one paper. After Mr. Maybrick’s body was 
disinterred I made a determination of the amount of arsenic 
in the liver. That was on 3rd June. I received a large stone 
jar containing the kidney and part of the liver, part of the 
heart, the sciotum, the femur, the sternum, the lungs, and 
part of the pelvic bones. This was given me by Inspector 
Baxendale. I distributed the contents of this jar into six 
other jars. Then I tested the kidneys. I took four ounces and 
found arsenic, but did not get it sufficiently pure to enable me 
to weigh it. I estimated the amount at about 1-1 00th part of 
a grain. I took six ounces of the liver, but owing to the 
presence of a large quantity of bismuth I found it diflScult 
to get the article sufficiently pure to weigh. In purifying I 
lost a considerable part. I w^eighed 2-lOOths of a grain, which 
on the whole liver would be equal to about one-eighth of a 
grain. This was a minimum quantity. There was certainly 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


B. DaTiM that; I believe more. The liver weighed about three pounds. 

I analysed the pelvic bone, but could not detect any arsenic, 
nor could I do so in the lungs and heart. I mean I did not get 
that clear and distinct evidence that would satisfy me, although 
there might be indications. I tested the bismuth deceased had 
been taking — that in the bottle, and some which Dr. Humphreys 
supplied me with. I found no arsenic in these. I sent what 
remained of all samples to Dr. Stevenson, in London. Dr. 
Humphreys^ testing of the excretions for arsenic was Reinsch’s, 
but in solid matter it is very difficult to get traces under an 
hour, and I myself always boil tlie samples for three hours 
when testing for arsenic. Two minutes for the water test 
would be verv insufficient, even if there was much arsenic 
present, I have been an analyst for thirty-six years. In all 
the list of articles except those which have been mentioned 
there was no arsenic. Some of the things, such as blacking and 
homoeopathic pilules, I did not test. There were both homoeo- 
pathic medicines and others of no great consequence, being 
remedies of no strength. I procured some glycerine similar to 
that I had tested for arsenic, and analvsed that, with the result 
that no arsenic w as found. 

F. E. Tozer p. E. TozER, recalled. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — Is this the boy, Mr. Davies, wffio gave 
you the samples of the various ingredients from which the 
prescriptions w’ere made uj)? 

Mr. Davies — This is the gentleman, I believe, who made up 
the prescriptions, and who show’ed me samples of each 
ingredient used. 

Examined by Mr. Addisox- — The ingredients wdiich I showed 
to Mr. Davies at the end of May were just the same as those 
used for the prescriptions on 24th April. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — The ingredients 
were exactly the same, none of the store bottles having been 
changed or replenished between the two dates named. 

Davies Edward Davies, examination continued — I made particular 
inquiries as to whether there had been any alteration. I found 
no arsenic in any one of the ingredients. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russbli^ — You use the expres- 
sions, traces, minute, and distinct. Can you tell me what is 
the lowest quantity which is called “ weighable in these 
matters? — I do not think I should try myself to w'eigh a quan- 
tity less than the 100th part of a grain. That is to say, if I 
had to separate it from a quantity of organic matter. 

What is the difference between a distinct trace and a minute 
trace? — If I get distinct, unmistakable evidence, that is a 

*34 



Evidence for Prosecution 


distinct trace. If I only get very small microscopic crystals, E* Davlw 
I should call it a minute trace. By Reinsch^s test I think the 
1000th of a grain would be the smallest quantity of arsenic. 

I should detect it when mixed with two ounces of organic 
matter. 

It is a poison which reveals itself easily by Reinsch’s test? — 
Unquestionably. That is to say, you may get the stain on the 
copper. But that stain may be due to various other causes 
besides arsenic; and then you have to convert that into crystals. 

And unless that is done carefully, arsenic may be lost in the 
conversion. 

Does arsenic, or does it not, easily reveal itself? — Yes. 

Have you got the tube showing the crystals you obtained 
from the liver? 

[Witness here handed down the tube from a box, and said it 
was from half an ounce. 

Sir Charles Russell, examining the tube, remarked that it 
required a strong glass even to see the film upon the glass, and 
he should like his lordship to see it. 

The Witness — Oh, you can see it distinctly enough on a 
black background.] 

Cross-examination continued — Before his lordship sees it, the 
two things on the bottom are the pieces of copper foils? — Yes. 

They have nothing to do except being the instrument; but the 
arsenic is on them. 

The arsenic is free from them, except that it is in minute 
forms on the glass itself? — Yes. 

It looks like the breath on a glass? — A film; yes, but under 
a microscope it is sure and sharp. 

I am not disputing that, Mr. Davies. 

[Mr. Justice Stephen brought into play two magnifying 
glasses, one of very high power. He tried lx)th, and appeared 
to be unable to find the film,^^ and he applied to Sir Charles 
Russell to say where the film was.] 

Sir Charles Russell — You must look for it yourself, my lord. 

Mr. Davies offered to explain the matter, but 

Sir Charles Russell — Please, Mr. Davies, don’t volun- 
teer; remember you are a witness. 

[Mr. Justice Stephen endeavoured to see the film ” for 
himself, and called into requisition the slate hat of the chaplain, 
against the dark ground of which he endeavoured to find out 
the speck of arsenic which Mr. Davies had indicated. After a 
pause of some time, during which the Court was silent, his 
lordship handed back the tube to the jury, with his two glasses, 
explaining that one was much more powerful than the other, 
but the more powerful one required to be so near to the eye 
on the one hand, and so close to the object on the other, that 

^35 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick, 


Davies it was very difficult to manage. The jury then proceeded to 
use the glasses of his lordship, the black coats of their fellow- 
jurymen being used as a backgi*ound where such an article 
was available, as it happened to be.] 

Cross-examination continued — Now, I want to follow this 
out, if you please. You found arsenic in the liver? — Yes. 

And a trace in the intestines? — Yes. 

And a trace in the kidneys? — I found a very distinct trace 
in the kidneys. 

Have you got the tube containing that trace? — Yes. 

Pass that tube i-ound. 

[The witness here produced a small test tube.] 

Where am I to look for this trace here? — In the same part 
of the tube as the last. 

Sir Charges Russell — W ill your lordship look at it, and let 
the jury see it. 

By Mr. Justice Stepiiei^’^ (after he liad taken tlie tube in 
his hand) — I have looked at it through my glass, and I think 
I cun see a certain number of diHerent bodies ; if you can tell 
me what they are, and how many of them there are, then I 
have conlidence in my glass? — They are distinctly visible 
without any glass. Just let the light on them, they glitter. 

IIow many of them are there? — There will lae some hundreds. 
I did not know that microscopical tests were allowed, or I 
should have taken my glass to examine them. 

There is a film in the bulb of the tube? — Yes, there is. 

That has nothing to do with the arsenical test? — Nothing 
wliatever. 

It argues the presence of some metal — bismuth or antimony? 
— Yes ; something that was not volatile. 

What you did was to test for arsenic, and for arsenic only? — 
Yes, I tested for bismuth at the same time. 

But not Avith the vieAv of seeing if it was in weighable quan- 
tities ? — No. 

You did not examine with that object; you accidentally 
observed it? — Yes. 

[The test tul>e Avas then handed to the jury for examination.] 

Cross-examination continued — Now, having found arsenic in 
the Ih^er, and traces in the intestines and kidneys, I want to 
enumerate in what parts of the body you found no traces. You 
found none in the stomach? — No. 

Nor in the contents of the stomach? — No. 

Nor in the spleen? — No. 

Nor in the bile? — No. 

Nor in the fluid which escaped when the body was turned 
over? — No. 

Nor in the heart and lungs? — No. 

136 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


Nor in the bedding? — No. £• D»vto 

Nor in the clothing? — No. 

In consequence of the presence of bismuth, you had a diffi- 
culty in getting your quantitative analysis of what remained in 
the liver? — Yes. 

But you got 2-lOOths of a grain of sulphide of arsenic? — Yes. 

Have you it with you? — No. I converted it into arsenious 
acid. 

Well, have you that? — I converted that into arsenite of 
silver. 

Have you that with, you? — No. I have not brought it. 

You can bring it to-morrow, I suppose? — Yes; but it has 
turned black now. 

Never mind ; bring it. Now, I want to ask you one question. 

You found the bottle in the laundry, to which Mrs. Maybrick 
had access. It is a small round bottle, unlabelled, and con- 
tained a small quantity of light liquid, which, in the result, 
you descnbe as containing a very weak solution of arsenic, 
with some scent, as if it was scented water. Would vou 
suggest it had been used for toilet purposes? — It suggested that 
the bottle had c()ntained scent, but whether it was mixed with 
the arsenic at tlie time the two were present I cannot say. 

My question was, whether it suggested to your mind that it 
had been used for toilet purposes? — It might have suggested 
that, sir. 

There was nothing in the house that contained arsenic except 
from the inner room or dressing-room and the lavatory? — Well, 
of course, I don't know where the things were from except by 
the list. 

I am taking the description that has been given in your 
evidence? — I think the question is, did I find arsenic in any- 
thing. 

Excluding the dressing gown — which I shall come to in a 
moment. — and the small bottle containing scent, except from 
the inner room and the lavatory? — Those are the only two 
places named in the list. 

Yes, quite so, that is what I want to get at? — Of course, I 
am excluding the jars with sediments from the sinks. 

Yes, certainly. As regards the handkerchief, look at the list 
and see a bottle marked 1 A,’' found by Mrs. Briggs in Mrs. 
Maybrick^s room; there was nothing in the bottle? — No. 

There were no distinct traces on the handkerchief? — Yes. 

I want to call your attention to this — there was a stain on it 
of a reddish kind? — Yes. 

Will you please look at it and say v>’hether it might be 
rouge — a rouge stain? — It is very difficult to say what it is. I 
rather think it is somewhat darker than rouge generally is. 

^37 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

Davies There is no doubt of traces of arsenic on the handkerchief, 
but not necessarily in the stain? — No. I have seen some tooth 
powders very much of that colour. 

Do you know whether in that bottle in which you found no 
arsenic there was, in fact, found oxide of zinc? — Yes. 

And what is that used for? — It is often used for outward 
application. 

The next thing I wish to call your attention to is part of the 
contents of tlie wooden box that was taken from under the 
hatbox — the black powder. Did you come to the conclusion 
that that was carbonised arsenic? — It was a mixture of 
powdered charcoal and arsenic. 

Is it not the fact that arsenic, as such, is sold in small 
quantities, either mixed with soot or carbon ? — It ought to be 
mixed with soot or indigo. But this is not in exact compliance 
with the Act ; it is neither soot nor indigo. 

Now for the tumbler, with the handkerchief. The latter 
showed distinct traces of arsenic? — Oh, it was soaked in this 
strong solution. 

There is no doubt whatever about that? — None whatever. 

And the contents of the tumbler were to some extent sour 
milk? — It was so thick that I think there must be solid arsenic, 
because there was too much arsenic for the water to dissolve. 

A handkerchief soaked and put into the pocket of a dressing- 
gown would leave traces of arsenic in the pockets? — It would 
leave a great deal more. I believe what was found in the 
pocket did come from the handkerchief. 

Where were the bottles made up by Clay & Abraham? — One 
was at the office, and the other was at the house. 

Were they not counterpart prescriptions? — They were made 
up from the same sheet, but they have not the same pre- 
scriptions. 

lliey were different? — Yes, totally different. 

Now, in reference to the pan, basin, and jug, I want to ask 
you a question. You can see from the appearance of the 
jug that it had been standing a considerable time — unused, I 
mean? — It was clean. Do you mean it was dusty? 

I wish you would attend to me, Mr. Davies. Can you say if 
it had been unused for some time? — No, I cannot. 

Had it the appearance of being recently used? — It was clean, 
that is all I can say. 

You cannot judge? — No. 

You found adhering to the side of it two small bits? — That 
was the jug. 

Do you understand what I am talking about? — I think you 
are speaking about the jug. 

Can you, in your judgment, say if the jug had been recently 

138 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


used or not? — It was some time, because the particles on the E. DatIm 
surface were quite dry. 

Therefore, you could come to the conclusion that it had not 
been used recently? — Not within the last day or two. 

Particles were sticking to the side, and they were hard and 
dry? — They were dry. 

And hard? — I did not touch them. They were dry. 

Is it a fact that from what you say the glazing of the pan in 
which the food was boiled contained arsenic? — No, not to my 
knowledge. 

Do you really say that? — I do. 

Have you tested it to see whether the glazing was arsenical? 

— I have not tested it, but I put some boiling water in a new 
pan to see if any of the glaze came off. 

Do you not know that in this glazing there is arsenic? — I do 
not know. 1 have looked through a number of books to see 
whether glazing of a pan contained arsenic, and have not known 
of it. 

Why did you not test the glazing? — Because 1 considered 
the test I put it to was satisfactory — boiling water. 

If there was arsenic in the glaze, wmuld not the acid set it 
free? — Not unless the acid was strong enough to make holes 
in the glaze. 

Did you carry out your exi^eriment in the pan? Did you 
have your hydrochloric acid in the pan ? — No. 

I do not know whether you can say that the jar had been 
used for cooking purposes, or whether it could generate acid ? 

— I think there was no time to generate acid from the time it 
left the house till the time it was poured out at the office. 

I am not speaking of that? — Well, the quantity was such a 
minute quantity that it could not generate it before it was dry. 

May not the acid have been generated before it was dried ? — 

I think not before, the quantity was so minute. 

I think what you said before was this, that all you could say 
was that you could not say any more than that there was a dis- 
tinct trace of arsenic? — That is what I said. 

Have you any tube that shows that? You do not know 
anything of the "history of the jug which was brought from the 
house? — I know nothing except what I heard. 

Do you know whether there was more than one jug? — I only 
heard of one. 

Now, I want to ask you about some other matters. You 
did not attempt — in fact, you had no materials to attempt — 
to make quantitative analysis of the traces of arsenic discovered 
in one of the tw^o bottles of Clay & Abraham ? — No, the quantity 
was too minute, and I thought it better to leave it, because I 
did not know but that it would be required by some one else. 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick, 


Davies 


As a matter of fact, you did not make a quantitative analysis? 
— No; I did not. 

Mr. Justice Stephen (to the jury) — I don’t know, gentlemen, 
that you would be very much edified by looking at this arsenic. 

[Sir Charles Russell then read over the result of the wit- 
ness’s analysis of the sediment which was taken from the lava- 
tory, the housemaid’s closet, and other parts of the house. In 
some there were traces, and in others not.] 

(To JTif/iess ) — Did you attach any importance to the finding 
of traces of arsenic in this place, having regard to the pipes and 
the proved use of fly-papers ? — No ; what I found might be 
reasonably expected to be found. 

They might be there, apart from the traces of arsenic in the 
house? — Yes, because I did not find arsenic in large quantities, 
but only small traces. 

I would like to ask you one question more. You have 
quite candidly told us what would be the entire quantity of the 
entire liver from the fractional portion you dealt with? — What 
I found would amount to an eighth of a grain. 

But you did not find one-eighth of a grain ; you found 
2-lOOths of a grain of sulphide of arsenic in the six ounces? — 
Yes. 

And assuming that the arsenic was distributed equally — taking 
the vhole weight of the liver — supposing it were distributed 
equally over the entire liver, it would amount to one-eighth of 
a grain?— Yes: ])ut I ])elieve there was more than that. 

lliat was the actual quantity that you were aware of? — Yes; 
but I believe it was much more. 

Was there not a mistake about your analysis of the liver? — 
No, there was not ; it was simply a misconception. In one 
case the sulphide of arsenic was spoken of as the oxide of 
arsenic — a difference of one-eighth of a grain. 

Do you recollect in testing the first part of the liver asking 
Dr. Paul to look and see how the arsenic was obtained from the 
copper foil? — Yes, 

Do you recollect applying Marsh’s test? — No, it was lost 
through an accident, and we just simply applied the test to the 
rinsings of the dish. 

Did not it disaj^pear altogether — what you supposed to be 
arsenic? — No. 

Was it not in consequence of a miscarriage that the experi- 
ment was lost? Did you not get the second test after the body 
was exhumed? — The first was too small to serve for a quantita- 
tive analysis. 

From that you drew no conclusions — except as to the presence 
of arsenic? — I do not know. 

I will ask you how long have you been in Liverpool? — 
Twenty-two years. 

140 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


You have heard of mistakes before now in medicine? — ^Yes. 
Do you recollect any case referring to Messrs. Clay & 
Abraham, a well-known and careful firm of chemists? — Yes, 
I do. 


E. Davies 


Probably you know of other mistakes? — No, I do not. 

In this case you only found half the arsenic you have found 
in any other case which ended fatally? — Yes; it was one-half of 
what I found in the case of Margaret Jennings, and that was 
half of the smallest amoimt I have ever known. 

Who was Margaret Jennings? — One of the women poisoned 
by Mrs. Flannigan. 

And you found double the amount in her liver? — Just twice 
the amount. Really about the same amount I believe, but half 
the amount of really weighed quantity. 

What do you mean by that? — The quantity that I weighed 
and found in six ounces of the liver was 4-lOOths of a grain of 
sulphide of arsenic, but in that case there was no bismuth to 
make the analysis more difficult. I got the whole quantity 
in the other case, and in this case I believe I only got about 
half. 

Have you ever until this moment said you believed you did 
not get more than half? — Yes, at the Coroner’s Court. I said 
that owing to the number of times that it had to be purified in 
order to get it clean, I believed I did not get more than half. 

Is not this what you said, I believe that to be the minimum 
quantity, because the process of separation necessarily involves 
some loss ”? — I do not know the exact words, but I said words 
to that effect. 

Re-examined by Mr. Addison — Can there be any mistake or 
confusion with bismuth, antimony, or anything else? — No; I am 
certain I have made no mistake. 


Ellen Ann Gore, examined by Mr. Addison — I am a cer- g. Gore 
tificated nurse. 

Were you on the 8th May sent for to nurse Mr. Maybrick? — 

Yes. 

What time did you get there? — About a quarter-past two. 

In what condition did you find him? — ^Very ill. 

Did you judge what was the matter with him? — No. 

How did he look to be? — Very ill indeed, and in bed. 

Anything else? — His feet and legs were very cold. 

Anything else? — I was told he had been vomiting before I 
arrived. 

Did he vomit when you arrived? — Not that day. 

Did you speak to him? — ^Yes ; I asked him how he waa, and 
he said he was very ill. 

Did he seem to be quite conscious? — Yes; he told me Hie 

141 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

E. A. Gop« doctors did not know what was the matter with him, but 
believed it was something wrong with his liver and stomach. 

Did you give him some medicine? — Yes. 

Where did you get the medicine? — ^Mrs. Maybrick brought it 
to me out of the medicine box. 

Where from? — From the lavatory. 

Did she tell you what to do with it? — She told me to give it 
to Mr. Maybrick. 

Did you do so? — I did, and left the stuff on the table in the 
room. 

Did you give him any more medicine after six o’clock? — 
Yes; I gave him some about seven o’clock, but I gave him 
some food before I gave him the medicine. 

Weil? — I wanted the medicine glass to give him some food 
in it, and I could not find it in the bedroom. 

Where was it? — I went outside and asked Mrs. Maybrick 
for it. She said she had seen it in the bedroom. 1 went to 
look for it in the bedroom again, but it was not there. I 
came out into the lavatory, and found Mrs. Maybrick had there 
mixed the medicine in the glass. 

W^hat happened then? — She put it in a tumbler with some 
water, and she then went downstairs. I threw the medicine 
away to give him the food in the glass. 

W^hy did you throw it away? — Because I wanted the glass to 
give his food in it. 

Why did she put water in the glass? — Because the medicine 
burned the patient’s throat. She had also put water in the 
medicine. 

You stayed all that day at the house? — Yes. 

The next day, was anything done with glycerine? — Yes, on 
Thursday night I refreshed the patient’s mouth with glycerine 
and borax. 

Where did you get it? — Mrs. Maybrick gave it to me. 

Did you see where she got it from? — She took it either from 
the medicine cupboard in her room or one of the washstand 
drawers. 

Was that all you gave him till the next day at eleven o’clock? 
You arrived on the Wednesday afternoon, and went at eleven 
the next morning. Did you give him anything else before 
you left? — I did not give him the glycerine before I left that 
time; I gave it him on Thursday night. 

Did you give him anything then before you left? — ^The 
doctor ordered him some new medicine on Thursday morning, 
and I believe I gave him one dose of that before I left, but I 
am not quite sure about it. 

How was he on Wednesday night? — He had rather a rest- 
less night. During the night he slept about two hours and 
fifty-five minutes, at intervals of about half an hour. 

142 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


Of what did he complain that night % — Straining in the E. A. Gore 
bowels. 

Can you tell me when that came on? — On the Wednesday 
night, sir, early in the evening. It got worse in the morning. 

Did he complain of his throat? — Yes. He said he felt aa if 
he had a hair tickling his throat. 

Did that go on all night? — Yes. Mrs. Maybrick slept in the 
dressing-room, and I remained up with the patient. I left at 
eleven o^ clock the next morning, and came back at eleven 
o^clock on Thursday night. Nurse Gallery was there, and Mrs. 

Maybrick came in soon afterward. 

Was it then that you gave the glycerine and borax? — I think 
it was some time afterward. 

Before midnight did you give him anything? — I gave Mr. 

Maybrick some of Valentine’s meat juice. 

About what time was that? — A few minutes after eleven. 

Where did you get it? — Mr. Edwin Maybrick had given me 
the bottle on the Wednesday night. 

Was it a fresh bottle at that time? — Yes, it was a bottle 
similar to this. 

Well, on Thursday night, when you came back, did you 
open the fi’esh bottle? Did you take the cork out? — 1 took 
off the covering of the bottle. 

How did you give the meat juice to Mr. Maj’^brick? — I gave 
one or two spoonfuls in water. 

Did Mrs. Maybrick say anything? — She said Mr. Maybrick 
had had the meat juice before, and it had made him sick. I 
made no remark upon that. 

Was he at all sick after taking the meat juice you gave him? 

— No. -i-*' 

When was he sick next? — He was sick twice in the night 
or the early part of the morning. 

Did you give him anything? — Yes, I gave him champagne 
every quarter of an hour. 

You found that open? — Yes. 

Then did Mr. Maybrick go to sleep that night? — Yes, he 
slept for about three-quarters of an hour. I was left in the 
bedroom then. 

Did any one else come in? — Yes, Mrs. Maybrick came in. 

Now, tell us in your own way what happened at that time, 
between the Thursday night and the Friday morning? — Mrs. 

Maybrick passed through the bedroom, and in doing so she 
took the bottle from the chest of drawers. 

Is that the same bottle you opened and made the extract for 
Mr. Maybrick? — Yes. 

Now, what happened after that? — She went into the dress- 
ing-room and remained there about two minutes. 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

E. A. Gore How was the door? Was it open or shut at this time? — It 
was not latched; it was pushed to. 

What did she do then? — She brought it back into the room, 
and wished me to go for some ice. 

How do you know that she wished you to do so? — She 
expressed it. 

What did she say? — She told me to get some ice to put in 
the water to bathe Mr. Maybrick^s head. 

Did you see what she did with the bottle? — She raised her 
hand and put it on the table. 

On which table? — On the small table in the room. 

How did she do it? — She had her hand by her side, and while 
speaking to me raised it and put the bottle on the table. 

So that you could see her? — I did see. 

Just show how it was done — [Witness took a bottle, and, 
covering it with her hand, placed it upon the desk before her.] 

Did she cover it with her hand? — I cannot say. 

She had it in her hand, and put it on the table while speak- 
ing to you? — Yes. 

Did she tell you then to get some ice? — Yes. 

Where was the ice kept? — In the lavatory. 

Where was the lavatory? — On the landing. 

You had to go out of the room to get it? — Yes. 

What did you say to that? — I said to her that the patient 
was asleep ; I could go when he awoke. 

What happened next ? — She went to lie down in the dressing- 
room. 

When did she come back? — When the patient woke up. 

Why? — He woke up with a choking sensation in his throat, 
and Mrs. Maybrick came into the room and moved the bottle 
of meat juice from the table on to the washhand stand. 

You say he made a noise as if he was choking? — Yes. 

What was kept on the w'ashhand stand? — The ordinary 
basins and jugs. 

What made the patient waken? — I suppose it was the 
choking. 

What did you do? Did you give him any of the ice? — No, 
sir, I did not. 

Did you get it during this time? — Yes. 

And what happened to him during the night? Did you make 
any use of it? — No, sir. 

You went off duty at eleven o’clock next morning, didn’t 
you? — Yes. 

When you went off duty Nurse Gallery came on duty? — 
Yes. 

Did you mention to her anything about this? — ^Yes. 

You gave her certain instructions and orders about it? — 
Yes, sir. 

144 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


When did you next see anything about this table t — I came B* A* Gore, 
at eleven the same night. 

When you left on Friday morning at eleven o’clock did you 
come back again at eleven o’clock at night? — I did not leave 
the house all the time. 

Did you, besides making a statement to Nurse Gallery, make 
a statement to Mr. Michael Maybrick about this bottle? — ^Yes. 
sir. 

And did you see what became of it? — ^Yes. 

What? — He took it away. 

What time would that be? — Between half-past one and two 
o’clock. 

The Court then adjourned. 


K 


145 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


Fourth Day — Saturday, 3rd August, 1889, 

The Court met at ten o’clock. 

B. A. Gore Eixent Ann Gore, examination by Mr. Addison continued — I do 
not know whether I asked you yesterday whether you gave your 
patient some of the Valentine’s meat juice? — Yes. 

Did you take the label off the cork, and then remove the 
cork ? — Yes. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — Is this the bottle she saw Mrs. May- 
brick handle? 

Mr. Addison — Yes, my lord. 

{To Witness) — Did you yourself taste it? — Yes. I mixed it 

with water, and tasted it after I had mixed it. 

What did you give it to him from? — A medicine glass. 

And then you put it down where? — On the table. 

And it was from that table that you saw Mrs. Maybrick take 
it at twenty minutes past twelve? — Yes. 

The next morning, before you went off at eleven o’clock, did 
you give him anything? — I don’t remember. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — You are a trained 
nurse, and have given your services in many serious cases of 
illness? — Yes. 

When you arrived on Wednesday, you did consider Mr. May- 
brick very ill, did you not? — Yes. 

And I take it from your experience you really thought he 
was very ill? — Yes, 

Did you express that opinion? — No. 

You entertained it, but you did not express it? — ^Yes. 

I wish to get from you particularly the hours during which 
you were in personal charge. You arrived at 2.16? — About 
that time. 

On Wednesday, the 8th? — Yes. 

And you continued in charge until eleven o’clock on Thursday 
morning? — Yes. 

You were then succeeded by Nurse Gallery? — Yes. 

When did you come again in charge? — About twelve o’clock 
on Thursday night. 

So that Nurse Gallery had been in charge as far as you know 
during the intervening period? — ^Yes, 

Is she also a skilled nurse? — Yes. 

You came in charge, then, again about eleven o’clock on 
Thursday night? — ^Yes. 

How long upon that occasion did you continue in charge? — 
Until eleven o’clock on Friday morning. 

146 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


And on Friday morning at eleven o’clock who succeeded yout B. 
Nurse Gallery again? — Yes. 

When did you come in charge again? — On Friday night at 
eleven o’clock. 

And as in the previous case you understood Nurse Gallery 
was in charge in your absence? — Not all the time. 

Then some other nurse was there? — Yes. 

You came on Friday night, at eleven o’clock. How long 
did you continue? — Until eleven o’clock on Saturday morning. 

Who came then? — Nurse Wilson. 

Did you go in charge again before the death? — ^About ten 
minutes before the death. 

Did you during your time have vigilant care of your patient ? 
—Yes. 

Observed what went on, and knew what was given to him? — 
Yes, as far as I knew I saw all that was given to him. 

And you considered it your duty to be vigilant? — Yes. 

Is there any ground for suggesting that you in any way 
relaxed your vigilance or went to sleep or anything of that kind ? 
—No. 

To the best of your opinion, observation, and knowledge, 
Miss Gore, was anything injurious given to the patient during 
•ny of your watches? — Not that I am aware of. 

To the best of your opinion was there? — No. 

Now, I wish to speak about this bottle of meat juice. Was 
it a fresh bottle? — Yes. 

Is there a capsule upon it or a seal, or what? — A piece of 
white kid. 

And did you remove it? — Yes. 

And underneath that is there a cork with a seal? — No seal. 

A cork? — Yes. 

Did you see whether the bottle of meat juice, when you 
epened it, was a fresh and untampered bottle? — As far as I could 
tell. 

The capsule fitted down tight round it in the ordinary way ? — 
Yes. 

And as far as you could judge it was a fresh and previously 
unopened bottle ? — Yes. 

I understand you to say that when you came in and got the 
meat juice you put it in water to reduce it to the proper 
strength, and tasted it to satisfy yourself that it was all right? 
—Yes. 

Now you have told us of seeing the bottle removed, let me 
see if I have rightly followed you. The bottle was taken away 
by Mrs. Maybrick to the next room, the door of which was put 
to and not closed, and then she afterwards returned — ^in what 
time? — About two or three minutes. 


147 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


£« A. Gore Afterwards coming back and placing it on the table? — ^Tes. 

Just tell me, was that round table standing near the window 
pf the bedroom? — ^Yes. 

Then I understand you to say it was afterwards moved to 
the washstand ; was it not after an interval? — Yes. 

Your attention was directed to it? — Yes. 

And it perhaps would not be too much to say that your 
suspicions were aroused? — Yes. 

Very well. Your suspicions being aroused you took care not 
to give it to the patient? — Yes. 

You are clear on that point? — Yes, not by me. 

Nor by any one else so far as you remember? — No. 

On that you are clear? — ^Yes. 

So that it stands thus — ^you are positive that during your 
watch nothing was given from the bottle? — No. 

Now, as regards the watch of the other nurses. You have 
no reason to suppose anything was given during that time from 
this bottle? — No. 

Is it not a fact that before you left your watch after that 
incident, you mentioned the circumstance to the nurse who 
succeeded you so as to put her on her guard? — Yes. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — I understood you to say that you 
had put out some stock in water, tasted it yourself, and then 
you gave him some? — Yes. 

Sir Charles Russell — That was before this incident, my lord, 
and before Mrs. May brick took it in. 

The Witness — Yes. 

Sir Charles Russell — My friend will agree with me in that. 

Mr. Addison — Certainly, Sir Charles. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — ^Who was it? 

Sir Charles Russell — Let us go back on that, because 1 
want to make it quite clear. 

{To Witness ) — You recollect telling us that you got a fresh 
bottle, apparently untouched; you took the capsule off; then 
you took the cork out ; then you took some food out, and 
reduced it to the proper strength in water? — ^Yes. 

Then you gave it to your patient? — ^Yes. 

What time was that? — A minute or two after eleven o’clock 
on Thursday night. 

Then having given a portion of it, I suppose you corked the 
bottle — put the cork in it — and again placed the bottle on the 
table? — ^Yes. 

How soon after was it that you saw Mrs. May brick remove 
the bottle for a moment when she went into the next room? — 
About twenty minutes past twelve. 

And after you had given him the first lot out of it? — ^Yes. 

I think it is quite clear from what you said, but I want to 

148 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


put it beyond any doubt, that the person to whom the com- ^ (kn% 
munioation you referred to was made was Nurse Gallery? — ^Yes. 

You say you were there a few minutes before this poor man 
died, and Mrs. Maybrick was prostrate, was she not?-— I didn’t 
see her. 

Did you not help to carry her into the spare bedroom? — No. 

Did you know who did? — I think it was Nurse Wilson. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — Was this some time before he died? — 

No, my lord, it was on the Saturday night after he died. 

Cross-examination continued — I think you have already said 
to Mr. Addison in examination that a glass of medicine was 
handed to you by Mrs. Maybrick, and that you threw it away, 
because you wanted to use the glass for food? — ^Yes. 

You found some medicine in the glass? — Yes; it was put on 
the slab. 

And you wanted the glass for the purpose of using it for food ? 

—Yes. 

And you threw the medicine away and rinsed the glass? — Yes. 

And that was the only reason for throwing it away? — That 
was my only reason. 

Re-examined by Mr. Addison — So far as you know, you 
gave him nothing with anything wrong in it? — Not that 
I know of. 

Will you speak up, please. You told us that at half -past two 
you did give some medicine? — ^Yes. 

Do you know what that was? — I do not know, but I was 
under the impression that it was from a medicine bottle. 

Did you put it into the glass? — No, sir, Mrs. Maybrick gave 
it to me. 

And did you give it him as she gave it to you ? — Yes. 

That was the Wednesday at half-past two o’clock? — Yes. 

Where did you get the food, the wine, and things you gave 
him? — The food we prepared by ourselves — myself and the 
other nurses. 

Yes, yes; but where did you get them? — The milk was 
brought to us by the servants. 

And you cooked it? — Yes, we cooked them in the bedroom. 

That was the way of it? — ^Yes. 

And the wine and things, where did you get them? — There 
was a bottle of brandy in the bedroom. 

Very well; you got it from that? — No, Mr. Maybrick took 
that away, and Mr. Michael Maybrick brought a fresh bottle. 

And the medicines, where did you get them? — They were in 
the bedroom. 

On Wednesday you say you didn’t expiess any opinion as to 
his state, but you thought he seemed very ill? — Yes, he seemed 
very ill. 


149 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


B. A, In what way did he appear ill to you ? — He complained very 

much of his throat, and said his legs were very bad. 

Was that all you could see or judge by, I want to know? — 
complained of his bowels. 

Yes; was there anything else you could judge by — on the 
Wednesday, I mean, when you arrived? — I think he was very 
ill. 

You said something about your suspicions. What was it 
that you noticed that excited your suspicion? 

Sir Charles Russell — I really must object to that question. 
She has told us what she saw. 

'Mr. Addison — M y friend has cross-examined about the sus- 
picions. 

(To Witness) — The bottle of meat juice was taken away out 
of the room and brought back. Now, what made you 
suspicious ? 

Sir Charles Russell — Well, now, really, Mr. Addison, I can’t 
allow that. 

Mr. Addison — I am very sorry, but she has told us what 
she saw. 

By Mr. Justicjb Stephen — Her manner excited suspicion in 
taking away the Valentine’s meat juice. What was it in her 
manner? — She did not take it openly. 

How did she take it? — She tcx>k it from the table in her left 
hand, and covered it with her right hand. 

Re-examination continued — Yes, and then? — She brought it 
back with her right hand on my other side. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — Was it in such a position when 
she brought it back that you could see it openly? — I could see 
her put it on the table, but she had it in her liand by lier 
side. 

Re-cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — Do you recollect 
what the medicine was? — No. 

It was not Clay A Abraham’s, nor Dr. Fuller’s prescription f 
—No. 

That is the point I want to make clear. What time did you 
give him that medicine? — About half-past two. 

You continued on duty until when? — From 11 a.m. till 
11 p.m. 

You don’t quite understand what I want. How long did 
you continue on duty after giving that medicine at half-past 
two? — Eleven on Thursday morning. 

Ifi it the fact that in that interval he was not sick or vomited? 
— On Thursday morning at eight o’clock. 

You say he did not vomit during that day; you mean the 
next morning? — Yes. 

Then it stands thus — that from that 2.15 — you gave the 

150 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


medicine at 2.30 — ^he was not sick until 8.15 the next morning? K. A. Qer« 
— ^Yes. 

Very well. The champagne was given to you by Mrs. 

May brick? — No, the champagne was got from the lavatory. 

As regards the brandy, one bottle was taken away by Mr. 

Michael Maybrick? — Yes. 

And he brought you a fresh bottle? — ^He took it into the 
room. I did not see him do it. 


Margaret Jane Gallery, examined by Mr. M'Connell — I am m. j. Caiiei 
a nurse at the Dover Street Institution. In pursuance with 
my duty I attended at Battlecrease House on Thursday, the 9th 
of May, about half -past eleven in the morning. I had never 
seen my patient before. I remained on duty till eleven o’clock 
that night. During the time I was there the patient waa very 
much exhausted, and complained of a burning sensation in his 
throat and pains in the abdomen. He was not sick during 
that time. During the twelve hours I gave him some peptonised 
Neave’s food, champagne, chicken broth, brandy, and medicine, 
ordered by Dr. Humphreys. I found all I gave him prepared 
in the sick-room — the chicken broth and all that. I saw Mrs. 

Maybrick during the day. Mrs. Maybrick was in the room 
most of the time, and when she left the room she went either 
in the inner room or to the passage. Ice was ^ven to the 
deceased when he complained of his throat, sometimes by me> 
sometimes by Mrs. Maybrick, and sometimes by Alice Yapp. 

It was kept in the bathroom. I left the patient once on 
Thursday night, and at that time Mrs. Maybrick and Mr. 

Michael Maybrick were with him. 

Both of them ^gether? — Yes. 

Were they both in the room each time you left? — Yes. 

Was a linen handkerchief applied to his mouth that day? — I 

don’t know. 

Nurse Gore relieved you when you left on Thursday night at 
eleven o’clock, and she remained from 11 p.m. that night to 

11 a.m. on Friday? — ^Yes. , t « xt 

You were not in the room during those twelve hours? — No. 

You came on duty about eleven o’clock on Friday mornings 


the 10th? — Yes. . , , xt n 

When you came on duty in the morning had Nurse Gore a 

conversation with you with reference to a bottle of Valentine’s 
juice? — Yes. 

Wa« the bottle pointed out to you? — ^Yes. 

Where was it then?— On the washhand stand. 

Was any of the Valentine’s juice given to the patient during 

the day? — No. . ‘x# xr 

Did you open it at all or put anything m it? — No. 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


M. J, Callery 


Did it remain there till Mr. Michael Maybrick took possession 
of it?— Yes. 

What time did Mr. Michael Maybrick take it ? — I don’t know. 

Did you take a sample of it? — did. 

Why did you take a sample of it? — Because Nurse Gore 
asked me. 

What did you do with it? — I threw it away. 

Where? — In the slop-can in the bedroom. 

On Friday, the day we are speaking of, how long did you 
remain on duty in the sick-room? — From eleven in the morning 
till half -past four in the afternoon. 

Was Mr®. Maybrick in the loom during that day ? — Yes, most 
of the time. 

Was she helping you to nurse, or what was she doing during 
the time? — She was just in the room. I administered all the 
food and medicine myself. 

Did she speak to you at all or suggest anything? — I only 
remember her suggesting a hot- water bottle. 

During that day, between eleven and half-past four, how was 
the patient? — He was in a very exhausted condition, and com- 
plained of pain in his throat and tongue. 

Did he say anything to Mrs. Maybrick, or in her presence? — 
He said to her, You have given me the wrong medicine 
again.” 

To whom did he say that? Have you any indication to whom 
he said that? — Yes, it was to Mrs. Maybrick. 

What did she say to that? — She said — What are you talking 
about? You never had wrong medicine.” 

By Mr. Justicb Stephen — Did he say the wrong medicine, 
or any wrong medicine? — I don’t know, my lord. I could not 
say whether either of these words were us^. 

Examination continued — Had he any wrong medicine while 
you were there? — No. 

What was occurring when Mr. Maybrick said that? — Mrs. 
Maybrick was trying to persuade him to take some medicine I 
was offering. There was no vomiting, but there was a little 
straining during the day. It was about eleven o’clock when he 
spoke of straining. I left duty about half-past four, and did 
not go up again the same day, nor did I see deceased again 
during his life. Nurse Wilson followed me. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — You record all 
matters on the notes which seem of importance each day on 
the state of your patient? — ^Yes. 

I notice you say that at 8.15 on the 9th — that would be 
Thursday — ^he vomited; that would be right, would it? — Yes, 
that will be right. 

Then I don’t find any mention of any sickness again till — 
will you please tell me if it is correct ?-~af ter half-past six on 

152 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


the 10th. That would be correct, would iti — ^That would be H. J. CalieiT 
right. 

Whatever is on these notes is correct, I suppose? — ^Yes, it 
would be correct. 

Just tell us, if you please, when did you make these notes? 

— While I was on duty. 

But I don’t find any record of the straining or of diarrhoea? 

— There was straining, but I did not make a record of it. 

I do not find any record of any diarrhoea? — No, sir, there 
was none. 

Either on the Thursday, or the Friday, or the Saturday? — 

I was only there on the Thursday and Friday. 

I find notes here relating to Saturday? — Those are Nurse 
Wilson’s notes. 

The notes say on Friday he was delirious? — Those are Nurse 
Wilson’s notes. 

You came at 11.30 a.m. on Thursday, the 9th, and you 
remained on duty until 11 p.m.? 

Mr. Justice Stephen — Half -past four, I understand. 

Sir Charles Russell — No, that was on the Friday, my lord. 

She only remained till half -past four on the Friday. 

{To Witness) — Then you returned to duty at eleven o’clock in 
the morning, and remained until half -past four on the Friday? — 

Yes. 

Did you leave the room during the time you were there? 

Did you yourself administer all the food and all the medicine 
that were administered? — I did not leave the room, and I 
administered all the food and medicine. 

I think you said Mrs. Maybrick made some suggestion about 
a water bottle for his feet, which were cold. Did she in any 
way interfere? — Not in any way. 

And on this occasion when Mr. Maybrick said something 
about, Don’t give me the wrong medicine again,” or some- 
thing of that kind, were you at that time endeavouring to induce 
him to take some of the medicines you had been ordered to 
give him? — Yes; I had the glass in my hand. 

And was she endeavouring to persuade him to take the 
medicine ? — ^Yes. 

As a matter of fact, were the medicines frequently changed? 

—Yes. 

I don’t know whether you recollect that, on the day that 
incident occurred, bismuth was one of the medicines given, 
instead of antipyrin, which had been given the day before? — 

No. 

At what time wa« it that the statement was made to you by 
Nurse Gore as to the Valentine’s meat juice? — It was when I 
went on duty on Friday morning, I believe. 

That would be eleven o’clock?- — ^Yes. 


153 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


M. J. Callery In consequence of that statement, were you vigilant to see 
what was given to your patient? — Yes. I got the medicines 

together on a small table by themselves. 

And were you careful to see that nothing from that bottle 
of meat juice was given to him? — Yes. 

Now, speaking of these two periods when you yourself were 
in charge, was anything improper put in the medicine or food 
given to him? — No. 

Are you sure? — Quite sure. 

I must ask you one other question. Mrs. Maybrick was a 
good deal in the room. On occasions w^hen she was out of the 
room, did Mr. Maybrick make any observations to you about 
it? — Yes, he asked for her when she went out of the room. 

Then you sent for her, I suppose? — Yes. 

Did she appear to be very anxious about him? — Yes, very 
much so. 

I should like to know did she speak to her husband? Did 
you hear any conversation? — I can^t recollect anything she said. 

No, I am not meaning to say that you recollect what the 
conversation was, but they did converse? — Yes. 

Used she to sit on the bed beside him, or how? — Sometimes 
on the bed and sometimes beside him. 

You, of course, did not concern yourself in their conversation, 
but did they speak in a low tone? — Yes, a great deal. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — Do you mean they conversed a 
great deal, or in a low tone? — They spoke a great deal in a 
low tone. The patient was very we^ ; his voice was not 
strong. 

Re*eiamined by Mr. Addison — Did you apply anything to 
his mouth? — Yes, glycerine and borax. 

Where did you get the glycerine? 

Sir Charles Russell — Really, Mr. Addison, I don't think 
this arises out of my cross-examination. 

Mr. JusTiCH Stephen — You will have another opportunity 
afterwards, Sir Charles. 

Sir Charles Russell — Yes, but I wish my friend would make 
up his mind what he is going to ask. 

Re-examination continued — Where did you get the glycerine? 
— It was on the table in the sick-room. 

What was it in? — On the table. 

What was it in? — I believe it was in a saucer, mixed. 

How did you apply it? — It was to clean his tongue. 

Did you apply it to his tongue? — ^Yes. 

How often? — Frequently. 

Morse Wilson Nurse Wilson, examined by Mr. Swift — I was in charge of 
Mr. Maybrick from four or five in the afternoon of the 10th 
till eleven of the same night, and on the next day I was in 

154 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


charge from eleven in the morning to five at night. I found in Nurfc WI1 m« 

the sick-room Nurse Gallery and Mrs. May brick. During the 

time I was in the room I administered all the medicine and 

food to the patient. Mrs. Maybrick was in the room most of 

the time. During the evening of the Friday, about six o'clock, 

the patient said to Mrs. Maybrick — Oh, feunny. Bunny, how 

could you do it? I did not think it of you." He said that 

three times. 

At that time how did he appear with regard to the state 
of his mind? — He appeared quite conscious. 

Did Mrs. Maybrick answer? — ^Yes, she said — ‘'You silly old 
darling, don't trouble your head about things." 

And did she follow that up by some other remark? — Yes. 

What was that? — She said he could not tell what was the 
matter with him, or what had brought his illness on. 

Upon that day was he taking any food by mouth? — ^Yes. 

At what time of the day? — Until about half-past seven. 

Were you present on Saturday night when Nurse Yapp 
opened the trunk ? — Yes. 

And found the chocolate box and parcel? — ^Yes. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — You were present when she opened 
the trunk that day. What day was it? — Saturday night. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — ^ou were on duty 
from a quarter to five o'clock on Friday up to eleven o'clock 
at night? — ^Yes. 

And on the Saturday from eleven o'clock in the morning till 
Mr. Maybrick died? — Yes. 

You were at the conclusion of the illness, in fact? — Yes. 

At the time he made that observation, “Oh, Bunny, Bunny," 
were you aware that there was any trouble about a man named 
Brierley? — No, I was not. 

What time was it that he made that observation ? — About six 
o'clock. 

Was it a fact that he had on that day delirious turns? — After 

then he was delirious. 

That same evening? — Yes, sir. 

You remained in the house looking after Mrs. Maybrick 
nursing her? — Yes, sir. 

Until wjbat day? — Until the following Saturday. 

And you were there on the Tuesday after the death — the 

14th? — Yes. 

And at that time there were policemen in the house, were 
there not? — They were on the outside of the bedroom. 

She was in the spare bedroom? — ^Yes. ^ 

Do you recollect on that Tuesday Mrs. Hughes being on the 
landing and you and Mrs. Briggs being in the bedroom? — 

Y^es sir. 

With Mrs. Hughes and the policeman outside? — ^Yes. 

I5S 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


IIUPS6 Wilton 


A. Setaweisfo 


And do you recollect Mrs. Briggs making a statement to 
you about several things that had been found, and, amongst 
others, about the meat juice — arsenic having been found in a 
bottle of meat juice? — ^Yes, sir. 

Do you recollect whether Mrs. May brick said anything or 
began to say something? — No. 

What happened outside the room? Did a policeman and 
Mrs. Hughes say anything? — Some one came and said the con- 
versation was to be stopped. 

That is w^hat I want to get at? — ^Yes, sir. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — Who was it mentioned about the 
arsenic being found? 

Sir Charles Russell — Mrs. Briggs, I believe, my lord. 

The Witness — Mrs. May brick had been told by some of the 
family that arsenic had been found. 

Cross-examination continued — It was Mrs. Briggs? — I really 
cannot say whether it was Mrs. Briggs. 

I understood you to say it was Mrs. Briggs? That is what 
I have noted as your saying? — Somebody mentioned it before 
Mrs. Briggs. 

That is when you say the interruption of the conversation 
took place outside? — Yes. 

Mrs. Hughes and the policeman were on the landing? — Yes. 

Alfred Schweisso, examined by Mr. M‘ Connell — In March 
last I was head waiter at a hotel kept by Mr. Flatman, 21 and 
22 Henrietta Street, London. I remember on Thursday, the 
21st March, a lady coming to the hotel between one and half- 
past. 

Who was that lady? — Mrs. Maybrick. 

Were you aware that rooms had been engaged beforehand? — 
Yes. 

What rooms were engaged ? — The first rooms were in Temple 
Place, a dining-room and bedroom adjoining. 

Was there any gentleman called to see the lady, in the 
afternoon of that day? — Yes, sir. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — What time? — About half -past 

six. 

Examination continued — What did they do that evening? — 
They went out. 

At what time? — About a quarter to seven o’clock. 

Do you know what time Mrs. Maybrick returned? — I do 
not, sir. 

T^at time did you see her next? — On Friday morning at 
breakfast. 

Did any one breakfast with her? — I saw some one else with 
her, but he did not breakfast with her. 

156 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


Was that the gentleman who called the previous evening? — A, Sehwetfso 
No. 

By Mr. JusncB Stephen — At what time would that be? — 

About half-past nine. 

Examination continued — Did he breakfast in the private 
room? — In the dining-room. It was a private room, and was 
occupied as a sitting-room. I did not wait at breakfast, 
although I took it in to her. It was only for one person. 

On Friday, the 22nd, I saw Mrs. Maybrick with Mr. Brierley. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — What time was that? — About 
half-past seven. 

Examination continued — I first saw Mr. Brierley at dinner. 

He occupied the same bedroom in the hotel as Mrs. Maybrick. 

They occupied the same bedroom up to Sunday, when they 
left between twelve and one o’clock. Mrs. Maybrick paid the 
bill. 

Dr. Thomas Stevenson, examined by Mr. Addison — I am T. Stevenson 
lecturer on forensic medicine and chemistry at Guy’s Hos- 
pital, London. 

And there, I suppose, you are extremely versed with poisons; 
you are, in fact, a toxicologist? — I have had a very large 
experience for many years. 

And have known a great many cases of poisoning by arsenic 
in every shape — both purposed poisoning and accidental poison- 
ing?—!^ es. I act officially for the Home Office and Treasury 
in such cases. 

Did you receive on the 22nd July certain articles from Inspec- 
tor Baxendale and from Mr. Davies? — I did. 

You analysed and returned them to Inspector Baxendale on 
the 30th July? — I did. 

Can you tell me from your notes, in your own way, exactly 
what you received — what parts of the body, and what you 
found? — I received eleven vessels, of which I examined and 
analysed five only. In one of these vessels which 1 examined 
there was a quantity of the contents of the stomach. I 
analysed that, and found no arsenic in two ounces of the fluid. 

Another vessel contained portions of the stomach; they were 
decomposed, but I could see that the mucous membrane was 
thickened and had been inflamed. I analysed one ounce — 
equal to one-fifth or one-sixth of the whole stomach — but I 
could not detect any arsenic or other poison in it. Another 
vessel was labelled as containing the intestines and the spleen, 
but I could not find the spleen. I took some of the bowels, 
and by a pi’eliminary experiment I found they contained arsenic 
and bismuth. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — ^What about the jar labelled in- 

157 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


•l•v«i•oll testines and spleen ? — The spleen had liquidated by decomposi- 
tion, and I could not find it. I made a preliminary examina- 
tion, and found arsenic, and a metal which I believed to be 
bismuth. I then took eight ounces of the intestines, and 
I extracted from that portion arsenic and bismuth. 

Examination continued — ^What was the quantity foimdl — 
The quantity of arsenic in the eight ounces was *015 of a grain 
expressed as white arsenic. I produce the metallic arsenic 
obtained from the eight ounces, and there is a very visible 
quantity, about the one-hundredth of a grain. I weighed the 
intestines of another person, and I conclude that in the intes- 
tines there would probably be one-eleventh part of a grain of 
white arsenic. In another vessel was a portion of kidney. 

Before you pass away from the arsenic in the intestines, 
what proportion did you find of bismuth? — The bismuth in 
the eight ounces of intestines corresponded to grains of 
subnitrate of bismuth — the ordinary medicinal preparation. 

Is there any difficulty, speaking from your chemical ex- 
perience, in distinguishing between bismuth and arsenic ? — 
No, there is not. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — Just repeat the quantity of that 
last, will you? — It corresponded, my lord, to 1^ grains of sub- 
nitrate of bismuth, ordinarily called bismuth. 

Mr. Addison — That is bismuth, my lord. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — Yes, I know. 

Examination continued — That is all we will say about that 
jar. Pass on to the kidneys? — Another vessel contained a 
portion of kidney, one ounce of which yielded evidence of 
the presence of arsenic. 

By Sir Charles Bussell — What is the number of that jar? — 
The jar labelled Kidney ” has, I think, no number. 

Examination continued — ^The presence of arsenic was dis- 
tinctly revealed by test, but sufficient was not obtained from 
one ounce to admit of accurate weighing. 

You pass on from that to the liver? — The liver was con- 
tained in two vessels. One contained a small quantity — the 
one taken at the original post-mortem examination, I believe. 
That I did not analyse, as it was too small. 

What quantity was there? — The whole of the liver in the two 
vessels was twenty-eight ounces. 

In the part that you analysed how much? — I made a pre- 
liminary experiment with one ounce, and obtained evident 
presence of arsenic. I then made a separate analysis for the 
quantity. I took four ounces, and by a process which would 
extract the arsenic without the bismuth by distillation, obtained 
a quantity of arsenic corresponding to 32 hundredths of a 
grain in three poimds of liver, about one- third of a grain. 

158 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


Did that oamplete the whole of Ihe four ounces? — I have 
recalculated and find that it would be nearer 27-1000th8 than 
26-1000th8 of a grain. 

That is in the four ounces? — Yes. 

You said four ounces of liver ; what is the weight of the entire 
liver? — I heard in the evidence of those who made the post- 
mortem that the whole weight was three pounds or forty-eight 
^ounces. 

There was about a third of the grain for the whole liver? — 
Yes, I produce the metallic arsenic obtained from four ounces 
of liver, a very distinct quantity. 

Did you try the alternative test? — I did. 

What was that? — By a process known as the chlorate pro- 
cess, I obtained both arsenic and bismuth from eight oimces 
of liver. The quantity of arsenic expressed as white arsenic 
was *049 of a grain, or 49-lOOOths of a grain from eight ounces. 
That would correspond to *29, or 29-lOOths of a grain, for the 
whole liver, very nearly the same quantity as in the previous 
case. 

And the bismuth from the eight ounces? You told us the 
process by which you separated and determined it? — It was 
corresponding to a grain of bismuth for the 'whole liver. 

By Mr. Justich Stephen — Just tell me how much? — One 
grain. 

Examination continued — What does that result in in your 
mind? — That the body at the time of death probably contained 
a fatal dose of arsenic. I have found a little more or a little 
less than the quantity I did find here in undoubtedly fatal cases 
of arsenical poisoning. 

And in what organs of the body do you usually find arsenic 
after death by arsenical poisoning? — In the liver, independent 
^of what is found in the stomach unabsorbed. The liver is the 
chief organ one finds it in in cases of arsenic poisoning, and, 
I may add, in largest quantities. 

When you speak in that way, you speak from actual exami- 
nations and experience, not merely from stories you find in 
books? — I am speaking from my own very extensive experience. 

Have you analysed any of Valentine^s meat juice?- — I have 
recently. 

Is there arsenic in that? — ^No. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — ^Where did you obtain it? — I 
bought it myself in Clapham. 

Examination continued — Have you followed the character of 
the entire evidence given ? — I have ; except the latter portion 
of Nurse Wilson's evidence. 

Have you formed an opinion upon it? — I have. 

"What do you say, doctor? — I have no doubt that this man 
tdied from the effects of arsenic. 


159 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


Stevenson Tell us the general grounds of that opinion? — His main 
symptoms were those attributable to irritant poisoning ; and 
during his more serious illness, I think all his symptoms mi^ht 
be attributed to that. The symptoms of irritant poisoning 
more closely resemble those of arsenic than of any other irritant 
of which I know. 

Well, what makes you say that? In what respect is that so? 
— Well, the dryness of the throat, glazed appearance, the whole 
character of the sickness, and, taking the whole of it, the 
anomalies — if I might use the term — of the symptoms, are more 
marked in arsenic than in any other form of irritant poisoning. 
Then the post-mortem appearances 

Yes, I will ask you generally before we get to the post- 
mortem appearances what are the usual symptoms of arsenic 
poisoning? — The usual symptoms 

By Sir Charles Russell — Are you speaking of the post- 
mortem? — No, I should take symptoms to mean, and should 
use the word as applying only to life, not to the appearances 
after death. 

Examination continued — Yes, I suppose you would, Dr* 
Stevenson. I was asking you what the general symptoms of 
arsenical poisoning were ? — The general symptoms which usually 
appear within half an hour to an hour of taking some article 
of food or medicine are nausea, with a sinking sensation at 
the stomach ; vomiting, and, unlike vomiting produced by any 
ordinary article of food or drink that disagrees, the vomiting 
affoids no relief as a rule, and often comes on again. Then 
there is most commonly pain in the stomach and diarrhoea. 
After a time the region of the stomach becomes tender to pres- 
sure; the patient becomes restless; often bathed in perspira- 
tion. The throat is complained of ; there is pain in the throat 
extending down to the stomach. The tongue is very foul in 
appearance and furred. ITiere is not the bad smell as in the 
ordinary dyspeptic tongue. The patient goes on getting col- 
lapsed, gets a rapid and feeble pulse, a thirst; there is great 
straining at stool ; vomits and evacuations are frequently 
stained mth blood, and the patient dies. 

Tell me, the symptoms you describe, are they infallible 
symptoms? Do you always find all of them together, or are 
tiiev anomalous symptoms, one coming sometimes and some- 
times others? — Very anomalous, and I should add that there 
are other symptoms, later symptoms, but those are the ordinary 
characteristics of acute arsenical poisoning. 

Then, I will ask you another general question, and then after 
that alwut this case. What is a fatal dose of arsenic — a dose 
which by itself will take away the life of an adult person? — 
Two grains or thereabouts. I have learned from my experience 

i6o 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


in small doses — believe that a smaller dose than that may T. 
kiU. A full half or thereabouts has been known to kill, given 
in one dose. 

Then when a fatal dose of that kind has been taken, in what 
time does it in the generality of cases kill? — Generally, I may 
say, from six to twenty-four hours ; twelve hours is a very 
common period. 

Now, please to tell us, will you, the effect of repeated doses, 
small doses ; may it be longer than twelve or twenty-four hours? 
— Oh, yes, there are exceptional cases which go beyond that 
which is usual. 

Where there is a smaller than fatal dose given, what then? 
Are the symptoms, for instance, the samel-— Much the same, 
but more spread out. I should put a word to that, and say 
particular symptoms, such as vomiting and purging, may be 
less severe than when one large dose is given. 

That is under the hypothesis that a person recovers from 
such a dose; but suppose it be repeated, what then, doctor? — 

I am speaking from my own knowledge. When the symptoms 
of arsenical poisoning come on, they may subside to a certain 
extent; they recur with another dose, and again subside, and 
so on. 

Might that result in death without any second dose having 
been given? — Yes. If a second dose were given before the 
first had practically disappeared from the body, the effect of 
the second would be added to the first. I wish to add, that 
even if the effect of the first had disappeared, if a second large 
dose be given, the patient, weakened by the first, will be more 
liable to suffer from a smaller dose given a second time. That 
is to say, the same amount is not required to kill in the second 
dose, I believe. 

Arsenic is a white powder sometimes. Has it any taste in 
food or medicine? — It is practically tasteless. I have known 
an ounce put into twenty ounces — a pint— of rice pudding, and 
yet not be detected. 

And is there any difference in these effects, as to whether it 
is given in solid or in liquid form? — In the liquid form, of 
course, it is absorbed more readily, more freely, than in the 
solid ; a small dose is more likely to produce the maximum 
effect. Again, when solid arsenic is given, the particles often 
become entangled in the coats of the stomach, and the chance 
of recovery is diminished thereby. It is not removed by 
vomiting and purging. In those cases one very frequently 
finds that after death solid arsenic is adherent to the stomach, 
visibly adherent. 

And where it is given in solution you find no visible particles 
in the stomach, of course? — My experience is that you gener- 
ally find it in the stomach if death is very quick. 

i6i 


L 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

9teT«nson Let me ask you one more question. In how much liquid can 
you dissolve one fatal dose of two grains? — You can dissolve 
it with skill in about less than a tablespoonful of water, but 
it requires skill. Ordinarily if you put a fatal dose into about 
a wine glass of liquid that woidd dissolve a fatal dose of two 
grains. 

How long would it take to dissolve? — It depends whether it 
was shaken or not. It would dissolve in a few hours to some 
extent. 

You heard what Mr. Davies said about the fly-papers? — I 
did. 

Is that according to your knowledge? — I experimented with 
similar fly-papers, and I have reason to believe that what he 
said is quite correct. 

Sir Charles Russell — ^That is not really a material portion 
of the case if he did not analyse the papers from the same 
people. There is no doubt whatever that there is arsenic in 
fly-papers, and I shall not raise a single objection on the point ; 
but in a case of this kind the question put is irregular. 

Mr. JusTTCB Stephen ruled that the question should be put. 

Examination continued — Have you seen the fly-papers? — I 
have seen others like them. 

Not the same? — Not the same, but they are made by local 
chemists in a similar way. What I examined are precisely like 
these, except in regard to the name. 

And what is the result of your experiments on fly-papers? — 
That they contain arsenic, and it is readily extracted from 
them by simply soaking them in cold water. 

Now, I have asked you so far on the general symptoms of 
arsenic and arsenical poisoning. Taking the symptoms of this 
case before the post-mortem, you have watched carefully, as 
you have told us, all the evidence, with the exception of that 
of Nurse Wilson. What do you say as to these symptoms? — 
I say that if from the 27th of April to about the 2nd or 3rd 
May the deceased had recovered, I should not have been able 
to say that it was caused by arsenical poisoning, although I 
now believe, from the subsequent circumstances of the case, 
that they may be referred to arsenic; at all events, some of the 
prominent symptoms. 

Which symptoms make you think so now? — He began with 
sickness in the morning. 

On Saturday? — Yes. Then he had sickness again on Sunday, 
the 28th. He complained very much of foulness of the tongue, 
which is a sign of congested stomach. He said he felt seedy 
for days, which would mean a sense of nausea. Then he said 
to Dr. Humphreys on the morning of the 3rd May 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — When a person says he is seedy, 

162 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


how would you describe it? — I do not attach much importance T. 
to that, except that the man was not well, and on the Friday, 
the 3rd May, he told the doctor he had not been well since 
the previous day, when I learn he had his luncheon at the 
office. His tongue, in spite of the treatment, was worse than 
it had been on the previous occasion when Dr. Humphreys saw 
him. Those symptoms pointed out that he had had some 
irritant; it might not have been arsenic, but something which 
might not have agreed with him. It might not have been 
arsenic. 

Examination continued — That is all you could say up to 
the time? — Yes. 

Did you attach any importance to the numbness? Perhaps 
you have forgotten that on the 27th, when he went downstairs, 
he complained of numbness of the legs? — Numbness is a 
symptom of arsenical poisoning, which usually comes on not at 
the beginning, but later on, when the patient is recovering, if 
he does recover. 

When you find numbness early in an illness would you infer 
other things? — It would not have excited suspicion in my mind 
of arsenical poisoning. 

Go to the 3rd of May, to the Friday — ^he died on the llth. 
What would you say as to the interval of the eight days between 
the 3rd and the llth, if the symptoms varied? — He told Dr. 
Humphreys that evening that he had been sick twice, as I 
take it, since he got home. He told the doctor, who saw him 
late in the evening, that he had been sick twice. 

From that you will tell us your opinion? — I may say Dr. 
Humphreys prescribed something of which he did not give me 
the term. Sciatica is often brought on by exposure to cold, and 
a severe purgative, or something of that kind, wdll develop it. 

I could not say that it was distinctive of arsenic. 

Yes; what next? — From that time foiwvard he appeared more 
or less sick until Dr. Carter saw him, and heard the history 
of the vomiting and looseness of the bowels. 

That would be Tuesday? — Yes, Tuesday, the 7th. 

Sir Charles Russell — ^My lord, I think this course is very 
unusual ; it does not prove the case at all. The matter of 
looseness of the bowels stands thus — Dr. Humphreys, who saw 
him first and attended on him, said that he spoke first of it on 
Thursday, the 9th; and Dr. Carter says that on the 7th he was 
told there was one loose motion, that w'^as all. And I would 
respectfully suggest, my lord, and ask if, from your experience, 
it is usual to give all these daily symptoms as given by other 
witnesses, and then put them to another witness. I would 
respectfully suggest that the proper course is to speak to the 
general symptoms only. 


163 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

T. StoTMton Mr. Addison — 1 do not desire to argue with your lordship. 
I will go by the inclination of your lordship's mind. 

Mr. JusTiOD Stephen — I think I must agree with Sir Charles. 
The way you put the questions assumes a degree of confidence 
in the witness and not of accuracy, and I think the evidence 
in a case like this, which is of the utmost importance, is made 
up to a very great extent of small matters, and I don't think 
it quite fair. I do not mean it is intentionally unfair, but it 
is not what the prisoner has a right to expect that you should 
take every day’s symptoms, as it is not fair. 

Mr. Ajddison — Q uite so, my lord. 

Mr. JusTTC® Stephen — There is strong mystery about all the 
circumstances, but I think you are going too minutely into 
some matters. 

Mr. Aj)dison — No, my lord; but I will try to follow my 
friend's desires. 

Examination continued — From the 4th to the 11th what do 
you say the symptoms point to? — They point to an irritant 
poison, and especially to arsenic. 

Why especially to arsenic ? — The dry, glazed throat, the 
continued vomiting, the passing of the bowels, and the strain- 
ing, all point to either antimony or arsenic at the period, and 
more likely arsenic than antimony. 

Now, as to the life appearances. The doctors do not speak 
of any tenderness upon pressure in the region of the stomach? — 
I noticed that, and I have seen cases where that symptom was 
absent. It results from the inflammation of the stomach, 
and all inflamed organs are as a rule tender. I find here no 
evidence that this man had at any time tenderness, but he had 
undoubted inflammation of the stomach. 

Why do you say undoubted inflammation of the stomach? — 
As seen at the post-mortem examination, and as seen by 
mvself. 

Now, doctor, I pass away from the symptoms in life to the 
post-mortem symptoms? — Appearances. 

Appearances, then. As regards them, will you as generally 
as possible give us the results which you drew from the post- 
mortem appearances? — The post-mortem appearances were 
those of irritant poisoning, and were more those of arsenic than 
of any other irritant poison. 

Why, doctor? — ^The bright redness of the stomach, the result 
of inflammation, and the presence of inflammation there, and 
in the first part of the intestines more marked than in the 
other parts. The rosy blush, as it is described, of the intes- 
tines and the vascularity is generally better seen in arsenic 
poisoning than from any other form of irritant poisoning. It 
is only fair to say that after seeing a post-mortem examination 

164 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


of that kind I should have withheld any absolute opinion until T« suvmmcni 
I had known the result of the analysis. 

Now, the question has been raised whether gastro-enteritis 
presents any post-mortem appearances I — This was a death from 
gEkstro-enteritis. It is a special disease set up by arsenic. 1 
have no knowledge of my own experience, or from the experi- 
ence of others, that gastro-enteritis occurs independent of the 
introduction of some irritant. 

Now, the question has been raised as to whether improper 
food is an irritant? — I hardly know what you mean by improper 
food. 

It is said that mutton that had been bad without actually 
becoming tainted, or grouse or sausages might affect him? I 
am speaking of injurious food? — I have seen many cases, and 
I have examined the organs of the persons who have died from 
that kind of food, and independently of the fact that the 
symptoms during life differ, from post-mortem appearances 
gastro-enteritis is lower down in the bowels in the case of 
injurious food. I am not speaking of game birds, which may 
have been affected by particular plants ; but of tinned food, 
canned meats, which have undergone some changes, and there 
you find the appearances more generally diffused, with slight 
inflammation, or maybe severe, of the bowels, or ulceration. 

The brunt of the post-mortem appearances are not in the 
Btoinach so much as in the bowels. 

That is all I have to ask you on the post-mortem appear- 
ances. After that I want to know what was the result of the 
analysis both as taken by yourself and by Mr. Davies. What 
was the result in your mind of the analysis? — It concludes my 
opinion. That is to say, coupling my analysis with what I 
have heard in this Court, I can have no doubt as to the cause of 
death being from an irritant poison, and from the irritant 
poison found. I discovered no antimony or mercury, which 
are other mineral poisons, in the body. 

By Mr. Justich Stephen — Did you search for them? — did, 
my lord. 

Elxamination continued — As to the absence of any trace of 
arsenic in the stomach at the post-mortem? — I have found in 
a case of known arsenic poisoning that there was in the stomach 
such a quantity of arsenic as I could only just detect ; hence it 
must have been very minute. I operate on one-fifth or one- 
sixth of the stomach, and I could detect 

No trace of arsenic? — No trace of arsenic at all; but that 
does not prove there was no arsenic at all in the stomach. 

The impossibility of your finding it, and the fact that you 
can’t find it, does that influence your opinion? Is it absolutely 
strange? — I was not surprised. It does not diminish my 
opinion that there was arsenic in the body. 


165 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

T. You said that the effect on the stomach is to produce in* 

flammation ; how is it (the arsenic) absorbed ? — It is absorbed 
from the stomach through the blood and passes into the liver. 

How does that get into the liver? — It is the hrst organ to 
which the blood passes. The liver is the first in circxilation from 
the stomach. 

Looking at the analysis and the post-mortem, as regards the 
post-mortem appearances, what time would you say the symp- 
toms would appear ? How long before death ? — Certainly some 
on the 3rd May, I should say. 

Do you infer anything after that? 

[Sir Charles Russell made objection, and Mr. Addison altered 
his question.] 

Do you infer that the whole of it would not be on the 3rd of 
May? — I have reason to think so from the medical facts. 

Is arsenic what is called a cumulative medicine? Does it 
remain in the system, or does it pass off? — I don’t like to use 
that term, but it does not accumulate and store up in the body 
like lead and several other things, with which if you take 1-1 00th 
of a grain day by day you will eventually get several grains in 
the body. But after arsenic is taken it is excreted with the 
water, and then it gets less and less unless a fresh quantity is 
introduced, and as a rule the whole of the poison is removed in 
a fortnight. It gets less and less. 

Your figures seem to indicate that you find a little more 
arsenic than Mr. Davies. Is that so? — That is so. 

Some question has been asked about previous cases of arsenic. 
If arsenic is taken in America as an anti-periodic — I don’t know 
how long, but some years before — would that have any effect 
upon this illness? — No. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — Suppose you administer to a rabbit 
a grain of arsenic, how long would it take to pass from the 
rabbit? To disappear from the body? — I don’t know in regard 
to a rabbit, but I know with regard to a human being. I 
think arsenic, as a rule, disappears from the water — the secre- 
tion disappears generally — in the course of a fortnight, although 
I have known it to appear in the urine in very minute quantities 
for twenty-five days. That is my experience. It gets less and 
less day by day. 

Examination continued — One question more. I think you 
did answer that any arsenic taken as anti-periodic in America 
or in any other form years before would have had no effect at 
all? — I do not think so. 

You mean any arsenic remaining in the body from the time 
in America? — Yes. I do not think it could have remained a 
year in any sensible quantity. 

The arsenic you say. What is the extreme length of time it 

i66 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


can have been there in the liver? — I do not know how long in T. Sievenaon 
that quantity ; it is such a quantity as I should have expected 
to find if the patient had lived for three or four days. 

You have heard it said that arsenic is used as a cosmetic? 

What do you say? — It is very rarely used as a cosmetic; it 
irritates the skin. It has been said, to be used in some cos- 
metics ; but my experience is that it is there simply as a slight 
impurity of the ordinary bismuth used in commerce. The pure 
commercial article contains a little. The medicinal article I 
have examined, and I find it contains the 10- 1000th part of a 
grain to the pound. 

Now, with regard to Fowler’s solution? — That is the ordinary 
medicinal preparation of arsenic, containing 1 per cent, of white 
arsenic. 

Would that in any way account for any of the appearances 
seen? — If given in large and repeated doses it would. It must 
be given to the amount of three- tenths of a grain, equal to 
thirty -five minims of Fowler’s solution. 

Taking all the symptoms and appearances before death and 
after, what do you say was the cause of death? — No doubt it 
was due to arsenical poisoning. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — You are nominated 
by the Home Office and by the College of Physicians? — I have 
been their analyst for many years before. 

Since the Lamson case you were nominated analyst by the 
Home Office, and your services can be called into requisition ? — 

Yes. 

And it is in that sense that you attend here officially? — Yes. 

Is your experience of arsenical poisoning principally confined 
to examinations after death, or of patients who have taken 
arsenic during their life? — Both. 

Principally ” was my question? — I suppose I have examined 
more persons during life than I have examined after death. 

When was the last case? — Within the last two weeks, I think, 

I want yon to be exact? — I have seen persons who have taken 
it as medicine 

I am not speaking of persons who have taken it as medicine, 
but of persons who have taken it improperly or an overdose ? — I 
can’t say ; it is not a very long time. 

The last accidental case you saw no evil results followed? — 

No. I think not in the last case I saw. 

What was the name of that case? — I don’t know. I see cases 
constantly in the hospital ; when they come in I see them. 

You have examined cases (post-mortem) in which it was 
suggested that arsenic was the cause of death ? — ^Yes. 

When last? — Oh, I examined portions of bodies frequently 
this year. 


167 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


StOTMton 


That was for the purpose of analysis. I am talking of ex- 
amining bodies? — I have frequently examined the internal 
organs ; but I don’t know when I last saw a whole post-mortem 
in a case of arsenical poisoning. I have, however, seen many. 

I want to know when you by yourself assisted at a post- 
mortem, and of a person said to have died from arsenic? — It 
may be a year or two ago. 

Have you the facts in your recollection? — I cannot say when 
it was or which was the last. 

Have you a very definite case in your recollection? — I have 
several. 

Will you fix one and tell me the circumstances of it? — The 
very first case that I had was at a post-mortem for poison. It 
was in the year 1858, when two hundred persons were poisoned 
by arsenic, and seventeen died. 

That is too long ago. Can you give me a more recent case? 
— Oh, yes ; but I don’t know the names. 

Will you kindly fix your mind upon one case of a post-mortem 
in which you yourself took part? Tell me when it was. About 
when? — There was a case some years ago 

Nearer than that, please? — I cannot call to mind the circum- 
stances of each particular case. 

Within a reasonable time? — I remember one case perfectly 
well. 

When was it? — A few years ago. 

You have the circumstances definitely in your mind? — I 
think so. 

You assisted at the post-mortem? — Yes. 

Was it a case of accidental or supposed wilful? — It was 
suicidal — a suicide ; half suicidal, I believe. 

And the dose taken proved fatal? — It proved fatal. 

Death followed soon after taking the dose? — Within a couple 
of days, I think. 

What was the dose taken? — Unknown. 

What? — It was unknown. 

But you found out afterwards, later? — No. 

What was the quantity found? — I don’t know. 

But I thought you assisted at the post-mortem, and had the 
circumstances in your mind? — Yes, but when a death occurs 
from suicide at a hospital, and we find visible evidence, we don’t 
analyse the amounts. 

Have you any case in your mind where you know the time of 
administration, the time of death, and the quantity found at the 
post-mortem at which you have assisted ? — I think so. 

Well, will you please keep your mind on that case. When 
did it occur? — Some years ago. 

When? — ^About a dozen years ago. 

i68 



Evidence for Prosecution 


Not nearer than that I — I have known man 7 cases where I T* 
examined the viscera and analysed that. 

I want to know from you, can you give any case the circum- 
stances of which you have in your mind, and in which you 
assisted at the post-mortem examination ? — I do not know of any 
case where I assisted at the post-mortem, knew the circum- 
stances, and made the analysis. It is rare with any one with 
such an experience. 

Can you recall sufficiently that case of two or three years ago 
to recollect what was the quantity supposed to be taken? — Not 
two or three years ago. I said some years ago. 

Do you know the quantity found? — ^There was no analysis. 

Was it taken in a fluid form or in the arsenious acid form? — 

It was discovered in the latter form. 

Then you cannot give me a case where death followed from 
the administration of arsenic, where you assisted in the post- 
mortem, and followed this up with analysis? — Not where any 
definite known quantity was given. 

Now, I would like to ask you this question. When you 
spoke of your view that up to about the 3rd May, I think you 
said, you would not have expressed an opinion, although you 
might entertain one — ^you would not express a competent opinion 
as to the cause of the previous illness. Do you recollect saying 
so ? — Yes. 

Do you form your opinion on what you have heard proved 
as having occurred on the 3rd of May? — ^Yes. In looking for 
the cause of the final illness I find that it is accounted for. 

After hearing the history of the case and the result of the 
post-mortem examination, would you maintain the same attitude 
of mind and withhold any pronounced opinion until you had 
heard the result of the analysis? — I should have had a pro- 
nounced opinion that the deceased had died from an irritant 
poison, and I should have had the strongest suspicion that it 
was arsenic, but I should have been cautious in saying that it 
was arsenic until it was proved to me in the analysis. 

You withheld your opinion as to the cause of death imtil you 
heard the result of the analysis? — ^Yes, and quite properly. 

Do you in the use of the word poison agree with what Dr. 
Carter has told us? I want to read to you what he told us. 
He expresses the opinion that death was caused by poison. This 
is apart from the analysis. By poison,’’ he says, ** I mean 
something that was bad, it might be bad tinned meat taken at 
a race dinner, not a good dinner, and perhaps wine had entered 
into it. From his manner of living he might have taken up 
something which would set up gastritis.” Do you use the word 
irritant poison giving the same explanation as Dr. Carter does? 
— Yes, though I should have formed a strong conclusion that 

169 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


T« jUf VMitoii some mineral irritant poison iiad been given from the appear* 
ances. 

Are you using the word irritant poison to the extent Dr. 
Carter used it? — If you like I will apply the term irritant poison 
to all metallic irritants, and such articles of food as contain 
irritants. 

If gasti’o-enteritis is set up from whatever cause, are the 
83miptoms substantially similar whether the cause is arsenical 
poisoning or by any other means? — Substantially similar, but 
there are differences. 

Will you indicate any one symptom which you say is dis- 
tinctly an arsenical poisoning symptom, and which is not to be 
foimd in cases of gastro-enteritis caused by other means than 
arsenic? — No, I would form no opinion from one single symptom, 
either present or absent. 

What do you mean by that answer — No? You cannot point 
to any distinct symptom of arsenical poisoning differentiating 
it from gastro-enteritis, however caused? — There is no distinc- 
tive diagnostic symptom of arsenical poisoning; the diagnostic 
thing is finding the arsenic. 

You have said there is no distinctive symptom, but there are 
differences. What do you mean by that? — Well, the symptoms 
produced by irritant food, as a rule, do not come on so very 
quickly after taking it as after taking arsenic. Then there is 
the fact that in the vast majority of cases several people par- 
take of a common food, and they suffer from like effects. 

Does arsenic affect the idiosyncrasies of the persons who par- 
take of it? — I don’t mean that. I mean they would all have 
the same symptoms. 

Now, when do you say in your experience the illness would 
come on after taking food? — Generally, a few hours afterwards, 
it might be two, three, or four hours, when the food is pretty 
well digested ; whereas in arsenic, as a rule, it comes on 
speedily. 

How long? — In half an hour, that is a common time ; it may 
be less or more. 

I should like this to be quite clear. You would ordinarily 
expect from the administration of improper quantities of arsenic, 
speaking apart from the medicinal doses, you would expect 
illness to follow in what time? — As a rule, from half an hour to 
an hour. 

And shows itself how? — I said already in nausea, with un- 
easiness of the stomach, vomiting. 

In what time, vomiting? — It comes on in a very few minutes 
after the nausea. It may be half an hour, or if not, less than 
an hour. 

But you would probably expect in some such time as half 

170 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

an hour to an hour persistent vomiting? — ^As a rule it is per- T. steveasoi 
sistent. Sometimes vomiting is entirely absent. 

That would be an unusual case? — No, I have in my mind’s 
eye ten persons who suffered simultaneously in one common 
family. The arsenic was taken in food, and in two of these 
cases vomiting was absent. 

Vomiting is not necessary? — In an appreciable percentage of 
oases it is absent. 

Diarrhcea, when does that ordinarily follow an improper dose 
of arsenic ? — It varies ; it follows vomiting generally, but at 
some little interval, an hour or two. 

You mean an hour or two from the vomiting, or an hour or 
two from the administration? — In some cases in an hour or two, 
or later, but diarrhoea is not infrequently also absent. 

I am speaking of the usual? — I am speaking of an appreciable 
percentage of cases where it is absent, or is not, at least, 
prominent until a later stage. 

Yes. It is a symptom that you would expect to follow, but 
there is an appreciable percentage of cases in which it does not? 

— That is so. 

Is the diarrhoea persistent and excessive? — I take it diarrhoea 
means that. 

Very good. Is another usual symptom — usual is what I am 
putting to you — pain in the stomach, and particularly in the pit 
of the stomach, increasing on pressure? — Yes; described as 
abdominal pain. 

According to the usual experience — what you would usually 
expect — when do you find that there is abdominal pain in the 
pit of the stomach increasing on pressure? — After vomit and 
diarrhoea have been set up. 

You have told us already you would expect that to be set up 
about half an hour afterwards, and diarrhcea about an hour and 
a half? — Yes, I should place the pain on pressure at two hours. 

Is not also redness, a slight inflammation of the eyelids, 
also a symptom ? — Yes ; not necessarily though. 

I am asking you, if you will kindly remember, about the 
usual symptoms? — Yes, but in the majority of acute poisoning 
oases, when the person dies, that inflammation is not set up. 

Is this a case of acute or chronic poisoning? — I think I should 
style it an acute case, long drawn out, I distinguish that from 
cases where people suffer from what I may term the minor 
troubles of arsenic, such as wall-papers and so on, in cases where 
persons suffer for weeks or months. 

Is the bloodshot appearance of the eyeballs also a usual 
symptom? — ^That is usual. 

The appearance in the eyes, the suffusion, redness, and irrita- 
tion of the mucous membrane generally? — It is the usual first 

171 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


Stmnioii symptom we observe when the persons take the arsenic 
medicinally and it is beginning to get well into their system, but 
it does not come as a rule until some days. 

Do you know what petechise are? — ^Yes. 

How would you describe them? — ^Little blood-flecks beneath 
the membranes — ^little dots or minute patches. 

Is that a usual appearance in the stomach of a person who 
has been suffering from arsenical poisoning? — It is. In the 
organs generally — ^not exclusively confined to arsenic, but is 
common to many diseases. 

But it is a symptom you would expect to find in arsenical 
poisoning. Talking about the effects and consequences of food, 
you recollect the case that occurred quite recently of Dr. Wool- 
right, of Guy’s? — I knew him. 

Probably you know the theory of his illness and death? — I 
was telegraphed to attend the post-mortem, but I could not get 
there. 

I should just like to ask you about that? — I had the organs 
after death. 

Tell us whether this extract from the Lancet is correct — 

After a sandwich and a glass of sherry he had faintness, 
severe diarrhoea, and pains in the limbs. Afterwards the pains 
and sickness seemed to alternate, and, finally, having been ill 
on Wednesday, the 29th of May, on Thursday, the 6th June, 
he died suddenly in bed.” You recollect? — Yes, but it is not 
complete; I can tell you exactly how he died. He was at his 
work at the hospital at half-past twelve. He went home, was 
examined by a physician, who ordered him to bed and left 
him, and he died very quietly in ten minutes. He was about 
his work until within an hour of his death. 

You know that in the post-mortem examination the stomach 
and duodenum were found to be much congested and ecchy- 
mosed? — But not the thickness and redness we have in this 
case. You will find the effects more manifested in the larger 
bowel, where there were a number of minute ulcers. 

Quite true. I am going to read it all. We found it con- 
gested and ecchymosed.” That would be dark-coloured, con- 
gested with blood? — No, congestion is a bright red; ecchymosis 
is a dark, livid, red spot. 

There was slight but undoubted dilatation of the ventricles 
of the heart. It would appear that the morbid state of the 
stomach and the colour produced in his existing condition a 
cardiac dilatation which proved fatal? — He had had cardiac 
dilatation before. 

Yes, but is there anything to account for the condition of the 
stomach and duodenum except that something in the food taken 
was wrong? — It was attributed to that, but he had no symptoms 

172 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


for days, and no one vtho had seen the viscera would have T. Steveasoi 
suppos^ that it was a case of arsenical poisoning. 1 should 
like to say that if there had been any suspicion from the 
appearance that he had arsenic, I should have analysed the 
viscera, which I had in my laboratory. 

When arsenic is taken into the system it is more usually 
dissolved in the liquid form, but it does dissolve in the fluid 
matter of the stomach if taken in any form? — ^Yes; but, as a 
rule, only partially. 

It is a question of time, I suppose? — No, it does not com- 
pletely dissolve. When solid arsenic is taken it sets up inflam- 
mation, from which a quantity of viscid mucus is thrown out. 

The arsenic becomes embedded, and you cannot even wash it 
out of the stomach after death, and it is there undergoing a 
very gradual solution. 

Very well. Do you mean that some particles would be 
adherent to the coats of the stomach? — ^Yes, but not readily 
observed. 

It is taken up into the blood? — ^Yes. 

Passes through the liver? — ^Yes. 

And is eliminated principally through the kidneys? — Yes. 

Is it a fact that one effect of the taking of arsenic would be 
to lessen the action of the kidneys? — Sometimes it does. Some- 
times urination is free; but, as a rule, I may say we do not 
observe very much effect on the urine in the quantity. 

But is not the usual effect to lessen the action of the kidnevs ? 

» 

— Only when perspiration becomes very profuse, and liquids 
taken are excreted through the skin. 

Would the arsenic be excreted through the skin ? — Sometimes. 

In medicinal doses it is very easy. I should say also that it 
does sometimes affect the kidneys. 

In this case 3'Ou found in the kidneys traces of arsenic, I 
think? — I got distinct evidence of arsenic. 

When I speak of traces I mean a weighable quantity? — ^I had 
not enough kidney to act upon and 

I really think you ought to answer me. As a matter of fact, 
did you find any weighable quantity? — No; and I did not 
attempt to, for the reason that I had not enough kidney. I 
tried one ounce, or about one-sixth of one kidney. 

Now, where you did find a weighable quantity was in the 
liver? — The liver and intestines. 

Now, I want to call your attention to this point. You have 
stated to Mr. Addison that you found rather more proportion 
of arsenic than Mr. Davies? — Yes. 

It is a fact, is it not, that in the order of the human frame, 
the kidneys, the intestines, or the liver, you do not find the 
arsenic to be evenly distributed? — ^In the liver it is pretty well 
distributed as a rule. I guarded myself against that. 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


T. StevttiiBOii I assure you there is no occasion to use the word guarded ** 1 

— I guarded myself against it by making 

There is no occasion to use the word “ guarded.’’ There is 
no suggestion of a mistake? — Very well, I will withdraw the word 
guarded.” But I will say that I had this in view. 

You had only a portion of the liver? — The main portion. 

How many ounces? — Twenty-eight out of forty-eight. 

You took a portion of some various parts of the liver? — I did. 
Did you macerate the whole mass in one bulk, and then take 
a part of it? — No, I reserved a portion of it. 

Now, it is not very important, but I would ask your attention 
to this — ^to the statement you have already made. As I now 
understand it, you say it was four ounces of the liver you took, 
and subjected it to hydrochloric acid and subsequent treatment, 
and you discovered 27-lOOOths; is that correct? Just look 
at your book ? — I gave you the quantity of the substance actually 
weighed. Shall I give you that? 

Did you give 27-lOOOths as the quantity discovered? — Yes, 

I did. 

Was not your original calculation 26-lOOOths? — It was, or 
thereabouts. 

Now, in the next experiment on the eight ounces, was not 
your original statement *046? — I think it was *047. I measured 
very carefully, and I think the difference is immaterial : by 
using more accurate figures it comes out a little different, but 
I attach no great importance to such decimal figures. 

What do you say about the actual weighable quantity of 
arsenic which you obtained? — What organ do you want? 

The liver. What was the actual weighable quantity you have 
obtained ? — The quantity obtained from four ounces of liver was 
*934 of a grain of the yellow sulphide of arsenic. 

How much white arsenic? — The 26- or 27-lOOOths. 

Now, in the eight ounces how much did you obtain? — I got 
*046 of a grain of white and *061 of the sulphide. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — You say that in the other or larger 
portion of the liver — eight ounces — there were *049. That was 
the amount in eight ounces of liver ; and adding the two to- 
gether you get *076 of a grain in twelve ounces of liver. In 
the eight ounces was *061 of yellow sulphide? — Yes. 

Cross-examination resumed — The result, therefore, of adding 
the tw^o parts together — the four ounces and the eight ounces 
of liver — is that you get 72- 76-lOOOths of a grain? — Yes. 

Mr. JusnoB Stephen (writing) — ^The 76-lOOOth of a grain of 
arsenic. 

Sir Charles Rubbeeij. — Yes, my lord. 

(To Witness ) — And in the intestines? — The intestines yielded 
*015 of a grain of yellow sulphide. 

174 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


That would be 16-1 000th parts of a grain? — ^Yes. T. stevenM 

Adding therefore the whole together, the 72 or 76, whichever 
is the correct figure, and the 16, it would be 87- to 91 -1000th 
parts of a grain? — ^Yes, from the small fraction of viscera 
operated upon. 

Now, we learn that there was none in the stomach, none in 
the contents of the stomach, and none in the bile? — I have not 
heard of the bile. 

I think so. You heard the evidence? — The bile may have 
been mentioned, but I don’t remember hearing it. 

None in the bile, none in the fluid from the mouth? — No. 

The spleen you are not able to distinguish from the rest of 
the matter, on account of its getting into a fluid state. 

Nothing in the heart or lungs? — No. 

Did you try in the heart or lungs? — No. 

Evidence for the prosecution closed. 


175 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


Opening Speech for the Defence. 

SmSSi**^** Sir Charles Russell — Gentlemen of the jury, with my 
learned friend Mr. Pickford I share the very anxious duty of 
defending, upon the most serious charge that can be preferred, 
the friendless lady in the dock. You will probably have 
gathered, from some of the questions that have been put in the 
course of the cross-examination of the witnesses, that it is 
desired by those who represent the prisoner that certain wit- 
nesses should be called on her behalf. And inasmuch as I 
shall have an opportunity at the close of the entire evidence 
given in the case to address you again, I propose at this stage 
to say but few words ; and those few words partly addressed 
with the object of conveying clearly to your minds the questions 
upon which your verdict will, as I submit, turn, and, further, 
with the object of suggesting the character of the evidence which 
it will be our duty presently to lay before you. I abstain, 
therefore at this stage of the case from any general, much less 
detailed consideration of these extraordinary incidents — extra- 
ordinary in many respects— and will reserve a more lengthened 
discussion on the subjects which are pertinent to this inquiry, 
proper to be discussed in order to help you in the solemn dis- 
charge of the very serious duty which ultimately will devolve 
upon you. 

Gentlemen, the question that will be put to you by my 
lord will be whether Florence Maybrick is guilty or not guilty 
of the charge here preferred against her, that charge being 
the deliberate and cruel murder of her husband. But in the 
consideration of that question of guilt or innocence there are 
two questions involved. The allegation on the part of the 
Crown here is that that man, James Maybrick, died of arsenical 
poisoning, and died of that arsenical poison administered by 
his wife. Two questions therefore must enter into your con- 
sideration — was it a death by arsenical poisoning? If it were, 
was that poison administered by his wife? I have stated what 
the two main questions therefore will be. But in consider- 
ing them, I need hardly remind you — and if I fail to do it 
my lord will — ^that in determining each of these questions, 
just as in determining what your responsible answer shall be 
to the definite question of guilty or not guilty, it lies upon the 
prosecution who prefer the charge to make out the charge. 

The law of this country forbids any one to say that this 
or any other person is guilty of that which is alleged against 

176 



Opening Speech for the Defence. 


him or her until the appointed tribunal shall have expressed 
their judgment, a judgment not foimded upon suspicion, how- 
ever strong, not founded upon probabilities, even if supported 
by apparently ample motives — unless the strength of the 
probability, the cogency of the evidence itself, be so strong 
as to dispel from your minds any reasonable doubt — I shall 
not suggest a doubt conjured up for the sake of a doubt, but 
such as will, after careful, anxious scrutiny and deliberation, 
remain in your minds with such weight and such persistence 
as would in any serious affair of life regulate your own minds — 
whatever cloud of doubt and mystery may surround the case, 
nothing short of the existence in your minds of the deliberate 
opinion that you can arrive at one conclusion, and one 
conclusion only, will justify you in pronouncing the verdict 
which must snap the thread of this poor woman’s life. 

Now, upon the question, was this a death by arsenical 
poisoning? Upon that I will content myself at this stage 
with making this general observation, that although Dr. 
Humphreys was attending on the man from the 27th April up 
to the time of his death, visiting him on the intermediate 
days, and several times searching with close scrutiny the pro- 
babilities of the case, yet the suggestion of illness caused by 
any foul means, much less by the use of arsenic, never occurred 
to his mind, and only after a suggestion to that effect had 
been made — to which I shall refer again — did he come to that 
opinion. And it is true to say the same of Dr. Carter, though 
his observation of the case was not so extended. It did not 
cover the same period of time. He saw him for the first time 
on the 7th of May. James Maybrick died on the 11th of 
May, and on one of the intervening days Dr. Carter was not 
there. I do not stop to point out what I may hereafter have 
to refer to — how it was Dr. Carter came to visit the deceased ; 
but even in view of these circumstances, Dr. Carter, up to the 
time of the post-mortem examination — ay, and as I shall 
demonstrate at a later stage, by a closer examination, up to 
the time of the result of the analysis — ^he could only come to 
the conclusion that the illness was caused by an irritant 
poison; but in his use of that phrase ‘‘ irritant poison ” he 
included not only metallic poisons, such as antimony or arsenic, 
or other poisons of that nature, but he included in that descrip- 
tion any external substance introduced into the system, such 
as tainted or impure meat, or anything which could cause 
gastro-enteritis in the stomach and intestines. Dr. Stevenson, 
a gentleman unquestionably of experience, gave an answer the 
significance of which is great, that even with the accoimt of 
the symptoms occurring during the progress of the case, that 
even with the description of the appearances presented at the 

M 177 


Sip Charles 
Russell 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

Sir Charles post-mortem examination, he would have felt himself con- 

Roesell strained from pronouncing judgment until the result of the 
analysis had shown the presence of arsenic in the stomach. 
So that you will see that in each of these witnesses a deter- 
mining factor in the mind of each was the fact of arsenic, the 
existence of arsenic in this man’s system being discovered in a 
portion of the human frame afterwards. Therefore you will 
see at once that it is natmal to inquire whether there are any 
other possible explanations of the presence of arsenic in his 
system, for it is an undoubted fact of the case that arsenic 
in minute quantity was present. It has not been disputed; 
it is not disputed, but there are many ways in which the presence 
can be explained other than by the mode which alone the prose- 
cution suggests — that is, by the criminal act of the woman 
in the dock. 

Messrs. Cleaver took up the defence of this lady when she 
was practically forsaken and alone, and on their instructions 
I will lay before you some facts which I have in statement 
before me, and which will be established in evidence. You 
have heard that the late Mr. James Maybrick lived some part 
of his life in America, and that at a later period of his life, 
when not living there, he visited America and stayed for some 
shorter or longer periods there. But some witnesses will be 
called before you who will speak as regards this question of 
the use of arsenic from the period of time when he lived in 
America, in the town of Norfolk, in the State of Virginia. 
Let me refer to the question put by the learned counsel who 
leads for the prosecution. He asked, and asked with an 
appearance of gravity. Dr. Stevenson whether the fact that 
the deceased had taken arsenic years ago in America would 
account for the presence of arsenic in his system in 1889, this 
year. There has not been, gentlemen, any such suggestion 
as that made, and why it should have been thought right to 
put the question, which I must call a preposterous one, I don’t 
know. That is not the ground, the reason for which I ask 
your attention to the evidence which you will hear given 
as to this man’s habits in America. It will be shown to you, 
according to instructions before us, that at the time, 1881, 
and I think 1882 — up to the marriage in 1881, he had un- 
questionably been in the habit of taking arsenic. I think 
there will be no doubt about that. The original reason for 
his taking arsenic I am not able to tell you, but probably it 
may have been as an anti -periodic — that is to say, to enable 
his system to resist malarial fever, or whatever disease there 
was prevalent in the neighbourhood where he lived. But it 
will be proved to you that during the time he lived in Norfolk 
he was in the habit of calling at a drug store and there getting 
arsenic, that he was in the habit on several occasions during 

178 



Opening Speech for the Defence, 

each of the several successive seasons, amounting to three or sir QiaipIm 
four cases extending over two or three seasons, of sending his 
servant to fetch parcels of arsenic, which can be obtained with 
much greater facility there than it can be in this country. 

His life, his habits of life from month to month, or even from 
year to year, cannot, of course, possibly be closely followed, 
but we have got one or two significant facts in this connection. 

There is a chemist who lived in Exchange Street East in this 
town, who has now retired, but who was in business in a small 
dispensing shop in the place I have indicated up to some time 
in the year 1888 . I should have mentioned to you that 
amongst the witnesses as to what took place in Norfolk is one 
gentleman who, happening to see the case reported in the 
papers, and who was arriving from America about the time of 
the coroner’s inquest, communicated what he himself knew 
about having seen the man in a druggist’s shop getting arsenic, 
who had a conversation in the shop with the assistant, and 
which was to the effect that he (Mr. James Maybrick) was a 
reputed arsenic eater. The man in Exchange Street East 
speaks of Mr. James Maybrick, whose name he did not know, 
as being in the habit of coming into his shop for what are 
known as pick-me-ups.” The difference between James 
Maybrick and many others who came for the like purpose was 
this, that he required an addition to be made to his dose of 
the liquor arsenicalis, and that addition went on during the 
time that the man was carrying on his business in this place, 
commencing with a few drops and ending in a larger and 
increased number of drops for the dose, and that he used to 
come in as many as three, and on one or more occasions five 
times, a day for his pick-me-up dosed with the liquor arseni- 
calis, or, in other words, arsenic in solution. Gentlemen, if 
this is so, I think you will at once see the bearing it has on 
this matter. If the man had contr acted a habit of that kind, 
or had created in himself a desire or want of that kind, it 
certainly is not one he would convey or tell to his friends, but 
would rather conceal from them. Then, again, you cannot 
follow closely the habits of a man who is in Liverpool, London, 
and other places going about his business. 

You cannot expect the defence to follow or to put before you 
what the sources of supply were. But you have had one or two 
facts here which I do submit to you have a remarkably important 
bearing on this point of the case. I refer to the consensus of 
opinion expressed by Dr. Hopper and Dr. Humphreys, that they 
regEirded this man as a man who was skilled in the knowledge 
— and was proud. Dr. Humphreys says, and boasted of his 
knowledge — of drugs. In Dr. Hopper’s evidence, reference is 
pointedly made to the use of arsenic; and by both Dr. Hopper 

179 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

pIm and Dr. Humphreys language is used which indicates that he 
was a man who knew, or thought he knew, a good deal, and 
was in the habit of drugging himself. You have, in Dr. 
Hopper^s evidence, the most serious statement — namely, that 
in the month of June, 1888, or September, 1888, he is not sure 
which, it was Mrs. Maybrick who, at a time when the dark 
shadow had not passed over her name, or over her home, spoke 
to Dr. Hopper and represented that her husband was in the 
habit of drugging himself with something that was pernicious, 
and she invited his aid to stop the habit then. Apparently 
Dr. Hopper contented himself with searching this inner room 
or dressing-room, whatever it may be called, and inasmuch as 
he discovered no arsenical compound or arsenic, seems to have 
rested content. This was as far back as June or September, 
1888. She made the same reference to Dr. Humphreys in the 
beginning of March, 1889, this year. And, again, we have that 
letter which, unhappily, Mr. Michael Maybrick has not pre- 
served — and I am not making any imputation upon him because 
of its not being forthcoming — in which he admits that Mrs. 
Maybrick wrote to him in London to point out that her husband 
was continuing to indulge in this practice. Then, when it is 
mentioned to James Maybrick, he uses some strong expression 
denying it, and no further inquiry on the subject is made. In 
view of the warning to Dr. Hopper in June or September, 1888, 
in view of the warning to Dr. Humphreys in the beginning of 
March, 1889, in view of the letter to Michael Maybrick in 
March, 1889, it is an extraordinary thing, to my mind, that, 
as regards this particular matter, there was not, in the lifetime 
of James Maybrick, even when he was on his sick bed, most 
careful and anxious mquiry made into this particular matter. 
And it is also an extraordinary fact that, although from Wed- 
nesday — if not from Tuesday, the 7th, certainly from Wednesday 
— the 8th of May, this lady was deposed from the position of 
mistress in her own house — deposed from the position of looking 
after her husband, ard pointed at as an object of suspicion — 
no adequate search or inquiry was made. For it does not seem 
that at any part of the case there was any one manly enough, 
friendly enough, honest enough, to go to her and make to her, 
in the form of words, a statement of the charge against her, 
in order to see whether or not she had any explanation to offer. 
The only approach was when she was formally charged by the 
policeman, which would afford no opportunity except for a mere 
denial or admission; the only opportunity she seems to have 
had when there was any discussion about those imputations — 
those floating suspicions against her — was on the Tuesday after 
her husband ^s death, when, carried prostrate into the spare 
bedroom, she lay on the bed attended by the nurse, Wilson, 
for several days On that occasion there does seem to have 

i8o 



Opening Speech for the Defence. 


been some conversation, in which Mrs. Briggs and Mrs. Wilson, 
the nurse, took part, at which, at all events, she was present, 
in which Mrs. Briggs did make some allusion to this question of 
arsenio in the Valentine’s meat juice. The policeman who 
outside heard the conversation of these women might have had 
the opportunity of hearing her make some statement, if she did 
not actually begin one on that occasion; but the policeman, 
hearing the conversation, and no doubt attracted by the sub- 
ject, called Mrs. Hughes to say that no further conversation of 
the kind must be allowed. 

Gentlemen, upon the first question, viz., the cause of death, 
by arsenic, I have said that it is not disputed that arsenio was 
in the body. It never has been, so far as I am aware, disputed. 
If the account that I have been giving to you of this man’s 
mode of life be true, then you will see whether it is not natural 
to account for the presence of such minute quantities of arsenic 
as were in fact discovered in his body after his death. But 
the further question comes : Granted that arsenic was in his 
body, was it that which caused his death? Was this a death, 
in other words, by arsenical poisoning? And, again, I remind 
you, some of the evidence given on this side amounts to nothing 
more than this, that the symptoms, the appearances, are — I 
must use the word his lordship dislikes — consistent with 
arsenical poisoning ; but when every gentleman is asked to point 
out a symptom which is found to exist here which would not 
equally have existed in gastro-enteritis, he failed to mention one. 
I shall have evidence to put before you from persons who are 
skilled in these matters. And that evidence I will presently 
lay before you will be pointed to this, that, although in the 
progress and the history and the experience of these cases the 
poisonous symptoms vary, and you do not find in any case a 
conjunction of all the symptoms, yet the peculiarity of this case 
is that some of the symptoms which are most commonly found 
are not here, or not distinctively marked here, as, for instance, 
one which will be told to you as distinctively a mark of arsenical 
poisoning — namely, pain at the pit of the stomach, and especi- 
ally on pressure of the stomach — is not mentioned in the whole 
course of Dr. Humphreys’ evidence from beginning to end ; and 
if my recollection is right, and if I am wrong I will be corrected, 
the only mention of it occurs during the last days of this poor 
man by one of the nurses ; another, cramp of the legs ; another, 
the petechious condition of the stomach, which is, in other 
words, a kind of dotting with red dots the size of a pin’s head 
over the stomach of a man who has died by arsenical poisoning. 
There is absence of redness of the lids or suffusion, or the blood- 
shot appearance of the eyes, and, perhaps most important of 
all, the absence of diarrhoea at any time in what one might oall 

i8i 


Sir dlMiHM 
RufIMl 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


8lp Chaplet 

HutMll 


an excessive degree, and the complete absence of any mention 
of diarrhoea by Dr. Humphreys earlier than Thursday, the 9th 
May ; the only previous reference to the question of the con- 
dition of the man’s bowels, so far as diarrhoea habit is con- 
cerned, being that mentioned by Dr. Carter, having reference 
to the day or one before in which he describes the man not as 
having diarrhoea, but as having had a loose motion. Dr. 
Tidy, a gentleman as eminent in his profession as Dr. Steven- 
son, and otlicrs who will be called before you, speaking of their 
experience and to their best judgment, will tell you that in their 
judgment this is not a case of arsenical poisoning. Some 
symptoms are unquestionably consistent with that cause, but 
are not distinctive of that cause. There are wanting in the 
symptoms and in the post-mortem appearances indications which 
they would have expected to find if the present case had been 
death by arsenical poisoning; and they will tell you they believe 
it was a case of gastro -enteritis, probably beginning from the 
day of the Wirral races, the 27th April, beginning from we know 
not what, extended by the effect of exposure and wet, which I 
think you will hear he underwent on that occasion, followed 
by error of diet, not unassisted by the strange course of treat- 
ment which was pursued in his case at later stages of his illness. 
So far as that part of the case is concerned, gentlemen, I think 
I have done enough to indicate — which is all I wish now to do 
— what will be the evidence laid before you. 

The next, and not less important, matter is, if you should 
come to the conclusion, the clear, definite conclusion, satis- 
factory to your own minds as men who desire honestly and 
conscientiously to discharge a painful duty, that this was death 
due to arsenical poison — the next question is, Does this evidence 
prove to you that the lady in the dock was the administrator of 
the poison? With this part of the case I will not trouble you 
at any great length, but you cannot have failed to be struck 
with one or two very remarkable circumstances. The only 
evidence submicted to you in this case showing the acquisition 
by the prisoner of any substance containing poison, is the evi- 
dence of the chemists Wokes and Hanson as to selling to her 
fly-papers about the month of April, 1889. And you will have 
observed that in each of these cases, instead of doing what a 
wicked woman contriving an ill thing would have done, ^oing 
to a place where she was not known, she goes to the shop of 
persons in her own neighbourhood, each of whom knew her 
well, knew her name, addressed her certainly in one case by 
her name, if not in both, and in each case the parcel was sent 
home. Gentlemen, you will ask yourselves this question — ^that 
arsenic was in the house is undeniable, that arsenic was in the 
house in such quantities as to indicate that at some time there 

182 



Opening Speech for the Defence. 

was a considerably large quantity is undeniable — ^How comes it, sir Charles 
then, that, after all the publicity that this case has had, there ^'*®*®** 
is no attempt to prove any suggestion in evidence that at any 
time, at any place, from any person, under any circumstances, 

Florence Maybrick purchased substances which were poisonous, 
or from which she could obtain poison, except in this instance 
of fly-papers? There is one bottle particularly to which I will 
have to call your attention, and to which I will allude on another 
occasion. It will be enough for me, and for my learned friend 
with me in this case, to say that, as regards the administration, 
the alleged administration, by this lady, there may be circum- 
stances of suspicion and of mystery which you may not be fully 
able to dispel, but there is no undeniably distinct evidence to 
justify you in pronouncing a judgment, a verdict, when the 
consequences are so serious as involved in this case. 

Well, gentlemen, I have one statement to make to you, a 
grave and serious statement to make. I do it because it is the 
wish of the prisoner it should be done, because she mentioned 
the fact to her solicitor before the inquest. I presume my lord 
will follow the course which it is known he has followed on 
similar occasions, namely, treating the statement of the 
prisoner as being evidence for the defence, and will allow her to 
make such a statement. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — I may tell you what I have done. 

The course I have adopted is to allow the prisoner to make any 
statement she wishes. I wish you had mentioned this before, 
that she might have made her statement before you addressed 
the jury. However, I may allow it after you have addressed 
the jury. She can't, unfortunately, be sworn, nor can she be 
questioned about it, but I will allow her to make a statement ; 
and the jury will take time to consider that it was a voluntary 
statement, a statement made — I am sorry for her sake that it is 
go — ^without the possibility of cross-examination, and without 
the sanction and weight attached to the oath. 

Sir Charles Russell — I suggest to my client that she should 
write down whatever she has to say and read it on Monday, 
if she is able and your lordship permits. 

Mr. JusTTOB Stephen — I do not tliink the prisoner should be 
allowed to read a written address, in which she might consult 
those around her and obtain advice. That, I think, would be 
objectionable. 

Sir Charles Russell — If she is physically able to do it, I 
should be glad if she could address you with notes. I do not 
know whether your lordship should intimate to me whether I 
should comment or bring before you what she wishes to say. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — It has been held by all judges that 
that course ought not to be allowed, and several of them have 

183 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

SlrrChariae practised what I now propose, viz., that she should be allowed 
^ to say whatever she pleases. But I cannot go so far as to 

permit her to write it down. 

Sir Charles Russell — I think it would meet your lordship's 
views, and I think it ought to be carried out, that no one 
should communicate with her between this and Monday morning. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — Then let it be regarded as an order 
of the Court to the persons who are in charge of her. If she 
likes to make notes, by all means let her do so. 

Sir Charles Russell — I cannot but echo the observation which 
has been made as to the regrettable circumstance, as I cannot 
but think it, that, in the interests of justice, in the interests of 
innocence if there is innocence, in the interests of penal justice 
if there be guilt, the prisoner should not have the opportunity 
of making a statement under such solemn sanction as evidence 
is ordinarily given — ay, and I will go further, and of having 
that statement tested in open Court by cross-examination. 
Because it is obvious a woman who has gone through what this 
woman has gone through, for days the object on which so many 
curious eyes have been fixed — and, however great an effort she 
may make to conceal the effect on her, she must feel acutely her 
position, and feel all the painful incidents of the trial — it is 
almost impossible that she could make a statement complete in 
all points and perfectly coherent, such as you would desire to 
hear. I will not even make a reference to the statement which 
I am told she desires to make, and which she had already made 
before the inquest was held. I will make no further reference 
to it. I will offer in evidence the fact that she did make 
that statement before any evidence was given at the inquest 
at all. I will pass from it ; I will not even make allusion as to 
what the subject is. It is a grave statement ; it is an extra- 
ordinary statement, which will need every scrutiny and examina- 
tion by you, in relation to which you will have to ask yourselves 
the question, If it be not a true statement, how comes it that the 
woman, who might make other excuses and explanations, comes 
to make that? 

At this stage I need not do more than I have in directing your 
minds to the two points to which the evidence will be addressed. 
Can you say that this death was one by arsenical poisoning? 
Was the poison found in the system to be accounted for by his 
own habits? And, next, was there evidence — -is there evidence 
— which drives you irresistibly to the conclusion that there is 
no other course open to you than to find that Florence May- 
brick, under circumstances of the greatest cruelty, thus mur- 
dered and destroyed her husband ? And one concluding observa- 
tion only remains. I refer to that dark cloud that passed over 
her life, and rests, and must for all time rest, upon her char- 

184 



Opening Speech for the Defence. 

acter as a woman and a wife. But I would earnestly entreat Stp^Ch^i»« 
you not to allow any repugnance that you may find resting in *‘'**®® 
your minds against a sin so abhorrent as that to lead you to the 
conclusion, unless the evidence drives you irresistibly there, 
that, because a wife has forgotten her duty and faithfulness to 
her husband, she is to be regarded as one who deliberately and 
wickedly will seek to destroy his life. 


Evidence for the Defence. 

Nicholas Bateson, of Memphis, United States of America, N. Bateson, 
examined by Mr. Pickford — From the year 1877 up to the year 
1881 I remember the late Mr. James Maybrick. He resided 
at Norfolk, Virginia, and we were both in the cotton business. 

I remember the name of a man, Thomas Stansell, who was a 
servant man who waited upon us. 

You have seen him here recently? — I have. 

In the year 1878, can you tell us of any medicine that Mr. 

Maybrick was taking? — No medicine in 1878, but in 1877. 

Well, tell us what you know about it? — Well, Mr. Maybrick 
had chills and fever in the autumn of 1877, or what is com- 
monly known as malarial fever. Chills and fever'' is the 
ordinary way of speaking of it. 

Do you remember him taking anything for that? — He took 
arsenic and strychnine, by order of Dr. Ward. 

Do you know Dr. Ward was an old doctor there at the time? 

^Yes. 

Do you know where the medicine was made up? — I don’t 
know; but probably at Santon's drug store, under Dr. Ward's 
premises. 

Do you know at all how long he went on with these prescrip- 
tions of arsenic? — About three months, so far as I know. 

That is the only period that you know of? — That is so. 

And did he suffer afterwards from malarial fever, in subse- 
quent years? — Not that I recollect. 

Was he a man who was nervous about his health? — He was. 

Will you tell me what was the sign of nervousness you saw? — 

He constantly rubbed the back of his hands in the morning, and 
complained of numbness in his hands and limbs. 

Did he seem in fear as to what it would end in ? — He was very 
much afraid of being paralysed. 

Did that continue about the same, or did they decrease or 

185 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

B^teton increase when he complained of numbness? — They got worse the 
last year I lived with him — ^worse than the first year. 

And during the time you knew him, did he become more or 
less addicted to taking different medicines? — ^No. 

These medicines which he took, do you know what they were? 
—No, I never took any notice of what he was taking. 

Do you know a person of the name of Thomson? — I do. 

Who was he? — He was a man who was an officer on board a 
steamer in the docks when I was living with Maybrick in 
Norfolk. 

Was Mr. Maybrick acquainted with him? — ^Yes; he became 
acquainted with him out there. 

He only knew him out there? — I think that afterwards they 
found they had a previous acquaintance on some Inman steamer 
during a voyage. 

At all events, he did know Mr. Maybrick? — He did. 

Did he become at all intimate with him during the time he 
was living there ? — I don’t recollect. 

Have you seen him here? — I have. 

And you recognise him as Mr. Maybrick’s acquaintance? — 

Yes. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Addison — ^Are you a Liverpool man? 
— Yes. 

And you happened to come here from Memphis, where you 
ere connected with the cotton business? — ^Yes. 

When did you cease living with Mr. Maybrick? — In 1881, 
when he got married. 

When he got married. That was what led you to separate? — 
Y es. 

Had he any chills and fever when he took this medicine in 
1877?— Yes, certainly. 

Is that the sort of malaria that prevails in Norfolk? — ^Yes. 

And is that the ordinary remedy taken for it so far as you 
know? — The ordinary remedy is quinine. That was given to 
him without effect, and afterwards he had to take arsenic and 
strychnine. 

By medical advice? — ^Yes. 

As well as quinine? 

Sir Charlbs Russell — I beg your pardon, he did not say so. 

Mr. Addison — I am very sorry; I certainly understood him 
to say so. 

(To Witness) — ^What did you say about quinine? — That was 
given to him, but he had to take arsenic and strychnine instead. 

Afterwards with quinine? — ^No. It is a stronger medicine 
than quinine, and produced the same result, as I understand. 

Do you understand how the arsenic was mixed that was givea 
to him? — It was in a bottle in solution with somethino:. 

i86 



Evidence for Defende. 


Did it apparently do him good? — It did. I * 

Do I understand he took it for three mgfnths? — For quite 
three months. 

And it did him good? — It cured him. 

He did not complain after that of any nfeculiar symptoms — 
vomiting, diarrhoea, or illness, and so on, /that you know of?- 
Not of the malarial symptoms, no. 

How long is it since you saw him last^ — I saw him last year, 
in July. 

Re-examined by Mr. Pickford — Youl say it cured him of the 
malarial symptoms? Was there anytming else left? — That was 
the specific disease at the time. had symptoms of other 

diseases afterwards, but once you brpak up the chills they do 
not return — they are done for. 

What were the other things you ilpean that he had? — I mean 
his feelings of numbness in the liilnbs. That had nothing 
whatever to do with the malaria. I 

Wliat you mean is this, that it curiid him of malaria, but the 
symptoms of rubbing of the hands and numbness were left? — 
These symptoms increased. They \yere, I should say, hypo- 
chondriacal symptoms. 


R. Thompson, examined by Sir Carles Russell — I hold a l 
master mariner’s certificate from 1®53. My eyesight has 
begun to fail, and I have no longer \^ommand of ships as I 
once had. 

When did you arrive in this city on yoil^last voj^'age? — ^About 
six weeks ago. 

And in consequence of seeing this case in febe paper, did you 
communicate with my friend Mr. Pickford? Yqm wrote to himi 
saying you knew something about Mr. Maybridk? — I did, sir. 

Were you, in 1880, second officer of/ the steamship 
''Plantain,” belonging to Messrs. Horsfall, of /this city? — I was, 
sir. / 

And did you at that time sail from Liverpoc^l, taking with you 
two dogs to Mr. Bateson, the gentleman whro just left the box? 
— I did, sir. j 

He was living at the time with the late Mjr. James Maybrick? 
—Yes. j ^ 

Were you introduced to Mr. James Maylj^'rick? — Yes. I was 

invited to his house, and was introduced tO; him at dinner. 

Do you remember whether he recognised you as a gentleman 
whom he had met before? — Yes. { 

And were you intimate with him during your stay? — Yes, 
very much so. I met him almost every a ay. 

I think you used to dine with him, and He used to come down 
to your ship sometimes? — Yes. 


[« BatMon 


• Thompson 


187 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

R. Thompten And you saw a Igood deal of one another during that timet — 
Tes. ( 

Do you recollect j one day meeting him when he asked you to 
have a drink? — I do, sir. 

And did you hav-e a drink immediately, or did anything 
happen? — He said, ‘‘,1 have a call to make here/* and wo 
walked into a druggist '’s. 

Do you recollect the' name of the druggist? — I do not, sir. 
It was a peculiar name. 

Do you recollect the sti-eet? — It was in Main Street, near the 
\ post office ; three or four {blocks away. 

When you went into Iffie druggist *s what did he do? — ^He 
said, I want my desideratum,'* 

Without asking further (questions, did the assistant hand him 
anything? — Yes, two powd^s, something similar to, but smaller 
than, a seidlitz powder. ^ 

Did you hear the assistai^it say anything? 

Mr. Addison — My lord, I object to what a druggist’s assistant 
said being received — an uniknown assistant in an unknown shop 
in Norfolk, Virginia, yearfe ago. 

Sir Charles Russell — It/ will be followed up by other evidence. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — think it safer, in so serious a case, 
to take the evidence offerejd. 

Examination continued^What did he say to him when he 
handed him t|ie paper It’s all right, Mr. Maybrick.” One 
of the packette was a w^ite paper and the other a yellow paper. 
He put his fijiger on jjJhe yellow paper, and said, Now, Mr. 
Maybrick, be carefut'/’ That is all I heard him say. 

He was sometii^ies, as you say, called Colonel,” and some- 
times Mr. Maybrick? — Yes, sir. 

Do you recollect being sent by the captain to this same chemist 
a day or two afte^? — Yes ; a couple of days after. 

Did you see the same assistant you had seen the previous 
day ? — Yes. 

Did he appear U) recognise you? — ^Yes. 

I do not want to know what he said to you, but he did make 
a statement to you with reference to Mr. Maybrick? — He did. 

Do you recollect, after that, Mr. Maybrick coming down to 
your old vessel — in [^our cabin? — Yes. 

What were you d«)ing? — ^We were sitting down in the cabin 
talking. 

Now, did you say Jmy thing to Mr. Maybrick as to what was 
told you by the assistant in the druggist’s shop? — I did. 

Tell the jury what you said? — ^We were on familiar terms, and 
I took the liberty of speaking to him about taking this arsenic. 

By Mr. Justice S'^hen — What did you tell him? — I said, ** I 
believe, Mr. Maybrick, you are in the habit of taking a dan- 
gerous and noxious drug.” He said, ‘‘What is that?” I 

i88 



Evidence for Deferi- 

i 

said, ** Arsenic ” ; and he said, “ Who the d« ^old youl ” I *• Thsmpson 
said, I asked the druggist’s assistant aw^ store, and he 
told me you are in the habit of taking it,*'^ I said, It ^as 
a pity ” ; and he said, '' Damn his »> 

By a Juryman — Did you know this sk ]50f(>re? I had been 

there once before. 

Examination continued — Once befo/ were sent back by 
Captain Price, when you had this c/^ergation? — ^Yes. 

Did you have any further convj^j^^-^j^ on the 

arsenic? — No, he was very touchy oi subiect ; so I dropped 
it. He neither admitted nor it. 

Nicholas Bateson recalled, exam)^^ . Charles Russell n. Bateson 

— The last witness is the officer wB^ Maybrick knew out ? 
in Norfolk. I do not know ^hethei^y^^^.^ any regulations 
as to the sale of arsenic in Amen^ before 1883 . I do not 
know whether it was easily procure^ 

Can you tell me where Santos’s dr^ gy^op is situated?— It 
is in Main Street, at the corner of X don’t know 

the name of the street. , ^ 

Was it two or three blocks from t^ p^gy. office? — ^Yes, aboUt 
three blocks. C 


Thomas Stansell, examined by Sir’vj^j^j^gg Russell I atm T* Stansoll 

a waiter at the St. James’s Hotel, Norfoy yirmnia. ‘ 

Do you recollect being engaged as y-o* Mr. James 

Maybrick and Mr. Bateson when they li\^ together? Yes. ' 

Where did they live? — In York Street, \ 

And did you act as servant during the yeah, ygvg 1879 and 
1880 ?— Yes. 

Do you recollect being sent anywhere by Mr. J^mes Maybrick 
to any store? — Yes. * 

Now tell us what he said to you? — He t^j y^o let him 
know before I went to the stores, and I Vent to him. He 
gave me half a dollar, and told me to stof^ y.y^^ druggist’s 
and get him some arsenic. 

How soon after you had got into the ^y^y y^g y^yy yo^ 

to go — the first time? — The first season, f 

How long after? — About more than twa—^Vo* 

And did you go to the druggist’s?— YeH * 

Were you asked who it was for? — Yes. j 
Did you state? — Yes. 

Did you get it? — Yes. 

And brought it back? — ^Yes. 

What did you get?— A very small packt so long as 

the box you have m your hand (pointing C® ^ somewhat large 
snufiHboi from which Sir Charles was just pinch). 

189 



Staniell 


'I’i'rial of Mrs Maybrick. 

How often ha ve you done this ? Have you done it more than 
once? — As far a^ I can remember I have done it three or four 
times. 

Did you always j^t money to pay for it? — Always. 

Did he always giv^ you the same amount of money? — ^Yes. 

Half a dollar? — Yes, 

Now I want to ask you this — ^when you brought him the 
arsenic, what did he tell you to do, or have you seen him do 
anything with it? — Yes. 

Just tell us what he has told you to do? — He told me to go 
and make him some beef tea. I went and filled a cup and 
brought it in to him. He asked me to give him a spoon, and 
taking the spoon, opened the package and took a small bit out. 
This he put in the tea and stirred it up. 

You have told us that the first time you went you got this 
small parcel. Was it always in the shape of a parcel, or in 
any other form? — It was sometimes in a bottle. 

How was it that you got it in a bottle sometimes and some- 
times in paper? — He told me just what form he wanted it in. 

And as well as you recollect you got it three or four times in 
paj>er? — Three or four times altogether. 

Do you know the name of the druggist where you got this? — 
Yes, sir. 

; Where? — At Santos and Barrowes ; both. 

i Where is Santos’s? — On Main Street. 

' How about the post office, is it far from that ? — It is nearly a 
block. 

^ You described what you saw him do with this arsenic — taking 
ja spoon and putting the least bit on the spoon, stirring it up. 
Have you seen him do this more than once? — ^Yes, sir. I have 
seen him do it every time that I brought it up to him. 

Did you notice any habit he had of rubbing himself? — Yes, 
sir ; he had a great habit of rubbing his hands and his limbs a 
while after. 

You continued, I think, in his service till he came to England 
to be married, did you not? — Yes, sir. 

Besides this arsenic you have told us about, used he to send 
you for any other things of that kind — I mean medicines? — 
Yes, a great many, bottles. I could not exactly say what 
they were, but there was quinine compound, cardamum pills, 
and seidlitz powders!. 

Had he many medicine bottles in his room? — A great many. 

Was he not in the habit of dosing himself with medicines?— 
Yes. 

Cross-examined by .^r. Addison — How long have you been in 
England? — About a. week. 

Is it the first tirie you have been here? — ^Yes. 


190 



Evidence for Defence. 


May I take it you were brought to give this evidence t — T. Staasell 
I was. 

Can you tell me now what year you saw him meet the 
chemist? He was married in 1881 remember? — It happened 
in 1878. He went about four times in the season. 

Was it once in each year, or oftener? — I cannot say. 

Can you remember that year whether there was any bad 
air or fever in Norfolk — ^was he ill? — ^Was he in bed? 

I didn’t ask you whether he was in bed, but whether he was 
ill or had fever? — He seemed to be ill at that time. 

Did you take a prescription to the chemist, or had he a 
prescription already? — I did not take one. He told me to go 
to the druggist, and he gave me half a dollar. 

What did he tell you to get? — To get arsenic. 

Did he tell you how much? — No. 

Did the chemist know? — He seemed to know very well. 

Without any trouble? — Yes. 

Did he seem to be well after taking his beef tea? — No, sir ; 
he didn’t seem to be very well, sir. 

What effect had the beef tea upon him? — Do you mean 
what colour? 

No ; what effect had it on him? — I really cannot say whether 
he was better or worse. 

Re-examined by Sir Charles Rttssbli. — W hen you asked for 
half a dollar ^8 worth of arsenic did you get any change? — ^No, 


Edwin Garnett Heaton, examined by Sir Charles Russell e. G. Heaton 
— I live at 20 Wylva Road, Anfield, Liverpool. I am now 
retired from business. 

You have been seen by the solicitor for the prosecution, or 
somebody from the solicitor’s office, or from the police. I am 
told from the police? — From the police. 

And you made a statement? — I did. 

To the police, or to the solicitors for the prisoner? — To both 
of them. 

Are you a registered chemist of over thirty years’ standing? 

— Thirty-seven years. 

And did you carry on business at 14 Exchange Street East 
for about seventeen years? — Seventeen or a little over seven- 
teen years. 

And before that did you carry on business for about seventeen 
years or more in Dale Street, Liverpool? — ^Yes. 

Did you give up business in Exchange Street in April, 1888? 

— Yes. 

That is last year? — ^Yes, last year. 

I think for some time you carried on business in another 

191 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

0« Heaton shop in Walton Vale, and since that time you have given up 
business and retired altogether? — ^Yes. 

Have you been shown by the police and Mr. Cleaver a photo- 
graph of the deceased gentleman, Mr. May brick? — Yes. 

Will you look at it? (Handing it up.) Is that the gentle- 
man you knew? — Yes. The only exception I can make is 
that he was a little grey at the last. 

You knew him very well, although you did not know his 
name? — Yes. 

Did he frequently call at your shop in Exchange Street East? 
— Frequently. 

How long had you known him as a customer ? — I should say 
for about ten years ; it might be more. 

Do you mean oflF and on? — Yes, off and on. 

I believe the way you came to identify him by his name was 
by seeing the report of the case before the coroner and seeing 
his likeness? — Yes. 

Now, what used he to get from you particularly ? — The tonic 
called pick-me-up. 

That is to say, he came into the shop and got it and drank 
it? — ^Yes. 

Do you recollect his giving you directions to put anything 
into the tonic? — ^Well, I recollect him first giving me a pre- 
scription which altered it. 

It altered it by what? — The liquor arsenicalis. 

And did you get it up? — I did. 

Do you recollect whose prescription it was? — I don't, sir. 

Was his prescription merely for the liquor arsenicalis, or 
fot the pick-me-up and the liquor arsenicalis? — With the liquor. 

Did you give him the prescription ? — Yes ; after the first few 
times I used to give it to him at once when he came into the 
, shop, and I had received his order. 

And what would you do? — Prepare the pick-me-up and add 
the stuff. 

By Mr. Justtcb Stephen — Have you got that prescription? 
— Unfortunately I have not. 

Examination continued — ^And this liquor arsenicalis, did you 
dispense the same quantity at the beginning as at the end? — 
Oh, no. 

Just tell us what difference, if any, you made? — 75 per cent, 
increase from first to last. 

That is to say, towards the end it was 75 per cent, greater 
in quantity than it was originally? — Yes. 

How many drops did you begin with? — It would be a trifle 
over four, and would be increased to seven. 

Now, I want to know how often he used to ask for this? — 
From two to five times a day. 

192 



Evidence for Defence. 


^ Was that towards the end that he got it most frequently 1 — E. 
Yes. 

And did that contain 75 per cent, increase? — Yes. 

Do you recollect his making any statement to you as to why 
he was taking this liquor arsenicalis? — I do, sir. 

When was that? How long before you gave up business in 
Exchange Street East? — I should say, without prejudice at the 
time, about twelve months. 

He gave you a reason why he wdshed it? — Yes. 

Do you know that liquor arsenicalis has aphrodisiacal quali- 
ties? Do you know that word? — I do not. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — Did it excite passion? — Yes, sir, it 
had that effect. 

Examination continued — When did you give it him last ? 
How long before you left Exchange Street East? — Oh, fully six 
months . 

Then you supplied it to him up to a period of six months 
before April, 1888 ? — Yes. 

And going back how many j^ears? — Not more than eighteen 
months. 

For a period of eighteen months you can call to mind? — Yes. 

By Mr. JusncB Stephen — Eighteen months before you left 
business ? — Yes. 

Sir Charles Russell — For eighteen months up to six months 
of leaving business. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — You left business when? 

Sir Charles Russell — He left that shop in April, 1888. 

(To Witness) — Your shop was a small shop? — It was. 

Is it the custom for men from the Flags to turn in to get 
pick-me-ups there? — Very many of them. 

I do not know whether this was the only one who got liquor 
arsenicalis or whether you had other customers? — I had others. 

So much as regards your supplying it to him at the shop. 
When he has been going a^vay from home have you done any- 
thing for him at his request? — Yes. I have made up eight or 
sixteen doses, according to the size of the bottle. 

I don’t know whether vou are able to recall about the last 
time you made it up in a bottle ? — I could not say. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — I suppose the eight or sixteen 
doses varied according to the size of the bottle, and whether 
he was going away for a longer or a shorter period? — Yes. 

Examination continued — Now, you left Exchange Street in 
1888; what became of your papers — the prescriptions? — They 
were all sold as waste paper and destroyed. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Addison — Have you ever had the 
name of May brick at all in your book? — No. 

Had you ever heard his name in any shape? — No., 

You did not know him, then? — I knew him well, but did not 
know his name. 


O.HeaUm 


193 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


B« G* Heaton 


Or who he was? — ^No. 

What made you look at his portrait — ^what induced you to 
suppose that the portrait was that of the man who died? — 
Because I had it shown to me. 

Who brought it to you? — It was first seen by me in the 
Liverpool Echo. 

The Liverpool Echo had a likeness, and you looked at it? — I 
not only looked at it, but recognised it at once. 

Oh, I understand. The portrait in the Echo was a good one, 
and you recognised him as being a customer at your shop? — 
Yes. 

Was this pick-me-up business near the Exchange? — Almost 
on it. 

Was it used by gentlemen of the Flags? — Very much. 

Were the pick-me-ups of your own compound? — Yes. 

Were the gentlemen many who used to oome there? — I have 
had as many as sixteen follow each other at a time. 

In the morning? — In the morning. 

And they take pick-me-ups several times in the day ? — 
Some do. 

What is the effect? — To improv^e digestion. 

Then, as I understand this gentleman, he suggested — he got 
two prescriptions, and suggested some liquor arsenicalis added 
to your pick-me-up. Is the liquor arsenicalis a solution? — It is. 

And what is the dose that he would take of the pick-me-up? 
— As I prepared it, it was kept in the concentrated state, and I 
added a little water. 

Do persons take pick-me-ups in your shop? — Very often. 

How much, and what is the ordinary dose? How much 
would a person take, a tumbler or wineglass? — ^A wineglass — 
a measured wineglass. 

In one dose there would be seven drops of the liquor arseni- 
calis? — Yes. 

And that would contain less than *07 of a grain, or seven- 
hundredths of a grain? — ^Well, I should have to 

Moreover, whatever the exact amount is, the few drops in this 
wineglass would do nobody any harm? — No. 

It didn’t strike you — indeed you got it as a prescription, and 
used it for a sort of pick-me-up? — ^Yes. 

Did other gentlemen take this liquor axsenicalis as a tonic? 
— Yes, frequently. 

Just in the form of a tonic? — Oh, yes. 

Did you ever see anybody harmed by taking it? Did they 
seem worse or better or very much as usual? — I don’t know 
whether I can answer that. 

Of course, you can’t tell how they felt, but, as far as you 
could judge by appearances, it was not a matter to do anybody 
any harm? — ^No. 

194 



Evidence for Defence. 


For instance, this gentleman, whom you say looked like Mr. E. G« Heaton 
Maybrick, he used to take it on the way down to the office, so 
that it could not do him any harm? — ^Yes; on the way to the 
office he used to call in. 

I believe that each chemist, as a rule, has his own tonic? — 

They are fond of concocting these things, sir. 

I understand you to say it is very common to add liquor 
arsenicalis to their tonics? — I should not like to say it is very 
common. 

I do not want you to say anything you cannot guardedly say. 

In your opinion, did most of them ask for liquor arsenicalis, or 
about how many had Fowler’s solution? — A small fraction. 

And would it have any effect of bracing up their nerves, or 
was it intended to brace up their nerves? — Yes, more or less. 

Re-examined by Sir Charles Russell — ^A great many take 
the pick-me-ups, but only a fraction of the customers have 
liquor arsenicalis with it? — Not many had that. 

I don’t know whether you think it was harmful or not. It 
would depend upon the frequency of the taking? — Certainly. 

Would seven drops five times a day be equal to one-third of a 
grain of white arsenic? — Pretty near it. 

Dr. J. Drtsdale, examined by Sir Charles Russell — I am j. Drysdala 
a physician, practising in Liverpool. 

Did you know the late Mr. James Maybrick? — He consulted 
me ; that is all I knew of him. 

Is this his photograph (handing a photograph of the 
deceased)? — Yes, that is him. 

On the 19th of November last year I believe he consulted 
—Yes. 

What were the symptoms of which he complained? — He said 
that he had been complaining for about three months. He 
was suffering from attack of pains from side to side of the head 
and a creeping all over his head, preceded by pains on the 
right side of the head and a dull headache. He was never free 
from pain except in the early morning, and possibly in the 
forenoon. There was no foul taste in the mouth. After 
smoking much or taking too much wine he became numb down 
the left leg and hand, and liable to eruption upon the skin. 

These were the symptoms of which he complained. 

I think you saw him, did you not, on the 19th, the 22nd, and 
the 26th November; the 5th December and the 10th December; 
and on the 7th March in the present year? — ^Yes. 

What did he complain of on the 7th of March? — He stated 
that he had been better during the interval, but never more 
than two days quite free from headache, although it was not 
so bad, and a little creeping sensation. He had no aggravation 

195 




Trial of Mrs May brick. 

Drysdale after eating; the tongue was a little furred, and there was 
still pain and numbness of the left leg and hands, but not so bad. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — Then all his symptoms were better? 
— Most of them. 

Examination continued — Without taking anything in the 
intermediate visits, were the symptoms substantially the same 
on each occasion? — Substantially the same all the time. 

I presume you had some conversation with him about his 
habits? — A little. 

Did you learn, for instance, from him whether he had been 
in the habit of doctoring himself? — He did not say anything 
about that. I asked him what medicine he had been 
in the habit of taking, and he said nitro-hydrochloric acid, 
strychnine, hydrate of potash, and several others. 

Did he mention these names as if he understood them? — 
Oh, yes; he understood them. 

Without having them written on a prescription? — He men- 
tioned them by word of mouth. 

Read again what he said he had taken? — He said he had 
taken nitro-hydrochloric acid, strychnine, and hydrate of potash, 
and several otlieis. 

Did he seem to be a nervous man ? — He seemed to be suffering 
from nervous dyspepsia. 

Would you say he was hypochondriacal or not? — Yes, I should 
say so. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Addison — You knew his name? — Yes. 

You had him as a patient, with his name and address, in the 
regular way? — Yes, 

My learned friend said you practise homoeopathically ? — I do. 
I also practise allopathically, but I believe in the other treat- 
ment. 

You have, in fact, I believe, a reputation that way. You 
are an expert in the homoeopathic system, and it was from your 
reputation in this that he came to you? — Yes. 

As a gentleman of skill in that respect? — Yes. 

He consulted you for dyspepsia — you call it nervous dys- 
pepsia — is that caused by nervous symptoms, or do they both 
go together? — They do. 

A man who is dyspeptic and nervous is very often out of order ? 
— It is very generally the case. 

He seems to have given you the whole account of his condition 
and remedies, which you have entered in your diary? — ^Yes, a 
pretty full account. 

You seem also to keep an accurate diary? — Yes. 

You always write these things down. I see that from 
November to March he consulted you once, twice, thrice, four, 
five, six times? — Yes. 

196 



Evidence for Defence. 


Did he mention anything he had taken for his nervous and J. Dryidato 
dyspeptic condition ? — es . 

Did he make any mention of arsenic? — He made no mention 
of it. 

Although he seemed to be very intelligent about the drugs he 
was taking? — Yes. 

What did you prescribe for him? — Various things. 

Was there any arsenic prescribed in any shape or form? — No. 

Did you prescribe such remedies as you usually prescribe in 
the course of your practice? — Yes. 

Re-examined by Sir Charles Russell — I do not know whether 
you have any experience of persons taking arsenic? — Persons 
who have taken it have come to me, but I have no experience 
of it as a poison. 

Do you know that persons who are in the habit of taking 
arsenic suffer in leaving it off? — I have no experience, but would 
not hesitate to leave it off immediately. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — Is it not in your experience that 
people leaving oh* arsenic, after being in the habit of taking it, 
suffer a depressing effect? — No, and I don’t believe it has. 

Have you had much experience of arsenic — do you know much 
about it? — Not specially. 

William J. Thomson, examined — I knew the late Mr. May- W.J. Thomson 
brick pretty well. 

Do you recollect seeing him riding on the racecourse at the 
Wirral races? — Yes. 

That would be about the 27th of April? — ^Yes. 

That is the other side of the water? — Yes. 

Do you recollect whether there was any rain? — Yes, during 
the day. 

Was he riding about during the day? — Yes. 

I don’t know whether you know where he dined that evening? 

—No. 

Do you recollect speaking to him on the racecourse? — ^Yes. 

And did he complain of not being well? — ^Yes. 

What did he say to you? — I said, You don’t seem to be 
able to keep your horse,” and he said afterwards, on coming 
back, that he had taken a double dose. 

That morning? — ^Yes, that morning. 

Are you sure it was only medicine he said? — ^Yes. 

How do you recollect that ? — He was not in his usual seat, but 
shaking about. 

John Thompson, examined by Sir Charles Russell — I carry j. Thomptoa 
on business as a wholesale druggist at 68 Hanover Street, I 
have been in business there for some seventeen years. I knew 
the late Mr. James May brick. I had in my employ a relation 
of hisj a cousin. 


197 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


J. Tliompion 


C. M. Tidy 


I think he asked you to take him in your employ? — ^Not in 
the first instance. But after his cousin left he came and asked 
me if I would take him back again. 

When did he come first? — I think it would be about 1884. 

And did he continue with you until the end of 1886? — Some 
time in 1886. 

And did he, as your assistant, have access to all the drugs? 
—Yes. 

Are you aware whether Mr. James Maybrick was in the 
habit of calling at your place? — I believe he was there three 
or four times. I think I saw him every time he called. 

Would there have been any difficulty if he had desired to get 
drugs? — Not the slightest. 

I think his relation is dead since? — ^Yes, sir. 

When he came, where was he shown? — Into the warehouse. 

Charles Mbtmott Tidy, examined by Sir Charles Russell — 
I am a Bachelor of Medicine and Master of Surgery. I am an 
Examiner of Forensic Medicine at the London Hospital. 

I believe you have for twenty years practised there? — More 
than that. 

And you are the same as Dr. Stevenson, employed as an 
analyst by the Home Office? — Yes. 

Have you had a large experience in cases, amongst others, 
of poisoning? — ^A very large experience ever since the year 1862, 
when I became assistant to one of the most eminent chemists in 
London. 

Have you assisted at many post-mortem examinations? — At a 
very large number. I was formerly one of the assistant 
pathologists at the London Hospital. 

How many post-mortems have you assisted at? — It is difficult 
to say; something short of a thousand. 

How many were cases of arsenical poisoning? — I oould not 
say at all. 

Can you give me some idea as regards the number of cases of 
arsenical poisoning which have come before you within the past 
few years? — I should say close upon forty. 

Do those enable you to indicate the recurring and distinctive 
indications found in cases of arsenical poisoning? — ^Yes, cer- 
tainly; I think they were very clearly and distinctly given by 
the learned counsel. 

Will you just enumerate those which you lay most stress upon 
as being distinctive? — The purging and the vomiting, which 
were described correctly as being in a very excessive degree. 

When you say that, you mean described by the counsel to be 
a distinctive sign of arsenical poison? — ^Yes; then a burning 
pain in the abdomen, but more marked in the pit of the 
stomach, which pain is considerably increased by pressure. 

19S 



Evidence for Defence. 


What next? — ^That pain is usually associated with a pain in c. if* Tidy 
the calves of the legs. Then, after a certain interval, suffusion 
of the eyes — the eyes fill with tears — great irritability about the 
eyelids, and frequent intolerance of light. There are then 
symptoms, such as cramps, tenesmus, straining, more or less 
present. But the prominent symptoms which I should attach 
more importance to than anything else are those I have men- 
tioned — first, the sickness; violent and incessant vomiting, 
very often with blood, frequently mixed with bile; the 
diarrhoea ; and the pain in the stomach and eyes. There are 
many others, of course. 

Is it true in your experience that you may find some one of 
these symptoms wanting in oases of arsenical poisoning? — I 
agree with Dr. Stevenson that the anomalies in this poisoning 
are very great. He said greater than in any irritant poison; 
but I fancy this is due to the fact that there is an infinitely 
greater number of cases of arsenical poisoning than of any other 
poisoning, and the result is that the anomalies become more 
apparent in the case of arsenical poisoning than in any others. 

We have heard it is easy to detect? — Oh, yes, extremely 
simple. 

You have vomiting, excessive and persistent purging, pain in 
the stomach, the eyes swollen, and you have not known a case 
where these four distinctive symptoms have not been strongly 
marked? — Personally, I have known cases where each one of the 
four symptoms has been absent in the case, but I have never 
known a case in which all the four symptoms have been absent. 

We will discuss the evidence in detail afterwards, but first as 
to the vomiting, which, you say, often is a distinctive mark — 
have you followed the description of the sickness of this poor 
man? — Yes, I have followed every detail in the case so far as 
I could, and I have read all the depositions both before the 
coroner and before the magistrates. 

I will ask you first whether the account of the vomiting agrees 
with your description of excessive and persistent vomiting? — 

Certainly not; it is not that kind of vomiting that is described 
as taking place in a typical case of arsenical poisoning. 

Why?— Why, the vomiting is persistent, incessant, and 
violent. The peculiarity of the vomiting in arsenic cases is 
that it does not relieve; but the patient, as soon as he has 
vomited, begins to vomit again immediately. 

About diarrhcea, you noticed that in the account of the case 
the first mention of the looseness of the bowels was on the 9th 
May ? — ^Yes. 

If there had been an administration of harmful doses, or a 
succession of doses, of arsenic beginning on the 27th or 28th 
of April, or any intermediate day before the 5th and 6th May, 

199 



Trial of Mrs May brick, 

C* H. Tidy in your judgment would you have expected to hear of diarrhoea 
long before that day 1 — I should most certainly have expected it, 
and if it is absent the case is an exceptional one, but I admit 
the exception. 

You admit there may be an exception? — ^Yes. I admit there 
may be an exception, that is to say, a case of arsenical poisoning 
without diarrhoea. I wish to say further that the term 
‘‘ looseness of the bowels ’’ does not convey to me any idea of 
diarrhoea from arsenical poisoning. 

I should just like to ask you this, still upon the hypothesis, 
the supposition, of the administration of a harmful dose of 
arsenic, how soon after the administration would you, in the 
ordinary course, expect to see signs of its effects in the shape of 
sickness and vomiting? — That varies necessarily with a great 
many conditions, such as the quantity of food in the stomach, 
and such like. But, as a rule, the symptoms of arsenic come 
on, as Dr. Stevenson has said, in half an hour to an hour and a 
half. I think he stated it perfectly correctly, as far as my 
experience goes. But it may be delayed longer, for instance, 
if the stomach is full; if it was given, for instance, in some 
hard body, like a dumpling. 

How soon after the administration of a dose of arsenic should 
you expect diarrhoea or purging? — That would probably occur 
in two hours. 

You agree with Dr. Stevenson, then? — Perfectly; that is my 
own experience 

You are aware, are you not, that there is no mention of pain 
in the stomach until on the eve of the death of this man? — 
That is so. 

As a matter of fact — allowing for exceptional cases — excep- 
tional cases where pain in the stomach and abdomen are 
wanting are excessively rare, far more than vomiting and 
purging? — I venture to call that a toxicological curiosity. 

You speak of the eyes, and said that you have never in your 
experience known a case in which there was an absence of this 
characteristic or distinctive symptom in a single case? — No; 
no case has ever come before me. 

But I must ask you about one thing. Tenesmus is pro- 
perly rendered by the word? — Straining. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — Is the absence of the symptoms of 
the eyes — is that sufficient to make the case exceptional in 
itself? — No, my lord; I do not think so. The condition of the 
eyes does not occur as soon as the other three symptoms which 
I have mentioned. All four are the dominant symptoms— sick- 
ness, diarrhoea, particularly pain, and then the condition of 
the eyes, all the prominent symptoms not being present in this 
case. 


200 



Evidence for Defence. 


Examination continued — Then a subsidiary and less important C. M, Tldjr 
one was the cramp in the calves of the legs'? — Yes. 

In your judgment is tenesmus always present where there is 
diarrhoea? — That is my opinion. It is an extremely common 
symptom. 

Could any one in any sense call it a distinctive symptom of 
arsenical poisoning? — I don’t think any one would place it as 
such. It is a common thing in summer diarrhoea. 

I want to ask you this general question. Taking the whole 
of the symptoms which have been before the post-mortem and 
analysis, could any one, in your judgment, safely suggest to us 
arsenical poisoning? — I can only speak for myself in the case. 

And you say undoubtedly that these are not the symptoms 
ef arsenical poisoning, nor do they point to such? — Certainly 
not. 

Now I come to the post-mortem appearances. You have 
actually assisted at some forty cases of supposed arsenical 
poisoning? — Yes. 

What are the features which you find distinctive of arsenical 
poisoning? — There are two important characteristics — post- 
mortem characteristics — of arsenical poisoning. The first is 
redness, more or less, over the entire stomach. 

By Mr. Justice Stephet^ — Do you mean under the skin? — 

Yes, my lord. Internally I am speaking of. Call it sub- 
mucous if you like. And that redness is, in my experience, a 
very peculiar one in the case of arsenic, which, so far as my 
own observation is concerned, is never found in any other case 
•of irritant poison. And that is minute petechiee over the sur- 
face of the redness. I should say that originally I remember 
this being pointed out by Dr. Sequard, and I have always 
made a point of observing this subject. I have given a draw- 
ing which I made myself, from a cast which I made from a 
istomach which I saw. 

Examination continued — That was, in fact, the diagram I 
was offering to show Dr. Stevenson? — ^Yes ; I saw the stomach, 
prepared the cast, and made the drawing myself. 

[The drawing was handed to witness, who in turn handed it to 
his lordship, explaining as follows : — This was a case of acute 
poisoning by arsenic that occurred in 1863, and it illustrates 
the condition of the stomach in arsenical poisoning. The 
petechias appearance are the small blots.] 

You say your attention was drawn to this as a distinct 
feature by Dr. Sequard, and you have since made observations 
yourself and found it was so i-Tes. 

[Mr. Justice Stephen said he thought the jury should see 
the drawing, and it was handed to them. Turning to the 
witness, his lordship asked for the meaning of the term 

petechifle/* with which he confessed himself unfamiliar.] 

201 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


C. M. Tidy 


Mr. Addison — It is the Italian for fleabite, my lord. 

Examination continued — have known circumstances in which 
there has been a small amount of inflammatory condition. That 
was the case of a man who took 12 grains of arsenic, and died 
in five and a half hours. 

You heard the description of the body, and you have the post- 
mortem notes ; is thei'e any suggestion in that of any such 
appearance? — The notes do not convey that idea to me. The 
arborescent condition did not convey it to me ; it conveys a 
totally different thing. 

What I understand you to say is this, that the degree of 
petechias varies very much? — But although it varies, to my 
mind it is the most distinctive characteristic of post-mortem 
appearances in cases of arsenical poisoning. 

What is the other distinctive feature? — If there is an interval 
of time between the administration of the poison and the 
advent of death, if the interval is considerable, there is a second 
most characteristic appearance in the post-mortem; there are 
fatty changes in the viscera. 

Then I understand that would be more peculiarly so where 
the doses had to be given over a period of time? — ^Yes. 

But assuming that the administration of proper doses began 
in April, and ^v'e^e from time to time repeated until the man 
died, was the period suflSciently long to enable you to expect the 
formation of these fatty appearances? — No. But I can point 
to exceptional cases where there were rapid fat changes. 

As regards the appearances of the stomach — that is, the 
description given of redness at the cardiac end of the stomach, 
the natural colour, and the red appearances at the pyloric end ? — 
Conjoined with the duodenum, and with such other parts, 1 
would say that these are perfectly consistent with death from 
gastro-enteritis. 

And not caused by arsenical poisoning at all? — ^Yes. 

You have assisted at a great many post-mortem examinations, 
and have diagnosed cases when the patients were living, and 
have afterwards tried to see whether the diagnoses were borne 
out ? — Yes ; or, rather, I should say other persons have tried to 
diagnose them. 

Very well, and you have seen whether the diagnosis was 
borne out by the appearances after death? — ^Yes. 

You have known cases where the post-mortem did not bear 
out the diagnosis? — ^Very frequently, I am sorry to say. 

Have you also had cases where even the post-mortem appear- 
ances were such as could not satisfactorily account for death t 
— ^Very many cases, where one was unable from post-mortem 
appearances to say of what the person died. 

Have you known many cases of gastro-enteritis set up where 


202 



Evidence for Defence. 


there was no suggestion of arsenical poisoning? — Oh, dear, yes, c. H. Tidy 
very many. I want to point out, that I quite agree with the 
remark that has been made in the evidence that gastro-enteritis 
does not occur idiopathically. 1 am of that opinion. 

That is, there must be some cause? — Yes, there must be a 
cause. 

From your experience are these causes various? — ^Various; I 
can speak of three causes that have more than once come 
before me professionally. 

For example? — First, in the case of the sausage poisoning, 
where the inflammation, occurring in the stomach and in the 
intestines, has been greater than anything certainly recorded in 
this case. 

What would that be due to? — It would be very difficult for 
me to say what the sausage poison was due to, but it would 
be due to alkaloid generated in the sausage by some bacilli. 

It is an open question, but I know the question very well 
indeed. 

And you have seen the post-mortem? — I have seen and 
investigated a case of that kind, and I may say in some respects 
many cases of that kind. Perhaps the most remarkable case 
is the effects of cheese. A great many cases have come before 
me of very great inflammatory conditions produced by the 
action of cheese setting up gastritis and gastro-enteritis. In 
one case especially the symptoms were actually described as due 
to arsenic. I could give a very remarkable case where a 
number of people were made ill by the cheese. I examined 
it for arsenic, but I could find none. And the man in the 
laboratory took this cheese which I gave him home, and the 
following morning, when I came down, I heard that three of 
his children were in the hospital, said to be suffering from 
arsenical poisoning, which I found out was due to the taking 
of the cheese, and there was not a trace of arsenic in it or 
anything of that kind. There are a great many other things. 

Lobster is a thing that gives the same result in some few cases. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — And the others? — The things in 
my mind were lobster, sausage poisoning, and cheese. 

Examination continued — Now, as regards the symptoms of 
which you describe the appearance, you say they are not dis- 
tinctive of arsenical poisoning, but would occur in gastritis or 
gastro-enteritis however set up. And does your experience 
enable you to say what are the only causes that will set up 
gastro-enteritis? — I cannot say. I expect they are very many 
indeed. 

Does your experience enable you to say with any degree of 
confidence that you could exhaust these causes? — Oh, dear, no. 

Was your attention attracted during the description of the 

203 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


C. M. Tidy post-mortem by Dr. Humphreys as to there being a greater 
redness in the posterior portions? — There is always a certain 
kind of lividities that occur at the posterior portions from the 
gravitation of blood ; and these lividities become a brighter red 
from exposure. This is an important fact. 

Now, before I go on to analysis I wish to ask you this. 
Arsenic is taken up in greater or less rapidity, as you have 
pointed out, according to the facilities for contact with the 
mucous membranes of the stomach? — ^Yes ; and according to 
the greater or less facilities with which it is taken into the 
blood. 

What is the principal organ of the body by which it is 
eliminated ? — By the kidneys, through the urine. 

According to your experience, has the fact of arsenic being 
taken into the system an effect upon the operation of the 
kidneys? — Yes, as a rule the action of arsenic is to decrease 
the quantity of urine. I admit, of course, exceptions, but it 
is the rule. 

So that the fact of the repeated administration of arsenic 
will lessen the efficacy of the organs for urinating? — Mani- 
festly. A poison that must have a special action on the 
organs of elimination is likely at the same time to affect the 
healthiness of that organ. 

We learn from the results that in the spleen, the lungs, 
stomach, bile, Ac., there was found no trace of arsenic? — No. 

But that there was found a certain weighable quantity in 
the liver and intestines, with traces in the kidneys? — Yes. 

That is the result of the analysis? — ^Yes. 

What do you say to that state of things? — ^The quantity 
assumed to be present (because it is not a quantity discovered 
but assumed to be present) is somewhere about three-tenths 
of a grain. 

Do you think that assumption is warranted? — I do not think 
so at all. For instance, to take a certain quantity of the 
intestines and to find a certain quantity of arsenic, and then 
multiply by the weight of the entire intestines, is certainly 
not an assumption to my mind which is accurate in any way. 

I do not know whether you noticed what Dr, Stevenson said 
about weighing another set of intestines ? — There were two 
sets. 

Assuming that you had actually the whole of the intestines 
of a given subject, would it be fair to assiune that arsenic was 
equally distributed over the intestines? — ^No, as a matter of 
fact we know that it is not. Arsenic is not equally dis- 
tributed over the intestines, I happen to know that arsenic 
is not equally distributed over the intestines. 

Therefore, to work out the calculation of the presence of those 
three-tenths of a grain of arsenic in the liver is wrong? — ^Yea. 

304 



Evidence for Defence. 

I want to ask you how you would get at the proportion of c. M. Tidy 
the arsenic in the liver? — This ought to be done. The whole 
liver — I have always done it myself, and so, of course, I can 
speak — ought to be mashed up, and you take a quantity of the 
mash after mixing it thoroughly. You cannot estimate the 
quantity of arsenic in the liver by cutting off a bit here and 
there, and I could give many instances in my experience in 
illustration. 

Is it proper to point out that the result might be that you 
might get a lesser proportion of arsenic than was in the rest 
of the liver? — Yes, the quantity might be more or less. 

It is not a reliable datum to go on? — Certainly not. I 
could give a case which occurred to me in which I found half 
a grain in ten ounces, and in this instance I could only recover 
one grain from the entire liver. 

Now, as regards the small quantity found in the intestines, 
does your observation equally apply to that? — It applies more 
to the intestines than to the liver. As a matter of fact, in 
certain parts of the intestines there is always, as we know very 
w’ell, a greater chance of finding arsenic than in other parts. 

Then I ask you this : What did you make out to be the total 
quantity weighed from the liver, taking together Mr. Davies 
and Dr. Stevenson? — I am afraid I have not got the details 
here. They are very small numbers; I think it is 46 
thousandths and 15 thousandths. 

I think not; because you have to add Mr. Davies’s quantity? — 

True; together it comes to 82 or 83 thousandths. 

What I want to ask you is this. Does the presence of that 
quantity of arsenic so discovered in your judgment prove the 
evil administration, criminally or otherwise, of arsenic? — No, 
and I may give you two cases to prove it. They were both cases 
where arsenic had been given medicinally. They were both 
cases of phthisis, where arsenic had been given medicinally 
for some periods before death. In the first case the arsenic 
had been given for three months before death. In the case 
where it was given for three months I found in 6 ounces of the 
liver upon analysing it *028 of a grain of arsenious acid. 

That would be 28 thousandths, would it not? — Yes. There 
were two-tenths of a grain in the whole liver. It was 
mashed up, and I took six ounces of it and determined the 
arsenic in that amount, multiplying it by the weight of the 
liver, which I was justified in doing, having a uniform mash. 

The other case was also one in which it was given for five 
months; and in the liver I found *174 of a grain of arsenious 
acid, and both at the heart and spleen and kidneys there 
were minute traces. Both of these cases died from phthisis, 
and there was no suggestion or possibility of arsenical poison 
being the cause of death. 


205 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


C. M. Tidy And are there recorded cases where even there was a longer 
interval than that? — Oh, yes. 

You noticed that in Dr. Stevenson's account he speaks of 
traces in the kidneys? — ^Yes. 

Now, recollect the kidneys are the organs by which princi- 
pally it is eliminated. Does the absence of more distinct 
traces suggest anything to you? — ^No, as a fact there is nothing 
more than a mere trace often found in the kidneys. 

What do you say to the absence of arsenic in the spleen, 
lungs, stomach, bile, and fluid from the mouth — does that 
point or not in the direction of arsenical poisoning, or in the 
opposite direction? — I think that part is rather variable; but 
I don’t think I can answer that question distinctly one 
way or the other. 

There is no doubt, I presume, that there may be death 
caused by arsenic without any being found at all? — That is 
so. It is very extraordinary. I confess that cases are 
recorded. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — Is it a fact that the administra- 
tion of arsenic gradually weakens and destroys life, and persons 
die from the effects just after it has been eliminated? — It is a 
question of elimination. 

The matter has been very much discussed in the celebrated 
case of Dr. Smethurst? — It was, my lord. I venture to say 
that case must be very exceptional. 

Examination continued — The result of your view is that 
some of the symptoms found here are consistent — I think I 
may use the word here — ^with arsenical poisoning, but not dis- 
tinctive of it? — That is so. Tenesmus and such are consistent. 

But as regards the symptoms? — There is the absence of 
three or four of the leading symptoms ; and if I had been called 
upon to advise, I should have said it was undoubtedly not 
arsenical poisoning. 

Is that view strengthened by the post-mortem? — ^Very much 
strengthened. The post-mortem has very much stren^hened 
my view. 

Do you know anything yourself on the question of arsenic 
being eaten by persons in this country? — No, I am afraid I do 
not. 

From your own experience? — No. 

All you know about that would be from your reading? — 
Entirely. 

Relating to other countries? — ^Yes. 

I wish you would tell us what is the law about getting small 
quantities of arsenic? — ^That when a quantity of arsenic is 
bought, which I think is under one oxmce, it has to be mixed 
with one-sixteenth part of soot or one- twelfth of indigo, or 
vice versa, I am not sure which, 

206 



Evidence for Defence. 

You have to go to a wholesale druggist to get a larger M. Tidy 
quantity? — ^Yes. 

The one other question you have heard — ^the treatment of 
this man. I am not going to criticise it, but do you think 
it was of a stimulating or depressing character? — Of a de- 
pressing character decidedly; both antipyrin and jaborandi are 
of a depressing character. 

What conclusion have you come to as to the cause of death? 

— That is due to gastro -enteritis of some kind or another, 
but that the symptoms of the post-mortem distinctly point away 
from arsenic. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Addison — Gastro-enteritis means 
inflammation? — Quite so. 

But the inflammation is caused by some irritant poison? — 

By some irritant poison, no doubt. 

He died from some irritant poison? — Yes; so far as you 
call sausages and such like bodies poison. 

He died from an irritant poison? — Yes; an irritant. It 
becomes a question as to what precise meaning you attach 
to the word poison. 

We won’t be very particular, but what meaning do you 
attach to it? — It is a body which, introduced into the system, 
is capable of destroying life, either by chemical action on 
certain tissues of the body, or by a physiological action on 
the tissues of the living system. 

Then it is some substance introduced into the body that 
kills a man? — Yes, but a great many substances introduced 
into the body kill which are not poison. For example, pins 
and powdered glass. They might set up irritation too. 

This was some irritant poison in the natural sense of the 
term? — An irritant I call it. 

In the case of the cheese, you mentioned that arsenic had 
been suggested. Was it by a doctor? — Yes, it had been actually 
suggested by a doctor. 

Then was that a case of death? — No, the people recovered; 
but it was suggested that this cheese was mixed with arsenic, 
and it was sent to me to determine whether arsenic was present 
or not. 

Then the symptoms of poisoning produced by that cheese 
were such as could be mistaken for arsenic? — ^Yes. 

Well, we have had the sausage, cheese, and lobster? — ^These 
cases are due to idiosyncrasies. I have known a small piece 
of lobster produce symptoms of acute irritant poisoning that 
might be mistaken for arsenical poisoning. A great many 
other things — fish, for instance, and mussels are a very special 
thing; mackerel in a certain condition, game in a certain con- 
dition, will sometimes do it. A hare has been known to do it 
on many occasions. 


207 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


C. M. Tidy You do not suggest that these are poisons, do you? — I did 
not use the word poison. I was very careful about that. 

They are such as may produce symptoms similar to those of 
an irritant poison? — Yes, they may produce gastro-enteritis. 

Have you ever known any case where eating a sausage or 
cheese resulted fatally? — Yes, I have known cases of sausage 
and of cheese killing people. 

But in those cases there were no traces of arsenic in the 
stomach or the liver? — Oh, no, no. 

Then the symptoms shown by this man Maybrick during his 
life were symptoms of an irritant of some kind? — Yes, I think 
so. 

And that poison killed him? — Possibly. 

Possibly ? — Yes, 

He died from gastro-enteritis, caused by an irritant? — ^Yes. 

Then that irritant, whatever it was, killed him? — ^Yes, I 
should say that was so. 

Can you suggest what it was? — No, I cannot. 

But it was some strong irritant ; probably poison ? — Some 
substance which to him acted as an irritant. 

Which was poisonous enough to kill him? — Which to him 
acted as an irritant. 

Can you suggest to us what it was? — No; I cannot. 

But you remarked this was produced on different days. The 
state of sickness and irritation, you will remember, was such 
that on the 4th and 6th May he was in such a case that Dr. 
Humphreys would not allow him to be given anything? — I 
remember that perfectly well ; I had it in my mind when I 
made these remarks ; but the sickness was not so persistent 
and incessant a sickness as described to me. 

As I understand it, during the whole of the 4th and 6th May 
— Saturday and Sunday — nothing could remain in his stomach? 
— I don't think my memory serves me to that extent. I have 
got a note, Sunday, the 6th, I found him better." 

But still able to retain nothing all that day ? — I have not got 
that down. 

The 4th and 6th he was unable to retain anything on his 
stomach? — No, I don't think so. 

If Dr. Humphreys says that he was straining and vomiting 
all day, and he gave him morphia to relieve him, would that 
alter you opinion ? — No ; it is only one of the symptoms, and 
was not associated, as arsenic invariably is, with diarrhoea. 

But excessive straining all night, would you consider that 
diarrhoea ? — No ; certainly not. 

You don't suggest that this condition occurs in anything 
except dysentery and cholera? — Oh, yes; summer diarrhoea. 

Would you call it a symptom of summer diarrhoea to have a 

2oS 



Evidence for Defence. 

dry, burning throat, and, as it were, a hair tickling all the C, M. Tidy 
time? — No, I do not say that is summer diarrhoea. 

What would you attribute intense thirst with a sense of a 
hair tickling all the time to? — Something disagreeable in the 
stomach. 

Is it due to poison of some kind? — Oh, dear, no. 

Dr. Stevenson says that one of the reasons which made him 
suspect arsenic was these symptoms? — I quite admit that they 
are symptoms which occur in arsenical poisoning. 

An intense dry and glazed throat occur in arsenical poisoning. 

Do they occur in anything else? — Oh, dear, yes, with any 
irritant. 

That is to say, that any irritant poison on the stomach would 
produce them? — Any irritant substance. 

An irritant substance in the stomach? — Quite so. 

But that is a sort of what you might call poison. Would 
that occur in any other state of things ? — I cannot say ; I am 
not a practising physician. 

Now, I see that you have taken something from the notes of 
the post-mortem. You did not see any of the parts? — No. 

You say that you saw no mention of petechise. Did you 
notice that Dr. Humphrey's said that he saw them there? — 

Well, he said he saw something of the kind, I believe. But I 
think afterwards he said that they were of a brilliant arborescent 
appearance, which would be the result of something else, and 
not petechiae. The petechiac of arsenical poisoning have a 
linear dotted appearance, and not arborescent. 

Why do you doubt him? — Because he afterwards explained 
what was the meaning of them. 

What do they look like? — Some dark dots. 

That is what Dr. Humphreys said they were? — Well, my 
recollection is very different. 

You do not suggest what this irritant was? — No. 

You say it was not a typical case of arsenical poisoning? — I 
say that it is not only not typical, but absolutely points away 
from arsenic as the cause of death. 

Why? — First, that the four prominent symptoms are absent. 

Wait a moment. One of these is vomiting, which you seem 
to have overlooked? — No, I have not overlooked it. I admit 
there is sickness. 

If you have illness brought on by lobster or sausage poison- 
ing, would you expect it to recur again as in this case? — Yes, 

I would. But I wasn't speaking of lobster. I only instanced 
it as an illustration, as one substance. 

When you find that a person has undoubtedly died from some 
irritant poison — ^when you find the arsenic there, does it lead 
you to suppose that this was arsenic? — No, it does not. 


o 


209 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

C, lf« Tidy The liver would be the place where you would find arsenic? — 
That is true. Arsenic is not cumulative in the strict scientific 
meaning ; but it has a power of accumulating in the liver. 

The liver is a place where you naturally look for it? — ^Yes ; 
but not only in the liver do you find it, you find it in the 
muscles of the heart very often ; but the liver is the natural 
organ. 

You have not seen the appearance of the stomach they 
attributed to arsenic? — No, I have not. 

Do you suggest that the liver should be mashed up ; you 
know three different parts of the liver were operated on by Mr. 
Davies and Dr. Stevenson, and the results were almost identical? 
— No, not identical, because Dr. Stevenson found more arsenic 
than Mr. Davies, so that the arsenic was not uniformly distri- 
buted. 

[Mr. Addison referred to Dr. Humphreys^ evidence-in-chief, 
in which he said, ‘‘ Even a drop of water made him sick on 
Sunday, 5th May. Sir Charles Kussell read the passage from 
the evidence upon his notes, and asked — Was not that what you 
would call a high state of inflammation? — No ; it was inflamed, 
but that is not a high state of inflammation.] 

Re-examined by Sir Charles Russell — ^We have had post- 
mortem notes, and you have heard the additions of Dr. Carter. 
There was no mention of petechiee in his description before the 
coroner? — I recollect it perfectly. 

There were, he said afterwards, spots of bright arborescent 
vascularity.^^ Does that agree with your description of 
petechiee? — No, not at all. 

You have his notes taken before the coroner, and he does not 
refer to that at all? — That is so. 

As regards the question of dryness and thirst in the throat 
and gullet, do you find that also in many other illnesses ? — Yes. 

In no sense is it distinctive of arsenical poisoning? — Not at 
all. 

Do you remember Dr. Humphreys’ evidence, where he said 
that he put the faeces and the urine in hydrochloric acid cold, 
and kept them there until it boiled, and then inserted a copper 
foil?_Yes. 

Could you say if there had been any arsenic there that he 
would have found a deposit? — He would probably have got it 
instantaneously, if there had been an appreciable quantity. 

Sir Charles Russell — In reference to an application that I 
made, I understood his lordship to say that the prisoner was 
to have no communication with any one outside between then 
and Monday. 

Mr. JusTiOB Stephen — I think that is understood. 


210 


The Court then adjourned. 



Evidence for Defence. 


Fifth Day — Monday, 5th AugnJSt, 1889. 

The Court met at ten o’clock. 

Dr. Rawdon Macnamara, examined by Sir Charles Russell — 
I am a Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of Ireland. I 
have been its President, and am its representative on the 
Ceneral Medical Council of the Kingdom. I am also a Doctor 
of Medicine of the University of London, and the author of a 
standard work on the action of medicine, which has passed 
through many editions. 1 am Professor of Materia Medica 
at the Royal College. I have been for many years senior 
surgeon at the Lock Hospital, Dublin, and I am also surgeon 
at the Meath Hospital. 

Have you, in the course of your experience, had to administer 
arsenic in a large number of cases? — Yes, in a very large 
number of cases. 

And for the purposes of administration it has been necessary 
to saturate the patient? — It has been on several occasions. 

And has that not, owing to accident or the idiosyncrasies of 
the patient, been exceeded? — Yes, either by accident, or the 
peculiarities of the patient, or the necessities of the case. 

That point has been reached, and what has been your observa- 
tion of the effects of arsenic? — The most strong symptoms in 
the case of saturation is the redness of the eyelid, where the 
lashes come out upon the eyelid. 

If it has been beyond that, are there marked peculiarities in 
the pit of the stomach? — Yes, about the size of a shilling, and 
that shilling burning hot, and thus spreading gradually down 
until the arsenic is eliminated. 

Have you observed any marked symptom in the matter of 
vomiting and purging? — In cases of arsenic poisoning there is 
a group of symptoms, but in any one case some one or other of 
these may be absent. 

You spoke of the purging and vomiting; describe what you 
mean by that in the case of these symptoms? — Vomiting is at 
first copious, violent, and persistent ; the purging is of a severe 
character at first, but, of course, it passes into ineffectual effort 
eventually. 

You have heard the description of the case by Dr. Humphreys, 
where he first describes the sickness when the deceased could 
not retain anything on the stomach, and then he went on to 
describe it as ' ‘ hawking, ’ ’ rather than vomiting ? — That points 
rather to inflammation of the stomach or bowels than to 
arsenical poisoning. 


Rawdon 

Blacnamapa 


2II 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

Rawdon Now, you have noticed in Dr. Humphreys’ evidence where 

Maenamara describes the application of a blister to the stomach with the 
view to stopping the retching and vomiting, and where he de- 
scribes that it seemed to be effective for a time — is it your 
experience that an application of that kind would stop arsenical 
vomiting? — It would not stop arsenical poisoning, but it would 
be very judicious in the case of gastro-enteritis, and would 
stop it. 

You have used the words arsenical poisoning? — I meant the 
vomiting attending upon arsenical poisoning. 

Now, some reference has been made to dryness in the throat 
and a sensation as if a hair were present. Can you say whether 
these are distinctive symptoms of arsenical poisoning? — In the 
vast number of cases I have had under treatment in which I 
have been administering arsenic, I have never heard one of 
them complain of a hair in the throat ; but I have had repeatedly 
very many patients to whom arsenic had never been adminis- 
tered, but who continually complained of this sensation — a reflex 
action of the throat. 

In that case what was the patient suffering from ? — Oh, 
scarcely anything. There is one lady I know now frequently 
complains of it, and is in perfect health. 

You don’t attach much importance to the symptom? — Not 
any. 

As regards tenesmus, I must ask you, whenever there is 
tenesmus, does it follow or precede violent purging? — It follows 
in arsenical poisoning. It follows violent purging. 

Have you ever known cases where it preceded it? — Never. I 
don’t remember ever having read of such a case. 

Now, you have spoken of cramps as a symptom — cramps, I 
understand you to say, in the calves of the leg? — Yes. 

You have heard the description of Dr. Humphreys of pains in 
the thighs. Have you in your experience known of that in 
connection with cases of saturation or over-saturation with 
arsenic ? — Never. 

I would like to ask you this question. Have you ever in your 
experience diagnosed patients living, and then had the oppor- 
tunity of examining the remains post-mortem? — I have. 

And have you found that, on your post-mortem, diagnosis 
was not borne out? — Unfortunately I have. 

Are there cases that you have not, from the post-mortem, 
been able to satisfy yourself as to the cause of death at all? — 
There are repeated cases of that kind. 

Now, bringing your best judgment to bear upon the matter, 
you have been present at the whole of this trial, and heard the 
evidence, in your opinion was this a death from arsenical 
poisoning? — Certainly not. 


212 



Evidence for Defence. 


Cross-examined by Mr. Addison — Ab you have listened to 
the case, and formed your own opinion, will you tell me what 
he died of? — To the best of my judgment and belief, he died 
of gastro-enteritis, not connect^ with arsenical poisoning. 

You are agreed, then, with the gentlemen called for the 
Crown, and with Dr. Tidy, that he died of gastro-enteritis, 
which is an inflammation of the stomach and bowels? — I am. 

And the gastro-enteritis is due also, I believe, to some foreign 
substance — I do not want to use the word poison, because Dr. 
Tidy guarded himself? — No, I do not agree wdth Dr. Tidy in 
that. I think foreign substances, in the manner in which he 
guarded himself, may give rise to gastro-enteritis ; but I believe 
there are outside circumstances which, in a patient, would cer- 
tainly result in gastro-enteritis. 

But do outside circumstances mean, taking something that 
produces it in the system? — Oh, dear, no. Shall I explain? 
The case of a person affected or troubled with a weak stomach — 
suppose dyspepsia — exposed to wet for some time, and not taking 
proper care and precaution against getting wet ; the result is, 
that the blood from the surface of the body is driven to the 
internal organs — amongst others, the stomach — and there pro- 
duces that which you explain as congestion ; and if, by any 
accident, such a patient committed any trifling error of diet, 
the result would be gastro-enteritis — a gastritis that would ex- 
tend down to the bowels, constituting the congestion of the 
stomach and of the bowels. 

Then, in other wmrds, you disagree with Dr. Tidy, and you 
think that gastro-enteritis may be produced idiopathically ? — 
I do not say idiopathically. I agree with Dr. Tidy, but I go 
beyond Dr. Tidy in my experience, in my belief. 

You like to take him a little further, and you suggest that 
foreign substances or food may have disagreed with Mr. May- 
brick? — I have known very serious 

Don’t speak like that, doctor, please. Without going into 
abnormal cases, do you suggest that in this particular case it 
was any particular food that caused this? — Unless I was told 
what the food was, I could not particularise it. 

Then does it require some to act as an irritant or poison upon 
that particular person? — Oh, no. 

Then will harmless food do it? — I have seen pips of grapes 
produce very great gastric disturbance. I have seen skins of 
gooseberries and other equally harmless substances act in that 
way. 

Does it require some sort of substance taken from the outside 
to produce it? — I do not think all the evidence goes in that 
direction. 

You have spoken of a wetting. Will a wetting do it without 

213 


Rawdon 

Maenamara 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

SSteiuSDara P^P® grapes or sausages? — I can perfectly believe that 

a wetting, coupled with neglect of precautions and a weak 
stomach and circulation, may produce these consequences. 

Then, do you mean to say that by getting wet this illness of 
gastro -enteritis — this acute inflammation, may be produced in 
the stomach and bowels ? — That, I think, is the evidence I have 
given. 

In saying that gastro-enteritis would be produced by a man 
with a weak stomach getting wet, do you understand that to be 
the opinion of Dr. Tidy as well? — I do not; Dr. Tidy can speak 
for himself. 

Did you hear him give his evidence? — I did. 

Do you agree or disagree with him ? — Will you kindly tell me 
what Dr. Tidy said? 

Did you hear him ? — I have heard so much in this Court that 
it would be very hard to tax my memory. 

Dr. Tidy said gastro-enteritis was produced by the introduc- 
tion of some foreign substance into the stomach, producing the 
effect of an irritant? — I bow to Dr. Tidy as a toxicologist, but 
not as a general practitioner. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — Please answer the question. Do 
you agree with him or not? — I do not. 

Cross-examination resumed — Do you agree that there is any 
diagnostic symptom in lifetime of arsenic. In other words, if 
you saw a case of arsenic in lifetime, is there anything to enable 
you to say this is arsenic rather than any other irritant? — Well, 
that is a very difficult question. 

Well, pass on then. Probably it is a difficult question. All 
the symptoms — vomiting, purging, cramp, intense pulse — all 
these are symptoms of arsenical poisoning and other poisons? — 
Yes, and of other irritant poisons: 

You have told us of a lady who was quite well in health, and 
who feels the sensation of a hair in her throat. Would you find 
intense thirst in that case? — No. 

Do you find the throat dry, glazed? — No. 

What is that the effect of? — Generally febrile disturbance; 
but, of course, may arise in different ways. 

But if you find that accompanied by tenesmus, what does that 
arise from ? — In that case it may be a case of gastritis or gastro- 
enteritis. 

Supposing you leave out the dysentery? — It may be due to 
inflammation of the mucous membranes. 

Suppose you find the temperature nearly normal, and no 
fever whatever? — Well, I should have to take into consideration 
the other symptoms. 

Quite so. Do you believe that tenesmus is generally the 
result of the vomiting? — I do not understand your question. 

214 



Evidence for Defence. 


What is tenesmus, ineffectual straining, due to; to what is it Rawdon 
due? — It may be due to a great number of causes. Macnamaw 

But take this case? — I should say it is one of the phenomena 
of gastro-enteritis. I have heard none of the witnesses in this 
case speak of cramp. 

You are quite right. Is it a fact that in cases of this kind 
the symptoms vary very much, both in degree, in order, and 
in the absence of some of them? — Certainly. 

Re-examined by Sir Charles Russell — I should like to ask 
you now, is dryness of the throat, according to your experience, 
in any way peculiar to any particular form of disease? — It is 
not. 

As regards the temperature, we know it was only taken once, 
and then it was found to be one degree above what is supposed 
to be the normal temperature. 

Mr. Addisok — If my learned friend will allow me, the nurses* 
notes were put in, and they show that the temperature was 
taken at different times. 

Sir Charles Russell — I was referring to Dr. Humphreys* 
evidence. 

{To Witness)- -1 wish to ask you this, doctor. Assume 
a case where there was a chronic weakness or derange- 
ment of the stomach, in the case of a man who had been 
taking various drugs, and who in that condition gets a wetting, 
such as that described, is a man in that condition the more 
liable from a slight cause to have set up in his system this 
gastro-enteritis ? — Yes. 

The weaker, from whatever cause, the patient is, the more 
likely is disease to be set up? — Yes, the weakest spot invariably 
suffers. 

For instance, when you speak of cold or wet driving the blood 
to the parts and congesting, would it drive it to the weakest 
part? — Yes, to the lungs if they were, and the stomach if it was. 

I think, doctor, you know nothing about the parties concerned 
in this case? — Neither directly nor indirectly. 

Frank Thomas Paul, F.R.C.S., examined by Sir Charles F. T. Paul 
Russell — I am Professor of Medical Jurisprudence at University 
College, Liverpool, and Examiner in Forensic Medicine and 
Toxicology to the Victoria University. 

There are one or two smaller matters I must ask you about. 

In the first instance, you recollect the pan produced by Mr. 

Davies? — I do. 

The glazed pan? — Yes. 

Have you seen a pan made in the same way — ^glazed in the 
same way? — I believe so. 

Did you yourself examine some of these pans? — I did. 

Have you them here? — I have not them here. 


215 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


F. T. Paul 


It is a great pity you do not produce them. In how many 
minutes can it be sent for? — In a quarter of an hour. 

Can any one go for it and bring it here? — Perhaps Dr. Tidy 
would go for it. 

Are you satisfied yourself whether arsenic enters into the 
glazing of these pans? — I have found arsenic in all the pans 
that I have examined of this class, in the glazing. 

I want to ask you how the arsenic in glazing is set free? — 
Anything that will tend to corrode the pan at all. 

Does that mean any acid? — Yes. 

According to the degree or the strength of the acid, the 
arsenic will be set free in a greater or less degree? — It will. 

Would this show in any marked way on the glazing? — No, 
not unless it was carried to a great extent. 

Well, will you just tell us what experiment you tried to show 
whether there was arsenic or not? — I added a little acid to some 
boiling water in the pan, and then applied Reinsch’s test to 
the result, and found the copper was coated with a film of 
arsenic. I tried it four times over with four different pans. 

[A pan was then handed to the witness, which, he stated, was 
exactly similar to the ones which he tested, and apparently 
of the same manufacture.] 

Now, have you also tried the experiment of what quantity 
— what minute quantity — of arsenic in urine will reveal itself 
upon Reinsch’s test? — Yes. 

Just tell us what was the experiment? — I experimented with 
various quantities, and found 1 -200th of a grain to 1 ounce, 
which would be readily detected by a person, scientific or 
otherwise, who saw the test; 1-lOOOth of a grain would be 
readily detected in this way. 

Now, I wish just to follow that to thousandths of a grain. 
What I want to ask you is this. You can reduce that to pro- 
portion between the arsenic and the urine in which it was 
placed? — I can. 

And how many times was there the quantity of urine that 
there was of arsenic? — About 55 thousand. 

That would be 1 to 55 thousand? — Yes. 

Then you boiled it for how long did you say? — I heated it 
for nearly one minute on the lamp, but not boiled all the time. 

And you introduced the copper foil? — We introduced the 
copper foil, and it showed the presence of arsenic. 

Now, I wish to ask you this question. We have heard Dr. 
Humphreys’ statement of his experiments, and also, it is proper 
to say, his expression of belief that it was perfectly carried out. 
Taking his account of what he did, viz., putting the urine and 
fasces upon the lamp for about a minute and heating it 

Mr. Justice Stephen — He said over the flame for two 
minutes till he had got it to a boiling point. 

2I6 



Evidence for Defence. 


Examination continued — I want to ask, if a serious or fatal F. 
dose had been administered within a fortnight of that time, 
must there have been, in your judgment, a deposit on the 
copper? — ^Yes, in my judgment. 

Have you taken the test exactly as he described it? — ^Yes. 

In your judgment, how long after the taking or administra- 
tion of arsenic in a series of over-medicinal doses — how long 
after that may its presence be revealed in the system? — Do you 
mean if it has been continuous, or administered on one or two 
occasions ? 

First of all on one or two occasions? — I think it would be 
eliminated in a fortnight on one or two occasions. 

And if taken over several occasions? — Then the elimination 
would not be complete probably for months. 

Just explain that? — I take it, from my reading, that in cases 
of arsenical poisoning, elimination appears to take place very 
rapidly after only one or two doses. But when people take 
arsenic for a long time — they may have given it up for months 
before death — still arsenic will be found after incorporated in 
some of the tissues. 

The liver particularly? — Yes. 

Let me assume the case of this being taken medicinally over 
a considerable period, in medicinal doses, would you, long after 
its administration had been stopped, expect to find traces in 
the liver? — I should. 

Now, as regards the symptoms of this case — the symptoms 
during life, what do you say of the common symptoms? — The 
common symptoms are those of an intense irritant in the 
stomach, producing violent vomiting, excessive purging, severe 
cramps, accompanied by pain over the stomach. 

Would you expect to find tenesmus or straining to precede or 
to follow violent purging? — To follow violent purging. 

Now, do you agree that one or the other of these symptoms 
may be wanting in cases of arsenical poisoning? — They may. 

Is it the result of your study and reading that several of the 
most marked should be absent in any marked degree? — No, 
certainly not. 

I think you have, as pathologist at the Royal Infirmary, 
assisted at a great many post-mortem examinations? — I have 
made between two and three thousand. 

Have you assisted, amongst others, at post-mortems where 
the patient is supposed to have died from gastro-enteritis ? — 

I have. 

And where there was no suggestion of arsenical poisoning? 

— I have. 

You know the symptoms described in this case? — I do. 

Did they, or did they not, accord with your experience of 

217 


T. Paul 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


F. T, Paul what you have found in cases of gastro-enteritis ? — They agree 
with cases of gastro-enteritis pure and simple. 

Was there anything in the post-mortem appearances which 
were wanting if you had expected to find a case of arsenical 
poisoning? — Yes. I would expect to find the stomach more 
affected, and to show the characteristics of the petechiae spots. 

You are aware that the petechiae are not mentioned in the 
post-mortem notes? — I am. 

You are aware that Dr. Humphreys, as he candidly told us, 
was looking the subject up ; that he did mention the word 
petechiae, and then proceeded to define what he thought was 
petechiae. Were they petechiae at all? — Certainly not; nothing 
like it. 

I should ask you this. What in your judgment in the case of 
a man like the late Mr. Maybrick, described of such an age 
and so on, what would you describe as a fatal dose of arsenic? 
— Certainly not less than three grains. 

You are aware there is one recorded case of two grains ; that 
was the case of a woman, was it not? — Yes, it was. 

Now, I ask you this. You have heard the account given by 
Dr. Stevenson and Mr, Davies as to the quantities actually 
found? — I have. 

First of all, I should like to ask you, do you agree that it is 
proper or safe to argue upon the quantities actually found in 
certain parts as to the possible quantity that may have been 
embodied ? — Certainly not. 

And why not? — Because it varies very much. 

Unequally distributed? — Yes. 

And is the liver a part in Avhich you would especially expect 
it? — Of course, the analysis shows that it was very unequally 
distributed . 

Lfooking at the fact that there was no trace in the bile, the 
spleen, in the stomach and the heart, do you think that the 
calculation of Dr. Stevenson as to what might be assumed to 
be there is likely to be not very precise? His language was 
that there was possibly and approximately a fatal dose? — I do 
not think it was a justifiable assumption. 

Taking altogether what was found by him and by Mr. Davies 
quantitatively, 88-lOOOths or 92-lOOOths, would you explain to 
the jury what that quantity would represent? — It is so very 
small that I hardly can. I don^t know anything quite small 
enough to indicate it. 

It would be a very minute quantity? — Very minute. A 
thousandth of a grain would be, I suppose, barely visible. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — Can you give us what to the eye 
a grain of arsenic would represent? — ^A good big pin’s head. 

That would be a grain? — ^Yes, of solid arsenic. 

Examination continued — What do you say would be visible to 

218 



Evidence for Defence. 


the naked eye, a thousandth part of a grain? Divide a pin's F. 
head into one thousand parts, it would only be very small — 
very, very minute? — Yes. 

According to the figures given by Mr. Davies and Dr. 
Stevenson, the first of whom said 88-lOOOths, and the second 
92-lOOOths, would that be visible? — ^Yes, 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — Can you compare them with any- 
thing? — I cannot think of anything I can suggest. 

Examination continued — It would be altogether a little less 
than a tenth of a grain? — I can imagine in my own mind what 
it would be to cut up a grain into ten parts. 

It would be extremely small? — ^Yes, a small dot would repre- 
sent it. 

You have heard of the minute quantities found in the places 
where there was arsenic in the body? — Yes. 

Is that consistent with the case of a man who has been taking 
it medicinally? — Yes, quite consistent. 

And who had left it off? — Yes, for a considerable time. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — When you say a considerable time, 
what do you mean — weeks, months, or what? — I should say 
several months. 

Examination continued — You have heard that the greatest 
eliminating agent is the kidneys? — Yes. 

What is the action of repeated small or medicinal doses upon 
the kidnevs? — It tends to check the amount of water, and 
checks elimination. 

Where do you expect to find in such cases the strongest 
evidence of the presence of the uneliminated arsenic? — In the 
liver. 

You told us you have assisted at a very large number of 
post-mortem examinations ; does your experience enable you 
to say whether you are always able to verify on the post-mortem 
the diagnosis that has been arrived at during life? — No, 
frequently not. 

And does it not frequently happen, though not, I presume, 
nearly so frequently, that on a post-mortem you are not able to 
satisfy yourself clearly as to the cause of death? — It does 
sometimes, but not frequently in the hands of a skilled 
practitioner. 

In your judgment, do you say this is a case of arsenical 
poisoning? — I think it is a case of gastro -enteritis. The post- 
mortem appearances do not show that it was set up by arsenic. 

If, in the case of a man who had been complaining for a 
considerable number of years of what you would call chronic 
dyspepsia, who had been drugging himself, or had been 
drugged, following the occurrences we heard of on the day of 
Wirral races — take the case of such a man, would a slighter 

219 


f . Paul 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

F# T, Paul cause be sufficient on such a man to set up gastro -enteritis than 
in a man perfectly well ? — Certainly ; such a case in such a man 
would be more likely to be fatal. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Addison — Did you hear of his going 
to Wirral races — his sickness — would such sickness be any 
indication of poisoning? — Oh, certainly. 

[Some controversy here arose as to the evidence in respect of 
Wirral races day being wet, in the course of which his lordship 
pointed out that Sir Charles Russell was assuming that the day 
was wet, and that Mr. Maybrick got wet.] 

Sir Charles Russell — We have tried, my lord, to get more 
evidence, but we could not; and he describes this man riding 
about during the day. I am informed that a witness has been 
called for the prosecution who can also speak to it. He will 
say that the deceased's clothes were saturated with wet. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — Then there is direct evidence of his 
having been wet? 

Cross-examination continued — I would just ask you about his 
sickness occurring and recurring twice before he went to the 
Wirral races. Sickness is the first indication of an irritant 
poison? — Violent vomiting is generally the first indication, not 
mere sickness. 

As regards gastro-enteritis, all the gentlemen seem to be 
agreed that was what immediately followed — acute inflamma- 
tion of the stomach and bowels, which set up exhaustion, which 
caused death in this case? — Yes. 

Do you agree with Dr. Tidy and the gentleman from Ireland 
— Dr, Macnamara — that it was gastro-enteritis that caused such 
inflammation to be set up without foreign agency? — Yes, I 
think it could. I have seen a great deal more redness in 
cases of death from natural causes. 

What natural cause? — Scirrhosis of the liver particularly. 

That is hardness of the liver? — Yes. Any condition which 
may produce congestion of the stomach and intestines is liable 
to run into inflammation. 

Can you suggest any other cause than scirrhosis to pro- 
duce such an acute inflammation of the stomach? — There is 
disease of the heart. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — I think every medical witness who 
has been examined has said that he would put special diseases 
tending to produce inflammation on the same footing as the 
introduction from -without of a tainted body. The instances 
which they gave were in particular ulcers and cancers. And 
this gentleman seems to think that this scirrhosis of the liver 
is a case of the same kind. 

Cross-examination continued — It is a very fatal and terrible 
disease? — It slowly tends to a fatal end. 


220 



Evidence for Defence. 

That is that all these diseases, such as heart disease and F. T. Paul 
scirrhosis of the liver, produce such a state of the stomach or 
the intestines as would be readily ascertainable on a post- 
mortem without your skill? — I should think so. 

You have told us that where arsenic was taken medicinally, 
the presence in the liver of those quantities might be attribut- 
able to the medicines which have been taken up to seven 
months before? — That is the longest case in my reading. I 
took an extreme case. 

In your practice, how long? Have you ever started with a 
case in which there were traces in the liver of arsenic, and in 
which you could trace in the post-mortem how long before it 
had been takenl — I have never analysed the liver in such a 
case. I cannot answer from my own experience, I can only 
answer from my reading. 

May I take it you have no experience of arsenic found in 
the liver as the remains of the administration some months 
or weeks before? — You can hardly find any man in England 
except a specialist who could answer that. 

I don’t suggest. It might have been that you had some 
practical knowledge of it. You have often found in post- 
mortem examinations arsenic in the liver? — Often; no. 

Have you never had a case at all where you detected arsenic 
in the liver? — I have never analysed and found arsenic in such 
cases, having had no large experience. 

Can you remember a case in which you have had arsenic 
in the liver? — I have not been engaged in an arsenical case 
before this. 

Well, that does not detract from your general knowledge, 
but you cannot recollect any case in your own mind that you 
have found arsenic in the liver? — I have never had such a 
case. 

Then, I think, I cannot ask you how long before finding it 
there, from the history of the case, it was administered? — 

Not from my own experience. 

By Mr. Justice Stephen — Have you carefully considered 
the question how long arsenic administered either medicinally 
or of some motive of his own by the person who took it, how 
long it remains in the liver? — Not personally, my lord. It 
is very clear to my mind what the conclusion is. When arsenic 
is taken for a great length of time it becomes very closely 
incorporated in the tissues of the body, and is very difl&cult 
to eliminate. 

Cross-examination continued — ^We have had it from Dr. Tidy 
and Dr. Stevenson, both men of great experience, and I was 
seeing whether you had the same advantages of noticing the 
arsenic in the liver and are able to trace it back? — I have 
nothing like the experience of those gentlemen. 


221 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

F. T. Paul In your reading, you have read as an outside case of seven 
months? — ^Yes, as an outside case. 

Then you have told us of those spots — which I find so diffi- 
cult to pronounce — these petechise spots. Were you then 
speaking from your general skill and knowledge? — I was. 

Now, with the matters of vomiting and purging, these are 
common symptoms of arsenical poisoning, but is not tenesmus 
the result of purging? — In my experience tenesmus results 
from severe purging. 

But in the case of an irritant, assuming there was some 
irritant in this man’s system, would not the purging lead to 
tenesmus? — I think it is far more common than you seem to 
assume. 

In this case do you think it was from purging? — I cannot 
say positively. It is from some irritant in the blood. 

Well, then, in the pains in the stomach. We are told that 
abdominal pains were first complained of, and these are pro- 
duced, I think, by acute inflammation of the stomach? — We 
had rather to judge between one of the nurses and the doctors, 
and the doctors said nothing about pain. I always go by the 
doctors in these cases. 

One of the nurses did speak of the pains on Friday? — I paid 
very little attention to this, because the nurses would tell the 
doctor, and if the pain was severe I can hardly imagine the 
nurse would pass over it. 

Have you any doubt that inflammation of the stomach was 
there? — Surely he would have complained of it. 

Have you any doubt after hearing the statement as to the 
condition of the stomach? — I don’t think the condition of the 
stomach was at all unusual. 

Do you mean that he did not die from it? — I presume that he 
died from exhaustion, produced by gastro-enteritis. I do not 
call this a severe case. 

Don’t you call a case which kills a man an indication of severe 
inflammation? — Some people are more easily killed than others. 
He merely had to get into a condition of exhaustion. I don’t 
think there was pain in this case; I feel morally certain there 
was not. 

Now, in the same way about the experiment you made, I 
suppose you used the same size of copper that Dr. Humphreys 
says he used ? — I tried to get it the same size. 

And did you perform the experiment lately? — I performed a 
number of the experiments on which Dr. Humphreys gave his 
evidence in order to prove them. 

You are a skilled chemist? — Yes. 

And the results on the copper required a skilled eye to detect ? 
— Would you like to look at them? 

No; probably the jury would like to see them. It would take 


222 



Evidence for Defence. 


a skilled eye to detect them on the copper? — Certainly not; if F. T, Paul 
you only ask an unskilled person to look at it. 

I will take your answer, but it is true that very often when 
the arsenic is there it is not traced in the urine? — I think it is 
there sometimes when not in the urine. 

That arsenic when in the body sometimes cannot be traced in 
the urine? — I think that depends very much upon how recent 
the administration was. A single dose or two is rapidly elimi- 
nated, and certainly would be found in the urine; but if locked 
up in the liver for some time, the elimination would be extra- 
ordinarily slow. 

May I ask you whether you have had any patienbs suffering 
from excessive doses of arsenic whom you have examined pro- 
fessionally ? — I do not know that I have. 

Then the result of your skill is from reading? None of your 
patients had been suffering from excessive doses, and you 
examined none to ascertain this point? — No. 

The arsenic was found by Mr. Davies after the ordinary pre- 
paration in the food? — Yes. 

I think he said he detected none after boiling water. The 
pan was one such as you have here. What did you use ? — Hydro- 
chloric acid. 

What quantity? — About one in ten. I have tried it with soda, 
and found this enamel on the pan contained arsenic. 

Did you try the experiment with warm water? — I did. 

Could you detect arsenic in the pan? — Not simply with warm 
water. I examined it by Keinsch^s test. 

Did you find arsenic in the liver? — ^Yes. 

To what extent? — I cannot say. I had only a small piece. 

Re-examined by Sir Charles Russell — ^You tried it by 
Reinsch’s test to see whether it indicated the presence of arsenic ? 

— That is so. 

And you have no doubt that there was ? — I have no doubt that 
there was. 

As regards the detectability of arsenic, if a man has been 
taking it for a considerable time, you say it would be less quickly 
eliminated? — After the dosing is stopped, yes. 

And in such cases as that, it may be in the system without 
necessarily revealing itself in the urine? — ^Yes. 

As regards the pain in the pit of the stomach, does that 
increase on pressure? That is the pain you refer to? — Yes. 

Let me remind you of what Dr. Humphreys said about the 
Wirral races. He said that Mr. Maybrick had told him that 
he had taken a double dose of his medicine, and he repeated 
the same thing to Mr. Thompson. Would that be sufficient to 
account for his sickness before he went to the Wirral races? — 

Yes. 

223 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

F. T. Paul Would it also probably have the effect of making his stomach 
more sensitive — increasing any normal derangement ? — It would. 

H. L. Jones Hugh Lloyd Jones, examined by Mr. Pickford — I am a 
chemist and druggist, carrying on business at Bangor. I was 
for some time assistant to Mr. Lathbury, a chemist, of Liver- 
pool. 

Can you speak, when you were there, as to the use of arsenic 
as a cosmetic? — I can speak to the fact that ladies came to buy 
fly-papers when no flies were about. 

Apart from that, do you know from the usual experience of 
your business that arsenic is used as a cosmetic ? — I do not know 
of my own experience ; but I know there is an impression in 
the trade that it is used for that purpose. 

J. Bloietti James Biolbtti, examined by Sir Charles Russell — I am a 
hairdresser and perfumer, carrying on business in Dale Street, 
Liverpool. I have been in business some thirty years. 

Can you tell my lord and the jury whether or not arsenic is 
used in cosmetic preparations? — It is used in toilet preparations. 

In toilet preparations? — It is used a good deal in the hair for 
some purposes, and I have used it as a wash for the face on 
being asked for it by ladies. There is an impression among 
ladies that it is good for the complexion. 

You only use it when you are asked for it? — Yes, on a few 
occasions. 

I must ask you, was Mrs. Maybrick ever a customer of yours? 
— Not to my knowledge. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Addison — You say it is used for the 
hair — you use it for the hair. Tell me how you use it? — 
Very largely for removing hair. 

It is used on the face to remove whiskers? — Principally by 
ladies for removing hair from the arms as a depilatory. 

What do you put in to do that ? — It is mixed with lime. 

How do you mix it? — Just mechanically. 

How do you mean? — One-fourth of arsenic to three-fourths 
of lime. 

In powder? — Yes. 

White powdered arsenic? — No, I generally use yellow arsenic, 
but I have used white. 

And what lime? — Slaked lime. 

That is all? — Yes. 

And do you put it together yourself? — Yes. 

And what is the label? — ^Depilatory. 

Do you put nothing else on it? — Directions. 

And nothing to show there is arsenic in it? — No, sir. 

Do you mean that you sell the stuff without any other label ? 

224 



Evidence for Defence. 

What weight is there in one of the packets? — It is generally J. 
in a two-ounce bottle. 

What weight? You as a chemist and druggist ought to 
know the weights. 

Sir Charles Russell — He is a hairdresser. 

Cross-examination continued — And each packet will contain 
half an ounce of arsenic, and you put nothing on but the label? 
— Only the directions. 

What are the directions? — To mix with water. 

In what proportion? — Sufficient to make it to the consistency 
of cream. 

Have you a bottle in the shop? — I think so. 

Producing a small bottle, Mr. Addison read — '' Depilatory, 
to remove superfluous hair ; mix with a quantity of water to the 
consistency of a thick cream, and then spread one-eighth of an 
inch on the skin and all over it, to remain three minutes ; if 
the skin is sensitive five minutes. Then remove it with a 
paper-knife. Wash with cold water, and apply a Ifttle cold 
cream. It should not touch a sore or it will be painful.” Is 
that so? — I think so. 

[The bottle was handed to Sir Charles Russell.] 

The lime would make yellow arsenic very nasty to the taste t 
— I never tasted it. 

Tell me do you know at all whether it is used as a cosmetic? 
— Not as a rule. 

Not unless asked for? — I have been asked for it a very few 
times in my life. I have been spoken to on the subject by 
ladies, asking as to its value as a cosmetic. It is generally 
supposed to be a good thing for improving the complexion. 

But when do you prepare it? — I only prepare it just for the 
occasion, and only in small quantity. I only remember dis- 
tinctly one occasion. 

We know that it produces skin eruptions if persisted in? — 
(No answer.) 

You do not know? — (No answer.) 

Re-examined by Sir Charles Russell — So far as this is con- 
cerned, it is only a depilatory for removing superfluous hairs 
from the face? — Or the arms. 

Is this (holding up a small bottle) in common use? — It is in 
common use. 

Although you do not have it for sale, are you sometimes asked 
for it for the purpose of cosmetics? — Yes. 

In that case you would prepare it in that form, I suppose, 
in solution? — I would just put a little into milk of almonds. 

Or any other purpose of the kind ? — Yes ; I have seen it in 
the country papers recommended for making the hair grow. 

P 225 


Bioletti 



J. BioletU 


. Maybriek 


Sir James 
Poole 


Trial of Mrs Maybriek. 

That is another matter ; that will do. 

Sir Charles Eussell (producing a pill box) — I should like to 
call some one to speak to a box I have here, which is labelled, 
" Taylor Brothers, pharmaceutical chemists, Norfolk, Virginia,’^ 
and the description of the contents of which says, Iron, 
quinine, and arsenic, one capsule every three or four hours; 
to be taken after food.'’ At the bottom of it is the name 
** Mr. Maybriek.” 

Mr. Addison — I shall call Mr. Edwin Maybriek at once to 
speak to it. 

Sir Charles Russell — I do not wish to make any complaint 
about this not being produced by any one. 

Mr. Addison — It is in the printed list. 

Sir Charles Russell — It is not. 

Mr. Addison — Mr. Edwin Maybriek will tell us all about it. 

«/ 

Sir Charles Russell — I will quite accept his statement. 

Edwin Matbrick recalled, examined by Mr. Addison — ^Where 
did you find this box? — I found it in the drawer of the wash- 
hand stand of my brother’s bedroom. 

It is dated Norfolk, Virginia ; how long is it since he was 
there? — Since 1884. 

Was that the last time he was there? — Yes. 

Cross-examined by Sir Charles Russell — Do you know how 
this escaped being recorded amongst the things found ? — I found 
it at the time the furniture was being removed from the house. 

When did you find it? — A week or two after he died — before 
the furniture was removed. 

Did you know that Mr. Cleaver, the president of the Law 
Society, was acting for this lady — I did. 

Did you communicate it to him? — No. 

By Mr. Addison — What did you do wdth it? — I kept it. 

When did you first give it? — On the 1st of August. 

By Sir Charles Russell — ^What day was it when you foimd 
it? — 1 cannot say. 

By Mr. Addison — ^Was it when the sale was on? — Just before 
the furniture was removed ; that would be about two weeks 
after the death of my brother. 

Sir James Poole, examined by Sir Charles Russell — I am a 
merchant. I have lived practically my whole business life here, 
and have served the office of Mayor. 

Did you know the late Mr. James Maybriek? — I did. I 
belong to the Palatine Club, of which he was a member. 

Do you recollect one day in the spring of the present year, 
1889, coming out of the underwriters’ room and meeting him 
and one or two other friends? — I do. 

226 



Evidence for Defence. 


By Mr. Justice Stephen — ^When was this? — As far as my Sl^ James 
recollection serves, it would be some time in the month of April. 

Examination continued — On a spring day? — Yes. 

Did the conversation in some way turn on the use of poisonous 
drugs? — As far as poisonous medicines, it did. 

Just tell us what he said and what you said? — Some one made 
the remark that it was becoming the common custom to take 
poisonous medicines. He had an impetuous way, and he 
blurted out, I take poisonous medicines.’* I said, How 
horrid. Don’t you know, my dear friend, that the more you 
take of these things the more you require, and you will go on 
till they carry you off.” I think he made some expression, 
fihrugg^ his shoulders, and I went on. 

Sir Charles Russell — That is the evidence I place before 
you, my lord. I don’t know what the desire of the lady 
may be now as to making any statement. 

Mr. Addison — It appears to me that Sir Charles might very 
well make them himself if they are to be received. 

Sir Charles Russell — I will ask the lady what is now her 
wish. 

Sir Charles Russell held a short whispered conversation with 
Mrs. Maybrick. — Then he said, addressing his lordship— My 
lord, I wish to tell you what has taken place. I asked if it 
was her wish to make any statement, and she said '^Yes.” I 
asked her if it was written, and she said No.” 


Mrs. Maybrick — My lord, I wish to make a statement, as Mrs 
well as I can, to you — a few facts in connection with the dread- **y*»**ck 
fully crushing charge that has been made against me — namely, 
the wilful and deliberate poisoning of my husband, the father 
of my dear children. I wish principally to refer to the use 
of the fly-papers and to the bottle of meat essence. The fly- 
papers were bought with the intention of using as a cosmetic. 

Before my marriage, and since, for many years, I have been 
in the habit of using a face-wash prescribed for me by Dr. 

Crreggs, of Brooklyn. It consisted principally of arsenic, 
tincture of benzoin, elderflower water, and some other in- 
gredients. This prescription I lost or mislaid last April, and, 
as at that time I was suffering from slight eruption of the face, 

I thought I should like to try to make a substitute myself. I 
was anxious to get rid of this eruption before I went to a ball 
on the 30th of that month. When I had been in Germany many 
of my young friends there I had seen using a solution derived 
from fly-papers, elder water, lavender water, and other things 
mixed, and then applied to the face with a handkerchief well 
soaked in the solution. I used the fly-papers in the same 
But to avoid the evaporation of the scent it was 


manner. 


227 



Trial oi Mrs Maybrick. 

necessary to exclude the air as much as possible, and for that 
® purpose I put a plate over the fly-papers, and put a folded towel 
over that, and another towel over that. My mother has been 
aware for a great many years that I have used an arsenical 
cosmetic in solution. My lord, I now wish to refer to the 
bottle of meat essence. On Thursday night, the 9th of May, 
after Nurse Gore had given my husband beef tea, I went and 
sat on the bed beside him. He complained to me of being 
very sick and very depressed, and he implored me then to 
give him this powder, which he had referred to early in the 
evening, and which I had declined to give him. I was over- 
wrought, terribly anxious, miserably unhappy, and his evident 
distress utterly unnerved me. He had told me that the powder 
would not harm him, and that I could put it in his food. I 
then consented. My lord, I had not one true or honest friend 
in that house. I had no one to consult, and no one to advise 
me. I was deposed from my position as mistress in my own 
house, and from the position of attending upon my husband, 
notwithstanding that he was so ill. Notwithstanding the evi- 
dence of the nurses and servants, I may say that he wished to 
have me with him. He missed me whenever I was not with 
him ; whenever I went out of the room he asked for me, and, 
for four days before he died, I was not allowed to give him a 
piece of ice without its being taken out of my hand. When I 
found the powder, I took it into the inner room, with the beef 
juice, and in pushing through the door I upset the bottle, and, 
in order to make up the quantity of fluid spilled, I added a 
considerable quantity of water. On returning to the room, I 
found my husband asleep, and I placed the bottle on the table 
by the window. When he awoke he had a choking sensation 
in his throat, and vomited. After that he appeared a little 
better, and as he did not ask for the powder again, and as I 
was not anxious to give it to him, I removed the bottle from the 
small table, where it would attract his attention, to the top of 
the washstand, where he could not see it. There I left it, my 
lord, until, I believe, Mr. Michael Maybrick took possession of 
it. Until Tuesday, the 14th of May, the Tuesday after my 
husband’s death, and until a few minutes before Mr. Bryning 
made this terrible charge against me, no one in that house had 
informed me of the fact that a death certificate had been refused, 
and that a post-mortem examination had taken place ; or that 
there was any reason to suppose that my husband had died from 
other than natural causes. It was only when Mrs. Briggs 
alluded to the presence of arsenic in the meat juice that I was 
made aware of the nature of the powder my husband had asked 
me to give him. I then attempted to make an explanation to 
Mrs. Briggs, such as I am stating to your lordship, when a 

228 




Sir Charles Russell, Q.C., M.P. 






Mrs Maybrick’s Statement. 

policeman interrupted the conversation, and put a stop to it. Mpi 
I n conclusion, I have only to add that, for the love of our 
children, and for the sake of their future, a perfect reconcilia- 
tion had taken place between us, and that on the day before his 
death I had made a full and free confession to him, and received 
his entire forgiveness for the fearful wrong I had done him. 

Sir Charles Kussbll — My lord, I now desire to call two 
persons to whom that statement was made before the inquest, 
to give evidence to that effect. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — I wish to say it is very painful to me 
to have to refuse what I feel to be an essentially reasonable 
request, but I think I cannot allow it. I cannot go beyond 
what the law allows. 

Sir Charles Russell — I do not for one moment make any 
complaint as to what your lordship says. 


Closing Speech for the Defence. 

Sir Charles Russell — My lord, gentlemen of the jury, I SIp Chaples 
will not at the outset make any allusion to the grave and 
remarkable statement which has been made by the woman 
in the dock. Hereafter I will allude to it. Now that we are 
approaching towards the end of this anxious and wearisome 
case, which involves my addressing you upon the whole of the 
facts of the evidence, I have to ask you, in view of all those 
facts, in view of all that evidence, in view of the mysteries 
which to a greater or less degree encompass this case, in 
view of the contrariety of opinion expressed by men of great 
eminence in their profession, I must ask you even at the 
outset whether it is possible for you, the jury, to arrive with 
satisfied judgment and with safe conscience to a verdict of 
guilty in this case. I confess that, looking through the 
momentous issues involved in it, I tremble to think that any 
want of care, or of vigilance, or of skill on the part of my 
able and loyal colleague and myself should in any way imperil 
the interests of the client committed to our charge. But I 
feel the utmost confidence that where our observations or 
comments on the case may fall short, you, as men of the 
world, and exercising your intelligence for yourselves, will 
think out the matter as men of sense, and supplement any 
shortcomings of ours. 

I have a right to call your attention to one fact in connec- 
tion with this prosecution. This lady has elected to take 

229 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

Sir Charles her trial in Liverpool before a Liverpool jury, in the com- 
munity with which her husband lived, in which he was known, 
and in which upon a bare recital of the supposed facts of this 
case it was inevitable that to ill-informed and to imperfectly- 
informed minds great and serious prejudice must have been 
caused. I think I shall probably secure the assent of my 
learned friend who conducts this prosecution if I say that, in 
view of those facts and of the extraordinary freedom of news- 
paper comment and announcement which have followed this 
case, if she had desired to shrink from meeting a jury dra’vvn 
from this community she would not have had interposed in 
the way of those who represent the Crown any difficulty in 
the way of effecting a change of venue. She comes before 
you asking from you nothing but that you will willingly grant 
a careful, an attentive, and a sympathetic hearing in her 
case. 

On Saturday I told you, gentlemen, there were two ques- 
tions in this case; and those two questions are — is there, 
taking the whole of the facts and taking the whole of the 
evidence in relation to those facts — is there clear, safe, satis- 
factory, unequivocal proof either that this was in fact a death 
caused by arsenical poisoning or that she administered that 
poison, if to the poison the death of her husband was due? 
If upon either of those questions, after the whole of the case 
has been exhausted short of your verdict, there still remains 
upon one or other of those questions a real, a substantial 
doubt such as would operate upon your minds in determining 
your course of action in any ordinary affair of life of im- 
portant moment, then it will be your duty to let this woman 
go free, for the law, tempered with mercy, just as it is, 
forbids the consigning to an ignominious death any human 
being unless the guilt of that human being has been estab- 
lished to your reasonable satisfaction, or so as to expel reason- 
able doubt. 

A word about the unhappy man whose death we are inquir- 
ing into. I shall refer to him only where it is necessary, 
and I shall, I hope, be called upon to say nothing which will 
hurt the natural susceptibilities or the feelings of his living 
friends. He appears in the course of this case as a man who 
seems to have been liked by his friends, and not without 
a kindly or generous nature; but certainly in some resi>ects, 
and in respects that touch closely some questions which we 
have to consider in this case, his history is a peculiar one. 
I am not referring, and do not propose to refer, on this sub- 
ject at all, in any detail to the evidence given in relation to 
his course of life in America, but we have it believed upon 
all hands that from the first moment of which we have 


230 



Closing Speech for the Defence. 

any emphatic account of his life and habits, he seems to have Sir Charles 
been a man who suffered chronically from what appears to ®'^**®** 
have been derangement of the stomach. He was not a man 
who was frequently ill in the sense that he was imable to 
attend to business, but he was, as far back as 1878 or 1879, 
complaining of his stomachic derangement, complaining to 
Dr. Hopper in 1882, to Dr. Humphreys and Dr. Drysdale in 
1888, and to Dr. Fuller in 1889. Indeed, for the whole 
period of his authentic history, as far as we know, he so 
suffered. It is a peculiar feature — ^and it is a peculiar 
feature of this case — that the same sj^mptoms in the illness 
which resulted in his death — I mean that coldness and numb- 
ness in the extremities, in his hands, legs, and feet — are 
symptoms spoken of as far back as his residence in America 
by Mr. Bateson amongst others, as far back as 1878 and 1879. 

He seems to have not merely a dyspeptic tendency, but what 
often accompanies it, he seems to have been of a hypochon- 
driacal nature, given to exaggerate his own condition and the 
gravity of his symptoms; and I have no doubt that human 
experience shows that that kind of temperament, that work- 
ing of the imagination constantly introspecting, if one may 
say so, his own symptoms, has upjon a man a pernicious effect. 

We find also that he was given from the earliest time of 
which we have any authentic account to dosing himself. He 
displayed a familiarity with the properties and uses of 
poisonous drugs and medicines. He was given to dosing him- 
self, and he was proud of his knowdedge of these medicines 
and drugs, boasting of it, and, to use Dr. Humphreys’ words, 
being extremely proud of it. He followed the suggestions 

of friends as to medicines which thev had been in the habit 

%/ 

of taking with beneficial results, and applying these medi- 
cines for use in his own case, and not always with benefit. 

In 1881 he was married, and of that marriage there are 
two children living; they are not represented in this inquiry, 
but they are children whose interests are bound up to some 
extent in this trial. One is a child of seven, the other is a 
child of three years of age. It would seem that from 1881 
up to the year 1889, in which I am now addressing you, that 
that was a happy marriage. We have had no suggestion 
from any one who knew Mr. and Mrs. May brick that there 
was up to 1889, when the man whose name has been referred 
to, unluckily for her and unluckily for him, crossed her 
path; we have no suggestion up to that time of any domestic 
unhappiness, and I have therefore a right to assume that, 
although there may have been from time to time differences 
of a minor character, and such as probably in most married 
lives, even the most happy, occasionally occur, that there 

231 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


Claries was not any serious domestic unhappiness, any serious difference 
between man and wife. I mention this fact for the reason 
which I now give in order that I may point your attention 
to a fact, the importance of which, if I mistake not, can hardly 
be exaggerated in this inquiry. I mean the important state- 
ment made by Dr. Hopper either in the June of 1888 or in 
the September of that year, and which Dr. Hopper has 
deposed to, that as far back as that period Mrs. May brick 
called his attention — that is the medical man attending him — 
to the fact that although she did not know what it was, 
whether arsenic or otherwise, that her husband had been 
and was in the habit of using certain powders, the nature of 
which she did not know, but which she had observed after he 
had taken them had apparently not agreed with him. They 
made him irritable, and, as she believed, "were doing him 
mischief. Again, let me remind you that that same observa- 
tion was repeated to Dr. Humphreys in the early part of 
March, 1889, and still more remarkable, a letter written by 
the wife of James May brick to his brother, Michael Maybrick, 
in London, in which she repeated in the year following, namely, 
in 1889, in substance what she had in 1888 told to Dr. 
Hopper upon the subject of the powders or the drugs which 
her husband was in the habit of taking. Gentlemen, in 1889 
— unhappy time for her — she meets, becomes intimately 
acquainted with, the man Brierley. 

But before I follow the story of that incident let me, in 
passing, call attention to what 'was done upon these state- 
ments and suggestions that had been made as to the drug- 
taking. Dr. Hopper contented himself with searching the 
dressing-room, or the inner room, and finding superphos- 
phates, did not do more. Michael Maybrick appears to have 
made some suggestion of it to the deceased man, and to have 
received from him some denial, but with that he seems to 
have rested content, prosecuting no further inquiry. I 
would remind you, gentlemen, I would ask you to consider 
whether that was a satisfactory course to pursue in such a 
case, whether any real weight should be given to a denial eo 
made, under such circumstances, in view of the facts estab- 
lished beyond any doubt that certainly not merely was this 
solution taken, but that in 1889, and for a considerable period 
before that time, going back for eighteen months, he had 
been in the habit of visiting constantly, several times a day, 
the shop of Mr. Heaton in Exchange Street East. These are 
habits of which men are not proud. They would not care 
about publishing them in all their fulness to the world. It 
might induce them to go the length of saying they were taking 
poisonous medicines, but not to the extent of admitting that 

232 



Closing Speech for the Defence. 

they had been for a considerable period pursuing a life which 
had been marked by the habit of taking such medicines. 

In 1889 the incident of the visit to London took place on 
the eve of the Grand National. You have observed, acting 
of course upon instructions conveyed to me by the solicitor, 
who in turn received them from the prisoner, that I have not 
uttered one word of cross-examination as to that story of 
what took place in London. This lady fell. She forgot her 
self-respect. She forgot her duty to her husband. She 
and her husband formed part of the same party at the Grand 
National. Mrs. Maybrick returned first, followed in the 
course of a few minutes by her husband. He did not know, 
not till it was told him on what proved to be his deathbed ; he 
never did know, as Mr. Michael Maybrick has told us, the 
extent of the gravity of her fault; but he complained of her 
conduct at the Grand National. A stormy scene then occurred 
between husband and wife, the first that came to the know- 
ledge of any of the servants of the house, and apparently 
to the knowledge of any of the friends of the family. Then 
we have the painful, the touching incidents which followed 
— the wife dressing herself to leave her husband’s house ; a 
cab ordered to take her away; the threat of the husband that 
if she crossed the threshold she would not be allowed to 
return ; the wife appai^ntly unmoved by that threat, and in 
the hall proceeding to leave her home. Then one of the 
servants came, and a kindly thought rose in her mind as to 
what would be the most effective appeal to a mother. She 
says, Come and see the baby,” puts her arm about her 
in kindness, and the woman, hard and relenting up to that 
time, apparently unmoved by her husband’s threat, yields to 
that appeal, and turns and rxjmains in the house. Well, the 
woman’s nature so yielding is not wholly bad. Then follows 
the story of the next day, the visit in company with Mrs. 
Briggs, who was then her friend, to Dr. Hopper’s; the further 
visit to Mrs. Briggs’ solicitor with the view of proceedings for 
a separation, the incident of the black eye, the only reference 
to such a subject that I will make; the reference to another 
person, a woman, concerned in the matter; and then finally 
Dr. Hopper visits the house, brings husband and wife 
together, and apparently this man, not of an ungenerous 
nature, appears to have made up his mind to forgive and to 
forget, and to all appearances a reconciliation took place 
between them. 

Now, I have told you this part of the story in order to 
fix your attention upon this point. This is not a case in 
which it is suggested, or can be suggested, any base 
j>ecuniary motive, which is not an uncommon incident of a 

233 


Sip Charles 
Russell 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

Sir Charles charge of this kind. The sole suggested motive, as 

Russell j understand, in this case is that she desired to 
conceal from her husband the fact that the grave error 
which she had committed, that she had conceived a feeling of 
estrangement towards her husband ; and was tempted by wicked, 
deliberate, foul, criminal means to end his life. If there 
were not this act of infidelity on her part, there would be no 
motive assigned in this case, and sm^ly there is a wide chasm 
between the moral guilt — the grave moral guilt I admit it to be 
— of the crime of unfaithfulness and the moral, ay, and the 
criminal, guilt involved in the deliberate plotting by such 
wicked and contrived means as these of the felonious death of 
her husband. Ah, gentlemen, for faults of this nature the 
judgments of the world are indeed unequal. In a man such 
faults are too often regarded with toleration, and they bring 
him often but few penal consequences. But in the case of a 
wife, in the case of a woman, it is with her sex the unforgiv- 
able sin. Those who should well consider throw stones at 
her from unworthy hands. She is regarded as a leper, deprived 
of the sympathy and encouragement and affection, and advice 
and consideration of friends and sympathetic hands. Now, 
is it true, I ask you, because she has committed — admits 
she has committed so grave a fault as this — because she sinned 
once is she, therefore, to be misjudged always? Ah, it 
appears likely to cast upon her life that stain which offences 
of this kind in domestic life — w^here woman falls — will cause. 
While there may be nothing to excuse, there may be something 
to palliate the offence. It may be found in selfishness, in 
w^ant of sympathy, in giving the blow where the kindly and 
affectionate word of entreaty and advice to the woman ought 
to have been substituted. 

These are the occurrences of March, 1889. Between that 
date and the date of the Wirral races — an important date — 
nothing of moment occurs except the fact of the purchase of 
some fly-papers from two persons, one from Wokes and the 
other from Hanson. Now, I wish you to try and put your- 
selves in the position of carefully scrutinising what would be 
the conduct and action of persons w^ho had allowed to enter 
into their minds the guilty desire of endeavouring by foul 
means to talce aw^av the life of her husband. Would she be 

t ' 

likely to go to persons to whom she was known for the pur- 
pose of obtaining the means, the instrument, by which to effect 
that wicked purpose ? Would she be likely — all the more 
because she had opportunities in other and distant places as 
in London, where she was but little known — would she be likely 
to go to persons who knew her sufficiently well as to address her 
her name, who knew her address, and who in one of these 
234 



closing Speech for the Defence. 

two instances actually sent to that address by the boy sir Charles 
for delivery one of the parcels of fly-papers? I dwell upon Bussell 
this fact because if I rightly understood the opening of my 
learned friend Mr. Addison, he dated the beginning of this 
design from the purchase of the fly-papers, and he dated the 
beginning of the attempt to put that design into execution as 
from the day of the Wirral races, or the night before the 
Wirral races, the 27th of April. Now, what took place on 
that day? We have it not upon Mrs. Maybrick’s suggestion 
only. We have it that Mrs. Maybrick says to Yapp that her 
master was ill, and that he w-as ill because he had taken 
a double dose of the medicine which never agreed 
with him, and we knew what that medicine was, namely, 
that nux vomica largely entered into it. Well, but was that 
statement of Mrs. Maybrick \s an imagination, a contrivance, 
a lie that she invented? Not at all; it was a fact, a fact 
proved by two witnesses, one called for the prosecution, the 
second for the defence. The witness called for the prosecution 
is Dr. Humphreys, who has told you that when upon the next 
dav, the 28th, he was called in under circumstancets I will 
presently mention, to see James Maybrick, he explained to 
liim that iiis first illness had begun with the taking of a double 
dose of medicine on the 27th, and I think he also made some 
reference as to the incidents which had occurred at the Wirral 
races. We called a gentleman, loiown to you in all probability, 

Mr. Thompson, who was called on Saturday, and who told us 
that at the Wirral races he had noticed, and some friends had 
noticed, that Maybrick was not well. Maybrick gave the 
same explanation ; he had taken a double dose of medicine 
which never agreed with him. On the 27th April he goes 
to the Wirral races, and, I think, without expecting from us 
further witnesses upon that point — for you, I am sure, will 
understand the difficulties there are in getting witnesses, 
especially if they have been friends of Mr. Maybrick, to come 
voluntarily forward, I am not complaining about it — we have 
sufficient proof to justify the statement that on that day at 
the Wirral races he was riding about in the wet. Thompson 
speaks of the heavy rain which had fallen during the day. 

He dines apparently on the other side of the water, under what 
circumstances we do not know, whether in the clothes he was 
wearing during the day we have no information. I do not 
know what the circumstances were, but the next day, the 28th, 
he is taken ill and complains of vomiting. 

What does this wife do — ^the wife who has then entered upon 
this dark path of crime according to the suggestion of the 
prosecution? We have that clearly described by the evidence 
of the servants in the bell violently rung by Mrs. Maybrick, 

*35 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


Sir Charles and Mrs. Maybrick coming down to the kitchen and asking for 
Russell 0^ mustard emetic quickly, taking it to her husband and bidding 
the servant prepare another emetic at once. Then a messenger 
was sent for Dr. Humphreys, who had attended Mrs. Maybrick 
and her children. He is summoned to attend the man whom 
at that time she is beginning to try to poison. Again, later 
on the same night when there is a recurrence of his sickness 
the servant, Mary Cadwallader, is again sent for a doctor, and 
this by a wife who in these circumstances, it is suggested, was 
then engaged in a foul design against her husband’s life. Be- 
tween the 8th of April and the 3rd of May one or two incidents 
occurred which it is important I should now call your attention 
to. You will recollect the statement as to the preparation 
of food in the house which was sent down to the olSice. I shall 
be precise about this, and shall fix the days clearly by reference 
to the evidence. It seems that on three occasions Du Barry's 
food was prepared for him. On the third occasion the fopd was 
prepared for him, but it was not brought down to the office; 
it was forgotten. On the first occasion it was taken down, 
and on the second also. Now, it is suggested that into that 
food Mrs. Maybrick introduced the poison to take away her 
husband’s life, and in that connection I will only ask you to 
bear in mind that I am speaking after a careful scrutiny of it 
— the evidence of Dr. Humphreys makes it clear that on neither 
of these occasions, on the 1st or 2nd May, was there any conse- 
quent illness which might be attributed to the taking of poisoned 
food. Dr. Humphreys says that he called on that Wednesday 
at the house after Mr. Maybrick ’s return from business. He 
found him better, without a headache, his tongue was cleaner, 
and he thought he was making progress. On the 2nd May he 
did not see him at all, and there is no suggestion in any 
part of the evidence, which I have inspected with as much 
care as I could, that with the food he had taken stuff which 
would injure him or bring on an illness. 

The case continues under the charge of Dr. Humphreys up 
to Tuesday, the 7th, and what took place on Tuesday, the 7th, 
I wish to make clear to your minds. On that morning Mrs. 
Maybrick telegraphs to Hale to a nurse, Mrs. Howell, who had 
attended her, and who, as she said, would be agreeable to her 
husband as being no stranger ; and it was on the same Tuesday 
she telegraphed to Liverpool to Mr. Edwin Maybrick to bring 
down a doctor of whom he had spoken to her, namely, a friend 
of his own, Dr. M'Chevne. And, further, I wish to draw vour 
attention to the fact — also important in judging of the proba- 
bilities of the kind of theory set up on the part of the prose- 
cution — ^that on the 25th April, that is two days before the 
Wirral races, Edwin Maybrick arrived in Liverpool from 
236 



closing Speech for the Defence. 

America, and was constantly — I don’t mean every day or every sir Charles 
hour — but constantly to the end of the illness, to the death of 
his brother, frequently sleeping at the house, frequently dining 
at the house, and with a full opportunity of conversing as 
freely as he desired with his brother, and noting the progress 
of his brother’s case. And I ought to have mentioned that 
after he had taken what he &uj)posed to have been poisoned 
food on Wednesday, the 1st, he returned home and went to a 
dinnei’ party, at which were Mr. Edwin May brick, Mr. and 
Mrs. May brick, and Captain Irving, of the steamship belong- 
ing to the White Star Line called the '^Celtic.” Mr. Edwin 
Maybrick did not bring out his friend Dr. M‘Cheyne, but 
brought instead Dr. Carter, and instead of the nurse from Hale 
coming, a trained nurse, namely, Nurse Gore, arrived. Dr. 

Carter arrives on Tuesday, the 7th Ma}^, Nurse Gore on Wednes- 
da}’, the 8th, at about half -past two o’clock. 

Now, I beg you to follow carefully for one moment. Dr. 

Carter comes up after communicating with Edwin Maybrick, 

Nui 'se Gore comes out with Mi*s. Briggs, who pays a visit 
with her sister, Mrs. Hughes, on Wednesday, the 8th. 

It is thought — and I think quite rightly thought — that skilled, 
trained nurses would be preferable to the nurse who had 
mei'ely been attending upon Mrs. Maybrick at childbirth. I ask 
you if it is not clear from the story of this case that there were 
three nurses — Nurse Gore, Nurse Callery, and Nurse Wilson, of 
each of whom I desire to speak with entire respect — who came 
practically to watch, to check, and to control hei‘, and that they 
did so watch, check, and control Mrs. Maybrick from that 
Wednesday until the day of Mr. Maybrick ’s death. I think that 
cannot be doubted, and as unhappily follows from that position 
of things all her acts, even of careful attention, even of what 
would at other times and under other circumstances be regarded 
as acts of solicitude and tenderness, are at once suspected, 
thoughts are suggested or raised in the mind, all such assume 
a different complexion, and if they are capable of being con- 
strued by ill suggestions probably receive that construction. 

But this at least is clear — from that Wednesday until the 
death, the words which this lady herself used in that statement 
this morning, she was deposed — she was not, in fact, allowed 
to render to her husband, who appears to have asked for her 
when she was absent from the room — she was not allowed to 
administer the smallest thing. Even pieces of ice to allay 
his thirst or mitigate his fever w^ere taken from her hand and 
given to the hands of others. 

On that Wednesday occurred an event, the importance of 
which I do not seek for one moment to conceal from myself — 
for so important do I regard it as even to suggest to you 

237 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

Slr^Ch^les that if it had not taken place yon never would hav© 
heard of this charge. You never would have heard of this 
prosecution. I mean the intercepted letter on the Wednesday 
to the man Brierley. Mr. Addison, in opening his case, 
referred to that letter. I don^t at all complain of the way 
in which he referred to it. But that letter disclose© clearly 
this, that she was addressing the man Brierley even then in 
terms in the highest degree improper, that she was betraying 
an anxiety to keep on close and affectionate terms with him 
so long as there was any chance of discovery of the guilty visit 
she had paid to London, and that she was speaking, ay, and, 
if you wish, speaking in exaggerated language of the illness 
of her husband as it then appeared, and of the serious char- 
acter of the illness. In that letter she also speaks of the 
presence of his relatives, and of the anxiety which she shows, 
and when you come to recollect the story of Mrs. Briggs and 
her sister and the statement of Nurse Gore you cannot have 
any doubt how it came that that illness presented so serious 
an aspect to her, and how she came to describe the feelings of 
herself and of her husband’s relatives as feelings of terrible 
anxiety. Why do I say this? Because Mrs. Briggs and 
her sister come, and they both tell you in the box they at once 
came to the conclusion that he was — I will not say in mortal 
peril — but in peril, and that it was a most serious state of 
things — far more serious than the doctors thought it was — and 
they said so to Mrs. May brick. When Nurse Gore came she 

thought it was a very serious case. The serv^ant in the house. 
Yapp, speaks to the same effect. The letter was written and 
given to be posted, but it never was conveyed to the post oflSce 
under the circumstances which you have heard. You may 
recollect my cross-examination of Nurse Yapp. That cross- 
examination was not directed to throwing any doubt upon the 
fact that the letter was written and was given to her to be 
posted, because there has been no contest about that at all, but 
in order that you might see how rapidly and how strongly 
suspicion had been generated in the minds of the servants in 
that house. Suspicion being generated, how probable it was 
that every act of this woman would, as far as they could scan 
it, be scanned by jealous and even suspicious eyes ; and while 
it is not material to my purpose to do more than this, I do 
suggest that the story as to the reason why that letter was 
opened has not been truly and fully given to you by the nurse — 
that, if it fell, it fell as a contrivance to supply an excuse 
for opening it, for it is obvious that in the case of an intelli- 
gent person like that, even if it was the case that the address 
had been so smeared as not to be perfectly legible, the obvious 
course which a trustworthy servant would pursue, if there 
238 



Closing Speech for the Defence. 

were not any motive to the contrary, would have been merely sir Charle* 
to enclose that letter unopened in another envelope. Even RusiaU 
that letter — take it, read it, scan it as you will, with all its 
exaggerations — for exaggeration there is — read it, and ask 
yourselves is it the letter of a guilty woman who is then 
planning the murder of her husband? 

I pass on with the history of this case, until I come to 
examine a little more carefully into what I may call the medical 
aspect. I will ask you to note this fact, that it is not until 
Thursday, the 9th May — that is to say, two days before the 
death — that Dr. Humphreys makes any reference to diarrhoea 
as affecting his patient. There is, indeed, in the evidence of 
Dr. Carter a statement that, as early as the 7th — which was 
Tuesday — there had been Avhat he described as a relaxed 
motion. That, I may remind you, is a very different thing 
from diarrhoea. You will find that of importance when I 
come to consider the medical evidence. On Thursday, the 
9th May, the first allusion by Dr. Humphreys to purging 
occurs — and it occuis in a way which points it out clearly. 

At the coroner’s inquiry he said — He was now suffering 
from diarrhoea.” Gentlemen, I have no criticism to make on 
the medical treatment of this case. No one suggests that 
treatment did more than to endeavour to allay some of the 
symptoms of the illness — jaborandi to increase the saliva and 
moisten the mouth ; sedatives to allay the febrile symptoms 
which were described as of a depressing tendency ; and finally, 
on Saturday, the 11th, James May brick dies. 

Now, again let me remind you of the theory, the only theory 
suggested by the prosecution — the administration of poison 
by his wife, beginning to show itself from the day of the 
Wirral races, 27th April, continued more or less frequently 
down to close upon his death, and a suggestion coming from 
Dr. Carter, and I think from Dr. Carter alone, suggesting 
the probability of a serious dose being given to him on 3rd 
May. And now I have to asl^ you, in view of the evidence 
you have heard, what would you expect if that was a true 
account? If in this state of his illness she had given these 
doses, and a serious dose on 3rd May, what would you have 
-expected according to the account of, I may say, all these 
so-called scientific gentlemen for the prosecution as well as for 
the defence — ^would you not have expected a more marked 
presence of arsenic in the man’s system after death — from the 
27th April to the 11th May, some fourteen days, from the 
3rd to the 11th May, some eight days? I do not enlarge on 
iihis point now ; I note it in passing. What was the condi- 
'tion, what was the conduct of the wife at this crisis? She 
knew certainly from Wednesday, the 8th, probably from 

*39 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

Slp Charles Tuesday, the 7th, she suspected, that her brother-in-law, or 
brothers-in-law, were dissatisfied with her. On Wednesday 
they come to the knowledge of that letter intercepted. I am 
using this to test the theory of the prosecution upon the 
assumption of this woman’s guilt. Is it conceivable that in 
that condition of things she would not have made any effort to 
remove from that house proofs of her guilt — traces and means 
by which her guilty design had been effected? There is not 
one of these things as to which there is evidence that could 
not have been removed some one of these days, destroyed, 
hidden, the contents vanished, leaving no trace behind by which 
her crime could be found out ; and yet what was her conduct, 
what her condition? She had, you have heard, spent many 
watchful nights. When Nurse Gore arrived she had been up 
several times, and she w^ent, at the instance of Nurse Gore, 
to rest, and wdien the end came she was utterly and completely 
prostrated ; so much so that she was carried from the room 
into the spare bedroom, and there she lies from the day of the 
death until, unknown to her, she is practically in charge, in 
her stricken condition, of policemen standing on the landing 
outside the door. Although no charge has been formulated 
against her, and although no opportunity has been given her 
for explanation, and although there was no friend or other 
person who came to her to state the points which were alleged 
against her, and the circumstances which were supposed to 
bring suspicion home to her, was that the conduct or the 
action of a woman of guilt? It is more intelligible upon 
another hypothesis. If it be true, as she says, that in one of 
those confidential conversations, those whispered conversations 
which Nurse Gallery spoke of — if it be true that in that 
illness she did tell her husband what was then unknown to him 
— the extent of her sin against him — if it be true that in view 
of that information this man was heard to murmur, '' Oh, 
Bunny, Bunny, how could you do it? ” — if it be true that she 
did make, as she has told you to-day she did make, a contrite 
statement of her fault, then, indeed, in view of her husband’s 
death, her condition would be accounted for. She could not 
but feel, apart from the gravity of her moral offence, the pain, 
the anxiety that her conduct — although the full scope of her 
misconduct was not known — might have had something to 
do with her husband’s illness. She could not but feel in such 
trying moments as these, the eve almost of his death, the 
bitter reproach, the ill part that she had played to the man 
who seems, on the whole and apart from a great temptation, 
to have been neither ungenerous nor unkind to her. Her 
condition of overwhelming grief can easily be accounted for, 
for one can understand under such circumstances the rising up 
240 



closing Speech for the Defence. 


in her mind of a recollection of better and happier times — 
recollections of the birth of her children, the kindness of her 
husband, and side by side with that bitter reproach in her 
own mind, how much she had done to forfeit his affection and 
how little she had done to repay him for his kindness, you 
will say whether, if a woman had the nerve and fibre enough 
to plan such a murder as this — cold, deliberate — she would not 
also have had the instinct of self-preservation strong enough 
in her to make some attempts at least to remove — and there 
was no difficulty in the operation — these evidences of the 
guilty means by which she had effected her fell purpose. 
Instead of that you find her prostrate, carried senseless from 
the room in which her husband died, and brought into another 
room, where she remained for seven days, until at last she 
left her husband’s house under police escort for Walton Gaol. 

At this stage the Court adjourned for luncheon. 

On the resumption of the proceedings after luncheon, 

Sir Charles Russell, continuing his address, said — I will now 
ask your closer consideration of the two main questions, the 
first of which, I take the liberty of reminding you, was this — 
What is the answer to the question — are you satisfied beyond 
a reasonable doubt that this w^as a case of poisoning by 
arsenic at all? In considering this I shall content myself 
wuth calling your attention to the views put forth by the one 
side or the other, by the witnesses that have been called before 
you — gentlemen of experience and of eminence. First, let me 
remind you of what Dr. Humphreys, Dr. Carter, and Dr. 
Stevenson, whose services were called in after death, all agree 
upon. It is this — with regard to Dr. Carter and Dr. 
Humphreys, the notion of arsenical poisoning did not occur to 
their own minds until it was suggested to them. As for Dr. 
Carter, he was puzzled to know what it was ; he believed it 
was some irritant poison, but what it was he could not t^l. 
Dr. Stevenson, especially relying upon the statement of Dr. 
Humphreys, who went more fully into the matter, said — 
‘ ‘ Although the symptoms during life in my opinion point to 
arsenical poisoning, although the post-mortem appearances 
point in the same direction, yet I would abstain from expres- 
sing a pronounced judgment in the matter until I had known 
the results of the analysis.” 

What does that mean except this, that if traces of arsenic 
had not been found in certain parts of the body, and more 
than a trace found in other parts, especially the liver, not- 
withstanding the view he expresses as to the character of the 
symptoms and the post-mortem appearances, he would not 
pronounce a judgment that the cause of death was arsenical 

Q 241 


Sip Charles 
Russell 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


Sir Charles poisoning ? And now it is important to bear in mind the 
Russell Binall quantity that was in fact found, and in this connection 
it is also important to bear in mind the evidence which I will 
shortly call attention to, beginning with the evidence in America, 
of a definite purpose, to which I shall refer, and ending with 
the last bit of evidence, with the statement of the conversation 
as late as April of this year with Sir James Poole. 

Now as to the symptoms, all the witnesses on both sides 
substantially agree in this, that the symptoms which they would 
expect to find in a case of arsenical poisoning they would also 
substantially expect to find in any case of gastritis or gastro- 
enteritis, however caused — that is to say, once the gastro- 
enteritis is set up involving both the stomach and the bowels, 
the symptoms are not distinguishable when that gastro-enteritis 
has been caused or occasioned by arsenical poisoning or by 
any of the other things capable of producing it. But they 
say that these symptoms point in the direction of arsenical 
poisoning, and when these symptoms came to be enumerated, 
which would be a 'priori expected, they were stated by my 
learned friend Mr. Addison, as Dr. Tidy said, with great 
correctness. They are — excessive and persistent vomiting, 
excessive purging or diarrhoea, pains in the stomach, increasing 
on pressure ; they are, if it is a case of long administration of 
arsenical poison, affection of the eyes, and cramps in the 
calves of the legs. All those have been deposed to by the 
witnesses you have heard. Of course, the most reliable and 
most valuable witness on that head is Dr. Humphreys, because 
he was in charge of the case from the 28th April, at its begin- 
ning, until it closed with the death of James May brick. Dr. 
Carter has spoken of the much more limited time, namely, 
from Tuesday, the 7th of May, until Saturday, the 11th of 
May. Now, -what was said by the witnesses on the other 
side? You have had Dr. Tidy, whose experience in these 
cases is certainly as great as that of any of the other gentle- 
men — I do not desire to depreciate at all their evidence. You 
have heard it from Dr. Macnamara, whose eminent position, 
especially that in which he represents the College of Surgeons 
on the General Medical Council, whose position vouches for 
his character in the estimation of his profession, and who had 
peculiar and exceptional opportunities for judging of cases of 
the action of arsenic from his position in connection with 
the Lock Hospital in Dublin, of which he has told us he is 
the senior surgeon : Our experience points to cases where 

arsenic given and causing death or injury may not produce 
this or that symptom, but we have never known a case of 
arsenical poisoning where there was an absence in a marked 
degree, as they allege there is in this, of three at least of the 

242 



Closing Speech for the Defence. 

eymptoms in conjunction.’^ Dr. Macnamara says in tlie sIf CharlM 
treatment of a class of patients who come to the Lock Hospital 
it has been necessary, to use his own expression, "to saturate 
those patients for the purpose of treatment with arsenic, and 
when the point of saturation is passed, either accidentally or 
because of the idiosyncracies or peculiarities of the physique 
or temperament of a particular patient, I in my large experi- 
ence find these symptoms became strongly marked.” 

Then there was the new opinion advanced by Dr. Stevenson, 
that this was a case of arsenical poisoning; but that, I venture 
to submit to you, must be to some extent discounted by the 
fact that even with the strong view he entertained he would 
have hesitated to pronounce a conclusive judgment on the 
point until he heard the result of the analysis. On the other 
hand, you have the evidence of Dr. Tidy, Mr. Paul, and Dr. 
Macnamara, in which, to use the language of Dr. Tidy, who 
is perhaps best entitled to speak upon this matter, the absence 
of these symptoms in conjunction points away from its being a 
case of arsenical poisoning. Now let us examine the further 
grounds of doubt. If I stopped there alone is it possible to say 
that you could with security — I use the common expression — 
express a judgment free from reasonable doubt? In this state 
of divided opinion could you safely arrive at the conclusion, 
if matters rested there, that this was arsenical poisoning at all? 

Let us take a further test, the test of the quantity found. In 
either view of the two theories suggested in this case — either 
the view that it was a case of repeated doses beginning some- 
where about the 27th April, or the suggestion made by Dr. 

Carter, and I think by him alone — of the possibility of a fatal 
dose on the 3rd May, in face of the evidence you have heard as 
to the effect of arsenic upon the kidneys in depressing the 
action of the kidneys, which are the chief agents of elimination, 
would you or would you not, when so short a time has elapsed 
before the death, have expected to find much stronger indica- 
tions of the existence of a large or serious quantity of arsenic 
than is present in this case? 

That now leads me to the consideration of what in fact was 
found. You will understand that, of course, with regard to 
that which bears upon the case, we represent the prisoner, and 
are bound to accept the statements of fact discounted by 
the possibility of error as to these results given by Mr. 

Davies and by Dr. Stevenson, as to whom I do not 
suggest or desire to misrepresent them as to the facts. 

We come to the region of opinion. Of course, men’s opinions 
are influenced in a great many different ways, sofhetimes quite 
unconsciously, and I wish, with regard to these gentlemen, not 
to attempt to suggest or in any way misrepresent the actual 

*43 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

statement of facts. Dr. Stevenson on analysis of 4 ounces of 
liver found, according to his original statement 26, and upon 
his revised statement 27, one-thousandths of a grain. In 
8 ounces of liver, according to his original calculation 46, 
according to his revised 49, one-thousandths of a grain. Mr. 
Davies, in 6 ounces of the liver, found a considerably smaller 
proportional quantity. It again bears out what Dr. Tidy 
pointed out to you — that it is impossible to rely upon a com- 
putation of what you find in a given part, however fairly you 
may have endeavoured to select it, and then upon that result 
derived from a given part to multiply that result by a pro- 
portion that the smaller part bears to the whole, and then say 
that in the whole there would probably be such and such a 
quantity. Whereas in 8 ounces of the liver Dr. Stevenson has 
found 49 thousandths, in 6 ounces of the liver Mr. Davies has 
found 16 one-thousandths only. Taking those two sets of 
figures together, putting together what was found by Dr. 
Stevenson and Mr. Davies, there were found altogether 88 
one -thousandths, or, according to the later calculation or 
checking which Dr. Stevenson went through, 92 one- 
thousandths, or less than one- tenth of a grain. Now, you can 
imagine for yourselves what a grain is, and when it is divided 
by ten you can fancy what a minute result you have so arrived 
at. Now, I ought to add that in 8 ounces of the intestines 
were 15 one-thousandths of a grain, which w’ould make 
altogether, taking the original figure of Dr. Stevenson 
of 88, 103 thousandths, taking the correct figure, 107 

thousandths, or, again, in that case a little more than 
one-tenth of a grain. Is that a result which the evidence 
justifies you in thinking w^ould naturally be expected if there 
had been, as according to either view suggested on the part 
of the prosecution had been the case, either a series of repeated 
administrations of arsenic in a noxious quantity beginning on 
the 27th, or still less, or still more, if there had been, as Dr. 
Carter suggested, the administration of a fatal dose on the 
3rd of May? 

You have had cases referred to by the witnesses for the 
defence, and with no question apparently of cross-examination, 
although a skilled suggestion was at command — cases where 
persons were treated medicinally with arsenic before their 
death, and where traces of that arsenic had been found 
in periods much greater than any which was involved in 
the consideration of this case. You have in the evidence 
of Mr. Paul and Dr. Tidy distinct statements that if 
there had been recent administration — and in answer to my 
lord he explained that by “ recent '' he meant not merely hours, 
but days and weeks— he would have expected to have found 

244 



closing Speech for the Defence. 

much stronger and clearer indications of the presence of arsenic, sir cImfImi 
W hat does Dr. Stevenson say ? Recollect that Dr. Stevenson 
is a very cautious man, and yet a man who has taken in this 
case a very strong view. His answer as to the conclusion 
which he built upon that very minute quantity found in the 
body was, that probably there was in the whole body approxi- 
mately a possibly fatal dose. I do not know how many 
qualifications are involved in that short answer; but if it be 
an answer closely affecting any fatal question in this case, if 
it be important that you should form a judgment as to what 
was probably administered to the man, basing your opinion 
to some extent on what was found in the body, I ask you, is 
such a vague answer as that an answer, hedged round by 
probabilities and possibilities and approximations, any safe 
guide or assistance to you in a case where such serious issues 
are involved. 

Then it is important to bear in mind as regard other por- 
tions of the body — the stomach and the contents of the stomach, 
the spleen, the bile, the fluid from the mouth, the heart, and 
the lungs, and a portion of the bone which was tested — there 
was no arsenic found. Here comes in an answer — the important 
answer given by Dr, Tidy from his own experience, and sup- 
ported by some cases to which he has referred, and corroborate 
by Dr. Paul — not a corroboration arising from his long experi- 
ence, but from his reading — that after there has been an 
administration of poison on a succession of occasions, there is 
a direct action upon the kidneys which lessens their power as 
eliminating agents. His experience points to, and both 
witnesses, certainly one of them, speak of the storing up in the 
liver, and the very gradual and minute and sometimes imper- 
ceptible amount of elimination through the urine of arsenic. 

This is the conclusion which Dr. Humphreys arrives at from 
the tests which he applied. You will remember he afterwards 
sought to discount it, because he said he had not boiled long 
enough in hydrochloric acid either the faeces or the urine. But 
Dr. Paul assured us that taking a particle of arsenic and a 
preparation of urine, so that the urine would bear the proportion 
of 65,000 to 1 of arsenic, after boiling two minutes under 
a light there was clear revelation on the foil of the presence of 
arsenic. 

I therefore say that, so far as this part of the case is con- 
cerned, not only do the symptoms point in another direction 
than that of arsenical poisoning, but the post-mortem appear- 
ances, as it is agreed, correspond up to a certain point with 
those which would be discovered in gastro-enteritis, with 
one very important exception. What is that? It is that 
petechious or flea-bitten condition of the stomach. This con- 

245 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


dition of the stomach, as Dr. Tidy had told them, was directed 
to his attention when a pupil of the celebrated Dr. 
Letheby many years ago. That was brought to his 
attention as one of the common signs of the condition of 
the stomach caused by the administration of arsenic. Now, 
Dr. Humphreys assist^ at the post-mortem, and Dr. Carter 
took the notes, and it is admitted that the petechious condition 
is not referred to, and that the only thing referred to is what 
is described as a marked arborescent appearance of certain of 
the small vessels of the surface of the stomach. Dr. Humphreys 
had been reading up for it. He had noticed that this 
petechious condition was one of the signs usually associated 
with arsenical poisoning. He used that word when asked to 
explain his reference to this arborescent appearance. Says Dr. 
Tidy — and Dr. Paul and, I understand, Dr. Stevenson say 
nothing to the contrary — That is not the petechious condition 
to which I have referred, which I have looked for in cases of 
alleged arsenical poisoning, and which my experience teaches 
me to expect.^’ 

Now, gentlemen, I therefore submit to you that upon this 
part of the case — I am but the mouthpiece of this creature in 
the dock, and have no right, even if I had formed opinions 
of my own, to convey them to you — I can only submit these 
views to you for your consideration as she would be entitled if 
she were speaking for herself. The question I have therefore 
to ask you in this connection in the case, touching the cause 
of death, can you say that you are satisfied, as reasonable men, 
beyond reasonable doubt, that this was a case of arsenical 
poisoning at all ? If you are not, there is an end of this matter, 
and it would only be natural the thought should arise in your 
minds, if not arsenical poisoning, we should like to have some 
suggestion what it was. I will take leave to say in that con- 
nection — while I will make a suggestion to you in a moment or 
two — that I am not called upon as representing the prisoner 
in the dock to advance any theory to you. I am sure my lord 
will tell you that the counsel representing the prisoner is entitled 
to stand upon a defence, and to say, “You have not proved 
the case which you allege.” But is there, passing that by, no 
reasonable hypothesis which may be suggested in a case with 
such extraordinary circumstances as this? Is it improbable — 
BO improbable as to be scouted by reasonable minds — that a 
man who had lived his life, who had been dosing himself, who 
had been taking medicines recommended by his friends, who h^d 
been taking, as I shall presently endeavour to show you, until 
a comparatively recent period, admittedly taking, poisonous 
medicines — is it remarkable that this man's constitution had 
suffered so that he should always be complaining of derange- 

246 



Closing Speech for the Defence. 

ment of the stomach, should be a chronic dyspeptic? Is it or 
is it not sound and reasonable to say that a man who had 
been pursuing — if he had been pursuing — such a course of 
treatment would have his constitution, and especially the organs 
connected with the stomach, considerably impaired, liable to 
be attacked, and seriously attacked, from causes which in the 
case of a man whose digestive organs were sound and healthy 
would be of non-efifect? Is it not common experience that if 
from any cause illness overtakes a man — cold, whatever the 
particular thing is — it flies to, fixes, and fastens upon the 
weakest part ? If the stomach is the weakest, catarrh ; if the 
throat is the weakest, cold in the throat. If this is true, he, 
having taken that day, the 27th April, an overdose of medicine 
which never agreed with him, goes to this race meeting, and 
riding about on a 'wet day gets cold, and does not perhaps pay 
that close attention to the particular dietary considered neces- 
sary, is it not reasonable to suppose that such a man sets up 
conditions which cause gastro-enteritis, and so cause his death? 

There are some people who think that any fatal occurrence 
to human life is to be accounted for. Man in his pride of 
reason, his knowledge of science, his observation and stored 
experience of the past, can explain everything. Dr. Tidy 
had said that a post-mortem had shown that his diagnose of 
a case had been wrong at first. There are mysteries in human 
life, mysteries in the influence, the agencies that touch the 
springs of human life, that often even the advanced science 
of to-day has not fully mastered. Recollect the statement 
made by Dr. Macnamara and endorsed by Dr. Tidy that they 
have known from slight causes gastritis and gastro-enteritis 
implicating the bowels set up in men from very slight causes 
indeed. Therefore upon this part of the case I have to submit 
to you that there is in this state of evidence and facts with the 
contrariety of opinion that has been expressed — there is sub- 
mitted to your judgment no safe resting-place on w^hich you can 
securely and satisfactorily justify to yourselves a finding that 
this was a death of arsenical poisoning. 

Now I come to the second question. If you are not satisfied 
as to the first, as I have said, there is an end of the case. If 
you are not satisfied as to the second there is equally an end 
of the case. That second question is — do the facts and the 
evidence bring home to your minds proof clear and satisfactory 
that Florence Maybrick administered the arsenic, if arsenic 
were indeed the cause of death? You will observe that the 
only means of obtaining arsenic directly traced to her is in the 
single case of the possession of fly-papers, and in connection 
with that it is equally true to say that there is no evidence 
forthcoming to show that the dead man, James Maybrick, had 

247 


Sir C^'aries 
RusmU 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

«lr Charles got arsenic any more than that there is evidence to show that 
she had got arsenic. The answer to that I submit is this. 
In the case of a woman it would be much more difficult with- 
out notice and without observation to get it. In the case of 
a man it would be less difficult, and again I would remind you 
that it is not a question of probability as to the one or the 
other; it is a question of clear and unequivocal proof. In this 
connection comes the question, who administered it? If it 
were administered, did the prisoner at the bar administer it? 
I should like to put two or three points to you that you may 
put the question to yourselves. I shall put them, asking you 
to give such weight to them as your common sense suggests 
they are worthy of. If, as is clear, there was in that house, 
Battlecrease, where James Maybrick and his wife lived, a 
quantity of poison capable of being fatally applied, with which 
fly-papers had nothing or nothing necessarily to do; if there 
was one packet of arsenic with which admittedly fly-papers 
have nothing to do ; and a bottle in which grains of arsenic 
are found with which admittedly fly-papers have nothing to 
do ; I ask if this was the woman of criminal designs, why with 
these means at her command if they were hers, should she have 
resorted to the clumsy, the stupid contrivance of trying to steep 
fly-papers in water? I ask you whether it accords with your 
experience of what is probable, and it is not suggested in the 
evidence that she had any skill in these matters, that in such 
a case as that, assuming still the hypothesis of wicked design 
and the desire of carrying it effectively to its end, she should 
resort to the use of a liquid taken from fly-papers, concerning 
the exact strength and potency and power of which she could 
know nothing? Would it be in accordance with your ex- 
perience that if a woman desired to commit such a crime as 
this, is it not the experience in such cases that the poison is 
administered in large doses, leaving indelible traces behind 
them, doses which become speedily effective because speedily 
fatal? In truth, on this part of the case the prosecution do 
not rely upon, for they have not the evidence, any direct act of 
the prisoner, either in possessing herself of the poison except 
through the fly-papers or showing that she administered it. 

Then, as regards the use of the fly-papers, which my learned 
friend will probably rely upon when he replies, it has been 
already given in evidence that they are purchased out of season 
by other persons under apparenly perfectly innocent conditions, 
and the man Bioletti has spoken of arsenic entering largely or 
considerably into use for cosmetic purposes. In truth, as I was 
going to say, the prosecution mainly rely upon four or five 
suspicious circumstances, and there is evidence of a circum- 
stantial kind not to be overlooked, not to be passed aside, but 

248 



Closing Speech for the Defence. 

to be considered. The first is the fly-papers, and as regards Sir Chaples 
that I should observe — was there ever less concealment than 
in this case of the fly-papers? She buys from one chemist, 

Wokes, and on the very day on which she buys she also buys 
elderflower and benzoin, which, as Hanson has stated, was 
commonly mixed with arsenic. He also mentions milk of 
almonds in which a solution of arsenic was put for the purpose 
of being used as a cosmetic. The bottle which was produced 
was not one used in the ordinary way, but as a depilatory, 
and was intended to be used in the form of a paste spread 
upon the skin for the purpose of removing surplus hairs. Was 
there ever more openness in this world displayed by a guilty 
woman than was here displayed ? She buys it from two 
persons who know her. In one case close upon the giving of 
that ball, to which she was accompanied by her brother-in- 
law, Mr. Edwin Maybrick, a parcel is sent by a boy who rings 
at the gate, and is told to leave the parcel on the hall table. 

It is then taken by a servant to the prisoner, in the presence 
of her husband; it is afterwards seen soaking in a basin of 
water with a plate and tow^el over it, in her bedroom, and in 
the morning the girl Brierley on entering the room sees it, and 
she tells you her mistress saw her going into the room. Later 
on in the day Brierley mentions it to the other servants, and 
the girl Yapp goes up in the afternoon of the same day, and 
forsooth 1 finds these suspicious fly-papers soaking for a wicked 
purpose still in the same place, having apparently continued 
there from morning in the same position in which the girl 
Brierley saw them. 

Now, as to the Du Barry food. I wish to point out to you 
with respect to the Du Barry food and the medicine bottle 
that you are asked to believe three different things. First 
of all you are asked to be satisfied that there was arsenic ; 
next, that it was put there with a criminal intention by some 
one; and next, that Mrs. Maybrick was the person who put 
it there. That applies both to the Du Barry food and the 
one bottle of medicine. Now, about these medicine bottles. 

If the medicine bottles in question had been made up at the 
same time by Clay & Abrahams, and were the same in sub- 
stance, and one was found in one place under his keeping, 
and another in another under her keeping, and there is arsenic 
in one and no trace of it in the other, it would undoubtedly 
be a very strong fact, but far from conclusive against her, 
that she put arsenic in the bottle. But that is not the case. 

There are different prescriptions, containing different substances, 
made up of different compounds, made up undoubtedly at the 
same time and place. Mistakes do occur, and in this case it 
is not suggested, as I understand that such trace of arsenic as 

249 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


Slp^^arlos was found in the medicine bottle at the house was such as to 
suggest to Mr. Davies the desirability of going on to a quanti- 
tative analysis so as to see if there was any considerable 
quantity. He gave some reason -why he did not even make 
the attempt. Now, as regards the Du Barry food, admittedly 
the food was got at the house with the view of being sent down 
from the house on three occasions — Wednesday, the Ist May, 
Thursday, the 2nd, and Friday, the 3rd. It is admitted that 
on two occasions, the Ist and 2nd May, it was in fact sent 
down and partaken of in a greater or lesser degree probably 
altogether by Mr. Maybrick; admittedly that on the third 
occasion it was forgotten, never sent down, and therefore was 
not consumed by him. What has been done is this : I do not 
know whether we have got — I have forgotten to ask the ques- 
tion — ^how the food was made, but the dishes out of which 
it was eaten, the dish in which it was carried, the pan in 
which it was cooked, remained neglected lying at the office of 
Mr. Maybrick until it occurred to Mr. Davies to see whether 
he could get some test from them. Thereupon he describes 
how he found particles of food adhering in the rim of the jug, 
and how, after employing Reinsch’s test, he found traces of 
arsenic on the copper foil. You had the glass produced to you 
in which he found the trace of arsenic. It is not for me to 
account for these things. I could discharge my duty in point- 
ing at the inoonclusiveness of the facts as pointing to the guilt 
on the part of the prisoner. Undoubtedly in these vessels 
a trace of arsenic was found. The suggestion is undoubtedly 
made which is worthy of note, and that is, that in these vessels 
that are glazed undoubtedly arsenic enters, and the presence 
of a certain amount of arsenic to a email degree is let free in 
the usage, and if nothing of that kind occurs, even the presence 
of the sour remains of the food or milk must generate acid, 
which will account for the very minute traces which are found 
in the very minute example of which Mr. Davies made his 
analysis. 

Now I come to find this out not by mere speculation, but 
by testing the actual occurrences. I told you of them this 
morning, and I wdll merely remind you of them now. On 
Wednesday, the 1st May, after he has presumably, according 
to the theory of the prosecution, eaten of a poisoned dish,, 
namely, the Du Barry food. Dr. Humphreys called upon him at 
6.30 and found him better. He had no headache, his tongue 
was cleaner, and he appeared to be making progress. On the 
2nd May Dr. Humphreys does not see him at all. We have no 
statement therefore that either upon the 1st or 2nd May there 
was any indication whatever, so far as you can judge, of 
any injurious results following from his partaking of the food. 

250 



closing Speech for the Defence. 

Now I come to two other points — what I call suspicious circum- Sir 
stances. One is the gown, and the handkerchief in connection 
with the gown — the fact that there was a trace of arsenic in 
the pocket of the gown and on the handkerchief. Mr. Davies 
quite candidly said exactly what one would have supposed — 
assuming that there was anything in the suggestion of the 
legitimate use for which these fly-papers were designed. Mr. 
Davies said if she had been dipping her handkerchief for 
cosmetic purposes and for purposes of rubbing her face, and 
put her handkerchief in the pocket in that w’ay, it would 
depend upon the extent to which it was wet or damp whether 
it would be sufficient to account for the traces of arsenic found 
in the pocket of the gown. Again, it is important to remind 
you of this, as to which all the witnesses agree, that there is 
no poison apparently which reveals itself upon an attempt 
at analysis or by Reinsch’s test more evidently and more easily 
than arsenic, as indeed is shown by the extraordinary instances 
given, and I believe instances more extreme than that might 
be given where, according to Dr. PauFs statement l-55th part 
of a 1000th of arsenic was found; that is to say, 1 of arsenic 
to 55,000 of other matter — urine. He tested it by Reinsch^s 
method, with hydrochloric acid added, and, after being boiled 
a minute, he could detect even so small a quantity. 

I come now to the most serious and remarkable point of all 
in one sense, not serious in the sense that it had to do so much 
as the proved facts could have had to do with the actual 
cause of the death of this man, but serious unquestion- 
ably, because it did point to the fact that, if it were not 
explained, if there were no possible explanation to be given of 
it, it would show that the prisoner had attempted to tamper 
with some food which was intended to be given to her husband 
then on his sick bed. My lord has stated that he has followed 
the course which I understand was agreed to by a considerable 
number of the judges of the High Court in allowing that state- 
ment to be made by the prisoner. That statement has been 
made, a careful and very serious statement, but I have to ask 
you in connection with it how comes it that this woman makes, 
and was persistent in making this statement, that Nurse Gore’s 
account of the incident was a substantiallv true account. Unless, 
in fact, prisoner’s statement in relation to it is true, she might 
have rested content with leaving her counsel to point out to 
you, what I have already pointed out, that except for the 
possible light it may throw on the conduct of the prisoner, it 
would have been enough to say, and to stop there with having 
said it, that, according to the evidence of Nurse Gore, that 
could have had nothing to do with this man’s death, because 
it is admitted he took no particle of the food which it was 

251 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

said was tampered with. According to Nurse Gk>re, her 
suspicion was naturally and justly aroused. She observed 
the woman take the bottle away and bring it back, and 
put it on the small table, and move it from the small table 
to the washstand, w^here neither the medicines nor the 
foods were placed. It is therefore at first sight a 
self-incriminating statement, although a statement which 
does not involve in any way the question of the direct 
cause of this man’s death; because Nurse Gore’s suspicions 
being aroused as she told you, she watched the bottle of meat 
juice, and when she left her post of w^atching and was succeeded 
by Nurse Gallery she did, as was her duty — narrated to Nurse 
Gallery the incident which she had observed, and gave her a 
similar caution; and each of these persons says that nothing 
was given from that small meat juice bottle to James Maybrick 
after that circumstance deposed to by Nurse Gore; and that on 
the next day, when Mr. Michael Maybrick came, it was given 
to him, and by him handed to Dr. Carter, and by Dr. Carter 
tested with Reinsch’s test, with the result that arsenic was found. 
The statement on this that the prisoner has made is certainly 
a remarkable one, and made under remarkable circumstances. 
It is not made under such sanction as the giving of evidence 
on oath carries with it; it is not made under such securities as 
cross-examination affords; but it is made by a woman who is 
upon trial for her life. I state that to you fully and freely, 
and, having stated it, you who have heard it, you who have 
w^eighed its substance and its purport, making such allowances 
as you think the circumstances of the case suggest ought to 
be made, must ask yourselves whether it is or is not a statement 
which should have some effect on your minds. I will not 
enlarge on it. I leave it to speak with such effect on your ears 
and hearts as the circumstances under which it was delivered, 
and the way in which is was delivered, and the tone in which 
it was delivered, and the inherent probabilities of the delivery 
itself will suggest to you what ought to be its proper and 
legitimate result. 

Now, if the case stopped here, if there were no more distinctive 
questions of fact relating to the personal habits of James 
Maybrick, I would ask you to consider whether it was possible 
to say whether, on these habits and inquiries, there could be a 
verdict against her. I must now refer to the new facts and 
evidence adduced in this case, and, again, let me remind you 
that, as regards the American evidence, I am not using it or 
seeking to use it for any purpose except one, and that is to 
show the familiarity and the use years ago of the knowledge 
which James Maybrick had of the qualities and properties of 
arsenic. I am willing to concede, in fact, I do not raise the 

252 



Closing Speech for the Defence. 

question, that it was used over and over again as an anti- 
periodic at that time in reference to malarial fever ; but can 
you doubt that he was using it under circumstances which 
suggest the possible danger of its use? You have had an 
undoubted account given by Mr. Bateson, who appears to be 
well and honourably known in Liverpool. He says that when 
he was living with James Maybrick he was unquestionably 
taking, amongst other things, arsenic. You have also the 
statement of Captain Thompson, and I fail to see what sugges- 
tion can be made to his prejudice, for the circumstances under 
which he appears in the case are entirely creditable to him. 
He arrived in this country a short time ago, and, reading the 
account in the paper, knowing Mr. Maybrick, and knowing 
that arsenic was one of the things suggested as the cause of 
death, he put himself in communication with my learned friend, 
Mr. Pickford , as to the facts in his knowledge. My learned 
friend did not suggest, and I am sure that he will not now 
suggest, that Thompson did other than meant to tell the truth. 
What did he say? That he brought two mastiffs to Mr. 
Bateson, in Norfolk, and Bateson introduced him to May- 
brick, with whom he became on chummy terms. I w^ent with 
him to a drug store, where he asked for his desideratum, which 
the shopman handed him, and told him to be careful. A day 
or tw^o afterwards he is sent to the shop for something in 
connection with the ship’s drug stores, and the man who had 
served Mr. Maybrick recognises him as the person who had 
accompanied the Englishman, James Maybrick, and he makes 
a statement to him, which Thompson, after dinner in his cabin, 
over, I suppose, a friendly glass of grog, ventures to approach 
James Maybrick about, and then speaks of w’^hat he was told 
of the dangerous habit of taking arsenic. Thereupon Maybrick, 
as one might expect, becomes touchy, and resents a reference 
to the subject, and uses some strong expletive phrases respect- 
ing the impudence of the chemist in venturing to talk about 
his private habits to a comparative stranger 

One of you gentlemen quite intelligently put a question under 
that head, and it w^ould certainly seem odd in this country 
at least that upon very slight acquaintance an assistant should 
venture to speak of the habits of one of his customers. But 
in a community wLere Englishmen were not so very numerous, 
and where an Englishman entered a shop with one of his 
friends for something w’hich might be thought dangerous to 
his health or life, would it be an unnatural or an improper 
thing that some observations of that kind should be made? 
Follow this up. Is there any one of you who supposes that 
the man Stansell, who lived for years as a servant of Bateson 
and Maybrick when they lived together, has come to invent 

253 


Sir Charldt 
Russell 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


Sir Charles the story he has told you, where he describes how he was 
in the habit of buying half-dollar^ s worth of arsenic for 
Maybrick ? He also describes him making the beef tea, how 
lie took the least little bit of the arsenic on a spoon, put it 
into the beef tea, stirred it up, and then partook of it. If 
that is not an invention it is a very significant fact. You 
follow that up when you come to Liverpool. I am dealing 
witli a man known to the public of Liverpool and to the men 
on Exchange, wlio carried on his business here for many 
years, and you are told he was in the habit of taking 
pick-me-ups with greater or less amounts of liquor 
arsenicalis. This habit, the chemist tells you, was not 
confined to Mr. James Maybrick. He describes the way 
he first came to make up the prescription which w^as 
brought to him — the prescription for arsenicalis. He describes 
how until a few months of his leaving business a certain 
number of drops was increased till the strength of the 
arsenic was increased 75 per cent., how it w^as origin- 
ally taken once a day, and then increased to five times in 

one day. Mr. Heaton disappears, gives up business, is no 

longer in Exchange Street East. Does any one of you 

believe that when Heaton left, the deceased gave up suddenly 
the habit of taking these pick-me-ups — and pick-me-ups with 
the liquor arsenicalis in them — or taking it in some other 

form ? I do not attach more significance to it than it 

properly deserves, but there is a curious continuity 
about this class of the evidence as to this man^s habits. 

Sir James Poole this morning told us of a conversa- 
tion in April last about the pernicious habit of taking 
poisonous drugs for medicines. He told us that the late 

Mr. Maybrick ridiculed the warning, that he would go on 

increasing his doses oi the stutf until it became injurious, and 
finally ended him. After this warning Mr. James Maybrick 
shrugged his shoulders, did not deny that he used it, and went 
his way. Can any one believe that he, a respectable, well- 
known man in Liverpool, is not telling you the truth? Can 
any one think that if Heaton, a respectable and well-known 
man in Liverpool, is telling the truth, this man^s use of liquor 
arsenicalis, or of arsenic in some form or other, ceased a few 
months before he gave up his business in Exchange Street 
East? 

Allusion has been made to the pill-box produced this morning 
for the first time. I do not for one instant wish it to be 
understood that Mr. Maybrick, or either of the Messrs. 
Maybrick, wished to keep it back. I think it is quite possible 
that this may have been the box in which, upon the occasion 
of his last visit to Norfolk, in 1884, he had got Dr. Ward’s 
254 



closing Speech for the Defence. 

prescription, which has been referred to. But, again, it is 
curious how, over the whole period we have got the same 
thing obviously made up from the same prescription, iron- 
tjuinine-arsenic, one capsule every three or four hours with 
food,^^ at Norfolk, Virginia. This may have been what 
he was taking out there as an anti-periodic ; we cannot 
follow these things ; but is it not clear that this story 
and the habits of this man are surrounded by certain curious 
phenomena? You cannot be sure that you have got to the 
bottom of the matter, and if you believe the evidence called 
for the defence, if you see reasonable grounds for supposing 
that in some form or another this man did go on taking the 
liquor arsenicalis or arsenic in any other form for a lengthened 
period, then the difficulty of finding that it was arsenical 
poisoning at all would be strengthened, and at the same time 
there would be sufficient evidence to account for the traces 
of arsenic which were, in fact, foimd on analysis. I have 
more than once said I do not think it is the duty, or obligation 
I would rather say, of those who represent the prisoner to explain 
by an affirmative theory what was the cause of death. I have 
already suggested one. It is one corroborated, or rather 
suggested, by the evidence of the medical men who have been 
called on both sides. But in this case, involving the question 
as it does — involving life or death — doubt, conjectures, 
ambiguities, suspicions, are not to take the place of that which 
I have described as being necessary to justify an adverse verdict, 
and I cannot better describe it now, a clear, direct, satisfactory, 
and unequivocal proof. 

Gentlemen, I have said all that occurs to me to say on 
this matter. There is nothing of which the people of this 
island have greater right to be proud of than that settled 
order of the people and the respect for the law and administra- 
tion of the law which the people honestly and heartily enter- 
tain — which they entertain because they believe the law to be 
just, because they believe the law to be honestly administered. 
And there is no more striking scene to the reflective mind 
than that which is presented on the trial of a criminal case 
where the charge is a grave one — a judge who tries with 
certain hands fairly to hold the scales of justice, and a jury 
calm, honest, dispassionate, with no desire except to do 
justice in the case according to their conscientious belief. 
To this has to be added the fact that the Crown, 

representing the law in its executive character, conduct 
their prosecutions in recent years without exception not 
as if a great effort were made, as in private litigation 

to wrest a verdict, but only so as to lay, as is 

the duty of those who represent the prosecution, fully 

255 


Sir Charles 
Russell 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


Slp Charles and completely and fairly before the jury all the grounds 
Russell upon which the opinion of the jury should be asked in deter- 
mining the grave question of guilt or of innocence. In the 
language of the officer of this Court giving the prisoner in 
charge to you, be informed you that the prisoner at the bar 
had put herself upon her country, which country you are. You 
are in number large enough to prevent, forgive me for sug- 
gesting it, the individual views and prejudices or prepossessions 
of one from ajffecting all, but in number small enough, limited 
enough to preserve to each one of you the undivided 
sense of individual responsibility. The verdict is to be the 
verdict of each one of you, and the verdict of all of you. I 
am not making in this case — let it be clearly understood — 
any appeal for mercy. You are administering a law which is 
merciful ; you are administering a law which forbids you to 
pronounce a verdict of guilty unless all other reasonable 
hypothesis of innocence can be excluded. And now I end as I 
began, by asking you, each one of you, in the perplexities, in 
the doubts, in the mystery, in the difficulties which surround 
this case, in view of the contrariety of things and opinions 
presented to you, upon some points more or less important, 
can you, can any one of you, with satisfied judgment and with 
safe conscience, say that this woman is guilty? If your duty 
compels you to do it, you will do it, you must do it; but you 
cannot, you will not, you must not, unless the whole burthen 
and facte and weight of the case fairly and fully considered 
with honest and impartial minds, drive you, drive you irre- 
sistibly, to that conclusion. 


Mr. Addison’s Closing Speech for the Prosecution. 

Mp Addison Mr. Addison — There is another matter of which this 
country may be proud, and of which we may be 
piroud as members of the great profession which my 
friend adorns, and that is of the great ability, of the 
fairness, and of the zeal with which he has defended his 
client. All that the trained intellect could have addressed 
to you, either to your feelings or to your judgment, has been 
put before you, and my friend has strained every nerve in 
defence of his client. I do not desire to do away with the 
effect of one single word that he has rightly said, and which 
ought rightly to weigh in your minds. My duty, as he has 
pointed out, is entirely different. When I am here for the 

256 



Closing Speech for the Prosecution. 

Crown, all I can do dispassionately, without feeling, or cer- Addltoa 
tainly without any feeling against the unhappy prisoner at 
the bar, is to lay before you the case for the prosecution. 

In a case like this it is not haerely the tradition of the bar 
and the practice of our profession that makes us do it. I 
confess we must naturally feel as enlisted on the same side. 

To have against a woman, attractive to all of us by her 
cleverness, by her appearance, by even the social position 
which puts us more or less into S5^mpathy with ourselves, to 
have to urge before twelve men that she has been guilty of 
a deliberate and cruel murder is not by any means a pleasant 
or an amiable task. And I must say, as far as I can judge, 
everybod}^ who has been concerned in the prosecution in this 
case has been impressed with the same feeling. 

With regard to the expression which fell from my friend 
when he spoke of the hostility of servants, I cannot help 
pointing out to you that the very servants in the house in 
half a dozen di&rent ways, notwithstanding this suspicion, 
have shown a kindness towards her from first to last. Every 
witness who spoke of her seemed to speak more or less in 
the same strain, and gave their evidence as calmly and 
guardedly as they could. My friend has alluded to the public 
Press. I may say this, and I quite accept what my friend 
says as being literally true, if he had made any sort of an 
appeal to me to try this case elsewhere I would have acceded 
to it, and not thought of making any objection. If this 
woman desired to be tried by a Liverpool jury, then let her 
have the full force and effect of that remark. But I must 
say, as 1113^ friend has alluded to the freedom of comment 
indulged in hj the newspapers, that she certainly in that 
respect has no disadvantage in being tried here. So far 
as I can judge, having read those criticisms — and probably 
you have read them also — although they did try to gratify 
the natural curiosity of the public, the right of the public to 
know what was going on, they did so most carefully, and 
acted in a way which does them great credit without in any way 
seeming to prejudice the case against the woman at the bar. 

On the contrary, the only matter in which they may be said 
to have exceeded their duty was that they did suggest that 
powerful evidence might be forthcoming at the trial to vary 
the evidence that had already been given for the prosecution. 

Except that, I cannot remember that there has been any sort 
of prejudice in any human being against the unhappy woman 
at the bar. On the contrary, so far as I can judge, witnesses, 
counsel, police even, and certainly the Press have every one 
desired to give her the fullest consideration, and to secure 
that she should have a perfectly fair trial. Now, I quite 

257 


B 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


Up Addison re-echo what my friend says to this extent — that you who 
are the last persons to decide her case will not, I am sure, 
find her guilty unless you and each one of you is persuaded 
that the case is made out fairly and beyond such doubts as 
are removable by discussion. I know that if, upon a fair 
consideration of it, you came to the conclusion that our case 
is not sufficiently made out there is not a man among you 
that will not give his verdict with a feeling of freedom and 
elasticity that you cannot have in the contrary case, if you 
find yourselves compelled to say of this woman that she is 
guilty ; you can only do it because you are forced to that 
conclusion in obedience to your duty, to your country, and 
to the oath you have taken. I desire now, as I must do 
the painful duty which the law imposes upon me, to point out 
to you how the case stands in its broad outline. As regards its 
detail you will have the further benefit of hearing my lord, and 
then you will be in a position to decide rightly and come to 
a true verdict. 

One cannot help remarking up>on the defence of my learned 
friend. His system of defence is not that which j’ou would 
employ in the careful and serious affairs of life which surround 
your own family or your own honour. The system of defence 
is this — it is to take each one of these proofs which we say 
indicate guilt ; to divest them of the circumstances of time and 
place ; to show of each one of them that it is consistent with 
the theorj^ of innocence, and having done that to suggest to 
you that the case fails. That is hardly the w'ay in which a 
case can be considered. You must take circumstances with 
all their surroundings, and put them together. One thing 
you may explain away, two suspicious matters you must take 
to be a coincidence, but when it comes to three or four convic- 
tion may be driven into your minds, and there may be so many 
of them that they can only be put together upon one theory — 
that upon which, I submit to your judgments, this case alone 
depends. My friend takesi the medical symptoms, and says, 

I wall show that they may be acceptable upon a different 
theory.” Again, he says, Death was from gastix>-enteritis, 
and that may be explained by some other irritant, except 
arsenic ” ; and when arsenic is found that arsenic is not to 
be taken in connection with the symptoms. So when we get 
to the fly-papers, the handkerchief soaked in arsenic, the 
arsenic in the different bottles, in the medicine, and, above all, 
the terrible evidence of Nurse Gore, of the arsenic which was 
put into the meat juice the very night before he died, each of 
these circumstances is separately put before you and explained 
with the art and ability of my learned friend as something 
which in itself is not very much. 

258 



Closing Speech for the Prosecution. 

In the remarks which I am bound to make to you I must Mr AddlMii 
put the facts before you as they occurred, and in the order in 
which they occurred, and ask you to take them in that way, 
and then say whether a fair hypothesis of innocence remains. 

We have had the life of Mr. Maybrick laid before us with 
that minuteness and a care which probably has never yet been 
bestowed on the life of anybody else in the same way. We 
know more about his habits, as regards medicine, than any 
other person of our acquaintance. He appears on the outside 
to be a strong, healthy, and cheerful man — that seems to have 
been his general disposition and character, although the doctors 
tell you that he was what is shortly called hyp.^’ — yet he was 
only a ^^hyp.” in matters connected with his health, and even 
in this had a care and intelligence which is very rare 
with patients. I thought that my learned friend was, at the 
oarlier stages of this case, going to make the suggestion that 
Mr. Maybrick was a sort of person who acquired the extra- 
ordinary habit of eating arsenic, that that habit he had con- 
tinued until not long before his death, when illness had been 
brought on by leaving it off. I thought it was going to be 
suggested that the eating of arsenic was a sort of pleasurable 
habit somewhat like the habit of eating opium, and I thought 
that, until Dr. Tidy told us, he had never in his experience 
known anything of the kind in England, although he had read 
accounts in some books of the habits of Styrian peasants, he 
never met it in all his experience in this coimtiw. 

We know that from 1877 to 1881 Mr. Maybi ick was living 
in Norfolk, Virginia, and while living there he was attacked 
by fever — malaria, ague, or marsh fever — a fever which is 
common to the climate. Thereupon he consulted a doctor, who 
prescribed a common remedy in these cases, a mixture of arsenic 
and quinine, or some other substances of that sort. Then it 
was that under medical advice the quinine seems to have been 
eliminated, and some arsenic in some form or other prescribed 
for him. Although we have not the prescription, yet we 
know that it was carefully prepared for him and for his com- 
plaint. This was told us by Mr. Bateson, a gentleman in 
whom the most absolute reliance must be placed. Although the 
other two witnesses from America may not be known to us, it 
is for you to deal with their evidence as the evidence of peopD 
against whom you know nothing. First came the sea captain, 
who told you about going to the drug store with Mr. Maybrick, 
and then came the evidence of the black servant, who tells you 
that three or four times Mr. Maybrick sent him with half a dollar 
to get arsenic. They evidently at the shop knew what to give 
him — it was a prescription for malarial fever. Sometimes it 
was in liquid, sometimes he was seen taking it at the end of 

259 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

Mp Addison a little spoon, whatever it was, and during the whole of the 
three or four years he had only taken it four times. I think 
that is what the black servant said. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — That he only bought it for him four 
times. 

Mr. Addison — I asked him especially whether these times 
were spread over the whole period of his service of three or 
four years, or whether he only did this when he was 
actually ill of the fever, and the black man could not 
tell whether it was all in the one season or spread over three 
or four. From that time undoubtedly, probably the result 
of malarial or ague or marsh fever, he seems to have suffered 
from time to time from numbness, which always made him 
fear it might end in paralysis. The vomiting was only a 
nervous condition left in his system. But in 1881 he married. 
Now, we have Dr. Hopper on the scene, and Dr. Hopper tells 
us when he was first called in he told him all about what 
occurred in America. He told him the exact prescription he 
had had there, and how he had taken quinine and arsenic as an 
anti-periodic — that is to say, a specific against a recurrence 
of the fever. Dr. Hopper explains very much the temperament 
of Mr. Maybrick — that he was particularly free and open-handed 
in his manner — and we have it that although Mr. Maybrick 
told him what medicines he had taken. Dr. Hopper tells us 
that he is morally certain he from first to last never prescribed 
arsenic for him. Then we have it that Mr. Maybrick went to 
Heaton^s, the chemist, off the Exchange Flags, and had pick- 
me-ups.^^ We know about his nervousness and numbness, 
and we are not astonished that he should take a pick-me- 
up ; but Avhen he came to put Fowler^ s solution of 
arsenic into his pick-me-up he came with a doctor’s pre- 
scription, which he showed with some other tonics to Mr. 
Heaton. It was in that way his tonics were taken, because 
he was a careful man, priding himself upon his knowledge of 
medicine. 

That, gentlemen, is all we know about him until we had a 
gentleman called before you — Dr. Drys^ale — who must have 
impressed you as a very careful and accurate practitioner. He 
seems to have told Dr. Drysdale of his symptoms, but he never 
mentioned arsenic to him in any shape or form. He went on the 
14th or 20th of April last to consult Dr. Fuller in London, 
who told him he need not fear paralysis from the numbness 
which for years he had suffered from. He gave him a pre- 
scription, which he varied on the Saturday, which contained no 
arsenic whatever, and which was not in any way calculated to 
injure him. That is, apart from all suggestions that may 
be made, the medical history of Mr. Maybrick. It shows 

260 



closing Speech for the Prosecution. 

nothing reckless or foolish ; it shows a careful man as regards Mr Addison 
his health who had suffered from symptoms that were very 
real and readily accounted for. It is also to be remarked 
that when his place was searched and when that 
accumulation of medicine bottles found in his house 
and his office were looked at, nothing was found, 
except the old prescription from Norfolk, Virginia, that had 
anything connected with arsenic in it. That was the sort of 
man he appeared to be to his doctor and to all who knew him. 

It is not suggested that any of these things ever made him ill, 
or that he was ever sick or made ill by an 3 'thing he took under 
medical advice. The clerks in his office described him as a 
cheerful and healthy man, although one of them had heard him 
discussing homoeopathy, and, oddly enough, it may have been 
about the time when he went to consult Dr. Drysdale. His 
servants apparently had no knowledge that he had ever been ill 
at all except Yapp, who said he looked worse after the Grand 
National. It may have been that after the quarrel of which 
you have heard his ailments were rather mental than physical, 
but his brothers, servants, and everybody connected with him 
seemed to have looked upon him as a strong and healthy man. 
Undoubtedl}", in September, Mrs. Maybrick, his wife, did tell 
Dr. Hopper that he was taking strong medicine, and Dr. Hopper 
said, Don't let him take it." That is all we know until 
March. 

I am compelled reluctantly to make the observation to you 
which I am about to make. In March, the exact day is not 
clear, at any rate before the 21st of March, Mrs. Maybrick 
told Dr. Hopper that her husband had been taking a white 
powder, and we do not know whether that was true or not. It 
certainly does seem, in connection now with the terrible story 
we know later, this taking of this white powder is a remark- 
able part of this case. But about the same time — namely, 
early in March — she writes a letter to Mr. Michael Maybrick 
in which she says, He is taking a white powder, 
but do not tell him who told ^^ou so," or words 
to that effect ; and in March, when Mr. Ma^^brick was 
told that he says to his own brother, Who told 

you so? It's a d lie." At the same time — the 21st 

March — she mentioned the white powder to Dr. Humphreys, 
who said off-handedly, not believing there was much point in 
the observation, '' Should he ever die suddenly, ask me and 
I will say I had this conversation." Now, gentlemen, I am 

to ask you whether you believe him when he said it was a d 

lie, or whether, recalling to mind what she was doing between 
the 14th and 21st March, you believe her. I feel very 
strongly on the general truth of the observation put forth 

261 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


Me Addison by my learned friend, that because a woman has been unfaith- 
ful to her husband, to her marriage vows;, she could be 
cruel to him, or kill him, or even be unkind to him. As my 
learned friend has said, there is a great chasm between the 
moral guilt of unfaithfulness and the guilt that would conceive 
the death of her own husband ; and I also cannot help agreeing 
in what he said, that notwithstanding that many men, even 
very guilty ones, are ready to throw stones at an adultress, 
certainly we know, as regards a woman, that Every fault a 
tear may claim, except an erring sister^ s shame.’' 

This is not a case in which discovery of adultery is put 
before you as a motive for the act. Unfortunately this woman, 
at that very time, by her own handwriting and her actual deeds, 
had so interwoven her adultery with her conduct that it was 
impossible to treat it as an ordinary case of adultery, and not 
treat it as having any actual connection with the alleged crime. 
We cannot help rememl^ering that on the 16th, 17th, 18th March 
last it was shown that she was a woman capable of duplicity, 
deceit, and falsehood. There are some letters in w^hich she is 
writing first of all from Battlecrease to a Mr. Flatman, in which 
she says she hopes she has not confused Mr. Flatman by writing 
for rooms for her sister and herself. His letter gives her the 
impression that he expects- her and Mrs. T. Maybrick, whereas 
it is only she and her husband who are coming. On the 17th 
March she is writing again, and ordering very minutely a little 
dinner for a lady and her husband, and saying that Mrs. May- 
brick has taken upon herself to make the arrangements for 
Mrs. T. Maybrick, who is a young lady, and has not very 
much experience. On the 18th she ordered a bedroom and 
sitting-room to be reserved for them, saying that the lady’s 
husband could not possibly arrive till Friday. Kemember, Mr. 
Brierley was not with her on the Thursday, and she again wrote 
saying she w^ould be glad to know whether she could have 
w^hat she wished on the day named. All I desire to do in 
bringing these painful letters before you is to show her rela- 
tions with her husband at that time, and until we get to the 
story of the Grand National. Now, before that, we arrive 
at the story of the fly-papers. You may remember that Mr. 
M'ay brick was first taken ill, sick for the first time in his 
life on 27 th April, and we find that there were two 
purchases of fly-papers on the 25th and the 29th. Why did 
she want them, and for what purpose did she use them? In 
explanation of that I wdll read from her statement accurately 
taken down. [Having read an extract from the published 
report of the statement relating to the cosmetics, Mr, Addison 
proceeded] — I may remark upon that statement so ably ex- 

262 



Closing Speech for the Prosecution. 

pressed and so well delivered to you by the prisoner to-day Mr Addison 
that it is fair to consider it carefully as either for or against 
her, for this reason, that, according to my learned friend, it is 
a statement which has been thought out and prepared for some 
time, that he himself was ready to open to you on Saturday, 
and was known to the legal advisers of this lady. It is said, 
indeed, that she was anxious to have made it at the very time 
when she first had suspicion that a charge was to he made 
against her — how that can be I do not know — when the police 
interrupted and prevented any statement being made in the 
fair, honourable discharge of their duties, and preventing her 
saying anything which they supposed might incriminate her- 
self. But if she had desired to make it there were two occa- 
sions when she could have done so after due warning, namely, 
when the policeman formally charged her, and when she was 
before the magistrates. 

I do not, as far as she is concerned, attach any importance 
to the fact that she did not make it befoi'e the magistrates. 

She was represented by Mr. Pickford, and he, even if it was 
known to him, had full discretion whether he would put it 
forward or not. But what I do say is that we are entitled 
to view it not as a hasty or hurried utterance under circum- 
stances of excitement, but as a carefully prepared and thought- 
out statement, which can consequently be criticised as such. 

That statement amounts to this — that in Germany she had heard 
of the use of fly-papers for cosmetics, and that from them was 
extracted arsenic. She does not suggest — I should think 
nobody could have suggested — that she had heard of a pro- 
ceeding of that kind in England. Up to April of last year 
she was in the habit of getting a prescription for the purpose 
of this cosmetic, and getting it made up, that it was only when 
she had lost this prescription that it struck her to do what she 
had seen done in Germany, and that was to procure arsenic from 
fly-papers for the purpose of cosmetics-. I ask you whether 
you think that any woman who wanted it for a cosmetic would 
not have asked for i)apers for that lawful purpose, and 
whether fly-papers would have been bought by any lady for 
the purpose of abstracting arsenic from them. She said at 
the shop that the flies were beginning to be troublesome in 
the kitchen. That was undoubtedly untrue, because not one 
of the four witnesses in the kitchen ever heard anything of the 
kind or knew of the existence of these particular fly-papers. 

She never asked for fly-papers, for, according to the evidence 
of the cook, there were some from the October of the previous 
year. 

It is again a remarkable occurrence, as showing, at least, 
that the servants were not actuated by hostility, that before 

263 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


Mr Addison Mr. May brick died, and when even there was a report that 
the police might come, two of them find behind a tray the fiy- 
papers from the October before, and that they burn them. 
That is the story which they gave — a story which I did not 
at first understand, because it had not, as they admitted, been 
told before. But having put these fiy-papers out of the way, 
they were not likely to tell it unless they were pressed upon 
it. That is the story about the fly-papers, and we cannot help 
remarking upon something else. You cannot leave out of this 
case the dates and the times at which these fly-papers were 
bought. These fly-papers, which in Germany Mrs. Maybrick 
knew arsenic could be distilled from, are bought within three 
days of the illness — on the day before he got the prescription 
made up at Clay & Abraham’s, and a day or two before Dr. 
Fuller’s prescription came from London. On the 29th the 
two dozen were bought — at the very time when he was recover- 
ing from that first illness — and it would be one of those curious 
coincidences which might happen, but which would indeed be 
remarkable if so extraordinary a thing should have happened 
that she should have extracted the arsenic for cosmetic pur- 
poses from fly-papers twice within one week, and just before 
he was taken ill, and just when he got better. That is the 
history of the fly-papers. 

We now find him getting ill on the 27th of April. Which 
of the medicines did he take, that from Clay & Abraham’s or 
that from London, before he went to the Wirral races? We do 
not know that. What we do know is this, that he was sick twice, 
and that when Mr. Thompson went to him at the races and 
asked him whether he was ill he said it was because he had an 
overdose of medicine. Nurse Yapp said he had been sick from 
a double dose of the medicine from London, that medicine in 
one of those bottles. In one of those bottles there was arsenic ; 
the one from Clay & Abraham’s. Who put it there? How 
did Mr. Maybrick come to take it? How was he made sick 
by it? Clearly he did not know the arsenic was in it. If he 
had known, the first thing he would have done would have 
been to see that he should not receive an overdose. You 
will find that there was arsenic in that bottle, and that is a 
circumstance which my friend does not in any way attempt to 
explain. You know that at night he went to a dinner, where 
he felt in such a condition that he was afraid his friends would 
think him drunk. On the Sunday he was sick again, but that 
first illness, wherever the arsenic was procured, was over on 
the Monday. On the Wednesday Mr. Edwin Maybrick took 
down to his office some food, but that does not seem to have 
affected him much, and for that night he was better, but on 
Thursday he took the food himself, and the same evening did 

264 



Closing Speech for the Prosecution. 

not feel so well. I must remind you of this, that the food was Mr Addifon 
brought down in a jug, which was warmed in a pan newly 
bought, and taken by him in a basin. Where was the arsenic 
found? It was not found in the basin, it was not found in the 
pan. It was found in the jug. 

Sir Charles Russell — That is not so. Mr. Davies washed 
out both the pan, basin, and jug, and boiled the contents of all 
in hydrochloric acid. 

Mr. Addison — If I am wrong I hope I will be set right. My 
impression was that it was taken from the inside of the rim of 
the jug, but it might be that he mixed all the washings together. 

If that was so I shall say no more, because one desires to be 
perfectly accurate in a case like this. I would rather assume 
for the moment that it was as my learned friend for the defence 
put it. All I can say is that thereupon Dr. Paul made an experi- 
ment to show that he could get arsenic from the glaze of the 
pan and basin by acid ; and Mr. Davies, who carefully tested 
the basin by boiling water in it, had not been able to get 
anything at all ; and according to Mr. Davies unless the arsenic 
had been put into the food when it was boiled the only Inference 
w’ould be that there was arsenic in it to begin with. On Friday, 
the 3rd, Mr. Maybrick ’was taken ill. From Friday until his 
death his illness showed most of the symptoms of which my 
friend has spoken. Up to the Thursday people supposed they 
were dyspepsia. Dr. Carter, when he came on the Tuesday, 
was in consultation 

Mr. JusncE Stephen — Here are my notes of Mr. Davies’ evi- 
dence (reading) — I poured water in and washed the jug out 
with it ; then reduced the bulk of water and tested it for arsenic 
and found distinct traces of arsenic. I bought a new pan and 
boiled distilled water to see whether there was arsenic in the 
glaze of that pan, but found none.” 

Sir Charles Russell — If Mr. Davies is here he will say I 
was correct. 

Mr. JusiiCE Stephen — Where is Mr. Davies? 

Mr. Davies here stood up and said the washings of the pan, 
the basin, and the jug were all put together, but the acid was 
not added in the pan or the jug or the basin. 

Mr. Addison — As my friend has said, after the washing 
of the jug there was something left which was mixed with 
the water in the pan, and these two together yielded 
arsenic. I will now pass on to the cause of illness. He 
said that he had not been very well, and the next day — on 
Friday, the 3rd — these symptoms began which continued more 
or less up to his death on the lltb. Now, upon that my 
friend says that the doctors were mistaken, because they 

265 



Addison 


Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

alleged that it was dyspepsia. What else could they call it? 
On the Thursday, however, Dr. Carter said that he had a 
strong presumption of an irritant poison. Both doctors agree 
that they could not tell during life whether the poison was 
arsenic or not, and this was the reason, that there was no 
diagnostic symptom in arsenic — that is, that no single symptom 
taken by itself could be said to arise from arsenic and nothing 
else. You have apparently vomiting, this retching of the 
bowels, this tenesmus and intense thirst, you have the dry 
and glazed throat, you have all these symptoms, but at the 
same time they may point to any irritant poison. It is said 
these symptoms ought to have followed a regular sequence, 
including severe vomiting or severe diarrhoea. It is said by 
Dr. Tidy, and by our witnesses too, not only are arsenic 
symptoms different in this respect from any other irritant, 
except it may be in their intensity, and by the fact that at 
last there is the great symptom of all. Dr. Fuller says, death ; 
but he says all these symptoms vary in their intensity. Some 
are present and some are absent, and they depend upon the 
idiosyncrasy of the patient, of his treatment, and his habit. 
That being so, when you find this man had intense thirst, 
and that vomiting and retching came on, and when you find all 
these symptoms pointed to some irritant poison, then what 
can you say except that you wmiild like to know what occurred 
at the post-mortem, and when the analysis was made. 

The post-mortem was attended by Dr. Barron on behalf of 
Mrs. Maybrick — that is to say, as an impartial person — and 
he has told us the examination indicated irritant poison. And 
when w e look at this man’s condition — the inflammation of the 
stomach and intestines — the doctors all say that death was 
the effect of an irritant, and they call it gastro-enteritis, which 
would be produced by poison of some kind. The doctors said 
there was irritant poison. Dr. Tidy agi’ees practically with that. 
He says of poison that what is poison to one man is not poison 
to another. He had heard of poisoning by sausages, lobsters, 
and mysterious causes in meat which he could not explain 
except that they were poison. There must be some evident 
matter put into the system to account for wdiat there is there. 
Dr. Macnamara suggested it might be brought on almost by 
natural causes, but when you consider how, while he was at 
Wirral races and when riding about was taken ill, I think you 
may reject that. The doctors say what is the cause, and they 
open him and find arsenic. They found the effects of irritant 
poison when alive, and found arsenic in the liver when he was 
dead. As regards the extent of that arsenic, you have heard 
a good deal how it passes away. There was a fatal dose in 
this case. It barely amounted to a fatal dose, but there the 

266 



Closing Speech for the Prosecution. 

arsenic was, and how did it get there? It has been suggested Mi» Additoa 
to you that he might have had some habit of taking arsenic 
within a few months of his death. We know nothing whatsoever 
of that, but is it not strange that if he had done so, 
that he who knew medicines so well, and was so fond 
of talking about them, should never have suggested to a soul, 
through all the course of this illness, that all these symptoms 
might have been due to his taking arsenic? Moreover, Dr. 

Paul is puzzled apparently by the presence of the arsenic, and 
Dr. Paul says that in his reading he has known arsenic to 
remain for seven months. That is the longest case he has 
known in his reading. Dr. Paul is not able to confirm that 
out of his own experience, but it is a case recorded in a book, 
and he and Dr. Tidy and Dr. Stevenson seemed to be agreed 
upon that point. 

If this case depended upon the niceties and disputes about 
petechise between the doctors, it would be very difiicult for 
the jury to come to a right conclusion. But we are not com- 
pelled to go into any of those niceties. Those are theories 
which are started to explain away facts. The medical gentle- 
men say that the symptoms showed the presence of an irritant, 
and upon analysis of parts of the body arsenic was found. 
Undoubtedly if I had no case against the prisoner except that 
she had some time previously been guilty of adultery, I might 
then think that the solicitude and tenderness were natural under 
the circumstances. Unfortunately, she has put on record 
feelings so inconsistent with that solicitude and that tenderness 
that they drive you to the conclusion that a strange and 
dreadful tragedy was at that time going on. Let us recall to 
mind how matters stood. On the Tuesday there was acute 
dyspepsia, but no one suggested a fatal termination. Mrs. 

Briggs came, and Nurse Gore when she arrived that afternoon 
saw that he was very ill, but the idea of death had not been 
mentioned by either doctor or nurse or friend, and if the 
anxious wife had it in her mind that he was going to die, was 
it not the first thing she would have asked the doctor whether 
or not there w^as any danger? Would she not have asked the 
nurse? But the fact was that the doctor did not think he was 
lying there in the condition in which he was. Then it was 
w^hilst he wuas in that wuiy that she wrote that letter w’hich now, 
when you understand the w^hole case, throw^s so much light upon 
it that it is impossible for me not to refer to it again. It 
goes to show that from Monday, the 6th, a week after she 
bought the fly-papers, when he had been ill from the Friday 
before, she w^as in correspondence with the man with whom 
she had committed adulterv in London, she had written him 
two letters, and, if that be the case, are we talking about an 

267 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


Addison ordinary case of adultery? Was the tenderness and solicitude 
real tenderness and real solicitude? She had said to him that 
which would induce him to come to her, being afraid she was 
discovered, and that there was something in the newspapers, 
and she had written to reproach him, and on Wednesday she 
had written to him. 

Now, when Nurse Gore had been there one quarter of an 
hour and she had just given her patient some medicine, 
and had hardly time to spare, this is the letter that 
she is writing — whilst there is this illness she is still 
in correspondence with the man who is so much impli- 
cated with her in the way you know in London — 
Dearest, your letter under cover to John K. came to hand 

just after I had written to you on Monday ” Now, you 

know what Monday the 6th was. I did not expect to hear 
from you so soon, and had delayed in giving you any instruc- 
tions. Since my return I have been nursing M. day and night. 
He is sick unto death.” Gentlemen, I don't want to go away 
from the force of my learned friend’s observations. She might 
have thought that before anybody else thought it. I leave that 
for you to judge. Is that the natural expression of a woman 
w^ho has tender solicitations for her husband? No, but it is 
the natural expression to write to her paramour — “ The doctors 
held a consultation yesterday, and all now depends upon how 
long his strength will hold out.” Gentlemen, you know nobody 
had said that. All my brothers-in-law are here, and we are 
terribly anxious. I cannot answer your letter fully to-day, my 
darling, but relieve your mind, as all fear of discovery is now 
at an end.” You see all fear of discovery was now at an end, 
not only then but for the future. M. has been delirious 
since Sunday.” Delirious! Was she preparing the way 
for what was going to happen ; for not only had he never 
been delirious at all, but he was never delirious until 
long after this — until the night before or the day before 
he died. I know he is perfectly ignorant even of the name 
of the street, and also that he has not made any inquiries 
whatever.” Gentlemen, is it possible for a tender, solicitous 
wife, nursing her husband, to send such a letter? ‘‘You need 
not trouble to go abroad on this account, dearest. Please 
do not leave England until I have seen you once again.” She 
did not want him to go abroad, and she goes on to appeal to 
him in letters written under such circumstances. Whether 
she be guilty or innocent, in a case like this I cannot but 
protest against the notion of any tenderness or solicitude for a 
husband in a woman who wrote that letter. I can only say 
she was consummately cunning. Well, that was the state of 
things on the 8th. 

268 



closing Speech for the Prosecution. 

Now we get to the 9th. I can hardly help having a feeling Mr Addison 
of regret that the terrible statement which has been made 
to-day should have been made. I cannot help thinking 

if my friend with his art had not intended to leave this 
case enshrouded in mystery and doubt, it is a great pity 
that statement was ever made. Well, on that day, the 

very day after this letter, Nurse Gore came on duty at 
noon. Nurse Gore made a statement, which, taken by 
itself, certainly outweighed a great many theories and proba- 
bilities in this case, because it looks something like proof 
positive of the administration of arsenic. She opened a fresh 
bottle of Valentino’s meat juice at eleven o’clock, and she 
gave some of it to the patient after mixing it with water and 
tasting it herself. After she had done with it she put it down, 
and at twenty minutes past twelve, under circumstances which 
at least to her seemed suspicious, she saw the prisoner take the 
bottle into the small room, stay there two minutes, come back 
and put it upon the table, and then immediately — he was asleep 
at the time — suggested to Nurse Gore to leave the room to 
get some ice. Nurse Gore did not leave the room, and that 
Valentine’s meat juice would have been administered to him 
if it had not been for Nurse Gore, wdio had seen this, and had 
told it to Nurse Gallery. It was never administered to him, 
and my friends say it is actually in her favour that it was not 
administered to him, and that it could not be from that he 
died. But why was it not administered? Not by the wdll or 
act of this w’oman. She left it to be administered by the first 
nurse wdio would come on duty, and in that food was half a 
grain of arsenic, such a dose as being repeated w^ould kill. 

One had hoped that upon that there might be some way of 
getting out of it, some suggestion that arsenic had found its 
w^ay into this food wdthout any act of the prisoner at the bar. 

The importance of this point has been felt by her, and in 
that statement so carefully prepared and so ably delivered she 
gives an account wdiich you heard this morning. She stated 
that she had put a white pow^der in the glass because he asked 
her to do so, and had said it would do him no harm. Well, 
gentlemen, I shall stop here for a moment. In her statement 
she said — I had no one to consult, no one to advise me; I 
was deposed from my position as mistress of my own house, 
and from the position of attendant on my husband, notwith- 
standing that he was so ill; and notwithstanding the evidence 
of the nurses and the servants, I may say that he missed me 
whenever I was not wdth him. Whenever I w^as out of the 
room he asked for me, and for four davs before he died I was 
not allowed to give him a piece of ice.” The statement was 
carefully prepared ; she said that she put the white powder 

269 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

Ur Addison into it because she was asked to do so, as he said it would do 
him no harm. I cannot help recalling to you in this connection 
the story which she told at another time about the white 
powders to others, and was it possible that she could innocently 
have done this, thinking it would not do him any harm”? After 
her experience in Germany, was it possible to suppose that she 
had put the white powder in in that way? If she had done 
it innocently, w^hy did she not tell the nurse? What was the 
necessity for concealment? Why were the doctors and the 
nurses not told about it? What necessity was there to keep 
it quiet and secret? It was not a time when she could put a 
white powder in his food innocently or unsuspiciously. She 
had said he was dying. If that statement of the 8th was a 
true impression of his condition, why, on the day before, had 
she said that he was delirious, that he could not recover, he 
was sick unto death? Is not that an extraordinarv time to 

Ito' 

put a white jx)wder in? She is complaining that she is the 
object of suspicion, that the food is cooked by the nurse, the 
management of the house entirely taken away from her. She 
said that not only to Humphreys, but to others, and yet she 
thinks that a proper time to tamper with the meat juice, and 
put a white powder in it of which she knows nothing, and 
when at least it would be folly and madness on her part, unless 
she were cariying on a murderous design, to do this without 
mentioning it to any one. Let me remind you how little notion 
her husband ever had of arsenic. On the 27th it was a double 
dose of some medicine which he thought had made him ill ; 
on the 28th he blamed some brandy he had ; and again on 
another occasion he complained of symptoms in his chest and 
of headaches, which he thought were due to a strong cup of 
tea. Prisoner, on the occasion of one of these attacks, said to 
Yapp it was strange he should be sick again, it must have been 
from the sherr}^ in the meat tea. On the 5th she said to 
Elizabeth Humphreys — He has taken another dose of that 
horrid medicine from London. If he had taken a little more 
he would have been a dead man.^^ He was sick on the 6th, 
after taking Valentine's meat food. On the 7th, he complained 
to Dr. Carter of something he had taken, which he suggested 
had probably brought on his sickness. On the 8th, when the 
nurses came in, and when she evidently saw that she was not 
above suspicion of all these little things, the beef tea, brandy, 
sherry, beef juice were all suggested as making him sick ; but 
not one word about arsenic. Do you believe, therefore, that he 
ever voluntarily took arsenic or knew about it? Where did she 
get the arsenic? She must have found it in some part of the 
dressing-room, but we find no coloured powder except a powder 
for cats. If he took arsenic in his food, why did she put 

270 



Closing Speech for the Prosecution. 

this powder in his food at dead of night? On the 10th he Mr Addls«n 
says to her before Nurse Gallery, '' Don’t give me the wrong 
medicine again.” She said, Why, love, who has given you 
the wrong medicine? ” Would it not have struck her to say in 
the presence of the nurse, It was you that told me the night 
before; I have put the powder in it is true, but you told me.” 

Then w^hen spoken to by Mr. Michael Maybrick, at two o’clock 
on the same day, the 10th, How dare you tamper with the 
medicine? ” she said in reply she had only changed the medicine 
on account of the sediment ; there is not one word, not a 
single suggestion of the story she now tells. On the same 
Friday it was that Nurse Wilson came, and did she say to 
Wilson anything to suggest that she was putting a powder in 
his food? No, she said, We cannot tell what is the matter 
with him, or what has brought this illness on.” What a 
remarkable thing ! That was a state of things in which they 
were supposed to say that you can believe one w^ord of this 
statement, and to account for Nurse Gore’s detection of the 
act which she saw. Well, what happens next? The next 
day was Friday, the day before he died, and she suggests now 
in her statement that on the Friday she revealed for the first 
time to her husband the fact that she had Ixjen to London and 
had committed adultery, and she does that very cleverly. If 
it is true it accounts for what he said several times in the 
presence of Nurse Wilson, Oh, Bunny, Bunny, how could 
you do it? I didn’t think you would treat me so.” But you 
know by the letter that vshe w\as keeping it from him, and that 
he died in ignorance of it. But I pass on from that. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — I have no doubt about the fact, and 
my impression is that Mr. Maybrick, when recalled yesterday, 
stated that he died in ignorance of it. 

Mr. Addison — That his brother died in ignorance of the 
adultery of his wife in London. Now^, gentlemen, he said to 
her on Friday, with evidently something on his mind, w^e do not 
know what, Oh, Bunin^, Bunny, how^ could you do it? ” And 
with an art which is remarkable, if it is not true, she says that 
she had told him of her adultery on the Friday. Can you 
believe the w'oman who, believing that he w^as dying on the 
Wednesday, that the hanrl of death was then upon him, and 
that all the struggle was hopeless, can you believe that she, 
surrounded by suspicion, on the Friday night, without any 
notice to anybody else, told him of her mistake ? But if she 
had done, and desired to make a clean breast of it, then, 
gentlemen, you would have found some indications of it, and 
some indications of repentance in that letter which she wrote 
to the very man with whom she had carried on the intrigue of 
which discovery was made afterwards, and when undoubtedly 

271 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


Mr Addison she was observing the suspicions of the others. She writes a 
letter in which there is not the remotest indication of the 
sorrow set out to-day. I am writing to you,” she says, to 
give me every assistance in your power in this terrible trouble. 
. . . The truth is known about my visit to London, and 

my last letter to you is in the hands of the police. Appearances 
are terribly against me, but before God I swear I am innocent.” 
Is that the letter of a woman who had confessed to her husband 
with shame and sorrow her sin the day before he died? If she 
had done that, do you imagine this man would be the first 
person to whom she would appeal for assistance, and would 
she say to him, My last visit to London is known, and my 
last letter is in the hands of the police ”? Would not she have 
applied to him, if she did apply, and if her story was true, in 
the language of repentance, and of a sorrowful woman — I 
confessed all to him — all that happened on that day”? You 
have heard the statement she has read. It is inconsistent 
with the defence. 

Now, there is another matter — the last matter with which 
I shall trouble you — that my friend has not in the least 
attempted to explain. In her room there was a box, and 
what was found in the box? In that box w^ere found three 
bottles of arsenic in different degrees of solution, and no fly- 
paper, and on the top of these was a bottle of 
'Valentine’s meat essence, without any poison in it. What 
do you infer from that? Wlio put it there? Who had these 
three bottles of arsenic dissolving on the 11th and 12th of 
May? My friend said, and with force, that there was no 
evidence of how she got the arsenic. We have no evidence 
of how she got it, but she had it. It was there, dissolving 
there, and dissolving in those bottles. You have, above all, 
in another box the handkerchief steeped in arsenic in some milk 
in a tumbler. If the handkerchief was put in the dressing 
gowui it would certainly account for the appearance of the 
pocket, and it seems to be a very fair account of how that 
arsenic was there. We are subject to this observation, which 
I don’t want to deprive of any force it ought to have, Why 
on the dav her husband died was not the arsenic removed, and 
all traces of her crime obliterated? ” That does seem an 
observation that ought to carry a certain amount of weight 
‘with you. There may be an answer to it such as this, that those 
who commit offences of this kind are not always careful enough 
to remove traces of it, and they do leave behind them such an 
indication as this. My friend has gone on to say that some 
sort of suspicion had been directed to her since the Wednesday. 
There is one answer to that which I cannot help thinking is 
unanswerable, that in the same way that she did not remove 

272 



Closing Speech for the Prosecution. 


the arsenic which was found in the place, the three letters of Mr Addison 
the 16th, 17th, and 18th, which were evidence of her guilt« 
were not destroyed, but found as the result of equal carelessness 
in a drawer. 

These are the salient features of the case. If any one of 
you has in his mind a strong doubt remaining, and not remov- 
able by argument, of her guilt, then I hope you will act upon 
it. It must be a gratification to a great many people if you 
acquit her. The law throws the onus, as my learned friend 
has said, upon us of laying a firm and clear conviction. The 
details of it no doubt you will have to listen to from my lord, 
who will go carefully through the evidence. If, when you 
come to consider it, you find that our proofs have failed and 
the case is not made out, if you find it is not made out, as my 
learned friend has said, not only in the minds of all twelve, 
but in one mind, and if our proofs fail, then it is no 
sign of weakness in you — it is, on the contrary, the carrying 
out of the law in you to say, ‘‘ We are not satisfied, and the 
prisoner is not guilty.^' It is no derogation at all from your 
duty, it is compliance with it. As you know, according to the 
solemn oath which you have taken, your duty is to act in 
accordance with the evidence, and if that evidence fails it is 
rather an indication, even if a crime has been committed and 
this woman be guilty, it is rather an indication that the proofs 
should be as clear as the light of noonday. It is only in the 
case of your minds being firm and clear that I would suggest to 
you to find this prisoner guilty. You have, as stern ministers 
of justice, to disregard all those feelings of sympathy which the 
age and the sex and the position of this unhappy woman would 
naturally create in your bosoms, and deal out to her the same 
justice as you would deal out to a poor and ill-favoured person 
who might be found guilty of this terrible crime. If she be 
guilty, if these facts satisfy your minds, then, gentlemen, we 
have, indeed, in this investigation, brought to light a very 
terrible deed of darkness, and proved a murder founded upon 
profligacy and adultery, and carried out with a hypocrisy and 
a cunning which have been rarely equalled in the annals of 
crime. 

[As the Court was rising Mr. Pickford made an application 
to his lordship as to whether the attendance of the medical 
and other witnesses would be required on the following day. 

His lordship said that he could say nothing aboTit it. He 
had known cases in which questions asked at the last moment 
upon matters that could not have been foretold, had proved of 
the utmost importance, and said that he could not say that 
the attendance of any of the witnesses could be dispensed with.] 


s 


The Court then adjourned. 


273 



Trial of Mrs May brick 


Mr Justice 
Stephen 


Sixth Day — ^Tuesday, 6th August, 1889. 

The Court met at ten o’clock. 

The Judge’s Summing Up. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — ^Gentlemen of the jury, it now be- 
comes my duty to call your attention to the evidence which 
has been given in this case, and I feel myself bound, in con- 
sideration both of its importance — its terrible importance — 
and also of the great length to which it lias run, to go through 
the whole of the evidence wdiich has been given. 1 am sorry 
to say I shall not be able to arrange it before you exactly as 
I could wish, because wdien a large matter has to be placed 
before a party of persons like yourselves — I mean a body of 
men not too large to exclude individuality, and yet large 
enough to provide for full communication of ideas — it is very 
difficult, if not to say practically impossible, for the judge who 
is summing up to them to arrange the whole matter in his own 
W’ay, and yet in such a w^ay that he can be sure of doing 
complete justice to the evidence which has been put before you. 
Witnesses naturally are obliged to witness to a great number 
of matters quite unconnected with each other; and to dissect 
the evidence of each witness in such a way as to bring before 
you at one view the whole of the matters to which he has 
testified would be an enormous labour, and it would be a labour 
which would hardly be repaid in regard to its clearness for your 
consideration. I shall take the course, accordingly, of going 
through the evidence as it has already been given. It has 
already been carefully considered by those who have had the 
management of the case on both sides, and although in some 
instances to some extent the arrangement of the witnesses is 
not that which I should myself have chosen, it is that which 
presents the matter to you as you have heard it, and I think 
I should do more harm than good by attempting to rearrange 
it in a different way. This, unfortunately, in one sense, implies 
a good deal of repetition. You have the same thing testified 
to by a great many different witnesses, and although it may be 
somewhat more tedious for you to hear, the repetition makes 
it better to remember. I have very little to lay before you, to call 
your attention to, by way of a general introduction to the case. 
It is a case on which much might be said, and has been said, 
upon the topics of the absence of reasonable doubt, the well-worn 
topic of the prisoner being entitled to the benefit of the doubt, and 

274 




Mr. Justice Stephen. 




The Judge’s Summing Up. 


a good deal of other general matter of that sort which it is not 
necessary for me to repeat, and on which I need only say that 
as to your duty in the matter I do not think that there is, or 
has been, expressed any difference of opinion, and I would adopt 
with equal readiness either the exhortations of Mr. Addison on 
the one side or those of Sir Charles Russell on the other. 

I will just mention to you by way of more special introduction, 
in a very few words, the leading dates in the case, because they 
enable you to Ijear in. mind, what is not always very easy to 
bear in mind, the general thread of the narrative; and to 
understand by these dates the stage which the matter has 
reached. Gentlemen, the time over which these transactions 
ranged is from somewhere about the 21st of March, and the 
last in the general narrative is the death of Mr. Maybrick, 
or possibly it was the post-mortem examination of his body, 
his death having taken place on Saturday, the 11th May, 
late in the evening, and the post-mortem was held on the 
following Monday. Now, these are the leading dates, and, 
subdividing them more carefully, I wdll point out to you how 
they come in. First of all, it w’as about the 21st of March 
Mrs. Maybrick went up to London. It was there that the 
relations which vou have had described existed between her 
and Brierley. The next date after that took place is the Grand 
National something. I don't know whether it is a race, or a 
steeplechase, or what it is — but it is something which is called 
the Grand National, as if everybody knew "what the substantive 
was — but the Grand National took place on the 29th March. 
Immediately after the Grand National the great quarrel between 
Mr. and Mrs. Maybrick took place, and for the purpose of 
settling the quarrel, so far as a settlement could be effected, 
Dr. Hopper, who had been the family physician, was called 
in on the 30th March, and some kind of reconciliation took 
place. Somewhere about this, at a date which is not correctly 
fixed, but about the 12th to the 19th March, took place the 
purchase of fly-papers, and some time shortly after that occurred 
— I think there were two purchases of fly-papers — matter 
occurred in the middle of April. On the 27th April, or near 
the end of April, occurred the Wirral races; and after that 
there took place the illness of Mr. Maybrick, and that illness, 
as I understand, was the first illness which it is suggested was 
due to the poisoning. 

Mr. PiCKFORD — Will your lordship forgive me; in regard to 
the question of fly-papers, Wokes fixed the date as the 24th, 
and the second chemist the 29th April, and not March. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — I said April. There is no use in 
disputing about whether I used one word or another. However, 
about that date in April the Wirral races were followed by 

275 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


Ifer Jastlee 
Stei^B 


symptoms which were ascribed to arsenic. To a certain extent 
it may be said that Mr. Maybrick recovered from that illness, 
though it cannot be said that he recovered absolutely and 
entirely. It was at that time, and in connection with that 
illness, that Dr. Humphreys was called in ; and the attendance 
of Dr. Humphreys did not entirely cease, although it nearly 
ceased for a few days, but he continued practically in attendance 
throughout the whole of the time* Now, the next circumstance 
that took place was the attendance of Mr. Maybrick at his 
office several times at the beginning of May. The food which 
he took to his office was prepared on four occasions, and taken 
down on three occasions. His last attendance at the office 
was on FViday morning, the 3rd May. He returned to his 
house from the office and took to his bed on that day. Then 
comes an interval from the 3rd May to the 11th May, a week 
and a day, during which he suffered with various symptoms 
which you have heard so much about, and he died about half- 
past eight in the evening of the 11th May. Those, in a few 
words, are the leading dates of the case; you will have to 
consider them very much more in detail as we go on with the 
evidence. Now, the next matter to be considered is the evidence 
on all these different points, and the range of evidence is in 
itself very wide ; the circumstances connected with the evidence 
are very varied, and the different witnesses go backwards and 
forwards in a way which makes the evidence somewhat confusing 
from the beginning of the case to the end. The first witness 
called before you was the surveyor who prepared the plans, 
but there were no plans used except the plan of the bedroom 
in which the poor man died. I do not think any part of that 
was very material except the way in which the bedroom opened 
into the inner room which was used as a dressing-room. Now, 
that is the way upon wffiich most of these occurrences that we 
have heard described passed. Now, the first witness who was 
called before you, after the architect and surveyor, was Mr. 
Michael Maybrick. 

He is one of two brothers of the deceased. I do not know 
whether there are any more brothers, but there are two only 
concerned in this case, namely, Mr. Michael Maybrick and 
Mr. Edwin Maybrick. Some observations have been made upon 
their conduct, and I will say a word upon that before I go 
through the evidence of Michael. Mrs. Maybrick herself 
pathetically complained of the manner in which they treated 
her. Sir Charles Russell — though I don’t think he exactly 
censured their conduct — pointed out that it was in his view 
somewhat harsh, and that it was needlessly suspicious, and 
that the suspicions they chose to entertain in their minds set 
the whole of this unhappy business in motion, although Mrs. 

276 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

Maybrick was not to blame. Now, gentlemen, I think it is Mr 
fair to say on a subject of that sort that the same remark ****’***** 
applies to the servants and to the nurses, who were all placed 
in a most painful position. If you should arrive finally at 
the conclusion that Mrs. May brick is not guilty, well, then, 
no doubt, that will establish, amongst other things, that their 
conduct in the matter was needlessly suspicious ; but, on the 
other hand, if she was guilty, you cannot charge them after- 
wards with entertaining undue suspicions, and I think the case 
really is not practically influenced one way or the other by 
the manner in which they behaved- They behaved as well as 
it occurred to them to behave at the time, and I think it is 
due to them, and to all persons who were placed in so dreadful 
a position as that of suspecting a secret treacherous domestic 
murder — it is due to them to say that it is almost as unhappy 
a position to be placed in as an innocent man can well occupy. 

If you think of it for one moment, you can hardly imagine 
a more dreadful necessity than that of supposing that your 
brother’s wife, who probably very often is the person to whom 
you are in the ordinary course of human intercourse much 
attached, is carrying on a transaction of that kind — it is a 
thing exquisitely painful. How a man could so behave, if he 
is unhappy enough to conceive a suspicion — how he could so 
behave himself as to conduct himself quite properly and 
prevent himself from being reproached afterwards, either for 
wicked suspiciousness or for almost criminal indulgence, namely, 
reluctance to face a dreadful fact — ^liow he could behave in 
such a way as to escape those reproaches is a difficulty which 
will present itself to you more and more vividly the more you 
consider the subject. I feel that, until your verdict decides 
the matter, I should abstain myself from having an opinion 
as to the way they behaved. At various points I feel they were 
placed in a very difficult position. I do not say they always 
took the best course in the matter at all; but I do not think, 
on the other hand, especially when you remember some of the 
circumstances brought to the attention of the medical men, 
that you can blame them for feeling in a most awkward 
position, for having suspicions, which they certainly had, for 
having to some extent interfered with Mrs. Maybrick’s natural 
position in the house, and having prevented her, as far as 
possible, from pursuing a course which they thought she was 
pursuing. That is a matter on which I can really say nothing 
beyond this, that it is all part of one dreadful whole, and that 
their position in the case, and the amount of blame, if any, 
to be attached to them, must be determined by the ultimate 
result of your opinion as to the guilt or innocence of the 
prisoner. The first witness was Mr. Michael Maybrick, a 

*77 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

musical composer, of llegent^s Park, London. Referring to the 
letter written by the prisoner to Brierley, and shown to Mr. 
Michael Maybrick by Mr. Edwin Maybrick, that letter is in 
the prisoner's handwriting. I pass it over at present, contenting 
myself with this, that, taken by itself, it establishes the unfaith- 
fulness of Mrs. Maybrick to her husband. It contains other 
matters which certainly must have been a very great shock 
indeed to both of the brothers, especially in view of the circum- 
stances in which it -was found. It certainly justified amongst 
them a painful and miserable state of things. 

His lordship then referred to the conversation which ensued 
between Mr. Michael Maybrick and Mrs. Maybrick, and to the 
statement of the former that he had a strong suspicion — upon 
which the learned counsel, Sir Charles Russell, did not cross- 
examine the witness as to what that suspicion was — and that 
he blamed her for not calling the nurses earlier and also a 
consulting physician. The letter of Brierley certainly was a 
ground upon which suspicion, strong or weak, might be raised. 
The mere not calling in a professional nurse and not calling 
in a second physician certainly seems very slight ground on 
which to base any very strong suspicion. There is a suggestion 
that one of her brothers-in-law had owed her a spite ever since 
her marriage. I do not know, however, that you ought to 
believe that very much, for various reasons. He was not asked 
any questions which would tend to confirm that opinion, and I 
do not myself see that we have material to form an opinion 
about it. He had heard as to Brierley's letter. There is no 
evidence as to the terms on which they were. The relationship 
might have been a very intimate one, or very little, according 
as it happens, Mr. Maybrick said in one case of strong 
suspicion — I had heard that Dr. Humphreys was in attend- 
ance, and that there was a nurse in attendance, and that Dr. 
Carter was called in.” That makes his strong suspicion more 
remarkable. However, she said that she had nursed her 
husband, and asked who had a better right to do so than his 
wife. I agree to that, of course ; everybody must agree to it. 
“ I will at once go and see Humphreys. I Avas very much dis- 
satisfied with the case.” Those remarks are well worth attend- 
ing to, although they do not very greatly affect the ultimate 
result. Having seen this letter at the time, and viewing the 
condition in which he found his brother, those things go 
together to explain the very sad and altogether anomalous and 
terrible state of things which had existed in the house at the 
time. If Mr. Michael Maybrick had said straight out to Mrs. 
Maybrick, '' I have seen this letter, and that dissatisfies me 
with the w'hole case, and suggests to my mind a suspicion that 

278 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

you are murdering my brother ” — if he had done that he would Mp Jnittoe 
have done an act of extraordinary rashness and cruelty. I 
do not think it is fair to say of a man, Why, you never 
clearly accused me at all. You never brought a clear accusa- 
tion, and unless you can show on what grounds you ought to 
have brought such an accusation, the case must rest entirely 
on mere suspicion.” It would have been cruel and wicked to 
make an accusation of that kind against a person without 
being in a position to support it. That is a remark doubtless 
on the one side somewhat against Mrs. Maybrick, but it was 
a statement of things unmistakably suggestive under the 
circumstances. 

[Continuing to read the evidence, his lordship commented on 
the fact of Mr. Michael Mavbrick having: taken awav the 
brandy from the sick room.] That shows that he had 
some suspicion of the brandy. I went into the room 
and took from the washstand a bottle of Valentine’s meat 
extract, a little more than half-full, which had been uncorked. 

I gave it to Carter.” That, as I take it, is the bottle 
of which we have heard so much, and will be further com- 
mented upon later. Passing on, ‘‘In the bedroom I found 
Mrs. Maybrick pouring from one bottle to another and patting 
the labels. I said, ‘ Florrie, how dare you tamper with the 
medicine?’” Verily this was a strange — I don’t say strange 
considering the circumstances, but dreadfully unwelcome — 
remark to make to a lady in her own house, when she is in 
attendance on her husband, and something which showed the 
state of feeling in his mind, and must have attracted her 
attention. “ I said I was much dissatisfied with the occurrence, 
and would have the prescription immediately made up, and I 
did so.” That, again, is a circumstance which to some extent 
must have shown her the suspicion at that time in his mind. 

Passing on, after the bottle was given to Dr. Carter — “ In the 
morning Carter made a statement to me about the bottle.” 

We now know what that statement was, namely, that he had 
examined the bottle, and found in it something which he 
suspected to be arsenic, and which made him take the bottle to 
the analyst in order to be more fully examined. He mentions that 
he saw Yapp, and that she brought him up two parcels — this 
chocolate box and a parcel which had upon it the words “ Arsenic 
— Poison for cats” — and, then, having found these, Mr. Steel, 
the solicitor, advised that be should seal the articles up. They 
were placed in the cellar, and they are now produced here. 

He also mentions that he searched in the bedroom with Edwin, 
where he found three letters. They are letters which you have 
heard repeatedly read, and which I shall have to read to you 
again. Mr. Michael I^ybrick, in cross-examination, described 

279 



Trial of Mrs May brick, 

Ihp^atlee the visit of his brother to Dr, Fuller, Then it was that Eldwin 
® told him about the letter to Brierley, Mrs, Briggs first saw 
him next day. " I thought he was better on Thursday,’’ he 
says. ‘‘ I expressed my suspicion to Mrs. Maybrick. I did not 
express suspicion to the nurses. They had received upon arrival 
instructions which would raise suspicion in their minds.” 
The instructions were that they would be responsible for any- 
thing given to him, and that she was not to administer anything. 
In consequence of what he had heard he took possession of a 
bottle of brandy. Nurse Gore made a statement about the 
Valentine’s meat juice. I shall reserve what I have to say 
about that till we come to consider Mrs. Maybrick’s statement. 
Mr. Michael Maybrick says, Nothing was given to my brother 
out of that.” That is to say, nothing was given to him out of 
the bottle of Valentine’s meat juice, which undoubtedly had 
arsenic in it. Its presence was detected, but of that bottle 
which was poisoned he certainly had none. He had a small 
taste out of it before it was poisoned, given to him by Nurse 
Gore. “ The changing of the medicines was made on Friday 
afternoon, the 10th.” Well, I do not see anything important 
in this. There was a brown paper parcel labelled “ Poison,” 
but that contained no arsenic. Then he was asked, on another 
head of evidence altogether, and said his brother was very 
particular about his personal appearance. He took podophyllin 
pills and phosphorus pills. Witness was asked whether his 
brother had had a habit of taking a powder, and he said that 
the first he heard of it was from a letter w^hich Mrs. Maybrick 
sent to him in a private and confidential manner, but which 
he had destroyed. She said that she had searched the house, 
and found her husband had been taking a white powder, and 
asked witness not to let him know. He, however, mentioned it 
to his brother, who said, ** Whoever told you ; it is a damned 
lie.” That certainly showed an irritable state of mind in James 
Maybrick. The brother understood that he took it for a certain 
purpose, and did not like to have it talked about. I may just 
observe about this that three or four witnesses all gave some- 
what similar evidence about his irritability on matters of this 
kind being talked about. There was a Liverpool captain who 
went over to Norfolk, and an American, a chemist, and some 
Liverpool merchants. And the last witness called. Sir James 
Poole, said that he blurted out the fact that he was in the 
habit of taking poisonous drugs, but he did not seem to have 
sworn at Sir James Poole, because it was his own statement 
alone that was under conversation. I must say that from the 
way in which these different matters appeared to have been 
mentioned, he seemed to feel sore about it, and did not like 
to have it talked about. 

280 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

Now, with regard to the evidence of Mr. Michael Maybrick, Mr Jiytlee 
he was questioned about the disputes between Mr. and Mrs. **•*••• 
Maybrick, and he said he did not know there was a dispute 
about a man, but there were complaints on both sides — there 
were disputes as soon as a certain woman^s name was men- 
tioned. The next witness was Dr. Hopper, and from his 
evidence it appears that the deceased was a man who complained 
very much. He attended on Mr. Maybrick between June and 
December, 1888, and prescribed a nerve tonic. He said he 
had a conversation with him about arsenic, and Mr. Maybrick 
said he knew of the use of it as an anti-periodic. On the 30th 
March of the present year Mrs. Maybrick went to him and 
complained that she had been awake all night. She had a 
black eye, which he had given her. Tliis is an important 
fact, for this assault, she said, was the result of a quarrel on 
the occasion of the Grand National. She said she had a strong 
feeling against him, a dislike to him, and was going to a lawyer 
about a separation. Afterwards Dr. Hopper went to Mr. 

Maybrick’ s house and saw them together. They stated the 
reason of the quarrel, and Mr. Maybrick said she had walked 
along the course with a gentleman named Brierley after he had 
forbidden her. The result of this was that the husband 
agreed to pay the wife’s debts, and there was apparently a 
reconciliation. I asked a question to ascertain the relations 
between Dr. Hopper and these Mayhricks. He said he was 
just the family doctor, he had attended her on two occasions, 
and had attended the children. It is for you to consider the 
nature of the complaint for which the husband treated his wife 
so brutally, giving her a black eye as the result of the quarrel, 
and not only so, but did it with the serious question of jealousy ; 
and though the doctor had arranged for the husband to pay 
her debts, you must consider whether that is a reconciliation. 

I should have thought when things had gone on to that length 
that a reconciliation, a growth of affection between these two 
persons, must be a slight and superficial thing until after a 
lapse of time, and the expression of kindness and good behaviour 
on both sides had brought about a perfect reconciliation. But 
after a desperate quarrel there simply comes the family doctor, 
who intervenes, and to say that that is a reconciliation does 
not accord with my knowledge of human nature. In June 
and December, 1888 — that is the last part of last year — I may 
have seen him fifteen or twenty times. I treated him for com- 
plaints of the liver, digestive organs, and the nerves. He used 
to exaggerate the importance of his complaints. He was given 
to dosing himself, and used to take things suggested by his 
friends, which I had not prescribed. He told me that hap- 
pened frequently. He told me he had taken double doses of 

281 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


^JMloe I will now pass on to the evidence of Mr. Edwin Maybrick. 
tepheii -went to the Wirral races, and when there 

complained of numbness in the limbs and right hand. That 
does not appear to be a subject to which any one attaches much 
importance. Such numbness is not uncommon. Thia, I think^ 
is the first notice we have had of the Wirral races, but some of 
the other witnesses say it was a very rainy day that he went 
there, that he was unwell all the day and attracted notice. He 
said something to one of them about having an overdose of 
medicine, and then went off home. He dined at a friend’s 
house on the way, and his arms there shook in such a way that 
he spilled some wine, and was afraid that they would think he 
had been drinking too much. This evidence fills up some things 
mentioned by others, but I don’t think it of very great import- 
ance in the case. I handed the things to Mr. Baxendale. 
Mrs. Maybrick sat up most of the night with her husband. I 
was not there when she sent for Dr. Humphreys. He had 
attended from the 7th May till the 11th of May. He attended 
from the date of the Wirral races till the day of his death. 
On Saturday, the 11th May, he died at 8.30 in the evening.” 
Then there was the question of Dr. M^Cheyne. She telegraphed 
to bring up Dr. M^Cheyne, and then he said, ” I sent for Dr. 
Carter.” She does seem to have sent for nurses. I don’t 
see anything upon which you can ground a suggestion that she 
kept people away from her husband, or prevented the medical 
men or nurses seeing him on every occasion when they could be 
of use to him. There are a good many small observations I 
will pass over, because the mass of the evidence is so great that 
I do not feel called upon to call your attention to every par- 
ticular incident that is mentioned. ” From Wednesday, the 
8th, until the death, I forbade Mrs. Maybrick to give food or 
medicine to the patient. I said that I should hold them re- 
sponsible for the medicine and food given to Mr. Maybrick. I 
did not tell Mrs. Maybrick I had given these instructions.” 
This is the time she complains of as being excluded from attend- 
ance upon her husband, and I can hardly imagine anything 
more irritating or more terrible to any woman than to be treated 
in that way in her own house. Whether or not this thing was 
necessary to be done is one of the things which your verdict will 
decide. Of course, if she really was poisoning her husband, it 
is the best reason for it. I don’t think it could be avoided. If 
she was not, it was one of the misfortunes from which she has 
suffered. He and his wife and Captain Irving dined together 
on Wednesday, the 5th, and there is some evidence about pre- 
scriptions and other small matters about things at the office. 
I may just observe that really nothing seemed to come of what 
was in the office, with one exception — ^the jug in which there 
was a certain amount of arsenic said to be found when the 
284 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

contents of the other vessels in which he had had his luncheon 
had been washed. But there is nothing else of importance at 
the office. 

That concludes Mr. Edwin Maybrick, and the next witness is 
Thomas Symington Wokes, who says that Mrs. Maybrick bought 
fly-paper, and told him that the flies were troublesome in the 
kitchen. You will be able to know whether flies are trouble- 
some in the middle of April or not. With reference to her 
statement, I will speak at more length later on. On the 29th 
of April she purchased some lotion and twenty-four fly-papers, 
paying for them at the time. I attach no importance whatever 
as to why she paid for them at the time ; it would be a hard 
thing to say, because she did not book them that she wanted 
to conceal the matter, and if they did so they would have to 
say why did she deceive Wokes more than Hanson. It seems to 
me to be hypercritical to attach any importance to her paying 
for the fly-papers on that occasion. The fly-papers were in 
a conspicuous position in the shops, and as often happens when 
people go into a place and see some things they want to buy 
them ; she bought on this occasion a lotion — I think elder flower 
— and according to the evidence of one or two witnesses arsenic 
is the natural thing to put in it. These fly-papers have been 
analysed, and found to contain arsenic. 

Then we come to the morning of the 27th April, the day of 
the Wirral races. George Smith, one of the servants of the 
deceased at the office, said that he saw his master on that occa- 
sion at the office, and he did not look well. On the 1st May 
he saw him warm something in a pan, and on the Wednesday he 
said he felt very seedy. This witness saw him on the Thursday, 
and he seemed very w'ell. He left on the Friday, and never 
came again. Friday was the day on which began the symptoms 
of what may be called the fatal dose. Thomas Lowry, clerk to 
the deceased for nearly five years, says he came to the office 
on the 27th, about 11.15, and left to go home before twelve,* 
and comes to the office again on Monday. He did not at all 

seem w’ell. When at his house I ordered his food.” He 

ordered him to buy a saucepan, a basin, and the spoon he 
showed us. He poured the liquid out of the jug into the sauce- 
pan and cooked it. It was proved that there w^as some very 
slight trace of poison found in the inside of this jug, and that 
was boiled up with other matters so as to suggest some amount 
of arsenic found in it. Elizabeth Busher, the charwoman who 
cleaned Mr. Maybrick’s office, washed out the saucepan and jug. 
But she could not get her hand in the latter. You 

see, it is a small jug which she could not possibly 

get her hand in to clean it out thoroughly, but she 

Not “to go home.” The 27th was the day of the Wirral races. 

aSs 


Mr 
Step 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

Mr Justiee washed it. There was one morning in the jug a dark sediment 
tephen bottom, and the next a white. 

The next witness called was Dr. Charles Fuller, who lives 
in Albany Street, London, and who by appointment made by 
Mr. Michael Maybrick met him on 14th April. He went 
with Michael Maybrick to see his brother James. ‘‘ I 
examined him/’ he says, and amongst other remarkable 
points in this case is the very, very remarkable one 
that at literally every stage of the case, almost every incident 
of it takes place under the eye of one at least, often of several 
separate medical men, and that all these medical men not only 
prescribed for, but examined and re-examined the patient. The 
consequence is that you have such minute medical testimony as 
to what took place w’hich has been rarely equalled in trials of this 
nature. '‘I examined him,” Dr. Fuller says, and he com- 
j)lained about numbness in his legs. He seemed to have a mis- 
conception as to the importance of this numbness. He had 
an hour’s consultation with Dr. Fuller. An hour is a longish 
time to be in consultation with a doctor. Such doctors as I have 
seen — but I have not seen many — would think an hour’s con- 
sultation a great deal too long, and it certainly would be very 
unpleasant for the other party. Dr. Fuller told him there was 
no appearance of paralysis, and two prescriptions were given by 
Dr. Fuller, but in none of these was there any mixture of arsenic. 
There was cascara, antimony, diluted hydrochloric acid — I do 
not know, gentlemen, whether these names convey much to 
your minds ; they certainly leave me in absolute ignorance, but 
they are none of the medicines which need frighten any one. 
One was an aperient, the other a tonic. None of them taken 
by themselves appear to have l:>een of any great moment. On 
Saturday, the 20th April, Mr. Maybrick called again, and he was 
then better ; and he was again given some medicine, of which 
some of the compounds were copper and sulphur ; lozenges, with 
sweet spirits of nitre added as a tonic. There was no arsenic,” 
says Dr. Fuller, ‘‘ in any of my prescriptions.” And it certainly 
is one of the most remarkable points of this case that two of 
these prescriptions were made up in Liverpool, and in one of 
these prescriptions arsenic was found. Dr. Fuller says he 
put no arsenic in, and you have heard what the chemist said 
about it. You will have to draw your own conclusions as to 
who put the arsenic in. Dr. Fuller says that when he saw Mr. 
Maybrick he showed no signs of taking arsenic, there was 
nothing about his eyelids to indicate it, nor any tenderness about 
the pit of the stomach. The medical evidence given before 
the coroner at the inquest, and that given before the magis- 
trates, was pretty much the same as to the symptoms of arsenic, 
but Dr. Fuller says he found no indications of it. On this 
subject the doctors do not seem to mention one particularly 

286 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

distinctive symptom of arsenic, and I should prefer to deal with Mr J^tiee 
the whole medical evidence together. It has been stated in the ® 
course of the case that the Styrian peasants use arsenic for the 
sake of enabling them to be long-winded, but that is not a 
very important fact. 

The next person who gave evidence was Christopher Robinson, 
assistant to Messrs. Clay & Abraham, well-known chemists in 
Liverpool, and he says that James Maybrick brought prescrip- 
tions to the shop, and that he (witness) checked them and 
handed the medicines to Maybrick on the 24th of April. Both 
the bottles were supplied, and there was no arsenic in them, 
neither was there Fowler’s solution. Then comes Frederick 
Tozer, a person to whom I did a slight injustice. He was a 
little man, and I spoke to him as a boy, although he was a man 
of thirty-two. But I have already apologised for that, and it 
will be a satisfaction to his employers that he should be spoken 
of with proper respect. He is a chemist at Clay & Abraham’s, 
and made up the prescriptions for the two bottles of medicines. 

There is no arsenic in them, and that is a very important fact 
to bear in mind. The substance of this is, that Dr. Fuller’s 
prescriptions which were made up for Mr. Maybrick had no 
arsenic in them, and were in a pure state, and neither was any 
found in the store or dispensary of Messrs. Clay & Abraham; 
but afterwards one of the bottles was found to contain arsenic 
when analysed. 

We come now to a different kind of witnesses, and that is 
the evidence of the domestic servants, and you find that the 
servants are Alice Yapp, and she was the nurse ; Brierley, she 
was housemaid ; Cadwallader, she was the parlour-maid ; and 
Elizabeth Humphreys, the cook. The evidence gives you the 
main outline of the case, but they form a class by themselves, 
as it were, and I don’t think that there is any very great 
difference between them as to the story they tell. Alice Yapp, 
the nurse, said in her evidence that there was an inner room 
in which Mrs. Maybrick sometimes slept. Continuing, she 
said — I remember the Grand National on the 29th of March. 

On the Thursday week before she (meaning Mrs. Maybrick) 
went up to town ” — that is when she went to see Brierley — 

she said I was to write to her to the Grand Hotel. At the 
Grand National she came home before seven, and he (Mr. May- 
brick) came home about 7.15. She went into the nursery 
and so did he; they did not speak. She afterwards heard 
him say to Mrs. Maybrick — ' It will be all over the town 
to-morrow ’ (meaning the scandal), and he further said, 

* Florrie, Florrie, I never thought it would come to this, and 
if you once cross this door you will never return.’ I asked 
Mrs. Maybrick to come and see the baby, and I put my arm 
round her and took her up to the nursery, and she very will- 

287 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

Siphen** came, and I made her a bed in the dressing-room. 

Now, they had certainly had a quarrel to the very extreme 
limit, all but his turning her out of the house, but he did 
actually strike her. Well, about a fortnight or three weeks 
after the Grand National, Brierley, the housemaid, took Yapp 
to Mrs. Maybrick s room, and there was a basin there, and 
under a towel and in the basin were some fly-papers. It has 
been shown that arsenic was found in this medicine, and you 
have Mr. Maybrick saying he was very sick and in great 
pain after taking it. These, gentlemen, are the important 
facts of the case. I don^t dwell upon them, but they come 
altogether in a very oppressive manner. Passing on, we come 
to the incident where Nurse Yapp is summoned to her master’s 
bedroom. I found him lying outside the bed in his dress- 
ing-gown.” That was suggested by Mr. Addison to be the 

first occasion of the administration of poison, and you will see 
that one of the symptoms, sickness and pain, although the 
locality of the latter is not mentioned, were present. According 
to Yapp’s description, this immediately followed on the taking 
of the medicine. If Mrs. Maybrick’s account of w^hat he said 
was right, it was taking an overdose. She went and got him 
an emetic, and said that she would remove the brandy at 
any rate.”* That is an act, I suppose, that if a man had 
taken arsenic, would give him relief — at all events, would not 
do him any harm. From what I know, I don’t think any 
of the witnesses were asked about it, but it would likely do 
him good, and no doubt was the best thing to do. She was 
no doubt doing her best to counteract the effects of the medi- 
cine. It seems to me one must simply take the facts as they 
come. He seems to have taken a dose of medicine ; he was 
sick afterwards, and she did her best to relieve the sickness 
by giving him mustard and water, stirring it with her finger 
because she would not wait for a spoon. You must take 
this all together. On Friday, the 1st of May, Mrs. May- 
brick said he had been very bad. I said it was very strange 
he had been sick, and I suggested another doctor. She said 
the doctors were fools.” I suppose most people would have 
said that, in their hastiness, about the doctors. It is a very 
common expression that all doctors are fools, and all lawyers 
rogues. It is a mere expression of temper, and not a thing 
to draw an inference from in this case. There has been very 
little attack upon the conduct of any of the medical men in 
this case; I am happy to say no great objection has been 
taken to their conduct. ‘‘ On Monday, the 6th, I found him 
moaning, very flushed, and restless. I saw Mrs. Maybrick, 

* Maybrick took the overdose of the medicine from London on April 
27th, and Mrs. Maybrick gave him the emetic of mustard and water on 
28th. 

288 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

-and advised sending for another doctor. Mrs. Maybrick said Justl#* 
she wanted to send for Dr. Hopper, but Mr. Maybrick said he 
would not see him if he came, or take anything from him. I 
said I think he would see him.” This is a somewhat singular 
thing. It is one of the singularities of the case, if you take 
the past relations between Dr. Hopper and the May bricks. 

Th^ seem to have consulted him, and to have been most 
intimate friends, on terms of the strictest confidence. For 
some reason or other she had a regard for him, and placed 
confidence in him. It seems a very odd thing, and it stands 
out very strangely. However, Yapp said, I think he would 
see Dr. Hopper if he came.” I do not know that there is 
anything much about it, but it is one of the very sad points 
in the case. Whether Mrs. Maybrick was correct in saying 
her husband had told her that I do not know. Well, then, 
the medicines were kept on the landing, near the bedroom. 

On Tuesday, the 7th May, she saw Mrs. Maybrick pour the 
contents of one medicine bottle into another. 1 do not know 
what to make of that at all. She was at that time managing 
in her own house, nursing her own husband, and I cannot see 
the act in itself can be called a suspicious one. It is one of 
those which might afterwards turn out to have been suspicious 
when afterwards strengthened by further evidence. I cannot 
see what this particular action has to do with the case. We 
next come to 8th May, a date of the utmost importance, and 
one which contains the whole history of the case. She 
continues, I asked him how he was, and heard him ask Mrs. 

Maybrick to rub his hands.” She said, You are always 
wanting your hands rubbed. It does them no good, and I 
can^t do it.” This is the only incident in the whole case 
that gives one occasion to say anything. It is rather a hard 
speech, but it is a long way from showing anything like a 
criminal mind, or even from intentional unkindness. Yet it 
is an unkind thing, and one could almost wish that she had 
not said it. In the afternoon Mrs. Maybrick came to see 
me again, and gave me a letter to post. I opened it, and 
about five o’clock gave it to Edwin Maybrick, outside the 
house, in the garden.” This is the letter on which so much 
turns. Sir Charles Russell asked her several times whether 
she did no-t drop the letter in the mud in order to make an 
excuse to open it afterwards — whether her object was not to 
intercept the correspondence. I don’t think it makes the 
smallest difference as to Mrs. Maybrick’s guilt or innocence; 
but I should be sorry if a woman who seemed to be well spoken 
and respectable should commit wilful and corrupt perjury. 

The circumstance is nob of the slightest importance in the 
case, but the letter itself is of the greatest importance, and 
is one of the critical points of the case. The cmiduct of this 

T 2S9 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


woman, supposing she had intercepted this letter, does not 
matter ; even if she had stolen it, it could make no difference 
in the case. There has been a good deal said about the mark- 
ing of the letter and as to how she got it, but I shall not say 
a single word about that; it is not a critical point whether 
she told the exact truth as to how she came to open the letter. 

From the evidence of Nurse Yapp Mrs. Maybrick had a 
conversation as to her husband’s illness with the nurse, 
and said, ‘'Do you know I am blamed for this?” Yapp 
asked why, and Mrs. Maybrick answered, " By Mr. 
Michael Maybrick, for not having another doctor and 
a nurse.” I don’t see that I can usefully say any more upon 
that letter than I have already said. “ After the death 
I fomid,” says the witness, “ a powder in the chocolate box, 
and a parcel in Mrs. Maybrick’s trunk, w^hich I afterwards 
gave to Mr. Michael Maybrick.” Then she is cross-examined, 
and she says there was no quarrel before the 3rd April.* It 
does not appear that there was. The husband and wife 
seemed to have lived on perfectly good terms until the 21st of 
April, t The cross-examination certainly was very judicious, 
and brought out a series of facts. Before Brierley — that is 
Brierley the housemaid — saw the fly-papers in the morning, 
Yapp saw the fly-papers on the washstand in the principal bed- 
room by the door of an inner room. That shows that there 
was no concealment. They were put there for everybody to 
see. She afterwards said that Mrs. Maybrick was about at 
the time when the woman Yapp was looking at the fly-papers, 
so that she had every opportunity of seeing them and knowing 
that they were there. They were, you will understand, on 
the washstand in the principal bedroom. The master did not 
dine at home on the 27th April. On the 25th April Edwin 
Maybrick came home, and appeared to be on friendly terms 
with his brother. He seems to have used his house as a kind 
of home. On the 28th April, Mrs. Maybrick sent for Dr. 
Humphreys ; and afterwards she was seen pouring medicine 
from one bottle to another. I myself cannot see much in this 
circumstance, unless you make all sorts of suppositions which 
you have no right to make. The witness goes on to say che 
put the letter in a clean envelope, because it was dirty through 
being dropped into the mud. She says, " I gave it to the 
baby to carry, and she dropped it on the way to the post 
office.” The only important part of her evidence with regard 
to that was where she says, “ I didn’t open the letter l^ause 
I suspected my mistress.” The next witness was Elizabeth 
Brierley, the housemaid, who describes the finding of fly- 

* This should be the 29th of March. 

t Here the judge must mean the 2l8t of March. 

290 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

papers, to which she never drew her mistress's attention. She Mr Justice 
got hot water for the deceased's feet, and gave Mrs. Maybrick 
bread and milk which she had received from the cook for Mr. 

Maybrick. She also speaks about asking to change the 
elothes, and the mistress objecting to the master's bed being 
touched. 

Mary Cadwallader's evidence follows, and she refers to Mrs. 

Maybrick saying that the doctor had ordered all Mr. Maybrick’ s 
medicines and food to pass through her hands, and it was 
perhaps a natural thing for them to do so, if they had done it, 
having no reason to put anything but confidence in the patient’s 
wife. As to the sweetening of the deceased's food, there 
seemed to be no objection on his part to have his food sweetened, 
and I do not think anything much depends on it. Witness 
also speaks to the boy fetching fly-papers from the chemist’s. 

With reference to the destruction of the fly-papers, according 
to the statement of Mrs. Maybrick they were prepared as a 
cosmetic for her face, and when she went to that ball. The 
fact that the servants destroyed these papers does not show 
any great ill-will to the prisoner at all events, although one 
might say it would have been better and of great importance if 
these fly-papers had been preserved and examined. One of 
the servants said that the extract from the fly-papers had been 
used for cleaning silk. I never heard of that before, and it is 
a strange kind of statement, although we know, or have been 
told, that they were applied for cosmetic pui’poses. After the 
evidence of another girl then comes the story of Humphreys, 
the cook, who overheard her master say to the prisoner. 

Beware, if you leave this house you return no more." She 
also states that, in October, 1888, she found some fly-papers in 
the butler's pantry, and destroyed them. There does not 
seem to be much in that. She found them in October, a good 
time for destroying them, but she did not destroy them then, 
but waited until the date she mentions before burning them. 

I do not think, however, much turns upon that point to deserve 
the attention of the jury. The cook also says, On Satur- 
day, 4th May, the chemist’s lad came, and I took what he 
brought to Mr. Maybrick's room, and I knocked at the door, 
and took in the medicine- Mrs. Maybrick said he was no 
better, and added that if he had taken so much more medicine 
than the quantity he had taken it would have killed him." I 
don’t think we ought to press it, as it is very unlikely for a 
person to say this if she had given him a dose. On the 
Wednesday I asked her how he was, and she said very much 
worse ; he was quite delirious. I asked her to take some rest, 
and that I would go upstairs, but she said she would manage." 

Then there was the question of the lemonade, which Mrs. May- 
brick took from the cook’s hand and placed on the washhand 

291 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

Xp stand. There was no evidence to show that what was done 

Stephan done out of any unkindness. Dr. Humphreys, when he 

oame to examine Mr. Maybrick, said he was to have as little 
to drink as possible, only to moisten his mouth, and not to be 
allowed to drink. Passing on, his loi*dship reviewed the 
remainder of llumphi'eys’ evidence. Her conduct, he said, 
shows that she >vas very kindly disposed, and sympathised 
with the various insults that she understood Mrs. Maybrick 
had sustained. That is the end of her evidence in chief. 
Then comes the cross-examination, in which the witness said 
she did not regard Mrs. Maybrick with any suspicion, as she 
spent most of her time with him, and was much grieved when 
not with him. This evidence she gives with a good deal of 
feeling. She speaks of Mrs. Maybrick saying there were 
'' strange things knocking about, but that I take to mean 
the hospital nurses coming in and out. This is the conclusion 
of that class of evidence, that given by the servants in the 
house. 

We go on now to the medical evidence, and the first witness 
who is called on the subject is, in my judgment, very nearly — 
is, indeed, very, very impoi’tant; I don’t mean because of 
special opportunities, for he was the doctor in charge, seeing 
him all the time during his illness, and, of course, knew as 
nobody else could know fiom day to day all the circumstances 
which, as the medical man in attendance, he only would know. 
With that remark upon his evidence I will go on to read it to 
you. [His lordship then proceeded to read Dr. Humphreys’ 
evidence, and coming to the point wheie he said Mrs, May- 
brick told him that deceased was taking a white powder, his 
lordship said] — That is a remarkable circumstance to be con- 
sidered with what she tells us in her own statement made to 
you. Dr. Humphreys says, “ I first called to see him 
on Sunday, 28th April, and Mrs. Maybrick was pre- 
sent. He said he was afraid of paralysis, and thought his 
symptoms were the result of drinking a cup of strong tea. 
He complained of his tongue being furred and dirty. He 
said he had been to Wirral races, and felt very stiff. He said 
he had dined with a friend, and his hands were so unsteady that 
he upset some wine. He was distressed lest they should think 
he was drunk. I prescribed for him, and advised him to 
drink nothing but soda and milk. He did not tell me he had 
been sick the day before. I saw him again the same evening, 
when he complained of stiffness in the legs. In the morning 
he showed me Dr. Fuller’s prescription. He thought the stiff- 
ness in the limbs much worse. He said, ' My liver is wrong.” 

I did not contradict him. I remained about an hour. He 
said, ‘ My friends call me hypochondriacal, but I am not.’ I 
call^ next day, and found he was in bed, but he said the 

292 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

symptoms had disappeared. On Wednesday, the Ist of May, M r JhMtt ee 
I found him better. He said, ‘ You need not come again.’ ®^**^'*** 
On Friday, the 3rd of May, he was not so well. He said, 

‘ Your medicine does not agree with me.’ Mrs. Maybrick 
said, * You always say so after taking medicine for two or 
three days.’ I said, ' Your tongue is not so clean as it was, 
but there is nothing the matter with you.’ He asked if he 
might go to town, and I said ' Yes.’ I saw him in the after- 
noon, and he was in great pain from the hips to the knees. 

Mrs. Maybrick and Edwin were present. He had rubbed hie 
lege inside with turpentine. He complained of a gnawing 
pain in the back. He said he had been sick after coming 
home and attributed it to his drinking inferior sherry.” 

On the 4th of May, Saturday, he was sick and vomiting, but 
when these symptoms were referred to, and the question was 
under discussion about his sickness. Dr. Stevenson* said he did 
not recognise in that the particular kind of sickness which 
would be produced by arsenic. 1 will have more to say about 
this afterwards. On the 5th, he was sick, and complained 
of a pain in his head. On the 6th he took some Valentine’s 
meat juice, which did not agree with him, and Dr. Humphreys 
says, I told him to stop it, as I was not surprised at it 
making him sick. 1 prescribed Fowler’s solution, and mixed 
the medicine myself.” [His lordship, after reading over the 
evidence of Dr. Humphreys in reference to the earlier stages 
of Mr. Maybrick’s illness, observed] — Dr. Humphreys, on seeing 
his patient on the Tuesday, said he was getting on favourably, 
and would probably be well in a few days. lie saw him again 
on the Wednesday, and he was then getting on favourably. 

Now, this is important, because on Wednesday the letter wag 
sent by the prisoner to Brierley, in which she used the 'words, 

** He is sick unto death.” Then Mr. Michael Maybrick came 
down from London, and had a conversation with Dr. Hum- 
phi-eys on the case. This was on the Thursday, and on that 
night there was a great deal of straining in the bowels. Dr. 
Humphreys said he was not satisfied wdth the case. Suspicion 
seem^ to have been excited in Mr. Michael Maybrick’s mind, 
and he appears to have communicated those suspicions to Dr. 
Humphreys; but how far those affected Dr. Humphreys, and 
whether his opinions w^ere the result of his suspicions, must 
be considered by you. Dr. Humphreys, on being examined 
as to the urine and faeces experimented upon, said he had not 
much faith or confidence in his experiments. On the other 
hand, Dr. Paul talked about it as if it was a thing any one 
could do. If anybody could not do such a small thing at 
extract a small amount of arsenic — supposing there was in 

* This should be “ Dr. Tidy.^* 

293 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

mibstance an appreciable quantity — then it seemed to Dr. 
Paul as if he must be a mere bungler. If it were so, it would 
be that Dr. Humphreys by his experiment proved the negative 
— ^^ere was no arsenic in these matters. I would only say 
this, that it was very possible Dr. Paul, who was eminent in 
these matters, and would devote a great deal of time to such 
experiments, would detect a very small quantity of arsenic 
infinitely easier than Dr. Humphreys, who was an ordinary 
general practitioner. The difference between the two doctors 
is one of those neat differences which sometimes arise between 
scientific witnesses, and I merely direct your attention to it. 
Dr. Humphreys stated that forty-eight hours before death he 
apprehended no serious results, and this has an important 
bearing upon the state of the mind of Mrs. May brick when she, 
about the same time, wrote her letter to Brierley, and it was 
certainly remarkable that at so late a period of the disease, 
and so short a period before death, the medical attendants did 
not apprehend any serious results. 

Mr. Addison — Would your lordship allow me to qualify a 
statement which I made yesterday? My lord, I said in regard 
to the handkerchief which was found in the bottle saturated 
with arsenic, that it had been used — probably used — ^might 
have been used — on the deceased man’s mouth, to which a 
handkerchief had been applied for the purpose of allaying 
the thirst. Although that was prescribed, there seems to have 
been no evidence of it having been done, and I want to guard 
myself in that way for fear I should be unintentionally unfair. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — I do not think the evidence justifies 
that assumption. 

Mr. Addison — I do not think so, my lord. 

[Mr. JusncB Stephen continued to deal with the evidence of 
Dr. Humphreys, describing the condition of Mr. Maybrick till 
the Saturday, when he gradually sank and died.] The doctor 
told us, “ I did not direct that all food and medicine should 
be given by Mrs. Maybrick.” If that is correctly taken, if 
that is really what was said, there is a contradiction between 
him and Mrs. Maybrick, but the value of that contradiction 
and the degree in which it bears on the subject is another 
matter. It may be very easily taken in different ways, and 
words may be differently interpreted. Coming to the effect of 
Dr. Humphreys’ evidence, he says, My opinion is that ho 
died of some irritant poison, probably arsenic.” There is one 
part of the matter in which there is some slight difference in 
point of fact, and that was when Dr. Humphreys spoke of 
some spots called petechiss, which were explained as small 
points or spots of bright red, compared to flea-bites. That does 
net give one the least idea in the world of a small red pointy 

294 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

but he said it was from an Italian word, petechise. I was Mp Jimiiea 
anxious to find out what the word was, and found it in an 
Italian dictionary ; and I looked for the word flea-bite, but it 
was quite a different form of expression altogether. The word 

as by spots observed in some particular 
kind of fever. I was anxious to find out whether there was 
any particular meaning, but I could not find it. It did not 
matter very much, however, for among medical men it is 
applied to a small red spot under the mucous surface. There 
was no question whatever from the notes taken at the time 
that such had occurred. Dr. Humphreys had said that he had 
seen them ; but he was not corroborated by any note or report 
made at the time, or by any other person who had observed 
them. I now go on to the cross-examination. I will tell you, in 
general terms, where I understand the difference to be between 
the two seta of medical men, the one called on behalf of the 
Crown and the other on behalf of the accused, but first I will 
go on with Dr. Humphreys. In cross-examination he gave 
somewhat geneial answers, which were given to Sir Charles 
Russell, and which I have not taken down so fully as I could 
wish. I will read them to you from one of the newspaper 
reports, which appears to be a verbatim report, and which 
certainly agrees with my recollection of the examination. [His 
lordship then proceeded to read from a book containing clippings 
from a newspaper, forming a complete report of the case.] 

Speaking about not giving a certificate of death, he said the 
usual course was, when the doctor refuses to give a certificate 
of death the police were sent for. The effect of Dr. Humphreys^ 
evidence in regard to the post-mortem examination is, that from 
the different things found in the body of all kinds, including 
what was found in the intestines, putting all that together, he 
sajs he founded his opinion that the deceased died from arsenical 
poisoning. He said, I think, that the different symptoms 
indicate arsenical poisoning. During the time he was attending 
deceased ho did not suspect arsenic or poison, until it had 
been suggested to him by Michael Maybrick. I did not consider 
thift a very important answer, because the question is not 
whether Mr. Maybrick had suggested this thing to Dr. 
Humphreys first, but that, taking the whole of the examina- 
tions, what did he think it was? He seems to think now 
that it was arsenical poisoning. There are, as you will 
remember, several doctors who have been examined on the 
point, who generally gave an entirely different opinion. I 
won't go into that question about their opinions, but I will 
;ry and give them, and vary as they require to be varied. I 
will try to give them as I go on. Now, going on to what he 
Bays about the symptoms during life, on which ho appears to 

*95 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

Sinhin^ cross-examined, I attended,’" he says, “ Mr. May- 

brick on the 28th April. He told me that he had been at 
the Wirral races ; but he did not say that he had got ’wet.” He 
did get wet, no doubt, as is proved by the evidence. ** He 
said he had dined with a friend, and complained to me after- 
wards that he had a headache,” and so on; and also that he 
had had discomfort in the neighbourhood of the heart. ‘*He 
complained of stiffness in his knees. I should suspect that this 
might arise from catching cold. I was able to loosen the 
stiffness.” You remember how the witness described the moving 
about of deceased’s legs. I connected this,” the witness goes 
on to say, “ with his conversation about this having been 
caused by his having taken the nux vomica contained in Fuller’s 
medicine. His tongue was dirty on Sunday ; on the 29th it 
was cleaner; and on the 30th of April and Ist and 2nd May 
he was in the office. On Friday, the 3rd, he complained that 
his medicine did not agree with him. I said that nothing was 
the matter with him except dyspepsia. I saw him from eleven 
to twelve on the 3rd May. He then complained of pains in his 
legs, from the hips to the knees.” Those pains in the limbs, 
it seems to be the general opinion of every doctor who has been 
examined that with regard to the calves of the legs it is a very 
strong sign of poisoning by arsenic, but no one of them seems 
to say that pains in the limbs are a strong sign of the adminis- 
tration of arsenic. Also Dr. Humphreys suggested a morphine 
suppository at the time deceased said he was sick after coming 
home from the Turkish baths, although Dr. Humphreys did 
not oonnect the sickness with the bath. He describe the 
deceased as taking no food from Saturday at twelve o’clock 
until Monday at 8.30 a.m. All Sunday afternoon and Monday 
he took nothing. He was unable to retain things in his stomach. 
I put a blister on his stomach, which stopped the vomiting. 
He complained about the action of the food in the stomach on 
Tuesday, the 7th. 1 saw him twice on Wednesday, the 8th. 
He was going on favourably.” He speaks further on of a loose 
motion. I think all the medical men agree that purging — 
continual and constant purging — are marks or proofs of 
arsenical poisoning. They are all, I think, of one mind in 
this, that if this man did die of arsenical poisoning, one of the 
symptoms most frequently associated with it — that is to say, 
obstinate and irrepressible diarrluca — did not occur ; and it is 
pointed out and insisted upon by the medical men, those called 
for the prisoner as well as those called for the prosecution, thal 
that is a circumstance indicating the absence of arsenical 
poisoning. He was suffering from tenesmus. That is very rare, 
but it appears in this particular case that it did occur. Some 
of the medical men — but there is great difference of opinion 

296 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

among them — deny that it is so very rare, and say it is more 
frequently to be seen than others admitted. It has been said 
many times over that it is a symptom of dysentery, common, I 
might almost say expected, to attend upon dysentery, a dis- 
tressing disease, though it is not common in this country. 
But the desire to relieve the bowels and the absence of any 
evacuation is, I believe, one of the marked, very marked, 
symptoms of dysentery. Then there is the account of the 
doctor^s experiment to extract arsenic from the faeces, about 
which he was not very confident ; and he gives an account of 
the patient’s condition on the 8th, and in this part of his 
evidence he tells you that he never said to Mrs. Maybrick that 
all depended on how long his strength would hold out. He says 
he never told her that her husband was sick unto death, and 
that he never gave such a gloomy account as she appears to 
have given. All the medical men agree that the cause of this 
man’s death was exhaustion, which exhaustion was caused by 
gastro-enteritis. But what caused the gastro-enteritis is the 
question between the two sets of evidence. The one part say 
it was arsenic, and the other say it was not arsenic. And that 
is the great medical question between them. Supposing that 
two ounces or some other large quantity of arsenic had l)een 
extracted from this man’s body, nobody could have doubted 
that the arsenic was the cause of death. The diflSculty here 
arises, as I understand it, from the comparative smallness of 
the dose, and from the suggestion that that small quantity 
was not discovered in the right place, and also from the sugges- 
tion that it might have got into the place where it was found 
by other means than the wilful introduction of poison. It 
seems to me, though it is very difficult to put the matter fairly, 
that the real crucial question seems to be, how did the poison 
found in that man’s liver and other organs get there 1 Did it 
get there in such a degree, and in such a way, as to show that 
the cause of death was arsenical poisoning, or did it get there 
in a way which would otherwise be accounted for? When you 
have gone through the whole of the case, and when I have 
called your attention to every part of it, you will find that 
that is the main question for your decision. The answer to 
that question will really and substantially settle the case, 
according as you tbink one way or the other. If you can s ow 
a sufficient quantity to cause death, why, you need not go 
further. It seems to me that is too plain for argument— if 
you can show that you really got a deadly dose of that jwison 
in that man. I am so much brought to that opinion that 1 
feel rather inclined to miss out a good deal of the evi(len<^ 
which has been given, because it all comes to that, loo a i 
how you please. For instance, there is a long account of all 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


Hr Jtattiea the different things which he swallowed at times — caacara, 
** nitro-hydrochloric acid, nux vomica. Then there was a little 
antimony in Plummer's pills, and a little bromide of potaBsium. 
The doctor mentions the different reasons why all these things 
were swallowed, and he gives his account of them. But I do 
not understand, I have not heard anything mentioned from the 
beginning to the end of this trial to show, that any one of 
these things in itself, or each one administered, could produce 
any symptoms which caused this man's death, so that you can 
put your hand on them and say that each one of these things 
have caused it. The thing you have to assure yourselves about 
is whether he died from arsenical poisoning — the opinions of 
the doctors where they differ is as to whether the arsenic found 
in his body was sufficient, and whether that arsenic was the 
cause of death. If any one wishes me to read that part of the 
evidence, of course, I will read it fully. 

A great deal appears to me to turn upon the circumstances 
which do not go right to the proof or disproof of the matter. A 
great deal has been said as to the redness of the stomach, which 
wa« a very bright red. There was a long story about these 
small spots, and mention was made of a brilliant arborescent 
vascularity, which I understand means something of the nature 
of a bloodshot eye — any spot which is blood, but which is under 
the skin, and therefore is not exactly flowing about. He says 
there were a great number of very minute spots, petechise. I 
must say that I should have thought that if an intelligent and 
observant doctor said, Well, whatever I wrote down, and 
whatever interpretation you like to put on this arborescent 
vascularity, I do mean to say that I saw spots,'' and if he 
positively said that, I should be very apt to believe him. How- 
ever, you must put whatever application you like upon it. We 
have heard over and over again that there were these petechious 
spots which have been spoken of, this brilliant arborescent 
vascularity. Arborescent certainly does not go very well with 
the rest of the description, as it means treelike. These spots 
were more netlike. There were other traces indicating more of 
a fibrine nature, there were lines going aSbut from part to part. 
The question therefore seems to be whether or not Dr. 
Humphreys observed that the actual cause of death was some- 
thing in the nature — I don't think it matters whether you use 
the word or not — of an irritant. Whichever you call it, the 
cause of death was the presence of an irritant substance, which 
produced all the train of things described in the stomach and 
bowels, a state of things which could have been produced by 
arsenic if there were arsenic there, but a state of things which, 
on the other hand, does not absolutely imply arsenic, as it may 
be produced by a variety of other causes. Dr. Tidy gave 
us several causes likely to cause an unpleasant feeling to people, 

298 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

like sausages, cheese, and lobster. All these things have been Mr Justire 
known to produce this kind of inflammation. This is the ^^J****® 
obvious difficulty of the case. We certainly know this man 
as far as we can know anybody, and know that for a considerable 
period before he died he never ate lobster, or cheese, or sausages. 

His dietary we know was prescribed for him. There is no sug- 
gestion whatever of his having eaten any one of these particularly 
mentioned things, or indeed anything except the diet prescribed 
for him by different doctors. There did not seem to have 
been an opportunity for the administration of food like these 
things. There was not any food of that kind, or anything 
which might have had any effect of the kind which sausage 
poison, or lobster, or such things may produce. A good deal 
has been said about Dr. Humphreys’ answer when he was asked 
what he would have certified if he had died on the Wednesday. 

He replied. I should have given a certificate of death from 
aoute inflammation.” But it is very difficult, gentlemen, to 
be quite plain in the many assumptions which come together 
in these conditional questions. ” Suppose he had died on the 
Wednesday, what would you have certified? ” ” I should have 

certified so and so.” Yes, but suppose he had died on the 
Friday, what then? It is an extremely difficult question taking 
such suppositions. With regard to what Dr. Humphreys would 
have certified, he would do as all doctors would — he would have 
certified in accordance with the knowledge he had up to the death. 

One of the medical men, I think it was Dr. Carter, said, I 
really could not certify that he died of arsenic poisoning unless 
arsenic had been discovered.” Of course, till you have ex- 
hausted the very difficult points in working out the question, 
you can’t give a final opinion upon the case, or upon any case 
into which you have to inquire. You have to exhaust things 
before coming to a final conclusion. At this very moment, 
although I hardly like to draw illustrations from this very case, 
until you have heard the whole of the evidence in the case, have 
heard the summing up in the case, and have discussed amongst 
yourselves your views on the subject, you can hardly lay down 
what will be your verdict — I hope there is no man in that box 
at this moment who would do so— it is a virtue to keep your 
mind open to any new argument placed before you. That is 
a great intellectual virtue which all persons should assiduously 
oultivate. And you can hardly expect any doctor to give an 
opinion as to what he would have done under certain circum- 
stances before he knew all he now knows, or to give his opinion 
as to what he would have done had it occurr^ a week or a 
month or ten days before. He cannot answer such questions. 

I don’t think, eiHier, they exercise any great effect upon your 
opinion. The evidence of a certain number of these medical 
men is, I think he died of arsenic poisoning,” or, I don’t 

299 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

SiipSn^ think he died of arsenic poisoning, but of gastro-enteriti*, 
caused by the administration, or, at any rate, caused by some- 
thing capable of causing gastro-enteritis, but not necessarily 
arsenic/* and in some instances probably not arsenic.*' 
These parts may be passed over as really more fit for medical 
jurisprudence than for a jury actually engaged upon the ad- 
ministration of criminal law. It is the great tendency of all 
cases of this kind to run into scholastic discussion. Gentlemen, 
you probably are men engaged in different ranks of life, and 
I should think it probable that a very small number of you 
have any other knowledge of medicine than that which we all 
pick up in the course of our lives and in the course of our 
general experience. This would be a kind of guide. There is 
no use telling you how far you may rely upon it. But you 

must infallibly rely upon it to a gp'eater or less extent. I 

have gone through the evidence of Dr. Humphreys, and having 
gone through his evidence and that of Dr. Carter, I feel dis- 
posed not to go through the evidence of the doctors who have 
been called merely to give an opinion. 

The next point was the evidence of Dr. Carter, which was 
very important, because of Dr, Carter’s reputation in the city of 
Liverpool, and because he had the opportunity of seeing the 
deceased Mr. Maybrick, and because the deceased was under his 
personal observation. He says, “ 1 saw a great deal of vomit- 
ing," and I do not know whether that was explained by Dr. 

Tidy, but I do not think it was, but it rather qualifies the 

evidence of Dr. Humphreys and the servants and Dr. Carter. 
Vomiting is certainly one of the symptoms of arsenical poison- 
ing, but, according to Dr. Tidy, it ought to be a special kind 
of vomiting. Some of the s^^mptoms were similar to those 
which might have been caused by irritant poisoning. Dr. 
Carter described him as suffering from looseness of the bowels 
on the Thursday, but there is a g^eat difference between a man 
having looseness and having that kind of violent purging which 
we are told is usually the accompaniment of arsenical poisoning. 
Dr. Carter wished to examine the patient as to the condition 
of the bowels, but he was unable to do so on account of the pain 
which resulted from pressure. Dr. Carter attributed death to 
arsenical poisoning, and stated that the appearance of deceased's 
body at the post-mortem examination was not consistent with 
death from dyspepsia. Dr. Carter judged the death to be the 
result of arsenical poisoning. Two grains of it given in five 
successive days would have killed him.* Then Dr. Carter gives 
his account of various matters connected with the use of arsenic. 
He said the idea of poison did not occur to him until it was 

* Dr. Carter said “not less than three grains would have been a fatal 
doae to a man of Maybrick’s age and habits. 

300 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

suggested to him. When one considers what a tremendous !?j.ij****^ 
thing the administration of poison is, what an awful thought 
it is to admit into the mind of any one, one cannot wonder 
that any medical man should admit it only at the very last 
extremity, and to find that he does find himself justified in ex- 
cluding the idea. I could not imagine a more dreadful thing 
than that of a doctor, going to cure by his skill a suffering man, 
finding that he is the victim of a diabolical kind of plot, the 
existence of which he (the doctor) is perfectly unfamiliar with. 

Well, that is the evidence of the different doctors, and you 
have the whole body of evidence of the medical men who formed 
opinions upon this case. Here comes in the great controversy 
in this case, and that controversy I will, to the best of my 
ability, call your attention to. I do not propose to read 
through the whole of that evidence, as I do not think it would 
be a reasonable way of employing your time. You have heard 
the evidence, and not only heard it, but you have seen the men 
and fully noticed their different peculiarities of manner and 
expression, and you have been able to form your own judgment 
to a certain extent upon that. I do not wish to say an^hing 
definite about it, but you have formed your own opinion about 
tliese gentlemen, and formed an opinion as to their impartiality 
and as to their partisanship, as to their understanding and 
judgment generally. You will by these means have the ground 
of forming in your own mind a more or less definite opinion of 
their character, and of the value to be attached to the evidence 
of each. I do not say for one moment that they are not to be 
thoroughly relied upon. I do not think that any imputation 
is cast upon them, upon their good faith, but they certainly 
do differ very much as to the conclusions at which they arrive. 

You must be guided in a general way as to the value of the 
evidence of each, and you must be guided by the credit which 
you attach to the evidence, and by the reasons given for their 
opinions. I think I shall be of more use to you in this matter 
by telling you, in somewhat general terms, what are the different 
views for which these gentlemen contend ; how in the main, as 
I understand, they support those views ; and what are the 
observations which the l^st attention T have been able to give 
to their discourses upon the subject have suggested to my mind. 

It is for you to decide, and not for me. I will content myself, 
as I am bound to do, and as it is my duty, to indicate to you 
the way in which you ought to view the subject, and the views 
which you may probably arrive at. You know perfectly well 
that there is such a thing in scientific and legal questions, and 
questions of forensic medicine more particularly — there is such 
a thing as subtle partisanship, w^hich very much diminishes the 
value of the evidence given under such circumstances. Any 

301 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


Wr jQstiee person who has been in the habit of attending: Committees of 
^ the Houses of Parliament and hearing the evidence which is 

given there by different engineers, or of persons connected with 
the mechanical arts, and sees the way in which they deliver 
their views on subjects of very considerable national importance, 
must have learnt that the mere fact of a man coming into a 
Court and swearing this, that, and the other, does not by any 
means give a reason for unqualified belief in what he says. 

You have to take off a good deal of discount from the testi- 
mony of skilled witnesses on the ground of their becoming, 
probably insensibly to themselves, advocates rather than wit- 
nesses. I certainly would not like to be invidious, and I would 
not do so unjust a thing as to impute in this awful inquiry advo- 
cacy to those gentlemen who have given the Court the benefit of 
their experience. Well, you must exercise your own frcie judg- 
ment, free from all unnecessary modesty about your own 
opinion, and free from all unnecessary respect for the opinions 
and special knowledge of men especially acquainted with these 
things. You must give them due weight, and treat them with 
a discreet and rational freedom of mind. I have no concealed 
meaning. I don’t attribute this kind of thing to anybody, but 
I say you must be all on your guard against all indiscrimi- 
nately. This is purely a general remark. Now, what appeared 
to be the opinions of these gentlemen on this great subject T I 
do not mean scientifically, but these opinions are supremely 
important to the woman at the bar and highly important to the 
administration of justice, and all-important for your own feel- 
ings, peace of mind, self-respect, when you reflect on what you 
have to do on this occasion ; and I feel what is required of you 
is an act of high moral and civil courage, that is to say, you 
must look all these things straight in the face and decide them 
like free and honourable men, not afraid of your own opinions, 
and, on the other hand, free from all bias. Now, let me 
consider what the question is. Up to a certain point, as I 
have pointed out already, it appears to be that all the witnesses 
are at one. The question being, Did this man die of arsenical 
poisoning? all the witnesses agree that this man’s death was 
caused through gastro-enteritis, that is to say, inflammation of 
the stomach. 

Then arises the question as to what that state of things led to. 
You have the whole history detailed to you at great length of 
his disease, of the disease getting worse and worse, and ulti- 
mately causing death. That death you have had described with 
the minutest detail. The illness is a matter which I don’t think 
there is any doubt about at all; none is suggested. It is 
described by the medical men who attended him, by the people 
who had care of him, right from its commencement at the 

302 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

Wiiral I’aces to his death in May. To what is the death to be SjL'^h*^*** 
ascribed? The first matter that suggests itself is his illness. ^ 

He became ill, and his illness, seizing the weak point, attacked 
his stomach. The stomach became congested, and the con- 
^stion went on until it reached the stage of inflammation, and 
it became acute. Acute inflammation involved both the 
stomach and the bowels. In that way the man died of a severe 
attack of gastro-enteritis. That is what it is said to be in 
various forms, with no very substantial difference of opinion, 
by Dr. Tidy, Dr. Macnamara, and other doctors whose names 
I do not remember. What is the other view? That this is a 
case of gastro-enteritis caused by arsenic. You find it in 
different parts of the body, in the liver principally, and in 
several other parts of the body, and that poisoning was pro- 
duced by a wicked plot devised by his whfe, and with the motive 
of disposing of him, and with the result known. Gentlemen, 
there are a great many subordinate questions connected with 
that which I postpone till I come to the last part of my sum- 
ming up, such as the question of motive, which I will now pass 
•over. For instance, the fly-papers I pass over, and the question 
about Valentine ^s meat juice I pass over. I pass over a variety 
of questions which are brought together for the purpose of 
showing that, in point of fact, she did it. You have been 
told that, if you are not satisfied in your minds about poison, 
if you think he may have died from some disease, then the 
case is not made out against the prisoner. It is a necessary 
step — ^it is essential to this charge — that the man died of 
poison, and the poison suggested is arsenic. This question you 
have to consider, and it must be the foundation of a judgment 
unfavourable to the prisoner that he died of arsenic. Now, 
then, let us see what the doctors say. Some said death was 
caused by arsenic, and others said it was not by arsenic — ^that 
he died of gastro-enteritis. I think slight traces of arsenic were 
found in the intestines. There was none in the heart, none in 
the blood, nor in other parts of the body where, in the case of 
death by arsenic, you would suppose arsenic to be found. But 
there certainly was arsenic found; it was found in the liver, in 
the intestines, but we are not equally sure whether it was found 
In other places. 

Mr. M'CoNNBLii — In the kidney, my lord; a trace. 

Mr. PiCKPORD — trace only, my lord. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — Yes, very well; it was very small ; it 
was a trace, I believe. Well, now, these are the places in 
which it was found, and there are several explanations of it; 
there are several things to be said about it. There was one 
thing which I don’t think was said about it, but which I think 
everybody will be tempted to say — ^there was so very little of it. 

303 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

And I share with the feeling which you must have, and more 
particularly every man who has not had a scientific training, 
that they would have to look very closely, and would have ta 
have a great deal of faith in science generally to attach the 
importance which medical men attach even in this case, and 
which they all attach to matters physically so very, very small. 
I do not know how far you were successful. I don't say 
anything about myself in detecting in some of those test tubes 
the barely visible little bits of bright shining metal which were 
said to be arsenic. I don’t ask, and I do not know 
anything about it. But, however these things were, all the 
medical men agreed that there the thing was if you could see 
it; and they said they could see it, and there was no attempt 
in the defence to deny that there actually was arsenic in the 
places which I have named. Now, this is the introduction to 
another question, and this is a question of terrible interest. 
Who put it there? Well, as far as one could see, it could not 
come there itself. So who put it there? Now, there are 
several ways of answering that question which do not involve 
guilt on the part of any one. You must consider what is the 
degree of probability which may be attached to each of these 
different ways. I have been following these ways, and if I omit 
any I hope I may be corrected. The first way which was sug- 
gested is that Mr. Maybrick put it there himself, namely, that 
he, owing to gi-ounds which must be more carefully considered, 
had been in the habit of eating arsenic. Gentlemen, the first 
way which is suggested is that Mr. Maybrick put, on grounds 
known only to himself, arsenic into his food through this dread- 
ful habit which he had acquired. Another way, and the only 
way suggested in which the arsenic could not have been adminis* 
tered criminally, was by the improper taking of it as medicine. 
The only other way which is suggested, that I know of, in 
which arsenic could have been put into him is by crime. It 
might have been put in by himself through a very unwise and 
injudicious act of self-indulgence, or it may have been put in 
by somebody else by crime. When you come to consider the 
matter carefully, you will find that in one way, or either of these 
two ways, this matter must have been got into his body. There 
are various points to deal with which may be consistent. The 
arsenic may have been taken by reason of unwise and in- 
judicious habits of self-indulgence; that is one thing. It may 
have been by the taking of medicine improperly, or by some 
means of the kind ; and if it was taken in this way, the presence 
of the arsenic may reasonably be accounted for. If, 
however, you think there is a possibility of doubt, you ought 
to acquit the prisoner. If, however, it did not come into his 
body in either of these ways, I can hardly see how it has been; 

304 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 


administered except by crime, and it has not been suggested Ki* 
that any one could well be the criminal except the prisoner in 
the dock, and some observations will have to be m^e to you 
on that when I deal with the matter. 

Now, first of all, is it possible, is it reasonably possible, to 
suppose that he took it himself? We have heard a great deal 
on the subject from first to last about it; a doctor was called 
who was acquainted with the deceased, and knew him in the 
prime of life. Some twelve years ago he was out in Norfolk, 
Virginia. Now, what is the evidence as to his taking arsenic 
at that time there? You have had several stories told you. 
The first is the account of Mr. Bateson, who lived with him, 
and that account is carried out and made stronger by several 
additional witnesses. There was the black man, who used to be 
sent out to buy half a dollar’s worth of arsenic, and who saw him 
take it on several occasions by putting it in a kind of beef tea, 
and who said the deceased was in the habit of taking arsenic. 
Well, there was also a ship captain, who was with him, and 
who saw him served in several drug stores in Norfolk, Virginia, 
in a particular manner with certain quantities of arsenic, and 
who swore to Mr. Maybrick taking arsenic. Now, with regard 
to that, it was not suggested by Sir Charles Russell — indeed, 
he expressly repudiated the notion — that he meant to suggest 
that arsenic which was taken by James Maybrick in the year 
when he lived in Virginia — somewhere about the year 1877 — 
that the arsenic taken so long ago as that could rationally be 
supposed to have been present in his body so as to account for 
the arsenic found when, in point of fact, it was found — that it 
remained there all those many years. Sir Charles Russell re- 
pudiated this notion. An advocate owes it to his own self- 
respect and to his professional position to found his defence, at 
any rate, upon reasonable, possible grounds, and that ground 
would be so very remote that I do not think any reasonable 
man could purposely put it before a jury and expect them to 
accept it. If it is not reliable for that purpose, all that evidence 
becomes, I won’t say altogether irrelevant to the case, but its 
relevancy is very narrowly confined, although it shows that 
he was accustomed to take arsenic otherwise than — at that time 
and place — so far as I can find by medical prescription. There 
seems to have been no medical man present when he went into 
the drug store, where he received that warning to be careful.” 
There does not seem to have been any medical man present 
when the matter was talked over by the person who served in 
the drug store, or when he talked it over with the foolish ship 
captain afterwards, but at the same time Mr. Addison — ^and I 
will speak of this directly — got an answer from Mr. Maybrick’s 
own friend that Mr. Maybrick did take arsenic under prescrip- 

305 


u 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

l^JjBstioa tion from his doctor ; but there were occasions when this did 

***** ** not appear to be the case, and that was probably the way he 
took it in Norfolk, Virginia. A gentleman named Bateson, 
who apparently knew Mr. James Maybrick on terms of inti- 
macy, said that his taking of arsenic began in connection 
with what is now called fevers and chills in that neighbourhood, 
which is a swampy kind of country, whose people suffer from 
malarial fever, and, amongst others, Mr. Maybrick suffered 
from these fevers. He used to get arsenic prescribed for him, 
that arsenic being regarded at the time and in that place as a 
more powerful remedy for that kind of disease than quinine, 
which, as we all know, is the constant remedy in most parts of 
the world for malarial fever. It seems that in that country 
arsenic answers the case in a more powerful manner, and, in 
consequence of having attacks of chills and fever — in conse- 
quence of being prescribed arsenic, he was cured of that disease. 
That would certainly give him a knowledge of arsenic. He 
seems to have been on that subject an inquisitive man, and 
it is very natural that he should learn that arsenic was good 
(as he afterwards said) as an antiperiodic. He learnt by 
taking it that effects might be obtained for which quinine is 
the common means, but which in certain cases fails. That is 
the first time he is shown to have had to do with arsenic at all. 
The witnesses who prove that are Bateson, and then Thompson, 
of Liverpool, and then Stensall. His evidence was that the 
deceased used to send Stensall out, and he gave him half a 
dollar to get a small packet, described as the size of Sir Charles 
RusselTs snuffbox, but, however, he used to be sent out for «a 
packet three or four times in the course of his service; he 
afterwards opened the packet and put in a very little on the 
end of a spoon in some beef tea, and, after stirring it, the 
deceased drank it. That is the evidence, and I don’t think 
that it was in any way contradicted or shaken, but that is the 
thing he (the servant) said the deceased used to do. This is 
the first connection which w^as made between him and arsenic. 

Then comes the witness Edwin Garnett Heaton, a retired 
chemist, who used in 1888 to keep a shop in this city near the 
Exchange. With regard to this evidence I will call your 
attention to a matter. Apparently Mr, Heaton saw a news- 
paper (referring to the Liverpool Echo) in this town, contain- 
ing what he described as a very good likeness of Mr. May- 
brick. He then went to the solicitors in the case, and they 
produced to him a photograph, which is placed before you, 
and upon being shown that photograph he said, ‘‘ I know him 
quite well; I am quite sure that is the man.” He did not 
seem to have known him by name. He did not go after him 
as a matter of name, he never seems to have known his name, 
but he said, ‘‘ That is the man who used to come to me for a 

306 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 


pick-me-up/’ A pick-me-up is a thing ■which does not gener- MrAnltoe 
rally contain any arsenic at all, but this man used to have 
pick-me-ups specially made for him. They contained a certain 
amount of arsenic. He went on taking these till within six 
months before the chemist left business, for a period of eighteen 
months in all. I shall warn you that you ought not to allow 
yourself to consider this absolutely proved. The man was 
only identified by a photograph. I don’t put forward my own 
opinions on the matter, but although I don’t speak on authority, 

I think I have been told that in the Divorce Court, where 
identification is constantly practised, the evidence of a photo- 
graph is not admitted. If it be as I say that the judge does 
not allow the production of a photograph in his Court, it should 
be sufficient to say that there must be considerable difficulty 
in the identification of a man by a photograph. Heaton 
stated, ** He used to come to me for pick-me-ups,” 
all of which, when you come to translate it, shows that he 
ceased to make his visits to the witness for eighteen months 
before his death. It has been argued that a man in the habit 
of taking arsenic would not give up the habit because a chemist 
changed his place of business, and that he would go somewhere 
else, but this is the only definite fact we know about it. 

It is a very singular thing, gentlemen, that in this case, 
where so many eminent persons have been engaged, and where 
there has been so much exertion to arrive at the facte, that 
in this case the degree of evidence we have got as to the length 
of time where arsenic may remain in the human body is most 
imperfectly ascertained. I think Dr. Stevenson, or some other 
witness, spoke with very great want of confidence on the sub- 
ject. It is not many people who get the opportunity of 
making experiments. In the present opportunity the neces- 
sary experiments have been made, and some witness spoke to 
seven months as the extreme limit he had known any trace 
to be shown as remaining in the body of a person taking it. 

There is no doubt, they say, arsenic leaves the body principally 
through the kidneys, and they also say the effect of taking 
arsenic is to considerably retard the operations of the kidneys, 
and so delay the elimination of the arsenic, and so it remains 
much longer in the body than otherwise would be possible. 

The subject and the evidence in this case is but one of the 
many instances which has satisfied me, if I had not already 
been satisfied of it before, that medicine and everything con- 
nected with medicine is so much a matter of fact, and experi- 
ence of facte which do not readily present themselves for inspec- 
tion, that you never can arrive at medical conclusions with 
anything like the same degree of certainty in your conclusions 
as you are entitled to expect in science which deals with mathe- 
matical demonstration or legal argument. I would not for 

307 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

Mr Jattiee the world say anything disrespectful of a science to which we 

Stephen gQ very much; but it is a science based upon more or 

less conjecture, and good sense and good fortune in making 
guesses. A celebrated physician in olden times said that a 
physician spent his time in putting drugs of which he knows 
little into a body of which he knows less. This is one of those 
pointed sayings which are convenient, but there is a degree of 
truth at the bottom of it. Persons who are employed for the 
time being in the tremendous functions confided to us ought 
to be very modest in their conclusions. That modesty cuts 
on an occasion like this all ways. It cuts to a certain extent 
against the prosecution, and it cuts against the defence, and it 
diminishes and lowers the degree of assurance with which 
we receive medical evidence of all kinds. 

I will just recall to your memory the different remarks of 
Mrs. Maybrick to her brother-in-law about the white powder, 
and the remarks to him by Sir James Poole, when he blurted 
out, I take poisonous drugs.’' Well, this is a proof show- 
ing that this man for some extraordinary reason did contract 
a habit of taking this kind of medicine ; and I was very much 
struck with the medical witnesses not definitely saying — if you 
put together all that they said you will find it gave Sir Charles 
Russell a foundation for the remark, when 1 say foundation 
I mean it suggested the remark — does a man “who takes medi- 
cines of this kind contract the habit of taking it in various 
forms, and if so late as January* he admitted to Sir James 
Poole that he was in the habit of doing so, and if that was 
arsenic, might that not account for the quantity found in his 
body? I don’t wish to discuss the matter now till I state to 
you how I understood Sir Charles Russell to put it. He says 
that if that accounted for the small quantity of arsenic found 
in the body they had destroyed the case against the prisoner, 
because it would show her to be innocent. That is part of the 
argument w^hich tends — I do not say it answers the case for the 
Crown — but it tends to explain what is certainly the strongest 
part of the case for the Crown, namely, that arsenic was found 
in this man at his death. I feel some kind of delicacy about 
developing that argument before you, because in doing so 
I think I might go in advance of what was said by Sir Charles 
Russell, and this I should always be sorry to do — ^however, I 
understood him to say this in substance, that this fact explains 
the presence of arsenic. I leave the matter in your hands. 

Now, then, we will pass on to consider the other matters 
concerned with regard to the nature of the administration of 
arsenic. It is given in a variety of ways. The argument 

♦It was some time in April that the conversation referred to between 
Sir James Poole and Maybrick took place. 

308 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

t^at the prisoner administered the arsenic is an argiunent Mr Jii9ttee 
depending upon the combination of a great variety of circum- ®^***'*® " 
stances of suspicion, which no doubt are much more suspicious 
when they are put together and considered with reference to 
the time when they arose than they are when considered each 
of them alone. It is no use saying this or that, gentlemen. I 
don't think, however, I shall have to consider the different 
circumstances in her case, the different matters which have 
been referred to. It is now a quarter past four, and I have 
been addressing you now for six hours and a quarter; and I 
am afraid I shall not be able to go on much beyond five. I 
will go on with you for three-quarters of an hour. I hope 
to-morrow I shall have said all I have to say. 

Now I should like particularly to read to you the evidence 
of two witnesses, because it is the evidence of highly skilled 
men. They are strongly opposed to each other, and you 
must decide as far as you think proper, and as far as you are 
fully qualified to go into such a discussion — ^you must decide 
which of the two is correct. I mean Dr. Tidy on the one hand 
and Dr. Stevenson on the other. 1 will tell you a little more 
before I go on to that matter. I will tell you something more 
of the nature of the controversy, which I xmderstand to exist. 

The controversy seems to me to come very much — if you look at 
it as a matter of symptoms— it comes, I say, very much to this 
sort of form. The doctors — the medical men — ^who do not 
telieve in the arsenic, do not believe that the symptoms of that 
sort were the symptoms of arsenic; and that is, of course, of 
great importance — although I fear that we are there getting 
amongst questions which I have already warned you are really, 
speaking quite plainly, too difficult for us. At all events, they 
are too difficult for me. But still, having been mentioned as 
they have, I will certainly state them, and as well as I can 
go into them, although I am bound to tell you that in all 
probability I should have to go into them at the expense of 
saying a good many things which had better not be said, and 
of showing my own extreme ignorance of the great difficulty of 
the subject. But there is this question upon which there seems 
to have been a great deal of evidence before us. There are 
the medical men who speak of the administration of arsenic 
because they thought there were symptoms of arsenic; and 
there are the medical men who speak against the doctrine of 
the administration of arsenic who strongly rely upon the absence 
of a large number of characteristic symptoms of arsenical poison- 
ing according to their experience. They take this view, that 
decidedly it is not a case of arsenical poisoning, for this reason, 
that poisoning by arsenic may well be present, although one 
or two of the particular symptoms are absent, but you cannot 

309 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

ttpjMtfee have poisoning by arsenic where so many of the oharacteristio 
symptoms are absent, as they are in this case. 

What are the characteristic symptoms of arsenic? We have 
heard them over and over again. One symptom is constant 
purging, very violent purging. Another symptom is constant 
sickness, very violent sickness, symptoms which one or two of 
the witnesses. Dr. Tidy, for instance, speak of as a sort of 
sickness which in ordinary conversation we have no adequate 
phrase for, but it is a very violent kind of sickness. The 
third symptom is pain in the pit of the stomach, which pain 
is greatly increased by pressure. The simile by which Dr. 
Macnamara tried to bring it home to our minds was this. He 
said — Suppose you get a red-hot shilling and press it on the 
pit of the stomach, and supposing that you get some one to 
violently press that, then you would have a notion of the 
kind of pain of which I have been speaking, and of which I 
have had very great experience.’^ The fourth symptom is 
itching of the eyelids, and inflammation generally attending. 
The fifth symptom is cramps in the calves of the legs. Now, 
says Dr. Macnamara — ^and several other doctors said the 
same — the argument taken in general comes to this, I can 
understand a man poisoned with arsenic having no cramps in 
the calves of the legs; I can understand a man poisoned with 
arsenic having no swelling or discomfort about his eyelids ; but 
I cannot understand poisoning from arsenic not being followed 
by great sickness, great itching, great pain in the stomach, 
such as have been described to you by these gentlemen. That 
is a very general argument. It is the very argument by which 
the Jews detected those unfortunate people who could not frame 
their mouths to say ‘‘ Shibboleth.” They could only say 
Sibboleth.” The principle is exactly the same. You may be 
a Jew, and do this, that, and the other, but you cannot say 
Shibboleth,” and that was the test by which they tried the 
matter. I do not think in this instance any such test is pro- 
posed. In fact, the doctors who dealt with this topic felt 
great difficulty in finding a test of that kind. Indeed, they 
found it absolutely impossible to find such a test, and went so 
far as to say so. I am bound to tell you that the medical 
witnesses in this case do all of them concur in general things 
about arsenic, and one of them, I think Dr. Stevenson, said 
it was a very anomalous disease. That is to say, there are 
characteristic features, and plenty of them; and there is no 
doubt that those which I have enumerated are the great char- 
acteristic features. But, although the disease is thoroughly 
well characterised (and if all those symptoms occur the disease 
may be said to be established), yet they do not always occur 
in the same order, nor do they occur with the same degree of 

310 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

relative severity . When you have once made this admission^ Mr Jostle# 
you find that the belief or unbelief in certain symptoms as Stepli#ii 
symptoms of arsenic become very much a question of degree. 

I well recollect saying to a most eminent advocate of the 
English bar (when he put a question) — “ Well, is not that a 
question of degree 1 to which he replied, But will your 
lordship tell me anything which is not a question of degree 1 ** 
Everything is a question of degree. But, at the same time, 
that is the great argument in this case, that the symptoms, or 
& large number of those most characteristic of arsenic poison, 
are absent. I shall just point out some other matters connected 
with that. They all agree that of the five symptoms which I 
pointed out there are two, cramps in the legs and itchings of the 
eyes, which had not been mentioned at all. It has also been 
said that the pain in the stomach increased on pressure, and 
that has not been mentioned. I don^t think there is any 
mention of pains increasing on pressure, unless some remarks, 
some incidents towards the very close of the evidence, can be 
regarded in that light. This sickness undoubtedly occurred, 
but, according to one of the medical witnesses, it was not the 
right kind of sickness. I heard with some degree of incredulity 
that the man was in such a state of vomiting for days together 
that he was unable to keep anything on his stomach, and that 
he was told by his doctor that he must abstain from food 
altogether; and that if he was in a condition that he was made 
sick by a drop of hot water, he was told for that reason to 
keep a damp cloth to his mouth to assuage his thirst. If that 
was his state, I confess that I cannot understand how he could 
be said not to have been persistently sick. However, I am 
always very conscious of my own ignorance, and am always 
ready to improve my knowledge, and I just make that sort of 
protest as to what had been said. Then there is another thing 
about diarrhoea. Now, gentlemen, the sort of diarrhoea that 
existed in this case was much less than one was accustomed 
to hear spoken of in connection with arsenical poisoning. The 
fatal dose was said to have been administered on the 3rd May, 
and that would be an interval of six days before the diarrhoea 
set in. I think the absence of diarrhoea, the absence of cramps 
in the calves of the legs, the absence of any itching of the 
eyes, are certainly together a remarkable list of deficiencies 
in the symptoms you would expect in arsenical poisoning. With 
regard to the sickness, there seems to be a considerable differ- 
ence of opinion as to the distinctive symptoms of arsenical 
sickness. With regard to that I am unable to assist you. I 
think I am correct in saying there is an absence of the charac- 
teristic symptoms which are necessary to establish the 
arsenical state of this man*s body. I am very sorry I can do 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

Justlee so little to ihelp you in this great matter, but it is a great relief 
to me that, under the constitutional law of this country, it is 
you who have to decide the case and not I, and all I have a 
right to do is to call your attention to the different matters in 
the case as they suggest themselves to my mind. I am afraid 
that I see a good deal on which I shall have to occupy your 
attention as well as I can, comparing together the evidence, 
I will not say of all the witnesses, but the evidence of Dr. 
Stevenson and the evidence of Dr. Tidy, and also the evidence 
of several other doctors who have favoured us with their 
testimony. 

I think the time which is still at my disposal I will expend 
in a way which I hope will be to some extent useful to you, 
that is, in reading the evidence of a witness who has given 
most remarkable evidence in this case — evidence not too long 
to be read through to you at this late hour of the afternoon. 
It is very w^ell worth hearing by itself, the evidence of Dr. 
Macnamara, who is a very eminent medical man in Dublin, 
and occupies a very distinguished position among the medical 
men of that city. Another thing, he is Surgeon of the Dublin 
Lock Hospital, and he says that he has had to administer 
arsenic in a very large number of cases. (To Dr. Macnamara) — 
You say, We have to administer arsenic in a very large 
number of cases. What class of cases did you refer to? 

Dr. Macnamara — As an alterative in specific diseases, my 
lord. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — I quite understand; thank you. I 
thought arsenic was used for that kind of purpose. Of course, 
we all know what the object of Lock Hospitals is, and we have 
got Dr. Macnamara from the Dublin Hospital, who has said 
he has to administer arsenic in a very large number of cases. 
He says — “ I have several times had to ' saturate * them.” 
In cases of this kind saturation means to administer as much 
arsenic as the patient will bear without very serious conse- 
quences. “ And in some cases the point of saturation has been 
exceeded.” That, of course, would lead him to examine the 
different results. He says the commonest result has been upon 
the eyelids, and after that comes the stomach and 
bowels. In the case of Mr. Maybrick it was not the 
vomiting which resulted from arsenical poisoning, and 
he never heard of persons complaining of a hair in the 
throat from arsenical poisoning. Dr. Macnamara is not by 
any means satisfied with the description of the throat, in which 
he does not recognise any arsenical symptoms. And, again, 
in the purging, he does not consider the evidence points to 
that sort of poisoning. He says, In my opinion this was 
certainly not a case of arsenical poisoning.” This is a very 
strong expression; and I think it all comes to the general 

312 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

argument advanced by all the doctors called for the prisoner Mr JnsUe* 
on this occasion — ^the suggestion of gastro-enteritis unattended 
by any poisoning — ^a state of things which may arise from 
dyspepsia. Riding in the rain at Wirral, and partaking of 
unwholesome food, might produce the state described — so say 
the doctors called for the prisoner ; but the doctors for the 
Crown, all of them say that they do not believe that gastro- 
enteritis was idiopathic, which means that it in a sort of way 
arises of itself. Of course, speaking with precision, such a 
thing as an absolutely idiopathic disease can hardly exist at 
all; it could not arise except by some means, though one does 
not always know what it is. The doctors are divided in opinion, 
and, of course, I cannot answer the question whether there 
was arsenical poisoning or not; the symptoms of arsenical 
poisoning, the witnesses told us, vary very much, or, as one 
medical man described it, there are anomalies ; and several of 
the proofs relied upon as showing arsenical poisoning were by 
some of the medical men suggested to be capable of a different 
interpretation. Dr. Tidy expresses his opinion that this was 
not a case of arsenical poisoning at all. It was a case of gastro- 
enteritis, produced by so small a cause as a whetting. I may 
just remark that Dr. Macnamara is almost the only witness 
called to prove that symptoms of this sort have been produced 
by so common a cause, and have also produced symptoms of 
irritant poisoning, which include a great number of the effects 
of irritant poison, and which have led a variety of other medical 
men of distinguished attainments of various kinds to the opinion 
that this was actually a case of arsenical poisoning. But I have 
taken an analysis of it, as I thought it was remarkable in itself ; 
and I thought there was just about time to read it before the 
Court rises, but I regret to say that I will have to leave that 
over till to-morrow. I feel that our duty in this case is to 
consider it fully out to the very utmost extremity, and I am 
sorry to say that I must require your attendance to-morrow at 
the usual hour of ten o’clock. 

The Court then adjourned. 


313 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


Mp Justieo 
Stephen 


Seventh Day — Wednesday, 7th August, 1889. 

The Court met at ten o^clock. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — I am about to continue what I was 
pointing out to you yesterday on this subject. I have passed 
through the greater part of the medical evidence, and since 
the adjournment I have been through the rest, with the view of 
seeing how far I could substantially add to your knowledge of 
the case if I took the course of reading the whole of it. I 
intend to read Dr. Stevenson ^s evidence for the purpose of 
contrasting it with the evidence of Dr. Tidy upon the other 
hand in the central points of each. The evidence of Dr. 
Stevenson, who is a lecturer upon forensic medicine at Guy’s 
Hospital, and is very well known in his profession, is that on 
analysis he found arsenic and bismuth. He took 8 ounces 
of the intestines to test with, and he found 1-53-1 000th part 
of a grain.* I have already said that I decline to say anything 
of what I saw in those tubes. I am ignorant in the matter, 
and do not know what it was, but the skilled witnesses all 
appear to have accepted the results, and state that this is 
arsenic. Now, before you can go into an arithmetical calcula- 
tion as to the quantity of arsenic in the liver you have to 
consider this — ^you cannot say that if in 8 ounces you get so 
much, then in dealing with the whole of it you would get so 
much proportionately more, because it is a very uncertain 
calculation, the proportion of arsenic present varying. I 
think it was Dr. Tidy who went to the rather horrible expedient 
of mashing up a liver, and taking part of the whole for the 
purpose of a test. I do not understand that very well, for it 
appears to me that you want previous proof that, if you mash 
animal matter in that way, mechanical mashing will produce 
the effect which Nature did not produce. The whole of the 
liver in this case weighed 48 ounces when pounded all up. I 
don’t understand why that should produce an equal distribution 
of the mineral, which is, to a certain extent, distributed over 
every part of it. In another vessel containing a portion of the 
kidneys Dr. Stevenson says he found a trace of arsenic, but not 
enough to be accurately weighed. The liver was contained in 
two vessels; the larger quantity this witness analys^, and 
found in it a quantity of arsenic corresponding to a third of a 
grain in the whole of the liver. The body. Dr. Stevenson says, 
contained at the time a nearly fatal dose of arsenic. 

Upon that point there is certainly a strong controversy, 

* This should be one 15- 1000th of a grain. 

314 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

because Dr. Tidy most certainly contradicts that opinion. He Mr Justice 
does not think, in the first place, that you could get the whole 
of what was contained in the liver; and if you did get the 
whole quantity, he does not think that you could draw the 
inference which is drawn in this case. It is extremely difficult 
to decide in this matter. It is a special science, of which I 
know nothing, and of which, I think, it is very unlikely that 
any one of you could possibly know very much. It is not a 
kind of knowledge that is likely, in the ordinary course of 
affairs, to fall to your lot. Two eminent men are put forward 
as very great authorities on this subject, and they both arrive 
at different conclusions on the matter ; and the point in dispute 
is one upon which I cannot myself profess to form an opinion ; 
and I don^t see how to suggest to you that you should form an 
opinion. But, however, that is the opinion of Dr. Stevenson, 
and I will read you some portions of Dr. Tidy’s evidence 
afterwards. If the cause of death is arsenical poisoning, the 
liver is the chief organ in which it is found, and in the largest 
quantity. There was no arsenic in Valentine’s meat juice,” 
he says. Then he says, in answer to a general question, I 
have heard the whole of the evidence in this case, and I have 
formed an opinion. I have no doubt deceased died from the 
effects of arsenic.” Then he seeks to support that opinion by 
saying that the symptoms were those of an irritant poison, and 
they resemble those of arsenic more than any other, the glazed 
throat and so on being so. In regard to that he is not agreed 
with other of the doctors. Dr. Macnamara especially, who said 
the glazed throat was not distinctively characteristic of arsenic. 

Then the first appearance of certain symptoms was usually 
within half an hour of taking the drug — nausea, vomiting which 
gives no relief. That is a point on which the doctors all agree, 
with regard to vomiting being a symptom of arsenical poisoning 
when it is characterised especially by the fact that it gives no 
relief. In this case there was certainly a great deal of vomit- 
ing, as you have heard described, it appearing again and again 
in the earlier stages of the case. Then of the pain in the 
stomach we have but some very slight mention towards the 
close of the case; but one of the medical men — Dr. Macnamara, 

I think — says that pain, if produced by arsenic, should be 
very much more decided than it was, and he described what 
it would be more specifically and pointedly than any of the 
other doctors. Then, the patient becomes restless.” The 
poor man was restless, no doubt, until the very last. It was 
described that he was restless in the earlier stages, and one 
of the doctors — Dr. Humphreys, I think — says, '' I did not 
see he was particularly weak, but he was very restless.” 

Certainly the throat on this occasion was the great point of 

31 $ 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

teSen^ co^plO'int. The pain extended down to the stomach, but I 
hardly know that is distinctively known; but it is difficult to 
say, when the man’s throat was in a state of inflammation, and 
the appearances were presented which are described, 
where the pain stopped. The tongue was foul and 
furred, but there was no bad smell. The foulness 
of the tongue was a matter of complaint very nearly 
all through. The tongue continued to give great difficulty to 
Dr. Humphreys in dealing with it, and Dr. Humphreys did 
what he could with a view of relieving it. This symptom itself 
was continued down, so far as I am aware, very nearly through 
the whole matter. The tongue was foul and furred, and it is 
a remaikable thing in connection with this that there was no 
bad breath. The patient after that collapses with rapid and 
feeble pulse, and he added, In the last day the pulse was so 
high that it could not be counted.” Gread thirst was, of course, 
there, and the evacuations were frequently stained with blood. 

That does not appear to have been the case; ” and then the 
patient dies. Dr. Stevenson says the symptoms are very 
anomalous, and the resemblances between case and case were 
so different that it was impossible to lay down any rule, and 
the differences were to be considered comparatively with each 
other, and with the personal peculiarities of the patient him- 
self. Those, I think, are the principal things Dr. Stevenson 
says. He adds a variety of matters which I do not think are 
important, and he adds that solid arsenic often becomes 
entangled in the coats of the stomach. One glass of water, 
the doctor continues, would hold a fatal dose of arsenic in 
solution. That appears to me to be a summary of his evidence, 
and he adds that on the 27th April, and on the 2nd and 3rd 
of May, he could not have said that this Tvas a case of arsenical 
poisoning. In that case he would not have had the post- 
mortem analysis to support him; but he says, ''I think now 
they may be referred to arsenical poisoning.” He says that 
up to Friday, the 3rd May, he could not have said any more 
than that. You will see, gentlemen, that a number of the 
medical men speak of symptoms of the living body, and of 
the appearances after death, and they speak further of the results 
of the analysis. The post-mortem appearances were those of 
an irritant poison, and more those of arsenic than of any other 
irritant poison.” Then he adds, The immediate cause of 
death is gastro-enteritis, but that is developed only by an 
irritant.” Then he goes on to describe gastro-enteritis, which 
is caused by an irritant poison, and which he supposes to be 
arsenic in this case, because arsenic was actually found. He 
says that injurious food produces post-mortem appearances in 
the bowels rather than in the stomach, and he adds, The 

316 



Xhe Judge’s Summing Up. 

analyst proves my opinion that an irritant poison was the cause Mr Jostle* 
of death. I searched for antimony and mercury, but found ^ 
none. As to the absence of arsenic in the stomach, I have 
found cases of arsenical poisoning in which I could find no 
traces in the stomach. It is absorbed into the circulation, and 
goes to the liver. As far as I can see, it enters the mouth, 
passes into the stomach, then goes into the liver, and leaves 
the body by secretions through the kidneys.'^ The witness 
proceeds, I should say that more arsenic was administered on 
the 3rd of May.’^ The theory is that there was poisoning by 
successive doses, and it is rather suggested that there may h^ve 
been several doses. But I do not know that there was any 
effort made to point out the precise times at which doses may 
have been administered. Arsenic disappears from the urine 
in about a fortnight, though I have known it to go on longer. 

Arsenic taken years ago would have disappeared.^’ That is 
admitted, as I have already said, by Sir Charles Russell. He 
does not ask you to suppose that the early taking of arsenic 
had anything to do with this poisoning. Taking the symp- 
toms and the post-mortem appearances, I have no doubt that 
he died from arsenic.” That is Dr. Stevenson’s evidence. He 
is cross-examined, and a good many theories are then admitted. 

He says, however, that arsenic generally acts in half an hour, 
or in some such time, and that vomiting is absent in an appre- 
ciable percentage of cases. In this case vomiting was not 
absent, because it went on in one form or another. The 
diarrhoea is sometimes absent. In this case it was not quite 
absent, but it might be said to be substantially absent. Then 
he speaks of the petechise or small blood pricks, which is a 
symptom one would expect with arsenical poisoning. If arsenic 
is taken in solid form, it does not entirely disappear at once; 
it passes into the kidneys and irritates them, and that would to 
a certain extent check the arsenic which it is their function to 
pass out of the body. I found rather more arsenic than Mr. 

Davies,” and then he gives some calculations. He says, I 
had 28 ounces of liver out of 48 ounces, which the liver weighed, 
and I found 27-lOOOths of a grain. I actually weighed from 
the liver *034 of sulphide of arsenic, equivalent to *026 of a 
grain of white arsenic,” and he makes out *087 or *091 of a 
grain — altogether lOO-lOOOths of a grain, which is, of course, 

1-lOth of a grain, and this would be less. I cannot convey 
to your minds, or to any human being’s mind, anything to 
enable you to attach any meaning to figures representing such 
very small quantities. I don’t think anybody has eyer suc- 
ceeded in making men imagine very small quantities or very 
great quantities. When we are told of billions and trillions and 
numbers of that kind, they mean only to you a very large 

3>7 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

Mf Justice number indeed, which is practically too great for you to think 
about or realise. The globules of blood in a man’s body are 
so small that there are more than a billion, but really that 
conveys no idea whatever to our minds. 

Well, that, gentlemen, is the evidence of Dr. Stevenson about 
that. Now I will take the evidence of Dr. Tidy, and I am 
happy to say it is not very long, although very much importance 
is attached to it. He says the distinctive features of arsenical 
poisoning are purging and vomiting in a very excessive degree, 
pain in the abdomen, more marked in the pit of the stomach, 
and this is usually associated with cramps in the calves of the 
legs, and after an interval there is suffusion in the eyes, irrita- 
bility about the eyeballs, and tenesmus more or less present. 
Now, as to the purging and vomiting, it becomes a question as 
to whether it was in an exceptional degree in this case. There 
was plenty of vomiting, but not much purging, throughout the 
whole time, and the degree of vomiting is a point on which it 
is difficult to form an opinion. Dr. Tidy admits that there are 
anomalies in arsenical poisoning, but he says that the presence 
of arsenic is easily detected. I daresay familiarity in dealing 
with such a matter makes it appear easy, although it might 
appear almost impossible to other people. I do not think in 
this case, however, that vomiting w’as excessive and persistent, 
nor do I think from what we have heard that vomiting did 
relieve this man, for he kept on ; and when he was not vomiting 
he was doing what Dr. Humphreys describes as hawking,” a 
motion towards vomiting. He was reduced to that state that 
apparently he had nothing in his stomach, and the least thing 
— a drop of water — was enough to excite vomiting. The 
looseness of the bowels was not noticed till the 9th May, and 
if poisoning took place on the 27th or 28th April, and no 
diarrhoea took place until 9th May, Dr. Tidy said that is an 
exceptional case. He said further, that he would have expected 
vomiting to take place after the administration of the poison 
within from half an hour to tw^o hours. Then he says that 
whether a dose containing supposed arsenic, or whatever it 
may be, comes in contact "with the mucous membrane depends 
upon circumstances. I think,” he goes on to say, the 
absence of pain in the stomach would be a toxicological 
curiosity.” You will remember that some rather foolish j>eople 
in Court thought fit to laugh at that expression. It seems to 
me to be a perfectly proper expression. It was accompanied 
possibly by some slight peculiarity in Dr. Tidy’s manner of 
speaking, which perhaps struck some one’s fancy, and made 
people laugh. It certainly appears to me to a weighty 
remark — namely, that it would have been a very remarkable 
thing if there was absence of pain of that kind in the stomach 

318 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

in a case of poisoning by arsenic. Tbat is bis opinion. You 
must give what weight to it you think fit. Then Dr. Tidy 
goes on to say, with regard to the symptoms, that they were 
not symptoms of arsenical poisoning, and did not point to that 
fact. There is a difference of opinion on that point. You have 
heard different views expressed by the different doctors. I 
should feel inclined to say, looking at the matter as an unpro- 
fessional person should look at it, that a great deal of contro- 
versy of that sort depends upon the result. When one medical 
man says that he thinks these were symptoms of arsenical 
poisoning, and that he thinks that they were caused by arsenic, 
but that he does not mean to say that they were all the symp- 
toms that one would expect to find in a case of arsenical poison- 
ing ; another medical man then comes and says that if arsenic 
had been administered, symptoms usually found in the body 
were in this case deficient, and that he should have expected 
more symptoms — that he should think it very odd if it was a 
case of arsenical poisoning, because these things were not 
present. He says it is very odd and> singular. Still, the 
poison was present, and to my mind that means a great deal 
to consider. Then he says the redness is all over the external 
surface of the stomach, and is of a very peculiar colour in 
arsenic poisoning. Then he refers to these petechious spots, 
all varying within limits, and that he calls the most distinc- 
tive characteristic I know of.’^ That is his opinion on it. I 
don’t know whether you will try to compare colours which you 
don’t see. That is to my mind practically impossible, and 
other doctors don’t take his view. They don’t disagree with 
Dr. Tidy in general. They all agree with the general facts in 
this case, but they take different views about the colour they 
saw. He also says he would expect certain fatty changes, but 
that appears to be another of the uncertainties of this case. 

Dr. Tidy and Sir Charles Russell said a good deal about the 
negative kind of evidence, that there were not present symptoms 
which they would expect in arsenic poisoning. But I think 
that is an unsatisfactory mode of treating the subject, and is 
inherently weak. What you want to find is some theory as to 
how this disease arose, and what it came from. I think the 
prosecution have to prove their case, because the defence only 
try to show that they have not done so. But it would obviously 
have given much consistency, power, and vigour to the defence 
had they been able to point out some other thing which had 
produced this disease. If their position was not merely I 
take my stand upon the question of reasonable doubt,” that 
is, in a certain way, a very good position to occupy, but it is 
very inferior to this position — I will tell you all about it; I 
will tell you how it arose.” There was a theory set up and 

3*9 


Mr JuBtlae 
StAplMB 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


■pJmtieean explanation given of the causes producing gastro-enteritis, 
tophen from which — as all agree — rhe died. Dr. Macnamara said a 
man naturally dyspeptic getting wet, and going about in his 
wet clothes, might easily take the disease from that. In other 
cases Dr. Tidy suggests that it was done by bad food, and that 
bad food would set up this trouble, might have caused gastro- 
enteritis. He says that almost any kind of food would do it ; 
game too high, fowl too high — or high at all, in fact — and he 
mentioned particularly three things which in his experience 
had set up the disease. Sausage poison, although it could not 
be found in the sausage, would do it, for by some means that 
poison appeared to be set up in the making. Then came cheese, 
of which I suppose he means a certain kind ; and it is a singu- 
lar thing that in one case he tells us that the attendants who 
also partook of it suffered from the same symptoms. But it 
contained nothing which chemical inspection can tell us of. 
Then he also spoke of lobsters as particularly setting up this 
terrible disease. But from the 28th of April, from the begin- 
ning of his illness, we know everything that was administered, 
and it has not been suggested that he had in any way anything 
to cause that. Everything that was given him was given under 
the most careful and watchful regime of medical men and 
nurses, and he could hardly have taken anything to cause these 
painful symptoms. 

Now, I shall go on to speak of what was said by other medical 
men with respect to arsenic not being equally distributed over 
the whole of the body. He (Dr. Tidy) speaks of the quantity 
weighed being from 82-lOOOths to 86-1000th8 of a grain found 
in the liver. Dr. Tidy says — “ I have known arsenic to be 
obtained from the body after three months or five months.’’ 
That is a very important point of the case. It is certainly 
one in which Dr. Tidy gives his evidence less directly and 
closely in that matter than it might have been. In the five- 
months’ case, where the arsenic was found after five months’ 
administration, there was found in the liver 174:-1000ths of a 
grain of arsenious matter, but there was no suggestion in that 
case of poisoning. And there are even longer cases than that, 
and that is a very important piece of evidence, which I will 
leave to your consideration. Dr. Tidy says that the trace of 
arsenic in the kidneys suggests nothing to him ; the absence of 
it in the heart suggests nothing ; and that there are cases 
recorded in which no arsenic at all was found. There was a 
case in which, though a man was shown to have died of arsenic, 
nonie could be found afterwards. In regard to that, I put a 
question in reference to the great discussions there were on the 
subject a good many years ago in a case which attracted as 
much attention as this has, or even more. It was pointed out 

320 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

then that what kills in regard to arsenic was the part which 
waa in process of going through the body, and not the part 
which remained in the body ; that death was caused by some 
unknown means, by which great injury was inflicted upon the 
body by the arsenic which passed through it by degrees. As 
regarded that matter, if they could imagine a sufficiently skilful 
person who could carefully watch an experiment at the rate 
at which arsenic passed out, and the rate at which it passed 
through a person who happvened to die of arsenic, just after 
the last had left him, he would be found without arsenic, 
although he died of arsenical poisoning. I remember instances 
being mentioned in which experiments were performed for the 
purposes of a great trial.* A dog was poisoned, and was known 
to have taken a large number of grains of arsenic in the course 
of his life. It was known what was the quantity of arsenic 
the dog had taken when it died. I do not pretend to give 
figures, although I could give some ; although it had many 
grains of arsenic they did not find a single grain — it was less 
than a grain. That is a kind of thing which may be taken 
into consideration when you come to consider the small quantity 
of arsenic which was found in Mr. Maybrick^s body. Dr. Tidy 
says — I cannot suggest what caused his death ; I cannot sug- 
gest what substance it was which acted on him as an irritant. 
The sickness was not like that of arsenic.’^ That is the whole 
of Dr. Tidy’s evidence, and I have given you the whole of Dr. 
Stevenson’s testimony also. So that you have the matter 
fairly before you as far as I know how to put it, and I will say 
no more about that part of the case. 

I ought just to mention Dr. Paul’s evidence. He certainly 
gave some remarkable testimony, and, as he is probably well 
known in Liverpool, where he occupies a responsible position, 
it will be a matter of special interest for you to hear what he 
said. The first point he mentioned was an entirely new one, 
and that was about this pan. Mr. Davies, the analyst, stated 
that he washed out the pan and the two other vessels, and that 
in the course of doing so he cleared away certain films which 
were in this jug. Testing the result for arsenic, he found that 
poison. He stated that the only place where it is supposed to 
have come from was from the jug. Well, that would be an 
important piece of evidence. It occurred to Dr. Paul, however, 
that there might be arsenic in the glaze of the jug, or in the 
glaze of some of the other things; and, accordingly, he tested 
it with distilled water, with which he washed out the vessels. 
Now, of course, the very object of distilling the water was 

* The judge here alludes to the Smethurst case. Dr. Smethurst waa 
tried at the Central Criminal Court in 1859 for the murder of Isabella 
Bankes by poisoning with arsenic. The case had not been referred to in 
the oourae of the tr»l, except in the judge’s one question to Dr. Tid 3 \ 

3*1 


X 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


Vp Jastiee that it should be quite pure, and nothing in it except what was 
Stephen particular vessels. “ Well/^ says Dr. Paul, “ I 

put in some acid, and I dissolved (by putting in that acid) a 
portion of the glaze, and when I examined the solution which 
contained some portion of the glaze of the vessel I found 
arsenic.'' So he supposed there was arsenic in the glaze of the 
vessel. No doubt that is a perfectly fair thing to say, and 
there is not a word to be said against the doctor for saying it. 
But the analyst, Mr. Davies, did not put in acid, and he did 
not find any arsenic in the liquor which came from the vessels ; 
that is to say, he might have found some arsenic probably if 
he had put in acid tending to dissolve the arsenic and set it 
free, which arsenic is contained in the glaze. But he did not 
put in that acid. He wanted to test what was in the vessels 
themselves, and accordingly he put nothing into them. He 
did not wish to put any acid into them, except such as might 
be contained in the fragments of Du Barry's food, which 
was found in the vessels. It is therefore the result of Dr. Paul's 
evidence, as it strikes me, that you get arsenic by dissolving 
the glaze of a jug of exactly the same make and the same 
composition. Yet it is the fact that that jug was not treated 
in such a manner as to set the arsenic free. If that was not 
done, the jug itself would not affect anything that was put into 
it with arsenic unless those things contained arsenic. This is 
the position in which the thing stands. If the little fragments 
of food which remained in the jug owing to the defective wash- 
ing, if they contained arsenic, you would detect it by washing 
the jug up quite clean, and then applying the proper test as 
described by Mr. Davies, and nothing was found to contain 
arsenic except in the food. But it does not follow that the 
vessels themselves would communicate arsenic unless that 
arsenic was put in by somebody else. I must say, when we get 
highly experienced chemists against one another, we are 
involved in great difficulties. I have told you, and you must 
consider whether you think it worth anything, or whether the 
inference ought to be that no arsenic has been proved to be 
present in that jug. Dr. Humphreys, you will remember, said 
he attached very little importance to the test he performed, 
when he took some of the faeces and a small portion of the water 
and tested for arsenic. Dr. Paul says Reinsch's test is a certain 
test. He himself had taken a small quantity of water, and 
had put in it a small quantity of arsenic, equal, I believe, to 
1-65-lOOOths of the bulk of the whole matter in the test tube, 
and he obtained a distinct trace of arsenic in a very short time. 
With regard to that, I need not add that it is worthy of note. 

I can understand a rough test conducted even by a man who is 
properly acquainted with something of these matters may have 
gone wrong. You must consider how far it is different from the 

322 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

teet of a highly skilled chemist, how far that will go against MpJjwtice 
Dr. Humphreys, who says that his experiment is not an indica- 
tive test to show that there was arsenic — whether he is justified 
in saying that for such and such reasons he does not think much 
of the test. Dr. Paul says, if the arsenic had been there you 
would have found an appreciable quantity of arsenic, and the 
test is such that you could discover it in a minute, and without 
any difiiculty whatever. Dr. Paul further said, if arsenic be 
administered in one or two doses it would pass away in a 
fortnight; but if it were administered in a number of doses 
it would take a longer period. He said, by the way, one little 
thing which it is well to know. He said, “ I think that a 
1000th part may be possibly measured of a grain of arsenic, 
and that it would be scarcely the size of the smallest pin's 
head." This is a case in which skilled experience suggests what 
to look for, and to know how to look for it, and which further 
enabled a man to see so small a thing as lOQOth part of a grain. 

It gives, however, no idea to the mind of a man who has all 
his life been dealing with tangible articles of appreciable size 
and weight. Then he also says that the quantity of arsenic 
supposed to be found in the body was consistent with the 
presence of the traces for months after medicinal administra- 
tion. The question might have been put to Dr. Tidy very 
nearly in this form — What verdict do you think the jury 
ought to find?" He says that he thought this was a case of 
gastro-enteritis, but that there is no evidence to show that it 
was caused by arsenic. It is for you to consider whether you 
think it is so or not. I don't think you ought to allow any 
one to find a verdict for you. You are there — and you alone 
are the persons — ^to find a verdict in this case. This witness 
mentioned a disease I never heard of before, and which I hope 
never to hear of again. It was a horrible complaint called by 
some such name as erosis. He has described it as one that 
almost always terminates fatally. This disease, he says, is 
very likely indeed to have caused gastro-enteritis. He then 
went on to enumerate various other diseases and complaints 
into which the symptoms of gastro-enteritis enter, and any of 
which might have caused gastro-enteritis. You are getting 
there into that portion of the medical questions which I have 
warned you against at every step. You cannot decide upon 
medical refinements. I have now gone through the whole of 
the subject of the medical and chemical controversy in this 
case. I shall not attempt to sum it up more fully than I have 
done. I have brought, as far as I know, all the points — at all 
events, all the principal points — of the subject before your 
minds, and I shall show you more fully afterwards how they 
.apply. But I must point out to you again and again that I 
think that Mr. Addison was perfectly justified in what he said, 

3*3 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


that you are not to decide this case as if it consisted of some 
one argument. It might do so. That is possible, but I do 
not think it does so. It depends upon a combination — a great 
number of different things — and it is according to the con- 
clusions at which you arrive upon that number of things that 
you must ground the verdict you have to deliver. 

Now, gentlemen, I have to go to another part of the question,, 
and it is certainly the one I approach with the greatest feeling 
of responsibility, with the greatest wish that I may not in any 
way unduly influence your minds u])on the question of which I 
am going to treat. The question which I have to deal with now 
is the question of that variety of general circumstances with 
which the case — the series of matters, more or less matters 
of the suspicion — I should say matters full of the suspicion — 
with which the case is surrounded, and you will have to put 
your own value on what I say before you can arrive at a fair 
conclusion, before you can really and properly discharge your 
duties, before you can come to a fair conclusion upon the whole 
of the subject. Gentlemen, in this matter I must point out to 
you that one general remark, which was suggested to me through 
connection with this very case, and which I think well worthy 
of your consideration. If I were to pnt it in a paradoxical 
form, I should put it thus — that facts are not always fair. I 
should put it in that form merely for the purpose of drawing 
attention to it. It may appear a strange statement to make; 
and, if taken literally, it is, of course, a strange statement to 
make. I will tell you what I mean by it, in order that you 
may guard against a real danger in such a case as this and o^er 
similar cases. You see here an impressive sight ; you are taking 
part in a memorable transaction. You have heard evidence 
of great importance for many days, and you have been exhorted 
by eloquent counsel, and with perfect truth and justice, to 
perform a most arduous duty, and, above all, to perform the 
duty of saying aye or no — is that woman guilty or not guilty t — 
which is identical — that you are sure beyond all reasonable doubt 
that she is guilty or that she is not guilty. Now, gentlemen, 
in order to enable you to discharge that function, great efforts 
have been made to provide you with every material which, 
according to rules established by the experience of centuries — 

I may almost say by the experience of a thousand years — ^have 
been ascertained to give the best chance of arriving at a right 
conclusion. You have heard all that has been said, and all 
that could be said, upon a considerable variety of subjects, and 
now I am bound to say to you that facts are not always fair, 
because it is meant to sound very surprising. The danger 
against w^hich I wish to warn you is this — ^that as soon as you 
are told that a particular circumstance takes place in connection 
with a greet trial of this kind, as soon as any circumstance 

324 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 


associated with such a trial as this occurs, it is a natural tendency Mr JuwMm 
of the human mind to separate it from common things, and say *^®*^®* 
that this is part of the evidence that we are to look upon as 
very serious matter — as an element in the Maybrick case — as 
a thing which has been brought forward, sorted out and set 
before us in order, because it is an element in that case. We 
must look upon it, therefore, as a very serious kind of thing, 
and there undoubtedly is — I have seen it again and again — 
there undoubtedly is a disposition in persons who are called upon 
to decide upon great matters of this sort — there is a disposition 
to give some degree of undue weight to any bit of evidence put 
before them, just because it is a bit of evidence; you are apt 
to assume a connection between the thing which is a proof in 
the result at which you are to arrive — ^because it is put before 
you — and in that way you may be led to do a greater or leas 
degree of injustice according to the state of the case. With 
resj>ect to these matters I would suggest to you to be on your 
guard against being unduly influenced by small matters — very 
email matters — and to remember there are a number of instances 
which take place in the ordinary course of life which neither 
have, nor are meant to have, any connection whatever with any 
great matter at all, but which arise from causes to which you 
cannot really attach any importance. I will give you a few 
instances, a few pointed instances, taken from this very trial, 
to show you what I mean, and to show you the wisdom, and to 
impress upon you the importance, of not allowing your minds 
to be affected by things very slight in themselves, and which 
it is attempted to elevate into matters of great importance. 

In the course of this trial evidence was given with regard to 
the purchase of fly-papers — evidence was given that although 
Mrs. Maybrick had a bill running at each of these shops, at Mr. 

Wokes' and at Mr. Hanson ^s, she paid for the fly-papers out of 
her own pocket, and, of course, the suggestion would be that 
she had been actuated in doing so by the desire to avoid 
detection. 

Mr. Addison — 1 studiously avoided making any such sugges- 
tion. 

Mr. JusTiCB Stephen — I am quite aware of that, Mr. Addison. 

I know perfectly well that you avoided it, and that you avoided 
it wisely and properly, but it was brought out in evidence, and 
I think you will agree with me in what I have said, because 
this is not a vindictive, cruel, or unfair prosecution, and I think 
I have very seldom heard of such a thing in my life, although 
1 have been in the habit of listening to prosecutions during the 
last five and tw^enty or thirty years, and I have known a great 
deal about such things. I have instanced this to show you what 
a foolish argument that would be, a very unjust argument to be 
advanced in such a serious question as one of life or death — it 

3«5 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


ilr^stioe is so foolish an argument that 1 just mentioned it — I do not saj 
that any kind of weight attaches to it. Go on to another 
matter. With regard to these things I have pointed out, and 


which I think ought to be pointed out, and which it was my 
duty to point out, in order to show that no weight whatever 


is to be attached to these matters, 1 will also mention what has 


been given in evidence about Mrs. Maybrick saying to the 
druggist that the flies were beginning to be troublesome in the 
kitchen — a statement which at the time, and under the circum- 


stances, you can hardly doubt that it was not truly made; but 
there is a great proportion of people who are in the habit — I do 
not like to use the harsh word “ lie ” — but there are a great 
many people who are in the habit of telling little untruths, little 
fibs, almost without having any particular object in view. I 
may point out that when Mrs. IMaybrick purchased these, as she 
says, for the purpose of preparing a cosmetic, she might not 
like to tell the chemist what her purpose was, and not being 
a very scrupulous person — as we all ought to be about telling 
falsehoods — she might have said that the flies were troublesome 
in order not to excite the man's curiosity as to her little devices 
of dress. That is another instance of what I have described 


of attaching too much importance to small things, and I ask 
you to be on your guard against, and not to attach a degree of 
weight to them to which they are not entitled. No doubt we 
all know that when a person in a novel is going to commit a 
crime there are a number of these things which occur to the 
novelist, and are skilfully arranged, so that one may say after- 
wards, ** Oh, what a clever fellow you are, how surprisingly 
well you have written that. You have introduced every kind 
of precaution that was possible. How much you know of the 
way of criminals." But that is one of the distinctions — one 
of the very many distinctions — between what passes in novels and 
what passes in real life. You may, if a person is addicted to 
the habit of reading novels, you can tell after reading only one 
or two pages not only who is going to marry who, but also who 
is going to poison who. But that is not the way in which you 
must look upon grave matters of this description. You must 
take things as they happen in real life, and be on your watch 
against doing otherwise; for if you do, you are almost certain 
to attach gr^at importance to things which are probably mere 
trifles. If you do attach any importance to such things they 
are almost sure to make against the prisoner, and for the 
very reason that if they did not make against the prisoner they 
would not have been introduced by the writer. They may be 
also accounts that are entirely fictitious arising from the charge 
that is ultimately made. I mention this, though perhaps it is 
hardly worth mentioning, in order to remind you in dealing 
with this topic, that you must form your opinion of materials 


126 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

of firm, solid moment, excluding all those which are not of that 
class, especially as they usually more or less militate against *^>*®*^ 
the person implicated. 

I now come to other points. A question always gone into in 
matters of this nature is the question of motive. I do not 
myself think that the impossibility of assigning a motive — I 
do not myself think that it is always possible to assign a motive, 
or that it is always desirable to do so. If you cannot find 
a motive, well you can’t, and you must consider the fact with- 
out the light that motive would throw upon it. But when clear 
evidence of motive can be given, that clear evidence is a matter 
of the very first importance to consider. Now, gentlemen, in 
this case I am bound reluctantly to say that there is strong 
evidence for your consideration of the prisoner having been 
actuated by a motive at once strong and disgraceful. The 
learned counsel for the defence found himself called 
upon to speak with pathos and eloquence upon this sub- 
ject. and some familiar quotations to you have been made, 
and some familiar observations repeated, about the inequality 
with which the world judges, and in particular about 
the inequality with which the world at large judges the conduct 
of men and the conduct of women. I shall say absolutely 
nothing upon that subject. It is not to the point. We have 
not to determine any moral question at all, but simply to look 
at the matter as it comes before us, and with reference to the 
well-known and well-established principles of human conduct. 

There is one thing in this matter upK)n which there can be no 
doubt whatever ; in fact, we have it now stated by Mrs. 
Maybrick herself, that she did, about the latter part of March 
last, carry on an adulterous intercouse with this man Brierley. 

She went up to London for that purpose, and she stayed for 
some nights at the hotel there with him. They stayed together 
as man and wife, and she afterwards returned and went about 
her other duties. I do not think it necessary or desirable — 
it certainlv is not desirable — to read anything which is not 
necessary in such a matter. I do not think it desirable to say 
anything or read to you the correspondence between the prisoner 
and Mr. .Flatman, who kept the hotel in question. It proves 
nothing except that she did make preparations to come up to 
London, and made preparations to stay at this hotel for the 
purpose of meeting Mr. Brierley. What certainly is the most 
remarkable feature in the case about her conduct is that 
Brierley is not the first person who appeared at the hotel in 
London, or who appeared at the hotel in a very questionable 
position. We cannot go into the matter in detail. We do not 
know precisely what happened, or who was the person, or what 
he did. As we do know, some person, not being Brierley, met 
her at that hotel earlier in the evening, that he went out with 

327 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


her to various places. That the vraiter, a man named Schweisa 
fftnAim — j suppose a Swiss or a German — said that they had 

not come home when he went to bed. So that she had left 
her husband, coming to London, meeting a man who has not 
been recognised, who is not known, and with him passing a 
very large portion of this day apparently.* It was a very 
curious transaction indeed. Whoever this man is, she is seen 
at breakfast with another man, who probably may have been 
Mr. Brierley, but he has not been positively identified, and 
he seems to have disappeared in the course of the day. After 
that she was undoubtedly in the company of Brierley ; that is 
clear. I do not think there is much evidence as to where they 
went that day — but this is not a divorce case, and we will not 
go into those details — but she did sleep with Brierley that 
night. They stopped that night at the hotel, and the result 
was they stayed together for two or three nights. These 
are letters which were found in her room at Battlecrease House ; 
and I confess that it is to me a most extraordinary thing that 
any woman having the least regard for her character and 
reputation should not have put the letters in the fire the 
moment she received them. However, she did not; and this 
is rather curious, in view of a remark made by Mr. Addison 
in relation to another part of the case, to which I will call 
your attention afterwards — I mean the keeping of a large 
number of poisons which were found in the house. There are 
several letters w’hich have been given in evidence, and which 
bear upon this subject. It appears that the guilty visit to 
London, which took place somewhere about the 2l6t March, 
had excited a great deal of anxiety in the minds of her friends 
who were living in London, and to whom, from what we can 
gather, she would naturally have gone, but to whom she did 
not go. I am bound to tell you what I think of this case, and 
I am bound to say it is remarkable, because it appears from 
the correspondence that her relations seem to have complained 
bitterly of the mass of falsehoods which she told them on those 
matters. I will just read them to you, and then you will say 
what you think ; I may just observe that they appear to be 
connected with the guilty intrigue itself. It is not my business 
to speak as a moralist, but there is one horrible and lamentable 
result of a connection of that sort which renders it almost a 
moral necessity, it furnishes the strongest possible provocation, 
the strongest possible inducement, for entering upon a system 
of the most disgraceful intrigue, and telling a great number of 
lies. ^Fhere is a letter on the 13th April from Mrs. Baillie to 

* The judge would seem to have assumed rather too much here. Mr. 

Levy in a footnote says, **Thi8 gentleman, an old family friend of the 
Maybricks, could easily have been produced and have proved that nothing 
improper passed between them, if tnat had been necessary. ** 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

Mrs. May brick, having reference to the Grand Hotel incident, 
and speaking of the great anxiety all were in, and this letter 
charges Mrs. May brick with systematic falsehood ; but as 
to whether this systematic falsehood would be actuated by this 
intrigue, I am afraid I shall have to refer to in another part of 
this case. Well, there is another letter on the 7th of May, 
1889, to Mrs. Maybrick, and that letter is signed Your 
sincere friend, John.’* Who John is we don’t know, but I 
don’t think it matters in this case to ascertain who he was, 
but it is a very strange letter. The letter was found by Nurse 
Yapp, when Mr. Maybrick was very ill. It says — “ I intended 
to write you fully, but I have, of course, been afraid to do so, 
for my own sake and your own. In consequence I have been 
compelled to submit to several censorious letters. You cer- 
tainly did make a mess of it when you were last in London, 
and really it was quite unnecessary and still worse to tell so 
many fibs. When one once gets into the meshes, the least 
contretemps is quite enough to spoil everything. I told my 
aunts the truth, as it seemed to be the best thing for me to 
do. I said we went to the Grand Hotel, and w^ent to the Gaiety, 
and went home in a cab.” This certainly seems to imply that 
this John must have been the man who took her out when she 
came to London, and met her at the hotel in Henrietta Street. 
** I went to the Grand Hotel and dined, and then went to the 
Gaiety, and came home in a cab.” That letter is dated 
” Junior Travellers’ Club, 8 St. James’s Square.” Then comca 
another letter, but I am not quite sure whether it was proved 
to be in Brierley’s handwriting. It is signed A. B.” Can 
you tell me, Mr. Addison, about this letter? It commences. 

My dear Plorrie.” 

Mr. Addison — ^Yes, my lord. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — Do you know Mr. Brierley’s hand- 
writing? 

Mr. PiCKPORD — The handwriting is not proved ; that is my 
recollection. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — ^Well, is there any witness in Court 
who is acquainted with Brierley’s handwriting? Is Brierley 
here? 

Mr. Addison — Yes, he was subpoenaed by the prosecution. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — It is a very painful thing to call him 
here. However, this letter is not brought for the purpose of 
evidence,* but it was found in her possession. The writer 
further stated that he thought there would be some difficulty 
about Mrs. Maybrick’s reception at their house again. He 
further said, “ I forgot to say, also, that my aunts discovered 
that you did not stay at the Griund ” . . and now, 

* Was the judge justified in reading this letter of ** John K.’* to the 

Jury T It had not apparently been put in by Mr. Addison. 


3^9 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

I&SSS- once for all, I am not going to be led into telling any more liee^^ 
or doing any underhand and dangerous missions. 1 am quite 
in the dark as to what all this mystery is for/’ . . I 

am tired of all this scheming, which seems to be endangering 
your reputation at a most critical time. If I could see I was 
serving your interests in any way, I would not speak as 
strongly; besides, I have my own interests to think of, and, 
although you might think me veiy selfish I shall take the 
utmost care of them. 1 shall be glad to have a long letter 
from you in reply to this, but I will have no abuse. Address 
me here. I am thinking of going away from here for a night 
or two.” [The learned judged then quoted the letter, in 
which the writer spoke of a previous communication as a 
staggerer, and in which he spoke of taking a round trip to the 
Mediterranean. Commenting on these letters, he continued] — 
I do not know that the letter is of itself a circumstance of much 
importance, but these two letters certainly do show in the 
most unmistakable terms what was the position of this woman 
as regards wicked falsehoods. Here are different persons con- 
nected with her, charging her with living in a maze of false- 
hoods, which was really essential for the position in which she 
had placed herself. That is a specimen of the correspondence 
she was carrying on at the time at which she wrote a letter 
like this, a very grave and great disgrace. I am not going 
to say another word about the circumstances under which that 
letter came to the hands of Bryning, for that letter is genuine, 
and that it is here before you admits of no sort of doubt. The 
letter, and not the means by which it was obtained, is of such 
terrible importance- The letter begins thus, ” Dearest.” 
That shows they were, therefore, on affectionate terms, and the 
day on which it was written was the day on which it was 
discovered, Wednesday, the 8th of May. At that time you 
will recollect, that was the day on which Nurse Gore came into 
charge. It was on the day on which, certainly, Mr. Maybrick 
was very ill, and on which she afterwards declared that she 
was suffering under the greatest feeling of degradation because 
her place was taken from her by her relations. Yet, on that 
day, she unhappily writes this letter, which I have read at 
various times with feelings which I shall not describe — ” Your 

letter under cover to John K came in just after I had 

written to you on Monday.” She had, therefore, written to 
him on Monday, but the letter is not before us. ” I did not 
expect to hear from you so soon, and had delayed giving the 
necessary instructions. Since my return 1 have been nursing 
M. day and night. He is sick unto death. The doctors held 
a consultation yesterday, and now all depends upon how long 
his strength will hold out.” I will just observe, the account 
given by certain of the doctors on that day is exactly opposed 

330 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

to that. So far from being sick unto death, and it being a jfr Jjwy— 
mere question of how long his strength would hold out even, 

I will say for some days after that Dr. Humphreys still expected 
a favourable result. However, she says — He is sick luito 
death. Both my brothers -in-law are here ; we are terribly 
anxious. I can^t answer your letter fully to-day, my darling. 

I will just point out here for your attention how strangely 
words of endearment, and such words of endearment as we 
usually find in the very closest and lovable relations of life, 
how strangely they read on this occasion. But relieve your 
mind from all fear of discovery now or in the future.'' That 
is vei y much like saying — My husband is going to die, and 
you needn't be afraid that anybody will ever know as to what 
has passed between us." He has been delirious since Sun- 
day." But that w'as not so, as she knew, having been with 
him all the time. " I know that he is perfectly ignorant of 
everything, even the name of the street, and I think he has not 
been making any inquiries whatever, that all he told me was 
a pure fabrication, and only invented to frighten the truth out 
of me. I am sure he believes me, although he won't admit it. 

You needn't therefore go abroad on this account, dearest, but 
in any case please do not leave England until I have seen you 
once again. You must feel that those two letters of mine 
were written under circumstances which can never excuse their 
injustice in your eyes." What they were we do not know. 

Do you suppose I could act as I am doing if I really meant 
and felt what I inferred then?" From this it would appear 
that there must have been some kind of misunderstanding 
between them ; and that appears from what I read just now in 
the letter which I said was apparently for him. " If you wish 
to write to me about anything do so now, as all letters pass 
through my hands at present. Excuse this scrawl, my own 
darling, but I dare not leave the room for a moment, and I 
do not know when I shall be able to w'rite to you again. — In 
haste, yours ever, Florrie." Gentlemen, that is the letter 
which came into the possession of Mr. Edwin Maybrick, and 
which was shown by him to his brother Michael in the course 
of Wednesday, when Mr. James Maybrick was very ill, although 
not so ill, not by any means so ill, as that letter implies. In 
order not to do any injustice in the matter, I think it neoes- 
«ary to read to you a word or two from Dr. Humphreys' 
evidence as to the history of the case, and as to what passed 
that afternoon. I saw him at 8.30 on Wednesday (that is 
this date). He was going on favourably, and no worse. I 
saw Mrs. Maybrick that morning. I don't remember saying 
anything to her on his state. There was no sickness. He 
had had a restless night. He said his throat was better. I did 

331 



Mr JuMtiem 


Trial of Mrs May brick. 

not tell Mrs. May brick that it depended upon how long hia 
strength would hold, or that he was sick unto death, or that 
he had been delirious from Sunday. There is nothing to 
show that he had been delirious at all at that time. I will 
look through my notes and see. Oh, there is this. “ On 
Sunday I saw Mrs. Maybrick, and said to her, ‘ Would you 
like to see any doctor, as he is worse than he has ever b^n 
before? ’ She then said she did not think it necessary, as 
he had had so many doctors, and that there was very little 
good done him.’’ Dr. Carter was called in on the Tuesday, 
and Dr. Humphreys consulted with him. That is really the 
whole of what happened at that time. Now, as I say I know 
nothing to justify the expressions in this letter, I think that 
Dr. Humphreys expressed that he did not apprehend even so 
late as that night that Mr. Maybrick would die — he did not at 
that time apprehend that he would die. 

And this is the position in which she reported his health to 
be on the day on which she wrote this letter. What can you 
infer from that, except that she wished this man to believe 
that her husband was very ill and likely to die? ''It is all a 
question how long his strength will hold out, and that he will 
soon die.” Now you have the matter put plainly. What 
does that show to you? I know, in some cases of illness, 
apprehension that a person to whom you are fondly attached 
will die is one of the dreadful thoughts which most of us have 
had occasion in the course of our lives to know only too well. 
But it may be — I am only saying it is possible — a thought 
which gives a dreadful satisfaction if the woman really hopes 
and wishes that her husband should die. And if she tells a 
man with whom she has lately committed adultery in the 
manner described, then is it not a very strong and cogent 
reason for thinking that she wished she might be free to live 
with the man to whom she made the greatest sacrifice that a 
woman can possibly make, that she might be rid of her hus- 
band, for whom she entertained little affection? Gentlemen, 
I am on the question of motive, and I point out to you a motive 
which I feel to be my duty not to overlook — I cannot. It is 
& sad and terrible case. It is a case which in many w^ays 
appeals to the feelings of every man who has a heart ; but I 
feel to do my duty is to see that things are put before you 
which ought to be put before you, and I ask you whether the 
matter which I now suggest is not supj>orted by terrible 
evidence? And look back for a moment, when you speak of 
it now, on the scenes which took place before. A blow, a black 
eye, a half-leaving the house, readiness to leave the house, 
consultation with Dr. Hopper, and then is it a complete recon- 
ciliation for the sake of the children? Do you believe that 

332 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

people change in that kind of way ? Do you think that a 
quarrel of the sort can be made up by the family doctor, who 
is not very intimate with them — that the saying, Oh I you 
had better make it up; kiss and be friends,'' would settle it? 
You must act upon your own experience ; and do you think 
that if such a reconciliation had been sincere, and that there 
had been a real putting away of causes of strife, after that 
would she have made an assignation with the lover of whom 
he had apparently been jealous when he saw her with him — 
for I should be apt to assume that it was with him — after 
going up to London and living with him in the commission of 
adultery for two days! 

You are to be the judges in this matter, but this terrible 
consideration — which it is impossible — from which it is impos- 
sible, and from which it would be a terrible dereliction of duty 
to avert your minds — you must fully consider before you give 
your final answer. Now, so much as to motive in such a case 
as this ; she had an awful temptation, and I have pointed 
out to you such evidence as there was that she may have given 
way to it. 

Mr. Addison — May I point out to you, my lord, in favour of 
the prisoner, that the Grand National was on the 29th of 
March, and the reconciliation took place on the 30th — the week 
after she was in I.ondon. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — You are quite right. 

Mr. Addison — The only assignation after that is a letter in 

which she says she would like to see him. 

•> 

Mr. Justice Stephen — You are quite right ; I have made a 
mistake, and I am sorrv I have done so in a case of this 
importance. But I have made a mistake, and Mr. Addison has 
done very properly in reminding me of it, and I thank him for 
doing so. It certainly does appear that the reconciliation took 
place some time before — that which is called the reconciliation 
took place on the 30th March, the Grand National having taken 
place on the 28th or 29tli. But although I have certainly made 
a mistake with regard to that which took place after the 
meeting in London, and no doubt it is true that it deprives 
my remarks of part of their weight, yet I do not think it 
deprives them of all weight in this way, that after the recon- 
ciliation had taken place, after the meeting in London, she 
writes this letter. Can you think this reconciliation was true, 
when on the 8th May she is writing to this man in terms of 
endearment and in the spirit of a lover? If you desire to find 
whether the reconciliation is true, I say look at the conduct 
of the parties afterwards, and I ask you if the reconciliation 
could be really sincere when it took place on the 30th April***" 


* This should be March. 

333 


Mr J ueUm 
StephM 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

ihp Jgwtte a and this letter was written on the 8th May? That is how it 

5ttpbm stands, and how the matter of motive presents itself to my 
mind. 

Gentlemen, I will pass away from that part of the subject. 
I will pass to other circumstances in the case which are greatly 
suspicious, and therefore I will use the greater precaution in 
dealing with them. There are some highly serious matters 
which are distinguished by this peculiarity, that the prisoner 
has made a statement about them. Before I comment on that 
I will make a few observations with regard to the fact that she 
was able to do so. Gentlemen, it is one of the distinctive 
peculiarities of Englai^d — if I were a lecturer on the subject 
I could give you the history about how that law came into 
force — but it is one of the distinctive peculiarities of the law 
of England, although not written down in any statute, that no 
one is allowed to question the prisoner. In foreign countries 
the questioning of the prisoner is sometimes the most important 
part of the whole proceedings, and it has been considered to 
give rise to scenes which lead to a contest between the prisoner 
and the judge of a nature extremely displeasing to all British 
feeling, and the more particularly on occasions such as this. 
I shall say nothing about that, except that at one time it was 
the practice of England, although that practice has now been 
long forgotten — disused, roughly speaking, and with a very 
few slight exceptions, for over two hundred years, and the 
practice of asking the prisoner no questions has arisen up in 
place of it. Gentlemen, some time ago, some years ago, there 
was a very great question which arose as to the conduct of a 
member of the bar, who said, ** I know nothing about the 

matter, but as the mouth of the prisoner is closed I tell you 

flo and so.” That was carefully considered by the judges who 
deliberated whether that practice was permissive or not, and 
the majority of the judges ruled it was not permissive. If you 
consider the matter you will see very readily it may be reason- 
able enough to let the prisoner say what he likes ; but to let 

the counsel say what the prisoner likes is exposing the prisoner’s 
oounsel to temptations to throw what is told him into his own 
manner, to use his own expressions in dressing up that which 
the prisoner has told him, and this is likely to injure the 
administration of justice. And therefore it was held it was not 
proper to allow the prisoner’s counsel to make himself the 
mouthpiece of the prisoner. And then arose the other ques- 
tion — “ How if the prisoner wishes to make a statement 
himself?” and that was a good deal discussed. No uniform 
practice has prevailed since that time ; but a considerable 
number of judges (myself for one) were of opinion that if the 
prisoner chose to make a statement he should not be prevented 
from doing so. It ought to be made in such a way as to be the 

334 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

statement of the priyoner himself, and not to be a matter M r Jj Mtt OT 
arranged between the prisoner and the prisoner’s counsel. That ^^®**^** 
was and is now some years ago. Since this took place, and 
I on a good many occasions since that time always — ^when I 
have been requested to do so — I have always said, “ If you like 
to make a statement you can make it yourself; you may make 
it, and say what you like, but I, nor the Court at large, nobody 
has any right to ask you any questions about it; nobody has 
any right.” I, as a general rule, said, ''That you had no 
right at all to allow the prisoner in any way to make such a 
statement.” I said, if Mrs. Maybrick wished to make a state- 
ment precautions must be taken that it shall be her own 
statement, and I would not allow anybody to ask her questions. 

The result accordingly was that the whole of Sunday she 
managed so that she should be able to make any statement 
that she thought w^ell to make, and she did make her state- 
ment, after Sir Charles Russell had an opportunity of examining 
•all his witnesses. I said on that occasion that I had gone to 
the very utmost length to which the law would allow me to go, 
and that I did not think it would be right that the witness 
should be called who would say what she had said about the 
matter before. I thought the effect of that would be contrary 
to the principles of English justice, and that it would be in 
effect allowing the prisoner, by going and making a statement 
to some persons who repeat it afterwards, and therefore would 
be cross-examined upon it — it would be doing away with that 
part of the law of England which at present, to my mind most 
unhappily, most unjustly — say, rather most unwisely than 
unjustly — prevents prisoners from being called as witnesses on 
their own behalf. I should have much preferred if it had been 
in my power to allow her to be called as a witness and ques- 
tioned, instead of leaving her merely to give her own account 
of this matter in her own language. Well, the result was that 
she did make a statement, and you heard it, and I will proceed 
to read it over to you, and to comment upon it; and in doing 
so, or rather as a preparation for doing so, I wish to say a 
word or two to some persons who, I think, have not quite under- 
stood the principles upon which certain things have been 
reported in the course of this trial. Mr. Addison objected to 
the introduction of newspaper statements, and in particular to 
a statement contained in a copy of the Lancet y wherein he held 
certain statements were made which were not right and proper 
to lay before the jury. Yet it may be said in connection with 
his remarks upon the subject that it was proposed to receive a 
shorter note taken of the statement which was made. I will 
point out to you that there is really no inconsistency between 
the two things. The statement in the Lancet y and pimilar 

335 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

M» jrattlee statements to which reference was made, were statements about 
medical cases involving the result of a great number of medical 
and other observations, which nobody ever thought at the time 
of inquiring into and rendering fit to be put before the jury in 
the way in which we have been occupied during the last week. 
I said, as I always say, that should it be said, for instance, 
that we did not say the person who died of arsenic was a man 
of such an age, that he was taken ill on such a day, and he 
manifested this, that, and the other symptoms — I should reply 
at once to the remarks, ‘‘Why we have come here in order to 
ascertain how that was — we have exhausted, I may say, all 
the sciences of the law of England in order to be sure that that 
was done; and why take as a solemn legal proof of all these 
important matters the statements in some medical work, the 
author of which probably may take fair care about it, but could 
not possibly have liad a right to put these things forward as a 
matter which must be taken for granted in any judicial 
inquiry ? The difficulty of letting in statements made in books 
of that kind is the difficulty that it assumes that they are 
themselves the result of such procedure as this, w'hereas they 
are the result of nothing of the kind. We don’t know how 
they are stated, who observes them, what degree of talent the 
writer had for taking down necessary facts, or what was the 
degree of information he had with regard to the particular facts 
mentioned. Therefore, as we don’t know how far the statements 
are correct, we will only attend to the sworn testimony, which 
we can test, and not the testimony of books which w’e cannot 
test. Suppose we imagine that there has been a battle 
fought in Egypt. Suppose you were to take, for the purpose 
of a criminal trial, a newspaper account of that battle, how 
could you possibly rely upon it — I mean rely upon it with that 
degree of definite decision which is absolutely necessary when 
you are dealing with any facts that you have to consider t But 
you can use it, because it is within the competency of gentlemen 
connected with newspapers to take down a short statement of 
that kind in almost absolute accuracy, and because every one 
of us who has experience of taking notes knows perfectly well 
that the reporter who does nothing but catch the words which 
are repeated before him would give a far better account of 
the statement than one who is not so engaged. I feel, therefore, 
that in reading what I am about to read to you I am appealing 
to my own recollection of what Mrs Maybrick said. I therefore 
feel that I shall do her no injustice by reading her statement 
from a newspaper report which I know to be substantially what 
she stated. 

[The judge quoted the statement at length, and then con- 
tinued.] 

3J^ 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

About the fly-papere there is some kind of evidence, though » Justlee 
I must say it is very insufficient, about some of these things ** 

being used for cosmetic purposes. I think the very last witness, 

Mr. James Bioletti, said something about it. He said, ** I 
have used arsenic as a toilet preparation. I have used it on a 
few occasions as a depilatory for hair with three parts of slaked 
lime. I sell it in bottles. I have often been asked about 
arsenic as a cosmetic, but I have only occasionally prepared it 
when specially asked for it. I remember mixing once some 
arsenic with milk of almonds.^’ It is a singular thing that, if 
this is a fact she has stated, there should not be witnesses to 
prove it. Gentlemen, this statement is made under circum- 
stances which you can well remember. It was stated that it 
was known before, and Sir Charles Russell wished to call wit- 
nesses who had heard it long before it was brought before the 
Court. It must, therefore, have been under the consideration 
of Mrs. Maybrick’s legal advisers. Why are there no witnesses 
to prove it? If she knew that her young friends were in the 
habit of using things of this kind, why was it more difficult, or 
why would it take more time or cost more money, to get wit- 
nesses from Germany? This is a thing which might have been 
done. She is a person who — very likely owing to the kindness 
of Mr. Cleaver, but that is not the point — obviously has the 
means of procuring excellent legal advice, and of providing 
evidence which costs considerable sums of money. Why is 
there no evidence ? Why is the matter brought forward only at 
the last moment in this way when it is no longer possible to 
test it in any way? She was in the habit of using a face-wash 
prescribed by Dr. Gregg, of Brooklyn, which prescription she 
says she lost. Surely if she was in the habit of using that face- 
wash, she was comparatively in the habit of getting prescriptions 
made up somewhere in the neighbourhood of the place where 
she lives, at some chemist's. And he would be in a position 
to know about Dr. Gregg, of Brooklyn, and would be able to 
testify to that portion ; but on that subject no evidence is forth- 
coming. It is certainly very strange that there is no evidence 
of this matter in the defence. What Mr. Maybrick did many 
years ago in America, when he lived in Norfolk, Virginia, we 
have heard. We have the retired chemist, who recognised him 
from a photograph, and said he was in the habit of taking 
pick-me-ups with liquor arsenicalis in them for eighteen months. 

It is very singular there is no evidence brought forward to 
substantiate this part of the case about Dr. Gregg, of Brooklyn. 

Then, again, she mentions her mother, saying that she knew 
her habit for years of using arsenic face- wash. Where is her 
mother? In that unhappy correspondence which I read to you 
there is reference to her mothef. Mrs. Baillie points out that 

Y 337 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


Mp Jnftiee fibo wrote to her, and exchanged letters with her mother, with 
Stoiilie ^ view to relieving her own anxiety. But why is not her 
mother called if she knew this, if she knew that Mrs. May brick 
had been in the habit for many years of using an arsenical 
cosmetic? It may be said because she never thought of it, 
and that she could not be expected to know the importance of 
calling her mother. If that is so, it puzzles me still more, 
because evidence was tendered to show that she made this state- 


ment, or substantially the same statement, long ago before 
she was committed. There has been ample time to call her 
mother to prove anything, and to call some other of those young 
friends in Germany whom she says used this solution from fly- 
papers. This is very curious ; I might say a much stronger 
word. It is a most painful duty for me to make those observa- 
tions ; but I cannot refuse to say to you that which occurs to 
my mind upon reading a statement like this. 

Now, we will go on — ** My lord, I wish to refer to the bottle 
of meat essence. On Thursday night, the 9th of May, after 
Nurse Gore had given my husband the beef tea, I went and sat 
on the bed beside him. He complained to me of feeling very 
sick, very weak, and very depressed. But he implored me 
then to give him this powder which he had referred to early 
in the evening, and which I declined to give him. I was over- 
wrought, terribly anxious, miserably unhappy, and his evident 
distress utterly unnerved me. He had told me that the powder 
would not harm him, and tliat I could put it in his food. I 
then consented. My lord, I hadn’t one true and honest friend 
in the house. I had no one to consult and no one to advise me. 


I was deposed from my position as mistress in my own house, 
and from the position of attending on my husband, notwith- 
standing that he was ill. Notwithstanding the evidence of 
the nurses and servants, I may say that he wished to have me 
with him.” I understand the nurse and the servants to testify 
to the same fact. I thought, certainly, that all of them were 
asked about it, and they said that she behaved very kindly to 
him, that he used to ask for her, and that she used to be con- 
tinually with him. That is quite true. '' Whenever I went 
out of the room he asked for me ; and for four days before he 
died I was not allowed to give him a piece of ice without its 
being taken out of my hand. When I found the powder I took 
it into the inner room with the beef juice, and in pushing 
through the door I upset the bottle. And in order to make up 
the quantity of fluid spilled I added a considerable quantity of 
water.” It was obvious to observe, ‘‘When I foimd the 
powder I took it into the inner room with the meat juice.” I 
do not quite understand why she should take it, but I suppose 
to put into the meat juice, but this is a thing which strikes 




The Judge’s Summing Up. 

me as being very remarkable. When I found the powder I 

took it into the inner room.^* I am sure I speak with the 

greatest possible reluctance, and with the greatest diffidence, but 
when I look at the mass of papers and evidence which have been 
given on the subject, I recollect no evidence of any powder 
lying about on the table, or that she could take the powder 
into the inner room, nor do I recollect — I shall come more fully 
to remind you of the number of things which Mr. Davies said 
were found — but I do not recollect any mention of any powder 
being found of this kind either as being in the sick room or as 
being in the inner room. If Mr. Pickford, or any other gentle- 
man connected with the case, can refer me to any place where 
such powder is mentioned, certainly I shall feel grateful to him, 
and partly by examining my own notes, and partly by examin- 
ing the evidence, I will do my best to give any evidence that 
may have been given on the point. I certainly at the present 
moment recollect no mention of any white powder being placed 
in the room in such a way that it could be seen. Well, I feel, 
too, that there is another difficulty which suggests itself im- 
mediately — ^What powder? Well, I suppose she means to say 

some powder which he wished to drink, or that she would put 
into his food. Now, nowhere in the whole evidence, so far as 
I can see, is there any reference to his wishing to have any 
powder, unless those prescribed for him to put into his food for 
the purpose of relieving his symptoms. Gentlemen, the evi- 
dence about powder in the case is this — ^that on several occasions 
and to several persons she expressed great anxiety about a habit 
which her husband, as she supposed, had of taking — secretly 
taking — some kind of powder. I remind you of the evidence of 

Dr. Hopper, the evidence of Dr. Humphreys, the evidence of 
Mr. Maybrick, as to the letter which she wrote to him — three 
persons at once — and I am not sure that there are not more. 
I may also point out evidence to this effect, that she was 
zealously objecting to his making use of some powder — I think 
she spoke of powder — which she was afraid was of an objection- 
able kind. And, indeed, she spoke to Dr. Humphreys as to 
what would be the effect of his taking strychnine. He gave 
the only answer he could give, When a man takes too much 
strychnine it kills him.” Then there was that further con- 
versation to the effect that if Mr. Maybrick ever died — it struck 
me at the time as being a strange conversation to hold — if he 
ever died suddenly, You can mention ” ^said Dr. Humphreys) 
that you mentioned the matter to me.” In that state of 
things was it natural that an affectionate wife should all of a 
sudden give way to that which her sick husband suggested she 
should do, and do so extraordinary a thing as to put an unknown 
white powder into her sick husband's meat juice? This is a 

339 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick, 


Mp Jnsttee point which presses verj hard upon her. You have heard 

Stephea upon it ; you heard him speak about it with a 

degree of earnestness and impressiveness which 1 am sure 1 

appreciated, which I do not think was answered. But I will 

say no more about it; you have heard him say what was his 

view of the question, and you must ask yourselves whether you 

think that you can find a proper answer to the questions which 

he put together on that subject. They very greatly impressed 

my mind. I am happy to think that I have not to find any 

positive answer to them, but it is a matter for you to see if 

you can, and you must say what you think about it. [His 

lordship proceeded to read another portion of the statement of 

the prisoner, in which she said] — On returning to my room I 

found my husband asleep, and I placed the bottle on the table 

by the window. When he awoke he had a choking sensation 

ill his throat and vomiting. After that he appeared a little 

better, and as he did not ask for the powder again, and as I 

was not anxious to give it to him, I removed the bottle from 

the small table, where it would attract his attention, to the top 

of the washstand.’* Here is a man craving for this powder, 

begging to have it — no doubt she was in a terrible condition at 

the time — and the woman goes to get it, and when she gets 

it she does not give it to him — a very strange result to arrive 

at on this subject. If that story is true, if you can accept it — 

it is a matter for you to decide, but you must take account of 

the imputations of falsehood made against her in those letters. 

Certainlv Sir Charles Russell must have known what the effect 
%/ 

was of the statement she was to make, and I ask you if the 
cross-examination was not in a degree influenced by the know- 
ledge of it ? I do not like it — I am afraid I may be going too 
far in speaking about the counsePs asking a particular question 
— but this story was an essential part of the case, and was to 
be supported as we have heard ; and in connection with the 
meat juice, it is rather a striking circumstance that a counsel 
of the eminence of Sir Charles Russell, who must have had the 
whole thing in his mind, took so little notice of it as he did. 

I have said enough about that ; I will go on with the rest of the 
case. It is certainly a fair observation in this matter. I have 
already brought to your attention the dreadful state of distress, 
alarm, and confusion of every kind which existed in that house 
owing to the discovery of that dreadful letter — I call it so 
advisedly — and which must have thrown all the persons into 
disorder. The prisoner said, Until Tuesday, the 14th of 
May, the Tuesday after my husband's death, and until a few 
minutes before Mr. Bryning made this terrible charge against 
me, no one in that house had informed me of the fact that a 
death certificate had been refused, and that a post-mortem 

MO 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 


examination had taken place, or that there was any reason Wr Jastiee 
to suppose that my husband had died from other than natural ®*®®**** 
causes. It was only when Mrs. Briggs alluded to the presence 
of arsenic in the meat juice that I was made aware of the 
nature of the powder my husband had asked me to give him. I 
then attempted to make an explanation to Mrs. Briggs, such 
as I am stating to your lordship, when a policeman interrupted 
the conversation, and put a stop to it.*’ 

I pass no opinion on those persons who were sorely tried — 
it was a severe ordeal. I have already made such remarks 
as occur to me on the subject. I bewail the misery of the 
whole transaction, but I think, from the way it is mentioned 
here, it would be almost impossible to expect any woman in 
the world to be just to others under such circumstances, or 
not to feel a deep and solemn indignation against them and 
their doings. But the whole question comes back to this — 
whether their suspicions were right, or whether their suspicions 
were wrong? If it was that they were right, the matter is 
at an end one way; if it was that they were wrong, which I 
suppose every person in the Court hopes will be the case, then 
it will be a question upon which much cannot be said. I 
have told you what I thought of the conduct of the policeman. 

I thought he acted like an honourable man. He felt that the 
conversation which was about to take place was not one which 
he would have wished to hear, which probably he ought not 
to hear, and, therefore, he checked it. I think his action 
was wise. I have to make one remark more. At the end 
of the examination of the prisoner before the magistrates a 
question is always put to the prisoner, and which, I have 
no doubt, was put in this case, and that question is, You 
have heard the evidence against you, do you wish to say 
anything about it? ” The form in which it was put was, 

'' Florence Elizabeth Maybrick, having heard the evidence, 
do you wish to say anything in reply to the charge? You 
are not obliged to say anything unless you desire to do so, 
but whatever you say will be taken down in writmg, and may 
be given in evidence against you at your trial. And you are 
also clearly to understand that you have nothing to hope from 
any promise or favour that might be holden out to you, ani 
nothing to fear from any threat to induce you to make any 
admission of your guilt; but whatever you now say will be 
taken down in writing, and may be given in evidence against 
you at your trial, notwithstanding such promise or threat.” 
Whereupon she said, by the advice of Mr. Pickford, I reserve 
my defence.” That is what the prisoner said in answer to 
that question. I can hardly — I think Mr. Pickford has done 
his duty throughout the whole of these proceedings in a manner 

34X 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

lU^Jnttlee whioh deserves the highest respect and satisfaction, and it 

steiilMii must be a satisfaction for him to reflect upK>n ; but I cannot 
help thinking that if on that occasion he had said, ** Say 
what you have to say now about the fly-papers and the meat 
juice,” and if she had then told the story which she has now 
told, I think it would have been better. I don’t say — I have 
no right to say — more. I have the greatest confidence in 

Mr. Pickford’s judgment, and I should be sorry to say that 
he did not act properly. He might have act^ properly as 
far as I know, but if he had thought fit to advise her to tell 
them the account given now, I think it would have been a 
wiser course to take. I may say that in the course of my 
long and wide experience of administering criminal justice, I have 
had the same thought occurring to me many many times when I 
have heard that answer given. I think if the prisoner really 
has important things to say which are capable of being made 
the basis of defence, then, for his own and the public interest, 
the sooner he distinctly says them the better for him and for 
all concerned. In conclusion, I have only to add that for 
the love of our children and for the sake of their future, a 
perfect reconciliation had taken place between us, and that on 
the day before his death I made a full and free confession to 
him and received his entire forgiveness for the fearful wrong 
I had done him.” A person cannot but be deeply moved on 
hearing such a statement. Whatever one’s feelings may be, 
one is obliged to ask oneself whether that story is true or not 
— whether she really did make a confession to her husband 
of her intrigue with Mr. Brierley, and whether under those 
circumstances a reconciliation did take place, which we may 
all hope did. I don’t know that the legal aspect of the case 
is aflfected by its taking place or not taking place. But no 
doubt it will be a satisfaction to think that so terrible and 
sad — particularly dark in respect of that part of it^ — a story 
may have ended, I won't say happily, but not without one 
last gleam of sunshine. When we come to consider that 
statement we find that its truth depends upon the evidence. 

Before I entirely leave this matter I shall read over to you 
part of the evidence which I have not before read, but which 
it appears to me will come in at this time in an appropriate 
way — that is, the evidence of the nurses who were attendant 
on her and her unhappy husband at this time. The whole thing 
hangs together. There are several incidents in it on which I 
wish to remark, and I will therefore read this evidence to you. 
It is the evidence of Nurse Gore, who says she is a certified nurse, 
and was called in to attend Mr. James Maybrick on the 8th of 
May. He was then ill in bed. “ I heard,” she says, he 
had been vomiting before I arrived. He did not on that day 

343 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 


vomit after I arrived. He seemed quite conscious. I asked Mr Jnttle# 
Mrs. May brick what was the matter. She said that the doctor ®^J^***** 
did not know, but that she believed he wag suffering from fevered 
stomach. Shortly after I arrived I gave him some medicine. 

Mrs. May brick brought it from the lavatory, and told me to 
give it him. I put the glass on the table in the bedroom, 
and afterwards threw the medicine out, as I wanted the glass 
to give him food.'* It seems rather strange that there was 
but one glass for both food and medicine, but it evidently was 
so. Continuing, she says, “ On Thursday night I moistened 
his mouth with glycerine and borax." There was some little 
doubt about a handkerchief being used, but it would be, if 
used, evidently in this way (his lordship here illustrated the 
action by putting his handkerchief to his mouth). After that 
the nurse says he had a restless night, and slept only two hours 
and fifty five minutes. About 11.20 on the Friday morning 
Mrs. Maybrick passed through the room where the nurse was 
then, and took a Valentine's meat juice bottle, which she carried 
into the inner room, and there remained about two minutes. 

The door was not locked, but was shut to. I do not think 
that that agrees with Mrs. Maybrick 's account of it, though I 
do not know that the two accounts are altogether inconsistent. 

The witness said, Mrs. Maybrick took away the meat juice 
and went into the dressing-room. The door was not latched, 
but pushed to." Thi^ is not the impression that Mrs. May- 
brick's statement gives; and I think I may safely say there is 
no evidence at all to confirm Mrs. Maybrick 's statement that 
her husband was anxious for this powder, and that she should 
put it into his food. The witness said, “ She told me to get 
ice and bathe his head. She raised her hand and put the bottle 
on the table from which she had taken it." The witness 
seems to have had a special warning about Mrs. Maybrick not 
administering food or medicine to her husband. In cross- 
examination, Nurse Gore said she entered the room before mid- 
night and gave the deceased some of Valentine's meat juice. 

It was a few minutes after eleven. She got the bottle from 
Mr. Edwin Maybrick on Wednesday night, and it was a fresh 
one. On Thursday night she opened the bottle, taking the 
cover off, and the cork out. She gave one or two spoonfuls 
in water to Mr. Maybrick, and he was not sick after taking it, 
though it was said he had been sick before after having had 
it. [His lordship here read from the Liver 'pool Daily Post 
verbatim report the account which Nurse Gore gave of the 
suspicious circumstance of Mrs. Maybrick taking the bottle of 
meat juice out of the room and depositing it on the table again. 

Coming to the part where the nurse said Mrs. Maybrick had 
told her to leave the room and fetch some ice, hiB lordship 

343 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


gp Juitloe commented] — ^That certainly did suggest to my mind that Mrs. 
epnen May brick made an excuse, and tried, by sending Nurse Gore 
out of the room, to get an opportunity of putting arsenic into 
her husband’s meat juice. Nurse Gore, when asked to explain 
how the putting down of the bottle was done, made a gesture, 
and the impression made on my mind was that she struggled 
to say that Mrs. May brick had acted secretly so as to conceal 
what she was doing. Nure Gore goes on to say that her reply 
was, “ I said the patient was asleep, and that I could go out 
when he awoke.” She also says “ When he woke up it was 
with a choking sensation in his throat.” That is what Mrs. 
May brick says, and I do not think there is much difference 
about what took place between the nurse’s account and her 
statement. I do not think I need read to you the cross- 
examination; nothing seems to me very much to turn upon it, 
but it appears that Miss Gallery, who succeeded her, was 
instructed to take care and not give any of the meat juice to 
the patient, and in point of fact it remained where it was until 
taken away by Mr. May brick and given by him to the medical 
men. 

[At this stage the Court adjourned for lunch, the learned 
judge saying he expected to finish in no great length of time. 
Upon his lordship entering the Court after luncheon,] 

Mr. PiCKPQRD said — My lord, before the jury come in I 
should like to say something in reference to a remark of your 
lordship about the prisoner reserving her defence when before 
the magistrates. Whether it was wrong, my lord, it was 
entirely my act, and 

Mr. JusTiCTE Stephen — Oh, pray, Mr. Pickford, dismiss from 
your mind the notion that I in the smallest possible way censure 
what was done, or that I assume there was any kind of division 
between you and Sir Charles Russell. 

Mr. Pickford — It is not that I wish to speak for myself, but 
for Mrs. Maybrick, I only wish to say the action was mine, 
and I take the entire responsibility. Whatever might have 
been the nature of the defence, the magistrates would have 
committed on such a charge, and therefore I reserved the whole 
of the defence. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — Before the adjournment I was reading 
you the evidence of Nurse Gore, and we had just come to the 
conclusion of it. The next witness is Nurse Gallery, in whose 
evidence there is not much particularly important. In Nurse 
Gore’s evidence there is much which was important after the 
statement made by the prisoner. Nurse Gallery speaks more 
as to the state of her patient, of which you have already heard, 
also as to the food and medicines she administered. She said, 
Mrs. Maybrick was there most of the time. She went some- 

344 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

times into the inner room and sometimes into the passage.*^ Mf Justlae 
But this witness says very little that bears upon the matter 
we are dealing with. I think the only part of her evidence 
deserving to be mentioned here is that where she spoke about 
his complaining about pains in the abdomen. The witness also 
stated that he said to Mrs. May brick, “ Don’t give me the 
wrong medicine again,” and she replied, What are you talking 
about? You never had any wrong medicine.” “ She was then 
persuading him,” the witness said, to take some medicine 
which I was offering him. I went off duty at half-past four, 
and Wilson succeeded me. I did not see him again. I adminis- 
tered all the medicine; Mrs. Maybrick did not give him any at 
all.” I do not think all this is of much importance. The next 
evidence that I will mention to you is that of Nurse Wilson. 

She came on duty at five minutes past four on Friday, and she 
stayed till eleven o’clock on Saturday, the day when he died. 

She said that on the Friday night Mr. Maybrick said to his 
wife, Oh, Bunny, Bunny, how could you do it? I did not 
think it of you.” He said this three times over, and he seemed 
to be quite conscious. She said, “ You silly old darling, don’t 
trouble your head about anything.” She afterwards remarked 
to the witness, “ He can’t tell what is the matter with him, or 
what has brought the illness on.” As I have already said in 
other matters, I do not wish to inquire too curiously into what 
that means. It may be that these words bear out what has 
been said by the prisoner, and that those expressions showed 
that she had made the full confession to him of which she speaks 
as having been made the night before his death, and that he 
made a remark to this effect (calling her by a pet name), How 
could you forget yourself so far as to be guilty of this adulterous 
intercourse? I did not think it of you. I never in all the 
world could have thought it.” If he said so, it would be a most 
pathetic way of speaking, and I cannot suggest any other 
explanation of the remark. It has been pointed out to me that 
Dr. Carter spoke of his not being delirious, but if that were so 
it contrasts strongly with what the prisoner said in her letter 
to Mr. Brierley. That is the evidence of the three nurses which 
I have read. I have gone through a very large proportion, 
and perhaps most, of the evidence which bears upon that state- 
ment of hers. 

There are now some other topics which I must direct your 
attention to. I must point out to you for one thing that '^ere 
is one part of this case which is of a most remarkable character, 
and which has not been put so clearly as I wish, but which, I 
think, it is your duty to carefully consider, and that is the 
question about poison. There is evidence about a very con- 
siderable quantity of poison in this house, and more particularly 

345 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


Ip JufUee 
Itephen 


about one or two receptacles which were in the inner room, as 
it has been pointed out. Gentlemen, I think there was 
undoubtedly a large quantity of poison ; it was poison, of which 
it might be said with certainty Mrs. May brick had — I don't 
use the word possession, but to which she undoubtedly had 
access. The room in which the illness took place was the room 
which Mr. and Mrs. May brick used to occupy as husband and 
wife; the inner room to a certain extent seems to have been 
used as a separate room for Mr. Maybrick when he wished for 
it. Whether Mrs. Maybrick slept there, except on special 
occasions, I don't profess to know, but there were in that room 
various things, and in particular there were two hatboxes, which 
stood side by side, and, by the way, I had a plan here pointing 
out the bedroom. [His lordship then referred to the plan, and 
pointed out the bedroom and the room which the witnesses 
stated was used as a dressing-room.] Just look at the different 
articles of furniture that were in it (pointing to the plan). First 
of all there is the bed in this corner here. Then here is a table ; 
and here is another table, which stands before the window; 
and here is the place where the two hatboxes were found of 
which I have been speaking. With that explanation, and with 
some further explanation which I shall give you as I go along, 
you will perhaps be able to understand this matter about the 
poisons. As I said, you must begin the whole subject of poison 
with this, which is a remarkable fact in the case, and which 
it seems to me tells favourably rather than otherwise for the 
prisoner — ^you must take notice of it and consider what inference 
you draw from it — in the whole case from first to last there is 
no evidence at all of her having bought any poison, or definitely 
had anything to do with the procuring of any, with the excep- 
tion of those fly-papers. But there is evidence of a considerable 
quantity having been found in various things which were kept — 
some here and some there — kept principally, as I gather, in the 
dressing-room, which was also spoken of as the inner room 
during the course of the case. All these things were collected 
together and finally passed through the hands of Mr. Davies, 
who is an analyst very well known to you no doubt. His credit 
does not appear to have been attacked by any of the witnesses 
who have also examined the articles that were submitted to 
him, and who appear to arrive at not identically the same, but 
at substantially the same, results as to the presence or absence 
of arsenic from the different things which they have dealt with. 
Now, first of all, Mr. Davies is called and examined about his 
attainments, and so on, and then he says that on the 11th of 
May, namely, Saturday, ‘‘Dr. Carter came to me about half-past 
ten, and brought with him a bottle of Valentine's meat essence 
to be examined by me. I took it to the laboratory and tested 
346 



The Judge's Summing Up. 

it there, and found the presence of arsenic in it.” That is the 
bottle which you have already heard so much about, and upon 
which the statements have been made which I have already 
remarked upon. Afterwards, on the 23rd, he determined the 
amount of arsenic, and found a part of a grain of white arsenic. 
That arsenic was put in solution, and, of course, it acts more 
readily in solution than if it was put in solid, as it would take a 
considerable time to dissolve. It was found that the specific 
gravity was less than that of the meat juice generally. Mr. 
Davies, it appeared, had analysed the contents of several 
bottles which had been given to him, and he detected arsenic 
in some of the organs. Dr. Stevenson also made an analysis, 
and, while detecting arsenic in the liver, he failed to find any 
in the spleen, which had been reduced to a condition in which 
it was no longer capable of being separately examined. Then 
there was a series of bottles containing matters which were 
taken from the sinks and from the lavatory. There is an 
account of each, and in some of the bottles a trace of arsenic 
was found. The medical men treated them very lightly, and 
said that in a house which had contained arsenic they would 
expect to find a certain amount of arsenic in the sinks and 
drains, and that could be accounted for by other means. There 
is also a handkerchief and a bottle, w’hich is labelled lA, and 
is said to have been found by Mrs. Briggs in Mrs. Maybrick^s 
room covered with the handkerchief. There was no arsenic 
in the bottle, but there was in the handkerchief. There is 
another bottle which was found in the small wooden box in 
a box in the sleeping or dressing room. That, I think, is the 
box Mrs. Maybrick used, and which was packed up for the 
children. There was some arsenic in that, twelve or fifteen 
grains of solid arsenic in the water. There was also some 
powdered charcoal, which was identical with the small parcel 
produced, labelled Poison — for cats.” There was some 
powdered arsenic — the only powdered arsenic which was found — 
found in a little box, if I remember rightly, in one of the hat- 
boxes to which I have referred. That had apparently been 
used to put into water, because there was some other part of the 
arsenic found which was coloured in the same way with the 
same matter. There was other liquid in the bottle, and that 
was a saturated solution of arsenic in the water, and a small 
portion of solid arsenic in the bottle in crystals. 

Gentlemen, that shows that there was a large quantity in the 
bottle. A saturated solution is a solution which has taken 
up as much arsenic as it can ; and the water becoming saturated 
with arsenic, the remainder of the arsenic is found at the 
bottom. In this case there was a saturated solution of arsenic 
in the water and a small portion of solid arsenic at the bottom. 

347 


Mr JiittieA 
Stephen 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


With regard to that these questions arise — ^What was it for, and 
who was wanting such a quantity of strong solution of arsenic % 
who would put it there, and how was it to be used? These are 
questions in the solution of which I cannot help you. There 
is nothing definite to connect Mr. Maybrick with it. Certainly 
if he was in the habit of arsenic eating, he would not keep it 
saturated in water in quantities which he could not possibly 
use. There was another bottle said to contain saturated and 
solid arsenic, and it is supposed to contain ten to twelve grains 
of solid arsenic. Then there was a glass found in a bandbox, 
and it contained a liquid in which a handkerchief was soaked. 
A j>ortion of the fluid was found to contain 94 per cent, of 
arsenic.* There would be a very considerable quantity of 
arsenic. We have already got three or four bottles contain- 
ing a very considerable quantity of arsenic, part in a saturated 
state and part more or less dissolved. Then, as to the hand- 
kerchief, it is identical with the two others. I should think 
it not unlikely that these handkerchiefs were Mrs. Maybrick’ s. 
Sir Charles Russell pointed out with regard to one of them 
that if she had possession of the handkerchief, and put it into 
the pocket of her dressing-gown, that would be a very likely 
way for the dressing-gown to get spotted with arsenic. That 
seemed to be acquiesced in by Mr. Addison, and probably is 
the way in which that dressing-gown came to be marked with 
arsenic. Well, gentlemen, that is all very well, and it only 
forces one’s attention to this question — "V^at could anybody 
want with a handkerchief saturated with arsenic? What could 
she want carrying it about with her, and having her dressing- 
gown spotted with the poison? I don’t know why any one 
should saturate any part of their clothes with arsenic, or carry 
it about in their pocket. The next article is the chocolate 
box, in which was found arsenic powder, with the inscription 
on it Poison — for cats,” and this on being analysed con- 
tained 71 grains of arsenic. And of this 65 2-lOths were pure 
arsenic ; while the remaining quantity was apparently colouring 
matter — powdered charcoal. It was brought out by Sir Charles 
Russell that there is an Act of Parliament which requires 
arsenic sold under a certain quantity, four ounces I think, to 
be coloured either with soot or charcoal. There would be a 
difliculty found in getting the arsenic unless it were coloured 
in this way. Well, then, there was a handkerchief in the 
chocolate box. On that some liquid had escaped ; it had 
become stiff, and in the stiff part there was found a good deal 
of arsenic. The next place in which arsenic was found — in 
which it is supposed to have been found — is one to which refer- 

* The correct figure is 2*94, or rather less than 3 per cent. It U not 
always possible to say whether such errors as these in the report are those 
of the reporter or the judge. 

348 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

ence has been repeatedly made ; it is supposed to have been SL**^?**^ 
found in certain films, which formed part of the washings out 
of this jug (pointing to the article). I need not mention 
further, as I have mentioned it already, the evidence Mr. 

Davies gave on one side on this point and Dr. Paiil on the 
other. There was a bottle produced by a policeman named 
Davenport, which is said to have contained a very weak 
solution of arsenic, and that bottle was found in the linen closet 
over which the mistress of the house would naturally have more 
control than the master.* Then we come to some medicine 
apparently prepared on Dr. Fuller’s prescription by Messrs. 

Clay & Abraham. There was a thick liquid in the bottle 
when Mr. Davies got it. '' I put water in it, and shook it 
well up, and took half of it for examination. There was dis- 
tinct evidence of arsenic, though not enough to make a quanti- 
tative examination. I went to Clay & Abraham and examined 
samples from all the bottles from which this prescription had 
been made up, and when examined I found no arsenic in them.” 

Then you get to the blue bottle, which contained Price’s 
glycerine. Here is the bottle, and a considerable portion is 
still left. That glycerine was found in the lavatory outside, 
and if the bottle were filled and the same proportion of arsenic 
added, there would be two-thirds of a grain of arsenic in it. 

You have heard already that his mouth was moistened with 
glycerine and borax apparently the night before he died. If 
that is so, and the glycerine really be poisoned, it is certainly 
a very shocking result to arrive at.f 

Sir Charles Russell — I think the evidence of Nurse Gore is 
that the bottle that was used on the night before his death was 
taken not from the lavatory but from the cupboard on the 
washstand. 

Mr. Justice Stephen — It does not follow that that was the 
same bottle. One does not know the history of that bottle, 
or where it went to. It may or may not have been the glycerine 
which was used for the purpose I have mentioned — namely, 
for moistening his lips. But what does appear in the case is, 
that a bottle was found in the lavatory, and that it contained 
a grain of arsenic, and that his mouth was moistened with 
glycerine and borax during the night in question, but the 

* This bottle, according to Mrs. Maybriok, contained the face-wash she 
had prepared from the fly-papers. Mr. Davies described it “a very weak 
solution of arsenic,** 1-lOth of a grain to the full bottle. It had **no 
inscription, and had contained scent of some kind.** 

t Mr. Levy in a footnote points out that the sulphuric acid used in 
preparing glycerine is often obtained from iron pyrites which contains 
arsenic, and so arsenic is often found in glycerine. In this instance the 
quantity of arsenic found was one part in 10,500, a not unusual proportion. 

349 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

Mr Jaittoe tivelj ordinary innocent people — a horrible and incredible 

Stephen thought that a woman should be plotting the death of her 
husband in order that she might be left at liberty to follow her 
own degrading vices. There is a presumption of innocence in 
favour of every one whatever, and, of course, the presumption 
becomes stronger and stronger as the imputation made upon 
the person becomes more and more horrible. You ought not 
to convict a woman of such a crime as this unless you are sure 
in your own mind that she really committed it. That is what 
I have to say. There is no doubt that the propensities which 
lead persons to vices of that kind do kill all the more tender, 
all the more manly, or all the more womanly feelings of the 
human mind. That is a comment upon which I will not^'insist ; 
I will spare you what would be very painful to me, exquisitely 
painful to her, and not necessary to you. I will not say any- 
thing about it, except that it is easy enough to conceive how 
a horrible woman, in so terrible a position, might be assailed by 
some fearful and terrible temptation. When you take that 
into accoxmt, you must look to some extent at the feelings which 
are shown, which the evidence shows you, remained in her 
mind. I have read to you what the learned counsel have both 
read to you, that terrible letter which she wrote on Wednesday, 
the 8th of May. Gentlemen, it is a matter to which again I 
will, as I have endeavoured to do at every stage of this inquiry, 
suppress the feelings upon it which one is at any moment 
tempted to enlarge. But recollect what is said — recollect that 
in two or three unmistakable expressions she has intimated that 
it is a mere question of strength. She has intimated that he 
is sick unto death — and untruly stated so ; recollect that she 
said he was labouring under symptoms which in point of fact 
were not present. Recollect that you will have a somewhat 
difficult task ; recollect on the one hand that it is very difficult 
to say that she did not at that time know she was the subject 
of suspicion among those who were in the house, her brother- 
in-law and other persons ; and recollect, on the other hand, that 
she, while her husband lived, and, according to her own account, 
while his life was trembling in the balance — even at that awful 
moment, there arose in her heart and flowed from her pen 
various terms of endearment to the man with whom she had 
behaved so disgracefully. That was an awful thing to think 
of, and a thing you will have to consider in asking yourselves 
whether she is guilty or not guilty. You will have to consider 
that motive, and you must bear in mind, as I said before, 
all the circumstances ; you will bear in mind that you have 
been addressed by men of the greatest eminence in a great pro- 
fession, who have told you distinctly that they did not think 
there is evidence enough to induce them to say that he died of 

352 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

arsenical poisoning, and that there are others equally eminent Mr Jvatlee 
who say that he did die of arsenical poisoning. On the other 
hand, you have to say with equal clearness and equal distinct^ 
ness whether he died from gastro-enteritis — inflammation of the 
stomach. The question for you is, by what was the illness 
caused — was it caused by arsenic or by some other means] If 
you consider that his death was caused by arsenic, then you 
settle on the side of the prosecution one great question, by no 
means the least or only one of the great questions which you 
have to consider. You must also consider how far you think 
them — I won’t say satisfactory — in themselves, but how far 
you think that they are consistent with the facts, and how far 
you think they may be satisfactory, that it might be so satis- 
factory as might lead you to say, as Dr. Paul said, '' We think 
that he died from gastro-enteritis, but we see no sufficient 
reason to connect that with arsenic.” You have heard that 
gastro-enteritis may be produced by what 1 may call some 
common cause. On the other hand, you have it suggested, 
especially by Dr. Tidy, that it was a case in which impure or 
injurious — I cannot find exactly a suitable adjective, but I think 
if I say impure — food may have caused all those symptoms, but 
I certainly cannot; I don’t mention — 1 have to avoid expressing 
any opinion upon the case or parts of the case, and I don’t 
express any opinion about it — but I don’t feel that Dr, Tidy 
dealt in a manner very satisfactory to me with this question, 
which I asked, “What impure food do you think the man 
took] ” He mentioned certain things which might have caused 
it if he had been going about through the ordinary course of 
life, eating and drinking like other people, and not very par- 
ticular as to the kind of food he was taking. Then they might 
have said that he, in some unguarded or neglectful moment, 
might have taken some of these things ; but it seems rather 
going out of the way to ascribe the symptoms of which he died 
to any of the causes that were subsequently mentioned. The 
things which were chosen — certainly not as an exhaustive list, 
but by way of illustration — were three. He should not have 
taken in that period any of these things — sausages, cheese, or 
lobster. There is certainly no evidence that he took anything 
of the sort, but a good deal, I think, of medical improbability 
that he was able to take any of them. Those parts of the case 
you will have to consider. As to the symptoms, you have 
very considerable conflict of evidence about them. You will 
have heard over and over again, and no doubt formed some 
opinion about, these particulars of vomiting which were present 
all along. It was said by some of the wdtnesses, by Dr. Tidy, 
who has taken a very prominent part — I am not speaking in any 
dispraise of him ; on the contrary — that it was not the sort of 

353 


z 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 

BfpJaitiea tively ordinary innocent people — a horrible and incredible 

Stephen thought that a woman should be plotting the death of her 
husband in order that she might be left at liberty to follow her 
own degrading vices. There is a presumption of innocence in 
favour of every one whatever, and, of course, the presumption 
becomes stronger and stronger as the imputetion made upon 
the person becomes more and more horrible. You ought not 
to convict a woman of such a crime as this imless you are sure 
in your own mind that sh,e really committed it. That is what 
I have to say. There is no doubt that the propensities which 
lead persons to vices of that kind do kill all the more tender, 
all the more manly, or all the more womanly feelings of the 
human mind. That is a comment upon which I will not 'insist ; 
I will spare you what would be very painful to me, exquisitely 
painful to her, and not necessary to you. I will not say any- 
thing about it, except that it is easy enough to conceive how 
a horrible woman, in so terrible a position, might be assailed by 
some fearful and terrible temptation. When you take that 
into account, you must look to some extent at the feelings which 
are shown, which the evidence shows you, remained in her 
mind. I have read to you what the learned counsel have both 
read to you, that terrible letter which she wrote on Wednesday, 
the 8th of May. Gentlemen, it is a matter to which again I 
will, as I have endeavoured to do at every stage of this inquiry, 
suppress the feelings upon it which one is at any moment 
tempted to enlarge. But recollect what is said — recollect that 
in two or three unmistakable expressions she has intimated that 
it is a mere question of strength. She has intimated that he 
is sick unto death — and untruly stated so ; recollect that she 
said he was labouring under symptoms which in point of fact 
were not present. Kecollect that you will have a somewhat 
difficult task ; recollect on the one hand that it is very difficult 
to say that she did not at that time know she was the subject 
of suspicion among those who were in the house, her brother- 
in-law and other persons ; and recollect, on the other hand, that 
she, while her husband lived, and, according to her own account, 
while his life was trembling in the balance — even at that awful 
moment, there arose in her heart and flowed from her pen 
various terms of endearment to the man with whom she had 
behaved so disgracefully. That was an awful thing to think 
of, and a thing you will have to consider in asking yourselves 
whether she is guilty or not guilty. You will have to consider 
that motive, and you must bear in mind, as I said before, 
all the circumstances ; you will bear in mind that you have 
been addressed by men of the greatest eminence in a great pro- 
fession, who have told you distinctly that they did not think 
there is evidence enough to induce them to say that he died of 

35 * 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

arsenical poisoning, and that there are others equally eminent Mr JjMtiaa 
who say that he did die of arsenical poisoning. On the other 
hand, you have to say with equal clearness and equal distinct- 
ness whether he died from gastro-enteritis — inflammation of the 
stomach. The question for you is, by what was the illness 
caused — was it caused by arsenic or by some other means! If 
you consider that his death was caused by arsenic, then you 
settle on the side of the prosecution one great question, by no 
means the least or only one of the great questions which you 
have to consider. You must also consider how far you think 
them — I won't say satisfactory — in themselves, but how far 
you think that they are consistent with the facts, and how far 
you think they may be satisfactory, that it might be so satis- 
factory as might lead you to say, as Dr. Paul said, We think 
that he died from gastro-enteritis, but we see no sufl&cient 
reason to connect that with arsenic." You have heard that 
gastro-enteritis may be produced by what I may call some 
common cause. On the other hand, you have it suggested, 
especially by Dr. Tidy, that it was a case in which impure or 
injurious — I cannot find exactly a suitable adjective, but I think 
if I say impure — food may have caused all those symptoms, but 
1 certainly cannot; I don't mention — I have to avoid expressing 
any opinion upon the case or parts of the case, and I don’t 
express any opinion about it — but I don’t feel that Dr. Tidy 
dealt in a manner very satisfactory to me with this question, 
which I asked, What impure food do you think the man 
took 1 ’ ’ He mentioned certain things which might have caused 
it if he had been going about through the ordinary course of 
life, eating and drinking like other people, and not very par- 
ticular as to the kind of food he was taking. Then they might 
have said that he, in some unguarded or neglectful moment, 
might have taken some of these things ; but it seems rather 
going out of the way to ascribe the symptoms of which he died 
to any of the causes that were subsequently mentioned. The 
things which were chosen — certainly not as an exhaustive list, 
but by way of illustration — were three. He should not have 
taken in that period any of these things — sausages, cheese, or 
lobster. There is certainly no evidence that he took anything 
of the sort, but a good deal, I think, of medical improbability 
that he was able to take any of them. Those parts of the case 
you will have to consider. As to the symptoms, you have 
very considerable conflict of evidence about them. You will 
have heard over and over again, and no doubt formed some 
opinion about, these particulars of vomiting which were present 
all along. It was said by some of the witnesses, by Dr. Tidy, 
who has taken a very prominent part — I am not speaking in any 
dispraise of him ; on the contrary — ^that it was not the sort of 

3S3 


z 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


Mr JiiftiM tioknets he should have expected in a case of arsenical poison- 
mg, and not the sort of internal pain he should have expected. 
You have heard that on the one side. The opposite view of 
the subject is taken on the other side. You must consider what 
you think of that, and what you think of the gentlemen who 
gave evidence on the subject, and who no doubt have produced 
on your mind a certain effect. You must say what is the 
effect of the evidence given by these gentlemen. 

Well, then, when you have gone through that you have still 
another, and I am not sure that it is not the most difficult part 
of the task, because, as I have said so often, and as 1 think it has 
been said to you different times throughout, and by different 
persons, you must decide upon the whole case. There are three 
or four circumstances in the case which are circumstances of 
very grave suspicion indeed ; and where you find a case in which 
this dreadful accusation is made, and is accompanied by circum- 
stances which, apart from the physical, chemical, and medical 
aspects of the case, are of such a character as are likely to pro- 
duce suspicion, you must consider how far they corroborate the 
other evidence that has been given. If I were to illustrate from 
the general run of criminal cases, I should say if there were 
circumstances of suspicion against a man which led you to 
believe he had committed a burglary, and if, on examination of 
his pockets, there were found burglars* implements, and if those 
instruments were found on examination to correspond with the 
marks found at the house broken into, the existence of this 
would be an important thing for you to consider in determining 
his guilt or innocence. I desire to avoid all illustration except 
what is just enough to make you understand the way in which 
I wish you to look at the case, and with which I think you have 
a right to look at it when you come to deal with the questions. 
For one thing there is the subject of food, for another thing 
there is the subject of the fly-papers to be considered. I am not 
going to say more — I do not think I could say more usefully, 
but there is another subject — a highly important subject — about 
the meat juice, about which I have said all I intend to say. I 
may say this, however, supposing you find a man dying of 
arsenic, and it is proved that a person put arsenic in his plate, 
and if he gives an explanation which you do not consider satis- 
factory, that is a very strong question to be considered. How 
far it goes, what its logical value is, what the general effect of 
it may be, I do not say ; I am not prepared to say. I 
could not say, and unless I had to write my verdict I should 
not say how I should deal with the verdict ; but being no 
juryman, but only a judge, I can say only this, it is a matter 
for your serious eonsideration. I have pointed out to you the 
circumstances connected with that statement, and I do not need 

354 



The Judge’s Summing Up. 

to refer to that. But I may just say that I really think it is 
better to avoid any foolish excitement or talk by mentioning 
openly what the contents of a letter are, which I will not read 
to you. It is signed by a name which I do not choose to say, 
and I venture to apply to that person the words, Mind your 
own business,'' but he gives a series of suggestions about some 
of the incidents of the case which he thinks should be inquired 
into. Well, gentlemen, I have been telling you of these remarks 
about her statements in Court, which I think a reasonable man 
would have kept to himself, and which were no business of his. 
I have done my best upon all I think necessary to say to you 
upon that painful subject. I think no doubt you have care- 
fully considered that statement, and do not think you want very 
much to be addressed by anybody else upon the matter. It is 
a foolish letter, and I will just pass on. 

Gentlemen, these are really the combination of questions to 
which you have got to apply your minds. I have dealt with 
all the matters. I have certainly dealt with all the matters 
which have occurred to me in my consideration of the case. I 
do not wish to spin out the last words to you, and 1 accordingly 
will ask you to consider your verdict. 


Verdict. 

The jury, after the bailiffs had been sworn, letired to consider 
the verdict at eighteen minutes past three. 

The jury returned at four minutes to four, after an absence 
of about thirty-five minutes. 

The Clerk of Arraigns (Mr. Shuttleworth) having called the 
list of the jury, asked — Have you agreed upon a verdict, gentle- 
men? 

The Foreman — We have. 

Clerk of Arraigns — And do you find the prisoner guilty of 
the murder of James May brick or not guilty? 

The Foreman — Guilty. 

The Clerk of Arraigns (to the prisoner) — Florence Elizabeth 
May brick, you have been found guilty of wilful murder; have 
you anything to say why the Court should not pronounce 
sentence upon you? 

The Prisoner — Although I have been found guilty, with the 
exception of my intimacy with Mr. Brierley, I am not guilty of 
this crime. 


Mr Justiee 
Stephan 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


Hr Jttttle* 
Stephen 


The Sentence. 

Mr. Justice Stephen (having assumed the black cap) — Prisoner 
at the bar, I am no further able to treat you as being innocent 
of the dreadful crime laid to your charge. You have been 
convicted by a jury of this city,* after a lengthy and most pain- 
ful investigation, followed by a defence which was in every 
respect worthy of the case. The jury have convicted you, 
and the law leaves to me no discretion, and 1 must pass on you 
the sentence of the law; and this sentence of the law is — This 
Court doth ordain you to be taken from hence to the place from 
whence you came, and from thence to the place of execution, 
and that you be there hanged by the neck until you are dead ; 
and that your body be afterwards buried within the precincts 
of the prison in which you shall have been confined after your 
conviction, and may the Lord have mercy on your soul. 

* The jury was a Lancashire and not a Liverpool jury. 


356 



APPENDICES. 




APPENDIX 1. 


Passage from Mb. Justice Stephen’s Charge to the Grand Jury at 
THE Liverpool Assizes, July 26, 1889, relating to Mrs. May- 
brick’s Case. 

** The next case I will mention to you is a case which 1 have reason to 
believe has excited very great attention in this country, and certainly if the 
prisoner is guilty of the crime alleged to her in the charge, it is the most 
cruel and horrible murder that could be committed. 

“ I refer to the csise of Florence Elizabeth Maybrick, who is charged with 
the wilful murder of her husband, James Maybrick. The case is one which 
will no doubt occupy a very considerable time, and, as I have said, it has 
• attracted a great deal of attention. I will speak very shortly on the nature of 
the circumstances and the nature of the case, because to any one who has been 
accustomed to the transaction of criminal busiiiesB it is perfectly obvious 
that the case is one in which every part of the allegations will be vigorously 
contradicted, and in which the circumstances will be questioned. 1 know 
not, of course, what the defence may be which may be set up for 
Mrs. Maybrick, but it is quite possible that evidence may be given on her 
behalf which may be of very great importance. You have nothing to do 
with that however, and all I have to say is to point out to you, very shortly, 
the facts apparently proved by the prosecution as far as they bear on the 
case. 

“Gentlemen, I think you know Mrs. Maybrick’s husband was a cotton 
merchant in the city, and although these matters are hardly contested, he 
appears to have been unhappy enough to have had an unfaithful wife. 
Whatever may be thought of the rest of the case, letters are produced 
which render it very diflScult not to believe — in fact I should think it almost 
necessary to admit — that she was carrying on an adulterous intrigue with a 
man of the name of Brierley. It appears that either with the object or for 
some other reason not very clearly set forth, on the occasion of the Grand 
National Steeplechase, which took place on the 29th of March, there was a 
very violent quarrel between Mrs Maybrick and her husband. Some time 
after that quarrel took place suspicious circumstances were noticed. 1 think 
the first circumstance of any leading or remarkable kind which was noticed 
was the fact that she used to put into water a certain quantity of fly-papers, 
the proper use of which is the destruction of flies, but which contain a 
certain quantity of arsenic. These papers, which nobody can have proper 
occasion to use except it be to kill flies, were found in, not exactly her 
room, but a room to which, of course, she had access. They were found 
soaking in water, and that water in which they were soaked would become 
impregnated with arsenic, and might have been used for poisonous purposes. 
A good many incidents occurred, some in the month of April and in the 
early part of May, which produced symptoms in Mr. Maybrick, the nature 

359 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 

of which oaa be explained to you by the medical men whom he consulted. 
He stated that his legs felt very much numbed, and complained of what he 
suffered in that way. There were many minor matters — a crowd of things 
which happened about the early part of May. On the 3rd of May he was 
taken very ill. The illness appears to have consisted principally of very 
great congestion and disturbance of the stomach, which went so far that as 
time went on he was in very great and continued sickness. The disturb- 
ances of the stomach went to the extent that he was unable to retain any- 
thing on his stomach. That went on with several alterations of better and 
worse for several days. On the 8th of May, a very striking and remarkable 
incident happened, to which your attention will be directed. Mrs. Maybrick 
in the course of that day gave one of her servants, a nurse, a letter addressed 
to Mr. Brierley in Liverpool, which she wished her to post by a particular 
post — I think it was between three and four o’clock. The servant went 
out with a child whom she called the baby, I suppose it was the youngest 
child of the Maybricks, and she gave it the letter to hold. The child carried 
it for some distance and, in crossing the road, she dropped it into a puddle. 
The nurse took it up and found it was very dirty. She then went to the 
Post-office with the intention, as she said, of getting a new envelope, and 
redij-ecting it — I suppose, at all ev^ents in order to post it. However, when 
she got to the Post-office she seems to have opened the letter, and in doing 
so she noticed some expressions in it which attracted her attention, indeed, 
would have attracted anyone’s attention. The girl, after seeing these 
expressions, did not post the letter, but took it home and gave it to one of 
Mr. Maybrick’s brothers, who was in attendance on the sick man. There 
can hardly be any doubt that the letter implied in its terms an adulterous 
connection between Mrs. Maybrick and Mr. Brierley. Then, in addition 
to that, there are in that letter expressions which there may be many ways 
of reading. I merely wish to speak here of what will be read actually 
on the depositions, and do not wish to go into commentaries which may 
be made on the reading of the letter. But it contained these expressions 
very nearly in the first lines: “He is sick unto death,” the reference, 
apparently, being to Mr. Maybrick, who had been referred to in the very 
begiiming of the letter as “ M,” whom she, Mrs. Maybrick (as she said) 
had been nursing for some days. So she had. Then she said, “ He is sick 
unto death.” That, of course, if it is interpreted, meant that Mr. Maybrick 
was sick unto death, when at the time it did not appear that any one had 
told her that he was in danger, a circumstance of the greatest possible 
suspicion. However, whatever that may be, what follows shows the terms 
on which she was with Mr. Brierley. And I should observe, in addition to 
that, that there is evidence on the depositions to show that she had been to 
London, and that she met a gentleman. There are some strange peculiarities 
about that part of the story, which I leave out. She had been to London, 
and there met Mr. Brierley, with whom she slept on two occasions, 
during her absence from home. Of course, if that is proved, there can be 
no doubt as to what her relations to him were. But certainly if she stood 
in those relations to him, 1 hardly know how to put it otherwise than this : 
that if a woman does carry on an adulterous intrigue with another man, it 
may supply every sort of motive — that of saving her own reputation ; 

360 



Appendix I. 

that of breaking through the connection, which, under such circumstances, 
one would think would be dreadfully painful to the party to it. It certainly 
may quite supply — I won’t go further — a very strong motive why she should 
wish to get rid of her husband. Gentlemen, those matters will be brought 
before you, and you will have to consider them. After that, Mr. Maybrick 
appears to have got worse. He had but a short time to live. This took 
place on Friday, and he died on Saturday afternoon. There will be a great 
deal of evidence as to the different things of which he took a part ; but ho 
got worse, and finally died on Saturday afternoon, the 11th May. I will 
pass over very lightly indeed what was found immediately after his death. 
A variety of things were found, which rendered it natural to suppose he 
had been poisoned. There was what I have already -mentioned, the fly- 
papers ; but I will also mention several things which, when the medical 
men came to examine them, were, they say, found to contain arsenic. 
There was a bottle of what is described as Valentine’s meat juice, that con- 
tained arsenic ; there were some other things which also contained arsenic, 
a bottle of brandy, and other things, all of which were said to have arsenio 
in them. In the course of the post-mortem examination it appeared that they 
found arsenic in a number of the parts of the body. There was arsenic in 
the liver, and some other places — but I am speaking entirely from memory. 
They found arsenic in various portions of the body. That, of course, is a 
matter of the utmost suspicion. It appears she administered the medicine 
to him until they called in a nurse. There were several professional nurses, 
but I don’t think they were called in until a day or two before his death. 
It was by them that the medicine and things were found. 

“After the death, after the examination of the man himself, I may tell 
you that they made a search through the house, and they found a variety 
of things, some of which contained arsenic. There were some things kept 
in a chocolate box which contained arsenic ; and there was in addition — I 
hardly know what to call it — some kind of stuff which apparently contained 
arsenic, because there was the word ‘ poison ’ on it, and afterwards like a 
sort of postscript written in ink the words, ‘for cats,’ so as to make it read 
‘ poison for cats. ’ That appears to have been found in a box over which 
Mrs. Maybrick had charge, but which was used for the children who were 
about the house. That is a very bare outline of the case, and I have made 
it a very bare outline, because you have to consider not whether she is 
guilty or not guilty, but whether there is sufficient evidence to put her on 
her trial for poisoning her husband with arsenic, and for causing his death. 
There are very many circumstances of the case which will be brought out, 
on one side or the other, fully — circumstances such as I have mentioned, 
and such as will be suggested in the course of the inquiry — and you will 
have to consider whether they are sufficiently suspicious to put the prisoner 
on her trial. I may sum it all up in a very few words, which, however, may 
bo sufficient to guide you in your inquiries. It seems that a state of things 
existed between her and her husband and Mr. Brierley, which might — 
although it W€is not certain to say — operate as a strong motive to her to get 
rid of him. It appears that she nursed h m during very nearly the whole 
of his illness — nursed him and administered to him the food and medicine 
which he took. It appears, I say again, it is in evidence, althbugh you 
have not evidence on the other side, and do not know what may be put in, 

361 


1 A 



Trial of Mrs May brick. 


bat there certainly is evidence that poison was found in various parts of his 
body, and that the symptoms of the disease from \vhich he suffered, and 
which I do not think it necessary to insist upon, were symptoms of arsenical 
poisoning. If, after that, you think it desirable that the matter should 
have further investigation, you will find a true bill against her.” 


APPENDIX IL 

Sho&t Account up thb Judge and CouNaBU engaged in the 

Maybrick Trial. 

Sib James Fitzjames Stephen, K.C. S,I. (1829-1894), was the second 
son of Sir James Stephen, Under Secretary for the Colonies from 1836 to 
1847, Regius Professor of Modern History at Cambridge University (1847- 
1859). He was educated at Eton and Trinity College, Cambridge. He 
was called to the bar at tlie Inner Temple in 1854, and joined the Midland 
Circuit. His rise at the bar was slow. In 1859 he was appointed Recorder 
of Newark, and in 1861 he defended Hr. Rowland Williams on his trial 
for heresy before the Court of Arches. In 1868 he was made a Queen’s 
Counsel, and a year later was appointed legal Member of Council in India. 
There he spent two and a half years, during which he was mostly employed 
in carrying on the work of codifying the Indian laws. On his return to 
England he resumed his work at the bar. In 1873 he unsuccessfully con- 
tested Dundee as a supporter of Gladstone. He was appointed Professor 
of Common Law at the Inns of Court in 1875, and in 1879 became a Judge 
of the Queen’s Bench. In 1887 Mr. Justice Stephen presided at the trial 
of Lipski, a Pole, convicted at the Central Criminal Court of the brutal 
murder of a woman in Whitechapel. An appeal, vigorously supported by 
the Pall Mall Gazette^ at that time under the editorship of W. T. Stead, 
was addressed to Mr. Matthews, then Home Secretary, to commute the 
sentence, on the ground of the weakness of some of the evidence against 
the prisoner. After carefu consultation with Mr. Justice Stephen, Mr. 
Matthews decided that the law must take its course. Lipski, before 
execution, confessed his guilt. In 1885 the Judge was attacked by serious 
illness, but recovered sufficiently to resume his duties. In 1891, in 
consequence of certa n public comments brought to his attention, and 
acting on medical advice, Mr. Justice Stephen retired from the bench 
and was created a baronet. He died at Ipswich in 1894. In his 
early years Stephen had been a frequent contributor to the Pall Mall 
Gazette and the Saturday Review. His chief works are his “ History 
of the Criminal Law,” “ Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity,” a criticism of 
J. S. Mill’s “Liberty,” and “The Story of Nuncomar and Sir Elijah 
Impey,” a defence of the latter against Macaulay’s unjust accusations. 
The Judge was succeeded in the baronetcy by Sir Herbert Stephen, who 
is the present Clerk of Assize on the Northern Circuit, and has edited some 
of his father’s legal works. The Judge’s second son was James Kenneth 
Stephen, the brilliant scholar and author of “Lapsus Calami” and “Quo 
Musa, Tendis ? ” Another son, Mr. H. L. Stephen, is a judge of the High 

362 



Appendix II. 

Oourt of Bengal. There is a life of Sir James Stephen, by his brother. Sir 
Xieslie Stephen, the distinguished critic and man of letters. 

JoHW Edmund Wientworth Addison, Q.C. (1838-1907), was the son Of 
Colonel H. R. Addison. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, and 
called to the Bar at the Inner Temple in 1862. Addison joined the North- 
ern Circuit, and, in spite of the rivalry of such competitors as Russell, 
Herschell, and Gully, acquired a considerable practice. From 1874: to 1890 
he was Recorder of Preston. In 1880 Addison took silk, and five years 
later entered Parliament as Conservative Member for Ashton -under-Lyme. 
He represented that constituency for ten years until, in 1895, he accepted 
a County Court judgeship, sitting first in Norfolk and Cambridge, later at 
Southwark. Judge Addison died in 1907, having shortly before resigned 
his appointment. 

William Robert M ‘Connell, K.C. (1837-1906), was the son of Mr. 
David M ‘Connell, a magistrate of County Down. Educated in Belfast and 
at London University, M‘Connell was called to the bar in 1862. He joined 
the Northern Circuit, where he soon became one of the leading juniors- 
He was made revising barrister for Liverpool in 1868, and later became 
junior counsel to the Board of Trade and the Board of Customs. He was a 
member of the Royal Commission appointed to inquire into the corrupt 
practices at Gloucester. In 1896 M ‘Connell succeeded Sir Peter Edlin as 
Chairman of the County of London Sessions, a post he held until his death 
ten years later. On his appointment as Chairman he became a Queen’s 
Counsel. As showing his fairness and sympathy in dealing with the 
prisoners who came before him at the London Sessions, M ‘Connell’s char- 
acteristic phrase, “ Tell me all the good of yourself,” may be quoted. 

Sir Charles Russell, Lord Russell of Killowen (1832-1900), came 
of an Ulster family of Roman Catholics. His father, Arthur Russell, died 
when he was a boy. His uncle, Charles William Russell, was President of 
Maynooth College. Charles Russell was educated in Ireland, where he 
began his career as a solicitor in 1854. In 1859 he was called to the 
English Bar and joined the Northern Circuit. There he acquired a con- 
siderable reputation, and in 1872 became a Queen’s Counsel. It was not 
until 1878 that Russell made his mark in London. The moment was 
propitious. Ballantine, Parry, Karslake, and Holker — all prominent 
leaders — were in failing health, Hawkins had just become a judge. In 
November, 1878, Russell gained a signal victory over Ballantine in 
the case of Wyhrow Robertson v. Lahoucherey in which Russell appeared 
for the defendant, the proprietor of Truth, and in 1880 he defeated Sir 
Hardinge Giffard on behalf of the same client in the action of Lamhri v. 
I/dbouchere. He obtained for Clement Scott, the dramatic critic, £1500 
damages for libel aginst Sampson, the proprietor of the Referee newspaper. 
In 1882 he appeared for the defendant in Relt v. Ltawes, when Sir Hardinge 
Giffard, for the plaintiff, won a verdict for £5000. In 1883 Russell visited 
America with the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Coleridge, and Sir James 
Hannen. In the same year he defended O’Donnell, who was executed for 
the murder of James Carey, the Irish informer. In 1880 Russell 
entered Parliament as Liberal member for Dundalk. In 1882 he was 

363 



Trial of Mrs Maybrick. 


offered, and declined, a judgeship. Elected member for South Hackney 
in 1885, he was appointed Attorney-General by Gladstone during his 
brief term of office in 1886. While acting as Attorney -General, he con- 
ducted the prosecution of Mrs. Bartlett, who was tried at the Central 
Criminal Court for the murder of her husband by poisoning him with 
chloroform. She was brilliantly defended by Mr. (now Sir) Edward 
Clarke, Q.C. , and acquitted. Russell was leading counsel for Parnell 
before the Parnell Commission, 1888-1889, when he greatly distinguished 
himself by his cross-examination of Pigott, the forger, and his speech, 
lasting six days, in defence of the Irish members. In 1891 Russell waa 
briefed for the defendants in Sir W. Gordon -Cumming’s unsuccessful 
action for slander against Mr. Berkeley Levett and others, who had 
accused him of cheating at cards ; Sir Edward Clarke appeared for the 
plaintiff. In the same year Russell represented Mrs. Osborne, the plaintiff, 
in the action of Osborne v. Hargreave^ better known as “ The Pearl Case.” 
Attorney-General again under Gladstone in 1892, Russell, with Sir 
Richard Webster, now Lord Alverstone, represented England before the 
Behring Sea Arbitration Court in 1893. In May, 1894, Russell quitted the 
bar, accepting a Lordship of Appeal and a life-peerage as Lord Russell of 
Eillowen. A month later he succeeded Lord Coleridge as Lord Chief 
Justice of England. In 1896 he presided at the trial of the Jameson 
raiders, and in the same year, with Sir Frank Lockwood, visited America 
a second time, to deliver the annual address before the American Bar 
Association. He was one of the arbitrators, with Lord Justice Henn 
Collins, on the Venezuelan Boundary dispute in 1899. He died in August, 
1900, after a brief illness. As a judge, Russell more than fulfilled the 
expectations of those who believed in his fitness for high judicial office, 
and, on the bench, showed a freedom from a certain impatience and 
hastiness of temper which, at the bar, had been among his few infirmities. 
Lord Russell’s eldest son, the Hon. Arthur Russell, who was a County 
Court Judge, died in 1907. His second son, the Hon. Charles Russell, is 
the well known solicitor and a member of the London County Council, and 
another son, the Hon. Frank Russell, K.C., is one of the present leaders 
at the Chancery Bar. 

Sir William Pickford, born 1848, is the son of Thomas Edward 
Pickford. He was educated at Liverpool College and Exeter College, 
Oxford. In 1875 Mr. Pickford joined the Northern Circuit, where he 
soon obtained a very considerable practice, chiefly in commercial and 
shipping oases. He took silk in 1893. He represented the British 
Government in the North Sea Inquiry into the Dogger Bank incident with 
the Russian fleet, and at the International Diplomatic Conference on the 
Unification of Maritime Law. Mr. Pickford Vas Recorder of Oldham, 
1901-19()4, and of Liverpool, from 1994 to 1907. In 1906 Mr. Pickford 
went as Commissioner of Assize on the North-Eastern Circuit, and in the 
following year was appointed a Judge of the BLing’s Bench Division. 


364 




