NS its 


rhea at : 0 
0 


a 


as 
ee. 
he AA 


an aes 
ree ies 





z 

°@ 
n 
‘yy LO 
0 © 
0@ 
< e+ 


Book No. 
346 Ne4a 





SAN FRANCISCO PUBLIC LIBRARY 


i eg 


3 03671 7628 © 











* 
A 








eee 


CREEEPOECHE 





Lord Coleridge. 


ht Hon. 


1g; 


The R 


Trial of 


John Alexander Dickman 


Edited by 


S. O. Rowan-Hamilton 


BARRISTER-AT-LAW OF 


Lincotn’s INN AND THE NorTH-EASTERN CIRCUIT 





EDINBURGH AND LONDON 
WILLIAM HODGE & COMPANY 


PRINTED BY 
WILLIAM HODGE & COMPANY 
GLASGOW AND EDINBURGH 
1914 


Stylo 
Ws 
186548 


TO 
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD COLERIDGE, 
ONE OF THE JUDGES OF THE HIGH COURT 
OF JUSTICE, 

THIS VOLUME IS 
RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED 
BY 


THE EDITOR 





PREFACE. 


Wuen the Criminal Evidence Act of 1898 wags passed, enabling 
a prisoner in every case to give evidence, the opponents to the 
bill protested that the onus on the part of the prosecution to 
prove their case would be shifted to the prisoner, who would 
be required henceforward by juries to prove his innocence. 
There is little doubt that this has come to pass. The question 
is not, has the Act led to the conviction of the guilty? but has 
it led to the conviction of any imnocent person? Usually it is, 
of course, a great advantage for the accused to be able to 
go into the box and tell his own story. But those who think 
that it is so always, show but a slight knowledge of the practical 
side of a criminal Court. The appearance, demeanour, and in 
those cases where the past character of the accused is admis- 
sible, all these things count in the eyes of the jury. A man of 
slow comprehension, cross-examined by an astute counsel, by 
the very stupidity of his answers, often leaves a damaging 
impression on the minds of the twelve, and convicts himself. 
A totally different impression might be created by a nimble liar. 

But one thing is certain—juries now expect to see the 
accused in the witness-box. The judge, too, has the power of 
commenting, and frequently does comment, on the fact that 
the prisoner has not come forward in his own interests to 
protest his innocence—a dangerous risk for an advocate to run. 

Opinions doubtless differ, but many, I feel sure, will contend 
that, if it had been possible to keep Dickman out of the 
witness-box, the probability is that the jury would have acquitted 
him, on the ground that the prosecution had failed to satisfy 


them entirely as to his guilt. 


vill PREFACE. 


I wish to express my sincere thanks to the Director of Public 
Prosecutions, Sir Charles Mathews, for his kindness in placing 
the shorthand notes of the trial at my disposal; to Mr. Mitchell 
Innes, K.C., for lending me the maps and plans for the purpose 
of having them copied; to the editor of the Wewcastle Chronicle 
for his courtesy in allowing me to reprint the speeches of 
counsel ; to Messrs. Stevens & Haynes in allowing me to include 
the proceedings in the Court of Criminal Appeal, taken from 
the Criminal Appeal Reports, edited by Mr. Cohen; lastly, to 
the Council of Law Reporting, in permitting the publication of 
Mrs. Nisbet’s claim for compensation under the Workmen’s 
Compensation Act, 1906, reprinted from the Law Reports, 1910, 
2 K.B. 689. 


Introduction, - 2 : - a 2 = = 2 . 
Table of Dates, : - = : = : A : 3 


The Trial— 
First Day—Monpay, 41TH JuLy, 1910. 


Mr. Tindal Atkinson’s Speech for the Prosecution, - - 


Evidence for the Prosecution. 


W.H. Dickenson, - - - 39 | John T. Cosher, - 
Mark Watson Ramsay, - - 41 | George Harker, - 
Charles Franklin Murphy, - 42 | George Yeoman, - 
Thomas Anderson, - - - 43 | Andrew Bruce, - 

John Bradshaw Wilson, - - 43 | Thomas William Charlton 


- 44 | Robert Wilkinson, - 
- 45 | William Hogg, - - 
- Andrew Tait, - - 
- 65 | John Weddell, - - 
- 56 | Dr. Burnham, - - 


Charles Raven, - - 

Wilson Hepple, - 

Percival Harding Hall, 
John William mph, 


‘ ' ‘ ' ‘ 
i» 
© 


Dr. Robert Boland, 91 | Frank Christie, < 


Peter Spooner, - 94 | William T. Christie, 


Thomas Marshall, - - 95 | James Irving, - - 
Robert Sweeney, - 95 
Prisoner, John Alexander eras, - 4 ; : s 


Mrs. Nisbet, - 

John Athey, - - - - 59 | Jobn Nicholas, - - 

John Grant, - - - - 59 | Statement of George Nishet, 
Szconp Day—Tuzspay, 5tH JuLy, 1910. 
Hvidence for the Prosecution—continued. 

John Athey, - - : - 84 | Samuel Cohen, - - - 

Henrietta Hymen, - - - 84 | Mr. Kettering, - - 

Thomas Simpson, - - - 89 | John Dennis Badoock, - 

Andrew Craig Kirkwood, - - 90 | Robert Sedcole, .. - : 

Peter Halliday, - - - 91 | Thomas Paisley,” - - 


a ke 


Mr. Tindal Atkinson’s Closing Speech for the Prosecution,: - 
Mr. E. A. Mitchell-Innes’ Speech for the Defence, - - - 
Turrp Day—WeEpnNzESDAY, 6TH JULY, 1910. 


Lord Coleridge’s Gonpuing Ups: ey. 1z> - - nee 
The Verdict, - - - : - s : 
The Sentence, - - - - - : : Z 4 ! 


APPENDICES. 
I. The Appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal, - 


MP en iMi TR) ae aay 


Il. Letter from the Chief Constable of Northumberland to the Under 


Secretary of State, Home Office, - - S 

III. A Note on the Murder of Hermann Cohen, - - - 
IV. Statement of Mr. A. G. Brocklehurst, — - : - , 
V. Application for Compensation by Mrs. Nisbet, : - 
VI. A Short Account of the Counsel engaged in the Case, - 


PAGE 
1 


25 


159 
187 
188 


191 
201 
203 


204 
207 





LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


‘The Right Hon. Lord Coleridge, 
Map of Morpeth District, - - 
EK. Tindal Atkinson, Esq., K.C., 
‘C. F. Lowenthal, Esq., - - : 
Lord William Percy, - - 

#. A. Mitchell-Innes, Esq., K.C., 


- Frontispiece 


- fuciny paye 


16 
32 
64 
112 
150 





JOHN ALEXANDER DICKMAN. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Since the introduction of railways only seven murders have 
been committed in railway carriages in England. The first 
was perpetrated on 9th July, 1864, by Franz Miller.* The 
second was when Lefroy murdered Mr. Isaac Gold on the 
L.B. & S.C. Railway in 1881. The next, in 1897, remains a 
mystery. The victim was a Miss Camp, whose dead body was 
found in a second-class compartment on 12th February, 1897, 
on the arrival of the L. & S.-W. train from Feltham, at Water- 
loo. A chemist’s pestle with blood and hair upon it was found 
on the side of the line, and, it is supposed, was thrown out of 
the carriage window after the crime was committed. 

The fourth in 1901, a Mr. Pearson being murdered in a train 
near Wimbledon; and the fifth in 1905, known as the 
‘‘Merstham Tunnel’? mystery, on the L.B. & S.C. Railway. 
The verdict of the jury at the inquest in this case was—‘ That 
Miss Money met her death by severe injuries brought about by 
a train, but the evidence was insufficient to show whether she 


fell or was thrown from a train.”T 





* An account of this murder and trial, edited by Mr. H. B. Irving, 
forms a companion volume to the present. 

+On 19th August, 1912, a fire broke out at a corner house at Enys 
Road, Eastbourne. In the burning house were found the bodies of a 
man, his wife and child, and two other children; all had been mur- 
dered. The mother of the two children escaped a like fate, but had 
received two bullet wounds in the neck. On the mantelpiece was a 
piece of paper on which were the words ‘* Am absolutely ruined and have 
killed all who were dependent on me. Would like all to be buried 
in one grave. God forgive me.” 

Such a primitive method of overcoming your own and other people’s 
difficulties naturally created a sensation. But it was not till some 
weeks had elapsed that it was discovered that this murderer and 
suicide, known under the name of Robert Hicks ‘‘ Murray,’’ was the 
brother of Miss Money. The murdered woman and the one who 
escaped were sisters. He married them both, and succeeded in keep- 
ing them apart and in ignorance of it. CP 

Perhaps so desperate a criminal could have rom 
the Merstham Tunnel mystery beyond the ev 8 

& I 









n some light on 
he gave at the 





inquest. 


John Alexander Dickman. 


The sixth took place on 18th March, 1910, when a Mr. John 
Nisbet was found murdered on the main line of the North- 
Eastern Railway. This murder forms the subject of the 
following pages. The seventh railway tragedy is still 
unsolved. On 8th January, 1914, Willie Starchfield, aged five, 
was sent on an errand. As he did not return, information was 
given to the police. His parents were separated, the child 
living with his mother, the father earning a somewhat pre- 
carious livelihood by selling papers. In the afternoon of the 
same day the body of the boy was discovered under the seat of a 
third-class carriage at Haggerston station, on the North Londoh 
railway. There was no signs of any struggle in the carriage. 
Death had been caused by strangulation with a piece of string. 
The father, at the present time, stands accused, on the coroner’s 
injunction, of the murder. 

The publication of the report of a notable trial is not intended 
as a sop to the curious or as a feast for the morbid; it fulfils 
a far more honourable purpose. To students of law the reports 
of these trials are not books merely recording an exciting 
episode; they are volumes from which much information can, 
after labour, be extracted, and much of practical use can be 
learned from a careful study of the work of the eminent counsel 
engaged in them. After a notable trial the newspapers 
generally publish a large amount of correspondence from persons 
setting forth their views of what the verdict of the jury should 
have been. Few of these, who seek a morning notoriety, have 
attended the trial from beginning to end. They have read 
a résumé of what the reporter considers will most interest the 
general public—not necessarily what is of most importance— 
and have formed their conclusions on these slight materials. 
After the trial of Dickman the papers were filled with this type 
of letter, denouncing the verdict of the jury as “ vicious and ill- 
considered,” &. It is hoped that the publication of the 
evidence in full, will afford to many food for reflection and 
comfort to the sceptical. 

Before dealing with the facts of the case, attention should be 
drawn to one offer circumstance. From the moment of the 
discovery of the edy, it is no exaggeration to say the whole 

‘afew days with the murder. The Press, 
carefully cultivating the curiosity of the public, did their best 
2 






Introduction. 


to supply them with every detail that could be discovered. The 
usual sensational headlines appeared, showing what a wealth of 
English is at the command of the journalist. In the south the 
public excitement soon abated, replaced by something more 
recent. But in the north it was kept alive by the supposed 
“clue ’’ in London, the arrest of Dickman, the funeral of the 
murdered man, John Nisbet (which was attended by such a 
vast concourse eager to gratify their morbid taste that the gates 
of the cemetery had to be closed long before the arrival of the 
cortége), and many other rumours personal to both the deceased 
and Dickman—an interest kept alive right up to the date of the 
trial, so that the question forces itself upon one, ought not the 
venue to have been changed to some place where the same 
interest would not have been taken in the proceedings? Was it 
possible to select twelve jurymen from the locality with their 
minds unaffected by prejudice or tainted by the rumours that 
filled the air? Public opinion had grown so strong on the 
morning of Dickman’s trial, Monday the 4th July, 1910, 
that while. he was being removed from the gaol to the Moot 
Hall thousands lined the road, booing and vociferating as he 
passed, hidden from view in the prison van; while even old 
women, old enough to have acquired some restraint over their 
feelings, and some silent pity for others, gathered up their petti- 
coats, and joining in the crowd, ran as far as they could behind 
the van, shouting their execrations. 

Inside sat John Alexander Dickman on his way to a trial that 
“might” end in his death. 

Have such scenes as these no effect on a jury, however much 
they may be determined to find their verdict according to the 
evidence produced before them? 

I venture to think that this is a matter demanding the most 
serious attention of the authorities. The disgraceful, nay, 
terrible, sights witnessed in the streets of London when Dr. 
Crippen was produced at Bow Street, scenes which were re- 
peated after every remand before the magistrates and every 
adjournment at his trial, scenes only credible in a half-civilised 
country, do not they demand the suppres ion before trial of 
the evidence collected and published in @stai‘ by enterprising 
newspapers, and written up in the manne kely to achieve 
for them a large sale? Doubtless these con atulate themselves 

3 








John Alexander Dickman. 


on the “ power of the Press,” or on their being “‘a factor in 


eliciting the truth ’’ and other high-faluting sentences, but one 
knows perfectly well the one object they hold steadily in view 
is to increase the sale of their paper. Nothing sells better than 
an account of an atrocious murder. The result of such pub- 
lication is that the more horrible, mysterious, and notorious 
the crime, the less chance is there that the trial will be before 
an impartial jury. To the accused it constitutes a real danger. 
A miscarriage of justice arises at the present time, not from 
the secrecy, but from the publicity of the proceedings. Dr. 
Crippen, and to a lesser degree John Dickman, were both con- 
victed before they were placed in the dock. 

The King’s Bench Division of the High Court of Justice has 
jurisdiction to change the place of trial of any felony or mis- 
demeanour whenever it is necessary for the purpose of securing 
a fair trial. An Act, known as the Palmer Act,* was specially 
passed in order to have the trial of Dr. Palmer, the poisoner, 
removed to London owing to the violent prejudice the case had 
excited in the Midlands. The Act extends to all trials thereafter. 
The difficulty in making such an application lies in gauging the 
barometer of public interest some time before the trial, and 
therefore in persuading the King’s Bench of the necessity of 
removing it to another place. The intense interest and the 
prejudice the case of Dickman excited were never realised till 
the very morning of the trial—too late for any such application 
to be made. 

On Friday, 18th March, 1910, a train left Newcastle at 
10.27 a.m., stopping at all the stations till Alnmouth was _ 
reached, where it was due at 12.8 p.m., a distance of 34? miles. 
It was quite a short train, consisting of a luggage van and 
three compartment carriages, and in the one next to the engine 
John Innes Nisbet was travelling. He was a clerk and book- 
keeper in the employ of the Stobswood Colliery Company, and 
it was part of his duties to proceed on alternate Fridays to pay 
the wages at the colliery half a mile away from Widdrington 
station. The amount of money required varied, but on this 
occasion he took with him £370 9s. 6d. His employers handed 


him a cheque, which he cashed at Lloyd’s Bank, putting the 






*19 & 20 Vict. c. 16, 8. 1. 
4 


Introduction. 


coin received in canvas bags, into a small leather bag, which he 
locked, retaining the key. Nisbet was seen by a Mr. Charles 
Raven going in the direction of No. 5 platform (from which 
the train started), apparently in company with another man 
whom he knew by sight, but not by name. Wilson Hepple, 
an artist, had taken a seat in the rear of the train, and was 
walking up and down outside his carriage, when he saw 
Dickman, whom he had known for many years, pass with a man, 
a stranger to him, towards the front part of the train. One 
of them had his hand on the handle of the compartment, but 
when he turned round again both had disappeared. Two 
cashiers, Hall and Spink, were also travelling on the same 
errand as Nisbet, but to their respective collieries. Hall, on 
looking out of the window just before the train started, saw 
Nisbet coming along the platform with another man wearing 
a light overcoat, and noticed Nisbet open the door of the com- 
partment behind theirs and get in, followed by his companion. 
On these fortnightly pay journeys it had been the custom of 
the murdered man’s wife to meet her husband on the platform 
at Heaton, where they lived, and to have a few moments’ con- 
versation with him. Heaton is the second station from New- 
castle, and on this occasion Mrs. Nisbet found he was travelling 
in the front part of the train, whereas he was usually in the 
rear. Nisbet, however, looked out of the window, but it took 
her some seconds to reach his compartment. ‘lhe carriage 
had stopped under the shadow of a tunnel outside the station, 
but Mrs. Nisbet had just time to observe he was not alone, for 
she noticed a man was seated at the far end of the carriage, 
and that the collar of his light overcoat was partly turned up. 
The train proceeded on its way to Stannington, at which station 
the clerks, Hall and Spink, left their carriage, Hall nodding in 
a friendly way as he passed to Nisbet; they, too, noticed he 
was not alone. The next station to Stannington is Morpeth, 
a run of 24 miles, timed to occupy six minutes. On the 
arrival there a man gave up to Athey, the ticket collector, the 
outward half of a return ticket from Newcastle to Stannington 
and 24d., which is the correct excess fare. Beyond noticing 
that he was wearing a loose overcoat, he left. no particular im- 
"pression on Athey. During the time the train stopped at 
‘Morpeth to take up water—a matter of about four minutes—a 
5 


John Alexander Dickman. 


passenger in passing to find a comfortable seat, looked casually 
into the third compartment of the first carriage, which was 
apparently empty, and he passed on. 

On the train arriving at Alnmouth, the foreman porter, 
William Charlton, on opening the door of the third compart- 
ment in the first carriage, made a gruesome discovery. From 
under the seat came three streams of blood, and on his bending 
down he discovered the body of a man lying face downwards 
and pushed as far back as possible. Examination showed the 
unfortunate person had been shot in no less than five places 
in the head. A broken pair of spectacles showed that life had 
not been surrendered without a struggle. 

A soft felt hat on the floor of the carriage led to the identi- 
fication of the deceased as Mr. James Nisbet. A post-mortem 
examination disclosed two cut of the five bullets were still 
lodged in his head, one of which was an ordinary lead bullet, 
but the other was nickel capped. As they were of different 
calibre, it was clear that the murderer had needed two revolvers 
to accomplish successfully his foul work.* 

A reward of £100 was at once offered by the employers of 
the murdered man in the following terms :— 


“ £100 REWARD. 
“* MURDER. 


‘‘ Whereas on the 17th March, 1910, John Innes Nisbet, a 
clerk or cashier, late of 180 Heaton Road, Newcastle, was 
murdered in a third-class carriage on the North-Eastern 
Railway between Newcastle and Alnmouth, and a black leather 
bag containing £370 9s. 6d. in money (mostly gold and silver), 
which was in charge of the deceased man, was stolen. 

‘A man of the following description was seen in the same 
carriage as the deceased at Newcastle and Stannington railway 
stations, and appeared to be on friendly terms with the 
deceased :—About thirty-five to forty years of age, about 5 feet 
6 inches high, about 11 stones in weight, medium build ; 
heavy, dark moustache, pale or sallow complexion; wore a 


*See p. 11 of the Introduction. . “ 
6 


Introduction. 


light overcoat, down to his knees; black, hard, felt hat 3 well 
dressed and appeared to be fairly well to do. 

“The above reward will be paid by the owners of the 
Stobswood Colliery, near Widdrington, to any person (other 
than a person belonging to the police force in the United 
Kingdom), not being the actual murderer, who shall be the 
first to give such information and shall give such evidence as 
shall lead to the discovery and the conviction of the murderer 
or murderers.’’ 

Rumour, as usual, was not silent; the murderer had been 
seen in many places, and in London had offered a drink to a 
*busman, showing him at the same time a handful of gold. 
With surprising swiftness the man was traced, but, promptly 
proving his right to the money, he was equally promptly 
discharged. Information, however, reached the police that 
Dickman had been in the company of the deceased, and 
Detective Inspector Tait called at his house. He was not 
cautioned, nor can one gather that he was at the time looked 
upon other than as a witness whose evidence might be useful 
to the police. After some conversation Dickman told the 
inspector he had seen Nisbet on the morning of the murder, 
had booked his ticket at the same time, had travelled by the 
same train, but had not seen ‘him after the train started, as 
he did not travel in the same compartment. Asked if he 
would make a statement at the police office, he at once 
acquiesced, and accompanied by the inspector went there and 
made a voluntary statement which was written down, read 
over to him, and signed by him as correct. 

The statement, which appears in full in the evidence of 
Superintendent Weddell, described his movements at the 
station on the morning of the 18th March—how he travelled 
in a carriage at the end of the train, passed Stannington 
station without noticing it and got out at Morpeth, paying an 
excess fare of 24d.; after starting to walk back to Stannington 
he was taken ill and returned to Morpeth to catch the 1.12 
p-m. train back to Newcastle. This he missed, but took the 
1.40 p.m. instead. While waiting for this train he left the 
station, walking towards the town, meeting a man called 
Elliott, with whom he conversed for a few moments. In 


‘ as 7 


John Alexander Dickman. 


conclusion he said that the object of his journey was to see 
a Mr. Hogg at Dovecot Colliery. This statement being in 
contradiction to evidence already in the possession of the police, 
Dickman was at once arrested. 

The police visited his house, and found in a bureau some 
pawn tickets for small articles pawned in the name of “‘ John 
Wilkinson,’’ one of which was pawned the day before the 
murder. In the same bureau were also found a life preserver 
and two pass-books, one relating to an account at the National 
Provincial Bank and the other to an account at Lambton’s 
(now amalgamated with Lloyd’s). Amongst the clothing 
seized by the police were a pair of trousers and a pair of suede 
gloves, which were found, after expert examination, to have 
blood stains on them. No revolvers were—or ever have been 
—discovered. 

The question of the identification of the prisoner was of vital 
importance, both to the prosecution and to the defence. From 
the very first, perhaps it is not too much to say, that it became 
the only question; and it becomes necessary to see how and 
by what means the links in the chain of identification are 
connected, and especially to notice two incidents which did 
not come to light at the trial, but which were subsequently 


discovered. 
As Dickman admitted he was at the station on the 18th and 


had travelled by the 10.27 a.m. train, there is no occasion to 
consider the evidence as to that fact. But it is necessary to 
consider the statements of the witnesses for the prosecution, 
gontrasting their story with his own. 

The first evidence on this question was given by Charles 
Raven, who knew the prisoner by sight, but not by name, and 
who knew Nisbet quite well. He saw them enter the platform 
together, but did not hear them conversing. 

The artist Hepple knew Dickman intimately, but did not 
know Nisbet. He saw Dickman on the platform with some- 
body, but his evidence carries the case no further on this point. 

He also saw one of them with his hand on the handle of a 
carriage door while he was walking up and down outside his 
own compartment, and on looking round later noticed they 
had presumably entered the carriage together, as they were 
no longer visible on the platform. 

8 


Introduction. 


Now, the witness Hall knew Nisbet, but not the prisoner, 
not even by sight. He identified Nisbet as being the person 
who opened the carriage door; though he only saw his com- 
panion for two or three seconds, he was quite close to him 
and ‘‘ got a fairly good view.’? On the 21st March, at the 
police station, he was taken to a room in which nine men 
were placed, from whom he was asked to identify the prisoner. 
He picked Dickman out, at the same time saying, ‘‘If I was 
assured that the murderer was in amongst those nine men I 
would have no hesitation in picking the prisoner out ’’—not 
very strong identification at the most, but hardly identification 
at all in view of what has transpired subsequently. 

The suspicion of the leading counsel for the defence was 
aroused at the trial by this answer, but nothing definite was 
elicited. But between the verdict and the appeal to the Court 
of Criminal Appeal these suspicions became confirmed, as will 
be found in the letter from the chief constable of Northumber- 
land in Appendix II.* From this it appears that when Hall 
and Spink went to identify Dickman at the police station, 
while waiting in a corridor it was suggested to them by a 
constable that they should look through a window of a room 
in which Dickman was being examined, to see if they could 
recognise him before being officially called on to do so. Acting 
on the suggestion, they both went to the outside of the window, 
but owing to the lower part being frosted, they could only see 
the top of a man’s head, and consequently declined to draw 
the deduction that he was the man they had seen in the train 
with Nisbet. Another attempt was then made by the police 
to facilitate the identification through a half-open door, and 
this time Hall noticed the light overcoat Dickman was wearing, 
and was therefore in a better position to identify him from 
the other nine men. It would be interesting to know if all 
these, or any of them, at the time he was called upon officially 
to identify Dickman, were wearing similar overcoats. In 
face of these facts the last paragraph in the chief constable’s 
letter is not of much account; but the question presents itself 
that if that statement is correct, why should the officers have 


* See also Hall’s evidence before the Court of Criminal Appeal. 
Appendix. I. 
9 


John Alexander Dickman. 


- suggested to Hall and Spink this illegal and underhand means 
of identification, not a word of which was mentioned at the 
trial? It is to be feared that much of the so-called identification 
that takes place at police stations is of a similar, wrongful, and 
unfair description. 

Let me now pass on to the second incident in the identification 
of the prisoner. 

Mrs. Nisbet was called before the magistrates, and first gave 
evidence on 14th April. She spoke to seeing her husband in 
the train and running along the platform to his carriage, and 
then a fainting attack coming on, it was some time before she 
could resume. She again swooned at the close of her 
evidence. Other evidence was called, and the prisoner 
was remanded till the 22nd inst., on which date Mrs. Nisbet 
expressed her desire to make a further statement, which was 
as follows :—‘‘ The little I saw of the man in the train that 
morning, he had his coat collar up and it partly covered his 
face. I recognised the same part of his face in the dock the 
other day, and that is how I lost my senses. . . .” 

It never transpired till after the trial that Mrs. Nisbet had 
known Dickman by sight for years, and remembered seeing 
him only shortly before the murder. It would have been better 
if she had returned into Court on the 14th and made her 
statement then, rather than postpone it for days—till the 22nd 
—when she must have had every opportunity of talking it over 
with the police and others. One would have thought she would 
have returned to the Court, and then and there denounced 
Dickman. Her excuse for delay is that she “was not called 
upon to do so.’’ Surely after such a startling incident this 
would have suggested itself even to the lay mind! 

But does not the fact that Mrs. Nisbet failed to recognise 
at once aman she had known for years, throw a grave suspicion 
on the value not only of her identification of Dickman, but 
on every particle of her evidence? Is it conceivable that under 
the circumstances she should have hesitated so long before she 
became convinced of his identity? 

The murder, it must not be forgotten, was undoubtedly 
committed between Stannington and Morpeth. The evidence of 


Grant, who looked into the carriage occupied by Nisbet, and 
10 


Introduction. 


found it apparently empty at Morpeth, and the evidence of other 
officials along the line disposes of any other premise. The 
last witness as to the identification was Athey, the ticket 
collector, who declined to say more than that Dickman 
resembled in his general appearance the man who left the train 
at Morpeth. 

It now becomes necessary to consider the question’ as to the 
possession of firearms by the prisoner; nor must it be forgotten 
that no firearms were found at his house, nor have the revolvers* 
with which this crime was perpetrated, ever been discovered. 
Dickman was in the habit of having letters sent to him at a 
place of business in Newcastle kept by a Miss Hyman, under 
the name of “F. Black.” Many of the letters were concerned 
with betting transactions, but undoubtedly about the end of 
October, a small parcel was delivered from a firm of gunsmiths 
addressed to him under his pseudonym. Dickman did not call 
for it for a couple of months, and in the meantime a postcard 
was received for him from the firm, asking for the return of 
the revolver sent in error. This postcard was read by the 
proprietress of the shop, who when he called in January, 1910, 
gave him a label for the purpose of returning it; but she had 
no knowledge whether in fact he had done so, as he took both 
parcel and label away with him. This was the last time he 
was in Miss Hyman’s shop, and on that occasion, for some 
reason known only to himself, he told her his correct name was 
Dickman and gave his address. 

The evidence of the gunsmith on behalf of the prosecution 
shows that two of the four bullets produced were such as are 
used in an automatic pistol; but no evidence was presented to 
the Court that Dickman possessed another revolver. 


* Although I have treated, as I am bound to treat, the evidence as 
pointing to two pistols being used in the murder, there is little doubt 
that one only was employed. The murderer had endeavoured to 
make the smaller bullets fit the barrel by wrapping paper round the 
cartridge. In this he was only partially successful, which accounts for 
the loss of penetrative power as referred to in the evidence. One 
such piece of paper was found in the carriage, but it was not realised 
to what use it had been put. The prosecution having to account for 
the bullets of different calibre, naturally formed ‘the conclusion that 
two revolvers had been employed. There is now no doubt that only 
one was used. My authority for this statement is Mr. Mitchell-Innes, 
K.C. 

II 


John Alexander Dickman. 


The medical evidence was given by Dr. Boland, who con- 
ducted the post-mortem and examined the blood stains on the 
left-hand glove, and the left pocket of the trousers ; he declined 
to decide as to whether it was the blood of a human being or 
even of a mammal, but was positive as to the stains not being 
more than a fortnight old when he examined them on 26th 
March. On the outside of the prisoner’s overcoat he also dis- 
covered a large dark stain on the left front, and microscopical 
examination showed that efforts had been made to remove it by 
means of an oil (probably paraffin); but of what nature the 
stain consisted Dr. Boland could give no opinion, owing to the 
action of the oil. Certain it was he found no blood on the 
overcoat.* 

On the 9th June, hardly a month before the trial, an impor- 
tant discovery was made. Peter Spooner, a colliery manager 
at the Hepcott colliery, found at the bottom of an air shaft 
at the Isabella pit the bag Nisbet was carrying with him when 
he was murdered. The Isabella mine is situated 1$ miles south- 
east of Morpeth station, close to the high road. Dickman was 
an acquaintance of Spooner, and the latter had spoken to him 
on certain occasions as to the difficulty of working this pjt 
owing to the presence of the large quantity of water. The 
air shaft was covered by an iron grid with bars 6 inches or 
64 inches apart, sufficiently wide to admit the passage of the 
bag. The grid could also be lifted quite easily by any one 
with their hands. This air shaft was only visited occasionally 
about once in five weeks. 

The bag, which was locked, had a large cut in the side, and 
the contents were missing, with the exception of a few coppers, 
while round the place where it lay other coppers were scattered. 

The motive of the murder being obviously robbery, it becomes 
necessary to inquire into the prisoner’s financial condition at 
that time. 

Dickman, after he had given up the secretaryship of a colliery 
syndicate, worked on a variable commission with certain book- 
makers, and at one time had an office in Newcastle. He kept 
two banking accounts, one at Lambton’s, now Lloyd’s, which 
was closed in December, 1909, and only small sums had ever 


*See p. 92. 
12 


Introduction. 


been passed through it. The other account was at the National 
Provident Bank. 

In October, 1909, he borrowed £20 for three months at 
60 per cent. per annum from the Cash Accommodation and 
Investment Company, which high-toned name covers the deal- 
ing of an ordinary moneylending business.* The sum was 
payable on demand, with interest at £1 per month. In the 
following January, 1910, though the interest had been paid 
regularly, Dickman called at the office and obtained an exten- 
sion of the loan for a further period of three months, on the 
ground that he was not in a position to repay the principal. 
This interest was carefully paid, the last payment being made 
on 17th March—the day before the murder. 

In November, 1909, Dickman introduced to the company a 
Mr. Frank Christie, who obtained a loan from them of £200. 
The whole of this sum found its way at once into Dickman’s 
account at the National and Provincial Bank, but found its 
way out again directly, Dickman withdrawing it on the 26th 
and 29th inst. by cheques payable to self. Mr. Christie gave 
evidence that of the £200, he eventually received about 
half. Other sums for large amounts had from time to time 
beeh paid to Dickman’s account, but no other transaction took 
place after this last-mentioned cheque was presented for 
payment. 

On 14th February, 1910, Dickman again appears to have 
been in low water, for he visited a firm styling themselves 
Cush & Co., jewellers, of Newcastle, and obtained £5 on the 
security of some jewellery of trifling value. He stated to Mr. 
Ketterer, a partner, that he required the money to go to 
Liverpool to see the Waterloo Cup races. A few days later, 
meeting one of the partners, he expressed the desire to repay 
the loan shortly, regretting he was unable to do so at the 
moment. 

This being the state of his financial resources, let us see if 
Mrs. Dickman was in a position to help him. 

In January, 1910, she had a sum of about £15 standing to 
her credit, but practically the whole of it was. withdrawn by 
the middle of February. In addition, she also had a second 


*See Appendix ITI. 13 


John Alexander Dickman. 


account at a co-operative society, which showed a credit in 
1907, of roughly, £73, but this had by March, 1910, fallen 
to £4. It is also clear that in January, 1910, she wrote 
from Newcastle as follows to her husband, who was away 
at the time :— 


“Dear Jack, 

“J received your card, and am sorry that you have no 
money to send. I am needing it very badly. The weather here 
is past description. I had to get in a load of coals, which 
consumed the greater part of a sovereign. The final notice for 
rates has come in—in fact, came in last week—which means 
they must be paid next Thursday. Also Harry’s school account. 
With my dividend due this week and what is in the Post Office 
I dare say I can pay the most pressing things, but it is going 
to make the question of living a poser, unless you can give 
me some advice as to what to do. 

“Trusting to hear from you soon regarding what you think 
I had best do. 
“T am, 
“Yours faithfully, 


“Annis Dickman.” 


So in January Mrs. Dickman is engaged in a fruitless en- 
deavour to obtain from her husband the necessities of life. At 
the time she wrote that letter she had the sum of £32 to her 
credit. But she foresaw that with her husband earning 
nothing, relying very largely on the uncertainty of backing the 
winning horse, the ‘‘ question of living ’’ was rapidly becoming 
“a poser.”? Although Dickman had in the previous November 
obtained a sum of something over £100 from Mr. Christie, it 
did not satisfy his requirements for very long, for in December 
he journeyed to Stannington to try to borrow a couple of pounds 
from Hogg to ‘‘ tide him over,’’ and it will be remembered that 
it was in the following January he was asking for an extension 
of the loan from the Investment Company through Cohen, a 
moneylender, and in February had been obliged to pawn 
jewellery to raise a five-pound note. On the day before the 
murder their united funds amounted to a sum of £4, and as to 
this, it is not certain whether Dickman even knew of its 

14 


Introduction. 


existence. Mrs. Dickman, like many other wise women, 
doubtless endeavoured to get as much money out of her 
husband as the occasion allowed, and to put away in her own 
name all she could spare for a ‘‘ rainy day.’’ 

In his cross-examination Dickman said, ‘“ We had some little 
bickering as to who should pay or draw upon certain things 
at the time, but, however, I gave way and settled matters.’’ 

At any rate, on the 17th March their financial position must 
have been ‘acute, if not indeed critical. 

Thus there was ample motive, if motive were necessary for 
Dickman to commit the crime. But it should be remembered 
that it is not incumbent on the prosecution to prove motive, 
as many crimes are committed to which no motive can be 
assigned. ‘‘ Motive,’’ said the learned judge in summing up 
the case to the jury, ‘‘if the facts are clear, is irrelevant. If 
the facts are not clear, motive may explain what otherwise 
would be difficult of explanation.’’ ~ Deep, hidden in the 
remoter depths of the hearts of all of us, lie thoughts no man 
can drag forth into the light. 

On the 21st March, when Dickman was arrested, the sum of 
£17 9s. 11d. was found on him in coin in one of Lambton & Co.’s 
small bags. Owing to the amalgamation of Lloyds with the 
North-Eastern and Lambton’s Bank, the clerk in their employ 
could not say in which bags the £370 9s. 6d. was originally 
put. Suffice it to mention here, that unlike most murders 
committed for money, and differing in this from the other train 
murders previously mentioned, neither the weapons with which 
the deed was perpetrated nor the bulk of the £370 have ever 
been found. The murderer, be he Dickman or some other 
man, laid his plans well, and with a care that showed the most 
thorough premeditation ; notwithstanding the closest search, no 
trace beyond the coppers in the Isabella pit has been discovered. 
Did he hide them, intending to come for the spoil some future 
day? If Dickman was rightly convicted of the crime, the 
secret of his hiding place has been well kept, as indeed it will 
be, for it lies with him at the bottom of a nameless grave. 

In 1898 was passed an Act of Parliament which has been, 
perhaps, more far-reaching in its effects on the criminal law 
than any other statute. By the first section of the Act, the 
accused person and the wife or husband of the accused may 

15 


John Alexander Dickman. 


give evidence for the defence. He or she cannot be called upon 
to do so: it is entirely a voluntary matter. It is expressly 
laid down in the Act that should they decide not to avail them- 
selves of the privilege, the opposing counsel may not comment 
on their absence from the witness-box.* This last clause 
became of importance later. 

In a trial of so mysterious a character, a trial that created 
such an immense amount of interest, it is a little curious that 
the only witness called for the defence was the prisoner himself. 
He availed himself of the Act allowing him to give evidence, 
and faced what must have been a severe ordeal, with the same 
composure as he had exhibited throughout the proceedings. 

In answer to questions of his counsel, he stated his visits to 
the witness Hogg were never by appointment, that he saw Nisbet 
on the morning of the 18th March, and asserted that his 
acquaintanceship with the deceased was of a casual nature only ; 
and that he never saw Nisbet after leaving the ticket office, 
where he had taken his ticket to Stannington. It being the 
morning of the Grand National the racing news was of special 
interest that day, so he bought a Manchester Sporting Chronicle 
to study the latest stable information while en route. _ The 
swerve on the railway between Stannington and Morpeth brought 
him back to reality, and he realised that he had passed his 
station. He left the train at Morpeth, paying the excess fare, 
and carrying his overcoat over his arm or shoulder. 

It would perhaps be advisable to leave for a moment Dick- 
man’s evidence and glance at the accompanying map. It will 
be seen there are two roads leading from the Morpeth station to 
Stannington, one the main road to Newcastle, the other lying 
to the east of the railway, which rejoins the main road about 
34 miles below Stannington station. The direct route from 
Morpeth station to the Dovecot Moor Colliery (where Hogg was 
engaged) would have been along the high road. 

Returning to his evidence, Dickman decided not to go back 
to Stannington by the train, which he knew left Morpeth a few 
minutes later, because if he had carried out his original plans, 
after seeing Hogg at Dovecot, he would have walked to Morpeth 
station, as he wished to inspect the Landsale Drift, past which 


*Should the defendant not give evidence, the judge may comment 
on the fact. 


16 


WSTANNINGTON 
By STATION 








Lough Ho.¢. 











2 
Middle Duddo _ STANNINGTON 
is ™) 
3 
SCALE 1 MILE = /32 INCHES 
/ ° / . r 2 


Map of Morpeth District. 


Thin ses 


et 
. ke he 





Introduction. 


the road between these stations leads. So on leaving Morpeth 
station after he had walked for about half an hour, he reached 
a village known to him as Clifton, where he was taken ill, 
necessitating his lying down in an adjoining field for about half 
an hour; but one must confess that the symptoms of his com- 
plaint are somewhat mysterious. This sudden indisposition 
decided Dickman to return at once to Newcastle, and he reached 
Morpeth station a few minutes late for the express. As he had 
some time to wait for the next train, he left the station on the 
east side, and met Elliott, who was with a friend. He then 
returned alone and took the 1.45 p.m. train home. 

With regard to the parcel, which it was alleged contained a 
revolver from Messrs. Bell Brothers, Dickman stated that he 
returned it unopened, and was not aware of its contents. 

Dickman was then examined as to his financial affairs, and 
gave evidence contradicting much that was tendered on behalf 
of the prosecution. The canvas bag in which the money was 
found, he stated, was his own, and that he used it as 
a purse. ~ But he affirmed that he had a sum of £120 
in reserve known only to himself, with part of which 
sum he intended to start betting when the flat race season 
opened. This £120 was intact in the previous November, and 
out of this some time before Christmas he gave his wife £50. 
It was made up partly of his own and partly of Mr. Frank 
Christie’s money. By the middle of February £40 remained, 
all of which was his own. It had been his intention to go to 
see the Waterloo Cup run, but when he abandoned that idea, 
he gave his wife a further sum of £15 or £20. The £17 
which was found on him at the police station was the remainder 
of the reserve fund of £120. 

In cross-examination Dickman admitted, as indeed he was 
obliged to admit, being an ex-secretary to a colliery company, 
that he knew the colliery wages in the district were paid on 
alternate Fridays. He admitted making the journey on the 
4th March, also a Friday, stating he wished to see Hogg with 
regard to the payment of wages, though he had no appointment 
with him, and no interest in the sinking operations at Dovecot. 
““Q. How long before that did you visit Mr. Hogg?—That I 
could not say. @Q. Was it usually on a Friday?—It might have 
been—I think it was.’’ 


B 17 


John Alexander Dickman. 


These frequent journeys on a Friday—what was their object? 
This curiosity, exposed under cross-examination as to the 
financial operations between Hogg and Christie—this desire to 
find out whether Christie was ‘‘ bluffing ’’’ when he told him he 
had no money, was this the real object? or was there a deeper 
motive underlying, necessitating a careful reconnaisance of 
the ground, a practical demonstration of the noise made by the 
train at the fastest portion of the track, the distance between 
Stannington and Morpeth? Was the story of Mr. Brockle- 
hurst and his companions,* though no evidence against the 
prisoner, altogether devoid of foundation? or was it that he 
had to cover up an unfortunate admission? To return to the 
cross-examination of the defendant. He maintained that on 
the day in question he was wearing an old brown overcoat, and 
not the fawn-coloured ‘‘ Burberry,’’ as described by the wit- 
nesses for the prosecution, and he produced both in the box. 
There were others, he said, travelling in the same compartment 
with him, possibly five or six, but he paid no attention to them, 
hardly observing whether they were men or women—the surprise 
caused by the shock of his arrest, and the accusation launched 
against him, having driven from his mind all thoughts and all 
details of his fellow-passengers on that eventful morning. The 
visit to Mr. Hogg was not the only object of the journey, for a 
Mr. Houldsworth had consulted him as to the value of the Land- 
sale Drift. When asked why he did not return from Morpeth to 
Stannington by the train due in a few minutes he replied, “If I 
had got out at Stannington I should have gone to the Dovecot 
pit, and then I should have walked from the Dovecot pit to 
Morpeth, so that by walking back from Morpeth to the Dovecot 
pit I should pass this drift, so 1 was merely stopping, as it 
were, at the wrong end of the journey.”’ 

He adhered to the details of his attack of illness on the road, 
and it is true that he was attended during his detention for 
the same complaint. Obviously it was not a very serious 
affair, as on reaching home he went out after tea. As to the 
position and locality of the Isabella Pit he denied all knowledge, 
thought he might ‘‘ have passed it and not known.’’ Spooner 
he knew to be connected with the Hepscott Colliery on the 





*See Appendix IV. 
18 


Introduction. 


east side of Morpeth station. ‘I had never known the name 
of the pit by the Isabella Pit,’’ and he declared, in answer to 
a question of the learned judge—‘‘I never knew there was 
an Isabella Pit.’’ : 

The suede gloves on which the blood stains were found had 
been discarded some three months before; they fitted badly, 
and were thrown aside. Why or how the blood stains had 
been found on them he could give no account, unless his nose 
had bled, or he had at some time or other received a cut and 
touched the place with them. In spite of the evidence of the 
analyst, who deposed the blood stain was of recent date, he 
maintained he had neither worn nor carried them since 
Christmas. 

The blood marks on the inside of the trouser pocket came 
probably from the same cause, with the addition of a new 
source, perhaps when “‘ he was cutting his corns.’? The oil 
on his coat came from his bicycle. 

He denied that he required any money in October, and 
stated that he went to Cohen to ‘‘ ascertain if it were possible 
to obtain loans at the advertised rate of interest, and for no 
other purpose.’’ Asked if he had not spent it, he replied, 
“‘T do not know. It would go with my other amounts.”’ 
He asserted he had, in February, a sum of £70, but could 
not repay Cohen the borrowed £20. 

Asked to explain other attempts to borrow money from 
Swinney (a witness not called at the trial) and from Hogg, 
he answered that with regard to Swinney he did not want to 
borrow for himself, and with regard to the loan by Hogg, it 
was to save him the trouble attendant on going home. 

As for the jeweller Kettering’s evidence that he was pawning 
the goods, he declined to look at it in that light, describing 
the transaction as merely “‘ putting them in a place of safety,” 
because of the recent burglaries in the neighbourhood. The 
use of the name, “‘ John Wilkinson was an idea of a moment.’’ 

These answers, especially as to his transactions with Cohen, 
must have raised the gravest suspicion in the minds of the 
jury as to the truth of his whole story. Is :it possible that 
a fairly well educated person, who had held a responsible 
position, would borrow money at 60 per cent. interest just to 

19 


John Alexander Dickman. 


find out if the moneylender’s advertisement were true? 
Neither could his story with regard to the £5 borrowed from 
Cust be regarded by reasonable men as other than an invention. 
These are merely two improbabilities that occurred in his 
narrative. 

At the close of his re-examination, the letter from Mrs. 
Dickman to her husband, previously referred to, was allowed 
to be put in, and he was cross-examined in regard to it. 

This completed the evidence on both sides. 

I have already commented on what I suggest was the unsatis- 
factory evidence of the identification of Dickman; but in 
connection with this it must not be forgotten that the accused 
admitted that he travelled on that train. Obviously the 
murderer of Nisbet travelled in his carriage, and with his coat 
collar turned up to avoid detection. Who was he? 

It is with the greatest regret I am unable to give the 
speeches of the counsel engaged in full. No effort has been 
spared to obtain them, or to collate them from the various 
newspaper reports published at the time. Official shorthand 
writers take no note of the addresses of counsel, and I have 
failed to obtain a correct note from any other source. 
After much consideration I have therefore decided to reprint 
the report of the speeches from the Wewcastle Daily Chronicle, 
which, though only a summary, is the best report I have 
succeeded in finding. 

In the course of his address to the jury, Mr. Tindal Atkinson 
inadvertently commented on the fact that Mrs. Dickman had 
not been called by the defence to give certain evidence on 
behalf of her husband as to facts which must have been within 
her knowledge. Such comment is in contradiction with the 
express terms of the statute mentioned above. The defence 
were placed in a difficulty. If Mr. Mitchell Innes at once 
objected, however rapidly he did so, he could not have 
prevented the jury knowing that he could have called evidence 
on certain points, which he had thought wiser to keep in the 
background. If he took no objection, he might then hope 
that on this ground the Court of Criminal Appeal would quash 
the conviction, though it might have been said that objection 
ought to have been taken at the trial. 


20 


Introduction. 


In the course of his speech for the defence, Mr. Mitchell 
Innes alluded to the incident. ‘‘ Gentlemen, my friend 
observed that I did not call the wife to give evidence with 
regard to her having cleaned the coat. In not doing so, I 
exercised my judgment on behalf of the prisoner, and acting 
in what I thought were his interests and the interests of the 
wife. I may say there is an Act of Parliament’ which says 
that when a husband is accused of a crime, or a wife is accused 
of a crime, and the wife is not called on behalf of the husband, 
or the husband is not called on behalf of the wife, as the case 
may be, they are protected from any strictures being passed by 
the prosecution on the conduct of the defence in not doing so.” 


Mr. Trnpau AtTkInson—May I say with regard to that at once, as 
my friend has mentioned the matter, I made the comment with regard 
to the absence of the wife by inadvertence, having forgotten for the 
moment the extent of the terms of that statute which my friend has 
referred to. If my attention had been called to it, I would not have 
said a word with regard to it. But your lordship knows that though 
I am prohibited from making any comment on the absence of the wife 
in a case of this kind, of course your lordship can comment to the 
jury upon such absence. I ought not, I say at once, to have made 
the observation. It was done in pure inadvertence and forgetfulness 
of the extent of the provisions in the Act of Parliament. 

Mr. Mitcuzett Innzes—I accept that absolutely from my learned 
friend, and he will believe me when I say that my reference was not 
made in a spirit of sharp criticism on his conduct of a case, which, if 
I may say so without impertinence, he has so fairly and so ably pre- 
sented to the Court. 


When the jury returned into Court with their verdict, Lord 
Coleridge, who had not referred to the incident in the course 
of his summing up, interposed. 


Lord Cotrripge—Gentlemen, before you give your verdict there is 
an incident in yesterday’s proceedings which I forgot to allude to. 
Learned counsel for the prosecution commented upon the absence of 
the wife as a witness for the defence in connection with the allegation 
made by the prisoner that the wife had cleaned his coat. Such com- 
ment is forbidden, I ought to have said, but it escaped my attention 
for the moment. I attach no importance to the coat, and I think I 
indicated this to you; but I forgot to add that such a comment made 
by the learned counsel ought to be banished from your minds, and 
not to influence your verdict. If you allowed that comment to affect 
your minds adversely to the prisoner, I must ask you to reconsider 
your verdict, dismissing such comment from your minds. If you 
have not allowed it to affect your decision in any way, then you can 
deliver your verdict. 

21 


John Alexander Dickman. 


The ForEMAN (without consulting the other jurymen)—It has not. , 

Lord Coter1ipGre—Have you allowed it to affect you? 

The ForremaNn—We have not. 

Lord Corzr1tpce—Then that question does not arise. 

The Forrman—It has not been mentioned. 

Lord Corzripcz—I understand you have not allowed it to affect 
your minds. 

The Forrman—We have not mentioned it. 

Fortunately the address of the learned judge is taken down 
verbatim by the official shorthand writer to the Court, and if 
in tendency it was not altogether in favour of the prisoner, it 
was a clear, unbiassed discussion of every material point in the 
case, framed in perfect English. As an example of a masterly 
summing up of the facts, for the language and style in which 
it was delivered, one would have to travel back to the trial 
of Dr. Palmer to find its equal. 

The jury retired a few minutes before one, returning with 
their verdict about two and a half hours later. 

Asked if he had anything to say in answer to the verdict of 
‘* Guilty,’’ Dickman, in calm, clear tones, reiterated his 
innocence. ‘‘I can only repeat that I am entirely innocent 
of this cruel deed. I have no complicity in this crime, and I 
have spoken the truth in my evidence—in everything that I 
have said.” 

Sentence of death was then passed by Lord Coleridge in these 
brief, solemn, and striking phrases :— 

“ Prisoner at the bar, the patient, careful trial is now ended, 
the irrevocable decision has now been given. The jury have 
found you guilty of murder. In your hungry lust for gold you 
had no pity upon the victim whom you slew, and it is only 
just that the nemesis of the law should overtake the author of 
the crime. The scales of justice are now balanced by the verdict 
which your fellows have pronounced. The punishment is 
death.” 

There is a silence that creeps round a Court of justice while 
the sentence of death is being pronounced. Just for a few 
seconds it seems as if the noise of the world is hushed, and time 
stands still. Each hears his own heart beat; the crowded 
gallery strain and crane their necks to get a look at the man 
that is holding on to the rail, with a warder on each side. His 
friends sob audibly ; tears stream from the eyes of women who 

22 


Introduction. 


have cared for him with all his faults; sometimes a wife or lover 
faints. Hardly a soul that does not feel an instant’s terror 
when the Spirit of Death stalks in to claim his prize. 

“‘T declare,” said Dickman, turning round, “I declare to all 
men, I am innocent.” 

* * * * * * 

Many efforts were made to save the condemned man. The 
Court of Criminal Appeal, not very long established, was at 
once moved to quash the conviction, and declined to interfere ; 
an account of those proceedings will be found at the end of the 
trial. A petition for a reprieve was very largely signed and 
forwarded to the Home Secretary. Even his refusal to interfere 
did not bring the efforts of his friends to a close, for on the day 
before his execution London was flooded with handbills bearing 
in huge type the following words :— 


“Must Dickman be hanged to-morrow? No! No! No! 
Wire Home Secretary at once and wash your hands 
of complicity in the legal crime.” 


These were left at nearly every restaurant and public-house, 
and were distributed in the streets by both men and women of 
every rank and calling in society. Circulars to the same effect 
were sent out all over the country, and hundreds of telegrams 
and letters endeavoured unsuccessfully to obtain from the Home 
Office a respite of the sentence. 

John Alexander Dickman died within the precincts of New- 
castle prison on the 10th of August, 1910. 


23 





Principal Dates in the Dickman Case, 


18th March, 1910, - John Innes Nisbet murdered in a railway 


carriage on the North-Eastern Railway. 


Dickman travels to Morpeth by the same train. 


21st ae 33 Det. Inspector Tait visits Dickman at his house. 
a oe Arrest of Dickman at Police Station. 
3 ss Identified by Hall and Spink. 
14th April, ,, Mrs. Nisbet first gives evidence before the 
Magistrates. 
22nd_ =a, as The second portion of Mrs. Nisbet’s evidence. 
9th June, ey Discovery at the Isabella Pit of the missing 
money bag. 
4th July, 3 First Day of Trial. 
5th ,, ye Second Day of Trial. 
6th ,, as Summing up and Verdict. 
22nd ,, np Appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal. 


10th August, 


Execution of John Dickman. 


25 


chtee 4 
eerie 
Rene) 
NEP eels y 
a 


7H 
th 
ee) 





THE TRIAL. 


NEWCASTLE SUMMER ASSIZES. 


MONDAY, 4ra JULY, 1910. 


Judge— 
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD COLERIDGE, 


One of the Judges of the King’s Bench Division 
of the High Court of Justice. 


Counsel for the Crown— 


Mr. Epwarp TinpaL ATKINSON, K.C. 


Mr, CHARLES FREDERICK LOWENTHAL. 


Counsel for the Defence— 


Mr. EpwarD ALFRED MircHELL-INNEs, K.C. 


Lord WILLIAM PERCY. 


27 





First Day—Monday, 4th July, 1910. 


Opening Speech for the Prosecution. 


Mr. Trypan Arxryson, in opening the case for the Crown,* Mr. Tindal 
said John Alexander Dickman was standing upon his trial for 
the murder of a man called John Innes Nisbet. The murder 
in question was committed by some one in a third-class com- 
partment on a train that left Newcastle at 10.27 on the morn- 
ing of Friday, 18th March. The train arrived at Alnmouth 
at six minutes past twelve. At Alnmouth the deceased was 
found by a porter who opened the carriage door, lying under 
one of the seats of the carriage, where he had, no doubt, been 
pushed by the murderer. There was no question that this 
man was murdered. He was found with five bullet wounds 
in his head. Four of the bullets had been recovered, and 
according to the evidence of the doctor, one of those bullet 
wounds was sufficient to have caused instant death. The ques- 
tion which the jury had to determine—a very solemn one 
indeed—was whether or not the prosecution, by the evidence 
they proposed to lay before the jury, were in a position to 
prove that the prisoner was the man who murdered the 
deceased. 

It was a case, as they would find out, entirely of circum- 
stantial evidence. They would know that circumstantial 
evidence might be the weakest of all evidence upon which to 
convict a person of a crime. On the other hand, it might be 
the strongest possible testimony in bringing home a crime to 
a prisoner. He was quite sure that they would give the 
closest attention to the evidence. The case was a peculiar 
one, and one that would require their closest attention, as 
every single fact was important. If they were satisfied, after 
careful and due consideration of the evidence, that the prisoner 
was the person who committed this murder, he need hardly say 


*From the report in the Newcastle Chronicle, 6th July, 1910. 
29 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Mr. Tindal that they would not shrink from giving their verdict accord- 
ingly. E 
He would tell them shortly the history of this case. The 
deceased man, John Innes Nisbet, was employed at the time 
of his death as a clerk and book-keeper by the Stobswood 
Colliery Company. He was a married man, forty-four years 
of age, and about 5 feet 4 inches in height. He was of slight 
build, and wore a moustache and also gold spectacles. His 
duty as clerk to this colliery company was, on every alternate 
Friday, to go from Newcastle to a place called Widdrington, 
which was on the railway line between Newcastle and Aln- 
mouth. It was, he thought, the fourth station from Aln- 
mouth, and was 23 miles from Newcastle. He usually went 
by the train that left Newcastle for Alnmouth at 10.27 a.m. 
On 18th March last he received a cheque from his employers 
on Lloyds Bank for the sum of £370 9s. 6d. He took with 
him to the bank a leather bag, which had a lock attached to 
it, in which to place and carry the money. He called at 
Lloyds Bank that morning, cashed the cheque, and received 
231 sovereigns, 206 half-sovereigns, £35 9s. in silver and 
20s. 6d. in copper, making the total of £370 9s. 6d. The 
gold was contained in three canvas bags, the silver in paper in 
bags, and the copper in brown paper parcels. It would be 
shown that the bags in use at the bank comprised bags marked 
‘No. 1 Lambton,’’ ‘‘ Lloyds,’’ and ‘‘ North-Eastern Bank ”’ ; 
and it was important that they should bear that in mind, 
because subsequently they would hear that there was found on 
the prisoner a quantity of gold in a canvas bag that was marked 
‘Lambton No. 1.’? With this money in his bag the deceased 
man left the bank. 

The next that was seen of him was by a man called Raven, 
who knew him well, and who also knew the prisoner well 
by sight, and had seen him during many years. This man 
Raven was standing at the end of the passage-way—he had no 
doubt he was speaking to a good many who knew Newcastle 
station well—leading from that part of the station used for 
the Tynemouth traffic to the broader part of the station. He 
was close to a gate numbered ‘‘ No. 4.’’ Looking up the 
passage-way towards the Tynemouth part of the station there 


30 


Opening Speech for Prosecution. 


was ‘‘No. 4”’ gate on the right, and, going behind a cigar Mr. Tindal 
divan, there was another gate called ‘‘ No. 5.”” Raven was 
standing at the end of that passage-way, near No. 4 gate, and 
he would tell them that as he stood there he saw the deceased 
man and the prisoner—he had no doubt about the identity of 
the prisoner—walking together from the direction of the third- 
class refreshment room down the passage-way. They passed 
him quite close, and he said (counsel thought) that if it had 
not been that the prisoner was with the deceased, he would 
have spoken. Prisoner and deceased passed round into the 
No. 4 gate, which was then open, and proceeded behind the 
cigar divan, at which point he lost sight of them. That was 
their way to the No. 5 platform, at which was standing the 
10.27 train, by which deceased proposed to leave Newcastle. 
The 10.27 train from Newcastle consisted of an engine and 
four long carriages, bogey-wheel carriages. The first carriage 
consisted largely of luggage accommodation, with some three 
third-class compartments. The next carriage consisted of a 
third-class compartment at each end, and a first-class compart- 
ment in the middle. The third carriage was composed entirely 
of third-class compartments, and the fourth of some third-class 
compartments and accommodation for luggage. These were 
the four vehicles composing the train. He believed there 
were two carriages standing at the end of the train that were 
not attached to the train, and were not intended to be attached 
to. it. As he had told them, Raven saw these two men 
together, proceeding undoubtedly towards the No. 5 platform. 
This was a few minutes before the train started. The next 
thing noticed was by a man named Hepple, who was a pas- 
senger on the train, and who was standing at the open door 
of a compartment of a carriage on the train. There was no 
doubt about the compartment, for he stated that there was in 
it a picture of Brancepeth Castle. It had since been ascer- 
tained that this was the only compartment in which there was 
a picture of Brancepeth Castle, and that this compartment was 
the third of the third carriage. He was standing there when 
he saw the prisoner, whom he knew well, walking with another 
man whom he did not know, but whom he described as a lightly- 
built man; and what they would hear from him would be a 


31 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Me Tindal fair general description of the deceased. He had his 
face to the train, and he saw the two men _ proceed 
to the head of the train. The last he saw of them 
was that one of them had his hand on the handle of 
the door of a compartment close to the head of the 
train. Hepple turned away and walked a little distance for- 
ward, and when he turned round again the men had disappeared. 
The next piece of evidence was that given by a man called 
Hall. Hall was in company with a man called Spink, and 
they were passengers by this train. They had selected their 
compartment and had got into it. The door was closed, but 
Hall had his head out of the window. That was the second 
compartment of the three third-class compartments of the first 
carriage. Hall had his head out of the window, and saw 
coming towards him two men. One he knew and the other 
he did not know. The one he knew was the deceased. He 
knew him well, and was on speaking terms with him. He 
saw these two men go to the compartment which was next to 
his, farther from the engine. So Raven saw the two men 
practically coming to the end of No. 5 platform. Hepple 
would speak to seeing the prisoner and another man a moment 
afterwards, whose general description tallied with that of the 
deceased; and, almost at the time as Hepple was watching 
these two men going towards the head of the train, they 
had Hall speaking to seeing two men near the head of the 
train, one of whom he identified as the deceased. He (counsel) 
ought to have mentioned that Hall—although he had not seen 
this other man before—picked the prisoner out from among 
other nine men who had been placed side by side in the police 
station. He picked prisoner out as the man who, in his 
opinion, was most like the man he saw. Now, they knew 
this was an all-important part of the case. If, after they 
had heard the other evidence, the jury were satisfied that it 
was the prisoner who was in company with the deceased, and 
who entered that compartment, they had gone a long way 
towards satisfying their minds that it was the prisoner, and 
no other person, who murdered Nisbet. 

There was another piece of evidence. Two stations from 
Newcastle (Central) was Heaton station, and there on the plat- 


32 





C 


inson, Esq., K 


indal Atki 


BH. T 





Opening Speech for Prosecution. 


form was the deceased man’s wife. She was there purposely 
to see her husband—it might be for the purpose of getting his 
wages—but that he did not know. At any rate, she was there. 
and as the train drew up her husband came to the window 
of the compartment, put his head out, and spoke to his wife 
whilst the train was standing. The wife would say that, 
through the side window—the deceased having his head out 
of the middle portion—she saw another man at the further 
end. of the compartment, sitting with his back to the engine. 
She only got a momentary glance at him, and she would say 
that the shadow of the archway in which the train was stand- 
ing threw a shadow on his face. The man had his coat collar 
turned up, and she had very little opportunity of identifying 
him. 

But an incident happened when the case was before the 
magistrates. Mrs. Nisbet had given her evidence; and after 
having given her evidence she, from the position in which 
she was in Court, caught a view in profile of this man, and 
then fainted. She would tell them that that was the view 
she got of this man’s face in the carriage, and the resemblance 
was so marked, and gave her such a shock at the time, that 
she fainted. 

They had thus, said counsel, four witnesses—Raven, Hepple, 
Hall, and Mrs. Nisbet. Raven swore to both men; Hepple 
swore to the prisoner and that his companion was of a build 
corresponding to that of the deceased; and Hall was watch- 
ing the two men approaching the end of the train. This man 
swore to the deceased, and picked out the prisoner as the man 
who resembled the man who was with the deceased. And they 
had the evidence of Mrs. Nisbet, such as he had outlined it. 

The train left Heaton, and it passed Forest Hall, Killingworth, 
Annitsford, Cramlington, and Plessy, and arrived at Stanning- 
ton at six minutes past eleven o’clock. At Stannington Hall 
and Spink got out of their compartment. They stood upon 
the platform for a moment or two, and they saw the deceased 
alive, and apparently well, in the compartment next to theirs. 
They nodded to him, and he nodded to them. He was sitting 
with his face to the engine at the further end of the carriage 
farthest from the platform. The other man was sitting with 

c 33 


Mr. T 
Atkin 


indal 


kinson 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Mr. ae his back to the engine. Hall said he did not notice another man 

eee in the compartment, but Spink said he saw the other man ; and 
he would tell them that in his opinion he resembled in appear- 
ance the prisoner, although he could not absolutely identify him. 
That was the last time Nisbet was seen alive. 

At Morpeth station a man was standing on the platform when 
the train arrived. He would tell them that he passed this third- 
class compartment and looked into it, but saw no one in it. 
He did not go into the compartment, but went into another. 
The man who had been in the compartment with the deceased 
had got out at Morpeth. Morpeth was the station next after 
Stannington. There was some one in the compartment at 
Stannington, but no one in at Morpeth. The deceased was not 
visible, and inasmuch as he was found under the seat at Aln- 
mouth, dead and murdered, if he was not seen at Morpeth, he 
must have been murdered between Stannington and Morpeth. 
Who got out of the compartment at Morpeth? Among others 
who got out undoubtedly—on his own confession—was the 
prisoner. By his own statement he had booked to Stannington, 
but said that, intent on reading his newspaper in the carriage, 
he passed his station by mistake, and went on to Morpeth. The 
ticket collector at Morpeth would tell them that the man ten- 
dered him 23d., the fare between Stannington and Morpeth, and 
went out of the station. The prisoner had said that himself in 
a voluntary statement. 

The train went on, and it arrived at Alnmouth. The porter 
opened the door of the compartment, and saw under a seat the 
body of the deceased, with five bullet wounds in the head. 
Four of the bullets had been recovered—one in the carriage 
and the other three in the deceased’s head. These bullets varied 
in character. Two of them were nickel-nosed. There must 
have been two pistols used. All the bullets would not fit the 
same pistol. The murderer must have used two pistols. He had 
traced the history of the case up to the discovery of the body. 

On 21st March, three days afterwards, a detective visited 
the prisoner’s house, 1 Lily Avenue, Jesmond, Newcastle. He 
there told him that the county police had information that he 
(prisoner) had been seen in deceased’s company on the morning 
of the murder, and asked him if he could throw any light on it? 

34 


Opening Speech for Prosecution. 


Prisoner said, “I knew Nisbet for many years. I saw him that Mr. Tindal 
morning. I booked at the ticket window after him, and went by — 
the same train, but I did not see him after the train left. I 
would have told the police if I had thought it would have done 
any good.” Prisoner was asked, on that, whether he would have 
any objection to go to the detective office and see the superin- 
tendent, and he said he had not. 

On arrival there he made a voluntary statement, which was 
taken down at the time. That statement was as follows :— 

“On Friday morning last I went to the Central Station, and 
took a return ticket for Stannington. Nisbet, the deceased 
man, whom [| knew, was at the ticket office before me, and, 
so far as I know, had left the hall by the time I got mine. I 
went to the bookstall and got a paper, the Manchester Sporting 
Chronicle. I then went to the refreshment room and had a pie 
and a glass of ale. I then went on to the platform, and took 
my seat in a third-class carriage nearer the hinder end than 
the front end. My recollection is, although I,am not quite 
clear on the matter, that people entered and left the compart- 
ment at different stations on the journey. The train passed 
Stannington station without my noticing it, and I got out at 
Morpeth and handed my ticket, with the excess fare of 24d., 
to the collector. I left Morpeth to walk to Stannington by the 
main road. I took ill of diarrhoea on the way, and had to 
return to Morpeth to catch the 1.12 p.m. train, but missed it, 
and got the 1.40 p.m. at Morpeth. After missing the 1.12 
train, I came out of the station on the east side and turned 
down towards the town. I met a man named Elliott, and spoke 
to him. I did not get into the town, but turned and went back 
to the station, and got the 1.40 p.m. slow to Newcastle. I got 
a single ticket for Stannington, and did not give it up. I gave 
up the return portion at the Manors. I have been very unwell 
since, but was out on Saturday afternoon and evening. I went 
on this journey to see Mr. Hogg of Dovecot in connection with 
new sinking operations there.” 

Proceeding, counsel said that there were one or two observa- 
tions he should like to make on that statement. According to the 
prisoner, he knew the deceased man. He said the deceased was 
at the ticket office before him, and, “so far as I knew, he had 


35 


John Alexander Dickman. 


ir. Tedal left the hall by the time I got mine.” He (prisoner) then went 
to the bookstall, then to the refreshment room, then on to the 
platform, and then took his seat in a third-class carriage. If 
that statement was true, all that prisoner saw of the deceased 
was at the ticket office. He went apparently alone to the refresh- 
ment room, took his seat in the hinder end part of the train, and 
did not see the deceased apparently afterwards. That statement 
was in distinct flat contradiction with the evidence of a witness 
named Raven, who saw him in company with deceased when the 
ticket must have been taken. He watched them go from the 
refreshment room in which the prisoner said he had been. He 
saw them turn into No. 4 gate and proceed towards No. 5 
platform. Then, if they believed the evidence of a witness 
named Hepple, the prisoner did not proceed te the hinder part 
of the train, but towards the engine; and the last he saw 
of the prisoner and the other man was that one of them had 
his hand on the handle of the carriage close to the engine end. 
Prisoner said he got out at Morpeth and gave 24d. to the 
collector. The train arrived at Morpeth twelve minutes past 
eleven, and it was due out at sixteen minutes past eleven. 
Prisoner said that he missed his station inadvertently, and got 
out at Morpeth to go back to Stannington to visit a man called 
Hogg at Dovecot, some three miles from Stannington station. 
There was a train back to Stannington at 11.24, which would 
allow twelve minutes to get from one side of Morpeth station to 
the other. Prisoner apparently did not ask the ticket collector 
at all whether he could return to Stannington. He gave him 
24d. and went out of the station. He was going to Mr. Hoge’s 
at Dovecot, and the nearest place to go from was from Stanning- 
ton station. He waited about for over two hours, according to 
his own statement, and he went back to Morpeth station just 
in time to miss the twelve minutes past one train back to New- 
castle. He did not remain on the platform to wait for the 
1.40, but went down in the direction of Morpeth, where, he said, 
he met a man named Elliott. 

Then after that he came back and caught the 1.40 train 
back to Newcastle. What he was doing in those two hours they 
did not know. But the bag had been discovered since, which 
was missing with all the money. The bag was discovered 

36 


Opening Speech for Prosecution. 


on 9th June, nearly two months after the committing of this Mx. Tindal 
murder. It was found accidentally at the bottom of a shaft 

at the Isabella pit at Hepscott. He would call the witnesses 

who examined this shaft and found something lying on the floor. 

It was a leather bag, and it had been identified as the bag 
deceased carried in the train from Newcastle. It had been 

ripped open by a knife at the side, and the whole of the gold 

and silver was gone. There were some coppers in the bag ; later 

on some further coppers were found strewn about the place 

where the bag had been thrown. 

There was no question about it, the murderer had thrown this 
bag down the pit with a view of preventing evidently its being 
subsequently found. This shaft was a mile and three-quarters 
south-east of Morpeth station. It was situated close to the 
highway, which led from Morpeth south-east. There was no 
doubt the person who murdered this man, if he got out at 
Morpeth station, as he (counsel) suggested he must have done, 
proceeded along this road until he got to this pit shaft, and 
took the opportunity to throw the bag down there. It would, 
he thought, be shown in the course of the evidence that the 
prisoner knew of the existence of the shaft where the bag was 
found. 

After this statement was made by the prisoner to the police 
he was taken into custody, and charged with this murder. 
The reply he made was, “It is absurd for me to deny the 
- charge, because it is absurd to make it. I only say I absolutely 
deny it.” He was searched, and on him was found the sum of 
£17 9s. lld. Of that sum £15 was in gold, and it was in a 
bag marked “No. 1, Lambton & Co., Newcastle.” His house 
was searched, and two pawntickets were found. Prisoner subse- 
quently stated he had pawned a pair of field glasses. There was 
also found two passbooks—one of the National Provincial Bank 
and the other Lambton’s. Prisoner appeared at one time to 
have kept accounts at these banks. Both the accounts were 
closed in December, 1909. Amongst his clothes was found a 
pair of suede gloves. An examination had been made of these, 
and they would have before them a witness, a professor, who 
had examined and discovered a smear of recent blood on the 
root of the palm portion just below the left thumb. On exami- 

37 


John Alexander Dickman. 


oat nation of prisoner’s trousers it was found that there were 
. blood spots inside the pocket of the left-hand side, which no 
doubt were caused by the stained hand having been put into the 
trouser’s pocket. 

He proposed to prove to them that the prisoner was 
in a state of impecuniosity at this time. He did this 
advisedly. If he was hard pressed for money, and if he 
had no resources, that would, of course, supply a motive for 
this crime, and some explanation should be given of the sum 
of £17 9s. 1ld. having been found in a canvas bag in the 
prisoner’s pocket. He had told them that his banking accounts 
were closed in December last. About a month before this 
murder was committed prisoner obtained a loan of £5 on some 
small articles of jewellery from a jeweller, who would be called, 
and to whom he had said he was hard up. 

In October, 1909, he had borrowed the sum of £20 from a 
moneylender called Cohen, paying £1 a month interest on it. 
He had paid no portion of the principal back, but he had paid 
the interest on it, he believed, before the murder was com- 
mitted. It appeared there was an account at the Co-operative 
Stores in the name of prisoner’s wife, and also an account at 
the Post Office Savings Bank, also in the name of his wife. 
The amounts banked had been considerable—between £60 and 
£70 on one occasion—and in respect of one account there had 
been left £4, and the savings bank account showed that every- 
thing had been drawn excepting 10s. This was a matter the 
jury must undoubtedly take into consideration. 

Counsel concluded by saying he thought he had described to 
them, as well as he could, the whole circumstances which the 
prosecution were prepared to lay before them. He had said 
the case was one of circumstantial evidence. If the jury be- 
lieved it was the prisoner who entered the carriage with the 
deceased, they had gone a long way towards arriving at a 
conclusion in this case. If in the carriage at Newcastle, was 
the prisoner the same man as seen at Heaton by Mrs. Nisbet? 
Was he the same man as seen by Spink at Stannington station ! 
There was no one in that carriage when another witness passed 
along the train at Morpeth. Whoever the murderer was, 
counsel thought he would get out at the very earliest oppor- 
tunity after the murder was committed. It would never have 

38 


Opening Speech for Prosecution. 


done for him to have remained in the carriage at the risk of Mr. Tindal 
any one getting in at a succeeding station. Prisoner did oe 
get out at Morpeth, although he took a ticket for Stannington ; 

and he was away for two hours. This was a case in which 

every single fact had to be taken into account. Every single 

fact, the prosecution said, tended towards showing that the 
prisoner was guilty of this murder. He (counsel) thought he 

was right in saying that not one single fact pointed to any 

other conclusion, so far as his part in the history of the case 

was concerned.* 


Evidence for the Prosecution. 


Wautrr Henry Dickenson, examined by Mr. LowsnrHar— oo 
I am a civil engineer in the employ of the North-Eastern 
Railway. I produce a plan of part of the Central Station, 
Newcastle, showing platforms 4 and 5, with an engine and 
four carriages standing along No. 5. Also a North-Eastern 
time-table for March, 1910, giving the distances between the 
stations in miles. There is a train that leaves Newcastle at 
10.27 a.m. from No. 5 platform for Alnmouth, timed to arrive 
there at 12.8 p.m. It stops at all the stations on the way, 
which are in the following order :—Newcastle, Heaton, Forest 
Hall, Killingworth, Annitsford, Cramlington, Plessey, Stanning- 
ton, Morpeth, Pegswood, Longhurst, Widdrington, Chevington, 
Acklington, Warkworth, Alnmouth. It was due to leave 
Stannington at 11.6, and to arrive at Morpeth at 11.12, leav- 
ing there at 11.16. There was a slow train back to New- 
castle, leaving Morpeth at 11.24 a.m., reaching Stannington 
at 11.30. There is, in addition to this train, an express from 
Morpeth to Newcastle at 1.12 p.m., and a slow train at 1.40 
p-m. I was told that the body was found in the third com- 
partment of the first carriage. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mircueri Innzs—I want to ask you 
one or two questions about the plan and the station. Would 
you look at gate No. 4?—Yes. 





* The sposch on behalf of the Crown lasted an hour. 
39 


Walter H. 
Dickenson 


John Alexander Dickman. 


You have rightly said that anybody going from gate 4 can 
turn in on to No. 5 platform ?!—Yes. 

Supposing a man was, instead of turning on No. 5 platform, 
to go straight on to a urinal which is on platform No. 8 first, 
do you know that there is a urinal at a point which I will 
indicate on my plan? If you look at it you will see it, where 
I have marked it—it is there marked in blue?—No, I am not 
aware that there is. 

Mr. Mrrcusti-Innes—There is no question about it, I think. 

Mr. Trnpau Arxinson—It is not shown on this plan. 

Mr. Mircueuu-Innes—He has not marked it, because he did 
not know that I was going to make the point. The point I 
am directing the witness’ attention to is whether there is not 
a urinal there. I have seen the place myself, and it is there. 

Lord Cotermce—By the bookstall? 

Mr. Mrrcnetu-Innes—It is nowhere near the bookstall—I 
mean right down there, turning through gate 4 and going 
straight as if you are going on to platform 5. 

Lord Coteripeze—lIs it ‘‘ lavatory ’’? 

Mr. Mircueii-Innes—It is not marked as “‘lavatory.’’ He 
has not marked it. That is the difficulty. 

Mr. TiypaL Arxinson—He does not know where it is. You 
had better wait till somebody comes who does know it. 

Lord Coturipce—He does put a lavatory. 

Mr. MrrcHeii-Innes—Yes, but he has not marked this one. 
(Zo Witness)—Assume it for the moment—you cannot prove it 
for me—that at that spot there is a lavatory !—Yes. 

This is a point that I will prove presently. I say that point 
marked with a blue cross is the lavatory. 

Lord Coutzripcre—lIs it on or out of the plan? 

Mr. Mirconeri-Innes—It is out of the plan. If I may hand 
this plan to your lordship you will see my blue mark. I am 
taking it that the man has passed through gate 4, and wants 
to get on to platform 8. 

Lord Cotzripge—Which is platform 84 

Mr. Mircusiu-Innes—Platform 8 is the main platform where 
the lavatory is. 

Lord Cotzripce—Across by the footbridge? 

Mr. Mrrcue.u-Innus—aAcross by the footbridge. Those are 


40 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


the rails across by the footbridge, and the footbridge continues Walter H. 
over the platform. niesceaee 

(Zo Wetness)—Supposing a man having passed through gate 
4 wished to get on to platform 8 he could do so by continuing 
straight on past the end of platform 5%—Yes. 

Through the opening?—He could do so. 

That would lead him straight on to platform 8%—It would. 

Nearest where the point is which I have marked ‘lava- 
tory ’’ 1—Yes. 

If he wished to get back to platform 5 he would go the same 
way back on to platform 5?!—Yes. 

Do you know of your own knowledge that this 10.27 train 
is a train very much used for the purposes of those travellers 
or people stopping at stations north in the morning?—It 
certainly is. 

Indeed, your own time-table shows, does it not, that if 
anybody wished, starting from Newcastle, to call at any of the 
small stations between Newcastle and Morpeth, if he missed 
the 10.27 he would have to wait till 12.38?—Till 12.38. 

If anybody going from Newcastle wished to call at any of the 
small stations between Morpeth and Alnmouth, for instance, at 
Longhurst, or any of those stations, he would have to wait 
till 1.30?—Except on Saturdays. 

I agree?—On weekdays. 

Except on Saturday, if a man wishing to do business at 
the small stations between Morpeth and Alnmouth did not take 
the 10.27 he would have to wait till 1.30 in the afternoon!— 
That is so. 

Re-examined by Mr. Trnpan Arxrnson—I think the principal 
lavatory is shown on your plan!—Yes, the principal lavatory. 
It is by the telegraph office ?—It is by the telegraph office. 

On the extreme left of your plan?—On the extreme left of 
my plan. 

But personally you do not know the existence of the place 
which my friend has referred to?’—No, I have never seen it. 


Marx Watson Ramsay, examined by Mr. Lowmyraar—I am Baek erie 
an employee of the North-Eastern Railway Company, and I 
live at 23 Milton Street. I took the four photographs of 
the Central Station, which I produce. The first photograph 
41 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Mark Watson shows the entrance to platforms 4 and 5, also the refreshment 


Ramsay 


Charles F. 


Murphy 


room and the cigar shop. The other photographs are of the 
whole train; the third carriage with the door open; and a 
photograph of the next carriage but one to the one in which 
the deceased was found. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mrroneui-Innes—Are you well 
acquainted with this station?!—Yes. 

Do you know the position of the urinal which we have been 
talking about on platform 8!—Platform 5. 

I mean platform 8. Do you know, in fact, whether or not 
there is a urinal in that little place at the corner there (point- 
ing on the plan?’—Yes. 

Mr. Mircuuiu-Innes—Then he proves that. 

By Lord Coteripcze—The first compartment towards the 
engine of the first coach looks upon this photograph to be a 
smoking compartment. Is that so?—Yes. 

Mr. Mrrcusii-Innes—I do not know whether your lordship 
got the formal evidence as to the position of the urinal on your 
note. 

Lord Cotrr1pce—I have marked the plan. 

Mr. Mrrcuseti-Innes—If your lordship pleases. This wit- 
ness says he knows of its existence, and he says it is in the 
position I have stated. 


Cuarius Franxurn Murrny, examined by Mr. LownntHatr—I 
am a surveyor at Morpeth. I have prepared a plan showing 
the district between Morpeth station and Stannington, which I 
produce. Morpeth station is marked in red on it, also the 
road to the Dovecot Moor Colliery. It also shows Stannington 
station and the road leading from Morpeth to the Isabella pit. 
The Isabella pit is where the bag was found, and is 1? miles 
from Morpeth. A portion of this road is a regular highway, 
and you turn off it up a lane to the Isabella pit. From Dovecot 
Moor Colliery to Stannington station is about 12 miles. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mrrcueuu-Iwwes—As far as the turning 
off to the Dovecot Moor Colliery the road from Morpeth station, 
as far as that turn, is the main road to Newcastle!—It is. 

I take it that anybody going to Morpeth station, driving to 
Morpeth station from Dovecot Moor Colliery would go that way? 
—Undoubtedly. 

42 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


They would go from Dovecot Moor and turn to the left on Charis F: 
to the Newcastle main road, and drive to Morpeth station ?—Yes. eee 
That is a distance of about 3$ miles?—That is so. 


Tuomas ANDERSON, examined by Mr. Tinpat Atxinson—lI am T. Anderson 
manager and cashier to Messrs. Rayner & Burn, who are the 
owners of the Stobswood Colliery. The deceased, John Innes 
Nisbet, was employed by the firm as clerk and book-keeper, 
and had been so for a number of years. In appearance he was 
a small man with a rubicund countenance, rather thin. Part 
of his duty was to take money for the wages to the colliery 
every alternate Friday. On the 18th March last I gave him 
a cheque for £370 9s. 6d. to cash at Lloyds Bank at Newcastle. 
He took a black leather bag with a lock to put the money in 
which he received in exchange. The bag had a key, and was 
about 9 inches in length. The Stobswood Colliery is nearly 
half a mile from Widdrington station, on the main line north. 
On the 13th of June last a bag was produced to me by the 
police, and I identified that bag as the one which Nisbet had 
taken with him on the 18th March. It was locked, but a 
slit along the top and down each side had been made, and the 
bag pulled open. ‘The leather had been cut round the lock. 
I was shown some coppers that had been taken out of it, also 
some papers; they are the colliery pay-bills for that day. 

Mr. Mrrcuei-Ivnes—I ask no questions. 


Joun BrapsHaw Wison, examined by Mr. LowentHat—I am JohnB.Wilson 
a clerk in the employ of Lloyds Bank at Newcastle, and I live 
at No. 31 Lesbury Road, Newcastle. I knew Mr. Nisbet, the 
deceased man, and I remember his coming to the bank on the 
18th of March last and cashing a cheque for £370 9s. 6d. I 
paid him £231 in sovereigns, 206 half-sovereigns, £35 9s. in 
silver, £1 Os. 6d. in copper. The gold was in three canvas 
bags, the silver in paper bags, and the copper in a brown paper 
parcel. Lloyds Bank use little square canvas bags drawn 
together by a string at the top, into which the money from 
cashed cheques is put and handed to the customer. 

The North-Eastern Bank and Lambton’s Bank have now 
amalgamated with Lloyds. They all used their own bags, which 
had their respective names on. ‘These bags are still used by 
Lloyds. The two bags produced have ‘‘ Lambton’s Bank, 

43 


John Alexander Dickman. 


John B.Wilson Newcastle-on-Tyne,’’ written on both of them. These are just 
the same sort of bags as we use now and were using in March 
last. I cannot say into what particular bags the gold I gave 
Mr. Nisbet was put, but it would have been one of the kind 
of bags I have mentioned. 

- Cross-examined by Mr. Mrroneri-Innzes—These bags seem to 
have seen some wear ?—Yes. 

They look oldish?—Yes. 

Do you know of your own knowledge—I believe another wit- 
ness is going to prove it—that Dickman had an account at 
your bank for a considerable number of years!—I cannot say 
that. 

You cannot say that!—No. 

Assuming for the moment he had, is it not quite a common 
occurrence that customers should have these bags!—Yes. 

And would receive money from you in these bags !—Yes. 

Re-examined by Mr. Trypat Arxinson—Do you always give 
out clean bags, or are they dirty bags when you send them 
out?—They are clean when we send them out, but we send 
them out dirty as well as clean—both dirty and clean. 

Do you get them returned ?—Sometimes. 

I see on the bag is written, ‘‘ Please return this bag ’’ +— 
Yes, but it is not carried out. 

You say that the gold was in three bags’—Yes, in three 
bags. 

Were they all of the same size and are those bags of the 
same size’—I could not say. 

You do not know ?—I do not know. 


CharlesRaven CuHartes Raven, examined by Mr. Tinpat Arxrvson—I am 
a commercial traveller, residing at King John Terrace, New- 
castle-on-Tyne. I have known the deceased to speak to for 
five or six years. I did not know him during this period by 
name, but I knew him by sight. On the 18th of March last 
I was at the Central Station, Newcastle, about 10.20. I was 
coming towards the gateway at No. 4 platform from the wes 
station. The first-class and third-class tea-room was on mj 
left. I was about three yards from the gate. I saw the 
deceased and the prisoner. I am quite sure it was then. 
They were walking along together and went through the gate 

44 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


to No. 4 platform. When they got through the gate they 
turned to the right, behind the cigar shop, going in the direc- 
tion of No. 5 platform. I did not see them speak, though I 
saw them go through the gate together. I lost sight of 
them when they had got behind the cigar place. My atten- 
tion was called to the matter when I saw an account of the 
tragedy in the afternoon papers. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mrircneuu-Innus—They were not in 
conversation, you say /—No. 

You lost sight of them behind the cigar divan?—Yes. 

And that is all you saw of them’?—Yes. 


Witson Herpie, examined by Mr. Lowenrnar—I am an 
artist, and live at Cauld Cottage, Acklington. I have known 
the prisoner for the last twenty years. On the 18th of March 
I travelled from Newcastle by the 10.27 a.m. train. As I 
was getting my ticket I saw the prisoner. I then went to 
No. 5 platform and selected my seat. I put some parcels on 
the rack and then I got out on to the platform and walked 
about in front of the doorway of the compartment I had 
selected. I walked up and down outside for a few minutes, 
about three to four steps each side of the carriage door. I 
remember the carriage distinctly, because there were several 
photographs in it, amongst which was one of Brancepeth Castle. 
On the 3rd of April I was shown a train which had been made 
up, and I identified the carriage in which I travelled by the 
photograph. A photograph of this carriage was taken with 
me standing outside (photograph produced). I travelled in 
the third coach from the engine, which was the last coach but 
one in the train. I got into the last compartment but one 
in that coach. While I was walking up and down outside I 
saw Dickman with a companion whom I did not notice very 
particularly, but I think he was of a slight build. From their 
demeanour I think they were talking together; they were 
walking up the platform past where I was standing in the 
direction of the engine. In my passings up and down | 
turned and went towards the engine, and noticed Dickman and 
his companion were about to board the train. One of them had 
his hand upon the handle of a compartment of the first car- 
riage. That is the last I saw of them, because at the moment I 

45 


Charles Raven 


Wilson Hepple 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Wilson Hepple turned round and walked in the opposite direction, and when I 
retraced my steps I found they had disappeared. I did not see 
if the compartment door was open or shut, but it was a com- 
partment in the front coach near the engine. As I have said, 
I have known Dickman for the last twenty years. I never saw 
Dickman again that day. 

Were you shown the train in which you appear here in the 
photograph ? 

Lord Coturipce—He has already identified that. 

Mr. LowsnrHat—I want to ask him a question upon it. 

Lord Coutzeripgze—Then he had better take mine. 

Examination continued—You remember being shown that 
train ?—Yes. 

When you looked at the train were you then able to see, 
looking at the train, which coach it was that you saw Dick- 
man opposite? 

Mr. Mrrcunii-Innes—Is there any mark on the photograph 
to assist him? 

Mr. LowrntHar—None. (Z’0 Witness)—Did you hear my 
question?—I do not quite understand your question. 

Will you look at that photograph ? 

Mr. Mircueti-Innzs—I must object to this question. A 
photograph is put into the witness’s hand suggesting some- 
thing to him by the nature of the photograph itself, and a 
question is put to him which, in conjunction with that photo- 
graph, is most distinctly leading. 

Mr. Trnpau Arxrnson—lIt does not suggest anything to him. 

Mr. Mrtcpzii-Innes—Would your lordship kindly look at 
the picture. It is impossible that it should not suggest to 
him. 

Mr. Tinpau ATKINSON 
right. 

Lord Co.tzermex—Will you ask your question again? 

Examination continued—Did you go to Newcastle station and 
see the train when Guard Wilkinson showed it to you?—I did. 

Looking at the train as you saw it then, were you able to 
point to the coach in which you saw the prisoner and his com- 
panion opposite?—Yes, by experiment. 

Was there any door open then?—No. 

What did you do? You say ‘‘ by experiment ’?!—Two men 

46 








I follow the point. It is quite 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


walked up the platform, and I was asked to show by the signal Wilson Hepple 
of my hand, when I thought they were at the point of the plat- 

form where I saw the man with his hand upon the handle of 

the compartment of the carriage. 

You stopped them when you got there/—Yes, with a hand 
signal. 

Where were they?—I could not tell you, except I thought 
they were about that part of the platform where I saw the two 
men. 

Did you afterwards go up and find they were opposite the 
front carriage?—I did nothing of the kind. I took no further 
interest in it. 

Was Superintendent Weddell with you, when you stopped 
them /—Yes. 

You stopped them when you say they were at the place where 
you had seen the prisoner and his companion ?—Yes. 

Mr. Mrrcne.u-Innes—So far as he could tell. 

Mr. LowzntHat—Quite so. (Zo Wzitness)—Will you tell 
me as well as you can, how long before the train started was 
it, that you saw the prisoner and his companion coming along !— 

I had walked a considerable time when I saw the prisoner and 
his companion, and I was beginning to think myself that it 
was time the train was about to start. 

How long after that did the train start? 

By Lord Conzripaz—The proper question is—you saw these 
two people, and how long was it between the time you saw these 
two people for the last time, and the starting of the train?— 
About one minute. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mrrcnzii-Innzs—I understand you to 
say that you were walking up and down the platform three paces 
on each side of your door !—Yes. 

So that your turns were about six paces in length?’—About 
that. 

Were you sauntering or walking fast ?—Just leisurely. 

Sauntering backwards and forwards in front of your door ?— 
Yes. 

I understand what happened was, that you saw these people, 
turned round, walked six paces in either direction, and when 
you turned round again they had vanished ?!—Yes. 

Is that right?—That is so. 





47 


Wilson Hepple 


John Alexander Dickman. 


You had walked your six paces between the time that you 
saw them, and then turned round and found they had dis- 
appeared /—Yes. 

When you got into the carriage did you do anything particu- 
lar?—I sat down. 

Did you sit with your back to the engine or the other way !— 
With my back to the engine. 

Did you at that time take notice of anything or anybody in 
particular ?—I just sat looking out of the window till the train 
started. 

And you noticed nobody in particular ?—Nobody in particular. 
There was no one to notice that I saw. 

But there was nothing to call your attention !—Nothing what- 
ever. 

You arrived that morning at the station in pretty good time 
for your train?—Yes, I did. 

How long before your train went did you arrive at the 
station?—I arrived in the booking hall about seven minutes 
past ten. 

As early as that!—Yes. 

It was then you saw Dickman in the booking office}—The 
window was not open when I got there. 

It was then that you saw Dickman in the booking office — 
Some time after I got there myself, I saw him. 

How long after?—I could not say exactly how long in 
minutes, but I had been there some time before the window 
opened. I was the second passenger to get my ticket. 

Did you go straight from the booking office to the platform 
or not?—After leaving the booking office I walked through 
the quadrangle to see where the train was to start from. There 
was no indicator, and I waited a considerable time until the 
board was put up. As soon as ever they put the board up I 
walked through to the platform and placed my parcels on the 
rack. 

How long altogether do you think you were walking up and 
down in front of your carriage’—Well, I should think about 
seven or eight minutes. 

You did not know, as you told us, who Dickman’s companion 
was !—No. 

As far as your hearing went, you cannot say whether they 
were talking or not?—Except by their demeanour. 

48 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


So far as your hearing is concerned, you could not tell from Wilson Hepple 
your hearing!—Just so. They were 18 feet from me. 

They never passed nearer to you than 6 yards off !—Six 
yards off. 

Re-examined by Mr. Trnpan AtKiInson—You say you could not 
hear them’?—I could not hear them. 

But could you tell from their movements of the head whether 
they were talking to one another?—Their faces were turned 
towards each other as being in conversation apparently. 

Did you lose sight of them between their passing you and 
when you say you saw the last of them, when one man had 
his hand upon the handle!—They were never out of my view 
from first seeing them, as it were. 

I understand you to say you did not notice the other man at 
all?—Not at all. 

You could not give any description of him?—No description 
whatever. 

By Lord Cotzrmcz—You told us they were never nearer than 
18 feet from you. Is that so?—Yes. 

Then you told us they passed you!—They passed me at that 
distance from me. 

What is the breadth of the platform?—It must extend to 
that, I should think. 

Mr. Trypat Arxinson—I understand it is over 18 feet. 

By Lord Coteripcz—lIt is a very broad platform %—Yes. 


PrrcivaL Harping Hau, examined by Mr. Trnpat ATKINSON— Percival H. 
I live at Deuchar Street, Newcastle-on-Tyne, and am in the oe 
employment of the Netherton Coal Company. I knew the 
deceased man Nisbet as the Widdrington cashier. I have 
known him for four or five years by sight. I have travelled 
for about the same period in the same train with him. We 
were both going on the same errand, that is, we were both 
carrying money to our respective collieries. I have never 
travelled in the same compartment with him. 

On the 18th of March I left Newcastle by the 10.27 train 
accompanied by a fellow-clerk of the name of Spink. We both 
got into the second compartment of the first coach. After 
getting in and closing the door I went to the door and looked 
out of the window. I saw the deceased man and a companion 

D 49 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Porgival H. coming towards me—they were 8 or 10 yards away. They 
came towards our compartment to get into the one immediately 
behind ours. Nisbet opened the door and got in first. I 
am certain it was Nisbet who opened the door. I had never 
seen the other man to my knowledge before. I had a fairly 
good view of him for two or three seconds—he came quite close 
tome. It was close on train time. I went as far as Stanning- 
ton in the train. Both Spink and I got out at Stannington. 
We had to wait for the train passing out of the station before 
leaving the platform, and while standing there I observed Nisbet 
sitting in the compartment immediately in the rear, and as 
the train was going out he looked in our direction, and I bowed 
to him. I am quite sure it was he who was in the compart- 
ment at Stannington when the train left. I cannot say 
whether there was anybody else in the carriage or not. 

On the afternoon of the 18th I gave a description of the 
man I had seen with Nisbet to the police at Newcastle. I 
noticed the man who was with him was wearing an overcoat 
about three-quarters length, say, about down to his knees. It 
was a lightish overcoat of fawn colour. I also noticed he had 
a hard felt hat on. 

On the 21st of March did you go to the Central Police 
Station at Newcastle?—I did. 

That is three days afterwards !—Yes. 

Where were you taken?’—I do not quite understand. 

Where were you taken when you got to the police station /— 
We were taken to a room, where there were nine men set 
before us. 

Did you point anybody out as being, so far as you could 
identify him, the person you had seen?—I did not point him 
out in that way. 

How did you point him out?!—As being, or as very much 
resembling the companion of Nisbet, and I made one or two 
remarks at the same time. 

In the prisoner’s presence!—In the prisoner’s presence. 

So that he could hear you?—I suppose he would hear me— 
every one in the room would hear me. 

Mr. Mrrcueii-Innes—I am quite glad to have them. 

Mr. Tinpat Arxrinson—You want them? 

Mr. Mrrcneri-Innus—Yes. 


50 


Hviderice: for Prosecution. 


Examination continued—What did you eyed said words a He 
to the effect that if I was assured that the murderer was’ in 
amongst those nine men I would have had no hesitation in; 
picking the prisoner out. 

You said something about resembling just now. Will you 
repeat it?—I said that in my mind the prisoner very much 
resembled the party I saw on the 18th. The train started, 
and Spink and I got out at Stannington. We had to wait for 
the train to pass out of the station before leaving the platform. 
While we were standing there I observed Nisbet sitting in 
the compartment immediately in the rear, and as the train 
was going out he looked in our direction and I nodded to him. 
I am quite sure he was in the compartment at Stannington when 
the train left. I could not see whether there was any one else 
in the carriage with him or not. On the afternoon of the 18th 
of March I gave a description of the man I had seen with Nisbet 
to the Newcastle police. The man who was with Nisbet had a 
lightish fawn-coloured overcoat of about three-quarters way 
down to his knees. He was also wearing a hard felt hat. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mrrcnenu-Innes—I do not think I am 
doing you an injustice, but I do not think you have ever said any- 
thing before about this man, whoever he was, wearing a fawn- 
coloured overcoat!/—I gave that description to the police on °* 
the Friday evening. 

But you did not say so before the magistrates?’—I was never 
asked. : 

I want to ask you a question about the so-called identifica- 
tion. You went down to the police station, I understand !— 
Yes. 

There you found the policeman. Who was the policeman 
that you first saw there!—I saw a number together. 

Can you mention one who seemed to be in control, who took 
you into the room or place where these men were. What was 
his name?!—I could not say who it was. 

Do you know Superintendent Weddell!—I know Superin- 
tendent Weddell. 

Was he there?—I think he was there. He was there later 
anyhow. 

You went into the room and you found nine men standing 
in a row!—Quite so. 

51 


John Aletindé’ Dickman: 


Deve val H. I put it to you, you walked more than once, two, or three 
times, ay. and down the row and picked out nobody?!—I walked 
‘.« « ace down the row. 
' [put it to you, you walked more than once?—I think not. 

You think not. Will you swear that you did not walk more 
than once? Be careful—(The witness hesitated a long time.) 

Well?’—To the best of my knowledge I walked down once, 
and then came straight back to the prisoner. I had a look at 
each one. 

That is to the best of your knowledge. Then you will not 
swear that you did not walk down the row more than once? 
Now be careful—No, I will not swear that. 

I put it to you that you then went away from the row of men 
and approached the officer—I do not care who you asked. Is 
that right?—That is so. 

And you said to that officer something. What was it? Tell 
me what you said to the officer?—I asked him what I was 
expected to do. 

By that time you had already walked down the line at least 
once ?—At least once. 

Do you mean to say that you had not been told before you 
walked down the line what you were expected to do? What 
had you gone there for?—I had gone there to try and identify 
the companion of Nisbet. 

Why did you ask the policeman after having walked down 
the line and made that attempt and failed, what you were 
expected to do? 

Mr. Trnpat Arxinson—Do not interpolate that he had failed. 
He had not at that time pointed him out, and had not been 
asked to. 

Lord CoLzripce—He might have formed an opinion in his 
own mind which he had not expressed by any act. 

The Witness—That was it. 

Mr. Mircueti-Innus—I agree. (Zo Witness)—Why did you 
ask the policeman what you were to do!—Because I wanted 
to know if by pointing out a certain man I was swearing that 
that was the man I saw get in with Nisbet. 

How could you come to think that you were swearing any- 
thing. You had not been asked to take any oath?—Well, in 

52 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


my own mind, I understood that that is what identification ake H. 
meant, but I may have been wrong. 

You had not in fact been asked to swear anything or to take 
any oath, had you?—I suppose not—no. 

Was it that you were afraid of binding yourself with the 
same effect as though you had sworn!—That was it, exactly. 

You were not sure enough to bind yourself absolutely by 
pointing out anybody?!—That was just it. 

When you asked the officer what you were expected to do, 
what did he answer!—(After hesitating)—He said, ‘‘ Point him 
out.”’ 

You knew before that you had to point him out?!—Yes. 

What else was said!—Then I explained. 

Just a moment. He said, “ Point him out.” What did you 
say in answer to his direction ‘‘ Point him out ’’?—I think— 
well, I must not say that—I said I would not swear that the 
man I was going to point out was the companion of Nisbet, 
but that if I was assured that the murderer was there I would 
have no hesitation in pointing out that man, and I pointed to the 
prisoner. 

You gave evidence about this before the magistrates !—Yes. 

You were cross-examined on the question!—Quite so. 

I suppose you saw the deposition /—Yes. 

It was read over to you!—Yes. 

You signed it /—Yes. 

May I remind you what you said then you said. You said, 
“T will not swear that the man I pointed out was the man I 
saw get in with Mr. Nisbet, but if I could be assured the 
murderer was there (whatever that means), I would have no 
hesitation in pointing the prisoner out ” 1—Yes. 

To-day you have told us—I do not want to catch you—I 
want you to understand my question—that what you said was 
“T will not swear that the man I am going to point you out 
was the man I saw get in with Mr. Nisbet.” Which was it? 
Had you pointed the man out or had you not pointed the man 
out when you said that?—I said that as I did it. 

What!?—I made that statement before I pointed the man out 
to explain my action and how I stood. 

May I call your attention to the fact that those are not the 

a3 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Fereival H. words that you put into your own mouth before the magis- 
trates. May I remind you what you said to the magistrates was, 
which makes it clear, as I submit to you—I want you to under- 
stand the question—that you had already pointed out the man 
when you used these words. What you said before the magis- 
trate was, “I will not swear that the man I pointed out was 
the man I saw.” When you said words like that or something 
like that, had you pointed out the man, or were you still going 
to point him out?—I was just going to point him out. 

How comes it that you used the expression “I will not swear 
the man I pointed out”?—I was referring back then to the 
incident. 

To what incident’—To the incident of the identification, or 
the attempted identification. 

You had not yet identified anybody. You had not pointed 
anybody out then ?—I was speaking then in this Court. 

Your lordship will see why I say these words are capable of 
this construction, because they are in the first person, “I will 

- not swear that the man I pointed out.” 

Lord Cotzripce—Grammatically you are correct. 

Mr. Mircueii-Innus—That is what I mean. (Zo Witness)— 
Your account to-day, whether it differs from the account before 
the magistrate or not, I understand to be that you walked, 
you will not swear whether it is more than once, down the 
line, and you went to the police constable and asked, “ What 
am I expected to do?’’ and he said, ‘‘ Point him out ”’ ; will you 
just tell us the rest?’—Then I said that I would not swear that 
the man I am about to point out was the companion of Nisbet, 
but if I was assured that the murderer was here I would have 
no hesitation in pointing that man out, and I pointed to 
the prisoner. They were words to that effect. I think I used 
that expression before. 

It was a curious expression, “the murderer.” There was 
no question of a murderer being there, and nobody then had 
been put on his trial?!—Perhaps I should have said the com- 
panion of Nisbet; it would have been better perhaps. 

Did you use the word “murderer” because you had formed 
some conclusion in your mind with regard to this case?/—No, 
not at all. 

54 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


It was simply a pleasant way of referring to the prisoner ?— nee 
(No answer.) 

Re-examined by Mr. Trypan ATxrnson—You knew a murder 
had been committed !—Quite so. 

I suppose everybody in the district knew a murder had been 
committed !—Everybody. 

You knew what you were called to the police station for?— 
Yes. 

Are you sure that you used the word “murderer” or the 
“companion of Nisbet ”?—I think I used the word “ murderer.” 


Joun Wiuuiam Spink, examined by Mr. LowsnrHar—I live John W. Spink 
at 51 Highbury, Newcastle, and am a fellow-clerk with the 
last witness. I travelled with him by the 10.27 train on the 
18th of March to Stannington. We both got into the second 
compartment of the first coach. I sat down on the seat, but 
Hall looked out of the window. When we got to Stannington 
we both got out, putting our bags on the platform. In the 
carriage to the rear of the one we had got out of I saw the 
deceased with a companion. Mr. Nisbet was sitting facing 
the engine on the far side from the platform. He nodded to 
me and I nodded back to him. The other man was sitting 
facing the deceased, but I did not know who he was. He 
resembled the prisoner, but I could not swear it was him. 
There was nobody else in the compartment except these two 
people. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mircueti-Inves—Was the train 
leaving when you saw Mr. Nisbet and this other man?—I saw 
them before the train started to move. 

I do not want to labour this point, but I wish to remind 
you that what you said before the magistrates was this—‘‘ I 
noticed the train passing out from the station on its journey. 
I then saw Nisbet ’’? ?—Well, I saw him then and also before. 

Why did you not say you saw him before? Do you mean 
to say you saw him before the train began to move and after? 
—What is that? 

How long before the train began to move did you see him? 
—Immediately we got out and put the bag on the platform. 
I then looked into the carriage. 

55 


John W. Spink 


Mes. Cicely 
E. Nisbet 


John Alexander Dickman. 


How soon after that did the train begin to move!—Probably 
a quarter of a minute. 

I suppose when you got out of your carriage you put the 
bag down just outside the carriage where you got out?!—Not 
necessarily, about between our carriage and the other one. 

I understand your account of the matter to be that Mr. 
Nisbet was facing the engine and the other man was sitting 
with his back to it?—That is so. 

You had an opportunity of identifying this man when you 
were taken, like your friend Mr. Hall was taken, to identify 
him ?—I had. 

And you could not!—No, I could not. 

Re-examined by Mr. Tinpau Arxinson—I noticed the man 
that I saw in the carriage had a moustache. I also saw he 
was wearing a black felt hat. 

By Lord Cotzrince—The man was wearing a hard felt hat. 
When I was called upon to pick out the man I had seen in the 
railway carriage at the police station I failed to do so and 
said nothing. 


Mrs. Cicety ExizaBetH Nispet, examined by Mr. TinpaL 
ATKINSON—I am the widow of the deceased man, and we lived 
at 180 Eaton Road, Newcastle. He was forty-four years of 
age last January. He was about 5 feet 3 inches or 5 feet 
4 inches in height, of a fresh complexion, wearing a moustache. 
He also wore gold spectacles. At the time of his death he 
was in the employment of the Stobswood Colliery Company as 
a clerk and book-keeper. On alternate Fridays it was his 
duty to take the wage-money from Newcastle to Widdrington, 
and he usually travelled by the 10.27 a.m. train. I live quite 
close to Heaton station, and it was my habit to meet this 
train at Heaton station and have a few moments’ conversation. 
I did this every fortnight, not for the purpose of getting 
wages from him, but just to have a little conversation. 

On the 18th March last I went as usual to Heaton station to 
meet the train. He usually travelled in the rear of the train, 
and I stood on that part of the platform. When the train 
came in I missed him, but after waiting for a time I looked 
up the platform and saw him look out of the carriage window 
close to the engine. He was looking for me, and, as far as 

56 


Se 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


I can remember, he was in the first or second compartment Mrs. Cieely 
in the front carriage. While I was having a few moments’ are 
conversation with him I noticed there was a man in the same 
compartment on the seat facing the engine at the far end. I 
only saw his profile; he had his collar turned up and he never 
moved. ‘There was a shadow from the tunnel right on to the 
seat. The carriage was quite close to the tunnel. There is 
a tunnel right outside Heaton station, and, although the 
shadow fell on the seat, I saw his profile quite distinctly. I 
remained there until the train went out. There was nobody 
else in the carriage but these two. I gave evidence before 
the coroner and the magistrate. I think my evidence was 
taken down in writing. Just after I had given my evidence 
I had to be taken from the witness-box. I was carried from 
the witness-box after giving my evidence, because I fainted 
after the last question. The reason I did so was that I recog- 
nised the man that I saw in the train—the profile again—in 
the same position. This was the first time I had seen his 
face exactly in the same position as I saw it on the morning 
of the 18th of March. Up to that time I had not been able 
to identify the man distinctly, but I am now certain that the 
man I saw in that carriage is the man I now see in the dock, 
the man Dickman. I am perfectly certain of this. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mrrcunii-Innes—You are more 
certain to-day than you ever were before the magistrates !— 
Yes, I am certain. 

You are more certain to-day than you ever were before the 
magistrates ?—I beg your pardon. 

You are more certain to-day than you ever were before the 
magistrates !—I am. 

Because so far as you got on that day, according to your 
evidence here, you said, ‘‘ All I can say is that he resembled the 
man sitting behind.” 

You pointed to Dickman sitting behind!—Yes. 

What you said then was he resembled the man sitting 
behind. That is all you could say’—Yes, I recognised him 
distinctly. 

What I want to know is this. What has made you certain, 
since you said that, that the man is here?—If I did not say 
so then, I felt certain then. 

57 


Cicely 
- Nisbet 


John Alexander Dickman. 


I thought you told my friend that you are quite certain this 
is the man you saw!—Yes. 

Why are you certain to-day if you were not certain before 
the magistrate?—I do not remember saying I was not certain. 

I am trying to help you. It is before his lordship, and 
he can correct me if I am wrong. The most you could say 
then was, “ He resembled the man sitting behind you” (point- 
ing to Mr. Pearce) ‘‘ with his face this way.’’ Was that what 
you said?—If it is there it would be right, but I scarcely re- 
member again. 

I accept that answer, Mrs. Dickman!—Please will you not 
call me Mrs. Dickman. You have called me Mrs. Dickman 
all through. 

I beg your pardon, Mrs. Nisbet. Do you remember saying 
on the occasion when you were first called, ‘‘I can only say 
there was another man there in the compartment ’’!—Yes, I 
did say that. 

‘* There was a heavy shadow thrown right on to the man’’? 
—Yes. 

You described the shadow in this way, if you will listen to 
me. ‘‘ What I did see was in a shadow a man—it was right 
on to the man—-sitting on the seat in the far corner of the 
carriage.’’ Is that right?—That is right. 

The shadow was right on to the man?—Right on to him. 

He had his hat on?—Yes. 

His collar held up in the way you have described !—Held up. 

You are quite sure he was sitting with his face to the engine? 
—Yes. 

Re-examined by Mr. ‘TinpaL Arxkinson—The word 
‘“resembled ’’ is written down in your evidence, after you 
had seen this man’s profile. I want you to understand that 
the word ‘‘ resembled ’’ is found in the depositions, that it is 
in the evidence as written down that you gave before the 
magistrates /—Yes. 

Do you remember whether the word ‘‘ resembled’’ was 
yours, or whether it was the word of the person who was 
examining you?—Well, I do not remember saying that. I 
was so perfectly sure after recognising the man in the dock— 
I was perfectly sure of it. 

58 


Evidence for Prosecution, 


The first time you were before the magistrate was the time Mrs. Cicely 
when you fainted?—Yes, I was carried out. saa 
You came up again?’—I came back again the same day when 
I came round. I told them what I thought was the cause of 
my fainting. I waited to be called upon during the after- 
noon, but I was not called upon. ‘That is the same day. 
I think you asked on the second occasion when you came back 
to be allowed to make a statement /—Yes, I did. 


Joun ArHry, examined by Mr. LowsnrHar—I am a ticket John Athey 
collector at Morpeth station, and I was on duty on the 18th 
of March lass. I remember a man passing the barrier and 
paying excess fare. He tendered the outward portion of a 
third-class return ticket from Newcastle to Stannington and 
23d. This is the ticket he handed me (produced). I did not 
tell him what the excess fare was, but when he gave it up to me 
he said, “I think 24d. is the correct fare from Stannington,’’ 
and I said “‘ Yes,’’ and he gave me 24d. and the ticket in my 
hand. Just when he stood at the barrier his overcoat was 
loose like that (illustrating with his hand), and he had 24d. 
in his hand and the ticket. That was the only excess fare 
collected at Morpeth from that train that day. I have not 
been able to identify the man, though the prisoner resembles 
him as much as anybody. I cannot be certain if it is him. 
The train was punctual. There was a train returning to 
Newcastle at 11.24 a.m. The man who tendered me this 
excess fare made no inquiries from me as to any return train 
shortly to Stannington. He then went straight off. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mrrcnuti-Iwnes—Have you any doubt 
that this is the man?’—Well, I should not like to swear posi- 
tively ; I can only say he is like him. 


Joun Grant, examined by Mr. Tirnpan Arxinson—I am a John Grant 
platelayer, living at Ulgham Crossing, which is between Long- 
hurst and Widdrington. On Friday, 18th March, I was 
travelling on the train that is due to reach Morpeth 
at 11.15. I joined it there in order. to travel to 
Longhurst. After I came in I went along the train 
and casually looked into the third compartment of the first 
59 


John Grant 


John T. Cosher 


John Alexander Dickman. 


carriage. I did not see anybody in it. If there had been 
anybody there I would have seen him. I did not get into that 
carriage. I got into the first compartment of the second 
carriage from the engine. I saw Mr. Bruce sitting in the first 
compartment of all of the first coach. I looked casually into 
the second one, and saw no one in the second compartment. I 
went into the fourth compartment of the second carriage. I 
mean it was the first compartment of the second carriage that I 
got into. There was nobody in the second compartment and 
nobody in the third. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mrrcne.u-Innss—At which end of the 
platform were you waiting for this train?—At the north end of 
the platform. 

That is the engine end!—That is the engine end. 

Was Mr. Bruce sitting up against the window of the carriage? 
—He was sitting with his back to the engine—on the platform 
side. 

Up against the window?!—The near side. 

It would be more easy to see people on the platform side 
than on the further side/—Exactly. 


Joun Tuomas CosHer, examined by Mr. LowzntHar—I am 
a porter in the service of the North-Eastern Railway Company 
at Longhurst station. I was on duty on the 18th of March 
last. I saw the 10.27 train from Newcastle come in. When 
the train was running into the station I was just coming on to 
the platform on the north end. When it stopped I was near 
the front van of the train. I glanced in the carriages as I 
was walking along the platform shouting the name of the 
station. There were people in the first coach. The first 
compartment was occupied, but neither the second, nor third 
compartments. I saw Mr. Grant alighting from the first com- 
partment of the next coach. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mircumii-INnzes—I understand you 
meet the train as it runs in?—Yes. 

Then you did your duty walking along the train shouting 
the name of the station !—Yes. 

You glanced into the carriages, and that was the result, so 
far as you could see?!—That is so. 

60 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Grorcu Harker, examined by Mr. LowsnrHat—I am the G. Harker 
stationmaster at Pegswood station. I was on duty on the 
18th of March last, and was standing on the platform when 
the 10.27 train from Newcastle arrived. Two passengers 
alighted from the train—a woman and a little girl. I was 
standing about the centre of the train when it came into the 
station. I did not examine the train. 

Mr. Mrrcnetu-Innzs—I ask no questions. 


Guorcp Yuoman, examined by Mr. Tinpa, Arxinson—I am G. Yeoman 
the stationmaster at Longhurst. I remember Friday, the 
18th of March, when the 10.27 train from Newcastle came in. 
Three people got out, a platelayer named Grant, and a man 
and a woman from Morpeth. I knew them by sight; I think 
their name is Horstead. Both the man and the woman belong 
to Morpeth. They came back and joined the 3.31 train in the 
afternoon ; they are in Court now. I knew Nisbet very well. 
I often used to speak to him on Fridays when he passed through 
in the train. I did not see him on this Friday, but I did not 
go up to the head of the train. 

Mr. Mrronmii-Innes—I ask no questions. 


AnpREW Bruce, examined by Mr. LowznrHar—I am a AndrewBruce 
carriage inspector in the service of the North-Eastern Railway 
Company. I travelled on the 18th of March last by the 
10.27 train from Newcastle. I got into the carriage next to 
the engine, that is, into the leading compartment of the first 
coach—a smoking carriage. There was another gentleman 
with me; he got out at Chevington. I saw two young men 
carrying bags get out at Stannington, who I have since learnt 
are the witnesses Hall and Spink. I saw them lay their bags 
down and stand on the platform. I recognised them as being 
the two I saw in the morning. When the train started the 
shortest man of the two nodded to somebody in the train— 
that would be Hall. I got out at Alnmouth. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mrrcne.i-Innes—I understand the 
train had started when you saw him nod?—Yes, just started ; 
it was just moving away. 

61 


T. W.Charlton 


R. Wilkinson 


~ 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Tuomas Witi1aM CHARLTON, examined by Mr. Trnpau ATKIN- 
son—I am the foreman porter at Alnmouth station. On 
Friday, the 18th of March, I was on duty when the 10.27 train 
from Newcastle arrived. I examined the train and opened the 
door of the third compartment of the first coach. Apparently 
there was nobody in it, but I saw three streams of blood oozing 
across the floor of the compartment—they were coming out of 
the end of the seat facing the engine farthest from me. I 
looked under the seat and found the body of a man lying face 
downwards, pushed right in under it. The blood was coming 
from where his head lay. I found a hard felt hat beside his 
head and a pair of spectacles in two parts. I found one of the 
pebbles of the spectacles on the arm-rest of the seat facing 
the engine. The spectacles were broken in two, part of which 
I found on the floor and one of the pebbles on the arm-rest 
nearest my side of the carriage. The body was lying across 
the compartment under the seat from end to end. ‘The piece 
of glass was on the arm-rest just above where the man’s foot 
was as he was lying. His head was turned from me. I should 
like to say the train was shunted into a different platform at 
Alnmouth, and I opened the door on the opposite side of the 
train from what passengers would land and join the train on the 
road. ‘The train arrived to time, but the express, which should 
have passed before it, was late, so we had to shunt the train 
on to a bay line, and that caused the opposite side of the train 
to be attended to by the porters. I saw no firearms, nor did I see 
any bag. I did not move the body myself, but called for the 
guard of the train and called one of the porters, and also sent 
for the stationmaster. The stationmaster found a ticket; it 
was a return ticket, third-class, to Widdrington. 

Mr. Mrrcusiu-Innes—I ask no questions. 


Rossrt Witkrinson, examined by Mr. LowrentHar—I am a 
passenger train guard on the North-Eastern Railway, and was 
in charge of the 10.27 a.m. train from Newcastle on the 18th 
of March. The train was made up of four coaches. There 
was a brake at each end. I travelled in the rear brake. I 
saw a train made up on the 3rd of April, just as it was on the 


18th of March. It was then photographed by Mr. Ramsey. 
62 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


When it was made up I examined all the third-class carriages R- Wilkinson 
and found only one carriage with a picture of Brancepeth 
Castle in it. Mr. Hepple stood against that carriage for the 
photograph. 

Mr. Mircnsii-Innes—I ask no questions. 


Witu1am Hoce, examined by Mr. Tinpan Arxinson—I am a Wm. Hogg 
contractor and live at Pegswood. I have known the prisoner 
for some years—between eight and ten. When I knew him 
first he was secretary of a colliery company at Morpeth. I 
had no appointment to meet him on the 18th of March at Stan- 
nington. On that day I was in Newcastle. I came from 
Pegswood and went in by the early train at twenty minutes 
past eight. I was engaged in sinking operations at the time 
at a place called Dovecot. Stannington is the nearest station 
to Dovecot. I think the prisoner had visited me four or five 
times before. The last time he was there was on Friday, 
the fortnight previous to the 18th of March. I had no appoint- 
ment with him on that day, nor did I know he was coming. 
He had nothing to do with the work I had on hand. He came 
by the train that leaves Newcastle some time after ten. He 
turned up to see me about noon. It would take him about 
half an hour to walk from the station. I daresay it was the 
10.27 a.m. that he caught. Only on one occasion has he asked 
me for money. I think it would be about the back end of 
last year, some time about December. I have no note of the 
date, nor could I give it. He asked for a loan of £2, 
saying he was in need of a couple of sovereigns to put him 
over—to tide him over—something to that effect were the 
words that he used. I gave him a sovereign. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mircusii-Innus—To deal with the 
point last mentioned, did you understand that he wanted a 
sovereign to tide him over the week-end!—That is the way he 
put it to me. I understood it in that way. 

You have known the prisoner for some time!—Yes. 

You are engaged in sinking operations at this colliery at 
Dovecot !—Yes. 

I believe a Mr. Christie, of Newcastle, is interested with you 
in those operations !—Yes, he has a little interest in it. 

63 


Wm. Hogg 


John Alexander Dickman. 


You are working a royalty there!—Yes. 

Tell me if I am right, had Mr. Christie an arrangement with 
you to share or help with the expenses/—Yes, he was helping 
with the expenses. 

The expenses of the sinking operations!—Yes. 

You told us the prisoner had been to see you four or five 
times previously ’—Somewhere about that time. 

On each occasion without appointment!—Without appoint- 
ment. 

Did he on any or all of those occasions come to see you about 
this share of Mr. Christie, or had he spoken to you about a 
share of the expense of the sinking operation that Mr. Christie 
had to pay?—He had nothing to do with it. 

He had nothing to do with the sinking operations, but had 
he mentioned about the matter of Christie paying his share to 
you !—He may have done. 

The prisoner knew Christie!—Yes. 

I put it to you, for instance, that on the 4th of March when 
the prisoner came to see you he mentioned to you that Mr. 
Christie was trying to raise some money by insurance to pay 
his share?—No, he did not ask me that, nor did he mention it. 

I put it to you that he mentioned it to you!—He did not 
mention it to me. 

Let me remind you. Do you remember driving the prisoner 
back to Morpeth station that day?—No, I did not drive the 
prisoner back to Morpeth station. I was going back and he 
had a ride with me. 

I do not suggest that you took him on purpose!—I beg your 
pardon. 

I suggest you took him into your trap and drove him to 
Morpeth station?—No, I beg your pardon, I drove him into 
Morpeth. I gave him a ride into Morpeth. I did not take 
him into the station. 

It was the 4th of March, I think, that you drove him into 
Morpeth, a fortnight before the 18th March ?—Yes. 

Had the prisoner mentioned to you on several occasions the 
matter of your arrangement with Mr. Christie about the sink- 
ing !—He may have done that. 

You will not say he did not?—He may have done that. 

64 





Cc. F. Lowenthal, Esq. 





Evidence for Prosecution. 


You will not say that he did not?—I will not say that he Wm. Hoge 
did not. 

I put it to you on the 4th of March whether he spoke about 
the insurance or not, that the first and chief thing he came 
to see you about was the question about Christie’s contribu- 
tion towards the payment of the share of expenses for the 
sinking operations/—I beg your pardon, he had nothing 
to do with it. 

Did he mention it?—He had nothing to do with it. 

Did he mention it?—No, I do not think he did. 

Will you swear it?—I am not going to swear anything. I 
am telling you that he had nothing to do with it. 

By Lord Cotzrmer—The point is whether he mentioned it 
to you!—I do not think he did. 

By Mr. Mrrowgii-Innss—Will you swear he did not?—I will 
not swear either the one thing or the other, but I do not think 
he did. 

By Lord Co.zrinaz—He did not mention Christie at all’— 
He may have mentioned Christie. 

Lord Coutzripaz—That is just what you are being asked. 

By Mr. Mrrcongii-Ivnzs—I wish you would be straight in 
your answers. Did he mention Christie or not?—Well, prob- 
ably he did mention Christie. 

Why do you say probably—because he generally did !—Well, 
sometimes he did and sometimes he did not. 

Did he not mention Mr. Christie to you because Christie was 
interested in the sinking operations with you. Be careful!—I 
did not catch that question. 

Did he not mention Mr. Christie to you because Christie was 
interested in the sinking operations with you?—If he men- 
tioned Christie that was the reason he mentioned it. 

Then he did mention Christie. We have got it at last. I 
think you told us that he generally came by the 10.27 train? 
—No, I have not told you that. 

What have you told us/—I told you that that day he came 
by that train. 

What train did he generally come by!—I do not know. 

On that day he came by the 10.27?—He came by that train, 

ER” 65 





John Alexander Dickman. 


Wm. Hogg MRe-examined by Mr. Trypau Atxinson—Do you mean on the 
4th of March?—I mean on the 4th of March. 

On the 18th?!—On the 18th I never saw him. 

You never saw him at all?—No. 

You did not know he was coming!—No, I did not know he 
was coming. 

I want to know what is the state of your mind. Have you 
any distinct recollection of his mentioning Christie’s name to 
you at all?—I do not want to say whether he may have done 
it or not. 

He may have done lots of things, but have you any distinct 
recollections at all? 

Mr. Mrrcueti-Innses—I submit this witness has clearly said 
he did mention it. 

The Wirness—I would say he has done it. 

Lord CoLzripez—He said to me when I asked him that he 
may have mentioned Christie’s name, and if he did it may 
have been with reference to the sinking operations. 

The Wirness—Yes. 

Re-examination continued by Mr. Trypan Arxinson—Have 
you any distinct recollection of his mentioning Christie’s name 
at alli—I could not say which. 

If he did mention Christie’s name it would be in connection 
with the sinking operations !—Yes. 

He had nothing to do, as I understand you, with the sink- 
ing operations !—Nothing. 

What part had Christie to do with the sinking operations ?— 
He was interested in it. 

He was interested in the colliery !—Yes. 

There is one question which I ought to have put before if 
your lordship will allow me to put it now. You say he was 
secretary to the Morpeth Colliery Company /—Yes. 

How long ago was that?—It would be about six years since 
he was done with it. 

Do you know whether he has been in any situation since /— 
Not as I know of. 

What became of the Morpeth Colliery?—It was sold to Mr. 
Christie, and Mr. Christie and a company bought it. 

Is it working now?—Yes, under a new company again; it 
has been sold again. 

66 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Is the company in existence to which this man was secretary ? Wm. Hogg 


—No. 

It came to an end?—It came to an end. 

As far as you know, since that time he has not been in any 
’ situation !—Not that I am aware of. 

By Mr. Mrrcngu-Innes—Arising out of that, do you know or 
not that the prisoner negotiated the sale of the Morpeth Moor 
Colliery /—Yes. 

He did?—That is quite correct. 

Do you happen to know that he got a commission out of it 
of £4001—Yes. I do not know exactly what amount of money 
he got. 

He got a good commission!—I know he got a good com- 
mission. 

I think the colliery company which was formed after the 
purchase of the Morpeth Colliery was called the Wansbeck 
Company ?—Yes. 

That is right!—Yes. 

It included the Morpeth Moor Colliery —Yes. 

It was the same colliery /—Yes. 

In that Mr. Christie was interested !—Yes. 


Anprew Tart, examined by Mr. LowsnrHat—I am a detective- 
inspector in the Newcastle city police force. On the 21st 
of March I went to No. 1 Lily Avenue, Jesmond, where the 
prisoner lived. I reached there about 4.35 p.m., and rang 
the bell, which the prisoner answered. I said to him, ‘‘ Are 
you Mr. Dickman?’’ He replied ‘‘ Yes.’”’ I said, ‘‘ John 
Alexander Dickman?’’ He said “Yes.’’ I said, ‘‘ Were you 
at one time employed as book-keeper with a firm of shipbrokers 
in this city?’’? He replied ‘‘ Yes.’? I then told him who I 
was, and added, ‘‘ The Northumberland county police have been 
informed that you were seen in the company of the murdered 
man Nisbet on Friday morning last. I have since learnt that 
you are an acquaintance of his. If that is so, the county 
police would like to know if you could throw any light on 
the affair.’ The prisoner replied, ‘“‘I knew Nisbet for many 
years. I saw him that morning. I booked at the ticket 
window with him, and went by the same train, but I did not see 
him after the train left. I would have told the police if I had 

67 


Andrew Tait 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Andrew Tait thought it would have done any good.’’ I then asked him if he 
would accompany me to the detective office and see Superin- 
tendent Weddell and give a statement. He replied “‘ Certainly.’’ 
He then went back into the room and took off his slippers and 
put on his boots. I was in the room with him while he did 
it. We then went to the detective office, and I introduced him 
to Superintendent Weddell. The prisoner in my presence then 
made a statement, which the superintendent wrote down and 
handed Dickman to read, which he did, saying it was correct. 
After this statement had been taken he was arrested by Superin- 
tendent Weddell. | We searched him, and found upon him the 
sum of £17 9s. 11d. in money ; fifteen sovereigns were in gold 
in one of Lambton & Co.’s small bank bags. It is a similar 
bag to the one in Court. The remainder of the money which 
was in his trouser pocket, comprised one sovereign, two kalf- 
sovereigns, one half-crown, one florin, three shillings, four six- 
pences, and five pennies. We also found a handkerchief, pair 
of gloves, and other articles. The gloves were tan gloves made 
of dog skin. The card case contained, among letters and 
cards, a local money-lender’s card, which has been already pro- 
duced in Court. On it is a memo. of a loan of £20 to the 
prisoner in October, 1909. The name of the lender is 

Lord Co.eripae—‘‘ Cash Accommodation and Investment.”’ 

Examination continued—That is really the man Cohen, 130 
Northumberland Street. | There were eleven articles found 
altogether. 

The Prisonzsr—You have not mentioned the diary you found. 
That is it. You will see my signature inside. You might 
hand that to the jury, please. 

Lord CoLeripce—I see this contains a coupon of an insurance 
ticket for J. Alexander Dickman, Ocean Accident and Insurance 
Corporation. | 

Mr. Mrrcueii-Innes—I understand the prisoner’s point to be 
that he wishes the Court and everybody concerned in this case 
to see the way he signs his name. His name is signed to 
the coupon and insurance ticket ‘‘ J. Alex. Dickman.’’ 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mrrcnetui-Innes—Mr. Dickman on this 
morning made the statement perfectly freely !—Yes. 

And truly /—Yes. 

He went with you readily !—Yes. 

68 / 





Evidence for Prosecution. 


He showed every disposition, so far as you could judge, to Andrew Tait 
assist —Yes, he came away at once. 

I take it that until he told you he had booked at the same 
time as Nisbet that morning, and had gone by that train, you 
did not know that?—No. 

That was the first you heard of it?—Yes. 

That statement you believed to be true?—The statement that 
he went by the same train? 

And that he booked with Nisbet or next to Nisbet at the 
booking oftice?—The evidence bears that out. 

You are not able to contradict it, and, so far as you know, 
it is true?—So far as up to that. 

To-day, I am asking you?—Up to where he says 

It is being suggested to-day that he did go by the same train 
as Nisbet ?—Yes. 

That was the first information from him or from anybody 
that you had of that point. That was the first you had heard 
that he had gone by the same train as Nisbet when you asked 
him that on this particular day !—That was the first time I had 
heard that. He had been seen, but I did not know that he had 
gone by the same train until then. 

Re-examined by Mr. Tinpat Arxinson—I suppose the 
Northumberland county police were the persons getting up this 
case 1—Yes. 

The information on which you acted was not got in any way 
except through the Northumberland county police!—No, the 
Northumberland county police telephoned through on the 
Sunday. 

Did your information come from the Northumberland county ' 
police 1—Yes. 

You yourself knew very little or nothing about it!—Nothing, 
until I got that information from the county police. 

It was in consequence of that information that you went and 
saw him?—Yes. 

By Lord CoLeripcze—You did not know how much or what 
the county police knew or suspected’/—No; we got a telephone 
message on the Sunday that a man named Dickman had been 
seen with Nisbet in the Central station. We were not told 
in what part or anything. Then I made inquiries on the Sunday 
night to locate Dickman. I did not know the man, and I 

69 





John Alexander Dickman. 


Andrew Teit made inquiries on Monday, and I was not very sure that I had 
got the right man, because he was living in a good 
residential district, living in a £30 house, costing, with rates, 
£40 per year. All my inquiries amongst people who knew him 
said that he was very hard up; therefore I was not sure that 
he was the man. 


John Weddell Joun WeppeLL, examined by Mr. Tirnpau Arxinson—I am 
superintendent of police for the Newcastle division, and am 
stationed at Gosforth. I heard of this on the 18th of March, 
and I was at the police station on the 21st of March when the 
prisoner was brought in. He was in the office, as was also the 
last witness Tait, when I arrived. He introduced Dickman to 
me, saying, at the same time, “‘ This is Mr. Dickman, and he 
will give you a statement respecting what he knows about 
the train murder on Friday.’? The prisoner said he would do 
so, and he made a statement. I did not press him in any way. 
It was an entirely voluntary statement. I took it down in 
writing, and after he had finished, I handed it to him, and he 
read it himself. He said it was quite correct. The original 
of this statement is attached to the depositions. 

The CuerxK or Arraians read the following statement by 
John Alexander Dickman:—On Friday morning last I went 
to the Central station and took a ticket, return for Stanning- 
ton. Nisbet, the deceased man, whom I knew, was at the 
ticket office before me, and, so far as I know, had left the 
hall by the time I got round. I went to the bookstall and 
got a paper, the Manchester Sporting Chronicle; then to the 
refreshment room, and had a pie and a glass of ale. I then 
went on to the platform and took my seat in the third-class 
carriage nearer the hinder end than the front end. My 
recollection is, although I am not clear on the matter, that 
people entered and left the compartment at different stations 
on the journey. The train passed Stannington station without 
my noticing it, and I got out at Morpeth and handed my 
ticket with excess fare, 2$d., to the collector. I left Morpeth 
and walked to Stannington by the main road. I took ill of 
diarrhoea on the way, and had to return to Morpeth to catch 
the 1.12 p.m. train, but missed it, and got the 1.40 slow at 
Morpeth. After missing the 1.12 p.m. I came out of the 

70 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


station at the east side, and turned down towards the town. John Weddell 
I met a man named Elliott, and spoke to him. I did not get 

into the town, but turned and went back to the station, and 

got the 1.40 p.m. slow to Newcastle. I got a single ticket 

for Stannington, and did not give it up. I gave up the return 

portion at the Manors. I have been very unwell since, but 

was out on Saturday afternoon and evening. I went on this 

journey to see a Mr. Hogg, at Dovecot, in connection with a 

new sinking operation there. 

Examination continued—I did not arrest him immediately, 
but I did so a short time after, when he was searched. I 
have been in Court and heard the account that Tait has given 
of the things that were found on him, and it is correct. He 
made no observation about anything when the money was 
found on him. He was cautioned and charged, and in answer 
he said—‘‘I do not understand the proceedings; it is absurd 
for me to deny the charge, because it is absurd to make it. I 
only say I absolutely deny it.’”? On the 21st I went to the 
prisoner’s house at 1 Lily Avenue, Jesmond, with some other 
officers, and searched the premises. We found a bureau there, 
and opened it with a key the prisoner had in his possession. 
It contained various papers and some letters and books relating 
to banking. There was also a life preserver. I did not find 
any pawn tickets that day, but I did on the 26th when I 
went again to the house. There were two pawn tickets 
(produced), one is dated the Ist March in the present year, 
and the pawnbroker is J. E. Wilson, 12 Pilgrim Street, 
Newcastle-on-Tyne, and the article—a field glass—is pawned 
in the name of John Wilkinson, and the address given is 180 
Westmoreland Road. The money advanced on the pledge is 
12s. 1d. The second pawnbroker is James Somerfield & Sons, 
of Pink Lane, Newcastle. It refers to a pair of field glasses 
pawned on the 17th March, 1910, the day before the murder, 
for 15s., by one John Wilkinson. I also produce, among other 
letters, some letters apparently written by the wife to the 
prisoner. They are attached to the depositions. I also found 
two pass-books, one relating to an account at the National 
Provincial Bank, the other showing an account at Lambton’s. 
They refer to accounts the prisoner had at one time at these 
banks. 

71 


John Alexander Dickman. 


The Prisonser—Those accounts are not closed. Excuse me 
interrupting. 

(Pass-books were handed to his lordship.) 

Lord Cotzrrpgz—Apparently the account at the National 
Bank is closed on the 31st December, 1909, with a balance of 
3s. against the prisoner. The other account, at Lambton’s, 
on the 11th August. 

Examination continued—I subsequently got some clothing 
from the prisoner’s house—that is, I took it on the 21st. 
The only clothing of importance was a pair of trousers and 
a pair of suede gloves, which I produce. On the left hand 
glove, on the thumb, is a piece cut out by Dr. Boland. When 
I took possession of it I noticed a slight, dark stain on the 
top of the thumb. I gave the gloves to the doctor. As to 
the trousers, I did not myself notice anything on any part of 
them, but they were also submitted to Dr. Boland. I was 
present in the Newcastle station when the train was made up 
supposed to have been identical with the 10.27 a.m. train of 
the 18th March. The witness Hepple was standing on the 
platform. He was then told to stand by the compartment in 
which it was alleged he was riding. He identified that 
compartment by the photograph of Brancepeth Castle, which 
was in the last compartment but one in the third coach. The 
witness Hepple took up his position at the door of the com- 
partment spoken of, and I, in company with Superintendent 
Tait, went towards the front part of the train. He arranged 
to give us a signal to stop when we got to the place where he 
last saw the man Dickman about to enter the compartment 
on the morning of the 18th. We walked up the side of the 


train, and after getting to about the middle of the compart- 


ment next the intervening carriage between where Hepple 
was and the front carriage we turned and went slowly back- 
wards. He had arranged to hold up his hand as a signal 
when we reached the spot I have already indicated. We went 
slowly backwards before getting the signal. Facing Hepple, 
we passed the intervening coach, and after passing the door 
of the carriage next to it, about, I think, three feet, we walked 
past the carriage door and nearer to the engine. He held up 
his hand as a signal for us to stop. We were then at the spot 
opposite where he saw the last of the person he says was the 
72 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


prisoner. I have made a thorough search to see if I could find John Weddell 
a revolver, but have only found four bullets. They are of 

different sizes—two pairs—one capped with nickle, and the 

others ordinary leaden bullets. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mrrcneri-Innes—When Dickman 
made the statement to you in the police office he made it quite 
freely /—Quite freely. 

And frankly /—Yes. 

In fact, you say it was entirely a voluntary statement !— 
Yes. 

He did not seem disturbed or excited!—No. 

You were in charge, more or less, of this case?—Yes. 

I take it his statement conveyed to you a good deal of 
information you had not before?—At that time, yes. 

Just let me see what he has told you that you did not 
know at that time. Did you know that he had known Nisbet 
except that he had been seen at the station—did you know 
that he had known him?—No, I cannot say that I did. 

Did you know that this man Dickman had seen Nisbet at 
the ticket office that morning !/—No. 

Did you know then that the prisoner was going to Stannington 
that morning !—No. 

Did you know that the train passed Stannington unnoticed 
by him then?—He told me s0. 

Did you know from other sources except from what he told 
you!—No. 

Apart from his statement, did you know that he got out at 
Morpeth ?—Not at that time. 

That is my question. Did you know that he paid the 
excess fare of 24d., the difference from Stannington to Morpeth, 
on his return ticket to Morpeth then!—No. 

Did you know that he had met a man called Elliott at 
Morpeth?—I did not. 

Did you take the trouble to test that question, whether he 
had seen Elliott?—It has been done. 

I know it has, and you found that it was true?—Yes. 

On the occasion of the applicetion for remand before the 
magistrates the police called a witness named Sanderson, who 
was with Elliott when Dickman met him!—Yes. 

Is Sanderson here to-day ?—Yes. 

73 


John Alexander Dickman. 


John Weddell You were in Court when Sanderson gave his evidence!— 
Yes. 

Mr. Tinpat Arkrinson—This was some time after one o’clock. | 

Mr. Mrircueuit-Innes—Yes, but Sanderson was called before 
the magistrates. (Z’o Witness)—Did you, before the magis- 
trates, hear Sanderson say that Dickman spoke perfectly 
rationally and quietly to Elliott?—Yes. 

And that there was nothing remarkable about him at all?— 
Yes. 

That he talked about odds on horses?—Well, I do not think 
there was anything said—I do not recollect anything being 
said about that. 

He was called, but he is not on the depositions, and I do not 
know why !—No deposition was taken. 

Mr. Tryna Arxinson—I am told he was called for the pur- 
pose of remand. His evidence was not considered of sufficient 
importance to make him a witness. 

Mr. Mrrcneii-Innes—For the prosecution. 

Mr. TrypaL ATKINSoN—Quite so. 

Mr. Mrrcuetu-Innus—I quite appreciate that. (Zo Witness) 
—Do you remember Sanderson saying on that occasion that 
he talked about bets on horses with Elliott?—I do not think 
he went into any details. My recollection is that he just made 
a single remark about what was going to win. 

By Lord Cotermpce—Who made the remark ?—Dickman and 
Elliott made the remark to each other, and, as far as I can 
recollect, that was all that passed. That is my recollection 
of it. 

By Mr. Mrrcusii-Innes—Let me see if I can refresh your 
memory. Did you hear Sanderson say that Dickman asked 
Elliott what he fancied for the big race?—Possibly that might 
be so. I am not prepared to swear. 

Lord Corertrpce—He heard Sanderson say what? 

Mr. Mrrcneii-Innes—No, Sanderson heard Dickman say, 
‘‘ What do you fancy for the big race? ”’ 

Lord Cotzripce—This witness is only saying what he heard 
Sanderson say. 

Mr. Mrrcnsiu-Innes—He heard Sanderson say that Dickman 
said something to Elliott, and I want to know what it was. 
(To Witness)—Will you just follow my question clearly. I 

74 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


want to get this clear. Did you hear Sanderson, in Court John Weddell 
before the magistrates, say this, “Dickman talked quite 
rationally, and asked Elliott what he fancied for the big race? ’’ 
—Yes, I think that was in cross-examination. 
That is so. It is equally a statement of truth, we hope?— 
Quite so. 

Did you hear Sanderson say that he, that is Dickman, talked 
quite rationally, and appeared quite a rational being !—Yes. 

So that with regard to that part of his statement you tested 
it and found it to be true!—Yes. 

On the other parts of the statement I need not trouble you. 

You were also informed in this statement that he went out to 
see Mr. Hogg at Dovecot !—He said so. 

Mr. Trypau Arxinson—The form of your question is am- 
biguous. 

Mr. Mritcuai-Innes—I beg your pardon. (Zo Witness)— 

I believe you have had the whole of this man’s clothes which 
he wore upon this day under your examination?—Well, the 
whole of the clothing belonging to him, but what he wore on 
that day I cannot say. 

I quite agree that you were not there. Have you had all 
the clothes that could be found in his house handed over to 
you!—Yes, and also everything that he wore on his arrest. 

Both the outer clothing and the underclothing !—Yes. 

Has any kind of stain or trace of anything the least suspicious 
been found on any of his garments except that spot of blood on 
the top of the thumb of the glove?—Well, I am not prepared 
to say. 

So far as you know?—I think the doctor will be better able 
to say that. 

You are in charge of this case. So far as you know is that 
all that has been found? 

Lord Co.eripce—wWill you put the question again? 

Mr. Mrrcnmui-Innes—So far as the witness knows, has any 
stain of any suspicious character been found on any of his 
clothing except upon the thumb and forefinger of the suéde 
gloves, and, secondly, a few stains on the inside pocket of 
the trousers ? 

Lord CoLeripce—You omitted that. 

Mr. Mrrcusii-Innes—I was going to put that in a moment. 

75 





John Alexander Dickman. 


John Weddell The Wirness—Well, I am scarcely prepared to say what is 
suspicious and what is not. 

By Mr. Mrrcnei-Innes—Then I will put it to you perfectly 
frankly. Has it been suggested that any other stain of blood 
has been found !—No. 

You have not traced a halfpenny of this money except the £17 
to Dickman !—No. 

Unless it is the £17, you have not traced the money to him 
at all?—No. 

In the discharge of your duty, perfectly properly, you have 
taken considerable trouble in trying to trace it?—Yes. 

You have dug up his garden, I think; you have taken his 
piano to pieces; you have searched his cistern ; you have taken 
out all his drawers, and had up all his carpets?—That is so. 

You found nothing !/—Nothing. 

You have found no pistol?—I have found no pistol. 

Either in his house or in the neighbourhood of which he 
lived ?—We have found no pistol anywhere. 

Have you taken trouble and been at pains to search the 
neighbourhood of Morpeth and the surrounding country ?!—It 
has been done undoubtedly, but I have not been there. 

You have not, but it has been searched by your orders !—I 
understand so, by the orders of the chief constable. 

Do you know from your inquiries that Dickman, as a matter 
of fact, was to some extent a betting man!—Yes. 

Do you know that a subscription was raised for him in the 
Bigg Market for the purposes of his defence !—I have heard so. 

By Lord Cotermpcz—Is that an agricultural market?—No, 
my lord. 

What kind of market is it?—When the counsel mentions in 
the Bigg Market I think he means the frequenters of the Bigg 
Market. The Bigg Market is largely frequented by book- 
makers. 

Mr. Mrrcwuti-Innus—So I understood. (To Witness)—Is 
it a market for anything else except bookmakers !—Yes. 

A sort of Saturday Fair goes on there !—Yes. 

I think it is the fact that you have had handed over to you 
amongst his clothes a pair of tan gloves, or brown gloves. I 
think they were produced by the previous witness /—Yes. 

And a enuffbox!—Yes. 

76 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Re-examined by Mr. Trypan Arxinson—Did you find amongst John Weddell 
his papers a bill in the name of Dickinson ?—Yes. 

Have you got it there?—Yes. 

How many ?—Four. 

Will you give me the document?—I may mention that two 
of these bills were produced at the committal. The other 
two I found amongst his papers between the committal and 
the inquest. The third and fourth were produced at the 
inquest. 

This is a receipt for 3s. 6d. of the 21st of October so far back 
as 1904. The next is an invoice of S. & C. W. Dixon, boot and 
shoe makers—that is, “Mrs. Dickinson, 1 Lily Avenue, Jes- 
mond. Ist January, 1908, shoes soled and heeled, 3s. 9d., 
received.” Then on the 14th January, 1908, there is from 
Bainbridge & Co., Newcastle-on-Tyne, “credit bought depart- 
ment, Mr. Dickinson, 1 Lily Avenue, 2s. 4d.” Then there is 
Newcastle and Gateshead Water Company, Dickinson, 
November, 1907. Those are the documents. They are all 
in the name of Dickinson, and the address, I think I am right 
in saying, of every one is 1 Lily Avenue?—Yes. 

My friend has asked you whether or not you knew the 
circumstances which were referred to in the prisoners state- 
ment before he made that statement to you. You say ‘‘No’’? 
—No. 

Among other things he has asked you whether you knew 
whether he passed Stannington station unnoticed. Do you 
know that now !—Yes. 

But personally, except from what the prisoner has told you, 
that he did not notice the station when he passed through it, 
have you any other information !—Except that, none whatever. 

Except what he told you, that he had gone into the hinder 
part of the train, do you know that!—That was directly con- 
trary to the information I had at that time. 


Dr. Caantes Cuarke Burnuam, examined by Mr. LowEnTHat pp, Burnham 
—I am a police surgeon, residing at Alnwick. I have examined 
the witness, George Nisbet; he is suffering from pneumonia, 
and is quite unfit to be here to-day. 
Mr. Mrrcseti-Innes—I ask no question. 
77 


John Nicholas 


Dr. Burnham 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Joun NicHouas, examined by Mr. LowsntrHat—I am assistant 
magistrate of this Court. I was sitting when the witness, 
George Nisbet, gave his evidence, which was taken down in 
writing and signed by him. It is in the deposition before my 
lord. 

The Cuerk or Arraigns read the following deposition :— 
“George Nisbet, having been sworn, said—I am a police con- 
stable stationed at Alnmouth. I was called by the witness, 
Charlton, to see the body of the deceased man. I made a 
search of the body. I found no leather bag of money nor 
any weapon. I found four bullets in the presence of the 
doctor and Superintendent Bolton, one when the body was 
found, two the next morning at the post-mortem, and one in 
the carriage shortly afterwards. These bullets are produced by 
Supt. Weddell.”’ 


Dr. Caartes Ciarke Burnuam, recalled—On the 18th of 
March I examined the body of Mr. Nisbet at Alnmouth station, 
at two in the afternoon. I made a report to the superinten- 
dent of police, which report was put in before the magistrate. 

Lord Cotzripcz—lI should think much the best plan were to 
ask how many wounds there were—what each wound was caused 
by, and the calculated result of each wound on the man—and 
then we should have something clear in our minds. 

Mr. Mrrcuuti-Innzes—Subject to what your lordship’s opinion 
is on the matter, I may say that so far as this witness is con- 
cerned, I should complain of no question not being asked if the 
reports could be put in and read. 

Lord Cotzripee—I have read the report, and*I think, with- 
out saying anything derogatory, it is a confused report. I 
think I should like to have it more clearly described. 

Examination continued—I found certain wounds upon Mr. 
Nisbet’s body; there are five in all. The first wound was 
designated in my report—— 

By Lord Cotsripce—In your report which I have before me, 
you enumerated five wounds. Will you take each one and 
deal with it separately and tell us in each case where it was, 
by what it was produced, and what the effect was? You may 
look at your notes. Have you the bullets before you!—Yes. 

78 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Was the first wound a bullet wound or a punctured wound? Dr. Burnham 
—They were all punctured wounds. 

Of course they were, but there were some bullet punctures. 
You know the difference between a punctured wound and a 
bullet wound. Was it, in your opinion, done by such a thing 
as a bullet or by an instrument like a knife? What is the first 
wound—how would you characterise it?—If I might describe 
these slighter wounds, the first wound would be behind the 
right ear. 

Was it a bullet wound!—A bullet wound distinctly. 

Where was it?—Immediately behind the right ear. 

Where did the bullet pass!—The bullet had just entered the 
skin of the neck, but had not entered the skull. It had just 
touched the tissues of the skull and had not caused any injury 
to the bones below. 

It had not injured the bones—is that right?’—Quite right. 

By Mr. LowentHat—tTherefore, that wound had no serious 
effect /—None. 

Lord Cotzrmcn—We know you describe your firat wound in 
your report as a bullet wound under the left eye. 

Mr. LowrenrHat—He is taking the third in the report. 

By Lord Cozurincu—Let us take them one by one. I do 
not want No. 3. What is No. 1? Was there a bullet wound 
under the left eye which you described in your report as wound 
No. 14—Yes. 

Examination continued—I have the notes of my report before 
me from which the full report was taken. First of all there 
was the large wound, not the small wound. The large wound 
was under the left eye. It passed underneath the nose, 
evidently through the bones, puncturing the right cheek bone. 
It was caused by something discharged only a few inches 
distant. The direction of the wound passed from the left side 
to the right through the nose, and I found a bullet in the 
temple bone on the right side, then it took a slightly upward 
course through the tissues of the nose. It did not enter the 
cavity of the skull proper, but went through the bones of the 
face. The bullet showed marked signs of having destroyed 
the bone. This is the bullet I have in my hand. It is a lead 
bullet, not cased with nickel. The natural result of such a 
wound would not be to cause death ; it is a very serious wound ; 

79 





John Alexander Dickman. 


Dr. Burnham it would cause a very large amount of hemorrhage and shock. 
but is not necessarily fatal. It would stun, and I do not think 
a man could do anything after he had received it. There was 
a tissue fracture of the bones of the face, and there was so 
much hemorrhage through the tissues of the nose, through 
which it had travelled, that I should think the result of the 
injury would be such that the deceased would be rendered un- 
conscious. That is all I have to say about the first wound. 

As to the second wound on the left forehead, it is a very super- 
ficial wound, and is caused by a bullet which I produce. The 
wound is over the left forehead, over the left eyebrow. This 
bullet, you see, is nickel capped; it was removed from -the 
wound, and shows no sign of injury at all. The wound also 
shows very little sign of burning. The wound is just super- 
ficial, and this bullet was lying underneath the skin just below. 
It had produced no injury to the bone, and its direction was 
downwards towards the eyebrow, which leads to the presump- 
tion that when the bullet was discharged the man must have 
been lying down or prostrate. It was a superficial wound, and 
the bullet was lying underneath the skin, and had produced no 
injury to the bone. 

As to the third wound, this was a punctured wound 
just behind the left ear—no bullet was found. In my 
report I mentioned the small wound just behind the right 
ear first, so I will make the wound behind the right ear 
No. 3 to keep sequence. The bullet had just entered the 
tissues of the skin and had not penetrated the bone. The 
direction of the bullet was straight inwards, through the scalp 
and no more. This wound was not dangerous at all. 

As to the fourth wound, it was a punctured wound behind 
the left ear; no bullet was found in the wound, but a bullet 
had caused slight injury to the bone below, but no fracture. 
It had been inflicted with a greater amount of force, and it 
had inflicted a greater amount of injury than the other bullets, 
though it had not entered the skull nor exactly injured the bone. 

Mr. LowentHat—Did the witness tell your lordship that the 
wound behind the left ear did not enter the skull? 

Lord Cousripce—That is what I am asking him. 

The Wirnuss—The wound behind the left ear is the one 
which has injured the bone slightly. 

80 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


By Lord Cotsricz—That is what your report says—‘‘ The Dr. Burnham 
lower of the two wounds behind the left ear is found to extend 
into the skull ’’ ’—But we have not got to that yet. 

By Mr. Lowsnruat—I believe you made the post-mortem, 
and you found there were two wounds behind the left ear?— 
There was a superficial wound, but the wound below that is a 
deeper wound. 

By Lord Conzripce—Then wound 1 disappears altogether. 
There were only five?—Behind the left ear there is a super- 
ficial wound which just touches the skull bone. Two inches 
below that, on the left side, is the wound which enters the 
skull, and this is the bullet of it. (Produced.) 

By Mr. Lownnrnat—Those are separate and distinct wounds? 
—Yes. In my report I say 2 inches below this is the left 
wound, which I describe as one which passes into the skull. 

By Lord Cotsripce—Then that makes six wounds !—No, five 
wounds. 

Lord Coizripce—I really do not follow this. 

Examination continued—Under the left eye is No. 1 wound, 
the wound on the left forehead is the second wound, the punc- 
tured wound that passes behind the right ear is the third wound, 
the punctured wound behind the left ear is the fourth; the 
fifth wound is 2 inches below that. There are two behind the 
left ear; the first wound behind the left ear is superficial, and 
the second wound extends into the skull. The wound I am. 
speaking about is the one behind the left ear, which is quite 
superficial, and just touches the bone of the skull and no more. 

Lord Coturipge—May I ask where in your post-mortem you 
allude to No. 4 wound, which you describe as the punctured 
wound with a ragged edge behind the left ear? It is a great 
pity you did not keep the wounds in the same order with the 
same description. N 

Examination continued—My external examination was eS 
reported before my post-mortem examination. The punctured 
wound behind the left ear did not fracture the skull, and no 
bullet was found in that wound. It was a lacerated wound, 
without any signs of burning. Two inches below that wound 
was a large, ragged one, which entered the skull. This is a 
bullet wound exactly similar to the one we described under 


p 81 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Dr. Burnham the left ear. This penetrated the cerebellum and the medulla, 
and was found in the anterior part of the brain. It must have 
caused death instantaneously. It was a similar bullet to No. 
1, and traversed both the cerebellum and the medulla in the 
direction upwards across the face. The bullet was lying 
behind the left part of the right eye. Presumably the man’s 
hand that had fired it was below the level of the deceased’s 
head. This wound was caused by the bullet which was dis- 
charged through the coat; I have the cloth which is cut, and 
it corresponds exactly to the injury. I put the coat in position, 
and it showed the bullet had traversed through the overcoat 
collar before entering the brain. The coat shows distinct 
evidence of burning. Having regard to the position of the 
wound and the position of the man’s body, I should say the 
coat must have been pushed up, because the bullet entered 
just at the juncture of the neck, so that the overcoat collar 
must have been up, or it would not have traversed it. The 
direction of the bullet was upwards. I found the fourth 
bullet in the carriage behind the upholstery below the arm rest. 
It is exactly the same as the little bullet found in the forehead 
—nickel capped. I produce it. It shows signs of indenta- 
tion, and was found lying loose on the seat. I saw the railway 
carriage at half-past two. There was blood running down 
between the cushion and the back of the arm rest. I traced 
that down to the seat, and it was there that I found the bullet. 
The blood had trickled down behind the arm rest on to the floor 
at the back, showing that the deceased’s head must have been 
backwards, because had it fallen forwards the blood would 
have been in front. It was behind, showing it had gone down 
exactly in the angle between the arm rest and the cushion. 
When the body was put under the seat it would continue to 
bleed from the wound in the face. There was considerable 
abrasion on the forehead, where the bullet was lying. The 
blood would continue to flow from the wound which had 
traversed the nose bones. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mircurni-Innes—I do not want to 
prolong the discussion of this matter, but I think you said 
you found blood on the neck and the front of the overcoat and 
other articles of clothing !—Certainly. 

82 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


It had flowed back and down?—It was all over the hand Dr. Burnham 
which was not covered with the glove, and also it covered the 
glove. It covered his clothing where he had been lying. 

As well as the upholstery and the floor’—Yes. They had 
covered the floor with sawdust when I saw it, but there had 
been a considerable quantity of blood about. 

As a matter of fact, blood was still flowing when you 
examined the body?!—Yes, especially from the pistol wound in 
the skull. 

Re-examined by Mr. Tiypau Arxrnson—Would there neces- 
sarily be a large quantity of blood at the moment after this 
man met his death?—The blood which flowed from his nose 
would be very considerable. The wound at the back of the 
head opened large vessels which would bleed considerably. 

Would it commence at once!—Yes. 

Where would the blood be flowing from?—In whatever 
position he was in the hemorrhage would take place where 
the face had been injured, particularly the posterior wound, 
or the wound in the nose. 

He would continue to bleed after death?—Yes ; it would run 
out especially from this posterior wound—especially if he lay 
on his back. 

That is the wound behind the ear?!—Yes. 


The Court adjourned. 


83 


John Athey 


H. Hymen 


Second Day—Tuesday, 5th July, 1910. 


Evidence for the Prosecution—continued. 


Joun Atuey, recalled, by Lord Cotzripeze—With regard to 
the question of the excess fare, and as to the man who paid it, 
I could not make certain of the colour of the coat, but the 
person was wearing an overcoat. I could not swear positively 
as to whether he had a bag with him or not, as I could not 
see his right hand. I have seen the bag, which is of con- 
siderable size, and if he had that bag he must have kept it 
under his coat; but I could not say that he had no bag with 
him—certainly he was carrying none outside, but I did not 
see his right hand. When he wanted to bring his hand up 
he had to partially turn towards me—he had to push back 
the lapel of his coat in order to get his hand past into his 
pocket. J am certain the man had an overcoat on. 


Henrietta Hymen, examined by Mr. LownntHat—I am a 
single woman, and manageress of a business at 35 Groat 
Market, Newcastle. I know the prisoner; he has had letters 
addressed to my shop under the name of Fred Black. In 
January of this year he told me what his real name was. He 
also had parcels addressed to my shop under the name of 
Black, one of which contained a gun. The parcel would be 
a foot in length—a fairly long parcel. 

Lord Cotzrip¢e—That would be a short parcel for a gun. 

(The witness illustrated the length of the parcel on the 
bar of the witness-box, making it about 2 feet.) 

Examination continued—I know it was a gun, because Mr. 
Black told me at the time that he was expecting one, and 
asked me to take it in and pay the carriage. This was in 
October, last year. A post card came a few weeks after the 
gun, for Fred Black. It asked for the return of the revolver 
sent in error. I gave it to the prisoner. There was a small 

&4 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


parcel at the shop at the time—it was a very small parcel. H. Hymen 
I do not know what it contained, except that the post card said 
it contained a revolver. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mircusni-Innzs—I think you keep 
a newsagent’s and stationer’s shop?—lI do. 

The prisoner used to get his newspapers from you?!—He 
did. 

As I understand, he used your shop to receive his letters 
and call for them !—Yes. 

Do you know of your own knowledge—do not say if you do 
not—what was the character of a great many of the letters 
he received !—They were betting letters. 

And telegrams ?—Yes. 

Betting telegrams!—I should think so. 

Do you know?’—No, I do not know about the telegrams, 
just about the letters. 

You knew what the letters were?—Yes. 

Did you happen to know what the address was of the 
person who sent this post card about the revolver?’—yYes, I 
think it was Bell Brothers, Glasgow. 

Did you notice whether their address was Waterloo Road?— 
I believe it was. 

By Lord Cotsripae—Are you speaking of the post card!— 
The post card. 

By Mr. Mrircnunu-Innes—I am asking about the post card 
as to the revolver. It came from Bell Brothers, Waterloo 
Road, Glasgow?—I know it came from Glasgow. 

And Bell Brothers !—Yes. 

Do you know or not that the parcel was in fact returned to 
Bell Brothers, Waterloo Street, Glasgow!—I think it was, 
because I gave him a label to send it away. The parcel had 
lain at the shop some time. 

Lord Cotzrmp¢e—You asked her if she knew of her own 
knowledge. 

Mr. Mrrcneni-Innes—Yes. 

The Wirnsss—The parcel had lain at the shop some time. 

Lord CoLerip¢e—You must not tell us what you saw some- 
body else do. Anything the prisoner said or did in your 
presence you can give evidence of, and we can draw our own 


inferences. 
85 


H. Hymen 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Mr. Mrrcue.i-Innzs—Your lordship will understand the 
answer came without my asking for it. (Z’0 Witness)—Did you 
give him a label?—I did. 

Was it in connection with the parcel that you gave him a 
label?—It was. 

Mr. Trnpau Atkinson—That again is very objectionable. 

Lord CoLmripce—That is rather an ambiguous phrase. (Zo 
Wvtness)—What did he say when he asked for the label; did 
he say anything or do anything!—He did not know that the 
parcel was there. It had lain in the shop about two months. 

You cannot tell what he knew; what you can tell is what 
he said and did?—He asked for the label to send it straight 
back. 

By Mr. Mrrcusii-Innes—He did that?—He did. 

Did you give him a label?—I did. 

What did he do, if anything, with the label?—I could not 
say. 

That is all you know?—That is all I know. 

Re-examined by Mr. TinpaL Atxinson—You gave him a 
label?—I did. 

Did he take it away !—Yes. 

Is that the last you saw of the label?—Yes. 

At the time he asked you for the label did he take the 
parcel away !—Yes. 

At the same time !—Yes. 

That is the last you saw of the parcel?—Yes. 

How long was the parcel at your shop?—For about two 
months, from the latter end of October till January. 

I am speaking of the last parcel?—The small parcel? 

Yes /—Yes. 

By Lord Cotzripce—The small parcel was two months in 
your shop?—About two months. 

By Mr. Trypan Atxinson—It came when 1—The latter part 
of October. 

It would be there, therefore, up to the latter week of 
December ?—It was the first week in January. 

The first parcel, I understand, was longer than the second? 
—Much longer. 

I think you indicated in an answer to my lord it was about 

86 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


the length of that brass rod in front of you!—Yes, it would H. Hymen 
be about that length. 

How was it done up?’—Just in a brown paper parcel. 

About the second one?—I could not say. 

How was that done up tI think it was in brown paper, 
too, with string. 

Was the first parcel in a box, so far as you could tell, inside 
the paper?—No, the first one was not. 

Not in a box?—No, it was just the shape of the gun. 

Could you see the outline of it?—Yes. 

Could you see whether it was bigger at one end than the 
other ?—I did not notice that. 

Did you notice that both ends were the same size, or one 
end was bigger than the other!—One end was bigger than the 
other. 

I thought you said you did not notice it; did you notice it?— 
Yes, I did notice that one end was wider than the other. 

What about the small size, was that the same size at each 
end!—I could not say. 

You could not say ?—No. 

How did you come to know that his name was Dickman 
and not Black?—He told me the night he took his revolver 
away. He told me that Mrs. Dickman and he lived in Lily 
Avenue. That was the first time I knew his right name. 

When he took the revolver away?—Yes, the last time he 
was in the shop. 

By Lord Coterip¢e—What did he tell you?—He told me his 
right name was Mr. Dickman. 

Did you ever dispatch parcels for him?!—No. 

Or letters!—No, my lord. 

You only received them !—Yes. 

Did any letters or parcels come for him after he took the 
revolver away ?—Letters came. 

What did you do with them?—I handed them over to the 
superintendent. 

He never called for them!—No, my lord. 

Did he give you his address so that you could send them 
on?—No, my lord, he did not give me the address for me 
to send them. 

Were you expecting him to call?—I was. 

87 


H. Hymen 


John Alexander Dickman. 


How often did he call?—Well, at one time he used to come 
nearly every day, when I first went to the shop. 

Later on, from October to January!—He had never been in 
the shop from October to January. 

How many letters remained for him when you handed them 
over to the police/—There was only one, but they have» been 
coming ever since. 

Ever since/—Ever since I handed the one over they have 
been coming very frequently, and I have given them all to the 
police. 

You did not give them to the police until after March?— 
Yes, but until after March only one came—in the meantime, 
from January up till March, only one came. 

Mr. Mrrcusiu-Innss—I am not quite sure whether I am quite 
correct, but your lordship, I understand, asked the witness 
whether he gave any address to send the letters to, and she 
said ‘‘ Yes.”’ Would your lordship be good enough to make it 
clear. I do not quite understand whether it was at the time 
he took away the revolver that he gave his right name and 
address. I may be wrong, but I should like to be clear about 
that. 

By Lord Cotermczr—He gave the name of Fred Black /—He 
gave me his right name. 

He had given you the name of Fred Black ?—Yes. 

He had given you no address!—No. 

He called for these letters and used to take them away ?— 
Yes. 

The last time he was with you, when he took away what 
you call the revolver, he gave his name as John Dickman ?— 
Yes. 

J. A. Dickman?—Just Mr. Dickman. 

Did he give you his address ?—Yes. 
~ What address’—Lily Avenue, Jesmond. 

Mr. Mrrcneri-Innzs—I was under the impression that she 
said that. 

By Lord Cotmripce—Did he say why he had taken the name 
of Black !—He said for business purposes. 

You knew his name, and you knew his address. Did you 
send the letter that was written for him to the name and 
address?—I did not, because he had not asked me to send 
them. 

88 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Tuomas Smpson, examined by Mr. Trypan Atxrnson—I am T. Simpson 


in the employ of Mr. Pape, Collingwood Street, Newcastle, a 
gunsmith. I have seen four bullets produced by Superintendent 
Weddell—two of them are nickel capped with calibre °-250— 
calibre denotes the diameter. The other two bullets are leaden, 
they have no nickel capping, and their calibre is °320. They 
are larger, of course, than the first two. The nickel-plated 
bullets would be fired from an automatic pistol. By automatic, 
I mean that it works entirely from the pull of the trigger. 
It is a magazine pistol, and the cartridges are retained in a 
magazine. It would contain seven cartridges when fully loaded. 
It has one barrel, and all the charges are taken out from the 
magazine and one by one put into the chamber automatically. 
I have an automatic pistol here which can be quite easily 
carried in the pocket, being rather flat in shape. With regard 
to the other two bullets, they are larger, and could not have 
been fired from that pistol. They are of a common calibre, 
and it follows that these four bullets which were found in the 
man’s body must of necessity have been fired from two different 
pistols. There is nothing peculiar in these pistols; they are 
quite ordinary, and sold at gunsmiths. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mironeri-Innes—And could easily 
be purchased by anybody !—Quite easily. 

The same thing is true of the bullets I take it?—Yes. 


Prerer Hauuipay, sworn. 

Lord Cotzripez—lI think we had better go in order. Have 
you any further evidence with regard to this? 

Mr. Tinpau AtTxrnson—With regard to which? 

Lord Coteripaz—With regard to the pistol. 

Mr. Trypat Arxrnson—Well, there is on the depositions un- 
doubtedly. I have carefully inquired into it. Both I and my 
learned friend agree that there are circumstances connected 
with it which would prevent it capable of being proved, but I 
will put the witness in the box if your lordship thinks the 
question should be investigated. I have taken a view of it 
myself. 

Lord Coueripgze—I have taken no view about it, Mr. Atkin- 
son. Your experience is one to which every one ‘would bow, 
and, if you think that, there is an end of it. 

& 89 


P. Halliday 


P. Halliday 


Andrew C, 
Kirkwood 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Mr. Trnpat Arxryson—I have made most careful inquiries 
with regard to the whole of the information which could be 
given upon that point, and it is of such a character that I do 
not think it is admissible in evidence. 

Lord Cotzripez—Very well. 

Mr. Trnpat Arxinson—May I say without indicating any- 
thing that would be to the prejudice of the prisoner, that the 
evidence in question relates to a register. I have made careful 
inquiries how that register is kept, and it is kept in such a 
way as to prevent that register being evidence in this case. 

Lord CoLtzeripaz—You are alluding to Kirkwood? 

Mr. Tinpau Arxinson—Yes; but if there is any doubt about 
it—it is a question of great responsibility—if there is any 
question about it I think the better plan would be to put the 
witness in the box and see exactly. I think that would be 
more satisfactory, perhaps, to see how far the proof legiti- 
mately can go. 

Lord Cotrripgz—As I have mentioned it, I think that would 
be the best course to take. 


Anprew Craic Krrkwoop, examined by Mr. Tinpat ATKINSON 
—TI am in the employment of Mr. Pape, gunsmith, of Collingwood 
Street, Newcastle. Under the Act of Parliament, 1903, I 
kept a register of pistols sold, which I produce. There is an 
entry on the fourth line from the bottom of this page in my 
handwriting. It is in this book that I enter whenever a 
revolver is sold, either by myself or by some one else in the 
shop in my employ. By looking at this entry I could not say 
that I had sold a particular revolver to the person whose name 
appears there, because I make the entry myself, whereas the 
fact is that sometimes it has been sold by an employee. I 
cannot say whether I sold this one or not. 

Mr. Trypan Arxinson—That is my difficulty. 

Mr. Mrrcnsti-Innes—Needless to say, I very much appre- 
ciate the absolutely fair spirit in which this is conducted, as 
one would expect in such a case as this. 

Lord Cotermeze—I did not know what it was. 

Mr. Mrrconeti-Innus—I quite agree. 

Mr. Trnpau Arxinson—That is the difficulty I was in, and I 
thought myself it was inconclusive. 

Lord Cotzr1ipaz—Very well. 

go 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Prerer Hauiipay, examined by Mr. LowentHat—lI am a ser- P. Halliday 
geant of police, stationed at Moot Hall. | The prisoner on the 
30th of March was in custody in the cells here. Among other 
things that I took from him was a fawn Burberry overcoat, 
which I produce. I also took certain other clothes— 
a shirt, vest, trousers, coloured shirt, &c. I handed the over- 
coat to Dr. Boland on the evening of the same day. The 
prisoner was wearing it when he came into the cells, but had 
taken it off when I took it. 
Mr. Mircnetu-Innes—I ask no questions. 


Dr. Roperr Bonanp, examined by Mr. Tinpau AtTxinson— Dr, R. Boland 
I am a doctor of medicine, a member of the Royal College of 
Physicians, Professor of Medical Jurisprudence of the College 
of Medicine affiliated to the University of Durham. I have 
had given to me a pair of suede gloves, a pair of trousers, and 
a Burberry overcoat. I examined the gloves and found upon 
the palm of the left glove a stain. I mean when I use the word 
palm, the palm surface of the fingers and thumb respectively. 
(Witness here pointed on his hand, indicating the top of the 
thumb.) It was a smeared stain about ? of an inch by }. 
It was distinctly coloured, especially under the lines. It was 
dark red. I examined it and cut out a portion; I tested 
it chemically, microscopically, and with a spectroscope. I 
applied a number of different tests, and the result of them was 
that I came to the conclusion that the stain was due to blood. 
I could not say whether it was human blood or animal blood. 
All I was able to determine was simply that there was blood 
present, of what kind I could not swear. I examined the 
trousers and found a stain within the front left pocket. There 
were nine small stains in an area of about 2 inches by 1, well 
down in the pocket. The pocket is 11 inches deep, and the 
area stained was some 4 to 6 inches from the bottom. The stains 
varied in size, the largest being about the size of the head of 
a small shawl pin. They were very small in all—small drop- 
lets—but quite distinct. I have here the fragment of clothing 
on which the stains were. I cut it out of the pocket in one 
piece. It is the whole area stained. The stains are not 
there now since the examination, though there are some rem- 
nants left. Regarding the gloves, the stains were recent. I 
gI 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Dr. R. Boland began the examination on the 26th March, and these stains 
must have been made within the space of a fortnight. I have 
also examined a Burberry overcoat which I have here. It is 
made of what is considered to be rainproof cloth. There was 
a large stain upon the left front, and the cloth is darkened. 1 
also cut a portion of it out for examination, but there are 
some remnants of the stain on the other part of the cloth. 
(Witness pointed to it.) The surface is frayed as if it had 
been rubbed. The edges of the area were cleaner than any 
other portions in the neighbourhood ; it smelt faintly of paraffin. 
Microscopically there were droplets of oil, which might have 
been paraffin oil. It appeared to me that it had been rubbed 
and stained with paraffin oil. Assuming for the moment that 
the stain was blood, it would be possible, with a material of 
this kind, to wash out the traces, either by water or paraffin. 
In the coat before me there is a large pocket on either side 
entered by a slit. You can put your hands through the slits 
and into the pockets or not, as you like. These pockets would 
very easily hold a revolver of the description which has been 
produced. The hand could be inserted through the slit and 
hold it quite easily, and be covered by the coat. Similarly 
any other article, such as a bag, might be held in the same 
way. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mrrcneru-Innes—Could you find any 
evidence of blood whatever on the Burberry coat?!—None. 

Of any kind?—Not of any kind. 

So far as the stain itself was concerned when you saw it, it 
might have been anything—I mean any kind of dirt?—It was 
a stain of paraffin. 

That is exactly what I am suggesting, and I am obliged to 
you. When you saw it, the whole stain might originally have 
been caused by paraftin’—With the exception of the lighter 
area outside. 

The lighter area ?—Yes. 

You mean where it was more rubbed ?—It was more cleansed, 
I should say. 

But if the outer area were more cleansed, that would mean 
that the original stain had been more successfully removed, 
would it not?—Well, I am not in a position to say what it was. 

92 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Lord Cotzrmez—lI suppose by the ‘‘ outer area ’’ he means Dr. R. Boland 
the area not covered by the stain? 

Mr. Mrrcueti-Innps—I understand his account to be that 
this longish stain, as to part of it, was less well cleaned than 
the other part, and the part which was better cleaned was the 
outer fringe of the stain. (Zo Witness)—Is that what you 
mean ? 

Lord Cotzrmes—He did not say that.’ 

Mr. Mrrcneuu-Innes—That is what I want to understand. 
(To Witness)—What do you mean by the outer area?!—The 
fringe. 

That is the area of the stain’—That is the area of the stain 
that shows, as to a portion of it, that it was lighter than the 
surrounding areas—lighter than any other portion of the coat. 

Lord Cotzripce—That portion, as I understand, which was 
lighter, has never been covered by the stain. 

By Mr. Mircneit-Innus—That is what I want to know ?!— 
Yes; it has never been covered by the paraffin stain. 

But whether it be the outer part or the inner part, there 
was no trace of blood, as you told us’—None. 

Have you the suede glove!—Yes. 

Would you be kind enough to hold it up with the left thumb 
extended, so that the jury may see the place where you cut 
out the stain?—It is there. 

On the very point of the thumb?—Yes, and on the tip of 
the forefinger. 

Would you kindly produce the part that you cut out for 
testing ?—I can only produce part of it. 

Then I do not trouble you. With a glove of that size, is it 
true to say that the little pin points or shawl pin points, as 
you described them, of blood in the pocket, were in such a 
position as might have been caused by this thumb of the glove 
being put into the pocket like that (illustrating) /—Yes. 

It is plain that if one puts the left hand into the pocket your 
thumb goes down that wall of the pocket?—When you wish 
to put the thumbs into the pocket, as your hand goes into the 
pocket it relapses and it touches the outer surface of the 
pocket. 

That is the inner surface of the outer wall of the pocket !— 
That is the inner surface of the outer wall of the pocket. 
93 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Dr. R. Boland I am right in suggesting that you will admit that those 

stains might well have been caused by that?—Very probably. 

I take it the stain on the coat might have been a stain, for 
instance, contracted by a man walking in a colliery with oil 
and coal dust about. It might have been caused by that, and 
then treated, so far as you could tell, with paraffin?—So far 
as I could tell. 

So far as you could tell, it might be?—It might be. 

There was nothing to make you conclude otherwise ?—No. 

By Lord Cotzr1p¢e—Suppose the stain had been blood, would 
paraffin chemically remove the signs of that?—No, my lord. 
It is not a very efficient removing agent. It is a concealing 
agent. It vitiates some of the tests, but it is not a good 
material to remove the stains. 

Then, chemically, has it prevented the application of the 
tests?—It interferes with the tests. 


P. Spooner Purer Spooner, examined by Mr. LowzntrHat—I am colliery 
manager to the Barr Moor East Colliery. On 9th June last, 
I went down the Isabella pit at four o’clock in the 
morning, and examined the air shaft. I saw a leather bag 
lying on the bottom of No. 2 air shaft. It is the bag pro- 
duced. I brought it out of the shaft with me, and it is now 
in the condition in which I found it. There were some 
coppers in it, and also a considerable amount of coppers lying 
all around the place where I found it—altogether 14s. 8d. in 
coppers. I afterwards handed the bag to Superintendent 
Marshall. There were coppers in the bag also. I know the 
prisoner—he was a fellow-workman of mine years ago. At 
certain times I have talked about the difficulties on my mine— 
they were connected with a large quantity of water that 
collected there. I could not say that he knew where the pit 
was, although I had discussed the water difficulty with him. 
The air shaft at the top is covered with an iron grid or grate. 
The square of the grate is something about 5 feet square with 
iron bars across dividing it, with a space of 6 or 7 inches 
between each bar. This grate lies horizontally over the top 
of the shaft—it could be quite easily lifted by the hand or 
otherwise. Anything the size of the bag could be put down 
between the grates that cover the air shaft. 

94 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Cross-examined by Mr. Mrrcusnu-Innzs—I understand you P. Spooner 
are the manager !—Yes. 

It is your duty, no doubt, under the Coal Mines Regulation 
Acts, to constantly inspect the air shaft?—Yes. 

And the ways?!—Yes. 

You have to do that?—Yes. 

You do carry out your duties ’—Yes. 

How often in a week do you inspect it?—We are not tied 
to once a week in roads like that—just occasionally, once in 
three weeks, once in a month, once in five weeks. 

But you do carry out your duties!’—Yes. 


Tomas MarsHaLtt, examined by Mr. LowzntHar—I am T. Marshall 
superintendent of police stationed at Morpeth. On 9th June 
I received from the witness Spooner a leather bag and 14s. 6d. 
in money. The bag contained the papers which have been 
referred to. On the following day I went and searched the 
shaft and found a further sum of 4s. 9d. in copper, making 
the total amount found there 19s. 3d. 
Mr. Mrrconeti-Innes—I ask no questions. 


Rosert SwEENEY, examined by Mr. Trypan Arxinson—lI live R, Sweeney 
at King’s Avenue, Morpeth, and have known the prisoner for 
five or six years. When I first knew him he had something 
to do with the colliery company in Morpeth. The last time 
I saw him, as near as I can remember, was about the end of 
October. He came to my office and asked me if I could lend 
him £10. He did not say why—he said nothing at all as to 
his pecuniary condition. He said nothing except the request 
for the loan of £10. 
Mr. Mrronera-Innes—I ask no questions. 


Samus, ConEn, examined by Mr. LowznrHar—I am manager Samuel Cohen 
of a firm styled the Cash Accommodation and Investment Com- 
pany, of Northumberland Street, Newcastle. 1 know the 
prisoner. He first came to our office about the 15th of 
October last—I think it was on that day. He asked for a 
loan of £20, saying he would probably want it for three months 
at the outside. At the same time he asked me about the 
interest—I told him I would charge him £1 a month. He said 
he had applied to other money-lenders, but the charges were 
95 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Samuel Cohen too high. When I named the rate of interest he said he 
would consider the terms, and went away. He returned on 
the 18th October, and I then lent him £20, for which he gave 
me a promissory note. I have not got his note with me. 
The note was for interest at £1 a month, the capital payable 
on demand. He paid the interest every month. I do not 
remember his coming in January to see me when the instal- 
ment was due. I remember him coming to see me with 
regard to the principal standing over again after the three 
months were up. I am not sure that this was in January, 
but he came in some time or other about this matter. He 
said he could not possibly meet the £20 loan. 

By Lord Coteripae—When was this!—In January, three 
months after the loan. He asked whether I would permit him to 
extend it for a further period of three months, to which I 


agreed. 
Examination continued—I think the last payment of interest 
was made on 17th March of this year. I remember the 


prisoner writing to me in November, 1909, in reference to a 
loan of £200 to a gentleman of the name of Christie. I have 
not got this letter. (A letter was handed to him, and he was 
asked if it was the letter referred to.) This is the letter and 
the signature of J. A. Dickman. 

Mr. Trnpat Arxrnson—I notice that it is signed J. A. Dick- 
man. I do not know that there is any point about it, but 
some point was made about the diary. It is not ‘‘ J. Alex.,’” 
but ‘‘J. A. Dickman.’’ 

Examination continued—The rest of the transaction was 
carried through with Mr. Christie, whom the prisoner intro- 
duced to me at the office. As far as I remember, the prisoner 
was not present at any of the subsequent interviews. I lent 
£20 to the prisoner on the 15th October. I do not know 
who paid the commission on Christie’s loan. The original 
loan of £20 to the prisoner was paid by the prisoner’s wife to 
me in cash. The £200 loan to Christie was paid by me to 
Christie by cheque payable to him. The last payment of 
interest by the prisoner was on the 17th March, and that was 
in respect of the £20. Since that date that loan has been 
repaid—I think it was on the 9th of May last. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mrrcusni-Innes—By whom!—By 
the prisoner’s wife. 

96 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Mr. Kurrerina, examined by Mr. Tinpat AtTxinson—I am a Mr. Kettering 
partner of the firm of Cush & Co., jewellers, of Collingwood 
Street, Newcastle-on-Tyne. On the 14th of February last the 
prisoner came into my shop. He came in quite in an ordinary 
way; he mentioned to me that he wanted some money, 
but he did not say why. He just said, as far as I can remember, 
*“T must have £5, to go to Liverpool.’’ As far as I can 
remember he did not say anything as to his financial condition 
at the time. He just said he wanted £5 to go to Liverpool. 
Those are the exact words he used. He did not say what he 
was going to Liverpool for, but I think that there was some 
race on, or something of that sort—the Waterloo Cup. 

By Lord Cotzrmer—Did he say anything about the Waterloo 
Cup /—Yes. 

Examination continued—He brought some articles of 
jewellery as security about three hours before, and he left 
those. The articles were a gold scarf ring set with three 
brilliants, a set of studs which were not new and had been 
worn some time. When I say studs I mean links. I took 
them and lent him £5 on them. Afterwards I met him again, 
when he made a statement to me with regard to the loan— 
it might have been three or four days afterwards. He said 
he would not be in a position to pay me back at present, but 
I should not have to wait long; it would not be very long 
before he could ; it would be all right. I have still these articles 
in my possession—I have not yet been paid back the money. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mrrcnstu-Innes—I think the studs 
and sleeve-links were gold !—Yes. 


JouN Dennis Bapcock, examined by Mr. LowzntHar—lI am J.D. Badeoek 
cashier at the National Provincial Bank, Moseley Street, 
Newcastle. I produce a certified copy of the prisoner's 
account in our books from December, 1907, up to 
the last transaction. It has been compared with the ledger 
account and signed by the bank accountant as being correct. 
It deals with the period from December, 1907, up to the last 
transaction, which took place on 29th November of last year. 
On the 30th June, 1909, the account shows a credit balance of 
7d. Between that date and the closing of the account that 


G 97 


John Alexander Dickman. 


J.D. Badeoek 7d. was increased by the following payments :—£4 10s., £20, 


R. Sedeole 


and £200. Credit of £20 on 18th October, was one cheque 
for £20 drawn by Samuel Cohen on the North-Eastern Bank, 
Stockton, in favour of J. A. Dickman. The credit of 24th 
November, of £200, consisted of one cheque for £200, drawn 
by Samuel Cohen in favour of F. Christie, and sent for collec- 
tion to the Stockton Branch of the Newcastle Provincial Bank. 
It was drawn upon the North-Eastern Bank, Stockton. On 
the 13th September there is a credit of £4 10s., which is paid 
in on that date, making a total credit of £4 10s. 7d. On the 
16th September, three days afterwards, it was reduced to 
3s. 9d. On the 18th October £20 was paid in, leaving a 
credit of £19 12s. 9d., because in the meantime there had been 
a small cheque paid which had overdrawn the account to the 
extent of 7s. 3d. By the 21st October, the credit account was 
reduced to 2s. 9d. On the 24th November the Christie cheque 
for £200 was paid in, and that was drawn out by two drawings 
on the 26th and 29th November. With the bank charges of 
5s. 9d. there was remaining a debit of 3s. against Dickman 
on the 3lst December. The two cheques drawn by Dickman 
on the 26th and 29th November were both payable to self. 

Mr. Lowrenrnat—lI ought to put the certificate in to make 
it in form with regard to the banking accounts. It is the 
certificate of the National Provincial Bank showing the extract 
is accurate. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mrrcusiu-Inwss—On 26th November 
there was a cheque of £160 payable to Dickman himself, and 
on 29th November, there was another cheque of £40 payable 
to self, Dickman ?—Yes. 

Can you tell me how long, not within a month or two, but 
approximately, Dickman has been a customer of this bank? 
Let me put it to you and see if you will say yes or no—I 
put it to you he has had an account since 1892 or 1893%—I 
should think so. 

Mr. LowrentHat—Of course, I put in the extract that the 
witness produced. 


Rosert SEDCOLE, examined by Mr. Lowznrnar—I am a 
clerk at Lloyds Bank, Newcastle-on-Tyne. Lambton’s is now 
amalgamated with Lloyds Bank, and I am clerk at the 
Lambton branch of Lloyds Bank. I produce a certified copy 

98 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


of the prisoner’s account at my branch, which deals with that R. Sedeole 


account from 3lst December, 1907, till it was closed on the 
14th December, 1909. The last payment in was on the 13th 
of May, 1909. The sum of £10 was paid in then. The last 
sum iof any substantial amount, viz., the sum of £7, was drawn 
out on the 11th August, 1909. The effect of these transactions 
was to leave a credit balance of 13s., which was exhausted on 
the 16th October when a sum of lls. was apparently drawn 
out by the prisoner, added to which there was 2s. charged for 
commission. There has been no payment since May. The 
account just balanced—there was nothing due either way. 

Mr. LowentHat—Then I put it in the extract, and I also 
put in the certificate. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mrrcueni-Innes—Can you tell me 
how long Dickman had been a customer of Lambton’s branch, 
or Lloyds Bank, Lambton branch?—I am not absolutely 
certain. I have been at Lambton’s seven years, and I fancy 
he has had an account during that time. 

All that time?—I fancy so, but I am not quite sure. 

That is quite fair. That is your impression?—Yes; we have 
so many changes. 

But that is your impression /—Yes. 


Tuomas Paistey, examined by Mr. Trnpau Atxinson—I am 
treasurer of the co-operative society which carries on business 
at 103 Newgate Street. The prisoner’s wife had an account 
with us, which I produce. I have not got the book—that is 
in the possession of Mrs. Dickman—but this is a copy of our 
books, the member keeping the pass-book. We have the 
member’s claims book; it is in our office at Newgate Street. 
I was not told to produce it. I will fetch it. 


Frank Curistin, examined by Mr. TinpaL Atxinson—I am 
a coal merchant, and have known Dickman for a period of 
about six years. At that time he was secretary to the Morpeth 
Moor Colliery Company, which company is now extinct, and 
a new company has now been formed. Dickman held no office 
in the new company. I have occasionally backed’ horses 
through Dickman. I borrowed a sum of £200 from Mr. 
Cohen—he was introduced to me by Dickman. A cheque for 
this sum was made out to me. ! handed it to Dickman after 

99 


T. Paisley 


F. Christie 


John Alexander Dickman. 


F. Christie endorsement. The £200 was paid into his account, not into 
mine. It was used partly for my own private affairs, about 
half of it; the other half of it went for betting transactions— 
it went through Dickman for bets on my behalf. He was not 
to receive anything out of it for himself, but if they were suc- 
cessful he would undoubtedly have received something. There 
was no definite arrangement made as to what he was to receive. 
I cannot say exactly the amount that came to me, but I got 
approximately £100; that left £100 with Dickman. At least 
I got that sum ultimately. I could not tell what became 
of the rest of it—he said the transaction did not come to any- 
thing—it did not come off. By that I mean that the betting 
business did not come off with any success. He had nothing 
to do with this sinking operation at Dovecot—it was sinking 
for coal. He had no authority from me to go to Dovecot or 
to discuss any matters in connection with the sinking. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mircuetu-Innes—He, in fact, did go 
to your office pretty regularly after the sale of this colliery ?— 
Yes. 

He did give you information about the colliery 7—Yes, about 
the Morpeth Moor Colliery, certainly, several times. 

I do not suggest for a moment that he was interested in it 
pecuniarily, but in that sense he was interested in it’—Quite 
so. 

I take it that Dickman was interested in it because he hoped 
to get some commission eventually out of it?—Yes, he would 
get it when the colliery was sold. 

What I suggest is that he wanted the thing to go on success- 
fully in this case between you and Mr. Hogg?—Mr. Hogg had 
nothing to do with it. 

I am talking about the Dovecot Colliery !—He had nothing 
to do with it. 

I suggest to you he spoke about the Dovecot Colliery as 
well as the Morpeth Moor Colliery when he came to your office? 
—He may have done s0. 

By Lord Conzripaz—Is the Dovecot Colliery different from 
the Morpeth Moor Colliery !/—Yes. 

Had you anything to do with the Dovecot Colliery!—Yes, I 
had. 


100 


Evidence for Prosecution, 


But you had nothing to do with the Morpeth Moor Colliery a F. Christie 
I had, but the Morpeth Moor Colliery was eventually sold. so ae 

Was it sold at this time, this year !—It was sold last year. 

Then this year you had nothing to do with the Morpeth Moor 
Colliery ’—Nothing whatever. 

By Mr. Mrronseti-Innes—This year you were still interested 
in the Dovecot Colliery !—Yes. 

Where Mr. Hogg was working these operations !—Yes. 

I suggest to you that the prisoner—there is nothing much one 
way or the other in it—had in fact mentioned the Dovecot 
sinking to you in your office from time to time!—He may have 
done, but I have no recollection. I have no doubt it was 
discussed. 

Did you ever go out to the Dovecot Colliery !—Yes. 

By Lord Couermpce—What has Hogg to do with it?—He is 
interested in the Dovecot Colliery. 

Not in the Morpeth Moor Colliery 1—No. 

It is the Dovecot royalty !—Yes. 

By Mr. Mircuutu-Innus—Try and remember about this. I 
suggest to you that on one occasion, or perhaps on more than 
one, you suggested to Dickman he should accompany you, not 
on business, out to Morpeth and Dovecot!—I may have done 
so, but I have no recollection of it. 

There would be nothing surprising if you did?—Well, I do 
not think so. 

You said you thought the prisoner got more than £100 of 
that £2007—It would not be very much more. 

I put it to you that the figure was more than that, and that 
he got £150 of it?—No, he would not get so much as that. 

You say a little over £1004—Yes, he probably got a little over 
that. 


Wit1am THomas Curistig, examined by Mr. LowzntHat—You w. T. Christie 
have got my name incorrectly—it is William Albert, and I am 
a clerk in the Savings Bank, General Post Office, London. (To 
his lordship)—My lord, before I give this evidence I must 
ask you for your direction. Under the secrecy clause of the 
Act of Parliament we cannot give this evidence except under 
the direction of the Court. 
101 


W. T. Chtistie « 


James Irving 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Lord Cotmrmez—I do not know what you are asked to give 
at present. 

Mr. LowsenrHat—I am asking him to produce the extract of 
the savings bank account of Mrs. Dickman. I ask your lordship 
to direct him to do that. 

Lord CoturmeGz—lIt is the Savings Bank, London, I suppose. 
I direct him to produce the extract. 

Examination continued—The particular savings bank concerned 
here is at Holly Avenue Post Office, Newcastle-on-Tyne. The 
account shows that the deposits between 1907 and 1910 
amounted to about £20, leaving a balance of £15 Os. 9d. stand- 
ing to the credit of the depositor on Ist January, 1910. On 
5th January last £12 was drawn out. On Ist February, £1; 
16th February, £1; 14th March, 10s., leaving a balance on that 
date of 10s. 9d. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Mrrcxauu-Innss—This is the account 
of Mrs. Annie Dickman ?!—Yes. 

1 Lily Avenue, Jesmond !—Yes. 

It goes without saying that these sums were withdrawn by 
the depositor !—Yes, Mrs. Dickman. 

You do not deal with cheques payable to third parties !—No. 


James Irvine, examined by Mr. LowsnrHar—I am acting 
inspector of police stationed at Gosforth. I was in charge of 
the prisoner at the Moot Hall Police Court on the 14th April 
last. I found two pawntickets upon him, and when I removed 
him to the cells he there made a statement to me about them. 
He said, “There is nothing in that evidence about ‘the pawn- 
tickets. When racing you get mixed up with the Bigg Market 
boys, and after the season is over they are always asking you 
for money. One pair of the field glasses were my own, the other 
pair I got from a friend who owed me some money. I took 
them and pawned them myself, so that if any of the boys asked 
me for money I could pull out the pawntickets and say, ‘ Look 
here, this is what I am down to,’ and they think you are hard 
up.” That was all. 

Mr. Mrrcweii-Innes—I ask no questions. I have just 
seen my learned friend, Mr. Tindal Atkinson, and I 
told him about a question which I want to ask your 
lordship, and he has assented to my asking it in his 

102 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


presence. It is a small question on the evidence which James Irving 
I wish to be sure about, which I have not got on my own note, 
though I am quite sure it was mentioned. Would your lordship 
tell me, did Spink, the clerk, say at Stannington on which 
side of the carriage the two men whom he saw, one of whom 
was Nisbet, were sitting—were they sitting the nearer side to 
the platform or the further side from the platform? 

Lord Cotzrmezr—“ The deceased was sitting facing the engine 
on the far side.” 

Mr. Mircuevi-Innes—That is what I thought. 

Lord Cormringe—“ His companion was sitting facing the 
deceased.” 

Mr. Mirconeti-Innzs—I am obliged to your lordship. That is 
my impression and my friend Mr. Tindal Atkinson’s impression. 


James Parstny, recalled, examination continued by Mr. James Paisley 
TinpaL Atxinson—I am a treasurer of the co-operative society 
which have their offices at 103 Newgate. I produce books of 
the society showing the account of Mrs. Dickman commencing 
in May, 1904, and continuing up to 7th March, 1910. This 
book was issued on the 28th May, 1904, and the account is 
entered up to 17th March, 1910. On 30th October, 1907, the 
account was in credit in the sum of £73 17s. 2d. This is the 
highest amount there has been in. Since then on three occasions 
there have been additions to the capital. The first was in 
December, 1907, and another on 18th May, 1908—£5. On Ist 
July, 1909—£3. Any other increase of capital has been derived 
from dividends and interest. The withdrawals are shown in the 
account, and have been pretty frequent during the whole of 
1909, until on 17th March, 1910, a sum of £2 was withdrawn, 
leaving a balance in credit of £4. At one time it was £73, but 
on 17th March, 1910, it had been reduced to £4 in credit. The 
copy I have in my hand is correct, and I have verified each item 
since the adjournment. 

Mr. LowenrHat—I think I can put it in now instead of putting 
in these four books.., 

Lord Coturings—Certainly. 

Mr. Trypau ATKinson—That is the case for the prosecution. 


Evidence for the Prosecution closed. 
103 


J. A. Dickman 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Evidence for the Defence. 


Jonn Atexanprr Dickman, examined by Lord Wii11am Percy 
—I am a married man, with a son and daughter, and have 
lived in Newcastle all my life. At present I live at 1 Lily 
Avenue, Jesmond. I have lived at different places, but always 
in the neighbourhood. In 1903 I was secretary to a syndicate 
which was formed to purchase the Morpeth Colliery Company 
and royalty. The company was formed later. The colliery was 
at Morpeth—it was the Howburn Colliery. Then a new company 
was formed, and it was the Morpeth Colliery Company, Limited. 
When I was secretary and my employers gave it up, I negotiated 
the sale to Messrs. Moore, Brown & Fletcher, through Mr. Frank 
Christie, in the year 1905 or 1906; the sale was completed in, 
the latter year. I was secretary from 1903 to 1906. I think 
I drew £500 or £550 commission, and there was £150 given 
away. Between the years 1903 and 1906 I had a legacy left 
to me—I am not certain at what exact period it was, but I think 
it would be about 1905 or 1906, possibly later. It consisted 
of some founders’ shares in the Wiltshire and Dorsetshire 
Bank, amounting to about £220; at least I think that was what 
I got for them. After leaving the employment of the colliery 
I took a holiday, and I also occupied my time by racing occa- 
sionally when it suited me. I put considerable sums of money 
on races, sometimes as much as £100, £50, or £30. I have 
put money on horses for a witness in this case called Christie 
with bookmakers, and also at meetings; that is what is called 
working on commission, but there was nothing stated, no fixed 
amount. At that time I kept on the old colliery office, but 
I gave it up when the owners altered the building—it was in 
the Exchange Buildings. I gave it up about the end of the 
year 1907 or 1908, I am not certain which; I had it on a yearly 
tenancy. I was always very fortunate, but I have had bad 
periods, like most betting men. I know the witness Cohen— 
he is a money lender. I introduced Mr. Frank Christie to him 
in last November. As a result of that Mr. Cohen lent Christie 
£200. I retained £150 of this sum, as I had previously arranged 

104 


Evidence for Defence. 


with Christie. It was for betting transactions. At that time J. A. Dickman 
I was rather ill; in December I had given up racing until the 
flat season began. I used this £150 for betting, but was not 
very successful, and lost, I should think, about £110 or so; 
I lost some of my own money as well. As to the balance of the 
£150, I gave some to Mr. Christie when he came to London, 
and altogether I think he had about £70 or £80 of the loan. 

I know Mr. Hogg very well, intimately, in fact. He is a 
contractor, and did several contracts for the Morpeth Moor 
Colliery. This colliery has changed hands, and was called by 
the purchasers the Wansbeck Colliery Company. The Morpeth 
Moor royalty is adjoining the Pegswood royalty, but the Dovecot 
Colliery is nearer to Stannington. It was in connection with 
- these collieries that I got to know Mr. Hogg. They are sinking 
a new shaft at the Dovecot Colliery nearer to the road, and there 
is also a drift midway between Stannington or the Dovecot pit 
and Morpeth station. Mr. Hogg has stated that they started 
driving that shaft in October last. Mr. Christie was interested 
in these sinking operations at Dovecot—in fact, it was through 
my original introduction of Mr. Hogg to Mr. Christie that Mr. 
Hogg took it up or got into this royalty. In the early part of 
this year I think I went on several occasions to see Mr. Hogg 
at Stannington. I did not go there in connection with these 
sinking operations entirely—I went to see him in regard to a 
private transaction with Mr. Christie. Mr. Christie was inter- 
ested in the sinking. I wished to have some private information, 
and I also wished to give Mr. Hogg information of a private 
nature. The last time that I went to see Mr. Hogg before 
the 18th of March was about a fortnight previously—I think it 
would be on the 4th. I met him—he was going into Morpeth, 
and I got a ride with him; he drove me in his trap. It was 
never my custom when I went to see Mr. Hogg to make an 
appointment with him—he was always glad to see me, and I 
to see him. 

On the 18th March I think it was probably ten o’clock when 
I left my house. I was wearing the same clothes as I have 
on now, except as to the trousers. I had the same coat and 
waistcoat on, and trousers to match them. My black boots 
were the same as I have on. I wore a flannel shirt, and I think 

105 


John Alexander Dickman. 


J.A.Diekman J had on a similar collar to this, and I believe a similar 
tie, black hat, brown overcoat, and a pair of brown gloves; 
the coat I was wearing then is in my cell. When I left my 
house I took a car which stops at Fern Avenue—I got off at 
the foot of Northumberland Street, and I walked down intending 
to go to the quay first, as I thought I had plenty of time to 
make a call and I could then go back and catch the 10.27 a.m. 
train, but in going down Gray Street I thought I would not have 
sufficient time, and cut through Highbridge. I went to the 
station, and arrived there early. When I got into the booking 
hall I did not see anybody whom I knew. When I went to the 
ticket office I saw Nisbet, and he said “Good morning,” and I 
said “Good morning.” I would not have spoken to him if he 
had not spoken to me. I then got a return ticket to Stanning- 
ton. I have known Nisbet for several years, but I was never 
intimate with him. He was no companion of mine, and I never 

- made a point of stopping to speak to him at any time. He was 
just a casual acquaintance—hardly an acquaintance at all. I 
knew he was on the quay, but what he was or what he was 
employed in and what he was engaged in I did not know. After 
buying my ticket I went to the bookstall to buy a Manchester 
Sporting Chromcle. From there I went to the refreshment 
room, just as you go down to the Tynemouth platform, and 
had some refreshments. I looked at the clock—it was about 

. twenty minutes past ten. I came out and walked round to 
take my seat. Whether I went through the No. 4 gateway 
or behind the cigar divan, or whether I went in front of it, I will 
not swear, but I know that I went to the lavatory on No. 8 
platform. I never saw the deceased man again after he had 
left the booking hall. It is true that I got my ticket just 
after him, but, to the best of my knowledge, I was never in 
his company or near him after that. I then went through the 
connecting way and took my seat. The train was a good long 
way up the platform. 

By the time I had taken my seat the train was just about to 
start. After I had taken my seat I put my coat on the rack— 
I had been carrying it over my arm. I read my paper—I looked 
at the racing news and read different parts of it, and had a look 


at the programme. It was the Grand National day, and to a 
106 


Evidence for Defence. 


racing man the information in the paper was extremely inter- J. A. Dickman 
esting. I read the different news, as far as I know, and looked 
at anything I thought would be of interest to me. I know I 
got in near the end of the train—I think about two compart- 
ments away from the compartment which had a “ reserved” 
ticket on the window, but which special or particular com- 
partment I could not say definitely, but I know it was close to 
the “reserved” one. I did not notice the train draw up at 
Stannington. Nor do I think I noticed any of the stations after 
leaving Newcastle until I was surprised to find the train 
swerving, and then I knew it was Morpeth, for there is a swerve 
outside the station. This swerve is quite well known to any 
one who travels on the line—it is a rather startling one. It 
woke me up, as it were. 

When we got to Morpeth, as far as I can remember, I took 
my coat off the rack and opened the door. I noticed some 
porters and luggage at that end. We stopped a long way up 
the platform, past the refreshment room. I noticed a group of 
men, who seemed to be either shaking hands or speaking to 
some one in this reserved compartment. I walked past them 
or through them, and went straight out. I went out at the 
south end of the station, and took my ticket out of my waistcoat 
pocket—the return ticket—and gave it to the collector. I do 
not know whether I had my coat over my arm or over my 
shoulder. I again put my hand into my waistcoat pocket and ‘ 
took out some coppers. By that time he had torn the ticket 
in two, and he gave me the return half, and I gave him 24d., 
and I said “ 24d. is the correct fare,” or words to that effect. 

When I got out of the station I considered whether to go 
back to Stannington by train, and I decided not to. I knew 
there was a train back to Stannington, but had I got out at 
Stannington I should still have walked from the Dovecot pit to 
Morpeth station, because I particularly wanted to see that drift 
on the road, and to see the class of coal they were getting out, 
and I wanted to locate the position particularly. This drift 
is one which delivers coal on to the Newcastle Road, and it lies 
about half-way between Stannington and Morpeth. It is called 
the Landsale drift—it is just on the bank side. The coal 
is almost on the surface, and they can get down to it by 

107 


John Alexander Dickman. 


J.A.Diekman a slight working instead of sinking a straight shaft. A 
Landsale colliery means sale from the land, that is, selling the 
coal in the town. I went down and took the ordinary way out, 
and then I turned up the Newcastle Road—this is the main 
road between Newcastle and Morpeth. It goes towards 
Stannington from Morpeth—the main road goes through 
Stannington, but to go to Dovecot you turn off to the right, 
and to go to Stannington station you turn off to the left—that 
is, looking from Morpeth to Newcastle. I went down that road 
past some houses and almost within sight of the drift—I had 
walked for about half an hour or more. I do not know the 
name of the village, but there are some houses known as Clifton 
—TI think I had got a little way beyond Clifton. The Landsale 
Colliery is on the right-hand side of this road as you go through 
Morpeth station. I do not think it is past Clifton Bridge. I 
am not sure that it is called Clifton, though I remember it by 
that name. 

Mr. TrypaL Arxgrnson—It is not, of course, Clifton Bridge, 
but it is past Clifton itself. 

Lord Cotzmripce—Could you mark it on this plan? 

(The witness examined the plan handed to him, and stated 
that the Dovecot Moor Colliery was marked in it.) 

Examination continued—I think it may have been a little 
way past Catchbourne—I do not know the name of the place, 
but I know there are houses as you go along spread about. So 
far as my memory goes, it is between Catchbourne and Clifton 
Bridge, but I just mark on this plan the location as near as 
possible. (The witness made a mark on the plan.) 

Lord Coturipee—He has marked it half-way between Catch- 
bourne and Clifton. 

Examination continued—As I had just got past these houses 
I was taken very ill. I had a very bad seizure; I think it 
was diarrhoea, but when I attempted to relieve myself I could 
not. I got over a hedge. This from the great amount of 
strain brought on another complaint. I never told Weddell 
about this because I did not wish to discuss my infirmities. 
By the other complaint I mean piles, which I have been troubled 
with for about twelve or fifteen years, and while I have been 
in prison I have been treated for them. After some time I 

108 


Evidence for Defence. 


got some relief. I spread my coat out and lay down for a J. A. Dickman 
short time; I felt very ill. I remember once at Brampton, 
from nine o’clock in the morning or some time about that, I 
was ill right up to dinner. _I should think, off and on, getting 
up now and then, I lay down about an hour and a half. [| 
got up to try and relieve myself of the pain, but that was 
useless, and I was in such a state that I thought it better to 
get back to Morpeth and get the train home and go to some 
one and put myself in proper order. I went back towards 
Morpeth station, but I could not walk very quickly. 

I should think it was twenty minutes past one when I was 
on the platform; it may have been a little earlier, but I was 
very warm. I put my coat on and went out of the east side 
of the station. I went back, as I said, at twenty minutes past 
one, thinking the express might be late, as 1 have known it 
to be when I used to travel out to the colliery in 1903 and 
1904. It is timed to leave Morpeth at 1.10 or 1.12. As it 
turned out, I was a few minutes late, so I went out on the 
east side of the station. I went out to cool myself a little, and 
I also had a look in at the coal depét to see if they were doing 
any business. I went a short way up the bank about as far 
as the Auction Mart. I met no one that I knew—I did not 
take particular notice of any one. It struck me that I would 
go down and see if Mr. Hogg was known to be going to call 
at the Newcastle Arms, and on going down I met Elliott and 
his friend, and I just happened to stop on the spur of the 
moment and asked them if they had any information about the 
big race. Elliott was with a man called Sanderson. After 
stopping to speak to them they left me, and I thought that I 
had better return and catch the 1.40, which I did. I got 
into a.compartment which was heated, which greatly relieved 
me. All this happened on 18th March. 

On the Monday, Detective Tait came to me about 5 o’clock 
in the evening. He asked me my name or if I was Mr. Dick- 
man. Isaid yes. He asked me if I would go down to make 
a statement at the police station with him, and I said I would. 
I went down with him. My wife came in just as we’ were 
going out. I made the statement which has been read to the 
jury, to Mr. Weddell, who took it down. I did not go closely 

109 


John Alexander Dickman. 


J. A. Dickman into details, but it is substantially correct. When I went to 
the police station I was not dressed as I had been on the 
18th, but I had this complete light suit on. I said to the 
superintendent—I think it was Mr. Wilson—‘‘ This is not the 
suit I had on Friday.”’ As far as I know, all my other clothes 
which were left behind were handed to the police. I never 
went back home after being taken away. They have got 
everything, including the very boots I wore, and have cut my 
house up into mincemeat, practically speaking. The trousers 
produced here are the trousers I had on Friday—this is a com- 
plete suit, the trousers match this coat. I remember the 
witness Hall being brought in. I was standing in about the 
middle of the men who were put up for the purpose of identifi- 
cation. He came and he talked, and he went three or four 
times past me, and then he was in the act of walking away. 
There was a stout officer who sort of jokingly dashed up, or, 
practically speaking, as it seemed to me, said, ‘‘ You cannot 
get out of here without choosing some one or making a selec- 
tion.”? The man was very reluctant to do so, and if he had 
not been practically intimidated into it, he would have made 
none. I heard some words passed, and this is my impression 
of them. 

Mr. Trnpat ArKrnson—What were the words? 

Lord Cotzrincs—The witness has not stated anything which 
amounts to intimidation; so that if you heard anything, I 
should be glad to hear it. 

Examination continued—They were principally to the effect 
of what the witness stated, that he was very reluctant to make 
any choice. Hall was walking away after having viewed the 
rank three or four times, when the policeman got in his way 
and would not allow him to pass, practically speaking, pushing 
him back. He sort of joked or cajoled him into making a 
selection. 

Mr. Trypat Arkinson—That was not put to the witness. 

Lord Witu1am Psercy—I think so. 

Mr. Tinpan Arxkinson—That he was intimidated—not that 
or anything approaching it. 

Examination continued—By the word ‘“‘ intimidation’? I 
mean it was almost amounting to force—stopping him from 

110 


Evidence for Defence. 


going away, and in the discussion as much as saying, ‘‘ Well, J: 4- Dickman 
you must make a selection, as it is of importance; no matter 

who it is, you must give us something to do.’’ That is the 

impression I formed from the action of that particular officer. 

It was not Mr. Weddell. Mr. Weddell was not there. There 

was a policeman and a lot of officers present. One was taking 

notes on a desk. 

It is quite true that Miss Hymen keeps a shop and that I 
have had communications sent there, principally betting and 
racing telegrams and tips. I remember the postcard she 
referred to. I think I got a letter at the same time, but I 
am not quite sure. The postcard was addressed to F. Black, 
and asked for the return of a revolver which had been sent in 
error. I sent it back. I think I sent it back about Thurs- 
day or Friday in the same week. At any rate, I sent it 
back when I sent the patent roller bearing off to Leeds to a 
firm there with whom I was in communication. I sent it to 
Bell Brothers, Waterloo Street, Glasgow. I never opened the 
parcel; whether it contained anything of a dangerous char- 
acter I do not know, but I know the postcard said either a 
pistol or a revolver, and asked for it to be returned. I read 
the postcard, and I think I sent the parcel back on that par- 
ticular day. I think it was the same day on which I com- 
municated with the Leeds firm about the patent as to which 
I was trying to form a syndicate. I bought a packet of 
labels, I think, and wrote the address in the shop. When I 
was searched I emptied all my pockets and gave up everything 
in them. 

I had an account at Lambton & Co.’s Bank in Grey Street 
for seven or ten years—you can see by my passbook; it is the 
only passbook I have had, and will show when the account 
was opened. The little canvas bag found on me was possibly 
got from that bank, but I have drawn sums of money from 
nearly every bank in the town, and I have had to cash cheques 
for different people. I use these bags instead of a purse. 
When one gets worn out I throw it away or burn it, and get 
a new one. I have done this all my life. I have used these 
bags for the last twenty years, and anybody who knows me 
will tell you so. Whenever I have paid money to anybody 

III 


John Alexander Dickman. 


J. A. Dickman I have always taken it out of one of these bags. I had £15 
in reserve in the bank for a special purpose. At the end of 
the flat racing season, 1909, that would be the end of Novem- 
ber, as regards my betting account, I had a reserve fund of 
possibly nearly £120. This was known only to myself. Be- 
tween that time in November and the next few months I gave 
my wife £50 of that sum, before Christmas. I went to some 
meeting in the south after the transaction had taken place 
with Mr. Christie, and for current expenses I was using part 
of my own money and also part of his. 

In February of this year I had £120 of my own. I had 
given my wife £50 of it, that left £70, and some went in 
different ways. At the time the Waterloo Cup was run, I 
would have about £40 of my own; there was none of Christie’s 
money left then. I had £17 odd over of my own, with which 
I intended to go to the Waterloo Cup. I gave my wife £15 
or £20 out of the £40. I was keeping the rest of the money 
to start my season with. 

By Lord CoLzripce—£15 of what?—Of the £120. 

Lord Wiiu1am Prrcy—He says he had £120 at the end of 
the flat racing season, 1909. That was the remainder of that 
sum. 

Examination continued—It would be from £110 to £120 
that was my own money, which I was keeping separately. Of 
that I was keeping £15 or £20 capital to start the next season 
with. It is quite sufficient to make a decent living with. 

By Lord Corzripez—You had £110—you gave your wife 
£50 or £60!—Yes. 

Then, at the beginning of February you had £402—Yes. 

Did you give your wife any of that!—Yes, I gave my wife 
£15 or £20 of that amount; that was when I had decided 
not to go to the Waterloo Cup. 

Examination continued—When I was at the police station 
I said in answer to the charge—‘‘I do not understand these 
proceedings. It is absurd for me to deny the charge, because 
it is absurd to make it. I can only say that I absolutely deny 
it,’’ with the stress upon the word ‘‘ absurd,’’ because I thought 
then it was a most absurd charge to be made against me, and 
I still think so. 

112 





Lord William Percy. 





Evidence for Defence. 


Cross-examined by Mr. Trnpa, Atxrnson—You say you knew J: A. Dickman 
the deceased man?—I knew the deceased man; but if I had 
been asked off-hand what his name was, I could not have told 
you. 

Did you not know his name?’—No; if any one had said to 

-me—‘‘Do you know Nisbet?’ after a description, I would 
have known the man. 

I do not understand you. Did you know his name, or did 
you not!’—Yes; but if I had been asked off-hand, I would not 
be able to call that man Nisbet. 

But you knew his name was Nisbet!—Yes. 

By Lord Cotzripg¢ze—You knew him and you knew his name? 
—Yes, if it had been mentioned to me. 

By Mr. Trypan Arxinson—I do not quite understand that. 
Did you know his name independently at that time of anybody 
telling it to you?—No, he was not an individual who was in 
my mind at all. 

I did not ask you that. It is a very plain question. Did 
you know this man by name?—Yes, I did know him by name. 

On the 18th March, did you know this man by name?—I 
did. 

By Lord Cotzripezs—And by sight!—By sight. I knew he 
was a Quaysider. 

By Mr. Trnpat Atxinson—Did you know what he was!—I 
knew he was a clerk on the quay, but whom he was employed 
with or where he was employed I did not know. 

Did you know he was clerk and book-keeper to a colliery 
company ’!—No, I did not. Whether he was with a firm of 
merchants or shipbrokers or general dealers, or anything like 
that, I was not aware. 

You have been connected with a colliery /—Yes. 

Do you know that wages are paid once a fortnight?—I do. 

Do you know they are usually paid on Friday ?—Yes. 

Do you know that wages are usually taken from the place 
of business in Newcastle to the collieries in the neighbourhood 
of Newcastle!—No, I could not say that—in fact, to any 

; particular colliery. 
Do you know that money has been brought !—It may have 
been. 


H . 113 


J. A. Dickman 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Money has to be drawn from the bank?—Yes, in my own 
case I always got the money at the bank at Morpeth. 

Wherever the bank is, and wherever the banking account 
is kept, the cheque would have to be drawn?—And cashed. 

And the money obtained !—Yes. 

And carried by some one!—Yes. 

To the colliery where the wages had to be paid!—Yes. 

You knew that?—yYes, I had done the same business myself. 

I suppose you know they are usually carried in a bag of 
some sort?’—Yes. 

A leather bag?!—I could not say whether it was leather, but 
cash bags are usually leather. 

You had gone from Newcastle to Stannington just a fortnight 
before this 18th March?!—Yes. 

That was on the Friday /—Yes. 

The 4th March ?—Yes. 

You had made no appointment with Mr. Hogg on that 
occasion !—I did not. 

He did not know you were coming!—Well, he might have 
been expecting me. He could expect me at any time. 

I dare say he could; but he did not know you were coming? 
— Quite so, but he might be expecting me. 

Why did you select a Friday ?—Because it was on account of 
certain payments which he made on that day. 

Payments that he made to whom!—To his own men. 

His wages !/—Yes. 

What had you got to do with his wages?—I had nothing 
particular to do with his wages. 

Had you anything to do with his wages!—Nothing whatever. 

Why did you use the word “‘ particular ’’? ’—Well, I did not 
subscribe them. I did not find any money for his wages. 

Did it concern you at all, either the fact or the amount of 
the wages that he paid to his workmen?—Well, I do not quite 
understand your question. 

The question is a plain one. Did it in any way concern 
you!—I know that he was expecting 

Did the fact concern you that he was paying his men wages, 
or the amount he paid them?—In this respect it did. I 
wished to know whether he was receiving a portion of his 
fortnightly pay from Mr. Christie. 

114 





Evidence for Defence. 


Why !—Because I was interested to that extent. I wanted J. As Dickman 
to know if Mr. Christie 

Why? How were you interested!—I understood them to 
be partners. 

You understood they were to be partners !—I understood they 
were partners. 

Christie and Hogg were partners!—Yes. I was very 
intimate with both of them. 

Did you hear what Mr. Christie said in Court, that you 
had absolutely nothing to do with the sinking of this pit?— 
Neither had I anything to do with it. 

Nor his connection with it?—Neither had I. 

What would it matter to you if Christie and Hogg were 
partners!—It mattered very much. 

How !/—Because they were both friends of mine. 

You have got a great many friends besides Christie and 
Hogg ?—Yes, but I was more deeply interested in them than 
in others. 

Why should you take the trouble to go over to Stannington 
to ascertain whether Christie was supplying money to Hogg 
for the payment of wages—that is how you put it, I believe, 
is it not?—Yes. I wished to know whether Mr. Christie was 
bluffing me or not. r 

Bluffing you !—Yes. 

What do you mean by that?—By saying that he had no 
money. 

What had that to do with you, supposing he had not?— 
(No answer.) 

But you went?—Yes. 

You went to Stannington?—Yes. 

On that occasion you did not over-travel your station !— 
No. 

Do you usually read a newspaper in the train!—Sometimes. 

Nearly always!—Yes, if it is a long journey. 

Did you on that occasion!—I possibly would have a news- 





paper with me. 
Do you remember !—No, I could not. 
Probably you had!—Very likely I had. 
A racing paper’—For racing, yes, but I might have had 
both a racing paper and a local paper. 
115 


J. A. Dickman 


John Alexander Dickman. 


You were reading those papers on the 4th March!—Well, I 
could not say. 

If you bought them, I suppose you would read them?—But 
I have not said I bought them. I said it was possible I might 
have had two papers with me. 

You think it is possible you might have had?—Yes. 

At any rate, you did not overpass your station?—Oh, no. 

You got out properly at Stannington !—Yes. 

How long before that did you visit Mr. Hogg!—That I 
could not say. 

Was it usually on a Friday?—It might have been—I think 
it was. 

I asked you was it?—Yes. 

It was !—Yes. 

Do you know Stobswood Colliery ?—I do not. 

You know there are a good many collieries!—Yes, in the 
neighbourhood. 

In the neighbourhood of Morpeth?—The principal ones that 
I know would be the Pegswood, Morpeth Moor, and Dovecot, 
and that one on the opposite side of the railway—I forget 
the name at the moment. 

If the business offices of those colliery proprietors are in 
Newcastle, and the banking account is kept in Newcastle, you 
would know, would you not, that on Fridays in each fortnight 
there would be somebody who would be taking a large amount 
of wages to these pits?—Yes, but I had not that knowledge. 

I want an answer?—I had not that knowledge. 

What?—I had not that knowledge. 

I say if there being a number of pits in the neighbourhood of 
Morpeth 7—Yes. 

If the proprietors of those pits keep their banking accounts 
in Newcastle, out of which wages had to be paid, you would 
know, from what you have told me, that every alternate Friday 
there would be a number of clerks who would have to go by 
railway with money to pay the wages!—Yes, but I did not know 
the working of any particular one. 

You saw, on the morning of the 18th March, the deceased 1— 
Yes. 

You saw him in the large booking hall at the Newcastle 

116 


Evidence for Defence. 


station’—I was coming just as he was going away from the J- A. Dickman 
ticket window. 

He preceded you!—Yes. 

He spoke to you!—Yes, he said ‘‘ Good morning.”’ 

That was the first time you had spoken to him?—Oh, no. 

Where had you seen him to speak to before!—I think I saw 
him at the Lloyd George visit at Northumberland Street. 

Do you mean that you saw him at the political meeting }—Not 
at the meeting, but he was passing in the crowd. 

You spoke to him then?—No. 

Did he speak to you?—No. 

I asked you the last time you spoke to him?—Well, I did 
not speak to him. I thought you said the last time I saw him. 

If that was not the last time you had spoken to him, when 
was the last time?!—That I could not say. | 

Had you spoken to him many times?!—If I met him on the 
quay we would always give a nod, but I could not fix the time 
when I had spoken to him before. 

You knew he was in the employment of a colliery company? 
—TI did not. 

Did you know what his business was?!—No. 

Did you know what his business was!—I just knew he was a 
clerk somewhere on the quay. 

Had he a bag with him on that day?—I did not see it on’ 
that morning—lI did not notice any bag. 

Were there many people at the booking office!—No, he was 
the only one I noticed. 

Was he the only one that you can remember was there at the 
time /—Yes. 

Could you not tell whether he had got anything with him? 
—I could not. I did not see him carrying anything. 

You had a good view of him?—I was not looking. 

He was leaving the booking office as you approached it?~— 
But I was not looking to see what he had with him or anything. 

You do not know whether he had a bag with him or not}—I 
could not say. 

You went to buy a newspaper at the bookstall, and from 
there you went to the third-class refreshment room 1—Yes. 

Along that passageway that leads towards the Tynemouth 
station /—Yes. 

117 


J. A. Dickman 


John Alexander Dickman. 


You got some refreshment /—Yes. 

You came out!—Yes. 

You came towards the central part of the station?’—Yes. 

Towards No. 4 gate?—Yes, No. 4 gate was on my left hand. 

Alone /—Alone. 

Absolutely 7—Yes, to the best of my knowledge and belief 
I was. 

You could say?’—Yes. 

By Lord Cotmripce—You were alone!—I was alone. There 
was nobody with me that I know, although there might have 
been people about. 

By Mr. Trnpan Argrnson—If the deceased had been walking 
by your side you must have seen him?—Yes, I think I would 
have seen him. 

Of course you would?—Yes, although I have known myself 
pass people that I have known a good deal, frequently. 

I am not asking you that. I am asking you about the 
particular occasion as you were walking down towards No. 4 
gate—is it true or is it not true that you were walking side 
by side with the deceased man—yes or no?}—That I could not 
say. I know I never saw him again. 

You said that the last you saw of him was when he left the 
booking office?—Yes; I never saw him again. 

Could it have been possible that he could have been side by 
side and walking along that passageway side by side with you, 
passing into No. 4 gate, without your knowing it?—Well, I 
could not say. 

Cannot you—think, think?—I know my mind was occupied 
with something very different from looking after any one that 
morning. 

To the best of your knowledge, do you say you were alone ?— 
I was. I was in no one’s company. 

There were very few people about. I think that is what you 
said just now!—I did not notice a crowd anywhere. 

By Lord CoLtmrrpez—Were there very few people about?—So 
far as I know, there were very few people about. | 

By Mr. TiypaL Arxinson—Do you know a man called Raven? 
—I do not, except I know him now from his having been a 
witness. 

118 


Evidence for Defence. 


You have seen him now!—I have seen him here as a witness. J. A. Dickman 

Have you seen him before !—Never. 

He says he knew you by sight ?—He said so. 

Do you remember what he said—that he saw you pass side 
by side in company with the deceased man, and you passed 
through No. 4 gate—together you passed behind this cigar | 
place in the direction of No. 5 platform 1!—Yes. 

To the best of your knowledge, you say that is untrue /—That 
could not have happened to my knowledge. 

To the best of your knowledge, you say it is untrue!—To the 
best of my knowledge it is. It is quite possible that I might 
have gone through that gate, but I was never in the deceased 
man’s company. 

You did not go through No. 4 gate?—I may have done so; 
I either went through there or I went through the front, 
passing the front of the cigar divan. What I am positive about 
is going into the urinal. 

You are positive as to that!’—Yes. 

You have not forgotten that?—I could not, because it was a 
necessity. 

On Monday you made a statement. In that statement you 
said, “I went to the bookstall. I got a paper, the Manchester 
Sporting Chronicle; then to the refreshment room, where I 
had a pie and a glass of ale; I then went on to the platform 
and took my seat in a third-class carriage in the hinder end of 
the train” ?—That is so. 

You did not mention the fact that you went to the urinal !— 
I was not aware that they wanted such minute details. I 
thought that they merely wanted a rough statement. 

Do you know a man called Hepple!—Yes, the artist. 

Did you know him to speak to?!—Yes, we are very old friends. 
We lived together at Wickham. 

He could not make a mistake about your identity ?—Well, 
he might now, at his age. 

What!—He might now. 

What do you mean—he might now?’—Well, he is not so young 
as he used to be.’ : 

Do you mean to say he is too old?—He is very much failed 
to what I used to know him—very much failed. 

119 


J. A. Dickman 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Do you mean to say he could not see you, or if he saw you 
he could not tell that it was you’—He might have made a 
mistake. 

He said he saw you 18 feet away?—Yes. 

You passed him?—Yes. 

With another person !—Yes. 

And he watched you and that other person proceed to the 
head of the train, and the last he saw was of one of you with 
a hand on the handle of the carriage, and then you disappeared? 
—From the knowledge I have of my own actions I know he has 
made a mistake. 

The whole of that is a mistake ?—Yes. 

If your companion was not the deceased man, can you suggest 
who it was?—I had no companion. 

You are positive of that?—Absolutely. 

He says he saw you in the act, although he could not hear 
your words, of speaking to the man who was with you?—In that 
he is mistaken. 

Is it also a mistake that you went to the front part of the 
train?—It is. I could not have had time to go to the front 
part of the train. 

What was the compartment that you say you got into!— 
It would be the second or third, or close to the compartment 
which had a reserve ticket upon the window, near to the 
guard’s van. 

In the last coach ’—It would be in that coach. 

The last coach that was travelling from Newcastle. We 
know there was an engine and carriage at the end of it?—lf 
we are going from the guard’s van it would be the carriage 
or coach next to the guard’s van. I nearly got into the com- 
partment next to the guard’s van. 

The last compartment of the train in which passengers are 
kept ?—The last carriage. 

The last carriage?—The last carriage or coach. There is 
a compartment next to the guard’s van. I nearly got into 
that, but in going past I saw that it was a compartment 
engaged, and I went two or three compartments past that and 
got in. 

Then you did not get into the last coach at all?—Not the one 
which is the guard’s van. 

Pak 2O eto 


Evidence for Defence. 


Not the one which has the guard’s van attached!—No. 

We know the last one had the guard’s luggage van and some 
compartments attached!—Well, I went past this compartment, 
which had on it a ticket saying it was either reserved or 
engaged. 

Was that in the last coach, or in the last coach but one!— 
That is what I am not quite sure about. I think it was next 
the guard’s van, though—the carriage next to the guard’s 
van. 

By Lord Coner1ince—The compartment next to the one with 
“reserved ’? on?—Next but one, or two, to the one which had 
the ‘‘ reserved ’’ ticket on the window. 

It was in the last coach of the train?—No, I think the 
guard’s van was the last coach. 

By Mr. Tryna Arxrnson—You got into the last coach but 
one’—Well, I cannot follow you. Do you call. the guard’s 
van a coach? 

Yes!—Very well then, it must be the last but one, as far as 
my knowledge goes. I nearly got into the compartment which 
is next to the guard’s van. 

In justice to you I want to explain that the guard’s van 
in this train was one coach, but with some compartments !— 
Yes. 

There are some compartments and the guard’s van all in 
one coach?—That is it. 

Which compartment did you get into?—It would be the coach 
next the guard’s van coach. 

By Lord Coturmer—tThe last coach but one of the train !— 
That will be it. 

By Mr. Tinpau Arxmvson—You got into the last compart- 
ment but one, or the last compartment in that particular 
coach?—No, I think it would be somewhere about the middle 
of the coach. 

Next to the one that was reserved!—No, I think it might 
have been a door or two away. 

Do you know that Hepple says that he was standing at the 
open door of the last compartment but one of that coach !— 
I do not. 

Then, if your story is true, you must have passed just round 

121 


J. A. Dickman 


John Alexander Dickman. 


J. A. Dickman him and got into a compartment just ahead of where he was 
standing /—That I do not know. 

It must be so if I am right in my statement?—Well, I never 
saw Hepple that day. 

Did you see Hepple at all that day?—I did not. I know 
if I had seen him I would have travelled with him. 

Were you wearing that fawn coat?—No. 

If Hall says you were wearing that fawn coat is he mis- 
taken ’—Well, I do not think he referred to me at all as 
wearing a fawn coat. He referred to some individual wearing 
a fawn coat. 

The man-whom he afterwards picked out is yourself ?—Yes, 
but I had my fawn coat on on that very occasion. 

Had you a fawn coat on on this occasion’—No, I had no 
coat on; I was carrying my coat over my arm. 

By Lord Cotzerrpce—Had you a fawn coat with you!—No, my 
lord. 

No coat?—I had a brown coat—my brown coat which I have 
with me. 

By Mr. Trnpat Arxrnson—You saw the coat which was pro- 
duced here to-day. Had you that coat on?—No, I had not. 

Had you that coat with you?—I had not. 

Lord Coteripce—You call it a Burberry. 

Mr. Mrrcneti-Innes—I will send for it. I think it might 
be wise. 

The Wirness—I had my Burberry on at night at the 
Pavilion ; at least I put it on because it was raining after tea. 

By Lord Corermcz—I want to know whether you had with 
you, either on or off, the coat that has been described as the 
Burberry ?—No, my lord, I had not. I neither had it on nor 
had I it off. I had the brown coat with me which I have in 
the cell downstairs. 

Can you get it? 

wy Mr. Mrronsut-Innnes—I have sent for it. 

The Wrrnuss—That is the coat I had with me. I was not 
wearing it for the simple reason that it is rather old-fashioned. 
(Brown coat produced.) 

By Mr. Trypan Arxivson—You do not call that a fawn coat? 
—I have had it four or five years. 

122 





Evidence for Defence. 


Do you call that a fawn coat 1—Certainly not. It is a dark J. A. Dickman 
brown coat. 

By Lord Conzrmer—lIt could not be described as a lightish 
colour fawn coat. You would not so describe it 1—No, I call this 
a dark brown coat. 

By Mr. Trypan Arxrvson—You did have such a coat which 
might fairly be described as fawn in your possession ?—Yes, 
the one which was produced in Court. 

Did anybody travel with you in your compartment?—I think 
there were some people in, but I could not say. 

Are you sure!—I think so. There would be people in that 
corner, some one in this corner, and I was in the middle. 

Did you know who they were?—No. Somebody else might 
have got in and got out—so I should think. They both got 
in and got out. 

Have you ever heard of them since?—I have not. 

This occurrence has caused widespread interest !—Yes. 

Have you ever heard of any of these passengers since!—I 
have not. I have had no opportunity. 

How many got in?—I think there was one in each corner, 
and I was in the middle, and there might have been one on the 
opposite seat. 

That makes five ?—Yes. 

Or six ?—Possibly. 

At Newcastle !—Yes. 

By Lord Cotermez—One passenger in each corner—that 
is four?—So far as my knowledge goes. 

By Mr. Tinpau Arxinson—There might be a fifth!—Yes, 
possibly. 

You said there was possibly a sixth on the opposite side 
to you!—There might have been, but I did not observe par- 


ticularly. j 
Your attention was called to this question and the import- 
ance of this question very shortly afterwards. You were 


arrested on the Monday, and this happened on the Friday ’— 
Yes. 
Cannot you give us any more definite information with re- 
gard to the number of persons’/—I am sorry I cannot. 
Or what they were like?—No. 
123 


J. A. Diekman 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Whether they were men or women?—No, I did not observe 
any one particularly. 

Whether they were men or women !—The effect of the treat- 
ment I have received, practically speaking, made me forget. 

What made you forget it?—The treatment I have received 
from first to last. 

The treatment that you have received made you forget 
that /—Yes. 

But you remember minutely what you did up to that time? 
—Yes, but I was not making observations. I might have 
been seen by people and not seen them. 

All I can say is—and I pass it by with that remark—that 
your attention was called to the supreme importance of this 
matter as short a time as three days after it occurred !—Yes. 

You cannot give us any better information as to the persons? 
—I was not asked any particular question in that respect. 

In which portion of the carriage were you sitting?—I was 
sitting in about the centre seat, with my back to the engine. 

How far did these people travel in that compartment!—I 
could not say. 

Do you know when they got out?—Not conclusively—not 
exactly. 

At all?—I think they got out before Morpeth. 

Do you not know at what station any of them got out?—I 
did not observe. 

They would have to pass you to get out?—Some of them 
would. 

Two of them at least ?—Yes. 

You have no recollection as to when they got out?—I have 
not. 

By Lord Coturtrpaze—Did they get out?—There was somebody, 
I think, got out, and somebody got in. 

By Mr. Trnpau Atxinson—Your mind is a blank?—It is, 
except as regards my reading the paper. 

That is all that you remember !—Yes. 

You were so engrossed in your newspaper that you quite 
forgot: 1—And other business matters. 

That you forgot what were the people who were in the 
carriage, and when they got out?—No, I could not conclusively 
say. 


124 





Evidence for Defence. 


Did you know Mrs. Nisbet?—Just by sight. 

You do?—Yes. 

Did you see her on the journey ?—I did not. 

You got out at Morpeth?—Yes. 

You had meant to go to Stannington!—Yes. 

Did you consider the visit of importance ?—Yes. 

You had taken the 10.27 in order that you might be at 
Stannington or Dovecot at some particular time!—Not at any 
particular time, but that was the most suitable train to go by 
for me so as to get back into town for the afternoon. 

You wanted to get back in time for the afternoon !—Yes. 

What time did you want to get back?—By the 1.40. 

You had meant to walk from Morpeth to Stannington?— 
Not when I first went out. 

You set out to walk from Morpeth to Stannington?—Yes. 

Instead of taking a train which you knew was coming up in 
a few minutes after you got to Morpeth?—Yes; if I had got 
out at Stannington I should have gone to Dovecot pit, and 
then I should have walked from the Dovecot pit to Morpeth, 
so that by walking back from Morpeth to the Dovecot pit I 
should pass this drift; so I was merely stopping, as it were. 
at the wrong end of the journey. 

Were you going to see Hogg, or were you going to see the 
drift?—I was going to see Mr. Hogg. 

You had not set out to see the drift?—Partly. Are you 
referring to the Dovecot pit or the new drift? 

I am talking about the drift you mentioned?—I should have 
seen that as well, after having seen Mr. Hogg. 

You intended to walk from Dovecot to Morpeth !—Yes. 

To see this drift !—Yes. 

What had you got to do with the drift?—A friend of mine 
had asked me certain particulars about it as regards what it 
was worth. 

Who was the friend—What is his name?—Is it necessary 
to disclose private names? 

Why not, it will do him no harm?—Mr. Ernest Houldsworth. 

Of Newcastle /—Yes. 

Had you arranged with him to see it?—I had not. 

Did he know you were going to see it?—He did not. 

By Lord Cozmrmpez—What do you say 1—He asked me some 

125 


John Alexander Dickman. 


J. A. Dickman time ago regarding its position, and the conditions and facilities 
as to putting coal on either at Morpeth or at Stannington, and 
what it was likely to turn out, or what it was likely to be 
worth. He had asked me if I knew any particulars. 

How long ago had he asked you’—Well, a short time 
previously. 

What is his address!—In Grainger Street; I forget the 
number. 

By Mr. Trypat Atxinson—What is he?—A coal merchant. 

Mr. E. Houldsworth, coal merchant, Grainger Street, New- 
castle, asked you!—Yes. 

By Lord Cotsripas—Do you know the number!—I do not 
know the number, but it is Merton’s Buildings. 

I suppose he had got his address up ?—Yes. 

By Mr. Trypat Arxrnson—You had that in your mind when 
you started ?—I had. 

That you were going to Dovecot to see this drift, and then 
walking on back to Morpeth, and coming on back that way !— 
Yes. 

Why come back to Morpeth? Why not go back to Stanning- 
ton /—Well, it is immaterial; I like the walk for one thing. 

As I understand you, I have not got the actual mark which 
was made; it was somewhere between Catchbourne and Clifton, 
about half-way /—Yes. 

You would be going out of your way to go back to Morpeth, 
because you would be going back on the line. It is as near 
to Stannington station from that point as it is to Morpeth?!— 
Well, we do not take it in that way; at least, I do not take it 
in that way. Besides, if I had plenty of time, I should have 
gone to the refreshment room and had refreshments at Morpeth. 

You got out on to the platform at Morpeth. Had you got 
your ticket ready before you approached the collector }—No. 

Did you have to get your ticket out of your pocket?—I got 
my ticket out of my waistcoat pocket. 

With which hand?’—T/zs hand. 

The left hand !/—Yes. 

Did you take 24d. out at that time?—Not at the same time. 

Had you the 24d. ready for the collector as you passed out? 
—No. 


126 , 


E 


¥ 


Evidence for Defence. 


Did he have to wait while you found the 23d. ?—No, he was J. A. Dickman 
busy tearing the ticket in half. I gave him the whole ticket. 

He was tearing it in two and giving you the other part — 

By the time he had done that I had got my 23d. ready. 

Did you know it was 2}d.?—I was not quite sure, but I 
thought it was. That is why I asked him. I believe I had 
threepence in my hand. 

Did he give you change?—No; I had two pennies and two 
halfpennies, and I gave him 24d. and I said, ‘‘I think that 
is correct.”’ 

Did you ask him any question whether that was correct?— 

Yes, I said, ‘‘I think that is correct,’? and handed it to him 
when he handed the return half to me. 

You had this coat over your arm?—It was over my arm like 
that, so I had it in that position. (The witness illustrated with 
the coat.) It was either one or the other. (The witness 
further illustrated his position.) 

Then you proceeded to walk?—I went down the bank. 

You got in at twelve minutes past eleven!—Yes, so I suppose 
from the evidence. 

When was it that this sudden attack seized you? 

By Lord Co.zrice—Before you pass from that you had 
better put Athey’s evidence to him. 

Mr. Trypan Atxinson—I am obliged. (Zo Witness)—You 
heard Athey’s evidence; he was recalled ?—Yes. 

He says you were wearing an overcoat?—Well, I was not. 
I had it over my shoulder or over my arm. 

Did you have the ticket and the 24d. ready for him?—I had 
not. I gave him the whole ticket, which he tore in two, and 
he gave me the return half. 

Had you to pull your coat on one side to free yourself to 
get the ticket and money!—No, I might have had to unbutton 
this jacket. 

By Lord Cotmrince—Then he is wrong ?—He is wrong in that 
respect. I might have had to unbutton this jacket to get at my 
waistcoat pocket. 

By Mr. Trnpat Atxivson—And that you had 23d. ready for 
him, and not 3d?!’—I gave him 24d. He could not see what 
I had in my hand, so far as I know. 





127 


J. A. Dickman 


John Alexander Dickman. 


You heard his evidence !—I did. 

No suggestion was made to him that you had got your coat 
in the position in which you now say it was?—I do not under- 
stand you. 

No suggestion was made to Athey in the witness-box that 
you had your coat in the position in which you say it was?—I 
do not know. 

Where were you when this sudden attack came on!—Well, 
I would be a little way past these houses where I marked it— 
there, what I believe is called Catchbourne. 

You were a little past Catchbourne when the attack attacked 
you’—Yes, I was within a few hundred yards of the drift, or 
about the drift—almost to the drift. 

Do you mean to say that the attack did not arrive until you 
had got to the drift?—It had been threatening all along. 

By the time you got to the drift it was at its worst ?—Yes. 

By Lord Cotmripce—When did you first begin to feel the 
symptoms!—In walking along the road. 

How far from this place?—Well, perhaps after I had walked 
ten minutes or a quarter of an hour, or half an hour. 

You could not go back to the lavatory at Morpeth?—No, my 
lord. 

By Mr. Trypan Atxrinson—Did you think of turning back to 
Morpeth !—No, I thought I could relieve myself straightaway. 

Why should you not go back? You had only ten minutes’ 
walk from the lavatory at Morpeth?—It was not severe enough 
then. 

You kept on?—Yes. 

It kept getting worse?—Yes. 

The further you got from Morpeth the worse it became ?—Yes, 
at different times. 

Finally it got to such a state that you had to stop—and you 
had just got to the drift?—Not quite to the drift. 

Did you ever see the drift that day?—Yes, I could see the 
heap at the side. 

Did you see it when you were taken so bad?—No, I could 
not see the drift itself, I could see where they had been putting 
the refuse out. 

You never visited the drift actually that day!—No. 

128 


Evidence for Defence. 


Did you ever get over the hedge, or what did you do?—I think J. A. Dickman 


I got over some railings or through a hedge. 

You think—you do not know!—No, I could not absolutely 
say which, whether it was a fence or a gate in the hedge or 
what. 

Or a gate?—No, I could not say that. 

You could not say whether it was a gate, or hedge, or 
railings?—It certainly was not a gateway. 

You got over somewhere!—I got through the hedge, I think, 
or over the hedge. 

By Lord Coterip¢z—What sort of hedge?—Just an ordinary 
hedge or fence. 

A quick set hedge?—Well, I think the fence was perhaps 
broken in some places. 

Was it a quick set hedge?—I do not know what that is. 

Was it a thorn hedge?—A thorn hedge. 

A thorn hedge it was!—Yes. 

By Mr. Trypat Arginson—You are sure about that?—I think 
so, but it might have been some railings. 

It might have been anything !—Yes. 

It might have been railings or it might have boda a hole in 
the hedge!—I did not take particular notice. 

It might have been that you got over the hedge!—Yes. 

Or through ?—Yes. 

A thorn hedge !—Yes. 

Where did you find yourself?—In a field. 

What sort of a field?—An ordinary pasture field. 

Was it a pasture field?—Yes, a grass field. 

On which side of the road?—On the right hand as you go from 
Morpeth. 

Were you returning to Morpeth at the time!—No, I was then 
expecting to be relieved, so as to go on my journey. 

You got out of the field—as I understand, you did relieve 
yourself 7—No. 

You failed ?—I did ; I was very severely strained ; I had very 
bad feelings. 

You took off your coat?—No, I had no coat to take off. I laid 
my coat down part of the time. 

Did you lay that coat down !—Yes. 

I 129 


J. A. Dickman 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Did you lie down in the field ?—I did, to rest. 

How near the hedge?’—Close to it. 

For how long !—Well, four or five or ten minutes at different 
periods; I then got up. 

By Lord Coturinee—Different periods !—Different periods. 

What do you mean by “different periods ”?—After resting 
I got up and tried to relieve myself, and failed. Then I had to 
lie down again; then I was trying to put myself right, and 
I could not put myself right, and I was waiting for these lumps 
to recede. 

Was it diarrhoea or constipation that you were suffering 
from ?—First of all, I thought it was diarrhea. 

And then it turned out to be constipation?—It turned out 
a case of straining and no relief. 

By Mr. Tinpau Arxinson—You mean to say you could not 
pass anything ?—I could not pass anything. 

What was the good of lying down?—To give these pro- 
tuberances a chance of getting back. 

Then you got up again?—Yes. 

Had they gone!—No. 

Why did you not continue to lie down?—I was trying to put 
myself right. 

How many times did this performance go on!—Well, twice 
or thrice. 

What was the whole time occupied before you were in a 
position to take the road again?—That I could not say, but it 
seemed to me about half an hour. 

How long had it taken you to get where you were?—About 
half an hour. 

That would be an hour?—Yes, it might have been more or 
less. 

I do not know what that means. You told us that it would 
not be more than a mile and a half at the outset ?—Yes. 

It would not be more than a mile and a half that you would 
travel?—Well, I should think it would be about two. miles. 

It would not take you more than half an hour?—Well, I 
could not say the exact distance, I think I had walked about 
half an hour. 

It took you half an hour to get yourself into condition to take 

130 


Evidence for Defence. 


the road again from the field ?—Yes, it might have been more or J. A. Dickman 
less. 

I took your own words!—It might have been more or less. 
In either case I did not fix the time, because I did not look at 
my watch. 

Then you walked back to Morpeth ?—Yes. 

Were you more comfortable then?—I was feeling a little 
better, a little easier, after I got on the road. 

How long did it take you to get back to Morpeth?—I should 
think it would take possibly half an hour. 

Half an hour?—More than that. 

To walk a mile and a half?—No, it would be more than a 
mile and a half, so far as I know. 

At the outside it is a mile and three-quarters?!—But that is 
an indefinite place I have put; I have put it from memory. 

I know ?/—Yes. 

Assuming it took you the same time to go back as it took 
you to come, it would be half an hour, with half an hour in 
the field?—It would take me slightly longer to get back. 

You did not get back to Morpeth till ten minutes past one? 
—It would be about twenty minutes past. 

That is over two hours from the time you left Morpeth 
station !—Yes. 

Where was the other half-hour spent?—The time was fully 
occupied in what I have told you. 

Did you see anybody on the way?—Yes, there were different 
people, but I took no special notice of that. There was no 
one that I saw that I knew. 

Were you in pain when you got back to Morpeth!—Slightly, 
I was sore. 

I suppose rest is the best thing for that sort of thing?—A 
reclining position, as you need to have these protuberances 
put back. 

You got back to Morpeth station at thirteen minutes past 
one for a train starting at 1.40. Instead of waiting for the next 
train to Morpeth and going into the waiting-room, you walked 
away from Morpeth station down to Morpeth town 1—I went 
out at the east side of the station. 

I know?—I put my coat on then. 

131 


J. A. Dickman 


John Alexander Dickman. 


You proceeded to walk further than you need do?—Not what 
you may term a quick walk. 

I did not ask you about a quick walk?—No. 

You told me a reclining position was the best for your 
complaint ?—Yes, but I had walked then. I had walked back 
to the station, and during that—— 

How far from the station did you walk? I think you gave 
us the point!—That is as far as my memory can say. 

You walked to the Newcastle Arms!/—I was going down to 
the Newcastle Arms. 

How far did you walk from Morpeth station?—I walked up 
to the depét. 

By Lord Cotzricze—Can you point out where the Newcastle 
Arms is’—Yes. (The witness marked on the plan.) 

By Mr. Trnpat Arxrinson—How far do you say you got?!— 
When I left the platform? 

Yes?—I went out by the east side, and I went up past the 
coal depdt up to the top of the bank near to the cattle market 
place or the auction market. 

How long did it take you to do all that?—Half a minute or 
a couple of minutes. Then I turned back. 

You intended to go to the pew Arms?—Not when I 
first left the station. 

What did you go for?—I just went out to see the coal depét. 

For a walk?’—To see the coal depdt, and just cool off. 

Cool off ?—Yes. 

Why could you not cool off by reclining in the waiting-room 
at Morpeth station?—That would be in a sitting position. I 
would be sitting in an arm-chair. 

By Lord Cotzripcze—Had you walked so fast as to get yourself 
hot?—Well, it does not take me much walking, or walking 
very far, to perspire when I am in that condition. 

By Mr. Trypan Arxinson—It was the 18th March, not the 
summer-time /—Yes ; but I was very stout then. 

You got very hot?—Yes, I was hot. 

It took you more than half an hour, I understand you want 
to suggest, to walk a mile and three-quarters?—Yes. I do 
not know whether it is a mile and three-quarters, or two miles, 
or two and a half. I am not sure of the distance. 

132 


Evidence for Defence. 


We know that you have marked the plan’—Yes; but I am J. A. Dickman 
not sure about that place. If you could find out where the 
drift is, I should say that is the point. 

My lord asked you to mark it, and you have marked it?—I 
am not sure of that point on the plan. I have told you the 
place I went to, and you can ascertain where the drift is. 

You had not reached the drift?7—No, I was not quite to the 
drift. 

Then you caught the 1.40%—I came back with the intention 
of catching the express. That is how it is I tried to hurry. I 
hurried as much as I possibly could. 

Before you got to Morpeth station 1—Yes. 

You hurried as much as you could?—Yes, I tried to catch 
the express. 

Then you took the 1.40, and you came back to Newcastle?— 
Yes, ultimately. 

Were you out again that day?—I went home at about half- 
past four or a quarter to five. 

You went out again’—I went home. 

Did you go out again that evening?—I did, certainly, after 
tea. 

What time did you get home ultimately ?—At night, it would 
be about half-past nine. I came straight home from the 
Pavilion. 

Were you out on Saturday?—I was out on the Saturday 
afternoon. After that I came down to the Turk’s Head. 

Had you got better then!—Not completely, but I was feeling 
better. 

You were feeling better !—Yes. 

I see in your statement you say, “‘I have been very unwell 
since ’’?—So I have been. 

“But was out on Saturday afternoon and evening.’’ You 
were out on Friday afternoon and evening?—After I came back 
to town I went and had a cup of coffee, and that brought on 
the diarrhoea which gave me the relief that I needed. 

Do you know this pit, the Isabella pit?—I do not. 

Do you know where it is!—I do not. 

Do you know to whom it belongs?!—I do not. 

Have you ever passed it?—I may have passed it and not 
known. 

133 


J. A. Diekman 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Have you been along that road?—About twice, I think. 

Is there a pit shaft close to the road?—As far as I know 
there is—that one beside Stannington station. What is that 
one? 

About half-way between Morpeth station or a little more— 
I think it is just about half-way—is there a pit shaft close to 
the road; do you not know?—No. 

You may have passed it?—That is what is called the place 
at Stannington on the opposite side of the bank. 

I do not understand you. I am speaking of the Hepscott 
Colliery ?—I do not know that colliery. 

You have been along that road ?—Yes. 

Do you not know there is a shaft close to the road?—I do 
not. 

Do you know Spooner?—Yes, he used to be manager for us. 

Do you know he is connected with this very colliery?—I 
know he has had to do with the colliery at Hepscott, which is 
known as the Hepscott Colliery. 

Do you know there were difficulties in working the pit on 
account of the water?—I did not. 

He says you did!—Well, I believe I met him once, and we 
had some talk, but I had not paid any attention to it, or made 
any particular note about it. I might have asked him how 
he was getting on, and he might have told me this; but I 
paid no attention. 

By Lord Cotzrmez—Did you know he was connected with the 
Isabella pit?—I had never known the name of the pit by the 
Isabella pit. I never knew there was an Isabella pit. 

By Mr. Trnpat Arxinson—Did you know there was a Heps- 
cott colliery. Do you know where Hepscott is!—I know it is 
at the east side of Morpeth station. 

South-east of the railway ?’—Well, I do not say whether it is 
the south-east or not. I know it is the east, along what you 
call the Blyth—at least what I cail the Blyth Road. 

You have passed along that road?—Only on two occasions. 

By Lord Cotznmcz—What do you call the Blind Room ?—The 
Blyth Road. 

By Mr. Trypat Arxrnson—You have not been asked, but I 
am going to ask you, how do you account for that blood upon 
these suede gloves?—I cannot account for it at all. I know 

134 


Evidence for Defence. 


I discarded the use of those particular gloves a good long J. A. Dickman 
period. 

How long ?—Before Christmas. 

Three months before?/—Quite. They have been thrown on 
one side. They did not fit me. Might I look at them? 

The gloves!—Yes, both of them. (Gloves handed to the 
witness.) 

By Lord Cotermaz—‘‘I had discarded them three months 
before ’’ 1—Yes. 

By Mr. Trypau Arxinson—You had not used them?—I had 
not used them. 

They are yours!—I am trying to recognise them. I bought 
these gloves—the brown leather ones—at the same time. At 
the time I was using these on week-days and the brown gloves 
on Sunday. I discarded these, and I used the brown gloves 
continuously. 

Why did you discard those ?—Because they were badly fitting 
gloves. 

Why did you ever wear them?—I was bound to wear them 
after I had bought them. I thought they would have stretched. 

They are too small?—They are too small. 

But you have worn them?—Yes, I have worn them as well as 
I could. 

You started wearing those on week-days and the brown ones 
on Sundays ?/—Yes. 

You cannot account for that smear of blood upon the left 
thumb of that glove!—No, I cannot very well; not unless I 
have been bleeding at my nose, or I have had a cut, or some- 
thing like that, and touched it. 

By Lord Cotzripcp—tThe analyst said it was recent /—Yes. 

If these gloves had been discarded for three months it could 
not have come in that way?—I have not had those gloves to 
wear or to carry this side of Christmas. 

By Mr. Trnpat Arxinson—Where do you keep them?—In a 
drawer in the hall-stand as a rule, or about there. 

Can you account for the blood in your left hand trousers 
pocket on the clothes that you were actually wearing on the 
18th March?—My own opinion of that is that I might have 
got it from my nose, or from a cut in my face. 

135 


J. A. Diekman 


John Alexander Dickman. 


In your left hand pocket?—Yes, or when I have been cutting 
my toes. 

Cutting your what?—Cutting my toes. I mean cutting my 
corns. 

That is the only way you can account for it?—That is the 
only way I can account for it. 

You must have got some blood upon your hand, and it must 
have been communicated to your pocket?—I had very frequent 
bleedings at the nose in the morning—very frequent. 

You would not wear your gloves then?—No. 

How about this stain upon your coat; what is that stain?— 
So far as I know, I think it was got with bicycle oil when I 
was busy oiling the patent roller bearing with which I was 
interviewing different gentlemen about at Christmas. 

What sort of oil?—Bicycle oil. One of the bearings was 
stiff, and I had to use the bicycle lubricator to squirt the oil in. 

That is bicycle oil!—Yes. 

That is not paraffin oil?—That might have been from the 
patent cleaner that we have at home. I think my wife tried 
to clean it. 

Your wife tried to clean it?—Yes. 

With what!—This patent cleaner, one of these ball things— 
a small sort of thing. I do not know what you call them, but 
you see them in chemists’ shops. 

When was this?—That would be some time about Christ- 
mas or some time in January, when I was busy with this par- 
ticular model of the roller bearing. 

You say that you had £120?—Approaching that—£110 to 
£120. 

Approaching from £110 to £120 as the result of the flat 
racing season !—I had that. That was about the amount I had 
at the end of November. 

Had that gradually been increasing !—Well, I think it had. 

For what period?!—Well, over the whole year. That was 
what I was left with. 

How much had you in October?—That I cannot say. 

How much had you in October?—I could not say how much. 

About £100%’—I do not know. I might have had £50, or 
£60, or more or less. 

136 


Evidence for Defence. 


Do you not know!—No. 

A considerable sum ?—Yes. 

If that were so, how came you to be going to Cohen, the 
moneylender, and borrowing the sum of £5%—£20. The 
purpose that I had for going to Cohen was to ascertain if it 
were possible to obtain loans at the advertised rates of interest, 
and for no other purpose. I did not need money. 

By Lord Cotmripce—You did not want the money!—I did 
not. 

You wanted to see whether it was possible to obtain loans 
at all, or at what interest?—At the advertised rate of interest. 

By Mr. Trypat Atxinson—You took the loan?—After con- 
sideration. 

And you spent the money!—I do not know whether I spent 
it. It would go with my other amounts. 

Do you know that in January you said you could not pay 
back the principal?—I may have done so. 

You had only borrowed this as an experiment !—Yes. 

To test Mr. Cohen’s rate of interest./—Yes. 

You had got at that time a considerable sum of money !— 
Yes. 

I think it must have been something more than £70%—Yes. 

You say you had got £70 in February /—Yes. 

You told Mr. Cohen that it was not convenient to repay the 
principal?—I must have said so, but I have no recollection of 
it. 

If you did, it was an untruth?—I know Mr. Cohen said at 
our interview that he would be very pleased if I kept it as long 
as ever I liked. 

He said so, as long as you paid the interest?—He did not 
want it back. I was certainly not hard up. 

You paid the last £1 on the 17th March?—Yes, that was a 
Thursday. 

The day before this murder was committed!—Yes. « . 

By Lorp Conermen—You would have had no difficulty in 
repaying the £207—None whatever. 

The experiment having proved successful, why did you go 
on paying £1 a month interest instead of repaying the prin- 
cipal’—It was only a very small remuneration that he was 

137 


J. A. Dickman 


John Alexander Dickman. 


J. A. Dickman getting, or he made out it was a small remuneration—£3, as 
he called it, but if I were to keep it for a matter of six months, 
then £6 was worth considering if he was going to make—— 

You do not follow me. You said you had plenty of money 
to repay him?—Yes. 

You only took this loan as an experiment to find out whether 
you could get the loan upon the advertised terms!/—Yes, as 
he advertised. 

That experiment turned out to be a success because you found 
you could ?—Yes. 

Having ascertained what you wanted to know, why did you, 
instead of repaying the principal, which you said you could 
do, after that go on paying him 60 per cent. interest ?—Well, 
it was not such a great amount. It was not a large amount 
to pay—5s. a week, or about £1 a month. He rather de- 
murred when the loan was being discussed that it was only a 
small amount, and in the meantime this £200 had been loaned. 

By Mr. Trypau Arxinson—You were paying 60 per cent?— 
Yes, but it does not amount to very much at £1 a month. 

You continued to pay up long after you found out!—I was 
only going to pay it till the end of six months. That is as long 
as I intended to pay it, and I expected to get certain commis- 
sion from the loan of £200 which would have recouped that. 

Do you remember whether at the same time you were trying 
another experiment by trying to borrow a sum of £10 from a 
man called Swinney’—That was what Swinney thought was 
about October, but I think it was the year previous. 

I am taking his statement. He says it was in October last 
that you came to him and wanted to borrow £10, and that he 
refused !—Possibly. 

How came you to be borrowing £10 from Swinney when 
you had got a large amount of your own!—I did not want to 
borrow money for myself. 

You had got a large amount of your own?—I had sufficient 
for my own purposes. 

Do you remember asking Mr. Hogg to let you have £2 to 
tide you over, or to put you over—I think that was the exact 
word he used?—No, I did not. I remember the whole of one 
Saturday afternoon with Mr. Hogg, and I remember the occa- 
sion when he said he had only £2, and he gave me a sovereign. 

138 


Evidence for Defence. 


‘He has told us you asked him for £2?—Yes. He said, J. A. Dickman 
** How much do you want? I will let you have a cheque for 
what you want.’? I said, ‘‘ A cheque is of no use. Give me a 
pound,’’ and he gave me a pound. 

You were not in want of money at all?—On that occasion 
I did not want to go home. I had my money at home. I 
was down town, and I had spent the whole Saturday afternoon 
with him, and it meant me missing a certain party. 

You asked him, according to his account, to lend you money 
to put you over or to tide you over!—He said he thought it 
was to put me over, but I did not give any reason why I wanted 
it. I said, “Can you let me have a couple of sovereigns?” 

On the 14th of February of the present year is it true that 
you went to Mr. Ketterer, a jeweller?—That is quite true. 

You borrowed from him a sum of £5 on some jewellery !— 
I did not borrow the money. I said, ‘‘Give me £5, and 
here is something to show I will pay you back again.”’ 

You had got money then ?—Yes. 

You had got £70 at least then?!—Oh, no, I should have 
about £40 or £45 then. 

That is quite sufficient for your purpose?—£40 or £45. 

You were pledging a scarf ring/—No, I was not. 

You were depositing with him a scarf ring/—I was putting 
them in a place of security. 

And some links?—I was putting those links and things in 
a place of security. 

Some links and some studs!—They can be produced without 
your giving any description if you wish for them. 

I only want the fact. Is Mr. Ketterer’s statement correct? 
—Certainly it is—a great portion of it—but I gave him a 
different impression of what I wanted the money for. I put 
these articles in a place of security on account of there having 
been some burglaries in our neighbourhood, and I intended 
to go away for a period. 

Do you suggest they were out of the way of possible burglars 
—Isg that the reason that you went to Mr. Ketterer 1—Yes, 
partly. I used to leave these things lying about the house. 

Did you say you were going to Liverpool?—I was going to 
see the Waterloo Cup. 

Did you say you wanted it for the Waterloo Cup 1—I believe 
I did. 139 


J. A. Dickman 


John Alexander Dickman. 


You had got £40 or £50 of your own?—About £40 or £50. 
I suppose you are a business man yourself 

Never mind. On the Ist March were you pledging field 
glasses for 12s. 1d.1—I took those field glasses down to sell, and 
I failed to sell them, and therefore I left them down in pawn. 

Why? You were not in want of money!—No, I was not. 

On the 17th March?—I have pawned things without needing 
money. 

On the 17th March, the day before this murder, you 
pledged some more glasses for 15s.?—Yes, I intended selling 
both of those glasses. At least I intended to buy a new 
pair of glasses, and-I wished to dispose of both those racing 
glasses. 

You pledged them in the name of John Wilkinson, of 180 
Westmoreland Street?—I do not know the exact address. I 
think I made a mistake in the address. 

Why ‘‘ John Wilkinson’’’—I do not know—just on the 
spur of the moment. 





What had you then on you?—I gave my wife a sum of . 
money of £15 or £20 when I did not go to the Waterloo Cup. 

You did not go to the Waterloo Cup after all?—No. 

You had two banking accounts at one time?—Yes. 

Were those both closed at the end of the year!—Neither of 
them is closed now. They are both lying dormant. 

There is nothing in them belonging to you!—I believe there 
are a few coppers in one—a few odd shillings. 

Has your wife a savings bank account?—She had, or she has. 

Do you know that at the time of this murder it had been 
reduced to 10s. and something?—I did not. She often had 
money in reserve that I knew nothing about. 

Your wife had an account at the Co-operative Society !—Yes, 
I knew about that. 

Did you know that had been reduced down from about £70 at 
one time to a sum of £4%—I know that it had been reduced, 
but I do not know the exact amount. 

Except your story about this £15 in the canvas bag and the 
£17 that you had upon you!—That I had upon me. 

Except your account that this was the balance of your 
winnings after racing, is there any other source which you 
can suggest from which this money came?—None whatever. 

140 


Evidence for Defence. 


Do you know you were being pressed for rates?—Never in J. A. Dickman 
my life while I have been a tenant. 

On 25th January !—No. 

What?—I was never pressed for rates. 

Did you know there was trouble about getting the money 
for the rates/—Never—never any trouble. 

Re-examined by Mr. Mrircnetu-Inwas—You have been asked 
several questions about the people in the train with whom you 
travelled on that day!—Yes. 

You remember when you got in at Newcastle?—Yes. 

Do you remember mentioning that fact in your statement 
to the police on 21st March?—I think I said 

Wait one moment, I will read it. Do you remember saying 
this, ‘‘ My recollection is, although I am not quite clear on the 
matter, that people entered and left the compartment at 
different stations on the journey ”!—Yes, I said that off-hand. 

That was your account then?—Yes. 

That is your account to-day ’—Yes, but I wish to imply that 
I did not make a very close observation. 

I quite follow that. You say, ‘‘ Though I am not quite 
clear ’’ /—Yes. 

It was put to you, why did you not go back to Stannington 
instead of going to Morpeth!—By train? 

In walking, why did you not go to Stannington instead of 
going on to Morpeth!—Yes. 

You told Mr. Atkinson.that if you had got out at Stannington 
you intended to walk to Morpeth by way of Dovecot?—Yes. 

Is there any refreshment room at Stannington at all?—None. 

Was that the object with which you would have gone on 
to Morpeth?—Partly. As a rule, when I have been out on 
a journey I always called in and had a cup of Bovril or a 
cup of tea, or some slight refreshment of some sort at that 
refreshment room. 

There are, I take it, better trains from Morpeth to New- 
castle than from Stannington to Newcastle?—Yes, you can get 
expresses at Morpeth. 

I understand your account is that on this particular day you 
had a very bad attack of piles!—That was the absolute result 
of it when I was out there. 

It is no use mincing matters. You had a bad attack of 
piles ?—Yes. I4y 





J. A. Dickman 


John Alexander Dickman. 


And you attempted two or three times to relieve yourself 
and could not?—I could not. 

You could not get the piles back?—No, I could not. 

I want to be quite clear about that. How did you feel when 
you got out of that field, after having rested there, when you 
started upon your journey to Morpeth?—I felt very stiff; at 
least, I felt it was very bad walking, I was in a sort of strain. 

-You hurried as much as you could to catch the express?—I 
tried to. 

Could you go very fast?—Well, I was in a very heated state 
through exertion, and through being in a very uncomfortable 
position. 

Were you in pain?—I was. There was something that would 
not go away. 

Do you know, as a matter of fact, what has happened to 
those suede gloves since you have discarded them?—Nothing 
whatever. 

Do you know of anybody that has been wearing them?—I 
put them on to one side for any one’s use; or, perhaps, to put 
them on if I was going to clean my bicycle. 

What I want to know is, do you know or not that any of 
your family has been wearing them!—No, I do not. 

Yiou have not, in fact, worn them, and you have taken to the 
tan gloves !—Yes. F 

You have mentioned a patent cleaner. What do you mean 
by a patent cleaner. What is it like?—I bought it myself. 

Is it a pad or a piece of soap?—It is a pad. That is the 
proper thing to say. It is a patent pad cleaner. 

Sold by chemists?—Yes, I believe I bought it in London, 
and brought it home with me. 

Has it any odour of any kind?!—It has. 

What of ?—Ammonia. 

It smells of ammonia ’—Yes, it smells of ammonia so far as 
my memory goes. 

It has a sort of spirituous smell !—Yes. 

It has not been seriously suggested, I understand, but any- 
how there is no foundation for the suggestion that you have 
been in difficulty about your rates?—I have never been in 
ditficulty about my rates—my wife may have thought so. 

142 


Evidence for Defence. 


With you, like other people, if you could not pay your rates, J. A. Dickman 
a distress would be put in’—I can explain this. 

Will you answer the question? I suppose, if you do not 
pay your rates, with you, as with other people, a distress 
would be put into your house?!—Of course, it would be, but 
there has never been any occasion like that with me. I have 
never been in such a position, or in such a condition. I might 
have allowed my wife to think I was short of money, merely 
to cause her to keep expenses down. 

As to money matters, did your wife, as a matter of fact, 
ever complain to you that she was in want of money!—No; 
she has not complained—not in a complaining way. 

I understand you to say that she had money that you might 
not have known of!—Yes. ; 

Why do you say that’—Well, she had a reserve fund in the 
stores. It was in her own name. It was a question of whether 
it was my money or whether it was her money—that is between 
us. 

With regard to the Landsale Colliery that you referred to, 
or this drift as I understand, has it recently been opened ?!— 
Well, I think it would be opened some time at the back end. 

Of last year ?—Yes. 

It has been opened as recently as the back end of last year? 
—tTherefore I got to know about it. 

Therefore it is not marked upon any of these maps!—No. 

In putting the mark as you have, at the request of his lord- 
ship, you have put it as nearly as you can, according to your 
memory /—Yes, but I am not certain about the place. 

Is it in a field?—Yes. 

An ordinary field ?!—Yes ; it might be close to where I marked, 
or I might be mistaken in my distance on the map. But I 
know Mr. Houldsworth asked me about it, but I had no know- 
ledge of the place when he asked me about it. 

Mr. Trnpau Arxrinson—There are some documents that I 
could not use in the first instance; documents written by the 
wife to her husband. My friend has chosen to ask the question 
whether the wife had ever complained about the want of money. 
Under those circumstances I am entitled to use these documents, 
I think. 

Lord Coturipee—I think you are. 

143 


John Alexander Dickman. 


J.A.Dieckman Mr. Mircnstu-Innes—I have no objection—none whatever— 
but I shall have a comment to make upon it at the bar. 

~The Wirnuss—May I make a remark? 

Mr. Mircneti-Innes—You had better not. 

The Wirness—Thank you. 

Further cross-examined by Mr. Trypau Arxrnson—This is a 
letter dated from 1 Lily Avenue, Jesmond, Newcastle-on-Tyne, 
of the 25th January, 1910—‘‘ Dear Jack—lI received your card, 
and am very sorry that you have no money to send. I am 
needing some very badly. The weather here is past description. 
I had to get in a load of coals, which consumed the greater 
part of a sovereign. The final notice for rates has come in— 
in fact, came in last week, which means they must be paid 
before next Thursday. Also Harry’s school account. With 
my dividend due this week and what is in the post office I 
dare say I can pay the most pressing things, but it is going 
to make the question of living a poser, unless you can give me 
some advice as to what to do.’’ Then there is something which 
does not matter. ‘‘ Trusting to hear from you soon regarding” 
what you think I had best do, I am, yours faithfully, Annie 
Dickman.’’ Is that letter from your wife to you!—I think © 
so; but you are putting a very different construction on it as: 
an outsider. 

I have read it?—Yes; an outsider puts a very different con- 
struction upon that letter and what the words infer to what I 
do, as coming from my own wife to me. 

Further re-examined by Mr. Mrronett-Inwes—Upon that I 
ask you, is it within your knowledge that in January, 1910, 
your wife had £17 11s. in the Co-operative society!—I did not 
know how much she had, but I knew she had some. 

By Lord Corzrirp¢e—At that time!—At the same date as 
that letter. 

By Mr. Mircnenu-Innes—And at the savings bank she had 
£15 Os. 9d. 1—Yes. 

That would approach £40 altogether, if added together? 

Mr. Tinpau Arxinson—£32. 

The Wirnuss—Yes. We had some little bickering as to who 
had to pay or draw upon certain things at that time, but, 
however, I gave way and settled matters. 

144 


Evidence for Defence. 

By Mr. Mircuenn-Innes—However that may be, that was in J. A. Dickman 
her account at the time she wrote that letter ’—Yes, we always 
had little bickerings about these accounts. 

As to who should pay what?—As to these little bits of things. 

That is all I ask you?—Shall I take these coats, or leave 
them? 

Mr. Mircue.u-Innes—Leave them. That is my case. 


Evidence for the defence closed. 


Mr. Tindal Atkinson’s Address to the Jury on 
behalf of the Prosecution. 


Mr. Trypau Arxrnson, in the course of his address* to the - i 
jury on behalf of the prosecution, said the prisoner was en” 
titled, whatever charge might be brought against him, to go 
into the witness-box. Dickman had been there, and the jury 
had had an opportunity of hearing what he had to say in 
explanation of the facts which had been laid before them by 
the prosecution, and, in order to show if he could, that he was 
innocent of the charge. They had an opportunity of watching 
him, seeing his demeanour, and of listening to the statements he 
had made. ‘To a large extent, where the ring closed more 
closely than ever around him, the accused had contented him- 
self with a flat denial of some of the principal facts sworn to 
by the witnesses for the prosecution. The jury would have 
to make up their minds which they were to believe. It was 
a case of circumstantial evidence. No one saw the crime 
committed. They had to link together the facts and see 
if they formed a complete chain. They had to decide whether 
they were satisfied, beyond all reasonable doubt, that the 
prisoner was guilty of this murder. First, let them ascertain 
what was practically certain. At what stage of his journey 
was the man murdered? Was he murdered before Stanning- 
ton? That was impossible, because he was seen alive and 
well at that station. Was he alive at Morpeth? There was 





*From the report in the Newcastle Chronicle, 7th July, 1910. 
K 145 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Mr. Tindal evidence that he was not. If they believed the evidence of 
Grant, the man must have been underneath the seat, murdered. 
It seemed clear that the murder took place between Stanning- 
ton and Morpeth. Who did it? From the evidence it 
appeared that there was only one man in the compartment 
with the deceased when the train left Newcastle. | Whoever 
that man was, he was the murderer. They would come to the 
conclusion also that the murderer got out at Morpeth. Who 
was the man? Evidence had been called for the purpose of 
showing that it was the prisoner—that it was he who accom- 
panied the deceased when he approached the 10.27 train. If 
they believed that evidence, it would enable them to go a long 
way towards coming to a conclusion that Dickman was the 
murderer. It was not suggested that once in, he ever got 
out. He travelled to Morpeth, the station at which the 
murderer undoubtedly got out. Was Dickman the man who 
got into the compartment with the deceased at Newcastle? 
They had witnesses who spoke to having seen him on the 
platform. 

Mr. Atkinson, criticising prisoner’s evidence, said the best 
he could say about the deceased being with him at the Central 
station was that he did not notice anybody by him. ‘That 
would not do. Because Raven saw the two men walking side 
by side as companions. If they believed that prisoner had 
told an untruth with regard to one of the most important 
matters in the case, they could not place reliance upon his 
testimony generally. 

But that is not the whole of the evidence against him, pro- 
ceeded Mr. Tindal Atkinson. On this question of identity 
you have the evidence of Hepple, who knows the prisoner well. 
He had known him for several years. There can be no mis- 
take here in the identification, unless you accept the explana- 
tion which the prisoner was driven to, namely, that Hepple 
has got so old that he could not possibly use his eyesight with 
sufficient accuracy to know the prisoner when he passed him. 
Do you believe that? If you don’t believe that, then that 
is another falsehood. ‘‘ Eighteen feet away,” said Mr. Hepple, 
“ T saw this man with another man whom I did not know.” The 
man I did not know was a slightly built man, and you have 
that description given by the widow. The prisoner passed 

146 


Mr. Atkinson’s Address to the Jury. 


Hepple with that man, and went to the head of the train, and Mr. Tindal 
they were seen to get in. If that is true, then it makes false- en 
hood number three, for the prisoner’s evidence is that he got 
into the hinder part of the train. He has gone further, because & 
he has told us that he got into the compartment which was in 
the centre of the last coach but one. 

That, in the face of Mr. Hepple’s evidence, said Mr. Tindal 
Atkinson, is absolutely impossible, because the prisoner’s ex- 
planation is inconsistent with there being any one at all with 
him. It won’t do for the prisoner’s advocate now to suggest 
that it might have been some one else than the deceased who 
entered the compartment with the prisoner. The prisoner’s 
evidence has put an end to that account. “No one was with 
me,’’ he says. To suggest that some one else than the de- 
ceased was with the prisoner was the only possible explanation, 
but it is not the prisoner’s explanation. If you come to that 
conclusion, then you have landed him in the compartment in 
which this murder took place. Then when Hepple saw the 
prisoner and deceased pass him, Hall saw the deceased and 
another man go towards them up the train, and in the absence 
of any explanation that it was some other companion than the 
deceased who was with him, and some one whom he cannot 
name, the prosecution invite you to say there can be no doubt 
the deceased and the prisoner were the same men who passed 
up the platform and got into the compartment in which the 
murder took place. 

Then they had the evidence of the widow, who is absolutely 
certain it was the prisoner who was with her husband in the 
compartment. The evidence therefore was cumulative. It 
did not depend upon one witness. A man naturally shrunk 
from being absolutely certain, as Hall had done, unless he 
had evidence beyond the possibility of any doubt. 

But up to this point you have quite sufficient evidence to 
convict him of this murder. But there is something more. 
There is the overcoat, and the fact that he had his money ready 
to pay for his ticket, and except for his own statement there 
is no evidence called for the purpose of accounting for his actions 
between twelve minutes past eleven and twelve minutes past 
one. You have only this very extraordinary statement which 
he has made, and if he has chosen to tell falsehoods with 

147 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Be. Tindal regard to the earlier history of this case, can you believe the 
statement as to what he was doing during those two hours? 

Then why did he select a Friday to go? He made these 
journeys to Stannington on Fridays, when the money was taken 
from Newcastle to the collieries. He was there on the 4th, 
exactly a fortnight before. It is for you to judge if it was 
possible—and the facts seem to show it may be probable— 
that if he had made up his mind—having regard to his 
financial position, and being desperate to get money somehow— 
if it is possible in the circumstances, and probable, that he took 
that journey on the 4th, for the purpose of seeing if it was 
possible to obtain some of the money which was for the 
collieries. On the 18th, just a fortnight afterwards, he goes 
again. 

With reference to the prisoner’s story at Morpeth, counsel 
remarked that, even allowing half an hour each way and an ~ 
hour at the place where Dickman said he was, he had not 
accounted for the two hours. The suggestion of the prose- 
cution was that the two hours spent by the prisoner at Morpeth 
were occupied in getting rid of the bag which contained the 
money. Had he that bag when he left Morpeth station? 
That was a question they would have to ask themselves. If 
he had not, he could not be the murderer. He probably had 
it beneath his coat. 

That bag, as they knew, had been found ripped open, and 
must have- been carried from Morpeth by somebody in the 
compartment in which the murdered man was. The suggestion 
of the prosecution was that he took the high road which led 
past the Isabella pit, and, having got so far as that, there 
came this apparent easy way of disposing of this bag. There 
was this apparently disused shaft with an iron cage over it, 
under which he could have thrown the bag, or pushed it 
through the place between the iron bars. So the bag was dis- 
covered there, with all the gold and silver taken out. His 
explanation about the blood could not be true if they believed 
Dr. Bolam, who said it had come upon the glove within less 
than a fortnight from the time he examined it. So far as 
the stain on the coat was concerned, prisoner might have 
called his wife as a witness. It was said there would have 
been more blood upon the prisoner had he murdered Nisbet. 

148 


Atkinson’s Address to the Jury. 


But, with one exception, the wounds would not bleed very much Mr. Tindal 
until afterwards. One of the curious features in this case was “**!S™ 
that two pistols were used. There were two different pistols, 
and, according to the gunsmith, the bullets must have been 
fired from two different weapons. Whoever committed the 
murder must have used two pistols. The automatic pistol 
was comparatively flat and short in length, and could be easily 
put into the trousers or coat pocket. What the other pistol 
was, he did not know. Whoever committed the murder might 
have thought it was necessary to have two pistols to complete 
this ghastly act of murder. He must have thought it neces- 
sary to commit this brutal act to use two of them, in order to 
secure the death of the man he intended to rob. Robbery 
was the motive of this murder. Money was to be obtained by 
the murderer after he had killed his victim; now they 
approached the question which threw some light upon the motive 
for committing this act. 

Counsel dealt with the prisoner’s financial position, and said 
the evidence showed conclusively that the prisoner was in 
urgent need of the money at the time this murder was com- 
mitted; and there had been no satisfactory evidence given to 
the Court of the possession of the large sum of money on the 
prisoner at the time of the arrest. It was, concluded counsel, 
a case of extreme importance, not only to the prisoner, but 
to the public at large. It was the sort of crime that would 
set a certain amount of terror amongst the community if they 
supposed people were not safe to travel in a railway carriage 
with another; but the verdict of the jury was to be given on 
evidence and on evidence alone; and, of course, he need not 
remind them that they must not find a verdict against the 
prisoner unless they were satisfied beyond all doubt that he 
was the person who committed the deed.* 





*The closing address to the jury on behalf of the Crown lasted 
about an hour. 


149 


Mr. Mitchell- 
Innes 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Mr. Mitchell-Innes’ Address to the Jury on 
behalf of the Prisoner. 


Mr. Mircueiu-Innzs addressed the jury on behalf of the 
prisoner.* He was afraid, he said, he must ask them to listen 
to him for some considerable time, and he felt that they must 
be now almost exhausted by this case. He thought, however, 
he could claim their patient attention, as he would remind 
them that was the first, as it was the last, time he should have 
the opportunity of addressing them on behalf of the prisoner. 
His learned friend, Mr. Tindal Atkinson, in his concluding 
observations, appealed to them not to allow any extraneous 
considerations to weigh with them in coming to a conclusion 
in this case. He believed that they would not turn a deaf ear 
to that appeal. It would be idle for him to pretend that 
he did not know this case had excited a peculiar amount of 
public attention, and had been the centre of a great. deal of 
public gossip and comment—most of it idle, all of it almost 
ignorant in the highest degree. It would be idle for him to 
pretend he did not know it. And there were good reasons 
for it. The manner of the perpetration of the crime, the place 
of perpetration, in a railway carriage upon a main line thronged 
daily by passengers in this north country, were features in it, 
and besides, the evidence upon which this case reposed was 
difficult and voluminous. 

Whatever features there might be in the case, they must 
pay the most earnest attention to the evidence, and to the 
evidence alone, which had been laid before them. He rejoiced 
to believe that that was their attitude in this case, for, what- 
ever had been said or thought outside about the case, there in 
that place, they stood in very different and far higher grounds. 
There, as their consciences would tell them, neither gossip nor 
prejudice might enter; there, irresponsible babbling was 
silent; there, there was no voice but the voice of the law 
reminding them that upon their word hung the life of a fellow- 





*From the report in the Newcastle Chronicle, 7th July, 1910. 
150 





B. A. Mitchell-Innes, Esq., K.C. 









aha anes . 


is os, e i 
m~* gr se oe ae Se ee eee 

pitop gett ¢ DIAL ELE OSTSE ei a Ae 

' “ yi 


Mr. Mitchell-Innes’ Address to the Jury. 


creature, reminding them that upon them was laid the double 
duty—the vindication of the innocent, no less than the con- 
viction of the guilty ; and reminding them that those who made 
a charge, before a conviction must follow, must bring proof 
of that charge, proof that destroyed all reasonable doubt in 
their minds as to guilt. That was a matter they had to address 
their minds to. Proof. Had that proof, or anything like it, 
been given in this case? There was another feature which he 
ventured to say was most remarkable, and it was this, that a 
very large portion of the evidence, indispensable as the ground 
work for that case, was furnished by the deliberate statement 
of the prisoner himself, not from any inference drawn from what 
he had said, or done, but from his deliberate statement put in 
evidence that day by the prosecution against him. That 
statement was made freely, openly, and readily of matters, 
many of them unknown to the police at the time they were 
made, matters which, some of them, they could not have proved 
at all except by the statement that the prisoner made. He 
wanted them to remember that, because he thought it gave 
some colour favourable to the prisoner. He wished them to 
keep that in their minds when they came to consider the facts. 
What were the facts which he referred to, of which the police 
were ignorant, necessary facts for the prosecution of that case, 
some of which, at any rate, had been verified, and many of 
which, with the exception to which he would refer, had been 
accepted by the prosecution, and put forward against the 
prisoner. Let him read a list of the things which the prisoner 
said on the 21st of March to Superintendent Weddell, and 
which had been used against him, and which had been either 
verified or accepted as true. Firstly, that he knew Nisbet ; 
secondly, that he exchanged greetings with him; thirdly, that 
he was going to Stannington, although his statement was the 
only evidence; fourthly, that the train passed Stannington ; 
fifth, that he got out at Morpeth. Tle only evidence as to 
that was that of Athey, the ticket collector, because although 
it was admitted now that prisoner was the man, Athey was not 
willing to swear that he was the man. 

Consequently, the direct and conclusive evidence that he got 
out at Morpeth was the evidence of himself. Next was the 
statement that he met a man called Elliott, and spoke to him. 

151 


de Mitehell- 
Innes 








John Alexander Dickman. 


Mr. Mitchell- That fact had, again, been verified. There was no doubt 


about it, and about the rational and quiet way in which the 
prisoner spoke on that occasion. There were three facts, two 
of them referred to in that statement and one of them outside 
it, and which, perhaps, formed the main grounds of difference 


ve _ and of difficulty as between the prosecution and the prisoner 


in that case. It was not accepted by them that he got into 
the hinder part of the train, and it was not accepted that he 
went by Stannington by mistake. They said it was to murder 
the man that he went by Stannington by design. It was not 
accepted by the prosecution—in fact, it was vigorously denied 
that the prisoner’s account of what happened to him in Morpeth 
was true. They had now to deal with the first two questions— 
whether he got into the hinder compartment and went by 
Stannington by mistake. The first two questions brought him 
direct to the evidence of the witnesses Raven, Hepple, and Mrs. 
Nisbet. There was no doubt whatever, as far as Raven’s 
evidence was concerned, of the fact that these men were walking 
together to the No. 4 gate in the railway station. It seemed, 
having regard to the prisoner’s statement on the matter, that 
there was a direct conflict of testimony, unless they (the jury) 
could find it possible to believe—as he suggested as a quite 
possible explanation—that if the deceased was walking, as 
Raven said, in company of the prisoner, he was not the first 
man, nor would he be the last, who had ever caught up or 
been caught up by a friend walking in the street or station, 
and who had walked side by side with the man without knowing 
he was there. Raven’s evidence was that no conversation was 
going on, and that indicated that there might be something in 
what the prisoner said was true as far as his knowledge went— 
that if he was walking with Nisbet he did not know he was 
there. 

In the evidence it was stated that both men turned through 
gate No. 4 to platform 5. They might very well have done 
so, but the prisoner was perfectly certain that he went into 
aurinal. Nisbet went up the platform, and the prisoner turned 
off to the urinal. It had been put against him that he said 
nothing at the time he made his statement on 21st March of 
going to a urinal, but it had to be remembered that at that 

152 . ie 


Mr. Mitchell-Innes’ Address to the Jury. 


time he was not charged with the crime, but had gone freely, 
of his own will, down to the police station to. make a statement 
—to throw light on this matter, for he was innocent, as he 
(counsel) hoped to assist them to think—and did not even 
expect to be charged. He would not realise the importance of 
that detail until the case was brought into Court, and the 
evidence marshalled against him. 

So much for Raven. Now they came to Hepple. There was 
not the slightest doubt that between Hepple and the prisoner 
there was a collision of fact on the point of the latter having 
gone to the front of the carriage. He (counsel) frankly admitted 
that so far as giving evidence of what he believed to be true 
there was not one word to be said against the witness. He 
believed him to be an absolutely truthful witness so far 
as to what he thought he saw, but the question was 
what did he see? It was for them to say whether 
they thought it was possible that Hepple could have 
made a mistake. That was a plain issue. Counsel 
suggested that at the time between Hepple getting in 
his carriage and the prisoner arriving just in time to get into 
‘the hinder part of the train it was evident Hepple was not at 
the door of his carriage. If they were to believe Hall, two men 
came up, and Nisbet was the first to get in. There still lay 
upon the prosecution the burden of putting the prisoner into 
that carriage by evidence which it was possible not to believe. 

As to the evidence of Mrs. Nisbet—with whom he expressed 
the most respectful sympathy—he wanted the jury to remember 
the history of the development of her identification, if it might 
be so called, of prisoner. Before the magistrates she said— 
““T could only say that there was a man there.’’ The jury 
saw Mrs. Nisbet in the box, and he thought as men of the 
world they would not have the slightest doubt that at the time 
she appeared before the magistrates she must have been suffering 
intensely from weakness and distress. In fact, what happened 
proved that it was so. Her testimony was ended, and she 
turned to go. “She suddenly fainted. Later she was recalled— 
she desired to make a statement—and then, for the first time, 
she said she had seen the prisoner’s profile turned exactly in 
the same way she saw it in the carriage. How much of the 

, 153 


Mr. Mitehell- 
Innes 


John Alexander Dickman. 


pean profile she saw it was difficult to imagine. Evidence of identi- 
fication ought to have two characters. It ought to be deliberate 
and it ought to be certain. Did they trust, as an identification, 
evidence of that description—admittedly under eyesight 
circumstances of great difficulty—upon a spasm of emotion, 
acting on a mind weakened by suffering and distress—did they 
trust as identificaton evidence that had such a history? He 
suggested that identification was no identification. It was 
curious about that case that two witnesses, at least, seemed to 
have identified—save the mark!—this man in circumstances 
which he ventured to think ought to make the jury hesitate a 
very long time before they accepted their evidence. Remember 
this, in addition, about Mrs. Nisbet. That lady, if any person 
in the world, must desire to see this murderer, whoever he be, 
brought to justice. He did not suggest that she would deliber- 
ately say anything that she knew to be untrue, or that she 
would desire to suggest anything that at the moment she did 
not believe to be true, but they must remember her mind must 
be coloured with the natural, the human desire that the person 
who perpetrated this horrible murder should suffer. Add that 
to the history of the rest of her so-called identification, and 
beware before they accepted her evidence as anything like 
conclusive or reasonable. 

As to Hall, he deliberately swerved from pledging his oath 
that the prisoner was the man, and that was the evidence, 
added to Mrs. Nisbet’s identification, on which they were asked 
to believe that this was the man who got into the train with 
the deceased. ‘Two bad identifications could not make one 
good identification. They might heap suspicions mountains 
high—they still remained mere suspicion. They might mul- 
tiply bad identifications by the dozen. Here they had got 
two. They did not make one good one. The theory of the 
prosecution was that this murder took place between Stanning- 
ton and Morpeth, and a number of witnesses had been called 
to speak to stations where no one had been seen in the com- 
partment, and where people had left the train who could not 
possibly be associated with the crime. 

His friend said, in opening, ‘“‘ Whoever was the murderer, I 
think you may take it he would get out of the train at the 

154 


Mr. Mitchell-Innes’ Address to the Jury. 


first possible opportunity.”’ Where was the first possible Mr. Mitehell- 
opportunity? Mr. Tindal Atkinson suggested Morpeth. a 
Might he suggest, as a reply to Mr. Tindal Atkinson’s sugges- 
tion, that he could, and would, have got out of the train 
between Stannington and Morpeth? It was a slow train. 
There were six minutes between Stannington and Morpeth, and 
the distance was short. He agreed absolutely that a man 
would be mad, from his own point of view, if, having done this 
terrible thing in this carriage, he travelled on to a station of 
the importance of Morpeth, or to any station at all, with the 
body of his victim under the seat, and the floor and the cushions 

of the carriage dripping with blood like a shambles. Of 
course, there was nobody on the seats at Morpeth or at Pegs- 
wood, nor did the murderer get out at any of these stations. 
He had done the very thing that, of course, every man in his 
senses would do if he were in such danger as that. A man 
with the reeking witness of his crime locked up in the carriage 
would have escaped from it as soon as he could. That part of 
the case for the prosecution, he ventured to suggest, was of no 
value whatever. 

The first remarkable thing about the murder was that two 
pistols were used. There were five shots, two delivered with 
one kind of bullet and two with another. It might have been 
that the first shots did not take deadly effect. If there was 
a struggle, as he suggested there was, was it not incredible that 
there should only have been one murderer using two weapons 
at close quarters? The reasonable inference from the presence 
of these shots, two kinds of bullets, was that two murderers 
did the deed. If two men did the deed, the whole story of 
the prosecution fell to the ground. Then consider the blood. 
When a big vessel was severed, the blood did not come slowly, 
but it spurted. Then these murderers had to push him under 
the seat. What was the evidence, after all the description of 
wounds and blood in the carriage, to connect this man with 
the murder? A grey glove was produced, with a small hole 
at the top of the thumb, on which was recent blood, and 
there was not one word of proof that that blood was human. 
The police got the prisoner’s boots. The floor of the carriage 
was covered with blood. There was no suggestion of any 

155 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Mr. Mitehell- stain of blood on the boots. He suggested to the jury most 
emphatically that, so far as evidence of murder was concerned, 
there was absolutely no weight at all to be attached to these 
spots of blood. 

Coming to the point of what the prisoner did at Morpeth, 
Counsel observed that this was a station where news of the 
murder would be promptly telephoned over the whole system. 
Yet the jury had been asked to believe that the murderer 
spent some time in the neighbourhood of Morpeth; that he 
came back to the centre of danger, putting his head, as it 
were, straight into the lion’s jaws; and that he absolutely did 
not take the trouble to catch the 1.12 train to make sure of it. 
If he had caught the 1.12 train he would have caught an 
express, and would have been carried straight away into New- 
castle, and been lost in the city. But he did not take the 
trouble to do that. He came back to Morpeth, found he had 
just missed the train, lingered about, met somebody outside 
and talked to him like a perfectly rational being, and caught 
the 1.40—a slow train which could have been stopped at any 

_ station. 

Was it conceivable that the murderer would have gone back 
to Morpeth at all? He would have gone anywhere rather than 
back to the town and the station where the train had stopped, 
out of which he had got, leaving his murdered victim in the 
carriage, who must by that time have been discovered. If 
they took the prisoner’s behaviour from the point of view of 
being a murderer, he (counsel) frankly said it seemed to him 
absolutely inexplicable. 

Attempts, he continued, had been made to associate this 
man with the crime by producing the bag which was found 
down the shaft of a pit. This shaft must have been inspected 
several times since 18th March, yet the bag was not found until 
the 9th of June. This suggested to him that the murderer, 
whoever he was, waited until the first hue and cry was over, 
until the first vigorous search had been made in the neighbour- 
hood, and then went to the shaft—while Dickman was in prison. 
That explanation, he submitted, was far more probable than 
the one which suggested that the bag was put down on 18th 
March by the prisoner. Then, no pistol was found. Of course, 

156 


Mr. Mitchell-Innes’ Address to the Jury. 


it might be said the man had time to hide the pistol; never- Mr. Mitchell- 
theless, when there were absent from the case some of the gst 

most leading features of convictions of crime of this character, 

it was a matter to make a jury pause. Nothing whatever had 

been called to connect this man with the possession of the 

pistol. 

With regard to money, nothing more was found than £17. 
Did they honestly think there was anything in the point of 
the bank bag? The clerk admitted that the man had had an 
account with Lambton’s Bank for years, and a similar bag to 
the one produced was found in a bureau at his house. Did 
they believe this murderer—this fiendish murderer—would have 
walked about with such proof of guilt?) A whole mass of 
evidence had been raked together to prove that the prisoner 
was a betting man. Such he undoubtedly was, and, though 
he had been successful on the whole, he had had his ‘‘ ups and 
downs.”’ 

He (counsel) wished to draw attention to the letter from 
Mrs. Dickman to her husband asking him for money. At 
that time Mrs. Dickman had £32 of her own—2£17 in the 
co-operative stores and £15 in the Savings Bank. Prisoner 
gave a very fair account of this. He did not think he should 
be called upon to pay for certain things, and his wife did not 
think she should pay for certain things. She thought it was 
her duty to get out of him what she could. It was ludicrous 
to suggest that they were so completely without money that 
he should commit a crime so terrible as this. But that part 
of the case, he reminded them, did not begin to arise for their 
consideration, until they were satisfied that this man was the 
murderer. His connection with the crime must be completely 
established before the question of his motive for the crime 
could become even relative to their consideration. 

There remained to be considered his account of how he 
passed the time at Morpeth. The prisoner had told them that 
he suffered from, and had been treated for, a painful disease ; 
that he was suffering from it this morning. Personally, he 
(counsel) could not imagine why a man should not go into the 

country, knowing there were fields on each side of the road. 
He went irto a field, spent half an hour or more there, and 
. : 157 


John Alexander Dickman. 


ee nr then, feeling too ill to go on with what he intended to do, 
returned to Morpeth—returned to Morpeth in pain. That was 
a statement which he (counsel) suggested was perfectly true. 
The statement of the prisoner was that of a man on trial for 
his life, with his back to the wall if they liked; but it was a 
statement made by the man to the police. He claimed it in 
his favour to say that, when he could have withheld direct 
facts absolutely necessary for the foundation of this case, and 
which was presented there as direct evidence on these facts— 
facts without which this prosecution would, at any rate, have 
been in grave danger and difficulty if it could have been got 
up at all. He asked them to remember the demeanour of the 
prisoner in the witness-box, and to ask themselves where any 
witness, after he had undergone such sorrow and suffering, 
such slow torture as he had undergone during the last three 
months, would have stood the searching cross-examination of 
Mr. Tindal Atkinson in the way he did unless he had been 
supported by a clear conscience. Considering this man’s 
evidence, and remembering what he said before the charge was 
made against him, and the way in which he had stood the trial 
that day, they should think well before they came to a 
conclusion adverse to the prisoner. Let them remember the 
name that had been invoked to guide their counsels and to 
inspire their decision, and leave all extraneous matter out, 
and if they did these things, they would, he prayed most 
sincerely, come to a right and just conclusion.* 


The Court adjourned. 


*The speech for the defence occupied an hour and twenty minutes. 


158 


Third Day—Wednesday, 6th July, 1910. 


The Judge’s Summing Up. 


Lord Cotermce—Gentlemen of the jury, the prisoner is 
indicted for the wilful murder of Nisbet on the 18th March in 
this year. However long many of you may live, you will never 
have a more anxious and critical task than is placed before 
you to-day. The prosecution allege, and undertake to prove, 
that the prisoner is the man who is the author of the death of 
the deceased. 

At the outset I should like to mention, and dispose of, the 
question of the prisoner’s means. It is quite inaccurate to say 
that it is necessary in the case of a crime to prove the motive. 
Many crimes are committed apparently without motive. Many 
are committed with what appears to be an inadequate motive, 
but if the facts are clear, the motive is immaterial. If the 
facts in this case were abundantly clear, it would not be 
wise for you to seek about to find a motive, but the prosecution 
allege that there was in the case of the prisoner an adequate 
motive. They say that plunder was the motive, and the only 
motive, for this crime. It is not alleged that the deceased 
man had any enemy; that he had done anything to mark him 
out for private vengeance, and it is in the fact that he was in 
possession of a large sum of money that you see the reason or 
motive for the crime which undoubtedly was committed. If 
the prisoner had been a man of ample means, and if the facts 
were clear and proved that he was the author of the crime, the 
apparent absence of motive would be immaterial. 

But here the prosecution allege that if you are to ask for 
motive, if you think that the nature of the case requires that 
a motive should be put forward to explain the crime, then the 
prosecution say that the prisoner was in want of money. He 
was, some years ago, it appears, in a good position. He was 

159 


Lord 
Coleridge 


Lord 
Coleridge 


John Alexander Dickman. 


the secretary of a colliery, and at that time it seems that he 
had received a substantial sum when that colliery was converted 
into some other company into the nature of which we need not 
inquire. But the prosecution allege that towards the end of 
last year, and throughout this year, there is evidence from 
which, if you believe it, you may draw conclusions that the 
prisoner was in want of money. It appears that some time 
ago, towards the end of last year, he asked a witness who has 
been called, of the name of Swinney, for a loan of £10. The 
loan was refused, but in the asking for that loan, the prosecution 
say you may assume that the loan was necessary. Again, in 
October of last year, it appears that he had business relations 
with a moneylender, a moneylender of the name of Cohen, 
and that he gave a bill or promissory note or some document 
of the kind, or at any rate he entered into a legal obligation 
in consideration of the loan to him of £20 to pay the ample, 
some may think exorbitant, interest of £1 a month, which is 
equal to 60 per cent. per annum. That loan he had, as far 
as I know, up to the crucial date of the 18th March, never 
paid off. He had paid regularly this interest, and the last 
payment of the interest was the day before the murder. The 
loan was granted for a period of three months, and at the end 
of three months it was represented to Mr. Cohen, or his repre- 
sentatives, that he was unable to repay the principal, and 
another period of three months was allowed to be given, which, 
as I say, had not terminated at the time of the murder, and 
did not terminate, I think, until the month of May or June, 
and the last payment of the interest was made on the 17th 
March. The prisoner’s explanation of that is that he entered > 
into this obligation by way of an experiment to decide for 
himself, and I presume in the interests of the public, or the 
assumed interests of the public, whether or not this particular 
moneylender would be ready and willing to perform the obliga- 
tions which he set forth in some advertisement of his. If that 
was his desire, his desire would have been satisfied the instant 
the loan was granted, and there would certainly have been no 
desire on his part to refrain from repaying the capital at the 
end of the first period of three months; and it does not seem 
consistent with his conduct to accept that, as the only explana- 
160 


The Judge’s Summing Up. 


tion of the obtaining of this loan. Then, again, we have it 
that on the 14th February, I think it was in this year, he went to 
a jeweller’s, and there he pawned some jewellery of some value, 
a ring set with brilliants, studs, links, for the sum of £5. 
Those articles still remain to this hour in the custody of the 
person with whom he had pledged them, and the prosecution 
say, and have given evidence that the repayment of the 
£5 was difficult, if not impossible, on the part of the 
prisoner. Then we have the tripartite transaction 
between the prisoner, Mr. Christie, and Mr. Cohen. 
The result seems to have been that a sum of £200 
was lent by Cohen to Christie, of which undoubtedly some 
portion—it is a little indefinite what portion; Christie puts it 
at about half—but it is not quite clear how much seems to 
have remained with the prisoner for the purpose of carrying 
on some mutual betting transactions which apparently failed. 
So far as I gather, with the exception of two smaller incidents, 
that concludes the evidence in regard to the prisoner’s financial 
position. There are two or three other incidents. He appears 
to have pawned on the Ist March a pair of field glasses with 
a man of the name of Wilson, and the day before the murder 
he appears to have pawned another pair of field glasses with 
Messrs. Somerfield for the sum of 15s., those pawn tickets 
being, if I remember aright, discovered among his papers. 
He pawned them not in his own name, but in a fictitious name 
at a fictitious address, not that there is no such address, but 
that he did not live at it. He gave the name of John Wilkinson, 
180 Westmoreland Road, Newcastle, a name that was not his, 
and an address at which he certainly never lived. Those field 
glasses, at the time of the murder, were not in his possession, 
because they had never been redeemed. 

Such are the facts with regard to what I may call the outward 
incidents of his financial position. It has not been suggested 
that he had more than two banking accounts. One was a 
banking account in the National Provincial Bank, which was 
closed with a debit of 3s. The other was a banking account 
with Lloyd’s Bank, which at the end of 1909 had been either 
closed, or at any rate all transactions were at an end in regard 
to it, with an even balance. That was his financial position, 


1 161 


Lord 
Coleridge 


Lord 
Coleridge 


John Alexander Dickman. 


so far as he was concerned. His wife had two funds in which 
some money seems to have remained. When I say remained 
I mean to infer that at one time those resources had shown 
a far larger amount standing to the credit of the prisoner’s wife 
than they did at the time and the dates when the matter is 
important, March, 1910. The Post Office Savings Bank showed 
on the 14th March, a few days before the murder, a balance of 
10s. 9d. The Co-operative society, in which she had some 
money, showed on the 17th March a credit of £4, so that if 
we may take £5, or £6, or £7, so far as the evidence is con- 
cerned on documents, that seems to have been the only available 
resources of the prisoner. He says, and it is for you entirely 
to trust or not to trust to the accuracy of his account, that 
towards the end of last year he had been successful, though he 
had had his ups and downs, in his betting speculations. He 
avers that he still had, if I gather him aright, an available 
income—when I say income I mean an available capital—of 
something like £40 at the time that the murder was committed. 
For all that I am not saying that you ought not to believe it for 
that reason ; it may be that the necessary facts and surroundings 
of the case prevent any further evidence upon the point, evidence 
which documents could discover, but it is a fact, of course, 
that upon that we have no testimony but his own, testimony 
not independent; but, as I say, you must not take it that that 
is conclusive against him. It may be that the circumstances of 
the case forbid the possibility of any further evidence on the 
point; but at any rate it is the fact that we have only his 
uncorroborated testimony of the existence of that £40 or £50, 
or whatever the exact amount may be, in his pocket available 
at the time of the committal of the murder. 

There is this particular item of evidence which has still 
further to be brought to your attention, and that is a letter 
which was written by the prisoner’s wife to the prisoner on the 
25th January, 1910. That letter had been read to you, and 
you will recollect its terms. It is a letter which is all about 
money, and contains the expression that if further money is not 
forthcoming how to live “‘ will be a poser.” The suggestion 
on the other side is, that the wife and the husband were at 
odds as from what fund the money for necessary household 

162 


The Judge’s Summing Up. 


expenses should be drawn. She was demanding that he should Lord 


raeet them, and he was demanding that she should meet them, 
and she could have met them if she would, because at that 
time the circumstances were slightly different from the circum- 
stances in March, 1910, inasmuch as in the Co-operative society 
she had some £15 or £17, I forget exactly the amount, and 
in the Post Office Savings Bank she had a sum of £3 9s., which 
would come to something under £20. You have heard the 
arguments in relation to that. The arguments may have put 
a different complexion on that if you think they are of weight. 

Mr. LowsenrHat—tThere is one slight error. Mrs. Dickman 
had in the Post Office Savings Bank in January £15. 

Lord Corzricz—You will forgive me, Mr. Lowenthal, I 
think I am right. 

Mr. LowznrHat—My friend asked me to correct it. 

Lord Cotzrmpce—I know it was so stated. 

Mr. LowsentHat—Then we are wrong. 

Lord Cotermer—lIf you all just look at it, I think you will 
find that on the 25th January the balance was £3 9s. 

Mr. LowenrHar—I think that is right, and I beg pardon 
for interposing. 

Lord CotzrrmGe—Will you ascertain whether I am right? 

Mr. LowzntHat—yYes ; it is lst January. 

Lord Conzrmen—lI agree that was so, on the lst January ; 
but the 25th was the date on which the letter was written. 
I may say, in the passing, if I make any error in any state- 
ment of fact, I only hope I shall be corrected. I desire to 
be correct in every particular. 

Mr. LowsnrHat—I know your lordship does. 

Lord Cotermcz—I think I have dealt with that portion of 
the case. 

As I say, if the facts are clear, the motive is irrelevant. If 
the facts are not clear, motive may explain what otherwise 
would be difficult of explanation. Upon those facts you must 
make up your mind, aye or no, whether or not you think, 
on the whole, the prisoner on the 18th March was in a position 
in which the sum of £370 was a most valuable acquisition. 
Now, gentlemen, I have dealt with that, and I shall not recur 
to it. 

163 


John Alexander Dickman. 


The next point to be dealt with is this. | Who was the de- 
ceased? The deceased was a man who was in the employ- 
ment of the Stobswood Colliery at Widdrington. His duty 
as such clerk was on every alternate Friday to go to the bank 
in Newcastle to cash the cheque that was given to him by his 
employers and to take the money to the colliery at Widdrington 
for the purpose of paying the necessary wages. That this was 
a practice known to the prisoner seems to be beyond doubt. 
He knew it; he had been connected with a colliery before; and 
he does not dispute now that he knew that the deceased was 
going on that day, and he does not dispute that that was a 
practice with which he was familiar, a general practice. On 
the 18th March the deceased followed his usual practice. He 
went to Lloyd’s Bank at Newcastle with a cheque for 
£370 9s. 6d., and he went there with the black bag that you 
have seen as one of the exhibits in this case. At the bank 
he duly changed the cheque. He changed the cheque into 
the following coins:—231 sovereigns, 206 half-sovereigns, 
£35 9s. in silver, and £1 in copper. The gold he put into 
three canvas bags. Those canvas bags were bags which were 
used by the bank for this very purpose. As the bank had 
changed its nomenclature more than once, there were three 
kinds of bags stamped in three different ways in use at the 
bank in March of this year. We need not trouble about the 
other two forms of bags, but there were bags stamped 
‘* Lambtons ”’ in use at the bank at this time. The silver was 
put into paper bags, and the copper into a brown paper parcel 
or parcels. Having done that, the deceased proceeded, and 
there is no doubt about that, to catch the 10.27 train at New- 
castle. He could not have travelled alone, because he was 
murdered before he got to Widdrington. I do not suppose 
there exists a human being who has listened to this case who 
doubts that he was murdered by a companion, somebody who 
travelled in the carriage with him. The prosecution undertake 
to prove that the prisoner was that companion. _ If they prove 
the prisoner was his companion on that day, and therefore in 
the same compartment with him, I should think you will be of 
opinion that the crime against the prisoner was proved beyond 
all possible doubt. The question is have they proved that 
fact, or have they not? They may prove it by direct evidence, 

164 


Lord 
Coleridge 


The Judge’s Summing Up. 


they may prove it by circumstantial evidence, and proof by 
circumstantial evidence may often be as conclusive as proof 
by direct evidence. It all depends on the force, the variety, 
the independence of the circumstances all pointing or not 
pointing in one direction. Now, the prisoner has made a 
statement, and in regard to that statement it is perfectly plain 
that the prisoner did travel by the same train; that he got 
in at Newcastle at 10.27, and that he got out at Morpeth at 
11.10. Did he see the deceased? He says he did. He 
saw the deceased, who took his ticket just before he did. 
That is his statement. But he says that, after seeing the 
deceased take his ticket in the booking office, so far as he was 
concerned the deceased disappeared from view, and he never 
saw him again. If that be true, it is clear that he could not 
have been the author of his death. He says he went to the 
refreshment room, a matter which is not disputed. He says 
he had a pie and some beer, a matter which is quite irrelevant. 
It does not matter one way or the other. Then he says he 
went to the urinal which is situated at the edge of No. 8 plat- 
form. To get to that, even if he went to it, he would have to 
pass down the platform which goes ultimately to No. 4 gate. He 
says he walked down unaccompanied, not knowing anybody, 
not recognising anybody, in conversation with nobody, and that 
from the urinal he took his seat on No. 5 platform in the 
train, but to the rear of the train. Inasmuch as it has been 
proved that the deceased was murdered in the third compart- 
ment of the first coach, it is clear that if that account be true, 
some one else must be the author of the death of the deceased. 
Gentlemen, is that or is that not correct? Again, I say we 
have the testimony of the prisoner alone. But, again, I warn 
you that there are many, many occasions on which the testi- 
mony of the prisoner alone can be given. It would be unfair 
to say, because there is nothing but the testimony of the 
prisoner to support it, that therefore it is not to be believed. 
There may be circumstances under which it would be impossible, 
if not unlikely, unlikely if not impossible, that he could, having 
regard to the circumstances, produce any corroboration. There- 
fore the bare fact that his statement is uncorroborated ought 
not of itself to militate against its truth. Then, is it true? 
and that is what we have to ask ourselves. 
165 


Lord 
Coleridge 


Lord 
Coleridge 


John Alexander Dickman. 


First of all, we have a witness of the name of Raven, against 
whose character and against whose competence, whether from 
age, or sight, or hearing, or recollection, no serious attack 
has been made. Well, we have the witness Raven, who knew 
both of them, both the prisoner and the deceased. He knew 
them, at any rate, either by sight or by name, or by both. 
The name does not really matter. He knew them both by 
sight, and he stood on a particular spot, which has been marked 
by himself upon the map. As you, gentlemen, have not seen 
the map, I would be obliged if you would take it and look at 
the cross upon that photograph which indicates the position. 
(His lordship handed the photograph to the jury, in which 
Raven has placed himself as he stood with his face towards the 
refreshment room.) Standing there, he says this, ‘‘ There were 
not many people there. I saw the deceased and the prisoner 
together, walking along together.’? He would have you to 
understand not as strangers who happened to be walking along- 
side of each other, but in the way in which two persons who 
have some sort of intercourse, some sort of knowledge of each 
other, some sort of companionship, would walk. They were 
coming towards him. They turned in the direction of No. 4 
platform. They passed in at No. 4 gate, and passed behind 
the cigar divan which is there situated, which, on passing 
through, would enable them to reach the necessary platform, 
No. 5. ‘‘ After they passed behind this divan I saw them 
no more.’”’ Can you trust Mr. Raven’s observation? If Mr. 
Raven’s observation be correct, he saw an account of the 
tragedy in the papers the same afternoon, so that attention 
was called to this fact hot-foot upon the observation which he 
made, he tells you what he saw, is it or is it not consistent 
with the prisoner’s account? That is a matter which you, 
not I, have to determine for yourselves. 

The next witness was the witness Hepple. Hepple was a 
man who had known the prisoner for twenty years, and could 
not, if he was sober and had his wits about him, make a mistake 
with regard to the prisoner, unless the prisoner has a double. 
He says that he went on to No. 2 platform, and that he selected 
a compartment. That compartment has been ascertained by 
one, of those strange little facts which are so conclusive. He 
recollects that in that compartment there was a photograph of 

166 


The Judge’s Summing Up. 


Brancepeth Castle. The train hag been searched, and the 
only compartment which has a photograph of Brancepeth 
Castle is the last compartment of the third coach. If you 
look at that photograph you will see the figure of the witness 
Hepple standing outside the compartment which contains the 
photograph of Brancepeth Castle, and in which undoubtedly 
he travelled that day. Hepple, though he knew the prisoner, 
and had known him for twenty years, did not know the de- 
ceased by sight, but, standing and walking, as he did until 
the train left the platform, to and fro, three or four paces 
each way, waiting for the train to go off, he noticed the 
prisoner, and the prisoner passed him, and the prisoner went 
on towards the head of the train. If the prisoner did not 
repass him, his evidence is inconsistent with the prisoner’s 
account—that he took his seat in the rear of the train. Not 
only so, but he says that the prisoner was in company with 
a companion, and although the companion was unknown to him, 
he says his companion was a slightly built man, and from the 
evidence which we have in the case, as compared with the 
prisoner, it appears that the deceased was a slightly built 
man. They walked past him in the direction of the engine. 
He took a turn, and while he took that turn his back was 
turned towards them. But he saw this. The train was just 
about to start, and he saw one of them, they being still in 
companionship, that is, the prisoner and the other man, with 
his hand on the handle of a door a long way up the train. 
Which particular door that was, of course, he could not tell 
you. It isa matter more or less guesswork to place the exact 
position of the door, but it is hardly a matter of guesswork to 
say whether it was a good way on in front or whether it was 
close to him, or to the rear of him. Some time afterwards an 
experiment was made. The train was drawn up in the same 
place. Hepple stood at the door of the same compartment 
in which he had travelled. The detectives, or porters, or 
whoever they may be, walked slowly in the direction of the 
engine, and he was to signal to them when they came 
to a spot about as far off as where he had seen these 
two men, of whom the prisoner was one, with a hand upon a 
door, just before the train started. They walked slowly, 
“¢urned backwards, walked with their back towards the engine, 
167 


Lor 
bore ila 


Lord 
Coleridge 


John Alexander Dickman. 


and, singularly enough, when they got within a foot or two of 
the carriage in which the deceased undoubtedly travelled, the 
signal was given by Hepple that that was the approximate 
distance from him. Gentlemen, the only observation I have 
to make upon that is this. Persons may, of course, make 
mistakes about small matters; and if a person is particularly 
accurate in a particularly small matter, I should say that such 
evidence was rather doubtful, because persons are very often 
proud of their accuracy in proportion to their inaccuracy. But 
there are two features in regard to Hepple’s evidence which are 
not features which can be characterised as small pieces of 
accuracy. One is, did the prisoner get into the train, broadly 
speaking, a good way off in front of him, or close to him to 
the rear? That is not a minute piece of accuracy; that is a 
matter of general observation. If he got into the train any- 
where near where Hepple says he saw him in the act of getting 
in, then it is clear that the prisoner is wrong when he says 
that he travelled to the rear of the train. If Hepple is 
accurate in saying that the prisoner was accompanied by a 
companion, in the sense that he was obviously talking to him, 
and obviously known to him, and walking in company with 
another man, and if the result of his observation leads you 
to conclude that the prisoner and the other man, whoever it 
was, got into the same compartment, whichever it was, to 
travel together, then it is clear that the prisoner’s account 
cannot be relied on when he says that alone he walked up that 
platform unaccompanied, and, so far as any companionship was 
concerned, he travelled alone to Morpeth. 

Gentlemen, the next witness is a witness of the name of 
Hall. I might say, in passing, that it seems to me to be fairly 
accurately proved that the first compartment in the first coach 
was a smoker, because in that compartment travelled the 
witness Bruce with another man. Bruce was travelling from 
Newcastle to Alnmouth, and Hall, whose accuracy has been 
impugned, says and corroborates Bruce that the first compart- 
ment was a smoker. It is clear that the prisoner did not 
travel in that compartment, because Bruce was in it with 
another man, certainly not the prisoner. Did he travel in 
the second compartment of the first coach? Certainly not, 
because Hall was in the second compartment of the first coach, 

168 


The Judge’s Summing Up. 


and in that compartment he travelled with Spink. As I gather 
Hall and Spink were on the same errand ag the deceased, only 
happily the man who carried the bag, whichever it was, was 
accompanied, and not unaccompanied. Perhaps, if the poor 
man into whose death we are inquiring had had a companion 
this would not have happened. However that may be, Hall 
knew the deceased. Hall travelled in the next compartment 
to the compartment in which the murder was committed. He 
travelled in the second compartment of the first coach, and 
the deceased travelled in the third compartment of the first 
coach. Hall knew the deceased. He did not know, up to 
that time, the prisoner, but he saw the deceased, and he saw 
another man come along right up to the first coach. The 
deceased and this other man were in conversation, so no doubt 
could exist in his mind that the deceased had a companion, 
somebody with whom he was talking and with whom he was 
walking. What is the evidence as to that other man? If 
that other man got into that compartment as the deceased’s 
companion, no one could doubt that he was the author of the 
deceased’s death. Who was it? He was a man who had on 
a light fawn overcoat, so says Hall. On the 21st March—that 
is, three days afterwards—Hall was taken to the police station. 
What took place at the police station about which we have 
heard so much, but not too much?! He was taken to the police 
station, and he was there confronted with nine other men. 
Of those nine other men the prisoner was one. Now, there 
are some persons, as I have said, who are so proud of their 
accuracy that in that very pride you may discover grounds for 
doubting it. There are other persons who are scrupulous, 
careful, conscientious, who do not want to be more sure 
than their mind and conviction justify, and will not go for 
any purpose beyond what they are satisfied they can swear to. 
My experience tells me that that class of mind is more to be 
depended upon than the mind of a man with a cocksure mind. 
You may depend upon it that, if he is sound and sensible and 
is of very good memory, so far as he goes he is a person who 
ought probably to be trusted. It is perfectly true that Hall 
did not pick out the prisoner in the sense that he came in 
and put his hand upon the man and swore to him. But he 
looked them up and down, and then he asked the policeman 
169 


Lord 


> Coleridge 


John Alexander Dickman. 


what he was expected to do. Now, he knew that he was there 
called in to do what was the most responsible thing a man 
could do, to recognise a murderer. In his hesitation, in his 
queries to the police officer, you may either see if you think 
fit, on the one hand, signs of a real doubt existing in his 
mind, or you may see signs of a hesitation, a momentary 
hesitation, to do that which must be so vital to the person 
whom he assumed to recognise. It is open to both views, the 
one view has been put forward by the prosecution, the other 
view by the defence. It is in the demeanour of the witness, 
his appearance, his character, the view you take of him, that 
will guide you as to whether to place him in one category or 
in the other. True it is that he asked the policeman what he 
was expected to do, and then the policeman very properly 
said—‘‘ You are expected, if you can, to point the man out 
whom you saw,’’ upon which Hall said this—‘‘I said I was 
not sure enough to bind myself by pointing out anybody. I 
wanted to know whether by pointing the man out I was swearing 
that he was the man who was with the deceased.’’ But he 
did select the prisoner. That is the position of Hall. He has 
come into the witness-box here, and he has said that he did 
point out the prisoner as being very like the man, and that, 
as far as I gather, is as far as he is willing to go. How can 
you trust him to that extent? Is he mistaken or not? It is 
for you to say upon that evidence whether or not it comes to 
this, that the man believes the prisoner to be the man, but 
that he has not sufficient confidence in the accuracy of his 
observation to swear to him positively in so momentous a 
matter. He said that he was like him, and so far as he was 
concerned, if he was told that the murderer was among those 
nine men, he would not therefore be so trammelled, and that 
he would have no hesitation in pointing the man out. I have 
tried, I hope with success, to give what I think is the fair 
judicial interpretation of his evidence. You may see fit—it is 
your province—to take a totally different view. You may 
think it is entirely satisfactory ; you may think it is entirely 
unsatisfactory. It is entirely for you to say what view you 
take of that evidence. The train proceeds and it gets as far as 
Heaton, and there the deceased’s wife comes to meet the 
deceased. Apparently he is in the habit of travelling towards 
170 


The Judge’s Summing Up. 


the rear end of the train. She meets him every fortnight when 
he goes. It is her custom. She awaits him on the platform 
at the customary part of the train. On this occasion the 
deceased is not travelling in the customary part of the train, 
and owing to that she nearly missed catching sight of him at 
all. Just before the train is about to start she sees him. I 
think he puts his head out of the window. She runs up to 
him ; she has a few moment’s conversation with him, and she 
observes this, that there is one man in the compartment with 
him. I will deal with that piece of evidence in another con- 
junction a little later on. She observed at Heaton only one 
other man. There is a shadow cast by something going over 
the line, a bridge of some character, which cast a shadow on 
the man’s face. She can only see his profile, and he is sitting 
in the corner at the further end, with his coat collar high up 
upon the neck, and therefore intentionally, I should think, 
concealing as much of his face as he could without attracting 
undue suspicion ; because no one can doubt, whoever that man 
was, that he was in the train when the deceased was murdered. 
He was sitting on the seat facing the engine at the far end. 
He never moved. I think she says he was reading a paper. 
There came an inquiry. The deceased’s wife appeared as 
witness. As I gather, she said in the casual glance she made 
she could not recognise him. She turned to leave the Court. 
As she turned she caught sight of the prisoner’s profile. The 
result of that was that she instantly swooned away, because it 
struck her absolutely as being the profile of the man whom she 
saw in the carriage. Yesterday she came into the witness-box, 
and she went a great deal further than she has ever gone before. 
She says that, looking at him again, she is certain that he is 
the man who sat there alone with the deceased in that carriage. 
The question for you is, not whether she is certain, but whether 
she is right. It is to be said, and fairly said, that an identifica- 
tion thus growing is not to be trusted; that the woman is in 
a state of distress of mind in which the desire, the natural 
desire, that the person who has murdered her husband should 
be brought to account would lead her mind insensibly and gently 
from possibility to probability, and from probability to certainty. 
That is how it might be put on the one side. On the other 
171 


Lord 
Coleridge 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Lord hes side, it might be said that the more she saw the more she was 
sure, and in her positive assertion to-day, knowing what depends 
upon it, she can only be credited with an honest conviction, 
freed from all exterior motive, that she is speaking the truth 
when she says the man in the dock is the man that she saw 
in the carriage. So much for the deceased’s wife. The train 
goes on to Stannington. Here the prisoner should have got 
out. He had booked, according to his own statement, and 
according to the evidence of Athey, the man who took the 
tickets at Morpeth, on to Stannington with a return ticket, 
because, as his account is, his desire was to see Mr. Hogg, 
who lived at Dovecot, and the next nearest station to Dove- 
cot was the station at Stannington. He did not get out. 
He says he was so occupied in the betting news of the news- 
paper which he was reading, which was more than ordinary 
interesting because I think the Liverpool Handicap, or some 
important race, was to be run or had been run. 

Mr. Mircnetu-Innes—The Grand National. 

Lord Corrrrpce—The Grand National had just been run, and 
he was reading an account of it in the paper. 

Mr. Mrrcueii-Innes—I think it is of importance. The Grand 
National was to be run, and it was the calculation of the odds 
that was important. 

Lord Coreripe¢e—Thank you. At any rate, there was some- 
thing in the paper which was mcre than usually attractive and 
absorbing, and that, owing to that, through inadvertence, he 
did not get out at the place to which he had booked. There 
was a man who did get out at Stannington. That was Spink. 
Spink was in the next compartment, and got out. He 
got out, and as the train passed—for, if I remember rightly, 
you have to wait till the train passes away before you can get 
out of the station—he saw the deceased sitting in the far 
corner, facing the engine. He was alive and well at Stanning- 
ton. There was another man in the compartment, clearly the 
same man whom Mrs. Nisbet had observed at Heaton. He 
had a moustache and a black felt hat—that comes to nothing— 
and he was sitting opposite reading a paper. Therefore, it is 
clear, is it not, that at Stannington the deceased was alive and 
well, with one companion in the carriage. The train reached 
Morpeth, and at Morpeth a man called Grant got out. He 

172 


The Judge’s Summing Up. 


was in the next compartment, towards the rear of the com- Lord 
partment in which the deceased was murdered, for he occupied Parente 
the first compartment of the second coach. 

Mr. LowsntHat—Grant got in there. 

Lord Cotsrmes—You are quite right. He got in and 
returned the same day, but whether he got out or got in really 
does not affect what I was saying. When he got into this 
compartment of the second carriage he had an opportunity of 
looking at the compartment in which the deceased was mur- 
dered. His observation told him that that compartment was 
empty. If we believe his story, it is quite clear that between 
Stannington and Morpeth the deceased had been murdered, 
and that at Morpeth the murderer had got out, unless a sug- 
gestion be accepted which has been put forward by the defence, 
that the murderer had leapt from the train between Stanning- 
ton and Morpeth. At Morpeth the prisoner got out. He had 
gone past Stannington, and he had therefore to pay excess 
fare to Morpeth. Here we take up the evidence of Athey, 
the man who took his ticket. Athey was called, and at the 
suggestion of one of you, if I may say so, most rightly and 
most wisely recalled. Athey does not pretend that he can 
identify the prisoner, although the prisoner undoubtedly 
passed him. But it does not matter whether he identifies him 
or not, because the prisoner’s story is that he did pass him 
and did give him his ticket; but the important point of the 
evidence of Athey is this. He says that the man who passed 
him had on an overcoat. The prisoner has sworn that he 
carried his overcoat in his hand, and that it was not a light 
overcoat but a dark brown coat. Athey describes somewhat 
dramatically, in a way I should think, if he is an accurate man, 
that would commend itself to you, how the prisoner, because we 
can call him the prisoner, as it is admitted that he was the 
prisoner, though Athey does not recognise him, behaved. He 
said he had his ticket and his fare in his left hand, and he 
remembers some little edge of his coat hanging forward, so 
to speak, rather to prevent his hand getting out; he made 
some remark of that kind showing his attention was attracted 
to the fact that the prisoner had a coat on. He certamly had, 
it is suggested, his fare ready; and it is suggested on the part 
of the prosecution that the exact amount of his excess fare 


173 


Lord 
Coleridge 


John Alexander Dickman. 


was suspiciously ready. However that commends itself to you, 
it is a matter for you and not for me; but if the suggestion of 
the prosecution be correct that in his right hand, under his 
coat, he was carrying a bag with £370 in it, it would not 
leave his right hand free for getting at his ticket or finding 
his change. His left hand alone would be free; and there- 
fore the prosecution rather suggest that he, calculating the 
fare beforehand, got his ticket ready, and the exact amount of 
the excess fare, so as to be able to pass the barrier, utilising 
his left hand, and his left hand only. That is their suggestion. 
Of course, it is only a little fact, not a fact from which you 


‘should draw unmerited conclusions, but it is a fact which has 


been pointed out to you by the prosecution. There was no 
one in this compartment where the man was murdered 
apparently at Morpeth; Cosker says there was no one apparently 
at Longhirst; and at Widdrington, Yeoman, who knew the 
deceased well, and who had to look through the whole train, 
when looking over the front carriages, did not see the deceased. 
Finally, at Alnmouth the body is found under the seat. 

I have pointed out that it is suggested by the prosecution 
that the murderer must have got out at Morpeth. Well, he 
certainly did not get out at Longhirst, because at Longhirst 
only Grant got out, another man whom Yeoman, the station- 
master, knows, and a woman; and they all three returned to 
Morpeth the same day and travelled from Morpeth to Long- 
hirst and back. No suggestion has been made as to one of 
those three that it was the murderer. He certainly did not 
get out at Pegswood. Only two persons got out at Pegswood, 
and both were women, as the stationmaster tells you. The only 
suggestion, I suppose, is that he might have got out at the 
stations intermediate between Pegswood and Widdrington. 
There are two or three stations. 

Mr. Mrrcneiu-Innes—Pegswood is the next station to Mor- 
peth. 

Lord Co.eripaz—Then Longhirst and then Alnmouth. It 
is the only suggestion that can be made, but I have not heard 
that it was seriously argued. In the meantime, what was 
the prisoner doing? His object, he tells us, was to go to 
see Mr. Hoge at Dovecot. For Dovecot, as I have told you, 
the station was Stannington, and Stannington was the station 

174 


The Judge’s Summing Up. 


to which he booked. He said it was in connection with a 
new sinking operation at Dovecot. Hogg has been called. 
Hogg says that it is true that on two or three, it may be three 
or four occasions previously, the prisoner has visited him at 
Dovecot, coming out at Newcastle for the purpose. What 
the purpose or object of those visits was Hogg does not much 
enlighten us upon. He does not know; he knew him as a 
friend. He cannot tell you what was the exact reason ; in fact, 
he can assign no reason for those visits. He says he came 
and chatted to him; but that he had no connection whatever 
with the sinking operations, and he certainly does not confirm 
the prisoner’s suggestion that there was any connection between 
the prisoner and Hogg in the matter of the operations of sink- 
ing at Dovecot. He did not come as a rule by appointment. 
He certainly did not make any appointment on the 18th March, 
because Hogg was in Newcastle on that day, and so was not 
there if he had visited the colliery. It is pointed out to you, 
and it is suggested it is a significant fact, and it may strike 
you in that light or it may not, that the last visit that the 
prisoner made to Hogg was on the Friday a fortnight before. 
That is the very day upon which it was customary for the 
deceased to travel by that train, and travel with the money 
for the wages. I suppose the suggestion would be that the 
prisoner was either taking what might be called a trial trip 
for the purpose of laying his plans and seeing what time it 
took to do this, that, and the other, or it may be, as 1 suppose 
the prosecution would suggest, that he could not get the 
deceased to travel alone, and that therefore he was tracking 
him, and tracking him without result. Those are mere sur- 
mises to which you may attach no weight, but they are inci- 
dents which it is perfectly right that the prosecution should 
draw to your attention. 

What is the net result, to sum it up, of the evidence so far? 
The net result seems to me, but it is a matter for you, to be 
this. Firstly, that the deceased was in the third compart- 
ment of the first coach; secondly, that he was murdered be- 
tween Stannington and Morpeth; thirdly, that there was one 
man and one man alone in the carriage with him, certainly 
between Heaton and Morpeth; fourthly, that the prisoner, 

if you believe Raven, was seen with the deceased at the station 
175 


Lo: 
Co 


rd 
lerldge 


Lord 
Coleridge 


John Alexander Dickman. 


at Newcastle in apparent companionship with him; fifthly, that 
the prisoner was seen with a companion getting into a com- 
partment approximate at any rate to the one in which the 
deceased was murdered—that is, if you believe Hepple; but 
that it was not the first compartment of the coach, because 
Bruce was there and not the prisoner. Not the second com- 
partment of that coach, because Spink and Hall were in that, 
and not the prisoner. Then, if you believe Hall, and I do not 
repeat what I said about his identification, because you have 
it in mind Hall points out (I will not say identifies) the prisoner 
as being the man who got into the third compartment at New- 
castle with the deceased. That is the summary, I think, I 
hope, the fair summary, I believe the accurate summary of 
the evidence. Further, at Heaton Mrs. Nisbet saw the man, 
and you will recollect what I said about her identification. 
The result of that surely is this, if we believe it, unless we are 
to throw it to the winds, that the prisoner had a companion. 
He says he had none. If he says he had no companion when 
we know that he had, who was that companion? Have the 
prosecution satisfied you that that companion was the deceased 
or have they not? If they have, the rest of the case is not 
worth investigation. If you await further evidence, then all 
the rest of the case becomes material. 

I now pass on to the rest of the case. The prisoner has given 
us an account of his movements. Though it may be perfectly 
true to say that an innocent man from stupidity or some desire 
to shield or conceal something that he wishes to conceal, gives 
a false account of his movements, yet in the proportion of the 
gravity of the case against him, lies the improbability that he 
would tell a false story merely to conceal something. Nothing 
is more momentous to him, if he be innocent, than to tell the 
truth. Therefore a good deal depends upon whether you believe, 
or do not believe the story of the prisoner’s movements as 
recounted by himself. If you believe them, it is in his favour. 
It is a complete exculpation of the accusation that is brought 
against him. If you do not believe them, what assignable cause 
has he given for deceiving us? With those preliminary observa- 
tions let me now draw your attention to the prisoner’s own story 
of his own movements. Up to the time of his getting out at 

176 


The Judge’s Summing Up. 


Morpeth no controversy arises. At Morpeth he found on the Herd. dee 
opposite platform a train of the existence of which he knew, 
waiting to take passengers to Stannington. His desire being to 
see his friend Hogg at Stannington, and his desire at the outset 
to travel as far as Stannington, and Stannington only, there 
was the opportunity at once to cross the platform, take his seat 
for Stannington, and be back at Stannington within ten minutes. 
He knew the train. He knew of its existence. He knew it 
had not left. But he does not. He goes out at Morpeth under 
the circumstances which I have recounted to you. He says this 
is the reason for his action, “ As I had intended if I had gone 
to Stannington, to Dovecot, to have walked in to Morpeth in 
order to pass a drift or some sinking operations about half-way 
between Stannington and Morpeth, it did not matter to me 
which way I walked, whether from Stannington to Morpeth 
or Morpeth to Stannington, and I determined to walk from 
Morpeth to Stannington instead of from Stannington to 
Morpeth.” That is the account that he gives of not going back 
to Stannington by the next train. He comes out of the station 
at 11.10, I think it is, and from 11.10 until twenty minutes 
after one no one sees him. That is common ground. Where 
did he go? He says he set forth on the walk to Stannington, 
and then he is attacked by some strange malady. I could not 
discover quite whether it was diarrhcea or whether it was 
constipation. He would seem to infer that it was a mingling 
of both which seems to me to be a mixture of opposites. In 
going along the road he had walked for some distance when 
this malady attacked him, and he got into a field. He cannot 
remember whether there was or was not a hedge between the 
road and the field, whether it was a high quickset hedge, 
whether he got over the railings, or through or under or past 
the quickset hedge, if any. It is strange obliviousness. It may 
be, as he says, that his pain was so extreme as to take from 
him the power of observation. He met no one. He lay 
down, I think, two or three times in this field, getting up 
at intervals and lying down again. He did not get as far as 
the sinking operation, the drift, which was half-way ; therefore 
he did not get more than about a mile and three-quarters or 
so from Morpeth. Then he returned to Morpeth without having 


M 177 


ord 


L 
Col 


eridge 


John Alexander Dickman. 


seen the sinking operations half-way or his friend Hogg at 
Stannington. He returned, so he says, to Morpeth, and he 
returned too late to catch the 1.10 back to Newcastle, and he 
had to wait until the 1.40. Recumbency being, according to 
him, the remedy for the malady of piles, from which he was 
suffering, he certainly did not seek the ordinary remedy. I 
presume that at the station of Morpeth there is a waiting room, 
if not a bench or a chair, but he goes out from Morpeth and 
walks up to the town towards the Newcastle Arms. There, 
some time about twenty minutes past one, he meets a man 
called Elliott and a police officer of the name of Sanderson, 
and passed the time of day with them. 

Mr. Mrrcneiu-Innes—He was not a police officer. 

Lord Cotzripce—Very well, a man named Sanderson. It 
is said, why did not they call Sanderson and have thus ascer- 
tained that his statement in regard to Elliott was quite correct? 
They have ascertained, I do not doubt, that the prisoner is 
correct when he says that he met Elliott and he met Sanderson 
and talked to them; and he may be perfectly correct in saying 
that so far as Sanderson and Elliott were concerned he did not 
exhibit anything in his manner which aroused suspicion. Appar- 
ently he did not, or else I suppose he would have dilated upon 
that, acquainted them with his malady, or exhibited signs in his 
face of the sufferings he had undergone, because, according 
to him, he has put it forward in his own defence, that he 
appeared cool and collected in his manner. The prosecution 
say what happened after 1.20 is quite immaterial. What 
happened to him between 11.10 and 1.20 is the vital question 
in the case. Gentlemen, you have heard this story of this 
malady; you have heard his account of his walk, do you 
believe it? If you believe it, then clearly you must seek else- 
where for the murderer. If you do not believe it, what assign- 
able ground has been put forward for this statement for facts 
which are no facts? Assignable ground consistent with his 
innocence I mean, because naturally a guilty man would seek 
in any way that he could lay his hand to to account otherwise 
than how they were spent for the spending of that crucial 
interval. Gentlemen, you have heard him, and I have no doubt 
that you have formed an opinion as to whether or not you 

178 


The Judge’s Summing Up. 


can rely upon his story in regard to the passing of the interval. Lord 
: : : E Coleridge 

The story depends upon his evidence, and his evidence alone, 

for he did not use the lavatory at Morpeth going or returning. 

He did not acquaint anybody at the railway station with his 
malady; neither Elhott nor Sanderson whom he subsequently 

met. I know not how much this road may be frequented, it 

may be very little, but in fact he met no one on the road, and 
therefore has no corroborative evidence of his being on that road 

at all. ; 

Mr. Mrrcueii-Innes—As you have been good enough to invite 
correction, may I remind your lordship that it is the uncon- 
tradicted evidence on behalf of the prisoner that he has in fact 
been treated for this very malady at the prison? 

Lord Coizripce—I do not doubt that. I am glad to be 
reminded of it, and I do not think anybody has disputed he 
suffered from piles. Of that I have no doubt. He said he was 
so treated in the prison, and I do not gather there is any 
contradiction, or that any question was put about it, that he 
had suffered from piles. 

Now, gentlemen, I pass that by. I will say a few words 
about the important question which has been raised by the 
defence in regard to this, the defence, if I may say so, so dis- 
creetly, so fairly, so eloquently urged, and with such restraint. 
He made a statement to the police, and it is urged on his behalf, 
and I have no doubt you gave it due attention, that much of 
the story which we now know came from the lips of the prisoner 
at the time when he himself alone knew of it, and when the 
police were ignorant of it, and after it would have been difficult 
for the prosecution to patch the story up in the absence of the 
guidance given by the prisoner in his own voluntary statement. 
It is urged that behaviour like that speaks trumpet tongued in 
favour of his innocence, that no guilty man would so inculpate 
himself, and only an innocent man would make statements which 
would be available and useful to the prosecution in his own 
prosecution. What are we to say to that? A great deal depends 
upon what the prisoner thought the police knew. He did not 
know how much they knew. I am not saying this against 
him. I am only putting the argument hypothetically, you 
understand; and I am assuming for the moment without proof 


179 


John Alexander Dickman. 


—s ape that he was a guilty man. He would know that to say he had 
not travelled by that train might be proved beyond demonstra- 
tion to be false. He was known. He had travelled by that 
train before; it would be very strange if some one had not 
observed that. Does it commend itself to your good sense that 
a guilty man would have said as much truth as was possible 
without implicating himself in the crime? It was an innocent 
act to go by the train. It was an innocent act to travel by the 
train. He was known, and it might be traced where he got out; 
it might be traced where he had got his ticket. It was a per- 
fectly innocent act to pass from the station, a perfectly inno- 
cent act to get out and pay the excess fare. All those facts 
are perfectly consistent with innocence. Would a guilty man 
who was a clever man, find it the best resource to tell all those 
facts which did not implicate him so as to prevent its being 
said that he told us anything that was false. It is true he 
travelled by the train. It is true we find that he got out at 
Morpeth. It is true that he took a ticket to Stannington. 
I do not want to suggest anything against the prisoner, but when 
you have an argument put before you, that in the fact that he 
made these statements, lies the strongest testimony to his inno- 
cence, I think it must be said that you may look at it if you 
think it right, under another aspect. It may be consistent with 
his innocence. It may be consistent with his guilt. 

In regard to the murdered man, it is proved to demonstration 
that he was murdered with bullet shots, with four, I think, 
actually embedded in his head; either there is evidence of 
their having wounded him in the head, or they are embedded 
in his head. Certainly one, if not more, of the wounds must 
have been instantaneously fatal. The presumption is that one 
of them, at any rate, must have been inflicted when the man 
was crouching on the ground, holding up the collar of his coat 
to ward off an anticipated attack, because the bullet went 
through the back of the collar of his coat, and the bullet went 
into his brain. The place where it entered his brain was high 
up upon his neck, showing that the coat had been drawn up 
to ward off an attack. The direction of the wound was up, 
which looks as if the man was prone when the wound was 
inflicted. Another thing that is clear is this, that the wounds 

180 


The Judge’s Summing Up. 


were inflicted by two instruments—that is, by two pistols, oe dee 
because they were inflicted by a small, nickel-plated bullet, 
and by a leaden bullet, and the two classes of bullet would not 
fit into the same bore. The first natural inference you would 
derive from that is, would you not, that the man must have 
been attacked by two persons, each holding a lethal weapon? 
As a matter of fact, it would appear upon the evidence, 
unless we are to disregard it in its entirety, one man and one 
man alone was the companion of the deceased in that compart- 
ment. If, therefore, you are of opinion upon the evidence— 
and I will not recall it to your minds—that one man, and one 
man alone, was in the carriage with that deceased man when 
he was murdered, it stands to reason, does it not, that, however 
unusual, the murderer must have used two weapons, unless 
one of the wounds was self-inflicted by the deceased, which is 
a suggestion that has never yet been put forward? But 
whoever committed this murder, clearly was a man who had 
thought it out beforehand, who had laid his plans, and it may 
be, though I know not, thought it would be safer, inasmuch 
as he travelled alone with the man, and was only seen alone 
with the man, to give some good ground for believing that, 
inasmuch as the murder was committed by two, in some way 
or somehow he was not one of the two, and in some way unex- 
plained the man met his death unconnected with the murderer 
himself. One knows not what may operate exactly in the mind 
of a man, whoever he is, because whoever he be in this case, 
it was the mind of a man who had planned it, and had carried 
into effect a concerted, skilful plan, weighing the effect upon 
the public mind of this, that, and the other piece of evidence. 
Therefore, if we believe that the deceased had one companion, 
and one companion only, the argument that two pistols point to 
two operators fails to have any effective force. 

Gentlemen, I pass by the question of the wounds, because 
that really has not been seriously contested. 

You have one or two other pieces of evidence which are said 
to implicate the prisoner. On the 30th March, 1910, a fawn 
Burberry overcoat, which has been produced, was taken from 
the prisoner when he was in custody. On the left front, and 


you have seen it at the bottom, there was a very large stain. 
181 


Lord 
Coleridge 


John Alexander Dickman. 


The doctor cannot pronounce what caused that stain. It was 
a stain that had been treated. It had been rubbed with some- 
thing apparently in the nature of paraffin. That was shown by 
the slight, infinitesimal globules of the oil still remaining on 
the fabric of the garment. The edges of the stain, exhibiting 
a lighter texture from the rest of the coat, bore witness to the 
efficacy or want of efficacy in rubbing with some cleansing 
substance the injured place. Paraffin, while it does not neces- 
sarily erase marks of blood, prevents the chemical test for 
blood discovering its presence. Therefore, so far as that stain 
is concerned, there is no evidence that it ever consisted of blood. 
It seems to be an old coat, a well-used coat. We know very 
well that coats of that kind get stains upon them, and that 
when they get stains on them people try to rub them out, and 
in the absence of any evidence indicative that that stain was a 
blood stain, I would suggest to you that you dismiss it from 
your minds. It may be capable of a totally innocent explana- 
tion. He says that very likely some bicycle oil got on it. At 
any rate, it would be most unfair, and to the prejudice of the 
prisoner, to press the evidence in regard to that coat further 
than legitimately it should be pressed. I would caution you, 
if I may advise you, not to regard the coat as any evidence 
implicating the prisoner. 

Then there are other two pieces of evidence of a like class. 
On the 21st March, 1910, a pair of grey suede gloves were taken 
or found—at any rate were taken—as belonging, and did 
belong, to the prisoner. On the palm surface of the glove, 
on the thumb of the left hand, appears a smear which chemical 
analysis pronounces to be blood. It can pronounce no more; 
it cannot pronounce whether it be human blood, mammal blood, 
or blood of fishes—but it is blood. It is not due to any cut 
upon the finger penetrating into the fabric of the glove, because 
the mark is from the outside and not from the inside. The 
glove has come in contact with blood. The prisoner says that 
on the occasion in question he was wearing tanned gloves, 
gloves which undoubtedly present no suspicious appearance at 
all. If it rested there, you might say why should you not 
believe him? But he further supplements that statement by 
saying that these suede gloves had been cast aside and not 

182 


The Judge’s Summing Up. 


worn for, I think he said, three months; that he wore his tan 
gloves in their place. The doctor says that the blood which 
was found upon the glove was recent. It could not have got 
upon that glove three months before; it must have got upon 
that glove within a very short time of the 21st March, when 
the gloves were taken and examined. Asked how he could 
account for the glove, the prisoner says, ‘‘I cannot.’’ It is 
urged that in this carriage the body when discovered was 
reeking with blood. Blood had poured from the head across 
the floor. It had poured from the elbow joint down behind 
the seat, and I think the expression the learned counsel used 
was that the carriage was a shambles. Gentlemen, it all 
depends, to my mind, upon how soon the deceased met his 
death. If there was a long struggle during which blood flowed 
freely, then I think it would be a fair thing to say that in a 
struggle with a desperate man who was bleeding from cut 
arteries, you would expect the murderer to exhibit signs upon 
his person of considerable effusion of blood ; but not if the first 
shot, or the second shot, if not instantaneously fatal, stunned 
the victim, and made him motionless and incapable of resist- 
ance, then the man would only have the corpse to deal with. 
He might dispose of that as carefully as a murderer would, who 
was desirous of letting as little tell-tale blood as possible appear 
upon his clothes. It all depends upon that. If there was 
evidence of a fearful struggle, if the walls of the carriage were 
splashed in all directions, if the glass was broken, and the 
cushions of the seats hurled about, if they were loose, then I 
think the argument would be strong; but, in the absence of 
such circumstances, it is for you to say whether the argument 
is equally strong. 

Then, again, there is the question of the trousers. The 
trousers which had been the subject of investigation were the 
trousers which, by the admission of the prisoner, he was wearing 
on the 18th March. Inside the left-hand pocket appears stains 
of blood. I do not suppose people who have listened to the 
evidence will doubt that those stains of blood were produced 
by the glove, still having wet blood upon it, being put into 
the trousers with the hand inside. There, again, the prisoner 
ig asked to account for it, and though there may be a hundred 

183 


Lord 
Coleridge 


Lord 
Coleridge 


John Alexander Dickman. 


ways of explaining blood dripping on the outside of your cloth- 
ing, the suggestion of the prisoner that his nose bled may or 
may not commend itself to you as a satisfactory explanation of 
blood upon the inside of the pocket of the trousers. I cannot 
assist you further, than to tell you there is no explanation— 
with the exception that he explained that he was troubled with 
bleeding of the nose. But he has not put this forward 
specifically as an explanation, for he does not say, on such 
and such a day my nose did bleed, nor does he remember 
specifically blood falling on his glove and putting his hand into 
his pocket. The explanation which is put forward, at any rate, 
is vague, and other explanation he apparently has none. It is 
for you to say whether that explanation satisfies you as an 
account of the existence of those marks of blood. If it does, 
you are entitled to put that out of the case. If it does not, 
what does it tell? I leave you, gentlemen, to supply the 
answer. 

Now, gentlemen, I believe that I have gone through, I do not 
say every fact, but if I have omitted any fact material or 
immaterial, supply it for yourselves and supply the argument 
which you base upon that fact. I do not pretend to have 
exhausted every item in this case. 

The suggestion on the part of the prosecution is that between 
11.10 and 1.20 somebody, the murderer, took that bag, ripped 
it open, and threw it down the Isabella pit. That is not 
disputed. There was the bag. There was everything gone 
but the 19s. in copper, bulky stuff that you would not carry 
away. All the gold and silver were gone, but all the papers 
relating to the distribution of the money were in the bag, 
which identified the bag beyond question as the bag which 
the deceased carried. If the prisoner did not go down the 
road to Stannington, where did he go? If you think he went 
down the road to Stannington, then you will acquit him, 
because it is quite inconsistent with the deposition of the bag 
in the Isabella mine. The prosecution do not suggest he 
carried the bag about him for days and then put it down. 
Although the mine, it is true, was not searched sufficiently to 
discover the bag until June, I do not suppose any one will 
doubt that the murderer, whoever he was, took the first avail- 

184 


The Judge’s Summing Up. 


able moment to get rid of the evidence of his guilt. The 
prosecution say he carried the bag with him when he got out 
at Morpeth station. I think the learned counsel for the 
prosecution invited you to say, if that was not proved, he 
was not the murderer. I do not know that that quite 
follows. I can understand, whoever the murderer was, having 
many ways of disposing of the bag. The bag might have 
been thrown intact on a selected spot on the railway, and 
aiterwards searched for, recovered, and dealt with. It may 
be that the murderer, whoever he was, who certainly got out 
at Morpeth, may have thought that to come out at Morpeth 
without a bag would certainly tend less to his discovery than 
coming out at Morpeth with a bag containing £370 upon him. 
All that is left is vague. We know not how and when that 
bag was placed, and how and when it was ripped open. The 
prosecution say there was an interval between 11.10 and 1.20 
unexplained by the prisoner, during which an opportunity 
could be afforded for the disposal of the bag. But there it is 
left. All I say, if you believe the prisoner’s story of his 
movements on that afternoon, it is clear that he did not 
deposit the bag in the Isabella mine. If you do not believe 
it, you must ask yourselves where he went, what he did, and 
why he conceals it from us. It is perfectly true, as the 
prosecution say in this case, that this is a case of circumstantial 
evidence, and circumstantial evidence alone. Now, circum- 
stantial evidence varies infinitely in its strength in proportion 
to the character and variety, the cogency, the independence, 
one of another, of the circumstances; I think one might 
describe it as a network of facts cast around the accused man. 
That network may be a mere gossamer thread, as light and 
unsubstantial as the very air itself. It may vanish at a touch. 
It may be that, strong ag it is in part, it leaves great gaps 
and rents, through which the accused is entitled to pass in 
safety. It may be so close, so stringent, so coherent in its 
texture that no efforts on the part of the accused can break 
through. It may come to nothing. On the other hand, it 
may be absolutely convincing. If we find a variety of circum- 
stances all pointing in the same direction, convincing in pro- 
portion to the number and variety of those circumstances and 
185 


Lord 
Coleridge 


Lord 
Coleridge 


, 


John Alexander Dickman. 


their independence one of another, although each separate 
piece of evidence, standing by itself, may admit of an innocent 
interpretation, yet the cumulative effect of such evidence may 
be, I do not say that it is, overwhelming proof of guilt. The 
law does not demand that you should act upon certainties and 
certainties alone. In the passage of our lives, in our acts, in 
our thoughts, we do not deal with certainties. We ought to 
act—we do, in fact, act—on just and reasonable convictions 
founded upon just and reasonable grounds. Juries ought to 
act upon the evidence. The law asks for no more, and the 
law demands no less. Gentlemen, if upon a grave and careful 
purview of the facts any reasonable doubt assail your minds, 
the prisoner is entitled to go free. The prosecution are bound 
to allay such doubts and to convince you of the truth of the 
accusation which they bring. Ask yourselves, then, what is 
the cumulative effect upon your minds of so many, so varied, 
so independent pieces of evidence, all pointing, it is said, in 
one direction, all tending, it is said, to inculpate the prisoner, 
and the prisoner alone, in the commission of this crime. 
Summon to your aid your just and ordered reason. If it tells 
you that the guilt of the prisoner is reasonably proved, then 
the law and the oath which you have taken alike demand that 
you should act with firmness and with courage. 

My duty is done. Yours remains yet to be fulfilled, and I 
pray most earnestly that you may be guided to the deliverance 
of a just and righteous verdict. 

Mr. Mrrcuetu-Innus—My lord, your lordship may not have 
thought it worth while to mention that there was a suggestion, 
which I regard as serious, made by myself on behalf of the 
prisoner that the murderer may have leapt from the train 
between the stations. 

Lord Cotzrmer—lI dealt with that. 

Mr. Mrrcueti-Inwes—I did not understand you did. 

Lord Cotzurmen—lI did mention that. 

Mr. Mrrcuevi-Innus—I beg your pardon. 

Lord Conzrmez—You may take any documents you desire, 
gentlemen. 

The Foreman or tHe Jury—Thank you. 

The jury retired at 12.55 and returned into Court at 3.32. 

186 


The Judge’s Summing Up. 


Lord CoLertipce—Gentlemen, before you give your verdict, ee ine 
there is an incident in yesterday’s proceedings which I forgot to 
allude to. Learned counsel for the prosecution commented upon 
the absence of the wife as a witness for the defence, in connection 
with the allegation made by theprisoner that the wife had cleaned 
his coat. Such a comment is forbidden by the law to be ' 
made. I ought to have said so, but it. escaped my attention for 
the moment. I attach no importance to the coat, and I think 
I indicated this to you; therefore, I forgot to add that such a 
comment made by the learned counsel ought to be banished 
from your minds, and not to influence your verdict. If you 
allowed that comment to affect your minds hostilely to the 
prisoner, I must ask you to reconsider your verdict, dismissing 
such comment from your minds. If you have not allowed it 
to affect your minds in any way, then you can deliver your 
verdict. 

The Forrman—lIt has not. 

Lord Cotzrmez—Have you allowed it to affect you? 

The Foreman—We have not. 

Lord Co.rermpez—Then that question does not arise. 

The Forrman—lIt has not been mentioned. 

Lord Coueriper—I understand you have not allowed it to 
influence your minds. 

The Forrman—We have not mentioned it. 

The Crarx or Anratans—You are all agreed on your verdict? 

The Forrman—Yes. 

The Cusrx or Arrarigns—Do you find the prisoner at the bar 
guilty or not guilty of wilful murder? 

The Forsman—We find him guilty. 

The Cumrk or Arrsians—That is the verdict of you all? 

The Forrman—Of us all. 

The Currk or Arraigns—John Alexander Dickman, you 
have been convicted of wilful murder. What have you to say 
why the Court should not give you sentence of death according 
to law. 

The Prisonsr—lI can only repeat that I am entirely innocent 
of this cruel deed. I have no complicity in this crime, and I 
have spoken the truth in my evidence, and in everything I have 
said. 

187 


Lord 
Coleridge 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Lord Cotzrmpee—Prisoner at the bar, this careful trial is now 
ended. The irrevocable decision has now been given. The 
jury have found you guilty of the crime of murder. In your 
hungry lust for gold you had no pity upon the victim whom 
you slew, and it is only just that the Nemesis of the law should 
overtake the author of the crime. The scales of justice are 
now balanced by the verdict which your fellows have pro- 
nounced ; the punishment is death. I do not presume to judge 
you. I am nothing but the minister of the law, and in passing 
sentence I only do that duty which the law commands. That 
sentence is that you be taken from hence to the place from 
whence you came, and from thence to a place of execution, and 
that you be there hanged by the neck until you be dead, and 
that your body be afterwards buried within the precincts of the 
prison in which you have been last confined after your convic- 
tion, and may God Almighty have mercy upon your soul. 

The CHapLain—Amen. 

The Prisonsr—I declare to all men that I am innocent. 


188 


APPENDICES. 





APPENDIX I. 


REX v. JOHN DICKMAN. 
Tue Court or Crimmnan APPBAL. 


Before the Lorp Curr Justicn, Mr. Jusricn Lawrence, and 
Mr. Justicy Pamumore. 


Mr. Mrrcneiu-Innes, K.C., and Lord Wittram Percy for the 
Appellant; Mr. Trypan Arkinson, K.C., and Mr. 
LowantHat for the Crown. 


This was an appeal against conviction on questions of law 
and on reference by the Home Secretary under section 19 (a) of 
the Criminal Appeal Act. 

Appellant was convicted of murder on 6th July, 1910, at the 
Northumberland Assizes before Lord Coleridge (J.), and sen- 
tenced to death. The date of the murder was 18th March, 
1910. 

Mr. Mrreneti-Innes, K.C. (with him Lord Wi11am Psrcy), 
for the appellant (under section 10 of the Criminal Appeal 
Act), who was not present—In addition to the grounds of 
appeal as set out in the notice of appeal, I submit that since 
the case is referred by the Home Secretary, all the facts are 
at large, and that it is for the Court to consider whether, upon 
the facts, the verdict is one that can stand. Appellant was 
called. He said he saw Nisbet at the Newcastle station, and 
never again. He travelled by the same train as Nisbet to 
Morpeth, there paying the excess fare from Stannington, which 
he passed by mistake. He walked to see a friend some miles 
from Morpeth in the direction of Stannington, was taken ill, 
rested some time in a field near the road, arrived at Morpeth 
at 11.6, and took the 1.40 back to Newcastle. 

The ground of appeal in the notice were (a) misdirection ; 
(6) comment by the prosecution on the omission of the wife 
of the prisoner to give evidence for the defence ; (c) withdrawal 
of evidence from the jury. The misdirection and withdrawal 
of evidence involved the same point. The learned judge in his 
summing up dealt first with the question of motive. Evidence 
of motive cannot supplement the absence of evidence connecting 


191 


John Alexander Dickman. 


the appellant with the death of the deceased. If the evidence 
is weak on that point, evidence of motive cannot be invoked to 
supply its place. Before ever the question of motive was 
reached, the evidence connecting appellant with the crime fell 
far short of what was requisite upon any criminal charge, and 
a fortiort on a charge of murder. The evidence as to identi- 
fication by the witness for the Crown was in the highest degree 
unsatisfactory. The prosecution called witnesses to prove 
that appellant was the person who was seen travelling in the 
same compartment with the deceased, Nisbet, when the train 
left Newcastle. The learned judge’s summing up on Raven’s 
evidence amounts to misdirection. Raven spoke to seeing 
appellant walking with Nisbet at Newcastle station. My 
submission is that this was one of those cases where a man, 
walking to catch a train, either was overtaken by, or himself 
overtook another man, and then unconsciously walked beside 
him. It was proved that the two were not talking. Appellant 
was never conscious of being with Nisbet, and, further, though 
he had seen Nisbet earlier, he never saw him after leaving the 
booking office. Raven admits he never saw the two men 
talking, but the learned judge did not put this to the jury. 
Appellant further said that he first went to the urinal, and . 
then up platform 5 to the hinder part of the train, and if his 
story, which on this point is consistent with Raven’s evidence, 
is to be believed, it severs him from Nisbet’s company at the 
important moment. Then there was the evidence of Hepple, 
an old and deaf man, who had for twenty years been a friend 
of the appellant. | Hepple’s evidence was no doubt given in 
perfect good faith, but clearly for the purpose of identification 
we have to rely upon Hepple’s powers of observation solely. 
His evidence is to the effect that either appellant or his com- 
panion had his hand on the handle of the door of the com- 
partment into which both were preparing to enter. The 
witness then says he walked down the platform for a few paces, 
and that when he turned round the two men had vanished. 
Therefore, having his back to appellant, he was quite unable 
to say with certainty what happened. Hepple’s evidence had 
a certain force added to it by that of the next witness to identi- 
fication, Hall; but if Hall’s evidence is discredited that would 
materially affect the force of the evidence given by Hepple. 
Hall’s evidence was that he (Hall), in the company of a fellow- 
clerk, entered the same train as the murdered man, and that 
he saw Nisbet and a companion, whom he did not know, get 
into an adjoining carriage. Three days later Hall was taken 
to the police station for the purpose of identifying the person 
he saw getting into the train, and he there pointed Dickman 
out as “very much resembling the companion’’ of Nisbet. 
More is now known about the circumstances attending the 
192 


Appendix I. 


identification at the police station, and an inquiry on that 
subject was addressed by the Home Secretary to the Chief 
Constable of Northumberland. The reply from the Chief Con- 
stable I now propose to put in. 

(The Lorp Cur Justice—That is not the proper way of 
bringing evidence before the Court.) 

We now know that Hall, before purporting to identify 
appellant, had been invited to try and see him through a 
window, and that subsequently, before the identification, he 
had a back view of appellant at the police station. In view 
of the great gravity of the case, I feel I must ask for per- 
mission to put the letter in. 

The Court refused the application. 

Mr. Trnpau Arkinson, K.C., for the Crown—Hall is in 
Court. 


PercivaL Harpine Hatz, recalled, and cross-examined by 
Mr. Mircuett-Innes, K.C. (by permission of the Court), said 
that on 21st March he was taken, with another witness, Spink, 
into a passage at the police station, where some policemen in 
plain clothes were standing about. They were kept waiting 
for some ten minutes. Immediately after they arrived they 
were invited by one of the persons present, presumably a 
detective officer, to go outside and look through a window. 
Witness said he could not remember having had any conversa- 
tion with the people in the passage, nor at that time did he 
discuss the appearance of the man whom he had come to_ 
identify. | Witness could not explain why he was invited to 
look through the window, and he thought it a most irregular 
proceeding. He saw nothing through the window, and, indeed, 
thought he protested that it was ridiculous to expect him or 
Spink to get a view through the window. They were then 
taken to the door of a room, in and out of which a few officials 
were occasionally passing. It was on one of these occasions 
that they were asked to look through the slightly opened door. 
They did so. They saw a man sitting in a chair leaning over 
to another man, and apparently in conversation. The former 
man had his hat off, and wore a light overcoat. The witness 
saw the colour of his hair. The witness had no recollection of 
any conversation with anybody about the appearance of 
appellant between the time he came back from the window 
and the time he looked through the door. After this latter 
view of the man they went upstairs to the room where they were 
to identify the man. This was an hour and a half afterwards. 
When they got into the room he saw that the appellant was 
wearing a coat similar in colour to that worn by the man he 
had seen through the door. 


N 193 


John Alexander Dickman. 


Further examined by Mr. Trypan Arxryson, K.C., witness 
said that on the evening of 18th March, which was the even- 
ing of the day of the murder, he gave an account at the police 
station of the appearance of the man he subsequently saw at 
that station, and that he then described his overcoat as a light 
fawn overcoat. The impression the witness got in his view 
through the doorway almost led him to make up his mind that 
the man was not the man he had seen in the train, because 
the man at the police station seemed from a back view so much 
more massive. Spink and the witness had both discussed that 
at tea, and came to that conclusion. 

The Lorp Cumr Justice+Although we have our own opinion 
as to what took place at the police station, we must say that 
the question of identification by Hall is not so important as it 
would have been had the case for the defence been that Dick- 
man was not in the train at all.) 

Mr. Mircnevi-Innes, K.C.—I do not propose to deal with 
the irregularity; but at the same time, although Hall denies 
that the view through the partially opened door assisted him 
in his identification, he did not see a man wearing a light 
overcoat, and was able to recognise the colour of his hair. 

I now propose to put in evidence a statement made by Mrs. 
Nisbet in response to a request by the Home Secretary for 
information as to whether she had known Dickman by sight 
for a number of years. 

(The Lorp Curr Justice—We have frequently declined to 
listen to statements of the kind you now suggest. No doubt 
the Home Secretary receives all manner of communications 
from interested friends or from the prisoner himself. The 
mere fact of their being addressed to the Home Secretary 
cannot make them evidence.) 

Mr. Trypan Atkinson, K.C.—I may say that Mrs. Nisbet is 
in Court. 

The statement was then allowed to be read on the distinct 
understanding that it should not be regarded as a precedent. 

Mr. Mrroureuu-Innes, K.C.—The statement is this—‘‘I am 
the widow of J. I. Nisbet, to whom I was married about 
eighteen years ago. _I first knew the prisoner Dickman shortly 
after I was married, and then only by sight. I was never 
introduced to him, and never spoke to him. On 18th March, 
when speaking to my husband at Heaton station, the view in 
profile I got of my husband’s companion did not enable me 
to identify him as any one I knew. On giving evidence at 
the Police Court I never saw the prisoner until I had finished 
my evidence, when I caught sight of him in the dock. He was 
in the same position, and I had the same view of his profile 
as I had in the train, and I then recognised him as being the 
same man. I then fainted, and was carried out of Court.”’ 


194 


Appendix I. 


My submission is that it is curious that Mrs. Nisbet, having 
a clear view of appellant’s profile at Heaton station, could 
not recognise him; it was still more curious that she was able 
to recognise him in Court, when she was unable to recognise 
him in the railway carriage. Further, the debility and dis- 
tress under which she laboured at the hearing before the magis- 
trates made her evidence unreliable. 

(PuttumorE (J.)—She does not say that it was Dickman 
she saw in the train; she says that the profile of the man she 
saw in the carriage was the profile of the man in the dock at 
the trial.) 

Leaving the question of identification, I submit that the 
date when the bag was found is significant. The bag was found 
down an air-shaft as late as June. It was put there, I 
suggest, by the real murderer after the hue and cry had ceased. 
The air-shaft had been searched between the murder and June, 
and nothing found. Dickman could not have put the bag 
there, because he was arrested a day or two after the murder. 

(The Lorp Cuter Justice—One would think that a man would 
have destroyed the bag instead of keeping it and then putting 
it down the pit. He had from March to June in which to 
dispose of it.) 

It is not impossible that the murder was committed north 
of Morpeth. The train was a slow one, stopping at five 
stations between Heaton and Stannington. It should have 
been put to the jury that there were thus five intervening 
stations at which interchanges of passengers could take place. 
The learned judge was under the impression that Stannington 
was the next station after Heaton. There is no identification 
of the appellant in the carriage north even of Heaton. The 
real murderer may well have left the train while in motion; 
yet the learned judge assumed that the theory of the murder 
taking place north of Morpeth was practically untenable. 

(Purttm«oRE (J.)—There was doubtless plenty of opportunity 
for change. But appellant does not suggest that; he says, 
_**T never changed carriages.’’) 

I say that, having regard to the theory of the prosecution 
of continued identity from beginning to end, this was a point 
that should unquestionably have been left to the jury. Apel- 
lant’s case, it is true, was quite different; he said he got into 
the carriage far behind. 

It is true appellant took a ticket for a station short of Mor- 
peth, but that he went as far as that place and paid excess 
fare. He therefore, by giving up a Stannington ticket at 
Morpeth and paying the excess fare, voluntarily supplied the 
prosecution with the means of identifying him. Appellant 
himself gave the police their first information on this point. 


195 


John Alexander Dickman. 


He was not seen carrying Nisbet’s bag at Morpeth, and it is 
a bag large enough to attract attention. 

Again, as to the pistols; two must have been used, accord- 
ing to the prosecution, as the bullets found in the body were 
admittedly different; in other words, the murderer changed 
pistols. No pistol has been traced to the appellant. 

That is the case for the appellant on the facts. On the law 
my submission is that section 1 (b) of the Criminal Evidence 
Act, 1898, the prosecution is forbidden to comment on the 
failure of the wife of the accused to give evidence; Counsel for 
the prosecution did comment on the fact that the appellant’s 
wife had not been called to corroborate the appellant’s state- 
ment that his wife had cleaned his overcoat. No doubt the 
jury were subsequently told that they were to dismiss the com- 
ment from their minds, and the foreman answered that they 
had not paid the slightest attention to it. No one can say 
with certainty what the effect on the individual minds of the 
jury might have been. The statutory prohibition is absolute 
in its terms. My submission is that there has been a mistrial, 
or, as it has been sometimes put, that the trial was a nullity. 
Consequently there must be a venire de novo for a new trial. 
I refer to the judgments of the minority in Aaron Mellor, 468, 
27 L.J.M.C. 121; 4 Jur. N.S..214; 7 Cox C.C.; Dears, & 
B.C.C./454, 1858, a murder trial where by mistake a person 
not called upon had served on the jury which convicted the 
prisoner. See also Fowler, 4B, & Ald. 273, 1821. 

(Potumore (J.)—That decision has been explained in 
Attorney-General for New South Wales v. Murphy, L.R. 2 
P.C.- $35; 6 Moore P:C.N.8.-177; 38, L.J:P.C:. 633-29 Lot: 
598; 17 W.R. 1047; 11 Cox C.C. 372, 1869.) 

The Court of Crown Cases Reserved had jurisdiction to grant 
a venire de novo; Yeadon, L. & C. 81; 31 L.J.M.C. 70; 9 
Cox C.C. 91; 7 Jur. N.S. 1128; 5 L.T. 329, 1861, C.C.R. 
By virtue of section 20, sub-section (4) of the Criminal Appeal 
Act, 1907, this Court inherits that jurisdiction. 

Tindal-Atkinson, K.C. (with him Lowenthal), for the Crown, 
was not called upon. 

The Lorp Cuter Justicz—This case has given us occasion for 
the most anxious consideration. We have examined very care- 
fully all the evidence before the sitting of the Court, so that 
we might be in a position to appreciate all the arguments. 

I desire to mention two points before dealing with the case 
itself. The first is the attempt to make communications to 
the Home Secretary evidence in this case. We are sitting 
here as a Court of law, and possess large powers in certain 
events which are only to be exercised on the consideration of 
legal evidence. We do not consider matters brought before 

196 


Appendix I. 


us except upon such evidence. No doubt the existence of such 
correspondence may lead the Court to make further inquiries, 
and to require the production of further evidence. It must 
not be supposed, however, that the reading of such communi- 
cations amounts to the giving of evidence. If it did, people 
would say that we had allowed our minds to be influenced by 
them. Therefore, we have confined our attention to the 
evidence given by Hall on oath. We did not think the other 
further evidence sought to be given was of any importance, 
and therefore we refused to allow it to be given. The second 
point I desire to take is that elicited from Hall in cross- 
examination by Mr. Mitchell-Innes to the effect that when he 
went down for the purpose of seeing if he could identify Dick- 
man he was first invited by somebody, possibly on behalf 
of the police, to look through a window, and on doing so did 
see, sitting alone, the person who was afterwards convicted. 
We need hardly say that we deprecate in the strongest manner 
any attempt to point out beforehand to a person coming for 
the purpose of seeing if he could identify another, the person 
to be identified, and we hope that instances of this being done 
are extremely rare. I desire to say that if we thought in any 
case that justice depended upon the independent identification 
of the person charged, and that the identification appeared to 
have been induced by some suggestion or other means, we 
should not hesitate to quash any conviction which followed. 
The police ought not, either directly or indirectly, to do any- 
thing which might prevent the identification from being abso- 
lutely independent, and they should be most scrupulous in 
seeing that it is so. In the present case we have come to the 
conclusion that, although Hall’s identification of the actual 
individual might have been slightly influenced by what had 
previously taken place, it has so little bearing on the real 
merits of the case that it is quite impossible for us to interfere 
with the verdict on this ground. 

Now, it has been suggested by Counsel for the appellant that 
the murder might have taken place north of Morpeth—that 
is to say, after the appellant had left the train, it being 
admitted that in that case the murderer must have left the 
train while in motion; but there is no substantial ground for 
thinking that that was the case. The learned judge, in a 
summing up which is one of the most able I have ever read, 
dealt with that suggestion. It was not disputed that the 
appellant was in the train which carried the deceased man, 
that he took a ticket for a station short of Morpeth, but that 
he travelled as far as the latter place, where he left the train, 
paying excess fare, and that Nisbet’s bag was found down the 
air-shaft of the Isabella pit, about 1} miles from Morpeth 


197 


John Alexander Dickman. 


station, and rather nearer Stannington station than Morpeth; 
and also that the object of the prisoner’s journey was to trans- 
act some business at Stannington. 

I now come to a part of the case which will cause the greatest 
difficulty to those who may disagree with the conclusion at 
which this Court has arrived—namely, aye or no, was there 
sufficient evidence that the man who, between Stannington and 
Morpeth, murdered the deceased man Nisbet was the appellant? 
The evidence was entirely circumstantial, but circumstantial 
evidence derived from admitted facts proved against a person 
charged is often most reliable, because it is not likely to be 
invented, and if invented, would in all probability not fit in 
with the admitted facts. 

We must exclude the fact that he left the train at Morpeth; 
we must not assume that because he travelled to Morpeth 
he was necessarily in the carriage with Nisbet. The crucial part 
of this case is whether there is satisfactory evidence that 
Dickman entered the same compartment with Nisbet at New- 
castle. The evidence at Newcastle is, first, that of Raven, who 
had known the prisoner for eight or nine years and Nisbet for 
six years. He saw Nisbet and Dickman come along in the 
direction of Gate 4, and then did not again see the appellant. 
The main criticism on this evidence is that the learned judge 
did not call the attention of the jury to the exact evidence as 
to whether Nisbet and Dickman were talking together or not. 
Raven does not speak as to the men being actually in conversa- 
tion. The theory that Dickman did enter the compartment 
occupied by Nisbet and then changed to a compartment at the 
back of the train may be dismissed ; it is unlikely in any circum- 
stances. Mr. Mitchell-Innes has pressed on us that because the 
men were not engaged in conversation that in some way or other 
throws doubt on the accuracy of Raven’s evidence. But the 
appellant denied he was ever in the same compartment with 
Nisbet, and the jury were face to face with the contradiction 
between him and the other witnesses. It is suggested that 
Dickman went into a urinal a little beyond the bookstall. But 
looking at the thing in substance, in order to say whether or not 
Dickman got into the same compartment with Nisbet, it does not 
seem to us very important whether they were or were not in 
conversation, or whether. Dickman was absent for some little 
time, and we think that if the learned judge had stopped to 
discuss such an incident as that it might have misled the jury. 
We are satisfied that this cannot, from any point of view, alter 
the result. Omission is not of necessity misdirection. The story 
is taken up by Hepple, who knew appellant well, and who had 
taken his place further back than the compartment in which 

198 


Appendix I. 


Nisbet travelled, and then, as many of us have done, walked 
up and down outside his compartment for some minutes before 
the train started. He describes Dickman as going along with 
his companion; he cannot say whether they were talking, but 
they were walking in the direction of the engine. Now, if 
Dickman’s defence had been that he never went by train, 
the argument of Mr. Mitchell-Innes would have been entitled 
to more consideration. But Hepple has known appellant for 
twenty years, and, after all, describes a very ordinary incident. 
The inference from his most natural story is that Nisbet and 
Dickman stepped into the train together. The theory of the 
defence is, that if Hepple’s evidence is true, Dickman must 
have come back and got into a carriage at the back part of 
the train. But, assuming Hepple to be right, why should Dick- 
man do anything of the kind? It is said Hepple is old and 
somewhat infirm; but he had known Dickman for no less than 
twenty years. Moreover, Mr. Mitchell-Innes does not suggest 
how any physical infirmity affects his evidence. 

Then, again, Mr. Mitchell-Innes contends that the weight of 
Hepple’s evidence depends on the accuracy of Hall’s identifica- 
tion. I could not follow the argument. The recollection of 
Raven, Hall, and Hepple, was stereotyped in their minds; this 
murder is noised abroad, and they have to say what they happen 
to know about it. Even if you eliminate Hall, it does not 
weaken Hepple’s evidence. 

Hall’s evidence is very important, quite apart from whether 
his identification at the police station was accompanied by the 
circumstances described. Hall knew Nisbet well as the Wid- 
drington cashier, and knew the errand on which Nisbet was 
going. Hall speaks to a part of this case which cannot be said 
to be in dispute, viz., Nisbet and some one he did not know 
coming along towards that train and getting into the next 
compartment. There was therefore strong evidence that at 
Newcastle station the man who got into the train was Dickman ; 
he was identified by all three men—Raven, Hepple, Hall. I 
have left Spink out; I do not rely upon Spink’s evidence, but 
it in no way weakens the combined story of others. 

Now, that is the case for the prosecution; they show that 
appellant entered the train in the part where Nisbet was. It 
was quite sufficient to call upon the prisoner for an answer, and 
when he does elect to give evidence, then what he says with 
regard to the incident is for the jury to consider. The result 
of the cumulative observation of these men is to throw doubt 
on his whole story. He absolutely contradicts the recollection 
of all these three men. There is no motive suggested why he 
should enter Nisbet’s compartment and then change to another ; 


199 


John Alexander Dickman. 


it is far more important to observe that, assuming he was in 
company with Nisbet, there was no possible motive suggested 
why he should come back to the rear part of the train. There- 
fore the jury having heard it, the judge was justified in leaving 
it to them. The jury were therefore face to face with his con- 
tradiction in the crucial part of the whole case. 

At Heaton, Nisbet is seen by his wife, and no one can doubt it 
from the way she tells the story. Her husband was in the habit 
of making this journey. She hurries up to Nisbet at Heaton 
station, and speaks to another man being there, but was unable 
to see him very plainly, for he had his coat collar up. She 
could not say who the man was; but on her examination before 
the magistrates she says she saw the appellant’s profile, and 
thereupon immediately collapsed in consequence; finally, at 
the trial, she says there is no doubt at all about the matter. 
The passage in the summing up which refers to her evidence is 
not open to any criticism. At Stannington station Hall and 
Spink got out, and one cannot come to any other conclusion 
than that the murder took place between Stannington and 
Morpeth. 

It is contended that the jury were directed that the train 
went directly to Stannington from Heaton without stopping, 
whereas there were several intervening stations at which other 
persons might well have entered the compartment or got out. 
But this does not really affect the question at all, when 
we consider what the appellant’s defence was. 

Lastly, we have an incident which is not more than an 
incident. If the jury had evidence before them that appellant 
got into the compartment at Newcastle, having a return ticket 
for Stannington, why did he go on to Morpeth? Then there 
is his account of it. If the jury were satisfied that there was 
evidence of his going as far as Stannington, it can scarcely 
be denied there was a strong case for him to answer. 

Is there sufficient in Dickman’s answer to throw on undis- 
puted points such a doubt that we ought to say that there 
has been a miscarriage of justice or that the verdict was un- 
satisfactory? He says he was reading the paper, and allowed 
the train to go on without noticing it. It is pointed out, too, 
that the inspector at Morpeth saw no bag, but recollects that 
a man did get out and pay 24d. excess fare. Whether there 
is a dispute or not as to that incident of the inspector and the 
bag does not seem to us of very great importance, for he need 
not have had the bag with him at that moment. The bag is 
found ultimately down the Isabella pit. It is contended that 
a doubt is thrown on the case because the bag was not found 
till June. But the lateness of the discovery does not materially 
affect the question. 


200 


% 


Appendix I. 


Again, with regard to the pistols, we cannot, in face of all 
the circumstances, think it is necessary for the prosecution to 
trace them to the appellant, nor that the case is at all weakened 
by so little of the gold and silver being found upon him. These 
are matters to which the Home Secretary might direct his 
attention. There is another incident which without these 
various other points might not have been sufficient. I refer 
to the blood stains on appellant’s coat. 

With regard to the point based on the comment made as 
to the not calling of Mrs. Dickman to speak to the stains on 
the coat, it must be remembered that it had been withdrawn 
from the jury, and they, indeed, stated, that they had not even 
spoken about it, so that it was impossible for the Court to 
support the contention that there was a mistrial. It was an 
accidental slip, such as must often occur, and its effect, if 
any, was removed before the verdict was given. 

Upon the merits of the case therefore we are against the 
appellant. We have thought it right to examine the case with 
the greatest possible care, having regard to the fact that it 
rested on circumstantial evidence. We have no doubt that 
there was a substantial case for the jury showing that the 
murder was committed by Dickman, and there is no ground 
upon which we can say that the verdict was wrong. The 
appeal must therefore be dismissed. 

Appeal dismissed. 


APPENDIX II. 


Chief Constable’s Office, 
Morpeth, 14th July, 1910. 


Sir,—I am in receipt of your letter (191, 957/16) of the 13th 
instant, and, in reply thereto, I have the honour to herewith 
forward you copy of statement taken from Mrs. Nisbet by my 
Superintendent Weddell to-day. 

With regard to Hall’s identification, I beg to state that the 
Chief Constable of Newcastle-on-Tyne and myself have to-day 
seen both Hall and his companion Spink. 

It appears to us to be the fact that while Hall and Spink 
were waiting in a passage, which was fairly full of police officers 
in plain clothes, that some loose talk went on amongst these 
men in this passage, and that some one suggested to Hall and 
Spink to go round and have a look in at the window of the 

201 


John Alexander Dickman. 


room in which Dickman was then being examined, and that 
Hall and Spink did go round and looked in, but could only 
see tops of some human heads. 

Hall alleges he was accompanied by a police officer in plain 
clothes, but Spink is equally certain that they went alone. 
Shortly afterwards both allege that the door of the room in 
question was slightly opened and some one—presumably a 
policeman—who was in the passage suggested to them to look 
in at the man. They say they did this, but only saw the back 
view of the man, and from that view Hall says he would not 
have identified Dickman as the companion of Nisbet on the 
18th March, as the back view made him appear a much more 
thick-set man. He did notice that Dickman had on a light 
overcoat, and that the man he picked out later on in the day 
was wearing a similar one. 

He further states, and is most emphatic, that the impression 
he got when looking through the door did not in any way 
influence him when he came to the ‘“‘ Identification,’’? such as 
it was. 

For it must not be forgotten that Hall’s so-called identifica- 
tion has always been regarded as extremely weak. Both Mr. 
Wright and myself have very closely examined Mr. Hall and 
Mr. Spink this afternoon, and we find they both are certain 
that neither of them could recognise the officers who they allege 
they said made these suggestions. 

In this connection we find that the incident as alleged took 

place between 5.40 and 6 p.m. in a partially lighted passage, 
and that in the passage at that time were at least fourteen 
officers of both county and city force congregated, and two 
N.-E. Railway police, most of whom were engaged in this case, 
and none of whom were in uniform. 
_ Having regard to the inability of Hall and Spink to identify 
the police officer in question, we do not consider it necessary 
to collect all the officers who were probably there at the time 
(although we have to-day seen seven of the number, and all 
absolutely deny any knowledge of the incidents). 

Three of the officers who were probably present are on leave 
(one of these being in Ireland), and two more are sick. 

Of course, if it be desired, we could parade the whole number ~ 
in a few days’ time. It is only proper to say that several 
of the statements of Hall and Spink are at variance, one 
of the officers (known to Hall) and stated by him to have been 
present has now proved satisfactorily to us that he was engaged 
away from the office till some half-hour after the incident 
complained of. 

May I be allowed to say that even if these allegations were 
true as represented, that Dickman then was not in arrest, and 

202 


Appendix II. 


so far as the officers in the passage were concerned, they had 
no knowledge that he ever would be. 


I have the honour to be, 


Sir, 
Your obedient servant, 
(Sd.) FuLLARTON JAMES, 


Chief Constable of Northumberland. 


The Under-Secretary of State, 
Home Odfiice, 
Whitehall, London. 


APPENDIX Iil. 


On Monday, 8th March, 1909, a Jewish moneylender, named 
Hermann Cohen, was discovered in his office with his skull 
battered in, and a dreadful wound in his forehead. When found 
the man was alive, but unable to make any statement to the 
police. A curious feature of the murder was that the little 
finger of his left hand, on which he usually wore a diamond 
ring, had been cut off. 


APPENDIX IV. 
(From the Newcastle Daily Chronicle, 22nd March, 1910.) 


‘‘Mr. A. G. Brocklehurst, 57 Tavistock Road, Jesmond, 
Newcastle, a commercial traveller, in an interview with one of 
our reporters yesterday, said that, about a fortnight ago he 
and several others were travelling by the 9.30 express from 
Newcastle to Morpeth, when between Annitsford and Stanning- 
ton they were startled by a noise that sounded like revolver 
shooting. On letting down the carriage window and looking 
out they saw that the framework outside the window of their 
compartment’ was splintered, apparently by bullets fired from 


a revolver by a person in another compartment. Mr. 
Brocklehurst and his companions were travelling in the last 
compartment in the second carriage from the engine. Had 


the shots been fired from the outside of the train they would 
have gone into the compartment instead of glancing off.’’ 


203 


John Alexander Dickman. 


APPENDIX V. 
Kine’s Benen Division. 
(In tHE Court or APPHAL.) 
NISBET v. RAYNE & BURN. 


Employer and workman—C ompensation—Accident arising 
out of the employment—Cashier—M urder—Risks 
aneidental to the employment—W orkmen’s Compensa- 
tion Act, 1906 (6 Edw. VII., c. 58), sec. 1, sub-sec. 1. 

A cashier, while travelling in a railway carriage 
to a colliery with a large sum of money for the pay- 
ment of his employers’ workmen, was robbed and 
murdered. On an application by his widow for 
compensation— 

Held that the murder was an “‘accident’’ from 
the standpoint of the person who suffered from it, 
and that it arose ‘‘ out of’? an employment which 
involved more than the ordinary risk, and conse- 
quently that the widow was entitled to compensation 
under the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1906, sec. 
1, sub-sec. 1. 

Challis v. London & South-Western Railway 
Company, 1905, 2 K.B. 154, applied. 

APPEAL against an award of the judge of the County 
Court of Newcastle-on-Tyne sitting as arbitrator under 
the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1906. 

The main question raised by this appeal was whether murder 
was an “‘accident’’ within the meaning of the Act. The 
facts were very short and were as follows: The applicant was 
the widow of John Innes Nisbet, the victim of the Morpeth 
train murder, who claimed compensation from Messrs. Rayne 
& Burn, as the Stobswood Coal Company, for the death of her 
husband. The admitted statement of facts showed that Nishet, 
in respect of whose death the application was being made, was 
a workman to whom the Act applied; that he was in the 
employment of the respondents at the time of his death, and 
was in receipt of £2 15s. a week; that his death took place 
on 18th March, 1910, whilst in the execution of his duty when 
he was carrying money to Stobswood Colliery on behalf of | 
the respondents in a railway carriage on the North-Eastern 
Railway; and that his death was caused by pistol or revolver 
shots fired by some one other than Nisbet himself. The 
County Court judge held that the risk undertaken by Nisbet 

204 


Appendix V. 


in carrying a large sum of money was a risk incidental to his 
employment, and likely to have been in the contemplation of 
the parties when Nisbet was engaged, and he accordingly made 
an award in favour of the applicant for £300. The respondents 
appealed. 

The appeal was heard on 11th and 12th July. 

C. A. Russsui, K.C., and Grirrita Jonzs for the appellants. 
—In the first place, this murder was not an accident within 
the meaning of the Act. The tortious act of some third person, 
which had no relation whatever to the employment, is not an 
“accident ’’ for which an employer is liable (Armitage v. 
Lancashire & Yorkshire Railway Company ;1 Fitzgerald v. 
W. G@. Clarke & Son.2 In Challis v. London & South-Western 
Railway Company, which was relied on by the applicant, the 
question of accident was not argued. It was admitted in that 
case that there had been an accident, and the only question 
was whether it could be said to be an accident arising ‘‘ out of 
the employment.’’ Death in this case resulted from the 
intentional act of the murderer, and intention excludes any 
idea of accident. 

(Cozens-Harpy, M.R.—Suppose a gamekeeper is injured by 
poachers, could it be said that that was not an accident arising 
out of his employment?) 

It would not be an accident. The keeper who had been 
deliberately hit on the head by the poacher would be the last 
person to describe his injury as accidental. The question of 
injury to a gamekeeper was very recently considered in Anderson 
v. Balfour* by the Court of Appeal in Ireland, where the 
majority of the Court considered that compensation was pay- 
able. Compensation is not given for any injury a man may 
receive in the execution of his duty, it must be an injury by 
accident. The Police Act, 1890, specially provides for ‘ injury 
received in the execution of duty.” The County Court judge 
seems to have been impressed with Lord Coke’s definition of 
an accident ‘‘as when a servant of an obligor, mortgagor, &c., 
is sent to pay the money on the day, and he is robbed,”5 but 
that refers only to relief in equity for non-production of the 
money or deeds at a given date. 

The accident, if it was one, did not arise “out of the employ- 
ment”; on this point Challis vy. London & South-Western 
Railway Company® is distinguishable. The risk of being 
murdered while carrying money cannot be treated as a risk 
incidental to the deceased’s employment. In all the cases the 


11902, 2 K-B. 178. 41910, 2 IL.R. 497. 
21908, 2 K.B. 796. 54 Co.Inst. 84. 
31905, 2 K.B. 154. 61905, 2 K.B. 154. 


205 


John Alexander Dickman. 


fact that the act causing injury was tortious negatived the idea 
that it arose out of the employment. Armitage v. Lancashure 
& Yorkshire Railway Company,’ Fitegerald v. W. @. Clarke 
é& Son,’ and Collins v. Collins? are conclusive on this point. 

Dancxwerts, K.C., and J. R. Ranpoupn, for the applicant— 
This was clearly an accident, so far as the deceased was con- — 
cerned. Neither the employers nor the servant ever contem- 
plated that such an event would happen; the event was wholly 
unexpected, and is exactly within the definition given by Lord 
Loreburn (L.C.) in Clover, Clayton, & Co., Limited v. 
Hughes,'° “ an unlooked-for mishap or an untoward event which 
is not expected or designed.” The unexpectedness must be on 
the part of the injured person. It was an accident that the 
deceased met the man in the train who shot him. 

The carrying of large sums of money weekly was part of the 
deceased’s employment, a more than ordinary risk which was 
undertaken by him, which must have been in the contemplation 
of the parties when he was engaged. Persons regularly carrying 
money about must run the risk of being robbed. The injury 
causing death clearly arose “ out of” the employment and as 
incidental to it, just as in Anderson v. Balfour,11 and as pointed 
out in Fitzgerald v. W. G. Clarke & Son.8 

C. A. Russziy, K.C., in reply—Any one with anything to 
lose is always liable to be robbed, and, if he defends his pro- 
perty, to be injured, but that is not a risk incidental to any 
particular employment, and the accident must be reasonably 
incidental to the employment. Everything undesigned or 
unexpected is not an accident. 

Cozuns Harpy (M.R.), in giving judgment, after reciting the 
facts, said, “‘ This was obviously a criminal act, whether robbery 
alone was intended, or whether murder was directly contem- 
plated. |The widow claimed compensation by reason of her 
husband’s death. It is contended by the employers that this 
was not ‘an accident’ within the meaning of the Act, because 
it was an intentional felonious act which caused the death, 
and’ that the word ‘ accident’ negatives the idea of intention. 
In my opinion this contention ought not to prevail. I think 
it was an ‘accident’ from the point of view of Nisbet, and it 
makes no difference whether the pistol shot was deliberately 
fired at Nisbet or whether it was intended for somebody else, 
and not for Nisbet. 

‘‘The point was incidentally decided by this Court in 
Challis v. L. &. S.-W. Railway, 1905, 2 K.B. 154, where an 
engine-driver was injured by a stone wilfully dropped by a 





71902, 2 K.B. 178. 1910, A.C. 242, at p. 244. 
81908, 2 K.B. 796. 11910, 2 LR. 497. 
91907, 2 LR. 104. 


206 


Appendix V. 


boy over a bridge. The very recent case of Anderson v. 
Balfour, 1910, 2 1.R. 497, in the Court of Appeal in Ireland is 
a direct decision on the point. A gamekeeper was attacked 
by three poachers and wounded. The majority of the Court 
held that the gamekeeper was entitled to the benefit of the 
Act, notwithstanding that the act of the poachers was criminal, 
and done with wilful intention. 

*‘ Tt remains, however, to consider whether the accident arose 
not only ‘in the course of his employment,’ as it clearly did, 
but ‘out of’ his employment. This really depends upon the 
nature of the man’s duties, and the extent to which those duties 
involved him in special work, and in ihe case of the game- 
keeper above referred to it was held, and I think rightly, 
that his employment was necessarily attended with special risk 
of assault by poachers. The only question which caused 
doubt in my mind is whether in the discharge of his duties 
Nisbet was exposed to special risk. Upon the whole I think 
he was. A man who is known to be carrying a bag of money 
is a tempting object for criminals to attack. . .. . 

** The learned County Court judge has found that the fact 
that Nisbet carried the money in the bag was the reason why 
the robbery and the murder were committed, and that this 
was a risk incidental to the employment of a man to carry 
money about, and that it has been so from the earliest times. 
In my opinion the learned County Court judge was justified in 
that finding. I think the appeal fails, and must be dismissed, 
with costs.” 

(This report is taken from the Law Reports, 1910, 2 K.B. 
689, by kind permission of the Council of Law Reporting.) 


APPENDIX VI. 
A Suort Account or tHE CounsEL ENGAGED IN THE CASE. 


Epwarp Tinpat Atxrnson—Called to the bar at the Middle 
Temple in 1870, taking a first-class and the certificate of 
honour. First practised in London in the chambers of his 
elder brother, Henry Tindal Atkinson, who became a County 
Court judge in 1901. 

Localised in Leeds in 1873, where he rapidly acquired a 
very large practice. He returned to London in 1886. 
Appointed Recorder in 1897. Became Solicitor-General for 
the County Palatine of Durham, and Attorney-General for the 


same county in 1901. Appointed Chief Commissioner to hear 
207 


John Alexander Dickman. 


the, Worcester Election Commission, 1906. In the summer of 
1907 was sent the Midland Circuit as Commissioner of Assize. 
For some time one of the leading members of the Bar Council. 
Leader of the North-Eastern Circuit for many years. 


Epwarp A.rrep Mircuenu-Innss—Educated at Wellington 
College. Exhibitioner of Balliol College, Oxford. Called to 
the bar in 1894, joining the North-Eastern Circuit, on which 
circuit he soon acquired a substantial junior practice. Took 
silk in 1908. 


Cartes Freperick LowentHat—Educated at Marlborough. 
Called to the bar in January, 1888. Entered the chambers 
of the late Attorney-General, Sir Lawson Walton. Joined 
the North-Eastern Circuit. Appointed the junior counsel tc 
H.M. Commissioners of Work. 


Lorp Winu1Am Prercy—Educated at Eton and Christchurch. 
Oxford. Called to the bar in January, 1906, joining the 
North-Eastern Circuit. Read as pupil with E. A. Mitchell- 
Innes. 


Tue Ricut Hon. Bernarp JoHn Seymour Coteripae—Lord 
Coleridge, whose father was the first Baron Coleridge, and was 
Lord Chief Justice of England, was educated at Eton and 
Trinity College, Oxford. He was called to the bar in 1877, 
joining the Western Circuit; appointed junior standing counsel 
to the Bristol Joint Stock Bank in 1884; took silk in 1892, 
and was elected a bencher at the Middle Temple in 1894; sent 
as Commissioner of Assize, Midland Circuit, 1907; his success 
was such that no surprise was occasioned by his elevation to the 
bench. 


208 








aoa 
a> 


pais 


No r 
Poet 


at eS 
ia 


i 


a 0 


ae 


an 


ee see 
Pars 





